古文：熊概，字元节，丰城人。
现代文：熊概，字元节，丰城人。
English: Xiong You, Byte Festival, Fengcheng people.

古文：幼孤，随母适胡氏，冒其姓。
现代文：自幼丧父，随母亲改嫁胡氏，冒姓胡。
English: He lost his father at a young age, and changed his surname to Hu after his mother married into the Hu clan.

古文：永乐九年进士。
现代文：永乐九年，中进士。
English: Yongle 9 years old, junior high school graduate.

古文：授御史。
现代文：后被授予御史。
English: He was given the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：十六年擢广西按察使。
现代文：十六年，升为广西按察使。
English: Sixteen years later, he was promoted to inspector of Guangxi Province.

古文：峒溪蛮大出掠，布政使议请靖江王兵遏之。
现代文：峒溪蛮人大肆出来抢掠，布政使计划请靖江王的军队来阻止他们。
English: The barbarians of Lixi came out to plunder. Bu Zhengzhi planned to ask the army of the King of the Jing River to stop them.

古文：概不可，曰： 吾等居方面，寇至无捍御，顾烦王耶？
现代文：熊概不同意，他说： 我等任方面之官，贼寇来时不能抵御，怎能还烦劳王爷？
English: Xiong Qi disagreed. He said, "We, as officials of any province, cannot resist the arrival of thieves and robbers. How can we bother the prince?

古文：且寇必不至，戒严而已。 
现代文：况且贼寇肯定不来，他们只是戒严而已。 
English: Moreover, the bandits will definitely not come, they are just under martial law.

古文：已而果然。
现代文：后来果然如此。
English: Afterward, it really was like that.

古文：久之，调广东。
现代文：不久，他调任广东。
English: Soon, he was transferred to Guangdong Province.

古文：洪熙元年正月，命以原官与布政使周干、参政叶春巡视南畿、浙江。
现代文：洪熙元年正月，命他以原官和布政使周干、参政叶春巡视南畿、浙江。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Hongxi era, he ordered him to inspect Nangui and Zhejiang with the former official and the political envoy Zhou Gan and the political participant Ye Chun.

古文：初，夏原吉治水江南还，代以左通政赵居任，兼督农务。
现代文：当初，夏原吉在江南治水回来后，以左通政赵居任取代他，兼督理农业事务。
English: At first, after Xia Yuanji came back from fighting the floods in the south of the Yangtze River, he was replaced by Zuotong Zhao Jiu Ren, who was also in charge of agricultural affairs.

古文：居任不恤民，岁以丰稔闻。
现代文：赵居任不体恤百姓，每年都上报说丰收。
English: Zhao Juren did not show mercy to the people, and reported a bumper harvest every year.

古文：成祖亦知其诬罔。
现代文：成祖也知道他谎报。
English: Cheng Zu also knew that he was lying.

古文：既卒，左通政岳福继之，庸懦不事事。
现代文：他死后，左通政岳福继任，他庸愚懦弱，不理事。
English: After his death, Zhaotong Zheng Yuefu took over, but he was weak and ineffectual.

古文：仁宗监国时，尝命概以御史署刑部，知其贤，故有是命。
现代文：仁宗监国时，曾命熊概以御史之衔代理刑部事务，仁宗知道他贤，所以有这个任命。
English: When he was the overseer of the country, he had ordered Kumakata to act as the magistrate of the criminal department with the title of goshi. Ninso knew that he was a wise man, so he had this appointment.

古文：是年八月，干还，言有司多不得人，土豪肆恶，而福不任职。
现代文：这年八月，周干回京，说有关部门多任用非人，当地豪强肆意作恶，而岳福又不管事。
English: In August of this year, Zhou Gan returned to Beijing, saying that the relevant departments had appointed more than one non-person, local strongmen were doing evil at will, and Yuefu did not care about anything.

古文：宣宗召福还，擢概大理寺卿，与春同往巡抚。
现代文：宣宗把岳福召回，升熊概为大理寺卿，与叶春一同前往巡抚。
English: Emperor Xuanzong recalled Emperor Yuefu, and Emperor Xiong Xiong became the Lord of Dali Temple, and went to the governor together with Emperor Yeh Chun.

古文：南畿、浙江设巡抚自此始。
现代文：南畿、浙江设巡抚自此而始。
English: Nanki and Zhejiang set up inspectorates from here.

古文：浙西豪持郡邑短长为不法。
现代文：浙西豪强把持郡县生杀之权。
English: Western Zhejiang Gaoqiang holds the power of life and death in counties.

古文：海盐民平康暴横甚，御史捕之，遁去。
现代文：海盐县百姓平康非常残暴，御史要逮捕他，他逃掉了。
English: The people of Haiyan County were very cruel to Pingkang. The imperial historian wanted to arrest him, but he escaped.

古文：会赦还，益聚党八百余人。
现代文：正赶上大赦，他又回来了，还聚众八百余人。
English: Just in time for the amnesty, he came back again and gathered more than eight hundred people.

古文：概捕诛之。
现代文：熊概将他逮捕诛杀。
English: The bear arrested him and killed him.

古文：已，悉捕豪恶数十辈，械至京，论如法。于是奸宄帖息。
现代文：过后，又把巨恶之徒数十人全部逮捕，押解来京，于是奸宄之徒被平息下去了。
English: Later, they arrested dozens of the villains and escorted them to Beijing. As a result, the villains were subdued.

古文：诸卫所粮运不继，军乏食。
现代文：各卫所粮饷不继，军队缺粮。
English: There was a shortage of food in the garrisons, and the army was short of food.

古文：概以便宜发诸府赎罪米四万二千余石赡军，乃闻于朝。
现代文：熊概先把各府赎罪米四万二千余石发出供应部队，然后再上报朝廷。
English: Xiong Zhou first sent out more than 42,000 kilos of atonement rice to supply troops, and then reported to the imperial court.

古文：帝悦，谕户部勿以专擅罪概。
现代文：皇上很高兴，传谕户部不要给熊概治以擅作主张之罪。
English: The emperor was very pleased and ordered the head of the household not to punish Xiong Xuanzhi with the crime of making unsolicited proposals.

古文：概用法严，奸民惮之，腾谤书于朝。
现代文：熊概执法严厉，奸民很害怕他，便将诽毁他的书上传朝廷。
English: Xiong Qi enforced the law strictly, and the villains were so afraid of him that they submitted a book slandering him to the imperial court.

古文：宣德二年，行在都御史劾概与春所至作威福，纵兵扰民。
现代文：宣德二年，行在都御史弹劾熊概与叶春所到之处擅自赏罚，纵兵骚扰百姓。
English: In the second year of Xuande, he went to the capital to impeach Xiong Guo and Ye Chun. He arbitrarily rewarded and punished wherever he went, and the soldiers harassed the people.

古文：帝弗问，阴使御史廉之，无所得。由是益任概。
现代文：皇上不问，暗中派御史去调查，但一无所得，由此更加信任熊概。
English: The emperor did not ask, but secretly sent the imperial historian to investigate, but nothing came of it, which made him trust Xiong Gu even more.

古文：明年七月赐玺书奖励。
现代文：第二年七月赐玺书奖励他。
English: In July of the following year, he was awarded a posthumous award.

古文：概亦自信，诸当兴革者皆列以闻。
现代文：熊概也很自信，应当兴废的事他都列出上奏。
English: Xiong You is also very confident. He lists all the things that should be done.

古文：时屡遣部官至江南造纸、市铜铁。
现代文：当时朝廷屡次派出部官到江南造纸、买铜铁。
English: At that time, the imperial court repeatedly sent officials to the south of the Yangtze River to make paper and buy copper and iron.

古文：概言水涝民饥，乞罢之。
现代文：熊概说洪水积涝，百姓饥馑，请求停罢这种行动。
English: Xiong Guo said that the flood waters had receded and the people were starving, and asked for a halt to such actions.

古文：五年还朝，始复姓。
现代文：五年，他回到朝廷，才改回原姓。
English: Five years later, when he returned to the imperial court, he changed back to his original surname.

古文：亡何，迁右都御史，治南院事。
现代文：不久，他升为右都御史，掌南都察院事。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of the Right Metropolitan Historian, and was in charge of the Southern Metropolitan Academy.

古文：行在都御史顾佐疾，驿召概代领其职，兼署刑部。
现代文：行在都御史顾佐有病，朝廷通过驿传召熊概代管他的职务，兼代理刑部。
English: The imperial court summoned Xiong Qi to take over his duties as acting head of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：九年十月录囚，自朝至日宴，未暇食，忽风眩卒。
现代文：九年十月，省察记录犯囚的罪案，熊概从早到晚，未暇进食。突然他感到晕眩，然后便去世了。
English: In October of the ninth year, while investigating the criminal case of a recorded criminal prisoner, Xiong Guo went from morning to night, not having time to eat. Suddenly he felt dizzy, and then he died.

古文：概迁都御史。
现代文：皇上赐祭，派船送他归葬。
English: The emperor offered a sacrifice and sent a ship to take him to be buried.

古文：春同日进刑部右侍郎。
现代文：熊概性格刚毅果断，巡视江南时，威名很盛。
English: Xiong You's character is resolute and decisive. When he patrolled the south of the Yangtze River, his reputation was great.

古文：卒于官。
现代文：到他掌都察院后，声名渐损。
English: He died in office.

古文：陈镒，字有戒，吴县人。
现代文：陈镒，字有戒，吴县人。
English: Chen Yao, a native of Wuxian County.

古文：永乐十年进士。授御史。迁湖广副使，历山东、浙江，皆有声。
现代文：永乐十年，中进士，后被授予御史，再升任湖广副使，历任山东、浙江副使，都很有名声。
English: Yongle ten years, junior high school graduate, was later awarded the imperial history, and then promoted to deputy envoy of Hubei, Shandong, Zhejiang deputy envoys, are very famous.

古文：英宗即位之三月，擢右副都御史，与都督同知郑铭镇守陕西。
现代文：英宗即位后三个月，他被升为右副都御史，与都督同知郑铭镇守陕西。
English: Three months after the enthronement of Emperor Yingzong, he was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, and together with the governor, Zheng Ming, he governed Shaanxi.

古文：北方饥民多流移就食。
现代文：北方饥民多到处流移就食。
English: The starving people in the north mostly move around to eat.

古文：镒道出大名见之，疏陈其状，诏免赋役。
现代文：陈镒从大名府出来见到他们，便上疏报告了这一情况，皇上下诏免除当地赋税徭役。
English: Chen Xi came out from the daimyofu to see them, so Shang Su reported the situation, and the emperor issued an edict exempting the local tax officials.

古文：正统改元，镒言陕西用兵，民困供亿，派征物料，乞悉停免。
现代文：正统改元后，陈镒说陕西因为用兵，百姓苦于供给，国家还派征物料，请求全部停免。
English: After the reform of the Yuan Dynasty, Chen Wei said that because of the use of soldiers in Shaanxi, the people suffered from the supply, the state also sent materials, and requested that all be suspended.

古文：诏可。
现代文：诏令说可以。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：明年五月，以劳绩下敕奖励，因命巡延绥、宁夏边。
现代文：第二年五月，他以有劳绩受到皇上下敕书奖励，并命他巡视延绥、宁夏边防。
English: In May of the following year, he was rewarded by the Emperor for his distinguished service, and he was ordered to inspect the Yenching and Ningxia border defenses.

古文：所至条奏军民便宜，多所废置。
现代文：所到之处他都上奏军民之事，多有兴废。
English: Everywhere he went, he reported on military and civilian affairs, mostly in a jovial manner.

古文：所部六府饥，请发仓振。
现代文：他所辖的六府闹饥荒，他请求发仓米赈济。
English: There was a famine in the six prefectures under his jurisdiction, and he asked for rice to be sent from storehouses.

古文：帝从辅臣请，修荒政。
现代文：皇上听从辅臣的请求，整治救荒之政。
English: The emperor heeded the request of his vassal to rectify the famine relief policy.

古文：镒请遍行于各边，由是塞上咸有储蓄。
现代文：陈镒请把救荒之政普遍施行于各个边区，因此塞上都有粮饷储蓄。
English: Chen Xi asked that the policy of drought relief be universally implemented in all border regions, so there are grain and rice savings on the plug.

古文：六年春，以镒久劳于外，命与王翱岁一更代。
现代文：六年春，因陈镒长年辛劳在外，皇上命王翱隔年去代替他。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, because Chen Xi had been working hard for a long time, the emperor ordered Wang Xi to replace him the following year.

古文：七年，翱调辽东，镒复出镇。
现代文：七年，王翱调到辽东，隘镒便又出去镇守。
English: In the seventh year, Wang Qian was transferred to Liaodong, and Yuxuan went out to guard the town.

古文：岁满当代，以陕人乞留，诏仍旧任。
现代文：当年任满应当更代，因为陕西人请求留下他，诏令仍让他留任。
English: He should have been replaced at the end of his term that year, because the people of Shaanxi requested that he stay on, and the imperial decree still allowed him to remain in office.

古文：时仓储充溢，有军卫者足支十年，无者直可支百年。
现代文：当时仓库储备充溢，有军卫的地方足以支用十年，没有军卫的地方则可以支用一百年。
English: At that time, warehouse reserves were overflowing. A place with a military guard could be used for ten years, while a place without a military guard could be used for a hundred years.

古文：镒以陈腐委弃可惜，请每岁春夏时，给官军为月饷，不复折钞。
现代文：陈镒因如果粮食陈腐了弃掉可惜，便请每年春夏之时，拨给官军做月饷，不再折成钱钞。
English: Because it would be a pity to discard the grain if it became stale, Chen Yao asked that it be allocated to the government army to make moon cakes every spring and summer, and that it no longer be made into banknotes.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：九年春进右都御史，镇守如故。
现代文：九年春，他升为右都御史，仍镇守陕西。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, he was promoted to the Right Capital Imperial Historian, and still served as the governor of Shaanxi Province.

古文：秦中饥，乞蠲租十之四，其余米布兼收。
现代文：陕西饥荒，陈镒请减免赋税十分之四，其他的米布兼收。
English: During the famine in Shaanxi Province, Chen Rong requested a four-tenths tax reduction and exemption, while other rice and cloth producers received both.

古文：时瓦剌也先渐强，遣人授罕东诸卫都督喃哥等为平章，又置甘肃行省名号。
现代文：当时瓦剌部的也先逐渐强盛起来，派人授予罕东等卫的都督喃哥等人为平章，还设置了甘肃行省之名。
English: At that time, the corrugated board sector was also the first to grow in strength, and people were sent to award the governor of Handong Province and other officials, such as the governor of Handong Province and others, with the title of Pingzhang, and the name of Gansu Province was also established.

古文：镒以闻，请严为之备。
现代文：陈镒上报朝廷，请严加戒备。
English: Chen Qi reported to the imperial court. Please be on high alert.

古文：已，命与靖远伯王骥巡视甘肃、宁夏、延绥边务，听便宜处置。
现代文：后来，朝廷命他与靖远的王骥巡视甘肃、宁夏、延绥边防事务，授权他们相机处理。
English: Later, the imperial court ordered him and Jingyuan Wang Xi to inspect the border defense affairs of Gansu, Ningxia, and Yan'an, and authorized them to handle the camera.

古文：以灾沴频仍，条上抚安军民二十四事，多议行。
现代文：因为灾异频繁，他提出安抚军民二十四条建议上奏，多被讨论通过实行。
English: Because of the frequent disasters, he put forward 24 proposals to appease the military and the people. Most of them were discussed and implemented.

古文：镒尝恐襄、汉间流民啸聚为乱，请命河南、湖广、陕西三司官亲至其地抚恤之。
现代文：陈镒曾担心襄阳、汉中一带流民啸聚作乱，请命令河南、湖广、陕西三司官员亲自到地区抚恤百姓。
English: Chen Yu was worried that the people in Yangyang and other areas of Hanzhong Province would gather and create turmoil. Please order the officials of the three departments of Henan, Hukang and Shaanxi to personally go to the region to support the people.

古文：得旨允行，而当事者不以为意。
现代文：此建议得圣旨允许实行，而当事者却不以为意。
English: This proposal was allowed by the Holy See to be implemented, but the parties were not impressed.

古文：王文亦相继力言有司怠忽，恐遗祸。
现代文：王文也继之极力说有关官员怠慢疏忽，恐怕会留有后患。
English: Wang Wen also went on to say that the relevant officials were negligent and careless, and I am afraid that there will be consequences.

古文：至成化时，乃有项忠之役，人益思镒言。
现代文：到成化时期，果然有项忠一场战事，人们更加怀念陈镒的话。
English: By the Chenghua period, there was indeed a war between Xiangzhong and Chen Xi, and people missed Chen Xi's words even more.

古文：英宗北狩，景帝监国，镒合大臣廷论王振。
现代文：英宗被俘时，景帝监国，陈镒联合其他大臣在朝廷上弹劾王振。
English: When Emperor Yingzong was captured, Emperor Jing, the supervisor of the country, Chen Xi and other ministers jointly impeached Wang Zhen in the imperial court.

古文：于是振侄王山伏诛。
现代文：于是王振的侄儿王山被诛杀。
English: As a result, Wang Zhen's nephew Wang Shan was beaten to death.

古文：也先将入犯，以于谦荐，出抚畿内。
现代文：也先将要入侵，因于谦的推荐，陈镒出京安抚畿内。
English: They were also going to invade first. Due to Qian Qian's recommendation, Chen Xi went to Beijing to pacify the Kinai region.

古文：事宁，召还，进左都御史。
现代文：事态平息后，他被召回，升为左都御史。
English: After the situation calmed down, he was recalled and promoted to Sadogoto Imperial Historian.

古文：景泰二年，陕西饥，军民万余人， 愿得陈公活我。 
现代文：景泰二年，陕西饥荒，有一万余名军民一致说 ：愿得陈公活我！ 
English: In the second year of Jing Tai, there was a famine in Shaanxi, and more than ten thousand soldiers and civilians unanimously said: "May Chen Gong live!

古文：监司以闻，帝复命之。
现代文：按察使报告朝廷，皇上于是又命他出镇陕西。
English: According to the inspector's report to the imperial court, the emperor then ordered him to leave the town of Shaanxi.

古文：镒至是凡三镇陕，先后十余年，陕人戴之若父母。
现代文：至此陈镒共三次镇守陕西，前后十余年，陕人很爱戴他，敬若父母。
English: Up to this point, Chen Wei has been the garrison commander of Shaanxi Province for a total of three times. For more than ten years, the people of Shaanxi love him very much and respect his young parents.

古文：每还朝，必遮道拥车泣。
现代文：每次陈镒回朝廷，老百姓总是挡道拥车而泣。
English: Every time Chen Xuan returned to the imperial court, the common people always blocked the way, hugged the car and cried.

古文：再至，则欢迎数百里不绝。
现代文：他回来时，则欢迎的人群数百里不绝。
English: When he returned, he was greeted by hundreds of people.

古文：其得军民心，前后抚陕者莫及也。
现代文：他之得军民之心，前后镇守陕西的无人可及。
English: He won the hearts of the military and the people, and no one in the town guard of Shaanxi can match him.

古文：三年春召还，加太子太保，与王文并掌都察院。
现代文：三年，他被召回，加封为太子太保，与王文一起掌都察院。
English: Three years later, he was recalled and given the additional title of Crown Prince and Protector of the Realm. Together with Wang Wen, he was appointed to the Capital Inspection Office.

古文：麓川平，召为左副都御史，所至有声。
现代文：王文很威严，御史们敬之如神灵。陈镒性格宽恕，对风宪工作贡献不大，声望稍损于在陕西之时。
English: Wang Wen was very dignified, and historians revered him as a deity. Chen Xi was forgiving and made little contribution to constitutional work, and his reputation was slightly lower than when he was in Shaanxi.

古文：陈泰，字吉亨，光泽人。
现代文：第二年秋他因病退休。他去世后，赠太保，谥僖敏。陈泰，字吉亨，光泽人。
English: In the autumn of the following year, he retired due to illness. After his death, he bestowed the title of Taibao, Jimin, Chen Tai, Ji Heng, and Shining Man.

古文：幼从外家曹姓，既贵，乃复故。
现代文：小时跟从外家姓曹，显贵之后，才改回原姓。
English: He changed his family name to Cao at an early age, and only changed it back to his original family name after he became prominent.

古文：举乡试第一，除安庆府学训导。
现代文：考取乡试第一名，被任为安庆府学训导。
English: He won the first place in the township examination and was appointed as the Anqing prefectural school instructor.

古文：正统初，廷臣交荐，擢御史，巡按贵州。
现代文：正统初年，廷臣纷纷推荐他，他被升为御史，巡按贵州。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, courtiers recommended him one after another. He was promoted to Imperial Historian and made a tour of Guizhou.

古文：官军征麓川，岁取土兵二千为乡导，战失利，辄杀以冒功，泰奏罢之。
现代文：官军征讨麓川时，每年征取士兵二千名做向导，战事一失利，常常杀他们来冒功，陈泰上奏停罢这一举动。
English: When the government army went to conquer the Luchuan River, 2,000 soldiers were recruited every year to serve as guides. Once the battle was lost, they often killed them to take credit. Chen Tai appealed to stop this action.

古文：再按山西。
现代文：他又出去按察山西。
English: He went out again to inspect Shanxi Province.

古文：时百官俸薄，折钞又不能即得。
现代文：当时百官的俸禄微薄，由禄米折成的钱钞又不能马上得到。
English: At that time, the salary of a centurion was meager, and it was not possible to get money immediately from the money.

古文：泰上章乞量增禄廪，俾足养廉，然后治赃污，则贪风自息。
现代文：陈泰上奏请量加禄米，使百官足以养廉，然后惩治贪污，这样贪污之风自然消失。
English: Chen Tai made a request for the amount of gallons of rice, so that the officials would be enough to raise corruption, and then punish corruption, so that the corruption would naturally disappear.

古文：事格不行。
现代文：这一建议被格去不实行。
English: This suggestion was ruled out of order.

古文：六年夏言： 连岁灾异，咎在廷臣，请敕御史给事中纠弹大臣，去其尤不职者，而后所司各考核其属。 
现代文：六年夏，他说： 连年发生灾异，咎在于廷臣，请敕令御史和给事中纠察弹劾大臣，撤去极不称职的人，而后各部门各自考核其属官。 
English: In the summer of the sixth year, he said: "The blame for the disasters that have occurred year after year lies with the courtiers. I request you to order the imperial historian and the minister of picketing and impeachment to remove those who are extremely incompetent, and then each department will evaluate their subordinates.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：于是御史马谨等交章劾吏部尚书郭琎等数十人。
现代文：于是御史马谨等人纷纷上书弹劾吏部尚书郭等数十人。
English: As a result, Goshimagami and others sent letters to impeach dozens of officials including Shoseki.

古文：已，复出按山东。
现代文：后来，他又出去按察山东。
English: Later, he went out to inspect Shandong again.

古文：泰素励操行，好搏击。
现代文：陈泰素来磨砺自己的品德，喜欢攻击自己所看不惯的事。
English: Chen Tai has always honed his character and likes to attack things he dislikes.

古文：三为巡按，惩奸去贪，威棱甚峻。
现代文：他三为巡按，惩治奸吏，除去贪污，非常威严。
English: He is very dignified in his three-pronged mission of inspecting, punishing traitors, and eliminating corruption.

古文：九年超擢四川按察使，与镇守都御史寇深相失。
现代文：九年，他超升为四川按察使，与镇守官都御史寇深合不来。
English: In the ninth year, he was promoted to the post of inspector of Sichuan, and he could not get along well with the town guard officer, the governor of the capital.

古文：十二年八月，参议陈敏希深指，劾泰擅杖武职，殴舆夫至死。
现代文：十二年八月，参议陈敏仰承寇深的旨意，弹劾陈泰擅自杖打武职人员，还殴打舆夫致死。
English: In August of the 12th year, Councilor Chen Min obeyed the will of Cao Sheng and impeached Chen Tai for beating military personnel with a cane without authorization. He also beat his father-in-law to death.

古文：逮刑部狱，坐斩。
现代文：将他逮入刑部监狱，判了斩刑。
English: He was arrested and taken to the Ministry of Justice prison, where he was sentenced to beheading.

古文：泰奏辩，大理卿俞士悦亦具状以闻。
现代文：陈泰上奏辩解，大理寺卿俞士悦也把实际情况上报。
English: Chen Tai went on to make a defense, and Dairiji Ching Shiyue also reported the actual situation.

古文：皆不听。
现代文：皇上都不听。
English: These kings of the sea don't listen.

古文：景帝监国，赦复官。
现代文：景帝监国时，给他赦免，并恢复官职。
English: When Emperor Jing was in charge of the country, he pardoned him and restored his official position.

古文：于谦荐守紫荆关。
现代文：于谦推荐他守紫荆关。
English: Yu Qian recommended him to guard the Bauhinia Pass.

古文：也先入犯，关门不守，复论死。
现代文：也先入侵时，关门失守，他又被判死罪。
English: He was also sentenced to death after he failed to close the gate during the first invasion.

古文：景帝宥之，命充为事官，从总兵官顾兴祖筑关隘自效。
现代文：景帝宽宥了他，命他充任事官，跟随总兵官顾兴祖修筑关隘自效。
English: Emperor Jing pardoned him and ordered him to serve as an official and follow the commander-in-chief Gu Xingzu to build the pass.

古文：景泰元年擢大理右少卿，守备白羊口。
现代文：景泰元年，升他为大理寺右少卿，守备白羊口。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Taejo, he was promoted to the Right Junior Secretary of Dali Temple, guarding Baiyangkou.

古文：四月，都督同知刘安代宁远伯任礼巡备涿、易、真、保诸城，命泰以右佥都御史参其军务。
现代文：四月，都督同知刘安取代宁远伯任礼巡回守备涿州、易州、真定、保定各城，皇上命陈泰以右佥都御史之衔参佐刘安军务。
English: In April, Liu An, the governor of the capital, replaced Ningyuan Bo Renli and went on a tour to defend the cities of Bozhou, Yizhou, Zhending and Baoding. The emperor ordered Chen Tai to serve as Liu An's military adviser with the title of the right-hand governor of the capital.

古文：三年兼巡抚保定六府。
现代文：三年，他兼任保定六府巡抚。
English: For three years, he also served as the governor of six prefectures in Baoding.

古文：寻命督治河道。
现代文：不久命他督治河道。
English: Before long he was in charge of the river.

古文：自仪真至淮安，浚渠百八十里，塞决口九，筑坝三，役六万人，数月而毕。
现代文：从仪真到淮安，共疏浚渠道一百八十里，堵塞决口九处，筑坝三座，役使民夫六万人，只用了几个月就完工了。
English: From Yizhen to Huai'an, a total of 180 miles of channels were dredged, nine breaches were blocked, three dams were built, and 60,000 people were employed. It took only a few months to complete.

古文：七年移抚苏、松。
现代文：七年，他调任苏松巡抚。
English: Seven years later, he was transferred to the post of Su Song patrolman.

古文：天顺改元，罢巡抚官，改广东副使，以忧去。
现代文：天顺改元后，停罢巡抚官，陈泰改任广东副使，因亲丧去职。
English: After the reform of the Yuan Dynasty, Tianshun suspended the post of the inspector, and Chen Tai was appointed as the vice-envoy of Guangdong, but left the post due to the death of his relative.

古文：四川盗起，有言泰尝莅其地，有威名，乃复故官，往巡抚。
现代文：四川盗贼起事，有人说陈泰曾治理该地，有威名，于是恢复他原官，前往巡抚。
English: Thieves in Sichuan rioted. Some people said that Chen Tai had governed the area and had a prestigious name, so he resumed his original post and went to the governor.

古文：不携岭表一物，以清节显。
现代文：八年，他进升右副都御史，总督漕运兼巡抚淮安、扬州等府。他在淮三年，辞职而归。
English: In the eighth year, he was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, the governor of Cao Yun and the governor of Huai'an, Yangzhou and other prefectures. He resigned in the third year of Huai.

古文：曾翚，字时升，泰和人。
现代文：成化六年，去世。曾翚，字时升，泰和人。
English: He was six years old when he died. Zeng Yao, also known as Shi Sheng, was a Thai warrior.

古文：宣德八年进士。
现代文：宣德八年，中进士。
English: In the eighth year of Xuan De, he became a junior high school graduate.

古文：治秦府永兴王葬，却有司馈遗。
现代文：他治理秦府永兴王葬事时，辞去有关官员的馈赠。
English: When he was in charge of the funeral of King Yongxing of Qin, he resigned from the gift of the relevant officials.

古文：历刑部员外郎。
现代文：历任刑部员外郎。
English: Gairo, a former member of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：尚书金濂器之，俾典奏牍。
现代文：尚书金濂很器重他，让他掌管奏章。
English: Shangshu Jinyu respected him very much and let him take charge of the movement.

古文：有重狱，诸郎不能决，辄以属翚。
现代文：有什么重案，各郎官不能决断，总是交给曾翚。
English: If there is any serious case that cannot be decided by the various officials, it is always handed over to Zeng Yao.

古文：秦王讦巡抚陈镒狎妓。
现代文：秦王揭发巡抚陈镒狎妓。
English: The Qin King exposed the procurator Chen Yuxuan.

古文：翚按得其情，劾藩府诬大臣，镒得白。
现代文：曾翚调查出实情，弹劾藩府诬陷大臣，陈镒得以洗清罪名。
English: Zeng Yao investigated and found the truth, impeached the government for framing the minister, and Chen Yao was able to clear his name.

古文：正统十三年进郎中。
现代文：正统十三年，他升为郎中。
English: In the 13th year of orthodoxy, he was promoted to junior vassal.

古文：以何文渊荐，擢广西右参政。
现代文：因何文渊的推荐，他升为广西右参政。
English: Because of He Wenyuan's recommendation, he was promoted to Guangxi right-wing politician.

古文：李棠檄翚及副使刘仁宅按黄矰父子。
现代文：李棠传檄曾翚和副使刘仁宅去调查黄翚父子。
English: Li Tang Chuan, Zeng Qi and his deputy sent Liu Ren home to investigate Huang Qi and his son.

古文：矰使人持千金贿于道，且拥精兵挟之。
现代文：黄翚派人持千金在路上贿赂他们，并且拥精兵来要挟。
English: Huang Qi sent people with thousands of money to bribe them on the road, and gathered elite soldiers to blackmail.

古文：二人佯许诺，已，诱执矰下之狱。
现代文：两人假装答应，过后，把黄翚诱出抓进狱中。
English: The two pretended to agree, and then lured Huang Qi into prison.

古文：棠以闻。
现代文：李棠向朝廷汇报了此事。
English: Li Tang reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：未几，矰以上书擢都督同知，父子俱出狱，翚等太息而已。
现代文：不久，黄翚通过上书被升为都督同知，父子两人都出狱了，曾翚等人叹息不已。
English: Soon, Huang Qi was promoted to the same rank as the governor through a letter. Both father and son were released from prison, and Zeng Yao and others sighed.

古文：寻以忧去。
现代文：不久他因亲丧去职。
English: He returned to his hometown shortly after his family members passed away.

古文：服阕，起官河南御史。
现代文：守孝期满后，他被起任为御史，出河南办事。
English: After his term of filial piety expired, he was appointed imperial historian and went to Henan to work.

古文：清军者利得军，多枉及民，翚辨释甚众。
现代文：清军的官员利在得军，多害及百姓。曾翚进行申辩，使许多百姓获释。
English: The officials of the Qing army benefited the army and harmed the people. Zeng Yao pleaded his case and many people were released.

古文：南阳诸府多流户，众议驱逐，人情惶急，翚与巡抚抚安之。
现代文：南阳等府流来的百姓很多，大家建议把他们赶出去，以致人心惶恐，曾翚与巡抚安抚了他们。
English: There were a lot of people from Nanyang and other prefectures, and everyone suggested that they should be driven out, which made people panic. Zeng Yao and the governor calmed them down.

古文：天顺五年迁山东右布政使。
现代文：天顺五年，他升为山东右布政使。
English: In the fifth year of Tianshun, he was promoted to the Shandong Right cloth political envoy.

古文：民垦田无赋者，奸民指为闲田，献诸戚畹。
现代文：百姓开垦没有税额的田地，奸民把它们指为闲田，献给外戚。
English: The common people reclaimed the fields without the tax amount, and the ruffians designated them as idle fields and dedicated them to their relatives.

古文：部使者来勘，翚曰： 祖制，民垦荒田，永不科税，奈何夺之？ 
现代文：部使者来调查，曾翚说： 根据祖制，百姓开垦荒田，永不征税，为什么要夺他们的田？ 
English: When an envoy from the Ministry of the Interior came to investigate, Zeng Yao said: According to the ancestral system, the people cultivate wasteland and never collect taxes. Why should their fields be seized?

古文：使者奏如言，乃免。
现代文：使者根据他的话上奏，于是免予夺田。
English: The envoy played on his words, and was therefore exempted from seizing the field.

古文：成化初，转左。
现代文：成化初年，他转为左布政使。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he was transferred to Zuo Bu political envoy.

古文：河南岁饥，计开封积粟多，奏请平粜，贫民赖以济。
现代文：河南闹饥荒，计开封积粟为多，他奏请平卖粮食，贫民赖此得以度过饥荒。
English: Henan was suffering from famine, and there was a lot of poppies in the open, so he asked for grain to be sold on the open market, and the poor people were able to get through the famine.

古文：召拜刑部左侍郎，仍食从二品俸。
现代文：他被召回任刑部左侍郎，仍享受从二品官俸禄。
English: He was recalled to serve as the Left Attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, still enjoying the salary of a second-class official.

古文：寻巡视浙江，考察官吏，奏罢不职者百余人，他弊政多所厘革。
现代文：不久他巡视浙江，考察官吏，上奏罢免了一百多名不称职的人，其他方面的弊政他也多所改革。
English: Soon he toured Zhejiang, inspected officials, and dismissed more than a hundred incompetent people. He also reformed many other aspects of maladministration.

古文：还朝，久之，谢病去。
现代文：回朝后不久，他称病辞去。
English: Shortly after returning to the North, he called in sick and resigned.

古文：居数载，引疾归。
现代文：曾翚品行谨慎，所到之处都有名声。
English: Zeng Yao has a reputation for being discreet wherever he goes.

古文：李侃，字希正，东安人。
现代文：他回去后，家庭生计萧然，绝迹不到公府，乡里人都视为贤士。李侃，字希正，东安人。
English: After he went back, the family's livelihood was depressed, the extinction did not reach the government, and the villagers were regarded as sages. Li Kan, Zi Xizheng, Dongan people.

古文：正统七年进士。
现代文：正统七年，中进士。
English: He has been a member of the Orthodox Church for seven years.

古文：授户科给事中。
现代文：被授予户科给事中。
English: He was awarded a degree in home economics.

古文：景帝监国，陈简将才、募民壮、用战车三事。
现代文：景帝监国时，他上书建议挑选将才、招募民壮、使用战车三件事。
English: When Emperor Jing oversaw the country, he wrote a letter suggesting three things: the selection of generals, the recruitment of able-bodied men, and the use of chariots.

古文：也先逼京师议者欲焚城外马草。
现代文：也先逼近京师，议论者想焚掉城外的马草。
English: They also approached the capital first, arguing that they wanted to burn the horse grass outside the city.

古文：侃言敌轻剽，无持久心，乞勿焚，免复敛为民累。
现代文：李侃说敌人轻装剽劫，没有持久之心，请不要焚掉，以免再次征敛，苦及百姓。
English: Li Kan said that the enemy is lightly disguised and does not have a lasting heart, please do not burn it, so as not to collect again, and the people will suffer.

古文：皆报许。
现代文：都得到批准。
English: All were approved.

古文：时父母在容城，侃晓夜悲泣，乞假，冒险迎之。
现代文：当时他父母在容城，李侃日夜悲泣，请假去冒险迎接回来。
English: At that time, his parents were in Yongcheng, and Li Kan cried day and night, taking time off to go on an adventure to welcome them back.

古文：景泰初，议录扈从死事诸臣后。
现代文：景泰初年，计划登记扈从英宗出征的死难大臣的后代。
English: In the first year of Jing Tai, it was planned to register the descendants of the Minister of Disaster who went to war from Ying Zong.

古文：侃因言避难偷生者，宜严谴以厉臣节。
现代文：李侃因而说避难偷生的人，应该严加谴责以励臣节。
English: As a result, Li Kan said that those who take refuge and steal a living should be severely condemned on the occasion of Reverence Day.

古文：上皇将还，与同官刘福等言礼宜从厚。
现代文：上皇将回来时，他与同官刘福等人说礼仪应该从厚。
English: When the emperor returned, he and his colleague Liu Fu and others said that the etiquette should be thicker.

古文：忤旨，被诘，尚书胡濙为解，乃已。
现代文：这建议忤逆了皇上，遭到斥问，尚书胡氵荧为他们解释，才罢了。
English: This suggestion did not go down well with the Emperor, and he was rebuked. It was only necessary to write a book of lies to explain it to them.

古文：再迁都给事中。
现代文：李侃再升为都给事中。
English: Li Kan is in the process of being promoted again.

古文：军兴，减天下学校师儒俸廪。
现代文：当时正用兵，减少天下学校师儒的俸禄。
English: At that time, soldiers were being used to reduce the salary of the world's school teachers.

古文：侃奏复之。
现代文：李侃上奏恢复原额。
English: After Li Kan's encore, the original score was restored.

古文：户部尚书金濂违诏征租，侃论濂，下之吏。
现代文：户部尚书金濂违犯诏令征取租税，李侃弹劾他，使他受到司法官员审问。
English: Li Kan impeached the head of the household, Shangshu Jinyu, for levying taxes in violation of the imperial edict, and he was interrogated by judicial officials.

古文：石亨从子彪侵民业，侃请置重典，并严禁勋戚、中官不得豪夺细民，有司隐者同罪。
现代文：石亨的侄子石彪侵占百姓产业，李侃请用重法处治他，并严禁勋戚、宦官不得强夺小民，有关官员隐瞒不报的与之同罪。
English: Shi Heng's nephew, Shi Biao, has encroached on the people's property. Li Qianlong is requested to punish him with a heavy penalty. It is strictly forbidden for relatives and eunuchs to forcibly seize small people. The relevant officials are guilty of the same crime if they conceal and do not report.

古文：帝宥亨、彪，余如其请。
现代文：皇上宽宥了石亨和石彪，其他的都批准了他的请求。
English: The emperor pardoned Shi Heng and Shi Biao, and the others approved of his request.

古文：时给事中敢言者，林聪称首，侃亦矫抗有直声。
现代文：当时给事中敢于说话的，林聪可说是第一个，李侃倔强而有正直的名声。
English: At that time, Lin Cong could be said to be the first one who dared to speak out, while Li Kan had a reputation for being stubborn and honest.

古文：廷议易储，诸大臣唯唯。侃泣言东宫无失德，聪与御史朱英亦言不可，时议壮之。
现代文：朝廷讨论更换太子，大臣们唯唯诺诺，李侃哭着说东宫太子没有失德，林聪和御史朱英也说不可，时人议论都认为他们很胆壮。
English: The imperial court discussed the replacement of the crown prince, the ministers acquiesced, Li Kan cried and said that the East Palace Prince did not lose his virtue, Lin Cong and Gu Shi Zhu Ying also said that they could not, and people at the time thought that they were very courageous.

古文：擢詹事府丞。
现代文：升为詹事府丞。
English: He was promoted to Janzhifu no jo.

古文：天顺元年改太常丞，进太仆卿。
现代文：天顺元年，他改任太常寺丞，进升为太仆寺卿。
English: In the first year of Tenshun, he was reassigned to the post of Taijo-ji chojo and promoted to the post of Taipo-ji chieftain.

古文：明年复设山西巡抚，迁侃右佥都御史任之。
现代文：第二年重设山西巡抚，升李侃为右佥都御史担任该职。
English: The next year, the post of Shanxi governor was re-established, and Li Kan was promoted to the post of the right-hand governor of the capital.

古文：奏言： 塞北之地，与穷荒无异。
现代文：他上奏说 ：塞北之地，与穷荒无异。
English: He began his speech by saying: "In the north of Syria, there is nothing but desolation.

古文：非生长其间者，未有能宁居而狎敌者也。
现代文：不是生长其间的人，没有能够安居而对敌的。
English: It is not the people who grew up there, who were not able to live in peace and confront the enemy.

古文：今南人戍西北边，怯风寒，闻寇股栗。
现代文：现在南方人戍守北部边疆，他们害怕风寒，一听说敌人来便发抖。
English: Now the southerners are guarding the northern border. They are afraid of the wind and cold, and tremble when they hear that the enemy is coming.

古文：而北人戍南，亦不耐暑，多潜逃。
现代文：而北方人戍守南疆，也不耐暑热，多潜逃回来。
English: However, northerners who stay in southern Xinjiang are not able to withstand the heat, and many of them sneak back.

古文：宜令南北清勾之军，各就本土补伍，人情交便，戎备得修。 
现代文：应令南北清勾军，各就本土补入军队，这样人情两便，而军备也得到修整。 
English: The Northern and Southern Qing armies should be ordered to supplement each other's troops on the mainland. This will benefit both sides, and the armaments will also be repaired.

古文：时不能用。
现代文：他的建议当时没被采用。
English: The recommendation was not implemented.

古文：奏发巡按李杰罪，杰亦讦侃。
现代文：他上奏揭发巡按李杰的罪行，李杰也揭发他。
English: He reported to expose the crimes of patrol Li Jie, and Li Jie also exposed him.

古文：按杰事有验，除名。
现代文：查李杰的罪行得到验证，他被除名。
English: Zha Lijie's crime was verified and he was removed from the list.

古文：侃无赃罪，获宥。
现代文：李侃没有赃罪，得到宽宥。
English: Li Kan did not commit any crime and was pardoned.

古文：六年考察属吏，奏罢布政使王允、李正芳以下百六十人。
现代文：六年，他考察属吏，上奏罢免了布政使王允、李正芳以下等一百六十人。
English: In the sixth year, he inspected the subordinate officials, and dismissed 160 people including the Bu government envoys Wang Yun and Li Zhengfang.

古文：因言： 诸臣年与臣若、不堪任事者，臣悉退之，臣亦当罢。 
现代文：他顺便说道： 那些年龄与臣相当，不胜任本职工作的人，臣都把他们罢免了，臣也请求罢免。 
English: He said in passing: Those who are of the same age as the minister and are not competent to do their job, the minister has dismissed them, and the minister has also requested to be dismissed.

古文：诏不许。
现代文：诏令不许。
English: The edict does not allow it.

古文：侃性刚方，力振风纪，贪墨者屏迹。
现代文：李侃性格刚直，力整风纪，贪赃者因此敛迹。
English: Li Kan has an upright personality and strives to rectify the etiquette, so those who are greedy will be restrained.

古文：其年冬以母丧归，军民拥泣，至不得行。
现代文：这年冬，他因母亲去世回家，军民围着他哭泣，以至于难以走动。
English: This winter, when he returned home after his mother died, the soldiers and civilians around him were crying so much that it was difficult for him to move.

古文：服除，遂不出，家居十余年卒。
现代文：守孝期满后，他不再出来为官，家居十余年后去世。
English: After the expiration of the period of filial piety, he no longer came out as an official, and died more than ten years later.

古文：锐见笥中惟敝衣，挥涕曰： 君子也。 
现代文：李侃事奉亲人至孝，喜欢学习，安于贫穷，他死后家里几乎不能装殓。
English: Li Kan held his relatives in the highest regard, loved to study, and was content to live in poverty. After his death, his home could barely be decorated.

古文：为具棺敛，闻其清节于朝。帝特命赐祭葬，不为令。纲清刚似李侃，为时所重。原杰，字子英，阳城人。
现代文：弘治初年，国子监生江纪等人说，从前的祭酒胡俨、都御史高明、李侃，无论是学者的品行还是事功，都昭然著于耳目，并请给他们赐给谥号。这建议被压下，没有执行。原杰，字子英，阳城人。
English: In the first year of the Hongzhi era, Jiang Ji, the son-in-law of Guo Zi, and others said that in the past, Hu Yao, Du Mi Shi Gao Ming, and Li Kan Yu, whether it was the scholar's behavior or achievements, were clearly visible to the eye and ear, and asked them to give them a nickname. This suggestion was suppressed and not implemented.

古文：正统十年进士。
现代文：正统十年，中进士。
English: Ten years of orthodoxy, junior high school graduate.

古文：又二年，授南京御史，寻改北。
现代文：过了两年，他被授予南京御史，不久改到北京。
English: Two years later, he was awarded the title of Nanjing Imperial Historian, and soon moved to Beijing.

古文：巡按江西，捕诛剧盗，奸宄敛迹。
现代文：后来他巡按江西，捕诛巨盗，奸宄之徒因此而敛迹。
English: Later, he made a tour of Jiangxi Province, catching a huge thief, and the traitors were thus deterred.

古文：复按顺天诸府。
现代文：他又巡按顺天等府。
English: He also visited Shuntian and other prefectures.

古文：大水，牧官马者乏刍，马多毙，有司责偿，杰请免之。
现代文：发大水，牧养官马的百姓因缺草料，马匹多死，有关官员向百姓索赔。
English: Due to the lack of fodder, many horses died, and the relevant officials claimed compensation from the people.

古文：开中盐引入米振饥。疏入，为部所格，景帝卒从杰议。
现代文：原杰请求免以索赔，并实行开中法，令商人输米到本地来换取盐引，以此来赈济饥荒。他的奏疏呈入后，被部里反对，但景帝最后还是批准了原杰的建议。
English: Yuanjie requested to be exempted from the claim, and implemented the opening-up law, forcing merchants to export rice to the local area in exchange for salt, in order to alleviate the famine. After his petition was submitted, it was opposed by the ministry, but Jingdi finally approved Yuanjie's proposal.

古文：超擢江西按察使。
现代文：他被超升为江西按察使。
English: He was promoted to the position of Jiangxi Deputy Inspector General.

古文：发宁王奠培淫乱事，革其护卫。
现代文：原杰揭发宁王朱奠培淫乱的事，革去他的护卫。
English: Yuan Jie exposed the adultery of Zhu Dian, the king of Ning, and dismissed his bodyguard.

古文：治行闻，赐诰旌异，迁山东左布政使。
现代文：他的治行传到朝廷，皇上赐给诰命表彰他，升他为山东左布政使。
English: His governance was passed on to the imperial court, and the emperor gave him a posthumous commendation and promoted him to Shandong Zuo Bu political envoy.

古文：成化二年就拜右副都御史，巡抚其地。
现代文：成化二年，他在山东就任为右副都御史，巡抚该地。
English: In the second year of Chenghua, he was appointed as the right vice-governor of Shandong and the governor of the region.

古文：岁凶振救，民无流移。
现代文：遇到荒年，他赈济救灾，使百姓没有流离。
English: In the face of a bad year, he helped with disaster relief, so that the people were not displaced.

古文：召为户部左侍郎。
现代文：他被召回任户部左侍郎。
English: He was called back to serve as the left hand man of the household.

古文：时黄河迁决不常，彼陷则此淤。
现代文：当时黄河崩决改道不常，这里塌陷那里又淤塞了。
English: At that time, it was not common for the Yellow River to collapse and change its course, collapsing here and silting up there.

古文：军民就淤垦种。奸徒指为园场屯地，献王府邀赏，王府辄据有之。
现代文：军民在淤塞的地区开垦种植，奸徒却说那些地方是园场屯地，献给王府以邀赏赐，王府便总是据为己有。
English: The soldiers and civilians reclaimed and planted in the silted areas, but the traitors said that those places were gardens and settlements, dedicated to the royal court with an invitation and reward, and the royal court always took possession of them.

古文：杰请献者谪戍，并罪受献者。
现代文：原杰请将献出田地的人贬去戍边，并给接受的人加罪。
English: Yuanjie asked that the person who offered the field be stripped of his rights, and that the person who accepted the offer be punished.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：江西盗起，以杰尝再莅其地得民，诏往治。
现代文：江西盗贼起事，因原杰曾两度统治该地区，得民心，皇上下诏派他去治理。
English: Thieves in Jiangxi Province rioted. Since Yuan Jie had ruled the region twice and won the people's hearts, the emperor sent him to govern.

古文：捕戮六百余人，余悉解散。
现代文：原杰逮捕并杀戮了六百余人，其他的全部解散。
English: Yuan Jie arrested and killed more than six hundred people, and all the others were disbanded.

古文：改左副都御史，还佐院事。
现代文：改任他为左副都御史，将他召回佐理都察院事务。
English: He was reappointed as Left Deputy Metropolitan Historian, and he was called back to the affairs of the Sakuridokain.

古文：荆、襄流民数十万，朝廷以为忧。
现代文：荆、襄地区有流民数十万，朝廷很忧虑。
English: There are hundreds of thousands of displaced people in the Jing and Xiang regions, and the imperial court is very worried.

古文：祭酒周洪谟尝著《流民图说》，谓当增置府县，听附籍为编氓，可实襄、邓户口，俾数百年无患。
现代文：祭酒周洪谟曾著有《流民图说》，说应当增设府县，听任流民附籍，成为编户之民，这样可以充实襄阳、邓州户口，使几百年没有祸患。
English: Zhou Hongmu, the sacrificial wine, once wrote "The Story of the Displaced People," saying that prefectures and counties should be added, and that the displaced people should be allowed to be registered and become the people of the household, so that the households of Xiangyang and Denzhou can be enriched, so that there will be no disaster for hundreds of years.

古文：都御史李宾以闻，帝善之。
现代文：都御史李宾将该书上奏朝廷。
English: Li Bin, the Metropolitan Historian, reported the book to the Imperial Court.

古文：十二年，遂命杰出抚。
现代文：皇上称善。十二年，遂命原杰出去安抚。
English: The emperor commended him for his kindness. In the twelfth year, he ordered Yuan Jie to go out and appease him.

古文：遍历山溪，宣朝廷德意，诸流民欣然愿附籍。
现代文：原杰遍历山谷，宣布朝廷德意，流民们都欣然愿意附籍。
English: Yuan Jie traversed the valley and announced the imperial edict, and the exiles were all willing to be registered.

古文：于是大会湖广、河南、陕西抚、按官籍之，得户十一万三千有奇，口四十三万八千有奇。
现代文：于是原杰大会湖广、河南、陕西抚、按官员来编户籍，获得十一万三千多户，人口四十三万八千多人。
English: As a result, the Yuanjie General Assembly of Hunan, Henan and Shaanxi provinces compiled household registration according to officials, obtaining more than 113,000 households, with a population of more than 438,000.

古文：其初至，无产及平时顽梗者，驱还其乡，而附籍者用轻则定田赋。
现代文：初到的流民，没有资产以及平时顽劣的，将他们驱回故乡，而那些附籍的流民，则用轻额定田税，百姓非常高兴。
English: The newly arrived displaced persons, who had no assets and were usually vicious, were driven back to their hometowns, while those who had been registered as displaced persons were charged a light land tax, which made the people very happy.

古文：民大悦。因相地势，以襄阳所辖郧县，居竹、房、上津、商、洛诸县中，道路四达，去襄阳五百余里。山林阻深，将吏鲜至，猝有盗贼，府难遥制。乃拓其城，置郧阳府，以县附之。
现代文：原杰又审度地势，因襄阳府所辖的郧县，在竹、房、上津、商、洛五县之中，道路四达，离襄阳有五百余里，山林阻隔，将领官吏鲜到其地，一旦有盗贼发生，府难以遥制，于是拓广该城，设置郧阳府，以郧县附属于它。
English: Yuan Jie also examined the topography. Among the five counties of Zhu, Fang, Shangjin, Shang and Luo, Handan County, which is under the jurisdiction of Xiangyang Prefecture, has four roads. It is more than five hundred miles away from Xiangyang, separated by mountains and forests. Generals and officials rarely go there. In the event of theft, it is difficult to control the prefecture remotely. Therefore, he expanded the city and set up Handan Prefecture, with Handan County attached to it.

古文：且置湖广行都司，增兵设戍，而析竹山置竹溪，析郧置郧西，析汉中之洵阳置白河，与竹山、上津、房咸隶新府。
现代文：他还设置湖广行都司，增兵设戍所，分竹山县设置竹溪县，分郧县设郧西县，分汉中的洵阳县设白河县，将它们与竹山、上津、房县都隶属于新府。
English: He also set up the Huguangxing Capital Division, the Military Surge Headquarters, the Zhushan County Division, the Zhuxi County Division, the Shaanxi County Division, and the Baihe County Division, and subordinated them to the new prefecture along with Zhushan, Shangjin, and Fang County.

古文：又于西安增山阳，南阳增南召、桐柏，汝州增伊阳，各隶其旧府。
现代文：又在西安增设山阳县，南阳增设南召、桐柏县，汝州增设伊阳县，各隶属其旧府。
English: In addition, Sanyang County was added in Xi'an, Nanzhao and Tongbai County were added in Nanyang, and Iyang County was added in Ruzhou, all of which were subordinate to their old prefectures.

古文：制既定，荐知邓州吴远为郧阳知府，诸县皆择邻境良吏为之。
现代文：制定之后，他推荐邓州人吴远为郧阳知府，各县知县都选择邻境的良吏来担任。
English: After it was formulated, he recommended Wu Yuan, a native of Dengzhou, to be the governor of Fenyang Prefecture. All prefectures selected good officials from the neighboring areas to serve as governors.

古文：流人得所，四境乂安。
现代文：流民各得其所，四境平安。
English: The displaced persons have each found their own place, and all regions are safe.

古文：将还，以地界湖广、河南、陕西，事无统纪，因荐御史吴道宏自代。
现代文：他将要回来时，因该地处湖广、河南、陕西交界，百事没有统属，便推荐御史吴道宏来取代他。
English: When he was about to return, because the place was located at the junction of Hougang, Henan and Shaanxi, and Pepsi did not have a subordinate, he recommended Gu Shi Wu Daohong to replace him.

古文：诏即擢道宏大理少卿，抚治郧阳、襄阳、荆州、南阳、西安、汉中六府。
现代文：诏令即升吴道宏为大理寺少卿，抚治郧阳、襄阳、荆州、南阳、西安、汉中六府。
English: The imperial edict promoted Wu Daohong to the post of Dalian Temple Minor Lord, and he governed the six prefectures of Poyang, Yangyang, Jingzhou, Nanyang, Xi'an, and Hanzhong.

古文：郧阳之有抚治，自此始也。
现代文：郧阳有抚治，即从这时开始。
English: Fuzhi in Shenyang began at this time.

古文：杰以功进右都御史。
现代文：原杰以功劳升为右都御史。
English: Genjie was promoted to Utsunomiya governor for his merits.

古文：杰数扬历于外，既居内台，不欲出。
现代文：原杰多次任职在外，入居都察院后，便不想再出来。
English: Yuan Jie has been out of office for many times, and after moving into the Duza Academy, he does not want to come out again.

古文：荆、襄之命，非其意也。
现代文：他受命赴荆、襄，不是出于自己的意愿。
English: He was ordered to go to Jing and Xiang, not out of his own will.

古文：事竣，急请还朝。
现代文：事情办完后，他马上请回朝。
English: After the job was done, he immediately asked me to come back in the morning.

古文：会南京兵部缺尚书，以杰任之。
现代文：正好南京兵部缺尚书，便委任原杰。
English: As the Nanjing Military Department was in need of an officer, Yuan Jie was appointed.

古文：以上杭地接江西、广东，盗易啸聚，请析置永定县。
现代文：原杰上疏推辞，皇上不许。他最后死于南阳，终年六十一岁。
English: The emperor did not allow Yuan Jie to resign. He eventually died in Nanyang at the age of sixty-one.

古文：移疾径归。久之，卒。杨继宗，字承芳，阳城人。
现代文：郧阳、襄阳百姓给他立祠，诏令赠他为太子太保，录取他的儿子宗敏为国子监生。杨继宗，字承芳，阳城人。
English: The people of Shenyang and Xiangyang gave him a small shrine, the imperial edict bestowed him with the title of crown prince, and his son, Zongmin, was admitted as the son of the state. Yang Jizong, surnamed Chengfang, was from Yangcheng.

古文：天顺初进士。
现代文：天顺初年中进士。
English: Tenshun first year of junior high school graduate.

古文：授刑部主事。
现代文：被授予刑部主事。
English: He is now in charge of the criminal justice department.

古文：囚多疫死，为时其食饮，令三日一栉沐，全活甚众。
现代文：囚犯多患瘟疫而死，继宗为他们安排饮食，令三天一洗澡，因此他存活了很多人。
English: Most of the prisoners died of the plague, but his son-in-law arranged for them to eat and bathe once every three days, so many of them survived.

古文：又善辨疑狱。
现代文：他又善于辨解疑案。
English: He is also good at solving mysteries.

古文：河间获盗，遣里民张文、郭礼送京师，盗逸。
现代文：河间府抓到盗贼，派当地百姓张文、郭礼押送到京师，途中盗贼逃了。
English: Kawama prefecture caught the thief and sent local citizens Zhang Wen and Guo Li to escort him to the capital, but the thief escaped on the way.

古文：文谓礼曰： 吾二人并当死。
现代文：张文便对郭礼说 ：我二人都要被处死。
English: Zhang Wen then said to Guo Li: "Both of us will be executed."

古文：汝母老，鲜兄弟，以我代盗，庶全汝母子命。 
现代文：你母亲老了，又没有兄弟，你就把我当作盗贼，这样可保全你母子的性命。 
English: Now that your mother is old and has no brothers, you have treated me like a thief to save the lives of your mother and your son.

古文：礼泣谢，从之。
现代文：郭礼感泣致谢，同意了。
English: Guo Li cried tears of gratitude and agreed.

古文：文桎梏诣部，继宗察非盗，竟辨出之。
现代文：张文戴着枷锁被送到部里，继宗察知他不是盗贼，竟辨白清楚将他释放了。
English: Zhang Wen was sent to the ministry wearing shackles, but the succeeding emperor sensed that he was not a thief and released him.

古文：成化初，用王翱荐，擢嘉兴知府。
现代文：成化初年，受王翱的推荐，他被升为嘉兴知府。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he was promoted to Jiaxing prefecture on the recommendation of Wang Qi.

古文：以一仆自随，署斋萧然。
现代文：他只以一个仆人随从，官署摆设非常简单。
English: He was accompanied by only one servant, and the decoration of the office was very simple.

古文：性刚廉孤峭，人莫敢犯。
现代文：他个性刚直廉洁又孤傲，人们都不敢触犯他。
English: His personality is upright, incorruptible and proud, and people do not dare to offend him.

古文：而时时集父老问疾苦，为祛除之。
现代文：他又时常集中父老来询问疾苦，并为他们排忧除难。
English: He also often gathered his parents to inquire about their ailments and to relieve their worries.

古文：大兴社学，民间子弟八岁不就学者，罚其父兄；遇学官以宾礼。
现代文：又大兴社学，民间子弟八岁不入学的，就处罚他的父兄。对学官他待以宾主之礼。
English: He also greatly promoted social studies. If a commoner's eight-year-old son did not go to school, his father and brother would be punished. He treated school officials as honored guests.

古文：师儒竞劝，文教大兴。
现代文：因此师儒竞相劝学，教育文化事业大兴。
English: Therefore, teachers and students are competing to persuade students to study, and the educational and cultural undertakings are booming.

古文：御史孔儒清军，里老多挞死。
现代文：御史孔儒清军，乡里老人多被打死。
English: During the history of Confucianism and the Qing Dynasty, most of the old people in the countryside were killed.

古文：继宗榜曰： 御史杖人至死者，诣府报名。 
现代文：继宗放榜公告说 ：有被御史杖人至死的，到府里报告他的姓名。 
English: The announcement of the successor to the patriarch said: If there is a person who has been killed by the imperial scepter, report his name to the government.

古文：儒怒。
现代文：孔儒大怒。
English: Confucius was furious.

古文：继宗入见曰： 为治有体。
现代文：继宗进去见他说： 治理国家应该有体。
English: Tsugimune went in to see him and said, "Governing the country should be dignified.

古文：公但剔奸弊，劝惩官吏。
现代文：公只要剔除奸弊，劝勉和惩治官吏就行了。
English: It is enough for the public to weed out malpractices, and to exhort and punish officials.

古文：若比户稽核，则有司事，非宪体也。 
现代文：如果要挨户核实，则这是有关官员的事，并非台宪官员之体。 
English: If door-to-door verification is required, then this is a matter for the relevant officials, not the Taiwanese constitutional officials.

古文：儒不能难，而心甚衔之。
现代文：孔儒无法反驳，但心里却很恨继宗。
English: Confucius could not refute it, but in his heart he hated the successor.

古文：濒行，突入府署，发箧视之，敝衣数袭而已。
现代文：他临走时，突然进入府衙，翻开继宗的箱子查看，却发现只是几件破衣而已。
English: When he was about to leave, he suddenly entered the residence, opened the box of the successor to check, but found only a few pieces of rags.

古文：儒惭而去。
现代文：孔儒惭愧而去。
English: Embarrassed, Confucius left.

古文：中官过者，继宗遗以菱芡、历书。
现代文：路过的宦官，继宗送他们菱芡、历书。
English: When eunuchs passed by, the Emperor sent them a honeysuckle and a almanac.

古文：中官索钱，继宗即发牒取库金，曰： 金具在，与我印券。 
现代文：宦官索要金钱，继宗即发出文件取库金，说： 金都在这里，你给我收据。 
English: The eunuch demanded money, and the heir immediately issued a document to collect the treasury money, saying: The money is all here, give me a receipt.

古文：中官咋舌不敢受。
现代文：宦官咋舌不敢接受。
English: The eunuch did not dare to accept.

古文：入觐，汪直欲见之，不可。
现代文：他入京朝见时，王直想见他，他不同意。
English: When he went to Beijing to see the emperor, Wang Zhengrong wanted to see him, but he did not agree.

古文：宪宗问直： 朝觐官孰廉？ 直对曰： 天下不爱钱者，惟杨继宗一人耳。 
现代文：宪宗问王直来朝见的官员中哪个最廉洁，王直回答说： 天下不爱钱的人，只杨继宗一人而已。 
English: Xianzong asked Wang Zhizong which of the officials he had come to see was the most incorruptible. Wang Zhizong replied: Yang Jizong was the only one in the world who did not love money.

古文：九载秩满，超迁浙江按察使。
现代文：九年任满后，他被超升为浙江按察使。
English: After nine years in office, he was promoted to the post of inspector general of Zhejiang Province.

古文：数与中官张庆忤。
现代文：他多次与宦官张庆冲突。
English: He repeatedly clashed with eunuch Zhang Qing.

古文：庆兄敏在司礼，每于帝前毁继宗。
现代文：张庆的哥哥张敏在司礼监，常常在皇上面前诋毁继宗。
English: Zhang Qing's brother, Zhang Min, who was the ceremonial supervisor, often slandered the successor in front of the emperor.

古文：帝曰： 得非不私一钱之杨继宗乎？ 
现代文：皇上问 ：是不是那位不私取一文钱的杨继宗？ 
English: The emperor asked, "Is this the same Yang Jizong who did not take a penny for himself?"

古文：敏惶恐，遗书庆曰： 善遇之，上已知其人矣。 
现代文：张敏很害怕，送信给张庆说 ：你要善待他，皇上已知道他了。 
English: Zhang Min was very scared and sent a message to Zhang Qing saying, "You should treat him well, the emperor already knows him."

古文：闻母丧，立出。止驿亭下，尽籍廨中器物付有司。惟携一仆、书数卷而还。
现代文：得知母亲去世，他立即出来，停在驿亭下，将衙门中的器物抄送给有关官员，然后只带一名仆人和几卷书回家。
English: Upon learning of his mother's death, he immediately came out, parked under the pavilion, copied the items in the pavilion to the relevant officials, and then returned home with only a servant and a few books.

古文：服除，以右佥都御史巡抚顺天。畿内多权贵庄田，有侵民业者，辄夺还之。
现代文：守孝期满后，他以右佥都御史之衔巡抚顺天府，畿内权贵的庄田很多，凡有侵夺百姓产业的，继宗都夺回还给百姓。
English: After the expiration of his term of filial piety, he was appointed as the governor of Shuntianfu with the title of the right-hand governor of the capital. There were many estates of the powerful in the Kinai region, and all the estates that were taken from the people were returned to the people.

古文：按行关塞，武备大饬。
现代文：他又巡行考察关塞，使武备大整。
English: He also went on a patrol to inspect the pass and made preparations.

古文：星变，应诏陈言，历指中官及文武诸臣贪残状，且请召还中官出镇者。
现代文：有星变，他响应诏令上书提建议，历指宦官和文武大臣贪污残暴的情况，并请召回出去镇守的宦官。
English: There was a sudden change of fortune. In response to the imperial edict, he wrote a letter to the shogun to make suggestions, pointing out the corruption and brutality of the eunuchs and the Minister of Education and Culture, and requesting that the eunuchs who went out to guard the town be recalled.

古文：益为权贵所嫉。
现代文：因此他更被权贵所恨。
English: This made him even more hated by the powerful.

古文：治中陈翼讦其过，权贵因中之，左迁云南副使。
现代文：治中陈翼揭发他的过失，权贵们借机中伤，他被降为云南副使。
English: During the reign of Chen Ying, his faults were exposed, the dignitaries took the opportunity to slander him, and he was demoted to Yunnan deputy envoy.

古文：孝宗立，迁湖广按察使。
现代文：孝宗即位后，他升为湖广按察使。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaozong, he was promoted to inspector general of Hunan Province.

古文：既至，命汲水百斛，洗涤厅事而后视事，曰： 吾以除秽也。 
现代文：到任后，他命提一百斛水来洗衙门的大厅，然后他才理事。他说： 我这是要除秽。 
English: After taking office, he ordered a hundred gallons of water to wash the hall of the gate, and then he became the director. He said, "I want to purify myself."

古文：居无何，复以佥都御史巡抚云南。
现代文：不久，他又以佥都御史之衔巡抚云南。
English: Soon after, he became the governor of Yunnan with the title of the governor of Yunnan.

古文：三司多旧僚，相见欢然。
现代文：云南三司多是他原来的下属，大家相见都非常高兴。
English: Most of the Yunnan three divisions were his former subordinates, and everyone was very happy to see each other.

古文：既而出位揖之曰： 明日有公事，诸君幸相谅。 
现代文：随后他出位对官员们作揖说 ：将来有公事，诸君可要相互谅解。 
English: He then went out to greet the officials and said, "In the future, there will be official business, and you should all understand each other."

古文：遂劾罢不职者八人。
现代文：遂后他弹劾罢免了八位不称职的人。
English: He then impeached and removed eight incompetents.

古文：未几卒。
现代文：不久他去世。
English: He died soon after.

古文：继宗力持风节，而居心慈厚，自处必以礼。
现代文：继宗力持风宪，而居心仁慈宽厚，对自己也以礼来要求。
English: Following the principle of upholding the Constitution, while being kind and generous, he also demands courtesy from himself.

古文：为知府，谒上官必衣绣服，朝觐谒吏部亦然。
现代文：任知府时，他拜见上级官员一定穿绣服，朝觐时拜见吏部也是这样。
English: When he was governor, he always wore embroidered clothes when meeting higher-ranking officials, and he did the same when meeting officials during the hajj.

古文：或言不可，笑曰： 此朝廷法服也，此而不服，将安用之？ 
现代文：有人说这样不可，他笑着说： 这是朝廷的法服，除此而不穿，那它有什么用？ 
English: Some people say this is unacceptable, he said with a smile: "This is the court dress of the imperial court. If I don't wear it, what good is it?

古文：为浙江按察时，仓官十余人坐缺粮系狱，至鬻子女以偿。
现代文：任浙江按察使时，管仓库的官员十余人因仓库少粮被关进监狱，甚至被迫出卖子女来偿还。
English: When he was inspector general of Zhejiang Province, more than a dozen officials in charge of warehouses were put in prison because of the shortage of grain in warehouses, and they were even forced to sell their children to repay the debt.

古文：继宗欲宽之而无由。
现代文：继宗想宽宥他们又没有理由。
English: There is no reason why the Heir Apparent should want to pardon them.

古文：一日，送月俸至，命量之，则溢原数。
现代文：有一天，送月俸来，继宗命量一下，结果发现超过原数。
English: One day, when the monthly salary was delivered, the successor weighed it and found that it exceeded the original amount.

古文：较他司亦然。因悟仓吏缺粮之由，将具实以闻。
现代文：他查了别的官员，也是这样，于是他领悟到了仓库官吏少粮的原因，将实情报告了朝廷。
English: He investigated other officials, too, and realized the reason for the shortage of grain for warehouse officials, and reported the truth to the imperial court.

古文：众惧，请于继宗，愿捐俸代偿。
现代文：众人害怕了，向继宗请求，愿意捐出俸禄代为偿还。
English: The people were afraid and asked the heir to donate his salary as compensation.

古文：由是十人者获释。
现代文：于是那十余人获释了。
English: As a result, the dozen or so people were released.

古文：尝监乡试得二卷，具朝服再拜曰： 二子当大魁天下，吾为朝廷得人贺耳。 
现代文：他曾监考乡试，得到两份试卷，他穿上朝服再拜说道 ：这两位当成为天下大魁，我为朝廷获得人才而庆贺。 
English: He used to supervise the village examination and got two exam papers. He put on the imperial robe and bowed again and said: "These two should become the world's leader. I am celebrating the talent gained by the imperial court."

古文：及拆卷，王华、李旻也，后果相继为状元。
现代文：到拆卷时，知道是王华、李，后来果然两人都相继中了状元。
English: At the time of unrolling, I knew that it was Wang Hua and Li, and later both of them were hit in succession.

古文：人服其鉴。
现代文：人们都佩服他能鉴别人才。
English: People admire his ability to spot talent.

古文：天启初，谥贞肃。
现代文：天启初年，赠给他谥号叫贞肃。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, he was given a nickname called Zhengsu.

