古文：君子之心事，天青日白，不可使人不知；君子之才华，玉韫珠藏，不可使人易知。
现代文：品德高尚又有见识的人，心胸像青天白日一般光明正大，没有什么不可告人的事情；而他的才华就应该像珍藏的珍宝一样，不可轻易让人知道。
English: A man of high moral and intellectual character, whose mind is as clear as day, has nothing to hide; and his talent, like a precious treasure, should not be easily known.

古文：耳中常闻逆耳之言，心中常有拂心之事，才是进德修行的砥石。
现代文：耳朵常常听到不顺耳的话，心里常常想着不顺心的事，有利于增进品德修炼品行。
English: The ear often hears words that are not pleasing to the ear, and the heart often thinks of things that are not pleasing to the heart, which is conducive to improving moral character and cultivating moral conduct.

古文：若言言悦耳，事事快心，便把此生埋在鸩毒中矣。
现代文：相反的，如果每句话都顺耳，每件事都称心，那就等于把自己的一生埋在剧毒之中了。
English: On the contrary, if every word is pleasing to the ear and everything is pleasing to the heart, it is tantamount to burying one's life in poison.

古文：疾风怒雨，禽鸟戚戚；霁月光风，草木欣欣，可见天地不可一日无和气，人心不可一日无喜神。
现代文：狂风暴雨来临的时候，鸡飞狗跳，飞禽走兽也会变得十分忧伤，而在风清月朗的时节，草木长得欣欣向荣。由此可见，天地之间不可一日没有和气，人的内心不可一日没有喜神。
English: When violent storms and rain come, chickens fly and dogs jump, birds and beasts also become very sad, and in the season of wind and moon, plants grow vigorously. It can be seen that there can not be a day without harmony between heaven and earth, and the human heart can not have a day without joy.

古文：醲肥辛甘非真味，真味只是淡；神奇卓异非至人，至人只是常。
现代文：浓烈肥美辛辣甘甜并不是真的美味，真的美味是清淡；标奇立异超凡绝俗不是真正的完人，真正的完人就是平常人。
English: Strong, fat, beautiful, spicy and sweet are not really delicious, really delicious is light; extraordinary and extraordinary is not a real perfect person, a real perfect person is an ordinary person.

古文：夜深人静独坐观心；始知妄穷而真独露，每于此中得大机趣；既觉真现而妄难逃，又于此中得大惭忸。
现代文：夜深人静的时候自己坐下来，反思自己内心，才知道自己的一些私心，妄想，而把自己最原始善的真情流露出来，每到这个时候，都会从这个 反思 中的到很大的启发、趣味；既能察觉到自己最原始的初心，又能够知道难以割除私心妄想，从这两个对比中让自己感到很惭愧。
English: When you sit down in the dead of night and reflect on your own heart, you will only know some of your selfishness and delusions, and reveal your most original and good true feelings. At this time, you will get great inspiration and interest from this reflection. You can not only realize your most original original intention, but also know that it is difficult to cut out selfishness and delusions. From these two contrasts, you will feel very ashamed.

古文：恩里由来生害，故快意时须早回头；败后或反成功，故拂心处切莫放手。
现代文：恩泽中往往隐伏着祸患，所以春风得意时应该尽早回头；失败是成功之母，因此失意时千万不可放弃。
English: Misfortune often lurks in the midst of grace, so when the spring breeze is strong, you should turn back as soon as possible; failure is the mother of success, so you must not give up when you are disappointed.

古文：藜口苋肠者，多冰清玉洁；衮衣玉食者，甘婢膝奴颜。
现代文：以藜苋充口腹的人，他们大多品性高洁；而追求华服美食的人，他们甘心卑躬屈节地向人拍马讨好。
English: Those who fill their stomachs with gourds are mostly of high moral character, while those who pursue fine food are willing to grovel to please others.

古文：盖志以淡泊明，而节从肥甘丧矣。
现代文：人的志气总是在清心寡欲中显露出来，人的节操都是在追求物欲享受中丧失殆尽。
English: People's aspiration is always revealed in the cleanliness of the heart, and people's self-restraint is lost in the pursuit of material enjoyment.

古文：面前的田地要放得宽，使人无不平之叹；身后的惠泽要流得长，使人有不匮之思。
现代文：对眼前的利益要宽厚些，不要让人有不平之感；死后留给子孙与世人的恩泽要长远些，才会让人长久地怀念。
English: We should be more generous with our immediate interests, and not make people feel unequal; after death, the grace left to our children and grandchildren and the world should be long-term, so that people can remember it for a long time.

古文：路径窄处留一步，与人行；滋味浓的减三分，让人嗜。
现代文：在狭窄的路要留出一步让别人走；吃到可口的饭菜，要留出点让别人分享。
English: On a narrow path, you should leave a step for others to walk; when you eat delicious food, you should leave a point for others to share.

古文：此是涉世一极乐法。
现代文：这是让你最快乐的处世方法之一。
English: It's one of the things that will make you happiest in life.

古文：作人无甚高远的事业，摆脱得俗情便入名流；为学无甚增益的工夫，减除得物累便臻圣境。
现代文：做人并不是要懂得什么高深的道理，摆脱了世俗人情就可进入名流之列；治学没有什么增进补益的功夫，摆脱了外物的干扰就能达到至高境界。
English: To be a person is not to understand any profound truth. If you get rid of worldly human feelings, you can enter the ranks of celebrities. There is no effort to enhance the benefits of studying. If you get rid of the interference of foreign objects, you can reach the highest level.

古文：宠利毋居人前，德业毋落人后，受享毋逾分外，修持毋减分中。
现代文：追逐功名利禄不要抢在他人之前，进修德业不要落在人后，享受生活不要超过本分应有的限度，修养品德不要减低应有的标准。
English: Do not rush ahead of others in the pursuit of fame and glory, do not lag behind others in the further study of virtue, do not enjoy life beyond the limits of duty, and do not lower the standards of moral cultivation.

古文：处世让一步为高，退步即进步的张本；待人宽一分是福，利人实利己的根基。
现代文：为人处事，以遇事都要让一步的态度，这样才算是高明，退让一步是日后进步的基础；待人宽容一点是福气，与人方便就是给自己方便，有利他人是为了对自己更加有利。
English: When dealing with people, it is wise to be prepared to give up a step in any situation. Giving up a step is the basis for future progress. To be tolerant is a blessing. To be convenient to others is to be convenient to oneself. To be advantageous to others is to be more advantageous to oneself.

古文：盖世的功劳，当不得一个矜字；弥天的罪过，当不得一个悔字。
现代文：哪怕有盖世的功劳，也承受不了一个骄矜的 矜 字，骄矜了就会前功尽弃；即使犯了滔天大罪，只要能真诚忏悔，痛改前非，就能赎回以前的罪过。
English: Even if there is a world-renowned achievement, it can not bear a proud swastika. If you are proud, you will give up your previous achievements. Even if you have committed a heinous crime, as long as you can sincerely repent and correct your past mistakes, you can redeem your previous sins.

古文：完名美节，不宜独任，分些与人，可以远害全身；辱行污名，不宜全推，引些归己，可以韬光养德。
现代文：完美的名气和节操，千万不要一个人独享，必须分一些给别人，才不会惹人嫉妒，才能远离祸害，保全自己；不论多么耻辱的行为和名声，不能全推到他人身上，自己也要分摊一点，这样才能不孤立自己从而达到韬光养晦的目的。
English: Perfect reputation and self-discipline should never be enjoyed by one person alone. It is necessary to give some to others so as not to arouse envy, so as to be able to keep away from evil and protect oneself. No matter how disgraceful the behavior and reputation, it cannot be completely pushed onto others, and you should also share a little, so as not to isolate yourself and thus achieve the purpose of shining light and keeping a low profile.

古文：事事要留个有余不尽的意思，便造物不能忌我，鬼神不能损我。
现代文：做任何事都要留有余地，不能太绝。如果能这样，即使是上天也不会嫉妒我，鬼怪神灵也不能损害我。
English: There should be room for everything, not too much. If I can do this, even the heavens will not be jealous of me, and ghosts and spirits cannot harm me.

古文：若业必求满，功必求盈者，不生内变，必招外忧。
现代文：如果做事都要求达到尽善尽美，一切功业都追求登峰造极的境界，即使内心不出问题，也必然招致外来的忧患。
English: If everything you do requires perfection, and all your work pursues the realm of perfection, even if there is no problem in your heart, it will inevitably lead to external worries.

古文：家庭有个真佛，日用有种真道，人能诚心和气、愉色婉言，使父母兄弟间形骸两释，意气交流，胜于调息观心万倍矣。
现代文：家中人人信奉真正的佛，日常生活中坚守一个真正的 道 ，人能够诚心诚意、心平气和，神色和悦、言辞婉转，使父母兄弟之间感情融洽、意气相投，这比静坐调心的修行还要好上千万倍。
English: Everyone in the family believes in the true Buddha, and adheres to a true path in daily life. People can be sincere, peaceful, pleasant-looking, and eloquent, so that the parents and brothers can have a harmonious relationship and a congenial spirit. This is ten million times better than the practice of meditation.

古文：攻人之恶毋太严，要思其堪受；教人以善毋过高，当使其可从。
现代文：责备别人的过错不要太过严厉，要考虑到对方是否能接受；教诲别人从善不要期望过高，要顾及到对方是否能做到。
English: When reproaching others for their faults, do not be too harsh, but consider whether the other party can accept it; when teaching others to do good, do not expect too much, but consider whether the other party can do it.

古文：粪虫至秽变为蝉，而饮露于秋风；腐草无光化为荧，而耀采于夏月。
现代文：粪土里的虫子最肮脏，可一旦蜕变为蝉，就在秋天的凉风中吸饮露水；腐败的野草本不发光，可一旦孕育出萤火虫，就在夏天的月夜里闪耀光彩。
English: The worms in the dung are the dirtiest, but once the maggots turn into cicadas, they will drink dew in the cool autumn wind; the corrupt wild herbs do not emit light, but once they breed fireflies, they will shine in the summer moonlit night.

古文：故知洁常自污出，明每从暗生也。
现代文：由此而知，清洁的东西常常从污秽中产生，明亮的事物常常在黑暗中出现。
English: From this we learn that clean things often come out of filth, and bright things often come out of darkness.

古文：矜高倨傲，无非客气；降伏得客气下，而后正气伸；情欲意识，尽属妄心。消杀得妄心尽，而后真心现。
现代文：一个人的内心之所以会有矜气高傲的态度，都是由于受外部气机的影响，只要把这种外来气机降服，心内的浩然之气才能出现。一个人的所有欲望意识，都是由于无常的妄念造成的，只有铲除这种妄念，真正的心性就会显现出来。
English: The reason why a person's heart has an arrogant and haughty attitude is due to the influence of external gasses. As long as this external gasses are subdued, the magnificent gasses in the heart can appear. All of a person's desire consciousness is caused by impermanent delusions. Only by eradicating this delusion will the true nature of the mind be revealed.

古文：饱后思味，则浓淡之境都消；色后思淫，则男女之见尽绝。
现代文：在吃饱之后回味佳肴的味道，浓淡滋味已无处寻觅。交欢之后再回想淫邪之事，那种男欢女爱的念头已经荡然无存。
English: After eating, there is no place to look for the aftertaste of the delicious food, the richness and subtlety of the taste. After intercourse, if you recall the evil, the idea of male and female love has disappeared.

古文：故人当以事后之悔悟，破临事之痴迷，则性定而动无不正。
现代文：所以如果人在事后能经常这样思考，就能破除做事之前对它的痴迷，那么心性就能得定，一切行为自然都中正。
English: So if people can often think like this afterwards, they can break the obsession with it before doing things, then the mind can be determined, and all actions are naturally correct.

古文：居轩冕之中，不可无山林的气味；处林泉之下，须要怀廊庙的经纶。
现代文：身居要职的人，要保持一种隐居山林淡泊名利的思想；身居林木泉石之下的隐士，要有胸怀天下治理国家的知识和才干。
English: Those who hold important positions should maintain the thought of living in seclusion in the mountains and forests, indifferent to fame and fortune; those who live in seclusion under trees and springs should have the knowledge and ability to govern the country.

古文：处世不必邀功，无过便是功；与人不求感德，无怨便是德。
现代文：人生在世不必刻意去争取功劳，只要没有过错就算功劳；帮助别人不必希望对方感恩戴德，只要对方不怨恨就算是积德了。
English: In life, you don't have to deliberately strive for merit, as long as there is no fault, it is considered a merit; helping others doesn't have to hope that the other party is grateful, as long as the other party doesn't resent it, it is considered a virtue.

古文：忧勤是美德，太苦则无以适性怡情；淡泊是高风，太枯则无以济人利物。
现代文：尽自己最大努力去做好一件事情是一种美德，但如果过分了就会失去生活乐趣；把功名利禄看得很淡是一种高风亮节，但如果对功名过于淡泊，做事业的心也就没有了，对社会就没有什么贡献了。
English: It is a virtue to do one's best to do a good job, but if it is too much, it will lose the joy of life; it is a high wind and a bright festival to take fame and fortune lightly, but if you are too indifferent to fame, you will not have the heart to do business, and there will be no contribution to society.

古文：事穷势蹙之人，当原其初心；功成行满之士，要观其末路。
现代文：对于事业失败陷入困境而心灰意冷的人，要思索而不是责难，回想他当初奋发的精神：对于事业成功感到万事如意的人，要观察他是否能长期坚持下去，考虑结局如何。
English: For those who are disheartened by the failure of their career and are in trouble, they should reflect rather than blame, and recall the spirit of their initial efforts: for those who feel everything is satisfactory for their career success, they should observe whether they can stick to it for a long time and consider the outcome.

古文：富贵家宜宽厚而反忌克，是富贵而贫贱，其行如何能享？
现代文：富贵之家待人接物应该宽容仁厚，很多人却反而刻薄无理，这样又如何能长久地享有富贵呢？
English: The homes of the rich should be tolerant and kind to everyone, but many people are mean and unreasonable, so how can they enjoy their wealth for a long time?

古文：聪明人宜敛藏而反炫耀，是聪明而愚懵，其病如何不败！
现代文：聪明之人应该谦虚有礼而不露锋芒，但有人却反来夸耀自己的本领，这种人又如何会不失败呢？
English: A wise man should be modest and courteous and not show off his sharpness, but if someone boasts of his ability, how can such a person not fail?

古文：人情反复，世路崎岖。
现代文：人世间的人情冷暖是变化无常的，人生的道路是崎岖不平的。
English: People's feelings in the world are fickle, and the road of life is bumpy.

古文：行不去，须知退一步之法；行得去，务加让三分之功。
现代文：因此，当遇到困难走不通时，必须先退后一步；当路途通顺时，一定要把功绩让给别人三分。
English: Therefore, when encountering difficulties and can't go through, we must first step back; when the road is smooth, we must give the credit to others.

古文：待小人不难于严，而难于不恶；待君子不难于恭，而难于有礼。
现代文：对于小人态度严厉苛刻并不困难，困难的是无法不憎恨他们；对于品德高尚的君子恭敬谦逊并不困难，困难的是对他们始终以礼相待。
English: It is not difficult to be severe and harsh with villains, but it is difficult not to hate them; it is not difficult to be respectful and humble with virtuous gentlemen, but it is difficult to always treat them with courtesy.

古文：宁守浑噩而黜聪明，留些正气还天地；宁谢纷华而甘淡泊，遗个清名在乾坤。
现代文：人宁可保持纯朴天真的本性而屏除后天的聪明，以便保留一些刚正之气还给孕育灵性的大自然；宁可抛弃俗世的荣华富贵而甘于恬静淡泊的生活，以便保留一个纯洁高尚的美名还给孕育本性的天地。
English: People would rather preserve their simple and innocent nature and reject the wisdom of the day after tomorrow, in order to retain some uprightness to return to the nature that gave birth to spirituality; they would rather abandon worldly glory and wealth and be content with a quiet and unassuming life, in order to retain a pure and noble reputation to return to the world that gave birth to nature.

古文：降魔者先降其心，心伏则群魔退听；驭横者先驭其气，气平则外横不侵。
现代文：要想降伏邪魔，先得控制自己的心智，只要自己心志坚定，其他魔障自然都不起作用。要想控制横逆事件，必须先控制自己浮动的心绪，心绪平和则外来的横逆之事就不能侵入。
English: If you want to surrender to evil, you must first control your own mind. As long as your mind is firm, other obstacles will naturally not work. If you want to control rebellious events, you must first control your floating mood. If your mood is peaceful, then external rebellious things cannot invade.

古文：养弟子如养闺女，最要严出入，谨交游。
现代文：教育子弟就好像养闺阁中的女儿一样，出入要有严格的规矩，交结朋友要小心谨慎。
English: Educating a child is like raising a daughter in a boudoir. There should be strict rules for going in and out, and you should be careful when making friends.

古文：若一接近匪人，是清净田中下一不净的种子，便终身难植嘉苗矣。
现代文：倘若一旦接近了品行不端的人，就等于在清洁纯净的土地中撒下一颗不干净的种子，一辈子就很难长出茁壮的庄稼了。
English: If you once get close to a person of bad character, it is tantamount to scattering an unclean seed in a clean and pure land, and it will be difficult to grow strong crops for the rest of your life.

古文：欲路上事，毋乐其便而姑为染指，一染指便深入万仞；理路上事，毋惮其难而稍为退步，一退步便远隔千山。
现代文：关于欲念上的事，不要乘着某种方便而有所染指，一旦进去就会坠入万丈深渊；义理方面的事，绝不要由于畏惧困难而产生退缩的念头，一旦退缩就与真理相隔万水千山。
English: With regard to matters of desire, do not take advantage of some convenience to get a foothold, and once you get in, you will fall into the abyss; with regard to matters of righteousness, never have the idea of retreating due to fear of difficulties, and once you retreat, you will be separated from the truth.

古文：念头浓者自待厚，待人亦厚，处处皆厚；念头淡者自待薄，待人亦薄，事事皆薄。
现代文：一个心性宽厚的人，不但对待自己宽厚，对别人也宽厚，对待一切事物都宽厚；反之，心性淡泊的人，不但对自己淡薄，对待别人也淡薄，对待一切事物都淡薄。
English: A generous-hearted person is not only generous to himself, but also generous to others and generous to all things; on the other hand, a light-hearted person is not only light-hearted to himself, but also light-hearted to others and light-hearted to everything.

古文：故君子居常嗜好，不可太浓艳，亦不宜太枯寂。
现代文：所以品德高尚又有见识的人，日常爱好不可过分讲究奢华，也不宜过分吝啬刻薄。
English: Therefore, people with high moral character and insight should not be too extravagant in their daily hobbies, nor should they be too stingy and mean.

古文：彼富我仁，彼爵我义，君子故不为君相所牢笼；人定胜天，志壹动气，君子亦不受造化之陶铸。
现代文：别人拥有富贵我拥有仁德，别人拥有爵禄我拥有正义，所以一个有高尚心性的正人君子不会被高官厚祿束縛；人的力量一定能够战胜自然的力量，意志坚定一定可以催生出无坚不摧的精气，所以君子当然也不会被造物者摆布。
English: Others have wealth, I have benevolence, others have peerage, I have justice. Therefore, an upright gentleman with a noble heart will not be bound by high-ranking officials; human power will surely be able to overcome the power of nature, and a strong will will surely give birth to an indestructible spirit. Therefore, a gentleman will certainly not be manipulated by the Creator.

古文：立身不高一步立，如尘里振衣、泥中濯足，如何超达？
现代文：立身处世如果不把目标放得高远一些，就像是在灰尘里抖衣服，在泥水中洗脚，怎能超凡脱俗？
English: Standing in the world, if you don't set your goal higher, it's like shaking your clothes in the dust and washing your feet in muddy water. How can you be otherworldly?

古文：处世不退一步处，如飞蛾投烛、羝羊触藩，如何安乐？
现代文：处理世事不懂得该退却时就退却的道理，就像飞蛾扑火、公羊顶墙那样，怎么能得到安宁快乐？
English: Dealing with the world without understanding the principle of retreating when it is time to retreat, like a moth to a flame or a ram to a wall, how can one achieve peace and happiness?

古文：学者要收拾精神并归一处。
现代文：追求学问应集中精神，专心一致。
English: The pursuit of learning should be concentrated and consistent.

古文：如修德而留意于事功名誉，必无实诣；读书而寄兴于吟咏风雅，定不深心。
现代文：如果在潜修道德时仍去注意事功名誉，则必得不到真实的造诣；读书只停留在炫耀，附庸风雅，在他人面前只想显露那一时的才气，才是定不深心。
English: If you still pay attention to achievements and reputation when you are studying morality, you will not get real accomplishment; if you only read books to show off, to be elegant, and only want to show that momentary talent in front of others, you will not be deep-hearted.

古文：人人有个大慈悲，维摩屠刽无二心也；处处有种真趣味，金屋茅檐非两地也。
现代文：每一个人都有一颗慈悲之心，维摩诘大士和屠夫、刽子手的佛性是一样的；如果悟出真正的人生趣味，住富丽堂皇的高楼大厦和住简陋的茅草屋没有什么差别。
English: Everyone has a heart of compassion, and the Buddha nature of Venerable Master Vimalakirti is the same as that of a butcher or an executioner; if you realize the true taste of life, there is no difference between living in a magnificent high-rise building and living in a humble thatched cottage.

古文：只是欲闭情封，当面错过，便咫尺千里矣。
现代文：只是由于被欲念和私情所蒙蔽，以至于错过了慈悲心和真趣味，使这些原本唾手可得的慈悲心真趣味变得遥不可及了。
English: It is only because they are blinded by their desires and selfishness that they miss compassion and true taste, making these readily available compassion and true taste become unattainable.

古文：进德修行，要个木石的念头，若一有欣羡便趋欲境；济世经邦，要段云水的趣味，若一有贪着便堕危机。
现代文：凡是进德修业、磨练心性的人，必须有木石般坚定的意志，若对外界的荣华富贵有所羡慕，就会被物欲所迷惑；凡是治理国家、服务人群的人，必须有一种行云流水般的淡泊胸怀，假如一有贪婪的念头，就会陷入危机四伏的险恶深渊。
English: Anyone who pursues moral cultivation and hones his or her character must have a will as firm as a rock. If one is envious of the glory and wealth of the outside world, one will be deceived by material desires. Anyone who governs the country and serves the people must have a light-hearted mind like a flowing stream. If one has the thought of greed, one will fall into a dangerous abyss.

古文：肝受病则目不能视，肾受病则耳不能听。
现代文：肝脏染上疾病，眼睛就看不清，肾脏染上疾病，耳朵就听不见。
English: When the liver is diseased, the eyes cannot see clearly; when the kidneys are diseased, the ears cannot hear.

古文：病受于人所不见，必发于人所共见。
现代文：病体虽然生在人们所看不见的内脏，但病症必然发生在人们所能看见的地方。
English: Although the disease originates in the viscera, which people cannot see, the symptoms inevitably occur where people can see them.

古文：故君子欲无得罪于昭昭，先无得罪于冥冥。福莫福于少事，祸莫祸于多心。
现代文：所以君子要想在明处没有过错，必须做到在别人看不到的细微处不犯过错。人的幸福莫过于了无牵挂，人的灾祸莫过于心思繁多。
English: Therefore, if a gentleman wants to have no mistakes in the light, he must not make mistakes in the subtle places that others cannot see. Human happiness is nothing more than having no worries, and human disaster is nothing more than having many thoughts.

古文：惟苦事者方知少事之为福；惟平心者始知多心之为祸。
现代文：只有事情繁多的人才知道事情少是人生最大的幸福；只有那些心性平淡的人，才知道心事繁多是最大的灾祸。
English: Only those who have many things to do know that having few things to do is the greatest happiness in life; only those with a dull mind know that having many things to do is the greatest calamity.

古文：处治世宜方，处乱世当圆，处叔季之世当方圆并用。
现代文：当政治清明、天下太平时，待人接物应坚持原则；当政治黑暗、天下纷乱时，待人接物应灵活圆滑；当国家行将衰亡时，待人接物就应刚直与圆滑并用。
English: When politics is clear and the world is at peace, one should adhere to principles; when politics is dark and the world is in turmoil, one should be flexible and smooth; when the country is on the verge of decline, one should be both rigid and smooth.

古文：待善人宜宽，待恶人当严，待庸众之人宜宽严互存。
现代文：对待善良的人要宽厚，对待邪恶的小人要严厉，对待一般人应宽严并用。
English: Treat good people with kindness, treat evil villains with severity, and treat ordinary people with both leniency and severity.

古文：我有功于人不可念，而过则不可不念；人有恩于我不可忘，而怨则不可不忘。
现代文：自己帮助了别人不要记在心上，但自己对别人的过错却要记住；别人对自己的恩惠不能忘记，但别人对自己的怨恨则必须忘记。
English: Do not keep in mind that you have helped others, but remember your own faults to others; others cannot forget their own benefits, but others must forget their own grudges.

古文：心地干净，方可读书学古。不然，见一善行，窃以济私；闻一善言，假以覆短。是又藉寇兵而济盗粮矣。
现代文：只有心地纯洁的人，才可读圣贤书、学古人训，否则，看见一个善良行为就悄悄用来满足私欲，听闻一个善良言语就用来掩饰自己缺点，这就等于借给敌人武器又送给强盗粮食一样。
English: Only those with a pure heart can read the books of the sages and learn the teachings of the ancients. Otherwise, if they see a good deed, they will quietly use it to satisfy their selfish desires, and if they hear a kind word, they will use it to cover up their shortcomings. This is tantamount to lending weapons to the enemy and giving food to robbers.

古文：奢者富而不足，何如俭者贫而有余。能者劳而俯怨，何如拙者逸而全真。
现代文：奢侈的人即使再富有也不满足，还比不上节俭而略有赢余的穷人幸福；能干的人虽然出力很多反而招来怨恨，还不如愚笨的人安闲无事而能保全纯真的本性。
English: The extravagant man, even if he is rich, is not satisfied, and is not as happy as the poor man who is frugal and has a little surplus; the capable man, although he makes a lot of effort, but attracts resentment, is not as good as the stupid man who is idle and can preserve his pure nature.

古文：读书不见圣贤，如铅椠佣。居官不爱子民，如衣冠盗。讲学不尚躬行，如口头禅。立业不思种德。如眼前花。
现代文：读书不理解古圣先贤的思想精义，只能成为一个写字匠；做官如果不爱护百姓，就如同一个穿着官服的强盗；只传授学问却不注重身体力行，那就像一个只讲理论而缺少修行的和尚；创立事业而不想积累功德，那就像一朵艳丽却很快凋谢的昙花。
English: Reading books without understanding the essence of the thoughts of the ancient saints and sages can only be a scribe; if you are an official without caring for the people, you are like a robber wearing an official uniform; if you only teach knowledge but do not pay attention to physical practice, it is like a monk who only talks about theory but lacks practice; if you create a career without accumulating merit, it is like a bright but quickly fading flower.

古文：人心有部真文章，都被残编断简封固了；有部真鼓吹，都被妖歌艳舞湮没了。
现代文：人人心中都有一部真文章，可惜被各种残缺不全的书给禁锢住了；每个人的心中都有一首美妙的乐曲，可惜被一些妖邪的歌声和艳丽的舞蹈埋没了。
English: In everyone's heart there is a true story, but it is unfortunately imprisoned by various incomplete books; in everyone's heart there is a wonderful piece of music, but it is unfortunately buried by some evil songs and gorgeous dances.

古文：学者须扫除外物直觅本来，才有个真受用。
现代文：读书人必须排除一切外物的影响，直接寻觅自己的本性，才能获得一生受用不尽的真学问。
English: A reader must eliminate the influence of all external things and directly search for his own nature in order to obtain true knowledge that will last a lifetime.

古文：苦心中常得悦心之趣；得意时便生失意之悲。
现代文：苦苦用心之中，常有愉悦之情；得意时会想到失意时的悲哀。
English: In the midst of hard work and diligence, there is often a feeling of joy; when you are proud, you will think of the sadness when you are disappointed.

古文：富贵名誉自道德来者，如山林中花，自是舒徐繁衍。自功业来者，如盆槛中花，便有迁徙废兴。若以权力得者，其根不植，其萎可立而待矣。
现代文：荣华富贵的显赫，假如是从道德修养中得来，那就如同生长在大自然环境中的野花，会不断繁殖绵延不绝；如果是从建功立业中得来，那就如同生长在花园中的盆景一般，只要稍微移植，花木的成长就会受到严重的影响；假如是靠特权，甚至恶势力得来，那就如同插在玻璃瓶中的花朵，由于根部并没有深植在土中，所以花的调谢枯萎指日可待。
English: If it comes from moral cultivation, it will be like wildflowers growing in the natural environment and will continue to multiply and extend; if it comes from making contributions, it will be like a bonsai growing in a garden. As long as it is transplanted a little, the growth of flowers and trees will be seriously affected; if it comes from privilege or even evil forces, it will be like flowers in a glass bottle. Since the roots are not deeply planted in the soil, the flowers will wither and die.

古文：栖守道德者，寂寞一时；依阿权势者，凄凉万古。
现代文：一个坚守道德准则的人，也许会暂时寂寞；那些阿谀奉承、攀附权贵的人，则会永远凄凉。
English: A person who sticks to the moral code may be lonely for a while; those who flatter and cling to the powerful will always be desolate.

古文：达人观物外之物，思身后之身，宁受一时之寂寞，毋取万古之凄凉。
现代文：通达事理的人能察觉到物质以外的精神价值，并顾及死后的名誉，宁愿承受一时的寂寞，也不愿遭受永久的凄凉。
English: Reasonable people can perceive the spiritual value beyond the material, and take into account the honor after death. They would rather suffer a moment of loneliness than suffer permanent desolation.

古文：春至时和，花尚铺一段好色，鸟且啭几句好音。
现代文：春天来临时，风和日丽，花草树木争奇斗艳，为大地铺上一层美丽的景色，连鸟儿也发出。
English: When spring comes, the wind and the sun are beautiful, the flowers and trees compete with each other, laying a layer of beautiful scenery on the earth, and even the birds are out.

古文：士君子幸列头角，复遇温饱，不思立好言、行好事，虽是在世百年，恰似未生一日。
现代文：品德高尚的文人学士，若能侥幸出人头地身居高位，又能衣食无忧，却不肯为后世留下几句好话，做上几件好事，即使他活到一百岁，也如同一天都没活过。
English: A literati with high moral character, if he is lucky enough to be promoted to a high position, and can have food and clothing without worries, but he is not willing to leave a few good words and do a few good things for posterity, even if he lives to be a hundred years old, it is as if he has not lived for a day.

古文：学者有段兢业的心思，又要有段潇洒的趣味。
现代文：做学问的人，既要有兢兢业业、刻苦钻研的精神，又要学会调剂生活，潇洒而富有情趣。
English: Those who study should not only have the spirit of dedication and hard study, but also learn to adjust their lives, be chic and full of fun.

古文：若一味敛束清苦，是有秋杀无春生，何以发育万物？
现代文：如果只知一味地克制自己，生活过得单调而清苦，那么就像是自然界中只有秋天的万物肃杀，而缺乏春天的生意盎然，那样的话，自然界的万物靠什么来繁衍生息呢？
English: If you only know how to restrain yourself and live a monotonous and pure life, then it is as if all things in nature are only in autumn, and there is a lack of spring business. In that case, what do all things in nature rely on to reproduce?

古文：真廉无廉名，立名者正所以为贪；大巧无巧术，用术者乃所以为拙。
现代文：一个真正廉洁的人不与人争名，所以建立不起廉洁之名，到处树立声誉的人，正是贪图虚名才这样做；巧妙至极的人不炫耀不自己的巧妙技术，炫耀巧计的人是为了掩饰笨拙。
English: A truly honest person does not compete with others for fame, so he cannot build a reputation for honesty. A person who builds a reputation everywhere does so because he is greedy for fame; a very clever person does not show off his clever skills, and a person who shows off cleverness is to cover up clumsiness.

古文：心体光明，暗室中有青天；念头暗昧，白日下有厉鬼。
现代文：一个人如果心地光明磊落，即使立身在黑暗世界，也如同站在万里晴空下一般；一个人如果有邪恶之念，即使在光天化日之下，也会遇见厉鬼。
English: If a person's heart is bright and upright, even if he stands in the dark world, it will be like standing under a clear sky; if a person has evil thoughts, even in broad daylight, he will encounter a fierce ghost.

古文：人知名位为乐，不知无名无位之乐为最真；人知饥寒为忧，不知不饥不寒之忧为更甚。
现代文：人们只知道名位的好，却不知无名无位的好是真好；人们只知道饥寒是很困难、需要忧虑的事情，却不知道解决吃饭穿衣问题后的忧虑更为严重。
English: People only know that fame is good, but they don't know that fame without fame is really good; people only know that hunger and cold are very difficult and need to be worried about, but they don't know that the worries are more serious after solving the problem of eating and dressing.

古文：为恶而畏人知，恶中犹有善路；为善而急人知，善处即是恶根。
现代文：作恶的人若是害怕自己的恶行被人知道，此时尚留有一线良知。而做好事的人若是急功好名、唯恐天下不知，则常常好心办坏事，他越要去做反而犯的错就越大。
English: If the evil-doer is afraid that his evil deeds will be known, this fashion will leave a trace of conscience. But if the good-doer is anxious to make a good name, lest the world does not know, he is often good at doing bad things, and the more he wants to do, the greater the mistake he makes.

古文：天之机缄不测，抑而伸、伸而抑，皆是播弄英雄、颠倒豪杰处。
现代文：上天的法则默默无言但又变幻莫测，有时使人先陷于窘境而后再春风得意，有时先让人一番得意后再受挫折，像是在戏弄那些所谓的英雄豪杰。
English: God's law is silent but ever-changing. Sometimes it puts people in a predicament and then makes them happy. Sometimes it makes people happy first and then frustrates them. It seems to be mocking those so-called heroes.

古文：君子只是逆来顺受、居安思危，天亦无所用其伎俩矣。
现代文：品德高尚又有见识的人因为逆来顺受，处于平安之际思量危难之时，即使上天对他也不再使用戏弄伎俩了。
English: The virtuous and intelligent man, because he is submissive, is at peace when he thinks of danger, and even the heavens no longer play tricks on him.

古文：福不可邀，养喜神以为招福之本；祸不可避，去杀机以为远祸之方。
现代文：幸福不可勉强去追求，保持心情愉快才是人生幸福的根本；人间的灾祸难以避免，消除内心的杀机才是远离灾祸的方法。
English: Happiness should not be pursued reluctantly. Maintaining a happy mood is the foundation of happiness in life. Human disasters are unavoidable. Eliminating the inner killer is the way to stay away from disasters.

古文：十语九中未必称奇，一语不中，则愆尤骈集；十谋九成未必归功，一谋不成则訾议丛兴。
现代文：十句话中有九句正确不一定稀奇，因为其中一句话不对就会立刻被指责；十次计谋九次成功不一定有功劳，如果有一次失败许多非议就汹汹而来。
English: It is not unusual for nine out of ten sentences to be correct, because if one of them is wrong, it will be immediately criticized; ten times of planning and nine times of success do not necessarily have merit, and if one fails, many criticisms will come.

古文：君子所以宁默毋躁、宁拙毋巧。
现代文：所以品德高尚又有见识的人宁可保持沉默、处事不躁，宁可表现得笨拙些，也不自作聪明。
English: Therefore, people of high moral character and insight would rather remain silent and be impatient, and would rather behave clumsily than pretend to be clever.

古文：天地之气，暖则生，寒则杀。
现代文：天地间的气象，和暖则生机盎然，寒冷则萧杀枯索。
English: The weather between heaven and earth, the warmth is full of vitality, the cold is gloomy.

古文：故性气清冷者，受享亦凉薄。惟气和暖心之人，其福亦厚，其泽亦长。
现代文：一个性情脾气高傲冷漠的人，他得到的福分也就微薄；只有那些脾气和善、能给别人带来温暖的人，他获得的福分必然丰厚，他留下的恩泽也会长久。
English: A person with a haughty and cold temperament will only receive a meager amount of blessings. Only those who are kind and can bring warmth to others will receive abundant blessings, and the blessings they leave behind will be long-lasting.

古文：天理路上甚宽，稍游心胸中，使觉广大宏朗；人欲路上甚窄，才寄迹眼前，俱是荆棘泥涂。
现代文：天地之义理像一条宽阔的大道，只要略为用心探究，就会觉得无边辽阔、豁然开朗；人世追求欲望的道路则非常狭窄，刚踏上脚就觉得眼前是一片荆棘和泥泞，前途难测。
English: The principles of heaven and earth are like a broad avenue. As long as you explore with your heart, you will feel boundlessly vast and suddenly cheerful; the path of pursuing desires in the world is very narrow. As soon as you step on your feet, you will feel that you are facing a thorny and muddy road, and the future is unpredictable.

古文：一苦一乐相磨练，练极而成福者，其福始久﹕一疑一信相参勘，勘极而成知者，其知始真。
现代文：人的一生有苦有乐，只有从苦难中磨练出来的幸福才能长久；在求学中，抱着既怀疑又相信的态度去勘验实证，这样得到的学问才是真学问。
English: A person's life is full of suffering and joy, and only the happiness that is honed through suffering can last long. In studying, we should examine the empirical evidence with an attitude of both doubt and belief, and the knowledge obtained in this way is true knowledge.

古文：地之秽者多生物，水之清者常无鱼，故君子当存含垢纳污之量，不可持好洁独行之操。
现代文：肮脏污秽的地方生长着更多的植物；清澈见底的水中常常不会有鱼虾。所以，品德高尚又有见识的人应该有包容污垢的度量，不可秉持喜好高洁而自命清高。
English: More plants grow in dirty and filthy places; fish and shrimp are often not found in crystal clear water. Therefore, people of high moral character and insight should have the ability to tolerate dirt. They should not uphold the preference of high cleanliness and claim to be high.

古文：泛驾之马可就驰驱，跃冶之金终归型范。
现代文：性情凶悍的野马只要训练有术、驾驭得法，可以用它奔驰万里；熔化时的金属虽然不停地跃动，最后还是被注入模型变为器具。
English: As long as the fierce-tempered wild horse is trained and driven properly, it can be used to drive thousands of miles; although the metal at the time of melting is constantly jumping, it is finally injected into the model to become a tool.

古文：只一优游不振，便终身无个进步。
现代文：一个人只要一时优柔寡断不加振作，就会陷于委靡不振的状态，一辈子也不会有出息。
English: As long as a person is indecisive for a while and does not cheer up, he will be stuck in a depressed state and will not have a future in life.

古文：白沙云﹕ 为人多病未足羞，一生无病是吾忧。 真确实之论也。
现代文：陈献章说： 做人有许多过失不算耻辱，一生没有一点过失才是最大的忧患。 这的确是一句至理名言。
English: Chen Xianzhang said, "It is not a disgrace to be a person with many faults, but it is the greatest sorrow to have no faults at all in one's life.

古文：人只一念贪私，便销刚为柔，塞智为昏，变恩为惨，染洁为污，坏了一生人品。
现代文：人的心中只要出现一点贪欲的念头，那他原本刚直的性格就会变得懦弱，原本聪明的头脑就会变得昏庸，原本慈悲的心肠就会变得残酷，原本纯洁的人格就会变得很污浊，最终毁了他一辈子的人品。
English: As long as the thought of greed appears in a person's heart, his originally upright character will become weak, his originally clever mind will become dull, his originally compassionate heart will become cruel, and his originally pure personality will become very dirty, eventually ruining his entire life.

古文：故古人以不贪为宝，所以度越一世。
现代文：所以古代圣贤以 不贪 为修身之宝，所以能够超脱物欲度过一生。
English: Therefore, the ancient sages regarded non-greed as the treasure of self-cultivation, so they were able to go through life free from material desires.

古文：耳目见闻为外贼，情欲意识为内贼，只是主人公惺惺不昧，独坐中堂，贼便化为家人矣。
现代文：每个人眼睛所看、耳朵所闻的声色是外贼，内心的情欲意识是内贼，只要自己的心性保持正直清醒，像主人似的端坐堂中，那么，内贼外贼都会成为家中仆人供你驱使。
English: What everyone sees with their eyes and hears with their ears is the outside thief, and the inner desire consciousness is the inside thief. As long as one's own mind is honest and clear, and sits in the hall like a master, then the inside thief and the outside thief will become the servants of the house for you to drive.

古文：图未就之功，不如保已成之业；悔既往之失，亦要防将来之非。
现代文：贪图那些未必成功的事业，不如坚守已经成功的事业；不但要忏悔过去的失误，还要防止将来可能出现的过错。
English: It is better to stick to a successful business than to covet those that may not be successful; not only to repent of past mistakes, but also to prevent possible mistakes in the future.

古文：气象要高旷，而不可疏狂。心思要缜缄，而不可琐屑。趣味要冲淡，而不可偏枯。操守要严明，而不可激烈。
现代文：一个人的气质形象要高放旷逸，不可流于粗疏狂放；思维要缜密周详，不可繁琐屑细；生活情趣要清静恬淡，不可流于偏执单调；操守要严正光明，不可过于偏激刚烈。
English: A person's temperament image should be high-spirited and open-minded, and should not flow from coarse to wild; thinking should be meticulous and detailed, and should not be tedious and trivial; life taste should be clear and quiet, and should not flow from paranoid monotony; ethics should be strict and bright, and should not be too intense.

古文：风来疏竹，风过而竹不留声；雁度寒潭，雁去而潭不留影。
现代文：清风吹拂稀疏的竹林，风过之后，竹林没有留下那沙沙的声音；大雁飞过寒冷的深潭，大雁飞走，潭水不会留下大雁的影子。
English: The clear wind blows through the sparse bamboo forest. After the wind passes, the bamboo forest does not leave the rustling sound; the geese fly over the cold deep pond, the geese fly away, and the pond water does not leave the shadow of the geese.

古文：故君子事来而心始现，事去而心随空。
现代文：由此可见，一个品德高尚又有见识的人，当事情来时，他的心性就会显现，事情过去之后，他的心性就恢复原来的空寂状态。
English: From this it can be seen that a person of high moral character and insight, when things come, his mind will be revealed, and after things are over, his mind will return to its original empty state.

古文：清能有容，仁能善断，明不伤察，直不过矫，是谓蜜饯不甜、海味不咸，才是懿德。
现代文：清廉纯洁又能包容，心地仁慈又能当机立断，内心聪明而又不失于观察，性情刚直而又不矫枉过正。这就像是蜜饯不觉其甜，海鲜不觉其咸，如此尺度才是真正的美德。
English: To be honest and pure and tolerant, to be kind-hearted and quick-witted, to be intelligent and observant, and to be straightforward and fair-minded, is to be virtuous. It is like honey that is not sweet and seafood that is not salty.

古文：贫家净扫地，贫女净梳头。
现代文：一个贫穷的家庭，经常把地扫得干干净净，一个贫穷家的女儿，经常把头梳得干净整齐。
English: A poor family often sweeps the floor clean, and a poor family's daughter often combs her hair neatly.

古文：景色虽不艳丽，气度自是风雅。
现代文：这样的景致虽算不上鲜艳华丽，但却能保持一种端庄的风范。
English: Although such scenery is not bright and gorgeous, it can maintain a dignified demeanor.

古文：士君子当穷愁寥落，奈何辄自废弛哉！
现代文：品德高尚的文人学士遇到穷愁潦倒的景况，怎么能随便萎靡不振、自暴自弃呢？
English: How can a literary scholar of high moral character casually languish and give up in the face of poverty-stricken circumstances?

古文：闲中不放过，忙中有受用。静中不落空，动中有受用。暗中不欺隐，明中有受用。
现代文：闲暇的时候，为以后的事情作点准备，等忙碌时就会受益；平静的时候，为日后工作做点准备，等行动时就会受益；在灵魂深处如能保持你光明磊落的胸怀，你外在的一切言行一定会更加进步。
English: In your leisure time, prepare for the future, so that when you are busy, you will benefit; when you are calm, prepare for the future, so that when you act, you will benefit; in the depths of your soul, if you can keep your mind bright, all your external words and deeds will surely be more progressive.

古文：念头起处，才觉向欲路上去，便挽从理路上来。
现代文：念头初起时，一旦发觉到邪欲路上了，就要拉到义理路上来。
English: At the beginning of the thought, once it is discovered that it is on the path of evil desire, it should be pulled to the path of righteousness.

古文：一起便觉，一觉便转，此是转祸为福、起死回生的关头，切莫当面错过。
现代文：念头一起就要警觉，一警觉就离开，这是转祸为福、起死回生的紧要关头，千万不要放过。
English: The idea is to be alert at the same time, and leave as soon as you are alert. This is a critical moment to turn misfortune into good fortune, and bring life back to life. Don't miss it.

古文：天薄我以福，吾厚吾德以迓之；天劳我以形，吾逸吾心以补之；天扼我以遇，吾亨吾道以通之。
现代文：假如上天给我福分不多，我就多做些善事来培育我的福分；假如上天用劳苦来劳乏我，我就放逸我的心性来弥补它；假如上天用穷困来折磨我，我就开辟我的生路来摆脱困境。
English: If heaven gives me few blessings, I will do more good deeds to cultivate my blessings; if heaven exhausts me with labor, I will relax my mind to make up for it; if heaven tortures me with poverty, I will open up my life to get out of the predicament.

古文：天且奈我何哉！
现代文：如此，上天又能奈何我什么呢！
English: If that is so, how can Heaven help me?

古文：真士无心邀福，天即就无心处牖其衷；险人着意避祸，天即就着意中夺其魂。
现代文：真正修行的人无意挖空心思追求福运，可上天却使他在无意之间得到福运以满足其心愿；阴险邪恶的小人虽然用尽心机逃避灾祸，可上天却偏偏在他逃避时夺走他的魂魄。
English: A true cultivator, who unintentionally empties his mind in pursuit of good fortune, may be granted good fortune unintentionally by Heaven to fulfill his wishes; a sinister villain, who tries his best to escape disaster, may be deprived of his soul by Heaven while he is running away.

古文：可见天之机权最神，人之智巧何益！
现代文：可见，上天的机智权谋最为神奇，人类的智慧技巧又有何用！
English: You can see that God's wit and strategy are the most amazing, and human wisdom and skill are of no use!

古文：声妓晚景从良，一世之烟花无碍；贞妇白头失守，半生之清苦俱非。
现代文：妓女到了晚年做了良家妇女，那么她以前放荡的生活没有对后来的生活形成阻碍；可是一个一直坚守贞操的节妇，到了晚年由于耐不住寂寞而失节的话，那她半生守寡的清苦就都付诸东流。
English: If a prostitute becomes a good housewife in her old age, then her former debauched life does not form an obstacle to her later life; but if a woman who has always adhered to chastity loses her chastity in her old age because she can't stand loneliness, then her half-life of widowhood will all be in vain.

古文：语云﹕ 看人只看后半截 ，真名言也。
现代文：俗谚说： 评定一个人的功过得失，要看他的后半生。 这真是一句至理名言。
English: There is a saying that a person's merits and demerits should be judged in the second half of his life, which is a true saying.

古文：平民肯种德施惠，便是无位的卿相；仕夫徒贪权市宠，竟成有爵的乞人。
现代文：一个普通百姓只要肯多积功德、广施恩惠，虽没有爵位，也像卿相般受万人景仰；反之，一个达官贵人假如一味贪婪权势、祈求上司宠爱，这种行径就如同一个有爵禄的乞丐。
English: If an ordinary citizen is able to accumulate merit and grant favors, he will be admired like a lord, although he does not have a title; on the other hand, if a high-ranking dignitary is greedy for power and asks his boss to favor him, this behavior is like a beggar with a knighthood.

古文：问祖宗之德泽，吾身所享者，是当念其积累之难；问子孙之福祉，吾身所贻者，是要思其倾覆之易。
现代文：要问祖宗的恩德福泽，我们自身所享有的就是，应当感念他们积德的艰难；要问我们子孙后代的福祉如何，要看我们现在能给他们留下什么，要想到子孙后代可能因遭遇坎坷而家道败落。
English: To ask about the blessings of our ancestors, what we ourselves have enjoyed, is to feel the hardships of their virtues; to ask about the well-being of our future generations, to see what we can leave for them now, to think about the possibility that future generations may fail due to adversity.

古文：君子而诈善，无异小人之肆恶；君子而改节，不若小人之自新。家人有过不宜暴扬，不宜轻弃。
现代文：品德高尚又有见识的人假装为善，就与恣意作恶的小人一般无二；品德高尚又有见识的人改节易操，还不如一个痛改前非的小人。家里的人犯了过错，不应该揭露传扬，不应该轻易放弃。
English: A person of high moral character and insight who pretends to be good is generally no different from a villain who arbitrarily commits evil; a person of high moral character and insight is easy to change, and is not as good as a villain who makes amends. People in the family have made mistakes, and should not expose and spread, and should not give up easily.

古文：此事难言，借他事而隐讽之。今日不悟，俟来日正警之。
现代文：这件事情难以言说，可以假借其他事情来暗示他改正；今天不能醒悟，明天再警示他。
English: It's hard to say. Other things can be used to suggest that he make amends. If he doesn't wake up today, warn him again tomorrow.

古文：如春风之解冻、和气之消冰，才是家庭的型范。
现代文：就像春风化解冻土、暖气消融坚冰那样，这才是家庭的典范。
English: Just as the spring breeze thaws the frozen ground and the heating melts the hard ice, this is the model of the family.

古文：此心常看得圆满，天下自无缺陷之世界；此心常放得宽平，天下自无险侧之人情。
现代文：在一个内心圆满的人看来，天下万物都圆满，毫无缺陷；在一个胸襟宽广平和的人看来，天底下没有邪恶之人。
English: In the eyes of a person with a perfect heart, everything in the world is perfect and without flaw; in the eyes of a person with a broad and peaceful mind, there is no evil person under heaven.

古文：淡薄之士，必为浓艳者所疑；检饬之人，多为放肆者所忌。
现代文：品德高洁、性情淡泊的人，一定会遭到那些追名逐利之人的怀疑；言行谨慎处处检点的人，大多会遭受那些邪恶放肆的小人所嫉妒。
English: People of high moral character and light-hearted disposition will certainly be suspected by those who pursue fame and profit; people who are cautious in words and deeds will mostly be envied by those evil and impudent villains.

古文：君子处此固不可少变其操履，亦不可太露其锋芒。
现代文：品德高尚又有见识的人如处此境，绝不能对自己的操守和志向有少许改变，也不可过分表现自己的才华锐气。
English: A man of high moral character and insight must not, in such a situation, make the slightest change in his ethics and aspirations, and he must not over-express his brilliance.

古文：居逆境中，周身皆针砭药石，砥节砺行而不觉；处顺境内，眼前尽兵刃戈矛，销膏靡骨而不知。
现代文：一个人如果处在逆境中，周围所接触到的全是能治病的医疗器具和药物，不知不觉中磨砺你的操守和品行；一个人如果生活在衣食无忧的顺境中，眼前尽是兵刃戈矛等杀人利器，不知不觉中销蚀你的灵魂和躯体。
English: If a person is in an adverse situation, all the medical equipment and drugs that can cure diseases are around him, unconsciously sharpening your ethics and behavior; if a person lives in a prosperous environment without food and clothing, the eyes are full of killing weapons such as swords and spears, unknowingly eroding your soul and body.

古文：生长富贵丛中的，嗜欲如猛火、权势似烈焰。
现代文：生长在富贵之家的人，欲望高涨如猛火，权势逼人似烈焰。
English: People who grow up in a rich family have their desires soar like a raging fire, and their power is like a blazing flame.

古文：若不带些清冷气味，其火焰不至焚人，必将自焚。
现代文：假如不及时给他一些清冷的气味缓和一下，这个火焰虽然不至于焚烧他人，但早晚有一天焚毁他自己。
English: If you don't give him some cold and refreshing scents in time, this flame won't burn others, but sooner or later it will burn him.

古文：人心一真，便霜可飞、城可陨、金石可贯。
现代文：人的心地一旦真诚，就可感天动地，以至盛夏可以飞雪，城墙可以哭崩，金石可以贯穿。
English: Once a person's heart is sincere, he can feel the earth move, so much so that snow can fly in midsummer, city walls can crumble, and stones can penetrate.

古文：若伪妄之人，形骸徒具，真宰已亡。对人则面目可憎，独居则形影自愧。
现代文：若是虚伪诈妄的人，徒然具有一副形体骸骨，真正的主宰灵魂早已死亡，与他人相处让人觉得面目可憎，独自一人面对自己的影子也觉羞愧。
English: If you are a deceitful person, you have a skeleton of a body in vain, the true master soul has long been dead, getting along with others makes you feel disgusting, and you are ashamed to face your own shadow alone.

古文：文章做到极处，无有他奇，只是恰好；人品做到极处，无有他异，只是本然。
现代文：文章做到最好，并没有什么特别奇妙的地方，只是表达得恰到好处而已；人品修炼到最高，也并没有什么特别的地方，只是回归自己的天然本性而已。
English: There is nothing particularly strange about doing one's best in writing, it's just about expressing oneself in the right way; there is nothing special about cultivating one's character to the highest level, it's just about returning to one's natural nature.

古文：以幻迹言，无论功名富贵，即肢体亦属委形；以真境言，无论父母兄弟，即万物皆吾一体。
现代文：从虚幻的境界看，不但是功名富贵，就是四肢躯体也是上天委付的；从现实的境界看，不论是父母兄弟，还是其他的一切事物，都与我是一体的。
English: Viewed from the illusory realm, not only the merits, but also the limbs and body are entrusted to Heaven; viewed from the real realm, whether it is my parents, brothers, or all other things, I am one.

古文：人能看得破，认得真，才可以任天下之负担，亦可脱世间之缰锁。
现代文：对这一切能够看得透彻、认得真切的人，才可以胜任人世间重大的使命，也才可以摆脱人世间的一切羁绊。
English: Only a person who can see all of this thoroughly and recognize it accurately can be qualified for the great mission of the human world, and can also get rid of all the shackles of the human world.

古文：爽口之味，皆烂肠腐骨之药，五分便无殃；快心之事，悉败身散德之媒，五分便无悔。
现代文：清爽可口的美味，说来都是溃烂肠胃腐蚀筋骨的毒药，吃个半饱就不会伤害身体；畅快舒心的事情，说来都是败坏身体丧失德行的媒介，适度控制才不会后悔。
English: Refreshing and delicious delicacies are said to be poisons that fester the intestines and stomach and corrode the bones and muscles. Eating a half-full meal will not harm the body; things that are pleasant and comfortable are said to be the means of corrupting the body and losing virtue. Moderate control will not regret it.

古文：不责人小过，不发人阴私，不念人旧恶，三者可以养德，亦可以远害。
现代文：不要责难他人的小错，不要揭发他人的隐私，不要念念不忘他人过去的坏处。这三大原则不但可以培养自己的品德，也可以让自己远离祸害。
English: Don't criticize others' minor mistakes, don't expose others' privacy, and don't remember others' past bad points. These three principles can not only cultivate one's own character, but also keep oneself away from evil.

古文：天地有万古，此身不再得；人生只百年，此日最易过。
现代文：天地万古长存，可是人死了就不会再复活；人的寿命最多百年左右，一天很容易就过去了。
English: Heaven and earth will exist forever, but people will not be resurrected after they die; a person's lifespan is at most about a hundred years, and a day can easily pass.

古文：幸生其间者，不可不知有生之乐，亦不可不怀虚生之忧。
现代文：我们有幸生存在天地之间，不可不了解活着的乐趣，也不可不怀有虚度光阴的担忧。
English: We are fortunate to exist between heaven and earth, and we must understand the joy of being alive, and we must also harbor the fear of wasting time.

古文：老来疾病都是壮时招得；衰时罪孽都是盛时作得。
现代文：人到老年时所生的疾病，都是年轻力壮时留下的病根；家道衰败以后遭受的罪孽，都是家道兴盛时造成的祸根。
English: The diseases that people get when they are old are the roots of the diseases left behind when they were young and strong; the sins suffered after the decline of the family are the root of the evil caused by the prosperity of the family.

古文：故持盈履满，君子尤兢兢焉。
现代文：因此，在成功完满的幸福生活中，君子还应小心谨慎，不可得意忘形。
English: Therefore, in a successful and happy life, a gentleman should also be careful not to get carried away.

古文：市私恩不如扶公议，结新知不如敦旧好，立荣名不如种阴得，尚奇节不如谨庸行。
现代文：布施给个人恩惠，不如支持公正舆论；结交新的知己，不如加深对旧朋友的交情；与其沽名钓誉追求知名度，不如在暗中积一些阴德；与其崇尚标新立异的名节，不如谨言慎行多作一些平凡的事情。
English: It is better to support fair public opinion than to lavish personal favors; it is better to deepen the friendship of old friends than to make new friends; it is better to accumulate some hidden virtues than to pursue fame; it is better to do more ordinary things than to advocate innovative festivals.

古文：公平正论不可犯手，一犯手则遗羞万世；权门私窦不可着脚，一着脚则玷污终身。
现代文：凡是社会所公认的规范绝对不能触犯，一旦触犯了你就遗臭万年；凡是权贵营私舞弊的地方千万不可踏进去，一旦踏进去，就会玷污一世的清名。
English: It is absolutely forbidden to violate any socially recognized norms. If you do, your name will be tarnished for a thousand years. You must never step into any place where the rich and powerful engage in personal fraud. If you do, you will tarnish the reputation of the first generation.

古文：曲意而使人喜，不若直节而使人忌；无善而致人誉，不如无恶而致人毁。
现代文：委曲逢迎他人以博取他人欢心，不如刚正不阿、身体力行而遭受小人的忌恨；没有善良的行为而得到他人的赞誉，不如没有恶行而遭到他人的毁谤。
English: It is better not to be upright, but to do what is right and be hated by others. It is better not to do what is wrong and be praised by others, than to do what is right and be despised by others.

古文：处父兄骨肉之变，宜从容不宜激烈；遇朋友交游之失，宜剀切不宜优游。
现代文：当遇到父母兄弟等至亲骨肉之间发生变故时，应该从容镇定，绝不可采取激烈的言行而把事情弄得更坏；当你跟知心朋友交往时，如发现朋友有过失，应该很亲切诚恳地规劝他，不能犹豫不决由着他继续错下去。
English: When encountering changes between parents, brothers, etc. and even flesh and blood, you should be calm and calm, and you must not take drastic words and actions to make things worse; when you interact with a close friend, if you find that your friend is at fault, you should very cordially and sincerely persuade him, and you should not hesitate to let him continue to make mistakes.

古文：小处不渗漏，暗处不欺隐，末路不怠荒，才是真正英雄。
现代文：细微之处不可粗心大意疏忽遗漏，在没人见的地方不能做见不得人的事，即使处于穷途末路的时候也振作精神、奋发向上，这才是真正的英雄好汉。
English: You can't carelessly neglect the subtleties, you can't do despicable things where no one can see you, and even when you're at the end of your rope, you can keep your spirits up and work hard. That's what a true hero is.

古文：惊奇喜异者，终无远大之识；苦节独行者，要有恒久之操。
现代文：一个标新立异、行为怪诞不经的人，肯定没有远见卓识；一个苦守名节而独行其事的人，要保持长久的操行。
English: A person who is unconventional and acts eccentrically is certainly not visionary; a person who sticks to his name and does his own thing must maintain a long-term practice.

古文：当怒火欲水正腾沸时，明明知得，又明明犯着。
现代文：当一个人怒火燃烧欲望沸腾之时，他明知道这样不对，可又控制不住自己。
English: When a person's anger burns and desire boils, he knows it's wrong, but he can't control himself.

古文：知得是谁，犯着又是谁。
现代文：知道这种道理的是谁？明知故犯的又是谁？
English: Who is it that knows this truth? Who is it that knowingly commits a crime?

古文：此处能猛然转念，邪魔便为知真君子矣。
现代文：假如当此紧要关头能够猛然顿悟，欲望等邪恶的魔鬼就会消退，而你就成为真正的君子了。
English: If you can have a sudden epiphany at this critical moment, the evil demons such as desires will subside, and you will become a true gentleman.

古文：毋偏信而为奸所欺，毋自任而为气所使，毋以己之长而形人之短，毋因己之拙而忌人之能。
现代文：不要偏听偏信而被奸诈之徒所欺骗，不要自负自信而被一时意气所驱使；不要用自己的长处比照他人的短处，不要因为自己笨拙就妒忌他人的才能。
English: Do not be deceived by the deceitful, do not be deceived by the treacherous, do not be carried away by the confident, do not be carried away by the impetuous, do not use your own strength against the weaknesses of others, do not envy the talents of others because you are clumsy.

古文：人之短处，要曲为弥缝，如暴而扬之，是以短攻短；人有顽的，要善为化诲，如忿而嫉之，是以顽济顽。
现代文：别人有缺点，要委婉地为他掩饰弥补，如果在众人面前宣扬他的缺点，这其实就是用你的缺点攻击别人的缺点；别人愚顽固执，要善于感化教诲他，如果自己动怒并且厌恶他，就是用自己的顽固助长他人的顽固。
English: If someone has a shortcoming, you should subtly cover it up for him and make up for it. If you announce his shortcoming in front of everyone, this is actually using your shortcoming to attack someone else's shortcoming. If someone is stubborn, you should be good at influencing and teaching him. If you get angry and dislike him, you are using your stubbornness to encourage the stubbornness of others.

古文：遇沉沉不语之士，且莫输心；见悻悻自好之人，应须防口。
现代文：遇到表情阴沉、沉默寡言的人，千万不要对他推心置腹表露内心；遇到满脸怒气自以为是的人，在他面前就要小心提防不多说话。
English: When you meet a gloomy, taciturn person, you must not show your heart to him; when you meet an angry, self-righteous person, you must be careful not to talk too much in front of him.

古文：念头昏散处，要知提醒；念头吃紧时，要知放下。不然恐去昏昏之病，又来憧憧之扰矣。
现代文：当你意念昏沉散乱的时候，要提醒自己已经处于昏沉散乱之中了，当意念思绪感到很累时，就暂时放下，轻松一下；否则的话，恐怕刚刚除去昏沉散乱的毛病，又来了懵懵懂懂的毛病。
English: When your thoughts are muddled, remind yourself that you are already muddled. When you are tired of your thoughts, let them go for a while and relax. Otherwise, you may have just got rid of the problem of muddled thinking, and now you have the problem of not understanding.

古文：霁日青天，倏变为迅雷震电；疾风怒雨，倏转为朗月晴空。
现代文：刚刚还是太阳高照、晴空万里，突然间乌云密布、雷雨交加；刚刚还是狂风怒吼、大雨倾盆，忽然变得皓月当空、万里无云。
English: Just now, the sun was still shining high and the sky was clear for miles and miles, and all of a sudden, dark clouds were thick and thunderstorms were interspersed; just now, the wind was still howling and heavy rain was pouring down, and suddenly, there was a bright moon in the sky and no clouds at all.

古文：气机何尝一毫凝滞，太虚何尝一毫障蔽，人之心体亦当如是。
现代文：大自然中的气机何时曾被凝滞？
English: When has the natural gas engine ever been stalled?

古文：胜私制欲之功，有曰识不早、力不易者，有曰识得破、忍不过者。盖识是一颗照魔的明珠，力是一把斩魔的慧剑，两不可少也。
现代文：茫茫宇宙何时曾被阻碍？我们人类的心性也应当不受任何的凝滞、阻碍。在战胜私欲这个问题上，有些人说是因为没及时发现，没有坚强的意志控制它，有些人说是认识到了私欲的害处，却又经受不住它的诱惑。认识是一颗照见魔鬼的法宝，智慧是一把消灭魔鬼的利剑，在战胜私欲方面要双管齐下，这两种法宝都不可缺少。
English: When has the vast universe ever been obstructed? Our human mentality should also be free from any stagnation and obstruction. On the issue of defeating selfishness, some people say that they did not discover it in time and did not have a strong will to control it. Some people say that they recognized the harm of selfishness, but could not withstand its temptation. Knowledge is a magic weapon to see the devil, and wisdom is a sharp sword to destroy the devil. In defeating selfishness, both methods should be used. Both of these magic weapons are indispensable.

古文：横逆困穷，是煅炼豪杰的一副炉锤。能受其煅炼者，则身心交益；不受其煅炼者，则身心交损。
现代文：人间的横祸逆运困苦贫穷等等，都是磨炼英雄豪杰心性的熔炉和铁锤，能经受到这种磨炼的人，他的身体与精神都会受益，没有经受过这种磨炼的人，对他是一种损失和缺憾。
English: The vicissitudes of human life, adversity, hardship, poverty, and so on, are the crucible and hammer for honing the character of heroes and heroes. Those who can undergo this kind of tempering will benefit their body and spirit. Those who have not undergone this kind of tempering will be a loss and a shortcoming to him.

古文：害人之心不可有，防人之心不可无，此戒疏于虑者。宁受人之欺，毋逆人之诈，此警伤于察者。
现代文： 害人之心不可有，防人之心不可无 ，这句话是告诫那些与人交往时思考不周的人。 宁可忍受他的欺骗，也不要当面拆穿他的骗局 ，这句话是用来告诫那些警惕性过高的人。
English: Do not have a harmful heart, and do not have a protective heart, this sentence is a warning to those who do not think carefully when dealing with people. It is better to put up with his deception than to expose his deception in person, this sentence is used to warn those who are too vigilant.

古文：二语并存，精明浑厚矣。
现代文：如果在和别人交往时这两句话并用，则是既精明又厚道。
English: If you use these two sentences together when dealing with others, it is both shrewd and kind.

古文：毋因群疑而阻独见，毋任己意而废人言，毋私小惠而伤大体，毋借公论以快私情。
现代文：不要因为别人都怀疑你的观点，你就放弃自己独特的见解，不要固执己见而拒绝别人的意见，不要因为小恩小惠来而害了大局，不要假借公众舆论来满足自己的私心。
English: Don't give up your own unique opinions just because others doubt your point of view, don't be stubborn and reject others' opinions, don't harm the overall situation because of small favors, and don't use public opinion to satisfy your selfishness.

古文：善人未能急亲，不宜预扬，恐来谗谮之奸；恶人未能轻去，不宜先发，恐招媒孽之祸。
现代文：碰到善良的人，如果不能很快亲近他，也不要先行赞扬他，以免招来恶言中伤的奸恶小人；碰到邪恶的人，如果不能轻易离开他，也不要轻率打发他，以免遭受陷害报复之类的灾祸。
English: If you meet a good person, if you can't get close to him quickly, don't praise him first, so as not to attract a malicious villain. If you meet an evil person, if you can't easily leave him, don't send him away carelessly, so as not to suffer the calamity of frame-up and revenge.

古文：青天白日的节义，自暗室屋漏中培来；旋乾转坤的经纶，从临深履薄中操出。
现代文：青天白日般光明磊落的节操义行，是从黑暗破败的房屋中培养出来的；经天纬地治国平天下的伟大韬略，是从如临深渊、如履薄冰的小心谨慎的做事态度中磨练出来的。
English: The bright-as-the-blue-sky-and-day virtuous conduct is cultivated from the dark and dilapidated houses; the great strategy of ruling the country through the world is honed from the careful and prudent attitude of doing things as if approaching the abyss and treading on thin ice.

古文：父慈子孝、兄友弟恭，纵做到极处，俱是合当如是，着不得一毫感激的念头。
现代文：父母对子女慈祥，子女对父母孝顺，兄姐对弟妹爱护，弟妹对兄姐恭敬，这些做法即使做到最高境界，也都是应该的，彼此间不应有丝毫感激的念头。
English: Parents should be kind to their children, children should be filial to their parents, brothers and sisters should be affectionate to their brothers and sisters, and brothers and sisters should be respectful to their brothers and sisters. These practices, even if they reach the highest level, are all appropriate, and there should not be the slightest thought of gratitude between them.

古文：如施者任德，受者怀恩，便是路人，便成市道矣。
现代文：如果布施的人感到自己对人有恩，受施的人感到自己应该报恩，这就成了陌路人了，施受也就成了一项交易了。
English: If the giver feels indebted to the receiver, and the receiver feels indebted to the giver, then the giver becomes a stranger and the receiver a transaction.

古文：炎凉之态，富贵更甚于贫贱；妒忌之心，骨肉尤狠于外人。
现代文：人情的冷暖，世态的炎凉，富贵人家比贫贱人家表现得更加明显；人们嫉妒猜忌的心理，对亲人比对外人更加厉害。
English: The warmth and coldness of people's feelings, the hot and cold of the world, the rich and noble people are more obvious than the poor; people's jealousy and suspicion are more severe to relatives than to outsiders.

古文：此处若不当以冷肠，御以平气，鲜不日坐烦恼障中矣。
现代文：此情此景，如不能冷静下来，让自己的心情处于心平气和的状态，那就几乎天天处在烦恼之中了。
English: In this situation, if you can't calm down and let your mood be in a peaceful state, then you will be in trouble almost every day.

古文：功过不宜少混，混则人怀惰隳之心；恩仇不可太明，明则人起携贰之志。
现代文：功绩和过错不能有丁点混淆，如果混淆了，就会使人产生懒惰、不思进取之心；恩惠和仇恨不能分得太清楚，分得太清楚就会使人离心离德，产生背叛之心。
English: Merit and fault should not be confused in the slightest. If they are confused, it will make people lazy and unambitious. Favor and hatred should not be too clearly separated. If they are too clearly separated, it will make people alienated and betray.

古文：恶忌阴，善忌阳，故恶之显者祸浅，而隐者祸深。善之显者功小，而隐者功大。
现代文：做了坏事最怕的是掩盖它，做了好事最忌讳的是宣扬它。坏事公开了灾祸后果就会小，而坏事藏而不露其灾祸后果就会大；好事宣扬出去功德就会小，好事秘而不宣功德就会大。
English: The worst thing to do when you have done a bad thing is to cover it up, and the most taboo thing to do when you have done a good thing is to publicize it. If you disclose a bad thing, the evil consequences will be small, but if you hide a bad thing and don't reveal it, the evil consequences will be big; if you publicize a good thing, the merits will be small, and if you keep a good thing secret and don't publicize it, the merits will be big.

古文：德者才之主，才者德之奴。
现代文：品德是才干的主人，才干则是品德的奴隶。
English: Character is the master of talent, and talent is the slave of character.

古文：有才无德，如家无主而奴用事矣，几何不魍魉猖狂。
现代文：一个人假如只有才干而没有好的品德，就等于一个家庭没有主人而由仆人当家，怎会不群魔乱舞呢？
English: If a person has only talent but no good moral character, it is equivalent to a family without a master but with a servant as the head of the family. How can there not be a group of devils dancing?

古文：锄奸杜幸，要放他一条去路。
现代文：铲除邪恶之徒，杜绝投机取巧的小人，也要给他们一条出路。
English: We must root out the evil-doers, stop the opportunistic villains, and give them a way out.

古文：若使之一无所容，便如塞鼠穴者，一切去路都塞尽，则一切好物都咬破矣。
现代文：如果逼急了，使他们无立锥之地，他们就会狗急跳墙，就好比堵老鼠洞，一切出路都堵住，老鼠的逃路固然都堵死了，可里面的好东西却也都被老鼠咬坏了。
English: If they are in a hurry and there is no place for them to stand, they will be in a hurry to jump over the wall. It is like blocking a rat hole. All the exits are blocked. The rat's escape route is certainly blocked, but the good things inside are all bitten by the rat.

古文：士君子不能济物者，遇人痴迷处，出一言提醒之，遇人急难处，出一言解救之，亦是无量功德矣。
现代文：品德高尚的文人学士虽然自己很贫穷，不能用物质财富来帮助别人，可一旦遇到有人为某事迷惑时，说句话提醒他一下，或遇到别人有紧急危难事故时，能从旁说几句话来解救他的危难，这也算是一种很大的善行。
English: Although he is very poor and cannot use his material wealth to help others, it is a great act of kindness for a virtuous literati to say a few words to remind someone when he is confused about something, or to say a few words to save someone's life when they are in an emergency.

古文：反己者触事皆成药石，尤人者动念即是戈矛，一以辟众善之路，一以浚诸恶之源，相去霄壤矣。
现代文：严于律己的人，自己所接触的一切事物都是自己修身的良药；怨天尤人的人，他的每一动念都带有一股杀气。严于律己开辟了一条向善的途径，怨天尤人却是走向各种罪恶的源头，两者之间真是有着天壤之别。
English: For those who are strict with themselves, everything they come into contact with is good medicine for self-cultivation; for those who complain about the weather, there is a murderous spirit in their every thought. Strict self-discipline opens up a path to goodness, but complaining about the weather is the source of all kinds of evil. There is a world of difference between the two.

古文：事业文章随身销毁，而精神万古如新；功名富贵逐世转移，而气节千载一时。
现代文：事业和文章随着人的死亡而消失，但精神万古长存；功名和富贵随着时代的变迁而转移，但气节永留人间。
English: The cause and articles disappear with the death of a person, but the spirit lasts forever; the fame and wealth shift with the changes of the times, but the spirit remains forever.

古文：君子信不当以彼易此也。鱼网之设，鸿则罹其中；螳螂之贪，雀又乘其后。
现代文：品德高尚又有见识的人绝对不应当放弃留名千秋万代的精神和气节，而去追求转眼即逝的事业文章和功名富贵。设网是为了捕鱼，不料却捕到了鸿；贪婪的螳螂一心想吃眼前的蝉，不料后面却有一只黄雀要吃它。
English: A person of high moral character and insight should never give up the spirit and spirit of leaving a name for generations to come, but pursue a fleeting career and fame. The net was set up to catch fish, but it was caught; the greedy cockroach wanted to eat the cicada in front of him, but a yellow bird wanted to eat it behind him.

古文：机里藏机变外生变，智巧何足恃哉。
现代文：天地万物间真是奥妙无穷，玄机中藏有玄机，变化中还有变化，人类的智慧和计谋怎么够用？
English: Between heaven and earth and all things, the mysteries are truly endless. There are mysteries hidden in mysteries, and there are still changes in changes. How can human wisdom and strategy be enough?

古文：作人无一点真恳的念头，便成个花子，事事皆虚；涉世无一段圆活的机趣，便是个木人，处处有碍。
现代文：做人如果没有一点真诚恳切的念头，就会像个叫花子一样，什么事业也做不成；人生处事如果不会圆滑机灵随机应变，就等于是一个木头人，无论做什么都会处处碰壁。
English: If a person does not have a sincere and earnest thought, he will be like a flower child, and no cause can be accomplished; if he does not handle life with tact and ingenuity, he is equal to a wooden man, no matter what he does, he will hit the wall everywhere.

古文：事有急之不白者，宽之或自明，毋躁急以速其忿；人有切之不从者，纵之或自化，毋操切以益其顽。
现代文：有些事情越着急越弄不明白，暂且宽缓一些或许会自然明白，对做事性急的人千万不要急躁，否则会让他急上加急，心生怨气；相反，世上还有一些人，你指导他，他却不肯听从，这时放松约束给他点时间或余地，他也许会慢慢觉悟过来，千万不可操之过急，以免增加他的蛮横和顽固。
English: Some things are more and more difficult to understand the more you hurry. If you relax for a while, you may naturally understand some things. Don't be impatient with a person who is in a hurry, otherwise he will be in a hurry and resentful. On the contrary, there are some people in the world. If you guide him, he will not want to listen. At this time, relax the constraints and give him some time or space. He may slowly come to his senses. Don't be too hasty, so as not to increase his arrogance and stubbornness.

古文：节义傲青云，文章高白雪，若不以德性陶镕之，终为血气之私、技能之末。
现代文：气节高洁可以傲视青天白云，文章高雅可以超过阳春白雪，但如果不用道德品性陶铸熔炼它们，追求气节高洁不过就是个人的血气冲动，追求文章高雅不过就是写作的雕虫小技。
English: High-quality writing can be proud of the blue sky and white clouds, high-quality writing can exceed the yang spring and white snow, but if they are not melted by casting moral character, the pursuit of high-quality writing is nothing more than the individual's blood and gas impulse, and the pursuit of high-quality writing is nothing more than the small skill of writing.

古文：谢事当谢于正盛之时，居身宜居于独后之地，谨德须谨于至微之事，施恩务施于不报之人。
现代文：要引退，应该选择事业的辉煌时期；要修身，应该选择与世无争的清静地方。要想修炼品德，必须从小事做起；要想施恩不图报，就要施恩那些不能回报你的人。
English: If you want to retire, you should choose a glorious period of your career; if you want to improve your health, you should choose a peaceful place that is not in conflict with the world. If you want to cultivate your moral character, you must start with small things; if you want to show kindness without expecting anything in return, you must show kindness to those who cannot repay you.

古文：德者事业之基，未有基不固而栋宇坚久者；心者修裔之根，未有根不植而枝叶荣茂者。
现代文：高尚的品德是事业成功的基础，基础不稳固，高楼大厦就不能坚固持久；善良的心是孕育后代繁茂昌盛的根基，这就像同植树一般，没有树根，树木就不可能枝繁叶茂。
English: A noble character is the foundation of a successful career. If the foundation is not solid, a high-rise building cannot be strong and lasting. A kind heart is the foundation for nurturing future generations to flourish. It is like planting a tree. Without roots, the tree cannot flourish.

