古文：郑袤，字林叔，荥阳开封人也。
现代文：郑袤，字林叔，是荥阳开封人。
English: Zheng Yao, also known as Uncle Lin, was the founder of Shenyang.

古文：高祖众，汉大司农。
现代文：高祖郑众，汉时任大司农。
English: Zheng Zong, the founder of the school, was the director of agriculture in the Han Dynasty.

古文：父泰，扬州刺史，有高名。
现代文：父亲郑泰，汉时任扬州刺史，有好名声。
English: His father, Zheng Tai, was Yangzhou's chief historian in the Han Dynasty and had a good reputation.

古文：袤少孤，早有识鉴。
现代文：郑袤年少丧父，很早就有见地和能识别人才。
English: Zheng Yao lost his father at a young age, and he had insight and ability to recognize talent very early.

古文：荀攸见之曰： 郑公业为不亡矣。 
现代文：荀攸见到他说： 郑公业好像还活着呢。 
English: When Yu Yu saw him, he said, "It seems that Zheng Gongye is still alive."

古文：随叔父浑避难江东。
现代文：郑袤随叔父郑浑避难江东。
English: Zheng Rong followed his uncle Zheng Hun to take refuge in the east of the river.

古文：时华歆为豫章太守，浑往依之，歆素与泰善，抚养袤如己子。
现代文：当时华歆任豫章太守，郑浑前往投靠他，华歆一向与郑泰友善，抚养郑袤如同自己的儿子。
English: At that time, Hua Tuo was appointed as the governor of Yuzhang, and Zheng Hun went to him for help. Hua Tuo had always been friendly with Zheng Tai, and raised Zheng Tai like his own son.

古文：年十七，乃还乡里。
现代文：郑袤十七岁时，才回故里。
English: At the age of seventeen, Zheng Rong returned to his hometown.

古文：性清正。
现代文：为人清正。
English: He is a man of integrity.

古文：时济阴魏讽为相国掾，名重当世，袤同郡任览与结交。
现代文：当时济阴人魏讽任相国掾，名气很大，和郑袤同郡的任览与他结交。
English: At that time, Wei Liren, a native of Jilin, was appointed to the position of Guozhen, and he was very famous. He made friends with Zheng Xuan and Ren Xuan of the same county.

古文：袤以讽奸雄，终必为祸，劝览远之。
现代文：郑袤认为魏讽是奸雄之人，终究要酿成祸害，劝任览远离他。
English: Zheng Yao thought that Wei Lian was a villain and would eventually cause a disaster, and advised Ren Zhan to stay away from him.

古文：及讽败，论者称焉。
现代文：等到魏讽事发兵败，议论的人都称赏郑袤。
English: By the time the Wei Dynasty was defeated, everyone praised Zheng Qi.

古文：魏武帝初封诸子为侯，精选宾友，袤与徐干俱为临淄侯文学，转司隶功曹从事。
现代文：魏武帝当初封儿子为诸侯时，为他们精心选择门客朋友，郑袤和徐干都担任临淄侯文学，后改任司隶功曹从事。
English: When Emperor Weiwu initially appointed his sons as princes, he carefully selected the best friends for them. Zheng Qi and Xu Gang both served as princes of Linyi literature, and later changed their positions to serve as officials of Gong Cao.

古文：司空王朗辟为掾，袤举高阳许允、扶风鲁芝、东莱王基，朗皆命之，后咸至大位，有重名。
现代文：司空王朗延请为属官，郑袤举荐高阳人许允、扶风人鲁芝、东莱人王基，王朗都任用他们，后来他们都做了高官，有很高的名望。
English: Wang Lang, the governor of Kuang, invited Xu Yun, the governor of Goyang, Lu Zhi, the governor of Feng, and Wang Ji, the governor of Donglai, to be subordinate officials. Wang Lang appointed all of them, and later they all became high-ranking officials and had a high reputation.

古文：袤迁尚书郎。
现代文：郑袤升任尚书郎。
English: Zheng Qi was promoted to Shang Shuro.

古文：出为黎阳令，吏民悦服。
现代文：后外任为黎阳令，部下和百姓都心悦诚服。
English: After that, he was appointed to Liyang, and his subordinates and the people were sincerely pleased.

古文：太守班下属城，特见甄异，为诸县之最。
现代文：太守考核属官，经过甄别，郑袤尤为突出，为各县县令之首。
English: After screening, Zheng Yao was particularly outstanding and became the head of the county government of each county.

古文：迁尚书右丞。
现代文：升任尚书右丞。
English: He was promoted to Shoshu Ujo.

古文：转济阴太守，下车旌表孝悌，敬礼贤能，兴立庠序，开诱后进。
现代文：改任济阴太守，到任就表彰孝悌之人，尊重贤才能人，兴办学校，教育后辈。
English: He was reappointed as the governor of Jiyin, and when he took office, he commended the filial piety of the people, respected the talented people, established schools, and educated the younger generation.

古文：调补大将军从事中郎，拜散骑常侍。
现代文：调任大将军从事中郎，任散骑常侍。
English: He was transferred to the position of general and engaged in the role of middle-rank officer. He was appointed as a samurai.

古文：会广平太守缺，宣帝谓袤曰： 贤叔大匠垂称于阳平、魏郡，百姓蒙惠化。
现代文：正值广平太守空缺，宣帝对郑袤说： 你叔叔将作大匠郑浑在阳平、魏郡任上留有好名声，百姓得到恩惠感化。
English: When the position of Guangping Empress Dowager was vacant, Emperor Xuan said to Zheng Qi: Your uncle will be a great craftsman, Zheng Hun will have a good reputation in Yangping and Wei County, and the people will be blessed.

古文：且卢子家、王子雍继踵此郡，使世不乏贤，故复相屈。 
现代文：况且卢子塞、王子雍接着管理此郡，使该地世代不乏贤人，所以再次让你去任职。 
English: Moreover, Luzisei and Prince Yong continued to manage the county, so that there was no shortage of wise men in the area for generations, so I will let you serve again.

古文：袤在广平，以德化为先，善作条教，郡中爱之。
现代文：郑袤在广平，把教化放在首位，善于用法规管理人，百姓爱戴他。
English: In Guangping, Zheng Rong put enlightenment first, and was good at using laws and regulations to manage people. The people loved him.

古文：征拜侍中，百姓恋慕，涕泣路隅。
现代文：征召为侍申，百姓敬仰他，舍不得他走，在路旁哭泣相送。
English: He was called up to be a steward, and the people admired him. They could not bear to see him go, and wept on the roadside as they saw him off.

古文：迁少府。
现代文：升任少府。
English: Promoted to junior prefect.

古文：高贵乡公即位，袤与河南尹王肃备法驾奉迎于元城，封广昌亭侯。
现代文：高贵乡公即位，郑袤和河亩尹王盛备好车马仪仗在元球迎接他，封卢旦台侯。
English: When the noble townsman ascended the throne, Zheng Zhen and He Mu Yin Wang Sheng prepared a carriage and horse ceremonial battle to welcome him in Yuanqiu, the fief of Ludantai.

古文：徙光禄勋，领宗正。
现代文：改任光禄勋，领宗正。
English: He was appointed as a member of the Order of the Star, with the rank of Major General.

古文：毌丘俭作乱，景帝自出征之，百官祖送于城东，袤疾病不任会。
现代文：毌丘俭作乱，景帝亲自征讨，百官在城束为他祭路神相送，郑袤有病没能到。
English: Zeng Qian made a disturbance, Emperor Jing personally collected the money, and hundreds of officials held a religious service for him in the castle to send him on his way. Zheng Qian was ill and was unable to attend.

古文：帝谓中领军王肃曰： 唯不见郑光禄为恨。 
现代文：景帝对中领军王肃说： 衹是没见到鄞袤很遗憾。 
English: Emperor Jing said to the middle leader Wang Su: "I'm sorry I didn't see you.

古文：肃以语袤，袤自舆追帝，及于近道。
现代文：王肃告诉了郑袤，郑袤亲自驾车追赶景帝，没多远就追上了。
English: Wang Su told Zheng Yao, and Zheng Yao himself drove to catch up with Emperor Jing, and soon caught up with him.

古文：帝笑曰： 故知侯生必来也。 
现代文：景帝笑着说： 本来就知道你像侯生一样必定会来的。 
English: Emperor Jing smiled and said, "I knew you would come, just like Hou Sheng.

古文：遂与袤共载，曰： 计将何先？ 
现代文：于是和郑袤共同乘车，问他： 先用什么计谋？ 
English: So he rode in the car with Zheng Yao and asked him: Which stratagem should be used first?

古文：袤曰： 昔与俭俱为台郎，特所知悉。
现代文：郑袤答： 过去我和里丘俭同为尚书郎，特别了解他。
English: Zheng Wei: In the past, I and Li Qiu Jian were the same as Shang Shuro, and I knew him very well.

古文：其人好谋而不达事情，自昔建勋幽州，志望无限。
现代文：此人喜爱谋略而不明事理，自过去在幽州立功以来，志向和欲望无限。
English: This person likes strategy but does not understand reason. Since his past achievements in Yuzhou, his aspirations and desires are unlimited.

古文：文钦勇而无算。
现代文：文钦勇而无谋。
English: Wen Qin is brave but has no plan.

古文：今大军出其不意，江、淮之卒锐而不能固，深沟高垒以挫其气，此亚夫之长也。 
现代文：如今王师出其不意，江、淮士兵有锐气而不能坚守，我们挖深沟筑高垒以挫伤其锐气，这是亚夫去最擅长的。 
English: Now Wang Shi was taken by surprise. The soldiers of Jiang and Huai had the spirit but could not hold on. We dug a deep ditch and built a high wall to frustrate their spirit. This is what Yafu was best at.

古文：帝称善。
现代文：景帝很赞同。
English: Wen Di thought it was right.

古文：转太常。
现代文：改任太常。
English: Reassignments are all too common.

古文：高贵乡公议立明堂辟雍，精选博士，袤举刘毅、刘寔、程咸、庾峻，后并至公辅大位。
现代文：高贵经公让大臣议论建立明堂辟雍，精心挑选博士，塑产推举刘毅、刘寔、程咸、庾峻，他们后来都做到三公和辅相的高位。
English: The noblemen had the minister discuss the establishment of the Ming and Tang Dynasties, carefully selected the doctor, and selected Liu Yi, Liu Wei, Cheng Xian, and Hao Jun. Later, they all achieved the high positions of the three princes and the auxiliary phase.

古文：及常道乡公立，与议定策，进封安城乡侯，邑千户。
现代文：等到常道乡公为君主，因参与商议拥立之事，进封安城乡侯，封邑一千户。
English: When the lord of the township, Tsundo, became the monarch, because he had participated in the deliberation on the establishment of the township, a thousand households in the township of Fong'an were transferred to the fief.

古文：景元初，疾病失明，屡乞骸骨，不许。
现代文：景元初年，病重失明，多次请求退休，未准。
English: In the first year of Jingyuan, he was seriously ill and went blind. He repeatedly asked to retire, but was not allowed.

古文：拜光禄大夫。
现代文：任光禄大夫。
English: Ren Guanglu is a doctor.

古文：五等初建，封密陵伯。
现代文：建立五等封爵时，封为密陵伯。
English: When the fifth-class knighthood was established, he was given the title of Milingbo.

古文：武帝践阼，进爵为侯。
现代文：武帝即位，进爵为侯。
English: Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, and he was given the title of marquis.

古文：虽寝疾十余年，而时贤并相推荐。
现代文：虽卧病十余年，但却被当时贤人争相推荐。
English: Although he was bedridden for more than ten years, he was highly recommended by the sages of the time.

古文：泰始中，诏曰： 光禄密陵侯袤，履行纯正，守道冲粹，退有清和之风，进有素丝之节，宜登三阶之曜，补衮职之阙。
现代文：泰始年间，诏书说： 光禄密陵侯袤，为人中和纯正，退有清静平和的风度，进有洁白无暇的节操，应当登三公之位，补上公之缺。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizhi, the imperial edict said: Guanglu Miling Houyi is the best among men and pure, has a calm and peaceful demeanor, and has a pure and immaculate morality. He should ascend to the position of the three princes and make up for the lack of princes.

古文：今以袤为司空。 
现代文：任命郑袤为司空。 
English: Zheng Jun was appointed as Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：天子临轩，遣五官中郎将国坦就第拜授。
现代文：武帝走到殿前，派五宫中郎将国坦到郑袤家宣旨。
English: Emperor Wu walked to the front of the palace and sent the middle son of the Fifth Palace to proclaim the imperial edict to the Zheng family.

古文：袤前后辞让，遣息称上送印绶，至于十数。
现代文：郑袤一再推辞，派儿子送回官印，来回十多次。
English: Zheng Rong repeatedly refused, and sent his son back to the imperial seal, going back and forth more than ten times.

古文：谓坦曰： 魏以徐景山为司空，吾时为侍中，受诏譬旨。
现代文：对国坦说： 魏以徐景山为司空，当时我是侍中，受韶如圣旨。
English: To Guotan, he said: Wei took Xu Jingshan as the Empress Dowager. At that time, I was an attendant and received the imperial edict as if it were a sacred edict.

古文：徐公语吾曰： 三公当上应天心，苟非其人，实伤和气，不敢以垂死之年，累辱朝廷也。 终于不就。
现代文：途公对我说： 三公应当上合天意，如果任非其人，的确很伤和气，不敢以快死之人，连累辱没朝廷，终于没有接受任命。
English: Tu Gong said to me: The three princes should be in line with the will of heaven. If they are not, it is indeed very hurtful, and those who dare not die soon, even humiliate the imperial court, and finally did not accept the appointment.

古文：遵大雅君子之迹，可不务乎！ 
现代文：遵循高雅君子的足迹，是可以不接受的吧! 
English: It is unacceptable to follow in the footsteps of an elegant gentleman!

古文：固辞，久之见许，以侯就第，拜仪同三司，置舍人官骑，赐床帐簟褥、钱五十万。
现代文：坚决推辞，很久才被允许，以侯爵退休，授仪同三司，设置属官守卫，赏赐床上用品、钱五十万。
English: He firmly refused, and it took a long time before he was allowed to retire with the title of marquis, receive the same ceremony as the three divisions, set up an official guard, and was awarded bedding and money of half a million.

古文：九年薨，时年八十五。
现代文：九年去世，终年八十五岁。
English: He died nine years later, aged 85.

古文：帝于东堂发哀，赐秘器、朝服一具、衣一袭、钱三十万、绢布各百匹，以供丧事。
现代文：皇帝在束堂发丧，赏赐棺材、朝服一套、常服一件、钱三十万、绢布各百匹，用来办丧事。
English: The emperor held a funeral in the Bundang Hall, and awarded a coffin, a set of imperial robes, an ordinary robe, 300,000 yuan in money, and 100 pieces of silk cloth each, to be used for the funeral.

古文：谥曰元。
现代文：谧号元。
English: 号元.

古文：有子六人，长子默嗣，次质、舒、诩、称、予，位并列卿。
现代文：有六个儿子，长子郑默继嗣，次子郑质、郑舒、郑诩、郑称、郑予，官位都到卿。
English: He had six sons, the eldest son Zheng Mo Jizhe, the second son Zheng Quan, Zheng Shu, Zheng Yao, Zheng Zhan and Zheng You, and all of them were given the title of nobility.

古文：默字思元。
现代文：郑默字思元。
English: Zheng Mei Zi Si Yuan.

古文：起家秘书郎，考核旧文，删省浮秽。
现代文：初为秘书郎，考订旧文，删除多余污秽之语。
English: At first, he was a secretary, and he would revise old texts and delete superfluous filthy language.

古文：中书令虞松谓曰： 而今而后，硃紫别矣。 
现代文：中书令虞松对他说： 从今以后，红紫有区别了。 
English: The second-ranked magistrate, Yu Song, said to him, "From now on, there is a difference between red and purple.

古文：转尚书考功郎，专典伐蜀事，封关内侯，迁司徒左长史。
现代文：改任尚书考功郎，专管讨伐蜀国之事，封关内侯，升任司徒左长史。
English: He was appointed as a meritorious scholar of the imperial examinations, in charge of the campaign against Shu, a vassal of the Inner Court, and was promoted to the post of the left chief historian of the Sidu.

古文：武帝受禅，与太原郭奕俱为中庶子。
现代文：晋武帝接受魏帝挥让时，郑默与太原人郭奕同为中庶子。
English: When Emperor Jinwu accepted Emperor Wei's concession, Zheng Mo and Guo Yi, a Taiyuan native, were the middle child.

古文：朝廷以太子官属宜称陪臣。默上言： 皇太子体皇极之尊，无私于天下。
现代文：朝廷认为太子官属应当称陪臣，郑默上疏说： 皇太子体现帝王的高贵，对天下无私。
English: The imperial court believed that the prince's subordinates should be called attendants, and Zheng Mingshu said: The crown prince embodies the nobility of the emperor and is selfless to the world.

古文：宫臣皆受命天朝，不得同之籓国。 
现代文：宫臣皆受命于朝廷，不能与封国等同。 
English: Palace courtiers are all appointed by the imperial court, and cannot be equated with vassals of the state.

古文：事遂施行。
现代文：建议被采纳。
English: This opinion will soon come into force.

古文：出为东郡太守，值岁荒人饥，默辄开仓振给，乃舍都亭，自表待罪。
现代文：出任塞登太守，正值年荒人饥，塑麸开仓赈济百姓，然后住在郡县治所，上表请求处分。
English: He took office as the governor of Sedan, and at a time of famine, he opened a warehouse to help the people, and then lived in the county government, requesting the above table.

古文：朝廷嘉默忧国，诏书褒叹，比之汲黯。
现代文：朝廷认为此是忧国之举，下韶褒奖他，把他比作汲黯。
English: The imperial court considered this to be a move that worried the country, and gave him the lowest praise, comparing him to a gnat.

古文：班告天下，若郡县有此比者，皆听出给。
现代文：朝廷还布告天下，如郡县有这种情况的，都照此办理。
English: The imperial court also announced to the world that if there is such a situation in a county, it will be handled accordingly.

古文：入为散骑常侍。
现代文：召入任散骑常侍。
English: He was called up to be a samurai.

古文：初，帝以贵公子当品，乡里莫敢与为辈，求之州内，于是十二郡中正佥共举默。
现代文：当初，武帝认为宗室子弟应当定等级，乡里人不敢与他们为同等级，向州裹寻求，于是十二郡中正都共同推举郑默。
English: At first, Emperor Wu thought that the lineal descendants should be ranked, and the villagers did not dare to be on the same level with them, so they asked the prefectures, and the twelve counties of Zhongzheng jointly elected Zheng Mu.

古文：文帝与袤书曰： 小兒得厕贤子之流，愧有窍贤之累。 
现代文：文帝给郑袤写信说： 小儿得以跻身贤德之流，实在惭愧。 
English: Emperor Wen wrote to Emperor Zheng He, saying, "I am truly ashamed that my child has been able to join the stream of virtue.

古文：及武帝出祀南郊，诏使默骖乘，因谓默曰： 卿知何以得骖乘乎？
现代文：等到武帝在南郊祭天时，下诏让郑默陪乘，对郑默说： 你知道为什么让你陪乘吗?
English: When Emperor Wu arrived at the Southern Suburbs Festival, he ordered Zheng Mei to accompany him. He said to Zheng Mei, "Do you know why I let you accompany me?

古文：选人得才，济世之道。
现代文：原来州中推举你同等级，常愧连累公正的评价。 
English: It used to be that you were promoted to the same level in the middle of the state, and you often suffered from unfair evaluation.

古文：居官久职，政事之宜。
现代文：于是问到政事，堑邀说： 勤耕务农是国家的根本，选用贤才是救世之道。
English: When asked about politics, Zou Ying said: "Diligent farming is the foundation of the country, and choosing a wise person is the way to salvation."

古文：明慎黜陟，劝戒之由。
现代文：任职期限长，有利于政事。慎重进退，以利劝戒。
English: A long term of office is conducive to political affairs. Carefully advance and retreat in order to benefit exhortation.

古文：崇尚儒素，化导之本。
现代文：推崇儒家真义，是教化和引导的根本。
English: Upholding the true meaning of Confucianism is the foundation of enlightenment and guidance.

古文：如此而已矣。 
现代文：如此而已。 
English: That's it.

古文：帝善之。
现代文：武帝很赞同。
English: Emperor Wu agreed wholeheartedly.

古文：后以父丧去官，寻起为廷尉。
现代文：后来因为父亲的丧事辞官，不久起用为廷尉。
English: Later, because of his father's death, he resigned from his post and was soon employed as a court lieutenant.

古文：是时鬲令袁毅坐交通货赂，大兴刑狱。
现代文：当时朝廷因鬲令袁毅犯有贿赂罪，大兴刑狱。
English: At that time, the imperial court sentenced Yuan Yi to Daxing Prison for the crime of bribery.

古文：在朝多见引逮，唯默兄弟以洁慎不染其流。
现代文：在朝官员多受牵连，衹有郑默兄弟洁身自好没有事。
English: In North Korea, officials are often implicated, and there is nothing wrong with the Zhengmo brothers being self-righteous.

古文：迁太常。
现代文：升任太常。
English: Promoted too often.

古文：时仆射山涛欲举一亲亲为博士，谓默曰： 卿似尹翁归，令吾不敢复言。 
现代文：当时仆射山涛想要推举一亲戚任博士，对郑默说： 你好像是尹翁归，让我不敢再说。 
English: At that time, Zhu Sha Shantao wanted to nominate a relative, Dr. Ren, and said to Zheng Mo: You seem to be Yin Wengui, so I dare not say it again.

古文：默为人敦重，柔而能整，皆此类也。
现代文：郑默为人敦厚庄重，柔中有刚，事情大都如此。
English: Zheng Mei is dignified and dignified, soft and strong, and this is the case with most things.

古文：及齐王攸当之国，下礼官议崇锡典制。
现代文：齐王司马攸将去封国时，让礼官议论崇赐的典章制度。
English: When the king of Qi, Sima You, was about to be enthroned, he asked the etiquette official to discuss the honorific system.

古文：博士祭酒曹志等并立异议，默容过其事，坐免。
现代文：博士祭酒曹志等违背司马攸的意思，郑默没有深究，因牵连有罪而免官。
English: Cao Zhi, the doctor of the doctoral ceremony, and others violated the intention of Sima You, Zheng Mo did not investigate deeply, and was removed from office for implication of guilt.

古文：寻拜大鸿胪。
现代文：不久任大鸿胪。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of Da Hongjun.

古文：遭母丧，旧制，既葬还职，默自陈恳至，久而见许。
现代文：赶上母亲去世，旧例，葬后就要回来供职，郑默恳请不回，很久才获准许。
English: Catching up with the death of his mother, the old case, after the funeral, he had to return to work, Zheng Miao implored him not to return, and it was a long time before he was allowed to return.

古文：遂改法定令，听大臣终丧，自默始也。
现代文：于是改定法令，听任大臣服丧期满，这是从郑默开始的。
English: As a result, the decree was amended to allow the minister to serve out the period of mourning, which began with Zheng Miao.

古文：服阕，为大司农，转光禄勋。
现代文：服丧期满，任大司农，改任光禄勋。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed as the chief secretary of farmers, and was reappointed as Guanglu Xun.

古文：太康元年卒，时年六十八，谥曰成。
现代文：太康元年去世，终年六十八岁，谧号成。
English: Taikang died in the first year of the year, sixty-eight years old at the end of the year.

古文：尚书令卫瓘奏： 默才行名望，宜居论道，五升九卿，位未称德，宜赠三司。 
现代文：尚书令卫罐上奏： 郑默才高望重，应当担任三公，却五次担任九卿，没有尽显其德，应追封三公。 
English: Shang Shu ordered Wei Jian to recite: Zheng Mucai was highly respected and should have served as the Third Prince, but he served as the Ninth Prince five times. If he did not show his virtue, he should be awarded the Third Prince.

古文：而后父杨骏先欲以女妻默子豫，默曰： 吾每读《隽不疑传》，常想其人。
现代文：皇后的父亲杨骏原想把女儿嫁给郑默的儿子郑豫，郑默说： 我每次读《隽不疑传》，常常寻思这个人。
English: The queen's father, Yang Hui, originally wanted to marry his daughter to Zheng Mo's son, Zheng Yu. Zheng Mo said, "Every time I read "The Legend of Zou," I often think about this person.

古文：畏远权贵，奕世所守。 
现代文：害怕并远离位高权重的人，是我们世代要遵守的。 
English: To fear and stay away from powerful people is the rule of our generation.

古文：遂辞之。骏深为恨。
现代文：于是加以推辞。杨骏很忌恨。
English: So he turned it down. Yang Mi hated it.

古文：至此，骏议不同，遂不施行。
现代文：所以他不同意，此事就没有实行。
English: So he didn't agree and it didn't go ahead.

古文：默宽冲博爱，谦虚温谨，不以才地矜物，事上以礼，遇下以和，虽僮竖厮养不加声色，而犹有嫌怨，故士君子以为居世之难。
现代文：郑默宽厚平和，充满爱心，谦虚谨慎，不以才华和门第傲视别人，恭谨对上，谦和待下，即便对家奴厮役也不发火，但还有隔阂怨恨，所以士大夫们认为处世是很难的。
English: Zheng Mo is generous and peaceful, full of love, modest and prudent, does not look down on others with talent and pedigree, is respectful and humble, and does not get angry even if he is a domestic slave, but there is still estrangement and resentment, so the scholars think that life is difficult.

古文：子球。
现代文：郑默的儿子郑球。
English: Zheng Mu's son Zheng Qiu.

古文：球字子瑜。
现代文：郑球字子瑜。
English: Zhengqiu Ziyu.

古文：少辟宰府，入侍二宫。
现代文：年少时被宰相府征用，在束宫侍奉。
English: When he was young, he was requisitioned by the Prime Minister's Office and served in the Imperial Palace.

古文：成都王为大将军，起义讨赵王伦，球自顿丘太守为右长史，以功封平寿公。
现代文：成都王任大将军，起兵讨伐赵王司马伦，郑球由顿丘太守改任右长史，因为有功封为平寿公。
English: Chengdu Wang was appointed as a general and raised an army to fight against Zhao Wang Simaren, and Zheng Ku was changed from Dongqiu Taishu to U Changshi, because he had a Gongfu for Ping Shou Gong.

古文：累迁侍中、尚书、散骑常侍、中护军、尚书右仆射，领吏部。
现代文：多次升官任侍中、尚书、散骑常侍、中护军、尚书右仆射，领吏部。
English: He was promoted many times and served as a chamberlain, courtier, horseback riding attendant, middle bodyguard, courtier's right-hand man, and leader of the cadre.

古文：永嘉二年卒，追赠金紫光禄大夫，谥曰元。
现代文：永嘉二年去世，追封为金紫光禄大夫，谧号元。
English: Yongjia died two years later and was posthumously awarded the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, with the posthumous name Yuan.

古文：球弟豫，永嘉末为尚书。
现代文：郑球的弟弟郑豫，永嘉末年任尚书。
English: Zheng Yu, the younger brother of Zheng Qiu, was appointed as Shang Shu at the end of Yong Jia.

古文：李胤，字宣伯，辽东襄平人也。
现代文：李胤字宣伯，是辽东襄平人。
English: Li Tan, also known as Xuan Bo, is a native of Xiangping, Liaodong Province.

古文：祖敏，汉河内太守，去官还乡里，辽东太守公孙度欲强用之，敏乘轻舟浮沧海，莫知所终。
现代文：祖父李敏，汉时任河内太守，辞官回家乡，辽东太守公孙度想逼他当官，他乘扁舟漂流大海，不知去向。
English: Li Min's grandfather, who was the governor of Hanoi during the Han Dynasty, resigned and returned to his hometown. The governor of Liaodong Province, Gongsun Du, tried to force him to become an official, and he drifted across the sea in a flatboat, not knowing where he was going.

古文：胤父信追求积年，浮海出塞，竟无所见，欲行丧制服，则疑父尚存，情若居丧而不聘娶。
现代文：儿子李信找他多年，渡大海走塞外，始终未找到，想要服丧，又怀疑他还活着，于是心情如同服丧不思婚娶。
English: His son, Li Xin, has been searching for him for many years, crossing the sea and traveling far and wide, but has never found him. He wants to mourn his father's death, but also suspects that he is still alive. As a result, he feels as if he is mourning his father and does not want to get married.

古文：后有邻居故人与其父同年者亡，因行丧制服。
现代文：后来因邻居故人与他父亲同岁的人死了，便也开始服丧了。
English: Later, he also began to mourn the death of his father's neighbour, who was the same age.

古文：燕国徐邈与之同州里，以不孝莫大于无后，劝使娶妻。
现代文：与他同乡的燕国人徐邈以不孝有三无后为大为由，劝他娶妻。
English: His fellow countryman Xu Yao from Yan Guo persuaded him to marry on the grounds that he was not a filial son of the Queen of Heaven.

古文：既生胤，遂绝房室，恆如居丧礼，不堪其忧，数年而卒。
现代文：生下李胤后，就断绝与妻来往，好像在服丧一样，悲伤过度，几年后去世。
English: After giving birth to Li Yin, he broke off contact with his wife, as if in mourning, grief was excessive, and he died a few years later.

古文：胤既幼孤，母又改行，有识之后，降食哀戚，亦以丧礼自居。
现代文：李胤幼年丧父，母又改嫁，成年以后，节食悲伤，也说自己在服丧。
English: Li Yan lost her father at a young age, and her mother remarried. After she became an adult, she went on a diet to deal with her grief, and also said that she was in mourning.

古文：又以祖不知存亡，设木主以事之。
现代文：又因祖父生死不明，就设木制牌位以供奉。
English: Also, since the grandfather's life and death are unknown, a wooden plaque was set up to pay tribute to him.

古文：由是以孝闻。
现代文：因此以孝闻名。
English: Therefore, it is famous for its filial piety.

古文：容貌质素，颓然若不足者，而知度沈邃，言必有则。
现代文：外表不加修饰，弱不经风，却知识渊博，宽宏大量，言而有信。
English: Unvarnished, unpretentious, knowledgeable, generous, and trustworthy.

古文：初仕郡上计掾，州辟部从事、治中，举孝廉，参镇北军事。
现代文：李胤初为郡国上计掾，州中征用为部从事、治中，举为孝廉，参与镇北军事。
English: At first, Li Yan was the county's top military planner, and he was requisitioned to serve as a minister in the middle school of the county, and was promoted to the rank of filial piety, and participated in the military in the north of the town.

古文：迁乐平侯相，政尚清简。
现代文：升任乐平侯相，为政崇尚清明简约。
English: He was promoted to the post of Leping marital minister, advocating a clear and concise policy.

古文：入为尚书郎，迁中护军司马、吏部郎，铨综廉平。
现代文：召入任尚书郎，改任中护军司马、吏部郎，选拔官吏公正廉洁。
English: He was called to the post of Shoshuro, and was reassigned to the post of the middle guard, the secretary of the army, and the secretary, and the selection of officials was fair and clean.

古文：赐爵关中侯，出补安丰太守。
现代文：赐爵关中侯，外任补为安丰太守。
English: He was given the title of Lord of Guanzhong, and was appointed as the governor of Anfeng.

古文：文帝引为大将军从事中郎，迁御史中丞，恭恪直绳，百官惮之。
现代文：文帝用为大将军从事中郎，改任御史中丞，秉公执法，百官都怕他。
English: Emperor Wen used him as a general to engage in middlemen, and he was reassigned to the position of imperial historian, enforcing the law impartially. All officials were afraid of him.

古文：伐蜀之役，为西中郎将、督关中诸军事。
现代文：伐蜀时任西中郎将、督关中诸军事。
English: At the time of the sack of Shu, he was appointed West Middle Steward and was in charge of the military in the middle of the pass.

古文：后为河南尹，封广陆伯。
现代文：后来任河南尹，封为广陆伯。
English: He later served as Henan Yin and was given the title of Guang Lu Bo.

古文：泰始初，拜尚书，进爵为侯。
现代文：泰始初年，任尚书，进爵为侯。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, Ren Shangshu was ennobled and became a marquis.

古文：胤奏以为： 古者三公坐而论道，内参六官之事，外与六卿之教，或处三槐，兼听狱讼，稽疑之典，谋及卿士。
现代文：李胤上奏认为： 古代三公坐而论道，在内参与六官之事，在外参预六军之教，处于三公之位，兼听断案，考核疑难典章，和大臣商量。
English: Li Yan, the last speaker, believed that: the three ancient emperors sat and discussed the Tao, participated in the affairs of the six officials inside, participated in the teaching of the six armies outside, were in the position of the three emperors, and listened to the verdict, examined the difficult regulations, and discussed with the minister.

古文：陛下圣德钦明，垂心万机，猥发明诏，仪刑古式，虽唐、虞畴谘，周文翼翼，无以加也。
现代文：陛下圣明，日理万机，多发诏令，遵循古法，虽唐、虞访求，周文严谨，也赶不上啊。
English: Your majesty is a saintly man, with a great deal of power, issuing more imperial decrees, and following the ancient law. Although Tang and Yu visit and ask, Zhou Wen is strict, but it can't keep up.

古文：自今以往，国有大政，可亲延群公，询纳谠言。
现代文：从今以后，国家有大事，可亲自召见诸公，询问采纳正确之言。
English: From now on, when the state has a major event, it can personally summon officials to inquire and adopt the correct words.

古文：其军国所疑，延诣省中，使侍中、尚书谘论所宜。
现代文：遇到疑难，可扩大到台省，让侍中、尚书各抒己见。
English: In case of difficulty, it can be expanded to Taiwan Province, and let the chamberlains and scholars express their own opinions.

古文：若有疾病，不任觐会，临时遣侍臣讯访。 诏从之。
现代文：如果有病没来，可临时派近臣垂问。 皇帝下诏同意。
English: If someone is ill and does not come, the emperor may temporarily send a close courtier to inquire.

古文：迁吏部尚书仆射，寻转太子少傅。
现代文：升任吏部尚书仆射，不久改任太子少傅。
English: He was promoted to the position of secretary, but was soon transferred to the position of prince's page.

古文：诏以胤忠允高亮，有匪躬之节，使领司隶校尉。
现代文：因高风亮节领司隶校尉。
English: Due to the high winds on the day of the festival, the captain resigned.

古文：胤屡自表让，忝傅储宫，不宜兼监司之官。
现代文：李胤多次表示自己愧当太子师傅，不适合兼任监察官。
English: Li Yin has repeatedly said that he is worthy of being the prince's teacher and is not suitable to serve as an inspector.

古文：武帝以二职并须忠贤，故每不许。
现代文：武帝认为任此二职者都必须忠诚贤明，所以每次都不同意。
English: Emperor Wu believed that anyone holding these two positions must be loyal and wise, so he always disagreed.

古文：咸宁初，皇太子出居东宫，帝以司录事任峻重，而少傅有旦夕辅导之务，胤素羸，不宜久劳之，转拜侍中，加特进。
现代文：咸宁初年，皇太子到东宫居住，武帝认为司隶校尉事务繁重，而少傅又要早晚辅导太子，李胤向来身体羸弱，不应长期劳累，改任侍中，加特进。
English: In the first year of Xianning, the crown prince came to live in the East Palace. Emperor Wu thought that the captain of the officer corps was heavy with affairs, and the young master had to tutor the prince in the morning and evening. Li Yin had always been physically weak and should not be tired for a long time. He was reassigned to the chamberlain, Gatjin.

古文：俄迁尚书令，侍中、特进如故。
现代文：不久改任尚书令，侍中、特进照旧。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of Shoshiryo, and continued to serve as a chamberlain and a special envoy.

古文：胤虽历职内外，而家至贫俭，兒病无以市药。
现代文：李胤虽然当过朝内外官职，但家中却很贫穷俭朴，儿子有病没钱买药。
English: Although Li Yan had been an official in and out of the imperial court, his family was very poor and frugal. His son was sick and had no money to buy medicine.

古文：帝闻之，赐钱十万。
现代文：武帝听说后，赏钱十万。
English: After Emperor Wu heard about it, he offered a reward of 100,000 yuan.

古文：其后帝以司徒旧丞相之职，诏以胤为司徒。
现代文：后来武帝认为以前丞相职位中有司徒一职，下韶以李胤为司徒。
English: Later, Emperor Wu thought that there was a post of tutor in the former position of chancellor, and Li Yin was appointed as the tutor.

古文：在位五年，简亮持重，称为任职。
现代文：在任五年，清静持重，很称职。
English: He has been in office for five years, he is calm and serious, and he is very competent.

古文：以吴会初平，大臣多有勋劳，宜有登进，乃上疏逊位。
现代文：以吴会刚平定，大臣多有功劳，应当提拔为由，上疏请求辞官。
English: On the grounds that the Wu Society had just been pacified, and that the minister had much merit and should be promoted, Shang Su requested that he be relieved of his post.

古文：帝不听，遣侍中宣旨，优诏敦谕，绝其章表。
现代文：武帝不听，派侍中宣旨，拒绝其上疏，厚诏敦促。
English: Emperor Wu did not listen, and sent an attendant to issue an edict. He refused to abdicate, and issued an imperial edict.

古文：胤不得已，起视事。
现代文：李胤不得已，出来处理政事。
English: As a last resort, Li Yin came out to deal with political affairs.

古文：太康三年薨，诏遣御史持节监丧致祠，谥曰成。
现代文：太康三年去世，武帝下诏派御史持节监丧致哀，谧号成。
English: Three years after the death of Taikang, Emperor Wu issued an imperial edict ordering the Emperor to hold a mourning ceremony on the day of the Emperor's death.

古文：皇太子命舍人王赞诔之，文义甚美。
现代文：皇太子令舍人王赞写哀悼文章，文笔和内容都很美。
English: The crown prince ordered Wang Shenren to write a condolence article, and the writing and content were beautiful.

古文：帝后思胤清节，诏曰： 故司徒李胤，太常彭灌，并履忠清俭，身没，家无余积，赐胤家钱二百万、谷千斛，灌家半之。 
现代文：武帝后来想起李胤高洁的节操，下韶说： 已故司徒李胤，太常彭灌，忠心耿耿，高洁俭朴，人死以后，家无余财，赏李胤家钱二百万、谷一千斛，彭灌家减半。 
English: Emperor Wu later remembered Li Yin Gao Jie's self-restraint, and said: The late scholar Li Yin, too often Peng Gu, is loyal, Gao Jie is frugal, and after death, the family has no spare money. Li Yin's family will be awarded two million yuan and 1,000 mu, and Peng Gu's family will be halved.

古文：三子，固、真长、修。
现代文：三个儿子：李固、李真长、李修。
English: Three sons: Li Gu, Li Zhenchang and Li Xiu.

古文：固字万基，散骑郎，先胤卒，固子志嗣爵。
现代文：李固字万基，担任散骑郎，死于李胤前，儿子李志继承爵位。
English: Li Guzhi Wanji, who served as Sanzhirang, died before Li Yin, and his son Li Zhi inherited the title.

古文：志字彦道，历位散骑侍郎、建威将军、阳平太守。
现代文：李志字彦道，历任散骑侍郎、建威将军、阳平太守。
English: Li Zhi Zi Yan Dao, successively Zangjia Zhilong, General Jian Wei, Yangping Dazhong.

古文：真长位至太仆卿。
现代文：李真长官至太仆卿。
English: Li Zhen rose from the position of superior officer to that of eunuch.

古文：修黄门侍郎、太弟中庶子。
现代文：李修任黄门侍郎、太弟中庶子。
English: Li Xiu served as Huangmen's chamberlain and was the younger half-brother's illegitimate son.

古文：卢钦，字子若，范阳涿人也。
现代文：卢钦字子若，是范阳涿人。
English: If Luqin is a character, Fan Yang is a person.

古文：祖植，汉侍中。
现代文：祖父卢植，汉时任侍中。
English: His grandfather, Lu Zhi, was a chamberlain in the Han Dynasty.

古文：父毓，魏司空。
现代文：父亲卢毓，魏时任司空。
English: His father, Lu Yao, was appointed to the post of Secretary of the Communist Party of China (CPC) in Wei.

古文：世以儒业显。
现代文：世代以儒学显赫。
English: Generations have been distinguished by Confucianism.

古文：钦清淡有远识，笃志经史，举孝廉，不行，魏大将军曹爽辟为掾。
现代文：卢钦淡泊有远见，专攻经史，被举为孝廉，不去，魏大将军曹爽征用为属官。
English: Lu Qin Tanbo had foresight, specialized in history, was raised as a filial piety, not to go, Wei general Cao Shuang was requisitioned as a subordinate officer.

古文：爽弟尝有所属请，钦白爽子弟不宜干犯法度，爽深纳之，而罚其弟。
现代文：曹爽的弟弟曾经有所嘱托，卢钦告诉他们应依法办事，曹爽非常赞同，惩罚了弟弟。
English: Cao Shuang's younger brother once asked Lu Qin to tell him to act according to the law. Cao Shuang agreed and punished his younger brother.

古文：除尚书郎。
现代文：担任尚书郎。
English: He served as Sho Shuro.

古文：爽诛，免官。
现代文：曹爽被杀，卢钦免官。
English: Cao Shuang was killed and Lu Qin was dismissed.

古文：后为侍御史，袭父爵大利亭侯，累迁琅邪太守。
现代文：后为侍御史，继承父亲的大利亭侯爵位，多次升任琅邪太守。
English: Later, he was an attendant to the Emperor, inherited his father's title of Marquis of Daliting, and was promoted several times to the position of Grand Prince of Shanyang.

古文：宣帝为太傅，辟从事中郎，出为阳平太守，迁淮北都督、伏波将军，甚有称绩。
现代文：宣帝任太傅时，征用为从事中郎，外任阳平太守，升任淮北都督、伏波将军，很有政绩。
English: When Emperor Xuan was appointed Taifu, he was requisitioned to serve as a middle-ranking official, and he was appointed Yangping Taifu, and was promoted to Governor of Huaibei and General of Fubao. He had a lot of political achievements.

古文：征拜散骑常侍、大司农，迁吏部尚书，进封大梁侯。
现代文：征召为散骑常侍、大司农，升任吏部尚书，进封大梁侯。
English: He was conscripted as a horseback riding attendant and chief farmer, promoted to the post of secretary of the personnel department, and promoted to the post of grand steward.

古文：武帝受禅，以为都督沔北诸军事、平南将军、假节，给追锋轺卧车各一乘、第二驸马二乘、骑具刀器、御府人马铠等，及钱三十万。
现代文：武帝接受惮让，以卢钦为都督沔北诸军事、平南将军、假节，给追锋韬卧车各一乘、第二驸马二乘、骑具刀器、御府人马镜甲等以及钱三十万。
English: Emperor Wu accepted the offer, appointing Lu Qin as the governor of the Northern Warring States, the General of Pingnan, and the False Festival, and giving him a sleeper carriage, a second horse, a riding tool, a horse mirror, and 300,000 yuan.

古文：钦在镇宽猛得中，疆埸无虞。
现代文：卢钦在军镇宽猛相济，边疆平安无事。
English: Luchin is lenient in military towns, and there is no trouble on the border.

古文：入为尚书仆射，加侍中、奉车都尉，领吏部。
现代文：召入任尚书仆射，加侍中、奉车都尉，领吏部。
English: He was called up to serve as Shoshu's footman, as well as serving as a middle-ranking officer, a second-ranked officer, and a leading official.

古文：以清贫，特赐绢百匹。
现代文：因为清贫，特被赏赐绢一百匹。
English: Because of his poverty, he was specially rewarded with a hundred yakitori.

古文：钦举必以材，称为廉平。
现代文：卢钦惟才是举，享有廉洁公平的美誉。
English: Luqin is the only one to hold the post, and has a reputation for being honest and fair.

古文：咸宁四年卒，诏曰： 钦履道清正，执德贞素。
现代文：咸宁四年去世，诏书说： 卢钦遵循正道，清正廉洁。
English: When Xianning died four years ago, the imperial edict said: Luqin followed the right path and was upright and honest.

古文：文武之称，著于方夏。
现代文：文武双全，闻名华夏。
English: The combination of literature and martial arts is well-known in China.

古文：入跻机衡，惟允庶事。
现代文：入掌机要，处事公平。
English: When you are in charge, you should be fair.

古文：肆勤内外，有匪躬之节。
现代文：勤政于内外，鞠躬尽瘁。
English: We will work hard both at home and abroad, and do our best.

古文：不幸薨没，朕甚悼之。
现代文：不幸去世，我很悲痛。
English: I am deeply saddened by his untimely death.

古文：其赠卫将军、开府仪同三司，赐秘器、朝服一具、衣一袭、布五十匹、钱三十万。 
现代文：追赠卫将军、开府仪同三司，赐棺材、朝服各一套、常服一件、布五十匹、钱三十万。 
English: He also gave gifts to the general of the imperial guard, the keeper of the imperial residences, and three officials, including a coffin, a set of imperial robes, an ordinary robe, fifty pieces of cloth, and 300,000 yuan.

古文：谥曰元。
现代文：谧号元。
English: 号元.

古文：又以钦忠清高洁，不营产业，身没之后，家无所庇，特赐钱五十万，为立第舍。
现代文：因卢钦忠诚高洁，不经营产业，去世以后，家无房产，特赏钱五十万，为盖房舍。
English: Because of Luqin's loyalty and nobility, he did not run an industry, and after his death, his family had no real estate. He received a special reward of 500,000 yuan to build a house.

古文：复下诏曰： 故司空王基、卫将军卢钦、领典军将军杨嚣，并素清贫，身没之后，居无私积。
现代文：又下诏书说： 已故司空王基、卫将军卢钦、领典军将军杨嚣，都一向清贫，去世以后，家无余财。
English: The imperial edict also said: The late Siku Wangji, Wei General Luchin, and Liding Army General Yang Han, have always been poor, and after their deaths, the family has no spare money.

古文：顷者饥馑，闻其家大匮，其各赐谷三百斛。 
现代文：近来闸饥荒，听说这几家尤其匮乏，各给谷三百斛。 
English: Recently, there has been a famine in Zhaozhou, and I heard that these few families are particularly destitute, with each family giving 300 baht to the valley.

古文：钦历宰州郡，不尚功名，唯以平理为务。
现代文：卢钦历任地方官，不崇尚功名，衹以公平治理为宗旨。
English: Luchin, who has served as a local official, does not worship merit, but aims at fair governance.

古文：禄俸散之亲故，不营赀产。
现代文：俸禄分给亲戚故旧，不经营家产。
English: The old system of allocating salary to relatives does not apply to family businesses.

古文：动循礼典，妻亡，制庐杖，终丧居外。
现代文：按礼仪典章办事，妻子去世，盖陋舍，在外舍服丧完毕。
English: According to the etiquette and ceremony, the wife died, the house was built, and the funeral service was completed in the outhouse.

古文：所著诗赋论难数十篇，名曰《小道》。
现代文：所著诗赋论难数十篇，书名《小道》。
English: He has written dozens of essays on the subject of poetic fu, and the title of his book is "Trail."

古文：子浮嗣。
现代文：儿子卢浮继嗣。
English: His son, Lu Fu, succeeded him.

古文：浮字子云，起家太子舍人。
现代文：卢浮，字子云，初为太子舍人。
English: Lu Fu, the character Zi Yun, was a prince at first.

古文：病疽截手，遂废。
现代文：手生毒疮被截去，成了残废。
English: His hand was amputated after the growths were removed.

古文：然朝廷器重之，以为国子博士、祭酒、秘书监，皆不就。
现代文：但朝廷很器重他，让他任国子博士、祭酒、秘书监，他都不肯。
English: However, the Imperial Court held him in high esteem, and he refused to be appointed as Kuniko hakase, sacrificial wine, or secretarial supervisor.

古文：钦弟珽字子笏，卫尉卿。
现代文：卢钦的弟弟卢珽，字子笏，任卫尉卿。
English: Lu Qin's younger brother Lu Yao, also known as Lu Zi Yao, was appointed as the first lieutenant of the Imperial Guards.

古文：珽子志。
现代文：卢埏的儿子卢尽。
English: Lu Yan's son, Lu Jin.

古文：志字子道，初辟公府掾、尚书郎，出为鄴令。
现代文：卢志，字子道，最初征用为公府掾、尚书郎，外任邺令。
English: Lu Zhi, Zizi Dao, was initially requisitioned as a government official, Shang Shuro, and later as an external magistrate.

古文：成都王颖之镇鄴也，爱其才量，委以心膂，遂为谋主。
现代文：成都王司马颖镇守邺时，喜欢他的才量，委以心腹，于是成为谋主。
English: When Chengdu Wang Sima Ying Zhen was in charge of Shantou, he liked his talent and entrusted his heart to him, so he became the mastermind.

古文：齐王冏起义，遣使告颖。
现代文：齐王司马间起兵，派使臣告诉司马颖。
English: King Sima of Qi raised an army and sent an envoy to tell Sima Ying.

古文：颖召志计事，志曰： 赵王无道，肆行篡逆，四海人神，莫不愤怒。
现代文：司马颖召卢志商议，卢志说： 赵王暴虐，肆意谋反，普天神人，都很痛恨。
English: Sima Ying called Lu Zhi for consultation. Lu Zhi said: Zhao Wang is a tyrant, a wanton rebel, and a man of God, all of which are hated.

古文：今殿下总率三军，应期电发，子来之众，不召自至。
现代文：现在殿下统率三军，按期突发，一呼百应，不招自来。
English: Now, His Royal Highness is leading the three armies, making surprise attacks on schedule, responding to every call, and not inviting anyone from outside.

古文：扫夷凶逆，必有征无战。
现代文：扫平谋反之人，必不战而逃。
English: Those who try to wipe out rebels will have to flee without a fight.

古文：然兵事至重，圣人所慎。
现代文：然而军事事关重大，是圣人谨慎的事情。
English: However, military matters are of great importance, and it is the prudent thing for a sage to do.

古文：宜旌贤任才，以收时望。 
现代文：应表彰贤明重用贤人，以孚众望。 
English: We should commend those who are wise, who make good use of their talents, and who are popular among the people.

古文：颖深然之，改选上佐，高辟掾属，以志为谘议参军，仍补左长史，专掌文翰。
现代文：司马颖非常赞同他，重新选择幕僚，高聘下层属官，以卢志为谘议参军，补任左长史，专掌文书。
English: Sima Ying very much agreed with him, re-selected staff members, highly recruited lower-level subordinate officers, consulted Lu Zhi to join the army, filled the post of left-long history, and specialized in paperwork.

古文：颖前锋都督赵骧为伦所败，士众震骇，议者多欲还保朝歌。
现代文：司马颖前锋都督赵骧被司马伦打败，士兵惊恐，多数人主张退保朝歌。
English: Sima Ying striker Tudou Zhao Wei was defeated by Sima Lun, the soldiers were terrified, and most people advocated the withdrawal of Choga.

古文：志曰： 今我军失利，敌新得胜，必有轻易陵轹之情，若顿兵不进，三军畏衄，惧不可用。
现代文：卢志说： 如今我军失利，敌人刚胜，必定放松警惕而骄横，如果按兵不动，三军害怕失败，我担心不可用。
English: Lu Zhi said: Now that our army has lost and the enemy has just won, we must relax our vigilance and be arrogant. If we do not move, the three armies are afraid of failure, and I am worried that I will not be able to use it.

古文：且战何能无胜负，宜更选精兵，星行倍道，出贼不意，此用兵之奇也。 
现代文：况且打仗怎能无胜负，应选择精兵星夜兼程，出其不意，这是用兵的奇谋。 
English: Moreover, how can there be no victory or defeat in war? The best soldiers should be chosen to travel at night and take the enemy by surprise. This is the stratagem of using soldiers.

古文：颖从之。
现代文：司马颖听从了他。
English: Sima Ying obeyed him.

古文：及伦败，志劝颖曰： 齐王众号百万，与张泓等相持不能决，大王迳得济河，此之大勋，莫之与比，而齐王今当与大王共辅朝政。
现代文：司马伦被打败，卢志劝司马颖说： 齐王号称百万，与张泓等相持不下，殿下径直渡过黄河，这是大功，没有人能与殿下相比，而齐王现在却要与殿下共辅朝政。
English: Sima Lun was defeated, Lu Zhi advised Sima Ying, saying: King Qi boasted a million, and he could not compete with Zhang Ye and others. His royal highness crossed the Yellow River directly, which is a great achievement. No one can compare with his royal highness, but King Qi now wants to supplement the imperial government with his royal highness.

古文：志闻两雄不俱处，功名不并立，今宜因太妃微疾，求还定省，推崇齐王，徐结四海之心，此计之上也。 
现代文：我听说两雄不能并处，功名不能并立，现在最好以太妃有小病，请求回去探望，推崇齐王，慢慢笼络天下人心，这是上策。 
English: I've heard that the two heroes can't coexist, and their merits can't stand side by side. Now, it's best to have a minor illness, ask to go back to visit, promote King Qi, and slowly win the hearts of the world. This is the best strategy.

古文：颖纳之，遂以母疾还籓，委重于冏。
现代文：司马颖采纳了他的建议，于是以母亲有病为由回封国，把重任交给司马同。
English: Sima Ying accepted his suggestion, so she returned to the country on the grounds that her mother was ill, and handed over the important task to Sima Tong.

古文：由是颖获四海之誉，天下归心。
现代文：由此获得了广泛赞誉，人心向往。
English: As a result, it has received wide acclaim and is highly coveted.

古文：朝廷封志为武强侯，加散骑常侍。
现代文：朝廷封卢壶为达旦毖，加散骑常侍。
English: The imperial court sealed Lu Jiu as a high-ranking eunuch, plus a free-riding equerry.

古文：及河间王颙纳李含之说，欲内除二王，树颖储副，遣报颖，颖将应之，志正谏，不从。
现代文：河间王司马显采纳李含的建议，想要内除二王，立司马颖为皇太子，派人报告司马颖，司马颖将要答应，卢志进谏阻止，不听。
English: Kawama King Sima Hsien accepted Li Han's suggestion and wanted to remove the two kings and make Sima Ying the crown prince. He sent someone to report to Sima Ying. Sima Ying was going to agree, but Lu Zhijin blocked him and would not listen.

古文：及冏灭，颖遥执期权，遂怀觖望之心。
现代文：等到司马冈被灭，司马颖遥控朝政，于是有野心。
English: Wait until Sima Gang is eliminated, Sima Ying will remotely control the government, so there is ambition.

古文：以长沙王乂在内，不得恣其所欲，密欲去乂。
现代文：因为长沙王司马义在内，不能为所欲为，想秘密除掉他。
English: Because the king of Changsha, including Sima Yi, could not do whatever he wanted and wanted to secretly get rid of him.

古文：时荆州有张昌之乱，颖表求亲征，朝廷许之。
现代文：当时荆州有张昌叛乱，司马颖上表请求亲征，朝廷同意。
English: At that time, there was a rebellion by Zhang Chang in Jingzhou. Sima Ying went to the court and requested to be conscripted, and the court agreed.

古文：会昌等平，乃回兵以讨乂。
现代文：等到张昌等被灭，便回师讨伐司墨丛。
English: After Zhang Chang and the others were eliminated, he returned to his division to fight against Sima Cong.

古文：志谏曰： 公前有复皇祚之大勋，及事平，归功于齐，辞九锡之赏，不当朝政之权，振阳翟饥人，葬黄桥白骨，皆盛德之事，四海之人莫不荷赖矣。
现代文：卢尽进谏说： 您过去有恢复国统的大功，等到事情平定，归功于齐王，推掉九锡之赏，不要朝政大权，赈济阳翟饥民，埋葬黄桥白骨，这都是大善之举，四海之内没有不仰仗您的。
English: Lu Jinjun said: You have made great contributions to the restoration of national unity in the past, and when things are calm, you should give credit to King Qi, push away the reward of Jiuxi, do not want the power of the government, give money to the hungry, and bury the white bones of the Yellow Bridge. These are all great acts of kindness. There is nothing in the four seas that does not depend on you.

古文：逆寇纵肆，猾扰荆、楚，今公扫清群难，南土以宁，振旅而旋，顿军关外，文服入朝，此霸王者之事也。 
现代文：叛贼侵犯，扰乱荆、楚，现在您扫清他们，南方得以安宁，你凯旋归来，驻兵关外，以文官之服入朝，这是霸王的事业。 
English: The traitors invaded and disturbed Jing and Chu. Now you have swept them away, the south has been pacified, and you have returned triumphantly. You have stationed troops outside the pass, and entered the country in civilian attire. This is the cause of the overlord.

古文：颖不纳。
现代文：司马颖不听。
English: Sima Ying did not listen.

古文：及乂死，颖表志为中书监，留鄴，参署相府事。
现代文：司马义死后，颖上奏卢志任中书监，留在鄴，参与相府的事情。
English: After Sima Yi's death, Ying Shangsoo appointed Lu Zhi as the middle school's librarian. He stayed in Handan and took part in the affairs of the Sangfu.

古文：乘与败于荡阴，颖遣志督兵迎帝。
现代文：皇帝败于荡阴，司马颖派卢尽带兵迎接皇帝。
English: The emperor was defeated by the swirling clouds, and Sima Ying sent Lu Jin to lead the troops to meet the emperor.

古文：及王浚攻鄴，志劝颖奉天子还洛阳。
现代文：王浚攻打邺，卢志劝颖送皇帝回洛阳。
English: Wang Jun attacked and defeated Lu Zhi, and Lu Zhi persuaded Ying to send the emperor back to Luoyang.

古文：时甲士尚万五千人，志夜部分，至晓，众皆成列，而程太妃恋鄴不欲去，颖未能决。
现代文：当时士兵还有一万五千人，卢志夜裹重新组合，到天亮，都排列成队，但程太妃留恋鄴不肯走，颖题不能决定。
English: At that time, there were still fifteen thousand soldiers. Lu Zhiyuan regrouped at night, and by dawn, they were all lined up in a line. However, Cheng Tofei lingered and refused to leave, and Ying Tie could not decide.

古文：俄而众溃，唯志与子谧、兄子綝、殿中武贲千人而已，志复劝颖早发。
现代文：一会儿众人溃散，衹有卢志和儿子卢谧、侄子卢绋、殿中武贲一千人，卢志再次劝司马颖早出发。
English: After a while, the crowd dispersed. Lu Zhi, his son Lu Yao, his nephew Lu Yao, and a thousand warriors gathered in the hall. Lu Zhi once again urged Sima Ying to leave early.

古文：时有道士姓黄，号曰圣人，太妃信之。
现代文：这时有道士姓童，号圣人，太妃相信他。
English: At this time, there was a Taoist priest surnamed Tong, who called himself a sage, and Toi believed him.

古文：及使呼人，道士求两杯酒，饮讫，抛杯而去，于是志计始决。
现代文：等把他叫进来，他要了两杯酒，喝完，扔杯而去，于是决定用卢尽的计谋。
English: When he was called in, he asked for two glasses of wine. When he had finished, he threw the glass away and decided to use Lu Jian's trick.

古文：而人马复散，志于营阵间寻索，得数乘鹿车，司马督韩玄收集黄门，得百余人。
现代文：但人马又散了，卢志在营阵间寻找，得到几乘鹿车，司马督韩玄召集黄门，得一百多人。
English: But the crowd dispersed again. Lu Zhi searched among the battalions and obtained several deer carts. Sima Governor Han Xuan summoned Huangmen and obtained more than a hundred people.

古文：志入，帝问志曰： 何故散败至此？ 
现代文：卢志入见皇帝，皇帝间他： 什么原因溃败如此? 
English: Lu Zhi went to see the emperor. When the emperor was present, he asked, "What is the reason for such a crushing defeat?"

古文：志曰： 贼去鄴尚八十里，而人士一朝骇散，太弟今欲奉陛下还洛阳。 
现代文：卢志答： 贼离邺还有八十里，但士众一时惊散，太弟现在想要送陛下回洛阳。 
English: Lu Zhi replied: The thief is still eighty miles away from Luoyang, but all the scholars were momentarily startled, and the great-uncle now wants to send His Majesty back to Luoyang.

古文：帝曰： 甚佳。 
现代文：皇帝说： 很好。 
English: The emperor said, "Very good.

古文：于是御犊车便发。
现代文：于是驾牛车出发。
English: So they set off in a bullock cart.

古文：屯骑校尉郝昌先领兵八千守洛阳，帝召之，至汲郡而昌至，兵仗甚盛。
现代文：屯骑校尉郝昌先领兵八千守盗匮，皇帝召他来，皇帝到汲郡时郝昌赶到，兵势很盛。
English: The cavalry colonel Yu Chang led the first eight thousand soldiers to guard against theft, and the emperor called him to come. When the emperor arrived in Kyu County, Yu Chang arrived, and the army was very strong.

古文：志喜于复振，启天子宜下赦书，与百姓同其休庆。
现代文：卢志高兴军威重振，奏天子应下赦书，和百姓共庆。
English: Lu Zhi was pleased to reinvigorate the military's prestige, play the son of heaven should be pardoned, and celebrate with the people.

古文：既达洛阳，志启以满奋为司隶校尉。
现代文：到了洛阳，卢志又启奏让满奋担任司隶校尉。
English: When he arrived in Luoyang, Lu Zhi also asked Manfen to serve as Sili's lieutenant.

古文：奔散者多还，百官粗备，帝悦，赐志绢二百匹、绵百斤、衣一袭、鹤绫袍一领。
现代文：奔散者大多归来，百官基本齐备，皇帝很高兴，赏卢尽绢二百匹、绵百斤、衣一套、鹤绫袍一件。
English: Most of those who had been dispersed returned, and the officials were basically ready. The emperor was very pleased, and rewarded Lu with 200 horses, 100 catties of cotton, a set of clothes, and a crane's robe.

古文：初，河间王颙闻王浚起兵，遣右将军张方救鄴。
现代文：当初，河间王司马显听说王浚起兵，派右将军张方救邺。
English: At first, Kawama King Sima Hsien heard that Wang Jun had raised an army and sent his right-hand general Zhang Fang to rescue him.

古文：方闻成都军败，顿兵洛阳，不敢进，纵兵虏掠，密欲迁都长安，将焚宗庙宫室，以绝人心。
现代文：张方听说成都王司马颖兵败，驻兵洛阳，不敢前进，纵兵掳掠，秘密地想要迁都长安，将要焚毁宗庙宫室，坚定迁都之心。
English: Zhang Fang heard that Wang Sima Ying of Chengdu was defeated and garrisoned in Luoyang. He did not dare to advance, but held out and plundered. He secretly wanted to move the capital to Chang'an, and was going to burn down the imperial palace of the ancestral temple. He was determined to move the capital.

古文：志说方曰： 昔董卓无道，焚烧洛阳，怨毒之声，百年犹存，何为袭之！ 
现代文：卢志对张方说： 过去董卓暴虐，焚烧洛阳，怨恨之声，百年犹存，你为何继承他呢! 
English: Lu Zhi said to Zhang Fang: In the past, Dong Zhuo was tyrannical, he burned Luoyang, and the resentment lingered for a hundred years. Why did you succeed him?

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：方遂逼天子幸其垒。
现代文：张方逼皇帝到他的营垒去。
English: Zhang Fang forced the emperor to return to his camp.

古文：帝垂泣就舆，唯志侍侧，曰： 陛下今日之事，当一从右将军。
现代文：皇帝垂泪上车，仅有卢志侍奉在旁，说： 陛下今天的事，应当听从右将军。
English: The emperor got into the car in tears, with only Lu Zhi as attendant, saying: Your Majesty should listen to the right general about today's matter.

古文：臣驽怯，无所云补，唯知尽微诚，不离左右而已。 
现代文：我才劣胆怯，不知帮陛下什么，惟知尽忠，不离左右而已。 
English: I'm just a coward, I don't know what to do to help His Majesty, I only know to be loyal and to stay by his side.

古文：停方垒三日便西，志复从至长安。
现代文：在张方营中停了三天便往西去，卢志又紧随到了长安。
English: After a three-day stay at Zhangfang Camp, he went west, and Lu Zhi followed him to Chang'an.

古文：颖被黜，志亦免官。
现代文：司马颖被废，卢志也免官。
English: Sima Ying was abolished, and Lu Zhi was also dismissed.

古文：及东海王越奉迎大驾，颙启帝复颖还鄴，以志为魏郡太守，加左将军，随颖北镇。
现代文：等到东海王司马越迎接皇帝，司马颐启奏皇帝让司马颖回邺，以卢志为魏郡太守，加左将军，随司马颖镇守北方。
English: When the East Sea king Sima Yue greeted the emperor, Sima Yan played the role of the emperor to let Sima Ying return to the capital, with Lu Zhi as the governor of Wei County, plus General Zuo, and with Sima Ying to guard the north.

古文：行达洛阳，而平昌公模遣前锋督护冯嵩距颖。
现代文：走到洛阳，却遇平昌公司马模派前锋督护冯嵩抵御司马颖。
English: When he came to Luoyang, he met Feng Song, the forward overseer of the PyeongChang Company, who was sent by Ma Mok to defend against Sima Ying.

古文：颖还长安，未至而闻颙斩张方，求和于越。
现代文：司马颖回长安，未到就听说司马腮斩了张方，向司马越求和。
English: Sima Ying returned to Chang'an, but before he arrived, he heard that Sima Yao had killed Zhang Fang and asked Sima Yue for peace.

古文：颖住华阴，志进长安，诣阙陈谢，即还就颖于武关。
现代文：司马颖住在华阴，卢志到了长安，进皇宫谢罪，又马上到武关与司马颖会面。
English: Sima Ying lived in Huayin, Lu Zhi went to Chang'an, entered the imperial palace to apologize, and immediately went to Wuguan to meet with Sima Ying.

古文：奔南阳，复为刘陶所驱，回诣河北。
现代文：逃往南阳，又被刘陶驱赶，回到河北。
English: He fled to Nanyang, but was driven out by Liu Tao and returned to Hebei.

古文：及颖薨，官属奔散，唯志亲自殡送，时人嘉之。
现代文：等到司马颖去世，官属逃散，衹有卢志亲自送殡，当时人都夸奖他。
English: When Sima Ying died, the officials and subordinates fled, and Lu Zhi personally conducted the funeral. At that time, everyone praised him.

古文：越命志为军谘祭酒，迁卫尉，永嘉末，转尚书。
现代文：司马越任命卢志为军谘祭酒，升任卫尉。永嘉末年，改任尚书。
English: Sima Yue appointed Lu Zhi as a military advisor and he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant. At the end of Yong Jia's life, Lu Zhi was promoted to the rank of senior clerk.

古文：洛阳没，志将妻子北投并州刺史刘琨。
现代文：洛阳陷落，卢志带领妻子儿女往北投奔并州刺史刘琨。
English: Luoyang fell, and Lu Zhi led his wife and children to the north to join Liu Bei.

古文：至阳邑，为刘粲所虏，与次子谧、诜等俱遇害于平阳。
现代文：到阳邑，被刘粲俘虏，与次子卢谧、卢就等同被害于平阳。
English: He went to Yangyun, was captured by Liu Bei, and suffered the same fate as his second sons Lu Bei and Lu Chong in Pingyang.

古文：长子谌。
现代文：长子卢谌。
English: The eldest son, Lu Yao, began to sing.

古文：谌字子谅，清敏有理思，好《老》《庄》，善属文。
现代文：卢谌字子谅，头脑清晰敏捷有见解，喜欢《老》《庄》，擅长写文章。
English: Lu Hao's son is an understanding person, his mind is clear and agile, he has opinions, he likes "Lao" and "Zhuang" and is good at writing articles.

古文：选尚武帝女荥阳公主，拜驸马都尉，未成礼而公主卒。
现代文：娶武帝女儿荣阳公主，任驸马都尉，还没完婚公主就去世。
English: He married Princess Rongyang, the daughter of Emperor Wu, and was appointed captain of the imperial horse. The princess died before the marriage was completed.

古文：后州举秀才，辟太尉掾。
现代文：后来州中举为秀才，征用为太尉掾。
English: Later, he was promoted as a talented person in the middle school of the state, and was requisitioned as a second lieutenant.

古文：洛阳没，随志北依刘琨，与志俱为刘粲所虏。
现代文：洛阳陷落，跟随卢志北面依附刘琨，与卢志同被刘粲俘虏。
English: When Luoyang fell, he followed Lu Zhi north to attach himself to Liu Bei, and he and Lu Zhi were captured by Liu Bei.

古文：粲据晋阳，留谌为参军。
现代文：刘粲占据晋阳，留卢谌任参军。
English: Liu Bei occupied Jinyang, leaving Lu Wei to join the army.

古文：琨收散卒，引猗卢骑还攻粲。
现代文：刘琨收罗散兵，领猗卢的骑兵回攻刘粲。
English: Liu Bei collected Luo's foot soldiers and led Luo's cavalry back to attack Liu Bei.

古文：粲败走，谌得赴琨，先父母兄弟在平阳者，悉为刘聪所害。
现代文：刘粲败走，卢谌得以回到刘琨处，原先父母兄弟在平阳的，都被刘聪杀害。
English: Liu Bei was defeated and fled, and Lu Wei was able to return to Liu Bei's place. Liu Cong killed his parents and brothers who were originally in Pingyang.

古文：琨为司空，以谌为主薄，转从事中郎。
现代文：刘琨任司空，以卢谌为主簿，改任从事中郎。
English: Liu Xuan was appointed as the second-in-command, with Lu Xuan as the main book, and was reassigned to be the middle-man.

古文：琨妻即谌之从母，既加亲爱，又重其才地。
现代文：刘琨的妻子是卢谌的伯母，既爱他又看重他的才干和门第。
English: Liu Yao's wife is Lu Yao's aunt, who loves him and values his talent and lineage.

古文：建兴末，随琨投段匹磾。
现代文：建兴末年，随刘琨投奔段匹蝉。
English: At the end of Jianxing's life, he followed Liu Yao to join Duanpizhimen.

古文：匹磾自领幽州，取谌为别驾。
现代文：段匹殚独占幽州，以卢谌为别驾。
English: Duanpizhao is exclusive to Yuzhou, with Luqiao as the highlight.

古文：匹磾既害琨，寻亦败丧。
现代文：段匹弹害死刘琨后不久自己也败亡。
English: Duan Ping shot and killed Liu Yao, and was himself defeated soon after.

古文：时南路阻绝，段末波在辽西，谌往投之。
现代文：当时南方的路阻隔，段末波在辽西，卢谌前往投奔他。
English: At that time, the road to the south was blocked, and Duan Mianbo was in West Liaoning. Lu Wei went to join him.

古文：元帝之初，末波通使于江左，谌因其使抗表理琨，文旨甚切，于是即加吊祭。
现代文：元帝初年，段末波和晋朝互通使臣，卢谌因使臣上奏替刘琨申诉，文意深切，于是朝廷加以吊唁祭祀。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Duan Matsuo and the Jin Dynasty exchanged envoys, and Lu Wei, because the envoy sent a complaint on behalf of Liu Wei, had a profound meaning, so the court made a condolence sacrifice.

古文：累徵谌为散骑中书侍郎，而为末波所留，遂不得南渡。
现代文：多次征召卢谌为散骑中书侍郎，却被段末波留住，不得南渡。
English: Lu Wei was called up many times to serve as a horseback riding attendant, but he was held back by the end of the stage and was not allowed to go to the south.

古文：末波死，弟辽代立，谌流离世故且二十载。
现代文：段末波死，弟弟段辽继位，卢谌流落他乡近二十年。
English: Duan Mudu died, his brother Duan Liao succeeded him, and Lu Yao was exiled to another village for nearly twenty years.

古文：石季龙破辽西，复为季龙所得，以为中书侍郎、国子祭酒、侍中、中书监。
现代文：石季龙攻破辽西，卢谌又被石季龙得到，以为中书侍郎、国子祭酒、侍中、中书监。
English: Shi Jilong conquered the western part of Liaoning Province, and Lu Wei was obtained by Shi Jilong, who was the attendant of the middle school, Kuniko's sacrificial wine, the attendant of the middle school, and the middle school supervisor.

古文：属冉闵诛石氏，谌随闵军，于襄国遇害，时年六十七，是岁永和六年也。
现代文：冉闵杀死石氏，卢谌跟随冉闵的军队，在襄国遇害，终年六十七岁，那年是永和六年。
English: Ran Xuan killed Shi Shi, Lu Xuan followed Ran Xuan's army and was killed in Xiangguo. He was 67 years old. That year was the sixth year of Yonghe.

古文：谌名家子，早有声誉，才高行洁，为一时所推。
现代文：卢谌是名家之子，早有声誉，才高行洁，为当时人所推崇。
English: Lu Yao was the son of a famous family. He had an early reputation for being highly virtuous and was highly respected by people at the time.

古文：值中原丧乱，与清河崔悦、颖川荀绰、河东裴宪、北地傅暢并沦陷非所，虽俱显于石氏，恆以为辱。
现代文：正值中原战乱，与清河人崔悦、颉川人荀绰、河东人裴宪、北地人傅畅都身陷异邦，虽然在后赵很显赫，却总引以为耻。
English: At the time of the Central Plains War, he was trapped in a foreign country with the Qinghe people Cui Yue, the Shichuan people Shao Zhuo, the Hedong people Pei Xian, and the Hokkien people Fu Chang. Although Zhao was very prominent in the future, he was always ashamed.

古文：谌每谓诸子曰： 吾身没之后，但称晋司空从事中郎尔。 
现代文：卢谌总对儿子们说： 我死以后，衹称晋司空从事中郎。 
English: Lu Yao always said to his sons: After my death, I will pretend to be Jin Zi Kuo and work as a middle-man.

古文：撰《祭法》，注《庄子》，及文集，皆行于世。
现代文：撰写《祭法》，为《庄子》作注，加上文集，都流传于世。
English: The author of "Sacred Law," the annotator of "Shuang Zi" and his collected works have been passed down to the world.

古文：悦字道儒，魏司空林曾孙，刘琨妻子之侄也。
现代文：崔悦字道儒，是魏司空崔挞的曾孙，刘琨的内侄。
English: Cui Yue, also known as Daoju, was the great-grandson of Wei Sikuang Cui Yao and the nephew of Liu Yao.

古文：与谌俱为琨司空从事中郎，后为末波佐史。
现代文：和卢谌同为型玺司空从事中郎，后来任垦圭遮佐史。
English: He was the same type as Lu Xun, and was engaged in the role of middle-ranking official. Later, he was appointed to the post of Xinggui Zhasa Shi.

古文：没石氏，亦居大官。
现代文：落入篷赵，也当大官。
English: Zhao, who fell into the canopy, also became a high-ranking official.

古文：其绰、宪、暢并别有传。
现代文：苞钟、宪、暢本书另外有传。
English: There are also legends about Shuchong, Xian and Changbu.

古文：华表，字伟容，平原高唐人也，父歆，清德高行，为魏太尉。
现代文：华表字伟容，是平原高唐人。父亲华歆，品行高洁，任魏太尉。
English: Hua table character Wei Rong, is a plain Gao Tang people. The father, Hua Yao, is of high moral character and is a Wei Tai Liang.

古文：表年二十，拜散骑黄门郎，累迁侍中。
现代文：华表二十岁时，任散骑黄门郎，多次升任侍中。
English: When Hua table was twenty years old, he was appointed as Huangmenro, several times promoted to the rank of chamberlain.

古文：正元初，石苞来朝，盛称高贵乡公，以为魏武更生。
现代文：正元初年，石苞来朝，盛赞高贵乡公，认为魏武再生。
English: In the first year of the Zhengyuan era, Shijie came to the DPRK and praised Gao Guoxiang, believing that Weiwu had been reborn.

古文：时闻者流汗沾背，表惧祸作，频称疾归下舍，故免于大难。
现代文：当时在场者都汗流浃背，华表害怕大难临头，一再说自己病重要回家，所以免于大难。
English: At that time, everyone present was sweating profusely. Hua table was afraid of the impending disaster, and repeatedly said that he was too sick to go home, so he was spared from the disaster.

古文：后迁尚书。
现代文：后来升任尚书。
English: Later, he was promoted to Shangshu.

古文：五等建，封观阳伯。
现代文：立五等爵位，封为观阳伯。
English: He was raised to the fifth class of peerage and given the title of Guanyangbo.

古文：坐供给丧事不整，免。
现代文：因给丧事供应的东西不齐备，被免官。
English: He was dismissed from his post for not having enough supplies for the funeral.

古文：泰始中，拜太子少傅，转光禄勋。迁太常卿。
现代文：泰始年间，任太子少傅，改任光禄勋，升任太常卿。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizhi, he was appointed to the position of the Prince's Junior Master, changed to the position of the Honorable Order of the Star, and was promoted to the position of the Grand Councilor.

古文：数岁，以老病乞骸骨。
现代文：几年后，以年老有病请求退休。
English: A few years later, he asked to retire on grounds of old age and ill health.

古文：诏曰： 表清贞履素，有老成之美，久干王事，静恭匪懈。
现代文：诏书说： 清正而品行端正，有老成之美，多年处理政务，不敢懈怠。
English: The edict said, "Being honest and upright, having the beauty of old age, and having handled government affairs for many years, you dare not slacken.

古文：而以疾固辞，章表恳至。
现代文：因病重请求退休，态度恳切。
English: He earnestly asked to retire due to serious illness.

古文：今听如所上，以为太中大夫，赐钱二十万，床帐褥席禄赐与卿同，门施行马。 
现代文：现在准其所求，以为太中大夫，赏钱二十万，床帐褥席俸禄与九卿相同，门前设置拦阻人马通行的木栅。 
English: Now, his request has been granted, and he has been rewarded with 200,000 yuan as a junior doctor, the same salary as the nine nobles, and a wooden grate in front of the door to block the passage of people and horses.

古文：表以苦节垂名，司徒李胤、司隶王宏等并叹美表清澹退静，以为不可得贵贱而亲疏也。
现代文：以守志不渝闻名，司徒李胤、司隶王宏等都感慨茎昼淡泊宁静，认为不可以贵贱来定远近。
English: They are famous for their unswerving adherence to their principles, and both St. Li-yin and St. Wang-hong are full of compassion for the tranquility of the countryside, and believe that it is not possible to be noble and lowly in order to settle far and near.

古文：咸宁元年八月卒，时年七十二，谥曰康，诏赐朝服。
现代文：咸宁元年八月去世，终年七十二岁，谧号尘，诏令赐给朝服。
English: Xianning died in August of the first year of the year, aged seventy-two, and was given the imperial robe by imperial decree.

古文：有六子：暠、岑、峤、鉴、澹、简。
现代文：有六个儿子：华度、华岑、华崤、华鉴、华澹、华简。
English: They had six sons: Huadu, Huayu, Huayu, Huajian, Huayu, and Huajian.

古文：暠字长骏，弘敏有才义。
现代文：华暠，字长骏，才思敏捷。
English: Brilliant, long-winded, quick-witted.

古文：妻父卢毓典选，难举姻亲，故暠年三十五不得调，晚为中书通事郎。
现代文：岳父卢毓主持选举，不举姻亲，所以华虞三十五岁都不得当官，很晚才任中书通事郎。
English: His father-in-law Lu Wei presided over the election and did not nominate any in-laws, so Huayu was not allowed to become an official at the age of thirty-five, and he was appointed as the secretary of the Central Secretariat very late.

古文：泰始初，迁冗从仆射。
现代文：泰始初年，升任冗从仆射。
English: In the first year of Taizhi, he was promoted to the post of leader.

古文：少为武帝所礼，历黄门侍郎、散骑常侍、前军将军、侍中、南中郎将、都督河北诸军事。
现代文：年少时被亘堕礼遇，历任黄门侍郎、散骑常侍、前军将军、侍中、南中郎将、都督河北诸军事。
English: When he was young, he was treated with great courtesy, and successively served as Yellow Gate chamberlain, horseback riding chamberlain, former army general, chamberlain, southern middle-ranking officer, and military governor of Hebei Province.

古文：父疾笃辄还，仍遭丧旧例，葬讫复任，暠固辞，迕旨。
现代文：父亲病重便返家，父亲病故。旧例，下葬完毕就要回到任上，茎廛坚决不回，违背了皇帝的旨意。
English: When his father became seriously ill, he returned home, but his father died of illness. The old rule was that he had to return to his post after he was buried, but Tsuchimaro resolutely refused to return, which was against the emperor's will.

古文：初，表有赐客在鬲，使暠因县令袁毅录名，三客各代以奴。
现代文：当初，有客三人在区，派华暠到县令袁毅处登记姓名，三客均作奴用。
English: At first, there were three guests in the district, and they sent Hua Wei to the county magistrate Yuan Yi to register their names. All three guests were used as slaves.

古文：及毅以货赇致罪，狱辞迷谬，不复显以奴代客，直言送三奴与暠，而毅亦卢氏婿也。
现代文：等到袁毅以贿赂致罪，判决文书糊涂荒谬，不再体现以奴代客，而是直接说送三奴给茎虞，而袁毅也是卢家的女婿。
English: By the time Yuan Yi was convicted of bribery, the verdict document was muddled and absurd, no longer reflecting the use of a slave as a valet, but directly saying that the three slaves were sent to Zhuyu, and Yuan Yi was also the son-in-law of the Lu family.

古文：又中书监荀勖先为中子求暠女，暠不许，为恨，因密启帝，以袁毅货赇者多，不可尽罪，宜责最所亲者一人，因指暠当之。
现代文：再者中书监苞玺以前为儿子向华腐求其女儿为婚，因不同意便怀恨在心，于是密奏皇帝，认为行贿的人太多，不能都治罪，应当惩罚最亲的一人，于是提出华虞合适。
English: Furthermore, the Censors of the Chinese Academy of Letters had previously asked Hua Gu for his son to marry his daughter, and because he did not agree, he harbored a grudge. Therefore, he played a trick on the emperor, thinking that there were too many people who paid bribes, that they could not all be punished, and that one of the closest relatives should be punished. Therefore, he proposed that Hua Gu was suitable.

古文：又绿暠有违忤之咎，遂于丧服中免暠官，削爵土。
现代文：又因华糜有违旨的过失，于是就在华虞服丧期间免了他的官，剥夺了他的爵位和封地。
English: Moreover, because of Hua Yu's fault of violating the directive, he relieved him of his official position and deprived him of his peerage and fief during the period of Hua Yu's funeral.

古文：大鸿胪何遵奏暠免为庶人，不应袭封，请以表世孙混嗣表。
现代文：大鸿胪何遵启奏华廛应免为普通百姓，不应再继承封爵，请求以华昼嫡孙茎退继嗣。
English: If the Great Hungarians did not obey the edict, they should be exempted from being ordinary people and should no longer inherit the title of nobility, and they should request that the legitimate grandson of Hua Rong succeed to the throne.

古文：有司奏曰： 暠所坐除名削爵，一时之制。
现代文：有关部门上奏说： 华虞犯罪被取消原有身份并剥夺爵位，衹是一时的规定。
English: Relevant departments reported that: Hua Yu's crime was canceled the original identity and deprived of a knighthood, which is a temporary provision.

古文：暠为世子，著在名簿，不听袭嗣，此为刑罚再加。
现代文：是嫡子，写在名簿上，不让继嗣，这比刑罚还重。
English: If he is the legitimate son and it is written in the register that he is not allowed to have an heir, this is even more severe than the punishment.

古文：诸侯犯法，八议平处者，褒功重爵也。
现代文：诸侯犯法，按八议公平处理，应当减免刑罚。
English: If a vassal commits a crime, he shall be dealt with fairly in accordance with the Eight Opinions, and his punishment shall be reduced or remitted.

古文：嫡统非犯终身弃罪，废之为重，依律应听袭封。 
现代文：嫡子继承不是犯终身废置罪的，废爵就太过分了，依据法律应听任他继嗣。 
English: If the legitimate son inherits without committing the crime of lifelong abolition, it is too much to abolish the peerage. According to the law, he should be allowed to succeed.

古文：诏曰： 诸侯薨，子逾年即位，此古制也。
现代文：诏书说： 诸侯去世，儿子过一年即位，这是古制。
English: The imperial edict said: Princes die, their sons take the throne a year later. This is the old system.

古文：应即位而废之，爵命皆去矣，何为罪罚再加？
现代文：应即位而废置他，爵位和性命全丢了，什么叫比刑罚还重?
English: He should be dethroned with immediate effect, lose his title and his life. What could be more severe than this punishment?

古文：且吾之责暠，以肃贪秽，本不论常法也。
现代文：况且我惩罚他，是为了整治贪财丑恶，本来就不按常规办。
English: Moreover, I punished him in order to rectify the greed and ugliness, and I did not do it according to the usual procedure.

古文：诸贤不能将明此意，乃更诡易礼律，不顾宪度，君命废之，而群下复之，此为上下正相反也。 
现代文：你们不能明白我的意图，反而偷换礼律，不顾法律，我命令废掉他，你们又恢复他，这是上下不一致。 
English: Instead of understanding my intention, you have changed the rules of etiquette and disregarded the law. I ordered him to be removed, and you reinstated him. This is inconsistent.

古文：于是有司奏免议者官，诏皆以赎论。
现代文：于是有关部门上奏免去异议者的官位，韶令予以赎罪论。
English: As a result, the relevant departments made a report to remove the official position of the dissident and ordered him to be atoned for.

古文：混以世孙当受封，逃避，断发阳狂，病喑不能语，故得不拜，世咸称之。
现代文：华混以嫡孙应当受封，他逃避，断发装疯，喑哑失音不能说话。因此得以不就任，人们都称赞他。
English: Huagong's great-grandson should have been given the title, but he ran away and pretended to be insane. He was dumb and mute and could not speak. Therefore, he was able to not take up the post, and people praised him.

古文：暠栖迟家巷垂十载，教诲子孙，讲诵经典。
现代文：华皮隐居在家快十年了，教育子孙，讲读经典。
English: Huapi has been living in seclusion at home for nearly ten years, educating his children and grandchildren, and reading the classics.

古文：集经书要事，名曰《善文》，行于世。
现代文：收集经书要事，编成《善文》，流行于世。
English: He collected important matters of scriptures and compiled them into "Good Literature," which became popular in the world.

古文：与陈勰共造猪阑于宅侧，帝尝出视之，问其故，左右以实对，帝心怜之。
现代文：和陈勰一起在屋旁建猪栏，皇帝曾经外出看见，问原因，左右以实话相告，皇帝很同情他。
English: Together with Chen Xi, they built a pig pen next to the house. The emperor once went out to see, asked the reason, and told the truth. The emperor was very sympathetic to him.

古文：帝后又登陵云台，望见廙苜蓿园，阡陌甚整，依然感旧。
现代文：后来皇帝又登陵云台，望见华滇苜蓿园，阡陌纵横，十分怀旧。
English: Later, the emperor also ascended the Yuntai Mausoleum, where he could see the Huayuan Garden and the Longmen Pagoda, which was very nostalgic.

古文：太康初大赦，乃得袭封。
现代文：太康初年大赦，华虞才得以继承封爵。
English: In the first year of Taikang's reign, there was an amnesty, and only then was Huayu able to inherit his title.

古文：久之，拜城门校尉，迁左卫将军。
现代文：很久以后，任城门校尉，升任左卫将军。
English: A long time later, he was appointed captain of the castle gate and promoted to General of the Left Division.

古文：数年，以为中书监。
现代文：几年后，任中书监。
English: A few years later, he was appointed Central Library Supervisor.

古文：惠帝即位，加侍中、光禄大夫、尚书令，进爵为公。
现代文：惠帝即位，加侍中、光禄大夫、尚书令，进爵为公。
English: Emperor Hui ascended to the throne, with the addition of the chamberlains, the doctors of Guanglu and Shang Shuling, and he was raised to the peerage.

古文：暠应杨骏召，不时还，有司奏免官。
现代文：杨骏召华糜回，他未按时到，有关部门上奏免官。
English: Yang Xi called Huayu back, but he did not arrive on time, and the relevant department dismissed him.

古文：寻迁太子少傅，加散骑常侍，动遵礼典，得傅导之义。
现代文：不久升任太子少傅，加散骑常侍，按礼行事，得师傅教导的真义。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of Prince's Junior Master, and was given the additional post of Knight's Equerry. He acted according to proper etiquette and learned the true meaning of his master's teachings.

古文：后年衰病笃，诏遣太医疗病，进位光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
现代文：后来年老病重，诏令命太臀给他治病，进位光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
English: Later, when he became seriously ill in his old age, he was ordered by the Emperor to be treated by the Empress Dowager, and promoted to the position of doctor of Guanglu, Kaifu, and the three departments.

古文：时河南尹韩寿因托贾后求以女配暠孙陶，暠距而不许，后深以为恨，故遂不登台司。
现代文：造时河亩尹韩蠢托买后请求把女儿许配给华腐的孙子华陶，遭到华虞拒绝，买后非常恨他，所以不能登三公之位。
English: Zou Shihe Mu Yin Han stupidly bought and then requested that his daughter be married to Hua Fu's grandson Hua Tao. Hua Yu refused, and hated him very much after the purchase, so he could not ascend to the position of the Three Princes.

古文：年七十五卒，谥曰元。
现代文：七十五岁时去世，谧号元。
English: He died at the age of seventy-five, with the posthumous name Yuan.

古文：三子：混、荟、恆。
现代文：三个儿子：华混、华蕾、华恒。
English: Three sons: Hua Jun, Hua Lei and Hua Heng.

古文：混字敬伦，嗣父爵，清贞简正，历位侍中、尚书，卒官。
现代文：华混，字敬伦，继承父亲爵位，清正简朴，历任侍中、尚书，死于任上。
English: Hua mixed, the word Jing Lun, inherited his father's title, pure and simple, successive attendants, Shang Shu, died in office.

古文：子陶嗣，补巩令，没于石勒。
现代文：儿子华陶继嗣，补任巩令，落入互勤手中。
English: His son, Huatao Heir, who replaced Gongling, fell into the wrong hands.

古文：荟字敬叔，为河南尹。
现代文：华荟，字敬叔，任河南尹。
English: Huayuan, the word Jingshu, the role of Henan Yin.

古文：与荀籓、荀组俱避贼，至临颖，父子并遇害。
现代文：和荀籓、荀组一起避贼，到临颖，父子同时遇害。
English: Together with Zou and Zou's group, they avoided the thieves, and when they arrived at Linying, father and son were killed at the same time.

古文：恆字敬则，博学以清素为称。
现代文：华恆，字敬则，博学以清白闻名。
English: She is known for her beauty, courtesy, erudition and innocence.

古文：尚武帝女荥阳长公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：娶武帝女儿荣阳长公主，任驸马都尉。
English: He married the eldest princess Rongyang, the daughter of Emperor Wu, and was appointed captain of the imperial horse.

古文：元康初，东宫建，恆以选为太子宾友，赐爵关内侯，食邑百户。
现代文：五尘初年，立太子，茎恒因被选为太子宾友，赐爵关内侯，食邑一百户。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wu, Prince Zhi Heng was chosen as the prince's close friend, he was given the title of Lord of Guanai and became the patron of a hundred households.

古文：辟司徒王浑仓曹掾，属除散骑侍郎，累迁散骑常侍、北军中候，俄拜领军，加散骑常侍。
现代文：司徒工运征用为仓曹掾，接着任散骑侍郎，多次升任散骑常侍、北军中候，不久任领军，加散骑常侍。
English: Szeto was requisitioned by the workers' movement as Cang Cao, then he was appointed as a horseback riding attendant, several times promoted to a horseback riding attendant, a middle-ranking officer in the Northern Army, and soon became the leader of the army, plus a horseback riding attendant.

古文：愍帝即位，以恆为尚书，进爵苑陵县公。
现代文：愍帝即位，以华恆为尚书，进爵苑陵县公。
English: Emperor Qian ascended to the throne, and he was awarded the title of Duke of Yuanling County.

古文：顷之，刘聪逼长安，诏出恆为镇军将军，领颍川太守，以为外援。
现代文：不久，刘聪逼近长安，诏令华恆外任镇军将军，领颖川太守，以为外援。
English: Soon after, Liu Cong approached Chang'an and ordered Hua Heng to act as the general of the town army, leading the governor of Yingchuan, in the hope of receiving foreign aid.

古文：恆兴合义军，得二千人，未及西赴，而关中陷没。
现代文：华恒集合义军，得二千人，未来得及开往西边，关中就失守了。
English: Huaheng rallied the rebels, gaining two thousand men, but before they could head west, Guanzhong was lost.

古文：时群贼方盛，所在州郡相继奔败，恆亦欲弃郡东渡，而从兄轶为元帝所诛，以此为疑。
现代文：当时群贼正强大，所在州郡相继望风而逃，华恒也想弃郡束渡，而堂兄华轶被元帝杀死，因此犹豫。
English: At that time, the bandits were strong, and the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures of the prefectures.

古文：先书与骠骑将军王导，导言于帝。
现代文：先给骠骑将军王导写信，王导报告元帝。
English: First, he wrote a letter to the cavalry general Wang Du, and Wang Du reported to the Yuan Emperor.

古文：帝曰： 兄弟罪不相及，况群从乎！ 
现代文：元帝说： 兄弟罪不相连，何况是叔伯兄弟呢! 
English: Yuan Di said, "Brotherly sins are not connected, let alone uncle brothers!

古文：即召恆，补光禄勋。
现代文：立即召回华恒，补任光禄勋。
English: Immediately recall Hua Heng, fill the post with Guang Luk Xun.

古文：恆到，未及拜，更以为卫将军，加散骑常侍、本州大中正。
现代文：华恒到后，还没来得及任命，又改任卫将军，加散骑常侍、本州大中正。
English: After Hua Heng arrived, before he could be appointed, he was reappointed as the General of the Guards, plus the non-commissioned officer, and the vice-president of the Honshu University.

古文：寻拜太常，议立郊祀。
现代文：不久任太常，议论行郊祭。
English: He was soon appointed to the position of Taichang and discussed the holding of a suburb festival.

古文：尚书刁协、国子祭酒杜彝议，须还洛乃修郊祀。
现代文：尚书刁协、国子祭酒杜彝认为必须回洛阳再行郊祭。
English: Shang Shuxuan Association and Guozhi Festival Liquor Cuckoo believed that it was necessary to go back to Luoyang for the suburban festival.

古文：恆议，汉献帝居许，即便郊柴，宜于此修立。
现代文：华恒认为漠献帝在许住，就在许郊祭，应当在本地行郊祭。
English: Hua Heng believed that since Emperor Mu Xian lived in Xu, the suburb festival should be held in Xu, and the suburb festival should be held locally.

古文：司徒荀组、骠骑将军王导同恆议，遂定郊祀。
现代文：司徒荀组、骠骑将军王导与华恒意见一致，于是决定郊祭。
English: The Stubai group and the cavalry general Wang Du agreed with Hua Heng, so they decided to hold a suburb festival.

古文：寻以疾求解，诏曰： 太常职主宗庙，烝尝敬重，而华恆所疾，不堪亲奉职事。
现代文：不久以病重提出辞官，诏书说： 太常专管宗庙，祭祀很庄重，而华恒病重，不能亲自主持。
English: Not long after, the dictionaries were put forward due to the severity of the illness, and the imperial edict said: Taizang was in charge of the ancestral temple, and the sacrificial rites were very solemn, but Hua Heng was seriously ill and could not personally preside.

古文：夫子称 吾不与祭，如不祭 ，况宗伯之任职所司邪！
现代文：孔子说 我不参加祭祀，就如同没有祭祀，何况这本身就是太常的职责呢!
English: Confucius said, "If I do not participate in the sacrificial rites, it is as if there were no sacrificial rites, and what is more, this in itself is my duty!"

古文：今转恆为廷尉。 
现代文：现在改任华恒为廷尉。 
English: Now, Hua Heng has been promoted to the rank of court lieutenant.

古文：顷之，加特进。
现代文：不久，加特进。
English: Soon, Gatter came in.

古文：太宁初，迁骠骑将军，加散骑常侍，督石头水陆诸军事。
现代文：太宁初年，升骠骑将军，加散骑常侍，督石头水陆诸军事。
English: In the first year of Taining, he was promoted to the general of cavalry, and the attendant of cavalry was added, and he was in charge of military affairs.

古文：王敦表转恆为护军，疾病不拜。
现代文：王敦上奏改任华恒为护军，病重不就任。
English: Wang Dun was appointed as Hua Heng's bodyguard, but he was too ill to take up the post.

古文：授金紫光禄大夫，又领太子太保。
现代文：任金紫光禄大夫，又领太子太保。
English: He was appointed as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and also received the title of the prince's bodyguard.

古文：成帝即位，加散骑常侍，领国子祭酒。
现代文：成帝即位，加散骑常侍，领国子祭酒。
English: Emperor Cheng ascended to the throne, and was accompanied by a retinue of horsemen.

古文：咸和初，以愍帝时赐爵进封一皆削除，恆更以讨王敦功封苑陵县侯，复领太常。
现代文：咸和初年，因愍帝时赐爵进封全部取消，华恒另以讨王敦功封苑陵县侯，再领太常。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, all the titles conferred by Emperor Gong were cancelled, and Hua Heng was awarded the title of county magistrate of Yuanling County for his services to Wang Dungong, and then received the title of Taizhong.

古文：苏峻之乱，恆侍帝左右，从至石头，备履艰危，困悴逾年。
现代文：苏峻之乱，华恒侍奉在皇帝身边，一起到石头，备受艰辛，困窘一年以匕。
English: During the Sushun Rebellion, Hua Heng served at the emperor's side, went to the stone together, suffered hardships, and was embarrassed for a year.

古文：初，恆为州大中正，乡人任让轻薄无行，为恆所黜。
现代文：当初，华恒任州大中正，同乡任让轻薄放纵，被华恒黜落。
English: At the beginning, Hua Heng was a state university junior high school student, while his fellow villagers indulged in frivolity and indulgence, and were ridiculed by Hua Heng.

古文：及让在峻军中，任势多所杀害，见恆辄恭敬，不肆其虐。
现代文：等到任让在苏峻军中，有势者多被他杀害，见到华恒则很恭敬，不胡作非为。
English: By the time Ren Zheng was at the head of the Su Shun army, most of the powerful people had been killed by him. When he saw Hua Heng, he was very respectful and did not do anything wrong.

古文：钟雅、刘超之死，亦将及恆，让尽心救卫，故得免。
现代文：钟雅、刘超死后，也将轮到华恒，任让尽心相救，所以得以脱险。
English: After the death of Zhongya and Liu Chao, it will also be the turn of Hua Heng, let him do his best to save, so he was able to escape.

古文：及帝加元服，又将纳后。
现代文：等到元帝加元服，又将立皇后。
English: Wait until the former emperor attains manhood, and a new queen will be crowned.

古文：寇难之后，典籍靡遗，婚冠之礼，无所依据。
现代文：战乱之后，典籍全毁，婚冠之礼，无所依据。
English: After the war, the classic books were completely destroyed, and there was no basis for the wedding crown.

古文：恆推寻旧典，撰定礼仪，并郊庙辟雍朝廷轨则，事并施用。
现代文：华恒探寻旧典，撰定礼仪，加上郊庙辟雍朝廷礼制，全部得以实施。
English: Hua Heng explored the old classics, compiled the etiquette, and together with the suburb temples and the Yong imperial court etiquette, all of which were implemented.

古文：迁左光禄大夫、开府，常侍如故，固让未拜。
现代文：升任左光禄大夫、开府，常侍照旧，坚决推让没有就任。
English: He was promoted to the position of Sakoroku-dokufu, the head of the government, and continued to serve as a regular attendant. However, he refused to take the position.

古文：会卒，时年六十九，册赠侍中、左光禄大夫、开府，谥曰敬。
现代文：适逢去世，终年六十九岁，册赠侍中、左光禄大夫、开府，谧号敬。
English: When he passed away, he was 69 years old. He was given the titles of Junior Chamberlain, Doctor of the Left Hand, Keifu, and his posthumous name was Ryo.

古文：恆清恪俭素，虽居显列，常布衣蔬食，年老弥笃。
现代文：华恒谨慎俭朴，虽居颢位，常布衣蔬食，年老尤其如此。
English: Hua Heng is prudent and frugal. Although he holds a high position, he always wears clothes and eats vegetables. This is especially true when he is old.

古文：死之日，家无余财，唯有书数百卷，时人以此贵之。
现代文：死时家无余财，祇有书敷百卷，人们因此很尊敬他。
English: At the time of his death, the family had no spare money, only a hundred volumes of calligraphy, so people respected him very much.

古文：子俊嗣，为尚书郎。
现代文：儿子华俊继嗣，为尚书郎。
English: His son, Huajun's heir, is Shang Shuro.

古文：俊子仰之，大长秋。
现代文：茎鱼儿子迎之，任大长秋。
English: The son of the stem fish welcomes him, and he is appointed to the position of chief magistrate.

古文：峤字叔骏，才学深博，少有令闻。
现代文：华崤字叔骏，学识渊博，年少有好名声。
English: Huazhong Zi Shuxuan was well-educated and had a good reputation at a young age.

古文：文帝为大将军，辟为掾属，补尚书郎，转车骑从事中郎。
现代文：文帝任大将军，征用为属官，补任尚书郎，改任车骑从事中郎。
English: Emperor Wen was appointed as a general, requisitioned as a subordinate officer, appointed as a supplement to Shang Shuro, and was reappointed as a chauffeur.

古文：泰始初，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：泰始初年，赐爵关内侯。
English: In the first year of Taishi, he was given the title of Lord of Kwanai.

古文：迁太子中庶子。出为安平太守。
现代文：升任太子中庶子，出任安平太守。
English: He was promoted to the position of the Prince's middle child and became the Anping governor.

古文：辞亲老不行，更拜散骑常侍，典中书著作，领国子博士，迁侍中。
现代文：以父母年老推辞不就，改任散骑常侍，负责中书著作，领国子博士，升任侍中。
English: His parents' old-age excuse was not enough, so he was reassigned as a horseback riding attendant, in charge of Chinese books, leading Dr. Kuniko, and was promoted to attendant.

古文：太康末，武帝颇亲宴乐，又多疾病。
现代文：太康末年，武帝沉湎于酒色，又多疾病。
English: In the last years of Taikang, Emperor Wu indulged in alcohol and suffered from many illnesses.

古文：属小瘳，峤与侍臣表贺，因微谏曰： 伏惟圣体渐就平和，上下同庆，不觉抃舞。
现代文：病稍好，华娇和侍臣上表祝贺，乘机隐晦地进谏道： 圣体渐安，上下同庆，欢欣鼓舞。
English: The illness is a little better, Hua Jiao and his attendant congratulate each other on the table, and take the opportunity to obscurely enter the path: the Holy Body is gradually safe, the upper and lower parts celebrate together, and rejoice and encourage.

古文：臣等愚戆，窃有微怀，以为收功于所忽，事乃无悔；虑福于垂成，祚乃日新。
现代文：我等愚昧，私下以为，不放过任何细微之处，才能没有后悔的事；胜利在望时想到幸福来之不易，国家才能日新月异。
English: We are so stupid that we secretly believe that only by sparing no detail can there be no regrets; only when victory is in sight can we think that happiness is hard to come by, and only then can the country change with each passing day.

古文：唯愿陛下深垂圣明，远思所忽之悔，以成日新之福。
现代文：衹愿陛下无限圣明，深思不经意处的后悔，来获得常新的幸福。
English: May your majesty be infinitely holy, and may you gain ever-renewed happiness through the contemplation of your inadvertent regrets.

古文：冲静和气，啬养精神，颐身于清简之宇，留心于虚旷之域。无厌世俗常戒，以忽群下之言，则丰庆日延，天下幸甚！ 
现代文：淡泊和气，颐养精神，心胸开阔，不要厌恶世俗常规，不要忽视百官的话，那么就会永远富足幸福，天下幸运! 
English: Be light-hearted, nurture your spirit, be open-minded, don't detest the mundane routine, don't ignore the words of officials, then you will always be rich and happy, lucky!

古文：帝手诏报曰： 辄自消息，无所为虑。 
现代文：皇帝亲自写韶书说： 自己休养，不用考虑。 
English: The emperor himself wrote an imperial edict saying, "Don't think about recuperating on your own.

古文：元康初，封宣昌亭侯。
现代文：元康初年，封宣昌亭侯。
English: In the first year of Yuan Kang, he was given the title of Xuan Changting.

古文：诛杨骏，改封乐乡侯，迁尚书。
现代文：杀杨骏后，改封乐乡侯，升任尚书。
English: After killing Yang Xuan, he was given the title of Le Township, and was promoted to Shangshu.

古文：后以峤博闻多识，属书典实，有良史之志，转秘书监，加散骑常侍，班同中书。
现代文：后来以华崤博闻多识，著书考核，有良史之志，改任秘书监，加散骑常侍，和中书并列。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of secretary-supervisor, and given the titles of erudite, knowledgeable, book-writing appraisal, and good history. He was also given the title of sanshiki (free-rider) attendant, which was on a par with Chinese calligraphy.

古文：寺为内台，中书、散骑、著作及治礼音律，天文数术，南省文章，门下撰集，皆典统之。
现代文：机构设在尚书省，中书、散骑、著作和制定礼仪、考校音律、天文算术、尚书和门下撰文，都归他管。
English: The institution is located in Shangshu Province, and he is in charge of Chinese calligraphy, horseback riding, writing and formulating etiquette, examination music, astronomical arithmetic, Shangshu and writing.

古文：初，峤以《汉纪》烦秽，慨然有改作之意。
现代文：当初，华崤认为《汉纪》繁杂，感慨有改写之志。
English: At first, Hua Wei thought that the "Han Dynasty" was complicated, and he had the desire to rewrite it.

古文：会为台郎，典官制事，由是得遍观秘籍，遂就其绪，起于光武，终于孝献，一百九十五年，为帝纪十二卷、皇后纪二卷、十典十卷、传七十卷及三谱、序传、目录，凡九十七卷。
现代文：正赶上担任尚书郎，专管官制，由此得以遍览各种典籍，于是大体就绪。始于光武帝，终于孝献帝，共一百九十五年，有帝纪十二卷、皇后纪二卷、十典十卷、传七十卷及三谱、序传、目录，共九十七卷。
English: He was just in time to assume the post of Shang Shulang, in charge of the official system, which enabled him to read all kinds of classics, so he was basically ready. Starting with Emperor Guangwu and finally Emperor Xiao Xian, a total of one hundred and ninety-five years, there are twelve volumes of imperial history, two volumes of empress history, ten volumes of classics, seventy volumes of biography, and three volumes, preface, and catalogue, a total of ninety-seven volumes.

古文：峤以皇后配天作合，前史作外戚传以继末编，非其义也，故易为皇后纪，以次帝纪。
现代文：华娇认为皇后与皇帝为一体，前史将皇后放在外戚传并放在最后不对，所以改为皇后纪，排在帝纪后面。
English: Hua Jiao thought that the empress and the emperor were one, and the previous history was wrong to put the empress in the lineage and at the end, so it was changed to the empress's era, which was behind the imperial era.

古文：又改志为典，以有《尧典》故也。
现代文：又改志为典，因为有《尧典》的缘故。
English: He also changed his name to Kanen, because of the success of "Kansetsu."

古文：而改名《汉后书》奏之。诏朝臣会议。
现代文：全书改名为《汉后书》上奏，韶令朝臣讨论。
English: The entire book was renamed "The Book of the Later Han Dynasty," and was read aloud and discussed by the imperial court.

古文：时中书监荀勖、令和峤、太常张华、侍中王济咸以峤文质事核，有迁固之规，实录之风，藏之秘府。
现代文：当时中书监荀勖、中书令和崤、太常张华、侍中王济都认为华崤文字质朴、史实真实，有司马迁、班固的遣风，把它藏在专放秘籍的地方。
English: At that time, the Censors of Chinese Books, the Censors of Chinese Books, the Censors of Chinese Books, the Censors of Chinese Books, the Censors of Chinese Books, the Censors of Chinese Books, the Censors of Chinese Books, the Censors of Chinese Books, the Censors of Chinese Books, the Censors of Chinese Books, the Censors of Chinese Books, the Censors of Chinese Books, the Censors of Chinese Books, the Censors of Chinese Books, the Censors of Chinese Books, the Censors of Chinese Books, the Censors of Chinese Books, the Censors of Chinese Books,

古文：后太尉汝南王亮、司空卫瓘为东宫傅，列上通讲，事遂施行。
现代文：后来太尉汝南王司马亮、司空卫罐任太子师傅，上奏要给太子通讲一遍，获准施行。
English: Later, Prince Sima Liang and Prince Kong Wei Can, who were appointed as the prince's teachers, were allowed to perform the recital.

古文：峤所著论议难驳诗赋之属数十万言，其所奏官制、太子宜还宫及安边、雩祭、明堂辟雍、浚导河渠，巡禹之旧迹置都水官，修蚕宫之礼置长秋，事多施行。
现代文：华崤所著议论、驳论、诗赋之类数十万言，他所说的官制、太子应当回宫和安定边疆、求雨的祭祀、明堂辟雍、疏导河流、巡访禹的足迹设置都水官、撰写皇后养蚕的礼仪设置长秋官，事情大多施行。
English: Huayu wrote hundreds of thousands of words such as discussions, refutations, and poems, and most of the things he said, such as the official system, the prince should return to the palace and the stable frontier, the rain-seeking ritual, the Ming dynasty, the dynasties, the rivers, the footprints of Yu's visit, the setting up of the capital water official, the writing of the etiquette for the queen to raise silkworms, and the setting up of the long autumn official, were implemented.

古文：元康三年卒，追赠少府，谥曰简。
现代文：元康三年去世，追赠少府，谧号简。
English: Yuan Kang died three years later and was posthumously given the title of Shofu and the nickname Jane.

古文：峤性嗜酒，率常沈醉。
现代文：华娇酷爱喝酒，经常喝醉。
English: Hua Jiao loves to drink and often gets drunk.

古文：所撰书十典未成而终，秘书监何劭奏峤中子彻为佐著作郎，使踵成之，未竟而卒。
现代文：撰写十典还未完成就去世了，秘书监何劭上奏用华崤的儿子华彻为佐著作郎，让他续完，未完成也去世了。
English: He died before he had finished writing the Ten Classics. The secretary supervisor, He Ying Shangso, used Hua Yao's son, Hua Che, as the author to let him continue, and he also died before he was finished.

古文：后监缪徵又奏峤少子暢为佐著作郎，克成十典，并草魏、晋纪传，与著作郎张载等俱在史官。
现代文：后来秘书监缪征又上奏用华崤的小儿子华畅为佐著作郎，终于完成十典，并撰写魏、晋纪传，和著作郎张载同为史官。
English: Later, the secretary, Supervisor Mu Xie, also used Hua Yan's youngest son, Hua Chang, as the author's son, and finally completed ten books, and wrote Wei and Jin biographies, and the author's son, Zhang Jie, was also a historian.

古文：永嘉丧乱，经籍遗没，峤书存者五十余卷。
现代文：永嘉之乱，经籍遗失，华崤的书仍保存了三十余卷。
English: During the Yongjia Rebellion, the scriptures were lost, but more than thirty volumes of Huayu's books were still preserved.

古文：峤有三子：颐、彻、暢。
现代文：华蜗有三个儿子：华颐、华彻、华畅。
English: Hua Jun has three sons: Hua Jun, Hua Che and Hua Chang.

古文：颐嗣，官至长乐内史。
现代文：华颐继嗣，官至长乐内史。
English: Heir of Hua Xi, official of Changle History.

古文：暢有才思，所著文章数万言。
现代文：华畅才思敏捷，所写文章敷万言。
English: Brilliant and quick-witted, his articles are full of words.

古文：遭寇乱，避难荆州，为贼所害，时年四十。
现代文：遭遇战乱，避难荆州，被贼杀害，年仅四十。
English: Encountered war, took refuge in Jingzhou, was killed by thieves, only forty years old.

古文：石鉴，字林伯，乐陵厌次人也。
现代文：石鉴，字林伯，是乐陵厌次人。
English: Shi Jian, the character Lin Bo, is the second most popular.

古文：出自寒素，雅志公亮。
现代文：出身寒门，志趣高雅，处事公正。
English: He comes from a humble background, has a high sense of ethics, and is fair in his dealings.

古文：仕魏，历尚书郎、侍御史、尚书左丞、御史中丞，多所纠正，朝廷惮之，出为并州刺史、假节、护匈奴中郎将。
现代文：在魏做官时，历任尚书郎、侍御史、尚书左丞、御史中丞，对时政人事多有纠正，皇帝都怕他，出任并州刺史、假节、护匈奴中郎将。
English: When he was an official in the Wei Dynasty, the successors of Shang Shuro, Samurai Goshi, Shang Shuro Zu Rong, and Goshi Zhong Rong mostly corrected the current political personnel, and the emperor was afraid of him, and he served as the middle general of the state stabbing history, false festival, and protection of the Xiongnu.

古文：武帝受禅，封堂阳子。
现代文：武帝接受魏帝禅让，封石鉴为堂阳子。
English: Emperor Wu accepted Emperor Wei's offer of Zen, and Fuxi Jian became Doyang's son.

古文：入为司隶校尉，转尚书。
现代文：召入任司隶校尉，改任尚书。
English: He was called up to the rank of captain of the division, and was reassigned to the post of secretary.

古文：时秦、凉为虏所败，遣鉴都督陇右诸军事，坐论功虚伪免官。
现代文：造时秦、凉被异族打败，派石鉴都督陇右诸军事，因虚报战功被免官。
English: When the Qin and Liang dynasties were defeated by an alien race, he sent the governor of Shijiazhuang to subdue the military, and was dismissed from his post for falsely reporting his military exploits.

古文：后为镇南将军、豫州刺史，坐讨吴贼虚张首级。
现代文：后任镇南将军、豫州刺史，因讨吴时虚报杀敌人数被治罪。
English: The next Zhenan general, Yuzhou Zhishi, was punished for criticizing Wu for falsely reporting the number of enemy killed.

古文：诏曰： 昔云中守魏尚以斩首不实受刑，武牙将军田顺以诈增虏获自杀，诬罔败法，古今所疾。
现代文：诏书说： 从前云中守魏尚以斩首人数不对被治罪，武牙将军田顺以多报俘虏人数而自杀，欺诈坏法，古今所痛恨。
English: The edict said: In the past, Wei Shang, the governor of Yunnan Province, was punished for not reporting the number of beheadings, and Tian Shun, the general of Wuga Province, committed suicide for over-reporting the number of captives. This was a bad method of deception and was hated by all ages.

古文：鉴备大臣，吾所取信。
现代文：石鉴身为大臣，我很信任他。
English: As a minister, I trust him very much.

古文：往者西事，公欺朝廷，以败为得，竟不推究。
现代文：过去西边战事，公然欺骗朝廷，以败报功，最后未追究。
English: In the past, when the Western Front was at war, he openly deceived the imperial court and took credit for defeats, but in the end he was not investigated.

古文：中间黜免未久，寻复授用，冀能补过，而乃与下同诈。
现代文：期间免官不久，再次启用，希望能将功补过，但仍与部下共同欺诈。
English: During the period of dismissal, he was reinstated shortly afterwards, hoping to make amends, but he still committed fraud together with his subordinates.

古文：所谓大臣，义得尔乎！
现代文：作为大臣，情义何在!
English: As a minister, what's the point!

古文：有司奏是也，顾未忍耳。
现代文：有关部门上奏是对的，回头想想又不忍心。
English: The relevant departments were right to raise the issue. Looking back, I can't bear to do it.

古文：今遣归田里，终身不得复用，勿削爵土也。 
现代文：现在遣返回家，终身不得再用，但不要剥夺爵位和封地。 
English: Repatriate them home now. They may not be used again for life, but do not deprive them of their titles and fiefs.

古文：久之，拜光禄勋，复为司隶校尉，稍加特进，迁右光禄大夫、开府，领司徒。
现代文：很久以后，任光禄勋，再任司隶校尉，不久加特进，升任右光禄大夫、开府，领司徒。
English: After a long time, he was appointed as Guanglu Xun, and then as Sili lieutenant, and soon as Gatjin, he was promoted to Uguanglu doctor, Kaifu, and leader of Sito.

古文：前代三公册拜，皆设小会，所以崇宰辅之制也。
现代文：前代册封三公，都要设宴会，以显示三公的重要。
English: The previous generation of the three princes should have a banquet to show the importance of the three princes.

古文：自魏末已后，废不复行。
现代文：自魏末以后，不再推行。
English: After the end of the Wei Dynasty, it was no longer implemented.

古文：至鉴，有诏令会，遂以为常。
现代文：到石鉴时，韶令恢复，于是成为制度。
English: At the time of Shijian, the imperial edict was restored, and thus became a system.

古文：太康末，拜司空，领太子太傅。
现代文：太康末年，任司空，领太子太傅。
English: At the end of Taikang's life, he was appointed as the second-in-command to the crown prince Taifu.

古文：武帝崩，鉴与中护军张劭监统山陵。
现代文：武帝去世，石鉴与中护军张劭监管陵墓。
English: Emperor Wu died, and Shi Jian and the middle guard Zhang Ye supervised the mausoleum.

古文：时大司马、汝南王亮为太傅杨骏所疑，不敢临丧，出营城外。
现代文：当时大司马、汝南王司马亮被太傅杨骏怀疑，不敢前去吊唁，在城外驻扎。
English: At that time, Grand Sima and Runnan Wang Sima Liang were suspected by Taifu Yang Hui, and they did not dare to go to offer condolences and stationed outside the city.

古文：时有告亮欲举兵讨骏，骏大惧，白太后令帝为手诏，诏鉴及张劭使率陵兵讨亮。
现代文：这时有人报告说司马亮想出兵讨伐杨骏，杨骏很害怕，让太后命令皇帝亲自写韶书，令石鉴和张劭率守陵兵讨伐司马亮。
English: At this time, someone reported that Sima Liang wanted to send soldiers to fight against Yang Hui. Yang Hui was very afraid and asked the empress dowager to order the emperor to personally write an imperial edict and order Shi Jian and Zhang Ye to lead the soldiers guarding the tomb to fight against Sima Liang.

古文：劭，骏甥也，便率所领催鉴速发，鉴以为不然，保持之，遣人密觇视亮，已别道还许昌，于是骏止，论者称之。
现代文：张劭是杨骏的外甥，便率兵催石鉴快发兵，石鉴认为不会这样，按兵不动，派人窥视司马亮，司马亮已从另外一条道回许昌，杨骏便停止行动，议论的人都称赞石鉴。
English: Zhang Xuan was Yang Xuan's nephew, so he led an army to urge Shijian to quickly dispatch an army. Shijian thought that this would not be the case, so he ordered the soldiers not to move, and sent someone to spy on Sima Liang. Sima Liang had already returned to Xu Chang from another road, Yang Xuan then stopped the action, and everyone who talked about it praised Shijian.

古文：山陵讫，封昌安县侯。
现代文：守陵完毕，封昌安县侯。
English: After guarding the mausoleum, the feudal lord of Chang'an County passed away.

古文：元康初，为太尉。
现代文：元康初年，任太尉。
English: In the first year of Motoyasu, he was promoted to second lieutenant.

古文：年八十余，克壮慷慨，自遇若少年，时人美之。
现代文：八十多岁，慷慨激昂，把自己当成少年：人们都赞美他。
English: Eighty-plus years old, impassioned, thinks of himself as a teenager: people are praising him.

古文：寻薨，谥曰元。
现代文：不久去世，谧号元。
English: He died soon after, with the posthumous name Yuan.

古文：子陋，字处贱，袭封，历屯骑校尉。
现代文：儿子石陋字处贱，继承封爵，担任屯骑校尉。
English: Ishihara's son, Shuchika Ishihara, inherited the title of knight and served as a cadet.

古文：温羡，字长卿，太原祁人，汉护羌校尉序之后也。
现代文：温羡，字长卿，是太原祁人，汉护羌校尉温序的后代。
English: Wen Xian, Zi Changqing, is a descendant of Taiyuan Xianren, Han Xunjun's lieutenant.

古文：祖恢，魏扬州刺史。
现代文：祖父温恢，魏时任扬州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Wen Huan, was Yangzhou's chief historian in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：父恭，济南太守。
现代文：父亲温恭，任济南太守。
English: His father, Wen Qiong, was appointed governor of Jinan.

古文：兄弟六人并知名于世，号曰 六龙 。
现代文：兄弟六人同闻名于世，号称 六龙 。
English: The six brothers are famous all over the world, known as the six dragons.

古文：羡少以朗寤见称，齐王攸辟为掾，迁尚书郎。
现代文：温羡年少时以聪明闻名，齐王司马攸征用为属官，升任尚书郎。
English: When he was young, Wen En was famous for his cleverness. Qi Wang Sima You was conscripted as a subordinate officer and promoted to Shang Shuro.

古文：惠帝即位，拜豫州刺史，入为散骑常侍，累迁尚书。
现代文：惠帝即位，任豫州刺史，召入任散骑常侍，多次升官任尚书。
English: When Emperor Hui ascended the throne, he was appointed as the Historian of Yuzhou, was called in as the Knight of the Horse, and was promoted several times to the post of the Secretary of State.

古文：及齐王冏辅政，以羡攸之故吏，意特亲之，转吏部尚书。
现代文：等到齐王司马间辅政，因温羡是司马攸的旧部，特别亲近他，改任吏部尚书。
English: Wait until the king of Qi, Sima Yue's assistant, because Wen En is Sima Yue's old department, especially close to him, he was transferred to the administrative department of Shangshu.

古文：先是，张华被诛，冏建议欲复其官爵。
现代文：原先张华被杀，冏建议恢复他的官爵。
English: Originally, Zhang Hua was killed, and Zou proposed to restore his title.

古文：论者或以为非，羡驳之曰： 自天子已下，争臣各有差，不得归罪于一人也。
现代文：有人提出异议，湿羡反驳道： 白天子以下，谏官各有过失，不能归罪于一人。
English: Someone raised an objection, and Mo Enjun retorted: Below Bai Tianzi, each eunuch has made mistakes, and they cannot be blamed on one person.

古文：故晏子曰： 为已死亡，非其亲昵，谁能任之？ 
现代文：所以垒王说： 为己死亡，不是他亲近的人，谁能承担? 
English: So the king said, "Who can bear the death of someone who is not close to him?

古文：里克之杀二庶，陈乞之立阳生，汉朝之诛诸吕，皆积年之后乃得立事。
现代文：里克杀庶子二人，陈乞立阳生，汉朝杀吕氏，都是多年后才能立事。
English: Rick killed two of his illegitimate children, Chen Qi killed Yang Sheng, and the Han Dynasty killed Lv Shi, all of which took many years to come to fruition.

古文：未有事主见存，而得行其志于数月之内者也。
现代文：没有事主还活着，而能在数月之内为所欲为的。
English: No matter that the perpetrator is still alive and will be free to do as he pleases in a few months.

古文：式乾之会，张华独谏。
现代文：式干殿之会，独有张华进谏。
English: The meeting of Shikiganden, starring Zhang Hua Jinjun.

古文：上宰不和，不能承风赞善，望其指麾从命，不亦难乎！
现代文：宰相不和，不能顺势扬善，指望张华指挥他们紧跟，不也是很难的吗!
English: If the prime ministers do not get along, it is not possible to carry the momentum forward, and it is difficult to expect Zhang Hua to lead them closely!

古文：况今皇后谮害其子，内难不预，礼非所在。
现代文：况且现在皇后衹是陷害太子，并没参预内难，于礼不通。
English: Moreover, now the Empress Dowager is a framed prince, and did not anticipate the internal difficulties, and does not understand the etiquette.

古文：且后体齐于帝，尊同皇极，罪在枉子，事不为逆，义非所讨。
现代文：而且皇后和皇帝同为一体，尊同皇帝，罪在陷害太子，不算谋反，按礼不应讨伐。
English: Moreover, the empress and the emperor are one and the same, respect and the emperor, the crime is to frame the prince, not to rebel, according to etiquette should not fight.

古文：今以华不能废枉子之后，与赵盾不讨杀君之贼同，而贬责之，于义不经通也。 
现代文：现在把张华不能废掉陷害太子的皇后，舆赵盾不讨伐杀害国君的贼等同，而贬低谴责他，是于理义不通。 
English: It is unreasonable to equate Zhang Hua's failure to depose the empress who framed the crown prince with Zhao Dun's failure to fight the thieves who killed the sovereign, and to disparage and condemn him.

古文：华竟得追复爵位。
现代文：张华最终得以恢复爵位。
English: Zhang Hua was eventually reinstated.

古文：其后以从驾讨成都王颖有勋，封大陵县公，邑千八百户。
现代文：后来以从驾讨伐成都王司马颖有功，封大陵县公，食邑一千八百户。
English: Later, Wang Sima Ying, who made a great contribution to the conquest of Chengdu, was made the governor of Daling County, with 1,800 households in the county.

古文：出为冀州刺史，加后将军，范阳王虓败于许昌也，自牧冀州，羡乃避之。
现代文：出任冀州刺史，加后将军。范阳王司马娆兵败许昌，自己统管冀州，温羡避开他。
English: Fan Yang Wang Simakun defeated Xu Chang and took charge of Jizhou, but Wen Zhen avoided him.

古文：惠帝之幸长安，以羡为中书令，不就。
现代文：惠帝到长安，以温羡为中书令，他不去。
English: When Hui Di went to Chang'an, he did not go because he regarded Wen Qian as the second in command.

古文：及帝还洛阳，征为中书监，加散骑常侍。
现代文：惠帝回洛阳，征召为中书监，加散骑常侍。
English: Hui Di returned to Luoyang and was conscripted as a middle school librarian, as well as a non-commissioned officer.

古文：未拜，会帝崩。怀帝即位，迁左光禄大夫、开府，领司徒。论者佥谓为速。
现代文：还没任命，惠帝去世，怀帝即位，任左光禄大夫、开府，领司徒，人们议论他晋升太快。
English: He had not yet been appointed when Emperor Hui died and Emperor Huai ascended to the throne. He was appointed as the doctor of Zuo Guanglu, the head of the government, and the leader of the magistrates. People said that his promotion was too fast.

古文：在位未几，病卒，赠司徒，谥曰元。
现代文：在任不久病死，赠司徒，谧号元。
English: He died of illness shortly after taking office, and was given the title of sutsu and the posthumous name of Yuan.

古文：有三子：祗、允、裕。
现代文：有三个儿子：温祗、温允、温裕。
English: They had three sons: Wen Kun, Wen Yun and Wen Yu.

古文：祗字敬齐，太傅西曹掾。
现代文：湿祗字敬齐，任太傅西曹掾。
English: Mo Xizhe Zi Jingqi, Ren Taifu Xi Cao Yao.

古文：允字敬咸，太子舍人。
现代文：湿允字敬咸，任太子舍人。
English: Mo Yunzhi respected Xian, but he did not want to be crown prince.

古文：裕字敬嗣，尚武安长公主，官至左光禄大夫。
现代文：湿裕字敬嗣，娶武安长公主，官至左光禄大夫。
English: Mokuyu, who was given the title of Keishi, married the eldest princess, Buan, and rose to the position of Sakoroku-dokufu.

古文：史臣曰：晋氏中朝，承累世之资，建兼并之业，衣冠斯盛，英彦如林。
现代文：史臣曰：晋朝中期，继承了几代的功业，建立了统一大业，人才济济，贤士如林。
English: Shichen said: In the middle of the Jin Dynasty, he inherited the work of several generations and established the great cause of unification. Talents abound and sages are like a forest.

古文：此数公者，或以雅望处台槐，或以高名居保傅，自非一时之秀，亦曷能至于斯。
现代文：这几个人，或以名望处台省，或以名高而为太子师傅，不是一时之秀，何以能至于此。
English: These few people, either famous for ruling Taiwan, or famous for being the prince's teacher, are not a one-time show, how could this happen.

古文：惜其参缄于论道之辰，独善于兼济之日，良图鲠议，无足多谈。
现代文：可惜他们在论道之时保持沉默，在济世救国时独善其身，良谋直言，无可称道。
English: It is a pity that they kept silent when they were discussing the Tao, but when it came to saving the world and saving the country, they were selfless, well-planned and outspoken, which is beyond praise.

古文：然退已进贤，林叔弘推让之美；自家刑国，宣伯协恭孝之规。
现代文：然而退己进贤，林叔弘扬推让的美德；以国治家，宣伯理顺孝敬的规则。
English: However, instead of retreating into virtuousness, Lin Shuxiong promoted the virtue of concession; he was a statesman and promoted the rules of obedience and filial piety.

古文：子若之儒素为基，伟容之苦节流誉，庆垂来叶，不亦宜哉！
现代文：子若的儒者德行，伟容的守志不渝，福传来世，不也很好吗!
English: The young Confucian's virtue, the great man's unswerving determination, and the blessing of the afterlife, are not they also very good!

古文：石鉴以公亮升，温羡以明寤显，属于危乱，不陨其名。
现代文：石鉴以公正亮直晋升，温羡以贤明显赫，正值危乱，不失其名。
English: Shi Jian was promoted with fairness and straightforwardness, Wen Zhen was promoted with obvious virtue, and was at the peak of crisis and turmoil, which did not lose its reputation.

古文：岁寒见松柏之后凋，斯人之谓矣。
现代文：岁寒知松柏之挺拔，说的就是这些人。
English: It is these people who speak of the stiffness of the pine and cypress trees in the winter.

古文：赞曰：让矣密陵，孝哉广陆。
现代文：赞曰：让矣密陵，孝哉广陆。
English: Zang said, "Let Miling go, and Guanglu stay."

古文：钦既博雅，表亦贞肃。
现代文：钦既博雅，表亦贞肃。
English: The chin is both elegant and refined, and the face is also chaste.

古文：鉴绩克宣，温声载穆。
现代文：互鉴好胜，过董肃穆。
English: Mutual learning is a win-win situation.

古文：同锵玉振，争芬兰郁。
现代文：共振玉声，竞相芬芳。
English: Resonant tones, competing fragrances.

