古文：芝竹芝楼阙芝天尊芝紫芝参成芝夜光芝隐晨芝凤脑芝
现代文：芝竹芝楼阙芝天尊芝紫芝参成芝夜光芝隐晨芝凤脑芝
English: Bamboo Grass Grass Grass Grass Grass Grass Grass Grass Grass Grass Grass Grass Grass Grass Grass Grass Grass Grass

古文：白符芝五德芝石桂芝滴芝木芝萤火芝肉芝小人芝地下肉芝
现代文：白符芝五德芝石桂芝滴芝木芝萤火芝肉芝小人芝地下肉芝
English: White rune, five virtue, stone, cinnamon, drip, wood, firefly, meat, dwarf, underground,

古文：异菌石菌竹肉毒菌
现代文：异菌石菌竹肉毒菌
English: Heterotrophic Bacteroides Bamboo-flesh Poisonous Bacteria

古文：苔叙苔地钱蔓金苔如苣苔石发瓦松瓦松赋
现代文：苔叙苔地钱蔓金苔如苣苔石发瓦松瓦松赋
English: moss moss moss moss moss moss moss moss moss

古文：芝
现代文：芝
English: Lawn

古文：竹芝
现代文：竹芝
English: Bamboo Grass

古文：梁简文延香阁，大同十年，竹林吐芝。长八寸，头盖似鸡头实，黑色。
现代文：梁简文帝的延香阁。大同十年的时候，竹林里长出灵芝草，长八寸，头盖像乳房，黑色。
English: Yan Xiangge of Emperor Liang Jianwen. When Datong was ten years old, Ganoderma lucidum grass grew in the bamboo forest, eight inches long, head like a breast, black.

古文：其柄似藕柄，内通干空。
现代文：它的柄像荷藕的柄，柄内是空通的。
English: Its handle is like the handle of a lotus, and the handle is hollow.

古文：皮质皆纯白，根下微红。
现代文：柄的皮质全是纯白色，根下略微发红。
English: The entire cortex of the stalk is pure white, with a slight reddish tinge at the base.

古文：鸡头实处似竹节，脱之又得脱也。
现代文：长 乳房 的地方像一个竹节，剥下一层还能剥下另一层。
English: The place of the long breast is like a bamboo knot, peel off one layer and you can peel off another layer.

古文：自节处别生一重，如结网罗，四面，周可五六寸，圆绕周匝，以罩柄上。
现代文：从节处另长出一重，像结成的网罗，四面都有，周长有五六寸，圆转环绕，罩在柄上。
English: From the joint, another layer grows, like a knotted net, on all four sides, with a circumference of five or six inches, circled around, and covered on the handle.

古文：相远不相著也。
现代文：它与柄的距离较远，并不附着在柄上。
English: It is far away from the handle and is not attached to the handle.

古文：其似结网众自，轻巧可爱。
现代文：它像结网的许多网眼，轻巧可爱。
English: It is like many meshes of a net, light and lovely.

古文：其与柄皆得相脱。
现代文：它和柄都能互相脱离。
English: Both it and the handle can be detached from each other.

古文：验仙书，与威喜芝相类。
现代文：查验《仙书》，这种灵芝与威喜芝相类似。
English: According to the "Book of Immortals," this Ganoderma lucidum is similar to the Weixi mushroom.

古文：楼阙芝
现代文：楼阙芝
English: Lou Yanzhi

古文：隋大业中，东都永康门内会昌门东，生芝草百二十茎，散在地，周十步许。
现代文：隋大业年间，东都的永康门内，会昌门东，长出一百二十棵灵芝草。这些灵芝草就那么散生在地上，大约十步方圆的一块地方。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, in the Yongkang Gate of Dongdu, east of Huichang Gate, one hundred and twenty Ganoderma lucidum plants grew up. These Ganoderma lucidum plants were scattered on the ground, about ten paces square.

古文：紫茎白头，或白茎黑头。
现代文：它们都是紫茎白头，有的是白茎黑头。
English: They are all purple-stemmed whiteheads, some are white-stemmed blackheads.

古文：或有枝，或无枝。
现代文：有的有枝，有的无枝。
English: Some with branches, some without.

古文：亦有三枝，如古 出 字者。
现代文：有的三枝，像古文字 出 那样。
English: Some of them have three branches, like the one from the Old Testament.

古文：地内根并如线，大道相连著。
现代文：埋在地下的根，像细线一样，在大道的下边互相牵连着。
English: Buried roots, like thin threads, weave in and out of each other at the foot of the avenue.

古文：乾阳殿东，东上阁门槐树上，生芝九茎，共本相扶而生。
现代文：乾阳殿东，东上阁门的槐树上，长出九棵灵芝。九棵灵芝长在一块木上，互相扶持着。
English: Nine reishi mushrooms grow on the eucalyptus tree at the east of the Qianyang Palace and the east gate of the pavilion. Nine reishi mushrooms grow on a piece of wood and support each other.

古文：中茎最长，两边八茎，相次而短，有如树阙。甚洁白。
现代文：中间一棵最高，其它八棵依次变矮，很像树阙，特别洁白。
English: The middle one is the tallest, and the other eight trees become shorter in turn, much like tree ferns, especially white.

古文：武贲郎将段文操留守，图画表奏。
现代文：武贲郎将段文操留守在那里，并画图上表禀奏了皇上。
English: Takehiro left Duanwenxu there, and played the emperor on the table on the drawing.

古文：天尊芝
现代文：天尊芝
English: Tian Zunzhi

古文：唐天宝初，临川郡人李嘉，所居柱上生芝草，形类天尊。
现代文：唐天宝年初，临川郡人李嘉家里的一根柱子上长出一棵灵芝，样子像天尊。
English: At the beginning of Tang Tianbao, a reishi mushroom grew on a pillar in the home of Li Jia, a resident of Linchuan County. It looked like a heavenly god.

古文：太守张景佚截献之。
现代文：太守张景佚把它截下来献入宫中。
English: Grand Prince Zhang Jinglian cut it down and presented it to the palace.

古文：紫芝
现代文：紫芝
English: Purple grass grows

古文：唐大历八年，卢州庐江县紫芝生，高一丈五尺，芝类至多。
现代文：唐朝大历八年，卢州庐江县生长紫灵芝，高一丈五尺，类似的灵芝也很多。
English: In the eighth year of the Tang Dynasty, purple reishi mushrooms grew in Luzhou's Lijiang County, reaching a height of five feet. There are many similar reishi mushrooms.

古文：参成芝
现代文：参成芝
English: Sangcheng Zhi

古文：参成芝，断而可续。
现代文：有一种灵芝草叫 参成芝 ，弄断以后可以再接上。
English: There is a kind of Ganoderma called Ganoderma lucidum, which can be reattached after being broken.

古文：夜光芝
现代文：夜光芝
English: Noctilucent turf

古文：夜光芝，一株九实。
现代文：夜光芝，一棵灵芝上结出九颗果实。
English: Noctiluca, a lingzhi tree, produces nine fruits.

古文：实坠地如七寸镜。
现代文：果实落到地上，就像一面七寸镜。
English: The fruit fell to the ground like a seven-inch mirror.

古文：夜视如牛目。
现代文：夜间看它，它像牛眼睛一样明亮。
English: Look at it at night, it's as bright as a cow's eye.

古文：茅君种于句曲山。
现代文：茅君在名曲山上种植它。
English: Mao Jun grows it on Meiqu Mountain.

古文：隐晨芝
现代文：隐晨芝
English: Yin Chen Zhi

古文：隐晨，状如斗，以星为节，以茎为网。
现代文：有一种名叫 隐晨 的灵芝草，样子像斗，用星形成节，用茎织成网。
English: There is a kind of Ganoderma lucidum called "Ming Chen," which looks like a bucket, uses star-forming knots, and weaves a net with its stem.

古文：凤脑芝
现代文：凤脑芝
English: Fenugreek

古文：《仙经》言，穿地六尺，以环宝一枚种之，灌以黄水五合，以土坚筑之。
现代文：《仙经》上说，在地上挖六尺深，把一枚环宝种到里边，浇上五盒黄水，用土牢固地修筑一下。
English: "The Immaculate Conception" says, dig six feet deep into the ground, plant a ring treasure inside, pour five boxes of yellow water, and use the soil to build it firmly.

古文：三年，生苗如匏，实如桃，五色。
现代文：三年后生长出一种东西来，苗像匏，果如桃，五色。
English: Three years later, something grew out of it. The seedling looked like a sprout, the fruit like a peach, and it had five colors.

古文：名凤脑芝。食其实，唾地为凤，乘升太极。
现代文：有人给它起名叫 凤脑芝 ，吃了它的果实，吐口唾沫就能变成凤凰，骑着凤凰便可升上太极。
English: Some people call it "Phoenix Brain Mushroom," and if you eat its fruit and spit, you can turn into a phoenix. If you ride a phoenix, you can ascend to the Taiji.

古文：白符芝
现代文：白符芝
English: White fenugreek

古文：白符芝，大雪而白华。
现代文：有一种叫做 白符芝 的灵芝草，生在大雪中而且开白花。
English: There is a kind of Ganoderma called Bai Fuzhi, which grows in heavy snow and has white flowers.

古文：五德芝
现代文：五德芝
English: Wu Dezhi

古文：五德芝，如车马。
现代文：五德芝形状好像车马。
English: Wudeshi is shaped like a chariot and horse.

古文：石桂芝
现代文：石桂芝
English: Shi Guizhi

古文：石桂芝，生山石穴中，似桂树而实石也。高如大绞尺，光明而味辛，有枝条。
现代文：石桂芝，生长在山石洞穴之中，就像桂树上结出了石头果实，像大绞尺那么高，能发光，味道辣，还长有枝条。
English: Stone cinnamon, growing in a mountain cave, is like a stone fruit on a cinnamon tree. It is as tall as a large winch, can emit light, tastes spicy, and still has branches.

古文：捣服之，一斤得千岁也。滴芝
现代文：把它捣碎服下，服一斤便可活一千岁。滴芝
English: If you mash it and drink it, you can live for a thousand years with just one kilo.

古文：少室石户中，更有深谷，不可得过。
现代文：少室山的一个石洞中，还有更深的山谷，没法过得去。
English: In a stone cave on Mt. Shomuro, there is a deeper valley, which is impossible to pass.

古文：以石投谷中，半日犹闻其声也。
现代文：把石头投入谷中，老半天还能听到它的声音。
English: If you throw a stone into a valley, you can still hear its sound for a long time.

古文：去户外十余丈，有石柱，柱上有偃盖石，南度径可一丈许。
现代文：离洞口十几丈以外的地方，有一根石柱，柱上有一块仰卧的盖石，量南面的径长估计能有一丈左右。
English: There is a stone pillar more than ten meters away from the mouth of the cave. There is a supine capstone on the pillar. The diameter of the south face can be estimated to be about one meter.

古文：望之，蜜芝从石上随石偃盖中，良久，辄有一滴，有似雨屋后之余漏，时时一落耳。
现代文：望去，蜜芝从石上滴落到在石仰盖中。很久，就有一滴，像雨后漏屋的余漏，时不时地一落。
English: Looking out, honeydew drips from the stone into the stone roof. For a long time, there is a drop, like the leakage of a leaky house after rain, falling from time to time.

古文：然蜜芝堕不息，而偃盖亦终滴也。
现代文：然而蜜芝不息地滴落，那仰盖到底也因为装不下而滴落了。
English: However, the nectar kept dripping down, and in the end, the back cover also dripped down because it couldn't fit.

古文：户上刻石为科斗字，曰： 得服石蜜芝一斗者，寿万岁。 
现代文：洞穴上方的石头上刻着字，是蝌蚪文，说： 能服用石蜜芝一斗的，可以活一万岁。 
English: On the stone above the cave, there is an inscription carved by a crocodile, saying: "He who can take a bucket of stone honey can live for ten thousand years."

古文：诸道士共思惟其处，不可得往。
现代文：道士们都在想过去取石蜜芝的办法，可谁也去不了。
English: The Taoists are all thinking about how to go and get the stone honey mushroom, but no one can go.

古文：唯当以碗器置劲竹木端，以承取之。然竟未有能为之者。
现代文：只可能把碗一类的东西绑在极长极结实的竹竿木杆的一端，伸过去接一点，但是到底没有办得到的。
English: It was only possible to tie something like a bowl to one end of a very long, very strong bamboo pole, reach over and connect it, but it was impossible.

古文：按此户上刻题如此，前世必已有之者也。
现代文：从洞穴上边的石刻题字看，一定在很早以前就已经有能做得到的。
English: Judging by the stone inscription on the upper side of the cave, it must have been possible a long time ago.

古文：木芝
现代文：木芝
English: Wood turf

古文：木芝者，松柏脂沦地千岁，化为茯苓；万岁，其上生小木，状似莲花，名曰木威喜芝。
现代文：木芝，是松柏的脂滴落到地上一千年后，化为茯苓；一万年后，茯苓上长出小树木，样子像莲花，名字叫 木威喜芝 。
English: After a thousand years, the sap drips from the cedar and turns into reeds. Ten thousand years later, small trees grow on the reeds. They look like lotus flowers and are called Mu Wei Xizhi.

古文：夜视有光，持之甚滑。
现代文：木威喜芝晚上看有光，用手拿很光滑。
English: Mu Wei Xizhi looks shiny in the evening, and it is very smooth to hold by hand.

古文：烧之不焦。
现代文：烧它不能把它烧焦。
English: You can't singe it by burning it.

古文：带之辟兵。
现代文：把它带在身上，可避兵匪之灾。
English: If you wear it, you can avoid the scourge of bandits.

古文：以带鸡，而杂以鸡十二头笼之，去其处十二步，射十二箭，他鸡皆伤，带威喜芝者，终不伤也。
现代文：把它带到鸡身上，把这只鸡与其它十一只鸡一起装进一个笼子里，离开十二步，向鸡笼射十二箭，其它的鸡全都射伤，这只带木芝的却始终不伤。
English: He took it to the chicken, put the chicken in a cage with eleven other chickens, walked twelve paces away, shot twelve arrows into the cage, and all the other chickens were wounded, but the one with the woodlouse was never wounded.

古文：萤火芝
现代文：萤火芝
English: Firefly Grass

古文：良常山有萤火芝，其实是草，大如豆。
现代文：良常山有一种灵芝叫 萤火芝 ，它的果实是一种草，有豆子那么大。
English: There is a kind of Ganoderma lucidum called "Firefly" in Liangzhang Mountain, and its fruit is a grass the size of a bean.

古文：紫花，夜视有光。
现代文：开紫色花，夜里看它有光。
English: Purple flowers bloom, and at night you can see it glowing.

古文：食一枚，中心一孔明。
现代文：吃一枚，内心的一孔透明。
English: Eat one, and a hole in your heart will become transparent.

古文：食至七，心七窍洞澈。
现代文：吃到七枚，心和七窍全都洞澈明亮。
English: After eating up to seven pieces, the heart and the seven points are all clear and bright.

古文：可以夜书。肉芝
现代文：夜间写字，可以用萤火芝照明。肉芝
English: When writing at night, you can use firefly grass for illumination.

古文：昔有人泊渚登岸，忽见芦苇间，有十余昆仑偃卧，手足皆动。
现代文：从前有一个人乘船来到一个小岛登岸，忽然间发现芦苇丛中有十几个黑皮肤的人仰卧在那里，手脚都会动。
English: Once upon a time, a man came by boat to a small island to land, and suddenly found a dozen dark-skinned people lying on their backs in the reeds, moving their hands and feet.

古文：惊报舟人。
现代文：他大吃一惊，急忙告诉了别的乘船人。
English: Shocked, he rushed to tell the other passengers.

古文：舟人有尝行海中者识之，菌也。
现代文：乘船的人当中，有的曾经在海上航行过，认识这东西，是一种菌。
English: Some of the people on the boat had sailed on the sea and knew this thing, it was a fungus.

古文：往视之，首皆连地。
现代文：过去细看，见那东西头全连着地。
English: I went over to take a closer look and saw that the whole thing had landed on its head.

古文：割取食之，菌但无七窍。
现代文：于是就割取面食之。它只是没有七窍，太像人了。
English: So they cut out the pasta. It just didn't have the seven points, it was too human-like.

古文：《抱朴子》云： 肉芝如人形，产于地。 
现代文：《抱朴子》说的： 肉芝像人的身形，从土地上长出。 
English: "Embrace Puxi" said: "Nutmeg is like a human figure, growing out of the land.

古文：亦此类也。何足怪哉？
现代文：也是这一类东西，有什么可怪的呢？
English: It's the same sort of thing, what's so strange about it?

古文：小人芝
现代文：小人芝
English: The Little Mermaid

古文：或山中见小人，乘车马，长七八寸者，肉芝也。
现代文：有的人在山中看见一种小人，乘坐着车马，有七八寸高，那是一种肉灵芝草。
English: Some people have seen a kind of dwarf in the mountains, riding a chariot horse, seven or eight inches high, it is a fleshy grass.

古文：取服芝，即仙矣。
现代文：把它弄来服下，立即就成仙。
English: Bring it under control and it will immediately become immortal.

古文：地下肉芝
现代文：地下肉芝
English: Underground meat grinder

古文：兰陵萧逸人，亡其名。
现代文：兰陵有一个姓萧的隐士，我忘了他叫什么名字了。
English: There was a hermit surnamed Xiao in Lanling. I have forgotten his name.

古文：尝举进士下第，遂焚其书，隐居潭水上，从道士学神仙。
现代文：他曾经考进士没有考中，一气之下，就把书全都烧了，隐居到潭水之上，跟着道士学成仙之道。
English: He once failed the entrance examination for novices, and in a fit of rage, he burned all his books, went into seclusion above a pool of water, and learned the way to immortality from a Taoist.

古文：因绝粒吸气，每旦屈伸支体，冀延其寿。
现代文：于是他就不吃粮食，只吸空气，每天早晨起来屈伸肢体，希望延长寿命。
English: So he stopped eating food and only breathed air, getting up every morning to stretch his limbs in the hope of prolonging his life.

古文：积十年余，发尽白，色枯而背偻，齿有堕者。
现代文：十几年之后，他的头发全白了，脸色枯干，背也驼了，牙齿也有掉的。
English: A dozen years later, his hair is completely white, his face is withered, his back is hunched, and his teeth are gone.

古文：一旦引镜自视，勃然发怒，且曰： 吾弃声利，隐身田野间，绝粒吸气，冀得长生。
现代文：一天早上他照了一下镜子，立刻就勃然大怒，并且说道： 我放弃了名利，隐身在田野之间，只吸气不吃粮，希望能够长生不老。
English: One morning he looked in the mirror and immediately flew into a rage, saying: I have renounced fame and fortune, hidden myself among the fields, only inhaling and not eating food, hoping to live forever.

古文：今亦衰瘠如是，岂我之心哉？ 
现代文：现在竟衰老到这种程度，哪是我的心愿哪！ 
English: Now I am aging to such an extent, what is my wish!

古文：即还居邺下，学商人逐什一之利。
现代文：于是他马上还居邺下，跟商人学着追逐那十分之一的小利。
English: So he immediately became a subordinate, learning to chase the small profit of one-tenth with the merchant.

古文：凡数年，资用大饶，为富家。
现代文：共几年，他家的资用就多起来，成为富足人家。
English: In just a few years, his family's wealth increased and they became very wealthy.

古文：后因治园屋，发地得物，状类人手，肥而且润，色微红。
现代文：后来由于建宅院，挖地挖出一个东西来，这东西样子很像人的一只手，肥厚而且润滑，色微红。
English: Later, as a result of the construction of the courtyard, something was dug up from the ground. This thing looked very much like a human hand, thick and lubricated, with a reddish color.

古文：逸人得之惊曰： 岂非祸之芽？
现代文：他看见了这东西之后惊诧地说： 莫非这是祸事的先兆？
English: When he saw it, he was surprised and said, "Isn't this a sign of disaster?"

古文：且吾闻太岁所在，不可兴土事。脱有犯者，当有修肉出其下，固不祥也。
现代文：我听说太岁在的地方是不能动土的，如果有人违犯了，就可能挖出一块肉来，是特别不祥的事。
English: I've heard that you can't move the earth in the area where the old man is. If someone violates this, they might dig up a piece of meat, which is a particularly ominous thing.

古文：今果有，奈何？
现代文：现在果然挖出来一块肉，怎么办呢？
English: Now that a piece of meat has been dug up, what should we do?

古文：然吾闻：得肉食之，或可以免。 
现代文：但是我又听说，挖出肉来就把它吃了，或许还可以免祸。 
English: But I also heard that if you dig up the meat and eat it, you may be able to avoid disaster.

古文：于是烹而食，味甚美，食且尽。
现代文：于是他就把这块肉煮着吃了。味道很美，他全吃了。
English: So he cooked the piece of meat and ate it. It was delicious and he ate it all.

古文：自是逸人听视明，力愈壮，貌愈少。
现代文：从此，他的听觉、视觉比原先灵了，力气更大了，模样更年轻了。
English: Since then, his hearing and vision have become sharper than before, his strength has increased, and he looks younger.

古文：发之秃者，尽黰然而长矣；齿之堕者，亦骈然而生矣。
现代文：头发秃了的地方，纷纷地长出了新头发；掉了牙的地方，又长出新的牙齿。
English: Where hair was bald, new hair sprouted; where teeth were lost, new teeth sprouted.

古文：逸人默自奇异，不敢告于人。
现代文：他暗自感到奇怪，不敢告诉别人。
English: He secretly felt strange and did not dare to tell anyone.

古文：后有道士至邺下，逢逸人。惊曰： 先生尝得饵仙药乎？
现代文：后来有一个道士来到邺下，见到他便吃惊地说： 先生你吃到过仙药吗？
English: Later, a Taoist monk came to see him and said in surprise, "Sir, have you ever eaten the elixir?"

古文：何神气清晤如是？ 
现代文：为什么气色如此之好？ 
English: Why do you look so good?

古文：道士因诊其脉。
现代文：道士就给他诊脉。
English: The Taoist priest gave him a diagnosis.

古文：久之又曰： 先生尝食灵芝矣。
现代文：诊了很长时间又说： 先生你吃过灵芝。
English: After a long consultation, he said, "Sir, you have eaten reishi mushrooms.

古文：夫灵芝状类人手，肥而且润，色微红者是也。 
现代文：那灵芝样子像人的手，肥厚而且润滑，色微红。 
English: The reishi looks like a human hand, thick and greasy, with a reddish hue.

古文：逸人悟其事，以告。
现代文：他只好把怎么回事全都告诉了道士。
English: He had to tell the priest everything that had happened.

古文：道士贺曰： 先生之寿，可与龟鹤齐矣。
现代文：道士祝贺说： 先生你的寿命，可以和龟和鹤一样了。
English: The Taoist priest congratulated him and said, "Sir, your life expectancy can be the same as that of a turtle and a crane.

古文：然不宜居尘俗间，当退休山林，弃人事，神仙可致。 
现代文：但是不能居住在尘俗之间，应该休闲于山林，放弃人事纷争，就能成仙。 
English: But you can't live among the mundane, you should relax in the mountains and forests, give up personnel disputes, and you can become immortal.

古文：逸人喜而从其语，遂去。
现代文：他十分高兴，听了道士的话，就离去了。
English: He was very happy. After listening to the words of the priest, he left.

古文：竟不知所在。
现代文：到底也不知他去了哪里。
English: After Shen Tuo Sheng left, he no longer knew where he was going.

古文：异菌
现代文：异菌
English: Foreign bacteria

古文：唐开成元年春，段成式修行里思第书斋前，有枯紫荆数株蠹折，因伐之，余尺许。
现代文：唐朝开成元年春天，段成式修行里思第书斋前，有几棵枯紫荆被虫子咬折，因此就伐掉了，留下了一尺多高的树茬子。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, before the establishment of the Duancheng style of practice in the Siddi study hall, several dead bauhinia trees were bitten by insects, so they were cut down, leaving more than a foot high tree stumps.

古文：至三年秋，枯根上生一菌，大如斗，下布五足，顶黄白两晕，绿垂裙，如鹅鞴，高尺余。
现代文：至开成三年秋，枯根上生出一菌，大如斗，下边分布着五只脚，顶着黄、白两道晕，绿色垂裙，像一种叫做 鹅抱 的草，高一尺多。
English: By the autumn of the third year, a fungus grew on the withered root, large as a bucket, with five feet distributed on the underside, topped with yellow and white halo, green skirt, like a kind of grass called goose hug, more than a foot high.

古文：至冬，色变黑而死。
现代文：到了冬天，颜色变黑而死。
English: In winter, the color turns black and dies.

古文：焚之，气如茅香。
现代文：用火烧，气味像茅香。
English: Burned with fire, it smells like thatch.

古文：成式尝置香炉于枿台上念经，问僧。
现代文：段成式曾经把它放到枿台上的香炉里燃着它念经，向僧人请教这是怎么回事。
English: Duancheng once put it in an incense burner on the ring stand and burned it while chanting sutras, and asked a monk what was going on.

古文：以为善徵。
现代文：僧人认为是好征兆。
English: The monk thought it was a good omen.

古文：后览诸志怪：南齐吴郡褚思庄，素奉释氏。
现代文：后来翻看各种志怪的书籍，看到如下一则：南齐吴郡的褚思庄，一向信奉佛教。
English: Later, I looked through all kinds of strange books and saw the following one: Juxizhuang in Wuxi County, Nanqi Province, has always believed in Buddhism.

古文：眠于梁下，短柱是柟木，去地四尺余，有节。
现代文：他睡眠的梁下，有一个柟木的短柱。这短柱离地四尺，有节子。
English: Under the beam where he sleeps, there is a short pillar of birch, four feet from the ground, with knots.

古文：大明中，忽有一物如芝，生于节上，黄色鲜明，渐渐长。
现代文：大明年中，忽然从节子上长出一个像灵芝草的东西，黄色，鲜艳明亮，一天天增长。
English: In the middle of the Chinese New Year, something like Ganoderma lucidum suddenly sprouted from the stump. It was yellow, bright and shiny, and grew day by day.

古文：数日，遂成千佛状。
现代文：几天后，长成千佛状。
English: A few days later, it grew into a thousand Buddhas.

古文：面目指爪及光相衣服，莫不宛具，如金鐷隐起，摩之殊软。
现代文：脸、眼睛、手指以及衣服什么的，没有不完备的。隐起有如金鐷，用手一摸却感到很软。
English: The face, the eyes, the fingers, the clothes, everything is perfect. It looks like gold, but it feels soft to the touch.

古文：尝以春末落，落时佛形如故，但色褐耳。
现代文：曾在春末脱落。脱落时佛的形状没变，只是颜色变成褐色了。
English: It fell off at the end of spring. When it fell off, the shape of the Buddha did not change, but the color turned brown.

古文：至落时，其家贮之箱中。积五年，思庄不复住其下，亦无他显盛。
现代文：他家把它放到箱子里。过去五年，褚思庄不再在那梁下睡觉了，也没有其它显著的大事。
English: His family put it in a box, and in the past five years, Zou Shizhuang no longer sleeps under the beam, and there are no other significant events.

古文：阖门寿老：思庄父终九十七；兄年七十，健如壮年。
现代文：全家的老人多寿。褚思庄的父亲活到九十七岁；他的哥哥七十岁了，还像个中年人那么壮健。
English: All the old people in the family are long-lived. The father of Juxizhuang lived to be ninety-seven years old; his brother was seventy years old and still as robust as a middle-aged man.

古文：石菌
现代文：石菌
English: Stone fungus

古文：宋州莆田县破岗山，唐武宗二年，巨石上生菌，大如合篑，茎及盖黄白色。其下浅红。
现代文：宋州莆田县的破岗山，唐武宗二年的时候，大石头上长出菌来，大小有如合篑，茎和盖是黄色的，下边是浅红色的。
English: In the second year of Tang Wuzong's reign, there was a fungus growing on a large rock on the mountain of Baigang in Putian County, Songzhou. The size of the fungus was similar to that of an aphid, the stem and cap were yellow, and the underside was light red.

古文：尽为过僧所食。
现代文：这些菌都被路过的和尚所吃了。
English: The mushrooms were eaten by a passing monk.

古文：云：美倍诸菌。
现代文：他们说，这种石菌的味道要比其它各种菌好上好多倍。
English: They say the taste of this stone fungus is many times better than that of other types of fungi.

古文：竹肉
现代文：竹肉
English: Bamboo meat

古文：竹肉。江淮有竹肉，如弹丸，味如白鸡。
现代文：江淮一带有竹肉，长在竹节上，弹丸大小，味如白条鸡。
English: Jianghuai one has bamboo meat, grows on bamboo shoots, is the size of a projectile, and tastes like white chicken.

古文：代北又有大树鸡，如杯棬。呼为胡猕头。
现代文：代北又有大树鸡，大小如杯棬，叫做 胡猕头 。
English: In the north of the country, there is also a large tree chicken, the size of a cucumber, called Hu Shantou.

古文：卢山有石耳，性热。
现代文：卢山有石耳，性热。
English: Lu Shan has stone ears, sexual fever.

古文：毒菌
现代文：毒菌
English: Poisonous fungi

古文：江夏汉阳县出毒菌，号茹闾。
现代文：江夏汉阳县出一种毒菌，名叫 茹闾 。
English: In Hanyang County, Jiangxia Province, a kind of poisonous fungus, called rutabaga, was found.

古文：非茅搜也。
现代文：茹闾不是茅搜。
English: Zhu Xi is not Mao Zuo.

古文：每岁供进。
现代文：每年都要向宫中贡进这种毒菌。
English: Every year, a tribute of this poisonous fungus is brought to the Imperial Palace.

古文：县司常令人于田野间候之，苟有此菌，即立表示人，不敢从下风而过，避其气也。
现代文：县里常常派人在田野间察看，一旦发现有此菌，就立即立上标志向人们报警，不要从下风头通过，避开毒菌的毒气。
English: The county often sends people to inspect the fields. As soon as this bacterium is found, a sign is immediately put up to alert people. Do not pass under the spotlight and avoid the poisonous gas of the bacterium.

古文：采之日，以竹竿芟倒，遽舍竿于地，毒气入竹。
现代文：采的时候，用竹竿子把它割倒，急忙扔掉竹竿，让毒气进入竹内。
English: When harvesting, cut it down with a bamboo pole, quickly throw away the bamboo pole, and let the poison gas enter the bamboo.

古文：一时爆裂。
现代文：竹子就爆裂。
English: The bamboo burst.

古文：直候毒歇，仍以榉柳皮蒙手以取，用毡包之，亦榉柳皮重裹。
现代文：直等到毒气没了，就用榉柳皮蒙着手把它取下来，用毡子包好，再用榉柳皮重包一遍。
English: Until the poison gas is gone, use the willow bark to cover the hands to take it off, wrap it with tweezers, and then rewrap it with the willow bark.

古文：县宰封印在而进。
现代文：县令封印之后就往京城送。
English: After the sealing of the county ordinance, it will be sent to the capital.

古文：其赍致役夫，倍给其直，为其道路多为毒薰，以致头痛也。
现代文：那些进京去送的人，要成倍地给钱，因为在道上很容易被毒气薰着，薰着就头痛。
English: Those who go to Beijing to send money should pay double, because it is easy to be poisoned by poison gas on the road, causing headaches.

古文：张康随侍其父宰汉阳，备言之。
现代文：张康随着在汉阳做县令的父亲长住过汉阳，所以他说得很详备。
English: Zhang Kang lived in Hanyang for a long time with his father, who was a county magistrate in Hanyang, so he spoke in great detail.

古文：人有为野菌所毒而笑者，煎鱼椹汁服之，即愈。
现代文：人有中了野菌毒而发笑不止的，煎鱼椹汁给他服下，立刻就好。
English: If a person has been poisoned by a wild mushroom and can't stop laughing, give him a dose of fried fish sauce and he'll be fine in no time.

古文：僧光远说也。
现代文：这是和尚光远说的。
English: This was said by the monk Guangyuan.

古文：苔叙
现代文：苔叙
English: moss sorrel

古文：苔
现代文：苔
English: moss

古文：苔钱亦谓之泽葵，又名董钱草，亦呼为宣癣，南人呼为垢草。
现代文：苔钱也叫做 泽葵 ，又名 董钱草 ，也叫做 宣癣 ，南方人叫它 垢草 。
English: Moss money is also called "Zehuao," also known as "Dong Qian Cao," also known as "Xuan Yao," and the southerners call it "Wu Cao."

古文：地钱
现代文：地钱
English: Local money from

古文：地钱，叶圆茎细，有蔓，多生溪涧边。
现代文：地钱，叶是圆的，茎较细，有蔓，大多生长在溪涧的边上。
English: Local money, the leaves are round, the stem is thin, with vines, mostly growing on the edge of the creek.

古文：一曰积雪草，亦曰连钱草。
现代文：一名叫 积雪草 ，也叫 连钱草 。
English: One of them is called "Cumulus Snow Grass," also known as "Lian Qian Cao."

古文：蔓金苔
现代文：蔓金苔
English: Creeping golden moss

古文：晋梨国献蔓金苔。
现代文：晋时梨国献来了蔓金苔。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, the country of Lishu offered the golden vine.

古文：色如金，若萤火之聚，大如鸡卵。
现代文：颜色宛如金子，像许许多多的萤火虫聚集在一起，鸡蛋大小。
English: The color is like gold, like a huge number of fireflies gathered together, the size of an egg.

古文：投之水中，蔓延波澜之上，光出照日，皆如火生水上也。
现代文：把它投入水中，它的蔓伸延到波澜之上，日光一照，都像火苗在水上燃烧。
English: Throw it into the water, its tendrils stretch out over the waves, and when the sun shines, it burns like a flame on the water.

古文：乃于宫中穿池，广百步，时时观此苔，以乐宫人。
现代文：于是就在宫中挖了一个一百步宽的大水池放养此苔，天天观看，用来逗乐宫中美人。
English: So he dug a large pond a hundred paces wide in the palace and stocked it with this moss, watching it every day and using it to amuse the beautiful women in the palace.

古文：宫人有幸者，则以金苔赐之。
现代文：受到宠爱的美人，皇帝就把蔓金苔赐给她。
English: Beloved beauty, the emperor gave her the vine golden moss.

古文：以置漆碗中，照耀满室，名曰夜明苔。
现代文：把它放在一个漆碗里，可以照耀满屋，名叫 夜明苔 。
English: Put it in a lacquer bowl and it can light up the whole house. It's called Yamei Moss.

古文：著衣襟则如火光矣。
现代文：把它附着到衣襟上，那就像火光了。
English: Attach it to the lapel and it's like a flame.

古文：帝虑外人得之，炫惑百姓，诏使除苔塞池。
现代文：皇帝担心让外人把蔓金苔弄了去夸耀迷惑百姓，就下诏把蔓金苔除掉了，把池子填上了。
English: The emperor was worried about letting outsiders boast of having made the golden lichen to confuse the people, so he issued an edict to remove the golden lichen and fill the pool.

古文：及皇家丧乱，犹有此物。皆入胡中。
现代文：等到皇家丧乱的时候，还有这种东西，都被弄到胡人那里去了。
English: By the time of the royal death, these things, too, had been taken to the Hu people.

古文：如苣苔
现代文：如苣苔
English: Like the moss

古文：慈恩寺唐三藏院后檐楷，开成末，有苔状如古苣，布于砖上，色如蓝绿，轻软可爱。
现代文：开成年末，慈恩寺唐三藏院后檐楷上长出苔来，样子像古苣，分布在砖上，色如蓝草绿，轻软可爱。
English: At the end of the year of opening, moss grew on the back of the gatepost of the Tang Sanzang Temple of Zi'en Temple, looking like ancient reeds, distributed on the bricks, the color was like bluegrass green, soft and lovely.

古文：谈论僧义林，大和初，改葬基法师，初开冢，香气袭人。
现代文：大和年初，改葬基法师，刚打开坟墓的时候，香气袭人。
English: At the beginning of the Yamato year, when the tomb of Ji Mage was reburied, when the tomb was just opened, the aroma was overwhelming.

古文：侧卧砖台上，形如生。
现代文：基法师侧卧在砖台上，像活人一样。
English: The foundation mason lay on his side on the brick platform, like a living person.

古文：砖上苔厚二寸余，作金色，气如爇檀。
现代文：砖上苔厚二寸还多，呈金黄色，气味宛如爇檀。
English: The moss on the bricks is still more than two inches thick, is golden yellow, and smells like sandalwood.

古文：石发
现代文：石发
English: Stone hair

古文：张乘言，南中水底有草，如石发。
现代文：张乘说，南方的水底下有一种草，好像石头的头发。
English: Zhang Rong said that there is a kind of grass under the water in the south, which looks like stone hair.

古文：每月三四日始生，至八九已后可采。
现代文：每月的初三初四开始生长，到初八初九以后便可采集了。
English: They begin to grow on the third and fourth days of the month, and can be collected after the eighth and ninth days of the month.

古文：及月尽，悉烂。
现代文：等到月底，全都烂掉。
English: By the end of the month, they'll all be rotten.

古文：似随月盛衰也。
现代文：它似乎是随着月亮的盛衰而盛衰。
English: It seems to wax and wane with the moon.

古文：瓦松
现代文：瓦松
English: Vashon

古文：《广雅》： 在屋曰昔耶，在墙曰垣衣。 
现代文：《广雅》写道： 生在屋上的叫 昔耶 ，生在墙上的叫 垣衣 。
English: "Guangya" wrote: A cockroach born on a roof is called xuye, and one born on a wall is called fences.

古文：《广志》谓之兰香。
现代文：《广志》叫它 兰香 。
English: "Guangzhi" called it "Lanxiang."

古文：生于久屋之瓦。
现代文：它生在老屋的瓦上。
English: It was born on the shingles of an old house.

古文：魏明帝好之，命长安西载其瓦于洛阳，以覆屋。
现代文：魏明帝喜欢这玩艺儿，就命令把长安的瓦西运到洛阳，瓦到洛阳的屋顶上。
English: Emperor Ming of Wei liked this art and ordered that the washi tiles from Chang'an be transported to Luoyang and placed on the roofs of Luoyang.

古文：前后词人诗中，多用 昔耶 。
现代文：前前后后的词人诗中，大多使用的是 昔耶 这一名称。
English: In most of the poets' poems around the world, the name "Yesteryear" is used.

古文：梁简文帝《咏薇》曰： 缘阶覆碧绮，依檐映昔耶。 
现代文：梁简文帝《咏薇》写道： 缘阶覆碧绮，依檐映昔耶。 
English: Emperor Liang Jianwen wrote in "The Rose": "The edge of the steps is covered with turquoise, and the nestling is reminiscent of the past."

古文：或言构木上多松栽，土木气泄，则瓦生松。
现代文：有的人说，建筑上多用松木，土木之气泄露出来，就生出瓦松。
English: Some people say that pine is mostly used in construction, and when the air of civil engineering leaks out, it produces stone pine.

古文：大历中，修含元殿，有一人投状请瓦，且言瓦工唯我所能。
现代文：大历年中，修含元殿，有一个人投状请求让他为大殿盖瓦，并且说，瓦工里只有他能行，他爷爷当年就为此殿瓦瓦。
English: In the year of the great calendar, when the original hall was renovated, a man came with a petition asking him to lay tiles for the hall, and said that he was the only one who could do it, and that his grandfather had laid tiles for the hall that year.

古文：祖父时尝瓦此殿矣，众工不能服。因曰： 若有能瓦毕不生瓦松乎？ 
现代文：众瓦工不服气。于是他说： 你们瓦的瓦，能让它永不生瓦松吗？ 
English: The bricklayers were not convinced. So he said: "Can you, the bricklayers, make it so that there will never be a brick?

古文：众方服焉。
现代文：众瓦工这才服气。
English: This was enough to convince the bricklayers.

古文：又有李阿黑者，亦能治屋，布瓦如齿，间不通綖，亦无瓦松。
现代文：又有一个叫李阿黑的，也能盖房子，布瓦如齿，紧凑无间，也不长瓦松。
English: There is another one called Li Ahye, who can also build a house. The bricks are like teeth, compact, and have no gaps.

古文：《本草》： 瓦衣谓之屋游。 
现代文：《本草》： 瓦衣谓之屋游。 
English: "Honkusa": Wafers are said to be a home tour.

古文：瓦松赋
现代文：瓦松赋
English: Vasong Fu

古文：崔融《瓦松赋·序》云： 崇文馆瓦松者，产于屋溜之下。
现代文：崔融在《瓦松赋》的序中说： 崇文馆瓦松，生长在屋檐之下。
English: Cui Rong said in the preface of "Vasong Fu": Chongwen Pavilion's "Vasong" grows under the eaves.

古文：谓之木也，访山客而未详；谓之草也，验农皇而罕记。 
现代文：说它是树木吧，访问山上熟悉树木的人也问不明白；说它是草呢，查验农耕之书也不见记载。 
English: If it is said to be trees, people who visit the mountains and are familiar with trees will not understand the question; if it is said to be grass, there is no record in the inspection of agricultural books.

古文：赋云： 煌煌特秀，状金芝之产溜。
现代文：赋说： 煌煌特秀，状金芝之产溜。
English: Fu said: Brilliantly brilliant and outstanding, the product of the state of Jinzhi.

古文：历历虚悬，若星榆之种天。
现代文：历历虚悬，若星榆之种天。
English: The past hangs in the air, like the seed of a star.

古文：葩条郁毓，根祗连拳。
现代文：葩条郁毓，根祗连拳。
English: It's a long shot, but it's a long shot.

古文：间紫苔而裛露，凌碧瓦而含烟。 
现代文：问紫苔而裛露，凌碧瓦而含烟。 
English: Ask the purple moss for dew, and the lingbi tile for smoke.

古文：又曰： 惭魏宫之乌悲，恧汉殿之红莲。 
现代文：又说： 惭魏宫之乌悲，恧汉殿之红蓬。 
English: He also said, "The dark sorrow of the Wei Palace and the red canopy of the Han Palace are the same."

古文：崔公学博，无不该悉，岂不知瓦松已有著说乎？
现代文：崔公学识渊博，没有不具备不熟悉的，难道不知道已经有了关于瓦松的著说了吗？
English: Cui Gong is very knowledgeable and has no lack of unfamiliar things. Doesn't he know that there is already a book about Wassong?

