古文：武王问太公曰： 吾欲以少击众，以弱击强，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武王问太公说： 我想要以少击众，以弱击强，应该怎么办呢？ 
English: King Wu asked the Grand Duke, "What should I do if I want to beat the crowd with fewer people and beat the strong with the weak?"

古文：太公曰： 以少击众者，必以日之暮，伏于深草，要之隘路；以弱击强者，必得大国而与，邻国之助。 
现代文：太公答道： 要以少击众，就要利用日暮昏暗的时候，把军队埋伏在杂草丛生的地带，在险隘的道路上截击敌人。要以弱击强，必须有大国的支持，邻国的支援。 
English: He replied, "To defeat the enemy with fewer troops, it is necessary to take advantage of the twilight to ambush the enemy in the overgrown area and intercept the enemy on the narrow road. To defeat the enemy with fewer troops, it is necessary to have the support of a big country, the support of a neighboring country.

古文：武王曰： 我无深草，又无隘路，敌人已至，不适日暮；我无大国之与，又无邻国之助。
现代文：武王问： 如果我方没有深草地带可供设伏，又没有险隘道路可以利用，敌人大军到达时又不在日暮时分；我军也没有大国支持，也没有邻国的支援，应该怎么办呢？ 
English: King Wu asked: What should we do if we do not have a deep grassland to lay ambush, and there is no narrow road to use, and the enemy army does not arrive at dusk; our army does not have the support of a big country, nor the support of a neighboring country?

古文：为之奈何？ 太公曰： 妄张诈诱，以荧惑其将，迂其途，令过深草，远其路，令会日路，前行未渡水，后行未及舍，发我伏兵，疾击其左右，车骑扰乱其前后，敌人虽众，其将可走。
现代文：太公答道： 用虚张声势、引诱诈骗手段迷惑敌将，诱使敌人迂回前进，使其一定经过伏击地带；引诱敌人绕走远路，延误时间，使其正好在日暮之时同我交战。乘敌人先头部队尚未全部渡水，后续部队来不及宿营时，发动我伏击部队，迅速猛烈地攻击敌人的两翼，并令我战车和骑兵扰乱敌人的前后。这样，敌人虽然众多，也会被我打败。
English: The father-in-law replied, "Using bluffing, seduction and deception to confuse the enemy general, I enticed the enemy to advance in a roundabout way, so that it would definitely pass through the ambush zone; I enticed the enemy to take a long way around, delaying the time, so that it would just fight with me at dusk. When the enemy's leading troops had not yet fully crossed the water and the following troops were too late to camp, I launched my ambush troops, quickly and violently attacked the enemy's two wings, and made my chariots and cavalry disturb the enemy's front and rear. In this way, the enemy,

古文：事大国之君，下邻国之士，厚其币，卑其辞，如此，则得大国之与邻国之助矣。 
现代文：恭敬事奉大国的君主，礼遇下交邻国的贤士，多送钱财，言辞谦逊，这样就能够得到大国的支持，邻国的援助了。 
English: Respectfully serve the monarchs of the great powers, treat the wise men of the neighboring countries with courtesy, send more money and money, and speak humbly, so that you can get the support of the great powers and the assistance of the neighboring countries.

古文：武王曰： 善哉！ 
现代文：武王说： 说得真好啊！ 
English: King Wu said, "What a great way to say it!

