古文：如来释迦，即是牟尼，原系成佛之祖；老聃李耳，即是道君，乃是道教之宗。
现代文：如来佛就是释迦牟尼，本是佛教的始祖；谥号为 聃 的李耳就是老子，后来被尊为道教的始祖。
English: Buddha is Shakyamuni, originally the founder of Buddhism; Li Er, whose nickname is, is Laozi, later revered as the founder of Taoism.

古文：鹫岭、祗园，皆属佛国；交梨、火枣，尽是仙丹。
现代文： 灵鹫山 和 祗园 都是佛祖说法的地方，属于佛国； 交梨 、 火枣 全都是道家服用的仙丹。
English: Linglong Mountain and Lingyuan Garden are both places mentioned by the Buddha, and belong to the Buddha's country; the pear and jujube are all used by Taoists.

古文：沙门称释，始于晋道安；中国有佛，始于汉明帝。
现代文：僧侣开始以 释 为姓，源于东晋僧人道安；中国有佛教，开始于东汉明帝。
English: Monks began to use 释 as their surname, originating from the Eastern Jin Dynasty monk 人道安; China has Buddhism, which began with the Eastern Han Dynasty Emperor Ming.

古文：籛铿即是彭祖，八百高年；许逊原宰旌阳，一家超举。
现代文：传说中的篯铿就是封于彭城的彭祖，寿高达八百岁；东晋许逊本来是旌阳县令，得道之后全家飞升。
English: The legendary Zou is Peng Zu, sealed in Pengcheng, with a life expectancy of up to eight hundred years; Eastern Jin Xu Xun was originally the ruler of Poyang County, and the whole family soared after he was ordained.

古文：波罗犹云彼岸，紫府即是仙宫。
现代文：梵语 波罗蜜 就是汉语的 到彼岸 ； 紫府 就是道家所说的仙人所住的地方。
English: In Sanskrit, Borommi means "to the other shore" in Chinese; Zifu is what Taoists call the place where the sages live.

古文：曰上方、曰梵刹，总是佛场；曰真宇、曰蕊珠，皆称仙境。
现代文：说 上方 、说 梵刹 ，都是佛教活动的场所；说 真宇 、说 蕊珠 ，都是誉指仙人居住的地方。
English: Shangfang and the Vatican are said to be the sites of Buddhist activities; Zhenyu and Ruizhu are said to be the places where hermits live.

古文：伊蒲馔可以斋僧，青精饭亦堪供佛。
现代文：在家修行的男性佛教徒的食物可以施舍给僧人；用南烛叶煎汁浸米做成的饭也可以供养神佛。
English: The food of male Buddhists practising at home can be given to monks as alms; rice made from rice soaked in Nan candle leaf sauce can also be used to feed gods and Buddhas.

古文：香积厨，僧家所备；仙麟脯，仙子所餐。
现代文： 香积厨 是僧家必备的斋厨， 仙麟脯 是神仙所吃的食物。
English: Incense cooking is an essential part of a Buddhist monk's diet, and celery is the food of the gods.

古文：佛图澄显神通，咒莲生钵；葛仙翁作戏术，吐饭成蜂。
现代文：天竺僧人佛图澄显神通，焚香念咒语使钵中生出莲花；三国道士葛仙翁作法术，张口吐饭能变成蜜蜂。
English: The celestial pagoda monk, Buddha Tsu Cheng, is said to have magical powers. He burns incense and recites a spell to make a lotus flower grow from a cocoon; the Three Kingdoms Taoist, Ge Xian Weng, performs a spell so that if you spit rice into your open mouth you can turn into a bee.

古文：达摩一苇渡江，栾巴噀酒灭火。
现代文：天竺僧人达摩可以脚踩一根芦苇渡江，后汉人栾巴能用嘴喷酒灭掉远在千里之外的火灾。
English: The celestial reed monk Damo could cross a river by stepping on a reed with his foot, while the later Chinese man Daba could extinguish a fire thousands of miles away by spraying wine with his mouth.

古文：吴猛画江成路，麻姑掷米成珠。
现代文：晋代道士吴猛可以用羽扇划开江水变成道路，神话中的麻姑能把米扔在地上变成珍珠。
English: Wu Meng, a Taoist priest of the Jin Dynasty, could use a feather fan to turn river water into a road, and the mythical Ma Gu could turn rice into pearls by throwing it on the ground.

古文：飞锡挂锡，谓僧人之行止；导引胎息，谓道士之修持。
现代文： 飞锡 、 挂锡 ，是说僧人的出游和停留； 导引 、 胎息 ，是说道士的修身养性的方法。
English: "Flying tin" and "hanging tin" refer to the travel and stay of monks; "guiding" and "breathing in the womb" refer to the methods of cultivating the self-cultivation of monks.

古文：和尚拜礼曰和南，道士拜礼曰稽首。
现代文：和尚双手合十行礼叫作 和南 ，道士举单手向人行礼叫作 稽首 。
English: A monk's two-handed, ten-line salute is called "wanam," while a Taoist's one-handed salute to the crowd is called "keijo."

古文：曰圆寂、曰荼毗，皆言和尚之死；曰羽化、曰尸解，悉言道士之亡。
现代文：说 圆寂 、说 荼毗 ，都是指和尚的死；说 羽化 、说 尸解 ，都是指道士的死。
English: To speak of the death of a monk is to speak of the death of a monk; to speak of the death of a Taoist is to speak of the death of a Taoist.

古文：女道曰巫，男道曰觋，自古攸分；男僧曰僧，女僧曰尼，从来有别。
现代文：女道士叫做 巫 ，男道士叫做 觋 ，从古时候就这样划分；男僧人称作 僧 ，女僧人称作 尼 ，也是从来就有这样的区别。
English: Female Taoists are called 巫, male Taoists are called, and they have been divided in this way since ancient times; male monks are called 僧, female monks are called 尼, and there has always been such a distinction.

古文：羽客黄冠，皆称道士；上人比丘，并美僧人。
现代文： 羽客 、 黄冠 ，都是道士的誉称； 上人 、 比丘 ，是对和尚的赞美。
English: "Hake" and "Huangguan" are praise names for Taoists; "Shonin" and "Bhikshu" are praise names for monks.

古文：檀越、檀那，僧家称施主；烧丹、炼汞，道士学神仙。
现代文： 檀越 、 檀那 是佛家称呼施主；外炼金丹，内修精气的道士，想做长生不老的神仙。
English: "Tan Yue" and "Tan Na" are Buddhist terms for benefactors. They are external alchemists and internal spiritualists, who want to become immortals.

古文：和尚自谦，谓之空桑子；道士诵经，谓之步虚声。
现代文：和尚谦称自己，说自己无父无母，像有莘氏女采药，在空桑中捡到的婴儿，所以称为 空桑子 ；道士念经，仿效神仙的声音，所以称之为 步虚声 。
English: Monks humbly call themselves, saying that they have no father or mother, like the daughter of a dragonfly taking medicine, the baby found in the empty mulberry, so it is called the empty mulberry; Taoist chanting, imitating the voice of the immortal, so it is called "step bluff."

古文：菩者普也，萨者济也，尊称神祇，故有菩萨之誉；水行龙力大，陆行象力大，负荷佛法，故有龙象之称。
现代文： 菩 就是普遍的意思， 萨 则是救助的意思，因此天地神灵有 菩萨 的美誉；在水中行走龙的力量最大，在陆地上行走象的力气最大，因此精通佛法的高僧有 龙象 的称号。
English: Bodh means universal, and sa means help. Therefore, the gods and spirits of heaven and earth are known as bodhisattvas. The dragon has the greatest power to walk in water, and the elephant has the greatest strength to walk on land. Therefore, the high priest who is proficient in Buddhism has the title of dragon elephant.

古文：儒家谓之世，释家谓之劫，道家谓之尘，俱谓俗缘之未脱；儒家曰精一，释家曰三昧，道家曰贞一，总言奥义之无穷。
现代文：儒家称的 世 ，佛家称之为 劫 ，道家称之为 尘 ，这都是说还没有摆脱世俗的人事牵连；儒家说 精一 ，佛家说 三昧 ，道家说 贞一 ，这都是说深奥的道理无穷无尽。
English: Confucianism calls it the world, Buddhism calls it the calamity, and Taoism calls it the dust, all of which mean that we have not yet got rid of worldly personnel entanglement; Confucianism says it is the first, Buddhism says it is the third, and Taoism says it is the first, all of which mean that the profound truth is endless.

古文：达摩死后，手携只履西归；王乔朝君，舄化双凫下降。
现代文：达摩死后，有人看见他手提一只鞋从东方归向西天；后汉王乔朝见皇帝，不用车马，站在由鞋变成的两只野鸭身上从天空中降落。
English: After Dharma's death, he was seen carrying a shoe from the East to the West; later, the Han Dynasty King Qiao Zhaojun met the emperor and, without a chariot or horse, descended from the sky standing on two wild ducks that had been turned into shoes.

古文：辟谷绝粒，神仙能服气炼形；不灭不生，释氏惟明心见性。
现代文： 辟谷绝粒 ，是指神仙不吃五谷，能够用吐纳之法修炼身体； 不灭不生 ，释迦牟尼能内心悟道，超脱生死的境界。
English: Shakyamuni was able to attain inner enlightenment and transcend the realm of life and death.

古文：梁高僧谈经入妙，可使岩石点头，天花坠地；张虚靖炼丹既成，能令龙虎并伏，鸡犬俱升。
现代文：梁朝的高僧道生法师讲经，绝妙处能够使顽石点头，云光法师说法能够使天上的宝花纷纷降落；张虚靖炼丹成仙后，能够降龙伏虎，平素养的鸡犬都跟着他升天了。
English: Liang Dynasty's high-ranking monk Daosheng Mage gave a sermon. The great point could make the stone nod, and Yunguang Mage's words could make the heavenly flowers descend one after another. After Zhang Xujing had made Dan into a immortal, he was able to surrender to dragons and tigers, and the ordinary dogs and chickens all ascended to heaven with him.

古文：藏世界于一粟，佛法何其大；贮乾坤于一壶，道法何其玄。
现代文：能把整个世界藏在一粒米中，佛家的法力是何等的强大；把整个乾坤贮藏在一把壶里，道家法术多么玄妙。
English: If the whole world can be hidden in a grain of rice, how powerful is the magic of Buddhism; if the whole universe can be stored in a pot, how profound is the magic of Taoism.

古文：妄诞之言，载鬼一车；高明之家，鬼瞰其室。
现代文：无稽之谈，就好像说装了一车鬼魂；富贵人家，鬼都要偷窥他的家室。
English: Nonsense, it's like saying there's a truckload of ghosts; the ghosts of the rich and famous want to peep into their homes.

古文：《无鬼论》作于晋之阮瞻，《搜神记》撰于晋之干宝。
现代文：《无鬼论》是晋朝阮瞻所写；《搜神记》是东晋干宝所撰。
English: "On the Absence of Ghosts" was written by Ruan Zhan in the Jin Dynasty; "A Search for the Gods" was written by Gan Bao in the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：颜子渊、卜子商，死为地下修文郎；韩擒虎、寇莱公，死为阴司阎罗王。
现代文：孔子的徒弟颜子渊、卜子商，死了以后在阴间做了修文郎；隋朝大将韩擒虎、北宋丞相寇莱公，死后在地府做阎罗王。
English: Yan Ziyuan, an apprentice of Confucius and a fortune-teller, became a reverend in the underworld after his death; Han Xunhu, a general of the Sui Dynasty, and Kolei, a chancellor of the Northern Song Dynasty, became the king of hell in the underworld after their death.

古文：至若土谷之神曰社稷，干旱之鬼曰旱魃。
现代文：至于说到土神和谷神，就叫做 社稷 ；使人间干旱的鬼叫做 旱魃 。
English: As for the earth god and the valley god, they are called Shaka; and the ghost of human drought is called Sukune.

古文：魑魅魍魉，山川之祟；神荼郁垒，啖鬼之神。
现代文： 魑魅 、 魍魉 都是山川中危害人类的精怪； 神荼 、 郁垒 都是吃鬼的门神。
English: Diao Mei, Zhao Ruo are all monsters that harm humans in the mountains and rivers; Shen Yao, Yu Rong are all demon-eating door gods.

古文：仕途偃蹇，鬼神为之揶揄；心地光明，吉神自为之呵护。
现代文：官路困顿不通，连鬼神都要对其拍手戏弄；做人光明磊落，吉神自然呵护庇佑。
English: The official road is difficult to pass, even the ghosts and gods have to clap their hands to tease it; people are bright and honest, and the auspicious gods naturally care for and protect.

