古文：◎海陵废帝海陵庶人亮，字元功，本讳迪古乃，辽王宗干第二子也。
现代文：被废弃的皇帝，海陵庶人，名叫完颜亮，字元功，本名叫迪古乃，是辽王宗干的第二个儿子。
English: The abandoned emperor, the commoner of Hailing, named Guan Yanliang, the character Yuan Gong, whose real name was Digunai, was the second son of Liao Wang Zonggang.

古文：母大氏。
现代文：他的母亲是大氏。
English: His mother was Taiji.

古文：天辅六年壬寅岁生。
现代文：完颜亮出生于天辅六年。
English: Kan Yan Liang was born in Tianshuo six years ago.

古文：天眷三年，年十八，以宗室子为奉国上将军，赴梁王宗弼军前任使，以为行军万户，迁骠骑上将军。
现代文：天眷三年，完颜亮十八岁，以宗室子弟的身份当了奉国上将军，到梁王宗弼军前听任派遣，当了一名行军万户，后来迁任骠骑上将军。
English: Three years later, after Yan Liang was 18 years old, he became a general serving the country with the status of a son of the family, and was dispatched to the army of Liang Wang Zongyi. He became a member of the marching million households, and later he was transferred to the general riding the horse.

古文：皇统四年，加龙虎卫上将军，为中京留守，迁光禄大夫。
现代文：皇统四年，完颜亮被加封为龙虎卫上将军，任中京留守，迁任光禄大夫。
English: In the fourth year of imperial unification, Yan Liang was given the additional title of Dragon and Tiger Guards General, and he stayed in Beijing and was transferred to the post of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：为人僄急，多猜忌，残忍任数。
现代文：完颜亮为人轻佻急躁，遇事多猜忌，残忍任性。
English: Guan Yanliang is frivolous, impatient, suspicious, cruel and capricious.

古文：初，熙宗以太祖嫡孙嗣位，亮意以为宗干太祖长子，而己亦太祖孙，遂怀觊觎。
现代文：起初，熙宗让太祖的嫡孙继承帝位，完颜亮认为宗干是太祖的长子，而自己也是太祖的孙子，于是心怀非分的希望和企图。
English: At first, He Zong let the great-grandchild of the great-grandfather succeed to the imperial throne, but Yan Liang thought that Zong Gan was the eldest son of the great-grandfather, and he was also the grandson of the great-grandfather, so he harbored hopes and intentions.

古文：在中京，专务立威，以厌伏小人。
现代文：在中京，他专门注意树立自己的权威，来压制低微卑贱的人。
English: In Zhongjing, he paid special attention to establishing his authority to suppress the low and lowly.

古文：猛安萧裕倾险敢决，亮结纳之，每与论天下事。
现代文：猛安萧裕临近危险敢于决斗，完颜亮结交容纳他，经常和他讨论天下事。
English: Meng'an and Xiao Yu dared to fight a duel when danger was approaching. They made friends to accommodate him, and often discussed world affairs with him.

古文：裕揣知其意，因劝海陵举大事，语在《裕传》。
现代文：萧裕揣摸知道完颜亮的用意，因此劝告海陵采取大的行动，这些记载在《萧裕传》中。
English: Xiao Yu guessed what Guan Liang's intention was, so he advised Hailing to take drastic action. These are recorded in "The Biography of Xiao Yu."

古文：七年五月，召为同判大宗正事，加特进。
现代文：皇统七年五月，海陵被召进宫任同判大宗正事，加授特进这一官职。
English: In May of the seventh year of the Emperor's reign, Hailing was summoned to the palace to be assigned to the position of co-judge of major cases, and was promoted to this official position.

古文：十一月，拜尚书左丞，务揽持权柄，用其腹心为省台要职，引萧裕为兵部侍郎。
现代文：十一月，升任尚书左丞，专营揽持权柄，任用他的心腹人士委以省台重要职务，引荐萧裕当了兵部侍郎。
English: In November, he was promoted to Shangshu Zuojo, specializing in power-grabbing, appointing his confidants to important positions in the province and Taiwan, and introducing Xiao Yu as the attendant of the military department.

古文：一日因召对，语及太祖创业艰难，亮因呜咽流涕，熙宗以为忠。
现代文：一天，海陵被皇上召见对话，谈到太祖创业艰难，完颜亮因为呜咽流涕，被熙宗认为是忠心耿耿。
English: One day, Hailing was summoned by the emperor for a dialogue. He talked about the difficulties of starting a business with his grandfather, and his face lit up because he was crying. He was considered to be a loyal person by Xi Zong.

古文：八年六月，拜平章政事。
现代文：皇统八年六月，出任平章政事。
English: In June of the eighth year of imperial unification, he assumed the post of Taira no Sho Seiji.

古文：十一月，拜右丞相。
现代文：十一月，又被授予右丞相。
English: In November, he was also awarded the title of Minister of the Right.

古文：九年正月，兼都元帅。
现代文：皇统九年正月，海陵兼任都元帅。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of imperial rule, Hailing also served as a field marshal.

古文：熙宗使小底大兴国赐亮生日，悼后亦附赐礼物，熙宗不悦，杖兴国百，追其赐物，海陵由此不自安。
现代文：熙宗派小底叫大兴国的去把赐物送给完颜亮过生日，悼平皇后也附上自己赐予完颜亮的礼物，熙宗不高兴，打了大兴国一百杖，追回那些赐物，海陵完颜亮从此自己感到不安。
English: Xi Zong sent Xiaodi to Daxing to give gifts to Guan Yanliang for his birthday. The mourning Queen Ping also attached the gifts she had given to Guan Yanliang. Xi Zong was not happy and hit Daxing with a hundred sticks to recover the gifts. He felt uneasy about Guan Yanliang.

古文：三月，拜太保、领三省事，益邀求人誉，引用势望子孙，结其欢心。
现代文：三月，又拜受太保之职，统领三省政事，更是追求人们的赞誉，引荐任用有权势的名门望族子孙，结交使他欢心的人。
English: In March, he was appointed to the position of grand tutor and took charge of the political affairs of the three provinces. What's more, he pursued the praise of the people, recommended the appointment of the powerful sons and daughters of famous families, and made friends with people who made him happy.

古文：四月，学士张钧草诏忤旨死，熙宗问： 谁使为之？ 
现代文：四月，学士张钧起草诏书违逆旨意而死，熙宗问： 谁让他写的？ 
English: In April, when the scholar Zhang Ye died while drafting an edict against his will, Xi Zong asked: Who made him write it?

古文：左丞相宗贤对曰： 太保实然。 
现代文：左丞相宗贤回答 ：实际是太保这样做的。 
English: Zuojo Minister Muneyoshi replied: Actually, it was Taibo who did it.

古文：熙宗不悦，遂出为领行台尚书省事。
现代文：熙宗不高兴，于是令完颜亮出任领行台尚书省事。
English: Xizong was not happy, so he appointed Guan Yanliang as the leader of Taishang Shu to save trouble.

古文：过中京，与萧裕定约而去。至良乡，召还。
现代文：完颜亮路过中京，和萧裕定立盟约而后离开，到良乡，皇上把他召回。
English: After Yan Liang passed through Zhongjing, he made a covenant with Xiao Yu Ding and left for Liangxiang. The emperor called him back.

古文：海陵莫测所以召还之意，大恐。
现代文：海陵猜测不到召他回来的原因，大为惊恐。
English: Unable to guess the reason for his recall, Hailing panicked.

古文：既至，复为平章政事，由是益危迫。
现代文：到了后来，熙宗又让他当平章政事，从此更是危机紧迫。
English: Later, Emperor Xizong made him a peer of the realm, and from then on, the crisis became more urgent.

古文：熙宗尝以事杖左丞唐括辩及右丞相秉德，辩及与大理卿乌带谋废立，而乌带先此谋告海陵。
现代文：熙宗曾经因故对左丞唐括辩和右丞相秉德施用杖刑，唐括辩于是和大理卿乌带谋划对皇帝废旧和立新的事，然而乌带先把这一阴谋告诉了海陵。
English: For some reason, Emperor Xizong had used the cane to punish the left and right emperors Tang Biao and Bing De. Tang Biao and Dali Qing U took this opportunity to plan to abolish the old and establish the new against the emperor. However, U first told this conspiracy to Hailing.

古文：他日，海陵与辩语及废立事，曰： 若举大事，谁可立者？ 
现代文：有一天，海陵和唐括辩说到废旧君、立新君的事，说： 如果要举行大事业，谁是可以拥立的人？ 
English: One day, Hailing and Tang argued about the abolition of the old king and the establishment of a new king, saying: If a great cause is to be carried out, who is the person who can support it?

古文：辩曰： 胙王常胜乎？ 
现代文：唐括辩说 ：胙王常胜可以吗？ 
English: Tang parenthetically argued, "Is it okay for the king of Qi to always win?"

古文：问其次，曰： 邓王子阿懒。 
现代文：海陵问其次谁还可以，唐括辩说： 邓王的儿子阿懒。 
English: When Hailing asked who could be next, Tang Duan said, "Alao, the son of King Deng."

古文：亮曰： 阿懒属疏，安得立？ 
现代文：完颜亮说： 阿懒疏陋、浅薄，怎么能够立他？ 
English: Guan Yanliang said, "Alao is impoverished and shallow, how can you elevate him?

古文：辩曰： 公岂有意邪？ 
现代文：唐括辩说： 您难道有意吗？ 
English: Tang Yu argued: Do you really mean it?

古文：海陵曰： 果不得已，舍我其谁！ 
现代文：海陵说： 真的不得已，除了我还有谁！ 
English: Hailing said: I really have no choice, who else but me!

古文：于是旦夕相与密谋。
现代文：于是早晚和唐括辩一起密谋策划。
English: So, sooner or later, they conspired and plotted together with the Tang Dynasty.

古文：护卫将军特思疑之，以告悼后曰： 辩等公余每窃窃聚语，窃疑之。 
现代文：护卫将军特思怀疑他们的行为，就把这些情况报告给悼平皇后，说： 唐括辩等人公事办完常常聚在一起窃窃私语，我暗中对这件事很怀疑。 
English: The escorting general, Teth, suspected their actions, and reported the situation to Empress Weiping, saying, "I have a sneaking suspicion that after the official business is done, people such as Tang Baofeng and others often gather together to whisper.

古文：后以告熙宗。
现代文：皇后又把这情况告诉了熙宗。
English: The Empress also told Emperor Hezong about this.

古文：熙宗怒，召辩谓曰： 尔与亮谋何事，将如我何？ 
现代文：熙宗生气，召见唐括辩对他说： 你和完颜亮密谋什么事，将要把我怎么样？ 
English: Xi Zong was angry and summoned Tang Baofeng to say to him: What are you plotting with Guan Yanliang, and what are you going to do to me?

古文：杖之。
现代文：对他施用了杖刑。
English: He was beaten with a cane.

古文：亮因此忌常胜、阿懒，且恶特思。
现代文：完颜亮因此忌恨常胜、阿懒，并且厌恶特思。
English: As a result, he has a strong aversion to those who are always successful and lazy, and aversion to those who think too much.

古文：因河南兵士孙进自称皇弟按察大王，而熙宗之弟止有常胜、查剌，海陵乘此构常胜、查剌、阿懒、达懒。
现代文：因为河南籍兵士孙进自称是皇弟按察大王，而熙宗只有常胜、查剌两个弟弟，海陵便趁此机会设计陷害常胜、查剌、阿懒、达懒。
English: Because Sun Jin, a soldier from Henan Province, claimed to be the younger brother of the emperor, but Xi Zong only had two younger brothers, Chang Sheng and Zha Jun, Hailing took this opportunity to frame Chang Sheng, Zha Jun, Alu and Dalu.

古文：熙宗使特思鞫之，无状。
现代文：熙宗派特思审讯常胜等人，没有实证。
English: There is no empirical evidence to support the claim that the Hee Sect's Tetsu Sect interrogated Josho and others.

古文：海陵曰： 特思鞫不以实。 
现代文：海陵说： 特思查问不按事实办事。 
English: Hailing said: The investigation is not based on facts.

古文：遂俱杀之。
现代文：于是把特思和常胜等人一起杀害了。
English: So he killed Teth together with Josho and others.

古文：护卫十人长仆散忽土旧受宗干恩。
现代文：护卫十人长仆散忽土往昔受过宗干的恩德。
English: The ten-man escort was led by the chief retainer Sanhukutsu, who in the past had enjoyed the benevolence of the patriarch.

古文：徒单阿里出虎与海陵姻家。
现代文：徒单阿里出虎和海陵是亲家。
English: Hailing from the same family as Hailing from the same family as Hailing from the same family.

古文：大兴国给事寝殿，时时乘夜从主者取符钥归家，以为常。
现代文：大兴国在皇帝寝殿供事，常常乘着黑夜从主人那里拿符钥回家，习以为常。
English: Daxing Guo served in the emperor's bedchamber, often taking advantage of the darkness to take the key from his master and return home, which he took for granted.

古文：兴国尝以李老僧属海陵，得为尚书省令史，故使老僧结兴国为内应，而兴国亦以被杖怨熙宗，遂与亮约。
现代文：大兴国曾经把李老僧引见给海陵，李老僧得以担任尚书省令史的职务，所以海陵让李老僧去勾结大兴国作为内应，而大兴国也因为被用过杖刑怨恨熙宗，于是和完颜亮订立了盟约。
English: Daxing Guo had introduced Li Laozang to Hailing, and Li Laozang was able to assume the post of Shang Shuxuan Rongshi. Therefore, Hailing asked Li Laozang to collude with Daxing Guo as an internal response, and Daxing Guo also resented Xi Zong because he had been punished with a cane, so he entered into a covenant with Can Yanliang.

古文：十二月丁巳，忽土、阿里出虎内直。
现代文：十二月九日，忽土、阿里出虎在内廷值班。
English: On December 9th, suddenly, Ali went on duty in the Inner Court.

古文：是夜，兴国取符钥启门纳海陵、秉德、辩、乌带、徒单贞、李老僧等人至寝殿，遂弑熙宗。
现代文：当天夜里，大兴国拿符钥开门接应海陵、秉德、唐括辩、乌带、徒单贞、李老僧等人到了皇上寝殿，于是杀了熙宗。
English: In the evening of the same day, Daxing Guo took the key and opened the door to receive Hailing, Bingde, Tang Parenthesis, Wuzi, Tu Shan Zhen, Li Lao Zang and others who came to the emperor's bedchamber, and then killed Xi Zong.

古文：秉德等未有所属。
现代文：秉德等没有归属。
English: There is no attribution of Bingde and so on.

古文：忽土曰： 始者议立平章，今复何疑。 
现代文：忽土说 ：起初时候商议立为平章，现在还有什么疑问？ 
English: Khudo said: At the beginning, the negotiations were a success, what doubts are there now?

古文：乃奉海陵坐，皆拜，称万岁。
现代文：这才尊奉海陵上坐，都来参拜，口称 万岁 。
English: It was only then that the venerable Bonghai sat on the mausoleum, and everyone came to pay homage and say "long live."

古文：诈以熙宗欲议立后，召大臣，遂杀曹国王宗敏，左丞相宗贤。
现代文：海陵谎称熙宗谋划要立皇后，召见大臣，杀了曹国王宗敏、左丞相宗贤。
English: Hailing falsely claimed that He Zong planned to establish a queen, summoned ministers, and killed King Cao Zongmin and Left Wing Minister Zongxian.

古文：是日，以秉德为左丞相兼侍中、左副元帅，辩为右丞相兼中书令，乌带为平章政事，忽土为左副点检，阿里出虎为右副点检，贞为左卫将军，兴国为广宁尹。
现代文：当天，海陵封秉德当左丞相兼侍中、左副元帅，唐括辩为右丞相兼中书令，乌带为平章政事，忽土为左副点检，阿里出虎为右副点检，仆单贞为左卫将军，大兴国为广宁尹。
English: On the same day, Hailing Feng Bingde served as the Left Vice-Minister of War and Vice-Marshal of the Left, Tang Baofeng served as the Right Vice-Minister of War and Vice-Marshal of the Left, Wu Zi served as the Right Vice-Minister of War and Vice-Marshal of the Left, Wu Zi served as the Vice-Minister of War and Vice-Marshal of the Left, Wu Zi served as the Vice-Minister of War and Vice-Marshal of the Left, Wu Zi served as the Vice-Minister of War and Vice-Marshal of the Left, Ping Zhang served as the

古文：于是自太师、领三省事勖以下二十人进爵增职各有差。
现代文：于是自太师、领三省事的完颜勖以下二十人各有不同等级的进爵增职。
English: As a result, twenty people from the Taiji, the leader of the three provinces, and the leader of the three provinces, each had different levels of promotion.

古文：己未，大赦。
现代文：十二月十一日，海陵大赦天下。
English: That's it, amnesty.

古文：改皇统九年为天德元年。
现代文：改年号，把皇统九年改为天德元年。
English: The year was changed from the ninth year of imperial rule to the first year of the Tiande era.

古文：参知政事萧肄除名。
现代文：参知政事萧肄被除名。
English: Sanzhi politician Xiao Yao was removed from the list.

古文：镇南统军孛极为尚书左丞。
现代文：镇南统军孛极当了尚书左丞。
English: The Zhennan Unification Army became the Shangshu Zuoxiao.

古文：赐左丞相秉德、右丞相辩、平章政事乌带、广宁尹兴国、点检忽土、阿里出虎、左卫将军贞、尚书省令史老僧、辩父刑部尚书阿里等钱绢马牛羊有差。
现代文：海陵赐给左丞相秉德、右丞相唐括辩、平章政事乌带、广宁尹兴国、点检忽土、阿里出虎、左卫将军徒单贞、尚书省令史李老僧、唐括辩的父亲刑部尚书阿里等钱、绢、马、牛、羊数目各不相同。
English: The imperial mausoleum was given to the left chancellor Bing De, the right chancellor Tang Parfen, the political affairs of Ping Zhang, Guangning Yin Xing Guo, the point inspection Hu Tu, Ali the tiger, the left guard general Tu Shan Zhen, the old monk Shang Shuxu Li, the father of Tang Parfen, and the number of money, horses, horses, cattle, and sheep are different.

古文：甲子，誓太祖庙，召秉德、辩、乌带、忽土、阿里出虎、兴国六人赐誓券。
现代文：十六日，海陵在太祖庙发誓，召集秉德、唐括辩、乌带、忽土、阿里出虎、兴国等六人，并发给他们誓券。
English: On the 16th, Hailing swore an oath at Taizu Temple, and summoned six people, including Bing De, Tang Parenthesis, Utao, Kuudo, Ali Shidiger, and Xing Guo, and issued them oath certificates.

古文：丙寅，以燕京路都转运使刘麟为参知政事。
现代文：十八日，任命燕京路都转运使刘麟为参知政事。
English: On the 18th, the appointment of Yanjing Road Transportation Center made Liu Lin a political advisor.

古文：癸酉，太傅、领三省事萧仲恭，尚书右丞禀罢。
现代文：二十五日，太傅、领三省事萧仲恭，尚书右丞完颜禀被免除职务。
English: On the 25th, Xiao Zhongyong, Taifu and leader of the three provinces, and Shangshu Rongjie were relieved of their duties.

古文：以行台尚书左丞温都思忠为右丞。
现代文：任命行台尚书左丞温都思忠为右丞。
English: Appointed Gongtai Shangshu Zuo Jie and Windu Shizhong as Zuo Jie.

古文：乙亥，追谥皇考太师宪古弘道文昭武烈章孝睿明皇帝，庙号德宗，名其故居曰兴圣宫。
现代文：二十七日，追谥皇考太师宪古弘道文昭武烈章孝睿明皇帝，庙号定为德宗，命名他的故居为兴圣宫。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Xiankohong, Daowen Zhaowu, Zhang Xiaoriming, the imperial examiner, was chased away. The temple was given the name Dezong, and his former residence was named Xing Sheng Gong.

古文：宋、高丽、夏贺正旦使中道遣还。
现代文：宋、高丽、夏国的贺正旦使中途被遣回。
English: Song, Goryeo, and He Zhengdan of Hsia were sent back halfway.

古文：二年正月辛巳，以同知中京留守事萧裕为秘书监。
现代文：天德二年正月三日，海陵任命同知中京留守事萧裕为秘书监。
English: On the third day of the first month of the second year of the Tiande era, Hailing appointed his friend Xiao Yu, who was staying in Beijing, as secretary supervisor.

古文：癸巳，尊嫡母徒单氏及母大氏皆为皇太后。
现代文：十五日，尊封嫡母徒单氏和母亲大氏都是皇太后。
English: On the fifteenth day, Takafusa's legitimate mother, the Tsuchidan clan, and his mother, the Dai clan, became empress dowager.

古文：名徒单氏宫曰永寿，大氏宫曰永宁。
现代文：命名徒单氏居住的宫为永寿宫，大氏的宫为永宁宫。
English: The palace where the Tushan clan lived was named Yongshu Palace, and the palace of the Dai clan was named Yongning Palace.

古文：乙巳，以励官守、务农时、慎刑罚、扬侧陋、恤穷民、节财用、审才实七事诏中外。
现代文：二十七日，向中外颁布了七件事，即励官守、务农时、慎刑罚、扬侧陋、恤穷民、节财用、审才实。
English: On the 27th, seven matters were promulgated at home and abroad, namely, encouraging officials to be conscientious, working in agriculture, cautiously imposing punishments, correcting faults, sympathizing with the poor, saving money, and judging merits.

古文：遣侍卫亲步军都指挥使完颜思恭等以废立事报谕宋、高丽、夏国。
现代文：派遣侍卫亲军步军都指挥使完颜思恭等人把废旧君立新君的事变通知宋、高丽、夏国。
English: He dispatched the bodyguards of the pro-army marching troops and commanded the envoys of Guan Yan Sikyong and others to inform Song, Goryeo, and Xia Guo of the events of the new king.

古文：以左丞相兼左副元帅秉德领行台尚书省事。
现代文：任命左丞相兼左副元帅秉德领行台尚书省事。
English: He appointed the Left Minister of War and the Left Vice-Marshal Bing De to lead the Taishang Provincial Affairs.

古文：二月戊申朔，封子元寿为崇王。
现代文：二月一日，海陵封自己的儿子元寿为崇王。
English: On February 1, Hailing enthroned his son Yuan Shou as Chongwang.

古文：庚戌，降前帝为东昏王。
现代文：初三，把前皇帝更名为东昏王。
English: On the third day of the new year, the former emperor was renamed Dongguang Wang.

古文：给天水郡公孙女二人月俸。
现代文：给予天水郡公的孙女两个人的月俸。
English: Two monthly salaries were given to granddaughters of the district magistrate of Tianshui County.

古文：甲子，以兵部尚书完颜元宜等充贺宋生日使。
现代文：十七日，让兵部尚书完颜元宜等充当贺宋生日使。
English: On the seventeenth day, Yan Yuanyi and others from the military department were asked to act as He Song's birthday envoys.

古文：戊辰，群臣上尊号曰法天膺运睿武宣文大明圣孝皇帝，诏中外。
现代文：二十一日，群臣尊海陵号叫法天膺运睿武宣文大明圣孝皇帝，并诏告中外。
English: On the twenty-first day, a group of courtiers called the tomb of Emperor Fa Tianjun Yun Rui Wu Xuanwen Daming Sheng Xiao Emperor, and issued an edict to China and abroad.

古文：永寿、永宁两太后父祖赠官有差。
现代文：海陵对永寿、永宁两宫皇太后的父亲以及祖父均赠给了不同级别的官职。
English: For Yongshu, Yongning, the father of the Empress Dowager's father and grandfather, Hailing gave them official positions at different levels.

古文：以右丞相唐括辩为左丞相，平章政事乌带为右丞相。
现代文：海陵又让右丞相唐括辩当了左丞相，平章政事乌带当了右丞相。
English: Hailing also made the Minister of the Right, Tang Baofeng, the Minister of the Left, and the Minister of the Right, Pingzhang Zhengji and Wu Zhe, the Minister of the Right.

古文：三月丙戌，宋、高丽遣使贺即位。
现代文：三月九日，宋、高丽两国分别派遣使者前来祝贺新君即位。
English: On March 9, the two countries of Song and Goryeo separately sent envoys to congratulate the new emperor on his accession to the throne.

古文：以弟衮为司徒兼都元帅。
现代文：海陵命他的弟弟完颜兖当司徒兼都元帅。
English: Hailing his younger brother's death as a martyr, he also became the marshal of the capital.

古文：诏以天水郡王玉带归宋。
现代文：诏令天水郡王的玉带归宋所有。
English: The imperial edict decreed that the king of Tianshui County's jade belt belonged to the Song Dynasty.

古文：四月戊午，杀太傅、领三省事宗本，尚书左丞相唐括辩，判大宗正府事宗美。
现代文：四月十二日，海陵杀死太傅、领三省事宗本，尚书左丞相唐括辩，判大宗正府事宗美。
English: On April 12th, Hailing killed Taifu and led the three provincial affairs of Zongben, Shangshu and Zuoxing Tang bracketed, and sentenced Daizong Zhengfu to affairs of Zongmei.

古文：遣使杀领行台尚书省事秉德，东京留守宗懿，北京留守卞及太宗子孙七十余人，周宋国王宗翰子孙三十余人，诸宗室五十余人。
现代文：派人杀领行台尚书省事秉德、东京留守宗懿、北京留守卞以及太宗的子孙七十多人、周宋国王宗翰的子孙三十多人，还杀了诸宗室五十多人。
English: He sent people to kill the heads of the Tai Shang, the provincial governor Zhibing De, the Tokyo resident Zong Xi, and the Beijing resident Zong Xi, as well as more than seventy descendants of Taizong, more than thirty descendants of King Zong Han of the Zhou Song Dynasty, and also killed more than fifty members of the family.

古文：辛酉，以尚书省译史萧玉为礼部尚书，秘书监萧裕为尚书左丞，司徒衮领三省事、封王，都元帅如故，右丞相乌带司空、左丞相兼侍中，平章政事刘筈为尚书右丞相兼中书令，左丞宗义，右丞温都思忠为平章政事，参知政事刘麟为尚书右丞，殿前左副点检仆散忽土为殿前都点检。
现代文：十五日，任命尚书省译史萧玉当礼部尚书，秘书监萧裕为尚书左丞，司徒兖领三省事、封王，都元帅还是原来的，右丞相乌带做了司空、左丞相兼侍中，平章政事刘薚是尚书右丞相兼中书令，左丞宗义、右丞温都思忠为平章政事，参知政事刘麟为尚书右丞，殿前左副点检仆散忽土当了殿前都点检。
English: On the 15th, the translation of history Xiao Yu of Shangshu Province was appointed as Shangshu of the Ceremonial Department, the secretary supervisor Xiaoyu was appointed as Shangshu of the Left, the three provincial affairs and the crowning of the king were assigned to the three provincial marshals, the right-hand minister Uta was appointed as Siku, the left-hand minister and the attendant, the right-hand minister Liu Wei of Pingzhang was appointed as Shangshu of the Right and the middle secretary, the left-hand minister Zongyi and the right-hand minister Windu Sizhong were appointed as Pingzhang of the Political Affairs, Liu Lin of the

古文：五月戊子，以平章行台尚书省事、右副元帅大抃为行台尚书右丞相，元帅如故。
现代文：五月十三日，任命平章行台尚书省事、右副元帅大白大为行台尚书右丞相，元帅保留原来的。
English: On May 13th, Pingzhang Xingtai Shangshu was appointed as the Minister of the Interior, and the Right Vice-Marshal Dabai was appointed as the Minister of the Right of Xingtai Shangshu, while the Marshal was retained.

古文：壬辰，以左副元帅撒离喝为行台尚书左丞相，元帅如故。
现代文：十七日，任命左副元帅撒离喝为行台尚书左丞相，元帅保留原来的。
English: On the 17th, the Left Vice-Marshal Sa Liang was appointed as the Left Vice-Marshal of Xingtai Shangshu, and the Marshal retained the original.

古文：同判大宗正事宗安为御史大夫。
现代文：同判大宗正事宗安为御史大夫。
English: In the same decision, Daizong Zhengji Muneyasu was promoted to goshi taifu.

古文：六月丙午朔，高丽遣使贺即位。
现代文：六月一日，高丽派遣使者来祝贺新君即位。
English: On June 1, Korea sent an envoy to congratulate the new emperor on his accession to the throne.

古文：甲子，太庙初设四神门及四隅罘罳。
现代文：十九日，开始在太庙设置四个门神以及四个城角的罘謒。
English: On the 19th, the four door gods and the four corner towers were set up in the Great Temple.

古文：七月己丑，司空、左丞相兼侍中乌带罢。
现代文：七月十五日，解除了司空、左丞相兼侍中乌带的官职。
English: On the 15th of July, the official positions of Siku and Zuojo, as well as that of Uta, a chamberlain, were removed.

古文：以平章政事温都思忠为左丞相，尚书左丞萧裕为平章政事，右丞刘麟为左丞，侍卫亲军步军都指挥使完颜思恭为右丞。
现代文：任命平章政事温都思忠为左丞相，尚书左丞萧裕为平章政事，右丞刘麟为左丞，侍卫亲军步军都指挥使完颜思恭为右丞。
English: He appointed Pingzhang Zhengji Wendu Sizhong as the Minister of the Left, Shangshu Zhengji Xiaoyu as the Minister of the Right, Liu Lin as the Minister of the Left, and Guanqian Siyong as the Minister of the Right.

古文：参知政事张浩丁忧，起复如故。戊戌，夏国遣使贺即位及受尊号。
现代文：参知政事张浩遇到父母丧事，丧期未满，应召任职和以前一样。二十四日，夏国派使者前来祝贺新君即位和受尊号。
English: On the 24th, Xia Guo sent an envoy to congratulate the new prince on his enthronement and receiving the honorific title.

古文：八月戊申，以司徒衮为太尉、领三省事，都元帅如故。
现代文：八月五日，任命司徒兖为太尉，领三省事、都元帅如故。
English: On August 5th, he was appointed as the first lieutenant of the three provinces and the marshal of the capital.

古文：以礼部尚书萧玉为参知政事。
现代文：任礼部尚书萧玉为参知政事。
English: Shangshu Xiao Yu, who was appointed to the Ministry of Ceremonies, became a member of the Council of State.

古文：九月甲午，立惠妃徒单氏为皇后。
现代文：九月二十一日，立惠妃徒单氏为皇后。
English: On September 21, Empress Dowager Hui Tu Shan became empress.

古文：十月癸卯，太师、领三省事勖致仕。
现代文：十月一日，太师、领三省事完颜勖辞去官职。
English: On October 1st, Yan Xuan resigned from his official position after completing the duties of grandmaster and leader of the three provinces.

古文：辛未，杀太皇太妃萧氏及其子任王偎喝。
现代文：三十日，海陵帝杀了太皇太妃萧氏以及她的儿子任王偎喝。
English: On the 30th, Emperor Hailing killed the Grand Empress Dowager Xiao and her son Ren Wangxiao.

古文：使使杀行台左丞相、左副元帅撒离喝于汴，并杀平章政事宗义、前工部尚书谋里野、御史大夫宗安，皆夷其族。
现代文：派人在汴京杀行台左丞相、左副元帅撒离喝，同时杀死平章政事宗义、前工部尚书谋里野、御史太夫宗安，并且杀死了他们的全部族人。
English: He sent people to Shinging to kill the left minister of the left and the left vice-marshal of the left, and at the same time killed Pingzhang Zhengji Soyi, the former minister of the Ministry of Industry, Shang Shumo Rino, and Gostayu Zongan, and killed all their people.

古文：以魏王斡带之孙活里甲好修饰，亦族之。
现代文：魏王斡带的孙子活里甲好修饰，也遭灭族之灾。
English: The grandson of the Wei king, who was well-groomed, also suffered from the disaster of extermination.

古文：十一月癸未，尚书右丞相刘筈罢。
现代文：十一月十一日，免去了尚书右丞相刘薚的官职。
English: On November 11th, the official post of the Minister of the Right, Liu Xi, was removed.

古文：以会宁牧徒单恭为平章政事。
现代文：任命会宁牧徒单恭为平章政事。
English: Appointed the Ning Herdsman and Shan Gong of the Association as the Pingzhang Government.

古文：尚书左丞刘麟、右丞完颜思恭罢。
现代文：免除了尚书左丞刘麟、右丞完颜思恭的官职。
English: He exempted Liu Lin, the left secretary of Shangshu, and Xizhong, the right secretary, from their official posts.

古文：以参知政事张浩为尚书右丞。
现代文：任命参知政事张浩为尚书右丞。
English: He appointed Zhang Hao, a member of the Council of State, as his right-hand man.

古文：乙酉，以行台尚书左丞张通古为尚书左丞。
现代文：十三日，任命行台尚书左丞张通古为尚书左丞。
English: On the 13th, Zhang Tongu, the left-hand man of Gangtai Shangshu, was appointed as the left-hand man of Shangshu.

古文：丙戌，白虹贯日。
现代文：十四日，天空出现一道白色的虹横贯阳光。
English: On the 14th, a white rainbow appeared in the sky.

古文：丁亥，以太后旨称令旨。
现代文：十五日，把太后的旨称为令旨。
English: On the fifteenth day, the empress dowager's will was referred to as the imperial edict.

古文：戊子，以十二事戒约官吏。
现代文：十六日，拿十二件事戒约官吏。
English: On the 16th, officials were ordered to abstain from doing 12 things.

古文：己丑，命庶官许求次室二人，百姓亦许置妾。
现代文：十七日，下令庶官准许娶二房二人，也准许百姓娶妾。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the magistrate issued an order permitting the marriage of two men and two women, and also permitting the people to marry concubines.

古文：十二月癸卯朔，诏去群臣所上尊号。
现代文：十二月一日，诏令除去群臣所奉上的尊号。
English: On December 1st, the imperial edict removed the honorific titles given to ministers.

古文：丙午，初定袭封衍圣公俸格。
现代文：四日，开始规定袭封衍圣公俸禄的标准。
English: On the 4th, the standard of hereditary title and sacred public salary began to be stipulated.

古文：命外官去所属百里外者不许参谒，百里内者往还不得过三日。
现代文：命令外任官员所属地方离京城百里以外的不许参谒，百里以内的往返不得超过三天。
English: It was ordered that officials from outside the capital are not allowed to visit places that are more than 100 miles away from the capital, and the round trip within 100 miles must not exceed three days.

古文：癸丑，立太祖射碑于纥石烈部中，上及皇后致奠于碑下。
现代文：十一日，在纥石烈部落中建立太祖射碑，皇上以及皇后在碑下祭奠。
English: On the 11th day of the month, a monument was erected to the great-grandfather of the Jinshi tribe. The emperor and empress paid their respects at the foot of the monument.

古文：甲寅，野人来献异香，却之。
现代文：十二日，郊外的农民来献异香，推却了。
English: On the 12th, farmers from the suburbs came to offer incense, but were turned away.

古文：乙卯，有司奏庆云见，上曰： 朕何德以当此。
现代文：十三日，有司奏禀有彩云出现，皇上说： 朕有什么德行来承当彩云出现。
English: On the thirteenth day, the emperor said, "What virtue do I have to undertake when the clouds appear?"

古文：自今瑞应毋得上闻，若有妖异，当以谕朕，使自警焉。 
现代文：到现在为止，吉祥的应兆不得让更多的人知道，如果有妖异，应当把情况告诉朕，让朕自己警惕。 
English: Up until now, more people should know about auspicious omens, and if there are any strange occurrences, they should tell me about the situation, so that I can be vigilant.

古文：己未，罢行台尚书省。
现代文：十七日，取消行台尚书省。
English: On the 17th, the visit to the Ministry of Education and Culture was cancelled.

古文：改都元帅府为枢密院。
现代文：把都元帅府改为枢密院。
English: Change the title of the Imperial General Headquarters to the Privy Council.

古文：诏改定继绝法。
现代文：诏令改定继绝法。
English: The imperial edict revised the law of succession.

古文：以右副元帅大抃为尚书右丞相兼中书令，参知行台尚书省事张中孚为参知政事，都元帅衮为枢密使，太尉、领三省事如故，元帅左监军昂为枢密副使，刑部尚书赵资福为御史大夫。
现代文：任命右副元帅大白大为尚书右丞相兼中书令，参知行台尚书省事张中孚为参知政事，都元帅兖为枢密使，太尉、领三省事依然如故，元帅左监军昂为枢密副使，刑部尚书赵资福为御史大夫。
English: He appointed the Right Vice-Marshal Da Bai Da as the Vice-Minister of the Right and the Vice-Minister of Letters, Zhang Zhongfu as the Vice-Minister of Political Affairs, Du Marshal Yan as the Privy Envoy, the First Lieutenant and the Lieutenant of the three provinces remained the same, the Marshal Ang as the Vice-Minister of the Left, and the Criminal Department's Vice-Minister of Letters, Zhao Zifu, as the Imperial Historian.

古文：三年正月癸酉朔，宋、夏、高丽遣使来贺。
现代文：天德三年正月初一，宋、夏、高丽国派遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of the reign of Emperor Dezong, the states of Song, Xia and Goryeo sent envoys to congratulate the emperor.

古文：乙亥，参知政事萧玉丁忧，起复如故。癸未，立春，观击土牛。
现代文：初三，参知政事萧玉为父母丧事告假，丧期未满，应召仍任原职。十一日，立春，观看当地民间斗牛。
English: On the third day of junior high school, the councillor and politician Xiao Yu took a leave of absence for the funeral of her parents. The mourning period was not over, but she was still called to her original post. On the 11th day of spring, she watched the local folk bullfight.

古文：丁亥，初造灯山于宫中。
现代文：十五日，初次在宫中制造灯山。
English: On the 15th, for the first time, a lantern mountain was made in the palace.

古文：戊子，生辰，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十六日，皇上生辰，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使臣来祝贺。
English: On the 16th, the emperor's birthday, Song, Goryeo and Xia sent envoys to congratulate him.

古文：甲午，初置国子监。
现代文：二十二日，开始设置国子监。
English: On the 22nd, the establishment of the State Children's Supervisor began.

古文：谓御史大夫赵资福曰： 汝等多徇私情，未闻有所弹劾，朕甚不取。
现代文：对御史大夫赵资福说 ：汝等多次徇私舞弊，没听说有谁弹劾你们，朕认为这样做很不可取。
English: To Dr. Zhao Zifu, he said, "You have repeatedly engaged in self-serving fraud. I haven't heard of anyone impeaching you. I think this is very undesirable.

古文：自今百官有不法者，必当举劾，无惮权贵。 
现代文：从今以后，百官中有违法的，一定要检举弹劾，不要畏惧权贵。 
English: From now on, if any of the hundreds of officials violate the law, they must be prosecuted and impeached. Don't be afraid of the powerful.

古文：乙未，上出猎，宰相以下辞于近郊。
现代文：二十三日，皇上出去打猎，宰相以下官员送行到近郊告别。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor went out hunting, and officials from the prime minister on down accompanied him to the suburbs to bid him farewell.

古文：上驻马戒之曰： 朕不惜高爵厚禄以任汝等，比闻事多留滞，岂汝等苟图自安不以民事为念耶？
现代文：皇上停住马告诫他们说： 朕不惜把高爵厚禄委任给你们，近来听说办事多拖拉停滞，难道你们可以苟且贪图自己安宁而不把人民的事放在心上吗？
English: The emperor stopped his horse and admonished them: "I have no hesitation in entrusting you with a high rank and a generous salary. Lately, I have heard that things have been slow and stagnant. Can you just be greedy for your own peace and not take the people's affairs to heart?

古文：自今朕将察其勤惰，以为赏罚，其各勉之。 
现代文：从今天起，朕将考察你们是勤勉还是懒惰，作为赏罚的依据，各自用这些话来勉励自己。 
English: From today, I will examine whether you are diligent or lazy, as a basis for reward and punishment, and each of you will use these words to encourage yourself.

古文：丁酉，白虹贯日。
现代文：二十五日，又出现白虹贯日的景象。
English: On the 25th, the scene of a white rainbow appeared again.

古文：二月丁巳，还宫。
现代文：二月十六日，皇上回到宫中。
English: On February 16, the Emperor returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：三月庚寅，以翰林学士刘长言等为宋生日使。
现代文：三月十九日，命令翰林学士刘长言等人作为生日使赴宋国。
English: On March 19, he ordered Liu Changyan, a scholar of Hanlin, and others to go to Song as a birthday envoy.

古文：壬辰，诏广燕城，建宫室。
现代文：二十一日，诏令扩大燕京城，建造宫室。
English: On the 21st, the imperial edict was issued to expand Yanjing City and build a palace.

古文：己亥，谓侍臣曰： 昨太子生日，皇后献朕一物，大是珍异，卿试观之。 
现代文：二十八日，对侍臣说 ：昨天太子过生日，皇后献给朕一件东西，大概是奇珍特异之物，卿试着来观看它。 
English: On the 28th, he said to his equerry, "Yesterday was the birthday of the Crown Prince, and the Empress gave me something. It is probably a rare and special object. Sir, try to see it."

古文：即出诸绛囊中，乃田家稼穑圆。 后意太子生深宫之中，不知民间稼穑之艰难，故以为献，朕甚贤之。 
现代文：就从绛囊中取出那件东西，是田家稼穑图。又说 ：皇后的意思是说太子生长在深宫之中，不知道民间播种和收获的艰难，所以把这张图作为礼品献上来，朕认为她很有德行。 
English: He took out the thing from his satchel, which was a picture of the family's income. He added: "The queen meant to say that the prince grew up in the depths of the palace and did not know the hardships of folk sowing and harvesting, so she presented this picture as a gift. I think she is very virtuous."

古文：四月丙午，诏迁都燕京。
现代文：四月五日，皇上诏令把国都迁移到燕京。
English: On April 5, the emperor issued a decree to move the national capital to Yanjing.

古文：辛酉，有司图上燕城宫室制度，营建阴阳五姓所宜。
现代文：二十日，有司呈上燕京城宫室制图，请示营建阴阳五行适当的场所。
English: On the 20th, a company submitted a drawing of the palace room of Yanjing Castle, requesting the construction of a suitable place for yin and yang five elements.

古文：海陵曰： 国家吉凶，在德不在地。
现代文：海陵皇上说： 国家是吉是凶，在于德政而不在地方。
English: Hailing the emperor, he said, "Whether the country is auspicious or inauspicious depends on German politics, not on the localities.

古文：使桀、纣居之，虽卜善地何益。
现代文：让桀、纣居住在那里，虽然占卜说是好地方有什么用处？
English: What is the use of letting the baboons live there, even though fortune-tellers say it is a good place?

古文：使尧、舜居之，何用卜为。 
现代文：如果让尧帝、舜帝居住在同一地方，还用什么占卜？ 
English: If Emperor Gong and Emperor Gong lived in the same place, what kind of divination would be used?

古文：丙寅，罢岁贡鹰隼。
现代文：二十五日，免除每年进贡鹰类的规定。
English: On the 25th, exempted from the annual tribute eagles.

古文：沂州男子吴真犯法，当死，有司以其母老疾无侍为请，命官与养济，著为令。
现代文：沂州有个叫吴真的男子犯法，应当判死罪，有司以他母亲年老多病无人侍候为理由为他请求减罪，皇上命令官府给予救济，写成书面命令。
English: There was a man named Wu Zhen in Zhangzhou who committed a crime and should be sentenced to death. A magistrate pleaded for a reduction of his sentence on the grounds that his mother was too old and sick to be attended by anyone. The emperor ordered the government to grant relief and write a written order.

古文：闰月辛未朔，命尚书右丞张浩调选燕京，仍谕浩无私徇。
现代文：闰四月一日，下令尚书右丞张浩选调官员到燕京，仍然告诉他不要徇私舞弊。
English: On April 1, Shangshu Rongcheng ordered Zhang Hao, an election official, to go to Yanjing, but still told him not to engage in self-dealing.

古文：丙子，命太官常膳惟进鱼肉，旧贡鹅鸭等悉罢之。
现代文：六日，下令太官平时用膳只进鱼、肉，往昔进贡鹅、鸭等的规定全都免除。
English: On the 6th, he ordered that only fish and meat be served to the eunuchs in their daily meals, and that all regulations such as goose and duck being served as tribute in the past be waived.

古文：丁丑，罢皇统间苑中所养禽兽。
现代文：七日，除去皇统年间宫苑中所豢养的禽兽。
English: On the seventh day, the animals that were kept in the palace during the imperial era were removed.

古文：归德军节度使阿鲁补以撤官舍材木构私第，赐死。
现代文：归德军节度使阿鲁补用撤职官舍的材料木头建造私宅，被赐死。
English: On the day of the German army's return to Japan, Aru built a private house with wood from the materials of the dismissed official's house, and was sentenced to death.

古文：戊戌，诏朝官称疾不治事者，尚书省令监察御史与太医同诊视，无实者坐之。
现代文：二十八日，诏令朝廷官员中声称有病不能做事的，尚书省要派监察御史和太医一同去诊视，对不是实情的要判罪。
English: On the 28th, the imperial edict stated that among the officials of the imperial court who claimed to be ill and unable to do things, the Ministry of Education and Culture should send the inspector and the doctor to go to the clinic together, and if it was not true, they should be convicted.

古文：五月壬子，以戒敕宰相以下官，诏中外。
现代文：五月十三日，用禁制教育宰相以下官员，并诏告中外。
English: On May 13, officials below the prime minister were banned from teaching, and this was announced to the public.

古文：戊辰，宰臣请益嫔御以广嗣续。
现代文：二十九日，宰相大臣请求皇上增加御封嫔妃，以便广有继承续后的人选。
English: On the 29th, the Prime Minister asked the Emperor to increase the number of Imperial Princesses, so that there would be a wide range of candidates to succeed to the throne.

古文：上命徒单贞语宰臣，前所诛党人诸妇人中多朕中表亲，欲纳之官中。
现代文：皇上命令徒单贞告诉宰相大臣，以前所诛杀的政治上结成朋党的人的妻子中不少是朕的表亲，想接纳她们到宫中。
English: The emperor ordered Tsuchizan Zhen to tell the prime minister that many of the wives of the political cronies he had killed were my cousins, and he wanted to admit them to the palace.

古文：平章政事萧裕不可，上不从。
现代文：平章政事萧裕认为不可以，皇上不听从他的劝告。
English: The Emperor did not listen to the advice of Xiao Yu, who thought that the political affairs of Emperor Pingzhang were unacceptable.

古文：遂纳宗本子莎鲁啜，宗固子胡里剌、胡失打，秉德弟糺里等妻宫中。
现代文：于是接纳宗本的儿子莎鲁啜、宗固的儿子胡里剌和胡失打、秉德的弟弟礣里等人的妻子到宫中。
English: So he received into the palace the wives of Sohon's son Sarus, Sogo's sons Horitsune and Hutsude, and Byeongde's brother Yuri.

古文：六月丙子，杀太府监完颜冯六。
现代文：六月七日，诛杀太府监完颜冯六。
English: On June 7th, Yan Fengrui was executed for the murder of the Taifu Supervisor.

古文：宋遣使祈请山陵，不许。
现代文：宋国派人来祈请山陵，未获准许。
English: Song sent people to pray for the tomb, but they were not allowed to do so.

古文：九月庚戌，赐燕京役夫帛，人一匹。
现代文：九月十三日，赐给燕京工匠帛，每人一匹。
English: On September 13th, Yanjing craftsmen were given a pair of horses, one for each of them.

古文：以东京路兵马都总管府判官萧子敏为高丽生日使，修起居注萧彭哥为夏国生日使。
现代文：让东京路兵马都总管府判官萧子敏当生日使赴高丽，让修《起居注》的萧彭哥作为夏国生日使。
English: Let Xiao Zimin, the judge of the Tokyo Road General Headquarters of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses, be the birthday envoy to Korea, and let Xiao Pengge, the author of "Living Notes," be the birthday envoy to summer country.

古文：十月己巳，杀兰子山猛安萧拱。
现代文：十月三日，诛杀兰子山猛安萧拱。
English: On October 3rd, the battle of Lanzhishan, Meng'an and Xiaoqiang began.

古文：以右副点检不术鲁阿海等为宋正旦使。
现代文：派右副点检不术鲁阿海等作为贺宋正旦使。
English: He sent his right-hand deputy, Lu Ahai, as the envoy of He Song and Zheng Dan.

古文：十一月癸亥，诏罢世袭万户官，前后赐姓人各复本姓。
现代文：十一月二十七日，诏令免除世袭万户官，前后曾经赐予姓氏的人各自恢复本姓。
English: On November 27th, the imperial edict exempted all hereditary officials, and those who had given surnames before and after restored their own surnames.

古文：十二月戊辰，杖寿宁县主徐辇。
现代文：十二月二日，对寿宁县主徐辇施用杖刑。
English: On December 2nd, the ruler of Shuning County, Xu Jun, was punished with a cane.

古文：癸酉，猎于近郊。
现代文：七日，皇上在近郊打猎。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：乙酉，还宫。
现代文：十九日，回到宫中。
English: He returned to the Imperial Palace on the day of the earthquake.

古文：是岁，子崇王元寿薨。
现代文：这一年，海陵皇帝的儿子崇王元寿逝世。
English: In this year, Emperor Hailing's son, Chong Wang Yuan Shou, passed away.

古文：四年正月丁酉朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：天德四年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of the Heian period, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to the Imperial Court.

古文：群臣请立皇太子，从之。
现代文：群臣请求拥立皇太子，皇上听从了他们意见。
English: A group of courtiers requested that the crown prince be enthroned, and the emperor heeded their advice.

古文：戊戌，初定东宫官属。
现代文：初二，初次设置东宫官属。
English: In the second year of junior high school, the East Palace was set up for the first time.

古文：立捕盗赏格。
现代文：建立捕盗奖赏的格次。
English: Establishing a special level of reward for theft.

古文：癸卯，太白经天。
现代文：初七，太白星经天。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, a white star streaks across the sky.

古文：壬子，生辰，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十六日，皇上生辰，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者前来祝贺。
English: On the 16th, the emperor's birthday, Song, Goryeo and Xia sent envoys to congratulate him.

古文：癸亥，朝谒世祖、太祖、太宗、德宗陵。
现代文：二十七日，皇上去朝拜世祖、太祖、太宗、德宗陵墓。
English: On the 27th, the emperor went to pay homage to the mausoleums of Shizu, Taizu, Taizong and Dezong.

古文：甲子，还宫。
现代文：二十八日，回到宫中。
English: On the 28th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：二月丁卯，立子光英为皇太子，庚午，诏中外。
现代文：二月二日，海陵帝立他的儿子光英为皇太子，五日，向中外诏告这一消息。
English: On February 2nd, Emperor Hailing made his son Guangying the crown prince. On the 5th, he announced the news to the world.

古文：甲戌，如燕京。
现代文：九日，海陵帝在燕京。
English: On the 9th, Emperor Hailing arrived in Yanjing.

古文：昭义军节度使萧仲宣家奴告其主怨谤。
现代文：昭义军节度使萧仲宣的家奴告他的主子心怀怨恨并有诽谤之词。
English: At the time of the Boxer Rebellion, Xiao Zhongxuan's manservant accused his master of harboring resentment and slander.

古文：上曰： 仲宣之侄迪辇阿不近以诽谤诛，故敢妄诉。 
现代文：皇上说 ：仲宣的侄子迪辇阿不最近因诽谤罪被杀，所以你因恐惧而胆敢胡言乱语。 
English: The emperor said, "Chung Hsien's nephew, Dizhao Wang, was recently killed for slander, so you are afraid and dare to say nonsense.

古文：命杀告者。
现代文：下命令杀了告主子的家奴。
English: He gave the order to kill the slave who was suing his master.

古文：迪辇阿不者，萧拱也。
现代文：迪辇阿不，就是萧拱。
English: No, it's Xiao Gong.

古文：戊子，次泰州。
现代文：二十三日，皇帝到泰州。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor arrived in Taizhou.

古文：三月丙申朔，以刑部尚书田秀颖等为宋生日使。
现代文：三月一日，派出刑部尚书田秀颖等人作为贺宋生日使。
English: On March 1, the Ministry of Justice dispatched Shosukuda Hideyoshi and others as envoys for He Song's birthday.

古文：四月丙寅朔，有司请今岁河南、北选人并赴中京铨注，从之。
现代文：四月一日，有司请示皇上，今年从河南、河北挑选人才到中京去做铨注，皇上采纳了这个意见。
English: On April 1st, there was a request to the emperor to select talents from Henan and Hebei to go to Chukyo to do the pouring this year, and the emperor accepted this opinion.

古文：壬辰，上自泰州如凉陉。
现代文：二十七日，皇上从泰州到了凉陉。
English: On the 27th, the emperor arrived in Liangyao from Taizhou.

古文：五月丁酉，猎于立列只山。
现代文：五月三日，皇上在立列只山打猎。
English: On May 3, the emperor went hunting in the mountains.

古文：甲寅，赐猎士，人一羊。
现代文：二十日，赐予陪同打猎的士卒，每人一只羊。
English: On the 20th, he gave each of his hunting companions a sheep.

古文：乙卯，次临潢府。
现代文：二十一日，驾临临潢府。
English: On the 21st, they arrived in Linfen.

古文：丁巳，太白经天。
现代文：二十三日，太白星经天。
English: On the 23rd, a white star streaked across the sky.

古文：六月甲子朔，驻绵山。
现代文：六月一日，停驻在绵山。
English: On June 1, it stopped in Mianshan.

古文：戊寅，权楚底部猛安那野伏诛。
现代文：十五日，权楚底部猛安那野罪行，那野伏法被杀。
English: On the fifteenth day, at the bottom of the power, there was a violent crime in Nano, and Nano Fuba was killed.

古文：七月癸卯，命崇义军节度使乌带之妻唐括定哥杀其夫而纳之。
现代文：七月十日，命令崇义军节度使乌带的妻子唐括定哥杀了他的丈夫，而海陵帝纳娶了她。
English: On July 10th, the Chongyi Army Festival was ordered to make the wife of Wu Zhe kill her husband, while Hailing Dina married her.

古文：八月癸亥朔，猎于途你山。
现代文：八月一日，在途你山打猎。
English: On August 1st, you were on your way to hunt in the mountains.

古文：甲戌，以侍御史保鲁鞫事不实，杖之。
现代文：十二日，因为侍御史保鲁审讯之事虚浮不实，用了杖刑。
English: On the 12th, because the matter of the interrogation of the chamberlain Paul was false, he was punished with a cane.

古文：丙子，次于铎瓦。
现代文：十四日，到达铎瓦。
English: On the 14th, we arrived in Shenhua.

古文：九月甲午，次中京。
现代文：九月三日，到中京。
English: On September 3, he arrived in Chukyo.

古文：丙午，尚书右丞相大抃罢。
现代文：十五日，免除尚书右丞相大白大的职务。
English: On the fifteenth day, he relieved Shang Shu Rong, the Minister of the Right, of his duties.

古文：杀太府少监刘景。
现代文：杀了太府少监刘景。
English: He killed Liu Jing, the Taifu Juvenile Supervisor.

古文：以都水使者完颜麻泼为高丽生日使，吏部郎中萧中立为夏国生日使。
现代文：派都水使者完颜麻泼赴高丽当生日使，吏部郎中萧中立赴夏国当生日使。
English: He sent the emissary of the Capital Water Bureau to Goryeo as the birthday envoy, and the official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Xiao Zhonglian, to the summer country as the birthday envoy.

古文：十月壬戌朔，使使奉迁太庙神主。
现代文：十月一日，派人奉迁太庙神主。
English: On October 1st, someone was sent to relocate the temple's deity.

古文：御史大夫赵资福罢。
现代文：免除御史大夫赵资福的职务。
English: to relieve the imperial historian Zhao Zifu of his duties.

古文：甲申，以太子詹事张用直等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：二十三日，派太子詹事张用直等人作为贺宋正旦使。
English: On the 23rd, he sent Prince Zhan Zhi Zhang Yizhong and others as envoys to He Song Zhengdan.

古文：杀太祖长公主兀鲁，杖罢其夫平章政事徒单恭，封其侍婢忽挞为国夫人。
现代文：杀死太祖的长女公主兀鲁，对她的丈夫平章政事徒单恭施用杖刑，并免除他的官职，封兀鲁公主的侍婢忽挞为国夫人。
English: Princess Jilu, the eldest daughter of the great-grandfather, was killed, her husband, Pingzhang Zhengjiutang, was punished with a cane, and he was exempted from his official position. Princess Jilu's servant and maid, Hu Jun, was made the wife of the country.

古文：恭之兄定哥初尚兀鲁，定哥死，恭强纳焉，而不相能，又与侍婢忽挞不协。
现代文：徒单恭的哥哥定哥起初和兀鲁公主匹配，定哥死后，徒单恭强行纳娶了兀鲁，而互相不亲善，徒单恭又和侍婢忽挞不和协。
English: At first, Tutankhamun's brother Ding Ge matched with Princess Jiro. After Ding Ge's death, Tutankhamun forcibly married Jiro, but they were not friendly with each other. Tutankhamun was also at odds with his servants and maids.

古文：忽挞得幸于后，遂谮于上，故见杀，而并罢恭。
现代文：忽挞在皇后那里得到宠爱，于是在皇上面前说坏话，所以兀鲁被杀，而同时罢免了徒单恭。
English: As he was favored by the empress, he spoke ill of her in front of the emperor, so Jilu was killed and Tutangong was removed from his post.

古文：十一月戊戌，以咸平尹李德固为平章政事。
现代文：十一月八日，任命咸平尹李德固为平章政事。
English: On November 8th, he appointed Xianping Yin Li Degu as the political affairs of Pingzhang.

古文：辛丑，买珠于乌古迪烈部及蒲与路，禁百姓私相贸易，仍调两路民夫，采珠一年。
现代文：十一日，在乌古迪烈部以及蒲与路购买珠子，禁止百姓私人之间互相贸易，仍然征调两路民夫，采珠一年。
English: On the 11th, the purchase of beads in the Ugudi hot spot and Puyong Road was prohibited, and the mutual trade between the people and private individuals was prohibited. The people's servants of the two roads were still conscripted, and the beads were harvested for one year.

古文：戊申，以前平章政事徒单恭为司徒。
现代文：十八日，任命前平章政事徒单恭为司徒。
English: On the 18th, the former Taira no Shosho political apprentice, Shankyo, was appointed as an apprentice.

古文：十二月甲子，斩妄人敲仙于中京市。
现代文：十二月四日，在中京市场上斩了狂妄的人敲仙。
English: On December 4th, a deranged man stabbed a hermit in the Zhongjing market.

古文：辛未，以汴京路都转运使左瀛等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：十一日，让汴京路都转运使左瀛等担任贺宋正旦使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Beijing Road was transferred to the Zuoying Road, and Zuoying Road was transferred to the He Song Zhengdan Road.

古文：庚寅，太尉、领三省事、枢密使衮薨。
现代文：三十日，大尉、领三省事、枢密使兖逝世。
English: On the 30th, the captain, the leader of the three provinces, and the confidential envoy died.

古文：贞元年正月辛卯朔，上不视朝。
现代文：贞元元年正月初一，皇上不临朝。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the Zhengyuan era, the emperor did not come to the court.

古文：诏有司受宋、高丽、夏、回纥贡献。
现代文：诏令有司收受宋、高丽、夏、回纥使者贡献的财物。
English: According to the imperial edict, there was a secretary to receive the property contributed by the emissaries of Song, Goryeo, Xia and Hui.

古文：丙午，生辰，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十六日，皇帝诞辰，宋、高丽、夏国遣使者来祝贺生日。
English: On the 16th, the emperor's birthday, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate the birthday.

古文：以中京留守高桢为御史大夫。
现代文：任命中京留守高桢做御史大夫。
English: Chukyo left-behind high school students were appointed as goshi-dafu.

古文：二月庚申，上自中京如燕京。
现代文：二月一日，皇上从中京启驾到燕京。
English: On February 1, the emperor drove from Zhongjing to Yanjing.

古文：三月辛亥，上至燕京，初备法驾，甲寅，亲选良家子百三十余人充后宫。
现代文：三月二十二日，皇上到达燕京，开始准备法驾。二十五日，亲自挑选良家子弟一百三十多人充实后宫。
English: On March 22nd, the emperor arrived in Yanjing and began to prepare for the Dharma drive. On the 25th, he personally selected more than one hundred and thirty children of good families to enrich the harem.

古文：乙卯，以迁都诏中外。
现代文：二十六日，把迁都燕京的事诏告中外。
English: On the 26th, the relocation of the capital to Yanjing was announced to the public.

古文：改元贞元。
现代文：改年号为贞元。
English: His era name was changed to Sadamoto.

古文：改燕京为中都，府曰大兴，汴京为南京，中京为北京。
现代文：把燕京改称中都，官署叫大兴府，把汴京改叫南京，中京改叫北京。
English: Yanjing was renamed Zhongdu, the government office was called Daxingfu, Shuijing was renamed Nanjing, and Zhongjing was renamed Beijing.

古文：丙辰，以司徒徒单恭为太保、领三省事，平章政事萧裕为右丞相兼中书令，右丞张浩、左丞张通古为平章政事，参知政事张中孚为左丞，萧玉为右丞，平章政事李德固为司空，左宣徽使刘萼为参知政事，枢密副使昂为枢密使，工部尚书仆散师恭为枢密副使。
现代文：二十六日，任命司徒徒单恭为太保、领三省事，平章政事萧裕为右丞相兼中书令，右丞张浩、左丞张通古为平章政事，参知政事张中孚为左丞，萧玉为右丞，平章政事李德固为司空，左宣徽使刘萼为参知政事，枢密副使昂为枢密使，工部尚书仆散师恭为枢密副使。
English: On the twenty-sixth day of the month, the following were appointed as Tai Po and the three provincial governorships: Siu Tsung-kyung, the Tai Po and the three provincial governorships; Siu Yu, the Tai Po and the three provincial governorships; Zhang Hao, the Tai Po and the three provincial governorships; Zhang Tongu, the Tai Po and the three provincial governorships; Zhang Zhongfu, the Tai Po and the three provincial governorships; Li Degu, the Tai Po and the three provincial governorships; Liu Cai, the Tai Po and the three provincial governorships; Xiao Yu, the Tai Po and the three provincial governorships

古文：四月辛酉，以右宣徽使纥石烈撒合辇等为贺宋生日使。
现代文：四月二日，派右宣徽使纥石烈撒合辇等人作为贺宋生日使。
English: On April 2nd, he sent Yu Xuan Hui to make Zou Shi Leshi Zahao and others as the birthday envoy of He Song.

古文：辛未，特封唐括定哥为贵妃。
现代文：十二日，特封唐括定哥为贵妃。
English: On the twelfth day, Tang Bolting Brother was specially appointed as a noble consort.

古文：戊寅，皇太后大氏崩。
现代文：十九日，皇太后大氏逝世。
English: On the 19th, Empress Dowager Dai died.

古文：五月辛卯，杀弟西京留守蒲家。西京兵马完颜谟卢瓦、编修官圆福奴、通进孛迭坐与蒲家善，并杀之。
现代文：五月三日，杀死自己的弟弟西京留守蒲家，西京兵马完颜谟卢瓦、编修官圆福奴、通进孛迭因为和蒲家关系好而牵连获罪，一同被杀了。
English: On May 3rd, he killed his younger brother, Saikyo, who stayed behind in Pujiang, and the soldiers and horses of Saikyo, including Yan Mulua, editor Yuan Fuluo, and Tongjin Xie, were implicated and convicted because of their good relationship with Pujiang, and were killed together.

古文：乙卯，以京城隙地赐朝官及卫士。
现代文：二十七日，把京城空隙的地方赐给朝廷官员以及卫士。
English: On the 27th, he gave the Imperial Court officials and guards a vacant place in the capital.

古文：六月乙丑，以安国军节度使耶律恕为参知政事。
现代文：六月七日，命令安国军节度使耶律恕出任参知政事。
English: On June 7th, the An Kuo-tung Army was ordered to make Yerushalayim a member of the Council of State.

古文：七月戊子朔，元赐朝官京城隙地，征钱有差。
现代文：七月一日，本来赐给朝廷官员的京城空地，开始按地面大小不同征收数量不等的钱。
English: On July 1, the government began to levy varying amounts of money according to the size of the land on the largest open space in the capital, which was originally given to imperial officials.

古文：八月壬戌，司空李德固薨。
现代文：八月五日，司空李德固逝世。
English: On August 5, Sikyong Li Degu passed away.

古文：禁中都路捕射獐兔。
现代文：发出禁令，禁止中都路捕射獐兔。
English: An injunction was issued to prohibit the hunting and shooting of jackrabbits in Zhongdu Road.

古文：戊寅，赐营建宫室工匠及役夫帛。
现代文：二十一日，拿帛赏赐给营建宫室的工匠以及役夫。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the craftsmen and servants who built the palace were rewarded with a bowl.

古文：九月丁亥朔，以翰林待制谋良虎为夏国生日使，吏部郎中窊合山为高丽生日使。
现代文：九月一日，让翰林待制谋良虎当夏国生日使，吏部郎中纞合山当高丽生日使。
English: On September 1st, Hanlin was appointed as the envoy for the birthday of the Republic of Korea, Hanlin was appointed as the envoy for the birthday of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, and Hanhwa was appointed as the envoy for the birthday of the Republic of Korea.

古文：十月丁巳，猎于良乡。
现代文：十月二日，在良乡打猎。
English: October 2nd, hunting in Liangxiang.

古文：封料石冈神为灵应王。
现代文：封料石冈神为灵应王。
English: The god of sealing materials, Ishioka, is the king of spiritual response.

古文：初，海陵尝过此祠，持杯珓祷曰： 使吾有天命，当得吉卜。 
现代文：起初，海陵曾经过这座祠堂，拿着占卜吉凶用的杯繡祷告说： 假使我有天命，应当得到一个吉祥的予卜。 
English: At first, Hailing used to pass by this ancestral hall, holding a cup used for divination and praying, saying, "If I have a heavenly destiny, I should receive an auspicious omen.

古文：投之，吉。
现代文：投下杯繡果然是吉卦。
English: The toss of the goblet is a lucky guess.

古文：又祷曰： 果如所卜，他日当有报，否则毁尔祠宇。 
现代文：海陵又祷告说 ：果然像所占卜的这样，他日定当报答，如果不灵验，毁了你这祠宇。 
English: Hailing prayed again, "Indeed, just as the soothsayer foretold, he has set a day for retribution, and if it does not work out, he will destroy this shrine of yours."

古文：投之，又吉，故封之。
现代文：又投下杯繡，又是吉，所以现在封这座庙神。
English: The cup and goblet were also thrown, and it was good luck, so now the temple god is sealed.

古文：戊午，还宫。
现代文：初三，回宫。
English: Junior high school, back to the palace.

古文：壬戌，有司言： 太后园陵未毕，合停冬享及祫祭。 
现代文：初七，有司说，太后的陵园没有完工，太后的神主与太祖合停在太祖庙冬享并且举行合祭，皇上同意了。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, a priest said that the empress dowager's necropolis had not been completed. The empress deity and the great-grandfather stopped at the great-grandfather's temple to enjoy the winter and hold a closing ceremony. The emperor agreed.

古文：从之。丙子，命内外官闻大功以上丧，止给当日假，若父母丧，听给假三日，著为令。
现代文：二十一日，命令内外官听到有大功以上的人丧亡，只给当天假去吊丧；如果是父、母丧亡，听说了给三天假，写成书面条令。
English: On the twenty-first day, he ordered the officials at home and abroad to hear that people with more than great achievements had died, and only give them the same day off to mourn; if it was the death of a father or mother, they heard that they would be given three days off, and write a written order.

古文：十一月丙戌朔，定州献嘉禾，诏自今不得复进。
现代文：十一月一日，定州献好稻米，诏令从今以后不得再进献。
English: On November 1st, the rice in Dingzhou was donated, and it was decreed that no more rice would be donated in the future.

古文：己丑，瑶池殿成。
现代文：四日，瑶池殿建成。
English: On the 4th, Tsugaike-den was completed.

古文：丙申，以户部尚书蔡松年等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：十一日，派户部尚书蔡松年等作为贺宋正旦使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he dispatched the household secretary Cai Songnian and others as envoys of He Song Zhengdan.

古文：戊戌，左丞相耨碗温都思忠致仕。
现代文：十三日，左丞相耨碗温都思忠辞去官职。
English: On the 13th, the Minister of the Left, Won Do Sih Chung, resigned from his post.

古文：庚戌，以枢密使昂为左丞相，枢密副使仆散思恭为枢密使。
现代文：二十五日，任命枢密使昂为左丞相，枢密副使仆散师恭为枢密使。
English: On the 25th, he appointed the Privy Envoy, Aung, as the Left Minister, and the Deputy Privy Envoy, Minxuan Shigong, as the Privy Envoy.

古文：十二月，太白经天。
现代文：十二月，太白星经天。
English: In December, a white star streaks across the sky.

古文：戊午，特赐贵妃唐括定哥家奴孙梅进士及第。
现代文：四日，特赐贵妃唐括定哥的家奴孙梅进士及第。
English: On the 4th, the empress dowager of Tang Dynasty specially bestowed the title of Sun Mei Jinji and the first place to the family slave of Tang Huading brother.

古文：壬戌，以签书枢密院事南撒为枢密副使。
现代文：八日，任命签书枢密院事南撒为枢密副使。
English: On the 8th, Nansa, a Privy Councillor, was appointed Deputy Privy Counsellor.

古文：辛未，对所纳皇叔曹国王宗敏妃阿懒为昭妃。
现代文：十七日，封所纳娶的皇叔曹国王宗敏的妃子阿懒为昭妃。
English: On the seventeenth day, the consort of Emperor Cao's uncle, King Zongmin, who was married by Fuxonna, was named Zhaofei.

古文：丙子，贵妃唐括定哥坐与旧奴奸，赐死。
现代文：二十二日，贵妃唐括定哥因为和往昔的奴仆通奸，被赐死。
English: On the twenty-second day, the noblewoman Tang Guoding was sentenced to death for committing adultery with her former servant.

古文：闰月乙酉朔，杀护卫特谟葛。
现代文：闰十二月一日，杀了护卫特谟葛。
English: On the first day of December, he killed the bodyguard, Temujin.

古文：癸巳，定社稷制度。
现代文：九日，定立社稷制度。
English: On the 9th, the company badge system was established.

古文：太白经天。
现代文：太白星经天。
English: A very white star streaks across the sky.

古文：癸卯，以太保、领三省事徒单恭为太保、领三省事如故。
现代文：十九日，让太保、领三省事徒单恭当太师，仍然领三省事。
English: On the 19th, he let Taibao and the three provincial governors take the lead, but he still led the three provincial governors.

古文：命西京路统军挞懒、西北路招讨萧怀忠、临潢府总管马和尚、乌古迪烈司招讨斜野等北巡。
现代文：命令西京路统军挞懒、西北路招讨萧怀忠、临潢府总管马和尚、乌古迪烈司招讨斜野等巡察北部领土。
English: He ordered the West Beijing Road Unification Army to be lazy, the Northwest Road to invite Xiao Huaizhong, the Linyi Prefecture General Manager Ma Monk, and the Ugudi Martyrs to invite Xiangye to patrol the northern territory.

古文：二年正月甲寅朔，上不豫，不视朝。
现代文：贞元二年正月初一，皇上不舒服，没有临朝听政。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of the Zhengyuan era, the emperor was not feeling well and did not come to the imperial court to listen to politics.

古文：赐宋、高丽、夏使就馆燕。
现代文：赐予宋、高丽、夏国使臣就在宾馆用宴。
English: The envoys of Song, Goryeo and Xia were given a banquet at the hotel.

古文：庚申，太白经天。
现代文：七日，太白星经天。
English: On the seventh day, a white star streaked across the sky.

古文：尚书右丞相萧裕与前真定尹萧冯家奴、前御史中丞萧招折、博州同知遥设等谋反，伏诛，诏中外。
现代文：尚书右丞相萧裕与前真定府尹萧冯家奴、前御史中丞萧招折、博州同知遥设等密谋造反，依法诛杀，诏告中外。
English: Shangshu Righteous Minister Xiao Yu conspired to rebel with former Zhendingfu Yin Xiao Feng Jia Nuan, former Imperial Historian Zhongzheng Xiao Zhifu, Boshou Tongzhi Yuanshi and others, fought and killed according to the law, and reported to China and abroad.

古文：己巳，生辰，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十六日，皇上诞辰，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使臣来祝贺生日。
English: On the 16th, the emperor's birthday, Song, Goryeo and Xia sent envoys to congratulate the birthday.

古文：二月甲申朔，以平章政事张浩为尚书右丞相兼中书令。
现代文：二月一日，任命平章政事张浩为尚书右丞相兼中书令。
English: On February 1, Zhang Hao, a political officer of the Taira clan, was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Right and the Vice-Minister of Letters.

古文：甲午，以尚书右丞萧玉为平章政事，前河南路统军使张辉为尚书右丞，西北路招讨使萧好胡为枢密副使。
现代文：十一日，任命尚书右丞萧玉为平章政事，前河南路统军使张晖为尚书右丞，西北路招讨使萧好胡为枢密副使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he appointed Shangshu Yu Rongcheng Xiao Yu to be the Pingzhang Political Affairs, the former Henan Road Unification Army envoy Zhang Qi to be the Shangshu Yu Rongcheng, and the Northwest Road Invitation to Xiao Hao Hu to be the Privy Vice-Envoy.

古文：三月戊辰，夏遣使贺迁都。
现代文：三月十五日，夏国派使者来祝贺迁都。
English: On March 15th, Xia Guo sent an envoy to congratulate the relocation of the capital.

古文：四月丙戌，幸大兴府及都转运使司。
现代文：四月四日，巡视大兴府以及都转运使司。
English: On April 4th, he inspected Daxingfu and the capital transfer envoy.

古文：遣荐含桃于衍庆宫。
现代文：在衍庆宫分发祭祀时用的樱桃。
English: Cherries used in the distribution of sacrificial offerings at Yanqing Palace.

古文：五月癸丑朔，日有食之，避正殿，敕百官勿治事。
现代文：五月一日，有日食发生，皇上回避正殿，命令百官都不要办公事。
English: On the first day of May, a solar eclipse occurred. The emperor avoided the main hall and ordered all officials not to do office work.

古文：己未，诏自今每月上七日不奏刑名，尚食进馔不进肉。
现代文：七日，诏令从今往后每月上旬的七日不禀奏刑罚的名称，管理进奉饮食但是不要进肉食。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor decreed that from now on, the seven days at the beginning of each month would not bear the name of the punishment, and the administration would eat and drink, but not eat meat.

古文：丁卯，始置交钞库，设使副员。
现代文：十五日，开始设置交钞库，设使及其副员。
English: On the 15th, the banknote depository was set up, and the chief envoy and his deputy were appointed.

古文：丁丑，太原尹徒单阿里出虎伏诛，复命其子术斯剌乘传焚其骨，掷水中。
现代文：二十五日，太原府尹徒单阿里出虎被抓诛杀，又命令他的儿子术斯剌乘坐驿站的传车，焚毁他父亲的尸骨，投掷到水中。
English: On the 25th, the Taiyuan prefectural Yin Tushan Ali was caught and killed by a tiger. He also ordered his son, Zhusheng, to take a train from the railway station, burn his father's bones, and throw them into the water.

古文：七月庚申，初设盐钞香茶文引印造库使副。
现代文：七月九日，初次设置盐钞、香茶、文引印造库使以及副使。
English: On July 9, for the first time, salt banknotes, fragrant tea, a printing warehouse for printing documents and a deputy postmaster were set up.

古文：丙子，参知政事耶律恕罢。
现代文：二十五日，免除参知政事耶律恕的官职。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, he removed the official post of Sanzhi Zhengji Yeruxiu.

古文：八月丙午，以左丞相昂去衣杖其弟妇，命杖之。
现代文：八月十三日，因左丞相昂脱去衣裳杖打他的兄弟媳妇，命杖笞左丞相昂。
English: On August 13, he beat his brother's daughter-in-law with a cane for stripping off his clothes, and stabbed him with a cane.

古文：戊申，以御史大夫高桢为司空，御史大夫如故。
现代文：十五日，任命御史大夫高桢为司空，仍然保留御史大夫像以前一样。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, he appointed the chief historian, Dr. Gao Jun, to be the secretary, and still retained the chief historian as before.

古文：九月己未，常武殿击鞠，令百姓纵观。
现代文：九月九日，在常武殿打球，让百姓纵情观看。
English: On September 9th, they played a game at the Jōmu-den, and the people were allowed to watch.

古文：辛酉，以吏部尚书萧颐为参知政事。
现代文：十一日，命吏部尚书萧赜出任参知政事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Shangshu Xiaoqi of the Ministry of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat.

古文：癸亥，猎于近郊。
现代文：十三日，在近郊打猎。
English: On the 13th, they went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：丁卯，次顺州。
现代文：十七日，到顺州。
English: On the 17th, to Shunzhou.

古文：太师、领三省事徒单恭薨。
现代文：太师、领三省事徒单恭逝世。
English: Daishi, the leader of the three provinces, Jito Shankong passed away.

古文：是夜，还宫。
现代文：当天夜间，皇上回到宫廷。
English: In the evening of the same day, the Emperor returned to court.

古文：乙亥，复猎于近郊。
现代文：二十五日，又到近郊打猎。
English: On the 25th, they went hunting again in the suburbs.

古文：十月庚辰朔，杀广宁尹韩王亨。
现代文：十月一日，诛杀广宁府尹韩王亨。
English: On October 1, Wang Heng Yin Han of Guangningfu was killed.

古文：庚寅，还宫。
现代文：十一日，回宫。
English: On the 11th day, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：庚子，以左丞相致仕温都思忠起为太傅、领三省事。
现代文：二十一日，因为左丞相辞官，起用温都思忠为太傅、领三省事。
English: On the twenty-first day, because of the resignation of the Left Chancellery, Wengdu Sizhong was appointed as Taifu and led three provincial affairs.

古文：以刑部侍郎白彦恭等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：派刑部侍郎白彦恭等为贺宋正旦使。
English: He sent Hisong Seongtan's envoy, including the attendant of the Department of Justice, Bai Hikong.

古文：十一月戊辰，上命诸从姊妹皆分属诸妃，出入禁中，与为淫乱，卧内遍设地衣，裸逐为戏。
现代文：十一月十九日，皇上命令诸侍从姊妹都分别隶属各位王妃，出入宫禁之中，皇上和她们淫乱，卧室内遍铺地毯，裸体追逐游戏取乐。
English: On November 19th, the emperor ordered all the attendants and sisters to be subordinate to the princesses separately, and they were forbidden to enter and leave the palace. The emperor had sexual intercourse with them, spread carpets all over the bedroom, and chased naked games for fun.

古文：是月，初置惠民局。
现代文：当月，开始设置惠民局。
English: In the same month, the People's Welfare Bureau was established.

古文：高丽遣使谢赐生日。
现代文：高丽遣使者感谢生日赏赐。
English: The Korean envoy expressed his gratitude for the birthday reward.

古文：十二月乙酉，以太傅温都思忠为太师，领三省事如故，平章政事张通古为司徒，平章政事如故。
现代文：十二月七日，命太傅温都思忠当太师，仍然像以前一样领三省事；命平章政事张通古当司徒，仍然保留以前的平章政事职务。
English: On December 7th, Grand Master Wen Du Sizhong was appointed as Grand Master, and still led the three provincial affairs as before; Grand Master Zhang Tonggu, who was appointed as the political leader, still retained the previous political position of the Grand Master.

古文：三年正月己酉朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：贞元三年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of the Zhengyuan era, Song, Goryeo and Xia sent envoys to the Imperial Court.

古文：辛酉，以判东京留守大抃为太傅、领三省事。
现代文：十三日，任命判东京留守大白大为太傅、领三省事。
English: On the 13th, Daibaku Daisho, who stayed in Tokyo, was appointed as Taifu and assigned to three provinces.

古文：甲子，生辰，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十六日，皇上诞辰，宋、高丽、夏国遣使来祝贺生日。
English: On the 16th, the emperor's birthday, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate the birthday.

古文：二月壬午，以左丞相昂为太尉、枢密使，右丞相张浩为左丞相兼侍中，枢密使仆散思恭为右丞相兼中书令。
现代文：二月五日，任命左丞相昂为太尉、枢密使，右丞相张浩为左丞相兼侍中，枢密使仆散师恭为右丞相兼中书令。
English: On February 5th, he appointed the left-ranked chancellor Aung as the first lieutenant and privy councilor, the right-ranked chancellor Zhang Hao as the left-ranked chancellor and chamberlain, and the privy councilor Dousan Shigong as the right-ranked chancellor and chancellor.

古文：尚书左丞张中孚罢，右丞张晖为平章政事。
现代文：免除尚书左丞张中孚的官职，右丞张晖为平章政事。
English: Zhang Zhongfu, Shangshu's left-hand man, was exempted from his official duties, and Zhang Ye, the right-hand man, was given the title of Pingzhang Zhengji.

古文：参知政事刘萼为左丞，参知政事萧颐为右丞，吏部尚书蔡松年为参知政事。
现代文：升参知政事刘萼为左丞，参知政事萧赜为右丞，吏部尚书蔡松年为参知政事。
English: Liu Caly, who rose to be a senator, was the left-hand senator, Xiao Wei, a senator, was the right-hand senator, and Shangshu Cai Song, a clerk, was the right-hand senator.

古文：三月壬子，以左丞相张浩、平章政事张晖每见僧法宝必坐其下，失大臣体，各杖二十。
现代文：三月五日，因为左丞相张浩、平章政事张晖每次见到僧人法宝必定坐在僧人的下首，有失大臣体面，皇上各打他们二十杖。
English: On March 5th, the Emperor gave each of them twenty canes, because whenever the Left Chancellors Zhang Hao and Pingzhang Zhengji Zhang Ye saw a monk, the magic treasure would always sit on the monk's lower head, and the minister would lose his dignity.

古文：僧法宝妄自尊大，杖二百。
现代文：僧人法宝妄自尊大，被笞二百杖。
English: The monk Fa Bao was full of arrogance and was beaten with 200 canes.

古文：乙卯，命以大房山云峰寺为山陵，建行宫其麓。
现代文：八日，命令把大房山云峰寺作为山陵，在它的山脚建筑行宫。
English: On the eighth day, the order was given to treat the Dafangshan Yunfeng Temple as a mountain mausoleum, and to build a palace at its foot.

古文：庚午，以左司郎中李通为贺宋生日使。
现代文：二十三日，派左司郎中李通当贺宋生日使。
English: On the 23rd, he sent his left-hand man, Li Tong, to be the envoy for He Song's birthday.

古文：夏四月丁丑朔，昏雾四塞，日无光，凡十有七日。
现代文：四月一日，大雾昏蒙弥漫，太阳失去了光辉，大概十天中有七天是这样。
English: On April 1st, the fog was thick and the sun lost its brilliance for about seven days out of ten.

古文：五月丁未朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月一日，有日食发生。
English: On the first day of May, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：癸丑，南京大内火。
现代文：七日，南京的皇宫失火。
English: On the 7th, the imperial palace in Nanjing caught fire.

古文：乙卯，命判大宗正事京等如上京，奉迁太祖、太宗梓宫。
现代文：九日，命令判大宗正事京等人到上京，迁移太祖、太宗的棺木。
English: On the 9th, Daizong Zhengji and others were ordered to go to Shangjing to move the coffins of Taizu and Taizong.

古文：丙寅，如大房山，营山陵。
现代文：二十日，到大房山，营建山陵。
English: On the 20th, he went to Dafang Mountain to build a mausoleum.

古文：六月丙戌，登宝昌门观角抵，百姓纵观。
现代文：六月十日，海陵登上宝昌门观看摔跤比赛，百姓们也围观。
English: On June 10, Hailing boarded the Baochang Gate to watch the wrestling match, and the people also watched.

古文：乙未，命右丞相仆散思恭、大宗正丞胡拔鲁如上京，奉迁山陵及迎永寿宫皇太后。
现代文：十九日，命令右丞相仆散师恭、大宗正丞胡拔鲁去上京，奉迁山陵以及迎接永寿宫皇太后。
English: On the 19th, he ordered the Minister of the Right, San Shigong, and the Grand Chancellor, Hu Ba Lu, to go to Beijing to relocate the mountain and meet the Empress Dowager of Yongshu Palace.

古文：七月癸丑，太白昼见。
现代文：七月八日，太白金星白天显现。
English: On July 8th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：辛酉，如大房山，杖提举营造官吏部尚书耶律安礼等。
现代文：十六日去大房山，杖笞提举营造官吏部尚书耶律安礼等人。
English: On the 16th, he went to Dafangshan, and raised the staff to build the government officials' office, including Shangshuyeru and Anli.

古文：乙亥，还宫。
现代文：三十日，还宫。
English: On the 30th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：八月壬午，如大房山。
现代文：八月七日，到大房山。
English: On August 7th, I went to Dafang Mountain.

古文：甲申，启土，赐役夫，人绢一匹。
现代文：九日，破土动工，赏赐役夫，每人一匹绢。
English: On the ninth day, they broke ground and rewarded the laborers with a donkey each.

古文：是日，还宫。
现代文：当天，回宫。
English: On the same day, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：甲午，遣平章政事萧玉迎祭祖宗梓宫于广宁。
现代文：十九日，派遣平章政事萧玉到广宁迎接祭奠祖宗梓宫。
English: On the 19th, Pingzhang Zhengji sent Xiao Yu to Guangning to welcome the celebration of the ancestor Zongzi Palace.

古文：乙未，增置教坊人数。
现代文：二十日，增加设置教坊人数。
English: On the 20th, the number of people setting up classrooms will be increased.

古文：庚子，杖左宣徽使敬嗣晖、同知宣徽事乌居仁及尚食官。
现代文：二十五日，对左宣徽使敬嗣晖、同知宣徽事乌居仁以及尚食官施加杖刑。
English: On the 25th, a cane punishment was imposed on Zuo Xuan Hui's envoy, Jing Zijiao, and his confidant, Xuan Hui's secretary, Wu Jiren, as well as Shang Shikan.

古文：九月戊申，平章政事张辉迎祭梓宫于宗州。
现代文：九月四日，平章政事张晖在宗州迎接祭奠梓宫。
English: On September 4th, Zhang Ye, the political leader of Pingzhang, came to Zongzhou to welcome the memorial ceremony.

古文：乙卯，上谓宰臣及左司官曰： 朝廷之事，尤在慎密。
现代文：十一日，皇上对宰相大臣以及左司官员们说： 朝廷的事，尤其在于谨慎严密。
English: On the 11th day, the Emperor said to the Prime Minister and the officials of the Left Division, "In the matter of the Imperial Court, it is especially important to be very careful.

古文：昨授张中孚、赵庆袭官，除书未到，先已知之，皆汝等泄之也。
现代文：昨日授予张中孚、赵庆承袭官职，任命书没到，先已经知道了这件事，都是你们泄露出去的。
English: Yesterday, Zhang Zhongfu and Zhao Qing were appointed to succeed to the post, but the letter of appointment did not arrive. You all leaked the fact that you already knew about it.

古文：敢复尔者，杀无赦。 
现代文：你们敢再这样做的，杀无赦。 
English: If you dare to do it again, there will be no mercy.

古文：己未，如大房山。
现代文：十五日，到大房山。
English: On the 15th, I went to Mt. Ofusa.

古文：庚申，还宫。
现代文：十六日，回到宫中。
English: On the 16th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：丙寅，以殿前都点检纳合椿年为参知政事。
现代文：二十二日，任命殿前都点检纳合椿年为参知政事。
English: On the 22nd, he was appointed to the post of prefectural inspector general, and in the following year he was appointed to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：丁卯，上亲迎梓宫及皇太后于沙流河，命左右持杖二束，跽太后前，曰： 某不孝，久失温凊，愿痛笞之。 
现代文：二十三日，皇上亲自到沙流河迎接梓宫以及皇太后，命令左右持杖二束，自己跪在太后面前，说： 某不孝顺，失去了冬温夏清的孝顺父母之道很久了，愿意接受您的痛笞。 
English: On the 23rd, the emperor himself went to the Shalyu River to meet the Azusa Palace and the empress dowager. He ordered her to hold two bundles of canes on her right and left, and kneeled in front of the empress dowager, saying: "A certain person is not filial, and has lost the way of filial piety of the Winter, Winter and Summer for a long time, and is willing to accept your pain.

古文：太后掖起之，曰： 凡民有子克家，犹爱之，况我有子如此。 
现代文：太后拉起了他，说： 平民百姓有能继承家业的儿子，还要爱他，何况我有你这样继承祖宗大业的儿子呢！ 
English: The empress dowager pulled him up and said, "The common people have sons who can inherit the family business, and they still want to love them. How much more should I have a son like you who can inherit the great business of the ancestors!"

古文：叱持杖者退。
现代文：呵叱拿杖的人退下。
English: Tell the man with the cane to back off.

古文：庚午，猎，亲射獐以荐梓宫。
现代文：二十六日，皇上打猎，亲自射獐拿来供献在梓宫前。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the emperor went hunting and personally shot a dragonfly to offer it in front of the Azusa Palace.

古文：壬申，至自沙流河。
现代文：二十八日，到沙流河。
English: On the 28th, we arrived at Sharyu River.

古文：十月丙子，皇太后至中都，居寿康宫。
现代文：十月二日，皇太后到达中都，居住在寿康宫。
English: On October 2nd, the Empress Dowager arrived in Zhongdu and lived in Shukang Palace.

古文：戊寅，权奉安太庙神主于延圣寺，致奠梓宫于东郊，举哀。
现代文：四日，在延圣寺权衡审定奉安太庙神主，在东郊向梓宫致以祭奠，举行哀悼。
English: On the 4th, it was decided to pay homage to the god of the Andean temple at the Yen Sheng Temple, and to pay tribute to the Zi Gong in the eastern suburbs, and to hold a mourning ceremony.

古文：己卯，梓宫至中都，以大安殿为丕承殿，安置。
现代文：五日，梓宫到达中都，把大安殿当作丕承殿，安置梓宫。
English: On the fifth day, Zi Gong arrived in Zhongdu, and used the Da'an Hall as a succession hall to install Zi Gong.

古文：壬午，命省部诸司便服治事，不奏死刑一月。
现代文：八日，命令省部各司着便服办理公事，一个月内不禀奏死刑。
English: On the eighth day, he ordered all the departments of the ministry to wear casual clothes to handle public affairs, and not to announce the death penalty within one month.

古文：辛卯，告于丕承殿。
现代文：十七日，在丕承殿祭告先祖。
English: On the 17th, a memorial service was held for the ancestors at Suisho-den.

古文：乙未，如菆宫，册谥永宁皇太后曰慈宪皇后。
现代文：二十一日，到宫去，册永宁皇太后的谥号叫慈宪皇后。
English: On the twenty-first day, she went to the palace and was given the title of Empress Dowager Cixin.

古文：丁酉，大房山行宫成，名曰磐宁。
现代文：二十三日，大房山行宫建成，名叫磐宁宫。
English: On the 23rd, the Dafangshan Xinggu was completed and named the Ipanning Palace.

古文：戊戌，还宫。
现代文：二十四日，皇上回宫。
English: On the 24th, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：己亥，以翰林学士承旨耶律归一等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：二十五日，派翰林学士承旨耶律归一等人赴宋当贺宋正旦使。
English: On the 25th, he sent Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi Ye Lu and others to Songdanghe as envoys of Song Zhengdan.

古文：十一月乙巳朔，梓宫发丕承殿。
现代文：十一月一日，梓宫从丕承殿发送。
English: On November 1st, Azusa Palace sent it from the Imperial Palace.

古文：戊申，山陵礼成。
现代文：四日，山陵礼仪已经完成。
English: On the fourth day, the mountain ritual was completed.

古文：木冰。乙未，上朝太后于寿康宫。
现代文：十二月二十四日，皇上到寿康宫朝见皇太后，二十六日，太傅、领三省事大白大逝世。
English: On December 24th, the emperor went to Shukang Palace to see the empress dowager, and on the 26th, the daifu and the leader of the three provinces passed away.

古文：己亥，太傅、领三省事大抃薨，亲临哭之，命有司废务及禁乐三日。
现代文：皇上亲自到灵前哀哭他，并命令有司免于公事以及禁止音乐三天。
English: The emperor himself went to the shrine to mourn him, and ordered the emperor to be exempt from official duties and to ban music for three days.

古文：正隆元年正月癸卯朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：正隆元年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first year of Zhenglong, Song, Goryeo and Xia sent envoys to the Imperial Court.

古文：己酉，群臣奉上尊号曰圣文神武皇帝。
现代文：初七，群臣奉上尊号叫圣文神武皇帝。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the group of courtiers were given the honorific title of "Emperor Shenwen Shenwu."

古文：上自九月废朝，常数月不出，有急奏，召左右司郎中省于卧内。
现代文：皇上从去年九月荒废朝政事务，已经几个月不出来，有急于奏禀的事情，在卧室内召见左右司郎中省。八日，开始临朝理事。
English: Since last September, the Emperor had neglected the affairs of the Imperial Court and had not been able to come out for several months. He was in a hurry to deliver a message, so he summoned the Left and Right Divisions of the Imperial Household Agency in his bedroom. On the 8th, he began to serve as the Director of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：庚戌，始视朝。戊午，生辰，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十六日，是皇上诞辰，宋、高丽、夏国遣使来祝贺。
English: On the 16th, the emperor's birthday, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate him.

古文：乙丑，观角抵戏。
现代文：二十三日，观看角抵表演。
English: On the 23rd, watch the wrestling show.

古文：罢中书门下省。
现代文：废除中书、门下省。
English: Abolish Zhongshu and subordinate ministries.

古文：以太师、领三省事温都思忠为尚书令，太尉、枢密使昂为太保，右丞相仆散思恭为太尉、枢密使。
现代文：委任太师、领三省事温都思忠做尚书令，太尉、枢密使昂为太保，右丞相仆散师恭为太尉、枢密使。
English: He appointed Wen Du Sizhong as the Grand Master and the leader of the three provinces to be the Grand Secretary, Aung as the First Lieutenant and the Privy Counsellor, and San Shigong, the Minister of the Right, as the First Lieutenant and the Privy Counsellor.

古文：左丞刘萼、右丞萧颐罢，参知政事蔡松年为尚书右丞。
现代文：免除左丞刘萼、右丞萧赜的官职，命令参知政事蔡松年为尚书右丞。
English: He exempted Liu Caly, the left senator, and Xiao Yao, the right senator, from their official posts, and ordered Cai Songnian, the political advisor to the governor, to be promoted to the right senator.

古文：枢密副使萧怀忠罢，吏部尚书耶律安礼为枢密副使。
现代文：免除枢密副使萧怀忠职务，命令吏部尚书耶律安礼当枢密副使。
English: Xiao Huaizhong was relieved of his duties as a vice-envoy of the Privy Council, and was ordered to serve as a vice-envoy of the Privy Council.

古文：平章政事萧玉为右丞相，平章政事张晖罢，不置平章政事官。
现代文：任命平章政事萧玉为右丞相，免除平章政事张晖的职务，不再设置平章政事的官职。
English: Appointed Pingzhang Zhengji Xiao Yu as the Minister of the Right, exempted from the post of Pingzhang Zhengji Zhang Xi, and no longer set up the official post of Pingzhang Zhengji.

古文：二月癸酉朔，改元正隆，大赦。
现代文：二月一日，改年号叫正隆，大赦天下。
English: On February 1st, the New Year's Day is called Zhenglong, and the world is pardoned.

古文：庚辰，御宣华门观迎佛，赐诸寺僧绢五百匹、彩五十段、银五百两。
现代文：八日，皇上在宣华门观看迎佛仪式，赏赐各位寺僧绢五百匹、彩绸五十段、银五百两。
English: On the eighth day, the emperor watched the welcoming ceremony at the Xuanhua Gate and rewarded the monks of the temple with five hundred horses, fifty pieces of colored silk, and five hundred taels of silver.

古文：辛巳，改定内外诸司印记。
现代文：九日，改定内外各司的印记。
English: On the 9th, the seals of all departments at home and abroad were revised.

古文：乙未，司徒张通古致仕。
现代文：二十三日，司徒张通古辞去官职。
English: On the 23rd, Zhang Tonggu resigned from his post.

古文：庚子，谒山陵。
现代文：二十八日，拜谒山陵。
English: On the 28th, they paid their respects at the mountain mausoleum.

古文：辛丑，还都。
现代文：二十九日，返回京都。
English: On the 29th, he returned to Kyoto.

古文：三月壬寅朔，始定职事官朝参等格。
现代文：三月一日，开始确定职事官入朝参拜的等级格次。
English: On March 1st, officials began to determine the rank of officials entering the North to visit.

古文：仍罢兵卫。
现代文：仍然免除兵卫。
English: He is still exempt from military service.

古文：庚申，以左宣徽使敬嗣晖等为贺宋生日使。
现代文：十九日，派左宣徽使敬嗣晖等担当贺宋生日使。
English: On the 19th, Zhao Xuanhui sent the envoy for the birthday of He Song, including the envoy for the birthday of He Song.

古文：四月，太尉、枢密使仆散思恭以父忧，起复如故。
现代文：四月，太尉、枢密使仆散师恭因为父亲丧事，守丧不满招回任职，仍任原职。
English: In April, because of his father's funeral, the captain and confidential envoy San Shigong was called back to his post, still in his original position.

古文：五月辛亥，修容安氏阁女御为妖所凭，舞噪宫中，命杀之。
现代文：五月十一日，修容安氏卧室中的女御被妖依附在身上，在宫中手舞足蹈大声喧哗，皇上命令把她杀了。
English: On May 11th, the empress in the bedroom of Shorong An was possessed by a demon. She danced and made a lot of noise in the palace. The emperor ordered her to be killed.

古文：是月，颁行正隆官制。
现代文：当月，颁布施行正隆官制。
English: In the same month, the Zhenglong system was promulgated and implemented.

古文：六月庚辰，天水郡公赵桓薨。
现代文：六月十日，天水郡公赵桓逝世。
English: On June 10, Tianshui County magistrate Zhao Huan passed away.

古文：丙戌，以尚书右丞蔡松年为左丞，枢密副使耶律安礼为右丞，附马都尉乌古论当海为枢密副使。
现代文：十六日，任命尚书右丞蔡松年为左丞，枢密副使耶律安礼为右丞，驸马都尉乌古论当海为枢密副使。
English: On the 16th, Cai Songnian, the right-hand man of Shangshu, was appointed as the left-hand man, the vice-minister of the privy council, Ye Lu'anli, was appointed as the right-hand man, and the lieutenant of the imperial horse, Wugu Xuan Danghai, was appointed as the vice-minister of the privy council.

古文：七月己酉，命太保昂如上京，奉迁始祖以下梓宫。
现代文：七月十日，命令太保昂去上京，奉迁始祖以下各祖先的梓宫。
English: On July 10th, Taiboang was ordered to go to Beijing to relocate the Zi Gong of each ancestor after the first ancestor.

古文：八月丁丑，如大房山行视山陵。
现代文：八月八日，到大房山步行视察山陵。
English: On August 8th, he walked to the Dafang Mountain to inspect the mausoleum.

古文：十月乙酉，葬始祖以下十帝于大房山。
现代文：十月十七日，安葬始祖以下十位皇帝梓宫在大房山。
English: On October 17th, ten emperors including the founder were buried in Dafangshan.

古文：丁酉，还宫。
现代文：二十九日还宫。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Keizong returned to the palace.

古文：闰月己亥朔，山陵礼成，群臣称贺。
现代文：闰十月一日，山陵落成典礼，群臣称贺。
English: On leap October 1, the inauguration ceremony of the mountain mausoleum was held, and the courtiers congratulated.

古文：甲辰，回鹘使使寅术乌笼骨来贡。庚寅，杖右丞相萧玉、左丞蔡松年、右丞耶律安礼、御史中丞马讽等。
现代文：六日，回鹘派使者寅术乌笼骨来进贡，庚寅，对右丞相萧玉、左丞蔡松年、右丞耶律安礼、御史中丞马讽等人施用杖刑。
English: On the sixth day, Emperor Hui sent the envoy Ting Zhi to bring tribute, and Emperor Goyang punished the ministers of the right, Xiao Yu, the left, Cai Song Nian, the right, Yeru Anli, and the middle, Ma Lin, with canes.

古文：十一月己巳朔，以右司郎中梁钅求等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：十一月一日，派右司郎中梁钅求作为贺宋正旦使。
English: On November 1st, he sent his right-hand man, Liang Yingqiu, as the envoy of He Song Zhengdan.

古文：癸巳，禁二月八日迎佛。
现代文：二十五日，禁止二月八日迎佛仪式。
English: On the 25th, the ceremony to welcome the Buddha on February 8 was banned.

古文：二年正月戊辰朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：正隆二年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Zhenglong, Song, Goryeo and Xia sent envoys to the Imperial Court.

古文：庚辰，太白昼见。
现代文：十三日，太白金星白天显现。
English: On the 13th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：癸未，生辰，宋、高丽夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十六日，皇上生辰，宋、高丽、夏国派使者来祝贺。
English: On the 16th, the emperor's birthday, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate him.

古文：庚寅，以工部侍郎韩锡同知宣徽院事，锡不谢，杖百二十，夺所授官。
现代文：二十三日，让工部侍郎韩锡同知宣徽院事，韩锡不谢恩，打一百二十杖，剥夺所授予的官职。
English: On the 23rd, Han Xi, a chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry, was ordered to report to the Xuanhui Academy. Han Xi did not thank him and was deprived of the official post he had been awarded.

古文：二月辛丑，初定太庙时享牲牢礼仪。
现代文：二月五日，开始规定太庙时享牲牢礼仪。
English: On February 5th, the etiquette of being allowed to keep animals when visiting the Imperial Temple began to be stipulated.

古文：癸卯，改定亲王以下封爵等第，命置局追取存亡告身，存者二品以上，死者一品，参酌削降。
现代文：十一日，修改规定亲王以下人员封爵的等级，命令置局追踪取回生存或死亡者授官的凭信，对生存的授二品以上官职，死去的授一品，参照酌情削降。
English: On the 11th, it was amended to stipulate that the level of knighthood for persons below the prince should be higher, and ordered the establishment bureau to track down and retrieve the certificates of those who survived or died, and to award two or more official positions to those who survived, and one to those who died, and reduce them as appropriate.

古文：公私文书，但有王爵字者，皆立限毁抹，虽坟墓碑志并发而毁之。
现代文：公私文书中，凡是有王爵字样的，都立即限期毁掉或抹去，即使是坟墓碑志也要一并毁掉它。
English: Any public or private documents with the word "Kingship" must be destroyed or erased within a specified period of time. Even tombstones must be destroyed.

古文：三月丙寅朔，高丽遣使贺受尊号。
现代文：三月一日，高丽派遣使者祝贺受到尊号。
English: On March 1, Goryeo sent an envoy to congratulate him on receiving the honorific title.

古文：四月戊戌，追降景宣皇帝为丰王。
现代文：四月三日，追降景宣皇帝为丰王。
English: On April 3, Emperor Jingxuan was dethroned as Fengwang.

古文：以佥书宣徽院事张哲为横赐高丽使，宿直将军温敦斡喝为横赐夏国使。
现代文：派签书宣徽院事张吉吉为横赐高丽使，宿直将军温敦斡喝为横赐夏国使。
English: Zhang Jiji of the Xuanhui Academy was appointed as the envoy to Korea, and General Wen Dun of the Sui Dynasty was appointed as the envoy to Xia.

古文：六月乙未，参知政事纳合椿年薨。
现代文：六月二日，参知政事纳合椿年逝世。
English: On June 2nd, the party's vice-chairman and secretary of state, Nago Tsubaki, died.

古文：以礼部尚书耶律守素等为贺宋生日使。
现代文：任命礼部尚书耶律守素等人当贺宋生日使。
English: He appointed members of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, such as Shangshuyeru Shousu and others, as envoys for He Song's birthday.

古文：八月癸卯，始置登闻院。
现代文：八月十日，开始设置登闻院。
English: On August 10th, the construction of Dengwen Hospital began.

古文：甲寅，罢上京留守司。
现代文：二十一日，罢免上京留守司。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Kamigyo Rusu no Tsukasa was dismissed.

古文：九月乙丑，以宿直将军仆散乌里黑为夏国生日使。
现代文：九月三日，任命宿直将军仆散乌里黑作为夏国生日使。
English: On September 3rd, Urihei San, a retainer of the retired general, was appointed as an envoy for the birthday of Xia Guo.

古文：戊子，罢护驾军，置龙翔虎步军。
现代文：二十六日，罢免护驾军，设置龙翔虎步军。
English: On the 26th, the escorting army was dismissed and the dragon-soaring-tiger marching army was established.

古文：罢尚书省文资令史出为外官。
现代文：罢免尚书省文资令史，放出京城当外官。
English: He dismissed Shang Shushu, the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and released Jingcheng from his post as Foreign Minister.

古文：是秋，中都、山东、河东蝗。
现代文：这年秋天，中都、山东、河东闹蝗灾。
English: In the autumn of this year, the Central Capital, Shandong Province and Hedong Province were plagued by locusts.

古文：十月壬寅，命会宁府毁旧宫殿、诸大族第宅及储庆寺，仍夷其址而耕种之。
现代文：十月十日，命令会宁府毁掉旧宫殿、诸大族宅第以及储庆寺，夷平这些地方在上面耕种。
English: On October 10, Ningfu was ordered to destroy the old palace, the houses of the great clans, and the Zuoqing Temple, and to raze these places and cultivate them.

古文：丁未，禁卖古器入他境。
现代文：十五日，禁止把古薰器具卖到别国境内。
English: On the 15th, it was forbidden to sell the ancient aromatherapy utensils to other countries.

古文：乙卯，初铸铜钱。
现代文：二十三日，开始铸造铜钱。
English: On the 23rd, the minting of copper coins began.

古文：十一月辛未，以侍卫亲军副指挥使高助不古等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：十一月九日，派侍卫亲军副指挥使高助不古等人为贺宋正旦使。
English: On November 9, Gaosuke Fugu, deputy commander of the Imperial Guards, and others were sent as envoys to He Song Zhengdan.

古文：十二月己亥，以侍卫亲军都指挥使纥石烈良弼为参知政事。
现代文：十二月七日，任命侍卫亲军都指挥使纥石烈良弼为参知政事。
English: On December 7th, he appointed the commander of the palace guards and the commander of the army to make Zou Shi Lerong as the governor of politics.

古文：三年正月壬戌朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：正隆三年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国遣使来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of Zhenglong, Song, Goryeo, and Xia states sent envoys to congratulate the emperor.

古文：丙寅，子矧思阿不死，杀太医副使谢友正及其乳母等。
现代文：五日，海陵帝的儿子矧思阿不死去，海陵杀了太医副使谢友正以及矧思阿不的乳母等人。
English: On the fifth day, Emperor Hailing's son, Juxia Bu, died. Hailing killed the deputy imperial physician, Xie Youzheng, and Juxia Bu's wet nurse, among others.

古文：丁丑，生辰，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十六日，海陵生辰，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者来祝贺。
English: On the 16th, Hailing's birthday, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate him.

古文：己卯，杖右谏议大夫杨伯雄。
现代文：十八日，杖笞右谏议大夫杨伯雄。
English: On the 18th day of the month, Dr. Yang Boxiong, a doctor of medicine, came to see me.

古文：二月壬辰朔，都城及京兆初置钱监。
现代文：二月一日，都城以及京兆首次设置钱监。
English: On February 1, money supervisors were set up for the first time in Miyakonojo and Keicho.

古文：甲午，遣使检视随路金银铜铁冶。
现代文：三日，派人检查巡视随路冶炼金银铜铁的情况。
English: On the third day, someone was sent to inspect the situation of smelting gold, silver, copper and iron along the road.

古文：三月辛酉朔，司天奏日食，侯之不见。
现代文：三月一日，司王禀奏将发生日食，等候却不见日食出现。
English: On the first day of March, the eclipse of the sun will occur according to the king's harp, but the eclipse will not appear.

古文：命自今遇日食，面奏，不须颁告。
现代文：命令从今以后遇到有日食发生，可以当面禀告，不需要颁布民间。
English: From now on, if there is a solar eclipse, it can be reported in person, and does not need to be promulgated to the public.

古文：辛巳，以兵部尚书萧恭等为贺宋生日使。
现代文：二十一日，任派兵部尚书萧恭等人当贺宋生日使。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Minister of the Ministry of the People's Armed Forces, Shangshu Xiaoqong, and others were appointed as He Song's birthday envoys.

古文：四月丙辰，枢密副使乌古论当海罢，以北京留守张晖为枢密副使。
现代文：四月二十七日，免除枢密使乌古论当海的职务，让北京留守张晖当枢密副使。
English: On April 27th, he relieved the Privy Envoy, Wu Guon, of his duties at sea, and allowed Zhang Ye to remain in Beijing as Deputy Privy Envoy.

古文：六月壬辰，蝗入京师。
现代文：六月四日，蝗虫飞入京都。
English: Locusts fly into Kyoto on June 4.

古文：七月庚申，封子广阳为滕王。
现代文：七月三日，海陵封自己的儿子广阳为滕王。
English: On July 3, Hailing enthroned his son Guangyang as the King of Teng.

古文：甲申，以右丞相萧玉为司徒，尚书左丞蔡松年为右丞相，右丞耶律安礼为左丞，参知政事纥石烈良弼为右丞，左宣徽使敬嗣晖、吏部尚书李通为参知政事。
现代文：二十七日，任命右丞相萧玉为司徒，尚书左丞蔡松年为右丞相，右丞耶律安礼为左丞，参知政事纥石烈良弼为右丞，左宣徽使敬嗣晖、吏部尚书李通为参知政事。
English: On the 27th, Xiao Yu, Minister of the Right, was appointed as the secretary, Shangshu Zuo Cai Songnian as Minister of the Right, Yu Erruanli, Minister of the Right, was appointed as Minister of the Left, Shi Lile Liangyi, Minister of the Left, was appointed as Minister of the Right, Xuan Hui Jing Shi, Minister of the Left, and Shangshu Li Tong, Minister of the Left, was appointed as Minister of the Right.

古文：九月己未，太白经天。
现代文：九月三日，太白星经天。
English: On September 3rd, a white star streaked across the sky.

古文：甲子，滕王广阳薨。
现代文：八日，滕王广阳逝世。
English: On the eighth day, Teng Wang Guangyang passed away.

古文：庚午，以宿直将军阿鲁保为夏国生日使。
现代文：十四日，让宿直将军阿鲁保当夏国生日使。
English: On the 14th, General Arubao was appointed as the envoy for the birthday of Xia Guo.

古文：丁丑，以教坊提点高存福为高丽生日使。
现代文：二十一日，让教坊提点高存福当高丽生日使。
English: On the 21st day of the month, let the school offer high blessings to the birthday messenger of Goryeo.

古文：辛巳，迁中都屯军二猛安于南京，遣吏部尚书李惇等分地安置。
现代文：二十五日，把中都屯驻军队的二猛安迁调到南京，派遣吏部尚书李等人分出地方给予安置。
English: On the 25th, he transferred the two Meng'an troops stationed in Zhongdu to Nanjing, and dispatched officers such as Shang Shuli and others to be resettled in other places.

古文：十月戊戌，诏尚书省： 凡事理不当者，许诣登闻检院投状，院类奏览讫，付御史台理问。 
现代文：十月十二日，诏令尚书省： 凡是遇到处理不当的事情，允许到闻检院去投状，闻检院分类上奏，阅览完毕，交付御史台理问。 
English: On October 12th, the Ministry of Education and Culture issued the following edict: In the event of any improper handling, it is permitted to go to the Censor's Office to submit a petition, the classification of the Censor's Office is recorded, the reading is completed, and it is handed over to the Historian's Office for questioning.

古文：十一月辛酉，以工部尚书苏保衡等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：十一月五日，派工部尚书苏保衡等任贺宋正旦使。
English: On November 5th, the Ministry of Industry and Trade sent Shangshu Su Baoheng and others as envoys to He Song Zhengdan.

古文：癸亥，诏有司勤政安民。
现代文：六日，诏令有司勤于政事安抚人民。
English: On the 6th, there was an order for officials to be diligent in political affairs to appease the people.

古文：癸未，尚书左丞耶律安礼罢。
现代文：二十六日，免除尚书左丞耶律安礼官职。
English: On the 26th, Sho Sho Zuojo Yerutsuan was relieved of his official duties.

古文：参知政事李通以忧制，起复如故。
现代文：参知政事李通因为亲属丧期，召回仍任原职如故。
English: Due to the period of bereavement of relatives, Li Tong, the political secretary of the prefectural government, was recalled and remains in his original post.

古文：诏左丞相张浩、参知政事敬嗣晖营建南京宫室。
现代文：诏令左丞相张浩、参知政事敬嗣晖营建南京宫室。
English: The imperial edict ordered the construction of the Nanking Imperial Palace by the chancellor and minister of the left, Zhang Hao, and the senator and statesman, Keizhi.

古文：十二月乙卯，以枢密副使张晖为尚书左丞。
现代文：十二月十九日，任命枢密副使张晖为尚书左丞。
English: On December 19th, he appointed the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, Zhang Jun, as the Vice-Minister of the Left.

古文：归德尹致仕高召和式起为枢密副使。
现代文：归德府尹辞官，起用高召和式当枢密副使。
English: He returned to the German government as a retired official, and was appointed as a high-ranking Japanese vice-envoy.

古文：四年正月丙辰朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：正隆四年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国遣使来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of Zhenglong, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate the emperor.

古文：上朝太后于寿康宫。丁巳，御史大夫高桢薨。
现代文：皇上到寿康宫朝见太后。初二，御史大夫高桢逝世。
English: The emperor went to Shukang Palace in the morning to see the empress dowager. On the second day of the first month, the imperial historian Gao Yao passed away.

古文：庚申，更定私相越境法，并论死。
现代文：初五，修定私相越境法，有私自相互越过边境的，论处死罪。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the law on crossing the border without permission was amended. Those who cross the border without permission will be sentenced to death.

古文：辛酉，罢凤翔、唐、邓、颍、蔡、巩、洮、胶西诸榷场，置场泗州。
现代文：初六，取消凤翔、唐、邓、颍、蔡、巩、洮、胶西各地的边境互市市场，在泗州设置榷场。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the cross-border markets of Fengxiang, Tang, Deng, Handan, Cai, Gong, Handan and Jiaoxi were cancelled, and a market was set up in Ganzhou.

古文：辛未，生辰，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十六日，是海陵诞辰，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者来祝贺。
English: On the 16th, the birthday of Hailing, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate.

古文：二月己丑，以左宣徽使许霖为御史大夫。
现代文：二月四日，任命左宣徽使许霖为御史大夫。
English: On February 4th, Xu Lin, the left emissary of Xuan Hui, was appointed as the chief historian.

古文：丁未，修中都城。
现代文：二十二日，维修中都城。
English: On the 22nd, the maintenance of Zhongdu City was completed.

古文：造战船于通州。诏谕宰臣以伐宋事。
现代文：在通州打造战船。诏告宰相大臣要攻伐宋国的事。
English: To build a warship in Tongzhou, the prime minister was told by the emperor to invade Song.

古文：调诸路猛安谋克军年二十以上、五十以下者，皆籍之，虽亲老丁多亦不许留侍。
现代文：调集诸路猛安军队中年龄在二十岁以上、五十岁以下的兵士，都登记在册。虽然是亲戚或老兵多数也不准留在原地。
English: All soldiers over the age of 20 and under the age of 50 in Zhulu Meng'an's army are registered, and although most of them are relatives or veterans, they are not allowed to stay in place.

古文：三月丙辰朔，遣兵部尚书萧恭经画夏国边界。
现代文：三月一日，派遣兵部尚书萧恭勘查画出夏国边界图。
English: On March 1st, the military department dispatched Shangshu Xiaoqiong to survey and draw the border map of Xia.

古文：遣使分诣诸道总管府督造兵器。
现代文：派遣使者分别到各道总管府督促制造兵器。
English: Envoys were sent to the provincial headquarters to urge the production of weapons.

古文：四月辛丑，命增山东泉水、毕括两营兵士廪给。
现代文：四月十七日，命令增加对山东路泉水、毕括两营兵士的粮米供给。
English: On April 17th, it was ordered to increase the supply of grain and rice to the soldiers of the two battalions from Shandong Road Spring Water and Bihu.

古文：庚戌，诏诸路旧贮军器并致于中都。
现代文：二十六日，诏令各路原先贮存的兵器一并送到中都。
English: On the 26th, the imperial edict ordered all the weapons that had been previously stored to be sent to the capital.

古文：时方建宫室于南京，又中都与四方所造军器材用皆赋于民，箭翎一尺至千钱，村落间往往椎牛以供筋革，至于乌鹊狗彘无不被害者。
现代文：当时正在南京营建宫室，又加上中都和四方所造兵器用的材料全都是民间收取的赋税，箭翎一尺达到一千钱之贵，乡村间往往杀牛来供应皮革，至于鸟鹊猪狗没有不被宰杀的。
English: At that time, a palace was being built in Nanjing, and the materials used for the weapons made by the capital and the four provinces were all taxes collected by the people. An arrowhead was as expensive as a thousand yuan. In rural areas, cattle were often killed to supply leather. As for birds, pigs and dogs, there were none that could not be slaughtered.

古文：辛亥，尚书左丞张晖、御史大夫许霖罢。
现代文：二十七日，尚书左丞张晖、御史大夫许霖被免除职务。
English: On the 27th, Shangshu Zuocheng Zhang Jun and Goshi Daifu Xu Lin were relieved of their duties.

古文：以大兴尹徒单贞为枢密副使。
现代文：任命大兴府尹徒单贞为枢密副使。
English: Appointed Daxingfu Yin Tushan Zhen as Privy Vice-Envoy.

古文：以秘书监王可道等为贺宋生日使。
现代文：派秘书监王可道等人当贺宋生日使。
English: He sent his secretary, Guan Wang Kedao, and others to act as messengers for He Song's birthday.

古文：八月，诏诸路调马，以户口为差，计五十六万余匹，富室有至六十匹者，仍令户自养饲以俟。
现代文：八月，诏令各路征调马匹，按户口规定数目，总计要征调五十六万多匹，富人家有达到六十匹的，命令仍然各户自己饲养，以等待调用。
English: In August, the emperor ordered that all roads be requisitioned for the transfer of horses, up to the number specified by the household registration, with a total of more than 560,000 horses to be requisitioned. If a rich family had up to 60 horses, the order was still for each household to raise them themselves to wait for the transfer.

古文：己卯，尚书右丞相蔡松年薨。
现代文：二十八日，尚书右丞相蔡松年逝世。
English: On the 28th day of the month, Minister of the Right Sho Sho Sho passed away.

古文：九月，以翰林待制完颜达纪为高丽生日使，宿直将军加古挞懒为夏国生日使。
现代文：九月，派翰林待制完颜达纪当高丽生日使，派宿值将军加古挞懒当夏国生日使。
English: In September, Hanlin was sent as an envoy to celebrate the birthday of the Republic of Korea after the completion of the production of Yandagi, and the retired general Kaku was sent as an envoy to celebrate the birthday of the Republic of Korea.

古文：十月乙亥，猎于近郊，观造船于通州。
现代文：十月二十五日，在近郊打猎，到通州观看造船。
English: On October 25th, I went hunting in the suburbs and went to Tongzhou to watch shipbuilding.

古文：赐尚书右丞纥石烈良弼、枢密副使徒单贞佩刀入宫。
现代文：恩赐准许尚书右丞纥石烈良弼、枢密副使徒单贞佩刀进入宫中。
English: The gift allowed Shang Shu Yu Zheng, Shi Lerong Liang, and the vice-apostle of the Privy Council, Shan Zhen, to enter the palace.

古文：十一月甲辰，以翰林侍讲学士施宜生等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：十一月二十四日，派翰林侍讲学士施宜生等人当贺宋正旦使。
English: On November 24th, He Song Zhengdan sent Hanlin's attendant and lecturer Shi Yisheng and others as envoys.

古文：十二月乙卯，宋遣使告母韦氏哀。
现代文：十二月五日，宋派使者来报告宋主正居母亲韦氏丧事。
English: On December 5th, Song sent an emissary to report the funeral of Song Zhengyu's mother, Wei.

古文：甲子，太白昼见。
现代文：十四日，太白金星白天显现。
English: On the 14th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：乙丑，以左副点检大怀忠等为宋吊祭使。
现代文：十五日，派遣左副点检大怀忠等赴宋担任吊祭使。
English: On the fifteenth day, he dispatched the deputy left point inspector Dahui Zhong and others to Song to serve as the envoy.

古文：乙亥，太医使祁宰上疏谏伐宋，杀之。
现代文：二十五日，太医使祁宰上疏谏议攻打宋国，皇上把他杀了。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the Emperor killed him after the Imperial Physician asked the Emperor to attack Song.

古文：五年正月庚辰朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：正隆五年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of Zhenglong, Song, Goryeo and Xia sent envoys to congratulate the emperor.

古文：乙未，生辰，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十六日，海陵诞辰，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者来祝贺。
English: On the 16th, Hailing's birthday, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate him.

古文：二月壬子，宋遣使献母后遣留物。
现代文：二月三日，宋国君主遣使者来奉献他的母后的遗留物。
English: On February 3, the monarch of Song sent an envoy to dedicate his mother's leftovers.

古文：丁卯，太白昼见。
现代文：十八日，太白金星白天显现。
English: On the 18th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：辛未，河东、陕西地震，镇戎、德顺军大风，坏庐舍，人多压死。
现代文：二十二日，河东、陕西发生地震，镇戎、德顺军遭大风袭击，房舍被摧毁，许多人被压死。
English: On the 22nd, an earthquake occurred in Hedong and Shaanxi. Zhenrong and Deshun were hit by strong winds, houses were destroyed, and many people were crushed to death.

古文：甲戌，遣引进使高植、刑部郎中海狗分道监视所获盗贼，并凌迟处死，或锯灼去皮截手足。
现代文：二十五日，派遣引进使高植、刑部郎中海狗分道监视所擒获的盗贼，并把他们凌迟处死，或者锯掉他们的手脚、烧灼他们的皮肤。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the thieves caught by the diversionary surveillance dogs of Gao Zheng and the head of the Criminal Investigation Department were dispatched, and they were tortured to death, or their hands and feet were sawn off, and their skin was burned.

古文：仍戒屯戍千户谋克等，后有获者，并处死，总管府官亦决罚。
现代文：并且告诫屯驻戍守的千户谋克等人，以后有再擒获的，一并处死，总管府官也可以决定惩罚。
English: In addition, they warned the thousand families of Moke and others who were stationed there, that if they were caught again in the future, they would be executed together, and the chief government official could also decide on the punishment.

古文：三月辛巳，东海县民张旺、徐元等反，遣都水监徐文、步军指挥使张弘信、同知大兴尹事李惟忠、宿直将军萧阿窊率舟师九百，浮海讨之，命之曰： 朕意不在一邑，将试舟师耳。 
现代文：三月二日，东海县民张旺、徐元等人造反，派遣都水监徐文、步军指挥使张弘信、同知大兴尹事李惟忠、宿值将军萧阿纞率领舟师九百人，驾船在海上讨伐反贼，命令他们说： 朕的意思不在一座城邑，而是要试一下舟师罢了。 
English: On March 2, the citizens of Donghai County, Zhang Wang, Xu Yuan and others rebelled and dispatched the capital water inspector Xu Wen, the commander of the marching army Zhang Hongxin, the fellow scholar Daxing Yin Li Wei Zhong, and the general in residence Xiao Aqi, led by the leader of the boat division of nine hundred people, drove the boat on the sea to fight the anti-thieves, and ordered them to say: My intention is not a city, but to try the boat division.

古文：庚子，以司徒判大宗正事萧玉为御史大夫，司徒如故，尚书右丞纥石烈良弼为左丞，横海军节度使致仕刘长言起为右丞。
现代文：二十一日，任命司徒判大宗正事萧玉为御史大夫，保留司徒之职。尚书右丞纥石烈良弼为左丞，横海军节度使辞去官职，起用刘长言当右丞。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Xiao Yu, the Grand Historian of Taizong Zhengji, was appointed as the Grand Historian, retaining the position of the scholar. Shang Shu, the right-hand man, and Shi Lerong, the left-hand man, were appointed, and Liu Changyan, the naval attaché, was appointed as the right-hand man.

古文：四月庚戌，昭妃蒲察阿里忽有罪赐死。
现代文：四月二日，昭妃蒲察阿里忽因为有罪被赐死。
English: On April 2nd, Zhaofei Pucha Ali was sentenced to death for his crime.

古文：甲寅，宿州防御使耶律翼使宋失体，杖二百，除名。
现代文：六日，宿州防御使耶律翼出使宋国而丧失体面，被打二百杖，除去官职。
English: On the 6th day of the month, the defense of Suizhou made Yerut Ying lose his dignity by sending an envoy to Song, and he was beaten with two hundred canes and removed from his post.

古文：甲戌，太白昼见。
现代文：二十六日，太白金星白日显现。
English: On the 26th, the too-white Venus appeared in broad daylight.

古文：六月，徐文等破贼张旺、徐元，东海平。
现代文：六月，徐文等打败反贼张旺、徐元，平定了东海县。
English: In June, Xu Wen and others defeated the anti-thieves Zhang Wang and Xu Yuan, and pacified Donghai County.

古文：七月辛巳，诏东海县徐元、张旺诖误者，并释之。
现代文：七月五日，诏说东海县徐元、张旺是被人连累的，并且释放了他们。
English: On July 5, it was announced that Xu Yuan and Zhang Wang of Donghai County had been detained and released.

古文：壬午，以张弘信被命讨贼，称疾逗遛莱州，与妓乐饮燕，杖之二百。
现代文：六日，因为张弘信被命令去讨伐贼寇，却谎说有病逗留在莱州，和妓女寻欢饮宴，所以笞他二百杖。
English: On the sixth day, because Zhang Hongxin was ordered to go and fight the bandits, but lied that he was ill and stayed in Laizhou to seek pleasure and feast with prostitutes, he was beaten with two hundred canes.

古文：癸卯，遣使签诸路汉军。
现代文：二十七日，派人去登记诸路军队中的汉族兵士。
English: On the 27th, someone was sent to register the Han soldiers in ZhuLu's army.

古文：八月丙午朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月一日，有日食发生。
English: On August 1, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：辛亥，命榷货务并印造钞引库起赴南京。
现代文：六日命令将贸易货物连同印造钞从国库中提取出来运赴南京。
English: On the 6th, an order was issued to withdraw the trade goods together with the printed money from the state treasury and transport them to Nanjing.

古文：己巳，枢密副使徒单贞罢，以太子少保徒单永年为枢密副使。
现代文：二十四日，解除枢密副使徒单贞的职务，任命太子少保徒单永年为枢密副使。
English: On the 24th, he dismissed the vice-apostle of the Privy Council, Shan Zhen, and appointed the prince's younger brother, Shan Yong, as vice-minister of the Privy Council.

古文：辛未，谒山陵，见田间获者，问其丰耗，以衣赐之。
现代文：二十六日，拜谒山陵，看见田间收获的人，问他们是丰收还是欠收，把衣服赏赐给他们。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, he paid homage to the mountains and hills, and asked the people who saw the harvest in the fields whether they had a good harvest or a poor harvest, and gave them clothes.

古文：九月己卯，还宫。
现代文：九月四日，回到宫廷。
English: On September 4, he returned to court.

古文：十月庚午，遣护卫完颜普连等二十四人督捕山东、河东、河北、中都盗贼。
现代文：十月二十六日，差遣护卫完颜普连等二十四人去督促捕捉山东、河东、河北、中都的盗贼。
English: On October 26, twenty-four people, including Yan Puli, were sent to urge the capture of thieves in Shandong, Hedong, Hebei and Zhongdu.

古文：籍诸路水手得三万人。
现代文：登记注册各路的水手得到三万人。
English: The number of sailors who have registered for registration has reached 30,000.

古文：十一月乙酉，以济南尹仆散乌者等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：十一月十一日，派济南府尹仆散乌者等当贺宋正旦使。
English: On November 11th, Jinan Prefecture sent Yin, the messenger to disperse the Wu, and others as envoys to He Song Zhengdan.

古文：尚书右丞刘长言罢。
现代文：罢免了尚书右丞刘长言的官职。
English: He removed Liu Changyan from his official position.

古文：命亲军司以所掌付大兴府。
现代文：命令亲军司将所掌管的军队交付大兴府。
English: He ordered the pro-army chief to hand over the troops under his control to the Daxing government.

古文：置左右骁骑都副指挥使，隶点检司。
现代文：设置左右骁骑都副指挥使，隶属点检司。
English: The deputy commanding officers of the left and right cavalry were set up, subordinate to the point inspection division.

古文：步军都副指挥使，隶宣徽院。
现代文：步军都副指挥使，隶属宣徽院。
English: The marching troops are all under the command of the deputy commander, and are subordinate to the Xuanhuiyuan.

古文：十二月癸丑，禁中都、河北、山东、河南、河东、京兆军民纲捕禽兽及畜养雕隼者。
现代文：十二月九日，发布命令禁止中都、河北、山东、河南、河东、京兆军民张网捕捉禽兽，以及畜养雕、隼。
English: On December 9, an order was issued prohibiting the people of the Central Military Region, Hebei Province, Shandong Province, Henan Province, Hedong Province and Beijing Military Region from setting up nets to catch animals, as well as raising eagles and cormorants.

古文：戊辰，禁朝官饮酒，犯者死，三国人使燕饮者罪。
现代文：二十四日，禁令朝中官员饮酒，违犯者处死，宋、高丽、夏三国的使者宴饮不在禁令范围。
English: On the 24th, officials of the DPRK and China were banned from drinking alcohol, and violators were put to death. The ban did not apply to the banqueting of the envoys of Song, Goryeo, and Xia.

古文：六年正月甲戌朔，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：正隆六年正月初一，宋、高丽、夏国派使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year of Zhenglong, Song, Goryeo, and Xia all sent envoys to congratulate the emperor.

古文：丁丑，判大宗正徒单贞、益都尹京、安武军节度使爽、金吾卫上将军阿速饮酒，以近属故，杖贞七十，余皆杖百。
现代文：初四，判大宗正徒单贞、益都府尹京、安武军节度使爽、金吾卫上将军阿速饮酒，因为是皇帝近亲的缘故，杖打徒单贞七十，其余的人都各打一百杖。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, it was decided that Daizong Zhengtu Shanzhen, Yidufu Yinjing, Anwu Army Festival Commander Shuang, and Jinwu Admiral General Ahui would drink alcohol. Because they were close relatives of the emperor, the stick beat the disciple Shanzhen seventy, and the rest of the people each beat a hundred sticks.

古文：壬午，上将如南京，以司徒、御史大夫萧玉为大兴尹，司徒如故。
现代文：九日，皇上将到南京去，任命司徒、御史大夫萧玉为大兴府尹，仍任司徒。
English: On the 9th, the emperor will go to Nanjing and appoint Sito and Grand Historian Xiao Yu as Daxingfu Yin, still serving as Sito.

古文：枢密副使徒单永年罢，以都点检纥石烈志宁为枢密副使。
现代文：免除枢密副使徒单永年的官职，任命都点检纥石烈志宁为枢密副使。
English: Exempted the vice-ambassadors of the Privy Council from their permanent posts, and appointed Du Dang Jianxuan Shi and Li Zhining as vice-ambassadors of the Privy Council.

古文：己丑，生辰，宋、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十六日，海陵帝诞辰，宋、高丽、夏国派遣使者来祝贺生日。
English: On the 16th, the birthday of Emperor Hailing, Song, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate the birthday.

古文：癸巳，命参知政事李通谕宋使徐度等曰： 朕昔从梁王军，乐南京风土，常欲巡幸。
现代文：二十日，命令参知政事李通告诉宋国使者徐度等人说 ：朕往昔随从梁王军队，喜欢南京的风土，常常想去巡视。
English: On the 20th, Li Tong, the political secretary of the prefectural governor, told the Song emissary Xu Du and others: I used to follow the army of King Liang, I like the culture of Nanjing, and I often want to go on a tour.

古文：今营缮将毕功，期以二月末先往河南。
现代文：现在南京宫室营建修缮即将完工，定下日期在二月末先往河南去。
English: Now the construction and renovation of the Nanjing Palace is about to be completed, and the date is set to go to Henan at the end of February.

古文：帝王巡守，自古有之。
现代文：帝王视察诸侯所守的地方，自古以来就有这样做的。
English: Since ancient times, emperors have inspected the places guarded by princes.

古文：以淮右多隙地，欲校猎其间，从兵不逾万人。
现代文：因为淮河右侧空地多，想用木栏把其间圈起来，猎取禽兽，随从的兵士不超过一万人。
English: Because there is a lot of open space on the right side of the Huaihe River, he wants to use a wooden fence to enclose it and hunt animals. The soldiers accompanying him do not exceed ten thousand.

古文：况朕祖宗陵庙在此，安能久于彼乎。
现代文：况且朕的祖宗陵庙在这里，哪能长久在那里呢？
English: Besides, my ancestral mausoleum is here, how can I stay there for long?

古文：汝等归告汝主，令有司宣谕朕意，使淮南之民无怀疑惧。 
现代文：你们回去告诉你们的君主，命令有司宣告朕的旨意，让淮南人民不必怀疑惧怕。 
English: You should go back and tell your monarchs to order officials to announce my will, so that the people of Huainan do not have to doubt or fear.

古文：庚子，诏自中都至河南府所过州县调从猎骑士二千。
现代文：二十七日，诏令从中都到河南府所经过的州县选调随从狩猎骑士二千人。
English: On the 27th, the imperial edict called for the transfer of two thousand hunting knights from the provinces and counties that passed through from the capital to Henan.

古文：辛丑，杀蒲察阿虎迭女义察。
现代文：二十八日，诛杀蒲察阿虎迭的女儿义察。
English: On the 28th, Yicha, the daughter of Putsa Ahodii, was killed.

古文：义察，庆宜公主出，幼鞠宫中，上屡欲纳之，太后不可。
现代文：义察，是庆宜公主所生，自幼生长宫中，皇上屡次想纳娶她，太后不许可。
English: According to tradition, she was born to Princess Qingyi and grew up in the palace. The emperor repeatedly wanted to marry her, but the empress dowager did not allow it.

古文：至是，以罪杀之。
现代文：到现在，却因为她有罪而杀了她。
English: Until now, he killed her because she was guilty.

古文：二月乙巳，杖卫王襄之妃及左宣徽使许霖。
现代文：二月二日，对卫王襄的妃子以及左宣徽使许霖施用杖刑。
English: On February 2, Xu Lin, the concubine of Wei Wangxiang and Zuo Xuanhu, was punished with a cane.

古文：甲寅，以参知政事李通为尚书右丞。
现代文：十一日，任命参知政事李通为尚书右丞。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Tong, a political advisor to the governor, was appointed as the vice-governor.

古文：己未，禁扈从纵猎扰民。
现代文：十六日，下令禁止养马的仆从放纵打猎扰乱百姓。
English: On the 16th, he issued an order prohibiting the servants who kept horses from indulging in hunting and disturbing the people.

古文：庚申，征诸道水手运战船。
现代文：十七日，征集诸道的水手运输战船。
English: On the 17th, sailors from all over the country were called up to transport the warship.

古文：癸亥，发中都。
现代文：二十日，皇上从中都出发。
English: On the 20th, the emperor set out from Zhongdu.

古文：丙寅，次安肃州。
现代文：二十三日，到安肃州。
English: On the 23rd, to Anshu.

古文：三月己卯，改河南北邙山为太平山，称旧名者以违制论。
现代文：三月六日，把河南北邙山改名叫太平山，叫旧名的按违犯条令论处。
English: On March 6, the name of the North and South Lushan Mountains in Henan Province was changed to Taiping Mountain, and the old name was dealt with according to the violation regulations.

古文：丁亥，将至获嘉，有男子上书言事，斩之，所言莫得闻。
现代文：十四日，将要到达获嘉的时候，有一个男子上书报告事情，皇上命把他杀了，他所说什么事不得知道。
English: On the fourteenth day, when he was about to receive the award, a man wrote to report the incident. The emperor had him killed, and nothing of what he said can be known.

古文：癸巳，次河南府，因出猎，幸汝州温汤，视行宫地。
现代文：二十日，到河南府，就出去打猎，驾临汝州温汤，察看行宫所在地。
English: On the 20th, after arriving in Henan Province, he went out hunting, drove to Ruzhou and inspected the location of the Imperial Palace.

古文：自中都至河南，所过麦皆为空。
现代文：从中都到河南，所经过的地方麦子都用光了。
English: From Zhongdu to Henan, the wheat has run out everywhere.

古文：复禁扈从毋辄离次及游赏饮酒，犯者罪皆死，而莫有从者。
现代文：又下禁令养马的仆从不要动不动就离开岗位去游玩饮酒，违犯禁令的全部以死罪论处，但是没有服从的。
English: The servants of the horse breeder were also forbidden to leave their posts to go out and drink, and all those who violated the ban were sentenced to death, but they did not obey.

古文：诏内地诸猛安赴山后牧马，俟秋并发。
现代文：诏令内地各猛安到山后牧马，等到秋天集合出发。
English: The emperor ordered the mainlanders to go to the mountain pasture and wait until the autumn to set out.

古文：弟衮之妻乌延氏有罪，赐死。
现代文：海陵的弟弟完颜兖的妻子乌延氏有罪，被赐死。
English: Hailing's brother Guan Yan's wife Wu Yan was found guilty and sentenced to death.

古文：乌延氏之弟南京兵马副都指挥使习泥烈亦以罪诛。
现代文：乌延氏的弟弟是南京兵马副都指挥使习泥烈，也因为有罪被杀。
English: Wu Yan's younger brother was the vice-commander of the Nanjing Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and was also killed for his crime.

古文：四月丁未，诏百官先赴南京治事，尚书省、枢密院、大宗正府、劝农司、太府、少府皆从行，吏、户、兵、刑部，四方馆，都水监，大理司官各留一员。
现代文：四月五日，诏令百官赴南京治理事务，尚书省、枢密院、大宗正府、劝农司、太府、少府都随行，吏、户、兵、刑部，四方馆，都水监，大理司官署各留下一名官员。
English: On April 5, the emperor ordered 100 officials to go to Nanjing to conduct government affairs. Shangshu, the Privy Council, Dasongzheng, Zhengrong, Dafu, and Shofu accompanied the delegation, while officials, households, soldiers, the Criminal Investigation Department, the Four Directions Museum, the Capital Water Conservancy Bureau, and the Administration of Justice Department each left one official behind.

古文：以签书枢密院事高景山等为贺宋生日使。
现代文：派签书枢密院事高景山等人为贺宋生日使。
English: Gao Jingshan and others who sent a signed letter to the Privy Council were the envoys for He Song's birthday.

古文：戊申，诏汝州百五十里内州县，量遣商贾赴温汤置市。
现代文：六日，诏令汝州周围一百五十里内各州县，派遣适量商人赴温汤设置贸易市场。
English: On the 6th, the emperor ordered all prefectures and counties within 150 miles around Ruzhou to send an appropriate number of merchants to Wenyang to set up a trade market.

古文：诏有司移问宋人，蔡、颖、寿诸州对境创置堡戍者。
现代文：诏令有司传递文件给宋国，问在与蔡、颍、寿诸州相对的边境地带建立多少堡垒布下多少戍守的人。
English: The imperial edict ordered the imperial secretary to pass the document to Song, asking how many fortresses should be built in the border areas opposite the states of Cai, Min and Shou, and how many people should guard them.

古文：庚戌，发河南府。
现代文：八日，皇上从河南府出发。
English: On the eighth day, the emperor set out from Henan.

古文：契丹不补自山驰下，伏道左，自陈破东海贼有功，为李惟忠所抑，立命斩之。
现代文：契丹的不补从山上驰下，匍匐在道路左边，自己陈述破东海贼寇有功，被李惟忠所压制，皇上立刻命令杀了他。
English: Qidan's Nezu galloped down from the mountain, got up on the left side of the road, and declared that he had been successful in breaking the East Sea piracy. He was suppressed by Li Weizhong, and the emperor immediately ordered him to be killed.

古文：丁卯，次温汤。
现代文：二十五日，到温汤。
English: On the 25th, it was time for the soup.

古文：诫扈从毋辄过汝水。
现代文：告诫养马的仆从不要随意渡过汝水。
English: Warn the servants who keep horses not to cross the river at will.

古文：上猎，奔鹿突之堕马，呕血数日。
现代文：皇上打猎，追逐奔鹿突然掉下马来，接连几天吐血。
English: The emperor hunted and chased deer until he suddenly fell off his horse and vomited blood for several days.

古文：遣使征诸道兵。
现代文：派使者征集诸道的兵士。
English: Send emissaries to recruit soldiers from all the sects.

古文：五月庚辰，太师、尚书令耨碗温都思忠薨。
现代文：五月八日，太师、尚书令耨碗温都思忠逝世。
English: On the 8th of May, the Grand Master, Shang Shuling, and his bowl, Weng Du Sizhong, passed away.

古文：契丹诸部反，遣右卫将军萧秃剌等讨之。
现代文：契丹诸部造反，皇上派遣右卫将军萧秃剌等人去讨伐他们。
English: The various departments of Khitan rebelled, and the emperor sent the right guard general Xiao Zhengqi and others to fight them.

古文：六月癸卯，命枢密使仆散思恭、西京留守萧怀忠将兵一万讨契丹诸部。
现代文：六月二日，命令枢密使仆散师恭、西京留守萧怀忠率领一万兵士讨伐契丹各部。
English: On June 2, Xiao Huaizhong, an envoy of the imperial court, was ordered to lead 10,000 soldiers to fight against the Khitan forces.

古文：上自汝州如南京。
现代文：皇上从汝州去南京。
English: The emperor left Ruzhou for Nanjing.

古文：壬戌，次南京近郊，左丞相张浩率百官迎谒。
现代文：二十一日，到南京近郊，左丞相张浩带领百官迎接拜谒。
English: On the twenty-first day, to the outskirts of Nanjing, the Minister of the Left, Zhang Hao, led a hundred officials to meet the worship.

古文：是夜，大风，坏承天门鸱尾。
现代文：当天夜晚，刮起大风，承天门上的鸱尾被刮坏。
English: In the evening of the same day, a strong wind blew, and the appendix on the Heaven's Gate was damaged.

古文：癸亥，上备法驾入于南京。
现代文：二十二日，皇上特准备了法驾进入南京。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor specially prepared to drive into Nanjing.

古文：七月丁亥，以左丞相张浩为太傅、尚书令，司徒、大兴尹萧玉为尚书左丞相，吏部尚书白彦恭为枢密副使，枢密副使纥石烈志宁为开封尹，安武军节度使徒单贞为御史大夫。
现代文：七月十六日，任命左丞相张浩为太傅、尚书令，司徒、大兴府尹萧玉为尚书左丞相，吏部尚书白彦恭为枢密副使，枢密副使纥石烈志宁为开封府尹，安武军节度使徒单贞为御史大夫。
English: On July 16, Zhang Hao, the Minister of the Left, was appointed as Taifu and Shang Shuling, Sitou and Daxingfu Yin Xiaoyu was appointed as the Minister of the Left, Shang Shuling, the Ministry of the Left, Shang Shuling Bai Yanqiong was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, Zou Shi Retshining was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Kaifeng, and the Anwu Army Festival Apostle Shan Zhen was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the History.

古文：己丑，赐从驾、从行、从军及千户谋克钱帛。
现代文：十八日，赏赐从驾、从行、从军以及千户谋克钱帛。
English: On the eighteenth day, rewards were given to those who drove, marched, or joined the army, as well as to a thousand households.

古文：大括天下羸马。
现代文：大量收集天下骡马。
English: A large collection of horses from all over the world.

古文：杀亡辽耶律氏、宋赵氏子男凡百三十余人。
现代文：杀剿辽耶律氏、宋赵氏的子男大约一百三十多人。
English: The sons and sons of Liao Ye Lu and Song Zhao killed about one hundred and thirty people.

古文：八月壬寅，单州贼杜奎据城叛，遣都点检耶律湛、右骁骑副都指挥大磐讨之。
现代文：八月二日，单州反贼杜奎占据城叛变，派遣都点检耶律湛、右骁骑副都指挥使大磐讨伐杜奎。
English: On August 2, Dukui, the anti-thief of Shan State, occupied the city and mutinied. Dukui was dispatched to check Yerutchan, the right-hand rider and deputy commander of Dukui, to fight Dukui.

古文：以枢密副使白彦恭为北面兵马都统，开封尹纥石烈志宁副之，中都留守完颜彀英为西北面兵马都统，西北路招讨使唐括孛古的副之，讨契丹。
现代文：任命枢密副使白彦恭为北面兵马都统，开封府尹纥石烈志宁为副都统，中都留守完颜彀英为西北面兵马都统，西北路招讨使唐括孛古的为副都统，让他们去讨伐契丹。
English: He appointed the vice-secretary of the Privy Council, Bai Yanqong, to be the deputy of the Northern Terracotta Warriors and Horses, the head of the Kaifeng Prefecture, Yin Zheishi, the vice-head of the Northern Terracotta Warriors and Horses, Yan Xingying to be the vice-head of the Northwestern Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and the vice-head of the Northwestern Terracotta Warriors and Horses to be the vice-head of the Northern Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and the vice-head of the Northern Terracotta Warriors and Horses to be the vice-head of the Northern Terracotta Warriors and Horses.

古文：癸丑，以谏伐宋弑皇太后徒单氏于宁德宫，仍命即宫中焚之，弃其骨水中，并杀其侍婢等十余人。
现代文：十三日，依照谏议讨伐宋国。在宁德宫杀死皇太后徒单氏，并且命令就在宫中焚烧她的尸体，把她的尸骨丢弃在水中，并杀死她的侍从婢女等十多人。
English: On the 13th, in accordance with the imperial edict, he attacked Song. He killed the Empress Dowager Tu Shan in the Ningde Palace, and ordered her body to be burned in the palace, her bones to be thrown into the water, and more than ten of her attendants and maids to be killed.

古文：癸亥，杀右卫将军萧秃剌、护卫十人长斡卢保，族枢密使仆散思恭、北京留守萧赜、西京留守萧怀忠，杖尚书令张浩、左丞相萧玉。
现代文：二十三日，杀死右卫将军萧秃剌、护卫十人长斡卢保、枢密使仆散师恭、北京留守萧赜、西京留守萧怀忠，对尚书令张浩、左丞相萧玉施用杖刑。
English: On the 23rd, he killed the right guard general Xiao Zhengqi, the ten-member escort leader Lu Bao, the confidential envoy San Shigong, the Beijing resident Xiao Zhengqi, and the West Beijing resident Xiao Huaizhong, and used the cane to punish Shang Shuling Zhang Hao and the Left Minister Xiao Yu.

古文：以太常博士张崇为高丽生日使，萧谊忠为夏国生日使。
现代文：让太常博士张崇当高丽生日使，萧谊忠当夏国生日使。
English: Let Dr. Zhang Chong of Taizang be the envoy for the birthday of Goryeo, and Xia Yizhong be the envoy for the birthday of Xia.

古文：甲子，封所幸太后侍婢高福娘为郧国夫人。
现代文：二十四日，封所宠爱的太后的侍婢高福娘为郧国夫人。
English: On the 24th, Gao Fu's daughter, the favorite handmaid of the empress dowager, became the wife of Xiang Guo.

古文：九月庚午朔，以太保、判大宗正事昂为枢密使，太保如故。
现代文：九月一日，任命太保、判大宗正事昂为枢密使，保留太保职务。
English: On September 1, he appointed Taibao and Daizongshengjiang as envoys and retained the post of Taibao.

古文：戊子，杀前寿州刺史毛良虎。
现代文：十九日，杀死前寿州刺史毛良虎。
English: On the 19th, he killed the former Shoushu assassin, Mao Lianghu.

古文：庚寅，大名府贼王九据城叛，众至数万，所至盗贼峰起，大者连城邑，小者保山泽，或以十数骑张旗帜而行，官军莫敢近。
现代文：二十一日，大名府贼寇王九占据城叛乱，聚众达到几万人，所到之处盗贼蜂起，大的占领城邑，小的则保守山泽，或者用十几个骑士举着旗帜横行，官军不敢接近他们。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, the notorious thief and robber Wang Jiu led a rebellion to occupy the city, gathering tens of thousands of people. The thieves rose up wherever they went. The big ones occupied the cities, while the small ones protected the mountains and lakes, or rode around with a dozen knights holding flags. The government army did not dare to approach them.

古文：上又恶闻盗贼事，言者辄罪之。
现代文：皇上又厌恶听报告盗贼的事，有人报告则判他们的罪。
English: The emperor also disliked to hear reports about thieves, and some reports condemned them.

古文：上自将三十二总管兵伐宋，进自寿春。
现代文：皇上亲自率领三十二总管兵攻打宋国，从寿春进发。
English: The emperor personally led the 32nd General Headquarters to attack Song, starting from Shouchun.

古文：以太保、枢密使昂为左领军大都督，尚书右丞李通副之，尚书左丞纥石烈良弼为右领军大都督，判大宗正乌延蒲卢浑副之，御史大夫徒单贞为左监军，同判大宗正事徒单永年为右监军，左宣徽使许霖为左都监，河南尹蒲察斡论为右都监，皆从。
现代文：任命太保、枢密使昂为左领军大都督，尚书右丞李通做他的副将；任命尚书左丞纥石烈良弼为右领军大都督，判大宗正乌延蒲卢浑做他的副将；任命御史大夫徒单贞为左监军，同判大宗正事徒单永年为右监军；左宣徽使许霖为左都监，河南府尹蒲察斡论为右都监，上述这些人都服从皇上命令。
English: He appointed the Taibao and the Privy Envoy Aung as the left leader of the Grand Capital, and the Right Honourable Li Tong as his vice-commander; he appointed the Left Honourable 石烈良 as the right leader of the Grand Capital, and sentenced the Grand Chancellor Wu Yanbulu to be his vice-commander; he appointed the Imperial Historian Dr. Tsuchizan Zhen as the left supervisor of the army, and sentenced the Grand Chancellor Zhengji Tsuchizan to be the right supervisor of the army forever; he appointed the Left Honourable Xu Lin as the left supervisor of the army, and the Henan Governor Yin Puchagong as the

古文：工部尚书苏保衡为浙东道水军都统制，益都尹郑家副之，由海道径趋临安。
现代文：任命工部尚书苏保衡为浙东道水军都统制，益都府尹郑家做他的副将，经由海道直接奔赴临安。
English: He appointed Shangshu Su Baoheng of the Ministry of Industry as the host of the Zhejiang Naval Command, and Yin Zhengjia of the Yidu Prefecture as his vice-commander, and rushed to Lin'an directly via the highway.

古文：太原尹刘萼为汉南道行营兵马都统制，济南尹仆散乌者副之，进自蔡州。
现代文：任命太原府尹刘萼为汉南道行营兵马都统制，济南府尹仆散乌者做他的副将，从蔡州进发。
English: He appointed Yin Liu Cai of Taiyuan Province as the commander of the troops and horses of Hannan Province, and Yin Du Xuan Wu of Jinan Province as his vice-commander, and set out from Caizhou.

古文：河中尹徒单合喜为西蜀道行营兵马都统制，平阳尹张中彦副之，由凤翔取散关，驻军以俟后命。
现代文：河中府尹徒单合喜为西蜀道行营兵马都统制，平阳尹张中彦是他的副将，经由凤翔攻取散关，军队驻扎下来等候命令。
English: Yin Tushan Hexi of the Central Prefecture of Huanchu controlled the troops and horses of the Western Shu Road Campaign, and Yin Zhang Zhongyan of Pingyang was his vice-general. He captured Sankuan through Fengxiang, and the army camped down to wait for orders.

古文：武胜、武平、武捷三军为前锋。
现代文：武胜、武平、武捷三军作为前锋。
English: The three armies of Bu Sheng, Bu Ping and Bu Jie led the way as forwards.

古文：徒单贞别将兵二万入淮阴。
现代文：徒单贞另外率领二万人马进入淮阴。
English: In addition, Tushanzhen led another 20,000 people to enter Huaiyin.

古文：甲午，上发南京，诏皇后及太子光英居守，尚书令张浩、左丞相萧玉、参知政事敬嗣晖留治省事。
现代文：二十五日，皇上从南京发兵，诏令皇后以及太子光英居住留守，尚书令张浩、左丞相萧玉、参知政事敬嗣晖留下治理省事。
English: On the 25th, the emperor sent troops from Nanjing, and issued a decree ordering the empress and the prince Guangying to stay at home. He also ordered Zhang Hao, the minister of the left, Xiao Yu, and the senator for political affairs, Keizhi Yao, to stay and manage the affairs of the province.

古文：丙申，太白昼见。
现代文：二十七日，太白金星白天显现。
English: On the 27th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：将士自军中亡归者相属于道。
现代文：将士从军队中逃跑回去的在道路上络绎不绝。
English: There is a steady stream of soldiers on the road back from the army.

古文：曷苏馆猛安福寿、东京谋克金住等始授甲于大名，即举部亡归，从者众至万余，皆公言于路曰： 我辈今往东京，立新天子矣！ 
现代文：曷苏馆猛安福寿、东京谋克金住等开始在大名发授铠甲，就带领全部人马逃跑回来，跟从的人达一万多，都公开在路上说： 我们现在往东京去，拥立新天子了！ 
English: Lingsu Pavilion, Meng'an, Fuxou, Tokyo Mokke, Jinzhu, and others began to award armor to daimyos, and they led all the people to flee back, with more than ten thousand people following them, all openly saying on the road: We are now going to Tokyo to support the new emperor!

古文：十月乙巳，阴迷失道，二鼓始达营所。
现代文：十月六日，天阴，迷失道路，二更天才到达军营所在地。
English: On October 6, it was cloudy and the road was lost. It took two days to reach the location of the military camp.

古文：丙午，庆云见。
现代文：七日，有吉祥的彩云出现。
English: On the seventh day, an auspicious colored cloud appeared.

古文：东京留守曹国公乌禄即位于辽阳，改元大定，大赦。
现代文：东京留守曹国公乌禄在辽阳即位，改年号为大定，大赦天下。
English: Cao Guogong Ulu, who stayed in Tokyo, ascended the throne in Liaoyang, changed the era name to Dating, and pardoned the whole world.

古文：数海陵过恶：弑皇太后徒单氏，弑太宗及宗翰、宗弼子孙及宗本诸王，毁上京宫室，杀辽豫王、宋天水郡王、郡公子孙等数十事。
现代文：历数海陵过去的恶行：杀皇太后徒单氏，杀太宗以及宗翰、宗弼子孙和宗本各位王爷，毁坏上京宫室，杀辽豫王、宋天水郡王、郡公子孙等几十件事。
English: Count the evil deeds of Hailing in the past: killing Empress Dowager Tutan, killing Emperor Taizong, Emperor Zonghan, Emperor Zonghu's descendants, Emperor Zongben's princes, destroying Shangjing's palace, killing King Liao Yu, King Song Tianshui, and Prince Gu's descendants, and dozens of other things.

古文：丁未，大军渡淮，将至庐州，获白鹿，以为武王白鱼之兆。
现代文：八日，大军渡过淮河，将要到达卢州，擒获一只白鹿，认为是武王白鱼的预兆。
English: On the eighth day, the army crossed the Huaihe River and was about to reach Luzhou. They captured a white deer, which was thought to be an omen of King Wu's white fish.

古文：汉南道刘萼取通化军、蒋州、信阳军。
现代文：汉南道刘萼攻取通化军、蒋州、信阳军。
English: Liu Cai of Hannan Province captured the Tonghua Army, the Jiangzhou Army, and the Xinyang Army.

古文：徒单贞败宋将王权于盱眙，进取扬州。
现代文：徒单贞在盱眙打败宋将王权，进发去取扬州。
English: Tsuchizan Zhen defeated the Song general Wang Quan in Yunnan and set out to capture Yangzhou.

古文：前锋军至段寨，宋戍兵皆遁去，败宋兵于蔚子桥，败宋兵于巢县，斩二百级，至和州。
现代文：前锋军队到段寨，宋的守兵都逃遁了，前锋军队在蔚子桥打败宋兵，又在巢县打败宋兵，斩敌人二百首级，到达和州。
English: When the vanguard army reached Duanzhai, the Song defenders had all fled. The vanguard army defeated the Song soldiers at Uizi Bridge, defeated the Song soldiers at Chaoxian, cut off 200 heads of the enemy, and arrived at Hezhou.

古文：王权夜以兵千余来袭，射却之。
现代文：王权夜间用兵一千余人来袭击，前锋军用弓箭射退了他们。
English: Wang Quan attacked at night with more than a thousand soldiers, and the vanguard army repelled them with bows and arrows.

古文：翼日，雨。
现代文：第二天，下雨。
English: The next day, it rained.

古文：宋人夜焚其积遁去。
现代文：宋人夜间焚烧了他们积聚的财物逃遁离开了。
English: The Song people burned their accumulated property at night, fled and left.

古文：诘旦追之，宋人逆战，猛安韩棠军却，遂失利。
现代文：到天明去追击他们，宋人回过来迎战，猛安韩棠军败退了，于是战斗失利。
English: They went to chase them at dawn, the Song people came back to fight, and the Meng'an and Han Tang forces retreated, thus losing the battle.

古文：温都奥剌奔北，武捷军副总管阿散率猛安谋克力战，却之。
现代文：温都奥剌向北逃奔，武捷军副总管阿散率领猛安谋克奋力作战，打退了敌兵。
English: Windu Okuyama fled to the north, and Ahsan, the vice-commander-in-chief of the Wuyue army, led the troops to fight hard and beat back the enemy soldiers.

古文：王权退保南岸。
现代文：王权退兵守在淮河南岸。
English: The Wangquan Retreating Guard is located on the south bank of the Huai River.

古文：癸亥，上次和州，阿散等进阶赏赉有差。
现代文：二十四日，皇上到和州，对阿散等给予晋级并给予不同层次的赏赐。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the emperor came to Wazhou and promoted Asan and others and gave them rewards of different levels.

古文：西蜀道徒单合喜驻散关，宋人攻秦州腊家城、德顺州，克之。
现代文：西蜀道徒单合喜驻守散关，宋人攻打秦州腊家城、德顺州，攻克了。
English: Xishu Daoists stationed in Shanhexi guarded Sankuan. Song people attacked and conquered Lajia City and Deshunzhou in Qin State.

古文：浙东道苏保衡与宋人战于海道，败绩，副统制郑家死之。
现代文：浙东道苏保衡和宋人在海道作战，失败了，副统制郑家在这场战斗中丧生。
English: The Zhe host, Su Baoheng, and the Song people fought on the sea road and failed. The vice-regent Zheng Jia lost his life in this battle.

古文：十一月庚午，左司郎中兀不喝等闻赦，入白东京即位改元事，上拊髀叹曰： 我本欲灭宋后改元大定，岂非天命乎？ 
现代文：十一月二日，传说左司郎中兀不喝等被赦免后，进入空无所有的东京参与乌禄即位改年号的事情，皇上拍着大腿感叹道 ：我本来打算消灭宋国后改年号为大定，这难道是天命吗？ 
English: On November 2nd, after being pardoned of the legend of Zuo Si Lang Zhong Yao not drinking and so on, he entered the emptiness of Tokyo to participate in the event of Ulu being enthroned and changing the year, the emperor patted his thigh and lamented: I originally planned to change the year after the destruction of Song, is this fate?

古文：出其书示之，即预志改元事也。
现代文：拿出他以前写好的诏书给大家看，内容就是予行确定改元的事情。
English: He took out the edict he had previously written and showed it to everyone, the content of which was to determine the date of the change.

古文：以劝农使完颜元宜为浙西道兵马都统制，刑部尚书郭安国副之。
现代文：任命劝农使完颜元宜为浙西道兵马都统制，刑部尚书郭安国做他的副将。
English: He appointed Guan Yan Yuan Yi as the commander of the Western Zhejiang Province and Guo Anguo as his vice-commander of the Penal Department.

古文：上驻军江北。遣武平总管阿邻先渡江至南岸，失利。
现代文：皇上把军队驻扎在长江北岸，派遣武平总管阿邻先渡到南岸，渡江失利。
English: The emperor stationed the army on the north bank of the Yangtze River, and sent Wu Ping's general, A Niang, to cross the river to the south bank first, but he failed.

古文：上还和州，遂进兵扬州。
现代文：皇上回到和州，又向扬州进军。
English: The emperor returned to Hezhou and then marched to Yangzhou.

古文：甲午，会舟师于瓜洲渡，期以明日渡江。
现代文：二十六日，在瓜洲渡和舟师会合，定下日期第二天渡江。
English: On the 26th, Guazhou ferrymen and boatmen met in Guazhou to set a date for the next day's crossing.

古文：乙未，浙西兵马都统制完颜元宜等军反，帝遇弑，崩，年四十。
现代文：二十七日，浙西兵马都统制完颜元宜等的军队造反，海陵帝遇刺身亡，时年四十岁。
English: On the 27th, after Yan Yuan Yi's army revolted after taking control of Western Zhejiang, Emperor Hailing was assassinated and died at the age of forty.

古文：海陵在位十余年，每饰情貌以御臣下。却尚食进鹅以示俭，及游猎顿次，不时需索，一鹅一鹑，民间或用数万售之，有以一牛易一鹑者。
现代文：海陵在位十多年，常常掩饰自己的真实感情和面貌来统治臣下，推却管理饮食的侍者进鹅来表示自己勤俭，可是去巡游打猎每住到一个地方，又不时地需要求索，虽说是一只鹅、一只鹌鹑，民间有的要卖数万钱，有时用一头牛换取一只鹌鹑。
English: During the more than ten years that Hailing reigned, he often concealed his true feelings and appearance in order to rule his subjects. He pushed the waiter in charge of the meal into a goose to show that he was frugal. However, whenever he went on a hunting trip, he would have to search for a goose or a quail from time to time. Some people would sell them for tens of thousands of dollars, and sometimes he would exchange a cow for a quail.

古文：或以弊衾覆衣，以示近臣。或服补缀，令记注官见之。或取军士陈米饭与尚食同进，先食军士饭几尽。
现代文：海陵有时拿破被子盖在衣服上面，来让近臣看，或者穿打补钉的衣服，让记注官看见他这样；或者把军士的剩米饭拿来和管理皇上吃饭的侍者一同吃，抢先吃军士的剩饭几乎吃光。
English: At times, Hailing would place a quilt over Napoleon's clothes for his courtiers to see, or he would wear clothes with patched studs so that the notetaker would see him that way, or he would take the sergeant's leftover rice and eat it with the waiter who was supervising the emperor's meal. He would eat the sergeant's leftover rice first and eat almost all of it.

古文：或见民车陷泥泽，令卫士下挽，俟车出然后行。
现代文：有时他看见老百姓的车子陷入泥泽，命令卫士下去推车，等车出了泥泽然后他再启行。
English: Sometimes he would see a citizen's car stuck in the mud, order the guards to go down and push the car, wait for the car to get out of the mud and then he would set off again.

古文：与近臣燕语，辄引古昔贤君以自况。
现代文：和近臣闲聊，则引用古代贤君的事迹来说明自己的情况。
English: When chatting with his close vassals, he would cite the deeds of ancient sages to illustrate his own situation.

古文：显责大臣，使进直言。
现代文：当面斥责大臣，让他们有话直说。
English: Rebuke ministers to their faces and let them have their say.

古文：使张仲轲辈为谏官，而祁宰竟以直谏死。
现代文：让张仲轲一类人当谏官，然而祁宰竟然因为直言劝谏而招致杀身之祸。
English: Zhang Zhongya and others were allowed to become eunuchs, but because of his outspoken advice, he was killed.

古文：比昵群小，官赏无度，左右有旷僚者，人或以名呼之，即授以显阶。
现代文：对亲近的一群小人，封官赏赐没有限度，左右有缺员的，有的人呼唤他的名字，就授予显贵的官阶。
English: For a close group of villains, there is no limit to the reward of the official seal. If there are vacancies on the left and right, and some people call his name, he will be awarded a prominent official rank.

古文：常置黄金裀褥间，有喜之者，令自取之。
现代文：常常把黄金放在床垫和褥子之间，有他喜欢的人，就让这人自己去拿那些金子。
English: He often put the gold between the mattress and the mattresses, and if there was someone he liked, he would let that person take the gold for themselves.

古文：而淫嬖不择骨肉，刑杀不问有罪。
现代文：浸淫、纳娶宠爱不择骨肉，判刑、诛杀不问是否有罪。
English: Immersion, acceptance, marriage, and favors are all based on flesh and blood, and sentencing and killing do not ask whether one is guilty or not.

古文：至营南京宫殿，运一木之费至二千万，牵一车之力至五百人。
现代文：到营造南京宫殿的时候，运输一块木头的费用高达二千万，牵引一车材料的人力多达五百人。
English: By the time of the construction of the Nanjing Palace, the cost of transporting a piece of wood was as high as 20 million yuan, and the manpower to tow a cart of materials was as high as 500 people.

古文：宫殿之饰，遍傅黄金而后间以五采，金屑飞空如落雪。
现代文：宫殿的装饰，遍附黄金而其间镶嵌五彩，金屑飞舞在空中像下雪。
English: The decoration of the palace, covered with gold and inlaid with multicolored, gold dust flying in the air like snow.

古文：一殿之费以亿万计，成而复毁，务极华丽。
现代文：一座宫殿的费用以亿万两银来计算，修成不满意而又毁掉，务必要极其华丽。
English: The cost of a palace is calculated at one hundred million taels of silver. If it is not completed satisfactorily and is destroyed, it must be extremely ornate.

古文：其南征造战舰江上，毁民庐舍以为材，煮死人膏以为油，殚民力如马牛，费财用如土苴，空国以图人国，遂至于败。
现代文：他为了南征在长江上造战舰，毁掉老百姓的住宅当材料，煮死人熬油，用尽民力像用马牛，浪费财物像尘土草末，拿空国去图谋人国，终于招致失败。
English: For the Southern Expedition, he built warships on the Yangtze River, destroyed the houses of the common people as materials, boiled dead people to boil oil, exhausted the people's strength like using a horse and ox, wasted wealth like dust and grass, and took the empty country to plot the people's country, and finally caused failure.

古文：都督府以其柩置之南京班荆馆。
现代文：都督府把海陵的灵柩放在南京班荆馆。
English: The governor-general's office placed the coffin of Hai Ling in the Nanjing Ban Jing Hall.

古文：大定二年，降封为海陵郡王，谥曰炀。
现代文：大定二年，降封他为海陵郡王，谥号叫炀。
English: In the second year of Dading, he was demoted as the king of Hailing County, and his posthumous name was Yu.

古文：二月，世宗使小底娄室与南京官迁其柩于宁德宫。
现代文：二月，世宗派听差的小底娄室和南京官员把海陵的灵柩迁移到宁德宫。
English: In February, the Xiaodixing Chamber and Nanjing officials moved the coffin of Hailing to the Ningde Palace.

古文：四月，葬于大房山鹿门谷诸王兆域中。
现代文：四月，下葬在大房山鹿门谷诸王坟墓的界址内。
English: In April, he was buried within the boundaries of the tombs of the kings of the Dafang Mountain and the Lumen Valley.

古文：二十年，熙宗既祔庙，有司奏曰： 炀王之罪未正。
现代文：二十年，以熙宗附祭于先祖，有司禀奏说： 炀王的罪恶没有治办。
English: In the 20th year after Emperor Hezong made offerings to his ancestors, there was a priest who said, "There is no punishment for the sins of King Hezong.

古文：准晋赵王伦废惠帝自立，惠帝反正，诛伦，废为庶人。
现代文：比照晋赵王伦废除惠帝自立皇帝，惠帝反过来治了伦的罪，杀了伦，并把伦废除帝名而作为庶人。
English: Comparing with Jin Zhao Wanglun's abolishing Hui Di as a self-reliant emperor, Hui Di in turn punished Lun's crime, killed Lun, and made Lun abolish the imperial name and become a commoner.

古文：炀帝罪恶过于伦，不当有王对，亦不当在诸王茔域。 
现代文：炀帝的罪恶超过了伦，不应当有王封，也不应当葬在诸王坟茔区域内。 
English: Emperor Qian's crimes exceeded the limits of len, and he should not have a royal seal, nor should he be buried in the royal tombs.

古文：乃诏降为海陵庶人，改葬于山陵西南四十里。
现代文：世宗于是诏令把海陵降为庶人，改葬在山陵西南四十里。
English: Sejong then decreed that Hae-ling be reduced to a commoner and be reburied forty miles southwest of the mountain.

