古文：国子曰： 秦破马服君之师，围邯郸。
现代文：国子说： 秦国打败马服君赵括的军队，包围了邯郸。
English: Kuniko said, "Qin State defeated the army of Ma Fu Jun Zhao Kuang and encircled Yao.

古文：齐、魏亦佐秦伐邯郸，齐取淄鼠，魏取伊是。
现代文：齐国、魏国也帮助秦国进攻邯郸，齐围攻占淄鼠，魏国攻占伊是。
English: Qi and Wei also helped Qin attack Yunnan, Qi besieged and occupied Yunnan, and Wei conquered Yizhe.

古文：公子无忌为天下循便计，杀晋鄙，率魏兵以救邯郸之围，使秦弗有而失天下。
现代文：魏国公子无忌为天下设下妙计，杀死将军晋鄙，率领魏国军队去解救邯郸之围。使秦国不能占领邯郸而且失去天下民心。
English: The noble son of Wei set up a brilliant plan for the world, killed the general Jin and led the Wei army to relieve the siege of Yunnan, so that Qin could not occupy Yunnan and lost the hearts of the world.

古文：是齐入于魏而救邯郸之功也。
现代文：这就是齐兵侵入魏国造成无忌救援邯郸的大功。
English: This is the great achievement of Qi soldiers invading Wei and causing the inevitable rescue of Zang.

古文：安邑者，魏之柱国也；晋阳者，赵之柱国也；鄢郢者，楚之柱国也。故三国欲与秦壤界，秦伐魏取安邑，伐赵取晋阳，伐楚取鄢郢矣。
现代文：安邑是魏国的都城；晋阳是赵国的都城；鄢郢是楚国的都城。本来三国和秦国接壤，如果秦国进攻魏国，就会夺取安邑，进攻赵国，就会夺取晋阳，进攻楚国，就会夺取鄢郢。
English: An'yip is the capital of Wei; Jinyang is the capital of Zhao; Nang is the capital of Chu. Originally, the three countries bordered Qin. If Qin attacked Wei, it would capture An'yip; if it attacked Zhao, it would capture Jinyang; and if it attacked Chu, it would capture Nang.

古文：福三国之君，兼二周之地，举韩氏取其地，且天下之半。
现代文：逼迫三国君主，兼并东西周的土地，攻占韩国夺取它的土地，秦国将要夺取天下的一半土地了。
English: Persecuting the monarchs of the three countries, annexing the land around the east and west, conquering South Korea and seizing its land, Qin is about to seize half of the world's land.

古文：今又劫赵、魏，疏中国，封卫之东野，兼魏之河南，绝赵之东阳，则赵、魏亦危矣。
现代文：如今又强取赵国、魏国，疏远中原各国的邦交，割取卫国的东部领土，兼并魏国的河南，断绝赵国的东阳，那么赵国、魏国也就危险了。
English: Today, it has forcibly taken over Zhao and Wei, alienated the diplomatic relations of the Central Plains countries, cut off the eastern territory of the defending country, annexed Henan of Wei, and cut off Dongyang of Zhao, so Zhao and Wei are also in danger.

古文：赵、魏危，则非齐之利也。
现代文：赵国、魏国处于危险境地，那并不是齐国的利益。
English: Zhao and Wei are in a dangerous situation, which is not in the interest of Qi.

古文：韩、魏、赵、楚之志，恐秦兼天下而臣其君，故专兵一志以逆秦。
现代文：韩国、魏国、赵国、楚国的意思，是害怕秦国兼并天下而使它们的君主称臣，所以专意用兵抗拒秦兵。
English: The meaning of Korea, Wei, Zhao, and Chu was that they were afraid of Qin's annexation of the whole world, which would make their monarchs subordinate, so they deliberately used soldiers to resist Qin's soldiers.

古文：三国之于秦壤界而患急，齐不与秦壤界而患缓。
现代文：三国与秦国接界祸患就迅速，齐国不与秦国接界祸患就迟缓。
English: The border disaster between the three countries and Qin will be quick, while the border disaster between Qi and Qin will be slow.

古文：是以天下之势，不得不事齐也。
现代文：因此根据天下局势看来，诸侯不得不事奉齐国。
English: Therefore, according to the situation in the world, the princes had to serve the Qing Dynasty.

古文：故秦得齐，则权重于中国；赵、魏、楚得齐，则足以敌秦。
现代文：如果秦国得到齐国的支持，那么它的权势在中原将得到重视；赵国、魏国、楚国得到齐国的支持，那么完全可以抵御秦国。
English: If Qin is supported by Qi, then its power will be valued in the Central Plains; if Zhao, Wei and Chu are supported by Qi, then they can completely resist Qin.

古文：故秦、赵、魏得齐者重，失齐者轻。
现代文：所以秦国、赵国、魏国谁得到齐国的支持，就会得到诸侯的重视，失掉齐国的支持就会受到诸侯的轻视。
English: Therefore, if Qin, Zhao or Wei gained the support of Qi, they would be valued by the princes. If they lost the support of Qi, they would be despised by the princes.

古文：齐有此势，不能以重于天下者何也?
现代文：齐国既然占有这样好的形势，却不能在天下得到重视是什么原因呢？
English: Since Qi has such a good situation, what is the reason why it cannot be valued in the world?

古文：其用者过也。 
现代文：大概是用错了计策。 
English: They probably used the wrong strategy.

