古文：周宗室
现代文：宇文广，字乾归，从小就端正严谨，喜好文学。
English: Yu Wenguang is a dry returner. He has been neat and rigorous from an early age, and likes literature.

古文：葬于陇右，所司一遵俭约之典。子洽嗣，隋文辅政，被害，国除。
现代文：北周明帝武成初年，他任大将军、梁州总管，进而又被封为蔡国公，迁任秦州刺史、总管十三州诸军事。性情明察，善于扶危，官吏百姓对他既畏惧又喜欢。
English: In the first year of the Northern Zhou Ming Emperor Wucheng, he was appointed as a general and the chief administrator of Liangzhou, and then he was named Cai Guogong, transferred to Qinzhou and became the chief administrator of the military of the 13 states. His temperament was clear, he was good at helping in danger, and the officials and the people were both afraid of him and liked him.

古文：翼字乾宜，封西阳郡公，早薨，曰昭。
现代文：晋公宇文护专擅朝廷大权，宇文广劝他收敛，宇文护不接受，便将宇文广调到陕州任总管，宇文广因病才免于调出京城。
English: Jin Gong Uwenguo was particularly adept at wielding the power of the imperial court. Uwenguang advised him to restrain himself, but Uwenguo did not accept, so Uwenguang was transferred to Shaanxi to serve as the general manager. Uwenguang was only exempted from being transferred out of Beijing due to illness.

古文：无子，以杞公亮子温嗣，后坐亮反诛，国除。
现代文：他的母亲李氏很替儿子担心，竟忧虑成疾，终至去世。
English: His mother, Ms. Li, was so worried about her son that she became ill and eventually died.

古文：众字乾道，少不慧，封天水郡公，为隋文所诛。
现代文：宇文广居丧病情加重，也不幸去世，人们都称赞他们母子是母为子病，子为母死，慈母孝子，集于一门。
English: Uwen Guangju's bereavement and illness worsened, and he unfortunately passed away. People praised their mother and son as mother and son illness, son and mother death, motherly and filial son, gathered in one family.

古文：护字萨保，幼方正有志度，特为德皇帝所爱。
现代文：宇文护，字萨保，幼年时为人方正，颇有志气度量，特别被他的祖父德皇帝所喜爱。
English: Uwenguo, also known as Sabo, was a square-jawed young man with a strong will and determination. He was especially loved by his grandfather, the German Emperor.

古文：文帝之入关，以年小不从。
现代文：周文帝宇文泰率兵入关，他因年龄小没有跟从。
English: Zhou Wen Diyu and Ventai led the troops into the pass, but he did not follow due to his young age.

古文：普泰初，始自晋阳至平凉，时年十七。
现代文：普泰初年，他才从晋阳到达平凉，这时才十七岁。
English: In the first year of Putai, he was only seventeen years old when he arrived in Pingliang from Jinyang.

古文：文帝诸子并幼，遂委以家务，内外无不严肃。
现代文：宇文泰的儿子们也都年幼，宇文泰便把家务交给了宇文护。在他管理下，家庭内外无不严肃静穆。
English: Uwentai's sons are also young, so he left the housework to Uwentai's nanny. Under his management, both inside and outside the family, everything is serious and quiet.

古文：文帝叹之，以为类已。
现代文：宇文泰称赞他，认为他很像自己。
English: Mr. Uwentai praised him, saying he was very much like himself.

古文：及临夏州，留护事贺拔岳。
现代文：宇文泰到达夏州，留下宇文护跟随贺拔岳。
English: Uwentai arrived in Xiazhou, leaving Uwentai to follow Mt.

古文：岳被害。文帝至平凉，以护为都督，从破侯莫陈悦。
现代文：贺拔岳被害，宇文泰回到平凉，任命宇文护为都督，跟随自己打败侯莫陈悦。
English: After He Baturakure was killed, Uwentai returned to Pingliang, appointed Uwentai as the governor, and followed him to defeat Hou Mo Chen Rong.

古文：后以迎魏帝功，封水池县伯。
现代文：后来，因为迎立魏文帝元宝炬立功，他被朝廷封为永池县伯。
English: Later, because of his contribution in welcoming Weiwen Emperor Yuan Baoqi, he was awarded the title of Yongchi County Count by the imperial court.

古文：从文帝禽窦泰，复弘农，破沙苑，战河桥，并有功。
现代文：他又跟着宇文泰打败窦泰，收复弘农，攻破沙苑，征战河桥，都建有军功。
English: He also followed Uwen Tai to defeat Dou Tai, recover Hong Nong, break through Sha Yuan, and conquer He Qiao, all of which have military merits.

古文：芒山之役，为敌人所围，赖都督侯伏龙恩救，乃免。
现代文：邙山之役，他被东魏的军队包围，依赖都督侯伏、侯龙恩救援，才突出包围。
English: In the Battle of Lushan, he was encircled by the Eastern Wei army and relied on the relief of the governor Hou Fu and Hou Long En before he was encircled.

古文：坐免官，寻复本位。
现代文：因作战失利被免去官职，不久又恢复原来的职务。
English: He was dismissed from his post due to the defeat in the war, but soon returned to his former position.

古文：大统十三年，进封中山公。十五年，迁大将军。
现代文：大统十三年，他晋封为中山公，十五年，迁任大将军。
English: In the thirteenth year of unification, he was promoted to Zhongshan, and in the fifteenth year, he was transferred to the position of general.

古文：与于谨征江陵，进兵径至江陵城下，以待大军至，围而克之。
现代文：他与于谨征讨江陵，率军直至江陵城下。等待大军到来后，包围江陵，一举攻克。
English: He participated in the honorable enlistment to fight against Gangneung and led the army to the foot of Gangneung Castle. After waiting for the large army to arrive, he surrounded Gangneung and defeated it in one fell swoop.

古文：师还，护又讨平襄阳蛮帅向天保等万余落。
现代文：归来后，他又率军讨平了襄阳的蛮族首领向天保等一万多人。
English: After returning, he led the army to level the barbarian leader Xiang Tianbao and more than ten thousand others in Xiangyang.

古文：初行六官，拜司空。
现代文：朝廷刚实行文官制度，他被封为小司空。
English: The imperial court had just implemented the civil service system, and he was appointed as a petty officer.

古文：文帝西巡，至牵屯山遇疾，召护至泾州，见文帝。
现代文：宇文泰西巡，行至牵屯山患病，派人召宇文护到泾州。
English: Uwen Taishi, who was on a tour to the west, fell ill on his way to Tutun Mountain, and someone was sent to summon Uwen to Quzhou.

古文：帝曰： 吾形容若此，必不济。诸子幼，天下事以属汝。 
现代文：他见到宇文泰，宇文泰对他说： 我的病情这个样子，一定难于恢复，我的儿子都年纪幼小，天下的事情就交给你管理。 
English: He saw Uwentai. Uwentai said to him, "My condition is such that it will be difficult for me to recover. My sons are very young. I will leave the management of the world to you."

古文：护涕泣奉命。
现代文：他哭着接受了叔父的命令。
English: He wept as he accepted his uncle's order.

古文：行至云阳，文帝崩，护秘之，至长安乃发丧。
现代文：行至云阳，宇文泰驾崩，宇文护护送他的遗体到长安后才发丧。
English: After traveling to Yunyang, Uwen Tai passed away. Uwen escorted his body to Chang'an before his death.

古文：时嗣子冲幼，强寇在近，人情不安。
现代文：这时，接替周文帝事业的儿子年纪尚小，强敌压境，人心浮动。
English: At this time, the son who took over the business of Zhou Wendi was still young, the strong enemy was under pressure, and people's hearts were floating.

古文：护纲纪内外，抚循文武，众心乃定。
现代文：宇文护总揽朝廷内外，抚慰文武大臣，人心才稳定下来。
English: It was only after Umunno, the chief protector of the imperial court and beyond, consoled the Minister of Education and Culture that the people's hearts were stabilized.

古文：先是，文帝常云 我得胡力 ，当时莫晓其指，时人以 护 字当之。
现代文：早先，宇文泰经常说 ：我得胡力。 当时人们不晓得所指何人，这时，人们理解为 护 字。
English: In the early days, when people did not know who he was referring to, he would often say, "I have to get huli," which was understood to mean "protection."

古文：寻拜柱国。
现代文：不久，朝廷封他为柱国。
English: Soon, the imperial court made him a pillar state.

古文：文帝山陵毕，护以天命有归，遣讽魏帝以禅代事。
现代文：宇文泰安葬完毕，宇文护认为天命归周，讽劝西魏天子禅让。
English: After the funeral of Uwen Tai'an, Uwen Mu believed that the fate of the world was in his hands, and advised the Western Wei Emperor to give up Zen.

古文：孝闵践阼，拜大司马，封晋国公，邑万户。
现代文：北周孝闵帝宇文觉即皇帝位，封他为晋国公，食邑一万户。
English: Emperor Wuwen Jue of the Northern Zhou Dynasty was enthroned as the emperor, and he was given the title of Jin Guogong, with 10,000 households.

古文：赵贵、独孤信等将谋袭护，护因贵入朝，执之，党与皆伏诛。
现代文：赵贵、独孤信等人密谋袭击他，他利用赵贵入朝的机会将其抓获，赵贵的同党都被诛灭。
English: Zhao Gui, Duk Guoxin and others plotted to attack him. He used the opportunity of Zhao Gui's entry into the imperial court to capture him, and Zhao Gui's fellow party members were annihilated.

古文：拜大冢宰。
现代文：朝廷封他为大冢宰。
English: The imperial court made him the grand secretary.

古文：时司会李植、军司马孙恆等密要宫伯乙弗凤、张光洛、贺拔提、元进等为腹心，说帝，言护不守臣节，宜图之。
现代文：这时，司会李植、军司马孙恒等秘密勾结宫伯乙佛凤、张光洛、贺拔提、元进等心腹，游说闵帝，说宇文护不遵守大臣的礼节，应该除掉他。
English: At this time, Secretary Li Zhi and Military Secretary Ma Sunheng secretly colluded with close confidants such as Gong Bo Yi, Fofeng, Zhang Guangluo, He Batti, and Yuan Jin to lobby Emperor Zhao, saying that Uwenguo did not comply with the minister's etiquette and should be eliminated.

古文：帝然之，数将武士于后园，为执缚势。
现代文：闵帝同意了，多次率武士在后园，作出要抓捕他的架势。
English: Emperor Yao agreed, and several times led the samurai in the backyard to make a stand to capture him.

古文：护微知之。出植为梁州，恆为潼州，欲遏其谋。
现代文：宇文护多少知道了有关的消息，调李植任梁州刺史，孙恒为潼州刺史，想遏止他们的阴谋。
English: Yu Wenguo knew more or less the relevant news, transferred Li Zhi Ren to Liangzhou and Sun Heng to Zhangzhou, and wanted to stop their conspiracy.

古文：后帝思植等，每欲召之。护谏曰： 天下至亲，不过兄弟。
现代文：后来，闵帝想念李植等人，常想召见他们，宇文护便谏止说： 天下最亲密的，都不超过兄弟。
English: Later, Emperor Gong missed Li Zhi and the others and often wanted to see them, but Uwen Huan said: The closest people in the world are no more than brothers.

古文：若兄弟自构嫌隙，他人何易可亲？
现代文：如果兄弟之间互相猜疑，别的人怎么可以亲近呢？
English: If brothers are suspicious of each other, how can others be close?

古文：但恐除臣后，奸回得逞其欲，非唯不处陛下，亦危社稷。 
现代文：只恐怕将我除掉后，奸佞们的目的便可以达到。不仅对陛下您不利，也会危害国家。 
English: However, I am afraid that if I am eliminated, the purpose of the traitors will be achieved, which will not only be unfavorable to Your Majesty, but will also harm the country.

古文：因泣涕，久之乃止。
现代文：说着便哭了起来，过了很久才停止。
English: She began to cry as she spoke, and it was a long time before she stopped.

古文：帝犹猜，凤等益惧，密谋滋甚，遂克日将诛护。
现代文：闵帝对他仍然猜忌，乙佛凤等人越发畏惧，密谋得更加频繁，近日就要将他除掉。
English: Emperor Xuan was still suspicious of him, and the other Buddhas and the phoenixes became more and more afraid of him. They plotted more frequently, and they were about to eliminate him.

古文：光洛告护，护乃召柱国贺兰祥、小司马尉迟纲等以凤谋告之。
现代文：张光洛向他告密，他便召集柱国贺兰祥、小司马尉迟纲等人，把乙佛凤的阴谋告诉了他们。
English: Zhang Guangluo tipped him off, and he then gathered Zhuo Guo, Helan Xiang, Xiao Sima, Chi Gang, and others, and told them about the conspiracy of Yifo Feng.

古文：祥并劝废帝。
现代文：贺兰祥等都劝他废掉闵帝。
English: Helan Xiang and others all advised him to abolish the emperor.

古文：时纲总领禁兵，护乃遣纲入宫，召凤等议事，以次执送护第。
现代文：这时，尉迟纲统领着禁军，宇文护便派他到宫中以议事的名义召见了乙佛凤等人，将他们一个个抓获，送到宇文护的家里。
English: At this time, Ye Chi Gang was in charge of the forbidden army, and Uwen Rong sent him to the palace to summon Yifo Feng and others in the name of deliberation, captured them one by one, and sent them to Uwen Rong's home.

古文：因罢散宿卫兵，遣祥逼帝，幽于旧邸。
现代文：解散宿卫兵，派贺兰祥逼迫闵帝退位，将他囚禁在他原来住的官邸。
English: He disbanded the guards and sent Horan Xiang to force Emperor Xuan to abdicate, imprisoning him in his former residence.

古文：于是召公卿毕集护第。护曰： 先王勤劳王业三十余年，寇贼未平，奄弃万国。
现代文：于是，宇文护把公卿大臣召集到自己家中，他对大家说： 先王为王业辛劳了三十多年，天下的贼寇还未平定，就已去世。
English: As a result, Uwen Rong summoned the noble minister to his home, and he said to everyone: The former king worked hard for Wangye for more than thirty years, and the thieves and robbers in the world have not yet been pacified, and he has passed away.

古文：寡人地则犹子，亲受顾命，以略阳公既居正嫡，与公等立而奉之，革魏兴周，为四海主。
现代文：我就像他的儿子，临终前他将朝廷大事托付给我。因为略阳公宇文觉是正出的长子，所以，我与诸位一起拥立他称帝，革去魏国，建立大周，他成为天下的君主。
English: I am like his son. Before his death, he entrusted the affairs of the imperial court to me. Because Liangyang Gongwu Wenkuo was the eldest son of Zhengde, I, together with all of you, supported him to become emperor, go to Wei, and establish Dazhou. He became the monarch of the world.

古文：自即位已来，荒淫无度，昵近群小，疏忌骨肉，大臣重将，咸欲诛夷。
现代文：但是，他自即位以来，荒淫无度，亲近一群邪恶小人，疏远和猜忌骨肉兄弟，想把重要的大臣将领都杀掉。
English: However, since his accession to the throne, he has been wildly immoral, close to a group of evil villains, estranged and suspicious of his brothers, and wants to kill important ministers and generals.

古文：若此谋遂行，社稷必致倾覆。
现代文：如果这个阴谋得逞，国家必然被颠覆。
English: If this plot succeeds, the country will inevitably be overthrown.

古文：寡人若死，将何面目以见先王？
现代文：我如果死掉，有什么面目到地下去见先王！
English: If I die, how can I face going underground to see the former king!

古文：今日宁负略阳公，岂可负社稷！
现代文：今天，我宁负略阳公，也不能有负天下！
English: Today, I'd rather be a loser than a winner!

古文：宁都公年德兼茂，仁孝圣慈，今欲废昏立明，公等以为何如？ 
现代文：宁都公宇文毓年轻有为，道德卓异，仁孝慈爱，现在我想废去昏庸，拥立圣明，你们认为怎么样？ 
English: I'd rather be a public figure, a scholar, a young and dynamic person, with outstanding morality, filial piety, and mercy. Now I want to abolish mediocrity and uphold holiness. What do you think?

古文：群公咸曰： 此公之家事，敢不唯命是听！ 
现代文：朝臣们都说 ：这是您家里的事情，我们敢不惟命是听！ 
English: The courtiers all said: This is a matter for your family, we dare not disobey orders!

古文：于是斩凤等于门外，并诛植、恆。
现代文：于是，将乙佛凤等人在门外斩首，并诛杀李植、孙恒。
English: As a result, he beheaded Eifo Feng and others outside the gate, and killed Li Zhi and Sun Heng.

古文：寻弑帝，迎明帝于岐州而立之。
现代文：不久杀掉闵帝，从岐州迎回明帝，立他为帝。
English: Soon after, he killed Emperor Xizong, welcomed Emperor Ming back from Qizhou, and made him emperor.

古文：二年，拜太师，赐路车冕服，封子至为崇业郡公。
现代文：第二年，朝廷封宇文护为太师，赐给他路车和冕服，封他的儿子宇文至为崇业郡公。
English: The following year, the Imperial Court made Uwensho the Grand Master, gave him a carriage and ceremonial robes, and made his son Uwensho the governor of Sungei County.

古文：初改雍州刺史为牧，以护为之，并赐金石之东。
现代文：这时将雍州刺史改为牧，也让他担任。还赐给他许多钟磬一类的乐器。
English: At this time, he changed the title of Yongzhou Zishi to Moo, and also gave him the post. He also gave him many musical instruments such as gongs.

古文：武成元年，护上表政，帝许之，军国大事尚委于护。
现代文：武成元年，宇文护上表请求归政给天子。明帝同意，但军队的事情还委托给他负责。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wucheng's reign, Uwen Guo petitioned the emperor to hand over the reins of government to him. Emperor Ming agreed, but he was still entrusted with military affairs.

古文：帝性聪睿，有识量，护深惮之。
现代文：明帝聪明睿智，有见识和度量，宇文护很害怕他。
English: Emperor Ming was intelligent, wise, insightful, and prudent. Wu Wenguang was very afraid of him.

古文：有李安者，本以鼎俎得宠于护，擢为膳部下大夫。
现代文：有一个叫李安的人，因烹饪手艺好被宇文护宠爱，宇文护将他提拔为膳部下大夫。
English: There was a man named Li An, who was favored by Uwenho because of his culinary skills. Uwenho promoted him to the position of a doctor under the Ministry of Cuisine.

古文：至是，护令安因进食加毒，帝遂崩。
现代文：这时，宇文护命他在送给明帝的饭菜中加上毒药，明帝吃后去世。
English: At this time, he added poison to the meal sent to Emperor Ming, and Emperor Ming died after eating it.

古文：护立武帝，百官总已以听护。
现代文：宇文护又立武帝宇文邕为帝，朝廷百官都听从他的指挥。
English: Emperor Wu established Emperor Uwenhu as emperor, and the hundreds of officials in the imperial court obeyed his command.

古文：自文帝为丞相，立左右十二军，总属相府。
现代文：自从周文帝宇文泰任西魏丞相，建立左右十二军，归丞相府统领。
English: Since Emperor Zhouwen Yu Wentei was the prime minister of the Western Wei Dynasty, he established the left and right twelve armies and became the leader of the prime minister's office.

古文：文帝崩后，皆受护处分，凡所征废，非护书不行。护第屯兵禁卫，盛于宫阙。
现代文：宇文泰去世后，这些军队都由宇文护管辖，凡是有征发调动，非得有他的文书才行，他屯兵在京城，分布在皇宫各处。
English: After the death of Uwentai, these armies were all under the jurisdiction of Uwentai. Whenever there was a conscription and mobilization, he had to have his document. He stationed soldiers in the capital and distributed them throughout the imperial palace.

古文：事无巨细，皆先断后闻。
现代文：朝廷事情不论大小，都由他先行决断，再奏闻天子。
English: No matter how big or small the court matters are, they are all decided by him first, and then reported to the emperor.

古文：保定元年，以护国都督中外诸军事，令一府总于天官。
现代文：保定元年，朝廷命他为都督中外诸军事，太傅、太尉、司徒、司空、大将军都由宰相统管。
English: In the first year of Baoding, the imperial court appointed him as the governor of all military forces in and out of the country. Taifu, Taiji, Sito, Siku, and Daijin were all under the control of the prime minister.

古文：或有希护旨者，云周公德重，鲁立文王之庙，以护功比周公，宜用此礼。
现代文：有巴结奉迎宇文护的，说周公德高望重，鲁国建立了周文王的庙。把宇文护比为周公，提出也应该采用这个礼仪。
English: It is said that Zhou Gong's virtue is highly respected, and the state of Lu has established a temple of King Zhou Wen. Comparing Uwen to Zhou Gong, it is suggested that this etiquette should also be adopted.

古文：于是诏于同州晋国第立德皇帝别庙，使护祭焉。
现代文：于是，朝廷下诏在同州晋国相继建立德皇帝的庙宇，命宇文护祭祀。
English: As a result, the imperial court ordered the establishment of the German Emperor's temples in Jin Province in Tongzhou successively, and the Myouwen protection and worship began.

古文：三年，诏自今诏诰及百司文书并不得称公名，以彰殊礼。
现代文：保定三年，朝廷下诏从今以后朝廷的诏书文诰以及各部司的文书里面，都不得直接称宇文护的名字，以表示对他特殊的礼遇。
English: In the third year of Baoding, the imperial court decreed that from now on, the imperial edict and documents of all ministries and departments should not directly mention the name of Uwenkuo, in order to show special courtesy to him.

古文：护抗表固让。
现代文：他上表坚决推让。
English: He pushed back hard on the table.

古文：初，文帝创业，即与突厥和亲，谋为掎角，共图高氏。
现代文：开初，宇文泰创业时与突厥实行和亲，想互为犄角，共同打败高欢。
English: At the beginning, when Uwentai started its business, it made peace with the Turks and wanted to be friends with them to jointly defeat Gaohuan.

古文：是年，乃遣柱国杨忠与突厥东伐，破齐长城，至并州而还，期后年更举，南北相应。
现代文：这一年，宇文护派柱国杨忠联合突厥东伐北齐，攻破齐的长城，到达并州还师，准备后年再举进攻，以南北呼应，夹击齐军。
English: In this year, the pillar country Yang Zhong of the Uyun protection faction united with the Turks to march north and east, broke through the Great Wall of Qi, reached and returned the division to the state, prepared to attack again the following year, and clamped down on the Qi army with the north and south.

古文：齐主大惧。
现代文：北齐天子大为恐惧。
English: Beiqi Tianzi was very scared.

古文：先是，护母阎与皇第四姑及诸戚属并没齐，皆被幽絷。
现代文：早先，宇文护的母亲阎氏与皇室的四姑，以及很多周朝大臣将领的亲属都流落在北齐，被囚禁起来。
English: Earlier, Yan's mother, the fourth aunt of the imperial family, and many relatives of Zhou dynasty ministers and generals had been exiled to North Qi and imprisoned.

古文：护居宰相后，每遣间使寻求，莫知音息。
现代文：他任宰相后，常暗中派人寻找，都没有打听出音讯。
English: After he was appointed prime minister, he often secretly sent people to look for him, but no one heard anything.

古文：至是，并许还朝，且请和好。
现代文：这时，北齐允许送他们还朝，借此要求两国通好。
English: At this time, the Northern Qi allowed them to return to the North, thereby requesting the two countries to be on good terms.

古文：四年，皇姑先至。
现代文：保定四年，皇姑先回来。
English: After four years of Baoding, the Empress Dowager came back first.

古文：齐主以护权重，乃留其母，以为后图。
现代文：齐主认为宇文护掌握北周大权，仍留下他的母亲，以后再作打算。
English: Qi believed that Wu Wenguo held the supreme power of Northern Zhou, but still left his mother behind, and would make plans later.

古文：仍令人为阎作书与护曰：
现代文：北齐便命人替他的母亲阎氏写信给他说：
English: Bei Qi then ordered someone to write to him on behalf of his mother Yan:

古文：吾念十九入汝家，今以八十矣。
现代文： 我回想过去，十九岁嫁到你们家，现在已经八十岁了。
English: Looking back, I was nineteen years old when I married into your family, and now I am eighty years old.

古文：凡生汝辈三男二女，今日目下，不睹一人，兴言及此，悲缠肌骨。
现代文：一共生下你们兄弟姐妹三男二女五个人，今天我的面前却见不到一个。说到这里，悲入肌骨。
English: You have given birth to a total of five people, three brothers and sisters, three sons and two daughters, but today I can't see a single one in front of me. When it comes to this, I am heartbroken.

古文：赖皇齐恩恤，差安衰暮。
现代文：幸赖齐皇恩惠关怀，仍可安度衰暮之年。
English: Fortunately, thanks to the benevolent care of the emperor, it is still possible to spend the twilight years in peace.

古文：又得与汝杨氏姑及汝叔母纥干、汝嫂刘及汝新妇等同居，颇以自适。
现代文：仍可以与你的姑母杨氏，以及你的叔母纥干、你的嫂子刘氏、你的妻子等人住在一起，颇感安适。
English: You can still live comfortably with your aunt Yang, your aunt Jiangan, your sister-in-law Liu, your wife and others.

古文：但为微有耳疾，大语方闻，行动饮食，幸无多损。
现代文：只是耳朵多少有些毛病，大声说话才能听见，行动饮食，幸好还没有多大亏损。
English: It's just that I have some problems with my ears. I have to speak loudly to be heard, and I have to be active in my diet. Fortunately, I haven't lost much weight.

古文：汝与吾别之时，年尚幼小，以前家事，或不委曲。
现代文： 你与我分别的时候，年龄还小。以前家里的事情，也许不太清楚。
English: When you and I separated, you were still young. Maybe you don't know what happened at home before.

古文：昔在武川镇，生汝兄弟，大才属鼠，第二属兔，汝身属蛇。
现代文：过去我们住在武川镇，生下你们兄弟三人，老大属鼠，老二属兔，你属蛇。
English: In the past, we lived in Bukawa Town and gave birth to three of your brothers. The eldest is a rat, the second is a rabbit, and you are a snake.

古文：鲜于修礼起日，吾合家大小先在博陵郡住，相将欲向左人城。
现代文：鲜于修礼起兵时，我们全家大小先在博陵郡居住，接着想移向左人城。
English: When I was just about to take the oath of allegiance, my whole family lived in Boling County at first, and then we wanted to move to Zuoren City.

古文：至唐河北，被定州官军打败。
现代文：到了唐河北，被定州的官军打败。
English: When he arrived in Tang Hebei, he was defeated by the government army in Dingzhou.

古文：汝祖及第二叔时俱战亡。
现代文：你的祖父及二叔都在当时阵亡。
English: Your grandfather and your second uncle were both killed at that time.

古文：叔母贺拔及兒元宝、汝叔母纥干及兒菩提并吾与汝六人，同被禽捉入定州城。
现代文：叔母贺拔氏和她的儿子元宝、你的叔母纥干和儿子菩提，连我和你一共六人，一同被捉拿到定州城。
English: Auntie He Ba and her son Yuan Bao, your aunt Jian Gang and her son Bodhi, and you and me, a total of six people, were captured and taken to Dingzhou City.

古文：未几间，将吾及汝送与元宝掌，贺拔、纥干各别分散。
现代文：没有多长时间，将我和你送给了元宝掌，贺拔、纥干都被分散处置。
English: It didn't take long before I and you were given to Yuan Bao Zhuang, and He Bao and Yan Gan were dispersed and disposed of.

古文：宝掌军营在唐城内，经停三日。宝掌所掠得男夫女妇可六七千人，悉送向京。
现代文：元宝掌的军营在唐城内，停了三天，他掠得的男夫女妇有六七千人，都送往京城。
English: Yuan Baofeng's military camp was in Tangcheng, and he stayed there for three days. The 67,000 men and women he captured were all sent to the capital.

古文：吾时与汝同被送限。
现代文：我和你都在被押送的人里面。
English: You and I are among those being escorted out.

古文：至定州城南，夜宿同乡人姬库根家。
现代文：到了定州城南，晚上住在同乡人姬库根的家里。
English: When I arrived in the south of Dingzhou, I stayed at the home of a fellow villager, Ji Kugen, in the evening.

古文：蠕蠕奴望见鲜于修礼营火。语吾云： 今走向本军。 
现代文：蠕蠕族的奴仆看见鲜于修礼军营的篝火对我说 ：我现在到咱们的军队中去。 
English: Seeing the bonfires of the newly-consecrated military camp, the slave of the Cumhurians said to me: I am now going to join our army.

古文：既至营，遂告吾辈在此。
现代文：回到军营，便告诉他们我们都在这里。
English: I went back to the barracks and told them we were all here.

古文：明旦日出，汝叔将兵邀截，吾及汝等还得向营。
现代文：第二天早晨，你的叔父领兵前来截击，我和你等人得以回到军营。
English: The next morning, your uncle led the troops to intercept, and you and I and others were able to return to the camp.

古文：汝时年十二，共吾并乘马随军，可不记此事由缘也？
现代文：当时你十二岁，和我骑一匹马随着军队行进，你还能记得这些事情的经过吗？
English: When you were twelve years old, riding with me on a horse to march with the army, can you still remember these events?

古文：后吾共汝在寿阳任。
现代文：后来，我们住在寿阳。
English: Later, we lived in Shouyang.

古文：时元宝、菩提及汝姑兒贺兰盛洛，并汝身四人同学。
现代文：这时，元宝、菩提和你姑母的儿子贺兰盛洛，连你一共四人同学读书。
English: At this time, Yuan Bao, Bodhi and your aunt's son, Horan Shengluo, and you, a total of four students, were studying.

古文：博士姓成，为人严恶，汝等四人谋欲加害。吾共汝叔母闻知，各捉其兒打之。
现代文：请的教师姓成，对人十分严厉凶狠。你们四个人经过密谋想加害他，我和你的婶母听说后，各抓住自己的孩子打了一顿。
English: The teacher, whose name was Cheng, was very harsh and cruel to people. After the four of you plotted to harm him, I and your aunt heard about it, and we each grabbed our children and beat them.

古文：唯盛洛无母，独不被打。
现代文：惟有贺兰盛洛没有母亲，所以没有被打。
English: However, Horan Shengluo did not have a mother, so he was not beaten.

古文：后尔硃天柱亡岁，贺拔阿斗泥在关西，遣人迎家累。
现代文：后来，朱天柱被打败，贺拔阿斗泥在关西，派人迎接家小。
English: Later, Zhu Tianzhu was defeated, and He Baadou was in Kansai, where he sent someone to greet his family.

古文：汝叔亦遣奴来富迎汝及盛洛等。
现代文：你的叔父宇文泰也派奴仆来富迎接你和盛洛等人。
English: Your uncle, Uwentai, also sent slaves to meet you and Shengluo and the others.

古文：汝时着绯绫袍、银装带，盛洛着紫纤成缬通身袍，黄绫里，并乘骡同去。
现代文：你当时穿着红绫子做的袍子，腰里束着用银器装饰的带子；盛洛穿着紫色带有用绸子结成的彩球的通身长袍，袍子的里是用黄绫做的。
English: You were wearing a robe made of red satin, with a belt decorated with silver at the waist; Sheng Luo was wearing a purple robe with a color ball made of silk, and the inside of the robe was made of yellow satin.

古文：盛洛小于汝，三人并唤吾作阿摩敦。
现代文：你们一起骑着骡子同往关西。盛洛比你小，你们三人都喊我为阿摩敦。
English: You rode the mule together to Kansai. Sheng Luo is younger than you, and all three of you called me Amodong.

古文：如此之事，当分明记之。
现代文：这件事，你应当记得很清楚。
English: This is something you should remember clearly.

古文：今又寄汝小时所着锦袍表一领，至宜捡看，知吾含悲抱戚，多历年祀。
现代文：今天，寄给你小时候穿的锦袍一件，收到后应仔细检看，要理解我含茹痛苦与悲愤，已经有好多年了。
English: Today, I am sending you a brocade robe that I used to wear when I was a child. You should examine it carefully after receiving it, and you should understand that I have been in pain and anger for many years.

古文：禽兽草木，母子相依，吾有何罪，与汝分隔，今复何福，还望见汝。
现代文： 世间的禽兽和草木，还母子相依，不分不离。我有什么罪，与你长时间分隔！今天又有什么福分，让我能将要见到你！
English: The animals and plants of the world, as well as the mother and child, depend on each other, inseparable. What is my sin, to be separated from you for a long time! And what is my blessing today, so that I can see you soon!

古文：世间所有，求皆可得，母子异国，何处可求！
现代文：世间的东西，只要想法追求就能得到；母子分处两国，哪里可以看到这种情况！
English: The things of the world can be obtained as long as the pursuit of ideas; mother and son are separated into two countries, where can you see this situation!

古文：假汝贵极公王，富过山海；有一老母，八十之年，飘在千里，死亡旦夕，不得一朝暂见，不得一日同处，寒不得汝衣，饥不得汝食，汝虽穷荣极盛，光耀世间，汝何用为？
现代文：虽然你贵极王侯，财富比高山和大海还多，可还有一个八十岁的老母亲孑然一身，飘泊在千里之外，死亡就在旦夕之间，不能暂时见上一面，不能一起过上一天，天气寒冷得不着你送来的棉衣，腹中饥饿得不到你送来的饭食，你虽然极荣极贵，光耀世间，但要你这个儿子又有什么用呢？
English: Although you are the most valuable prince and have more wealth than the mountains and the sea, there is still an eighty-year-old mother all alone, drifting thousands of miles away, death is just around the corner, you can't see her for a while, you can't spend a day together, the weather is too cold to get the cotton clothes you sent, the hunger in your stomach can't get the food you sent, although you are extremely honorable and valuable, shining in the world, but what use is it to have this son of yours?

古文：于吾何益？
现代文：对我又有什么益处呢？
English: What's in it for me?

古文：吾今日之前，汝既不得申其供养，事往何论。
现代文：今天以前，我得不到你的供养，事情已经过去，不必论说。
English: Before today, I couldn't get your support. It's over, there's no need to talk about it.

古文：今日以后，吾之残命，唯系于汝。
现代文：今天以后，我衰残的生命都系在你的身上。
English: After today, my withered life depends on you.

古文：戴天履地，中有鬼神，勿云冥昧，而可欺负。
现代文：上有苍天，下有厚土，中有鬼神，不要认为冥府蒙昧，可以欺负。
English: Above is heaven, below is thick earth, and there are ghosts and gods. Don't think that Hades is ignorant and can be bullied.

古文：杨氏姑今虽炎暑，犹能先发。
现代文： 你的杨氏姑母虽在炎天盛暑，还能出发还国。
English: Your Aunt Yang can go back to China even though it's scorching hot.

古文：关、河阻远，隔绝多年，书依常体，虑汝致惑，是以每存款质，兼亦载吾姓名，当识此理，勿以为怪。
现代文：关、河阻隔，千里迢迢。你们分离多年，如照常体写信，考虑你会疑惑，所以信中常举事实，又写上我的姓名，你应当理解这个道理，不要感到奇怪。 
English: You have been separated for many years. If you write a letter as usual, consider that you will have doubts. Therefore, the letter often cites facts and writes my name. You should understand this principle and do not be surprised.

古文：护性至孝，得书悲不自胜，左右莫能仰视。
现代文：宇文护十分孝敬老人，得到书信不胜悲痛，左右的人都不忍心看到他痛苦的样子，他给母亲写回信说：
English: Yu Wenguo was very filial to the old man. It was heartbreaking to receive the letter. People around him could not bear to see him in pain. He wrote back to his mother, saying:

古文：报书云：区宇分崩，遭遇灾祸，违离膝下，三十五年。
现代文： 天下分崩离析，我们母子遭遇战乱带来的灾祸，儿子我远离你的膝下，匆匆已有三十五年。
English: The world is falling apart, our mother and son have encountered the disaster brought by the war, my son, I have been away from your knees for thirty-five years.

古文：受形禀气，皆知母子，谁知萨保，如此不孝！
现代文：人一生下来都知道母子间的亲情，谁知道萨保我这样的不孝顺！
English: People are born knowing the love between mother and child. Who knew that Sabo was so unfilial?

古文：宿殃积戾，唯应赐锺，岂悟纲罗，上婴慈母。
现代文：过去的祸殃，积留的罪恶，只有应该成为过去，怎么能料到战乱带来的灾难，一直加在我慈母的身上！
English: The scourge of the past, the accumulated evil, should only become a thing of the past, how can I expect the disaster brought about by the war, has been imposed on my loving mother!

古文：但立身立行，不负一物，明神有识，宜先哀怜。
现代文：母亲的立身行事，不辜负一事一物，神明有知，应该哀怜。
English: A mother's steadfast behavior is worthy of praise. The gods are wise and should be pitied.

古文：而子为公侯，母为俘隶，热不见母热，寒不见母寒，衣不知有无，食不知饥饱，泯如天地之外，无由暂闻。
现代文：儿子身为公侯，母亲却为俘虏，我天热时不能看见母亲受热，天冷时不能看见母亲受冷，衣服不知道有还是没有，吃饭不知道能否吃饱，音讯渺茫，就好像在天地之外，无法听到您的消息。
English: My son is a prince, but my mother is a prisoner. When it's hot, I can't see my mother in the heat. When it's cold, I can't see my mother in the cold. I don't know if I have clothes or not. I don't know if I can eat my fill. The news is vague. It's as if I can't hear your news outside of heaven and earth.

古文：昼夜悲号，继之以血，分怀冤酷，终此一生，死若有知，冀奉见于泉下耳。
现代文：我因思念母亲日夜悲泣痛苦，泪水流干，继而双眼流血。自认为怀着极大的冤屈了却一生，死后如能有知，希望能在九泉之下拜见母亲。
English: I think of my mother day and night, weep bitterly, my tears run dry, and then my eyes bleed. I feel that I have been greatly wronged, but all my life, if I can know after death, I hope to be able to visit my mother under the nine springs.

古文：不谓齐朝解纲，惠以德音，摩敦、四姑，并许哀放。
现代文：不料想齐朝解除罗网，送来这令人兴奋的好消息，摩敦、四姑你们都可获得释放。
English: Unexpectedly, all of them were released, bringing this exciting good news. Moton and Shigu, you can all be released.

古文：初闻此旨，魂爽飞越，号天叩地，不能自胜。
现代文：刚听到齐主的旨意，我灵魂清爽，好像要飞出体外，对天狂号，对地叩拜，无法控制自己。
English: As soon as I heard the will of the Lord of Qi, my soul was refreshed, as if I wanted to fly out of my body, and I couldn't control myself.

古文：四姑即蒙礼送，平安入境，以今月十八日于河东拜见。
现代文：四姑已蒙齐国礼貌护送，平安归来，我在这一月的十八日在河东拜见了她。
English: The fourth aunt has been escorted by the courtesy of Mengqi country and returned safely. I visited her in Hedong on the 18th day of this month.

古文：遥奉颜色，崩恸肝肠。
现代文：远远地一看见她，我就悲痛得肝肠好像要崩裂一样。
English: As soon as I saw her from a distance, I was so heartbroken I felt like I was going to burst.

古文：但离绝多年，存亡阻隔，相见之始，口未忍言。
现代文：但是，由于离别多年，生死阻隔，刚开始见面，嘴里不忍心叙述几十年的分别之苦。
English: However, due to the separation of many years, life and death barriers, just started to meet, the mouth can not bear to describe the pain of decades of separation.

古文：唯叙齐朝宽弘，每存大德，云与摩敦虽处宫禁，常蒙优礼，今者来鄴，恩遇弥隆。
现代文：她只叙述齐朝宽宏大量，常对你们施以恩德，说她与您虽然被幽禁宫中，却受到优厚的礼遇。现在来到邺城，齐主的恩遇更加隆重。
English: She only described the magnanimity of the Qi Dynasty, often showing you kindness, saying that although she and you were imprisoned in the palace, they were treated with great courtesy. Now that we have come to Handan, the blessing of the Lord of Qi is even more grand.

古文：重降矜哀，听许摩敦垂敕，曲尽悲酷，备述家事。
现代文：接到您的来信，聆听到您的训教，您极尽悲愤，详细地叙述家事。
English: After receiving your letter and listening to your training, you were extremely sad and angry, describing the family affairs in detail.

古文：伏读未周，五情屠割。
现代文：还没有读完，我的五脏六俯就有如刀割一般。
English: I haven't finished reading it yet, and my bowels feel like they've been cut with a knife.

古文：书中所道，无一事敢忘。
现代文：信中所叙述的事情，没有一件敢于忘怀。
English: None of the events described in the letter dares to be forgotten.

古文：摩敦年尊，又加忧苦，常谓寝食贬损，或多遗漏。
现代文：您年纪高迈，又加上心情忧伤苦恼，常说饮食减少，记忆多有遗漏。
English: In your old age, coupled with the sadness and distress of your mood, it is often said that your diet is reduced and your memory is often lacking.

古文：伏奉论述，次第分明。
现代文：捧读来信，叙述得条贯分明。
English: Reading the letter carefully, the description is very clear.

古文：一则以悲，一则以喜。
现代文：读完后我一则以悲，一则以喜。
English: After I finished reading, I sang one song in sorrow and one in joy.

古文：当乡里破败之日，萨保年以十余岁，邻曲旧事，犹自记忆；况家门祸难，亲戚流离？
现代文：当我们家乡遭受战乱的时候，我年龄才十多岁，左邻右舍的一些旧事，我还能记得；更何况自己家里遭受的祸难，与亲人们流离失所的情况呢？
English: When our hometown was ravaged by war, I was just over ten years old, and I can still remember some of the old things that happened in my neighborhood; not to mention the misfortune suffered in my own home, and the displacement of my relatives?

古文：奉辞时节，先后慈训，刻肌刻骨，常缠心府。
现代文：与您辞别时的情景，以及您前后对我的教训，记忆犹如刻入肌骨，常在心里萦绕。
English: The scene at the time of parting with you, as well as the lessons you have taught me before and after, are engraved in my memory and often linger in my heart.

古文：天长丧乱，四海横流，太祖乘时，齐朝抚运，两河三辅，各遇神机。
现代文： 天下长期动乱，四海板荡横流，太祖因时乘势，占有关西；齐朝应运趋时，拥据山东。两河三辅之地，各自都遇到上天赐给的机会。
English: The world has been in turmoil for a long time, and the four seas have swirled and flowed. The Great Ancestor, because of the time and the situation, occupied the west; the Qi Dynasty, when it was time to move, supported Shandong. In the land of the two rivers and the three auxiliary rivers, each has encountered the opportunity given by God.

古文：源其事迹，非相负背。
现代文：追溯各自的事迹，不是互相敌对。
English: tracing their respective histories, not hostile to each other.

古文：太祖升遐，未定萨保，萨保属当犹子之长，亲受顾命。
现代文：太祖去世时，天下尚未平定，我是我们这一辈中年龄最大的，亲自接受太祖的遗命。
English: At the time of my grandfather's death, the world had not yet been pacified. I was the oldest of my generation, and I personally accepted my grandfather's will.

古文：虽身居重任，职当忧责，至于岁时称庆，子孙在庭，顾视悲摧，心情断绝，胡颜履戴，负愧神明。
现代文：虽然身负重任，应当忧虑自己的职责。但到岁首庆贺时，子孙们都站满了大庭，环顾他们，想到您的处境，心中极为悲哀。
English: Although you have heavy responsibilities, you should be worried about your duties. But when the New Year's Eve celebration, the grandchildren were standing in the courtyard, looking around them, thinking about your situation, my heart is very sad.

古文：齐朝霈然之恩，既已沾洽，爱敬之至，施及傍人。
现代文：情绪纷乱，没有心情担负这重大的责任，实在是有负太祖的在天之灵。齐朝霈然有如雨露的大恩大德，我们都已沐浴满身。爱敬之心，施与给别的人。
English: Our emotions were in turmoil, and we were not in the mood to take on this great responsibility. It was really the spirit of our great-grandfather in heaven that was responsible for this. All of us have been showered with great grace, like rain and dew. Our hearts are full of love and respect, and we give to others.

古文：草木有心，禽鱼感泽，况在人伦，而不铭戴？
现代文：草木有感激之心，禽兽和鱼类也会报答别人的恩泽，更何况是人呢？谁会不对此铭刻肺腑，感恩戴德？
English: Plants and trees are grateful, animals and fish repay the kindness of others, let alone people. Who would not engrave this in his heart, grateful?

古文：有国有家，信义为本，伏度来期，已应有日。
现代文：于国于家，都把信义作为根本，我估计您归来的日期指日可待。
English: In our country and at home, we all regard loyalty as fundamental. I estimate that the date of your return is just around the corner.

古文：一得奉见慈颜，永毕生愿。
现代文：那时，我就可以拜见您慈祥的容颜，了却终生的愿望。
English: At that time, I will be able to see your kind face, which is my lifelong wish.

古文：生死肉骨，岂过今恩，负山戴岳，未足胜荷。
现代文：骨肉间的生死分离，怎能超过今天的恩德？就是让山岳负载，也难以载完。
English: How can the separation of life and death between bones and flesh exceed today's benefit? Even if the mountain is loaded, it is difficult to load it.

古文：二国分隔，理无书信，主上以彼朝不绝母子之恩，亦赐许奉答。
现代文： 两国对立，按理不应该互通书信。我朝天子因齐朝不断绝我们母子的恩情，也允许我写信奉答。
English: Since the two countries are in opposition, it is reasonable that they should not exchange letters. I am allowed to write and receive a reply from the Emperor of Heaven because the Emperor of Qi has constantly denied the kindness of our mother and son.

古文：不期今日，得通家问，伏纸呜咽，言不宣心。
现代文：不料想今天得以互通音讯，提笔趴在纸上哭泣，每句话都无法表达我对母亲的思念之情。
English: Unexpectedly, we were able to exchange messages today. I picked up my pen and wept on the paper. No words can express how much I miss my mother.

古文：蒙寄萨保别时所留锦袍表，年岁虽久，宛然犹识，抱此悲泣，至于拜见，事归忍死，知复何心！
现代文：蒙您寄来我与您分别时留下的锦袍的衣面，年岁虽然久远，却依然熟识，我拿着它，不禁悲痛哭泣。至于拜见母亲，我在等待着您的归来，您知道我的心是多么急切！ 
English: The face of the brocade robe you sent me, which I had left behind when I parted from you, although it is many years old, is still familiar to me, and I can't help but cry with sorrow as I hold it. As for visiting my mother, I am waiting for your return, you know how anxious my heart is!

古文：齐朝不即发遣，更令重与护书，要护重报。
现代文：齐朝不立即送回他的母亲，又重新给宇文护写信，并要他重新回信。
English: Qichang did not immediately return the letter to his mother, but wrote again to Uwen Rong and asked him to write again.

古文：护复书，往返至于再三，而母竟不至。
现代文：他回信后，双方书信往返，以至于连续多次，而他的母亲竟没有被送回。
English: After he wrote back, the two sides exchanged letters so many times in a row that his mother was not sent back.

古文：朝议以其失信，令有司移齐，移未送而母至。
现代文：朝臣们议论，认为北齐失信，命有司送公文给北齐。公文还没有送，他的母亲已经归来。
English: The courtiers discussed and thought that Bei Qi was not trustworthy, and ordered a secretary to send a document to Bei Qi. The document had not yet been sent, and his mother had already returned.

古文：举朝庆悦，大赦天下。
现代文：北周举朝欢庆，朝廷为此大赦天下。
English: North Zhou held a morning celebration, and the imperial court granted amnesty to the whole world for this.

古文：护与母暌隔多年，一朝聚集，凡所资奉，穷极华盛。
现代文：他与母亲分别多年，一朝相见，凡所奉给母亲的都极尽豪华。
English: He had been separated from his mother for many years, and when he saw her again, everything he gave her was extremely luxurious.

古文：每四时伏腊，武帝率诸亲戚，行家人礼，称觞上寿，荣贵之极，振古未闻。
现代文：每到夏天的伏日，冬天的腊日，周武帝都率领所有的亲戚，向宇文护的母亲行家人的礼节，举杯献酒，祝她长寿。荣华富贵已到极点，自古以来都没有听说过。
English: Every summer, Emperor Zhou led all his relatives to raise a glass of wine to the mother of Wu Wenzhou, wishing her a long life. The glory and wealth had reached the extreme, and it had not been heard of since ancient times.

古文：是年，突厥复率众赴期。
现代文：这一年，突厥又率领军队按期会合，准备联合进攻齐朝。
English: In the same year, the Turk also led the army to meet on schedule to prepare a joint attack against Qi.

古文：护以齐氏初送国亲，未欲即行，复虑失信蕃夷，不得已，遂请东征。
现代文：宇文护因为母亲刚被齐国送还，不想马上就出发。但又担心失信于突厥，不得已，便请求东征。
English: Because his mother had just been sent back by the State of Qi, Uwenguo did not want to leave immediately. However, he was worried that he would not be trusted by the Turks and, as a last resort, he asked to go to the East.

古文：九月，诏征二十四军及左右厢散隶、秦陇巴蜀兵、诸蕃国众二十万人。
现代文：九月，朝廷下诏征发二十四军，以及左右厢的奴隶，秦、陇、巴、蜀一带驻防的士兵，各藩属国的兵士共二十万人。
English: In September, the imperial court issued an edict to conscript and dispatch the 24th army, as well as the slaves of the left and right compartments, the soldiers stationed in the areas of Qin, Min, Ba and Shu, and the soldiers of each domain belonging to the country, totaling 200,000 people.

古文：十月，帝于庙庭授护斧铖。
现代文：十月，武帝在庙庭授予宇文护斧钺。
English: In October, Emperor Wu awarded Yuwen with a protective axe in the temple courtyard.

古文：出军至潼关，乃遣柱国尉迟迥为前锋，大将军权景宣率山南兵出豫州，少师杨标出轵关。
现代文：军队进至潼关，宇文护便派柱国尉迟回为前锋，大将军权景宜率领山南兵进向豫州，少师杨进向轵关。
English: The army marched into Shaoguan. Uwen Po Ben sent Zhu Guofeng to the front as a latecomer. Senior General Quan Jingyi led the Shannan soldiers to march into Yuanzhou, and Junior Master Yang marched into Shaoguan.

古文：护连营渐进，屯军弘农。
现代文：宇文护连结营寨，逐步向前推进，在弘农驻扎下来。
English: Uwengu linked the encampment, gradually pushed forward, and stationed in Hongnong.

古文：迥围洛阳，柱国齐王宪、郑公达奚武等营芒山。
现代文：尉迟回包围洛阳，柱国齐王宇文宪、郑公达奚武等在邙山安下军营。
English: The army encircled Luoyang in the late afternoon, and the pillar states of Qi Wang Yuwen Xian and Zheng Gong Dahuwu were encamped in Lushan Ange Military Camp.

古文：护性无戎略，此行又非本心，故师出虽久，无所克获。
现代文：宇文护本来就缺乏战略头脑，这次出兵又不是出于他的本愿，所以，军队出发虽然很久，却没有取得什么胜利。
English: Umenomiya originally lacked a strategic mind, and this dispatch of troops was not his original intention. Therefore, although the troops set out for a long time, they did not achieve any victory.

古文：以无功，与诸将稽首请罪，帝弗之责。
现代文：因为出师无功，他与各位将领伏首请罪，武帝没有责难他。
English: Because of his failure as a teacher, he and the other generals prostrated themselves and asked for forgiveness, but Emperor Wu did not reprimand him.

古文：天和二年，护母薨，寻诏起令视事。
现代文：天和二年，他的母亲去世。不久，朝廷下诏命他不再守丧，到朝廷任事。
English: Two years later, his mother died. Soon after, the imperial court ordered him to stop attending funerals and to work at the court.

古文：五年，诏赐护轩悬之乐，六佾之舞。
现代文：天和五年，朝廷赐给他只有诸侯王公才能陈列的轩悬乐器和六佾之舞。
English: At the age of five, the imperial court gave him the Xuan Xuan musical instrument and the dance of the six gongs, which only princes could display.

古文：护性甚宽和，然暗于大体。
现代文：宇文护为人十分宽厚平和，然而，在大的问题上他都不甚明白。
English: Uwen Guo is a very generous and peaceful person, however, he is not very clear on big issues.

古文：自恃建立功，久当权轴，所任皆非其人。
现代文：他自认为建立了功勋，长时间掌握国家的权柄，但任用的人都很不恰当。
English: He thinks he's done a great job, he's been in charge of the country for a long time, but he's appointed the wrong people.

古文：兼诸子贪残，僚属纵溢，莫不蠹政害人。
现代文：加上皇室诸子贪婪残忍，僚属们为所欲为，无不为政肆虐，残害百姓。
English: In addition, the sons of the imperial family are greedy and cruel, and their subordinates do whatever they want, all of them wreak havoc and brutalize the people.

古文：以其暴慢，密与卫王直图之。
现代文：武帝因为他专权凶暴怠慢，暗中与卫王宇文直密谋想除掉他。
English: Emperor Wu, because of his despotic and violent negligence, secretly conspired with Wei Wang Yuwen Zhi to get rid of him.

古文：七年三月十八日，护自同州还，帝御文安殿见护讫，引入含仁殿，朝皇太后。
现代文：天和七年三月十八日，宇文护从同州归来，武帝在文安殿接见他完毕，引他到含仁殿拜见皇太后。
English: On the 18th day of the 3rd month of the 7th year of the Heian period, when Uwenguo returned from Tongzhou, Emperor Wu received him at the Wen'an Hall and then led him to the Hanren Hall to meet the Empress Dowager.

古文：先是，帝于禁中见护，常行家人礼。
现代文：先前，武帝在宫中接见他，常行家人的礼节。
English: Previously, Emperor Wu received him at the palace, following the etiquette of his family.

古文：护谒太后，太后必赐之坐，帝每立侍。
现代文：他拜谒皇太后，太后必定赐给他座位，武帝常侍立在旁边。
English: If he paid homage to the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager would certainly give him a seat, and Emperor Wu would often stand next to him.

古文：至是，护将入，帝谓曰： 太后春秋既尊，颇好酒，诸亲朝谒，或废引进。
现代文：这时，他准备进入殿中，武帝对他说 ：太后年事已高，颇好饮酒，很多亲属拜谒她。她常因饮酒不让引进。
English: At this time, he was about to enter the hall, and Emperor Wu said to him, "The Empress Dowager is very old, she is a good drinker, and many of her relatives worship her. She often refuses to be brought in because of her drinking.

古文：喜怒有时乖爽。
现代文：喜怒有时也不正常。
English: Emotions and anger are sometimes abnormal.

古文：比谏，未蒙垂纳。
现代文：劝阻她，又不被采纳。
English: He tried to dissuade her, but was rebuffed.

古文：兄今愿更启请。 
现代文：望兄长你今天能劝劝她。 
English: Hope you can persuade her today.

古文：因出怀中酒诰授护曰： 以此谏太后。 
现代文：说着从怀中掏出一份《酒诰》交给他，说： 用这个劝谏太后。 
English: Pulling out a copy of "Sake Lees" from her bosom, she handed it to him, saying, "Use this to persuade the Empress Dowager."

古文：护入，如帝所诫，读示太后。
现代文：宇文护进入含仁殿，按照武帝的要求，将《酒诰》读给太后听。
English: Uwenguo entered Kanrin-den and read "Sake Lees" to the empress dowager according to Emperor Wu's request.

古文：未讫，帝以玉珽自后击之，踣地，又令宦者何泉以御刀斫之。泉惧，斫不能伤。
现代文：没有读完，武帝用玉从背后猛力击他，他倒在地上。武帝又命宦官何泉用御刀砍杀他，何泉恐惧，却不能砍伤他。
English: Before he finished reading, Emperor Wu hit him hard from behind with a jade ball, and he fell to the ground. Emperor Wu also ordered eunuch He Quan to slash him with his imperial sword, but He Quan was afraid and could not slash him.

古文：时卫王直先匿于户内，乃出斩之。
现代文：当时，卫王宇文直事先藏在殿内，便跳出来将他杀死。
English: At that time, Wei Wang Yuwen was hiding in the hall beforehand, and jumped out to kill him.

古文：初，帝欲图护，王轨、宇文神举、宇文孝伯颇预其谋。
现代文：最初，武帝想除掉宇文护，王轨、宇文神举、宇文孝伯都参与了预谋。
English: At first, Emperor Wu wanted to get rid of Uwen, and Wang Lu, Uwen Shenhu, and Uwen Xiao Bo all took part in the premeditation.

古文：是日，轨等并在外，更无知者。
现代文：这一天，王轨等人都在外边，没有人知道这件事。
English: On this day, Wang Luo and others were outside, and no one knew about it.

古文：杀护讫，乃召宫伯长孙览等，即令收护子柱国谭国公会、大将军莒国公至、崇业公静、正平公乾嘉及乾基、乾蔚、乾祖、乾威等，并柱国侯伏侯龙恩、龙恩弟大将军万寿、大将军刘勇、中外府司录尹公正、袁杰、膳部下大夫李安等，于殿中杀之。
现代文：杀死宇文护后，武帝召见宫伯长孙览等人，命他们立即逮捕宇文护的儿子、柱国谭园公宇文会、大将军莒国公宇文至、崇业公宇文静、正平公宇文乾嘉，以及宇文乾基、宇文乾光等人，连同柱国侯符侯龙恩、龙恩的弟弟大将军万寿、大将军刘勇、中外府司录尹公正、袁杰、膳部下大夫李安等人，都在殿中被杀害。
English: After the killing of Uwen, Emperor Wu summoned Grand Prince Sun Zhan and others and ordered them to immediately arrest Uwen's son, pillar states Tan Yuan Gong Uwen Hui, grand generals Zang Guo Gong Uwen Zi, Zong Yekong Uwen Jing, Zheng Ping Gong Uwen Qian Jia, as well as Uwen Qian Ji, Uwen Qian Guang and others, together with pillar states Fuhou Long En, Long En's brother Grand General Wan Shou, Grand General Liu Yong, Central and Western Prefecture Secretary Yin Zheng, Yuan Jie, and the doctor of the Ministry of Food Li An and others, were all killed in the hall.

古文：齐王宪曰： 安出自阜隶，所典庖厨而已，未足加戮。 
现代文：齐王宇文宪说： 李安出身皂隶，只是管理厨房罢了，不值得杀戮。 
English: Qi Wang Yuwen Xian said: Li An is from Soju, he just manages the kitchen, he is not worth killing.

古文：帝曰： 汝不知耳，世宗之崩，安所为也。 
现代文：武帝说： 你不知道啊，世宗的去世，就是他在饭中下毒害死的。 
English: Emperor Wu said, "You don't know, Sejong's death was caused by poisoning during a meal.

古文：十九日，乃诏暴护等罪，大赦，改天和七年为建德元年。
现代文：十九日，武帝命公布宇文护等人的罪状，大赦天下其他囚犯，将天和七年改为建德元年。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Wu issued an order to publicize the criminal charges against Uwengu and others, to grant amnesty to other prisoners around the world, and to change the date and seven years to the first year of the founding of the Republic of China.

古文：护世子训为蒲州刺史，其夜遣柱国越公盛乘傅镇蒲州，征训赴京师，至同州赐死。
现代文：宇文护的嫡长子宇文训任蒲州刺史，这天夜晚，派柱国、越公宇文盛赶快镇守蒲州，将宇文训调回京城，行至同州被赐死。
English: Uwenshu's eldest legitimate son, Uwenshu, was appointed as the governor of Gushu. That night, he quickly sent Uwenshu, the vassal state, to guard Gushu, and transferred Uwenshu back to the capital, where he was sentenced to death.

古文：护长史叱罗协、司录冯迁及所亲任者皆除名。
现代文：宇文护的长史叱罗协、司录冯迁，以及他所信任的人都被免去官职，除去名籍。
English: Wu Wenguo's long-term secretary Luo Jie, secretary Feng Qian, as well as the people he trusted, were all removed from their official positions and removed from their names.

古文：高祖中山、曾祖豆頺、祖骐麟、父永，仕魏，位并显达。
现代文：他的儿子昌城公宇文深出使突厥，朝廷派开府宇文德带着玺书将他就地处死。建德三年，朝廷下诏恢复宇文护以及他的儿子们先前的封爵，给他赐号为荡，并改葬他处。
English: His son, Changcheng Uwenshen, sent an envoy to Turkey, and the imperial court sent the governor, Uwende, with an imperial edict to put him to death on the spot. Three years after Uwenshen's death, the imperial court issued an edict to reinstate Uwenshu and his sons' previous titles, to give him a posthumous name, and to change his burial place.

古文：测性沉密，少笃学诣，仕魏，位司徒右长史，尚宣武女阳平公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：广川公宇文测，字澄镜，周文帝宇文泰同族人的儿子。他性情深沉细密，从小喜好读书，魏时入仕，官至司徒右长史，娶宣武帝的女儿阳平公主为妻，被封为驸马都尉。
English: Guangchuan Gongyu Wenshu, the son of Zhou Wenshu, the son of Zhou Wenshu, the son of Zhou Wenshu, the son of Zhou Wenshu, the son of Zhou Wenshu, the son of Zhou Wenshu, the son of Zhou Wenshu, the son of Zhou Wenshu, the son of Zhou Wenshu, the son of Zhou Wenshu, the son of Zhou Wenshu, the son of Zhou Wenshu, the son of Zhou Wenshu.

古文：及孝武疑齐神武，诏测诣文帝，密为之备。
现代文：孝武帝怀疑神武帝高欢，命宇文测到周文帝宇文泰那里，暗中请他防备。
English: Emperor Xiaowu suspected that Emperor Shenwu was high-spirited, and ordered Uwen to go to Emperor Zhouwen and secretly ask him to be on the alert.

古文：还，封广川县伯。
现代文：归来，被封为广川县伯。
English: After his return, he was given the title of Guangchuan County magistrate.

古文：寻从孝武西迁，进爵为公。
现代文：不久，他跟随孝武帝西迁关内，被晋爵为公。
English: Soon after, he followed Emperor Xiaowu westward to Guanai and was promoted to the peerage.

古文：文帝为丞相，以测为右长史，委以军国，又令测详定宗室昭穆远近，附于属籍。
现代文：宇文泰任丞相，让宇文测任右长史，把军国大事都委托给他。宇文泰又命他详细审定宗室源流，以排列宗庙的顺序，并附在名籍册簿的后面。
English: Uwentei was appointed as chancellor, and had Uwentei appointed as chancellor, entrusting him with military and national affairs. Uwentei also ordered him to verify the genealogy of the family in detail, to arrange the order of the ancestral temple, and to attach it to the back of the register book.

古文：历位侍中、开府仪同三司，行汾州事。
现代文：宇文测历任侍中、开府仪同三司，行汾州刺史的职责。
English: Uwen Jie served as a chamberlain, keeper of the imperial residences, and secretary of the Third Division, and performed the duties of the governor of Gansu Province.

古文：政在简惠，颇得人和。
现代文：他为政清简慈惠，颇受百姓拥戴。
English: He is known for his simple and benevolent politics and is well-liked by the people.

古文：地接东魏，数相抄窃，或有获其为寇者，多缚送之。
现代文：汾州与东魏接壤，东魏多次派人偷袭抢掠，西魏人抓住来犯者，捆绑着送给宇文测。
English: Ganzhou was on the border with the Eastern Wei Dynasty. The Eastern Wei Dynasty repeatedly sent people to raid and plunder. The Western Wei Dynasty people caught the criminals, tied them up and sent them to Uwenmei.

古文：测皆命解缚，置之宾馆，然后引与相见，如客礼焉。
现代文：他却让解开俘虏的绳索，将他们安置在宾馆里，然后接见他们，其礼遇有如客人。
English: Instead, he had his captives unchained, put up in a hotel and received as guests.

古文：仍宴设，放还其国，卫送出境。
现代文：又宴请他们，释放他们回国，派人送出国境。
English: And he made them a feast, and sent them away, and sent them out of the country.

古文：自是东魏人大惭，乃不为寇，两界遂通庆吊，时论方之羊叔子。
现代文：从此东魏人非常惭愧，不再来侵犯。两国边界的百姓互通婚庆和丧吊，人们议论起来把他比作羊叔子。
English: From then on, the Eastern Wei people were very ashamed and no longer came to encroach. The people on the border of the two countries exchanged wedding celebrations and funerals, and people began to talk about him as a son of a goat.

古文：或有告测怀贰，文帝怒曰： 测为我安边，何为间骨肉！ 
现代文：有人诬告他对朝廷怀有二心，宇文泰听了大发雷霆，训斥道 ：宇文测替我安抚边境，为什么你要离间我们的骨肉亲情？ 
English: Someone falsely accused him of harboring ill will toward the imperial court. Upon hearing this, Uwen Tai became furious and reprimanded him, saying, "Uwen measured and pacified the border for me. Why do you want to separate our flesh-and-blood relatives?

古文：乃命斩之。
现代文：命将诬告的人斩首。
English: He ordered that the false accuser be beheaded.

古文：仍许测便宜从事。
现代文：他下令仍允许宇文测在汾州根据情况相机行事。
English: He ordered that Yu Wenmei still be allowed to act as a camera in Zhangzhou according to the situation.

古文：转行绥州事。
现代文：宇文测又奉命负责绥州的政务。
English: Yu Wenke was also ordered to be responsible for the government affairs of Zhangzhou.

古文：每岁河冰合后，突厥即来寇掠。
现代文：每年冬天，黄河封冰之后，突厥人就来抢掠骚扰。
English: Every winter, after the Yellow River is frozen, the Turks come to loot and harass.

古文：先是，常预遣居人入城堡以避之。
现代文：先前，常常提前让居民搬进城堡躲避突厥人。
English: In the past, residents were often allowed to move into the castle ahead of time to escape the Turks.

古文：测至，皆令安堵。乃于要路数百处并多积柴，仍远斥候，知其动静。
现代文：他上任之后，令当地居民不要搬迁，便在要害的地方堆放一百多处柴草，并派哨探远远地去侦查突厥人的动静。
English: After he took office, he ordered the local residents not to relocate, then he piled more than a hundred pieces of firewood and grass in critical places, and sent out scouts from afar to investigate the movements of the Turks.

古文：是年十二月，突厥从连谷入寇，去界数十里，测命积柴处一时纵火。
现代文：这年的十二月，突厥人从连谷出发，前来入寇。离边界还有数十里，他命把堆积的柴草一起点着。
English: In December of that year, the Turks set out from the valley and came to invade. There were still dozens of miles from the border, and he lit the heaps of firewood together.

古文：突厥谓大军至，惧而遁走，委弃杂畜辎重不可胜数。自是不敢复至。
现代文：突厥人以为西魏大军来到，心里惧怕，赶快逃走。丢掉牲畜粮草等物品不可胜数，从此不敢再来。
English: The Turks thought that the West Wei army was coming, they were afraid, and quickly fled. They lost countless livestock, grain, grass and other goods, and dared not come back.

古文：测因请置戍以备之。
现代文：他因此请求朝廷在边界设置军队，以防备突厥人的进攻。
English: He therefore asked the court to set up troops on the border to guard against a Turkish attack.

古文：后卒于太子少保，文帝亲临恸焉，仍令水池公监护丧事，谥曰靖。
现代文：后来，他在太子少保任上去世，宇文泰亲自来哭祭他，并派水池公负责料理丧事，谥号为靖。
English: Later, when he passed away in the position of Prince Junior Protector, Uwentei himself came to mourn him, and sent Mizuchi-ko to be in charge of the funeral meal. His nickname was Yasushi.

古文：测性仁恕，好施与。在洛阳之日，曾被窃盗，所失物即其妻阳平公主之衣服也。
现代文：宇文测性情仁慈宽厚，好施舍，在洛阳的时候，他家里被盗，丢失的东西是他妻子阳平公主的衣服。
English: When he was in Luoyang, his house was robbed, and what was lost were the clothes of his wife, Princess Yangping.

古文：州县禽盗，并物俱获。
现代文：州县官吏擒获盗贼，并得到赃物。
English: State and county officials caught the thieves and recovered the stolen goods.

古文：测恐此盗坐之以死，不认焉，遂遇赦免。
现代文：他恐怕这个盗贼被叛处死刑，就不认领赃物，官府便将盗贼赦免。
English: Fearing that the thief would be sentenced to death for treason, he did not claim the stolen goods, and the authorities pardoned the thief.

古文：盗既感恩，请为测左右、及测从孝武西迁，事极狼狈，盗人亦从测入关，并无异志。
现代文：盗贼非常感激他，请求跟随在他的左右效劳。宇文测跟随孝武帝西迁，情况极其艰险狼狈，这个盗贼也跟着他入关，并没有产生二心。
English: The thief was very grateful to him and asked to follow him and serve at his side. Wu Wenmei followed Emperor Xiaowu to the west, the situation was extremely difficult and perilous. This thief also followed him into the customs, and there was no second thoughts.

古文：子该嗣，位除州刺史。测弟深。
现代文：宇文深，字奴于，是宇文测的弟弟。
English: Yu Wenshen, also known as Nu Yu, is the younger brother of Yu Wensheng.

古文：深字奴于，性鲠正，有器局。
现代文：他性情耿直，有才识和度量。
English: He is honest, intelligent and measured.

古文：年数岁，便累石为营，折草作旌旗，布置行伍，皆有军阵之势。
现代文：才只有几岁，便垒石作军营，折草作旌旗，布置军队，颇有战阵的形势。
English: It was only a few years old, and the situation was quite chaotic, with flagstones being used as barracks, weeds as banners, and troops being deployed.

古文：父永遇见之，喜曰： 汝自然知此，后必为名将。 
现代文：父亲宇文永见了高兴地说： 你从小就天生地会布阵，长大后一定会成为名将。 
English: His father, Uwen Yong, was pleased to see him and said, "You've been able to set up a formation since you were a child. When you grow up, you're sure to become a great player."

古文：孝武西迁，事起仓卒，人多逃散。
现代文：孝武帝西迁，由于事变仓促，很多人都四处奔逃。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu moved to the west, due to the haste of the event, many people fled in all directions.

古文：深时为子都督，领宿卫兵，抚循所部，并得入关。
现代文：宇文深当时任子都督，带领宿卫兵，安抚所部军士一起入关。
English: At that time, Yu Wenshen was appointed as the governor of the capital, and he led the guards of the inn and the sergeants of the pacification department to enter the customs together.

古文：以功赐爵长乐县伯。
现代文：因建立功劳，他被赐爵为长乐县伯。
English: He was given a knighthood for his contribution to the establishment of Changle County.

古文：大统中，累转尚书直事郎中。
现代文：西魏大统时，多次升迁，官至尚书直事郎中。
English: During the Great Reign of the Western Wei Dynasty, he was promoted several times and became a subordinate of Shang Shuzhong.

古文：及齐神武屯蒲坂，分遣其将窦泰趋潼关，高敖曹围洛州。
现代文：神武帝高欢率军驻扎在蒲坂，派遣他的部将窦泰进向潼关，高敖曹领兵围攻洛州。
English: Emperor Jinwu Gao Huan led the army stationed in Busaka and sent his general Dou Tai to advance towards Shiguan, while Gao Bing Cao led the army to besiege Lozhou.

古文：周文帝将袭泰，诸将咸难之。
现代文：周文帝宇文泰准备袭击窦泰，他的部将都不同意。
English: Zhou Wenyi Yu Wentei prepared to attack Dou Tai, but his subordinates did not agree.

古文：帝隐其事，阳若未有谋，独问策于深。深曰： 窦氏，高欢骁将，欢每仗之御侮。
现代文：宇文泰将这件事隐瞒起来，假装没有议论过，单独问宇文深的意见，他答道： 窦泰是高欢的一员猛将，高欢常依靠他抵御强敌。
English: Wu Wentai concealed the matter, pretending not to have discussed it, and asked Wu Wenshen's opinion separately. He replied: Dou Tai is a member of Gaohuan's strongmen. Gaohuan often relies on him to resist strong enemies.

古文：今大军就蒲坂，则欢拒守，窦必援之，内外受敌，取败道也。
现代文：如果现在我们的大军进攻蒲坂，那么高欢就会坚守，窦泰一定去救援他，我军内外受敌，这是取败之道。
English: If our large army attacks Busaka now, then Gao Huan will hold out, Dou Tai will definitely go to his rescue, our army will be attacked by enemies inside and outside, this is the way to defeat.

古文：不如选轻锐潜出小关，窦性躁急，必来决战，高欢持重，未即救之，则窦可禽也。
现代文：不如选派精锐部队偷偷进向小关。窦泰性情暴躁，一定来和我军决战，高欢老成持重，不一定会立即救援他，那么，窦泰就可以被擒获。
English: It would be better to send elite troops to sneak into Xiangyang Pass. Dou Tai is hot-tempered and will definitely come to fight our army, Gao Huan is old-fashioned and will not necessarily rescue him immediately. Then, Dou Tai can be captured.

古文：虏窦，欢势自沮，回师御之，可以制胜。 
现代文：抓住了窦泰，高欢就会情绪沮丧，回师防御，我们就可以获得胜利。 
English: If we catch Dou Tai, Gao Huan will be emotionally depressed, and we will return to the defensive, and we can win.

古文：文帝喜曰： 是吾心也。 
现代文：宇文泰听了十分高兴，说： 说出了我的心里话。 
English: He was very happy to hear it and said, "I spoke my heart out."

古文：军遂行，果获泰，齐神武亦退。
现代文：军队便出发，果然活捉了窦泰，高欢也退兵东去。
English: The army then set out, and indeed captured Dou Tai alive. Gao Huan also withdrew to the east.

古文：深又说文帝进取弘农，复克之。
现代文：他又劝说宇文泰进取弘农，又将弘农克复。
English: He also persuaded Uwentai to take on Hongnong, and also won back Hongnong.

古文：文帝大悦，谓深曰： 君即吾家陈平也。 
现代文：宇文泰兴奋异常，对宇文深说： 你就是我家的谋士陈平啊！ 
English: Yu Wentai was extremely excited and said to Yu Wenshen: You are my family's strategist Chen Ping!

古文：是冬，齐神武又率大众至沙苑，诸将皆惧，惟深独贺。
现代文：这年冬天，高欢又率领大军进至沙苑，西魏诸将都很恐惧，独有宇文深认为值得庆贺。
English: This winter, Gao Huan again led an army into Shayuan. The generals of the Western Wei Dynasty were very afraid, but Yu Wenshen thought it was worth celebrating.

古文：文帝问其故，对曰： 欢抚河北，甚得众心，虽乏智谋，人皆用命，以此自守，未易可图。
现代文：宇文泰问他原因，他对答说： 高欢安抚河北，很得人心。他虽然缺乏智谋，但人们却愿意为他效命，靠人和自守，我们不容易图取。
English: Uven Tai asked him the reason, and he replied: Gao Huan's pacification of Hebei is very popular. Although he lacks wisdom, people are willing to work for him. By relying on people and self-defense, we are not easy to win.

古文：今悬师度河，非众所欲，唯欢耻失窦氏，复谏而来，所谓忿兵，一战可禽也。不贺何为？ 
现代文：现在他率军渡过黄河，远离后方，不是他手下的将士们所愿意的。只是高欢耻于失掉窦泰，刚愎自用，又进谏天子，卷土重来。所说的忿怒的军队，一战即可擒获，为什么不值得庆贺呢？ 
English: Now he has led his army across the Yellow River, far away from the rear, which is not what the soldiers under his command wanted. However, they are very happy to have lost Dou Tai, they are stubborn and self-serving, and they are determined to return. The said angry army can be captured in one battle, why is it not worth celebrating?

古文：文帝然之。
现代文：宇文泰认为他说的很对。
English: Mr. Uwentai thinks he is right.

古文：寻大破齐军，果如所策。
现代文：不久，将高欢打得大败，和他预料的完全一样。
English: Soon, he defeated Gao Huan, just as he had expected.

古文：俄进爵为侯。
现代文：很快，朝廷给他晋封为侯。
English: Soon, the imperial court promoted him to marquis.

古文：六官建，拜小吏部下大夫，迁中大夫。
现代文：文官制度建立，他被封为小吏部下大夫，又迁任中大夫。
English: After the establishment of the civil servant system, he was appointed as a junior doctor, and later as a junior doctor.

古文：武成元年，迁豳州刺史，改封安化县公。
现代文：北周武成元年，他又任豳州刺史，改封爵位为安抚县公。
English: In the first year of Northern Zhou Wucheng, he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, and his title was changed to the governor of Anpu County.

古文：保定初，除京兆尹，入为司会中大夫。
现代文：保定初年，任京兆尹，进入朝廷任司会中大夫。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was appointed as Jing Zhaoyun, and entered the imperial court as the secretary of the middle doctor.

古文：深少丧父，事兄甚谨。
现代文：宇文深从小丧父，对他的哥哥宇文测十分恭顺。
English: Having lost his father at a young age, Uwenshin was very obedient to his older brother, Uwensho.

古文：性多奇谲，好读兵书，既居近侍，每进筹策。
现代文：他的性情奇异诡秘，好读兵书。既然位居朝廷的中枢，所以，不断奉献自己筹划的策略。
English: He has a strange and secretive temperament, and is a good reader of military books. Since he is at the center of the imperial court, he constantly devotes himself to planning strategies.

古文：及在选曹，颇有时誉。
现代文：担任选拔官吏的职责后，颇受到人们的赞誉。
English: After assuming the duties of a selection official, he received a lot of praise from people.

古文：性仁爱，从弟神举、神庆幼孤，深抚训之，义均同气，世亦以此称焉。
现代文：他的性情仁慈惠爱，从弟宇文神举、宇文神庆从小丧父，孤独无依，他对他们抚养教育，就好像亲兄弟一样，人们也因此称赞他。
English: His disposition is benevolent and benevolent. He was raised by his younger brother, Uwenshin, and lost his father when he was a child. He was left alone. He raised and educated them as if they were his own brothers. People praised him for this.

古文：卒于位，谥曰成康。
现代文：在官位上去世，谥号成康。
English: He died in office, and his posthumous name was Chengkang.

古文：子孝伯。
现代文：宇文孝伯，字胡王，宇文深之子。
English: He was the son of Uwen Takahaku, also known as King Hu, and Uwen Sheng.

古文：孝伯，字胡王，其生与武帝同日，文帝甚爱之，养于第内。
现代文：他与周武帝宇文邕同一天出生，所以，周文帝宇文泰很喜欢他，将他养在自己家里。
English: He was born on the same day as the Zhouwu Emperor Wenzhong, so the Zhouwu Emperor Wenzhong liked him very much and raised him in his own home.

古文：及长，又与武帝同学。
现代文：长大后，又与武帝一起上学。
English: When he grew up, he went to school with Emperor Wu.

古文：武成元年，拜宗师上士，时年十六。
现代文：武成元年，朝廷封他为宗师上士，年仅十六岁。
English: In the first year of the Wu Cheng era, the imperial court appointed him as a master sergeant, he was only sixteen years old.

古文：性沉正謇谔，好直言。
现代文：他性情沉稳正直，说话爽快，好直率地说出自己的看法。
English: His temperament is calm and honest, his speech is brisk, and he is very straightforward in expressing his opinions.

古文：武帝即位，欲引置左右。
现代文：武帝即位，想将他安置在自己身边。
English: Emperor Wu ascended the throne and wanted to place him next to him.

古文：时政在家臣，不得专制，乃托言少与同业受经，思相启发。
现代文：当时，朝廷大权由宰相宇文护掌握，武帝无法决定，便托词说孝伯从小与自己一起学习经书，想在一起互相启发。
English: At that time, the power of the imperial court was in the hands of the prime minister, Uwen Rong, and Emperor Wu could not decide, so he used the excuse that Xiao Bo had studied scriptures with him since childhood and wanted to inspire each other together.

古文：由是护弗之猜，得入为右侍上士，恆侍读。
现代文：因此，宇文护没有怀疑，孝伯得以进入朝廷，任右侍上士，常常陪武帝读书。
English: As a result, there was no doubt in Uwen's mind that he would be able to enter the imperial court, serve as a right-hand man to the emperor, and often study with the emperor.

古文：及遭父忧，诏令服中袭爵。
现代文：他的父亲去世后，朝廷命他在守丧时继承父亲的爵位。
English: After his father's death, the court ordered him to succeed his father's title during the funeral.

古文：武帝尝谓曰： 公于我，犹汉高与卢绾也。 
现代文：武帝曾对他说： 你与我，就像卢绾与汉高祖啊！ 
English: Emperor Wu once said to him: You and I are like Lu Xun and Han Gao Zu!

古文：赐以十三环金带。
现代文：赐给他镶有十三块玉环的金带。
English: and gave him a gold belt with thirteen precious stones.

古文：自是恆侍左右，出入卧内，朝务皆得预焉。孝伯亦竭心尽力，无所回避。
现代文：从此，他常常侍奉在武帝身边，出入于武帝的卧室，朝廷事务也都得以参与，他都竭心尽力，无所保留。
English: From then on, he often served at Emperor Wu's side, going in and out of Emperor Wu's bedroom, and was able to participate in court affairs. He did his best and did not hold anything back.

古文：至于时政得失，外间细事，皆以奏闻。
现代文：对于时政的得失，外面的种种事情，他都讲给武帝听。
English: He told Emperor Wu about the gains and losses of the current political situation, as well as various external matters.

古文：帝信委之，当时莫比。
现代文：武帝对他十分信任，当时无人可比。
English: Emperor Wu trusted him very much. At that time, there was no one comparable.

古文：及将诛晋公护，密与卫王直图之，惟孝伯及王轨、宇文神举等颇得参预。
现代文：准备诛杀晋公宇文护时，武帝与卫王宇文直秘密商议，只有他和王轨、宇文神举等人参与。
English: When Emperor Wu was preparing to fight and kill Jin Gong Uwen Guo, he secretly discussed with Wei King Uwen Zhi. Only he, Wang Lu and Uwen Shenhu participated.

古文：护诛，授开府仪同三司，历司会中大夫、左宫正。
现代文：宇文护被诛杀，朝廷封他为开府仪同三司，又历任司会中大夫和左官正的职务。
English: Uwenshu was beaten to death, and the imperial court appointed him as the keeper of the imperial office and the third secretary, as well as the successive secretary, the middle doctor and the plasterer.

古文：皇太子既无令德，孝伯言于帝曰： 皇太子德声未闻，请妙选正人为其师友，调护圣质，不然，悔无所及。 
现代文：皇太子不具备美好的品德。孝伯对武帝说 ：没有听说皇太子有很好的道德声誉，请认真挑选正派的人做他的老师和学友，以改变他的品质。不然，后悔也来不及。 
English: The crown prince does not have a good moral character. Xiao Bo said to Emperor Wu: I have not heard that the crown prince has a good moral reputation. Please carefully select a decent person to be his teacher and student to change his character. Otherwise, it is too late to regret.

古文：帝敛容曰： 卿世载鲠正，竭诚所事，观卿此言，有家风矣。 
现代文：武帝听后严肃地说 ：你是举世公认的耿直正派，应该竭诚地对待太子。听你说话的意思，这是家风造成的。 
English: After listening, Emperor Wu said seriously: You are a universally recognized upright and honest person, and you should treat the prince sincerely. Listen to what you are saying, this is caused by the family tradition.

古文：孝伯拜谢曰： 非言之难，受之难也，深愿陛下思之。 
现代文：孝伯连忙叩拜谢罪说： 不是我说起来难，是你接受起来不容易啊，深望陛下您三思。 
English: Xiao'er quickly bowed to Xie Sin and said, "It's not that it's difficult for me to say, but it's not easy for you to accept. I sincerely hope that Your Majesty will think twice."

古文：帝曰： 正人岂复过君？ 
现代文：武帝说： 正派的人谁能赶得上您呢？ 
English: Emperor Wu said, "Who is a decent person who can catch up with you?

古文：于是以尉迟运为右宫正，孝伯仍为左宫正、宗师中大夫。
现代文：于是，武帝命尉迟运为右官正，宇文孝伯为左官正、宗师中大夫。
English: As a result, Emperor Wu later promoted him to the post of right-hand officer, while Uwen Takahiro became the post of left-hand officer and his father's junior high school teacher.

古文：累迁右宫伯。
现代文：他又迁升为右宫伯。
English: He was also elevated to the position of Ugu-haku.

古文：尝因侍坐，帝问： 我兒比进不？ 
现代文：一次因侍坐武帝身边，武帝问他 ：太子最近有长进吗？ 
English: Once, because he was sitting next to Emperor Wu, Emperor Wu asked him, "Has the crown prince grown taller recently?"

古文：答曰： 皇太子比惧天威，更无罪失。 
现代文：他答道 ：皇太子畏惧您的威严，没有什么过失。 
English: He replied, "The crown prince fears your majesty, and there is nothing wrong with that."

古文：及王轨因内宴捋帝须，言太子之不善。
现代文：王轨在宫内宴会上捋着武帝的胡须，叙说太子的过失。
English: Wang Luo stroked Emperor Wu's beard at a palace banquet and recounted the prince's faults.

古文：帝罢酒，责孝伯曰： 公常谓我云太子无过，今轨有此言，公为诳矣。 
现代文：武帝停止喝酒，指责孝伯说 ：你常对我说太子没有过失，现在王轨这样说，是你欺骗了我。 
English: Emperor Wu stopped drinking and reproached Xiao Bo, saying, "You often told me that the prince was not at fault. Now Wang Luo is saying that you deceived me."

古文：孝伯拜曰： 臣闻父子之际，人所难言，臣知陛下不能割情忍爱，遂尔结舌。 
现代文：孝伯叩头，然后说 ：我听说父子之间的感情，一般人很难说清楚。我知道陛下您不能割舍父子的情爱，便结舌闭口。 
English: The filial uncle bowed his head and then said, "I have heard that the feelings between father and son are difficult for ordinary people to explain clearly. I know that Your Majesty cannot give up the love between father and son, so I hold my tongue.

古文：帝知其意，默然久之，乃曰： 朕已委公，公其勉之。 
现代文：武帝理解他的意思，沉默许久才说： 我已将太子委托给你，你要勉为其难，认真教育。 
English: Emperor Wu understood what he meant. He was silent for a long time before he said, "I have entrusted the prince to you. You should do your best to educate him carefully."

古文：及大军东讨，拜内史下大夫，令掌留台事。
现代文：周军大举东进，讨伐北齐，朝廷封他为内史下大夫，命他掌管留守京城的事务。
English: Zhou's army marched eastward on a large scale to fight against the Northern Qi, and the imperial court made him a doctor of internal history, ordering him to take charge of the affairs of the capital.

古文：军还，帝曰： 居守之重，无忝战功。 
现代文：大军归来，武帝对他说： 留守职责的重大，并不次于作战的功劳。 
English: When the great army returned, Emperor Wu said to him: "The important duty of staying behind is not inferior to the merit of fighting.

古文：于是加授大将军，进爵广陵郡公，并赐金帛女妓等。复为宗师。
现代文：于是，加授他为大将军，晋封爵位为广陵郡公，并赐给他金银布帛和歌妓等，又命他为宗师。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the rank of general and given the title of Guangling County Governor. He was also given gold, silver, cloth and prostitutes. He was also appointed as the head teacher.

古文：每车驾巡幸，常令居守。
现代文：武帝每次外出，都令他留守京城。
English: Whenever Emperor Wu went out, he was made to stay in the capital.

古文：后帝北讨，至云阳宫寝疾，驿召孝伯赴行在所，执其手曰： 吾自量必无济理，以后事付君。 
现代文：后来，武帝向北讨伐，到云阳宫时患病，赶快召孝伯赶赴临时的住所，武帝拉着他的手说： 我估计很难痊愈，因而把后事托给你。 
English: Later, Emperor Wu marched to the north, and when he arrived at the Yunyang Palace, he fell ill. He quickly called his brother-in-law to rush to his temporary residence. Emperor Wu took him by the hand and said, "I think it will be difficult for me to recover, so I'll leave the aftercare to you."

古文：是夜，授司卫上大夫，总宿卫兵马，令驰驿入京镇守。
现代文：当夜，封他为司卫上大夫，统率宿卫京城的兵马，命他赶快回京城镇守。
English: That night, he was appointed as the senior doctor of the Imperial Guards, leading the soldiers and horses of the guards of the capital, and he was ordered to quickly return to the capital.

古文：宣帝即位，授小冢宰。
现代文：宣帝即位，封孝伯为小冢宰。
English: Emperor Xuanxuan ascended the throne, and Feng Xiao Bo became Xiao Yu Zai.

古文：帝忌齐王宪，意欲除之，谓孝伯曰： 公能图之，当以其官位相授。 
现代文：宣帝忌恨齐王宇文宪，想除掉他，便对孝伯说 ：你如果能除掉他，我把他的官位授给你。 
English: Emperor Xuanzong hated King Yuwen Xian of Qi and wanted to get rid of him, so he said to Prince Xiao: "If you can get rid of him, I will give you his official position."

古文：孝伯叩头曰： 齐王戚近功高，栋梁所寄。
现代文：他连忙叩头，劝谏说： 齐王在宗室中关系亲近，功劳又高，是国家的栋梁。
English: He quickly kowtowed and persuaded him, saying, "King Qi has a close relationship with his ancestral family, and his achievements are high. He is the pillar of the country.

古文：臣若顺旨，则臣为不忠，陛下为不孝之子也。 
现代文：我如果遵从您的旨意，那么我对国家就不忠，陛下您也会成为不孝之子。 
English: If I follow your wishes, then I will be disloyal to my country, and you, Your Majesty, will become an unfilial son.

古文：帝因疏之，乃与于智、郑译等图其事。令智告宪谋逆，遣孝伯召入，诛之。
现代文：宣帝因而疏远他，便与于智、郑译等密谋这件事，命于智诬告齐王阴谋反叛，派孝伯将他召入宫中杀死。
English: Emperor Xuan thus alienated him, so he conspired with Yu Zhi, Zheng Zhan and others. He ordered Yu Zhi to falsely accuse King Qi of conspiracy and rebellion, and sent Prince Xiao Bo to summon him to the palace and kill him.

古文：帝之西征也，在军有过行，郑译时亦预焉。
现代文：宣帝曾参与西征，在军中犯有过失，郑译当时也参与其事。
English: Emperor Xuanzong had participated in the Western Expedition and committed mistakes in the army. Zheng Yu also participated in the matter at that time.

古文：军还，孝伯及王轨尽以白武帝。
现代文：军队归来后，孝伯和王轨把情况全部奏报给武帝。
English: After the army returned, Xiao Bo and Wang Lu reported the entire situation to Emperor Wu.

古文：武帝怒，挞帝数十，乃除译名。
现代文：武帝恼怒，打了宣帝数十杖，除掉郑译的名籍。
English: Emperor Wu was so angry that he beat Emperor Xuan with dozens of canes to get rid of Zheng Yue's name.

古文：至是，帝追憾被杖，乃问译： 我脚上杖痕谁所为也？ 
现代文：宣帝当皇帝后，追想起这件被打的事，问郑译： 我脚上被杖责的伤痕是谁干的事？ 
English: After Emperor Xuan Di became emperor, he recalled this incident of being beaten and asked Zheng: Who did the scars on my feet from being beaten with a cane?

古文：译曰： 事由宇文孝伯及王轨。 
现代文：郑译答 ：事情是由宇文孝伯和王轨告发引起的。 
English: Zheng translation: The incident was caused by the complaint of Yuwen Xiaobing and Wang Liao.

古文：译又说轨捋帝须事，帝乃诛轨。
现代文：郑译又说王轨捋武帝胡须的事，宣帝便将王轨杀害。
English: Zheng's translation also says that Wang Liao plucked Emperor Wu's beard, and Emperor Xuan then killed Wang Liao.

古文：尉迟运惧，私谓孝伯曰： 吾徒必不免祸，奈何？ 
现代文：尉迟运心里害怕，私下里对孝伯说： 我们这些人一定不会免除灾祸，怎么办呢？ 
English: Fearing in his heart, he said to his brother-in-law in private, "We people will certainly not be spared from the disaster. What should we do?

古文：孝伯曰： 有老母，地下有武帝，为臣为子，知欲何之！
现代文：孝伯说 ：现在堂上有年迈的母亲，地下有刚去世不久的武帝，为人臣又为人子，又能怎么办？
English: Xiao Bo said: Now there is an old mother in the hall, and a recently deceased Emperor Wu in the basement, both as a subject and as a son, what can we do?

古文：且委质事人，本徇名义，谏而不入，将焉逃死？
现代文：况且我们以自身侍奉人君，本来就应为名节大义殉身，劝谏他又不听，怎么会逃脱一死？
English: Moreover, we should have been martyred for the sake of the festival, since we were serving the emperor. If he did not listen to our advice, how could we have escaped death?

古文：足下若为身计，宜且远之。 
现代文：你如果为了一己的身家性命打算，应该远祸保身，离开朝廷。 
English: If you want to save your own life and that of your family, you should leave the imperial court.

古文：于是各行其志。运寻出为秦州总管。
现代文：于是，他们二人各行其志，尉迟运不久出任秦州总管。
English: As a result, the two of them each pursued their own goals, and soon after they were promoted to the post of Qinzhou general manager.

古文：帝荒淫日甚，诛戮无度。
现代文：宣帝荒淫无度，一天比一天严重；诛戮大臣，毫无法度。
English: Emperor Xuanxi's debauchery is unbridled, becoming more serious day by day; the Minister of Repression is unbridled.

古文：孝伯频谏不从，由是益疏。
现代文：孝伯多次劝谏，都无济于事，宣帝反而更加疏远和忌恨他。
English: Xiao Bo tried to persuade him many times, but to no avail. On the contrary, Xuan Di became more distant and hated him.

古文：后稽胡反，令孝伯为行军总管，从越王盛讨平之。
现代文：后来稽胡造反，宣帝命他为行军总管，与越王宇文盛一起将叛兵讨平。
English: Later, Jihu rebelled, and Emperor Xuanzong ordered him to be the commander-in-chief of the march, and together with Yuwen Sheng, the king of Yue, he fought against the rebels.

古文：及军还，帝将杀之，乃托以齐王事诮之曰： 公知齐王谋反，何以不言？ 
现代文：大军归来后，宣帝想杀掉他，便假借齐王宇文宪的事讥讽他，说： 你明明知道齐王想谋反，为什么不告发？ 
English: After the return of the large army, Emperor Xuanzong wanted to kill him, so he mocked him under the pretext of Qi Wang Yuwen Xian, saying: You clearly know that Qi Wang wants to rebel, why not report it?

古文：对曰： 臣知齐王忠于社稷，为群小媒蘖，加之以罪。
现代文：孝伯答道： 我知道齐王忠于朝廷，被群小们构陷诬害，横加罪名。
English: Xiao Bo replied, "I know that King Qi was loyal to the imperial court, and was framed up and slandered by a group of boys, and the charges were added arbitrarily.

古文：臣以言必不用，所以不言。
现代文：我说了一定不被采用，所以不说。
English: I said it definitely wouldn't be adopted, so I won't say it.

古文：且先帝属微臣辅陛下，今谏而不从，实负顾托。
现代文：况且先帝嘱托我辅助陛下您，现在劝谏您又不听，我实在有负先帝重托。
English: Moreover, the former emperor asked me to assist you, Your Majesty, and now I am advising you and you are not listening. I have indeed failed the former emperor's important request.

古文：以此为罪，是所甘心。 
现代文：你因此加罪于我，是我甘心领受的。 
English: I'm willing to take the punishment you're going to give me.

古文：帝惭，俯首不语。令赐死于家，时年三十六。
现代文：宣帝听后满面惭愧，俯首不语，命在家中赐孝伯死罪，时年仅三十六岁。
English: After hearing this, Emperor Xuan was so ashamed that he bowed his head and did not speak. He gave Xiao Bo the death penalty at home, when he was only thirty-six years old.

古文：及隋文帝践极，以孝伯、王轨忠而获罪，并令收葬，复其官爵。
现代文：隋文帝代周立隋，即皇帝位，因孝伯和王轨忠贞而获罪被害，命将他们重新安葬，恢复他们的官爵。
English: Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty, Zhou Li of the Sui Dynasty, i.e. the emperor, ordered the reburial of Xiao Bo and Wang Lu, who were killed for their loyalty, and the reinstatement of their titles.

古文：尝谓高颖曰： 宇文孝伯实有周良臣，若此人在朝，我辈无措手处。 
现代文：他曾对高颍说： 宇文孝伯实在是北周卓越的大臣。如果此人继续在朝执政，我们就没有下手的地方。 
English: He once said to Gao Qi: "Uwen Xiaobo is truly an outstanding minister of Northern Zhou. If this person continues to rule the country, we have no place to start.

古文：子歆嗣。东平公神举，文帝之族子也。
现代文：东平公宇文神举，是周文帝宇文泰同族人的儿子。
English: Dongping Gong Yuwen Shenhu is the son of Zhou Wen Di Yuwen Tai's compatriot.

古文：高祖普陵、曾祖求男，仕魏位并显达。
现代文：他的父亲宇文显和，从小继承前辈的爵位。
English: His father, Uwen Xianhe, inherited the peerage of his predecessors from an early age.

古文：祖金殿，魏兗州刺史安喜县侯。父显和，少而袭爵，性矜严，颇涉经史，膂力绝人，弯弓数百斤，能左右驰射。
现代文：显和性情矜持严肃，涉猎很多经书，臂力超过正常人，可以拉动数百斤的大弓，能骑在马上向左右两边射箭。
English: He appears to be serious and reserved, reads a lot of scriptures, has more arm strength than a normal person, can pull a large bow weighing hundreds of pounds, and can ride a horse and shoot arrows to the left and right.

古文：孝武之在蕃，显和早蒙眷遇。
现代文：孝武帝在番邦，显和早就蒙受他的器重和礼遇。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was treated with great respect and courtesy in Pangang.

古文：时属多难，尝问计于显和。
现代文：当时国家多难，孝武帝曾请他出谋划策。
English: At that time, the country was in a difficult situation, and Emperor Xiaowu had asked him to come up with a plan.

古文：显和具陈宜杜门晦迹，相时而动，帝深纳焉。
现代文：他陈奏应闭门不出，隐晦自己的行迹，等待时机，再图进取。孝武帝采纳了他的建议。
English: He should always keep his door closed, conceal his whereabouts, wait for the right time, and then try to make progress. Emperor Xiaowu took his advice.

古文：及即位，拜阁内都督，封城阳县公，以恩旧遇之甚厚。
现代文：孝武帝即位后，命他为阁内都督，封为城阳县公，因旧恩对他礼遇甚厚。
English: After Emperor Xiaowu ascended to the throne, he appointed him as the governor of the Imperial Household and the governor of Joyang County. Because of his old favor, he was treated with great courtesy.

古文：显和所居隘陋，乃撤殿省赐为寝室，其见重如此。
现代文：他住的房子又小又破，孝武帝便撤掉殿省，将房子赐给他居住，他就是这样被孝武帝看重。
English: The house he lived in was small and dilapidated, so Emperor Xiaowu removed the palace guards and gave him a house to live in. This is how he was valued by Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：及齐神武专政，帝每不自安，问显和曰： 天下汹汹，将如之何？ 
现代文：神武帝高欢专擅朝廷大权之后，孝武帝常常感到不安稳，问宇文显和： 天下汹汹，动荡不安，应怎么办？ 
English: After Emperor Gao Huan of the Jin Dynasty usurped the supreme power of the imperial court, Emperor Xiaowu often felt uneasy and unstable, and asked Yu Wenxianhe: The world is turbulent and turbulent, what should we do?

古文：对曰： 莫若择善而从。 
现代文：显和答： 不如择善而从之。 
English: Xianhe A: It is better to choose the good and follow it.

古文：因诵诗云： 彼美人兮，西方之人兮。 
现代文：因而吟诵《诗经》中的句子说： 那个美人啊，就是西方的那个人呀。 
English: So he recited a sentence from the Book of Songs, saying, "That beautiful woman is the person in the West."

古文：帝曰： 是吾心也。 
现代文：孝武帝说 ：你说出了我的心里话。 
English: Emperor Xiaowu said: You have spoken my heart.

古文：遂定入关策。
现代文：于是，朝廷决定了西入关中的策略。
English: As a result, the imperial court decided on a strategy for the western entrance.

古文：以其母老，令预为计。对曰： 今日之事，忠孝不并。然臣不密则失身，安敢预为私计。 
现代文：因为他的母亲年迈，孝武帝让他拿出个主意，他对答： 今天的情况，忠孝不能两全，如果我不保全机密就失掉作为臣子的责任，怎么敢先为自己打算！ 
English: Because his mother was old, Emperor Xiaowu asked him to come up with an idea, to which he replied: In today's situation, loyalty and filial piety cannot go hand in hand. If I do not keep secrets, I will lose my responsibility as a courtier. How dare I think about myself first!

古文：帝怆然改容曰： 卿，我之王陵也。 
现代文：孝武帝因悲怆改变了脸色，说： 你真是我的王陵啊！ 
English: Emperor Xiaowu turned pale with grief and said, "You really are my royal tomb!"

古文：迁硃衣直合、合内大都督，改封长广县公。
现代文：升任他为朱衣直阁、阁内大都督，改封爵号为长广县公。
English: He was promoted to Zhu Yizhong, the Grand Governor of the Inner Court, and his title was changed to Changguang County.

古文：从孝武入关。至溱水，周文帝素闻其善射而未之见，俄而水傍有一小鸟，显和射中之。
现代文：他跟从孝武帝入关，到达溱水，周文帝宇文泰平常听说他善于射箭，却从没有见过。少倾，水边飞来一只小鸟，显和将它射中。
English: He followed Emperor Xiaowu into the customs and arrived in Surabaya. Zhou Wendi Yu Wentei usually heard that he was good at archery, but he had never seen it. Unexpectedly, a small bird flew by the water's edge, and Xian He shot it.

古文：建德三年，追赠骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：宇文泰笑着说 ：我知道你工于此道。 朝廷晋封他为车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
English: "I know you're good at this," said Uwentai with a smile, "the Imperial Court has promoted him to General of Chariot and Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Imperial Household Agency, and Master of the Horse.

古文：神举早孤，有夙成之量。
现代文：后来去世。宇文神举幼年丧父，有天生夙成的器量。
English: He died later. Umenobu lost his father at a young age, and was born with a natural talent.

古文：及长，神情倜傥，志略英赡，眉目疏朗，仪貌魁梧。
现代文：长大后，神情潇洒风流，志气韬略，英武丰赡。眉目清秀俊朗，仪表魁伟，相貌堂堂。
English: When he grew up, he had a dashing and elegant demeanor, a high spirit, and was a great warrior. His eyes were clear and handsome, he had a great appearance, and he was handsome.

古文：明帝初，起家中侍上士。
现代文：北周明帝初年离家出仕，任中侍上士。
English: In the first year of the Northern Zhou Ming Dynasty, he left home to serve, and was appointed to the post of junior officer.

古文：帝留意翰林，而神举雅好篇什，每游幸，神举恆从。
现代文：明帝留心学问，而神举爱好文章。明帝每次出巡，都让神举跟从。
English: Emperor Ming paid attention to learning, while Shen Hui was fond of writing. Every time Emperor Ming went on a tour, he had Shen Hui follow him.

古文：袭爵长广县公。
现代文：他继承父爵，被封为长广县公。
English: He succeeded his father and was named the governor of Changguang County.

古文：天和元年，累迁右宫伯中大夫，进爵清河郡公。
现代文：天和元年，迁任为右宫伯中大夫，晋爵位为清河郡公。
English: In 1902, he was transferred to the position of the doctor of the right palace, and was promoted to the peerage as the lord of Qinghe County.

古文：建德三年，自京兆尹出为熊州刺史，齐人惮其威名。
现代文：建德三年，自京兆尹的职位出任为熊州刺史，北齐人都害怕他的威名。
English: Jiande three years, since the post of Jing Zhaoyun served as the history of Xiongzhou, the North Qi people are afraid of his prestige.

古文：及帝东伐，从平并州，即授刺史。
现代文：周武帝东伐，神举随从平定并州，被授为并州刺史。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu's eastward campaign, Shenhu followed the pacification and annexation of the state, and was awarded the history of annexation of the state.

古文：州既齐氏别都，多有奸猾，神举示以威恩，远近悦服。
现代文：并州原为北齐的别都，城内有很多刁滑邪恶的人。神举恩威并用，远近的人都心悦诚服。
English: And the prefecture used to be the capital of the Northern Qi, and there were many wicked people in the city. God raised up grace and used it, and people near and far were sincerely convinced.

古文：改封武德郡公，进柱国大将军，又改封东平郡公。
现代文：朝廷改封他为武德郡公，升任为柱国大将军。又改封为东平郡公。
English: The imperial court changed his title to Wude County, and he was promoted to Column State General. He was also changed to Dongping County.

古文：宣政元年，转司武上大夫。
现代文：宣政元年，他又转任司武上大夫。
English: In the first year of the proclamation of the Republic of China, he was transferred to the post of Sifu Senior Doctor.

古文：及幽州人卢昌期等据范阳反，诏神举讨禽之。
现代文：幽州人卢昌期占据范阳造反，朝廷命他率军讨伐。
English: Lu Chang, a native of Yuzhou, occupied Fanyang during the rebellion, and the imperial court ordered him to lead the army in the crusade.

古文：时齐黄门侍郎卢思道亦在反中，贼平，将解衣伏法，神举乃释而礼之，即令草露布。
现代文：北齐的黄门侍郎卢思道也在反军中，反叛被平定，正要将卢思道解开衣领斩首，神举将他释放并礼貌对待，还命他起草露布。
English: Lu Sidao, the Yellow Gate attendant of Northern Qi, was also in the rebel army. The rebellion was suppressed. Lu Sidao was about to be decapitated with his collar undone. He was released and treated politely. He was also ordered to draw up a bluff.

古文：属稽胡反，寇西河，神举与越王盛讨之。
现代文：稽胡造反，侵犯西河，神举与越王宇文盛进讨。
English: He rebelled, invaded the West River, and had a heated discussion with the king of Yue.

古文：时突厥赴救，神举以奇兵击之，突厥败走，稽胡款服。
现代文：这时突厥人赶来救援稽胡，神举用奇兵袭击，突厥人败退，稽胡归附。
English: At this time, the Turks came to the rescue of Qin Hu, and the gods raised a strange soldier to attack. The Turks were defeated, and Qin Hu was annexed.

古文：即授并州总管。
现代文：朝廷授予他并州总管的职务。
English: The court also awarded him the post of state governor.

古文：神举见待于武帝，处心腹之任，王轨、宇文孝伯等屡言皇太子之短，神举亦颇预焉。
现代文：神举被周武帝器重，他竭尽心腹的责任。王轨、宇文孝伯等屡次向武帝说太子的过失，神举也参与了。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu valued Shenghuo and he did his best to fulfill his duty. Wang Lu and Uwen Xiao Bo repeatedly told Emperor Wu about the prince's fault, and Shenghuo also participated.

古文：及宣帝即位，荒淫无度，神举惧及祸，怀不自安。
现代文：宣帝即位后，荒淫无度，神举惧怕遭受祸患，心中常不自安。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuan, he was wildly immoral, feared God and suffered calamities, and was often uneasy in his heart.

古文：初定范阳之后，威声甚振，帝亦忌其名望，兼以宿憾，遂使人赍酒赐之，薨于马邑，时年四十八。
现代文：刚平定范阳之后，他的威望名声大振，宣帝忌恨他的名望，加上过去的怨仇，便派人将毒酒赐给他，他死在马邑，当时年仅四十八岁。
English: After he had just subdued Fan Yang, his prestige and reputation soared. Emperor Xuan envied his reputation, and in addition to past grudges, he sent someone to give him poisoned wine. He died in Mayi at the age of forty-eight.

古文：神举美风仪，善辞令，博涉经史，性爱篇章，尤工奇射。
现代文：神举风仪俊美，善于辞令，博览经史，喜爱篇章，尤其工于骑马射箭。
English: The god has a beautiful demeanor, is good at rhetoric, is well-versed in scripture and history, and likes to read, especially horseback riding and archery.

古文：临戎对寇，勇而有谋，莅职当官，每著声绩。
现代文：临阵对敌，英勇无畏，又颇有谋略；莅职为官，政绩突出，声誉四起。
English: He fought against the enemy in the front line, was brave and fearless, and had a lot of strategy; he was a high-ranking official, had outstanding political achievements, and his reputation spread far and wide.

古文：兼好施爱士，以雄豪自居，故得任兼文武，声彰外内。百僚无不仰其风则，先辈旧齿至于今称之。
现代文：加上乐善好施，爱护人才，以雄武豪迈自居，所以能够文武官职兼任，声名播于内外，百官无不仰望他的风采，前辈旧友至今赞颂不绝。
English: In addition, he was kind and generous, loved talented people, and regarded himself as a great warrior. As a result, he was able to serve concurrently as a civil and military officer, and his fame spread both at home and abroad. Hundreds of officials looked up to his style, and his predecessors and old friends have been praising him ever since.

古文：子同嗣，位至仪同大将军，神举弟庆。庆字神庆，沈深有器局，少以敏见知。
现代文：宇文庆，字神庆，宇文神举的兄弟。性情深沉，有才识和度量，从小以聪明敏捷被人们称誉。
English: The brother of Uwen Qing, Zhe Shenqing, and Uwen Shenhu. He has a deep temperament, talent and measure, and has been praised for his intelligence and agility since childhood.

古文：初受业东观，颇涉经史。
现代文：他最初在东观读书，涉猎大量文史经典。
English: He first studied in Dongguan and read a large number of literary and historical classics.

古文：既而谓人曰： 书足记姓名而已，安能久事笔砚为腐儒业乎？ 
现代文：过些时候他对别人说 ：读书能够认识人的姓名就行了，怎么能长久地从事笔墨生涯而成为腐儒呢？ 
English: After a while, he said to others: "It's enough to be able to recognize people's names when reading books. How can you be a calligrapher for a long time and become a rotten person?"

古文：时文州贼乱，庆应募从征，以功授都督。
现代文：当时，文州贼寇作乱，他应募从征，因立功被授予都督。
English: At that time, thieves and robbers from Wenzhou caused a riot, and he was drafted into the army. He was awarded the title of "governor" for his service.

古文：卫王直镇山南，引为左右。
现代文：卫王宇文直镇守山南，让他在自己左右。
English: The king of Wei, Yu Wenzhong, guarded the southern part of the mountain, leaving him to his own devices.

古文：庆善射，有胆气，好格猛兽，直甚壮之。稍迁车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：他善于射箭，又有胆气，好与猛兽格斗，宇文直很器重他，升任他为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: He was good at archery, had courage, and was good at fighting fierce beasts. Yu Wenzhong respected him very much, and promoted him to General of Chariot and Cavalry and Third Secretary of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies.

古文：及诛宇文护，庆有谋焉。
现代文：诛杀宇文护，他也参与其事。
English: He was also involved in the assassination of Umenosuke.

古文：时授骠骑大将军，加开府。
现代文：进而被授予骠骑大将军，加封为开府。
English: In addition, he was awarded the title of General of Horse Cavalry and the title of Kaifu.

古文：从武帝攻河阴，先登攀堞，与贼短兵接，中石乃坠，绝而后苏。
现代文：他跟随武帝进攻河阴，首先登上城垛。与敌人短兵相接，被石头击中，从城上坠落，昏迷后又苏醒过来。
English: He followed Emperor Wu to attack Heyin, and first climbed the battlements. He met the enemy at close quarters, was hit by a stone, fell from the castle, and woke up after falling into a coma.

古文：帝劳之曰： 卿勇可以贾人也。 
现代文：武帝慰劳他说 ：你的勇气多得可以卖给别人了。 
English: Emperor Wu consoled him, saying, "You have so much courage that you can sell it to others."

古文：复从武帝拔晋州，齐兵大至，庆与齐王宪轻骑觇之，卒与贼相遇，为贼所窘。
现代文：他又跟随武帝攻打晋州，齐军大批涌来。他与齐王宇文宪骑马了望敌兵情况，突然与敌兵相遇，被敌人包围。
English: He also followed Emperor Wu to attack Jinzhou, and a large number of Qi troops poured in. He and Qi King Yuwen Xian rode on horseback to see the situation of the enemy soldiers, suddenly met with the enemy soldiers, and was surrounded by the enemy.

古文：宪挺身而遁。
现代文：宇文宪催马逃跑，宇文庆退却，据守汾桥。
English: Uwen Hsien urged his horse to run away, while Uwen Qing retreated and guarded the bridge.

古文：庆退据汾桥，众贼争进，庆射之，所中人马必倒，贼乃稍却。
现代文：敌兵争相追击，他弯弓射箭，中箭的人马一定倒地，敌兵才稍稍退却。
English: The enemy soldiers scrambled to chase him. He bent his bow and shot an arrow. The man who was hit by the arrow must have fallen to the ground, and the enemy soldiers only retreated a little.

古文：及拔高壁，克并州，下信都，禽高湝，功并居最。
现代文：周军攻占高壁，克复并州，取下信都，活捉高蔆，他的功劳最为突出。
English: Zhou's army captured Gaoqi, recovered and annexed the prefecture, took down Xindu, and captured Gao Yao alive. His achievement is the most outstanding.

古文：进位大将军，封汝南郡公。
现代文：因而被晋位为大将军，封爵为汝南郡公。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the rank of general and knighted as the Duke of Yunnan.

古文：寻以行军总管击延安反胡，平之。历延、宁二州总管。
现代文：不久，任行军总管，挥师讨伐延安反叛的胡人，平定后，任延、宁二州的总管。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the marching army to fight against the rebellious Hu people in Yan'an. After the war, he was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the two states of Yan'an and Ning.

古文：隋文帝为丞相，以行军总管征江表，次白帝，以劳进上大将军。
现代文：隋文帝杨坚任北周丞相，他以行军总管的身份征讨江南，到达白帝城，因建立功劳晋封为上大将军。
English: Yang Jian, the emperor of Sui and Wen dynasties, served as the minister of Northern Zhou Dynasty. He went to the south of the Yangtze River as the commander-in-chief and arrived at Baidicheng. He was promoted to the rank of general for his achievements.

古文：帝与庆有旧，甚见亲待，令督丞相军事，委以心腹。
现代文：杨坚与他有旧时的交情，对他十分亲近，命他督领丞相府的军事，把他当作心腹。
English: Yang Jian had an old friendship with him, was very close to him, ordered him to supervise the military of the Prime Minister's Office, and regarded him as a confidant.

古文：寻加柱国。
现代文：不久，加封他为柱国。
English: Soon, he was given the title of "pillar country."

古文：开皇初，拜左武卫将军，进上柱国。
现代文：开皇初年，封他为左武卫将军，晋封为上柱国。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was appointed General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards and promoted to Shangzhu Province.

古文：数年，除凉州总管。岁余征还，不任以职。
现代文：数年之后，又任凉州总管，一年多后被征还朝廷，没有任职。
English: A few years later, he was also appointed as the chief administrator of Liangzhou. More than a year later, he was conscripted back to the imperial court, but did not take up the post.

古文：初，文帝龙潜时，尝与庆言，谓曰： 天元质无积德，其相貌寿亦不长，加以法令繁苛，耽恣声色，以吾观之，殆将不久。
现代文：当初，杨坚还没有当皇帝时曾对宇文庆说 ：天元皇帝品质平平，没有积德，从他的相貌看，寿命也不会太长。加上他制定的法令严厉繁苛，他又天天沉湎于声色之中，让我看他不会长久。
English: At the beginning, when Yang Jian was not yet emperor, he said to Yu Wenqing: Emperor Tianyuan is of mediocre quality and lacks virtue. Judging from his appearance, his life expectancy will not be too long. Coupled with the strict and cumbersome laws he has enacted, he is immersed in gossip every day, so I don't think he will last long.

古文：又诸侯微弱，各令就国，曾无深根固本之计，羽翮既翦，何及远？
现代文：另外，各诸侯藩王力量弱小，让他们各自驻守本土，却没有深根固本的计谋。羽毛的茎被剪掉了，怎么能够飞向远方？
English: In addition, the power of the lords and lords was weak, so they were stationed on the mainland, but there was no deep-rooted strategy. The stem of the feather was cut off, how could it fly far away?

古文：尉迟迥贵戚，早著声望，国家有衅，必为乱阶。
现代文：尉迟回是皇家贵戚，早就有很高的声望，国家如有战争，他一定是祸乱之源。
English: If there is a war in the country, he must be the source of disaster.

古文：然智量庸浅，子弟轻佻，贪而少惠，终致亡灭。
现代文：然而，他的指挥本领凡庸，度量短浅，子弟们轻薄无能，贪婪残酷，对百姓缺少恩惠，终于会导致灭亡。
English: However, his command ability is mediocre, his measurement is short-sighted, his children are light and incompetent, his greed is cruel, and his lack of favor to the people will eventually lead to his downfall.

古文：司马消难反覆之虏，亦非池内之物，变在俄顷。
现代文：司马消难反复无常，也不是池中的蛟龙，变化不定，常在俄顷之间。
English: Sima Qianhuang is capricious, not a dragon in the pool, changeable, often in between.

古文：但轻薄无谋，未能为害，不过自窜江南耳。
现代文：但是，他轻薄率易，没有智谋，不能成为大害，最多逃向江南，依附南陈。
English: However, he is frivolous and reckless, has no wisdom and cannot become a great harm. At most, he will flee to the south of the Yangtze River and cling to Nan Chen.

古文：庸蜀险隘，易生艰阻，王谦愚蠢，素无筹略，但恐为人所误，不足为虞。 
现代文：庸、蜀之地，险峻闭塞，易生难于阻止的事变。王谦愚钝，缺乏谋略，但恐怕他被人利用，却不值得担忧。 
English: The land of the Yangtze River and the Shu River is steep and congested, and prone to events that are difficult to prevent. Wang Qian is dull and lacks strategy, but I am afraid that he is being used, but it is not worth worrying about.

古文：未几，上言皆验。
现代文：不久，他预料的全部应验。
English: Soon, all of his predictions came true.

古文：及此，庆恐上遗忘，不复收用，欲见旧蒙恩顾，具录前言，为表奏之。
现代文：杨坚称帝后，宇文庆怕他忘掉，不再被收录引用，又想显示杨坚过去对他的友谊和信任，便把这些话全部记录，上表奏闻。
English: Yang insisted that the Empress, Yu Wenqing was afraid that he would forget and would no longer be included and quoted, and also wanted to show Yang Jian's friendship and trust in the past, so he recorded all these words and reported them on the table.

古文：上省表大悦，下诏曰： 朕言之验，自是偶然；公乃不忘，弥表诚节。
现代文：杨坚看后十分高兴，下诏说 ：我的话应验，本属偶然。你仍没有忘记，足可表示你对过去友谊的忠诚和珍重。
English: Yang Jian was very happy after reading it, and said: My words came true by chance. You still haven't forgotten, which is enough to show your loyalty and cherish the past friendship.

古文：深感至意，嘉尚无已。 
现代文：我深深地感谢你友好的用意，对你实在感激不尽。 
English: I am deeply grateful for your kind offer and cannot thank you enough.

古文：自是上每加优礼。
现代文：从此，隋文帝对他常常给予优厚的礼遇。
English: From then on, Emperor Sui Wen often gave him generous courtesy.

古文：卒于家。
现代文：他在家中去世。
English: He died at home.

