古文：魏武有一妓，声最清高，而情性酷恶。
现代文：魏武帝曹操有个歌伎，歌声最为清越悠远，但性情却非常不好。
English: Emperor Cao Cao of Weiwu has a kabuki. His singing voice is the clearest and the longest, but his temperament is very bad.

古文：欲杀则爱才，欲置则不堪。
现代文：曹操想杀了她，却又爱惜她的歌唱技艺；想留下她，却又受不了她的脾气。
English: Cao Cao wanted to kill her, but he didn't care for her singing skills; he wanted to keep her, but he couldn't stand her temper.

古文：于是选百人一时俱教。
现代文：于是挑选了一百名女子，同时训练她们的歌唱本领。
English: So they selected a hundred women and trained them in singing.

古文：少时，还有一人声及之，便杀恶性者。王蓝田性急。
现代文：不久发现果然有一个人唱的能赶上她，就把她杀了。蓝田侯王述性情急躁。
English: Not long after, he found out that there was indeed a singer who could catch up with her, so he killed her. Lantian Hou Wang described his temperament as impatient.

古文：尝食鸡子，以箸刺之，不得，便大怒，举以掷地。
现代文：有一次吃鸡蛋，用筷子夹鸡蛋，夹不起来，就大发脾气，拿起鸡蛋扔到了地上。
English: Once, when eating eggs, I used chopsticks to hold the eggs. When I couldn't hold them, I lost my temper and picked up the eggs and threw them on the ground.

古文：鸡子于地圆转未止，仍下地以屐齿蹍之，又不得，瞋甚，复于地取内口中，啮破即吐之。
现代文：鸡蛋在地上滚个不停，他也跟着从席上下地，用屐齿去踩，依然踩不到。他气极了，再从地上捡起来放进口里，咬破壳就吐了出来。
English: The egg kept rolling on the ground, and he followed it from the table, waving it up and down, using his pincers to step on it, but he still couldn't step on it. He was so angry that he picked it up from the ground, put it in his mouth, bit through the shell and spat it out.

古文：王右军闻而大笑曰： 使安期有此性，犹当无一豪可论，况蓝田邪？ 
现代文：王羲之听说了，大笑起来，说： 假使安期有这种性格，有这样的性格也一无可取，何况是王述！ 
English: When Wang Xizhi heard this, he burst out laughing and said, "If Anji had this kind of character, it would be undesirable to have such a character, let alone Wang Shu!

古文：王司州尝乘雪往王螭许。
现代文：司州刺史王胡之有一次冒着大雪前去王螭府上。
English: On one occasion, Wang Huzhi, the governor of Shizhou, braved heavy snow to go to Wangye's palace.

古文：司州言气少有牾逆于螭，便作色不夷。
现代文：王胡之说话的语气冒犯了王螭，王螭便很不高兴。
English: Wang Hu's tone of speech offended Wang Yao, and Wang Yao was very unhappy.

古文：司州觉恶，便舆床就之，持其臂曰： 汝讵复足与老兄计？ 
现代文：王胡之发现了，就把坐床挪近王螭身边，拉着他的手臂说： 你难道值得和老兄计较！ 
English: When Wang Huzhi found out, he moved the bed closer to Wang Yao, took him by the arm and said, "Do you really deserve to quarrel with your brother!"

古文：螭拨其手曰： 冷如鬼手馨，强来捉人臂！ 
现代文：王螭拨开他的手说： 冷得像鬼手一样，还硬要来拉人家的胳膊！ 
English: Wang Yao opened his hand and said, "It's as cold as a ghost's hand, and you still want to pull someone's arm!

古文：桓宣武与袁彦道樗蒱，袁彦道齿不合，遂厉色掷去五木。
现代文：桓温和袁耽玩樗蒲。袁耽掷出的点子不合心意，就神色愠怒地把博具给扔掉了。
English: Huan Wen and Yuan Tan played darts. Yuan Tan threw out an idea that didn't meet his heart's desire, so he angrily threw the darts away.

古文：温太真云： 见袁生迁怒，知颜子为贵。 
现代文：温峤说： 看到小袁迁怒的样子，才知道颜回的可贵。 
English: Wen Wei said, "Only when I saw Xiao Yuan's angry look did I know how precious it is to have a beautiful face."

古文：谢无奕性粗强。
现代文：谢奕秉性粗狂刚强。
English: Xie Yibing is rough and tough.

古文：以事不相得，自往数王蓝田，肆言极骂。
现代文：因为一件事不满意，就亲自跑到王述那里，口无遮拦，一顿大骂。
English: Because he was not satisfied with one thing, he personally ran to Wang Shu, where he ranted and raved.

古文：王正色面壁不敢动，半日。
现代文：王述正色面壁，不敢动一动。
English: Wang Shu faces the wall and does not dare to move.

古文：谢去良久，转头问左右小吏曰： 去未？ 答云： 已去。 
现代文：谢奕骂了半天才走。过了很久，王述问左右的小吏： 走了没？ 答说： 走了。 
English: Xie Yi cursed for half a day before he left. After a long time, Wang Shu asked the petty officials around: Have you left? He replied: I have left.

古文：然后复坐。
现代文：这才回到原来的座位上。
English: Only then did he return to his original seat.

古文：时人叹其性急而能有所容。
现代文：当时的人都赞叹他性子虽急，却能够包容别人。
English: People at the time admired his quick temper, but he was able to tolerate others.

古文：王令诣谢公，值习凿齿已在坐，当与并榻。
现代文：王献之去拜访谢安，正值习凿齿已经在座。
English: Wang Xianzhi went to visit Xie An, who was already present on duty to practice chiseling teeth.

古文：王徙倚不坐，公引之与对榻。
现代文：两人本该并排坐，但王献之徘徊着不肯坐下。谢安引导他坐在对面的坐榻上。
English: The two were supposed to sit side by side, but Wang Xianzhi lingered and refused to sit down. Xie An guided him to sit on the opposite couch.

古文：去后，语胡儿曰： 子敬实自清立，但人为尔多矜咳，殊足损其自然。 
现代文：王离开后，谢安对谢朗说： 王献之确实清高自立，只是故意这么做，有些矜持固执，这太有损于自然了。 
English: After Wang left, Xie'an said to Xie Lang, "Wang Xianzhu is indeed clear-minded and self-reliant, but he only did it on purpose. He is a bit stubborn, which is too detrimental to nature."

古文：王大、王恭尝俱在何仆射坐。恭时为丹阳尹，大始拜荆州。讫将乖之际，大劝恭酒。恭不为饮，大逼强之，转苦，便各以裙带绕手。
现代文：王大和王恭曾经一起在左仆射何澄家做客，王恭当时任丹阳尹，王大刚受任荆州刺史等到他们快要分别的时候，王大劝王恭喝酒，王恭不肯喝，王大就强迫他，越来越急迫，随即各自拿起裙带缠在手上。
English: Wang Dai and Wang Qiong had once been guests together at the house of the left-hand man of He Cheng, Wang Qiong, who was then in charge of Danyangyin, and Wang Dagang, who was in charge of Jingzhou, and when they were about to separate, Wang Dai advised Wang Qiong to drink, but Wang Qiong refused to drink, so Wang Dai forced him, becoming more and more urgent, and then each of them picked up the bridle and wrapped it around their hands.

古文：恭府近千人，悉呼入斋，大左右虽少，亦命前，意便欲相杀。
现代文：王恭府中有近千人，全都叫来何澄家中；王大的随从虽然少，也叫他们前来，双方的意思是想要打起来。
English: There were nearly a thousand people in Wang Gongfu, all of whom were called to He Cheng's home. Wang Da's entourage, although small, also called them to come. Both sides wanted to fight.

古文：射无计，因起排坐二人之闲，方得分散。
现代文：何澄没有办法，就站起来插入两人中间坐着，才把两人分开。
English: There was nothing He Cheng could do, so he stood up and sat in the middle of the two, before separating them.

古文：所谓势利之交，古人羞之。
现代文：人们所说的依仗权势和财富的交往，古人认为是可耻的。
English: The ancients considered it shameful to associate with people who were said to rely on power and wealth.

古文：桓南郡小儿时，与诸从兄弟各养鹅共斗。
现代文：南郡公桓玄小的时候，和堂兄弟们各自养鹅来斗。
English: When Minami-gun gong Kangen was small, he and his cousins raised geese to fight each other.

古文：南郡鹅每不如，甚以为忿。
现代文：桓玄的鹅常常斗输了，就非常恼恨他们的鹅。
English: Kuan Xuan's geese often lost the fight, and he was very angry with their geese.

古文：迺夜往鹅栏闲，取诸兄弟鹅悉杀之。
现代文：于是夜间跑到鹅栏里。把堂兄弟的鹅全抓出来杀掉。
English: So he ran into the goose pen at night. He caught all of his cousin's geese and killed them.

古文：既晓，家人咸以惊骇，云是变怪，以白车骑。
现代文：天亮以后，家人全都被这事吓呆了，以为是妖怪所为，就把这件事报告给车骑将军桓冲。
English: After dawn, all the family members were stunned by the incident and thought it was the work of a monster. They reported the incident to General Huanchong.

古文：车骑曰： 无所致怪，当是南郡戏耳！ 
现代文：桓冲说： 不可能是妖怪，定是桓玄开玩笑罢了！ 
English: Kuanchong said, "It can't be a ghost, it must be Kuan Xuan just joking!"

古文：问，果如之。
现代文：追问起来，果然如此。
English: On further investigation, this is indeed the case.

