古文：李德裕齐州僧抱玉师束草师惠宽素和尚怀信佛陀萨兴元上座赵蕾
现代文：李德裕齐州僧抱玉师束草师惠宽素和尚怀信佛陀萨兴元上座赵蕾
English: Li Deyu, a monk from Qizhou, holding a jade, Shuang Cao, Hui Kuang Su, a monk from Huizhou, and Zhao Lei, a monk from Qizhou, sitting in the front row

古文：怀浚智者禅师法本
现代文：怀浚智者禅师法本
English: Huajun the Wise Zen Master's Dharma Text

古文：李德裕
现代文：李德裕
English: Li Deyu

古文：唐相国李德裕为太子少保分司东都，尝召一僧，问己之休咎。
现代文：唐朝宰相李德裕在任太子少保分管东都洛阳时。曾经召见一位僧人，让他占卜自身吉凶。
English: When Li Deyu, the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty, was in charge of the Eastern Capital Luoyang, he once summoned a monk and asked him to tell his fortune.

古文：僧曰： 非立可知。
现代文：僧人说： 这不是马上就能知道的。
English: The monk said, "It's not something you can know right away.

古文：愿结坛设佛像。 
现代文：我要设立祭坛和佛像，才能观察出来。 
English: I have to set up an altar and a Buddha statue to be able to observe it.

古文：僧居其中，凡三日。谓公曰： 公灾戾未已，当万里南去耳。 
现代文：祭坛设好后，僧人居于其中，一共过了三天，他对李公说： 你的灾难还没有结束，你要到万里之遥的南方去。 
English: After the altar was set up, the monk lived in it. After a total of three days, he said to Li Gong: Your disaster is not over, you have to go thousands of miles away to the south.

古文：公大怒，叱之。
现代文：李公大怒，大声地呵叱了他一顿。
English: Li Gong was furious and scolded him loudly.

古文：明日，又召其僧问焉，虑所见未仔细，请更观之。
现代文：第二天，他又召见这位僧人问卜，对他说： 我担心你昨天看得不仔细，今天请你重新观察一下。 
English: The next day, he summoned the monk again for divination and said to him, "I'm worried that you didn't look carefully yesterday. I'd like you to look again today."

古文：即又结坛三日，告公曰： 南行之期，不旬月矣。
现代文：于是又设祭坛观察了三天，僧人告诉李公道： 你离南行的日期，不足一个月了。
English: So they set up an altar and observed for three days. The monk told Li Gongdao: "The date you left for the south is less than a month away.

古文：不可逃。 
现代文：这是逃脱不了的。 
English: There's no getting away from it.

古文：公益不乐，且曰： 然则吾师何以明其不妄耶？ 
现代文：李公更为不高兴，并且质问道： 然而，师父怎么能够证明你说的话不是随便胡说的呢？ 
English: Li Gong was even more displeased and asked: However, how can Master prove that what you said is not random nonsense?

古文：僧曰： 愿陈目前事为验，庶表某之不诬也。 公曰： 果有说也。 
现代文：僧人说： 我可以说件眼前的事作为验证，略微表示一下我的话绝非欺人之谈。 李公说： 你果然有说词呀！ 
English: The monk said, "I can say something about the matter at hand as a verification, to show that my words are not deceitful." Li Gong said, "You really have something to say!"

古文：即指其地曰： 此下有石函，请发之。 
现代文：僧人当即指着一个地方说： 这下面有只石盒子，请你挖开看看。 
English: The monk immediately pointed to a place and said, "There is a stone box under here. Please dig it out and take a look."

古文：即命穷其下数尺，果得石函，启之亦无睹焉。
现代文：李公立即命人往下挖了几尺深，果然挖出一只石盒子，打开盒子什么也没看见。
English: Li Gong immediately ordered the man to dig down a few feet, and he dug out a stone box. When he opened the box, he saw nothing.

古文：公异而稍信之，因问： 南去诚不免矣？然乃遂不还乎？ 僧曰： 当还耳。 
现代文：李公有些惊异，对他的话有点相信了，于是便问道： 到南方去看来确定是免不了的事了，然而去了之后就回不来吗？ 僧人说： 能回来的。 
English: Li Gong was a bit surprised and believed his words a little, so he asked: Going to the south seems to be inevitable, but can't you come back after you go? The monk said: I can come back.

古文：公讯其事，对曰： 相国平生当食万羊，今食九千五百矣。
现代文：李公询问他这是怎么回事，僧人对他说： 相国平生应当吃一万只羊，现在吃了九千五百只了。
English: Li Gong asked him what was going on, and the monk said to him: "He should have eaten ten thousand sheep in his lifetime, but now he has eaten nine thousand five hundred.

古文：所以当还者，未尽五百羊耳。 
现代文：说你能够回来的理由，就是因为还差五百只羊而已。 
English: He said the only reason you can come back is because you're five hundred sheep short.

古文：公惨然而叹曰： 吾师果至人。
现代文：相国伤心地叹道： 师父果然是个了不起的人呀！
English: The partner country sadly sighed: Master is indeed a great man!

古文：且我元和十三年，为丞相张公从事于北都，尝梦行于晋山，见山上尽目皆羊，有牧者十数，迎拜我。我因问牧者，牧者曰： 此侍御平生所食羊。 吾尝记此梦，不泄于人。
现代文：我在元和十三年，在北都为张丞相从事时，曾梦到正在晋山走路，看见山上满眼都是羊，有十几个牧羊人迎着我施礼，我就询问他们，牧羊人说： 我们在这里放牧的，就是您平生所吃的羊 我过去一直记着这个梦，没有向别人透露过。
English: In the 13th year of the Yuan and 13th years, when I was working for Minister Zhang in Beijing, I had a dream that I was walking in the Jinshan Mountains. I saw that the mountains were full of sheep, and more than a dozen shepherds greeted me with a bow. I asked them, and the shepherds said, "The sheep we graze here are the sheep you have eaten all your life. I have always remembered this dream in the past and have never revealed it to others.

古文：今者果如师之说耶，乃知阴骘固不诬也。 
现代文：今天果然像师父说的一样呀。由此便知阴德之事确实不是骗人的。 
English: Today, I did exactly as Master said. From this, I know that the matter of yin and yang is indeed not deceptive.

古文：后旬日，振武节度使米暨遣使致书于公，且馈五百羊。
现代文：过了十天，振武节度使米暨派人给相国送书信，并且赠给他五百只羊。
English: Ten days later, Zhenwu gave him rice and sent someone to deliver a letter to the other country, and gave him five hundred sheep.

古文：公大惊，即召告其事。
现代文：李相国大为吃惊，立即召见僧人告诉了他这件事。
English: Li Xianguo was very surprised and immediately summoned a monk to tell him about it.

古文：僧叹曰： 万羊将满，公其不还乎！ 
现代文：僧人叹道： 一万只羊要够数了，相国公南行可要回不来了！ 
English: The monk sighed and said, "Ten thousand sheep should be enough, but I can't go back to my fatherland!"

古文：公曰： 吾不食之，亦可免耶。 
现代文：李相国说： 我不食这些羊，也是可以避免的嘛。 
English: Li Xianguo said, "If I don't eat these sheep, it can be avoided."

古文：曰： 羊至此，已为相国所有。 
现代文：僧人说： 羊即到这里，就已为相国所有。 
English: The monk said, "Once the sheep arrive here, they are already the property of the other country.

古文：公戚然。
现代文：李相国非常愁闷。
English: Li Sanguo was very depressed.

古文：旬日，贬潮州司马，连贬涯州司户。
现代文：第十天，李相国被贬为潮州司马。接着又贬为崖州司户。
English: On the tenth day, Li Xianguo was demoted to Chaozhou Sima, and then to Yanshou Sido.

古文：竟没于荒裔也。
现代文：最终死在荒凉的边远地区。
English: He eventually died in a desolate, remote area.

古文：齐州僧
现代文：齐州僧
English: Monks of Qizhou

古文：史论在齐州时，出猎至一县界。
现代文：史论在齐州的时候，出外打猎走到一个县的边界。
English: On the subject of history, when I was in Qizhou, I went hunting and came to the border of a county.

古文：憩兰若中，觉桃香异常，访其僧。
现代文：他在一座寺庙里歇息，闻到一股非常香的桃子味，便问这里的僧人。
English: He was resting in a temple and smelled a very fragrant peach, so he asked the monks there.

古文：僧不及隐。
现代文：僧人来不及隐瞒。
English: The monk had no time to hide.

古文：言近有一人，施二桃，因从经案下取出，献论。
现代文：就说附近有个人施舍给他两枚桃子，于是便从经案下面拿出来献给了史论。
English: He said that a person nearby gave him two peaches, so he took them out from under the sutra and dedicated them to history.

古文：大如饭碗。
现代文：桃子大如饭碗。
English: A peach as big as a rice bowl.

古文：论时饥，尽食之。
现代文：史论当时饿了，把桃子全吃了。
English: Shi Rong was hungry at the time and ate all the peaches.

古文：核大如鸡卵。
现代文：桃核像鸡蛋那样大。
English: The peach pit is as big as an egg.

古文：论因诘其所自，僧笑曰： 向实谬言之。
现代文：吃完之后，史论详细盘问桃子的来历，僧人笑着说： 刚才我说的，其实是假话。
English: After eating, the historian questioned the peach's origin in detail. The monk smiled and said, "What I just said is actually a lie.

古文：此桃去此十余里，道路危险。
现代文：这桃子离此地十多里远，道路又很危险。
English: This peach is more than ten miles away from here, and the road is very dangerous.

古文：贫道偶行脚见之，觉异，因掇数枚。 
现代文：贫道偶然间走到那里看见了，觉得奇异，于是摘了几个。 
English: The beggar happened to go there, saw them, thought they were strange, and picked a few.

古文：论曰： 愿去骑从，与和尚偕往。 
现代文：史论说： 我愿扔下马与随从人员，跟和尚一起去。 
English: The historian said: I would like to throw down my horse and attendants and go with the monk.

古文：僧不得已，导论出荒榛中。
现代文：僧人不得已，只好带他去。
English: The monk had no choice but to take him with him.

古文：经五里许，抵一水。僧曰： 恐中丞不能渡此。 
现代文：他们穿过灌木丛，走了五里左右，到了一条河边，僧人说： 史中丞恐怕不能渡过这条河。 
English: They walked through the bushes for about five miles until they came to a river. The monk said, "I'm afraid Shizunojo can't cross this river."

古文：论志诀往，乃依僧解衣，载之而浮。
现代文：史论坚决要过，便依照僧人的样子脱掉衣服，用手举着衣服游了过去。
English: The historian was determined to pass, so he took off his clothes according to the monk's appearance and swam past with his hands holding up his clothes.

古文：登岸，又经西北，涉二水，上山越涧，数里至一处。奇泉怪石，非人境也。
现代文：上岸后，又经西北方向，涉过两条河，爬山越涧，走了好几里，来到一个地方，只见到处是奇泉怪石，与人间大不一样。
English: After going ashore, they traveled northwest, waded through two rivers, climbed mountains, walked for several miles, and came to a place where they only saw strange springs and rocks, which were very different from those on earth.

古文：有桃数百株，枝干扫地，高二三尺，其香破鼻。
现代文：这里有几百棵桃树，枝条垂到地上，树高只有二三尺，散发着冲鼻的香味。
English: There are hundreds of peach trees here. The branches hang down to the ground, the trees are only two or three feet high, and they emit a pungent scent.

古文：论与僧各食一串，腹饱矣。
现代文：史论与僧人各吃了一串，肚子便饱了。
English: Shi Rong and the monk each ate a bunch, and their stomachs were full.

古文：论解衣，将尽力包之。僧曰： 此域灵境，不可多取。
现代文：史论脱下衣服，想尽量多包几个，僧人说： 这个地方是仙境，不可多拿。
English: The historian took off his clothes and tried to pack as many as he could. The monk said, "This place is a wonderland. You can't take more than you need."

古文：贫道常听长老说： 昔有人亦尝至此，怀五六枚，迷不得出！ 
现代文：贫道常听方丈说，过去有人也曾到过这里，带了五六枚桃子，结果迷路出不去了。 
English: The poor often heard the abbot say that someone had been here in the past, bringing five or six peaches, and as a result they got lost and couldn't get out.

古文：论亦疑僧非常，取两颗而返。
现代文：史论也怀疑僧人不是寻常人，只拿了两颗就往回走。
English: Historians also suspect that the monk was not an ordinary person. He only took two stones and went back.

古文：僧切戒论不言。
现代文：僧人极力劝诫史论，回去之后不要跟任何人说起此事。
English: The monk strongly advised him not to talk about the incident with anyone after he returned.

古文：论至州，使召僧，僧已逝矣。
现代文：史论回到齐州后，派人去叫僧人来，僧人却已经消失了。
English: After Shi Rong returned to Qizhou, he sent someone to summon the monk, but the monk had already disappeared.

古文：抱玉师
现代文：抱玉师
English: The Ball-Bearer

古文：抱玉师以道行闻，居长安中，师而事者千数。
现代文：抱玉禅师以道行高深闻名于世，住在长安城内，拜他为师的门人弟子数以千计。
English: Huggyu Zen Master is world-renowned for the depth of his practice. He lives in the city of Chang'an and has thousands of disciples who worship him as their teacher.

古文：每夕独处一室，阖户撤烛。
现代文：每天夜晚他独处一室，关着门窗不点灯烛。
English: Every night he sits alone in his room, shuts the doors and windows and does not light a candle.

古文：尝有僧于门隙视之，见有庆云自口中出。
现代文：曾有个僧人从门缝里去看他，见有一片祥云从他的嘴里飘了出来。
English: A monk once looked at him through a crack in the door and saw a cloud of auspiciousness float out of his mouth.

古文：后年九十卒，时方大暑，而其尸无萎败。
现代文：抱玉师后来在九十岁时去世，当时正是盛夏酷暑，但他的尸体一点也不腐败。
English: He later died at the age of 90 in the sweltering heat of the summer, but his body did not decay at all.

古文：唐宰相第五琦与师善，及卒，来治丧。
现代文：唐朝宰相府中的第五琦与抱玉师关系密切，抱玉师去世时第五琦前来吊丧。
English: The fifth generation in the Tang Dynasty Prime Minister's Office had a close relationship with the Grandmaster, and when the Grandmaster passed away, the fifth generation came to pay their respects.

古文：将以香乳灌其口，已而有祥光自口出，晃然四照。
现代文：他用香奶汁往抱玉师的嘴里灌，灌完之后，见有祥光从嘴里射出来，明晃晃地照射着四面。
English: He poured the fragrant milk juice into the mouth of the cradling teacher, and after he had finished, he saw a ray of light shoot out of his mouth, shining brightly in all directions.

古文：公甚奇之。
现代文：第五琦非常惊奇。
English: The fifth son was very surprised.

古文：或曰。佛有庆祥光，今抱玉师有之，真佛矣。
现代文：有人说，佛的嘴里就有祥庆之光，如今抱玉师也有这种光，可见他是真佛。
English: Some people say that in the mouth of the Buddha there is the light of auspicious celebration, and now the person holding the jade also has this light, which shows that he is the true Buddha.

古文：束草师
现代文：束草师
English: The weaver

古文：长安平康坊菩提寺，先有僧，不言姓名，常负束藁，坐卧于于寺西廊下，不肯住院，经数年。
现代文：长安平康坊菩提寺里，原先有个僧人，自己从来不说姓名，常常背着一捆川芎，整天呆在寺庙西面的廊檐下，不愿住在寺院里，就这样一连过了好几年。
English: In the family temple of Chang'an Ping Kangfang, there was originally a monk who never said his name, often carrying a bundle of river reeds, staying all day under the gallery on the west side of the temple, unwilling to live in the temple, and it went on like this for several years.

古文：寺纲维或劝其住房。曰： 尔厌我耶？ 
现代文：寺院里有个管事的和尚劝他到僧房里去住，他却说： 你们这样厌恶我吗？ 
English: A monk in charge of the temple advised him to live in the monks' quarters, but he said: "Do you hate me so much?

古文：其夕，遂以束藁焚身。至明，唯灰烬耳，无血菺之臭。
现代文：那天夜晚，他便用那捆川芎把自己烧化了，到天亮时，只剩下一堆灰烬，没有半点血腥味。
English: That night, he burned himself with the bundle of river reeds, and by dawn, there was only a pile of ashes, without a hint of blood.

古文：众方知为异人，遂塑灰为僧于佛殿上。
现代文：众人这才知道他是个异人，便用他烧剩的灰塑了他的像，供在佛殿上。
English: Only then did the people realize that he was a stranger, and they used his ashes to make a statue of him, which they placed in the Buddhist temple.

古文：世号为束草师。
现代文：世人称他为束草师。
English: The world calls him a weaver.

古文：惠宽
现代文：惠宽
English: Hui Kuan

古文：绵州静慧寺僧惠宽，先时年六岁，随父设黄箓斋。
现代文：绵州静慧寺僧人惠宽，当年他仅六岁的时候，跟随父亲摆设道教的斋场。
English: When he was only six years old, Hui Guang, a monk at Jinghui Temple in Mianzhou, followed his father in setting up a Taoist prayer hall.

古文：众礼石天尊像。
现代文：人们信奉道教，都给天尊的石像施礼。
English: People believe in Taoism and pay homage to the stone statues of deities.

古文：惠宽时在，不肯礼，曰： 礼则石像遂倒，不胜致也。 
现代文：惠宽当时在场，却不肯施礼，他说： 我若施礼，石像就会倒了，弄得不可收拾。 
English: Hui Kuan was present at the time, but refused to bow. He said, "If I bow, the stone statue will topple over, making it impossible to clean up."

古文：既礼而天尊像果倒，腰已折矣。
现代文：他施礼之后，天尊的石像果然倒下，腰已经摔折了。
English: After he bowed, the stone statue of the deity fell down, and his waist was broken.

古文：后出家在寺。
现代文：惠宽后来出家住进了寺院。
English: Hui Guang later became a monk and lived in a temple.

古文：寺近池，人多扑鱼为业。
现代文：寺院附近有个池塘，许多人在池塘捕鱼为业。
English: There is a pond near the temple, and many people fish in the pond for a living.

古文：惠宽与受戒，且曰： 尔辈不当以此为给，吾能令汝所得，不失于旧。 
现代文：惠宽给他们讲解佛教戒规，让他们受戒，不要杀生，并且说： 你们不要以捕鱼的收入维持生活，我能让你们所得的收入不低于捕鱼。 
English: Hui Quan explained the Buddhist precepts to them and told them not to kill animals, and said, "Don't live off the income from fishing. I can make sure that your income is no less than that from fishing."

古文：因指其池畔，尽生菌蕈。
现代文：于是用手指了指池畔，池畔顿时生满了香菇。
English: So he pointed to the edge of the pond with his finger, and the edge of the pond was suddenly covered with mushrooms.

古文：鱼人采之，省力得利。后人呼为和尚蕈也。
现代文：渔民都去采磨菇，与捕鱼相比，即省力气又能多卖钱，后来，人们称这种蘑为和尚蘑。
English: Fishermen all went to collect mushrooms. Compared with fishing, it saves effort and can sell more money. Later, people called this mushroom "monk mushroom."

古文：素和尚
现代文：素和尚
English: Vegetarian Monk

古文：长安兴善寺素和尚院庭有青桐数株，皆素之手植。
现代文：长安兴善寺素和尚的庭院里有几棵青桐树，都是素和尚亲手栽植的。
English: In the courtyard of the lay monk of Chang'an Xingzen Temple, there are several trees of the Cypress tree, which were planted by the lay monk himself.

古文：唐元和中，卿相多游此院。
现代文：唐宪宗元和年间，朝廷的卿相们经常到这座院里游览。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zong Yuan of the Tang Dynasty, the court nobles often visited this courtyard.

古文：桐至夏有汗，污人衣如輠脂，不可浣。昭国郑相，尝与丞郎数人避暑，恶其汗，渭素曰： 弟子为和尚伐此桐，各植一松也。 
现代文：青桐树每到夏天就往外淌汗，沾到人的衣服上就像车上的润滑油一样，没法洗掉，昭国郑相曾与丞郎数人来这里避暑，因为厌恶青桐树上的汗，便对素和尚说： 弟子给和尚把这几棵青桐伐掉算了，伐一棵青桐就给你栽一棵松树。 
English: Every summer, the paulownia tree drips with sweat. The sweat that gets on people's clothes is like the lubricating oil on a car, and it can't be washed off. Zheng Xiang of the State Council once came here with several people to spend the summer. Because he disliked the sweat on the paulownia tree, he said to Su Monk: "Don't let your disciple cut down these several paulownia trees for the monk. If you cut down one paulownia tree, he will plant a pine tree for you."

古文：及暮，素戏祝树曰： 我种汝二十余年，汝以汗为人所恶，来岁若复有汗，我必薪之。 
现代文：到天黑时，素和尚开玩笑对青桐树说： 我种了你二十多年了，你因为流汗被别人所厌恶。明年如果再有汗，我一定把你当木柴烧。 
English: When it got dark, Su Monk jokingly said to Qing Tong Shu: "I have been raising you for more than twenty years, and you are disliked by others because you sweat. If you sweat again next year, I will definitely burn you as firewood."

古文：自是无汗矣。
现代文：从此之后，这几棵青桐树就不再淌汗了。
English: Since then, these trees no longer sweat.

古文：素公不出院，转法华经三万七千部。
现代文：素和尚从不出院门，整年坐在屋里抄经书，共抄写《法华经》三万七千部。
English: The lay monk never left the gate of the hospital, and sat in the house the whole year copying scriptures, altogether copying thirty-seven thousand copies of "The Lotus Sutra."

古文：夜常有狼子听经。
现代文：夜里经常有狼来听他读经。
English: Wolves often come to listen to him read at night.

古文：斋时，有乌鹊就案取食。
现代文：吃饭时常有乌鸦与喜鹊飞到桌子上啄取食物。
English: During meals, crows and magpies often fly onto the table to snatch food.

古文：长庆初，有僧玄幽题此院诗云： 三万华经三十春，半生不蹋院门尘。 
现代文：唐穆宗长庆初年，有位僧人玄幽给这个庭院题的诗道： 三万华经三十春，半生不踏院门尘。 
English: In the first year of the Tang Mu Zong's Long Qing, a monk named Xuanyu wrote a poem about the courtyard: "Thirty thousand years of Chinese classics, thirty years of spring, half a lifetime of not stepping on the door of the courtyard."

古文：当时以为佳句也。怀信
现代文：当时的人认为这两句诗是佳句。怀信
English: At that time, people thought that these two poems were good poems.

古文：扬州西灵塔，中国之尤峻峙者。
现代文：扬州的西灵塔是中国最高的佛塔。
English: The Xiling Pagoda in Yangzhou is the tallest pagoda in China.

古文：唐武宗末，拆寺之前一年，有淮南词客刘隐之薄游明州。梦中如泛海，见塔东渡海。
现代文：唐武宗末年，在拆毁寺庙的头一年，淮南有个词客刘隐之，到明州去旅游，梦到自己好像在漂洋过海，看见西灵塔正在泛海东渡。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, in the first year of the demolition of the temple, Liu Yingzhi, a poet from Huainan, went to travel to Mingzhou. He dreamed that he was crossing the ocean and saw the Xiling Pagoda crossing the sea.

古文：时见门僧怀信居塔三层，凭栏与隐之言曰： 暂送塔过东海，旬日而还。 
现代文：同时看到守护寺塔大门的僧人怀信正在第三层塔上，靠着塔上的栏杆与刘隐之说道： 我现在暂时护送寺塔渡过东海，十天后再返回来。 
English: At the same time, the monk Huai Xin, who saw the gate of the guardian temple tower, was on the third floor of the tower, leaning against the railing on the tower and Liu Yingzhi said: I am temporarily escorting the temple tower across the East China Sea, and will return ten days later.

古文：数日，隐之归扬州，即访怀信。
现代文：过了几天，刘隐之从明州回到扬州，立即去访问怀信。
English: A few days later, Liu Yingzhi returned to Yangzhou from Mingzhou and immediately went to visit Huaxin.

古文：信曰： 记海上相见时否？ 
现代文：怀信说： 你还记得在海上与你相见时的情况不？ 
English: Huaxin said, "Do you still remember what happened when I met you at sea?

古文：隐之了然省记。
现代文：刘隐之豁然想了起来。
English: Liu Yingzhi suddenly came to mind.

古文：数夕后，天火焚塔俱尽，白雨如泻，旁有草堂，一无所损。
现代文：几天之后，突然起火把塔烧光了，塔上的白灰以及瓦砾像大雨一样落下来，塔旁的草房却一点也没有损坏。
English: A few days later, a sudden fire burned the tower to the ground, and the white ash and rubble on the tower fell down like heavy rain, but the grass house next to the tower was not damaged at all.

古文：佛陀萨
现代文：佛陀萨
English: Buddhasa

古文：有佛陀萨者，其籍编于岐阳法门寺。
现代文：有个叫佛陀萨的僧人，他的名籍编在岐阳法门寺。
English: There was a monk named Buddhasa, whose name was recorded in the records of Famen Temple in Qiyang.

古文：自言姓佛氏，陀萨其名也。
现代文：他自己说是姓佛，陀萨是他的名字。
English: He himself said that his surname was Buddha and that Tosa was his first name.

古文：常独行岐陇间，衣黄持锡。
现代文：他常常一个人在岐阳的乡村行乞，穿的是道教徒常穿的黄衣服，手里拿着佛僧离不了的锡杖。
English: He often goes begging alone in the countryside of Qiyang, wearing the yellow robe often worn by Taoists, and holding a pewter cane that Buddhist monks can't do without.

古文：年虽老，然其貌类童騃。
现代文：年纪虽然老了，然而相貌就像不懂事的孩子一样。
English: Although he is old, his appearance is like that of a naughty child.

古文：好扬言于衢中，或诟辱群僧。
现代文：他喜欢在大庭广众之中大声说话，或者辱骂其他僧人。
English: He likes to speak loudly in public or abuse other monks.

古文：僧皆怒焉。
现代文：僧人对他又气又恨。
English: The monks were angry and hated him.

古文：其资膳裘紵，俱乞于里人。
现代文：他的吃喝穿戴都是跟乡里人乞讨来的。
English: He begged for food and clothing from the villagers.

古文：里人怜其愚，厚与衣食，以故资用独饶于群僧。
现代文：乡里人可怜他愚呆，格外多给他衣食，所以他的费用比其他僧人都富裕。
English: The villagers felt sorry for his stupidity and gave him extra food and clothing, so his expenses were better than those of other monks.

古文：陀萨亦转均于里中穷饿者焉，里人益怜其心。
现代文：佛陀萨也把自己宽裕的东西匀给乡里的穷苦人，乡里人于是更喜爱他的善良心肠。
English: Buddhasa also gave away his ample wealth to the poor in the village, and the villagers loved his kind heart even more.

古文：开成五年夏六月，陀萨召里中民告曰： 我今夕死矣，汝为吾塔瘗其尸。 
现代文：开成五年夏季六月，陀萨召集起乡里人，告诉他们说： 我今晚上就要死了，你们要为我建一座塔，把我的尸体葬在里面。 
English: In the summer of the fifth year, in the month of June, Tosa called the villagers together and said to them, "I am going to die tonight, build a tower for me and bury my body in it."

古文：果端坐而卒。
现代文：到了晚上，他果然端坐着死去了。
English: In the evening, he did indeed die sitting up.

古文：于是里中之人，建塔于岐阳之西冈上，漆其尸而瘗焉。后月余，或视其首，发仅寸余，弟子即剃去。
现代文：乡里人于是在岐阳的西山岗建起佛塔，把他的遗体安葬在里面。一个多月之后，有人看到他的头发长出一寸多长，弟子们便去剃掉了。
English: The villagers then built a pagoda at Xishan Ganglu in Qiyang and buried his remains inside. More than a month later, someone saw his hair grow more than an inch long, and his disciples shaved it off.

古文：已而又生，里人大异，遂扃其户，竟不开焉。
现代文：剃完之后又长了出来，乡里人大为惊异，便把塔门锁住了，再也打不开。
English: After it was shaved off, it grew back. The villagers were so surprised that they locked the gate and could not open it again.

古文：兴元上座
现代文：兴元上座
English: Xingyuan Zhou

古文：兴元县西墅有兰若，上座僧常饮酒食肉，群辈皆效焉。
现代文：兴元县西郊有座寺庙，上座僧人常常喝酒吃肉，下面的许多僧人都跟着效仿。
English: There is a temple in the western suburb of Xingyuan County. The monks in the upper seat often drink alcohol and eat meat, and many of the monks below follow suit.

古文：一旦多作大饼，招群徒众，入尸陁林。
现代文：有一天早上寺庙里做了许多大饼，上座僧人招呼着一群门徒，走进了专门停放尸体的山林。
English: One morning, when many large cakes had been made in the temple, the head monk called out to a group of disciples and went into the mountain forest, where corpses were kept.

古文：以饼裹腐尸肉而食，数啖不已。
现代文：他用大饼包着腐尸的肉吃，一块一块地吃起来没完。
English: He ate the rotting flesh, wrapped in a large cake, piece by piece, without stopping.

古文：众僧掩鼻而走。
现代文：僧人们一个个捂起鼻子就跑。
English: One by one, the monks hold their noses and run.

古文：上座曰： 汝等能食此肉，方可食诸肉。 
现代文：上座僧却说： 你们只有能吃此肉，才能吃其他的肉。 
English: But the head monk said, "You can only eat other meat if you can eat this meat."

古文：自此缁徒因成精进也。
现代文：从此以后，佛教徒因为能吃此物更修行精深了。
English: Since then, Buddhists have become more diligent in their practice because they can eat it.

古文：赵蕃
现代文：赵蕃
English: Zhao Wei

古文：唐国子祭酒赵蕃，大和七年为南宫郎。
现代文：唐朝国子祭酒赵蕃，文宗大和七年时任南宫郎。
English: In the Tang Dynasty's National Children's Festival, Zhao Zhen, Wenzong Daiwa, and Nan Gong Rong, who served for seven years.

古文：忽一日，有僧乞食于门且谓，其家僮曰： 吾愿见赵公。可乎？ 
现代文：一天，忽然有个僧人到他门前讨饭，并且对僮仆说： 我要见见你家赵公。可以吗？ 
English: One day, a monk suddenly came to his door begging for food, and said to his servant: I want to see your family, Zhao Gong. Is that okay?

古文：家僮告蕃，蕃即命延入与坐。
现代文：僮仆报告了赵蕃，赵蕃就让把僧人领进屋，又让他坐下。
English: Zhao Yao was informed by his manservant. Zhao Yao let the monk into the house and sat him down.

古文：僧乃曰： 君将有忧，然亦可禳去。 
现代文：僧人说： 你要面临忧患，但这忧患也是可以消除的。 
English: The monk said, "You will face sorrow, but this sorrow can also be eliminated.

古文：蕃即拜而祈之。僧曰： 遗我裁刀一千五百、庶可脱君之祸。
现代文：赵蕃急忙施礼祈求消除之法，僧人说： 送给我一千五百把剪刀，说不上就能解除你的祸患。
English: Zhao Yao hurriedly bowed and prayed for the method of elimination. The monk said, "Give me fifteen hundred pairs of scissors, and I will be able to eliminate your misfortune.

古文：不然，未旬日，当为东南一郡耳。 
现代文：不然，你要离开朝廷而去东南一个郡任职。 
English: Otherwise, you will have to leave the imperial court and take up a post in a county in the southeast.

古文：蕃许之，约来日就送焉，且访其名暨所居。僧曰： 吾居青龙寺，法安其名也。 
现代文：赵蕃答应了他，约定明天把剪刀送去，并且询问僧人的名字与住所，僧人说： 我住在青龙寺，法安是我的名字。 
English: Zhao Yao agreed and agreed to send the scissors to Rin tomorrow. He also asked the monk for his name and address. The monk said, "I live in the Qinglong Temple. Fa'an is my name."

古文：言已遂去。
现代文：说完他就走了。
English: After saying this, he left.

古文：明日，蕃即办送之。
现代文：第二天，赵蕃就备齐了剪刀派人给送去。
English: The next day, Zhao Wei prepared a set of scissors and sent someone to pick them up.

古文：使者至寺，以物色访群僧，僧皆不类。
现代文：使者到了青龙寺时，根据相貌在僧人群里查找法安，僧人们一个个都不像。
English: When the envoy arrived at Qinglong Temple, he searched for Fa'an in the crowd of monks based on their appearance. None of the monks resembled each other.

古文：且询法安师所止，周遍院宇，无影响踪迹。
现代文：他便询问法安师父在什么地方。全寺庙都找遍了，也没见到法安的音讯和踪迹。
English: He then inquired about the whereabouts of Master Faan. The entire temple was searched, but no news or trace of Faan was found.

古文：后数日，蕃出为袁州刺史。
现代文：过了几天，赵蕃离开京城出任袁州刺史。
English: A few days later, Zhao Wei left Beijing to become the governor of Yuanzhou.

古文：怀浚
现代文：怀浚
English: Haizhong

古文：秭归郡草圣僧怀浚者，不知何处人。
现代文：秭归郡草圣僧人怀浚，不知是什么地方人，唐昭宗乾宁初年到了秭归。
English: It is unknown what kind of local people, the Tang Zhaozong Qianning, came to Xingu in the first year.

古文：唐乾宁初到彼，知来藏往，皆有神验。
现代文：他能预测未来的事情，每次都像神灵一样准确。
English: He could predict future events, and every time he was as accurate as a god.

古文：爱草书，或经、或释、或老，至于歌诗鄙琐之言，靡不集其笔端。
现代文：爱好草书，对于儒教、佛教、道教等思想学说，乃至于诗歌、笔记、小说等文字，无不广泛涉猎，都能驾驭运用。
English: As a lover of cursive, he is able to master the use of Confucianism, Buddhism, Taoism and other ideologies and doctrines, as well as poems, notes, novels and other texts.

古文：与之语，即阿唯而已，里人以神圣待之。
现代文：别人跟他说话时，他只是哼哼哈哈而已。乡里人都把他当做神人圣人看待。
English: When people talk to him, he just hums and haws. The villagers regard him as a holy man.

古文：刺史于公以其惑众，系而诘之。乃以诗代通状曰： 家在闽川西复西，其中岁岁有莺啼。
现代文：秭归刺史于公以 惑众 之罪名把他绑了去审问，他用诗歌代替状子道： 家在闽川西复西，其中岁岁有莺啼。
English: He used poetry instead of prose: "My home is west of Fuxi, west of Xingchuan, and I've had bed sores for years."

古文：如今不在莺啼处，莺在旧时啼处啼。 
现代文：如今不在莺啼处，莺在旧时啼处啼。 
English: It's not the same now as it was in the old days.

古文：又诘之，复有诗曰： 家住闽川东复东，其中岁岁有花红。
现代文：又一次审问他，他又用诗回答道： 家住闽川东复东，其中岁岁有花红。
English: He interrogated him again, and he replied with a poem: I live in East Fudong, Beichuan, and every year I have red flowers.

古文：而今不在花红处，花在旧时红处红。 
现代文：而今不在红花处，花在旧时红处红。 
English: But now it is not at the safflower, the flower is red at the old time.

古文：郡牧异而释之。
现代文：郡守以为他是异人，就把他释放了。
English: The county governor thought he was a stranger and released him.

古文：详其诗意，似在海中，得非杯渡之流乎？
现代文：推究他的那两首诗的含义。似乎说的是在海中的事，怀浚莫非是杯渡之流吗？
English: Investigate the meaning of his two poems. They seem to be talking about being in the middle of the sea. Isn't dredging the sea the same as crossing a stream?

古文：行旅经过，必维舟而礼谒，告其吉凶，唯书三五行，终不明言，事往果验。
现代文：过路的行人在路过此地时，必定泊船停车前去访问他。他在告诉人家吉凶之事时，只写几句文字，一直不明说。事过之后，往往都能应验。
English: When passing by, pedestrians must stop their boats to visit him. When he tells people about auspicious or inauspicious events, he only writes a few words, which he never says. After the event, he is often able to fulfill them.

古文：荆南大校周崇宾谒之，书字遗之曰： 付皇都勘。 
现代文：荆南大校尉周崇宾访向他时，他写了几个字送给他，这几个字是： 付皇都勘 。
English: When Jingnan Senior Lieutenant Zhou Chongbin visited him, he wrote a few words to give to him, these words are: Pay attention to the imperial capital.

古文：尔后入贡，因王师南讨，遂絷于南府，竟就戮也。
现代文：尔后氏入朝进贡，因为朝廷军队南下讨伐，周崇宾被拘囚在南府，终于被杀死了。
English: Later, the clan paid tribute to the imperial court, because the imperial army went south to fight, Zhou Chongbin was detained in Nanfu, and was finally killed.

古文：押衙孙道能谒之，书字曰： 付竹林寺。 
现代文：押衙孙道能访向他时，他写的几个字是： 付竹林寺 。
English: When Abbot Sun Daoneng visited him, the few words he wrote were: "Build a bamboo forest temple."

古文：其年物故，营葬乃古竹林寺基也。
现代文：这年孙道能死了，安葬的地点就是过去一座竹林寺的旧址。
English: This year, Sun Dao Neng died, and the place of his burial was the former site of a bamboo forest temple.

古文：皇甫铉知州，乃画一人荷校，一女子在旁。
现代文：皇甫铉知州访问他时，他画了一个人带着枷，有一女子在旁边。
English: When he was visited by the crown prince of Chizhou, he drew a man with shackles and a woman next to him.

古文：后为娶民家女遭讼，锢身入府。
现代文：后来皇甫铉因为娶了民家女子一事吃了官司，被关押在官府里。
English: Later, Emperor Fuxi was sued for marrying a woman from a private family and was imprisoned in the government office.

古文：波斯穆昭嗣幼好药术，随其父谒之，乃画一道士乘云把胡卢，书云： 指挥使高牒衙推。 
现代文：波斯人穆昭嗣年幼时爱好制药的技术，跟着父亲去访问怀浚时，怀浚画了一个道士手把胡卢坐在云端，并在画上题字道： 指挥使高牒衙推。 
English: When the Persian Mu Zhaoxi was young, he was fond of pharmaceutical technology. When he followed his father to visit Huajun, Huajun drew a Taoist monk holding a hulu sitting on a cloud, and inscribed on the picture: "Commander, make Gao Zhaoxu push."

古文：穆生后以医药有效，南平王高从诲与巾裹，摄府衙推。
现代文：穆昭嗣后来因为药做得好，很有疗效，南平王高从海给一套官服，让他统摄府内衙推。
English: Later, because Mu Zhaozhi's medicine was well-made and very effective, Nanping Wanggao gave him a set of official uniforms from the sea, and let him take charge of shooting in the government.

古文：王师伐荆州，师寄南平王诗云： 马头渐入扬州路。亲眷应须洗眼看。 
现代文：南平王出师讨伐荆州时，怀浚师寄给南平王两句诗： 马头渐入扬州路，亲眷应须洗眼前。 
English: When Nanping Wang sent his army to fight against Jingzhou, Huai Junshi sent two poems to Nanping Wang: The horse's head is gradually entering Yangzhou Road, relatives should wash their eyes.

古文：是岁输诚淮海，获解重围。
现代文：这一年南平王输诚于淮海，才得以解脱了重围。
English: It was in this year that Nanping Wang sent Chengcheng to Huaihai, and only then was he able to free himself from the heavy siege.

古文：其他不可殚记。
现代文：类似的例子很多，其他的就不能一件件都写在这里了。
English: There are many similar examples, and it would be impossible to list them all here.

古文：或一日，题庭前芭蕉叶上云： 今日还债。
现代文：有一天，怀浚在院子内的芭蕉叶上题写道： 今日还债。 
English: One day, Huajun wrote on a plantain leaf in the courtyard: "Pay your debts today."

古文：幸州县无更勘穷。 
现代文：因为州县之中没有比他更贫穷的，所以当天并没人杀害他。
English: No one killed him that day, because there was no state or county poorer than his.

古文：来日为人所害，尸首宛然，刺史高公为之荼毗之。
现代文：后来有一天被人害死了，尸体就象活着时一样，表情很自然，刺史高公将他遗体火化了。
English: Then, one day, someone killed him, and the corpse looked as if it was still alive, with a very natural expression. Mr. Gao Zhishi cremated his remains.

古文：智者禅师
现代文：智者禅师
English: The Wise Zen Master

古文：唐越州山阴县有智禅师。
现代文：唐代，越州山阴县有个智禅师。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a wise Zen master in Shanying County, Yuezhou.

古文：院内有池，恒赎生以放之。
现代文：寺庙院里有个池塘，他经常赎回被人扑捞的生物放到池塘里。
English: There is a pond in the temple courtyard, and he often redeems the creatures that have been fished by people and puts them in the pond.

古文：有一鼍，长三尺，恒食其鱼。
现代文：池塘里有一只大鳄鱼，有三尺长，总吃池塘里的鱼。
English: In the pond there is a large crocodile, three feet long, which always eats the fish in the pond.

古文：禅师患之，取鼍送向禹王庙前池中。
现代文：禅师把它当作祸患，便把它送到禹王庙前面的池塘里去了。
English: The Zen master took it as a misfortune and sent it to the pond in front of Yu Wang Temple.

古文：至夜还来。
现代文：到了夜晚，这只大鳄鱼又自己回来了。
English: In the evening, the big crocodile came back on its own.

古文：禅师咒之曰： 汝勿食我鱼，即从汝在此。 
现代文：禅师对它诅咒道： 你不吃我的鱼，就随你呆在这里。 
English: The Zen master cursed him, "If you don't eat my fish, you can stay here as long as you like.

古文：鼍于是出外放粪，皆是青泥。
现代文：从此，鳄鱼到池塘外面排粪时，排出的全是黑泥。
English: From then on, when the crocodile defecates outside the pond, all that comes out is black mud.

古文：禅师每至池上，唤鼍即出，于师前伏地。
现代文：禅师到池边一召唤它就爬上来，趴在禅师面前。
English: As soon as the Zen master summons it to the edge of the pond, it climbs up and lies down in front of the Zen master.

古文：经数十年，渐长七八尺。
现代文：过了几十年，这只鳄鱼慢慢长到七八尺长。
English: Over the decades, the crocodile slowly grew to seven or eight feet long.

古文：禅师亡后，鼍亦不复见。
现代文：禅师去世后，鳄鱼也看不到了。
English: After the Zen master's death, the crocodile could no longer be seen.

古文：法本
现代文：法本
English: Legal text

古文：晋天福中，考功员外赵洙言：近日有僧自相州来。云： 贫道于襄州禅院内与一僧名法本同过夏，朝昏共处，心地相洽。
现代文：晋朝天福年间，考功员外赵洙说，近日有个僧人从相州来到京城，对他说： 贫道在襄州禅院里与一个叫法本的僧人一起避暑，朝夕共处，情投意合。
English: During the years of Tianfu in the Jin Dynasty, Zhao Yu, an examiner, said that recently a monk from Xiangzhou came to Beijing and said to him: Poor Tao is spending the summer with a monk called Fabon in the Xiangzhou Zen Temple. They spend the morning and evening together, and their feelings match.

古文：法本常言曰： 贫道于相州西山中住持竹林寺，寺前有石柱。
现代文：法本经常说： 贫道在相州西山中住持竹林寺，寺前有石柱。
English: The Dharma text often says: Poor Tao is the abbot of the Bamboo Forest Temple in the western mountains of Sangju. There is a stone pillar in front of the temple.

古文：他日有暇，请必相访。  
现代文：他日有闲暇时，请你一定去访向我。  
English: If you have any spare time, please be sure to visit me.

古文：其僧追念此言，因往彼寻访。
现代文：这位僧人一直惦记着法本的话，便去相州寻访法本。
English: The monk always remembered the words of the Dharma text and went to Sangju to look for the Dharma text.

古文：洎至山下村中，投一兰若寄宿。
现代文：他到了相州西山下的村庄，在一座寺庙里寄宿。
English: He went to a village at the foot of a mountain west of Sangju and stayed in a temple.

古文：问其村僧曰，此去竹林寺近远。
现代文：他问村里的僧人，去竹林寺还有多远。
English: He asked the monks in the village how far it was to the Bamboo Forest Temple.

古文：僧乃遥指孤峰之侧曰： 彼处是也。
现代文：村中僧人指着远处孤峰的侧面说： 那个地方就是竹林寺。
English: A monk in the village pointed to the side of a lonely peak in the distance and said: That place is the Bamboo Forest Temple.

古文：古老相传，昔圣贤所居之地。
现代文：自古以来代代相传，说那个地方是从前圣贤所居之地。
English: Since ancient times, it has been passed down from generation to generation, saying that the place was once the abode of sages.

古文：今则但有名存焉，故无院舍。 
现代文：但是现在只保留下竹林寺的名称，并没有寺院房舍。 
English: However, now only the name of the Lower Bamboo Forest Temple is preserved, and there is no temple building.

古文：僧疑之，诘朝而往。
现代文：这位僧人表示怀疑，第二天一早就朝那里走去。
English: The monk was suspicious and went there early the next morning.

古文：既至竹林丛中，果有石柱，罔然不知其涯涘。
现代文：走到竹林丛中，果然看到有石柱，但除了石柱之外，再也看不到可供找寻的标志。
English: When I walked into the bamboo thicket, I did indeed see a stone pillar, but apart from the stone pillar, I could no longer see any signs to look for.

古文：当法本临别云： 但扣其柱，即见其人。 其僧乃以小杖扣柱数声。
现代文：他想起法本临别时说过，只要敲上石柱就能见到他本人，于是就用手中的小锡杖敲了石柱几下。
English: He remembered that Faben had said at the time of his departure that he could see himself by tapping on a stone pillar, so he tapped the stone pillar a few times with the small tin cane in his hand.

古文：乃风雨四起，咫尺莫窥。
现代文：顿时风雨四起，眼前漆黑一团，咫尺之内都看不见东西。
English: All of a sudden, the wind and rain began to blow. It was pitch black, and I couldn't see anything within a few feet.

古文：俄然耳目豁开，楼台对峙，身在山门之下。
现代文：眨眼之间又豁然开朗，耳目为之一新，只见楼台双双耸立，自己就站在寺庙的山门跟前。
English: In the blink of an eye, I was suddenly cheerful again. My eyes and ears were new. I saw the two towers standing tall, and I stood in front of the temple's mountain gate.

古文：逡巡，法本自内而出，见之甚喜，问南中之旧事。乃引其僧，度重门，升秘殿，参其尊宿。
现代文：不大一会儿，法本从寺内走了出来，两人相见十分高兴，又问起当初在襄州相处时的往事，然后就领着这位僧人穿过重门，走上秘殿，参见法本的老前辈。
English: After a short while, Dharma Ben came out of the temple. The two were very happy to see each other, and asked about the past when they were together in Xiangzhou. Then he led the monk through the heavy gate and walked up to the secret hall to see Dharma Ben's predecessors.

古文：尊宿问其故，法本云： 早年相州同过夏，期此相访，故及山门也。 
现代文：老前辈询问法本为什么领进这位僧人来，法本说： 早年在相州一起避暑时，约他来此访问我，所以他才来到山门下的。 
English: The elder asked him why he had brought the monk. He said, "In the early years, when we spent the summer together in Sangju, I invited him to visit me here, so he came to the foot of the mountain gate.

古文：尊宿曰： 可饭后请出，在此无座位。 
现代文：老人家说： 请他吃过饭后就出去吧。在这里没有他的座位。 
English: The old man said, "Let him go out after dinner, there is no place for him here."

古文：食毕，法本送至山门相别。
现代文：吃完饭后，法本送他到山门。于是两人相别。
English: After the meal, Fabon took him to the mountain gate, and the two parted ways.

古文：既而天地昏暗，不知所进。
现代文：他与法本刚刚分手，就见眼前天昏地暗，不知该往哪里走。
English: He had just broken up with Farben when he saw the darkness before him and didn't know where to go.

古文：顷之，宛在竹丛中石柱之侧，余并莫睹。
现代文：转眼之间，他已站在竹林丛中石柱旁边，刚才看到的一切全不见了。
English: In the blink of an eye, he was standing next to a stone pillar in a bamboo grove, and everything he had just seen was gone.

古文：即知圣贤之在世，隐显难涯，岂金粟如来独能化见者乎。
现代文：由此可知，古代圣贤在世间是存在的，只不过他们的存在或隐或显很难辨清而已；岂止像金粟如来等能够化身而出现在世上呢！
English: From this, it can be seen that the ancient sages existed in the world, but their existence, whether hidden or apparent, is difficult to discern; it is more than just being able to incarnate and appear in the world like a golden poppy!

