古文：十有二年春，用田赋。
现代文：十二年春季，采用按田亩征税的制度。
English: In the spring of 2012, the system of taxing per mu of farmland was adopted.

古文：夏五月甲辰，孟子卒。
现代文：夏季五月甲辰日，鲁昭公夫人孟子去世。
English: On the first hour of May in summer, Lu Zhaogong's wife Meng Zi passed away.

古文：公会吴于橐皋。
现代文：哀公在橐皋与吴国会见。
English: Aigong met with Wu Congregation in Handan.

古文：秋，公会卫侯、宋皇瑗于郧。
现代文：秋季，哀公与会卫侯、宋国的皇瑗在郧地会见。
English: In autumn, Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：宋向巢帅师伐郑。
现代文：宋国的向巢率领军队攻打郑国。
English: Song's Xiangzhu led an army to attack Zheng.

古文：冬十有二月，螽。
现代文：冬季十二月，蝗虫成灾。
English: In winter, in December, the locusts became a plague.

古文：十二年春，王正月，用田赋。
现代文：十二年春季，周王朝历法的正月，采用按田亩征税的制度。
English: In the spring of the twelfth year, the first month of the Zhou Dynasty calendar, the system of taxing per mu of land was adopted.

古文：夏五月，昭夫人孟子卒。
现代文：夏季，五月，鲁昭公夫人孟子死了。
English: In the summer, in May, Lu Zhaogong's wife Meng Zi died.

古文：昭公娶于吴，故不书姓。
现代文：昭公在吴国娶妻，所以《春秋》不记载孟子的姓。
English: Zhaogong married his wife in the State of Wu, so "Spring and Autumn" does not record Mengzi's surname.

古文：死不赴，故不称夫人。
现代文：死了没有发讣告，所以不称夫人。
English: There was no obituary, so she wasn't referred to as Mrs.

古文：不反哭，故不言葬小君。
现代文：安葬以后没有回到祖庙号哭，所以不说葬小君。
English: After the funeral, he did not return to the ancestral temple to cry, so he did not say that he buried Xiaojun.

古文：孔子与吊，適季氏。
现代文：孔子参加吊唁，到了季氏那里。
English: Confucius took part in the condolences and went to Ji.

古文：季氏不，放绖而拜。
现代文：季氏不脱帽，孔子除掉丧服下拜。
English: Ji did not take off his hat, Confucius removed his mourning clothes and bowed down.

古文：公会吴于橐皋。吴子使大宰嚭请寻盟。
现代文：哀公在橐皋会见吴国人，吴王派太宰嚭请求重温过去的盟约。
English: Aigong met with the people of Wu in Shao, and the king of Wu sent Dazai to Shao to ask him to revisit the past covenant.

古文：公不欲，使子贡对曰： 盟所以周信也，故心以制之，玉帛以奉之，言以结之，明神以要之。
现代文：哀公不愿意，派子贡回答说： 盟誓，是用来巩固信用的，所以用诚心来约束它，用玉帛来奉献它，用言语来完成它，用神明来保证它。
English: "The oath is used to strengthen one's faith," Paizigong replied, "so use sincerity to bind it, use jade to dedicate it, use words to complete it, and use gods to guarantee it."

古文：寡君以为苟有盟焉，弗可改也已。
现代文：寡君认为如果有了盟约，就不能更改了。
English: The widower believes that if there is a covenant, it cannot be changed.

古文：若犹可改，日盟何益？
现代文：如果还是可以更改，每天盟誓又有什么好处？
English: What's the point of swearing every day if you can change it?

古文：今吾子曰，必寻盟。若可寻也，亦可寒也。 
现代文：现在您说 一定要重温过去的盟约 ，如果可以重温，它同样可以寒凉下去的。 
English: Now you say you must revisit the past covenant, if it can be revisited, it can also be cooled down.

古文：乃不寻盟。
现代文：于是就没有重温盟约。
English: So there was no revisiting of the covenant.

古文：吴征会于卫。
现代文：吴国召集卫国参加诸侯会见。
English: Wu summoned Wei to attend the princes' meeting.

古文：初，卫人杀吴行人且姚而惧，谋于行人子羽。
现代文：当初，卫国人杀了吴国的行人且姚因而害怕，就和行人子羽商量。
English: At first, the defenders of the country killed a pedestrian in the State of Wu, and Yao was afraid, so he discussed the matter with the pedestrian Zi Yu.

古文：子羽曰： 吴方无道，无乃辱吾君，不如止也。 
现代文：子羽说： 吴国正在无道的时候，恐怕会羞辱我们国君。不如不做。 
English: Zi Yu said, "When the state of Wu is in a desperate situation, I'm afraid it will humiliate our sovereign. It's better not to do it."

古文：子木曰： 吴方无道，国无道，必弃疾于人。
现代文：子木说： 吴国正在无道的时候，国家无道，必然加害于人。
English: Zigi said, "When the State of Wu is losing its way, the country is losing its way, and it will inevitably harm people.

古文：吴虽无道，犹足以患卫。
现代文：吴国即使无道，还足以祸害卫国。
English: Even if the State of Wu has no way, it is still enough to harm the defense of the country.

古文：往也！
现代文：去吧！
English: Let's go!

古文：长木之毙，无不摽也。国狗之瘈，无不噬也。而况大国乎？ 
现代文：高大的树倒下，遇到的东西没有不受打击的；最好的狗发疯，没有不咬人的，而何况是大国呢？ 
English: Tall trees fall, and nothing is unharmed; the best dogs go mad, and bite no one, and what of great nations?

古文：秋，卫侯会吴于郧。
现代文：秋季，卫出公在郧地会见吴人。
English: In autumn, Wei De Gong met with Wu people in Handan.

古文：公及卫侯、宋皇瑗盟，而卒辞吴盟。
现代文：哀公和卫出公、宋国皇瑷结盟，而终于辞谢了和吴国结盟。
English: Aigong allied with Weidegong and Empress Dowager of Song, and finally allied with the State of Wu.

古文：吴人藩卫侯之舍。
现代文：吴国人围住了卫出公的馆舍。
English: The people of Wu surrounded Wei Dejong's mansion.

古文：子服景伯谓子贡曰： 夫诸侯之会，事既毕矣，侯伯致礼，地主归饩，以相辞也。
现代文：子服景伯对子贡说： 诸侯的会见，事情完了，盟主礼宾，所在地的主人馈送食物，以此互相辞别。
English: Zifu Jingbo said to Zigong, "The meeting of the princes is over, the host and the guests have exchanged vows, and the host of the place has given food to the guests to say goodbye to each other.

古文：今吴不行礼于卫，而藩其君舍以难之，子盍见大宰？ 
现代文：现在吴国对卫国不执行礼节，反而围住他们国君的馆舍使他为难，您何不去见太宰？ 
English: Now that the State of Wu does not observe the etiquette of defending the country, but instead surrounds the residence of their sovereign, putting him in a difficult position, why don't you go and see the grand vizier?

古文：乃请束锦以行。
现代文：子贡请求给了他五匹锦，就去了。
English: Zigong asked for and was given five pieces of brocade, and he left.

古文：语及卫故，大宰嚭曰： 寡君愿事卫君，卫君之来也缓，寡君惧，故将止之。 
现代文：谈到卫国的事情，太宰嚭说： 寡君愿意事奉卫国国君，但是他来晚了，寡君害怕，所以要把他留下。 
English: Speaking of the matter of the defense of the country, Dazai Zang said: The prince was willing to serve the prince of the defense of the country, but he came late, and the prince was afraid, so he wanted to keep him.

古文：子贡曰： 卫君之来，必谋于其众。其众或欲或否，是以缓来。其欲来者，子之党也。
现代文：子贡说： 卫君前来，一定和他的臣下们商量，那些人有的同意他来，有的不同意他来，因此才来晚了。
English: Zigong said, "When Wei Jun came, he must have discussed with his vassals. Some of them agreed with him and some disagreed with him. That's why he came late."

古文：其不欲来者，子之仇也。
现代文：那些同意的人，是您的朋友。那些不同意的人，是您的仇人。
English: Those who agree with you are your friends; those who disagree with you are your enemies.

古文：若执卫君，是堕党而崇仇也。夫堕子者得其志矣！且合诸侯而执卫君，谁敢不惧？
现代文：如果拘禁了卫国国君，这是毁了朋友而抬高了仇人，那些想毁坏您的人就得意了，而且会合诸侯却拘留了卫国国君，谁敢不怕？
English: If you detain the Emperor of the Great Patriotic War, it means that you have destroyed your friends and exalted your enemies. Those who want to destroy you will be pleased. Moreover, the princes have detained the Emperor of the Great Patriotic War. Who would not be afraid?

古文：堕党崇仇，而惧诸侯，或者难以霸乎。 
现代文：毁坏了朋友，抬高了仇人，而又让诸侯害怕，也许难于称霸吧！ 
English: If you ruin your friends, exalt your enemies, and make the princes afraid, it may be difficult to rule.

古文：大宰嚭说，乃舍卫侯。
现代文：太宰嚭高兴了，就释放了卫出公。
English: Dazai Yan was pleased and released Wei Deguang.

古文：卫侯归，效夷言。子之尚幼，曰： 君必不免，其死于夷乎！
现代文：卫出公回国，学着说夷人的话，子之当时还年幼，说： 国君必定不能免于祸难，恐怕会死在夷人那里吧！
English: When Wei Deguang returned to China, he learned to speak the language of the barbarians. At that time, his son was still young, and he said, "The sovereign must not be immune from disaster. I'm afraid he will die among the barbarians!"

古文：执焉，而又说其言，从之固矣。 冬十二月，螽。
现代文：被他们拘禁还喜欢学他们的话，跟他们走是必然的了。 冬季，十二月，蝗虫成灾。
English: Imprisoned by them, they still like to learn their words, and it is inevitable to follow them. In winter, in December, the locusts are rampant.

古文：季孙问诸仲尼，仲尼曰： 丘闻之，火伏而后蛰者毕。
现代文：季孙向孔子询问这件事。孔子说： 丘听说，大火星下沉以后昆虫都蛰伏完毕。
English: Ji Sun asked Confucius about this, and Confucius said, "You have heard that after the great planet Mars sinks, all insects will be extinct.

古文：今火犹西流，司历过也。 
现代文：现在大火星还经过西方，这是司历官的过错。 
English: Now, the Great Mars is still westward at dusk, which is the fault of those who have mastered the calendar.

古文：宋郑之间有隙地焉，曰弥作、顷丘、玉畅、嵒、戈、钖。
现代文：宋国和郑国之间有些空地，名叫弥作、顷丘、玉畅、嵒、戈、钖。
English: Between Song and Zheng dynasties, there are some open spaces called Yizhuo, Haoqiu, Yuchang, Yao, Gao and Zhou.

古文：子产与宋人为成，曰： 勿有是。 
现代文：子产和宋国人讲和，说 不要这些地方了。 
English: Zibo made peace with the Song people and said, "Don't go to these places anymore."

古文：及宋平、元之族自萧奔郑，郑人为之城嵒、戈、钖。
现代文：等到宋国平公、元公的族人从萧地逃亡到郑国，郑国人为他们在嵒地、戈地、钖地筑了城。
English: When the Song Guo Ping Gong and the Yuan Guo Gong fled from Xiaodi to Zheng Guo, the Zheng Guo Gong built a city for them in Xuan Di, Goudi and Xuan Di.

古文：九月，宋向巢伐郑，取钖，杀元公之孙，遂围嵒。十二月，郑罕达救嵒，丙申，围宋师。
现代文：九月，宋国的向巢进攻郑国，占领了钖地，杀死了元公的孙子，并进而包围了嵒地十二月，郑国的罕达救援嵒地。二十八日，包围了宋军。
English: In September, the Song Dynasty attacked Zheng, occupied Fengtian, killed the grandson of Yuan Gong, and then encircled Fengtian. In December, the Zheng Dynasty's Handa rescued Fengtian. On the 28th, it encircled the Song Army.

