古文：王鉷，太原祁人也。
现代文：王鉷，太原祁人。
English: Wang Qian, Taiyuan Qianren.

古文：祖方翼，夏州都督，为时名将，生臣、瑨、珣。
现代文：祖父方翼，是夏州的都督，为当时的名将，生有王臣、王晋、王旬。
English: His grandfather, Fang Ying, was the governor of Xiazhou and a famous general at the time. He was the father of Wang Chen, Wang Jin, and Wang Shun.

古文：臣、瑨，开元初并历中书舍人。
现代文：王臣、王晋两人在开元初年担任中书舍人。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, Wang Zhen and Wang Jin both served as middle school teachers.

古文：珣，兵部侍郎、秘书监。
现代文：王旬，担任兵部侍郎、秘书监。
English: Wang Shun, served as the secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：鉷，即瑨之孽子。
现代文：鉷，即是王晋的儿子。
English: He was the son of Wang Jin.

古文：开元十年，为鄠县尉、京兆尹稻田判官。
现代文：开元十年，任雩卩县尉、京兆尹稻田判官。
English: In the 10th year of the year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, he was appointed as the county magistrate of Jixian County and the judge of Jingzha Yin Rice Field.

古文：二十四年，再迁监察御史。
现代文：二十四年，又升为监察御史。
English: Twenty-four years later, he was promoted to Inspector-General of History.

古文：二十九年，累除户部员外郎，常兼御史。
现代文：二十九年，多次担任户部员外郎，常常兼任侍御史。
English: In the 29th year, he served as a member of the Household Department for several times, and often also served as a Samurai Historian.

古文：天宝二年，充京和市和籴使，迁户部郎中。
现代文：天宝二年，充任京和市和使，升为户部郎中。
English: In the second year of the Tenpo era, he was appointed as the peace envoy of Kyoto and the city, and was promoted to the junior vassal of the household department.

古文：三载，长安令柳升以贿败。
现代文：第三年，长安令柳升由于贿赂罪被罢官。
English: In the third year, Chang'an leader Liu Sheng was removed from office for bribery.

古文：初，韩朝宗为京兆尹，引升为京令。
现代文：开始，韩朝宗任京兆尹的时候，推荐升为京令。
English: In the beginning, when Han Chaozong was appointed as the Beijing Zhaoyun, the recommendation was raised to the Beijing order.

古文：朝宗又于终南山下为苟家觜买山居，欲以避世乱。
现代文：朝宗又在终南山下为苟家觜买山居住，想逃避世乱。
English: Emperor Taozong also bought a mountain for the Gou family to live in at the foot of Mount Nan, hoping to escape the turmoil.

古文：玄宗怒，敕鉷推之，朝宗自高平太守贬为吴兴别驾。
现代文：玄宗生气，敕令鉷罢免他，朝宗从高平太守贬为吴兴别驾。
English: Xuanzong was angry, Zhaoling dismissed him, and Chaozong was demoted from Gaoping to Wu Xing.

古文：又加鉷长春宫使。
现代文：又加授鉷长春宫使。
English: He was also awarded the title of Changchun Palace Envoy.

古文：四载，加勾户口色役使，又迁御史中丞，兼充京畿采访使。
现代文：四年后，任户口色役使，又升为御史中丞，兼任京畿采访使。
English: Four years later, he was appointed to the post of Hukou Shoryu envoy, and was promoted to the post of Goshi Chujo, concurrently serving as Gyeonggi envoy.

古文：五载，又为京畿、关内道黜陟使，又兼充关内采访使。
现代文：五年后，又任京畿、关内道黜陟使，同时兼任关内采访使。
English: Five years later, he was also appointed as the Gyeonggi and Gwanai Provincial Commissioner, and concurrently served as the Gwanai Envoy.

古文：时右相李林甫怙权用事。志谋不利于东储，以除不附己者，而鉷有吏干，倚之转深，以为己用。
现代文：此时右相李林甫依仗权势行事，其志向谋略不利于东储，用以除去不利于自己的人，而鉷有吏官才能，依附他较深，因而将鉷为自己所用。
English: At this time, the right minister, Li Linfu, acted on the basis of power. His ambition and strategy were not conducive to the Eastern Reserve, and he used it to remove people who were not conducive to himself. However, he had the ability to be an official, and he was deeply attached to him, so he used it for himself.

古文：既为户口色役使，时有敕给百姓一年复。
现代文：鉷此时作为户口色役使，当时有免除百姓一年的赋税的敕令。
English: At that time, there was a royal decree exempting the common people from paying taxes for one year.

古文：鉷即奏征其脚钱，广张其数，又市轻货，乃甚于不放。
现代文：鉷于是上奏征收其脚钱，扩充其数量，又对于街市上买卖的货物，也不肯放过。
English: Therefore, the government began to collect its foot money, expanded its quantity, and refused to let go of the goods sold on the street market.

古文：输纳物者有浸渍，折估皆下本郡征纳。
现代文：缴纳的贡品有浸渍，便将其损失折算下达给本郡征纳。
English: If the paid tribute is impregnated, the loss will be converted and submitted to the county for collection.

古文：又敕本郡高户为租庸脚士，皆破其家产，弥年不了。
现代文：又敕令本郡高户为雇佣劳动力，都破其家产，使之一年没有收成。
English: In addition, the high-ranking households in the county were forced to hire labor, which broke their family income, resulting in no harvest in the first year.

古文：恣行割剥，以媚于时，人用嗟怨。
现代文：恣行盘剥，用以讨好，受到当时人们怨恨。
English: Arbitrary bargaining, used to curry favor, was resented by people at the time.

古文：古制，天子六宫，皆有品秩高下，其俸物因有等差。
现代文：古代的制度规定，天子的六宫，都有品位之别，因而其俸物也有差别。
English: According to the ancient system, the six palaces of the sons of heaven have different grades, so their salaries are also different.

古文：唐法沿于周、隋，妃嫔宫官，位有尊卑，亦随其品而给授，以供衣服铅粉之费，以奉于宸极。
现代文：唐代的法制是沿袭于周朝、隋朝而来，妃嫔宫官，地位有尊卑之分，俸物也随其品位的高低而分别授予，用以供给衣饰服装铅粉的费用，奉献于皇宫。
English: The legal system of the Tang Dynasty was inherited from the Zhou Dynasty and the Sui Dynasty. The status of concubines and palace officials was divided into superior and inferior, and the salaries were also awarded separately according to the level of their grade, to be used to supply the cost of lead powder for clothing and clothing, and dedicated to the imperial palace.

古文：玄宗在位多载，妃御承恩多赏赐，不欲频于左右藏取之。
现代文：玄宗在位多年，妃妾御吏承蒙恩宠，时常给予赏赐，皇上不想将赐物储藏在身边而多次去取出。
English: During Emperor Xuanzong's many years on the throne, empresses and concubines were favored and often given gifts. The emperor did not want to keep the gifts around, so he took them out several times.

古文：鉷探旨意，岁进钱宝百亿万，便贮于内库，以恣主恩锡赍。
现代文：鉷探得皇上旨意后，每年进献钱财宝物百亿万，将其储藏在内库，以任凭皇上用以赏赐。
English: After finding the emperor's will, every year he donated money, treasures and treasures worth hundreds of millions of yuan and stored them in the inner vault to be used by the emperor as a reward.

古文：鉷云： 此是常年额外物，非征税物。 
现代文：鉷说： 这是每年的额外物品，不是征税来的。 
English: Zou said: This is an annual extra item, not a tax.

古文：玄宗以为鉷有富国之术，利于王用，益厚待之。
现代文：玄宗认为鉷有聚财富国的能力，有利于自己，越来越对他予以厚待。
English: Xuanzong believed that Zou's ability to amass wealth was beneficial to him, and treated him more and more generously.

古文：丁嫡母忧，起复旧职，使如故。
现代文：适遇嫡母丧事，被免除官职服孝。不久，恢复旧职，使职仍如同以前。
English: Due to the death of his mother-in-law, he was exempted from official duties to show his filial piety. Soon, he resumed his old duties, and his duties remained the same as before.

古文：七载，又加检察内作事，迁户部侍郎，仍兼御史中丞，赐紫金鱼袋。
现代文：七年，又加授检察内作使，升为户部侍郎，仍然兼任御史中丞，赐予紫金鱼袋。
English: In the seventh year, he was additionally awarded the title of procurator, promoted to the position of household attendant, still concurrently held the position of goshi chujo, and was given a purple gold fish bag.

古文：八载，兼充闲厩使及苑内营田五坊宫苑等使、陇右群牧都支度营田使，馀并如故。
现代文：八年，兼任闲厩使及苑内营田五坊宫苑等使、陇右群牧都使支度营田使，其余官职一并如故。
English: Eight years later, he concurrently held the posts of Leisure Mews Envoy, Ying Tian in the Courtyard, Wobo Palace and Gardens Envoy, and Zou Youqun Pastoral Envoy to prepare the Ying Tian Envoy, and the rest of his official positions remained the same.

古文：太白山人李浑言于金星洞见老人，云有玉版石记符，圣上长生久视。
现代文：太白山人李浑说在金星洞看见一位老人，说在玉版石上记有符号，皇上长生不老久视人间。
English: Li Hun, a resident of Taibai Mountain, said that he saw an old man in the Venus Cave. He said that there was a symbol on the jade tablet, and that the emperor would live forever.

古文：玄宗令鉷入山洞求而得之。因上尊号，加鉷银青光禄大夫、都知总监及栽接等使。
现代文：玄宗令鉷进入洞内求取得到，由于皇上尊奉称号，加授鉷银青光禄大夫、都知总监及栽接等使职。
English: Emperor Xuanzong ordered him to go into the cave to retrieve it, and because the emperor honored him with the title, he was given additional duties such as the doctor of the Qingguanglu, the director of the Sichuan Province, and the secretary.

古文：九载五月，兼京兆尹，使并如故。
现代文：九年五月，兼任京兆尹，使职仍如同过去。
English: In May of the ninth year, he was concurrently appointed as Jing Zhaoyun, and his duties remained the same as before.

古文：鉷威权转盛，兼二十馀使，近宅为使院，文案堆积，胥吏求押一字，即累日不遂。
现代文：鉷权势越来越大，兼使职二十多年，近的住宅作为使院，文件堆积，小官吏请求签押一个字，也是多日不行。
English: The power of the shogun is growing. He has been holding the post for more than 20 years. His nearby residence is used as an embassy. Documents are piling up. It takes several days for minor officials to request the signing of a document.

古文：中使赐遗，不绝于门，虽晋公林甫亦畏避之。
现代文：中使受皇上委托赐予的东西络绎不绝，即使晋公林甫也因害怕回避他。
English: Even Shingong Linfu shunned him out of fear.

古文：林甫子岫为将作监，供奉禁中；鉷子准卫尉少卿，亦斗鸡供奉，每谑岫，岫常下之。
现代文：林甫的儿子岫为了想做监官，向皇上供奉；鉷的儿子准是卫尉少卿，也杀鸡供奉皇上，每次都戏谑岫，岫常常甘拜下风。
English: Lin Fu's son, Yao, wanted to be an inspector, so he offered his services to the emperor. Yao's son must have been an ensign, and he also killed chickens to offer to the emperor. They always joked about it, and Yao often bowed down to the emperor.

古文：万年尉韦黄裳、长安尉贾季邻常于事贮钱数百绳，名倡珍馔，常有备拟，以候准所适。
现代文：万年尉官韦黄裳、长安尉官贾季邻经常处理贮钱数以百绳，名娼、珍馔，往往有所准备，用以提供准所用。
English: Wannen lieutenant Wei Huangxiang and Chang'an lieutenant Jia Jizhong often handled hundreds of strings of stored money, famous prostitutes and rare egrets, and were often prepared to provide what they needed.

古文：又于宅侧自有追欢之所。
现代文：又在住宅旁边置设追欢的场所。
English: In addition, a place for revelry was set up next to the house.

古文：鉷与弟户部郎中銲，召术士任海川游其门，问其相命，言有王否。
现代文：鉷与其弟户部郎中钅旱，召见术士任海川游览其门第，同时让他看相，问能否当皇帝。
English: Yao and his younger brother, the head of the household, Zhaozhou, summoned the sorcerer Ren Haichuan to visit their family, and at the same time asked him if he could become emperor.

古文：海川震惧，潜匿不出。
现代文：海川非常震惊和恐惧，躲藏起来不露面。
English: Shocked and terrified, Kaikawa went into hiding.

古文：鉷惧泄其事，令逐之，至冯翊郡，得，诬以他事杖杀之。
现代文：鉷害怕海川会泄露此事，命令追捕他，在冯翊郡抓获，以其他事由诬陷他并将其杀死。
English: He was afraid that Haichuan would leak the matter, so he ordered to hunt him down, capture him in Fengye County, frame him for other reasons and kill him.

古文：定安公主男韦会任王府司马，闻之，话于私庭，乃被侍兒说于佣保者。
现代文：定安公主的儿子韦会任王府司马，听说这件事，在私人场所提起此事，于是被侍奉的小孩向受雇佣的人说了。
English: When Princess Ding'an's son Wei Hui, who served as the palace's steward, heard about the incident, he brought it up in a private place, and the child who was being served said it to the hired man.

古文：或有憾于会，告于鉷，鉷遣贾季邻收于长安狱，入夜缢之，明辰载尸还其家。
现代文：有的人对会不满，于是告诉了鉷，鉷派遣贾季邻将会打入长安监狱，夜晚将他吊死，第二天凌晨将其尸体载回他的家中。
English: Some people were dissatisfied with the meeting, so they told him that they would send Jia Ji's neighbor to Chang'an Prison, hang him at night, and take his body back to his home in the early morning of the next day.

古文：会皇堂外甥，同产兄王繇尚永穆公主，而惕息不敢言。
现代文：会是皇上的堂外甥，娶永穆公主为妻的同父兄王繇，屏息不敢言语。
English: It would be the emperor's cousin and nephew, the same father and brother Wang Yao, who married Princess Yongmu, holding his breath and not daring to speak.

古文：十载，封太原县公，又兼殿中监。
现代文：十年，封为太原县公，同时兼任殿中监。
English: Ten years later, he was given the title of Taiyuan County magistrate and concurrently served as the palace middle superintendent.

古文：十一载四月，銲与故鸿胪少卿邢璹子纟宰情密累年，縡潜构逆谋，引右龙武军万骑刻取十一月杀龙武将军，因烧诸城门及市，分数百人杀杨国忠及右相李林甫、左相陈希烈等。
现代文：十一年四月，钅旱与过去的鸿胪少卿邢王寿的儿子纟宰感情深厚多年，纟宰暗中密谋策反，召引龙武军万骑，并定于十一月杀死龙武将军，趁势烧毁各城门及市井，分兵数百人杀死杨国忠及右相李林甫、左相陈希烈等人。
English: In April of the eleventh year of the Heian period, Gan Gan and the son of the former Hongwu Shaoqing and Shao Wangshou had deep feelings for many years. Gan Gan secretly plotted a countermeasure, called the Longwu army to ride, and planned to kill the Longwu general in November, taking advantage of the situation to burn all the city gates and wells. Hundreds of soldiers killed Yang Guozhong and the right minister Li Linfu, the left minister Chen Xilei and others.

古文：先期二日事发，玄宗临朝，召鉷，上于玉案前过状与鉷。
现代文：此事在约定时间前二天泄露，玄宗上朝，召见鉷，皇上在玉案前责问鉷的过失。
English: The matter leaked out two days before the appointed time, and Emperor Xuanzong summoned Zou to see him. The emperor questioned Zou's fault before the Jade Case.

古文：鉷好弈棋，縡善棋，鉷因銲与之交故，至是意銲在縡处金城坊，密召之，日晏，始令捕贼官捕之。
现代文：鉷喜欢下棋，纟宰也擅长下棋，鉷由于钅旱与纟宰相好多年的缘故，让钅旱去纟宰住处金城坊，秘密召见他，晚上，开始命令捕贼官去捕捉纟宰。
English: He likes to play chess, and his steward is also good at playing chess. Due to the fact that he and his steward have been friends for many years, he asked his steward to go to his steward's residence, Jinchengfang, and secretly summoned him. In the evening, he began to order the thief-catcher to catch the steward.

古文：万年尉薛荣光、长安尉贾季邻等捕之，逢銲于化度寺门。
现代文：万年尉官薛荣先、长安尉官贾季邻等人去捕捉，在化度寺门前遇见钅旱。
English: Xue Rongxian, a ten-thousand-year-old lieutenant, Jia Jixiang, a Chang'an lieutenant, and others went to catch it, but encountered a drought in front of the gate of Kado-ji Temple.

古文：季邻为鉷所引用，为赤尉，銲谓之曰： 我与邢縡故旧，縡今反，恐事急妄相引，请足下勿受其言。 
现代文：季邻由鉷推荐担任赤尉，钅旱对季邻说： 我与邢纟宰是老朋友，纟宰今天谋反，担心因事态紧急胡乱牵引，请你不要相信他的话。 
English: Ji's neighbor was recommended by Zhai as a second lieutenant. Zhai said to Ji's neighbor: I am an old friend of Zhai's. Zhai is plotting a rebellion today, and I am worried that the situation is urgent and chaotic. Please don't believe his words.

古文：荣先等至縡门，縡等十馀人持弓刃突出，荣先等遂与格战。
现代文：荣先等人到达纟宰门前，纟宰等十多人手持弓箭刀刃冲出，荣先等人与他们格斗相战。
English: Rongxian and the others arrived in front of the gate of Baizai. More than ten people including Baizai rushed out with bows, arrows and blades. Rongxian and the others fought with them.

古文：季邻以銲语白鉷，鉷肐谓之曰： 我弟何得与之有谋乎！ 
现代文：季邻将钅旱的话告诉鉷，鉷对他说： 我弟弟怎么会与纟宰同谋！ 
English: Ji's neighbor told Yao about the drought, and Yao said to him, "How could my brother be a co-conspirator with Yao!

古文：鉷与国忠共讨逐縡，縡下人曰： 勿损太夫人。 
现代文：鉷与国忠共同讨伐纟宰，纟宰的部下人说： 不要伤害大夫手下的人。 
English: Gong and Guozhong jointly fought against Gongzai, and Gongzai's subordinates said: Don't hurt the doctor's men.

古文：国忠为剑南节度使，有随身官以白国忠曰： 贼有号，不可战。 
现代文：国忠任剑南节度使，他的随身官员将此话告诉国忠，说： 叛贼有命令，不可战。 
English: Guotong was appointed as the Jiannan Festival envoy, and his accompanying officials told this to Guotong, saying: The traitors have orders not to fight.

古文：须臾，骠骑大将军、内侍高力士领飞龙小兒甲骑四百人讨之，縡为乱兵所斩，擒其党善射人韦瑶等以献。
现代文：过一会，骠骑大将军、内侍高力士率领飞龙小儿甲骑四百人前来战斗，纟宰被乱兵所杀，抓获其同党擅长射箭的韦瑶等人。
English: After a while, the cavalry general Zhai and the chamberlain Gao Lixiong led four hundred cavalrymen to fight. Zhai Zhai was killed by the disorderly soldiers, and his fellow party members such as Wei Xuan, who was good at archery, were captured.

古文：国忠以白玄宗，玄宗以鉷委任深，必不与之知情，鉷与銲别生，嫉其富贵，故欲陷鉷耳，遂特原銲不问，然意欲鉷请罪之。
现代文：国忠将听到的话告诉玄宗，玄宗认为鉷身负重任，一定不会让他知道内情，鉷与钅旱不是亲生兄弟，钅旱嫉妒其富贵，因而想陷害鉷，于是特地敕免钅旱不问罪，其意图想让鉷为他请罪。
English: Guozhong told Xuan Zong what he heard. Xuan Zong thought that Xuan had a heavy responsibility and would not let him know the inside story. Xuan and Zhou were not brothers. Zhou was jealous of his wealth and wanted to frame Xuan. Therefore, he specifically pardoned Zhou without asking for punishment. His intention was to have Zhou plead guilty for him.

古文：上密令国忠讽之，国忠不敢泄上意，讽鉷曰： 且主上眷大夫深，今日大夫须割慈存门户，但抗疏请罪郎中。郎中亦未必至极刑，大夫必存，何如并命！ 
现代文：皇上密令国忠暗示规劝他，国忠不敢泄露皇上的旨意，对鉷规劝说： 皇上宠爱大夫深厚，现在大夫必须割舍门户的慈念，不过抗疏替郎中请罪，郎中也未必去死，大夫必须活下来，为何不同命！ 
English: The Emperor's secret order to Kunitada hinted and advised him, Kunitada did not dare to reveal the Emperor's will, and persuaded him: The Emperor is deeply fond of the doctor, now the doctor must give up the portal's mercy, but he pleaded guilty to resisting the substitute, and the son-in-law may not die, the doctor must survive, why not die!

古文：鉷俯首久曰： 小弟先人馀爱，平昔频有处分，义不欲舍之而谋存。 
现代文：鉷低头很久说： 小弟他蒙受前辈的余爱，过去多次遭责备，按仁义说不应舍去他而谋图自己生存。 
English: Yao bowed his head for a long time and said, "My younger brother, he has been loved by his predecessors, and has been reproached many times in the past. According to the principle of benevolence, you should not abandon him and try to survive on your own.

古文：乃进状。
现代文：于是递进状表。
English: Thus, the progressive form came into being.

古文：十二日，鉷入朝，左相陈希烈言语侵之，鉷恨之，愤诉言气颇高。鉷朝回，于中书侍郎修表，令人进状，门司已不纳矣。
现代文：十二日，鉷上朝，左相陈希烈用话欺辱他，鉷对他不满，诉说语气非常激愤，鉷上朝回来，在中书侍郎厅写状表，令人递进，门口司职官不接纳。
English: On the twelfth day, in the morning of the previous day, the left phase Chen Xilei bullied him with words. He was dissatisfied with him, and the tone of his speech was very angry. When he returned in the morning of the previous day, he wrote a letter table in the Chinese book waiter's hall, which was progressive, and the gate officer did not accept it.

古文：须臾，敕希烈推之。
现代文：过了一会，敕令希烈推辞。
English: After a while, she withdrew her resignation.

古文：鉷以表示宰相，林甫曰： 大夫后之矣。 
现代文：鉷将表送给宰相，林甫说： 大夫已经晚了。 
English: Zhai gave the watch to the prime minister, and Lin Fu said: The doctor is already late.

古文：遂不许。
现代文：于是不同意。
English: So they disagreed.

古文：俄銲至，国忠问： 大夫知否？ 
现代文：一会儿钅旱来了，国忠问： 大夫知道此事吗？ 
English: After a while, a drought came. Guotong asked: Did the doctor know about this?

古文：銲未及应。
现代文：钅旱没有应答。
English: Drought is not the answer.

古文：侍御史裴冕恐銲引之，冕叱詈之曰： 足下为臣不忠，为弟不义。
现代文：侍御史裴冕担心钅旱涉及他，冕大声责问： 你作为臣子不忠，作为弟不仁义。
English: The chamberlain, Shi Fei Guan, worried that the drought would affect him, Guan loudly reprimanded: You are disloyal as a vassal, and you are not benevolent as a brother.

古文：圣上以大夫之故，以足下为户部郎中，又加五品，恩亦厚矣。
现代文：圣上由于大夫的缘故，由于你为户部郎中，又加授五品官位，恩宠已经很深厚了。
English: His Holiness, because of the doctor, because you are a member of the household department, has also awarded you the rank of the fifth grade official, the grace is already very deep.

古文：大夫岂知縡事乎？ 
现代文：大夫难道不知道纟宰的事情？ 
English: Doesn't the doctor know anything about gonorrhea?

古文：国忠愕然，谓銲曰： 实知，即不可隐；不知，亦不可妄引。 
现代文：国忠很惊讶，对钅旱说： 如果真的知道，那不可隐瞒；如果不知道，也不可胡乱牵连。 
English: Guozhong was very surprised and said to Zhaozhou: "If you really know, you can't hide it; if you don't know, you can't falsely implicate."

古文：銲方曰： 七兄不知。 
现代文：钅旱这才说： 七兄不知道。 
English: That's when Zhaozhou said, "The seven brothers don't know anything."

古文：季邻证其罪。
现代文：季邻证明其罪。
English: It is up to the next-door neighbour to prove his guilt.

古文：及日暮，奏之。
现代文：到了晚上，向皇上进奏。
English: In the evening, they played for the emperor.

古文：銲决杖死于朝堂，赐鉷自尽于三卫厨。
现代文：钅旱在朝堂被乱杖打死，赐予鉷在三卫厨自尽。
English: Zhaozhou was beaten to death with a cane in the hall of the imperial court, and Zhao Yu committed suicide in the kitchen of the Sanwei Palace.

古文：明日，移于资圣寺廊下，裴冕言于国忠，令归宅权敛之，又请令妻、女送墓所，国忠义而许之，令鉷判官齐奇营护之。
现代文：第二天，又移到资圣寺廊下，裴冕告诉国忠，让鉷的尸体回到家宅装殓，又恳请让其妻、女送到墓地，国忠商议后同意了，令鉷的判官齐奇料理此事。
English: The next day, they moved to the corridor of the Zu Sheng Temple. Fei Guanyuan told Guozhong to let the dead body return to the house for decoration, and implored that his wife and daughter be sent to the cemetery. Guozhong agreed after discussion, and ordered the judge Qi Qi to handle the matter.

古文：男准除名，长流岭南承化郡，备长流珠崖郡，至故驿杀之；妻薛氏及在室女并流。
现代文：儿子准除名，长期流放到岭南承化郡，后又长期流放到珠崖郡，到达旧驿时被杀；妻薛氏及女儿一并流放。
English: His son was allowed to be expelled, and was exiled to Chenghua County in Lingnan Province for a long time, and then to Zhuya County for a long time, and was killed when he reached the old capital; his wife Xue and daughter were exiled together.

古文：初，鉷与御史中丞、户部侍郎杨慎矜亲，且情厚，颇为汲引，及贵盛争权，鉷附于李林甫，为所诱，陷慎矜家。
现代文：当初，鉷与御史中丞、户部侍郎杨慎矜亲善而且情谊深厚，两人相互非常友好，等到富贵时争夺权力，鉷依附于李林甫，为他所利诱，陷害慎矜家人。
English: At the beginning, Zhai was friendly and had a deep friendship with Yang Shanyu, the vice-president of the imperial history department and the steward of the household department. The two were very friendly with each other. When they became rich, they competed for power. Zhai clung to Li Linfu, lured him for his benefit, and framed Shanyu's family.

古文：经五年而鉷至赤族，岂天道欤！
现代文：五年后鉷也沦落家破人亡，这难道是天意吗？
English: Five years later, Zou was also left penniless. Was this God's will?

