古文：以一世之度制治天下，譬犹客之乘舟，中流遗其剑，速契其舟桅，暮薄而求之，其不知物类亦甚矣！
现代文：用某个朝代的制度来治理多变的社会，这就好像外乡人乘船，船至江中，这位外乡人的剑掉入水中，他就赶快在剑掉落下的船舷部位刻上记号，等傍晚船靠岸后他就在所刻的记号处下水去找剑，这实际上反映了此人不懂事物已变化很多了。
English: Using the system of a certain dynasty to govern a changeable society is like a foreigner taking a boat to the middle of the river. The foreigner's sword fell into the water, and he quickly carved a mark on the side of the boat where the sword fell. When the boat docked in the evening, he went into the water at the carved mark to find the sword. This actually reflects that this person does not understand that things have changed a lot.

古文：夫随一隅之迹，而不知因天地以游，惑莫大焉。虽时有所合，然而不足贵也。
现代文：只知道在掉剑的船舷旁打转，而不知道因顺自然遨游，没有比这更糊涂的了，虽然有时偶然间有所合，但这种 合 不值得珍贵。
English: There is no one more confused than he who only knows how to turn around the side of the ship where the sword has fallen, and does not know how to travel by natural means. Although there are occasional coincidences, these coincidences are not precious.

古文：譬若旱岁之土龙，疾疫之刍狗，是时为帝者也。
现代文：就好像大旱之年求雨用的土龙，求神保佑疾病痊愈用的刍狗，只是暂时地在祭祀中起主宰作用。
English: Just like the earth dragon used to pray for rain in the year of great drought, and the hyena used to pray for God to bless and heal the sick, they only temporarily play a dominant role in the sacrificial rites.

古文：曹氏之裂布，蛷者贵之，然非夏后氏之璜。
现代文：也就好像小孩用过的尿布，只有患蝫蛷疮的人视为宝贝，但是它终究不是夏后氏的玉璜。
English: It's also like a used diaper for a child, only people with acne see it as a treasure, but it's not Xiao's treasure after all.

古文：无古无今，无始无终，未有天地而生天地，至深微广大矣。
现代文：没有古今，也没有始终，天地未分时的混沌状态能够产生天地，这就是最深奥又微妙且广大的道。
English: There is no past, present, or future. The chaotic state when heaven and earth are undivided can produce heaven and earth. This is the most profound, subtle, and vast path.

古文：足以蹍者浅矣，然待所不蹍而后行；智所知者褊矣，然待所不知而后明。
现代文：人走路时跨出的每一步都是有限的，但就是不停地跨步踩踏未曾踩踏过的地方才能走向远方；同样，人的智慧每次能掌握的事理也是有限的，但就是不断地认识未曾认识过的事理才能越变越聪明。
English: Every step that a person takes when walking is limited, but it is only by constantly stepping on and stepping on places that have never been stepped on that one can go far away. Similarly, the things that human wisdom can grasp each time are also limited, but it is only by constantly recognizing the things that have never been recognized that one can become more and more intelligent.

古文：游者以足蹶，以手柿，不得其数，愈蹶愈败，及其能游者，非手足者矣。
现代文：初学游泳的人用脚乱扑腾、用手乱抓挖，没有掌握游泳的技艺，越扑腾、乱抓挖，越往下沉；而当人一旦掌握了游泳的技艺，就用不了手脚如此慌乱了。
English: Beginner swimmers flutter with their feet and dig with their hands, and without mastering the skill of swimming, the more they flutter and dig, the more they sink; and once they master the skill of swimming, they can't use their hands and feet so confused.

古文：鸟飞反乡，兔走归窟，狐死首丘，寒将翔水，各哀其所生。
现代文：鸟儿飞翔再远再高，也总得返回鸟巢；兔子跑得再快再远，也总得返回洞穴；狐狸死时，头总朝着巢穴；寒将水鸟总贴着水面飞翔，它们各自依恋着自己生存的环境。
English: Birds have to return to their nests no matter how high or far they fly; rabbits have to return to their burrows no matter how fast or far they run; when a fox dies, its head always turns towards its nest; cold-water shorebirds always fly close to the surface of the water, and they are all attached to the environment in which they live.

古文：毋贻盲者镜，毋予躄者履，毋赏越人章甫，非其用也。
现代文：不要给盲人送镜子，不要送鞋给跛子，不要送帽子给越国人，这是因为这些物件对他们来说是无用的。
English: Do not give mirrors to the blind, shoes to the lame, or hats to the Vietnamese, because these objects are useless to them.

古文：椎固有柄，不能自椓，目见百步之外，不能自见其眦。
现代文：木椎本来安着木柄，但它不能自我敲击；眼睛能看到百步开外，但看不到自己的眼眶。
English: The wooden spindle was originally attached to a wooden handle, but it could not strike itself; the eyes could see a hundred paces away, but could not see their own eyelids.

古文：狗彘不择甂瓯而食，偷肥其体而顾近其死；凤皇高翔千仞之上，故莫之能致。
现代文：猪狗不管这装食物的器具是什么，它们只顾进食，苟且贪生吃肥了自己，但这样反而是接近了死亡；凤凰高飞在千仞的高空，不随便栖息进食，所以也没什么人能诱它上钩自投罗网。
English: Pigs and dogs, no matter what the food container is, they only care about eating and greedily eat and fatten themselves, but in this way they are close to death; phoenixes fly high in the sky, do not casually perch and eat, so no one can lure it onto the hook to fall into the net.

古文：月照天下，蚀于詹诸；腾蛇游雾，而殆于蝍蛆。乌力胜日，而服于鵻礼；能有修短也。
现代文：月亮能够照亮天下，却被蟾蜍所侵蚀；腾蛇能够腾云驾雾，却被蝍蛆所制服；乌鸦经得起太阳的灼热，却对付不了?
English: The moon can illuminate the world, but is eroded by the dragonfly; the flying snake can soar through the clouds and drive the fog, but is subdued by the dragonfly; the crow can withstand the scorching heat of the sun, but can not cope?

古文：莫寿于殇子，而彭祖为夭矣。
现代文：礼鸟：这说明它们各自的能耐有长有短。
English: Reverend Bird: This shows that they each have their own strengths and weaknesses.

古文：短绠不可以汲深，器小不可以盛大，非其任也。
现代文：如果认为没有比夭折归天更长寿的了，那么彭祖活八百岁也算是短命的。短绳的汲水器不能汲取深井的水，容量小的器皿装不下大的东西，这是因为它们胜任不了。
English: If it is believed that there is no longevity greater than dying young and returning to heaven, then Peng Zu's 800-year-old life is also short-lived. Short-cable water drawers cannot draw water from deep wells, and small containers cannot hold large things, because they are not competent.

古文：怒出于不怒，为出于不为。
现代文：愤怒出自不怒之时，有为出于没有作为之前。
English: Anger comes from not being angry, from not having acted before.

古文：视于无形，则得其所见矣；听干无声，则得其所闻矣。
现代文：能看清无形，那么就能看清所有物体；能听见无声之声，那么天下就没有什么不能听到的了。
English: If you can see the invisible, you can see everything; if you can hear the inaudible, there is nothing you cannot hear.

古文：至味不慊，至言不文，至乐不笑，至音不叫，大匠不斵，大豆不具，大勇不斗，得道而德从之矣。譬若黄钟之比宫，太簇之比商，无更调焉。
现代文：最鲜美的味道尝着没有快感，最高深的语辞不讲究文饰，最大的快乐是无笑意，最高的声音不呼叫；最高明的工匠无须砍削，最高明的厨师无须陈列食具，最勇敢的人不以打斗取胜。这些均是掌握了 道 ， 德 也就随着而来了，就像黄钟配宫音、大蔟配商音，不可更改这声音的调配。
English: The most delicious taste tastes without pleasure, the most profound words do not pay attention to decoration, the greatest happiness is no smile, the highest voice does not call; the most brilliant craftsmen do not need to chop, the most brilliant chefs do not need to display utensils, and the bravest people do not win by fighting. These are all mastered Tao, and virtue comes along with it, just like the yellow bell with the palace tone, and the great cymbal with the merchant tone. It is impossible to change the arrangement of this sound.

古文：以瓦鉒者全，以金鉒者跋，以玉鉒者发，是故所重者在外，则内为之掘。
现代文：用瓦器作赌注的人心定不慌，以黄金作赌注的人则心神不安，将美玉作赌注的人就内心焦虑。
English: Those who bet with earthenware are not panicked, those who bet with gold are uneasy, and those who bet with precious stones are anxious.

古文：逐兽者目不见太山，嗜欲在外，则明所蔽矣。
现代文：这是因为过于看重这些黄金和美玉这样的外物，导致内心世界的心智变得笨拙起来。
English: This is because the mind of the inner world has become clumsy due to over-valuing these external things such as gold and gems.

古文：听有音之音者聋，听无音之音者聪；不聋不聪，与神明通。
现代文：这就好像追逐野兽猎物时，眼睛和心志一直盯着这猎物，导致连泰山都看不见了，眼睛被外物所蒙蔽了。听有声之声会耳聋，听无声之声会耳灵；而 道 要求是不聋不聪，这样才能和 神明 相通。
English: It is as if, when chasing a wild animal prey, one's eyes and mind keep staring at the prey, so that even Mount Tai cannot be seen, and one's eyes are blinded by external things. Hearing a sound will make one deaf, and hearing a soundless sound will make one deaf; but the Tao requires one not to be deaf or hard of hearing, so as to be able to communicate with the gods.

古文：卜者操龟，筮者端策，以问于数，安所问之哉！
现代文：占卜者拿着龟壳，占筮者拿着蓍草，而要询问占卜的方术，这哪里是他们该问的呢！
English: The diviner holds the tortoise shell, the soothsayer holds the thistle, but to ask about the divination, where is the right place to ask?

古文：舞者举节，坐者不期而皆如一，所极同也。
现代文：跳舞者合着节拍起舞，在座观赏的人不约而同地鼓起了掌，这是因为两者欣赏的观念相同、节拍一致的缘故。
English: The dancers danced to the same beat, and the audience applauded in unison. This was because they both appreciated the same concept and the same beat.

古文：日出旸谷，入于虞渊，莫知其动，须臾之间，俛人之颈。
现代文：太阳从旸谷升起，到虞渊落下，没人知道它是怎么运行的，片刻间就偏西了，人只须反转头颈就能看到。
English: The sun rises in Shibuya and sets in Yuyuan. No one knows how it works, but it moves westward in an instant. One only has to turn their head and neck to see it.

古文：人莫欲学御龙，而皆欲学御马，莫欲学治鬼，而皆欲学治人，急所用也。
现代文：人都不想学驾龙技术，而想学御马技术；都不想学习治理鬼的本领，而想学治理社会的本事，因为御马驾车、治人管理社会是急需的事。
English: People don't want to learn dragon-driving skills, but horse-riding skills; they don't want to learn the ability to control ghosts, but the ability to control society, because horse-driving and managing people to manage society are urgently needed.

古文：解门以为薪，塞井以为臼，人之从事，或时相似。
现代文：将门板卸下劈了当柴烧，将水井堵塞作碓臼，人们有时做的蠢事就像这样。
English: People sometimes do stupid things like this, such as removing and splitting a door panel to use as firewood, and blocking a well to use as a millstone.

古文：水火相憎，鏏在其间，五味以和。骨肉相爱，谗贼问之，而父子相危。
现代文：水火不相容，但是装有水和食物的小鼎锅放在火上却能煮成五味俱全的美食；骨肉亲情，但被谗贼小人从中挑拨，父子都有可能互相危害。
English: Water and fire are incompatible, but a small pan with water and food placed on the fire can be cooked into a full-flavored cuisine; flesh and blood, but provoked by a thief, father and son may harm each other.

古文：夫所以养而害所养，譬犹削足以适履，杀头而便冠。
现代文：为贪养生之物而伤害生命，这就好像削足适履，又好像削尖脑袋去带小帽子。
English: It is like whittling the feet to fit the shoes, or the head to fit the hat.

古文：昌羊去蚤虱而来岭穷，除小害而致大贼，欲小快而害大利。
现代文：菖蒲能除掉跳蚤和虱子，但却又招来蚰蜒害人，这真是除去小的害虫却招来大的害人虫，贪图小的快活而伤害大的利益。
English: The iris can get rid of fleas and lice, but it also attracts meandering pests, which is really the removal of small pests but attracts large pests, craving small pleasures and harming large interests.

古文：墙之坏也，不若无也，然逾屋之覆。
现代文：墙壁毁坏倒不如没有墙壁来得好，但总比房屋倒塌好得多。
English: The destruction of the walls is not as good as the absence of walls, but it is much better than the collapse of the house.

古文：壁瑗成器，礛诸之功；镆邪断割，砥砺之力。
现代文：璧瑗能成为玉器，是礛诸的功劳；莫邪宝剑削铁如泥，是砥砺的力量。
English: The ability of gems to become jade is the merit of the people; the ability of swords to cut iron like mud is the power of sharpening.

古文：狡兔得而猎犬烹，高鸟尽而强弩藏。
现代文：狡兔捕捉到手，猎犬就被烹煮；飞鸟射杀了，这强弓就被收藏起来了。
English: If a rabbit is caught by the hand, the hound is cooked; if a bird is shot, the mighty bow is collected.

古文：虻与骥，致千里而不飞，无糗粮之资而不饥。
现代文：虻蝇叮咬在马身上，随马奔驰而不用飞动，没有干粮供应也不挨饿。
English: The horse flies bite on the horse, and the horse gallops without flying, and does not starve without a supply of dry food.

古文：失火而遇雨，失火则不幸，遇雨则幸也，故祸中有福也。
现代文：失火正好碰上下雨，失火是件不幸的事，但遇上了下雨却又是件幸事，所以说祸中有福。
English: The fire accident happened to coincide with the rain. The fire accident is a misfortune, but the rain is a blessing, so it's a blessing in disguise.

古文：鬻棺者欲民之疾病也，畜粟者欲岁之荒饥也。
现代文：卖棺材的老板希望大家都得不治之症，囤积粮食的奸商希望闹饥荒。
English: The boss who sells coffins hopes that everyone will get an incurable disease, the profiteers who hoard grain hope for famine.

古文：水静则平，平则清，清则见物之形弗能匿也，故可以为正。
现代文：水静止就平正，平静就清澈，清澈就能映出物形，使它不能藏匿，所以静水可以作为镜子来帮助整饬衣冠。
English: When the water is still, it is flat, when it is calm, it is clear, and when it is clear, it can reflect the shape of the object, so it cannot be hidden. Therefore, the still water can be used as a mirror to help straighten the crown.

古文：川竭而谷虚，丘夷而渊塞，唇竭而齿寒。河水之深，其壤在山。
现代文：川涧枯竭则溪谷空虚无水，山丘夷平则深渊填塞，嘴唇翻裂则牙齿受寒；河床之所以深，是水冲刷山崖泥土形成的。
English: When the riverbeds are exhausted, the valleys are empty of water, when the hills are flattened, the abysses are filled, when the lips are cracked, the teeth are chilled; the riverbeds are deep because the water has washed away the mud of the cliffs.

古文：钩之缟也，一端以为冠，一端以为，冠则戴致之，纬则履之。
现代文：将一块白绢分成两半，一半做成帽子，一半缝成袜子，帽子戴在头上，袜子却被踩在脚下。
English: A piece of chalk is divided into two halves, one half is made into a hat, the other half is sewn into socks. The hat is worn on the head, while the socks are trodden underfoot.

古文：知己者不可诱以物，明于死生者不可却以危，故善游者不可惧以涉。
现代文：有自知之明的人是不能拿物质来诱惑他的，明白生死由命这个道理的人是不能用危难来胁迫他的，所以会游泳的人是不可以用涉水渡河来吓唬他的。
English: A self-aware person cannot be tempted by material things, a person who understands the principle of life and death cannot be coerced by danger, so a person who can swim cannot be frightened by wading across the river.

古文：亲莫亲于骨肉，节族之属连也，心失其制，乃反自害，况疏远乎！
现代文：亲密关系莫过于骨肉相连，全身的关节筋络将它们紧紧相连；但如果心脏失去对人体的控制，人体的各个器官就会互相残害，更何况关系本身就疏远的事物呢？
English: There is nothing more intimate than the flesh and bones that are joined together, and the sinews and sinews of the whole body that hold them tightly together; but if the heart loses control of the human body, the various organs of the human body will destroy each other, not to mention the things that are alienated by the relationship itself?

古文：圣人之于道，犹葵之与日也，虽不能与终始哉，其乡之诚也。
现代文：圣人对于 道 ，就好像葵花向太阳，虽然不能和太阳同始共终，但朝向仰慕太阳的心情是真诚的。
English: The sage is to the Tao as the sunflower is to the sun. Although he cannot be with the sun from beginning to end, he is sincere in his admiration for the sun.

古文：宫池涔则溢，旱则涸；江水之原，渊泉不能竭。
现代文：辟挖出来的水池，久雨积水就会漫溢，天旱就会干涸，而有源头的长江之水，却像深泉那样不会枯竭。
English: If you dig out a pool, the accumulated rainwater will overflow, the drought will dry up, but the water of the Yangtze River, which has a source, will not be depleted like a deep spring.

古文：盖非撩，不能蔽日，轮非辐不能追疾，然而橑、辐未足恃也。
现代文：伞盖离开盖架的支撑便不能张开遮阳；车轮没有辐条便不能飞快奔驰。但是光靠盖架和辐条又是不行的。
English: Without the support of the cover frame, the umbrella cover cannot open the sunshade; the wheel cannot run fast without the spokes. However, the cover frame and the spokes alone are not enough.

古文：金胜木者，非以一刃残林也；土胜水者，非以一墣塞江也。
现代文：说金能克木，并不是说一刀就能砍倒树木；说土能克水，并不是说一块土就能堵塞长江。
English: Saying that gold can cut wood does not mean that trees can be cut down with a single blow; saying that soil can cut water does not mean that a piece of soil can block the Yangtze River.

古文：躄者见虎而不走，非勇，势不便也。
现代文：跛子看到老虎不逃跑，不是他勇敢，而是他的腿脚不方便。
English: When the mule saw that the tiger did not run away, it was not that he was brave, but that his legs and feet were inconvenient.

古文：倾者易覆也，倚者易驸也，几易助也，湿易雨也。
现代文：倾斜的东西容易倾覆，斜靠的东西容易推倒，饥饿者容易得到帮助，空气潮湿容易成雨。
English: A leaning thing is easy to topple, a leaning thing is easy to push over, a hungry person is easy to help, and a humid air is easy to rain.

古文：设鼠者机动，钓鱼者泛杭，任动者车鸣也。
现代文：捕捉老鼠靠机关发动，钓鱼则要看浮子的飘动，车轮转动则车子发出声响。
English: Catching mice depends on the mechanism, fishing depends on the floating of the float, and the car makes a noise when the wheel turns.

古文：刍狗能立不能行，蛇床似麋芜而不能芳。
现代文：刍狗能像狗一样站立但不能行走，蛇床草外表像蘼芜但没有芳香。
English: The hyena can stand like a dog but cannot walk, and the snake bed weed looks like a toad but has no fragrance.

古文：谓许由无德，乌获无力，莫不丑于色，人莫不奋于其所不足。
现代文：如果谁说许由缺德，说乌获不是大力士，那么他们必定脸色难看不高兴，人没有不竭力来弥补自己不足的。
English: If anyone says that Xu Yuzhen is not virtuous, that Wu Guomao is not a strong man, then they must be hard to look happy, people do not make every effort to make up for their own shortcomings.

古文：以免之走，使犬如马，则逮日归风；及其为马，则又不能走矣。
现代文：按照兔子奔跑的速度，如果让它长得像马那样大，这奔跑的速度一定能追上太阳、赶上风；但如果兔子真的变成马，说不定奔跑的速度还没有马快。
English: According to the speed of the rabbit's running, if it grows to be as big as a horse, it will certainly be able to catch up with the sun and catch up with the wind; but if the rabbit really becomes a horse, it may not be able to run as fast as a horse.

古文：冬有雷电，夏有霜雪，然而寒暑之势不易，小变不足以妨大节。
现代文：冬天有时会打雷闪电，夏天有时会降霜下雪，但这种偶然现象无法改变冬寒夏暑的基本规律，这说明小的变化不足以妨害大的常规法则。
English: Thunder and lightning sometimes strike in winter, and frost and snow sometimes fall in summer, but this accidental phenomenon cannot change the basic laws of winter cold and summer heat, which shows that small changes are not enough to interfere with the general laws.

古文：黄帝生阴阳，上骈生耳目，桑林生臂手，此女蜗所以七十化也。
现代文：黄帝化生阴阳两气，上骈造出耳目，桑林造出手臂，女娲所以能化生七十变而造出人类，靠的是众神的帮助。
English: The Yellow Emperor transmuted yin and yang, the upper jaw transmuted ears and eyes, the mulberry grove transmuted arms, and the maiden was able to transmute seventy transformations to create human beings, relying on the help of the gods.

古文：终日之言必有圣之事，百发之中必有羿、逢蒙之巧，然而世不与也，其守节非也。
现代文：从早说到晚，一定能说出通达圣明的话；上百次的射中目标，这其中必定有像羿和逢蒙那样的射箭技巧。尽管如此，世人并不认为他们就是圣者和神射手，因为他们并没有掌握真正的法度、技巧。
English: From morning to night, they must be able to say words that can reach the holy light; hundreds of times of hitting the target, among which there must be archery skills like crossbow and trap. Nevertheless, the world does not think they are saints and sharpshooters, because they have not mastered the true law, skills.

古文：牛蹄彘颅亦骨也，而世弗的，必问吉凶于龟者，以其历岁久矣。
现代文：牛的蹄子和猪的头颅也是骨头，但世人就是不用它们来灼烧占卜，而一定要用龟甲来占卜凶吉，这是因为龟的年岁经历久远的缘故。
English: The hoof of a cow and the head of a pig are also bones, but the world does not use them to burn divination, but must use the tortoise shell to divine bad luck, this is because of the tortoise's long experience.

古文：近敖仓者不为之多饭，临江、河者，不为之多饮，期满腹而已。
现代文：住在敖仓附近的人并不因为靠近粮仓而饭量特大，生活在江河边的人也不因为靠近河边而多饮水，他们只求吃饱喝足就行了。
English: People who live near Kamakura do not overeat because they are close to grain silos, and people who live near rivers do not drink more water because they are close to rivers. They just want to eat and drink enough.

古文：兰芝以芳，未尝见霜；鼓造辟兵，寿尽五月之望。舌之与齿，孰先砻也？
现代文：兰草、白芷因为芳香，所以不到下霜的季节就被人摘掉了；世人有五月望作枭羹以避凶，所以枭鸟也就活不过五月五日。舌头和牙齿，哪个先磨损？
English: Orchids and egrets are fragrant, so they are picked off before the season of frost; people hope to make a stew in May to avoid evil, so the ostrich will not live past May 5th. Tongue and teeth, which will wear out first?

古文：錞之与刃，孰先弊也？
现代文：刀癡和刀锋，哪个先破损？
English: Which breaks first, the hilt or the blade?

古文：绳之与矢，孰先直也？
现代文：缴绳和箭枝，哪个先折断？
English: Which will break first, the rope or the arrow?

古文：今鳝之与蛇，蚕之与蝎，状相类而爱憎异。
现代文：鳝和蛇，蚕和蛾，形状相似，但人们对它们的一爱一憎，态度各异。
English: Dragonflies and snakes, silkworms and moths are similar in shape, but people have different attitudes towards them.

古文：晋以垂棘之壁得虞、虢，骊戎以美女亡晋国。
现代文：晋国用垂棘之璧作诱饵而夺得了虞、虢两国，骊戎用美女嫁给晋献公而使晋国灭亡。
English: Jin used the thorn as a bait to conquer the states of Yue and Yan, while Qian Rong used a beautiful woman to marry the prince of Jin to bring about the downfall of Jin.

古文：聋者不歌，无以自乐；高盲者不观，无以接物。
现代文：聋子不能唱歌，因此没法享受这其中的乐趣；盲人因为眼瞎，所以无法看到外物。
English: Deaf people can't sing, so they can't enjoy it; blind people can't see because they're blind.

古文：观射者遗其，观书者忘其爱，意有所在，则忘其所守。
现代文：观看别人射箭的人忘记了自己所做的事，看书入迷者遗忘了自己的爱好。思想集中在某个地方，就会忘记自己所应持守的东西。
English: He who watches others shoot arrows forgets what he has done, he who reads books forgets what he likes, and he who concentrates his thoughts on one place forgets what he should hold on to.

古文：古之所为不可更，则推车至今无蝉匷。使但吹竿，使氏厌窍，虽中节而不可听，无其君形者也。
现代文：让倡优吹竽，却叫乐工给他按发音孔，虽然能合节奏音调，但奏出的音调不好听，这是因为两人共奏一只乐器使之失去了主宰。
English: He asked the musician to press the sound hole for him to blow, but although he could match the rhythm and tone, the tone he played was not good, because the two people played a musical instrument together and lost control of it.

古文：与死者同病，难为良医；与亡国同道，难与为谋。
现代文：和死者患同一种毛病的医生是难以成为良医的，与灭亡的国家采用相同的治国之道是难以再产生新的治国方针的。
English: It is difficult for a doctor suffering from the same disease as the deceased to become a good doctor, and it is difficult to use the same way of governing the country as the country that has perished to create a new approach to governing the country.

古文：为客治饭而自藜藿，名尊于实也。
现代文：给客人准备饭菜而自己却吃野菜，这种人是将名声看得比实际更重要。
English: A person who prepares food for guests but eats vegetables himself is someone who values reputation more than reality.

古文：乳狗之噬虎也，伏鸡之搏狸也，恩之所加，不量其力。
现代文：哺乳时期的母狗敢咬老虎，孵化小鸡的母鸡敢与狸猫斗，这是因为它们将一切都倾注在幼畜身上，而不考虑自己的力量能否斗得过老虎和狸猫。
English: Lactating female dogs dare to bite tigers, and hens hatching chicks dare to fight with civet cats, because they pour everything into the young animals, without considering whether their strength can beat tigers and civet cats.

古文：使景曲者，形也；使响浊者，声也。
现代文：使影子弯曲的是弯曲的物体，让回音浊重的是浊重的声音。
English: It is the curved object that bends the shadow, it is the heavy sound that weighs down the echo.

古文：情泄者，中易测。华不时者，不可食也。
现代文：真情外露的人，他的内心世界容易测度；开花结果不合时宜的果实不可食用。
English: A man whose true feelings are exposed, his inner world is easy to measure; fruit that blooms out of season is inedible.

古文：蹠越者或以舟，或以车，虽异路，所极一也。
现代文：到越国去的人，有的乘船、有的坐车，虽然交通工具和路线都不同，但是所要达到的目的地是一样的。
English: Some people go to Vietnam by boat, some by car. Although the means of transport and the route are different, the destination is the same.

古文：佳人不同体，美人不同面，而皆说于目。
现代文：佳人体态各异，美女脸蛋各不相同，但都招人喜欢。
English: Beautiful women have different physiognomies, and beautiful women have different faces, but they are all attractive.

古文：梨、橘、枣、栗不同味，而皆调于口。
现代文：梨、橘、枣、栗味道各异，但是人们都喜欢吃。
English: Pears, tangerines, dates and chestnuts all have different tastes, but people like to eat them.

古文：人有盗而富者，富者未必盗；有廉而贫者，贫者未必廉。
现代文：有人是靠偷盗发财的，但发财的人并不一定是盗贼；有因为廉洁而清贫的，但清贫的人并不一定是廉洁的。
English: There are people who get rich by stealing, but those who get rich are not necessarily thieves; there are people who are poor because they are honest, but those who are poor are not necessarily honest.

古文：蔐苗类絮而不可为絮，磨不类布，而可以为布。
现代文：芦荻花像棉花絮，但是不可以将它当棉花絮来使用；粗麻不是布，但是可以用它来织成布。
English: Reeds are like lint, but they cannot be used as lint; flax is not cloth, but it can be woven into cloth.

古文：出林者不得直道，行险者不得履绳。
现代文：要穿出林子的人不可能走直道，在险要地方行走的人不可能走直线。
English: The man who wants to get out of the woods cannot take the straight road, and the man who wants to walk in dangerous places cannot walk in a straight line.

古文：羿之所以射远中微者，非弓矢也；造父之所以追速致远者，非辔衔也。
现代文：羿之所以射中远距离的细微目标，不只是凭着弓箭；造父之所以驾车跑得又快又远，不只是靠缰绳和马嚼子。
English: It is not by bow and arrow alone that the dragonfly shoots at small targets at medium and long distances; it is not by bridle and bit alone that the patriarch drives fast and far.

古文：海内其所出，故能大。轮复其所过，故能远。
现代文：大海能容纳百川，所以是浩瀚无边；车轮能周而复始地不停转动，所以能走得远。
English: The sea can hold a hundred rivers, so it is vast and boundless; the wheel can rotate continuously, so it can go far.

古文：羊肉不慕蚁，蚁慕于羊肉，羊肉膻也。醯酸不慕蚋，蚋慕于醯酸。
现代文：羊肉并没有引诱蚂蚁，是蚂蚁找上了羊肉，因为羊肉有膻味；酸醋并没有招惹蚊蚋，是蚊蚋叮上了酸醋，因为醋有酸味。
English: The mutton did not attract the ants, but the ants found the mutton, because the mutton had a salty taste; the vinegar did not attract the gnats, but the gnats stung the vinegar, because the vinegar had a sour taste.

古文：尝一脔肉而知一镬之味，悬羽与炭而知燥湿之气，以小见大，以近喻远。
现代文：尝一小块肉，便能知道一鼎锅的肉味；悬挂羽毛和木炭能知道空气的湿度，这是从小可以见大，由近可以知远。
English: If you taste a small piece of meat, you can know the meat flavor of a pot; if you hang feathers and charcoal, you can know the humidity of the air. This is something that can be seen from a young age, and can be seen from near and far.

古文：十顷之波可以灌四十顷，而一顷之陂可以灌四顷，大小之衰然。
现代文：十顷大的池塘可以浇灌四十顷的农田，但一顷的池塘就不够灌溉四顷农田，这是因为有大小的差别。
English: A ten-hectare pond can irrigate forty hectares of farmland, but a one-hectare pond is not enough to irrigate four hectares of farmland, because of the difference in size.

古文：明月之光可以远望，而不可以细书；甚雾之朝可以细书，而不可以远望寻常之外。
现代文：明亮的月光，可以用它看到远处的物体，但不可以靠月光来写蝇头小字；大雾迷漫的早晨，可以看清蝇头小字，但却看不清几米以外的物体。
English: The bright moonlight can be used to see distant objects, but it is not possible to use moonlight to write cursive; in the foggy morning, you can see the cursive, but you can't see objects a few meters away.

古文：画者谨毛而失貌，射者仪小而遗大。
现代文：绘画者如果只注意到画好毛发这样的细节，就不可能画好人物的全貌；射箭者瞄准有微小的偏差，就会带来很大的差错。
English: If the painter only pays attention to details such as drawing the hair, it is impossible to draw the whole picture of the character; if the archer aims with a slight deviation, it will cause a big error.

古文：治鼠穴而坏里闾，溃小疱而发痤疽，若珠之有类，玉之有瑕，置之而全，去之而亏。
现代文：为了捉老鼠挖开鼠穴而破坏了宅院，为了挑破叮疱而引发毒疮，这就好像珍珠上有疵点、玉石上有斑点，这疵瑕斑点不去雕掉，珠玉也就完整无损，如一去掉这些疵瑕斑点，这珠玉也就会弄残缺了。
English: In order to catch the mouse and dig out the mouse hole, the house was destroyed, and in order to pick out the stinger, the poisonous sores were caused. It's like there are flaws on the pearl and spots on the jade. If you don't carve out the flaw spots, the pearl will be intact. If you remove these flaw spots, the pearl will be crippled.

古文：榛巢者处林茂，安也；窟穴者托埵防，便也。
现代文：在树木丛生的森林里筑巢的鸟儿，将巢筑在树林茂密的深处，因为那里安全。挖洞的小兽将洞穴建在堤防的高处，因为那里方便。
English: The nesting birds of the wooded forest build their nests in the dense depths of the woods, for there it is safe; the burrowing beasts build their holes high up in the dikes, for there it is convenient.

古文：王子庆忌足蹑麋鹿，手搏兕虎，置之冥室之中，不能搏龟鳖，势不便也。
现代文：王子庆忌双脚能追上麋鹿，双手能搏杀犀牛和老虎，但如果将他关在黑暗的空房间里，恐怕就连龟鳖都捉不住，这是因为环境地势不方便他捉拿龟鳖。
English: Prince Qing Boi's feet can catch elk, his hands can kill rhinos and tigers, but if he is locked in a dark empty room, he may not even be able to catch turtles. This is because the environment is not convenient for him to catch turtles.

古文：汤放其主而有荣名，崔杼弑其君而被大谤，所为之则同，其所以为之则异。
现代文：商汤放逐夏桀而获得美名，而崔杼却因杀死齐庄公而受到他人的谴责，他们所做的事均为臣犯君主，但冒犯君主的原因却不一样。
English: Shang Tang gained fame by exiling Xia Yao, while Cui Yao was condemned by others for killing Prince Qizhuang. What they did were vassals of the monarch, but the reasons for offending the monarch were different.

古文：吕望使老者奋，项托使婴儿矜，以类相慕。
现代文：吕望到晚年才大有作为，这样使得老年人也为之振奋；项托小时就难倒孔子而为孔子之师，这样使得少年们也为之骄傲：这都是因为同类互相仰慕的缘故。
English: Lvang did not achieve much until late in life, so that the elderly were also excited about it; Xiangtuo was able to defeat Confucius and was Confucius's teacher, so that the boys were also proud of it: all because of the mutual admiration of the same kind.

古文：使叶落者风摇之，使水浊者鱼挠之。
现代文：使树叶飘落的是风在吹动，使水浑浊的是鱼在搅挠。
English: It is the wind that makes the leaves fall, and the fish that disturbs the water.

古文：虎豹之文来射，蝯狖之捷来乍。
现代文：虎豹因长着美丽的皮毛而招致捕杀，猿猴因动作敏捷而遭到刺伤。
English: Tigers and leopards are hunted and killed because of their beautiful fur, and apes are stabbed because of their agility.

古文：行一棋不足以见智，弹一弦不足以见悲。
现代文：走一步棋不足以显示智慧，弹拨一下琴弦不足以表达悲哀。
English: One move of the chessboard is not enough to show wisdom, one pluck of the strings is not enough to express sorrow.

古文：三寸之管而无当，天下弗能满；十石而有塞，百斗而足矣。
现代文：三寸长的竹管如果没有底，那么天下再多的粮食也无法填满它；十石大的容器如果有底，那么一百斗粮食就可以盛满它。
English: If a three-inch-long bamboo tube has no bottom, then no amount of grain in the world can fill it; if a ten-stone container has a bottom, then a hundred buckets of grain can fill it.

古文：以篙测江，篙终而以水为测，惑矣。
现代文：用竹篙来测量江水的深度，如果竹篙没了顶就以为篙长等于水深，那就糊涂了。
English: The depth of river water is measured with a bamboo pole. If the bamboo pole does not have a top and the length of the pole is assumed to be equal to the depth of the water, it is confusing.

古文：渔者走渊，木者走山，所急者存也。
现代文：渔夫在河边奔走，樵夫在山里兜转，因为他们所需要的东西在那里。
English: The fisherman runs to the river, the woodcutter runs to the mountains, because what they need is there.

古文：朝之市则走，夕过市则步，所求者亡也。
现代文：早上赶集的人走得飞快，傍晚到集市的人则踱着方步，这是因为此时他要购买的货物集市上已没有了。
English: Those who go to the market in the morning walk quickly, while those who go to the market in the evening walk slowly, because the goods they want to buy are no longer available at the market.

古文：豹裘而杂，不若狐裘之粹；白壁有考，不得为宝；言至纯之难也。
现代文：毛色驳杂的豹皮大衣不若毛色纯一的狐裘大衣；白璧有了污点裂缝，就不能变宝贝了：这是说绝对纯粹是困难的。
English: A leopard-skin coat of variegated colors is no better than a fox-fur coat of a single color; a white coat with spots and cracks cannot become a treasure: this is to say that it is difficult to be absolutely pure.

古文：战兵死之鬼憎神巫，盗贼之辈丑吠狗。
现代文：死于战争的人的鬼魂是讨厌神巫的，偷盗之徒是讨厌吠叫的狗的。
English: The ghosts of those who died in war hate witches and wizards, and thieves hate barking dogs.

古文：无乡之社易为黍肉，无国之稷易为求福。
现代文：没有主的社神，随便弄些黍肉就可祭祀它；亡了国的谷神，容易向它祈求降福。
English: If there is no main shrine god, it is easy to make some stew to worship it; if there is a dead country's grain god, it is easy to pray to it for blessings.

古文：鳖无耳，而目不可以瞥，精干明也。替无目，而耳不可以察，精于聪也。
现代文：鳖没有耳朵，但眼睛却蒙蔽不了，因为它没有了听觉，这视觉就变得特别灵敏；盲人没有了眼睛，但耳朵却无法闭塞，因为他失去了视觉，这听觉就变得特别灵敏。
English: The baboon has no ears, but his eyes cannot be blinded, because he has lost his sense of hearing, so his vision has become particularly sensitive; the blind man has no eyes, but his ears cannot be closed, because he has lost his vision, so his hearing has become particularly sensitive.

古文：遗腹子不思其父，无貌于心也；不梦见像，无形于目也。
现代文：遗腹子不思念他的父亲，因为他心里原本就没有父亲的印象；他连做梦都不会梦见到父亲的形容，因为他从来就没见过父亲是什么样的。
English: The bereaved son does not miss his father, because he does not have the impression of his father in his heart; he does not even dream of a description of his father, because he has never seen what his father is like.

古文：蝮蛇不可为足，虎豹不可使缘木。
现代文：蝮蛇不可以给它们添上脚，虎豹不可以让它们爬上树。
English: Pythons can't give them legs, and tigers and leopards can't let them climb trees.

古文：马不食脂，桑扈不啄粟，非廉也。
现代文：马不吃油脂类的食物而只吃草料；桑扈鸟不啄食粟粒而爱吃油脂类的东西，它们不吃什么东西，并不表示它们廉洁。
English: Horses do not eat fatty foods, but only eat grass; mulberry ostriches do not nibble poppy seeds, but like to eat fatty foods. They do not eat anything, which does not mean that they are clean.

古文：秦通崤塞，而魏筑城也。
现代文：秦国修通崤山要塞，魏国便筑起城墙加以防范。
English: Qin built the Lushan Fortress, and Wei built the city wall to prevent it.

古文：饥马在厩，寂然无声；投刍其旁，争心乃生。
现代文：饿马呆在马厩里安静无声，而一旦有草料出现在它们身旁，互相间的争夺就发生了。
English: Hungry horses stay quietly in the stables, but as soon as grass appears next to them, a fight breaks out between them.

古文：引弓而射，非弦不能发矢，弦之为射，百分之一也。
现代文：拉弓射箭，没有什么弦箭射不出去；但弦箭的长度与射程相比，不到百分之一。
English: With a bow and arrow, there is no string that cannot be shot, but the length of the string is less than one percent of the range.

古文：道德可常，权不可常，故遁关不可复，亡汗不可再。
现代文：道和德是可以永恒不变的，但是权变就不能永远不变。
English: Tao and virtue can be eternal and unchanging, but the power of change cannot be eternal and unchanging.

古文：环可以喻员，不必以轮；条可以为繶，不必以紃。
现代文：所以从关卡处偷渡出去的，就再也难以重新来一次；越狱逃跑不可能会有第二次成功。
English: So if you sneak out of the checkpoint, it's hard to do it again; it's impossible to escape from prison a second time.

古文：日月不并出，狐不二雄，神龙不匹，猛兽不群，鸷鸟不双。
现代文：圆环可以用来比喻圆形，就用不着用车轮来比喻圆形了；绦带可以用来作饰鞋的丝带，就用不着用眐带了。太阳月亮不可能同时出现，一雌狐不能配两只雄狐，神龙没有配偶，猛兽不会群聚，猛禽不会成双。
English: The sun and moon cannot appear at the same time, a female fox cannot mate with two male foxes, dragons do not have mates, wild beasts do not congregate, and birds of prey do not form pairs.

古文：循绳而斵则不过，悬衡而量则不差，植表而望则不惑。
现代文：照着墨绳弹出的墨线砍削就不会出差错，用秤来称量计算就没有误差，立圭表来观测就不会迷惑。
English: There will be no error in cutting according to the ink line that pops out of the ink rope, there will be no error in weighing with a scale, and it will not be confusing to observe with a ruler.

古文：损年则嫌于弟，益年则疑于兄，不如循其理，若其当。
现代文：少报年龄就和弟弟相混淆，多报年岁就和哥哥难分清，不如老老实实遵循事理，顺随真情行事。
English: Underreporting one's age confuses one with one's younger brother, and overreporting one's age confuses one with one's older brother. It is better to honestly follow the facts and act in accordance with one's true feelings.

古文：人不见龙之飞，举而能高者，风雨奉之。
现代文：人看不见龙之飞举而能将龙高高托起的，是风雨的帮助。
English: People can't see the dragon's flight, but being able to hold the dragon aloft is the help of wind and rain.

古文：蠹众则木折，隙大则墙坏。
现代文：蠹虫多了木头就会折断，缝隙大了墙就会倒塌。
English: If there are too many maggots, the wood will break, and if the gap is too large, the wall will collapse.

古文：悬垂之类，有时而隧；枝格之属，有时而弛。
现代文：悬挂下垂的物体，时间长了就会坠落，长得长长的枝条一类的东西，时间长了也会脱落。
English: Suspended sagging objects will fall if the time is long, and things such as branches that grow long will also fall off if the time is long.

古文：当冻而不死者，不失其适；当暑而不喝者，不亡其适；未尝适，亡其适。
现代文：在冰天雪地里冻不死的人，有着他的适应能力；在酷暑高温下不中暑的人，有着他的适应能力。
English: A person who does not freeze to death in the ice and snow has his ability to adapt; a person who does not suffer from heatstroke in extreme heat and high temperatures has his ability to adapt.

古文：汤沐具而虮虱相吊，大厦成而而燕雀相贺，忧乐别也。
现代文：从来没有不适应的，也就不知道什么叫适应性。洗头的热水准备停当，头上的虮子虱子就会互相吊唁；大厦落成，燕雀就会互相庆贺可以筑巢了，这忧乐各不相同。
English: There has never been anything that doesn't adapt, so we don't know what adaptability is. When the hot water for washing hair is ready to stop, the lice on the head will congratulate each other; when the building is completed, the chaffinches will celebrate each other and can build a nest.

古文：柳下惠见馅，曰可以养老；盗跖见饴，曰可以黏牡；见物同，而用之异。
现代文：柳下惠见到饴糖说： 可以用它来赡养老人。 而盗跖见了则会说： 用它可以来粘锁簧。 
English: When Yu Xia Hui saw the sugar cane, she said, "I can use it to support the elderly," but when the thief saw it, he said, "I can use it to tighten the lock."

古文：蚕食而不饮，二十二日而化；蝉饮而不食，三十日而脱；蚌游不食不饮，三日而死。
现代文：看到的物件相同，但所得出的观念不一样。蚕只吃桑叶而不喝水，经二十一天后化为蛾子；蝉喝露水而不吃食物，经三十天后蜕化；蜉蝣既不吃也不喝，只要三天就会去。
English: The objects seen are the same, but the resulting concepts are different. Silkworms only eat mulberry leaves and do not drink water, and after 21 days they turn into moths; cicadas drink dew and do not eat food, and after 30 days they turn into maggots; earthworms neither eat nor drink, and only go away after three days.

古文：人食署石而死，蚕食之而不饥；鱼食巴寂而死，鼠食之而肥；类不可必推。
现代文：人吃礜石会被毒死，而蚕吃了却不会饥饿；鱼食巴豆会死，而老鼠吃了巴豆却会长胖。
English: People will be poisoned if they eat ocher, but silkworms will not be hungry if they eat it; fish will die if they eat mung beans, but mice will gain weight if they eat mung beans.

古文：瓦以火成，不可以得火；竹以水生，不可以得水。
现代文：瓦是经过火烧后形成的，但直接用火干烧这瓦就会破裂；竹子是靠水生长的，但将竹浸泡在水中这竹子就会死掉。
English: The tile is formed after being burned, but if it is burned directly with fire, the tile will crack; the bamboo is grown with water, but if the bamboo is soaked in water, the bamboo will die.

古文：扬垛而欲弭尘，被裘而以翣翼，岂若适衣而已哉！槁竹有火，弗钻不然；土中有水，弗掘无泉。
现代文：以扬起尘埃来消除尘埃，穿着皮衣却又用扇子来散热，哪里比得上根据不同季节穿合适的衣裳？枯竹能起火，但不钻就不会出火燃烧；地下有水，但不挖掘就不会出泉水。
English: Lifting dust to remove dust, wearing a fur coat but using a fan to dissipate heat, how can it be compared to wearing appropriate clothes according to different seasons? Dead bamboo can catch fire, but it will not burn without drilling; there is water underground, but there will be no spring water without digging.

古文：蛖象之病，人之宝也；人之病，将有谁宝之者乎？
现代文：给蚌蛤、大象带来灾难的是珍珠象牙，而这正是人类的宝物；而人的病痛、灾难又有谁当宝贝呢？
English: It is pearls and ivory that bring disaster to baboons and elephants, and this is the treasure of mankind; but who is the treasure of human illness and disaster?

古文：为酒人之利而不酤，则竭；为车人之利而不漱，则不达。握火提人，反先之热。
现代文：为了不让卖酒者获得更多的利就不去买酒，那就只好干渴着；为了不让驾车者获得更多的利就不去租车，那就不能到达远处目的地；手握火把去掷击人家，自己反倒烧伤。
English: If you don't buy wine in order to prevent the wine seller from making more profit, you'll just be thirsty; if you don't rent a car in order to prevent the driver from making more profit, you won't be able to reach a distant destination; if you hold a torch and throw it at someone's house, you'll burn yourself.

古文：邻之母死，往哭之，妻死而不泣，有所劫以然也。
现代文：邻居家的母亲死了倒前去哭吊，而自己的妻子死了却不掉泪，那是在一种怕被人说成溺于情色的胁迫下的表现。
English: When the neighbor's mother died, he fell forward to weep, but when his own wife died, he did not shed a tear. It was a kind of performance under duress for fear of being said to be addicted to eroticism.

古文：西方之倮国，鸟兽弗辟，与为一也。
现代文：西方的裸国，鸟兽也不回避人群，那是因为人和它们混和为一，习性相似。
English: In the naked country of the West, birds and beasts do not avoid the crowd, because man and they are mixed into one, and their habits are similar.

古文：一膊炭熯，掇之则烂指；万石俱熯，去之十步而不死，同气异积也。
现代文：一根燃烧着的炭，用手去拿，就会烫伤手指；一万石的炭放在一起燃烧，离它十步之外就烧不伤人，这是因为同是热气而聚散方式不同。
English: If you take a burning stick of charcoal with your hands, it will burn your fingers; if you put ten thousand pieces of charcoal together and burn them, they won't hurt you if you take ten steps away from them. This is because they are the same heat but are dispersed in different ways.

古文：大勇小勇，有似于此。
现代文：大的勇气和小的勇气的情况与这种情况相似。
English: The case of high courage and low courage is similar to this.

古文：今有六尺之席，卧而越之，下材弗难；植而逾之，上材弗易；势施异也。百梅足以为百人酸，一梅不足以为一人和。
现代文：现在有六尺宽的席子，平铺在地上，一般性的人越过它并不困难；但如果将席子竖立起来，就是弹跳力出众的人要跨越它也不是件容易的事：这是因为席子摆放的态势不一样。百颗梅子足以调配一百人食用的酸汁，而一颗梅子就不足以调配一个人所需的食用酸汁。
English: Now there is a six-foot-wide mat, flat on the ground, and it is not difficult for an ordinary person to cross it; but if the mat is erected, it is not easy for a person with outstanding bounce to cross it: this is because the mat is placed differently. A hundred plums are enough to prepare sour juice for a hundred people, and one plum is not enough to prepare edible sour juice for one person.

古文：有以饭死者而禁天下之食，有以车为败者而禁天下之乘，则悖矣。
现代文：如果因有人吃饭给噎着而禁止天下所有人吃饭，如果因有人坐车出车祸而禁止天下所有人乘车子，那就显得十分荒唐了。
English: It would be quite absurd to ban everyone in the world from eating because someone was eating too fast, or to ban everyone in the world from driving because someone was involved in a car accident.

古文：钓者静之者扣舟，罩者抑之；罣者举之，为之异，得鱼一也。
现代文：钓鱼的静静地等待鱼儿咬钩，水中积柴捕鱼的扣舟惊鱼，用鱼罩的下罩捉鱼，用罾具的举罾得鱼：方法各异，但能捕获鱼则是一致的。
English: Fishing quietly waiting for the fish to bite the hook, catching fish in the water, catching fish with the lower cover of the fish cover, catching fish with the lifting of the bait: the methods are different, but the ability to catch fish is consistent.

古文：见象牙乃知其大于牛，见虎尾乃知其大于狸，一节见而百节知也。
现代文：看到象牙便能知道象比牛要大，看到老虎的尾巴就能知道老虎比狸猫大，掌握了部分，整体也就能推断出来。
English: If you see ivory, you can know that an elephant is bigger than a cow. If you see a tiger's tail, you can know that a tiger is bigger than a civet. If you master the parts, you can deduce the whole.

古文：小国不斗于大国之间，两鹿不斗于伏兕之。
现代文：两小国不在大国面前争斗，两只鹿不在卧伏的犀牛旁争斗。
English: Two small countries do not fight in front of a big country, and two deer do not fight next to a crouching rhinoceros.

古文：佐祭者得尝，救斗者得伤。
现代文：帮助祭祀的人得以尝新，制止打斗的人却受了伤。
English: Those who helped with the ritual were able to try something new, while those who stopped the fight were injured.

古文：荫不祥之木，为雷电所扑。
现代文：在不吉祥的树荫下躲雨，会被雷电所击。
English: If you hide from the rain under the ominous shade of a tree, you will be struck by lightning.

古文：或谓冢，或谓陇；或谓笠，或谓签。
现代文：有叫 冢 的，有称 陇 的，有叫 笠 的，有称 簦 的，名称不同但实物一样。
English: Some are called, some are called, some are called 笠, and some are called. The names are different, but the products are the same.

古文：头虱与空木之瑟，名同实异也。
现代文：头上 虱子 的 虱 和空心木做的 琴瑟 的 瑟 ，二字读音相同，但所指的物体却不同。
English: The  of the  and the  of the  made of hollow wood have the same pronunciation, but the objects they refer to are different.

古文：日月欲明而浮云盖之，兰芝欲修而秋风败之。
现代文：总想太阳月亮永远光明，但浮云就是遮盖它们的光；总希望兰芝四季生长，但秋风就是使它们枯萎。
English: I always want the sun and the moon to shine forever, but the clouds are the light that covers them; I always want the orchids to grow in all four seasons, but the autumn wind is to wither them.

古文：虎有子，不能搏攫者，辄杀之，为堕武也。
现代文：老虎产下的虎子，如果不会搏击猎物，老虎就会将它们吃掉，因为这样传代下去会将虎的威武丧失殆尽。
English: If the cubs born to tigers do not fight their prey, the tigers will eat them, because if this is passed on to the next generation, the power of the tiger will be lost.

古文：龟纽之玺，贤者以为佩；土壤布在田，能者以为富。
现代文：装饰着龟钮的印章，贤者将它当作饰物来佩戴；土壤分散在田里，能干的人靠它致富。
English: The seal, adorned with a turtle's knob, is worn as an ornament by the wise; the soil is scattered in the fields, and the able are enriched by it.

古文：予拯溺者金玉，不若寻常之缠索。
现代文：丢给溺水者黄金美玉，不如抛给他一段救命的绳索。
English: It is better to throw a piece of rope to save a drowning man's life than to throw gold to him.

古文：视书，上有酒者，下必有肉，上有年者，下必有月，以类而取之。
现代文：看书时，看到前有一个 酒 字，就知下面必有一个 肉 字；看到前有一个 年 字，就知下面必有一个 月 字：这是根据它们的类别而推知的。
English: When reading a book, if you see a wine character in front, you know that there must be a meat character below; if you see a year character in front, you know that there must be a month character below: this is inferred according to their category.

古文：蒙尘而眯，固其理也；为其不出户而堁之也。
现代文：蒙上灰尘就会眯起眼睛，这是理所当然的；但说他不出门就被尘土蒙眯了眼睛，这就不合情理了。
English: It is natural that a man should close his eyes when he is covered with dust, but it is not natural that he should close his eyes when he does not go out.

古文：屠者羹藿，为车者步行，陶者用缺盆，匠人处狭庐，为者不必用，用者弗肯为。
现代文：屠户杀猪宰羊却吃的豆叶羹，制造车辆的人却用脚步行，烧制陶器的人却用的缺口盆子，盖房造屋的人却住在狭窄简陋的小屋里：这些制造某物的人不一定自己使用，而使用这些物件的人又不从事这类工作。
English: Butchers kill pigs and sheep but eat bean curd, people who make cars walk on their feet, people who make pottery use cracked pots, and people who build houses live in cramped huts: these people who make something do not necessarily use it themselves, and the people who use these objects do not engage in this kind of work.

古文：毂立，三十辐各尽其力，不得相害。使一辐独入，众辐皆弃，岂能致千里哉？
现代文：车毂设置三十根辐条，各尽自己的力量，互不妨害；如果让一根辐条联接车毂，其余二十九根辐条都不用，这车哪能行走达到千里之外？
English: There are thirty spokes in a chariot, and each of them, to the best of its ability, does not injure the others. If a spoke were connected to the chariot, and the other twenty-nine spokes were not used, how could the chariot travel thousands of miles?

古文：夜行者掩目而前其手，涉水者解其马载水舟，事有所宜，而有所不施。
现代文：黑夜走路的人，眼睛就像被东西蒙住，只好伸手摸索着走；渡江涉水的人只得将原来骑的马装载到船上去：事物总有它适用的范围，也有它不适用的范围。
English: A man walking at night, his eyes as if blindfolded by something, has to reach out and feel his way; a wader crossing a river has to load the horse he was riding onto the boat: things always have a range of applicability, as well as a range of inapplicability.

古文：橘袖有乡，雚苇有丛。兽同足者相从游，鸟同翼者相从翔。
现代文：橘子和柚子都有自己的产地，荻草和芦苇各有自己的丛生处，兽类脚爪相同的在一起从游，鸟类翅翼相同的在一起翱翔。
English: Tangerines and grapefruit each have their own place of origin, rushes and reeds each have their own clumps, animals with the same paws swim together, and birds with the same wings fly together.

古文：田中之潦，流入于海；附耳之言，闻于千里也。
现代文：田地里的积水最终流入大海；贴在耳边讲的悄悄话最终会传到千里之外。
English: The standing water in the fields eventually flows into the sea; the whispered words whispered in the ear eventually travel thousands of miles away.

古文：苏秦步，曰何故，趍，曰何趍驰；有为则议，多事固苛。
现代文：像苏秦这样有争议的人物，他走得慢些，人家就会问： 为什么走得这么慢？ 
English: If a controversial figure like Su Qin walked more slowly, people would ask: Why does he walk so slowly?

古文：皮将弗睹，毛将何顾！
现代文：他走得快了，人家也会问： 为什么跑得这么快？ 
English: He walks fast, and people ask: Why does he run so fast?

古文：畏首畏尾，身凡有几！
现代文：这说明有所为人家就要说三道四，好多事就会被别人吹毛求疵。
English: This shows that if you have something to say, you have to say a lot, and many things will be criticized by others.

古文：欲观九州之上，足无千里之行；心无政教之原，而欲为万民之上；则难。
现代文：皮都要磨得差不多了，到哪里还能看到毛！畏首畏尾，那么身上还有多少是不怕的呢？要想视察九州大地，但双脚又不作千里跋涉；内心没有治政教化的想法，却想身居万民之上，那就难了。
English: The skin has to be almost worn away, where else can you see the hair! If you are afraid of your head and tail, how much of your body is not afraid? If you want to visit the land of Kyushu, but your feet do not travel thousands of miles; if you do not have the idea of governance and education in your heart, but want to be above all people, then it is difficult.

古文：旳旳者获，提提者射，故大白若辱，大德若不足。
现代文：明眼看得见的东西容易抓获，暴露明显的目标容易射中，所以最洁白的东西容易污染，德行最高的人总像空虚不足。
English: The most visible things are easy to catch, the most obvious targets are easy to hit, so the whitest things are easy to pollute, and the most virtuous people always seem to lack emptiness.

古文：未尝稼稿粟满仓，未尝桑蚕丝满囊，得之不以道，用之必横。
现代文：未经过辛勤耕种就粮食满仓，未经过采桑养蚕就蚕丝满袋；东西来得不是正道，用起来也必定挥霍无度。
English: Without diligent cultivation, the grain storehouse is full, and without harvesting mulberry and raising silkworms, the silk bag is full; things are not the right way, and they must be spent extravagantly.

古文：海不受流胔，太山不上小人，光不升俎，聊驳不入牲。
现代文：大海不接纳漂浮的腐肉，泰山不容许小人攀登，膀胱不能上俎案，杂色斑驳的马不能作牺牲。
English: The sea does not accept floating carrion, Mount Tai does not allow villains to climb, the bladder can not be hanged, and the horse with variegated colors can not be sacrificed.

古文：中夏用箑，快之，至冬而知去，褰衣涉水，至陵而不知下；未可以应变。
现代文：盛夏季节使用扇子很凉快，但到了寒冬还不晓得放下扇子；提着衣裳趟水过河，但上了岸还不知道放下：这样的人就显得相当呆板而不能适应变化着的形势。
English: It's cool to use a fan in the middle of summer, but in the cold winter you don't know how to put it down; you carry your clothes across the river, but you don't know how to put them down when you get ashore: such people seem rather stiff and can't adapt to the changing situation.

古文：有山无林，有谷无风，有石无金。
现代文：有的山没有树林，有的山谷没有风，有的矿石不含金属。
English: Some mountains do not have forests, some valleys do not have wind, some ores do not contain metals.

古文：满堂之坐，视钩各异，于环带一也。
现代文：满堂坐客，看看他们的衣带钩各不相同，但都用来环扣衣带却是一致的。
English: The hall was full of guests, look at their different belt hooks, but they are all used to fasten the belt, but they are the same.

古文：献公之贤，欺于骊姬；叔孙之智，欺于竖牛。故郑詹入鲁，《春秋》曰： 佞人来。佞人来。 
现代文：晋献公本来是很贤明的，可是后来被骊姬所蒙欺；叔孙如此聪明，却被竖牛耍弄，竟连自己的性命也不保，所以郑国的郑詹来到了鲁国，《春秋》就记载了 佞人来了，佞人来了 。
English: Jin Xian Gong was originally very wise, but later he was deceived by Yan Ji; his uncle and grandson were so clever, but they were tricked by the cattle, and they couldn't even save their own lives, so Zheng Zhan from Zheng came to Lu. "Spring and Autumn" recorded that "the eunuchs are coming, the eunuchs are coming."

古文：君子有酒，鄙人鼓缶，虽不见好，亦不见丑。
现代文：君子饮酒表示欢乐，鄙陋的人敲击瓦缶表示欢乐，这虽然不见得好，但也不见得丑。
English: It is not good, but it is not bad either, for a gentleman to drink wine to show his joy, or for a vulgar man to knock on bricks to show his joy.

古文：人性便丝衣帛；或射之，则被铠甲：为其所不便以得所便。
现代文：人生性以穿丝帛来得舒适方便；但当有人用箭射他时，就以穿上铠甲为好了，这穿上铠甲尽管不轻便舒适，但却能换得防身保命的安全和方便。
English: It is the nature of man to wear silk stockings for comfort and convenience; but when someone shoots him with an arrow, it is better to put on armor, which, although not light and comfortable, can be exchanged for the safety and convenience of self-defense.

古文：辐之入毂，各值其凿，不得相通，犹人臣各守其职，不得相干。
现代文：车辐条插入车毂，各自正对着相应的孔凿口，互相不干扰，这就像臣子各守本职，不得互相干犯一样。
English: The spokes of the chariot are inserted into the rim of the chariot, and each of them is facing the corresponding hole of the chisel, and they do not interfere with each other. This is just like the courtiers who keep their duties and do not interfere with each other.

古文：当被甲而免射者，被而入水；尝抱壶而渡水者，抱而蒙火，可谓不知类矣。
现代文：曾经因穿着铠甲而免遭箭伤，现在还以为穿着铠甲能到水中去游泳；曾经因有大瓠而得以渡过江，现在还以为抱着大瓠能挡着火：这些人真是叫不懂事物的类别的不同啊！
English: Once, because they were wearing armor, they were protected from arrow wounds, now they think that they can swim in the water with armor; once, because they had coats, they were able to cross the river, now they think that they can hold coats to prevent fire: these people really do not understand the difference between categories of things!

古文：君子之居民上，若以腐索御奔马，若跟薄冰，蛟在其下；若入林而遇乳虎。
现代文：君臣处在民众之上，这就像用腐烂的草绳驾御奔驰的马；也就好像踩在薄冰之上，下面有蛟龙等着；也好像进入森林遇到哺乳的母虎。
English: It is like riding a galloping horse on a rotting rope; it is like treading on thin ice with a dragon waiting below; it is like entering a forest and encountering a suckling tigress.

古文：善用人者，若蚈之足，众而不相害；若唇之与齿，坚柔相摩而不相败。
现代文：善于用人者，就像盚虫之百脚，多而不会互相伤害；又好像嘴唇和牙齿，尽管柔软和坚硬经常摩擦，但并不互相伤害。
English: Those who are good at using people are like a hundred feet of aphids, they multiply but do not hurt each other; and like lips and teeth, although soft and hard often rub, they do not hurt each other.

古文：清醠之美，始于耒耜；黼黻之美，在于杼轴。
现代文：清醇的美酒，是来自于耕种后获得的谷物；艳丽华美的衣裳，是来自于纺织织布。
English: The clear and mellow wine comes from the grain obtained after cultivation; the bright and gorgeous clothes come from the textile weaving.

古文：布之新不如紵紵之獘不如布，或善为新，或恶为故。
现代文：新的布帛不如盝麻织的夏布；而盝麻织的夏布破败之后又不如新的布帛。这正是有的东西新的好，有的东西旧的好。
English: New cloths are not as good as the old; and the old cloths which are torn are not as good as the new: so that what is new is better than what is old.

古文：在颊则好，在颡则丑。绣以为裳则宜；以为冠则讥。
现代文：酒窝儿长在面颊上很好看，但如果长到额头上那就丑陋不堪了；刺绣的丝织品用来做衣裳很合适，但用它来做帽子就要遭人讥笑了。
English: A dimple on the cheek is beautiful, but on the forehead it is hideous; embroidered silk is good for a dress, but for a hat it is ridiculous.

古文：马齿非牛蹄，檀根非椅枝，故见其一本而万物知。
现代文：马的牙齿不是牛蹄，檀树根不是椅枝条。所以看到事物的本源，这各种事物也就能分别看清。
English: A horse's tooth is not a cow's hoof, and the root of a sandalwood tree is not the branch of a chair. Therefore, when we see the origin of things, we can see these various things clearly.

古文：石生而坚，兰生而芳，少自其质，长而愈明。
现代文：石头生来就坚硬，兰草生来就芳香，从幼小时就具备了美好的素质，长成后就越发鲜亮。
English: Stone is hard by nature, and bluegrass is fragrant by nature. From a young age, it has a beautiful quality, and the more it grows, the brighter it is.

古文：扶之与提，谢之与让，故之与先，诺之与已也，之与矣相去千里。
现代文：扶持和掷击，道歉和责备，得到和失去，许诺和拒请，相差十万八千里。
English: Support and attack, apology and reproach, gain and loss, promise and refusal, are a hundred and eighteen thousand miles apart.

古文：污准而粉其颡；腐鼠在坛，烧薰于宫，入水而憎濡，怀臭而求芳；虽善者弗能为工。
现代文：弄脏了鼻子而粉饰了额头；死老鼠在庭院的台阶上，却在室内薰香以驱恶臭；要入水中，却又怕沾湿衣服；揣着臭物，却去寻找芳草：这些即使是有能耐的人也无法做到的。
English: To have a dirty nose and whitewash the forehead; to have a dead rat on the steps of the courtyard, but to burn incense indoors to drive away the stench; to want to go into the water, but to be afraid of getting wet clothes; to carry the stench, but to go in search of herbs: these are things that even a capable person cannot do.

古文：再生者不获，华大旱者不胥时落。
现代文：重新发芽生长的禾苗是不会有收获的；花开得太早就不会按季节凋谢。
English: The re-sprouted grass seedling will not be harvested; the flower will not wither seasonally if it blooms too early.

古文：毋曰不幸，甑终不堕井。
现代文：不要说不走运，甑终究不会掉到水井里。
English: Don't say it's bad luck, the dragonfly won't fall into the well after all.

古文：抽簪招，有何为惊！
现代文：抽下簪子时会摩出火花来，这没有什么可惊奇的。
English: There's nothing surprising about the sparks that come from pulling the pliers.

古文：使人无度河，可；中河使无度，不可。
现代文：让人不要渡江是可以的，也是可能的；但已经航行到江中却要人家不渡江，这是不可以的，也是不可能的。
English: It is permissible and possible to ask people not to cross the river, but it is impermissible and impossible to ask people not to cross the river when they have already sailed into the river.

古文：见虎一文，不知其武；见骥一毛，不知善走。
现代文：只见虎皮上的一点斑纹是不会知道老虎的威武的；只看到骐骥身上的一根毛，是不会知道它善跑的。
English: You wouldn't know the might of a tiger just by looking at a speck of markings on its skin; you wouldn't know it was a good runner just by looking at a single hair on its body.

古文：水虿为蟌孓孓为，兔啮为螚。
现代文：水虿变成蜻蜓，孑孓变成蚊子，兔啮变成虻虫。
English: Mink turn into ticks, ticks turn into mosquitoes, maggots turn into maggots.

古文：物之所为，出于不意，弗知者惊，知者不怪。
现代文：事物的变化出人意料，不理解的人惊奇，了解的人就不会感到奇怪了。
English: Things change unexpectedly. People who don't understand are surprised. People who understand aren't surprised.

古文：铜英青，金英黄，玉英白，磨烛确，膏烛泽也，以微知明，以外知内。
现代文：铜的光泽呈青色，金的光泽呈黄色，玉的光泽呈奶白色；麻杆火光昏暗，油脂灯光明亮。由微暗衬托明亮，由外表了解内质。
English: The luster of copper is blue, the luster of gold is yellow, and the luster of jade is milky white; the light of the lamp is dim, and the light of the lamp is bright. The light is set off by the dimness, and the internal quality is understood by the appearance.

古文：象肉之味不知于口，鬼神之貌不著于目，捕景之说不形于心。
现代文：象肉的味道，谁也没有尝过；鬼神的模样，谁也没有亲眼见过；对鬼神的捕风捉影的讲法，是不可能在内心留下深刻印象的。
English: No one has ever tasted the taste of elephant meat; no one has ever seen the appearance of ghosts and gods with their own eyes; it is impossible to leave a deep impression on ghosts and gods.

古文：冬冰可折，夏木可结，时难得而易失。
现代文：冬天的坚冰会消融，夏天的树木会衰败，时机难以掌握而容易失去。
English: The hard ice of winter will melt, the trees of summer will decay, the time is difficult to grasp and easy to lose.

古文：木方茂盛，终日采而不知；秋风下霜，一夕而殚。
现代文：树木正茂盛时，即使整天采伐也不显衰败凋敝；而秋风一刮，寒霜一打，一夜间树叶都落光。
English: When the trees are in full bloom, even if they are harvested all day long, they do not appear to be decaying and withering; but as soon as the autumn wind blows and the frosts set in, the leaves fall overnight.

古文：病热而强之餐，救喝而饮之寒，救经而引其索，拯溺而授之石，欲救之，反为恶。
现代文：患伤寒症的人被强迫进食，抢救中暑者却让他饮冷水，搭救自缢者时却又递给他绳索，拯救溺水者时却递给他石头，这本身想救助他人，但却反而害了他。
English: A person suffering from typhoid fever is forced to eat, a rescuer of a heatstroke makes him drink cold water, a rope is handed to a person who has hanged himself, and a stone is handed to a person who has drowned, which in itself wants to save others, but instead harms him.

古文：虽欲谨亡马，不发户磷；虽欲豫就酒，不怀蓐。
现代文：即使要谨慎，丢失马后也不必非得拆掉门槛来寻找；即使要预防，喝酒时也不必一定要抱着席子，以防醉倒时可以躺下。
English: Even if you want to be cautious, you don't have to remove the threshold to find the lost horse; even if you want to prevent it, you don't have to hold the mat when drinking, so you can lie down when you get drunk.

古文：孟责探鼠穴，鼠无时死，必噬其指，失其势也。
现代文：勇士孟贲用手掏鼠洞，老鼠虽然会随时被抓获，但也必定会咬伤勇士的手指，因为伸入鼠穴捉老鼠，使勇士本身的优势无法发挥出来。
English: The warrior Meng Yao dug a rat hole with his hand. Although the rat would be caught at any time, it would certainly bite the warrior's finger, because reaching into the rat hole to catch the rat would make the warrior's own advantage useless.

古文：山云蒸，柱础润；伏苓掘，兔丝死。
现代文：山中云雾蒸腾，柱子石墩湿润；伏苓被挖掘，兔丝草则枯死。
English: In the mountains, the clouds are steaming, the pillars are wet; the shafts are being excavated, and the rabbit grass is withering.

古文：一家失熛，百家皆烧；夫阴谋，百姓暴骸。
现代文：一家失火，百家被烧；进谗者玩弄阴谋，百姓就暴尸荒野。
English: One house catches fire, a hundred are burned; those who enter the house play with intrigue, and the people become a wilderness of corpses.

古文：粟得水湿而热，颤得火而液，水中有火，火中有水。
现代文：粟被水浸泡就会发热，甑在灶锅上受火烧煮就会冒汽滴水，水能生热，火能生水气。
English: When millet is soaked in water, it will heat up. When millet is cooked on the stove, it will steam and drip. Water can generate heat, and fire can generate water vapor.

古文：疾雷破石，阴阳相薄。
现代文：迅雷能劈开石头，这是阴阳二气相交的自然现象。
English: The lightning can split the stone, which is a natural phenomenon of the intersection of yin and yang.

古文：汤沐之于河，有益不多。流潦注海，虽不能益，犹愈于已。
现代文：洗澡水倒入河中，会增加河水，但相当有限；雨水和积水注入大海，虽然无法使海水水位升高，但还是改变了原来的状态。
English: Bathing water poured into the river will increase the river water, but quite limited; rainwater and stagnant water injected into the sea, although unable to make the sea water level rise, but still changed the original state.

古文：一目之罗，不可以得鸟；无饵之钓，不可以得鱼；遇士无礼，不可以得贤。
现代文：一个网眼的罗网是不可能捕到鸟儿的；没有鱼饵的垂钓是难以钓到鱼的；对待士人无礼是不能得到贤才的。
English: It is impossible to catch a bird with a net with a mesh; it is difficult to catch a fish without a fishing rod; it is impossible to get a wise man by being rude to a scholar.

古文：兔丝无根而生，蛇无足而行，鱼无耳而听，蝉无口而鸣，有然之者也。
现代文：兔丝草无根而能生长，蛇无脚却能爬行，鱼没有耳朵却能听到声音，蝉不长嘴而能鸣叫，这些都有着它们的一定合理性和原由。
English: Honeysuckle can grow without roots, snakes can crawl without feet, fish can hear without ears, and cicadas can sing without mouths. All of these have their certain rationality and reason.

古文：鹤寿千岁，以极其游；蜉蝣朝生而暮死，而尽其乐。
现代文：仙鹤寿长千年，因此能游遍天下；蜉蝣虽朝生暮死，却也能享尽生命乐趣。
English: Cranes live for thousands of years, so they can travel all over the world; dragonflies live and die, but they can also enjoy the fun of life.

古文：纣醢梅伯，文王与诸侯构之；桀辜谏者，汤使人哭之。
现代文：纣王把梅伯剁成肉酱，周文王就和诸侯计划要推翻纣王统治；桀肢裂劝谏的忠臣，商汤就派人去吊唁。
English: King Zhaozhou turned Mei Bo into mincemeat, King Zhouwen and the princes planned to overthrow the rule of King Zhaozhou; when Zhaozhou split his limbs, Shang Tang sent his loyal vassals to offer condolences.

古文：狂马不触木，猘狗不自投于河，虽聋虫而不自陷，又况人乎！
现代文：狂奔的马不会撞到树上去，疯狗不会自己跑入河里去，即使是最没有理性的兽类都不会自取灭亡的，更何况人呢？
English: A runaway horse will not run into a tree, a mad dog will not run into a river on its own, even the most irrational animals will not kill themselves, let alone people?

古文：爱熊而食之盐，爱獭而饮之酒，虽欲养之，非其道。
现代文：喜欢大熊却喂它吃盐，热爱水獭却让它喝酒，这真是想要饲养它们，但却违背事理。
English: To like a bear and feed it salt, to love an otter and let it drink, is to want to keep them, but to do so is irrational.

古文：心所说，毁舟为杕；心所欲，毁钟为铎。
现代文：心里喜欢就会毁掉船来做船舵；内心想要就会不惜毁熔大钟铸铃铎。
English: If you like, you can destroy the ship to make a rudder; if you want, you can melt the big clock to make a bell.

古文：管子以小辱成大荣，苏秦以百诞成一诚。
现代文：管子是忍受了无数次小的耻辱才得以成就大荣耀的；苏秦是说了无数次的谎话才实现 合纵 想法的。
English: Guanzi endured countless small humiliations to achieve great glory; Su Qin told countless lies to realize the idea of conciliation.

古文：质的张而弓矢集，林木茂而斧斤入，非或召之，形势所致者也。
现代文：箭靶一张开就招来箭矢射聚，树木一茂盛就招人砍伐，这并不是它们想召引人们，而是客观形势所致。
English: It is not that they want to attract people, but that this is the result of the objective situation.

古文：待利而后拯溺人，亦必利溺人矣。
现代文：等到得到好处以后才去救溺水者，那么时间一长，也必定有人以借溺水者而谋利。
English: If you wait to save a drowning person until you get some benefit, then over time, someone is bound to take advantage of the drowning person to make a profit.

古文：舟能沉能浮，愚者不加足。骐骥驱之不进，引之不止，人君不以取道里。
现代文：一艘破损易沉的船只，就是连愚蠢者都不会去乘坐；一只赶它不前进、勒它不停止的千里马，那么君王是不会用它来赶路的。
English: A ship that is broken and sinking is not fit for a fool to sail in; a pony that is driven but does not go, or driven but does not stop, is not fit for a king to ride in.

古文：刺我行者，欲与我交；訾我货者，欲与我市。
现代文：讽刺我的品行的人，是想和我交往的；贬低我的货物的人，是想和我做生意的。
English: He who ridicules my character wants to associate with me; he who disparages my goods wants to do business with me.

古文：以水和水不可食，一弦之瑟不可听。
现代文：用白开水掺和白开水，是清淡无味没什么好吃的；单根弦的琴瑟是弹不出好听的曲子来的。
English: Mixing boiled water with boiled water is bland and tasteless, and there is nothing good to eat; a single-stringed lute cannot play a good tune.

古文：骏马以抑死，直士以正穷，贤者摈于朝，美女摈于宫。
现代文：骏马因为受遏抑而死去，鲠直之士因为正直而受困窘；贤能的人被排挤在朝廷之外，美女则在宫内被冷落。
English: The horse dies because it is restrained, the upright man is embarrassed because of his honesty, the wise man is excluded from the court, and the beautiful woman is left out in the palace.

古文：行者思于道，而居者梦于床；慈母吟于巷，适子怀于荆。
现代文：远行的人在旅途思念家人，家人则在睡梦中和远行者相会；慈母在北国燕地叹息，亲生儿子则在南方楚地怀念母亲。
English: A traveler misses his family on his journey, his family meets him in his sleep, his mother sighs in the north, and his own son misses his mother in the south.

古文：赤肉悬则乌鹊集，鹰隼鸷则众鸟散，物之散聚，交感以然。
现代文：新鲜的肉悬挂起来，乌鸦喜鹊就会纷纷飞来啄食；而老鹰鹞子搏击食物，众鸟就会四处逃散。物类的聚散，是互相感应造成的。
English: When fresh meat is hung up, crows and magpies will fly to peck at it one after another; when eagles and pigeons fight over the food, the birds will scatter everywhere. The dispersion of species is caused by mutual sensing.

古文：食其食者不毁其器，食其实者不折其枝。塞其源者竭，背其本者枯。
现代文：吃他的食物不会捣毁盛放食物的器皿，吃树上结的果实不会折断树枝；堵塞源头水流就会枯竭，损坏树枝树木就会枯死。
English: Eating his food will not destroy the vessels that hold it, eating the fruit of the tree will not break the branches; block the source of the stream will be depleted, damage the branches of the tree will die.

古文：交画不畅，连环不解，其解之不以解。
现代文：错综交叉的线条不流畅，连环相套的环子不易解，解开它的方法是不解。
English: The intricately intersected lines are not smooth, the interlocking rings are not easy to solve, and the way to solve it is not easy.

古文：临河而羡鱼，不如归家织网。
现代文：临河羡鱼，不如回家织网以便打鱼。
English: It is better to go home and weave a net in order to catch fish.

古文：明月之珠，蛖之病而我之利；虎爪象牙，禽兽之利而我之害。
现代文：明月之珠是蚌蛤的病害，却是我们的宝贝利益；虎爪象牙是禽兽的利器，却是我们的祸害。
English: The pearl of the bright moon is the disease of the dragonfly, but it is our precious benefit; the tiger claw ivory is the sharp weapon of the beast, but it is our scourge.

古文：易道良马，使人欲驰；饮酒而乐，使人欲歌。
现代文：平坦的道路，优良的骏马，使得人想骑马快鞭奔驰；喝酒喝得痛快时，使人禁不住引吭高歌。
English: The smooth roads and fine horses make people want to ride fast; when drinking, people can't help but sing.

古文：是而行之，故谓之断；非而行之，必谓之乱。
现代文：认为是正确的就去做，所以这叫 决断 ；认为不对的，却还去做，这就叫做 乱来 。
English: If you do what you think is right, it is called decision; if you do what you think is wrong, it is called confusion.

古文：矢疾，不过二里也，步之迟，百舍不休，千里可致。
现代文：箭矢飞快，但顶多也不过射到两里地远；步行虽慢，但走上上百天，也可达到千里之远。
English: Arrows and arrows fly fast, but at most they can only shoot two miles away; walking is slow, but if you walk for hundreds of days, you can also reach thousands of miles away.

古文：圣人处于阴，众人处于阳；圣人行于水，众人行于霜。
现代文：圣人处在阴隐处，众人处在阳露处；圣人行于水而无迹，众人履霜雪而有迹。
English: The saint is in the shade, the people are in the sun; the saint walks on water and there is no trace, the people walk on snow and there is a trace.

古文：异音者不可听以一律，异形者不可合于一体。
现代文：音律不同者是不能欣赏同一种旋律的；形制不同的东西是不能归为同一类体的。
English: People with different tunings cannot appreciate the same melody; things with different shapes cannot be put into the same category.

古文：农夫劳而君子养焉，愚者言而智者择焉。
现代文：农夫辛勤劳动而官僚贵族从中得到供养；愚者七嘴八舌而智者从中选择有用的语言。
English: Peasants toil and the bureaucratic aristocracy feeds on it; fools babble and the wise choose useful language.

古文：舍茂林而集干枯，不弋鹊而弋乌，难与有图。
现代文：舍弃茂盛的大树不歇凉而停歇在枯树之下，不弋射天鹅而戈射乌鸦，这样的人是难以和他谋划大事的。
English: It is difficult to plan great things with such a person who abandons the luxuriant trees and rests under the dead trees instead of resting in the cool, and shoots crows instead of swans.

古文：寅丘无壑，泉原不溥；寻常之壑，灌千顷之泽。
现代文：大丘深山没有沟壑，是因为泉水的源头不广浡；而普通的沟壑水源不断，可以灌满千顷湖泽。
English: Large hills and deep mountains do not have gullies, because the source of spring water is not vast; but ordinary gullies have a continuous source of water, which can fill thousands of hectares of lakes.

古文：见之明白，处之如玉石；见之暗晦，必留其谋。
现代文：看得明白，处事就能像玉石那样坚定明确；见识昏昧，则必定心存疑虑，行动犹豫。
English: If you can see clearly, you can deal with things as firmly and clearly as jade; if you are dim-witted, you must have doubts and hesitate to act.

古文：以天下之大，托于一人之才，譬若悬千钩之重于木之一技。
现代文：将天下大事托付给一个人的才能上，就好像将千钧重物悬挂在一根树枝上。
English: Entrusting the world's great events to the talent of one person is like hanging thousands of heavy objects on a branch.

古文：负子而登墙，谓之不祥，为其一人陨而两人伤。
现代文：背着孩子爬墙头，叫做不吉祥，因为一个人从墙头上跌下来却是两个人受伤。
English: It is considered unlucky to climb a wall with a child on one's back, because if one person falls off the wall, two people will be injured.

古文：善举事者，若乘舟而悲歌，一人唱而千人和。
现代文：而善于处理事务的人是像乘船悲歌，一人唱歌而千人应和。
English: But a man of affairs is like a dirge on a ship; one sings and a thousand sing with him.

古文：不能耕而欲黍粱，不能织而喜采裳，无事而求其功，难矣。
现代文：不能辛勤耕种却想收获黍粱，不善纺织却想穿着亮丽，不费功夫却想事业有成，这些都是困难的。
English: It is difficult not to be able to cultivate diligently but want to harvest straw, not good at weaving but want to wear bright clothes, not effort but want to have a successful career.

古文：有荣华者必有憔悴，有罗纨者必有麻蒯。
现代文：有繁荣的时候，也必有憔悴的日子；有穿罗衣绢服的时间，也必有披麻卧草的时候。
English: A time to be rich, and a time to be poor; a time to be clothed with scarlet, and a time to be covered with sackcloth.

古文：鸟有沸波者，河伯为之不潮，畏其诚也。
现代文：大雕展翅翱翔水面，扇起水波，河伯因此不敢弄潮，这是敬畏大雕的真诚。
English: The great eagle spreads its wings and soars over the surface of the water, fanning the waves, so Hebe does not dare to get wet. This is the sincerity of the reverence for the great eagle.

古文：故一夫出死，千乘不轻。
现代文：所以一个勇士敢于拼死决战，那么就是有千辆战车的大军也不可轻视他的勇气。
English: Therefore, if a warrior dares to fight to the death, even an army of a thousand chariots cannot despise his courage.

古文：蝮蛇螫人，傅以和堇财愈，物故有重而害反为利者。
现代文：蝮蛇咬伤了人，敷上和堇就可治愈，事物本来就有大害反而变成大利的情况。
English: When a boa constrictor bites a person, it can be cured by applying vinegar and aloe vera. Things can be very harmful, but they turn out to be a blessing.

古文：圣人之处乱世，若夏暴而待暮，桑榆之间，逾易忍也。
现代文：圣人处于乱世之中，就像盛夏处在正午烈日暴晒之下等待傍晚清凉降临；如果太阳已经西沉，那就容易熬过去。
English: The saint is in the midst of a turbulent world, like the midsummer in the midday sun waiting for the cool evening to come; if the sun has set, it is easy to get through.

古文：水虽平，必有波；衡虽正，必有差；尺寸虽齐，必有诡。
现代文：水虽然平静，但也一定会起波纹；衡器虽然平正，但也一定会有误差；尺才虽然整齐划一，但也一定会有出入。
English: Although the water is calm, there will be ripples; although the balance is flat, there will be errors; although the ruler is uniform, there will be discrepancies.

古文：非规矩不能定方圆，非准绳不能正曲直，用规矩准绳者，亦有规矩准绳焉。
现代文：没有规矩不能成方圆，没有准绳不能定曲直；使用规矩准绳的人，也必定有使用规矩准绳的法则。
English: There is no rule that can't be squared, no yardstick that can't be set straight; people who use a yardstick must also have a rule for using a yardstick.

古文：舟覆乃见善游，马奔乃见良御。
现代文：船翻沉了才显示出游泳的水平，马惊奔时才显示出驾御的优秀。
English: It is only when the boat capsizes and sinks that the level of swimming is revealed, and it is only when the horse gallops that it shows excellent control.

古文：嚼而无味者弗能内于喉，视而无形者不能思于心。
现代文：嚼着没有滋味的食物，不能咽进喉咙；看不见形象的东西，不会在心中留下回忆的印象。
English: Chewing tasteless food, unable to swallow it down the throat; things that cannot be visualized, do not leave the impression of memories in the mind.

古文：兕虎在于后，随侯之珠在于前，弗及掇者，先避患而后就利。
现代文：犀牛和老虎在后边追着，即使前面有隋侯宝珠，也来不及弯腰拾取，因为首先是要避开可能被伤害的危险，然后才谈得上是不是有可能拾取隋侯宝珠。
English: The rhinoceros and the tiger are chasing behind. Even if there is a pearl in front, it is too late to bend down to pick it up, because the first thing is to avoid the danger of being hurt, and then we can talk about whether it is possible to pick up the pearl.

古文：逐鹿者不顾兔，决于金之货者不争铣两之价。
现代文：追捕鹿的猎人是看不上在身边跑的兔子；做价值千金货物生意的人是不会去计较铢两的价钱的。
English: Deer hunters don't care about a rabbit running around; people who deal in valuable goods don't care about the difference in price.

古文：弓先调而后求劲，马先驯而后求良，人先信而后求能。
现代文：弓先调好，然后才讲究它的强劲有力；马先驯服，然后才讲究它的品质优良；人首先要诚实，然后才看他是否能干。
English: Let the bow be well-tuned before it is strong; let the horse be tamed before it is good; let a man be honest before he is competent.

古文：陶人弃索，车人掇之；屠者弃销，而锻者拾之；所缓急异也。
现代文：陶人扔掉的绳索，车夫感到可用而拾回家；屠夫丢掉的生铁，而铁匠却把它拾起重新使用：这各人所急需的物件各不相同。
English: The rope that the potter throws away, the coachman finds it useful and takes it home; the pig iron that the butcher throws away, but the blacksmith picks it up and puts it to use again: everyone's urgent need is different.

古文：百星之明不如一月之光，十牖之开，不如一户之明。
现代文：百颗星星的光明不如一牙月儿明亮；十扇敞开的窗户不如敞开一扇门亮堂。
English: The light of a hundred stars is not as bright as a crescent moon; ten open windows are not as bright as one open door.

古文：矢之于十步贯兄甲，及其极，不能入鲁编。
现代文：箭在十步之内，其力量可以穿透皮铠甲，但等到箭飞到极限，其力量连薄薄的细绢都穿透不了。
English: Within ten strides, an arrow's power can pierce leather armor, but when the arrow flies to its limit, its power can't penetrate even a thin thin cocoon.

古文：太山之高，背而弗见；秋豪之末，视之可察。
现代文：泰山那么高，但背朝着它是什么都看不见的；秋毫的细端，如盯住它看就能看得一清二楚。
English: Mount Tai is so high, but you can't see anything with your back to it; if you stare at it, you can see the thin end of autumn.

古文：山生金，反自刻；木生蠹，反自食；人生事，反自贼。
现代文：山出产金矿，也因为出产金矿，这山也就因此被不断挖掘，所以说山是自招挖掘；木头生出蛀虫，这木头反而被蛀虫蛀空。人爱没事找事，就会自己祸害自己。
English: The mountain produces gold, and because it produces gold, the mountain is constantly being excavated, so it is said that the mountain is self-excavating; wood produces aphids, but the wood is hollowed out by aphids. If people do not look for something, they will harm themselves.

古文：巧冶不能铸木，工巧不能斵金者，形性然也。
现代文：不管怎样灵巧的冶炼工，他是不能熔铸树木的；不管怎样灵巧的木匠，他是不能砍削金属物的；这是由他们所从事的职业特点决定的。
English: No matter how skillful a smelter is, he cannot smelt wood; no matter how skillful a carpenter is, he cannot cut metal; this is determined by the characteristics of the profession they are engaged in.

古文：白玉不琢，美珠不文，质有余也。
现代文：洁白的玉不需雕琢，美丽的珍珠无须文饰，因为它们的内在本质够美好的了。
English: White jewels do not need to be carved, beautiful pearls do not need to be decorated, because their inner nature is beautiful enough.

古文：故跬步不休，跛鳖千里；累积不辍，可成丘阜。
现代文：所以只要一步一步坚持下去，就是跛脚的鳖也能爬行千里；不断地积土筑土，就可以堆成山丘。
English: Therefore, as long as you stick to it step by step, even a lame toad can crawl thousands of miles; constantly accumulating soil and building soil, you can pile up hills.

古文：城成于上，木直于下，非有事焉，所缘使然。
现代文：高大的城墙是由一筐筐土筑成，高耸入云的大树靠它植入土中的根基，这些都不可能人为造成，而是由事物的必然规律所决定。
English: Tall city walls are built from a basket of soil, and towering trees use it to plant their roots in the soil. These things cannot be artificially created, but are determined by the inevitable laws of things.

古文：凡用人之道，若以燧取火，疏之则弗得，数之则弗中，正在疏数之间。
现代文：大凡用人之道，就好像用燧钻木来取火，钻得太慢、不连续不能出火，钻得太快过密又不容易钻准，最好是快慢疏密恰到好处。
English: It is like using a hammer to drill wood to make fire. If you drill too slowly, you can't make fire. If you drill too fast, you can't make fire. If you drill too fast, you can't make fire. If you drill too fast, you can't make fire. If you drill too fast, you can't make fire.

古文：从朝视夕者移，从在准直者亏；圣入之偶物也，若以镜视形，曲得其情。
现代文：从早上看晚上，太阳是移动了；用曲的东西来校正直的东西，这物体就残缺不全；圣人对待事物，像用镜子照物一样，能够周密精致地反映出事物的本来面貌。
English: From the morning to the evening, the sun has moved; from the musical to the honest, the object is incomplete; the sage treats things as if they were reflected in a mirror, and can reflect the original appearance of things in a thorough and delicate manner.

古文：杨子见逵路而哭之，为其可以南可以北；墨子见练丝而泣之，为其可以黄可以黑。
现代文：杨朱看到四通八达的道路就哭泣起来，因为这道路既可通南也可通北；墨子看见洁白的生绢就掉泪，因为这绢既可以染成黄色也可以染成黑色。
English: Yang Zhu burst into tears when he saw the four-way road, because this road can lead to both the south and the north; Mo Zi shed tears when he saw the pure white ginger, because this ginger can be dyed yellow or black.

古文：趍舍之相合，犹金石之一调，相去千岁，合一音也。
现代文：人的取舍志向投合，就像金钟石磬一旦定形，音调也就固定，就是相隔千年还是发出当初一样的声音。
English: People's choices and aspirations coincide, just as the Admiralty stalagmite once shaped, the tone is fixed, even if it is a thousand years apart, it still sounds the same as it did at the beginning.

古文：鸟不干防者，虽近旨射；其当道，虽远旨释。
现代文：对于没有危害的鸟，即使栖息在家门口也不会去射杀它；但如果是危害人类的鸟，即使是远离人类，人也不会放过它们。
English: For a harmless bird, even if it roosts in front of a house, people will not shoot it; but if it is a bird that harms humans, even if it is far away from humans, people will not let them go.

古文：酤酒而酸，买肉而臭，然酤酒买肉不离屠沽之家，故求物必于近之者。
现代文：买邻近酒家的酒是酸的，买附近肉店的肉是臭的，但人们买酒买肉仍上这些店家，因为人们求得物件习惯是就近购取的。
English: Buying wine from nearby wineries is sour, buying meat from nearby butchers is stinky, but people still go to these stores to buy wine and meat, because people are used to buying things nearby.

古文：以诈应诈，以谲应谲，若披蓑而救火，毁读而止水，乃愈益多。
现代文：用欺诈来对付欺诈，用诡谲来应对诡谲，这就好像披着蓑衣去救火，挖开河渠来堵水一样，只会乱上添乱。
English: Using deception to deal with deception, using cunning to deal with cunning, it's like wearing a sackcloth to put out a fire, digging a ditch to block the water, it will only add to the chaos.

古文：西施、毛嫱，状貌不可同，世称其好，美钧也。尧、舜、禹、汤，法籍殊类，得民心一也。
现代文：西施和毛嫱模样不可能相同，但世上人都称道她们长得好，因为她们容貌美丽是相同的；尧、舜、禹、汤的治国法典是各不相同的，但他们的德政深得人心则是一致的。
English: It is impossible for Xi Shi and Mao Dun to look the same, but people all over the world praise their good looks, because their beauty is the same; the codes of governance of Zhai, Zhai, Yu and Tang are different, but their deep-rooted moral governance is the same.

古文：圣人者，随时而举事，因资而立功，涔则具摆对，早则修土龙。
现代文：圣人是顺应时势来做事的，根据自己的才能资质来建功立业的；多雨时准备好贮水器具，天旱时制作土龙以求雨。
English: The sage does things in accordance with the current situation, and builds achievements according to his talents and qualifications; when it rains, he prepares water storage devices, and when it is dry, he makes clay dragons to seek rain.

古文：临淄之女，织纨而思行者，为之悖戾。室有美貌，缯为之纂绎。
现代文：临淄的女子，织绢时思念远行的亲人，因此将绢织得粗劣毛糙；家室中添了美貌的女子，织布的丝线也因此打结蓬乱。
English: Women in Linyi, when weaving, think of their relatives who have traveled far away, so they weave coarse and rough; women who have added beauty to their homes, so the silk threads of the weaving are knotted and unkempt.

古文：徽羽之操，不入鄙人之耳；抮和切适，举坐而善。
现代文：徵和羽这样的高雅乐曲，却不为那些粗俗人欣赏；将中和的曲调转变为激切的音调，却获得满堂喝彩。
English: Such high-brow music as "Fei and Yu" is not appreciated by the vulgar; the transformation of a neutral melody into a passionate tone is applauded by the whole hall.

古文：过府而负手者，希不有盗心；故侮人之鬼者，过社而摇其枝。
现代文：路过存放钱财的仓库时故意将手背在后面的人，很少没有偷盗之心的；所以致人生病的鬼魅，经过寺庙时总要摇动树枝作掩护。
English: People who deliberately put their hands behind their backs when passing a warehouse where money is stored are rarely without the heart of a thief; therefore, ghosts that cause people to fall ill should always shake the branches of a tree for cover when passing a temple.

古文：晋阳处父伐楚以救江，故解捽者不在于捌格，在于批伔。
现代文：晋国阳处父讨伐楚国来解救被围困的江国；所以平息打得不可开交的争斗，不在于掺在其中拉架劝阻，而在于打击其要害，使争斗者自动撒手停止争斗。
English: The ruler of Jin, Guoyang, led a crusade against Chu to rescue the besieged Jiang. Therefore, the way to quell an irreconcilable conflict is not to meddle in it, but to strike at its core, so that the combatants will voluntarily give up and stop fighting.

古文：木大者根攫，山高者基扶，蹠巨者志远，体大者节疏。
现代文：高大树木的根一定根系发达，高耸的山峰一定以宽厚牢固的土地作基础；脚掌宽大的人善走远路，个儿大的人血脉流畅。
English: The roots of tall trees must have a developed root system, towering peaks must be based on a broad and solid land; people with broad feet are good at walking long distances, and tall people have smooth blood flow.

古文：狂者伤人，莫之怨也；婴儿署老，莫之疾也，贼心。
现代文：疯子伤人，没人会埋怨；幼儿骂老汉，没人会嫉恨：这是因为他们并无害人之心。
English: If a madman injures someone, no one complains; if a child insults an old man, no one is envious: this is because they are harmless.

古文：尾生之信，不如随牛之诞，而又况一不信者乎！
现代文：像尾生那样守信，不如跟牛者弦高的欺诈有意义，更何况只是偶尔一次不讲信用呢？
English: Is it more meaningful to be as trustworthy as Osho than to be as dishonest as the cowherd, not to mention only occasionally not to be trustworthy?

古文：忧父之疾者子，治之者医，进献者祝，治祭者庖。
现代文：忧虑父亲疾病的是子女，而能治病的是医生；求神时供奉祭品的是巫祝，而备办祭品的是厨师。
English: It is the children who worry about their father's illness, but it is the doctor who can cure it; it is the sorcerer who offers the sacrifice when praying to God, but it is the cook who prepares the sacrifice.

