古文：桓公曰： 吾欲南伐，何主？ 管子对曰： 以鲁为主。
现代文：齐桓公说： 我打算征伐南方，哪个国家可以作东道主供给我们军用？ 
English: Qi Kuan Gong said: I am planning to conquer the south, which country can host and supply us with troops?

古文：反其侵地棠、潜，使海于有蔽，渠弭于有渚，环山于有牢。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 用鲁国作东道主。我们归还侵占它的棠和潜两个地方，使我们军队在海边有依托隐蔽的地方，在海湾可以停驻，在山区有牲畜的肉可吃。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "We will use Lu as the host country. We will return the two places of Tang and Xing that we occupied, so that our troops can have a place to hide on the seashore, can be stationed in the bay, and can eat the meat of livestock in the mountainous areas.

古文：桓公曰： 吾欲西伐，何主？ 管子对曰： 以卫为主。
现代文：桓公说： 我打算征伐西方，哪个国家可以作东道主供给我们军用？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "I plan to conquer the West. Which country can host and supply us with troops?"

古文：反其侵地台、原、姑与漆里，使海于有蔽，渠弭于有渚，环山于有牢。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 用卫国作东道主。我们归还侵占它的台、原、姑和漆里四个地方，使我们军队在海边有依托隐蔽的地方，在海湾可以停驻，在山区有牲畜的肉可吃。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "We will use the defense of the country as the host. We will return the four places that we occupied, namely, Tai, Yuan, Gu and Chuxli, so that our troops can have a place to hide on the seashore, can stop in the bay, and can eat the meat of livestock in the mountainous areas.

古文：桓公曰： 吾欲北伐，何主？ 管子对曰： 以燕为主。
现代文：桓公说： 我打算征伐北方，哪个国家可以作东道主供给我们军用？ 
English: Huan Gong said: I plan to conquer the north, which country can host and supply us with troops?

古文：反其侵地柴夫、吠狗，使海于有蔽，渠弭于有渚，环山于有牢。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 用燕国作东道主。我们归还侵占它的柴夫和吠狗两个地方，使我们军队在海边有依托隐蔽的地方，在海湾可以停驻，在山区有牲畜的肉可吃。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "Let's use Yan Province as a host. We will return the two places of Zhafu and Barking Dogs that we have occupied, so that our troops can have a place to hide on the coast, can stop in the bay, and can eat the meat of livestock in the mountainous areas.

古文：四邻大亲。
现代文：于是齐国与周边国家都建立起睦邻关系。
English: The four neighbors have become very friendly.

古文：既反侵地，正封疆，地南至于■阴，西至于济，北至于河，东至于纪酅，有革车八百乘。
现代文：归还了侵占邻国的土地，重新厘正了疆界以后，齐国的国土南至阴，西达济水，北到黄河，东临纪国的酅城，拥有兵车八百辆。
English: After the return of the land invaded and occupied by neighboring countries and the re-adjustment of the borders, the territory of Qi from south to north, west to west, north to the Yellow River, and east to Jizhong, has eight hundred military vehicles.

古文：择天下之甚淫乱者而先征之。
现代文：然后选择当时最腐败的国家首先发动进攻。
English: Then they chose the most corrupt country at the time to attack first.

古文：即位数年，东南多有淫乱者，莱、莒、徐夷、吴、越，一战帅服三十一国。
现代文：齐桓公即位后的最初几年，东南方有很多腐败的国家，如莱、莒、徐夷、吴和越等国，齐国一次出兵就征服了三十一个国家。
English: In the first few years after the enthronement of Prince Qi Huan, there were many corrupt countries in the southeast, such as Lai, Lu, Xu Yi, Wu and Yue. Qi conquered 31 countries with a single military expedition.

古文：遂南征伐楚，济汝，逾方城，望汶山，使贡丝于周而反。
现代文：于是又向南进攻楚国，渡过汝水，翻越方城山，汶山也已经可以望见了，迫使楚国向周王室朝贡丝帛然后才撤军。
English: Therefore, they attacked Chu to the south, crossed the Ye River, crossed the Fangcheng Mountains, and the Wenshan Mountains were already in sight, forcing Chu to pay tribute to the Zhou royal family before withdrawing.

古文：荆州诸侯莫敢不来服。
现代文：荆州一带的诸侯小国没有谁敢不服从的。
English: No one in the small states around Jingzhou dared to disobey.

古文：遂北伐山戎，■令支，斩孤竹而南归。海滨诸侯莫敢不来服。
现代文：于是又向北进攻山戎，打败令支，击溃孤竹然后才撤军南返，海边一带的诸侯小国没有谁敢不服从。
English: As a result, they attacked Shan Rong to the north, defeated Lingzhi, defeated Lone Bamboo, and then withdrew to the south. No one in the small states along the coast dared to disobey.

古文：与诸侯饰牲为载，以约誓于上下庶神，与诸侯戮力同心。
现代文：齐国与这些国家的诸侯缔结盟约放在刷洗干净的牛身上，以此向天地间的神灵发誓，愿永远和诸侯们并力同心。
English: The alliance between the State of Qi and the princes of these countries was placed on the cleanly washed oxen, in order to swear to the gods of heaven and earth that they would always work together with the princes.

古文：西征攘白狄之地，至于西河，方舟设泭，乘桴济河，至于石枕。
现代文：齐国又向西进攻，占领了白狄的土地，到达西河附近，置备了船只和木筏，渡过黄河，直抵晋国的石枕。
English: Qi attacked westward again, occupied the land of Baidi, reached the vicinity of the West River, prepared ships and rafts, crossed the Yellow River, and reached the stone pillow of Jin.

古文：悬车束马，逾太行与辟耳之溪拘夏，西服流沙，西吴。
现代文：为了通过当地的高山深谷，齐国军队悬吊起兵车，勒紧马缰翻越了太行山和辟耳山的拘夏峡谷，征服了西面的流沙和西吴。
English: In order to pass through the local high mountains and deep valleys, the Qi army hoisted the crane truck and tightened the horse's bridle to climb over the Taihang Mountain and the Guoxia Canyon of the Bailu Mountain, and conquered the western quicksand and West Wu.

古文：南城于周，反胙于绛。
现代文：齐国还组织诸侯的军队守卫周的王城，讨伐晋乱，帮助晋惠公回到绛城继承君位。
English: The State of Qi also organized the armies of the princes to guard the royal city of Zhou, to fight against the Jin Rebellion, and to help the Duke of Jin Hui to return to Shandong to inherit the throne.

古文：岳滨诸侯莫敢不来服，而大朝诸侯于阳谷。
现代文：北岳一带的诸侯没有谁敢不服从的，于是齐桓公得以在阳谷这个地方举行大规模的诸侯盟会。
English: None of the lords in the vicinity of Beidake dared to disobey, so Prince Qi Kuan was able to hold a large-scale lords' meeting in this place in Yanggu.

古文：兵车之属六，乘车之会三，诸侯甲不解累，兵不解翳，弢无弓，服无矢。
现代文：总计齐桓公执政期间，共组织过有阅兵仪式的盟会六次，乘车举行盟会三次，诸侯们纷纷休兵卸甲，弓箭入库。
English: In total, during the reign of Prince Qi Huan, a total of six military parades were organized, and three military parades were held by car. Princes and lords took leave from the army to unload their armor, and their bows and arrows were stored.

古文：隐武事，行文道，帅诸侯而朝天子。
现代文：在消弭了诸侯国之间的战乱，推行文治之道的基础上，齐桓公率领各诸侯恢复了对周天子的朝见。
English: On the basis of eliminating the war between the vassal states and promoting the way of civil government, Prince Qi Kuan led the vassals to restore the imperial court to Zhou Tianzi.

