古文：制断五刑，各当其名，罪人不怨，善人不惊，曰刑。
现代文：制定五种刑律，每一种都应与罪名相当，使罪人无所抱怨，良民不生惊恐，这叫作 刑 。
English: To establish five kinds of punishments, each of which should be commensurate with the crime, so that the criminal has nothing to complain about and the good people have nothing to fear, this is called punishment.

古文：正之、服之、胜之、饰之，必严其令，而民则之，曰政。
现代文：规正人们，制服人们，控制人们，整治人们，一定要出令严格，而使人遵守，这叫作 政 。
English: To regulate the people, to subdue the people, to control the people, to rectify the people, it is necessary to issue strict orders and make the people comply with them. This is called governance.

古文：如四时之不貣，如垦辰之不变，如宵如昼，如阴如阳，如日月之明，曰法。
现代文：象四时运行一样没有差错，象天上星辰一样没有变更，象昼与夜、阴与阳、太阳与月亮一样分明，这叫作 法 。
English: There is no error like the four o'clock movement, no change like the stars in the sky, and it is as clear as day and night, shade and sun, sun and moon. This is called practice.

古文：爱之、生之、养之、成之，利民不德，天下亲之，曰德。
现代文：爱护人们，生育人们，教养人们，育成人们，利人而不居有德，使天下都来亲近，这叫作 德 。
English: Caring for people, giving birth to people, educating people, nurturing people, benefiting people without being virtuous, and bringing the world closer together are called virtues.

古文：无德无怨，无好无恶，万物崇一，阴阳同度，曰道，刑以弊之，政以命之，法以遏之，德以养之，道以明之。
现代文：不施恩，也不结怨，无所爱，也无所恶，认为万物都本乎 一 ，阴阳都有规范，这叫作 道 。应当用刑律进行裁断，用政权推行命令，用法来遏制人们，用德来教养人们，用道来启发人们。
English: It does not show favoritism, does not bear grudges, does not love anyone, and does not do anything evil. It believes that all things are one, and that there are norms for both the yin and the yang. This is called the Way. It is necessary to use the criminal law to make judgments, use the political power to enforce orders, use the law to restrain people, use virtue to educate people, and use the way to inspire people.

古文：刑以弊之，毋失民命；令之以终其欲，明之毋径；遏之以绝其志意，毋使民幸；养之以化其恶，必自身始；明之以察其生，必修其理。
现代文：用刑律进行裁断，为的是不错伤人命；命令人们杜绝私欲，为的是不使人们走邪路；遏制人们，以杜绝非分之心，为的是不使人们寻求侥幸；教养人们改变恶行，一定要从自身做起；启发人们省察其性情，一定要顺从道理。
English: To judge with the law of punishment is to injure people's lives; to order people to put an end to selfishness is to prevent people from going down the wrong path; to restrain people is to prevent them from seeking luck; to educate people to change evil deeds must start from themselves; to inspire people to reflect on their dispositions is to be obedient to reason.

古文：致刑，其民庸心以蔽；致政，其民服信以听；致德，其民和平以静；致道，其民付而不争，罪人当名曰刑，出令时当曰政，当故不改曰法，爱民无私曰德，会民所聚曰道。
现代文：施之以刑，人们就做事用心而且敬谨；施之以政，人民就守信而且服从；施之以德，人民就和平而且敬慕；施之以道，人民就亲附而不争夺。判罪合乎罪名叫作 刑 ，出令合乎时宜叫作 政 ，合于成规而不改变叫作 法 ，爱民而无偏私叫作 德 ，合乎众民所宜叫作 道 。
English: When punishment is applied, people will do things conscientiously and respectfully; when politics is applied, the people will keep their promises and obey; when morality is applied, the people will be peaceful and respectful; when a way is applied, the people will be attached to it without competition. Conviction that fits the crime is called punishment, issuing orders that fit the time is called politics, conforming to the rules without changing is called law, loving the people without partiality is called morality, and conforming to the people is called the way.

古文：立常行政，能服信乎？
现代文：立法与执行政事，能守信于民么？
English: Can legislation and the implementation of government affairs keep faith with the people?

古文：中和慎敬，能日新乎？
现代文：保持中正和平与谨慎恭敬，能日新其德么？
English: Maintaining the peace, prudence and respect of the Chinese people, can it be renewed day by day?

古文：正衡一静，能守慎乎？
现代文：政情平稳安定，也能保持谨慎么？
English: If the political situation is stable and stable, can we still be cautious?

古文：废私立公，能举人乎？
现代文：废私立公，能用在荐举贤人上么？
English: Can the abolition of private and public be used for recommending and elevating sages?

古文：临政官民，能后其身乎？
现代文：执行政事，治理人民，能做到先人后己么？
English: Is it possible to carry out political affairs and govern the people in a way that benefits all?

古文：能服信政，此谓正纪。
现代文：能守信于民，这叫作端正纲纪。
English: To be able to keep faith with the people, this is called the doctrine of rectitude.

古文：能服日新，此谓行理。
现代文：能日新其德，这叫作履行正理。
English: To be able to renew one's virtue day by day is called fulfilling one's duty.

古文：守慎正名，伪诈自止。
现代文：保持谨慎，又辨正名分，虚伪奸诈之事自然可以停止。
English: We should be cautious and distinguish right from wrong, and the hypocrisy and treachery can naturally be stopped.

古文：举人无私，臣德威道。
现代文：举人废私立公，其臣德将被全国称道。
English: Those who abolish the private sector and promote the public sector will be praised by the whole country.

古文：能后其身，上佐天子。
现代文：能做到先人后已，就可以辅佐天子了。
English: If you can live up to the expectations of your predecessors, you will be able to assist the Son of Heaven.

