古文：苗晋卿，字元辅，潞州壶关人，世以儒素称。
现代文：苗晋卿的字叫元辅，潞州壶关县人，世代都以儒学出名。
English: Miao Jinqing's character is called Yuan Fu. He is from Juguan County, Luzhou, and has been famous for Confucianism for generations.

古文：擢进士第，调为修武尉，累进吏部郎中、中书舍人，知吏部选事。
现代文：他考中了进士，被封为怀州修武县县尉，多次升官后任吏部郎中、中书舍人、知吏部选事。
English: He passed the entrance examination and was awarded the title of County Lieutenant of Xiuwu County, Waizhou Province. He was promoted several times and later served as Vice-Minister of the General Staff Department, Assistant Professor of the Middle School, and Secretary of the General Staff Department.

古文：选人诉索好官，厉言倨色纷于前，晋卿与相对，终日无愠颜。
现代文：入选的人扯皮要好官，纷纷到他面前言辞激烈、态度傲慢地要求，他和他们谈话，从早到晚没有生气的神色。
English: The men who had been chosen to be good officials came to him in great numbers, demanding with vehemence and arrogance, and he talked to them from morning till night with an impassive air.

古文：久之，进侍郎，积宽纵，而吏下因缘作奸。
现代文：一段时间以后，升任吏部侍郎，因总是宽大放纵，手下官吏因此干坏事。
English: After a period of time, he was promoted to the position of an attendant of the cadre department, because he was always generous and indulgent. As a result, the officials under him did bad things.

古文：方时承平，选常万人，李林甫为尚书，专国政，以铨事委晋卿及宋遥，然岁命它官同较书判，核才实。
现代文：当时天下太平，参加科举的常有一万人，李林甫任吏部尚书，一心掌管国家大政，将科举选官的事交给苗晋卿和宗遥，只是每年任命另一名官员一起参加评卷和录取，考察才能和实际。
English: At that time, the world was peaceful, and there were often 10,000 people participating in the imperial examinations. Li Linfu, who served as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Service, was in charge of the country's major policies. He handed over the election of officials for the imperial examinations to Miao Jinqing and Zongyao. However, every year he appointed another official to participate in the examination and admission together, to examine talent and practice.

古文：天宝二年，判入等者凡六十四人，分甲、乙、丙三科，以张奭为第一。
现代文：天宝二年，决定录取的共六十四人，分为甲、乙、丙三等，定张为第一名。
English: In the second year of Tianbao, a total of 64 people were decided to be admitted, divided into A, B, and C, and Zhang was ranked first.

古文：奭，御史中丞倚之子，倚新得幸于帝，晋卿欲附之，奭本无学，故议者嚣然不平。
现代文：张是御史中丞张倚的儿子，张倚新近被皇帝宠幸，苗晋卿想讨好他。张本来没有学识，因此批评的人议论纷纷。
English: Zhang was the son of the imperial historian Zhang Yixing. Zhang Yixing was newly favored by the emperor, and Miao Jinqing wanted to please him. Zhang had no knowledge, so critics talked about it.

古文：安禄山因间言之，帝为御花萼楼覆实，中裁十一二，奭持纸终日，笔不下，人谓之 曳白 。
现代文：安禄山借机会报告了这事，皇帝为此驾临花萼楼考核实情，录取的人能通过考核的只有十分之一二。张拿着卷纸一整天，没有落笔，人们称他 交白卷 。
English: An Lushan took the opportunity to report this matter, and the emperor came to Caiyulou to verify the situation. Only one in two out of ten people who were admitted could pass the assessment. Zhang held a roll of paper for a whole day without dropping a pen, and people said that he handed in a blank roll.

古文：帝大怒，贬倚淮阳太守，遥武当太守，晋卿安康太守。
现代文：皇帝非常生气，贬张倚为淮阳郡太守、宗遥为武当郡太守、苗晋卿为安康郡太守。
English: The emperor was very angry and demoted Zhang Li as the governor of Huaiyang County, Zong Yao as the governor of Wudang County, and Miao Jinqing as the governor of Ankang County.

古文：明年，徙魏郡，即充河北采访使。
现代文：第二年，他调任魏郡太守，随即任河北采访使。
English: The following year, he was transferred to the position of the governor of Wei County, and was immediately appointed as the Hebei liaison envoy.

古文：居三年，政化大行。
现代文：三年之后，政令教化很突出。
English: Three years later, the edification of the edict is very prominent.

古文：尝入计，谒归壶关，望县门辄步，吏谏止，晋卿以 公门当下，况父母邦乎 ？
现代文：有次入京报账，请求回壶关看望，老远看见城门就下马步行，部下劝阻，他认为： 看见官府的门就应下马，何况是故乡呢？ 
English: On one occasion, he went to Beijing to report his accounts and asked to visit Kuchuguan again. Seeing the city gate from afar, he dismounted and walked. His subordinates dissuaded him. He thought: Seeing the gate of the government office, you should dismount. What's more, it's his hometown?

古文：郡太守迎犒，使所属令行酒，酒至，必立饮白酹，侍老有献，降西阶拜而饮，时美其恭。
现代文：当地太守迎接犒劳他，让属下县令巡行劝酒，酒斟了，他必定站着喝干，主人敬酒，他从西边台阶下堂跪拜后才喝，当时人赞扬他的恭敬。
English: When the wine was poured, he had to drink it standing up. The host gave a toast, and he only drank it after kneeling down from the west steps of the hall. At that time, people praised his reverence.

古文：改河东郡，兼河东采访使。
现代文：后调任河东郡太守，兼任河东采访使。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of the governor of Hedong County and concurrently served as the head of the East Hedong liaison office.

古文：徙抚风郡，封高平县男。
现代文：又调任抚风郡太守，封高平县男爵。
English: He was also transferred to the position of Fufeng County Governor and given the title of Baron of Gaoping County.

古文：迁工部尚书、东都留守。
现代文：后升任工部尚书、东都留守。
English: After that, he was promoted to the Ministry of Works, but remained in the East.

古文：召为宪部，兼左丞。
现代文：又调进京城任宪部尚书，兼任左丞。
English: In addition, he was transferred to the capital to serve as the constitutional secretary, and also served as the secretary of the left.

古文：安禄山反，窦廷芝弃陕郡不守，杨国忠本忌其有望，即奏 东道贼冲，非大臣不可镇遏 ，授陕郡太守、陕虢防御使，晋卿见帝，以老辞，忤旨，听致仕于家。
现代文：安禄山反叛了，窦廷芝放弃陕郡不守卫，杨国忠本来忌妒他有声望，就上奏说 ：东边是叛军进军的方向，不是重臣不能守住。 任命他为陕郡太守、陕虢防御使，苗晋卿拜见皇帝时，用年迈来推辞，违背了皇帝的心意，就让他退休回家了。
English: Anlu Mountain rebelled, Dou Tingzhi abandoned Shaanxi County and did not guard it, and Yang Guozhong, who was originally jealous of his reputation, made a report saying: The east is the direction of the rebel army's advance, and it is not the senior vassal who cannot keep it. He appointed him as the governor of Shaanxi County and the defense envoy of Shaanxi and Fujian. When Miao Jinqing met the emperor, he used his old age to excuse himself, and violated the emperor's will, and let him retire and go home.

古文：车驾入蜀，搢绅多陷贼，晋卿间道走金州。
现代文：皇帝逃到蜀地，大臣多被叛军抓获，苗晋卿从小路逃往金州。
English: The emperor fled to Shoudi, most of his ministers were captured by the rebels, and Miao Jinqing fled to Jinzhou by a back road.

古文：肃宗至扶风，召赴行在，拜左相。
现代文：唐肃宗到了扶风，把他召到驻地，任命为左相。
English: When Tang Su Zong arrived at Fu Feng, he summoned him to the residence and appointed him as the minister of the left.

古文：平京师，封韩国公，食五百户，改侍中。
现代文：收复京城后，又封为韩国公，食实封五百户，调任侍中。
English: After the recapture of the capital, he was again made a Korean citizen, and was assigned to be an attendant.

古文：既而乞骸骨，罢为太子太傅。
现代文：后来他请求退休，被免职任太子太傅。
English: He later asked to retire and was removed from his post as crown prince.

古文：未几，复拜侍中。
现代文：不久，又任命为侍中。
English: Soon after, he was appointed a chamberlain.

古文：玄宗崩，肃宗疾甚，诏晋卿摄冢宰，因让曰： 大行遗诏，皇帝三日听政，稽祖宗故事，则无冢宰之文，奉遗诏则宜听朝。
现代文：唐玄宗去世了，唐肃宗病重，下诏命苗晋卿代理冢宰，他坚决推辞说： 故世皇帝有遗诏，要皇帝三天后上朝听政，考察祖宗惯例，没有冢宰的说法，按照先帝遗诏就应由皇帝听朝。
English: Tang Xuan Zong passed away, Tang Su Zong was seriously ill, and issued an edict ordering Miao Jinqing to act as the regent. He firmly refused, saying: The late emperor had an edict that the emperor should go to the court three days later to listen to the government and examine the ancestral practices. If there was no edict from the regent, according to the former emperor's edict, the emperor should listen to the court.

古文：惟陛下顺变以幸万国。 
现代文：希望皇上顺应民心，改变决定，造福天下。 
English: It is hoped that the emperor will conform to the people's will, change his decision, and benefit the world.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：皇帝不听从。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：后数日，代宗立，复诏摄冢宰，固辞乃免。
现代文：几天后，唐代宗登基，又下诏命他代理冢宰，他坚决辞谢才免除了。
English: A few days later, the Tang Dynasty Emperor ascended to the throne, and issued an imperial edict ordering him to act as regent, but he refused to do so.

古文：时年老蹇甚，乞间日入政事堂，帝优之，听入閤不趋，为御小延英召对。
现代文：当时他年纪大，脚病重，请求隔一天去一次政事堂，皇帝优待他，准许他进宰相官署时不行趋礼，驾临小延英殿召他谈话。
English: At that time, he was old and his foot was seriously ill. He asked to go to the government building every other day. The emperor treated him favorably, allowing him to enter the prime minister's office without bowing, and calling him to the Xiao Yan Ying palace for a conversation.

古文：宰相对小延英，自晋卿始。
现代文：宰相在小延英殿召见，从苗晋卿开始。
English: The prime ministers were summoned to the palace of Xiao Yan Ying, starting with Miao Jinqing.

古文：吐蕃犯京师，晋卿以病卧家，贼舆致胁之，噤不肯语，贼不敢害。
现代文：吐蕃进犯京城，苗晋卿因病躺在家中，敌人把他抬到官署里威逼他，他闭口不肯说话，敌人不敢加害于他。
English: Tubo invaded Beijing. Miao Jintao lay ill at home. The enemy carried him to the government office to coerce him. He shut up and refused to speak. The enemy did not dare to harm him.

古文：帝还，拜太保，罢政事。
现代文：皇帝回京后，任命他为太保，罢免了他的知政事职。
English: After the emperor returned to Beijing, he appointed him as Taibo and dismissed him from the post of governor.

古文：永泰初薨，年八十一，赠太师，京兆少尹护丧，谥曰懿献，元载未显时，为晋卿所遇，载方相，故讽有司改谥文贞。
现代文：永泰初年他去世了，享年八十一岁，赠官为太师，命京兆少尹办理丧事，拟赐谥号叫懿献。元载没任高官时，曾受苗晋卿提拔，元载当时任宰相，因此示意有关部门改谥号为文贞。
English: He died in the first year of Yongtai, at the age of 81, and was given the title of Grand Master. He ordered Jing Zhao Shao Yin to handle the funeral, and he intended to give him the title of Grand Master. When Yuan Zai was not a high-ranking official, he was promoted by Miao Jinqing. At that time, Yuan Zai was the prime minister, so he suggested that the relevant departments change the title of Grand Master to Wen Zhen.

古文：晋卿宽厚，所至以惠化称。
现代文：苗晋卿宽大仁厚，所到之处都以仁惠教化被人称道。
English: Miao Jinqing was generous and benevolent, and was praised for his benevolence and benevolence everywhere he went.

古文：魏人为营生祠，立石颂美。
现代文：魏郡人在他活着时为他建祠庙，树碑赞美他。
English: The people of Wei County built an ancestral temple for him when he was alive, and the tree monument praised him.

古文：再秉政，出入七年，小心谨畏，不甚斥是非得失，故能安保宠名。
现代文：他两次执政，共任宰相七年，小心谨慎，不过分计较是非得失，因此能保住宠信和名声。
English: He governed twice and served as prime minister for seven years. He was careful and prudent, but he weighed the pros and cons, so he was able to keep his popularity and reputation.

古文：然练达事体，百官簿最，一省无遗，议者比汉胡广。
现代文：他办事干练、通晓制度，各部门的文书，他过目不忘，评论的人把他比作汉代的胡广。
English: He is good at his job, familiar with the system, the documents of various departments, he never forgets, and commentators compare him to Hu Guang of the Han Dynasty.

古文：肃宗欲以李辅国为常侍，奏曰： 常侍近密，非贤不可居，岂宜任等辈？ 
现代文：唐肃宗想任命李辅国为常侍，他上奏说： 常侍与皇帝关系亲近密切，不是贤才不能任此职，怎能任命这类人呢？ 
English: Tang Su Zong wanted to appoint Li Shuo Guo as a regular attendant. He said in his report: A regular attendant has a close relationship with the emperor. Only a wise man can hold this position. How can such a person be appointed?

古文：罢之。
现代文：就罢免了他。
English: and dismissed him.

古文：朝廷欲论陈希烈等死，晋卿曰： 陛下得张通儒、安守忠、孙孝哲等，何以加罪？ 
现代文：朝中想判陈希烈等人为死罪，苗晋卿说 ：皇上抓到张通儒、安守忠、孙孝哲等人后，怎么加重处罚呢？ 
English: The imperial court wanted to sentence Chen Xilai and others to death. Miao Jinqing said, "After the emperor caught Zhang Tongru, An Shouzhong, Sun Xiao Zhe and others, how could he increase the punishment?

古文：帝不从。
现代文：皇帝不听。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：俄而史思明乱，持是以诱众。
现代文：不久史思明又反叛了，用这来胁迫叛军。
English: Soon Shi Siming rebelled again, using this to coerce the rebels.

古文：虽甚狂险犹不为之，况老臣乎？ 
现代文：他曾自己写了父亲的碑文，有喜鹊到碑上做窝。
English: He once wrote his father's inscription himself and had magpies nest on it.

古文：帝然之，而粲官终不显。
现代文：叛军攻进上党，焚烧、抢劫一空，苗家墓地单单没有损坏。
English: The rebels invaded Shangdang, burned and looted everything, but the Miao Family Cemetery was not damaged at all.

古文：裴冕，字章甫，河中河东人，本冠族仕家，以廕再调渭南尉。
现代文：大历七年，将他供到唐肃宗庙里接受祭祀。裴冕的字叫章甫，河中府河东人，本是当地为首的名门当官家庭出身，因上辈的功劳两次升官后任渭南县县尉。
English: In the seventh year of the lunar calendar, he was offered to the Tang Su Zong Temple for sacrifice. The character of Pei Guan Rong is called Zhang Fu, a native of Hedong, Hechu Prefecture. Originally, he was from a famous family of local officials. Due to the merits of his superiors, he was promoted twice and later became a county officer of Yinan County.

古文：王鉷为京畿采访使，表署判官，历殿中侍御史。
现代文：王钅共任京畿采访使，任命他为判官，后任殿中侍御史。
English: Wang Qian served as the envoy to Gyeonggi Province, appointed him as a judge, and later appointed him as a palace attendant and historian.

古文：冕少学术，然明锐，果于事，众呈称职，钅共雅任之。
现代文：裴冕没什么学问，但明察敏锐，遇事果断，人称称职，王钅共很信任他。
English: Pei Guan did not have much knowledge, but he was perceptive, decisive, and competent. Wang Bingkun trusted him very much.

古文：及鉷得罪，有诏廷辨，冕位甚下，而抗言其诬。
现代文：到王钅共被抓，皇帝下诏在朝廷上辩论，裴冕官职很低，却直说他冤枉。
English: By the time Wang Shaoqun was arrested, the emperor's edict was being debated in the imperial court, and the coroner's post was very low, but he said frankly that he was wronged.

古文：鉷死，李林甫方用事，僚属惧，皆引去，独冕为敛葬，由是浸知名。
现代文：王钅共被处死，李林甫正当权，同僚和属官怕李林甫，都走开了，只有裴冕为他入殓安葬，从此渐渐有了名气。
English: Wang Shaoqun was executed, Li Linfu's legitimate authority, colleagues and subordinate officials were afraid of Li Linfu, and all walked away. Only Fei Guan was buried in his tomb, and gradually gained fame.

古文：河西节度使哥舒翰辟行军司马。
现代文：河西节度使哥舒翰任命他为行军司马。
English: The Hexi Festival made Goshukhan appoint him as the marching steed.

古文：玄宗入蜀，诏皇太子为天下兵马元帅，拜冕御史中丞兼左庶子副之。
现代文：唐玄宗逃到蜀地，下诏命皇太子任天下兵马元帅，任命裴冕为御史中丞兼任左庶子辅佐他。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang fled to Shu, and issued an edict ordering the crown prince to be appointed the world's field marshal, and appointing Pei Guan as the vice-commander-in-chief of the imperial army and his left illegitimate son as his assistant.

古文：初，冕在河西，方召还，而道遇太子平凉，遂从至灵武，与杜鸿渐、崔漪同辞进曰： 主上厌于勤，且南狩蜀，宗社神器，要须有归。今天意人事，属在殿下，宜正位号。有如逡巡，失亿兆心，则大事去矣。 
现代文：此前，裴冕在河西，奉诏归京，路上在平凉遇到了太子，于是跟随他到了灵武。裴冕和杜鸿渐、崔漪一起劝太子登基说： 皇帝对辛劳厌倦了，并已南去蜀地，国家皇位，应有归属；现天意人心，都朝向您，应登基称帝；如有犹豫，使万民失望，国家就完了。 
English: Previously, the crown prince met the crown prince in Pingliang on the way back to Beijing after receiving the imperial edict in Hexi, so he followed him to Lingwu. Together with Du Hongqian and Cui Gan, the crown prince persuaded the crown prince to ascend to the throne, saying: The emperor is tired of hard work and has gone south to Shu, the national throne should belong to him; now the will of heaven and the hearts of the people are all toward you, you should ascend to the throne and be called emperor; if you hesitate and disappoint the people, the country will be over.

古文：太子曰： 我平寇逆，奉迎乘舆还京师，退居凉贰，以侍膳左右，岂不乐哉！
现代文：太子说 ：我扫平叛贼后，迎接皇帝回到京城，我仍当太子，侍奉皇帝饮食，岂不快乐吗？
English: The prince said, "After I have wiped out the traitors and welcomed the emperor back to the capital, I will still be the prince and serve the emperor food and drink. Won't that make me happy?"

古文：公等何言之过！ 
现代文：你们怎么说这样的错话！ 
English: How dare you say such a wrong thing!

古文：对曰： 殿下居东宫二十年，今多难启圣，以安社稷，而所从将士皆关辅人，日夜思归，大众一骚，不可复集，不如因而抚之，以就大功。
现代文：他们回答说 ：您任太子二十年了，现天下有难，需要贤君来平定国家，跟随您的兵将都是关中人，日夜想回家，军队如散去，不可能再聚拢，不如顺应、安抚他们，建立平叛大功。
English: They replied, "You have been the crown prince for twenty years, and now the world is in trouble. We need a wise ruler to pacify the country. The soldiers who follow you will all be Guanzhong people who want to go home day and night. If the army is dispersed, it will be impossible to regroup. It is better to comply, appease them, and establish a great achievement in defeating the rebellion."

古文：臣等昧死请。 
现代文：我们冒着死罪请求您。 
English: We're asking you on pain of death.

古文：太子固让，凡五请，卒见听。
现代文：太子坚决推辞，他们共请求了五次，终于被采纳了。
English: The prince firmly refused, and they made a total of five requests, which were finally accepted.

古文：太子即位，进冕中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：太子登基后，提升他任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: After the crown prince ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the post of Chushisajiro and Shimohei Shoji.

古文：乃建言卖官、度僧道士，收赀济军兴。
现代文：他建议出卖官职、剃度僧人道士，收集钱财来接济军费。
English: He proposed to sell official positions, shave monks and humanitarians, and collect money to help pay for military expenses.

古文：时取偿既贱，众不为宜。
现代文：当时出价很低，众人认为不恰当。
English: The bid was low at the time and was widely considered to be inadequate.

古文：肃宗至凤翔，罢冕政事，拜尚书右仆射。
现代文：唐肃宗到了凤翔府，罢免了裴冕的知政事职，任命为尚书右仆射。
English: When Tang Su Zong arrived at Fengxiangfu, he dismissed Fei Guan from the post of governor and appointed him as Shang Shu's right-hand man.

古文：两京平，封冀国公，实封五百户，出为剑南西川节度使。
现代文：长安、洛阳收复后，封他为冀国公，食实封五百户，派他出京任剑南西川节度使。
English: After the recovery of Chang'an and Luoyang, he appointed him as the governor of Ji Province, and sent him to Beijing to serve as the chief envoy of the Jianan and West River Festival.

古文：复为右仆射，待制集贤院。
现代文：后又任右仆射、集贤院待制。
English: Later, he was appointed as the right-hand man of the Emperor, and Jixian was put on standby.

古文：俄充山陵使。
现代文：不久任皇陵使。
English: He was soon appointed imperial mausoleum envoy.

古文：于是，中书舍人刘烜为李辅国所昵，冕表为判官。
现代文：这时，中书舍人刘火亘与李辅国亲近，裴冕任命他为判官。
English: At this time, Liu Huowat, a scholar of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, was close to Li Yuxuo, and Pei Guan appointed him as a judge.

古文：烜抵法，坐降施州刺史，徙澧州。
现代文：刘火亘被治罪，他受牵连贬任施州刺史，又调任澧州刺史。
English: Liu Huowan was punished, he was implicated and demoted to the post of Shizhou magistrate, and then transferred to the post of Zhangzhou magistrate.

古文：大历中，郭子仪言于代宗曰： 冕首佐先帝，驰驱灵武，有社稷勋，程元振忌其贤，遂加诬构，海内冤之。
现代文：大历年间，郭子仪对唐代宗说： 裴冕首先拥戴肃宗皇帝，到灵武效力，有安定国家的功劳，程元振忌妒他的贤德，就诬陷他，天下人都认为他冤枉。
English: During the Great Calendar, Guo Ziyi said to the Tang Dynasty Zong: Pei Guan first supported Emperor Su Zong, to the spiritual and military effectiveness, has the merit of a stable country, Cheng Yuan Zhen envied his virtue, he framed him, the world thought he was wrong.

古文：陛下宜还冕于朝，复俾辅相，必能致治成化。 
现代文：皇上应把他调回朝中，再任宰相，定能治好国家。 
English: The emperor should transfer him back to the imperial court and reappoint him as prime minister. He will surely be able to heal the country.

古文：时元载秉政，冕早所甄引，载德之，又贪其衰瘵，且下己，遂拜左仆射、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：当时元载当权，裴冕过去曾提拔过他，元载感他的恩，又认为他衰老可以利用，并又顺从自己，就任命他为左仆射、同中书门下平章事。
English: At that time, Yuan Zai was in power. Pei Guan had promoted him in the past. Yuan Zai felt his grace, and thought that he could take advantage of his old age, and obeyed himself. He appointed him as a left-handed shooter and a bookkeeper.

古文：入见，拜不能兴，载自扶之，代为赞谢。
现代文：他入朝见皇帝，跪拜后站不起来，元载亲自去扶他，代替他谢恩。
English: He entered the court to see the emperor, kneeled down and could not stand up, and the emperor personally went to help him and thanked him in his place.

古文：俄兼河南江淮副元帅、东都留守。
现代文：不久兼任河南、江淮副元帅、东都留守。
English: Soon he also served as deputy marshal of Henan, Jianghuai and Dongdu.

古文：不逾月卒，有诏赠太尉。
现代文：没过一个月就去世了，皇帝下诏赠官为太尉。
English: He died less than a month later, and the emperor granted him the rank of second lieutenant.

古文：冕以忠勤自将，然不知宰相大体。
现代文：裴冕以忠诚勤奋要求自己，但不知道宰相的主要政务。
English: Fei Guan demanded himself with loyalty and diligence, but did not know the prime minister's main government affairs.

古文：性豪侈，既素贵，舆服食饮皆光丽珍丰，枥马直数百金者常十数，每广会宾客，不能名其馔，自制巾子工甚，人争效之，号 仆射巾 。
现代文：生性奢侈，长期任高官，车辆衣裳饮食都豪华丰盛，栏中价值几百金的马常有几十匹，每次大宴宾客，菜的名字别人都叫不出来。他自制的头巾做工极精，人们争着模仿他，称为 仆射巾 。
English: He was born into luxury, he was a high-ranking official for a long time, his car, clothes and food were luxurious and plentiful, there were often dozens of horses worth hundreds of gold in the column, guests at every banquet, and the name of the dish could not be called out by others. His self-made headscarf was extremely fine workmanship, and people competed to imitate him, known as "puppet."

古文：领使既众，吏白俸簿月二千缗，冕顾视，喜见颜间，世訾其嗜利云。
现代文：有人说他担任的使职多了，官吏报告每月的俸禄有两千贯，裴冕回头炫耀，喜笑颜开，当时人批评他好财。
English: Some people said that he held more posts, officials reported a monthly salary of two thousand yuan, Fei Guan returned to show off, smiling, at that time people criticized his good fortune.

古文：始，肃宗庙惟苗晋卿配享，冕卒后二十馀年，有苏正元者奏言： 肃宗为元帅时，师才一旅，冕于草创中，甄大义以劝进，收募骁勇几十馀万。
现代文：当初，唐肃宗庙中只有苗晋卿陪受祭祀。裴冕死后二十多年，苏正元上奏说 ：肃宗皇帝任元帅时，军队很少，裴冕在创业之时，明大义劝登基，招募军队近十多万。
English: At first, only Miao Jinqing accompanied the sacrificial rites in the Su Zong Temple of Tang Dynasty. More than 20 years after the death of Pei Guan, Su Zhengyuan reported: When Emperor Su Zong was appointed as a marshal, the army was very few. When Pei Guan started his business, he was advised to ascend to the throne and recruited more than 100,000 troops.

古文：既逾月，房琯来；又一年，而晋卿至。
现代文：过了一个多月，房才来；又过了一年，苗晋卿才到。
English: It took more than a month for Fang to arrive, and another year for Miao Jinqing to arrive.

古文：今晋卿从祀，而冕乃不与。 
现代文：现苗晋卿陪受祭祀，裴冕却没有。 
English: Now Miao Jinqing is accompanied by a sacrificial offering, but there is no crown.

古文：有诏冕配享肃宗庙。
现代文：皇帝下诏将裴冕供到肃宗庙里接受祭祀。
English: The emperor decreed that the crown be offered to Su Zong Temple for worship.

古文：裴遵庆，字少良，绛州闻喜人。
现代文：裴遵庆的字叫少良，绛州闻喜县人。
English: Pei Zunqing's character is called Shao Liang. He is from Wenshi County, Zhangzhou.

古文：幼强学，该综图传，外晦内明，不干当世。
现代文：他从小刻苦学习，博览群书，胸有才干却含而不露，不参加科举。
English: He studied hard from a young age, read a lot of books, had talent but did not show it, and did not participate in the imperial examinations.

古文：年既长，始以仕家推廕为兴宁陵丞，调大理丞。
现代文：年龄已大，才因上辈的功劳被任命为兴宁陵丞，后调任大理丞。
English: When he was old, he was appointed as Xingninglingzheng due to the merits of his superiors, and later he was transferred to Dalizheng.

古文：边将萧克济督役苛暴，役者有丑言，有司以大逆论，遵庆曰： 财不足聚人，力不足加众，焉能反？ 
现代文：边境将领萧克济督促劳役苛刻暴虐，役夫说他的坏话，有关部门要按反叛论罪，裴遵庆说： 他们讲财产不能招兵，讲勇力不能服众，怎能造反？ 
English: The border general Shao Keji urged the laborer to be harsh and brutal, the laborer spoke ill of him, and the relevant departments should charge him with rebellion. Pei Zunqing said: They say that property cannot recruit soldiers, that courage cannot serve the public, how can they rebel?

古文：由是全救数十族。
现代文：因此保全了十几族的性命。
English: As a result, the lives of more than a dozen people were saved.

古文：频擢吏部员外郎，判南曹。
现代文：他多次升官后任吏部员外郎、判南曹。
English: After he was promoted several times, he served as a member of the administrative department, and later as a magistrate.

古文：天宝时，选者岁万计，遵庆性强敏，视簿牒，详而不苛，世称吏事第一。
现代文：天宝年间，参加科举的每年上万人，裴遵庆生性能干敏捷，阅卷评选，详细而不苛刻，当时认为他是吏部第一人。
English: During the Tianbao period, tens of thousands of people participated in the imperial examinations every year. Pei Zunqing was considered to be the first person in the cadre department at that time because of his ability to work quickly, his ability to read and select papers in a detailed but not harsh manner.

古文：肃宗时，为吏部侍郎。
现代文：唐肃宗时，他任吏部侍郎。
English: During the Tang and Su Zong dynasties, he served as a chamberlain in the cadre department.

古文：萧华辅政，屡荐之，拜黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：萧华任宰相，多次推荐他，于是任命他为黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Xiao Hua served as the prime minister and recommended him many times, so he appointed him as the Yellow Gate attendant, and the book gate of the same school.

古文：代宗初，仆固怀恩反，帝以遵庆忠厚大臣，故奉诏宣慰，怀恩听命将入朝，既而为其将范志诚沮止。
现代文：唐代宗初年，仆固怀恩不听命令，皇帝因为裴遵庆性情宽厚又任重臣，派他带诏书去宣诏慰问，仆固怀恩接受诏命后准备进京朝拜，后被他的部将范志诚劝阻。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the servant Gu Wai En did not listen to the order. The emperor, because of the generous nature of Pei Zunqing, who was also a senior vassal, sent him with an imperial edict to proclaim condolences. After accepting the imperial edict, the servant Gu Wai En prepared to go to Beijing to worship. Later, he was dissuaded by his general Fan Zhicheng.

古文：时帝在陕，遵庆脱身赴行在。
现代文：当时皇帝逃到陕郡，裴遵庆抽身赶赴皇帝驻地。
English: At that time, the emperor fled to Shaanxi, and Pei Zunqing rushed to the emperor's residence.

古文：帝还，迁太子少傅。
现代文：皇帝回到京城后，提升他任太子少傅。
English: After the emperor returned to Beijing, he was promoted to the post of crown prince.

古文：罢为集贤院待制，改吏部尚书，以尚书右仆射复知选事，朝廷优其老，听就第注官，时以为荣。
现代文：后免职任集贤院待制，又调任吏部尚书，以尚书右仆射身份又任知选事，皇帝优待他年迈，让到他家里去任命官职，当时人认为荣耀。
English: After being relieved of his duties, he was appointed as a member of Jixian Academy, and was transferred to Shangshu, the administrative department. He was also appointed as the chief selector with the status of Shangshu's right-hand man. The emperor treated him favorably in his old age and let him go to his home to appoint official positions. At that time, people thought it was an honor.

古文：尝有族子病狂易，告以谋反，帝识其谬，置不问。
现代文：曾有同族兄弟的儿子有疯癫病，告发他谋划反叛，皇帝知道他是瞎说，搁置不予追究。
English: Once, the son of a brother of the same race who had a mental illness denounced him for plotting a rebellion. The emperor knew that he was lying and did not pursue the matter.

古文：性惇正，老而弥谨。
现代文：他生性厚道正直，年老后更加谨慎。
English: By nature he is kind and honest, but he has become more cautious in his old age.

古文：每荐贤，有来谢者，以为耻。
现代文：每次推荐了贤才，有来感谢他的，他认为是耻辱。
English: Every time he recommended a talented person and someone came to thank him, he thought it was a disgrace.

古文：谏而见从，即内益畏。
现代文：劝谏被采纳了，他去宫中反更谨慎了。
English: His advice was heeded, and he went to the palace more cautiously.

古文：虽亲近，但记其削稿疏数，而莫知所言。
现代文：即使是亲人近侍，只知道他常写奏疏，但不知道他说了什么。
English: Even relatives and close attendants only knew that he often wrote music, but did not know what he said.

古文：大历十年薨，年九十馀。
现代文：大历十年他去世了，享年九十多岁。
English: He died ten years ago, in his nineties.

古文：初为郎时，著《王政记》，述今古治体，识者知其有公辅器云。
现代文：据说当初他当郎官时，撰写了《王政记》，叙述古今的政治体制，有见识的人知道他有宰相的才干。
English: It is said that when he was a vassal, he wrote "King's Political Diary," describing the ancient and modern political system, and people with insight know that he has the ability of prime minister.

