古文：沈炯虞荔弟寄马枢
现代文：沈炯字礼明，吴兴武康人。
English: Shen Yu Zi Li Ming, Wu Xing Wu Kangren.

古文：沈炯，字礼明，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：祖父选遥，在梁朝任寻阳太守。
English: His grandfather, Zengyao, served as the governor of Huanyang in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：祖瑀，梁寻阳太守。父续，王府记室参军。
现代文：父亲选坛，任王府记室参军。
English: His father was a chancellor, and he joined the army as a clerk of the king's household.

古文：炯少有隽才，为当时所重。
现代文：沈炯少年时有出众的才智，为当时人们所推重。
English: When he was a boy, Shen Yao had outstanding talent, which was highly valued by people at that time.

古文：释褐王国常侍，迁为尚书左民侍郎，出为吴令。
现代文：始任王国常侍，升任为尚书左民侍郎，调出朝廷任为吴兴县令。
English: He was first appointed as a royal equerry, promoted to the position of Shang Shuzhimin's equerry, and transferred out of the imperial court to become the governor of Wuxing County.

古文：侯景之难，吴郡太守袁君正入援京师，以炯监郡。
现代文：在遭遇侯景叛乱的灾难时，吴郡太守袁君正入京援救，任用沈炯监理郡中政事。
English: When confronted with the calamity of the rebellion of Houjing, Yuan Jun, the governor of Wu County, went to Beijing to help, and appointed Shen Yu as the supervisor of the county's internal affairs.

古文：京城陷，景将宋子仙据吴兴，遣使召炯，委以书记之任。
现代文：京城失陷，侯景的将领宋子仙占据吴兴，派遣使者招致沈炯，委任他书记的职务。
English: After the fall of the capital, Song Zixian, the general of Houjing, occupied Wu Xing, sent an envoy to invite Shen Yao and appointed him to the post of secretary.

古文：炯固辞以疾，子仙怒，命斩之。
现代文：沈炯以有病为理由坚决推辞，宋子仙发怒，下令杀他。
English: Shen Rong firmly refused on the grounds that he was ill, and Song Zixian became angry and ordered him to be killed.

古文：炯解衣将就戮，碍于路间桑树，乃更牵往他所，或遽救之，仅而获免。
现代文：沈烟脱去衣服将要被杀时，因为路间有桑树妨碍，于是把他牵往另一个地方，有人赶紧救助他，幸而得以免死。
English: When Shen Yan took off his clothes and was about to be killed, because there was a mulberry tree in the way, he was dragged to another place. Someone rushed to help him, and fortunately he was able to avoid death.

古文：子仙爱其才，终逼之令掌书记。
现代文：宋子仙爱惜他的才能，终于逼他服从命令掌管书记的工作。
English: Song Zixian cherished his talent and finally forced him to obey the order to take charge of the secretary's work.

古文：及子仙为王僧辩所败，僧辩素闻其名，于军中购得之，酬所获者铁钱十万，自是羽檄军书皆出于炯。
现代文：到宋子仙为王僧辩击败，王僧辩向来知道沈炯的名声，就在军中出钱购买到了他，酬谢捉到沈炯的人铁钱十万，从这时起紧急檄文和军事文书都出自于沈炯。
English: When Song Zisen defeated Wang Sangye for him, Wang Sangye always knew the reputation of Shen Ye and paid money to buy him in the army. The reward for catching Shen Ye was 100,000 iron coins. From then on, emergency documents and military documents all came from Shen Ye.

古文：及简文遇害，四方岳牧皆上表于江陵劝进，僧辩令炯制表，其文甚工，当时莫有逮者。
现代文：到简文查遇害，四方的封疆大吏都上书给在江陵的萧绎劝他登上帝位，王僧辩命令沈炯写劝进表，他的文词十分精美，当时各封疆大吏的上书没有比得上他的。
English: By the time of Jianwencha's murder, officials of the four provinces had written to Xiao Yuanzhang in Jiangling to persuade him to ascend to the throne. Wang Sangyan ordered Shen Qi to write a letter of persuasion. His writing was very exquisite. At that time, the letters from officials of the various provinces could not be compared to his.

古文：高祖南下，与僧辩会于白茅湾，登坛设盟，炯为其文。
现代文：产担南下，舆王坦趱会合于皇荃湾，登上坛场举行盟会，沈炯为他们写作了盟书。
English: When the production managers went south, they met in Tsuen Wan, and held a meeting on the altar. Shen Yi wrote a letter of alliance for them.

古文：及侯景东奔至吴郡，获炯妻虞氏，子行简，并杀之，炯弟携其母逃而获免。
现代文：到侯景往东逃至昱登时，抓住了选坝的妻子虞压，儿子选适，并杀了他们，选炯的弟弟带着他们的母亲逃走而得以免除死难。
English: When Hou Jing fled east to Luodeng, he caught Zengba's wife, Yu Peng, and son, Zeng Si, and killed them. Zengba's younger brother fled with their mother and was spared death.

古文：侯景平，梁元帝愍其妻子婴戮，特封原乡县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：侯景叛乱被子定后，梁元童同情他的妻和子遭杀戮，特封他为原乡县侯，食邑五百户。
English: After the Houjing Rebellion was settled, Liang Yuan Tong sympathized with his wife and son who were killed. He was specially appointed as the head of the original township and county with 500 households.

古文：僧辩为司徒，以炯为从事中郎。
现代文：王僧辩担任司徒时，任用沈炯为从事中郎。
English: When Wang Sangye served as an attendant, he appointed Shen Yao as a middle-ranking official.

古文：梁元帝征为给事黄门侍郎，领尚书左丞。
现代文：梁元帝征召他进入朝廷任命为给事黄门侍郎，领尚书左丞。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan conscripted him to enter the imperial court and appointed him as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, leading Shangshu to the left.

古文：荆州陷，为西魏所虏，魏人甚礼之，授炯仪同三司。
现代文：荆州失陷时，沈炯被西魏所俘虏，西魏的人十分礼遇他，任命沈炯为仪同三司。
English: When Jingzhou fell, Shen Yi was captured by the Western Wei Dynasty. The Western Wei Dynasty treated him very politely and appointed Shen Yi as the leader of the three departments.

古文：炯以母老在东，恒思归国，恐魏人爱其文才而留之，恒闭门却扫，无所交游。
现代文：沈炯因为母亲年老在束边居住，总想回国，惟恐魏人爱惜自己的文才而留着自己不肯放行，于是一直闭门不再扫路迎客，没有什么交游。
English: Because his elderly mother lived in Sokuban, Shen Yao always wanted to return to China. Fearing that the Wei people cherished their literary talent and would not let him go, he kept his door closed and no longer swept the road to welcome guests. There was no socializing.

古文：时有文章，随即弃毁，不令流布。
现代文：时常有文章写好，随即就毁掉，不让流传开来。
English: From time to time, articles are written and then immediately destroyed to prevent them from spreading.

古文：尝独行经汉武通天台，为表奏之，陈己思归之意。
现代文：曾经独自行经漠武帝筑的通天台，写了陈情表呈上朝廷，诉说自己思念回乡的意思。
English: He had once walked alone through the roof-spanning platform built by Emperor Mu, and wrote a petition to present to the imperial court, saying that he missed his hometown.

古文：其辞曰： 臣闻乔山虽掩，鼎湖之灵可祠，有鲁既荒，大庭之迹无泯。
现代文：他在文中说： 臣听说乔山虽然遮蔽，鼎湖的神灵还可以祈祷，有鲁已经荒芜，左庭的业迹没有消灭。
English: He said in the article: The minister heard that although Mount Qiao is covered, the gods of Dinghu can still pray, Yilu has been deserted, and the deeds of Zuotian have not been destroyed.

古文：伏惟陛下降德猗兰，纂灵豊谷。
现代文：伏思陛下能降恩德于猹芦，继承神灵于丰釜。
English: His Majesty Fuxi can bestow grace on the gourd and inherit the gods from the caldron.

古文：汉道既登，神仙可望，射之罘于海浦，礼日观而称功，横中流于汾河，指柏梁而高宴，何其乐也，岂不然欤！
现代文：选王朝已经建立，想做神仙正可期望，追随前代帝王登上海滨的之罘山，在泰山的日观峰祭神而称颂自己的功德，在汾河的中段绝流而渡，指点柏梁台而举行盛宴，多么快乐呀，难道不是吗!
English: The election of the dynasty has been established, and if you want to be a god, you can expect to follow the previous emperors to climb the coast of the Lushan Mountain, worship the god of the day on the peak of Mount Tai and praise your own merits, cross the middle of the Lushan River, point the beam and hold a feast, how happy it is, isn't it?

古文：既而运属上仙，道穷晏驾，甲帐珠帘，一朝零落，茂陵玉碗，宛出人间，陵云故基，共原田而膴々，别风馀址，对陵阜而茫茫，羁旅缧臣，能不落泪！
现代文：不久之后命运归宿是离开人世而成仙，道路走到尽头帝王去世，杂错珍宝的帐子缀饰珍珠的帘子，一时破败散落，茂陵玉碗，仿佛离开了人间，陵云原有的基础，和平原上肥沃的田地一样了。别风宫的余址，对着土山显得模糊不清，寄居他乡被拘缚的臣子，哪能不落泪。
English: Soon after, the fate of the destination is to leave the world and become immortal, the road comes to an end, the emperor dies, the curtain of miscellaneous treasures adorns the pearl curtain, momentarily broken and scattered, the lush jade bowl, as if leaving the human world, the original foundation of Lingyun, the same as the fertile fields on the plain. The remaining site of the Bifeng Palace, against the soil mountain, appears blurred and indistinct, and the captive vassal who lives in another country cannot help but shed tears.

古文：昔承明既厌，严助东归，驷马可乘，长卿西返，恭闻故实，窃有愚心。
现代文：从前承明殿既然倾倒，严助便向东归去，有套着四匹马的车乘坐，司马长卿往西返回，恭敬地听说这些足以效法的往事，私下亦有回去的心意。
English: Once upon a time, since Shomei-den had fallen, Isuke went back to the east and rode in a four-horse carriage, while Sima Choshu went back to the west. Respectfully, I heard about these past events, which are enough to be emulated, and privately, I also have the intention to return.

古文：黍稷非馨，敢忘徼福。 
现代文：黍稷没有远扬的香气，但哪敢忘记追求幸福。 
English: Dragonfly does not have a far-reaching aroma, but how dare we forget the pursuit of happiness.

古文：奏讫，其夜炯梦见有宫禁之所，兵卫甚严，炯便以情事陈诉，闻有人言： 甚不惜放卿还，几时可至。 
现代文：呈上朝廷后，这天夜裹沈炯梦见有宫廷戒严的地方，士兵警卫得非常严密，沈炯便把自己的事情陈诉，听到有人说： 十分不愿意放您回去，但这个时候可以到来。 
English: After presenting it to the imperial court, that night, Shen Ye dreamed of a place where the palace was under martial law, and the soldiers were very closely guarded. Shen Ye then reported his own case, and heard someone say: I am very reluctant to let you go back, but this time can come.

古文：少日，便与王克等并获东归。
现代文：不多几天，他就和王克等人一起获准往东回去。
English: Within a few days, he and Wang Ke and others were allowed to return to the East.

古文：绍泰二年至都，除司农卿，迁御史中丞。
现代文：绍泰二年到达都城，被任命为司农卿，升任御史中丞。
English: Shao Tai arrived in the capital in the second year, was appointed as the Secretary of Agriculture, and was promoted to the Vice-Minister of History.

古文：高祖受禅，加通直散骑常侍，中丞如故。
现代文：高祖接受禅让，选姻加官通直散骑常侍，中丞的职务依然担任。
English: Gao Zu accepted Zen's resignation, the marriage ceremony was held, and the officials were added to the regular attendants. He still held the position of Vice-Commander.

古文：以母老表请归养，诏不许。
现代文：因为母亲年老他上表请求回家抚养母亲，皇帝下令不许可。
English: Because his mother was old, he asked the emperor to allow him to return home to raise his mother, but the emperor refused.

古文：文帝嗣位，又表曰： 臣婴生不幸，弱冠而孤，母子零丁，兄弟相长。
现代文：文帝登位，邀姻又上表说： 臣平生遭遇不幸，二十岁时父亲去世而成了孤儿，母子孤单，兄弟间相互扶助成长。
English: Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, invited the couple to marry, and said: "Wen suffered misfortune in his life, became an orphan when his father died at the age of twenty, his mother and son were lonely, and the brothers helped each other to grow up.

古文：谨身为养，仕不择官，宦成梁朝，命存乱世，冒危履险，百死轻生，妻息诛夷，昆季冥灭，馀臣母子，得逢兴运。
现代文：恭敬周到地亲身奉养母亲，出仕不选择官职，做官在梁朝成功，生命幸存于乱世，冒着危难经历险途，在百次遭遇死难的险境中已把生命看轻，妻和儿子都被杀害，兄弟已经去世，剩下臣母子两人，得以遇上国家兴盛的时运。
English: Respectfully and thoughtfully, he personally supported his mother, he did not choose a post to serve, he was successful in the Liang Dynasty, his life survived the chaotic world, he braved the perilous path, and he has taken life lightly in the hundred times he has encountered the danger of death. His wife and son were killed, his brother has died, and the remaining two subjects, mother and son, were able to meet the prosperity of the country.

古文：臣母妾刘，今年八十有一，臣叔母妾丘，七十有五，臣门弟侄故自无人，妾丘儿孙又久亡泯，两家侍养，馀臣一人。
现代文：臣的母亲刘氏，今年八十一岁，臣的叔母丘氏，七十五岁，臣家中的弟侄从前一直没有后人，叔母丘氏的儿孙又很久前就死去了，两家老人的侍奉抚养，祇剩臣一人。
English: My mother, Liu, is eighty-one years old, my aunt, Qiu, is seventy-five years old, my brothers and nephews in my family have never had descendants, and my aunt's children and grandchildren died a long time ago. The servants of the two old people have been raised, and only I am left.

古文：前帝知臣之孤茕，养臣以州里，不欲使顿居草莱，又复矜臣温清，所以一年之内，再三休沐。
现代文：前帝知道臣的孤独，以俸禄养臣于故乡，不愿让臣留居乡野地方，又关心臣冬暖夏凉，所以一年之中，再三让臣休假。
English: The former emperor knew the loneliness of the vassal, and used his salary to raise the vassal in his hometown. He did not want to let the vassal stay in the countryside, and was concerned about the vassal in winter and summer, so he repeatedly let the vassal take a vacation throughout the year.

古文：臣之屡披丹款，频冒宸鉴，非欲苟违朝廷，远离畿辇。
现代文：臣屡次披露赤诚之心，频繁地在君主阅览时有所冒犯，不是随意违抗朝廷，要远离京城。
English: The vassal has repeatedly disclosed his sincerity, frequently offending the monarch during the reading, not arbitrarily defying the imperial court, and staying away from the capital.

古文：一者以年将六十，汤火居心，每跪读家书，前惧后喜，温枕扇席，无复成童。
现代文：一是因为自己年纪将到六十岁，家事如沸汤烈火存在心中，每次跪着拜读家中来信，总是先感到恐惧而后才喜悦起来，给母亲冬温枕夏扇席，不再是年龄稍大的儿童了。
English: First, because he will be sixty years old, the family affairs are like a boiling pot in his heart. Every time he kneels to read a letter from home, he always feels fear first and then joy. He gives his mother a winter pillow and a summer fan seat. He is no longer a slightly older child.

古文：二者职居彝宪，邦之司直，若自亏身体，何问国章？
现代文：二是因为职务在于掌管经常大法，担任国家的司直，如果自己毁坏了本身应当遵守的礼节，怎么来执行国家的法规?
English: Second, because the duty is to administer the regular law and serve as the country's magistrate, if you destroy the etiquette you should abide by, how can you enforce the country's laws and regulations?

古文：前德绸缪，始许哀放，内侍近臣，多悉此旨。
现代文：前帝的恩德真是情意殷勤，最初许可因哀怜而放归，宫中内侍皇上近臣，多数人都知道遣个旨意。
English: The former emperor's kindness was truly affectionate and courteous. At first, he was allowed to return home because of his sorrow. Most of the palace attendants and close retainers of the emperor knew of the emperor's will.

古文：正以选贤与能，广求明哲，趑趄荏苒，未始取才。
现代文：正是因为选拔具有贤德和才能的人，广求聪明睿哲之士，徘徊不前时间推移，才没有实现最初的愿望。
English: It is precisely because of the selection of people with virtue and talent, the wide search for clever and wise people, and the time lapse, that the initial desire has not been realized.

古文：而上玄降戾，奄至今日，德音在耳，坟土遽乾，悠悠昊天，哀此罔极。
现代文：而天降不幸，时间过去直至今日，善言依然在耳，坟上的泥土已经很快就干了，遥远无际的上天，哀悼这个不幸真是不能穷尽。
English: But the misfortune fell from the sky, time passed until today, the kind words are still in the ear, the soil on the grave has quickly dried, the sky is far away, and the mourning for this misfortune is really inexhaustible.

古文：兼臣私心煎切，弥迫近时，缕缕之祈，转忘尘触。
现代文：加上臣个人的心念如煎熬一样焦急，近来的日子中更加急迫，恭谨的请求，尽快忘却尘世。
English: In addition, the minister's personal thoughts are as anxious as suffering, more urgent in recent days, and respectfully request to forget the world as soon as possible.

古文：伏惟陛下睿哲聪明，嗣兴下武，刑于四海，弘此孝治。
现代文：伏思陛下睿哲聪明，继位兴起之后继承前帝的事业，以礼法治理天下，弘扬这种孝治。
English: His Majesty Fuxi was wise and clever. After the rise of succession, he inherited the former emperor's career, governed the world with etiquette, and promoted this kind of filial piety.

古文：寸管求天，仰归帷扆，有感必应，实望圣明。
现代文：短小的笔管祈求上天，仰首向往帝座，以精诚感动必然相应，实在期望皇上。
English: The short and small pen tube prays to the heavens, raises its head to yearn for the imperial throne, and is inevitably moved with sincerity, really expecting the emperor.

古文：特乞霈然申其私礼，则王者之德，覃及无方，矧彼翔沈，孰非涵养。 
现代文：特别乞求恩泽得以表白个人尽孝之礼，那么君主的恩惠，广施所及没有边际，况无足称道之人的升沉，谁不受到滋润养育。 
English: If it is possible to express one's filial piety by begging for special favors, then the monarch's bounty is boundless and boundless, and it is not enough to praise a person's rise and fall, who is not nourished and nurtured.

古文：诏答曰： 省表具怀。
现代文：皇帝下诏书回答说： 看了陈情表陈述的心怀。
English: The Imperial Rescript replied: "I have read the report form, I am well aware of it, and I am very moved.

古文：卿誉驰咸、雒，情深宛、沛。
现代文：你的声誉传扬在咸、雒一带，情感深切地板注宛、沛那方。
English: Your reputation is spreading in the Haman and Handan areas, and the emotions are deeply felt in the Shuan and Panagatang areas.

古文：日者理切倚闾，言归异域，复牵时役，遂乖侍养。
现代文：道理切实是母亲每天倚门盼子来归，许诺之言却已归他乡，又为掌管国事所牵连，于是有违于侍奉养育母亲之责。
English: The truth is that the mother is waiting for her son to come home every day, but the word of promise has gone to another country, and is involved in the management of state affairs, so it is contrary to the responsibility of serving and nurturing the mother.

古文：虽周生之思，每欲弃官，《戴礼》垂文，得遗从政，前朝光宅四海，劬劳万机，以卿才为独步，职居专席，方深委任，屡屈情礼。
现代文：虽然周生的思念，常要辞去官职，《戴礼》焕发文采，可以派遣主持政务，前代帝王恩德覆被四海，辛勤劳苦料理纷繁政务，以你的才能为独一无二，任用为御史中丞每次朝见君主都独坐一席，正当要更加委以重任，屡次在情礼方面有所委屈。
English: Although the thought of life is often to resign from an official position, "Dairi" is full of wit and can be dispatched to preside over government affairs. The previous emperor, Ende, covered the four seas, worked hard and carried out complex government affairs. With your talent, you are unique. Appointed as an Imperial Historian, every time you see the monarch in the morning, you sit alone. You should be entrusted with more responsibilities, and you have repeatedly been wronged in terms of etiquette.

古文：朕嗣奉洪基，思弘景业，顾兹寡薄，兼缠哀疚，实赖贤哲，同致雍熙，岂便释简南闱，解绂东路。
现代文：朕继承帝位，想扩展大业，祇是这样寡恩薄德，心中又缠绕哀伤愧疚，实在有赖于德才兼备的明智之士，共同达到和乐的境地，难道就舍去手版离开南边的宫廷，解除官职取往东之路回去。
English: I want to succeed to the throne and expand my great career, but I am so ungrateful, and my heart is full of sorrow and guilt. It really depends on wise people who are both virtuous and wise to achieve a peaceful state together. Should I give up the manuscript and leave the southern court, remove the official position and take the road to the east?

古文：当令冯亲入舍，荀母从官，用睹朝荣，不亏家礼。
现代文：应当使冯亲入京居住，荀母跟从住到官署，以见朝廷的光荣，不欠缺家庭的礼节。
English: Feng Jian should be allowed to live in Beijing, and his mother should follow him to live in the government office, so as to see the glory of the imperial court and not lack the etiquette of the family.

古文：寻敕所由，相迎尊累，使卿公私得所，并无废也。 
现代文：考虑诏书这样做的理由，去迎接尊贵的家室，使你公私两方面得到适宜的安排，都不受损害呀。 
English: Consider the reasons for the imperial edict to do so, to meet the noble family, and to get the appropriate arrangements for both your private and public affairs, without being harmed.

古文：初，高祖尝称炯宜居王佐，军国大政，多预谋谟，文帝又重其才用，欲宠贵之。
现代文：当初，高祖曾经称赞沈炯适合任辅佐帝王的职务，军队国家的大事，沈炯多参与谋划，文帝又看重他行事的才能，要加给恩宠使他显贵。
English: At the beginning, Gaozu had praised Shen Zhen as being suitable for the post of assistant to the emperor, the great event of the army and the country, Shen Zhen was more involved in the planning, and Emperor Wen valued his ability to act, and wanted to give him grace to make him distinguished.

古文：会王琳入寇大雷，留异拥据东境，帝欲使炯因是立功，乃解中丞，加明威将军，遣还乡里，收合徒众。
现代文：遇上玉壁进犯去重，旦退拥兵占据束边国境，塞童想使沈炯因此建立功勋，便解除他中丞的职务，加官明威将军，派他回故乡，收拢集合部队。
English: In the face of the invasion of the Jade Wall, the retreating soldiers occupied the border of Shu, and Saido wanted to make Shen Yao build up merits, so he relieved him of the duties of the Vice-Commander, and sent him back to his hometown to gather the troops.

古文：以疾卒于吴中，时年五十九。
现代文：沈烟因为疾病在吴中去世，时年五十九岁。
English: Shen Yan died of illness in Wu Middle School at the age of fifty-nine.

古文：文帝闻之，即日举哀，并遣吊祭，赠侍中，谥曰恭子。
现代文：文帝听到逭消息，当天举行哀悼仪式，并派使者前往吊唁祭奠，赠给侍中官衔，谧号叫做恭子。
English: When Emperor Wen heard the sad news, he held a mourning ceremony on the same day, and sent an envoy to pay condolences and tribute, and presented him with the official rank of chamberlain. His posthumous name was Yuanzi.

古文：有集二十卷行于世。
现代文：有著作集二十卷流行于世间。
English: A collection of twenty volumes has been handed down to the world.

古文：虞荔，字山披，会稽馀姚人也。祖权，梁廷尉卿、永嘉太守。
现代文：卢墓字山披，盒擅篮毖人。祖父虞权，在梁曲任廷尉卿、丞台太守。
English: Grandfather Yu Quan was appointed as the court lieutenant of Liang Qu and the grand marshal of Jodai.

古文：父检，平北始兴王谘议参军。
现代文：父亲廛捡，任平北篮罢王谘议参军。
English: He was picked up by his father and advised to join the army by the governor of North Pyongan Province.

古文：荔幼聪敏，有志操。
现代文：卢墓幼年时聪明敏睿，有志向操守。
English: As a child, Lu Guo was smart and astute, and had a strong sense of ethics.

古文：年九岁，随从伯阐候太常陆倕，倕问《五经》凡有十事，荔随问辄应，无有遗失，倕甚异之。
现代文：九岁那年，随从堂伯父虞阐去探望太常陆任，陆任问虞菱《五经》中的十件事，虞茎随问随答，没有遗漏阙失的地方，陆堡十分诧异。
English: When he was nine years old, he followed his great-uncle, Yu Xuan, to visit his great-uncle, Lu Ren. Lu Ren asked Yu Ling the ten things in the Five Classics, and Yu Zi answered the questions as he was asked. He did not omit anything, and Lu Bai was very surprised.

古文：又尝诣徵士何胤，时太守衡阳王亦造焉，胤言之于王，王欲见荔，荔辞曰： 未有板刺，无容拜谒。 
现代文：又曾经拜访不就朝廷征聘的士人何胤，当时太守衡阳王也来访，何胤把虞墓的情况告诉衡阳王，蜜旦延要见虞墓，卢莶推辞说： 没有担任官职，不可拜见。 
English: He also once visited the scholar He Yan, who was not recruited by the imperial court. At that time, the eunuch Hengyang Wang also visited. He Yan told Hengyang Wang about the situation of the yu tomb. Mitan Yan wanted to see the yu tomb. Lu Wei declined, saying, "I did not hold an official position, so I cannot visit."

古文：王以荔有高尚之志，雅相钦重，还郡，即辟为主簿，荔又辞以年小不就。
现代文：堑堡王因为卢墓有高尚的志行，极为敬重，回到郡中，立即征召虞荔为主簿，虞荔又以年纪小辞谢而不就任。
English: Because of the lofty aspirations of Lu Tomb, the king of Qianbao highly respected him. When he returned to the county, he immediately conscripted Yu Lai as the chief, and Yu Lai declined to take office, saying that he was too young.

古文：及长，美风仪，博览坟籍，善属文。
现代文：到成年时，有漂亮的风度仪表，博览古代典籍，善于作文章。
English: By the time he was an adult, he had a beautiful demeanor, was well versed in ancient classics, and was good at writing essays.

古文：释褐梁西中郎行参军，寻署法曹外兵参军，兼丹阳诏狱正。
现代文：脱去平民布衣出任官职时是担任凿曲的西中郎行参军，接着署理法曹外兵参军，兼任且屋诏狱正。
English: When he took off his civilian clothes to take up his official position, it was Nishinakuro Yukimura, who was in charge of chiseling, who joined the army, followed by the acting legal officer, a foreign soldier, who also served as the head of the prison.

古文：梁武帝于城西置士林馆，荔乃制碑，奏上，帝命勒之于馆，仍用荔为士林学士。
现代文：梁亘皇童在京城西边设置士林馆，虞荔便写作碑文，呈上朝廷，梁武帝命令将碑文刻石陈列于馆中。便任用虞荔做士林学士。
English: Emperor Liang Wuan set up a Shilin Hall on the west side of Beijing, and Yu Lai wrote an inscription and presented it to the imperial court. Emperor Liang Wu ordered the inscription to be displayed in the hall. He appointed Yu Lai as a Shilin scholar.

古文：寻为司文郎，迁通直散骑侍郎，兼中书舍人。
现代文：接着任用为司文郎，升任通直散骑侍郎，兼任中书舍人。
English: Next, he was appointed as Sibunro, promoted to Tsuchida Sanzhijijiro, and concurrently served as Chushushoshojin.

古文：时左右之任，多参权轴，内外机务，互有带掌，唯荔与顾协淡然靖退，居于西省，但以文史见知，当时号为清白。
现代文：当时梁武帝左右任职的官员，多参与权力中枢，朝廷内外的军政大事，互相间交错兼管，惟有虞荔和顾协宁静淡泊恭谨地退避，居住在宫中西边的官署裹，祇以通晓文史为人所知，当时号称清白。
English: At that time, the officials around Emperor Liangwu were mostly involved in the center of power, the military and political events inside and outside the court, and interlaced and managed each other. Only Gu Lai and Gu Xie quietly and respectfully retreated, living in the government office on the west side of the palace. They were only known for their knowledge of literary history. At that time, they were known for their innocence.

古文：寻领大著作。
现代文：接着领大著作的职务。
English: Next came the post of head of the university's literature department.

古文：及侯景之乱，荔率亲属入台，除镇西谘议参军，舍人如故。
现代文：到侯景叛乱时，虞荔率领亲属进入台城，任命为镇西谘议参军，舍人的职务依旧担任。
English: At the time of the rebellion of Houjing, Yu Lai led his relatives into Taicheng and was appointed as the Zhenxi advisory to join the army. He still held the position of a subordinate.

古文：台城陷，逃归乡里。
现代文：台城失陷后，逃回故乡。
English: After the fall of Taichung, he fled back to his hometown.

古文：侯景平，元帝征为中书侍郎，贞阳侯，授扬州别驾，并不就。
现代文：侯景被平定，元帝征召他为中书侍郎，贞阳侯任命他为扬州别驾，虞荔都没有就任。
English: Houjing was subdued, the Yuan Emperor conscripted him as a secretary, Zhengyang Hou appointed him as the Yangzhou governor, and Yu Li did not take office.

古文：张彪之据会稽也，荔时在焉。
现代文：张彪占据会稽，虞荔当时在那裹。
English: Zhang Biao was in charge of the auditorium, while Gu Li was there.

古文：及文帝平彪，高祖遗荔书曰： 丧乱已来，贤哲凋散，君才用有美，声闻许、洛，当今朝廷惟新，广求英隽，岂可栖迟东土，独善其身？
现代文：到文帝平定张彪后，高祖给虞荔写信说： 死丧战乱以来，德才兼备的明智之士凋零离散，您有杰出的才能，名声著称许、洛，现在朝廷更新，广泛搜求才智出众之士，难道可以居留在束边的故乡，保持个人的节操?
English: After Emperor Wen had subdued Zhang Biao Rong, Gao Zu wrote to Yu Li, saying, "Since the death and destruction of the war, the wise people with both virtue and talent have withered and dispersed. You have outstanding talents, famous for Xu and Luo. Now the imperial court is updating and extensively searching for talented and outstanding people. Can you stay in your hometown and maintain personal discipline?

古文：今令兄子将接出都，想必副朝廷虚迟也。 
现代文：现在您哥哥的儿子奉命接您离开故乡前往都城，想必是不负朝廷谦虚的希望呀。 
English: Now your brother's son has been ordered to pick you up from your hometown and take you to the capital. I'm sure he will live up to the modest hopes of the imperial court.

古文：文帝又与书曰： 君东南有美，声誉洽闻，自应翰飞京许，共康时弊，而削迹丘园，保兹独善，岂使称空谷之望邪？
现代文：文帝又给他写信说： 你在东南一带有美好的名望，声誉广为人知，自然应当高飞京许，共同安治时弊，而隐居乡里家园，保持这种独善其身，难道能和空谷一般深切的愿望相称吗?
English: Emperor Wen also wrote to him, saying, "You have a good reputation in Southeast Asia, and your reputation is widely known. It is natural that you should fly high to the capital city, and work together to solve the problems of the times. But can you live in seclusion in your rural home and maintain this self-righteousness? Is it commensurate with the deep desire of the empty valley?

古文：必愿便尔俶装，且为出都之计。
现代文：真诚希望你立即整理行装，还是做离开故乡前往都城的计划。
English: I sincerely hope that you will immediately sort out and pack, or make a plan to leave your hometown for the capital.

古文：唯迟披觏，在于兹日。 
现代文：但愿披心相见，在于那一天。 
English: Let's hope it's the day we meet in person.

古文：迫切之不得已，乃应命至都。
现代文：情势迫切之下虞荔不得已，就服从命令来到都城。
English: Under the urgent situation, Yu Lai had no choice but to obey the order to come to the capital.

古文：高祖崩，文帝嗣位，除太子中庶子，仍侍太子读书。
现代文：高祖崩，文帝继承帝位，任命虞荔为太子中庶子，跟随侍候太子读书。
English: Gao Zu passed away, Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne, appointed Gu Li as the prince's middle son, and studied with the prince.

古文：寻领大著作、东扬扬州二州大中正，庶子如故。
现代文：接着领大著作、束扬扬州两个州大中正的职务，庶子一职依旧担任。
English: Next, he led the work of the university, and led the two state universities in Yangzhou, and still held the position of the son-in-law.

古文：初，荔母随荔入台，卒于台内，寻而城陷，情礼不申，由是终身蔬食布衣，不听音乐，虽任遇隆重，而居止俭素，淡然无营。
现代文：当初，虞荔的母亲随虞荔进入台城，死于台城中，接着台城失陷，哀情丧礼无法表示，虞荔因此终身吃素食穿布衣，不听音乐，虽所任职务待遇贵盛，而生活节俭朴素，宁静淡泊无所追求。
English: At the beginning, Yu Lai's mother followed Yu Lai into Taicheng, died in Taicheng, and then Taicheng fell. The funeral ceremony could not express the grief. Therefore, Yu Lai ate vegetarian food, wore cloth clothes, and did not listen to music for life. Although his duties were well-paid, his life was frugal and simple, and he did not pursue tranquility.

古文：文帝深器之，常引在左右，朝夕顾访。
现代文：文帝十分器重他，时常带领在自己身边，早晚顾问。
English: Emperor Wen held him in high esteem and often had him by his side as an advisor.

古文：荔性沉密，少言论，凡所献替，莫有见其际者，故不列于后焉。
现代文：虞荔性格深沉谨慎，少说话，凡是静言进谏献上可行的意见除去不可行的做法，逭方面没有谁能比得上他，所以虞荔的位置不会列在别人之后。
English: Yu Lai's character is deep and cautious, he rarely speaks, and when he does speak, it is to offer feasible suggestions and eliminate unfeasible practices. No one can match him in this respect, so Yu Lai's position will not be listed after others.

古文：时荔第二弟寄寓于闽中，依陈宝应，荔每言之辄流涕。
现代文：那时虞荔的第二个弟弟虞寄居住在闽中，依附陈实应，虞荔每次谈到他就流泪。
English: At that time, Yu Lai's second brother Yu Ying lived in Handan, attached to Chen Shiying, and Yu Lai shed tears every time he talked about him.

古文：文帝哀而谓曰： 我亦有弟在远，此情甚切，他人岂知。 
现代文：文帝哀怜而对他说： 我也有弟弟在远方，这种思念的心情十分迫切，他人哪裹知道。 
English: Emperor Wen pitifully said to him, "I also have a younger brother far away, and this feeling of missing him is very urgent. How would others know?

古文：乃敕宝应求寄，宝应终不遣。
现代文：于是下发诏令给陈宝应索要虞寄，陈宝应最终不肯遣送。
English: As a result, an imperial decree was issued to require Chen Baoying to send money, but Chen Baoying ultimately refused to be sent.

古文：荔因以感疾，帝数往临视。
现代文：虞荔因此而伤感生病，文帝几次亲往看望。
English: As a result, Gu Li became sadly ill, and Emperor Wen personally visited him several times.

古文：令荔将家口人省，荔以禁中非私居之所，乞停城外，文帝不许，乃令住于兰台，乘舆再三临问，手敕中使，相望于道。
现代文：命令虞荔将家中人口搬进宫署居住，虞荔以宫中不是私家居住的处所，请求留居城外，文帝不许可，便命令他家住在兰台，文帝乘舆再三亲临慰问，亲自写诏书派往探视的宫中使者，在道路上彼此都能看到。
English: He ordered Yu Lai to move his family into the residence of the Imperial Household Agency. Yu Lai requested to stay outside the city, as the palace was not a private residence. Without permission from Emperor Wen, he ordered his family to live in Lantai. Emperor Wen took advantage of the public's repeated condolences and personally wrote an edict to send the palace envoys to visit. They could see each other on the road.

古文：又以荔蔬食积久，非羸疾所堪，乃敕曰： 能敦布素，乃当为高，卿年事已多，气力稍减，方欲仗委，良须克壮，今给卿鱼肉，不得固从所执也。 
现代文：又因为虞荔吃素食太久，不能承受疲病的折磨，文帝于是下诏令说： 能淳朴地穿布衣吃素食，便是高尚的节操，你年纪已经老了，生气活力稍有减退，正要依仗托付，十分需要能够健壮起来，现在给你鱼肉，不准坚持所遵守的布衣素食的做法。 
English: And because Gu Lai had been eating vegetarian food for too long and could not bear the torture of fatigue, Emperor Wen then issued a decree saying: To be able to simply wear cloth and eat vegetarian food is a noble act of self-restraint. You are old, your vitality has slightly declined, you are relying on trust, and you really need to be able to become strong. Now you are given fish meat, and you are not allowed to adhere to the practice of cloth and vegetarian food.

古文：荔终不从。
现代文：虞荔最终不听从。
English: In the end, Gu Li did not listen.

古文：天嘉二年卒，时年五十九。
现代文：天嘉二年去世，时年五十九岁。
English: Tian Jia died two years later, at the age of 59.

古文：文帝甚伤惜之，赠侍中，谥曰德子。
现代文：文帝十分哀伤惋惜，赠给他侍中的官衔，谧号叫做德子。
English: Emperor Wen was very sad and regretful, and gave him the official title of chamberlain. His nickname was Dezi.

古文：及丧柩还乡里，上亲出临送，当时荣之。
现代文：到他的丧柩送还故乡时，塞帝亲自出来送行，当时人认为很荣耀。
English: When his funeral cortege returned to his hometown, Seti himself came out to see it off, which was considered a great honor at the time.

古文：子世基、世南，并少知名。
现代文：儿子虞世基、虞世南，都在年少就有名于时为人所知。
English: His sons, Yu Shiji and Yu Shiminan, both became famous at a young age.

古文：寄字次安，少聪敏。
现代文：虞寄字次安，年少就聪明敏睿。
English: If you are young, you will be wise.

古文：年数岁，客有造其父者，遇寄于门，因嘲之曰： 郎君姓虞，必当无智。 
现代文：年纪几岁时，有客人来探访他的父亲，在门口遇上虞寄，于是嘲弄他说： 郎君姓虞，一定是没有智慧。 
English: When he was a few years old, some guests came to visit his father. They met Yu Yuxin at the door and mocked him, saying, "Your father, surnamed Yu, must be stupid."

古文：寄应声答曰： 文字不辨，岂得非愚？ 
现代文：卢宣应声回答说： 文字不能辨认，难道不愚蠢? 
English: Lu Xuan replied in response: "Isn't it stupid that the characters can't be recognized?

古文：客大惭。
现代文：客人非常惭愧。
English: The guest was mortified.

古文：入谓其父曰： 此子非常人，文举之对不是过也。 
现代文：进门对他父亲说： 这个孩子不是平常人，孑乙文举一样的对答不是过失呀。 
English: When he came through the door, he said to his father: This child is not an ordinary person. It's not a mistake to give the same answer.

古文：及长，好学，善属文。
现代文：到成年时，爱好学习，很会写文章。
English: By the time he was an adult, he loved to study and was good at writing articles.

古文：性冲静，有栖遁之志。
现代文：性格淡泊宁静，有隐居遁世的志向。
English: His personality is calm and serene, and he aspires to live in seclusion.

古文：弱冠举秀才，对策高第。
现代文：二十岁时被荐举为秀才，考试对答中取得优秀成绩。
English: At the age of 20, he was recommended as a talented person, and achieved excellent results in the examination.

古文：起家梁宣城王国左常侍。
现代文：以担任梁朝宣城王国左常侍起家。
English: He began his career as a servant of the Liang Dynasty in the Kingdom of Xuancheng.

古文：大同中，尝骤雨，殿前往往有杂色宝珠，梁武观之甚有喜色，寄因上《瑞雨颂》。
现代文：大同年中，曾经在下暴雨时，殿前往往有五彩相杂的实珠，梁武帝看见十分喜悦，虞寄因此呈上《瑞雨颂》。
English: In the middle of the same year, when there was a heavy rain, there were often multi-colored solid beads in front of the hall. Emperor Liang Wu was very pleased to see them, and therefore presented the "Song of the Rain."

古文：帝谓寄兄荔曰： 此颂典裁清拔，卿家之士龙也。
现代文：梁武帝对虞寄的哥哥虞荔说： 这篇颂文雅脱俗，是你家的陆士龙呀。
English: Liang Wudi said to Yu Li, the elder brother of Yu Ying: "This ode to elegance and refinement is your family's Lu Shilong.

古文：将如何擢用？ 
现代文：应如何提拔任用? 
English: How should promotion and appointment be made?

古文：寄闻之，叹曰： 美盛德之形容，以申击壤之情耳。
现代文：虞寄听到这样说，感叹道： 赞扬盛美之事的形象，以表示歌颂盛世太平之情啊。
English: Hearing this, Yu Ying exclaimed, "To praise the image of prosperity and beauty is to sing the praises of prosperity and peace."

古文：吾岂买名求仕者乎？ 
现代文：我难道是以文买名求得仕进的人吗? 
English: Am I the one who bought and sold his way to the top?

古文：乃闭门称疾，唯以书籍自娱。
现代文：于是闭门不出声称有病，衹以读书自娱。
English: As a result, he did not go out of doors, claiming to be ill, and amused himself by reading.

古文：岳阳王为会稽太守，引寄为行参军，迁记室参军，领郡五官掾。
现代文：岳阳王担任会稽太守时，任用虞寄为行参军，升任记室参军，领郡五官掾。
English: When Yueyang Wang served as the auditor general of the association, he appointed Yu Ying to join the army, was promoted to the record office, joined the army, and led the county five officials.

古文：又转中记室，掾如故。
现代文：又转任中记室，掾的职务依旧担任。
English: He was also transferred to the Central Records Office, but still held the post of secretary.

古文：在职简略烦苛，务存大体，曹局之内，终日寂然。
现代文：在职守之中无论事务简略还是烦琐，一定保全原则，官署裹面，整天安静。
English: In the line of duty, regardless of whether the matter is simple or cumbersome, the principle of certain preservation, the government office is wrapped in a mask, and the whole day is quiet.

古文：侯景之乱，寄随兄荔入台，除镇南湘东王谘议参军，加贞威将军。
现代文：侯景叛乱的时候，虞寄随哥哥虞荔进入台城，任命为镇南湘束王谘议参军，加官贞威将军。
English: At the time of the rebellion of Houjing, Yu Ying followed his brother Yu Li into Taicheng and was appointed to advise and join the army of Zhenan Xiangzhuang Wang and promoted to the position of General Zhen Wei.

古文：京城陷，遁还乡里。
现代文：京城失陷后，逃回故乡。
English: After the fall of the capital, he fled back to his hometown.

古文：及张彪往临川，强寄俱行，寄与彪将郑玮同舟而载，玮尝忤彪意，乃劫寄奔于晋安。
现代文：在张彪前往临川时，强迫虞寄同行，虞寄和张彪的部将郑璋同坐一条船，郑璋曾经忤逆过张彪的心意，于是劫持虞寄逃奔到晋安。
English: When Zhang Biao was on his way to Linchuan, he forced Yu Ying to accompany him. Yu Ying and Zhang Biao's subordinate, Zheng Yao, rode on the same boat. Zheng Yao had once defied Zhang Biao's wishes, so he kidnapped Yu Ying and fled to Jin'an.

古文：时陈宝应据有闽中，得寄甚喜。
现代文：当时陈宝应占据了闽中，得到虞寄非常高兴。
English: At that time, Chen Baoying occupied the middle of the cocoon, and he was very happy to receive the fortune.

古文：高祖平侯景，寄劝令自结，宝应从之，乃遣使归诚。
现代文：高祖平定侯景，虞寄劝使陈宝应主动结交，陈宝应听从他的意见，便派使者去表示归顺。
English: Gaozhu pacified Houjing, and sent an envoy to persuade Chen Bao that he should take the initiative to make friends, and Chen Bao should listen to his advice, and then sent an envoy to show his submission.

古文：承圣元年，除和戎将军、中书侍郎，宝应爱其才，托以道阻不遣。
现代文：承圣元年，任命虞寄为和戎将军、中书侍郎，陈实应喜爱他的才能，以沿途道路不安定为托辞不予遣送。
English: In the first year of the saint's life, Yu Ying was appointed as the general of Wairoa and the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters. Chen Shi loved his talent and used the excuse that the road was unstable as an excuse not to send him.

古文：每欲引寄为僚属，委以文翰，寄固辞，获免。
现代文：常要任用虞寄为所属官吏，委托他掌管信札公文，虞寄坚决推辞，得以免除。
English: He often had to appoint Yuyou as his subordinate official, entrusting him with the management of official correspondence. Yuyou resolutely refused and was exempted.

古文：及宝应结婚留异，潜有逆谋，寄微知其意，言说之际，每陈逆顺之理，微以讽谏，宝应辄引说他事以拒之。
现代文：到陈宾应舆留异结亲，暗中有背叛的谋划时，虞寄伺察到他的意思，谈话的时候，常陈述叛逆归顺的道理，隐微地婉言规劝，陈宝应就引开说其他事以拒绝虞寄的规劝。
English: When Chen Bin Yingying was planning to leave behind his estranged relatives and secretly plotting treachery, Yu Yingying noticed his intention. When talking, he often stated the principle of rebellion and submission, and gave subtle and gentle words of exhortation. Chen Bao should have said other things to reject Yu Yingying's exhortation.

古文：又尝令左右诵《汉书》，卧而听之，至蒯通说韩信曰 相君之背，贵不可言 ，宝应蹶然起曰 可谓智士 。
现代文：陈宝应又曾经命令身边的人诵读《汉书》，躺着听，读到蒯通劝垄信造反时说 相君之背，贵不可言 ，陈宝应突然站起来说 可谓明智之士 。
English: Chen Baoying also once ordered the people around him to recite the "Chinese Book," lay down and listen, and when he read the exhortation to rebel, he said, "The back of your partner, you can't say," Chen Baoying suddenly stood up and said, "He is a wise man."

古文：寄正色曰： 覆郦骄韩，未足称智；岂若班彪《王命》，识所归乎？ 
现代文：虞寄严肃地说： 败坏郦食其劝降查王旦尘的计划而骄纵堕值，不足以称为明智之士；哪裹像班彪的《王命》这样，认识到归宿呢? 
English: Yu Ying said solemnly, "It is not enough to be a wise man to corrupt and devour his plan to persuade, humiliate and investigate the king's enemies, and to be proud of his depravity; how can one recognize the destination like Ban Biao's "King's Life"?

古文：寄知宝应不可谏，虑祸及己，乃为居士服以拒绝之。
现代文：虞责知道陈宝应不可规劝，顾虑祸害到自己，就穿上居士的衣服以拒绝陈实应。
English: Knowing that Chen Baoying could not be persuaded, and fearing harm to himself, Gu Rong put on the clothes of a layman to refuse Chen Shiying.

古文：常居东山寺，伪称脚疾，不复起，宝应以为假托，使烧寄所卧屋，寄安卧不动。
现代文：长久地居住在东山寺，假称脚生了病，不再起床，陈实应认为是假装的托辞，派人去烧虞寄的卧房，虞寄安稳地躺着不动。
English: Lived in Dongshan Temple for a long time, pretended that his foot was ill and would not get up, but it should be considered as a fake excuse. He sent someone to burn Yu Ying's bedroom, but Yu Ying was lying still.

古文：亲近将扶寄出，寄曰： 吾命有所悬，避欲安往？ 
现代文：身边亲近的人要扶虞寄出去，卢寄说： 我的生命已无所依靠，要往哪裹逃避? 
English: People who are close to him should help him out, Lu Ying said: My life has nothing to rely on, where should I flee?

古文：所纵火者，旋自救之。
现代文：放火的人，不久自己来救火了。
English: The man who started the fire soon came to put it out himself.

古文：宝应自此方信。
现代文：陈宝应从此才相信了。
English: Only then did Chen Baoying believe.

古文：及留异称兵，宝应资其部曲，寄乃因书极谏曰：
现代文：到留异起兵时，速宜尘派军队支援他，卢寄于是写信极力规劝说：
English: When Ruyi raised an army, he immediately sent troops to support him. Lu then sent a letter to persuade him:

古文：东山虞寄致书于明将军使君节下：寄流离世故，飘寓贵乡，将军待以上宾之礼，申以国士之眷，意气所感，何日忘之。
现代文：东山虞壹致书于明将军使君节下：虞寄在世间变故之时流离失所，飘泊寄居贵乡，将军待我以上宾之礼，表示出对国士那样的器重，意气所感，哪天也不会忘记这些。
English: Dongshan Yu I wrote a letter to the Ming general to the emperor: Yu Ying was displaced at the time of the world's change of fortune, drifted to stay in your hometown, the general treated me as a guest, expressed the feelings of weight and spirit like a statesman, and will not forget these any day.

古文：而寄沈痼弥留，忄妻阴将尽，常恐卒填沟壑，涓尘莫报，是以敢布腹心，冒陈丹款，愿将军留须臾之虑，少思察之，则瞑目之日，所怀毕矣。
现代文：然而虞寄处在重病弥留之时，暮年将到尽头，经常担忧很快会死去而填埋到沟壑之中，知遇之恩点滴都没有报答，所以敢坦诚地告诉真心，冒昧陈述赤诚之意，希望将军能暂时从容考虑，稍加思考观察这事，那么我闭上眼睛死去的那天，所耿耿于怀的事情就不存在了。
English: However, at the time of his death, when he was seriously ill, his twilight years were coming to an end, he was often worried that he would soon die and be buried in a ditch, and there was no return for his kindness. Therefore, he dared to honestly tell his true feelings, boldly stated his sincerity, and hoped that the general could calmly consider and observe this matter for a while. Then, on the day I closed my eyes and died, the matter I was concerned about did not exist.

古文：夫安危之兆，祸福之机，匪独天时，亦由人事。
现代文：安危的征兆，祸福的关键，不单是上天的旨意，也在于人事。
English: The sign of safety and the key to misfortune and good fortune is not only God's will, but also human resources.

古文：失之毫厘，差以千里。
现代文：失之毫厘，差以千里。
English: A millimeter lost is a millimeter gained.

古文：是以明智之士，据重位而不倾，执大节而不失，岂惑于浮辞哉？
现代文：所以明智之士，据有重要地位而行事不会偏颇，掌握安危存亡的关键而不犯过失，难道能迷惑于虚饰浮夸的言辞吗?
English: Therefore, can a wise man, who is in an important position and does not act in an unbalanced manner, who has grasped the key to safe survival without making mistakes, be confused by false and pompous words?

古文：将军文武兼资，英威不世，往因多难，仗剑兴师，援旗誓众，抗威千里，岂不以四郊多垒，共谋王室，匡时报主，宁国庇民乎？
现代文：将军兼有文武双全的才能，英明威武世间少有，以前因为国家多难，仗剑兴兵，执大旗告诚众将士，振奋威武达于千里，难道不是因为都城四郊有许多军营，共同谋划辅佐王室，挽救艰危的时局报答君主，安定国家保护人民吗?
English: It is rare for a general to have both literary and military talents, to be wise and powerful. In the past, due to the difficulties of the country, he fought with the sword and rallied the troops, led the flag and told the soldiers to be sincere, and aroused the courage of thousands of miles. Isn't it because there are many military camps in the suburbs of the capital, jointly planning and supporting the royal family, saving the difficult situation, rewarding the monarch, stabilizing the country and protecting the people?

古文：此所以五尺童子，皆愿荷戟而随将军者也。
现代文：因此五尺高的儿童，都愿意拿起武器跟随将军。
English: Therefore, five-foot-tall children are willing to take up arms and follow the general.

古文：及高祖武皇肇基草昧，初济艰难。
现代文：到高祖武皇开创基业于混乱时世之中，初步度过艰难时期。
English: Emperor Gao's ancestor Emperor Wu founded the foundation in the midst of a chaotic world and initially went through a difficult period.

古文：于时天下沸腾，民无定主，豺狼当道，鲸鲵横击，海内业业，未知所从。
现代文：那时天下沸腾，人民没有一个确定的君主，豺狼当道，鲸鲵横击，海内畏惧，不知所从。
English: At that time, the world was in turmoil, the people did not have a certain monarch, the wolves were on the road, the whales were attacking, the seas were afraid, and they did not know what to do.

古文：将军运动微之鉴，折从衡之辩，策名委质，自托宗盟，此将军妙算远图，发于衷诚者也。
现代文：将军运用明察精微的鉴识，判断合纵连横的辩论，表示归顺，自己依托于同宗结盟，这是将军的妙计有远见的圆谋，发自于衷诚的呀。
English: It was the general's ingenious and far-sighted strategy, which came from the bottom of his heart, to make use of his keen observation and discernment, to judge and reconcile the long-term and long-term debates, to express his submission, and to rely on the alliance of the same sect.

古文：及主上继业，钦明睿圣，选贤与能，群臣辑睦，结将军以维城之重，崇将军以裂土之封。
现代文：到现在的君主继承大业，钦明睿圣，选拔贤能之士。群臣和睦，结交将军给予连城以卫国的重任，尊敬将军分封给土地。
English: The present monarch inherits the great cause, honors the wise and the saintly, and selects the virtuous. The courtiers are harmonious, and befriend the generals to give Liancheng the important task of defending the country, and the respected generals are assigned to the land.

古文：岂非宏谟庙略，推赤心于物也？
现代文：难道不是朝廷对国家大事远大的谋略，推诚相待于他人吗?
English: Isn't it the imperial court's grand strategy for national events to treat others with sincerity?

古文：屡申明诏，款笃殷勤，君臣之分定矣，骨肉之恩深矣。
现代文：屡次发布诏书，情意恳挚亲切，君臣之分已定，骨肉之恩已深。
English: The imperial edict has been issued repeatedly, the feelings are sincere and cordial, the division of monarchs and ministers has been determined, and the gratitude of the flesh and blood has been deepened.

古文：不意将军惑于邪说，遽生异计，寄所以疾首痛心，泣尽继之以血。
现代文：没有想到将军迷惑于邪说，突然心生背叛的计划，虞寄因此疾首痛心，眼泪哭尽了继之以流血。
English: Without thinking of the general's obsession with evil thoughts and his sudden betrayal of the plan, Yu Ying was heartbroken, crying tears and bleeding as a result.

古文：万全之策，窃为将军惜之。
现代文：万热一失的办法，私下为将军感到可惜。
English: In private, I feel sorry for the general.

古文：寄虽疾侵耄及，言无足采，千虑一得，请陈愚算。
现代文：虞寄虽然疾病侵身已到老年，言论不足以采纳，千虑一得，请允许陈述愚笨的计划。
English: Yu Ying, although the disease has invaded his body to old age, speech is not enough to adopt, a thousand thoughts, please allow me to present a stupid plan.

古文：愿将军少戢雷霆，赊其晷刻，使得尽狂瞽之说，披肝胆之诚，则虽死之日，由生之年也。
现代文：愿将军稍微收敛雷霆之怒，给一点时间，使得能将悖理不明的话说完，披露肝胆的赤诚，那么虽死之曰，犹生之年呀。
English: May the general slightly restrain the wrath of thunder, give a little time, so that he can finish saying the words that are not clear, and disclose the sincerity of his heart, then although it is the year of death, it is the year of rebirth.

古文：自天厌梁德，多难荐臻，寰宇分崩，英雄互起，不可胜纪，人人自以为得之。
现代文：自从上天抑制了梁朝的气数，灾难一再到来，整个国家分崩离析，英雄交相竞起，不可全部记载，人人自以为得之。
English: Since Heaven restrained the Qi of the Liang Dynasty, disasters have come again and again, the whole country has fallen apart, and heroes have begun to compete with each other. It is impossible to record everything, everyone thinks they have it.

古文：然夷凶翦乱，拯溺扶危，四海乐推，三灵眷命，揖让而居南面者，陈氏也。
现代文：然而消灭凶顽剪除叛乱，拯溺扶危，天下众人拥戴，天地人眷爱而赋以重任，让位于贤而坐北朝南登上帝位的，陈氏呀。
English: However, the Chen clan, which has eliminated the villainy, eliminated the rebellion, rescued the drowning and assisted the danger, has been supported by all people in the world, loved by all people in the world and given a heavy responsibility, and has given way to the virtuous and sat in the North Dynasty and the South Dynasty to ascend the throne of God.

古文：岂非历数有在，惟天所授，当璧应运？
现代文：难道不是有天道在，上天所授，成为国君顺应天道吗?
English: Isn't there a heavenly way, given by heaven, to become a sovereign in accordance with the heavenly way?

古文：其事甚明一也。
现代文：这件事十分明显，这是一。
English: It's so obvious, this one.

古文：主上承基，明德远被，天纲再张，地维重纽。
现代文：现在的君主继承基业，完美的德性及于远方，国法再次实施，国土重新稳定。
English: The current monarch inherits the inheritance, the perfect virtue extends to the distance, the national law is implemented again, and the country is stable again.

古文：夫以王琳之强，侯瑱之力，进足以摇荡中原，争衡天下，退足以屈强江外，雄长偏隅。
现代文：以王琳的强大，侯填的势力，进足以动摇中原，为争天下角逐胜负，退足以占据江南而不顺从，豪横自大于边侧之地。
English: With Wang Lin's powerful and powerful influence, the advance is enough to shake the Central Plains, to compete for victory and defeat, and the retreat is enough to occupy the south of the Yangtze River without obeying, and the arrogance is greater than the peripheral land.

古文：然或命一旅之师，或资一士之说，琳则瓦解冰泮，投身异域，瑱则厥角稽颡，委命阙廷。
现代文：然而或者命令一旅之众的军队，或者依靠一个文士的说辞，王琳就瓦解冰消，投身外国，侯填就以头叩地，归顺朝廷。
English: However, either by commanding an army of travelers, or by relying on the words of a scribe, Wang Lin broke the ice and joined a foreign country, while Hou Gui bowed his head and submitted to the imperial court.

古文：斯又天假之威，而除其患。
现代文：这又是上天给予的威力，而除去他的患害。
English: This, in turn, is a heaven-given power that removes his affliction.

古文：其事甚明二也。
现代文：这件事十分明显，这是二。
English: It's very clear that it's two.

古文：今将军以籓戚之重，东南之众，尽忠奉上，戮力勤王，岂不勋高窦融，宠过吴芮，析圭判野，南面称孤？
现代文：现在将军以藩镇诸侯的重任，东南地方的部众，竭尽忠诚侍奉君主，勉力为王事效劳，难道不是功勋高过窦融，宠信超过吴芮，分颁珪玉划分疆野封为诸侯，坐北朝南身居王位?
English: Now, the generals are entrusted with the important duties of the princes of the provinces, towns and villages, and the subordinates of the southeastern region, and they serve the monarch with utmost loyalty and work hard to serve the royal cause. Isn't the merit higher than Dou Rong, the pet letter higher than Wu Xi, the distribution of the precious and base metals, the division of the territory and the field into the princes, and the sitting of the North Dynasty and the South Dynasty on the throne?

古文：其事甚明三也。
现代文：遣件事十分明显，这是三。
English: The dismissal of the case is very obvious, this is the third.

古文：且圣朝弃瑕忘过，宽厚得人，改过自新，咸加叙擢。
现代文：而且当今朝廷抛弃前嫌不计较过去，宽厚得人心，改过自新的人，都加以提拔授予官职。
English: Moreover, today's imperial court does not care about the past before abandoning it, and those who are generous and popular and reformed are promoted and awarded official positions.

古文：至于余孝顷、潘纯陀、李孝钦、欧阳頠等，悉委以心腹，任以爪牙，胸中豁然，曾无纤芥。
现代文：至于余孝顷、潘纯陁、李孝钦、欧阳颛等人，都委以亲信的要职，任用为得力的助手，胸中豁然坦荡，毫无一点芥蒂。
English: As for Yu Xiaoha, Pan Chunhui, Li Xiaoqin, Ouyang Qi and others, they were all entrusted with important positions of intimacy, appointed as powerful assistants, and their hearts were suddenly open, without any bitterness.

古文：况将军衅非张绣，罪异毕谌，当何虑于危亡，何失于富贵？
现代文：何况将军的过失不同于张绣，罪愆有别于毕谌，那么哪裹值得忧虑安危存亡，哪裹会失去荣华富贵?
English: Moreover, the general's fault is different from Zhang Xiu, the crime is different from Bi, so which is worth worrying about, which will lose glory and wealth?

古文：此又其事甚明四也。
现代文：这些又使事情十分明显，这是四。
English: This, in turn, makes it very clear that this is the fourth.

古文：方今周、齐邻睦，境外无虞，并兵一向，匪朝伊夕，非刘、项竞逐之机，楚、赵连从之势，何得雍容高拱，坐论西伯？
现代文：现在周、齐与邻国和睦，因此境外没有忧患，朝廷可以集中兵力于一个方向，已经不止一日，目前不是刘邦、项羽竞争逐鹿的时机，楚国、赵国连横合纵的形势了，哪能体态温文高拱两手地安坐着，空谈建立且塞王那样的事业?
English: Now Zhou and Qi are at peace with their neighbors, so there are no worries outside the country. The imperial court can concentrate its forces in one direction. It has been more than a day. Now is not the time for Liu Bang and Xiang Yu to compete for the deer. The situation of Chu and Zhao Guolian is horizontal and vertical. How can they sit calmly with both hands, talk about building a business like the king of Sai?

古文：其事甚明五也。
现代文：这件事十分明显，这是五。
English: It's very clear that this is five.

古文：且留将军狼顾一隅，亟经摧衄，声实亏丧，胆气衰沮。
现代文：况且留将军畏惧地据守一隅，屡经摧折挫败，声誉实力亏损丧失，胆量勇气衰落沮丧。
English: Moreover, the remaining generals fearfully clung to a corner, repeatedly defeated, reputation and strength lost, courage and courage faded and depressed.

古文：高瓖、向文政、留瑜、黄子玉，此数人者，将军所知，首鼠两端，唯利是视；其馀将帅，亦可见矣。
现代文：高瓖、向文政、留瑜、黄子玉，这几个人，将军知道，他们迟疑不定，衹注视自己的利益；其余的将帅，也可以看出来。
English: Gao Qi, Xiang Wen Zheng, Liu Yu, Huang Ziyu, these few people, the general knows that they are hesitant and indecisive, and they are watching their own interests; the rest of the generals can also be seen.

古文：孰能被坚执锐，长驱深入，系马埋轮，奋不顾命，以先士卒者乎？
现代文：谁能身披坚甲手执锐器，长驱深入敌阵，固守不退，奋勇不顾生命，以身先士卒的呢?
English: Who can put on the armour, hold the spear, drive deep into the enemy's lines, hold fast and not retreat, fight bravely regardless of life, and be the first to die?

古文：此又其事甚明六也。
现代文：这又使事情十分明显，这是六。
English: This, again, makes it very clear that this is six.

古文：且将军之强，孰如侯景？
现代文：况且将军的强大，怎么比得上侯景?
English: Besides, how can a powerful general be compared to Houjing?

古文：将军之众，孰如王琳？
现代文：将军的部众，怎么比得上王琳?
English: How can the general's subordinates be compared to Wang Lin?

古文：武皇灭侯景于前，今上摧王琳于后，此乃天时，非复人力。
现代文：武皇消灭侯景的事在前，现在的君主摧毁王琳的事在后，这是天道，不再是人的力量所能及的。
English: Emperor Wu eliminated Houjing first, and the current monarch destroyed Wang Lin later. This is the way of heaven, and is beyond human power.

古文：且兵革已后，民皆厌乱，其孰能弃坟墓，捐妻子，出万死不顾之计，从将军于白刃之间乎？
现代文：而且战争以后，人民都厌恶动乱，谁能抛弃家人的坟墓，离别妻和子，做出万死不顾的安排，随从将军在白刃之间进行血战呢?
English: Moreover, after the war, the people are averse to turmoil. Who can abandon the graves of his family, leave his wife and son, make desperate arrangements, and follow the general in a bloody battle?

古文：此又其事甚明七也。
现代文：逭又使事情十分明显，这是七。
English: Again, to make it very clear, this is seven.

古文：历观前古，鉴之往事，子阳、季孟，倾覆相寻，馀善、右渠，危亡继及，天命可畏，山川难恃。
现代文：依次观察前古，借鉴往事，子阳、季孟，相继倾覆，余善、右渠，危亡相连而到，上天的意旨应当畏惧，不足依恃。
English: Observe the ancient times in turn, learn from the past, Ziyang, Ji Meng, successively overturned, Yu Shan, right canal, danger and death come one after another, the will of heaven should be feared, not relied on.

古文：况将军欲以数郡之地，当天下之兵，以诸侯之资，拒天子之命，强弱逆顺，可得侔乎？
现代文：况且将军要以几个郡的地盘，抵挡国家的军队，以诸侯的资格，抗拒君主的命令，这种强弱逆顺的情况下，怎么可以达到目的呢?
English: Moreover, the general wants to use the territory of several counties to resist the country's army, and to resist the monarch's order as a vassal, how can the goal be achieved in this situation of strength against weakness?

古文：此又其事甚明八也。
现代文：这又使事情十分明显，这是八。
English: This, again, makes it very clear that this is the eighth.

古文：且非我族类，其心必异。
现代文：况且不是和我同一族类，他的心思必然不同。
English: Besides, he is not of the same race as me, so his thoughts are bound to be different.

古文：不爱其亲，岂能及物？
现代文：不爱他的亲戚，难道能爱他人?
English: Can one love others without loving one's relatives?

古文：留将军身縻国爵，子尚王姬，犹且弃天属而弗顾，背明君而孤立，危急之日，岂能同忧共患，不背将军者乎？
现代文：留将军身受国家爵位的束缚，儿子娶帝王之女，还是抛弃父子亲属而不顾，背叛圣明君主而孤立，危急的时候，哪能同忧共患，不背叛将军的呢?
English: Is it better to remain a general and be bound by the country's nobility, or for a son to marry an emperor's daughter, or to abandon his father and relatives, betray the sacred monarch and become isolated? In times of crisis, who can share the same sorrow and not betray the general?

古文：至于师老力屈，惧诛利赏，必有韩、智晋阳之谋，张、陈井陉之势。
现代文：至于军队士气衰落力量穷尽，畏惧诛杀因利求赏，必定会有韩、智在晋阳所做的那种谋划，退、速在韭压所形成的那种局势。
English: As for the army's morale decline, exhausted strength, fear of fighting and killing for profit and reward, there will certainly be the kind of situation formed by Han and Zhi's planning in Jinyang, retreating and hastily suppressing.

古文：此又其事甚明九也。
现代文：遣又使事情十分明显，这是九。
English: It's the ninth, which makes things very clear.

古文：且北军万里远斗，锋不可当，将军自战其地，人多顾后。
现代文：况且北方的军队万里远征前来战斗，势猛不可抵挡，将军在自己的地方进行战斗，人们多数都顾虑后方。
English: Moreover, the army of the north has come thousands of miles to fight, the momentum is irresistible, the general is fighting in his own place, and most people are worried about the rear.

古文：梁安背向为心，修旿匹夫之力，众寡不敌，将帅不侔，师以无名而出，事以无机而动，以此称兵，示知其利。
现代文：梁安变化无常，修睁匹夫之力，众寡不敌，将帅不相当，出师没有正当的名义，起事没有合适的时机，以这种条件兴兵。不知有什么利。
English: Liang An is fickle, he cultivates the strength of his peers, he is outnumbered, his generals are no match for him, he does not have a legitimate name for his division, and there is no right time for him to rise up and raise an army under these conditions. I don't know what the benefits are.

古文：夫以汉朝吴、楚，晋室颖、颙，连城数十，长戟百万，拔本塞源，自图家国，其有成功者乎？
现代文：以邀目的昱、楚两个藩国，置室题、堕二王，连城几十座，军队百万，毁灭根本，自己谋取国家，他们有成功的吗?
English: With the purpose of inviting the two feudal states of Shun and Chu, setting up a cabinet, overthrowing two kings, annexing dozens of cities, millions of troops, destroying the foundation, and seeking a country by themselves, have they been successful?

古文：此又其事甚明十也。
现代文：遣又使事情十分明显，这是十。
English: This is the tenth time he has made things very clear.

古文：为将军计者，莫若不远而复，绝亲留氏，秦郎、快郎，随遣入质，释甲偃兵，一遵诏旨。
现代文：为将军计划，不如趁走得不远就回头，和留氏断绝姻亲关系，秦郎、快郎，即遣送朝廷作为人质，解除武装停止战争，一切遵守韶书的意旨。
English: As for the general's plan, it would be better to take advantage of the short distance to turn back, and break off the relationship of in-laws with the Ruishi, Qin Lang, Khai Lang, that is, send the imperial court as a hostage, disarm and stop the war, and all comply with the intention of the imperial edict.

古文：且朝廷许以铁券之要，申以白马之盟，朕弗食言，誓之宗社。
现代文：况且朝廷许诺授以世代享受特权的铁券，重复宰白马歃血立下的盟誓，朕不食言，向宗庙社稷发誓。
English: Moreover, the Imperial Court has promised to grant iron coupons for generations to enjoy privileges, and I will repeat the oath I made with the blood of the White Horse. I will not break my word and swear to the family temple.

古文：寄闻明者鉴未形，智者不再计，此成败之效，将军勿疑。
现代文：虞寄听说聪明的人在后果未形成之前就能照见，智慧的人不再谋划，这种成败的效果，将军不用怀疑。
English: Yu Ying heard that a clever person can see the consequences before they are formed, and a wise person no longer plans. The general does not have to doubt this effect of success or failure.

古文：吉凶之几，间不容发。
现代文：是吉是凶相距十分细微，中无一发之间隙。
English: The difference between good and evil is very small, and there is no gap between them.

古文：方今籓维尚少，皇子幼冲，凡预宗枝，皆蒙宠树。
现代文：现在藩镇系结在一起的不多，皇子还在幼年，凡是同宗的子孙，都得到宠爱培植。
English: At present, there are not many hanzhong lines tied together, the prince is still young, and all the descendants of the same clan have been favored and cultivated.

古文：况以将军之地，将军之才，将军之名，将军之势，而能克修籓服，北面称臣，宁与刘泽同年而语其功业哉？
现代文：况且以将军的地域，将军的才能，将军的名望，将军的势力，而能胜任整治藩镇的职务，北面朝见君主称臣，难道不是可以和刘涅的功业相提并论吗?
English: Moreover, with the general's region, the general's talent, the general's reputation, and the general's power, and being able to competently perform the duties of rectifying the towns and villages, and the north sees the monarch as a minister, can it not be compared with Liu Nie's achievements?

古文：岂不身与山河等安，名与金石相敝？
现代文：难道不是身与山河同样安定，名与金石共同长存?
English: Isn't the body just as stable as the mountains and rivers, and the name and the precious stone co-exist?

古文：愿加三思，虑之无忽。
现代文：希望加以三思，考虑这些不要疏忽。
English: I hope you will think twice and not neglect these things.

古文：寄气力绵微，馀阴无几，感恩怀德，不觉狂言，鈇钺之诛，甘之如荠。
现代文：卢昼气力薄弱，余生不多，感念恩德，不觉口出狂言，鈇铁的诛杀，心甘情愿。
English: Lu Rong's strength is weak, his remaining life is not much, he feels grateful, he unconsciously blurts out crazy words, he fights with an iron fist, and he is willing.

古文：宝应览书大怒。
现代文：陈实应看了书信非常愤怒。
English: Chen Shijie read the letter and was very angry.

古文：或谓宝应曰： 虞公病势渐笃，言多错谬。 
现代文：有人对陈宝应说： 卢公病势渐渐沉重，言谈多有错误。 
English: Some people said to Chen Baoying: Lu Gong's illness is getting worse, and his speech is often wrong.

古文：宝应意乃小释。
现代文：陈宝尘的怒意才稍微消除。
English: Chen Baofeng's anger only subsided a little.

古文：亦为寄有民望，且优容之。
现代文：也因为虞寄在民众中有声望，姑且宽容他。
English: He was also tolerated because he had a reputation among the people.

古文：及宝应败走，夜至蒲田，顾谓其子扞秦曰： 早从虞公计，不至今日。 
现代文：到陈宝应败走，晚上来到蒲田时，回头对他的儿子赶秦说： 以前听从了虞公的计谋，不会落到今天的地步。 
English: When Chen Bao came to Kamata in the evening after his defeat, he turned to his son Hui Qin and said, "In the past, I listened to the schemes of Yu Gong, but I will not fall to the level of today.

古文：扞秦但泣而已。
现代文：扦秦祇是哭泣而已。
English: It's just crying.

古文：宝应既擒，凡诸宾客微有交涉者，皆伏诛，唯寄以先识免祸。
现代文：速宜尘被抓住后，众多宾客中凡是稍微与这事有关系的，都被杀，衹有虞寄因为有先见之明得以免祸。
English: After Hiyoshi was caught, any of the many guests who had anything to do with the incident were killed, although there is a possibility that he had the foresight to avoid the disaster.

古文：初，沙门慧摽涉猎有才思，及宝应起兵，作五言诗以送之，曰： 送马犹临水，离旗稍引风。好看今夜月，当入紫微宫。 
现代文：起初，和尚苤题涉猎文史有才思，到陈实应起兵时，作五言诗送给他，说： 送马犹临水，离旗稍引风，好看今夜月，当入紫微宫。 
English: At first, the monk had the talent to dabble in literature and history. When Chen Si was about to raise an army, he wrote a five-character poem and sent it to him, saying: "Send horses to the water, slightly draw the wind away from the flag, look at the moon tonight, and enter the Purple Palace."

古文：宝应得之甚悦。
现代文：陈宝尘得到这首诗十分高兴。
English: Chen Baofeng was very happy to get this poem.

古文：慧摽赍以示寄，寄一览便止，正色无言。
现代文：慧标拿给虞寄看，虞寄一看就停下来，脸色严肃不说话。
English: Hui Bao showed it to Yu Sheng. Yu Sheng stopped at the sight of it, his face was serious and he did not speak.

古文：摽退，寄谓所亲曰： 摽既以此始，必以此终。 
现代文：慧揼退出，虞台对所亲信的人说： 揼公既然以这件事开始，必定因这件事告终。 
English: When Hui Xuan withdrew, Yutai said to his close confidants: "Since Xing Gong began with this matter, it must end with this matter.

古文：后竟坐是诛。
现代文：后来果然因此犯罪被杀。
English: Later, he was indeed killed for his crime.

古文：文帝寻敕都督章昭达以理发遣，令寄还朝。
现代文：文帝接着诏令都督童昭达依据情理发配遣送，命令叠宣返回朝廷。
English: Emperor Wen then issued a decree ordering the governor, Tong Zhaoda, to be dispatched according to the circumstances, and ordered Shou Xuan to return to the imperial court.

古文：及至，即日引见，谓寄曰： 管宁无恙？ 
现代文：到抵达后，当天就接见，对卢台说： 笪空无疾无忧。 
English: After arriving, he received an interview on the same day and said to Lutei: "There is no problem with flying.

古文：其慰劳之怀若此。
现代文：他慰劳的情意就像这样。
English: His sentiments of consolation are as follows.

古文：顷之，文帝谓到仲举曰： 衡阳王既出阁，虽未置府僚，然须得一人旦夕游处，兼掌书记，宜求宿士有行业者。 
现代文：不久，塞壶对型控垩说： 蛮驻既然离开朝廷去自己的封地做藩王，虽然尚未设置王府僚属，但必须有一人早晚交游相处，兼掌书记职务，应当寻求老成博学之士中操行事业卓越的。 
English: Not long after, Ce Jiu said to Guan Yu: Since Brute Zheng has left the imperial court to become the king of his own fief, although he has not yet set up a subordinate of the royal court, he must have someone to travel with in the morning and in the evening, and also hold the position of secretary. He should look for those who have excelled in business among the old and learned men.

古文：仲举未知所对，文帝曰： 吾自得之。 
现代文：到仲举不知怎么回答，文帝说： 我自己找到他了。 
English: Not knowing how to answer, Wendi said, "I found him myself."

古文：乃手敕用寄，寄入谢，文帝曰： 所以暂屈卿游籓者，非止以文翰相烦，乃令以师表相事也。 
现代文：于是亲手下诏令任用虞寄。虞寄进入宫廷拜谢，文帝说： 所以委屈您在藩王处任职，不衹是以信札公文相烦，而且是作为学习的榜样来辅佐呀。 
English: Therefore, he personally ordered his subordinates to appoint Yu Ying. When Yu Ying entered the court to give thanks, Emperor Wen said: Therefore, it is a grievance for you to serve in the office of the king of the clan, it is not a matter of annoying each other with letters and official documents, but it is to assist as a learning example.

古文：寻兼散骑常侍，聘齐，寄辞老疾，不行，除国子博士。
现代文：接着兼任散骑常侍，派遣出使齐朝，虞寄以年老有病推辞，没有成行，任命为国子博士。
English: Next, he also served as a roving equerry, dispatching envoys to the Qi Dynasty. However, he did not go because he was too old and sick, and was appointed as a Kuniko doctor.

古文：顷之，又表求解职归乡里，文帝优旨报答，许其东还。
现代文：不久，又上表请求解除职务回归故乡，文帝以优待的韶书报答他，准许他往东还乡。
English: Soon after, he requested to be relieved of his duties and return to his hometown, and Emperor Wen rewarded him with a favorable imperial edict, allowing him to return to his hometown in the east.

古文：仍除东扬州别驾，寄又以疾辞。
现代文：仍任命为束扬州别驾，虞寄又以有病辞去。
English: He was still appointed as the second-in-command of the Yangzhou Military Region, but resigned due to illness.

古文：高宗即位，征授扬州治中及尚书左丞，并不就。
现代文：高宗登上帝位，征召虞寄授予扬州治中和尚书左丞的职务，都没有就任。
English: Gao Zong ascended to the throne of God, conscripted Yu Yizhong and awarded Yangzhou Zhizhong monk Shuzho Zuo, but did not take office.

古文：乃除东中郎建安王谘议，加戎昭将军，又辞以疾，不任旦夕陪列。
现代文：于是任命为东中郎建安王谘议，加官戎昭将军，又以有病推辞，不能胜任早晚陪伴。
English: As a result, he was appointed as an adviser to King Jianan of the Eastern Middle Ages, and was promoted to General Rong Zhao, but he also resigned due to illness, saying that he was not competent to accompany him in the morning and evening.

古文：王于是特令停王府公事，其有疑议，就以决之，但朔望笺修而已。
现代文：建室王于是特令卢寄停止在王府办公，互续互有疑难的问题，前往虞寄那裹判明解决，衹是在农历每月的初一日和十五日写给建安王书启而已。
English: King Jianmu then ordered Lu Xun to stop working at the royal palace, and the two continued to have problems with each other. They went to Yu Xun to find a solution, but only wrote to King Jianan on the first day and 15th day of the lunar month.

古文：太建八年，加太中大夫，将军如故。
现代文：左建八年加官太中大夫，将军职务依旧担任。
English: Zuo Jian has been promoted to the post of Vice Admiral for eight years, and still holds the post of general.

古文：十一年卒，时年七十。
现代文：太建十一年去世，时年七十岁。
English: Tai Jian died eleven years later, at the age of seventy.

古文：寄少笃行，造次必于仁厚，虽僮竖未尝加以声色，至于临危执节，则辞气凛然，白刃不惮也。
现代文：虞寄年少时就行为淳厚，仓猝间行事也必是仁义厚道的，虽童仆不曾给过严厉的声色，至于面临危难坚守气节时，则言词声调严肃令人敬畏，白刃在前也不害怕。
English: When he was young, Gu Ying's behavior was chaste, and when he acted in haste, he must also be benevolent and virtuous. Although the boy servant had never given a stern tone, when he was faced with danger, the tone of his words was serious and awe-inspiring, and Bai Yao was not afraid.

古文：自流寓南土，与兄荔隔绝，因感气病，每得荔书，气辄奔剧，危殆者数矣。
现代文：自从流离居住在南方。与哥哥卢蔓隔绝，因为感伤得了气病，每次收到卢墓的书信，气便奔腾剧烈，危险的情况出现了好几次。
English: Since his exile, he has been living in the south, isolated from his brother Lu Man. Because of his sentimental feelings, he developed gas sickness. Every time he received a letter from Lu Tomb, his gas was soaring, and dangerous situations occurred several times.

古文：前后所居官，未尝至秩满，才期年数月，便自求解退。
现代文：前后所任官职，不曾到任期届满，才一年几个月，便自己请求解除职务退出官场。
English: He did not reach the end of his term of office, but only a year and a few months later, he asked to be relieved of his duties and withdrew from the official scene.

古文：常曰： 知足不辱，吾知足矣。 
现代文：常说： 知足就能不受屈辱，我知足啦。 
English: He used to say: contentment can avoid humiliation. I am content.

古文：及谢病私庭，每诸王为州将，下车必造门致礼，命释鞭板，以几杖侍坐。
现代文：到因病引退家居时，每次各位藩王受任为州中将领，来到后必下车登门致礼，命令虞寄不用手板，以几案和手杖坐着陪伴。
English: When retiring home due to illness, each time the kings of the clan were appointed as state lieutenant generals, they would get off the car and come to the door to give a gift, order the yakitori without a hand board, and sit with a few cases and a cane to accompany.

古文：常出游近寺，闾里传相告语，老幼罗列，望拜道左。
现代文：虞寄常出游附近的僧寺，乡里的人互相传告，老幼排列，在道路的左方朝他下拜。
English: People in the village spread the news to each other and lined up, young and old, to bow down to him on the left side of the road.

古文：或言誓为约者，但指寄便不欺，其至行所感如此。
现代文：有用言词发誓为约的人，衹要指着虞寄便不会欺骗，他非常人所及的德行形成的影响就是这样。
English: A man who swears to a contract in words will not cheat if he has to point to the moon, such is the influence of the formation of his very unattainable virtue.

古文：所制文笔，遭乱多不存。
现代文：所写作的文章，遭受战乱多数没能保存下来
English: Most of his writings were destroyed in the war and have not been preserved.

古文：马枢，字要理，扶风郿人也。
现代文：马枢，字要理，迭凰题人。
English: Ma Zu, Zi You Li, Dai Huo Zi Ren.

古文：祖灵庆，齐竟陵王录事参军。
现代文：祖父区玺庆，在查朝任竟陵王的录事参军。
English: His grandfather, Gu Yingqing, joined the army during the reign of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：枢数岁而父母俱丧，为其姑所养。
现代文：马枢才几岁时父母亲都去世了，为他的姑姑所收养。
English: His parents died when he was just a few years old, and he was adopted by his aunt.

古文：六岁，能诵《孝经》、《论语》、《老子》。
现代文：六岁时，能朗读《孝经》、《论语》、《老子》。
English: At the age of six, he was able to read aloud "The Filial Piety Sutra," "Analects" and "Laozi."

古文：及长，博极经史，尤善佛经及《周易》、《老子》义。
现代文：到成年后，广泛地涉猎经书史籍，特别擅长佛经和《周易》、《老于》的意义。
English: After he became an adult, he extensively dabbled in scriptures and historical books, and was particularly good at Buddhist scriptures and the meaning of "Zhou Yi" and "Lao Yu."

古文：梁邵陵王纶为南徐州刺史，素闻其名，引为学士。
现代文：梁朝邵陵王萧纶做南徐州刺史时，素闻其名，任用为学士。
English: When the Liang Dynasty's Shaoling King Xiaohui made history in southern Xuzhou, his name was little known and he was appointed as a bachelor.

古文：纶时自讲《大品经》，令枢讲《维摩》、《老子》、《周易》，同日发题，道俗听者二千人。
现代文：萧纶当时自己讲解《人品经》，命令马枢讲解《维摩》、《老子》、《周易》，同一天发出题目，道俗各界来听的有二千人。
English: At that time, Xiao Yu himself gave a lecture on "The Personality Sutra" and ordered Ma Zu to give a lecture on "Vima," "Lao Zi" and "Zhou Yi." On the same day, he gave out the topics, and 2,000 people from all walks of life came to listen.

古文：王欲极观优劣，乃谓众曰： 与马学士论义，必使屈伏，不得空立主客。 
现代文：邵陵王想彻底了解马枢学识的优劣，便对众人说： 和马学士讨论经义，必须使他理屈而受制，不得空立主客的名义。 
English: Shaoling Wang wanted to thoroughly understand the merits and demerits of Ma Zu's learning, so he said to the crowd: When discussing the meaning of the sutras with Ma Baozhang, he must be restrained by his logic, and must not use the name of host and guest.

古文：于是数家学者各起问端，枢乃依次剖判，开其宗旨，然后枝分流别，转变无穷，论者拱默听受而已。
现代文：于是数家学者各自起来提出问题，马枢便依次分析评判，揭示他的宗旨，然后区分流派，转折变化无穷，论辩的人拱手静默聆听接受而已。
English: As a result, several scholars independently raised questions, and Ma Zuo in turn analyzed and judged, revealed his purpose, and then distinguished between genres. The twists and turns were endless, and the debaters only listened and accepted in silence.

古文：纶甚嘉之，将引荐于朝廷。
现代文：萧纶非常赏识他，将要引领推荐给朝廷。
English: Xiao Yao appreciated him very much and was going to recommend him to the imperial court.

古文：寻遇侯景之乱，纶举兵援台，乃留书二万卷以付枢。
现代文：接着遭遇侯景的叛乱，萧纶起兵援救台球，便留下书籍二万卷交付给马枢。
English: Then, faced with Houjing's rebellion, Xiao Yu raised an army to rescue the billiard ball, leaving behind 20,000 volumes of books to be delivered to Mazhu.

古文：枢肆志寻览，殆将周遍，乃喟然叹曰： 吾闻贵爵位者以巢、由为桎梏，爱山林者以伊、吕为管库，束名实则刍芥柱下之言，玩清虚则糠秕席上之说，稽之笃论，亦各从其好也。
现代文：马枢纵情阅览，几乎要读遍，于是感叹地说： 我听说尊崇爵位的人以巢父、许由的生活方式为桎梏，爱好山林隐逸的人认为伊尹、吕尚衹不过是掌管库藏的小官，看重名实的人则把老子的言论视作草芥，喜好清净虚无的人则把儒学的言论视作糠秕，考察这些都是确当的评论，亦衹是各人遵从自己的爱好呀。
English: Ma Zu indulged in reading, almost read it all, and then said with regret: I heard that people who respect the title of nobility regard the lifestyle of the nest father and Xu Yue as a joke, people who like the mountains and forests to be secluded think that Yi Yin and Lü Shangyu are only minor officials in charge of the repository, people who value the name and truth regard the speech of Lao Zi as a mustard, and people who like pure nothingness regard the speech of Confucianism as a joke. These are all valid comments, and it is also for each person to follow their own hobbies.

古文：然支父有让王之介，严子有傲帝之规，千载美谈，所不废也。
现代文：然而支父有辞让王位的耿直，严王有高傲地对待帝王的准则，千载美谈，是不会磨灭的呀。
English: However, the father-in-law had the nerve to abdicate the throne to Geng Zhi, the king-in-waiting had the principle of treating the emperor with pride, and the thousand-year-old beautiful talk would not be extinguished.

古文：比求志之士，望途而息。
现代文：比较追求自己志向的人，不禁望着人生的道路而叹息。
English: People who pursue their own ambitions can't help but look at the road of life and sigh.

古文：岂天之不惠高尚，何山林之无闻甚乎？ 
现代文：哪裹是上天不赐予人高尚情操，什么山林隐士不是听说过很多吗? 
English: What if heaven does not bestow people with noble sentiments, what mountain hermits have not heard a lot about?

古文：乃隐于茅山，有终焉之志。
现代文：于是隐居于茅山，有终此一生的志向。
English: As a result, he lived in seclusion in Maoyan, with the ambition of remaining there for the rest of his life.

古文：天嘉元年，文帝征为度支尚书，辞不应命。
现代文：天嘉元年，文帝征召屋担为度支尚书，他推辞不肯应命。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Emperor Wen summoned Yatang to write a letter of recommendation, but he declined to do so.

古文：时枢亲故并居京口，每秋冬之际，时往游焉。
现代文：当时马枢的亲友都居住在京，每逢秋冬之际，时常前往游玩。
English: At that time, Ma Zu's relatives and friends all lived in Beijing, and whenever it was autumn or winter, Ma Zu often went to visit them.

古文：及鄱阳王为南徐州刺史，钦其高尚，鄙不能致，乃卑辞厚意，令使者邀之，前后数反，枢固辞以疾。
现代文：到鄱阳王任南徐州刺史，敬重他的高尚，惭愧不能将他罗致，于是用谦卑的言词诚恳的意思，命令使者去邀请他，前后几次往返，马枢坚持以生病为由推辞。
English: When the king of Shenyang was appointed as the governor of South Xuzhou, he respected his nobility and was ashamed that he could not be invited. Therefore, he ordered the envoy to invite him with humble and sincere words. He went back and forth several times, but Ma Zu insisted on refusing on the grounds of illness.

古文：门人或进曰： 鄱阳王待以师友，非关爵位，市朝之间，何妨静默。 
现代文：弟子中有人进言说： 鄱阳王以师友的情谊相待，与爵位无关，名利争逐的场所中，哪能妨碍清静。 
English: One of the disciples said, "King Shenyang treats his teachers and friends with friendship, which has nothing to do with the title of nobility. In a place where fame and fortune are in competition, what can hinder tranquility?"

古文：枢不得已，乃行。
现代文：区枢不得已，就前往了。
English: As a last resort, I went to the regional center.

古文：王别筑室以处之，枢恶其崇丽，乃于竹林间自营茅茨而居焉。
现代文：塑阳王另外建筑房屋以安排他住。马枢讨厌这房子高大华丽，便于竹林间自己建一所茅屋住下。
English: Shouyang Wang also built a house for him to live in. Ma Zu hated that the house was so tall and gorgeous, so he built himself a hut among the bamboo groves to live in.

古文：每王公馈饷，辞不获已者，率十分受一。
现代文：每次王公赠送财物，推辞不了不得已的情况下，大概十分中接受一分。
English: Every time Wang Gong gives away property, he will accept one point out of ten if he can't refuse.

古文：枢少属乱离，每所居之处，盗贼不入，依托者常数百家。
现代文：马枢少年就遭遇战乱流离的世道，他所居住的每个地方，盗贼都不进入，依托他的人常有几百家。
English: The boy Ma Zu encountered a world of war and displacement. In every place where he lived, thieves did not enter, and there were often hundreds of people relying on him.

古文：目精洞黄，能视暗中物。
现代文：马枢眼睛深黄，能看见黑暗中的东西。
English: Horses have deep yellow eyes and can see in the dark.

古文：常有白燕一双，巢其庭树，驯狎纮庑，时集几案，春来秋去，几三十年。
现代文：常有白燕一双，在他家庭院的树上筑巢，渐渐地习惯到廊屋的屋檐下，有时飞到几案上，春来秋去，几乎有三十年。
English: A pair of white swallows often built a nest on a tree in his courtyard, gradually getting used to the roof of the hall, sometimes flying to several cases, from spring to autumn, for almost thirty years.

古文：太建十三年卒，时年六十。
现代文：太建十三年去世，时年六十岁。
English: Tai Jian died thirteen years ago, at the age of sixty.

古文：撰《道觉论》二十卷行于世。
现代文：撰写《道觉论》二十卷流行于世。
English: He wrote the twenty-volume "Treatise on Taoism," which became popular around the world.

古文：史臣曰：沈炯仕于梁室，年在知命，冀郎署之薄官，止邑宰之卑职，及下笔盟坛，属辞劝表，激扬旨趣，信文人之伟者欤！虞荔之献筹沈密，尽其诚款，可谓有益明时矣。
现代文：史臣曰：沈炯在梁王朝出任官职，年纪是五十岁，任命为郎署的小官，衹不过是邑宰一类的卑微职务，到撰写盟书，写作劝进表，文章的旨趣令人激动振奋，的确是文人中伟大的人啊虞荔献计筹划深沉严密，竭尽他的忠心，可以说是有利于清明世道啦。
English: The historian said: "At the age of fifty, Shen Yi was appointed as a junior official in the Liang Dynasty. He was appointed as a farmer's aide, but it was only a lowly position like the governor of a town. He also wrote a letter of alliance and a letter of persuasion. The essence of the article was exciting and uplifting. He was indeed a great man among the literati. He was deep and meticulous in his planning and devoted his loyalty to the best of his ability. It can be said that he was conducive to a clear world.

