古文：除省郎者，初降旨挥，但云： 除某部郎官。 
现代文：任命省中郎宫的人，原来皇上降下的诏令只写道； 任命为某部郎官 。
English: The person who appointed the provincial palace steward, originally only wrote the imperial decree issued by the emperor; Appointed as a certain department steward.

古文：盖以知州资序者，当为郎中，不及者为员外郎。
现代文：一般有知州资历的人，应该做郎中，不到这个资历的人做员外郎。
English: Generally, a person with Chizhou qualification should be a junior member, and a person with less than this qualification should be a junior member.

古文：及吏部拟告身细衔，则始直书之。
现代文：等到吏部拟定详细官衔的任职文书时，才直接写上。
English: Wait until the personnel department drafts the detailed title of the post before writing it down directly.

古文：其兼权者，初云： 权某部郎官 ，洎入衔及文书，皆曰 权员外郎 ，已是他部郎中，则曰 权郎中 。
现代文：那些兼职和暂任的，原来写道； 暂任某部郎官 ，等到授予具体官衔和文书时，都写道； 暂任员外郎 ，如果已经是其他部的郎中，就写道： 暂任郎中 。
English: Those who are part-time and temporary, write originally; those who are temporarily assigned to a certain ministry, write when they are awarded a specific title and document; those who are temporarily assigned to a foreign ministry, if they are already assigned to other ministries, write: temporarily assigned to foreign ministry.

古文：至绍兴末，冯方以馆职摄吏部，欲为异，则系衔曰： 兼权尚书吏部郎官 。予尝叩其说，冯曰： 所被省札只言 权郎官 ，故不敢耳 。
现代文：到宋绍兴末年，冯方以馆阁职位掌握吏部，想要做得不同，就在原职称号外加上 兼权尚书吏部郎官 ，我曾经询问其中的理由，冯方说： 我所接到的省中文书只说 权郎官 ,所以不敢写别的。 
English: Towards the end of the Song Dynasty, Feng Fang was in charge of the personnel department with the post of the cabinet of ministers. He wanted to do something different, so he added the title of 兼权尚書吏部郎官 to his original job title. I once asked the reason for this, and Feng Fang said: The provincial Chinese books I received only said 权郎官, so I didn't dare to write anything else.

古文：予曰： 省札中岂有 尚书 二字乎？ 
现代文：我说： 省中的文书难道有 尚书 两个字吗？ 
English: I said: Are there two words "Shangshu" in the provincial documents?

古文：冯无以对，然讫不肯改。
现代文：冯方没有话来回答，但是终究不肯改。
English: Feng Fang didn't have the words to answer, but in the end he refused to change.

古文：自后相承效之，至今告命及符牒所书，亦云 权郎官 ，固已甚野，至于尚左、待右之名，遂入除目，皆小吏不谙熟故事，驯以致然，书之记注，为不美耳。
现代文：自此以后就继承仿效它，到现在皇上的诏令和符牒上写的，也写成 权郎官 ，当然已经很不雅了，至子 尚左 、 侍右 的名号，也就写进了任免名单中，这都是小吏不熟悉原来的事例，顺从现在习惯造成的，把这些写进记注里，这是不完美的。
English: Since then, he has inherited and imitated it. Up to now, it has been written on the emperor's edicts and charters, and it has also been written as "power vassal," which is, of course, very indecent. The names of his son Shang Zuo and his attendant Zuo have also been written into the appointment and dismissal list. This is all due to the fact that the petty officials are not familiar with the original cases and obey the current habits. It is not perfect to write these into the notes.

