古文：高逸
现代文：《周易》记载君子之道四种，说的是仕舆隐的事。
English: Gao Yizhe

古文：○褚伯玉明僧绍顾欢臧荣绪何求刘虬庾易宗测杜京产沈飗士吴苞徐伯珍
现代文：所以有人身在朝堂而形同隐居，有人浪迹江湖而长期归隐。隐居避世的形式情态，繁复纷纭，千差万别。
English: Therefore, some people live in seclusion in the morning hall, and some people live in seclusion for a long time. The form of seclusion to avoid the world is complex and varied.

古文：《易》有君子之道四焉，语默之谓也。故有入庙堂而不出，徇江湖而永归，隐避纷纭，情迹万品。若道义内足，希微两亡，藏景穷岩，蔽名愚谷，解桎梏于仁义，示形神于天壤，则名教之外，别有风猷。
现代文：如果对道的含义理解十分透彻，声名与形迹都已忘怀，将身影隐埋在峻极的山岩，把名声掩蔽在深深的谷底，解除了仁义的桎梏，将形体精神回归于自然，那么在儒家名教之外，另有一番风韵情致。
English: If you understand the meaning of the Tao very thoroughly, if you have forgotten the fame and the traces, if you have buried your shadow in the steep mountain rocks, if you have hidden your reputation in the deep valley bottom, if you have released the shackles of benevolence and righteousness, and if you have returned the body spirit to nature, then there is another charm in addition to the famous Confucianism.

古文：故尧封有非圣之人，孔门谬鸡黍之客。
现代文：所以，在唐尧时代就有不信奉圣人的隐士，孔门子弟也阴差阳错地成为荷篠丈人的客人。
English: Therefore, in the Tang Dynasty, there were hermits who did not believe in saints, and the sons and daughters of Confucius mistakenly became the guests of Hoshino's father-in-law.

古文：次则揭独往之高节，重去就之虚名，激竞违贪，与世为异。
现代文：其次则高举独来独往的节操，看重仕隐去就的空虚的名声，他们热烈争取的不是实际的物质利益，这与世俗风尚不同。
English: On the other hand, they hold high the principle of self-reliance and cherish the empty reputation of seclusion. What they ardently strive for is not the actual material benefits, which is different from the worldly fashion.

古文：或虑全后悔，事归知殆；或道有不申，行吟山泽。
现代文：有人谋虑周全而最终悔悟，事情有了结局方知道它的危险陆；有人志向得不到伸展，于是归隐山林，歌吟泽畔。
English: Some people are well-planned and eventually repent, and when things come to an end, they know the danger of it; some people's aspirations cannot be extended, so they go into seclusion in the mountains and forests, and sing songs by the lakeside.

古文：咸皆用宇宙而成心，借风云以为戒。
现代文：这些人都是凭藉宇宙而成其心志，以自然风云作为警戒借鉴。
English: These people are all inspired by the universe, using natural phenomena as a cautionary tale.

古文：求志达道，未或非然；含贞养素，文以艺业。
现代文：其志向如果真的达到了道，也是很自然的。他们具有贞洁纯正的品德，并以 文 来培养它们。
English: It is only natural that their aspirations, if they truly attain the Way, will be chaste and pure, and they will cultivate them with the help of literature.

古文：不然，与樵者之在山何殊别哉？
现代文：不然的话，他们与那些在山中砍柴的樵夫又有什么区别呢?
English: Otherwise, what is the difference between them and the woodcutters in the mountains?

古文：故樊英就征，不称李固之望；冯恢下节，见陋张华之语。
现代文：所以樊英接受了征聘，这不符合李固对他的期望。冯恢改节出仕，便受到张华的鄙薄。
English: Therefore, Hao Ying accepted the recruitment, which did not meet Li Gu's expectations of him. When Feng Gao submitted his resignation, he was despised by Zhang Hua.

古文：期之尘外，庶以弘多。
现代文：希望身处尘世之外的人，可见是很多的。
English: It can be seen that there are many people who wish to be beyond this world.

古文：若今十余子者，仕不求闻，退不讥俗，全身幽履，服道儒门，斯逸民之轨操，故缀为《高逸篇》云尔。
现代文：像现在的这十多位先生，出仕却不求闻达，退隐又不受世俗的讥讽，虽信服儒道，但能保全自身，这就是逸民节操的模范，所以将他们合在一起写成《高逸篇》。
English: Like these more than ten gentlemen now, they served without seeking recognition, retired without being ridiculed by the world, and although they were convinced of Confucianism, they were able to preserve themselves. This is the model of Yimin's discipline, so they were put together to write "High Yihan."

古文：褚伯玉，字元璩，吴郡钱唐人也。
现代文：褚伯玉字元璩，吴郡钱唐人氏。
English: He was a member of the Qiantang Clan in Wuxi County.

古文：高祖含，始平太守。
现代文：高祖褚含曾为始平太守。
English: His great-great-great-grandfather, Shikan, was once Shihira Taishu.

古文：父襜，征虏参军。
现代文：父亲褚襜为征虏参军。
English: His father joined the army as a conscript.

古文：伯玉少有隐操，寡嗜欲。
现代文：褚伯玉年轻时便有隐士的品德，清心寡欲。
English: When she was young, Zou Bo-yu had the character of a recluse, with a pure heart and little desire.

古文：年十八，父为之婚，妇入前门，伯玉从后门出。
现代文：十八岁时，其父为他婚配，新娘从前门进房，褚伯玉便从后门外出。
English: At the age of eighteen, his father married him. The bride entered the room from the front door, and Zibo Yu went out from the back door.

古文：遂往剡，居瀑布山。
现代文：于是前往剡地，居住在瀑布山。
English: So he went to Shunde and lived in the Cascade Mountains.

古文：性耐寒暑，时人比之王仲都。
现代文：他很能忍耐寒冷暑热，当时人们把他比作是王仲都。
English: He was very tolerant of cold and heat, and people compared him to Wang Zhongdu at that time.

古文：在山三十余年，隔绝人物。
现代文：在山上三十余年，与世人隔绝。
English: On the mountain for more than thirty years, cut off from the world.

古文：王僧达为吴郡，苦礼致之，伯玉不得已，停郡信宿，裁交数言而退。
现代文：王僧达作吴郡太守，不辞繁劳地苦苦礼请他来，褚伯玉迫不得已，只好在郡城停留了二夜，才交谈几句便告退。
English: Wang Zongda was the governor of Wuzhong County, and he went to great lengths to invite him. However, Zou Boyu had no choice but to stay in the county seat for two nights, and only after a few words of conversation did he withdraw.

古文：宁朔将军丘珍孙与僧达书曰： 闻褚先生出居贵馆，此子灭景云栖，不事王侯，抗高木食，有年载矣。
现代文：宁朔将军丘珍孙写信给王僧达说： 听说褚先生住在您的馆舍。这位先生藏身于云雾山中，不侍奉王侯，高尚其志，采野果为食，已有很多年了。
English: Ningshuo General Qiu Zhensun wrote to Wang Sengda, "I heard that Mr. Zou is living in your mansion. This gentleman has been hiding in the misty mountains, not serving the prince, noble in his aspirations, harvesting wild fruits for food, for many years.

古文：自非折节好贤，何以致之？
现代文：如果不是屈己谦恭喜爱贤者的人，怎能够请他到来。
English: How can he be invited if he is not a humble person who loves the sage?

古文：昔文举栖冶城，安道入昌门，于兹而三焉。
现代文：从前文举曾住冶城，安道进入昌门，加上这次伯玉宿吴郡，共是王件美事了。
English: From the previous article, I lived in Yecheng, Ando entered Changmen, and this time I stayed at the Bo-Yu Inn in Wuxi County. It was a great success.

古文：夫却粒之士，餐霞之人，乃可暂致，不宜久羁。
现代文：大凡辞却米粮，以烟霞为食的人，祗可以暂时礼请他来，而不宜长久地留住他们。
English: Those who are too proud to eat rice grain and smoke and haze can be invited temporarily, but it is not appropriate to keep them for a long time.

古文：君当思遂其高步，成其羽化。
现代文：您应该顺遂其遣世独立、羽化登仙的愿望。
English: You should fulfill his wish to become independent and ascend to heaven.

古文：望其还策之日，暂纡清尘，亦愿助为譬说。 
现代文：希望他回马归山时，能屈尊暂停；也希望您能帮我转达，使他知晓。 
English: I hope that when he returns to the mountain, he can deign to pause; I also hope that you can help me convey it so that he knows.

古文：僧达答曰： 褚先生从白云游旧矣。
现代文：王僧达回信说： 褚先生随云烟飘游已经很久了。
English: Wang Xanda wrote back: Mr. Zou has been wandering with the clouds for a long time.

古文：古之逸民，或留虑儿女，或使华阴成市。
现代文：古代的隐逸之士，有的因为思虑儿女而留下，有的则使隐居地成为闹市，但这位先生对此毫无兴趣，祇与青松山石交友。
English: Some of the ancient hermits stayed behind because they were worried about their children, while others made the hermitage into a bustling city, but this gentleman had no interest in this and only made friends with Qingming Shan Shi.

古文：而此子索然，唯朋松石，介于孤峰绝岭者积数十载。近故要其来此，冀慰日夜。
现代文：身居孤峰绝岭累积已达几十年。所以最近特邀请他来这襄，期望宽慰我日夜仰慕他的一片真心。
English: He has been living in solitude for decades, so I recently invited him here, hoping to soothe his sincere heart, which I admire day and night.

古文：比谈讨芝桂，借访荔萝，若已窥烟液，临沧洲矣。
现代文：及至谈轮起寻访芝桂、荔萝之类隐居生活，我就好像亲见烟波流泉，亲临隐居之地一样。
English: When I started talking about and visiting the secluded life of Zhigui and Lilo, I felt as if I had personally seen the source of the smoke wave and the place of seclusion.

古文：知君欲见之，辄当申譬。 
现代文：知道您想拜见他，我会转达您的意思。 
English: I know you want to see him, and I'll tell him that.

古文：宋孝建二年，散骑常侍乐询行风俗，表荐伯玉，加征聘本州议曹从事，不就。
现代文：宋武帝孝建二年，散骑常侍乐询施行风俗教化，上表荐举褚伯玉，特准征聘为本州议曹从事，褚伯玉不肯就职。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Xiaojian of the Song Dynasty, Zou Bo-yu refused to take up the post of the chief councillor of Honshu when he was recommended to be promoted to the position of the chief councillor of Honshu.

古文：太祖即位，手诏吴、会二郡，以礼迎遣，又辞疾。
现代文：齐太祖即位，亲手韶命吴郡、会稽二郡太守对他以礼迎送，褚伯玉又藉口有病而辞谢。
English: When Emperor Qizong ascended to the throne, he was greeted with courtesy by the governors of Wu County and the two counties who had personally risked their lives for him. However, Zou Bo-yu declined to thank him on the pretext that she was ill.

古文：上不欲违其志，敕于剡白石山立太平馆居之。
现代文：太祖不想违背他的志向，敕命在剡县白石山建筑太平馆让他居住。
English: The great-grandfather did not want to go against his wishes and tried his best to let him live in the Taiping Pavilion, a building in Baishishishan, Handan County.

古文：建元元年卒，年八十六。
现代文：建元元年去世。享年八十六岁。
English: He died in 1981, at the age of 86.

古文：常居一楼上，仍葬楼所。
现代文：因为经常住在一楝楼上，所以就安葬在这座楼中。
English: Because he often lived on the same floor, he was buried in the same building.

古文：孔稚圭从其受道法，为于馆侧立碑。
现代文：孔稚珪曾经跟随他学道法，所以替他在馆舍旁立了一块碑石。
English: Kong Zhiqi once followed him to study Daoism, so a monument was erected for him next to the hall.

古文：明僧绍，字承烈，平原鬲人也。
现代文：明僧绍字承烈，平原郡鬲县人。
English: Ming Dynasty monk Shao Zi Cheng Rong, a native of Min County, Pingyuan County.

古文：祖玩，州治中。
现代文：祖父明玩，为州治中。
English: My grandfather was an avid gambler and played for the prefectural government.

古文：父略，给事中。
现代文：父亲明略，为给事中。
English: The father is clearly absent, as he is in the middle of something.

古文：僧绍宋元嘉中再举秀才，明经有儒术。
现代文：宋元嘉年间明僧绍两次举为秀才，通晓经义，儒学造诣很深。
English: During the Song and Yuan Dynasties, Mingzang Shao was twice named as an outstanding scholar. He was well versed in scriptures and had a deep knowledge of Confucianism.

古文：永光中，镇北府辟功曹，并不就。
现代文：宋永光年间，镇北府征召他为功曹，一概不就职。
English: During the Song Yongguang era, Zhenbei Prefecture conscripted him as a meritorious serviceman, but he never took up the post.

古文：隐长广郡崂山，聚徒立学。
现代文：隐居在长广郡的崂山，聚徒讲学。
English: He lives in seclusion in Lushan, Changguang County, and gives lectures to students.

古文：淮北没虏，乃南渡江。
现代文：淮北陷落于敌手之后才南渡长江。
English: Huaibei only crossed the Yangtze River to the south after it had fallen to the enemy.

古文：明帝泰始六年，征通直郎，不就。
现代文：宋明帝泰始六年，征他为通直郎，不肯就任。
English: In the first six years of the reign of Emperor Taizong of Song Dynasty, Emperor Taizong recruited him as Tong Naorong, but he refused to take up the post.

古文：升明中太祖为太傅，教辟僧绍及顾欢、臧荣绪以旍币之礼，征为记室参军，不至。
现代文：宋顺帝升明年间，齐太祖当时为太傅，教采用以旌旗币帛为礼品的征聘大礼去聘请明僧绍及顾欢、臧荣绪等人，征召明僧绍篇记室参军，他也不来。
English: When Emperor Song Shun ascended to the throne the next year, Qi Taizu, who was the Tai Fu at that time, used the recruitment gift of 旗幣 as a gift to hire Ming monk Shao, Gu Huan, Gong Rongxu and others, and conscripted Ming monk Shao Zhen to join the army, but he did not come.

古文：僧绍弟庆符为青州，僧绍乏粮食，随庆符之郁洲，住弇榆山，栖云精舍，欣玩水石，竟不一入州城。
现代文：明僧绍之弟明庆符，任贵州刺史，明僧绍因为缺乏粮食，所以随明庆符一起到郁洲，住在弁榆山，栖云精舍，喜欢赏玩水石，竟然一次也没有进过青州城。
English: Ming Qingfu, the younger brother of Ming Monk Shao, was sent to Guizhou to write history. Ming Monk Shao went to Yuzhou with Ming Qingfu because of the lack of grain. They lived in Benqingshan, Suiyun Jiexie, and liked to play with water stones. In fact, they never entered Qingzhou City.

古文：建元元年冬，诏曰： 朕侧席思士，载怀尘外。
现代文：齐高帝建元元年冬，诏书说： 朕辗转反侧地思念贤士，又怀想尘俗之外的隐者。
English: In the winter of the first year of the Qigong Emperor Jianyuan, the imperial edict said: I turn around and miss the sages, and also miss the hermits outside the world.

古文：齐郡明僧绍标志高栖，耽情坟素，幽贞之操宜加贲饰。 
现代文：齐郡明僧绍立志高远，心性酷爱纯朴，幽静贞节的操守，应当加以褒奖。 
English: Qixian Mingzang should be commended for his lofty aspirations, his love of simplicity, and his quiet and chaste conduct.

古文：征为正员外郎，称疾不就。
现代文：征召他为正员郎，明僧绍藉有病而不肯就职。
English: He was called to serve as the head priest, but due to illness, the Ming monk Shao refused to take up the post.

古文：其后与崔祖思书曰： 明居士标意可重，吾前旨竟未达邪？
现代文：以后齐高帝在给崔祖思的信中说： 明居士立志值得敬重，我以前的旨意竟然没有传达给他吗?
English: Later, Emperor Qigong said in a letter to Choe Zu Si: "Ming Ju Shi's will is worthy of respect. Was my previous will not conveyed to him?

古文：小凉欲有讲事，卿可至彼，具述吾意，令与庆符俱归。 
现代文：天气稍凉想举办讲习之事，你可以到他那儿，把我的意思全部告诉他，令他和明庆符一块儿回来。 
English: If you want to hold a seminar when the weather is a little cooler, you can go to him, tell him everything I want, and have him come back with Ming Ching Fu.

古文：又曰： 不食周粟而食周薇，古犹发议。在今宁得息谈邪？
现代文：又说： 伯夷、叔齐不吃周朝粮食却采食周朝野菜，在古时候尚且受到人们议论，现今难道能息止造种议论吗?
English: He also said, "Bo Yi and Uncle Qi do not eat Zhou Dynasty grain, but eat Zhou Dynasty vegetables. In ancient times, people still talked about it. Can we stop the seed-making discussion now?

古文：聊以为笑。 
现代文：姑且把它当作笑话罢了。 
English: Let's just take it as a joke.

古文：庆符罢任，僧绍随归，住江乘摄山。
现代文：明庆符解除现任职务后，明僧绍跟着他返回，住在江乘摄山。
English: After Ming Qingfu was relieved of his current duties, Ming monk Shao followed him back to live in Jiangren.

古文：太祖谓庆符曰： 卿兄高尚其事，亦尧之外臣。
现代文：齐太祖对明庆符说： 你的兄长高尚隐逸之事，这也是尧的方外之臣。
English: Qi Taizu said to Ming Qingfu: Your elder brother is a noble and secluded person, which is also a foreign retainer of Yao.

古文：朕虽不相接，有时通梦。 
现代文：朕虽然没有与他直接交往，有时却在梦中相通。 
English: Although I have no direct contact with him, sometimes we communicate in dreams.

古文：遗僧绍竹根如意，笋箨冠。
现代文：赠给明僧绍一支竹根如意，一顶笋壳冠。
English: He presented the Ming monk Shao with a bamboo root, a skull and crossbones crown.

古文：僧绍闻沙门释僧远风德，往候定林寺，太祖欲出寺见之。
现代文：明僧绍听说佛教徒释僧远有高尚的风范品德，前往定林寺守候他。太祖想出寺庙去见僧绍。
English: Ming monk Shao heard that the Buddhist monk Shih had a high moral character and went to Dinglin Temple to wait for him. Taizu wanted to go to the temple to see monk Shao.

古文：僧远问僧绍曰： 天子若来，居士若为相对？ 
现代文：僧速问明僧绍说： 天子如果到来，居士你怎样和他相见? 
English: The monk quickly asked Ming and Shao, "If the Son of Heaven comes, householder, how will you meet him?"

古文：僧绍曰： 山薮之人，政当凿坏以遁。
现代文：说： 山野之人，正应当凿墙挖洞以躲避。
English: He said: "People in the mountains should be cutting walls and digging holes to escape.

古文：若辞不获命，便当依戴公故事耳。 
现代文：假如得不到同意，便应当依照以前戴公的办法行事了。 
English: If they do not get consent, they should act in accordance with the previous method of paying tribute.

古文：永明元年，世祖敕召僧绍，称疾不肯见。
现代文：永明元年，世祖敕命召僧绍，他藉口有病不肯相见。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, the ancestor sent for the monk Shao, but he refused to see him on the pretext of illness.

古文：诏征国子博士，不就，卒。
现代文：下诏征聘他为国子博士，也不肯就任，去世。
English: After the imperial edict recruiting him as a Kuniko doctor, he refused to take up the post and died.

古文：子元琳，字仲璋，亦传家业。
现代文：其子明元琳，字仲璋，也能继传家业。
English: His son, Mingyuanlin, also known as Zhongyao, will also be able to continue the family business.

古文：僧绍长兄僧胤，能玄言。宋世为冀州刺史。
现代文：明僧绍的长兄明僧胤，能谈玄说道，宋朝时为冀州刺史。
English: Ming Monk Shao's eldest brother, Ming Monk Yin, who can talk about the occult, said that the Song Dynasty was the history of Jizhou.

古文：弟僧暠，亦好学，宋孝武见之，迎颂其名，时人以为荣。
现代文：明僧绍之弟明僧嵩，也爱好学问，宋武帝见了他，亲自迎接并颂扬其名声，当时人认为这是很荣耀的事。
English: Mingzang Song, the younger brother of Mingzang Shao, was also fond of learning. Emperor Song Wu met him and personally greeted and praised his fame, which was considered a very honorable thing at the time.

古文：泰始初，为青州刺史。
现代文：宋明帝泰始初年，他任青州刺史。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Song Dynasty, he was appointed as the governor of Qingzhou.

古文：庆符，建元初为黄门。
现代文：明庆符在齐高帝建元初年为黄门官。
English: In the first year of the Qigong Emperor Jianyuan, Ming Chingfu became the Yellow Gate official.

古文：僧胤子惠照，元徽中为太祖平南主簿，从拒桂阳，累至骠骑中兵，与荀伯玉对领直。
现代文：僧胤之子惠照，元徽年间，任太祖平南主簿，跟随拒守桂阳，累官至骠骑中兵，与荀伯玉同为值班管领。
English: The son of a monk, Huizhao, during the Yuanhui era, served as the chief accountant of the great ancestor Pingnan, followed the refusal to defend Guiyang, and was promoted to the cavalry lieutenant, and was the duty leader with Zou Boyu.

古文：建元元年为巴州刺史，绥怀蛮蜒，上许为益州，未迁，卒。
现代文：齐高帝建元元年，为巴州刺史，对銮羞人采用绥靖怀柔政策，答允让他作益州刺史，还未升转便去世了。
English: In the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China (PRC), Emperor Qigong became the prefect of Bazhou Province, and adopted a policy of appeasement and conciliation towards the shy person, promising to let him become the prefect of Yizhou Province. However, he passed away before he could be promoted.

古文：顾欢，字景怡，吴郡盐官人也。
现代文：顾欢字景怡，吴郡盐官人氏。
English: Gu Huan Zi Jing Yi, a salt official from Wuxi County.

古文：祖赳，晋隆安末，避乱徙居。
现代文：祖顾赳，晋朝隆安末年，因躲避动乱而迁居。
English: Zu Guzheng, in the last years of the Longan period of the Jin Dynasty, moved to Lhasa to escape the turmoil.

古文：欢年六七岁书甲子，有简三篇，欢析计，遂知六甲。
现代文：顾欢六七岁时书写甲子，有简策三篇，顾欢据以分析推算，于是知道了六甲。
English: When Gu Huan was six or seven years old, he wrote about his six-year-old son. There were three simple strategies, and Gu Huan used them to analyze and calculate, so he knew about his six-year-old son.

古文：家贫，父使驱田中雀，欢作《黄雀赋》而归，雀食过半，父怒，欲挞之，见赋乃止。
现代文：他家境贫寒，父亲让他驱赶田中麻雀，顾欢作了《黄雀赋》便回家，麻雀将田中稻谷吃了大半，父亲发怒，想鞭打他，看见顾欢作的赋才停手。
English: His family was poor. His father asked him to drive away the Tanaka sparrow. Gu Huan went home after making the "Yellow Sparrow Fu." The sparrow ate most of Tanaka's rice. His father was angry and wanted to whip him. He only stopped when he saw Gu Huan's Fu.

古文：乡中有学舍，欢贫无以受业，于舍壁后倚听，无遗忘者。
现代文：乡村中有学堂，顾欢因贫困而拿不出钱来上学，于是就靠在学堂后墙上旁听，所学东西没有什么遗忘的。
English: There is a school in the village. Due to poverty, Gu Huan cannot afford to go to school, so he leans against the back wall of the school to listen. He has not forgotten anything he has learned.

古文：八岁，诵《孝经》、《诗》、《论》。
现代文：他八岁便读了《孝经》、《诗经》、《论语》。
English: At the age of eight, he read "The Filial Piety Sutra," "The Poetry Sutra" and "The Analects."

古文：及长，笃志好学。
现代文：等到长大后，更笃志好学。
English: When I grow up, I want to be a good student.

古文：母年老，躬耕诵书，夜则燃糠自照。
现代文：他母亲年老，他便边种田边读书，晚上便燃烧谷糠来照明。
English: His mother was old, so he grew crops and read books at the same time. In the evening, he would light up the valley with firecrackers.

古文：同郡顾顗之临县，见而异之，遣诸子与游，及孙宪之，并受经句。
现代文：同郡人顾觊之来到县裹，见了他觉得很是惊奇，于是让几个儿子都与他相交往，顾觊之的孙子顾宪之也跟他学经傅。
English: When Gu Xizhi, a fellow county resident, came to the county, he was very surprised to see him, so he let several sons interact with him, and Gu Xizhi's grandson Gu Xizhi also studied with him.

古文：欢年二十余，更从豫章雷次宗谘玄儒诸义。
现代文：顾欢二十多岁便跟随豫章人雷次宗咨询玄学儒学各种意义。
English: In his twenties, Gu Huan followed Yu Zhangren Lei Zizong to consult various meanings of metaphysics and Confucianism.

古文：母亡，水浆不入口六七日，庐于墓次，遂隐遁不仕。
现代文：母亲亡故时，他有六七天都水米不沾牙，在墓旁筑室而居，于是就隐逸避世而不出仕。
English: When his mother died, he did not brush his teeth for six or seven days, building a room next to the grave, so he hid from the world and did not go to work.

古文：于剡天台山开馆聚徒，受业者常近百人。
现代文：他在剡县天台山开馆聚众讲学，接受他教导的经常有近百人。
English: He opened a public lecture hall in Tiantai Mountain, Handan County, and nearly a hundred people often received his teachings.

古文：欢早孤，每读《诗》至 哀哀父母 ，辄执书恸泣，学者由是废《蓼莪篇》不复讲。
现代文：顾欢早年丧父，每当读到《诗经》中 哀哀父母 这句诗时，便拿著书恸哭流泪，学者从此放弃《蓼莪篇》而不再讲。
English: Gu Huan lost his father at an early age. Whenever he read the poem "Mourning for Parents" in the Book of Songs, he would hold the book and weep and shed tears. Since then, scholars have abandoned the "Song of Songs" and no longer recite it.

古文：太祖辅政，悦欢风教，征为扬州主簿，遣中使迎欢。
现代文：齐太祖辅佐宋朝朝政时，对枫欢的风范教化很欣赏，征召他为扬州主簿，并派中使去迎接顾欢。
English: When Qidai Zu Fu was in charge of politics in the Song Dynasty, he was very appreciative of Feng Huan's demeanor and education. He recruited him as the Yangzhou master, and sent an envoy to meet Gu Huan.

古文：及践阼，乃至。
现代文：到太祖即位，顾欢才到了京城。
English: Gu Huan did not arrive in Beijing until the Emperor ascended the throne.

古文：欢称 山谷臣顾欢 ，上表曰： 臣闻举网提纲，振裘持领，纲领既理，毛目自张。
现代文：顾欢自称是山谷臣顾欢，上表章说： 臣听说张纲要提纲绳，整理裘衣要提着衣领。纲领既已理顺，裘毛网眼自然会张开。
English: Gu Huan claimed to be the valley minister Gu Huan, and the above table chapter said: The minister heard that Zhang Guo outlined the outline rope, and the collars should be carried to arrange the fur coat. Once the program has been straightened out, the fur net will naturally open.

古文：然则道德，纲也；物势，目也。
现代文：而道德是纲，事物的形式是目。
English: But morality is the principle, and the form of things is the eye.

古文：上理其纲，则万机时序；下张其目，则庶官不旷。
现代文：从上治整其纲，则万事都符合时势顺序；从下张开其目，则庶民百官都不敢荒废其业。
English: If you rectify your system from the top, everything will be in line with the current situation; if you open your eyes from the bottom, ordinary people and officials will not dare to waste their work.

古文：是以汤、武得势师道则祚延，秦、项忽道任势则身戮。
现代文：因此商汤、周武王既得情势又师法正道，其基业便延绵不绝；秦始皇、项羽轻视正道而一昧放纵其威势，结果是身遭杀戮。
English: As a result, Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu gained power and taught the righteous path of the Fa, and their foundation work continued uninterruptedly; Qin Shihuang and Xiang Yu despised the righteous path and indulged in their power, and as a result, they were killed.

古文：夫天门开阖，自古有之，四气相新，絺裘代进。
现代文：自古以来，天门便有开有闭，春夏秋冬气候互相更新，丝衣皮裘也互相变换替代。
English: Since ancient times, the gates of heaven have been opened and closed, the spring, summer, autumn and winter climates have renewed each other, and silk clothes and fur coats have also replaced each other.

古文：今火泽易位，三灵改宪，天树明德，对时育物，搜扬仄陋，野无伏言。
现代文：当今已是火水更换了位置，日、月、星也变改了法轨，上天树立显德之人，适应时序生育万物，搜集宣扬偏狭浅陋的意见，草莽中也没有隐伏的议论了。
English: Today, fire and water have changed places, the sun, moon and stars have also changed their orbits, the heavens have established a virtuous person, adapted to the time sequence to give birth to all things, collected and promoted narrow and shallow opinions, and there is no hidden discussion in the grass.

古文：是以穷谷愚夫，敢露偏管，谨删撰《老氏》，献《治纲》一卷。伏愿稽古百王，斟酌时用，不以刍荛弃言，不以人微废道，则率土之赐也，微臣之幸也。
现代文：因此山谷中愚笨之人，也敢于表明自己偏颇的一管之见，谨删撰《老子》一书，献上《治纲》一卷希望皇上能考察古代百王的治理方法，斟酌运用到现时，不要因为是草野鄙陋之人的话而抛弃它，不要因为是地位微贱者的见识而废置它，那么就是率土之民的福分，微臣我的万幸了。
English: Therefore, the foolish man in the valley also dared to show his biased one-man management opinion. He carefully deleted the book "Lao Zi" and presented a volume of "Ji Gang" in the hope that the emperor could examine the governance methods of hundreds of kings in ancient times and apply them to the present. Don't abandon it because it is the word of a vulgar person, and don't discard it because it is the insight of a low-ranking person. Then it is the fortune of leading the people of the land, my humble servant.

古文：幸赐一疏，则上下交泰，虽不求民而民悦，不祈天而天应。
现代文：希望皇上能看看，则从上至下都相互安泰。虽不求百姓欢悦而百姓自然欢悦，不祈请上天保佑而上天自会答应。
English: Hope that the emperor can see, from top to bottom are mutually secure. Although not to please the people and the people naturally pleased, do not pray for God's blessing and God will agree.

古文：应天悦民，则皇基固矣。
现代文：上顺应天，下使民欢悦，那么皇上的基业便很稳固了。
English: If the emperor obeyed God above and pleased the people below, then the emperor's foundation would be very solid.

古文：臣志尽幽深，无与荣势，自足云霞，不须禄养。
现代文：臣志向在深山幽谷，不想获得荣耀；云霞野食完全满足需要，不必依靠俸禄养身。
English: The vassal aspires to be in the deep mountains and valleys, and does not want to gain glory; the cloud and haze picnic fully meets the needs, and does not have to rely on the salary for self-cultivation.

古文：陛下既远见寻求，敢不尽言。
现代文：陛下既然远道寻求访见我，我怎敢不畅所欲言?
English: Since Your Majesty has come all this way to see me, how dare I not say what I want to say?

古文：言既尽矣，请从此退。 
现代文：话已说完，请求允许我从此退隐。 
English: Having said this, I would like to request that I be allowed to retire from this life.

古文：是时员外郎刘思效表陈谠言曰： 宋自大明以来，渐见凋弊，征赋有增于往，天府尤贫于昔。
现代文：当时员外郎刘思效上表陈述自己正直的意见说： 刘宋白大明以来，逐渐凋敝衰落，征收的税赋比往年增多但国库却比以前更贫乏。
English: At that time, Liu Sihui, a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee, stated his honest opinion on the table and said: Since Liu Songbai Daming, it has gradually withered and declined. The taxes collected have increased compared to previous years, but the national treasury is poorer than before.

古文：兼军警屡兴，伤夷不复，戍役残丁，储元半菽，小民嗷嗷，无乐生之色。
现代文：加上战争烽火屡起，国家创伤得不到平复，服兵役的兵士们，家中没有半点粮食储备，百姓哀号哭叫，毫无生活的快乐。
English: In addition, wars have broken out repeatedly, the national trauma has not been healed, soldiers who have served in the military have no grain reserves at home, and the people are wailing and crying, without the joy of life.

古文：贵势之流，货室之族，车服伎乐，争相奢丽，亭池第宅，竞趣高华，至于山泽之人不敢采饮其水草。
现代文：豪门权贵之流，富商巨贾之族，其车马服饰伎乐，争相攀比奢侈靡丽；其亭台楼阁池苑居宅，互相竞争着趋于高大华美。甚至连居于山泽之人也不敢采摘饮用他们的水草。
English: The rich and powerful, the wealthy merchants, and the great families, with their horse-drawn carriages, costumes, and tricks, compete with each other to be the most luxurious; their pavilions and pavilion gardens compete with each other to be the most magnificent. Even people living in Yamazawa do not dare to pick the water plants that drink them.

古文：贫富相辉，捐源尚末。
现代文：贫富对照鲜明，抛弃本源而崇尚未流。
English: The contrast between the rich and the poor is stark, and the abandonment of the original source and the worship of the elite has not yet flowed.

古文：陛下宜发明诏，吐德音，布惠泽，禁邪伪，薄赋敛，省徭役，绝奇丽之赂，塞郑、卫之倡，变历运之化，应质文之用，不亦大哉！
现代文：陛下应当发布明确的韶书，倾吐仁德的声音，广施恩惠甘霖，禁止邪僻奸伪，减省徭役，杜绝奇丽的财物，堵塞郑、卫之音，顺应历数天命的变化，改变前朝奢靡的风气，使礼文与实质相符，这样做目不是很伟大吗?
English: His majesty should issue a clear imperial edict, pour out the voice of benevolence, spread the blessings of benevolence, prohibit the eccentricity and hypocrisy, reduce the number of officials, eliminate the wonderful property, block the voices of Zheng and Wei, conform to the changes in the fate of the past few days, change the extravagant style of the former dynasty, and make the ritual consistent with the essence. Isn't this a great goal?

古文：又彭、汴有鸱枭之巢，青丘为狐兔之窟，虐害逾纪，残暴日滋。
现代文：又彭城、汴州有鸱枭的巢穴，青丘是狐兔藏身的洞窟，这些害人精残虐百姓祸害人民，其程度比以往更凶暴，而且一天比一天更厉害。
English: In Pengcheng and Zhangzhou, there are lairs of baboons, and Qingqiu is a cave where foxes and rabbits hide. These evil spirits brutalize the people and harm the people, and their degree is more ferocious than ever, and it is becoming more and more severe day by day.

古文：鬼泣旧泉，人悲故壤，童孺视编发而惭生，耆老看左衽而耻没。
现代文：鬼神哭泣旧泉的改色，人们悲愤故土的陷敌；儿童见发式改换而感到活得惭愧，老人见衣襟左掩而觉得陷入敌手的羞耻。
English: Ghosts and gods weep at the discolouration of an old spring, people are saddened and angry at the trapping of their homeland; children feel ashamed to be alive when they see the change of hairstyle, and the elderly feel ashamed to be caught by the enemy when they see their clothes covered.

古文：陛下宜仰答天人引领之望，下吊氓黎倾首之勤，授钺卫、霍之将，遗策萧、张之师，万道俱前，穷山荡谷。
现代文：陛下应当回报上天、臣民的引颈以顾的期望，哀怜悯惜群黎百姓翘首以待的殷切企盼，授兵权给卫青、霍去病之类的将领，把韬略交给萧何、张良那样的军师，万道并进，扫荡山谷。
English: His majesty should repay the expectations of heaven and the expectations of his subjects, pity and pity the ardent expectations of the masses of the people, grant military powers to generals such as Wei Qing and Huo Dexia, and give the command to military strategists such as Xiao He and Zhang Liang, and sweep the valley.

古文：此即恒山不足指而倾，渤海不足饮而竭，岂徒残寇尘灭而已哉！ 
现代文：这样不用挥鞭而恒山倾倒，渤海不够饮用而枯竭，哪裹仅仅址使敌寇灰飞烟灭而已呢! 
English: In this way, it is not necessary to wave a whip to topple Hengshan, and the Bohai Sea is not enough to drink and is exhausted, which is just a place to make the enemy's ashes fly out!

古文：上诏曰： 朕夙旦惟夤，思弘治道，伫梦岩滨，垂精管库，旰食萦怀，其勤至矣。
现代文：齐太祖颁诏说： 朕以继夜，思考着弘扬治理朝政的方法，做梦都停留在山岩海滨，精力集中在国家的管理库藏，诸事烦扰于心而很晚才进食，可以说是极其勤勉了。
English: Qi Taizu issued an edict saying, "I stay up all night, thinking about how to promote the governance of the dynasty. My dreams stay in the mountains and on the seashore. My energy is concentrated on the management of the country's treasury. I worry about many things and eat late. I can say that I am extremely diligent."

古文：吴郡顾欢、散骑郎刘思效，或至自丘园，或越在冗位，并能献书金门，荐辞凤阙，辨章治体，有协朕心。
现代文：吴郡顾欢、散骑郎刘思劲，或来自山丘田园，或处于闲散职位，都能到金门凤阙的朝廷来上书献策，辨析治理世事的方式方法，对朕心有所帮助。
English: Wu County's Gu Huan and stunt rider Liu Sijin, either from the hills and countryside, or in idle positions, can come to the imperial court of Kinmen and Fengtai to submit proposals and analyze the ways and means of managing world affairs, which is helpful to my heart.

古文：今出其表，外可详择所宜，以时敷奏。
现代文：现将其表章发下，外臣们可详细选择适用的，以待陈奏。
English: The foreign ministers can choose the appropriate one in detail and wait for it to be issued.

古文：欢近已加旍贲，思效可付选铨序，以显谠言。 
现代文：顾欢最近已赏给旌旗饰物，刘思劫可以交给吏部按照铨序官员的制度予以升迁，以显扬正直之言。 
English: Gu Huan has recently been awarded the decoration of the national flag, and Liu Si Rong can be promoted to the personnel department in accordance with the system of senior officials to show his honesty.

古文：欢东归，上赐麈尾、素琴。
现代文：顾欢束归时，太祖赐给他尘尾、素琴。
English: When Gu Huanzhu returned, his great-grandfather gave him a dust tail and a suqin.

古文：永明元年，诏征欢为太学博士，同郡顾黯为散骑郎。
现代文：齐武帝永明元年，有韶征聘顾欢为太学博，同郡人顾黯征为散骑郎。
English: In the first year of Emperor Yongming of Qiwu, Gu Huan was recruited as Taigaku Bo, and Gu Yingzheng was recruited as Sanzhiro.

古文：黯字长孺，有隐操，与欢俱不就征。
现代文：顾黯字长孺，有隐逸的节操，与顾欢一起都不接受徼召。
English: Gu Ying's character is long-suffering, has a hidden discipline, and does not accept the summoning together with Gu Huan.

古文：欢晚节服食，不与人通。
现代文：顾欢晚年的衣着食物与常人不同。
English: Gu Huan's clothes and food in his later years were different from those of ordinary people.

古文：每旦出户，山鸟集其掌取食。
现代文：每天早晨一出门，山鸟便聚集在他手掌上啄食。
English: Every morning, as soon as he leaves the house, the mountain birds gather on the palm of his hand to feed.

古文：事黄老道，解阴阳书，为数术多效验。
现代文：信奉黄老之道，善解阴阳之书，用术数预测事物，大多应验。
English: He believes in the ancient wisdom of the Yellow Emperor, is good at solving the book of yin and yang, and predicts things with the number of operations, and most of them come true.

古文：初元嘉末，出都寄住东府，忽题柱云： 三十年二月二十一日。 
现代文：当初宋元嘉末年时，他出京都寄住在柬府，忽然在柱上题字说： 三十年二月二十一日。 
English: When Song Yuan Jia was in his last years, he went to Kyoto and stayed in Cambodia. Suddenly, an inscription on the pillar said: "Thirty years have passed since February 21st."

古文：因东归。
现代文：并因此而束返。
English: And that's why they're coming back.

古文：后太初弑逆，果是此年月。
现代文：后刘劭弑君篡逆，果然是这一年的这一天。
English: After Liu Yijun's usurpation, it was indeed this day of this year.

古文：自知将终，赋诗言志云： 精气因天行，游魂随物化。 
现代文：他自知将要去世，便赋诗言志说： 精气随天命而行，游魂随物化而逝。 
English: He knew that he was going to die, so he wrote a poem saying: "The spirit goes with the destiny, the wandering soul passes away with the materialization."

古文：克死日，卒于剡山，身体柔软，时年六十四。
现代文：死期一到，卒于剡山，身体仍然柔软，时年六十四岁。
English: As soon as the time of death arrived, he died in Shaoshan, his body still soft, at the age of 64.

古文：还葬旧墓，木连理出墓侧，县令江山图表状。
现代文：归葬旧墓，树木枝干相连从墓侧长出，县令江山图上表描述。
English: An old tomb for burial, tree branches growing out from the side of the tomb, as shown in the county map above.

古文：世祖诏欢诸子撰欢《文议》三十卷。
现代文：齐世祖诏令顾欢的几个儿子，编撰顾欢的《文议》三十卷。
English: Qizhe Zu ordered several sons of Gu Huan to compile 30 volumes of Gu Huan's "Recommendations."

古文：佛道二家，立教既异，学者互相非毁。
现代文：佛道两家，其立教宗旨不同，学者因此互相非难诽谤。
English: The two schools of Buddhism have different purposes in establishing their teachings, so scholars cannot accuse each other of slander.

古文：欢著《夷夏论》曰：
现代文：顾欢着《夷夏论》说：
English: Gu Huan said with reference to "The Summer of the Barbarians":

古文：夫辩是与非，宜据圣典。
现代文：凡是辨别是非，应当依据圣典。
English: Any distinction between right and wrong should be made on the basis of the Holy Scriptures.

古文：寻二教之源，故两标经句。
现代文：所以追寻二教的本源，特标明二教的经典之句。
English: Therefore, to trace the origin of the two religions, the classic sentence of the two religions is specially marked.

古文：道经云： 老子入关之天竺维卫国，国王夫人名曰净妙，老子因其昼寝，乘日精入净妙口中，后年四月八日夜半时，剖左腋而生，坠地即行七步，于是佛道兴焉。 
现代文：道经云： 老子入关到天竺维卫国，国王夫人名曰净妙，老子趁着她白天睡觉，乘太阳的精气入净妙口中，后年四月八日夜半时，剖左腋而出生，坠地就行走七步。于是佛道兴盛了。 
English: Legend has it that: Lao Zi entered the Heavenly Palace to defend the country. The king's wife was named Ching Miao. Lao Zi took advantage of her sleeping during the day and used the sun's essence to enter Ching Miao's mouth. At midnight on April 8th of the following year, he was born with a cleft palate and walked seven steps when he fell to the ground. Thus, Buddhism flourished.

古文：此出《玄妙内篇》。
现代文：此段话出白《玄妙内篇》。
English: This passage is from the "Mystery of the Mysteries."

古文：佛经云： 释迦成佛，有尘劫之数。 
现代文：佛经云： 释迦牟尼成佛，有在尘世中遭劫难的命数。 
English: Buddha sutra: Shakyamuni became a Buddha because of the number of lives he suffered in the earthly world.

古文：出《法华无量寿》。
现代文：语出自《法华无量寿》。 为国师道士，儒林之宗 。
English: The phrase comes from "Law of Immeasurable Life." He is a national teacher, Taoist, and a member of the Jolin sect.

古文：或 为国师道士，儒林之宗， 出《瑞应本起》。
现代文：语出《瑞应本起》。
English: "We should start from scratch," he said.

古文：欢论之曰：五帝、三皇，莫不有师。
现代文：顾欢论述道：五帝三皇，莫不有师傅。
English: Gu Huan commented: Five emperors and three emperors, there is no master.

古文：国师道士，无过老、庄，儒林之宗，孰出周、孔？
现代文：国师道士，没有超过老聃、庄周的；儒林之宗，谁能超出周公、孔子。
English: As a national teacher and Taoist, no one surpasses Lao Zi and Zhuang Zhou; as a member of the Julin sect, who can surpass Zhou Gong and Confucius?

古文：若孔、老非佛，谁则当之？
现代文：如果孔、老都不是圣，那么谁可称得上是圣。
English: If Kong and Lao are not saints, then who can be called a saint.

古文：然二经所说，如合符契。
现代文：然上述经籍所说，像符契一样相合。
English: However, as mentioned in the above scripture, they fit together like a contract.

古文：道则佛也，佛则道也。
现代文：道则是佛，佛即是道。
English: The way is the Buddha, and the Buddha is the way.

古文：其圣则符，其迹则反。
现代文：其道义的极致是相符合的，其行迹则相反。
English: Their moral absolutes are compatible, but their actions are not.

古文：或和光以明近，或曜灵以示远。
现代文：或聚合光辉以照明近处，或星光闪耀以照亮远处。
English: Or coalesce the radiance to light the near, or the starlight sparkle to light the far.

古文：道济天下，故无方而不入；智周万物，故无物而不为。
现代文：道救济天下，所以无处不进；智周全万物，所以无物不为。
English: The way of relief is universal, so it can go everywhere; the way of wisdom embraces all things, so it can do nothing.

古文：其入不同，其为必异。
现代文：它们进入世界的方式不同，所以其作法必定不一样。
English: They come into the world in different ways, so they must do things differently.

古文：各成其性，不易其事。
现代文：各成其本性而不改易其事。
English: Each to his own nature and not to be tampered with.

古文：是以端委搢绅，诸华之容；剪发旷衣，群夷之服。
现代文：因此端庄从容的绅士，遣是华夏的容貌；剪发而松开衣服，这是各少数民族的服饰。
English: Therefore, the gentleman who is dignified and calm has the appearance of China; cutting hair and loosening clothes are the costumes of various ethnic minorities.

古文：擎跽磬折，侯甸之恭；狐蹲狗踞，荒流之肃。
现代文：挺身跪跽，如磬一样弯曲行礼，这是中原的恭敬的礼节；像狐狗一样地蹲踞，这是蛮荒之地的庄严的礼俗。
English: Standing up, kneeling, and bowing like a baboon, this is the respectful etiquette of the Central Plains; crouching like a foxhound, this is the solemn etiquette of the wilderness.

古文：棺殡椁葬，中夏之制；火焚水沈，西戎之俗。
现代文：用棺椁殡葬死者，这是中原华夏的丧葬制度，火化水沉，这是酉戎的丧葬习俗。
English: Burial of the dead in coffins, this is the funeral system of Central Plains China, cremation by immersion, this is the funeral custom of Qiongwu.

古文：全形守礼，继善之教；毁貌易性，绝恶之学。
现代文：保全身形笃守礼仪，这是使人保存善性的教导；破坏容貌改易性格，这是教人杜绝恶性的学问。
English: Keeping one's body in good shape and observing the etiquette are the teachings to preserve one's virtuous nature; destroying one's appearance and changing one's character are the teachings to eliminate one's vicious nature.

古文：岂伊同人，爰及异物。
现代文：不仅人是如此，就连异于人的万物也是这样。
English: This is true not only of people, but also of all things that are different from people.

古文：鸟王兽长，往往是佛，无穷世界，圣人代兴。
现代文：鸟兽之王也往往是佛，在无穷无尽的世界裹有圣人代代兴起。
English: The king of beasts and birds is also often a Buddha, who rises from generation to generation in an endless world, surrounded by sages.

古文：或昭五典，或布三乘。
现代文：或昭明五经，或传布三乘。
English: or the Five Classics of Zhao Ming, or the propagation of the Three Noble Truths.

古文：在鸟而鸟鸣，在兽而兽吼；教华而华言，化夷而夷语耳。
现代文：在鸟的世界便如乌一样呜，在兽的世界裹便像兽一样吼。用华夏的语言教导他，便说华夏之语：用夷戎的语言化育他，便说夷戎的话。
English: In the world of birds, it will growl like a blackbird; in the world of beasts, it will roar like a beast. If you teach it the language of China, it will speak the language of China; if you educate it in the language of barbarians, it will speak the language of barbarians.

古文：虽舟车均于致远，而有川陆之节；佛道齐乎达化，而有夷夏之别。
现代文：虽然舟与车都是用来乘坐以行达远方的，但却有衹能济川或行陆的限制。佛与道都是为了教化世人，但也有夷戎与华夏的区别。
English: Although the boat and the car are both used to travel far away, there are restrictions on traveling to Jecheon or overland. Buddha and Tao are both to enlighten the world, but there is also a difference between Yirong and Huaxia.

古文：若谓其致既均，其法可换者，而车可涉川，舟可行陆乎？
现代文：假如说它们要达到的目的是一致的，因而采用的方法可以互换的话，这岂不是车可以渡河，舟可以在陆上行走吗?
English: If the goal they want to achieve is the same and the methods they use are interchangeable, wouldn't a car be able to cross a river and a boat be able to walk on land?

古文：今以中夏之性，效西戎之法，既不全同，又不全异。
现代文：现在以中原华夏的体性，去仿效西戎的方法，既不完全相同，也不完全相异。
English: Now, with the physique of the Central Plains Huaxia, to imitate the method of Xi Rong, is neither completely the same, nor completely different.

古文：下弃妻孥，上废宗祀。
现代文：在下抛弃妻子儿女，在上废除宗庙祭祀。
English: Abandoning his wife and children below, abolishing the ancestral temple rites above.

古文：嗜欲之物，皆以礼伸；孝敬之典，独以法屈。
现代文：贪图物欲享受的，都因为礼节而得到伸张；孝亲敬长的标准，衹凭藉是否犯法来判断理亏。
English: Those who are greedy for materialistic enjoyment are promoted because of etiquette; the standards of filial piety and respect for elders are not judged by whether they violate the law.

古文：悖礼犯顺，曾莫之觉。
现代文：违犯了礼仪的条理次序，还一点也不觉悟。
English: He violated the orderly sequence of etiquette, and he didn't realize it at all.

古文：弱丧忘归，孰识其旧？
现代文：丧失了体性忘却了回返，谁还记得旧有的道路?
English: Who can remember the old ways, who have lost their identity and forgotten how to return?

古文：且理之可贵者，道也；事之可贱者，俗也。
现代文：况且理的可贵之处是正道；事的可卑视之处在于习俗。
English: Moreover, what is precious in reason is the right way; what is despicable is custom.

古文：舍华效夷，义将安取？
现代文：舍弃华夏而仿效夷戎，这是什么道理?
English: What is the reason for abandoning Huaxia and following the example of Yirong?

古文：若以道邪，道固符合矣；若以俗邪，俗则大乖矣。
现代文：是因为道吗?
English: Is it because of the road?

古文：屡见刻舷沙门，守株道士，交诤小大，互相弹射。
现代文：道原本就是相同的。
English: The road is basically the same.

古文：或域道以为两，或混俗以为一。
现代文：或将道一分为二，或将华夷习俗混为一谈。
English: or to divide the Tao into two, or to conflate Huai customs.

古文：是牵异以为同，破同以为异。
现代文：造就是牵强附会地将异认作同，将同破坏成异。
English: To create is to far-fetchedly identify differences as the same, and to destroy the same as the different.

古文：则乖争之由，淆乱之本也。
现代文：那么这种论争所持的理由就是混淆是非的本源。
English: Then the reason for this argument is the source of confusion between right and wrong.

古文：寻圣道虽同，而法有左右。
现代文：考察两教，最崇高的道义是相同的，衹是所取的方法有分别。
English: Examining the two religions, the loftiest moral principles are the same, but the methods adopted are different.

古文：始乎无端，终乎无末。
现代文：开始于无端，结束于无终止。
English: Starts with no reason, ends with no end.

古文：泥洹仙化，各是一术。
现代文：或涅槃或仙化，各是一种方式。
English: or nirvana or immortality, each is a way.

古文：佛号正真，道称正一。
现代文：佛教号称正真，道教叫作正一。
English: Buddhism is known as Zhenzhen, and Taoism is called Zhengyi.

古文：一归无死，真会无生。
现代文：正一归结于无死，正真归结于无生。
English: It boils down to no-death, it boils down to no-life.

古文：在名则反，在实则合。
现代文：在词义上虽然相反，实际含意上却互相符合。
English: Although they are opposites in the sense of the word, they actually correspond to each other in meaning.

古文：但无生之教赊，无死之化切：切法可以进谦弱，赊法可以退夸强。
现代文：但无生的教义则渺远，无死的教义更切近。切近之法可以使性格谦虚软弱者得到促进，渺远之法可以使喜好夸口逞强者受到抑制。
English: But the doctrine of the lifeless is remote, and the doctrine of the deathless is nearer. The method of proximity can promote those who are modest and weak in character, and the method of remoteness can suppress those who like to boast.

古文：佛教文而博，道教质而精：精非粗人所信，博非精人所能。
现代文：佛教有文采而广博，道教质直而精细。太精细则不是粗笨之人所能信服的，太广博则不是精细之人所能信奉的。
English: Buddhism is literate and broad, and Taoism is straightforward and refined. Too much detail is not convincing to the dull, and too much breadth is not believable to the refined.

古文：佛言华而引，道言实而抑：抑则明者独进，引则昧者竞前。
现代文：佛教的语言华美而善于诱导，道教的语言朴实而慎密。太慎密则衹有聪明人能上进领悟，善导引则使愚昧者争着向前。
English: The language of Buddhism is beautiful and good at inducing, while the language of Taoism is simple and prudent. If it is too prudent, clever people will not be able to advance and understand, and if it is a good guide, the ignorant will struggle to advance.

古文：佛经繁而显，道经简而幽：幽则妙门难见，显则正路易遵。
现代文：佛经繁多而明显，道经简练而幽深。幽深则使人难于看清其奇妙的门径，明显则使人容易遵循其正路。
English: The sutras are numerous and obvious, while the Tao Te Ching is concise and profound. The profundity of the Tao Te Ching makes it difficult for people to see its wondrous path, while the clarity makes it easy for people to follow its right path.

古文：此二法之辨也。
现代文：这就是佛道二法的区别。
English: This is the difference between the two methods of Buddhism.

古文：圣匠无心，方圆有体，器既殊用，教亦异施。
现代文：神圣的大师原本没有形成差别的心思，但形式体制却方圆有别。方圆的器物既然用途不同，因而二教实施的方法也不相同。
English: Originally, the sacred masters did not form the idea of difference, but the formal system is different. Since the use of the square utensils is different, the methods of implementing the two teachings are also different.

古文：佛是破恶之方，道是兴善之术。
现代文：佛教是破除恶习的方法，道教是舆起善德的方法。
English: Buddhism is a method of breaking bad habits, and Taoism is a method of cultivating good morals.

古文：兴善则自然为高，破恶则勇猛为贵。
现代文：兴善则以崇尚自然为高，破恶则以讲究勇猛为贵。
English: To do good is to hold nature in high esteem, and to destroy evil is to be brave.

古文：佛迹光大，宜以化物；道迹密微，利用为己。
现代文：佛教的行迹光明正大，适宜于教化万物；道教的行迹慎密捆微，有益于为自己所用。
English: The practice of Buddhism is above-board and suitable for enlightening all things; the practice of Taoism is carefully bundled and beneficial for one's own use.

古文：优劣之分，大略在兹。
现代文：其优劣的分别，大致就是这些。
English: The difference between their merits and demerits is roughly this.

古文：夫蹲夷之仪，娄罗之辩，各出彼俗，自相聆解。犹虫嚾鸟聒，何足述效。
现代文：至于蹲踞平坐的种种仪式，本出于它们各自的习俗；教徒们互相争论，也衹不过出于他们各自的理解，这犹如蚊呜乌叫一样，怎么值得一一去比较呢?
English: As for the various ceremonies of squatting and sitting, they are based on their own customs; the believers argue with each other, but also with their own understanding, this is like a mosquito howling, how is it worth comparing one by one?

古文：欢虽同二法，而意党道教。
现代文：顾欢虽然赞同二教，但内心更偏向道教。
English: Although Gu Huan agrees with the two religions, his heart is more inclined to Taoism.

古文：宋司徒袁粲托为道人通公驳之，其略曰：
现代文：宋司徒袁粲假托道人通公的名义驳斥他，其内容大略说：
English: Song's disciple, Yuan Xuan, refuted him in the name of Taoist justice, the content of which was roughly as follows:

古文：白日停光，恒星隐照，诞降之应，事在老先，似非入关，方炳斯瑞。
现代文：白曰停息了照耀，恒星隐藏了光辉，这是佛祖诞生时应验的征兆，其事在老子之先，所以并非老子入关后，上天才显现这种祥瑞。
English: The day has ceased to shine, the stars have hidden their light. This is a sign of the fulfillment of the birth of the Buddha. It happened before Lao Zi, so it was not after Lao Zi entered the gate that the auspiciousness appeared.

古文：又老、庄、周、孔，有可存者，依日末光，凭释遗法，盗牛窃善，反以成蠹。检究源流，终异吾党之为道耳。
现代文：又老子、庄周、周公、孔子，他们存世的论述，都是依靠太阳的余光，凭藉佛经的遣法，从中窃取善言而来的，结果反成了书蠹，探究考察其源流，毕竟和我们崇尚的道不同。
English: In addition, Lao Zi, Zhuang Zhou, Zhou Gong, Confucius, and others, all of their extant discourses relied on the afterglow of the sun, using the methods of the Buddhist scriptures to steal good words from them. As a result, they turned into books, and their sources were explored and examined. After all, they were different from the way we advocate.

古文：西域之记，佛经之说，俗以膝行为礼，不慕蹲坐为恭，道以三绕为虔，不尚踞傲为肃。
现代文：依照西域的记载和佛经的税法，其民俗以膝行为敬礼，而不以蹲坐为恭敬；道教以环绕三圈为虔诚，而不以踞傲为庄重。
English: According to the records of the Western Regions and the tax laws of the Buddhist scriptures, its folk custom is to salute with the act of kneeling, rather than squatting for respect; Taoism is to surround three circles for piety, rather than pride for solemnity.

古文：岂专戎土，爰亦兹方。
现代文：岂衹是戎夷之地如此，就连我们遣襄也一样。
English: If it is so in the land of the soldiers, it is also so in our exile.

古文：襄童谒帝，膝行而进；赵王见周，三环而止。
现代文：襄童见帝是膝行而前；赵王见周也是环绕三圈才停止。
English: When Xiang Tong saw the emperor, he walked forward on his knees; when Zhao Wang saw Zhou, he also circled around three times before stopping.

古文：今佛法在华，乘者常安；戒善行交，蹈者恒通。
现代文：现在佛法流行于华夏，信仰者常觉安宁；它劝诫人们相互友善，走上这条路的人常能通达。
English: Now Buddhism is popular in China, believers often feel peaceful; it exhorts people to be kind to each other, and people who take this path can often reach.

古文：文王造周，大伯创吴，革化戎夷，不因旧俗。
现代文：文王创立周朝泰伯建立吴国，都能改革戎夷的风气而不因循他们旧有的习俗。
English: King Wen founded the Zhou Dynasty, Tai Bo established the State of Wu, and all of them were able to reform the customs of the Rongyi without following their old customs.

古文：岂若舟车，理无代用。
现代文：这哪裹像舟与车那样，按理是不可代用的呢?
English: Which of these, like a boat and a car, is logically irreplaceable?

古文：佛法垂化，或因或革。
现代文：佛法讲求感化，有的因循有的变革。
English: Buddhism emphasizes inspiration, and some changes come as a result of others.

古文：清信之士，容衣不改；息心之人，服貌必变。
现代文：在家修行的居士，容貌服饰都不改变；出家修炼的和尚，其服饰容貌必须改变。
English: For lay practitioners who practice at home, their appearance and clothing do not change; for ordained monks, their appearance and clothing must change.

古文：变本从道，不遵彼俗，教风自殊，无患其乱。
现代文：这种改变原本是根据佛教教规，并不是遵守其地的民俗。教规与民风本不相同，所以用不着担心会互相淆乱。
English: This change was originally based on Buddhist precepts, not on local folk customs. The precepts and folk customs are different, so there is no need to worry that they will be confused with each other.

古文：孔、老、释迦，其人或同，观方设教，其道必异。
现代文：孔子、老子、释迦牟尼，其为圣人大概相同，但对世界的观照不同，因此立教的宗旨不同。
English: Confucius, Lao Tzu, and Sakyamuni are almost the same as saints, but their view of the world is different, so the purpose of establishing a religion is different.

古文：孔、老治世为本，释氏出世为宗。
现代文：孔、老以治理现世为根本，释氏以出世为宗旨。
English: Confucius and Lao Tzu took the governance of this world as the foundation, and Shih Tzu took the birth of the world as the purpose.

古文：发轸既殊，其归亦异。
现代文：其出发点既然有别，其终极目标也有所不同。
English: Since its starting point is different, its ultimate goal is also different.

古文：符合之唱，自由臆说。
现代文：二教符合的论调，自然是出于臆说之词。
English: The argument that the two religions are compatible is, of course, a fabrication.

古文：又仙化以变形为上，泥洹以陶神为先。
现代文：又道教仙化以形体变化为上，佛教涅槃以修炼精神为上。
English: In addition, Taoist immortality is based on physical changes, while Buddhist nirvana is based on cultivating the spirit.

古文：变形者白首还缁，而未能无死；陶神者使尘惑日损，湛然常存。
现代文：讲求变形的，就是满头白发变成黑色，但终不免于一死；修炼精神的，使尘世的诱惑渐减少，精神更加清纯而长存。
English: To seek transformation is to have a full head of white hair turn black, but eventually to die; to cultivate the spirit is to gradually reduce earthly temptations and make the spirit more pure and long-lasting.

古文：泥洹之道，无死之地，乖诡若此，何谓其同？
现代文：涅槃的方法，是没有死的。二教的差别如此之大，怎能说它们是相同的呢?
English: The method of nirvana is not dead. The two religions are so different, how can they be said to be the same?

古文：欢答曰：
现代文：顾欢答辩说：
English: Gu Huan replied:

古文：案道经之作，著自西周，佛经之来，始乎东汉，年逾八百，代悬数十。
现代文：案道经的著作，产生于西周；佛经的传入，开始于束汉，二者年月相差超过八百年，时代相隔数十代。
English: The writings of the Tao Te Ching originated in Western Zhou; the introduction of the Buddhist scriptures began in the Han Dynasty. The difference between the two is more than eight hundred years, and the times are separated by dozens of generations.

古文：若谓黄老虽久，而滥在释前，是吕尚盗陈恒之齐，刘季窃王莽之汉也。
现代文：如果说黄老之说虽然久违，而其源在于释氏，遣就好比说吕尚窃取了陈恒的齐国，刘邦窃取了王莽的汉朝一样。
English: If we say that Huang Laozhi's words, although long lost, originated from the Shih clan, it would be like saying that Lushan stole Chen Heng's Qi, and Liu Bang stole Wang Mang's Han Dynasty.

古文：经云，戎气强犷，乃复略人颊车邪？
现代文：经书说，戎夷之气强悍粗犷，这难道又是拾人牙慧吗?
English: The sutras say that the spirit of the warrior is strong, tough and rough. Is this picking up people's wisdom teeth?

古文：又夷俗长跽，法与华异，翘左跂右，全是蹲踞。
现代文：又夷俗是长跪，与华夏不同，是抬起左腿踮起右脚，适全是蹲踞的模样。
English: It is also vulgar to kneel for a long time, and unlike Huaxia, it is to lift the left leg and lift the right foot, and it is appropriate to squat.

古文：故周公禁之于前，仲尼戒之于后。
现代文：所以周公与孑子先后都禁止这种姿式。
English: Therefore, Zhou Gong and Zongzi successively banned this posture.

古文：又舟以济川，车以征陆。
现代文：又舟足用来渡河的，车是用来行陆的。
English: A boat is used to cross a river, and a car is used to drive on land.

古文：佛起于戎，岂非戎俗素恶邪？
现代文：佛教兴起于戎地，岂不是戎俗向来便是恶的吗?
English: Buddhism arose in Wonsan, but wasn't the Wonsan custom always evil?

古文：道出于华，岂非华风本善邪？
现代文：道教出于华夏，岂不是华夏风气原本就是善的吗?
English: Taoism originated in China, isn't the Chinese culture inherently good?

古文：今华风既变，恶同戎狄，佛来破之，良有以矣。
现代文：现在华夏风气已经变化得与戎狄一样丑恶，因而佛教便来破除它，确实是有原因的。
English: There is indeed a reason why Buddhism has come to destroy the Chinese culture, which has now changed into something as ugly as Juche.

古文：佛道实贵，故戒业可遵；戎俗实贱，故言貌可弃。
现代文：佛理的确珍贵，故其戒律条文值得遵守；戎俗实在低贱，故其语言妆扮可以抛弃。
English: Buddhism is indeed precious, so its precepts and regulations are worth abiding by; its customs are really low-brow, so its linguistic trappings can be discarded.

古文：今诸华士女，民族弗革，而露首偏踞，滥用夷礼。
现代文：现在华夏的一些士女们，民族并没有改变，却光着脑袋偏向蹲踞，滥用戎夷的礼仪。
English: Now some scholars and women in China, the nation has not changed, but bare-headed bias to squatting, abuse the etiquette of the soldiers.

古文：云于翦落之徒，全是胡人，国有旧风，法不可变。
现代文：对于这些削发之徒来说，完全是胡人了。各国都有其原来的风尚习俗，按理是不可以改变的。
English: For these haircutters, it's a complete no-no. Every country has its own original fashion and customs, which by definition cannot be changed.

古文：又若观风流教，其道必异，佛非东华之道，道非西戎之法，鱼鸟异渊，永不相关，安得老、释二教，交行八表？
现代文：如果说观照世界的方式不同，因而设教的宗旨必定不同的话，那么，佛教并非是东方华夏的宗教，道教也不是西方戎狄的宗教，按理应当像鱼鸟一样，因渊源不同而永不相关；但为什么老、释二教都能流行于四面八方?
English: If the way of observing the world is different, and therefore the purpose of establishing a religion must be different, then Buddhism is not the religion of East China, and Taoism is not the religion of the West, and it should be like fish and birds, because of different origins and never related. But why can the old and new religions be popular in all directions?

古文：今佛既东流，道亦西迈，故知世有精粗，教有文质。
现代文：现在既然佛教已风行于东方，道教也向西方迈进，故此知道世风有精粗之分，宗教有文质之别。
English: Now that Buddhism has become popular in the East, and Taoism has also advanced to the West, we know that there is a difference in sophistication in the world and a difference in the literary quality of religions.

古文：然则道教执本以领末，佛教救末以存本。
现代文：但道教执守根本以导引末流，佛教拯救末流以保存根本。
English: However, Taoism adheres to the fundamental to guide the last stream, and Buddhism saves the last stream to preserve the fundamental.

古文：请问所异，归在何许？
现代文：请问其差别的要领有哪些?
English: What are the essentials of the difference, please?

古文：若以翦落为异，则胥靡翦落矣。
现代文：如果仅认为差别在于是否剪落头发，则罪犯也剪落头发。
English: If the only difference is whether or not the hair is cut, then the offender will also have his hair cut.

古文：若以立像为异，则俗巫立像矣。
现代文：如果以为差别在于是否设立偶像，则巫觋也设立偶像。
English: If you think that the difference is whether or not to set up an idol, then sorcerers also set up idols.

古文：此非所归，归在常住。
现代文：这些都不是其要领，其要领在于恒久不变。
English: These are not its essentials; its essentials lie in permanence.

古文：常住之象，常道孰异？神仙有死，权便之说。
现代文：二教都以永恒不变的 常住 为其形于物外的 象 ，那么其思想体系的 道 又有什么差异?神仙有死，衹是权宜的说法。
English: Both religions regard the eternal and unchanging abode as their external form, so what is the difference in the way of their ideological system? Immortals have death, and death is an expedient argument.

古文：神仙是大化之总称，非穷妙之至名。
现代文：神仙是大化的总称，而不是穷极玄妙的至名。
English: Shen Xian is the general name of Dahua, rather than the name of the most profound and mysterious.

古文：至名无名，其有名者二十七品，仙变成真，真变成神，或谓之圣，各有九品，品极则入空寂，无为无名。
现代文：至名是没有名称的，其有名称者共有二十七个品级， 仙 变而成 真 ， 真 变便成 神 ， 神 或称为 圣 ，仙、真、神各有几种品级，品级达到极致便进入了空寂的境界，既无为又无名。
English: The Supreme Name is nameless, and those who have names have a total of twenty-seven grades. Immortal becomes true, true becomes god, god or saint, and there are several grades of immortal, true, and god. When the grade reaches the extreme, it enters the realm of emptiness, which is neither action nor name.

古文：若服食茹芝，延寿万亿，寿尽则死，药极则枯，此修考之士，非神仙之流也。
现代文：如果仅仅是服用素食丹芝，以求延年益寿，那药尽寿终便会死去，这衹是些修身养颜之徒，并非神仙一流人物。
English: If you just take vegetarian Dan Zhi to prolong your life, the medicine will eventually die. These people are cultivators, not gods.

古文：明僧绍《正二教论》以为： 佛明其宗，老全其生。
现代文：明僧绍《正二教论》认为： 佛教在于显明其信仰，道教在于保全其生命。
English: The Ming monk Shao, "On the Doctrine of Right and Wrong," held that: Buddhism is to manifest its faith, and Taoism is to preserve its life.

古文：守生者蔽，明宗者通。今道家称长生不死，名补天曹，大乖老、庄立言本理。 
现代文：保全生命者暗蔽，显明信仰者通达现在道家宣扬长生不死，可以补为天上的神官，这根本违背了老、庄立论的原理。 
English: Those who preserve life are hidden, while those who believe are revealed. The Taoists now preach immortality and can become heavenly priests, which is a fundamental violation of the principle of the old, solemn theory.

古文：文惠太子、竟陵王子良并好释法。
现代文：文惠太子、竞陵王萧子良都喜好佛教。
English: Prince Wen Hui and King Jingling Xiao Ziliang both liked Buddhism.

古文：吴兴孟景翼为道士，太子召入玄圃园。
现代文：吴兴孟景翼为道士，太子召他进玄圃园。
English: Wu Xing Meng Jingyi was a Taoist, and the prince invited him to the garden.

古文：众僧大会，子良使景翼礼佛，景翼不肯。子良送《十地经》与之。
现代文：当时正足众僧大会，萧子良让盂景翼向佛礼敬，孟景翼不肯，萧子良赠送《十地经》给他。
English: At that time, Xiao Ziliang was attending a general assembly of monks. He asked Meng Jingyi to pay homage to the Buddha, but Meng Jingyi refused. Xiao Ziliang presented him with the Ten Classics.

古文：景翼造《正一论》，大略曰： 《宝积》云 佛以一音广说法 。
现代文：孟景翼作《正一论》，大约是说： 《宝积》云 佛以一音广说法 。
English: Meng Jingyi's "Theory of Right and Wrong" begins roughly as follows: "The treasure" of the Buddha is said in a wide range of tones.

古文：老子云 圣人抱一以为天下式 。 一 之为妙，空玄绝于有境，神化赡于无穷，为万物而无为，处一数而无数，莫之能名，强号为一。
现代文：《老子》云 圣人抱一以为天下式， 一 是极其神妙的，它的空寂幽玄可以与有形的世界相隔绝，其神奇的变化可以充满于无穷的境界。它无为而可衍生万物，处一而成为无数。没有谁能给予确切的命名，故勉强称之为 一 。
English: "Lao Zi" cloud The sage holds one as the universal form, one is extremely miraculous, its emptiness and obscurity can be isolated from the tangible world, and its magical changes can be filled with the infinite realm. It can do nothing but derive everything, and become countless in one place. No one can give an exact name, so it is reluctantly called one.

古文：在佛曰实相，在道曰玄牝。
现代文：在佛教称为 实相，在道教称为 玄牝 。
English: In Buddhism, it is called "truth," and in Taoism, it is called "hypothesis."

古文：道之大象，即佛之法身。
现代文：这无形的东西就是道家所说的 大象 ，也即是佛教所谓的 法身 。
English: This intangible thing is what Taoists call the elephant, and what Buddhists call the Dharma body.

古文：以不守之守守法身，以不执之执执大象。
现代文：二教都主张采用不去有意为之而是听其自然方法来执守 法身， 大象 。
English: Both sects advocate the use of the natural method of adhering to the Dharma body, the elephant, rather than intentionally doing it.

古文：但物有八万四千行，说有八万四千法。
现代文：但事物有八万四千种，说法也有八万四千种。
English: But there are 84,000 kinds of things and 84,000 kinds of sayings.

古文：法乃至于无数，行亦逮于无央。
现代文：方法既然是无数的，其施行也是没有穷尽的。
English: Since the methods are innumerable, their application is also inexhaustible.

古文：等级随缘，须导归一。
现代文：虽然各种品级的修炼衹是随其机缘，不能勉强，但必须引导归之于 一 。
English: Although the cultivation of various grades of gongs is opportunistic and cannot be forced, it must be guided to become one.

古文：归一曰回向，向正即无邪。
现代文：遣归之于 一，叫作回归向正，向正即是无邪。
English: Repatriation to the One is called the return to the positive, and the positive is innocence.

古文：邪观既遣，亿善日新。
现代文：邪念既已排除，众多的善性便会曰曰更新。
English: Once the evil thoughts have been eliminated, many good qualities will be renewed day by day.

古文：三五四六，随用而施。独立不改，绝学无忧。
现代文：三五四六，随用而行，独立持守而不改变，弃绝学问而无忧愁。
English: Three-five-four-six, go with the flow, maintain independence without change, abandon learning without sorrow.

古文：旷劫诸圣，共遵斯一。
现代文：远古的诸圣，都共同遵守着这个 一 。
English: All the saints from ancient times have jointly observed this one.

古文：老、释未始于尝分，迷者分之而未合。
现代文：老、释二教初始之时并未分开，迷惑的人将其分离而不能融合。
English: In the early days of the two religions, the old and the new were not separated, and the confused people separated them and could not integrate them.

古文：亿善遍修，修遍成圣，虽十号千称，终不能尽。
现代文：众多的善行都去普遍地修炼，修行普遍了便能成为圣人。虽然称号有千百种，但终究不能穷尽。
English: Many good deeds can be cultivated universally, and if the practice is widespread, one can become a saint. Although there are thousands of titles, they cannot be exhausted.

古文：终不能尽，岂可思议。 
现代文：既然难以穷尽，怎能一一思议。 
English: Since it is difficult to exhaust, how can it be imagined one by one.

古文：司徒从事中郎张融作《门律》云： 道之与佛，逗极无二。
现代文：司徒从事中郎张融作《门律》说： 道舆佛的终极没有不同。
English: Stubbs, who played the middle brother, Zhang Rong, in "The Rite of the Gate," said: "The ultimate of Taoist Buddhism is no different.

古文：吾见道士与道人战儒墨，道人与道士辨是非。
现代文：我看佛僧与道士论辩是非，好像儒、墨两家论战一样。
English: I see Buddhist monks and Taoists arguing the rights and wrongs, as if the two schools of Confucianism and Buddhism were engaged in a polemic.

古文：昔有鸿飞天首，积远难亮。
现代文：从前有鸿雁在天边飞翔，距离遥远而形象不很鲜明。
English: Once upon a time, there were wild geese flying on the edge of the sky. The distance was far and the image was not very clear.

古文：越人以为凫，楚人以为乙，人自楚越，鸿常一耳。 
现代文：越人认为是凫，楚人以为是乙。人的看法有楚、越之分，但鸿雁就是鸿雁，这是同一的。 
English: The Yue people think it's a rooster, the Chu people think it's a rooster. People's opinions are Chu and Yue, but the wild goose is the wild goose, which is the same.

古文：以示太子仆周颙。
现代文：张融把它拿给太子仆周颐看。
English: Zhang Rong showed it to the prince's servant Zhou Jun.

古文：颙难之曰： 虚无法性，其寂虽同，位寂之方，其旨则别。
现代文：周颗驳难他说： 虚与无就其内涵性质来说，都指空寂，这点是相同的。
English: Zhou Zi refuted: "In terms of the nature of its connotation, both void and nothing refer to emptiness, which is the same.

古文：论所谓 逗极无二 者，为逗极于虚无，当无二于法性耶？
现代文：但它们处于空寂的方位，所表露的意义则有所区别。你持论的根据是 处于极远处方是无二 。
English: But they are in an empty position, and the meaning they reveal is different. The basis of your theory is that the prescription is the same.

古文：足下所宗之本一物为鸿乙耳。驱驰佛道，无免二末。
现代文：这处于极遗的虚与无没有分别，大概是指其内涵的性质而言的但足下您所宗仰的本旨却是同一在鸿这一实实在在的物上，而没有同一于虚无。以此奔驰在佛道二教之中，难免不会产生错误。
English: This is the ultimate difference between nothingness and nothingness, probably referring to the nature of its connotation, but at the moment, the original meaning you worship is the same in Hong, a real thing, and not the same in nothingness. In this way, in the two teachings of Buddhism, there will inevitably be no mistakes.

古文：未知高鉴缘何识本，轻而宗之，其有旨乎？ 
现代文：不知您高明的眼光是如何认识本源的，轻易地信仰，哪裹会有根本的宗旨呢? 
English: I don't know how your high-minded vision can recognize the source and easily believe, but how can there be a fundamental purpose?

古文：往复文多不载。
现代文：他们之间往来论辩很多，遣裹就不一一记载了。
English: There was a lot of back-and-forth between them, so it's hard to document everything.

古文：欢口不辩，善于著笔。
现代文：顾欢不善于日辩，而善于写作。
English: Gu Huan is not good at Japanese debate, but good at writing.

古文：著《三名论》，甚工，钟会《四本》之流也。
现代文：着有《三名论》，很是精巧，是钟会《四本》之类的著作。
English: He is the author of "Three People's Theory," which is very exquisite, and is a work like "Four Books" of the Bell Society.

古文：又注王弼《易》二《系》，学者传之。
现代文：又注释王弼《易》书的《系辞》，在学者中流传。
English: He also annotated the "Declaration" of Wang Xi's "Yi" book, which has been circulated among scholars.

古文：始兴人卢度，亦有道术。
现代文：始兴人卢度，道教的造诣也很深。
English: Lu Du, the founder of Xingxing, was also very accomplished in Taoism.

古文：少随张永北征。
现代文：年轻时他曾经跟随迟丞北征。
English: When he was young, he once followed Chi Zheng on the Northern Expedition.

古文：永败，虏追急，阻淮水不得过。
现代文：退丞战败，敌虏追击得非常紧迫，前面又被进丞阻挡不得渡通。
English: The retreating emperor was defeated, the pursuit of the enemy was very urgent, and the front was blocked by the advancing emperor.

古文：度心誓曰： 若得免死，从今不复杀生。 
现代文：卢仅在心中发誓说： 如果能够免死，从今以后再不杀生。 
English: Lu only swore in his heart, "If I can avoid death, I will never kill again."

古文：须臾见两盾流来，接之得过。
现代文：不一会儿便看见两根栏木漂来。卢度接到栏木得以渡过淮水。
English: After a while, he saw two railings floating by. Ludo was able to cross Huai Shui after he received the railing.

古文：后隐居西昌三顾山，鸟兽随之。
现代文：后隐居西昌三顾山，常有飞鸟走兽伴随他。
English: After that, he lived in seclusion in Xichang San Gu Mountain. He was often accompanied by birds and animals.

古文：夜有鹿触其壁，度曰： 汝坏我壁。 
现代文：天夜里，有鹿触碰其墙壁，卢度说： 你碰坏了我的墙壁。 
English: Every day and night, a deer would touch the wall, and Ludo would say, "You've broken my wall."

古文：鹿应声去。
现代文：鹿应声离去。
English: The deer moves away in response.

古文：屋前有池养鱼，皆名呼之，鱼次第来，取食乃去。
现代文：他屋前有一水塘养鱼，他用名字来招呼这些鱼，鱼便依次前来，取食后方离开。
English: In front of his house there is a pond where fish are kept. He greets them by name, and the fish come one after the other to feed and then leave.

古文：逆知死年月，与亲友别。
现代文：他预先便猜测到自己去世的年月，于是便和亲友诀别。
English: He guessed the year of his death in advance, so he said goodbye to relatives and friends.

古文：永明末，以寿终。
现代文：齐永明末年，寿终正寝。
English: In the last years of Qi Yongming's life, he died in bed.

古文：初，永明三年，征骠骑参军顾惠胤为司徒主簿。
现代文：当初，在永明三年，征召骠骑参军顾惠胤为司徒主簿。
English: At first, in the third year of Yongming, Gu Huiyan, who was conscripted to join the army as a cavalryman, was the main bookkeeper.

古文：惠胤，宋镇军将军觊之弟子也。
现代文：顾惠胤是宋朝镇军将军顾觊之弟弟的儿子。
English: Gu Huiyan was the son of the younger brother of the Song Dynasty general Gu Yao.

古文：闲居养志，不应征辟。
现代文：他志在闲居养身，不肯应征。
English: He wanted to stay idle and improve his health, and refused to enlist.

古文：臧荣绪，东莞莒人也。祖奉先，建陵令，父庸民，国子助教。
现代文：臧荣绪是东莞莒县人祖父臧奉先是建陵县令，父亲臧庸民是国子助教。
English: Gong Rongxu was born in Dongguan, the grandfather of Gong Bongxian was the governor of Jianling County, and the father of Gong Yomin was the assistant professor of Guozin.

古文：荣绪幼孤，躬自灌园，以供祭祀。
现代文：臧荣绪年幼时父亲便亡故了，他亲自种菜浇园，用以供奉祭祀。
English: When Gong Rongxu was young, his father passed away. He personally planted vegetables and watered the garden to offer sacrifices.

古文：母丧后，乃著《嫡寝论》，扫洒堂宇，置筵席，朔望辄拜荐，甘珍未尝先食。
现代文：母亲死后，于是便撰著《嫡寝论》，洒扫房屋，设置筵席，每遇朔、望之便按礼拜献，甘珍美味从不先尝。
English: After his mother's death, he wrote "The Doctrine of Legitimacy," swept the house, and set up a banquet. Every New Year's Eve and New Year's Eve, he would make offerings according to the custom of the week. He never tasted the sweet delicacies first.

古文：纯笃好学，括东西晋为一书，纪、录、志、传百一十卷。
现代文：臧荣绪性格纯厚喜好学问，他搜集束晋、西晋史合成书，分纪、录、志、传，共一百一十卷。
English: Gong Rongxu was a man of pure character with a penchant for learning. He collected a total of one hundred and ten volumes of Sogdian and Western Jin history books, including histories, records, epics, and biographies.

古文：隐居京口教授。
现代文：隐居在京口教授门徒。
English: He lived in seclusion in Kyoguchi and taught his disciples.

古文：南徐州辟西曹，举秀才，不就。
现代文：南徐州征辟他为西曹，举荐为秀才，都不肯应允。
English: Nanxuzhou recruited him as a leading actor and recommended him as an outstanding talent, but he refused to accept.

古文：太祖为扬州，征荣绪为主簿，不到。
现代文：齐太祖作扬州刺史时，曾征召臧荣绪为主簿，他也不来。
English: When Qi Taizu was writing the history of Yangzhou, he had called on Gong Rongxu to be the main author, but he did not come.

古文：司徒褚渊少时尝命驾寻之，建元中启太祖曰： 荣绪，朱方隐者。
现代文：司徒褚渊年轻时曾经亲自寻找过他。齐建元年间，褚渊禀告太祖说： 臧荣绪是朱方的隐士。
English: During the first year of the Heian period (1603-1868), Shih Chuan told his great-grandfather that Gong Rongxu was a hermit from Zhu Fang.

古文：昔臧质在宋，以国戚出牧彭岱，引为行佐，非其所好，谢疾求免。蓬庐守志，漏湿是安，灌蔬终老。与友关康之沈深典素，追古著书，撰《晋史》十帙，赞论虽无逸才，亦足弥纶一代。
现代文：从前臧质在宋朝时，以国戚身份出任彭岱的牧守，曾招引他为辅佐，但这并不是臧荣绪所爱好的，所以藉有病而请求免职他坚守归隐之志，身居草屋，虽条件艰苦，渗漏潮湿也觉安宁，以浇园种菜终老一生与朋友关康之都沉溺于典籍，追记古事著书立说，撰有《晋史》十帙，赞论虽没有显示出超卓的才华，但也完全能包罗统括一代之事。
English: Once upon a time, in the Song Dynasty, he served as the herdsman of Penghu with the status of a relative of the state. He had invited him to be an assistant, but this was not the favorite of Gong Rongxu. Therefore, he requested to be relieved of his duties due to illness. He adhered to his desire to go into seclusion. He lived in a grass hut, although the conditions were difficult, he also felt peace and was able to grow vegetables in the garden. He spent his whole life with his friend Guan Kangshi, indulging in classics, writing books about ancient history, and writing the "History of Jin." Although he did not show outstanding talent, he was

古文：臣岁时往京口，早与之遇。
现代文：臣年前去京，早已与他相见。
English: When I went to Kyoto a few years ago, I already met him.

古文：近报其取书，始方送出，庶得备录渠阁，采异甄善。 
现代文：最近告诉他要取用他的书，他已送出，希望能收录进石渠秘合，供博采异闻鉴别善本之用。 
English: He had recently told him that he wanted to borrow his book, which he had already sent, in the hope that it would be included in the "Secrets of the Stone Canal" for the purpose of collecting anecdotes and identifying good books.

古文：上答曰： 公所道臧荣绪者，吾甚志之。
现代文：齐太祖回答说： 公所说的臧荣绪，我很记得他。
English: Qi Taizu replied, "I remember very well what Gong Rongxu said.

古文：其有史翰，欲令入天禄，甚佳。 
现代文：他有史书。想把它收进天禄阁，很好。 
English: He has a history book. If he wants to put it in his attic, that's fine.

古文：荣绪惇爱《五经》，谓人曰： 昔吕尚奉丹书，武王致斋降位，李、释教诫，并有礼敬之仪。 
现代文：臧荣绪看重和爱好《五经》，他对入说： 从前吕尚奉献丹书，周王斋戒降位以迎；老氏、释门的教诫，都有礼敬的仪式。 
English: Gong Rongxu valued and loved the "Five Classics," he said to the newcomer: In the past, Lushang dedicated the Book of Dan, Zhou Wang fasted to welcome the abdication, and there were ceremonies of respect for the teachings of Laojie and Shimen.

古文：因甄明至道，乃著《拜五经序论》。
现代文：为表明至道，于是便着《拜五经序论》。
English: In order to show the true path, the "Introduction to the Five Classics of Prayer" was written.

古文：常以宣尼生庚子日，陈《五经》拜之。
现代文：因孔生于庚子日，故常常在逭一天陈列《五经》叩拜他。
English: Because Confucius was born on the day of Geng Zi, the "Five Classics" were often displayed on the same day to worship him.

古文：自号 被褐先生。 又以饮酒乱德，言常为诫。
现代文：自号 被褐先生 又认为饮酒会淆乱德性，所以平时言谈常以酒为诫。
English: He also believes that drinking will confuse the disordered morality, so he often talks about alcohol as a warning.

古文：永明六年卒，年七十四。
现代文：齐永明六年去世，享年七十四岁。
English: Qi Yongming died six years ago at the age of 74.

古文：初，荣绪与关康之俱隐在京口，世号为 二隐 。
现代文：当初，臧荣绪和关康之都隐居在京口，世人称为 二隐 。
English: At first, Gong Rongxu and Guan Kang all lived in seclusion in Beijing, known to the world as Eryin.

古文：康之字伯愉，河东人。
现代文：关康之字伯愉，河东人。
English: Guan Kang's character, Bo Yu, is from Hedong.

古文：世居丹徒。以坟籍为务。
现代文：世代居住在丹徒县，以研学古代典籍为业。
English: He has lived in Dantu County for generations, studying ancient classics as his profession.

古文：四十年不出门。不应州府辟。
现代文：四十年不出门，不肯应承州府的招聘。
English: He hasn't been out of the house for forty years and refuses to accept a job offer from the state government.

古文：宋太始中，征通直郎，不就。
现代文：宋太始年间，征召为通直郎，不就任。
English: During the Song Dynasty, he was conscripted as Tong Naorong, but did not take office.

古文：晚以母老家贫，求为岭南小县。
现代文：晚年因为母亲年老家境贫寒，所以要求做岭南小县的县令。
English: In her later years, because her mother was old and her family was poor, she asked to be the county magistrate of a small county in Lingnan.

古文：性清约，独处一室，稀与妻子相见。不通宾客。
现代文：性格清正简约，独自居一室，很少与妻小相见，也不与宾客交往。
English: He is simple and straightforward, lives alone in a room, rarely sees his wife, and does not mingle with guests.

古文：弟子以业传受。
现代文：弟子以学业相传授。
English: Disciples learn from one another.

古文：尤善《左氏春秋》。
现代文：特别喜好《左氏春秋》，齐太祖为领军时，平素也喜欢《左氏春秋》。
English: He is particularly fond of Zuo's Spring and Autumn. When Qi Taizu was leading the army, he also liked Zuo's Spring and Autumn.

古文：太祖为领军，素好此学，送《春秋五经》，康之手自点定，并得论《礼记》十余条。
现代文：关康之送给齐太祖《春秋》、《五经》，是经他亲手句读校定的，并且还有十余条论述《礼记》的文字。
English: The "Spring and Autumn" and "Five Classics" that Guan Kangzhi gave to Qi Taizu were read and calibrated by his own hand, and there are more than ten articles discussing the "Rituals."

古文：上甚悦，宝爱之。遗诏以经本入玄宫。
现代文：齐太祖非常高兴，很是珍惜这部书，死时还遣诏命将这部书放入冥宫。
English: Qi Taizu was very happy and treasured the book. When he died, he sent an imperial edict to place the book in the Netherworld.

古文：宋末卒。
现代文：关康之卒于刘宋末年。
English: Guan Kangzhi died at the end of the Liu Song Dynasty.

古文：何求，字子有，庐江灊人也。
现代文：何求字子有，庐江郡潜县人。
English: What a character to have, a native of Qianjiang County.

古文：祖尚之，宋司空。
现代文：祖父何尚之是宋司空。
English: His grandfather, He Shangzhi, was a Song Dynasty official.

古文：父铄，宜都太守。
现代文：父亲何铄为宜都太守。
English: His father, He Xuan, was the de facto ruler.

古文：求元嘉末为宋文帝挽郎，解褐著作郎，中军卫军行佐，太子舍人，平南参军，抚军主簿，太子洗马，丹阳、吴郡丞。
现代文：何求于宋元嘉末年为宋文帝的挽郎，初仕著作郎，中军卫军行佐，太子舍人，平南参军，抚军主簿，太子洗马，丹阳、吴郡丞。
English: What did Song Yuan Jia do at the end of his life to become the groomsman of Emperor Song Wenzong, the first secretary of the imperial court, the vice-commander of the Central Army, the prince's son, the prince's son-in-law, the prince's son-in-law, the prince's son-in-law, the prince's son-in-law, the prince's son-in-law, the prince's son-in-law, the prince's son-in-law, the prince's son-in-law, the prince's son-in-law, the prince's son-in-

古文：清退无嗜欲。
现代文：何求性格清淡没有过分的欲望。
English: What to look for is a light personality without excessive desires.

古文：又除征北参军事，司徒主簿，太子中舍人。
现代文：又官拜征北参军事，司徒主簿，太子中舍入。
English: In addition, the North Sanzan military, the main book of the scholar, and the crown prince were rounded up.

古文：泰始中妻亡，还吴葬旧墓。除中书郎，不拜。
现代文：宋泰始年间，何求的妻子丧亡，归葬在吴县旧墓中，授职为中书郎，他不肯拜受。
English: During the Song Dynasty, He Zuo's wife died and was buried in an old tomb in Wuxian County. He refused to accept the post of middle school teacher.

古文：仍住吴，居波若寺，足不逾户，人莫见其面。
现代文：仍住在吴县，居住在波若寺内，足不出产，谁也见不着他。
English: He still lives in Wuxian County, in the Borao Temple. He has not been able to give birth, and no one can see him.

古文：明帝崩，出奔国哀，除为司空从事中郎，不就。
现代文：宋明帝驾崩，他才出门赴京奔国丧，被授为司空从事中郎，不肯就任。
English: After the death of Emperor Song Ming, he went to Beijing for the national mourning. He was awarded the post of Vice Marshal of the Air Force, but he refused to take up the post.

古文：乃除永嘉太守。
现代文：于是便拜官为永嘉太守。
English: As a result, he was appointed Yongjia governor.

古文：求时寄住南涧寺，不肯诣台，乞于寺拜受，见许。
现代文：何求当时寄住在南涧寺内，他不肯前往台省，请求就在寺中拜受，获得许可。
English: He did not want to go to Taiwan Province, so he asked to worship at the temple and obtained permission.

古文：一夜忽乘小船逃归吴，隐虎丘山，复除黄门郎，不就。永明四年，世祖以为太中大夫，又不就。
现代文：一天晚上忽然乘小船逃回吴县，隐居在虎丘山。又授职为黄门郎，不肯就任齐永明四年，世祖让他做太中大夫，又不就任。
English: One night, he suddenly fled back to Wuxian by boat and lived in seclusion on Mount Huqiu. He was also given the post of Huangmen Lang, but refused to take office for four years. The ancestor asked him to be the Taizhong Doctor, but he did not take office.

古文：七年卒，年五十六。
现代文：永明七年去世，享年五十六岁。
English: Yongming died seven years later at the age of fifty-six.

古文：初，求母王氏为父所害，求兄弟以此无宦情。
现代文：当初，何求的生母工区被他父亲害死，何求兄弟因此没有做官的兴趣。
English: At first, his biological mother was killed by his father, and his brother was not interested in becoming an official.

古文：求弟点，少不仕。
现代文：何求之弟何点，年轻时就不肯出仕。
English: No matter how much his younger brother begged him, he refused to serve when he was young.

古文：宋世征为太子洗马，不就。
现代文：宋朝时曾征召他为太子洗马，不就任。
English: During the Song Dynasty, he was called upon to wash the prince's horse, but did not take up the post.

古文：隐居东离门卞望之墓侧。
现代文：隐居在东离门外卞望之的墓旁。
English: He lived in seclusion outside Higashiyama Gate, next to the grave of Tsuchimoto.

古文：性率到，鲜狎人物。
现代文：他性格循顺善良，很少亲附名人。
English: He is a good-natured person and rarely associates with celebrities.

古文：建元中，褚渊、王俭为宰相，点谓人曰： 我作《齐书》已竟，赞云： 渊既世族，俭亦国华。
现代文：齐建元年间，褚渊、王俭为宰相，何点对人说： 我作《齐书》已经完成，赞辞云： 褚渊出身于豪门世族，王俭也门第高贵家族华丽。
English: In the first year of Qi Jianyuan, Zouyuan and Wang Jian were the prime ministers, and they said many things to people: I have completed the "Qi Book," and the praise was overwhelming: Zouyuan was born into a high-ranking family, and Wang Jian, the most noble family in Yemen, was gorgeous.

古文：不赖舅氏，遑恤外家。 
现代文：若不是依赖于母舅之力，怎能够关怀体恤亲戚之家。  
English: How could I care for my relatives' home if I did not depend on my maternal uncle's strength?

古文：欲俭候之，知不可见，乃止。
现代文：王俭原想会见他，知道见不着，才打消了这个念头。
English: Wang Jian originally wanted to meet him, but when he found out that he couldn't, he gave up the idea.

古文：永明元年，征中书郎。
现代文：齐永明元年，征召他为中书郎。
English: In the first year of Qi Yongming, he was conscripted as a middle school teacher.

古文：豫章王命驾造门，点从后门逃去。
现代文：豫章王亲自登门造访，何点却从后门逃出去。
English: King Yuanzhang himself came to the door to pay a visit, but escaped at some point through the back door.

古文：竟陵王子良闻之，曰： 豫章王尚不屈，非吾所议。 
现代文：竟陵王萧子良闻知此事，说： 豫章王尚且不能够使他屈就，我更不能提出这种要求。 
English: In fact, Xiao Ziliang, the king of Ling, heard about this and said, "Even though King Yuzhang can't make him submit, I can't even make such a request.

古文：遗点嵇叔夜酒杯、徐景山酒鎗以通意。
现代文：于是赠给何点嵇叔夜酒杯和徐景山酒枪以表达心意。
English: As a result, he gave a few glasses of wine and a gun to Xu Jingshan to express his feelings.

古文：点常自得，遇酒便醉，交游宴乐不隔也。
现代文：何点常自得其乐，虽然一喝酒就醉，但交游宴乐时仍不离酒。
English: They often enjoy themselves, although they get drunk as soon as they drink, but they still do not leave the wine when they have a party.

古文：永元中，京师频有军寇，点尝结裳为袴，与崔慧景共论佛义，其语默之迹如此。
现代文：永元年间，京都常受敌寇的侵扰，何点曾把亡衣结成下裤，与崔慧景共同讨论佛教教义，其归隐的行迹多是这样。
English: During the first year of the Heian period, Kyoto was often invaded by enemy raiders. At some point, he tied his robe into trousers and discussed Buddhist doctrines with Choi Hye Kyeong. This is how he spent most of his time after returning to seclusion.

古文：点弟胤，有儒术，亦怀隐遁之志。所居宅名为小山。
现代文：何点之弟何胤，有儒学造诣，也怀抱着隐遁之志，将居宅命名为小山。
English: Ho-tin, the younger brother of Ho-tin, was an accomplished Confucian scholar and also had a desire to live in seclusion. He named his home Koyama.

古文：隆昌中为中书令，以皇后从叔见亲宠。
现代文：齐隆昌年间他为中书令，因是皇后的堂叔而受到亲近恩宠。
English: During the reign of Qilongchang, he was the Chinese Calligrapher, and because he was the cousin of the empress, he was favored with closeness.

古文：明帝即位，胤卖园宅，将遂本志。
现代文：齐明帝即位，何乱便出卖了田园住宅，准备顺遂自己归隐的心愿。
English: When Emperor Qiming ascended to the throne, he sold his rural residence in order to fulfill his wish to go into seclusion.

古文：建武四年为散骑常侍、巴陵王师，闻吴兴太守谢朏致仕，虑后之，于是奉表不待报而去，隐会稽山。
现代文：建武四年，他为散骑常侍、巴陵王师。听说吴兴太守谢础辞官，何胤深恐落在他后边，于是上表辞职不等回音便擅自离开，隐居在会稽山。
English: In the fourth year of the Jianwu era, he was a strolling equerry and the teacher of Baling Wang. He heard that Wu Xingta was keeping the oath of office, and he was deeply afraid of falling behind him, so he resigned from the table without waiting for a reply and left without permission. He lived in seclusion in Heji Mountain.

古文：上大怒，令有司奏弹胤，然发优诏焉。
现代文：齐明帝大怒，命有司上奏弹劾何胤，然后再发布优待他的诏书。
English: Emperor Qiming was furious, and ordered his superiors to impeach Ho Yin, and then issued an imperial edict to treat him favorably.

古文：永元二年，征散骑常侍，太常卿。
现代文：永元二年，征召何胤为散骑常侍，太常卿。
English: In the second year of the eleventh month of the first year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year.

古文：刘虬，字灵预，南阳涅阳人也。
现代文：刘纠字灵预，南阳郡涅阳县人。
English: Liu Guanzhiling, a native of Nenyang County, Nanyang County.

古文：旧族，徙居江陵。
现代文：他本是中原旧族，迁居到江陵。
English: Originally from the Central Plains, he moved to Gangneung.

古文：虬少而抗节好学，须得禄便隐。
现代文：他年轻时便节操高尚，好学上进，必要取得爵禄后方归隐。
English: When he was young, he was noble and virtuous, eager to learn, and needed to earn a peerage before he retired.

古文：宋泰始中，仕至晋平王骠骑记室，当阳令。
现代文：宋泰始年间，官至晋乎王骠骑记室，宣厘县令。
English: During the Song and Taiji period, he served as the official of the Jin Dynasty, the riding office of Wang Qi, and the county seat of Xuanli.

古文：罢官归家，静处断谷，饵术及胡麻。
现代文：后罢官归家，便选择幽静处居住，不食五谷，以吃山蓟及胡麻为生。
English: After returning home from retirement, he chose to live in a secluded place, did not eat grain, and lived on hawthorn and sesame seeds.

古文：建元初，豫章王为荆州，教辟虬为别驾，与同郡宗测、新野庾易并遣书礼请，虬等各修笺答而不应辟命。
现代文：齐建元初，豫章王为荆州刺史，教人写信礼请刘虬，要聘任他为别驾，与他同时受到礼请的还有同郡人宗测、新野人庾易，刘纠等人各修书答谢，却都不应允受召之事。
English: At the beginning of the 19th century, Yu Zhang Wang, a historian of Jingzhou, sent a letter to Liu Qi, asking him to hire him as his second-in-command. At the same time, he was also politely invited by people from the same county such as Zong Jie, Xinshuangren Zou Yi, Liu Guo and others to write a thank-you letter. However, they did not accept the invitation.

古文：永明三年，刺史庐陵王子卿表虬及同郡宗测、宗尚之、庾易、刘昭五人，请加蒲车束帛之命。
现代文：永明三年，刺史庐陵王萧子卿表奏朝廷，请加授给予刘纠及同郡人宗测、宗尚之、庾易、刘昭五人蒲车束帛之命。
English: In the third year of the Yongming era, King Xiao Ziqing, the scribe of Fuling, appealed to the imperial court, asking for an additional grant to give Liu Tang and five people from the same county, Zong Xu, Zong Shangzhi, Xing Yi, and Liu Zhao, the order to build a carriage.

古文：诏征为通直郎，不就。
现代文：有韶征请刘纠为通直郎，不就任。
English: There was a call for Liu Guo to become Tong Nairo, but he did not take up the post.

古文：竟陵王子良致书通意。
现代文：竞陵王萧子良写信向他表达心意。
English: Xiao Ziliang, the king of Jingling, wrote to him to express his thoughts.

古文：虬答曰： 虬四节卧病，三时营灌，畅余阴于山泽，托暮情于鱼鸟，宁非唐、虞重恩，周、邵宏施？
现代文：刘纠回信说： 我一年四季经常患病，平时以浇园种菜为业。若使我余生能在山泽间得到舒畅，暮年情趣寄托在鱼鸟身上，这难道不是唐尧、虞舜对我的深重恩典，周公、邵公对我的宏大惠泽吗?
English: Liu Guo replied to the letter, saying, "I often suffer from illness throughout the year, and I usually grow vegetables in my garden. If I can spend the rest of my life enjoying the mountains and lakes, and if I can spend my twilight years enjoying fish and birds, wouldn't that be a great blessing for me from Tang Jun and Yu Jun, and a great benefit for me from Zhou Gong and Shao Gong?

古文：虬进不研机入玄，无洙泗稷馆之辩；退不凝心出累，非冢间树下之节。
现代文：刘纠进不研究机巧玄妙，没有孔门之徒、稷下学人的论辩才能；退不费神脱离物累，没有终老于坟间树下的节操。
English: Liu Kuangjin did not study the subtlety of the machine, did not have the argumentative ability of Confucian scholars and scholars; he did not take the trouble to get rid of the burden, and did not stay in the grave under the tree.

古文：远泽既洒，仁规先著。
现代文：远来的恩泽既已洒下，仁爱的规劝也已表明。
English: Far-reaching blessings have already been showered, and benevolent exhortations have also been expressed.

古文：谨收樵牧之嫌，敬加轼蛙之义。 
现代文：我谨收起被认为是樵夫牧人之类的嫌疑，对您表示越工勾践 轼蛙 般的敬意。 
English: I would like to put aside the suspicion of being considered a woodcutter and herdsman, and show you the respect of a Vietnamese worker and a frog.

古文：虬精信释氏，衣粗布衣，礼佛长斋。
现代文：刘纠笃信佛教，他穿粗衣布衫，礼敬佛而吃长斋。
English: Liu Guodu believes in Buddhism. He wears a coarse cloth shirt, worships Buddha and eats a long fast.

古文：注《法华经》，自讲佛义。
现代文：注解《法华经》，亲自讲说佛教教义。
English: He annotated the Lotus Sutra and personally lectured on Buddhist doctrines.

古文：以江陵西沙洲去人远，乃徙居之。
现代文：因为江陵西面的沙洲远离人群，于是迁居到那儿。
English: Because the sandbank on the west side of Gangneung is far away from the crowd, they moved there.

古文：建武二年，诏征国子博士，不就。
现代文：建武二年，有诏征聘为国子博士，他不就任。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, there was a recruitment for Dr. Kuniko, but he did not take office.

古文：其冬虬病，正昼有白云徘徊檐户之内，又有香气及磬声，其日卒。年五十八。
现代文：这年冬天，刘纠病重，正午有白云飘绕在屋檐下房门内，又有香气及磬声，这天他便亡故了，终年五十八岁。
English: This winter, Liu Gang was seriously ill. At noon, there was a white cloud floating around the door of the room under the eaves, and there was a fragrance and a beeping sound. On this day, he passed away at the age of 58.

古文：刘昭与虬同宗，州辟祭酒从事不就，隐居山中。
现代文：刘昭与刘则同宗。州府聘请他为祭酒从事，不肯就任，隐居在山中。
English: Liu Zhao and Liu Ze are from the same family. The state government hired him to engage in sacrificial wine, but he refused to take up the post and lived in seclusion in the mountains.

古文：庾易，字幼简，新野新野人也。
现代文：庾易字幼简，新野郡新野县人。
English: He is a native of Nino-gun, Nino-ken.

古文：徙居属江陵。
现代文：迁居到江陵某地。
English: Moved to a certain place in Gangneung.

古文：祖玫，巴郡太守。父道骥，安西参军。
现代文：祖父庾玫是巴郡太守，父亲庾道骥是安西参军。
English: Zou Mei's grandfather was the governor of Ba County, and her father, Zou Daojun, joined the army in Anxi.

古文：易志性恬隐，不交外物。
现代文：庾易生性恬静志在归隐，不舆外界交往。
English: I'm retiring, and I don't want to interact with the outside world.

古文：建元元年，刺史豫章王辟为骠骑参军，不就。
现代文：齐建元元年，刺史豫章王聘请他为骠骑参军，他不肯就任。
English: In the first year of the first year of Qi Jianyuan, the king of Yuzhang hired him as a rider to join the army, but he refused to take office.

古文：临川王映临州，独重易，上表荐之，饷麦百斛。易谓使人曰： 民樵采麋鹿之伍，终其解毛之衣；驰骋日月之车，得保自耕之禄。
现代文：临川王萧映来到州府，特别看重庾易，上表举荐他，并送他一百斛麦子毛庾易对来使说： 山民我砍柴采野食与麋鹿为伍，终年少有皮毛之衣，自耕自种的收获足够度过岁月。
English: Xiao Ying, King of Linchuan, came to the prefectural capital and paid special attention to Xing Yi, recommending him in the above table and sending him a hundred bunches of wheat and wool to Xing Yi, saying: "Mountain people, I cut firewood and harvest wild foods with elk, I rarely wear fur clothes all year round, and the harvest of self-cultivation is enough to pass the years.

古文：于大王之恩，亦已深矣。 
现代文：受大王的恩泽，已经很深重了。 
English: By the grace of the great king, it has been very difficult.

古文：辞不受。
现代文：推辞不接受所赠的粮食。
English: Refusing to accept the donated food.

古文：永明三年，诏征太子舍人，不就。
现代文：永明三年，有诏征为太子舍人，不肯就任。
English: In the third year of Sun Myung Moon's reign, he was recruited to be the crown prince, but he refused to be conscripted.

古文：以文义自乐。
现代文：平时以作文章而自得其乐。
English: He usually amuses himself by writing articles.

古文：安西长史袁彖钦其风，通书致遗。易以连理机竹翘书格报之。
现代文：安西长史袁彖钦佩他的风范，写信给他表达自己的心意，庾易则以兄弟间家书的格式给他回信。
English: Anxi chancellor Yuan Qi admired his demeanor and wrote to him to express his thoughts, while Zou Yi replied in the form of a family letter between brothers.

古文：建武二年，诏复征为司徒主簿，不就。
现代文：建武二年，又下诏征召他为司徒主簿，不肯应征。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, he was once again summoned by imperial edict to serve as the chief priest, but he refused to be conscripted.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：宗测，字敬微，南阳人，宋征士炳孙也。世居江陵。
现代文：宗测字敬微，南阳人，是宋朝征士宗炳的孙子，世代居住在江陵。
English: Zong Jie Zi Jingwei, from Nanyang, is the grandson of the Song Dynasty warrior Zong Xi, and has lived in Gangneung for generations.

古文：测少静退，不乐人间。
现代文：宗测年轻便好幽静避隐，不喜欢处于世俗间。
English: When young, Munetsu prefers to be secluded and avoid the limelight. He does not like being in the world.

古文：叹曰： 家贫亲老，不择官而仕，先哲以为美谈，余窃有惑。
现代文：慨叹说： 因家境贫寒双亲年老便不择官而出仕，先哲以此为美谈，我却有所疑惑。
English: Lamenting, he said, "Because my family was poor and my parents were old, they did not choose to become officials. The sages talked about this, but I have my doubts.

古文：诚不能潜感地金，冥致江鲤，但当用天道，分地利。
现代文：人的孝心确实不能感动神灵而获得财物，但应该顺应自然规律，凭劳动去分取土地的出产。
English: It is true that human filial piety cannot move the gods to obtain wealth, but it should conform to the laws of nature and extract the produce of the land by labor.

古文：孰能食人厚禄，忧人重事乎？ 
现代文：怎能够去接受别人鬯厚的俸禄，替他分担重任呢? 
English: How can you accept someone else's generous salary and share the heavy responsibilities for him?

古文：州举秀才，主簿，不就。
现代文：州府推举宗测为秀才，主簿，不肯就任。
English: The prefectural government recommended Muneyoshi as a great talent, but he refused to take up the post.

古文：骠骑豫章王征为参军，测答府召云： 何为谬伤海鸟，横斤山木？ 
现代文：骠骑将军豫章王征聘他为参军，宗测答覆说： 为什么要错误地去伤害海中之鸟，横暴地去砍伐山中之木呢? 
English: He was recruited to join the army by the cavalry general Yu Zhangwang. Zong Xu replied, "Why would you want to hurt the birds in the sea by mistake, and cut down the trees in the mountains by force?

古文：母丧，身负土植松柏。
现代文：母亲丧亡，他亲自背土种植松柏。
English: After his mother's death, he planted conifers in his backyard.

古文：豫章王复遣书请之，辟为参军。
现代文：豫章王又写信给他聘请为参军。
English: Yuanzhang Wang also wrote to him to invite him to join the army.

古文：测答曰： 性同鳞羽，爱止山壑，眷恋松筠，轻迷人路。
现代文：宗测回答说： 我性格同于鱼鸟，喜爱止息在山岩沟壑，眷恋着青松翠竹，迷失了人世之路。
English: Zongmei replied, "My personality is the same as that of a fish or a bird. I like to rest in the mountains and ravines, and I am attached to the green pine and the green bamboo. I have lost my way in life.

古文：纵宕岩流，有若狂者，忽不知老至。而今鬓已白，岂容课虚责有，限鱼慕鸟哉？ 
现代文：纵情游荡在高山流水之中，好像发狂一般，忽而不觉老之将至而今双鬓已白，怎么可以再要求我收敛虚渺的行迹而担负实际的责任，限制我倾慕鱼乌的心情呢? 
English: Indulging in wandering in the mountains and rivers, as if I were mad, I suddenly became old, and now my eyelids have turned white. How can I be asked to restrain my imaginary actions and take on actual responsibilities, and limit my admiration for fish and fish?

古文：永明三年，诏征太子舍人，不就。
现代文：永明三年，有韶征聘他为太子舍人，不肯应征。
English: In the third year of Sun Myung Moon's reign, he was recruited to be the crown prince, but he refused to be conscripted.

古文：欲游名山，乃写祖炳所画《尚子平图》于壁上。
现代文：宗测想要游览名山，于是便将其祖父宗炳画的《尚子平图》临摹到墙壁上。
English: Zong Jie wanted to visit famous mountains, so he copied his grandfather Zong Yao's painting "Shang Zi Ping Tu" onto the walls.

古文：测长子官在京师，知父此旨，便求禄还为南郡丞，付以家事。
现代文：宗测的长子在京师作官，知道父亲有出游的意思，便求取俸禄，回去作南郡丞，以便照管家事。
English: The eldest son of Zongmei, who was working as an official in Beijing, knew that his father wanted to travel, so he asked for a salary and went back to work as a southern county magistrate in order to take care of the housework.

古文：刺史安陆王子敬、长史刘寅以下皆赠送之，测无所受。
现代文：刺史安陆王萧子敬、长史刘寅以下的各级官员都赠送礼物给他，宗测什么也不接受。
English: Officials at all levels from the Prince of Anlu Xiao Zi Kei to the Prince of Changshi Liu Yin gave him gifts, but Zongmei did not accept anything.

古文：赍《老子》《庄子》二书自随。
现代文：衹随身携带了《老于》、《庄子》两部书。
English: Zou carried with him two books, "The Old Man" and "The Story of Zhuangzi."

古文：子孙拜辞悲泣，测长啸不视，遂往庐山，止祖炳旧宅。
现代文：子孙们拜别他时悲痛哭泣，而宗测看也不看便长啸而去。于是他前往庐山，在祖父宗炳的旧宅中居住。
English: When his children and grandchildren bade him farewell, they wept with grief, but Zong Xu could not bear to see him go, so he went to Lushan to live in his grandfather Zong Yao's old house.

古文：鱼复侯子响为江州，厚遣赠遗。
现代文：鱼复侯萧子响为江州刺史，赠送给他丰厚的礼物。
English: Yu Fu Hou Xiao Zixing was awarded a rich gift for his contribution to the history of Jiangzhou.

古文：测曰： 少有狂疾，寻山采药，远来至此。
现代文：宗测说： 年轻患有癫狂病，为找山采药，才从速道来到造裹。
English: Zong Xu said: Young people suffering from epilepsy, in order to find the mountain to find medicine, came from the expressway to Zouwu.

古文：量腹而进松术，度形而衣薜萝，淡然已足，岂容当此横施！ 
现代文：按肚量而进食松子苍术，按形体而穿薜荔女萝，这已足够维持我淡泊的生活，怎能再接受这强加的施予! 
English: Eating pine nuts according to the size of my stomach and wearing lotus flowers according to the shape of my body is enough to sustain my lackadaisical life, how can I accept this imposed gift!

古文：子响命驾造之，测避不见。
现代文：萧子响亲自去拜访他，宗测隐避不见。
English: Xiao Zixing went to visit him in person, and Zong Xu could not be avoided.

古文：后子响不告而来，奄至所住，测不得已，巾褐对之，竟不交言，子响不悦而退。
现代文：后来萧子响干脆不通告便来访，已经快要到宗测的住所，他不得已，才戴着葛巾穿着麻布衣与萧子响相见，但却不和他交谈，萧子响很不高兴地回去了。
English: Later, Xiao Zixing simply came to visit without notice. He was about to arrive at Zongmei's residence. He had no choice but to meet Xiao Zixing wearing a silk scarf and linen, but he did not talk to him. Xiao Zixing was very unhappy and went back.

古文：尚书令王俭饷测蒲褥。
现代文：尚书令王俭送给宗测蒲草被褥。
English: Shang Shuling ordered Wang Jian to give the bedclothes to Zong Jie.

古文：顷之，测送弟丧还西，仍留旧宅永业寺，绝宾友，唯与同志庾易、刘虬、宗人尚之等往来讲说。
现代文：不久，宗测护送弟弟的灵柩西去回到江陵，仍留住在旧宅永业寺内，不和宾客朋友相交往，衹和志趣相投的庾易、刘纠、族人宗尚之等人往来谈论。
English: Soon after, Zongmei escorted his brother's coffin back to Gangneung, but he still stayed in the old house of Yongye Temple. He did not mingle with the guests and friends, but talked with the like-minded people such as Xing Yi, Liu Guo, and the tribesman Zong Shang.

古文：刺史随王子隆至镇，遣别驾宗哲致劳问，测笑曰： 贵贱理隔，何以及此。 
现代文：刺史随王萧子隆来到江陵，派遣别驾宗哲前去慰问，宗测笑着说： 按理贵贱不相交往，你为什么来到这裹? 
English: Zushi followed Wang Xiao Zilong to Gangneung and sent Zong Zhe to offer condolences. Zong Jie said with a smile, "By rights, the high and the low should not associate with each other. Why did you come here?"

古文：竟不答。
现代文：竟不回答他的问候。
English: He didn't even reply to his greeting.

古文：建武二年，征为司徒主簿，不就。
现代文：建武二年，征召他为司徒主簿，不肯就任，去世。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, he was called up to be the chief priest, but he refused to take up the post and died.

古文：卒。测善画，自图阮籍遇苏门于行障上，坐卧对之。
现代文：宗测善绘画，自己在屏风上画有阮籍在苏门山相遇孙登的图画，无论坐卧都能看着它。
English: Zong Jie is good at painting. He drew a picture of Sun Deng, whom Nguyen Quoc met on Mount Sumon, on the screen. You can look at it no matter where you are sitting.

古文：又画永业佛影台，皆为妙作。
现代文：又画永业寺的佛影台，这些都是精妙之作。
English: He also painted the Buddhist screen of Yongye Temple, all of which are exquisite works.

古文：颇好音律，善《易》《老》，续皇甫谧《高士传》三卷。
现代文：他又很爱好音乐，喜欢《易经》、《老子》，为皇甫谧的《高士传》续作三卷。
English: He was also very fond of music. He liked "I Ching" and "Lao Zi" and wrote a three-volume sequel to "The Biography of Gao Shi" by Wang Fuxi.

古文：又尝游衡山七岭，著衡山、庐山记。
现代文：又曾经游历衡山的七座峰岭，着有《衡山记》、《庐山记》。
English: He also traveled to the seven peaks of Hengshan, and wrote "Hengshan Record" and "Lushan Record."

古文：尚之字敬文，亦好山泽。
现代文：宗尚之字敬文，爱好山水泽。
English: Zong Shang's family name is Jingwen, and he is fond of the mountains and rivers.

古文：与刘虬俱以骠骑记室不仕。
现代文：和刘纠一样，祇做官至骠骑记室便辞官不仕。
English: Like Liu Guo, he resigned from his post as soon as he reached the office.

古文：宋末，刺史武陵王辟赞府，豫章王辟别驾，并不就。
现代文：宋末，刺史武陵王聘请他为赞府。豫章王聘请他为别驾，都不肯应允。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, King Zhishu of Wuling hired him as a deputy. King Yu of Zhang hired him as a second driver, but they both refused to agree.

古文：永明中，与刘虬同征为通直郎，和帝中兴初，又征为谘议，并不就。寿终。
现代文：齐永明年间，与刘纠一同征召为通直郎，和帝中兴初年，又征召为谘议，都不就任高寿而终。
English: During the next year, Qiyong was conscripted together with Liu Guo as Tong Nairo, and in the first year of Emperor Zhongxing, he was also conscripted for consultation. Both of them did not live to a ripe old age.

古文：杜京产，字景齐，吴郡钱唐人。杜子恭玄孙也。
现代文：杜京产字景齐，吴郡钱唐人，是杜子恭的玄孙。
English: Du Jing produced Zi Jing Qi, Wu County Qian Tang people, is the great-great-grandson of Du Zi Gong.

古文：祖运，为刘毅卫军参军。
现代文：祖父杜运，为刘毅卫军参军。
English: Grandfather Du Yun joined the army as Liu Yi's bodyguard.

古文：父道鞠，州从事，善弹棋，世传五斗米道，至京产及子栖。
现代文：父亲杜道鞠，是州从事，他善于弹琴下棋。杜家世传五斗米教，直传至杜京产及其子杜栖。
English: Du's father, Du Daoqiu, was engaged in the state, he was good at playing the piano and playing chess. Du's family handed down the five-square-meter teaching, straight to Du Jingzang and his son Du Qian.

古文：京产少恬静，闭意荣宦。
现代文：杜京产年轻时便恬淡静穆，无意于荣耀与仕宦。
English: When he was young, Du Jingzang was a quiet man, with no intention of glory and service.

古文：颇涉文义，专修黄老。
现代文：颇涉猎文章道义，专修黄老之学。
English: He dabbles in articles on morality, specializing in the study of Huang Lao.

古文：会稽孔觊，清刚有峻节，一见而为款交。
现代文：会稽人孔觊，清正刚毅有高节，一见杜京产便与他结成好友。
English: The auditor of the association, Kong Hao, had a high opinion of Qing Zheng Gang Yi, and became friends with him at the first sight of Du Jing Zan.

古文：郡召主簿，州辟从事，称疾去。
现代文：郡召杜京产为主簿，州聘他为从事，他都称病离开。
English: The county summoned Du Jing production as the main book, the state hired him to engage in, he said he was sick and left.

古文：除奉朝请，不就。
现代文：拜官为奉朝请，也不就任。
English: He did not accept Liu Bongchao's invitation.

古文：与同郡顾欢同契，始宁东山开舍授学。
现代文：他与同郡人顾欢脾性相投，在始宁束山设馆聚徒讲学。
English: He and his compatriot Gu Huan shared the same temperament, and set up a lecture hall for students in Shining Bunch Mountain.

古文：建元中，武陵王晔为会稽，太祖遣儒士刘瓛入东为晔讲说，京产请瓛至山舍讲书，倾资供待，子栖躬自屣履，为瓛生徒下食，其礼贤如此。
现代文：齐建元年间，武陵王萧晔任会稽太守，齐太祖派遣儒士刘秋去东方为萧晔讲说儒术，杜京产便邀请刘辙到馆舍讲书，竭尽资财供应接待他，儿子杜栖匆忙间拖着鞋走路，亲自替刘珊师徒做饭，他们就是这样礼敬贤士的。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, King of Wuling, Xiao Qi, was appointed as the auditor of the association. The founder of Qi sent the Confucianist Liu Qiu to the East to lecture on Confucianism for Xiao Qi. Du Jingzang invited Liu Ru to lecture at the hall, and made every effort to provide for his reception. His son Du Qian walked hurriedly with his shoes dragging, and personally cooked for Liu Shan's teachers and disciples. This is how they honored the wise men.

古文：孔稚珪、周颙、谢抃并致书以通殷勤。
现代文：孔稚珪、周颐、谢满都写信给他以表达恳切深厚的情意。
English: Kong Zhiqi, Zhou Qi and Xie Man all wrote to him to express their sincere and profound feelings.

古文：永明十年，稚珪及光禄大夫陆澄、祠部尚书虞悰、太子右率沈约、司徒右长史张融表荐京产曰： 窃见吴郡杜京产，洁静为心，谦虚成性，通和发于天挺，敏达表于自然。
现代文：永明十年，孔稚珪及光禄大夫陆澄、祠部尚书虞惊、太子右率沈约、司徒右长史张融上表荐举杜京产说： 依我们看吴郡杜京产这个人，心地洁静，性格谦虚，平顺通和出自于天性，聪敏豁达表露得极其自然。
English: In the 10th year of the Yongming era, Kong Wanzhong and Guanglu doctor Lu Cheng, ancestral hall minister Shang Shuxu Yuzhen, crown prince Yuzhang Shenyu, and chief historian of the State Council of the People's Republic of China Zhang Rong recommended Du Jingshan, saying: "According to our view, this person from Du Jingshan, Wuxian County, has a pure and quiet heart, a modest personality, a smooth communication and comes from nature, and is extremely naturally intelligent and open-minded.

古文：学遍玄、儒，博通史、子，流连文艺，沈吟道奥。
现代文：学遍玄、儒之经，博通历史、诸子之书，耽乐于文章学问，沉吟于道义奥妙。
English: Studying all the classics, Confucianism, history, and the books of all the sons and daughters, indulging in the study of articles, and meditating on the mysteries of morality.

古文：泰始之朝，挂冠辞世，遁舍家业，隐于太平。
现代文：宋泰始之朝，挂冠罢仕，抛舍家业，辞世遁避，隐归于太平。
English: In the early morning of Song Taishi, he resigned his post, gave up his family business, avoided death, and returned to Taiping.

古文：葺宇穷岩，采芝幽涧，耦耕自足，薪歌有余。
现代文：在峻极的山者上筑室而居，在深幽的山涧中采芝而食，自耕自种，自给自足，自得其乐。
English: They live in rooms built on top of extremely steep mountains, gather and eat grass in the deep mountains, cultivate and grow their own food, are self-sufficient, and enjoy themselves.

古文：确尔不群，淡然寡欲，麻衣藿食，二十余载。
现代文：卓然独立而不群，淡泊寡欲，麻衣蔬食，已二十余年。
English: It has been more than 20 years since he has been so independent and not a member of the herd.

古文：虽古之志士，何以加之。
现代文：即使是古代的高尚志士，怎能超过他!
English: How can even the noblest of the ancients surpass him!

古文：谓宜释巾幽谷，结组登朝，则岩谷含欢，薜萝起抃矣。 
现代文：我们认为应该使他放弃幽谷中的隐居生活，穿着绣衣进入朝廷，则山谷都会欢悦，薜萝也会鼓掌欢迎。 
English: We think that he should give up his secluded life in the valley and enter the imperial court wearing embroidered clothes, then the valley will be happy and the dill will be applauded.

古文：不报。
现代文：表章虽上但未见回音。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：建武初，征员外散骑侍郎，京产曰： 庄生持钓，岂为白璧所回。 
现代文：建武初年，征召为员外散骑侍郎，杜京产说： 庄生持钓的志向，怎能为白璧而回转。 
English: In the first year of Jianwu, he was conscripted as an outside horseback riding attendant, and Du Jing said: How can the ambition of Zhuang Seng to fish be turned around for Bai Bi?

古文：辞疾不就。
现代文：推辞有病不肯应微。
English: He refused to accept the excuse that he was ill.

古文：年六十四，永元元年卒。
现代文：年六十四，卒于永元元年。
English: He died at the age of sixty-four in the first year of the Yongyuan era.

古文：会稽孔道征，守志业不仕，京产与之友善。
现代文：会稽人孔道征，坚守志向而不仕宦，杜京产和他很友好。
English: The auditor of the association, Kong Dao Zheng, adheres to his aspiration and does not serve others. Du Jingshan is very friendly with him.

古文：永明中，会稽钟山有人姓蔡，不知名。山中养鼠数十头，呼来即来，遣去便去。言语狂易，时谓之 谪仙 。
现代文：永明年间，会稽钟山有一个姓蔡的人，不知其名在山中养鼠数十只，叫来就来，叫去便去此人言谈狂妄简慢，当时称之为 谪仙 。
English: Once upon a time, there was a person surnamed Cai in Zhongshan, who raised dozens of mice in the mountains. He would come when he was called, and go when he was called. This person talked about arrogance and simplicity. At that time, he was called the "Evil Immortal."

古文：不知所终。
现代文：不知所终。
English: I don't know where it will end.

古文：沈飗士，字云祯，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：沈骚士字云祯，吴兴武康人。
English: Shen Suo Shi Zi Yun Qi, Wu Xing Wu Kang Ren.

古文：祖膺期，晋太中大夫。
现代文：祖父沈膺期是晋朝的太中大夫。
English: His grandfather, Shen Xizhi, was a doctor of the imperial court during the Jin Dynasty.

古文：飗士少好学，家贫，织帘诵书，口手不息。
现代文：沈膦士年轻时爱好学习，家境贫寒，他就边织帘边读书，手不停。
English: When he was young, Shen Yuxi loved to study. His family was poor, so he spent his time knitting and reading.

古文：宋元嘉末，文帝令尚书仆射何尚之抄撰《五经》，访举学士，县以飗士应选。
现代文：宋元嘉末年，宋文帝令尚书仆射何尚之抄撰《五经》，并查访举荐好学之士，武康县以沈膦士应选。
English: At the end of Song Yuan Jia's reign, Emperor Song Wendi ordered his servant, He Shang, to copy and compile the Five Classics. He also visited Wu Kang County to recommend people who were eager to learn, and Shen Yuxi was chosen.

古文：尚之谓子偃曰： 山薮故有奇士也。 少时，飗士称疾归乡，更不与人物通。
现代文：何尚之对儿子何偃说： 呈会从来就有奇异之士 不久，沈鳞士便藉有病而回归乡里，再不与名人交往。
English: He Shangzhi said to his son He Yao: "There has always been a strange person in the presentation." Soon, Shen Qishi returned to the countryside due to illness, and no longer socialized with celebrities.

古文：养孤兄子，义著乡曲。
现代文：他抚养丧父的侄儿，义名显扬于乡间。
English: He raised his nephew, who had lost his father, and became famous in the countryside.

古文：或劝飗士仕，答曰： 鱼县兽槛，天下一契，圣人玄悟，所以每履吉先。吾诚未能景行坐忘，何为不希企日损。 
现代文：有人劝说选盐工出仕，他回答说： 悬鱼囚兽，天下同是如此。圣人妙悟，所以每行一步都有吉兆在先我确实未有高尚的德行，不能淡泊无虑，物我两忘，为何不企求谦退一些? 
English: Someone persuaded the salt-picker to serve, and he replied: "It is the same for all the fishes and beasts in the world. The sage has great insight, so there are auspicious signs at every step. In the past, I really did not have noble virtues, I could not be indifferent and carefree, I forgot both things, why did I not try to be more humble?

古文：乃作《玄散赋》以绝世。
现代文：于是作《玄散赋》表示与世隔绝。
English: As a result, he wrote "Hyakusanpu" to express his isolation from the world.

古文：太守孔山士辟，不应。
现代文：太守孔山士聘请他，他不应允。
English: He did not agree to be hired by the daimyō, Kong Sanshi.

古文：宗人徐州刺史昙庆、侍中怀文、左率勃来候之，飗士未尝答也。
现代文：同族人徐州刺史逸昙庆、侍中这怀文、左率沈勃都来探望他，沈膦士一概不答理。
English: Xuzhou compatriot Xizhi Yijie Qing, the attendant Gao Weiwen, and the left leader Shen Bo all came to visit him, but Shen Yishi did not reply at all.

古文：隐居馀干吴差山，讲经教授，从学者数十百人，各营屋宇，依止其侧。
现代文：他隐居在余不吴差山，讲授经书，跟他学的有百十人，他们各自营建房舍，紧挨在他家的旁边居住。
English: He lived in seclusion on Yufu's Wuxia Mountain, lecturing on the scriptures. There were a hundred people who studied with him, and they each built a house and lived right next to his house.

古文：飗士重陆机《连珠》，每为诸生讲之。
现代文：沈鳞士很看重陆机的连珠》，所以常常给诸生讲解它。
English: Shen Daishi placed great importance on the connection of the land machine, so he often explained it to sentient beings.

古文：征北张永为吴兴，请飗士入郡。
现代文：征北将军张永为吴兴太守，邀请沈鳞士入郡。
English: Zhang Yong, the general of the Northern Expedition, was the governor of Wu Xing and invited Shen Qishi to enter the county.

古文：飗士闻郡后堂有好山水，乃往停数月。永欲请为功曹，使人致意。
现代文：沈鳞士听说郡后堂有好山好水，于是便前往并停留了数月之久张永想请他作功曹，让人把这个意思转达给他。
English: Shen Shishi heard that there were good mountains and good water in Guxiu Hall, so he went there and stayed for several months. Zhang Yong wanted to ask him to do a good deed, so he asked someone to convey this meaning to him.

古文：飗士曰： 明府德履冲素，留心山谷，民是以被褐负杖，忘其疲病。
现代文：沈鳞士说： 太守的明德施布遍及淡泊质朴之人，他心中念及山谷之民，我所以才披褐衣拄拐杖而来，忘记了疲劳疾病。
English: Shen Qiushi said, "The Emperor's benevolence extends to the simple people. His heart yearns for the people of the valley. That's why I'm wearing a brown robe and walking with a cane. I've forgotten about my fatigue disease."

古文：必欲饰浑沌以蛾眉，冠越客于文冕，走虽不敏，请附高节，有蹈东海而死尔。 
现代文：如果一定想要让混沌之人去描画蛾眉，给披发的越人戴上有文饰的冠冕，那么对我来说，逃走虽然不是聪明的做法，但要我依附于权贵，那只好投束海而死丫。 
English: If I must let the chaotic people draw moth brows, and put a literary crown on the Yue people with hair, then for me, although it is not a smart way to escape, but if I want to cling to the powerful, then I have to throw myself into the sea and die.

古文：永乃止。
现代文：张永这才打消了这一念头。
English: Zhang Yong no longer forced him to leave.

古文：升明末，太守王奂上表荐之，诏征为奉朝请，不就。
现代文：宋升明末年，太守王奂上表举荐他，有诏征召为奉朝请，沈膦士不应召。
English: At the end of Song Shengming's life, he was recommended by the eunuch Wang Xuan on a list. There was an edict calling him to serve the imperial court, but Shen Xuan should not be called.

古文：永明六年，吏部郎沈渊、中书郎沈约又表荐飗士义行，曰： 吴兴沈飗士，英风夙挺，峻节早树，贞粹禀于天然，综博生乎笃习。
现代文：齐永明六年，吏部郎沈渊、中书郎沈约又上表推荐沈骈士的义行，说： 吴兴沈鳞士，杰出的风范早已超群拔俗，高尚的节操也早就树立，贞洁纯正的品性出于天生，渊博的知识得自于诚笃的学习。
English: In the sixth year of Qi Yongming, the chief secretary, Shen Yuan, and the chief scribe, Shen You, also recommended the righteous deeds of Shen Yu to the table above, saying: Wu Xing Shen, an outstanding gentleman, has already surpassed the vulgar, and has long established a noble morality. Chaste and pure character comes from nature, and profound knowledge comes from sincere study.

古文：家世孤贫，藜藿不给，怀书而耕，白首无倦，挟琴采薪，行歌不辍。
现代文：家世孤弱贫寒，粗茶淡饭也难以自给。镶抱书籍而躬耕，至白头而不倦；挟带琴瑟而砍柴，放歌吟咏而不停止。
English: His family was lonely, weak, and poor, and it was difficult for him to provide for himself. He cultivated with books and never tired of it; he chopped wood with a harpsichord and never stopped singing.

古文：长兄早卒，孤侄数四，摄尪鞠稚，吞苦推甘。
现代文：长兄早卒，留下孤侄四人。他扶持病弱，养育幼稚，含辛茹苦，而把甘甜让给别人。
English: The eldest brother died early, leaving four orphaned nephews. He supported the weak, nurtured the naive, endured hardships, and left the sweet to others.

古文：年逾七十，业行无改。
现代文：年纪虽已超过七十，但为人行事仍然没有改变。
English: Although he is over seventy years old, his demeanor has not changed.

古文：元嘉以来，聘召仍叠。玉质逾洁，霜操日严。
现代文：自塞亘台以来，有过多次的聘请征召，但他如玉的品质更加纯洁，如霜雪的节操更加严正。
English: Since he took office, there have been many times that he has been hired and called up, but his qualities are more pure, and his discipline is more rigorous.

古文：若使闻政王庭，服道槐掖，必能孚朝规于边鄙，播圣泽于荒垂。 
现代文：假如能让他在朝廷参预政事，在公卿中占一席位置，定能使边鄙之地都符合朝廷纲纪，使圣上的恩泽流播于荒远的边疆。 
English: If he can be allowed to participate in the pre-political affairs of the imperial court and occupy a place among the nobles, he will surely be able to make the outlying areas conform to the imperial discipline and spread the holy grace to the desolate frontier.

古文：诏又征为太学博士；建武二年，征著作郎；永元二年，征太子舍人；并不就。
现代文：有诏征聘沈膦士为太学博士，建武二年，征请他为著作郎，永元二年，征为太子舍人，他都一概不肯厅征。
English: There was an edict to recruit Shen Bingshi as a doctor of science, in the second year of Jianwu, he was recruited as a writer, and in the second year of Yongyuan, he was recruited as a prince, but he refused to be recruited at all.

古文：飗士负薪汲水，并日而食，守操终老。
现代文：沈鳞士亲自背柴取水，两曰才吃一餐饭，坚守节操至终老。
English: Shen Qiushi personally carried firewood and fetched water, and only ate one meal a day for two days. He adhered to the principle of self-restraint until the end of his life.

古文：笃学不倦，遭火，烧书数千卷，飗士年过八十，耳目犹聪明，手以反故抄写，灯下细书，复成二三千卷，满数十箧，时人以为养身静嘿之所致也。
现代文：他专心于学问毫无厌倦，家中遭受火灾，烧书数千卷，当时沈璘士已年遇八十，但还是耳聪目明，他在灯下仔细地察看，用废纸的反面亲手抄写，又完成了二三千卷，装满丁几十只箱箧，当时人认为这是由于他养身静默的结果。
English: He devoted himself to learning without getting tired. His home suffered a fire, burning thousands of volumes. At that time, Shen Yushi was eighty years old, but he was still sharp-eyed. He carefully examined under the lamp, copied by hand with the reverse side of waste paper, and completed another two or three thousand volumes, filled with dozens of boxes. At that time, people thought that this was the result of his self-cultivation.

古文：著《周易两系》《庄子内篇训》，注《易经》、《礼记》、《春秋》、《尚书》、《论语》、《孝经》、《丧服》、《老子要略》数十卷。
现代文：撰著《周易》、《两系》、《庄子内篇训》，注释《易经》、《礼记》、《春秋》、《尚书》、《论语》、《孝经》、《丧服》、《老广要略》数十卷。
English: He is the author of "Zhou Yi," "Two Systems" and "Tale of Zhuo Zi," and has annotated dozens of volumes of "Yi Jing," "Li Ji," "Chunqiu," "Shang Shu," "Analects," "Chiao Jing," "Mourning Robe" and "Outline of Lao Guang."

古文：以杨王孙、皇甫谧深达生死，而终礼矫伪，乃自作终制。年八十六，卒。
现代文：他有鉴于杨王孙、皇甫谧等人虽深通生死之道，却大办葬礼的虚伪行径，于是自己便预先写下如何安葬的遗书，享年八十六岁而卒。
English: In view of the fact that Yang Wangsun, Wangfujing and others, although they were well versed in the ways of life and death, were hypocritical in their funerals, he wrote a suicide note in advance on how to be buried, and died at the age of 86.

古文：同郡沈俨之，字士恭，徐州刺史昙庆子，亦不仕。
现代文：同郡人沈俨之，字士恭，徐州刺史沈昙庆之子，也不出仕。
English: The son of fellow county resident Shen Yuzhi, Zha Shigong, and Xuzhou scholar Shen Yueqing, also did not serve.

古文：征太子洗马，永明元年，征中书郎。
现代文：征召他为太子洗马，永明元年，征召为中书郎。
English: He was conscripted to wash horses for the crown prince, and in the first year of the Yongming era, he was conscripted as a junior high school teacher.

古文：三年，又诏征前南郡国常侍沈摐为著作郎，建武二年。征太子舍人，永元二年，征通直郎。摐字处默，宋领军寅之兄孙也。
现代文：永明三年，有诏征聘前南郡国常侍沈颢为着作郎，建武二年，征聘他为太子舍人，永元二年，又征聘为通直郎沈颛字处默，是宋朝领军沈演之兄长的孙子。
English: In the 3rd year of the Yongming era, there was an edict to recruit the former Nan County State Councilor Shen Xuan as the son-in-law, in the 2nd year of the Jianwu era, he was recruited as the son-in-law of the Crown Prince, and in the 2nd year of the Yongyuan era, he was recruited as the son-in-law of the Tongzhi Emperor Shen Xuan, the grandson of the elder brother of the Song Dynasty leader Shen Xuan.

古文：吴苞，字天盖，濮阳鄄城人也。
现代文：吴苞字天盖，濮阳鄄城人。
English: Wu Zhi Zi Tengai, Ziyang Zicheng Ren.

古文：儒学，善《三礼》及《老》、《庄》。
现代文：他是儒学之士，喜好《三礼》及《老子》、《庄子》。
English: He is a man of Confucianism and likes "Three Rites" and "Lao Tzu" and "Zhuang Tzu."

古文：宋泰始中，过江聚徒教学。冠黄葛巾，竹麈尾，蔬食二十余年。
现代文：宋泰始年间，渡过长江聚徒讲学，他常戴一顶黄葛巾，手持竹尘尾，粗茶淡饭二十余年。
English: In the early years of Song Taishi, he crossed the Yangtze River to give lectures to students. He often wore a yellow georgette scarf, held a bamboo dust tail, and ate coarse tea and light meals for more than 20 years.

古文：隆昌元年，诏曰： 处士濮阳吴苞，栖志穹谷，秉操贞固，沈情味古，白首弥厉。
现代文：宋隆昌元年，诏书说： 处士濮阳入吴苞，其志向在于居处高山大谷，秉性节操贞洁坚固，情趣沉浸在古籍之中，至白头更是老当益壮。
English: In the first year of Song Longchang, the imperial edict said: "The official Shanyang entered Wuxi. His ambition is to live in Gaoshan Valley. He is virtuous, chaste and strong. His passion is immersed in ancient books. He is even more vigorous when he is old."

古文：征太学博士。 
现代文：征聘为太学博士。 
English: He was recruited as a doctor of science.

古文：不就。
现代文：他不肯应征。
English: He refused to be drafted.

古文：始安王遥光、右卫江祏于蒋山南为立馆，自刘瓛卒后，学者咸归之。
现代文：始安王萧遥光、右卫江柘在蒋山南面替他建立馆舍，自刘珊死后，学者都跟随着吴苞。
English: Xiao Yaoguang, the King of Shi'an, and Uwei Jiangyou built a museum for him in the south of Mount Jiang. Since Liu Shan's death, scholars have followed Wu Gan.

古文：以寿终。
现代文：高寿而终。
English: He lived to a ripe old age.

古文：鲁国孔嗣之，字敬伯。宋世与太祖俱为中书舍人，并非所好，自庐陵郡去官，隐居钟山，朝廷以为太中大夫。
现代文：鲁国孔嗣之，字敬伯，宋世舆齐太祖同为中书舍人，但这并非他所好，从庐陵郡任上离官而去，隐居在钟山。齐朝时被任命为太中大夫。
English: Confucius of the State of Lu, known as Jingbo, and the great-grandfather of Song Shiyou Qi were both Chinese scholars, but this was not to his liking. He left his post in Fuling County and lived in seclusion in Zhongshan. During the Qi Dynasty, he was appointed as the great-grandfather's doctor.

古文：建武三年卒。
现代文：建武三年，去世。
English: Jianwu three years, passed away.

古文：徐伯珍，字文楚，东阳太末人也。
现代文：徐伯珍，字文楚，东阳太末人。
English: Xu Bozhen, a word and text expert, is the last person of the Eastern Yang Dynasty.

古文：祖父并郡掾史。
现代文：祖父与父亲都是郡掾史。
English: Both his grandfather and father were county magistrates.

古文：伯珍少孤贫，书竹叶及地学书。
现代文：徐伯珍早年丧父，家境贫困，在竹叶及地上写字练字。
English: Xu Bozhen lost her father at an early age, her family was poor, and she practiced writing on bamboo leaves and on the ground.

古文：山水暴出，漂溺宅舍，村邻皆奔走，伯珍累床而止，读书不辍。
现代文：山洪暴发，淹没了房屋，村裹邻居都急忙逃走，徐伯珍却把床叠架起来，留在上面，读书不止。
English: When a flash flood occurred, the house was submerged, and all the neighbors in the village fled in a hurry. However, Xu Bozhen stacked the beds and left them on top of each other, reading more and more.

古文：叔父璠之与颜延之友善，还祛蒙山立精舍讲授，伯珍往从学，积十年，究寻经史，游学者多依之。
现代文：其叔父徐墦之与颜延之很要好，回到祛蒙山设立学舍聚徒讲学，徐伯珍前往那儿跟随叔父学习，经过十年，对经籍子史都很有研究，所以游学的人大多依从于他。
English: His uncle, Xu Bozhen, was very close to Yan Yan, and went back to the Yimeng Mountain to set up a dormitory to gather students for lectures. Xu Bozhen went there to study with his uncle. After ten years, he had studied a lot about the history of the scribes, so most of the students followed him.

古文：太守琅邪王昙生、吴郡张淹并加礼辟，伯珍应召便退，如此者凡十二焉。
现代文：太守琅邪王萧昙生、吴郡人张淹都曾礼聘他，徐伯珍应召后便立即退归，这样做共有十二次。
English: Xiao Yansheng, the eunuch-king of the eunuchs, and Zhang Dun, a native of Wu County, both hired him, and Xu Bozhen immediately returned after being called. He did this a total of twelve times.

古文：征士沈俨造膝谈论，申以素交。
现代文：征士沈俨和徐伯珍促膝而谈，以表达真诚不移的友情。
English: Conquerors Shen Yi and Xu Bo Zhen had a heart-to-heart talk to express their sincere and unswerving friendship.

古文：吴郡顾欢擿出《尚书》滞义，伯珍训答甚有条理，儒者宗之。
现代文：吴郡人顾欢挑剔出《尚书》中含义不通的地方，徐伯珍训释回答得很有条理，因此儒学之士对他极为宗仰。
English: Gu Huan, a resident of Wuxi County, picked out the incomprehensible parts of the "Shang Shu," and Xu Bozhen's exegesis was very organized, so Confucian scholars were extremely impressed by him.

古文：好释氏、老庄，兼明道术。
现代文：徐伯珍还喜好释氏、老庄之学，并通晓占卜之术。
English: Xu Bozhen also likes the teachings of Shi Shi and Lao Zhuang, and is familiar with divination.

古文：岁常旱，伯珍筮之，如期雨澍。举动有礼，过曲木之下，趋而避之。
现代文：年岁常旱，徐伯珍占筮，时雨如期而降他行为举止很有礼貌，过有曲折的小桥，他都要急忙走过而避开，惟恐阻拦别人。
English: Years of drought, Xu Bozhen is busy, when the rain falls as scheduled, he behaves very politely, and when crossing a small bridge with twists and turns, he has to walk quickly and avoid it, for fear of blocking others.

古文：早丧妻，晚不复重娶，自比曾参。
现代文：年轻时他的妻子便丧亡，盲到晚年他也不再重新娶妻，自比于曾参。
English: His wife died when he was young, and he did not remarry until late in life, comparing himself to Zeng Zang.

古文：宅南九里有高山，班固谓之九岩山，后汉龙丘苌隐处也。
现代文：他家南边九里有座高山，班固称之为九岩山，足后汉龙丘苌隐居的地方。
English: On the south side of his house, there is a high mountain in Jiulian, which is called Jiulian Mountain by Ban Gu. Behind him, there is a secluded place called Hanlong Hill.

古文：山多龙须柽柏，望之五采，世呼为妇人岩。
现代文：山上长有很多龙须柏，看起来五彩缤纷，世人叫作妇人岩。
English: There are a lot of dragon's beards on the mountain, it looks colorful, the world is called the gypsy rock.

古文：二年，伯珍移居之。
现代文：二年后，徐伯珍移居逭里。
English: Two years later, Xu Bozhen moved to Minli.

古文：门前生梓树，一年便合抱；馆东石壁夜忽有赤光洞照，俄尔而灭；白雀一双栖其户牖；论者以为隐德之感焉。
现代文：他家门前长着一棵梓树，一年便艮得很粗壮，须两人合抱。馆舍束面的石壁夜晚忽然有红光通明地照耀。不大一会儿又熄灭了有一对白雀栖息在他家门窗上，人们议论纷纷，认为这是隐居之德感应的结果。
English: In front of his house, there was a tree that grew thick and strong every year, and the two of them had to hug each other. On the stone wall of the pavilion, a red light suddenly shone brightly in the evening. It soon went out again. There was a pair of white finches perched on the doors and windows of his house, and people argued that this was the result of the virtue of seclusion.

古文：永明二年，刺史豫章王辟议曹从事，不就。
现代文：永明二年，刺史豫章王聘请他为议曹从事，不肯应召。
English: In the second year of the Yongming era, King Xuanzhang hired him to be a councillor, but he refused the call.

古文：家甚贫窭，兄弟四人，皆白首相对，时人呼为 四皓 。
现代文：家境很足贫乏，兄弟四人，都白首相对，时人称之为 四皓 。
English: The family was very poor. There were four brothers, all white-haired, and they were called the "four brothers" at the time.

古文：建武四年卒，年八十四。
现代文：建武四年，徐伯珍去世，享年八卜四岁。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu, Xu Bozhen died at the age of eight.

古文：受业生凡千余人。
现代文：接受他教诲的人共有一千余人。
English: In total, more than a thousand people received his teachings.

古文：同郡楼幼瑜，亦儒学。著《礼捃遗》三十卷。
现代文：同郡人楼幼瑜，电是儒学之士，着有《礼捃遗》三十卷。
English: In the same county, Renlou Yuyu, a scholar of Confucianism, wrote the thirty-volume "Rites and Decrees."

古文：官至给事中。
现代文：官至给事中。
English: The official is in the middle of giving a speech.

古文：又同郡楼惠明，有道术。
现代文：又有同郡人楼惠明，有道术。
English: There is also Huiming, a manor house in the same county, and Taoism.

古文：居金华山，禽兽毒螫者皆避之。
现代文：居住在金华山，飞禽走兽毒虫之类都躲避他。
English: Living in Jinhua Mountain, birds, beasts, poisonous insects and the like all avoid him.

古文：宋明帝闻之，敕出住华林园，除奉朝请，固乞不受，求东归。
现代文：宋明帝闻知此事，敕命要他出山居住在华林园。授官奉朝请，楼惠明坚辞不受，要求束归。
English: Emperor Song Ming heard about this and desperately wanted him to leave the mountain and live in the Hualing Garden. He was offered a post in the imperial court, but Luo Huiming refused and demanded to return home.

古文：永明三年，忽乘轻舟向临安县，众不知所以。
现代文：齐永明三年，忽然乘轻便的小舟去丰安县，大家不知道是什么缘故。
English: Three years ago, Qi Yongming suddenly took a small boat to Feng'an County. No one knows why.

古文：寻而唐宇之贼破郡。
现代文：不久而唐寓之贼便攻破了郡府。
English: Soon after, the thieves of the Tang Residence broke into the county seat.

古文：文惠太子呼出住蒋山，又求归，见许。
现代文：文惠太子召请他出来住在蒋山，楼惠明又请求归回原处，得到允许。
English: Prince Wen Hui invited him to come and live in Jiangshan. Lou Huiming also requested to return to his original place and was allowed to do so.

古文：世祖敕为立馆。
现代文：齐世祖敕命为他建立馆舍。
English: Qi Shizuo made it his life's mission to build a museum for him.

古文：史臣曰：顾欢论夷夏，优老而劣释。
现代文：史臣曰：顾欢论戎夷、华夏的二种宗教，以星氐道教为优而以释氏佛教为劣。
English: Shichen said: Gu Huan on the two religions of the Warring States and China, with Xingtao Taoism as superior and Shichuan Buddhism as inferior.

古文：佛法者，理寂乎万古，迹兆乎中世，渊源浩博，无始无边，宇宙之所不知，数量之所不尽，盛乎哉！
现代文：佛法这种东西，其理义来自万古荒寂，其迹象显示于中世；渊源深远广博，无始无终，无边无际，宇宙也不知道其深广的程度，数日也难以计量出来。
English: Buddhism is a thing whose reason comes from the desolation of the ages, and whose signs appear in the Middle Ages; its source is profound and vast, beginningless and endless, boundless, and the universe does not know the extent of its depth and breadth, and it is difficult to measure a few days.

古文：真大士之立言也。
现代文：多么地兴盛啊!
English: What a boom!

古文：探机扣寂，有感必应，以大苞小，无细不容。
现代文：真正的菩萨的创立言论，深察机微紧扣空寂，有所触发必定有所感应，以大包小，无捆不容至于儒家之教，讲究的是仁义礼乐。
English: The founding speech of a true bodhisattva, deeply observing the subtleties of emptiness, must be triggered by something. As for Confucianism, it is intolerant of large packages and no bundles, and it is concerned with benevolence and righteousness.

古文：若乃儒家之教，仁义礼乐，仁爱义宜，礼顺乐和而已；今则慈悲为本，常乐为宗，施舍惟机，低举成敬。
现代文：仁是爱心义是适宜，礼讲顺从乐主中和，如此而已。而现今则以慈悲为本原，以常乐为宗旨。施舍随其机缘，细小的举动也能表示敬仰之意。
English: Benevolence is love, righteousness is appropriateness, etiquette is obedience to the Lord of music, and that's it. But nowadays, mercy is the basis, and pleasure is the purpose. Charity follows its opportunity, and small actions can also express admiration.

古文：儒家之教，宪章祖述，引古证今，于学易悟；今树以前因，报以后果，业行交酬，连璅相袭。
现代文：儒家之教，以祖宗言行为其规范，引古证今，对学习者来说容易晓悟。而现今讲因果报应，前有何因，后必报以何果。功业与行为互为因果，连锁相承，循环不已。
English: In Confucianism, it is easy for students to understand that the ancestor's words are the standard for behavior, and that the past is the proof of the present. Today, however, it is about karma and retribution. Whatever the cause, the result will be the same. Work and behavior are the cause and effect of each other, they are interlinked, and the cycle continues.

古文：阴阳之教，占气步景，授民以时，知其利害；今则耳眼洞达，心智他通，身为奎井，岂俟甘石。
现代文：阴阳五行之教，占验的是气候变化月运行，教给人民知晓天时变化与世事兴衰之间的利害关系。现今却讲耳眼聪明洞达，心智与外物相通，自身便如上天星宿，哪裹要等待甘石星经的占验结果。
English: The teachings of yin and yang and the five elements test the climate change and the movement of the moon, teaching the people to know the relationship between the change of the day and the rise and fall of the world. Nowadays, they teach that the ears and eyes are clever and clever, the mind is connected to foreign objects, and they themselves are like the stars in the sky, so they have to wait for the test results of the Gemstone Astrology.

古文：法家之教，出自刑理，禁奸止邪，明用赏罚；今则十恶所坠，五及无间，刀树剑出，焦汤猛火，造受自贻，罔或差贰。
现代文：法家之教，出自刑法，禁止奸佞邪伪，赏罚分明。
English: The teachings of the legalists come from the criminal law, which forbids adultery and forgery, and stipulates clear rewards and punishments.

古文：墨家之教，遵上俭薄，磨踵灭顶，且犹非吝；今则肤同断瓠，目如井星，授子捐妻，在鹰庇鸽。
现代文：现今却讲十恶不赦十恶所坠落之处，有五种达到最低的地方。受到刀山剑树的砍杀，热水烈火的烫烧，遭受这样的劫难都是自己造孽留下的恶果，这是毫无差错的。墨家之教，崇尚俭薄，即使摩顶放踵，为他人辛劳万分，也不要过分吝惜自身。现今则讲身体如同断蒂的瓠瓜，眼光如同井星，捐妻献子，是雄鹰也要庇护小鸽。
English: Nowadays, however, it is said that the ten evils are unforgiving, and the places where the ten evils have fallen are five kinds of places that have reached the lowest. Being killed by the sword mountain sword tree, scalded by the hot water fire, and suffering such disasters are all the evil consequences left by their own sins, which is no mistake. The teachings of the Mohawk family advocate frugality, even if the motorcycle top is down, and they work hard for others, they should not be too stingy with themselves. Nowadays, it is said that the body is like a broken gourd, the eyesight is like a well star, the wife is donated, and the eagle is to

古文：从横之教，所贵权谋，天口连环，归乎适变；今则一音万解，无待户说，四辩三会，咸得吾师。
现代文：纵横家的理论，贵在运用权谋，能言善辩、滔滔不绝，归根结底在于顺应时势的变化而变化。现在则是佛以一音说法，万众随类各得其解而不须一一解释，佛性四论，三度法会，都是我们的教师。
English: The theory of vertical and horizontal thinkers, you are using power and strategy, can speak well and talk endlessly, in the final analysis, is to change in accordance with the changes of the times. Now it is the Buddha with one-tone speech, all people can get their own solution without explanation, the four theories of Buddha nature and the three-degree puja are all our teachers.

古文：杂家之教，兼有儒墨；今则五时所宣，于何不尽。
现代文：杂家之教，兼有儒、墨二家之论。现在却是释迦牟尼于五时依次而说法，对什么理论不能穷尽呢!
English: The teachings of miscellaneous schools include both Confucianism and Buddhism. Now, however, it is Shakyamuni who speaks in turn at five o'clock. What theory cannot be exhausted!

古文：农家之教，播植耕耘，善相五事，以艺九谷；今则郁单粳稻，已异阎浮，生天果报，自然饮食。
现代文：农家之教，讲播植耕耘，善于考察雨、旸、燠、寒、风五种物候的变化，以培育各种农作物。
English: It teaches farmers how to plant and cultivate crops, and is good at investigating the changes in five types of weather, such as rain, hail, sleet, cold and wind, in order to cultivate various crops.

古文：道家之教，执一虚无，得性亡情，凝神勿扰；今则波若无照，万法皆空，岂有道之可名，宁余一之可得。
现代文：现在却讲北方郁单越洲的稻米谷物，和南方阎浮洲的已不相同，这是上天回报的果实，是自然的产物。道家之教，主张执守虚艇专心致志，得真性而忘情欲，聚精会神而不为外物干扰。现今则讲最高的智慧无从明说，万法皆空；极高的道法怎能够给它命名呢?祇好归之于 一 。
English: Now, however, it is said that the rice grains of the North's Yudanotsu-chō and the South's Yanpu-chō are no longer the same. This is the fruit of God's reward, a product of nature. The Taoist teachings advocate adhering to the empty boat, concentrating on one's aspiration, gaining authenticity and forgetting sexual desire, and concentrating on God without being disturbed by foreign objects. Now, it is said that the highest wisdom cannot be said clearly, all laws are empty; how can the highest Taoism be named? Let it all be one.

古文：道俗对校，真假将雠。
现代文：道法与世习相对比，便是将真与假相匹仇。
English: Comparing the Dharma with the world is like comparing the true with the false.

古文：释理奥藏，无往而不有也。
现代文：佛理奥妙而深藏，它无所不在，无往不有。
English: Buddhism is mysterious and deeply hidden. It is omnipresent and omnipresent.

古文：能善用之，即真是俗。
现代文：如果善于运用它，真便是俗，俗即是真了。
English: If you are good at using it, true is vulgar, and vulgar is true.

古文：九流之设，用藉世教，刑名道墨，乖心异旨，儒者不学，无伤为儒；佛理玄旷，实智妙有，一物不知，不成圆圣。
现代文：九家教义的设立，为的是藉以教化世俗之人。刑名道墨诸家，意旨相互乖异；儒者不学这些理论，对于儒家也毫无损害。佛理玄妙旷远，佳讲实有、智慧、圆成实性的妙有。若有一物不知，便不能成为觉慧周遍的菩萨。
English: The doctrines of the nine sects were established in order to enlighten worldly people. The names of the sects differ from each other; Confucians do not learn these theories, and there is no harm to Confucianism. Buddha's wisdom is profound and far-reaching, and it is better to speak of reality, wisdom, and the wonder of roundness of reality. If you do not know something, you cannot become a Bodhisattva of awareness and wisdom.

古文：若夫神道应现之力，感会变化之奇，不可思议，难用言象。
现代文：至于佛法与现实相感应的力量之神妙，变化之奇幻，是小叮思议的，难以用语言描绘表达出来。
English: As for the miraculousness of the power of the Dharma to resonate with reality, the wonder of change, it is inconceivable and difficult to describe in words.

古文：而诸张米道，符水先验，相传师法，祖自伯阳。
现代文：而诸家张氏的五斗米道教，讲究的是丹书符录的事先征验，道法来自师传，其祖宗便是伯阳。
English: However, the Wudoumei Taoism of the Zhang family emphasizes the prior examination of the Dan Shu Fu Lu. The Taoism comes from the teacher, and its ancestor is Boyang.

古文：世情去就，有此二学，僧尼道士，矛盾相非。
现代文：世俗人情的信仰去就，便是佛教或道教。僧尼和道士，互相非难、攻击。
English: When the secular, humanistic faith falls short, it is Buddhism or Taoism. Monks and nuns and Taoists blame and attack each other.

古文：非唯重道，兼亦殉利。
现代文：这不仅仅是尊崇教义，同时也是不顾一切地去求利。
English: It's not just about honoring doctrine, it's also about pursuing profit at all costs.

古文：详寻两教，理归一极。
现代文：审慎查考佛道两教，其教理归结于同一极致。
English: A careful examination of the two teachings of Buddhism reveals that their doctrines boil down to the same ultimate.

古文：但迹有左右，故教成先后。
现代文：但行迹有不同，所以成教有先后。
English: However, everyone's path is different, so there is a sequence to becoming a teacher.

古文：广略为言，自生优劣。
现代文：大略而言，其优劣都是由教义本身产生出来的。
English: Broadly speaking, its merits and demerits are generated by the doctrine itself.

古文：道本虚无，非由学至，绝圣弃智，已成有为。
现代文：道的根本在于虚无逭不是通过学习能够达到的。但绝圣弃智，这种作法已经是有所为了。
English: The fundamental principle of the Tao is that nothingness cannot be achieved through learning. However, this practice of abandoning wisdom has a purpose.

古文：有为之无，终非道本。
现代文：有所为的虚无境界，终究不是道的根本。
English: After all, the realm of nothingness is not the foundation of the Way.

古文：若使本末同无，曾何等级。
现代文：假如本与末都同是 无 ，那么有什么等级的分别?
English: If the beginning and the end are both nothing, then what is the difference in rank?

古文：佛则不然，具缚为种，转暗成明，梯愚入圣。
现代文：佛教则非如此。它以各种戒律束缚去培养人们，使愚暗者转向光明，依照一定的阶梯次序而逐渐步入圣殿。
English: This is not the case with Buddhism, which cultivates people with all kinds of precepts and restrictions, so that the dim-witted turn to the light and gradually enter the temple according to a certain order of steps.

古文：途虽远而可践，业虽旷而有期。
现代文：路途虽远而可以逐步实践，功业虽然旷远而总有实现的期限。
English: Although the road is long, it can be gradually practiced, and although the work is long, there is always a deadline for realization.

古文：劝慕之道，物我无隔。
现代文：劝人向善的道义，对于物我都是一样的，没有差别。
English: The morality of exhorting people to do good is the same for all things, there is no difference.

古文：而局情浅智，鲜能胜受。
现代文：而心智短浅的人，很少能够胜任的。
English: And short-sighted people are rarely competent.

古文：世途揆度，因果二门。
现代文：世途的度量，全在因果二类。
English: The measurement of one's life path is all in the second category of cause and effect.

古文：鸡鸣为善，未必余庆；脍肉东陵，曾无厄祸。
现代文：鶸叫便早起为善，未必能够泽及后人；在东陵吃肉享乐，也未必就有灾祸。
English: If you wake up early, you will be good, but you may not be able to benefit future generations; if you eat meat and enjoy yourself in Dongling, you may not have a disaster.

古文：身才高妙，郁滞而靡达；器思庸卤，富厚以终生。
现代文：才能高妙者，也会因为郁结不通而不能达道；而心智平庸粗鲁之辈，也可能终生富裕丰厚。
English: Those with high talents will not be able to reach the Tao because they are not well-versed; while those with mediocre and rude minds may also be rich and prosperous throughout their lives.

古文：忠反见遗，诡乃获用。
现代文：忠贞之人反被遗弃；诡谲之人，却获得福运。
English: Those who are loyal are abandoned; those who are treacherous are blessed.

古文：观此而论，近无罪福，而业有不定，著自经文，三报开宗，斯疑顿晓。
现代文：由此看来，接近佛教不一定有祸有福，因为人们的身、口、意三方的行为是不确定的。经文上已说得很明显，开宗明义，人有现报、生报、后报等三报，所以上述的疑惑便顿时能够解开。
English: From this point of view, it is not necessarily a blessing or a curse to be close to Buddhism, because the behavior of people's body, mouth, and mind is uncertain. It has been clearly stated in the scriptures that the beginning is clear, and people have present, past, and future, so the above-mentioned doubts can be solved immediately.

古文：史臣服膺释氏，深信冥缘，谓斯道之莫贵也。
现代文：史臣衷心信服释迦之教，深信冥冥中的因缘，认为没有比佛教更可贵的。
English: Shichen wholeheartedly believes in the teachings of Sakyamuni Buddha, is convinced of the hidden causes and conditions, and believes that nothing is more precious than Buddhism.

古文：赞曰：含贞抱朴，履道敦学。
现代文：赞曰：含蕴贞正怀抱素朴，这是诚笃地学习和实行道教教义。
English: Zang said: "It is the sincere study and practice of Taoist teachings that embody sincerity and simplicity.

古文：惟兹潜隐，弃鳞养角。
现代文：衹有这佛教有如潜渊幽处的真龙，要抛弃鱼鳞而培养龙角。
English: In other words, Buddhism is like a real dragon in the seclusion of the abyss. It is necessary to abandon the fish scales and cultivate the dragon horns.

