古文：且臣虽伤甚，幸不至死，请勿治。 帝尤贤之。
现代文：别里古台，烈祖也速该第五子，太祖之四弟。
English: Apart from Gutai, the fifth son of the great ancestor, the fourth brother of the great ancestor.

古文：当创业之初，征取诸国，王未尝不在军中，摧锋陷阵，不避艰险。
现代文：天性纯厚，聪明多谋，身体魁伟，勇力过人。自幼就随太祖平定蒙古诸部落，冲锋陷阵，不怕艰险。
English: Pure by nature, clever and resourceful, with a great physique and great courage. From a young age, he followed his great-grandfather in subduing the Mongolian tribes, charging into battle and not fearing hardship and danger.

古文：口温不花，领兵河南，屡建大功，子曰灭里吉台、瓮吉剌台。
现代文：太祖说： 有别里古台之力、哈撒儿之射，这就是我取天下所依恃的力量。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "There is the power of the ancient table and the shooting of the Hassar, which is the power that I have taken from the world.

古文：术赤
现代文：赐别里古台蒙古百姓三千户及广宁路、恩州二城百姓一万一千六百零三户，又以斡难河与怯鲁连河间地方为其封地。
English: He gave away 3,000 households of Mongolian people in Liguotai and 11,603 households of people in Guangning Road and Ercheng, Enzhou, as well as the area between the Erdan River and Zhululian River as his fief.

古文：术赤者，太祖长子也。
现代文：平定江南后又加赐信州路及铅山州二城百姓一万八千户。
English: After the southern part of the Yangtze River was pacified, an additional 18,000 households in Shinshu Road and Lead Mountain State Second City were given.

古文：国初，以亲王分封西北。
现代文：术赤为太祖长子，国初，作为亲王分封于西北。
English: Zhuchao was the eldest son of the great-grandfather, and at the beginning of the country, he was assigned to the northwest as a prince.

古文：其地极远，去京师数万里，驿骑急行二百余日，方达京师，以故其地郡邑风俗皆莫得而详焉。
现代文：其地极远，离京师数万里，驿站马匹需急行二百余日方能至京师。因此，对该地的风俗民情均不能详细了解。
English: The place is very far away, tens of thousands of miles away from Beijing Division, and the horses of the post station need to travel more than 200 days to reach Beijing Division. Therefore, the customs and folk customs of the place cannot be understood in detail.

古文：术赤薨，子拔都嗣。
现代文：术赤死，由其子拔都继承王爵。
English: Juchao died, and his son Badu inherited the title of prince.

古文：拔都薨，弟撒里答嗣。
现代文：拔都死，由其弟撒里答继承。
English: Batu died and was succeeded by his brother Sarita.

古文：撒里答薨，弟忙哥帖木儿嗣。
现代文：撒里答死，其弟忙哥帖木儿继承。
English: When Sarri died, his younger brother, Busy's brother, Timur, took over.

古文：忙哥帖木儿薨，弟脱脱忙哥嗣。
现代文：忙哥帖木儿死，其弟脱脱忙哥继承。
English: Busy Brother Timur Dies, His Brother Takes Over From Busy Brother

古文：脱脱忙哥薨，弟脱脱嗣。
现代文：脱脱忙哥死，弟脱脱继承。
English: If the elder brother dies, the younger brother inherits.

古文：脱脱薨，弟伯忽嗣。
现代文：脱脱死，弟伯忽继承。
English: After his death, his brother-in-law succeeded him.

古文：至元二年，月即别遣使来求分地岁赐，以赈给军站，京师元无所领府治。三年，中书请置总管府，给正三品印。
现代文：伯忽死，弟月即别继承。至元二年，月即别遣使来京请求分地和岁赐以赈济军站。三年，中书请为月即别置总管府，给正三品印。
English: He died suddenly, and his younger brother Tsukiji succeeded him. In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Tsukiji sent an envoy to Beijing to request the allocation of land and the year to support the military station. In the third year, in Chinese characters, please set up the headquarters for Tsukiji, and give the official third seal.

古文：至大元年，月即别薨，子札尼别嗣。其位下旧赐平阳、晋州、永州分地，岁赋中统钞二千四百锭，自至元五年己卯岁始给之。
现代文：至大元年，月即别死，子札尼别继承，赐平阳、晋州、永州为分地，及岁赋中统钞二千四百锭，然而自至元五年始给予。
English: In the first year of the Taisho era, he died in the same month, but his son Zani did not succeed him, and he gave Pingyang, Jinzhou, and Yongzhou as part of the land, and the year-end allowance was 2400 baht, but it was given from the beginning of the first year of the Taisho era.

古文：秃剌秃剌，太祖次子察合台四世孙也。
现代文：秃剌，太祖次子察合台四世孙。
English: Vulture, the fourth generation of Chagatai's great-grandfather's second son.

古文：少以勇力闻。
现代文：年少时以勇力闻名。
English: He was known for his bravery as a young boy.

古文：大德十一年春，成宗崩，左丞相阿忽台等潜谋立安西王阿难答，而推皇后伯岳吾氏称制，中外汹汹。
现代文：大德十一年春，成宗崩，左丞相阿忽台等潜谋立安西王阿难答为帝，而拥皇后伯岳吾氏代理朝政，于是朝野议论纷纷，人心不定。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year of the reign of Emperor Dezong, Chengzong passed away, and the left chancellor, Ahutai, and others plotted to make the Anxi king, Ananda, emperor, while the queen, Bo Yuego, acted as regent of the imperial court. As a result, there were many discussions between the imperial court and the people, and people's minds were unsettled.

古文：仁宗归自怀孟，引秃剌入内，缚阿忽台等以出，诛之，大事遂定。
现代文：仁宗自怀孟回归京师，引秃剌入宫，逮捕阿忽台等斩首示众，局势才稳定下来。
English: The situation stabilized only after Nanzong returned to Beijing from Huai Meng, brought the vulture into the palace, arrested and beheaded Ahkutai, and so on.

古文：武宗即位，第功，封越王，锡金印，以绍兴路为其分地。
现代文：武宗即位，论功封秃剌为越王，赐金印，以绍兴路为其封地。
English: Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, conferred the honorary title of "King of Yue" on Zheng Qi, and gave him the golden seal, with Shaoxing Road as his fief.

古文：秃剌居常怏怏，有怨望意。
现代文：然秃剌常怏怏不乐，怀有怨心。
English: But vultures are often unhappy and resentful.

古文：至大元年秋，武宗幸凉亭，将御舟，秃剌前止之。
现代文：至大元年秋，武宗车驾至凉亭，将乘舟，秃剌上前阻止。
English: By the autumn of the first year of the Taisho era, Emperor Wu's car drove to the pavilion, and he took a boat to prevent the vultures from coming forward.

古文：帝曰： 尔何如？朕欲登舟。 
现代文：武宗问道： 你要干什么？朕要乘舟。 
English: Wu Zong asked: What do you want to do? I want to take a boat.

古文：秃剌曰： 人有常言：一箭中麋，毋曰自能；百兔未得，未可遽止。 
现代文：秃剌曰： 常言说，一箭射中麋鹿，不可自认为能射；未猎得百兔，不可就此罢休。 
English: The vulture said: As the saying goes, if you shoot a deer with one arrow, don't think you can shoot it; if you haven't hunted a hundred rabbits, don't give up.

古文：此盖国俗侪辈相靳之语，而秃剌言之，武宗由是衔焉。
现代文：这是蒙古族同辈人相互讥笑的话，而秃剌说这话，使武宗怀恨于心。
English: These are the words of Mongolian contemporaries mocking each other, and the vultures said this, which made the Emperor hold a grudge.

古文：既而大宴万岁山，秃剌醉起，解其腰带掷诸地，嗔目谓帝曰： 尔与我者，止此尔！ 
现代文：不久，皇帝大宴于万岁山，秃剌大醉，起身将腰带解下来掷于地，怒目对武宗说： 你与我不过如此！ 
English: Not long after, the emperor held a grand banquet on Mount Wanzhou, and the vulture got very drunk. He got up, unbuckled his belt and threw it to the ground. Angrily, he said to Wuzong, "You and I are no different!

古文：帝益疑其有异志。
现代文：帝更怀疑他别有用心，图谋不轨。
English: The emperor even suspected that he had ulterior motives and was scheming.

古文：二年春，命楚王牙忽都、丞相脱脱、平章赤因铁木儿鞫之，辞服，遂伏诛。
现代文：至大二年春，命楚王牙忽都、丞相脱脱、平章赤因铁木儿共同审问，秃剌服罪，予以处死。
English: In the spring of the second year of his sophomore year, he ordered that Chu Wangya Kudu, Josho Dechu, and Pingzhang Aka be jointly interrogated for Tiemu'er, and Zheng Ya was found guilty and executed.

古文：子西安王阿剌忒纳失里，天历初以推戴功，进封豫王。
现代文：其子西安王阿剌忒纳失里，天历初以拥戴文宗即位之功而进封豫王。
English: His son, Xi'an's King Ajna, lost his way, and at the beginning of the calendar, he ascended to the throne of Henan as a result of his support for Emperor Wenzong's accession.

古文：牙忽都牙忽都，祖父拨绰，睿宗庶子也。拨绰之母曰马一实，乃马真氏。
现代文：牙忽都，祖名拨绰，睿宗之妃所生。拨绰之母名马一实，姓乃马真氏。
English: The ancestral name of Dakuku was Tsukuda, and he was born to the wife of Ruizong. Tsukuda's mother's name was Ma Yicheng, and her surname was Ma Zhen.

古文：拨绰骁勇善骑射，宪宗命将大军，北征钦察有功，赐号拔都。
现代文：拨绰骁勇善骑射，宪宗任命他为大将军，因北征钦察有功，赐号拨都。
English: Zi Zhuo was brave and good at riding and shooting. He was appointed as a great general by Emperor Xianzong. He was given the title of Zi Zhuo because he had distinguished himself in the Northern Expedition.

古文：岁丁巳，分土诸侯王，赐蠡州三千三百四十七户，为其食邑。拨绰娶察浑灭儿乞氏，生薛必烈杰儿。
现代文：宪宗七年分土地与诸王侯，赐蠡州三千三百四十户与他。拨绰娶察浑灭儿乞氏，生薛必烈杰儿。
English: In the seventh year of his reign, Emperor Xianzong divided the land among the princes and granted 3,340 households in Zhangzhou to him. He chose Zizhe to marry Chahun Zhi'er Kishi, who gave birth to Xue Birejie.

古文：薛必烈杰儿娶弘吉剌氏，生牙忽都。
现代文：薛必烈杰儿娶弘吉剌氏，生牙忽都。
English: Xue Bili Rongjie married a member of the Hongjitai clan, and gave birth to Fang Huadu.

古文：牙忽都年十三，世祖命袭其祖父统军。
现代文：牙忽都年十三岁，世祖命承袭其祖父之职统领大军。
English: At the age of thirteen, the great-grandfather was ordered to succeed his grandfather as the leader of the army.

古文：至元十二年，从北安王北征。
现代文：至元十二年，从北安王北征。
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he went on the Northern Expedition from Beian Wang.

古文：十三年，失列吉叛，遣人诱胁之，牙忽都不从，事王益忠谨。
现代文：十三年，失列吉叛，遣人对牙忽都利诱和威胁，牙忽都不为所动，而对北安王更加忠心耿耿。
English: In the thirteenth year, after losing the rebellion, the envoys tried to entice and threaten Fang Ku, but Fang Ku was not moved, but was more loyal to the King of Bei'an.

古文：八鲁浑拔都儿、粘闿与海都通，相率引去，王遣牙忽都将兵追之，擒八鲁浑等以献。
现代文：八鲁浑拔都儿、粘与海都暗中勾结，相率引所部而去。北安王遣牙忽都将兵追赶，擒八鲁浑等献与北安王。
English: Hachiharu and Hakuin secretly colluded with Hakuin, Kishi and Hakuin, and together they led Hakuin's army away. Hakuin's army was soon chased away by Hakuin's army, and Hakuin and Hakuin were sacrificed to Hakuin.

古文：未几，失列吉、约木忽儿、脱帖木儿等反，以兵攻王。
现代文：不久，失列吉、约木忽儿、脱帖木儿等反，连兵攻北安王。
English: Not long after, after losing Lekji, Jokkuro, and Dechengmuro, the company attacked Beianwang.

古文：脱帖木儿生致牙忽都，使失列吉拘系之。
现代文：脱帖木儿生俘牙忽都，交失列吉关押。
English: De Timur was captured alive and imprisoned in Lehi.

古文：牙忽都与王亲臣那台等谋逃归，事觉，那台等被杀，复系牙忽都，困辱备至。
现代文：牙忽都与北安王亲臣那台等谋划逃归，被发觉，那台等被杀，对牙忽都多方侮辱。
English: Dahuodu plotted an escape with King Bei'an's relatives and retainers, and was found out. Dahuodu was killed, and Dahuodu was insulted in many ways.

古文：十四年，兀鲁兀台、伯颜帅师讨叛，失列吉、约木忽儿迎战，牙忽都潜结赤斤帖木儿、秃秃哈乱其阵。
现代文：十四年，兀鲁兀台、伯颜率师讨伐叛军，叛军失列吉、约木忽儿迎战。牙忽都暗与赤斤帖木儿、秃秃哈联合，扰乱叛军后营。
English: In the 14th year, Lu Xuntai and Bo Yan led the division to fight against the rebel army. The rebel army lost the battle, and Yimhuku'er fought against it. Yimhuku'er allied with Chakkin Timur and Bald Bald Ha to disrupt the rear camp of the rebel army.

古文：失列吉军乱，因得脱走。
现代文：失列吉军大乱，牙忽都等得以逃回。
English: Due to the chaos caused by the defeat of the Lezhi army, the capital was able to escape.

古文：见帝，须发尽白。
现代文：朝见世祖时已是须发尽白。
English: When he saw his ancestor in the morning, his hair was completely white.

古文：帝闵之，赏赉甚厚。
现代文：世祖多加勉励，重予奖赏。
English: The ancestor gave more encouragement and re-awarded the prize.

古文：至元十八年，加封耒阳州五千三百四十七户。
现代文：至元十八年加封耒阳州五千三百四十七户。
English: In the 18th year of the Yuan Dynasty, 5,347 households were added to Fenyang Prefecture.

古文：二十一年，命与秃秃哈同讨海都，牙忽都先进，逻得谍人，知其虚实，直前冲敌阵，破其精兵，海都败走，得所俘掠军民而还。
现代文：至元二十一年，牙忽都受命与秃秃哈共同讨伐海都。牙忽都先进，俘获敌军侦探，从而知敌军虚实，挥军向前，击破敌军精兵阵营，海都败走，得所俘掠军民而还。
English: In the 21st year of the Yuan Dynasty, Dahuodu was ordered to jointly fight Haidu with Bald Baldha. Dahuodu advanced, captured the enemy's detective, thus knowing the enemy's true and false, waved the army forward, broke the enemy's elite army camp, Haidu was defeated, and the captured soldiers and civilians returned.

古文：朵儿朵哈上其功，诏赐钞币、铠甲、弓矢。
现代文：朵儿朵哈上报牙忽都军功，诏赐钞币、铠甲、弓矢等。
English: The emperor awarded money, armor, bows and arrows, and so on.

古文：其后北安王驻帖木儿河。
现代文：其后，北安王军进驻帖木儿河。
English: After that, the King's Army of Northern An marched into the Timur River.

古文：乃颜、也不坚有异图，也不坚引兵趋怯绿怜河大帐。
现代文：乃颜、也不坚图谋不轨。也不坚引兵开赴怯绿怜河大帐。
English: Neither Yan nor Yan was determined to plot an evil course, nor was Yan determined to lead the army to go to Qiuyulunlihe.

古文：王遣阔阔出、秃秃哈率众追之。
现代文：北安王遣阔阔出、秃秃哈率众追之。
English: King Bei'an sent out his troops in a broad front, and Bald Bald Ha led the crowd in pursuit.

古文：那怀之民扰攘不知所从。
现代文：那怀之民深受扰攘，不知所从。
English: The people of Nahua are deeply disturbed and do not know what to do.

古文：牙忽都将三百骑，进至阿赤怯地。
现代文：牙忽都领三百骑兵进至阿赤怯地方。
English: Dagon led three hundred horsemen into the land of Achaea.

古文：会王帐下逊笃思部兵逃去，牙忽都谕之使还。
现代文：恰逢北安王帐下之逊笃思部的兵潜逃，牙忽都将他们召还。
English: It coincided with the absconding of the soldiers under the account of the King of Northern An, and they were all recalled at once.

古文：时怯必秃忽儿霍台诱蒙古军二万从乃颜，牙忽都知之，夜袭其河上军，突入帐中，遇忽都灭儿坚，几获之，间道逸去。
现代文：当时又有怯必秃忽儿霍台引诱蒙古军二万人归从于乃颜。牙忽都知道后，夜袭之，突入帐中，忽都灭儿坚从偏僻小道逃走。
English: At that time, there was also the timid Baldur Hotei, who lured 20,000 Mongolian troops to Naien. After everyone knew about it, the night attack broke into the account, and Baldur fled from the remote path.

古文：二十七年，海都入寇。
现代文：至元二十七年，海都入寇。
English: In the 27th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Haidu was invaded.

古文：时朵儿哈方居守大帐，诏遣牙忽都同力备御。
现代文：当时，朵儿朵哈方居守大本营，世祖命牙忽都同心协力防御。
English: At that time, the Dong Er Dong Ha side was guarding the base camp, and the world ancestors were all working together to defend it.

古文：军未战而溃，牙忽都妻帑辎重驻不思哈剌岭上，悉为药木忽儿、明理帖木儿所掠。
现代文：敌军至，元军未战而溃，牙忽都之妻室儿女以及辎重均在不思哈剌岭上，悉为药木忽儿、明理帖木儿所掠。
English: When the enemy army arrived, the Yuan army was defeated without a fight, and the wives, children, and baggage of the wives, children, and baggage of the wives, children, and baggage of the wives, children, and baggage of the wives, children, and baggage of the wives, children, and baggage of the wives, children and baggage of the wives and children of the wives and children of the wives and baggage of the wives and children of the wives and children of the wives and baggage of the wives and children of the wives and children of the wives and baggage of the wives and children of the wives and baggage of the wives and children of the wives and children of the wives and baggage of the wives and children of the wives

古文：牙忽都与其子脱列帖木儿相失，独与十三骑奔还。
现代文：牙忽都与其子脱列帖木儿离散，独率十三骑奔还京师。
English: Zhakudo and his son separated from Timur, and led the thirteen horsemen back to the capital.

古文：世祖抚慰嘉叹，赐爵镇远王，涂金银印，以弘吉剌氏女赐之，资装特厚。
现代文：世祖倍加抚慰，赐爵镇远王，授涂金银印，以弘吉剌氏女为妻。
English: The ancestor was greatly comforted and granted a title of nobility to King Zhenyuan, a gold and silver seal, and a daughter of the Hongji family as his wife.

古文：复命纳里忽、彻彻不花往锡命其部属同时被剽掠者，以故相桑哥家财分赐之，仍各赐白金五十两、珠子一酒扈，钞币称是。又命牙忽都居北安王第二帐。
现代文：又命纳里忽、彻彻不花以故相桑哥家财分赐予牙忽都部属之被劫掠者白金、珠子、钞币。又命牙忽都居北安王第二帐。王死，命牙忽都掌管大帐。
English: He also ordered that Zangge's family's wealth should be given to the victims of the looting, who belonged to Zangge's subordinates, in the form of platinum, beads, and banknotes. Zangge also ordered that Zangge should keep the second account of King Bei'an. When the king died, Zangge was in charge of the big account.

古文：王薨，帝命掌大帐，固辞。成宗立，命牙忽都常侍左右。
现代文：牙忽都力辞不受。成宗即位，命牙忽都常在左右侍奉。
English: Emperor Chengzong ascended the throne, and Empress Dowager Cangdu often served on his right and left.

古文：武宗抚兵漠北，请以子脱列帖木儿从。
现代文：成宗崩，安西王阿难答与明理帖木儿企图夺取帝位。
English: Chengzong passed away, and Anxi King Ananda and Mingli Timur attempted to seize the imperial throne.

古文：至大三年，察八儿来归，宗亲皆会。
现代文：其子脱列帖木儿承袭其父爵位封为镇远王。至大三年，叛王察八儿来归。
English: His son, the renegade Timur, inherited his father's title and was crowned King Zhenyuan. When he was three years old, the renegade Chahal returned.

古文：牙忽都进曰： 太祖皇帝削平四方，惟南土未定，列圣嗣位，未遑统一。
现代文：牙忽都奏陈皇帝曰 ：太祖皇帝削平四方势力，唯南方尚未平定，其后历代皇帝也未及完成统一大业。
English: Emperor Chen said: The great-great-grandfather emperor leveled the four powers, but the south has not been pacified, and subsequent emperors have not been able to complete the great cause of unification.

古文：世祖皇帝混一四海，顾惟宗室诸王，弗克同堂而燕。
现代文：世祖皇帝虽一统天下，但宗室诸王也未曾聚集一堂欢宴。
English: Although the ancestral emperor ruled the world, the royal families never gathered for a banquet.

古文：今陛下洪福齐天，拔都罕之裔，首已附顺，叛王察八儿举族来归，人民境土，悉为一家。
现代文：今陛下洪福齐天，拔都罕后裔首先归顺，叛王察八儿也率全族来归，人民境土合为一家。
English: Now, His Majesty Hong Fu Qi Tian, the descendants of Badukhan are the first to surrender, the traitor Chabal also led the whole family to return, and the people's territory is united as one family.

古文：地大物众，有可恃者焉，有不可恃者焉。
现代文：国家虽地大物博，然而有可依恃者，亦有不可依恃的方面。
English: Although the country is vast, there are aspects that can be embraced and aspects that cannot.

古文：昔我太祖有训，世祖诵之，臣与有闻，治乱国者，宜以法齐之，所以辨上下，定民志。
现代文：昔我太祖的训戒，世祖曾向我们宣读过，臣亦闻之。把一个纷扰多年各自为政的国家治好，应依赖于法制，以明上下之分，统一人民的思想。
English: Long ago, my great-grandfather's precepts were read to us by our forefathers, and they were also heard by me. In order to heal a country that has been divided for many years, it is necessary to rely on the legal system to unify the people's thoughts by clarifying the differences between the upper and lower classes.

古文：今请有以氏整饬之，则人将有所劝惩，惟陛下鉴之。 
现代文：今切望陛下加以整顿，则人民明白勉励什么，反对什么。望陛下明察。 
English: Now that His Majesty is eager to rectify the situation, the people know what to encourage and what to oppose. Let His Majesty see clearly.

古文：泰定三年，封威顺王，镇武昌，赐金印，拨付怯薛丹五百名，又自募至一千名。设王传官属。
现代文：武宗闻之甚加赞许，并加采纳。牙忽都死后，仁宗命其子脱列帖木儿继承楚王爵位。脱列帖木儿死，子八都儿继王爵。八都儿死，其子燕帖木儿嗣王爵，时年仅十二岁。宽彻普化，世祖之孙，镇南王脱欢之子，泰定三年封为威顺王，镇守武昌，赐金印，拨付怯薛丹五百名，又自募至一千人。
English: Wu Zongwen's report was highly praised and adopted. After the death of Jia Kudu, Rinzong ordered his son to de-list Timur to inherit the title of the king of Chu. After the death of Timur, his son Hachidu succeeded to the title of the king. After the death of Hachudu, his son Yan Timur succeeded to the title of the king, when he was only twelve years old. Kuan Che Puhua, the grandson of the ancestor, the son of the king of Zhenan, Taiding, was named the king of Weishun for three years, the town guard of Wuchang, and was given a gold seal. He allocated

古文：湖广行省供亿钱粮衣装，岁支米三万石，钱三万二千锭，又日给王子诸妃饮膳。
现代文：湖广行省供给钱粮衣装，每年支米三万石、钱三万二千锭。还要供给其王子诸妃膳食。
English: The province of Hubei and Guangxi supplies money, grain and clothing, 30,000 kilos of rice and 32,000 yuan of money every year. It also supplies its princes and princesses with meals.

古文：文宗天历初，赐宽彻普化金银各五十两、币三十匹，仍镇湖广，而宽彻普化纵怯薛等官侵夺民利，民颇患苦之。
现代文：文宗天历初年，赐宽彻普化金银各五十两，帛三十匹，仍令他镇守湖广，而宽彻普化却纵使怯薛等官侵夺民利，人民苦不堪言。
English: In the first year of the Wenzong calendar, he gave Quan Che Pu Hua 50 taels of silver and 50 taels of gold, and 30 horses, and still ordered him to guard the lake. However, Quan Che Pu Hua, despite the fact that officials such as Qiu Xue encroached on the people's interests, made the people suffer terribly.

古文：至元五年，太师伯颜矫制召赴京，贬之。
现代文：至元五年，太师伯颜假传圣旨，召宽彻普化赴京，贬其官职。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Grand Master Boyan falsified the transmission of the holy will, summoned Kuan Chepuk to Beijing, and was demoted from his official position.

古文：及脱脱为相，始明其无辜，命复还镇。
现代文：脱脱为相，始昭雪其冤，命复镇湖广。
English: As a result, his wrongdoing was cleared up, and his life was restored to the town of Hukang.

古文：至正二年，湖北廉访司纠言，宽彻普化恃以宗室，恣行不法。
现代文：至正二年，湖北廉访司弹劾宽彻普化恃宗室之势，恣意横行，违法乱纪。
English: By the second year of the year, the Hubei Lianhuizi impeached the influence of the widower's family, arbitrarily rampant, illegal and undisciplined.

古文：不报。
现代文：但丞相脱脱不上报顺帝。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：十一年，徐寿辉为乱，起蕲、黄，宽彻普化与其子别帖木儿、答帖木儿引兵至金刚台，寿辉部将倪文俊败之，执别帖木儿。
现代文：至正十一年，徐寿辉在蕲州、黄州起义，宽彻普化与其子别帖木儿、答帖木儿引兵至金刚台，寿辉部将倪文俊大败元军，俘虏别帖木儿。
English: In the eleventh year of the Zheng He year, Xu Shouhui led an uprising in Zhangzhou and Huangzhou, and Guangcher Puhua and his sons, Bie Timur and Bie Timur, led troops to the Diamond Plateau. The Shouhui commander, Ni Wenjun, defeated the Yuan army and captured Bie Timur.

古文：十二年，寿辉伪将邹普胜陷武昌，宽彻普化与湖广行省平章和尚弃城走，诏追夺宽彻普化印，而诛和尚。
现代文：十二年，寿辉部将邹普胜攻陷武昌，宽彻普化与湖广行省平章和尚弃城而逃，顺帝诏令追夺宽彻普化印，诛和尚。
English: In the twelfth year, the Shouhui Department invaded Wuchang with the victory of Yan Puxing, and Pingzhang Monk of Guangche and Guangxing Province abandoned the city and fled, and Shun the Emperor's edict to pursue the victory of Yan Puxing and Yan Monk.

古文：十三年，湖广行省参知政事阿鲁辉克复武昌及汉阳。
现代文：十三年，湖广行省参知政事阿鲁辉克复武昌及汉阳。
English: In the thirteenth year, the governor of Hubei Province, Aru Huike, returned to Wuchang and Hanyang.

古文：宽彻普化复率领王子并本部怯薛丹，屡讨贼立功。
现代文：宽彻普化率领五子及本部怯薛丹多次讨伐起义军而立功。
English: The five sons of the general Kuangcher and the head of the headquarters, Qiu Xuedan, repeatedly fought against the insurgents and made great achievements.

古文：十四年，诏宽彻普化复镇武昌，还其印。
现代文：十四年，诏宽彻普化复镇守武昌并还其官印。
English: In the 14th year, the imperial edict was issued to restore the town guard of Wuchang and return its official seal.

古文：十六年，命宽彻普化与宣让王帖木儿不花以兵镇遏怀庆，各赐黄金一锭、白金五锭、币帛九匹、钞二十锭。
现代文：至正十六年，命宽彻普化与宣让王帖木儿不花镇守怀庆，各赐黄金一锭、白金五锭、帛九匹、钞二十锭。
English: In the 16th year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, the generalization of life and the announcement that Wang Tiemu'er would not spend the town guarding Huaiqing, each gave a gold ingot, platinum five ingots, nine ingots, and twenty banknotes.

古文：未几，复还武昌，命其子报恩奴、接待奴、佛家奴以大船四十余只水陆并进，至沔阳攻徐寿辉伪将倪文俊，且载妃妾以行。
现代文：不久，宽彻普化又还镇武昌，命其子报恩奴、接待奴、佛家奴率大船四十余只水陆并进，且载妃妾同行，向沔阳进发，攻徐寿辉部将倪文俊。
English: Not long after, Guangcher Puhua also went to Wuchang, and ordered his son to repay the favor, the reception slave, and the Buddhist slave to lead more than forty large ships to sail along the land and sea, and to carry the concubine to go to Fenyang and attack the Xu Shouhui captain Ni Wenjun.

古文：兵至汉川县鸡鸣汊，水浅船阁，不能行，文俊以火筏尽焚其船，接待奴、佛家奴皆遇害，而报恩奴自死，妃妾皆陷，宽彻普化走陕西。
现代文：行至汉川县鸡鸣汊，船搁浅，文俊以火攻，尽焚其船，接待奴、佛家奴皆死，报恩奴亦自尽，妃妾皆被俘，宽彻普化逃往陕西。
English: He went to Qinmingtao in Hanchuan County, the ship ran aground, Wenjun attacked with fire and burned his ship to the ground, the reception slaves and the Buddhist slaves all died, the reward slaves also committed suicide, the concubines were all captured, and the general fled to Shaanxi.

古文：二十八年，顺帝将北奔，诏淮王帖木儿不花监国，而以和尚佐之，及京城将破，即先遁，不知所之。
现代文：至正二十八年，顺帝在起义军威逼下北奔，诏淮王帖木儿不花留守京都掌管国事，以和尚为辅佐大臣。起义军围攻京都，和尚潜逃，不知去向。
English: In the 28th year of the Heian period, Emperor Shun was forced to flee to the north by the rebel army. Emperor Huai and King Timur stayed in Kyoto to take charge of state affairs, with the monk as an assistant minister. The rebel army besieged Kyoto, and the monk absconded, not knowing where to go.

古文：帖木儿不花帖木儿不花，世祖孙，镇南王脱欢第四子也。
现代文：帖木儿不花，世祖孙，镇南王脱欢第四子。
English: Timur, the fourth son of Zhenan Wang Deguan, is a great-great-grandson.

古文：初，世祖第九子脱欢以讨安南无成功，终身不许见，遂封镇南王，出镇扬州。
现代文：起初，世祖第九子脱欢因讨安南无功而令终身不许进见皇上，封为镇南王，出镇扬州。
English: At the beginning, the ninth son of the founder of the dynasty was deprived of the pleasure of seeing the emperor for the rest of his life due to his ineffectual efforts to persuade Annan, and he was named the king of Zhenan and exiled to Yangzhou.

古文：脱欢薨，子老章袭封镇南王。
现代文：脱欢死，子老章袭封镇南王。
English: After the death of Du Huan, Zi Lao Zhang attacked and sealed the southern king of the town.

古文：老章薨，弟脱不花袭封镇南王。
现代文：老章死，其弟脱不花袭为镇南王。
English: Old Zhang died, and his younger brother, Du Fuhua, became the king of the south of the town.

古文：脱不花薨，子孛罗不花幼，帖木儿不花乃嗣为镇南王。
现代文：脱不花死，其子孛罗不花尚幼，由其弟帖木儿不花嗣为镇南王。
English: After the death of Zhu Fuxin, his son, Jairo Fuxin, was still young, and his brother, Timur Fuxin, became the king of the south of the town.

古文：文宗天历初，赐帖木儿不花黄金五十两、白金五十两、币三十匹。
现代文：文宗天历初，帝赐帖木儿不花黄金五十两、白金五十两、帛三十匹。
English: At the beginning of the lunar calendar, Emperor Wenzong gave Timur fifty-two pieces of gold, fifty-two pieces of platinum, and thirty donkeys.

古文：二年，孛罗不花已长，帖木儿不花请以其位复还孛罗不花。
现代文：天历二年，孛罗不花已长大成人，帖木儿不花请将镇南王位还予孛罗不花。
English: In the second year of the solar calendar, Dora spent has grown to adulthood, Timur spent please return the throne to Dora spent.

古文：朝廷以其让而不居也，改封宣让王，赐金印，移镇于庐州。
现代文：朝廷允许，改封帖木儿不花为宣让王，赐金印，移镇于庐州。
English: With the permission of the imperial court, Timur was given the title of "King of Concession" and a gold seal, and moved to Zhangzhou.

古文：顺帝至元元年，拨庐州、饶州牧地一百顷赐之。
现代文：顺帝至元元年，拨庐州、饶州牧地一百顷赐予帖木儿不花。
English: From Emperor Shun to the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, a hundred hectares of grazing land in Bozhou and Raozhou were granted to Timur.

古文：二年，赐市宅钱四千锭，命其王府官凡班次列于有司之右。
现代文：二年，赐买房屋钱四千锭，命其王府官员的地位在当地官府官吏之上。
English: Two years later, he gave him 4,000 baht to buy a house and ordered him to raise the status of royal officials above that of local government officials.

古文：五年，伯彦擅权，矫制贬帖木儿不花及威顺王宽彻普化。
现代文：至元五年，伯颜专权，假借圣上名义贬帖木儿不花及威顺王宽彻普化。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Bo Yan was given the exclusive right to use the name of the saint to denigrate Mu Rong and Wai Shun Wang.

古文：至脱脱为相，始言于帝，明此两王者皆无辜，诏令复还镇。
现代文：直到脱脱为相，方以实情奏明于帝，威顺王与宣让王皆无辜，诏令复还原镇。
English: It wasn't until he was no longer a fugitive that Fang reported to the emperor the truth, that both King Weishun and King Xuanzang were innocent, and that the imperial edict was issued to restore the original town.

古文：至正十二年，庐州境内贼起，淮西廉访使陈思谦言于帖木儿不花曰： 王以帝室之胄，镇抚淮甸，岂宜坐视。
现代文：至正十二年，庐州人民起义，淮西廉访使陈思廉对帖木儿不花说 ：你宣让王为皇族，镇抚淮西地区，岂可坐视。
English: In the twelfth year of the Taizhou people's uprising, Chen Siliang visited Huaxi and made Chen Siliang say to Timur, "If you declare Wang to be a member of the royal family and govern the Huaxi region, how can you sit idly by?"

古文：且府中官属及怯薛丹人等数甚多，必有可使摧锋陷阵者，惟王图之。 
现代文：且府中官员及怯薛军人数甚多，其中必有可使摧锋陷阵者，望王决断。 
English: Moreover, the number of officials in the government and the army of the cowardly Xue is very large, among which there must be those who can make the front line collapse, hoping for the king to make a decision.

古文：帖木儿不花大悟其言，曰： 此吾责也。 
现代文：帖木儿不花大悟道 ：此是我的职责所在。 
English: It didn't take long for Timur to understand: This is my job.

古文：即命以所部兵及诸王乞塔歹等，分道击贼，擒其渠帅，庐州境内皆平。
现代文：即命所部兵及诸王乞塔歹等，分路出击，擒义军领袖，庐州境内平息无事。
English: The soldiers of the command post and the kings and queens of the tower immediately ordered the leaders of the rebel army to attack separately, and the territory of Zhangzhou was pacified without incident.

古文：帝闻之，赐金带、银钞，以赏其功。
现代文：顺帝闻知，赐金带银钞，以赏其功。
English: Emperor Shun gave him a gold belt and a silver coin as a reward for his service.

古文：十六年，命帖木儿不花与宽彻普化以兵镇遏怀庆路，赐金银各一锭、币帛九匹、钞二十锭。
现代文：十六年，命帖木儿不花及宽彻普化镇守怀庆路，各赐金银各一锭、帛九匹、钞二十锭。
English: In the 16th year, the Town Guard of Huaiqing Road was reformed to be broad and universal, and each of them was given a gold and silver coin, nine horses, and 20 banknotes.

古文：既而汝、颍之寇南渡淮，帖木儿不花复以便宜，调芍陂屯军拒之。
现代文：不久，汝、颍一带起义军南渡淮水，帖木儿不花根据当时当地形势，自行调芍陂屯军抵御。
English: Not long after, the insurgents in and around Zhouzhuang made their way south to Huai Shui, and according to the local situation at the time, Timur took it upon himself to mobilize the garrison to defend against them.

古文：及庐州不守，乃挈身北归，留京师。
现代文：后庐失守，帖木儿不花只身北归京师。
English: After the defeat, Timur did not waste any time in returning to the capital.

古文：二十七年，进封淮王，赐金印，设王傅等官。
现代文：二十七年，进封为淮王，赐金印，设王傅等官。
English: In the 27th year, he was enthroned as King Huai, given the golden seal, and set up Wang Fu and other officials.

古文：二十八年，大明兵逼京师，顺帝北奔，诏以帖木儿不花监国，而拜庆童中书左丞相辅之。
现代文：二十八年，大明兵逼京师，顺帝北奔，诏令帖木儿不花留京代行朝政，拜庆童为中书左丞相以为辅佐之臣。
English: In the 28th year, the Daiming soldiers forced the Beijing division, Shun the emperor to move north, and ordered Timur to stay in Beijing on behalf of the imperial government, and Bai Qingdong was the vice-minister of the Vice-Minister of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：俄而城破，帖木儿不花死之，年八十三。
现代文：不久城破，帖木儿不花殉国，年八十三岁。
English: Soon the city fell, and Timur died a martyr at the age of eighty-three.

