古文：王敬则，临淮射阳人也。
现代文：王敬则，临淮射阳人。
English: Wang Jing Zi, Lin Huai Yang Zi.

古文：侨居晋陵南沙县。
现代文：侨居在晋陵南沙县。
English: The overseas Chinese live in Jinling, Nansha County.

古文：母爲女巫，常谓人云： 敬则生时胞衣紫色，应得鸣鼓角。 
现代文：母亲是个女巫，常常对别人说： 敬则出生的时候胞衣是紫色的，当时的时辰正好应该吹鸣鼓角。 
English: His mother was a witch, and she often said to others, "When Kei was born, his shirt was purple, and it was the right time to blow the trumpet.

古文：人笑之曰： 汝子得爲人吹角可矣。 
现代文：别人笑她说： 你儿子可以为别人去吹号角。 
English: Others laughed at her and said, "Your son can play the trumpet for others."

古文：敬则年长，而两腋下生乳，各长数寸。
现代文：王敬则渐渐长大，而两个腋窝下面生有乳房，每个都有几寸长。
English: Wang Jing is gradually growing up, and under his two armpits he has breasts, each a few inches long.

古文：梦骑五色师子。
现代文：曾经梦见自己骑着五色的狮子。
English: I once dreamed that I was riding a five-colored lion.

古文：性倜傥不羁，好刀剑，尝与暨阳县吏斗，谓曰： 我若得暨阳县，当鞭汝小吏背。 
现代文：他性格潇洒不羁，喜欢刀剑，曾经和暨阳县的官吏争斗，对他说： 我如果得了暨阳县，一定要鞭打你这个小吏的脊背。 
English: He had a dashing and uninhibited personality and liked swords. He once had a fight with an official from Jiyang County and said to him, "If I win Jiyang County, I'll definitely whip the back of this petty official's neck."

古文：吏唾其面曰： 汝得暨阳县，我亦得司徒公矣。 
现代文：那个官吏唾他的脸说： 你如果得了暨阳县，我也就得到司徒公了。 
English: The official spit in his face and said, "If you get Jiyang County, I'll get Szeto County, too."

古文：屠狗商贩，遍于三吴。
现代文：他杀狗贩卖，走遍了三吴。
English: He killed and sold dogs and traveled all over Sanwu.

古文：使于高丽，与其国女子私通，因不肯还，被收录然后反。
现代文：他曾被派遣到高丽，与高丽国的女子私通，因而不肯回来，结果被收监登录，然后才又返回。
English: He had been sent to Korea to have sexual relations with a Korean woman, but he refused to return, and as a result, he was jailed before he could return.

古文：善拍张，补刀戟左右。
现代文：他善于表演 拍张 杂技，身体左右带上刀戟。
English: He is good at acting, clapping, and acrobatics, and wears a sword around his body.

古文：宋前废帝使敬则跳刀，高出白虎幢五六尺，接无不中。
现代文：宋朝的前废帝让王敬则跳刀，高出白虎幢五六尺，没有接不中的。
English: The former deposed emperor of the Song Dynasty, Wang Jing, jumped with his sword, which was five or six feet higher than the White Tiger Tower, and did not miss.

古文：仍抚髀拍张，甚爲儇捷。
现代文：他频频地手拍大腿，拍张十分轻捷。
English: He frequently slaps his thighs with his hands, and the slapping is very light.

古文：补侠毂队主，领细铠左右，与寿寂之杀前废帝。
现代文：后来补任侠毂队主，率领左右细铠武士，和寿寂之一起杀死了前废帝。
English: Later, he was appointed as the head of the Knight's Guard team, leading the left and right guards, and together with Shoujia he killed the former emperor.

古文：及明帝即位，以爲直合将军，封重安县子。
现代文：等到明帝即位，任命他为直阁将军，封为重安县子。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he appointed him as General Zhiakou and named him the son of Chong'an County.

古文：敬则少时于草中射猎，有虫如乌豆集其身，擿去乃脱，其处皆流血。
现代文：王敬则少年的时候在草中打猎，有很多像黑豆一样的虫子聚集在他的身上，搔去才算摆脱，那些地方都在流血。
English: When Wang Jing was a teenager, he was hunting in the grass. Many black bean-like insects gathered on his body, and he could only get rid of them by scratching. All those places were bleeding.

古文：敬则恶之，诣道士卜，道士曰： 此封侯瑞也。 
现代文：王敬则很厌恶，找了一个道士给占卜，道士说： 这是封侯的祥瑞呀！ 
English: Wang Jing was disgusted and found a Taoist for divination. The Taoist said, "This is Xiang Rui, the feudal lord!"

古文：敬则闻之喜，故出都自效。
现代文：王敬则听了很高兴，所以便外出到京都去效力。
English: Wang Jing was very happy to hear this, so he went out to Kyoto to work.

古文：后补暨阳令，昔日斗吏亡叛，勒令出，遇之甚厚。
现代文：后来补任暨阳县令，从前和他争斗的官吏逃跑了。王敬则勒令他回来，待他十分宽厚。
English: Later, the official who had fought with him before ran away. Wang Jing ordered him to return and treated him very generously.

古文：曰： 我已得暨阳县，汝何时得司徒公邪？ 
现代文：说： 我已经得了暨阳县，你什么时候得司徒公呢？ 
English: He said, "I've already won Ji Yang County, when will you win Stugong County?"

古文：初至暨阳县陆主山下，宗侣十馀船同发，敬则船独不进，乃令弟入水推之，见乌漆棺。
现代文：当年走到暨阳县陆主山下面，在一起的十几条船同时出发，惟独王敬则的船不走，他就让他弟弟下水推船，结果遇到了一口黑漆棺材。
English: When he reached the bottom of Lujushan Mountain in Jiyang County that year, more than a dozen boats set out together at the same time. However, Wang Jingzhe's boat did not leave, so he asked his brother to launch and push the boat. As a result, he encountered a black-painted coffin.

古文：敬则祝云： 若是吉，使船速进，吾富贵当改葬尔。 
现代文：王敬则祷告说： 如果是吉利的话，让船迅速前进，我富贵以后一定重新安葬你。 
English: Wang Jing prayed and said, "If it is auspicious, let the boat move forward quickly. I will surely bury you again when I am rich."

古文：船须臾去，入县收此棺葬之。
现代文：不一会船就向前驶去。这次回到县里以后，他便把棺材收来埋葬。
English: After a while, the boat moved on. This time, after returning to the county, he collected the coffin and buried it.

古文：时军荒后，县有一部劫逃入山中爲人患，敬则遣人致意劫帅使出首，当相申论。
现代文：那时正当兵乱以后，县里有一部分劫寇逃入山中，成为祸患，王敬则派人向劫寇的首领提议，让他出来自首，应该彼此谈判。
English: At that time, after the just war, some robbers in the county fled into the mountains and became a scourge. Wang Jing sent someone to propose to the leader of the robbers that he should come out and surrender, and that they should negotiate with each other.

古文：郭下庙神甚酷烈，百姓信之，敬则引神爲誓，必不相负。
现代文：外城有一座庙里的神十分凶恶，老百姓都很相信，王敬则便向神发誓，说一定不相辜负。
English: There was a very evil god in a temple outside the city. The common people believed in him, and Wang Jing swore to the god that he would live up to his name.

古文：劫帅既出，敬则于庙中设酒会，于坐收缚曰： 吾啓神，若负誓，还神十牛。
现代文：抢劫者的首领出来以后，王敬则在庙中设了酒会，在座位上把他捉住捆绑起来，说： 我曾经向神宣誓，如果背弃了誓言，还给神十头牛。
English: After the leader of the robbers came out, Wang Jing set up a drinking party in the temple, caught him on the seat and tied him up, saying: I once swore to God, if I reneged on the oath, I would give God ten cows.

古文：今不得违誓。 
现代文：现在不能违背了庙神。 
English: You can't go against the temple gods now.

古文：即杀十牛解神，并斩诸劫，百姓悦之。
现代文：于是就杀了十头牛送给庙神，并且斩杀了那些劫寇，老百姓很高兴。
English: So he killed ten cows to give to the temple god, and killed those robbers, and the people were very happy.

古文：元徽二年，随齐高帝拒桂阳贼于新亭，敬则与羽林监陈显达、甯朔将军高道庆乘舸迎战，大破贼水军。
现代文：元徽二年，他随齐高帝在新亭抵御桂阳的贼兵，王敬则和羽林监陈显达、宁朔将军高道庆乘船迎战，大破贼兵的水军。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, he accompanied Emperor Qigong to Xingting to resist the Guiyang pirates, while Wang Jing, Chen Xianda, the overseer of the Hualin, and Gao Daoqing, the general of Ningshuo, went to war on a ship to smash the pirates' navy.

古文：事甯，带南泰山太守、右侠毂主，转越骑校尉、安成王车骑参军。
现代文：事情平息后，他兼任南泰山太守、右侠毂主，转任越骑校尉、安成王车骑参军。
English: After things calmed down, he concurrently served as the governor of the South Taishan Mountain and the right-hand knight, and was transferred to the Yue cavalry captain, and Ancheng Wang rode into the army.

古文：苍梧王狂虐，左右不自安。
现代文：苍梧王狂虐，左右的人不能自安。
English: Cangwu Wang is a maniac. People on both sides can't calm down.

古文：敬则以高帝有威名，归诚奉事，每下直辄往领军府。
现代文：王敬则因为高帝有威名，诚心归顺为他服务，常常在下朝以后就前往领军府去。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, because of the prestige of Emperor Gao and his sincere obedience to serve him, often went to the military headquarters after the fall of the dynasty.

古文：夜着青衣，扶匐道路，爲高帝听察。
现代文：夜里穿着黑衣服，趴伏在路上，为高帝观望动静。
English: At night, dressed in black, he crouched down on the road to watch for Gao Di.

古文：高帝令敬则于殿内伺机。
现代文：高帝让王敬则在殿内探察。
English: Emperor Gao let Wang Jing explore inside the palace.

古文：及杨玉夫将首投敬则，敬则驰谒高帝，乃戎服入宫。
现代文：后来杨玉夫将要告发王敬则，王敬则驰马去见高帝，他们便穿着军服入宫。
English: Later, Yang Yufu was going to denounce Wang Jingzhe, and Wang Jingzhe galloped to see Emperor Gao, and they entered the palace wearing military uniforms.

古文：至承明门，门郎疑非苍梧还，敬则虑人觇见，以刀环塞窐孔，呼开门甚急。
现代文：到了承明门，门卫怀疑不是苍梧王回来，王敬则怕让别人看见，用刀环塞住门上的小孔，叫喊开门十分紧急。
English: When they arrived at Chengming Gate, the gatekeeper suspected that it was not Cangwu Wang who had returned, but Wang Jing was afraid to let others see, so he plugged the small hole in the door with a knife ring and shouted that it was urgent to open the door.

古文：卫尉丞顔灵宝窥见高帝乘马在外，窃谓亲人： 今若不开内领军，天下会是乱尔。 
现代文：卫尉丞颜灵宝窥见了高帝骑马立在门外，偷偷地对亲信说： 现在如果不开门让领军进来，天下就会由此大乱。 
English: Yan Lingbao, a guard sergeant, spied Gao Di standing outside the gate on horseback and secretly said to his cronies: "If you don't open the door to let the leading troops in now, there will be chaos in the world."

古文：门开，敬则随帝入殿。
现代文：门开了，王敬则随着高帝进入殿中。
English: The door opened, and Wang Jing followed Emperor Gao into the hall.

古文：升明元年，迁辅国将军，领临淮太守，知殿内宿卫兵事。
现代文：升明元年，调任辅国将军，兼任临淮太守，掌管殿内的守卫任务。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he was transferred to the post of Vice-Governor General, concurrently serving as the Vice-Governor of Huai, in charge of guarding the palace.

古文：沈攸之事起，进敬则冠军将军。
现代文：沈攸之事件发生，提升王敬则为冠军将军。
English: Shen You's incident occurred, and Wang Jing was promoted to champion general.

古文：高帝入守朝堂，袁粲起兵，召领军刘韫、直合将军卜伯兴等于宫内相应，戒严将发，敬则开关掩袭，皆杀之。
现代文：高帝进入朝堂担任守卫，袁粲起兵，联合领军刘韫、直阁将军卜伯兴等在宫内相应，实行了戒严，正要发难，王敬则开关突袭，把他们全部杀死。
English: Emperor Gao entered the imperial palace to serve as a guard, Yuan Shun raised an army, and the co-leaders of the army, Liu Shun and Zhigang General Bu Bo Xing, implemented martial law in the palace accordingly, just before the outbreak of the war, and Wang Jing launched a surprise attack and killed them all.

古文：殿内窃发尽平，敬则之力也。
现代文：殿内暗地发动的事情全部平定，这确是靠了王敬则的力量。
English: The events that had been secretly instigated within the palace were all quelled, and this was truly due to Wang Jingzhe's strength.

古文：政事无大小，帝并以委之。
现代文：后来政治事务不论大小，皇帝一概委托给他。
English: Later, the emperor entrusted him with all political affairs, large and small.

古文：敬则不识书，止下名，然甚善决断。
现代文：王敬则不会念书，只认得名字，然而十分善于决断。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, can't study, only recognizes names, but is very good at making decisions.

古文：齐台建，爲中领军。
现代文：齐台建立，他担任中领军。
English: When Qidai was established, he served as the middle leader.

古文：高帝将受禅，材官荐易太极殿柱。
现代文：高帝将要接受禅让，建筑官员提议换掉太极殿的柱子。
English: Emperor Gao was about to accept the concession, and the building officials proposed to replace the pillars of the Taiji Hall.

古文：顺帝欲避上，不肯出宫逊位。
现代文：顺帝企图违抗皇上，不肯出宫让位。
English: Emperor Shun attempted to defy the emperor and refused to leave the palace to abdicate.

古文：明日当临轩，顺帝又逃宫内。
现代文：第二天应该到殿前举行仪式，顺帝逃往宫内。
English: The next day, a ceremony was to be held in front of the palace, and Emperor Shun fled to the palace.

古文：敬则将舆入迎帝，啓譬令出，引令升车。
现代文：王敬则带着车子进到里面去迎接顺帝，说服劝导，让他出来，拉扯着让他上车。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, took the car inside to meet Shun Di, persuaded him to come out, and pulled him into the car.

古文：顺帝不肯即上，收泪谓敬则曰： 欲见杀乎？ 
现代文：顺帝不肯上，止住眼泪对王敬则说： 想要杀掉我吗？ 
English: Shun Di did not want to go, but he stopped his tears and said to Wang Jing: "Do you want to kill me?

古文：敬则答曰： 出居别宫尔，官先取司马家亦复如此。 
现代文：王敬则回答说： 只是出来住到别的宫殿罢了，您的先人取代司马家的时候也是这样子的。 
English: Wang Jing replied, "He just went to live in another palace. It was the same when your ancestors replaced the Sima family."

古文：顺帝泣而弹指： 唯愿后身生生世世不复天王作因缘。 
现代文：顺帝弹着手指哭泣说： 只希望自己的后身生生世世不再跟天王有因缘。 
English: Shun Di snapped his fingers and wept, saying, "I only hope that my descendants will no longer be related to the Heavenly King.

古文：宫内尽哭，声彻于外。
现代文：宫内的人都哭了，声音响彻宫外。
English: Everyone in the palace was crying, and the sound echoed outside the palace.

古文：顺帝拍敬则手曰： 必无过虑，当饷辅国十万钱。 
现代文：顺帝拍着王敬则的手说： 一定不必过虑，应当给辅国将军赏钱十万。 
English: Emperor Shun patted Wang Jingzhe's hand and said, "Don't worry about it, you should reward the auxiliary general with 100,000 yuan."

古文：齐建元元年，出爲都督、南兖州刺史，封寻阳郡公。
现代文：齐朝建元元年，出京担任都督、南兖州刺史，封为寻阳郡公。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era of the Qi Dynasty, he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of the capital and the governor of the southern Luzhou Province, and was appointed as the governor of Xiangyang County.

古文：加敬则妻怀氏爵爲寻阳国夫人。
现代文：封王敬则的妻子怀氏为寻阳国夫人。
English: The wife of Wang Jingzhe, Huai, became the wife of Xiangyang.

古文：二年，魏军攻淮、泗，敬则恐，委镇还都，百姓皆惊散奔走。
现代文：建元二年，魏军攻打淮河、泗水地区，王敬则很恐惧，丢弃守城返回京都，老百姓都惊散奔走。
English: In the second year of the first century, the Wei army attacked the Huaihe River and the Surabaya region. Wang Jing was very afraid, abandoned the castle and returned to Kyoto. The common people were scared and ran away.

古文：上以其功臣不问，以爲都官尚书，迁吴兴太守。
现代文：皇上因为他是功臣而没有问罪，让他做都官尚书，调任吴郡太守。
English: The emperor did not find fault with him because he was a meritorious subject. He made him the official of the capital, Shangshu, and transferred him to the position of the governor of Wu County.

古文：郡旧多剽掠，有十数岁小儿于路取遗物，敬则杀之以徇。
现代文：郡中过去有很多强盗，有一个十几岁的小孩在路上拾到了别人丢掉的东西，王敬则就把他杀掉，以向公众宣示。
English: There used to be a lot of robbers in the county, and Wang Jing killed a teenage boy who picked up something someone else had dropped on the road to make a statement to the public.

古文：自此路不拾遗，郡无劫盗。
现代文：从此路不拾遗，郡中没有强盗。
English: Since then, there have been no robberies in the county.

古文：又录得一偷，召其亲属于前鞭之。
现代文：又抓到一个小偷，便把他的亲属召来站在面前看着进行鞭打。
English: When he caught another thief, he called his relatives to stand in front of him and watch the flogging.

古文：令偷身长扫街路，久之，乃令偷举旧偷自代。
现代文：他让小偷自身长期打扫街道，时间久了，就让小偷检举过去的小偷代替自己。
English: He let the thief himself clean the streets for a long time, and after a long time, he let the thief prosecute the past thieves to replace himself.

古文：诸偷恐爲所识，皆逃走，境内以清。
现代文：小偷们恐怕被认出来，都逃走了，境内因此清平。
English: The thieves are feared to have been recognised and have fled, leaving the area clear.

古文：仍入乌程，从市过，见屠肉枅，叹曰： 吴兴昔无此枅，是我少时在此所作也。 
现代文：有一天他到了乌程，从市场上经过，看见了屠户挂大秤称肉的横木，感叹说： 吴兴从前没有这个横木，这是我少年的时候在这里做的。 
English: One day when he arrived in Wucheng, he passed by the market and saw the crossbeam on which the butchers hung a large scale to weigh meat. He sighed and said, "Wu Xing didn't have this crossbeam before. I made it here when I was a teenager."

古文：召故人饮酒说平生，不以屑也。
现代文：于是就把过去的朋友找来，饮酒话说平生，不觉得琐碎。
English: So I called up my old friends. I've been a drinker all my life, so I didn't think it was trivial.

古文：迁护军，以家爲府。
现代文：调任护军，以家为军府。
English: He was transferred to guard the troops, and his home became the military headquarters.

古文：三年，以改葬去职，诏赠敬则母寻阳国太夫人，改授侍中、抚军。
现代文：建元三年，因为家中改葬的事离职，诏令追赠王敬则的母亲为寻阳国太夫人，又改封为侍中、抚军。
English: In the third year of Jianyuan, because he resigned from his post due to the family's reburial, Wang Jingze's mother was posthumously awarded the title of Lady of the State of Hanyang, and she was also renamed as a chamberlain and an attendant.

古文：高帝遗诏敬则以本官领丹阳尹，寻迁会稽太守，加都督。
现代文：高帝遗诏让王敬则以本官兼任丹阳尹，不久调任会稽太守，担任都督。
English: Emperor Gao's last will and testament allowed Wang Jing to serve concurrently as Danyang Yin as his own official, and he was soon transferred to the position of the auditor-general of the CPC Central Committee and became the governor of the capital.

古文：永明二年，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：永明二年，赠给乐队一部。
English: In the second year of the Yongming era, a portion of the proceeds was given to the orchestra.

古文：会土边带湖海，人丁无士庶皆保塘役。
现代文：会稽边缘地区连接湖海，民众不论士子、平民都要参加修塘的劳役。
English: The periphery of the community is connected to the lake and the sea, and the people, both clergymen and commoners, are required to participate in the labor service in Xiu Tang.

古文：敬则以功力有馀，悉评敛爲钱送台库，以爲便宜。
现代文：王敬则因为人力有余，全部折合为钱收缴上来交给财政部门，认为这样更为便利。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, because he had more manpower, collected all the money and handed it over to the financial department, believing that this was more convenient.

古文：上许之。
现代文：皇上批准了。
English: Emperor Jing agreed with this opinion.

古文：三年，进号征东将军。
现代文：永明三年，晋升封号为征东将军。
English: In the third year of Yongming, he was promoted and given the title of General of the Expedition to the East.

古文：宋广州刺史王翼之子妾路氏酷暴，杀婢媵，翼之子法朗告之，敬则付山阴狱杀之。
现代文：宋朝广州刺史王翼之儿子的妾路氏残酷暴虐，杀死了随嫁的仆女，王翼之的儿子王法朗控告了她，王敬则把她交给山阴监狱处死。
English: During the Song Dynasty, the concubine of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of

古文：路氏家诉，爲有司所奏，山阴令刘岱坐弃市刑。敬则入朝，上谓敬则曰： 人命至重，是谁下意杀之？
现代文：路氏家中控告，被有关部门上奏朝廷，山阴令刘岱因此获罪判决处死，皇上对王敬则说： 人命极关重要，是谁指示让杀她的？
English: Lu's family filed a complaint, which was reported to the imperial court by the relevant departments. The Sanin ordered Liu Wei to be convicted and sentenced to death. The emperor said to Wang Jing: Human life is very important. Who ordered her to be killed?

古文：都不啓闻。 
现代文：完全不上奏请示。 
English: Don't play it at all.

古文：敬则曰： 是臣愚意。
现代文：王敬则说： 是臣的意思。
English: Wang Jing said, "It means minister."

古文：臣知何物科法，见背后有节，便言应得杀人。 
现代文：臣哪懂得什么是刑法，看到背后有事端，便说应该杀人。 
English: A minister who knows what criminal law is, and sees that there is an ulterior motive, says that people should be killed.

古文：刘岱亦引罪，上乃赦之；敬则免官，以公领郡。
现代文：刘岱也认罪，皇上于是赦免了他；王敬则免官，以公侯的身份兼管郡务。
English: Liu Yao also pleaded guilty, and the emperor then pardoned him; Wang Jing was relieved of his duties and, as a prince, also took charge of county affairs.

古文：后与王俭俱即本号开府仪同三司。
现代文：后来与王俭一同在本官上面加封开府仪同三司。
English: Later, together with Wang Jian, he was awarded the title of Kaifu Yi and Sanji.

古文：时徐孝嗣于崇礼门候俭，因嘲之曰： 今日可谓连璧。 
现代文：当时徐孝嗣在崇礼门等候王俭，于是嘲笑他说： 今天可以说是二人连璧。 
English: At that time, Xu Xiaozhi was waiting for Wang Jian at the Chongli Gate, so he laughed at him and said, "Today, we can say that the two of us are the best."

古文：俭曰： 不意老子遂与韩非同传。 
现代文：王俭说： 没想到老子与韩非同在一篇传记当中。 
English: Wang Jian said: I didn't expect that Lao Tzu and Han Fei would be together in one biography.

古文：人以告敬则，敬则欣然曰： 我南沙县吏，徼幸得细铠左右，逮风云以至于此。遂与王卫军同日拜三公，王敬则复何恨。 
现代文：有人把这话告诉了王敬则，王敬则高兴地说： 我本是南沙县的一个小吏，侥幸当上宫中将官，卷入政局才有今天，于是与王卫军同日封为三公，王敬则还有什么怨恨！ 
English: Someone told this to Wang Jing, and Wang Jing said happily: I used to be a minor official in Nansha County, and I was lucky enough to become a vice-admiral of the palace. It was only today that I got involved in the political situation, so on the same day as Wang Weijun, I was crowned the third prince. What grudge does Wang Jing still have?

古文：了无恨色。
现代文：没有一点怨恨的神态。
English: There was no hint of rancour.

古文：朝士以此多之。
现代文：朝士们因此对他十分称赞。
English: The members of the morning assembly praised him highly for this.

古文：十一年，授司空。
现代文：永明十一年，封为司空。
English: In the eleventh year of Yongming, he was given the title of Siku.

古文：敬则名位虽达，不以富贵自遇。
现代文：王敬则名位虽然通达，却不以富贵自居。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, although he is well-educated, does not consider himself rich.

古文：初爲散辈使魏，于北馆种杨柳。
现代文：当初作为闲散官吏出使魏朝，在北馆种了一棵柳树。
English: At first, as an idle official sent to the Wei Dynasty, he planted a willow tree in the North Pavilion.

古文：后员外郎虞长曜北使还，敬则问： 我昔种杨柳树，今若大小？ 
现代文：后来员外郎虞长曜出使北方回来，王敬则问他说： 我过去种的那棵柳树，现在多大了？ 
English: Later, Foreign Minister Yu Changyou returned from his mission to the north, and Wang Jing asked him: How old is the willow tree I planted in the past?

古文：长曜曰： 虏中以爲甘棠。 
现代文：虞长曜说： 虏邦中以为是甘棠呢！ 
English: Yu Changyou said, "People in Ruibang think it's sweet potatoes!

古文：武帝令群臣赋诗，敬则曰： 臣几落此奴度内。 
现代文：武帝曾让大臣们作诗，王敬则说： 我差点落到了这家伙的框子里。 
English: Emperor Wu once asked his ministers to compose a poem, and Wang Jing said: I almost fell into this guy's box.

古文：上问之，敬则对曰： 臣若解书，不过作尚书都令史尔，那得今日。 
现代文：皇上问是怎么回事，王敬则说： 臣如果懂得书本，不过做个尚书令史罢了，哪有今天！ 
English: When the emperor asked what was going on, Wang Jing said: "If you know books, you can be a scholar of history, but not today!"

古文：敬则虽不大识书，而性甚警黠，临郡令省事读辞，下教判决，皆不失理。
现代文：王敬则虽然不大懂得书本，但是性格十分机警，到郡上让办事人员宣读诉讼词，训示判决，都不失情理。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, although he does not know much about books, has a very alert personality. It is reasonable for him to go to the county to have the clerk read out the words of the lawsuit and instruct the judgment.

古文：明帝辅政，密有废立意。
现代文：明帝辅佐政治，暗中有废除皇帝另立别人的意思。
English: Emperor Ming assisted politics, and secretly had the intention of abolishing the emperor and replacing him with someone else.

古文：隆昌元年，出敬则爲会稽太守，加都督。
现代文：隆昌元年，把王敬则派出京城去做会稽太守，并担任都督。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, Wang Jing was sent to Beijing to be the auditor-general of the association and served as the governor.

古文：海陵王立，进位太尉。
现代文：海陵王登基，提升他为太尉。
English: King Hailing ascended to the throne and was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant.

古文：明帝即位，爲大司马，台使拜授日，雨大洪注，敬则文武皆失色。
现代文：明帝即位，担任大司马，朝廷的使者宣布任命的那天，天下大雨，洪水流淌，王敬则和文武大臣都大惊失色。
English: On the day of Emperor Ming's enthronement, when he assumed the post of grand steward and an emissary from the imperial court announced his appointment, there was heavy rain and flooding all over the country. Wang Jing and the minister of literature and armed forces were shocked and disgraced.

古文：一客旁曰： 公由来如此，昔拜丹阳尹、吴兴时亦然。 
现代文：一个客人在旁边说： 您向来都是这样，过去任命为丹阳尹、吴兴太守的时候也是这样。 
English: A guest next to him said, "You have always been like this, and it was the same when you appointed Danyang Yin and Wu Xing as emperors.

古文：敬则大悦曰： 我宿命应得雨。 
现代文：王敬则非常高兴地说： 我的宿命当中应该得雨。 
English: Wang Jing was very happy and said, "It is my destiny to get rain."

古文：乃引羽仪、备朝服、导引出听事拜受，意犹不自得，吐舌久之。
现代文：于是叫来羽仪，准备朝服、导引而出，听候任命，可是心里还是不自然，惊愕了许久。
English: So he called Houyi, prepared the imperial robes, led her out, and awaited the appointment, but his heart was still unnatural, and he was stunned for a long time.

古文：帝既多杀害，敬则自以高、武旧臣，心怀忧惧。
现代文：明帝即位后杀了很多人，王敬则自己因为是高帝、武帝的旧臣，心中怀着忧虑和恐惧。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he killed many people. Wang Jing, as a former vassal of Emperor Gao and Emperor Wu, was filled with anxiety and fear.

古文：帝虽外厚其礼而内相疑备，数访问敬则饮食体干。
现代文：明帝对他虽然外表礼节很厚，而内心却非常猜疑，加以防备，多次打听王敬则的饮食、健康。
English: Although Emperor Ming was very polite to him on the outside, he was very suspicious of him on the inside, so he took precautions and repeatedly inquired about Wang Jingzhe's diet and health.

古文：闻其衰老，且以居内地，故得少安。
现代文：听说他已经衰老，而且又是住在内地，所以才感到稍微安定一些。
English: Hearing that he is old and lives in the hinterland made me feel a little more secure.

古文：后遣萧坦之将斋仗五百人行晋陵，敬则诸子在都，忧怖无计。
现代文：后来派萧坦之率领斋阁的武士五百人到了晋陵，王敬则几个儿子都在京城，忧虑恐惧，无计可施。
English: Later, Xiao Tianzhi sent five hundred warriors from Saigaku to Jinling, and Wang Jing's sons were in Beijing, worried and fearful, with nothing to do.

古文：上知之，问计于梁武帝，武帝曰： 敬则竖夫，易爲感，唯应锡以子女玉帛，厚其使人，如斯而已。 
现代文：皇上知道了这种情况，向梁武帝询问对策，梁武帝说： 王敬则是个粗货，容易被感化，只需要赐给他子女玉帛，多给他一些使唤人员，这样就足够了。 
English: When the emperor learned of this situation, he asked Emperor Liangwu for a countermeasure. Emperor Liangwu said, "Wang Jing is a low-grade commodity, easily influenced. All he needs to do is to give his children jade brooches and give him more servants. That will be enough."

古文：上纳之。
现代文：皇上采纳了。
English: The Emperor accepted their suggestion.

古文：吴人张思祖，敬则谋主也，爲府司马，频衔使。
现代文：吴地人张思祖，是王敬则的主要谋士，是他府中的司马，经常奉命出使。
English: Zhang Shizu, a native of Wu, was the main strategist of Wang Jingzhe, the Sima of his government, and was often sent on missions.

古文：上僞倾意待之，以爲游击将军。遣敬则世子仲雄入东。
现代文：皇上假装尽心地对待他，任命他为游击将军，让王敬则的世子王仲雄进入东部。
English: The emperor pretended to treat him with all his heart, appointed him as a guerrilla general, and let Wang Zhongxiong, the son of Wang Jingzhe, enter the east.

古文：仲雄善弹琴，江左有蔡邕焦尾琴在主衣库，上敕五日一给仲雄。
现代文：王仲雄善于弹琴，江东有蔡邕的焦尾琴藏在主衣库中，皇上指示每五天一次提供给王仲雄。
English: Wang Zhongxiong is good at playing the piano. The jiaozuo harp, which is said to have been owned by Cai Xuan in the East River, is hidden in the emperor's wardrobe. The emperor instructed that the harp be provided to Wang Zhongxiong once every five days.

古文：仲雄在御前鼓琴，作懊侬曲，歌曰： 常叹负情侬，郎今果行许。 
现代文：王仲雄在皇帝面前弹琴，作了一首《懊侬曲》，歌中说： 常叹负情侬，郎今果行许。 
English: Wang Zhongxiong played the piano in front of the emperor and composed a "Lover's Lament," saying in the song: "I often lament my lover, but now I have to forgive him."

古文：又曰： 君行不净心，那得恶人题。 
现代文：又说： 君行不净心，那得恶人题。 
English: He also said, "If you don't have a pure heart, then you must be an evil person."

古文：帝愈猜愧。
现代文：明帝更加猜忌和惭愧。
English: Emperor Ming was even more suspicious and ashamed.

古文：永泰元年，帝疾屡经危殆，以张瑰爲平东将军、吴郡太守，置兵佐，密防敬则。
现代文：永泰元年，皇上的疾病多次遇到危险，他派张瑰为平东将军、吴郡太守，配置兵士和属官，暗中防备王敬则。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, the emperor's illness repeatedly encountered danger. He sent Zhang Rui as the general of Pingdong and the governor of Wu County, deployed soldiers and subordinate officials, and secretly prepared Wang Jing.

古文：内外传言当有处分。
现代文：朝内外都传言将要对他采取行动。
English: Both inside and outside the DPRK, there are rumors that action will be taken against him.

古文：敬则闻之，窃曰： 东今有谁，只是欲平我耳。
现代文：王敬则听说了，私下说： 东面现在有谁，就是要平我罢了。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, heard about this and said privately: "Whoever is in the East now just wants to flatten me."

古文：东亦何易可平,吾终不受金罂。 
现代文：东面又哪里那么容易可平，我到了也不会接受他的金瓮。 
English: There is nowhere in the east that is so easy to flatten. When I get there, I won't accept his gold ingot.

古文：金罂谓鸩酒也。
现代文：金瓮就是指的毒酒。
English: Jinju refers to poisoned wine.

古文：诸子怖惧，第五子幼隆遣正员将军徐岳以情告徐州行事谢朓爲计，若同者当往报敬则。
现代文：几个儿子十分恐惧，第五个儿子王幼隆派正员将军徐岳把这情况告诉给徐州行事谢緿并商量计策，如果一致的话就去报告王敬则。
English: Several sons were very afraid. The fifth son, Wang Yulong, sent a regular officer, General Xu Yue, to tell this situation to Xuzhou Acting Xie Yao and discuss strategies. If there is a consensus, he will report to Wang Jingzhe.

古文：朓执岳驰啓之。
现代文：谢緿捉住徐岳驰马去告发。
English: Xie Qi caught Xu Yue riding his horse to report.

古文：敬则城局参军徐庶家在京口，其子密以报庶，庶以告敬则五官王公林。
现代文：王敬则的城局参军徐庶的家在京口，他的儿子把这事秘密报告了徐庶，徐庶又告诉了王敬则的五官王公林。
English: The home of Wang Jingze's city bureau member Xu Shiao was in Jingkou. His son secretly reported this to Xu Shiao, and Xu Shiao told Wang Jingze's five officials Wang Gonglin.

古文：公林，敬则族子也，常所委信。
现代文：王公林是王敬则的同族兄弟的儿子，常常委托他办事，十分信任。
English: Wang Gonglin is the son of Wang Jingze's brother from the same clan. He often entrusts him with affairs and trusts him very much.

古文：公林劝敬则急送啓赐儿死，单舟星夜还都。
现代文：王公林劝王敬则疾速上表请求赐儿子自杀，单独乘船星夜返回都城。
English: Wang Gonglin advised Wang Jing to make a hasty request for his son to commit suicide and return to the capital alone on the ship Starry Night.

古文：敬则曰： 若尔，诸郎要应有信，且忍一夕。 
现代文：王敬则说： 如果是这样，儿子们一定应该有个消息，暂且忍耐一夜吧。 
English: Wang Jing said: If this is the case, our sons must have some news. Let's be patient for one night.

古文：其夜，呼僚佐文武摴蒱赌钱，谓衆曰： 卿诸人欲令我作何计？ 
现代文：这天夜里，他叫来了属下的官员们一块赌钱，对众人说： 你们诸位想让我采取什么办法？ 
English: That night, he summoned his subordinate officials for a game of chance and said to the crowd: "What do you want me to do?

古文：莫敢先答。
现代文：没有人敢首先回答。
English: No one dares to answer first.

古文：防合丁兴怀曰： 官只应作尔。 
现代文：防阁丁兴怀说： 长官只好这样做。 
English: Ding Xinghuai, a guard, said: "The commander had to do this.

古文：敬则不作声。
现代文：王敬则不作声。
English: Wang Jing remained silent.

古文：明旦，召山阴令王询、台传御史锺离祖愿，敬则横刀跂坐，问询等发丁可得几人，库见有几钱物，询、祖愿对并乖旨，敬则怒，将出斩之。
现代文：天明的时候，召来了山阴令王询、台传御史钟离祖愿，王敬则横握大刀，垂足而坐，问王询等人发兵可以有多少人，府库中现有多少银钱财物，王询、钟离祖愿的回答都不符合他的意愿，王敬则很生气，把他们拉出去斩了。
English: At dawn, Shanying was summoned to order Wang En and the Taiwanese scholar Zhong Rong to leave the ancestral wish. Wang Jing held a large sword across his chest and sat with his feet bowed. He asked Wang En and the others how many people could send troops and how much money and property were available in the treasury. The answers of Wang En and Zhong Rong Rong did not meet his wishes. Wang Jing was very angry and pulled them out and beheaded them.

古文：王公林又谏敬则曰： 官讵不更思？ 
现代文：王公林又劝王敬则说： 长官何不重新再想一想？ 
English: Wang Gonglin also advised Wang Jingzhe to say: Why don't you think about it again?

古文：敬则唾其面，曰： 小子，我作事何关汝小子。 
现代文：王敬则唾他的脸说： 小子，我做事和你小子有什么相关！ 
English: Wang Jing spit in his face and said: Kid, what does my job have to do with your kid!

古文：乃起兵，招集配衣，二三日便发。
现代文：于是起兵，招集人马，配备服装，两三天便出发了。
English: So they raised an army, called up men and horses, equipped them with clothing, and two or three days later they set out.

古文：欲劫前中书令何胤还爲尚书令，长史王弄璋、司马张思祖止之曰： 何令高蹈，必不从，不从便应杀之。
现代文：打算劫持前中书令何胤仍为中书令，长史王弄璋、司马张思祖制止他说： 何胤品格高蹈，一定不会答应，不答应就应该杀掉。
English: He was planning to kidnap the former Clerk of the Privy Council, He Yan, who was still the Clerk of the Privy Council, but Chang Shi Wang and Sima Zhang Sizu stopped him, saying: He Yan is of high moral character, he will not agree, and if he does not agree, he should be killed.

古文：举大事先杀朝贤，事必不济。 
现代文：办大事先杀朝中贤士，事情一定不利。 
English: If you kill the wise men in the middle of the dynasty first, things will definitely be unfavorable.

古文：乃率实甲万人过浙江，谓曰： 应须作檄。 
现代文：于是便率领甲兵一万人渡过浙江，他说： 应该作一篇檄文。 
English: So he led ten thousand armored soldiers across Zhejiang and said, "We should write an obituary."

古文：思祖曰： 公今自还朝，何用作此？ 
现代文：张思祖说： 您现在亲自还朝，怎么还用写这个？ 
English: Zhang Shizu said: You are still in the morning, how can you still write this?

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是就没有作。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：朝廷遣辅国将军前军司马左兴盛、直合将军马军主胡松三千余人，筑垒于曲阿长冈；尚书左仆射沈文秀爲持节、都督，屯湖头，备京口路。
现代文：朝廷派遣辅国将军前军司马左兴盛的直阁将军骑兵主将胡松的三千余人，在曲阿长冈构筑营垒；尚书左仆射沈文秀为持节、都督，屯驻在湖头，防守京口的道路。
English: The imperial court dispatched more than 3,000 men of the auxiliary general Ma Zuo Xing Sheng, the former military secretary Ma Zuo Xing Sheng, the general Zhougu, and the cavalry commander Hu Song, to build a camp in Qu'a Nagaoka; Shang Shuxu's left-hand servant Shen Wenshu was the governor, stationed in Houtou, guarding the road to Beijing.

古文：敬则以旧将举事，百姓担篙荷锸随逐之十馀万衆。
现代文：王敬则依靠旧将领举事，老百姓担着篙背着锹跟随的人有十几万。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, relied on the old generals to do the work. There were more than 100,000 people who followed him, carrying shovels on their backs.

古文：至武进陵口恸哭，乘肩舆而前。
现代文：到了武进陵的山口他伤心痛哭，坐着轿前进。
English: When he arrived at the mountain pass of Wujin Mausoleum, he cried bitterly and sat in a sedan chair.

古文：遇兴盛、山阳二柴，尽力攻之。
现代文：遇到了左兴盛、山阳两座营寨，尽力攻打。
English: He encountered two camps, Zuo Xingsheng and Sanyang, and tried his best to attack them.

古文：官军不敌，欲退而围不开，各死战。
现代文：官军抵挡不住，企图撤退而冲不出包围圈，各自拚死战斗。
English: The government army could not resist, tried to retreat but could not break out of the encirclement, and fought to the death.

古文：胡松领马军突其后，白丁无器仗，皆惊散。
现代文：胡松率领骑兵冲杀他们的后部，未入兵籍的民丁没有武器，都被惊散。
English: Husong led the cavalry to charge their rear, and the unregistered civilians, who had no weapons, were dispersed.

古文：敬则大叫索马，再上不得上，兴盛军容袁文旷斩之传首。
现代文：王敬则大叫找马，但上了两次都没有上去，左兴盛的军容袁文旷杀了他并且把人头传到京城。
English: Wang Jing shouted for a horse, but he did not get on the horse twice. Yuan Wenyan, the military leader of Zuo Xingsheng, killed him and sent his head to the capital.

古文：是时上疾已笃，敬则仓卒东起，朝廷震惧。
现代文：这时候皇上的病情已经十分危险，王敬则仓促在东部起兵，朝廷震动而且恐惧。
English: At this time, the emperor's illness was already very dangerous, and Wang Jing hastily raised an army in the east. The imperial court was shocked and afraid.

古文：东昏侯在东宫议欲叛，使人上屋望，见征虏亭失火，谓敬则至，急装欲走。
现代文：东昏侯在东宫议论打算叛变，派人到屋顶上了望，看见征虏亭失火，以为是王敬则到了，急忙穿戴打算逃走。
English: In the East Palace, the dowager lord discussed his plan to rebel, sent someone to look up at the roof, saw the fire in the reception pavilion, thought it was Wang Jing, and hurriedly put on his clothes to escape.

古文：有告敬则者，敬则曰： 檀公三十六策，走是上计，汝父子唯应急走耳。 
现代文：有人告诉了王敬则，王敬则说： 檀公三十六计，走是上计，你们父子只是应该赶紧逃走。 
English: Someone told Wang Jingzhe, Wang Jingzhe said: "Dangong thirty-six plan, walking is the best plan, your father and son should just run away quickly."

古文：盖讥檀道济避魏事也。
现代文：大概是讥笑檀道济逃避魏朝的事。
English: He was probably mocking the fact that the Taoists fled from the Wei Dynasty.

古文：显达在江州遇疾，不疗之而差，意甚不悦。
现代文：王敬则军队开来，声势浩大，总共十天就失败了。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, led an army with a great reputation, which failed after a total of ten days.

古文：是时连冬大雪，枭首朱雀而雪不集，诸子皆伏诛。张敬儿，南阳冠军人也。
现代文：当时六十四岁。朝廷把他的头涂上油漆存放在武器仓库中，到了梁朝的天监元年，他过去的部下夏侯上表请求把他收葬，得到了允许。张敬儿，南阳冠军人。
English: At that time, he was sixty-four years old. The imperial court painted his head and stored it in a weapons warehouse. In the first year of the reign of Emperor Liang, his former subordinate, Prince Xia, requested permission to bury him. Zhang Jing'er, champion of Nanyang.

古文：父丑，爲郡将军，官至节府参军。
现代文：父亲张丑，是郡将军，官做到节府参军。
English: His father, Zhang Ushi, was a county general, and officers were required to join the army.

古文：敬儿年少便弓马、有胆气，好射猛兽，发无不中。
现代文：张敬儿少年时候就熟悉弓马、有胆气，喜欢射猎猛兽，发箭无不射中。
English: When Zhang Jing'er was a boy, he was familiar with the bow and arrow, had courage, liked to shoot wild beasts, and shot arrows all the time.

古文：南阳新野风俗出骑射，而敬儿尤多膂力。
现代文：南阳新野风俗多出骑射能手，而张敬儿臂力尤其大。
English: Nanyang and Shinuo customs often produce horseback archery experts, and Zhang Jing'er is particularly strong.

古文：稍官至宁蛮行参军，随郡人刘胡伐襄阳诸山蛮，深入险阻，所向皆破。
现代文：逐渐官职做到了宁蛮行参军，跟随本郡人刘胡讨伐襄阳各地的山蛮，深入险阻地区，所到之处都把敌人打败。
English: Gradually, he fulfilled his official duties and joined the army. He followed Liu Hu, a native of this county, to fight against the barbarians in the mountains around Xiangyang, went deep into the dangerous areas, and defeated the enemy everywhere he went.

古文：又击胡阳蛮，官军引退，敬儿单马在后，贼不能抗。
现代文：又去出击胡阳蛮人，官军撤退，张敬儿单马走在后面，贼军不能相抗。
English: He also went out to attack the Huyang barbarians, the government army retreated, Zhang Jing'er walked single-handedly behind, and the thief army could not resist.

古文：山阳王休佑镇寿阳，求善骑射士，敬儿及襄阳俞湛应选。
现代文：山阳人王休佑镇守寿阳，寻求善于骑射的武士，张敬儿和襄阳的俞湛应选。
English: Wang Xiuyou, a resident of Sanyang, guarded Shouyang and was looking for a samurai who was good at riding and shooting. Zhang Jing'er and Xiangyang's Jintan should be chosen.

古文：敬儿善事人，遂见宠，爲长兼行参军。
现代文：张敬儿善于侍奉别人，于是受到宠爱，做了官长兼任参军。
English: Zhang Jing'er was good at serving others, so she was favored and became a senior official and joined the army.

古文：泰始初，随府转骠骑参军，署中兵，领军讨义嘉贼，与刘胡相拒于鹊尾洲，啓明帝乞本郡。
现代文：泰始初年，随着军府转为骠骑参军，被任命为中兵，率领军队讨伐义嘉的贼军，和刘胡在鹊尾洲相对抗，上奏明帝请求主管本郡。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, he was appointed as a middle-ranking soldier to lead the army to fight against Yijia's bandits, and to oppose Liu Hu in Shanwei Zhou, and to appeal to Emperor Ming to be in charge of the county.

古文：事平，除南阳太守。
现代文：事情平定，任命他为南阳太守。
English: After the matter was settled, he was appointed as the governor of Nanyang.

古文：敬儿之爲襄阳府将也，家贫，每休假辄佣赁自给。
现代文：张敬儿做襄阳府将的时候，家里很贫穷，每到休假的时候就去打工自给。
English: When Zhang Jing'er was the mayor of Yangyang, her family was very poor. Whenever she was on vacation, she went to work to support herself.

古文：尝爲城东吴泰家担水，通泰所爱婢。
现代文：他曾经为城东吴泰家担水，和吴泰所喜爱的婢女私通。
English: He once carried water for Wu Tai's family in the east of the city, and had an affair with Wu Tai's favorite maid.

古文：事发，将被泰杀，逃卖棺材中，以盖加上，乃免。
现代文：事情暴露，他将要被吴泰杀死，逃到了出卖的棺材里，把盖盖在上面，才得以幸免。
English: When it was revealed that he was about to be killed by Wu Tai, he escaped into the coffin he had been sold, and only by putting the lid on it was he able to escape.

古文：及在鹊尾洲，啓明帝云： 泰以丝助雍州刺史袁顗爲弩弦，党同爲逆，若事平之日，乞其家财。 
现代文：后来在鹊尾洲，他启奏明帝说： 吴泰以丝帮助雍州刺史袁靑做弓弦，结为同党一齐反叛，如果事情平定的时候，我请求接受他的家财。 
English: Later, in Shanwei Zhou, he sent a message to Emperor Ming saying: Wu Taiyi Si helped Yangzhou Zhi Shi Yuan Qi to make the bow strings, and they rebelled together with the party. If things are calm, I request to accept his family wealth.

古文：帝许之。
现代文：明帝答应了他。
English: Emperor Daowu agreed.

古文：至是收籍吴氏，唯家人裸身得出，僮役财货直数千万，敬儿皆有之。
现代文：这时他便没收了吴氏家业，只有一个家人光着身子逃出，仆役财物价值几千万，都归张敬儿所有。
English: At this time, he confiscated the Wu family business. Only one family member escaped naked. The servants and property worth tens of millions were all owned by Zhang Jing'er.

古文：先所通婢，即以爲妾。
现代文：以前所私通的婢女，被纳为妾。
English: A servant girl, with whom he had previously had an affair, was taken as his concubine.

古文：后爲越骑校尉，桂阳王事起，隶齐高帝顿新亭。
现代文：后来他做了越骑校尉，桂阳王事件发生，他隶属于齐高帝屯驻在新亭。
English: Later, he became a Viet Cavalry Captain, the Guiyang Incident occurred, and he was stationed in Xinting under the command of Emperor Qigong.

古文：贼矢石既交，休范白服乘舆劳楼下。
现代文：贼军箭和石头一齐发来，刘休范身穿白色衣服坐着车子到楼下慰劳。
English: Thieves' arrows and stones were sent at the same time, and Liu Xiufan, wearing a white dress and sitting in a car, went downstairs to comfort her.

古文：敬儿与黄回白高帝求诈降以取之。
现代文：张敬儿与黄回告诉高帝请求用诈降来攻破他们。
English: Zhang Jing'er and Huang Hui told Gao Di to break through them by requesting a false surrender.

古文：高帝曰： 卿若办事，当以本州相赏。 
现代文：高帝说： 卿如果能办成事，一定把你的本州赏给你。 
English: Gao Di said: Sir, if you can accomplish something, I will definitely give you your home state.

古文：敬儿相与出城南，放仗走，大呼称降。
现代文：张敬儿便和黄回一起出了城南，扔下武器奔跑，大喊着要投降。
English: Zhang Jing'er and Huang Hui then left the south of the city together, threw down their weapons and ran, shouting that they wanted to surrender.

古文：休范喜，召至舆侧。
现代文：刘休范很高兴，把他们召到了车子旁边。
English: Liu Xiufan was very happy and called them to the side of the car.

古文：回阳致高帝密意，休范信之。
现代文：黄回假装传达高帝的秘密意旨，刘休范相信了。
English: Huang Hui pretended to convey Emperor Gao's secret intention, and Liu Xiufan believed him.

古文：回目敬儿，敬儿夺取休范防身刀斩之，其左右百人皆散。
现代文：黄回看着张敬儿，张敬儿夺过刘休范的防身刀把他杀死，他身边的百十个人都跑散了。
English: Huang Hui looked at Zhang Jing Er. Zhang Jing Er grabbed Liu Xuan's defensive knife and killed him. The hundred and ten people around him all ran away.

古文：敬儿持首归新亭。
现代文：张敬儿拿着人头回到了新亭。
English: Zhang Jing'er took the head and returned to Xinting.

古文：除骁骑将军，加辅国将军。
现代文：授为骁骑将军，加任辅国将军。
English: He was awarded the title of General of Cavalry and the additional title of General of Auxiliary Troops.

古文：高帝置酒谓敬儿曰： 非卿之功无今日。 
现代文：高帝设酒对张敬儿说： 不是卿的功劳，就没有今天。 
English: Gao Di set out the wine and said to Zhang Jing Er: "If it wasn't for your efforts, there would be no today."

古文：高帝以敬儿人位既轻，不欲使便爲襄阳重镇。
现代文：高帝认为张敬儿名位较轻，不想就让他主管襄阳这个重镇。
English: Gao Di thought that Zhang Jing'er's position was relatively light, and did not want to let him be in charge of the important town of Yangyang.

古文：敬儿求之不已，乃微动高帝曰： 沈攸之在荆州，公知其欲何所作，不出敬儿以防之，恐非公之利也。 
现代文：张敬儿不停地请求，他说动高帝道： 沈攸之在荆州，您知道他想要干什么，不派敬儿前往防备他，恐怕对您是不利的。 
English: Zhang Jing'er kept pleading, he said, moving Gao Di: Shen Youzhou is in Jingzhou, you know what he wants to do, if you don't send Jing'er to guard him, I'm afraid it will be bad for you.

古文：帝笑而无言，乃除雍州刺史，加都督，封襄阳县侯。
现代文：高帝笑着而没有说话，便任命他为雍州刺史，加任都督，封为襄阳县侯。
English: Gao Di smiled and did not speak, and then appointed him as Yongzhou's chief historian, governor, and lord of Xiangyang County.

古文：部伍泊沔口，敬儿乘舴艋过江，诣晋熙王燮。
现代文：他的部队停泊在沔口，张敬儿乘着舴艋小舟过江，去见晋熙王刘燮。
English: His troops anchored at the estuary, and Zhang Jing'er crossed the river in a small boat to meet with the king of Jinxi, Liu Xuan.

古文：中江遇风船覆，左右丁壮者各泅水走，余二小史没船下求敬儿救，敬儿两掖挟之，随船仰得在水上，如此翻覆行数十里，方得迎接。
现代文：在江中遇到大风翻了船，身边健壮的人各自游水逃走，剩下两个小吏淹没在船下求张敬儿救他们，张敬儿用两掖挟着他们，随着船仰过来得以到了船上，就这样翻来覆去行了几十里，才得到有人迎接。
English: In the middle of the river, a strong wind overturned the boat, and the strong people around them swam away. The remaining two minor officials drowned under the boat and begged Zhang Jing'er to save them. Zhang Jing'er held them between her two arms. As the boat tilted over, she was able to get on the boat. In this way, she went back and forth for dozens of miles before she was greeted by someone.

古文：失所持节，更给之。
现代文：丢掉了所带的信节，重新给他发了一个。
English: I threw away the letter I had with me and sent him a new one.

古文：至镇，厚结攸之，得其事迹，密白高帝，终无二心。
现代文：到了藩镇，和沈攸之建立了很深的交情，从而获得了他的活动情况，然后秘密地告诉了高帝，始终没有二心。
English: When he arrived at the hanzhen, he established a deep friendship with Shen Youzhi, thus obtaining information about his activities, and then secretly told Gao Di. There was never a second thought.

古文：又与攸之司马刘攘兵情款。
现代文：他又和沈攸之的司马刘攘兵非常要好。
English: He is also very close to Shen Yuanzhi's Sima Liu Joibing.

古文：及苍梧废，敬儿疑攸之当因此起兵，密问攘兵，攘兵无所言，寄敬儿马镫一只。
现代文：等苍梧王废黜，张敬儿怀疑沈攸之会借这个机会起兵，秘密地询问刘攘兵，刘攘兵没有说什么，送给张敬儿马蹬一双。
English: After the dethronement of King Cangwu, Zhang Jing'er suspected that Shen Youcun would take this opportunity to raise an army and secretly interrogate Liu Joibing. Liu Joibing did not say anything and gave Zhang Jing'er a pair of horse shoes.

古文：敬儿乃爲备。
现代文：张敬儿便做了准备。
English: Zhang Jing'er then made preparations.

古文：升明元年冬，攸之反，遣使报敬儿。
现代文：升明元年冬天，沈攸之反叛，派遣使者报告了张敬儿。
English: In the winter of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the rebellion of Shen You sent an envoy to report to Zhang Jing'er.

古文：劳接周至，爲设食讫，列仗于听事前斩之。
现代文：张敬儿接待慰劳非常周到，设饭让他吃过以后，列开仪仗在大厅前面把他斩首。
English: Zhang Jing'er's reception of consolation was very thoughtful. After setting a meal for him to eat, he was ceremoniously beheaded in front of the hall.

古文：集部曲。
现代文：然后集合部队。
English: Then gather the troops.

古文：侦攸之下，当袭江陵。
现代文：侦察到沈攸之沿江而下，他便准备袭击江陵。
English: Shen Youjun was spotted moving down the river and prepared to attack Gangneung.

古文：敬儿告变使至，高帝大喜，进号镇军将军，改督。
现代文：张敬儿报告军变的使者到达京城，高帝大喜，晋升他为镇军将军，改为都督。
English: Zhang Jing'er reported that the emissary of the military coup had arrived in Beijing, and Emperor Gao was overjoyed, promoted him to the general of the town army, and changed him to the governor.

古文：攸之至郢城败走，其子元琰与兼长史江乂、别驾傅宣等还江陵。
现代文：沈攸之到了郢城战败逃走，他的儿子沈元琰和兼长史江、别驾傅宣等返回江陵。
English: Shen Youzhi was defeated and fled to Shicheng, while his sons Shen Yuan Rong and Jang Shijiang, as well as Fu Xuan, returned to Gangneung.

古文：敬儿军至白水，元琰闻城外鹤唳，谓是叫声，恐惧欲走。
现代文：张敬儿的军队开到了白水，沈元琰听到城外鹤鸣，以为是人的叫声，十分恐惧打算逃走。
English: Zhang Jing'er's army drove to Baishui. Shen Yuanjun heard cranes singing outside the city and thought they were human cries. He was very afraid and planned to escape.

古文：其夜，乂、宣开门出奔，城溃，元琰奔宠洲见杀。
现代文：当天夜里，江、傅宣开门出逃，城内溃乱，沈元琰逃到宠洲被杀死。
English: On the night of the same day, Jiang and Fu Xuan opened the door and fled, causing a riot in the city. Shen Yuanyao fled to Jiuzhou and was killed.

古文：敬儿至江陵，诛攸之亲党，没入其财物数千万，善者悉以入私，送台者百不一焉。
现代文：张敬儿到了江陵，杀死了沈攸之的亲党，没收他们的财物数千万，好的都入了私人手里，送到朝廷的不到百分之一。
English: Zhang Jing'er went to Jiangling, killed Shen Youzhi's parent party, confiscated tens of millions of their property, and the good ones all went into private hands, less than one percent of which was sent to the imperial court.

古文：攸之于汤渚村自经死，居人送首荆州。
现代文：沈攸之在汤渚村自缢而死，当地人把他的人头送到荆州。
English: Shen Youzhi hanged himself in Tangzhu village and died. The local people sent his head to Jingzhou.

古文：敬儿使楯擎之，盖以青伞，徇诸市郭，乃送建邺。
现代文：张敬儿让人用盾举着，上面盖着青色的伞，在街市和外城巡游一周，然后送到建邺。
English: Zhang Jing'er was held aloft with a shield and covered with a blue umbrella. She was paraded around the city and its outskirts for a week before being taken to Jianye.

古文：进爵爲公。
现代文：晋升爵位为公。
English: Promotion to a knighthood is a matter of course.

古文：敬儿在雍州贪残，人间一物堪用，莫不夺取。
现代文：张敬儿在雍州十分贪婪残暴，世上只要有一件物品能用，无不强夺过来。
English: Zhang Jing'er in Yongzhou is very greedy and cruel. As long as there is only one item in the world that can be used, she will take it by force.

古文：于襄阳城西起宅，聚物货，宅大小殆侔襄阳。
现代文：他在襄阳城西建起了一处宅院，宅院的大小几乎和襄阳城相等。
English: He built a mansion in the west of Xiangyang City, the size of which is almost equal to that of Xiangyang City.

古文：又欲移羊叔子堕泪碑，于其处置台。
现代文：他又想搬移羊叔子堕泪碑，在那里建一座台子。
English: He also wants to remove the monument to the tears shed by Yang Shuzi and build a platform there.

古文：纲纪谏曰： 此羊太傅遗德，不宜迁动。 
现代文：州中的主簿劝谏说： 这是羊太傅的遗德，不宜迁动。 
English: The home book in the state advised him: This is the legacy of Yang Taifu, and it is not appropriate to move.

古文：敬儿曰： 太傅是谁，我不识。 
现代文：张敬儿说： 太傅是谁？我不认识。 
English: Zhang Jing'er said, "Who is Taifu? I don't know him."

古文：及齐受禅，转侍中、中军将军，迁散骑常侍、车骑将军，置佐史。
现代文：齐帝接受禅让以后，他转任侍中、中军将军，调为散骑常侍、车骑将军，设置了辅佐官吏。
English: After Emperor Qizong accepted Zen's resignation, he was transferred to the posts of the Vice Admiral and the General of the Chinese Army, the Vice Admiral of the Horse and the General of the Chariot, and the post of the Assistant Official.

古文：高帝崩，遗诏加开府仪同三司。
现代文：高帝逝世，遗诏加升他为开府仪同三司。
English: After the death of Emperor Gao, he was elevated to the position of Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji.

古文：于家窃泣曰： 官家大老天子可惜，太子年少，向我所不及也。 
现代文：他在家里偷偷地哭着说： 官家大老天子真可惜死去了，太子年少，过去我和他都没有什么联系！ 
English: He secretly cried at home and said: "It's a shame that the great statesman has died. The crown prince was young, and I had no contact with him in the past!

古文：及拜，王敬则戏之，呼爲褚彦回。
现代文：等到拜见的时候，王敬则给他开玩笑，称他为褚彦回。
English: When he visited him, Wang Jing joked with him and called him Yan Yanbei.

古文：敬儿曰： 我马上所得，终不能作华林合勋也。 
现代文：张敬儿说： 我是在马背上得到的地位，到底不能去做华林阁的功臣。 
English: Zhang Jing'er said: I got my position on horseback, after all, I can't be the hero of Waringge.

古文：敬则甚恨焉。
现代文：王敬则非常愤恨。
English: Wang Jing was very angry.

古文：初，敬儿微时，有妻毛氏，生子道门，而乡里尚氏女有色貌，敬儿悦之，遂弃毛氏而纳尚氏爲室。
现代文：起初，张敬儿微贱的时候，有个妻子毛氏，生了个儿子叫道门，而同乡尚氏的女儿颇有美貌，张敬儿很喜欢她，于是便抛弃了毛氏而纳尚氏为妻。
English: At first, when Zhang Jing'er was a lowly peasant, she had a wife, Mao, who gave birth to a son called Daomen, while the daughter of a fellow villager, Shang, was quite beautiful. Zhang Jing'er liked her very much, so she abandoned Mao and married Nashang.

古文：及居三司，尚氏犹居襄阳宅。
现代文：等他位居三司，尚氏还住在襄阳宅院中。
English: When he was in the Third Division, Mr. Shang still lived in the Xiangyang Mansion.

古文：虑不复外出，乃迎家口悉下至都，啓武帝，不蒙劳问。敬儿心自疑。
现代文：考虑着以后不再外出，便把家里的人都接到京城居住，启奏了武帝，却没有得到武帝的慰问，张敬儿心里便生了疑惑。
English: Considering that she would no longer go out in the future, she invited everyone in her family to live in Beijing, and played Emperor Wu, but did not receive Emperor Wu's condolences. Zhang Jing'er had doubts in her heart.

古文：及垣崇祖死，愈恐惧。
现代文：等到垣崇祖死后，越发恐惧。
English: After Kaki's death, he became more and more afraid.

古文：性好卜术，信梦尤甚，初征荆州，每见诸将帅，不遑有馀计，唯叙梦云： 未贵时，梦居村中，社树欻高数十丈。
现代文：他性情爱好占卜，信梦尤其厉害，起初征讨荆州，每次见到各位将帅，顾不上别的事情，只是叙述梦中的情景说： 还没有富贵的时候，梦见住在村子里，村中的树很快地长到了几十丈高。
English: At first, he wanted to conquer Jingzhou. Every time he saw the generals and admirals, he couldn't think of anything else but to describe the scene in the dream, saying: When I was not rich, I dreamed of living in a village, and the trees in the village quickly grew to dozens of feet high.

古文：及在雍州，又梦社树直上至天。 
现代文：后来在雍州，又梦见村中的树一直长到天上。 
English: Later, in Yongzhou, he also dreamed that the trees in the village grew all the way to the sky.

古文：以此诱说部曲，自云贵不可言。
现代文：他以此诱骗部下，自称贵不可言。
English: He used this to trick his subordinates into thinking he was worth a lot of money.

古文：由是不自测量，无知。
现代文：从此很不自量，十分无知。
English: Since then, I've been very self-centered and very ignorant.

古文：又使于乡里爲谣言，使小儿辈歌曰： 天子在何处？宅在赤谷口，天子是阿谁？非猪如是狗。 
现代文：又派人在家乡造出谣言，让小该子唱道： 天子在何处，宅在赤谷口，天子是阿谁，非猪如是狗。 
English: They also sent someone to fabricate rumors in his hometown, so that the little man would sing: Where is the son of heaven? His home is in Akataguchi. Who is the son of heaven? If he is not a pig, then he is a dog.

古文：敬儿家在冠军，宅前有地名赤谷。
现代文：张敬儿家在冠军，宅前有个地方叫赤谷。
English: Zhang Jing'er's home is in Champion, and there is a place called Akaya in front of the house.

古文：既得开府，又望班剑，语人曰： 我车边犹少班兰物。 
现代文：得到开府以后，又望着仪仗，对别人说： 我车子旁边还缺少一些珍奇物品。 
English: After he was elected, he looked at the ceremonial battle and said to others: I still lack some rare items next to my car.

古文：敬儿长自荒远，少习武事，既从容都下，又四方宁靖，益不得志。
现代文：张敬儿在荒远的地方长大，少年时候就练习武艺，既在京城发展，且又征讨四方，却越发感到不得志。
English: Zhang Jing'er grew up in a desolate place. When he was a boy, he practiced martial arts. Although he developed in Beijing and recruited people from all over, he felt more and more discouraged.

古文：其妻尚氏亦曰： 吾昔梦一手热如火，而君得南阳郡；元徽中，梦一髀热如火，君得本州；建元中，梦半体热，寻得开府；今复举体热矣。 
现代文：他的妻子尚氏也说： 我从前梦见有一只手热得像火烧，而你得到了南阳郡；元徽年间，梦见一条大腿热得像火烧，你便得到了本州；建元年间，梦见半个身子热，不久就得到了开府；现在又全身都热了。 
English: His wife, Shang, also said: I once dreamed of having a hand that was hot like fire, and you got Nanyang County; during the Yuanhui era, I dreamed of a thigh that was hot like fire, and you got Honshu; during the Jianyuan era, I dreamed of half of my body being hot, and soon got Kaifu; now my whole body is hot.

古文：以告所亲，言其妻初梦次梦，又言 今举体热矣 。
现代文：他把这些都告诉了他所亲近的人，说他妻子的初梦次梦，又说 现在全身都热了 。
English: He told everyone close to him about it, about his wife's first and second dreams, and that he was hot all over.

古文：阉人闻其言说之,事达武帝。
现代文：太监听到了他的话都互相说起，事情传到了武帝那里。
English: When the eunuchs heard his words, they all began to talk to each other, and the matter was reported to Emperor Wu.

古文：敬儿又遣使与蛮中交关，武帝疑有异志，永明元年，敕朝臣华林八关斋，于坐收敬儿。
现代文：张敬儿又派遣使者与蛮人来往，武帝怀疑他有异志。永明元年，下令让朝臣举行八关斋，在座位上把张敬儿抓了起来。
English: Zhang Jing'er also sent emissaries to interact with the barbarians. Emperor Wu suspected that he had ulterior motives. In the first year of the Yongming Dynasty, he ordered courtiers to hold a banquet and arrested Zhang Jing'er at his seat.

古文：初，左右雷仲显常以盈满诫敬儿，不能从，至是知有变，抱敬儿泣，敬儿脱冠貂投地曰： 用此物误我。 
现代文：起初，身边人员雷仲显常常劝诫张敬儿不要自满，他不肯听从，到现在知道有了变故，抱着张敬儿哭起来，张敬儿脱掉冠貂扔在地上说： 是这些东西害了我。 
English: At first, the people around Lei Zhongxian often advised Zhang Jing'er not to be complacent, but he refused to listen. Now that he knew something had changed, he hugged Zhang Jing'er and began to cry. Zhang Jing'er took off her crown and threw it on the ground and said, "It was these things that harmed me."

古文：及子道门、道畅、道休并伏诛，少子道庆见宥。
现代文：他的儿子道门、道畅、道休都被处死，少子道庆被宽免。
English: His sons Daomen, Daochang, and Daojue were all executed, while his younger son Daoqing was pardoned.

古文：后数年，上与豫章王嶷三日曲水内宴，舴艋船流至御坐前覆没，上由是言及敬儿，悔杀之。
现代文：后经数年，皇上与豫章王萧嶷在三月初三举行曲水内宴，舴艋小舟流到皇帝座位的前面覆没，皇上由此说起张敬儿，后悔不该把他杀死。
English: Several years later, the emperor and Yuanzhang Wang Xiaoqi held a banquet on the third day of the third month of March. The small boat of Yuanzhang flowed to the front of the emperor's seat and covered it. The emperor spoke of Zhang Jing'er, regretting that he should not have killed him.

古文：敬儿始不识书，及爲方伯，乃习学读孝经、论语。
现代文：张敬儿开始没有读书，等做了地方长官，才学习《孝经》、《论语》。
English: Zhang Jing'er didn't start reading until she became a local governor, and only then did she learn the "Filial Piety Sutra" and "Analects."

古文：初征爲护军，乃潜于密室中屏人学揖让答对，空中俯仰，妾侍窃窥笑焉。
现代文：起初征调他担任护军，他便在密室中屏退了众人学揖让对答，对着空中一仰一俯，侍妾偷偷地看了发笑。
English: At first, he was conscripted to serve as a bodyguard, and then he screened everyone in the secret room to learn how to give and receive answers. He looked up and down at the sky, and his concubine secretly watched and laughed.

古文：将拜三司，谓其妻嫂曰： 我拜后府开黄合。 
现代文：将要封为三司时，对他的妻子、嫂子说： 我封官后府里要开个黄阁。 
English: When he was about to be appointed to the Third Division, he said to his wife and sister-in-law: "After I am appointed, I will open a yellow pavilion in the palace."

古文：因口自爲鼓声。
现代文：于是自己在口中学起了鼓声。
English: So I started to play the drums in my head.

古文：初得鼓吹，羞便奏之。
现代文：刚得了乐队的时候，因为害羞而不让他们演奏。
English: When I first got the band, I didn't let them play because I was shy.

古文：又于新林慈姥庙爲妾祈子祝神，口自称三公，其鄙俚如此。
现代文：又在新林的慈姥庙中为他的妾向神灵祈求生子，嘴里自称三公，他就是这样的鄙俗。
English: He also prayed to the gods for a son for his concubine in the Temple of the Compassionate Grandmother in Xinlin, calling himself the Three Princes. He is just such a vulgarity.

古文：始其母于田中卧，梦犬子有角舐之，已而有娠而生敬儿，故初名苟儿。
现代文：开始他的母亲在田地里躺着，梦见一条狗的崽子有角而用嘴舔它。随后自己就怀孕生了张敬儿，所以起初名叫苟儿。
English: At first, his mother lay in the field and dreamed of a dog's beak with horns and licked it with her mouth. Later, she became pregnant and gave birth to Zhang Jing'er, so she was first named Guo'er.

古文：又生一子，因苟儿之名复名猪儿。
现代文：又生了一个儿子，随着苟儿的名字又叫猪儿。
English: She also gave birth to a son, who was named Piglet after his mother.

古文：宋明帝嫌苟儿名鄙，改爲敬儿，故猪儿亦改爲恭儿，位正员郎，谢病归本县，常居上保村，不肯出仕，与居人不异。
现代文：宋明帝嫌苟儿的名字低俗，改为敬儿，所以猪儿也改为恭儿，位居正员郎，告病回到了本县，常常住在上保村，不肯出来做官，和居民没有什么区别。
English: Emperor Ming of Song thought that the name of Gong'er was vulgar and changed it to Jing'er, so the Pig's name was also changed to Gong'er, and he was ranked as an official member. He became ill and returned to this county. He often lived in Shangbo Village and refused to come out to work as an official. There was no difference between him and the residents.

古文：与敬儿爱友甚笃。
现代文：他和张敬儿友爱很深。
English: He and Zhang Jing'er have a deep friendship.

古文：及闻敬儿败，走入蛮。
现代文：等他听说张敬儿被杀，逃跑进入蛮人区。
English: When he heard that Zhang Jing'er had been killed, he ran away and entered the barbarian area.

古文：后首出，原其罪。
现代文：后又出来自首，朝廷宽恕了他的罪过。
English: He later turned himself in, and the court pardoned his crime.

