古文：贞观元年，太宗谓房玄龄等曰： 致治之本，惟在于审。
现代文：贞观元年，唐太宗对房玄龄等人说： 治理国家的根本在于审慎。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to Fang Xuanling and others: The foundation of governing the country lies in prudence.

古文：量才授职，务省官员。
现代文：要根据一个人能力的大小授予官职，务必精减官员人数。
English: The number of officials must be reduced to a minimum, so that officials are appointed according to their ability.

古文：故《书》称： 任官惟贤才。 
现代文：所以《尚书》说： 只选取贤良和有才能的人做官。 
English: Therefore, the "Shang Shu" said: Only the virtuous and talented people should be selected to serve as officials.

古文：又云： 官不必备，惟其人。 
现代文：同时《尚书》还说： 官员不在多，在于用人得当。 
English: At the same time, "Shangshu" also said: There are not many officials, it is a matter of employing people properly.

古文：若得其善者，虽少亦足矣；其不善者，纵多亦奚为？古人亦以官不得其才，比于画地作饼，不可食也。《诗》曰： 谋夫孔多，是用不就。 
现代文：如果任用了好官，尽管人数不多也可以让天下得到治理；用了不好的官，人数再多又有什么用呢？古人说不根据才能选择官员，就像在地上画饼不能充饥一样。《诗经》有句话： 参谋的人如果多了，决策的时候反而不知所从。 
English: If good officials are appointed, the world can be governed, even if the number is small; if bad officials are appointed, what is the use of more people? The ancients said that officials should not be selected on the basis of ability, just as cakes cannot be painted on the ground to satisfy hunger. "The Book of Songs" has a saying: If there are more staff officers, they will not know what to do when making decisions.

古文：又孔子曰： 官事不摄，焉得俭？ 
现代文：孔子说： 官员不处理政务，官吏怎么会得到精简呢？ 
English: Confucius said: If officials do not handle government affairs, how can officials be streamlined?

古文：且 千羊之皮，不如一狐之腋。 
现代文：孔子还说： 一千只羊的皮，不如一只狐狸的毛。 
English: Confucius also said, "The skin of a thousand sheep is not as fine as the hair of a fox."

古文：此皆载在经典，不能具道。
现代文：这些至理名言都载入史册，数不胜数。
English: These wise sayings are recorded in the annals of history, countless.

古文：当须更并省官员，使得各当所任，则无为而治矣。
现代文：现在应当审查官吏，让他们都能够发挥各自的作用，那么国家就可以无为而治了。
English: Now is the time to review officials, so that they can all play their respective roles, and then the country can do nothing.

古文：卿宜详思此理，量定庶官员位。 
现代文：你应该仔细考虑一下这个问题，确定官员的人数。 
English: You should carefully consider this issue and determine the number of officials.

古文：玄龄等由是所置文武总六百四十员。太宗从之，因谓玄龄曰： 自此倘有乐工杂类，假使术逾侪辈者，只可特赐钱帛以赏其能，必不可超授官爵，与夫朝贤君子比肩而立，同坐而食，遣诸衣冠以为耻累。 
现代文：房玄龄等人于是拟定出文武官员共六百四十人，唐太宗接受了这个数额，并对房玄龄说： 从今以后，如果谁有音乐、杂艺等一技之长，超过一般人的，只可以赏赐给他们钱财丝帛，一定不可奖赏过度，授予他们官职。从而让他们和朝廷的栋梁之才并肩而站，同桌而食，致使绅士、大夫引以为耻。 
English: Fang Xuanling and others then worked out a total of 640 civil and military officials. Tang Taizong accepted this amount and said to Fang Xuanling: From now on, if anyone has a skill such as music and handicrafts that is superior to the average person, they can only be rewarded with money and silk brocade. They must not be over-rewarded and they must be granted official positions. Thus, they are allowed to stand side by side with the pillars of the court and eat at the same table, causing gentlemen and doctors to be ashamed.

古文：贞观二年，太宗谓房玄龄、杜如晦曰： 公为仆射，当助朕忧劳，广开耳目，求访贤哲。
现代文：贞观二年，唐太宗对房玄龄、杜如晦说： 你们身为仆射，应当帮助我排忧解难，广开耳目，求访贤能之人。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to Fang Xuanling and Du Rugao: You, as courtiers, should help me solve problems, open my ears and eyes, and seek out virtuous people.

古文：比闻公等听受辞讼，日有数百。此则读符牒不暇，安能助朕求贤哉？ 
现代文：听说你们每天要处理几百件诉讼，这样整天阅读公文都来不及，怎么能够帮助我寻访贤才呢？ 
English: I heard that you have to deal with hundreds of lawsuits every day, so it's too late to read official documents all day. How can you help me find talents?

古文：因敕尚书省，细碎务皆付左右丞，惟冤滞大事合闻奏者，关于仆射。
现代文：于是唐太宗下令尚书省把细碎的事情交给左右丞处理，只有冤案被延误应该奏请皇上这样的大事，才交给仆射处理。
English: As a result, Emperor Taizong of Tang ordered the Ministry of Literature and Literature to hand over the details of the case to Zuoying to deal with, and only if the case was delayed should it be reported to the emperor.

古文：贞观二年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 朕每夜恒思百姓间事，或至夜半不寐。惟恐都督、刺史堪养百姓以否。
现代文：贞观二年，唐太宗对侍从的大臣们说： 我每天夜里总想着民间的事情，有时到半夜还睡不着，就是担心都督、刺史能否安抚百姓。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to his attendant ministers: I always think about the people's affairs every night, and sometimes I can't fall asleep until midnight, because I'm worried about whether the governor and the chief secretary can appease the people.

古文：故于屏风上录其姓名，坐卧恒看，在官如有善事，亦具列于名下。
现代文：所以在屏风上记下他们的姓名，坐着躺下都可看看，他们在任上如果做了好事，也都记在他们的名下。
English: Therefore, write down their names on the screen, and you can look at them while sitting or lying down. If they do something good while in office, it will also be recorded under their names.

古文：朕居深宫之中，视听不能及远，所委者惟都督、刺史，此辈实治乱所系，尤须得人。 
现代文：我住在深宫之中，看不到也听不到远处，所依靠的就是都督、刺史。这些地方长官实在是关系到国家的太平和动乱，特别需要选择得力的人。 
English: I live in the middle of a deep palace, I can't see or hear far away, and what I rely on is the governor and the chief historian. These local governors are really related to the country's peace and turmoil, and it is especially necessary to choose competent people.

古文：贞观二年，太宗谓右仆射封德彝曰： 致安之本，惟在得人。
现代文：贞观二年，唐太宗对右仆射封德彝说： 天下太平的根本，在于得到合适的人才。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to his right-hand man Shafeng Dejun: The foundation of peace in the world lies in getting the right talent.

古文：比来命卿举贤，未尝有所推荐。
现代文：近来我让你向我推荐人才，却不见你有所行动。
English: Recently, I asked you to recommend talent to me, but I haven't seen any action from you.

古文：天下事重，卿宜分朕忧劳，卿既不言，朕将安寄？ 
现代文：天下的事情如此繁重，你应当为我分担忧虑，你不向我推荐贤才，那我又能向谁询问呢？ 
English: The affairs of the world are so heavy, you should be worried about me, you do not recommend me a wise man, then who can I ask?

古文：对曰： 臣愚岂敢不尽情，但今未见有奇才异能。 
现代文：封德彝回答说： 下臣虽然不才，怎么敢不尽心尽力呢？只是现在我还没有发现出类拔萃的俊杰。 
English: Feng Deyao replied, "Although my subordinate is not talented, how dare he not do his best? However, I have not yet found an outstanding talent.

古文：太宗曰： 前代明王使人如器，皆取士于当时，不借才于异代。
现代文：唐太宗说： 过去圣明的君主很善于使用人才，从众多的人才中选拔杰出者加以重用，不一味地依靠前朝的遗老遗少。
English: Tang Taizong said: In the past, the wise monarchs were very good at using talents, selecting outstanding talents from many talents to reuse them, and relying on the legacies of the previous dynasty.

古文：岂得待梦傅说，逢吕尚，然后为政乎？
现代文：哪里像商代的国君武丁在梦中见到了他以后的丞相傅说，周文王占卜找到了将要辅佐他的姜太公，然后才开始治理国家呢？
English: Where, for example, did the king of the Shang Dynasty, Wuding, see in a dream his future prime minister, Fu, or the king of Zhou Dynasty, Zhou Wen, use divination to find Jiang Taigong, who would assist him, before he began to govern the country?

古文：且何代无贤，但患遗而不知耳！ 
现代文：况且哪一个朝代没有贤才，恐怕是被遗漏不被发现罢了。 
English: Moreover, which dynasty does not have a wise man, I'm afraid it's just by omission and not being discovered.

古文：德彝惭赧而退。
现代文：封德彝听后，惭愧地退了下去。
English: After listening to Feng Deyao, he retreated with shame.

古文：贞观三年，太宗谓吏部尚书杜如晦曰： 比见吏部择人，惟取其言词刀笔，不悉其景行。
现代文：贞观三年，唐太宗对吏部尚书杜如晦说： 我发现吏部选择官员，只看他文才是否出众，而不看他的道德品行。
English: In the third year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to Shang Shudu, the head of the personnel department: I found that the personnel department selected officials only according to whether they were outstanding in literature, but not according to their moral conduct.

古文：数年之后，恶迹始彰，虽加刑戮，而百姓已受其弊。
现代文：几年之后，这些人的劣迹渐渐败露，虽然对他们进行了处罚，但是对老百姓已经造成了伤害。
English: A few years later, the misdeeds of these people gradually came to light. Although they were punished, they had already caused harm to the people.

古文：如何可获善人？ 
现代文：那么，如何才能够选拔到优秀的官员呢？ 
English: So, how can we select good officials?

古文：如晦对曰： 两汉取人，皆行著乡闾，州郡贡之，然后入用，故当时号为多士。
现代文：杜如晦说： 西汉和东汉选择的官员，他们的美德闻名乡里，成为众人的楷模，然后他们被州郡推荐，最后才被任用，所以两汉以选拔人才出众而著称。
English: Du Rugao said: The officials selected by the Western Han Dynasty and the Eastern Han Dynasty were the best. Their virtues were famous in the countryside and became a model for everyone. Then they were recommended by the state and county, and finally they were appointed. So the two Han Dynasties were famous for selecting outstanding talents.

古文：今每年选集，向数千人，厚貌饰词，不可知悉，选司但配其阶品而已。
现代文：现在每年所选的人才，多达数千人，这些人外表谨慎忠厚、言语巧加掩饰，不可能很全面地了解他们。吏部只能做到授予他们品级和职位而已。
English: Now, thousands of talented people are selected every year, and it is impossible to have a complete understanding of these people, who are outwardly cautious and loyal, and whose words are skillfully disguised. The cadre department can only grant them rank and position.

古文：铨简之理，实所未精，所以不能得才。 
现代文：选补官员的规章制度，实在不够完善，所以不能得到真正的人才。 
English: The rules and regulations for the selection of replacement officials are really not perfect enough, so it is impossible to get real talent.

古文：太宗乃将依汉时法令，本州辟召，会功臣等将行世封事，遂止。
现代文：太宗于是打算依照两汉时的法令，改由各州郡推荐人才，但因为功臣等人将实行世袭封官授爵制，这件事就停止了。
English: Emperor Taizong then planned to follow the laws of the two Han dynasties and have the states and counties recommend talents, but this was stopped because heroes and others would implement the hereditary knighthood system.

古文：贞观六年，太宗谓魏征曰： 古人云，王者须为官择人，不可造次即用。
现代文：贞观六年，唐太宗对魏徵说： 古人说过，君主必须根据官职来选择合适的人，不能轻率任用。
English: In the sixth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to Wei Zheng: The ancients said that the monarch must choose the right person according to the official position, and cannot be appointed rashly.

古文：朕今行一事，则为天下所观；出一言，则为天下所听。
现代文：我现在办一件事，就被天下人看到；说一句话，就被天下人听到。
English: If I do one thing now, the whole world will see it; if I say one word, the whole world will hear it.

古文：用得正人，为善者皆劝；误用恶人，不善者竞进。
现代文：任用了正直的人，干好事的都得到劝勉；错用了坏人，不干好事的就争相钻营求利。
English: If you hire honest people, those who do good things will be encouraged; if you hire bad people, those who don't do good things will compete for profits.

古文：赏当其劳，无功者自退；罚当其罪，为恶者戒惧。
现代文：奖赏和功绩相当，没有功劳的就会自动退避；惩罚和罪恶相称，坏人就有所戒惧。
English: If the reward is commensurate with the merit, those without merit will automatically withdraw; if the punishment is commensurate with the crime, the bad person will be afraid.

古文：故知赏罚不可轻行，用人弥须慎择。 
现代文：由此可知赏罚绝不可以轻易使用，用人更需要慎重选择。 
English: From this, it can be seen that rewards and punishments should never be used lightly, and employers need to choose carefully.

古文：征对曰： 知人之事，自古为难，故考绩黜陟，察其善恶。
现代文：魏徵对答说： 知人善任这件事，从古以来就是很难的，所以在考核劳绩、决定贬降还是升迁时，要察看他的善恶。
English: Wei Zheng replied: Since ancient times, it has been difficult to know whether a person is good or bad. Therefore, when assessing performance and deciding whether to demote or promote, it is necessary to look at his good or evil.

古文：今欲求人，必须审访其行。
现代文：如今想找人才，必须仔细察访他的品行。
English: Nowadays, if you want to find talent, you must carefully examine his character.

古文：若知其善，然后用之，设令此人不能济事，只是才力不及，不为大害。
现代文：如果了解到真是好的，然后才可任用。假如此人不会办事，只是才力不够，还没有什么大害处。
English: If it is really good to know, then it can be appointed. If so, people will not work, but they are not talented enough, and there is no great harm.

古文：误用恶人，假令强干，为害极多。
现代文：错用了坏人，假使他能力强会办事，那为害就太多了。
English: If a bad man is misused, and if he is capable and can do things, the harm is too great.

古文：但乱世惟求其才，不顾其行。
现代文：但在乱世只求有才能，可以不管品行。
English: But in a turbulent world, only talent is required, regardless of character.

古文：太平之时，必须才行俱兼，始可任用。 
现代文：太平时候，必须才能、品行都好，方可任用。 
English: In peacetime, a person can be appointed only if his or her ability and conduct are good.

古文：贞观十一年，侍御史马周上疏曰： 治天下者以人为本，欲令百姓安乐，惟在刺史、县令。
现代文：贞观十一年，侍御史马周上疏说： 人才是治理好天下的根本。要想让百姓安居乐业，关键是选好刺史和县令。
English: In the eleventh year of Zhenguan, the attendant Shima Zhou Shangsuo said: Talent is the foundation of good governance. If you want people to live and work in peace, the key is to choose a good history and county order.

古文：县令既众，不可皆贤，若每州得良刺史，则合境苏息。
现代文：县令那么多，不可能都是贤才，如果每个州都能有一个好的刺史，那么整个州就可以安定繁荣了。
English: There are so many county magistrates, they can't all be geniuses. If each state can have a good history, then the entire state can be stable and prosperous.

古文：天下刺史悉称圣意，则陛下可端拱岩廊之上，百姓不虑不安。
现代文：如果全州的刺史都符合皇上的心意，那么陛下就可以高枕无忧，百姓就不用忧虑不能安居乐业了。
English: If the history of the whole state is in line with the emperor's wishes, then his majesty can rest easy, and the people will not have to worry about living and working in peace.

古文：自古郡守、县令，皆妙选贤德，欲有迁擢为将相，必先试以临人，或从二千石入为丞相及司徒、太尉者。
现代文：自古以来，郡守、县令都是精心挑选德才兼备的人担任，打算提拔为将军或宰相的，一定先让他们做一段时间的地方官进行考察，有的从郡州官员升为宰相、司徒或太尉。
English: Since ancient times, county governors and county magistrates have been carefully selected people who are both talented and qualified. If they plan to be promoted to general or prime minister, they must first be allowed to work as local officials for a period of time to investigate, and some have been promoted from county and state officials to prime minister, magistrate or lieutenant.

古文：朝廷必不可独重内臣，外刺史、县令，遂轻其选。
现代文：朝廷千万不要只注意皇帝身边大臣的选拔，而忽视州县两级主要官员的选拔。
English: The imperial court must not only pay attention to the selection of ministers around the emperor, but ignore the selection of major officials at the state and county levels.

古文：所以百姓未安，殆由于此。 
现代文：百姓不能安居乐业，恐怕与此有关。 
English: I'm afraid this has something to do with the fact that people can't live and work in peace.

古文：太宗因谓侍臣曰： 刺史朕当自简择；县令诏京官五品已上，各举一人。 
现代文：于是太宗对侍臣说： 刺史由我亲自挑选，县令就由在京五品以上的官员每人推荐一人。 
English: Then Emperor Taizong said to his vassal, "I will personally select the sashimi chef, and the county magistrate will be recommended by officials of the fifth grade and above in Beijing.

古文：贞观十一年，治书侍御史刘洎以为左右丞宜特加精简，上疏曰： 臣闻尚书万机，实为政本，伏寻此选，授任诚难。
现代文：贞观十一年，治书侍御史刘洎认为尚书左、右丞的人选应当特别精心挑选，上疏说： 臣知道尚书省日理万机，是施政的中枢，这里人员的选用任命，确实很不简单。
English: In the 11th year of Zhenguan, Liu Wei, the secretary of the book, believed that the candidates for the left and right of the book should be carefully selected. Shang Shao said: The minister knows that the book department is a powerful mechanism, it is the center of government, and the selection and appointment of personnel here is really not simple.

古文：是以八座比于文昌，二丞方于管辖，爰至曹郎，上应列宿，苟非称职，窃位兴讥。
现代文：所以左、右仆射和六部长官好比是天上文昌宫内的众星，左右二丞好像是锁管车辖，这些官员以及下至曹郎，也与上天的星宿相应，如果不能称职，占了位置会引起讥评。
English: Therefore, the left and right servants and the six ministers are like the stars in the Chang Palace in heaven, and the left and right second lieutenants seem to be under the control of the lock. These officials, as well as down to Cao Lang, also correspond to the heavenly stars. If they are not competent, occupying the position will cause ridicule.

古文：伏见比来尚书省诏敕稽停，文案壅滞，臣诚庸劣，请述其源。
现代文：我看到近来尚书省承受诏敕后搁下来不迅速执行，文书案卷堆积不及时处理，我虽庸劣无能，也请让我讲一讲这种现象的由来。
English: Recently, I have seen that the Ministry of Education and Culture, after receiving the imperial edict, has not implemented it promptly, and the paperwork has not been handled in a timely manner. Although I am incompetent, please let me tell you the origin of this phenomenon.

古文：贞观之初，未有令、仆，于时省务繁杂，倍多于今。而左丞戴胄、右丞魏征并晓达吏方，质性平直，事应弹举，无所回避，陛下又假以恩慈，自然肃物。
现代文：在贞观初年，没有任命尚书令和左右仆射，当时尚书省里公务繁杂，比今天成倍地多，左丞戴胄、右丞魏徵，都办事熟练，公平正直，事情有问题就予以指责，从不回避。陛下对他们又信任爱护，自然能整肃纲纪。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Shang Shuling and his right and left subordinates were not appointed. At that time, the official duties in Shang Shuling were complex and more than doubled compared to today. Zu Rong Dai Zheng and Yu Rong Wei Zheng were skilled, fair and honest. If there was a problem, they would be criticized and never evaded. His Majesty also trusted and cared for them, and was naturally able to rectify the discipline.

古文：百司匪懈，抑此之由。
现代文：各个部门之所以不敢懈怠，就是任人得当的缘故。
English: The reason why various departments do not dare to slack off is because they have the right people.

古文：及杜正伦续任右丞，颇亦厉下。
现代文：到杜正伦继任右丞，也能够对下面严格要求。
English: To Du Zhenglan's successor, he can also make strict demands on the following.

古文：比者纲维不举，并为勋亲在位，器非其任，功势相倾。
现代文：近来之所以纲纪不整，都是由于勋旧亲戚占据了位置，既无才能胜任，又凭功勋倚仗势力互相倾轧。
English: Recently, the reason for the irregularity of the discipline is due to the fact that old relatives have occupied the position, neither having the ability to be competent, but relying on the merits of the forces to fight each other.

古文：凡在官寮，未循公道，虽欲自强，先惧嚣谤。
现代文：其他官僚，也不能秉公办事，即使想有所振作，又会先因畏惧争吵毁谤而退缩。
English: Other bureaucrats, too, cannot act impartially, and even if they want to cheer up, they will first shrink back for fear of quarrels and slander.

古文：所以郎中予夺，惟事咨禀；尚书依违，不能断决。或纠弹闻奏，故事稽延，案虽理穷，仍更盘下。
现代文：所以一般事务都由郎中定夺，遇到难事就都向上面请示；尚书也模棱两可，不能决断，有些纠察弹劾的案件应该上奏，也故意拖延，事情虽已弄得很清楚，仍然盘问下属。
English: Therefore, the general affairs are all decided by the vassals, and in the event of difficulties, the instructions are all requested from above; the instructions are also ambiguous and cannot be decided, some cases of picketing and impeachment should be reported, and they are also deliberately delayed. Although the matter has been made very clear, they still interrogate the subordinates.

古文：去无程限，来不责迟，一经出手，便涉年载。
现代文：公文发出去没期限，回复来迟了也不指责，事情一经交办，就拖上成年累月。
English: There is no deadline for the official document to be sent out, and there is no reproach if the reply is late. Once the matter is assigned, it will drag on for months.

古文：或希旨失情，或避嫌抑理。
现代文：有的只迎合上边的旨意而不考虑是否和实情相符，有的为了避免嫌疑而不管是否在理。
English: Some only cater to the will of the above without considering whether it is consistent with the facts, and some in order to avoid suspicion, regardless of whether it is reasonable.

古文：勾司以案成为事了，不究是非；尚书用便僻为奉公，莫论当否。互相姑息，惟事弥缝。
现代文：办案的部门只求办成就了事，不追究是非；尚书把逢迎谄媚作为奉公守法，不管对错，互相姑息，有了问题但求掩盖。
English: The case-handling departments only seek to accomplish things, and do not investigate the rights and wrongs; Shangshu regards the flattery as obeying the law, regardless of right and wrong, and tolerates each other. If there is a problem, it should be covered up.

古文：且选众授能，非才莫举，天工人代，焉可妄加？
现代文：而且官职应该从众人中选拔有才能的授予，没有才能就不应举荐，官是代上天办事，怎能随便叫人来做？
English: Moreover, official positions should be awarded to talented people selected from the masses, and those without talent should not be recommended. Officials act on behalf of heaven, so how can they just ask anyone to do it?

古文：至于懿戚元勋，但宜优其礼秩，或年高及耄，或积病智昏，既无益于时宜，当置之以闲逸。
现代文：至于亲戚元勋，只能给他们优厚的礼遇，他们有的高年老耄，有的因久病而理智不清，在当前既已做不出贡献，就应让他们休息去安度晚年。
English: As for the relatives of the founding fathers, they can only give them generous courtesy. Some of them are old and senile, and some are not rational due to long-term illness. Since they cannot make any contribution at present, they should be allowed to rest and enjoy their old age.

古文：久妨贤路，殊为不可。
现代文：让他们长期在位阻碍进用贤能的途径，这是极不恰当的。
English: It is highly inappropriate for them to remain in office for a long period of time to obstruct the path of meritocracy.

古文：将救兹弊，且宜精简尚书左右丞及左右郎中。如并得人，自然纲维备举，亦当矫正趋竞，岂惟息其稽滞哉！ 
现代文：为纠正这类弊端，应先精心挑选尚书左、右丞和左、右郎中，如果都用上称职的人，自然纲纪确立，还能纠正那种奔走争官做的歪风，这岂止是解决办事拖拉啊！ 
English: In order to correct this kind of drawback, it is necessary to first carefully select the left and right officers and the left and right junior officers. If they all use competent people, the natural discipline will be established, and it will be possible to correct the crooked style of running around and arguing with officials. This is not just a solution to procrastination!

古文：疏奏，寻以洎为尚书左丞。
现代文：奏章送了上去，不久便派刘洎做尚书左丞。
English: The score was sent up, and soon Liu Ye was assigned to be the secretary.

古文：贞观十三年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 朕闻太平后必有大乱，大乱后必有太平。
现代文：贞观十三年，唐太宗对侍臣说： 我听说，太平之后必然天下大乱，大乱之后，必然又复归太平。
English: In the thirteenth year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong of Tang said to his attendants: I have heard that after the Taiping, there will inevitably be great chaos in the world. After the great chaos, there will inevitably be a return to Taiping.

古文：大乱之后，即是太平之运也。
现代文：大乱之后，即是太平之运。
English: After the turmoil, it was a time of peace.

古文：能安天下者，惟在用得贤才。
现代文：要想使国泰民安，只有任用贤才。
English: If we want to make Guotai safe for the people, we can only appoint the best talents.

古文：公等既不知贤，朕又不可遍识，日复一日，无得人之理。
现代文：你们既然不知道贤才，我又不可能一一加以考察，这样下去是永远得不到贤才的。
English: Since you do not know the sages, it is impossible for me to examine them one by one. If we continue like this, we will never get the sages.

古文：今欲令人自举，于事何如？ 
现代文：现在我下令让人才自我推荐，你们看怎么样呢？ 
English: Now I've ordered people to recommend themselves. What do you think?

古文：魏征对曰： 知人者智，自知者明。
现代文：魏徵回答说： 了解别人的人聪明，了解自己的人明智。
English: Wei Zheng replied, "He who knows others is clever, he who knows himself is wise.

古文：知人既以为难，自知诚亦不易。
现代文：了解别人很不容易，了解自己就更为艰难。
English: It is not easy to understand others, and it is even more difficult to understand oneself.

古文：且愚暗之人，皆矜能伐善，恐长浇竞之风，不可令其自举。 
现代文：并且愚昧无知的人，都自以为了不起，时常打击比自己有才能的人。这样恐怕会助长世人攀比竞争的不良风气，我认为陛下不可这样做。 
English: Moreover, foolish and ignorant people think they are so great that they often beat those who are more talented than themselves. I am afraid that this will promote the bad culture of competition in the world. I don't think His Majesty should do this.

古文：贞观十四年，特进魏征上疏曰：
现代文：贞观十四年，特进魏徵上疏说：
English: In the 14th year of Zhenguan, the special envoy Wei Zheng said:

古文：臣闻知臣莫若君，知子莫若父。
现代文：我听说，了解臣子莫若君主，了解孩子莫若父亲。
English: I've heard it said that if you don't know your vassal, you don't know your monarch, and if you don't know your child, you don't know your father.

古文：父不能知其子，则无以睦一家；君不能知其臣，则无以齐万国。
现代文：父亲不了解自己的孩子，就无法使家庭和睦；君主不了解自己的臣子，就不能治理国家。
English: If a father does not understand his children, he will not be able to reconcile his family; if a prince does not understand his subjects, he will not be able to govern.

古文：万国咸宁，一人有庆，必藉忠良作弼，俊乂在官，则庶绩其凝，无为而化矣。
现代文：而要使天下太平，皇帝无忧无患，那就要忠臣辅佐。贤臣在朝就会政绩卓越，这样就可以无为而治了。
English: But to make the world peaceful and the emperor worry-free, it is necessary to have loyal vassals and assistants. Wise vassals will have excellent political performance in the government, so that they can rule without doing anything.

古文：故尧、舜、文、武见称前载，咸以知人则哲，多士盈朝，元、凯翼巍巍之功，周、召光焕乎之美。
现代文：所以尧、舜、文王、武王能名存千古，他们都有知人之明，使贤才会聚于朝廷。舜派八凯管理农耕，制定历法，让八元散布教化，使国家内外归顺，建立了赫赫功业。周公、召公辅佐周成王成就一代帝业，美名传扬。
English: Therefore, the names of Zhou, Zhou, King Wen, and King Wu can be preserved for thousands of years. They all knew each other well, and the wise men gathered at the imperial court. Zhou sent Hakkai to manage agriculture, establish a calendar, let Hakkai spread enlightenment, make the country and the world submit, and established a great achievement. Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong's assistant Zhou Chengwang achieved a generation of imperial career and spread their fame.

古文：然则四岳、九官、五臣、十乱，岂惟生之于曩代，而独无于当今者哉？
现代文：难道 四岳 、 九官 、 五臣 、 十乱 这样的贤臣，只能生活在前朝，而当今唯独没有吗？
English: Could it be that the Four Mountains, the Nine Officials, the Five Ministers, and the Ten Rebellions could only be lived in the former dynasty, while today there is no such thing as the Four Mountains, Nine Officials, Five Ministers, and Ten Rebellions?

古文：在乎求与不求，好与不好耳！
现代文：这只是在于国君求与不求、喜好与不喜好而已。
English: It's just a matter of what the sovereign wants and doesn't want, what he likes and doesn't like.

古文：何以言之？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why do you say that?

古文：夫美玉明珠，孔翠犀象，大宛之马，西旅之獒，或无足也，或无情也，生于八荒之表，途遥万里之外，重译入贡，道路不绝者，何哉？
现代文：像那些美玉明珠、孔雀翡翠、犀牛大象、大宛的宝马、西夷国的獒，它们不是没有手足，就是无情之物，出产在蛮荒的地方，离这里有万里之遥，但是还是有人源源不断地把这些东西带进来，为什么呢？
English: Like those beautiful jade pearls, peacock emeralds, rhinoceros elephants, Daewon's BMW, Xi'er country's dragonflies, they are either limbless or merciless things, produced in wild places, thousands of miles away from here, but there are still people who continuously bring these things in, why?

古文：盖由乎中国之所好也。
现代文：是因为这里的人喜好它们罢了。
English: It's just that people here like them.

古文：况从仕者怀君之荣，食君之禄，率之以义，将何往而不至哉？
现代文：况且做官的人都仰慕陛下的盛德，享受君主赐予的俸禄，如果君主用道义引导他们，他们怎么会不尽职尽责呢？
English: Moreover, all officials admire His Majesty's virtue and enjoy the salary given by the monarch. If the monarch guides them with morality, how can they not perform their duties?

古文：臣以为与之为孝，则可使同乎曾参、子骞矣；与之为忠，则可使同乎龙逄、比干矣；与之为信，则可使同乎尾生、展禽矣；与之为廉，则可使同乎伯夷、叔齐矣。
现代文：我认为如果导之以孝，那么就可以使他们像孝子曾参、子骞那样加以重用；如果导之以忠，就可以把他们当做龙逢和比干那样的臣子而加以提拔；导之以信，就可使他们像尾生、展禽一样；导之以廉，就可以使他们像伯夷、叔齐一样。
English: I think that if they are guided by filial piety, then they can be used as much as their filial sons Zeng Zang and Zi Zhu; if they are guided by loyalty, then they can be promoted as courtiers like Long Feng and Bi Gan; if they are guided by faith, then they can be used like bream and pheasants; if they are guided by laziness, then they can be used like Bai Yi and Uncle Qi.

古文：然而今之群臣，罕能贞白卓异者，盖求之不切，励之未精故也。
现代文：然而今天的群臣，洁身自好、才能出众的人非常少有，恐怕是因为朝廷求贤之心不急切，没有鼓励劝勉他们的缘故。
English: Today's courtiers, however, are very few and far between. This is probably due to the fact that the imperial court does not have an urgent desire to seek out and encourage those with outstanding talent.

古文：若勖之以公忠，期之以远大，各有职分，得行其道；贵则观其所举，富则观其所养，居则观其所好，习则观其所言，穷则观其所不受，贱则观其所不为；因其材以取之，审其能以任之，用其所长，掩其所短；进之以六正，戒之以六邪，则不严而自励，不劝而自勉矣。
现代文：如果用公正忠诚去要求他们，用建功立业去激励他们，让他们各尽其职，各安其位。处高位则看其举荐的人，身富则看其养育的人，闲居时看其所好，学习时看其言语，穷困时看其气节，卑贱时看其德行。量才录用，发挥他们的长处，克服他们的短处，用 六正 去勉励他们，用 六邪 去警戒他们。那么，即使不严厉地对待他们，他们自己也会振奋，不用苦口婆心地劝勉，他们也会自己努力。
English: If you use fairness and loyalty to require them, use merit to motivate them, let them each do their duty, each secure their place. The high position is based on the person they recommend, the wealth is based on the person they nurture, the idleness is based on their likes, the learning is based on their words, the poverty is based on their temperament, and the lowliness is based on their virtues. Only the best are hired, give play to their strengths, overcome their weaknesses, use the six virtues to encourage them, and use the six evils to warn them. Then, even if you do not treat them harshly, they will cheer themselves up. They do not have to work hard to persuade,

古文：故《说苑》曰： 人臣之行，有六正六邪。
现代文：因此汉代刘向在《说苑》中写道： 臣子的行为，表现为六正六邪。
English: Therefore, Liu Xiang of the Han Dynasty wrote in "Saying Garden": The behavior of the vassal is manifested as six positive and six evil.

古文：行六正则荣，犯六邪则辱。
现代文：实行六正则臣子光荣，犯了六邪之罪则臣子耻辱。
English: It is the glory of a vassal to practice the six virtues, and the disgrace of a vassal to commit the six vices.

古文：何谓六正？
现代文：什么是六正呢？
English: What is Rikusho?

古文：一曰萌芽未动，形兆未见，昭然独见存亡之机，得失之要，预禁乎未然之前，使主超然立乎显荣之处，如此者，圣臣也。
现代文：一是有先见之明，在事情还没有发生之前，臣子能够预见到得失存亡的利害，使君主免于祸患，永保江山稳固，这样的臣子，是圣臣。
English: On the one hand, there is foresight. Before things have happened, a vassal can foresee the interests of survival, save the monarch from disaster, and keep the country stable forever. Such a vassal is a saint.

古文：二曰虚心尽意，日进善道，勉主以礼义，谕主以长策，将顺其美，匡救其恶，如此者，良臣也。
现代文：二是虚心进谏，劝告君主实行礼义，帮助君主成就善事，避免君主犯错误，这样的臣子，是良臣。
English: The second is to be open-minded, to advise the monarch to practice propriety, to help the monarch achieve good deeds, and to avoid the monarch making mistakes. Such a vassal is a good vassal.

古文：三曰夙兴夜寐，进贤不懈，数称往古之行事，以厉主意，如此者，忠臣也。
现代文：三是废寝忘食，兢兢业业，不断地为朝廷举荐贤才，不断用古代圣贤的楷模来勉励君主，励精图治，这样的臣子，是忠臣。
English: Thirdly, a loyal vassal is a vassal who never sleeps, never forgets to eat, works diligently, constantly recommends talents to the imperial court, constantly encourages the monarch with the model of ancient sages, and works hard to govern.

古文：四曰明察成败，早防而救之，塞其间，绝其源，转祸以为福，使君终以无忧，如此者，智臣也。
现代文：四是明察秋毫，防微杜渐，断绝祸患产生的根源，转危为安，使君主高枕无忧，这样的臣，是智臣。
English: The fourth is to clearly observe the ups and downs, prevent the ups and downs, cut off the root causes of disasters, turn the corner, and make the monarch worry-free. Such a minister is a wise minister.

古文：五曰守文奉法，任官职事，不受赠遗，辞禄让赐，饮食节俭，如此者，贞臣也。六曰家国昏乱，所为不谀，敢犯主之严颜，面言主之过失，如此者，直臣也。是谓六正。
现代文：五是奉公守法，不收贿赂，谦让节制，这样的臣子，是贞臣。六是国家混乱，敢冒天下之大不韪，当面指出君主的过错，这样的臣子，是直臣。以上就是所说的 六正 。
English: The fifth is to be law-abiding, not to accept bribes, and to be modest and restrained. Such a vassal is a chaste vassal. The sixth is to be a vassal who dares to point out the mistakes of the monarch in the face of the chaos of the country. Such a vassal is an upright vassal. The above are the so-called six upright vassals.

古文：何谓六邪？
现代文：那么六邪是什么呢？
English: So what are the six evils?

古文：一曰安官贪禄，不务公事，与世浮沉，左右观望，如此者，具臣也，二曰主所言皆曰善，主所为皆曰可，隐而求主之所好而进之，以快主之耳目，偷合苟容，与主为乐，不顾其后害，如此者，谀臣也。
现代文：一是贪得无厌，不务正业，苟且偷生，没有立场，这样的臣子，是具臣。二是认为君主说的话都是好的，君主的行为都是对的，只会趋炎附势，助长君主的逸乐，不顾严重后果，这样的臣子，是谀臣。
English: On the one hand, a vassal is a vassal who is insatiably greedy, does not do his duty, lives a dissolute life, and has no position. On the other hand, a vassal is a vassal who thinks that the words of the monarch are good and the actions of the monarch are right, which will only inflame and encourage the monarch's pleasure, regardless of the serious consequences. Such a vassal is a vassal.

古文：三曰内实险诐，外貌小谨，巧言令色，妒善嫉贤，所欲进，则明其美、隐其恶，所欲退，则明其过、匿其美，使主赏罚不当，号令不行，如此者，奸臣也。
现代文：三是内心阴险，外表拘谨，八面玲珑，嫉贤妒能，要想提拔谁，就只说好的，隐瞒过失，要想排挤谁，就夸大他的缺点，掩盖他的优点，致使君王赏罚不明，下达的命令又不被执行，这样的臣子，是奸臣。
English: Three are insidious, outwardly prudent, eight-faced, jealous, if you want to promote someone, just say yes, hide faults, if you want to oust someone, exaggerate his shortcomings, cover up his strengths, so that the reward and punishment of the king is unclear, and the orders issued are not executed. Such a vassal is a treacherous vassal.

古文：四曰智足以饰非，辩足以行说，内离骨肉之亲，外构朝廷之乱，如此者，谗臣也。
现代文：四是凭着自己的机巧辩才，掩过饰非，对内离间骨肉之情，对外制造朝廷混乱，这样的臣子，是谗臣。
English: The fourth is to rely on one's own skillful argumentation, to cover up the embellishment, to create internal discord between flesh and blood, and to create chaos in the imperial court. Such a vassal is a vassal.

古文：五曰专权擅势，以轻为重，私门成党，以富其家，擅矫主命，以自贵显，如此者，贼臣也。
现代文：五是专权霸道，不可一世，私结友党，聚敛财富，伪造君主的诏令，以显贵自居，这样的臣子，是贼臣。
English: The fifth is the autocratic and domineering way, which is not for a lifetime, I will make friends with the party, accumulate wealth, forge the monarch's edict, and behave like a dignitary. Such a vassal is a vassal of thieves.

古文：六曰谄主以佞邪，陷主于不义，朋党比周，以蔽主明，使白黑无别，是非无间，使主恶布于境内，闻于四邻，如此者，亡国之臣也。是谓六邪。
现代文：六是用邪道歪门迷惑君主，陷君主于不仁不义之境，蒙蔽君主，使他不辨是非曲直，臭名昭彰，这样的臣子，是亡国之臣。这就是所说的 六邪 。
English: The sixth is to use evil ways and crooked doors to confuse the monarch, trap the monarch in a state of unkindness and injustice, blind the monarch, make him unable to distinguish between right and wrong, and become notorious. Such a courtier is a ruined courtier. This is the so-called six evils.

古文：贤臣处六正之道，不行六邪之术，故上安而下治。
现代文：如果贤臣做到六正，避免六邪，那么朝廷就会安宁，国家也会太平。
English: If the wise minister achieves the six virtues and avoids the six vices, then the imperial court will be at peace and the country will be at peace.

古文：生则见乐，死则见思，此人臣之术也。 
现代文：生时为百姓造福，死后被人追忆思念，这就是为臣之道。 
English: To benefit the people during one's lifetime and to be remembered after one's death is the way of a vassal.

古文：《礼记》曰： 权衡诚悬，不可欺以轻重。绳墨诚陈，不可欺以曲直。规矩诚设，不可欺以方圆。
现代文：此外，《礼记》说： 秤杆一提，物体的轻重就称出来了；绳墨一拉，曲直就显示出来了；规矩一比，方圆也就清楚了。
English: In addition, "Li Ji" said: If you mention the scale, the weight of the object will be weighed; if you pull the rope, the curvature will be shown; if you compare the rules, the square will be clear.

古文：君子审礼，不可诬以奸诈。 
现代文：有德之人都明白事理，不能妄说他们奸诈。 
English: Virtuous people know the truth and cannot be falsely accused of treachery.

古文：然则臣之情伪，知之不难矣。又设礼以待之，执法以御之，为善者蒙赏，为恶者受罚，安敢不企及乎？安敢不尽力乎？
现代文：可见臣子尽忠与否，其实不难辨别，如果朝廷能够对他们以礼相待，以法约束，行善的能够加以褒奖，作恶的能够处以刑罚，他们怎么会不尽力呢？
English: It can be seen that it is not difficult to distinguish whether a courtier is loyal or not. If the imperial court can treat them with courtesy and restrict them by law, can reward those who do good, and can punish those who do evil, how can they not do their best?

古文：国家思欲进忠良，退不肖，十有余载矣，徒闻其语，不见其人，何哉？
现代文：朝廷想要提携忠正善良的大臣，贬斥不贤之臣，已经有十几年了，但是为什么没有落实呢？
English: It has been more than a decade since the imperial court wanted to associate loyal and virtuous ministers and disparage unethical ones, but why has it not been implemented?

古文：盖言之是也，行之非也。
现代文：是因为只说不做。表面上是行公道，实际上行为不端。
English: It's because it's all talk and no action. On the surface, it's about doing the right thing, but in reality, it's about misbehaving.

古文：言之是，则出乎公道，行之非，则涉乎邪径。
现代文：这样，是与非互相矛盾，好与恶相互攻击。
English: In this way, right and wrong contradict each other, and good and evil attack each other.

古文：是非相乱，好恶相攻。所爱虽有罪，不及于刑；所恶虽无辜，不免于罚。
现代文：自己喜欢的人即使有罪，也不会受到处罚，自己不喜欢的人即使清白无辜，总会有罪名上身。
English: People they like, even if they are guilty, will not be punished, and people they don't like, even if they are innocent, will always be guilty.

古文：此所谓爱之欲其生，恶之欲其死者也。
现代文：这就是喜欢他就会使他存活，憎恨他就会将其置于死地。
English: That is, to like him is to keep him alive, to hate him is to kill him.

古文：或以小恶弃大善，或以小过忘大功。此所谓君之赏不可以无功求，君之罚不可以有罪免者也。
现代文：或者因为小小的过失而忘记巨大的功劳，因小小的缺点而忽略良好的品行，所以君主不可以奖赏无功之人，君主的刑罚不可以漏掉有罪的人。
English: Or because of small faults forget great merits, because of small faults ignore good conduct, so the monarch can not reward those who have no merit, the monarch's punishment can not miss the guilty.

古文：赏不以劝善，罚不以惩恶，而望邪正不惑，其可得乎？
现代文：奖赏不能勉劢大家为善，惩罚不能禁止一些人作恶。既然这样，我们希望达到邪正分明，怎么去加以实现呢？
English: Reward cannot encourage everyone to be good, and punishment cannot prohibit some people from doing evil. In this case, we hope to achieve righteousness, but how can we achieve it?

古文：若赏不遗疏远，罚不阿亲贵，以公平为规矩，以仁义为准绳，考事以正其名，循名以求其实，则邪正莫隐，善恶自分。
现代文：如果赏赐时不忘被疏远的臣子，处罚时不庇护亲近的人，做到公平仁义，实事求是，那么邪恶就会无处藏身，善恶自然泾渭分明。
English: If you do not forget the estranged vassals when rewarding, and do not shelter the close ones when punishing, if you are fair and just, and seek truth from facts, then evil will have nowhere to hide, and good and evil will naturally be clearly distinguished.

古文：然后取其实，不尚其华，处其厚，不居其薄，则不言而化，期月而可知矣。
现代文：崇尚质实，不慕虚华，观察官员是否仁厚，不到一个月就会清清楚楚。那些不诚实的臣子，他们的大公无私只表现在言语上而不落实在行动上，这样的官员是不会为民着想的。
English: In less than a month, it will be clear whether officials are benevolent or not. Those dishonest courtiers, whose selflessness is only manifested in words but not in actions, such officials will not think about the people.

古文：若徒爱美锦，而不为民择官，有至公之言，无至公之实，爱而不知其恶，憎而遂忘其善，徇私情以近邪佞，背公道而远忠良，则虽夙夜不怠，劳神苦思，将求至理，不可得也。书奏，甚嘉纳之。
现代文：如果喜欢臣子，就对他们的缺点视而不见，厌恶他们就认为他们一无是处，被一己私欲驱使、亲近奸邪的臣子，背离公正之道而疏远忠臣良将。一旦如此，即使夜以继日地为政务操劳，对治国也是于事无补的。看过奏书后，唐太宗欣然接受。
English: If you like your vassals, you will be blind to their shortcomings; if you detest them, you will think they are worthless; if you are driven by selfish desires, you will be close to treacherous vassals; if you deviate from the path of justice, you will alienate loyal vassals and good generals. If this is the case, even if you work day and night on political affairs, it will not help in governing the country. After reading the report, Emperor Taizong readily accepted it.

古文：贞观二十一年，太宗在翠微宫，授司农卿李纬户部尚书。
现代文：贞观二十一年，唐太宗在翠微宫加授司农卿李纬为户部尚书。
English: In the 21st year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong promoted Li Wei, the minister of agriculture, to the post of household secretary in the Tsuiwei Palace.

古文：房玄龄是时留守京城。
现代文：房玄龄当时留守在京城任职。
English: At the time, Fusa Genroi stayed behind to take up a post in Kyoto.

古文：会有自京师来者，太宗问曰： 玄龄闻李纬拜尚书，如何？ 
现代文：有个官员从京城来，唐太宗问他： 房玄龄听说李纬出任尚书之后，有什么意见呢？ 
English: An official came from Beijing, and Tang Taizong asked him: "Fang Xuanling, after hearing that Li Wei has been appointed as Shangshu, what is your opinion?"

古文：对曰： 但云 李纬大好髭须 ，更无他语。 
现代文：那个官员回答： 只听到房玄龄说李纬喜欢留胡子，再没有其他评语。 
English: The official replied: I only heard Fang Xuanling say that Li Wei liked to grow a beard, and there was no other comment.

古文：由是改授洛州刺史。
现代文：唐太宗听后，改任李纬为洛州刺史。
English: After listening to Emperor Taizong of Tang, Li Wei was appointed as the governor of Luozhou.

