古文：起玄黓困敦九月，尽阏逢摄提格四月，凡一年有奇。
现代文：起玄黓困敦九月，尽阏逢摄提格四月，一共一年。
English: From September to April, a total of one year.

古文：太祖圣神恭肃文武皇帝中广顺二年九月，甲寅朔，吴越丞相裴坚卒。
现代文：后周太祖广顺二年九月，甲寅朔，吴越丞相裴坚去世。
English: Later, in September of the second year of Zhou Taizu Guangshun, Gao Yinshuo and Wu Yuezheng minister Pei Jian passed away.

古文：以台州刺史吴延福同参相府事。
现代文：任命台州刺史吴延福共同参预丞相府事务。
English: Wu Yanfu, Taizhou's chief historian, was appointed to jointly participate in the affairs of the Prime Minister's Office.

古文：庚午，敕北边吏民毋得入契丹境俘掠。
现代文：庚午，后周太祖敕令北部边境官吏百姓不得进入契丹地界掳掠人口财物。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Emperor Zhou decreed that the northern border officials and the people should not enter the Qidan boundary to plunder the people's property.

古文：契丹将高谟翰以苇筏渡胡卢河入寇，至冀州，成德节度使何福进遣龙捷都指挥使刘诚诲等屯贝州以拒之。
现代文：契丹将领高谟翰用芦苇编成的筏子渡过胡卢河入侵，到达冀州，成德节度使何福进派遣龙捷都指挥使刘诚诲等屯驻贝州来抵抗。
English: The Khitan general Gaumukhan invaded Jizhou by crossing the Hulu River on a raft made of reeds. Chengde Festival made He Fuxin dispatch Long Jie Du to command Liu Chengyi and others to stay in Bozhou to resist.

古文：契丹闻之，遽引兵北渡。
现代文：契丹军队闻讯，马上引兵北上渡河。
English: When the Khitan army heard the news, they immediately led their troops north to cross the river.

古文：所掠冀州丁壮数百人，望见官军，争鼓噪，欲攻契丹，官军不敢应，契丹尽杀之。
现代文：所劫掠的冀州壮丁数百人，望见官军，争相鼓噪，想要攻击契丹军队，官军不敢响应，契丹军队杀死全部壮丁。
English: Hundreds of young men from Jizhou, who had been robbed, saw the government army and clamored to attack the Khitan army. The government army did not dare to respond, and the Khitan army killed all the young men.

古文：蜀山南西道节度使李廷珪奏周人聚兵关中，请益兵为备。
现代文：后蜀山南西道节度使李廷奏报后周人在关中地区集结军队，请求增加兵力进行防备。
English: After the Shushan Nanxi Road festival, Li Ting reported that the Zhou people had gathered troops in the Guanzhong area and requested an increase in troop strength for defense.

古文：蜀主遣奉銮肃卫都虞候赵进将兵趣利州，既而闻周人聚兵以备北汉，乃引还。
现代文：后蜀君主派遣奉銮肃卫都虞候赵进领兵赶赴利州。不久听说后周人集结军队用来防备北汉，于是退兵返回。
English: Later, the Shu monarch sent Zhao Jin to lead the troops to rush to Lizhou. Soon after, he heard that the Zhou people had assembled an army to guard against the Northern Han Dynasty, so he withdrew and returned.

古文：唐武安节度使边镐，昏懦无断，在湖南，政出多门，不合众心。
现代文：南唐武安节度使边镐，昏庸怯懦不决断，在湖南，政令出自多家，不符合民众心意。
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty's Wu'an Festival was dominated by the weak-willed, cowardly and indecisive. In Hunan, government decrees came from many people and did not meet the people's wishes.

古文：吉水人欧阳广上书，言： 镐非将帅才，必丧湖南，宜别择良帅，益兵以救其败。 
现代文：吉水人欧阳广上书，说： 边镐不是将帅之才，必定会丧失湖南，应该另外选择好的主帅，并增加军队来挽救败亡。 
English: Ouyang Guang, a person from Zhishui, wrote a letter, saying: Bentham is not a talented general, he will definitely lose Hunan, we should choose another good general and increase the army to save the defeat.

古文：不报。
现代文：没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：唐主使镐经略朗州，有自朗州来者，多言刘言忠顺，镐由是不为备。
现代文：南唐主让边镐筹划治理朗州，有从朗州来的人，大多说刘言忠诚顺服，边镐因此不作防备。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang let Bentham plan the governance of Lanzhou. Most of the people who came from Lanzhou said that Liu Yan was loyal and obedient, so Bentham did not take precautions.

古文：唐主召刘言入朝，言不行，谓王逵曰： 唐必伐我，奈何？ 
现代文：南唐主召刘言进京入朝，刘言不去，对王逵说： 唐必定讨伐我，怎么办？ 
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty summoned Liu Yan to Beijing to enter the dynasty, but Liu Yan refused to go, saying to Wang Yao: "The Tang Dynasty will certainly fight me, what should I do?

古文：逵曰： 武陵负江湖之险，带甲数万，安能拱手受制于人！
现代文：王逵说： 武陵依托长江、洞庭湖的险要，全副武装的士卒数万，怎么能束手待毙受制于人！
English: Wang Yao said: Wuling is backed by the Yangtze River and Dongting Lake, and there are tens of thousands of fully armed officers and men. How can they stand by and be controlled by others?

古文：边镐抚驭无方，士民不附，可一战擒也。 
现代文：边镐治理无方，士人百姓不愿亲附，可以一战就擒获。 
English: There is no way to govern the borderlands, and the officials and the people do not want to be attached to them. They can be captured in one battle.

古文：言犹豫未决，周行逢曰： 机事贵速，缓则彼为之备，不可图也。 
现代文：刘言犹豫不决，周行逢说： 机密之事贵在神速，动作迟缓的话对方就会作准备，不可谋取了。 
English: Liu Yan hesitated, and Zhou Xingfeng said: "The secret thing is precious in speed, if the action is slow, the other party will make preparations, and it is impossible to obtain.

古文：言乃以逵、行逢及牙将何敬真、张仿、蒲公益、硃全琇、宇文琼、彭万和、潘叔嗣、张文表十人皆为指挥使，部分发兵。
现代文：刘言于是任命王逵、周行逢以及牙将何敬真、张、蒲公益、朱全、宇文琼、彭万和、潘叔嗣、张文表十人都为指挥使，部署发兵。
English: Liu Yan then appointed Wang Qian, Zhou Xingfeng, and the generals He Jingzhen, Zhang, Pu Gongrui, Zhu Quan, Yu Wenqiong, Peng Wanhe, Pan Shushi, and Zhang Wenshe, all ten of whom were commanders, to deploy the troops.

古文：叔嗣、文表，皆朗州人也。
现代文：潘叔嗣、张文表都是朗州人。
English: Pan Shushi and Zhang Wenbo are both from Lanzhou.

古文：行逢能谋，文表善战，叔嗣果敢，三人多相须成功，情款甚昵。
现代文：周行逢擅长计谋，张文表善于作战，潘叔嗣果断勇敢，三人经常互相配合取胜，情投意合，非常亲密。
English: Zhou Xingfeng is good at scheming, Zhang Wenyu is good at fighting, Pan Shushi is resolute and brave. The three of them often cooperate with each other to win, and they are very close.

古文：诸将欲召溆州酋长苻彦通为援，行逢曰： 蛮贪而无义，前年从马希萼入潭州，焚掠无遗。
现代文：众将想召唤溆州酋长苻彦通作为援军，周行逢说： 蛮人贪婪而不讲信义，前年跟从马希萼进入潭州，烧杀抢掠没有遗留。
English: The generals wanted to summon the chief of Zhangzhou, Zou Yantong, as reinforcements. Zhou Xingfeng said: "The barbarians are greedy and not trustworthy. The year before, they followed Ma Xicel into Tangzhou. There is no trace of their burning, killing and looting.

古文：吾兵以义举，往无不克，乌用此物，使暴殄百姓哉！ 
现代文：我军以义起事勇往直前，攻无不克，何必动用这家伙，让他暴虐残害百姓呢！ 
English: Our army bravely marched forward in a righteous uprising, attacking all and sundry. Why did they have to use this guy and let him brutally massacre the people?

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：然亦畏彦通为后患，以蛮酋土团都指挥使刘瑫为群蛮所惮，补西境镇遏使以备之。
现代文：然而又怕苻彦通成为后顾之忧，因蛮人酋长团都指挥使刘被众蛮人部落所畏服，便补授他为西境镇遏使来防备苻彦通。
English: However, he was afraid that Yan Yan Tong would become an afterthought, because the barbarian chieftains had all commanded Liu to be feared by the barbarian tribes. Therefore, he was given the additional assignment of guarding Yan Yan Tong as the commander of Xijing Town.

古文：冬，十月，逵等将兵分道趣长少，以孙朗、曹进为先锋使，边镐遣指挥使郭再诚等将兵屯益阳以拒之。
现代文：冬季，十月，王逵等领兵分路奔赴长沙，任命孙朗、曹进为先锋使，边镐派遣指挥使郭再诚等领兵屯驻益阳抵抗。
English: In the winter, in October, Wang Qian and other military leaders rushed to Changsha separately, appointed Sun Lang and Cao Jin as vanguard envoys, and sent commanders to Guo Zecheng and other military leaders stationed in Yiyang to resist.

古文：戊子，逵等克沅江，执都监刘承遇，裨将李师德帅众五百降之。
现代文：戊子，王逵等攻克沅江，抓获都监刘承遇，副将李师德率部众五百人投降。
English: Wuzi, Wang Qian and others conquered the Minjiang River, captured the city supervisor Liu Chengyu, and the vice-general Li Shide led 500 people to surrender.

古文：壬辰，逵等命军士举小舟自蔽，直造益阳，四面斧寨而入，遂克之，杀戍兵二千人。
现代文：壬辰，王逵等命令军士举着小船遮蔽自己，直达益阳城下，从四面用斧子砍破寨门进入，于是攻克益阳，杀死戍守士兵二千人。
English: Rinchen, Wang Yao and others ordered the sergeants to lift the boat to cover themselves, and they reached the bottom of Yiyang Castle. They used axes to break through the walled gate from all sides to enter, and then conquered Yiyang, killing two thousand soldiers.

古文：边镐告急于唐。
现代文：边镐向南唐告急。
English: Bentham fled to southern Tang.

古文：甲午，逵等克桥口及湘阴，乙未，至潭州。
现代文：甲午，王逵等攻克桥口及湘阴；乙未，到达潭州，边镐据城亲自守卫。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Wang Qian conquered Qiaokou and Hunan; in the evening of the second day of the third month, he arrived in Tanzhou and personally guarded the border fortified city.

古文：边镐婴城自守，救兵未至，城中兵少。丙申夜，镐弃城走，吏民俱溃。
现代文：救兵没有到达，城中士兵又少，丙申夜晚，边镐弃城逃跑，官吏百姓全都溃逃。
English: The rescuers did not arrive, and there were few soldiers in the city. In the dead of night, the border abandoned the city and fled, and all the officials and people fled.

古文：醴陵门桥折，死者万馀人，道州刺史廖偃为乱兵所杀。
现代文：潭州城东的醴陵门桥断裂，死的有一万多人，道州刺史廖偃被乱军所杀。
English: The Fuling Gate Bridge in the east of the city of Tanzhou broke, killing more than 10,000 people. The governor of the province, Liao Wei, was killed by the rebels.

古文：丁酉旦，王逵入城，自称武平节度副使、权知军府事，以何敬真为行军司马。
现代文：丁酉清晨，王逵进入潭州城，自称武平节度副使，代理主持军府事务，任命何敬真为行军司马。
English: In the early morning of Ding Zhen, Wang Zhen entered Tanzhou City, claiming to be the deputy envoy of Wuping Jiedu, acting as the chairman of the military affairs, and appointed He Jingzhen as the marshal.

古文：遣敬真等追镐，不及，斩首五百级。
现代文：派遣何敬真等追赶边镐，没有追上，斩得首级五百。
English: After dispatching He Jingzhen and others to catch up with Bentham, they did not catch up, and were cut down to the first level of five hundred.

古文：薄公益攻岳州，唐岳州刺史宋德权走，刘言以公益权知岳州。
现代文：蒲公益进攻岳州，南唐岳州刺史宋德权逃跑，刘言任命蒲公益代理主持岳州军政。
English: Pu Gongyi attacked Yuezhou, Song Dequan fled from Southern Tang Yuezhou, and Liu Yan appointed Pu Gongyi to preside over the military government of Yuezhou.

古文：唐将守湖南诸州者，闻长沙陷，相继遁去。
现代文：南唐将领守卫湖南各州的，听说长沙陷落，相继逃跑离去。
English: When the Southern Tang generals, who were guarding the states of Hunan, heard that Changsha had fallen, they fled one after another.

古文：刘言尽复马氏岭北故地，惟郴、连入于南汉。
现代文：刘言全部收复马氏大庾岭以北旧地，只有郴州、连州落入南汉之手。
English: Liu Yan recovered all of the Ma clan's old territory north of the Dahuiling Mountains. Only Zhangzhou and Lianzhou fell into the hands of the Southern Han Dynasty.

古文：契丹瀛、莫、幽州大水，流民入塞散居河北者数十万口，契丹州县亦不之禁。
现代文：契丹瀛州、莫州、幽州发大水，流民进入边塞散居河北的有数十万人，契丹各州、县也不加禁止。
English: Hebei's Qidan, Mozhou and Yuzhou provinces were flooded, with hundreds of thousands of displaced people entering the border fortress and dispersing in Hebei. Qidan's provinces and counties were not banned.

古文：诏所在赈给存处之，中国民先为所掠，得归者什五六。
现代文：后周太祖下诏书命有关州、县救济接待流民，中原百姓从前被抢掠而得以返归者有十分之五六。
English: Later, Zhou Taizu issued an imperial edict ordering the relevant states and counties to provide relief and receive displaced people. Fifty-six out of ten Central Plains people who were robbed in the past have been able to return.

古文：丁未，谷以病臂久未愈，三表辞位，帝遣中使谕指曰： 卿所掌至重，朕难其人，苟事功克集，何必朝礼！
现代文：丁未，李因为手臂的伤长久不能痊愈，三次上表要求辞去职位，后周太祖派遣宫中使者传达旨意，说： 爱卿所执掌的事务至为重要，朕实在难得合适的人选，只要事业能够成功，何必讲究朝礼的形式！
English: Ding Wei, Li could not recover for a long time because of his arm injury, and he was asked to resign from his post three times. Later, Zhou Taizu sent an envoy to the palace to convey his will, saying: The affairs that Aicheng is in charge of are of paramount importance. I am really a rare and suitable candidate. As long as the cause can be successful, why should we pay attention to the form of the morning ceremony!

古文：朕今于便殿待卿，可暂入相见。 
现代文：朕现在便殿等候爱卿，可马上入宫相见。 
English: I am now waiting for Aicheng in the hall, but I will see him as soon as I enter the palace.

古文：谷入见于金祥殿，面陈悃款，帝不许。
现代文：李入宫在金祥殿谒见，当面陈述由衷之言，太祖不答应。
English: Li Ronggu met him at the Jinshang Palace and made a heartfelt speech in front of him, but the great-grandfather did not agree.

古文：谷不得已复视事。
现代文：李不得已再主事。
English: Li had to take over again.

古文：谷未能执笔，诏以三司务繁，令刻名印用之。
现代文：李不能握笔，太祖诏令：因三司事务繁杂，命刻李的印章用于公文。
English: Li can't hold a pen, Emperor Taizu decreed: Due to the complicated affairs of the three departments, the seal engraved with Li's name will be used for official documents.

古文：辛亥，敕： 民有诉讼，必先历县州及观察使处决，不直，乃听诣台省，或自不能书牒，倩人书者，必书所倩姓名、居处。
现代文：辛亥，后周太祖下敕令： 百姓若有诉讼，必须先经县、州以及观察使处理，认为判决不公，才允许向朝廷台省起诉。有人自己不能书写状牒，请他人书写的，必须写明代笔人的姓名、住址。
English: Xinhai, after Zhou Taizu issued an imperial edict: If the people have a lawsuit, they must first go through the county, state and observation to deal with it, and consider the judgment to be unfair before they are allowed to sue the province. If someone cannot write the notice himself, but asks someone else to write it, he must write the name and address of the author.

古文：若无可倩，听执素纸。
现代文：倘若无合适人可请，允许拿着白纸起诉。
English: If there is no suitable person to invite, they are allowed to come with a blank sheet of paper to sue.

古文：所诉必须己事，毋得挟私客诉。 
现代文：所申诉的必须是自己的事，不得挟持私心为他诉讼。 
English: The subject of the complaint must be one's own business, and it is not allowed to bring a suit for him out of selfishness.

古文：庆州刺史郭彦钦性贪，野鸡族多羊马，彦钦故扰之以求赂，野鸡族遂反，剽掠纲商。
现代文：庆州刺史郭彦钦生性贪婪，野鸡族部落羊马很多，郭彦钦故意骚扰他们来索求贿赂，野鸡族于是反叛，抢劫贸易商队。
English: Guo Yanqin, the governor of Gyeongju, was greedy by nature, and the pheasants had many sheep and horses. Guo Yanqin deliberately harassed them to demand bribes, and the pheasants rebelled and robbed the trade caravan.

古文：帝命宁、环二州合兵讨之。
现代文：后周太祖命令宁州、环州会合军队讨伐。
English: Later Zhou Taizu ordered the armies of Ningzhou and Huanzhou to join the crusade.

古文：刘言遣使奉表来告，称： 湖南世事朝廷，不幸为邻寇所陷，臣虽不奉诏，辄纠合义兵，削平旧国。 
现代文：刘言派遣使者前来报告，说： 湖南世代事奉朝廷，不幸被南唐所攻陷，臣下虽然没接奉诏令，但立即纠合义兵，已经平定湖南楚国旧地。 
English: Liu Yan sent an envoy to report, saying: Hunan has served the imperial court for generations. Unfortunately, it was invaded by the Southern Tang Dynasty. Although the vassals did not accept the imperial edict, they immediately rallied the volunteers and have already pacified the old land of Hunan Chu.

古文：唐主削边镐官爵，流饶州。
现代文：南唐主削去边镐的官职爵位，流放饶州。
English: The ruler of Southern Tang stripped Bentham of his official title and rank and exiled him to Raozhou.

古文：初，镐以都虞候从查文徽克建州，凡所俘获皆全之，建人谓之 边佛子 ；及克潭州，市不易肆，潭人谓之 边菩萨 ；既而为节度使，政无纲纪，惟日设斋供，盛修佛事，潭人失望，谓之 边和尚 矣。
现代文：当初，边镐任都虞候跟随查文徽攻克建州，凡是所捕获俘虏都保全性命，建州人称他 边佛子 ；及至攻克潭州，市场照常营业，潭州人称他 边菩萨 ；不久当了节度使，为政没有章法，只是每天摆设斋品，大修佛事，潭州人很失望，称他 边和尚 了。
English: At first, Bentham was appointed as a prefect to follow Chawen Hui to conquer Jianzhou. All the captured prisoners were spared their lives. The people of Jianzhou called him Bentham's son; and when he conquered Tamzhou, the market was open as usual. The people of Tamzhou called him Bentham's bodhisattva. Soon, he became a ceremonial envoy. There was no rule for politics, but every day he set up holy objects and overhauled Buddhist affairs. The people of Tamzhou were very disappointed and called him Bentham's monk.

古文：左仆射同平章事冯延己、右仆射同平章事孙晟上表请罪，皆释之。
现代文：左仆射同平章事冯延己、右仆射同平章事孙晟上表书请罪。南唐主都宽恕了他们。
English: His left-hand man, Feng Yanji, and his right-hand man, Sun Xuan, both pleaded guilty and were pardoned by the Lord of Southern Tang.

古文：晟陈请不已，乃与延己皆罢守本官。
现代文：孙晟陈述请罪不止，才和冯延己一同被罢免同平章事而担任原来的官职。
English: Sun Yat-sen pleaded guilty more than once before he and Feng Yan-chi were both removed from their posts and returned to their previous posts.

古文：唐主以比年出师无功，乃议休兵息民。
现代文：南唐主因连年出师无功，于是商议停止用兵休养生息。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty, because of the failure of successive years to send a teacher, then discussed stopping the use of soldiers to rest and recuperate.

古文：或曰： 愿陛下数十年不用兵，可小康矣！ 
现代文：有人说： 希望陛下几十年都不用兵，可以实现小康了。 
English: Some people said, "I hope His Majesty will not have to use soldiers for decades, and will be able to achieve a moderate well-being."

古文：唐主曰： 将终身不用，何数十年之有！ 
现代文：南唐主说： 我将终身不再用兵，何况几十年呢！ 
English: The Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty said: I will never again use soldiers for the rest of my life, let alone for decades!

古文：唐主思欧阳广之言，拜本县令。
现代文：南唐主想起欧阳广当初说的话，授任他为本县县令。
English: The Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty remembered Ouyang Guang's original words and appointed him as the county magistrate.

古文：十一月，辛未，徙保义节度使折从阮为静难节度使，讨野鸡族。
现代文：十一月，辛未，后周太祖调任保义节度使折从阮为静难节度使，讨伐野鸡族。
English: In November, Xinwei, the late Zhou Taizu transferred the post of Guoying Festival envoy from Ruan to Jingan Festival envoy to fight the pheasants.

古文：癸酉，敕： 约每岁民间所输牛皮，三分减二；计田十顷，税取一皮，馀听民自用及卖买，惟禁卖于敌国。 
现代文：癸酉，后周太祖颁发敕令： 规定每年民间所进贡的牛皮，减免三分之二。每十顷田，征税收取一张牛皮，其余的任凭百姓自己使用以及相互买卖，只禁止出卖给敌对国家。 
English: Later, Zhou Taizu issued an imperial edict: stipulating that two-thirds of the cowhide paid by the people each year should be reduced and exempted. For every ten-hectare field, one cowhide should be collected by taxation, and the rest should be allowed to be used by the people themselves and traded with each other. It was only forbidden to be sold to hostile countries.

古文：先是，兵兴以来，禁民私卖买牛皮，悉令输官受直。
现代文：在此之前，战争兴起以来，禁止百姓私自买卖牛皮，全部让送到官府接受偿值。
English: Prior to this, since the outbreak of the war, it was forbidden for people to buy and sell cowhide privately, and all of it had to be sent to the government for reimbursement.

古文：唐明宗之世，有司止偿以盐；晋天福中，并盐不给。
现代文：唐明宗时，官府只用盐作为偿还。后晋天福年间，连盐都不给。
English: During the Tang and Ming Dynasties, the government only used salt as repayment. During the Later Jin and Tianfu Dynasties, even salt was not given.

古文：汉法，犯私牛皮一寸抵死，然民间日用实不可无。
现代文：后汉法律规定，犯有私自动用一寸牛皮的处死，然而民间生活日用实在不可缺少。
English: According to the law of the later Han Dynasty, those who were guilty of using one inch of cowhide were automatically executed. However, it was indispensable for people's daily life.

古文：帝素知其弊，至是，李谷建议，均于田亩，公私便之。
现代文：后周太祖素知其中弊端，到这时，李提出建议，将上缴牛皮均摊到田亩里，公私双方都方便。
English: Later, Zhou Taizhu Su knew the drawbacks of it. At this time, Li suggested that the submitted cowhide should be evenly distributed to the fields, which was convenient for both the public and private sectors.

古文：十二月，丙戌，河决郑、滑，遣使行视修塞。
现代文：十二月，丙戌，黄河在郑州、滑州决口，后周太祖派遣使者巡视堵塞决口。
English: In December, the Yellow River burst its banks in Zhengzhou and Nanzhou. Later, Zhou Taizu sent an envoy to inspect and block the breach.

古文：甲午，前静难节度使侯章献买宴绢千匹，银五百两。
现代文：甲午，前静难节度使侯章进献买宴绢一千匹、银子五百两，后周太祖不接受。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, before the festival of Jingnan, Hou Zhang offered to buy a thousand yakitori and five hundred taels of silver, but Zhou Taizu did not accept.

古文：帝不受，曰： 诸侯入觐，天子宜有宴犒，岂待买邪！
现代文：说： 诸侯入朝觐见，天子应该有宴席犒劳，岂能等人出钱买宴呢！
English: He said, "Lords, when you go to the Imperial Court, you should expect to be rewarded with a banquet. How can you expect others to pay for a banquet?

古文：自今如此比者，皆勿受。 
现代文：从今以后像这类的进贡，一律不接受。 
English: From now on, this kind of tribute will not be accepted.

古文：王逵将兵及洞蛮五万攻郴州，南汉将潘崇彻救之，遇于蚝石。
现代文：王逵率领所部以及洞蛮军队五万进攻郴州，南汉将领潘崇彻救援郴州，在石相遇。
English: Wang Qian led the headquarters and the Dong barbarian army of fifty thousand to attack Zhangzhou, and the Southern Han general Pan Chongcher to rescue Zhangzhou, and they met in Shizuo.

古文：崇彻登高望湖南兵，曰： 疲而不整，可破也。 
现代文：潘崇彻登高观望湖南军队，说： 疲惫而不整齐，可以击败。 
English: Pan Chongche ascended high to watch the Hunan army, saying: Tired and disorderly, can be defeated.

古文：纵击，大破之，伏尸八十里。
现代文：纵兵出击，大败王逵，倒伏的尸体长达八十里。
English: Longitudinal soldiers attacked, defeated Wang Qi, and the fallen bodies were up to eighty miles away.

古文：翰林学士徐台符请诛诬告李崧者葛延遇及李澄，冯道以为屡更赦，不许。
现代文：翰林学士徐台符请求诛杀诬告李崧的葛延遇和李澄，冯道认为屡经赦免，不准许。
English: Xu Taifu, a scholar of Hanlin, requested Ge Yan and Li Cheng, who falsely accused Li Yao, to be killed. Feng Dao believed that they had been pardoned many times and were not allowed.

古文：王峻嘉台符之义，白于帝，癸卯，收延遇、澄，诛之。
现代文：王峻赞许徐台符的义气，向后周太祖禀报。癸卯，逮捕葛延遇、李澄，诛杀二人。
English: Wang Jun praised the loyalty of Xu Taifu and reported to the late Zhou Taizong. He also arrested Ge Yanhong and Li Cheng and killed two people.

古文：刘言表称潭州残破，乞移使府治朗州，且请贡献、卖茶，悉如马氏故事。
现代文：刘言上表称说潭州残坏破败，请求将节度使府治迁移到朗州，并且请求进纳贡献、卖买茶叶，全部比照马氏成例，后周太祖准许。
English: Liu Yan said on the table that Tanzhou was in a state of ruin, requested that the festival be moved to Lanzhou, and requested that contributions be paid, and that tea leaves be sold and bought, all of which were in accordance with Ma's precedent, and were later approved by Zhou Taizu.

古文：许之。唐江西观察使楚王马希萼入朝，唐主留之，后数年，卒于金陵，谥曰恭孝。
现代文：南唐江西观察使楚王马希萼进京入朝，南唐主留他在京，几年之后，马希萼在金陵去世，谥号为恭孝。
English: The observation of Jiangxi in Southern Tang Dynasty made King Ma Xicai of Chu enter Beijing and the dynasty. The Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty kept him in Beijing. A few years later, Ma Xicai died in Jinling. His posthumous name was Gongxiao.

古文：初，麟州土豪杨信自为刺史，受命于周。
现代文：当初，麟州土豪杨信自称刺史，接受后周的命令。
English: At first, Linshou local strongman Yang Xin claimed to be a historian and accepted Hou Zhou's order.

古文：信卒，子重训嗣，以州降北汉。
现代文：杨信去世，儿子杨重训继位，带着麟州投降北汉。
English: Yang Xin died, and his son Yang Chongxun succeeded him, leading Linzhou to surrender to the Northern Han Dynasty.

古文：至是，为群羌所围，复归款，求救于夏、府二州。
现代文：到这时，被众多羌人部落所包围，又归附投诚后周，向夏、府二州求救。
English: At this time, it was surrounded by many Hun tribes, and it fell under the control of Zhou, who asked for help from Xia and Fuzhou.

古文：太祖圣神恭肃文武皇帝中广顺三年春，正月，丙辰，以武平留后刘言为武平节度使，制置武安、静江等军事、同平章事；以王逵为武安节度使，何敬真为静江节度使，周行逢为武安行军司马。
现代文：广顺三年春季，正月，丙辰，后周太祖任命武平留后刘言为武平节度使、置制武安及静江等军事、同平章事。任命王逵为武安节度使，何敬真为静江节度使，周行逢为武安行军司马。
English: In the spring of the third year of Guangshun, in the first month of the year, in the third month of the year, and later in the second month of the year, Zhou Taizu appointed Wu Ping to stay behind and Liu Yan as Wu Ping's festival envoy, and set up Wu An and Jingjiang as military and dongping chapters. Appointed Wang Xi as Wu An's festival envoy, He Jingzhen as Jingjiang's festival envoy, and Zhou Xingfan as Wu An's marching horse.

古文：诏折从阮： 野鸡族能改过者，拜官赐金帛，不则进兵讨之。 
现代文：后周太祖下诏书给折从阮： 野鸡族首领能够改过的，授于官职赏赐金帛，怙恶不悛的就进兵讨伐。 
English: Later in the week, the great-grandfather issued an edict to the Nguyn: If the leader of the Pheasant Tribe could make amends, he would be given an official post and a golden scepter; if he was evil or disobedient, he would be sent to the army to fight.

古文：壬戌，从阮奏： 酋长李万全等受诏立誓外，自馀犹不服，方讨之。 
现代文：壬戌，折从阮奏报： 除酋长李万全等接受诏书立誓改过之外，其余的仍然不肯降服，正在讨伐他们。 
English: Nimman, from the Nguyn Son newspaper: Except for the chiefs Li Văn Cn and others who have accepted the edict and sworn to reform, the rest are still unwilling to surrender and are fighting them.

古文：前世屯田皆在边地，使戍兵佃之。
现代文：前代屯田都在边疆地带，让卫戍的士兵耕种。
English: The previous generation of military cantonments were all located in the frontier zone, and were cultivated by soldiers from the garrison.

古文：唐末，中原宿兵，所在皆置营田以耕旷土。
现代文：唐朝末年，中原驻扎军队，所在之处都设置营田来耕种空旷土地。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, troops were stationed in Central Plains. Campsites were set up to cultivate open land wherever they were located.

古文：其后又募高赀户使输课佃之，户部别置官司总领，不隶州县，或丁多无役，或容庇奸盗，州县不能诘。
现代文：以后又招募钱多的富户耕种让他们交纳租税，户部另外设置机构总管，不隶属于州、县，有的壮丁多而无徭役，有的收容庇护奸人盗贼，州、县没法追究。
English: Later, rich farmers with a lot of money were recruited to cultivate and pay taxes. The Household Department also set up a head office, which was not affiliated with the state or county. Some of them had a lot of sons and daughters but no servants, and some of them sheltered traitors and thieves. The state and county could not investigate.

古文：梁太祖击淮南，掠得牛以千万计，给东南诸州农民，使岁输租。
现代文：后梁太祖进击淮南，抢掠到的牛数以千万计，提供给东南各州农民，让他们每年交租。
English: After Liang Taizu invaded Huainan, he plundered tens of millions of cattle and offered them to farmers in southeastern states so that they could pay rent every year.

古文：自是历数十年，牛死而租不除，民甚苦之。
现代文：自此经过几十年后，牛死而租不免除，农民深受其苦。
English: Since then, after several decades, the death of a cow does not exempt the rent, and farmers suffer from it.

古文：帝素知其弊，会阖门使、知青州张凝上便宜，请罢营田务，李谷亦以为言。
现代文：后周太祖素知其中弊端，正好门使、知青州张凝上奏请便宜行事，要求撤销营田事务，李也这样说，乙丑，颁敕令： 全部取消户部营田事务，将耕种营田的农民隶属于州、县。
English: Later, Zhou Taizu Su knew one of the drawbacks, just as the gate envoy, Zhi Qingzhou Zhang Jian, requested to act cheaply and demanded the cancellation of the yakitori business. Li also said this, second ugly, issued an edict: All household yakitori business should be canceled, and farmers who cultivate yakitori should be subordinated to the state and county.

古文：乙丑，敕： 悉罢户部营田务，以其民隶州县；其田、庐、牛、农器，并赐见佃者为永业，悉除租牛课。 是岁，户部增三万馀户。
现代文：他们的田地、庐舍、耕牛、农具，同时赐给现在耕种者作为永久产业，全部免除牛租的征收。 这一年，户部增加三万多户人口。
English: Their fields, outhouses, cattle, and farm tools were all given to the current cultivators as permanent property, all exempt from the collection of cattle rent.In this year, the population of the household increased by more than 30,000 households.

古文：民既得为永业，始敢葺屋植木，获地利数倍。
现代文：农民既已得到这些成为永久产业，方才敢修葺房屋、种植树木，获取地利数倍于以前。
English: Since farmers have obtained these as a permanent industry, they dare to repair houses, plant trees, and acquire land several times more than before.

古文：或言： 营田有肥铙者，不若鬻之，可得钱数十万缗以资国。 
现代文：有人说： 营田中有肥沃富饶的，不如卖掉它，可以得钱数十万缗来充实国库。 
English: Some people say: If there is a fertile field in Yingtian, it is better to sell it, and you can get hundreds of thousands of baht to enrich the national treasury.

古文：帝曰： 利在于民，犹在国也，朕用此钱何为！ 
现代文：后周太祖说： 利益在农民那里，如同在国家一样，朕用这些钱干什么！ 
English: Later, Zhou Taizu said, "Benefits come from farmers, just as they do from the state. What am I going to do with all this money?"

古文：莱州刺史叶仁鲁，帝之故吏也，坐赃绢万五千匹，钱千缗。庚午，赐死。
现代文：莱州刺史叶仁鲁是后周太祖的旧吏，因贪污绢帛一万五千匹、钱一千缗而被判罪，庚午，赐其自杀。
English: Ye Renlu, the governor of Laizhou, was a former official of the late Zhou Taizu. He was convicted of embezzling 15,000 horses and 1,000 bags of money, and was forced to commit suicide.

古文：帝遣中使赐以酒食曰： 汝自抵国法，吾无如之何。
现代文：后周太祖派遣宫中使者赐给酒和食物，说： 你自己触犯国法，我没有什么办法！
English: Later, Zhou Taizu sent an emissary from the palace to give her wine and food, saying, "You yourself have violated the law of the land. I have no choice!"

古文：当存恤汝母。 
现代文：必当关照抚恤你的母亲。 
English: Take care of your mother.

古文：仁鲁感泣。
现代文：叶仁鲁感动得流下眼泪。
English: Ye Jinlu was moved to tears.

古文：帝以河决为忧，王峻请自往行视，许之。
现代文：后周太祖为黄河决口而忧愁，王峻自己请求前往巡视，后周太祖准许。
English: Later Zhou Taizu was saddened by the mouth of the Yellow River. Wang Jun himself asked to go on a tour, and later Zhou Taizu gave his permission.

古文：镇宁节度使荣屡求入朝，峻忌其英烈，每沮止之。
现代文：镇宁节度使郭荣屡次请求进京入朝，王峻忌恨他英武勇烈，经常阻挠。
English: Zhanning Festival made Guo Rong repeatedly request to enter Beijing and the imperial court. Wang Jun hated him for his bravery and courage, and often obstructed him.

古文：闰月，荣复求入朝，会峻在河上，帝乃许之。
现代文：闰月，郭荣又请求进京入朝，正好王峻外出在黄河边上，太祖就答应了。
English: During the leap month, Guo Rong again requested to enter Beijing and the imperial court. Wang Jun happened to be out on the edge of the Yellow River, and the great-grandfather agreed.

古文：契丹寇定州，围义丰军，定和都指挥使杨弘裕夜击其营，大获，契丹遁去。
现代文：契丹侵犯定州，包围义丰军，定和都指挥使杨弘裕夜晚袭击敌营，大获全胜，契丹军队逃跑离去。
English: The Khitan invaded Dingzhou, encircled the Yifeng army, and the commander of Dinghe ordered Yang Hongyu to attack the enemy camp at night. He won a complete victory, and the Khitan army fled.

古文：又寇镇州，本道兵击走之。
现代文：契丹军队又侵犯镇州，当地军队击败赶走了敌人。
English: The Khitan army invaded Zhenzhou again, and the local army defeated and drove away the enemy.

古文：丙申，镇宁节度使荣入朝。
现代文：丙申，镇宁节度使郭荣进京入朝。
English: Bishin, Zhanning Festival made Guo Rong enter Beijing and the imperial court.

古文：故李守贞骑士马全乂从荣入朝，帝召见，补殿前指挥使，谓左右曰： 全乂忠于所事，昔在河中，屡挫吾军，汝辈宜效之。 
现代文：原李守贞的骑士马全随郭荣入朝，后周太祖召见他，补授他为殿前指挥使，对左右的人说： 马全忠于所服务的主人，从前在河中时，屡次挫败我的军队，你们应该仿效他。 
English: The knight Ma Quan, originally Li Shouzhen, followed Guo Rong into the imperial court. Later, Zhou Taizu summoned him and appointed him as the commander of the front of the palace. He said to the people around him: Ma Quan is loyal to the master he serves. In the past, when he was in the river, he repeatedly defeated my army. You should follow his example.

古文：王峻闻荣入朝，遽自河上归，戊戌，至大梁。
现代文：王峻听说郭荣进京入朝，赶紧从黄河边上返回，戊戌，到达大梁。
English: When Wang Jun heard that Guo Rong had entered Beijing and the North, he hurriedly returned from the edge of the Yellow River and arrived in Dalian.

古文：雄武节度使高允权卒，其子牙内指挥使绍基谋袭父位，诈称允权疾病，表己知军府事。
现代文：彰武节度使高允权去世，他的儿子牙内指挥使高绍基图谋承袭父亲职位，谎称高允权病重，上表自己主持军府事务。
English: Zhangwu Jiedu caused Gao Yunquan's death, and his son, Commander Yanai, caused Gao Shaosha to plot to inherit his father's position, falsely claiming that Gao Yunquan was seriously ill, and presiding over the military affairs himself.

古文：观察判官李彬切谏，绍基怒，斩之，辛丑，以彬谋反闻。
现代文：观察判官李彬恳切劝谏，高绍基发怒，斩杀了他，辛巳，捏造李彬图谋造反向上报告。
English: Observing the magistrate Li Bin earnestly exhorting him, Gao Shaoqi got angry and killed him, and then fabricated the report that Li Bin was plotting to rebel against him.

古文：王峻固求领籓镇，帝不得已，壬寅，以峻兼平卢节度使。
现代文：王峻再三请求兼领藩镇，后周太祖不得已，任命王峻兼任平卢节度使。
English: Wang Jun repeatedly requested to also lead the town of the domain, and later Zhou Taizu had no choice but to appoint Wang Jun to also serve as the envoy of the Pinglu Festival.

古文：高绍基屡奏杂虏犯边，冀得承袭，帝遣六宅使张仁谦诣延州巡检，绍基不能匿，始发父丧。
现代文：高绍基屡次奏报各部强虏侵犯边境，希望能承袭父职，后周太祖派遣六宅使张仁谦到延州巡视检查，高绍基不能再隐瞒，才发布父丧。
English: Gao Shaoqi repeatedly reported to the various ministries that the invaders had violated the border, hoping to inherit his father's position. Later, Zhou Taizu sent six houses to Zhang Renqian to Yanzhou for inspection. Gao Shaoqi could no longer hide it before announcing his father's death.

古文：戊申，折从阮奏降野鸡二十一族。
现代文：戊申，折从阮奏报降伏野鸡二十一个部族。
English: Wushin, folded from Nguyen Son reported surrender pheasants are among the twenty-one tribes.

古文：唐草泽邵棠上言： 近游淮上，闻周主恭俭，增修德政。
现代文：南唐布衣之士邵棠上言说： 近来出游淮上，听说周主恭敬俭朴，不断推行德政。
English: Shao Tang, a clothier in Southern Tang, said: Recently, I have been traveling to Huaiyang. I heard that Zhou Rui was respectful and frugal, and constantly promoted German politics.

古文：吾兵新破于潭、朗，恐其有南征之志，宜为之备。 
现代文：我国军队新近在潭州、朗州失利，恐怕周有南征的意向，应该为此作好防备。 
English: Our army has recently lost in Tanzhou and Langzhou. I am afraid that Zhou has the intention of marching south. We should be prepared for this.

古文：初，王逵既克潭州，以指挥使何敬真为静江节度副使，硃全琇为武安节度副使，张文表为武平节度副使，周行逢为武安行军司马。
现代文：当初，王逵既已取得潭州，便任命指挥使何敬真为静江节度副使，朱全为武安节度副使，张文表为武平节度副使，周行逢为武安行军司马。
English: At the beginning, Wang Qian had already gained Tanzhou, so he appointed the commanding envoy He Jingzhen as the vice-envoy of the Jingjiang Festival, Zhu Quan as the vice-envoy of the Wu'an Festival, Zhang Wenbo as the vice-envoy of the Wu'an Festival, and Zhou Xingfeng as the marshal of the Wu'an March.

古文：敬真、全琇各置牙兵，与逵分厅视事，吏民莫知所从。
现代文：何敬真、朱全各自设置警卫牙兵，与王逵分厅处理政务，官吏百姓不知应该听从谁的。
English: He Jingzhen and Zhu Quan each set up guards and sentries, and dealt with government affairs with Wang Qi's branch office. Officials and people did not know who to listen to.

古文：每宴集，诸将使酒，纷拿如市，无复上下之分，唯行逢、文表事逵尽礼，逵亲爱之。
现代文：每次宴请聚会，众将领酗酒使性，纷纭杂乱得像市场一样，不再有上下尊卑的区分，只有周行逢、张文表对待王逵恭敬有礼，所以王逵亲近喜爱这两人。
English: At every banquet and gathering, the generals were so drunk and disorderly that it was like a market. There was no longer any distinction between the high and the low. Only Zhou Xingfeng and Zhang Wenbai treated Wang Qian with respect and courtesy, so Wang Qian loved the two of them very much.

古文：敬真与逵不协，辞归朗州，又不能事刘言，与全琇谋作乱。
现代文：何敬真与王逵不和，告辞返归朗州，但又不肯服从刘言，便与朱全谋划发动叛乱。
English: He Jingzhen did not get along with Wang Qian and resigned to return to Lanzhou, but he did not want to obey Liu Yan, so he and Zhu Quan planned to launch a rebellion.

古文：言素忌逵之强，疑逵使敬真伺己，将讨之，逵闻之，甚惧。
现代文：刘言一向顾忌王逵的强大，怀疑王逵派何敬真来窥探自己，准备征讨王逵，王逵闻知，很恐惧。
English: Liu Yan had always been wary of Wang Yao's strength. He suspected that Wang Yao had sent He Jingzhen to spy on him and prepare to recruit Wang Yao. Wang Yao heard about this and was very afraid.

古文：行逢曰： 刘言素不与吾辈同心，何敬真、硃全琇耻在公下，公宜早图之。 
现代文：周行逢说： 刘言素来不与我们一条心，何敬真、朱全以在您手下为耻，您应当及早处置他们。 
English: Zhou Xingfeng said, "Liu Yan has always been at odds with us. He Jingzhen and Zhu Quan are ashamed to be under your command. You should dispose of them as soon as possible."

古文：逵喜曰： 与公共除凶党，同治潭、朗，夫复何忧！ 
现代文：王逵大喜说： 与您共同翦除凶党乱徒，一道统治潭州、朗州，还有什么忧愁！ 
English: Wang Yao was overjoyed and said: "Together with you, we will root out the thugs and ruffians, and together we will rule Tanzhou and Langzhou. What else is there to be sad about!"

古文：会南汉寇全、道、永州，行逢请： 身至朗州说言，遣敬真、全琇南讨，俟至长沙，以计取之，如掌中物耳。 
现代文：正好遇上南汉入侵全州、道州、永州，周行逢请命： 我愿单身到朗州劝说刘言，让他派遣何敬真、朱全南下讨伐，等二人到达长沙，设计捉拿，犹如拿取掌中之物那样容易。 
English: Just as the Southern Han invaded Quanzhou, Daozhou, and Yongzhou, Zhou Xingfei requested: I am willing to go to Lanzhou alone to persuade Liu Yan to send He Jingzhen and Zhu Quanzhen to fight in the south, and wait for the two of them to arrive in Changsha. It is as easy to design and capture as it is to pick up something in the palm of your hand.

古文：逵从之。行逢至朗州，言以敬真为南面行营招讨使，全琇为先锋使，将牙兵百馀人会潭州兵以御南汉。
现代文：王逵听从此计，周行逢到达朗州，刘言任命何敬真为南面行营招讨使，朱全为先锋使，率领牙兵百余人会合潭州军队来抵御南汉。
English: Wang Qian followed this plan. Zhou made a trip to Lanzhou. Liu Yan appointed He Jingzhen as the envoy to the south, and Zhu Quan as the envoy to the vanguard. He led more than a hundred soldiers to join the Tanzhou army to resist the Southern Han Dynasty.

古文：二人至长沙，逵出郊迎，相见甚欢，宴饮连日，多以美妓饵之，敬真因淹留不进。
现代文：两人到达长沙，王逵亲自出城到郊外迎接，相互见面显得非常欢喜，设宴畅饮接连几天，常用美貌妓女款待引诱他们，何敬真因此滞留不再前进。
English: When the two arrived in Changsha, Wang Yao personally went out of the city to the suburbs to meet them. They seemed very happy to meet each other. They held a banquet and drank for several days in a row. They often used beautiful prostitutes to entertain and seduce them. Therefore, He Jingzhen did not move forward.

古文：朗州指挥使李仲迁部兵三千人久戍潭州，敬真使之先发，趣岭北，都头符会等因士卒思归，劫仲迁擅还朗州。
现代文：朗州指挥使李仲迁所部军队三千人长久戍守潭州，何敬真让他先出发，赶赴大庾岭北面，都头符会等因士兵思归故里，劫持李仲迁擅自返回朗州。
English: The commander of Lanzhou ordered Li Zhongqian's army of three thousand to stay in Tanzhou for a long time. He Jingzhen let him go first and rushed to the north of Dalatangling. Because the soldiers wanted to return to their hometowns, the Du Tou Fu Association and others kidnapped Li Zhongqian and returned to Lanzhou without permission.

古文：逵乘敬真醉，使人诈为言使者，责敬真以 南寇深侵，不亟捍御而专务荒宴，太师命械公归西府。 
现代文：王逵乘何敬真大醉，派人假装成刘言的使者，斥责何敬真： 南面敌寇大举入侵，不立即防御抵抗而专门追求荒淫玩乐，太师命令给您戴上脚镣手铐押回西府朗州。 
English: Wang Qiancheng got He Jingzhen very drunk and sent someone to pretend to be Liu Yan's messenger to reprimand He Jingzhen: The southern enemy bandits invaded in a big way. Instead of immediately defending and resisting, they exclusively pursued wild and lewd play. The Grand Master ordered you to be handcuffed and shackled and sent back to Lanzhou in the western province.

古文：因收系狱。
现代文：趁机将何敬真逮捕关进监狱。
English: took the opportunity to arrest He Jingzhen and put him in prison.

古文：全琇逃去，遣兵追捕之。
现代文：朱全逃跑离去，派兵追捕他。
English: Zhu Quan ran away and sent soldiers to chase him.

古文：二月，辛亥朔，斩敬真以徇。
现代文：二月，辛亥朔，斩杀何敬真来示众。
English: In February, Xinhai Shuo, killed He Jingzhen to show the public.

古文：未几，获全琇及其党十馀人，皆斩之。
现代文：不久，捕获朱全及其党羽十几人，全部斩首。
English: Soon, Zhu Quan and more than a dozen of his followers were captured and all of them were beheaded.

古文：癸丑，镇宁节度使荣归澶州。
现代文：癸丑，镇宁节度使郭荣返归澶州。
English: Guo Rong's return to Zhangzhou was a result of the ugly and calming of the situation.

古文：初，契丹主德光北还，以晋传国宝自随。
现代文：当初，契丹主耶律德光返回北方，将后晋传国玺印随身携走。
English: At first, the Khitan lord Yeruddeguang returned to the north, taking the seal of the Later Jin Dynasty with him.

古文：至是，更以玉作二宝。
现代文：到这时，又用玉做两枚玺印。
English: At this time, he also made two seals with beads.

古文：王逵遣使以斩何敬真告刘言，言不得己，庚申，斩符会等数人。
现代文：王逵派遣使者将何敬真斩首报告刘言，刘言不得已，于庚申，将符会等多人斩首。
English: Wang Yao sent an envoy to report the beheading of He Jingzhen to Liu Yan. Liu Yan had no choice but to behead many people, including Fu Hui, in Goshun.

古文：枢密使、平卢节度使、同平章事王峻，晚节益狂躁，奏请以端明殿学士颜衎、枢密直学士陈观代范质、李谷为相，帝曰： 进退宰辅，不可仓猝，俟朕更思之。 
现代文：枢密使、平卢节度使、同平章事王峻，晚年性情益发狂妄急躁，奏请任用端明殿学士颜、枢密直学士陈观取代范质、李为宰相，后周太祖说： 调换宰相，不可仓促行事，待朕再考虑一番。 
English: In his later years, Wang Jun's temperament became more and more arrogant and impetuous. He asked for the appointment of Duan Ming Dian Biao Yan and Privy Direct Biao Chen Guan to replace the norm, and Li as the prime minister. Later, Zhou Taizu said: "If you want to change the prime minister, you should not act hastily, wait for me to think about it."

古文：峻力论列，语浸不逊，日向中，帝尚未食，峻争之不已。帝曰： 今方寒食，俟假开，如卿所奏。 
现代文：王峻极力陈述己见，言语愈来愈不恭敬。太阳已近正中，太祖还未进食，王峻争执没个完，太祖说： 如今正是寒食节，等待休假结束，就照爱卿所奏办理。 
English: Wang Jun tried his best to state his opinion, and his words became more and more disrespectful. The sun was already close to noon, the great-grandfather had not yet eaten, and Wang Jun's dispute was not over. The great-grandfather said: Today is the cold food festival, waiting for the end of the holiday, it will be handled according to Ai Xing's report.

古文：峻乃退。
现代文：王峻这才退下。
English: Only then did Wang Jun back down.

古文：癸亥，帝函召宰相、枢密使入，幽峻于别所。
现代文：癸亥，后周太祖紧急召见宰相、枢密使入朝，将王峻软禁在别的地方。
English: Later, Zhou Taizu urgently summoned the prime minister and the confidential envoy to the imperial court, and put Wang Jun under house arrest in another place.

古文：帝见冯道等，泣曰： 王峻陵朕太甚，欲尽逐大臣，翦朕羽翼。
现代文：太祖见到冯道等人，流下眼泪说： 王峻欺朕太甚，想将大臣全部驱逐，翦除朕的左膀右臂。
English: Seeing Feng Dao and the others, the great-grandfather shed tears and said, "Wang Jun bullied me so badly that he wanted to expel all the ministers and cut off my right and left arms.

古文：朕惟一子，专务间阻，暂令诣阙，已怀怨望。
现代文：朕只有一子，王峻却专门设置障碍，临时让他进京入朝，王峻得知便已满腔怨恨。
English: I have only one son, but Wang Jun specifically set up obstacles to temporarily let him enter Beijing and the imperial court. When Wang Jun learned of this, he was filled with resentment.

古文：岂有身典枢机，复兼宰相，又求重镇！
现代文：况且岂有一身既主持枢密院，又兼任宰相，还要求遥领重要藩镇的道理！
English: Moreover, how can there be a person who presides over the Privy Council and concurrently serves as prime minister, and also requires the remote leadership of an important town!

古文：观其志趣，殊未盈厌。
现代文：观察他的志向意趣，永无满足。
English: Observe his aspirations and interests, he is never satisfied.

古文：无君如此，谁则堪之！ 
现代文：目中无君如此，谁能忍受！ 
English: In the eyes of the king, no one is like this, who can bear it!

古文：甲子，贬峻商州司马，制辞略曰： 肉视群后，孩抚朕躬。 
现代文：甲子，贬谪王峻为商州司马，制书之辞大略说： 视群臣如案板上的肉，待朕身似几岁孩童。 
English: The first son, Wang Jun, was relegated to the post of Shangzhou Sima, and the words of the book were roughly as follows: Treat the ministers like meat on the board, and treat me like a child.

古文：帝虑鄴都留守王殷不自安，命殷子尚食使承诲诣殷，谕以峻得罪之状。
现代文：太祖顾虑邺都留守王殷会自感不安，命王殷儿子尚食使王承诲前往王殷处，告知王峻获罪的情况。
English: The great-grandfather was worried that Wang Yin would feel uneasy if he stayed behind. He ordered Wang Yin's son, who was still eating, to go to Wang Yin's place to inform Wang Jun of the crime.

古文：峻至商州，得腹疾，帝犹愍之，命其妻往视之，未几而卒。
现代文：王峻到达商州，得了腹泄病，太祖仍然可怜他，命他的妻子前往探视，王峻不久便去世了。
English: When Wang Jun arrived in Shangzhou, he fell ill with diarrhea. The great-grandfather still pitied him and ordered his wife to visit him. Wang Jun died soon after.

古文：帝命折从阮分兵屯延州，高绍基始惧，屡有贡献。
现代文：后周太祖命折从阮分兵屯驻延州，高绍基开始害怕，时常有贡物给朝廷。
English: After the death of Zhou Taizu, Gao Shaoqi began to be afraid of the soldiers stationed in Yanzhou from Ruanwen, and often brought tribute to the imperial court.

古文：又命供奉官张怀贞将禁兵两指挥屯鄜、延，绍基乃悉以军府事授副使张匡图。
现代文：太祖又命供奉官张怀贞率领禁兵两个指挥屯驻州、延州，高绍基这才把全部军府事务交给节度副使张匡图。
English: The great-grandfather also ordered Zhang Huaizhen, the official in charge of offering sacrifices, to lead the two commanders of the forbidden soldiers stationed in Zhou and Yanzhou. Gao Shaoqi then handed over all the military affairs to Zhang Kuangtu, the deputy envoy of the festival.

古文：甲戌，以客省使向训权知延州。
现代文：甲戌，任命客省使向训出守延州。
English: He appointed a guest provincial envoy to Yanzhou.

古文：三月，甲申，以镇宁节度使荣为开封尹、晋王。
现代文：三月，甲申，后周太祖任命镇宁节度使郭荣为开封尹、晋王。
English: In March, after Jiaxing, Zhou Taizu appointed Zhenning Jiedu to make Guo Rong the king of Kaifeng and Jin.

古文：丙戌，以枢密副使郑仁诲为镇宁节度使。
现代文：丙戌，任命枢密副使郑仁诲为镇宁节度使。
English: He also appointed Zheng Renya, the vice-envoy of the privy council, as the chief envoy of the Zhenning Festival.

古文：初，杀牛族与野鸡族有隙，闻官军讨野鸡，馈饷迎奉，官军利其财畜而掠之；杀牛族反，与野鸡合，败宁州刺史张建武于包山。
现代文：当初，杀牛族与与野鸡族有磨擦，听说官府军队讨伐野鸡族，便馈送军粮迎接侍奉，官府军队贪图他们的财产牲畜而进行抢掠。杀牛族即造反，与野鸡族联合，在包山打败宁州刺史张建武。
English: At the beginning, there was friction between the cattle-killing tribe and the pheasant tribe. When they heard that the government army was fighting the pheasant tribe, they sent military food to welcome the servants. The government army coveted their property and livestock and plundered them. The cattle-killing tribe rebelled, united with the pheasant tribe, and defeated the Ningzhou chief Zhang Jianwu in Baoshan.

古文：帝以郭彦钦扰群胡，致其作乱，黜废于家。
现代文：后周太祖因为郭彦钦骚扰各胡人部族，导致发生叛乱，将他革职为民。
English: Later, Zhou Taizu dismissed Guo Yanqin for harassing various Hu tribes, which led to a rebellion.

古文：初，解州刺史浚仪郭元昭与榷盐使李温玉有隙，温玉婿魏仁浦为枢密主事，元昭疑仁浦庇之。会李守贞反，温玉有子在河中，元昭收系温玉，奏言其叛，事连仁浦。
现代文：当初，解州刺史浚仪人郭元昭与榷盐使李温玉有裂隙，李温玉女婿魏仁浦为枢密主事，郭元昭怀疑魏仁浦庇护岳丈；正好遇上河中李守贞造反，李温玉有个儿子在河中，郭元昭拘捕关押李温玉，上奏报告他叛变，事情牵连到魏仁浦。
English: At the beginning, Guo Yuan Zhao, the person responsible for the dredging of the history of Leshou, caused a rift between Li Wenyu and Yan Yan, Li Wenyu's son-in-law Wei Rimpu was the main secret, Guo Yuan Zhao suspected Wei Rimpu of sheltering his father-in-law; Li Shuzhen rebelled in the middle of the river, Li Wenyu had a son in the middle of the river, Guo Yuan Zhao arrested and detained Li Wenyu, reported his mutiny, and the matter involved Wei Rimpu.

古文：帝时为枢密使，知其诬，释不问。
现代文：后周太祖当时任枢密使，知道这是诬告，便放在一边不加追问。
English: Later, Zhou Taizu, who was a Privy Counsellor at the time, knew that this was a false accusation and put it aside without further inquiry.

古文：至是，仁浦为枢密承旨，元昭代归，甚惧，过洛阳，以告仁浦弟仁涤，仁涤曰： 吾兄平生不与人为怨，况肯以私害公乎！ 
现代文：到这时，魏仁浦任枢密承旨，郭元昭调职归京，很害怕，路过洛阳，来告诉魏仁浦的弟弟魏仁涤，魏仁涤说： 我哥哥平素不与人结怨记仇，怎么肯因私人恩怨来害您呢！ 
English: At this time, Wei Renpu was appointed to the Privy Council and Guo Yuan Zhao was transferred back to Beijing. He was very scared. He passed through Luoyang to tell Wei Renpu's younger brother Wei Renpiao. Wei Renpiao said: My brother usually does not hold grudges with people, how could he harm you because of personal grudges!

古文：既至，丁亥，仁浦白帝，以元昭为庆州刺史。
现代文：郭元昭已到京，丁亥，魏仁浦报告后周太祖，任命郭元昭为庆州刺史。
English: Guo Yuan Zhao has arrived in Beijing, Ding Hai, Wei Ren Pu reported to Zhou Taizu, and appointed Guo Yuan Zhao as the chief historian of Gyeongju.

古文：己丑，以棣州团练使太原王仁镐为宣徽北院使兼枢密副使
现代文：己丑，后周太祖任命棣州团练使太原人王仁镐为宣徽北院使兼枢密副使。
English: Later, Zhou Taizu appointed Wang Rensheng, a Taiyuan native, as the envoy of the Northern Yuan of the State Council of Hunan Province and the vice-envoy of the Privy Council.

古文：唐主复以左仆射冯延己同平章事。
现代文：南唐主又任命左仆射冯延己为同平章事。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty also appointed his left-hand servant, Sha Feng Yan, as Tongping Zhang.

古文：周行逢恶武平节度副使张仿，言于王逵曰： 何敬真，仿之亲戚，临刑以后事属仿，公宜备之。 
现代文：周行逢厌恶武平节度使副张，向王逵禀告说： 何敬真是张的亲戚，何敬真临刑时将后事托付给张，您应防备他。 
English: Zhou Xingxing always disliked Wu Ping, who was the deputy of Zhang, and told Wang Xi: He Jingzhen was Zhang's relative, and He Jingzhen would entrust Zhang with the aftermath when he was about to be executed. You should beware of him.

古文：夏，四月，庚申，逵召仿饮，醉而杀之。
现代文：夏季，四月，庚申，王逵召张喝酒，灌醉后杀了他。
English: In the summer, in April, in Goshun, Wang Yao invited Zhang Rong to drink, got him drunk and killed him.

古文：丙寅，归德节度使兼侍中常思入朝，戊辰，徙平卢节度使。
现代文：丙寅，归德节度使兼侍中常思进京入朝；戊辰，调任平卢节度使。
English: Cui Yin, returning to Germany, was appointed as the festival envoy and attendant of the emperor, and often thought about moving to Beijing to join the imperial court; Wu Chen, was transferred to be the festival envoy of Pinglu.

古文：将行，奏曰： 臣在宋州，举丝四万馀两在民间，谨以上进，请征之。 
现代文：常思将要出行，启奏说： 臣下在宋州，在民间发放四万余两丝的债，谨将债权进献皇上，请到时征收。 
English: Chang Si is about to travel, and the prelude says: My vassals in Songzhou have issued more than forty thousand two-thread debt to the people, and I would like to present the debt to the emperor. Please collect it at the right time.

古文：帝颔之。
现代文：后周太祖点头。
English: The emperor nodded yes.

古文：五月，丁亥，敕榜宋州，凡常思所举丝悉蠲之，已输者复归之，思亦无怍色。
现代文：五月，丁亥，太祖向宋州颁发布告，凡是常思所放的债全部豁免，常思知道后也没有惭愧的样子。
English: In May, Dinghai, Taizu issued a notice to Songzhou, exempting all debts issued by Changsi, and Changsi did not look ashamed after knowing.

古文：自唐末以来，所在学校废绝，蜀毋昭裔出私财百万营学馆，且请刻板印《九经》。蜀主从之。
现代文：自从唐朝末年以来，各地学校荡然无存，后蜀毋昭裔拿出私人财产上百万营办学馆，并且请求刻板印刷《九经》；后蜀主听从了他。
English: Since the end of the Tang Dynasty, schools in various regions have all but disappeared. Later, the descendants of Shu Ye Zhao took out millions of private property to run a school, and requested the rigid printing of the "Nine Classics"; the master of Shu Ye listened to him.

古文：由是蜀中文学复盛。
现代文：由此蜀地的文艺学术重新昌盛。
English: As a result, literature and art studies in Shunde have flourished again.

古文：六月，壬子，沧州奏契丹知户台军事范阳张藏英来降。
现代文：六月，壬子，沧州奏报契丹的知卢台军事范阳人张藏英前来投降。
English: In June, Zhang Zangying, the military leader of Renzi and Cangzhou, reported that the Chilutai of Khitan had come to surrender.

古文：初，唐明宗之世，宰相冯道、李愚请令判国子监田敏校正《九经》，刻板印卖，朝廷从之。
现代文：当初，后唐明宗时，宰相冯道、李愚请示让判国子监田敏校正《九经》，刻板印刷出售，朝廷同意。
English: At first, during the reign of Emperor Mingzong of the Later Tang Dynasty, the prime ministers Feng Dao and Li Yu requested that the court order the provincial governor Tian Min to proofread the "Nine Classics" and sell it in block printing, and the imperial court agreed.

古文：丁巳，板成，献之。
现代文：丁巳，刻板完成，进献朝廷。
English: Ding Si, rigidly completed, presented to the imperial court.

古文：由是，虽乱世，《九经》传布甚广。
现代文：从此，虽然世道大乱，但《九经》的传布仍然很广。
English: Since then, although the world is in turmoil, the spread of the "Nine Classics" is still widespread.

古文：王逵以周行逢知潭州，自将兵袭朗州，克之，杀指挥使郑珓，执武安节度使、同平章事刘言，幽于别馆。
现代文：王逵任命周行逢主持潭州事务，自己领兵袭击朗州，攻克州城，杀死指挥使郑，抓获武安节度使、同平章事刘言，囚禁在客馆。
English: Wang Qian appointed Zhou Xingfeng to preside over the affairs of Tanzhou. He led his troops to attack Langzhou, conquered the city, killed the commanding officer Zheng, captured the Wu'an Festival envoy, Tongping Zhangji Liu Yan, and imprisoned him in a guest house.

古文：秋，七月，王殷三表请入朝，帝疑其不诚，遣使止之。
现代文：秋季，七月，王殷三次上表请求进京入朝，后周太祖怀疑他不诚心，派遣使者制止。
English: In the autumn, in July, Wang Yin made three requests to enter Beijing and the DPRK. Later, Zhou Taizu suspected that he was not sincere and sent an envoy to stop him.

古文：唐大旱，井泉涸，淮水可涉，饥民度淮而北者相继，濠、寿发兵御之，民与兵斗而北来。
现代文：南唐大旱，井水、泉水干涸，淮河干得可徒步而过，饥民渡过淮河北上的接连不断，南唐濠州、寿州发兵阻止，百姓与士兵争斗朝北奔来。
English: There was a severe drought in southern Tang Dynasty. Wells and springs dried up. The Huai River was so dry that people could walk across it. Hungry people continued to cross the Huai River to the north. Luzhou and Shoushou in southern Tang Dynasty sent troops to stop them. The people fought with the soldiers and rushed northward.

古文：帝闻之曰： 彼我之民一也，听籴米过淮。 
现代文：后周太祖闻悉此情说： 对方和我方的百姓是一样的，听凭南面百姓过淮河来买粮。 
English: Later, Zhou Taizu learned of this situation and said: The other side and our people are the same. Let the people in the south cross the Huaihe River to buy grain.

古文：唐人遂筑仓，多籴以供军。
现代文：南唐人于是修筑仓库，多买粮食来供应军队。
English: The people of southern Tang therefore built warehouses and bought more grain to supply the army.

古文：八月，己未，诏唐民以人畜负米者听之，以舟车运载者勿予。
现代文：八月，己未，后周太祖颁诏令：南唐百姓用人力和牲口拉粮食的准许，用船只车辆运载粮食的不给。
English: In August, after Zhou Taizu issued an edict: the people of Nantang were allowed to use manpower and livestock to pull grain, but they were not allowed to use ships and vehicles to carry grain.

古文：王逵遣使上表，诬 刘言谋以朗州降唐，又欲攻潭州，其众不从，废而囚之，臣已至朗州抚安军府讫。 
现代文：王逵派遣使者上表书，诬称： 刘言阴谋率朗州向南唐投降，又准备攻打潭州，他的部众不肯从命，将他废黜并囚禁，臣下已经到达朗州安抚军府完毕。 
English: Wang Hui sent an envoy to make a report, falsely claiming: Liu Yan led a conspiracy to surrender Langzhou to Southern Tang, and was also preparing to attack Tanzhou. His subordinates refused to follow his orders, and he was deposed and imprisoned. His subordinates had already arrived in Langzhou to pacify the military headquarters.

古文：且请复移使府治潭州。
现代文：并且请求将节度使府治再迁移到潭州。
English: He also requested that the provincial government be relocated to Tanzhou.

古文：甲戌，遣通事舍人翟光裔诣湖南宣抚，从其所请。
现代文：甲戌，后周太祖派遣通事舍人翟光裔到湖南宣旨安抚，同意王逵的请求。
English: After the battle, Zhou Taizu sent a general to appease Wang Guangxuan to Hunan Province and agreed to Wang Xuan's request.

古文：逵还长沙，以周行逢知朗州事，又遣潘叔嗣杀刘言于朗州。
现代文：王逵返回长沙，任命周行逢主持朗州事务，又派遣潘叔嗣在朗州杀死刘言。
English: Wang Yao returned to Changsha, appointed Zhou Xingfeng to preside over the affairs of Langzhou, and sent Pan Shushi to kill Liu Yan in Langzhou.

古文：九月，己亥，武成节度使白重赞奏塞决河。
现代文：九月，己亥，武成节度使白重赞奏报堵塞黄河决口。
English: In September, Ji Hai, Wucheng Festival, Bai Chongzang blocked the mouth of the Yellow River.

古文：契丹寇乐寿，齐州戍兵右保宁都头刘彦章杀都监杜延熙，谋应契丹，不克，并其党伏诛。
现代文：契丹军队侵犯乐寿，齐州卫戍部队右保宁都头刘汉章杀死都监杜延熙，策划接应契丹军队，没有成功，连同他的党羽伏法处死。
English: The Khitan army invaded Leshou. Liu Hanzhang, the head of the Right Boryeong Capital of the Qizhou Garrison, killed Du Yanxi, the governor of the capital, and plotted to take over from the Khitan army. He did not succeed, and was executed along with his followers.

古文：南汉主立其子继兴为卫王，璇兴为桂王，庆兴为荆王，保兴为祯王，崇兴为梅王。
现代文：南汉主封立他的儿子刘继兴为卫王，刘璇兴为桂王，刘庆兴为荆王，刘保兴为祯王，刘崇兴为梅王。
English: The Lord of the Southern Han Dynasty appointed his son Liu Jixing as the King of Wei, Liu Jixing as the King of Gui, Liu Qingxing as the King of Jing, Liu Baoxing as the King of Zhai, and Liu Chongxing as the King of Mei.

古文：东自青、徐，南至安、复，西至丹、慈，北至贝、镇，皆大水。
现代文：东起青州、徐州，南到安州、复州，西到丹州、慈州，北到贝州、镇州，都发大水。
English: From Qingzhou and Xuzhou in the east, to Anzhou and Fuzhou in the south, to Danzhou and Cizhou in the west, and to Beizhou and Zhenzhou in the north, there is a lot of water.

古文：帝自入秋得风痹疾，害于食饮及步趋，术者言宜散财以禳之。
现代文：后周太祖以入秋以来受风得了痹病，影响饮食和行走，术士说应该散发财物来祛病消灾。
English: Since late autumn, Emperor Zhou's great-grandfather had been affected by the wind and suffered from paralysis, which affected his diet and walking. The sorcerer said that he should distribute wealth to cure the illness and eliminate the disaster.

古文：帝欲祀南郊，又以自梁以来，郊祀常在洛阳，疑之。
现代文：太祖打算在南郊举行祭祀，又因从后梁以来，祭祀天地常在洛阳举行，疑惑未决。
English: The great-grandfather planned to hold the ritual in the southern suburbs, but since the time of Houliang, the ritual has often been held in Luoyang, and the question is still unresolved.

古文：执政曰： 天子所都则可以祀百神，何必洛阳！ 
现代文：朝廷执政官说： 天子所在都城便可以祭祀百神，何必非在洛阳！ 
English: The imperial consul said: If the divine son is in the capital, then it is possible to worship hundreds of gods. Why not in Luoyang?

古文：于是，始筑圜丘、社稷坛，作太庙于大梁。
现代文：于是，开始建筑祭祀天地的圜丘、社稷坛，在大梁建造太庙。
English: As a result, they began to build a sacred mound and shrine altar for the worship of heaven and earth, as well as a grand temple in Daliang.

古文：癸亥，遣冯道迎太庙社稷神主于洛阳。
现代文：癸巳，派遣冯道到洛阳迎来太庙社稷的神主牌位。
English: At the same time, Feng Dao was sent to Luoyang to welcome the god card of Taimiao Shrine.

古文：南汉大赦。
现代文：南汉实行大赦。
English: Southern Han implemented an amnesty.

古文：冬，十一月，己丑，太常请准洛阳筑四郊诸坛，从之。
现代文：冬季，十一月，己丑，太常请示比照洛阳修筑四郊各坛，后周太祖同意。
English: In winter, November, Jiugou, it is too common to ask for the construction of four suburb altars according to Luoyang, and later Zhou Taizu agreed.

古文：十二月，丁未朔，神主至大梁，帝迎于西郊，祔享于太庙。
现代文：十二月，丁未朔，神主牌位抵达大梁，后周太祖到西郊迎接，合供在太庙。
English: In December, Ding Weishuo, the god card arrived in Dalian. Later, Zhou Taizu went to the western suburbs to meet, and the joint offering was held in the Great Temple.

古文：鄴都留守、天雄节度使兼侍卫亲军都指挥使、同平章事王殷恃功专横，凡河北镇戍兵应用敕处分者，殷即以帖行之，又多掊敛民财。
现代文：邺都留守、天雄节度使兼侍卫亲军都指挥使、同平章事王殷恃仗有功专横不法，凡是河北藩镇卫戍部队应用皇帝敕书才能处理的事，王殷却直接用自己的手帖就实施了，同时大量盘剥百姓财产。
English: Wang Yin was absent, Tianxiong, the commander of the festival, also the commander of the bodyguards, and Tongping, the commander of the troops, were absent, and Wang Yin, the commander of the army, was absent. All the things that Hebei's garrison troops could do with the help of the emperor's edict, Wang Yin did directly with his own handbook, and at the same time, he plundered a large amount of people's property.

古文：帝闻之不悦，使人谓曰： 卿与国同体，鄴都帑庾甚丰，卿欲用则取之，何患无财！ 
现代文：后周太祖听说这些很不高兴，派人对他说： 爱卿与国家同为一体，邺都国库非常丰盈，爱卿想用就拿取，还怕什么没财！ 
English: Later, Zhou Taizu was very unhappy to hear this and sent someone to say to him: "Aiqing and the country are one and the same. The Qidu treasury is very abundant. Aiqing can take what he wants, but he is afraid of running out of money!"

古文：成德节度使何福进素恶殷，甲子，福进入朝，密以殷阴事白帝，帝由是疑之。
现代文：成德节度使何福进一向憎恶王殷，甲子，何福进进京入朝，秘密地将王殷隐私之事禀报后周太祖，太祖由此怀疑王殷。
English: Chengde Festival has always made He Fuxin hate Wang Yin. When He Fuxin entered Beijing and entered the imperial court, he secretly reported Wang Yin's private affairs to Emperor Zhou, which made Emperor Zhou suspicious of Wang Yin.

古文：乙丑，殷入朝，诏留殷充京城内外巡检。
现代文：乙丑，王殷进京入朝，太祖颁诏留下王殷充任京城内外巡检。
English: In the second century, Wang Yin entered Beijing and the imperial court, and the great-grandfather issued an edict to leave Wang Yin as the inspector in and out of the capital.

古文：戊辰，府州防御使折德扆奏北汉将乔赟入寇，击走之。
现代文：戊辰，府州防御使折德奏报北汉将领乔入侵，将他打跑了。
English: In Boshin, the defense of Fuzhou made the Han general Qiao invade and beat him away.

古文：王殷每出入，从者常数百人。
现代文：王殷每次出入，随从经常有数百人。
English: Every time Wang Yin comes and goes, he is often accompanied by hundreds of people.

古文：殷请量给铠仗以备巡逻，帝难之。
现代文：王殷请求如数配给铠甲兵器以备巡逻之用，后周太祖对此感到为难。
English: When Wang Yin requested that a certain number of armored weapons be provided for patrols, Emperor Zhou was perplexed.

古文：时帝体不平，将行郊祀，而殷挟震主之势在左右，众心忌之。
现代文：当时太祖身体欠安，将要举行祭祀天地的典礼，而王殷挟持功高震主之势在天子左右，众人心中忌恨他。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather was in poor health and was about to hold a ceremony to worship heaven and earth, while Wang Yin held the potential of the great earthquake around the heavenly son, and the hearts of the people hated him.

古文：壬申，帝力疾御滋德殿，殷入起居，遂执之。
现代文：壬申，太祖竭力支撑带病的身子坐在滋德殿，王殷进入问安，于是拘捕了他。
English: In Jinshin, the great-grandfather tried his best to support his sick body while sitting in the Zide Hall. Wang Yin came in to say hello, so he was arrested.

古文：下制诬殷谋以郊祀日作乱，流登州，出城，杀之，命镇宁节度使郑仁诲诣鄴都安抚。仁诲利殷家财，擅杀殷子，迁其家属于登州。
现代文：颁下制书诬称王殷密谋在祭祀天地那天发动叛乱，流放登州，刚出京城，便杀死了他。命令镇宁节度使郑仁诲到邺都进行安抚，郑仁诲贪图王殷家产，擅自杀死王殷的儿子，并将他的家属迁到登州。
English: He issued an edict falsely accusing Wang Yin of plotting to launch a rebellion on the day of the sacrifice of heaven and earth, exiled him to Danzhou, and killed him as soon as he left Beijing. He ordered the Zhening Festival to pacify Zheng Renyao by sending him to Danzhou. Zheng Renyao coveted Wang Yin's family property, killed Wang Yin's son by suicide, and moved his family to Danzhou.

古文：唐祠部朗中、知制诰徐铉言贡举初设，不宜遽罢，乃复行之。
现代文：南唐祠部郎中、知制诰徐铉进言贡举制度刚开始设立，不应马上停止，于是又实行。
English: The tribute system was just established, and should not be stopped immediately, so it was implemented again.

古文：先是，楚州刺史田敬洙请修白水塘溉田以实边，冯延己以为便。
现代文：在此之前，楚州刺史田敬洙请示修理白水塘灌溉田地来充实边疆，冯延己认为有利。
English: Prior to this, Feng Yanji considered it advantageous that the governor of Chuzhou, Shishida Jingyao, requested the repair of the White Water Pond irrigation field to enrich the frontier.

古文：李德明因请大辟旷土为屯田，修复所在渠塘堙废者。
现代文：李德明因此请示大力开辟空旷土地作为屯田，修复当地已经埋没废弃的灌渠水塘。
English: Therefore, Li Deming asked for instructions to vigorously open up open land as a military garrison and repair the abandoned irrigation canals and ponds that have been buried in the local area.

古文：吏因缘侵扰，大兴力役，夺民田甚众，民愁怨无诉。
现代文：官吏乘机侵扰百姓，大兴徭役，夺取民田很多，百姓忧愁，怨恨无处诉说。
English: Government officials take the opportunity to harass the people, greatly enhance the plunder, seize a lot of people's fields, the people are sad, and there is nowhere to complain about resentment.

古文：徐铉以白唐主，唐主命铉按视之，铉籍民田悉归其主。
现代文：徐铉将情况禀报南唐主，南唐主命令徐铉检查视察，徐铉没收官吏所侵吞的民田全部归还原主。
English: Xu Gan reported the situation to the Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty, and the Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty ordered Xu Gan to inspect and inspect, and Xu Gan confiscated all the people's fields that were encroached by officials and returned them to the original owners.

古文：或谮铉擅作威福，唐主怒，流铉舒州。
现代文：有人进谗言说徐铉擅自作主，滥施恩威，南唐主发怒，将徐铉发配舒州。
English: Some people said that Xu Xi took the lead without authorization and abused his power. The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty was angry and dispatched Xu Xi to Shuzhou.

古文：然白水塘竟不成。
现代文：这样白水塘终于没能修成。
English: As a result, the construction of the White Water Reservoir was never completed.

古文：唐主又命少府监冯延鲁巡抚诸州，右拾遗徐锴表延鲁无才多罪，举措轻浅，不宜奉使。
现代文：南唐主又命少府监冯延鲁巡视安抚各州，左拾遗徐锴上表弹亥力冯延鲁没有才能却有许多罪行，举止轻浮浅薄，不适宜奉命出使。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang also ordered the minor prefect Feng Yanlu to patrol and pacify the states. Feng Yanlu did not have talent, but he had many crimes. His behavior was frivolous and shallow, and he was not suitable to be sent by order.

古文：唐主怒，贬锴校书郎、分司东都。
现代文：南唐主大怒，将徐锴贬为校书郎、分司东都。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty was furious and demoted Xu Xi to the position of school scribe and deputy governor of the Eastern Capital.

古文：锴，铉之弟也。
现代文：徐锴是徐铉的弟弟。
English: Xu Jun is the younger brother of Xu Jun.

古文：道州盘容洞蛮酋盘崇聚众自称盘容州都统，屡寇郴、道州。
现代文：道州盘容洞蛮酋长盘崇聚集部众自称盘容州都统，屡次侵犯郴州、道州。
English: The self-proclaimed Pan-Yong-Dong and Pan-Chung gatherings of Daozhou Pan-Yong-Dong barbarian chieftains repeatedly invaded Luzhou and Daozhou.

古文：乙亥，帝朝享太庙，被兗冕，左右掖以登阶，才及一室，酌献，俯首不能拜而退，命晋王荣终礼。
现代文：乙亥，后周太祖祭祀太庙，穿戴衮衣冠冕，由左右人搀扶着登上台阶，才到一室，刚斟酒进献，便低下头不能行拜而退下令，命令晋王郭荣完成祭祀。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, after Zhou Taizu's sacrificial rites at the Great Temple, he wore a long robe and crown, and was helped up the steps by the people on either side of him. When he reached the first room, he had just poured out the wine for the offering, when he bowed his head and ordered that he could not bow and retreat, and ordered Jin Wang Guorong to complete the sacrificial rites.

古文：是夕，宿南郊，疾尤剧，几不救，夜分小愈。
现代文：当晚，住宿南郊，病情格外加重，几乎没救了，夜半时稍有好转。
English: That night, in the southern suburb of the accommodation, the condition of the patient was particularly aggravated, almost not saved, and there was a slight improvement at midnight.

古文：太祖圣神恭肃文武皇帝中显德元年春，正月，丙子朔，帝祀圜丘，仅能瞻仰致敬而已，进爵奠币皆有司代之。
现代文：显德元年春季，正月，丙子朔，后周太祖到圜丘祭天，仅能抬头瞻仰表示致敬而已，进献酒爵、奠放币帛都由有关官员代劳。
English: In the spring of the first year of Xiande, in the first month of the year, in the second month of the year, in the second month of the year, in the second month of the year, in the second month of the year, in the second month of the year, in the second month of the year, in the second month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year,

古文：大赦，改元。
现代文：宣布实行大赦，改换年号。
English: An amnesty will be implemented and the year will be changed.

古文：听蜀境通商。
现代文：同意后蜀在边境通商贸易。
English: After agreeing, Shu began to trade at the border.

古文：戊寅，罢鄴都，但为天雄军。
现代文：戊寅，撤销邺都，只设天雄军。
English: Wu Yin, revoked the capital, only set up the Tianxiong Army.

古文：庚辰，加晋王荣兼侍中，判内外兵马事。
现代文：庚辰，晋王郭荣加官兼侍中，管理京城内外兵马事务。
English: Geng Chen, Jin King Guorong's adjutant and chamberlain, managed the affairs of soldiers and horses inside and outside the capital.

古文：时群臣希得见帝，中外恐惧，闻晋王典兵，人心稍安。
现代文：当时群臣很少能见到后周太祖，所以朝廷内外惊恐害怕，听说晋王掌管军队，人心渐渐趋于平静。
English: At that time, the courtiers were rarely able to see Emperor Zhou, so both inside and outside the imperial court were alarmed and afraid. They heard that King Jin was in charge of the army, and their hearts gradually calmed down.

古文：军士有流言郊赏薄于唐明宗时者，帝闻之，壬午，召诸将至寝殿，让之曰： 朕自即位以来，恶衣菲食，专以赡军为念。
现代文：军队将士中有流言说郊祀的赏赐比后唐明宗时少，后周太祖闻悉，壬午，召集众将到寝殿，责备说： 朕从即位以来，节衣缩食，专门把保证军队供给放在心上。
English: There was a rumor among the military officers that the reward of the suburban worship was less than that of the Tang and Ming dynasties. Later, Zhou Taizu heard about it, and at noon, he summoned the generals to the bedchamber and reproached them, saying, "Since I ascended the throne, I have been saving clothes and food, and I have been especially concerned with ensuring the supply of the military.

古文：府库蓄积，四方贡献，赡军之外，鲜有赢馀，汝辈岂不知之！
现代文：国库的积蓄，四方的贡献，除去供应军队之外，很少有剩余，你们难道不知晓！
English: Do you not know that the savings of the state treasury, the contributions of the four quarters, have very little surplus, except for the supply of the army?

古文：今乃纵凶徒腾口，不顾人主之勤俭，察国之贫乏，又不思己有何功而受赏，惟知怨望，于汝辈安乎！ 
现代文：如今却纵容凶恶之徒乱说，全然不顾念君主的勤勉俭朴，体察国家的贫穷匮乏，又不想想自己有什么功劳而接受赏赐，只知抱怨，你们于心能安吗！ 
English: Now, however, they are indulging in the wickedness of the wicked, saying, "How can you have peace of mind, when you have no regard for the diligence and frugality of the monarch, when you see the poverty and scarcity of the country, when you do not want to think about what you have done and receive rewards, but only complain!"

古文：皆惶恐谢罪，退，索不逞者戮之，流言乃息。
现代文：众将都惶恐告罪，退下，搜索军中不逞之徒立即杀戮，流言蜚语于是平息。
English: The generals panicked, pleaded guilty, retreated, and immediately killed the traitors in the search army, thus putting an end to the rumors.

古文：初，帝在鄴都，奇爱小吏曹翰之才，使之事晋王荣。荣镇澶州，以为牙将。
现代文：当初，后周太祖在邺都时，格外喜爱小吏曹翰的才能，让他事奉晋王郭荣；郭荣镇守澶州，任命他为牙将。
English: At first, when the late Zhou Taizu was in Shandong, he was particularly fond of the talent of the minor official Cao Han, and had him serve the Jin king Guo Rong; Guo Rong was in charge of Shandong Province, and appointed him as commander of the dental corps.

古文：荣入为开封尹，未别召翰，翰自至，荣怪之。
现代文：郭荣入朝任开封尹，没有立即召来曹翰，曹翰却自己到了，郭荣很奇怪。
English: Guo Rong entered the imperial court as Kaifeng Yin, but did not immediately summon Cao Han, but Cao Han arrived on his own. Guo Rong was very strange.

古文：翰请间言曰： 大王，国之储嗣，今主上寝疾，大王当入侍医药，奈何犹决事于外邪！ 
现代文：曹翰请求私下进言，说： 大王是国家的继承人，如今主上患病卧床，大王应当入宫侍侯医治用药，怎么还在外面处理决定事务呢！ 
English: Cao Han asked for private advice, saying: The great king is the heir of the country, and now his master is sick in bed, the great king should enter the palace to attend to the medicine, how can he still deal with the decision-making affairs outside!

古文：荣感悟，即日入止禁中。
现代文：郭荣醒悟，当天进入住在宫中。
English: Guo Rong woke up and went to live in the palace that day.

古文：丙戌，帝疾笃，停诸司细务皆勿奏，有大事，则晋王荣禀进止宣行之。
现代文：丙戌，后周太祖病情危重，停理各部门具体事务，全部不得奏报，有重大事情，则由晋王郭荣禀报可否而宣旨实行。
English: Later, Zhou Taizu was critically ill, and the specific affairs of each department were suspended, and all of them could not be reported. If there was a major event, the Jin King Guo Rongjun would report whether it was possible and issue an order to implement it.

古文：以镇宁节度使郑仁诲为枢密使、同平章事。
现代文：任命镇宁节度使郑仁诲为枢密使、同平章事。
English: The appointment of Zhenning Jiedu made Zheng Renyao a privy councilor and a peer.

古文：戊子，以义武留后孙行友、保义留后韩通、朔方留后冯继业皆为节度使。
现代文：戊子，任命义武留后孙行友、保义留后韩通、朔方留后冯继业都为节度使。
English: At the same time, Sun Xingyou, who stayed in Yiwu, Han Tong, who stayed in Baoying, and Feng Jiye, who stayed in Shuo Fang, were all appointed as festival envoys.

古文：通，太原人也。
现代文：韩通是太原人。
English: Hantong is from Taiyuan.

古文：帝屡戒晋王曰： 昔吾西征，见唐十八陵无不发掘者，此无他，惟多藏金玉故也。
现代文：后周太祖屡次告诫晋王说： 从前我西征时，看到唐朝十八座皇陵没有不被发掘的，这没有别的原因，只是多藏金银宝玉的缘故。
English: Later, Zhou Taizu repeatedly admonished the Jin king, saying: Once upon a time, when I was on the Western Expedition, I saw that there were no eighteen imperial tombs in the Tang Dynasty that had not been excavated. There was no other reason for this, but because of the large amount of gold, silver and precious stones.

古文：我死，当衣以纸衣，敛以瓦棺；速营葬，勿久留宫中；圹中无用石，以甓代之；工人役徒皆和雇，勿以烦民；葬毕，募近陵民三十户，蠲其杂徭，使之守视；勿修下宫，勿置守陵宫人，勿作石羊、虎、人、马，惟刻石置陵前云： 周天子平生好俭约，遗令用纸衣、瓦棺，嗣天子不敢违也。 
现代文：我死后，定当用纸衣给我穿上，用土烧的棺材收敛我；迅速办理安葬，不要久留宫中；墓穴中不要用石头，拿砖代替；工匠役徒都由官府出钱雇佣，不要麻烦百姓；安葬完毕，招募靠近陵墓的百姓三十家，免除他们的各种徭役，让他们看守陵墓；不要修建地下宫室，不要设置守陵宫人，不要造石羊、石虎、石人、石马，只刻一块石碑立在陵前，写上： 周天子平生好俭约，遗令用纸衣、瓦棺，嗣天子不敢违也。 
English: After my death, I must be dressed in paper clothes and restrained in a coffin made of earth; I must be buried quickly, and I must not stay in the palace for a long time; I must not use stone in the tomb, but bricks instead; the craftsmen and apprentices are all hired by the government at the expense of the government, and I must not trouble the people; after the burial, I must recruit thirty families of people near the mausoleum, exempt them from all kinds of duties, and let them guard the mausoleum; I must not build an underground palace room, and I must not set up guards for the mausoleum, and I must not make stone sheep, stone tigers

古文：汝或吾违，吾不福汝！ 
现代文：你如果违背我的话，我就不施福给你。 
English: If you disobey me, I will not bless you.

古文：又曰： 李洪义当与节钺，魏仁浦勿使离枢密院。 
现代文：又说： 李洪义应当授予符节和斧钺，魏仁浦不要让他离开枢密院。 
English: He also said: Li Hongyi should be awarded the insignia and the axe, and Wei Rimpu should not let him leave the Privy Council.

古文：庚寅，诏前登州刺史周训等塞决河。
现代文：庚寅，诏令前登州刺史周训等堵塞黄河决口。
English: Geng Yin, Deng Zhou and Zhou Xun blocked the mouth of the Yellow River.

古文：先是，河决灵河、鱼池、酸枣、阳武、常乐驿、河阴、六明镇、原武凡八口。
现代文：此前，黄河在灵河、鱼池、酸枣、阳武、常乐驿、河阴、六明镇、原武决口，共八个口。
English: Previously, there were a total of eight mouths of the Yellow River in Linghe, Yuchi, Jujube, Yangwu, Changle, Heyin, Liuming, and Wonwu.

古文：至是分遣使者塞之。
现代文：到这时，分别派遣使者去堵塞。
English: At this time, send emissaries separately to block.

古文：帝命趣草制，以端明殿学士、户部侍郎王溥为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：后周太祖命令赶快起草制书，任命端明殿学士、户部侍郎王溥为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Later, Zhou Taizu ordered to quickly draft the document, and appointed Wang Xi, a scholar of the Duanming Palace and a servant of the household, as a servant of the middle book and a peer of the chapter.

古文：壬辰，宣制毕，左右以闻，帝曰： 吾无恨矣！ 
现代文：壬辰，宣布制书完毕，左右的人将此事奏告后周太祖，太祖说： 我没有遗憾了。 
English: After the announcement of the completion of the book production, the people around Zhou Taizu reported the matter to the emperor. The emperor said: I have no regrets.

古文：以枢密副使王仁镐为永兴节度使，以殿前都指挥使李重进领武信节度使，马军都指挥使樊爱能领武定节度使，步军都指挥使何徽领昭武节度使。
现代文：任命枢密副使王仁镐为永兴军节度使，任命殿前都指挥使李重进兼任武信节度使，马军都指挥使樊爱能兼任武定节度使，步军都指挥使何徽兼任昭武节度使。
English: Appointed the vice-secretary of the Privy Council, Wang Rensheng, as the Yongxing Army's festival envoy, appointed the commander of the front of the palace, Li Shujin, as the festival envoy of Wuxin, the commander of the horse army, Zou Ai Neng, as the festival envoy of Wuding, and the commander of the infantry army, He Hui, as the festival envoy of Zhaowu.

古文：重进年长于晋王荣，帝召入禁中，属以后事，仍命拜荣，以定君臣之分。
现代文：李重进年龄大于晋王郭荣，太祖召他入宫中，托付后事，并命他拜见郭荣，以确定君臣之间的名分。
English: Li Chongjin was older than Guo Rong, the king of Jin. The great-grandfather summoned him to the palace, entrusted him with the succession, and ordered him to meet Guo Rong to determine the rank between the monarch and the vassal.

古文：是日，帝殂于滋德殿，秘不发丧。
现代文：当天，后周太祖死于滋德殿，封锁消息不发丧。
English: On the same day, the late Zhou Taizu died in Zide Hall, but the news of the blockade did not cause mourning.

古文：乙未，宣遗制。
现代文：乙未，宣布大祖遗制。
English: B, announced the great-grandfather legacy.

古文：丙申，晋王即皇帝位。
现代文：丙申，晋王即皇帝位。
English: Bishin, Jin Wang is the emperor.

古文：初，静海节度使吴权卒，子昌岌立。昌岌卒，弟昌文立。
现代文：当初，静海节度使吴权去世，儿子吴昌岌继位；吴昌岌去世，弟弟吴昌文继位。
English: At first, the Jinghai Festival caused Wu Quan to die, and his son Wu Changtu succeeded him; Wu Changtu died, and his brother Wu Changwen succeeded him.

古文：是月，始请命于南汉，南汉以昌文为静海节度使兼安南都护。
现代文：此月，开始向南汉请求任命，南汉任命吴昌文为静海节度使兼安南都护。
English: This month, he began to request an appointment from the Southern Han Dynasty, and the Southern Han Dynasty appointed Wu Changwen as the envoy of Jinghai Festival and the guardian of Annan.

古文：北汉主闻太祖晏驾，甚喜，谋大举入寇，遣使请兵于契丹。
现代文：北汉主听说后周太祖去世，极为高兴，图谋大举入侵后周，派遣使者到契丹请求出兵。
English: When the Northern Han lord heard that Hou Zhou Taizu had died, he was extremely happy. He plotted to invade Hou Zhou in a big way and sent an envoy to Khitan to request the dispatch of troops.

古文：二月，契丹遣其武定节度使、政事令杨兗将万馀骑如晋阳。
现代文：二月，契丹派遣它的武定节度使、政事令杨衮率领一万多骑兵前往晋阳。
English: In February, Khitan dispatched its military envoy Wu Ding Jiedu and political commissar Yang Hui to lead more than ten thousand cavalry to Jinyang.

古文：北汉主自将兵三万，以义成节度使白从晖为行军都部署，武宁节度使张元徽为前锋都指挥使，与契丹自团柏南趣潞州。
现代文：北汉主亲自领兵三万，任命义成节度使白从晖为行军都部署，武宁节度使张元徽为前锋都指挥使，与契丹军队从团柏南下赶赴潞州。
English: The ruler of the Northern Han personally led 30,000 soldiers, appointed Yicheng Jiedu to deploy Bai Conglu as the marching army, and Wu Ning Jiedu to command Zhang Yuanhui as the vanguard, and rushed to Quzhou with the Khitan army from the south.

古文：蜀左匡圣马步都指挥使、保宁节度使安思谦谮杀张业，废赵廷隐，蜀人皆恶之。
现代文：后蜀左匡圣马步都指挥使、保宁节度使安思谦进谗言杀害张业，废黜赵廷隐，蜀人都痛恨他。
English: Later, Shu Zuo Kuang, San Ma Bu Du commanded the envoys, and Boryeong Jiedu, An Si Qian, to kill Zhang Ye and depose Zhao Tingyin. The Shu people all hated him.

古文：蜀主使将兵救王景崇，思谦逗桡无功，内惭惧，不自安。
现代文：后蜀主派他领兵救援王景崇，安思谦徘徊观望而无战功，内心惭愧恐惧，自感不安。
English: After the Lord of Shu sent him to lead the troops to rescue Wang Jing Chong, An Si Qian lingered to watch without any war achievement, feeling ashamed and afraid, and feeling uneasy.

古文：自张业之诛，宫门守卫加严，思谦以为疑己，言多不逊。
现代文：从张业被诛杀以后，宫门守卫更加严密，安思谦认为这是怀疑自己，说话多有不敬。
English: After Zhang Ye was killed, the palace gate was guarded more closely. An Siqian thought that this was because he doubted himself and spoke disrespectfully.

古文：思谦典宿卫，多杀士卒以立威。
现代文：安思谦统领皇宫警卫，多杀士兵来树立自己的权威。
English: An Si Qian led the palace guards and killed more soldiers to establish his authority.

古文：蜀主阅卫士，有年尚壮而为思谦所斥者，复留隶籍，思谦杀之，蜀主不能平。
现代文：后蜀主查阅卫士名册，有年纪还轻而被安思谦所斥退的，便又留下归入簿籍，安思谦却杀死这些卫士，后蜀主深感不平。
English: Later, Lord Shu checked the roster of guards, and those who were too young and were rejected by An Si Qian were left to be recorded in the book, but An Si Qian killed these guards, and Lord Shu was deeply dissatisfied.

古文：思谦三子，扆、嗣、裔，倚父势暴横，为国人患。
现代文：安思谦有三个儿子：安、安嗣、安裔，倚仗父亲权势残暴横行，成为国人大患。
English: An Siqian had three sons: An, An Zi, and An Zi. Relying on their father's power, they were cruel and rampant, and became a big problem for the Chinese people.

古文：翰林使王藻屡言思谦怨望，将反，丁巳，思谦入朝，蜀主命壮士击杀之，及其三子。
现代文：翰林使王藻屡次奏言安思谦怀恨在心，准备谋反，丁巳，安思谦上朝，后蜀主命壮士击杀他，以及他的三个儿子。
English: Hanlin made Wang Mo repeatedly deliver speeches to An Si Qian, harboring hatred in his heart and preparing to plot rebellion. However, when An Si Qian ascended to the throne, he was killed and his three sons were killed by the strong men ordered by Emperor Shu.

古文：藻亦坐擅启边奏，并诛之。
现代文：王藻也因犯有擅自启拆边关奏报的罪，一同遭诛杀。
English: Wang Cao was also beaten to death for the crime of opening and tearing down a border post without permission.

古文：北汉兵屯梁侯驿，昭义节度使李筠遣其将穆令均将步骑二千逆战，筠自将大军壁于太平驿。
现代文：北汉军队屯驻梁侯驿，昭义节度使李筠派遣将军穆令均带领步兵、骑兵二千人迎战，李筠自己率领大部队在太平驿安下营垒。
English: The Northern Han army was stationed in Liang Houyi, and the Shouyi Festival made Li Yu send General Mu Ling to lead 2,000 infantry and cavalry to fight, and Li Yu himself led a large force to camp under the Taiping peace.

古文：张元徽与令均战，阳不胜而北，令均逐之，伏发，杀令均，俘斩士卒千馀人。
现代文：张元徽与穆令均交战，假装打不过而逃跑，穆令均追逐，北汉伏兵突然出击，杀死穆令均，俘虏斩杀士兵一千多人。
English: Zhang Yuanhui and Muling both fought, pretended not to be able to fight and fled, Muling both chased, the North Han ambush suddenly attacked, killed Muling, and the prisoners killed more than a thousand soldiers.

古文：筠遁归上党，婴城自守。
现代文：李筠逃归上党，据城自守。
English: Li Yao fled to join the party, but the city defended itself.

古文：筠，即李荣也，避上名改焉。
现代文：李筠就是李荣，为避周世宗郭荣的名讳而改了名。
English: Li Yu is Li Rong, who changed his name to avoid the reputation of Guo Rong, the Zhou dynasty's patriarch.

古文：世宗闻北汉主入寇，欲自将兵御之，群臣皆曰： 刘崇自平阳遁走以来，势蹙气沮，必不敢自来。
现代文：后周世宗听说北汉主领兵入侵，准备亲自率领军队抵抗，朝廷群臣都说： 刘崇从平阳逃跑以来，势力缩小，士气沮丧，必定不敢亲自再来。
English: Later, when Zhou Shizong heard that the Northern Han Dynasty was invading and he was preparing to personally lead the army to resist, all the courtiers of the imperial court said: Since Liu Chong fled from Pingyang, his power has shrunk and his morale has been depressed. He must not dare to come back in person.

古文：陛下新即位。山陵有日，人心易摇，不宜轻动，宜命将御之。 
现代文：陛下新近即位，为帝不久，人心容易动摇，不宜轻易出动，应该命令将领去抵抗。 
English: His Majesty has just ascended to the throne, and he has not been emperor for long. People's hearts are easily swayed. It is not appropriate to make a move so easily. The generals should be ordered to resist.

古文：帝曰： 崇幸我大丧，轻朕年少新立，有吞天下之心，此必自来，朕不可不往。 
现代文：世宗说： 刘崇庆幸我国有大丧，轻视朕年轻新近即位，颇有吞并天下之心，这次必定亲自前来，朕不可不前往。 
English: Sejong said: "Liu Chongqing is fortunate that our country is in great mourning, despises my young newly enthroned, and has the heart to absorb the world. This time I must come in person, I must go.

古文：冯道固争之，帝曰： 昔唐太宗定天下，未尝不自行，朕何敢偷安！ 
现代文：冯道一再争辩，世宗说： 昔日唐太宗平定天下，未尝不亲自出征，朕何敢苟且偷安！ 
English: Feng Dao argued again and again, and Shizong said: Long ago, Emperor Taizong of Tang conquered the whole world, and I dared to go to war in person. How dare I steal peace!

古文：道曰： 未审陛下能为唐太宗否？ 
现代文：冯道说： 不知陛下能不能成为唐太宗？ 
English: Feng Dao said, "I wonder if His Majesty can become the Tang Taizong?"

古文：帝曰： 以吾兵力之强，破刘崇如山压卵耳！ 
现代文：世宗说： 以我的兵力的强大，打败刘崇犹如大山压碎鸡蛋罢了。 
English: Sejong said, "With the strength of my army, defeating Liu Chong is like crushing an egg with a mountain."

古文：道曰： 未审陛下能为山否？ 
现代文：冯道说： 不知陛下能不能成为大山？ 
English: Feng Dao said, "I don't know if His Majesty can become a great mountain.

古文：帝不悦。
现代文：世宗不高兴。
English: Gao Di was not happy to hear this.

古文：惟王溥劝行，帝从之。
现代文：只有王溥鼓励出征，世宗听从他的话。
English: Only Wang Xi encouraged him to go to war, and Shizong obeyed his words.

古文：三月，乙亥朔，蜀主加捧圣、控鹤都指挥使兼中书令孙汉韶武信节度使，赐爵乐安郡王，罢军职。
现代文：三月，乙亥朔，后蜀主下令捧圣、控鹤都指挥使兼中书令孙汉韶加官武信节度使，赐爵位乐安郡王，免去军事职务。
English: In March, after the death of Emperor Xuanzong, Emperor Shu ordered that Sun Hanzhong be given the title of "King of Le'an County" and relieved of his military duties.

古文：蜀主惩安思谦之跋扈，命山南西道节度使李廷珪等十人分典禁兵。
现代文：后蜀主鉴于安思谦专横跋扈的教训，命令山南西道节度使李廷等十人分别统领禁兵。
English: Later, the Lord of Shu, in view of the lesson of An Siqian's tyranny, ordered the Shannan West Road Festival to make Li Ting and other ten people lead the banned soldiers separately.

古文：北汉乘胜进逼潞州。
现代文：北汉军队乘胜推进逼近潞州。
English: The North Han army is approaching Ganzhou, taking advantage of the victory.

古文：丁丑，诏天雄节度使符彦卿引兵自磁州固镇出北汉军后，以镇宁节度使郭崇副之；又诏河中节度使王彦超引兵自晋州东出邀北汉军，以保义节度使韩通副之；又命马军都指挥使、宁江节度使樊爱能、步军都指挥使、清淮节度使何徽、义成节度使白重赞、郑州防御使史彦超、前耀州团练使符彦能将兵先趣泽州，宣微使向训监之。
现代文：丁丑，后周世宗诏令天雄节度使符彦卿领兵从磁州固镇出现在北汉军队后面，任命镇宁节度使郭崇为副职，又诏令河中节度使王彦超领兵从晋州东北拦截北汉军队，任命保义节度使韩通为副职，又命马军都指挥使、宁江节度使樊爱能，步军都指挥使、清淮节度使何徽及义成节度使白重赞、郑州防御使史彦超、前耀州团练使符彦能领兵先赶赴泽州，宣徽使向训监督各部。
English: Ding Hsi, later Zhou Shizong, issued the edict of Tianxiong Jiedu to make Fu Yanqing lead the army from the magnetic state of Guzhen to appear behind the North Han army, appointed Zhenning Jiedu to make Guo Chong as a deputy, and ordered the edict of Hezhong Jiedu to make Wang Yanchao lead the army from the northeast of Jinzhou to intercept the North Han army, appointed Baoyi Jiedu to make Han Tong as a deputy, and ordered the commanding officer of the horse army, the Ningjiang Jiedu to make Zou Ai Neng, the commanding officer of the infantry army, the Qing Huai

古文：重赞，宪州人也。
现代文：白重赞是宪州人。
English: Bai Chongzang is a native of Gyeongju.

古文：辛巳，大赦。
现代文：辛巳，后周实行大赦。
English: It's time for a general amnesty.

古文：癸未，帝命冯道奉梓宫赴山陵，以郑仁诲为东京留守。
现代文：癸未，后周世宗命冯道护送太祖灵柩前往山陵，任命郑仁诲为东京留守。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong's successor, Feng Dao, escorted the great ancestor's coffin to the mountain, and appointed Zheng Renya to stay in Tokyo.

古文：乙酉，帝发大梁。庚寅，至怀州。
现代文：乙酉，后周世宗从大梁出发，庚寅，到达怀州。
English: Acetylene, after Zhou Shizong departed from Daliang, Goyang, arrived in Huizhou.

古文：帝欲兼行速进，控鹤都指挥使真定赵晁私谓通事舍人郑好谦曰： 贼势方盛，宜持重以挫之。 
现代文：世宗想日夜兼程快速前进，控鹤都指挥使真定人赵晁私下对通事舍人郑好谦说： 贼寇气势正在强盛之时，应该稳健持重来挫败它。 
English: Shizong wanted to advance rapidly both day and night, and he ordered the cranes to be controlled so that Zhao Yao, who was the real decision-maker, privately said to Zheng Haoqian, who was the mediator: When the bandit's momentum is strong, it should be steady and heavy to defeat it.

古文：好谦言于帝，帝怒曰： 汝安得此言！
现代文：郑好谦讲给世宗听，世宗发怒说： 你从哪里得到这话！
English: Zheng Haoqian told this to Shizong, and Shizong angrily said, "Where did you get that from?"

古文：必为人所使，言其人则生，不然必死， 好谦以实对，帝命并晁械于州狱。
现代文：必定是被人所支使，说出那人就活，不然定叫你死。 郑好谦据实回答，世宗命令将他连同赵晁一起关押在怀州监狱。
English: Zheng Haoqian answered truthfully that Shizong ordered him to be detained together with Zhao Yao in Huaizhou Prison.

古文：壬辰，帝过泽州，宿于州东北。
现代文：壬辰，世宗经过泽州，住宿在州城东北。
English: In Imjin, Sejong passed through Zezhou and stayed in the northeast of the state capital.

古文：北汉主不知帝至，过潞州不攻，引兵而南，是夕，军于高平之南。
现代文：北汉主不知后周世宗到达，所以经过潞州时没有进攻，领兵向南，当晚，军队驻扎在高平城南。
English: Unknown to the Northern Han ruler, Zhou Shizong arrived later, so there was no attack when passing through Zhangzhou, leading the troops to the south. That night, the army was stationed in the south of Gaoping.

古文：癸巳，前锋与北汉兵遇，击之，北汉兵却。
现代文：癸巳，后周前锋部队与北汉军队相遇，发起攻击，北汉军队后退。
English: Suddenly, the week after, the vanguard force met the North Han army and launched an attack, and the North Han army retreated.

古文：帝虑其遁去，趣诸军亟进。
现代文：世宗顾虑敌军逃跑，催促各路军队急速前进。
English: Wary of the enemy's escape, Shizong urged all the armies to advance rapidly.

古文：北汉主以中军陈于巴公原，张元徽军其东，杨兗军其西，众颇严整。
现代文：北汉主率中军在巴公原摆开阵势，张元徽率军在东边，杨衮率军在西边，部众十分严整。
English: The main army of the Northern Han Dynasty, led by the Central Army, set up a position in Ba Gongyuan, Zhang Yuanhui led the army in the east, Yang Hui led the army in the west, and the members were very strict.

古文：时河阳节度使刘词将后军未至，众心危惧，而帝志气益锐，命白重赞与侍卫马步都虞候李重进将左军居西，樊爱能、何徽将右军居东，向训、史彦超将精骑居中央，殿前都指挥使张永德将禁兵卫帝。
现代文：这时后周河阳节度使刘词率领后续部队尚未到达，大家心感危险惧怕，而世宗意志情绪更加坚决，命令白重进与侍卫马步都虞候李重进率领左路军队在西边，樊爱能、何徽率领右路军队在东边，向训、史彦超率领精锐骑兵居中央，殿前都指挥使张永德率领禁兵保卫世宗。
English: At this time, the Zhou-Hayang Festival caused Liu Zhi to lead the follow-up troops to have not yet arrived. Everyone felt danger and fear, and Shizong's will was more resolute. He ordered Bai Chongjin and the guards to wait for Li Chongjin to lead the left-hand army in the west, Zhai Ayneng and He Hui led the right-hand army in the east, Xiang Xun and Shi Yanchao led the elite cavalry in the center, and Zhang Yongde led the forbidden soldiers in front of the palace to protect Shizong.

古文：帝介马自临陈督战。
现代文：世宗骑着披甲的战马亲临阵前督战。
English: Sejong rode an armored horse and personally led the troops into battle.

古文：北汉主见周军少，悔召契丹，谓诸将曰： 吾自用汉军可破也，何必契丹！
现代文：北汉主看到北周军队人数少，后悔召来契丹军队，对众将说： 我独自用汉家军队就可破敌，何必再用契丹！
English: Seeing the small number of troops in Beizhou, the northern Han lord regretted calling in the Khitan army and said to the generals: I can defeat the enemy with the Han army alone, why should I use the Khitan again!

古文：今日不惟克周，亦可使契丹心服。 
现代文：今天不但可以战胜周军，而且还可以让契丹心悦诚服。 
English: Today, it is not only possible to defeat Zhou Jun, but also to win the heart of Khitan.

古文：诸将皆以为然。
现代文：众将都认为说得对。
English: The generals all thought he was right.

古文：杨兗策马前望周军，退谓北汉主曰： 勍敌也，未可轻进！ 
现代文：杨衮驱马向前观望北周军队，退下来对北汉主说： 是劲敌啊，不可轻易冒进！ 
English: Yang Hui drove his horse forward to watch the Northern Zhou army, stepped back and said to the Northern Han ruler: You are a strong enemy, you should not rush in so easily!

古文：北汉主奋髯，曰： 时不可失，请公勿言，试观我战。 
现代文：北汉主扬起两颊长须说： 时机不可丧失，请您不必多言，试看我出战！ 
English: The lord of Northern Han raised his cheeks and said: The time must not be lost, please do not talk too much, try me out!

古文：兗默然不悦。
现代文：杨衮沉默不快。
English: Yang Xuan was uncomfortable with the silence.

古文：时东北风方盛，俄而忽转南风，北汉副枢密使王延嗣使司天监李义白北汉主云： 时可战矣。 
现代文：这时东北风正大，一会儿忽然转成南风，北汉枢密副使王延嗣派司天监李义禀报北汉主说： 现在可以开战了。 
English: At this time, the north-east wind was strong, and it suddenly turned to the south wind. Wang Yanxi, the vice-envoy of the Northern Han Dynasty, sent Li Yixuan, the Celestial Inspector, to report to the Northern Han Dynasty lord, saying: Now we can go to war.

古文：北汉主从之。
现代文：北汉主听从所言。
English: The Lord of Northern Han listens to what is said.

古文：枢密直学士王得中扣马谏曰： 义可斩也！
现代文：枢密直学士王得中牵住马劝谏说： 李义应该斩首！
English: Wang Dezhong, a privy scholar, held the horse to persuade him and said: Li Yi should be beheaded!

古文：风势如此，岂助我者邪！ 
现代文：风向这样，哪里是在助我呢！ 
English: The wind is blowing this way, so where is it helping me?

古文：北汉主曰： 吾计已决，老书生勿妄言，且斩汝！ 
现代文：北汉主说： 我的主意已定，老书生不要胡言乱语，再说将杀你的头！ 
English: The Northern Han master said: My mind is made up, old scholar, don't talk nonsense, and I'll kill your head!

古文：麾东军先进，张元徽将千骑击周右军。
现代文：指挥东面军队首先推进，张元徽率领一千骑兵攻击北周右路军队。
English: Commanding the eastern army to advance first, Zhang Yuanhui led a thousand cavalry to attack the north Zhou Right Road army.

古文：合战未几，樊爱能、何徽引骑兵先遁，右军溃。步兵千馀人解甲呼万岁，降于北汉。
现代文：交战不多时，樊爱能、何徽带着骑兵首先逃跑，右路军队溃败，一千多步兵脱下盔甲口呼万岁，向北汉投降。
English: When there was not much fighting, Zou Aineng and He Hui led the cavalry and fled first. The right-hand army was defeated, and more than a thousand infantrymen took off their armor and shouted "long live" and surrendered to the Northern Han.

古文：帝见军势危，自引亲兵犯矢石督战。
现代文：后周世宗看到形势危急，自己带贴身亲兵冒着流矢飞石督战。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong saw that the situation was critical, and he took his close personal soldiers to fight the battle.

古文：太祖皇帝时为宿卫将，谓同列曰： 主危如此，吾属何得不致死！ 
现代文：宋太祖皇帝赵匡胤当时任后周警卫将领，对同伴说： 主上如此危险，我等怎么能不拼出性命！ 
English: Emperor Taizu of the Song Dynasty, Zhao Kuangyin, who was then the commander of the rear guard of Zhou, said to his companions: The Lord is so dangerous, how can I not fight for my life!

古文：又谓张永德曰： 贼气骄，力战可破也！
现代文：又对张永德说： 贼寇只不过气焰嚣张，全力作战可以打败！
English: He also said to Zhang Yongde: Thieves and robbers are just arrogant, and they can be defeated if they fight with all their strength!

古文：公麾下多能左射者，请引兵乘高西出为左翼，我引兵为右翼以击之。
现代文：您手下有许多能左手射箭的士兵，请领兵登上高处出击作为左翼，我领兵作为右翼攻击敌军。
English: There are many soldiers under your command who can shoot arrows with their left hand. Ask the leader to attack from a high place as the left wing, and I will lead the soldiers to attack the enemy as the right wing.

古文：国家安危，在此一举！ 
现代文：国家安危存亡，就在此一举。 
English: The country's safety and survival depend on this one move.

古文：永德从之，各将二千人进战。
现代文：张永德听从，各自率领二千人前进战斗。
English: Zhang Yongde obeyed, and each of them led two thousand men forward to fight.

古文：太祖皇帝身先士卒，驰犯其锋，士卒死战，无不一当百，北汉兵披靡。
现代文：宋太祖皇帝身先士卒，快马冲向北汉前锋，士兵拼死战斗，无不以一当百，北汉军队溃败。
English: Emperor Song Taizu led the way, fast horses rushed to the Northern Han front, soldiers fought to the death, all with one hundred, the Northern Han army was defeated.

古文：内殿直夏津马仁瑀谓众曰： 使乘舆受敌，安用我辈！ 
现代文：内殿直夏津人马仁对部众说： 让皇上受敌攻击，那还用我们干什么！ 
English: Inner palace Naoatsu's subordinate, Ma Ren, said to his subordinates: Let the emperor be attacked by the enemy, what else can we do!

古文：跃马引弓大呼，连毙数十人，士气益振。
现代文：跃马奔腾，拉弓发射，大声呼喊，连续击毙数十人，士气愈发振奋。
English: They galloped on their prancing horses, shot arrows, shouted loudly, and killed dozens of people in succession. Morale became more and more buoyant.

古文：殿前右番行首马全乂言于帝曰： 贼势极矣，将为我擒，愿陛下按辔勿动，徐观诸将破之。 
现代文：殿前右番行首马全对世宗说： 贼寇气势已经尽了，将要被我们擒获，望陛下抓住缰绳别动，慢慢观看众将如何击破贼寇。 
English: Ma Quan, the head of the right-hand line in front of the hall, said to Shizong: The bandit's momentum has been exhausted and will be captured by us. I hope His Majesty will hold on to the reins and not move, and slowly watch how the crowd will defeat the bandit.

古文：即引数百骑进陷陈。
现代文：立即率领数百骑兵前进深入敌阵。
English: He immediately led hundreds of cavalrymen to advance deep into the enemy lines.

古文：北汉主知帝自临陈，褒赏张元徽，趣使乘胜进兵。
现代文：北汉主得知后周世宗亲临战阵，便嘉奖重赏张元徽，催促他乘胜进兵。
English: When the Northern Han ruler learned that Zhou Shizong was personally present at the battle, he rewarded Zhang Yuanhui and urged him to take advantage of the victory and enter the army.

古文：元徽前略陈，马倒，为周兵所杀。
现代文：张元徽前往攻阵，坐骑摔倒，被后周士兵所杀。
English: Zhang Yuanhui went to attack, his horse fell, and he was killed by Hou Zhou's soldiers.

古文：元徽，北汉之骁将也，北军由是夺气。
现代文：张元徽是北汉有名的猛将，北汉军队因此丧失士气。
English: Zhang Yuanhui was a famous fierce general in Northern Han, and the Northern Han army lost morale as a result.

古文：时南风益盛，周兵争奋，北汉兵大败，北汉主自举赤帜以收兵，不能止。
现代文：这时南风越刮越大，后周士兵奋勇争先，北汉军队大败，北汉主亲自高举红旗来收集军队，还是不能制止溃败。
English: At this time, the south wind was blowing stronger and stronger. The soldiers of Hou Zhou bravely raced ahead. The Northern Han army was defeated. The Northern Han master himself held high the red flag to collect the army, but still could not stop the rout.

古文：杨兗畏周兵之强，不敢救，且恨北汉主之语，全军而退。
现代文：杨衮害怕后周军队的强大，不敢救援，而且痛恨北汉主的大话，便保全军队而撤退。
English: Yang Hui was afraid of Hou Zhou's powerful army and did not dare to rescue them. Moreover, he hated the great words of the Northern Han ruler, so he withdrew to protect the army.

古文：樊爱能、何徽引数千骑南走，控弦露刃，剽掠辎重，役徒惊走，失亡甚多。
现代文：樊爱能、何徽领数千骑兵向南逃奔，箭上弦、刀出鞘，抢掠军用物资，负责运送的役徒惊慌奔逃，跑失、死亡的很多。
English: Zhai Ayneng and He Hui led thousands of cavalrymen to flee to the south. They shot arrows, unsheathed swords, and looted military supplies. The officers in charge of transportation panicked and fled. Many ran away and died.

古文：帝遣近臣及亲军校追谕止之，莫肯奉诏，使者或为军士所杀，扬言： 契丹大至，官军败绩，馀众已降虏矣。 
现代文：后周世宗派遣身边大臣以及贴身军校追赶宣命制止他们抢掠，没有人肯接受诏令，使者有的被军士所杀死，军士扬言： 契丹大军赶到，官军溃败，其余部众已经是投降的俘虏了。 
English: Later, Zhou Shizong dispatched ministers around him as well as military academies close to him to pursue and issue orders to stop their looting. No one would accept the edict. Some of the emissaries were killed by a sergeant. The sergeant threatened: The Khitan army has arrived, the government army has been defeated, and the remaining officers and men are already prisoners of surrender.

古文：刘词遇爱能等于涂，爱能等止之，词不从，引兵而北。
现代文：刘词在路上遇到樊爱能等人，樊爱能等劝阻他，刘词不听，领兵北上。
English: On the way, Liu Zhi met Zhai Ayneng and others. Zhai Ayneng and others tried to dissuade him, but Liu Zhi did not listen and led the soldiers northward.

古文：时北汉主尚有馀众万馀人，阻涧而陈，薄暮，词至，复与诸军击之，北汉兵又败，杀王延嗣，追至高平，僵尸满山谷，委弃御特及辎重、器械、杂畜不可胜纪。
现代文：当时北汉主还有余部一万多人，凭借山涧作为障碍而布阵，接近日落时候，刘词到达，又与其它军队进攻，北汉军队又被击败，后周军杀死王延嗣，直追到高平，僵卧的尸体布满山谷，丢弃的皇帝专用物品以及军需、用具、各种牲畜不计其数。
English: At that time, there were still more than ten thousand people remaining in the Northern Han Dynasty, using the mountains as an obstacle. Near sunset, Liu Zhi arrived and attacked with other troops. The Northern Han Army was defeated again. Later, the Zhou Army killed Wang Yanzi and chased him straight to Gaoping. The dead bodies were scattered all over the valley. There were countless discarded special items for the emperor, as well as military supplies, equipment, and various livestock.

古文：是夕，帝宿于野次，得步兵之降敌者，皆杀之。
现代文：当天傍晚，后周世宗在野外宿营，得到投降敌人的步兵，全部杀死。
English: In the evening of the same day, Hou Zhou Shizong camped in the field, got the surrender of the enemy infantry, and killed them all.

古文：樊爱能等闻周兵大捷，与士卒稍稍复还，有达曙不至者。甲午，休兵于高平，选北汉降卒数千人为效顺指挥，命前武胜行军司马唐景思将之，使戍淮上，馀二千馀人赐资装纵遣之。
现代文：樊爱能等听说北周军队大捷，才与士兵逐渐又返回，有的至天亮还没到，甲午，世宗在高平休整队伍，挑选北汉投降士兵数千人组成效顺指挥，命令前武胜行军司马唐景思率领，让他们戍守淮上，其余二千多人给予路费服装释放遣返北汉。
English: After hearing of the great victory of the Northern Zhou army, Zou Ai Neng and his soldiers gradually returned. Some did not arrive until dawn, and in the afternoon, Shizong rested in Gaoping, selected thousands of Northern Han surrendering soldiers to form a subordinate command, ordered the former Wu Sheng marching Sima Tang Jingshi to lead, let them stay in Huai Shang, and the remaining more than two thousand people were given travel expenses clothing release to repatriate to Northern Han.

古文：李谷为乱兵所迫，潜窜山谷，数日乃出。
现代文：李被乱兵所逼迫，潜逃山谷之中，数日之后才出来。
English: Lee was chased by the rioters and fled into the valley, only to emerge a few days later.

古文：丁酉，帝至潞州。
现代文：丁酉，后周世宗到达潞州。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong arrived in Zhangzhou.

古文：北汉主自高平被褐戴笠，乘契丹所赠黄骝，帅百馀骑由雕窠岭遁归，宵迷，俘村民为导，误之晋州，行百馀里，乃觉之，杀导者。
现代文：北汉主从高平起穿上粗布衣服戴上斗笠，乘着契丹所赠送的黄骝骏马，率一百多骑兵从雕窠岭逃跑回归，夜晚迷路，俘虏村民为向导，错向晋州走去，行了一百多里，才发觉，杀死向导。
English: From Gaoping, the ruler of the Northern Han Dynasty put on coarse cloth clothes, put on a battle hat, rode a yellow horse presented by the Khitan, led more than a hundred cavalrymen to escape from Jiaojingling and returned, got lost at night, captured villagers as guides, mistakenly went to Jinzhou, walked more than a hundred miles, only to find out and kill the guide.

古文：昼夜北走，所至，得食未举箸，或传周兵至，辄苍黄而去。
现代文：日夜向北奔走，刚到一处，得到食物还未举起筷子，有人传言后周军队追到，便仓皇离去。
English: Running north day and night, just arrived at a place, got food and did not raise chopsticks, it was rumored that the Zhou army caught up, and then left.

古文：北汉主衰老力惫，仗于马上，昼夜驰骤，殆不能支，仅得入晋阳。
现代文：北汉主衰老疲惫，伏在马上，日夜奔驰，几乎不能支持，勉强得以进入晋阳。
English: The Northern Han Emperor, old and tired, lay on his horse, galloping day and night, barely able to support himself, barely able to enter Jinyang.

古文：帝欲诛樊爱能等以肃军政，犹豫未决。己亥，昼卧行宫帐中，张永德侍侧，帝以其事访之，对曰 爱能等素无大功，忝冒节钺，望敌先逃，死未塞责。
现代文：后周世宗想诛杀樊爱能等人以整肃军纪，但犹豫未决，己亥，白天躺在行宫的帐篷中，张永德在旁边侍侯，世宗拿此事询问他，张永德回答说： 樊爱能等人平素没有大功，白当了一方将帅，望见敌人首先逃跑，死了都不能抵塞罪责。
English: Later, Zhou Shizong wanted to kill Zou Ai Neng and others to rectify military discipline, but he hesitated. During the day, he was lying in the tent of the palace, Zhang Yongde was waiting for him. Shizong asked him about this matter. Zhang Yongde replied: Zou Ai Neng and others have never done much good. They were the commanders of one side. They saw the enemy flee first, and they could not escape the blame if they died.

古文：且陛下方欲削平四海，苟军法不立，虽有熊罴之士，百万之众，安得而用之！ 
现代文：况且陛下正想平定四海，一统天下，如果军法不能确立，即使有勇猛武士，百万大军，又怎么能为陛下所用！ 
English: Moreover, His Majesty is trying to pacify the four seas and rule the world. If military law cannot be established, even if there are brave warriors and a million-strong army, how can they be of use to His Majesty?

古文：帝掷枕于地，大呼称善。
现代文：世宗将枕头掷到地上，大声称好。
English: Sejong throws the pillow to the ground and shouts his approval.

古文：即收爱能、徽及所部军使以上七十馀人。责之曰： 汝曹皆累朝宿将，非不能战。今望风奔遁者，无他，正欲以朕为奇货，卖与刘崇耳！ 
现代文：立即拘捕樊爱能、何徽以及所部军使以上的军官七十多人，斥责他们说： 你们都是历朝的老将，不是不能打仗；如今望风而逃，没有别的原因，正是想将朕当作稀有的货物，出卖给刘崇罢了！ 
English: They immediately arrested more than seventy officers, including Gong Ai Neng, He Hui, and the commander of the headquarters, and reprimanded them, saying, "You are all veterans of all dynasties, but you are not incapable of fighting a war. Now you are running away from the wind. There is no other reason but that you want to sell me to Liu Chong as a rare commodity!"

古文：悉斩之。
现代文：随即将他们全部斩首。
English: He then beheaded them all.

古文：帝以何徽先守晋州有功，欲免之，既而以法不可废，遂并诛之，而给槥归葬。
现代文：世宗因何徽先前守卫晋州有功，打算赦免他，但马上又认为军法不可废弃，于是将他一起诛杀，赐给小棺材送归老家安葬。
English: The Sejong intended to pardon He Hui because of his previous service in the defense of Jinzhou, but he immediately thought that the military law could not be abandoned, so he killed him together and gave him a small coffin to be sent back to his hometown for burial.

古文：自是骄将惰卒始知所惧，不行姑息之政矣。
现代文：从此骄横的将领、怠惰的士兵开始知道军法的可怕，姑息养奸的政令不再通行了。
English: From then on, arrogant generals and lazy soldiers began to know the horrors of military law, and decrees condoning treason were no longer valid.

古文：庚子，赏高平之功，以李重进兼忠武节度使，向训兼义成节度使，张永德兼武信节度使，史彦超为镇国节度使。
现代文：庚子，赏赐高平战役中有功人员，任命李重进兼忠武节度使，向训兼义成节度使，张永德兼武信节度使，史彦超为镇国节度使。
English: Geng Zi rewarded the meritorious personnel in the Gaoping Campaign, and appointed Li Chongjin and Zhongwu as the festival envoys, Xiang Xun and Yicheng as the festival envoys, Zhang Yongde and Wuxin as the festival envoys, and Shi Yanchao as the township festival envoys.

古文：张永德盛称太祖皇帝之智勇，帝擢太祖皇帝为殿前都虞候，领严州刺史，以马仁瑀为控鹤弓箭直指挥使，马全乂为散员指挥使。自馀将校迁拜者凡数十人，士卒有自行间擢主军厢者。
现代文：张永德极力称赞宋太祖皇帝赵匡胤的智慧勇敢，后周世宗提拔宋太祖皇帝为殿前都虞候，兼任严州刺史，任命马仁为控鹤弓箭直指挥使，马全为散员指挥使；其余将校军官升任职务的共几十人，士兵有从行伍中提拔担任军主、厢主的。
English: Zhang Yongde highly praised the wisdom and bravery of Emperor Zhao Kuangyin of the Song Dynasty. Later, Zhou Shizong promoted Emperor Song to the position of pre-eminent prefect of the palace, and also served as the governor of Yanzhou, appointed Ma Ren as the commander of the control cranes and arrows, and Ma Quan as the commander of the scattered soldiers; the remaining officers and officers were promoted to a total of dozens of positions, and soldiers were promoted from the ranks to serve as commanders and van owners.

古文：释赵晁之囚。
现代文：解除对赵晁的禁囚。
English: Release Zhao Yao from prison.

古文：北汉主收散卒，缮甲兵，完城堑以备周。
现代文：北汉主收拾残兵，修缮武器装备，加固城池守卫工事来防备后周。
English: The Northern Han rulers collected the remnants, repaired weapons and equipment, and strengthened the castle guard construction to prepare for the next week.

古文：杨兗将其众北屯代州，北汉王遣王得中送兗，因求救于契丹，契丹主遣得中还报，许发兵救晋阳。
现代文：杨衮率领他的部众北上屯驻代州，北汉主派遣王得中送杨衮，趁此向契丹请求救援，契丹主遣送王得中回去报告，答应发兵援救晋阳。
English: Yang Decheng led his troops to the north and stationed them in Daizhou. The Northern Han ruler sent Wang Dezhong to see Yang Decheng off, and took this opportunity to request rescue from the Khitan. The Khitan ruler sent Wang Dezhong back to report and promised to send troops to rescue Jinyang.

古文：壬寅，以符彦卿为河东行营都部署兼知太原行府事，以郭崇副之，向训为都监，李重进为马步都虞候，史彦超为先锋都指挥使，将步骑二万发潞州。
现代文：壬寅，后周世宗任命符彦卿为河东行营都部署兼知太原行府事，任命郭崇为副职，向训为都监，李重进为马步都虞候，史彦超为先锋都指挥使，率领步兵、骑兵二万从潞州出发。
English: Ren Yin, later Zhou Shizong, appointed Fu Yanqing to be the commander of the east of the river and the commander of Taiyuan, appointed Guo Chong as the deputy, Xiang Xun as the governor of the capital, Li Chongjin as the governor of Ma Bu, and Shi Yanchao as the vanguard commander, and led 20,000 infantry and cavalry from Zhangzhou.

古文：仍诏王彦超、韩通自阴地关入，与彦卿合军而进，又以刘词为随驾部署，保大节度使白重赞副之。
现代文：并且诏令王彦超、韩通从阴地关进入，与符彦卿会师进军，又任命刘词为随驾部署，保大节度使白重赞为副职。
English: Moreover, the emperor ordered Wang Yanchao and Han Tong to enter from Yinji Pass and march with Fu Yanqing to join the army, and appointed Liu Zhi as the escort deployment, and Baoda Jiedu made Bai Chongzhan as the deputy.

古文：汉昭圣皇太后李氏殂于西宫。
现代文：后汉昭圣皇太后李氏在西宫去世。
English: The Holy Empress Dowager Ri of the Later Han Dynasty passed away in the West Palace.

古文：夏，四月，北汉盂县降。
现代文：夏季，四月，北汉盂县投降。
English: In the summer, in April, North Hanzhong County surrendered.

古文：符彦卿军晋阳城下，王彦超攻汾州，北汉防御使董希颜降。
现代文：符彦卿驻军晋阳城下，王彦超进攻汾州，北汉防御使董希颜投降。
English: Fu Yanqing garrisoned troops under the city of Jinyang, Wang Yanchao attacked Bozhou, and the defense of Northern Han made Dong Xiyan surrender.

古文：帝遣莱州防御使康延沼攻辽州，密州防御使田琼攻沁州，皆不下。
现代文：后周世宗派莱州防御使康延沼进攻辽州，密州防御使田琼进攻沁州，都没攻下。
English: Later, the Zhou Dynasty's defense of Laizhou caused Kang Yanmu to attack Liaozhou, and the defense of Myizhou caused Tian Qiong to attack Zhangzhou, but neither was conquered.

古文：供备库副使太原李谦溥单骑说辽州刺史张汉超，汉超即降。
现代文：供备库副使太原人李谦溥单人匹马去劝说辽州刺史张汉超，张汉超立即投降。
English: Li Qianyao, deputy envoy of the supply and preparation depot and a native of Taiyuan, went single-handedly to persuade Zhang Hanchao, the Liaozhou governor, to surrender immediately.

古文：乙卯，葬圣神恭肃文武孝皇帝于嵩陵，庙号太祖。
现代文：乙卯，后周将圣神恭肃文武孝皇帝安葬在嵩陵，庙号为太祖。
English: In the second week, Emperor Wenwuqiao was buried in Songling Mausoleum, and the temple name was Taizu.

古文：南汉主以高王弘邈为雄武节度使，镇邕州。
现代文：南汉主任命高王刘弘邈为雄武节度使，镇守邕州。
English: The lord of the Southern Han Dynasty appointed Gao Wang Liu Hongyi as the heroic military governor and the town guard of Bozhou.

古文：弘邈以齐、镇二王相继死于邕州，固辞，求宿卫，不许。
现代文：刘弘邈因齐王、镇王两人相继死在邕州，坚决推辞，请求入宫值宿警卫，南汉主不允许。
English: Liu Hongyi, because King Qi and King Zhen both died in succession in Zhangzhou, firmly refused and asked the guards on duty to enter the palace. The Southern Han Dynasty did not allow him to enter.

古文：至镇，委政僚佐，日饮酒，祷鬼神。
现代文：刘弦邈到达镇所，将政事交给手下僚佐，每天喝酒，祈祷鬼神保佑。
English: Liu Zhengyu arrived at the town hall, handed over the political affairs to his subordinate and assistant, drank alcohol every day, and prayed for the blessings of ghosts and gods.

古文：或上书诬弘邈谋作乱，戊午，南汉主遣甘泉宫使林延遇赐鸩杀之。
现代文：有人上书诬陷刘弦邈阴谋发动叛乱，戊午，南汉主派遣甘泉宫使林延遇赐给毒酒将刘弘邈杀死。
English: Someone wrote a letter accusing Liu Zhengyu of plotting to start a rebellion, and in the afternoon, the Southern Han Emperor sent Ganquan Palace to send Lin Yanru to give poisoned wine to kill Liu Hongyi.

古文：初，帝遣符彦卿等北征，但欲耀兵于晋阳城下，未议攻取。
现代文：起初，后周世宗派遣符彦卿等人北上征伐，只想在晋阳城下炫耀兵力，并没有打算攻取。
English: At first, Emperor Zhou Shizong sent Fu Yanqing and others to conquer the north, only wanting to show off their military strength at the foot of Jinyang Castle, and not intending to conquer it.

古文：既入北汉境，其民争以食物迎周师，泣诉刘氏赋役之重，愿供军须，助攻晋阳，北汉州县继有降者。
现代文：进入北汉境内后，那里的百姓争相用食物迎接后周军队，哭诉刘氏政权赋税徭役的沉重，表示愿意供应军需物资，帮助进攻晋阳，北汉的州、县相继有投降的。
English: After entering the territory of the Northern Han Dynasty, the people there scrambled for food to meet the approaching army, cried about the heavy tax burden of the Liu regime, and expressed their willingness to supply military supplies to help attack Jinyang. The states and counties of the Northern Han Dynasty surrendered one after another.

古文：帝闻之，始有兼并之意。遣使往与诸将议之，诸将皆言 刍粮不足，请且班师以俟再举。 
现代文：后周世宗知悉这些情况，开始有兼并北汉的意思，派遣使者前去与众将商议，众将都说： 粮草不足，请暂且回师，等待时机再发兵。 
English: Later, when Zhou Shizong learned of these circumstances, he began to have the intention of annexing Northern Han, and sent an envoy to consult with the generals. The generals all said: There is a shortage of grain and grass, please temporarily return to the division, and wait for the opportunity to send troops again.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：世宗不同意。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：既而诸军数十万聚于太原城下，军士不免剽掠，北汉民失望，稍稍保山谷自固。
现代文：不久后周各路军队数十万人聚集在太原城下，军士不免有抢掠行动，北汉百姓感到失望，渐渐退保山谷自守。
English: Soon after, hundreds of thousands of troops from all over Zhou gathered at the foot of Taiyuan Castle. The soldiers inevitably engaged in looting. The people of Northern Han were disappointed and gradually withdrew to the valley to defend themselves.

古文：帝闻之，驰诏禁止剽掠，安抚农民，止征今岁租税，及募民入粟拜官有差，仍发泽、潞、晋、绛、慈、隰及山东近便诸州民运粮以馈军。
现代文：世宗听说，派使者飞驰传送诏令禁止抢掠，安抚农民，只征今年租税，并且募集百姓缴纳粮食，按缴的数量授于不同的官职，同时征发泽州、潞州、晋州、绛州、慈州、隰州以及崤山以东路近方便的各州百姓运送粮食来供应军队。
English: Sejong heard that emissaries were dispatched at high speed to convey the edict prohibiting looting, pacifying farmers, levying taxes only for this year, and recruiting people to pay grain, awarding different official positions according to the amount of payment, and at the same time conscripting and dispatching the people of Zhezhou, Zhangzhou, Jinzhou, Zhangzhou, Cizhou, Zhangzhou and all the states near and convenient to the east of Lushan to transport grain to supply the army.

古文：己未，遣李谷诣太原计度刍粮。
现代文：己未，派遣李到太原筹划粮草。
English: However, Li was sent to Taiyuan to plan grain and grass.

古文：庚申，太师、中书令瀛文懿王冯道卒。
现代文：庚申，太师、中书令瀛文懿王冯道去世。
English: Feng Dao, the great master and the king of Chinese calligraphy, has passed away.

古文：道少以孝谨知名，唐庄宗世始贵显，自是累朝不离将、相、三公、三师之位，为人清俭宽弘，人莫测其喜愠，滑稽多智，浮沉取容，尝著《长乐老叙》，自述累朝荣遇之状，时人往往以德量推之。
现代文：冯道少年时以孝顺谨慎闻名，后唐庄宗时代开始尊贵显赫，从此历朝官不离将军、宰相、三公、三师的职位，为人清静俭朴宽容大度，别人无法猜测他的喜怒哀乐，能言善辩，足智多谋，与世沉浮，左右逢源，曾经作《长乐老叙》，自述历朝荣誉礼遇的情况，当时的人每每用有德行度量来推重他。
English: When he was a boy, Feng Dao was famous for his filial piety and prudence. After the Tang Dynasty, he began to be honored and distinguished. Since then, he has never left the positions of general, prime minister, three princes, and three divisions. He is a quiet, frugal, tolerant and generous person. Others can't guess his emotions, he can speak well, he is resourceful, he is content with the world, and he is right or left. He once wrote "Changle Lao Xiu," a self-description of the honor and courtesy of the dynasties. At that time, people always used the measure of virtue to promote him.

古文：欧阳修论曰： 礼义廉耻，国之四维。四维不张，国乃灭亡。 
现代文：欧阳修论曰： 礼、义、廉、耻，是国家赖以生存的四条纲维；这条纲维不能张立，国家就灭亡。 
English: Ouyang Xiu said: "Ritual, righteousness, honesty, and shame are the four principles on which a country's survival depends; if this principle cannot be upheld, the country will perish."

古文：礼义，治人之大法；廉耻，立人之大节。
现代文：礼、义，是统治人民的根本大法；廉、耻，是安身立命的基本节操。
English: Etiquette is the fundamental rule for governing the people of the country, and shamelessness is the fundamental discipline for people to stand up.

古文：况为大臣而无廉耻，天下其有不乱、国家其有不亡者乎！
现代文：况且身为大臣而毫无廉耻，天下岂有不乱，国家岂有不亡的啊！
English: Moreover, as a minister, he is shameless. How can there be no chaos in the world, and how can the country not perish?

古文：予读冯道《长乐老叙》，见其自述以为荣，其可谓无廉耻者矣，则天下国家可从而知也。
现代文：我读冯道《长乐老叙》，看他的自述不讲礼义廉耻反以为荣耀，真可谓是毫无廉耻的人了，那天下国家的命运也就可以从而知晓了。
English: When I read "Changle Lao Cun" written by Feng Dao, I saw that he was proud of himself. He could be said to be a man without shame, so the countries of the world can be known from this.

古文：予于五代得全节之士三，死事之臣十有五，皆武夫战卒，岂于儒者果无其人哉？
现代文：我从五代历史中找到保全节操的志士有三位，为事业而死的仁人有十五位，都是武夫战士，难道在儒者中间果真没有那样的人吗？
English: From five generations of history, I have found three people who are dedicated to the preservation of discipline, and fifteen people who died for the cause, all of whom were warriors. Are there really no such people among Confucians?

古文：得非高节之士，恶时之乱，薄其世而不肯出欤？
现代文：莫非是高尚节操的士人，憎恶时势的浊乱，鄙薄那世道不肯出来？
English: Could it be that he is a noble and austere scholar, who abhors the turmoil of the times and despises the ways of the world and refuses to come out?

古文：抑君天下者不足顾，而莫能致之欤？
现代文：还是统治天下的君主来不及关顾，而没能让他们出来呢？
English: Or are the princes of the earth not to be feared, and there is no one to deliver them?

古文：予尝闻五代时有王凝者，家青、齐之间，为虢州司户参军，以疾卒于官。
现代文：我曾经听说五代时有个叫王凝的人，家在青州、齐州之间，担任州司户参军，因为疾病在任上去世。
English: I once heard that five generations ago, a man named Wang Rong, whose home was between Qingzhou and Qizhou, served as the state secretary of the household to join the army, but died in office due to illness.

古文：凝家素贫，一子尚幼，妻李氏，携其子，负其遗骸以归，东过开封，止于旅舍，主人不纳。
现代文：王凝家中素来贫寒，一个儿子还年幼，他的妻子李氏，带着孩子，背着王凝的尸骨回老家，向东经过开封，在旅店住下，店主不愿接纳。
English: Wang Rong's family had always been poor. One of his sons was still young. His wife, Ms. Li, took the children and carried Wang Rong's bones back to their hometown. They went east through Kaifeng and stayed at a hotel. The owner did not want to accept them.

古文：李氏顾天已暮，不肯去，主人牵其臂而出之。
现代文：李氏眼看天色已晚，不肯离去，店主拉她的胳膊让她出去。
English: Ms. Li saw that it was too late and did not want to leave, so her master pulled her arm and dragged her out.

古文：李氏仰天恸曰： 我为妇人，不能守节，而此手为人所执邪！ 
现代文：李氏仰天痛哭说： 我是个女人，不能守住贞操，而让这只手臂被别的男人抓过了！ 
English: "I'm a woman, I can't keep my virginity, and I let this arm be grabbed by another man!

古文：即引斧自断其臂，见者为之嗟泣。
现代文：立即拿起斧子自己砍断那条胳膊，看见的人为她叹息流泪。
English: Immediately she took an axe and chopped off the arm herself. People who saw her sighed and shed tears for her.

古文：开封尹闻之，白其事于朝，厚恤李氏而笞其主人。呜呼！
现代文：开封尹听说后，将此事向朝廷禀报，优厚地周济李氏而鞭打了那位店主。呜呼！
English: After hearing about the opening of the seal, Yin reported the matter to the imperial court, generously helped Mr. Li and whipped the shopkeeper. Alas!

古文：士不自爱其身而忍耻以偷生者，闻李氏之风，宜少知愧哉！
现代文：士人不自己珍爱他的身子而忍受耻辱苟且偷生的，听说李氏的高风亮节，应当稍微知道羞愧了！
English: If a gentleman does not cherish his body and endure the humiliation of being born out of wedlock, he should be a little ashamed when he hears about Li's high winds and bright festival!

古文：臣光曰：天地设位，圣人则之，以制礼立法，内有夫妇，外有君臣。
现代文：臣司马光曰：天地设置方位，圣人作为准则，用来制定礼仪、建立法律，家中有夫妇，家外有君臣。
English: Minister Sima Guang said: Heaven and earth set the direction, saints as the standard, used to formulate etiquette, establish laws, there are couples at home, and there are princes and ministers outside the home.

古文：妇之从夫，终身不改；臣之事君，有死无贰。此人道之大伦也。
现代文：妇人随从丈夫，终身不能改变；臣子事奉君主，至死不二；这是为人之道的最大伦常。
English: A woman follows her husband and cannot change for the rest of her life; a courtier serves the sovereign until death; this is the greatest morality of the human way.

古文：苟或废之，乱莫大焉！
现代文：如果有人废弃它，祸乱莫过于此！
English: If someone abandons it, there is nothing more disastrous than that!

古文：范质称冯道厚德稽古，宏才伟量，虽朝代迁贸，人无间言，屹若巨山，不可转也。
现代文：范质称赞冯道德行深厚精研古道，才器雄伟度量宏大，虽然朝代变迁，人们也没有闲言，像大山屹立，不可转动！
English: Feng Daodexing was praised for his profound and meticulous study of the ancient path, his talent was majestic and grand. Although the dynasties changed, people did not gossip. He stood like a mountain and could not be moved!

古文：臣愚以为正女不从二夫，忠臣不事二君。
现代文：臣下我认为正派的女人不会跟从两个丈夫，忠诚的臣子不会事奉两位君主。
English: Subordinate, I believe that a decent woman will not follow two husbands, and a loyal subject will not serve two sovereigns.

古文：为女不正，虽复华色之美，织纴之巧，不足贤矣；为臣不忠，虽复材智之多，治行之优，不足贵矣。
现代文：做女人不正派，即使再有如花美貌，纺织巧手，也称不上贤惠；做臣子不忠诚，即使才智再多，政绩卓著，也不值得看重。
English: It is not virtuous to be a dishonest woman, even if she has the beauty of a flower and the skill of a weaver; it is not honorable to be a disloyal courtier, even if she has more intelligence and outstanding political achievements.

古文：何则？
现代文：什么缘故呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：大节已亏故也。
现代文：因为大节已亏。
English: Because the big festival is over.

古文：道之为相，历五朝、八姓，若逆旅之视过客，朝为仇敌，暮为君臣，易面变辞，曾无愧怍，大节如此，虽有小善，庸足称乎！
现代文：冯道任宰相，历事五个朝代、八位君主，如同旅店看待过客，清晨是仇敌，傍晚成君臣，更换面孔、变化腔调，竟无一点羞愧，大节如此，即使有小善，哪里值得称道！
English: Feng Dao served as prime minister, the history of five dynasties, eight monarchs, as if the inn regarded passers-by, the morning was the enemy, the evening became the sovereign, changing faces, changing tone, there is no shame, the big day is so, even if there is a small good, where is commendable!

古文：或以为自唐室之亡，群雄力争，帝王兴废，远者十馀年，近者四三年，虽有忠智，将若之何！
现代文：有人认为自从大唐皇室灭亡，群雄武力相争，一位帝王的兴盛衰亡，长的十几年，短的三四年，虽然有忠臣智士，又能怎么样呢！
English: Some people think that since the fall of the imperial family in the Great Tang Dynasty, a group of heroes have been competing with each other by force, and the rise and fall of an emperor has been a long ten years and a short three or four years. Although there are loyalists and wise men, what can be done?

古文：当是之时，失臣节者非道一人，岂得独罪道哉！
现代文：在这种时候，丧失为臣节操的不止冯道一个人，岂能单独怪罪冯道呢！
English: At such a time, if Feng Dao lost more than one person as a vassal, how could Feng Dao be blamed alone!

古文：臣愚以为忠臣忧公如家，见危致命，君有过则强谏力争，国败亡则竭节致死。
现代文：臣下我认为忠臣担忧国运如同家运，见到危险敢于献出生命，君主有过失就坚决劝谏、据理力争，国家衰败灭亡就至死恪守节操。
English: As a subject, I believe that a loyal subject worries about the national fortune as if it were a family fortune, dares to give his life when he sees danger, resolutely persuades the monarch when he is at fault, and struggles with him according to reason, and adheres to the principle of self-discipline to the death when the country declines and perishes.

古文：智士邦有道则见，邦无道则隐，或灭迹山林，或优游下僚。
现代文：智士见国家清明有道就出来，国家昏庸无道就隐居，或者遁入山林不留踪迹，或者身居小吏悠闲自在。
English: When a wise man sees that a country is pure and virtuous, he will come out. When a country is dull and stupid, he will live in seclusion. Or he will run away into the mountains and forests without leaving a trace. Or he will live a life of leisure as a minor official.

古文：抑此非特道之愆也，时君亦有责焉，何则？不正之女，中士羞以为家；不忠之人，中君羞以为臣。彼相前朝，语其忠则反君事仇，语其智则社稷为墟。后来之君，不诛不弃，乃复用以为相，彼又安肯尽忠于我而能获其用乎！
现代文：如今冯道论尊贵恩宠则胜过太师、太傅、太保三师，论权力责任则居各宰相之首，国家存在便拱着手闭着嘴不置可否，窃据权位无功受禄；国家灭亡便图谋保全苟且免死，迎接拜谒新主或上表劝进帝位。国君兴盛灭亡一个接着一个，冯道荣华富贵依然故我，这是奸臣然而这不光是冯道的过错，当时的君主也有责任。什么缘故呢？不正派的女人，一般男子羞以为妻；不忠诚的小人，一般君主羞以为臣。冯道为前朝宰相，说他忠诚却背叛前君事奉仇敌，说他智慧却听任国家变成废墟；后来的君主，对他既不诛杀又不抛弃，却再任用为宰相，他又怎么肯要求自己竭尽忠诚从而能派上他的用场呢！
English: Today, Feng Dao's opinion of honor and grace is superior to the three opinions of grand master, grand tutor, and grand guardian, and his opinion of power and responsibility is at the top of all chancellors. When the country existed, he kept his mouth shut and did not say whether it was possible or not, and there was no merit in stealing the power; when the country was destroyed, he tried to keep it safe and free from death, to meet the new lord of the court or to persuade him to enter the imperial throne. The prosperity and death of the king followed one after another, and Feng Dao's glory and wealth remained the same. This was a traitor. However, this was

古文：故曰：非特道之愆，亦时君之责也！
现代文：所以说，不光是冯道的过错，当时的君主也有责任啊！
English: Therefore, it is not only the fault of Feng Dao, but also the responsibility of the monarch at that time!

古文：辛酉，符彦卿奏北汉宪州刺史太原韩光愿、岚州刺史郭言皆举城降。
现代文：辛酉，符彦卿奏报北汉宪州刺史太原人韩光愿、岚州刺史郭言都率城投降。
English: Xin Xin, Fu Yanqing reported that Han Guangyan, Han Guangyan, Han Guangyan, Han Guangyan, Han Guangyan, Han Guangyan, Han Guangyan, Han Guangyan, Han Guangyan, Han Guangyan, Han Guangyan, Han Guangyan, Han Guangyan, Han Guangyan, Han Guangyan, Han Guangyan, Han Guangyan,

古文：初，符彦卿有女适李守贞之子崇训，相者言其贵当为天下母。
现代文：当初，符彦卿有个女儿嫁给李守贞的儿子李崇训，看相的人说她有贵相，日后当为天下的ó母。
English: At first, Fu Yanqing had a daughter married to Li Shouzhen's son, Li Chongxun. The people who looked after her said that she had noble features and would be the mother of the world in the future.

古文：守贞喜曰： 吾妇犹母天下，况我乎！ 
现代文：李守贞欣喜地说： 我的媳妇都能当天下的ó母，何况我呢！ 
English: Li Shouzhen said with joy: My daughter-in-law can do the same, let alone me!

古文：反意遂决。
现代文：反叛的念头于是决定了。
English: The idea of rebellion was decided upon.

古文：及败，崇训先自刃其弟妹，次及符氏；符氏匿帏下，崇训仓猝求之不获，遂自刭。
现代文：及至李守贞败亡，李崇训先用刀杀死弟弟妹妹，依次轮到符氏。符氏藏匿在帏帐下面，李崇训仓促之间寻找不到，于是自杀。
English: When Li Shuzhen was defeated and killed, Li Chongxun first killed his younger brother and sister with a knife, and then it was Fu's turn. Fu's brother was hiding under the bed, and Li Chongxun couldn't find him in a hurry, so he committed suicide.

古文：乱兵既入，符氏安坐堂上，叱乱兵曰： 吾父与郭公为昆弟，汝曹勿无礼！ 
现代文：乱兵已经进入，符氏却安然坐在堂前，叱责乱兵说： 我父亲与郭公是兄弟，你们不得无礼！ 
English: The disorderly soldiers had already entered, but Fuxi sat calmly in front of the hall and scolded the disorderly soldiers, saying: My father and Guo Gong are brothers, you must not be rude!

古文：太祖遣使归之于彦卿。
现代文：后周太祖派人将她送归给符彦卿。
English: Later, Emperor Taizu sent someone to return her to Lord Fuhiko.

古文：及帝镇澶州，太祖为帝娶之。
现代文：到了后周世宗镇守澶州，太祖为世宗选娶符氏。
English: After Zhou Shizong became the ruler of Bozhou, the great-grandfather chose Shizong and married Fu.

古文：壬戌，立为皇后。
现代文：壬戌，符氏立为皇后。
English: Imho, Fuuji became the empress.

古文：后性和惠而明决，帝甚重之。
现代文：皇后性情温和贤惠而聪明果断，世宗很看重她。
English: The empress is gentle, virtuous, intelligent and decisive, and Shizong values her very much.

古文：王彦超、韩通攻石州，克之，执刺史安彦进。
现代文：王彦超、韩通进攻石州，攻克州城，抓获刺史安彦进。
English: Wang Yanchao and Hantong attacked Shizhou, conquered the city of Shuzhou, and captured the assassin An Yanjin.

古文：癸亥，沁州刺史李廷诲降。
现代文：癸亥，沁州刺史李廷诲投降。
English: Jianhai, Zhangzhou, Zhishi, and Liting surrendered.

古文：庚午，帝发潞州，趣晋阳。
现代文：庚午，后周世宗从潞州出发，赶赴晋阳。
English: In the afternoon, Zhou Shizong set off from Ganzhou and rushed to Jinyang.

古文：癸酉，北汉忻州监军李勍杀刺史赵皋及契丹通事杨耨姑，举城降。以勍为忻州刺史。
现代文：癸酉，北汉忻州监军李杀死刺史赵皋和契丹通事杨耨姑，率城投降；后周世宗任命李为忻州刺史。
English: In the Northern Han Dynasty, Li Shizhou, the military supervisor of the Northern Han Dynasty, led the city to surrender after he killed the assassin Zhao Jun and the Khitan conspirator Yang Binggu. Later, Zhou Shizong appointed Li as the assassin of the Northern Han Dynasty.

古文：王逵表请复徙使府治朗州。
现代文：王逵上表请求再次将节度使府治迁到朗州。
English: On the table, Wang Yao once again requested that the festival be moved to Lanzhou.

