古文：三月初一日桂王临朝，命承奉刘及王承奉之侄设斋桃花冲施僧。
现代文：三月初一日桂王上朝处理王府事务，命令刘承奉和王承奉的侄子在桃花冲设斋饭施舍僧人。
English: On the first day of March, King Gui of the previous dynasty dealt with the affairs of the royal palace, and ordered Liu Chengbong and Wang Chengbong's nephew to set up a fast in Taohua to give alms to the monks.

古文：静闻往投斋，唔王承奉之侄，始知前投揭议助之意，内司不爽。
现代文：静闻前去吃斋，见到王承奉的侄子，才知道这之前金祥甫写启事送到内司商议救助我几个的那个意向，内司没能应承。
English: Quietly listening, I went to eat, and saw Wang Chengfeng's nephew, only to know that before this, Jin Xiangfu wrote a notice and sent it to the Internal Affairs Division to discuss the intention of rescuing me. The Internal Affairs Division could not accept it.

古文：盖此助非余本意，今既得金物，更少贷于刘，便可西去。
现代文：这个救助方式不是我的本意，如今既然得到金祥甫借给的银两，再向刘明宇稍微贷一些，便可往西旅游。
English: This way of rescue was not my intention. Now that I have received the silver and two pennies lent by Jin Xiangfu, and a little more from Liu Mingyu, I can travel to the west.

古文：静闻见王意如此，不能无望。
现代文：静闻见王承奉意下如此，不能没有一点指望。
English: From what I have heard, Wangcheng is doing this at the behest of others, and we cannot but have a little hope.

古文：余乃议先往道州，游九疑，留静闻候助于此，余仍还后与同去，庶彼得坐俟，余得行游，为两便云。
现代文：于是我与静闻商议决定，我先前往道州，游历九疑山，留下静闻在此等候救助，我重新回到衡州城后与他一同走，这样他得以坐等救助，我得以出游，符合双方各自的心愿。
English: So I discussed with Jingwen and decided that I would first go to Doushou, travel to Jiuzhishan, and leave Jingwen here to wait for help. I would return to Hengzhou City and walk with him, so that he could wait for help, and I could travel, in line with the wishes of both sides.

古文：初二日，乃促得金祥甫银，仍封置金寓，以少资随身。
现代文：初二日这天才催到金祥甫借给的银两，我将它仍然封起来放在寓所，只随身带少量费用。
English: It wasn't until the second day of the first month that I received the silver pair that Jin Xiangfu had lent me. I still sealed it up and put it in my apartment, taking only a small amount of money with me.

古文：刘许为转借，期以今日，复不能得。
现代文：刘明宇答应为我转借资金，约定今天就借到交给我，结果又不能拿到。
English: Liu Mingyu promised to lend me the money, and agreed to lend it to me today, but he couldn't get it.

古文：予往别，且坐候之，遂不及下舟。
现代文：我去与他辞别，并坐在他家中等候他，于是未来得及上船。
English: I went to say goodbye to him and sat in his house waiting for him, so I didn't have time to get on the boat.

古文：初三日，早出柴埠门登舟。
现代文：•初三日早早地出了柴埠门登上船。
English: • Early on the third day of the first month, I went out of the Chai Bu Gate to board the ship.

古文：刘明宇先以钱二千并绢布付静闻，更以糕果追予于南关外。
现代文：刘明宇先将两千文钱连同一些绢布交给静闻，再带着糕点果品到南关外追赶我。
English: Liu Mingyu first handed the two thousand yuan to Jingwen, together with some cloth, and then chased me outside Nanguan with pastries and fruits.

古文：时余舟尚泊柴埠未解维，刘沿流还觅，始与余遇，复订期而别。
现代文：当时我乘的船还停泊在柴埠，没有开船，刘明宇沿江流找回来，才与我相遇，我俩又约定了见面的日期才辞别。
English: At that time, the boat I was on was still anchored in Chaiwu, and there was no boat. Liu Mingyu came back along the river to meet me, and we agreed on a date to meet before saying goodbye.

古文：是日风雨复作，舟子迁延，晚移南门埠而泊。
现代文：这天风雨又起，船夫有意拖延，晚间将船划到南门埠停泊。
English: On this day, the wind and rain started up again, and the boatman deliberately delayed, and in the evening he rowed the boat to the Nanmen port for berthing.

古文：初四日，平明行，风暂止，夙雨霏霏。
现代文：初四日天亮时出发，风暂时停了，昨日以来的霏霏细雨仍不停地下着。
English: We set out at dawn on the fourth day of the first lunar month. The wind had temporarily stopped, but the drizzle that had been falling since yesterday continued.

古文：下午过汊江，抵云集潭，去予昔日被难处不远，而云集则艾行可沉汨之所也。
现代文：下午经过汉江，抵达云集潭，这里离开我前些天遇难的地方不远，就是艾行可沉没的处所。
English: In the afternoon, I passed through the Han River and arrived at Yunji Lake. Here, not far from the place where I was shipwrecked the other day, is the place where Ai Xing can sink.

古文：风雨凄其，光景顿别，欲为《楚辞》招之，黯不成声。
现代文：风雨寒凉，风光景物顿时变了样，想依照《楚辞》句式吟诵一段悼念文为艾行可招魂，但心神沮丧说不出话。
English: The wind and rain are cold, the wind and scenery have suddenly changed, and if you want to recite a mourning memorial in accordance with the sentence style of "Chuxi," you can attract the soul for Ai Xing, but the spirit is frustrated and can't say a word.

古文：是晚泊于云集潭之西岸，共行六十余里。
现代文：晚上停泊在云集潭西岸，这天共行了六十多里。
English: In the evening, we anchored at the west coast of Yunji Lake. We traveled more than sixty miles that day.

古文：初五日，雷雨大至。
现代文：初五日雷声隆隆，大雨倾注。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, thunder rumbled and heavy rain poured down.

古文：平明发舟，而风颇利。
现代文：天亮时开船，风很便于航行。
English: We set sail at dawn and the wind made it easy to sail.

古文：十里，过前日畏途，沉舟犹在也。
现代文：十里，经过前些天遭抢劫的那段凶险可怕的路，那只沉船的残骸还在。
English: Ten miles down the treacherous and terrifying road that had been robbed the day before, the wreckage of the sunken ship was still there.

古文：四里，过香炉山，其上有滩颇高。
现代文：再行四里，经过香炉山，它的上游不远处有个沙滩很高。
English: Four miles further on, past Mount Incense, there is a high sandy beach not far upstream.

古文：又二十五里，午过桂阳河口，桂阳河自南岸入湘。
现代文：又行二十五里，中午过了桂阳河口，桂阳河从湘江南岸汇入湘江。
English: Another twenty-five miles later, past the mouth of the Guiyang River at noon, the Guiyang River enters the Hunan River from the south bank.

古文：又七里，北岸有聚落村落名松北。
现代文：又行七里，江北岸有个村落名叫松北。
English: Seven miles further on, there is a village called Songbei on the north bank of the river.

古文：又四里，泊于瓦洲夹。
现代文：又行四里，停泊在瓦洲夹。
English: We sailed another four miles and anchored at Wazhou Clip.

古文：共行五十里。
现代文：这夭共行了五十里。
English: We've traveled a total of fifty miles.

古文：初六日，昧爽行，雨止风息。
现代文：初六日黎明开船，雨不再下，风也停了。
English: We set sail at dawn on the sixth day of the first month. The rain had stopped and the wind had died down.

古文：二十里，过白坊驿，聚落在江之西岸，至此已入常宁县界矣。
现代文：行二十里，经过白坊释，村落位于江的西岸上，到这里已进入常宁县界了。
English: Twenty miles later, after passing through Baifang Xie, the village is located on the west bank of the river, and here it has entered the Changning County boundary.

古文：又西南三十里，为常宁水口，其水从东岸入湘，亦如桂阳之口，而其水较小，盖常宁县治犹在江之东南也。
现代文：又往西南行三十里，为常宁县来的水汇入湘江的水口，那水从东岸汇入湘江，也如同桂阳河汇入湘江的水口处一样，但它比桂阳河小。大概常宁县城还在江的东南方。
English: Another thirty miles to the southwest, the water from Changning County flows into the mouth of the Hunan River. The water from the east bank flows into the Hunan River, just as the Guiyang River flows into the mouth of the Hunan River, but it is smaller than the Guiyang River. The city of Changning County is probably still in the southeast of the river.

古文：又西十五里，泊于粮船埠，有数家在东岸，不成村落。是日共行六十五里。
现代文：又往西行十五里，停泊在粮船埠，有几家人住在江东岸，不成村落，这天共行了六十五里。
English: Another fifteen miles to the west, anchored at the grain shipping port, there are several families living on the east bank of the river, not a village, this day a total of sixty-five miles.

古文：初七日，西南行十五里，河洲驿。
现代文：初七日往西南行十五里，到河洲骤。
English: On the seventh day of the first lunar month, I traveled fifteen miles to the southwest and arrived in Hezhou.

古文：日色影现，山冈开伏。
现代文：日光隐隐闪现，山冈相互分隔开并低伏下去。
English: Sunlight glimmered dimly, mountains and hills separated from each other and bowed down.

古文：盖自衡阳来，湘江两岸虽冈陀缭绕，而云母之外，尚无崇山杰嶂。
现代文：大概说，从衡阳县来，湘江两岸虽然山冈坡垄盘绕绵延，但云母山之外，还没见到其它高峻陡险的山。
English: Generally speaking, coming from Hengyang County, although the mountains and slopes on both sides of the Hunan River stretch around the ridge, there are no other tall and steep mountains other than Mica Mountain.

古文：至此地，湘之东岸为常宁界，湘江西岸为永之祁阳界，皆平陵扩然，冈阜远叠也。
现代文：到此地，湘江的东岸为常县地界，湘江的西岸为永州府的祁阳县地界，两边都是平衍宽展的大土山，远处冈阜交错重叠。
English: At this point, the east bank of the Xiangjiang River is the border of Chang County, and the west bank of the Xiangjiang River is the border of Yongzhou Prefecture's Fenyang County. Both sides are flat and wide expanses of the Dadu Mountains, and in the distance, there is a staggered overlap of the Gunfu Mountains.

古文：又三十里，过大铺，于是两岸俱祁阳属矣。
现代文：又行三十里，过大铺，从大铺以后江两岸就都是祁阳县的辖地了。
English: Another thirty miles, over the big shop, from the big shop, both sides of the river are under the jurisdiction of Fenyang County.

古文：上九州滩，又三十里，泊归阳驿。
现代文：上了九州滩，又行三十里，停泊在归阳释。
English: I went to Kyushu Beach, traveled another thirty miles, and anchored at Keiyangzi.

古文：初八日，饭后余骤疾急病，呻吟不已。
现代文：初八日饭后我骤然得病，不停地呻吟。
English: After dinner on the eighth day of the first month, I suddenly fell ill and kept groaning.

古文：六十里，至白水驿。
现代文：行六十里，到白水释。
English: Sixty-mile journey to Baishuisi.

古文：初拟登访戴宇完，谢其遇劫时解衣救冻之惠，至是竟不能登。
现代文：起初打算登岸去拜访戴宇完，感谢他在我遭到抢劫时解衣救冻的恩惠。现到了这里竟然不能登岸。
English: At first, I planned to go ashore to visit Dai Yukan and thank him for his kindness in rescuing me when I was being robbed. Now I am here, I can't even go ashore.

古文：去祁阳九十余里，又在东北。是耶，非耶？
现代文：这晚，船夫乘风顺，傍黑后又行十五里，停泊在石坝里，这是白水的上游。
English: That night, the boatman rode with the wind, and after dark, he traveled another fifteen miles, anchoring in the stone dam, which is upstream of the whitewater.

古文：初九日，昧爽，舟人放舟，余病犹甚。
现代文：这天共行了七十五里。初九日黎明时，船夫开船，我仍病得很历害。
English: This day we travelled a total of seventy-five miles. At dawn on the ninth day of the first month, the boatman set sail, and I was still very ill.

古文：五十余里，下午抵祁阳，遂泊焉，而余不能登。
现代文：行了五十多里，下午抵达祁阳县城，船便停泊下来，而我居然不能登岸。
English: After traveling more than fifty miles, I arrived at the county seat of Poyang in the afternoon. The ship docked, but I couldn't actually go ashore.

古文：先隔晚将至白水驿，余力疾起望西天，横山如列屏，至是舟溯流而西，又转而北，已出是山之阳矣，盖即祁山也。
现代文：这之前，昨晚船将到白水骚时，我竭力支撑着病体起来向西天眺望，见一山横贯如同一道屏障，从白水骚后船溯流西行，后又折往北，到祁阳县城便已经绕到那山的南面了，那山大概就是祁山。
English: Before that, last night, when the ship was about to reach Baishuisao, I tried my best to support the sick body and stood up to look at the western sky. I saw a mountain across like a barrier. From Baishuisao, the ship followed the current westward, and then turned north. By the city of Shenyang County, it had already circled to the south of that mountain. That mountain is probably Mount Lushan.

古文：山在湘江北，县在湘江西，祁水南，相距十五里。
现代文：祁山在湘江北面，县城在湘江西岸、祁水南岸，山与县城相距十五里。
English: Lushan is on the north side of the Hunan River, and the county seat is on the west bank of the Hunan River and the south bank of the Surabaya River. The distance between the mountain and the county seat is more than 15 miles.

古文：其上流则湘自南来，循城东，抵山南转，县治实在山阳、水西。
现代文：县城的上游，湘江从南面流来，顺城东流去，抵达山下而折向南，县城实际上在祁山南面，湘江西岸。
English: In the upstream of the county seat, the Hunan River flows from the south, flows along the east of the city, arrives at the foot of the mountain and turns south. The county seat is actually in the south of Lushan, on the west bank of the Hunan River.

古文：而县东临江之市颇盛，南北连峙，而西向入城尚一里。
现代文：县城东边临江的集市很兴盛，南北贯连，从集市上向西进入城中还有一里。
English: The bazaar on the east side of the county seat, Linjiang, is very prosperous. It runs from north to south, and there is still one mile from the bazaar to the west into the city.

古文：其城北则祁水西自邵阳来，东入于湘，遂同曲而东南去。
现代文：城的北面，祁水从西面的邵阳县流来，绕到城东汇入湘江，合流后便往东南绕流而去。
English: To the north of the city, Surabaya water flows from Shaoyang County in the west, flows around to the east of the city and flows into the Hunan River. After the confluence, it flows around to the southeast.

古文：初十日，余念浯溪之胜，不可不一登，病亦稍差病愈，而舟人以候客未发，乃力疾起。
现代文：初十日我心想语溪的胜迹美景，不可不登陆一游，病也稍好了些，而且船夫因为等候其他乘客未开船，于是竭力支撑着病体起身登上岸。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, I thought to myself, "I must visit the scenic beauty of Wuxi without disembarking," and my illness improved slightly. Moreover, the boatman did not sail because he was waiting for other passengers, so he tried his best to support my sick body to get up and go ashore.

古文：沿江市而南，五里，渡江而东，已在浯溪下矣。
现代文：沿江边的集市往南，走五里，渡过江流向东过去，便已在涪溪的下面了。
English: Go south along the riverside bazaar, walk five miles, cross the river flow to the east, and it will be under the Lushan Creek.

古文：第所谓狮子袱者，在县南滨江二里，乃所经行地，而问之，已不可得。
现代文：听说狮子袱在县城南边离江两里远的地方，就是我已经过的地方，但四处询问，却已找不到。
English: I heard that the lion's burden is in the south of the county seat, two miles away from the river, which is where I have been, but I have asked around and can't find it.

古文：岂沙积流移，石亦不免沧桑耶？
现代文：难道是因为泥沙淤积水流迁徙，使得石头也发生了沧海桑田般的变迁吗？
English: Is it because of the migration of silt and silted water currents that the stone has also undergone a sea of change?

古文：浯溪由东而西入于湘，其流甚细。
现代文：语溪从东往西汇入到湘江，水蒯良细小。
English: The Wuxi River flows into the Hunan River from east to west, and the water is fine and small.

古文：溪北三崖骈峙，西临湘江，而中崖最高，颜鲁公所书《中兴颂》高镌崖壁，其侧则石镜嵌焉。石长二尺，阔尺五，一面光黑如漆，以水喷之，近而崖边亭石，远而隔江村树，历历俱照彻其间。
现代文：溪北面三座山崖并列耸立，西临湘江。中间的山崖最高，颜鲁公书写的《中兴颂》高高地刻在崖壁上，它的侧边镶嵌着一块石镜，那石块长两尺，宽一尺五，有一面光亮而颜色是黑的，如同用水喷在漆上，近处崖边的亭子、石头，远处江对面的村庄树木，都清晰地映射到石块上。
English: Three mountain cliffs stand side by side on the north side of the creek, with the Xiangjiang River to the west. The middle cliff is the highest, and "Zhongxingzong" written by Yanlu Gong is carved high on the cliff wall. Its side is inlaid with a stone mirror. The stone block is two feet long, one foot five wide, and one side is bright and the color is black, as if sprayed with water on the paint. The pavilions and stones near the cliff, and the village trees on the opposite side of the river in the distance, are clearly reflected on the stone block.

古文：不知从何处来，从何时置，此岂亦元次山所遗，遂与颜书媲胜耶！
现代文：不知这石镜是从何处弄来，何时嵌到崖壁上的，难道也是元次山遗留下来，从而与颜鲁公书写的《中心颂》相媲美的吗？
English: I don't know where this stone mirror came from, or when it was embedded in the cliff wall. Could it have been left behind by Yuan Zishan, and thus be comparable to the "Central Ode" written by Yan Rukong?

古文：宋陈衍云： 元氏始命之意，因水以为浯溪，因山以为峿山，作室以为廡亭，三吾之称，我所自也。制字从水、从山、从广，我所命也。
现代文：宋人陈衍说， 元氏起初命名的意思是：因水而命名为语溪，因山而命名为晤山，建屋而命名为瘩亭，三 吾，的名称，是我自个取的，所造的三个字分别以 水 、以 山 、以 广 作为偏旁部首，是我构想的。
English: Chen Yan, a native of the Song Dynasty, said that the meaning of the original naming of the Yuan Dynasty was: named Wuxi because of the water, named Heshan because of the mountain, and named Shanting, Sanwu, because of the building. I took the name myself. The three characters I created were based on water, mountain, and wide as the subordinate head, which was my idea.

古文：三者之目，皆自吾焉，我所擅而有也。 
现代文：三样景物的名目，都是从我开始，都是属于我专有的。 
English: The names of the three scenic spots are all from me, and all belong to me exclusively.

古文：崖前有亭，下临湘水，崖巅石巉簇，如芙蓉丛萼。
现代文：山崖前有座亭子，下临湘水，山崖顶部石头高峻丛集，如同芙蓉花上丛密的粤片。
English: There is a pavilion in front of the cliff, with the Xiangshui River below, and the top of the cliff is a high cluster of stones, like a dense cluster of flowers on a hibiscus.

古文：其北亦有亭焉，今置伏魔大帝像。
现代文：山崖北面也有座亭子，如今亭中置放着伏魔大帝的塑像。
English: There is also a pavilion on the north side of the cliff, in which there is now a statue of Emperor Fumo.

古文：崖之东麓为元颜祠，祠空而隘。
现代文：山崖的东麓为元颜祠，祠中空荡荡的而且狭小。
English: At the eastern foot of the cliff is the Yuanyan Shrine, which is small and empty.

古文：前有室三楹，为驻游之所，而无守者。越浯溪而东，有寺北向，是为中宫寺，即漫宅旧址也，倾颓已甚，不胜吊古之感。
现代文：祠前有三间屋子，是供人们驻留而游览此地的处所，但没有守护的人，越过屑溪往东，有座寺朝向北面，这是中宫寺，它就是漫宅的旧址，已经倒塌得很严重，不能产生凭吊往古事迹的感慨。
English: There are three houses in front of the ancestral hall, which is a place for people to stay and visit this place, but if there is no guardian, go east across the trash stream, there is a temple facing north, this is Zhongguo Temple, it is the former site of the mansion, it has collapsed very seriously, it can not produce the emotion of hanging on to ancient deeds.

古文：时余病怯行，卧崖边石上，待舟久之，恨磨崖碑拓架未彻通撤而无拓者，为之怅怅！
现代文：当时我因病怕走路，躺在山崖边的石头上，等船好长时间，遗憾的是拓印摩崖碑的架子没有撤除但没有拓工，为此感到怅然若失。
English: At that time, I was afraid of walking due to illness, lying on the stone on the edge of the cliff, waiting for the ship for a long time. Unfortunately, the shelf of the rubbings of the cliff monument was not removed, but there was no excavator, so I felt completely lost.

古文：既午舟至，又行二十里，过媳妇娘塘，江北岸有石娉婷立岩端，矫首作西望状。
现代文：已经是中午船才来到，又行二十里，经过媳妇娘塘，江北岸有块岩石，如婷婷女子立在岩端，举头做出向西望的姿势。
English: It was already midday before the boat arrived. After another twenty miles, it passed through the Daughter-in-Law's Pond, and there was a rock on the north bank of the river. Tingting stood on the edge of the rock and raised her head to look west.

古文：其下有鱼曰竹鱼，小而甚肥，八九月重一二斤，他处所无也。
现代文：石头下面的水中有一种鱼叫竹鱼，小而很肥，到八九月间可以长到一二斤重，其它地方没有这种鱼。
English: In the water below the stone, there is a kind of fish called bamboo fish. It is small and very fat, and can grow up to one or two pounds in weight between August and September. This kind of fish is not found elsewhere.

古文：时余卧病舱中，与媳妇觌ī当面面而过。
现代文：当时我卧病船舱中，仅仅看了媳妇石一眼就过去了。
English: At that time, I was lying in the sick cabin. I just looked at my daughter-in-law Shi Rong and passed away.

古文：又十里，泊舟滴水崖而后知之，矫首东望，已隔江云几曲矣。
现代文：又行十里，船停在滴水崖后才知道那石的特别，举首向东望去，已经隔着几曲江流几重云雾了。
English: After another ten miles, the boat stopped at the dripping cliff, only to realize that the stone was special. Looking to the east with his head held high, he was already separated by several bends of the river and several clouds and fog.

古文：滴水崖在江南岸，危岩亘空，江流寂然，荒村无几，不知舟人何以泊此？
现代文：滴水崖位于江南岸，高高的岩石耸贯云空，江流静静地流淌，周围只有几个荒僻的小村子，不知船夫何以停泊在此。
English: The dripping cliff is located on the south bank of the river. High rocks pierce the clouds. The river flows quietly. There are only a few deserted small villages around. I don't know why the boatman anchored here.

古文：是日共行三十五里。
现代文：这天共行了三十五里。
English: On this day, we traveled a total of thirty-five miles.

