古文：张暐张行简贾益谦刘炳术虎高琪塔不也
现代文：程寀，字公弼，燕郡析津人。祖父程冀，任辽的广德军节度使。
English: Cheng Jie, also known as Gong Jie, was from Yan County, Jingjin. His grandfather, Cheng Jie, was the military attaché of the Guangxi German Army in Liao.

古文：张暐，字明仲，莒州日照县人。
现代文：程冀有六个儿子，父子都从科第出身任职，士族们称他家为 程一举 。
English: Cheng Jie has six sons. Both father and son were born and worked in Cody, and his family is called Cheng Yimou by the local people.

古文：博学该通。登正隆五年进士。
现代文：程冀的第二个儿子程四穆，是辽国的崇义军节度使。
English: Cheng Ji's second son, Cheng Si Mu, was a military attaché to the Liao Dynasty's Chongyi Army.

古文：调陈留主簿、淄州酒税副使，课增羡，迁昌乐令。
现代文：程寀是四穆的小儿子。他从小就像成年人一样。二十岁时，好学，中进士甲科，累迁至殿中丞。
English: Cheng Hao is the youngest son of Shimu. He has been like an adult since childhood. At the age of twenty, he was eager to learn, entered the junior high school, and gradually moved to the junior high school.

古文：改永清令，补尚书省令史，除太常博士，兼国子助教。
现代文：天辅七年，太祖入燕，被任命为尚书都官员外郎、锦州安昌县令，累加至起居郎，任史馆修撰，因为随军有功劳，加封少府少监。
English: In the seventh year of Tianshu, when the great-grandfather entered Yan, he was appointed as the official of Shangshu, the official of Anchang County of Jinzhou, and the resident of Kijiro. He was appointed as the editor of the history museum, and because of his merits in the army, he was appointed as the minor prefectural inspector.

古文：丁父忧，服除，调山东东路转运副使，入为太常丞，兼左赞善大夫。
现代文：金熙宗时，程寀历任翰林待制，兼右谏议大夫。他上疏朝廷奏事，其大略说： 殿前点检司，自古承担殿堂环卫之责，用以使宫禁肃然，天子尊严，防备不测之事。
English: During the reign of Kim Hee-jong, Choe Hyun was successively appointed as Hanlin's attendant and concurrently as the doctor of the Right Division of the Supreme Court. When he was appointed to the post of the imperial court's secretary, he said roughly: "The prefectural inspector of the palace has been responsible for the protection of the palace's environment since ancient times, so that the palace would be dignified, the dignity of the emperor, and the prevention of unforeseen events.

古文：章宗封原王，兼原王府文学。
现代文：臣下有幸得以接近皇上，跟从天子观阅田猎之礼。
English: The vassals were fortunate to be able to get close to the emperor and follow him to watch the hunting ceremony.

古文：章宗册为皇太孙，复为左赞善，转左谕德，兼太常丞，充宋国报谕使。至盱眙，宋人请赴宴，暐曰： 大行在殡，未可。 
现代文：我近见陛下打猎时，所有羽卫之士和侍从之臣不分贵贱都能够手执弓矢驰马追逐，而圣驾驰骋于崎岖不平的沙砾之地，加之林木丛中，容易迷失。当天从卯时直至申时，百官才走出沙漠，唯独不知皇上车驾在什么地方。
English: When I saw His Majesty hunting up close, all the guards and attendants, both high and low, were able to hold a bow and arrow in their hands and chase the horse, while the saint galloped in the rugged sand and gravel, as well as in the woods, easily getting lost. On that day, from dusk until dusk, the officials came out of the desert, but they did not know where the emperor was driving.

古文：及受赐，不舞蹈，宋人服其知礼。
现代文：等候了许久，才有骑士来报，说皇帝已带几骑人马到了行宫。
English: After waiting for a long time, a knight came to report that the emperor had arrived at the imperial palace with several horsemen.

古文：使还，迁太常少卿，兼修起居注。
现代文：我私下认为，古代的天子出入警跸，清道以后才出行。
English: Privately, I believe that in ancient times, heavenly beings entered and left through the gate, and only left after the road was cleared.

古文：改礼部郎中，修起居注如故。迁右谏议大夫，兼礼部侍郎。
现代文：至于楚田猎于云梦，汉校猎于长杨，都大举陈列兵士护卫，以防备非常之事发生。
English: As for Chu Tian hunting in Yun Meng and Han Xue hunting in Chang Yang, they both displayed a large number of soldiers as guards to prevent anything unusual from happening.

古文：明昌二年，太傅徒单克宁薨，章宗欲亲为烧饭，是时，孝懿皇后梓宫在殡，暐奏： 仰惟圣慈，追念勋臣，恩礼隆厚，孰不感劝。
现代文：陛下身膺祖宗的重托，怎么能够和数骑人马独自进出于林间沙漠之中，前无斥候，后无羽林侍卫，实在不能体现出宫禁中那种庄严肃穆的气氛来。微臣愿陛下深思熟虑。以后如再举行校猎，应当事先告诫有关人员，画好围猎场的地图，详细研究是否可行，然后下令清道再出行。
English: How could His Majesty, with the weight of his ancestors on his shoulders, enter and leave the forest-desert alone with a few horsemen, with no scouts in front and no feathered guards behind, really unable to reflect the solemn atmosphere of the palace ban. We wish His Majesty to think deeply. If school hunting is held again in the future, it is necessary to warn the relevant personnel in advance, draw a good map of the hunting ground, study in detail whether it is feasible, and then order a clear path to travel again.

古文：太祖时享，尚且权停，若为大臣烧饭，礼有未安。
现代文：选择交通要道旁的比较平坦的地方，作为皇帝休息的处所，挑选忠义的心腹卫士，由亲信心腹近臣加以统率，在周围加以警卫，等候麋鹿到来之后，再骑上马追射。
English: Choose a relatively flat place next to a major traffic route as the emperor's resting place, select a loyal bodyguard, lead it by a close confidant, guard it around, wait for the elk to arrive, and then ride on a horse to chase it.

古文：今已降恩旨，圣意至厚，人皆知之，乞俯从典礼，则两全矣。 章宗从之。
现代文：还需事先派遣人员，搜索丛中林木，并清楚地设立标志，作为进出行走的道路。不然，只怕会留下让宗庙社稷忧虑之事。 他又说 ：臣下读《唐史》时，见追尊高祖以下的皇帝谥号，有的多至十八个字。
English: It is also necessary to dispatch personnel in advance to search for trees in the bushes and clearly set up signs as a path for walking in and out. Otherwise, it will only leave the family temple society worried. He also said: When the vassals read "Tang History," see the emperor's posthumous name below the Emperor Gaozu, some up to eighteen characters.

古文：上封事者言提刑司可罢，暐上疏曰： 陛下即位，因民所利，更法立制，无虑数十百条。
现代文：前宋朝大中祥符年间谥号也多达十六个字，已灭亡的辽国也依照此例，近来陛下也接受了 崇天体道钦明文武圣德 十个字。
English: During the middle of the Song Dynasty and the middle of the Xiangfu Dynasty, the imperial seal also had as many as sixteen characters, and the Liao Dynasty, which had already perished, also followed this example. Recently, His Majesty also accepted the ten characters of "Chongzheng Daoqin Mingwenwu Shengde."

古文：提刑之设，政之大者，若为浮议所摇，则内外无所取信。
现代文：臣私下认为，人臣以归美报上为忠，天子以追崇祖宗为孝。太祖武元皇帝接受天命开启帝基，八年之间，包有天下，功德茂盛，史无前例，却只谥为 武元 二字，理实未妥，怎么能昭示于未来？
English: Privately, the vassal believed that the vassal was loyal to the return to the United States, and the heavenly son was loyal to the pursuit of the ancestors. The great-grandfather Emperor Wuyuan accepted the heavenly mandate to open the imperial foundation. In eight years, the world was covered, the merits were abundant, and there was no precedent in history, but it was only the word of Wuyuan. The truth was not correct. How could it be revealed in the future?

古文：唐开元中，或请选择守令，停采访使，姚崇奏 十道采访犹未尽得人，天下三百余州，县多数倍，安得守令皆称其职？ 
现代文：臣愿陛下诏令有关方面定议谥号，也许能够上慰祖宗在天之灵，使之光芒万丈，传至无穷。 又说 ：自古以来天子都有巡狩四方的惯例，无不因事而行。
English: It is the wish of His Majesty's subjects to issue an imperial edict to the relevant parties to make a final decision, so that they may be able to comfort their ancestors in the spirit of heaven, make it shine brightly, and pass it on to infinity. He also said, "Since ancient times, it has been the custom for heavenly sons to patrol the four directions, and they always do so because of something.

古文：然则提刑之任，诚不可罢，择其人而用之，生民之大利，国家之长策也。 因举汉刺史六条以奏。
现代文：或者视察民间风俗，或者审理各种冤狱，或访问民众疾苦，以布施恩德，这都是巡狩的含义。
English: Or inspecting folk customs, or hearing all kinds of unjust imprisonment, or visiting the people's sufferings, with charity, this is the meaning of the patrol.

古文：上曰： 卿言与朕意合。 
现代文：国家初兴，唯恐郡国新附民众，弃本逐末，仍依照旧时陋习，奢侈奸诈作伪，或者有审理不清的冤狱，官吏滥施刑罚，或者劳役无穷无尽，使四民各失其业。
English: In the early days of the country's development, the newly-enfranchised people of the county and the country were afraid of abandoning everything one by one and still following the old bad habits of extravagance, fraud and forgery, or unjust imprisonment with unclear trials, officials meting out punishment indiscriminately, or endless labor service, so that each of the four people lost their jobs.

古文：拜礼部尚书。孙即康鞫治镐王永中事，还奏，有诏复讯，群臣举暐及兵部侍郎乌古论庆裔。
现代文：如今圣驾省察四方，将依照古代惯例行事，臣下愿天心洞照一切，委派大小官员，端正民风民俗，或者设立匣箱，以听人投诉申冤，或派遣使者巡视郡国，访问民情听理上告，这都是古代巡狩应办之事。
English: Now, the sacred driver will inspect the four directions and will act in accordance with the ancient practice. The vassals hope that Tenshin-dong will take care of everything, appoint officials of all ranks to rectify the folk customs, or set up a box to listen to people's complaints and redress grievances, or send emissaries to inspect the county and country, visit the people's feelings and listen to reasoned appeals. These are all things that the ancient patrol should do.

古文：上使参知政事马琪谕暐曰： 百官举阅实镐王事，要勿屈抑其人，亦不可亏损国法。 
现代文：以前汉昭帝慰问民众疾苦，光武帝访求民众灾难，这样就民和气顺，天下太平可坐而待之了。 
English: In the past, Emperor Han Zhao used to offer condolences to the people for their sufferings, and Emperor Guangwu used to visit the people to ask for their misfortunes. In this way, the people were at peace, and the world was at peace.

古文：上因谓宰臣曰： 镐王视永蹈为轻。 
现代文：又说： 臣听说，高明的医生不是观察人长的胖瘦，而是诊察他的脉络是否有病而已。
English: He also said: I have heard that a skilled doctor does not look at a person's height and weight, but only examines his veins to see if they are diseased.

古文：马琪曰： 人臣无将。 由是永中之狱决矣。
现代文：善于观察天下形势的人不是光看天下是否安宁，而是看法令制度是否理顺而已。
English: People who are good at observing the situation in the world do not just look at whether the world is peaceful, but whether the system is rationalized.

古文：霍王从彝母早死，温妃石抹氏养之，明昌六年温妃薨，上问从彝丧服。暐奏： 慈母服齐衰三年，桐杖布冠，礼也。从彝近亲，至尊压降与臣下不同，乞于未葬以前服白布衣绢巾，既葬止用素服终制，朝会从吉。 
现代文：天下也就如同一个人，安危也就像人的胖瘦，法令制度就如同人的血脉，血脉没有毛病即使长得瘦也不要紧，血脉有病即使长得肥胖也是危险的。所以，人的四肢虽然齐全无病，也不足以此而有恃无恐，关键在于血脉。天下虽然安宁，也不足以夸耀，关键还在于法制如何。尚书省，是天子的喉舌之官，制定法制的机构。
English: The world is also like a person, safety is also like a person's fat and thin, the legal system is like a person's blood, the blood has no problems, even if it is thin, it does not matter, the blood has a disease, even if it is fat, it is dangerous. Therefore, although the human limbs are complete and disease-free, it is not enough to have no fear, the key lies in the blood. Although the world is peaceful, it is not enough to boast, the key also lies in the legal system. Shangshu is the mouthpiece of the Son of Heaven, the body that formulates the legal system.

古文：上从其奏。承安元年八月壬子，上召暐至内殿，问曰： 南郊大祀，今用度不给，俟他年可乎？ 
现代文：臣下愿皇上诏令尚书省官员，严令和督责百官，各尽其职，以立国家法度。如果吏部天官以举荐贤能，黜退不肖之徒为己任，就能使升降有章可循，选任合适官员，则法度立而民受其利，前代的兴亡，没有不是因此造成的。 
English: It is the wish of our subjects that the Emperor should issue an edict to the officials of the Ministry of Education and Culture, and issue strict orders to and supervise the hundreds of officials, so that each of them will do his duty to establish the national laws. If the officials of the Ministry of Education and Culture take it as their duty to recommend those who are capable and reject those who are not, they will be able to make the promotion and demotion have rules to follow, and the appointment of suitable officials, then the laws will be established and the people will benefit from it. The rise and fall of the previous generation was not caused by this.

古文：暐曰： 陛下即位于今八年，大礼未举，宜亟行之。 
现代文：又说 ：舜帝没有告知父母而娶了娥皇女英二妃。帝喾娶了四个王妃，以配合天上的四星。周文王有一位王后、三位夫人，嫔妃若干人。
English: He also said, "Emperor Zhou married the second wife of Empress E without informing his parents. Emperor Zhou married four queens to match the four stars in the sky. King Zhouwen had a queen, three wives, and several concubines.

古文：上曰： 北方未宁，致斋之际，有不测奏报何如？ 
现代文：所以选求淑女以充实后宫，是帝王的制度。但是女子无论美丑，入宫以后容易产生嫉妒之心，陛下如果想要多子女，不能不知道这种情形并事先加以告诫。 
English: Therefore, it is the emperor's system to choose a lady to enrich the harem. However, regardless of whether a woman is beautiful or ugly, she is prone to jealousy after entering the palace. If His Majesty wants to have more children, he must not be unaware of this situation and warn her in advance.

古文：对曰： 岂可逆度而妨大礼。
现代文：又说 ：臣下见本朝富有四海之地，礼乐制度，无不粲然一新。
English: He also said, "Our vassals see that our country is rich in the four seas, and the ceremonial music system is completely new.

古文：今河平岁丰，正其时也。 
现代文：但宫禁中的制度，尚未严密。
English: However, the system of confinement in the palace is not yet strict.

古文：上复问曰： 僧道三年一试，八十而取一，不亦少乎？ 
现代文：普通吏人兵士之流，都能任意出入其中，没有人加以检查，以至于好坏混杂而无区别。
English: Ordinary officials, soldiers and the like can enter and leave at will, and no one checks them, so that the good and the bad are mixed without distinction.

古文：对曰： 此辈浮食，无益有损，不宜滋益也。 
现代文：虽然制定一些禁令，但久未执行，实在不符合严格禁卫、申明法令的本意，这种情况，陛下不能不知道，一定要严加执行。 
English: Although some prohibitions have been formulated, they have not been implemented for a long time, which is really inconsistent with the intention of strictly prohibiting and affirming laws and regulations. This situation, His Majesty must know, must be strictly implemented.

古文：上曰： 周武帝、唐武宗、后周世宗皆贤君，其寿不永，虽曰偶然，似亦有因也。 
现代文：他奏疏送上以后，皇帝十分赞赏并加以采纳，于是命令有关部门商议增上太祖谥号的事情。
English: After he was sent up, the emperor was very appreciative and accepted it, so he ordered the relevant departments to discuss the matter of adding Taizu's posthumous name.

古文：对曰： 三君矫枉太过。今不毁除、不崇奉，是为得中矣。 是岁，郊见上帝焉。
现代文：皇统八年十二月，程寀由翰林侍讲学士改任横海军节度使，又转为彰德军节度使。死于任上，当年六十二岁。
English: In December of the eighth year of imperial unification, Cheng Yu was transferred from the Hanlin Attendant Lecturer to the Vice-Admiral of the Navy, and then to the Vice-Admiral of the German Army. He died in office at the age of sixty-two.

古文：顷之，翰林修撰路铎论胥持国不可再用，因及董师中趋走持国及丞相襄之门，上曰： 张暐父子必不如是也。 三年，为御史大夫，恳辞，不许。明年，坐奏事不实，夺一官，解职。
现代文：程寀为人刚直耿介，不阿谀奉承权贵以希图进取，有古代君子的风度。
English: Cheng Yu is a straightforward person. He does not flatter the powerful with the hope of making progress. He has the demeanor of an ancient gentleman.

古文：起为安武军节度使。
现代文：任熊祥，字子仁。他八代祖任圜，是后唐的宰相。
English: Ren Xiongxiang, also known as Zijin. His eighth-generation ancestor, Ren Xi, was the prime minister of the Later Tang Dynasty.

古文：致仕，例给半俸，久之，暐不复请，遂止。
现代文：任圜的孙子任睿，跟随石晋北迁，因而成为燕人。
English: Ren Rui, the grandson of Ren Hui, followed Shi Jin and moved north, thus becoming a Swallow Man.

古文：暐自妻卒后不复娶，亦无姬侍，斋居与子行简讲论古今，诸孙课诵其侧，至夜分乃罢，以为常。
现代文：任熊祥是辽国天庆八年的进士，当了枢密院令史。金太祖平燕以后，将燕郡给了宋人，任熊祥因而到了汴京，被任命为武当郡丞。宋朝法令规定，刚归附的官员不理政务，任熊祥便对郡守杨皙说： 既然不参预政务，请求只给我半俸来奉养双亲。 
English: Ren Xiongxiang was a member of Liao's Tianqing eight years and became a Privy Councillor. After King Taizu Pingyan, Yan County was given to the Song people, and Ren Xiongxiang thus came to Beijing and was appointed Wudang County Commissioner. Song Dynasty decrees stipulated that officials who had just been annexed did not deal with government affairs, so Ren Xiongxiang said to the county governor Yang Wei: Since I do not participate in pre-government affairs, I request only half salary to support my parents.

古文：历太常，礼部二十余年，最明古今礼学，家法为士族仪表。
现代文：杨皙虽然没有答应，但很喜欢他的清廉。金人攻占了均州和房州以后，任熊祥又到了金朝，重新被任命为枢密院令史。
English: Although Yang Pi did not agree, he liked his integrity very much. After the Jin conquered Junzhou and Fangzhou, Ren Xiongxiang returned to the Jin Dynasty and was reappointed as the Privy Councillor.

古文：子行简、行信，行信自有传。
现代文：当时，西京留守高庆裔代管枢密院事，没有人敢于违抗他的命令，任熊祥也不阿谀奉承他。
English: At that time, no one dared to disobey his order, and Ren Xiongxiang did not flatter him.

古文：行简字敬甫。颖悟力学，淹贯经史。
现代文：后来杜充、刘薚同知燕京行省，法制不统一，经常产生异议，任熊祥经常在中间调解处置。
English: Later, Du Chong and Liu Tongzhi went to Yanjing Province, but the legal system was not unified, and they often raised objections. Ren Xiongxiang was often in the middle to mediate.

古文：大定十九年进士第一，除应奉翰林文字。
现代文：后来他历任深州、磁州刺史，开封少尹，行台工部郎中，同知汴京留守事。天德初年，任山东东路转运使，又改任镇西军节度使。
English: Later, he successively held the posts of shenzhou and magnetized prefectural governor, kaifeng shaoyin, hongtai engineering department vice-minister, and stayed in Beijing. In the first year of Tiande, he was appointed as Shandong East Road transfer envoy, and he was also appointed as Zhen Xi Jun festival envoy.

古文：丁母忧，归葬益都，杜门读书，人莫见其面。服除，复任。
现代文：当时，朝廷命令徐文、张弘信讨伐东海县，张弘信有意逗留，宣称有病不肯前去，被责打二百杖。任熊祥被任命为会试主考官，他以 事不避难臣之职 作为赋题。
English: At that time, the imperial court ordered Xu Wen and Zhang Hongxin to attack Donghai County. Zhang Hongxin intended to stay, declared that he was ill and did not want to go, and was beaten with two hundred canes. Ren Xiongxiang was appointed as the chief examiner of the examination, and he took the post of the minister who did not take refuge as a subject.

古文：章宗即位，转修撰，进读陈言文字，摄太常博士。
现代文：当在朝廷御试时，他又以 赏罚之令信如四时 作为试题，海陵王大喜，任命他为翰林侍读学士。大定初年，他出任太子少师。
English: When he took the imperial examination at the Imperial Court, he also took "The order of reward and punishment is as important as four o'clock" as the test topic, and King Hailing was overjoyed and appointed him as the Hanlin Attendant Bachelor. In the first year of Da Ding, he served as the prince's junior teacher.

古文：夏国遣使陈慰，欲致祭大行灵殿。
现代文：当时契丹贼人窝斡窃用王号，北部连连用兵不止，皇帝深感忧虑，下令公卿百官商议进行招抚或讨伐的意见。
English: At that time, the Khitan thief's den was using the king's name, and the north was using soldiers more than once. The emperor was deeply worried and ordered the nobles and officials to discuss the idea of appeasement or crusade.

古文：行简曰： 彼陈慰非专祭，不可。 
现代文：众人有不同看法。任熊祥进言说： 陛下忧虑劳困民众，连连用兵，不如用恩惠和信义来招抚感化他。 
English: Many people have different opinions. Ren Xiongxiang said: His Majesty is worried about the poor and working people, so he is using soldiers one after another. It is better to use grace and faithfulness to entice and influence him.

古文：廷议遣使横赐高丽， 比遣使报哀，彼以细故邀阻，且出嫚言，俟移问还报，横赐未晚 。
现代文：皇帝问 ：谁可以充当使者？ 任熊祥说 ：微臣虽然年老，但凭借国家的威灵，还能充任前往。 皇帝说： 卿已年老，不需再烦你了。 
English: The emperor asked, "Who can act as an emissary?" Ren Xiongxiang said, "Though the minister is old, he can still serve as an emissary by virtue of the national spirit." The emperor said, "Sir, you are already old, there is no need to bother you anymore."

古文：徒单克宁韪其言，深器重之。
现代文：大定七年，又告退回家。任熊祥以事奉母亲孝顺而闻名。
English: In the seventh year of Dading, he returned home. Ren Xiongxiang is famous for serving his mother with filial piety.

古文：转翰林修撰，与路伯达俱进读陈言文字，累迁礼部郎中。
现代文：母亲去世时，他已经七十岁了，停食三天，人人都称赞他。后死于家中。王翛，字翛然，涿州人。
English: When his mother died, he was already seventy years old. He fasted for three days, and everyone praised him. He later died at home.

古文：司天台刘道用改进新历，诏学士院更定历名，行简奏乞复校测验，俟将来月食无差，然后赐名。
现代文：皇统二年中进士，由尚书省令史任同知霸州事。累迁至刑部员外郎，因为替故人说情而获罪，被责打四十杖，降任泰定军节度副使。四迁而任大兴府治中，被任命为户部侍郎。金世宗对宰臣说 ：王袺过去当外地官员时，以刚直而闻名。
English: In the second year of the Emperor's reign, he was promoted from Shangshusho (Ministry of Education) to Rongshi (Ministry of History) and appointed to Chiba Prefecture. He was successively transferred to the Criminal Investigation Department, where he was found guilty of interceding on behalf of the deceased, beaten with forty canes, and demoted to the position of Vice-Minister of Ceremonies of the Tai Ding Army. He was transferred four times to Daxing Prefecture, where he was appointed to the position of Household Attendant. King Sejong said to the Vice-Minister: "Wang Ye was famous for his uprightness when he was a foreign official.

古文：诏翰林侍讲学士党怀英等复校。
现代文：而今听说专门替人减免罪刑以积阴德，各种事情他都不按法令而从轻处理。
English: But now I hear that he has specialized in reducing and pardoning crimes and punishments for people by accumulating virtue. He does not follow the law and treats all kinds of things lightly.

古文：怀英等校定道用新历：明昌三年不置闰，即以闰月为三月；二年十二月十四日，金木星俱在危十三度，道用历在十三日，差一日；三年四月十六日夜月食，时刻不同。道用不会考验古今所记，比登事迹，辄以上进，不可用。
现代文：又善于侥幸以偷安，如果真是刚直的话，就应当为国家而忘记自身，公正而不偏颇，何必卖法来求得福佑呢？ 不久任命他去赈济密云等三十六县猛安的民户，他多请了三万多石的粟米，被尚书省参奏而降了一阶官阶，出任同知北京留守事。皇帝说 ：人们多认为王袺是名有才干的官员，依我看法，他凡事不肯尽力去办，只不过是个老奸巨猾的人罢了！ 
English: He was also good at taking advantage of opportunities to steal security. If he was truly upright, he should forget himself for the sake of the country. He should be fair and not biased. Why should he sell the law to seek blessings? Soon, he was appointed to go to the 36 counties of Meng'an, such as Lijiang and Miyun, to provide relief to the people. He invited more than 30,000 kilos of corn. He was invited by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, but was demoted to the first rank and left behind in Beijing. The emperor said: People often think that Wang Yao is a talented official. In my opinion, he is not willing to

古文：道用当徒一年收赎，长行彭徽等四人各杖八十罢去。
现代文：大定二十四年，改任辽东路转运使。一年多以后，又改任显德军节度使。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Dading, he was appointed as the Liaodong Road Transfer Envoy. More than a year later, he was appointed as the Xian German Army Festival Envoy.

古文：群臣屡请上尊号，章宗不从，将下诏以示四方，行简奏曰： 往年饥民弃子，或丐以与人，其后诏书官为收赎，或其父母衣食稍充，即识认，官亦断与之。
现代文：因为他在转运使的任上曾强扯硬拉侮辱仓使王祺致死，追降两级官阶解除现职务，并被命令打七十杖，降任郑州防御使。金章宗即位，又提升为同知大兴府事。审录官员上奏说，王袺在担任显德军节度使时，廉洁刚直，军吏们都服从命令，遵纪守法，没有发生争执诉讼。于是，被提升为礼部尚书，兼任大理卿。
English: Because he had forcibly pushed and pulled and insulted Wang Qi to death when he was the transfer envoy, he was demoted two ranks and relieved of his current duties, and was ordered to fight seventy staffs and demoted to Zhengzhou defense envoy. Jin Zhangzong ascended to the throne, and was promoted to Tongzhi Daxing prefectural affairs. The interrogation officer reported that when Wang Qi served as the Xian German military envoy, he was honest and upright, and the military officials obeyed orders, obeyed discipline and the law, and there was no dispute litigation. Therefore, he was promoted to the Department of Etiquette and concurrently served as the Secretary of

古文：自此以后，饥岁流离道路，人不肯收养，肆为捐瘠，饿死沟中。
现代文：他出使宋朝回国之后，正值朝廷要改葬太师广平郡王徒单贞。
English: After he returned to China from the Song Dynasty, it was time for the imperial court to change the funeral of the Grand Master Wang Tuxanzhen of Guangping County.

古文：伏见近代御灾诏书，皆曰 以后不得复取 今乞依此施行。 
现代文：徒单贞是金章宗母亲孝懿皇后的父亲。皇帝打算引用前代旧例，赐予班剑、鼓吹和羽葆等仪仗护卫。
English: Tsuchizan Zhen was the father of Emperor Jinzhangzong's mother, the Empress Xiaojun. The emperor intended to follow the precedent of the previous generation and bestow upon him a ceremonial guard of swords, trumpets, and feathers.

古文：上是其言，诏书中行之。
现代文：宰臣因为徒单贞是因参与刺杀金熙宗而被杀的，感到很为难。
English: Zai Zhen felt very embarrassed because Tushanzhen was killed for participating in the assassination of Kim Xizong.

古文：久之，兼同修国史。
现代文：于是，皇帝下诏让礼官们提出看法。
English: As a result, the emperor issued an edict asking the etiquette officials to come up with an opinion.

古文：改礼部侍郎、提点司天台，直学士，同修史如故。
现代文：王袺上奏说 ：晋朝埋葬丞相王导时，给予前后部的羽葆、鼓吹、武贲、班剑百人。
English: Wang Xuan Shangsoo said: When the Jin Dynasty buried the prime minister Wang Tao, they gave feathers, drums, weapons and swords to one hundred people in the front and back.

古文：行简言： 唐制，仆射、宰相上日，百官通班致贺，降阶答拜。国朝皇太子元正、生日，三师、三公、宰执以下须群官同班拜贺，皇太子立受再答拜。
现代文：唐朝以来，皇帝的仪仗使用班剑，王公以下的大臣使用的仪仗并无班剑，兼用羽葆也不是适宜臣子使用的，国朝以来埋葬大臣也没有采用过。 皇帝事先已经知道唐朝在安葬大臣李靖等人时都用了班剑和羽葆，便生气地说： 过去典故没有的，固然可以遵从，但使用了也并不过礼。 
English: Since the Tang Dynasty, the emperor's ceremonial sword has been a banjo, but there is no banjo for the ministers below the prince. It is not suitable for the courtiers to use feathered ploughshares, and the burial minister has not used them since the Ming Dynasty. The emperor knew in advance that the Tang Dynasty used the banjo and feathered ploughshares when the burial minister Li Jing and others were buried, so he said angrily: Although there was no allusion in the past, it can be followed, but it is not rude to use it.

古文：今尚书省宰执上日，分六品以下别为一班揖贺，宰执坐答揖，左右司郎中五品官廷揖，亦坐答之。
现代文：有一天，章宗诏令王袺和谏议大夫兼礼部侍郎张日韦到殿门来，对他们说： 朝廷中的事情，你们这些谏官、礼官也应当加以争辩和分析。
English: One day, Emperor Zhang Zong gave an order to Wang Qian and Zhang Rongwei, the eunuch and etiquette officer, to come to the palace gate and said to them: "You eunuchs and etiquette officers should also argue and analyze the things in the imperial court.

古文：臣谓身坐举手答揖，近于坐受也。
现代文：小民百姓的言论可以采纳的，我尚且听从，何况你们呢？
English: I still listen to what the common people have to say, but how about you?

古文：宰执受贺，其礼乃重于皇太子，巩于义未安。
现代文：自今以后在朝中议事，不能够都附和尚书省的意见。 
English: From now on, all the opinions of the Ministry of Monastic Affairs cannot be included in the deliberations of the North Korean government.

古文：别嫌明微，礼之大节，伏请宰执上日令三品以下官同班贺，宰执起立，依见三品官仪式通答揖。 
现代文：明昌二年，改任知大兴府事。当时许多僧人喜欢到各贵戚家里去游串，王袺十分厌恶，于是禁止僧人午后走出寺院。曾经有位僧人违犯了禁令，皇姑大长公主来替他求情，王袺说： 有皇帝的命令，立即可以放掉他。 于是，他立即召来这位僧人，打了一百杖致死，从此京城肃然。
English: In the second year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, he was reassigned to Chida University to work for the government. At that time, many monks liked to visit the homes of their noble relatives. Wang Yao was very disgusted, so he forbade the monks to leave the temple in the afternoon. Once, a monk violated the ban, and the Empress Dowager came to intercede for him. Wang Yao said, "There is an order from the emperor, you can release him immediately." So, he immediately summoned the monk and beat him to death with a hundred canes. From then on, the capital was in mourning.

古文：上曰： 此事何不早辨正之，如都省擅行，卿论之是矣。 行简对曰： 礼部盖尝参酌古今典礼，拟定仪式，省廷不从，辄改以奏。 
现代文：后来，他又因故意放纵罪人而获罪，又被削去官职。第二年，皇帝特别任命他为定海军节度使。并对他说： 你的性格过于刚直，随着自己心意办事，因而自陷于刑罚。
English: The next year, the emperor specially appointed him as the naval governor, and said to him, "Your character is too upright, and you act according to your own will, so you have brought punishment upon yourself.

古文：下尚书省议，遂用之。宰执上日，三品以下群官通班贺，起立答拜，自此始。
现代文：你在年底被降职，我念你任职日久，颇有主见，所以特地把你从遭罪贬谪之中提拔起用，授以现职。
English: You were demoted at the end of the year. I read that you had been in office for a long time and were quite assertive, so I specifically promoted you from the position you were demoted from and gave you your current position.

古文：行简转对，因论典故之学，乞于太常博士之下置检阅官二员，通礼学资浅者使为之，积资乃迁博士。
现代文：况且那个地方年成歉收，民众饥荒，盗贼众多，你必须仍用熟悉情况的旧人加以镇守和安抚，才能使地方安宁和得到治理。希望你尽力而为，以图后效。 不久，他便上表请求退休。皇帝说 ：王袺是个能干的人，国家的事情他出力很多。 
English: Moreover, the harvest in that region was poor every year, the people were starving, and there were many thieves. You must still use old people who are familiar with the situation to keep the peace and pacify them in order to make the region peaceful and governed. I hope you will do your best to be effective. Soon, he went to the table to ask for retirement. The emperor said: Wang Yao is a capable person, he has contributed a lot to the country's affairs.

古文：又曰： 今虽有《国朝集礼》，至于食货、官职、兵刑沿革，未有成书，乞定会要，以示无穷。 
现代文：因而不许可。
English: Therefore not allowed.

古文：承安五年，迁侍讲学士，同修史、提点司天如故。
现代文：后来，王袺又再次请求，这才答应了。泰和七年，死去，时年七十五岁。
English: Later, Wang Yao asked him again, and he agreed. Tai He was seven years old, and died at the age of seventy-five.

古文：泰和二年，为宋主生日副使。
现代文：王袺性情刚直严厉，遇事果断，官员和民众都害怕他的威严，就是有权势的豪强们也不敢触犯他。
English: Wang Yao was a stern and stern character, decisive in the face of adversity. Officials and the public were afraid of his majesty, and even the powerful dared not offend him.

古文：上召生日使完颜瑭戒之曰： 卿过界勿饮酒，每事听于行简。 
现代文：承安年间，知大兴府官员出缺，皇帝对宰辅大臣们说 ：要选用很有风度和气魄的就像王袺这样的官员当这个职务。 
English: During the Cheng'an era, there was a vacancy for an official of the Chida Xingfu, and the emperor said to the vice-ministers: It is necessary to select an official who is very personable and spirited, like Wang Qi, for this post.

古文：谓行简曰： 宋人行礼，好事末节，苟有非是，皆须正之，旧例所有，不可不至。 
现代文：他就是这样被皇帝所深知。
English: He was thus well known to the emperor.

古文：上复曰： 颇闻前奉使者过淮，每至中流，即以分界争渡船，此殊非礼。卿自戒舟人，且语宋使曰： 两国和好久矣，不宜争细故伤大体。 丁宁谕之，使悉此意也。 四年，诏曰： 每奏事之际，须令张行简常在左右。 
现代文：范拱，字清叔，济南人。
English: Fan Gong, aka Uncle Qing, from Jinan.

古文：五年，群臣复请上尊号，上不许，诏行简作批答，因问行简宋范祖禹作《唐鉴》论尊号事。
现代文：九岁就能写文章，尤其深通《易学》。北宋末年考取进士，任广济军曹，权邦彦任用他为书记，管理学校方面事务。
English: He was able to write articles at the age of nine, and was particularly well versed in Yi Xue. At the end of the Northern Song Dynasty, he passed the entrance examination and was appointed as a Guangji sergeant. Quan Bangyan appointed him as a secretary to manage school affairs.

古文：行简对曰： 司马光亦尝谏尊号事，不若祖禹之词深至，以谓臣子生谥君父，颇似惨切。 
现代文：刘豫镇守东平时，范拱撰写了一篇谒庙的文章，刘豫读后感到惊讶，十分赏识他。范拱便向刘豫进献了《六箴》。
English: When Liu Yu was in the East during peacetime, Fan Gong wrote an article on the Temple of Heaven. Liu Yu was surprised after reading it and appreciated him very much. Fan Gong then presented Liu Yu Jin with the "Six Precepts."

古文：上曰： 卿用祖禹意答之，仍曰太祖虽有尊号，太宗未尝受也。 行简乞不拘对偶，引祖禹以微见其意。
现代文：齐国建立后，范拱累迁任中书舍人。他上奏了《初政录》共十五篇：一为《得民》，二为《命将》，三为《简礼》，四为《纳谏》，五为《远图》，六为《治乱》，七为《举贤》，八为《守令》，九为《延问》，十为《畏慎》，十一为《节祥瑞》，十二为《戒雷同》，十三为《用人》，十四为《御将》，十五为《御军》。
English: After the founding of Qi, Fan Gong was successively transferred to the post of middle school teacher. He played a total of fifteen pieces of "First Political Record": one is "Win the People," the second is "Commander-in-Chief," the third is "Concise Etiquette," the fourth is "Acceptance," the fifth is "Vision," the sixth is "Combat Chaos," the seventh is "Raising Virtue," the eighth is "Keeping Orders," the ninth is "Asking Questions," the tenth is "Prudence," the eleventh is "Festive Season," the twelfth is "Prevention of War," the thirteenth is "Employing People,"

古文：从之。其文深雅，甚得代言之体。
现代文：刘豫很赏识他的这些意见但并不能完全采用。过了许久，被任命代理尚书右丞，又进升为左丞，兼任门下侍郎。
English: Liu Yu appreciated these opinions of his, but could not fully adopt them. After a long time, he was appointed acting Shoshu Ujo, promoted to Sojo, and concurrently served as a subordinate attendant.

古文：改顺天军节度使。上谓行简曰： 卿未更治民，今至保州，民之情伪，卒难臆度，如何治之则可？ 
现代文：刘豫实行收取什一税的方法，名为古法，实际上是搜括民众，加上刑法严厉峻急，官吏们因而十分残暴。民众久遭兵灾，就更加贫困，许多人又被判罪入狱，境内百姓苦不堪言。
English: Liu Yu implemented the method of collecting tithes, called the ancient law, which was actually a round-up of the people. In addition, the criminal law was strict and severe, so the officials were very cruel. The people had been plagued by war for a long time, so they were even more impoverished. Many people were sentenced to prison, and the people in the territory were miserable.

古文：对曰： 臣奉行法令，不敢违失，狱讼之事，以情察之，钤制公吏，禁抑豪猾，以镇静为务，庶几万分之一。 
现代文：右丞相张孝纯和范拱的哥哥侍郎范巽，竭力进言说明这些办法的弊端，请求仍实行履亩而税的方法，刘豫不肯听从。范巽还因此而被贬了官，从此以后没有人敢进言。范拱说 ：我如果进言的话就会被认为和哥哥是同党，不进言百姓就会困苦不堪。我既然参与朝政，就要为百姓而进谏。 
English: The Minister of the Right, Zhang Xiaochun, and Fan Gong's brother, the chamberlain, Fan Lan, tried their best to explain the drawbacks of these methods, and requested that the method of taxing by the mu still be implemented, but Liu Yu refused to listen. Fan Gong was also demoted for this reason, and from then on no one dared to speak out. Fan Gong said: If I speak out, I will be considered to be in the same party as my brother, and if I do not speak out, the people will be in dire straits. Since I am involved in court politics, I must speak out for the people.

古文：上曰： 在任半岁或一年，所得利害上之。 行简到保州，上书曰： 比者括官田给军，既一定矣，有告欲别给者，辄从其告，至今未已。
现代文：于是，他便上疏向刘豫进谏，大意是说： 国家以宋朝因重敛而亡作为教训，采用什一税法，本意在减轻民众负担，而官吏们实行的过于严急，使民众违犯禁令，这不是国家长久实行的良策。 刘豫虽然没有立即听从，也并不处罚他。
English: Therefore, he made a suggestion to Liu Yu, to the effect of saying: The state took the death of the Song Dynasty as a lesson and adopted the tithe tax law to reduce the burden on the people, but the officials implemented it too urgently, causing the people to violate the ban, which is not a good long-term policy of the state. Although Liu Yu did not immediately obey, he did not punish him.

古文：名曰官田，实取之民以与之，夺彼与此，徒启争端。
现代文：范拱便让刑部上奏各路以税抵罪的总人数多达一千多人。
English: Fan Gong then asked the Criminal Investigation Department to report the total number of people who used various methods to pay off their crimes with taxes to more than a thousand people.

古文：臣所管已拨深泽县地三百余顷，复告水占沙碱者三分之二，若悉从之，何时可定。
现代文：刘豫见人数太多，便更改为五等税法，但民众仍然认为赋税过重。齐国被废以后，梁王宗弼主管行台省事，范拱是他的属官。宗弼访查对民众有利和有害的事情，范拱请求减少百姓的赋税，宗弼听从了，百姓所交纳的赋税减少了三分之一，民众这才获得喘息之机。
English: Liu Yu saw that there were too many people, so he changed the tax law to a five-class tax, but the people still thought the tax was too heavy. After the abolition of Qi, Liang Wang Zongxuan was in charge of the affairs of the Taiwan Province, and Fan Gong was his subordinate officer. Zongxuan visited and investigated the things that were beneficial and harmful to the people. Fan Gong requested to reduce the tax of the people. Zongxuan obeyed, and the tax paid by the people was reduced by one-third. The people only got a breathing space.

古文：臣谓当限以月日，不许再告为便。 
现代文：范拱不轻易赞誉别人，但对有才干的人都加以举荐，李南、张辅、刘长言都是范拱举荐的。
English: Fan Gong is not easy to praise others, but he recommends talented people. Li Nan, Zhang Fu and Liu Changyan are all recommended by Fan Gong.

古文：下尚书省议，奏请： 如实有水占河塌，不可耕种，本路及运司佐官按视，尚书省下按察司复同，然后改拨。若沙碱瘠薄，当准已拨为定。 
现代文：刘长言从汝州的郏城县酒监被提升为行台省郎，没有人知道他是怎样被提升的，范拱自己也绝口不谈。后来，他因久病而请求到近郡任职，被任命为淄州刺史。
English: Liu Changyan was promoted from the wine inspector of Lucheng County in Ruzhou to the governor of Xingtai Province. No one knows how he was promoted, and Fan Gong himself does not talk about it. Later, due to his long illness, he requested to serve in a nearby county and was appointed as the governor of Lucheng.

古文：制曰： 可。 六年，召为礼部尚书，兼侍讲、同修国史。
现代文：皇统四年，以疾病为由请求退职，于是以通议大夫名义退休。他静居书室读书，很少和妻子交谈。
English: In the fourth year of imperial rule, he asked to retire on the grounds of illness, so he retired in the name of the mediator. He lived quietly in the library and rarely talked to his wife.

古文：秘书监进《太一新历》，诏行简校之。
现代文：金世宗在济南时就听说了他的声名。大定初年，范拱上疏奏事。七年，朝廷征召他入朝，任命为太常卿。负责有关郊祀的事务。
English: When Kim Sejong was in Jinan, he heard of his fame. In the first year of Daejeon, Fan Gong was called to the imperial court. In the seventh year, the imperial court called him to the imperial court and appointed him as the grand secretary. He was responsible for matters related to suburban worship.

古文：七年，上遣中使冯贤童以实封御紥赐行简曰： 朕念镐、郑二王误干天常，自贻伊戚。
现代文：有人进言说，过去历代建都于长安和汴京、洛阳，所以确定泰山、华山等为五岳，如今既然定都燕京，应当另行确定五岳的山名。寺中的臣僚们以《诗经？嵩高》疏中有 周朝建都酆镐，以吴岳为西岳 的话为据。
English: Some people suggested that in the past, the capitals were built in Chang'an, Suijing and Luoyang, so the names of Mount Tai and Mount Hua were determined to be the five mountains. Now that the capital has been determined to be Yanjing, the names of the five mountains should be determined separately. The ministers in the temple used the words that the capital was built in the Zhou Dynasty and that Wuyue was the West Mountain as evidence.

古文：藁葬郊野，多历年所，朕甚悼焉。
现代文：范拱认为不对，他在奏议中说： 轩辕皇帝居于上谷，在恒山之西，舜帝居于蒲坂，在华山之北。
English: Fan Gong did not think it was right. He said in his petition: Emperor Xuan Zang lived in Shanggu, in the west of the Hengshan Mountains, and Emperor Zang lived in Pusan, in the north of the Huashan Mountains.

古文：欲追复前爵，备礼改葬，卿可详阅唐贞观追赠隐、巢，并前代故事，密封以闻。 
现代文：以此而论，并没有根据所定居的都城而改变五岳的祭祀山名。 后来也就确定不改变祭祀的山岳。范拱曾经说 ：礼官应当遵守礼法，法官应当遵守法令，像汉代的张释之可以说是能够真正守法的人了！ 
English: On this basis, the names of the five sacred mountains were not changed according to the capital city where they were settled. Later, it was also determined that the sacred mountains would not be changed. Fan Gong once said: the etiquette officer should abide by the etiquette, the judge should abide by the law, and like Zhang Xizhi in the Han Dynasty, it can be said that he is a person who can truly abide by the law!

古文：又曰： 欲使石古乃于威州择地营葬，岁时祭奠，兼命卫王诸子中立一人为郑王后，谨其祭祀。
现代文：所以他所说的意见也就成了确定不可改变的。大定九年，他又再次退休，死在家中，年纪七十四岁。杨伯雄，字希云，真定藁城人。八世祖杨彦稠，后唐清泰年间，任定州兵马使。
English: In the ninth year of Dading, he retired again and died at home, at the age of seventy-four. Yang Buxiong, surnamed Xiyun, was from the city of Zhending, and his eighth-generation ancestor, Yang Yanchong, was appointed as an envoy of the State of Dading during the late Tang and Qing Dynasty.

古文：此事既行，理须降诏，卿草诏文大意，一就封进。 
现代文：后来跟随后晋国君北迁，便居住在临潢。他的父亲杨丘行，任太子左卫率府率。杨伯雄在皇统二年中进士，海陵王留守中京时，杨丘行在那里当幕府官员。
English: His father, Yang Qiu Xing, held the post of the Prince of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards. Yang Po Xiong entered the priesthood in the second year of imperial rule, and Yang Qiu Xing served as an official of the Shogunate when Prince Hailing stayed in central Beijing.

古文：行简乃具汉淮南厉王长、楚王英、唐隐太子建成、巢剌王元吉、谯王重福故事为奏，并进诏草，遂施行焉。
现代文：杨伯雄前来省亲，海陵王见到之后，十分器重他。
English: Yang Buxiong came to visit his provincial relative, and when King Hailing saw him, he held him in high esteem.

古文：累迁太子太保、翰林学士承旨，尚书、修史如故。
现代文：过了许久，他被调任韩州军事判官。有两个盗贼装成商人，说是受到旅店主人的欺负，一同跑来州衙中陈诉，其实是想挟迫杨伯雄。
English: After a long time, he was transferred to South Korea as a military judge. Two thieves pretended to be businessmen, saying that they were bullied by the owner of the inn, and together they came to Shuzhong to file a complaint. In fact, they wanted to blackmail Yang Bo Xiong.

古文：贞祐初，转太子太傅，上书论议和事，其略曰： 东海郡候尝遣约和，较计细故，迁延不决。
现代文：杨伯雄细心地觉察到他们的奸诈，便将他们抓起来审问，一起抓获了他们的同党十多人，一郡人都惊讶和敬服。又升任应奉翰林文字。当时，海陵王执政，他自以为和杨伯雄是旧相识，便吩咐他时常到自己家里走走。杨伯雄应许了但并不去。
English: Yang Po-hsiung carefully noticed their treachery, and arrested and interrogated them. He also arrested more than ten of their fellow party members, which surprised and awed everyone in the county. He was also promoted to the post of Bonghanlin. At that time, King Hailing was in power, and he thought that he and Yang Po-hsiung were old acquaintances, so he ordered him to walk to his home from time to time. Yang Po-hsiung promised, but did not go.

古文：今都城危急，岂可拒绝。臣愿更留圣虑，包荒含垢，以救生灵。
现代文：有一天，海陵王很奇怪地问他为什么，他回答说： 君子受知于人就应当以礼而进，依附于别人四处钻营，不是我平素的性格。 
English: One day, King Hailing asked him very strangely why, and he replied, "It is not my usual character that a gentleman, when he is known by others, should proceed with courtesy, clinging to others and drilling camps everywhere.

古文：或如辽、宋相为敌国，岁奉币帛，或二三年以继。
现代文：从此，海陵王更加厚待他。海陵王篡位自立后，过了几个月，提升他担任右补阙，改任修起居注。
English: From then on, King Hailing treated him more generously. After King Hailing usurped the throne and became independent, a few months later, he was promoted to serve as the right assistant magistrate, and was renamed as the assistant magistrate.

古文：选忠实辨捷之人，往与议之，庶几有成，可以纾患。 是时，百官议者，虽有异同，大概以和亲为主焉。
现代文：海陵王急于求得国家大治，经常和他谈论到深夜。曾经问道： 国君治理天下之道，以什么为贵？ 杨伯雄回答说 ：贵静。 
English: King Haile Selassie was eager to achieve national greatness and often talked with him late into the night. He once asked, "What is the most important thing for a king to govern the world?" Yang Po-hsiung replied, "Quietness."

古文：庄献太子葬后，不置宫师官，升承旨为二品，以宠行简，兼职如故。
现代文：海陵王听后沉默不语。第二天，又问他说： 我迁徙了诸部猛安分别驻守边境戍镇，前夜的回答是不是认为这种做法不合乎静的？ 回答说： 移兵以分驻边境，使之能够南北相互联系，这是国家长久之计。我所说的静，是指不扰民。 
English: The next day, he asked him again: "I moved the various departments of the People's Liberation Army to separately garrison the border town of Handan. Did the previous night's answer think that this practice was not in line with tranquility?" He replied: "Moving troops to separate the border so that they can communicate with each other from north to south is a long-term plan of the country. What I mean by tranquility is not disturbing the people."

古文：三年七月，朝廷备防秋兵械，令内外职官不以丁忧致仕，皆纳弓箭。
现代文：二更时分，又询问杨伯雄有关鬼神的事情。杨伯雄进言说 ：汉文帝召见贾谊，夜半时分，向前移动坐席，不询问有关百姓的事情而问鬼神之事，后世人颇以此来讥笑他。
English: At two o'clock, he also asked Yang Buxiong about ghosts and gods. Yang Buxiong said: Emperor Han Wen summoned Jia Yi, and at midnight, he moved the table forward and asked about ghosts and gods instead of asking about the people. Later generations used this to ridicule him.

古文：行简上书曰： 弓箭非通有之物，其清贫之家及中下监当，丁忧致仕，安有所谓如法军器。今绳以军期，补弊修坏，以求应命而已，与仓猝制造何以异哉。
现代文：陛下如果不认为我学识浅陋愚昧无知的话，希望能够问及治理天下的大计，鬼神之事我不曾学过。 海陵王说 ：你只管随便说说，以减轻夜间的困倦罢了。 杨伯雄无可奈何，便说： 臣下家里有一卷书，里面写有人死后复活的故事。
English: If Your Majesty does not think that my knowledge is shallow, stupid and ignorant, I hope to be able to ask about the grand plan for governing the world. I have never studied the things of ghosts and gods. King Hailing said, "You can just talk about it casually to relieve your sleepiness at night." Yang Bo Xiong was helpless, so he said, "There is a book in my vassal's home, in which there is a story about someone being resurrected after death.

古文：若于随州郡及猛安谋克人户拘括，择其佳者买之，不足则令职输所买之价，庶不扰而事可办。 
现代文：人们便问地狱中的官员，怎样给以免罪。回答说，你设一本日历，把白天所做的事情，在夜里记录下来，凡是不能写上去的就是不应当做的事情。 海陵王听后，脸色变得庄重起来。
English: The officials in hell were asked how to avoid sin. They replied, "You should keep a calendar and write down what you do during the day and what you do at night. Anything that cannot be written down is something that should not be done." After listening to this, King Hailing's face became solemn.

古文：左丞相仆散端、平章政事高琪、尽忠、右丞贾益谦皆曰： 丁忧致仕者可以免此。 
现代文：夏天时，海陵王登上瑞云楼乘凉，他让杨伯雄作诗。诗的末章写道： 六月不知蒸鰘到，清凉会与万方同。 
English: In the summer, King Hailing ascended the Ruiyun Building to enjoy the coolness, and he asked Yang Boxiong to write a poem. The last chapter of the poem reads: "I don't know if the distillation will arrive in June, the coolness will be the same as everywhere else."

古文：权参政乌古论德升曰： 职官久享爵禄，军兴以来，曾无寸补，况事已行而复改，天下何所取信。 
现代文：海陵王看后很高兴，拿给身边的人看并说： 伯雄一说话就忘不了进行规劝，当臣子的就是应当这样啊！ 
English: King Hailing was very happy when he saw it. He showed it to the people around him and said, "When Hakuo speaks, he can't forget to give advice. That's what a courtier should do!"

古文：是议也，丁忧致仕官竟得免。
现代文：再迁为兵部员外郎。守父丧，服终起任翰林待制，兼修起居注。
English: Relocated again to become the second son of a member of the military department. Guarded his father's funeral, served as a member of the Hanlin reserve system after his service ended, and also studied and lived in Shimo.

古文：是岁，卒，赠银青荣禄大夫，谥文正。
现代文：迁任直学士，再改任右谏议大夫兼任著作郎，修起居注如故。
English: He was transferred to the post of direct bachelor, and then he was reassigned to the post of doctor of the Right Division of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, concurrently serving as the author's son.

古文：行简端悫慎密，为人主所知。
现代文：皇子慎思阿不去世，伯雄因和他一起值班的同僚私下议论而获罪受责罚，话语写在《海陵诸子传》中。
English: Prince Shinsia did not die, and Hakuo was punished for having a private discussion with a colleague who was on duty with him. The words are written in "The Tale of the Sons of Hailing."

古文：自初入翰林，至太常、礼部，典贡举终身，缙绅以为荣。
现代文：海陵王商议南征江南时，杨伯雄上奏说： 晋武帝平吴时也都是任命将帅出征，何必亲自总领军队？ 
English: When King Hailing was discussing the southern conquest of the south of the Yangtze River, Yang Po-hsiung said: When Emperor Jinwu was in Pingwu, he also appointed generals to go to war. Why did he have to personally lead the army?

古文：与弟行信同居数十年，人无间言。
现代文：海陵王不听劝谏。于是，免除了他修起居注的官职，也不再召见他。
English: King Hailing didn't listen to his advice, so he relieved him of his official duties as a priest and no longer summoned him.

古文：所著文章十五卷，《礼例纂》一百二十卷，会同、朝献、禘佩、丧葬，皆有记录，及《清台》，《皇华》、《戒严》、《为善》、《自公》等记，藏于家。
现代文：大定初年，被任命为大兴府少尹，因服母丧而离职。
English: In the first year of Dading, he was appointed as Daxingfu Shao Yin, but left the post due to his mother's death.

古文：赞曰：张暐、行简世为礼官，世习礼学。
现代文：显宗当皇太子时，挑选东宫的属官，张浩向他推荐杨伯雄，于是在服满后被起用任少詹事。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong was crown prince, Zhang Hao recommended Yang Boxiong to him for the selection of officials for the East Palace, and Yang Boxiong was appointed as a minor official after he had completed his service.

古文：其为礼也，行於家庭，讲於朝廷，施用於邻国，无不中度。
现代文：杨伯雄哥哥的儿子蟠担任左赞善，他们进谏时言听计从，当时的舆论都以此为荣。杨伯雄收集了古代的太子贤能的和不肖的事迹，写成一部书，书名叫《瑶山往鉴》，进献给朝廷。
English: Yang Buxiong's elder brother's son, Zou, served as Zuo Zanzan, and the public opinion at that time was proud of this. Yang Buxiong collected the virtuous and disgraceful deeds of ancient princes and wrote a book called "Lushan Zanzan," which was presented to the imperial court.

古文：古者官有世掌，学有专门，金诸儒臣，唯张氏父子庶几无愧于古乎。
现代文：这本书和他又进献的《羽猎》、《保成》等箴言，都受到朝廷的嘉奖和采纳。
English: This book and the proverbs he also contributed, such as "feather hunting" and "guaranteeing success," were both praised and adopted by the imperial court.

古文：贾益谦，字彦亨，沃州人也，本名守谦，避哀宗讳改焉。
现代文：又被任命为左谏议大夫、翰林直学士。正遇到太子詹事职务缺人，宰相又举荐杨伯雄担任。皇帝说 ：伯雄不能离开我的身边，而东宫也需要他去辅导。 
English: He was also appointed as Zuo Jianbing Doctor and Hanlin Zhi Bao. When Prince Zhanji was facing a shortage of positions, the prime minister recommended Yang Boxiong to serve. The emperor said: Boxiong can't leave my side, and the East Palace also needs him to tutor.

古文：大定十年词赋进士，历仕州郡，以能称。
现代文：于是任命他为太子詹事兼谏议大夫。大定六年，皇帝巡幸西京，准备顺道到凉陉去避暑。
English: Therefore, he was appointed as Prince Zhan's secretary and doctor of the imperial edict. In the following six years, the emperor toured the western capital, preparing to go to Liangyao to escape the summer heat.

古文：明昌间，入为尚书省令史，累迁左司郎中。
现代文：杨伯雄领着谏官们一起进宫劝谏。皇帝说 ：让我再慢慢考虑。 
English: Yang Bo Xiong led the eunuchs into the palace to persuade the emperor. The emperor said, "Let me think about it a little longer."

古文：章宗谕之曰： 汝自知除至居是职，左司事不为不练，凡百官行止、资历固宜照勘，勿使差缪。
现代文：而杨伯雄仍然劝说个不停。同僚们都已经引退出去了，杨伯雄又过了很长时间才起身告退。
English: But Yang Boxiong still kept persuading. His colleagues had all retired, and it took Yang Boxiong a long time to get up and leave.

古文：若武库署直长移刺郝自平定州军事判官召为典舆副辖，在职才五月，降授门山县簿尉。
现代文：当年到了凉陉，在巡行过程中果然出现了疏漏和失误。皇帝又回想起杨伯雄说过的话，当回宫以后，任命他为礼部尚书，并对身边的近臣们说： 群臣之中有才干有气度的人不少，但没有人像伯雄那样忠实。 
English: When the year came to a close, there were indeed omissions and mistakes in the process of the parade. The emperor recalled what Yang Boxiong had said, and after returning to the palace, he appointed him as the ceremonial secretary, and said to the courtiers around him: There are many talented and dignified people among the courtiers, but no one is as faithful as Boxiong.

古文：朕比阅贴黄，行止乃俱书作一十三月，行止尚如此失实，其如选法何？
现代文：皇帝又对伯雄说： 龙逄、比干都是因为忠谏而死的，如果他们能够遇到明君，怎么会这样呢！ 
English: The emperor also said to Hakuo, "Longjing and Bi Gan both died because of their loyalty. If they were able to meet Ming Jun, how could this have happened?

古文：盖是汝不用心致然尔。
现代文：杨伯雄回答说 ：魏征愿意成为良臣，正是因为他认为自己遇到明君啊！ 
English: Yang Boxiong replied: Wei Zheng is willing to become a good minister, precisely because he thinks he has met Ming Jun!

古文：今姑杖知除掾，汝勿复犯之。 
现代文：于是，皇帝对着宰相们说： 《尚书》上说： 你们不要当面表示听从，离开以后又另有说法。 
English: Therefore, the emperor said to the prime ministers: "The Shangshu said: You should not obey in person, and then say something else after you leave.

古文：五年，为右谏议大夫，上言： 提刑司官不须遣监察体访，宜据其任内行事，考其能否而升黜之。 
现代文：我和你们一起治理天下，事情可不可行，应当立即当面陈说。卿等位居卿相，正是行道扬名之时，如偷安自便，侥幸于一时，如何向后世交代？ 
English: I am governing the world together with you. Things cannot be done, and it should be said face to face immediately. Sirs and lords, it is the time to make a name for yourself. If you take advantage of the situation and get lucky for a moment, how will you explain to future generations?

古文：上曰： 卿之言其有所见乎？ 
现代文：群臣都高呼万岁。大定十二年，杨伯雄改任为沁南军节度使，又召回朝廷任翰林学士承旨。
English: In the twelfth year of Dading, Yang Boxiong was reappointed as the festival envoy of the Southern Wei Army, and recalled to the imperial court to serve as Hanlin Scholar.

古文：守谦对曰： 提刑官若不称职，众所共知，且其职与监察等，臣是故言之。 
现代文：丞相石琚退休时，皇帝问他： 谁能替代你？ 石琚回答说 ：伯雄可以。 
English: When the prime minister, Shi Xuan, retired, the emperor asked him, "Who can replace you?" Shi Xuan replied, "Boxiong can."

古文：上嘉纳焉。
现代文：当时人议论都认为石琚举荐得人。
English: At that time, it was widely believed that Shi Hao was a recommended candidate.

古文：是年夏，上将幸景明宫清暑，守谦连上疏，极谏之。
现代文：朝廷又任命杨伯雄代理詹事职务。他知无不言，提出了许多匡助朝政的好见解。
English: The imperial court also appointed Yang Boxiong as Zhan's deputy. He knew everything and put forward many good opinions to help the imperial government.

古文：上御后阁，召守谦入对，称旨。
现代文：后来宫廷中的官员有狡诈善变的人时，人们便必定以称赞杨詹事的正直来使他羞耻。
English: Later, when the officials in the court were cunning and fickle, people would praise Yang Zhan's honesty to shame him.

古文：进兼尚书吏部侍郎。
现代文：后被任命为定武军节度使，改任平阳尹。
English: Later, he was appointed as the chief of staff of the Dingwu army, and changed his post to Pingyang Yin.

古文：时镐王以疑忌下狱，上怒甚，朝臣无敢言者。
现代文：起先，张浩曾经在平阳任职，有仁政。杨伯雄当了平阳尹后，百姓们都称颂他，并说： 前有张，后有杨。 
English: At first, Zhang Hao had served in Pingyang and had benevolent politics. When Yang Boxiong became the successor of Pingyang Yin, the people praised him and said, "Before there was Zhang, there was Yang."

古文：守谦上章论其不可，言极恳切。
现代文：又改任河中尹。死时六十五岁，谥为庄献。
English: He was also reappointed as Kawachu Yin. He was sixty-five years old at the time of his death.

古文：上谕之曰： 汝言诸王皆有觊心，而游其门者不无横议。
现代文：他的弟弟叫伯杰和伯仁，族兄名伯渊。萧贡，字真卿，京兆咸阳人。
English: His younger brothers are named Bo Jie and Bo Ren, and his elder brothers are named Bo Yuan, Xiao Gong, Zhenqing, and Jingzha Xianyang.

古文：此何等语，固当罪汝。
现代文：大定二十二年，中进士。
English: He entered the junior high school in 1922.

古文：以汝前言事亦有当处，故免。 
现代文：调为镇戎州判官、泾阳县令、泾州观察判官。补为尚书省令史。
English: He was appointed as the judge of Jeonju Town, the magistrate of Jeongyang County, and the judge of Jeonju Observation.

古文：既而以议镐王事有违上意，解职，削官二阶。
现代文：依照旧规定，必须试补两个月以后才正式补用。萧贡到尚书省只试用几天，上司就认为他有才干，当即正式补用他。
English: According to the old regulations, it is necessary to try out two months before officially using it. Xiao Gong only tried it for a few days in Shangshu Province, but his boss thought he was talented and immediately officially used him.

古文：承安元年七月，降为宁化州刺史。五年八月，改为山东路按察使，转河北西路转运使。
现代文：后晋升为监察御史。提刑司上奏说，萧贡在泾州时有美政，因而被升任北京转运副使。
English: Later, he was promoted to inspector of imperial history. The chief prosecutor of the Criminal Investigation Department said that Xiao Gong had US politics when he was in Zhangzhou, and was promoted to Beijing deputy envoy for transit.

古文：泰和三年四月，召为御史中丞。
现代文：双亲年老，便回家归养。左丞董师中、右丞杨伯通举荐萧贡有文学才能，被任命为翰林修撰。
English: His parents were old, so they returned home to raise him. The left elder, Dong Shizhong, and the right elder, Yang Bertong, recommended that Xiao Gong had literary talent, and he was appointed as the editor of Hanlin.

古文：四年三月，出为定武军节度使。
现代文：萧贡上书朝廷说： 近年的弊端，在于选拔人才不注意器度见识和品行，只要善于写文书、不涉及吏议的就是能干。
English: Xiao Gong said in a letter to the imperial court: The drawback in recent years is that the selection of talents does not pay attention to the degree of insight and conduct, as long as they are good at writing documents and do not involve officials, they are competent.

古文：八年六月，复为御史中丞。
现代文：用人时不注意因才任职，只拘泥于资格加以任用。
English: When appointing people, they do not pay attention to the reason for the appointment, but only to the qualifications.

古文：八月，改吏部尚书。
现代文：爵名重器的赐予不慎重，人人怀有侥幸之心。
English: The bestowal of a peerage is not a matter of prudence, but a matter of luck.

古文：九月，诏守谦等一十三员分诣诸路，与本路按察司官一员同推排民户物力。
现代文：选用守令不重视真才实学的人员，民众遭受其害。希望朝廷提拔真才以振改浅薄的习俗，考核功绩才能以确定职务功业，慎用名器以抑止侥幸之心，注重守令的选用以厚邦本。然后政令和教化可行，百事可举了！ 
English: It is hoped that the imperial court will promote true talent to shake up the shallow customs, assess merit to determine the duties and achievements, carefully use famous instruments to deter the spirit of chance, and pay attention to the selection of orders to be used as a solid foundation. Then government orders and education are feasible, and Pepsi can be raised!

古文：上召见于香阁，谕之曰： 朕选卿等随路推排，除推收外，其新强、销乏户，虽集众推唱，然销乏者勿销不尽，如一户元物力三百贯，今蠲减二百五十贯，犹有不能当。
现代文：皇帝下诏让文臣们写一篇《唐用董重质诛郭谊得失论》，萧贡所写的被评为第一名，获得皇帝赏赐的上等缯帛四端。萧贡评论当时治政方面的五弊、开言路方面的四难，言辞恳切，被改任为治书侍御史。守父丧，服丧期满重新任用，后改任右司员外郎，不久又转任郎中，升国子祭酒，兼太常少卿，他与陈大任一起修订《辽史》。
English: The emperor issued an edict to let the scholars write an article entitled "The Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's Tang Dynasty's

古文：新强者勿添尽，量存气力，如一户添三百贯而止添二百贯之类。
现代文：又改任刑部侍郎，历任同知大兴府事、德州防御史，三次升迁任河东北路按察转运使。大安末年，改任彰德军节度使。因 兵起不能守住城池，亡失百姓 的罪名，被降为同知通远军节度事。
English: In addition, he was appointed as a waiter of the Criminal Investigation Department, successively held the posts of Tongzhi Daxing Prefecture Affairs and Texas Defense History, and was promoted three times to the Northeast He River Road Inspection and Transfer Envoy. At the end of the Taian era, he was appointed as the Changde Army Festival Envoy. Because the soldiers could not hold the city and lost the people, he was reduced to the Tongzhi Tongyuan Army Festival Envoy.

古文：卿等宜各用心。百姓应当赋役，十年之间，利害非细。苟不称所委，治罪当不轻也。 
现代文：不久，又改任静难军节度使，历任河东北路、南京路转运使、御史中丞、户部尚书。南京戒严时，被指责军储物资缺乏治罪，皇帝下诏释放他不予追究。
English: Not long after, he was appointed as the festival envoy of the Jingnan Army, and successively served as the transportation envoy of the Northeast Heze Road and Nanjing Road, Goshi Chujo, and Hube Shoshu. When Nanjing was under martial law, he was accused of a lack of military supplies to commit crimes, and the emperor issued a decree to release him from investigation.

古文：寻出知济南府，移镇河中。
现代文：兴定元年退休。元光二年去世，谥为文简。萧贡好学，读书到老也不倦怠，注有《史记》一百卷。
English: Xingding retired in the first year of the year. Yuan Guang died in the second year of the year, and his name was changed to Wen Jian. Xiaogong was a good student, and he never tired of reading until he was old. He annotated one hundred volumes of "History."

古文：大安末，拜参知政事。
现代文：温迪罕缔达，通习经史，从女真字开始任官，累迁至国史院编修官。
English: Wendy Han Jida, a student of history, began her career as an official from the beginning, and gradually moved to the editor-in-chief of the National History Academy.

古文：贞祐二年二月，改河东南路安抚使，俄知彰德府。
现代文：起初，丞相希尹创造了女真字，并设立学校，让讹离剌等人任教。
English: At first, the prime minister, Xi Yin, created the female character of truth, and set up a school to teach people such as Zou Yixuan.

古文：三年，召为尚书省右丞。
现代文：后来读的人越来越多了，他就转为学习经史。
English: Later, as more and more people began to study it, he switched to studying the history of scripture.

古文：会宣宗始迁汴梁，益谦乃建言： 汴之形势，惟恃大河。
现代文：原先纳合椿年、纥石烈良弼都是从这条路后来直当到丞相的。
English: Originally, both Na Gotsubin and Shoseki Ryoryaku went straight from this road to become prime ministers.

古文：今河朔受兵，群盗并起，宜严河禁以备不虞，凡自北来而无公凭者，勿听渡。 
现代文：温迪罕缔达被认为是最精深此道的。大定十二年，朝廷下诏要缔达所教的学生学习做诗和策文，如果写得有文采的，就根据才学加以任用，自愿继续学习的也听从选择。大定十三年，设女真进士科。当年，徒单镒等二十七人中进士。
English: In the twelfth year of Dading, the imperial court issued an edict that the students to be taught by Wendi should learn to write poetry and prose. If they wrote poetically, they would be appointed according to their ability, and those who continued to study voluntarily would also be subject to selection. In the thirteenth year of Dading, Jianzhen Scholarship was established. In that year, 27 people, including Tu Shanqi, were promoted.

古文：是时，河北民迁避河南者甚众。侍御史刘无规上言： 侨户宜与土民均应差役。 
现代文：十五年，温迪罕缔达升任著作佐郎，和编修官宗璧、尚书省译史阿鲁、吏部令史张克忠一起翻译和注释经书。累迁任秘书丞。大定十九年，改任左赞善，因母亲年老请求离职归养。
English: In the fifteenth year of his reign, Wendy Han Jida was promoted to the position of Shosho Saro, translating and annotating scriptures together with the editor-in-chief Zong Bi, Shosho translation Shi Aru, and Shosho secretary Shi Zhang Kezhong. He was successively transferred to the position of secretary-general. In the nineteenth year of his reign, he was transferred to the position of Zuo Zanzhen, and because of his mother's old age, he asked to leave the post to take care of her.

古文：上留中，而自以其意问宰臣。丞相端、平章尽忠以为便。
现代文：显宗派内直丞六斤对温迪罕缔达说： 赞善，开始时并未任命你当这个官职，皇上对我说： 我得到一个出类拔萃的人才，学问博通，应该让他来辅导你有关德义方面知识。 
English: Emperor Xian said to Wendy Han Jida: "Praise be to God, I did not appoint you to this post at the beginning. The emperor said to me: I have gained an outstanding talent with a wide range of knowledge, and I should let him tutor you in the knowledge of virtue and righteousness."

古文：益谦曰： 侨户应役，甚非计也。
现代文：过了几天，任命你当了赞善。我自以为亲身受到有关德义方面的教益，不胜欣喜。你现在还不能离去，不要心中为难。 
English: A few days later, you were appointed as a zanzan. I was overjoyed to think that I had personally benefited from the teachings on morality. You can't leave now, don't be embarrassed.

古文：盖河北人户本避兵而来，兵稍息即归矣。
现代文：过了许久，转任翰林待制，死于任上。明昌五年，追赠为翰林学士承旨，谥为文成。张翰，字林卿，忻州秀容人。
English: After a long time, he was transferred to the position of Hanlin, and died in office. Mingchang five years, posthumously awarded the title of Hanlin bachelor, and the title of Wencheng. Zhang Han, Zhi Linqing, and Zhangzhou Xiurong.

古文：今旅寓仓皇之际，无以为生，若又与地著者并应供忆，必骚动不能安居矣。岂主上矜恤流亡之意乎。 
现代文：大定二十八年中进士，调任隰州军事判官。有人诬告一家兄弟三人拦路抢劫，张翰暗访得知真实情况，就向州里说明并释放了他们。历任东胜、义丰、会川县令，补任尚书省令史，又任户部主事，升为监察御史。服母丧，服终，调任山东路盐使。
English: He was promoted to the post of military judge of Bozhou in the 28th year of Dading. Someone falsely accused a family of three brothers of roadblock robbery. Zhang Han made an undercover visit and learned the true situation, he explained to the county and released them. He served as the governor of Dongsheng, Yifeng and Aichuan counties, was appointed as the governor of Shandong Province, and was appointed as the head of the household department. He was promoted to the position of inspector governor. He served his mother's funeral, and at the end of his service, he was transferred to the Shandong Road Salt Envoy.

古文：上甚嘉赏，曰： 此非朕意也。 
现代文：服父丧，起复任尚书省都事、户部员外郎。
English: After attending his father's funeral, he was reinstated as a member of the Household Department of the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：因出元规章示之。三年八月，进拜尚书左丞。四年正月，致仕，居郑州。
现代文：大安年间，平章政事独吉思忠、参知政事承裕行省戍守边境，张翰任左右司郎中，由于意见不一致，处置不得法，张翰多次力争不被采纳。
English: During the Taian era, the border was guarded by the Taira clan's political advisor, Doji Shizhong, and the governor's political advisor, Chengyu Xingguo, while Zhang Han served as the left and right secretary. Due to the disagreement, the decision was not legal, and Zhang Han tried many times not to be accepted.

古文：兴定五年正月，尚书省奏： 《章宗实录》已进呈，卫王事迹亦宜依《海陵庶人实录》，纂集成书，以示后世。 
现代文：承裕被逮捕后，卫绍王知道张翰事先已经提过不同看法，便召见他并加以安慰。改任知登闻鼓院，仍兼原来职务，又升为侍御史。贞祐初年，任翰林直学士，充元帅府经历官。中都戒严时，调度有方，改任户部侍郎。金宣宗迁都汴京，张翰规划筹措粮草并随从至真定，他上书皇帝进言五事： 一为强本，也就是要聚集兵士、迁徙豪强，以充实南京。
English: After the arrest of Cheng Yu, King Wei of Shao knew that Zhang Han had expressed a different opinion in advance, so he summoned him and consoled him. He was reassigned to the Zhidongwen Drum Academy, still holding his original position, and was also promoted to the history of the imperial court. In the first year of Zhenyu, he was appointed as a direct scholar of Hanlin, and served as an experienced officer of the marshal's office. When the capital was under martial law, he had a good schedule and was appointed as a house steward. Kim Xuan Zong moved the capital to Beijing, Zhang Han planned to raise grain and grass and followed him to Zhending. He

古文：制可。初，胡沙虎弑卫王，立宣宗，一时朝臣皆谓卫王失道，天命绝之，虎实无罪，且有推戴之功，独张行信抗章言之，不报，举朝遂以为讳。
现代文：二为足用，也就是说应当依照蔡州、汴河的旧渠道来通漕运。三为防乱，就是应当聚集义军，发给官印，让他们相互统帅，以使内部安定不致反复。
English: The second is for footing, that is to say, it should be in accordance with the old channels of Caizhou and Luohe. The third is for anti-riot, that is, it should gather the rebels, send them to the official seal, and let them command each other, so that internal stability will not be repeated.

古文：及是，史官谓益谦尝事卫王，宜知其事，乃遣编修一人就郑访之。
现代文：四为省事，是说县、邑不能自保的应当加以合并，既可减少官员人数，又便于防盗。
English: The fourth is to save trouble, that is, counties and towns that cannot protect themselves should be merged, which can reduce the number of officials and facilitate anti-theft.

古文：益谦知其旨，谓之曰： 知卫王莫如我。
现代文：五为推恩，也就是应当广施恩惠，以示天子所在地值得庆幸的意思。 
English: The number five is a sign of grace, which means that you should be generous with your favors to show that the location of the heavenly son is worthy of congratulation.

古文：然我闻海陵被弑而世宗立，大定三十年，禁近能暴海陵蛰恶者，辄得美仕，故当时史官修实录多所附会。卫王为人勤俭，慎惜名器，较其行事，中材不及者多矣。吾知此而已，设欲饰吾言以实其罪，吾亦何惜余年。 朝议伟之。正大三年，年八十，薨。
现代文：皇帝略加施行了。
English: The emperor imposed a slight increase.

古文：三子：贤卿、颐卿、翔卿，皆以门资入仕。赞曰：贾益谦于卫绍王，可谓尽事君之义矣。
现代文：代理参政乌古论德升说 ：官员们长期享有爵位俸禄，战事兴起以来，对国家没有一点裨益，况且如今事情已确定并在实行中，再为更改，怎么取信于天下？ 
English: Acting politician Uguon Desheng said: "Officials have long enjoyed the salary of a knighthood. Since the outbreak of the war, there has been no benefit to the country. Moreover, now that the matter has been determined and is being implemented, if it is changed, how can it be trusted by the world?"

古文：海陵之事，君子不无憾焉。
现代文：这次争议结果，那些服丧和退休在家的官员因而得以免除。
English: As a result of this dispute, those officials who are in mourning and retired at home are thus exempted.

古文：夫正隆之为恶，暴其大者斯亦足矣。
现代文：当年，张行简去世，赠封银青荣禄大夫，谥为文正。
English: In the same year, Zhang Xingjian passed away and was awarded the title of "Silver Qing Ronglu Doctor" and his posthumous name was Wenzheng.

古文：中綍之丑，史不绝书，诚如益谦所言，则史亦可为取富贵之道乎？
现代文：张行简品行端正，办事细心谨慎，被皇帝所知遇。他从初入翰林院到太常寺、礼部，终身掌管贡举官员的要职，缙绅们都以此为荣。他和弟弟张行信同居几十年，没有人说过闲话。
English: Zhang Xingxing was well-behaved, meticulous and prudent, and was well-known by the emperor. From the time he first entered Hanlin Academy to Taizhong Temple and the Ministry of Ceremonies, he held the important position of tribute official for life, and the gentry were proud of it. He and his brother Zhang Xingxin lived together for decades, and no one gossiped.

古文：嘻，其甚矣。《传》曰： 不有废者，其何以兴！ 
现代文：所写的文章有十五卷，《礼例纂》一百二十卷，有关会同、朝献、舉祭礼、丧葬等事，均有记录，同时还有《清台》、《皇华》、《戒严》、《为善》、《自公》等书，都收藏在家里。
English: There are fifteen volumes of articles written, one hundred and twenty volumes of the Code of Etiquette, and there are records of associations, morning offerings, sacrifices, funerals, etc. There are also books such as "Qingdao," "Imperial China," "Martial Law," "For Goodness" and "Self-Righteousness," all of which are collected at home.

古文：刘炳，葛城人。
现代文：刘炳，是葛城人。
English: Liu Yao is from Gecheng.

古文：每读书，见前古忠臣烈士为国家画策虑万世安，辄叹息景慕。
现代文：每次读书，看见古代为国家万世安定谋划策略的忠臣烈士，就赞叹仰慕。
English: Every time I read, I admire and admire the loyal martyrs who planned strategies for the eternal stability of the country in ancient times.

古文：贞祐三年，中进士第，即日上书条便宜十事：
现代文：贞祐二年中进士第，当天上书皇帝分列了适宜做的十件事：
English: On the day of Zhenyu's second year of junior high school, the emperor listed ten things that should be done:

古文：其一曰，任诸王以镇社稷。
现代文： 其一曰：任用诸王来安定国家。
English: The first was to appoint kings to stabilise the country.

古文：臣观往岁，王师屡战屡衄，率皆自败。
现代文：我看过去几年，王师屡战屡败，大都是自己先输。
English: In my opinion, over the past few years, Wang Shi has repeatedly lost battles, and most of the time he has lost first.

古文：承平日久，人不知兵，将帅非才，既无靖难之谋，又无效死之节，外托持重之名，而内为自安之计，择骁果以自随，委疲懦以临阵，阵势稍动，望尘先奔，士卒从而大溃。
现代文：太平的日子长了，人民不懂军事，将帅没有才能，既没有平定患难的谋略，又没有效力至死的节操，对外假托做事谨慎的美名，内心为自己的安全打算，挑选勇猛果敢的跟随自己，委派疲惫懦弱的到阵前交战，阵势稍有移动，望尘先逃，士卒跟着跑而大败。
English: The days of peace are long gone. The people do not understand military affairs. The generals have no talent. They have neither a strategy to pacify adversity nor a self-discipline that is effective until death. They pretend to the outside world that they are doing things carefully, but in their hearts they are planning for their own safety. They choose the brave and courageous to follow themselves, and appoint the tired and cowardly to go to the front to fight. The formation moves slightly, hoping to escape first, and the soldiers follow and are defeated.

古文：朝廷不加诘问，辄为益兵。
现代文：朝廷不加追问，只是增加兵力。
English: The imperial court did not pursue the matter, but only increased the number of troops.

古文：是以法度日紊，仓庾日虚，闾井日凋，土地日蹙。
现代文：因此法度日益混乱，仓库空虚，市井衰败，土地日缩。
English: As a result, the legal system is increasingly chaotic, warehouses are empty, towns and cities are decaying, and land is shrinking daily.

古文：自大驾南巡，远近相望，益无固志。
现代文：从圣驾南迁，远近相望，更无斗志。
English: Moved south from St. John's, far away from each other, and no fighting spirit.

古文：吏任河北者以为不幸，逡巡退避，莫之敢前。
现代文：官吏把在河北任职当作不幸，徘徊退避，没有人敢前进。
English: Government officials regard it as a misfortune to hold office in Hebei. They linger and retreat, and no one dares to advance.

古文：昔唐天宝之末，洛阳、潼关相次失守，皇舆夜出，向非太子回趋灵武，率先诸将，则西行之士当终老於剑南矣。
现代文：从前唐天宝末年，洛阳、潼关相继失守，皇帝夜逃，如果不是太子返回灵武，统帅诸将，那么西行的人将老死在剑南。
English: In the last years of the Tang Dynasty, Luoyang and Shaoguan were successively lost, and the emperor fled at night. If the prince did not return to Lingwu and command the generals, then the westbound people would die in Jiannan.

古文：臣愿陛下择诸王之英明者，总监天下之兵，北驻重镇，移檄远近，戒以军政。
现代文：我希望皇上把各王中杰出的人选出来，统领天下兵马，驻军北方重镇，向远近地区传递檄文，警告有关军政要事。
English: I hope that the emperor will select the outstanding person among the kings, command the world's soldiers and horses, garrison the major towns in the north, deliver the imperial edict to the far and near regions, and warn about the important military and political affairs.

古文：则四方闻风者皆将自奋，前死不避。
现代文：那么四方闻风者都将自奋，前死不避。
English: Then everyone who hears the wind in the four directions will be self-motivated and will not avoid death.

古文：折冲厌难，无大于此。
现代文：抵御敌人的困难，无大于此。
English: Nothing is more difficult than to resist the enemy.

古文：夫人情可以气激不可以力使，一卒先登，则万夫齐奋，此古人所以先身教而后威令也。
现代文：人们可用勇气激励不可用力强制，一卒先登，则万夫齐奋，这就是古人首先以身作则然后威严发令的原因。
English: People can be inspired by courage, but not forced by force. If you are the first to step up, everyone else will follow. This is why the ancients first led by example and then issued orders with authority.

古文：二曰，结人心以固基本。
现代文： 二曰：取得人心来稳固基业。
English: The second is to win the hearts and minds of the people to consolidate the foundation.

古文：天子惠人，不在施予，在于除其同患，因所利而利之。
现代文：天子给人恩惠，不在于给予，在于消除他们共同的忧患，按他们所需利益来给他们好处。
English: The grace of the Son of God does not consist in giving to people, but in eliminating their common sorrows and giving them benefits according to their needs.

古文：今艰危之后，易于为惠，因其欲安而慰抚之，则忠诚亲上之心，当益加于前日。
现代文：如今艰危之后，有必要施加恩惠，根据他们想要安定而慰抚他们，那么忠诚亲近皇上之心意，应当比前日更浓。
English: Now, after the peril, it is necessary to grant favors, to comfort them according to their desire for stability, so that loyalty to the Emperor's heart should be stronger than the day before.

古文：臣愿宽其赋役，信其号令，凡事不便者一切停罢。
现代文：我希望皇上放宽赋役，对发出的号令讲信用，凡事不利的一切停罢。
English: I hope that the emperor will relax the enlistment, give credit to the issued orders, and stop everything that is unfavorable.

古文：时遣重臣按行郡县，延见耆老，问其疾苦，选廉正，黜贪残，拯贫穷，恤孤独，劳来还定，则效忠徇义，无有二志矣。
现代文：常派重臣巡行郡县，邀请长者，问他们的疾苦，选拔廉正，罢黜贪婪，拯救贫穷，救济孤独，勤勉以得到安定，那么他们就会效忠徇义，没有二志了。
English: Regularly send chief ministers to patrol counties and counties, invite elders, ask them about their sufferings, select integrity, banish greed, save poverty, relieve loneliness, and work hard to get stability, then they will be loyal to righteousness and have no second thoughts.

古文：故曰安民可与行义，危民易与为乱，惟陛下留神。
现代文：所以说，安民可帮助行义，危民容易引发叛乱，请皇上留心。
English: Therefore, it is said that safe people can help to do justice, and dangerous people are likely to cause rebellion. Please pay attention to the emperor.

古文：三曰，广收人材以备国用。
现代文： 三曰：广收人才以备用。
English: On the third day: recruit talent from all over the country as a backup.

古文：备岁寒者必求貂狐，适长途者必畜骐骥。
现代文：准备御寒的人必求貂狐，到远处去的人一定要养骐骥。
English: Those who are preparing for the cold weather must ask for a fox, and those who go far away must raise a badger.

古文：河南、陕西，车驾临幸，当有以大慰士民之心。
现代文：河南、陕西皇上亲临，应当有用来大慰士民之心的作用。
English: The Emperor's personal visit to Henan and Shaanxi should have the effect of greatly comforting the hearts of the people.

古文：其有操行为民望者，稍擢用之，平居可以励风俗，缓急可以备驱策。
现代文：其中有操行被民敬仰的，稍提拔任用，日常可以劝勉风俗，缓急可以备有驱敌之策。
English: Among them, there are those who are respected by the people, slightly promoted and appointed, daily customs can be exhorted, and strategies for driving out enemies can be prepared in advance.

古文：昭示新恩，易民观听，阴系天下之心也。
现代文：昭示新恩，转变百姓的看法，心里想着天下人的想法。
English: Show new grace, change people's views, and think about the thoughts of the world.

古文：四曰，选守令以安百姓。
现代文： 四曰：选拔守令以安百姓。
English: The fourth day: the selection of the guards is to ensure the safety of the people.

古文：郡守、县令，天子所恃以为治，百姓所依以为命者也。
现代文：郡守、县令，天子治理国家所凭借，百姓维护生存所依靠的人。
English: The county governor, the county magistrate, the person on whom the country is governed by the Son of Heaven, and the person on whom the people rely to maintain their existence.

古文：今众庶已弊，官吏庸暗，无安利之才，贪暴昏乱，与奸为市，公有斗粟之赋，私有万钱之求，远近嚣嚣，无所控告。
现代文：如今百姓疲惫，官吏昏庸，无安民利国之才，贪暴昏乱，与奸民做交易，公家给予斗粟之赋，私人占有万钱的贿赂，远近吵闹，没有告发的地方。
English: Nowadays, the people are tired, the officials are dim-witted, there is no one who can keep the people safe and benefit the country, corruption is rampant, deals are made with traitors, the public sector gives the gift of poppies, the private sector takes bribes of tens of thousands of dollars, there is noise from far and near, and there is no place for whistleblowing.

古文：自今非才器过人，政迹卓异者，不可使在此职。
现代文：自今不是才器过人、政绩卓异的，不可以在郡县任职。
English: From now on, those who are not talented and have outstanding political achievements are not allowed to work in counties.

古文：亲勋故旧，虽望隆资高，不可使为长吏。
现代文：亲勋故旧，虽声望高资历深，也不可用为长吏。
English: Relatives of the ancient order, although prestigious and highly qualified, cannot be used as officials.

古文：则贤者喜於殊用，益尽其能，不肖者愧慕而思自励矣。
现代文：那么贤者因为特殊地使用他感到高兴，增尽其能，不贤的人惭愧羡慕而自然受到激励。
English: Then the wise, because of the special use of him, feel happy and increase their abilities, while the unwise are ashamed to admire him and are naturally inspired.

古文：五曰，褒忠义以励臣节。
现代文： 五曰：褒奖忠义以励臣节。
English: The fifth day: Loyalty is rewarded with the Encouragement Day.

古文：忠义之士，奋身效命，力尽城破而不少屈。
现代文：忠义之士，奋身效命，力尽城破也不稍微屈服。
English: Loyal men, fighting for their lives, do their best to break the city and not give in even a little.

古文：事定之后，有司略不加省，弃职者顾以恩贷，死事者反不见录，天下何所慕惮，而不为自安之计邪？
现代文：事定之后，有司忽略不加察看，弃职的用恩惠宽免给予关心，而为事死节的人反而不见记载，天下还有什么用来仰慕畏惧，而不为自己安全打算的人呢？
English: After the event, some magistrates ignored and did not inspect, and those who abandoned their duties were concerned with grace and mercy, but those who died for the cause were not recorded. What else is there in the world to admire and fear, but those who do not plan for their own safety?

古文：使为臣者皆知杀身之无益，临难可以苟免，甚非国家之利也。
现代文：让做臣子的都知道死节没有好处，遇到危险可以苟且求全，实在不是国家的利益。
English: It is not in the interest of the country to let the courtiers know that there is no benefit in dying, and that they can be meticulous in the face of danger.

古文：六曰，务农力本以广蓄积。
现代文： 六曰：从事农业来广蓄积。
English: The sixth day: Engage in agriculture to accumulate wealth.

古文：此最强兵富民之要术，当今之急务也。
现代文：这是最为富国强兵的重要方法，当今最紧急的任务。
English: This is an important method for the richest country and the strongest army, and it is the most urgent task today.

古文：七曰，崇节俭以省财用。
现代文： 七曰：推崇节俭以省财用。
English: The seventh day: promote thrift to save money.

古文：今海内虚耗，田畴荒芜，废奢从俭以纾生民之急，无先于此者。
现代文：现在国内贪乏耗尽，田地荒芜，停止奢侈提倡节俭来延缓养民之急，没有比这先需要做的了。
English: Now that domestic greed is exhausted and fields are barren, there is no need to do more than stop extravagance and promote frugality to delay the urgent need to feed the people.

古文：八曰，去冗食以助军费。
现代文： 八曰：去掉冗食来助军费。
English: The eighth day: to help the military expenses by eliminating unnecessary food.

古文：兵革之后，人物凋丧者十四五，郡县官吏署置如故，甚非审权救弊之道。
现代文：战乱之后，人员死亡十有四五，郡县官吏像往常一样设置，实在不是详查权力挽救弊病的方法。
English: After the war, people died in four out of five cases, and county and prefectural officials were set up as usual. It is really not a way to investigate the power and save the ills.

古文：九曰，修军政以习守战。
现代文： 九曰：整顿军务以熟习守战。
English: The ninth day: the rectification of military affairs with familiar defense.

古文：自古名将料敌制胜，训练士卒，故可使赴汤蹈火，百战不殆。
现代文：自古名将以谋略取胜，训练士卒，故可使赴汤蹈火，百战不殆。
English: Since ancient times, it has been known to win with strategy and train soldiers, so it can go through fire and water and win a hundred battles.

古文：孔子曰： 以不教民战，是谓弃之。 
现代文：孔子说： 用没有经过训练的士兵作战，这叫抛弃他们。 
English: Confucius said, "If you don't teach the people how to fight, you are giving up yourself and handing the country over to others."

古文：兵法曰： 器械不利，以其卒与敌也。
现代文：兵法说 ：兵器不锋利，是把他的士兵送给敌人。
English: The art of war says: the weapon is not sharp, is to give his soldiers to the enemy.

古文：卒不服习，以其将与敌也。
现代文：士兵不反复训练，是把他的将送给敌人。
English: A soldier who does not train repeatedly is giving his generals to the enemy.

古文：将不知兵，以其主与敌也。
现代文：将不知兵，是把他的主送给敌人。
English: If he does not know the soldiers, he is giving his master to the enemy.

古文：主不择将，以其国与敌也。 
现代文：主不选将，是把他的国家送给敌人。 
English: If the Lord does not choose, he is giving his country to the enemy.

古文：可不慎哉。
现代文：怎么能不慎重呢！
English: How can you not be careful!

古文：十曰，修城池以备守御。
现代文： 十曰：整修城池来准备守御。
English: The tenth day: Renovation of the castle pond to prepare for the defense.

古文：保障国家，惟都城与附近数郡耳。
现代文：保障国家，只有都城和附近数郡罢了。
English: Only the capital and a few nearby counties are safe.

古文：北地不守，是无河朔矣，黄河岂足恃哉。
现代文：北方之地失守，这就没有河朔一带了，黄河怎么能够足以凭借呢。 
English: If the northern land is lost, there will be no Hexuo area, how can the Yellow River be enough to rely on?

古文：书奏，宣宗异焉。
现代文：书奏上去，宣宗感到惊奇。
English: When the calligraphy began to play, Xuan Zong was surprised.

古文：复试之曰： 河北城邑，何术可保？
现代文：再次考试问他说： 河北城镇，什么方法可以保住？
English: Once again, the exam asked him: Hebei towns, what methods can be used to keep them?

古文：兵民杂居，何道可和？
现代文：兵民杂乱居住，什么方法可以使他们和睦？
English: The soldiers and the people live in disorder. How can they be reconciled?

古文：钞法如何而通？
现代文：纸币制度如何贯彻？
English: How will the banknote system be implemented?

古文：物价如何而平？ 
现代文：物价怎样才能平稳？ 
English: How can prices be stabilized?

古文：炳对大略以审择守将则城邑固，兵不侵民则兵民和，敛散相权则钞法通，劝农薄赋则物价平。
现代文：刘炳的回答大略是慎重选择守将那么城邑可以巩固，兵不侵扰百姓就可以使兵民和睦相处，聚集分散，相互平衡那么纸币制度可以通行，奖励农业减少赋税那么物价可以平稳。
English: Liu Wei's answer was roughly: carefully choose the commander-in-chief, so that the cities and towns can be consolidated; soldiers do not disturb the people, so that the soldiers and people can live in harmony, gather and disperse; balance each other, so that the banknote system can pass; reward agriculture, reduce taxes, so that prices can be stable.

古文：宣宗虽异其言，而不能用，但补御史台令史而已。
现代文：宣宗虽对他说的感到惊异，但是不能采用，只给他补个御史台令史罢了。
English: Although Xuanzong was surprised by what he said, he couldn't accept it and just gave him a copy of the imperial edict.

古文：论曰：刘炳可谓能言之士矣。
现代文：评论说：刘炳可谓是会说的人。
English: Comment: Liu Ye can be said to be a person who can speak.

古文：宣宗召试既不失对，而以一台令史赏之，足以倡士气乎？
现代文：宣宗召见廷试而他没有言辞失当，仅拿个台令史来奖赏他，这足够提高士气吗？
English: Is it enough to boost morale that he was summoned to the imperial court for a trial, and he did not say anything improper, and he was rewarded with only one record?

古文：术虎高琪，或作高乞，西北路猛安人。
现代文：术虎高琪，或写成高乞，是西北路猛安人。
English: Zhugu Gaoqi, or written as 高乞, is a person from Meng'an, Northwest Road.

古文：大定二十七年充护卫，转十人长，出职河间都总管判官，召为武卫军钤辖，迁宿直将军，除建州刺史，改同知监洮府事。
现代文：大定二十七年担任护卫，转为十人长，出任河间都总管判官，又召回任武卫军钤辖，升为宿直将军，授为建州刺史，改任同知临洮府事。
English: He served as an escort for 27 years, was promoted to the chief of ten, served as the judge of the chief administrator of the capital of Kawama, was recalled to be in charge of the military guard, was promoted to the general of the post, was awarded the history of the founding of the state, and was reassigned to the government affairs of Linyi.

古文：泰和六年，伐宋，与彰化军节度副使把回海备巩州诸镇，宋兵万余自巩州辘轳岭入，高琪奋击破之，赐银百两、重彩十端。
现代文：泰和六年，讨伐宋国，他和彰化军节度副使把回海防备巩州诸镇。宋军一万多人从巩州辘轳岭入侵，高琪奋力迎击，打败了他们，受赐银百两，各色彩锦十端。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he and the vice-envoy of the Changhua Military Jiedu returned to the sea to defend the towns of Gongzhou. More than ten thousand Song troops invaded from Gongzhou Lingling, Gao Qi fought hard and defeated them, and was given one hundred and two silver coins, each with ten colors.

古文：青宜可内附，诏知府事石抹仲温与高琪俱出界，与青宜可合兵进取。
现代文：青宜可前来归降，诏令知府事石抹仲温和术虎高琪一同出界，和青宜可合兵继续进攻。
English: Qingyi could come and surrender, and the magistrate ordered the governor of the prefectural capital, Mazu Zhongwen, and the magistrate, Hu Gaoqi, to leave the country together. Together with Qingyi, they could continue the attack.

古文：诏高琪曰： 汝年尚少，近闻与宋人力战奋勇，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：皇帝对术虎高琪说 ：你年纪还轻，近来听说在和宋军作战时奋力勇敢，我很高兴。
English: The emperor said to Zhugu Gaoqi, "You are still young. Recently, I heard that you fought bravely against the Song army. I am very happy."

古文：今与仲温同行出界，如其成功，高爵厚禄，朕不吝也。 
现代文：如今和仲温一起出境攻打，如果成功，高爵厚禄，我是不会吝惜的。 
English: Now, I will go abroad with Zhong Wen to attack. If I succeed, I will not begrudge the high rank and rich reward.

古文：诏封吴曦为蜀国王，高琪为封册使。
现代文：朝廷下诏封吴曦为蜀国国王，派高琪为封册使。
English: The imperial court anointed Wu Xi as the king of Shu and sent Gao Qi as the envoy.

古文：诏戒谕曰： 卿读书解事，蜀人亦识威名，勿以财贿动心，失大国体。
现代文：皇帝告诫他说 ：卿喜欢读书又懂事，蜀人也听知你的盛名，不要因财物而动心，有失国家大体。
English: The emperor admonished him, "Your highness likes to read and is knowledgeable. The people of Shuxi have also heard of your great name. Don't let your heart be moved by wealth, or you will lose the country as a whole."

古文：如或随去奉职有违礼生事，卿与乔宇体察以闻。 
现代文：如果跟从的人员有违礼生事的，你和乔宇严加观察回来上报朝廷。 
English: If there is a violation of etiquette by any of your followers, you and Qiao Yu should strictly observe and report to the imperial court.

古文：使还，加都统，号平南虎威将军。
现代文：出使回京，加封为都统，号称平南虎威将军。
English: He was sent back to Beijing and given the title of "Tutong," and became known as General Pingnan Huwei.

古文：宋安丙遣李孝义率步骑三万攻秦州，先以万人围皂角堡，高琪赴之。
现代文：宋将安丙派李孝义率领三万步骑兵攻打秦州，他先用一万人包围皂角堡，高琪领兵救援。
English: Song dispatched Li Xiaoyi to lead 30,000 infantry and cavalry to attack Qinzhou. He first surrounded Soap Cape Fort with 10,000 men, and Gao Qi led the rescue.

古文：宋兵列阵山谷，以武车为左右翼，伏弩其下来逆战。
现代文：宋军在山谷列下阵势，以战车为左右翼，设下弓弩前来迎战。
English: The Song army lined up in the valley, with chariots as the left and right wings, and set the bow and arrow to meet the battle.

古文：既合，宋兵阳却。
现代文：两军交战后，宋军假装败退。
English: After the two armies clashed, the Song Army pretended to retreat.

古文：高琪军见宋兵伏不得前，退整阵，宋兵复来。
现代文：高琪见宋军设有埋伏不能前进，便让军队后退以整顿阵容，宋兵又来战。
English: Gao Qi saw that the Song Army had an ambush and could not advance, so he let the army retreat to rectify the lineup, and the Song soldiers came to fight again.

古文：凡五战，宋兵益坚，不可以得志。
现代文：先后打了五仗，宋军越加坚固，难以取胜。
English: Five battles were fought successively, and the Song Army became more and more solid, and it was difficult to win.

古文：高琪分骑为二，出者战则止者俟，止者出则战者还，还者复出以更。
现代文：高琪便将军队分为两队，一队出战一队休息，那部分战回这部分又出去接战，相互轮换。
English: Gao Qi then divided the army into two teams, one team went out to fight and one team rested, and that part fought back and this part went out to fight and rotated with each other.

古文：久之，遣蒲察桃思剌潜兵上山，自山驰下合击，大破宋兵，斩首四千级，生擒数百人，李孝义乃解围去。
现代文：过了许久，他又派蒲察桃思剌悄悄带一部分军队上了山，从山上居高临下，前后夹击，大败宋军，斩首四千级，活捉几百人，李孝义这才解围而去。
English: After a long time, he sent Pu Chaotian to quietly lead a part of the army up the mountain. From the mountain, he stood tall, clamped down, defeated the Song Army, beheaded four thousand, and captured several hundred people alive. Li Xiaoyi was able to break the siege and leave.

古文：宋兵三千致马连寨以窥湫池，遣夹谷福寿击走之，斩七百余级。
现代文：宋兵三千人占领马连寨准备进攻湫池，高琪派夹谷福寿打败了他们，斩首七百余级。
English: Three thousand Song soldiers occupied Malian Village in preparation for the attack on Dianchi. Gao Qi's faction, Jigoku Fushou, defeated them, beheading more than seven hundred.

古文：大安三年，累官泰州刺史，以飐军三千屯通玄门外。
现代文：大安三年，累官至泰州刺史，带领礣军驻守在通玄门外。
English: In the third year of the Taian era, he went to Taizhou to make history, leading the Han army stationed outside the Tongyuan Gate.

古文：未几，升缙山县为镇州，以高琪为防御使，权元帅右都监，所部飐军赏赉有差。
现代文：不久，缙山县升格为镇州，任命高琪为防御使，代理元帅右都监，所领的礣军也分别各有赏赐。
English: Soon, Lushan County was upgraded to a town-state, Gao Qi was appointed as defense envoy, and the acting marshal was appointed as the procurator of the Right Capital. The Lushan troops led by Gao Qi were also rewarded.

古文：至宁元年八月，尚书左丞完颜纲将兵十万行省于缙山，败绩。
现代文：至宁元年八月，尚书左丞完颜纲领兵十万在缙山设置行省，兵败。
English: In August of the first year of the Ning Dynasty, Shang Shuzo and his subordinates set up a garrison of 100,000 soldiers in Lushan, but were defeated.

古文：贞祐初，迁元帅右监军。
现代文：贞祐初年，高琪晋升为元帅右监军。
English: In the first year of Zhenyu, Gao Qi was promoted to Marshal of the Right Supervision Army.

古文：闰月，诏高琪曰： 闻军事皆中覆，得无失机会乎？
现代文：闰月，皇帝对高琪说： 听说有关军中事务都要等待朝廷答复才办，这样能不失去机会吗？
English: In the intercalary month, the emperor said to Gao Qi: I have heard that all matters related to the military must wait for the reply from the imperial court before they can be handled, so can we not lose the opportunity?

古文：自今当即行之，朕但责成功耳。 
现代文：从今以后应当当机立断，我只是要求你们取得成功罢了！ 
English: From now on, you should be decisive, I just ask you to succeed!

古文：是月，被诏自镇州移军守御中都迤南，次良乡不得前，乃还中都。
现代文：当月，皇帝下诏将高琪的军队从镇州调回镇守中都南面，到达良乡时难以前进，便返回中都。
English: In the same month, the emperor issued an edict to transfer Gao Qi's army from Zhenzhou back to the south of the town of Zhongdu. When they reached Liangxiang, it was difficult to advance, so they returned to Zhongdu.

古文：每出战辄败，纥石烈执中戒之曰： 汝连败矣，若再不胜，当以军法从事。 
现代文：他每次出战都失败，纥石烈执中警告他说： 你连吃败仗，如再战不胜，当以军法从事。 
English: He failed every time he went to war, and in the middle of a fierce battle, Zou Shi warned him: "If you are defeated in battle, if you are not able to win again, you should practice military law."

古文：及出，果败，高琪惧诛。
现代文：再出战果然又败。高琪害怕被杀。
English: In the rematch, she lost again. Gao Qi was afraid of being killed.

古文：十月辛亥，高琪自军中入，遂以兵围执中第，杀执中，持其首诣阙待罪。
现代文：十月十五日，高琪带军队入京，进而包围了纥石烈执中的家，杀了执中，提着他的首级到朝廷请罪。
English: On October 15th, Gao Qi led an army into Beijing, and then surrounded the home of Zou Shi's son, Li Xizhong, killed him, and brought his head to the imperial court to plead guilty.

古文：宣宗赦之，以为左副元帅，一行将士迁赏有差。
现代文：金宣宗赦免了他，并任命他为左副元帅，一起的将士都各有封赏不等。
English: Kim Xuan Zong pardoned him and appointed him vice marshal of the left. All of the generals received rewards.

古文：丙寅，诏曰： 胡沙虎畜无君之心，形迹露见，不可尽言。
现代文：三十日，下诏说： 胡沙虎蓄谋叛乱，罪行显露，难以尽言。
English: On the 30th, the next imperial edict said: "Husha Tigers plotted rebellion, their crimes were revealed, it is difficult to say.

古文：武卫副使提点近侍局庆山奴、近侍局使斜烈、直长撒合辇累曾陈奏，方慎图之。
现代文：武卫副使提点近侍局庆山奴、近侍局使斜烈、直长撒合辇曾多次陈奏，正打算加以除去。
English: Wuwei's deputy envoy, Qing Shannu of the close attendant bureau, and the close attendant bureau's envoy, oblique and straight, have been played many times, and they are planning to remove them.

古文：斜烈漏此意于按察判官胡鲁，胡鲁以告翰林待制讹出，讹出达于高琪，今月十五日将胡沙虎戮讫。
现代文：斜烈将这个意图泄漏给按察判官胡鲁，胡鲁告诉了翰林待制讹出，讹出告诉了高琪，本月十五日将胡沙虎杀了。
English: He obliquely divulged this intention to the investigating judge, Huru. Huru told Hanlin to wait for the execution, Huru told Gao Qi to wait for the execution, and on the 15th day of this month, he killed Husa Tiger.

古文：惟兹臣庶将恐有疑，肆降札书，不匿厥旨。 
现代文：因为这件事怕臣民恐惧猜疑，故特广下书札，不隐匿内情。 
English: Because of this matter, the subjects are afraid of fear and suspicion, so the book is very broad and does not hide the inside story.

古文：论者谓高琪专杀，故降此诏。
现代文：议论者认为是术虎高琪擅自杀了胡沙虎，所以才发布这份诏书。
English: Commentators believe that the magic tiger Gao Qi committed suicide without permission, and that is why this edict was issued.

古文：顷之，拜平章政事。
现代文：不久，任命术虎高琪为平章政事。
English: Soon after, Zhugu Gaoqi was appointed as the political leader of Pingzhang.

古文：宣宗论马政，顾高琪曰： 往岁市马西夏，今肯市否？ 
现代文：金宣宗在论及马政时，对高琪说： 往年到西夏买马，现在西夏还肯卖吗？ 
English: When talking about horse politics, Kim Sunjong said to Gao Qi: In the past, you bought horses in Xixia. Is Xixia still willing to sell?

古文：对曰： 木波畜马甚多，市之可得，括缘边部落马，亦不少矣。 
现代文：高琪回答说： 木波养了许多马，可以买到，收取边境部落的马匹，数量也不少了。 
English: Gao Qi replied, "Mubo keeps a lot of horses. You can buy and collect horses from the border tribes, and there are quite a few.

古文：宣宗曰： 尽括边马，缓急如之何？ 
现代文：宣宗说： 把边境的马匹都收来，遇到危急时怎么办？ 
English: Xuan Zong said: Bring back all the horses at the border. What should we do in an emergency?

古文：阅三日，复奏曰： 河南镇防二十余军，计可得精骑二万，缓急亦足用。 
现代文：过了三天，高琪又上奏说： 河南各镇防备部队有二十多军，估计可以得到精锐骑兵二万，这样危急时也就够用了。 
English: Three days later, Gao Qi made another report: There are more than twenty armies in the town defense forces in Henan, and it is estimated that twenty thousand elite cavalry can be obtained, so it is enough in times of crisis.

古文：宣宗曰： 马虽多，养之有法，习之有时，详谕所司令加意也。 
现代文：宣宗说： 马匹虽多，饲养有一定方法，练习也有固定时间，详告各有关方面让他们多加留心。 
English: Xuanzong said: Although there are many horses, there is a certain way to raise them, and there is a fixed time for practice. Let all relevant parties know in detail so that they can pay more attention.

古文：贞祐二年十一月，宣宗问高琪曰： 所造军器往往不可用，此谁之罪也？ 
现代文：贞祐二年十一月，宣宗问高琪说： 所制造的兵器往往不能用，这是谁的罪责？ 
English: In November of the second year of Zhengyu, Xuanzong asked Gao Qi, "The weapons you make often cannot be used. Who is to blame for this?

古文：对曰： 军器美恶在兵部，材物则户部，工匠则工部。 
现代文：回答说 ：军器的好坏在于兵部，材料物资则属户部，工匠则归工部。 
English: He replied: The quality of military equipment depends on the military department, materials belong to the household department, and craftsmen belong to the industrial department.

古文：宣宗曰： 治之！且将败事。 
现代文：宣宗说： 要治罪，否则将会坏了大事。 
English: Xuan Zong said, "Crime must be punished, otherwise it will ruin the great event."

古文：宣宗问杨安儿事，高琪对曰： 贼方据险，臣令主将以石墙围之，势不得出，擒在旦夕矣。 
现代文：宣宗问杨安儿的事，高琪回答说： 贼人据险固守，我让主将用石墙将他围在里面，这样就跑不出来，早晚可以活捉他。 
English: When Xuan Zong asked about Yang An'er, Gao Qi replied, "A thief clings to life. I have asked the Lord to encircle him with a stone wall, so that he cannot escape. Sooner or later, he can be captured alive."

古文：宣宗曰： 可以急攻，或力战突围，我师必有伤者。 
现代文：宣宗说： 可以加急进攻。如果让敌人力战突围，我军必有伤亡。 
English: Xuanzong said, "We can speed up the attack. If we allow the enemy to break out of the encirclement, our army will certainly suffer casualties."

古文：应奉翰林文字完颜素兰自中都议军事还，上书求见，乞屏左右。
现代文：应奉翰林文字完颜素兰从中都商议军事回京，上书求见皇帝，并请求屏去左右随从。
English: Feng Hanlin finished writing, and Yan Xulan returned to Beijing from the capital to discuss military affairs. He sent a letter to the emperor, asking him to follow him.

古文：故事，有奏密事辄屏左右。
现代文：过去有惯例，上奏秘密要事时就让左右退下。
English: In the past, it was customary to have the left and right players step back when it was time to play the secret chord.

古文：先是，太府监丞游茂以高琪威权太重，中外畏之，常以为忧，因入见，屏人密奏，请裁抑之。
现代文：前些时候，太府监丞游茂因为高琪威权过大，朝内外都害怕，他常因此感到忧虑，便入见皇帝，屏去左右密奏，请皇帝加以抑制。
English: Some time ago, because Gao Qi's authority was too great, both inside and outside the court were afraid. He was often worried about this, so he went to see the emperor, and asked the emperor to restrain Gao Qi.

古文：宣宗曰： 既委任之，权安得不重？ 
现代文：宣宗说： 既然已经委任了他，权力怎么会不重？ 
English: Xuan Zong said: Since he has been appointed, how can the power not be heavy?

古文：茂退不自安，复欲结高琪，诣其第上书曰： 宰相自有体，岂可以此生人主之疑，招天下之议。 
现代文：游茂回去以后心中不安，就又想交结术虎高琪，便跑到他家里上书说： 宰相自有制度，怎么能够因此而招致国君的猜疑，使天下人在背后议论。 
English: After Youmao went back, he was uneasy in his heart and wanted to make contact with the magical tiger Gaoqi, so he ran to his home and wrote a letter saying: How can the prime minister's own system cause the suspicion of the sovereign and make the world talk about it behind his back?

古文：恐高琪不相信，复曰： 茂尝间见主上，实恶相公权重。
现代文：他还怕高琪不相信，又说： 我曾经私下见了皇上，他确实厌恶相公权力过重。
English: He was also afraid that Gao Qi wouldn't believe him, and said, "I once met the emperor in private, and he really dislikes the fact that the emperor has too much power.

古文：相公若能用茂，当使上不疑，而下无所议。 
现代文：相公如能任用我的话，我一定能够使皇上不怀疑，下面也没有人加以议论。 
English: If you can use my words, I will definitely be able to make the emperor not doubt, and no one will discuss it below.

古文：高琪闻茂尝请间屏人奏事，疑之，乃具以闻。
现代文：高琪听说游茂曾经请求屏去左右向皇帝奏事，心中怀疑，便将这事奏告皇帝。
English: When Gao Qi heard that Youmao had asked Ping to report to the emperor, he was suspicious and reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：游茂论死，诏免死，杖一百，除名。
现代文：游茂论罪应死，下诏免去死刑，责打一百杖，除名。
English: Youmao argued that the crime should be punished by death, but was exempted from the death penalty, beaten with a hundred canes, and expelled from the party.

古文：自是凡屏人奏事，必令近臣一人侍立。
现代文：从此凡是屏退左右奏事的，一定让一位近臣侍立于旁。
English: From then on, whenever there was a matter to be reported, a close vassal had to be present.

古文：及素兰请密，召至近侍局，给笔札，使书所欲言。
现代文：当完颜素兰请求密奏皇帝时，就将他召到近侍局，给他纸笔，让他把想说的话都写在上面。
English: When Yan Xulan finished his request for the Emperor's secret, he called him to the aide-de-camp's office, gave him a pen and paper, and asked him to write down what he wanted to say.

古文：少顷，宣宗御便殿见之，惟留近侍局直长赵和和侍立。
现代文：过了一会儿，宣宗在便殿召见他，只留近侍局直长赵和和在旁边侍立。
English: After a while, Emperor Xuanzong summoned him to the throne room, leaving only Zhao He, the immediate chief of the Privy Council, to stand next to him.

古文：素兰奏曰： 日者元帅府议削伯德文哥兵权，朝廷乃诏领义军。
现代文：完颜素兰上奏说： 近日，元帅府商议要削去伯德文哥的兵权，朝廷便下诏他统领义军。
English: "Recently, the Marshal's Office has been discussing the removal of the military power of Bao Dewenge, and the court has ordered him to lead the rebel army.

古文：改除之命拒而不受，元帅府方欲讨捕，朝廷复赦之，且不令隶元帅府。
现代文：可是，他不肯接受改任的命令，元帅府已准备讨伐和逮捕他，朝廷却又下诏赦免了他，而且不让他的军队隶属于元帅府。
English: However, he refused to accept the order to change his post, the marshal's office was ready to attack and arrest him, but the court pardoned him and did not allow his army to be subordinated to the marshal's office.

古文：不知谁为陛下画此计者，臣自外风闻皆出平章高琪。 
现代文：不知是谁替陛下出的计谋，我在外面听到传闻都说出自平章高琪。 
English: I don't know who came up with the scheme on behalf of His Majesty, but I've heard rumours outside that it came from Pingzhang Gaoqi.

古文：宣宗曰： 汝何以知此事出于高琪？ 
现代文：宣宗说： 你怎么知道这事出自高琪？ 
English: Xuan Zong said: How do you know that this is from Gao Qi?

古文：素兰曰： 臣见文哥与永清副提控刘温牒云，差人张希韩至自南京，道副枢平章处分，已奏令文哥隶大名行省，毋遵中都帅府约束。
现代文：素兰说 ：臣下见到伯德文哥送给永清副提控刘温的文书上说，差人张希韩从南京回来，说是副枢平章处理这事，已上奏让伯德文哥隶属大名行省，不必听从中都帅府的管束。
English: Sulan said, "When our subjects saw the document sent by Baode Wenge to Liu Wen, the Yongqing Deputy Prosecuting Magistrate, it said that the police officer Zhang Xihan had returned from Nanjing and said that the deputy magistrate was handling the matter, and that it had been reported that Baode Wenge was subordinate to the province of Daming, and did not have to listen to the control of the central government.

古文：温即具言于帅府。
现代文：刘温便将此事告知帅府。
English: Liu Wen then reported the matter to Shuai Prefecture.

古文：然则文哥与高琪计结，明矣。 
现代文：由此可见，术虎高琪和伯德文哥相互勾结，此事已清楚了。 
English: From this, it can be seen that Zhihu Gaoqi and Bo Dewenge have colluded with each other, and the matter has become clear.

古文：上颔之。
现代文：皇帝点了点头。
English: Emperor Xuanzong did not say a word.

古文：素兰复奏曰： 高琪本无勋望，向以畏死擅杀胡沙虎，计出于无聊耳。
现代文：完颜素兰又上奏说 ：高琪原来没有多少功劳和声望，以前是因为怕死而擅自杀了胡沙虎，这是无可奈何才采取的办法。
English: Guan Yan and Suran went on to say: Gao Qi originally did not have much merit and reputation. Previously, because he was afraid of death, he killed himself without permission. This was a method that had to be taken.

古文：妒贤能，树党与，窃弄威权，自作威福。
现代文：他嫉忌贤能，私结党羽，窃夺威权，作威作福。
English: He envies the virtuous, forms cliques, usurps authority, and uses his power for personal gain.

古文：去岁，都下书生樊知一诣高琪，言飐军不可信，恐生乱。
现代文：去年，京都有位书生叫樊知一的去见术虎高琪，对他说礣军不可信任，只怕会发生变乱。
English: Last year, a student in Beijing named Zou Zhiyong went to see Zhihu Gaoqi and told him that the Yan army could not be trusted and that there would be chaos.

古文：高琪以刀杖决杀之，自是无复敢言军国利害者。
现代文：高琪用刀杖把他杀掉了，从此没有人敢再进言军国大事了。
English: Gao Qi killed him with a cane, and from then on, no one dared to talk about the military affairs.

古文：使其党移剌塔不也为武宁军节度使，招飐军，已而无功，复以为武卫军使。
现代文：他又派同党移剌塔不也任武宁军节度使，招抚礣军，但徒劳而无功，又任命他当了武卫军使。
English: He also sent a party member to move the watchtower and serve as the military envoy of the Wu Ning army to entice the Shan army, but in vain, and appointed him as the military envoy of the armed forces.

古文：以臣观之，此贼灭乱纪纲，戕害忠良，实有不欲国家平治之意。
现代文：依臣所见，这个贼臣灭乱朝廷纲纪，残杀忠良，实在有不让国家安宁和得到治理的心思。
English: As far as his subordinates could see, this rogue vassal, who destroyed the discipline of the imperial court and killed loyal officials, was determined to prevent the country from being pacified and governed.

古文：惟陛下断然行之，社稷之福也。 
现代文：望陛下果断处置，才是社稷的福祉啊！ 
English: The welfare of society depends on His Majesty's decisive action!

古文：宣宗曰： 朕徐思之。 
现代文：宣宗说： 让我慢慢考虑。 
English: Xuanzong said: Let me think about it slowly.

古文：素兰出，复戒曰： 慎无泄也。 
现代文：完颜素兰离开时，宣宗又告诫他说 ：千万不可泄漏。 
English: When Yan Xulan left, Xuan Zong also warned him: "You must not leak anything."

古文：四年十月，大元大兵取潼关，次嵩、汝间，待阙台院令史高嶷上书曰： 向者河朔败绩，朝廷不时出应，此失机会一也。
现代文：四年十月，大元的大军攻下了潼关，到达嵩、汝之间，待阙台院令史高嶷上书说 ：原来在河朔失败时，朝廷没有及时出兵应战，这是首次失去机会。
English: In October of the fourth year, the great army of the Great Yuan conquered Shaoguan, and arrived between Song and You, and waited for the Xingtai Court to order Shi Gaozhen to write a letter saying: Originally, when the defeat in Hexuo, the imperial court did not send troops in time to fight, this was the first lost opportunity.

古文：及深入吾境，都城精兵无虑数十万，若效命一战，必无今日之忧，此失机会二也。
现代文：当深入我国境内时，都城中精兵不下数十万人，如果尽力为国作战，必定没有今日之忧，这是第二次失去了机会。
English: When deep into our country's territory, hundreds of thousands of elite soldiers in the capital will rise up. If you do your best to fight for the country, you will certainly not have today's worries. This is the second lost opportunity.

古文：既退之后，不议追袭，此失机会三也。
现代文：退却之后，又不商议追击敌人，这是失去了第三次时机了。
English: This is the third time that we have lost the opportunity to pursue the enemy after retreating without consultation.

古文：今已度关，不亟进御，患益深矣。
现代文：如今敌人已越过关隘，不加紧进行防御，祸患更深重。
English: Now that the enemy has crossed the narrow pass, if we do not step up our defense, the disaster will be even more serious.

古文：乞命平章政事高琪为帅，以厌众心。 
现代文：请命令平章政事高琪当元帅，以满足大家的愿望。 
English: Please order Pingzhang Zhengji Gaoqi to be a marshal to meet everyone's wishes.

古文：不报。
现代文：上书后没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：御史台言： 兵逾潼关、崤、渑，深入重地，近抵西郊。
现代文：御史台说 ：敌军越过潼关和崤关、渑池，深入重地，已近至京城西郊。
English: Goshidai said: The enemy army has crossed Shouguan, Shouguan, and Shuchi, and has penetrated deep into the heartland, and is now close to the western suburbs of Beijing.

古文：彼知京师屯宿重兵，不复叩城索战，但以游骑遮绝道路，而别兵攻击州县，是亦困京师之渐也。
现代文：敌人知道京城驻有重兵，因此并不攻城讨战，只是用游击的骑兵部队阻断交通要道，另派军队攻打各州县，这也是逐步围困京城的办法。
English: The enemy knew that there were heavy troops stationed in the capital, so they did not attack the city to fight. They just used the guerrilla cavalry troops to block the traffic routes, and sent other troops to attack the states and counties. This was also a method of gradually besieging the capital.

古文：若专以城守为事，中都之危又将见于今日，况公私蓄积视中都百不及一，此臣等所为寒心也。
现代文：如果只是专心防守京城，中都危险的情景又将见于今日。况且如今公家和私人的积蓄财物不及中都的百分之一，这是臣等感到寒心的事。
English: If they had just concentrated on defending the capital, the dangerous situation in the capital would still exist today. Moreover, public and private savings and assets are now less than one percent of the capital, which is a matter of chilling concern for the ministers.

古文：不攻京城而纵其别攻州县，是犹火在腹心，拨置于手足之上，均一身也，愿陛下察之。
现代文：敌人不攻京城而另外派部队攻打州县，这是如同要在心腹中放火，先放在手足之上，实际上都是身体一部分，请陛下认真细察。
English: If the enemy does not attack the capital but sends another force to attack the prefectures, it is like setting fire to your heart and placing it on your hands and feet first. In fact, they are all part of your body. Your Majesty, please take a close look.

古文：请以陕西兵扼拒潼关，与右副元帅蒲察阿里不孙为掎角之势，选在京勇敢之将十数人，各付精兵数千，随宜伺察，且战且守，复谕河北，亦以此待之。 
现代文：请将陕西部队扼守潼关，跟右副元帅蒲察阿里不孙形成掎角之势，选派在京都的勇将十几人，让他们各带领几千精兵，随机作战，边战边守，同时下令河北部队，也以这种办法对付敌人。 
English: Please keep the Shaanxi troops close to Shaoguan, form a corner with the Right Vice-Marshal Pucha Ali Fusun, select a dozen brave generals in Kyoto, let them each lead a few thousand elite soldiers, fight randomly, fight and defend the border, and at the same time order the Hebei troops to deal with the enemy in this way.

古文：诏付尚书省，高琪奏曰： 台官素不习兵，备御方略，非所知也。 
现代文：皇帝诏令交尚书省。高琪上奏说 ：朝官们平时不懂军事，防备敌人的计谋，不是他们所能知晓的。 
English: Gao Qi said in his report: The imperial officials usually do not understand military affairs, and it is not possible for them to know how to guard against the enemy's schemes.

古文：遂寝。
现代文：于是将这份奏疏搁置下来。
English: We'll leave it at that.

古文：高琪止欲以重兵屯驻南京以自固，州郡残破不复恤也。
现代文：高琪只想留下重兵防守南京，使之稳固些，州县被攻破，他并不心疼。
English: Gao Qi only wanted to leave heavy troops to defend Nanjing and make it more stable. He was not distressed when the prefectures were breached.

古文：宣宗惑之，计行言听，终以自毙。
现代文：宣宗被他所迷惑，对之言听计从，终于导致自毙。
English: Xuanzong was bewitched by him, listened to his words and followed his schemes, which finally led to his suicide.

古文：未几，进拜尚书右丞相，奏曰： 凡监察有失纠弹者从本法。
现代文：不久，升任术虎高琪为尚书右丞相，他上奏说： 凡是监察有失于纠正弹劾的请遵从本法。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Zhugu Gaoqi for Shang Shuxu, Minister of the Right, and he made a report saying: If the supervision fails to correct the impeachment, please comply with this law.

古文：若人使入国，私通言语，说知本国事情，宿卫、近侍官、承应人出入亲王、公主、宰执之家，灾伤阙食，体究不实，致伤人命，转运军储，而有私载，及考试举人关防不严者，并的杖。
现代文：如果使者入国以后，私通言语，告知本国事情的，或宿卫、近侍官员、承应人出入于亲王、公主、宰执重臣家里的，因灾荒受伤害而缺少食物，体察情况不实，致伤亡人命的，转运军储物资，却装载私货的，以及对参加考试的举人关隘检查不严的，一并给予杖责。
English: If, after an envoy enters the country, he or she engages in lewd talk and tells people about the country, or if a palace guard, an attendant official, or an undertaker enters or leaves the house of a prince, princess, or a senior vassal, or if he or she is injured by a natural disaster and is short of food, or if he or she inspects the situation inaccurately and causes death or injury, or if he or she transports military supplies but loads them with stolen goods, or if he or she does not strictly check the qualifications of those taking the examination, he or she will be given the cane.

古文：在京犯至两次者，台官减监察一等论赎，余止坐专差者。
现代文：在京城连犯两次的，朝官降为监察一等以抵罪，其余的只由专差坐罪。
English: In the case of two consecutive offenses in Beijing, the court official is reduced to a first-class inspector to atone for the offense, and the rest are only punished by special dispatch.

古文：任满日议定升降。若任内有漏察之事应的决者，依格虽为称职，止从平常，平常者从降罚。 
现代文：任满时确定官员升降，如果在任内有漏于审察的事情应当处置的，依照规定属于称职一类的，只以平常认定；政绩平常的，按照降罚一类处置。 
English: When an official's promotion or demotion is determined at the end of his term of office, if there is a matter that should be dealt with during his term of office that has been omitted from the examination, if it belongs to the category of competence according to the regulations, it will only be determined as usual; if the performance is ordinary, it will be dealt with according to the category of reduced punishment.

古文：制可。
现代文：皇帝认为可行。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：高琪请修南京里城，宣宗曰： 此役一兴，民滋病矣。
现代文：高琪又请求修筑南京的内城。宣宗说 ：这个工程一动工，民众就受累了。
English: Gao Qi also requested the construction of the inner city of Nanjing.Xuan Zong said: Once this project starts, the people will be burdened.

古文：城虽完固，能独安乎？ 
现代文：城池虽然坚固了，能够独自安宁吗？ 
English: Although the castle is solid, can it be left alone?

古文：初，陈言人王世安献攻取盱眙、楚州策，枢密院奏乞以世安为招抚使，选谋勇二三人同往淮南，招红袄贼及淮南宋官。
现代文：起初，有个叫王世安的向朝廷进言，献攻取盱眙和楚州的计策，枢密院上奏请求任命王世安为招抚使，选派有勇有谋的两三个人一起前往淮南，招抚红袄贼徒和淮南的宋朝官员。
English: At the beginning, there was a man named Wang Shian who advised the imperial court on strategies to attack and capture Quzhou and Chuzhou. The Privy Council petitioned for the appointment of Wang Shian as an envoy, and selected two or three brave and resourceful people to go to Huainan together to entice the Red Skull thieves and Song Dynasty officials in Huainan.

古文：宣宗可其奏，诏泗州元帅府遣人同往。
现代文：宣宗同意奏请，诏令泗州的元帅府派人随同前往。
English: Emperor Xuanzong agreed to the request, and ordered the marshal's office in Ganzhou to send someone to accompany him.

古文：兴定元年正月癸未，宋贺正旦使朝辞，宣宗曰： 闻息州透漏宋人，此乃彼界饥民沿淮为乱，宋人何敢犯我？ 
现代文：兴定元年正月初五，赴宋朝祝贺新年的使者上朝辞行，宣宗说： 听说息州那里跑来许多宋人，这是宋国边界上的饥荒民众在沿淮一带作乱，宋人怎么敢来进犯我国？ 
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the first year of Xingding, the envoy who went to the Song Dynasty to congratulate them on the New Year resigned, and Xuan Zong said: I heard that many Song people came to Sichuan. This is a famine on the border of the Song Dynasty. People are making trouble along the Huai River. How dare the Song people come to invade our country?

古文：高琪请伐之以广疆土。
现代文：高琪请求攻打宋国以扩大国土。
English: Gao Qi requested to attack Song to expand the territory.

古文：上曰： 朕但能守祖宗所付足矣，安事外讨。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：我只要能够守住祖宗所交给的土地就够了，何必还要向外攻打。 
English: The emperor said: It is enough for me to be able to hold on to the land given to me by my ancestors. I don't need to attack from the outside.

古文：高琪谢曰： 今雨雪应期，皆圣德所致。
现代文：高琪谢罪说： 如今雨雪如期而至，都是圣德所致。
English: Gao Qixie sin said: Today, the rain and snow have come as scheduled, all of which are caused by holiness.

古文：而能包容小国，天下幸甚，臣言过矣。 
现代文：我国能够包容小国，天下大幸，我所说的过份了。 
English: It is fortunate for the world that our country is able to accommodate small countries. What I have said is excessive.

古文：四月，遣元帅左都监乌古论庆寿、签枢密院事完颜赛不经略南边，寻复下诏罢兵，然自是与宋绝矣。
现代文：四月，派遣元帅左都监乌古论庆寿、签枢密院事完颜赛不南取土地，不久立即下诏罢兵，但是从此和宋断绝往来了。
English: In April, he dispatched Marshal Zuo to supervise the celebration of the birthday of Emperor Wugu and the signing of the Privy Council, and soon after, he immediately issued an edict to disband the army, but from then on, he broke off contact with Song.

古文：兴定元年十月，右司谏许古劝宣宗与宋议和，宣宗命古草牒，以示宰臣，高琪曰： 辞有哀祈之意，自示微弱不足取。
现代文：兴定元年十月，右司谏许古劝告宣宗跟宋国议和，宣宗让许古草拟文书，然后传示宰辅之臣。高琪说 ：文辞中有哀告祈求之意，这是自示衰弱，不能用。 
English: In October of the first year of Xingding, the right-hand man of Xuan Xu Gu advised Xuan Zong to negotiate peace with Song, and Xuan Zong asked Xu Gu to draft a document and then present it to the vassal of Zaisuke. Gao Qi said: "The text is meant to be a lament and a prayer, which is a sign of weakness and cannot be used."

古文：遂寝。
现代文：这件事也就停止了。
English: We'll leave it at that.

古文：集贤院谘议官吕鉴言： 南边屯兵数十万，自唐、邓至寿、泗沿边居民逃亡殆尽，兵士亦多亡者，亦以人烟绝少故也。
现代文：集贤院咨议官吕鉴进言说 ：南部边境屯兵几十万，从唐州、邓州至寿州、泗州，沿边民众逃亡将尽，兵士们也多有逃亡的，这也是人烟稀少的原因。
English: Lv Jian, the advisory officer of the Confucius Institute, said, "There are hundreds of thousands of soldiers stationed at the southern border. From Tangzhou and Dengzhou to Shoushou and Zhangzhou, the people along the border will flee, and many soldiers have fled. This is also the reason for the scarcity of people.

古文：臣尝比监息州榷场，每场所获布帛数千匹、银数百两，大计布帛数万匹，银数千两，兵兴以来俱失之矣。
现代文：臣下曾经任息州榷场监管，每场可以收入布帛几千匹、银子几百两，总计可以收得布帛几万匹、银子几千两，战争以来都失去了。
English: A vassal was once in charge of supervising the brocade market in Xizhou. Each market could bring in several thousand pieces of cloth and several hundred taels of silver. In total, tens of thousands of pieces of cloth and several thousand taels of silver could be collected. All of this has been lost since the war.

古文：夫军民有逃亡之病，而国家失日获之利，非计也。
现代文：这样，军士和民众都遭受逃亡之苦，而国家也失去日常收入，不是良策。
English: In this way, both the officers and the people suffer from the escape, and the country also loses its daily income, which is not a good policy.

古文：今隆冬冱寒，吾骑得骋，当重兵屯境上，驰书谕之，诚为大便。
现代文：如今正是隆冬严寒时节，我军骑兵可以来回驰骋，应当派重兵屯守边境，同时送去书信晓谕，这是有利的时机。
English: Now is the cold season of midwinter, our cavalry can gallop back and forth. It is a favorable time to send heavy troops to guard the border and send letters.

古文：若俟春和，则利在於彼，难与议矣。
现代文：如果等到春暖时，对方就处于有利时机，难以议和了。
English: If you wait until spring, the other side will be in a favorable time, and it will be difficult to negotiate.

古文：昔燕人获赵王，赵遣辩士说之，不许，一牧竖请行，赵王乃还。
现代文：过去燕人抓获了赵王，赵派一位能言善辩的人去说词，燕国不答应，一位牧童请求前往，赵王于是得以放回。
English: In the past, Yan people captured Zhao Wang, Zhao sent a person who could speak well to speak, Yan country did not agree, a shepherd boy asked to go, Zhao Wang was then able to return.

古文：孔子失马，驭卒得之。
现代文：孔子走失的马匹，被车夫抓到了。
English: Confucius's lost horses were caught by the coachman.

古文：人无贵贱，苟中事机，皆可以成功。
现代文：人无论贵贱，只要适合办事，都可以取得成功。
English: No matter who you are, you can succeed as long as you are good at what you do.

古文：臣虽不肖，愿效牧竖驭卒之智，伏望宸断。 
现代文：微臣虽然不肖，愿意效法牧童和车夫之智谋，请圣意裁断。 
English: Although he is not handsome, he is willing to follow the wisdom of the shepherd boy and the coachman and ask the Holy Spirit to decide.

古文：诏问尚书省。
现代文：诏令尚书省提意见。
English: The edict ordered the Ministry of Education and Culture to make a comment.

古文：高琪曰： 鉴狂妄无稽，但其气岸可尚，宜付陕西行省备任使。 
现代文：高琪说： 吕鉴狂妄，无稽之谈，但他的气概还是值得赞赏的，可以让他到陕西行省，以备出使时所用。 
English: Gao Qi said: Lv Jian's arrogance is nonsense, but his spirit is still worthy of appreciation, and he can be sent to Shaanxi Province to prepare for the dispatch.

古文：制可。
现代文：皇帝表示赞同。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：十二月，胥鼎谏伐宋，语在鼎传。
现代文：十二月，胥鼎进谏伐宋的事情，谏语写在《胥鼎传》中。
English: In December, the story of the entry of the Jieding Dynasty into the Song Dynasty was written in "The Legend of the Jieding Dynasty."

古文：高琪曰： 大军已进，无复可议。 
现代文：高琪说： 大军已经进发，不能再复议。 
English: Gao Qi said: The great army has already marched in, and there can be no reconsideration.

古文：遂寝。
现代文：于是又停止了。
English: We'll leave it at that.

古文：二年，胥鼎上书谏曰： 钱谷之冗，非九重所能兼，天子总大纲，责成功而已。 
现代文：二年，胥鼎上书进谏说： 钱粮这种繁杂之事，不是天子所能兼管的。天子总管大政，责成下面办好而已。 
English: In the second year, Gong Ding wrote to Jinyu, saying, "Such a complicated matter as money and grain cannot be managed by the Son of Heaven. The Son of Heaven is in charge of the overall management of the country, and has only ordered the following people to do a good job.

古文：高琪曰： 陛下法上天行健之义，忧勤庶务，夙夜不遑，乃太平之阶也。
现代文：高琪说： 陛下效法于 天行健，君子以自强不息 之意，忧虑和勤于日常事务，日夜不停，这是将会取得太平的步骤啊！
English: Gao Qi said, "Your Majesty follows the example of Tian Xingjian, a gentleman with self-improvement, anxiety and diligence in daily affairs, day and night, this is a step that will achieve peace!

古文：鼎言非是。 
现代文：胥鼎所说的不对。 
English: What Hao Ding said was not right.

古文：宣宗以南北用兵，深以为忧，右司谏吕造上章： 乞诏内外百官各上封事，直言无讳。
现代文：宣宗因南北两面同时作战而深为忧虑，右司谏吕造上奏章说： 请下诏让内外百官各自上密封的奏章言事，直言无所避讳。
English: Xuan Zong was deeply worried because of the simultaneous war between the north and the south, and the right secretary, Zou Lyu, said: "Please issue the following edict so that all the officials at home and abroad can speak frankly.

古文：或时召见，亲为访问。
现代文：有时召见，亲自访问。
English: Sometimes he is summoned for a personal visit.

古文：陛下博采兼听，以尽群下之情，天下幸甚。 
现代文：陛下博采众议兼听，则让下属人员都能尽情表达意见，天下大幸。 
English: It is fortunate for the world that His Majesty listens to the public and allows his subordinates to express their opinions.

古文：宣宗嘉纳，诏集百官议河北、陕西守御之策。
现代文：宣宗表示赞许并采纳，诏令百官议论有关河北、陕西防守御敌的计策。
English: Emperor Xuanzong expressed his approval and adopted the edict, and hundreds of officials discussed strategies for the defense of Hebei and Shaanxi against the enemy.

古文：高琪心忌之，不用一言。
现代文：高琪内心十分忌恨，不采纳一句话。
English: Gao Qi's heart is full of hatred and will not accept a single word.

古文：是时，筑汴京城里城，宣宗问高琪曰： 人言此役恐不能就，如何？ 
现代文：当时，正修建汴京的内城，宣宗问高琪 ：人们都在传言说这个工程恐怕难以修好，你以为如何？ 
English: At that time, the inner city of Beijing was being built, and Xuan Zong asked Gao Qi: People are spreading rumors that this project may be difficult to repair, what do you think?

古文：高琪曰： 终当告成，但其濠未及浚耳。 
现代文：高琪说： 终当修成，但城下壕沟来不及挖吧！ 
English: Gao Qi said: It should be completed eventually, but it's too late to dig a trench under the city!

古文：宣宗曰： 无濠可乎？ 
现代文：高宗问 ：没有城壕行吗？ 
English: Gao Zongqin: Is it possible without a trench?

古文：高琪曰： 苟防城有法，正使兵来，臣等愈得效力。 
现代文：高琪说 ：如果防守得法，即使敌兵前来，臣等越加能够效力。 
English: Gao Qi said: If the defense is good, even if the enemy soldiers come, the vassals will be more effective.

古文：宣宗曰： 与其临城，曷若不令至此为善。 
现代文：宣宗说： 与其让敌人到城下，何如不让他们到这里更好。 
English: Xuan Zong said: "Instead of letting the enemy go to the city, it is better not to let them come here.

古文：高琪无以对。
现代文：高琪无话可答。
English: Gao Qi had nothing to say.

古文：高琪自为宰相，专固权宠，擅作威福，与高汝砺相唱和。
现代文：高琪自从当了宰相以后，专力巩固权势和求得皇帝的宠信，擅自作威作福，和高汝砺一唱一和。
English: Since Gao Qi became the prime minister, he has made every effort to consolidate his power and win the favor of the emperor. He has been arrogant and self-serving, and has been singing the same tune as Gao Ruzhen.

古文：高琪主机务，高汝砺掌利权，附己者用，不附己者斥。
现代文：高琪主管机要事务，高汝砺掌管财利大权，依附自己的就重用，不依附自己的就排斥。
English: Gao Qi is in charge of important matters, and Gao Rucheng is in charge of financial and economic power. If you are attached to yourself, you will be reused, and if you are not attached to yourself, you will be excluded.

古文：凡言事忤意，及负材力或与己颉顽者，对宣宗阳称其才，使干当于河北，阴置之死地。
现代文：凡是进言时和自己想法相反的，或者自负有才干敢于同自己抗衡的，他便表面上向宣宗赞扬他的才能，同时让他到河北去办事，实际上是暗中置之死地。
English: If anyone spoke contrary to his own thoughts, or if he was arrogant and had the ability to dare to compete with himself, he would praise his talent to Xuan Zong on the surface, and at the same time let him go to Hebei to do business. In fact, he would secretly put him to death.

古文：自不兼枢密元帅之后，常欲得兵权，遂力劝宣宗伐宋。
现代文：自从他不再兼任枢密元帅以后，便时常想掌握兵权，因而力劝宣宗攻打宋朝。
English: Since he no longer concurrently served as Privy Marshal, he often wanted to control the military power, so he urged Xuan Zong to attack the Song Dynasty.

古文：置河北不复为意，凡精兵皆置河南，苟且岁月，不肯辄出一卒，以应方面之急。
现代文：他不再把河北方面事情放在心上，所有的精兵都布置在河南，苟且度日，不肯轻易出动一兵一卒，以援救危急的地方。
English: He no longer cared about the situation in Hebei Province. All the elite soldiers were deployed in Henan Province, and they were reluctant to send one soldier at a time to rescue the critical areas.

古文：平章政事英王守纯欲发其罪，密召右司员外郎王阿里、知案蒲鲜石鲁剌、令史蒲察胡鲁谋之。
现代文：平章政事英王守纯要告发高琪的罪状，密召右司员外郎王阿里、知案蒲鲜石鲁剌、令史蒲察胡鲁一起谋划。
English: Pingzhang government official Yingwang Shuchun wanted to denounce Gao Qi, and he secretly summoned the right-hand man, Wairo Wang Ali, the mastermind, Pu Xingshi Lu Yao, and the commander, Pu Cha Hulu, to plot together.

古文：石鲁剌、胡鲁以告尚书省都事仆散奴失不，仆散奴失不以告高琪。
现代文：石鲁剌、胡鲁把这件事告诉了尚书省都事仆散奴失不，仆散奴失不又告诉了高琪。
English: Shi Lulu and Hulu told this matter to Shang Shuxuan, and also told Gao Qi.

古文：英王惧高琪党与，遂不敢发。
现代文：英王因害怕高琪同党为数众多，因而不敢加以揭发。
English: The king was afraid of the large number of Gao Qi's accomplices, so he did not dare to expose them.

古文：顷之，高琪使奴赛不杀其妻，乃归罪于赛不，送开封府杀之以灭口。
现代文：不久，高琪让他的奴仆赛不杀了他的妻子，然后归罪于赛不，要把他送到开封府杀掉灭口。
English: Before long, Gao Qi ordered his servant Sai Niu to kill his wife, and then blamed Sai Niu and sent him to Kaifeng to kill him.

古文：开封府畏高琪，不敢发其实，赛不论死。
现代文：开封府害怕高琪的威势，不敢追究真实情况，便判赛不死刑。
English: The Kaifeng government was afraid of Gao Qi's power and did not dare to investigate the real situation, so they did not sentence her to death.

古文：事觉，宣宗久闻高琪奸恶，遂因此事诛之，时兴定三年十二月也。
现代文：事情被觉察之后，宣宗早就听说术虎高琪奸诈无恶不作，便因这件事而杀掉他，这时是兴定三年十二月间。
English: After the incident was discovered, Emperor Xuanzong had already heard about the treachery and evil deeds of Zhihu Gaoqi, and killed him because of this incident. This happened in December of the third year of Xingding.

古文：尚书省都事仆散奴失不以英王谋告高琪，论死。
现代文：尚书省都事仆散奴失不将英王的计谋告诉了高琪，论罪判死刑。
English: Gao Qi was found guilty and sentenced to death for failing to disclose the king's plot to Shang Shushu's provincial governor.

古文：蒲鲜石鲁剌、蒲察胡鲁各杖七十，勒停。
现代文：蒲鲜石鲁剌、蒲察胡鲁各被责打七十杖，勒令停职。
English: Pu Xingshi Lucheng and Pu Chahulu were each punished with 70 strokes of the cane and ordered to be suspended from duty.

古文：初，宣宗将迁南，欲置飐军于平州，高琪难之。
现代文：起初，宣宗准备迁都南京，打算把礣军安置在平州，高琪不愿意。
English: At first, Emperor Xuanzong planned to move the capital to Nanjing, intending to place the Han army in Pingzhou, but Gao Qi did not want to do this.

古文：及迁汴，戒彖多厚抚此军，彖多辄杀飐军数人，以至于败。
现代文：当迁都汴京以后，宣宗告诫彖多，让他厚待这支军队，而彖多却很快杀了礣军的几个人，以致失败。
English: When the capital was moved to Beijing, Emperor Xuanzong admonished Xingduo to treat this army well, but Xingduo soon killed several members of Xingduo's army, resulting in defeat.

古文：宣宗末年尝曰： 坏天下者，高琪、彖多也。 
现代文：宣宗到晚年时曾说 ：坏我天下的，是高琪和彖多啊！ 
English: In his later years, Emperor Xuanzong once said, "It is Gaoqi and Xinduo who are bad for me!

古文：终身以为恨云。
现代文：他终身引以为恨。
English: He hated it for the rest of his life.

