古文：十有六年春，王正月。
现代文：十六年春季，周历正月，无事。
English: In the spring of '16, the first month of the lunar calendar, nothing happened.

古文：夏，宋人、齐人、卫人伐郑。
现代文：夏季，宋国、齐国、卫国一起攻打郑国。
English: In the summer, Song, Qi and Wei attacked Zheng together.

古文：秋，荆伐郑。
现代文：秋季，楚国攻打郑国。
English: In autumn, Chu attacked Zheng.

古文：冬十有二月，会齐侯、宋公、陈侯、卫侯、郑伯、许男、滑伯、滕子同盟于幽。
现代文：冬季十二月，庄公与齐侯、宋公、陈侯、卫侯、郑伯、许男、滑伯、滕子在幽地结盟。
English: In the winter of December, Zhuang Gong allied with Qi Hou, Song Gong, Chen Hou, Wei Hou, Zheng Bo, Xu Man, Niu Bo, and Teng Zi in a secluded place.

古文：邾子克卒。
现代文：邾子克去世。
English: Hanzhik passed away.

古文：十六年夏，诸侯伐郑，宋故也。
现代文：十六年夏季，各诸侯联军进攻郑国，这是由于郑国入侵宋国的缘故。
English: In the summer of 166, the allied forces of various princes attacked Zheng, which was caused by Zheng's invasion of Song.

古文：郑伯自栎入，缓告于楚。
现代文：郑厉公从栎地回到国都，没有及时通知楚国。
English: Zheng Liguo returned to the capital from Handan without notifying Chu in time.

古文：秋，楚伐郑，及栎，为不礼故也。
现代文：秋季，楚国进攻郑国，到达栎地，这是为了报复郑厉公对楚国不恭敬没有及时通知的缘故。
English: In the autumn, Chu attacked Zheng and arrived at Handan. This was in retaliation for Zheng Liguo's disrespect to Chu and not notifying him in time.

古文：郑伯治与于雍纠之乱者。
现代文：郑厉公惩罚参与雍纠之乱的人。
English: Zheng Liguo punishes those who participated in the riots in Yongkang.

古文：九月，杀公子阏，刖强鉏。
现代文：九月，杀死了公子阏，砍去强鉏的两脚。
English: In September, he killed the male pheasant and chopped off the strong pheasant's feet.

古文：公父定叔出奔卫。
现代文：公父定叔逃亡到卫国。
English: His father-in-law, Uncle Sadafusa, fled to Japan.

古文：三年而复之，曰： 不可使共叔无后于郑。 
现代文：过了三年，郑厉公又让他回国了，说： 不能让共叔在郑国的后代没有禄位。 
English: After three years, Zheng Li Gong let him return to the country, saying, "We cannot let the descendants of the common uncle in Zheng Guo have no position."

古文：使以十月入，曰： 良月也，就盈数焉。 
现代文：让他在十月回到国内，说： 这是好月份，十月是个满数呢。 
English: Let him return to the country in October and say: This is a good month, October is a perfect number.

古文：君子谓： 强鉏不能卫其足。 
现代文：君子认为， 强鉏不能保住他的两脚 。
English: A gentleman believes that a strong man cannot keep his feet.

古文：冬，同盟于幽，郑成也。王使虢公命曲沃伯以一军为晋侯。
现代文：冬季，鲁庄公和齐桓公、宋桓公、陈宣公、卫惠公、郑厉公、许穆公、滑伯、滕子在幽地一起结盟，这是为了对郑国讲和。周僖王派虢公命令曲沃伯建立一军，做晋国国君。
English: In the winter, Lu Zhuang, Qi Huan, Song Huan, Chen Xuan, Wei Hui, Zheng Li, Xu Mu, Shu Bo, and Teng Zi formed an alliance in a secluded place in order to make peace with Zheng. King Zhou sent Zou Bo to build an army and become the ruler of Jin.

古文：初，晋武公伐夷，执夷诡诸。
现代文：当初，晋武公进攻夷地，俘虏了夷诡诸。
English: At first, Jin Wukong attacked Yidi and captured Yidanzhu.

古文：蒍国请而免之。
现代文：国为他请求因而释放了他。
English: He was released at the request of the state.

