古文：贾逵李百药王勃元嘉毛俊男苏颋刘晏林杰高定李德裕白居易崔铉李琪刘神童路德延韦庄
现代文：贾逵李百药王勃元嘉毛俊男苏颋刘晏林杰高定李德裕白居易崔铉李琪刘神童路德延韦庄
English: Jia Wei, Li Bai, Medicine King, Bo Yuan, Ji Mao, Handsome Man, Su Wei, Liu Wei, Lin Jie, Gao Ding, Li De, Yu Bai, Ju Yi, Cui Wei, Li Qi, Liu Zhen Tong, Lu De, Yan Wei Zhuang

古文：贾逵
现代文：贾逵
English: Jia Wei

古文：汉贾逵五岁，神明过人。
现代文：汉朝的贾逵五岁的时候就聪明过人。
English: When he was five years old, the Han Dynasty's Jia Zhang was exceptionally clever.

古文：其姊韩瑶之妇，瑶无嗣，而妇亦以贞明见称。
现代文：他的姐姐是韩瑶的妻子。
English: His sister is Han Min's wife.

古文：闻邻里诸生读书，日抱逵隔篱而听，贾逵静听无言，姊以为喜。
现代文：韩瑶没有儿子。逵的姐姐以贞节贤明出名。她听到邻居家的孩子们读书，便每天抱着贾逵隔着篱笆听。贾逵静静地听别人读书，一句话也不说，姐姐很高兴。
English: Han Yao did not have a son. Yao's sister was famous for her chastity. When she heard the children of her neighbors reading, she would hold Jia Yao across the fence and listen to them every day. Jia Yao quietly listened to others reading, without saying a word, and her sister was very happy.

古文：年十岁，乃暗诵六经。
现代文：贾逵十六岁的时候，就会背诵诗书礼易春秋六经。
English: When Jia Zhang was sixteen years old, he would recite poems from the book of poems, the Six Classics of Spring and Autumn.

古文：姊谓逵曰：吾家穷困，不曾有学者入门。汝安知天下有三坟五典，而诵无遗句邪？
现代文：姐姐对他说： 我们家很贫穷。从来没有过学者上门，你是怎么知道天下有 三坟五典 等书籍，并且背诵得一句不差的？ 
English: My sister said to him: Our family is very poor. No scholar has ever come to our door. How do you know that there are books such as "Three Graves and Five Classics" in the world, and that you can recite them well?

古文：且诵且记。期年，经史遍通。
现代文：贾逵说：当初姐姐抱我在篱笆下听邻居家孩子读书，我便记住了，所以如今能一句不差的背诵下来。
English: Jia Wei said: When my sister held me under the fence to listen to the neighbor's children reading, I remembered, so now I can recite a good sentence.

古文：门徒来学，不远万里，或襁负子孙，舍于门侧，皆口受经文。
现代文：贾逵剥下院子里桑树的皮当作纸张，或者将字写在门扇或墙壁上，一年以后便把各种经典著作和历史书籍全都读了一遍。这时各地的学生不远万里来向他拜师学习，还有的人背着子孙来送给他教育。
English: Jia Yan peeled the bark of the mulberry tree in his house and used it as paper, or wrote the words on the doors or walls. A year later, he read all the classics and history books. At this time, students from all over the world came thousands of miles to learn from him, and others brought their children and grandchildren to give him education.

古文：赠献者积廪盈仓。或云：贾逵非力耕所得，诵经口倦，世为舌耕。
现代文：他认真地教这些学生读书，学生及家长所赠送的钱物和粮食装满了仓库。人们说：贾逵不是用力气耕田种地来取得收获，而是用嘴讲授经史，一辈子用舌头耕种。
English: He conscientiously taught these students to read, and the money, goods and grain donated by students and parents filled the warehouse. People said: Jia Wei did not use his strength to cultivate the land to get the harvest, but used his mouth to teach the history of the scriptures, and used his tongue to cultivate all his life.

古文：李百药
现代文：李百药
English: Li Baiyao

古文：唐李百药七岁能属文。
现代文：唐朝的李百药七岁就会写文章。
English: Li Baiyao of the Tang Dynasty could write an article at the age of seven.

古文：齐中书舍人陆琇，常遇其父德林宴集。有说徐陵文者云：刈琅邪之稻。
现代文：他的文章和中书舍人陆琇齐名。有一次他的父亲设宴请客，有人谈论起徐陵的文章，说到其中一句：收割琅邪的稻谷。
English: His articles and those of Lu Ling, a Chinese scholar, are equally famous. Once, when his father was hosting a banquet, someone talked about Xu Ling's articles and mentioned one of the sentences: "Harvesting the evil rice."

古文：坐客并称无其事。
现代文：在座的人都不理解，说没有这回事。
English: People here don't understand and say there's no such thing.

古文：百药进曰：传称禹阝人籍稻，注云。禹阝国在琅邪开阳县。
现代文：李百药在旁边说：《春秋》记载。鄅国曾耕种稻谷，鄅在琅邪开阳县境内。
English: Next to it, Li Baiyao said: "Recorded in Spring and Autumn. Shandong Province once cultivated rice, and Shandong was in the territory of Shijiazhuang Kaiyang County.

古文：人皆惊喜云：此儿即神童。
现代文：大家都惊喜地说：这个孩子真是神童啊！
English: Everyone was surprised and said: this child is a real prodigy!

古文：百药幼多疾，祖母以百药为名。
现代文：李百药从小多病，祖母给他起名叫百药。他是名臣的后代。
English: Li Baiyao has been ill since childhood. His grandmother named him Baiyao. He is the descendant of a famous minister.

古文：名臣之子，才行相继，四海名流，莫不宗仰。
现代文：继承了先辈的才能和品德，四海之内的著名人士没有不佩服他的。
English: He inherited the talent and character of his predecessors, and famous people from all over the world admired him.

古文：怡然自得，穿地筑山，文酒谭宾，以尽平生之志，年八十五。
现代文：他文章写得既华美又深刻，尤其擅长写五言诗。不论是砍柴的孩子，还是放牛的儿童，他都赞美歌颂。他告老还乡以后，更加怡然自得，砍柴耕种，宴请朋友，谈论诗文，尽情实现自己的愿望。
English: His essays are both beautiful and profound, and he is especially good at writing five-character poems. Whether it is a child chopping firewood or a child herding cattle, he praises and praises. After he returned to his hometown, he was more self-satisfied, chopping firewood and farming, inviting friends, talking about poetry, and fulfilling his wishes.

古文：先是和太宗帝京篇，手诏曰：卿何身之老而才之壮？何齿之宿而意之新乎？
现代文：他活了八十五岁，从前因为奉和太宗帝的诗篇。大宗皇帝在写给他的亲笔信中说：你为什么身体老了，而才能和智慧仍以壮年；为什么牙齿旧了，而文章和思想富有新意？
English: He lived to the age of eighty-five, having been inspired by the poems of Emperor Bong Ho Taejong, who wrote to him in a personal letter: "Why is your body old, but your talent and wisdom are still in their prime; why are your teeth old, but your writings and thoughts are full of new ideas?"

古文：子安期，永徽末迁中书舍人，三代皆掌制诰。安期孙义仲又为中书。
现代文：李百药的儿子李安期，永徵末年被任命为中书舍人，三代人全都负责起草管理皇帝的诏书。李安期的孙子李义仲又成为中书舍人。
English: At the end of the Yongzheng era, Li Baizhe's son, Li Anji, was appointed as the keeper of the imperial rescript. All three generations were responsible for drafting and managing the imperial rescript. Li Anji's grandson, Li Yizhong, also became the keeper of the imperial rescript.

古文：王勃
现代文：王勃
English: Wang Bo

古文：王勃字子安，六岁能属文。清才浚发，构思无滞。年十三，省其父至江西。会府帅宴于滕王阁。
现代文：王勃的字叫子安，六岁能写文章，并且文思敏捷，构思巧妙，他十三岁的时候去江西看望父亲，出席府帅在滕王阁举行的宴会。
English: Wang Bo's character is called Zi An. At the age of six, he can write articles, and his writing is quick and clever. When he was thirteen, he went to visit his father in Jiangxi and attended a banquet held by the governor in Tengwang Pavilion.

古文：时帅府有婿善为文章，帅欲夸之宾友，乃宿构滕王阁序，俟宾合而出之，为若即席而就者。
现代文：府帅的女婿文章写得很好，府帅想要在宾客面前夸耀。他叫女婿预先构思了滕王阁序，准备等到宾客聚会时再当众写出来，说成是即席而作的。
English: The governor's son-in-law wrote a well-written article, and the governor wanted to boast in front of the guests. He asked his son-in-law to pre-conceive the Tengwang Pavilion sequence and prepare to wait until the guests were gathered before writing it out in public, saying that it was improvised.

古文：既会，帅果授笺诸客，诸客辞。
现代文：到了宴会上，府帅果然分发纸张给各位宾客，大家都不要推辞。
English: When it came to the banquet, the governor did indeed hand out papers to the guests. Everyone should not refuse.

古文：次至勃，勃辄受。
现代文：轮到王勃，王勃却接了下来。
English: It was Wang Bo's turn, but Wang Bo took it.

古文：帅既拂其意，怒其不让，乃使人伺其下笔。初报曰：南昌故郡，洪都新府。
现代文：府帅见王勃违背了他的意思，心里对王勃毫不谦让的态度很生气，便叫人观看王勃写了些什么，一开始，有人报告他说，王勃写的是：南昌故郡，洪都新府。
English: When the governor saw that Wang Bo had violated his will, he was very angry at Wang Bo's unyielding attitude, and asked people to watch what Wang Bo had written. At the beginning, someone reported to him that Wang Bo had written: Nanchang County, Hongdu New Prefecture.

古文：帅曰：此亦老生常谈耳。
现代文：府帅说：这是老生常谈啊！
English: The governor said: This is a cliché!

古文：次曰：星分翼轸，地接衔庐。
现代文：接着报告他说：星分翼轸，地接衔庐。
English: Then report to him: "The star-spangled wing-beam, the earth-linked wing-beam.

古文：帅沈吟移晷。
现代文：府帅沉默深思了很久。
English: The governor was silent for a long time, deep in thought.

古文：又曰：落霞与孤鹜齐飞，秋水共长天一色。
现代文：又来人告诉他说：落霞与孤鹜齐飞，秋水共长天一色。
English: Another person told him: "The fading sky and the solitary dragonfly fly together, and the autumn sky and the autumn sky are the same color.

古文：帅曰：斯不朽矣。
现代文：府帅说：这已经是不朽的名作了！
English: The governor said: This is already an immortal masterpiece!

古文：元嘉
现代文：元嘉
English: Yuan Jia

古文：元嘉少聪俊，右手画圆，左手画方，口诵经史，目数群羊，兼成四十字诗，一时而就，足书五言绝：六事齐举。
现代文：元嘉很小的时候就非常聪明，能够左手画圆。右手画方，口中背诵文章，眼睛数群羊的数目，心中构思四十个字的诗，脚趾夹笔书写五言绝句，六件事可以同时进行。
English: At a very young age, Yuan Jia was very clever, able to draw a circle with his left hand, how to draw with his right hand, recite an article with his mouth, count the number of sheep with his eyes, conceive a forty-character poem in his mind, write a five-word sentence with a toe pen, and six things can be done at the same time.

古文：代号神仙童子。
现代文：绰号叫神仙童子。
English: He was nicknamed the Fairy Boy.

古文：毛俊男
现代文：毛俊男
English: Mao Toshio

古文：并州人毛俊诞一男，四岁，则天召入内试字，千字文皆能暗书。赐衣裳放还。
现代文：并州人毛俊生下一个男孩，四岁的时候被武则天召进宫去测验识字，《千字文》全都能背着写出来，武则天赏赐给他衣服以后放他回家去了。
English: And a man named Mao Jun from Shuzhou gave birth to a boy. When he was four years old, Wu Zetian called him to the palace to test his literacy. He was able to write all the "Thousand Characters" backwards. Wu Zetian gave him clothes and let him go home.

古文：人皆以为精魅所托。其后不知所终。
现代文：人们都认为这孩子是神灵鬼怪托生的，后来不知道他怎么样了。
English: People believe that the child was born to a god or a monster, and they don't know what happened to him.

古文：苏颋
现代文：苏颋
English: Su Shi

古文：苏瑰初未知颋，常处颋于马厩中，与佣保杂作。
现代文：苏瑰一开始不知道儿子苏颋的才学，经常让他在马厩里和佣人一起干杂活。
English: At first, Su Gui didn't know about her son Su Yao's talent, and often made him do chores with the servants in the stables.

古文：一日，有客诣瑰，候厅事，颋拥彗趋庭，遗堕文书。
现代文：有一天，有客人来拜访苏瑰，等候在客厅里。苏颋抱着扫帚在在庭院里走过，怀里掉下一个本子。
English: One day, a guest came to visit Su Gui, waiting in the living room. Su Gui held a broom and walked through the courtyard, dropping a book in her arms.

古文：客取视之，乃咏昆仑奴诗也。其词云：指头十颋墨，耳朵两张匙。
现代文：客人取过来一看，是一首描写给绅门富豪作奴仆的南海国人昆仑奴的诗，诗里写道：指头十颋墨，耳朵两张匙。
English: The guest took it over and took a look. It was a poem describing Kunlunnu, a man from the South China Sea, who worked as a slave for a wealthy gentleman. The poem said: "Ten inksticks on his fingers, two spoons in his ears."

古文：客心异之。久而瑰出，与客淹留。客笑语之余，因咏其诗，并言形貌，问瑰何人，非足下宗族庶孽邪？
现代文：客人心中很奇怪，过了一会苏瑰出来陪伴客人，客人在说笑的时候，念了这两句诗，并讲述了苏颋的体形相貌，问苏瑰是什么人，是不是苏的远亲。
English: The guests thought it was very strange. After a while, Su Jiu came out to accompany the guests. When the guests were joking, they read these two poems and described Su Yao's body shape and appearance. They asked who Su Jiu was and whether he was Su's distant relative.

古文：瑰备言其事，客惊贺之，请瑰加礼收举，必苏氏之令子也。
现代文：苏瑰讲述了苏颋的情况，客人惊奇地祝贺他，让他送苏颋去读书，认为苏颋一定会成为苏家有出息的好儿子。
English: Su Gui recounted the situation of Su Yao. The guests were surprised and congratulated him and asked him to send Su Yao to study, thinking that Su Yao would definitely become a good son of the Su family.

古文：瑰自是稍亲之。
现代文：从此苏瑰对苏颋稍稍好了一点。
English: Since then, Suzhou has done a little better than Suzhou.

古文：适有人献瑰兔，悬于廊庑之下。
现代文：有一次，有人送给苏瑰一只兔子，悬挂在房檐。
English: On one occasion, someone gave Su Gui a rabbit, which was hanging from the eaves of the room.

古文：瑰乃召颋咏之，颋立呈诗曰：兔子死阑殚，持来挂竹竿。
现代文：苏瑰命令苏颋作歌咏兔子的诗。苏颋立刻写出一首诗说：兔子死阑殚，持来挂竹竿。
English: Su Jie immediately wrote a poem saying, "When the rabbit dies, bring a bamboo pole to hang it."

古文：试将明镜照，何异月中看。
现代文：试将明镜照，何异月中看。
English: Try bright mirror illumination, see how many months in the middle.

古文：瑰大惊奇，骤加顾礼。
现代文：苏瑰非常惊奇，于是给苏颋拿学费，送他去读书。
English: Surprised, Su Gui took the tuition money and sent him to school.

古文：由是学问日新，文章盖代。
现代文：从此苏颋的学问天天增长，文章超过了同时代的人。
English: From then on, Su Shi's knowledge grew day by day, and his writings surpassed those of his contemporaries.

古文：刘晏
现代文：刘晏
English: Liu Xuan

古文：玄宗御勤政楼，大张乐，罗列百妓。
现代文：玄宗到勤政楼观看各种伎艺节目，有上百名歌手参加演出。
English: Xuanzong went to the Gongzheng Building to watch various acrobatic shows, with over a hundred singers taking part in the performance.

古文：时教坊有王大娘者，善戴百尺竿，竿上施木山，状瀛州方丈，令小儿持绛节，出入于其间，歌舞不辍。
现代文：朝廷的文艺机构教坊有个王大娘，善于用头顶百尺高竿，竿上放一个木山，形状好像海上的仙山。然后再让小孩手里拿着红色的木棍，在木山上歌舞不停。
English: In the imperial court's literature and art institution, the teaching hall, there was a granddaughter of the king who was good at using a hundred-feet-high pole, placing a wooden mountain on the pole, shaped like a fairy mountain on the sea, and then letting the child hold a red wooden stick in his hand, singing and dancing on the wooden mountain.

古文：时刘晏以神童为秘书正字，年方十岁，形状狞劣。
现代文：这时刘晏才十岁，因为是神童，被任命为秘书正字。他相貌丑陋，但聪明过人。
English: At this time, Liu Yao was only ten years old, and because he was a child prodigy, he was appointed secretary Zheng Zi. He was ugly, but extremely smart.

古文：而聪悟过人。玄宗召于楼中帘下，贵妃置于膝上，为施粉黛，与之中栉。
现代文：皇帝将他叫到楼中的帘子下面，贵妃将他抱坐到膝盖上，为他涂脂抹粉，为他梳头。
English: The emperor called him to the middle of the building, under the curtains. The empress sat him on her lap, put grease and powder on him, and combed his hair.

古文：玄宗问晏曰：卿为正字，正得几字？
现代文：玄宗皇帝问他： 你身为秘书正字，纠正了几个字？ 
English: Emperor Xuanzong asked him: As a secretary, how many words did you correct?

古文：曰：天下字皆正，唯朋字未正得。
现代文：刘宴说： 天下字都可以纠正，只是朋字不能纠正。 
English: Liu Yen said, "All the characters in the world can be corrected, but my character cannot be corrected.

古文：贵妃复令咏王大娘戴竿，晏应声曰：楼前百戏竞争新，唯有长竿妙入神。
现代文：贵妃命令他歌咏王大娘顶竹竿。刘晏应声说道： 楼前百戏竞争新。唯有长竿妙入神。
English: Guifei ordered him to sing the song of the king's eldest daughter with a bamboo pole. Liu Ye said in response: There are hundreds of plays in front of the building. Only the long pole is magical.

古文：谁得绮罗翻有力，犹自嫌轻更著人。
现代文：谁得绮罗翻有力，犹自嫌轻更著人。 
English: Whoever has the power to turn a spade into a ploughshare is more likely to be a writer.

古文：玄宗与贵妃及诸嫔御欢笑移时，声闻于外，因命牙笏及黄文袍以赐之。
现代文：玄宗皇帝和贵妃娘娘，以及诸位侍妾、宫女欢笑多时，声音传到外边，玄宗皇帝命令赏赐给刘晏象牙笏板和黄文袍。林杰
English: Emperor Xuanzong and the princesses, as well as all the attendants, concubines, and ladies-in-waiting, laughed for a long time, and the sound spread to the outside world. Emperor Xuanzong ordered to reward Liu Ye with an ivory cutting board and a yellow robe. Lin Jie

古文：林杰
现代文：林杰的字叫智周。
English: Lin Jie's character is called Zhi Zhou.

古文：林杰字智周，幼而聪明秀异，言发成文，音调清举。年六岁，请举童子。
现代文：他从小就十分聪明伶俐，出口成章，音调响亮。他六岁的时候，就开始有了名声。
English: From an early age, he was bright, articulate and had a booming voice, and his fame began when he was just six years old.

古文：时肃为闽府大将，性乐善，尤好聚书，又妙于手谭，当时名公多与之交。
现代文：他的父亲林肃是闽府的大将，性格快乐善良，尤其喜欢收藏书籍，又精通下围棋，当时的社会名流都愿意和他结交。
English: His father, Lin Su, was the general of Ye Prefecture. He had a happy and kind personality, especially liked to collect books, and was good at playing Go. The social celebrities of the time were all willing to make friends with him.

古文：及有是子，益大其门。
现代文：等到林肃有了儿子，更加光耀门庭。
English: Wait until Lin Su has a son, the door will shine even more.

古文：廉使崔侍郎千亟与迁职，乡人荣之。
现代文：廉使崔千升任侍郎，家乡的人都引以为荣。
English: All the people in his hometown are proud of him.

古文：杰五岁，父因携之门脚，至王仙君霸坛，戏问童子能是乎？
现代文：这时李杰五岁，父亲带着他访客，走到王仙君霸坛。有人开玩笑说：小孩子能行吗？
English: At this time, when Li Jie was five years old, his father took him to visit Wang Xianjun. Someone joked: "Can a child do it?"

古文：杰遂口占云：羽客已归云路去，丹炉草木尽凋残。
现代文：李杰当即作诗念道：羽客已归云路出，丹炉草木尽雕残。
English: Li Jie immediately composed a poem and recited: "Hake has returned to the clouds, the Dan furnace plants and trees have all been carved."

古文：不知千载归何日，空使时人扫旧坛：父初不谓眇岁之作，遽臻于此。
现代文：不知千载归何日，空使时人扫旧坛。他的父亲一开始也没想到，小孩子作诗竟能达到这样高的水平。
English: I don't know how many thousands of years have passed since then, but the sky made people sweep away the old altar. His father didn't think at the beginning that a child's poetry could reach such a high level.

古文：群亲益所惊异，递相传讽，乡里喧然。
现代文：亲属们更加惊异，相互传递朗诵，震动了附近的人们。
English: The relatives were even more surprised, passing the recitation to each other, which shocked the people nearby.

古文：自此日课所为，未几盈轴。
现代文：从此他每天的功课，就是写几首诗。
English: From then on, his daily task was to write a few poems.

古文：明年，遂献唐中丞扶。
现代文：第二年，李杰将自己写的诗歌献给中丞唐扶。
English: The following year, Li Jie dedicated a poem he had written to the junior high school student Tang Fu.

古文：唐既伸幅窥吟，耸耳皆吹，命子弟延入学院。
现代文：唐扶打开观看朗诵，非常欣赏，命令将他以子弟的身份送入学院读书。
English: Tang Fu opened the door to watch the recitation, greatly appreciated it, and ordered that he be sent to the college as a child.

古文：时会七夕，堂前乞巧，因试其乞巧诗。
现代文：这一天来到七月初七，妇女们在堂前穿针乞巧诗。唐扶考试李杰作乞巧诗。
English: This day came on the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month.

古文：杰援毫曰：七夕今朝看碧霄，牵牛织女渡河桥。
现代文：李杰拿起笔写道：七夕今朝看碧霄，牵牛织女渡河桥。
English: Li Jie picked up a pen and wrote: On the seventh day of the seventh lunar month, this morning, look at the blue sky, the cowherd and the weaver cross the bridge.

古文：家家乞巧望秋月，穿尽红丝几万条。
现代文：家家乞巧望秋月，穿尽红线几万条。
English: Every family is looking forward to the autumn moon, wearing out tens of thousands of red lines.

古文：唐惊曰：真神童也。
现代文：唐扶惊奇地说：真是神童啊！
English: Tang Fu said in surprise: What a child prodigy!

古文：以是乡人群来求看，填塞门巷。
现代文：附近的人们都来观看神童，把大门和胡同都塞满了。
English: People from all over the neighborhood came to watch the child prodigy, crowding the gates and alleys.

古文：杰又精于琴棋及草隶书，俱自天然，不假师受。
现代文：李杰还精通弹琴，下棋和草书、隶书书法，全都是天生就会，没有经过老师的传授。
English: Li Jie is also proficient in playing the piano, playing chess and cursive and calligraphy, all of which are innate, without being taught by a teacher.

古文：杰必指踪出奇，往往返胜。曲尽玄妙，时谓神助。后复业词赋，颇振声问。
现代文：唐扶与客人下棋，遇到败局已定的时候，便叫人把棋局盖上，不许乱碰，然后叫李杰来接过残局继续下。李杰往往能出奇制胜，挽回败局，棋路非常精妙，人们都认为有神仙暗中相助。后来李杰又钻研词赋，也闯出很大的名声。
English: When Tang Fu was playing chess with a guest and the game was already lost, he asked someone to close the board and not to touch it, and then asked Li Jie to take over the remaining game and continue. Li Jie was often able to win by surprise and recover from defeat. His chess moves were very subtle, and people thought that he had the help of a fairy godmother. Later, Li Jie also studied writing and gained a great reputation.

古文：有仙客入壶中赋云：仙客以变化随形，逍遥放情。
现代文：他写的一篇《仙客入壶赋》说：仙客以变化随形，逍遥放情。
English: One of his articles, "The Immortal Guest in the Jug," said: "The Immortal Guest adapts to changes and indulges freely.

古文：处于外则一壶斯在，入其中则万象俱成。
现代文：处于外财一壶斯在，入其中则万象俱成。
English: When you are in foreign money, one pot is in, but when you are in it, all things are complete.

古文：飞阁重楼，不是人间之壮。奇花异木，无非物外之名。
现代文：飞阁重楼。不是人间之状；奇花异木，无非物外之名。
English: A flying pavilion is a heavy building. It is not an earthly state; strange flowers and trees are nothing more than names of things.

古文：至九岁，谒卢大夫贞、黎常侍殖，无不嘉奖。
现代文：到了九岁，他去拜见大夫卢贞、常侍黎殖，没有不夸奖他的。
English: When he was nine years old, he went to visit Lu Zhen, a doctor, and Li Xuan, his regular attendant, and he had nothing but praise for him.

古文：寻就宾见日，在宴筵。李侍御远、赵支使容深所知仰，不舍斯须。和赵支使詠荔枝诗尤佳，云：金盘摘下排朱果，红壳开时饮玉浆。
现代文：过了几天，在宴请宾客的宴席，侍郎李远和支使赵容也知道了他的名声，他和支使赵容的一首咏荔枝的诗尤其精采，诗中说：金盘摘下排朱果，红壳开时饮玉浆。
English: A few days later, at a banquet for invited guests, Li Yuan, the steward, and Zhao Rong, the steward, also learned of his fame. He and Zhao Rong, the steward, wrote a particularly brilliant poem about litchi. The poem said: "The gold plate picks off the row of red fruits, and when the red shell opens, it drinks the jade milk."

古文：刘副史立作奇童传，刘制使重为序，以贻之。
现代文：副史刘立为他作了神童传，制使刘重为其写序，然后赠送给他。
English: Liu Li, an assistant historian, made a child prodigy biography for him, and the producer asked Liu Chong to write a preface for him, and then presented it to him.

古文：至年十七，方结束琴书，将决西迈。
现代文：李杰到十七岁时，不再弹琴看书，准备西行游玩。
English: At the age of seventeen, Li Jie stopped playing the piano and reading books, and prepared to travel to the West.

古文：无何七月中，一旦天气澄爽，书堂前忽有异香氛氲，奇音响亮。
现代文：没想到七月中旬的一天，天气晴朗，书房前忽然有一股奇异的香气弥漫开来，又听到响亮的鸣叫声。
English: Unexpectedly, one day in mid-July, when the weather was fine, a strange aroma suddenly filled the air in front of the study, and loud chirping was heard.

古文：家人出户观，见双鹤嘹唳，盘空而下，雪翖朱顶，徘徊庭际。
现代文：家里的人跑出去一看，有两只仙鹤鸣叫着从天空盘旋而下。雪白的羽毛，朱红的头顶，在庭院中徘徊。
English: The family members ran outside and saw two cranes circling down from the sky, chirping, their snow-white feathers and crimson heads hovering in the courtyard.

古文：杰欣然舍笔，跃下庭前，抱得一只。
现代文：李杰高兴的放下笔，跑到庭前，抱住了一只。
English: Li Jie happily put down his pen, ran to the front of the court, and hugged a toad.

古文：其父惊讶，恐非嘉兆，令促放，逡巡溯空而去。
现代文：他的父亲感到很惊讶，认为不一定是吉兆，叫他赶快放开。不一会，两只白鹤飞向空中。
English: His father was surprised, thought it was not necessarily a good omen, and told him to let go quickly. Soon, two white cranes flew into the air.

古文：亲邻闻兹，咸来贺肃曰：家藏书栉比，乃类筵鳣之表祥也。
现代文：亲戚邻居们听到这个消息，都赶来向李肃祝贺。他们说：家中收藏的图书十分丰富，乃是丰盛富足的象征啊。
English: When relatives and neighbors heard the news, they all came to congratulate Li Su. They said, "The collection of books in our home is very rich. It is a symbol of abundance."

古文：及夕，杰偶得疾，数日而终。
现代文：到了晚上，李杰突然得病，数日后死了。
English: In the evening, Li Jie suddenly fell ill and died a few days later.

古文：则知杰乃神仙谪下人世，魂灵已蜕于鹤耳。
现代文：这时人们才知道，李杰原来是被贬到人间的仙人，那一天他的灵魂已经依附在仙鹤身上。
English: It was only then that people knew that Li Jie had originally been relegated to the realm of mortals. That day, his soul had attached itself to a crane.

古文：不然者，何亡之速也？
现代文：不然的话，怎么会死得那么快。
English: Otherwise, how could he have died so quickly?

古文：高定
现代文：高定
English: Gao Ding

古文：高定，真公郢之子。为易合八出，以画八卦，上圆下方，八则为重，转则为演，七转而六十四卦，六甲八节备焉。著外传二十二篇。
现代文：高定是真公高郢的儿子，精通易和八出，用来画八卦，上圆下方，把则为重，转则为演。七转而六十四卦。六甲八节全都具备了，他著述了《易经》外编二十二篇。
English: Gao Ding was the son of Zhen Gong Gao Yao. He was well versed in Yi and Yao, and was used to draw Ba Gua. The upper circle and lower circle were used to draw Ba Gua, and the handle was the weight, and the handle was the performance. The seven turned into sixty-four Gao. He had all the sixty-eight sections, and he wrote twenty-two chapters of the "I Ching" extra edition.

古文：定小字董二，时人多以小字称。
现代文：他的小名董二，人们大都称呼他小名。
English: His nickname is Dong Er, and most people call him by his nickname.

古文：初年七岁，读尚书至汤誓，问父曰：奈何以臣伐君？
现代文：高定七岁那年读《尚书》，读到汤誓一篇，他问父亲说：为什么臣子要讨伐君王呢？
English: When Gao Ding was seven years old, he read "Shang Shu" and read an article about the Tang Dynasty's oath. He asked his father, "Why would a courtier want to fight a king?"

古文：答曰：应天顺人。
现代文：父亲回答说：执行天命，顺应民心。
English: My father replied, "Carry out the will of heaven and follow the will of the people."

古文：又问曰：用命赏于祖，不用命戮于社，岂是顺人？
现代文：高定又问：用天命则说是受赏于祖先，不用天命就杀戮于社祭前。这怎么是顺应民心呢？
English: Gao Ding also asked: Using the Mandate of Heaven, it is said to be rewarded by the ancestors, without using the Mandate of Heaven, it is killed before the social festival. How is this conforming to the people's heart?

古文：父不能对。
现代文：父亲无法回答。
English: My father couldn't answer.

古文：李德裕
现代文：李德裕
English: Li Deyu

古文：李德裕神俊，宪宗赏之，坐于膝上。父吉甫，每以敏辩夸于同列。
现代文：李德裕天赋才智出众，宪宗皇帝很喜欢他，将他抱坐在自己的膝盖上，他的父亲李吉甫经常在同事面前夸奖他机敏善辩。
English: Li Deyu was gifted with outstanding talent. Emperor Xianzong liked him very much and held him on his lap. His father, Li Jifu, often praised him in front of his colleagues for his astuteness and eloquence.

古文：武相元衡召之，谓曰：吾子在家，所嗜何书？
现代文：宰相武元衡召见李德裕。问李德裕说：你在家喜欢看什么书？
English: Premier Wu Yuanheng summoned Li Deyu and asked him, "What kind of books do you like to read at home?"

古文：意欲探其志也。
现代文：意思是看他的志向是什么。
English: It means to see what his aspirations are.

古文：德裕不应。
现代文：李德裕不回答。
English: Li Deyu did not answer.

古文：翌日，元衡具告吉甫，因戏曰：公诚陟大痴耳。
现代文：第二天，武元衡告诉了李吉甫。并开玩笑说：这个孩子是个呆子。
English: The next day, Wu Yuanheng told Li Jifu about it and joked, "This kid is a dope."

古文：吉甫归责之，德裕曰：武公身为帝弼，不问理国调阴阳，而问所读书，书者成均礼部之职也。
现代文：李吉甫回去以后责备李德裕，李德裕说：武元衡身为皇帝的辅政大臣，不问如何治理国家，而问读什么书，读书有成的人均担任礼部的职务。
English: After Li Jifu returned, he reproached Li Deyu. Li Deyu said: Wuyuan Heng, as the emperor's assistant minister of state, did not ask how to govern the country, but asked what books to read. Those who were successful in reading were assigned to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：其言不当，所以不应。
现代文：他的话不合适，所以我不回答。
English: His words are inappropriate, so I won't answer.

古文：吉甫复告，元衡大惭。
现代文：李吉甫第二天又告诉了武元衡，武元衡非常惭愧。
English: The next day, Li Jifu told Wu Yuanheng again, and Wu Yuanheng was very ashamed.

古文：由是振名。
现代文：由于这件事，李德裕的声名迅速传播开来。
English: As a result of this incident, Li Deyu's fame spread rapidly.

古文：白居易
现代文：白居易
English: Bai Juyi

古文：白居易，季庚之子，始生未能言，默识之无二字，乳媪试之，能百指而不误。
现代文：白居易是白季庚的儿子，他刚生下来不久还不会说话的时候，就能默认之无二字，乳母考他，他能够准确地用手指认百次而不出现错误。
English: Bai Juyi is the son of Bai Ji Geng. When he was just born and could not speak, he could tacitly say nothing. When his nanny tested him, he was able to accurately use his fingers to identify a hundred times without making a mistake.

古文：间日复试之，亦然。
现代文：隔一天再考他，仍然一样。
English: The next day he was tested again, still the same.

古文：既能言，读书勤敏，与他儿异。
现代文：会说话以后，他读书非常用功，与别的孩子不一样。
English: After he could speak, he studied very hard, unlike other children.

古文：五六岁识声韵。
现代文：五岁时就学懂声调韵脚，十五岁就能作诗赋。
English: At the age of five, he learned to understand intonation and rhyme, and at the age of fifteen, he was able to compose poems.

古文：十五志诗赋，二十七举进士。
现代文：二十七岁被推荐参加考取进士。
English: At the age of twenty-seven, he was recommended to take the entrance examination.

古文：贞元十六年，中书舍人高郢掌贡闱，居易求试，一举擢第。
现代文：贞元十六年，中书舍人高郢主持科举考试，白居易一举便被录取。
English: In the 16th year of the Zhengyuan era, Gao Jian, a high school student, presided over the examination, and Bai Juyi was admitted in one fell swoop.

古文：明年，拔萃甲科。
现代文：第二年，选拔官员他又被录取。
English: The following year, he was accepted again by the selection officers.

古文：由是习性相近远、求玄珠、斩白蛇等赋，为时楷式，新进士竞相传于京师矣。
现代文：从此他作了《性相近远》《求玄珠》《斩白蛇》等赋，均成为当时的典范文章。
English: From then on, he wrote "Sex is Near and Far," "Seeking the Gem," "Chopping the White Snake" and other works, all of which became exemplary articles at the time.

古文：会宪宗新即位，始用为翰林学士。
现代文：宪宗皇帝即位，他被任命为翰林学士。
English: Emperor Gensong ascended to the throne, and he was appointed as Hanlin Scholar.

古文：崔铉
现代文：崔铉
English: Choi Min-soo

古文：魏公崔相铉，元略之子也。为童儿时，随父访于韩公滉。滉见而怜之。
现代文：魏公宰相崔铉是崔元略的儿子，他小时候跟他父亲去拜访韩滉，韩滉见了很喜欢他。
English: Wei's prime minister, Cui Wei, was the son of Cui Yuanliu. When he was a child, he and his father went to visit Han Wei. Han Wei liked him very much.

古文：父曰：此子尔来诗道颇长。
现代文：他父亲说：这个孩子近来作诗能力有很大进步。
English: His father said: "The boy has made a lot of progress in his poetry recently.

古文：滉乃指驾上鹰令詠焉。
现代文：韩滉便指着架上的鹰叫他歌咏。
English: Han Yan pointed to the eagle on the shelf and told him to sing.

古文：遂命笺笔，略无伫思，于是进曰：天边心性架头身，欲拟飞腾未有因。
现代文：崔铉接过纸笔，不加思索，很快就写完了。他的诗是：天边心性架头身，欲拟飞腾未有因。
English: Cui Rong took the pen and paper, without thinking, and quickly finished writing. His poem is: "Heaven's edge of the heart is the head of the body, and there is no reason to want to fly."

古文：万里碧霄终一去，不知谁是解绦人。
现代文：万里碧霄终一去，不知谁是解绦人。
English: I don't know who was the person who solved the riddle.

古文：滉益奇之。叹曰：此儿可谓前程万里也。
现代文：韩滉更加惊奇，感叹着说：这个孩子可以说是有万里前程啊！
English: Han Yan was even more surprised and said with a sigh: This child can be said to have a bright future!

古文：大历三年，侍郎崔郾下及第，果久居廊庙，三拥节旄。
现代文：大历三年崔铉在侍郎主持科举考试时被录取。果然长期在朝廷当官，多次担任重要职务。
English: In the third year of the lunar calendar, Cui Yao was admitted when the chamberlain presided over the imperial examinations. As expected, he was an official in the imperial court for a long time and held important positions for many times.

古文：大中咸通之中，时推清名重德。
现代文：大中咸通年间，很注重官员的才能品德。
English: During his time at Hamantong University, he paid great attention to the talent and moral character of officials.

古文：宣宗皇帝常朝罢，谓侍臣曰：崔铉真贵人，裴休真措大。
现代文：宣宗皇帝上朝回来对宦官说：崔铉真贵人，裴休真贫寒。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong returned to the previous dynasty, he said to the eunuch: "Cui Yu is really a noble person, but Pei Xiu is really poor.

古文：初李石镇江陵，辟为戎卒，一旦拂袖而去。既入京，登上第，俄升翰苑。
现代文：当初李石镇守江陵时，召募崔铉为士兵。崔铉拂袖而去，来到京城，参加科举考试被录取，不久成为翰林学士。
English: At that time, when Li Shizhen was guarding Jiangling, he conscripted Cui Yao as a soldier. Cui Yao went away, came to Beijing, was admitted to participate in the imperial examinations, and soon became a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：李未离荆渚，崔既秉钧衡，李乃驰笺贺之曰：某早拜光尘，叨承眷与，深蒙异分，屡接清言。
现代文：李石一直没有离开江陵，崔铉执掌评量人才的权力以后，李石写信向他祝贺说：我早就目睹了你的风采，承蒙你的热心照顾，深受你的特殊关怀。
English: Li Shih has never left Jiangling. After Cui Wei took over the power of evaluating talents, Li Shih wrote to him to congratulate him, saying: I have long witnessed your style, received your enthusiastic care, and deeply appreciated your special concern.

古文：幸曾顾于厚恩，俯见循于末契。
现代文：昔日同你多次清淡，有幸得到你的厚恩，低头就想起我们的情谊。
English: Many times in the past, I was light-hearted with you, and when I was fortunate enough to receive your kindness, I bowed my head and thought of our friendship.

古文：去载分麾南楚，拜节西秦。
现代文：如今我仍在江陵，你却去了京城。
English: Now I am still in Gangneung, but you have gone to Beijing.

古文：思贤方詠于嘉鱼，栖止实惭于威凤。
现代文：思贤方咏于嘉鱼，栖止实惭于威凤。
English: Xianxian is located in Jiayu, and Jiezhu is located in Weifeng.

古文：宾筵初启，曾陪樽俎之欢。
现代文：当初在酒宴上，曾陪着你畅快地喝酒。
English: At the beginning, I used to drink happily with you at a banquet.

古文：将幕未移，已存陶镕之下。光生邻部，喜溢辕门。
现代文：将幕未移，已存陶镕之下，光生邻部，喜溢辕门。
English: The curtain has not been moved, it has been stored under the pottery urn, the light is growing in the neighboring part, and the door is overflowing with joy.

古文：岂唯九土获安，斯亦一方多幸。
现代文：岂唯九土获安，斯亦一方多幸。
English: If only the nine lands are safe, then the Si side will be lucky.

古文：乃掌记李骘之词也，于今播于众口。
现代文：这是掌记李骘记载下来的，如今已经过众口传播开来。
English: This was recorded by the palm reader Li Yan, and has now been spread by word of mouth.

古文：李琪
现代文：李琪
English: Li Qi

古文：李琪名族也，父敬，唐广明中佐王铎滑州幕。
现代文：李琪是豪门贵族的后代，他的父亲李敬是唐朝广明中佐滑州王铎的参谋。
English: Li Qi is a descendant of a wealthy aristocrat. His father, Li Jing, was a staff officer of the Tang Dynasty Guangming lieutenant-colonel, Leshou Wang Yao.

古文：琪生而敏异，十岁通六籍。遂博览文史。
现代文：李琪生下来就特别聪明，十岁就懂了诗书礼乐春秋六经，然后又博览文史群书，无论是睡觉和休息的时候都不忘学。
English: Li Qi was born with special intelligence. At the age of ten, she understood the six classics of poetry, ritual and music, and then read books on literature and history. She did not forget to study even when she was sleeping or resting.

古文：如寤宿习。十三，词赋诗颂，大为时贤亲赏。
现代文：十三岁的时候所作的词赋诗颂，就得到亲戚朋友的赞赏。
English: When he was 13 years old, he wrote a poem called "Chu Fu Shisong," which was appreciated by his relatives and friends.

古文：府帅王铎闻而异之。然每见所作。亦有疑志。
现代文：府帅王铎听到后感到奇怪，每次看到李琪的诗作，都抱有怀疑。
English: The prefectural governor Wang Yao felt strange after hearing this. Every time he saw Li Qi's poems, he was suspicious.

古文：铎尝留其父敬及幕府帅饮，密遣人以汉祖三杰赋题试之，俟毕持去。
现代文：王铎曾经留下李琪的父亲在府内喝酒，暗中派人以汉高祖手下三杰为题目去考试李琪作赋。
English: Wang Yao once left Li Qi's father to drink alcohol in the mansion and secretly sent someone to examine Li Qi's performance on the topic of the three outstanding men of Han Gao Zu.

古文：赋尾云：得士则昌，非贤罔共。
现代文：等到李琪作完了，拿回来交给王铎，赋的末尾写道：得到人才就昌盛，不是贤士不要与之共事。
English: When Li Qi finished, she took it back and gave it to Wang Qi. At the end of the poem, she wrote: "If you get talent, you will prosper. If you are not a sage, don't work with them."

古文：龙头之友斯贵，鼎足之臣可重。
现代文：像三国一龙三友一样的朋友非常珍贵，如鼎足一样支撑局面的大臣要格外器重。
English: Friends like the Three Kingdoms, One Dragon, Three Friends are very precious, and the minister who supports the situation like the top foot should be particularly important.

古文：宜哉项氏之所以亡，一范增而不能用。
现代文：项羽之所以失败灭亡，主要是有范增而不用。
English: The reason for the failure and demise of Xiang Yu is mainly due to the increase in standards.

古文：铎骇曰：此儿大器也。
现代文：王铎惊奇地说：这个孩子能成为大器啊！
English: Wang Yao said in surprise, "This child can become a great instrument!"

古文：将欲发其文价，乃以赋示坐客，一席称奖。
现代文：想要抬高他的文章的声价，便将他作的赋拿给座上的官员客人们看，大家全都称赞夸奖。
English: In order to raise the prestige of his article, he showed his tribute to the officials and guests present, and everyone praised and praised.

古文：他日总角谒铎，铎顾曰：适蜀中诏到，用夏州拓跋思恭为京北收复都统，可作一诗否？
现代文：有一天李琪去拜见王铎，王铎看着他说：正好蜀中的公文到了，任用夏州拓跋思恭为京北收复都统。你能以此为题材写一首诗吗？
English: One day, Li Qi went to see Wang Qi. Wang Qi looked at him and said, "It just so happens that the official document from Shuzhong has arrived, appointing Xia Zhou Tuoba Sikyong to recover the capital for Beijing and the North. Can you write a poem based on this?

古文：即秉笔立制云：飞骑经巴栈，鸿恩及夏台。
现代文：李琪拿过笔立即写成一首诗：飞骑经巴栈，鸿恩及夏台。
English: Li Qi picked up a pen and immediately wrote a poem: "Flying on horseback through Bacheng, Hong'en and Xatai."

古文：将从上天去，人自日边来。
现代文：将从天上去。人自日边来。
English: It will come from the sky. People will come from the sun.

古文：此处金门远，何时玉辇回。
现代文：此处金门远。何时玉辇回。
English: It's a long way to Kinmen from here. When will you be back?

古文：早平关右贼，莫待诏书催。
现代文：早平关右贼，莫待诏书催。
English: Sooner or later, the thief will be caught. Don't wait for an edict.

古文：铎益奇之，因执琪手曰：此真凤毛也。
现代文：王铎更加惊奇，握着李琪的手说：你真是少有的人才啊！
English: Wang Yao was even more surprised, shaking Li Qi's hand and saying, "You really are a rare talent!

古文：时年十四岁。
现代文：这时李琪才十四岁。
English: At this time, Li Qi was only fourteen years old.

古文：明年丁母忧，因流寓青齐间。
现代文：第二年，他母亲死了，他家搬到青齐一带居住。
English: The following year, his mother died, and his family moved to Qingqi District.

古文：然糠照薪，俾夜作昼，览书数千卷，间为诗赋。
现代文：他烧米糠和木柴照明，将夜间当作白天，看书数千卷，同时写了不少诗赋。
English: He burned rice straw and firewood for lighting, treated the night as day, read thousands of volumes, and wrote a lot of poems.

古文：唐僖宗再幸梁洋，窃赋云：哀痛不下诏，登封谁上书。
现代文：唐僖宗再次巡视梁洋时，李琪私下写了一篇赋说：哀痛不下诏，登封谁上书。
English: When Tang Xizong once again inspected Liang Yang, Li Qi privately wrote a Fu saying: "There is no mourning without an edict, who will write a letter to the emperor?"

古文：又忽忽不乐，恨未得转四体，为训诰之语。
现代文：到昭宗时，李琪参加科举考试被录取，过后他又忽然不高兴了，恨自己没有分别用四种字体书写训导文章和诏书等考试文章。
English: When he arrived at Zhaozong, Li Qi was admitted to take the entrance examination. After that, he suddenly became unhappy, hating that he did not write the examination articles such as the teaching article and the edict in four different fonts.

古文：及梁祖受禅，琪始自前殿中侍御史，擢翰林学士。
现代文：等到后梁的太祖皇帝接受皇位时，李琪从前殿中侍御史，提拔为翰林学士。
English: When the emperor, Hou Liang's great-grandfather, accepted the throne, Li Qi served him from the front hall and was promoted to Hanlin Scholar.

古文：刘神童
现代文：刘神童
English: Liu Sheng Tong

古文：刘神童者，昭宗朝以乡荐擢第，时年六岁矣。
现代文：刘神童在昭宗当皇帝的时候，经推荐参加科举考试被录取，当时只有六岁。
English: Liu Sheng Tong was only six years old when he was recommended to take the imperial examinations by Emperor Zhaozong.

古文：帝召于便殿复试之，神童朗讽经书，初无微误，帝大称，因掇御盘果实赐之。左右侍臣，俱有羡色。
现代文：皇帝将他叫到偏殿复试，他背诵经典著作没有一点差错。皇帝大为称赏，拿御盘中的水果给他吃，左右的官员均流露出羡慕的神色。
English: The emperor called him to the hall to retake the exam, and he recited the classics without a single mistake. The emperor was very appreciative and gave him the fruit from the royal platter to eat, and the officials on both sides were full of admiration.

古文：故都官郑谷赠之诗曰：习读在前生，僧谭足可明。
现代文：都官郑谷赠诗说：习读在前生，僧谭足可明。
English: Zheng Gu, the prefectural official, presented a poem, saying, "Studying reading is the first step, and the monk Tan Jie is the best."

古文：还家虽解苦，登第未知荣。
现代文：还家虽解苦，登第未知荣。
English: Although the family returned home to relieve their hardships, they achieved unknown glory.

古文：时果曾沾赐，春关不任情。
现代文：时果曾沾赐，春关不任情。
English: The time and the result have been given, and the spring pass will not be tolerated.

古文：灯前犹恶卧，呓语诵书声。
现代文：灯前独恶卧，呓语诵书声。
English: Lying alone in front of the lamp, chanting slang.

古文：路德延
现代文：路德延
English: Lu De Yan

古文：路德延，儋州岩相之犹子也。数岁能为诗。
现代文：路德延是儋州路严相的侄子，他九岁就能作诗。
English: Lu Deyan is the nephew of Luzhou Lu Yan, who could write poems at the age of nine.

古文：居学舍中，尝赋芭蕉诗曰：一种灵苗异，天然体性虚。
现代文：他在学里作了一首歌咏芭蕉的诗说：一种灵苗异，天然体性虚。
English: At school, he wrote a song based on Basho's poem, saying: "A kind of ingenuity, natural physical deception.

古文：叶如斜界纸，心似倒抽书。
现代文：叶如斜界纸，心似倒抽书。
English: Leaves like diagonal paper, hearts like upside-down books.

古文：诗成，翌日传于都。
现代文：诗成以后，第二天就在京城流传开来。
English: After the poem was completed, it was circulated in the capital the next day.

古文：会儋州坐事诛，故德延久不能振。
现代文：路严相在儋州获罪被诛杀，影响路德延长时期无法出人头地。
English: Lu Yanfang was found guilty and beaten to death in Zhangzhou, which affected Luther's prolonged period of not being able to get ahead.

古文：光化初，方就举擢第，大有诗价。
现代文：直到光化初年，他才参加科举考试被录取，从此诗的声价大增。
English: It wasn't until his first year in Gwanghwamun that he was accepted to take the entrance exam, and from then on, the value of his poems soared.

古文：又为感旧诗曰：初骑竹马咏芭蕉，尝忝名卿诵满朝。
现代文：这时他又作了一首感怀芭蕉的诗说：初骑竹马咏芭蕉，尝忝名卿咏满朝。
English: At this time, he also wrote a poem expressing his fondness for the plant, saying: "First ride the bamboo horse, pick the plant, taste the famous cucumber, fill the morning."

古文：五字便容过绛帐，一枝寻许折丹霄。
现代文：五字便容过绛帐，一枝寻许折丹霄。
English: Five characters will be able to tolerate the account, and one will be able to break the sky.

古文：岂知流落萍蓬远，不觉推迁岁月遥。
现代文：岂知流落萍篷远，不觉推迁岁月遥。
English: Don't you know that you are far away from home, and you have been away for a long time.

古文：国境永宁身未立。至今颜巷守箪瓢。
现代文：国境永宁身未立，至今颜巷守简瓢。
English: The border of Yongning has not yet been established, and Yan Xiangguo Jianyuan has been promoted.

古文：天佑中，授左拾遗。
现代文：天佑年间，他被任命为左拾遗。
English: During the Tenyou era, he was appointed as Zuozhuizhong.

古文：会河中节度使朱友谦领镇，辟掌书记。
现代文：后来他又随同河中节度使朱友谦离开朝廷去担任书记。
English: Later, he also followed the edict of the middle of the river to make Zhu Youqian leave the imperial court to work as a secretary.

古文：乃因醉沉之黄河。诗实佳作也。尔后虽继有和者，皆去德延远矣。
现代文：路德延的这首诗确实是佳作，虽然后来不断有人用原韵和诗，但都与路德延的诗相差太远。
English: Lu Deyan's poem is indeed an excellent work, although later some people continued to use the original rhyme and verse, but they are too far from Lu Deyan's poem.

古文：诗曰：情态任天然，桃红两颊鲜。
现代文：路德延的原诗是：情态任天然，桃红两颊鲜。
English: Lu Deyan's original poem is: The situation is natural, the rosy cheeks are fresh.

古文：乍行人共看，初语客多怜。臂膊肥如瓠，肌肤软胜绵。
现代文：乍行人共看，初语客多怜，臂膊肥如瓠，肌肤软胜绵。
English: The first-time visitors are more pitiful, the arms are fat, and the skin is soft and supple.

古文：长头才覆额。分角渐垂肩。
现代文：长头才覆额，分角渐垂肩。
English: The forehead should be covered with a long head, and the shoulders should be gradually lowered.

古文：散诞无尘虑，逍遥占地仙。
现代文：散诞无尘虑，逍遥占地仙。
English: Sanzo is a carefree, happy-go-lucky earth dweller.

古文：排衙朱榻上，喝道画堂前。
现代文：排衙朱榻上，喝道画堂前。
English: On a row of red-painted tatami mats, drinking in front of a painting gallery.

古文：合调歌杨柳，齐声踏采莲。走堤冲细雨，奔巷趁轻烟。
现代文：合调歌杨柳，齐声踏采莲，走堤冲细雨，奔巷趁轻烟。
English: Singing poplar willows in unison, picking lotuses in unison, walking along the embankment to beat the drizzle, running through the streets to take advantage of the light smoke.

古文：嫩竹乘为马，新蒲掉作鞭。
现代文：嫩竹乘为马，新蒲掉作鞭。
English: Bamboo shoots are used as horses, and new shoots are used as whips.

古文：鴡雏金旋系，獢子采丝牵。
现代文：鴡雏金旋系，獢子采丝牵。
English: The chrysalis is a golden spiral system, and the pincers pick up the threads.

古文：拥鹤归晴岛，驱鹅入暖泉。
现代文：拥鹤归晴岛，驱鹅入暖泉。
English: The cranes return to Harajima, and the geese are driven into a warm spring.

古文：杨花争弄雪，榆叶共收钱。
现代文：杨花争弄雪，榆叶共收钱。
English: The poplars compete to make snow, and the maple leaves collect money.

古文：锡镜当胸挂，银珠对耳悬。
现代文：锡镜当胸挂，银珠对耳悬。
English: A pewter mirror hangs on his chest, silver beads dangle from his ears.

古文：头依苍鹘裹，袖学拓枝揎。
现代文：头依苍鹘里，袖学拓枝揎。
English: The head is in a heron's beak, and the sleeves are in an embroidered tassel.

古文：酒殢丹砂暖，茶催小玉煎。
现代文：酒殢丹砂暖，茶催小玉煎。
English: The wine is warm and the tea is roasted.

古文：频邀寿花插，时乞绣针穿。
现代文：频邀寿花插，时乞绣针穿。
English: Frequently invited to insert the lotus, when begging embroidery needles to wear.

古文：宝匣拿红豆，妆奁拾翠钿。
现代文：宝匣拿红豆，妆奁拾翠钿。
English: The treasure chest contains red beans, and the makeup drawer contains emeralds.

古文：短袍披案褥，劣帽戴靴毡。
现代文：短袍披案褥，劣帽带靴毡。
English: A short robe is draped over his shoulders, a shabby cap and boots are at his feet.

古文：展画趋三圣，开屏笑七贤。
现代文：展画趋三圣，开屏笑七贤。
English: The paintings in the exhibition tend to be the three saints and the seven sages.

古文：贮怀青杏小，垂额绿荷圆。
现代文：贮怀青杏小，垂额绿荷圆。
English: The blue apricot is small, and the green lotus is round.

古文：惊滴沾罗泪，娇流污锦涎。
现代文：惊滴沾罗泪，娇流污锦涎。
English: Shocked to the point of tears, Jiao Liu stains the brocade.

古文：倦书饶娅姹，憎药巧迁延。
现代文：倦书饶娅姹，憎药巧迁延。
English: Tired of the book, Rao Yaxuan, hate the medicine, Qiao Qianyan.

古文：弄帐鸾绡映，藏衾凤结缠。
现代文：弄帐鸾绡映，藏衾凤结缠。
English: If you make a mistake, you will regret it.

古文：指敲迎使鼓，箸拨赛神絃。
现代文：指敲迎使鼓，箸拨赛神絃。
English: Fingers beat the welcome drum, and chopsticks are used to beat the sacred drum.

古文：帘拂鱼钩动，筝推雁柱偏。
现代文：帘拂鱼钩动，筝推雁柱偏。
English: The curtain whisks the fish hook, the kite pushes the goose post.

古文：棋图添路画，笛管欠声镌。
现代文：棋图添画路，笛管欠声镌。
English: The chessboard adds a picture, the flute adds a chime.

古文：恼客初酣睡，惊僧半入禅。
现代文：恼客初酣睡，惊僧半入禅。
English: At first, the annoyed guest falls into a deep sleep, and then, to his surprise, he half enters into Zen.

古文：寻蛛穷屋瓦，探雀遍楼椽。
现代文：寻蛛穷屋瓦，探雀遍楼椽。
English: Looking for a spider in a poor house tile, searching for a sparrow all over the floor.

古文：抛果忙开口，藏钩乱出拳。
现代文：抛果忙开口，藏钩乱出拳。
English: Tossing the fruit, he quickly opened his mouth and unleashed a flurry of punches.

古文：夜分围榾柮，朝聚打秋千。
现代文：夜分围榾柮，朝聚打秋千。
English: At night, they gather around the bonfire, and in the morning, they play on the swings.

古文：折竹装泥燕，添丝放纸鸢。
现代文：折竹装泥燕，添丝放纸鸢。
English: Fold bamboo into muddy swallows, add silk to make paper cocoons.

古文：互夸轮水石岂，相效放风旋。
现代文：互夸轮水石岂，相效放风旋。
English: Mutual praise is like a water wheel, the effect is like a whirlwind.

古文：旗小裁红绢，书幽截碧笺。
现代文：旗小裁红绢，画幽裁碧笺。
English: The flag is a small-cropped red fern, with a faintly cropped tourmaline in the centre.

古文：远铺张鸽网，低控射蝇弦。
现代文：远铺张鸽网，低控射绳弦。
English: A pigeon net is spread far away, and a low-control shooting string is strung.

古文：吉语时时道，谣歌处处传。
现代文：吉语时时道，谣歌处处传。
English: The Yixing language is still spoken, and folk songs are passed down everywhere.

古文：匿窗肩乍曲，遮路臂相连。
现代文：匿窗肩乍曲，遮路臂相连。
English: The blinds of the windows are drawn up, and the shutters are connected.

古文：斗草当春迳，争球出晚田。
现代文：斗草当春迳，争球出晚田。
English: The grass is greener in spring, and the ball is in play in the evening.

古文：柳旁慵独坐，花底困横眠。
现代文：柳旁慵独坐，花底困横眠。
English: The willow next to the thistle sits alone, the flower bottom is sleepy.

古文：等鹊潜篱畔，听蛩伏砌边。
现代文：等鹊潜篱畔，听蛩伏砌边。
English: Wait for the sound of crickets on the edge of the hedge, listen for the sound of crickets on the edge of the wall.

古文：傍枝拈舞蝶，隈树捉鸣蝉。
现代文：傍枝拈舞蝶，隈树捉鸣蝉。
English: Butterflies dance in the branches, and cicadas sing in the trees.

古文：平岛跨跷上，层崖逞捷缘。
现代文：平岛跨跷上，层崖逞捷缘。
English: The flat island straddles the ridge, and the cliff rises steeply.

古文：嫩苔车迹小，深雪履痕全。
现代文：嫩苔车迹小，深雪履痕全。
English: Small moss tracks, deep snow tracks all over.

古文：竞指云生岫，齐呼月上天。
现代文：竞指云生岫，齐呼月上天。
English: They point their fingers at the clouds and shout at the moon.

古文：蚁窠寻迳属斤，峰穴绕阶填。
现代文：蚁窠寻径属斤，蜂穴绕阶填。
English: The ant cocoon is a catty, and the bee hole is filled with a winding step.

古文：樵唱回深岭，笙歌下远川。
现代文：樵唱回深岭，笙歌下远川。
English: The crickets sing back to the deep mountains, and the warblers sing down to the distant rivers.

古文：垒材为屋木，和土作盘筵。
现代文：垒材为屋木，和土作盘筵。
English: The base material is roof timbers and earthenware.

古文：险砌高台石，危挑峻塔砖。
现代文：险砌高台石，危挑峻塔砖。
English: Dangerous to build a high foundation stone, dangerous to build a steep tower brick.

古文：忽升邻舍树，逾上后池船。项橐称师日，甘罗作相年。
现代文：忽升邻舍树，逾上后池船，项橐称师日，甘罗作相年。
English: The neighbor's tree suddenly rises, the boat of the back pool is over the top, the day of the teacher is called the day of the teacher, and the year of the phase is made by Gan Luo.

古文：明时方在德，劝尔减狂颠。
现代文：明时方在德，劝尔减狂颠。
English: In the future, the party will be in Germany, and it is necessary to persuade and reduce the madness.

古文：韦庄
现代文：韦庄
English: Weizhuang

古文：韦庄幼时，常在华州下圭阝县侨居，多与邻巷诸儿会戏。
现代文：韦庄小时候经常到华州下圭阝县寄居，他很喜欢和胡同里邻居家的小孩在一起作游戏。
English: When Wei Zhuang was a child, he often lived in Huazhou, Shimo-Guizhou County. He liked to play games with the children of his neighbors in the alley.

古文：及广明乱后，再经旧里，追思往中，但有遗踪。因赋诗以记之。
现代文：等到广明之乱以后，他又回到这里，回想起往事，看到熟悉的景物，便作了一首诗作纪念。
English: After the Guangming Rebellion, he came back here, recalled the past, saw familiar scenery, and composed a poem as a memorial.

古文：又途次逢李氏诸昆季，亦尝赋感旧诗，下圭阝诗曰：昔为童稚不知愁，竹马闲乘绕县游。
现代文：在途中他又遇到了小时候的朋友李家兄弟，于是又作了一首感怀旧事的诗。在下圭阝作的诗是：昔为童稚不知愁，竹马闲乘绕县游。
English: On the way, he met his childhood friends, the Lijia brothers, and wrote another nostalgic poem. The poem written by Guizhou was: I used to be childish and carefree. I used to travel around the county by horse and buggy.

古文：曾为看花偷出郭，也因逃学暂登楼。
现代文：曾为看花偷出郭，也因偷学暂登楼。
English: He once sneaked out of the ward to look at flowers, and was also suspended from school for stealing.

古文：招他邑客来还醉，才得先生去始休。
现代文：招他邑客来还醉，才得先生去始休。
English: He invited his guests to his home and was still drunk when he had to leave for the day.

古文：今日故人无处问，夕阳衰草尽荒丘。
现代文：今日故人无处问，夕阳衰草尽荒丘。
English: Today, the dead have nowhere to go. The sun sets and the grass withers in the barren hills.

古文：又逢李氏弟兄诗曰：御沟西面朱门宅，记得当时好弟兄。
现代文：遇到李家兄弟作的诗是：御沟西面朱门宅，记得当时好弟兄。
English: The poem written by the Li brothers that I came across was: The Zhumen residence on the west side of Gogou. I remember that they were good brothers at that time.

古文：晓傍柳阴骑竹马，夜隈灯影弄先生。
现代文：晓傍柳阴骑竹马，夜隈灯影弄先生。
English: Xiaobai Liuyin riding a bamboo horse, the night lights and shadows in the neighborhood.

古文：巡街趁蝶衣裳破，上屋探雏手脚轻。
现代文：巡街趁蝶衣裳破，上屋探雏手脚轻。
English: Street patrols take advantage of the butterfly's broken clothes, and roof explorers are light on their feet.

古文：今日相逢俱老大，忧家忧国尽公卿。
现代文：今日相逢俱老大，忧家忧国尽公卿。
English: Today, we meet the boss of the club, worried about the family, worried about the country, and worried about the court.

