古文：符瑞中
现代文：麒麟，是仁德之兽。
English: The unicorn is a benevolent beast.

古文：麒麟者，仁兽也。
现代文：雄兽叫麒，雌兽叫麟。
English: The male animal is called the baboon, and the female animal is called the unicorn.

古文：牡曰麒，牝曰麟。
现代文：既不是胎生也不是卵生。
English: It is neither viviparous nor oviparous.

古文：不刳胎剖卵则至。麕身而牛尾，狼项而一角，黄色而马足。
现代文：它身体像獐而生有一条牛尾，颈项似狼而生有一只角，黄色皮毛而生成马足。
English: Its body is like a tadpole and has a cow's tail, its neck is like a wolf and has a horn, and its yellow fur forms a horse's foot.

古文：含仁而戴义，音中钟吕，步中规矩，不践生虫，不折生草，不食不义，不饮洿池，不入坑阱，不行罗网。
现代文：它具有仁义的天性，声音符合钟吕的音律，步行符合规矩，不践踏活的虫子，不折断活的草木，不食不义得来的食物，不饮污浊的池水，不误入陷阱裹，不走进罗网中。
English: It has the nature of benevolence and righteousness, its voice conforms to the melody of the bell, its walk conforms to the rules, it does not trample on live insects, it does not break live plants, it does not eat food obtained unfairly, it does not drink dirty pool water, it does not fall into traps, and it does not walk into traps.

古文：明王动静有仪则见。
现代文：圣明帝王行为符合规矩就会出现。
English: If Emperor Saint Ming behaves according to the rules, he will appear.

古文：牡鸣曰 逝圣 ，牝鸣曰 归和 ，春鸣曰 扶幼 ，夏鸣曰 养绥 。
现代文：雄兽呜叫称逝圣，雌兽呜叫称归和，春曰呜叫称扶幼，夏曰呜叫称养绥。
English: The male animal calls for the death of the saint, the female animal calls for the return to peace, the spring calls for the support of the young, and the summer calls for the rearing of the stork.

古文：汉武帝元狩元年十月，行幸雍，祠五畤，获白麟。
现代文：汉武帝元狩元年十月，巡行至雍地，在五峙原祭祀，获得白麟。
English: In October of the first year of the reign of Emperor Hanwu, he went on a procession to Yongdi and was awarded a white unicorn at the Wuzhizhihara ritual.

古文：汉武帝太始二年三月，获白麟。
现代文：汉武帝太始二年三月，获得白麟。
English: In March of the second year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, he received the white unicorn.

古文：汉章帝元和二年以来，至章和元年，凡三年，麒麟五十一见郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和二年以来，至章和元年，共三年，麒麟在郡国出现了五十一次。
English: From the 2nd year of Emperor Zhang of Han to the 1st year of Emperor Zhang, a total of three years, the unicorn appeared 51 times in the county.

古文：汉安帝延光三年七月，麒麟见颍川阳翟。
现代文：汉安帝延光三年七月，麒麟出现在颍川郡的阳翟。
English: In July of the 3rd year of the reign of Emperor An of Han, the unicorn appeared in Yangshuo, Jiangchuan County.

古文：延光三年八月戊子，麒麟见颍川阳翟。
现代文：延光三年八月戊子日，麒麟出现在颖川郡的区翟。
English: In August of the third year of Yan Guang, the Kirin appeared in the district capital of Yingchuan County.

古文：延光四年正月壬午，麒麟见东郡濮阳。
现代文：廷光四年正月壬午曰，麒麟出现在东郡的濮阳。
English: On the morning of the first month of the fourth year of Tingguang, the unicorn appeared in the eastern county of Shenyang.

古文：汉献帝延康元年，麒麟十见郡国。
现代文：汉献帝延康元年，麒麟在郡国出现了十次。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, the unicorn appeared ten times in the county.

古文：吴孙权赤乌元年八月，武昌言麒麟见。
现代文：吴孙权赤乌元年八月，武昌传说出现了麒麟。
English: In August of the first year of Wu Sun Quan's reign, the Kirin appeared in the legends of Wuchang.

古文：又白麟见建业。
现代文：又有白麟出现在建业。
English: Another white unicorn appeared in Jianye.

古文：晋武帝泰始元年十二月，麒麟见南郡枝江。
现代文：晋武帝泰始元年十二月，麒麟出现于南郡的枝江。
English: In December of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Jin Dynasty, the unicorn appeared in the Yangtze River in Nan County.

古文：晋武帝咸宁五年二月甲午，白麟见平原鬲县。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁五年二月甲午，白麟出现在平原郡的鬲县。
English: On the afternoon of February 1st in the 5th year of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, the white unicorn appeared in Jixian County of Pingyuan County.

古文：咸宁五年九月甲午，麒麟见河南阳城。
现代文：咸宁五年九月甲午曰，麒麟出现于河南郡的匾继。
English: On the afternoon of September 1st in Xianning in the 5th year of the Heian period, the unicorn appeared in Suihe, Henan County.

古文：晋武帝太康元年四月，白麟见顿丘。
现代文：晋武帝太康元年四月，白麟出现在顿丘。
English: In April of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang, Bai Lin appeared in Dongqiu.

古文：晋愍帝建兴二年九月丙戌，麒麟见襄平，州刺史崔毖以闻。
现代文：晋愍帝建兴二年九月丙戌曰，麒麟出现在襄平，州刺史崔毖向朝廷报告。
English: In September of the second year of the reign of Emperor Jianxing of the Jin Dynasty, it was reported to the imperial court that the Kirin appeared in Xiangping, and the provincial magistrate, Cui Wei, came to the court.

古文：晋元帝太兴元年正月戊子，麒麟见豫章。
现代文：晋元帝太兴元年正月戊子曰。麒麟出现于豫章。
English: Jin Emperor Taixing said in the first month of the first year of the year. Kirin appeared in Yuzhang.

古文：晋成帝咸和八年五月己巳，麒麟见辽东。
现代文：晋成帝咸和八年五月己巳闩，麒麟出现于辽东。
English: In May of the eighth year of Emperor Jincheng's reign, the unicorn appeared in Liaodong.

古文：凤凰者，仁鸟也。
现代文：凤凰，是仁德之鸟。
English: The phoenix is the bird of benevolence.

古文：不刳胎剖卵则至。
现代文：既不是胎生也不是卵生。
English: It is neither viviparous nor oviparous.

古文：或翔或集。
现代文：有时飞翔，有时栖止。
English: Sometimes flying, sometimes perched.

古文：雄曰凤，雌曰凰。
现代文：雄鸟称凤，雌鸟称凰。
English: The male bird is called phoenix, the female bird is called phoenix.

古文：蛇头燕颔，龟背鳖腹，鹤颈鸡喙，鸿前鱼尾，青首骈翼，鹭立而鸳鸯思。
现代文：头似蛇，颔似燕，背似龟，腹似鳖，颈似鹤，喙似鶸，前胸似鸿，后尾似鱼，青色的头颅和脖子，相连的双翼，像鹭鸶那样站立，像鸳鸯那样相思。
English: Head like a snake, beak like a swallow, back like a turtle, belly like a dragonfly, neck like a crane, beak like a dragonfly, chest like a giant, tail like a fish, blue head and neck, connected wings, standing like a dragonfly, like a dragonfly.

古文：首戴德而背负仁，项荷义而膺抱信，足履正而尾系武。
现代文：头戴德背负仁，颈项荷义胸前抱信，足走正道，尾系威武。
English: The head is dexterous, the back is dexterous, the neck is dexterous, the chest is dexterous, the feet are on the right path, and the tail is powerful.

古文：小音中钟，大音中鼓。
现代文：小声呜叫像子声，大声呜叫似鼓声。
English: Low-pitched whining sounds like a cymbal, while high-pitched whining sounds like a drum.

古文：延颈奋翼，五光备举。
现代文：伸长颈项奋力展翅，便五色光芒具备。
English: The elongated nape of the neck struggles to spread its wings, and the five-colored radiance appears.

古文：兴八风，降时雨，食有节，饮有仪，往有文，来有嘉，游必择地，饮不妄下。
现代文：能使八面来风，降下及时雨，吃食有节制，饮水有规矩，飞去有纹彩，飞来有嘉瑞。所行之处一定选择地方，饮食不轻率地飞下。
English: Can make the wind blow in all directions, timely rain fall, eat and drink with moderation, drink water with rules, fly away with patterns, fly in with luck. Wherever you go, you must choose a place, and do not eat and drink carelessly.

古文：其鸣，雄曰 节节 ，雌曰 足足 。
现代文：雄乌呜声为 节节 ，雌鸟鸣声为 足足 。
English: The male's call is 節節, and the female's call is 足足.

古文：晨鸣曰 发明 ，昼鸣曰 上朔 ，夕鸣曰 归昌 ，昏鸣曰 固常 ，夜鸣曰 保长 。
现代文：早晨呜叫称发明，白天呜叫称上朔，傍晚呜叫称归昌，黄昏呜叫称固常，夜晚呜叫称保长。
English: Morning whine is called invention, daytime whine is called ascent, evening whine is called return, dusk whine is called fixed, and night whine is called protection.

古文：其乐也，徘徘徊徊，雍雍喈喈。
现代文：欢乐时，徘徘徊徊，雍雍喈喈。
English: When rejoicing, linger, linger, linger.

古文：唯凤皇为能究万物，通天祉，象百状，达王道，率五音，成九德，备文武，正下国。
现代文：惟有凤凰能够推究万物，通晓上天的福祉，综合各种动物的特征，明达王道，鸣声符合五音，具有九种品德，具备文武资质，匡正天下郡国。
English: Only the phoenix can investigate all things, know the welfare of heaven, integrate the characteristics of various animals, know the king's way, sing in tune with the five tones, have nine kinds of virtues, have literary and military qualifications, and uphold the country.

古文：故得凤之象，一则过之，二则翔之，三则集之，四则春秋居之，五则终身居之。
现代文：所以凤凰出现的符瑞，一是经过某地，二是在某地飞翔，三是栖息某地，四是春秋两季居住某地，五是终身居住某地。
English: Therefore, the signs of the phoenix, one is to pass through a certain place, the second is to fly in a certain place, the third is to live in a certain place, the fourth is to live in a certain place in spring and autumn, and the fifth is to live in a certain place for life.

古文：汉昭帝始元三年十月，凤皇集东海，遣使祠其处。
现代文：汉昭帝始元三年十月，凤凰停留在东海，派遣使者在当地建立祠庙。
English: In October of the third year of Emperor Han Zhao's reign, the phoenix stayed in the East Sea and sent an envoy to establish an ancestral temple there.

古文：汉宣帝本始元年五月，凤皇集胶东。
现代文：汉宣帝本始元年五月，凤凰停留在胶束。
English: In May of the first year of Emperor Han Xuan's reign, the phoenix stayed in Micellar.

古文：本始四年五月，凤皇集北海。
现代文：本始四年五月，凤凰停留在北海。
English: In May of this year, the phoenix stayed in the North Sea.

古文：汉宣帝地节二年四月，凤皇集鲁，群鸟从之。
现代文：汉宣帝地节二年四月，凤凰停留在鲁地，群鸟随从。
English: In April of the second year of the Han Xuan Di Festival, the phoenix stayed in Ludi, followed by birds.

古文：汉宣帝元康元年三月，凤皇集泰山、陈留。
现代文：汉宣帝元康元年三月，凤凰停留在泰山、陈留二地。
English: In March of the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuan of the Han Dynasty, the phoenix stayed in Taishan and Chenlu.

古文：元康四年，南郡获威凤。
现代文：元康四年，南郡获得威凤。
English: In the fourth year of Yuan Kang, Nan County won Weifeng.

古文：汉宣帝神雀二年二月，凤皇集京师，群鸟从之以万数。
现代文：汉宣帝神雀二年二月，凤凰停留在京师，随从的群乌达数万只。
English: In February of the second year of the reign of Emperor Han Xuan, the phoenix stayed in Beijing, accompanied by tens of thousands of cranes.

古文：神雀四年春，凤皇集京师。
现代文：神雀四年春，凤凰停留在京师。
English: In the spring of the 4th year of the divine bird, the phoenix stayed in the capital.

古文：神雀四年十月，凤皇十一集杜陵。
现代文：神雀四年十月，凤凰十一次在杜陵停留。
English: In October of the 4th year of the Divine Sparrow, the phoenix made its 11th stop at the mausoleum.

古文：神雀四年十二月，凤皇集上林。
现代文：神雀四年十二月，凤凰停留在上林苑。
English: In December of the year of the divine sparrow, the phoenix stayed in Shanglin Yuan.

古文：汉宣帝甘露三年二月，凤皇集新蔡，群鸟四面行列，皆向凤皇立，以万数。
现代文：汉宣帝甘露三年二月，凤凰停留在新蔡，群乌环绕四方排列，都向凤凰侍立，有成千上万只。
English: In February of the third year of Emperor Han Xuan's reign, the phoenix stayed in Xin Cai, and the phoenix was surrounded by thousands of phoenixes.

古文：汉光武建武十七年十月，凤皇五，高八九尺，毛羽五采，集颍川郡，群鸟并从行列，盖地数顷，留十七日乃去。
现代文：汉光武帝建武十七年十月，凤凰五只，齐集颖川郡，高有八九尺，羽毛五彩缤纷，群乌随从排列，覆盖地面达数顷，停留了十七天才离去。
English: In October of the 17th year of the reign of Emperor Jianwu of the Han Dynasty, five phoenixes gathered in Yingchuan County. They were 89 feet tall, had colorful feathers, and were followed by a flock of doves. They covered several hectares of land. They stayed for 17 days before leaving.

古文：汉章帝元和二年以来，至章和元年，凡三年，凤皇百三十九见郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和二年至章和元年，共三年，凤凰出现于郡国共一百三十九次。
English: From the 2nd year of Emperor Zhang of Han to the 1st year of Emperor Zhang, a total of three years, the phoenix appeared in the county a total of 139 times.

古文：汉安帝延光三年二月，车驾东巡。
现代文：汉安帝延光三年二月，皇帝东巡。
English: In February of the third year of the Han Dynasty, the emperor went on an eastern tour.

古文：其月戊子，凤皇集济南台县丞霍收舍树上，赐台长嶷帛十五匹，收二十匹，尉半之，吏卒人三匹；凤皇所过亭部，无出今年田租；赐男子爵人二级。
现代文：这个月的戊子曰，凤凰停留在济南郡台县丞霍收屋舍的树上，朝廷赐给台逊长嶷十五匹帛，赐给霍收二十匹，县尉所得是霍收的一半，吏卒每人三匹；凤凰经过的亭部，免交当年的田租；赐给当地男子每人二级爵位。
English: According to this month's "Wu Zi," the phoenix stayed on a tree at the residence of the ruler of Taishan County, Jinan County, Zhuo Huo Hui. The imperial court gave the ruler of Taishan County 15 horses, the ruler of Huo Hui County 20 horses, the county commander half of Huo Hui's income, and the officials three horses each; the pavilion where the phoenix passed through was exempt from paying the year's field rent; and each local man was given a second-class knighthood.

古文：延光三年十月壬午，凤皇集京兆新丰西界槐树。
现代文：延光三年十月壬午日，凤凰停留在京兆所辖的新丰县西界的槐树上。
English: On the afternoon of October in the third year of Yan Guang, the phoenix stayed in the eucalyptus trees on the western border of Xinfeng County under the jurisdiction of Jing Zhao.

古文：汉桓帝建和元年十一月，凤皇见济阴己氏。
现代文：汉桓帝建和元年十一月，凤凰出现于济阴的己氏。
English: In November of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jianhe of the Han Dynasty, a phoenix appeared in Ji Clan, Jiyin.

古文：汉灵帝光和四年秋，五色大鸟见新城，群鸟随之。
现代文：汉灵帝光和四年秋，五色大乌出现于新城，群乌随从。
English: In the autumn of the 4th year of Emperor Guangwu's reign, the Five-Colored Emperor Wushu appeared in Xincheng, followed by a group of Emperor Wushu.

古文：民皆谓之凤皇。
现代文：民众都说这是凤凰。
English: People are saying it's a phoenix.

古文：汉献帝延康元年八月，石邑县言凤皇集。
现代文：汉献帝延康元年八月，石邑县说有凤凰栖止。
English: In August of the first year of the Han Dynasty, Yan Kang, it was said that there was a phoenix in Shiyi County.

古文：又郡国十三言凤皇见。
现代文：又郡国十三次上报凤凰出现。
English: In addition, the phoenix appeared for the thirteenth time in the county.

古文：吴孙权黄武五年七月，苍梧言凤皇见。孙权黄龙元年四月，夏口、武昌并言凤皇见。
现代文：吴孙权黄武五年七月，苍梧说有凤凰出现孙权黄龙元年四月，夏旦、盅昌都说有凤凰出现。
English: In July of the fifth year of Wu Sun Quan Huang Wu, Cang Wu said that a phoenix appeared. In April of the first year of Sun Quan Huanglong, Xia Dan and Qichang said that a phoenix appeared.

古文：吴孙亮建兴二年十一月，大鸟五见于春申。
现代文：吴孙亮建兴二年十一月，大鸟五次出现于春申。
English: In November of the second year of Wusunliang Jianxing, the big bird appeared five times in Chunshen.

古文：吴孙皓建衡四年正月，西苑言凤皇集。
现代文：吴孙皓建衡四年正月，西苑说有凤凰停留。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Wu Sun Ying Jianheng, Xi Yuan said that there was a phoenix stopover.

古文：晋武帝泰始元年十二月，凤皇见上党高都。
现代文：晋武帝泰始元年十二月，凤凰出现于上党的高都。
English: In December of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, the phoenix appeared in the high capital of the Shang Dynasty.

古文：泰始元年十二月，凤皇二见河南山阳。
现代文：泰始元年十二月，凤凰二次出现于河南的山区。
English: In December of the year 1200, the phoenix appeared for the second time in the mountains of Henan.

古文：泰始元年十二月，凤皇三见冯翊下邽。
现代文：泰始元年十二月，凤凰三次出现于冯翊的下邙。
English: In December of the first year of Taiji, the phoenix appeared three times in Feng Yao's lower eyelid.

古文：晋穆帝升平四年二月辛亥，凤皇将九子见郧乡之丰城。
现代文：晋穆帝升平四年二月辛亥曰，凤凰携带九只幼雏出现于郧乡的丰城。
English: In February of the 4th year of the reign of Emperor Jinmu, the phoenix carrying nine young chicks appeared in Fengcheng, Xingxiang.

古文：十二月甲子，又见丰城，众鸟随从。
现代文：十二月甲子日，又出现在丰城，众鸟随从。
English: On December 1st, it appeared again in Fengcheng, accompanied by many birds.

古文：升平五年四月己未，凤皇集沔北，至于辛酉。
现代文：升平五年四月己末日，凤凰停留在沔水之北，直到辛酉日。
English: On the last day of April in the 5th year of the Heian period, the phoenix stayed in the north of Surabaya until the end of the year.

古文：百姓聚观之。
现代文：百姓聚观凤凰。
English: People gather to watch the phoenix.

古文：宋武帝永初元年七月戊戌，凤皇见会稽山阴。
现代文：宋武帝永初元年七月戊戌曰，凤凰出现于会稽郡的山阴县。
English: In July of the first year of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Wu Yong said that the phoenix appeared in Shanyin County, Heji County.

古文：文帝元嘉十四年三月丙申，大鸟二集秣陵民王顗园中李树上，大如孔雀，头足小高，毛羽鲜明，文采五色，声音谐从，众鸟如山鸡者随之，如行三十步顷，东南飞去。
现代文：文帝元嘉十四年三月丙申，大鸟二次停留在秣陵县百姓王题园中的李树上，大如孔雀，头小足高，羽毛鲜丽明亮，五彩缤纷，声音和美动人，众乌如山鸡等随从，大约行走了三十来步，往东南飞去。
English: In March of the 14th year of Emperor Wen of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the big bird stayed for the second time on the plum tree in the people's Wang Qi Garden in Fuling County. It was as big as a peacock, with a small head and high feet, bright feathers, colorful, beautiful and beautiful, and was accompanied by many birds such as mountain chickens. It walked about thirty steps and flew to the southeast.

古文：扬州刺史彭城王义康以闻。
现代文：握业刺史彭城王刘盏尘上报朝廷。
English: Wang Liu, the successor of Wang Shishi, reported to the imperial court.

古文：改鸟所集永昌里曰凤皇里。
现代文：将鸟栖止的地方永昌里改为凤凰里。
English: The bird roosting place Yongchang-ri was changed to Fenghuang-ri.

古文：孝武帝孝建元年正月庚申，凤皇见丹徒篸贤亭，双鹄为引，众鸟陪从。
现代文：孝武帝孝建元年正月庚申曰，凤凰出现于且彼的憩贤亭，一对天鹅在前面引路，众鸟陪伴随从。
English: Emperor Xiaowu of Xiaojian in the first month of the year 1 said that the phoenix appeared in his pavilion, a pair of swans led the way in front, accompanied by many birds.

古文：征虏将军武昌王浑以闻。
现代文：征虏将军武昌王刘浑上报朝廷。
English: Liu Hun, the conscript general Wuchang Wang, reported to the imperial court.

古文：神鸟者，赤神之精也，知音声清浊和调者也。
现代文：神乌，是赤神的精华，知晓声音的清浊和声调。
English: Shenwu, the essence of the Red God, knows the clarity and tone of the voice.

古文：虽赤色而备五采，鸡身，鸣中五音，肃肃雍雍。
现代文：虽然足红色，但五彩具备，身体似鸡，呜声符合五音，肃肃雍雍。
English: Although the foot is red, it has five colors, the body is like a chicken, the whine is consistent with the five tones, and it is solemn.

古文：喜则鸣舞，乐处幽隐。
现代文：高兴时便鸣唱舞蹈，喜欢处在幽静隐秘的地方。
English: They sing and dance when they are happy, and like to be in a quiet, secluded place.

古文：风俗从则至。
现代文：风俗淳朴合度便会出现。
English: Customs of simplicity and conformity will emerge.

古文：汉宣帝五凤三年三月辛丑，神鸟集长乐宫东阙树上，又飞下地，五采炳发，留十余刻。
现代文：汉宣帝五凤三年三月辛丑日，神乌栖止在星銮宣东阙的树上，又飞下地，五彩焕发，停留了十余刻钟。
English: On the fateful day of March in the third year of the reign of Emperor Wufeng of the Han Dynasty, the divine phoenix perched on a tree in the East Garden of the Emperor Xuan of the Xing Dynasty, and then flew down to the earth, glowing in various colors, where it stayed for more than fifteen minutes.

古文：汉章帝元和中，神鸟见郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和年问，神鸟出现在郡国。
English: According to the Han Dynasty and the Year of the Dragon, the divine bird appeared in the county.

古文：黄龙者，四龙之长也。
现代文：黄龙，是四龙的首领。
English: The Yellow Dragon is the leader of the four dragons.

古文：不漉池而渔，德至渊泉，则黄龙游于池。
现代文：不把池水弄干而捕鱼，德行施及渊泉，那么黄龙就会游于池中。
English: If you catch fish without drying up the pond, and treat the spring with virtue, then the yellow dragon will swim in the pond.

古文：能高能下，能细能大，能幽能冥，能短能长，乍存乍亡。
现代文：能飞上飞下，能小能大，能隐身不见，能短能长，一会儿出现，一会儿消失。
English: Can fly up and down, can be small and large, can be invisible and invisible, can be short and long, appear for a while, disappear for a while.

古文：赤龙、《河图》者，地之符也。
现代文：赤龙、《河图》，是大地的符瑞。
English: The red dragon and the "river map" are the fury of the earth.

古文：王者德至渊泉，则河出《龙图》。
现代文：帝王的仁德施及渊泉，那么董回就会出现《龙图》。
English: The benevolence of the emperor and the fountainhead, then the "Dragon Map" will appear in Dongbei.

古文：汉惠帝二年正月癸酉，两龙见兰陵人家井中。
现代文：汉惠帝二年正月癸酉曰，两龙出现在体医人家的井中。
English: Han Huidi said on the second day of the first month of the year that two dragons appeared in the well of the doctor.

古文：汉文帝十五年春，黄龙见成纪。
现代文：汉文帝十五年春，黄龙出现于盛起。
English: In the spring of the 15th year of Emperor Hanwen, the Yellow Dragon appeared in full bloom.

古文：汉宣帝甘露元年四月，黄龙见新丰。
现代文：汉宣帝甘露元年四月，黄龙出现于新丰。
English: In April of the first year of Emperor Han Xuan's reign, the Yellow Dragon appeared in Xinfeng.

古文：汉成帝鸿嘉元年冬，黄龙见真定。
现代文：汉成帝鸿嘉元年冬，黄龙出现于真定。
English: In the winter of the first year of Emperor Hongjia of Han Dynasty, Huanglong appeared in Zhending.

古文：汉成帝永始二年二月癸未，黄龙见东莱。
现代文：汉成帝永始二年二月癸末日，黄龙出现于东莱。
English: On the last day of February in the second year of the reign of Emperor Han Chengyong, the Yellow Dragon appeared in Donglai.

古文：汉光武建武十二年六月，黄龙见东阿。
现代文：汉光武帝建武十二年六月，黄龙出现于东阿。
English: In June of the twelfth year of Emperor Jianwu of the Han Dynasty, the Yellow Dragon appeared in East Africa.

古文：汉章帝元和二年以来，至章和元年，凡三年，黄龙四十四见郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和二年至章和元年，凡三年，黄龙在郡国出现了四十四次。
English: From the second year of Emperor Zhang of Han to the first year of Emperor Zhang, in every three years, the yellow dragon appeared in the county forty-four times.

古文：元和中，青龙见郡国。
现代文：元和年间，青龙出现于郡国。
English: During the Yuan and He years, Qinglong appeared in the county.

古文：元和中，白龙见郡国。
现代文：元和年间，白龙出现于郡国。
English: During the Yuan and He years, white dragons appeared in the county.

古文：汉安帝延光元年八月辛卯，黄龙见九真。
现代文：汉安帝延光元年八月辛卯曰，黄龙出现于九真。
English: In August of the first year of the Han Emperor Yan Guang, Xin Wu said that Huanglong appeared in Jiu Zhen.

古文：延光三年九月辛亥，黄龙见济南历城。
现代文：廷光三年九月辛亥曰，黄龙出现于济南的历城。
English: In September of the third year of Tingguang, the Yellow Dragon appeared in Licheng, Jinan.

古文：延光三年十二月乙未，黄龙见琅邪诸县。
现代文：延光三年十二月乙未日，黄龙出现于琅邪的诸县。
English: On December 21st, the third year of the extension of the light, the yellow dragon appeared in the evil counties.

古文：延光四年正月壬午，黄龙二见东郡濮阳。
现代文：延光四年正月壬午曰，黄龙两次出现于东郡的濮阳。
English: On the morning of the first day of the fourth lunar month, Huanglong appeared twice in Fenyang, Dong County.

古文：汉桓帝建和元年二月，黄龙见沛国谯。
现代文：汉桓帝建和元年二月，黄龙出现于沛国的谯县。
English: In February of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jianhe of the Han Dynasty, the Yellow Dragon appeared in Jixian County of Pei Province.

古文：汉桓帝元嘉二年八月，黄龙见济阴句阳，又见金城允街。
现代文：汉桓帝互台二年八月，黄龙出现于济阴的句阳，又出现于金城的允街。
English: In August of the second year of Emperor Han's reign, the Yellow Dragon appeared in Jiyin's Guyang, and also in Jincheng's Yunguo Street.

古文：汉桓帝永光元年八月，黄龙见巴郡。
现代文：汉桓帝永光元年八月，黄龙出现于巴郡。
English: In August of the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongguang of the Han Dynasty, a yellow dragon appeared in Ba County.

古文：汉献帝延康元年三月，黄龙见谯。
现代文：汉献帝延康元年三月，黄龙出现于谯县。
English: In March of the first year of the Han Dynasty, the Yellow Dragon appeared in Jixian County.

古文：又郡国十三言黄龙见。
现代文：又郡国十三次上报说出现了黄龙。
English: In addition, the county reported 13 times that a yellow dragon had appeared.

古文：魏明帝青龙元年正月甲申，青龙见郏之摩陂井。
现代文：魏明帝青龙元年正月甲申曰，青龙出现于翅瑟的摩陂井。
English: Wei Ming Emperor Qinglong said in the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year.

古文：帝亲与群臣共观之，既而诏书工图写，龙潜而不见。
现代文：皇帝亲自与群臣一起观看，后来诏令画工描写，龙隐身不见了。
English: The emperor himself watched it with his courtiers, and later ordered the artist to depict it. The dragon disappeared.

古文：魏明帝景初元年二月壬辰，山茌县言黄龙见。
现代文：魏明帝景初元年二月壬辰曰，山茌县说出现了黄龙。
English: Emperor Jing of the Wei and Ming Dynasties said in February of the first year of the Ming Dynasty that Huanglong appeared in Shanxi County.

古文：魏少帝正元元年十月戊戌，黄龙见鄴井中。
现代文：魏少帝正元元年十月戊戌曰，黄龙出现于邺都的井中。
English: In October of the first year of the Young Emperor Wei Zhengyuan, the Yellow Dragon appeared in the well of the capital.

古文：魏少帝甘露元年正月辛丑，青龙见轵县井中凡二。
现代文：魏少帝甘露元年正月辛丑曰，青龙二次出现于软县的井中。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Wei Dynasty, Emperor Ganlu said that the blue dragon appeared for the second time in the well of Soft County.

古文：甘露元年六月，青龙见元城县界井中。
现代文：甘露元年六月，青龙出现在元城县境内的井中。
English: In June of the first year of Kamloops, a blue dragon appeared in a well in the territory of Yuancheng County.

古文：甘露二年二月，青龙见温县井中。
现代文：甘露二年二月，青龙出现于温县井中。
English: In February of the second year of the nectar, a blue dragon appeared in a well in Wen County.

古文：甘露三年八月甲戌，黄龙、青龙仍见顿丘、冠军、阳夏县井中。
现代文：甘露三年八月甲戌日，黄龙、青龙又出现于顿丘、冠军、阳夏县井中。
English: In August of the third year of the dew, on the day of Jiajing, the yellow dragon and the blue dragon appeared again in Dongqiu, Champion, and Yinzhong of Yangxia County.

古文：甘露四年正月，黄龙二见宁陵县井中。
现代文：甘露四年正月，黄龙二次出现于宁陵县井中。
English: In the first month of the 4th year of the Rooster, the Yellow Dragon appeared for the second time in Ningling County.

古文：魏元帝景元元年十二月甲申，黄龙见莘县井中。
现代文：魏元帝景元元年十二月甲申，黄龙出现于莘县的井中。
English: Emperor Jing of the Wei and Yuan Dynasties, in December of the first year of the Jiaxun Dynasty, the Yellow Dragon appeared in the well of the county of Jixian.

古文：景元三年二月，青龙见轵县井中。
现代文：景元三年二月，青龙出现于软县的井中。
English: In February of the third year of Jingyuan, Qinglong appeared in the well of Jixian County.

古文：刘备未即位前，黄龙见武阳赤水，九日乃去。
现代文：刘备在即位之前，黄龙出现于武阳的赤水，九天后才离去。
English: Before Liu Bei's enthronement, Huanglong appeared in Chashui, Wuyang, and only left nine days later.

古文：吴孙权黄武元年三月，鄱阳言黄龙见。
现代文：吴孙权黄武元年三月，鄱阳说出现了黄龙。
English: In March of the first year of Wu Sun Quan's reign, the Yellow Dragon appeared in Fenyang.

古文：吴孙权黄龙元年四月，夏口、武昌并言黄龙见；权因此改元。
现代文：吴孙权黄龙元年四月，夏旦、武昌都说出现了黄龙。逐护因此更改年号。
English: Wu Sun Quan Huanglong In April of the first year of the year, Xia Dan and Wuchang both said that a yellow dragon appeared. Therefore, the year name was changed one by one.

古文：作黄龙牙，常在军中，进退视其所向，命胡综为赋。
现代文：制黄龙牙旗，常在军中，队伍的进退依据旗帜指挥的方向，命令胡综作赋。
English: The yellow dragon's teeth flag is often made in the army, and the advance and retreat of the team is based on the direction of the flag command, and Hu Zong is ordered to make fu.

古文：吴孙权赤乌五年三月，海盐县言黄龙见县井中二。
现代文：吴孙权赤乌五年三月，海盐说黄龙二次在该县井中出现。
English: In March of the fifth year of Wu Sunquan's reign, Haiyan said that Huanglong appeared in the county well for the second time.

古文：赤乌十一年，云阳言黄龙见。
现代文：赤乌十一年，昼汇说出现了黄龙。
English: In the eleventh year of the Red Wu, the Yellow Dragon appeared in the daytime.

古文：黄龙二又见武陵吴寿，光色炫耀。
现代文：两条黄龙又出现于武陵的吴寿，光色炫耀。
English: Two yellow dragons also appeared in Wu Shou, Wuling, showing off their bright colors.

古文：吴孙休永安四年九月，布山言白龙见。
现代文：吴孙休永安四年九月，布山说出现了白龙。
English: In September of the fourth year of Wu Sunxu's reign, a white dragon appeared in the mountains of Busan.

古文：永安五年七月，始新言黄龙见。
现代文：永安五年七月，垃逝说出现了黄龙。
English: In July of the fifth year of Yongan, after his death, it is said that a yellow dragon appeared.

古文：永安六年四月，泉陵言黄龙见。
现代文：永安六年四月，泉陵说出现了黄龙。
English: In April of the sixth year of Yongan, Quanling said that a yellow dragon appeared.

古文：晋武帝泰始元年十二月，青龙二见济阴定陶。
现代文：晋武帝泰始元年十二月，青龙二次出现于济阴定陶。
English: In December of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, Qinglong appeared for the second time in Jiyin Dingtao.

古文：泰始元年十二月，青龙见魏郡汤阴。
现代文：泰始元年十二月，青龙出现于魏郡的汤阴。
English: In December of the first year of Taiji, Qinglong appeared in Tangyin, Wei County.

古文：泰始元年十二月，黄龙见河南洛阳洛滨。
现代文：泰始元年十二月，黄龙出现于河南洛阳洛水的岸边。
English: In December of the first year of Tai, Huanglong appeared on the shore of Luoshui, Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：泰始元年十二月，白龙二见太原祁。
现代文：泰始元年十二月，白龙二次出现于太原的祁妪。
English: In December of the first year of Taiyuan, the white dragon appeared for the second time in the mountains of Taiyuan.

古文：泰始二年七月壬午，黄龙见巴西阆中。
现代文：泰始二年七月壬午，黄龙出现于巴西的阆中。
English: In the early afternoon of July in the second year of Taixi, the yellow dragon appeared in the Brazilian forest.

古文：泰始三年四月戊午，有司奏： 张掖太守焦胜言，氐池县大柳谷口青龙见。 
现代文：泰始三年四月戊午曰，有司上奏说： 张掖太守焦胜说，氐池县大柳谷口出现了青龙。 
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the fourth month of the third year of Taizhi, there was a report from the superintendent: Zhang Jiasheng said that a blue dragon had appeared at the mouth of Daliu Valley in Dianchi County.

古文：晋武帝咸宁二年六月丙申，白龙二见于新兴九原居民井中。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁二年六月丙申日，白龙二次出现于新兴九原居民的井中。
English: On the second day of June in the second year of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, the white dragon appeared for the second time in the well of the emerging residents of Jiuhara.

古文：咸宁二年十月庚午，黄龙二见于汉嘉灵关。
现代文：咸宁二年十月庚午日，黄龙二次出现于莲毫的灵关。
English: On the afternoon of October in the second year of Xianning, Huanglong appeared for the second time in the Lingguan of Lianhao.

古文：咸宁二年十一月癸巳，白龙二见须度支部。
现代文：咸宁二年十一月癸巳日，白龙二次出现于须度支部。
English: In November of the second year of Xianning, the White Dragon appeared for the second time in the Sudo branch.

古文：咸宁五年十一月甲寅，青龙见京兆霸城。
现代文：咸空五年十一月甲寅曰，青龙出现于京兆的霸城。
English: In November of the fifth year of the Han and Qing dynasties, a dragon appeared in the city of Beijing and Shandong.

古文：晋武帝太康元年八月，白龙三见于永昌。
现代文：晋武帝太康元年八月，白龙三次出现于永昌。
English: In August of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang, the white dragon appeared three times in Yongchang.

古文：太康三年闰四月己丑，白龙二见济南历城。
现代文：太康三年闰四月己丑曰，白龙二次出现于济南历城。
English: Taikang three years leap April is ugly, the white dragon appears twice in Licheng, Jinan.

古文：太康五年正月癸卯，青龙二见武库井中，帝亲往观之。
现代文：太康五年正月癸卯日，青龙二次出现于武库的井中，皇帝亲自前往观看。
English: On the first day of the third month of the fifth year of Taikang, the blue dragon appeared in the well of the arsenal for the second time, and the emperor personally went to watch.

古文：太康六年九月，白龙见京兆阴盘。
现代文：太康六年九月，白龙出现于京兆的阴盘。
English: In September of the sixth year of Taikang, the white dragon appeared in the underworld of Beijing.

古文：太康九年十二月戊申，青龙一见鲁国公丘居民井中。
现代文：太康九年十二月戊申日，青龙出现在鲁国公丘居民的井中。
English: In December of the ninth year of Taikang, Qinglong appeared in the well of the residents of Gongqiu in Lu.

古文：晋惠帝元康七年三月己酉朔，成皋县狱有龙升天。
现代文：晋惠帝元康七年三月己酉初一，成皋县狱有龙飞升天空。
English: On the first day of the third month of the seventh year of Emperor Jingu's reign, a dragon flew into the sky.

古文：宋武帝永初元年七月，青龙见义兴阳羡。
现代文：宋武帝永初元年七月，青龙出现于义兴阳羡。
English: In July of the first year of Song Wudi Yong, Qinglong appeared in Yixing.

古文：永初元年八月，青龙二见南郡江陵。
现代文：永初元年八月，青龙二次出现于南郡的江陆。
English: In August of the first year of the Yongchu era, Qinglong appeared for the second time in Jianglu, Nan County.

古文：文帝元嘉十三年九月己酉，会稽郡西南向晓，忽大光明，有青龙腾跃凌云，久而后灭。
现代文：文帝元嘉十三年九月己酉曰，会稽郡西南在拂晓时，天色忽然非常光亮，有青龙飞腾升入云端，许久后消失。
English: Wen Diyuan Jia said in September 13th, that when he was in the southwest of Heji County at dawn, the sky was suddenly very bright, and a blue dragon soared into the clouds and disappeared after a long time.

古文：吴兴诸处并以其日同见光景。
现代文：呈玺邓各地均在这天观看这一奇景。
English: People from all over Chengdu and Dongguan watched this miracle on this day.

古文：扬州刺史彭城王义康以闻。
现代文：握业刺史堑继王刘面向朝廷上报。
English: Wang Liu, the successor of Wang Shishi, reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十一年十月己丑，永嘉永宁见黄龙自云而下，太守臧艺以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十一年十月己丑曰，永嘉的永宁看见黄龙从云端飞下，太守臧艺报告朝廷。
English: In October of the 21st year of Yuan Jia, it was said that Yongning of Yongjia saw a yellow dragon flying down from the clouds, and reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十五年五月丁丑，黑龙见玄武湖北，苑丞王世宗以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十五年五月丁丑曰，黑龙出现于直达翅的北面，苑丞王世宗上报朝廷。
English: In May of the 25th year of Yuan Jia, Ding Yuxi said that the black dragon appeared in the north of the straight wing, and Wang Shizong reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十五年五月戊戌，黑龙见玄武湖东北隈，扬州野吏张立之以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十五年五月戊戌曰，黑龙出现于玄逮湖东北角，扬州野吏张立之上报朝廷。
English: In May of the 25th year of Yuan Jia, the Black Dragon appeared in the northeast corner of Xuan Fang Lake, and the Yangzhou wild official stood up and reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十五年八月辛亥，黄龙见会稽，太守孟顗以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十五年八月辛亥口，黄龙出现于会稽，太守孟颉上报朝廷。
English: In August of the 25th year of Yuan Jia, according to Xinhai, Huanglong appeared in the audit, and the eunuch Meng Xuan reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十五年，广陵有龙自湖水中升天，百姓皆见。
现代文：元嘉二十五年，广陵有龙从湖水中飞升天空，百姓都看见了。
English: In the 25th year of Yuan Jia, the people of Guangling saw a dragon soar into the sky from the lake.

古文：孝武帝孝建二年七月癸丑，黄龙见石头城外水滨，中护军湘东王彧以闻。
现代文：孝武帝孝建二年七月癸丑日，黄龙出现于石头城外的水滨，中护军湘东王刘或上报朝廷。
English: In July of the second year of Emperor Xiaowu and Emperor Xiaojian, the Yellow Dragon appeared on the waterfront outside the Stone City, and it was reported to the imperial court by the Middle Protector, King Liu of Eastern Hunan.

古文：孝建三年五月己未，龙见临川郡，江州刺史东海王祎以闻。
现代文：孝建三年五月己末日，龙出现于临川郡，江州刺史东海王刘祎上报朝廷。
English: On the last day of May in the third year of Xiao Jian, the dragon appeared in Linchuan County, and the East Sea King Liu Xuan of Jiangzhou was reported to the imperial court.

古文：孝武大明元年五月癸亥，黑龙见晋陵占石村。
现代文：孝武大明元年五月癸亥，黑龙出现于晋陵的占石村。
English: In May of the first year of Xiaowu Daming, the black dragon appeared in the stone village of Jinling.

古文：改村为津里。
现代文：改村名为津里。
English: The village was renamed Tsumari.

古文：灵龟者，神龟也。
现代文：灵龟，就是神龟。
English: The spirit turtle is the divine turtle.

古文：王者德泽湛清，渔猎山川从时则出。
现代文：帝王的仁德恩惠清明，在山川渔猎适时就会出现。
English: The benevolence and beneficence of the emperor are clear, and will appear at the right time in mountain and river fishing and hunting.

古文：五色鲜明，三百岁游于蕖叶之上，三千岁常游于卷耳之上。
现代文：灵龟五色鲜明，三百岁的栖息于荷叶之卜，三千岁的经常游于卷耳之上。
English: The five-colored spirit turtle is bright. The 300-year-old inhabits the lotus leaf, and the 3,000-year-old often swims on the ear.

古文：知存亡，明于吉凶。
现代文：知道存亡，明了凶吉。
English: If you know how to survive, you know how to succeed.

古文：禹卑宫室，灵龟见。
现代文：帝禹宫室简陋，灵龟出现。
English: Emperor Yu's palace room is humble, and a spirit turtle appears.

古文：玄龟书者，天符也。
现代文：玄龟所负之书，是上天的符瑞。
English: The book held by the tortoise is a heavenly treasure.

古文：王者德至渊泉，则雒出龟书。
现代文：帝王的仁德施及渊泉，那么雒河中就出现《龟书》。
English: The benevolence of the emperor and the fountainhead, then the "turtle book" appears in the middle of the river.

古文：魏文帝初，神龟出于灵池。
现代文：魏文帝初，神龟出现于灵池。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Weiwen, the divine turtle appeared in Lingchi Lake.

古文：吴孙权时，灵龟出会稽章安。
现代文：吴孙权时，灵龟出现于会稽的章安。
English: At the time of Wu Sun Quan, the spirit turtle appeared in the audit of Zhang An.

古文：魏元帝咸熙二年二月甲辰，朐县获灵龟以献。
现代文：魏元帝咸熙二年二月甲辰日，朐腮县获得灵龟献上朝廷。
English: On the second day of the second month of the second year of Wei Yuan Emperor Han Xi, Jiaxing County won the turtle and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：晋长沙王乂坐同产兄楚王玮事，徙封常山，后还复国。
现代文：晋长沙王司马义因为受到同母兄楚王司马莲的牵连，封地迁徙到常山，后来又恢复原来的封国。
English: Jin Changsha King Sima Yi moved his fief to Changshan because he was implicated by his older maternal half-brother, Chu King Sima Lian, and later restored the original fief.

古文：在常山穿井，入地四丈，得白玉方三四尺。
现代文：他在赏山打井时，入地四丈，得到一块白玉，三四尺见方。
English: When he was digging a well in the mountains, he went down to the fourth floor and got a piece of white marble, three or four feet square.

古文：玉下有大石，其中有龟长二尺余，时人以为复国之祥。
现代文：白玉下面有一块大石头，其中有一只龟长二尺余，当时人们认为是他恢愎封国的兆头。
English: There is a large stone under the white jade, in which there is a turtle more than two feet long. At that time, people thought it was a sign that he would return to the country.

古文：宋文帝元嘉十九年四月戊申，白龟见吴兴余杭，太守文道恩以献。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉十九年四月戊申，白龟出现于吴兴的余杭，太守文道献上朝廷。
English: In April of the 19th year of the Song Emperor Wen Yuan Jia, the White Turtle appeared in Yuhang of Wuxing, and was presented to the imperial court by the eunuch Wen Dao.

古文：元嘉二十年四月辛卯，白龟见吴兴余杭，扬州刺史始兴王浚以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十年四月辛卯曰，白龟出现于吴兴的余杭，扬州刺史始兴王刘擅上报朝廷。
English: In April of the 20th year of Yuan Jia, Xinwu said that the white turtle appeared in the Yuhang of Wuxing, and the Yangzhou engraving of the history of King Liu of Shixing was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十四年十月甲午，扬州刺史始兴王浚获白龟以献。
现代文：元嘉二十四年十月甲午曰，扬州刺史始兴王刘檀获得白龟献上朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of October 1st, the 24th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Liu Dan, the Prince of Yangzhou, obtained a white turtle and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：孝武帝大明三年三月戊子，毛龟见宣城广德，太守张辨以献。
现代文：孝武帝大明三年三月戊子日，毛龟出现于宣城广德，太守张辨献上朝廷。
English: On the third day of the third month of the third year of Emperor Xiaowu Daming, the hairy turtle appeared in Xuancheng Guangde, and was presented to the imperial court by Zhang Ben, the eunuch.

古文：大明四年六月壬寅，车驾幸籍田，白龟见于千亩，尚书右仆射刘秀之以献。
现代文：大明四年六月壬寅曰，皇帝巡视籍田，白龟出现于籍田中，尚书右仆射刘秀之将它献给朝廷。
English: In June of the 4th year of the Ming Dynasty, Ren Yin said that the emperor inspected his home field, the white turtle appeared in the home field, and his right-hand man Liu Xiuzhi dedicated it to the imperial court.

古文：大明七年八月乙未，毛龟见新安王子鸾第，获以献。
现代文：大明七年八月乙末日，毛龟出现于新安王刘子鸾的府第，捕获献给朝廷。
English: On the last day of the second month of August in the seventh year of the Ming Dynasty, a hairy turtle appeared in the palace of Liu Zixuan, the king of Xin'an, and was captured and presented to the imperial court.

古文：明帝泰始二年八月丙辰朔，四眼龟见会稽，会稽太守巴陵王休若以献。
现代文：明帝泰始二年八月丙辰初一，四眼龟出现于会稽，会稽太守巴陵王休若献上朝廷。
English: On the first day of the second month of the eighth month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty, the four-eyed turtle appeared in the auditorium, and the auditor was presented to the imperial court by Baling Wang Xiu Ruo.

古文：泰始二年八月丙寅，六眼龟见东阳长山，文如爻卦，太守刘勰以献。
现代文：泰始二年八月丙寅日，六眼龟出现于东阳的长山，花纹像是爻卦，太守刘勰献上朝廷。
English: In August of the second year of Taizhi, the Six-Eyed Turtle appeared in the Changshan Mountains of Dongyang. The pattern looked like a hexagram, and was presented to the imperial court by the governor Liu Bei.

古文：泰始六年九月己巳，八眼龟见吴兴故鄣，太守褚渊以献。
现代文：泰始六年九月己巳曰，龟出现于吴兴的故鄣，太守褚渊献上朝廷。
English: In September of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, it was said that a turtle appeared in the tomb of Wu Xing, and was presented to the imperial court by the eunuch Qian Yuan.

古文：明帝泰豫元年十月壬戌，义兴阳羡县获毛龟，太守王蕴以献。
现代文：明帝泰豫元年十月壬戌曰，义兴阳羡县逊获得毛龟，太守王蕴献上朝廷。
English: In October of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Taiyuan said that Yixing County had obtained a hairy turtle, and the governor Wang Yun presented it to the imperial court.

古文：龙马者，仁马也，河水之精。
现代文：龙马，是仁德之马，河中的精灵。
English: Longma is a benevolent horse, a genie in the river.

古文：高八尺五寸，长颈有翼，傍有垂毛，鸣声九哀。
现代文：身高八尺五寸，长长的颈项生有翅膀，两旁有下垂的长毛，呜叫有各种悲沉的声调。一作音。
English: He was eight feet five inches tall, with wings on his long neck, long hair hanging down on both sides, and a mournful voice.

古文：腾黄者，神马也，其色黄。
现代文：腾黄是神马。
English: Tenghuang is a divine horse.

古文：王者德御四方则出。
现代文：马毛黄色，帝王恩德推及四方就会出现。
English: The horse's hair is yellow, and the emperor Ende will appear if pushed in all directions.

古文：白马硃鬣，王者任贤良则见。
现代文：白马生有红鬣，帝王任用贤良时就会出现。
English: The white horse is born with red cheeks, and when the emperor appoints a virtuous person, red cheeks will appear.

古文：泽马者，王者劳来百姓则至。
现代文：泽马，帝王劝勉百姓便会出现。
English: Zema, the emperor will appear after exhorting the people.

古文：夏马飖，黑身白鬣尾，殷马骆，白身黑鬣尾，周马骍，赤身黑鬣尾。
现代文：夏朝泽马名骝，黑身白鬣尾，壁曲泽马名骆，自身黑鬣尾，周翘泽马名辟，赤身黑鬣尾。
English: The summer morning, the horse is famous, the black body is a white iris, the wall song, the horse is famous, the camel is a black iris, the horse is famous, the naked body is a black iris.

古文：汉章帝元和中，神马见郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和年问，神马出现于郡国。
English: Emperor Han Zheng and the Year of the Horse appeared in the county.

古文：晋怀帝永嘉六年二月壬子，神马鸣南城门。
现代文：晋怀帝永嘉六年二月王子日，神马在南城门呜叫。
English: On Prince's Day in February of the sixth year of Emperor Jianhuai Yongjia, the divine horse howled at Nancheng Gate.

古文：晋孝武帝太元十四年六月甲申朔，宁州刺史费统上言： 所统晋宁之滇池县，旧有河水，周回二百余里。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元十四年六月甲申初一，宁州刺史登铲上奏说： 车纽统辖的置空登的远迤瑟，先前有河水，周围有二百余里。
English: On the first day of the first lunar month of the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, in June of the first lunar month of the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, the governor of Ningzhou, Zhi Shideng, made a speech, saying: "Chenyu is in charge of the remote village of Jiaotong, which used to have a river and is surrounded by more than 200 miles.

古文：六月二十八日辛亥，神马二匹，一白一黑，忽出于河中，去岸百步。
现代文：六月二十八日辛亥，神马二匹，一白一黑，忽然从河中跑出来，离岸有百步远。
English: On June 28th, Xinhai, two divine horses, one white and one black, suddenly ran out of the river and were a hundred paces away from the shore.

古文：县民董聪见之。 
现代文：县民董聪见到了。 
English: County resident Dong Cong saw it.

古文：白象者，人君自养有节则至。
现代文：白象，君主自我修养有节制就会出现。
English: A white elephant, a self-restrained and self-disciplined monarch will appear.

古文：宋文帝元嘉元年十二月丙辰，白象见零陵洮阳。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉元年十二月丙辰，白象出现于零陵的洮阳。
English: In December of the first year of the reign of Emperor Songwen of the Yuan Dynasty, a white elephant appeared in the city of Shenyang.

古文：元嘉六年三月丁亥，白象见安成安复，江州刺史南谯王义宣以闻。
现代文：元嘉六年三月了亥，白象出现于安成的安复，江州刺史南谯王刘盏宣上报朝廷。
English: At the end of March in the sixth year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the white elephant appeared in Anfu, Ancheng, and Liu Jian, the king of Nanxi in Jiangsu Province, announced it to the imperial court.

古文：汉武帝元狩二年三月，南越献驯象。
现代文：汉武帝元狩二年三月，南越贡献驯象。
English: In March of the second year of the reign of Emperor Wu of Han, South Vietnam contributed to the training of elephants.

古文：白狐，王者仁智则至。
现代文：白狐，帝王仁慈聪慧就会出现。
English: The white fox, the emperor benevolence and wisdom will appear.

古文：晋成帝咸康八年七月，燕王慕容皝上言白狢见国内。
现代文：晋成帝咸康八年七月，燕王慕容铣上奏说白貉在国内出现。
English: In July of the eighth year of Emperor Jiancheng's reign, Yan Wang Murong wrote that egrets had appeared in China.

古文：赤熊，佞人远，奸猾息，则入国。
现代文：赤熊，当佞人被疏远，奸猾之徒被抑制时，就会进入国境。
English: The red bear, when the slanderer is alienated and the backstabber is subdued, will enter the border.

古文：宋文帝元嘉二十年十二月，白熊见新安歙县，太守到元度以献。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉二十年十二月，白熊出现于瑟新安的歙县，太守到五庐献上朝廷。
English: In December of the 20th year of Song Emperor Yuanjia, a white bear appeared in Jixian County of Xi'an, and the governor presented it to the imperial court.

古文：九尾狐，文王得之，东夷归焉。
现代文：九尾狐，旦文王获得，东夷便归附于周。
English: Nine-tailed foxes were obtained by King Tanwen, and Eastern Yi was attached to Zhou.

古文：汉章帝元和中，九尾狐见郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和年间，九尾狐出现于郡国。
English: The nine-tailed fox appeared in the county during the reign of Emperor Han of Han Dynasty.

古文：魏文帝黄初元年十一月甲午，九尾狐见鄄城，又见谯。
现代文：魏文帝黄初元午十一月甲午日，九尾狐出现于鄄城，又出现于谯。
English: In the early afternoon of the first day of the first month of the Wei Emperor Wenhuang, on the afternoon of November 1, the nine-tailed fox appeared in Lucheng, and also appeared in Yunnan.

古文：白鹿，王者明惠及下则至。
现代文：白鹿，帝王对臣民开明有恩惠就会出现。
English: White deer, the emperor will appear if he is open-minded and benevolent to his subjects.

古文：汉章帝建初七年十月，车驾西巡，得白鹿于临平观。
现代文：汉章帝建初七年十月，皇帝巡视西方，在临平观获得白鹿。
English: In October of the seventh year of the founding of the Han Dynasty, the emperor inspected the west and obtained the white deer in Linpingguan.

古文：汉章帝元和中，白鹿见郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和年间，白鹿出现于郡国。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Zheng Yuan, white deer appeared in the county.

古文：汉安帝延光三年六月辛未，白鹿见右扶风雍。
现代文：汉安帝延光三年六月辛末日，白鹿出现于右扶风的雍地。
English: The Han Dynasty lasted for three years. At the end of June, the White Deer appeared in the right wind of the Yangtze River.

古文：延光三年七月，白鹿见左冯翊。
现代文：延光三年七月，白鹿出现于左冯翊。
English: In July of the third year of Yan Guang, the white deer appeared in Zuo Fengyu.

古文：汉桓帝永兴元年二月，白鹿见张掖。
现代文：汉桓帝永兴元年二月，白鹿出现于张掖。
English: In February of the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongxing of the Han Dynasty, a white deer appeared in Zhangye.

古文：魏文帝黄初元年，郡国十九言白鹿及白麋见。
现代文：魏文帝黄初元年，郡国十九次上报说出现了白鹿和白麋。
English: In the first year of Emperor Weiwenhuang, the county reported nineteen times that white deer and egrets appeared.

古文：晋武帝泰始八年十月，白鹿见扶风雍，州刺史严询获以献。
现代文：晋武帝参始八年十月，白鹿出现于扶风的雍地，州刺史严询捕获后献上朝廷。
English: In October of the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, a white deer appeared in the foothills of the wind in the Yangtze River. After being captured, it was presented to the imperial court.

古文：晋武帝太康元年三月，白鹿见零陵泉陵。
现代文：晋武帝太康元年三月，白鹿出现于零陵的泉陵。
English: In March of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, a white deer appeared in the spring mausoleum of the Zero Mausoleum.

古文：太康元年五月甲辰，白鹿见天水西县，太守刘辛获以献。太康三年七月壬子，白鹿见零陵，零陵令蒋微获以献。
现代文：太康元年五月甲辰日，白鹿出现于天水的西县，太守刘辛捕获后献上朝廷太康三年七月壬子日，白鹿出现于零陵，零陵令蒋微捕获后献上朝廷。
English: On the first day of May in the first year of Taikang, the white deer appeared in the west county of Tianshui. After being captured by the governor Liu Xin, it was presented to the imperial court. On the second day of July in the third year of Taikang, the white deer appeared in the zero mausoleum. After being captured by the zero mausoleum, Jiang Wei presented it to the imperial court.

古文：晋惠帝元康元年九月乙酉，白鹿见交趾武宁。
现代文：晋惠帝元康元年九月乙酉，白鹿出现于交趾的武宁。
English: In September of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, the white deer appeared in the city of Wu Ning.

古文：晋愍帝建武元年五月戊子，白鹿见高山县。
现代文：晋愍帝建武元年五月戊于曰，白鹿出现于高山县。
English: In May of the first year of Emperor Jianwu of the Jin Dynasty, the white deer appeared in Gaoshan County.

古文：晋元帝太兴三年正月，白鹿二见豫章。
现代文：晋元帝太兴三年正月，白鹿二次出现于豫章。
English: In the first month of the third year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, the white deer appeared twice in Yuzhang.

古文：太兴三年四月，白鹿见晋陵延陵。
现代文：太兴三年四月，白鹿出现于晋陵的延陵。
English: In April of the third year of Taixing, a white deer appeared in Yanling of Jinling.

古文：晋元帝永昌元年九月，白鹿见江乘县。
现代文：晋元帝永昌元年九月，白鹿出现于江乘县。
English: In September of the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongchang of the Jin Dynasty, white deer appeared in Jiangren County.

古文：晋成帝咸和四年五月甲子，白鹿见零陵洮阳，获以献。
现代文：晋成帝咸和四年五月甲子曰，白鹿出现于零陵的洮阳，捕获后献上朝廷。
English: Emperor Jincheng of the Han Dynasty and Emperor Jiazi of the May of the 4th year of the Jin Dynasty said that the white deer appeared in Luling in Shenyang, and was captured and presented to the imperial court.

古文：咸和四年七月壬寅，长沙郡逻吏黄光于南郡道遇白鹿，驱之不去，直来就光，追寻光三百余步。
现代文：咸和四年七月壬寅曰，长沙郡巡逻吏黄光布南郡的道路上遇到白鹿，不但驱赶不走，反盯。直跑来接近黄光，追随董光三百余步。
English: In July of the fourth year of Xianhe, Ren Yin said that the patrol officer of Changsha County, Huang Guang, encountered a white deer on the road of Bunan County. Not only did he not drive away, but he stared at it. He ran straight to approach Huang Guang and followed Dong Guang for more than three hundred steps.

古文：光遂抱取，遣吏李坚奉献。
现代文：黄光于是将它抱走了，派郡吏李坚奉献朝廷。
English: Huang Guang then took it away and sent the county official Li Jian to present it to the imperial court.

古文：咸和九年八月己未，白鹿见长沙临湘。
现代文：咸和九年八月己末日，白鹿出现于长沙的临湘。
English: It was the last day of August in the ninth year of the Heian period, and white deer appeared in Linxiang, Changsha.

古文：晋成帝咸康二年七月，白鹿见豫章望蔡，太守桓景获以献。
现代文：晋成帝咸康二年七月，白鹿出现于豫章的望蔡，太守桓景捕获后献上朝廷。
English: In July of the second year of Emperor Jiancheng's reign, the white deer appeared in the village of Wanzai in Yuzhang. After being captured, the deer was presented to the imperial court.

古文：晋孝武太元十六年三月癸酉，白鹿见豫章望蔡，获以献。
现代文：晋孝武太元十六年三月癸酉日，白鹿出现于豫章的望蔡，捕获献上朝廷。
English: On the 3rd day of the 3rd month of the 16th year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, a white deer appeared in the Wang Cai of Yuzhang, and was captured and presented to the imperial court.

古文：太元十八年五月辛酉，白鹿见江乘，江乘令田熙之获以献。
现代文：太元十八年五月辛酉曰，白鹿出现于江乘。江乘令田熙捕获后献上朝廷。
English: In May of the 18th year of the Taiyuan Emperor, the white deer appeared in Jiangren. Jiangren ordered Tianxi to capture it and present it to the imperial court.

古文：太元二十年九月丁丑，白鹿见巴陵清水山，荆州刺史殷仲堪以献。
现代文：太元二十年九月丁丑曰，白鹿出现于巴陵的清水山，荆业刺史殷仲堪献上朝廷。
English: In September of the 20th year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, Ding Yuxi said that the white deer appeared in the clear water mountain of Baling, and Jing Yue stabbed the history of Yinzhong and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：晋安帝隆安五年十一月，白鹿见长沙，荆州刺史桓玄以闻。
现代文：晋安帝隆安五年十一月，白鹿出现于长沙，荆州刺史桓玄上报朝廷。
English: In November of the 5th year of the reign of Emperor An of Jin, the White Deer appeared in Changsha, and the Jingzhou story of Huan Xuan was reported to the imperial court.

古文：宋文帝元嘉五年七月丙戌，白鹿见东莞莒县岣峨山，太守刘玄以闻。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉五年七月丙戌日，白鹿出现于东莞莒县岣峨山，太守刘玄上报朝廷。
English: In July of the 5th year of Emperor Yuanjia of the Song Dynasty, the White Deer appeared on Mount Saga in Dongguan's Handan County. The governor Liu Xuan reported it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉九年正月，白鹿见南谯谯县，豫州刺史长沙王义欣以献。
现代文：元嘉九年正月，白鹿出现于南谯的谯县，豫州刺史长沙王义刘欣献上朝廷。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of the Yuan Jia, the White Deer appeared in Min County, Nanlu, and was presented to the imperial court by the Prince of Changsha, Yi Liu Xin.

古文：元嘉十四年，白鹿见文乡。
现代文：元嘉十四年，白鹿出现于文乡。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Jia, the White Deer appeared in Wensong.

古文：元嘉十七年五月甲午，白鹿见南汝阴宋县，太守文道恩以献。
现代文：元嘉十七年五月甲午曰，白鹿出现于南汝阴的宋县，太守文道恩献上朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of May 1st in the 17th year of Yuan Jia, the white deer appeared in Song County, South Ruyin, and was presented to the imperial court by the eunuch Wen Dao En.

古文：元嘉二十年八月，白鹿见谯郡蕲县，太守邓琬以献。
现代文：元嘉二十年八月，白鹿出现于谯郡的蕲县，太守邓琬献上朝廷。
English: In August of the 20th year of Yuan Jia, the white deer appeared in the county of Jixian in Jixian County, and the governor of Jixian County, Deng Yao, presented the deer to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十二年二月，白鹿见建康县，扬州刺史始兴王浚以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十二年二月，白鹿出现于建康县，扬州刺史始兴王刘浚上报朝廷。
English: In February of the 22nd year of the Yuan Jia, the White Deer appeared in Jiankang County, and the Yangzhou stabbing of Prince Liu Jun was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十二年二月辛未，白鹿见南康灨县，南康相刘兴祖以献。
现代文：元嘉二十二年二月辛末日，白鹿出现于南康的灨县，南康相刘兴祖献上朝廷。
English: In February of the 22nd year of the Yuan Jia, at the end of the Xin Dynasty, a white deer appeared in Min County of Nankang, and Nankang Minister Liu Xingzu presented it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十三年二月戊戌，白鹿见交州，交州刺史檀和之以献。
现代文：元嘉二十三年二月戊戌日，白鹿出现于交州，交州刺史檀和之献上朝廷。
English: On February 23rd, Yuan Jia, the White Deer appeared in Jiaozhou, and the Jiaozhou thistle was presented to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十三年六月丙辰，白鹿见彭城彭城县，征北将军衡阳王义季获以献。
现代文：元嘉二十三年六月丙辰日，白鹿出现于彭城郡的彭城县，征北将军衡阳王刘义季捕获后献一朝廷。
English: On June 23, Yuan Jia, the White Deer appeared in Pengcheng County of Pengcheng County. After capturing the Northern General Hengyang Wang Liu Yizi, he presented him to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十七年二月壬辰朔，白鹿见济阴，徐州刺史武陵王骏以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十七年二月壬辰初一，白鹿出现于济阴，徐州刺史武陵王刘骏上报朝廷。
English: On the first day of the second lunar month of the 27th year of the Yuan Jia, the White Deer appeared in Jiyin, and the Xuzhou stabbing of the Wuling King Liu Bei was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十九年八月癸酉，白鹿见鄱阳，南中郎将武陵王骏以献。
现代文：元嘉二十九年八月癸酉曰，白鹿出现于鄱阳，南中郎将武陵王刘骏献上朝廷。
English: In August 29th, Yuan Jia said that the White Deer appeared in Shenyang, and Nan Zhong Lang presented the Wuling King Liu Ye to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉三十年十一月壬午，白鹿见南琅邪，南琅邪太守王僧虔以献。
现代文：元嘉三十年十一月壬午日，白鹿出现于南琅邪，南琅邪太守王僧虔献上朝廷。
English: On the morning of November 30th, Yuan Jia, a white deer appeared in Nanluye, which was presented to the imperial court by the grand abbot of Nanluye, Wang Xiangyan.

古文：元嘉三十年十一月癸亥，白鹿见武建郡，雍州刺史硃修之以献。
现代文：元嘉三十年十一月癸亥日，白鹿出现于武建郡，雍州刺史朱脩之献上朝廷。
English: In November of the 30th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the White Deer appeared in Wujian County, and was presented to the imperial court by the Yongzhou Emperor Zhu Xi.

古文：孝武帝孝建三年三月庚子，白鹿见临川西丰县。
现代文：孝武帝孝建三年三月庚子日，白鹿出现于临川的西丰县。
English: In March of the third year of Emperor Xiaowu and Emperor Xiaojian, the White Deer appeared in Xifeng County, Linchuan.

古文：孝武帝大明元年四月甲申，白鹿见南平。
现代文：孝武帝大明元年四月甲申日，白鹿出现于南平。
English: According to Emperor Xiaowu, in April of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the White Deer appeared in Nanping.

古文：大明二年四月己丑，白鹿见桂阳郴县，湘州刺史山阳王休祐以献。
现代文：大明二年四月己丑曰，白鹿出现于桂阳的郴县，湘州刺史山阳王刘休佑献上朝廷。
English: In April of the second year of the Ming Dynasty, it is said that the white deer appeared in Guiyang's Jixian County, and the king of Shanyang, Liu Xiuyou, presented the white deer to the imperial court.

古文：大明三年正月癸巳，白鹿见南琅邪江乘，南徐州刺史刘延孙以献。
现代文：大明三年正月癸巳曰，白鹿出现于南琅邪的江乘，南徐州刺史刘延孙献上朝廷。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Ming Dynasty, it was said that the white deer appeared in the southern part of the Yangtze River, and the southern part of Xuzhou was presented to the imperial court by Liu Yansun.

古文：大明三年三月辛卯，白鹿见广陵新市，太守柳光宗以闻。
现代文：大明三年三月辛卯日，自鹿出现于广陵的新市，太守柳光宗上报朝廷。
English: On the third day of the third month of the third year of the Ming Dynasty, the deer appeared in the new city of Guangling, and the governor Liu Guangzong reported it to the imperial court.

古文：大明五年五月丙寅，白鹿见南东海丹徒，南徐州刺史刘延孙以献。
现代文：大明五年五月丙寅日，白鹿出现于南柬海的丹徒，南徐州刺史刘延孙献上朝廷。
English: On May 4th, the 5th year of the Ming Dynasty, the White Deer appeared in Dantu in the South Cambodian Sea, and Liu Yansun from the South Xuzhou Province presented it to the imperial court.

古文：大明八年六月甲子，白鹿见衡阳郡，湘州刺史江夏王世子伯禽以献。
现代文：大明八年六月甲子曰，白鹿出现于衡阳郡，湘州刺史江夏王的世子伯禽献上朝廷。
English: In June of the 8th year of the Ming Dynasty, Jia Zi said that the white deer appeared in Hengyang County, and the heir of King Xia of Hunan Province presented the bird to the imperial court.

古文：明帝泰始二年二月乙亥，白鹿见宣城，宣城太守刘韫以闻。
现代文：明帝泰始二年二月乙亥臼，白鹿出现于宣城，宣城太守刘报献上朝廷。
English: In February of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty, a white deer appeared in Xuancheng, and Liu Bei, the governor of Xuancheng, presented it to the imperial court.

古文：泰始五年二月己亥，白鹿见长沙，湘州刺史刘韫以献。
现代文：泰始五年二月己亥曰，白鹿出现于长沙，湘州刺史刘粗献上朝廷。
English: In February of the fifth year of the Taizhi era, the White Deer appeared in Changsha, and the Hunan prickly pear tree, Liu Kuo, was presented to the imperial court.

古文：泰始六年十二月乙未，白鹿见梁州，梁州刺史杜幼文以闻。
现代文：泰始六年十二月乙未日，白鹿出现于梁州，梁州刺史杜幼文上报朝廷。
English: On the second day of December in the sixth year of the Tai Dynasty, the White Deer appeared in Liangzhou, and Liangzhou sent a letter to the imperial court.

古文：后废帝元徽三年二月甲子，白鹿见郁洲，青冀二州刺史、西海太守刘善明以献。
现代文：后废帝元徽三年二月甲子日，白鹿出现于郁洲，青冀二州刺史、西海太守刘善明献上朝廷。
English: After the abdication of Emperor Yuanhui, the White Deer appeared in Yuzhou on February 1st, and was presented to the imperial court by Liu Shanming, the governor of Qinghai and the governor of the West Sea.

古文：三角兽，先王法度修则至。
现代文：三角兽，古代圣王法度修定完备后就会出现。
English: The three-horned beast will appear after the revision and completion of the ancient holy king's law.

古文：一角兽，天下平一则至。
现代文：阙一角兽，天下太乎统一就会出现。
English: If there is a unicorn, the world will be too unified.

古文：六足兽，王者谋及众庶则至。
现代文：阙六足兽，帝王的谋略惠及老百姓就会出现。
English: Six-legged beast, the emperor's strategy to benefit the people will appear.

古文：比肩兽，王者德及矜寡则至。
现代文：阙比肩兽，帝王的恩德施及孤寡就会出现。
English: The emperor's benevolence and the lonely widow will appear.

古文：獬豸知曲直，狱讼平则至。
现代文：阙獬豸知晓是非曲直，刑狱诉讼公平就会出现。
English: If you know the rights and wrongs, the fairness of criminal proceedings will emerge.

古文：白虎，王者不暴虐，则白虎仁，不害物。
现代文：阙白虎，帝王不暴虐，那么白虎仁慈，不伤害其他动物。
English: The emperor is not violent, so the white tiger is kind and does not harm other animals.

古文：汉宣帝元康四年，南郡获白虎。
现代文：汉宣帝元康四年，南郡获得白虎。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Yuan Kang of the Han Dynasty, Nan County won the White Tiger.

古文：汉章帝元和二年以来，至章和元年，凡三年，白虎二十九见郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和二年至章和元年，共三年，白虎二十九次在郡国出现。
English: From the 2nd year of Emperor Zhang of Han to the 1st year of Emperor Zhang, a total of three years, the white tiger appeared 29 times in the county.

古文：汉安帝延光三年八月戊子，白虎二见颍川阳翟。
现代文：汉安帝延光三年八月戊子日，白虎二次在颖川的阳翟出现。
English: In August of the third year of the reign of Emperor An of Han, the White Tiger appeared for the second time in the impotence of Yingchuan.

古文：汉献帝延康元年四月丁巳，饶安县言白虎见。
现代文：汉献帝延康元年四月丁巳曰，饶安县说出现了白虎。
English: In April of the first year of the Han Dynasty, Ding Si said that a white tiger appeared in Rao'an County.

古文：又郡国二十七言白虎见。
现代文：另外，郡国说二十七次出现了白虎。
English: In addition, the county government said that the white tiger appeared 27 times.

古文：吴孙权赤乌六年正月，新都言白虎见。
现代文：吴孙权赤乌六年正月，新都说出现了白虎。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of Wu Sun Quan's reign, Xin Du said that a white tiger appeared.

古文：赤乌十一年五月，鄱阳言白虎仁。
现代文：赤乌十一年五月，鄱阳说白虎有仁德。
English: In May of the eleventh year of Akao, Shenyang said that the white tiger had benevolence.

古文：晋武帝泰始元年十二月，白虎见河南阳翟。
现代文：晋武帝泰始元年十二月，白虎出现于河南的阳翟。
English: In December of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, a white tiger appeared in the mountains of Henan Province.

古文：泰始元年十二月，白虎见弘农陆浑。
现代文：泰始元年十二月，白虎出现于弘农的陆浑。
English: In December of the first year of the Tai Dynasty, a white tiger appeared in the mud of Hongnong.

古文：泰始二年正月己亥，白虎见辽东乐浪。
现代文：泰始二年正月己亥曰，白虎出现于辽东的乐浪。
English: In the first month of the second year of Taizhi, the white tiger appeared in the music wave of Liaodong.

古文：泰始二年正月辛丑，白虎见天水西。
现代文：泰始二年正月辛丑曰，白虎出现于天水西县。
English: In the first month of the second year of Taishi, the white tiger appeared in West Tianshui County.

古文：晋武帝咸宁三年二月乙丑，白虎见沛国。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁三年二月乙丑曰，白虎出现于沛国。
English: Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty said in the second month of the second year of the third year that the white tiger appeared in Pei Province.

古文：晋武帝太康元年八月，白虎见永昌南罕。
现代文：晋武帝太康元年八月，白虎出现于永昌的南罕。
English: In August of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang, the white tiger appeared in Nanhan, Yongchang.

古文：太康四年七月丙辰，白虎见建平北井。
现代文：太康四年七月丙辰曰，白虎出现于建平的北井。
English: In July of the 4th year of Taikang, the white tiger appeared in the North Well of Jianping.

古文：太康十年十月丁酉，白虎见犍为。
现代文：太康十年十月了酉曰，白虎出现于犍为。
English: In October of the tenth year of Taikang, the white tiger appeared in Xingwen.

古文：晋成帝咸和八年五月己已，白虎见新昌县。
现代文：晋成帝盛和八年五月己巳，白虎出现于新昌县。
English: In May of the eighth year of Emperor Jinsheng's reign, a white tiger appeared in Xinchang County.

古文：晋简文帝咸安二年三月，白虎见豫章南昌县西乡石马山前。
现代文：晋简文帝咸安二年三月，白虎出现于豫章南昌县西部的石马山前。
English: In March of the second year of Emperor Jianwen's reign, a white tiger appeared in front of Shima Mountain in the western part of Nanchang County, Yuzhang.

古文：晋孝武太元十四年十一月辛亥，白虎见豫章郡。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元十四年十一月辛亥日，白虎出现于豫章郡。
English: In November of the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, the white tiger appeared in Yuzhang County.

古文：太元十九年二月，行巩令刘启期言白虎频见。
现代文：太元十九年二月，代理巩县令刘启期说白虎屡次出现。
English: In February of the 19th year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, Liu Qiji, the deputy governor of Gongxian County, said that the white tiger appeared repeatedly.

古文：太元十九年二月，行温令赵邳言白虎频见。
现代文：太元十九年二月，代理温县令赵邳说白虎屡次出现。
English: In February of the 19th year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, the agent of Wenshan County, Zhao Jun, said that the white tiger appeared repeatedly.

古文：晋安帝隆安五年十一月，襄阳言驺虞见于新野。
现代文：晋安帝隆安五年十一月，襄阳说绉虞出现于新野。
English: In November of the 5th year of the reign of Emperor An of Jin, Emperor Yong of An, Xiangyang said that Gan Yu appeared in Nyno.

古文：宋武帝永初元年八月癸巳，白虎见枝江。
现代文：宋武帝永初元年八月癸巳曰，白虎出现于枝江。
English: Emperor Songwu said in August of the first year of the Song Dynasty that a white tiger appeared in the Yangtze River.

古文：少帝景平元年十月，白虎见桂阳耒阳。
现代文：少帝景平元年十月，白虎出现于桂阳的耒阳。
English: In October of the first year of the Young Emperor Jingping, a white tiger appeared in Shenyang, Guiyang.

古文：文帝元嘉十九年十月，白虎见弋阳、期思二县，南豫州刺史武陵王骏以闻。
现代文：文帝元嘉十九年十月，白虎出现于弋屋、期思二县，南豫州刺史武陵王刘骏上报朝廷。
English: In October of the 19th year of the reign of Emperor Wen of the Yuan Dynasty, the white tiger appeared in the two counties of Jinya and Zhisi, and was reported to the imperial court by the king of Wuling, Liu Ye, in southern Henan Province.

古文：元嘉二十五年二月己亥，白虎见武昌，武昌太守蔡兴宗以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十五年二月己亥曰，白虎出现于武昌，武昌太守蔡兴宗上报朝廷。
English: In February of the 25th year of Yuan Jia, the white tiger appeared in Wuchang, and the Wuchang governor Cai Xingzong reported it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十五年十一月丁丑，白虎见蜀郡二，赤虎导前，益州刺史陆徽以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十五年十一月丁丑曰，二只白虎出现于星郡，赤虎在前面引路，益业刺史坠邀上报朝廷。
English: In November of the 25th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Ding Jiu said that two white tigers appeared in Xingshun, the red tiger led the way in front, and the history of the industry was invited to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十六年四月戊戌，白虎见南琅邪半阳山，二虎随从，太守王僧达以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十六年四月戊戌口，白虎出现于南琅邪的半阳山，有二只虎随从，太守王僧达上报朝廷。
English: In April of the 26th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the White Tiger appeared in the Banyang Mountain of the Southern Han Dynasty. It was accompanied by two tigers. It was reported to the imperial court by the eunuch Wang Zangda.

古文：孝武孝建三年三月壬子，白虎见临川西丰。
现代文：孝武孝建三年三月壬子，白虎出现于临川的西丰。
English: In March of the third year of the reign of Emperor Xiaowu, a white tiger appeared in Xifeng, Linchuan.

古文：白狼，宣王得之而犬戎服。
现代文：白狼，周宣王获得而犬戎顺服。
English: The white wolf, Zhou Xuan Wang obtained and the dog obeyed.

古文：白麞，王者刑罚理则至。
现代文：阙白麞，帝王的刑罚公平合理就会出现。
English: Sooner or later, the emperor's punishment will be fair and reasonable.

古文：晋武帝咸宁元年四月丙戌、乙卯，白麞见琅邪，赵王伦以献。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁元年四月丙戌、乙卯，白獐出现于琅邪，赵王俭献上朝廷。
English: In April of the first year of the reign of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, Zhao Wang Jian was presented to the imperial court.

古文：咸宁三年七月壬辰，白麞见魏郡。
现代文：威宁三年七月壬辰，白獐出现于委困。
English: In July of the third year of Wening, the egrets appeared in the committee.

古文：晋武帝太康三年八月，白麞见梁国蒙，梁相解隆获以献。
现代文：晋武帝太康三年八月，白獐出现于梁朝的蒙地，梁相解隆捕获献给朝廷。
English: In August of the third year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, the egret appeared in the Mongolian territory of the Liang Dynasty. Liang Xianglong captured the egret and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：太康五年九月己酉，白麞见义阳。
现代文：太康五年九月己酉日，白獐出现于义阳。
English: In September of the 5th year of Taikang, the egrets appeared in Yiyang.

古文：太康七年五月戊辰，白麞见汲郡。
现代文：太康七年五月戊辰曰，白獐出现于汲郡。
English: In May of the 7th year of the Taikang era, the white stork appeared in Kyu County.

古文：晋成帝咸和九年五月癸酉，白麞见吴国吴县，内史虞潭获以献。
现代文：晋成帝咸和九年五月癸酉日，白獐出现于吴国的吴县，内史虞潭捕获献上朝廷。
English: On the 3rd day of the 5th month of the 9th year of the reign of Emperor Jincheng of the Han Dynasty, the egret appeared in the Wu County of the State of Wu. It was caught in the Neishi Yutan and presented to the imperial court.

古文：晋穆帝永和元年八月，白麞见吴国吴县西界包山，获以献。
现代文：晋穆帝永和元年八月，白獐出现于吴国吴县西界的包山，捕获献上朝廷。
English: In August of the first year of Jin Mu Di Yonghe, the egret appeared in Baoshan in the western part of Wuxian County, Wuxi Province, and was captured and presented to the imperial court.

古文：永和八年十二月，白麞见丹阳永世，永世令徐该获以献。
现代文：永和八年十二月，白獐出现于丹阳的永世，永世令徐该捕获献上朝廷。
English: In December of the eighth year of Yonghe, the egret appeared in Yonghe, Danyang. Yonghe ordered Xu to capture the egret and present it to the imperial court.

古文：永和十二年十一月庚午，白麞见梁郡，梁郡太守刘遂获以献。
现代文：永和十二年十一月庚午曰，白獐出现于梁郡，梁郡太守刘遂捕获献上朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of November 12, Yonghe, egrets appeared in Liang County. Liu Sui, the governor of Liang County, captured them and presented them to the imperial court.

古文：晋安帝隆安五年十一月，白麞见荆州，荆州刺史桓玄以闻。
现代文：晋安帝隆安五年十一月，白獐出现于荆州，荆州刺史桓玄上报朝廷。
English: In November of the 5th year of the reign of Emperor An of the Jin Dynasty, the egret appeared in Jingzhou, and the Jingzhou gazetteer Huan Xuan reported it to the imperial court.

古文：宋少帝景平元年五月癸未，白麞见义兴阳羡，太守王准之获以献。
现代文：宋少帝景平元年五月癸末日，白獐出现于义兴的阳羡，太守王准之捕获献上朝廷。
English: On the last day of May in the first year of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Jingping, the egrets appeared in the sunlit fields of Yixing, and the capture of the eunuch Wang Jun was presented to the imperial court.

古文：景平二年六月，白麞见南郡江阳，太守王华献之太祖。
现代文：景平二年六月，白獐出现于南郡的江阳，太守王准献给太祖。
English: In June of the second year of King Jingping, the egret appeared in Jiangyang, Nan County, and was presented to King Taizu by the eunuch Wang Jun.

古文：太祖时入奉大统，以为休祥。
现代文：太祖当时入朝即帝位，以为这是吉祥的兆头。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather ascended the throne immediately after his accession to the throne, thinking that this was an auspicious sign.

古文：文帝元嘉五年四月乙巳，白麞见汝阳武津，太守郑据获以献。
现代文：文帝元嘉五年四月乙巳曰，白獐出现于汝阳的武滓，太守郑据捕获献上朝廷。
English: In April of the fifth year of Emperor Yuanjia, Emperor Wen said that egrets appeared in Wuyuan, Ryuyang, and the eunuch Zheng Rong was captured and presented to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十二年正月，白麞见东莱黄县，青、冀州刺史王方回以献。
现代文：元嘉十一二年正月，白獐出现于东莱的黄县，青、冀州刺史王方回献上朝廷。
English: In the first month of the twelfth year of the Yuan Jia, the egret appeared in Huang County of Donglai, and the king of Qing and Jizhou presented it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十九年五月，山阳张休宗获白麞，南兗州刺史临川王义庆以献。
现代文：元嘉十九年五月，山堕入张体塞获得白獐，南兖州刺史临川王型羞庆献上朝廷。
English: In May of the 19th year of Yuan Jia, the mountain fell into the Zhang body plug to obtain the egret, and the southern Luzhou stabbed the history of Linchuan king-type shy celebration presented to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十年八月，白麞见江夏安陆，内史刘思考以献。
现代文：元嘉二十年八月，白獐出现于江夏的安陆，内史刘思考献上朝廷。
English: In August of the 20th year of Yuan Jia, the egret appeared in Anlu, Jiangxia, and Liu Zhixing presented it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十五年二月己丑，白麞见淮南，太守王休获以献。
现代文：元嘉二十五年二月己丑曰，白獐出现于淮南，太守王休获得献上朝廷。
English: In February of the 25th year of Yuan Jia, it is said that the egret appeared in Huainan and was presented to the imperial court by the eunuch Wang Xiu.

古文：元嘉二十五年四月戊午，白麞见南琅邪，太守王远获以献。
现代文：元嘉二十五年四月戊午日，白獐出现于南琅垄，太守玉远捕获献上朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of April 25th, Yuan Jia, egrets appeared in Nanluoguan, and were captured by the governor, Yuluan, and presented to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十五年五月辛未朔，华林园白麞生二子皆白，园丞梅道念以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十五年五月辛未初一，华林园中白獐生二子皆白，园丞梅道念上报朝廷。
English: On the first day of May in the 25th year of Yuan Jia, the egrets in Hualin Garden gave birth to two white egrets, which were reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十六年五月丙戌，白麞见马头，豫州刺史南平王铄以献。
现代文：元嘉二十六年五月丙戌曰，白獐出现于马题，邃业刺史直垩王塑隧献上朝廷。
English: In May of the 26th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the White Dragonfly appeared in Maqian, and the King Sculpture Tunnel presented to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十七年正月己丑，白麞见济阴，徐州刺史武陵王骏以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十七年正月己丑，白獐出现于济壁，徐州刺史这隆王刘鬃上报朝廷。
English: In the first month of the 27th year of Yuan Jia, the egret appeared in Jibai, and the history of Xuzhou's Longwang Liuye was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十七年四月癸丑，华林园白麞生一白子，园丞梅道念以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十七年四月癸丑，华林园白獐生下一白子，园丞梅道念上报朝廷。
English: In April of the 27th year of Yuan Jia, Hua Lin Yuan's egret gave birth to a white chick. The egret was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十九年六月壬戌，白麞见晋陵暨阳，南徐州刺史始兴王浚以献。
现代文：元嘉二十九年六月壬戌日，白獐出现于晋陵的暨阳，南徐州刺史始兴王刘浚献上朝廷。
English: On June 29, Yuan Jia's birthday, the egret appeared in Jinling's Jiyang, South Xuzhou, and was presented to the imperial court by King Liu Jian.

古文：孝武帝孝建三年六月癸巳，白麞见广陵，南兗州以献。
现代文：孝武帝孝建三年六月癸巳曰，白獐出现于广陵，南兖州献上朝廷。
English: Emperor Xiaowu said in June of the third year of the reign of Emperor Xiaojian that egrets appeared in Guangling, and Southern Luzhou was presented to the imperial court.

古文：孝武帝大明元年七月丁丑，白麞见东莱曲城县，获以献。
现代文：孝武帝大明元年七月丁丑曰，白獐出现于束莱的曲城县，捕获献上朝廷。
English: According to Emperor Xiaowu Daming in July of the first year of Dingwuxi, egrets appeared in Qucheng County, Suclai, and were captured and presented to the imperial court.

古文：大明二年正月壬戌，白麞见山阳，山阳内史程天祚以献。
现代文：大明二年正月壬戌日，白獐出现于山阳，山阳内史程天祚献上朝廷。
English: On the 2nd day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Ming Dynasty, the egret appeared in Sanyang. The egret was presented to the imperial court.

古文：大明二年二月辛丑，白麞见济北，济北太守殷孝祖以献。
现代文：大明二年二月辛丑曰，白獐出现济北，济北大守殷孝祖献上朝廷。
English: In February of the 2nd year of the Ming Dynasty, Xin Ug said that the egret appeared in Jibei, and the governor of Jibei, Yin Xiaozu, presented it to the imperial court.

古文：大明五年九月己巳，白麞见南阳，雍州刺史永嘉王子仁以献。
现代文：大明五年九月己巳日，白獐出现于南阳，雍州刺史永嘉王刘子仁献上朝廷。
English: In September of the 5th year of the Ming Dynasty, the egret appeared in Nanyang, and the Yongjia King Liu Ziren of Yongzhou presented it to the imperial court.

古文：大明六年四月戊辰，白麞见营阳，湘州刺史建安王休仁以献。
现代文：大明六年四月戊辰日，白獐出现于营阳，湘州刺史建安王刘休仁献上朝廷。
English: On the day of the Pentecost in April of the 6th year of the Ming Dynasty, the egret appeared in Yingyang, and Liu Xuren, the king of Jian'an in Hunan Province, presented it to the imperial court.

古文：大明七年正月庚寅，白麞见南阳，荆州刺史临海王子顼以献。
现代文：大明七年正月庚寅曰，白獐出现于南阳，荆州刺史临海王刘子顼献上朝廷。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of the Ming Dynasty, Geng Yin said that the egret appeared in Nanyang, and the Jingzhou egret was presented to the imperial court by the king of Linhai, Liu Zixuan.

古文：大明七年六月己巳，白麞见武陵临沅，太守刘衍以献。
现代文：大明七年六月己巳曰，白獐出现于武陵的临沅，太守刘衍献上朝廷。
English: In June of the seventh year of the Ming Dynasty, it was said that the egret appeared in Linyi, Wuling, and was presented to the imperial court by the eunuch Liu Yan.

古文：大明七年九月癸未，白麞见南阳，雍州刺史刘秀之以献。
现代文：大明七年九月癸未日，白獐出现于南阳，雍州刺史刘秀之献上朝廷。
English: On the last day of September in the seventh year of the Ming Dynasty, the egret appeared in Nanyang and was presented to the imperial court by Liu Xiu, the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：明帝泰始三年五月癸酉，白麞见南东海丹徒，南徐州刺史桂阳王休范以献。
现代文：明帝泰始三年五月癸酉日，白獐出现于南塞渔的旦壁，南徐州刺史挂肚刘乸献上朝廷。
English: On the third day of the fifth month of the third year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty, the egret appeared on the wall of the Nansei fishery, and the southern Xuzhou egret was presented to the imperial court.

古文：泰始三年五月乙卯，白麞见北海都昌，青州刺史沈文秀以献。
现代文：泰始三年五月乙卯曰，白獐出现于北海的都昌，青州刺史沈文秀献上朝廷。
English: In May of the third year of Taizhi, the egret appeared in Duchang on the North Sea, and the Qingzhou embroiderer Shen Wenshu presented it to the imperial court.

古文：泰始五年正月癸卯，白麞见汝阴楼烦，豫州刺史刘勔以献。
现代文：泰始五年正月癸卯曰，白獐出现于汝阴的楼烦，豫州刺史刘劻献上朝廷。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, it was said that the egret appeared in the rubble of Ruyin, and the Yuzhou engraving Liu Yi was presented to the imperial court.

古文：明帝泰豫元年十月壬戌，白麞见义兴国山，太守王蕴以献。
现代文：明帝泰豫元年十月壬戌闩，白獐出现于义兴的国山，太守王蕴献上朝廷。
English: In October of the first year of the Ming Emperor Taiyuan, the egret appeared on the national mountain in Yixing, and was presented to the imperial court by the eunuch Wang Yun.

古文：后废帝元徽元年正月甲午，白麞见海陵宁海，宁海太守孙嗣之以献。
现代文：后废帝元徽元年正月甲午曰，白獐出现于海陵的宁海，宁海太守孙嗣献上朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the first month of the year of the deposed Emperor Yuan Hui, the egret appeared in the Ninghai Sea of Hailing, and the Ninghai Governor Sun Zi presented it to the Imperial Court.

古文：文帝元嘉二十三年五月甲寅，东宫队白从陈超获黑麞于肥如县，皇太子以献。
现代文：文帝元嘉二十三年五月甲寅曰，束宫卫队的侍从速超在肥如县获得黑獐，皇太子献上朝廷。
English: Emperor Wen Yuanjia said in May 23rd, Jia Yin, that the attendants of the palace guard obtained the black scepter in Hiryu County, and the crown prince presented it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十三年十月辛巳，东宫将魏荣获青麞于秣陵。
现代文：元嘉二十三年十月辛巳曰，东宫属将魏荣在秣陵获得青獐。
English: In October 23rd, Yuan Jia told Xin Mi that Wei Rong, the vassal of the Eastern Palace, won the Youth Award in Fuling.

古文：元嘉十年十二月，营城县民成公会之于广陵高邮界获白麞麂以献。
现代文：元嘉十一年十二月，营城县民成公会之在面的广陵高邮界获得白獐麂献给朝廷。
English: In December of the eleventh year of Yuan Jia, the Guangling High Post Community, in the presence of the Yingcheng County Mincheng Public Association, received the egret dedicated to the imperial court.

古文：孝武帝大明元年二月己亥，白麂见会稽诸暨县，获以献。
现代文：孝武帝大明元年二月己亥，白麂出现于会稽的诸暨县，捕获献上朝廷。
English: In February of the first year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, the egrets appeared in Zhuji County, and were captured and presented to the imperial court.

古文：银麂，刑罚得共，民不为非则至。
现代文：银麂，刑罚适度，百姓不以为非就会出现。
English: Silver ingots, moderate punishments, the people do not think that it will appear.

古文：赤兔，王者德盛则至。
现代文：阙赤兔，帝王仁德深厚就会出现。
English: If you chase the red hare, the emperor benevolence will appear.

古文：比翼鸟，王者德及高远则至。
现代文：阙比翼鸟，帝王的仁德施及高远就会出现。
English: The emperor's benevolence and benevolence will appear in the distant future.

古文：赤雀，周文王时衔丹书来至。
现代文：阙赤雀，周文王时口衔丹书来临。
English: "Chicken and Rooster" and "Zhou Wen Wang" are coming soon.

古文：晋愍帝建兴三年四月癸酉，赤雀见平州府舍。
现代文：晋愍帝建兴三年四月癸酉曰，赤雀出现于平州的府舍。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the 3rd year of the reign of Emperor Jianxing of the Jin Dynasty, an egret appeared in the residence of Pingzhou.

古文：宋文帝元嘉二十年五月，赤雀集南平郡府，内史臧绰以闻。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉二十年五月，赤雀停留在南平郡的府舍，内史臧绰上报朝廷。
English: In May of the 20th year of Song Emperor Yuanjia, the egret stayed at the residence in Nanping County, and the story was immediately reported to the imperial court.

古文：孝武帝孝建元年五月己亥，临沂县鲁尚斯军人于城上获赤雀，太傅假黄钺江夏王义恭以献。
现代文：孝武帝孝建元年五月己亥曰，临沂县鲁尚斯军人在城上获得赤雀，太傅假黄铁江夏王刘义恭献上朝廷。
English: Emperor Xiaowu said in May of the first year of Xiaojian that the soldiers of Linshans in Linyi County won the sparrow on the castle, and the false Huang Tiejiang Xia King Liu Yigong presented it to the imperial court.

古文：福草者，宗庙肃，则生宗庙之中。
现代文：福草，祭祀宗庙时恭敬，便生在宗庙中。
English: Fukuso, who was born in the ancestral temple, is respectful when worshiping at the temple.

古文：苍乌者，贤君修行孝慈于万姓，不好杀生则来。
现代文：删苍乌，贤明君主修养德行，孝敬慈爱行于天下百姓，不好杀生就会来临。
English: If a wise monarch cultivates virtue and practices filial piety and mercy among the people of the world, if he does not, killing will come.

古文：宋孝武帝大明元年五月丁丑，苍鸟见襄阳县。
现代文：宋孝武帝大明元年五月丁丑日，苍乌出现于襄阳县。
English: In May of the first year of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowu appeared in Yangyang County.

古文：大明二年四月甲申，苍鸟见襄阳，雍州刺史王玄谟以献。
现代文：大明二年四月甲申曰，苍乌出现于襄阳，雍州刺史王玄谟献上朝廷。
English: In April of the second year of the Ming Dynasty, Jia Shen said that Cang Wu appeared in Xiangyang, and the Yongzhou scribe Wang Xuan Mu presented it to the imperial court.

古文：甘露，王者德至大，和气盛，则降。
现代文：甘露，帝王德行浩荡无际，和气强盛，就会降临。
English: The nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar.

古文：柏受甘露，王者耆老见敬，则柏受甘露。
现代文：柏树受甘露，帝王为有德行的老人所敬重，那么柏树就会受甘露。
English: The cypress tree receives the nectar, the emperor is respected as a virtuous old man, then the cypress tree will receive the nectar.

古文：竹受甘露，王者尊贤爱老，不失细微，则竹苇受甘露。
现代文：竹子受甘露，帝王尊重贤良，敬重老者，关心备至，那么竹子和苇草接受甘露。
English: The bamboo receives the nectar, the emperor respects the virtuous, respects the elderly, cares for the prepared, then the bamboo and the reed grass receive the nectar.

古文：汉宣帝元康元年三月，甘露降未央宫。汉宣帝神雀二年二月，甘露降京师。
现代文：汉宣帝元康元年三月，甘露降临未央宫汉宣帝神雀二年二月，甘露降临京城。
English: In March of the first year of Hanzhong Emperor Yuan Kang, nectar fell on the Weiyang Palace. In February of the second year of Hanzhong Emperor Shenzhang, nectar fell on the capital city.

古文：神雀四年春，甘露降京师。
现代文：神雀四年春，甘露降临京城。
English: In the spring of the 4th year of the Divine Sparrow, nectar descends on Kyoto.

古文：汉宣帝五凤二年正月，甘露降京师。
现代文：汉宣帝五凤二年正月，甘露降临京城。
English: In the first month of the second year of Emperor Wu Feng's reign, nectar descended on Beijing.

古文：汉成帝元延四年三月，甘露降京师。
现代文：汉成帝元延四年三月，甘露降临京城。
English: In March of the fourth year of Emperor Hancheng's reign, nectar descended on the capital.

古文：汉光武建武中元元年五月，郡国上甘露降。
现代文：汉光武建武中元元年五月，郡国上奏甘露降临。
English: In May of the first year of the Han Guangwu Jianwu Middle Yuan Dynasty, the county's Shangso nectar came down.

古文：汉明帝永平十七年正月戊子夜，帝梦见光武帝、光烈皇后，梦中喜觉，悲不能寐。
现代文：汉明帝永平十七年正月戊子日夜晚，皇帝梦见光武帝、光烈皇后，梦中高兴得惊醒过来，醒后悲伤不能入睡。
English: On the evening of the 17th day of the 1st month of the year of Emperor Hanming Yongping, the emperor dreamed of Emperor Guangwu and Empress Guanglai. In the dream, he was so happy that he woke up, and after waking up, he couldn't fall asleep because of sadness.

古文：明旦上陵，百官、胡客悉会。
现代文：第二天清晨上陵墓拜谒，朝廷百官、国外使者全来聚会。
English: The next morning, hundreds of officials from the imperial court and foreign envoys came to pay their respects at the mausoleum.

古文：太常丞上言，其日陵树叶有甘露。帝令百官采甘露。
现代文：太常丞上奏说，这天陵墓周围的树叶有甘露，皇帝命令百官采集甘露。
English: Emperor Taizanjo reported that there was nectar in the leaves around the mausoleum that day, and the emperor ordered hundreds of officials to collect the nectar.

古文：帝自伏御床，视太后庄器奁中物，流涕，敕易奁中脂泽之具。
现代文：皇帝自己伏在御床上，注视太后盛在妆奁中的器物，流下眼泪，下令更换奁中脂粉香泽器具。
English: The emperor prostrated himself on the throne, gazed at the utensils that the empress dowager kept in her makeup case, shed tears, and ordered the replacement of the lipstick and fragrance utensils in the case.

古文：永平十七年春，甘露仍降京师。
现代文：永平十七年春，甘露又降临京城。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year of Yongping, nectar again descended on Beijing.

古文：汉章帝元和中，甘露降郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和期间，甘露降临于郡国。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Zang in the Yuan Dynasty, nectar fell on the county.

古文：汉安帝延光三年四月丙戌，甘露下沛国丰。
现代文：汉安帝延光三年四月丙戌曰，甘露降落于沛国的丰地。
English: In April of the third year of the reign of Emperor An of Han, the nectar fell on the rich land of Pei.

古文：延光三年七月，甘露下左冯翊频阳。
现代文：延光三年七月，甘露降落于左冯翊的频阳。
English: In July of the third year of Yan Guang, the nectar landed in the Phanyang of Zuo Fengyu.

古文：汉桓帝延熹三年四月，甘露降上郡。
现代文：汉桓帝延熹三年四月，甘露降临上郡。
English: In April of the third year of the reign of Emperor Han Huan, nectar fell on Shang County.

古文：汉桓帝永康元年八月，甘露降巴郡。
现代文：汉桓帝永康元年八月，甘露降临巴郡。
English: In August of the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongkang of the Han Dynasty, nectar descended on Ba County.

古文：魏文帝初，郡国三十七言甘露降。
现代文：魏文帝初年，三十七个郡国说甘露降临。
English: In the first year of Emperor Weiwen, thirty-seven counties said that the nectar was coming.

古文：魏少帝甘露元年五月，鄴及上洛并言甘露降。
现代文：魏少帝苴露元年五月，鄴和上洛都说有甘露降临。
English: In May of the first year of Emperor Wei's reign, Luo and Shangluo both said that there was nectar.

古文：魏元帝咸熙二年四月，南深泽县言甘露降。
现代文：魏元帝咸熙二年四月，南深泽县说甘露降临。
English: In April of the second year of Emperor Han Xi of Wei and Yuan Dynasties, it was said that nectar came down from the south of Shengze County.

古文：吴孙权黄武前，建业言甘露降。
现代文：吴孙权黄武年前，建业说有甘露降临。
English: Wu Sun Quan Huang Wu years ago, Jian Ye said that there was nectar coming.

古文：黄武二年五月，曲阿言甘露降。
现代文：黄武二年五月，曲阿说有甘露降临。
English: In May of the second year of Huangwu, Qu Ah said that there was nectar.

古文：吴孙权嘉禾五年三月，武昌言甘露降于礼宾殿。
现代文：吴孙权嘉禾五年三月，武昌说有甘露降临于礼宾殿。
English: In March of the fifth year of Wu Sun Quan Jia He, Wuchang said that there was nectar falling on the Concierge Hall.

古文：吴孙权赤乌二年三月，零陵言甘露降。
现代文：吴孙权赤乌二年三月，零陵说有甘露降临。
English: In March of the second year of Wu Sun Quan's reign, Ziling said that there was nectar.

古文：赤乌九年四月，武昌言甘露降。
现代文：赤乌九年四月，武昌说有甘露降临。
English: In April of the 9th year of Akebono, Wuchang said that there was nectar.

古文：吴孙皓甘露元年四月，蒋陵言甘露降。
现代文：吴孙皓甘露元年四月，蒋陵说有甘露降临。
English: In April of the first year of Wu Sun's reign, Jiang Ling said that the nectar of nectar had descended.

古文：晋武帝泰始十年四月乙亥，甘露降西河离石。
现代文：晋武帝泰始十年四月乙亥日，甘露降临于西河的离石。
English: In the 10th year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, on the 1st day of the 4th month of the 1st year of the 4th month of the 1st year of the 4th month of the 4th year of the 4th month of the 4th year of the 4th month of the 4th year of the 4th month of the 4th year of the 4th month of the 4th year of the 4th month of the 4th year of the 4th month of the 4th year of the 4th month of the 4th year of the 4th month of the 4th year of the 4th month of the 4th year of the 4th month of the 4th

古文：晋武帝咸宁元年四月丙戌，甘露降张掖。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁元年四月丙戌曰，甘露降临于张掖。
English: In April of the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Xianning said that the nectar fell on Zhangye.

古文：咸宁元年五月戊午，甘露降清河绎幕。
现代文：咸宁元年五月戊午曰，甘露降临于清河的绎基。
English: On the afternoon of May 3 in the first year of Xianning, the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the clear river.

古文：咸宁元年九月，甘露降太原晋阳。
现代文：咸宁元年九月，甘露降临于太原的晋阳。
English: In September of the first year of Xianning, nectar descended on Taiyuan's Jinyang.

古文：咸宁二年五月戊子，甘露降玄菟郡治。
现代文：咸宁二年五月戊子曰，露降临于玄菟的郡治。
English: In May of the second year of Xianning, Wu Zi said that the dew fell on the county seat of Xuanzang.

古文：咸宁三年六月戊申，甘露降巴郡南充国。
现代文：咸宁三年六月戊申曰，甘露降临于巴郡的南充国。
English: In June of the third year of Xianning, Wushin said that the nectar fell in Nanchong, Ba County.

古文：晋武帝太康五年三月乙卯，甘露降东宫。
现代文：晋武帝太康五年三月乙卯日，甘露降临于东宫。
English: On the second day of the third month of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taikang, nectar fell on the East Palace.

古文：太康七年四月，甘露降京兆杜陵。
现代文：太康七年四月，甘露降临于京兆的杜陵。
English: In April of the 7th year of Taikang, the nectar of nectar fell on the imperial mausoleum in Beijing.

古文：太康七年五月，甘露降魏郡鄴。
现代文：太康七年五月，甘露降临于魏郡的邺县。
English: In May of the seventh year of Taikang, nectar fell on the county of Weixian.

古文：晋惠帝元康四年五月，甘露降乐陵郡。
现代文：晋惠帝元康四年五月，甘露降临于降乐的陵郡。
English: In May of the 4th year of Emperor Jingu's reign, nectar fell on the county of Neung-gun in the province of Hwaseong.

古文：晋愍帝建兴元年六月，甘露降西平县。
现代文：晋愍帝建兴元年六月，甘露降临于西干县。
English: In June of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jianxing of the Jin Dynasty, nectar fell on Xigang County.

古文：建兴三年八月己未，甘露降新昌县。
现代文：建兴三年八月己末日，甘露降临于新昌县。
English: In August of the third year of Jianxing, the last day of the year, nectar fell on Xinchang County.

古文：晋愍帝建武元年六月丁丑，甘露降寿春。
现代文：晋愍帝建武元年六月丁丑，甘露降临于寿春。
English: Emperor Jianwu of the Jin Dynasty died in June of the first year, and the nectar fell in the spring.

古文：晋元帝太兴三年四月，甘露降琅邪费。
现代文：晋元帝太兴三年四月。甘露降临于降琅的邪费。
English: In April of the third year of the reign of Emperor Taheung of the Jin Dynasty, nectar rained down from the sky.

古文：晋明帝泰宁二年正月，巴郡言甘露降。
现代文：晋明帝泰宁二年正月，巴郡说有甘露降临。
English: In the first month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taining of the Jin and Ming dynasties, Ba County said that there was nectar.

古文：晋成帝咸和四年四月，甘露降武昌郡阁前柳树，太守诩以闻。
现代文：晋成帝咸和四年四月，甘露降临于武昌郡治阁前的柳树，太守翊上报朝廷。
English: In April of the fourth year of Emperor Jincheng's reign, nectar fell on the willow tree in front of the palace in Wuchang County, and the eunuch reported it to the imperial court.

古文：咸和六年三月，甘露降宁州城内北园榛桃树，刺史以闻。
现代文：咸和六年三月，甘露降临于宁州城内北园的榛桃树，刺史上报朝廷。
English: In March of the sixth year of the Heian period, nectar fell on a peach tree in the north garden of Ningzhou city, and the peach tree was reported to the imperial court.

古文：咸和七年四月癸巳，甘露降京邑，扬州刺史王导以闻。
现代文：咸和七年四月癸巳日，甘露降临于京邑，扬州刺史玉蔓上报朝廷。
English: On the seventh day of the fourth month of the seventh year of the Heian period, nectar fell on Kyoto, and Yangzhou sent a report to the imperial court.

古文：咸和八年四月癸卯，甘露降庐江襄安县蒋胄家。
现代文：咸和八年四月癸卯日，甘露降临于庐江襄安县蒋胄的家中。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month of the eighth year of Xianhe, nectar fell on the home of Jiang Wei in Xiang'an County of the Minjiang River.

古文：咸和八年四月癸卯，甘露降宣城宛陵县之须里。
现代文：咸和八年四月癸卯日，甘露降临于宣城宛陵县的须里。
English: On the last day of April in the eighth year of the Heian period, nectar fell on Suri in Wanling County, Xuancheng.

古文：咸和九年四月甲寅，甘露降吴国钱唐县右乡康巷之柳树。
现代文：咸和九年四月甲寅曰，甘露降临于吴国钱唐县右乡康巷的柳树上。
English: In April of the ninth year of the Heian period, according to Jia Yin, nectar fell on a willow tree in the Right Township of Kangxiang, Qiantang County, Wuxi Province.

古文：咸和九年十二月丙辰，甘露降建平陵。
现代文：咸和九年十二月丙辰曰，甘露降临于建平建。
English: On the ninth day of the twelfth month of the twelfth month of the ninth year of the Heian period, nectar fell on Jianping Jian.

古文：咸和九年十二月丁巳，甘露降武平陵。
现代文：咸和九年十二月丁巳曰，甘露降临于武平堕。
English: In December of the ninth year of the Heian period, Ding Si said that the nectar fell on Wuping.

古文：晋成帝咸康元年四月癸卯，甘露降西堂桃树。
现代文：晋成帝咸康元年四月癸卯曰，甘露降临于西堂的桃树。
English: In April of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinsheng, the dew fell on the peach trees in the West Hall.

古文：咸康二年三月甲戌，甘露降郁林城内。
现代文：咸康二年三月甲戌，甘露降临于郁登城中。
English: In March of the second year of Xiankang, the dew fell on the city of Yuteng.

古文：咸康二年四月，甘露降西堂，又降尚书都坐桃树，又降会稽永兴县，众官毕贺。
现代文：咸康二年四月，甘露降临西堂，又降临于尚书省议事厅前的桃树上，又降临于会稽的永兴悬，众官都来祝贺。
English: In April of the second year of the reign of Emperor Xiankang, the nectar fell on the West Hall, on the peach tree in front of the meeting hall of the Ministry of Education and Culture, and on the Yongxing hanging of the auditorium, and all officials came to congratulate.

古文：戊午，甘露降会稽山阴县，又降吴兴武康县。
现代文：戊午曰，甘露降临于会稽的山阴县，又降临于呈里的逮尘题。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, the nectar of nectar fell on Shanyin County, which is in charge of auditing, and also fell on the dust problem in the submission.

古文：庚申，又降武康。
现代文：庚申，又降临武康县。
English: Goshun, once again descends on Wukang County.

古文：咸康三年四月戊午，甘露降殿后桃李树。
现代文：咸康三年四月戊午，甘露降临宫殿后面的桃李树。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the fourth month in the third year of the reign of Emperor Xiankang, nectar fell on the peach and plum trees behind the palace.

古文：五月，甘露降义兴阳羡县柞树，东西十四步，南北十五步。
现代文：五月，甘露降临于义兴阳羡县的柞树上，东西十四步，南北十五步。
English: In May, the nectar fell on the eucalyptus trees in Yixingyang County, 14 steps east to west and 15 steps north to south.

古文：咸康七年四月丙子，甘露降彭城王纮第内，众官毕贺。
现代文：咸康七年四月丙子曰，甘露降临彭城王司马弦府第中，众官都来祝贺。
English: In April of the seventh year of Xiankang's reign, his son said that the nectar had descended on the Pengcheng Wang Sima Zhen Middle School, and all the officials came to congratulate him.

古文：晋穆帝永和元年三月，甘露降庐江郡内桃李树，太守永以闻。
现代文：晋穆帝永和元年三月，甘露降临于庐王城内的桃李树，太守司马永上报朝廷。
English: In March of the first year of Jin Mu Di Yonghe, the nectar fell on the peach and plum trees in the city of King Gong. The governor Sima Yong reported this to the imperial court.

古文：永和五年十一月，太常刘邵上崇平陵令王昂即日奉行陵内，甘露降于玄宫前殿。
现代文：永和五年十一月，太常刘邵上奏说崇平陵令王昼这天在陵中恭谨地巡行，甘露降临于玄宫的前殿。
English: In November of the fifth year of the Yonghe era, Liu Shao wrote in his diary that Chongping Mausoleum ordered the king to march respectfully in the mausoleum that day, and the nectar fell on the front hall of the Imperial Palace.

古文：永和五年十二月己酉，甘露降丹阳湖熟县西界刘敷墓松树，县令王恬以闻，众官毕贺。
现代文：永和五年十二月己酉日，甘露降临于丹阳邀塾逊西界的型堑墓地的松树上，县令王恬上报朝廷，众官都来祝贺。
English: On December 6th, Yonghe year five, the nectar fell on the pine trees in the cemetery of Danyang Zhaoju School of Western Song Dynasty. The county magistrate Wang Qian reported to the imperial court, and all officials came to congratulate.

古文：晋简文帝咸安二年正月，甘露降随郡滠阳县界桑木，沾凝十余里中。
现代文：晋简文帝咸安二年正月，甘露降临于随郡溺阳县境内的桑树上，沾溉方圆十余里。
English: In the first month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Jianwen of the Jin Dynasty, nectar fell on the mulberry trees in the territory of Su County, Dangyang County, and covered an area of more than ten miles.

古文：晋孝武帝太元十二年八月，甘露降宁州界内，刺史费统以闻。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元十二年八月，甘露降临于宁州境内，刺史费统上报朝廷。
English: In August of the twelfth year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, nectar fell on the territory of Ningzhou and was reported to the imperial court.

古文：太元十五年闰月，甘露降永平陵。
现代文：太元十五年闰月，甘露降临于永平陵。
English: In the intercalary month of the 15th year of Taigen, nectar fell on Yongping Mausoleum.

古文：太元十六年十一月庚午，甘露降句阳县。
现代文：太元十六年十一月庚午，甘露降临于句阳县。
English: In the late afternoon of November in the 16th year of Taiyuan, nectar fell on Guyang County.

古文：太元十七年二月，甘露降南海番禺县杨树。
现代文：太元十七年二月，甘露降临于南海番禺县的杨树上。
English: In February of the 17th year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, nectar fell on poplar trees in Panyu County in the South China Sea.

古文：晋安帝元兴二年十月，甘露降武昌王成基家竹。
现代文：晋安帝元兴二年十月，甘露降临于武昌的王成基家中的竹子上。
English: In October of the second year of the reign of Emperor Yuanxing of the Jin and An dynasties, nectar fell on the bamboo at the home of Wang Chengji in Wuchang.

古文：元兴三年三月己卯，甘露降丹徒。
现代文：元兴三年三月己卯日，甘露降临于丹徒。
English: On the third day of March in the third year of Genxing, nectar fell on Dantu.

古文：元兴三年四月己酉，甘露降兰台。
现代文：元兴三年四月己酉曰，甘露降临于兰台。
English: In April of the third year of the Genxing era, the nectar of nectar fell on Lantai.

古文：宋武帝永初元年九月庚辰，甘露降丹徒岘山。
现代文：宋武帝永初元年九月庚辰曰，甘露降临于丹徒的岘山。
English: Emperor Songwu said in September of the first year of the Heian period, that the nectar fell on Lushan Mountain in Dantu.

古文：永初元年十月庚午，甘露降兴宁、永宁二陵，弥冠百余里。
现代文：永初元年十月庚午口，甘露降临于兴宁、永宁二二陵，弥漫了百余里。
English: At the dawn of October in the first year of the Yongning Dynasty, nectar fell on the 22 mausoleums in Xingning and Yongning, spreading over more than 100 miles.

古文：文帝元嘉三年闰正月己丑，甘露降吴兴乌程，太守王韶之以闻。
现代文：文帝元嘉三年闰正月己丑日，甘露降临于吴兴的乌程，太守王韶之上报朝廷。
English: On the day of the leap year in the third year of Emperor Wen Yuanjia, nectar fell on Wu Xing's Ucheng, and was reported to the imperial court by the eunuch Wang Xi.

古文：元嘉四年五月辛巳，甘露降齐郡西安临朐城。
现代文：元嘉四年五月辛巳，甘露降临于齐郡西安的临朐城。
English: In May of the 4th year of the Yuan Jia, the nectar fell on Linyi City in Xi'an, Qi County.

古文：元嘉四年十一月辛未朔，甘露降初宁陵。
现代文：元嘉四年十一月辛未初一，甘露降临于初宁陵。
English: In November of the fourth year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, on the first day of Xin Wei, the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar.

古文：元嘉四年十一月己丑，甘露降南海熙安，广州刺史江桓以闻。
现代文：元嘉四年十一月己丑，甘露降临于南海的熙安，广州刺史江桓上报朝廷。
English: In November of the 4th year of the Yuan Jia, the dew fell on Xi'an in the South China Sea, and the Guangzhou Sisi Jianghuan reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉八年五月，甘露降南海番禺。
现代文：元嘉八年五月，甘露降临于南海的番禺。
English: In May of the eighth year of Yuan Jia, nectar fell on Panyu in the South China Sea.

古文：元嘉九年十一月壬子，甘露降初宁陵。
现代文：元嘉九年十一月壬子，甘露降临于初宁陆。
English: In November of the ninth year of the Yuan Jia, the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar.

古文：元嘉十一年八月甲辰，甘露降费县之沙里，琅邪太守吕绰以闻。
现代文：元嘉十一年八月甲辰日，甘露降临于费县的边里，退塑太守旦镗上报朝廷。
English: On the first hour of the eleventh day of the eighth month of the eleventh year of the Yuan Jia, nectar fell on the outskirts of Fei County and was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十三年二月丁卯，甘露降上明巴山。
现代文：元嘉十三年二月厂卯日，甘露降临上明的巴山。
English: On the 13th day of the 2nd month of the 13th year of the Yuan Jia, the nectar fell on the Ba Mountain of Shangming.

古文：元嘉十三年二月，甘露降吴兴武康董道益家园树。
现代文：元嘉十三年二月，甘露降临吴兴武康董道益家园的树上。
English: In February of the thirteenth year of Yuan Jia, nectar fell on the trees of Wu Xingwu Kang Dong Daoyi's home.

古文：元嘉十三年三月甲午，甘露降初宁陵。
现代文：元嘉十三年三月甲午日，甘露降临初宁陵。
English: On the afternoon of March 1st in the 13th year of Yuan Jia, the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar.

古文：元嘉十六年三月己卯，甘露降广州城北门杨树，刺史陆徽以闻。
现代文：元嘉十六年三月己卯日，甘露降临广州城北门的杨树上，刺史陆徽上报朝廷。
English: In March of the 16th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the nectar of nectar fell on the poplars of the north gate of Guangzhou, and the Lu emblem was engraved and reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十七年四月丁丑，甘露降广陵永福里梁昌季家树，南兗州刺史江夏王义恭以闻。
现代文：元嘉十七年四月丁丑日，甘露降临广陵永彊旦梁昌季家中的树卜，南兖州刺史江夏王刘义恭上报朝廷。
English: In April of the 17th year of the Yuan Jia, on the day of Ding Jiu, the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar

古文：元嘉十七年，甘露降高平金乡富民村方三十里中。
现代文：元嘉十七年，甘露降临于高平金乡富民邨，方圆有三二十里。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Yuan Jia, nectar fell on Gaoping Jin Township Fumin Township, with a circumference of thirty-two miles.

古文：徐州刺史赵伯符以闻。
现代文：徐州刺史赵伯符上报朝廷。
English: Xuzhou engraving master Zhao Bo submitted the document to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十七年十一月乙酉，甘露降乐游苑。元嘉十八年五月甲申，甘露降丹阳秣陵卫将军临川王义庆园，扬州刺史始兴王濬以闻。
现代文：苑。元嘉十七年十一月乙酉日，甘露降临乐游元嘉十八年五月甲申曰，甘露降临于丹阳秣陵卫将军临川王刘义庆的园中，扬州刺史始兴王刘浚上报朝廷。
English: Garden. In November of the seventeenth year of the Yuan Jia, the nectar fell on the garden of the general of the Danyang Tomb Guard Linchuan King Liu Yiqing. In May of the eighteenth year of the Yuan Jia, the nectar fell on the garden of the general of the Danyang Tomb Guard Linchuan King Liu Yiqing. In Yangzhou, the history of King Liu Jian was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十八年六月，甘露降广陵广陵孟玉秀家树，南兗州刺史临川王义庆以闻。
现代文：元嘉十八年六月，甘露降临广陵郡广陵城盂玉秀家中的树上，南兖州刺史临川王刘义庆上报朝廷。
English: In June of the 18th year of Yuan Jia, nectar fell on a tree in the home of Yu Yuxiu, the ruler of Guangling City, Guangling County. Liu Yiqing, the ruler of Linchuan in southern Luzhou Province, reported this to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十九年五月丁卯，甘露降建康司徒参军督护顾俊之宅竹柳。
现代文：元嘉十九年五月丁卯曰，甘露降临建康司徒参军督护顾俊之宅中的竹子、柳树上。
English: In May of the 19th year of Yuanjia, Dingwu said that the nectar fell on the bamboo and willow trees in the house of Gu Jun, the military governor of Jiankang.

古文：元嘉十九年五月乙亥，甘露降马头济阳宋庆之园树，太守荀预以闻。
现代文：元嘉十九年五月乙亥曰，甘露降临马头济阳宋庆之园中的树上，太守荀预上报朝廷。
English: In May of the 19th year of Yuan Jia, in the year of the boar, the dew fell on the trees in the garden of Ma Tou Jiyang and Song Qing, which was reported to the imperial court in advance by Ta Shou Qi.

古文：元嘉二十一年，甘露降益州府内梨李树，刺史庾俊之以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十一年，甘露降临益州府中的梨、李树上，刺史庾俊之上报朝廷。
English: In the twenty-first year of Yuan Jia, nectar fell on the pear and plum trees in Yizhou Prefecture, and was reported to the imperial court by Shijun.

古文：元嘉二十一年四月，甘露频降乐游苑。
现代文：元嘉二十一年四月，甘露屡次降临銮游苑。
English: In April of the 21st year of the Yuan Jia, the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar

古文：元嘉二十一年四月，甘露降彭城绥舆里，徐州刺史臧质以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十一年四月，甘露降临于彭城的绥舆里，徐州刺史臧质上报朝廷。
English: In April of the 21st year of Yuan Jia, the nectar of nectar fell on the city of Pengcheng, and the quality of Xuzhou's nectar was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十一年四月，甘露降义阳平阳，太守庞秀之以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十一年四月，甘露降临于义阳的平阳，太守庞秀之上报朝廷。
English: In April of the twenty-first year of Yuan Jia, nectar fell on Pingyang, Yiyang, and was reported to the imperial court by the eunuch Pang Xiu.

古文：元嘉二十二年十一月辛巳，甘露降南郡江陵方城里，荆州刺史南谯王义宣以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十二年卜一月辛巳曰，甘露降临于南娶堰方城里，趔业刺史卢益王刘盏宣上报朝廷。
English: In January of the 22nd year of Yuan Jia, Xin Si said that the nectar fell in the city of Nan Zhe Yan Fang, and Liu Jian, the king of Lu Yi, announced it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十二年十二月丁酉，甘露降长宁陵，陵令包诞以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十二年十二月丁酉曰，甘露降临长宁陵，陵令包诞上报朝廷。
English: In December of the 22nd year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Ding Xi said that the nectar descended on Changning Mausoleum, and the birthday of the mausoleum was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十三年二月丁未，甘露降乐游苑，苑丞张宝以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十三年二月丁末日。甘露降临乐游苑，苑丞张实上报朝廷。
English: On the last day of February in the 23rd year of Yuan Jia, when the nectar fell on the Pleasure Garden, the gardener Zhang Si reported it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十三年九月丙子，甘露降长宁陵，陵令华林以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十三年九月丙子曰，甘露降临长宁陵，陵令华林上报朝廷。
English: In September 23rd, Yuan Jia's third son said that when the nectar fell on Changning Mausoleum, the mausoleum ordered Hualin to report it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十三年十二月庚子，甘露降襄阳郡治，雍州刺史武陵王骏以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十三年十二月庚子日，甘露降临襄阳的郡治，壅丛刺史武堕王玺噬上报朝廷。
English: On December 23rd, Geng Zi Day in Yuan Jia, when the nectar fell on the county seat of Xiangyang, it was reported to the imperial court that a cluster of locusts was stinging the fallen king Shifu.

古文：元嘉二十三年十二月辛丑，甘露频降乐游苑，苑丞何道之以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十三年十二月辛丑日，甘露屡次降临乐游苑，苑丞何道之上报朝廷。
English: On the fateful day of December in the 23rd year of Yuan Jia, nectar repeatedly descended on Le Youyuan, and was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十四年二月己亥、庚子，甘露频降景阳山，山监张绩以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十四年二月己亥、庚子日，甘露屡次降临景阳山，山监昼瞪上报朝廷。
English: In February of the 24th year of Yuan Jia, on the day of Ji Hai and Geng Zi, nectar repeatedly fell on Mount Jingyang, and the overseer of the mountain reported it to the imperial court at noon.

古文：元嘉二十四年二月己亥、癸卯、三月丙辰，甘露频降景阳山，华林园丞陈袭祖以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十四年二月己亥、癸卯曰、三月丙辰曰，甘露屡次降临量盟山，茎并图丞速垄担朝廷。
English: In February and March of the 24th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the nectar repeatedly descended on the Mengmeng Mountain, and the stems and shoots of the nectar quickly reached the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十四年三月甲寅，甘露降寻阳松滋，江州刺史庐陵王绍以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十四年三月甲寅曰，甘露降临寻阳的查噬，丝州刺史庐陆王型钮上报朝廷。
English: In March of the twenty-fourth year of Yuan Jia, Jia Yin said that the investigation of the sun-seeking of the nectar of the raindrops, the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the land was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十四年四月癸未，甘露降寻阳松滋；丙申，又降江州城内桐树；丁酉，又降城北数里之中，江州刺史庐陵王绍以闻。
现代文：元嘉十四年四月癸末日，甘露降临寻阳的松滋；丙申日，又降临江州城内的桐树上；丁四日，又降临城北方圆数里之中，江州刺史庐陵王刘绍上报朝廷。
English: On the last day of April in the 14th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the nectar fell on Songzhi, which was searching for the sun; on the second day, it fell on Tongshu, which was in the city of Jiangzhou; on the fourth day, it fell on Guanzhili, which was in the northern part of the city; and on the fifth day, it fell on Liu Shao, the king of the imperial tombs in Jiangzhou, and was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十四年七月乙卯，甘露降京师，扬州刺史始兴王浚以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十四年七月乙卯曰，甘露降临京师，扬州刺史始兴王刘浚上报朝廷。
English: In July of the 24th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, it was said that the nectar descended on Beijing, and the Yangzhou scribe Liu Jun, the Prince of Xinxing, reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十四年七月，甘露降襄城治下无量寺，雍州刺史武陵王骏以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十四年七月，甘露降临襄城管辖的无量寺，雍州刺史武陵王刘骏上报朝廷。
English: In July of the 24th year of Yuan Jia, the nectar of nectar came to the Myriad Temple under the jurisdiction of Xiangcheng, and the Yongzhou engraving of the king of Wuling, Liu Ye, was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十四年十月甲午，甘露降魏兴郡内，太守韦宁民以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十四年十月甲午曰，甘露降临魏兴郡境内，太守韦宁民上报朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of October 1st, the 24th year of Yuan Jia, nectar fell on the territory of Weixing County, and the eunuch Wening Min reported it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十三年至二十四年十二月，甘露频降，状如细雪，京都及郡国处处皆然，不可称纪。
现代文：元嘉二十三年至二十四年十二月，甘露频频降临，形状如捆雪，京城和郡国各处都能见到，不可胜记。
English: From the 23rd to the 24th of December in the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the nectar frequently fell, the shape of which was like a bundle of snow. It could be seen everywhere in the capital and the county, and it was unforgettable.

古文：元嘉二十五年十一月庚辰，甘露降南郡，荆州刺史南谯王义宣以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十五年十一月庚辰日，甘露降临南塑，型业刺史虚盏眨型盏宣上报朝廷。
English: On the day of Geng Chen in November of the 25th year of Yuan Jia, nectar fell on Nanpu, and the history of the mold industry was announced to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十五年十一月乙未，甘露降丹阳秣陵岩山。
现代文：元嘉二十五年十一月乙末日，甘露降临丹阳秣陵岩山。
English: On the last day of November of the 25th year of the Yuan Jia, the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar.

古文：元嘉二十六年三月壬午，甘露降景阳山，华林园丞梅道念以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十六年三月壬午曰，甘露降临景阳山，华林园丞痉丝上报朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of March 26th, Yuan Jia, nectar fell on Mount Jingyang, and it was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十六年三月庚寅、癸巳，甘露频降武昌，江州刺史庐陵王绍以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十六年三月庚寅、癸巳曰，甘露屡次降临亘过，辽业刺史庐坠王塑囱上报朝廷。
English: In March of the 26th year of Yuan Jia, Geng Yin and Xun Si said that the nectar had repeatedly descended, and Liao Ye stabbed the history and the king of the king of the king of the king of the chimney to report to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十六年四月甲辰、丙午、戊申，甘露频降豫章南昌，太守刘思考以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十六年四月甲辰、丙午、戊申曰，甘露屡次降临重睦的卢旦，太守刘墨考上报朝廷。
English: In April of the 26th year of Yuan Jia, in the morning of the 1st day of the 2nd month, in the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, in the morning of the 5th month, in the afternoon of the 6th month, in the afternoon of the 7th month, in the afternoon of the 8th month, in the afternoon of the 9th month, in the afternoon of the 10th month, in the afternoon of the 11th month, in the afternoon of the 12th month, in the afternoon of the 13th month, in the afternoon of the 14th month, in the afternoon of the 14th month, in the afternoon of the 15th month,

古文：元嘉二十六年七月，甘露降南郡江陵，荆州刺史南谯王义宣以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十六年七月，甘露降临南郡的江陵，趔业刺史直盏王刘盏皇上报朝廷。
English: In July of the 26th year of the Yuan Jia, nectar fell on Jiangling in Nan County, and Liu Jian, the king of Zhizhi, was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十七年四月乙卯、丙辰、丁巳，甘露频降豫章南昌。
现代文：元嘉二十七年四月乙卯、丙辰、丁巳曰，甘露屡次降临圣睦的直吕。
English: In April 27th, Yuan Jia, Yi Wu, Bing Chen, Ding Si said that the nectar had repeatedly descended on Shentong's Zhi Lu.

古文：戊午午时，天气清明，有彩雾映覆郡邑，甘露又自云降。
现代文：戊午日午时，天气晴朗，有彩雾笼盖豫章郡邑，甘露又从云中下降。
English: At noon on the afternoon of the third day of the fifth lunar month, the weather was fine, with colored fog covering Yuzhang County, and the nectar falling from the clouds.

古文：太守刘思考以闻。
现代文：太守刘思考上报朝廷。
English: Empress Dowager Liu pondered and reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十七年五月甲戌，甘露降东海丹徒，南徐州刺史始兴王浚以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十七年五月甲戌日，甘露降临东海的昼链，南徐州刺史盘罢工刘檀上报朝廷。
English: On the 27th day of the fifth month of the seventh month of the Yuan Jia, when the nectar fell on the day chain of the East China Sea, the Southern Xuzhou stabbing strike Liu Dang reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十八年二月戊辰，甘露降钟山延贤寺，扬州刺史庐陵王绍以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十八年二月戊辰日，甘露降临钟山的延贤寺，荡州刺史庐堕王刘钮上报朝廷。
English: On the day of Pentecost of February 28, Yuan Jia, nectar fell on Yan Xian Temple in Zhongshan, and Liu Niu, the fallen king, was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十八年二月壬午，甘露降徽音殿前果树。
现代文：亘矗二十八年二月壬午曰，甘露降临徽音殿前的果树上。
English: On the morning of February 28th, Ganoderma, nectar fell on the fruit trees in front of Huiyin Hall.

古文：元嘉二十八年二月，甘露降合欢殿后香花诸草。
现代文：元嘉二十八年二月，甘露降临合欢殿后的香花诸草之上。
English: In February of the 28th year of the Yuan Jia, the nectar fell on the fragrant flowers and grasses behind the Huan Hall.

古文：孝武帝孝建元年三月丙辰，甘露降华林园。
现代文：孝武帝孝建元年三月丙辰曰，甘露降临华林园。
English: According to Emperor Xiaowu of Xiaojian, in March of the first year of the Heian period, the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the rain.

古文：孝建二年三月己酉，甘露降丹阳秣陵中里路与之墓树。
现代文：孝建二年三月己酉曰，甘露降临丹阳秣陵中里路与之墓地的树上。
English: In March of the second year of Xiao Jian's reign, he said that the nectar fell on the trees of Danyang Burying Ground Middle Road and its cemetery.

古文：孝建二年三月辛亥，甘露降长宁陵松树。
现代文：孝建二年三月辛亥，甘露降临长宁陵的松树上。
English: In March of the second year of Xiao Jian, during the Xinhai Festival, nectar fell on the pine trees of Changningling.

古文：孝建二年三月，甘露降襄阳民家梨树。
现代文：孝建二年三月，甘露降临襄阳百姓家中的梨树上。
English: In March of the second year of Xiao Jian, nectar descended on the pear trees in the homes of the people of Xiangyang.

古文：孝建二年三月戊午，甘露降丹阳秣陵尚书谢庄园竹林，庄以闻。
现代文：孝建二年三月戊午日，甘露降临丹阳秣陵尚书谢庄园中的竹林裹，谢庄上报朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of the second day of the third month of the second year of Xiao Jian, the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar

古文：孝武帝大明元年四月癸卯，甘露降华林园桐树。
现代文：孝武帝大明元午四月癸卯曰，甘露降临茎林园的桐树上。
English: On the afternoon of the 4th day of the 4th month of the 1st year of the reign of Emperor Xiaowu, the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar

古文：大明三年三月己卯，甘露降乐游苑梅树。大明三年三月戊子，甘露降宣城郡舍，太守张辩以闻。
现代文：大明三年三月己卯曰，甘露降临乐游苑的梅树上大明三年三月戊子曰，甘露降临宣越郡舍，太守张辩上报朝廷。
English: In March of the 3rd year of Daming, Ji Wu said that the nectar fell on the plum tree of the Pleasure Garden. In March of the 3rd year of Daming, Wuzi said that the nectar fell over the county seat of Xuanwu, and Zhang En reported to the imperial court.

古文：大明四年正月壬辰，甘露降初宁陵松树。
现代文：大明四年正月壬辰曰，甘露降临初宁陵的松树上。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Ming Dynasty, on the day of Imjin, the nectar fell on the pine trees of Hatsuningling.

古文：大明四年二月丙申，甘露降长宁陵松树。
现代文：大明四年二月丙申曰，甘露降临长宁陵的松树上。
English: In February of the 4th year of the Ming Dynasty, Xian Shen said that the nectar fell on the pine trees of Changningling.

古文：大明四年二月乙巳，甘露降丹阳秣陵龙山，丹阳尹孔灵符以闻。
现代文：大明四年二月乙巳日，甘露降临丹阳秣陵的龙山，丹阳尹孔灵符上报朝廷。
English: On the 21st day of the 2nd month of the 4th year of the Ming Dynasty, when the nectar fell on the Longshan Mountain of Danyang Mausoleum, Danyang Yin Kongling Fu was reported to the imperial court.

古文：大明五年四月辛亥，甘露降吴兴安吉，太守历阳王子顼以闻。
现代文：大明五年四月辛亥，甘露降临吴兴的安吉，太守历阳王刘子顼上报朝廷。
English: In April of the 5th year of the Ming Dynasty, at the time of Xinhai, when the nectar fell on Anji in Wuxing, Liu Zixuan, the governor of Liyang, reported the news to the imperial court.

古文：大明五年四月乙卯，甘露降吴兴乌程，太守历阳王子顼以闻。
现代文：大明五年四月乙卯曰，甘露降临吴兴的乌程，太守历阳王刘子顼上报朝廷。
English: In April of the 5th year of the Daming Dynasty, Emperor Liu Ziqi, the governor of Liyang, reported to the imperial court that the dew had fallen on Wu Xing's Ucheng.

古文：大明六年二月戊午，甘露降建康灵耀寺及诸苑园，及秣陵龙山，至于娄湖。
现代文：大明六年二月戊午曰，甘露降临建康的灵耀寺以及诸苑园裹，降及秣陵的龙山，直达娄湖。
English: On the afternoon of February 6th in the year of the Dog, the nectar descended from Lingyao Temple in Jiankang and all the gardens and parks to the Longshan Mountain in Fuling and reached as far as Lugu Lake.

古文：是日，又降句容、江宁二县。
现代文：这天，又降临句容、江宁二县。
English: On this day, the two counties of Jurong and Jiangning came down again.

古文：大明七年三月丙申，甘露降寻阳松滋，太守刘矇以闻。
现代文：大明七年三月丙申日，甘露降临寻阳的松滋，太守刘蒙上报朝廷。
English: On the seventh day of the third month of the seventh year of the Ming Dynasty, the day when the nectar falls on the sun-seeking pine forest, the governor Liu Meng reported to the imperial court.

古文：大明七年四月己未，甘露降荆州城内，刺史临海王子顼以闻。大明七年十二月辛丑朔，甘露降吴兴乌程，令苟卞之以闻。
现代文：大明七年四月己末日，甘露降临荆州城内，刺史临海王刘子项上报朝廷大明七年十二月辛丑初一，甘露降临吴兴的乌程，县令苟卞之上报朝廷。
English: On the last day of April in the seventh year of the Ming Dynasty, the nectar fell on the city of Jingzhou, and the story of Linhai King Liu Zi was reported to the imperial court. On the first day of December in the seventh year of the Ming Dynasty, the nectar fell on the city of Wuxing, and was reported to the imperial court by the county government.

古文：明帝泰始二年四月己亥，甘露降上林苑，苑令徐承道以献。
现代文：明帝泰始二年四月己末日，甘露降临上林苑，苑令徐承道献上朝廷。
English: At the end of April in the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty, nectar fell on Lin Yuan, and the court ordered Xu Chengdao to present it to the imperial court.

古文：泰始二年四月庚申，甘露降华林园，园令臧延之以献。
现代文：泰始二年四月庚申日，甘露降临华林园，园令臧延之献上朝廷。
English: In April of the 2nd year of Taishi, on the day of the Chinese lunar calendar, nectar fell on the Chinese Forest Garden, and the garden was presented to the imperial court.

古文：泰始二年五月己未，甘露降丹阳秣陵县舍斋前竹，丹阳尹王景文以献。
现代文：泰始二年五月己亥曰，甘露降临丹阳秣陵县舍斋前的竹子上，丹阳尹王景文献上朝廷。
English: In May of the second year of the Taizhi era, it was said that when the nectar fell on the bamboo in front of the residence of Danyang Fuling County, Danyang Yin Wangjing's document reached the imperial court.

古文：泰始三年十一月庚申，甘露降晋陵，晋陵太守王蕴以闻。
现代文：泰始三年十一月庚申日，甘露降临于晋陵，晋陵太守王蕴上报朝廷。
English: In November of the 3rd year of Taishi, on the day of Koshin, nectar fell on the Jin Mausoleum, and it was reported to the imperial court by Wang Yun, the guardian of the Jin Mausoleum.

古文：泰始三年十一月癸亥，甘露降南东海丹徒建冈，徐州刺史桂阳王休范以闻。
现代文：泰始三年十一月癸亥曰，甘露降临南束海昼造的建迩，涂业刺史桂阳王刘坯箠上报朝廷。
English: In November of the third year of the Taizhi era, it was reported to the imperial court that the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar of the nectar.

古文：泰始三年十二月壬午，甘露降崇宁陵，扬州刺史建安王休仁以闻。
现代文：泰始三年十二月壬午日，甘露降临崇宁陵，扬州刺史建安王刘休仁上报朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 12th month of the 3rd year of Taizhi, the nectar descended on Chongning Mausoleum, and the Yangzhou engraving of Jianan King Liu Xuren was reported to the imperial court.

古文：后废帝元徽四年十一月乙巳，甘露降吴兴乌程，太守萧惠明以闻。
现代文：后废帝元徽四年十一月乙巳曰，甘露降临吴兴的乌程，太守萧惠明上报朝廷。
English: In November of the 4th year of the former Emperor Yuanhui, the eunuch Xiao Huiming reported to the imperial court that nectar had fallen on Wu Xing.

古文：顺帝升明二年十二月，甘露降建康禁中里。
现代文：顺帝升明二年十二月，甘露降临建康的禁中里。
English: In December of the second year after Emperor Shun's ascension to the throne, nectar descended on Jiankang's Forbidden Middle School.

古文：升明二年十一月，甘露降南东海武进彭山，太守谢朏以闻。
现代文：升明二年卜一月，甘露降临南束海武进的彭山，太守谢肶上报朝廷。
English: In January of the second year of the Ming Dynasty, when the nectar fell on Pengshan in Nanzukhaiwujin, the eunuch Xie Yao reported it to the imperial court.

古文：升明二年十一月，甘露降吴兴长城卞山，太守王奂以闻。
现代文：升明二年十一月，甘露降临吴兴长城的卞山，太守王奂上报朝廷。
English: In November of the second year of the Ming Dynasty, when the nectar fell on Mount Lushan of the Great Wall of Wuxing, the governor Wang Xi reported it to the imperial court.

古文：威香者，王者礼备则常生。
现代文：威香，帝王的礼义完备就会常年生长。
English: Wei Xiang, the emperor's complete courtesy will grow all year round.

