古文：贞观元年，封中书令房玄龄为邗国公，兵部尚书杜如晦为蔡国公，吏部尚书长孙无忌为齐国公，并为第一等，食邑实封一千三百户。
现代文：贞观元年，唐太宗封中书令房玄龄为邗国公，兵部尚书杜如晦为蔡国公，吏部尚书长孙无忌为齐国公，官品都列为一等，享受一千三百户的俸禄。
English: In the first year of the Zhenguan era, Tang Taizong's middle-ranking official was Xuanling, the highest-ranking military official was Cai Guogong, and the highest-ranking government official was Qi Guogong. They were all ranked as first-class officials and enjoyed the salary of 1,300 households.

古文：皇从父淮安王神通上言： 义旗初起，臣率兵先至，今玄龄等刀笔之人，功居第一，臣窃不服。 
现代文：太宗的堂叔淮安王李神通上奏道： 在太原初举义旗时，我便带兵首先赶来响应，现在房玄龄这些舞文弄墨的人，却功居第一等，我心里暗自不服气。 
English: Li Shentong, the great-uncle of Emperor Taizong of the Huai'an Kingdom, gave a speech: "In the early days of Taiyuan, when the flag of righteousness was raised, I was the first to come with soldiers to respond. Now, Fang Xuanling, these people who danced and danced, have made the greatest contribution. I am secretly unconvinced.

古文：太宗曰： 国家大事，惟赏与罚。
现代文：太宗说： 处理国家大事，要做好赏与罚。
English: Taizong said: In dealing with national affairs, we must do a good job of reward and punishment.

古文：赏当其劳，无功者自退；罚当其罪，为恶者咸惧。
现代文：被赏赐的人要与他的功劳相当，没有功劳的人自然退避不争；所惩罚的人要与他的恶行相当，做坏事的人才会感到畏惧。
English: The one who is rewarded should be commensurate with his merit, and the one who has no merit should naturally retreat and not fight; the one who is punished should be commensurate with his evil deeds, and the one who does evil should be afraid.

古文：则知赏罚不可轻行也。
现代文：可知赏罚不能轻率施行。
English: It can be seen that rewards and punishments should not be implemented lightly.

古文：今计勋行赏，玄龄等有筹谋帷幄、画定社稷之功，所以汉之萧何，虽无汗马，指踪推毂，故得功居第一。
现代文：如今论功行赏，房玄龄等有运筹帷幄、安抚社稷的功勋，就像汉代的萧何一样，虽没有汗马战功，但能制定策略、推荐贤能，所以应该功居第一。
English: Nowadays, in terms of reward for meritorious service, Fang Xuanling and others have the merits of operational planning and pacifying the society, just like Xiao He in the Han Dynasty. Although they do not have the merits of war, they can formulate strategies and recommend talents, so they should rank first in merit.

古文：叔父于国至亲，诚无爱惜，但以不可缘私滥与勋臣同赏矣。 
现代文：叔父是国家至亲，要封赏我当然无所吝惜，但不能因为亲私关系就随意与功勋大臣同样封赏！ 
English: My uncle is a close relative of the state. Of course, I will do anything to be awarded, but I can't be awarded the same as the Minister of Merit just because of a personal relationship!

古文：由是诸功臣自相谓曰： 陛下以至公，赏不私其亲，吾属何可妄诉。 
现代文：因此功臣们相互之间说： 陛下秉公封赏，不偏袒亲眷，我们怎么可以胡乱申诉猜疑呢？ 
English: Therefore, the heroes and heroines said to each other: Your majesty awarded the reward fairly, without favoring relatives, how can we arbitrarily complain and suspect?

古文：初，高祖举宗正籍，弟侄、再从、三从孩童已上封王者数十人。
现代文：当初，高祖把同宗子弟和三代之内的旁系弟侄分封为王的有几十人。
English: At the beginning, there were dozens of people whom Gao Zu appointed as kings, including sons and nephews of the same clan and collateral brothers and nephews within three generations.

古文：至是，太宗谓群臣曰： 自两汉已降，惟封子及兄弟，其疏远者，非有大功，如汉之贾、泽，并不得受封。
现代文：太宗对臣下们说： 从两汉以来，只封子和兄弟，宗室中疏远的，除非有大功如汉代的刘贾、刘泽那样，否则一律不得受封。
English: Emperor Taizong said to his subjects: Since the Han Dynasty, only sons and brothers of emperors, who were estranged from the imperial family, were allowed to receive the title of emperor, unless they had made great contributions, such as Liu Jia and Liu Ze in the Han Dynasty.

古文：若一切封王，多给力役，乃至劳苦万姓，以养己之亲属。 
现代文：如果所有的宗室都封王，就会劳苦万民。 于是把郡王宗室中没有功劳的都降封为县公。
English: If all the sire's families were crowned as kings, it would bring hardship to all the people. Therefore, all the sire's families who did not have any merit were demoted to the position of county magistrate.

古文：于是宗室先封郡王其间无功者，皆降为县公。
现代文：贞观十一年，太宗认为周朝实行分封诸侯的制度，执掌江山八百余年，秦朝废除了分封制度，只经历了两代就灭亡了。
English: In the eleventh year of Zhenguan, Taizong believed that the Zhou Dynasty had implemented the system of allocating fiefs to princes, and had ruled the country for more than 800 years. The Qin Dynasty abolished the system of allocating fiefs, and died out after only two generations.

古文：贞观十一年，太宗以周封子弟，八百余年，秦罢诸侯，二世而灭，吕后欲危刘氏，终赖宗室获安，封建亲贤，当是子孙长久之道。
现代文：汉代吕后想篡夺汉室天下，最后靠刘姓宗室的力量获得安定。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Queen Lyu wanted to usurp the Han dynasty from the world, but she finally gained stability by relying on the power of the Liu dynasty.

古文：乃定制，以子弟荆州都督荆王元景、安州都督吴王恪等二十一人，又以功臣司空赵州刺史长孙无忌、尚书左仆射宋州刺史房玄龄等一十四人，并为世袭刺史。
现代文：分封子弟的方法应该是子孙保全江山的最好办法。于是定下制度，分封子弟荆王元景、吴王恪等二十一人为都督，功臣长孙无忌、房玄龄等十四人为刺史，并且世袭爵位。
English: The method of dividing the fief among the sons and grandsons should be the best way to preserve the country. Therefore, a system was established, in which twenty-one sons and grandsons of Jing Wang Yuanjing, Wu Wang Ke and others were appointed as governors, while fourteen great-grandsons and grandsons of Mu Mui, Fang Xuanling and other meritorious men were appointed as princes, and hereditary peerages were conferred.

古文：礼部侍郎李百药奏论驳世封事曰：
现代文：礼部侍郎李百药上书表示反对说：
English: Li Baiyao, a waiter in the ceremonial department, wrote a letter of objection, saying:

古文：臣闻经国庇民，王者之常制；尊主安上，人情之大方。
现代文：我听说治理国家造福百姓，是历代帝王的一贯做法。尊重皇上使他高枕无忧，这是人之常情。
English: I heard that governing the country for the benefit of the people has been the consistent practice of emperors throughout the ages. Respect for the emperor makes him carefree, which is human nature.

古文：思阐治定之规，以弘长世之业，万古不易，百虑同归。
现代文：考虑安定国家的方策，以开辟未来大业，这是所有帝王万古不变的想法。
English: It is the invariable idea of all emperors throughout the ages to consider the means of stabilizing the country in order to open up the great cause of the future.

古文：然命历有赊促之殊，邦家有治乱之异，遐观载籍，论之详矣。
现代文：然而，王朝的命运有长有短，国家有治有乱，认真考察历代的典籍，对这个问题讲述得很详细。
English: However, the fate of the dynasty has its long and short, the country has its rule and disorder, and a careful examination of the classics of past generations tells this problem in detail.

古文：咸云周过其数，秦不及期，存亡之理，在于郡国。
现代文：人们都说周朝的统治超过了其命数，秦的统治还没达到其应该享有的期限，国家存亡的原因，是由于是否分封诸侯。
English: People say that the rule of the Zhou Dynasty has exceeded its lifespan, that the rule of the Qin Dynasty has not yet reached the time limit it should enjoy, and that the reason for the country's survival is due to whether or not the princes were divided.

古文：周氏以鉴夏、殷之长久，遵皇王之并建，维城磐石，深根固本，虽王纲弛废，而枝干相持，故使逆节不生，宗祀不绝。
现代文：周朝借鉴夏殷统治长久的经验，遵循前代的统治经验，实行皇帝与诸侯并存的制度，加强统治力量，注意保全根本，即使王道废弛，可是各个朝代统治祭祀却没有断绝。
English: The Zhou Dynasty drew on the long-term experience of the reign of Xia Yin, followed the ruling experience of the previous generation, implemented the system of coexistence between the emperor and the princes, strengthened the ruling power, and paid attention to the preservation of the fundamentals. Even if the royal road was weakened, the ruling rituals of each dynasty were not broken.

古文：秦氏背师古之训，弃先王之道，践华恃险，罢侯置守，子弟无尺土之邑，兆庶罕共治之忧，故一夫号呼而七庙隳圯。
现代文：秦朝违背先王的遗训，舍弃先王的统治方法；倚仗华山一带地形险要，废除诸侯，只设置郡守。结果子孙没有一寸土地的封邑，百姓很难与之共处，所以陈涉揭竿起义，秦朝就迅速灭亡了。
English: The Qin Dynasty violated the former king's last instruction and abandoned the former king's method of rule; it relied on the dangerous topography around Mount Huashan, abolished the vassals, and only set up county governors. As a result, the descendants did not have an inch of land in the fiefs, and it was difficult for the people to coexist with them. Therefore, the Qin Dynasty suffered an uprising and quickly perished.

古文：臣以为自古皇王，君临宇内，莫不受命上玄，册名帝录，缔构遇兴王之运，殷忧属启圣之期。
现代文：我认为自古以来帝王统治天下，没有哪一个不是受命于天的。建邦立国是天命转移的缘故，心忧百姓是有道明君的高贵品德。
English: I think that since ancient times, emperors have ruled the world, and there is no one who has not been ordered by heaven. The founding of the state is the result of the transfer of heaven's destiny, and the people are concerned about the noble character of Tao Mingjun.

古文：虽魏武携养之资，汉高徒役之贱，非止意有觊觎，推之亦不能去也。
现代文：即使资质像曹操这样的养子，身份像汉高祖那样的役徒，他们也不是有意夺取天下，即使想逃脱也逃脱不掉的。
English: Even if they have the qualifications of an adopted son like Cao Cao and the status of a servant like Han Gao Zu, they do not intend to seize the world, and they cannot escape even if they want to.

古文：若其狱讼不归，菁华已竭，虽帝尧之光被四表，大舜之上齐七政，非止情存揖让，守之亦不可焉。
现代文：相反，如果是百姓民心不归，精华已尽，像尧、舜这样的皇帝，像放勋、重华这样的德行，他们也守不住基业，不能永保国家兴隆。
English: On the contrary, if the people do not return to the people's hearts, the essence has been exhausted, and emperors such as Xing and Yao, and virtues such as honoring and emphasizing, they can not protect the foundation, and can not keep the country prosperous forever.

古文：以放勋、重华之德，尚不能克昌厥后，是知祚之长短，必在于天时，政或兴衰，有关于人事。
现代文：从这里可以看出，国统的长短，在于天时，政治的兴衰，在于人事。
English: From this, it can be seen that the longevity of the National Unification Church depends on the weather, the rise and fall of politics, and personnel.

古文：隆周卜世三十，卜年七百，虽沦胥之道斯极，而文、武之器尚存，斯龟鼎之祚，已悬定于杳冥也。
现代文：周代的统治卜算起来，已经历三十余代七百多年。虽然历经浮沉兴衰，但周代开国的宏大气象还存在，这些通过卜筮所展示的祥瑞的法果，早已在冥冥之中注定了。
English: Counting the reign of the Zhou Dynasty, it has been more than seven hundred years for more than thirty generations of Bu. Although it has experienced ups and downs, the grand image of the founding of the Zhou Dynasty still exists. These auspicious Dharma fruits demonstrated by Bu have already been predestined.

古文：至使南征不返，东迁避逼，禋祀阙如，郊畿不守，此乃陵夷之渐，有累于封建焉。
现代文：至于后来发生的一系列祸患，那是由于国运渐衰，灭亡的日子将至的缘故，与当时的分封没有太大关系。
English: As for the series of calamities that occurred later, it was due to the gradual decline of the national movement and the impending day of destruction, and it had little to do with the partition at that time.

古文：暴秦运距闰余，数终百六，受命之主，德异禹、汤，继世之君，才非启、诵，借使李斯、王绾之辈盛开四履，将闾、子婴之徒俱启千乘，岂能逆帝子之勃兴，抗龙颜之基命者也！
现代文：暴秦的运数，算起来有一百六十多年，是受命于天的君主，他的才德与禹、汤相去甚远，后来的继承者，才能也远远比不上启、诵。即使有李斯、王绾等功臣，将闾、子婴诸子弟广受封土，列为诸侯，又怎能抗拒汉朝的兴起，阻止汉高祖称帝呢？
English: The number of operations of the tyrant Qin is more than one hundred and sixty years, and he is a monarch ordered by heaven. His talent is far from Yu and Tang, and the talent of later successors is far less than that of Qi and Qian. Even if there are heroes such as Li Si and Wang Qi, who have widely received fiefs and listed their children as princes, how can they resist the rise of the Han Dynasty and prevent the emperor of the Han Dynasty from being proclaimed?

古文：然则得失成败，各有由焉。而著述之家，多守常辙，莫不情忘今古，理蔽浇淳，欲以百王之季，行三代之法，天下五服之内，尽封诸侯，王畿千里之间，俱为采地。
现代文：然而，得失成败各有其本身的原因，而写书的人大多墨守成规，分辨不出古今的差别，弄不明白时代风气虚伪与淳厚的区别。想在众多朝代之后，实行夏、商、周三代的办法，将天下五服之内的国土全部分封给诸侯，千里王畿也都分给卿大夫做采地。
English: However, each success or failure has its own reasons, and most of the people who write books stick to the rules, can't tell the difference between the past and the present, and can't understand the difference between the hypocrisy of the times and the honesty. After many dynasties, I want to implement the method of Xia, Shang and San generations, and assign all the land within the five services of the world to the princes, and the thousand miles are also allocated to the doctor for mining.

古文：是则以结绳之化行虞、夏之朝，用象刑之典治刘、曹之末，纪纲弛紊，断可知焉。
现代文：这是要在虞舜、夏禹的时代实行上古结绳记事的古老方法，在汉魏时代推行远古象刑法典，这样的做法，必定造成纪纲松弛、社会混乱。
English: This is to implement the ancient method of tying ropes to record things in the era of Yu Xuan and Xia Yu, and to implement the ancient criminal code in the Han and Wei dynasties. Such an approach will inevitably lead to slack discipline and social chaos.

古文：锲船求剑，未见其可；胶柱成文，弥多所惑。
现代文：刻舟求剑是行不通的，胶柱鼓瑟更是弹不出乐章。
English: It is not possible to carve a boat and ask for a sword, and it is even more impossible for a rubber band to play a piece of music.

古文：徒知问鼎请隧，有惧霸王之师；白马素车，无复藩维之援。
现代文：大家只知道楚庄王问鼎的蛮横和晋文公想得到王者葬礼的野心，惧怕霸王的军队，秦王子婴白马素车投降汉高祖时，没有诸侯出来援助。
English: Everyone only knows the arrogance of the king of Chu Zhuang and the ambition of Jinwen Gong to get the king's funeral, fearing the overlord's army. When the Qin prince's infant white horse carriage surrendered to the Han Emperor Gaozu, no princes came out to help.

古文：不悟望夷之衅，未堪羿、浞之灾；既罹高贵之殃，宁异申、缯之酷。
现代文：未能从望夷宫秦二世被弑事件中有所领悟：像夏朝后羿推翻太康、寒浞杀害后羿所带来的灾难，更是不堪回首；魏朝的高贵乡公遭遇的杀身之祸，与周幽王被申侯与缯勾结犬戎所杀那样悲惨的遭遇，是谁也不愿碰上的。
English: They failed to understand something from the incident of Qin II's execution at the Palace of Wangyi: the disasters brought about by the overthrow of Taikang by Houyi of the Xia Dynasty and the killing of Houyi by Qianyi are even more unbearable to look back on; the death of the noble townsman in the Wei Dynasty, and the tragic encounter with King Zhou Yu, who was killed by the dog Rong in collusion with Shen Hou, are things that no one wants to encounter.

古文：此乃钦明昏乱，自革安危，固非守宰公侯，以成兴废。
现代文：这都是帝王自己昏乱，自己把自己由太平引向覆亡，与郡县制与分封制都没有关系。
English: This was all the emperor's own confusion, he led himself from peace to ruin, and had nothing to do with the county system and the sub-feudal system.

古文：且数世之后，王室浸微，始自藩屏，化为仇敌。家殊俗，国异政，强陵弱，众暴寡，疆场彼此，干戈侵伐。
现代文：皇室一旦建立，几代之后，逐渐衰微，原来作为屏障的诸侯，都变成仇敌，以至于各诸侯家庭传统不一样，国家政治各自不同，以强凌弱，以众侵寡，彼此互相攻城夺地，干戈相见。
English: Once the imperial family was established, after several generations, it gradually waned. The vassals, which were originally used as a barrier, all became enemies, so that the vassal families had different traditions, and the national politics were different from each other, with the strong dominating the weak, and the many encroaching on the few. They attacked each other to seize the land, and fought against each other.

古文：狐骀之役，女子尽髽；崤陵之师，只轮不反。
现代文：狐骀之战使邾国妇女全部用麻束发送葬；崤陵之战，秦军全军覆没，连一只车轮也未能返回秦国。
English: In the Battle of Foxtail, the women of Qin were all buried with hemp bundles; in the Battle of Fuling, the entire Qin army was annihilated, and not even a single cartwheel was able to return to Qin.

古文：斯盖略举一隅，其余不可胜数。
现代文：这里只略举数例，其余的不可胜数。
English: Here are just a few examples, the rest are countless.

古文：陆士衡方规规然云： 嗣王委其九鼎，凶族据其天邑，天下晏然，以治待乱。 
现代文：陆士衡却一本正经地写道： 继位的国君虽然抛弃九鼎而出逃，凶恶的外族占据了京城，但天下却太平无事，终究会扭转乾坤，化乱世为太平。 
English: On the other hand, Lu Shiheng wrote solemnly: Although the prince who succeeded to the throne abandoned Jiuding and fled, and the vicious foreigners occupied the capital, the world was peaceful. After all, it would turn things around and turn the chaotic world into a peaceful one.

古文：何斯言之谬也！
现代文：这话真是荒谬透顶。
English: That's absolutely ridiculous.

古文：而设官分职，任贤使能，以循良之才，膺共治之寄，刺举分竹，何世无人。
现代文：实行郡县制，设官分职，任用贤能，用贤良的人才，担负起共同治理国家的重任，分别担任刺史、太守。
English: The county-prefecture system was implemented, officials were divided according to their duties, the most capable were appointed, and the best talents were used to shoulder the heavy responsibility of jointly governing the country, and served as Sashishi and Taishu respectively.

古文：至使地或呈祥，天不爱宝，民称父母，政比神明。
现代文：哪个朝代没有贤良的人才？任用这些贤才做官，就会使土地呈现祥瑞、上天赐予宝物，百姓就会称颂国君为人民的父母，把朝廷奉为神明。
English: Which dynasty does not have talented people? If these talented people are appointed as officials, it will make the land appear auspicious, a treasure given by heaven, and the people will praise the sovereign as the people's parents and worship the court as a god.

古文：曹元首方区区然称： 与人共其乐者人必忧其忧，与人同其安者人必拯其危。 
现代文：而曹元首却说什么： 与人能共享其乐的，人必为他分忧；与人能共享安逸的，人必能为他解难。 
English: But Cao Fuhrer said: "If you can share your happiness with others, others will share your worries; if you can share your comfort with others, others will be able to solve your problems for you."

古文：岂容以为侯伯则同其安危，任之牧宰则殊其忧乐？
现代文：怎能说分封诸侯就能共同承担安危，而任命刺史、县官，他们就不能与国君同忧共乐？
English: How can it be said that the feudal lords can share the burden of safety and security, but if they appoint magistrates and county officials, they cannot share the same worries and joys with the sovereign?

古文：何斯言之妄也！
现代文：这是何等荒谬啊！
English: How absurd this is!

古文：封君列国，藉其门资，忘其先业之艰难，轻其自然之崇贵，莫不世增淫虐，代益骄侈。
现代文：被封的皇亲国戚，无不凭借门第，忘掉祖先创业的艰辛，自以为生下来就应享荣华富贵，一代比一代更骄奢淫逸。
English: The relatives of the emperor and the country who were sealed, all rely on their lineage, forget the hardships of their ancestors' entrepreneurship, think that they should be born to enjoy glory and wealth, and become more and more extravagant generation after generation.

古文：陈灵则君臣悖礼，共侮征舒；卫宣则父子聚麀，终诛寿、朔。乃云为己思治，岂若是乎？
现代文：他们修筑别馆，驱使民力为其效劳，召诸侯共同玩乐。陈灵公和大臣违背礼仪，一起侮辱夏徵舒。卫宣公违背父子之道，纳子之妻，最终将两个儿子杀死，还说自己想使国家安定，难道就这个样子吗？
English: They built a villa, forced the people to work for them, and invited the princes to play together. Chen Linggong and the minister violated the etiquette and insulted Xia Zhoshu together. Wei Xuangong violated the way of father and son, the wife of Na Zi, and finally killed the two sons, and said that he wanted to make the country stable. Is this the way it is?

古文：内外群官，选自朝廷，擢士庶以任之，澄水镜以鉴之，年劳优其阶品，考绩明其黜陟。进取事切，砥砺情深，或俸禄不入私门，妻子不之官舍。
现代文：朝廷百官，都是经过选拔的，他们的政绩，应该通过审核才能决定。那么人们的进取之心就会日益迫切，并经常自我激励，有的计日受俸，其余分文不取；有的只身赴任，不带妻儿。
English: The hundred officials of the imperial court are all selected, and their political achievements should be determined through examination. Then people's enterprising spirit will become increasingly urgent, and they will often self-motivate. Some will be paid by the day, and the rest will not take a penny; some will go to work alone, without their wives and children.

古文：班条之贵，食不举火；剖符之重，居惟饮水。
现代文：有的因为珍惜柴薪，索性就吃干饭；有的感激朝廷的信任，只饮当地之水。
English: Some simply eat dry rice because they cherish firewood; some are grateful for the trust of the imperial court and drink only local water.

古文：南阳太守，弊布裹身；莱芜县长，凝尘生甑。
现代文：羊续官为南阳太守，却布衣裹身，范丹身为莱芜县令却家贫如洗。
English: Nanyang Daju, the Yangzhuang official, was clothed in cloth, while Fan Dan, the governor of Laiwu County, was poor.

古文：专云为利图物，何其爽欤！
现代文：如果说做官都是为了贪图利禄，为什么他们就这样清廉呢？
English: If all officials are greedy for money, why are they so incorruptible?

古文：总而言之，爵非世及，用贤之路斯广；民无定主，附下之情不固。
现代文：总而言之，只要爵位俸禄不是世袭，任用贤才的路子就会很宽广；百姓要是没有一个固定的国君，他们就人心惶惶。
English: In a word, so long as the reward of nobility is not hereditary, there will be ample opportunity for the appointment of good men; but if the people do not have a fixed sovereign, they are in great perplexity.

古文：此乃愚智所辨，安可惑哉？
现代文：这个道理是聪明的人和愚昧的人都懂得的，怎么会迷惑不解呢？
English: This principle is understood by both the wise and the foolish, so how can it be puzzling?

古文：至如灭国弑君，乱常干纪，春秋二百年间，略无宁岁。
现代文：至于像灭国弑君、败坏纲纪一类的事，在春秋二百年间从来就没有断过。
English: As for such things as overthrowing the emperor and corrupting the discipline, they have never stopped in the past two hundred years.

古文：次睢咸秩，遂用玉帛之君；鲁道有荡，每等衣裳之会。
现代文：到睢水祭祀，就杀掉小国国君做祭品；鲁国无道，庄公夫人姜氏私自与齐侯幽会。
English: At the ceremony in Surabaya, he killed a minor prince to make a sacrifice; in Lu, there was no way, and Jiang, the wife of Zhuang, had a secret meeting with Qi Hou.

古文：纵使西汉哀、平之际，东洛桓、灵之时，下吏淫暴，必不至此。
现代文：纵然是西汉哀帝、平帝年间，东汉桓帝、灵帝之时，也不至于荒淫无道到这种程度。
English: Even if it was the Western Han Dynasty during the reigns of Emperor Lei and Emperor Ping, or the Eastern Han Dynasty during the reigns of Emperor Kuan and Emperor Ling, it would not have reached such a level of depravity.

古文：为政之理，可以一言蔽焉。
现代文：为政的道理可以用这句话加以概括。
English: The reason for politics can be summed up in this sentence.

古文：伏惟陛下握纪御天，膺期启圣，救亿兆之焚溺，扫氛祲于寰区。
现代文：陛下手握纲纪、掌管天下，开创帝业，拯救亿万百姓于水火之中，扫除邪气凶灾于四海之内。
English: His majesty grasped the principles of discipline, controlled the world, created an empire, saved hundreds of millions of people from floods and fires, and swept away evil spirits and disasters in the four seas.

古文：创业垂统，配二仪以立德；发号施令，妙万物而为言。
现代文：开创大业，传承子孙，媲美天地以立德；发布号召，施行政令，言行顺应万物之理。
English: To create a great cause, to pass it on to our children and grandchildren, to establish a virtue that is comparable to heaven and earth; to issue a call, to issue an executive order, and to conform our words and deeds to the principles of all things.

古文：独照神衷，永怀前古，将复五等而修旧制，建万国以亲诸侯。
现代文：圣心独察，永远缅怀古代先贤。如今将恢复 公、侯、伯、子、男 五等爵位，建立众多的诸侯国分封子弟、封赏诸侯。
English: The Sacred Heart looks after itself and remembers the ancient sages forever. Today, it will restore the five ranks of nobility: prince, lord, great-grandfather, son, and son-in-law, and establish a large number of vassal states and reward vassals.

古文：窃以汉、魏以还，余风之弊未尽；勋、华既往，至公之道斯乖。
现代文：我认为自从汉、魏以来，流弊未歇，从尧、舜时代以后，至公之道就已经背离很远了。
English: I think that since the Han and Wei dynasties, corruption has not stopped, and since the Han and Qing dynasties, the road to righteousness has been far away.

古文：况晋氏失驭，宇县崩离；后魏乘时，华夷杂处。
现代文：晋代失去权柄，国家分崩离析，后魏趁机兴起，致使华夏民族与异族杂居。
English: The Jin Dynasty lost power, the country fell apart, and the post-Wei Dynasty took advantage of the opportunity to rise, resulting in the intermingling of Chinese and foreign ethnic groups.

古文：重以关河分阻，吴、楚悬隔，习文者学长短纵横之术，习武者尽干戈战争之心，毕为狙诈之阶，弥长浇浮之俗。
现代文：纵然南北分治，相隔遥远，文人还在学习经国之术，武将仍是壮心不已，这些都是实现其政治野心的阶梯，滋长了虚假不淳朴的风气。
English: In spite of the separation of North and South and the distance between them, the literati are still learning the art of governing the country, and the military commanders are still full of enthusiasm. These are all steps to realize their political ambitions, and they have fostered a false and unsophisticated culture.

古文：开皇在运，因藉外家。驱御群英，任雄猜之数；坐移明运，非克定之功。
现代文：隋文帝是后周外戚，他驾驭群英，玩弄权术，篡周自立，坐享其成，不是打来的天下。
English: Emperor Sui was a relative of Emperor Zhou. He controlled the Qunying, played power games, usurped Zhou's independence, and enjoyed his success. He did not come from the world.

古文：年逾二纪，民不见德。
现代文：他的统治持续了二纪，百姓没有感受到他的恩德。
English: His rule lasted for two centuries, and the people did not feel his benevolence.

古文：及大业嗣立，世道交丧，一时一物，扫地将尽，虽天纵神武，削平寇虐，兵威不息，劳止未康。
现代文：等到隋炀帝即位，世道败坏、道德沦丧，当时的人物，几乎全都被摧毁。虽然陛下用自己天赋的神勇，平定了四方祸乱，然而战争的创伤并未愈合，百姓的疲弊也尚未安宁。
English: By the time Emperor Sui and Emperor Pu ascended the throne, the world had become corrupt and morals had fallen into ruin, and almost all the figures of the time had been destroyed. Although His Majesty used his innate bravery to quell the four-sided calamity, the wounds of war have not healed, and the people's weariness has not yet been pacified.

古文：自陛下仰顺圣慈，嗣膺宝历，情深致治，综核前王。
现代文：自从陛下顺应太上皇的旨意，继承大统，将全部精力用于治理国家，统观前代君王的经验得失。
English: Since His Majesty complied with the will of the Emperor and succeeded to the throne, he has devoted all his energy to governing the country, taking into account the experience of the previous monarchs.

古文：虽至道无名，言象所纪，略陈梗概，安所庶几。爱敬烝烝，劳而不倦，大舜之孝也。
现代文：虽然您的至善之道难以名状，但就某些方面的具体表现来说，也可以粗略地陈述出梗概。陛下爱敬敦厚，对待父母操劳侍奉不知疲倦，这是大舜一样的孝道。
English: Although it is difficult to describe your way of perfection, it is possible to give a rough outline of some specific aspects of your performance. Your Majesty is affectionate, devoted to his parents, and tireless in his service. This is the same filial piety as that of a great eunuch.

古文：访安内竖，亲尝御膳，文王之德也。
现代文：陛下亲自进宫询问太上皇起居，亲自为太上皇品尝饭菜，这是周文王的德行。
English: His Majesty personally went to the palace to inquire about the Emperor's residence, and personally tasted the food for the Emperor, which is the virtue of King Zhou Wen.

古文：每宪司谳罪，尚书奏狱，大小必察，枉直咸举，以断趾之法，易大辟之刑，仁心隐恻，贯彻幽显，大禹之泣辜也。
现代文：陛下每有官司，必定亲自审查，以免产生冤情。用断趾的刑法代替斩刑，可见陛下的恻隐之心，这是大禹见罪人而流泪的襟怀。
English: Whenever His Majesty has a lawsuit, he must personally review it in order to avoid causing grievances. His Majesty's compassion can be seen in the fact that he substituted the criminal law of severed toes for the punishment of beheading. This is the compassion that tears at the sight of a sinner.

古文：正色直言，虚心受纳，不简鄙讷，无弃刍荛，帝尧之求谏也。
现代文：陛下表情庄重、言行率直，虚怀若谷、肯于纳谏，对鄙俗之言不怠慢，对山野之人不忽视，像帝尧一样乐于接受意见。
English: His Majesty's expression is solemn, his words and deeds are straightforward, he is open-minded, he is willing to accept advice, he is not negligent of vulgar words, he does not ignore the people of the mountains and fields, and he is willing to accept opinions like the emperor.

古文：弘奖名教，劝励学徒，既擢明经于青紫，将升硕儒于卿相，圣人之善诱也。
现代文：陛下推崇教化，鼓励求学，通过科举选拔人才，并将大儒任命为卿相，像圣人一样地循循善诱。
English: His Majesty revered enlightenment, encouraged study, selected talents through the imperial examinations, and appointed the great Confucius as the noble minister, following the virtuous path like a saint.

古文：群臣以宫中暑湿，寝膳或乖，请移御高明，营一小阁，遂惜十家之产，竟抑子来之愿，不吝阴阳之感，以安卑陋之居。
现代文：由于夏天宫中湿热，不利于食宿，臣子们请陛下换个宽敞明亮的地方居住，陛下却害怕浪费钱财，违背了臣民的心愿，不顾及自身的寒暑，安于简陋的居所。
English: Due to the summer heat and humidity in the palace, which was not conducive to food and lodging, the courtiers asked His Majesty to change to a spacious and bright place to live. However, His Majesty was afraid of wasting money, violated the wishes of his subjects, disregarded his own heat and cold, and settled for a humble abode.

古文：顷岁霜俭，普天饥馑，丧乱甫尔，仓廪空虚。
现代文：最近几年又遇霜灾歉收，饥荒四起，仓库空虚。
English: In recent years, there have been frosts, poor harvests, widespread famine, and empty warehouses.

古文：圣情矜愍，勤加赈恤，竟无一人流离道路，犹且食惟藜藿，乐彻簨簴，言必凄动，貌成癯瘦。
现代文：陛下怜惜百姓，开粮仓拯济灾民，使全国没有一个人流离失所，而您自己却只吃粗淡的饮食，停止钟鼓之乐不听，时刻想着百姓疾苦，容貌日渐消瘦。
English: Your Majesty took pity on the people, opened granaries to rescue the victims of the disaster, so that no one in the whole country was displaced, but you yourself only ate a coarse diet, stopped listening to the music of the bell and drum, always thinking about the people's suffering, and your appearance became thinner and thinner.

古文：公旦喜于重译，文命矜其即叙。
现代文：吉时周公因为远方有人前来朝贡而欣喜，夏禹也因为四方安定而感到自豪。
English: Yoshitoki Zhou was pleased because people from far away came to pay tribute, and Xia Yu was also proud of the stability in the four directions.

古文：陛下每见四夷款附，万里归仁，必退思进省，凝神动虑，恐妄劳中国，以求远方，不藉万古之英声，以存一时之茂实。
现代文：陛下即位后，四方少数民族纷纷臣服，万里迢迢归顺仁德之君，但陛下依然谨慎小心，没有驱使百姓开拓疆土。陛下心怀贤德，不图千古英名，只求为百姓赢得安宁的生活。
English: After His Majesty's accession to the throne, the ethnic minorities in the four directions submitted one after another and came all the way to the benevolent and virtuous ruler, but His Majesty remained cautious and careful and did not drive the people to explore the territory. His Majesty is virtuous and does not seek fame, but only seeks to win a peaceful life for the people.

古文：心切忧劳，志绝游幸，每旦视朝，听受无倦，智周于万物，道济于天下。
现代文：陛下因为天下的忧患劳苦而心急如焚，而杜绝自身的巡行玩乐。每次上朝听政，听取接纳百官的诤谏却毫无倦意，智慧遍及万物，道义惠及天下。
English: His Majesty is in such a hurry because of the troubles and hardships of the world that he has cut short his own parade. Every time he goes to the palace to listen to the government and accept the invitation of the dignitaries, he is never tired. Wisdom pervades all things, and morality benefits the world.

古文：罢朝之后，引进名臣，讨论是非，备尽肝膈，惟及政事，更无异辞。
现代文：罢朝之后，还要与亲近的大臣讨论政教得失，言谈出于肺腑，只涉及政事，其余一概不谈。
English: After defecting to the DPRK, he also discussed the gains and losses of politics and religion with his close ministers. The talk was heartfelt and only involved political affairs, and nothing else was discussed.

古文：才日昃，必命才学之士，赐以清闲，高谈典籍，杂以文咏，间以玄言，乙夜忘疲，中宵不寐。
现代文：午后太阳偏西，必定下令才学之士进宫，赐予闲职，与其畅谈典籍，或作诗谈玄，以至深夜，到了废寝忘食的地步。
English: In the afternoon, when the sun was in the west, he would certainly order the scholars to enter the palace, give them sinecures, and talk with them about classics, or write poems about the occult, until late at night, to the point of losing sleep and forgetting to eat.

古文：此之四道，独迈往初，斯实生民以来，一人而已。
现代文：在这四个方面，您已经超越了历史上的圣贤，当居首位了。
English: In these four aspects, you have surpassed the sages of history and should take the first place.

古文：弘兹风化，昭示四方，信可以期月之间，弥纶天壤。
现代文：弘扬这样的风气教化，昭示四方百姓，定能在很短的时间内改换天地。
English: Carrying forward such a culture and enlightenment, and showing the people of the four directions, will surely change the world in a very short time.

古文：而淳粹尚阻，浮诡未移，此由习之久，难以卒变。
现代文：而现在淳朴的德行之所以没有推行开来，浮夸诡诈的风气之所以没有去除，是因为积习太久，难以一下子改变的缘故。
English: However, the reason why the simple virtue has not been promoted and the pompous and deceitful culture has not been eliminated is because it has been learned for too long and it is difficult to change it all at once.

古文：请待斫雕成器，以质代文，刑措之教一行，登封之礼云毕，然后定疆理之制，议山河之赏，未为晚焉。
现代文：请耐心等待移风易俗，质朴取代浮华，刑法不再使用、教化大行天下，登上泰山、举行封禅的大典进行完毕，然后再去制定划分疆域、治理天下的制度，讨论诸侯土地的分封问题，也为时不晚。
English: Please wait patiently for customs to change, for simplicity to replace pomposity, for criminal law to no longer be used, for enlightenment to spread throughout the world, for Mount Tai to be ascended, for the grand ceremony of the enthronement of the emperor to be completed, and then for the system of dividing territories and governing the world to be formulated, and for the issue of dividing the lands of the princes to be discussed. It is not too late.

古文：《易》称： 天地盈虚，与时消息，况于人乎？ 
现代文：《周易》有言： 天地浩大，充满了四季更替变化的规律，更何况人事呢？ 
English: "Zhou Yi" has a saying: Heaven and earth are vast, full of the law of change of the four seasons, let alone personnel?

古文：美哉斯言也。
现代文：这句话说得多好啊！
English: What a wonderful phrase!

古文：中书舍人马周又上疏曰：
现代文：中书舍人马周又上疏说：
English: Zhou Jianma, a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters, said:

古文：伏见诏书令宗室勋贤作镇藩部，贻厥子孙，嗣守其政，非有大故，无或黜免。
现代文：我见陛下下诏让王公贵族和有功的大臣都做镇藩统帅，并且可以传位给子孙，使他们世袭刺史的职位，没有大的变故，不被罢免。
English: I saw that His Majesty issued an edict to make princes, aristocrats and meritorious ministers the commanders of the town and clan, and that they could be passed down to their children and grandchildren, so that they would inherit the position of history, without major changes, and would not be dismissed.

古文：臣窃惟陛下封植之者，诚爱之重之，欲其绪裔承守，与国无疆。
现代文：我认为陛下分封皇族，是爱护重视他们，让他们的王位得到世袭，与大唐的政权一样万寿无疆。
English: I think that His Majesty's allocation of the imperial family is to cherish and value them, so that their throne is hereditary, and the regime of the Great Tang Dynasty is as everlasting as it is boundless.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：以尧、舜之父，犹有朱、均之子。
现代文：像尧、舜这样圣明的君王，尚且有丹朱、商均这样无能的儿子，更何况普通的君王呢？
English: How can a holy king like Zhai and Zhai still have such incompetent sons as Dan Zhu and Shangjun, let alone an ordinary king?

古文：况下此以还，而欲以父取儿，恐失之远矣。
现代文：还要像对待他们的父辈那样对待他们，恐怕会造成很大的失误。
English: And to treat them like their fathers, I'm afraid, would be a big mistake.

古文：倘有孩童嗣职，万一骄逸，则兆庶被其殃，而国家受其败。
现代文：如果后辈继承父业，万一骄奢放纵，那么不仅百姓遭殃，也会连累国家。
English: If the younger generation follows in their father's footsteps and indulges in extravagance, then not only will the people suffer, but also the country.

古文：政欲绝之也，则子文之治犹在；政欲留之也，而栾黡之恶已彰。
现代文：如果取消他的封国，而其先祖的功业还在；如果保留他的封国，而他本人已经罪恶昭彰。
English: If his title is revoked, the work of his ancestors is still alive; if his title is retained, he himself has already committed a crime.

古文：与其毒害于见存之百姓，则宁使割恩于已亡之一臣，明矣。
现代文：与其像这样危害百姓，还不如割爱一个已故的功臣，这才是明智的做法。
English: Rather than endangering the people like this, it would be wiser to spare a deceased hero.

古文：然则向之所谓爱之者，乃适所以伤之也。
现代文：如此一来，过去的所谓爱重，恰恰成了伤害。
English: As a result, the so-called love and respect of the past has turned into hurt.

古文：臣谓宜赋以茅土，畴其户邑，必有材行，随器方授，则翰翮非强，亦可以获免尤累。
现代文：所以，我认为应该对宗亲和功臣只分封土地、犒赏封邑就足够了；确实有才能的，就根据其特长授予官职，那么就算其能力不强也可以免除过失。
English: Therefore, I think that it is enough to award lands and fiefs to relatives and heroes; if they are really talented, they will be awarded official positions according to their strengths, so even if their ability is not strong, they can be exempted from negligence.

古文：昔汉光武不任功臣以吏事，所以终全其世者，良由得其术也。
现代文：过去汉光武帝不让功臣担任官职，所以忠臣得以保全名节性命，实在是因为方法得当。
English: In the past, Emperor Han Guangwu did not allow meritorious vassals to hold official positions, so loyal vassals were able to preserve the lives of famous figures, really because the method was appropriate.

古文：愿陛下深思其宜，使夫得奉大恩，而子孙终其福禄也。
现代文：望陛下深思，使宗亲和功臣能够蒙受大恩，同时使其后代也能终生享受福禄。
English: I hope that His Majesty will think deeply so that his great-great-grandchildren and great-great-grandchildren can receive great graces, and at the same time, his descendants can also enjoy lifelong blessings.

古文：太宗并嘉纳其言。于是竟罢子弟及功臣世袭刺史。
现代文：太宗皇帝非常赞许并接纳了这些意见，于是下令废除了子弟及功臣世袭刺史的制度。
English: Emperor Taizong highly approved and accepted these opinions, so he ordered the abolition of the system of hereditary history-making by his sons and meritorious soldiers.

