古文：世祖太武皇帝讳焘，明元皇帝之长子也。母曰杜贵嫔。
现代文：世祖太武皇帝名焘，是明元皇帝的长子，母亲是杜贵嫔。
English: The ancestor of the Taiwu Emperor, Meituan, was the eldest son of Emperor Mingyuan, and his mother was Du Guizhou.

古文：天赐五年，生于东宫。
现代文：天赐五年，生于东宫，长得体态容貌奇异过人。
English: He was born in the East Palace five years ago by God's grace, and he has an extraordinary physique and appearance.

古文：体貌瑰异，道武奇之，曰： 成吾业者必此兒也。 
现代文：道武帝惊讶地说 ：能成就我的大业的一定是这个孩子了。 
English: Emperor Daowu was surprised and said, "It must be this child who can accomplish my great cause."

古文：泰常七年四月，封太平王。五月，立为皇太子。
现代文：泰常七年四月，被封为太平王，五月，立为皇太子。
English: In April of the seventh year of Taizang, he was named King Taiping, and in May, he was appointed Crown Prince.

古文：及明元帝疾，命帝总摄百揆。
现代文：当明元皇帝有病时，任命他总理百事。
English: When Emperor Mingyuan was ill, he appointed him as the Prime Minister of Pepsi.

古文：帝聪明大度，意豁如也。
现代文：皇太子聪明又很有度量，心胸开阔。
English: The crown prince is smart and measured, with an open mind.

古文：八年十一月己巳，明元帝崩，壬申，太子即皇帝位，大赦天下。
现代文：泰常八年十一月初六，明元皇帝驾崩。初九，太子即皇帝位，大赦天下。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month of the 8th year of Taizhang, Emperor Mingyuan passed away. On the 9th day of the 11th month, the crown prince, that is, the emperor, was pardoned.

古文：十二月，追尊皇妣为密皇太后。
现代文：十二月，追尊生母为密皇太后。
English: In December, she succeeded her mother as Empress Dowager Michiko.

古文：进司徒长孙嵩爵为北平王；司空奚斤为宜城王；蓝田公长孙翰为平阳王。其余普增爵位各有差。
现代文：司徒长孙嵩被晋爵为北平王，司空奚斤为宜城王，蓝田公长孙翰为平阳王，其余的人都晋升高低不等的爵位。
English: Sgt. Major Sun Song was promoted to the rank of Peiping King, Sgt. Major Kuang Shujin was promoted to the rank of Yicheng King, Lantian Major Sun Han was promoted to the rank of Pingyang King, and the rest were promoted to various ranks.

古文：于是除禁锢，释嫌疑，开仓库，振穷乏。
现代文：于是解除各种禁令，开释相互间的嫌疑，打开粮仓，赈济贫民百姓。
English: As a result, various prohibitions were lifted, mutual suspicions were cleared, grain silos were opened, and the poor were fed.

古文：河南流人相率内属者甚众。
现代文：从河南逃亡的人们相继前来归附，人数众多。
English: A large number of people who had fled from Henan came one after another to return.

古文：始光元年春正月丙寅，安定王弥薨。
现代文：始光元年春正月初四，安定王弥死去。
English: On the 4th day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1

古文：夏四月甲辰，东巡，幸大宁。
现代文：夏四月十四日，东巡，到达大宁。
English: On the 14th day of the 4th month of the summer, the eastern inspection team arrived in Daning.

古文：六月，宋徐羡之弑其主义符。
现代文：六月，宋朝徐羡之杀死国君刘义符。
English: In June, Emperor Liu Yifu was killed by the Song Dynasty's Xu Enzhi.

古文：秋七月，车驾还宫。
现代文：秋七月，车驾回宫。
English: Autumn and July, driving back to the palace.

古文：八月，蠕蠕六万骑入云中，杀略人吏，攻陷盛乐。
现代文：八月，蠕蠕的六万骑兵入侵云中，杀死和掳掠平民和官吏，攻陷了盛乐。
English: In August, a ragtag force of sixty thousand cavalrymen invaded the city, killed and captured civilians and officials, and captured Shengle.

古文：帝帅轻骑讨之，虏乃退走。
现代文：皇帝带领轻骑兵讨伐，敌人才退走。
English: The emperor led the light cavalry into battle, and the enemy retreated.

古文：九月，大简舆徒于东郊，将北讨。
现代文：九月，在东郊大举选拔吏卒，准备北征。
English: In September, officials were selected in large numbers in the eastern suburbs to prepare for the Northern Expedition.

古文：冬十二月，遣平阳王长孙翰等讨蠕蠕，车骑次祚山，蠕蠕北遁，诸军追之，大获而还。
现代文：冬十二月，派平阳王长孙翰等人攻打蠕蠕，当车骑到达祚山时，蠕蠕北逃，各路军队追击，大胜而回。
English: In the winter of December, Pingyang King Chosun Han and others were sent to attack Cormorant Cormorant. When the chariot and cavalry reached Lushan, Cormorant Cormorant fled north, pursued by various armies, and returned with a great victory.

古文：二年春正月己卯，车驾至自北伐。
现代文：二年春正月二十三日，皇帝车驾北伐归来。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the second year of Spring, the emperor returned from the Northern Expedition.

古文：三月丙辰，尊保母窦氏曰保太后。
现代文：三月初一，尊封保姆窦氏为保太后。
English: On the first day of March, Lady Dou, the nanny of Prince Takamado, became the Empress Dowager.

古文：丁巳，以北平王长孙嵩为太尉，平阳王长孙翰为司徒，宜城王奚斤为司空。
现代文：初二，以北平王长孙嵩任太尉，平阳王长孙翰任司徒，宜城王奚斤任司空。
English: In the second year of junior high school, Beiping Wang Changsun Song was appointed as a captain, Pingyang Wang Changsun Han was appointed as an apprentice, and Yicheng Wang Yaojin was appointed as an apprentice.

古文：庚申，营故东宫为万寿宫，起永安、安乐二殿、临望观、九华堂。
现代文：初五，营建原来的东宫为万寿宫，建永安、安乐两殿和临望观、九华堂。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the original East Palace was built as the Palace of Longevity, and the Yongan and Anle Halls, the Linyangguan Hall, and the Jiuhadao Hall were built.

古文：初造新字千余。
现代文：开始造一千多新字。
English: Started to create more than a thousand new characters.

古文：夏四月诏龙骧将军步堆使宋。
现代文：夏四月，诏令龙骧将军步堆出使宋朝。
English: In the summer of April, the emperor ordered General Longyu to dispatch envoys to the Song Dynasty.

古文：五月，诏天下十家发大牛一头运粟塞上。
现代文：五月，下诏要全国每十家出一头大牛运送粮食到边塞。
English: In May, it was decreed that every tenth family in the country should send one ox to transport grain to the frontier fortress.

古文：秋八月，赫连屈丐死。
现代文：秋八月，赫连屈丐死去。
English: In autumn and August, Heren Kugyo died.

古文：九月，永安、安乐二殿成，丁卯，大飨以落之。
现代文：九月，永安、安乐两殿建成，十五日，大宴群臣庆贺两殿落成。
English: In September, the Yongan and Anle halls were completed, and on the 15th, a grand banquet was held to celebrate the completion of the two halls.

古文：冬十月癸卯，车驾北伐，东西五道并出。
现代文：冬十月二十一日，车驾北征，分东西五路齐头并进。
English: In winter, on October 21st, the Northern Expedition set out by car, and the five routes of the East and West marched side by side.

古文：平阳王长孙翰等绝漠追寇，蠕蠕北走。
现代文：平阳王长孙翰等深入大漠极远处追击贼寇，蠕蠕北逃。
English: The King of Pingyang, Chosun Han, and others pursued the bandits deep into the desert and fled north.

古文：三年春正月壬申，车驾至自北伐。
现代文：三年春正月二十一日，皇帝北伐归来。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of the third year of Spring, the emperor returned from the Northern Expedition.

古文：乞伏炽盘遣使朝贡，请讨赫连昌。
现代文：乞伏炽盘派使者朝贡，请求讨伐赫连昌。
English: He sent envoys to pay tribute to the imperial court, and requested a crusade against Helianchang.

古文：二月，起太学于城东，祀孔子，以颜回配。
现代文：二月，在城东建太学，祭祀孔子，以颜回配祭。
English: In February, the Confucius Temple was built in the east of the city, and the Confucius Festival was held.

古文：夏五月辛卯，进中山公纂爵为王，复南安公素先爵常山王。
现代文：夏五月十三日，中山公纂被晋爵为王，恢复了南安公素原先的常山王爵位。
English: On the thirteenth day of the fifth month of the summer, Zhongshan Gongzang was promoted to the rank of king, restoring Nan'an Gongsu's original title of King of Changshan.

古文：六月，幸云中旧宫，谒陵庙，西至五原，田于阴山，东至和兜山。
现代文：六月，巡视云中旧宫殿，拜谒陵墓和祖庙。西行到达五原，在阴山田猎，东至和兜山。
English: In June, he inspected the old palace in Yunzhong, the mausoleum and ancestral temple in Baiyun. He went west to the Wuhuan, hunted in the Yin Mountains, and went east to the Hetou Mountains.

古文：秋七月，筑马射台于长川，帝亲登台走马。
现代文：秋七月，在长川修建马射台，皇帝亲自登台驰马。
English: In autumn and July, a horse shooting range was built in Nagakawa, and the emperor himself mounted the stage to ride a horse.

古文：王公诸国君长驰射中者，赐金锦缯絮各有差。
现代文：王公及各国君王首领驰马而射中目标的，赏赐金钱、锦帛、缯絮等物多少不等。
English: Princes and sovereigns of various countries who hit the target while riding a horse were rewarded with money, brocade, lint and other things.

古文：八月，车驾还宫。宋人来聘。
现代文：八月，车驾回宫，宋人前来访问。
English: In August, after driving back to the palace, Song people came to visit.

古文：帝以赫连屈丐死，诸子相攻，冬十月丁巳，车驾西伐，幸云中，临君子津。
现代文：皇帝因赫连屈丐死后，几个儿子互相攻打，便在冬十月十一日，亲自西征，到云中时，亲临君子津。
English: After the death of Khelian Kegui, several of the emperor's sons fought against each other, so on the 11th day of the 10th month of the winter, the emperor personally went to the west, and when he arrived in Yunzhong, he personally visited Junzizu.

古文：会天暴寒，数日冰合。
现代文：正好天气突然大冷，几天之内冰冻。
English: Just as the weather suddenly got very cold, it froze within a few days.

古文：十一月戊寅，率轻骑袭赫连昌。
现代文：十一月初三，带领轻骑奔袭赫连昌。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, he led the light cavalry to attack Helianchang.

古文：壬午，徙万余家而还。
现代文：初七，迁移一万多家而回。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month, more than 10,000 people moved back.

古文：至祚山，班虏获以赐将士各有差。
现代文：到达祚山时，把俘虏和战利品分赏给将士，数量多少不等。
English: When arriving at Lushan, the captives and spoils of war were distributed to the soldiers, in varying amounts.

古文：十二月，诏奚斤西据长安。
现代文：十二月，诏令奚斤西进占领长安。
English: In December, the imperial edict ordered the Jurchens to march west and occupy Chang'an.

古文：秦、陇氐羌皆叛昌诣斤降。
现代文：秦、陇两地的氐羌都背叛赫连昌而到奚斤军中投降。
English: The warlords of Qin and Qi both betrayed Helianchang and surrendered to the Jin army.

古文：武都王杨玄及沮渠蒙逊等使使内附。
现代文：武都王杨玄和沮渠蒙逊等都派使者表示归附。
English: Yang Xuan, the King of Wudang, and Mengxun, the Grand Duke of Chu, both sent envoys to express their allegiance.

古文：四年春正月乙酉，车驾至自西伐，赐留台文武各有差。
现代文：四年春正月十一日，皇帝西征回朝，赏赐留守的文武官员们数量不等的物品。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the fourth year of the Spring, the emperor returned from the Western Expedition and rewarded the remaining civil and military officials with various items.

古文：从人在道多死，到者裁十六七。
现代文：随从出征的人在路上死亡很多，回朝的只有十分之六七。
English: Many of those who accompanied the expedition died on the way, and only six or seven out of ten returned to Korea.

古文：己亥，行幸幽州。
现代文：二十五日，巡行到达幽州。
English: On the 25th, the parade arrived in Yuzhou.

古文：赫连昌遣其弟定向长安。
现代文：赫连昌派他的弟弟赫连定进军长安。
English: He Lianchang sent his brother He Lianding to march into Chang'an.

古文：帝闻之，遣就阴山伐木造攻具。
现代文：皇帝得到消息后，派人到阴山砍木材以制造作战器械。
English: After the emperor received the news, he sent people to Shinshan to cut wood to make war equipment.

古文：二月，车驾还宫。
现代文：二月，皇帝回宫。
English: In February, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：三月丙午，诏执金吾桓贷造桥于君子津。
现代文：三月初三，诏令执金吾桓贷到君子津造桥。
English: On the 3rd day of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3

古文：丁丑，广平王连薨。
现代文：初四，广平王拓跋连去世。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Guangping King Tuoba died.

古文：夏四月丁未，诏员外散骑常侍步堆使于宋。
现代文：夏四月初四，诏令员外散骑常侍步堆出使宋朝。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4

古文：五月，车驾西讨赫连昌，次拔邻山。筑城舍辎重，以轻骑三万先行。
现代文：五月，皇帝西讨赫连昌，到达拔邻山，修建城堡存放辎重物资，用轻骑兵三万人先行出发。
English: In May, Emperor Xitong visited Helianchang, arrived at Bajiao Mountain, built a castle to store heavy materials, and set off with 30,000 light cavalry.

古文：戊戌，至黑水。帝亲祈天，告祖宗之灵而誓众。
现代文：二十六日，到达黑水，皇帝亲自向上天祈祷，并祭告祖宗在天之灵，从而当众誓师。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, when he arrived at Blackwater, the emperor himself prayed to heaven, and offered the ancestors to the spirit of heaven, thus becoming the oath-maker.

古文：六月癸卯朔，日有蚀之。甲辰，大破赫连昌，昌奔上邽。
现代文：六月初一，日食。初二，大破赫连昌军，赫连昌逃往上圭阝。
English: On the first day of June, there was a solar eclipse. On the second day of the first month of the year, Herenchang's army was defeated, and Herenchang fled to Shangguan.

古文：乙巳，车驾入城，虏昌群弟及其母妹妻妾宫人万数，府库珍宝车旗器物不可胜计。
现代文：初三，皇帝进城，俘虏了赫连昌的几个弟弟和他的母亲、妹妹、妻妾、宫女等近万人。府库中的珍宝、车、旗和各种物品多得难以计算。
English: On the third day of the first month, the emperor entered the city and captured several younger brothers of Herengchang, as well as his mother, sister, wife, concubine, concubine, and nearly ten thousand people. The treasures, cars, flags, and various items in the government treasury were too numerous to count.

古文：辛酉，班师。留常山王素、执金吾桓贷镇统万。
现代文：十九日，回师，留常山王素、执金吾桓贷镇守统万。
English: On the 19th, Wang Su, who stayed in Changshan, and Tong Wan, the town's governor, returned to the division.

古文：秋七月己卯，筑坛于祚岭，戏马驰射，赐中者金帛缯絮各有差。
现代文：秋七月初七，在祚岭建坛，驰马射箭为戏，射中的奖赏金帛、缯絮数量不等。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7

古文：蠕蠕寇云中，闻破赫连昌，惧而逃。
现代文：蠕蠕进犯云中，听说魏大败赫连昌，恐惧而逃。
English: Creeping into the clouds, he heard that Wei had defeated He Lianchang and fled in fear.

古文：八月壬子，车驾至自西伐，饮至策勋，告宗庙，班军实以赐留台百僚各有差。
现代文：八月十一日，皇帝西征回京，在宗庙欢饮庆贺，封赏军功，将军中物资赏给留守的百官，数量不等。
English: On August 11th, Emperor Xizeng returned to Beijing, celebrated at the ancestral temple, awarded military merit, and gave generals' materials to the remaining hundred officials, in varying quantities.

古文：冬十一月，以氐王杨玄为假征南大将军、都督、梁州刺史、南秦王。
现代文：冬十一月，封氐王杨玄为假征南大将军、都督、梁州刺史、南秦王。
English: In the winter of November, Yang Xuan, the king of Fuxi, was appointed as the fake general of the Southern Expedition, the governor, the governor of Liangzhou, and the king of Southern Qin.

古文：十二月，行幸中山，守宰贪污免者十数人。
现代文：十二月，巡行至中山，州郡守和令宰们因贪污而被免职的有十多人。
English: In December, the parade went to Zhongshan. More than a dozen prefectural governors and deputy governors were removed from office for corruption.

古文：癸卯，车驾还宫，复所过田租之半。
现代文：初四，车驾回宫，免除所经过地方一半田租。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, driving back to the palace, half of the land rent of the places passed through is exempted.

古文：神蒨元年春正月，以天下守令多非法，精选忠良悉代之。
现代文：神瞏元年春正月，由于天下的地方官员州郡守、县令等大多不守法令，皇帝便精心挑选忠诚而品质优良的人代替他们。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the Jin Dynasty, because most of the world's local officials, such as prefectural governors and county magistrates, did not abide by the law, the emperor carefully selected loyal and high-quality people to replace them.

古文：辛未，京兆王黎薨。
现代文：初二，京兆王拓跋黎去世。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, King Tuoba died.

古文：二月，改元。
现代文：二月，改年号。
English: February, New Year's Day.

古文：司空奚斤进军安定。
现代文：司空奚斤进军安定。
English: Sikyong Shujin's advance is stable.

古文：监军侍御史安颉出战，禽昌。
现代文：监军侍御史安颉出战，抓住赫连昌。
English: The overseer of the army, the attendant Shi Anhui, went to war and captured Herenchang.

古文：其余众立昌弟定为主，走还平凉。
现代文：剩余的部众拥立赫连昌的弟弟赫连定为主帅，逃回平凉。
English: The rest of the players supported the younger brother of He Lianchang, He Lianding, as the head coach, and fled back to Pingliang.

古文：三月辛巳，侍中古弼送赫连昌至于京师。
现代文：三月十三日，侍中古弼送赫连昌来到京都。
English: On March 13th, Samurai Chuko Gojo came to Kyoto to see Herencho off.

古文：司空奚斤追赫连定于平凉马髦岭，为定所禽。
现代文：司空奚斤在平凉的马髦岭追赶赫连定，被赫连定活捉。
English: Siku Shujin chased Herengding in the cool Ma Xiangling and was caught alive by Herengding.

古文：将军丘堆先在安定，闻斤败，东走长安。
现代文：将军丘堆原守安定，听到奚斤兵败，往东逃回长安。
English: Tseung Kwan O hill mound originally kept stable, but after hearing the defeat of the Hokkien soldiers, he fled eastward back to Chang'an.

古文：帝大怒，诏颉令斩之。
现代文：皇帝大怒，命令安颉把他斩首。
English: The emperor was furious and ordered An Xun to behead him.

古文：夏四月，赫连定遣使朝贡。
现代文：夏四月，赫连定派使者来朝贡。
English: In the summer of April, Kheren sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：壬子，西巡。
现代文：十五日，西巡。
English: On the 15th, the Western Patrol left.

古文：戊午，田于河西，大赦。
现代文：二十一日，在河西打猎，大赦天下。
English: On the twenty-first day, hunting in Hexi, amnesty to the world.

古文：南秦王杨玄遣使朝贡。
现代文：南秦王杨玄派使者朝贡。
English: Yang Xuan, king of Southern Qin, sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：五月，乞伏炽盘死。
现代文：五月，乞伏炽盘死去。
English: In May, the beggar died.

古文：秋八月，东幸广宁，临观温泉。
现代文：秋八月，东行到广宁，前去观看温泉。
English: Autumn and August, travel east to Guangning, go to see the hot springs.

古文：以太牢祭黄帝、尧、舜庙。
现代文：以太牢的礼节祭祀黄帝、尧、舜的庙。
English: Temples of the Yellow Emperor, the Dragon Emperor and the Dragon Emperor are worshipped with the etiquette of Taiji.

古文：冬十一月乙未朔，日有蚀之。是月，行幸河西，大校猎。
现代文：九月，车驾回宫。冬十一月初一，日食。当月，行至河西，大举狩猎。
English: In September, I drove back to the palace. In winter, on the first day of November, there was a solar eclipse. That month, I went to the west of the river and hunted a lot.

古文：十二月甲申，车驾还宫。
现代文：十二月二十一日，车驾回宫。
English: On December 21, he drove back to the Imperial Palace.

古文：二年夏四月，宋人来聘。
现代文：二年夏四月，宋人前来聘问。
English: In April of the summer of the second year, Song people came to ask questions.

古文：庚寅，车驾北伐。
现代文：二十九日，皇帝北征。
English: On the 29th, the emperor began the Northern Expedition.

古文：五月丁未，次于沙漠，舍辎重，轻骑兼冀马至栗水。蠕蠕震怖，焚庐舍，绝迹西走。
现代文：五月十六日，到达沙漠，放下辎重，以轻骑兵带双倍战马到达栗水，蠕蠕十分害怕，烧毁屋子，向西逃往没有人烟的荒漠。
English: On the 16th of May, arriving in the desert, he threw down his burden and rode to Chestnut Creek with a light cavalry and double the number of horses. Terrified, Wormwood burned down his house and fled westward into the uninhabited desert.

古文：冬十月，振旅凯旋于京师，告于宗庙。
现代文：冬十月，带领军队凯旋返回京城。并向宗庙告祭。
English: In the winter of October, he led the army in a triumphant return to the capital. He also made an offering to his ancestral temple.

古文：列置新人于漠南，东至濡源，西暨五原、阴山，竟三千里。
现代文：把新迁来的人安置在漠南，东到濡源，西至五原、阴山，全长三千里。
English: The newly arrived people will be resettled in the south of the desert, east to Nureyuan, west to Wuhuan and Yinshan, with a total length of three thousand miles.

古文：十一月，西巡，田于河西，至祚山而还。
现代文：十一月西巡，在河西打猎，到达祚山后回来。
English: In November, he went on a western tour, hunting in Hexi, and returned after reaching Lushan.

古文：三年春正月庚子，车驾还宫。
现代文：三年春正月十三日，皇帝回到宫廷。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the third year of the Spring, the emperor returned to the court.

古文：壬寅，大赦。
现代文：十五日，大赦天下。
English: On the 15th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：癸卯，行幸广宁，临温泉，作《温泉歌》。
现代文：十六日，行至广宁，到温泉，写了一篇《温泉歌》。
English: On the 16th, he went to Guangning, to a hot spring, and wrote a "hot spring song."

古文：二月丁卯，司徒、平阳王长孙翰薨。
现代文：二月初十，司徒、平阳王长孙翰去世。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month of the year, Sun Han, the King of Pingyang, passed away.

古文：戊辰，车驾还宫。
现代文：十一日，车驾回宫。
English: On the 11th day, he drove back to the palace.

古文：三月壬寅，进会稽公赫连昌为秦王。
现代文：三月十六，晋封会稽公赫连昌为秦王。
English: On March 16th, He Lianchang was crowned the King of Qin.

古文：夏四月甲子，行幸云中。
现代文：夏四月初八，出行到达云中。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month of summer, the journey reaches the clouds.

古文：敕勒万余落叛走，诏尚书封铁追灭之。
现代文：敕勒部的一万多村落百姓叛变逃走，诏令尚书封铁追赶并消灭他们。
English: More than ten thousand villagers in Xulebu rebelled and fled, and the emperor ordered Shang Shufeng to pursue and exterminate them.

古文：五月戊午，论讨敕勒功，大明赏罚。
现代文：五月十三日，根据攻打敕勒部中的功劳大小，大张旗鼓进行封赏和惩罚。
English: On May 13th, according to the merits of attacking the Zule Department, rewards and punishments were made with great fanfare.

古文：秋七月己亥，诏诸征镇将军、王公杖节边远者，听开府辟召，其次增置吏员。
现代文：秋七月十五日，下令所有征镇将军、王公持节杖驻守边远之地的官员，都由开府征召。其下增设官吏僚属。
English: On the 15th day of the 7th month of the autumn, it was ordered that all officials stationed in outlying areas, such as town-summoning generals and officials holding the scepter of the king, should be conscripted by the Kaifu, and officials and subordinates should be added.

古文：庚子，诏大鸿胪卿杜超假节都督冀、定、相三州诸军事、行征南大将军、太宰，进爵为王，镇鄴，为诸军节度。
现代文：十六日，令大鸿胪卿杜超临时持节都督冀、定、相三州诸军事、行征南大将军、太宰，晋封为王爵，镇守邺郡，为各军的节度。
English: On the 16th, Du Chao, the Great Magnanimous General Du Chao, was temporarily appointed as the military governor of Ji, Ding, and San of the three states, the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, and the Dazai, and was promoted to the title of prince, and the town guard of Shixian County, which was the festival of each army.

古文：八月，宋将到彦之自清水入河，溯流西行。
现代文：八月，宋将到彦之从清河进入黄河，逆流西上。
English: In August, the Song Dynasty entered the Yellow River from the Qing River and flowed westward.

古文：丙寅，彦之遣将度河攻治坂，冠军将军安颉督诸军击破之。
现代文：十二日，到彦之派将领渡河攻打冶坂，冠军将军安颉指挥各军击败了宋军。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Zuihiko's faction led the troops across the river to attack Yezan, and the champion general Anpi led the troops to defeat the Song army.

古文：九月癸卯，立密皇太后庙于鄴。
现代文：九月二十一日，在邺城建密皇太后庙。
English: On September 21, the Empress Dowager Cixi Temple was built in Handan.

古文：甲辰，行幸统万，遂征平凉。
现代文：二十二日，巡行至统万，进而攻打平凉。
English: On the 22nd, they marched to Tongman, and then attacked Pingliang.

古文：是月，冯跋死。
现代文：当月，冯跋死去。
English: That month, Feng Bao died.

古文：冬十月乙卯，冠军将军安颉济河攻洛阳，丙子，拔之。
现代文：冬十月初二，将军安颉渡过黄河攻打洛阳，二十三日，攻克洛阳。
English: On the second day of October in winter, General An Xun crossed the Yellow River to attack Luoyang, and on the 23rd day, he attacked Luoyang.

古文：辛巳，安颉平武牢。
现代文：二十八日，安颉讨平武牢关。
English: On the 28th, Pingwu's imprisonment was lifted.

古文：十一月乙酉，车驾至平凉。
现代文：十一月初三，车驾到达平凉。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the car arrived at Pingliang.

古文：己亥，行幸安定。
现代文：十七日，巡行至安定。
English: On the 17th, the procession was stable.

古文：庚子，帝自安西还临平凉，遂掘堑围守之。
现代文：十八日，皇帝从安定回至平凉，便挖沟围困平凉。
English: On the 18th, the emperor returned from the stable to the plain, and then dug a ditch to besiege the plain.

古文：行幸纽城，安慰初附，赦秦、陇之人，赐复七年。
现代文：又巡行至纽城，安抚初次归附的人，赦免秦、陇的罪人，并赐免租税七年。
English: He also went on a tour to New York City to appease those who had converted for the first time, pardoned the sinners of Qin and Handan, and granted tax exemption for seven years.

古文：辛丑，安颉帅诸军攻滑台。
现代文：十九日，安颉领各军攻打滑台。
English: On the 19th, Anhui led the army to attack the slide.

古文：沮渠蒙逊遣使朝贡。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊派使者朝贡。
English: The Mengsung envoys paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：壬寅，封寿光侯叔孙建为丹杨王。
现代文：二十日，封寿光侯叔孙建为丹杨王。
English: On the 20th, Fong Shuguang Hou's uncle Sun Jian was crowned King of Danyang.

古文：十二月丁卯，赫连定弟社于度洛孤面缚出降，平凉，收其珍宝。
现代文：十二月十五日，赫连定的弟弟社于度洛孤自缚出降，平凉讨平，收缴了所藏的珍宝。
English: On December 15th, He Lianding's younger brother, She Yu Duoluo, voluntarily surrendered, calmly appealed for peace, and collected the treasures he had collected.

古文：定长安、临晋、武功守将皆奔走，关中平。
现代文：赫连定原在长安、临晋、武功的守将都逃走，关中战乱平息。
English: In Chang'an, Linjin, and Guanzhong, the warlords of military merit all fled, and the war in Guanzhong subsided.

古文：壬申，车驾还东，留巴东公延普等镇安定。
现代文：二十日，皇帝东回，留下巴东公延普等人镇守安定。
English: On the 20th, the emperor returned to Dongbei, leaving Batongong Yanpu and others to keep the town stable.

古文：四年春正月壬午，车驾次木根山，大飨群臣。
现代文：四年春正月初一，车驾到达木根山，大宴群臣。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, the car arrived at Kigenyama, and a large banquet was held for the ministers.

古文：丙申，宋将檀道济、王仲德从清水救滑台。
现代文：十五日，宋将檀道济、王仲德从清河来救滑台。
English: On the 15th, Song Zhaodouji and Wang Zhongde came from Qinghe to rescue the slide.

古文：丹杨王叔孙建、汝阴公长孙道生拒之，道济等不敢进。
现代文：丹杨王叔孙建、汝阴公长孙道生拦阻敌军，檀道济等不敢前进。
English: Danyang Wang's uncle Sun Jian and Ruyin's chief Sun Dosheng blocked the enemy army, and Dangdozhi did not dare to advance.

古文：是月，赫连定灭乞伏慕末。
现代文：当月，赫连定消灭乞伏慕末。
English: In the same month, He Lianding annihilated the Beggar's Curse.

古文：二月辛酉，安颉、司马楚之平滑台。
现代文：二月初十，安颉、司马楚之攻下滑台。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month of the year, Anhui and Sima Chu launched an attack.

古文：癸酉，车驾还宫，饮至策勋，告于宗庙，赐留台百官各有差。
现代文：二十一日，皇帝车驾回宫，在宗庙与群臣欢饮，庆贺胜利并论功行赏，告祭宗庙，赏赐留守百官多少不等的物品。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor drove back to the palace, drank with his retainers in the ancestral temple, celebrated the victory and talked about the reward for the service, announced the sacrifice of the ancestral temple, and rewarded the remaining officials with various items.

古文：战士赐复十年。
现代文：赏赐战士免除十年租税。
English: Reward soldiers with a ten-year tax exemption.

古文：定州人饥，诏开仓以振之。
现代文：定州发生饥荒，诏令开仓赈济。
English: A famine occurred in Dingzhou, and the imperial edict was issued to open warehouses to provide relief.

古文：宋将檀道济、王仲德东走。
现代文：宋将檀道济、王仲德向东退走。
English: Song Daozi and Wang Zhongde retreated to the east.

古文：三月庚戌，冠军将军安颉献宋俘万余人，甲兵三万。
现代文：三月三十日，将军安颉献俘虏的宋人一万多人，铠甲、兵器三万件。
English: On March 30, General Anhui presented more than 10,000 Song people, 30,000 pieces of armor and weapons to the captives.

古文：夏六月，赫连定北袭沮渠蒙逊，为吐谷浑慕璝所执。
现代文：夏六月，赫连定北攻沮渠蒙逊，被吐谷浑慕瞐所俘获。
English: In the summer of June, Herending attacked the north and defeated Mengxiong, and was captured by the Tuyuan Hunmu army.

古文：闰月乙未，蠕蠕国遣使朝贡。
现代文：闰六月十六日，蠕蠕国派使者朝贡。
English: On the 16th day of the 6th month of the leap year, the State of Cm Cm sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：诏散骑侍郎周绍使于宋。
现代文：诏令散骑侍郎周绍出使宋朝。
English: The imperial edict ordered Zhou Shao, a samurai, to send an envoy to the Song Dynasty.

古文：秋七月己酉，行幸河西。起承华宫。
现代文：秋七月初一，巡行至河西，建承华宫。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, the parade went to Hexi to build the Chenghua Palace.

古文：八月乙酉，沮渠蒙逊遣子安周入侍。
现代文：八月初七，沮渠蒙逊派儿子安周前来入侍。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, An Zhou, the son of a Sunni monk, came to serve as an attendant.

古文：吐谷浑慕璝遣使奉表，请送赫连定。
现代文：吐谷浑慕瞐派使者呈上文书，请求送赫连定来魏。
English: Tu Gu sent an envoy to present a document requesting that he be sent to Wei.

古文：己丑，以慕璝为大将军，封西秦王。
现代文：十一日，任命吐谷浑慕瞐为大将军，封西秦王。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he appointed Tu Guhunmu Quan as a general and appointed him as the King of Western Qin.

古文：九月癸丑，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月初六，车驾回宫。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, I drove back to the palace.

古文：庚申，加太尉长孙嵩柱国大将军，以左光禄大夫崔浩为司徒，征西大将军长孙道生为司空。
现代文：十三日，加封太尉长孙嵩为柱国大将军，以左光禄大夫崔浩为司徒，征西大将军长孙道生为司空。
English: On the thirteenth day, Sun Song, the captain of the Second Division, was appointed as the general of Zhiguo, Cui Hao, the doctor of Zuo Guanglu, was appointed as the tutor, and Sun Daosheng, the general of the Western Expedition, was appointed as the secretary.

古文：癸亥，诏兼太常李顺持节拜河西王沮渠蒙逊为假节、加侍中、都督凉州持节及西域羌戎诸军事、行征西大将军、太傅、凉州牧、凉王。
现代文：十六日，诏令兼太常卿李顺持节，封河西王沮渠蒙逊为假持节、加侍中、都督凉州及西域的羌、戎诸军事、行征西大将军、太傅、凉州刺史、凉王。
English: On the 16th, Li Shunji, who was also the Tai Tai's permanent secretary, issued an imperial edict to proclaim the festival of Li Shunji, and to proclaim the festival of Li Shunji to be the festival of Li Shunji, and to appoint the Western King of the He River and the Western Governor of Liangzhou and the Western Regions, as well as the Western General, the Tai Fu, the Liangzhou Sashih, and the Western King of Liangzhou.

古文：壬申，诏曰： 范阳卢玄、博陵崔绰、赵郡李灵、河间邢颖、勃海高允、广平游雅、太原张伟等皆贤俊之胄，冠冕州邦，有羽仪之用。
现代文：二十五日，下诏说： 范阳的卢玄、博陵的崔绰、赵郡的李灵、河间的邢颖、渤海的高允、广平的游雅、太原的张伟等人都是贤俊的后裔，为州郡之首，有表率作用。
English: On the 25th, the next edict said: Lu Xuan of Fanyang, Cui Zhuo of Boling, Li Ling of Zhao County, Li Ying of Hema, Gaoyong of Bohai, Youya of Guangping, Zhang Wei of Taiyuan and others are descendants of Xianjun, and are the heads of prefectures and counties, and have exemplary roles.

古文：《易》曰： 我有好爵，吾与尔縻之。 
现代文：《易》书中说： 我有好爵，我和你一起使用它。 
English: In Yi, it says: I have a good sword, I will use it with you.

古文：如玄之比，隐迹衡门，不曜名誉者，尽敕州郡以礼发遣。 
现代文：像卢玄这些人，隐居国门，不显名声的，全部让州郡以礼送来朝廷。 
English: Like Lu Xuan, these people, who lived in seclusion and did not have a reputation, were all sent to the imperial court as gifts by the prefectures.

古文：遂征玄等。
现代文：便下令征召卢玄等人。
English: He then ordered Lu Xuan and others to be conscripted.

古文：州郡所遣至者数百人，皆差次叙用。
现代文：州郡所送来的有几百人，都分别加以录用。
English: The state and county sent several hundred people, all of whom were hired separately.

古文：冬十月戊寅，诏司徒崔浩改定律令。
现代文：冬十月初一，诏令司徒崔浩改定律令。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the imperial edict ordered the scholar Cui Hao to amend the legal edict.

古文：行幸漠南。
现代文：巡行至漠南。
English: Parade to the south of the desert.

古文：十一月丙辰，北部敕勒莫弗库若于率其部数万骑驱鹿兽数百万诣行在所。
现代文：十一月十日，北部敕勒的莫弗库若于领着他的部下几万骑兵驱赶着各种野兽几百万头来到皇帝行宫。
English: On November 10th, Mofuku Ryo, from the northern city of Mule, led tens of thousands of cavalry and drove millions of wild animals to the imperial palace.

古文：帝因而大狩，以赐从者，勒石漠南，以记功德。
现代文：皇帝便带领大家狩猎，以赏赐随从的人，并在漠南刻石，记载功德。
English: The emperor then led everyone on a hunting trip to reward his followers, and inscribed his merits on a stone in the southern desert.

古文：宜城王奚斤坐事降爵为公。
现代文：宜城王奚斤因事而被降为公爵。
English: As a result of the incident, Yicheng Wang Shujin was demoted to the rank of Duke.

古文：十二月，车驾还宫。
现代文：十二月，车驾回宫。
English: In December, driving back to the palace.

古文：延和元年春正月丙午，尊保太后为皇太后，立皇后赫连氏，以皇子晃为皇太子，谒于太庙，大赦改元。
现代文：延和元年春正月初一，尊封保太后为皇太后，立赫连氏为皇后，以皇子晃为皇太子，拜谒太庙，大赦天下，改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Yanhe, the Empress Dowager Zongfu Bao became the Empress Dowager, the Li He Lian clan became the Empress, the Prince Wang became the Crown Prince, the Imperial Temple was worshiped, the country was amnestied, and the year name was changed.

古文：三月丁未，追赠夫人贺氏为皇后。
现代文：三月初三日，追封夫人贺氏为皇后。
English: On the 3rd day of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 3

古文：壬申，西秦王吐谷浑慕璝送赫连定于京师。
现代文：二十八日，西秦王吐谷浑慕瞐押送赫连定到达京城。
English: On the 28th, the Western Qin king, Tu Gu, escorted He Lianding to the capital.

古文：夏五月，宋人来聘。
现代文：夏五月，宋人前来聘问。
English: In the summer of May, Song people came to ask questions.

古文：六月庚寅，车驾伐和龙。
现代文：六月初七，皇帝出征和龙。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month, the emperor went to war with the dragon.

古文：诏尚书左仆射安原等屯于漠南，以备蠕蠕。
现代文：诏令尚书左仆射安原等人在漠南屯守，以防备蠕蠕。
English: Zhao ordered Shangshu's right-hand man, Sha'an Yuan, and others to stay in the south of the desert to guard against the creep.

古文：辛卯，诏兼散骑常侍邓颖使于宋。
现代文：十八日，令兼散骑常侍邓颖出使宋国。
English: On the 18th, Deng Ying, an envoy of the Song Dynasty, was dispatched.

古文：秋七月己巳，车驾至和龙，穿堑以守之。
现代文：秋七月二十日，车驾到达和龙，挖沟以困守。
English: On the 20th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the driver arrived at Hulong, dug a ditch to defend it.

古文：是月，筑东宫。
现代文：当月，修建东宫。
English: In the same month, construction of the East Palace was completed.

古文：九月乙卯，车驾西还。
现代文：九月十四日，车驾西回。
English: September 14th, driving westbound.

古文：徙营丘、成周、辽东、乐浪、带方、玄菟六郡人三万家于幽州，开仓以振之。
现代文：迁移营丘、成周、辽东、乐浪、带方、玄菟六郡人三万家到幽州，开仓赈济他们。
English: Thirty thousand people from six counties, including Yingqiu, Chengzhou, Liaodong, Lelang, Bokfang and Xuanzang, moved to Yuzhou and opened warehouses to support them.

古文：冬十月，吐谷浑慕璝遣使朝贡。
现代文：冬十月，吐谷浑慕瞐派使者来朝贡。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Tumujin sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：十一月己巳，车驾至自和龙。
现代文：十一月二十七日，车驾从和龙回到京城。
English: On November 27th, I drove back to Beijing from Hailong.

古文：十二月己丑，冯弘子长乐公崇及其母弟朗、朗弟邈以辽西内属。
现代文：十二月十九日，冯弘的儿子长乐公冯崇和他同母所生的弟弟冯朗、冯朗的弟弟冯邈以辽西郡来归附。
English: On December 19, Feng Hong's son, Changle Gong Feng Chong, and his brother, Feng Lang, born of the same mother, and Feng Lang's brother, Feng Yu, came to Liaoxi County.

古文：先是，辟召贤良而州郡多逼遣之，诏以礼申喻，任其进退。
现代文：先前朝廷下诏征求贤良之士，各州郡便多方逼迫加以派送。下诏以礼相待说明原因，听从他们自愿前来或退隐。
English: In the past, the imperial court issued an edict to solicit virtuous people, and various states and counties forced them to be sent. The following edict explains the reasons with courtesy, and asks them to come or retire voluntarily.

古文：二年春二月庚午，诏兼鸿胪卿李继持节假冯崇车骑大将军、辽西王，承制，听置尚书已下。
现代文：二年春二月初一，诏令兼鸿胪卿李继持节，暂封冯崇为车骑大将军、辽西王，按照皇帝的旨意，由他设置尚书以下的官员。
English: On the first day of February in the spring of the second year, in accordance with the imperial edict and the Li Jizhi Festival of the Hongwu Emperor, Feng Chong was temporarily appointed as the cavalry general and the king of Liaoxi. In accordance with the emperor's will, he set up officials below Shang Shu.

古文：壬午，诏兼散骑常侍宋宣使于宋。
现代文：十三日，令兼散骑常侍宋宣出使宋国。
English: On the 13th, Song Xuan, who was also a knight errant, sent an envoy to Song.

古文：夏四月，沮渠蒙逊死，以其子牧犍为车骑将军，改封西河王。
现代文：夏四月，沮渠蒙逊死去，任命他的儿子沮渠牧犍为车骑将军，改封为河西王。
English: In the summer of April, Deshu Mengxun died, and appointed his son Deshu Muxun as the general of chariots and cavalry, and changed his title to King of Hexi.

古文：六月，遣永昌王健、尚书左仆射安原督诸军讨和龙。
现代文：六月，派永昌王健、尚书左仆射安原督促各军攻打和龙。
English: In June, Yongchang sent Wang Jian and Shangshu's left-hand man, Shao Anyuan, to urge the armies to attack the dragon.

古文：辛巳，诏乐安王范发秦、雍兵一万筑小城于长安城内。
现代文：十四日，令乐安王范征发秦、雍的兵卒一万名在长安城内建小城。
English: On the 14th, King Le'an summoned ten thousand soldiers from Qin and Yong to build a small city in Chang'an.

古文：秋八月，辽西王冯崇上表求说降其父，帝不听。
现代文：秋八月，辽西王冯崇上表请求劝降他的父亲，太武帝不答应。
English: In autumn and August, Feng Chong, the king of western Liaoning Province, went to the emperor and asked him to persuade his father to abdicate. Emperor Taibu did not agree.

古文：九月，宋人来聘，并献驯象一。
现代文：九月，宋人前来聘问，并且进献已驯好的大象一头。
English: In September, the Song people came to inquire, and presented a tamed elephant.

古文：戊午，诏兼大鸿胪卿崔赜持节拜征虏将军杨难当为征南大将军、仪同三司，封南秦王。
现代文：二十二日，诏令大鸿胪卿崔赜持节，拜征虏将军杨难当为征南大将军、仪同三司，封南秦王。
English: On the 22nd day of the year, the Emperor issued an imperial edict to the Great Homeric Emperor Cui Rongji, appointing the conscript general Yang Nan as the Grand General of the Conquest of the South, the Third Division of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and the King of Southern Qin.

古文：冬十二月己巳，大赦天下。
现代文：冬十二月初五，大赦天下。
English: On the 5th day of the 12th month in winter, the general amnesty will begin.

古文：辛未，幸阴山北。
现代文：初七，巡幸阴山北部地区。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he went on a tour of the northern part of Mount Yin.

古文：诏兼散骑常侍卢玄使于宋。
现代文：诏令散骑常侍卢玄出使宋朝。
English: The imperial edict ordered Lu Xuan, the imperial equerry, to dispatch an envoy to the Song Dynasty.

古文：三年春正月乙未，车驾次于女水，大飨群臣。
现代文：三年春正月初一，车驾巡行到女水，大宴群臣。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of spring, a car parade was driven to Namsui, and a large banquet was held for the ministers.

古文：戊戌，冯弘遣使求和，帝不许。
现代文：初四，冯弘派人前来求和，太武帝不答应。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Feng Hong sent someone to sue for peace, but Emperor Taibu did not agree.

古文：丙辰，南秦王杨难当克汉中，送雍州流人七千家于长安。
现代文：二十二日，南秦王杨难当攻下汉中，送雍州逃亡的民户七千家到长安。
English: On the 22nd, King Yang Nan of Southern Qin invaded Hanzhong and sent 7,000 fleeing households from Yongzhou to Chang'an.

古文：二月戊寅，诏以频年屡征，有事西北，运输之役，百姓勤劳，令郡县括贫富以为三级，富者租赋如常，中者复二年，下穷者复三年。
现代文：二月十五日，下诏说：由于连年多次出征，西北多事，运输服役，百姓辛劳，命令各郡县将百姓按照贫富分为三等级，富裕户照常交纳租税；中等户减免二年租赋；下等贫困户免交三年租赋。
English: On February 15th, the following edict was issued: "Due to the repeated military expeditions in successive years, the troubled northwest, the transportation service, and the hard work of the people, the counties and counties are ordered to divide the people into three grades according to the rich and the poor. The rich households will pay taxes as usual; the middle-class households will be exempted from paying two years of rent; and the lower-class poor households will be exempted from paying three years of rent."

古文：辛卯，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十八日，车驾回宫。
English: On the 28th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：三月甲寅，行幸河西。
现代文：三月二十一日，巡行至河西。
English: On March 21, the parade went to Hexi.

古文：闰月甲戌，秦王赫连昌叛走。丙子，河西候将格杀之。
现代文：闰三月十一日，秦王赫连昌叛变出奔，十三日，河西守将击杀了他。
English: On the 11th day of the third month of the leap year, Qin King He Lianchang mutinied and fled, and on the 13th day, the governor of Hexi Province killed him.

古文：验其谋反，群弟皆伏诛。
现代文：验证了他确属谋反之后，他的几个弟弟都被杀死。
English: Several of his younger brothers were killed after it was established that he was indeed a rebel.

古文：己卯，车驾还宫。进彭城公粟爵为王。
现代文：十六日，车驾回宫，晋封彭城公粟的爵位为王。
English: On the 16th, he drove back to the palace, and promoted Pengcheng Gongmao to the title of king.

古文：秋七月辛巳，东宫成，备置屯卫，三分西宫之一，壬午，行幸美稷，遂至隰城。
现代文：秋七月二十，东宫建成，配备了守卫人员，从西宫分去了三分之一。二十一日，巡行到美稷，进而到隰城。
English: On the 20th day of the 7th month of autumn, the East Palace was completed, equipped with guards, and one-third of the West Palace was allocated. On the 21st day, the parade went to Meiliang, and then to Lucheng.

古文：命诸军讨山胡白龙于河西。
现代文：命令各部在西河进攻山胡白龙。
English: All departments were ordered to attack Mount Hu Bailong in the West River.

古文：九月戊子，克之。斩白龙及其将帅，屠其城。
现代文：九月二十八日，攻克，斩了白龙和他的将帅，在全城大屠杀。
English: On September 28th, they defeated and beheaded the White Dragon and his general, causing a city-wide massacre.

古文：冬十一月，车驾还宫。
现代文：冬十一月，车驾回宫。
English: Winter November, driving back to the palace.

古文：十二月甲辰，行幸云中。
现代文：十二月十六日，巡行至云中。
English: December 16th, parade to Yunzhong.

古文：太延元年春正月乙未朔，日有蚀之。壬午，降死罪刑已下各一等。
现代文：太延元年春正月初一，日食。二十四日，死罪以下的罪犯各减刑一等。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Taiyan, the sun eclipsed. On the 24th, the criminals with less than the death penalty were each reduced by one grade.

古文：癸未，出道武、明元宫人，令得嫁。
现代文：二十五日，将道武和明元帝时的宫女们放出宫，让她们嫁人。
English: On the 25th, Emperor Daowu and the imperial concubines of Emperor Mingyuan were released from the palace and allowed to marry.

古文：甲申，大赦改元。
现代文：二十六日，大赦天下，改年号。
English: On the 26th, the world was amnestied, and the year was changed.

古文：二月庚子，蠕蠕、焉耆、车师各遣使朝贡。
现代文：二月十三日，蠕蠕、焉耆、车师各派使者朝贡。
English: On February 13, the envoys of Cm Cm, Yan Cm and Che Shih each sent tribute.

古文：诏长安及平凉人徙在京师其孤老不能自存者，听还乡里。丁未，车驾还宫。
现代文：诏令从长安和平凉迁到京都的难以维持生计的孤寡老人，听任回故乡。二十日，车驾回宫。
English: On the 20th, the lonely old man who had moved from Chang'an to Kyoto, where it was difficult to make a living, was allowed to return to his hometown.

古文：夏五月庚申，进宜都公穆寿为宜都王，汝阴公长孙道生为上党王，宜城公奚斤为恆农王，广陵公娄伏连为广陵王。
现代文：夏五月初四，宜都公穆寿被晋爵为宜都王。汝阴公长孙道生为上党王，宜城公奚斤为恒农王，广陵公娄伏连为广陵王。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month of the summer, Yidu Prince Mu Shou was promoted to the king of Yidu, Ru Yin Prince Chosun Daosheng became the king of Shang Dynasty, Yicheng Prince Shujin became the king of Hengnong, and Guangling Prince Shufu Lian became the king of Guangling.

古文：天降嘉贶，将何德以酬之？
现代文：派使者二十人出使西域。十八，巡行至云中。
English: He sent twenty messengers to the west, and eighteen to the middle of the cloud.

古文：其令天下大酺五日，礼报百神，守宰祭界内名山大川，上答天意。 
现代文：六月初八，下诏以 天降嘉赐 而 令天下人聚饮五天，以礼报答百神，由郡守、县宰等祭祀境内的名山大川，以报答天意。 
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, the emperor issued an edict to invite the people of the world to gather and drink for five days with the blessing of heaven, to repay the hundreds of gods with courtesy, and to worship the famous mountains and rivers in the territory by the county magistrate and the county governor to repay the will of heaven.

古文：丙午，高丽、鄯善国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：二十一日，高丽、善阝善国都派人来朝贡。
English: On the 21st, Goryeo and Shanxi sent people to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月，田于棝阳。
现代文：秋七月，在木固阳田猎。
English: Autumn in July, hunting in Kigoyada.

古文：己卯，乐平王丕等五将东伐，至和龙，徙男女六千口而还。
现代文：二十四日，乐平王丕等五将东征，到和龙，迁移男女六千人回京。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, five generals, including Leping Wang Qian, will march eastward to Hailong and relocate six thousand men and women back to Beijing.

古文：八月丙戌，行幸河西。
现代文：八月初一，巡行到河西。
English: On the first day of August, the parade went to Hexi.

古文：粟特国遣使朝贡。
现代文：粟特国派使者朝贡。
English: The Sogdian Empire sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：九月，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月，车驾回宫。
English: In September, he drove back to the Imperial Palace.

古文：冬十月癸卯，尚书左仆射安原谋反，伏诛。
现代文：冬十月十九日，尚书左仆射安原谋反，被杀。
English: In the winter of October 19th, Shangshu's second-in-command, Shao Anyuan, plotted a rebellion and was killed.

古文：甲辰，行幸定州，次于新城宫。
现代文：二十日，出巡到达定州，住在新城宫。
English: On the 20th, the inspection team arrived in Dingzhou and stayed in Xincheng Palace.

古文：十一月己巳，校猎于广川。
现代文：十一月十六日，在广川围猎。
English: On November 16th, the hunt began in Hirokawa.

古文：丙子，行幸鄴，祀密太后庙。
现代文：二十三日，到达邺城，祭祀密太后庙。
English: On the 23rd, they arrived in Lucheng and made a sacrifice at the Temple of the Empress Dowager.

古文：诸所过亲问高年，褒礼贤俊。
现代文：在所有经过的地方，皇帝亲自慰问老年人，表扬和礼遇贤俊之士。
English: In all the places he passed, the emperor personally consoled the elderly and praised and courted the virtuous.

古文：十二月癸卯，遣使者以太牢祀北岳。
现代文：十二月二十日，派使者以太牢的礼节祭祀北岳。
English: On December 20th, an emissary was sent to perform the ritual sacrifice of Beidake.

古文：二年春正月甲寅，车驾还宫。
现代文：二年春正月初二，车驾回宫。
English: On the second day of the first month of the second year of spring, the car drove back to the palace.

古文：二月戊子，冯弘遣使朝贡，求送侍子，帝不许。
现代文：二月初六，冯弘派使者进贡，请求送儿子入侍，皇帝不答应。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, Feng Hong sent an envoy to pay tribute and request that his son be made an attendant, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：壬辰，遣使者十余辈诣高丽、东夷诸国，诏喻之。
现代文：初十，派使者十多批人出使高丽和东夷各国，让他们知道皇帝的诏令。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he sent more than ten groups of envoys to the countries of Goryeo and Dongyi to let them know the emperor's edict.

古文：三月丙辰，宋人来聘。
现代文：三月初五，宋人来聘问。
English: On the fifth day of the third month of the year, Song people came to ask questions.

古文：辛未，遣平东将军娥清、安西将军古弼讨冯弘。
现代文：十九日，派平东将军俄清、安西将军古弼攻打冯弘。
English: On the 19th, he sent the generals of Pingdong, Ruxing and Anxi to attack Fenghong.

古文：弘求救于高丽，高丽遣其大将葛蔓卢迎之。
现代文：冯弘向高丽求救，高丽派大将葛蔓卢去迎接他。
English: Feng Hong appealed to Goryeo for help, and Goryeo sent General Gemanlu to meet him.

古文：夏四月甲寅，皇子小兒、苗兒并薨。
现代文：夏四月初三，皇子小儿、苗儿都去世。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, the prince's son and daughter-in-law both passed away.

古文：五月乙卯，冯弘奔高丽。
现代文：五月初五，冯弘逃奔高丽国。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth lunar month, Feng Hong fled to Korea.

古文：戊午，诏散骑常侍封拨使高丽，征送冯弘。
现代文：初八，令散骑常侍封拨出使高丽，让送回冯弘。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 3rd year of the 8th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8

古文：丁卯，行幸河西。
现代文：十七日，巡行到河西。
English: On the 17th, the parade went to Hexi.

古文：赫连定之西也，杨难当窃据上邽，秋七月庚戌，命乐平王丕等讨之。
现代文：赫连定西逃之后，杨难当私占上圭阝。秋七月初一，命令乐平王丕等讨伐他。
English: After He Lianding fled to the West, Yang Nan privately occupied Guizhou. On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, he ordered Leping Wang Yao and others to fight him.

古文：诏散骑常侍游雅使于宋。
现代文：诏令散骑常侍游雅出使宋国。
English: The Emperor's edict to send roving envoys to the Song Dynasty.

古文：八月丁亥，遣使六辈使西域。
现代文：八月初八，派使者六批出使西域。
English: On the eighth day of the eighth month, six groups of envoys were sent to the western region.

古文：帝校猎于河西，诏广平公张黎发定州七郡一万二千人通莎泉道。
现代文：皇帝在河西围猎，诏令广平公张黎征发定州七郡一万二千人开通莎泉道。
English: The emperor was hunting in Hexi, and issued a decree to Guangping Gong Zhang Li Zheng sent twelve thousand people from seven counties in Dingzhou to open the Shaquan Road.

古文：甲辰，高车国遣使朝贡。
现代文：二十五日，高车国派使者朝贡。
English: On the 25th, Gaochao sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：九月庚戌，乐平王丕等至，略阳公难当奉诏摄上邽守。
现代文：九月初二，乐平王丕等到达略阳，杨难当接受皇帝诏令为上圭阝太守。
English: On the second day of September, Leping Wang Yao and others arrived in Liaoyang, and Yang Nantong accepted the emperor's edict as Shangguizhou's governor-general.

古文：高丽不送冯弘，帝将伐之，纳乐平王丕计而止。
现代文：高丽不肯送回冯弘，皇帝打算讨伐它，后来采纳了乐平王丕的计策而终止。
English: Goryeo refused to send Feng Hong back, the emperor planned to fight it, and later adopted the strategy of Leping Wang Yao and terminated it.

古文：冬十一月己酉，幸棝阳。
现代文：冬十一月初一，到达木固阳。
English: In winter, on the first day of November, it reaches Kigoyang.

古文：驱野马于云中，置野马苑。
现代文：在云中驱赶野马，设野马苑。
English: Drive wild horses in the clouds and set up a wild horse park.

古文：闰月壬子，车驾还宫。
现代文：闰十二月初五，车驾回宫。
English: On the fifth day of the twelfth lunar month, the car drove back to the palace.

古文：乙丑，改封颍川王提为武昌王。
现代文：十八日，改封颍川王提为武昌王。
English: On the 18th, he was given the new title of King of Wuchang.

古文：河西王沮渠牧犍遣使朝贡。
现代文：河西王沮渠牧犍派使者朝贡。
English: The king of Western Heze dispatched an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：是岁，吐谷浑慕璝死。
现代文：当年，吐谷浑慕瞐死去。
English: In the same year, Tutani Hummucho died.

古文：三年春正月癸未，中山王纂薨。
现代文：三年春正月初七，中山王纂去世。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the third year of spring, Zhongshan Wang Zuo passed away.

古文：戊子，太尉、北平王长孙嵩薨。
现代文：十二日，太尉、北平王长孙嵩去世。
English: On the 12th, Sun Song, the first lieutenant and the eldest son of King Peiping, passed away.

古文：乙巳，丹杨王叔孙建薨。
现代文：二十九日，丹杨王叔孙建去世。
English: On the 29th, Danyang Wang's uncle Sun Jian passed away.

古文：二月乙卯，行幸幽州，存恤孤老，问人疾苦。
现代文：二月初九，巡行至幽州，慰问和抚恤孤寡老人，访问民间疾苦。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month, the parade went to Yuzhou to offer condolences and sympathy to the lonely and widowed elderly, and to visit the suffering of the people.

古文：还幸上谷，遂至代，所过复田租之半。
现代文：回来时到上谷，进而至代郡，所经过的地方减一半田租。
English: When returning to Kamitani, and then to Tsurumo-gun, half of the field rent will be reduced for the places passed.

古文：三月己卯，车驾还宫。
现代文：三月初四，车驾回宫。
English: On March 4th, I drove back to the palace.

古文：丁酉，宋人来聘。
现代文：二十二日，宋人前来聘问。
English: On the 22nd, Song people came to ask questions.

古文：夏五月己丑，诏天下吏人得举告守令不如法者。
现代文：夏五月十五日，下诏让全国所有官吏和民众举报地方上的守、令中不依法行事的人。
English: On the fifteenth day of the fifth month of the summer, the following edict was issued, instructing all officials and citizens across the country to report local officials and officials who did not act in accordance with the law.

古文：丙申，行幸云中。
现代文：二十二日，巡行至云中。
English: On the 22nd, they marched to Yunzhong.

古文：秋七月戊子，使永昌王健、上党王长孙道生讨山胡白龙余党于西河，灭之。
现代文：秋七月十五日，派永昌王健、上党王长孙道生到西河攻打山胡白龙的余党，全部消灭了他们。
English: On the 15th day of the 7th month of autumn, Yongchang Wang Jian and Shangtang Wang Changsun Daosheng were sent to the West River to attack the remaining party of Shanhu Bailong, and they all destroyed them.

古文：八月甲辰，行幸河西。
现代文：八月初一，巡行到河西。
English: On the first day of August, the parade went to Hexi.

古文：九月甲申，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月十二日，车驾回宫。
English: On September 12th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：丁酉，遣使者拜西秦王慕璝弟慕利延为镇西大将军、仪同三司，改封西平王。
现代文：二十五日，派使者封西秦王慕瞐的弟弟慕利延为镇西大将军、仪同三司，改封为西平王。
English: On the 25th, he sent an envoy to appoint Muriyan, the younger brother of the Western Qin King Murong, as the Zhenxi Grand General and the three departments of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and changed his title to the King of Xiping.

古文：冬十月癸卯，行幸云中。
现代文：冬十月初一，巡行至云中。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the parade reaches the clouds.

古文：十一月壬申，车驾还宫。
现代文：十一月初一，车驾回宫。
English: On the first day of November, I drove back to the palace.

古文：是岁，河西王沮渠牧犍世子封坛来朝，高丽、契丹、龟兹、悦般、焉耆、车师、粟特、疏勒、乌孙、渴盘陁、鄯善、破洛那、者舌等国各遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，河西王沮渠牧犍的世子封坛前来朝见。高丽、契丹、龟兹、悦般、焉耆、车师、粟特、疏勒、乌孙、渴盘瞓、善阝善、破洛那、者舌等国各派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, the heir to the throne of the king of Hexi, Deqiu Qu, came to see the emperor. Envoys from Goryeo, Khitan, Kuez, Yuepang, Yanshan, Cheji, Sogd, Shule, Usun, Qipan, Zenzhen, Balona, Zhouzhi and other countries sent tribute.

古文：四年春三月庚辰，鄯善王弟素延耆来朝。
现代文：四年春三月初十，善阝善王的弟弟素延耆来朝见。
English: On the 10th day of the 3rd month in the spring of the 4th year, the younger brother of King Zenzong Zenzong came to see the emperor.

古文：癸未，罢沙门年五十以下。
现代文：十三日，让五十岁以下的僧人还俗。
English: On the 13th, monks under the age of 50 were allowed to return to secular life.

古文：江阳王根薨。
现代文：江阳王根去世。
English: Jiangyang Wanggen passed away.

古文：是月，高丽杀冯弘。
现代文：当月，高丽杀死冯弘。
English: That month, Goryeo killed Feng Hong.

古文：夏五月戊寅，赦。
现代文：夏五月初九，大赦天下。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month of summer, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：秋七月壬申，车驾北伐。
现代文：秋七月初四，皇帝北伐。
English: Autumn On the fourth day of the seventh month, the Northern Expedition of the Emperor began.

古文：冬十一月丁卯朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬十一月初一，日食。十二月，车驾北伐归来。
English: In winter, the first day of November, the solar eclipse. In December, driving back from the Northern Expedition.

古文：十二月，车驾至自北伐。上洛巴、泉蕇等相帅内附。
现代文：上洛巴、泉艹单等相继归附。
English: Shangloba, Quanhuanshan and others were successively annexed.

古文：诏兼散骑常侍高雅使于宋。
现代文：诏令兼散骑常侍游雅出使宋国。
English: The Emperor's edict and the loose riding of the frequent traveler Ya sent an envoy to Song.

古文：五年春正月庚寅，行幸定州。
现代文：五年春正月二十五日，巡行至定州。
English: On the 25th day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, the parade went to Dingzhou.

古文：三月辛未，车驾还宫。
现代文：三月初七，车驾回宫。
English: On March 7th, I drove back to the palace.

古文：庚寅，以故南秦王世子杨保宗为征南大将军、秦州牧、武都王，镇上邽。
现代文：二十六日，以去世的南秦王之世子杨保宗为征南大将军、秦州牧、武都王，镇守上圭阝。
English: On the 26th, Yang Baozong, the son of the deceased King of Southern Qin, was appointed as the General of the Southern Expedition, the King of Qin, the King of Wudu, and the Town Warden of Shanggui.

古文：夏五月癸未，遮逸国献汗血马。
现代文：夏五月二十日，遮逸国进献汗血马。
English: On the 20th day of the 5th month of the summer, Qia Yi Province entered into a blood-sweat horse race.

古文：六月甲辰，车驾西讨沮渠牧犍。
现代文：六月十一日，皇帝西征沮渠牧犍。
English: On June 11th, the Emperor Xi Zheng drained the canal of herdsmen.

古文：侍中、宜都王穆寿辅皇太子决留台事，大将军长乐王嵇敬、辅国大将军建宁王崇二万人屯漠南，以备蠕蠕。
现代文：侍中、宜都王穆寿留在京城辅助皇太子处置国家要事。大将军长乐王嵇敬、辅国大将军建宁王崇带领二万人屯守漠南，以防备蠕蠕。
English: The courtier, Yidu Wang Mu Shou, stayed in the capital to assist the crown prince in dealing with important matters of state. The general, Changle Wang Shou Jing, and the adjutant general, Jianning Wang Chong, led twenty thousand people to stay in the south of the country to guard against trouble.

古文：秋七月己巳，车驾至上都属国城，大飨群臣，讲武马射。
现代文：秋七月初七，车驾到达上郡属国城，大宴群臣，讲习武艺，骑马射箭。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn and July, the car arrived at the county town of Shangguan, a large banquet of ministers, a martial arts class, horse riding and archery.

古文：壬午，留辎重，分部诸军。
现代文：二十日，留下辎重物资，分别安排各军队的任务。
English: On the 20th, heavy supplies were left behind, and the tasks of each army were arranged separately.

古文：八月丙申，车驾至姑臧，牧犍兄子祖逾城来降。
现代文：八月初四，车驾到达姑臧，牧犍哥哥的儿子祖越城投降。
English: On the fourth day of the eighth month, the car arrived at Guzheng, and the son of the elder brother of Muzheng, Zhu Yuecheng, surrendered.

古文：乃分军围之。
现代文：便分兵包围了城池。
English: The soldiers then surrounded the castle.

古文：九月丙戌，牧犍与左右文武五千人面缚军门，帝解其缚，待以籓臣之礼。
现代文：九月二十五日，牧犍和左右文武大臣五千人自缚到营中见皇帝。皇帝解下他的绳索，以藩王的礼节来对待他。
English: On September 25th, Muxuan and five thousand ministers of culture and armed forces from the left and right tied themselves to the camp to see the emperor. The emperor untied his ropes and treated him with the etiquette of the king of the domain.

古文：收其城内户口二十余万，仓库珍宝不可称计。
现代文：收得城内户口二十多万人，仓库中各种珍宝难以计数。
English: More than two hundred thousand people in the city's hukou have been collected, and it is difficult to count the various treasures in the warehouse.

古文：进张掖公秃发保周爵为王，与龙骧将军穆罴、安远将军源贺分略诸郡。
现代文：晋封张掖公秃发保周为王爵，和龙骧将军穆罴、安远将军源贺分别收复各郡。
English: Zhang Yigong, Bald Baozhou, who was promoted to the rank of prince, and Longyu Generals Mu Xi and Anyuan Generals Yuan He regained the counties respectively.

古文：牧犍弟张掖太守宜得西奔酒泉太守无讳，后奔晋昌；乐都太守安周南奔吐谷浑。
现代文：牧犍的弟弟张掖太守宜得西逃投奔酒泉太守无讳，后又逃奔晋昌；乐都太守安周南逃投奔吐谷浑。
English: The younger brother of the herdsman, Zhang Xuan, fled to the west of Yideshi, then to Jiuquan, and later to Jinchang; the ruler of Le Du, An Zhounan, fled to Tuyugun.

古文：戊子，蠕蠕犯塞，遂至七介山，京都大骇。
现代文：二十七日，蠕蠕入侵边境，进至七介山，京城大为恐慌。
English: On the 27th, creepy-crawlies invaded the border and entered the Qixia Mountain, causing panic in Beijing.

古文：皇太子命上党王长孙道生等拒之。
现代文：皇太子命令上党王长孙道生等迎击。
English: The crown prince ordered the head of the party, Sun Dosheng, to counterattack.

古文：冬十月辛酉，车驾还宫。徙凉州人三万余家于京师。
现代文：冬十月初一，车驾回宫，迁移凉州人三万多家到京城。
English: On the first day of October in winter, more than 30,000 people from Liangzhou moved to Beijing by car.

古文：留乐平王丕、征西将军贺多罗镇凉州。
现代文：留乐平王丕、征西将军贺多罗镇守凉州。
English: Liu Leping Wang Qian, the general of the Western Conquest, guarded Liangzhou from the town of Hedoro.

古文：癸亥，遣张掖王秃发保周喻诸部鲜卑，保周因率诸部叛于张掖。
现代文：初三，派张掖王秃发保周传谕鲜卑各部人，秃发保周便乘机领着鲜卑各部在张掖背叛朝廷。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, he sent Zhang Ye's king, Bald Baozhou, to preach to the subordinate ministers. Bald Baozhou then took the opportunity to lead the subordinate ministers to betray the imperial court in Zhang Ye.

古文：十一月乙巳，宋人来聘，并献驯象一。
现代文：十一月十五日，宋人来聘问，并进献驯养的大象一头。
English: On November 15th, the Song people came to inquire, and presented a domesticated elephant.

古文：十二月壬午，车驾至自西伐，饮至策勋，告于宗庙。
现代文：十二月二十二日，车驾北伐归来，欢饮于宗庙，论功行赏，告祭祖宗。
English: On December 22nd, he drove back from the Northern Expedition, had a drink at the ancestral temple, talked about the merits, and paid tribute to the ancestors.

古文：杨难当寇上邽，镇将元勿头讨走之。
现代文：杨难当侵犯上圭阝，守将元勿头和他作战后把他赶走了。
English: Yang Nantang violated Shang Guiqi, and the guard general Yuan Moutou drove him away after fighting with him.

古文：是岁，鄯善、龟兹、疏勒、焉耆、高丽、粟特、渴盘陀、破洛那、悉居半等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，鄯善、龟兹、疏勒、焉耆、高丽、粟特、渴盘瞓、破洛那、悉居半等国都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, envoys were sent to pay tribute from many countries, including Shaoshan, Guizi, Shule, Yancheng, Goryeo, Sogdia, Zhishan, Lorna, and Sibu.

古文：太平真君元年春正月己酉，沮渠无讳国酒泉。
现代文：太平真君元年春正月二十，沮渠无讳围困酒泉。
English: Taiping Zhenjun on the 20th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the Spring, brazenly besieged Jiuquan.

古文：辛亥，分遣侍臣巡行州郡，观察风俗，问人疾苦。
现代文：二十二日，皇帝分派侍臣巡行各州郡，观察民间风俗，访问民众疾苦。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor dispatched courtiers to tour the provinces and counties, observe folk customs, and visit the people.

古文：二月己巳，诏假通直常侍邢颖使于宋。
现代文：二月十一日，诏令代通直常侍邢颖出使宋国。
English: On February 11, the Emperor issued an imperial edict appointing Tsunenao's personal attendant, Jang Ying, as the envoy to Song.

古文：发长安人五千浚昆明池。
现代文：征发长安五千人疏浚昆明池。
English: 5,000 people from Chang'an were requisitioned to dredge Kunming Lake.

古文：三月，酒泉陷。
现代文：三月，酒泉失陷。
English: In March, Jiuquan collapsed.

古文：夏四月戊午朔，日有蚀之。庚辰，沮渠无讳寇张掖。
现代文：夏四月初一，日食。二十三日，沮渠无讳进犯张掖。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of summer, there was a solar eclipse. On the 23rd day of the month, Zhang Xuan was unceremoniously attacked.

古文：秃发保周屯删丹。
现代文：秃发保周驻兵删丹。
English: Bald-haired military garrison guarding Zhou Quandan.

古文：六月丁丑，皇孙浚生，大赦改元。
现代文：六月二十一日，皇孙拓跋出生，大赦天下，改年号。
English: On June 21st, the emperor's grandson Tuoba was born, and he was granted amnesty by the emperor, and his name was changed.

古文：秋七月，行幸阴山。
现代文：秋七月，巡行到达阴山。
English: In autumn and July, the procession reached Mount Everest.

古文：己丑，永昌王健大破秃发保周，走之。
现代文：初三，永昌王健大破秃发保周，秃发保周逃走。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Yongchang Wang Jian broke the lockdown and fled.

古文：丙申，保太后窦氏崩于行宫。
现代文：初十，保太后窦氏在行宫去世。
English: At the age of ten, Dowager Empress Dowager Dou died on her way to the palace.

古文：癸丑，保周自杀，传首京师。
现代文：二十七日，秃发保周自杀，首级被传送到京城。
English: On the 27th, Bald Guo Zhou committed suicide, and his head was sent to Beijing.

古文：八月甲申，沮渠无讳降。
现代文：八月二十九日，沮渠无讳投降。
English: On August 29th, they surrendered without a murmur.

古文：九月壬寅，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月十七日，车驾回宫。
English: On September 17th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：是岁，州镇十五饥，诏开仓振恤之。
现代文：当年，各州镇十五处发生饥荒，诏令开仓赈济民众。
English: In that year, famine occurred in fifteen towns in all prefectures, and the imperial edict was issued to open granaries to help the people.

古文：以河南主曜子羯兒为河间王，后改封略阳王。
现代文：封河南王曜的儿子羯儿为河间王，后来又改封为略阳王。
English: Henan Wangyou's son, Jie Er, was given the title of the King of Kawama and later the King of Liangyang.

古文：二年春正月癸卯，拜沮渠无讳为征西大将军、凉州牧、酒泉王。
现代文：二年春正月二十日，任命沮渠无讳为征西大将军、凉州牧、酒泉王。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the second year of spring, he was appointed the general of the Western Conquest, the herdsman of Liangzhou and the king of Jiuquan.

古文：三月辛卯，葬惠太后于崞山。
现代文：三月初九日，把惠太后埋葬在崞山。
English: On March 9th, Empress Dowager Hui was buried in Shaoshan.

古文：庚戌，新兴王俊、略阳王羯兒有罪，黜为公。
现代文：二十八日，新兴王俊、略阳王羯儿犯罪，贬为公爵。
English: On the 28th, the emerging Wang Jun and Liaoyang Wang Qian'er committed crimes and were demoted to dukes.

古文：辛亥，封蠕蠕郁久闾乞归为朔方王，沮渠万年为张掖王。
现代文：二十九日，封蠕蠕的郁久闾乞归为朔方王，沮渠万年为张掖王。
English: On the 29th day of the month, Iku Jiuyong, who had been imprisoned for a long time, was reinstated as the king of Shuo Fang, and Du Duqu was reinstated as the king of Zhangye.

古文：夏四月丁巳，宋人来聘。
现代文：夏四月初五，宋人前来聘问。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth month of the summer, Song people came to ask questions.

古文：秋八月辛亥，诏散骑侍郎张伟使于宋。
现代文：秋八月初一，诏令散骑侍郎张伟出使宋国。
English: On the first day of the autumn and the first day of August, Zhang Wei, the imperial order's cavalry officer, sent an envoy to Song.

古文：九月戊戌，永昌王健薨。
现代文：九月十九日，永昌王健去世。
English: On September 19, Yongchang Wang Jian passed away.

古文：冬十一月庚子，镇南大将军奚眷平酒泉。
现代文：冬十一月二十二日，镇南大将军奚眷打下酒泉。
English: On the 22nd day of November in winter, Zhenan's grand marshal, Zou Xin, went down to the wine spring.

古文：十二月丙子，宋人来聘。
现代文：十二月二十八日，宋人前来聘问。
English: On December 28th, Song Ren came to ask questions.

古文：三年春正月甲申，帝至道坛，亲受符箓，备法驾，旗帜尽青。
现代文：三年春正月初七，皇帝来到道坛，亲自接受符，准备了法驾，旗帜全用黑色。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the third year of spring, the emperor came to the Buddhist altar, personally received the amulets, prepared the dharma chariot, and the flags were all black.

古文：三月壬寅，北平王长孙颓有罪，削爵为侯。
现代文：三月二十五日，北平王长孙颓有罪，降为侯爵。
English: On March 25th, the king of Peiping, Sun Yat-sen, was found guilty and demoted to marquis.

古文：夏四月，酒泉王沮渠无讳走渡流沙，据鄯善。
现代文：夏四月，酒泉王沮渠无讳西走，渡过流沙，占领善阝善。
English: In the summer of April, the King of Jiuquan went to the west, crossed the quicksand, and occupied Zhengyi.

古文：凉武昭王孙李宝据敦煌，遣使内附。
现代文：凉武昭王的孙子李宝占据敦煌，派使者前来归顺。
English: Li Bao, the grandson of King Liangwu Zhao, occupied Dunhuang and sent an envoy to submit.

古文：五月，行幸阴山北。
现代文：五月，皇帝巡行到阴山北。
English: In May, the emperor went on a tour to the north of Yin Mountain.

古文：六月丙戌，杨难当朝于行宫。
现代文：六月十一日，杨难当到行宫朝见皇帝。
English: On June 11, Yang Nandu went to the imperial palace to meet the emperor.

古文：先是，起殿于阴山北，殿成而难当至，因曰广德焉。
现代文：起先，在阴山北建造宫殿，宫殿建成时杨难当来见，因此给这座殿命名为广德殿。
English: At first, a palace was built in the north of Yin Mountain. When the palace was completed, Yang Nantang came to see it, so he named the hall the Guangde Hall.

古文：秋八月甲戌晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：秋八月三十，日食。
English: Autumn, 30th August, solar eclipse.

古文：冬十月己卯，封皇子伏罗为晋王，翰为秦王，谭为燕王，建为楚王，余为吴王。
现代文：冬十月初六，封皇子伏罗为晋王，翰为秦王，谭为燕王，建为楚王，余为吴王。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of winter, the prince Fulao became the king of Jin, Han the king of Qin, Tan the king of Yan, Jian the king of Chu, and Yu the king of Wu.

古文：十二月辛巳，太保、襄城公卢鲁元薨。
现代文：十二月初九，太保、襄城公卢鲁元去世。
English: On the 9th day of the 12th month, Lu Luyuan, Tai Po and Xiangcheng Prince, passed away.

古文：丁酉，车驾还宫，李宝遣使朝贡，以宝为镇西大将军、开府仪同三司、沙州牧、敦煌公。
现代文：二十五日，车驾回京。李宝派使者朝贡，任命李宝为镇西大将军、开府仪同三司、沙州牧、敦煌公。
English: On the 25th, he drove back to Beijing. Li Bao sent an envoy to pay tribute and appointed Li Bao as Zhenxi Grand General, Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji, Shazhou Maki and Dunhuang Gong.

古文：四年春正月庚午，行幸中山。
现代文：四年春正月二十九日，巡行至中山。
English: On the 29th day of the first month of the fourth year of Spring, the parade went to Zhongshan.

古文：二月丙子，次于恆山之阳，诏有司刊石勒铭。
现代文：二月初五，到达恒山之南，诏令有关部门在石头上刻下铭文。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, when he reached the south of Hengshan Mountain, he ordered the relevant departments to carve an inscription on the stone.

古文：是月，克仇池。
现代文：当月，攻克仇池。
English: In the same month, he conquered Kechuike.

古文：三月庚申，车驾还宫。
现代文：三月二十，车驾回宫。
English: On March 6th, he drove back to the palace.

古文：夏四月，武都王杨保宗谋反，诸将禽送京师。
现代文：夏四月，武都王杨保宗谋反，被众将抓住送到京城。
English: In the summer of April, Yang Baozong, the King of Wu, plotted a rebellion and was captured and sent to the capital.

古文：氐、羌复推保宗弟文德为主，围仇池。
现代文：氐、羌人又推举保宗的弟弟当首领，围困仇池。
English: In addition, the Yan and Ya people elected Hozon's younger brother as their leader and besieged Kechi.

古文：六月庚寅，诏复人赀赋三年，其田租岁输如常，牧守不得妄有征发。
现代文：六月二十一日，下诏免除人口赋三年，田租每年照常交纳。各州刺史、太守不得随意征发人员。
English: On June 21st, the following edict exempted the population from the tax for three years, and the land rent was paid annually as usual.

古文：癸巳，大阅于西郊。
现代文：二十四日，在西郊大阅兵。
English: On the 24th, a large military parade was held in the western suburbs.

古文：九月辛丑，行幸漠南。
现代文：九月初三，巡行到达漠南。
English: On the third day of the ninth month, the procession reached the south of the desert.

古文：甲辰，舍辎重，以轻骑袭蠕蠕，分军为四道。
现代文：初六，放下辎重物品，以轻骑兵奇袭蠕蠕，把军队分为四路。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, he put down his heavy baggage and led his light cavalry in a surprise attack on Crum Crum, splitting his army into four parts.

古文：冬十一月甲子，车驾还至朔方。
现代文：冬十一月二十七日，车驾回到朔方郡。
English: In winter, on November 27th, I drove back to Shuofang County.

古文：诏曰： 夫阴阳有往复，四时有代谢，授子任贤，盖古今不易之令典也。
现代文：下诏说 ：阴阳有反复，四时有代谢，传业子孙，任用贤能，这是古今不变的规矩。
English: The following edict says: Yin and yang are repetitive, there is a metabolism at four o'clock, descendants are passed down, and talents are appointed. This is an unchanging rule from ancient times to the present.

古文：其令皇太子副理万机，总统百揆。
现代文：将令皇子辅助处理万机，总领百事。
English: He will order the prince to assist in the handling of all the machines and to be the leader of Pepsi.

古文：诸功臣勤劳日久，皆当以爵归第，随时朝请，飨宴朕前，论道陈谟而己，不宜复烦以剧职。
现代文：各功臣长期辛劳，都应以爵位回府，随时朝见，宴饮朕前，讲论治国之道，进献良谋奇策而已，不应再委以重职。
English: All meritorious persons who have worked hard for a long time should return to the capital with their peerage, see the emperor at any time, have a banquet before me, talk about the way of governing the country, and put forward good strategies. They should no longer be entrusted with important duties.

古文：更举贤俊，以备百官，明为科制，以称朕心。 
现代文：另举贤俊之士，以备百官之选，明定科制，以称我心。 
English: In addition, virtuous and talented people will be selected to prepare for the election of hundreds of officials, and the academic system will be clearly defined to praise my heart.

古文：十二月辛卯，车驾至自北伐。
现代文：十二月二十五日，车驾北伐归来。
English: On December 25th, I drove back from the Northern Expedition.

古文：五年春正月壬寅，皇太子始总百揆。
现代文：五年春正月初六，皇太子开始总管百事。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 5th year of spring, the crown prince began to be in charge of Pepsi.

古文：侍中中书监宜都王穆寿、司徒东都公崔浩、侍中广平公张黎、侍中建兴公古弼辅太子以决庶政。
现代文：侍中中书监宜都王穆寿、司徒东郡公崔浩、侍中广平公张黎、侍中建兴公古弼辅佐太子处置日常事务。
English: Attending the daily affairs of the Crown Prince were the Vice-Chamberlain and Chief Librarian Wang Mu Shou, the Vice-Chamberlain and East County Magistrate Cui Hao, the Vice-Chamberlain and High Court Magistrate Guangping Zhang Li, and the Vice-Chamberlain and Assistant Vice-Chamberlain Jian Xing Gong and Assistant Assistant Vice-Chamberlain Gu Wei.

古文：诸上书者皆称臣，上疏仪与表同。
现代文：所有上书的人都自称臣，上书时使用的仪式和奏表相同。
English: All the people who submitted the letters called themselves vassals, and the ceremony used to submit the letters was the same as the playlist.

古文：戊申，诏自王公已下至于庶人，私养沙门、巫及金银工巧之人在其家者，皆遣诣官曹，限今年二月十五日。
现代文：十二日，下诏说：从王公以下直至平民百姓，如果有私养僧人、巫者以及制作金银器物的工匠在家的，都送到官府，限期至今年二月十五日。
English: On the twelfth day, the next edict said: From the prince down to the common people, if there are private monks, sorcerers and craftsmen who make gold and silverware at home, they will be sent to the government, with a deadline of February 15 this year.

古文：过期不出，巫、沙门身死，主人门诛。
现代文：如果过了期限不交出来，巫者和僧人都处死，藏匿的主人满门抄斩。
English: If the deadline is not met, both the sorcerer and the monk are put to death, and the owner of the hiding place is beheaded.

古文：庚戌，诏自三公已下至于卿士，其子息皆诣太学，其百工伎巧驺卒子息当习其父兄所业，不听私立学校，违者师身死，主人门诛。
现代文：十四日，诏令自三公以下直至卿士，他们的子孙都要送往太学，而那些百工艺人、官府中吏役的子孙应当学习他们父兄的事业，不得私设学校，违犯者老师处死，主人满门抄斩。
English: On the fourteenth day of the month, the emperor issued an edict, ordering that the children and grandchildren of the three princes and below, as well as the nobles and aristocrats, should all be sent to study at the Imperial Academy, and that the children and grandchildren of the hundreds of craftsmen and government officials should study the work of their fathers and brothers, and should not set up private schools. Teachers who violated this edict were to be put to death, and their masters were to be beheaded.

古文：二月辛未，中山王辰等八人以北伐后期，斩于都南。
现代文：二月初六，中山王辰等八人因北伐时晚到，贻误军机而被斩于京都之南。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the year, eight people including Zhongshan Wangchen were beheaded in the south of Kyoto for arriving late for the Northern Expedition and missing the military plane.

古文：癸酉，乐平王丕薨。
现代文：初八，乐平王丕去世。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, King Leping passed away.

古文：庚辰，行幸庐。
现代文：十五日，巡行至庐。
English: On the fifteenth day, the procession arrived in Cangzhou.

古文：三月戊辰，大会于那南。
现代文：三月初二，在那南大会兵。
English: On the second day of March, a large number of soldiers arrived in Nam.

古文：遣使者四辈使西域。
现代文：派使者四批出使西域。
English: He sent four groups of envoys to the western region.

古文：甲辰，车驾还宫。
现代文：初九，车驾回宫。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, I drove back to the palace.

古文：夏四月乙亥，太宰、阳平王杜超为帐下所杀。
现代文：夏四月十一日，太宰、阳平王杜超被帐下人所杀。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of the summer, the Dazai, Yangping Wang Du Chao, was killed by his subordinates.

古文：五月丁酉，行幸阴山北。
现代文：五月初三，巡行至阴山北。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, they marched to the north of Yin Mountain.

古文：六月，西平王吐谷浑慕利延杀其兄子纬代，立纬弟，叱力延等来奔，乞师。
现代文：六月，西平王吐谷浑慕利延杀了他哥哥的儿子纬代，纬代的弟弟叱力延等人来投奔，请求派兵征讨。
English: In June, the king of Xiping, Tugu Humuli Yan, killed his brother's son, Shidai, and Shidai's younger brother, Sheli Yan, and others came to the capital to request that troops be sent to fight.

古文：以叱力延为归义王。
现代文：封叱力延为归义王。
English: He was given the title of Guiyi Wang.

古文：秋八月乙丑，田于河西。
现代文：秋八月初三，在河西田猎。
English: On the third day of autumn in early August, go goose hunting in Kasai.

古文：壬午，诏员外散骑常侍高济使于宋。
现代文：二十日，诏令员外散骑常侍高济出使宋国。
English: On the 20th day of the month, the imperial commanding officer Gaoji sent an envoy to Song.

古文：九月，帝自河西至于马邑，观于崞川。
现代文：九月，皇帝从河西到达马邑，观看了崞川。
English: In September, the emperor arrived in Mayu from the west of the river and watched the dragonflies in the Fen River.

古文：己亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：初七，车驾回宫。
English: On the 14th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：丁未，行幸漠南。
现代文：十五日，巡行到漠南。
English: On the 15th, the parade went to the south of the desert.

古文：冬十月癸未，晋王伏罗大破慕利延。慕利延走奔白兰，其部一万三千内附。
现代文：冬十月二十一日，晋王伏罗大败慕利延，慕利延逃走，投奔白兰，他的部属一万三千户归顺朝廷。
English: On October 21st in winter, Jin King Fulao was defeated by Mu Liyan. Mu Liyan fled and went to Bran. Thirteen thousand of his subordinates surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：十一月，宋人来聘。
现代文：十一月，宋人来聘问。
English: In November, Song people came to ask questions.

古文：十二月丙戌，车驾还宫。
现代文：十二月二十五日，车驾回宫。
English: On December 25th, he drove back to the palace.

古文：六年春正月辛亥，行幸定州，引见长老，存问之。
现代文：六年春正月二十一日，巡行到达定州，召见年长的老人们，慰问了他们。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of spring in the sixth year, the parade reached Dingzhou, summoned the elderly and consoled them.

古文：诏兼员外散骑常侍宋愔使于宋。
现代文：诏令兼员外散骑常侍宋出使宋朝。
English: The Emperor's edict and the dispatch of Song envoys to the Song Dynasty.

古文：二月，遂西幸上党，观连理树于玄氏。
现代文：二月，西巡到达上党，在玄氏那里观看了连理树。
English: In February, the western inspection team arrived at Shangdang and watched Lianlishu from Mr. Xuan.

古文：至吐京，讨徙叛胡，出配郡县。
现代文：到吐京时，讨伐并迁移了原来叛乱的胡人，把他们分开送到各郡县。
English: When he arrived in Tujing, he fought against and relocated the Hu people who had originally rebelled, and sent them separately to various counties.

古文：三月庚申，车驾还宫。
现代文：三月庚申日，车驾回宫。
English: On March 6th, he drove back to the palace.

古文：诏诸有疑狱皆付中书，以经义量决。
现代文：诏令将所有久疑不决的案件都移交中书处置，按经典的古义量刑。
English: The imperial edict transferred all cases that had been pending for a long time to the disposition of the middle book, and sentenced according to the classic ancient sense.

古文：夏六月戊子朔，日有蚀之。壬辰，北巡。
现代文：夏六月初一，日食。初五日，皇帝北巡。
English: On the first day of summer in June, there was a solar eclipse. On the fifth day of the first month, the emperor went on a tour of the north.

古文：秋八月壬辰，散骑常侍成周公万度归以轻骑至鄯善，执其王真达，与诣京师。
现代文：秋八月初六日，散骑常侍成周公万度归用轻骑兵到达善阝善，抓了国王真达，和他一起来到京都。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month of the autumn, the light cavalry led by the horseback cavalry officer, Cheng Zhou, arrived at Zhenxuan, captured King Zhenda, and came to Kyoto with him.

古文：帝大悦，厚待之。
现代文：皇帝十分高兴，很隆重地接待了他们。
English: The emperor was very pleased and gave them a grand reception.

古文：车驾幸阴山北，次于广德宫。
现代文：车驾前往阴山北，住在广德宫。
English: I drove to the north of Yin Mountain and stayed at the Guangde Palace.

古文：诏发天下兵，三取一，各当戒严，以须后命。
现代文：诏令天下各州郡征发三分之一军队，各部注意戒严，等待接受命令。
English: The imperial edict ordered that one-third of the army be conscripted and dispatched to all prefectures and counties in the world. All ministries should pay attention to the martial law and wait for the order.

古文：徙诸种杂人五千余家于北边。
现代文：迁移各种族混杂人五千多家到北面边境。
English: The relocation of more than five thousand mixed-race people to the northern border.

古文：令人北徙畜牧至广漠，以饵蠕蠕。
现代文：又让人北移到广阔的大漠中放牧，以引诱蠕蠕。
English: They also let people move north to graze in the vast desert to lure cormorants.

古文：壬寅，征西大将军、高凉王那等讨吐谷浑慕利延。
现代文：十一日，征西大将军、高凉王那等征讨吐谷浑慕利延。
English: On the 11th day, the general of the Western Expedition, King Gaoliang, and others went to conquer and extend Tumuli.

古文：军到蔓头城，慕利延驱其部落西度流沙，那急追，故西秦王莫璝世子被囊逆军拒战，那击破之。
现代文：军队到达蔓头城时，慕利延驱赶本部落人西渡流沙。高凉王那在后面急追不舍，原西秦王慕瞐的世子被囊回军对战，被那打败了。
English: When the army arrived at the city of Manitou, Muri Yan drove away the tribesman Xidu Lusa. King Gao Liang was in hot pursuit. The son of the former West Qin King Murong was sent back to fight against the army and was defeated by it.

古文：中山公杜丰追度三危，至雪山，禽被囊及慕利延兄子什归、炽盘子成龙，送于京师。
现代文：中山公杜丰追过三危，到达雪山，活捉了被囊和慕利延哥哥的儿子什归、炽盘的儿子成龙，送到京都。
English: Du Feng, the prince of Zhongshan, chased after the Three Dangers and reached the Snow Mountain. He captured alive Shigui, the son of Hechi and Muriyan's brother, and Chenglong, the son of Blazing Plate, and sent them to Kyoto.

古文：慕利延遂西入于阗国。
现代文：慕利延便往西进入了于阗国。
English: Muriyan then moved west into Yunnan Province.

古文：九月，卢水胡盖吴聚众反于杏城。
现代文：九月，卢水胡人盖吴聚众在杏城谋反。
English: In September, Lu Shui Hu and Gui Wu gathered in Ancheng to plot a rebellion.

古文：冬十一月，高凉王那振旅还京师。
现代文：冬十一月，高凉王那带军队回到京都。
English: In the winter of November, King Koryo returned to Kyoto with his army.

古文：庚申，辽东王窦漏头薨。
现代文：初五，辽东王窦漏头死去。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Liaodong Wang Douluo died.

古文：河东蜀薛永宗聚党入汾曲。西通盖吴，受其位号。
现代文：河东蜀薛永宗聚众进入汾曲，和西面的盖吴勾结，接受了他的封号。
English: Shu Xue Yongzong from the east of the river gathered a crowd to enter the Gongqu, and colluded with Gui Wu from the west to accept his seal.

古文：盖吴自号天台王，署百官。
现代文：盖吴自称天台王，设百官。
English: Gai Wu claimed to be the king of the rooftop, with hundreds of officials.

古文：辛未，车驾还宫。
现代文：十六日，皇帝车驾回宫。
English: On the 11th day, he drove back to the palace.

古文：选六州兵勇猛者，使永昌王仁、高凉王那分领为二道，南略淮、泗以北。徙青、徐之人以实河北。
现代文：选拔六州勇猛有力的人当兵，由永昌王仁和高凉王那分领为两路，南取淮河、泗水以北的土地，迁移青州、徐州的民众充实河北一带。
English: He selected brave and powerful people from six provinces to serve as soldiers, led by Yongchang Wangren and Gaoliang Wangna, and divided them into two routes, taking the land north of the Huaihe River and Surabaya to the south, and relocating the people from Qingzhou and Xuzhou to enrich the Hebei area.

古文：癸未，西巡。
现代文：二十八日，皇帝西巡。
English: On the 28th, the emperor went on a tour of the west.

古文：七年春正月戊辰，车驾次东雍，禽薛永宗，斩之。
现代文：七年春正月十四日，车驾到东雍，抓住了薛永宗，把他斩首。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the seventh year of Spring, he drove to Dongyong, caught Xue Yongzong and beheaded him.

古文：其男女无少长皆赴水死。
现代文：薛家人不论男女老少都投水而死。
English: Members of Xue's family, both men and women, young and old, all drowned.

古文：辛未，南幸汾阴。
现代文：十七日，南巡至汾阴。
English: On the 17th, the Southern Inspection Team arrived in Jinyin.

古文：盖吴退走北地。
现代文：盖吴退往北地。
English: Gai Wu retreated to the north.

古文：二月丙戌，幸长安，存问父老。
现代文：二月初二，到达长安，慰问父老们。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, I arrived in Chang'an to offer my condolences to my parents.

古文：丁亥，幸昆明池，遂田于岐山之阳。
现代文：初三，到昆明池，便在岐山南面田猎。
English: On the third day of junior high school, he went to Kunming Pond and went hunting in the fields south of Qishan.

古文：所过诛与盖吴通谋反害守将者。
现代文：凡所经过的地方杀掉那些和盖吴勾结叛乱而且杀害了守将的人。
English: Wherever you go, kill those who collaborated with Gai Wu in the rebellion and killed the general.

古文：三月，诏诸州坑沙门，毁诸佛像，徙长安城内工巧二千家于京师。
现代文：三月，命令各州活埋那些和尚，捣毁佛像，从长安城内迁移二千多家有技艺的工匠到京都。
English: In March, the states were ordered to bury those monks alive, destroy Buddha statues, and relocate more than two thousand skilled craftsmen from the city of Chang'an to Kyoto.

古文：夏四月甲申，车驾至自长安。
现代文：夏四月初一，车驾从长安归来。
English: In the summer, on the first day of April, I drove back from Chang'an.

古文：戊子，毁鄴城五层佛图，于泥像中得玉玺二，其文皆曰： 受命于天，既寿永昌 。
现代文：初五，毁坏邺城的五层佛图，在泥像中得到两枚玉玺，上面都刻有文字 受命于天，既寿永昌 。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, he destroyed the five-layered Buddha statue of Lucheng, and obtained two jade urns from the mud statue, both of which were engraved with the words "commanded by heaven, both live forever."

古文：其一刻其旁曰 魏所受汉传国玺 。
现代文：其中有一枚的旁边刻有 魏所受汉传国玺 字。
English: One of them is engraved with the words "Wei was influenced by the Han Dynasty" next to it.

古文：五月，盖吴复聚杏城，自号秦地王。
现代文：五月，盖吴又聚集在杏城，自称为秦地王。
English: In May, Gaiwu gathered again in Ancheng and called himself the King of Qin.

古文：丙戌，发司、幽、定、冀四州十万人筑畿上塞围，起上谷，西至于河，广袤皆千里。
现代文：六月初四，发司州、幽州、定州、冀州四州共十万人修筑京畿的塞围，起自上谷，西到黄河，土地宽广达千里之远。
English: On the fourth day of early June, a total of 100,000 people from the four prefectures of Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gyeong

古文：六月癸未朔，日有蚀之。秋八月，盖吴为其下人所杀，传首京师。
现代文：六月初一，日食。秋八月，盖吴被他的部下所杀，首级传送京城。
English: On the first day of June, there was a solar eclipse. In the autumn and August, Gai Wu was killed by his subordinates, and his head was sent to the capital.

古文：复略阳公羯兒王爵。
现代文：恢复略阳公羯儿的爵位为王爵。
English: He reinstated the title of Prince Xiaoyang as a peer.

古文：八年春正月癸未，行幸中山。
现代文：八年春正月癸未，巡行到中山。
English: On the last day of the first month of spring in the eighth year, the parade went to Zhongshan.

古文：三月，河西王沮渠牧犍谋反，伏诛。
现代文：三月，河西王沮渠牧犍谋反，被杀。
English: In March, the king of Hexi was killed for plotting a rebellion.

古文：夏五月，车驾还宫。
现代文：夏五月，车驾回宫。
English: Summer in May, driving back to the palace.

古文：六月，西征诸将扶风公处真等八将坐盗没军资，所在虏掠，赃各千万计，并斩之。
现代文：六月，西征的将领扶风公处真等八人犯罪，贪污军用物资，在所到之处掳掠民众，得到的赃物各达千万以上，全部处斩。
English: In June, the generals of the Western Expedition, including Fu Feng, Gong Sheng and eight others, committed crimes, embezzled military supplies, and abducted people wherever they went. The stolen goods they obtained amounted to more than ten million each. They were all executed.

古文：秋八月，乐安王范薨。
现代文：秋八月，乐定王范去世。
English: In autumn and August, Le Ding Wang Fan passed away.

古文：冬十一月，侍中、中书监、宜都王穆寿薨。
现代文：冬十一月，侍中、中书监、宜都王穆寿去世。
English: In the winter of November, the middle-ranking samurai and the chief librarian, King Mu Shou of Yidu, passed away.

古文：十二月，晋王伏罗薨。
现代文：十二月，晋王伏罗去世。
English: In December, Jin King Fulao passed away.

古文：九年春正月，宋人来聘。
现代文：九年春正月，宋人前来聘问。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of the Spring, Song people came to ask questions.

古文：二月癸卯，行幸定州。
现代文：二月初一，巡行至定州。
English: On the first day of February, the parade went to Dingzhou.

古文：山东人饥，诏开仓振之。
现代文：山东一带民间饥荒，下诏开仓赈济。
English: People in the Shandong region are starving, and the next order is to open warehouses to provide relief.

古文：罢塞围作。
现代文：停止修筑塞围。
English: Stop building dams.

古文：遂西幸上党。
现代文：进而巡行至上党。
English: Then the parade of the supremacy of the party.

古文：诏于壶关东北大王山累石为三封，又斩其凤凰山南足以断之。三月，车驾还宫。
现代文：诏令在壶关东北的大王山上堆积起三堆大石头，又在大王山的北面挖掉凤皇山的南足。三月，车驾回宫。
English: The imperial edict piled up three piles of large stones on Daowang Mountain in the northeast of Kuguan, and dug up the south foot of Fenghuang Mountain on the north side of Daowang Mountain. In March, the car drove back to the palace.

古文：夏五月甲戌，以交趾公韩拔为假征西将军、领护西戎校尉、鄯善王，镇鄯善，赋役其人，比之郡县。
现代文：夏五月初四，以交趾公韩拔为代征西将军、领护西戎校尉、鄯善王，镇守鄯善，那里的民众承担的租赋劳役，和一般郡县相同。
English: On the 4th day of the 5th month of the summer, the general of the Western Conquest, the lieutenant of the Western Conquest, the king of the Western Conquest, and the town guard of the Western Conquest, Han Ba, the people of the Western Conquest, undertook the same labor service as the general counties.

古文：六月辛酉，行幸广德宫。
现代文：六月二十一日，行至广德宫。
English: On June 21, he went to the Quang Duc Palace.

古文：丁卯，悦般国遣使求与王师俱讨蠕蠕。
现代文：二十七日，悦般国派使者请求发兵联合攻打蠕蠕。
English: On the 27th, Yuepang sent an envoy to request the dispatch of troops to jointly attack Crum Crum.

古文：帝许之。
现代文：皇帝应许了。
English: Emperor Daowu agreed.

古文：秋八月，诏中外诸军戒严。
现代文：秋八月，诏令中外各军队戒严。
English: In autumn and August, the Emperor issued an edict placing all Chinese and foreign armies under martial law.

古文：九月乙酉，练兵于西郊。
现代文：九月十六日，在西郊练兵。
English: On September 16th, soldiers were training in the western suburbs.

古文：丙戌，幸阴山。
现代文：十七日，前往阴山。
English: On the 17th, he went to Mount Yin.

古文：是月，成周公万度归千里驿上：大破焉耆国，其王鸠尸卑那奔龟兹。
现代文：当月成周公万度归沿着千里驿道向前，大破焉耆国，国王鸠尸卑那逃奔龟兹。
English: In that month, Cheng Zhou Gong Wan Du returned along the thousand-mile road forward, the country was devastated, and the king and the corpse of Bina fled.

古文：冬十月辛丑，恆农王奚斤薨。
现代文：冬十月初三，恒农王奚斤去世。
English: On the 3rd day of the 10th month of winter, Heng Nong Wang Shujin passed away.

古文：癸卯，以婚姻奢靡，丧葬过度，诏有司更为科限。
现代文：初五，因当时举办婚事过于奢侈浪费，而办理丧事也过度铺张，诏令有关方面制定条文加以限制。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, because the marriage was too extravagant and wasteful at that time, and the funeral was too extravagant, the relevant authorities were ordered to formulate provisions to restrict it.

古文：癸亥，大赦。十二月，诏成周公万度归自焉耆西讨龟兹。皇太子朝于行宫。遂从北讨。
现代文：二十五日，诏令成周公万度归从焉耆往西讨伐龟兹。皇太子在行宫朝见皇帝，便跟随皇帝北征。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the emperor ordered Cheng Zhou to return to the west to fight the turtles. The crown prince met the emperor at the palace and followed the emperor to the north.

古文：至受降城，不见蠕蠕，因积粮城内，留守而还。
现代文：到达受降城以后，不见蠕蠕的踪影，便在城内屯积粮食，留下军队守护，然后回军。
English: After reaching the besieged city, there was no sign of Cormorant, so they stockpiled grain in the city, left the army to guard, and then returned to the army.

古文：北平王长孙敦坐事降爵为公。
现代文：北平王长孙敦因事而被降为公爵。
English: The king of Beiping, Chosun Tun, was reduced to a duke because of the incident.

古文：十年春正月戊辰朔，帝在漠南，大飨百寮。
现代文：十年春正月初一，皇帝在漠南宴请百官。
English: On the first day of the first month of the tenth year of spring, the emperor invited hundreds of officials to a banquet in the south of the country.

古文：甲戌，蠕蠕吐贺真惧，远遁。
现代文：初六，蠕蠕国的吐贺真很害怕，便远逃了。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Toga of Creep Creep was really scared and ran away.

古文：三月，蒐于河西。
现代文：三月，在河西打猎。
English: In March, they went hunting in Hexi.

古文：庚寅，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十四日，车驾回宫。
English: On the 24th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：夏四月丙申朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：夏四月丙申，日食。
English: Summer, April, eclipse.

古文：九月，阅武于碛上，遂北伐。
现代文：九月，在河滩上检阅部队，进而北伐。
English: In September, the troops were reviewed on the beach, and then the Northern Expedition began.

古文：冬十月庚子，皇太子及群官奉迎于行宫。
现代文：冬十月初八，皇太子和群臣在行宫里迎候皇帝。
English: On the eighth day of the tenth month of winter, the crown prince and his courtiers were waiting for the emperor in the imperial palace.

古文：十二月戊申，车驾至自北伐。
现代文：十二月十六日，车驾北伐归来。
English: On December 16th, I drove back from the Northern Expedition.

古文：己酉，以平昌公托真为中山王。
现代文：十七日，封平昌公托真为中山王。
English: On the 17th, PyeongChang Tong Tozhen was crowned the King of Zhongshan.

古文：十一年春正月乙丑，行幸洛阳。所过郡国，皆亲对高年，存恤孤寡。
现代文：十一年春正月初四，巡行到达洛阳，所经过的郡国，皇帝都亲自看望老年人，慰问孤寡人。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the eleventh year of the Spring, the parade reached Luoyang. The emperor personally visited the elderly and consoled the lonely in all the counties he passed through.

古文：二月甲午，大蒐于梁山。
现代文：二月初三，在梁川大举围猎。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, a large-scale hunting was carried out in Liangchuan.

古文：皇子真薨。
现代文：皇子真去世。
English: Prince Makoto passed away.

古文：是月，大修宫室，皇太子居于北宫。
现代文：当月，大举修建宫室，让皇太子住在北宫。
English: That month, the palace was extensively rebuilt, and the crown prince was allowed to live in the North Palace.

古文：车驾遂征悬瓠。
现代文：车驾便征伐悬瓠。
English: After driving the car, he went to collect the hanging baskets.

古文：夏四月癸卯，车驾还宫，赐从者及留台郎吏已上生口各有差。
现代文：夏四月十三日，车驾回宫。赏赐随从的和留守的郎官以上人员牲口，数量不等。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of the summer, he drove back to the palace. He rewarded the attendants and the attendants who stayed behind with livestock, the number of which varied.

古文：六月己亥，诛司徒崔浩。
现代文：六月初十，杀了司徒崔浩。
English: On the 10th day of the 6th month, he killed Sgt. Choi Ho.

古文：辛丑，北巡阴山。
现代文：十二日，北行到阴山。
English: On the 12th, the northbound train arrived at Yinshan.

古文：秋七月，宋将王玄谟攻滑台。
现代文：秋七月，宋将王玄谟攻打滑台。
English: In autumn and July, Song ordered Wang Xuanmu to attack the slide.

古文：八月癸亥，田于河田。
现代文：八月初六，在河田打猎。
English: On the 6th of August, I went hunting in Kawata.

古文：癸未，练兵于西郊。
现代文：二十六日，在西郊练兵。
English: On the 26th, soldiers were training in the western suburbs.

古文：九月辛卯，车驾南伐。
现代文：九月初四，车驾南征。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month, the Southern Expedition began.

古文：癸巳，皇太子北伐，屯于漠南。
现代文：初六，皇太子北伐，屯兵漠南。
English: In the sixth year of his junior high school, the crown prince went to the north, and the soldiers went to the south.

古文：吴王余留守京都。
现代文：吴王余留守京城。
English: Wu Wang Yu remained in Kyoto.

古文：庚子，曲赦定、冀、相三州死罪已下。
现代文：十三日，特赦定州、冀州、相州三州死罪以下囚犯。
English: On the 13th, Dingzhou, Jizhou and Xiangzhou pardoned prisoners with death penalty or less.

古文：冬十月乙丑，车驾济河，玄谟弃军而走，乃命诸将分道并进。
现代文：冬十月初九，车驾渡过黄河，王玄谟丢下军队逃走，皇帝命令各将领分几路齐头并进。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of the winter, driving across the Yellow River, Wang Xuanmu left the army and fled. The emperor ordered the generals to march together in several directions.

古文：车驾自中道。十一月辛卯，至邹山。
现代文：皇帝从中路前进，十一月初五，到达邹山。
English: The emperor advanced from the middle of the road and reached Shaoshan on the fifth day of the first month of November.

古文：使使者以太牢祀孔子。
现代文：派使者以太牢的礼节祭祀孔子。
English: He sent an emissary to hold a ritual to worship Confucius.

古文：是月，頞盾国献师子一。
现代文：当月，安页盾国进献一头狮子。
English: In the same month, Anzhadun Province presented a lion.

古文：十二月丁卯，车驾至淮。诏刈雚苇作筏数万而济，淮南皆降。
现代文：十二月十二日，车驾到达淮河，下令割芒苇制成筏子几万只渡淮河，淮南全部归降。
English: On December 12th, the driver arrived at the Huaihe River and ordered that tens of thousands of mandarin ducks be made into rafts to cross the Huaihe River, and all of Huainan was surrendered.

古文：癸未，车驾临江，起行宫于瓜步山。
现代文：二十八日，皇帝到达长江边，在瓜步山建造行宫。
English: On the 28th, the emperor arrived at the edge of the Yangtze River and built the imperial palace in Guabushan.

古文：诸军同日皆临江，所过城邑，莫不望尘奔溃，其降附者不可胜数。
现代文：各军都在同一天到达江北，所经过的城池，人们无不望尘奔逃，前来投降的难以计算数量。
English: All the armies arrived at the north of the river on the same day. The cities they passed through, people were desperate to flee, and it was difficult to count the number of people who came to surrender.

古文：甲申，宋文帝使献百牢，贡其方物，又请进女于皇孙，以求和好。
现代文：二十九日，宋文帝派人进献各种食品和进贡地方特产，又请求将女儿嫁给皇孙为妻，请求相互和好。
English: On the 29th, Emperor Songwen sent people to offer various foods and tribute local special products, and also requested that his daughter marry the grandson as his wife, and requested mutual reconciliation.

古文：帝以师婚非礼，许和而不许婚，使散骑侍郎夏侯野报之。
现代文：皇帝认为以军队进逼而成婚姻是不合礼节的，同意两国和好而不答应婚姻，派散骑侍郎夏侯野去答复宋人。
English: The emperor thought it was not proper to force a marriage by using the army. He agreed to the reconciliation of the two countries but did not agree to the marriage. He sent his equerry, Xia Houye, to reply to the Song people.

古文：帝诏皇孙为书，致马通问焉。
现代文：皇帝又令皇孙写书信，送去马匹并表示问候。
English: The emperor also ordered the grandson to write a letter, send horses and express his greetings.

古文：正平元年春正月丙戌朔，大会群臣于江上，文武受爵者二百余人。
现代文：正平元年春正月初一，在江上大宴群臣，文武官员被封爵的有二百多人。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Zhengping, there was a grand banquet on the river for a group of ministers, and more than two hundred civil and military officials were knighted.

古文：丁亥，车驾北旋。
现代文：初二，车驾北回。
English: On the second day of the new year, drive north.

古文：二月癸未，次于鲁口。
现代文：二月二十九日，到达鲁口。
English: On February 29, they arrived in Lukou.

古文：皇太子朝于行宫。
现代文：皇太子到行宫朝见。
English: The Crown Prince visits the Imperial Palace in the morning.

古文：三月己亥，车驾至自南伐，饮至策勋，告于宗庙，以降人五万余家分置近畿，赐留台文武所获军资生口各有差。
现代文：三月十五日，皇帝南征归来，在宗庙大宴群臣，论功行赏，告祭祖先于宗庙，把投降的五万多家分别安置到京畿附近的地方。赏赐给留守京城的文武官员们缴获的军用物资和牲口多少不等。
English: On March 15, when the emperor returned from the Southern Expedition, he held a grand banquet for his retainers at the ancestral temple to reward them for their meritorious deeds and to offer sacrifices to their ancestors at the ancestral temple. More than 50,000 people who had surrendered were resettled to places near Gyeonggi. The amount of military supplies and livestock captured varied in the rewards given to the civil and military officials who remained in the capital.

古文：夏五月壬寅，大赦。
现代文：夏五月十九日，大赦天下。
English: On the 19th day of the fifth month of the summer, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：六月壬戌，改元。
现代文：六月初九，改年号。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month, the year will be changed.

古文：车师国王遣子入侍。
现代文：车师国王派儿子入侍。
English: The coachman king sent his son to become a samurai.

古文：诏以刑纲太密，犯者更众，命有司其案律令，务求厥中，自余有不便于人者，依比增损。
现代文：下诏说刑罚的律令过多，犯罪的人更多，命令有关部门依照法律办案时，务必做到量刑适中，其中有不便于使用的，依照上述要求增删。
English: The next edict said that there are too many penal decrees and more people committing crimes, and ordered the relevant departments to make sure that the sentencing is appropriate when handling cases in accordance with the law. Some of them are inconvenient to use, and should be added or deleted in accordance with the above requirements.

古文：诏太子少傅游雅、中书侍郎胡方回等改定律制。
现代文：诏令太子太少傅游雅、中书侍郎胡方回等人改定法律。
English: The imperial edict ordered Prince Taishang Fu Youya, the secretary of the Central Committee, and others to revise the law.

古文：略阳王羯兒、高凉王那有罪赐死。
现代文：略阳王羯儿、高凉王那有罪而被赐死。
English: Liangyang Wang Xi'er and Gao Liang Wang were sentenced to death for their crimes.

古文：戊辰，皇太子薨。
现代文：十五日，皇太子去世。
English: On the 15th, the Crown Prince passed away.

古文：壬申，葬景穆太子于金陵。秋七月丁亥，行幸阴山。
现代文：十九日，在金陵安葬了景穆太子。秋七月二十五日，巡行至阴山。
English: On the 19th, Prince Jingmu was buried in Jinling. On the 25th of autumn, the procession went to Yinshan.

古文：省诸曹吏员三分之一。
现代文：让各部减少官员三分之一。
English: Let the ministries reduce the number of officials by one third.

古文：九月癸巳，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月十二日，车驾回宫。
English: On September 12th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：冬十月庚申，行幸阴山。
现代文：冬十月初九，巡行至阴山。
English: In winter, on the 9th day of the 10th month, the parade goes to the gloomy mountain.

古文：宋人来聘。
现代文：宋人来聘问。
English: Song people come to ask questions.

古文：诏殿中将军郎法祐使于宋。
现代文：诏令殿中将军郎法出使宋国。
English: Emperor Taizong dispatched General Lang Fa to Song.

古文：己巳，司空、上党王长孙道生薨。
现代文：十八日，司空、上党王长孙道生去世。
English: On the 18th, Sun Dosheng, Secretary of the Kuomintang and the leader of the Upper Party, passed away.

古文：十二月丁丑，车驾还宫。
现代文：十二月二十七日，车驾回宫。
English: On December 27th, he drove back to the palace.

古文：封皇孙浚为高阳王，寻以皇孙世嫡，不宜在籓，乃止。
现代文：封皇孙为高阳王，不久又因为他是世嫡的皇孙，不适合封为藩王，便去了封号。
English: Emperor Gaoyang's grandson was named Emperor Gaoyang, but because he was a direct descendant of Emperor Gaoyang, he was not suitable to be named the king of the domain, so the name was changed.

古文：改封秦王翰为东平王，燕王谭为临淮王，楚王建为广阳王，吴王余为南安王。
现代文：改封秦王翰为东平王，燕王谭为临淮王，楚王建为广阳王，吴王余为南安王。
English: Qin Wanghan was renamed Dongping King, Yan Wang Tan became Linhuai King, Chu King Jian became Guangyang King, and Wu King Yu became Nan'an King.

古文：二年春正月庚辰朔，南来降人五千余家于中山谋叛，州军讨平之。
现代文：二年春正月初一，从南方来归降的五千多家在中山策谋叛乱，被州中的部队镇压下去。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of spring, more than five thousand returnees from the south plotted a rebellion in Zhongshan and were suppressed by the troops in the state.

古文：冀州刺史、张掖王沮渠万年与降人通谋，赐死。
现代文：冀州刺史、张掖王沮渠万年因和投降过来的人合谋叛乱，被赐死。
English: Jizhou's assassin, Zhang Xuan Wang Dequan, was sentenced to death for plotting a rebellion with those who surrendered.

古文：三月甲寅，中常侍宗爱构逆，帝崩于永安宫，时年四十五。
现代文：三月甲寅日，中常侍宗爱在宫中作乱，皇帝在永安宫驾崩，享年四十五岁。
English: On March 1st, the second-in-command, Zong Ai, caused a disturbance in the palace, and the emperor died in Yongan Palace at the age of forty-five.

古文：秘不发丧。
现代文：宫中先秘不发布皇帝去世的消息。
English: There will be no obituary.

古文：爱又矫皇后令，杀东平王翰，迎南安王余立。大赦，改元为永平。
现代文：宗爱又假传皇后的命令，杀东平王拓跋翰，迎南安王余为皇帝，大赦天下，改年号为永平。
English: Zong Ai also falsely transmitted the queen's order to kill Dongping King Tuoba Han, to welcome Nan'an King Yu as emperor, to grant amnesty to the world, and to change the year name to Yongping.

古文：尊谥曰太武皇帝，葬于云中金陵，庙号世祖。
现代文：尊谥号为 太武皇帝 ，埋葬在金陵，庙号为世祖。
English: His posthumous name was Emperor Taibu, and he was buried in Jinling. His temple name was Shizu.

古文：帝生不逮密太后，及有所识，言则悲恸，哀感傍人，明元闻而嘉叹。
现代文：皇帝生下来后就没有见到密太后，当他开始懂事以后，一提起来就十分悲伤，这种哀伤的感情使旁人都为之动心，明元帝知道以后很赞赏并感叹不已。
English: After the emperor was born, he did not see the Empress Dowager Mitya. When he began to understand, he was very sad when he mentioned it. This sad feeling moved others. Emperor Mingyuan appreciated it very much and sighed.

古文：及明元不豫，衣不释带。
现代文：明元帝有病时，太武帝衣带不解一直在身旁照料。
English: When Emperor Mingyuan was ill, Emperor Taibu always took care of him.

古文：性清俭率素，服御饮膳，取给而已，不好珍丽，食不二味。
现代文：他喜爱清静俭朴，衣服饰品和日常用具、饮食等，够用而已，不喜欢珍美艳丽的东西。
English: He likes clean, quiet and frugal, clothes and accessories and daily utensils, food, etc. are just enough, and he does not like rare and beautiful things.

古文：所幸昭仪、贵人，衣无兼彩。
现代文：吃饭没有两种以上品味的菜肴，所宠爱的昭仪、贵人，衣服没有两种以上的色彩。
English: There are no dishes with more than two tastes at meals, no favorite Zhaoyi and nobles, and no clothes with more than two colors.

古文：群臣白帝，更峻京邑城隍以从《周易》设险之义，又陈萧何壮丽之说。帝曰： 古人有言，在德不在险。
现代文：众官上奏皇帝，请他按照《周易》中所说的高险的意图而加高城墙和深挖护城河，并且引用汉代萧何建宫殿使京城壮丽的故事。太武帝说： 古人曾经说过，治国在德不在险。
English: The officials appealed to the emperor, asking him to increase the height of the city wall and dig a moat in accordance with the high-risk intention stated in "Zhou Yi," and citing the story of Xiao He building a palace in the Han Dynasty to make the capital magnificent.

古文：屈丐蒸土筑城，而朕灭之，岂在城也？
现代文：屈丐蒸土修筑城池，使之更加坚固，也被我灭掉了，难道在乎城池是否坚固险要吗？
English: I also eliminated the need to build a castle to make it stronger. Does it really matter whether the castle is strong or not?

古文：今天下未平，方须人力，土功之事，朕所未为。
现代文：如今天下未平，正需要大量人力，大兴土木的做法，不是我所要做的。
English: As the current situation is not stable, a large amount of manpower is needed, and the practice of large-scale civil engineering is not what I want to do.

古文：萧何之对，非雅言也。 
现代文：萧何对汉高祖所说的话，也不是美言啊！ 
English: What Xiao He said to Han Gao Zu is not a kind word!

古文：每以财者军国之本，无所轻费。
现代文：他常说财富是军队和国家的根本，不能轻易消耗浪费。
English: He often said that wealth is the foundation of the army and the country, and cannot be easily consumed and wasted.

古文：至于赏赐，皆是勋绩之家，亲戚爱宠，未尝横有所及。
现代文：至于他所赏赐的，都是建立功勋和政绩显著的人，亲戚和受他宠爱的人，没有人能够因此得到封赏。
English: As for his rewards, they are for those who have established merit and distinguished themselves in politics, relatives and those who are favored by him, and no one can be rewarded for this.

古文：临敌，常与士卒同在矢石间。左右死伤者相继，而帝神色自若。是以人思效命，所向无前。
现代文：每当和敌军对阵时，他常常和士卒们一起站在飞石乱箭四射的危险地方，左右人一个个被射死或受伤，太武帝依然神色自若，所以人人都愿意为他出力，所向无敌。
English: Whenever he faced off against the enemy, he often stood with his soldiers in a dangerous place where flying rocks and arrows were scattered. People on both sides were shot dead or injured one by one. Emperor Taibu still looked confident, so everyone was willing to do their best for him, and he was invincible.

古文：命将出师，指授节度，从命者无不制胜，违爽者率多败失。
现代文：他任命将领出兵时，都告诉他们指挥作战的方法，听从命令的人无不克敌制胜，而违反命令的则大多遭受失败。
English: When he appointed generals to lead the troops, they all told them how to command the war, and those who obeyed the orders were invariably victorious, while those who violated the orders were mostly defeated.

古文：性又知人。拔士于卒伍之中，唯其才效所长。
现代文：他知人善任，经常在普通士兵中选拔将领，并根据他们的才能发挥其特长，不管原出身如何。
English: He knew how to get the best out of people, often selecting generals from the ranks of ordinary soldiers and using their talents to the best of their ability, regardless of their background.

古文：不论本末，兼甚严断，明于刑赏。功者赏不遗贱，罪者刑不避亲，虽宠爱之，终不亏法。
现代文：他兼听各种意见而又勇于决断，刑赏分明，立功而受赏时不漏掉卑贱者，因罪而受刑时不偏袒亲近者，虽然是平时深受宠爱的人，也决不破坏法律。
English: He both listens to various opinions and has the courage to make decisions. The punishment and reward are clear. When he is awarded for meritorious service, he does not omit the lowly. When he is punished for crime, he does not favor those who are close to him. Although he is a person who is deeply loved in peacetime, he will never break the law.

古文：常曰： 法者，朕与天下共之，何敢轻也。 
现代文：他常说： 法律，是我和天下人所共同的准则，怎敢轻易改变？ 
English: He often said: The law is the common standard for me and all the people in the world, how dare we change it so easily?

古文：故大臣犯法，无所宽假。
现代文：所以大臣们违反法令，也决不宽恕。
English: Therefore, ministers who violate the law will not be pardoned.

古文：雅长听察，瞬息之间，下无以措其奸隐。
现代文：太武帝善于倾听和观察，瞬息之间，部下难以设法隐瞒真情。
English: Emperor Taowu was good at listening and observing, and in the blink of an eye, his subordinates could hardly manage to conceal the truth.

古文：然果于诛戮，后多悔之。
现代文：但他杀人很果断，过后又常感到后悔。
English: But he was determined to kill, and often regretted it later.

古文：司徒崔浩死后，帝北伐，时宣城公李孝伯疾笃，传者以为卒，帝闻而悼之，谓左右曰： 李宣城可惜。 
现代文：司徒崔浩被处死后，皇帝北伐时，正好宣城的李孝伯病重，外面传说他已经死去，皇帝知道后十分痛惜，对身旁人说： 李宣城真是可惜啊！ 
English: After the death of Siu Choi Ho, when the emperor was on the Northern Expedition, Li Xiao Bo, who happened to be from Xuancheng, was seriously ill. It was rumored outside that he had died. The emperor was very sorry when he found out, and said to those around him: What a pity about Xuancheng!

古文：又曰： 朕向失言，崔司徒可惜，李宣城可哀。 
现代文：又说 ：我刚才的话说错了，崔司徒真可惜，李宣城可是令人悲哀啊！ 
English: He also said, "What I just said was wrong. It's a pity about Trai Szu, but Li Xuancheng is sad!"

古文：褒贬雅意，皆此类也。
现代文：他对人褒贬很慎重，就像这种情况。
English: He's very careful about praising and criticizing people, like this.

