古文：凡出言，信为先。
现代文：开口说话，首先要讲究信用，遵守承诺。
English: When you open your mouth to speak, you must first be trustworthy and keep your promises.

古文：诈与妄，奚可焉？话说多，不如少。惟其是，勿佞巧。
现代文：欺骗或花言巧语之类的伎俩，绝不能去做。话说得多不如说的少，应实实在在，不要讲些不合实际的花言巧语。
English: We must not resort to tricks such as deception or rhetoric. It is better to say more than to say less. We should be realistic and not talk about unrealistic rhetoric.

古文：奸巧语，秽污词。市井气，切戒之。
现代文：刻薄的言语，下流肮脏的话，以及街头无赖粗俗的口气，都要切实戒除掉。
English: Mean words, foul and filthy language, and the coarse speech of street urchins should be strictly avoided.

古文：见未真，勿轻言。知未的，勿轻传。
现代文：还未了解真相之前，不轻易发表意见；对于事情了解的不够清楚，不任意传播。
English: It is not easy to express opinions before knowing the truth; it is not clear enough to understand the matter, and it is not spread arbitrarily.

古文：事非宜，勿轻诺。苟轻诺，进退错。
现代文：不合义理的事，不要轻易答应；如果轻易答应，就会使自己进退两难。
English: Don't easily agree to things that are unreasonable; if you easily agree, you will put yourself in a dilemma.

古文：凡道字，重且舒。勿急疾，勿模糊。
现代文：说话要口齿清晰，语速舒缓，不要说得太快，或者说得字句模糊不清。
English: Speak clearly, at a slow pace, and don't speak too fast or slur your words.

古文：彼说长，此说短。不关己，莫闲管。
现代文：遇到别人搬弄是非，要用智慧判断，不要介入，与己无关就不必多管。
English: If you encounter others playing games, you should use wisdom to judge, do not intervene, and do not have to be involved in matters unrelated to yourself.

古文：见人善，即思齐。纵去远，以渐跻。
现代文：看见他人的优点善行，就立刻向他看齐，虽然目前还差得很远，只要肯努力就能渐渐赶上。
English: When you see the merits and good deeds of others, you will immediately catch up with them. Although you are still far behind, you can gradually catch up if you are willing to work hard.

古文：见人恶，即内省。
现代文：看见他人的缺点或不良行为，心里先反省自己。
English: When you see the faults or bad behavior of others, you should first reflect on yourself.

古文：有则改，无加警。
现代文：有则改之，如果没有就警醒不犯同样的过错。
English: On the other hand, if not, be careful not to make the same mistake.

古文：唯德学，唯才艺。不如人，当自砺。
现代文：人应当重视自己的品德、学问和才能技艺的培养，如果感觉到有不如人的地方，应当自我惕励奋发图强。
English: People should attach importance to the cultivation of their own character, learning and talent skills. If they feel that they are not as good as others, they should be self-disciplined, motivated and strong.

古文：若衣服，若饮食。不如人，勿生戚。
现代文：至于外表穿著，或者饮食不如他人，则不必放在心上，更没有必要忧虑自卑。
English: As far as appearance, dress, or diet is not as good as others, you do not have to worry about it, and there is no need to worry about low self-esteem.

古文：闻过怒，闻誉乐。损友来，益友却。闻誉恐，闻过欣。
现代文：如果一个人听到别人说自己的过错就生气，听到别人称赞自己就欢喜，那么狐朋狗友就会来接近你，真正的良朋益友反而逐渐远离你。
English: If a person is angry when he hears others say that he is at fault, and rejoices when he hears others praise him, then the fox and dog friends will come close to you, but the true friends will gradually move away from you.

古文：直谅士，渐相亲。
现代文：听见别人对自己的恭维话应该感到不安；听见别人对自己的指责，不但不生气，还能欢喜接受，那么正直诚信的人，就会高兴和你接近。
English: You should feel uneasy when you hear others compliment you; when you hear others criticize you, you should not be angry, but you should be happy to accept it. Then people who are honest and trustworthy will be happy to get close to you.

古文：无心非，名为错。有心非，名为恶。
现代文：无心之过称为错，若是明知故犯，有意犯错便是罪恶。
English: An unintentional fault is called a mistake, but if it is committed knowingly, it is a sin to make a mistake intentionally.

古文：过能改，归于无。
现代文：知错能改，错误就弥补了。
English: Knowledge and mistakes can be changed, and mistakes can be made up for.

古文：倘掩饰，增一辜。
现代文：如果不但不认错，还要去掩饰，那就是错上加错了。
English: If you not only don't admit your mistake, but also try to cover it up, that's adding error to error.

