古文：◎泰定帝一泰定皇帝，讳也孙铁木儿，显宗甘麻剌之长子，裕宗之嫡孙也。
现代文：泰定皇帝，名叫也孙铁木儿，是显宗甘麻剌的长子，裕宗的嫡孙。
English: Emperor Taiding, whose name was Yasun Temur, was the eldest son of Emperor Gensong and the legitimate grandson of Emperor Yuzong.

古文：初，世祖以第四子那木罕为北安王，镇北边。
现代文：当初，世祖任命第四子那木罕为北安王，镇守北方边地。
English: At first, the ancestor appointed his fourth son, Namikhan, to be the king of Northern An, to guard the northern borderland.

古文：北安王薨，显宗以长孙封晋王代之，统领太祖四大斡耳朵及军马、达达国土。
现代文：北安王逝世后，显宗甘麻剌凭皇长孙身份册封为晋王以取代其位置，统领太祖四大斡耳朵及军马、达达国王。
English: After the death of King Bei'an, Emperor Xuanzong's eldest grandson, Emperor Ganma, was appointed as King Jin to take his place, leading the Four Great Ancestors and the war horse, King Dada.

古文：至元十三年十月二十九日，帝生于晋邸。
现代文：至元十三年十月二十九日，帝出生于晋王府邸。
English: The emperor was born at the residence of King Jin on October 29th, 1331.

古文：大德六年，晋王薨，帝袭封，是为嗣晋王，仍镇北边。成宗、武宗、仁宗之立，咸与翊戴之谋，有盟书焉。
现代文：大德六年，晋王逝世，帝承袭其爵位，成为嗣晋王，仍旧镇守北方边地，成宗、武宗、仁宗之立，都参与拥立的计划，有盟书在。
English: Dade six years, Jin Wang died, the emperor inherited his title and became the successor of Jin Wang, still guarding the northern borderlands, Chengzong, Wuzong, and Nizong, all participated in the plan to support the establishment, and there was a written agreement.

古文：王府内史倒剌沙得幸于帝，常侦伺朝廷事机，以其子哈散事丞相拜住，且入宿卫。
现代文：王府内史倒剌沙得到晋王的宠幸，常常刺探朝廷机密事务，派其子哈散侍奉丞相拜住，并成为宿卫人员。
English: In the history of the royal court, Lhasa was favored by the king of Jin. He often spied on the confidential affairs of the imperial court, sent his son Hasan to serve the prime minister, and became a lifeguard.

古文：久之，哈散归，言御史大夫铁失与拜住意相忤，欲倾害之。
现代文：久后，哈散返回，说御史大夫铁失与拜住意见相抵触，且有陷害之意。
English: After a long time, Hasan returned, saying that the loss of Dr. Mishi was contrary to the opinion of worshiping, and that it was a trap.

古文：至治三年三月，宣徽使探忒来王邸，为倒剌沙言： 主上将不容于晋王，汝盍思之。 
现代文：至治三年三月，宣徽使探忒前来王邸，对倒剌沙说 ：皇上将容不得晋王，你何不考虑考虑。 
English: In March of the third year of his reign, Emperor Xuanzong sent a scout to the royal residence, and he said to the unlucky Basha, "The emperor will not tolerate Jinwang, why don't you consider it."

古文：于是倒剌沙与探忒深相要结。
现代文：于是倒剌沙就与探忒深相结纳。
English: As a result, it was decided to combine the exploration of the depths with the exploration of the sands.

古文：八月二日，晋王猎于秃剌之地，铁失密遣斡罗思来告曰： 我与哈散、也先铁木儿、失秃儿谋已定，事成，推立王为皇帝。 
现代文：八月初二日，晋王行猎于秃剌之地，铁失密派斡罗思来告说： 我与哈散、也先铁木儿、失秃儿计谋已定，事成之后，推立晋王为皇帝。 
English: On the second day of the first month of August, when the king of Jin went hunting in the land of vultures, Tie Shouming sent his emissary Luo Si to announce: "I and Hasan, as well as Tie Mu'er and Shou Jiao'er, have decided on a plan. After this is accomplished, I will install the king of Jin as emperor."

古文：又命斡罗思以其事告倒剌沙，且言： 汝与马速忽知之，勿令旭迈杰得闻也。 
现代文：又命斡罗思将其事告知倒剌沙，并且说： 你和马速忽可知其事，但不得使旭迈杰得知此事。 
English: He also ordered Zhao Luo Si to report the matter to Qibao Sha, and said: You and Ma Zuo can know the matter, but you must not let Xu Meijie know the matter.

古文：于是王命囚斡罗思，遣别烈迷失等赴上都，以逆谋告，未至。
现代文：在这时晋王下令逮住斡罗思，派遣别烈迷失等人前往上都，以逆谋上告。
English: At this time, the king of Jin ordered the arrest of Yulong Luo Si and dispatched Bei Lie lost and others to Shangdu to appeal with a counter-plan.

古文：癸亥，英宗南还，驻跸南坡。
现代文：还没到上都，初四那天，英宗南还，驻扎于南坡。
English: Before arriving in Shangdu, on the fourth day of the first semester, Ying Zong Nanzhong was stationed in Nanpo.

古文：是夕，铁失等矫杀拜住，英宗遂遇弑于幄殿。
现代文：晚上，铁失等人矫旨杀害拜住，英宗于是遇害于幄殿。
English: In the evening, Tie Lu and others killed Bai Zhi, and Ying Zong was killed in the hall.

古文：乙未，大理护子罗蛮为寇。以枢密副使阿散为御史中丞，内史善僧为中书左丞。丁酉，以完泽知枢密院事，秃满同佥枢密院事。
现代文：当天任命知枢密院事淇阳王也先铁木儿为中书右丞相，诸王月鲁铁木儿袭封安西王。初五，任命内史倒剌沙为中书平章政事，乃马台为中书右丞，铁失知枢密院事，秃满同佥枢密院事。
English: On the same day, Wang Jiyang, the secretary of the Privy Council, also appointed Tie Mu'er as the secretary of the Privy Council of the People's Republic of China, and Zhu Wang Lu, the secretary of the Privy Council of the People's Republic of China, appointed Anxi Wang as the secretary of the Privy Council of the People's Republic of China. On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he appointed Nai Shi, the secretary of the Privy Council of the People's Republic of China, as the secretary of the Privy Council of the People's Republic of China, Ping Zhang, the secretary of the Privy Council of the People's

古文：戊戌，以撒的迷失知枢密院事，章台同知枢密院事。
现代文：初九，任命撒的迷失知枢密院事，章台同知枢密院事。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the Lost and Found Privy Councillors were appointed, and the Privy Councillors of Taiwan and Tongji were appointed.

古文：己亥，敕谕百司： 凡铨授官，遵世祖旧制，惟枢密院、御史台、宣政院、宣徽院得自奏闻，余悉由中书。 
现代文：初十，敕谕百司说： 凡选授官职，须遵太祖旧制，仅枢密院、御史台、宣政院、宣徽院可以自行奏闻，其余部门悉经中书省。 
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the oracle Baishi said: All the selection and awarding of official positions must follow the old system. Only the Privy Council, the Imperial Historian's Office, the Xuan Zheng Academy, and the Xuan Hui Academy can report on their own, and the rest of the departments must go through the Central Book Ministry.

古文：辛丑，以马某沙知枢密院事，失秃儿为大司农。
现代文：十二日，任命马某沙知枢密院事，失秃儿为大司农。
English: On the 12th, Ma was appointed as the Privy Councillor of Shachi, and Gaoler was appointed as the Chief Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：召诸王官属流徙远地及还元籍者二十四人还京师。
现代文：征召诸王官属流徙远地及归还原籍者二十四人返回京师。
English: Twenty-four members of the royal families who had migrated to distant lands and returned to their hometowns were conscripted to return to the capital.

古文：是岁，大宁蒙古大千户部风雪毙畜牧，赈米十五万石。
现代文：这一年，大宁路蒙古大千户部遭风雪伤害畜牧，赈济粮食十五万石。
English: This year, the 1,000 households in Mongolia's Danying Road suffered damage to their livestock due to wind and snow, resulting in the loss of 150,000 kilos of grain.

古文：南康、漳州二路水，淮安、扬州属县饥，赈之。
现代文：南安、漳州二路水灾，淮安、扬州二路属县饥荒，予以赈济。
English: The floods in Nan'an and Zhangzhou 2nd Road, and the famine in Huai'an and Yangzhou 2nd Road belong to counties, will be alleviated.

古文：冬十月癸亥，修佛事于大明殿。
现代文：冬十月初五，做佛事活动于大明殿。
English: In winter, on the fifth day of the first month of October, Buddhist activities are held in the Daming Hall.

古文：甲子，遣使至大都，以即位告天地、宗庙、社稷，诛逆贼也先铁木儿、完者、锁南、秃满等于行在所。
现代文：初六，派遣使者到大都，将即位之事告祭天地、宗庙、社稷之神。诛杀逆贼也先铁木儿、完者、锁南、秃满等人于行在处所。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, an envoy was sent to the capital to announce the enthronement to the gods of heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the shrine. Tiemu Er, Ganja, Zhonan, and Bald Man were the first to go to the place to kill the traitors.

古文：以旭迈杰为中书右丞相，陕西行中书左丞相秃忽鲁、通政院使纽泽并为御史大夫，速速为御史中丞。
现代文：任命旭迈杰为中书右丞相，陕西行中书省左丞相秃忽鲁、通政院使纽泽并为御史大夫，速速为御史中丞。
English: He appointed Xu Meijie as the Vice-Minister of the Right of the Chinese Academy of Letters, the Vice-Minister of the Left of the Chinese Academy of Letters in Shaanxi Province, and the Vice-Minister of the Left of the Chinese Academy of Letters in Shaanxi Province, the Vice-Minister of the Left of the Chinese Academy of Letters in Shaanxi Province, the Vice-Minister of the Left of the Chinese Academy of Letters in Shaanxi Province, the Vice-Minister of the Left of the Chinese Academy of Letters in Shaanxi Province, and the Vice-Minister of the Chinese Academy of Letters in Shaanxi Province.

古文：遣旭迈杰、纽泽诛逆贼铁失、失秃儿、赤斤铁木儿、脱火赤、章台等于大都，并戮其子孙，籍入家产。
现代文：派遣旭迈杰、纽泽诛杀逆贼铁失、失秃儿、赤斤铁木儿、脱火赤、章台等人于大都，并杀其子孙，抄其家产。
English: He dispatched Xu Meijie and Niu Zeqin to kill the traitors Tie Zun, Lu Balding, Ya Jian Tie Muer, Defeated Red, Zhang Tai and others in Dadu, and killed their children and grandchildren, and confiscated their family property.

古文：己巳，太白犯亢。
现代文：十一日，金星凌犯亢宿。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Venus transits Uranus.

古文：戊辰，召亦都护高昌王铁木儿补化。
现代文：初十，征召亦都护高昌王铁木儿补化。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the call-up was also made to protect Gaochang Wang Tiemu'er.

古文：壬申，以内史按答出为太师、知枢密院事。
现代文：十四日，任命内史按答出为太师、知枢密院。
English: On the 14th, according to the reply, Naishi was appointed as the Grand Master and the Privy Councilor.

古文：丙子，太白犯氐。
现代文：十八日，金星凌犯氐宿。
English: On the 18th, Jin Xing Ling committed suicide.

古文：诏百司遵守世祖成宪。
现代文：下诏百司遵守世祖成规。
English: The following edict is in strict accordance with the rules established by our ancestors.

古文：癸未，以旭迈杰兼阿速卫达鲁花赤。
现代文：任命旭迈杰兼领阿速卫断事官。
English: He appointed Xu Meijie as the adjudicator of the Supreme People's Procuratorate.

古文：丙戌，以江浙行省平章政事兀伯都剌为中书平章政事。
现代文：二十八日，任命江浙行省平章政事兀伯都剌为中书平章政事。
English: On the 28th, Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial Pingzhang Political Affairs Officer Bo Duyun was appointed as the Chinese-style Pingzhang Political Affairs Officer.

古文：八番顺元及静江、大理、威楚诸路徭兵为寇，敕湖广、云南二省招谕之。
现代文：八番顺元宣慰司及静江、大理、威楚诸路瑶兵作乱，敕令湖广、云南二省加以招谕。
English: The 8th Shunyuan Xuanliao Division and troops from Jingjiang, Dali and Weizhu made disturbances, and ordered the provinces of Hukang and Yunnan to invade.

古文：扬州江都县火，云南王、西平王二部卫士饥，皆赈之。
现代文：扬州路江都县火灾，云南王、西平王二部卫士饥荒，皆予以赈济。
English: Yangzhou Road Jiangdu County fire, Yunnan King, Xiping King two guards famine, are all from the relief.

古文：十一月己丑朔，荧惑犯亢。
现代文：十一月初一，火星凌犯亢宿。
English: On the first day of November, Mars will invade your home.

古文：车驾次于中都，修佛事于昆刚殿。
现代文：车驾进驻于中都，做佛事活动于昆刚殿。
English: He drove into the capital and did Buddhist activities at the Kungang Palace.

古文：庚寅，太白犯钩钤。
现代文：初二，金星凌犯钩钤。
English: In the second year of junior high school, Venus Ling committed a crime.

古文：丙申，次于祖妫。
现代文：初八，进驻于祖妫。
English: At the beginning of eighth grade, he was stationed at Zuyu.

古文：乙未，太白犯东咸。
现代文：初七，金星凌犯东咸。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Jinxing Ling committed East Ham.

古文：辛丑，车驾至大都。
现代文：十三日，车驾到达大都。
English: On the 13th, I drove to the capital, Tsumoto.

古文：壬寅，荧惑犯氐。
现代文：十四日，火星凌犯氐宿。
English: Minshin, Mars collides with Shibuya.

古文：诸王怯别遣使来朝。
现代文：诸王怯别派遣使者来朝。
English: Kings were afraid to send emissaries to Korea.

古文：丁未，御大明殿，受诸王、百官朝贺。
现代文：十九日，临御大明殿，接受诸王、百官朝贺。
English: On the 19th, he went to the Imperial Palace to receive the morning greetings from all the kings and officials.

古文：庚戌，诏百司朝夕视事毋怠。
现代文：二十二日，诏令各部门早晚办事不得懈怠。
English: On the 22nd, all departments were ordered not to slack off in their work.

古文：辛亥，御史中丞董守庸，坐党铁失免官。
现代文：二十三日，御史中丞董守庸因党同铁失之罪罢官。
English: On the 23rd, the Vice-Minister of History, Dong Shouyong, was removed from office for the crime of collusion with the party.

古文：壬子，敕营缮不急者罢之。
现代文：二十四日，敕令营建工程中非急务者罢免。
English: On the 24th, the government ordered the removal of non-emergency personnel from the construction project.

古文：癸丑，遣使诣曲阜，以太牢祀孔子。
现代文：二十五日，派遣使者前往曲阜，用太牢祭祀孔子。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, an envoy was sent to Qufu to offer sacrifices to Confucius in a dungeon.

古文：敕会福院奉北安王那木罕像于高良河寺，祭遁甲五福神。
现代文：敕令会福院供奉北安王那木罕画像于高良河寺。祭祀遁甲五福神。
English: The image of King Namgyal of the Northern Han Dynasty is enshrined at Goryo-ji Temple, and the Five Deities of Good Fortune are worshipped.

古文：甲寅，诸王怯别遣使来朝。
现代文：二十六日，诸王怯别派遣使者来朝。
English: On the 26th, all the kings were afraid to send envoys to the imperial court.

古文：乙卯，翙星于司天监。
现代文：二十七日，祭星于司天监。
English: On the 27th, the star of the festival appeared in the office of the overseer of heaven.

古文：丙辰，御史中丞速速坐贪淫免官。
现代文：二十八日，御史中丞速速因贪污之罪罢官。
English: On the 28th, Mishi Chujo was swiftly removed from office for corruption.

古文：丁巳，广州路新会县民汜长弟作乱，广东副元帅乌马儿率兵捕之。
现代文：二十九日，广州路新会县平民范长弟作乱，广东副元帅乌马儿督率兵马捕讨。
English: On the 29th, the civilian Fan Changdi of Guangzhou Road Xinhui County made a disturbance, and the Guangdong Vice Marshal Uma Erdu led the soldiers to investigate.

古文：云南开南州大阿哀、阿三木、台龙买六千余人寇哀卜白盐井。
现代文：云南行省开南州大阿哀、阿三木、台龙买率六千多人入寇哀卜白盐井。
English: In Yunnan Province, more than 6,000 people from the provinces of Kainan, Da'ai, Amagi, and Taitung entered the Baishan Well.

古文：诏： 凡有罪自首者，原其罪。 
现代文：下诏说： 凡有罪自首者，赦免其罪。 
English: The next edict said: Anyone who surrenders his guilt will be pardoned.

古文：袁州路宜春县、镇江路丹徒县饥，赈粜米四万九千石。
现代文：袁州路宜春县、镇江路丹徒县饥荒，平卖大米四万九千石加以赈济。
English: In Yichun County on Yuanzhou Road and Dantu County on Zhenjiang Road, 49,000 kilos of rice were sold to alleviate the famine.

古文：沅州黔阳县饥，芍陂屯田旱，并赈之。
现代文：沅州黔阳县饥荒，芍陂屯田处干旱，并予以赈济。
English: famine in Shenyang County, Luzhou Province, and drought in Shandong Province, and to provide relief.

古文：十二月己未，御史台经历朵儿只班、御史撒儿塔罕、兀都蛮、郭也先忽都，并坐党铁失免官。
现代文：十二月初二，御史台经历朵儿只班、御史撒儿塔罕、兀都蛮、郭也先忽都，皆坐党同铁失免职。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, Guo Shidaipan, Guo Shidaipan, Guo Shidaipan, Guo Shidaipan, Guo Shidaipan, and Guo Shidaipan were all dismissed from their posts.

古文：御史言： 曩者铁木迭儿专政，诬杀杨朵儿只、萧拜住、贺伯颜、观音保、锁咬儿哈的迷失，黥窜李谦亨、成珪，罢免王毅、高昉、张志弼，天下咸知其冤，请昭雪之。 
现代文：御史上言 ：从前铁木迭儿专政，诬陷杀害杨朵儿只、萧拜住、贺伯颜、观音保、锁咬儿哈的迷失，黥面放逐李谦亨、成王圭，罢免王毅、高日方、张志弼，天下之人皆知其冤，请予以平反昭雪。 
English: Gu Shengjian said, "In the past, the Tiemu Dictatorship was accused of killing Yang Duotiao, Xiao Baiju, He Boyan, Guan Yin Bao, and locking up Li Qianheng. Li Qianheng and Cheng Wang Gui were exiled to Minmen, and Wang Yi, Gao Nikfang, and Zhang Zhisheng were removed from office. Everyone in the world knows their wrongdoings. Please rectify them.

古文：诏存者召还录用，死者赠官有差。
现代文：下诏存者召还录用，死者赠予官爵不等。
English: According to the edict, those who survived were recalled and re-hired, while those who died were given official titles.

古文：授诸王薛彻干以其父故金印。
现代文：授予诸王薛彻干以其父旧金印。
English: King Xue Cherkang was awarded with his father's old gold seal.

古文：庚申，以宦者刚答里为中政院使。
现代文：初三，任命宦者刚答里为中政院使。
English: On the third day of the first month of the new year, Gangdali was appointed as the envoy of the Central Government.

古文：壬戌，赐潜邸卫士钞，人六十锭。
现代文：初五，赐予潜邸卫士钱钞，每人六十锭。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, the guards of the hidden mansion were given money, 60 monme each.

古文：浚镇江路漕河及练湖，役丁万三千五百人。
现代文：疏浚镇江路漕河及练湖，役使丁夫一万三千五百人。
English: Dredging of the Zhenjiang River, Caohe and Lianhu brought 13,500 people to Dingfu.

古文：给诸王八剌失里印。
现代文：给予诸王八剌失里印信。
English: Eight imperial seals were given to emperors.

古文：戊辰，请皇考、皇妣谥于南郊，皇考晋王曰光圣仁孝皇帝，庙号显宗，皇妣晋王妃曰宣懿淑圣皇后。
现代文：十一日，请皇考、皇妣谥号于南郊，皇考晋王为光圣仁孝皇帝，庙号显宗，皇妣晋王妃曰宣懿淑圣皇后。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the imperial examination and imperial edict were held in the southern suburb. The imperial examination and imperial edict of Jin Wang was Guang Sheng Ren Xiao Emperor, the temple name was Xian Zong, and the imperial edict of Jin Wangfei was said to be Xuan Shuxu Sheng Empress.

古文：己巳，辰星犯垒壁阵。
现代文：十二日，水星凌犯垒壁阵。
English: On the 12th, Mercury transits the ecliptic.

古文：庚午，以即位，大赉后妃、诸王、百官，金七百余锭、银三万三千锭，钱及币帛称是。
现代文：十三日，因即皇帝位，大赏后妃、诸王、百官，用黄金七百余锭、白银三万三千锭，钱钞及币帛亦相当。
English: On the thirteenth day of the month, because the emperor was enthroned, the empress dowager, the kings, and all the officials were rewarded with more than seven hundred talents of gold, thirty-three thousand talents of silver, and the same amount of banknotes and coins.

古文：遣使祀海神天妃。
现代文：派遣使者祭祀海神天妃。
English: Envoys were sent to offer sacrifices to the sea god Tenbi.

古文：盗入太庙，窃仁宗及庄懿慈圣皇后金主。
现代文：盗贼入太庙，窃走仁宗与庄懿慈圣皇后金制神主。
English: Thieves broke into the Imperial Temple and stole the gold-plated deities of Emperor Renzong and Empress Zhuangzhuang.

古文：辛未，荧惑犯房。
现代文：十四日，火星凌犯房宿。
English: On the 14th, Mars invaded the house.

古文：壬申，作仁宗主，仍督有司捕盗。
现代文：十五日，重制仁宗神主，仍督率有关部门搜捕盗贼。
English: On the 15th, the reincarnated Rinzong Shenshu still led the relevant departments to search for and arrest the thieves.

古文：翙星于司天监。
现代文：祭星于司天监。
English: In the priest's celestial overseer.

古文：癸酉，德庆路泷水县徭刘寅等降。
现代文：十六日，德庆路泷水县瑶人刘寅等投降。
English: On the 16th, Liu Ying and others surrendered at Deqing Road, Lishui County.

古文：甲戌，命道士吴全节修醮事。
现代文：十七日，命道士吴全节修作醮事。
English: On the 17th, the death of the Taoist priest Wu Quanzhijie was announced.

古文：乙亥，征东夷民奉兽皮来附。
现代文：十八日，征东行省夷民奉献兽皮来附。
English: On the 18th day of the month, the Eastern Expedition left for the provinces to offer animal skins to the Qin people.

古文：太常院臣言： 世祖以来，太庙岁惟一享，先帝始复古制，一岁四祭，请裁择之。 
现代文：太常院官上言： 世祖以来，太庙每年祭享一次。先帝开始恢复古制，每年祭享四次，请予以裁择。 
English: The chief abbot said, "Since the time of the ancestors, the Imperial Temple has been held once a year. The former emperor began to restore the ancient system, and the festival is held four times a year. Please make your choice."

古文：帝曰： 祭祀，盛事也，朕何敢简其礼。 
现代文：泰定帝说： 祭祀是大事，我怎敢简慢其礼仪呢？ 
English: Emperor Taiding said: Sacrifices are very important. How dare I shorten the rituals?

古文：命仍四祭。
现代文：命照旧每年四祭。
English: The annual four-day festival will continue as before.

古文：监察御史脱脱、赵成庆等言： 铁木迭儿在先朝，包藏祸心，离间亲藩，诛戮大臣，使先帝孤立，卒罹大祸。
现代文：监察御史脱脱、赵成庆等上言： 铁木迭儿在先朝，包藏祸心，离间亲王宗藩，杀戮大臣，致使先帝孤立于朝，结果遭逢大祸。
English: Supervisor of the Imperial Palace, Zhao Chengqing, and others commented: Tiemu Dier was in the previous dynasty, harboring evil intentions, alienating Prince Zonghan, and killing ministers, causing the former emperor to be isolated in the dynasty, and as a result, he suffered a great disaster.

古文：其子锁南，亲与逆谋，久逭天宪，乞正其罪，以快元元之心。
现代文：其子锁南，亲自参入谋反，久逃法网，请正定其罪，以大快人心。
English: His son, Zonan, personally joined the rebellion and escaped the net of the law for a long time. Please judge his crime correctly, and please the people's hearts.

古文：月鲁、秃秃哈、速敦皆铁失之党，不宜宽宥。 
现代文：月鲁、秃秃哈、速敦，皆为铁失的同党，不应宽大处理。 
English: Yue Lu, Gao Gao Ha and Haidong are all members of the same party, and should not be treated leniently.

古文：遂并伏诛。
现代文：于是皆被处决。
English: They were all executed.

古文：丙子，命岭北守边诸王彻彻秃，月修佛事，以却寇兵。
现代文：十九日，命岭北行省守边诸王彻彻秃，每月修作佛事，以使寇兵退却。
English: On the 19th day of the month, the kings of the northern border of the province were completely bald, and they performed Buddhist rituals every month in order to make the invaders retreat.

古文：己卯，命僧作佛事于大内以厌雷。
现代文：二十二日，命僧人在皇宫内做佛事以镇雷。
English: On the 22nd, a monk was ordered to do a Buddhist service in the imperial palace with a thunderbolt.

古文：增诸王薛彻干、驸马哈伯等岁赐金、银、币、帛有差。
现代文：增加诸侯王薛彻干、驸马哈伯等岁赐金、银、币、帛不等。
English: The annual gifts of gold, silver, coins, and pennies from the Princes Xue Chigang and Ma Habo were increased.

古文：辛巳，荧惑犯东咸。
现代文：二十四日，火星凌犯东咸。
English: On the 24th, Mars invaded East Ham.

古文：壬午，诸王月思别遣怯烈来朝，赐以金、币。
现代文：二十五日，诸王月思别派遣怯烈来朝。赐以黄金币帛。
English: On the twenty-fifth day of the month, the emperors decided to send the cowardly crows to the imperial court. They were given gold coins.

古文：癸未，广西右江来安路总管岑世兴遣其弟世元入贡。
现代文：二十六日，广西右江来安路总管岑世兴派遣其弟岑世元入京进贡。
English: On the 26th, Gong Shixing, the head of Guangxi Ujiang Lai'an Road, sent his brother Gong Shiyuan to Beijing to pay tribute.

古文：流诸王月鲁铁木儿于云南，按梯不花于海南，曲吕不花于奴儿干，孛罗及兀鲁思不花于海岛，并坐与铁失等逆谋。
现代文：流放诸侯王月鲁铁木儿于云南，按梯不花于海南，曲吕不花于奴儿干，孛罗及兀鲁思不花于海岛，皆坐与铁失等人谋逆之罪。
English: They banished the princes Yue Lu and Tie Mu Er to Yunnan, but did not banish the ladders to Hainan, nor the ladders to Nuer Gan, and did not banish the dragons to the islands. All of them were guilty of plotting against Tie Lu and the others.

古文：乙酉，云南车里于孟为寇，诏招谕之。
现代文：二十八日，云南车里府于孟作乱，下诏加以招谕。
English: On the 28th, Yunnan Cheli Prefecture in Meng made a riot, and issued an edict to invite them.

古文：谕百司借名器，各遵世祖定制。
现代文：晓谕百司爱惜名爵，皆得遵守世祖旧制。
English: As the saying goes, the emperor loves the nobles, and everyone must abide by the old system.

古文：丙戌，旭迈杰言： 近也先铁木儿之变，诸王买奴逃赴潜邸，愿效死力，且言不除元凶，则陛下美名不著，天下后世何从而知。
现代文：二十九日，旭迈杰上言： 前不久也先铁木儿之乱，诸侯王买奴逃赴潜邸，愿出死力效命，而且上言如不除掉元凶，则令陛下美名不传，天下后世之人从何而知。
English: On the 29th, Xu Meijie said, "Not long ago, there was the Tiemu'er Rebellion. Princes and lords fled to the Lurking House and were willing to do their utmost to carry out their orders. Moreover, if the culprits were not eliminated, His Majesty's good name would not be passed on. How would the world and future generations know?

古文：上契圣衷，尝蒙奖谕。
现代文：上符圣心，曾蒙嘉奖。
English: It was awarded the Sacred Heart Award.

古文：今臣等议，宗戚之中，能自拔逆党，尽忠朝廷者，惟有买奴，请加封赏，以示激劝。 
现代文：现在我等商议，宗戚之中，能从逆党中自拔而归，尽忠于朝廷者，唯有买奴一人，请给予封赏，以表示激劝之意。 
English: Now we are waiting to discuss, among the relatives, who can extricate themselves from the anti-party and return to be loyal to the court, only buy a slave, please give a reward to express the intention of persuasion.

古文：遂以泰宁县五千户封买奴为泰宁王。
现代文：于是以泰宁县五千户封买奴为泰宁王。
English: As a result, five thousand households in Taining County bought slaves to become the king of Taining.

古文：知枢密院事、大司徒阔彻伯授开府仪同三司，以前太师拜忽商议军国重事。
现代文：知枢密院事、大司徒阔彻伯被授予开府仪同三司。命前太师拜忽商议军国重事。
English: Tsukuo Chebo, the secretary of the Privy Council and the grand secretary, was awarded the Kaifu Rite and the three offices. Prior to his death, Grand Master Byaku discussed important military and national affairs.

古文：丁亥，议赏讨逆功，赐旭迈杰金十锭、银三十锭、钞七千锭，倒剌沙为中书左丞相，知枢密院事马某沙、御史大夫纽泽、宣政院使锁秃并加授光禄大夫，仍赐金、银、钞有差。
现代文：三十日，商议奖赏讨逆之功，赐予旭迈杰黄金十锭、白银三十锭、钱钞七千锭，倒剌沙为中书左丞相，知枢密院事马某沙、御史大夫钮泽、宣政院使锁秃皆加授光禄大夫，照例赐予黄金、白银、钱钞不等。
English: On the 30th day of the month, the award was discussed to reward the reverse merit, and Xu Meijie was awarded gold ten baht, silver thirty baht, and money and banknotes seven thousand baht. Huang Baosha was awarded the title of Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China, and Ji Ma Xiangsha, the Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China, Niu Ze, the Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China, and Xuan Zhao, the Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China, were awarded the title of the Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China. As usual

古文：塑马哈吃剌佛像于延春阁之徽清亭。
现代文：塑造马只哈吃剌佛像于延春阁之徽清亭。
English: Sculpting a horse-drawn horse-drawn horse-drawn horse-drawn horse-drawn horse-drawn horse-drawn horse-drawn horse-drawn horse-drawn horse-drawn horse-drawn horse-drawn horse-drawn horse-drawn horse-drawn horse-drawn horse-drawn carriage.

古文：下诏改元，诏曰： 朕荷天鸿禧，嗣大历服，侧躬图治，夙夜祗畏，惟祖训是遵，乃开岁甲子，景运伊始，思与天下更新。
现代文：下诏明年改年号，诏书说： 我承天大福，继登帝位，躬亲图治，日夜敬畏，唯祖训是遵。开年乃为甲子年，大运之始，思与天下改新。
English: In the imperial edict announcing the change of the year next year, the imperial edict said: "I, inheriting the great blessings of heaven, succeed to the throne, bow to my relatives and govern myself, fear day and night, but follow the teachings of my ancestors. The new year is the year of the Goat, the beginning of the great fortune, and I think of changing the world with the world.

古文：稽诸典礼，逾年改元，可以明年为泰定元年。 
现代文：考之于各类典礼制度，应于逾年改元。可将明年改称为泰定元年。
English: Considering the various types of ceremonial systems, it should be changed to the previous year. Next year can be changed to the first year of Tai Ding.

古文：免大都、兴和差税三年，八番、思、播、两广洞寨差税一年，江淮创科包银三年，四川、云南、甘肃秋粮三分，河南、陕西、辽阳丝钞三分。
现代文： 免除大都、兴和二路差税三年，八番、思州、播州、两广洞寨差税一年，江淮地区创科包银三年，四川、云南、甘肃三省秋粮三分，河南、陕西、辽阳三省丝钞三分。
English: Dadu and Xinghe will be exempted from the two-way difference tax for three years, Banqiao, Sizhou, Banzhou and Liangangdongzhai will be exempted from the two-way difference tax for one year, Jianghuai District will be exempted from the science and technology package for three years, the three provinces of Sichuan, Yunnan and Gansu will be exempted from the autumn grain for three years, and the three provinces of Henan, Shaanxi and Liaoyang will be exempted from the silk bill for three years.

古文：除虚增田税，免斡脱逋钱，赈恤云南、广海、八番等处戍军。
现代文：免除虚增田租，免除斡脱逋钱。赈恤云南、广海、八番等处戍守军士。
English: They are exempted from inflated farm rents, and are exempted from defrauding farmers of their money. They are awarded the title of "guarding sergeant" in Yunnan, Guanghai, and Hachiban.

古文：求直言，赐高年帛，禁献山场湖泊之利。
现代文：征求直言之士，赐与年长者丝帛。禁止献纳山场湖泊之利。
English: Soliciting outspoken people, giving silk cocoons to the elderly. Prohibiting the donation of the benefits of mountain lakes.

古文：定吏员出身者秩正四品。
现代文：规定吏员出身者官秩不得过四品。
English: It was stipulated that those who were born as clerks could not have more than four official ranks.

古文：以追尊皇考、皇妣，诏天下。
现代文：以追尊皇考、皇妣，下诏天下。
English: To pursue the honor of the imperial examination and imperial edict, the imperial edict was issued.

古文：云南花脚蛮为寇，诏招谕之。
现代文：云南花脚蛮作乱，下诏加以招谕。
English: Yunnan Huafu made a mess, and the next edict was issued to invite them.

古文：平江嘉定州饥，辽阳答阳失蛮、阔阔部风、雹，并赈之。
现代文：平江路嘉定州饥荒，辽阳答阳失蛮部、阔阔部风与冰雹成灾，皆予以赈济。
English: The famine in Jiading Prefecture on the Pingjiang Road, the devastation of the Liaoyang-Tangyang region, and the wind and hailstorms in the Guangbo region have all been alleviated.

古文：澧州、归州饥，赈粜米二万石。
现代文：澧州、归州饥荒，平卖大米二万石以赈济。 
English: There was a famine in Zhangzhou and Guizhou, and they had to sell 20,000 kilos of rice to get by.

古文：是岁，夏，诸卫屯田及大都、河间、保定、济南、济宁五路属县霖雨伤稼。
现代文：这一年夏天，诸卫屯田处及大都、河间、保定、济南、济宁五路属县，久雨损害庄稼。
English: In the summer of that year, heavy rains damaged crops in the five counties of Zhuwei, Dadu, Hema, Baoding, Jinan and Jining.

古文：秋，忻州定襄县及忠翊侍卫屯田所营田、象食屯田所陨霜杀禾。
现代文：秋天，沂州定襄县及忠翊侍卫屯田所营田、象食屯田所降霜伤害禾谷。
English: In the autumn, frost damage to the wheat fields of Dingxiang County, Luzhou, and Zhongyuan's guards' and elephant's food garrisons.

古文：土番岷州春疫，夏旱。
现代文：土番岷州春季瘟疫，夏季干旱。
English: Plague in the spring, drought in the summer.

古文：西番寇巩昌府。
现代文：西番入寇巩昌府。
English: The West Band invaded Gongchang Prefecture.

古文：泰定元年春正月乙未，以乃马台为平章政事，善僧为右丞。
现代文：泰定元年春正月初八，任命乃马台为平章政事，善僧为右丞，敕令诸王哈剌返还本部。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Tai Ding era, Na Madai was appointed as the political affairs of Pingzhang, the good monk as the right-hand man, and the kings were ordered to return to the headquarters.

古文：敕诸王哈剌还本部，召江西行省平章政事也儿吉你赴阙。
现代文：征召江西行省平章政事也儿吉你来朝。
English: Jiangxi Province, Pingzhang Province, has called on you to come to the DPRK.

古文：己亥，以诛逆臣也先铁木儿等诏天下。
现代文：十二日，以诛杀逆臣也先铁木儿等人之事下诏天下。
English: On the twelfth day, it was announced to the world that Tie Mu'er and others would be the first to be killed.

古文：辛丑，诸王、大臣请立皇太子。
现代文：十四日，诸王及大臣奏请立皇太子。
English: On the 14th, the kings and ministers petitioned for the crown prince to be appointed.

古文：赐诸王彻彻秃金一锭、银六十锭、币帛各百匹，塔思不花金一锭、银四十锭、币帛二百匹，阿忽铁木儿等金银各有差。
现代文：赐与诸侯王彻彻秃金一锭、银六十锭、币帛各为百匹，塔思不花金一锭、银四十锭、币帛两百匹，阿忽铁木儿等人金银各不等。
English: The vassals of the Princes gave Choe Chuljee one crock of gold, sixty crock of silver, and one hundred pennies each; Tassi did not spend one crock of gold, forty pennies of silver, and two hundred pennies; and others such as Akhur Timur received varying amounts of gold and silver.

古文：壬寅，以故丞相拜住子答儿麻失里为宗仁卫亲军都指挥使，彻里哈为左右卫阿速亲军都指挥使。
现代文：十五日，任命已故丞相拜住之子答儿麻失里为宗仁卫亲军都指挥使，彻里哈为左右卫阿速亲军都指挥使。
English: On the fifteenth day, the son of the late prime minister, Zhuang Baizhu, was appointed as the commander of the Zongren Guards and Cheriha was appointed as the commander of the left and right guards of the Ahok Guards.

古文：命僧讽西番经于光天殿。
现代文：命僧人讽诵西番佛经于光天殿。
English: The monks were ordered to chant the Western Standard Buddhist Scriptures in the Hall of Light.

古文：甲辰，敕译《列圣制诏》及《大元通制》，刊本赐百官。
现代文：十七日，敕令翻译《列圣制诏》与《大元通制》，将刊本分赐百官。
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict translated the "Imperial Edict on the Establishment of the Holy Office" and the "Imperial Edict on the Establishment of the Great Yuan Dynasty," and distributed the published copies to 100 officials.

古文：丁未，以称海屯田万户府达鲁花赤帖陈假岭北行中书省参知政事，近侍忽都帖木儿假礼部尚书，使西域诸王不赛因部。
现代文：二十日，命称海屯田万户府断事官帖陈借用岭北行中书省参知政事之衔，近侍忽都帖木儿借用礼部尚书之衔，出使西域诸王不赛因部。
English: On the 20th, it was ordered that the adjudicator of Haituntian Wanyu Prefecture, Jie Chen, borrowed the title of the governor of Lingbei Province, and the close attendant of the capital, Jie Mu'er, borrowed the title of the ceremonial department, and sent the kings of the western region.

古文：戊申，八番生蛮韦光正等及杨、黄五种人，以其户二万七千来附，请岁输布二千五百匹，置长官司以抚之。
现代文：二十一日，八番生蛮韦光正及杨、黄五种族之人，率其部属二万七千户前来归附，奏请每年输纳布二千五百匹，设置长官司加抚治。
English: On the twenty-first day, twenty-seven thousand households of the eighth generation of Wei, Guangzheng, Yang, and Huang Five Races, and their subordinates came to annex the territory, and requested that twenty-five hundred horses of the Nabu should be dispatched every year, and that a chief magistrate should be set up to administer the territory.

古文：己酉，命诸王远徙者悉还其部。
现代文：二十二日，诏令诸王远徙者皆返其原部。
English: On the 22nd, the emperors ordered all the wanderers to return to their hometowns.

古文：召亲王图帖睦尔于琼州，阿木哥于大同。
现代文：征召亲王图帖睦尔于琼州，阿木哥于大同路。
English: Prince Tut Timur was called up in Qiongzhou, and Amigo in Datong Road.

古文：定怯薛台岁给钞，人八十锭。
现代文：规定怯薛台年俸钱钞每人八十锭。
English: It is stipulated that the annual salary of Zhuxuedai is 80 yuan per person.

古文：甲寅，赐诸王太平、忽剌台、别失帖木儿等金印。
现代文：二十七日，赐予诸王太平、忽剌台、别失帖木儿等人金印。
English: On the 27th, the gold seal was given to the kings of Taiping, Kuantai, and Biechujie.

古文：敕高丽王还国，仍归其印。
现代文：敕令高丽国王归国，照例还其印信。
English: Emperor Gong ordered the King of Goryeo to return to the country, and his seal was returned as usual.

古文：粜米二十万石，赈京师贫民。
现代文：平价卖米二十万石，以赈济京师贫民。
English: Selling rice at a price of 200,000 koku to help the poor in Beijing.

古文：丙辰，赐故监察御史观音保、锁咬儿哈的迷失妻、子钞各千锭。
现代文：二十九日，赐予已故监察御史观音保、锁咬儿哈的迷失妻子儿女钱钞各千锭。
English: On the 29th, thousands of baht in banknotes were given to the lost wives and children of the deceased inspector Guan Yin Bao and the locked-in son Ha.

古文：赐司徒道住印。
现代文：赐印给司徒道柱。
English: The seal was given to the Stutthof pillar.

古文：敕封解州盐池神曰灵富公。
现代文：敕令封解州盐池之神为灵富公。
English: The imperial edict decreed that the god of the state of salt ponds should be named Lingfugu.

古文：广德、信州、岳州、惠州、南恩州民饥，发粟赈之。
现代文：广德、信州、岳州、惠州诸路及南恩州人民饥荒，调发粮食予以赈济。
English: The people in Guangde, Shinshu, Yuezhou, Huizhou Zhuolu and Nan'enzhou suffered from famine, and grain was allocated to help them.

古文：二月丁巳朔，作显宗影堂。
现代文：二月初一，建造显宗影堂。
English: On the first day of February, construction of the Hsien Chung Memorial Hall began.

古文：己未，修西番佛事于寿安山寺，曰星吉思吃剌，曰阔儿鲁弗卜，曰水朵儿麻，曰飒间卜里喃家，经僧四十人，三年乃罢。
现代文：初三，做西番佛事活动于寿安山寺，名为星吉思吃剌、阔儿鲁串卜、水朵儿麻、飒间卜里喃家，经僧四十人，三年之后才结束。
English: On the third day of junior high school, there was a Buddhist vigil at Shou'an Mountain Temple, with the names of Xing Jisi, Kuo Erlu, Shuido Erma, and Xing Ma Buri Rongya. There were forty monks, and it ended after three years.

古文：庚申，监察御史傅岩起、李嘉宾言： 辽王脱脱乘国有隙，诛屠骨肉，其恶已彰，恐怀疑贰，如令归藩，譬之纵虎出柙。
现代文：初四，监察御史傅岩起、李嘉宾上言 ：辽王脱脱，乘国家有乱之机，诛杀至亲骨肉，其恶行已显露，恐其怀有疑虑而生二心。如让其归藩，如同纵虎出笼一般。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, supervisors Fu Yanqi and Li Jiabin said: Liao Wang escaped, took advantage of the chaos in the country, fought and killed his own flesh and blood, his evil deeds have been revealed, and he may have doubts and have second thoughts. If he is allowed to return to the domain, it will be like letting the tiger out of the cage.

古文：请废之，别立近族以袭其位。 
现代文：请废掉他，另立近族之人承袭其位。 
English: Please abolish him, and let someone from a close clan take his place.

古文：不报。
现代文：未得到同意。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：甲子，作佛事，命僧百八人及倡优百戏，导帝师游京城。
现代文：初八，做佛事活动，命僧徒一百零八人及倡优百戏，引导帝师出游京城。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he held Buddhist activities, ordained 108 monks and nuns, initiated 100 plays, and guided the emperor on a tour of the capital.

古文：庚午，选守令、推官。
现代文：十四日，选择守令与推官。
English: On the 14th, the shoremen and the overseers were chosen.

古文：旧制，台宪岁举守令、推官二人，有罪连坐，至是言其不便，复命中书于常选择人用之。
现代文：按旧例，台宪每年推举守令、推官二人，有罪则连坐；至这时因论及不便之处，再命中书省从常选员额中择人予以任用。
English: According to the old practice, the Taiwanese Constitution annually elects two deputies and two commissioners, while the guilty are seated together. At this time, due to the inconvenience, the Ministry of Education and Culture selected a person from the regular elected posts to be appointed.

古文：壬申，请上大行皇帝谥于南郊，曰睿圣文孝皇帝，庙号英宗。
现代文：十六日，加上已故皇帝谥号于南郊，名为睿圣文孝皇帝，庙号为英宗。
English: On the 16th, together with the late emperor's posthumous name in the southern suburb, named Emperor Rui Shengwenhiao, the temple name is Yingzong.

古文：甲戌，江浙行省左丞赵简，请开经筵及择师傅，令太子及诸王大臣子孙受学，遂命平章政事张珪、翰林学士承旨忽都鲁都儿迷失、学士吴澄、集贤直学士邓文原，以《帝范》、《资治通鉴》、《大学衍义》、《贞观政要》等书进讲，复敕右丞相也先铁木儿领之。
现代文：十八日，江浙行省左丞赵简，奏请开讲经筵及选择师傅之事，令太子及诸王大臣子孙接受教育，于是命平章政事张王圭、翰林学士承旨忽都鲁都儿迷失、学士吴澄、集贤直学士邓文原，采用《帝范》、《资治通鉴》、《大学衍义》、《贞观政要》等书进讲，并敕令右丞相也先铁木儿管领其事。
English: On the 18th, Zhao Jian, the governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, was asked to give a speech on the subject of learning and choosing a teacher, so that the prince and the sons and grandsons of the ministers of the kings could receive education. Therefore, Zhang Wang Gui, the minister of the government, Hanlin, the bachelor, Wu Cheng, and Jixian Zhi, the bachelor, Deng Wenyuan, gave a speech using books such as "Imperial Fan," "Capitalism," "University" and "Chastity," and ordered the minister of the right to take charge of the matter.

古文：诸王怯别、孛罗各遣使来贡。
现代文：诸王怯别、孛罗各自遣使前来进贡。
English: The kings were afraid to leave, and each sent an envoy to bring tribute.

古文：高昌王亦都护帖木儿补化遣使进蒲萄酒。
现代文：高昌王亦都护帖木儿补化遣使进献葡萄酒。
English: The King of Gaochang also sent the tutelary deity Timur to replenish the supply of wine.

古文：丁丑，监察御史宋本、赵成庆、李嘉宾言： 盗窃太庙神主，由太常守卫不谨，请罪之。 
现代文：二十一日，监察御史宋本、赵成庆、李嘉宾上言 ：盗窃太庙神主，由于太常院官员守卫不谨慎所致，请予以加罪处罚。 
English: On the twenty-first day, supervisors Song Ben, Zhao Chengqing, and Li Jiabin said: the theft of the god of the temple was caused by the imprudence of the officials of the Tai Chang Yuan, please add to the punishment.

古文：不报。
现代文：未得到回答。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：戊寅，御史李嘉宾劾逆党左阿速卫指挥使脱帖木儿，罢之。
现代文：二十二日，御史李嘉宾劾奏逆党左阿速指挥使脱帖木儿，将其罢免。
English: On the 22nd, Grand Historian Li Jiabin impeached the leader of the anti-Party Zuo Ahui faction, Dang Timur, and dismissed him.

古文：癸未，宣谕也里可温各如教具戒。
现代文：二十七日，宜谕也里可温各如所教具戒。
English: On the twenty-seventh day, it is appropriate to teach the precepts in a gentle manner.

古文：加封广德路祠山神张真君曰普济，宁国路广惠王曰福祐。
现代文：加封广德路祠山神张真君为普济，宁国路广惠王为福。
English: Zhang Zhenjun, the ancestral mountain god of Guangde Road, Gafeng, is Pu Zi, and Guanghui Wang, of Ningguo Road, is Fu.

古文：绍兴、庆元、延安、岳州、潮州五路及镇远府、河州、集州饥，发粟赈之。
现代文：绍兴、庆元、延安、岳州、潮州五路及镇远府、河州、集州饥荒，调发粮食予以赈济。
English: Shaoxing, Qingyuan, Yan'an, Yuezhou, Chaozhou 5th Road and Zhenyuanfu, Hezhou, and Jizhou suffered from famine, and were allocated grain to help them.

古文：三月丁亥朔，罢徽政院，立詹事院，以太傅朵台、宣徽使秃满迭儿、桓国公拾得驴、太尉丑驴答剌罕，并为太子詹事；中书参知政事王居仁为太子副詹事，以同知宣政院事杨廷玉为中书参知政事，罢大同路黄华岭及崇庆屯田。
现代文：三月初一，撤销徽政院，设立詹事院，命太傅朵台、宣徽使秃满迭儿、桓国公拾得驴、太尉丑驴答剌罕，皆为太子詹事，中书参知政事王居仁为太子副詹事。任命同知宣政院事杨廷玉为中书参知政事。撤销大同路黄华岭及崇庆屯田。
English: On the first day of March, the Hui State Council was abolished and the Zhan State Council was established, with the names of Tai Fu Dotai, Xuan Hui Zhi Bal Man Di'er, Huan Guo Guo Zhi De Xie, and Tai Fei Cuxi De Xie Han, all of whom were the Prince Zhan State Council, and the Vice Prince Zhan State Council of the People's Republic of China, Wang Jiren, the Vice-Governor of the People's Republic of China, was appointed as the Vice-Governor of the People's Republic of China. Yang Tingyu, the Vice-Governor of the People's Republic of

古文：赐寿宁公主金十锭、银五十锭、钞二万锭。
现代文：赐予寿宁公主黄金十锭、白银五十锭、钱钞二万锭。
English: Princess Shuning was given 10 monme of gold, 50 monme of silver, and 20,000 monme of banknotes.

古文：乙未，以江西行省平章政事也儿吉你知枢密院事。
现代文：初九，任命江西行省平章政事也儿吉你知枢密院事。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Pingzhang Zhengji of Jiangxi Province was appointed Privy Councillor.

古文：置定王薛彻干总管府。
现代文：设置定王薛彻干总管府。
English: Set up the Dingwang Xuecheng General Administration Office.

古文：给蒙古流民粮、钞，遣还所部，敕擅徙者斩，藏匿者杖之。
现代文：给予蒙古流民粮食、钱钞，遣还所部，敕令擅自移徙者斩首，窝藏不报者杖责。
English: Mongolian refugees were given food and money, repatriated to their hometowns, unauthorized migrants were ordered to be beheaded, and those who harbored undocumented migrants were punished.

古文：赐诸王彻彻秃永福县户万三千六百为食邑，仍置王傅。
现代文：赐予诸侯王彻彻秃永福县一万三千六百户为食邑，照例设置王傅。
English: He granted 13,600 households in Bald Yongfu County to be food villages, and set up Wang Fu as usual.

古文：戊戌，廷试进士，赐八剌、张益等八十四人及第、出身有差；会试下第者，亦赐教官有差。
现代文：十二日，廷试进士，赐予八剌、张益等八十四人进士及第、出身不等；会试不中者，也赐予教官等职。
English: On the 12th, eighty-four people, including Yao Yao and Zhang Yi, were awarded the title of "Imperial Court Examiner" with different ranks and backgrounds. Those who failed the examination were also awarded the position of "instructor."

古文：中书省臣请禁横奏赏赉及逾越奏事者，从之。
现代文：中书省官员奏请禁止妄求奖赏及越级奏事的行为，同意这项提议。
English: The officials of the Chinese Ministry of Education and Culture asked for the prohibition of the act of seeking rewards and over-class reporting, and agreed to this proposal.

古文：庚子，钦察罢为陕西行台御史大夫。
现代文：十四日，钦察降为陕西行台御史大夫。
English: On the 14th, Qincha was demoted to the position of Shaanxi Yangtze River Provincial Historian.

古文：以四川行中书省平章政事囊加台兼宣政院使，往征西番寇参卜郎。
现代文：命四川行中书省平章政事囊加台兼任宣政院使，前往征讨西番寇贼参卜郎。
English: He was ordered to travel to Sichuan by the Minister of Literature, Pingzang, who was also the political affairs chief of Taiwan and also served as the envoy of the State Council, to go and fight the West Bank bandits, the Samburu.

古文：癸卯，命中书平章政事乃马台摄祭南郊，知枢密院事阔彻伯摄祭太庙，以册皇后、皇太子告。
现代文：十七日，命中书平章政事乃马台代为祭祀南郊，知枢密院事阔彻伯代为祭祀庆庙，以册封皇后、皇太子之事相告。
English: On the 17th, it was announced that Pingzhang Zhengji was to be enshrined in the southern suburb of Matai, and Zhizhuang Shiyin Zhengji was to be enshrined in the southern suburb of Qingdao, and that the Empress and the Crown Prince were to be enthroned.

古文：丙午，御大明殿，册八八罕氏为皇后，皇子阿速吉八为皇太子。
现代文：二十日，临御大明殿，册封八八罕为皇后，皇子阿剌吉八为皇太子。
English: On the 20th day of the month, at the Imperial Palace, Emperor Go-Shirakawa enthroned Hachihachi as empress, and his son, Prince Ajikihachi, as crown prince.

古文：己酉，以皇子八的麻亦儿间卜嗣封晋王。
现代文：二十三日，以皇子八的麻亦儿间卜嗣封晋王。
English: On the 23rd, the eighth son of the prince, Maki, was chosen to succeed to the throne.

古文：泰宁王买奴卒，以其子亦怜真朵儿赤嗣。
现代文：泰宁王买奴去世，命其子亦怜真朵儿赤嗣立。
English: Taining Wang Miao passed away, and ordered his son to also pity Zhen Doru and raise him as his heir.

古文：遣湘宁王八剌失里出镇察罕脑儿，罢宣慰司，立王傅府。
现代文：派遣湘宁王八剌失里出镇察罕脑儿，撤销宣慰司，设立王傅府。
English: He dispatched Wang Bajiao of Shonin to go out of town to investigate the cause of the accident, revoked the Consolation Division, and set up the Wang Fu Office.

古文：以知枢密院事也儿吉你为云南行省右丞相。
现代文：任命知枢密院事也儿吉你为云南行省右丞相。
English: Appointed Zhiyang Privy Council Secretary Yaerji You as Yunnan Provincial Minister of the Right.

古文：召流人还京师。
现代文：招集流亡人员返还京师。
English: The exiles were summoned to return to the capital.

古文：庚戌，月直延民真只海、阿答罕来献大珠。
现代文：二十四日，月直延民户真只海、阿答罕前来进献大珠。
English: On the twenty-fourth day of the month, the residents of Zhizhi Yancheng, Zhudaohai, and Atahan came to offer large beads.

古文：监察御史宋本、李嘉宾、傅岩起言： 太尉、司徒、司空，三公之职，滥假僧人，及会福、殊祥二院，并辱名爵，请罢之。 
现代文：监察御史宋本、李嘉宾、傅岩起上言： 太尉、司徒、司空为三公之职，滥予僧人，还有会福、殊祥二院，皆为辱没名爵，请予以撤销。 
English: Supervisors of the Imperial Historians Song Ben, Li Jiabin and Fu Yanqi made the following speech: Captain, Sutor, and Siku are the three public offices, and the abuse of monks, as well as Huifu and Shuxiang Second Academy, are all insults to the nobility, please revoke them.

古文：不报。
现代文：未得到回答。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：癸丑，诸王不赛因遣使朝贡。
现代文：二十七日，诸王不赛因遣使来朝进贡。
English: On the twenty-seventh day, the kings of Busai sent envoys to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：临洮狄道县，冀宁石州、离石、宁乡县旱，饥，赈米两月。
现代文：临洮府狄道县，冀宁路石州离石、宁乡二县干旱饥荒，赈济米谷两个月。
English: Dido County, Linfen, Jining Road, Shizhou, Liaoning, Ningxiang, two counties in drought and famine, Fujimi Valley for two months.

古文：广西横州徭寇永淳县。
现代文：广西横州瑶人入寇永淳县。
English: Guangxi's Hengzhou Yujin enters Kouyongchun County.

古文：夏四月戊午，廉恂罢为集贤大学士，食其禄终身。
现代文：夏四月初三，廉恂免职任集贤大学士，食其俸禄终身。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, Lian Ye was relieved of his duties and appointed as a member of the Academy of Merit, receiving a lifetime salary.

古文：赐乳母李氏钞千锭，赐征参卜郎军千人钞四万七千锭。
现代文：赐予乳母李氏钱钞千锭。赐予从征参卜郎的一千名军士钱钞四万七千锭。
English: Li's wet nurse was given 1,000 baht in banknotes, and 1,000 soldiers from the army were given 47,000 baht in banknotes.

古文：太尉不花、平章政事即烈，坐矫制以寡妇古哈强配撒梯，被鞫，诏以世祖旧臣，原其罪。
现代文：太尉不花、平章政事即烈，因矫制将寡妇古哈强迫配与撒梯之罪，受审讯，因其为世祖旧臣，下诏赦免其罪。
English: The captain did not spend any money, and Pingzhang's political career was in full swing. He was put on trial for the crime of forcing the widow Guha to marry Sati. Because he was the ancestor of the old minister, the emperor pardoned his crime.

古文：己未，以珠字诏赐帝师所居撒思加部。
现代文：初四，用珠字诏赐予帝师所居之地撒思加部。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 1st year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 3rd year of the 4

古文：庚申，诏整饬御史台。
现代文：初五，下诏整顿御史台。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the year, the order to rectify the historical platform was issued.

古文：作昭献元圣皇后御容殿于普庆寺。
现代文：在普庆寺建造昭献元圣皇后御容殿。
English: The Shokengen Shoshu Empress Goryo-den Hall was built at Pukei-ji Temple.

古文：辛酉，命昌王八剌失里往镇阿难答昔所居地。
现代文：初六，命昌王八剌失里前往镇守阿答从前所居之地。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Myochang Wang went to the place where the town's governor, Ata, used to live.

古文：亲王图帖睦尔至自潭州，及王禅，皆赐车帐、驼马。
现代文：亲王图帖睦尔自潭州至京师，与王禅一起，皆被赐与车帐及驼马。
English: Prince Tut Timur, from Tamzhou to Beijing, together with Wang Zen, were all given a cart and a camel.

古文：癸亥，以国言上英宗庙号曰格坚皇帝。
现代文：初八，用蒙古国语加英宗庙号为格坚皇帝。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 1st year of the 8th year of the 1st year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14

古文：修佛事于寿昌殿。
现代文：做佛事活动于寿昌。
English: Buddhist activities in Shuchang.

古文：甲子，车驾幸上都。
现代文：初九，车驾临幸上都。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, I drove to Shangdu, the capital of happiness.

古文：以诸王宽彻不花、失剌，平章政事兀伯都剌，右丞善僧等居守。
现代文：命诸侯王宽彻不花、失剌，平章政事兀伯都剌，右丞善僧等人留守。
English: Princes and lords, kings and queens, princes and princes, kings and queens, princes and queens, princes and queens, princes and queens, princes and queens, princes and queens, princes and queens, princes and queens, princes and queens, princes and queens, princes and queens, princes and queens, princes and queens, princes and queens, princes and queens, princes and queens, princes and queens, princes and queens, princes and queens, princes and queens, princes and queens and queens, princes and queens and queens, princes and queens and queens, princes and queens and queens and que

古文：以岭北行中书省左丞泼皮为中书左丞，江南行台中丞朵朵为中书参知政事，马剌罢为太史院使，罢卫士四百人还宗仁卫。
现代文：任命岭北行中书省左丞泼皮为中书左丞，江南行台中丞朵朵为中书参知政事。马剌罢免为太史院使。罢免卫士四百人返还宗仁卫。
English: He appointed Zojo Perpi, the left secretary of the Central Government of the Song Dynasty, as the left secretary of the Central Government of the Song Dynasty in the northern part of Lingjing Province, and Zojo Dodo, the right secretary of the Central Government of the Song Dynasty, as the right secretary of the Central Government of the Song Dynasty in the southern part of Jiangnan Province. Ma Jun was dismissed as the envoy of the Academy of the Grand Historian. Four hundred guardsmen were dismissed and returned to Zong Renwei.

古文：赐北庭的撒儿兀鲁军羊马。
现代文：赐予北庭的撒儿兀鲁军士羊马。
English: The Sarasvati Ram given to Kitaniwa.

古文：诸王不赛因遣使来贡。
现代文：诸王不赛因遣使前来进贡。
English: All the kings came to pay tribute to him.

古文：发兵民筑浑河堤。
现代文：调发兵民修筑浑河堤防。
English: Troops and civilians were dispatched to build a dike for the Hun River.

古文：丙寅，赐昌王八剌失里牛马橐驼。
现代文：十一日，赐予昌王八剌失里牛马骆驼。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Chang Wang was given eight lost cows, horses and camels.

古文：税僧、道邸舍积货。
现代文：对佛寺、道观房舍积货征税。
English: A tax will be levied on the accumulated goods of Buddhist temples and Taoist buildings.

古文：丁卯，遣诸王捏古伯等还和林。
现代文：十二日，派遣诸王捏古伯等返还和林。
English: On the twelfth day, they sent the kings, princes, and nobles back to Warim.

古文：封八剌失里继母买的为皇妹昌国大长公主，给银印。
现代文：封八剌失里继母买的为皇妹昌国大长公主，给予银印。
English: The eight-leaf clover lost by the stepmother was bought for the sister of the emperor, the eldest princess of Changguo, and was given a silver seal.

古文：以忽咱某丁为哈赞忽咱，主西域户籍。
现代文：任命忽咱某丁为哈赞忽咱，主掌西域户籍。
English: Appointment of Huzan Huzang Ding as the person in charge of household registration in the western region.

古文：辛未，月食既。
现代文：十六日，月全食。
English: On the 16th, there will be a total lunar eclipse.

古文：癸酉，以太子詹事秃满迭儿为中书平章政事。
现代文：十八日，任命太子詹事秃满迭儿为中书平章政事。
English: On the 18th, the crown prince Zhan Zhi Bal Man Di'er was appointed as the political secretary of the Central Government.

古文：甲戌，命咒师作佛事厌雷。
现代文：十九日，命咒师修佛事活动以镇雷。
English: On the 19th, the Buddhist activities of the life spell master started with a thunderbolt.

古文：庚辰，以风烈、月食、地震，手诏戒饬百官。
现代文：二十五日，因风烈、月食、地震，下手诏戒饬百官。
English: On the 25th, due to strong winds, a lunar eclipse, and an earthquake, hundreds of officials were ordered to evacuate.

古文：辛巳，太庙新殿成。
现代文：二十六日，太庙新殿落成。
English: On the 26th, the new hall of the Grand Temple was completed.

古文：木怜撒儿蛮部及北边蒙古户饥，赈粮、钞有差。
现代文：木怜撒儿蛮部及北部边地蒙古户饥荒，赈济粮食、钱钞不等。
English: Mongolian households in the western part of the country and in the northern borderlands were starving, and the relief supplies ranged from grain to banknotes.

古文：江陵路属县饥，云南中庆、昆明屯田水。
现代文：江陵路属县饥荒。云南中庆路昆明屯田处水灾。
English: Jiangling Road is a county famine. Yunnan Zhongqing Road Kunming Tunden is a flood.

古文：五月丁亥，监察御史董鹏南、刘潜、边笥、慕完、沙班以灾异上言： 平章乃蛮台、宣徽院使帖木儿不花、詹事秃满答儿党附逆徒，身亏臣节，太常守庙不谨，辽王擅杀宗亲，不花、即里矫制乱法，皆蒙宽宥，甚为失刑，乞定其罪，以销天变。 
现代文：五月初三，监察御史董鹏南、刘潜、边笥、慕完、沙班因灾异屡见上言 ：平章乃蛮台、宣徽院使帖木儿不花、詹事秃满答儿，党同依附于逆徒，违反臣子之节，太常官守庙不谨慎，辽王擅自杀害宗室亲属，不花、即里矫制乱法，都受到宽大处理，不合法制太甚，请正定其罪，以挽回天变。 
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, the supervisors of the Imperial Historians, Dong Pengnan, Liu Qian, Bentham, Mu Gan, and Shaban, frequently made the following comments due to the disasters and anomalies: Ping Zhang was a tyrant, Xuan Hui Yuan made Timur not spend money, Zhan Zhi was a bald man, the Party and the people adhered to the rebels, violated the festival of the vassals, too many officials were not careful in guarding the temple, Liao Wang killed his family members without permission, and did not spend money, and immediately imposed the disorderly law. They were all treated leniently. The illegal system

古文：不允。
现代文：未得到同意。
English: He did not agree to the request of the Guru.

古文：己丑，帝谕倒剌沙曰： 朕即位以来，无一人能执成法为朕言者。
现代文：初五，泰定帝晓谕倒剌沙说： 我即帝位以来，没有一人能根据成法为我加以说明。
English: On the fifth day of the first lunar month, Emperor Taiding said to Baisha, "Since I have been on the throne, no one has been able to explain my ascension according to the completed Fa.

古文：知而不言则不忠，且陷人于罪。
现代文：知而不言就是不忠，而且陷人于罪。
English: To know and not to tell is to be unfaithful, and to be trapped in sin.

古文：继自今，凡有所知，宜悉以闻，使朕明知法度，断不敢自纵。
现代文：从今以后，凡有所知，皆应上奏，让我明知法度，则断然不敢放纵。
English: From now on, everyone who knows something should play it, and if I know the rules, I absolutely dare not indulge.

古文：非独朕身，天下一切政务，能守法以行，则众皆乂安，反是，则天下罹于忧苦。 
现代文：不独对我一人如此，天下所有政务，只要能依法而行，则众人都得以安定。不这样的话，天下之人就会陷入忧苦之中。 
English: This is true not only for me, but for all government affairs in the world. As long as they are conducted in accordance with the law, everyone will be stable. Otherwise, everyone in the world will fall into misery.

古文：又曰： 凡事防之于小则易，救之于大则难，尔其以朕言明告于众，俾知所慎。 
现代文：还说 ：凡事预防于小时就容易，制止于大时就很难。你们应把我的话明告于众，使人知其所应谨慎之处。 
English: He also said: "It is easy to prevent things in the small time, but it is difficult to stop them in the big time. You should make my words known to the public and let them know where they should be cautious.

古文：壬辰，御史台臣秃忽鲁、纽泽以御史言： 灾异屡见，宰相宜避位以应天变，可否仰自圣裁。
现代文：初八，御史台官员秃忽鲁、纽泽因御史上言 ：灾异多次出现，宰相应避位以对待天变，能否实行应由皇上裁定。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the officials of the Imperial Historical Research Station, Zhao Hulu and Niu Ze, were summoned to the Imperial Historical Research Station because of the imperial historical statement: disasters and abnormalities have occurred many times, and the emperor has correspondingly avoided the throne to deal with the natural changes. Whether it can be implemented should be decided by the emperor.

古文：顾惟臣等为陛下耳目，有徇私违法者，不能纠察，慢官失守，宜先退避以授贤能。 
现代文：我等作为陛下耳目之人，有徇私违法的行为而不能纠察，怠慢国事失于职守，应先行退避，以让位于贤德之人。 
English: We, who are His Majesty's eyes and ears, cannot stand idly by when there is a breach of the law for personal gain, or a dereliction of duty in the conduct of state affairs. We should retreat first and give way to those who are virtuous.

古文：帝曰： 御史所言，其失在朕，卿等何必遽尔！ 
现代文：泰定帝说： 御史所说的事，其过失都在我身上，各位何必急着说这话呢？ 
English: Emperor Taiding said, "I am to blame for the things that history has said. Why do you all have to rush to say these things?

古文：秃忽鲁又言： 臣已老病，恐误大事，乞先退。 
现代文：秃忽鲁又开口发言： 我已老病，恐耽误国家大事，请让我先退。 
English: Bald Khu-lu spoke again: I have been ill for a long time, and I am afraid of delaying national affairs. Please let me go first.

古文：于是中书省臣兀伯都剌、张珪、杨廷玉皆抗疏乞罢。
现代文：于是中书省官员兀伯都剌、张王圭、杨廷玉皆上表求退。
English: As a result, the officials of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Zibo Tudun, Zhang Wanggui, and Yang Tingyu, all went to the table to withdraw.

古文：丞相旭迈杰、倒剌沙言： 比者灾异，陛下以忧天下为心，反躬自责，谨遵祖宗圣训，修德慎行，敕臣等各勤乃职，手诏至大都，居守省臣皆引罪自劾。
现代文：丞相旭迈杰、倒剌沙上言 ：不久前屡见灾异，陛下心忧天下，反躬自责，谨慎地遵守祖宗圣训，修德慎行，敕令我等各勤于其职，手诏到达大都，留守省臣都引罪自劾。
English: Prime Minister Xu Meijie said, "Recently, we have seen many calamities. Your Majesty is worried about the whole world. You should reproach yourself. You should carefully abide by the holy teachings of your ancestors. You should cultivate virtue and be prudent. You should order us all to be diligent in our duties. The imperial edict has arrived in the capital. The remaining provincial ministers are all guilty of self-incrimination."

古文：臣等为左右相，才下识昏，当国大任，无所襄赞，以致灾昆，罪在臣等，所当退黜，诸臣何罪。 
现代文：我俩身为左右丞相，才识低下，承担国家重任，无所救助，以致灾异屡现，罪过皆在我俩身上，应黜退的是我俩，各位大臣有什么罪过呢？ 
English: Both of us, as left- and right-wing prime ministers, have low intelligence, shoulder the heavy responsibilities of the country, and have no help, so that disasters occur repeatedly. The sins are on both of us. It is we who should retreat. What are the sins of the ministers?

古文：癸丑，命司天监翙星。
现代文：泰定帝说 ：你等如果统统告退而去，我将与谁共图国事呢？
English: Emperor Taiding said, "If you all withdraw, with whom will I conduct the affairs of state?"

古文：中书平章政事秃满迭儿、领宣徽使詹事丞回回，请如裕宗故事，择名儒辅太子，敕中书省臣访求以闻。
现代文：应各相宣谕，以尽责尽职。 十四日，将列圣神主迁于太庙新殿。十七日，循州瑶人入寇长乐县。二十日，命司天监祭星。中书平章政事秃满迭儿、领宣徽使詹事丞回回，奏请按照裕宗旧例，挑选名儒辅佐太子，敕令中书省访求得人后予以奏闻。
English: On the 14th, the holy deities were moved to the new hall of the Imperial Temple. On the 17th, the Xuzhou priests invaded Changle County. On the 20th, the priest of the celestial overseer, the star of the festival, was appointed. In accordance with the old example of Yu Zong, the Chinese Emperor Pingzhang sent the political affairs official Zhan Zhizheng back to the Chinese Emperor Pingzhang, and the Chinese Emperor Pingzhang sent the heraldic emblem official Zhan Zhizheng back to the Chinese Emperor Pingzhang.

古文：袁州火，龙庆、延安、吉安、杭州、大都诸路属县水，民饥，赈粮有差。
现代文：袁州火灾，龙庆、延安、吉安、杭州、大都诸路属县水灾，人民受饥，赈济粮食不等。
English: Fires in Yuanzhou, floods in Longqing, Yan'an, Ji'an, Hangzhou and other counties in the country, people suffering from hunger, and food shortages.

古文：六月乙卯朔，遣诸王阔阔出镇畏兀，赐金、银、钞千计。
现代文：六月初一，派遣诸王阔阔出镇守畏兀，赐予黄金、白银、钱钞以千计。
English: On the first day of June, all the kings were sent out to defend the city, and thousands of gold, silver, and banknotes were given.

古文：戊午，云南蒙化州高兰神场寨主照明罗九等寇威楚。
现代文：初四，云南行省蒙化州高兰神场寨主照明罗九等人入寇威楚。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, Luo Jiu, the chief illuminator of Gaolan God's Village in Menghua County, Yunnan Province, and others entered Wei Chu.

古文：庚申，张珪自大都至，以守臣集议事言： 逆党未讨，奸恶未除，忠愤未雪，冤枉未理，政令不信，赏罚不公，赋役不均，财用不节，请裁择之。 
现代文：初六，张王圭从大都来，将守臣集议之事上言： 逆党未予讨伐，奸恶之徒未除去，忠愤之士未能昭雪，冤枉不能审明，政令不信，赏罚不公、赋役不均，财用不节，请皇上予以裁决择定。 
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Zhang Wang Gui came from Dadu to raise the matter of collecting the subjects for discussion: the rebel party has not been defeated, the traitors have not been eliminated, the loyalists have not been cleared up, the wrongdoers cannot be judged, the government orders are not trusted, the rewards and punishments are not fair, the rewards and duties are not equal, and the financial use is not appropriate, please ask the emperor to make a ruling and selection.

古文：不允。
现代文：未接受这项提议。
English: He did not agree to the request of the Guru.

古文：诸王阿木哥薨，赙钞千锭。
现代文：诸侯王阿不哥去世，赠予钱钞一千锭。
English: After the death of Abungo, the Prince of the Princes, he gave a thousand baht in banknotes.

古文：诸王宽彻、亦里吉赤来朝。
现代文：诸侯王宽彻、亦里赤来朝。
English: Princes such as Prince Kancho and Prince Iriaka came to the imperial court.

古文：赐驸马铁木儿等部钞一万三千锭，北边戍兵钞万六千八十锭。
现代文：赐予驸马铁木儿等部钱钞一万三千锭，北方边地戍守兵士钱钞一万六千零八十锭。
English: A total of 13,000 baht in banknotes was given to soldiers of the Horse Cavalry and Timber Corps, and 16,080 baht in banknotes was given to soldiers of the Northern Frontier.

古文：赈蒙古饥民，遣还所部。
现代文：赈济蒙古族饥民，遣还所部。
English: He helped the starving Mongolian people and was sent back to the capital.

古文：延安路饥，禁酒。
现代文：延安路饥荒，禁止酿酒。
English: Yan'an Road famine, prohibition of brewing.

古文：丙寅，遣使招谕参卜郎。
现代文：初九，在上都及大同路建造礼拜寺。十二日，派遣使者招谕参卜郎。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, a worship temple was built in Shangdu and Datong Road. On the 12th day, an envoy was sent to summon Sambrao.

古文：遣阔阔出等诣高丽，取女子三十人。
现代文：派遣阔阔出等人前往高丽。选取女子三十人。
English: They sent a group of men and women to Goryeo and selected 30 women.

古文：广西左右两江黄胜许、岑世兴乞遣其子弟朝贡，许之。
现代文：广西左右两江黄胜许、岑世兴奏请遣其子弟入朝进贡，同意这项请求。
English: Huang Shengxu and Gong Shixingso of the two rivers around Guangxi requested that their sons be sent to the court to pay tribute, and they agreed to this request.

古文：丁卯，大幄殿成，作镇雷坐静佛寺。
现代文：十三日，大幄殿落成，做镇雷坐静佛事活动。
English: On the 13th, the Great Hall of the Ancestors was completed, and Buddhist activities were carried out.

古文：庚午，置海剌秃屯田总管府。
现代文：十六日，设置海剌秃屯田总管府。
English: On the 16th, the General Administration Office of Seagulls in ZhaoDunTian was established.

古文：辛未，修黑牙蛮答哥佛事于水晶殿。
现代文：十七日，在水晶殿做黑哥蛮答哥佛事活动。
English: On the 17th, in the Crystal Hall, there will be a black brother and a white brother Buddhist activity.

古文：癸酉，帝受佛戒于帝师。
现代文：十九日，泰定帝从帝师那儿接受佛戒。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Taiding received the Buddhist precepts from the emperor.

古文：己卯，诸王怯别等遣其宗亲铁木儿不花等，奉驯豹、西马来朝贡。
现代文：二十五日，诸王怯别等人派遣其宗室亲属铁木儿不花等人，恭奉驯豹、西马来朝进贡。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, all the kings and queens sent their relatives, such as Tiemu Er Fuxa and others, to pay tribute to the caribou and West Malay.

古文：诏： 疏决系囚，存恤军士，免天下和买杂役三年，蜒户差税一年。
现代文：颁布诏书说： 疏决待审囚徒，抚恤军士，蠲免天下和买杂役三年。譙户差税一年。
English: The edict was issued, saying: "Prisoners awaiting trial will be released, military officers will be given a pension, the country will be exempted from taxes and miscellaneous services for three years, and households will be exempted from taxes for one year."

古文：百官四品以下，普覃散官一等，三品递进一阶。
现代文：百官四品以下者，普进散官一等，三品以上官员递进一级官阶。
English: Officials with four or less out of a hundred court ranks will be promoted to the first grade, and officials with three or more court ranks will be promoted to the first grade.

古文：远仕瘴地，身故不得归葬，妻子流落者，有司资给遣还，仍著为令。 
现代文：远去烟瘴地面任职，去世后不能归葬故乡，妻子儿女流离失所者，有关主管部门出资使之返还，并按旧例著为律令。
English: Those who go far away to work on the ground of smokestacks, cannot be buried in their hometowns after death, and their wives and children are displaced, the relevant competent departments shall make contributions to return them, and the laws and regulations shall be made according to the old practice.

古文：云南大理路你囊为寇。
现代文： 云南大理路你囊作乱。
English: Yunnan Dali Road, you are creating chaos.

古文：大都，真定晋州、深州，奉元诸路及甘肃河渠营田等处，雨伤稼，赈粮二月。
现代文：大都路，真定路晋州、深州，奉元等路及甘肃行省河渠营田等处，雨水伤害庄稼，赈济粮食三个月。
English: Dadu Road, Zhending Road in Jinzhou, Shenzhou, Fengyuan Road and other roads in Gansu Province, the rainwater damaged crops and saved grain for three months.

古文：大司农屯田、诸卫屯田、彰德、汴梁等路雨伤稼，顺德、大名、河间、东平等二十一郡蝗，晋宁、巩昌、常德、龙兴等处饥，皆发粟赈之。
现代文：大司农屯田、诸卫屯田、彰德、汴梁等路雨水伤害庄稼，顺德、大名、河间、东平等二十一路蝗灾，晋宁、巩昌、常德、龙兴等路饥荒，皆调拨粮食予以赈济。
English: Daisho Nongtunden, Zhuwei Tunden, Zhangde, Qiliang and other areas suffered from rainwater damage to crops, Shunde, Daimyo, Hema and Dongping suffered from locust plagues, and Jinning, Gongchang, Changde and Longxing areas suffered from famine. Grain was allocated to alleviate the situation.

古文：大同浑源河，真定滹沱河，陕西渭水、黑水，渠州江水皆溢，并漂民庐舍。
现代文：大同路浑源河，真定路滹沱河，陕西渭水、黑水，渠州江水皆漫溢，并淹没民户房舍。
English: The Hunyuan River in Datong Road, the Lugu River in Zhending Road, the Lishui and Heishui Rivers in Shaanxi Province, and the Quzhou River all overflowed and flooded the houses of private households.

古文：宣德府、巩昌路及八番金石番等处雨雹。
现代文：宣德府、巩昌路及八番金石番等处降冰雹。
English: Hailstones fell in Xuandefu, Gongchang Road and Yabang Jinshiban.

古文：河间、晋宁、泾州、扬州、寿春等路，湖广、河南诸屯田皆旱。
现代文：河间、晋宁、泾州、扬州、寿春等路，湖广、河南各屯田处皆遭旱灾。 
English: Riverside, Jinning, Zhangzhou, Yangzhou, Shuchun and other roads, as well as Huguang and other townships in Henan Province, have all been affected by drought.

古文：秋七月丙戌，思州平茶杨大车、酉阳州冉世昌寇小石耶、凯江等寨，调兵捕之。
现代文：秋七月初二，思州平茶杨大车、酉阳州冉世昌入寇小耶、凯江等寨子，调发兵马予以剿捕。
English: On the second day of early July in autumn, Yang Dache from Pingcha County, Shizhou Province and Ran Shichang from Poyang County entered the villages of Kouxiaoye and Kaijiang, and dispatched soldiers and horses to capture them.

古文：诸王阿马薨，赙钞五千锭。
现代文：诸王阿马逝世，赠予钱钞五千锭。
English: When King Ama died, he gave away 5,000 baht in banknotes.

古文：赐云南王王禅钞二千锭，诸王阿都赤钞三千锭。
现代文：赐予云南王王禅钱钞二千锭，诸侯王阿都赤钱钞三千锭。
English: The king of Yunnan, King Zen, was given 2,000 baht in banknotes, and the prince, King Adu, was given 3,000 baht in red banknotes.

古文：作楠木殿。
现代文：建造楠木殿。
English: Construction of Kusunoki-den begins.

古文：招谕船领、义宁、灵川等处徭。
现代文：招谕船领、义宁、灵川等处瑶民。
English: Invite boatmen, Yining, Lingchuan and other places to go.

古文：庚寅，遣使代祀岳渎。
现代文：初六，遣使代为祭祀山川之神。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, the envoys came to offer sacrifices to the gods of mountains and rivers.

古文：丙申，以诸王薛彻秃袭统其父完者所部，仍给故印。
现代文：十二日，命诸王薛彻秃袭职统率其父完者旧部，仍给其父旧印。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the king ordered Xue Che to take over his father's old post, and he still gave his father the old seal.

古文：己亥，赈蒙古流民，给钞二十九万锭，遣还，仍禁毋擅离所部，违者斩。
现代文：十五日，赈济蒙古族流民，给予钱钞二十九万锭，遣还原处，照旧禁止不得擅离所部，违令者斩首。
English: On the 15th, the Mongolian refugees were given 290,000 baht in money and banknotes. They were sent back to the place of origin. As before, they were not allowed to leave the camp without permission, and violators were beheaded.

古文：庚子，诸王伯颜帖木儿出镇阔连东部，阿剌忒纳失里出镇沙州，各赐钞三千锭。
现代文：十六日，诸王伯颜帖木儿出镇阔连东部，阿剌忒纳失里出镇沙州，各赐予钱钞三千锭。
English: On the 16th, the kings Bo Yan and Timur went out of the town to the eastern part of Guolian, and Ahna Zuli went out of the town to Shazhou, and each was given 3,000 baht in banknotes.

古文：撒忒迷失率卫士佐太师按塔出行边，赐钞千锭。
现代文：撒忒迷失统率卫士辅佐太师按塔出巡行边地，赐予钱钞千锭。
English: The leader of the Lost Order of the Satyrs, the Guardian, the Assistant Assistant Grand Master, marched out of the pagoda and gave out thousands of coins.

古文：癸卯，罢广州、福建等处采珠蜒户为民，仍免差税一年。
现代文：十九日，罢免广州、福建等处采取珍珠的譙户为民户，按旧例免除差税一年。
English: On the 19th, the households in Guangzhou, Fujian and other places that adopted the pearl were removed as private households and exempted from the tax for one year according to the old practice.

古文：丙午，以畏兀字译西番经。
现代文：二十二日，用畏兀文字翻译西番佛经。
English: On the 22nd, the translation of the West Pan Buddhist sutra was carried out.

古文：丁未，翙星于上都司天监。
现代文：二十三日，在上都司天监祭星。
English: On the 23rd, the star of the festival of the celestial overseer, the chief priest of Shangdu, appeared.

古文：以山东盐运司判官马合谟为吏部尚书，佩虎符，翰林修撰扬宗瑞为礼部郎中，佩金符，奉即位诏往谕安南。
现代文：任命山东盐运司判官马合谟为吏部尚书，佩戴虎符，翰林修撰杨宗瑞为礼部郎中，佩挂金符，奉即位诏书往谕安南。
English: The judge of the Shandong Salt Transportation Division, Ma Haomu, was appointed as the secretary of the personnel department, wearing a tiger badge. Hanlin Shuxian Yang Zongrui was appointed as the vice-minister of the ceremonial department, wearing a gold badge, and sent the imperial edict of enthronement to Annan.

古文：置长庆寺，以宦者阿亦伯为寺卿。
现代文：设置长庆寺，任命宦官阿亦伯为长庆寺卿。
English: Chokei-ji Temple was established, and eunuch Ayibo was appointed as chancellor of the temple.

古文：罢中瑞司。
现代文：撤销中瑞司。
English: Revocation of Sino-Swedish Division.

古文：中书省臣言： 东宫卫士，先朝止三千人，今增至万七千，请命詹事院汰去，仍依旧制。 
现代文：中书省官员上言 ：东宫卫士，先朝只用三千人，现已增至一万七千，请下令詹事府加以挑选，使之遵守旧例。 
English: An official from the People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's People's Republic of China's

古文：从之。
现代文：接受这项提议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：戊申，以籍入铁木迭儿及子班丹、观音奴赀产给还其家。
现代文：二十四日，将抄没铁木迭儿及其子班丹、观音奴的财产归还其家。
English: On the 24th, the property confiscated from Tiemu Dieru, his son Bantan, and Guanyin will be returned to their families.

古文：奉元路朝邑县、曹州楚丘县、大名路开州濮阳县河溢，大都路固安州清河溢，顺德路任县沙、沣、洺水溢，真定、广平、庐州等十一郡雨伤稼，龙庆州雨雹大如鸡子，平地深三尺，定州屯河溢、山崩，免河渠营田租。
现代文：奉元路朝邑县、曹州楚丘县、大名路开州濮阳县黄河水溢，大都路固安州清河水溢，顺德路任县沙河、氵名河水溢，真定、广平、庐州等十一路雨水伤害庄稼，龙庆州降冰雹大如鸡蛋，平地深达三尺，定州屯河水漫溢，山陵崩塌，免除河渠营田租税。
English: Fengyuan Road, Chaoyu County, Caozhou Chuqiu County, Daming Road, Kaizhou Fenyang County, the Yellow River overflowed, Datu Road, Guanzhou Qinghe River overflowed, Shunde Road, Ren County, Shahe River, Yunnan River overflowed, 11 roads of rainwater such as Zhending, Guangping, and Zhangzhou damaged crops, Longqingzhou hailstone was as big as an egg, and the flat land was up to three feet deep, Dingzhou Tunhe River overflowed, and the mountains collapsed, and the river channels were exempted from farmland tax.

古文：大都、巩昌、延安、冀宁、龙兴等处饥，赈粜有差。
现代文：大都、巩昌、延安、冀宁、龙兴等路饥荒，平价售粮予以赈济。
English: Most of Dadu, Gongchang, Yan'an, Jining, Longxing and other areas are suffering from famine, and the sale of grain at a reasonable price is the best way to alleviate the situation.

古文：广西庆远徭酋潘父绢等率众来降，署为簿、尉等官有差。
现代文：广西庆远瑶人首领潘父绢等率众来降，用为簿、尉等官。
English: The leader of the Qingyuan people in Guangxi, Pan Fuxi, led the crowd to come down, and was used as a bookkeeper, lieutenant and other officials.

古文：加封温州故平阳侯曰英烈侯。
现代文：加封温州故平阳侯为英烈侯。
English: The late Pingyang marquis of Wenzhou in Gafu is a heroic marquis.

古文：八月甲寅，彻彻儿、火儿火思之地五千贫乏，赈粮二月。
现代文：八月初一，彻彻儿、火儿火思之地五千户贫乏，赈济粮食两个月。
English: On the first day of August, five thousand households in the Land of Fire and Dreams were destitute, and food rations were rationed for two months.

古文：乙卯，敕以刑狱复隶宗正府，依世祖旧制，刑部勿与。
现代文：初二，敕令将刑事讼诉再次隶属于宗正府，依照世祖旧制，刑部不得参与。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict once again subordinated criminal proceedings to the Munemasa government, and in accordance with the ancestral old system, the criminal department was not allowed to participate.

古文：丙辰，享太庙。
现代文：初三，祭享太祖。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, a festival is held at the Imperial Palace.

古文：丁巳，赐诸王八里台、黄头钞各千五百锭。
现代文：初四，赐予诸王八里台、黄头钱钞各一千五百锭。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, he gave each of the princes a gold coin of 1,500 baht and a silver coin of 800 baht.

古文：禁言赦前事。
现代文：禁止谈论赦前之事。
English: It is forbidden to talk about what happened before the pardon.

古文：庚申，市牝马万匹取湩酒。
现代文：初七，买母马万匹以做酿造马奶酒之用。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, he bought 10,000 mares to make horse milk wine.

古文：赈帖列干、木伦等驿户粮、钞有差。
现代文：赈济帖列干、木伦等处驿户粮食钱钞不等。
English: Seto's grain banknotes can be found in the rows of rice paddies, in the mulberry groves and other places.

古文：辛亥，遣翰林学士承旨斡赤祀太祖、太宗、睿宗御容于普庆寺。
现代文：初八，派遣翰林学士承旨斡赤祭祀太祖、太宗、睿宗御容于普庆寺。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Hanlin scholars were dispatched to Puqing Temple to perform the red sacrifice for the ancestors of the Taizong and Ruizong dynasties.

古文：赐亲王图帖睦尔钞三千锭。
现代文：赐予亲王图帖睦尔钱钞三千锭。
English: Prince Tutetimur was given 3,000 baht in banknotes.

古文：庚午，作中宫金脊殿。
现代文：十七日，建造中宫金脊殿。
English: On the 17th, the construction of the Middle Palace, the Golden Spine Hall, began.

古文：辛未，绘帝师八思巴像十一颁各行省，俾塑祀之。
现代文：十八日，画帝师八思巴肖像十一幅分发给各行省，以供塑像祭祀之用。
English: On the 18th, eleven portraits of the master painter Hachizuba were distributed to all provinces for use in statue sacrifices.

古文：敕武官坐罪制授者以闻，敕授者从行省处决。
现代文：敕令武官有罪过，制授者奏闻朝廷，敕授由行省处理决定。
English: If a military attaché is found guilty, the award-giver will report to the Imperial Court, and the award will be handled by the province.

古文：以金泉馆酒课赐公主寿宁。
现代文：将金泉馆酒税赐予公主寿宁。
English: He gave Princess Suning the tax from the Kinsen-kan liquor store.

古文：丁丑，罢浚玉泉山河役。
现代文：二十四日，罢免疏浚玉泉山河水的工役。
English: On the 24th, the worker who dredged Yuquanshan River was dismissed.

古文：车驾至大都。
现代文：车驾到达大都。
English: Most of the way to the capital is by car.

古文：癸未，敕枢密役军凡三百人以上奏闻。
现代文：三十日，敕令枢密院役使军士三百人以上者奏闻朝廷。
English: On the 30th, more than 300 officers and men of the Privy Council were ordered to report to the Imperial Court.

古文：诏谕云南大车里、小车里。
现代文：下诏晓谕云南大车里、小车里。
English: The following edict clarifies that Yunnan is a big car and a small car.

古文：秦州成纪县大雨，山崩，水溢，壅土至来谷河成丘阜。
现代文：秦州成纪县天降大雨，山陵崩塌，河水横溢，土石壅积于来谷河中形成高坡。
English: Heavy rain fell in Qinzhou Chengji County, mountains collapsed, rivers overflowed, and soil and rock accumulated in the middle of the Laiya River to form a high slope.

古文：汴梁、济南属县雨水伤稼，赈之。
现代文：汴梁、济南二路属县雨水伤害庄稼，予以赈济。
English: Qiliang and Jinan 2nd Road belong to the county's rainwater-damaged crops, and will be relieved.

古文：延安、冀宁、杭州、潭州等十二郡及诸王哈伯等部饥，赈粮有差。
现代文：延安、冀宁、杭州、潭州等十二路及诸王哈伯等部饥荒，分别赈济粮食不等。
English: Yan'an, Jining, Hangzhou, Tanzhou and other twelve provinces, as well as provinces such as Hebei, were affected by famine, and the amount of grain they received varied.

古文：九月乙酉，封也速不坚为荆王，赐金印。
现代文：九月初二，册封也速不坚为荆王，赐予金印。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, he was crowned the King of Jing and given the golden seal.

古文：以宣德府复隶上都留守司。
现代文：将宣德府再次隶属于上都留守司。
English: Xuandefu will once again be subordinated to Shangdu Remaining Division.

古文：辛卯，罢哈思的结鲁思伴卜总统所，更置临洮总管府。
现代文：初八，撤销哈思的结鲁思伴卜总统所，另置临洮总管府。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the President's Office of Keluth Pangbo was revoked, and the Linyi General Administration Office was established.

古文：赐潜邸卫士钞万锭。
现代文：赐予潜邸卫士钱钞万锭。
English: The guardian of the hidden mansion was given a lot of money.

古文：丙申，葺太祖神御殿。
现代文：十三日，修葺太祖神御殿。
English: On the 13th, the repair of the Grandfather God's palace was completed.

古文：乙巳，昭献元圣皇后忌日修佛事饭僧万万人，敕存恤武卫军一年。
现代文：二十二日，昭献元圣皇后忌日修佛事活动供养僧徒万人。敕令抚恤武卫军一年。
English: On the 22nd, Zhaojian dedicated the day of the death of the former holy empress to Buddhist activities to support thousands of monks and nuns. The imperial order to support the armed forces for one year.

古文：癸丑，以籍入阿散家赀给其子脱列。
现代文：三十日，将抄没阿散的家财给予其子脱列。
English: On the 30th, the family wealth that had been confiscated from Ahsan was given to his son and removed from the list.

古文：改邕州为南宁路。
现代文：改邕州为南宁路。
English: Rename Luzhou as Nanning Road.

古文：岑世兴遣其弟兴元来朝贡。
现代文：岑世兴派遣其弟世元来朝进贡。
English: Gong Shixing sent his younger brother Shiyuan to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：奉元路长安县大雨，沣水溢，延安路洛水溢，濮州馆陶县及诸卫屯田水，建昌、绍兴二路饥，赈粮有差。
现代文：奉元路长安县下大雨，沣水漫溢，延安路洛水漫溢，濮州馆陶县及诸卫屯田处水灾，建昌、绍兴二路饥荒，赈济粮食不等。
English: It rained heavily in Chang'an County, Fengyuan Road, and the irrigation water overflowed, and the water overflowed in Luo County, Yan'an Road, and the flood occurred in Guantao County and Zhuwei County, and the famine occurred in Jianchang and Shaoxing Second Road, and the food aid varied.

古文：冬十月乙卯，秦州成纪县赵氏妇一产三男。
现代文：冬十月初二，秦州成纪县赵氏妇人一胎生三个男孩。
English: On the second day of October in winter, a Zhao woman in Qinzhou Chengji County gave birth to three boys.

古文：成都嘉谷生一茎九穗。
现代文：成都产生嘉谷，一茎上结九穗。
English: Chengdu produces Jiayu, with nine shoots on one stem.

古文：丁巳，监察御史王士元请早谕教太子，帝嘉纳之。
现代文：初四，监察御史王士元奏请早日教导太子，泰定帝满意地接受此项提议。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the overseer of the Wang Shiyuan asked the prince to teach the prince at an early date, and Emperor Taiding accepted this proposal with satisfaction.

古文：戊午，享太庙。
现代文：初五，祭享太庙。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the temple is dedicated.

古文：立寿福总管府，秩正三品，典累朝神御殿祭祀及钱谷事，降大天源延圣寺总管府为提点所以隶之。
现代文：设立寿福总管府，品秩为正三品，掌管累朝神御殿的祭祀及钱谷之事；将大天源延圣寺总管府降格为提点所，并隶属于寿福总管府。
English: Establishment of the Shufuku General Administration Office, with the rank of Shosan Sanpon (Senior Third Rank), in charge of the rituals of the Lecho Shinto Shrine and Qiantan affairs; downgraded the Datengen Enshu-ji Temple General Administration Office to a reference point, and subordinated to the Shufuku General Administration Office.

古文：庚申，命左、右相日直禁中，有事则赴中书。
现代文：初七，命左、右丞相每日轮值于皇宫内，有事方才前往中书省。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the left and right ministers of the imperial court rotated daily in the imperial palace, and only went to the Ministry of Education and Culture when there was a need.

古文：丙寅，太白犯斗。
现代文：十三日，金星凌犯斗宿。
English: On the 13th, Jin Xing Ling committed a crime.

古文：己巳，太白入斗，太阴犯填星。
现代文：十六日，金星进入斗宿方位之内。太阴星凌犯土星。
English: On the 16th, Venus entered the dojo direction. The great yin star overtook Saturn.

古文：云南车里蛮为寇，遣斡耳朵奉诏招谕之。其酋塞赛子尼而雁、构木子刁零出降。
现代文：云南车里蛮作乱，派遣斡耳朵奉诏加以招谕，其首领寒赛之子尼面雁、构木之子刁零出降。
English: The carts of Yunnan made a lot of trouble, and sent out messengers to invite them, and their leaders Ni Mian Geese, the son of Hansai, and Jie Mu, the son of Jie Mu, came and went.

古文：庚午，太白犯斗。
现代文：十七日，金星凌犯斗宿。
English: On the seventeenth day, Jin Xing Ling committed a crime.

古文：壬申，安南国世子陈日爌遣其臣莫节夫等来朝贡。
现代文：十九日，安南国世子陈日火广派遣其臣莫节夫等人来朝进贡。
English: On the 19th, Chen Riguang, the heir of Annan, sent his vassal Mo Xifu and others to pay tribute to the North.

古文：真州珠金沙河，松江府、吴江州诸河淤塞，诏所在有司佣民丁浚之。
现代文：真州珠金沙河、松江府、吴江州各河道淤塞，诏令所在之地官府雇佣劳工加以疏浚。
English: The Pearl River in Zhenzhou, Songjiang Prefecture and Wujiang Prefecture were silted up, and the local government hired laborers to dredge them.

古文：丙子，命帝师作佛事于延春阁。
现代文：二十二日，命帝师在延春阁做佛事活动。
English: On the 22nd, Myochunji was doing Buddhist activities in Yanchunge.

古文：丁丑，缅国王子吾者那等争立，岁贡不入，命云南行省谕之。
现代文：二十四日，缅国王子吾者那等人因争夺王位，致使岁贡不进，命云南行省遣使招谕。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the son of the king of Burma, who was fighting for the throne, caused the tribute not to be paid, and sent an envoy to Yunnan Province.

古文：徙封云南王王禅为梁王，食邑益阳州六万五千户，仍以其子帖木儿不花袭封云南王。
现代文：改封云南王王禅为梁王，食邑为益阳州六万五千户，仍命其子帖木儿不花袭封为云南王。
English: He changed the title of the king of Yunnan, Wang Zhen, to the king of Liang, and the food village to the sixty-five thousand households of Yiyang Prefecture. He still ordered his son, Timur, to succeed to the title of the king of Yunnan.

古文：封亲王图帖睦尔为怀王，食邑瑞州六万五千户，增岁赐币帛千匹，并赐金印。
现代文：册封亲王图帖睦尔为怀王，食邑为瑞州六万五千户，增加岁赐币帛千匹并赐予金印。
English: He proclaimed Prince Tut Timur as the King-in-waiting, provided food for 65,000 households in Seozhou, increased the number of years of life, bestowed thousands of coins, and bestowed a gold seal.

古文：壬午，荧惑犯垒壁阵。
现代文：二十九日，火星凌犯垒壁阵。
English: On the 29th, Mars breached the dike.

古文：肇庆徭黄宝才等降。
现代文：肇庆瑶人黄宝才等投降。
English: Zhao Qing and Huang Baocai surrendered.

古文：延安路饥，发义仓粟赈之，仍给钞四千锭。
现代文：延安路饥荒，调发义仓粮食以赈济，按例给予钱钞四千锭。
English: During the famine in Yan'an Road, donations of grain were sent to relieve the famine, and 4,000 baht in banknotes and coins were given as usual.

古文：广东道及武昌路江夏县饥，赈粜有差。
现代文：广东道及武昌路江夏县饥荒，赈济平卖粮食不等。
English: In Guangdong and Wuchang Road, Jiangxia County, there is a famine, and Jiping sells grain.

古文：河南廉访使买奴坐多征公田租免官。
现代文：河南廉访使买奴因多收公田租税之罪罢官。
English: Henan Liangzhi ordered the buyer to be dismissed for the crime of overcharging public land tax.

古文：以鲁国大长公主女适怀王。
现代文：将鲁国大长公主之女嫁给怀王。
English: He married the daughter of the eldest princess of the State of Lu to King Huai.

古文：十一月己丑，命道士修醮事。
现代文：十一月初七，命道士做醮事活动。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, there will be a series of activities to commemorate Taoists.

古文：癸巳，遣兵部员外郎宋本，吏部员外郎郑立、阿鲁灰，工部主事张成，太史院都事费著，分调闽海、两广、四川、云南选。
现代文：十一日，派遣兵部员外郎宋本，吏部员外郎郑立、阿鲁灰，工部主事张成，太史院都事费著，分别调往闽海、两广、四川、云南诠选。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Song Ben, a member of the military department, Zheng Li, a member of the administrative department, Zhang Cheng, the head of the engineering department, and Tai Shi Yuan, a member of the history department, were dispatched to Bohai, Liangguang, Sichuan, and Yunnan respectively.

古文：诸王不赛因言其臣出班有功，请官之，以出班为开府仪同三司、翊国公，给银印、金符。
现代文：诸侯王不赛因上奏说其臣出班有功劳请给予官职，任用出班为开府仪同三司、翊国公，给予银印与金符。
English: Princes and lords did not hesitate to report to the emperor that their vassals who had distinguished themselves while on duty should be given official posts, and they were appointed to the posts of Kaifu Yi, Sanji, and Shikokuko, and were given silver seals and gold charms.

古文：赐诸王散术台、也速速儿钞各千五百锭，斡耳朵罕钞千二百锭，鲁宾钞千五百锭。
现代文：赐与诸王散术台、也速速儿钱钞各一千五百锭，斡耳朵罕钱钞一千二百锭，鲁宾钱钞一千五百锭。
English: He gave each of the kings 1500 baht for the sansaku table, 1200 baht for the yakitori bill, 1200 baht for the yakitori bill, and 1500 baht for the rubin bill.

古文：甲午，禜星于回回司天监。
现代文：十二日，在回回司天监祭星。
English: On the twelfth day, at the return of the priest, the festival star.

古文：己亥，以术温台知枢密院事。
现代文：十七日，任命术温台知枢密院事。
English: On the 17th, he was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：辛丑，造金宝盖，饰以七宝，贮佛舍利。
现代文：十九日，建造金宝顶盖，用七宝做装饰，以贮存佛舍利子。
English: On the 19th, the golden treasure roof was built, decorated with cloisonné, to store the Buddha's relics.

古文：甲辰，作歇山鹿顶楼于上都。
现代文：二十二日，建造歇山鹿顶楼于上都。
English: On the 22nd, the Xie Shanlu penthouse was built in Shangdu.

古文：丁未，释笞四十七以下囚及轻罪流人，给钞二千锭散与贫者。
现代文：二十五日，赦免笞刑四十七以上囚徒及轻罪流放者，给予钱钞二千锭分发给穷人。
English: On the 25th, he pardoned 47 prisoners who had been sentenced to flogging and those who had been exiled for minor crimes, and distributed 2,000 baht in cash and banknotes to the poor.

古文：印明年钞本至元钞四十万锭、中统钞十万锭。
现代文：印制明年钞本至元钞四十万锭、中统钞十万锭。
English: Next year, banknotes up to 400,000 baht and 100,000 baht will be printed.

古文：己酉，诏免也里可温、答失蛮差役。
现代文：二十七日，下诏免除也里可温、答失蛮差役。
English: On the 27th, the following edict exempted Yari, Kewen, and Atsushi from being sent to labor camps.

古文：庚戌，招谕融州徭般领、大、小木龙等百七十五团。
现代文：二十八日，招谕融州瑶人般领，大、小木笼等一百七十五团。
English: On the 28th, 175 groups, including large and small wooden cages, were invited to Rongzhou.

古文：河间路饥，赈粮二月。
现代文：河间路饥荒，赈济粮食两个月。
English: Famine in Kawama-ro, food rationing for two months.

古文：汴梁、信州、泉州、南安、赣州等路饥，赈粜有差。
现代文：汴梁、信州、泉州、南安、赣州等路饥荒，赈济平卖粮食不一。
English: Qilian, Shinshu, Quanzhou, Nan'an, Zhangzhou and other provinces are suffering from famine.

古文：嘉定路龙兴县饥，赈粮一月。
现代文：嘉定路龙游等县饥荒，赈济粮食一个月。
English: Longyou and other counties in Jiading Road suffered from famine, and food rations were provided for one month.

古文：大都、上都、兴和等路十三驿饥，赈钞八千五百锭。
现代文：大都、上都、兴和等路十三处驿站饥荒，赈济钱钞八千五百锭。
English: Thirteen stations along the Dadu, Shangdu, Xinghe and other routes suffered from famine, and the relief money amounted to 8,500 baht.

古文：十二月癸丑朔，以岑世兴为怀远大将军，遥授沿边溪洞军民安抚使，佩虎符，仍来安路总管；黄胜许为怀远大将军，遥授沿边溪洞军民安抚使，佩虎符，致仕，其子志熟袭为上思州知州。
现代文：十二月初一，任命岑世兴为怀远大将军，遥授沿边溪洞军民安抚使，佩挂虎符，并照旧为来安路总管，黄胜许为怀远大将军，遥授沿边溪洞军民安抚使，佩挂虎符，退职，其子黄志熟袭职为上思州知州。
English: On the first day of December, Zou Shixing was appointed as the general of Huaiyuan, the military and civilian pacification envoy along the Border Creek Cave, wearing a tiger emblem, and was still the general manager of Lai'an Road, Huang Shengxu was appointed as the general of Huaiyuan, the military and civilian pacification envoy along the Border Creek Cave, wearing a tiger emblem, and retired, and his son Huang Zhizhuang assumed the post of Shangshi Zhizhou.

古文：降诏宣谕，仍各赐币帛二。
现代文：降下诏旨宣谕，照例各赐币帛二份。
English: The imperial edict was issued, and, as usual, two coins were issued.

古文：乙卯，云南徭阿吾及歪闹为寇，行省督兵捕之。
现代文：初三，云南瑶人阿吾及歪闹作乱，行省官员督率兵马予以剿捕。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the Yunnan Xingren Agu and the crooked made a mess, and the provincial officials led the soldiers and horses to arrest them.

古文：庚申，同州地震，有声如雷。
现代文：初八，同州地震，有地声如雷鸣。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, an earthquake in the same prefecture caused a thunderous rumble.

古文：癸亥，盐官州海水溢，屡坏堤障，侵城郭，遣使祀海神，仍与有司视形势所便，还请叠石为塘，诏曰： 筑塘是重劳吾民也，其增石囤扞御，庶天其相之。 
现代文：十一日，盐官州海水倒灌，多次毁坏堤防，侵损城墙。朝廷派遣使者祭祀海神，使者于是与有关部门巡察地形与潮势，返还后奏请垒石砌筑海塘。下诏说 ：修筑海塘会使人民更为劳苦。还是增补石围加以抵御，也许老天会保佑的。 
English: On the 11th day of the month, the salt water of the Yangtze River flooded the city, repeatedly destroying the dike and damaging the city wall. The imperial court sent an emissary to worship the sea god. The emissary then inspected the terrain and tides with the relevant departments, and after returning the emissary asked for a foundation stone to build a seawall. The next edict said: Building a seawall will make the people more laborious. It is better to add a stone enclosure to resist it. Perhaps God will bless it.

古文：乙丑，给蒙古子女孳畜。
现代文：十三日，给予蒙古族子女繁殖所需的牲畜。
English: On the 13th, Mongolian children were given livestock needed for breeding.

古文：丙寅，命翰林国史院修纂《英宗》、《显宗实录》。
现代文：十四日，命令翰林国史院修纂《英宗实录》与《显宗实录》。
English: On the 14th, he ordered the Hanlin Institute of National History to compile the "Eing Sect Record" and the "Hsien Sect Record."

古文：敕： 内外百官凡行朝贺等礼，雨雪免朝服。 
现代文：敕令 ：内外百官凡举行朝贺等礼仪时，逢雨雪天可免朝服。 
English: Imperial edict: All officials, both at home and abroad, are exempt from wearing morning dress in the event of rain or snow when holding ceremonies such as morning greetings.

古文：庚午，荧惑犯外屏。
现代文：十八日，火星凌犯外屏。
English: On the 18th, the Mars invasion was off-screen.

古文：辛未，新作棕殿成。
现代文：十九日，新建的棕殿落成。
English: On the 19th, the newly built Palm House was completed.

古文：诸王锁思的薨，赙钞五百锭。
现代文：诸侯王锁思逝世，赠予钱钞五百锭。
English: Prince Zhaoxi died and presented a 500-baht banknote.

古文：乙亥，太白经天。
现代文：二十三日，金星经天。
English: On the 23rd, Venus moves across the sky.

古文：曲赦重囚三十八人，以为三宫祈福。
现代文：特赦要犯三十八名，以此来为三宫祈求福寿。
English: Thirty-eight people are to be pardoned as a way of praying for a long life for Sannomiya.

古文：夔路容米洞蛮田先什用等九洞为寇，四川行省遣使谕降五洞，余发兵捕之。
现代文：夔州路容米洞蛮夷田先什用等九洞作乱，四川行省派遣使者谕降五洞，而调兵马剿捕其余四洞。
English: The barbarian Tian Xian Shizhi used nine dungeons such as Luzhong Yimidong in Luzhou to make trouble, and sent an envoy to Sichuan Province to order five dungeons to be lowered, while the remaining four dungeons were captured by soldiers.

古文：陕西行省以兵讨阶州土蕃。
现代文：陕西行省用兵讨伐阶州土蕃族人。
English: Shaanxi Province sent troops to fight against the Tujia people in Zhazhou.

古文：察罕脑儿千户部饥，赈粮一月。
现代文：察罕脑儿千户部饥荒，赈济粮食一个月。
English: If a thousand households are starving, we will provide food for a month.

古文：延安路雹灾，赈粮一月。
现代文：延安路雹灾，赈济粮食一个月。
English: Yan'an Road disaster relief, food aid for a month.

古文：温州路乐清县盐场水，民饥，发义仓粟赈之。
现代文：温州路乐清县盐场水灾，人民饥饿，拿出义仓粮食予以赈济。
English: Wenzhou Road, Leqing County, salt farm floods, people are hungry, take out granaries to help.

古文：两浙及江东诸郡水、旱，坏田六万四千三百余顷。
现代文：两浙及江东各路水、旱灾害，毁坏田地六万四千三百多顷。
English: The floods and droughts in Zhejiang and Jiangdong have destroyed more than 64,300 hectares of farmland.

古文：二年春正月丙戌，辰星犯天鸡。
现代文：泰定二年春正月初五，水星凌犯天鸡。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Tai Ding Spring, Mercury will transit the celestial rooster.

古文：乙未，以畿甸不登，罢春畋。
现代文：十四日，因京郊年成不好，撤销春季行猎活动。
English: On the 14th, the spring hunting activity was cancelled due to the bad harvest in the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：禁后妃、诸王、驸马毋通星术之士，非司天官不得妄言祸福。
现代文：禁止后妃、诸王、驸马，不得交结星术之士，不是司天监官员不得妄言祸福。
English: It is forbidden for empresses, kings, and emperors to have sexual relations with astrologers, and officials who are not overseers of the Celestial Court are not allowed to speak ill of others.

古文：敕： 御史台选举，与中书合议以闻。 
现代文：敕令： 御史台选拔官员，应与中书省共同商议后再行奏闻。 
English: Executive Order: The selection of officials for the History Channel should be made after consultation with the Ministry of Chinese Literature.

古文：中书省臣言： 江南民贫僧富，诸寺观田土，非宋旧置并累朝所赐者，请仍旧制与民均役。 
现代文：中书省官员上言： 江南民贫而僧富，各寺庙田产，不是宋时旧置与累朝赐予的，请按旧制与民共同承担赋役。 
English: An official from the People's Republic of China's Shandong Province said: The people of Jiangnan are poor, but the monks are rich, and the temples are well-endowed with farmland. This is not something that was given to the Song Dynasty and the Qing Dynasty, so please share the burden with the people according to the old system.

古文：从之，以籍八思吉思地赐故监察御史观音宝、锁咬儿哈的迷失妻子，各十顷。
现代文：接受这项提议。将抄没八思吉思的田地赐予已故监察御史观音保、锁咬儿哈的迷失的妻子儿女，各为十顷。
English: Accept this proposal, and bestow the fields of the missing eight sages to the lost wives and children of the late Inspector Guan Yin Bao and the lost sons and daughters of the lost sons and daughters of the late Inspector Guan Yin Bao, ten hectares each.

古文：戊戌，造象辇。
现代文：十七日，建造用象驾的车辇。
English: On the 17th, an elephant-driven chariot was built.

古文：参卜郎来降，赐其酋班术儿银、钞、币、帛。
现代文：参卜郎部前来投降，赐与其首领班术儿银、钞、币、帛。
English: The chief's retinue came forward to surrender, giving their leader, Shuro, silver, banknotes, coins, and money.

古文：辛丑，怀王图帖睦尔出居于建康。
现代文：二十日，怀王图帖睦尔出居于建康。
English: On the 20th, Huaiwang Tut Timur was born in Jiankang.

古文：壬寅，太白犯建星。
现代文：二十一日，金星凌犯建星。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Jin Xing Ling committed the crime of building a star.

古文：甲辰，奉安显宗像于永福寺，给祭田百顷。
现代文：二十三日，奉安显宗画像于永福寺，给予祭田一百顷。
English: On the 23rd, the image of An Xian Sect was enshrined at Yongfu Temple, and a hundred hectares of sacred land was given.

古文：广西山獠为寇，命所在有司捕之。
现代文：广西山地蛮夷作乱，下令所在地方官予以剿捕。
English: Guangxi mountain barbarians rioted and ordered the local officials to arrest them.

古文：江浙行省平章政事脱欢答剌罕升为左丞相。
现代文：江浙行省平章政事脱欢答剌罕升职为左丞相。
English: Ping Zhang of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province was promoted to minister of the left.

古文：诸王怯别遣使贡方物，赐钞四万锭。
现代文：诸王怯别遣使进贡物品，赐与钱钞四万锭。
English: The kings were afraid to send tribute goods and gave 40,000 baht in money and banknotes.

古文：戊申，以乞剌失思八班藏卜为土蕃等路宣慰使都元帅，兼管长河西、奔不儿亦思刚、察沙加儿、朵甘思、朵思麻等管军达鲁花赤，与其属往镇抚参卜郎。
现代文：二十七日，任命乞剌失思八班藏卜为土蕃等路宣慰使都元帅，兼管掌河西、奔不儿亦思刚、察沙加儿、朵甘思、朵思麻等管军断事官，与其部属前往镇抚参卜郎。
English: On the 27th, he appointed eight groups of Tibetan monks to be the relief envoys to the capital, and also in charge of the military adjudicators such as Hexi, Benbu'er, Shigang, Chashagal, Do Gan Si, and Do Sima. He and his subordinates went to Zhenfu Sanburo.

古文：庚戌，诏谕宰臣曰： 向者卓儿罕察苦鲁及山后皆地震，内郡大小民饥。
现代文：二十九日，下诏晓谕执宰大臣说： 从前卓儿罕察苦鲁及山后地区都发生地震，内地各处人民饥荒。
English: On the 29th, the minister-in-charge issued the following edict, saying: In the past, earthquakes occurred in Zhuo'erhancha, Quru and the mountainous regions, and people throughout the inland suffered from famine.

古文：朕自即位以来，惟太祖开创之艰，世祖混一之盛，期与人民共享安乐，常怀祗惧，灾沴之至，莫测其由。
现代文：我从即帝位以来，唯念太祖创业的艰难，世祖统一天下的昌盛，期望与人民共享安乐，常怀恭敬恐惧之心，灾害的发生，不明其原因。
English: Since I have been on the throne, I have only thought about the difficulties of my great-grandfather's entrepreneurship, the prosperity of the ancestors, the hope of sharing happiness with the people, the respect and fear, the occurrence of disasters, and the unknown causes.

古文：岂朕思虑有所不及而事或僣差，天故以此示儆？
现代文：难道是因我思虑有所不及以致行事或有差错？所以老天爷用这些灾害表示警戒。
English: Was it because I was too worried to act or did something wrong? That's why God used these disasters to show His vigilance.

古文：卿等其与诸司集议便民之事，其思自死罪始，议定以闻。
现代文：各位应与各部门会集商议便民之事，可从死罪囚犯开始考虑，商议决定后再行奏闻。
English: You should gather with the various departments to discuss matters that are convenient for the people. You can start by considering death-row prisoners. After the decision is made, the report will be submitted.

古文：朕将肆赦，以诏天下。 
现代文：我将下诏天下，实行大赦。 
English: I will proclaim a general amnesty.

古文：肇庆、巩昌、延安、赣州、南安、英德、新州、梅州等处饥，赈粜有差。
现代文：肇庆、巩昌、延安、赣州、南安、英德、新州、梅州等路、州饥荒，发售粮食予以赈济。
English: Zhaoqing, Gongchang, Yan'an, Zhangzhou, Nan'an, Yingde, Xinzhou, Meizhou and other provinces and prefectures suffered from famine, and grain was sold to alleviate the situation.

古文：闰月壬子朔，诏赦天下，除江淮创科包银，免被灾地差税一年。
现代文：闰正月初一，下诏大赦天下，免除江淮地区创科包银，蠲免受害地区差税一年。
English: On the first day of the leap month, the general amnesty was issued, exempting the Jianghuai region from the creation of science and technology package, and exempting the affected areas from the tax increase for one year.

古文：庚申，修野狐岭、色泽、桑乾岭道。
现代文：初九，修筑野狐岭、色泽、桑干岭道路。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, the construction of Fox Ridge, Color, and Mulberry Ridge roads began.

古文：乙丑，命整治屯田。
现代文：十四日，下令整治屯田。
English: On the 14th, he ordered the rectification of Tonden.

古文：河南行省左丞姚炜请禁屯田吏蚕食屯户，及勿务羡增以废裕民之意，不报。
现代文：河南行省左丞姚炜奏请屯田处官员盘剥屯户，以及不得追求增收以废弃使民富裕的意旨，未得到答复。
English: In Henan, the provincial leftist leader Yao Bingxu asked the officials of the township office to exploit the residents, and that they should not pursue the intention of increasing revenue by discarding and enriching the people, but did not receive a reply.

古文：丁卯，中书省臣言： 国用不足，请罢不急之费。 
现代文：十六日，中书省官员上言 ：国家财用不足，请罢免不急之费。 
English: On the 16th, officials from the Ministry of Education and Culture made the following appeal: The state's financial resources are insufficient, please remove the unnecessary expenses.

古文：从之。
现代文：同意这项提议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：置惠远仓、永需库于海剌秃总管府。
现代文：设置惠远仓、永需库于海剌秃总管府。
English: The Huiyuan Warehouse and the Perpetual Supply Warehouse were set up at the General Administration Office of Haizhuangye.

古文：己巳，修滹沱河堰。
现代文：十八日，修筑滹沱河堤堰。
English: On the 18th, the construction of the Lugu River embankment weir began.

古文：壬申，罢永兴银场，听民采炼，以十分之二输官。
现代文：二十一日，撤销永兴银场，听任人民采炼，以十分之二所得输纳官府。
English: On the 21st, the Yongxing Silver Mine was abolished, and it was left to the people to mine, with two-tenths of the income going to the government.

古文：罢松江都水庸田使司，命州县正官领之，仍加兼知渠堰事。
现代文：撤销松江都水庸田使司，命州县正职长官兼管其事，照例加以兼知渠堰事之衔。
English: Revoke the Matsue Tousui Yongtian envoy, the Meishu County executive officer is also in charge of the matter, as usual, he is also given the title of knowing the canal.

古文：癸酉，作棕毛殿。
现代文：二十二日，建造棕毛殿。
English: On the 22nd, the Palm House was built.

古文：丙子，浙西道廉访司言： 四方代祀之使，弃公营私，多不诚洁，以是神不歆格，请慎择之。 
现代文：二十五日，浙西道廉访司上言： 四方代为祭祀的使者，弃公义而营私利，多不诚心洁净，所以神灵不来享受，请谨慎选择使者。 
English: On the 25th day of the month, the visiting priest of the Western Zhejiang Dao Liang said: The four directions are the messengers of sacrifice, abandoning righteousness and pursuing selfish interests. Most of them are not sincere and pure, so the gods do not come to enjoy, please carefully choose the messengers.

古文：山南廉访使帖木哥请削降铁失所用骤升官。
现代文：山南廉访使帖木哥奏请削降铁失破格超升的官员。
English: Shannan's unimpeachable visit made Tim Tebow play the role of an official who asked for a reduction of a failing grade.

古文：戊寅，诸王忽塔梯迷失等来朝，赐金、银、钞、帛有差。
现代文：二十七日，诸王忽塔梯迷失等人来朝，赐与金、银、钞、币不等。
English: On the twenty-seventh day of the month, the kings of Kutaisi and other lost people came to the imperial court and gave gifts of gold, silver, banknotes and coins.

古文：己卯，河间、真定、保定、瑞州四路饥，禁酿酒。
现代文：二十八日，河间、真间、保定、瑞州四路饥荒，禁止酿酒。
English: On the 28th, there was a famine in the provinces of Hama, Mama, Baoding, and Ruizhou, and brewing was prohibited.

古文：阶州土蕃为寇，巩昌总帅府调兵御之。
现代文：阶州土蕃作乱，巩昌总帅府调发兵马抵御他们。
English: When the peasants in Zhouzhou revolted, the Generalissimo of Gongchang dispatched soldiers and horses to resist them.

古文：站八儿监藏叛于兀敦。
现代文：站八儿监藏反叛于兀敦。
English: Eight children's detention centers rebelled in Shandong.

古文：保定路饥，赈钞四万锭、粮万五千石。
现代文：保定路饥荒，赈济钱钞四万锭、粮食一万五千石。
English: Famine in Baoding Road, 40,000 baht in relief money and 15,000 kilos of grain.

古文：雄州归信诸县大雨，河溢，被灾者万一千六百五十户，赈钞三万锭。
现代文：雄州归信等县降大雨，河水横溢，受灾者达一万一千六百五十户，赈济钱钞三万锭。
English: Heavy rain fell in Xiongzhou Guixin and other counties, causing rivers to overflow, affecting 11,650 households and costing 30,000 baht in banknotes.

古文：南宾州、棣州等处水，民饥，赈粮二万石，死者给钞以葬。
现代文：济南滨州、棣州等处水灾，人民饥饿，赈济粮食二万石，给予钱钞埋葬死者。
English: Floods in Jinan, Binzhou, Zhangzhou and other places, people are starving, 20,000 kilos of grain are donated, and money is given to bury the dead.

古文：五花城宿灭秃、拙只干、麻兀三驿饥，赈粮二千石。
现代文：五花城宿灭秃、拙只干、麻兀三处驿站饥荒，赈济粮食二千石。
English: Wufuacheng lodge eradicated baldness, malnourishment and starvation in three places, and provided food for two thousand koku.

古文：衡州衡阳县民饥，瑞州蒙山银场丁饥，赈粟有差。
现代文：衡州衡阳县人民饥荒，瑞州蒙山银场场丁饥饿，赈济粮食不一。
English: The people of Hengyang County in Hengzhou are starving, the people of Mengshan Silver Mine in Ruizhou are starving, and the food aid is uneven.

古文：山东廉访使许师敬请颁族葬制，禁用阴阳相地邪说。
现代文：山东廉访使许师敬奏请颁布族葬制，禁止采用阴阳家相地邪说。
English: Shandong Lianghui asked Xu Shi to respectfully request the promulgation of a family funeral system and prohibit the use of the evil theory of yin and yang.

古文：二月甲申，祭先农。
现代文：二月初四，祭祀先农。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, the sacrificial rites for the pioneer farmers ended.

古文：丙戌，颁《道经》于天下名山宫观。
现代文：初六，颁布《道经》于天下名山宫观。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the "Dao Jing" was promulgated in the world-famous Shan Gong Guan.

古文：丁亥，平伐苗酋的娘率其户十万来降，土官三百六十人请朝。
现代文：初七，平伐苗人首领的娘率领其属户十万人来降，土官三百六十人请求入朝。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the daughter of the leader of the Tairawa Miao people led 100,000 members of her household to descend, and 360 local officials requested to enter the imperial court.

古文：湖广行省请汰其众还部，令的娘等四十六人入觐，从之。
现代文：湖广行省奏请裁减其随从返还原部，只令的娘等四十六人入朝，同意这项提议。
English: H Quang Hng requested that his retinue be reduced to the original number, and only his daughter and forty-six others were allowed to enter the imperial court, and he agreed to this proposal.

古文：己丑，加嗣汉三十九代天师张嗣成太玄辅化体仁应道大真人。
现代文：初九，加封嗣汉第三十九代天师张嗣成为太玄辅化体仁应道大真人。
English: In the early 9th century, Zhang Zi, the 39th generation heavenly teacher of the Han Dynasty, became a disciple of Tao Daozhen.

古文：庚寅，荧惑、岁星、填星聚于毕。
现代文：初十，火星、木星、土星相聚于毕宿。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn come together in Pisces.

古文：辛卯，赈安定王朵儿只班部军粮三月。
现代文：十一日，赈济安定王朵儿只班部军粮三个月。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wang Duo'er only received three months of military rations.

古文：瓜哇国遣其臣昔剌僧迦里也奉表及方物来朝贡。
现代文：爪哇国派遣官员昔剌僧迦里也奉表及当地物产前来朝贡。
English: An official dispatched by the State of Java, the late Monk Gari, also came with a table and local products to pay tribute.

古文：广西徭潘宝陷柳城县。
现代文：广西瑶人潘宝攻陷柳城县。
English: Pan Bao, a man from Guangxi, invaded Liucheng County.

古文：丁酉，翙星于回回司天监。
现代文：十七日，祭星于回回司天监。
English: On the seventeenth day, the sacred star was returned to the chief overseer of heaven.

古文：己亥，命西僧作烧坛佛事于延华阁。
现代文：十九日，命西僧做烧坛佛事活动于延华阁。
English: On the 19th, the western monk was ordered to do the altar-burning Buddhist activities at Yanhua Pavilion.

古文：封阿里迷失为和国公、张珪为蔡国公，仍知经筵事。
现代文：封阿里迷失为和国公，张王圭为蔡国公，仍负责经筵事。
English: Zhang Wang Gui as Cai Guogong, still in charge of economic affairs.

古文：以中书右丞善僧为平章政事，参知政事泼皮为右丞；御史大夫秃忽鲁加太保，仍御史大夫。
现代文：任命中书右丞善僧为平章政事，参知政事泼皮为右丞。御史大夫秃忽鲁加太保衔，仍为御史大夫。
English: In the middle, the good monk, Shujo Ujo, was appointed as Taira no Shosho Seiji, and the councillor, Shinsho Udo, was appointed as Ujo. The goshi daifu, Baldo Kurokawa, retained his title and remained the goshi daifu.

古文：庚子，姚炜以河水屡决，请立行都水监于汴梁，仿古法备捍，仍命濒河州县正官皆兼知河防事，从之。
现代文：二十日，姚炜因黄河多次决堤，奏请设立行都水监于汴梁，仿照古法修备捍御，照旧例命沿河州县正职官员兼管河防事，同意这项提议。
English: On the 20th, because the Yellow River had broken through the dike several times, Yao Wei requested the establishment of the Gangdu Water Supervision Bureau in Yuliang, to follow the ancient law to repair and defend, and as usual ordered the full-time officials of Hezhou County to take charge of river defense, and agreed to this proposal.

古文：丙午，造玉御床。
现代文：二十六日，制造玉制御床。
English: On the 26th, the ball control bed was manufactured.

古文：戊申，命道士祭五福太一神。
现代文：二十八日，命道士祭祀五福太一神。
English: On the 28th day of the month, the ritual of the Five Deities of Good Fortune came to an end.

古文：庚戌，通、漷二州饥，发粟赈粜。
现代文：三十日，通州、氵郭州饥荒，调发粮食予以赈济或平价出售。
English: On the 30th, Tongzhou and Zhangguozhou suffered from famine, and grain was allocated to relieve the famine or sold at a fair price.

古文：蓟州、宝坻县、庆元路象山诸县饥，赈粮二月。
现代文：蓟州宝坻县、庆元路象山等县饥荒，赈济粮食两个月。
English: There was a famine in Baodi County, Qingyuan Road, Xiangshan County and other counties in Luzhou, and the food aid lasted for two months.

古文：甘州蒙古驿户饥，赈粮三月。
现代文：甘州蒙古驿户饥荒，赈济粮食三个月。
English: Gansu Mongolian Seto famine, food aid for three months.

古文：大都、凤翔、宝庆、衡州、潭州、全州诸路饥，赈粜有差。
现代文：大都、凤翔、宝庆、衡州、潭州、全州等路饥荒，分别予以赈济或平卖粮食。
English: Dadu, Fengxiang, Baoqing, Hengzhou, Tanzhou, Quanzhou and other provinces are experiencing famine, and will be provided with food aid or sold separately.

古文：三月癸丑，修曹州济阴县河堤，役民丁一万八千五百人。
现代文：三月初三，修筑曹州济阴县黄河堤防，役使民工一万八千五百人。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, 18,500 migrant workers were dispatched to build the Yellow River dike in Jiyin County, Caozhou.

古文：甲寅，禁捕天鹅。
现代文：初四，禁止捕捉天鹅。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, it is forbidden to catch swans.

古文：丁巳，赐诸王帖木儿不花等钞有差。
现代文：初七，赐与诸王帖木儿不花等人钱钞不一。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, King Timur gave money to all the kings.

古文：辛酉，咸平府清河、寇河合流，失故道，坏堤堰，敕蒙古军千人及民丁修之。
现代文：十一日，咸平府清河、寇河合流，失去故道，毁坏堤堰，敕令蒙古族军士千人及民工修筑。
English: On the 11th day, the confluence of the Qing River and the Kou River in Hamping Prefecture lost its old course, destroyed the dike, and ordered a thousand Mongolian soldiers and migrant workers to build it.

古文：乙丑，车驾幸上都。
现代文：十五日，车驾临幸上都。
English: On the 15th, I drove to Shangdu.

古文：诸王搠思班部战士四百人征参卜郎有功，人赏钞四千锭。
现代文：诸王搠思班部战士四百人征讨参卜郎有功，每人奖赏钱钞四千锭。
English: The four hundred warriors of Zhuangzhi's squad were rewarded with 4,000 baht each for their meritorious service to Sanburo.

古文：乙亥，安南国世子陈日爌遣使贡方物。
现代文：二十五日，安南国世子陈日火广遣使进贡物品。
English: On the 25th, Chen Riguang, the heir of Annan, sent tribute items.

古文：荆门州旱，漷州、蓟州、凤州、延安、归德等处民及山东蒙古军饥，赈粮、钞有差。
现代文：荆门州干旱，氵郭州、蓟州、凤州、延安、归德等处人民及山东蒙古族军士饥荒，赈济粮食、钱钞不一。
English: There was a drought in Jingmen Prefecture, and the people and Mongolian soldiers in Shandong suffered from famine in Ziguozhou, Zhangzhou, Fengzhou, Yan'an, Guidong and other places. The relief food and money varied.

古文：肇庆、富州、惠州、袁州、江州诸路及南恩州、梅州饥，赈粜有差。
现代文：肇庆、富州、惠州、袁州、江州等路及南恩州、梅州饥荒，分别赈济售粮不一。
English: Zhaoqing, Fuzhou, Huizhou, Yuanzhou, Jiangzhou and other provinces, as well as Nan'an and Meizhou suffered from famine, and the distribution of grain was uneven.

古文：夏四月丁亥，作吾殿。
现代文：夏四月初八，建造吾殿。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th month of the summer, the construction of my house began.

古文：癸巳，和市牝马有驹者万匹。
现代文：十四日，和买母马怀驹者一万匹。
English: On the fourteenth day of the same month, he bought a mare with ten thousand foals.

古文：敕宿卫驼马散牧民间者，归官厩饲之。
现代文：敕令宿卫人员所属的驼马散养于民间的，归还官厩饲养。
English: It was ordered that the camels and horses belonging to the guards should be raised by the people and returned to the official stables.

古文：丁酉，濮州鄄城县言城西尧冢上有佛寺，请徙之，不报。
现代文：十八日，濮州鄄城县上言城西尧冢上建有佛寺，请予以迁徙，未予以回答。
English: On the 18th, there was a Buddhist temple built on the west bank of Shangyuancheng in Licheng County, Luzhou Province. It was asked to relocate, but no answer was given.

古文：辛丑，加公主寿宁为皇姊大长公主。
现代文：二十二日，加封公主寿宁为皇姊大长公主。
English: On the 22nd, Princess Jiafeng Shuning became the eldest princess.

古文：禁山东诸路酒。
现代文：禁止山东诸路酿酒。
English: It is forbidden for Shandong ZhuLu to brew alcohol.

古文：丙午，僰夷及蒐雁遮杀云南行省所遣谕蛮使者，敕追捕之。
现代文：二十七日，覺夷与雁拦截杀害云南行省所派遣的谕蛮使者，敕令进行追捕。
English: On the 27th, Jueyi and Yan intercepted the murderous envoys sent to Yunnan Province and ordered them to pursue them.

古文：丁未，封后父火里兀察儿为威靖王。
现代文：二十八日，封皇后之父火里兀察儿为威靖王。
English: On the twenty-eighth day, the father of the empress, Huo Li Yunchao, was named King of Wei Jing.

古文：戊申，以许师敬为中书左丞；中政使冯亨为中书参知政事，仍中政使。
现代文：二十九日，任命许师敬为中书左丞；中政使冯亨为中书参知政事，仍兼中政使。
English: On the 29th, Xu Shijian was appointed as the Second Secretary of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP); the Central Political Envoy Feng Heng was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and still held the position of the Central Political Envoy.

古文：奉元路白水县雹。
现代文：奉元路白水县下冰雹。
English: Fengyuan Road, Baishui County was hit by hail.

古文：巩昌路伏羌县大雨，山崩。
现代文：巩昌路伏羌县降大雨，山陵崩塌。
English: Heavy rain fell in Gongchang Road, Fuxi County, and the mountain collapsed.

古文：镇江、宁国、瑞州、桂州、南安、宁海、南丰、潭州、涿州等处饥，赈粮五万余石。
现代文：镇江、宁国、瑞州、桂州、南安、宁海、南丰、潭州、涿州等处饥荒，赈济粮食五万多石。
English: Zhenjiang, Ningguo, Ruizhou, Guizhou, Nan'an, Ninghai, Nanfeng, Tanzhou, Zhangzhou and other places suffered from famine, and more than 50,000 kilos of grain were saved.

古文：陇西、汉中、秦州饥，赈钞三万锭。
现代文：陇西、汉中、秦州饥荒，赈济钱钞三万锭。
English: Shaanxi, Hanzhong and Qinzhou suffered from famine, and the relief money amounted to 30,000 baht.

古文：五月壬子，车里陶剌孟及大阿哀蛮兵万人乘象寇陷朵剌等十四寨，木邦路蛮八庙率僰夷万人寇陷倒八汉寨，督边将严备之。
现代文：五月初四，车里陶剌孟与大阿哀蛮兵一万人乘象入寇，攻陷朵剌等十四寨，木邦路蛮人八庙统率夷万人入寇，攻陷倒八汉寨，督率边将严加防备。
English: On the 4th day of the 5th month of the lunar calendar, 10,000 Taobao Meng and Great Aye barbarians in a chariot rode an elephant to invade and capture 14 villages, including Doan. Eight temples led by Mupang Road barbarians led 10,000 people to invade and capture eight Han villages. The governor and the border guard were on high alert.

古文：癸丑，龙牙门蛮遣使奉表贡方物。
现代文：初五，龙牙门蛮派遣使者奉表进贡物品。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Dragon's Teeth Gate sent an emissary to bring tribute items.

古文：辛未，罢京师官鬻盐肆十五。
现代文：二十三日，撤销京师官办卖盐店铺十五处。
English: On the 23rd, 15 salt shops run by the Beijing Municipal Government were revoked.

古文：改河间盐运司为大都河间等路都转运盐使司。
现代文：将河间盐运司改为大都河间等路都转运盐使司。
English: The Salt Transport Division of Kawama was changed to the Salt Transport Division of Most Rivers and Other Routes.

古文：遣察乃使于周王和世〈王束〉。
现代文：派遣察乃出使周王和世王束处。
English: Chano dispatched envoys to King Zhou and the king of the world.

古文：癸酉，融州否泉洞、吉龙洞、洞村山、黑江诸徭为寇，广西元帅府发兵讨之。
现代文：二十五日，融州否泉洞、吉龙洞、洞村山、黑江等处瑶人作乱，广西元帅府调拨兵马进行讨捕。
English: On the 25th, people rioted in Yequan-dong, Jilong-dong, Dongcunshan and Heijiang in Rongzhou Province, and the Guangxi Marshal's Office dispatched soldiers and horses to arrest them.

古文：丙子，旭迈杰等以国用不足，请减厩马，汰卫士，及节诸王滥赐，从之。
现代文：二十八日，旭迈杰等人因国家财用不足，奏请削减厩马，裁减卫士，及节制对诸侯王的过度赏赐。
English: On the 28th, Xu Meijie and others petitioned the emperor to reduce the number of stables, guards, and excessive rewards for princes due to insufficient state spending.

古文：赐潜邸怯怜口千人钞三万锭。
现代文：同意这项提议。赐予潜邸怯怜口一千人钱钞三万锭。
English: He agreed to the proposal, and granted 1,000 people and 30,000 baht in money and bills to the house.

古文：浙西诸郡霖雨，江湖水溢，命江浙行省及都水庸田司兴役疏泄之。
现代文：浙西诸路久雨，江湖洪水横溢，命令江浙行省与都水庸田司兴办工役进行疏导。
English: The roads in western Zhejiang have been raining for a long time, and the rivers and lakes have been flooded, and the Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces and the Capital Water Bureau have been ordered to organize construction workers to guide.

古文：置谏议书院于昌平县，祀唐刘蕡。
现代文：设置谏议书院于昌平县，供祭唐代刘。
English: He set up the Zheng He Academy in Changping County to offer sacrifices to Tang Dynasty Liu.

古文：大都路檀州大水，平地深丈有五尺，汴梁路十五县河溢，江陵路江溢，洮州、临洮府雨雹，潭州、兴国属县旱，彰德路蝗，龙兴、平江等十二郡饥，赈粜米三十二万五千余石。
现代文：大都路檀州发大水，平地水深一丈五尺，汴梁路十五县黄河水溢，江陵路长江大溢，洮州、临洮府降冰雹，潭州、兴国路属县干旱，彰德路蝗灾。龙兴、平江等十二路饥荒，赈济发售大米三十二万五千多石。
English: Dadu Road in Danzhou was flooded, the water depth on the flat land was five feet deep, the Yellow River overflowed in 15 counties of Qiliang Road, the Yangtze River overflowed in 15 counties of Jiangling Road, the hail fell in Luzhou and Linfen, the drought in counties of Tanzhou and Xingguo Road, and the locust plague in Zhangde Road. Longxing, Pingjiang and other 12 counties suffered from famine, and more than 325,000 kilos of rice were sold by Tongji.

古文：巩昌路临洮府饥，赈钞五万五千锭。
现代文：巩昌路临洮府饥荒，赈济钱钞五万五千锭。
English: Gongchang Road, Linfen, famine, 55,000 baht in relief money.

古文：六月己卯朔，皇子生，命巫祓除于宫。
现代文：六月初一，皇子出生，命巫觋祓除不祥于宫中。
English: On the first day of June, the prince was born, and he was exorcised from the palace.

古文：葺万岁山殿。
现代文：修缮万寿山宫殿。
English: Renovation of Manshoushan Palace.

古文：静江徭为寇，遣广西宣慰司发兵捕之。
现代文：静江路瑶人作乱，命广西宣慰司调兵剿捕。
English: Jingjiang Road instigated a riot and ordered the Guangxi Consolation Division to send troops to arrest the rioters.

古文：辛巳，柳州徭为寇，戍兵讨斩之。
现代文：初三，柳州瑶人作乱，戍守兵马进行征讨斩杀。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the soldiers of Liuzhou made a riot, and the soldiers and horses of the garrison were recruited and killed.

古文：癸未，浔州平甫县徭为寇，达鲁花赤都坚、都监姚泰亨死之。
现代文：初五，氵寻州平南县瑶人作乱，断事官都坚、都监姚泰亨遇害。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, there was a riot in Binan County, Suizhou Province. The adjudicator, Du Jian, and the city supervisor, Yao Taiheng, were killed.

古文：甲申，改封嘉王晃火帖木儿为并王。
现代文：初六，改封嘉王晃火铁木儿为并王。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, he changed his name to Jia Wang, and changed his surname to Tiemu Er.

古文：丙戌，填星犯井钺星。
现代文：初八，土星凌犯井宿钺星。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Saturn transits Uranus.

古文：丙申，中书参知政事左塔不台言： 大臣兼领军务，前古所无。
现代文：十八日，中书参知政事左塔不台上言 ：大臣兼管军务，是往古所无之事。
English: On the 18th, Chusho-sanchi (the vice-chairman of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China) made the following statement: "A minister being in charge of military affairs has never happened before."

古文：铁失以御史大夫，也先帖木儿以知枢密院事，皆领卫兵，如虎而翼，故成逆谋。
现代文：铁失以御史大夫之职，也先帖木儿以知枢密院事之职，皆兼管卫兵，如虎添翼，故达成逆谋。
English: Tetsu lost the post of Imperial Historian, and Timur took the post of Privy Councillor, both of which were also guards, like tigers adding wings, so they reached a counter-plot.

古文：今军卫之职，乞勿以大臣领之，庶勋旧之家得以保全。 
现代文：目今军卫之职，请不要以大臣兼管，以使勋旧之家得以保全。 
English: In order to preserve the honor of the old family, please do not concurrently hold the post of military guard as a minister.

古文：从之，仍赐币帛以旌其直。
现代文：同意这项提议，照例赐与币帛以表彰直言。
English: He agreed to the proposal and, as usual, was presented with a coin in recognition of his outspokenness.

古文：丁酉，静江义宁县及庆远安抚司蛮徭为寇，敕守将捕之。
现代文：十九日，静江路义宁县与庆远安抚司蛮瑶作乱，敕令守将讨捕。
English: On the 19th, Jingjiang Road, Yining County and Qingyuan Pacifying Division made a riot, and the commanding officer will arrest them.

古文：息州民赵丑厮、郭菩萨，妖言弥勒佛当有天下，有司以闻，命宗正府、刑部、枢密院、御史台及河南行省官杂鞫之。
现代文：息州平民赵丑厮、郭菩萨，妄言弥勒佛当统有天下，有关部门予以奏闻，命宗正府、刑部、枢密院、御史台及河南行省官员会审。
English: Zhao Gushan, Guo Bodhisattva, a commoner from Xizhou, said that Maitreya Buddha should rule the world, and the relevant departments reported it, and ordered officials from the Zongzheng Prefecture, the Criminal Law Department, the Privy Council, the History Channel and the Henan Provincial Government to investigate.

古文：辛丑，柳州马平县徭为寇，湖广行省督所属追捕之。
现代文：二十三日，柳州马平县瑶人作乱，湖广行省督率所属进行追捕。
English: On the 23rd, there was a riot in Liuzhou's Maping County, and the provincial governor of Huguangxing led his subordinates in a pursuit.

古文：丙午，填星犯井。
现代文：二十八日，土星凌犯井宿。
English: On the 28th, Saturn's transit through the constellation of Saturn.

古文：丁未，立都水庸田使司，浚吴、松二江。
现代文：二十九日，设立都水庸田使司，疏浚吴、松二江。
English: On the 29th, the Doushui Yongtian Envoy was set up to dredge the Wu and Song Erjiang Rivers.

古文：敕营造毋役五卫军士，止以武卫、虎贲二卫给之。
现代文：敕令营造工程不得役使五卫军士，只以武卫、虎贲二卫供役。
English: According to the imperial edict, five guardsmen were not allowed to serve in the construction project, and only two guardsmen, Wuwei and Tigress, were allowed to serve.

古文：开南州阿只弄、哀培蛮兵为寇，命云南行省督所属兵捕之。
现代文：开南州阿只弄、哀培蛮兵作乱，命云南行省督率所属兵马讨捕。
English: He ordered the provincial governor to go to Yunnan to lead the soldiers and horses to arrest the rebels.

古文：通州三河县大雨，水丈余，潼川府绵江、中江水溢入城郭，冀宁路汾河溢。
现代文：通州三河县降大雨，水深丈余。潼川府绵江、中江洪水横溢，浸入城内。冀宁路汾河洪水横溢。
English: Heavy rain fell in Tongzhou Sanhe County, and the water depth was too long. The Mianjiang River and the Zhongjiang River in Beichuan Prefecture flooded and flooded into the city. The Beichuan River in Jining Road flooded.

古文：秦州秦安山移。
现代文：秦州秦安山陵移动。
English: Qinzhou Qin'an Mountain Mausoleum moved.

古文：新州路旱，济南、河间、东昌等九郡蝗，奉元、卫辉路及永平屯田丰赡、昌国、济民等署雨伤稼，蠲其租。
现代文：新州路干旱。济南、河间、东昌等九路蝗灾。奉元、卫辉路及永平屯田处丰赡、昌国、济民等署雨水伤害庄稼，蠲免其租税。
English: Xinzhou Road is in drought. Nine roads including Jinan, Haima, and Dongchang are affected by locusts. Fengyuan, Weihui Road, and Yongping Tunden of Fengyi, Changguo, and Jimin Departments are exempted from taxes for crops damaged by rainwater.

古文：济宁、兴元、宁夏、南康、归州等十二郡饥，赈粜米七万余石。
现代文：济宁、兴元、宁夏、南康、归州等十二路饥荒，赈济出售大米七万多石。
English: Jining, Xingyuan, Ningxia, Nankang, Guizhou and other 12 provinces suffered from famine, and more than 70,000 kilos of rice were sold.

古文：镇西武靖王部及辽阳水达达路饥，赈粮一月。
现代文：镇西武靖王部及辽阳行省水达达路饥荒，赈济粮食一个月。
English: Towns west of Wujingwangbu and Liaoyang in Shuidada Road, Liaoyang Province, suffered from famine and had to ration food for a month.

古文：秋七月戊申朔，大、小车里蛮来献驯象。
现代文：秋七月初一，大、小车里蛮夷前来进献驯象。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, the barbarians in the large and small carts came to present the tamed elephant.

古文：己酉，赐诸王燕大等金、钞有差。
现代文：初二，赐予诸王燕大等人金、钞不等。
English: On the second day of the new year, he gave money and banknotes to Wang Yanda and others.

古文：庚戌，遣阿失伯祀宅神于北部行幄。
现代文：初三，派遣阿失伯祭祀宅神于北部行幄。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the deities were sent to the northern part of the country to perform the Ahasuerus ritual.

古文：甲寅，遣使奉诏分谕徭蛮，镇康路土官你囊、谋粘路土官赛丘罗出降；木邦路土官八庙既降复叛。
现代文：初七，派遣使者奉诏分别晓谕瑶蛮，镇康路土官你囊、谋粘路土官赛丘罗出降；木邦路土官八庙既降后又叛。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, an envoy was dispatched with an imperial edict to tell the barbarians that the local officials of Zhenkang Road and Moklui Road had surrendered; the local officials of Mubang Road and Hachimiao had both surrendered and rebelled.

古文：翙星于上都司天监。
现代文：祭星于上都司天监。
English: The star of the festival is the chief overseer of the capital.

古文：纽泽、许师敬编类《帝训》成，请于经筵进讲，仍俾皇太子观览，有旨译其书以进。
现代文：纽泽、许师敬编纂《帝训》完成，奏请在经筵进讲，照旧例使皇太子观览，有圣旨指示翻译其书以进呈。
English: After the compilation of the "Imperial Sermon" was completed, Nüze and Xu Shi Jing requested that the sermon be delivered at the Great Hall of the People. As usual, the crown prince was allowed to observe the sermon, and he was instructed by the Holy Spirit to translate the sermon and present it.

古文：丙辰，享太庙。
现代文：初九，祭享太庙。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, a festival is held at the Imperial Palace.

古文：播州蛮黎平爱等集群夷为寇，湖广行省请兵讨之，不许，诏播州宣抚使杨也里不花招谕之。
现代文：播州蛮人黎平爱等会集群夷作乱，湖广行省奏请用兵讨伐，不许可，下诏播州宣抚使杨也里不花进行招谕。
English: The barbarians of Banzhou, including Li Ping'ai and others, would gather in large groups to create chaos. The governor of Guangxi Province asked Yang to send troops to fight against them, but Yang did not agree. The governor of Banzhou issued an edict to Yang not to invite the barbarians.

古文：戊午，遣使代祀龙虎、武当二山。
现代文：十一日，派遣使者代为祭祀龙虎、武当二山。
English: On the 11th day, an emissary was dispatched to offer sacrifices to dragons and tigers and the two mountains of Wudang.

古文：己未，置车里军民总管府，以土人寒赛为总管，佩金虎符。
现代文：十二日，设置车里军民总管府，任命土人寒赛为总管，佩挂金虎符。
English: On the 12th, the General Administration for Civilian-Military Affairs was set up in Cheli, and the native Kansai was appointed as the chief administrator, wearing the golden tiger emblem.

古文：中书省臣言： 往岁征徭，廉访司劾其滥杀，今凡出师，请廉访司官一员莅军纠正。 
现代文：中书省官员上言： 往年征讨瑶人，廉访司弹劾军队滥杀无辜，今后凡出兵剿捕，请廉访司官员一名随军监督。 
English: An official from the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Education and Culture made the following statement: In previous years, officials from the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Education and Culture would recruit and investigate corrupt officials, and the Independent Investigation Department would impeach the army for the indiscriminate killing of innocent people. In the future, if soldiers are dispatched to make arrests, they should ask an official from the Independent Investigation Department to accompany the army to supervise.

古文：从之。
现代文：接受这项提议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：庚申，以宫人二赐藩王怯别。
现代文：十三日，将宫女两名赐予藩王怯别。
English: On the thirteenth day, the two court ladies were given to the lord of the domain to bid him farewell.

古文：癸亥，修大乾元寺。
现代文：十六日，修建大乾元寺。
English: On the 16th, Daikengen-ji Temple was built.

古文：以许师敬及郎中买驴兼经筵官。
现代文：命许师敬与郎中买驴兼任经筵官。
English: He ordered Hossu Shikei to buy a donkey and concurrently serve as eunuch.

古文：广西诸徭寇城邑，遣湖广行省左丞乞住、兵部尚书李大成、中书舍人买驴将兵二万二千人讨之，仍以诸王斡耳朵罕监其军。
现代文：广西各处瑶人攻略城池，命湖广行省左丞乞住、兵部尚书李大成、中书舍人买驴统率兵士二万二千人征讨，仍命诸王斡耳朵罕监督其军。
English: People from all over Guangxi gathered to attack the city, and twenty-two thousand soldiers led by the commander of the military department Shangshu Li Dacheng, the commander of the military department Shangshu Zuojo, the commander of the military department Shangshu Li Dacheng, and the commander of the military department Shangshu Li Dacheng, the commander of the military department Shangshu Zuojo, the commander of the military department Shangshu Zuojo, and the commander of the military department Shangshu Li Dacheng, the commander of the military department Shangshu Li Dacheng, the commander of the military department Shangshu Zuojo, and the commander of the military department Shangshu Zuojo,

古文：海北徭酋盘吉祥寇阳春县，命江西行省督兵捕之。
现代文：海北瑶人首领盘吉祥入犯阳春县，命江西行省督率兵马讨捕。
English: Pan Jixiang, the leader of the Xiongnu people in north China's Hainan Province, went to Yangchun County to commit crimes. He was ordered to go to west China's Jiangxi Province to lead soldiers and horses to arrest him.

古文：庚午，以国用不足，罢书金字《藏经》。
现代文：二十三日，因国家财用不足，罢免制作金字《藏经》之事。
English: On the 23rd, due to insufficient state funding, the production of the gold-lettered "Zangjing" was cancelled.

古文：威楚、大理诸蛮为寇，云南行省请出师，不允，遣亦剌马丹等使大理，普颜实立等使威楚，招谕之。
现代文：威楚、大理各处蛮夷作乱，云南行省奏请出兵讨伐，不予批准。派遣蛮剌马丹等出使大理路，普颜实立等人出使威楚路，进行招谕。
English: The barbarians in Wechu and Dali made disturbances everywhere, and the Yunnan Province requested the dispatch of troops for a crusade, but it was not approved. The barbarians such as Ma Dan were dispatched to Dali Road, and Puyan Shili and others were dispatched to Wechu Road to carry out the invitation.

古文：思州洞蛮杨银千等来献方物。
现代文：思州洞蛮杨银千等人前来进献物品。
English: Yang Yinqian and others from Sizhou Cave came to donate items.

古文：封驸马孛罗帖木儿、知枢密院事火沙并为郡王。
现代文：封驸王孛罗帖木儿、知枢密院事火沙并为郡王。
English: He became the county king after the feud between the king of Fuxi and the king of Luo.

古文：辛未，立河南行都水监。
现代文：二十四日，设立河南行都水监。
English: On the 24th, the Henan Capital Water Supervision Bureau was established.

古文：申禁汉人藏执兵仗，有军籍者，出征则给之，还，复归于官。
现代文：申命禁止汉人收藏执拿兵器。汉人有军籍的，出征则给予，返回后仍收藏于官府。
English: An order was issued prohibiting Han Chinese from collecting and possessing weapons. If a Han Chinese has a military record, he or she is allowed to go to the front, and the weapon will still be kept in the government office after returning.

古文：壬申，御史台臣言： 廉访司莅军，非世祖旧制。
现代文：二十五日，御史台官员上言： 廉访司派员监临军队，不是世祖旧制。
English: On the 25th, an official from the Gushitai made the following statement: The Independent Investigation Department sent officers to supervise the military, not the old system.

古文：贾胡鬻宝，西僧修佛事，所费不支，于国无益，并宜除罢。 
现代文：胡商卖宝，西僧修作佛事，花费很大，于国无补，都应取消。 
English: Hu merchants selling treasures and Western monks performing Buddhist rites are very costly and do not benefit the country. Both should be abolished.

古文：从之。
现代文：接受这项建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：敕太傅朵台、太保秃忽鲁日至禁中集议国事。
现代文：敕令太傅朵台、太保秃忽鲁每天来皇宫中会集商议国事。
English: The Emperor ordered Taifu Dottai and Taibo Baldulu to come to the palace every day to gather and discuss state affairs.

古文：徭蛮潘宝寇镡津、义宁、来宾诸县，命广西守将捕之。
现代文：瑶蛮潘宝进犯镡津、义宁、来宾等县，命广西守将征讨。
English: Pan Bao's savage attack on the counties of Shuijin, Yining, and Lebin will be investigated by the governor of Guangxi.

古文：庆远溪洞民饥，发米二万五百石，平价粜之。
现代文：庆远溪洞人民饥饿，调发米粮二万零五百石，平价出售。
English: The people of Qingyuan Xidong are starving, and rice grain of 20,500 kilos has been distributed and sold at a reasonable price.

古文：敕山东州县收养流民遗弃子女。
现代文：敕令山东州县收养流民遗弃子女。
English: Shandong Shuzhou County was ordered to adopt the abandoned children of displaced people.

古文：延安、鄜州、绥德、巩昌等处雨雹，般阳新城县蝗，宗仁卫屯田陨霜杀禾，睢州河决，顺德、汴梁、德安、汝宁诸路旱，免其租。
现代文：延安、州、绥德、巩昌等处下冰雹，般阳路新城县蝗灾，宗仁卫屯田处降霜伤害庄稼，睢州段黄河决口，顺德、汴梁、德安、汝宁等路干旱，皆免除其租税。
English: The hailstorms in Yan'an, Zhouzhou, Shunde, Gongchang, the locusts in Xincheng County of Banyang Road, the frost damage to crops in the Zongrenwei farmland, the Yellow River outfall in Zhouzhou section, and the droughts in Shunde, Qiliang, De'an, and Yuning are all exempt from tax.

古文：梅州、饶州、镇江、邠州诸路饥，赈粜米三万余石。
现代文：梅州、饶州、镇江、州等路饥荒，赈济出售米粮三万多石。
English: Meizhou, Raozhou, Zhenjiang, Shuzhou and other areas were hit by famine, and more than 30,000 kilos of rice grain was sold by the government.

古文：八月戊子，修上都香殿。
现代文：八月十一日，修建上都香殿。
English: On August 11, the construction of Shangdu Incense Hall was completed.

古文：辛卯，云南白夷寇云龙州。
现代文：十四日，云南白夷进犯云龙州。
English: On the 14th, Yunnan Baiyi invaded Yunnan Longzhou.

古文：癸巳，岁星犯天樽。
现代文：十六日，木星凌犯天木尊。
English: On the 16th, Jupiter violated the heavenly tree.

古文：辛丑，遣使代祀岳渎名山大川。
现代文：二十四日，派遣使者代为祭祀五岳四渎等名山大川。
English: On the 24th, an emissary was sent on behalf of the famous mountains and rivers such as the five mountains and four rivers.

古文：敕： 诸王私入京者，勿供其所用；诸部曲宿卫私入京者，罪之。 
现代文：敕令 ：诸王私事入京的，不得供应所用物品；各部宿卫人员私自入京的，定罪处罚。 
English: Imperial edict: Princes and queens entering the capital for personal reasons are not allowed to supply the items they use; guards of the various departments entering the capital for personal reasons are to be convicted and punished.

古文：命度支监汰阿塔赤所掌驼马，于外郡饲之。
现代文：命度支监裁减阿塔赤所掌管的驼马，给外郡牧养。
English: The life support overseer reduced the camels under the control of Ata Chih, and gave them to other counties for herding.

古文：大都路檀州、巩昌府静宁县、延安路安塞县雨雹，卫辉路汲县河溢。
现代文：大都路檀州、巩昌府静宁县、延安路安塞县下冰雹。卫辉路汲县黄河横溢。
English: Dadu Road in Danzhou, Jingning County in Gongchang Prefecture, Yan'an Road in Ansei County were covered with hail, and the Yellow River in Weihui Road in Qi County overflowed.

古文：南恩州、琼州饥，赈粮一月。
现代文：南恩州、琼州饥荒，赈济粮食一个月。
English: Nanshan and Qiongzhou suffered from famine and had to ration food for a month.

古文：临江路、归德府饥，赈粮二月。
现代文：临江路、归德府饥荒，赈济粮食两个月。
English: Linjiang Road, Guidefu famine, to provide food for two months.

古文：衡州、建昌、岳州饥，赈粜米一万三千石。
现代文：衡州、建昌、岳州三路饥荒，赈济出售大米一万三千石。
English: In Hengzhou, Jianchang and Yuezhou, where there are three famines, there are 13,000 kilos of rice for sale.

古文：九月戊申朔，分天下为十八道，遣使宣抚。
现代文：九月初一，划分天下为十八道，分遣使者宣谕抚治。
English: On the first day of September, the country was divided into eighteen provinces, and emissaries were dispatched to proclaim and administer.

古文：诏曰： 朕祗承洪业，夙夜惟寅，凡所以图治者，悉遵祖宗成宪。
现代文：下诏说： 我恭承大业，日夜恭敬谨慎，凡所以图治之法，都遵守祖宗成规。
English: The following edict said: I solemnly undertake the great cause, I am respectful and prudent day and night, and I abide by the rules of my ancestors in every way.

古文：曩屡诏中外百司，宣布德泽，蠲赋详刑，赈恤贫民，思与黎元共享有生之乐。
现代文：从前多次下诏内外各官府，传布朝廷德政，蠲免赋税，审慎刑罚，抚恤贫民，愿与黎民百姓共享有生之乐。
English: In the past, he repeatedly issued proclamations to all government offices at home and abroad, propagating the principles of the imperial court, tax exemption, prudent punishment, and support for the poor, and was willing to share the joys of life with the people of Lai.

古文：尚虑有司未体朕意，庶政或阙，惠泽未洽，承宣者失于抚绥，司宪者怠于纠察，俾吾民重困，朕甚悯焉。
现代文：还考虑到有关部门不能体会我的意图，造成施政或有缺失，德泽未能普施于民，承旨宣谕者失于抚治之道，主管法纪者怠于检查纠正，以致我的人民陷入重困，我很怜悯人民的遭遇。
English: Also, considering that the relevant departments are unable to understand my intention, resulting in poor governance, Deze has failed to provide for the people, the person who issued the edict has lost the way of governance, and the person in charge of legal discipline has neglected to check and correct, so that my people have fallen into dire straits, I am very sorry for the people's suffering.

古文：今遣奉使宣抚，分行诸道，按问官吏不法，询民疾苦，审理冤滞，凡可以兴利除害，从宜举行。
现代文：而今派遣使者宣谕抚治，分别巡行各道，拿问不法官吏，询问民生疾苦，审理冤案及久拖不判的案件，凡可以兴利除害之事，都可权宜办理。
English: But now, sending envoys to preach and administer justice, separately patrolling every street, questioning judges and officials, inquiring about people's livelihoods and hardships, trying unjust cases and cases that have not been judged for a long time, all things that can benefit and eliminate harm can be handled expeditiously.

古文：有罪者，四品以上停职申请，五品以下就便处决。
现代文：官员有罪的，四品官以上，停其职务申奏朝廷，五品以下，就便处理。
English: If an official is found guilty, officials with four or more court ranks can apply to the Imperial Court for suspension of their duties, and officials with five or fewer court ranks will be dealt with accordingly.

古文：其有政绩尤异，暨晦迹丘园，才堪辅治者，具以名闻。 
现代文：如有政绩特别优异，及隐居田园而有辅佐才能的人员，皆将姓名奏闻朝廷。
English: If there are particularly outstanding political achievements, and those who live in seclusion in the countryside and have the ability to assist, their names will be reported to the imperial court.

古文：以湖广行省参知政事马合某、河东宣慰使李处恭之两浙江东道，江东道廉访使朵列秃、太史院使齐履谦之江西福建道，都功德使举林伯、荆湖宣慰使蒙弼之江南湖广道，礼部尚书李家奴、工部尚书朱蕡之河南江北道，同知枢密院事阿吉剌、御史中丞曹立之燕南山东道，太子詹事别帖木儿、宣徽院判韩让之河东陕西道，吏部尚书纳哈出、董讷之山北辽东道，陕西盐运使众家奴、中书断事官韩庭茂之云南省，湖南宣慰使寒食、冀宁路总管刘文之甘肃省，山东宣慰使秃思帖木儿、陕西行省左丞廉惇之四川省，翰林侍讲学士帖木儿不花、秘书卿吴秉道之京畿道。
现代文：命湖广行省参知政事马合某、河东宣慰使李处恭前往两浙江东道，江东道廉访使朵列秃、太史院使齐履谦前往江西福建道，都功德使举林伯、荆湖宣慰使蒙弼前往江南湖广道，礼部尚书李家奴、工部尚书朱前往河南江北道，同知枢密院事阿吉剌、御史中丞曹立前往燕南山东道，太子詹事别帖木儿、宣徽院判韩让前往河东陕西道，吏部尚书纳哈出、董讷前往山北辽东道，陕西盐运使众家奴、中书断事官韩庭茂前往云南行省，湖南宣慰使寒食、冀宁路总管刘文前往甘肃行省，山东宣慰使秃思帖木儿、陕西行省左丞廉忄享前往四川行省，翰林侍讲学士帖木儿不花、秘书卿吴秉道前往京畿道。
English: Li Shunqiong went to the two Zhejiang Hosts, Du Liqian went to the two Zhejiang Hosts, Du Liqian went to the two Zhejiang Hosts, Du Liqian went to the two Zhejiang Hosts, Du Liqian went to the two Zhejiang Hosts, Du Liqian went to the two Zhejiang Hosts, Du Liqian went to the two Zhejiang Hosts, Du Liqian went to the two Zhejiang Hosts, Du Liqian went to the two Zhejiang Hosts, Du Liqian went to the two Zhejiang Hosts, Du Liqian went to the two Zhejiang Hosts, Du Liqian went to the two Zhejiang Hosts, Du Li

古文：以郡县饥，诏运粟十五万石贮濒河诸仓，以备赈救，仍敕有司治义仓。
现代文：因路府州县饥荒，下诏运粮十五万石贮藏于沿河各仓库，以备赈济，照例敕令有关部门修治义仓。
English: Due to the famine in Luzhou County, 150,000 kilos of grain were stored in warehouses along the river to prepare for the famine. As usual, the relevant departments were ordered to repair the warehouses.

古文：禁大都、顺德、卫辉等十郡酿酒。
现代文：禁止大都、顺德、卫辉等十路酿酒。
English: It is forbidden to brew alcohol in ten regions including Dadu, Shunde and Weihai.

古文：募富民入粟拜官，二千石从七品，千石正八品，五百石从八品，三百石正九品，不愿仕者旌其门。
现代文：招募富民输纳粮食买官，二千石粮食给从七品官职，一千石给正八品，五百石给从八品，三百石给正九品，不愿为官者旌表其门。
English: Recruit rich people to donate grain to buy officials, and give 2,000 koku of grain to officials of the seventh grade, 1,000 koku to officials of the eighth grade, 500 koku to officials of the eighth grade, and 300 koku to officials of the ninth grade.

古文：诸王斡即遣使贡金浮图。
现代文：诸侯王斡即派遣使者进贡金浮屠。 
English: Princes and lords immediately dispatched envoys to pay tribute to Kim Phu Tho.

古文：己酉，海运江南粮百七十万石至京师。
现代文：初二，海运江南粮食一百七十万石到京师。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, 1.7 million koku of grain from the southern part of the Yangtze River was shipped to Beijing.

古文：庚戌，复尚乘寺、光禄寺为正三品，给银印。癸丑，车驾至大都。
现代文：初三，恢复尚乘寺为正三品，给予银印。初六，车驾到达大都。
English: On the third day of junior high school, he was reinstated as a senior third-grade student of Shangren Temple and given a silver seal. On the sixth day of junior high school, he drove to Dadu.

古文：遣使祀海神天妃。
现代文：派遣使者祭祀海神天妃。
English: Envoys were sent to offer sacrifices to the sea god Tenbi.

古文：甲寅，禁饥民结扁檐社，伤人者杖一百，著为令。
现代文：初七，禁止饥民结成扁担社，打伤人的杖责一百下，定为律令。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, it was forbidden for the starving people to form a flat-shouldered society, and the punishment for beating a wounded person with a stick was one hundred lashes.

古文：乙卯，享太庙。
现代文：初八，祭享太庙。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, a festival is held at the Imperial Palace.

古文：己未，岑世兴上言，自明不反，请置蒙古、汉人监贰官，诏优从之。
现代文：十二日，岑世兴上书诉说，申明自己没有反叛，奏请设立蒙古及汉人监贰官，下诏同意这项奏请。
English: On the 12th, Xing Shixing appealed in a letter, affirming that he was not a rebel and requesting the establishment of Mongolian and Han eunuchs, and the next edict agreed to this request.

古文：壬戌，诸王牙即贡马。
现代文：十五日，诸王牙即进贡马匹。
English: On the fifteenth day, all the kings and queens came to pay tribute.

古文：丁丑，浚河间陈玉带河。
现代文：三十日，疏浚河间路陈玉带河。
English: On the 30th, the Chen Yutai River was dredged.

古文：广西徭寇宾州。
现代文：广西瑶人进犯宾州。
English: The Guangxi Shanshan people invaded Pennsylvania.

古文：礼部员外郎元永贞言： 铁失弑逆，皆由铁木迭儿始祸，请明其罪，仍录付史馆，以为人臣之戒。 
现代文：礼部员外郎元永贞上言 ：铁失弑逆君主，皆由铁木迭儿造下祸端，请表明其罪，照旧例记下交付史馆，作为为人臣下的警戒。 
English: A member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Wairo Motomoto Nagasada, said, "The iron lost its temper and rebelled against the monarch, and the disasters were all caused by Tiemukidire. Please show your guilt, and as in the past, write it down and hand it over to the history museum as a warning to your subjects."

古文：汉中道文州霖雨，山崩。
现代文：汉中道文州久雨，山体崩塌。
English: It rained for a long time in Wenzhou, Hanzhong Road, and the mountain collapsed.

古文：檀州雨雹，开元路三河溢，琼州、南安、德庆诸路饥，赈粮、钞有差。
现代文：檀州降冰雹。开元路三河横溢。琼州、南安、德庆等路饥荒，赈济粮食钱钞不一。
English: The hail fell in Danzhou. The three rivers of Kaiyuan Road overflowed. There were famines in Qiongzhou, Nan'an, Deqing and other roads, and the grain relief money varied.

古文：冬十月戊寅朔，张珪归保定上冢，以病辞禄，不允。
现代文：冬十月初一，张王圭返回保定上坟，以疾病为由请辞官禄，不同意。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Zhang Wang Gui returned to the tomb in Baoding, and asked for resignation on the grounds of illness, but was not accepted.

古文：岑世兴及子铁木儿率众寇上林等州，命抚谕之。
现代文：岑世兴与其子铁木儿率众进犯上林等处，命予以抚谕。
English: Xing Shixing and his son Tiemu Er led the crowd to attack the forest and other places, and were ordered to be punished.

古文：壬午，禁成都路酿酒。
现代文：初五，禁止成都路酿酒。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, it is forbidden to brew alcohol on Chengdu Road.

古文：癸未，以倒剌沙为御史大夫。
现代文：初六，任命倒剌沙为御史大夫。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, he was appointed to the post of chief historian.

古文：丁亥，享太庙。
现代文：初十，祭享太庙。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the temple is dedicated.

古文：己丑，赐恩平王塔思不花部钞五千锭。
现代文：十二日，赐与恩平王塔思不花部钱钞五千锭。
English: On the twelfth day of the month, he gave the king of Enping, Ta Si, five thousand taels of money.

古文：壬辰，荧惑犯氐。
现代文：十五日，火星凌犯氐宿。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Martian intruded into the inn.

古文：癸巳，填星退犯井。
现代文：十六日，土星凌犯井宿。
English: On the 16th, Saturn's transit of Uranus leaves the inn.

古文：播州凯黎苗率诸寨苗、獠为寇。
现代文：播州凯黎苗人率领各寨苗蛮作乱。
English: Banzhou Kaili Miao people led by each village Miao made a mess.

古文：乙未，皇后亦怜真八剌受佛戒于帝师。
现代文：十八日，皇后亦怜真八剌接受佛戒于帝师处。
English: On the 18th, the empress also received the Buddhist precepts at the emperor's office.

古文：丁酉，广西獠酋何童降，请防边自效，从之。
现代文：二十日，广西瑶人领令何童投降，奏请防边效力，同意这项奏请。
English: On the 20th, the people of Xing in Guangxi ordered He Tong to surrender, requested the border defense effect, and agreed to this request.

古文：乙巳，宁远知州添插言，安南国土官押那攻掠其木末诸寨，请治之，敕安南世子谕押那归其俘。
现代文：二十八日，宁远知州添插上言，安南国土官押那攻打掠夺木末等寨，请加以制裁，敕令安南国世子谕令押那归还所俘获的人与财物。
English: On the 28th, Ningyuan Zhizhou inscribed the words, Annan's land officer Abna attacked and plundered the wood and other villages, please impose sanctions, and order Annan's son-in-law to order Abna to return the captured people and property.

古文：丙辰，宁夏路、曹州属县水，霸州、衢州路饥，赈粮二月。
现代文：二十九日，宁夏路、曹州属县水灾。霸州、衢州路饥荒，赈济粮食两个月。
English: On the 29th, floods in Ningxia Road and Caozhou County, famine in Bazhou and Zhangzhou Road, and two months of grain rationing.

古文：十一月戊申，周王和世〈王束〉遣使以豹来献。
现代文：十一月初二，周王和世王束派遣使者以豹来进献。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, King Zhou and King Shigu sent an envoy with a leopard as an offering.

古文：改长宁军为州。
现代文：改长宁军建制为州。
English: Changning Army was reorganized as a prefecture.

古文：庚戌，旭迈杰以岁饥请罢皇后上都营缮，从之。
现代文：初四，旭迈杰以年饥为由奏请罢免皇后上都营建工程，同意此项要求。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Xu Meijie requested the dismissal of the Empress Shangdu Construction Project on the grounds of years of famine, and this request was agreed to.

古文：纽泽以病乞罢，不允。
现代文：纽泽因病请求退职，不同意。
English: Nyuze disagreed with the request to retire due to illness.

古文：丙辰，郭菩萨等伏诛，杖流其党。
现代文：初十，郭菩萨等人被处决，杖责流放其党徒。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, Guo Bodhisattva and others were executed, and their followers were banished.

古文：丁巳，幸大承华普庆寺，祀昭献元圣皇后于影堂，赐僧钞千锭。
现代文：十一日，临幸大承华普庆寺，祭祀昭献元圣皇后于影堂，赐与僧人钱钞千锭。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Rinchen Da Chenghua Puqing Temple held a sacrificial offering to the former holy empress in the auditorium, and gave the monk thousands of banknotes.

古文：岑世兴结八番蛮班光金等合兵攻石头等寨，敕调兵御之。
现代文：岑世兴交结八番蛮夷班光金等合兵攻打石头等寨子，敕令调兵抵御。
English: Xing Shixing allied with the eighth barbarian squad, Guangjin, and other troops to attack the stone stockade, and ordered the transfer of troops to resist.

古文：八番宣慰司官失备坐罪。
现代文：八番宣慰司官员失防备坐罪。
English: The eighth official of the Office of the Counselor lost his guard and prepared to take the blame.

古文：戊午，填星退犯井宿钺星。
现代文：十二日，土星退犯井宿钺星。
English: On the twelfth day, Saturn retreated to its home planet.

古文：己未，诏整饬台纲。
现代文：十三日，下诏整顿台纲。
English: On the 13th, the platform for rectification was issued.

古文：庚申，倭舶来互市。
现代文：十四日，倭国船舶前来互市。
English: On the 14th, ships from Wakoku came to trade.

古文：广西道宣慰使获徭酋潘宝下狱，其弟潘见遂寇柳州，命湖广行省左丞乞住捕之。
现代文：广西道宣慰使捕获瑶人首领潘宝，关入牢狱，其弟潘见便入犯柳州，命湖广行省左丞乞住捕讨。
English: Guangxi Dao Xuancheng led to the capture of the leader of the Xiongnu, Pan Bao, and he was put in prison. His brother, Pan Min, then went to Liuzhou and begged for his life.

古文：壬戌，敕军民官荫袭者，由本贯图宗支，申请铨授。
现代文：十六日，敕令军民官吏庇荫袭职者，由本人原籍所在地绘出宗支谱系，再申请选授。
English: On the 16th day of the month, the military and civilian officials of the imperial command drew the lineage of the clan from the place of origin, and then applied for the award.

古文：丙寅，倒剌沙复为中书左丞相，加开府仪同三司、录军国重事。
现代文：二十日，倒剌沙再次担任中书左丞相，并加开府仪同三司、录军国重事。
English: On the 20th, Gao Bingsha once again served as the Minister of the Left and Right of the Central Military Commission, and was added to the three departments of the General Office of the Central Military Commission and the General Office of the Central Military Commission.

古文：丁卯，罢蒙山银冶提举司，命瑞州路领之。
现代文：二十一日，撤销蒙山银冶提举司，命瑞州路管领其事。
English: On the 21st, Mengshan Yinye revoked the nomination of the secretary and ordered the Ruizhou road authority to lead the matter.

古文：壬申，赐诸王不赛因钞二万锭、帛百匹。
现代文：二十六日，赐予诸侯王不赛因钱钞二万锭、丝帛百匹。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, he gave the princes of Buxai twenty thousand baht in banknotes and one hundred silk cocoons.

古文：诸王斡耳朵罕遣使以追捕广西徭寇上闻，帝曰： 朕自即位，累诏天下悯恤黎元，惟广徭屡叛，杀掠良民，故命斡耳朵罕等讨之。
现代文：诸王斡耳朵罕派遣使者以追捕广西瑶寇之事上闻。泰定帝说： 我从即位以来，多次下诏天下抚恤黎民百姓，唯广西瑶人多次反叛，杀掠良民，所以才命斡耳朵罕等人讨捕。
English: It is said that emperors sent emissaries to hunt down the Guangxi Qiang. Emperor Taiding said: "Since I ascended the throne, I have repeatedly issued decrees to the world to support the Li people. However, the Guangxi Qiang people have repeatedly rebelled and killed and plundered the good people. Therefore, it was necessary to send emissaries to hunt down the Li people.

古文：今闻迎降者甚众，宜更以恩抚之。若果不悛，严兵追捕。 
现代文：现在听说迎降者很多，应用恩德抚治，如果确不改悔，方才严令兵马追捕。 
English: Now I have heard that there are many people who welcome surrender, and they should be treated with grace. If they do not repent, they should be pursued by soldiers and horses.

古文：京师饥，赈粜米四十万石。
现代文：京师饥荒，赈济出售大米四十万石。
English: After the famine in Beijing, 400,000 kilos of rice were sold to help the poor.

古文：内郡饥，赈钞十万锭、米五万石。
现代文：内地饥荒，赈济钱钞十万锭、大米五万石。
English: Famine in the interior of the country, 100 thousand baht in banknotes and 50 thousand koku of rice were collected.

古文：河间诸郡流民就食通、漷二州，命有司存恤之。
现代文：河间等路流民就食通州、氵郭州两处，命有关部门抚恤他们。
English: Kawama and other displaced people are living in two places, Tongzhou and Shenguozhou, and the relevant departments have been ordered to support them.

古文：杭州路火，赈贫民粮一月。
现代文：杭州路火灾，赈济贫民粮食一个月。
English: Hangzhou Road fire, help the poor with grain for a month.

古文：常德路水，民饥，赈粮万一千六百石。
现代文：常德路水灾，人民饥饿，赈济粮食一万一千六百石。
English: Floods in Changde Road, people starving, 11,600 kilos of grain saved.

古文：十二月戊寅，以塔失帖木儿为中书右丞相。
现代文：十二月初二，任命塔失帖木儿为中书右丞相。
English: On the 2nd day of the 12th month of the year, Ta Chou Tse-mul was appointed as the Minister of the Right of the Central Government.

古文：癸未，加塔失帖木儿开府仪同三司、上柱国、录军国重事、监修国史，封蓟国公。
现代文：初七，加塔失帖木儿开府仪同三司、上柱国、录军国重事、监修国史之衔，封为蓟国公。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Kata lost the title of "Kofu-gi," "Sanshi-koku," "Shoshu-koku," "Rekku-koku-shigoto" and "Supervisor of national history," and was given the title of "Shi-koku-koku."

古文：诸王不赛因遣使贡珠，赐钞二万锭。
现代文：诸侯王不赛因派遣使者进贡珍珠，赐予钱钞二万锭。
English: Princes and lords sent emissaries to collect tribute pearls, and were given 20,000 baht in banknotes.

古文：乙酉，帝复受佛戒于帝师。
现代文：初九，泰定帝再次于帝师处接受佛戒。
English: At the age of nine, Emperor Taiding once again received the Buddhist precepts from the emperor.

古文：荧惑犯天江，辰星犯建星。
现代文：火星凌犯天江，水星凌犯建星。
English: Mars encroaches on the Tianjiang, Mercury encroaches on the Jianxing.

古文：丁亥，修鹿顶殿。
现代文：十一日，修建鹿顶殿。
English: On the 11th day, the deer roof hall was built.

古文：镇南王脱不花薨，遣中书平章政事乃马歹摄镇其地。
现代文：镇南王脱不花逝世，派遣中书平章政事乃马歹代为镇守该地。
English: When the king of Zhenan, Du Fuhua, died, he sent the magistrate Pingzhang Zhengji to act as the town guard.

古文：中书省臣言山东、陕西、湖广地接戎夷，请议选宗室往镇，从之。
现代文：中书省官员上言山东、陕西、湖广地区与戎夷接壤，请商议选择宗室前往镇守，同意这项提议。
English: An official from the People's Republic of China's Shandong Province said that Shandong Province, Shaanxi Province, and Hukang Province all bordered Eunos, and requested that they discuss the choice of the family's ancestral home and go to the town's governor to agree to the proposal.

古文：申禁图谶，私藏不献者罪之。
现代文：申命禁止图谶，私藏而不献出者治罪。
English: An order was issued prohibiting the making of images, and those who kept them and did not donate them were punished.

古文：癸巳，京师多盗，塔失帖木儿请处决重囚，增调逻卒，仍立捕盗赏格，从之。
现代文：十七日，京师地区多盗贼，塔失帖木儿请处决重犯，增调巡逻的士卒，照旧例设立捕盗悬赏条文，接受这项提议。
English: On the 17th, many thieves in the Beijing Division area, the tower lost Timur asked to execute repeat offenders, increase the number of patrol officers, and set up a theft reward clause as usual, accepting this proposal.

古文：甲午，太白犯垒壁阵。
现代文：十八日，金星凌犯垒壁阵。
English: On the 18th, Venus broke through the wall.

古文：召张珪于保定。
现代文：从保定召回张王圭。
English: Zhang Wanggui recalled from Baoding.

古文：丁酉，加纽泽知枢密院事，与马某沙并开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十一日，加纽泽知枢密院事之职，与马某沙并为开府仪同三司。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Kanyuzawa Zechi was appointed to the Privy Council, and he and Ma Mousa were appointed to the three departments of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：弛瑞州路酒禁。
现代文：放宽瑞州路酒禁。
English: Relaxation of alcohol ban on Ruizhou Road.

古文：左丞乞住、诸王斡耳朵罕征徭贼，败之。
现代文：左丞乞住、诸侯王斡耳朵罕征讨瑶寇，将其打败。
English: Zuo Zheng begged to live, and the princes of Wang Rong listened to the rare call to fight the invaders, and defeated them.

古文：元江路土官普山为寇，命戍兵捕之。
现代文：元江路土官普山作乱，命戍防兵马捕讨。
English: Fushan, a local official on Yuanjiang Road, caused a riot and risked his life to prevent soldiers and horses from hunting him down.

古文：壬寅，大宁路凤翔府饥，禁酿酒。
现代文：二十六日，大宁凤翔府饥荒，禁止酿酒。
English: On the 26th, the famine in Fengxiangfu, Dalian, led to a ban on brewing alcohol.

古文：右丞赵简请行区田法于内地，以宋董煟所编《救荒活民书》颁州县。
现代文：右丞赵简奏请在内地推行区田法，将宋代董火胃所编《救荒活民书》分发州县。
English: U.S. Vice President Zhao Jianso asked to implement the zoning law in the mainland, and distribute the "Book of Wild Life Rescue" compiled by Song Dynasty Dong Huaguang to prefectures.

古文：济南、延川二路饥，赈钞三千五百锭。
现代文：济南、延川二路饥荒，赈济钱钞三千五百锭。
English: Famine in Jinan and Yanchuan, 3500 baht in relief money.

古文：惠州、杭州等处饥，赈粜有差。
现代文：惠州、杭州等路饥荒，赈济出售粮食不一。
English: There are famines in Huizhou, Hangzhou and other places, and the sale of grain by the government is not uniform.

古文：是岁，陕西府雨雹，御河水溢。
现代文：这一年，陕西降冰雹，御河河水漫堤。
English: This year, hail fell in Shaanxi, and the Ohe River flooded its banks.

古文：以故翰林学士不花、中政使普颜笃、指挥使卜颜忽里为铁失等所系死，赠功臣号及阶勋爵谥。
现代文：因翰林学士不花、中政使普颜笃、指挥使卜颜忽里被铁失等人关进牢狱致死，赠予功臣名号与阶勋爵谥。
English: Because of this, the scholar Hanlin Zhihua, the middle-ranking political envoy Puyan Du, and the commanding envoy Buyan Huuli were put in prison and died, and were given the title of meritorious servant and the title of Lord.

