古文：召公为保，周公为师，相成王为左右。
现代文：周成王时，召公任太保，周公任太师，他们同时成为成王身边的辅弼大臣。
English: Zhaogong was Taibo, Zhou Gong was Taishi, assisted Zhou Chengwang, and presided over state affairs.

古文：召公不说，周公作《君奭》。
现代文：召公感到不高兴，于是周公写下这篇《君奭》。
English: Zhao Gong was not happy, so Zhou Gong wrote down this article "Jun Yao."

古文：周公若曰： 君奭！
现代文：周公说： 君奭！
English: Zhou Gong said, "Gentlemen!

古文：弗吊天降丧于殷，殷既坠厥命，我有周既受。
现代文：很不幸，上天把丧亡之祸降临给了殷商。现在殷朝已经丧失了他们的天命，而我们周室承受了上天赐予的大命。
English: Unfortunately, the heavens brought the disaster of death to the Yin merchants. Now the Yin dynasty has lost their destiny, and our Zhou family has inherited the great destiny given by the heavens.

古文：我不敢知曰：厥基永孚于休。
现代文：但是我不敢说周室已开始的基业就能永久地延续下去。
English: But I wouldn't dare to say that the foundation work that Zhou Muro has begun will be able to continue forever.

古文：若天棐忱，我亦不敢知曰：其终出于不祥。
现代文：恭敬诚恳地顺从上天的意志，我也不敢断言周朝的王业能摆脱不详的结果。唉！
English: Respectfully and sincerely obeying the will of heaven, I dare not assert that the royal career of the Zhou Dynasty can get rid of the unknown result. Alas!

古文：呜呼！君已曰 时我 ，我亦不敢宁于上帝命，弗永远念天威越我民；罔尤违，惟人。
现代文：你曾经说过： 依靠我们自己，不要执守天命 ，我也不敢安于天命，也不敢不时时顾念上天的威严，安抚我们的人民。要想没有过错，一切在于人为。
English: You once said: Rely on ourselves, do not cling to the fate of heaven, I dare not be satisfied with the fate of heaven, nor dare I think about the majesty of heaven from time to time to appease our people. To think there is no fault, everything depends on man.

古文：在我后嗣子孙，大弗克恭上下，遏佚前人光在家，不知天命不易，天难谌，乃其坠命，弗克经历。嗣前人，恭明德，在今。
现代文：恐怕我们的后嗣子孙，不能敬天理民，不能继承发扬先王的光荣传统。身在家中，不知道天命难得，天意也难以信赖，如果他们不能继承发扬前人的光荣传统，他们将永远失去天命。
English: I am afraid that our heirs and descendants will not be able to respect the people of heaven and earth, and will not be able to inherit and carry forward the glorious tradition of our ancestors. When they are at home, they do not know that the fate of heaven is rare, and it is difficult to trust the will of heaven. If they cannot inherit and carry forward the glorious tradition of their predecessors, they will forever lose the fate of heaven.

古文：予小子旦非克有正，迪惟前人光施于我冲子。
现代文：现在我们应继承文王、武王的德业，恭敬地施行德政。我无法对自己的错误有所纠正，只想把文王的光辉德业传给我们的后辈。
English: Now we should carry on the virtuous deeds of King Wen and King Wu, and respectfully carry out a virtuous government. I cannot correct my own mistakes, but only want to pass on the glorious virtuous deeds of King Wen to our descendants.

古文：又曰： 天不可信 ，我道惟宁王德延，天不庸释于文王受命。 公曰： 君奭！
现代文：你还说过： 上天是不可以相信的 ，我们只有继承和发扬文王的美德，使之长久的保持下去，才会使上天不抛弃文王所承受的福命。 周公说： 君奭！
English: You also said: Heaven cannot be trusted, we can only inherit and carry forward the virtues of King Wen, and keep them for a long time, so that Heaven will not abandon the good fortune that King Wen has received. Zhou Gong said: Junyao!

古文：我闻在昔成汤既受命，时则有若伊尹，格于皇天。
现代文：我听说昔日商王成汤受了天命后，就有伊尹这样的贤臣辅助他，使他得以升配于天。
English: I heard that once upon a time, after the merchant Wang Cheng Tang received his heavenly calling, there was a wise man like Yi Yin to assist him, so that he could be promoted to heaven.

古文：在太甲，时则有若保衡。在太戊，时则有若伊陟、臣扈，格于上帝；巫咸乂王家。
现代文：太甲即位后，则有保衡的辅佐；太戊时又有贤臣伊陟、臣扈辅佐，使他们得以升配于上天。巫咸帮助商王治理国家。
English: After Taiga ascended the throne, he was assisted by Baoheng; when Taibu ascended the throne, he was assisted by Iyi, a wise retainer, and Yao, a wise retainer, so that they could be promoted to heaven. Wuxian helped the merchant king to govern the country.

古文：在祖乙，时则有若巫贤。
现代文：祖乙即位后，当时就有贤臣巫贤。
English: After Zu Yi ascended the throne, there was a group of wise men called Wuxian.

古文：在武丁，时则有若甘盘。
现代文：武丁时期，则有贤臣甘盘的辅佐。
English: During the Wuding period, he was assisted by the wise minister Ganpan.

古文：率惟兹有陈，保乂有殷，故殷礼陟配天，多历年所。
现代文：正因为有了这些贤臣辅助治理殷商，才使殷商诸王的神灵能够配享上天的祭祀，这种礼制延续了很多年，未曾改变。
English: It is precisely because of these sages who assisted in the governance of Yin merchants that the gods of the kings of Yin merchants were able to share the heavenly sacrifices. This ritual system has continued for many years and has not changed.

古文：天维纯佑命，则商实百姓王人，罔不秉德明恤，小臣屏侯甸，矧咸奔走。
现代文：上天专心帮助教导下民，于是商朝所有同姓和异姓之族莫不秉承其德业，明恤其政事。君王身边的亲近重臣及诸侯官员，也都奔走效命。
English: Heaven concentrated on helping to teach the people, so all the families with the same surname and different surnames of the Shang Dynasty adhered to their virtues and knew their politics. The close vassals and officials of the princes around the king also ran for their lives.

古文：惟兹惟德称，用乂厥辟，故一人有事于四方，若卜筮罔不是孚。 公曰： 君奭！
现代文：诸臣因为有美德而被推举，来辅佐他们的君王。所以一旦君王向四方发出政令，天下的臣民就像信奉卜筮的灵验一样，没有人不遵从君王的教令。 周公说： 君奭！
English: The courtiers were chosen because of their virtue to assist their king, so once the king issued a decree to the four quarters, the subjects of the world were like believers in the efficacy of Bu Xun, and no one disobeyed the king's edict. Zhou Gong said: "Jun Xun!

古文：天寿平格，保乂有殷，有殷嗣，天灭威。
现代文：天道中正平和，殷商才得以长治久安，于是商王世代相继，上天也没有给殷商降下灾祸。
English: The heavens were at peace, and the merchants of Yin were able to enjoy long-term peace. As a result, the merchant kings succeeded one another, and the heavens did not bring disaster to the merchants of Yin.

古文：今汝永念，则有固命，厥乱明我新造邦。 公曰： 君奭！
现代文：现在你一定要记住这个历史教训，只要我们尽心辅佐，就会有稳固的国运，以好的方法治理国家。 周公说： 君奭！
English: Now you must remember this historical lesson, as long as we do our best to assist, there will be a solid national movement to govern the country in a good way.Zhou Gong said: Junyao!

古文：在昔上帝割申劝宁王之德，其集大命于厥躬。
现代文：在以前，上天为什么再三勉励文王修德，把治理天下的重任放在他的身上呢？
English: In the past, why did the heavens repeatedly encourage King Shude, placing the important task of governing the world on his shoulders?

古文：惟文王尚克修和我有夏；亦惟有若虢叔，有若闳夭，有若散宜生，有若泰颠，有若南宫括。 
现代文：因为只有我们文王才能够将国家治理好，也因为当时有虢叔、闳夭、散宜生、泰颠、南宫括等贤臣辅佐他。 
English: Because only we, King Wen, are able to govern the country well, and also because at that time he was assisted by wise men such as Xing Xiu, Xing Yao, San Yisheng, Tai Bing, and Nan Gong Hui.

古文：又曰： 无能往来，兹迪彝教，文王蔑德降于国人。
现代文：周公又说： 如果没有这些贤臣辅佐文王，努力施行教化，文王也就无法施行德政给民众了。
English: Zhou Gong also said: If there were not these wise men to assist King Wen and strive to carry out enlightenment, King Wen would not be able to exercise moral government to the people.

古文：亦惟纯佑秉德，迪知天威，乃惟时昭文王，迪见冒闻于上帝，惟时受有殷命哉！
现代文：也因为文王至始至终保持美德，让百姓了解上天的威严，勉励他们使他们的功绩昭著，上天了解了他们的行为，才让他们接受殷国的大命。
English: It was also because King Wen maintained his virtue from beginning to end, letting the people understand the majesty of heaven, encouraging them to make their merits known, and heaven understood their actions, that they accepted the great command of Yin.

古文：武王惟兹四人，尚迪有禄。后暨武王，诞将天威，咸刘厥敌。
现代文：武王的时候，这五位贤臣中还有四人健在，后来武王征伐殷国的时候，也辅佐在旁，奋勇杀敌。
English: At the time of King Wu, four of these five wise men were still alive. Later, when King Wu conquered Yin, they also assisted him and fought bravely against the enemy.

古文：惟兹四人昭武王，惟冒丕单称德。
现代文：由于这四人尽职尽责地辅佐武王，才使武王成就大业，所以天下人都称赞他们的美德。
English: Because these four people dutifully assisted King Wu, they made King Wu achieve a great cause, so the whole world praised their virtues.

古文：今在予小子旦，若游大川，予往暨汝奭其济。
现代文：现在我像是在大江大河中漂游，我需要你的帮助才能渡河成功。
English: Right now I feel like I'm adrift in a big river, and I need your help to make it across.

古文：小子同未在位，诞无我责，收罔勖不及。
现代文：现在我无知却担任重要职位，如果你不能提出匡正我的意见，那就没有人纠正我的不足了。
English: Now that I am ignorant and hold an important position, if you cannot correct me, there is no one to correct me.

古文：耇造德不降，我则鸣鸟不闻，矧曰其有能格？ 
现代文：您这老成有德的人不指导我，我就听不到凤凰的叫声，那我的能力怎么能够匹配上天给的责任呢？ 周公说： 唉！
English: If you, an accomplished and virtuous person, do not guide me, I will not be able to hear the phoenix's cry, so how can my ability match the responsibility given by God? Zhou Gong said: Alas!

古文：公曰： 呜呼！君肆其监于兹！我受命于疆惟休，亦大惟艰。
现代文：您现在应该认识到这一点，我们承受天命，享受着无比的恩惠，却也面临着极大的困难。
English: You should realize this by now. We have been blessed with a great destiny and have enjoyed great blessings, but we have also faced great difficulties.

古文：告君，乃猷裕我，不以后人迷。 
现代文：请你谋划出可以使周室兴盛的种种措施，不要让后人感到迷惑啊！ 
English: Please plan all kinds of measures that can make the Zhou dynasty flourish, and don't let future generations feel confused!

古文：公曰： 前人敷乃心，乃悉命汝，作汝民极。
现代文：周公说： 先王曾经表明了他的心愿，他悉心教导你，命你做民众的表率。
English: Zhou Gong said, "The late king once expressed his wishes. He carefully taught you and ordered you to be a role model for the people.

古文：曰： 汝明勖偶王，在亶。乘兹大命，惟文王德丕承，无疆之恤。  公曰： 君！
现代文：并且说： 你们要尽心尽力地辅佐君王，负责地承担起这个重要的使命。要继承文王的圣德，并把它作为长久的计划。 周公说： 君！
English: He also said, "You must do your best to assist the king and responsibly undertake this important mission. You must inherit the sacredness of King Wen and take it as a long-term plan." Zhou Gong said, "You!

古文：告汝，朕允保奭。其汝克敬，以予监于殷丧大否，肆念我天威。
现代文：告诉你，我是非常信任你太保奭，希望你能够敬重我说的，和我一道吸取殷商亡国的教训，时时顾虑上天的惩罚。
English: To tell you the truth, I have great trust in you, my bodyguard, and I hope you can respect what I say, learn the lesson of the merchants who plundered the country together with me, and always be concerned about God's punishment.

古文：予不允，惟若兹诰，予惟曰： 襄我二人，汝有合哉？ 言曰： 在时二人。
现代文：如果我不诚心，会说这些话吗？我考虑之后还要问你： 除了我们两个人，还有比我们更同心同德的人吗？ 
English: If I were not sincere, would I say these things? After thinking about it, I would like to ask you: Besides the two of us, is there anyone more like-minded than us?

古文：天休兹至，惟时二人弗戡。 
现代文：你会说： 正是有我们二人共辅王室，上天才降下更多的恩惠。
English: You will say: It is because of the two of us, together with the royal family, that the Lord has bestowed more favors.

古文：其汝克敬德，明我俊民，在让后人于丕时。
现代文：但到了我们二人老去，就不能承担这么多的恩惠。 希望你能敬重贤良之士，提拔贤能之人，帮助后人继承先王的德业。唉！
English: But when the two of us grow old, we will not be able to bear so much grace. I hope you can respect the virtuous, promote the virtuous, and help future generations inherit the virtue of the forefathers. Alas!

古文：呜呼！笃棐时二人，我式克至于今日休？
现代文：如果真的没有我们二人，我们周朝能有今日这样的美好吗？
English: If there were really no two of us, could we Zhou morning have such a beautiful morning as today?

古文：我咸成文王功于不怠，丕冒海隅出日，罔不率俾。 公曰： 君！
现代文：我和你成就文王的功业在于不懈怠，要使那海边日出之地，也没有人不服从我们的统治。 周公说： 君！
English: My work and your work to become the King of Literature lies in not slacking off, so that no one in the land of the rising sun will disobey our rule. Zhou Gong said: You!

古文：予不惠若兹多诰，予惟用闵于天越民。 公曰： 呜呼！
现代文：我不是很聪慧，说了这么多，我只忧心天命和我们的人民。 周公说： 唉！君！
English: I'm not very clever, I've said so much, I'm only worried about the fate of heaven and our people. Zhou Gong said: Alas!

古文：君！惟乃知民德亦罔不能厥初，惟其终。
现代文：你知道给民众施行德政，开始时没有不好好干的，但是却很少有人能够始终如一，坚持到底。
English: As you know, there is no such thing as doing a bad job at the beginning of implementing a moral government for the people, but there are few people who can consistently stick to it.

古文：祗若兹，往敬用治！ 
现代文：我们要记住这一点，勤劳恭敬地治理国家。 
English: We must remember this and govern the country diligently and respectfully.

