古文：圣人以治天下为事者也，必知乱之所自起，焉能治之；不知乱之所自起，则不能治。
现代文：圣人是以治理天下为职业的人，必须知道混乱从哪里产生，才能对它进行治理。如果不知道混乱从哪里产生，就不能进行治理。
English: A sage is a person whose profession is to govern the world. He must know where the chaos comes from in order to govern it. If he does not know where the chaos comes from, he cannot govern it.

古文：譬之如医之攻人之疾者然：必知疾之所自起，焉能攻之；不知疾之所自起，则弗能攻。
现代文：这就好像医生给人治病一样，必须知道疾病产生的根源，才能进行医治。如果不知道疾病产生的根源，就不能医治。
English: Just as a doctor must know the root cause of a disease in order to treat it, if you don't know the root cause of a disease, you can't treat it.

古文：治乱者何独不然？
现代文：治理混乱又何尝不是这样，必须知道混乱产生的根源，才能进行治理。
English: This is not the case with the governance of chaos. In order to govern, it is necessary to know the root causes of the chaos.

古文：必知乱之所自起，焉能治之；不知乱之斯自起，则弗能治。圣人以治天下为事者也，不可不察乱之所自起。
现代文：如果不知道混乱产生的根源，就不能治理。圣人是以治理天下为职业的人，不可不考察混乱产生的根源。
English: If you don't know the root cause of chaos, you can't govern. A sage is a person who governs the world as a profession, and you must examine the root cause of chaos.

古文：当察乱何自起？
现代文：试考察混乱从哪里产生呢？
English: Let's take a look at where the confusion comes from.

古文：起不相爱。
现代文：起于人与人不相爱。
English: It's caused by people not loving each other.

古文：臣子之不孝君父，所谓乱也。
现代文：臣与子不孝敬君和父，就是所谓乱。
English: If a vassal and his son do not show filial respect to his lord and father, it is called a riot.

古文：子自爱，不爱父，故亏父而自利；弟自爱，不爱兄，故亏兄而自利；臣自爱，不爱君，故亏君而自利，此所谓乱也。
现代文：儿子爱自己而不爱父亲，因而损害父亲以自利；弟弟爱自己而不爱兄长，因而损害兄长以自利；臣下爱自己而不爱君上，因而损害君上以自利，这就是所谓混乱。
English: A son loves himself and does not love his father, and so harms his father for his own gain; a brother loves himself and does not love his brother, and so harms his brother for his own gain; a vassal loves himself and does not love his lord, and so harms his lord for his own gain. This is called confusion.

古文：虽父之不慈子，兄之不慈弟，君之不慈臣，此亦天下之所谓乱也。
现代文：反过来，即使父亲不慈爱儿子，兄长不慈爱弟弟，君上不慈爱臣下，这也是天下的所谓混乱。
English: On the other hand, even if the father does not love his son, the elder brother does not love his younger brother, and the ruler does not love his vassal, this is the so-called chaos of the world.

古文：父自爱也，不爱子，故亏子而自利；兄自爱也，不爱弟，故亏弟而自利；君自爱也，不爱臣，故亏臣而自利。
现代文：父亲爱自己而不爱儿子，所以损害儿子以自利；兄长爱自己而不爱弟弟，所以损害弟弟以自利；君上爱自己而不爱臣下，所以损害臣下以自利。
English: The father loves himself and does not love his son, so he harms his son for his own benefit; the elder brother loves himself and does not love his younger brother, so he harms his younger brother for his own benefit; the ruler loves himself and does not love his subjects, so he harms his subjects for his own benefit.

古文：是何也？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：皆起不相爱。
现代文：都是起于不相爱。
English: It all started because they didn't love each other!

古文：虽至天下之为盗贼者亦然：盗爱其室，不爱其异室，故窃异室以利其室。
现代文：即使是天下做盗贼的也是这样。盗只爱自己的家，不爱别人的家，所以偷盗别人家而自得利益。
English: Even the world's thieves are like this. Thieves only love their own homes, not other people's homes, so they steal other people's homes to make a profit.

古文：贼爱其身，不爱人，故贼人以利其身。
现代文：贼只爱自身而不爱他人。所以抢夺他人身上东西而自得利益。
English: A thief loves himself, not others, so he steals from others to enrich himself.

古文：此何也？
现代文：这是什么原故呢？
English: What is the reason for this?

古文：皆起不相爱。
现代文：都是起于不相爱的缘故啊！
English: It all started because they didn't love each other!

古文：虽至大夫之相乱家，诸侯之相攻国者亦然：大夫各爱其家，不爱异家，故乱异家以利其家。
现代文：即使是大夫互相侵扰其家，诸侯互相攻打其国也是这样的。大夫各自爱自己的家，不爱别人的家，所以扰乱他人的家而使自家得利。
English: It is even the case that doctors invade each other's homes, and princes attack each other's countries. Each doctor loves his own home, but not the homes of others, so he disturbs the homes of others to benefit his own family.

古文：诸侯各爱其国，不爱异国，故攻异国以利其国，天下之乱物，具此而已矣。察此何自起？皆起不相爱。
现代文：诸侯各自爱自己的国家，而不爱别的国家，所以攻打别国而使自己国家得利。天下各种乱事，全是这些了，细察它们的起因，都起于不相爱。
English: Princes love their own countries more than they love other countries, so they attack other countries in order to benefit their own countries. All kinds of chaos in the world are just like this. If you look closely at their causes, they all stem from not loving each other.

古文：若使天下兼相爱，爱人若爱其身，犹有不孝者乎？
现代文：假若天下都能相亲相爱，爱别人就像爱自己，还能有不孝的吗？
English: If the whole world could love each other, and love others as they love themselves, would there still be any unfilial piety?

古文：视父兄与君若其身，恶施不孝？
现代文：看待父亲、兄弟和君上像自己一样，怎么会做出不孝的事呢？
English: How can one be unfilial to one's father, brother, and sovereign if he considers them to be like himself?

古文：犹有不慈者乎？
现代文：还会有不慈爱的吗？
English: Will there be more unkindness?

古文：视弟子与臣若其身，恶施不慈？
现代文：看待弟弟、儿子与臣下像自己一样，怎么会做出不慈的事呢？
English: How can one be unkind to a younger brother, a son, and a vassal who is like oneself?

古文：故不孝不慈亡有。
现代文：所以不孝不慈都没有了。
English: Therefore, there is no filial piety or mercy.

古文：犹有盗贼乎？
现代文：还有盗贼吗？
English: Are there still thieves?

古文：故视人之室若其室，谁窃？
现代文：看待别人的家像自己的家一样，谁会盗窃？
English: If a man regard another man's house as his own, who will steal from him?

古文：视人身若其身，谁贼？
现代文：看待别人就像自己一样，谁会害人？
English: If you treat others as yourself, who will harm you?

古文：故盗贼亡有。
现代文：所以盗贼没有了。
English: So the thieves are gone.

古文：犹有大夫之相乱家、诸侯之相攻国者乎？
现代文：还有大夫相互侵扰家族，诸侯相互攻伐封国吗？
English: Are there still doctors who harass each other's families, and princes who invade and annex each other's countries?

古文：视人家若其家，谁乱？
现代文：看待别人的家族就像自己的家族，谁会侵犯？
English: Treat other people's families as if they were your own. Who would intrude?

古文：视人国若其国，谁攻？
现代文：看待别人的封国就像自己的封国，谁会攻伐？
English: Treating other people's fiefdoms as if they were your own, who will attack you?

古文：故大夫之相乱家、诸侯之相攻国者亡有。
现代文：所以大夫相互侵扰家族，诸侯相互攻伐封国，都没有了。
English: That is why there are no more doctors harassing each other's families, or lords invading and seizing each other's lands.

古文：若使天下兼相爱，国与国不相攻，家与家不相乱，盗贼无有，君臣父子皆能孝慈，若此，则天下治。
现代文：假若天下的人都相亲相爱，国家与国家不相互攻伐，家族与家族不相互侵扰，盗贼没有了，君臣父子间都能孝敬慈爱，像这样，天下也就治理了。
English: If all the people in the world loved each other, if countries did not attack each other, if families did not intrude on each other, if there were no thieves, and if princes and ministers could show filial piety and mercy to each other, then the world would be governed like this.

古文：故圣人以治天下为事者，恶得不禁恶而劝爱？
现代文：所以圣人既然是以治理天下为职业的人，怎么能不禁止相互仇恨而鼓励相爱呢？
English: Therefore, since a saint is a person whose profession is to govern the world, how can he not prohibit mutual hatred and encourage love?

古文：故天下兼相爱则治，交相恶则乱。
现代文：因此天下的人相亲相爱就会治理好，相互憎恶则会混乱。
English: Therefore, if people around the world love each other, they will be well governed, but if they hate each other, there will be chaos.

古文：故子墨子曰： 不可以不劝爱人者，此也。 
现代文：所以墨子说： 不能不鼓励爱别人 ，道理就在此。
English: That's why Mozi said, "You can't discourage people from loving others. That's the reason."

