古文：辛未，朝帝于怯绿连河，奏曰： 陛下若恩顾臣，使臣得与陛下四子之末，庶几竭其犬马之力。 
现代文：巴而术阿而忒的斤，原为高昌国王，臣属于契丹。太祖四年，巴而术阿而忒的斤杀契丹所置监国等官，归附于蒙古，遣使致书太祖，表示 愿率部众为臣仆 。太祖六年，他亲至怯绿连河朝见太祖，并请求太祖收为义子，仍表示要 竭尽犬马之力 。
English: In the fourth year of King Baizhu's reign, Baizhu killed the governor and other officials appointed by the Khitan emperor and annexed the country to Mongolia. He sent a letter to King Baizhu, expressing his willingness to lead his people as a vassal. In the sixth year of King Baizhu's reign, he was so close to King Gaochang that he was afraid to meet with King Baizhu, and he asked King Baizhu to adopt him as his son-in-law. He still said that he would do his best.

古文：大驾征西川，遣元帅兀良哈台自交趾捣宋，与诸军合。
现代文：宪宗伐宋，铁迈赤随皇弟世祖攻鄂州。元帅兀良哈台奉命由交趾攻宋，与南下之世祖所领蒙古大军会合。
English: Emperor Xianzong attacked Song, and Emperor Tiemei followed the emperor's younger brother Shizu to attack Ezhou. Marshal Gong Liang Hatai was ordered to attack Song from the south, and meet the Mongolian army in the territory of Shizu.

古文：岁己未，皇弟驻兵鄂渚，闻兀良哈台由广西至长沙，遣铁迈赤将练卒千人、铁骑三千迎兀良哈台于岳州。
现代文：宪宗九年，世祖大军驻鄂州，闻兀良哈台由广西至长沙，遣铁迈赤率精兵千人、铁骑三千至岳州迎接。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the Great Ancestor's army was stationed in Ezhou, and they marched from Guangxi to Changsha, and sent 1,000 elite soldiers and 3,000 cavalrymen to Yuezhou.

古文：兀良哈台得援，抵江夏，北涉黄州，铁迈赤与有力焉。
现代文：兀良哈台之所以能到达江夏，北渡黄州，是因为有铁迈赤的大力援助。
English: The reason why Qilianghatai was able to reach Jiangxia and Beidouhuangzhou was because of the strong support from Tiemai.

古文：世祖即位，命从征叛王于失木土之地，劳绩益著。
现代文：世祖即位，命铁迈赤征叛王于失木土，劳绩卓著。
English: The ancestor ascended to the throne. He was a traitor to the king of the Red Expedition in the Lost Wood and Earth, and his performance was outstanding.

古文：至元七年，授蒙古诸万户府奥鲁总管。
现代文：至元七年，授为蒙古诸万户府奥鲁总管，负责管理后方辎重及家属。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was given the title of Mongolian Zhu Wanyufu Olu Chief Administrator, responsible for the management of the rear and family members.

古文：其母姓刘氏，故人又称之曰刘汉卿云。
现代文：十九年病逝，有子八人，其中虎都铁木禄最为人知。
English: He died of illness at the age of nineteen, and had eight children, of whom Tigutu Temuroku is the best known.

古文：至元十一年，从丞相伯颜渡江。既取宋，遣视宋故宫室，护帑藏。
现代文：虎都铁木禄好读书，与学士大夫相交往，并字曰汉卿，因其母姓刘，故有人称他为刘汉卿。
English: Togutetsu Muroku was fond of reading, socialized with a doctor, and was nicknamed Han Ching. Because his mother's name was Liu, some people called him Liu Han Ching.

古文：谕下明、越等州。
现代文：至元十一年，虎都铁木禄随丞相伯颜渡江伐宋。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, the tiger capital Tiemu Lu followed the prime minister Bo Yan to cross the Yangtze River to fight the Song Dynasty.

古文：从平章奥鲁入觐，授忠显校慰总把，再转昭信校尉。
现代文：灭宋之后，奉诏随平章奥鲁回朝拜见世祖，授为忠显校尉总把，再转为昭信校尉。
English: After the destruction of the Song Dynasty, Bong Zhao accompanied Ping Zang Olu to pay homage to his ancestor, and was awarded the title of captain general of the Zhongxian school, and then transferred to the Zhaoxin school.

古文：姑听之，候还，朕自录任。 征东省罢，征汉卿还。
现代文：二十二年，授奉训大夫、荆湖占城等处行中书省理问官。荆湖占城行省，曾改名荆湖省，又改名湖广省。
English: In 1922, he was awarded the title of Doctor of Education, and became the interrogating officer of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of the People's Republic of China in Jinghu Zhancheng. Jinghu Zhancheng Province was once renamed as Jinghu Province, and then renamed as Huguang Province.

古文：丞相阿里海牙以湖广行省机密事重，舍汉卿无可用者，遣郎中岳洛也奴奏留，从之。
现代文：平章政事程鹏飞建议征日本，并为此奏荐虎都铁木禄为征东省郎中。后来撤销征东省，召虎都铁木禄还朝，而丞相阿里海牙因湖广行省机密事重，虎都铁木禄不能离任，奏请留用，世祖允准。
English: Pingzhang Zhengzicheng Pengfei proposed the conscription of Japan, and for this he recommended the tiger capital Tiemulu as the junior minister of the East Conquest. Later, the East Conquest was revoked, and the tiger capital Tiemulu was summoned to the imperial court, but the prime minister, Ali Haiga, could not leave his post because of the confidential affairs of the province of Hougang. He was asked to stay on, and the emperor agreed.

古文：二十一年，从皇子镇南王征交趾。
现代文：二十三年，虎都铁木禄从皇子镇南王征交趾。
English: In the 23rd year, the tiger capital, Tiemu Lu, emerged from the prince town, Nanwangzheng.

古文：比还鄂时，权臣方擅威福，遂退处于家。
现代文：及回到湖广省时，见权臣作威作福，便退居家中。
English: When he returned to Hubei Province, he saw the dignitaries doing their best, so he retired to his home.

古文：二十八年，诏太傅、右丞相顺德王答剌罕擒权奸于鄂。
现代文：二十八年，世祖诏令太傅兼右丞相顺德王答剌罕至湖广擒拿权奸。
English: In the 28th year of the King's reign, Shunde Wang, the Taifu and the Minister of the Right, ordered Shunde Wang to go to Lake Guangyuan to seize the power.

古文：答剌罕遂拜湖广行中书省平章政事，询旧人知方面之务者，众荐汉卿，遣使即南阳家居驿致武昌，奏事京师，帝嘉之，擢给事中。
现代文：答剌罕拜为湖广行中书省平章政事，询访原在湖广任职并了解该省情况的旧臣僚，众人荐举汉卿，即遣使到南阳将汉卿请到武昌。这个事奏报朝廷后，世祖大加称赞，升汉卿为给事中。
English: In answer to the question of whether Han Bei was the political leader of Pingzhang in Hukang, the province of calligraphy, the old ministers who had served in Hukang and knew the situation of the province were consulted, and they all recommended that Han Bei should be promoted, that is, Han Bei should be sent to Nanyang and invited to Wuchang. After the matter was reported to the court, the patriarch praised it greatly, and Han Bei was promoted.

古文：居再岁，提刑按察司改肃政廉访司，台臣奏授奉议大夫、广西海北道副使，陛辞，留之仍旧职。
现代文：第二年，提刑按察司改肃政廉访司，台臣奏请授汉卿为奉议大夫、广西海北道副使。但临赴任时，仍留京师原职。
English: In the following year, he was promoted from the position of inspector general to the position of political corruption investigator, and Han Qing was promoted to the position of deputy minister of the Northern Guangxi Province. However, he remained in his original position as Beijing division chief when he took office.

古文：既而湖广行省平章政事刘国杰奏伐交趾，造战船五百于广东，帝曰： 此重事也，须才干臣乃济用。 
现代文：湖广行省平章政事刘国杰奏请讨伐交趾，造战船五百于广东。
English: Pingzhang, the governor of Hubei and Guangxi provinces, and Liu Guojie, the political leader of Hubei and Guangxi provinces, requested that the two countries fight against each other and build 500 warships in Guangdong.

古文：以汉卿督匠南方，敕曰： 汝还，当显汝于众。 
现代文：汉卿奉诏督造。
English: Hanqing was built by the imperial edict.

古文：因顿首谢。事既集，帝崩，迁福建行省郎中，朝列大夫、汉阳监府，中顺大夫、湖南宣慰副使。
现代文：世祖崩后，调汉卿为福建行省郎中、朝列大夫、汉阳监府、中顺大夫、湖南宣慰副使。
English: After the death of the ancestor, Lord Han was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Fujian Province, the Vice-Minister of the Imperial Court, the Vice-Minister of Hanyang, the Vice-Minister of Hunan Province, and the Vice-Minister of Hunan Province.

古文：峒酋岑雄叛，奉诏开谕，顽犷帖服。
现代文：西南侗族酋长岑雄反对朝廷，汉卿奉诏去宣读皇上圣谕，侗族帖服。
English: The chief of the Southwest Qiang people, Zou Xiong, opposed the imperial court, the Han emperor issued an edict to read out the imperial edict, and the Qiang people celebrated.

古文：改太中大夫、河南行中书省郎中，通议大夫、同佥枢密院事，拜礼部尚书。
现代文：改为太中大夫、河南行中书省郎中，又改为通议大夫、同佥枢密院事，拜为礼部尚书。
English: It was changed to Taizhong Dafu, Henan Guozhong Zhongshu Rongzhong Langzhong, and also changed to Tongli Dafu, Tonglu Privy Councilor, and worshiped as the Ministry of Ceremonies Shangshu.

古文：大臣奏核实江南民田，汉卿奉诏使江西，以田额旧定，重扰民不便，置不问。止奏茶、漕置局十有七所，以七品印章敕授局官五十一员，增中统课缗五十万。
现代文：大臣将新核实的江南民田上报朝廷，而汉卿奉诏巡使江西时，则认为田亩数额原已核定，再改将扰民，因而置新核田亩数额于不顾，只奏陈为征茶课和漕运而设置的局十七所，以七品印章敕授局官五十一员，增中统课缗五十万。
English: The minister reported the newly verified Jiangnan people's fields to the imperial court, but when Lord Han issued an edict to send an envoy to Jiangxi, he thought that the amount of fields and mu had already been approved, and changing it would disturb the people. Therefore, he disregarded the amount of newly verified fields and mu, and only reported to the 17 bureaus set up for tea collection and transportation, and awarded 51 officials with seven seals, and increased the middle school uniform fee by 500,000.

古文：转正议大夫、兵部尚书。
现代文：其后，汉卿转正议大夫、兵部尚书。
English: After that, Han Qing was transferred to the post of chief advisor to the emperor, and became the secretary of the military department.

古文：未几命为中奉大夫、荆湖北道宣慰使，已命，复留之。
现代文：不久，命为中奉大夫、荆湖北道宣慰使，但未赴任，而仍留京师。
English: Soon after, he was assigned to serve as a doctor in Zhongfeng and a consolation envoy in North Jinghu Province, but he did not take up the post and remained in Beijing.

古文：世祖时，从土土哈充哈剌赤。
现代文：延三年，浙东日本商船在贸易中发生暴乱，大臣奏遣汉卿为闽、浙宣慰使，去制止暴乱，安抚军民。
English: Three years later, a riot broke out on a Japanese merchant ship in trade in eastern Zhejiang. The minister dispatched Han Xing as envoy and Zhe Xuan as comfort envoy to stop the riot and pacify the military and the people.

古文：至元二十四年，扈驾征乃颜。
现代文：汉卿赴任后，这些地方安宁如初。塔海，汉卿兄之子。至元二十四年，随从皇帝世祖征讨乃颜。
English: After Emperor Han took office, these places were as peaceful as ever. Taha, the son of Emperor Han's elder brother, followed the emperor's ancestor to fight Naoyan in the 24th year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：二十六年，入觐，帝命充宝儿赤，扈驾至和林，赐只孙冠服。
现代文：二十六年，入朝觐见皇帝，世祖命他充当宝儿赤，随皇帝至和林。
English: In the twenty-sixth year, he entered the imperial court to see the emperor. The patriarch ordered him to act as a red treasure and accompany the emperor to He Lin.

古文：大德四年，授中书直省舍人。迁中书客省副使。
现代文：大德四年授中书直省舍人，后改为中书客省副使。
English: Dade was awarded the title of Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China for four years, and was later changed to Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China.

古文：武宗即位，赐中统钞五百锭，以旌其能。寻进和林行省理问所官，改通政佥院。历和宁路总管，改汴梁。
现代文：武宗即位，赐中统钞五百锭，以表扬其才能，随之晋升为和林行省理问所官，以后历任通政佥院官、和宁路总管、汴梁总管。
English: When Emperor Wuzong ascended the throne, he gave Zhongtong 500 baht banknote to commend his talent, and was subsequently promoted to the official of the Wafang Provincial Government, and later successively served as the official of the Tongzheng Academy, the general manager of Haining Road, and the general manager of Jialiang.

古文：先是，朝廷令民自实田土，有司绳以峻法，民多虚报以塞命，其后差税无所于征，民多逃窜流移者。
现代文：朝廷令百姓向官府自报所有田地面积。百姓因怕官府而往往虚报，以致政府差税征发无着，人民也多逃亡。
English: The imperial court ordered the common people to self-report all farmland to the government. The common people were afraid of the government and often made false reports, so that the government could not collect and distribute taxes, and many people fled.

古文：岁丙子，复从定诸部有功，命领蒙古军为前锋，时木华黎暨博尔术为左右万户长，各以其属为翊卫。
现代文：塔海将此弊端如实报告了朝廷，因而减轻百姓纳粮负担二十二万石，百姓得以安居。后任庐州地方官吏时，百姓缺粮，塔海开仓赈济，使许多人免于饿死。天历元年十月，枢密院臣僚奏请塔海充任枢密佥院，镇守潼关及河中府。不久，西军帖木哥侵犯南阳，塔海率兵打败西军。朝廷因其功赐三珠虎符，进为大都督，后又升资善大夫。
English: Tahai truthfully reported this drawback to the imperial court, thereby reducing the burden of providing grain to the people by 220,000 koku, and the people were able to live in peace. Later, when he was a local official in Bozhou, the people were short of grain, and Tahai opened a warehouse to provide assistance, saving many people from starving to death. In October of the first year of the calendar, the ministers of the Privy Council requested Tahai to serve as a full member of the Privy Council, the town guard of Shiguan and Hechuanfu. Soon, the Western Army invaded Nanyang, and Tahai led the troops to defeat the Western Army. The imperial court

古文：太祖命木华黎为太师国王都行省承制行事，兵临燕、辽、营、青、齐、鲁、赵、韩、魏，皆下。
现代文：按扎儿，姓拓跋氏，曾随太祖南征。太祖十一年，因平定诸部族有功而受命为蒙古军前锋。这时，木华黎与博尔术分别为左右万户长，太祖又命木华黎为太师国王都行省承制行事。蒙古大军攻克燕、辽、营、青、齐、鲁、赵、韩、魏各地。
English: In the eleventh year of the reign of Emperor Taizu, he was ordered to be the vanguard of the Mongolian army for his contribution to the pacification of various tribes. At that time, Mu Huali and Borzhu were the heads of thousands of households, and the Emperor also ordered Mu Huali to act as the provincial governor for the King Taishi. The Mongolian army conquered Yan, Liao, Ying, Qing, Qi, Lu, Zhao, Han, and Wei regions.

古文：岁己卯，河中府降，兵北还，以按紥儿领前锋总帅，仍统所部兵屯平阳以备金，摄国王事。
现代文：太祖十四年，河中府归降，蒙古军北还，留按扎儿为前锋总帅，统所部兵马屯驻平阳以防御金兵，并代行国王事。
English: In the 14th year of Taizu, when the Mongolian army was retreating from the north after the surrender of Hezhongfu, Zaozar was left as the commander-in-chief of the vanguard, and the soldiers and horses of the General Headquarters were stationed in Pingyang to defend the gold soldiers and act on behalf of the king.

古文：时金将乞石烈氏拥兵数为边患，然畏按紥儿威名，不敢轻犯其境。
现代文：金朝将领乞石烈氏拥兵数次侵犯蒙古边界，然慑于按扎儿的威名，不敢轻举妄动。
English: The generals of the Kim dynasty have invaded the Mongolian border several times with the soldiers of the Beggar-Shirley clan, but they are afraid to act rashly because of their prestige.

古文：岁壬午，元帅石天应守河中府，屯中条山，金侯将军率昆弟兵十余万夜袭河中，天应遣偏裨吴权府率五百兵出东门，伏两谷间。
现代文：太祖十七年，蒙古军元帅石天应守河中府，屯驻于中条山，金侯将军率兵十余万夜袭河中，败蒙古军，元帅石天应战死，河中府失陷，金军将进攻中条山。
English: In the 17th year of Taizu, the Mongolian army marshal Shi Tian Ying guarded Hezhongfu and was stationed in Zhongjia Mountain. General Jin Hou led more than 100,000 soldiers to attack Hezhong and defeated the Mongolian army. Marshal Shi Tian Ying died in battle. Hezhongfu fell, and the Chinese army would attack Zhongjia Mountain.

古文：谕之曰： 俟其半过，即翼击之，俾腹背受敌，即成禽矣。 
现代文：按扎儿率军进击，大败金军，斩杀数万，逃生者仅十数人。
English: Zhaer led the army to attack, defeated the gold army, killed tens of thousands, and only a dozen people escaped.

古文：至钧州三峰山，金将完颜合达引兵十五万来战，俘其同佥移剌不花等，悉诛之。
现代文：太祖十八年春，木华黎卒于闻喜县下马村，平阳重地令按扎儿镇守。太宗二年，蒙军孛鲁部由云中围攻卫州，金守将武仙退保潞州东十余里之原上。孛鲁进军至沁州以南，为金将乞石烈所败，辎重人口皆陷没，按扎儿妻奴丹氏亦被俘。金主闻按扎儿威名，令奴丹氏招降其夫。
English: In the spring of the 18th year of King Taizu, Mu Huali died in Shimoma Village, Wensi County, and Pingyang ordered Azar to guard the town. In the 2nd year of King Taizong, the Mongolian army, the Yalu Department, besieged Weizhou from Yunchu, and Kim Shou took Wuxian back to the plain more than ten miles east of Baozhou. The Yalu marched to the south of Weizhou, and were defeated by Kim Shou, and the entire population was lost. The wife of Azar, the Nutan clan, was also captured. Kim heard the name of Azar, and ordered the N

古文：明年壬辰春，三月，帝班师北还，命偕都元帅唆伯台围汴。
现代文：奴丹氏口头答应，乘机逃回蒙古大营，受太宗嘉奖，并让她参预按扎儿的军机事务。
English: Nutan verbally agreed, took the opportunity to flee back to the Mongolian camp, received Taizong's award, and let her participate in the military aircraft business.

古文：城中识按紥儿旗帜，惧曰： 其妻犹勇且义，况其夫乎！ 
现代文：太宗率堂兄弟按只吉歹、口温不花大王、皇弟四太子及国王塔思，征讨潞州、凤翔。
English: Emperor Taizong led his cousins, Emperor Wenzhong, Emperor Wenfu, the four princes and King Tas, to conquer Bozhou and Fengxiang.

古文：岁甲午，金亡，诏封功臣，赐平阳户六百一十有四、驱户三十、猎户四。
现代文：太宗四年三月，帝班师北还，命按扎儿与都元帅唆伯台围攻汴梁。太宗六年，金亡，诏封功臣，赐按扎儿平阳民户六百一十有四、驱户三十户、猎户四户。
English: In March of the 4th year of Taizong's reign, Emperor Taibanshihoku also ordered Naozar and the Grand Marshal to besiege Baotai. In the 6th year of Emperor Taizong's reign, after the death of Emperor Jin and the conferment of the title of meritorious vassal, Naozar was given four of the 610 households in Pingyang, 30 households in Hefei, and four households in Jiaozuo.

古文：未几，以疾卒。
现代文：不久病卒。
English: He died of illness soon after.

古文：扈从征回鹘，其主弃国去，雪不台率众追之，回鹘竟走死。
现代文：雪不台，蒙古部族人，姓兀良罕氏。太祖七年，蒙古军攻桓州，雪不台率兵先攻入城。十一年与灭里吉部众战于蟾河，大破其军，占有其地。随太祖征回鹘，回鹘国王逃亡，雪不台率众追赶，国王死于途中。
English: Xue Bu Tai, a Mongolian tribesman, surnamed Yu Liang Han. In the seventh year of the founder's reign, the Mongolian army attacked Hanzhou, and Xue Bu Tai led the troops into the city first. In the eleventh year, he fought with the Ruiji troops in Luohe, defeated their army, and occupied their land. With the founder's enlistment, the king of Luo fled, Xue Bu Tai led the troops to chase him, and the king died on the way.

古文：其帑藏之积尽入内府，赐宝珠一银罂。十八年，讨定钦察，鏖战斡罗思大小密赤思老，降之，奏灭里吉、乃蛮、怯烈、杭斤、钦察部千户，通立一军。十九年，献马万匹。
现代文：十八年征讨钦察，雪不台与斡罗思大、小密赤思老鏖战，大败敌军，收降部众，奏请将灭里吉、乃蛮、怯烈、杭斤、钦察诸部千户合立一军。十九年，向太祖献马万匹。
English: In the 18th year of the conquest of Qincha, Xue Wutai fought with Yulong Luo Sidao and Xiao Mi Chia Sidao, defeated the enemy army, won the surrender of the followers, and invited the thousands of households in Zhurijie, Naimang, Qiu Rong, Hangjin and Qincha to form an army. In the 19th year, he offered ten thousand horses to Taizu.

古文：二十一年，取馺里畏吾、特勤、赤悯等部，德顺、镇戎、兰、会、洮等州，献牝马三千匹。
现代文：二十一年，攻取马及里畏吾、特勤、赤悯等部及德顺、镇戎、兰、会、洮等州，献牝马三千匹。
English: In the 21st year, we captured horses from the departments of Liji, Jiuwu, Special Service, and Red Compassion, as well as the prefectures of Deshun, Zhen Rong, Lan, Hui, and Handan, and donated 3,000 horses.

古文：太宗二年，大举伐金，渡河而南，睿宗以太弟将兵渡汉水而北，会河南之三峰山。
现代文：太宗二年，蒙古军大举伐金，大军南渡过黄河，睿宗以太弟领兵渡汉水而北，会师于河南三峰山。
English: In the second year of Taizong's reign, the Mongolian army went on a gold-hunting spree, and the army crossed the Yellow River to the south. Ruizong's brother Taizong led the army to cross the Han River to the north, and they joined forces at Sanfeng Mountain in Henan Province.

古文：师集三峰，金围之数匝，将士颇惧。
现代文：金朝大臣合达及诸将率步兵、骑兵数十万迎战，雪不台随睿宗兵出牛头关，大军屯驻于三峰山，金军围困重重，蒙军将士颇有惧色。
English: Minister Geda and other generals of the Kim dynasty led hundreds of thousands of infantry and cavalry to meet the battle. Xue Wutai followed Ruizong's soldiers out of Niu Tou Guan. A large army was stationed in Sanfeng Mountain. The Chinese army was heavily besieged, and the Mongolian soldiers were quite afraid.

古文：俄而风雪大作，金卒僵踣，士气遂奋，敌众尽殪。河南诸州以次降破。
现代文：忽然风雪大作，金军士卒冻僵倒地，蒙军士气大振，大败金军，河南诸州相继投降。
English: Suddenly, there was a snowstorm, the gold soldiers froze to the ground, the Mongolian soldiers' morale was greatly boosted, the gold army was defeated, and the states of Henan surrendered one after another.

古文：四年夏，雪不台总诸道兵攻汴，金义宗走卫州，又走归德，又走蔡州。
现代文：四年夏，雪不台统领诸道兵攻汴京，金朝义宗逃往卫州，再逃归德、蔡州。
English: In the summer of the fourth year, Xuebutai led the Taoist soldiers to attack Beijing, and Kim Chaoyu fled to Weizhou, and then returned to Germany and Caizhou.

古文：癸巳秋，汴将以城降，其冬攻蔡。
现代文：五年春，汴城金守将开门投降，同年冬雪不台进攻蔡州。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, Lucheng Jin Shou Jie opened the door and surrendered, and in the winter of the same year, it attacked Caizhou.

古文：六年春，金亡。
现代文：六年春，金朝灭亡。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, the Kim dynasty came to an end.

古文：雪不台以汴民饥，纵使渡河就食，民德之。
现代文：时汴城大闹饥荒，雪不台让百姓北渡黄河去谋生，百姓无不称颂。
English: At that time, there was a famine in Handan City, and the snow did not stop the people from crossing the Yellow River to earn a living. The people were all praised.

古文：是年诏宗王拔都西征，雪不台为先锋，战大捷。
现代文：太宗六年，朝廷命宗王拔都西征，以雪不台为先锋。出师大捷。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Taizong's reign, the imperial court ordered King Taizong to take the capital for a western expedition, with Xue Bu Tai as the vanguard.

古文：定宗三年，卒于笃列河之地，年七十有三。至大元年，赠效忠宣力佐命功臣、开府仪同三司、上柱国、河南王，谥忠定。
现代文：十三年征讨兀鲁思部，酋长野力班被擒。攻马答刂部，与其酋长怯怜战于氵郭宁河，大败之。北庭、西域、河南、河北、关陇相继平定，而以雪不台功最多。定宗三年，雪不台于笃列河逝世，年七十三岁。至大元年，赠效忠宣力佐命功臣、开府仪同三司、上柱国、河南王，谥 忠定 。
English: In the 13th year of his reign, he led a campaign against the Lu Si clan, and the chieftain Ye Li Ban was captured. He led an attack against the Ma Du Si clan, and fought a cowardly battle with his chieftain in the Guo Ning River, and was soundly defeated. Beiting, the Western Regions, Henan, Hebei, and Guanzhang were successively pacified, and it was Xue Wutai who made the greatest contribution. In the 3rd year of his reign, Xue Wutai died in the Tu Lei River, at the age of 73. In the first year of the Great Leap Forward, he was presented with the awards for his loyalty,

古文：唵木海唵木海，蒙古八剌忽氏，与父孛合出俱事太祖，征伐有功。
现代文：唵木海，蒙古族人，姓八剌忽氏，与其父孛合出同为太祖效力，征伐有功。
English: Hao Mu Hai, a Mongolian, surnamed Yao Hui, and his father, Yao Hui, both served as great ancestors and made great contributions to the conquest.

古文：帝尝问攻城略地，兵仗何先，对曰： 攻城以炮石为先，力重而能及远故也。 
现代文：太祖问他攻城夺地以何种武器为先，唵木海回答说： 攻城以炮石为先，因炮石力重而能远射。 
English: The great-great-grandfather asked him what kind of weapon should be used first to attack the city and seize the land. Hao Mu Hai replied: The first weapon to attack the city is the cannon stone. Because of the weight of the cannon stone, it can be fired far away.

古文：即授金符，使为随路炮手达鲁花赤。
现代文：太祖大喜，即命他为炮手。太祖九年，太师国王木华黎南伐，太祖命唵木海为随路炮手达鲁花赤。
English: The great-grandfather was overjoyed and immediately ordered him to be a gunner. In the ninth year of the great-grandfather, the grandmaster king Mu Huali went to the south, and the great-grandfather ordered the great-grandfather Mu Hai to be a gunner on the way.

古文：唵木海选五百余人教习之，后定诸国，多赖其力。
现代文：唵木海挑选五百余人，教习他们用炮之法。后来平定诸国，多得力于此炮队。
English: He selected more than five hundred people and taught them how to use cannons. Later, he conquered many countries thanks to this artillery team.

古文：太宗即位，留为近侍，以讲武艺。
现代文：太宗即位，留唵木海为近卫军，并讲习武艺。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, he left Yunnan to serve in the imperial guard and to study martial arts.

古文：岁壬辰，从攻河南有功。
现代文：太宗四年，唵木海随大军攻河南，有功。
English: In the fourth year of Taizong's reign, Zhangmu Hai invaded Henan with a large army and achieved great success.

古文：壬子，宪宗特授虎符，升都元帅。
现代文：宪宗二年，升唵木海为都元帅，并特授虎符。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Emperor Xizong promoted Muxihai to the rank of Marshal of the Capital, and he was specially awarded the Tiger Emblem.

古文：癸丑，从宗王旭烈兀征剌里西番、斜巨山、桃里寺、河西诸部，悉下之。
现代文：三年，随宗王旭烈兀征剌里西番、斜巨山、桃里寺、河西诸部，大军所至，攻无不克。
English: In the third year, with the help of King Xu Lai, he conquered West Pan, Xianghu Mountain, Tori Temple, and other parts of Hexi Province, as well as a large number of military bases.

古文：太祖时，西夏既臣服，大军西征，复怀贰心。
现代文：唵木海死后，其子忒木台儿、孙忽都答儿相继袭为炮手总管、炮手万户，在灭宋战争中立功。昔里钤部，唐兀族人，姓昔里氏。钤部也译称甘卜，音相近而互用。
English: After the death of Shumuhai, his sons Shumudai and Sun Hudutaro successively served as the chief gunner and gunner of all households, and played an important role in the war to extinguish the Song Dynasty. In the past, Shube, a member of the Tang Dynasty Yi people, was surnamed Shuri. Shube is also translated as Ganb, which is a close and interchangeable word.

古文：帝闻之，旋师致讨。命钤部同忽都铁穆儿招谕沙州。
现代文：太祖再度征讨西夏，命钤部与忽都铁穆儿去招降沙州。
English: The great-grandfather once again conquered Western Xia, and ordered Xibe and Kudu Tiemule to recruit and conquer Shazhou.

古文：州将伪降，以牛酒犒师，而设伏兵以待之。
现代文：沙州守将伪降，一面以牛酒慰劳蒙军，一面又设伏兵准备突然袭击。
English: The governor of Shazhou pretended to surrender, on the one hand consoling the Laomong army with cow wine, and on the other hand setting ambushes to prepare a surprise attack.

古文：进兵围肃州，守者乃钤部之兄，惧城破害及其家，先以为请。
现代文：蒙古军元帅到来时，伏兵突然出击，元帅坐骑被绊倒。钤部以自己的马让元帅骑上杀出，自己骑着那匹被绊倒的马断后。蒙军反攻取胜。后来太祖问钤部 ：你在生死存亡关头，而把马让与别人，是为了什么？ 
English: When the Mongolian marshal arrived, the ambush suddenly attacked, the marshal's mount was tripped. Xibe let the marshal ride out on his own horse, and he rode the horse that was tripped. The Mongolian army counterattacked and won. Later, the great-grandfather asked Xibe: You are in a life-and-death situation, and you give the horse to others, for what reason?

古文：帝怒城久不下，有旨尽屠之，惟听钤部求其亲族家人于死所，于是得免死者百有六户，归其田业。
现代文：钤部回答说： 小臣战死，无足轻重，而元帅是陛下所器重的老将，不可有闪失。 太祖大嘉其忠。蒙军进围肃州，肃州守将是钤部之兄。该城久攻不下，太祖大怒，下令攻下后把城中人杀尽，但由于钤部的请求，免于死者一百零六户。
English: He replied, "The death of a vassal in battle is insignificant, but the marshal is a veteran who is valued by His Majesty, and he must not slip up." The Mongolian army entered the siege of Suizhou, and the governor of Suizhou would be Heibe's brother. The city could not be conquered for a long time, and the great-grandfather was furious. He ordered that the people in the city be killed after the capture, but because of Heibe's request, 106 households were spared from death.

古文：岁乙未，定宗、宪宗皆以亲王与速卜带征西域，明年启行，钤部亦在中。
现代文：太宗七年，定宗、宪宗均以亲王身分与速卜带征西域，第二年起兵，钤部亦在军中。
English: In the seventh year of Taizong's reign, Dingzong and Kenzong both took part in the conquest of the Western Regions as princes, and the second year saw the start of the war, with Zoube also serving in the army.

古文：又明年，至宽田吉思海，钤部从诸王拔都征斡罗斯，至也里赞城，大战七日，拔之。
现代文：太宗九年，大军至宽田吉思海后，钤部又随诸王拔都征斡罗斯，在也里赞城大战七日，攻克此城。
English: In the ninth year of Taizong, after the great army reached the Kwantian Jisi Sea, Hebe also followed the kings to solicit Ross, and conquered the city on the seventh day of the great battle of Rizan City.

古文：己亥冬十有一月，至阿速灭怯思城，负固久不下。
现代文：太宗十一年十一月，蒙军进至阿速，攻灭怯思城久久不下。
English: In November of the 11th year of Taizong, the Mongolian army advanced to Asao, and for a long time they were too timid to attack and destroy the city.

古文：明年班师，授钤部千户，赐只孙为四时宴服，寻迁断事官。
现代文：第二年正月，钤部率敢死队十人以云梯先登城，俘敌十一人，在城上大呼 ：城攻破了！ 
English: In the first month of the second year, ten members of the death squad led by Hattori climbed the city first with a ladder, captured eleven of the enemy, and shouted on the city: The city is broken!

古文：丙午，定宗即位，进秩大名路达鲁花赤。
现代文：于是蒙军如同蚂蚁一样，相继沿云梯而上，攻下该城。太宗大喜，赐钤部名拔都，并赏西马、西锦。
English: As a result, the Mongolian army, like ants, successively climbed up the ladder of clouds and captured the city. Taizong was overjoyed, bestowing the name of Xibe on the capital, and awarding Xima and Xijin.

古文：宪宗以卜只儿来莅行台，命钤部同署，既又别锡虎符，出监大名。
现代文：太宗十三年蒙军班师，授钤部为千户，以后又任为断事官。定宗即位，进官为大名路达鲁花赤。
English: In the 13th year of Taizong's reign, he was the instructor of the Mongolian army. He was appointed as the leader of a thousand households, and later he was appointed as the adjudicator. When Taizong ascended the throne, he was promoted to the rank of daimyo.

古文：己未，世祖南征，供给军饷，未尝乏绝。
现代文：宪宗九年，世祖奉命南征，钤部负责供给军饷，从未断绝。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the founder was ordered to go to the south, and the Ministry of Civil Affairs was responsible for supplying military pay, which has never been cut off.

古文：以疾舆归，卒于家，年六十九。
现代文：因病归家，不久去世，年六十九岁。
English: Due to illness, he returned home and died soon after, at the age of 69.

古文：子爱鲁。爱鲁袭为大名路达鲁花赤。
现代文：爱鲁，昔里钤部之子，承袭父职为大名路达鲁花赤。
English: Airu, the son of Shibe in the past, inherited his father's position as the daimyo Ludaruhanaakira.

古文：至元五年，从云南王征金齿诸部。
现代文：至元五年，随云南王征金齿诸部。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, various departments followed the king of Yunnan to collect gold.

古文：蛮兵万人绝缥甸道，击之，斩首千余级，诸部震服。
现代文：金齿兵万人，断绝通往缥甸道路。爱鲁率兵进攻，斩首千余，金齿诸部大为惊震，相继臣服。
English: Jinzu soldiers ten thousand people, cut off the road leading to Xingtian. Ai Lu led the attack, beheaded more than a thousand, Jinzu all departments were greatly shocked, and successively surrendered.

古文：六年，再入，定其租赋，平火不麻等二十四寨，得七驯象以还。
现代文：六年，爱鲁再入金齿，规定他们应纳租税，同时还平定了火不麻等二十四寨，获象七头。
English: Six years later, Ai Lu reinstated the gold tooth, stipulated that they should pay taxes, and at the same time leveled twenty-four villages such as fire and hemp, and obtained seven elephants.

古文：七年，改中庆路达鲁花赤，兼管爨僰军。
现代文：七年改爱鲁为中庆路达鲁花赤，兼管爨军。
English: In seven years, he changed Ailu to Zhongqing Road Daru Flower Red, and was also in charge of the Han Army.

古文：十年，平章赛典赤行省云南，令爱鲁疆理永昌，增田为多。
现代文：至元十年，平章赛典赤主持云南省政务，令爱鲁统治永昌。
English: In the 10th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Pingzhang Sai Dianchong presided over the government affairs of Yunnan Province, and made Ai Lu rule Yongchang.

古文：十一年，阅中庆版籍，得隐户万余，以四千户即其地屯田。
现代文：爱鲁令百姓大力开垦田地。十一年，核查中庆户口籍册，搜出隐户万余，以其中四千户就地屯田耕种。
English: In the eleventh year, the verification of the Zhongqing household registration book was completed, and more than 10,000 hidden households were found, of which 4,000 were cultivated in the field.

古文：十三年，诏开乌蒙道，帅师至玉连等州，所过城寨，未附者尽击下之，水陆皆置驿传，由是大为赛典赤信任。
现代文：十三年，世祖命开辟至乌蒙通道，爱鲁率师至筠连等州，所经城寨，凡未归附者尽以武力使之臣服，水陆皆设驿传，因此非常受赛典赤信任。
English: In the thirteenth year, the ancestor's mission opened a channel to Umong, and Ai Lu led his division to Qilian and other provinces, passing through the walled city, and those who did not surrender were subjugated by force. The water and land were all set up, so they were very trusted by the Saetian Red.

古文：十四年，忙部、也可不薛叛，以兵二千讨平之，迁广南西道左右两江宣抚使，兼招讨使。十六年，迁云南诸路诏与西川都元帅也速答儿、湖南行省脱里察会师进讨，禽也可不薛送京师，仁普诸酋长皆降，得户四千。
现代文：也可不薛再次叛元，朝廷命爱鲁与西川都元帅也速答儿、湖南行省脱里察会师进讨，擒获也可不薛送至京师，仁普诸酋长皆降，得民四千户。
English: Even if Xue did not betray the Yuan Dynasty again, the imperial court ordered Ai Lu and Marshal Nishikawa to go to Hunan Province to discuss the matter. If the matter was resolved, it could be sent to Beijing. All the Rinpoche's chiefs were demoted, and 4,000 households were gained.

古文：诸王相吾答儿帅诸将征缅，爱鲁供馈饷，无乏绝。
现代文：诸王相吾答儿率诸将征缅国，爱鲁负责供应军队粮饷，从无缺乏。
English: All the kings and emperors led their armies to invade Burma, and Airu was responsible for supplying the army with grain, and there was never a shortage.

古文：二十二年，乌蒙阿谋杀宣抚使以叛，与右丞拜答儿往征之，拜答儿以爱鲁习知其山川道里，令诸军悉听指授，分道进击，生擒阿蒙以归。
现代文：二十二年，乌蒙阿谋叛元，杀宣抚使。爱鲁与右丞拜答儿领兵征讨，拜答儿因爱鲁熟知那里的山川道路，令诸军均听爱鲁指挥。各路分进，生擒阿蒙而还。
English: In the 22nd year, Umong Ah conspired to commit treason against the Yuan Dynasty and kill the envoy of the Xuanfu Emperor. Airu and Ujo Baidar led the army to recruit soldiers. Because Airu was familiar with the mountain and river routes there, Baidar ordered all the troops to listen to Airu's command. They went their separate ways, but Amun survived.

古文：二十四年，进右丞。
现代文：至元二十四年，爱鲁晋升为右丞。
English: In the 24th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Airu was promoted to Ujo.

古文：朝廷立尚书省，复改行尚书右丞。
现代文：朝廷设立尚书省，于是任爱鲁为行尚书右丞。
English: The Imperial Court established the Ministry of Imperial Rescript, and Ai Lu was appointed as the right-hand man of Imperial Rescript.

古文：镇南王征交趾，诏爱鲁将兵六千人从之。
现代文：镇南王征交趾，朝廷命爱鲁领兵六千人随行。
English: Zhenan Wang Zheng, the imperial court ordered Ai Lu to lead six thousand soldiers to accompany him.

古文：自罗罗至交趾境，交趾将昭文王以兵四万守木兀门，爱鲁与战破之，擒其将黎石、何英。
现代文：蒙军由罗罗至交趾境内，交趾将昭文王领兵四万守木兀门，爱鲁与之大战，破关，擒交趾将黎石、何英。
English: The Mongolian army from Luo Luo to Kojie territory, Kojie will lead the army of King Shouwen to Shima Muxuanmen, and Ai Lu will fight with him to break through, and Kojie will lead Li Shi and He Ying.

古文：比三月，大小一十八战，乃至其王城，与诸军会战又二十余合，功为多。
现代文：爱鲁在交趾连续征战三个月，大小共十八次战斗，一直打到王城，又与诸军会战二十余回合，多立战功。
English: Airu fought continuously for three months in Jiaozuo, with a total of eighteen battles, large and small. He fought all the way to the royal city, and fought more than twenty rounds with the armies, and achieved more war exploits.

古文：二十五年，感瘴疠卒。
现代文：至元二十五年因感染瘴疠而卒。
English: He passed away in the 25th year of the Yuan Dynasty due to a scabies infection.

古文：赠平章政事，谥毅敏。
现代文：朝廷赠平章政事，谥 毅敏 。
English: The Imperial Court presented him with the title of "Political Affairs" (平章政事), and he became known as "Yi Min."

古文：武宗时，赠太傅，追封卫国公，谥武敏。
现代文：后加赠太师，追封魏国公，改谥 忠节 。
English: Later, he was given the title of grandmaster, the title of Wei Guogong was restored, and the Loyalty Festival was changed.

古文：子撒吉思卜华，嗣将其军。
现代文：撒吉思卜华，蒙古人，姓克烈氏。
English: Sagisbhua, Mongolian, surnamed Krey.

古文：太宗元年己丑，锡金符，安辑河北、山东诸州。先是真定同知武仙攻灭都元帅史天倪家，其弟天泽击仙走，复真定。
现代文：其父槊直月盾鲁华率所部二百人归顺太祖，并随太祖征讨乃蛮、西夏，屡立战功；又曾为太师国王木华黎前锋，攻克金国的桓州；太祖六年，献计攻金国旧都东京，而在攻占河北之大名时中箭阵亡。武宗时赠太傅，追封卫国公，谥 武敏 。撒吉思卜华继领其父军队。太宗元年，撒吉思卜华奉命安抚河北、山东诸州。
English: His father, Zou Zizhongyue Dun Luhua, led 200 men of the headquarters to submit to the great ancestor, and fought with the great ancestor to conquer Naimang and Xixia, and repeatedly achieved military exploits; he was also the foreman of the great master king Mu Huali, and conquered Hanzhou of Jin; his great ancestor spent six years planning to attack the former capital of Jin, Tokyo, but was killed in the middle of the battle when he conquered the daimyo of Hebei. When Emperor Wuzong gave him Taifu, he pursued the prince of the defense of the country, Wu Min. Sagisibhua succeeded his father

古文：以天泽为真定、河间、济南、东平、大名五路万户。庚寅，命撒吉思卜华佩金虎符，以总师行省监其军。
现代文：当时，史天泽为真定、河间、济南、东平、大名五路万户，太宗二年，朝廷命撒吉思卜华佩金虎符以总师行省官职监督史天泽所统领兵马。
English: At that time, Shi Tianze was the head of the Shiding, Hema, Jinan, Dongping, and Daimyo provinces. In the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was appointed by the imperial court to lead the troops and horses as the chief instructor and provincial official supervisor of Shi Tianze.

古文：金宣宗之徙都于汴也，立河平军于新卫以自固，恃为北门。
现代文：在南下蒙古大军的威逼下，金朝宣宗迁都汴梁，同时在新卫建立河北军作为北方的屏障。
English: Under the threat of the Mongolian army moving south, the Kim dynasty's Emperor Xuanzong moved the capital to Qilian, and at the same time established the Hebei Army in Xinwei as a barrier to the north.

古文：撒吉思卜华数攻之，不拔。
现代文：撒吉思卜华多次攻新卫未下。
English: Sagisibhua attacked the new Wei several times.

古文：壬辰正月，太宗自白坡济河而南，睿宗由峭石滩涉汉而北。撒吉思卜华集西都水之舟，渡自河阴。至郑，郑守马伯坚降。
现代文：太宗四年正月，太宗自领兵由白坡渡过黄河向南，睿宗领兵由峭石滩渡过汉水向北，撒吉思卜华则集西都水之船由河阴渡过黄河指向郑州，郑州金守将马伯坚投降。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Emperor Taizong's reign, Emperor Taizong led his troops from Baipo across the Yellow River to the south, Emperor Ruizong led his troops from Qiaoshi Beach across the Han River to the north, Emperor Sagisibhua led his ships from the west across the Yellow River to Zhengzhou, and Zhengzhou's Jin Shou surrendered Ma Bo Jian.

古文：事闻，帝曰： 彼家再世死难，宜赐新卫民二百户。 
现代文：金义宗被迫逃亡，太宗命撒吉思卜华追击，占领卫辉。十二月，义宗自黄陵冈渡河，企图收复卫辉。
English: Jin Yizong was forced to flee, Taizong ordered Sagi to pursue Buhua and occupy Weihui. In December, Yizong crossed the river from Huanglinggang in an attempt to recapture Weihui.

古文：撒吉思卜华赠太师，谥忠武。
现代文：撒吉思卜华与金将白撒在白公庙鏖战五天五夜，俘斩金兵数以万计，其余溃散。
English: Sagi thought that Buhua and Jin would fight for five days and five nights in Baikong Temple, capturing and killing tens of thousands of Jin soldiers, and the rest scattered.

古文：明安答儿赠太保，谥武毅，爵皆卫国公。昔儿吉思昔儿吉思，幼从太祖征回回、河西诸国，俱有战功。
现代文：义宗逃往归德，撒吉思卜华追至归德。太宗五年四月，金将官奴夜间偷袭蒙军，撒吉思卜华腹背受敌，全军覆没，撒吉思卜华阵亡。世祖时，赠撒吉思卜华为太师，谥 忠武 。昔儿吉思，幼随从太祖征讨回回、河西诸国，俱有战功。
English: In April of the fifth year of the Taizong Dynasty, the Mongolian army was ambushed at night by Kim Jong-il's officers and men. Saeki Siphua was killed, and the entire army was wiped out. At the time of the founder of the dynasty, Saeki Siphua was given to the grand master, Zou Zhongwu. In the past, Gis, who was a child when he was recruited by the founder of the dynasty, and the other countries in the west of the river, had distinguished themselves in battle.

古文：太宗时，从睿宗西征，师次京兆府，会亦来哈率诸部兵作乱，昔儿吉思挺身斫贼阵，下马搏战，贼众莫不披靡。
现代文：太宗时，随睿宗西征，行军至京兆府，逢亦来哈率诸部兵作乱，昔儿吉思挺身杀入敌阵，下马搏战，敌军望风败逃。
English: At the time of Taizong, following Ruizong's westward expedition, the army marched to Jingzhao Prefecture. Feng Yilaiha led the troops to create a disturbance. In the past, Ji Si advanced into the enemy's line, dismounted and fought, and the enemy lost hope and fled.

古文：贼退，睿宗嘉其勤劳，妻以侍女唆火台。
现代文：睿宗嘉奖其功劳，以侍女唆火台许配他为妻。
English: Ruizong praised his service and married him with the help of a maid.

古文：世祖尤爱之，军旅田猎，未尝不在左右。
现代文：世祖尤其钟爱他，凡征战、打猎，都把他带在身边。
English: The patriarch especially loved him, and took him with him whenever he went to war or hunting.

古文：初，昔儿吉思之妻为皇子乳母，于是皇太后待以家人之礼，得同饮白马湩。
现代文：原来，昔儿吉思之妻为皇子乳母，于是皇太后待他如同家人，得以同饮白马奶汁。
English: Originally, the wife of the former Gith was the prince's nanny, so the empress dowager treated him like family and was able to drink white horse milk together.

古文：时朝廷旧典，白马湩非宗戚贵胄不得饮也。
现代文：按照本朝的旧制，白马奶汁除非宗戚贵族，一般人是不能饮的。
English: According to the old system of this dynasty, ordinary people could not drink the milk of the white horse unless they were aristocrats.

