古文： 周爰咨谋 ，是谓为议。议之言宜，审事宜也。
现代文：周代的祖先和豳人的商讨，就是所谓 议 。 议 是讲求适宜，研究怎样合于事理的。
English: The discussion between the ancestors of Zhou Dynasty and the people of Sui Dynasty is the so-called "discussion." "Discussion" is to pay attention to the appropriateness and study how to be reasonable.

古文：《易》之《节卦》∶ 君子以制度数，议德行 。
现代文：《周易·节卦》的象辞说： 君子节制礼仪，使之有定，议论德行，使之适宜。 
English: The epigraph of "Zhou Yi · Jie Gua" says: The gentleman should restrain the etiquette to make it stable, and discuss the virtue to make it suitable.

古文：《周书》曰∶ 议事以制，政乃弗迷 。
现代文：《尚书·周官》中说： 办事必须根据古义加以评议，政事才不迷乱。 
English: "Shangshu Zhou Guan" said: Affairs must be discussed in accordance with the ancient meaning, so that political affairs are not confused.

古文：议贵节制，经典之体也。
现代文：可见 议 以控制得当为贵，这是儒家经典的精神。
English: It can be seen that it is the spirit of the Confucian classics to value control.

古文：昔管仲称轩辕有明台之议，则其来远矣。
现代文：早在春秋时期的管仲就说过，轩辕黄帝曾立 明台之议 ，可见 议 的源头已很长远了。
English: As early as in the Spring and Autumn Period, Guanzhong said that Emperor Xuanzong of the Yellow Emperor had set up the Ming Dynasty, and it can be seen that the source of the discussion has been far away.

古文：洪水之难，尧咨四岳，宅揆之举，舜畴五人；三代所兴，询及刍荛。
现代文：唐尧时期洪水造成灾难，帝尧曾向管理四方诸侯的四岳提出询问；帝舜为了举出能任百揆等官的人选，曾向群臣征求意见，确定了禹、稷、契、皋陶、伯益等五人；夏、商、周三代办事，征询意见直到打柴草的人。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, a flood caused a disaster, and Emperor Qian inquired with the four mountains that governed the four provinces. In order to select a candidate who could serve as a hundred officials, Emperor Qian solicited opinions from his courtiers, and identified five people, including Yu, Xuan, Qi, Jintao, and Bo Yi. Xia, Shang, and San took over the work on Wednesday, and solicited opinions from people as far away as the woodcutter.

古文：春秋释宋，鲁桓预议。
现代文：春秋时期楚国释放宋襄公，鲁僖公曾参与此事的商议。
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period, the State of Chu released Song Xianggong. Lu Yonggong participated in the deliberation of this matter.

古文：及赵灵胡服，而季父争论；商鞅变法，而甘龙交辩：虽宪章无算，而同异足观。
现代文：战国时赵武灵王要换用胡人的衣服，他的叔父不同意而进行了反覆争论；商鞅在秦国变法，反对者甘龙和他进行了辩论：虽然 议 的基本法则尚未确定下来，但以上辩论是颇为可观的。
English: During the Warring States period, King Zhao Wuling wanted to change to the clothing of the Hu people, and his uncle disagreed and repeatedly argued; the discussion changed in Qin, and the opponent Ganlong debated with him: although the basic rules of the debate have not yet been determined, the above debate is quite considerable.

古文：迄至有汉，始立驳议。
现代文：到了汉代， 驳议 的体制才正式确立。
English: It was not until the Han Dynasty that the refutation system was formally established.

古文：驳者，杂也，杂议不纯，故曰驳也。
现代文：所谓 驳 ，就是杂；议论是纷纭复杂的，所以叫做 驳 。
English: The so-called refutation is miscellaneous; the discussion is complex and complicated, so it is called refutation.

古文：自两汉文明，楷式昭备，蔼蔼多士，发言盈庭；若贾谊之遍代诸生，可谓捷于议也。
现代文：从两汉文化昌明之后，典范的奏议显著而完备了；当时人才济济，好的奏议充满朝廷：如贾谊代替所有老臣草议，可说是写奏议最敏捷的作者了。
English: After the rise of the Han Dynasty and the rise of the Ming Dynasty, the model of the imperial rescript was remarkable and complete. At that time, talents were abundant, and the imperial court was full of good rescripts. For example, Jia Yi replaced all the old ministers to draft the rescript, and he could be said to be the most agile author to write the rescript.

古文：至如吾丘之驳挟弓，安国之辩匈奴，贾捐之之陈于珠崖，刘歆之辨于祖宗：虽质文不同，得事要矣。
现代文：又如吾丘寿王对禁民挟带弓弩的反驳，韩安国和反对与匈奴和亲者的辩论，贾捐之反对用大军平定朱崖郡叛乱的议论，刘歆关于不应毁武帝宗庙的争辩等，虽然内容和文辞各不相同，但都抓住奏议的要领了。
English: For example, King Wuqiu Shou's rebuttal to the ban on people carrying bows and arrows, the debate between Han and An against the Xiongnu and their relatives, Jia Dongzhi's opposition to using a large army to quell the rebellion in Zhuya County, Liu Bei's argument that Emperor Wu's ancestral temple should not be destroyed, etc. Although the content and wording are different, they all grasp the essence of the report.

古文：若乃张敏之断轻侮，郭躬之议擅诛；程晓之驳校事，司马芝之议货钱；何曾蠲出女之科，秦秀定贾充之谥：事实允当，可谓达议体矣。
现代文：至于东汉张敏反对 轻侮法 ，郭躬议论秦彭并非擅自杀人，三国时魏国程晓驳斥校事官的流弊，司马芝建议再铸五铢钱，晋代何曾要求免除对已嫁妇女不合理的刑律，秦秀议论怎样定贾充的谥号等，都写得符合实际，公允恰当，可说是通晓奏议体制的了。
English: As for the Eastern Han Dynasty Zhang Min's opposition to the light insulting method, Guo Wei's discussion of Qin Peng not committing suicide, Wei Guo Cheng Xiao's refutation of the school officials' corruption during the Three Kingdoms period, Sima Zhi's suggestion to mint another 50 yuan coin, Jin Dynasty He's request to exempt married women from the unreasonable criminal law, Qin Xiu's discussion of how to determine Jia Chong's nickname, etc., are all written in line with reality, fair and appropriate, and can be said to be familiar with the discussion system.

古文：汉世善驳，则应劭为首；晋代能议，则傅咸为宗。
现代文：汉代善于写驳议的，当以应劭为首；晋代长于写奏议的，则以傅咸为高。
English: In the Han Dynasty, if you are good at writing a rebuttal, you should take Ying Zheng as your leader; in the Jin Dynasty, if you are good at writing a report, you should take Fu Xian as your superior.

古文：然仲瑗博古，而铨贯有叙；长虞识治，而属辞枝繁。
现代文：但应劭博通古事，而铨衡贯通，颇有条理；傅咸很懂治道，却写得枝蔓纷繁。
English: However, it should be noted that Yan Bo is well-versed in ancient history, while Yan Heng is well-versed in history, and is quite organized; Fu Xian is very knowledgeable in politics, but he writes in a chaotic manner.

古文：及陆机断议，亦有锋颖，而腴辞弗剪，颇累文骨。亦各有美，风格存焉。
现代文：至于陆机的《晋书限断议》，尚为锐利，但未删减其繁杂的文辞，颇有影响于文章的骨力：这些也还各有优点和一定的教育意义。
English: As for Lu Jian's "Jin Book Restriction Resolution," it is still sharp, but it has not deleted its complex wording, which has a great influence on the backbone of the article: these also have their own advantages and certain educational significance.

古文：夫动先拟议，明用稽疑，所以敬慎群务，弛张治术。
现代文：凡有行动，首先要加以议论；要明了事物，必须把可疑的问题考察清楚。
English: If there is any action, it must first be discussed; if things are to be understood, the doubtful questions must be examined clearly.

古文：故其大体所资，必枢纽经典，采故实于前代，观通变于当今。理不谬摇其枝，字不妄舒其藻。
现代文：这是为了严肃慎重地处理各种政务，使治国之道缓急适度。所以，写议奏的主要依据，必须以儒家经典为典范，继承前代的传统，研究当今的变化；说理不应在枝节问题上大发谬论，用词不应在文采藻饰上过分铺张。
English: This is in order to seriously and prudently deal with various government affairs and make the national governance have appropriate priorities. Therefore, the main basis for writing discussions must be based on the Confucian classics as a model, inherit the traditions of previous generations, and study today's changes; reasoners should not make fallacies on branch issues, and the use of words should not be too extravagant in literary decoration.

古文：又郊祀必洞于礼，戎事必练于兵，佃谷先晓于农，断讼务精于律。
现代文：论祭祀，必须深悉礼仪；写战争，必须懂得军事；讲种田，首先要通晓农业；议断案，务须精通法律。
English: When discussing religious rites, it is necessary to have a deep understanding of etiquette; when writing about war, it is necessary to understand the military; when talking about farming, it is first necessary to be familiar with agriculture; when discussing and deciding on motions, it is essential to be familiar with the law.

古文：然后标以显义，约以正辞，文以辨洁为能，不以繁缛为巧；事以明核为美，不以环隐为奇：此纲领之大要也。
现代文：然后突出其重大意义，运用公允严正的文辞。议奏文以明辨简洁为能，不以繁富的采饰为巧；论事以明白核实为美，不以深幽隐晦为奇：这就是议奏文的基本要领了。
English: Then highlight its great significance and use fair and rigorous language. The argument of the argument is to be clear and concise, not to be rich and ornate; the argument is to be clearly verified, not to be deep and obscure: This is the basic gist of the argument.

古文：若不达政体，而舞笔弄文，支离构辞，穿凿会巧，空骋其华，固为事实所摈，设得其理，亦为游辞所埋矣。
现代文：如果不通晓国家政治，而随意搬弄文墨，东拉西扯地构成文辞，牵强附会地凑成小巧，这种徒然施展华丽的文章，固然要被事实所抛弃；即使讲出一些道理，也被大量的文采所淹没了。
English: If you do not understand national politics, but arbitrarily play around with words and phrases, make up words in all directions, and make up trifles in a far-fetched manner, this kind of vain display of gorgeous articles will certainly be abandoned by the facts; even if you tell some truth, you will be overwhelmed by a large amount of literature.

古文：昔秦女嫁晋，从文衣之媵，晋人贵媵而贱女；楚珠鬻郑，为薰桂之椟，郑人买椟而还珠。
现代文：从前秦穆公的女儿嫁给晋国的公子，随从大批服饰艳丽的陪嫁女，晋国人便重视陪嫁人而轻视秦穆公之女；楚国有人卖珠给郑国，用熏了桂香、装饰了玫瑰的精制匣子，郑国人只买盛珠的匣子而把珠退回。
English: In the past, when the daughter of Qin Mu Gong married the prince of Jin, she was accompanied by a large number of bridesmaids with gaudy costumes. The people of Jin valued the bridesmaids and despised the daughter of Qin Mu Gong. In Chu, someone sold beads to Zheng, using a refined box smoked with cinnamon and decorated with roses. The people of Zheng only bought the box of precious beads and returned the beads.

古文：若文浮于理，末胜其本，则秦女楚珠，复存于兹矣。
现代文：如果文饰淹没了所讲的道理，形式胜过了所表达的内容，那末，秦人嫁女、楚人卖珠的故事，便又出现在今天了。
English: If the literary embellishment drowns out the truth that is being told, and the form outweighs the content that is being expressed, then the story of the Qin people marrying women and the Chu people selling beads would appear again today.

古文：又对策者，应诏而陈政也；射策者，探事而献说也。
现代文：还有对策，是应答皇帝诏令而做出的政见陈述；射策，是为了研究事理而向皇帝主动奉献的政见。
English: There is also a countermeasure, which is a political opinion statement made in response to the emperor's edict; and a strategy, which is a political opinion actively dedicated to the emperor in order to study the matter.

古文：言中理准，譬射侯中的；二名虽殊，即议之别体也。
现代文：这种文体必须有中肯的言辞，准确的说理，就如同箭矢射中靶心一样。虽然两种文体名称不同，但都属于 议 的一种形式。
English: This style must have pertinent words, accurate reasoning, just like the bull's-eye in archery. Although the names of the two styles are different, they both belong to a form of "discussion."

古文：古者造士，选事考言。
现代文：古代造就人才的时候，要选拔那些能办事、善辞令的人。
English: In ancient times, when cultivating talent, it was necessary to select those who could do things and speak well.

古文：汉文中年，始举贤良，晁错对策，蔚为举首。
现代文：汉文帝中期，开始从各地选拔贤良。晁错因为对策对答而被列为第一名。
English: In the middle of the Han Dynasty, the selection of virtuous people from all over the country began. Zou Er was listed as the first because of his countermeasures and responses.

古文：及孝武益明，旁求俊乂，对策者以第一登庸，射策者以甲科入仕，斯固选贤要术也。
现代文：汉成帝则广访贤才，将对策第一的人直接任用，而射策的人因为中了甲科进入仕途。这确实是选拔贤才的重要方法。
English: Emperor Han Chengdu made extensive visits to the elite, directly appointed the person with the best strategy, and the person with the best strategy entered the career path because he won the first grade. This is indeed an important method of selecting the elite.

古文：观晁氏之对，验古明今，辞裁以辨，事通而赡，超升高第，信有征矣。
现代文：看晁错对策文，是以古验今，文辞简洁且辨理明确，论事通达且高瞻远瞩，卓越超群，获得第一完全是有根据的。
English: Looking at the mistakes and countermeasures, it is based on the ancient and modern, the words are concise and clear, the arguments are comprehensive and far-sighted, the excellence is superior, and the first place is fully justified.

古文：仲舒之对，祖述《春秋》，本阴阳之化，究列代之变，烦而不慁者，事理明也。
现代文：董仲舒写对策文，是根据《春秋》大义，结合阴阳两气相生相变的理论研究各时代的政治发展，虽然文辞繁杂但并不沉冗混乱，是因为说明白了其中的事理。
English: Dong Zhongshu wrote a counter-strategy, based on the principles of "Spring and Autumn," combining the theory of yin and yang phases to study the political development of each era. Although the wording is complex, it is not confusing, because it explains the facts.

古文：公孙之对，简而未博，然总要以约文，事切而情举，所以太常居下，而天子擢上也。
现代文：公孙弘写对策文，文辞简明扼要、外延不多，但能以简约的文辞概括要点，切合利弊而情理斐然，所以尽管被太常定为下等，却被汉武帝擢升为上等。
English: Gongsun Hong wrote a countermeasure article, the wording was concise and to the point, the extension was not much, but it was able to summarize the main points with a concise wording, it was reasonable and reasonable, so although it was too often designated as inferior, it was promoted by Emperor Hanwu to superior.

古文：杜钦之对，略而指事，辞以治宣，不为文作。
现代文：杜钦写对策文，以简略的文辞对答，却显示出他仅是就事论事，而不为堆砌辞藻写作。
English: Duchin wrote a rebuttal, with a brief rhetorical rejoinder, but he showed that he was only writing about things, not for the sake of piling up words.

古文：及后汉鲁丕，辞气质素，以儒雅中策，独入高第。
现代文：东汉鲁丕，其对策辞藻质朴，以儒家正论迎合对策主题，恰到好处，因此才独中高等。
English: The Eastern Han Dynasty's Lu Xun, whose countermeasures were simple, and who used Confucianism to cater to the theme of countermeasures, was just right, so he was able to dominate middle and high schools.

古文：凡此五家，并前代之明范也。
现代文：以上这五个人的对策文，都被前代公认为典范之作。
English: The above five people's countermeasures have been recognized by the previous generation as exemplary works.

古文：魏晋以来，稍务文丽，以文纪实，所失已多。
现代文：而自魏晋以来，为文者大都开始追求华丽的文辞，来记载实际的事理，不足之处逐渐增多。
English: However, since the Wei and Jin Dynasties, most writers have begun to pursue ornate literature to record the actual facts, and the shortcomings have gradually increased.

古文：及其来选，又称疾不会，虽欲求文，弗可得也。
现代文：到他们受推举应选的时候，都以病为借口拒绝对策，让皇帝即使希望征求到对策文，也无法得到。
English: By the time they were nominated for election, they all refused the countermeasures on the pretext of illness, so that the emperor could not get the countermeasures even if he wanted to solicit them.

古文：是以汉饮博士，而雉集乎堂；晋策秀才，而麏兴于前，无他怪也，选失之异耳。
现代文：所以当汉成帝主持博士饮酒礼时，堂上就出现了野鸡；当晋成帝集合各州郡的秀才举行对策考试时，就会在堂前出现麋鹿。这不是什么怪异的事情，不过是选举失当罢了。
English: Therefore, when Han Chengdi presided over the doctor's drinking ceremony, a pheasant appeared in the hall; when Jin Chengdi gathered the talents of all states and counties to hold a countermeasure examination, a moose would appear in front of the hall. This is not a strange thing, but it is an election malpractice.

古文：夫驳议偏辨，各执异见；对策揄扬，大明治道。
现代文：而 驳 这种文体则注重对事理的辩论，是持不同见解的各方的辩论；对策重在对理论进行宣扬，以阐明治理天下的道理。
English: And refute This style focuses on the debate of the cause and reason, is the debate of the parties with different opinions; the countermeasure focuses on the propaganda of the theory to clarify the reason for governing the world.

古文：使事深于政术，理密于时务，酌三五以熔世，而非迂缓之高谈；驭权变以拯俗，而非刻薄之伪论；风恢恢而能远，流洋洋而不溢，王庭之美对也。
现代文：如果对策能让其引述的史实符合治世之道，让其解说的道理切合当今政务，让其能斟酌错综复杂的情况来重铸世俗，而非不切实际的谈论；让作者的通达权变来拯救世俗而非冷漠地旁观；让自己的论述能广泛传播但不是泛泛而谈，就像水虽然很大却不至于泛滥，那就算得上是优秀的对策文了。
English: If the countermeasures can make the historical facts it cites conform to the way of the world, make the reason for its explanation fit today's politics, let it consider the intricacies of the situation to recast the mundane, rather than unrealistic talk; let the author's clever maneuvering save the mundane, rather than stand by indifferently; let its discussion be widely disseminated but not generalized, just like water, although large, will not flood, then it is an excellent countermeasure.

古文：难矣哉，士之为才也！或练治而寡文，或工文而疏治。对策所选，实属通才，志足文远，不其鲜欤！
现代文：能达到这种效果的人，是难得的有才人，但有很多人只是善于处理政务却文才不足，有的文才出众却短于政务，如果能通过对策选拔到具有文才又擅长处理国家政务的人，确实算得上是通才了。能够充分表达自己的思想，并且让文采声名远播，这样的人才难道很多吗？总结： 议 用于商讨政事，应该名实相符。
English: A person who can achieve this effect is a rare talented person, but there are many people who are only good at handling government affairs but lack literary talent. Some literary talents are outstanding but shorter than government affairs. If we can select a person with literary talent and good at handling national government affairs through countermeasures, it is indeed a generalist. Can there be many such talents who can fully express their thoughts and let literary fame spread far and wide? Summary: Discussion For discussing politics, the name should match the reality.

古文：赞曰∶议惟畴政，名实相课。
现代文：分析道理要有力量，运用文辞不能软弱。
English: Analytical reasoning should be strong, and the use of words should not be weak.

古文：断理必刚，攡辞无懦。对策王庭，同时酌和。治体高秉，雅谟远播。
现代文：在帝王之前对策，众多的应试者同时斟酌对答；只要把握好议对文应有益于治道的特点，雅正的谋议就能远为传播。
English: Before the emperor's countermeasures, a large number of candidates at the same time consider the answer; as long as we grasp the characteristics that the discussion of the text should be beneficial to the administration of justice, the consideration of elegance can be spread far and wide.

