古文：凡与敌战，营垒相远，势力相均，可轻骑挑攻之，伏兵以待之，其军可破。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，如果两军营垒相距较远，兵力也相差无几，可以派遣轻装骑兵前往敌营挑战，诱使敌方出兵追杀，同时在沿路设下埋伏，等对方追来就一举歼灭。
English: In any war against the enemy, if the two army camps are far apart and the troop strength is almost the same, you can send light cavalry to challenge the enemy camp, induce the enemy to send troops to chase and kill, and at the same time set up an ambush along the road, and wait for the other side to chase and annihilate in one fell swoop.

古文：若敌用此谋，我不可以全气击之。
现代文：倘若敌人也使用这种计谋引诱我时，我军不能全军出击去追击。
English: If the enemy also uses this trick to lure me away, our whole army will not be able to go out to pursue.

古文：法曰： 远而挑战，欲人之进也。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 敌人离我很远而又前来挑战，是企图诱我贸然轻进而上当。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: The enemy is far away from me and challenges me. It is an attempt to lure me into a trap.

古文：十六国，姚襄据黄落，苻生遣将苻黄眉、邓羌等率步骑讨襄。
现代文：十六国时期，后秦将领姚襄率军进占黄落镇，前秦帝苻生派遣苻黄眉、邓羌等将率领步骑兵讨伐姚襄。
English: During the Sixteen Kingdoms period, the post-Qin general Yao Xiang led the army to occupy Huangluocheng, and the former Qin emperor Zengsheng dispatched Yao Huangmei, Deng Yao and others to lead the infantry cavalry to fight Yao Xiang.

古文：襄深沟高垒，固守不战。
现代文：姚襄凭据深沟高垒而坚守不战。
English: Yao Xiang insisted that he would not fight because he had the advantage of a deep ditch and a high base.

古文：邓羌曰： 襄性刚愎，易以挠动。若长驱一行，直压其垒，襄必忿而出战，可一战而擒也。 
现代文：邓羌向苻黄眉建议说： 姚襄此人为人任性固执，容易被激怒，我们如果派一支部队假装声势浩大地去进攻他，兵临城下，他必定出兵迎战，我们就可以活捉了他。 
English: Deng Yao suggested to Zou Huangmei, "Yao Xiang is a headstrong and stubborn person, and he is easily provoked. If we send an army to attack him under the pretense of a large-scale attack, he will certainly send troops to fight, and we can capture him alive.

古文：黄眉从之，遣羌率骑三千军于垒门。
现代文：苻黄眉采纳了这个建议。于是，派遣邓羌率领三千骑兵直迫于姚襄军营门前。
English: Xing Huangmei accepted the suggestion, and sent Deng Jun to lead 3,000 cavalry to the front of Yao Xiang's camp.

古文：襄怒，尽锐出战。
现代文：姚襄果然大怒，率领其全部精锐部队出营交战。
English: Yao Xiang was furious and led all of his elite troops into battle.

古文：羌伪不胜，率骑而退，襄追之于三原，羌回拒襄，而黄眉至，大战，斩之，俘其众。
现代文：邓羌伪装战败而引军后退，姚襄挥军追到三原，这时邓羌突然回军拒战，苻黄眉率领大军也恰好赶到，与姚襄军展开激战，一举击斩了姚襄，他的士兵也全部被俘，苻黄眉等将整顿队伍，凯旋而归。
English: Deng Xuan disguised his defeat and withdrew his army, and Yao Xiang waved his army to chase Mihara. At this time, Deng Xuan suddenly returned to the army and refused to fight. Zou Huang Mei led a large army and just arrived. He fought a fierce battle with Yao Xiang's army, defeated Yao Xiang in one fell swoop, and all his soldiers were captured. Zou Huang Mei and others will reorganize the team and return home triumphantly.

