古文：紫微垣紫微垣东蕃八星，西蕃七星，在北斗北，左右环列，翊卫之象也。
现代文：紫微垣束蕃八星，西蕃七星，在北斗星的北面，左右环绕排列，是辅弼护卫的象征。
English: The eight stars and seven stars of the Western Cross of the Purple Small Wall are arranged on the north side of the Big Dipper, encircling it on the right and left. They are the symbols of the Auxiliary Palanquin.

古文：一曰大帝之坐，天子之常居也，主命、主度也。
现代文：一说大帝的座位，是天子日常居住的地方，是主管天命、主管法度的。
English: It is said that the seat of the Great Emperor is the place where the Son of Heaven lives every day, and is in charge of the Mandate of Heaven and the Rule of Law.

古文：东蕃近阊阖门第一星为左枢，第二星为上宰，三星曰少宰，四星曰上弼一曰上辅，五星为少弼一曰少辅，六星为上卫，七星为少卫，八星为少丞或曰上丞。
现代文：束蕃接近闾阖门的第一星是左枢，第二星是上宰，第三星叫少宰，第四星叫上弼，一说上辅。第五星是少弼，一说少辅。第六星是上街，第七星是少卫，第八星是少丞。有人说是上丞。
English: The first star is Zuo, the second star is Shangzai, the third star is Shanzai, the fourth star is Shangzai, and the first is Shangfu. The fifth star is Shao, and the first is Shaofu. The sixth star is Shangjie, the seventh star is Shaowei, and the eighth star is Shao Rong. Some people say it is Shang Rong.

古文：其西蕃近阊阖门第一星为右枢，第二星为少尉，第三星为上辅，第四星为少辅，第五星为上卫，第六星为少卫，第七星为上丞。
现代文：它的西蕃接近间阖门的第一星是右枢，第二星是少尉，第三星是上辅，第四星是少辅，第五星是上卫，第六星是少卫，第七星是上丞。
English: The first star of its west gate is the right pivot, the second star is the second lieutenant, the third star is the senior assistant, the fourth star is the junior assistant, the fifth star is the senior guard, the sixth star is the junior guard, and the seventh star is the senior guard.

古文：其占，欲均明，大小有常，则内辅盛；垣直，天子自将出征；门开，兵起宫垣。
现代文：它的星占，要均匀明亮，大小有规律，那么内朝辅臣兴盛；紫微垣直，天子自己率兵出征；闾阖门开，战争起于宫内。
English: Its horoscope should be uniformly bright and regular in size, so that the inner court and its vassals will prosper; the purple and white walls will be straight, and the heavenly son himself will lead the soldiers to go to war; the gate will be open, and the war will start in the palace.

古文：两蕃正南开如门，曰阊阖。
现代文：东酉两蕃朝正南方向张开好像城门，叫闾阖。
English: The two towers of the East Pagoda face due south, open like a city gate, and call to each other.

古文：有流星自门出四野者，当有中使御命，视其所往分野论之；不依门出入者，外蕃国使也。
现代文：有流星从阗闱门出行到四方郊野，就该有宫廷使者奉行皇帝的命令，看它所去的分野来评论；有不从闾阖门出入的星，是外番国的使臣。
English: If a shooting star travels from the palace gate to the countryside in the four directions, there should be a palace emissary to follow the emperor's order and comment on the field it went to; if there is a star that does not enter or leave the palace gate, it is an envoy from a foreign country.

古文：太阴、岁星犯紫微垣，有丧。
现代文：太阴、岁星凌犯紫微垣，有丧事。
English: The sun is too dark, the stars are too bright, there are funerals.

古文：太白、辰星犯之，改世。
现代文：太白星、辰星凌犯它，换代。
English: Taibai Xing and Chen Xing violated it and were replaced.

古文：荧惑守宫，君失位。
现代文：荧惑星占据紫微垣星宫，皇帝失去皇位。
English: Fluorescent planets occupy the purple and white star palace, and the emperor loses his throne.

古文：客星守，有不臣，国易政。
现代文：客星侵占，有叛臣，国家更易政权。
English: Guest stars invade and occupy, there are traitors, and the country changes regimes.

古文：国皇星，兵。
现代文：国皇星，预示着战争。
English: The Emperor's Star, heralding war.

古文：彗星犯，有异王立。
现代文：彗星凌犯，将有异姓的王立国。
English: Comet transgression, there will be a different surname of Wang Liguo.

古文：流星犯之，为兵、丧，水旱不调。
现代文：流星侵犯紫微垣，是战争、丧事，水旱不调。
English: If a meteor hits Zi Weigaki, it will be a war, a funeral, or a drought.

古文：使星入北方，兵起石氏云：东西两蕃总十六星，西蕃亦八星，一右枢，二上尉，三少尉，四上辅，五少辅，六上卫，七少卫，八少丞。
现代文：使星进入北方，战争发动。石氏说：东西两蕃总共十六星，西蕃也是八星，一右枢，二上尉，三少尉，四上辅，五少辅，六上卫，七少卫，八少丞。
English: He said, "There are a total of sixteen stars on the east and west towers, eight stars on the west tower, one right pivot, two captains, three second lieutenants, four upper assistants, five junior assistants, six upper guards, seven junior guards, and eight junior guards."

古文：上宰一星，上辅二星，三公也。
现代文：上宰一星，上辅二星，是三公。
English: Shangzai one star, Shangfu two stars, is the third.

古文：少宰一星，少辅二星，三孤也。
现代文：少宰一星，少辅二星，是三孤。
English: One star for Shorozai, two stars for Shoshu, that's three stars.

古文：此三公、三孤在朝者也。
现代文：这些三公、三孤是在朝廷的官。
English: These three nobles and three scoundrels are the officials of the imperial court.

古文：左右枢、上少丞，疑丞辅弼，四邻之谓也。
现代文：左枢右枢、七丞少丞，怀疑丞、辅、弼是天子四邻的称谓。
English: Zuo Zuo Rui Zuo, Qi Jiao Shiao Jiao, Zi Jiao Jiao, Fu Jiao, and Zi Jiao are the titles of the four neighbors of the Son of Heaven.

古文：尉二星，卫四星，六军大副尉，四卫将军也。
现代文：尉星二颗，卫星四颗，代表六军大副尉，四卫将军。
English: There are two lieutenant stars, four satellites, representing the six armies, and four generals.

古文：北极五星，在紫微宫中，北辰最尊者也，其纽星为天枢，天运无穷，三光迭耀，而极星不移，故曰 居其所而众星共之 。
现代文：北极五星在紫微垣中，北辰是最尊贵的，它的纽星是天枢，天体运行无穷无止，日月星辰三光交迭辉映，然而极星不移动，所以说 居其所而众星共之 。
English: The North Star is the most precious of the five stars at the North Pole. Its new star is the center of the heavens. The celestial bodies move endlessly. The sun, moon and stars shine in alternation. However, the North Star does not move, so it is said that it resides in its own place and is shared by all the stars.

古文：枢星在天心，四方去极各九十一度。
现代文：枢星在天的中心，四方距离极星各是九十一度。
English: The central star is in the center of the sky, and the four directions are each ninety-one degrees from the pole star.

古文：贾逵、张衡、蔡邕、王蕃、陆绩皆以北极纽星之枢，是不动处。
现代文：贾逵、张衡、蔡邕、王蕃、陆续都认为北极纽星的枢纽，是不移动的地方。
English: Jia Wei, Zhang Heng, Cai Wei, Wang Wei, successively all believe that the hub of the North Pole New Star is a place that does not move.

古文：在纽星末犹一度有余。
现代文：在纽星末端还有一度多。
English: There's more than one at the end of New York.

古文：今清台则去极四度半。
现代文：现在的清台的仪器距离极度却是四度半。
English: Today's Qingdao instrument is four and a half degrees away from the extreme.

古文：第一星主月，太子也；二星主日，帝王也，亦太一之坐，谓最赤明者也；第三星主五行，庶子也。
现代文：第一星主管月亮，是太子；第二星主管太阳，是帝王，也就是太一的座位，所谓是最红最明亮的星；第三星主管五行，是庶子。
English: The first star in charge of the moon is the crown prince; the second star in charge of the sun is the emperor, that is, the seat of Taichi, the so-called reddest and brightest star; the third star in charge of the five elements is the bastard.

古文：《乾象新星书》曰： 第三星主五行，第四星主诸王，第五星为后宫。 
现代文：《干象新星害》说： 第三星主管五行，第四星主管诸王，第五星是后官。 
English: "Ken Zi Xin Xing Hei" says: The third star is in charge of the five elements, the fourth star is in charge of the kings, and the fifth star is the subordinate.

古文：闳云： 北极五星，初一曰帝，次二曰后，次三曰妃，次四曰太子，次五曰庶子。 四曰太子者，最赤明者也。
现代文：洛下闳说： 北极五颗星，头一个叫皇帝，次二叫皇后，次三叫皇妃，次四叫太子，次五甽庶子 第四个叫太子星的原因，是因为它最红最明亮。
English: Luo Jianjun said: There are five stars at the North Pole. The first one is called the Emperor, the second one is called the Empress, the third one is called the Empress Dowager, the fourth one is called the Crown Prince, and the fifth one is called the Bastard Prince. The reason why the fourth one is called the Crown Prince Star is because it is the reddest and brightest.

古文：后四星勾曲以抱之者，帝星也。
现代文：后面的四颗星勾结盘曲以环抱的那颗星，是帝星。
English: The star that is encircled by the four stars at the back in a co-ordinated circle is the Imperial Star.

古文：太公望以为北辰，以为耀魄宝，以为帝极者是也。
现代文：左公望认为是北辰，认为是耀魄宝，认为是帝极的就是这颗星。
English: Zuo Gongwang thought it was the North Star, thought it was a dazzling treasure, and thought it was the imperial pole.

古文：或以勾陈口中一星为耀魄宝者，非是。
现代文：有人把勾陈座口中的一颗星当作耀魄宝，是不正确的。
English: It is not correct that some people regard a star in the mouth of Gou Chen's seat as a dazzling treasure.

古文：北极中星不明，主不用事；右星不明，太子忧；左星不明，庶子忧；明大动摇，主好出游；色青微者，凶。
现代文：北极中星不明亮，君主不能执政；右边的星不明亮，太子有忧患；左边的星不明亮，庶子有忧患；星色光明大放但动擂，君主喜欢出游；星色冷青微弱，是凶兆。
English: If the star in the North Pole is not bright, the monarch cannot govern; if the star on the right is not bright, the prince is in trouble; if the star on the left is not bright, the son-in-law is in trouble; if the star is very bright but moving, the monarch likes to travel; if the star is cold and faint, it is a bad omen.

古文：客星入，为兵、丧。
现代文：客星进入，是战争、丧事。
English: When a guest star enters, it's a time of war and mourning.

古文：彗星入，为易位。
现代文：彗星进入，是更易帝位。
English: When the comet enters, it is easier to reign.

古文：流星入，兵起地动。
现代文：流星进入，发生战争，地震。
English: A meteor enters, there is war, an earthquake.

古文：北斗七星在太微北，杓携龙角，衡殷南斗，魁枕参首，是为帝车，运于中央，临制四海，以建四时、均五行、移节度、定诸纪，乃七政之枢机，阴阳之元本也。
现代文：北斗七星在太微垣北面，它的斗杓携带龙角，它的斗衡处在南斗正中，它的斗魁枕着参宿头部，这就是帝车，在中央运行，统制着四海，用来建立四季、均衡五行、变动节度、制定诸纪，是七政的枢纽关键，是阴阳的元本。
English: The Big Dipper is in the north of the Great Wall. Its cormorant carries the Dragon's Horn. Its balance is in the middle of the Southern Dipper. Its leader rests on the head of the Betelgeuse. This is the imperial chariot, which runs in the center, controls the four seas, and is used to establish the four seasons, balance the five elements, change the measure, and establish the ages. It is the key to the seven kingdoms, and is the source of yin and yang.

古文：魁第一星曰天枢，正星，主天。又曰枢为天，主阳德，天子象。
现代文：斗魁的第一星叫天枢，是正星，主管天，又说枢为大，主管阳德，是天子的象征。
English: The first star of the leader of the duel is called the heavenly center, which is the positive star, the head of heaven. It is also said that the center is big, and the head is Yang De, which is the symbol of the Son of Heaven.

古文：其分为秦，《汉志》主徐州。
现代文：它的分野是秦，《汉书，天文志》说它主管徐州。
English: Its field is Qin, "Hanshu, Astronomy" says it is in charge of Xuzhou.

古文：《天象占》曰： 天子不恭宗庙，不敬鬼神，则不明，变色。 
现代文：《天象占》说： 天子不恭宗庙，不敬鬼神，则不明，变色。 
English: "Celestial Conquest" said: If the heavenly son does not respect the ancestral temple, and does not revere ghosts and gods, then it is unclear and discolored.

古文：二曰璇，法星，主地。又曰璇为地，主阴刑，女主象。
现代文：二叫璇，是法星，主管地，又说璇为地，主管阴刑，是女主的象征。
English: The second is called Yin, is the law star, the competent place, also said that Yin is the ground, the competent Yin punishment, is the symbol of the hostess.

古文：其分为楚，《汉志》主益州。
现代文：它的分野是楚，《汉书，天文志》说它主管益州。
English: Its field is Chu, "Hanshu, Astronomy" says it is in charge of Yizhou.

古文：《天象占》曰： 若广营宫室，妄凿山陵，则不明，变色。 
现代文：《天象占》说： 若广营宫室，妄凿山陵，则不明，变色。 
English: "Celestial Conquest" said: If Guangying palace room, hewn mountains, it is unclear, discoloration.

古文：三曰玑，为人，主火，为令星，主中祸。
现代文：三叫玑，是人，主管火，是令星，主管遭受灾祸。
English: The three are: the hail, the man; the fire, the star; and the calamity.

古文：其分为梁，《汉志》主冀州。
现代文：它的分野是梁，《汉书，天文志》说它主管冀州。
English: Its field is Liang, and "Hanshu, Astronomy" says it is in charge of Jizhou.

古文：若王者不恤民，骤征役，则不明，变色。
现代文：如果君王不体恤人民，暴征劳役，那么玑星就不明亮，变星色。
English: If the monarch does not sympathize with the people and brutally levies labor service, then the bright star will not be bright and will turn into a fading star.

古文：四曰权，为时，主水，为伐星，主天理，伐无道。
现代文：四叫权，是季节，主管水，是伐星，主持天理，讨伐无道。
English: Four call for power, are the seasons, are in charge of water, are the felling of the stars, preside over the heavenly law, and have no way to fight.

古文：其分为吴，《汉志》主荆州。
现代文：它的分野是昊，《汉书，天文志》说它主管剂州。
English: Its field is Hao, and "Hanshu, Astronomy" says that it is in charge of Jiaozhou.

古文：若号令不顺四时，则不明，变色。
现代文：如果号令不顺从四季，它就不明亮，变星色。
English: If the call does not obey the four seasons, it will not be bright and starry.

古文：五曰玉衡，为音，主土，为杀星，主中央，助四方，杀有罪。
现代文：五叫玉衡，是音乐，主管土，是杀星，主持中央，辅助四方，诛杀有罪。
English: The fifth is called Yu Heng, is music, in charge of soil, is star-killing, presides over the center, assists the four sides, and is guilty of killing.

古文：其分为燕，《汉志》主兖州。
现代文：它的分野是燕，《漠书，天文志》说它主管充州。
English: Its field is swallows. "Moses, the Astronomer" says that it is in charge of Chenzhou.

古文：若废正乐，务淫声，则不明，变色。
现代文：如果废止雅正音乐，追求淫荡声响，它就不明亮，变星色。
English: If you abolish the elegant music and pursue the lascivious sound, it will not be bright and starry.

古文：六曰闿阳，为律，主木，为危星，主天仓、五谷。
现代文：六叫闱阳，是律令，主管木，是危星，主管天仓、五谷。
English: Six is called Shanyang, is the Ruling, the head of the tree, is the danger star, the head of Tiancang, Wugu.

古文：其分为赵，《汉志》主扬州。
现代文：它的分野是趟，《汉书，天文志》说它主管扬州。
English: Its field is wading, "Hanshu, Astronomy" says it is in charge of Yangzhou.

古文：若不劝农桑，峻刑法，退贤能，则不明，变色。
现代文：如果不鼓励种田蚕桑，而是严峻刑法，斥退贤能之士，它就不明亮，变星色。
English: If the cultivation of silkworms is not encouraged, but a severe criminal law is imposed, and the virtuous are rejected, it will not be bright and will turn into a star.

古文：七曰摇光，为星，主金，为部星，为应星，主兵。
现代文：七叫摇光，是星辰，主管金，是部星，是应星，主管战争。
English: Seven is called the shaking light, is the star, responsible for the gold, is the star, is the star, is the star, responsible for the war.

古文：其分为齐，《汉志》主豫州。
现代文：它的分野是齐，《汉书，天文志》说它主管豫州。
English: Its field is Qi, and "Hanshu, Astronomy" says that it is in charge of Yuzhou.

古文：王者聚金宝，不修德，则不明，变色。
现代文：君王聚敛金银财宝，不修养德行，它就不明亮，变星色。
English: If a ruler amasses gold and silver and treasures, but does not cultivate virtue, it will not shine brightly, but turn into a star.

古文：又曰一至四为魁，魁为璇玑；五至七为杓，杓为玉衡：是为七政，星明其国昌。
现代文：又说第一到第四颗星是魁，魁是璇玑；第五到第七颗星是杓，杓是玉衡：道就是七政，如果七星明亮，国象就昌盛。
English: It is also said that the first to fourth stars are Kui, and Kui is Zhou; the fifth to seventh stars are Zhou, and Zhou is Yuheng: the Tao is the seven political systems, and if the seven stars are bright, the national elephant will prosper.

古文：第八曰弼星，在第七星右，不见，《汉志》主幽州。
现代文：第八叫弼星，在第七星右边，不出现，《汉书，天文志》说它主管幽州。
English: The eighth is called the Pleiades, on the right side of the seventh star, does not appear, "Hanshu, Astronomy" says it is in charge of Yuzhou.

古文：第九曰辅星，在第六星左，常见，《汉志》主并州。
现代文：第九叫辅星，在第六星的左边，经常出现。《漠书，天文志》说它主管并州。
English: The ninth is called the secondary star, on the left of the sixth star, often appears. "Moses, the Astronomer" said that it was responsible for the annexation of the state.

古文：《晋志》，辅星傅乎闿阳，所以佐斗成功，丞相之象也。
现代文：《晋书&;;天文志》说，辅星靠近闱阳，用来辅佐北斗七星事业成功，是丞相之象征。
English: "Jinshu" & "Astronomy" said that the auxiliary star is close to Fenyang, used to support the success of the Big Dipper, and is a symbol of the prime minister.

古文：其色在春青黄，在夏赤黄，秋为白黄，冬为黑黄。
现代文：它的星色在春天是青黄，在夏天是赤黄，秋天是白黄，冬天是黑黄。
English: Its star color is blue-yellow in spring, red-yellow in summer, white-yellow in autumn, and black-yellow in winter.

古文：变常则国有兵殃，明则臣强。
现代文：如果它改变常态，国家将有战争的灾殃，明亮就表明臣下强悍。
English: If it changes the normal situation, the country will have the scourge of war, and it will clearly show that the vassal is strong.

古文：斗旁欲多星则安，斗中星少则人恐。
现代文：北斗旁边要是有很多星就表明国家安定，北斗里面星少就使人恐慌。
English: If there are many stars next to the Big Dipper, it indicates that the country is stable. If there are few stars in the Big Dipper, people will be alarmed.

古文：太阴犯之，为兵、丧、大赦。
现代文：太阴凌犯它，是战争、丧事、大赦。
English: War, funerals, amnesties.

古文：白晕贯三星，王者恶之。
现代文：白色的云气横贯斗杓三星，君王厌恶这种情况。
English: A white pall hung over the three-star hotel, and the king was disgusted.

古文：星孛于北斗，主危。
现代文：在北斗发生星变，预示危险。
English: A star change occurs in the Big Dipper, foreshadowing danger.

古文：彗星犯，为易主。
现代文：彗星凌犯，是更换君主。
English: The comet's transgression is to replace the monarch.

古文：流星犯。主客兵。
现代文：流星侵犯，预示客籍军队发动战争。
English: The meteor intruded, foreshadowing the guest army starting a war.

古文：客星犯，为兵。
现代文：客星侵犯，是战争。
English: Alien invasion, that's war.

古文：五星犯之，国乱易主。
现代文：五星侵犯，国家动乱更换君主。
English: Five-star encroachment, national turmoil, change of monarch.

古文：按：北斗与辅星为八，而《汉志》云九星，武密及杨维德皆采用之。
现代文：按：北斗与辅星是八颗，而《汉书，天文志》说是九颗星，武密和杨维德都采用这种说法。
English: Press: The Big Dipper and its companion star are eight, while "Hanshu, Astronomy" says they are nine stars. Both Wu Mi and Yang Weidong use this argument.

古文：《史记索隐》云： 北斗星间相去各九千里。
现代文：《史记》索隐说： 北斗星间相距各九千里。
English: "History" Sokhin said: The distance between the Big Dipper and the star is nine thousand miles.

古文：其二阴星不见者，相去八千里。 
现代文：其二阴星不见者，相距八千里。 
English: If the second shadow star disappears, the distance is eight thousand miles.

古文：而丹元子《步天歌》亦云九星，《汉书》必有所本矣。
现代文：而丹元子《步天歌》也说是九颗星，《漠书》一定有所本了。
English: And Dan Yuan Zi's "Walking Song of Heaven" is also said to be nine stars, and "Book of the Desert" must have been written.

古文：勾陈六星，在紫宫中，五帝之后宫也，太帝之正妃也，大帝之帝居也。
现代文：勾陈六星，在紫微垣中，是五帝的后官，是太帝的正妃，是大帝的住处。
English: The six-pointed star, in the purple hedge, is the five emperors' aide-de-camp, the empress of the great emperor, and the residence of the great emperor.

古文：《乐纬》曰： 主后宫。 
现代文：《乐纬》说： 主后宫。 
English: "Le Wei" said: the main harem.

古文：巫咸曰： 主天子护军。 
现代文：巫咸说： 主天子护军。 
English: Wuxian said, "The Lord God protects the army."

古文：《荆州占》： 主大司马。 
现代文：《剂州占》： 主大司马。 
English: "Gangzhou Zhan": the main big Sima.

古文：或曰主六军将军。
现代文：有人说主管六军将军。
English: Some people say that the general in charge of the Sixth Army is Mao Zedong.

古文：或曰主三公、三师，为万物之母。
现代文：有人说主管三公、三师，是万物之母。
English: Some people say that the person in charge of the Three Princes and Three Divisions is the mother of all things.

古文：六星比陈，象六宫之化，其端大星曰元始，余星乘之曰庶妾，在北极配六辅甘氏曰：勾陈在辰极左，是为钩陈卫六军将军。
现代文：六颗星并排陈列，像六宫的变化，它的顶端大星叫元始，其余的星登在它上面叫庶妾，在北极中配合六辅。甘匿说：勾陈座在北极的左边，这是钩陈护卫六军将军。
English: The six stars are displayed side by side, like the changes of the six palaces. The big star at the top of it is called the origin, and the rest of the stars on top of it are called the concubines. In the north pole, they cooperate with the six auxiliary stars. Gan Ni said: "The seat of the hook is on the left side of the north pole. This is the hook guarding the general of the six armies."

古文：或以为后宫，非是。
现代文：有人认为是后宫，是不正确的。
English: Some people think it is a harem, which is incorrect.

古文：勾陈口中一星为阳德，天皇大帝内坐。
现代文：勾陈口中一星是阳德，是天皇大帝在勾陈内的座位。
English: One star in the mouth of the coffin is Yang De, the seat of the Emperor in the coffin.

古文：或即以为天皇大帝，非是。
现代文：有人就认为是天皇大帝，是不正确的。
English: Some people think that it was Emperor Taisei, which is incorrect.

古文：其占，色不欲甚明，明即女主恶之。
现代文：它的占法，星色不要太亮，星色太亮就会使女主厌恶它。
English: Its occupation method, the star color should not be too bright, the star color is too bright will make the hostess dislike it.

古文：星盛，则辅强；主不用谏，佞人在侧，则不见。
现代文：星辰兴盛，就是辅臣强悍；君主不采用谏议，奸佞之人在君侧，那么勾陈就不出现。
English: If the stars are prosperous, the vassals will be strong; if the monarch does not use persuasion, and the traitors are on the monarch's side, then there will be no collusion.

古文：客星入之，色苍白，将有忧；白，为立将；赤黑，将死。
现代文：客星侵入勾陈，星色苍白，将要有忧患；星色白，是拜立将帅；星色赤黑，将帅死。
English: A guest star invades Huchen, the star is pale, there will be sorrow; the star is white, it is Bai Li; the star is red and black, it will die.

古文：客星出而色赤，战有功；守之，后宫有女使欲谋。
现代文：客星在勾陈出现而星色赤红，战斗有功；侵占勾陈，后宫有女使要图谋不轨。
English: The guest star appears in the plot and the star is red, the battle is meritorious; the occupation of the plot, the harem has a female servant to plot.

古文：彗星犯之，后宫有谋，近臣忧。
现代文：彗星凌犯，后宫有阴谋，近臣有忧患。
English: Comets intrude, harems conspire, and vassals worry.

古文：流星入，为迫主。
现代文：流星进入，是逼迫看主。
English: When a meteor enters, it is a compulsion to look at the host.

古文：青气入，大将忧。
现代文：青气进入，大将有忧患。
English: When the Qingqi enters, there will be a lot of worries.

古文：天皇大帝一星，在勾陈口中，其神曰耀魄宝，主御群灵，执万神图，大人之象也。
现代文：天皇大帝一颗星，在勾陈口中，它的神叫耀蝗童，主管统御众多灵物，执掌万神画像，是大人的象征。
English: The Emperor held a star in his right hand. Its god was called Yao Locust Boy. He was in charge of a multitude of spiritual beings and images of all the gods. He was a symbol of an adult.

古文：客星犯之，为除旧布新。
现代文：客星凌犯，是除旧布新。
English: The guest star's transgression is old news.

古文：彗、孛犯，大臣叛。
现代文：彗星、变星凌犯，大臣叛乱。
English: Comet, variable star transgression, minister rebellion.

古文：流星犯，国有忧。
现代文：流星侵犯，国家有忧患。
English: Meteor intrudes, the country is in trouble.

古文：云气入之，润泽，吉。
现代文：云气进入，滋润流泽，吉利。
English: Cloudy air enters, moisturizing and moisturizing, auspicious.

古文：黄白气入，连大帝坐，臣献美女；出天皇上者，改立王。
现代文：黄白气进入，连接大帝座，臣下贡献美女；黄白气冲出天皇的上面，改立新的君主。
English: The yellow and white gas enters, connects the throne of the great emperor, and the vassals contribute beautiful women; the yellow and white gas rushes out of the top of the emperor and re-establishes a new monarch.

古文：四辅四星，又名四弼，在极星侧，是曰帝之四邻，所以辅佐北极，而出度授政也。
现代文：四辅四星，又叫四弼，在极星旁边，这叫大帝的四邻，用来辅佐北极，而制定出法度，授任政事。
English: The four complements and four stars, also known as the four cormorants, next to the pole star, are called the four neighbors of the great emperor, used to assist the North Pole, and to formulate laws and confer government affairs.

古文：去极星各四度。
现代文：四星距离极星都是四度。
English: All four stars are four degrees away from the pole star.

古文：闳云： 四辅一名中斗。 
现代文：洛下闳说： 四辅又叫中斗。 
English: Luo Jiaqi said: "The four auxiliaries are also called Zhongdou.

古文：或以为后宫，非是。
现代文：有人认为它是后宫，是不正确的。
English: Some people think it is a harem, which is incorrect.

古文：武密曰： 光浮而动，凶；明小，吉；暗，则不理。 
现代文：迭密说： 星光飘浮而且波动，凶险；亮度小，吉利；昏暗，就不理事。 
English: Idemitsu said, "Starlight floats and fluctuates, which is dangerous; low brightness, which is auspicious; dim, which is not.

古文：客星犯之，大臣忧。
现代文：客星凌犯四辅，大臣有忧患。
English: The guest star, Ling, has committed four offenses, and the minister is worried.

古文：彗、孛犯，权臣死。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，权臣死。
English: Comets and variable stars invade, and a powerful vassal dies.

古文：流星犯，大臣黜。
现代文：流星侵犯，大臣被罢黜。
English: Meteor strikes, minister ousted.

古文：黄、白气入，四辅有喜。
现代文：黄白气进入，四辅有喜事。
English: The yellow and white gasses enter, and four auspicious events take place.

古文：白气入，相失位。
现代文：白气进入，宰相失去职位。
English: The prime minister lost his position.

古文：五帝内坐五星，在华盖下，设叙顺，帝所居也。
现代文：五帝内座五颗星，在华盖下面，安排顺序次第，是大帝居住的地方。
English: Five stars in the constellation of the Five Emperors, below the flower cover, arranged in order, is the place where the great emperor lived.

古文：色正，吉；变色，为灾。
现代文：星色纯正，吉利；变色，是灾祸。
English: The star color is pure and auspicious; discoloration is a disaster.

古文：客星犯紫宫中坐，占为大臣犯主。
现代文：客星凌犯紫微垣中座，星占是大臣凌犯君主。
English: The guest star is the offender in the middle of the purple wall, and the horoscope is the minister offending the monarch.

古文：彗、孛犯之，民饥，大臣忧，三年有兵起。
现代文：彗星、变星凌犯，人民饥荒，大臣忧患，三年将有战争爆发。
English: Comets, changing stars, criminals, people starving, ministers worried, war will break out in three years.

古文：流星犯，为兵起、臣叛；出，为有诛戮。
现代文：流星凌犯，是战争爆发、臣子叛乱；流星冲出，是将有杀戮。
English: If a meteor strikes, it means war will break out and the vassals will revolt; if a meteor rushes out, it means there will be killing.

古文：云气入，色黄，太子即位，期六十日，赤黄，人君有异。
现代文：云气进入，星色黄，太子即位，期限六十天；星色赤黄，人君发生异常的事。
English: The clouds enter, the stars are yellow, the crown prince is enthroned, the period is sixty days; the stars are red and yellow, and unusual things happen to people.

古文：六甲六星，在华盖杠旁，主分阴阳，配节候，故在帝旁，所以布政教、授农时也。
现代文：六甲六颗星，在华盖杠的旁边，主管区分阴阳，调配节气物候，所以在大帝旁边，用来发布政教、传授农时。
English: The six-pointed star, next to the rim of the lantern, is responsible for distinguishing between yin and yang and adjusting the solar terms. Therefore, next to the great emperor, it is used to issue political education and teach agricultural time.

古文：明，则阴阳和；不明，则寒暑易节；星亡，水旱不时。
现代文：星色明亮，就会阴阳调和；不明亮，就会寒暑节气变换；星消亡，水旱就不按季节。
English: If the star is bright, the yin and yang will be harmonized; if it is not bright, the cold and hot seasons will change; if the star dies, the drought will not be seasonal.

古文：客星犯之，色赤，为旱；黑，为水；白，则人多疫。
现代文：客星凌犯，星色赤，是旱灾；星色黑，是水灾；星色白，那么百姓多有瘟疫。
English: The red star represents drought, the black star represents floods, and the white star represents plagues.

古文：彗、孛犯，女主出政令。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，女主颁布政令。
English: Comets and variable stars invade, and the mistress issues a decree.

古文：流星犯，为水旱，术士诛。
现代文：流星侵犯，是水灾旱灾，术士被诛杀。
English: Meteor invasion, floods and droughts, sorcerers killed in battle.

古文：云气犯，色黄，术士兴。
现代文：云气侵犯，星色黄，术士兴起。
English: The clouds encroach, the stars turn yellow, and sorcerers arise.

古文：苍白，史官受爵。
现代文：星色苍白，史官接受封爵。
English: Starry-eyed and pale, the historian receives a knighthood.

古文：柱史一星，在北极东，主记过，左右史之象。
现代文：柱史一颗星，在北极的束边，主管记录过失，是左史、右史的象征。
English: The pillar of history is a star. At the edge of the North Pole, the person in charge records mistakes. It is a symbol of left history and right history.

古文：一云在天柱前，司上帝之言动。
现代文：一说在天柱前边，执掌上帝的言语行动。
English: One speaks in front of the pillar of heaven, presiding over God's words and actions.

古文：星明，为史官得人；不明，反是。
现代文：星色明亮，是史官找到了合适的人选；不明亮，与此相反。
English: If the stars are bright, it is because the historian has found the right person; if they are dim, it is the opposite.

古文：客星犯之，史官有黜者。
现代文：客星凌犯，史官有被罢黜的。
English: Historians have been ousted for guest star abuses.

古文：彗、孛犯，太子忧，或百官黜。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，太子有忧患，如百官被罢黜。
English: Comets and variable stars invade, princes are troubled, and hundreds of officials are deposed.

古文：流星犯，君有咎。
现代文：流星侵犯，君主有过错。
English: Meteor strikes, monarch at fault.

古文：云气犯，色黄，史有爵禄。
现代文：云气侵犯，星色黄，史官有爵禄。
English: The clouds encroach, the stars are yellow, and the historian has a knighthood.

古文：苍白气入，左右史死。
现代文：苍白氯进入，左史、右史死。
English: Pale chlorine enters, and the left and right lobes die.

古文：女史一星，在柱史北，妇人之微者，主传漏。
现代文：女史一颗星，在柱史北边，是妇人中卑微的，主管报时。
English: Women's history is a star, on the north side of the column, it is the lowly among women, in charge of time.

古文：天柱五星，在东垣下，一云在五帝左稍前，主建政教。
现代文：天柱五颗星，在束垣下边，一说在五帝左边稍前，主管建立政教。
English: The five stars of the pillar of heaven, below the hedge, and a little ahead of the five emperors on the left, are responsible for the establishment of politics and religion.

古文：一曰法五行，主晦朔、昼夜之职。
现代文：一说以五行为法，主管晦朔、昼夜的职责。
English: One of them said that with the five behaviors, he was responsible for the day and night duties.

古文：明正，则吉，人安，阴阳调；不然，则司历过。
现代文：星光明亮纯正，就吉利，人民安定，阴阳调和；不这样，就主管记录过失。
English: If the stars are bright and pure, it is auspicious, the people are stable, and the yin and yang are in harmony; otherwise, the supervisor will record the fault.

古文：客星犯之，国中有贼。
现代文：客星凌犯，国家中有奸贼。
English: The guest star is a criminal, and there are traitors in the country.

古文：彗、孛犯，宗庙不安，君忧，一曰三公当之。
现代文：彗星、变星凌犯，宗庙不安定，君主有忧患，一说三公承担责任。
English: Comets, variable stars, unstable ancestral temples, and troubled monarchs are said to be the responsibilities of the three princes.

古文：云气赤黄，君喜；黑，三公死。
现代文：云气赤黄，君主高兴；云气黑色，三公死。
English: The clouds are red and yellow, the monarch is happy; the clouds are black, the three kings are dead.

古文：女御四星，在大帝北，一云在勾陈腹，一云在帝坐东北，御妻之象也。
现代文：女御四颗星，在大帝北边，一说在勾陈腹部，一说在帝星东北，御妻的象征。
English: On the north side of the great emperor, the empress has four stars, one in the abdomen, and one in the northeast of the imperial star, a symbol of the empress.

古文：星明，多内宠。
现代文：星色明亮，皇帝多内宠。
English: The starry sky is bright, and it is the emperor's favorite.

古文：客星犯之，后宫有诛，一云自戮。
现代文：客星凌犯，后宫有阴谋，一说自杀。
English: The guest star is a rapist, there is a conspiracy in the harem, and it is said that he committed suicide.

古文：孛、彗犯，后宫有诛。
现代文：变星、彗星凌犯，后宫将有诛杀之事。
English: If a variable star or comet were to intrude, the harem would fight to the death.

古文：流星犯，后宫有出者。一云外国进美女。
现代文：流星侵犯，后宫有被休弃的，一说外国进贡美女。
English: Meteor invasion, the harem has been abandoned, one said foreign tribute beauty.

古文：云气化黄，为后宫有子，喜；苍白，多病。
现代文：云气化为黄色，是后宫有生育子女的喜事；苍白色，多病。
English: The clouds turn yellow, and it is a happy event for the harem to have children; pale and sickly.

古文：尚书五星，在紫微东蕃内，大理东北，《晋志》在东南维，一云在天柱右稍前，主纳言，夙夜咨谋，龙作纳言之象。
现代文：尚书五颗星，在紫微垣柬蕃里面，大理东北，《晋书&;;天文志》说它在东南角，一说它在天柱右边稍前，主管纳言，白天黑夜咨询谋划，岁星作为纳言的象征。
English: Shangshu five stars, in the purple microhedge camphor, Dali Northeast, "Jinshu&;; Astronomy" said it was in the southeast corner, one said it was just before the right side of the pillar, the supervisor Nagan, day and night consultation and planning, the year star as a symbol of Nagan.

古文：彗、孛犯之，官有叛，或太子忧。
现代文：变星、彗星凌犯，官吏有人叛乱，或者太子有忧患。
English: Variable stars, comets, criminals, officials rebelling, or the crown prince in distress.

古文：流星若出，则尚书出使；犯之，谏官黜，八坐忧。
现代文：流星如果从尚书出去，那么尚书将出使；流星凌犯尚书，谏官被罢黜，八坐有忧患。
English: If the meteor goes out from Shangshu, then Shangshu will send an envoy; if the meteor violates Shangshu, the eunuch will be ousted, and the eight seats will be in trouble.

古文：云气入，黄，为喜；黄而赤，尚书出镇；黑，尚书有坐罪者。
现代文：云气进入，星色黄，是喜事；黄而且赤，尚书出任军镇；星色黑，尚书有犯法获罪的。
English: The clouds enter, the stars are yellow, it is a happy event; yellow and red, Shangshu serves as a military town; the stars are black, Shangshu has been convicted of a crime.

古文：大理二星，在宫门左，一云在尚书前，主平刑断狱。
现代文：大理二颗星，在宫门左边，一说在尚书前边，主管整治刑罚判决讼案。
English: Dali two stars, on the left side of the palace gate, one said in front of Shangshu, in charge of rectification of criminal sentence litigation.

古文：明，则刑宪平；不明，则狱有冤酷。
现代文：星色明亮，那么刑罚法令公平；星色不明亮，讼案有冤枉残酷。
English: If the star is bright, then the penal code is fair; if the star is not bright, then the lawsuit is unjustifiably cruel.

古文：客星犯之，贵臣下狱；色黄，赦；白，受戮；赤黄，无罪；守之，则刑狱冤滞，或刑官有黜。
现代文：客星凌犯，尊贵的大臣下狱；星色黄，赦免；星色白，受杀戮；星色赤黄，无罪；客星侵占大理，刑事诉讼出现冤枉滞碍，或者刑事官员被罢黜。
English: If the guest star commits a crime, the distinguished minister will be sent to prison; if the star is yellow, he will be pardoned; if the star is white, he will be killed; if the star is reddish-yellow, he will not be guilty; if the guest star encroaches on the territory of Dali, the criminal proceedings will be unjustly delayed, or the criminal official will be dismissed.

古文：彗犯，狱官忧；流星，占同。
现代文：彗星侵犯，主管刑狱的官员有忧患；流星，占法与彗星侵犯相同。
English: Comet intrusion, the officer in charge of the prison is worried; meteor, the same as comet intrusion.

古文：云气入，黄白，为赦；黑，法官黜。
现代文：云气进入，星色黄白，是赦免；黑色，审判讼案的官员被罢免。
English: The clouds are coming in, the stars are yellow and white, it's an amnesty; black, the officials involved in the lawsuit have been dismissed.

古文：阴德二星，巫咸图有之，在尚书西，甘氏云： 阴德外坐在尚书右，阳德外坐在阴德右，太阴太阳入垣翊卫也。 
现代文：阴德二颗星，巫咸的星图有它，在尚书西边，甘氏说： 阴阳外坐在尚书右，阳德外坐在阴德右，太阴太阳入垣翊卫也。
English: Yin and De are two stars, the star map of Wuxian has it at the top, on the west side of Shangshu, Mr. Gan said: Yin and Yang sit on the right side of Shangshu, Yang and De sit on the right side of Yin and De, and the sun enters the hedge and guards.

古文：《天官书》则以 前列直斗口三星，随北耑锐，若见若不见，曰阴德。 
现代文：《天官书》就用 前列直斗口三星，随北专锐，若见若不见，曰阴德。 
English: "The Book of Heaven's Officials" uses three stars in the front row for the straight mouth, and three stars for the north. If you see it, if you don't see it, it's Yin De.

古文：谓施德不欲人知也。
现代文：说明施予恩德却不想让人知道。
English: It's a way of saying that you're doing something nice for someone, but you don't want them to know.

古文：主周急振抚。
现代文：主管周全苊急、救济抚慰。
English: Supervisor Zhou Quan is in charge of emergency, relief and comfort.

古文：明，则立太子，或女主治天下。
现代文：星色明亮，就立太子，或有女主治理天下。
English: If the stars are bright, there will be a crown prince or empress to rule the world.

古文：客星犯之，为旱，饥；守之，发粟振给。
现代文：客星凌犯，是旱灾、饥荒；侵占阴德，发放粟物救济供给。
English: The guest star is drought, famine; invading and occupying the Yin and De, distributing cereal relief supplies.

古文：彗、孛犯，后宫有逆谋。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，后宫有叛逆的阴谋。
English: Comets, variable stars invade, harems plot treason.

古文：流星犯，君令不行。
现代文：流星侵犯，君主的旨令不能实行。
English: If the meteor strikes, the monarch's decree cannot be carried out.

古文：云气入，黄，为喜；青黑，为忧。
现代文：云气进入，色黄，是喜事；色青黑，是忧患。
English: The clouds enter, the yellow color is a happy event; the blue-black color is a sorrow.

古文：天床六星，在紫微垣南门外，主寝舍解息燕休。
现代文：天床六颗星，在紫微垣南门外，主管睡卧宿舍、松懈休息、饮宴休闲。
English: The six-star Heavenly Bed, located outside the south gate of Zi Weigaki, is responsible for sleeping quarters, relaxing rest, banqueting and leisure.

古文：一曰在二枢之间，备幸之所也。
现代文：一说在左枢右枢之间，预备皇帝临幸的地方。
English: It is said that between the left and right centers, there is a place where the emperor is preparing for the auspicious occasion.

古文：陶隐居云： 倾则天王失位。 
现代文：陶隐居说： 倾则天王失位。 
English: The Taoist hermit said, "If you do that, you will lose your throne."

古文：客星入宫中，有刺客，或内侍忧。
现代文：客星进入，宫中将有刺客，或者内侍有忧患。
English: When a guest star enters, there will be an assassin in the palace, or a chambermaid will be in trouble.

古文：彗、孛犯之，主忧，大臣失位。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，君主有忧患，大臣失去职位。
English: Comets and variable stars invade, the monarch is troubled, and ministers lose their posts.

古文：流星犯，后妃叛，女主立，或人君易位。
现代文：流星侵犯，后妃叛乱，女主即位，或者君主更换皇位。
English: Meteors invading, queens rebelling, mistresses ascending the throne, or monarchs changing the throne.

古文：云气入，色黄，天子得美女，后宫喜有子；苍白，主不安，青黑，忧；白，凶。
现代文：云气进入，星色黄，天子获得美女，后宫高兴有了皇子；星色苍白，君主不安，青黑色，君主有忧患；白色，君主有凶险。
English: The clouds enter, the stars are yellow, the heavenly son obtains a beautiful woman, the harem is happy to have a prince; the stars are pale, the monarch is uneasy, the blue-black, the monarch has sorrow; the white, the monarch has danger.

古文：华盖七星，杠九星，如盖有柄下垂，以覆大帝之坐也，在紫微宫临勾陈之上。
现代文：华盖七颗星，杠九颗星像华盖有伞把一样下垂，用来盖住大帝的宝座，在紫微垣临于勾陈的上面。
English: Huagai seven stars, bar nine stars like Huagai with umbrella handle hanging down, used to cover the throne of the great emperor, in the purple hedge on the top of the curtain.

古文：正，吉；倾，则凶。
现代文：星象端正，吉利；星象倾斜，有凶险。
English: The stars are aligned, auspicious; the stars are tilted, ominous.

古文：客星犯之，王室有忧，兵起。
现代文：客星凌犯，王室有忧患，战争爆发。
English: A guest star commits a crime, the royal family is in trouble, and war breaks out.

古文：彗、孛犯，兵起，国易政。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，战争爆发，国家改变政权。
English: Comets, variable stars invade, wars break out, countries change regimes.

古文：流星犯，兵起宫内，以赦解之；贯华盖，三公灾。
现代文：流星侵犯，战争从宫内爆发，用赦免罪犯来解救；流星横贯华盖，三公有灾祸。
English: Meteors invade, war breaks out in the palace, criminals are pardoned to save the day; meteors streak across the sky, and all three kingdoms are plagued.

古文：云气入，黄白，主喜；赤黄，侯王喜。
现代文：云气进入，星色黄白，君主有喜事；星色赤黄，侯王有喜事。
English: The clouds enter, the stars are yellow and white, the monarch has a happy event; the stars are red and yellow, the prince has a happy event.

古文：传舍九星，在华盖上，近河，宾客之馆，主北使入中国。
现代文：传舍九颗星，在华盖上边，接近银河，是宾客的旅馆，主管北方的使臣进入我国中原。
English: The Nine Stars Mission, on the upper side of Hua Gai, close to the Milky Way, is a guest hotel, responsible for the northern envoys entering the Central Plains of China.

古文：客星犯，邦有忧；一曰客星守之，备奸使；亦曰北地兵起。
现代文：客星侵犯，国家有忧患；一说客星占据传舍，戒备奸佞的使臣；也说北方地区战争爆发。
English: A guest star invades, the country is in distress; one says that the guest star occupies the mission house, guarding the envoys of the traitor; it is also said that war broke out in the northern region.

古文：彗、孛犯，守之，亦为北兵。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，占据传舍，也是北方有战争。
English: Comets and variable stars invade and occupy the mission house, and there is also war in the north.

古文：黑云气入，北兵侵中国。
现代文：黑色的云气进入，北方的军队将入侵我国中原。
English: Black clouds are coming in, and the northern army will invade the central plains of our country.

古文：八谷八星，在华盖西、五车北，一曰在诸王西。
现代文：八谷八颗星，在华盖西边，五车北边，一说在诸王西边。
English: The eight stars of the eight valleys are on the west side of Huagai, on the north side of Wuchang, and on the west side of Zhuwang.

古文：武密曰： 主候岁丰俭，一稻、二黍、三大麦、四小麦、五大豆、六小豆、七粟、八麻。 
现代文：武密说： 主候岁丰俭，一稻、二黍、三大麦、四小麦、五大豆、六小豆、七粟、八麻。 
English: Wu Mi said, "The Lord waits for a year of abundance. One rice, two stalks, three barley, four wheat, five beans, six red beans, seven millet, and eight hemp.

古文：甘氏曰： 八谷在宫北门之右，司亲耕，司候岁，司尚食。 
现代文：甘氏说： 八谷在官北门之右，司亲耕，司候岁，司尚食。 
English: Mr. Kan said, "Yatani is on the right side of the north gate of the government office.

古文：星明，吉；一星亡，一谷不登；八星不见，大饥。
现代文：星色明亮，吉利；一颗星隐匿不现，一种谷物不丰收；八颗星隐匿不现，大饥荒。
English: The stars are bright, auspicious; one star is hidden and does not appear, one kind of grain is not plentiful; eight stars are hidden and do not appear, great famine.

古文：客星入，谷贵。
现代文：客星进入，谷物昂贵。
English: The guest star enters, the grain is expensive.

古文：彗星入，为水。
现代文：彗星进入，水灾。
English: Comet comes in, floods.

古文：黑云气犯之，八谷不收。
现代文：黑色的云气俊犯，八种谷物都不丰收。
English: The black clouds are the culprits, and the eight kinds of grain are not plentiful.

古文：内阶六星，在文昌东北，天皇之阶也。
现代文：内阶六颗星，在文昌东北，是天皇的台阶。
English: The six stars on the inner steps, in the northeast of Wenchang, are the steps of the emperor.

古文：一曰上帝幸文馆之内阶也。
现代文：一说是上帝临幸文馆的内阶。
English: It is said to be the inner staircase of the Gospodarinko Library.

古文：明，吉；倾动，忧。
现代文：星色明亮，吉利；倾斜浮动，有忧患。
English: Starry bright, auspicious; tilt floating, there are worries.

古文：彗、孛、客、流星犯之，人君逊避之象。
现代文：彗星、变星、客星、流星凌犯，是君主退位逃避的象征。
English: Comets, variable stars, guest stars and meteors are symbols of the abdication of the monarch.

古文：文昌六星，在北斗魁前、紫微垣西，天之六府也，主集计天道。
现代文：文昌六颗星，在北斗的斗魁前面，紫微垣的西边，是天上的六府，丰管集体策划天道。
English: Wenchang six stars, in front of the leader of the Big Dipper, on the west side of the Purple Weak Wall, are the six prefectures in the sky, and Fengguan collectively plans the heavenly way.

古文：一曰上将、大将军，建威武；二曰次将、尚书，正左右；三曰贵相、大常，理文绪；四曰司禄、司中、司隶，赏功进；五曰司命、司怪、太史，主灭咎；六曰司寇、大理，佐理宝。
现代文：一叫上将、大将军，建立威武；二叫次将、尚书，端正左右；三叫贵相、大常，治理礼乐文章事业；四叫司禄、司中、司隶，劝赏军功和仕进；五叫司命、司怪、太史，主管消灭遇错；六叫司寇、大理，辅佐治理财宝。
English: One is called the admiral, the general, to establish military might; the second is called the second general, Shangshu, to straighten up the left and right; the third is called the noble, the great, to govern the liturgy; the fourth is called the seru, the secretary, and the subordinate, to commend military service and promotion; the fifth is called the secretary, the secretary, and the historian, to eliminate mistakes; the sixth is called the secretary, the magistrate, and the assistant to manage the treasure.

古文：所谓一者，起北斗魁前近内阶者也。
现代文：所说的第一颗星，是指从北斗斗魁前面、靠近内阶的那颗星。
English: The so-called "first" refers to the star that has been close to the inner circle since before the Big Dipper.

古文：明润色黄，大小齐，天瑞臻，四海安；青黑微细，则多所残害；动摇，三公黜。
现代文：星色明亮润泽呈黄色，大小齐整，天的祥瑞呈现，四海安定；星色青黑细微，就有很多伤残杀害的事情；星色动摇，三公被罢黜。
English: The stars are bright and yellow, the size is uniform, the sky is auspicious, and the four seas are stable; the stars are blue and black, and there are many cases of maiming and killing; the stars are wavering, and the three princes are ousted.

古文：月晕其宿，大赦。
现代文：在它的星宿地位发生月晕，大赦。
English: In its sidereal position, the Moon fades, amnesties.

古文：岁星守之，兵起。
现代文：岁星占据它的位置，战争爆发。
English: The year star takes its place and war breaks out.

古文：荧惑守之，将凶。
现代文：荧惑星占据它的位置，将有凶险。
English: The fluorescent planet will occupy its place, and there will be peril.

古文：太白守、入，兵兴。
现代文：太白星占据它的位置，战争发生。
English: Too white star takes its place, war happens.

古文：填星守，国安。
现代文：镇星侵占，国家安定。
English: Town star occupation, national stability.

古文：客星守，大臣叛。
现代文：客星侵占，大臣叛乱。
English: A guest star encroaches, a minister mutinies.

古文：彗、孛犯，大乱。
现代文：彗星、变星凌犯，天下大乱。
English: Comets and variable stars intrude, and the world is thrown into turmoil.

古文：流星犯，宫内乱。
现代文：流星侵犯，宫内动乱。
English: Meteors invade, turmoil in the womb ensues.

古文：三公三星，在北斗杓南及魁第一星西，一云在斗柄东，为太尉、司徒、司空之象。
现代文：三公三颗星，在北斗斗杓的南边，以及斗魁第一星的西边，一说在斗柄的束边，是太尉、司徒、司空的象征。
English: The three kings and three stars, on the south side of the Big Dipper, as well as on the west side of the first star of the leader, are said to be on the edge of the handle of the bucket. They are the symbols of Taifeng, Szeto, and Sikuo.

古文：在魁西者名三师，占与三公同，皆主宣德化、调七政、和阴阳之官也。
现代文：在斗魁西边的叫三师，占法与三公相同，都是主管宣扬德行教化，调理七政，调和阴阳的官。
English: The so-called Three Divisions on the west side of Tuo Kui are the same as the Three Kings. They are the officials in charge of promoting virtue and enlightenment, regulating the seven political systems, and reconciling yin and yang.

古文：移徙，不吉；居常，则安；一星亡，天下危；二星亡，天下乱；三星不见，天下不治。
现代文：三星迁徙移动，不吉利；地位正常，就安定；一颗星隐匿不现，天下危急；两颗星隐匿不现，天下大乱；三颗星都不出现，天下得不到治理。
English: Three stars migrate and move, which is unlucky; if the status is normal, it is stable; if one star is hidden and does not appear, the world is in crisis; if two stars are hidden and do not appear, the world is in chaos; if three stars do not appear, the world cannot be governed.

古文：客星犯，三公忧。
现代文：客星凌犯，三公有忧患。
English: If a guest star commits sexual assault, the three kingdoms will be in trouble.

古文：彗、孛及流星犯之，三公死。
现代文：彗星、变星以及流星侵犯，三公死。
English: Comets, variable stars and meteors invade, and three people die.

古文：天牢六星，在北斗魁下，贵人之牢也，主绳愆禁暴。
现代文：天牢六颗星，在北斗斗魁的下边，是贵人的监牢，主管制裁罪遇禁止暴虐。
English: The six-star Heaven's Prison, below the Big Dipper, is a prison for nobles. The person in charge of sanctioning crimes forbids brutality.

古文：甘氏云： 贱人之牢也。 
现代文：甘氏说： 贱人之牢也。 
English: Mr. Kan said, "Prison is no place for a slut."

古文：月晕入，多盗。
现代文：月晕进入，盗贼多。
English: The moon enters the halo, thieves abound.

古文：荧惑犯之，民相食，国有败兵。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯，民间人吃人，国家有打了败仗的兵士。
English: Fluorescent planets invade, civilians eat people, and the country has soldiers who have lost the war.

古文：太白、岁星守，国多犯法。
现代文：太白星、岁星侵占，国内犯法的人很多。
English: Too white star, year star encroach, domestic law-breakers abound.

古文：客星、彗星犯之，三公下狱，或将相忧。
现代文：客星、彗星侵犯，三公入狱，或者将相有忧患。
English: Invaded by a guest star or a comet, the three princes will go to prison, or they will be in trouble.

古文：流星犯之，有赦宥之令。
现代文：流星凌犯，有赦罪宽免的命令。
English: The order to pardon the crime and grant clemency to the perpetrator of meteorite assault.

古文：势四星，在太阳守西北，一曰在玑星北。
现代文：势四颗星，在太阳守的西北，一说在玑星北边。
English: Four stars, in the northwest of the sun, one said to be in the north of the Pleiades.

古文：势，腐形人也，主助宣王命，内常侍官也。
现代文：势，是受宫刑的人，主持帮助宣布君王的命令，是宫内常侍的宦官。
English: It is the eunuch who presides over and helps to announce the king's orders, and is the eunuch of the palace attendant.

古文：以不明为吉，明则阉人擅权。
现代文：以星色不明亮为吉利，明亮就要有闱人专权。
English: It is good luck to have a star that is not very bright, but if it is bright, it is necessary to have exclusive rights.

古文：天理四星，在北斗魁中，贵人之牢也。
现代文：天理四颗星，在北斗的斗魁中，是贵人的监牢。
English: The four stars of the celestial law, in the battle of the Big Dipper, are the prison of the nobles.

古文：星不欲明，其中有星则贵人下狱。
现代文：星木要明亮，其中有星就有贵人入狱。
English: The asterisks should be bright, and among them there is a star with a noble person in prison.

古文：客星犯，多狱。
现代文：客星凌犯，多讼案。
English: Guest star assault, multiple lawsuits.

古文：彗、孛犯之，国危。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，国家危急。
English: Comet, variable star intrusion, national emergency.

古文：赤云气犯之，兵大起，将相行兵。
现代文：赤色云气侵犯，战争大规模爆发，将相带兵作战。
English: Red clouds encroach, war breaks out on a large scale, and troops are brought in to fight.

古文：相一星，在北斗第四星南，总百司，集众事，掌邦典，以佐帝王。
现代文：相一颗星，在北斗第四星南边，总管各个部门，集中各种事宜，执掌国家典籍，用来辅佐帝王。
English: On one star, on the south side of the fourth star of the Big Dipper, the general manager of various departments, concentrates various matters, holds the national classics, and is used to assist the emperor.

古文：一曰在中斗文昌之南，在朝少师行大宰者。
现代文：一说在中斗文昌的南边，在朝廷中以少师官阶充当首相的官员。
English: One is said to be in the south of Zhongdou Wenchang, in the imperial court, with a small number of officials serving as the prime minister's officials.

古文：明，吉；暗，凶；亡，则相黜。
现代文：星色明亮，吉利；星色暗淡，凶险；隐匿不现，宰相就被罢黜。
English: The stars are bright and auspicious; the stars are dim and dangerous; the prime minister is dismissed if he does not appear.

古文：太阳守一星，在相星西北、斗第三星西南，大将、大臣之象，主设武备以戒不虞。
现代文：太阳守一颗星，在相星的西北，北斗第三星的西南，是大将大臣的象征，主管建设军备以戒备不测的事变。
English: The sun keeps a star, in the northwest of the phase star, the southwest of the third star of the Big Dipper, is the symbol of the general minister, in charge of building armaments to guard against unforeseen events.

古文：一曰在下台北，太尉官也，在朝少傅行大司马者。
现代文：一说在下台的北面，是太尉官，是在朝廷中以少傅官阶充当大司马的官员。
English: It is said that on the north side of the step-down, there is a lieutenant-commander, an official who acts as a great steed in the imperial court with a minor official rank.

古文：明，吉；暗，凶。
现代文：星色明亮，吉利；星色暗淡，凶险。
English: The stars are bright and auspicious; the stars are dim and dangerous.

古文：客、彗、孛犯之，为易政，将相忧，兵乱。
现代文：客星、彗星、变星凌犯，是变更政权，将相有忧患，军队叛乱。
English: A guest star, a comet, a changing star, a criminal, a change of regime, a crisis, an army mutiny.

古文：云气入，黄，为喜；苍白，将死；赤，大臣忧。
现代文：云气进入，星色黄，是喜事；星色苍白，将自巾死；星色赤红，大臣有忧患。
English: The clouds enter, the stars are yellow, it is a happy event; the stars are pale, they will die; the stars are red, the minister is in trouble.

古文：内厨二星，在紫微垣西南外，主六宫之内饮食及后妃夫人与太子燕饮。
现代文：内厨二颗星，在紫微垣西南方的外面，主管六宫里面的饮食，以及后妃、夫人与太子的饮宴。
English: The two stars of the inner kitchen, outside the south-west of Ziyi Weigaki, are in charge of the food inside the Six Palace, as well as the banquet of the Empress, the Lady and the Prince.

古文：彗、孛或流星犯之，饮食有毒。
现代文：彗星、变星或流星侵犯，饮食中有毒。
English: Comets, variable stars or meteors invade, and the diet is poisonous.

古文：天厨六星，在扶筐北，一曰在东北维外，主盛馔，今光禄厨也。
现代文：天厕六颗星，在扶筐的北面，一说在东北维的外面，主管丰盛的饮食，就是如今的光禄厨。
English: The six-pointed star in the sky, to the north of the basket, outside the northeastern direction, is responsible for the rich diet, which is today's Guanglu Cuisine.

古文：星亡，则饥；不见，为凶。
现代文：星消亡，就有饥荒；隐匿不现，是凶兆。
English: When the stars die, there is famine; when they disappear, it is a bad omen.

古文：客星、流星犯之，亦为饥。
现代文：客星、流星侵犯，也是饥荒。
English: Invasions by shooting stars and meteors are also signs of famine.

古文：天一一星，在紫微宫门右星南，天帝之神也，主战斗，知吉凶。
现代文：天一一颗星，在紫微垣闾阖尸弓右边星的南面，是天帝的神，主管战斗，预知吉凶。
English: One star in the sky, to the south of the star on the right side of the purple-and-brown dragonfly's body, is the god of the celestial emperor, who is in charge of battles and foresees fortunes and misfortunes.

古文：明，则阴阳和，万物盛，人君吉；亡，则天下乱。
现代文：星色明亮，那么阴阳调和，万物兴盛，君主吉利；这颗星消亡，那么天下大乱。
English: The star is bright, so yin and yang are in harmony, everything prospers, the monarch is lucky; this star dies, then the world is in turmoil.

古文：客星犯，五谷贵。
现代文：客星侵犯，五谷昂贵。
English: The guest star encroaches, the grain is expensive.

古文：彗、孛犯之，臣叛。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，大臣叛乱。
English: Comets, invading variable stars, ministers rebelling.

古文：流星犯，兵起，民流。
现代文：流星侵犯，战争爆发，人民流亡。
English: Meteors invade, war breaks out, people flee.

古文：云气犯，黄，君臣和；黑，宰相黜。
现代文：云气侵犯，星色黄，君臣和谐；星色黑，宰相被罢黜。
English: The clouds encroach, the stars are yellow, the monarchs and ministers are harmonious; the stars are black, and the prime minister is ousted.

古文：太一一星，在天一南相近一度，亦天帝神也，主使十六神，知风雨、水旱、兵革、饥馑、疾疫、灾害所在之国也。
现代文：太一一颗星，在天一的南面靠近一度的位置，也是天帝的神，主管驱使十六神，预知风雨、水灾旱灾、兵马战乱、饥荒、疾病瘟疫、灾害所在的国家。
English: It is also the god of the celestial emperor, who is in charge of driving the sixteen gods to predict the wind and rain, floods and droughts, wars, famines, diseases and plagues, and disasters in the country.

古文：明，吉；暗，凶；离位，有水旱。
现代文：星色明亮，吉利；星色暗淡，凶险；偏离星位，有水灾旱灾。
English: The star is bright, auspicious; the star is dim, dangerous; it deviates from the star, there are floods and droughts.

古文：客星犯，兵起，民流，火灾，水旱，饥馑。
现代文：客星凌犯，战争爆发，人民流亡，火灾，水灾旱灾，饥荒。
English: Invaders, war, exodus, fire, flood, drought, famine.

古文：彗、孛犯，兵、丧。
现代文：彗星、变星凌犯，有战争、丧事。
English: Comets, variable stars, war, and death.

古文：流星犯，宰相、史官黜。
现代文：流星侵犯，宰相、史官被罢黜。
English: A meteor strikes, and the prime minister and historian are ousted.

古文：云气犯，黄白，百官受赐；赤为旱、兵；苍白，民多疫。
现代文：云气侵犯，星色黄白，百宫受到赏赐；星色赤红是旱灾、战争；星色苍白，那么人民多有瘟疫。
English: When the clouds encroach, the stars are yellow and white, and the hundred palaces are rewarded; when the stars are red, it is drought and war; when the stars are pale, then the people are plagued.

古文：天枪三星，在北斗杓东。
现代文：天枪三颗星，在北斗斗杓束。
English: Tianzhu three stars, in the Big Dipper bunch.

古文：一曰天钺，天之武备也，故在紫微宫左右，所以御难也。
现代文：一叫天铁，是天的军备，所以在紫微垣左右，用来抵御国难。
English: One is called Tian Tie, which is the sky's armament, so it is used to resist the national calamity around Zi Weigaki.

古文：明，吉；暗、小，兵败；芒角动，兵起。
现代文：星色明亮，吉利；暗淡、微小，战争失败；星的光芒颤动，战争爆发。
English: The stars are bright and auspicious; dim and small, the war is lost; the stars flicker, the war breaks out.

古文：客星、彗星、流星犯，皆为兵、饥。
现代文：客星、彗星、流星侵犯，都是战争、饥荒。
English: Invasions by guest stars, comets, and meteors are all caused by war and famine.

古文：天棓五星，在女床北，天子先驱也，主分争与刑罚藏兵，亦所以御难，备非常也。
现代文：天棓五颗星，在女床的北面，是天子的前导，主管排解争端和刑罚隐藏兵器，也是用来抵御国难，防备变故。
English: The five stars of the heavens, on the north side of the female bed, are the forerunners of the heavenly son, responsible for resolving disputes and punishments. The hidden weapons are also used to resist national difficulties and prevent misfortune.

古文：一星不具，其国兵起；明，有忧；细微，吉。
现代文：一颗星不具备，对应的国家爆发战争；星色明亮，有忧患；星色细微，吉利。
English: If a star does not exist, the corresponding country will go to war; if the star is bright, there will be trouble; if the star is faint, there will be good luck.

古文：客星入，兵、丧。
现代文：客星凌犯，有战争、丧事。
English: A guest star commits a crime, there is a war, a funeral.

古文：彗星守，兵起。
现代文：彗星侵占，战争爆发。
English: Comet invades, war breaks out.

古文：流星犯，诸侯多争。
现代文：流星侵犯，诸侯多争端。
English: Meteors invade, feuding lords clash.

古文：云气犯，苍白、黑，为凶。
现代文：云气侵犯，星色苍白、黑色，都是凶险。
English: Cloud intrusion, starry pale, black, are all dangerous.

古文：天戈一星，又名玄戈，在招摇北，主北方。
现代文：天戈一颗星，又叫玄戈，在招摇的北面，主管北方。
English: Tengo a star, also known as Xengo, in the swaggering north, in charge of the north.

古文：芒角动摇，则北兵起。
现代文：星的光芒动摇，那么北方战争爆发。
English: The light of the star wavered, then the Northern War broke out.

古文：客星守之，北兵败。
现代文：客星侵占，北方军队失败。
English: The guest star invaded and occupied, and the northern army failed.

古文：彗、孛、流星犯之，占同。
现代文：彗星、变星、流星侵犯，占法与彗星侵占相同。
English: Comets, variable stars, and meteors invade, occupying the same way as comets.

古文：云气犯，黑，为北兵退；苍白，北人病。
现代文：云气侵犯，星色黑，是北方军队撤退；星色苍白，北方人得病。
English: The clouds encroach, the stars are dark, the northern army retreats; the stars are pale, and the northerners fall ill.

古文：太尊一星，在中台北，贵戚也。
现代文：太尊一颗星，在中台的北面，是贵人的亲戚。
English: Taizun, a star in the north of Zhongtai, is a relative of the noble.

古文：不见，为忧。
现代文：隐匿不现，是忧患。
English: Concealment without manifestation is a sorrow.

古文：客、彗、流星犯之，并为贵戚将败之徵。
现代文：客星、彗星、流星侵犯，都是贵人的亲戚将要衰败的征兆。
English: The invasion of a guest star, comet or meteor are all signs that your relative is about to decline.

古文：按《步天歌》载，中宫紫微垣经星常宿可名者三十五坐，积数一百六十有四。
现代文：按《步天歌》记载，中宫紫微垣中经常见到可以叫出名字的星宿就有三十五座，总数一百六十四颗星。
English: According to the "Walking Song of Heaven," there are thirty-five stars that can be called by name, with a total of one hundred and sixty-four stars.

古文：而《晋志》所载太尊、天戈、天枪、天棓皆属太微垣，八谷八星在天市垣，与《步天歌》不同。
现代文：而《晋书，天文志》所记载的太尊、天戈、天枪、天桔都属于太微垣，八谷八星在天市垣中，与《步天歌》不同。
English: However, the Taizong, Tengo, Tianyu, and Tianju recorded in the "Jinshu, Astronomical History" all belong to the Taibai Mountains, and the eight valleys and eight stars are in the Tianshi Mountains, which is different from the "Walking Song of Heaven."

古文：太微垣太微垣十星，《汉志》曰： 南宫朱鸟，权、衡。 
现代文：太微垣十颗星，《汉书，天文志》说： 南宫朱乌，权、衡。 
English: "Hanshu, Astronomical History" says that the ten stars of Taibiao are: Nangu, Zhu, Wu, Weigh, and Balance.

古文：《晋志》曰： 天子庭也，五帝之坐也，十二诸侯之府也。
现代文：《晋书，天文志》说： 是天子庭也，五帝之坐也，十二诸侯之府也。
English: "Jinshu, An Astronomical History" says: It is also the heavenly garden, the seat of the five emperors, and the capital of the twelve princes.

古文：其外蕃，九卿也。
现代文：其外藩星，九卿也。
English: Its outer screen is the Nine Lords.

古文：一曰太微为衡，衡主平也；又为天庭，理法平辞，监升授德，列宿受符，诸神考节，舒情稽疑也。
现代文：一日太微为衡，衡主平也；又为天庭，理法平辞，监升授德，列宿受符，诸神考节，舒情稽疑。
English: One day is too small to be a standard, and the standard itself is too small; it is also the heavenly court, the level of reason, the level of law, the level of virtue, the level of accommodation, the level of festivals, and the level of comfort.

古文：南蕃中二星间曰端门。
现代文：南蕃中二星间曰端门。
English: The door between the two stars of Nanlu Middle School is called the end door.

古文：东曰左执法，廷尉之象。
现代文：束曰左执法，廷尉之象。
English: Sokcho is said to be a left-wing law enforcement officer, like a courtier.

古文：西曰右执法，御史大夫之象。
现代文：西曰右执法，御史大夫之象。
English: The West says, "Enforce the law on the right, and you will become a doctor of history."

古文：执法所以举刺凶邪。
现代文：执法所以举刺凶邪。
English: For law enforcement, stabbing is evil.

古文：左执法东，左掖门也。
现代文：左执法束，左掖门也。
English: The left side of the law enforcement, the left side of the gate.

古文：右执法西，右掖门也。
现代文：右执法西右掖门也。
English: Right-wing law enforcement is also on the rise.

古文：东蕃四星：南第一曰上相，其北，东太阳门也；第二曰次相，其北，中华东门也；第三曰次将，其北，东太阴门也；第四曰上将，所谓四辅也。
现代文：东蕃四星：南第一日上相，其北束太阳门也；第一曰次相，其北中华东门也；第三曰次将，其北东太阴门也；第四日上将，所谓四辅也。
English: The four stars of the Eastern Zodiac: on the first day of the South, the Upper Phase, the North Star Gate is also; on the first day of the Second Phase, the North East China East Gate is also; on the third day of the Second Phase, the North East Yin Gate is also; on the fourth day of the Upper Phase, the so-called Four Auxiliary Gates are also.

古文：西蕃四星：南第一曰上将，其北，西太阳门也；第二曰次将，其北，中华西门也；第三曰次相，其北，西太阴门也；第四曰上相，亦曰四辅也。 
现代文：西蕃四星：南第一日上将，其北西太阳门也；第二日次将，其北中华西门也；第三日次相，其北西太阴门也；第四日上相，亦曰四辅也。 
English: The four stars of Xidi: on the first day of the South, the general, and on the second day the northwest sun gate; on the second day the general, and on the third day the northwest sun gate; on the fourth day the superior phase, and on the fifth day the four auxiliary phases.

古文：《汉志》： 环卫十二星，蕃臣：西，将；东，相；南四星，执法；中，端门；左右，掖门。 
现代文：《漠书，天文志》： 环卫十二星，蕃臣：西，将；束，相；南四星，执法；中，端门；左右，掖门。 
English: "Moses, the Astronomer": Twelve stars of environmental protection, officials: west, will; bunch, phase; south four stars, law enforcement; middle, end gate; left and right, gate.

古文：《乾象新书》：十星，东西各五，在翼、轸北。
现代文：《干象新书》：十颗星，东西各五颗，在翼宿、干宿北面。
English: "Dry Elephant New Book": Ten stars, five each for east and west, in the north of Tsubasa and Genshuku.

古文：其西蕃北星为上相，南门右星为右执法。
现代文：它的西蕃北边的星是上相，南门右边的星是右执法。
English: The star on the north side of its west gate is the upper phase, and the star on the right side of the south gate is the right enforcement.

古文：东西蕃有芒及动摇者，诸侯谋上。
现代文：束、西蕃有光芒并动摇的星，诸侯图谋犯上。
English: The stars of Sokcho and Xidi are shining and wavering, and the princes are plotting against them.

古文：执法移，刑罚尤急。
现代文：执法星移动，刑罚太急迫。
English: The enforcement star moves, the penalty is too urgent.

古文：月、五星入太微轨道，吉；其所犯中坐，成刑。
现代文：月亮、五星，进入太微垣的轨道，吉利；它所凌犯的星是中座，完成刑罚。
English: The moon, the five stars, enter the orbit of the great wall, auspicious; the star it transgresses is the middle seat, completing the punishment.

古文：月犯太微垣，辅臣恶之，又君弱臣强，四方兵不制；犯执法，《海中占》云： 将相有免者期三年。 
现代文：月亮侵犯太微垣，辅佐大臣厌恶这种情况，又君主衰弱臣下强悍，四方的军队不合制度；月亮侵犯执法，《海中占》说： 将相有免者期三年。 
English: The moon encroaches too far, the assistant minister abhors this situation, the monarch is weak and the vassals are strong, the army of the four sides is not in accordance with the system; the moon encroaches on law enforcement, "Hai Zhongzhan" said: there will be a three-year exemption period.

古文：月入东西门、左右掖门，而南出端门，有叛臣，君忧；入西门，出东门，君忧，大臣假主威。
现代文：月亮进入东西门、左右掖门，并向南出端门，有叛逆之臣，君主有忧患；进入西门，从束门出去，君主有忧患，大臣假藉君主的权威。
English: When the moon enters the East-West Gate, the Left-Right Gate, and the South-East Gate, there is a rebellious vassal, and the monarch is in distress; when it enters the West Gate, and goes out from the Shackle Gate, the monarch is in distress, and the minister is taking advantage of the monarch's authority.

古文：月中犯乘守四辅，为臣失礼，辅臣有诛。
现代文：月亮当空侵犯太微垣并乘机占据四辅，是臣下失去礼仪，辅佐大臣被杀。
English: When the moon invaded Taiweigaki in the air and took the opportunity to occupy Shifu, it was the vassal who lost the etiquette, and the assistant minister was killed.

古文：月晕，天子以兵自卫。
现代文：月晕，天子带军队保卫自己。
English: The moon is faint, and the Son of Heaven is leading an army to defend Himself.

古文：一月三晕太微，有赦。
现代文：一个月内太微垣出现三次月晕，有赦免。
English: Within a month, Tao Weigaki had three bouts of menorrhagia and was pardoned.

古文：月食太微，大臣忧，王者恶之。
现代文：月亮掩食太微垣，大臣有忧患，王者厌恶这种情况。
English: The moon occultation is too weak, the minister is worried, and the king is disgusted with this situation.

古文：岁星入，有赦；犯之，执法臣有忧；入东门，天下有急兵；守之，将、相、执法宪臣死；入端门，守天庭，大祸至；入南门，出东门，旱；入南门，逆出西门，国有丧；逆行入东门，出西门，国破亡。
现代文：岁星进入，有赦免；岁星侵犯，执法大臣有忧患；进入束门，天下将有紧急战事；侵占，将、相、执法官、御史死；进入端门，占据天庭，大祸来到；进入南门，从束门出去，旱灾；进入南门，逆向从西门出去，国家有丧事；逆向进入束门，从西门出去，国家破败灭亡。
English: When the year star enters, there is amnesty; when the year star encroaches, the minister of law enforcement is in distress; when it enters the bunch gate, there will be an emergency war; when it encroaches, the general, the minister, the magistrate, and the historian will die; when it enters the end gate, it will occupy the heavenly court, and a great disaster will come; when it enters the south gate, it will go out of the bunch gate, and there will be a drought; when it enters the south gate, it will go out of the west gate in the opposite direction, and the country will have a tragedy; when it enters the bunch gate in the opposite direction,

古文：填星、荧惑犯之，逆行入，为兵、丧；犯上将，上将忧；守端门，国破亡，或三公谋上，有戮臣；犯西上将，天子战于野，上相死；入太微，色白无芒，天下饥；退行不正，有大狱；犯太微门，左右将死；入天庭在屏星南，出左掖门左将死，右掖门右将死，直出端门无咎；入太微，凌犯、留止，为兵，入二十日，廷尉当之，留天庭十日有赦；犯太微东南陬，岁饥，执法大臣忧；犯上相，大臣死。
现代文：镇星、荧惑星凌犯，逆向进入，是战争、丧事；凌犯上将，上将有忧患；侵占端门，国家破败灭亡，或者三公图谋犯上，有大臣被杀；凌犯西上将，天子在荒野上争战上相死；进入太微垣，星色苍白没有光芒，天下饥荒；倒退运行不正，有大的讼案；侵犯太微门，左将右将死；在屏星南面进入天庭，出左掖门左将死，出右掖门右将死，直接出端门无凶险；进入太微垣，凌犯、占据，是战争，进入二十天廷尉承担责任，占据天庭十天有赦免；凌犯太微垣东南角，年成饥荒，执法大臣有忧患；凌犯上相，大臣死。
English: Town star, fluorescent planet trespassing, reverse entry, is war, funeral; trespassing on the general, the general will have sorrow; trespassing on the end gate, the country will be ruined and destroyed, or on the three public plots, a minister will be killed; trespassing on the west general, the heavenly sons will fight and die in the wilderness; entering the Taimiao Gate, the star color is pale and there is no light, the world is starving; backward operation is not correct, there is a big lawsuit; trespassing on the Taimiao Gate, the left will die; entering the Heavenly Garden on the south side of the screen star,

古文：填星犯入太微，有德令，女主执政。
现代文：土星凌犯太微垣，实施有德行的政令，女主执政。
English: Saturn transiting the ecliptic is too weak, virtuous decrees are implemented, and the empress is in power.

古文：若逆行执法、四辅，守之，有忧；守太微，国破；守西蕃，王者忧。
现代文：如果逆向运行到执法、四辅，侵占它们，有忧患；侵占太微垣，国家破败；侵占西蕃，王者有忧患。
English: If it runs in the opposite direction to the enforcement of the law and the four auxiliary organs and encroaches on them, there will be trouble; if it encroaches on Taibugaki, the country will be ruined; if it encroaches on Xidi, the king will be in trouble.

古文：太白犯入太微，为兵，大臣相杀；留守，有兵、丧；与填星犯太微中，王者恶之；入右掖门，从端门出，贵人夺势；昼见太微，国有兵、丧。
现代文：太白星凌犯太微垣，是战争，大臣自相残杀；占据太微垣，有战争、丧事；太白星与镇星一起侵犯太微垣中央，王者厌恶这种情况；进入右掖门，从端门出去，贵人争权夺势；白天看到太微垣，国家有战争、丧事。
English: If Taibai Xing violated Taibai Wall, it was war, and the ministers killed each other; if he occupied Taibai Wall, there was war and mourning; if Taibai Star and Zhenxing invaded the center of Taibai Wall together, the king was disgusted with this situation; if he entered the right gate and went out from the end gate, the nobles were competing for power; if he saw Taibai Wall during the day, the country was at war and mourning.

古文：月掩太白于端门外，国受兵。
现代文：月亮在端门掩食太白星，外国遭受战争。
English: The moon eclipses the white star at the end of the gate, and foreign countries suffer from war.

古文：辰星犯太微，天子当之，有内乱；入天庭，后宫忧，大水；守左右执法，入，兵起，有赦；入西门，后宫灾，大水；入西门，出东门，为兵、丧、水灾。
现代文：辰星侵犯太微垣，天子担当责任，有内乱；进入天庭，后宫有忧患，发大水；占据左右执法，进入，战争爆发，有赦免；进入西门，后宫有灾祸，发大水；进入西门，从束门出去，是战争、丧事、水灾。
English: When the morning star invades the afternoon star, the son of heaven assumes responsibility, and there is civil strife; when it enters the heavenly court, there is sorrow in the harem, and there is a flood; when it occupies the left and right law enforcement, it enters, war breaks out, and there is amnesty; when it enters the west gate, there is disaster in the harem, and there is a flood; when it enters the west gate, and goes out from the bund gate, it is war, bereavement, and flood.

古文：客星犯入太微，色黄白，天子喜；出入端门，国有忧；左掖门，旱；右掖门，国乱；出天庭，有苛令，兵起；入太微三十日，有赦；犯四辅，辅臣凶。
现代文：客星凌犯侵入太微垣，星色黄白，天子有喜事；从端门出入，国家有忧患；从左掖门出入，有旱灾；从右掖门出入，国家动乱；从天庭出去，有苛酷的法令，战争爆发；进入太微垣三十天，有赦免；凌犯四辅，辅佐大臣有凶险。
English: When a guest star trespasser enters Taimiao, the stars are yellow and white, and the son of heaven has a happy event; when he goes out of the end gate, the country is in trouble; when he goes out of the left gate, there is a drought; when he goes out of the right gate, the country is in turmoil; when he goes out of heaven, there are harsh decrees and war breaks out; when he enters Taimiao for 30 days, there is an amnesty; when he goes out of the left gate, there is a drought; when he goes out of the right gate, the country is in turmoil; when he goes out of heaven, there are harsh decre

古文：彗星犯太微，天下易；出太微，宫中忧，火灾；犯执法，执法者黜；犯天庭，王者有立；孛于翼，近太微上将，为兵、丧；孛于西蕃，主革命；孛五帝，亡国杀君。
现代文：彗星侵犯太微垣，天下改换朝代；从太微垣出去，宫中有忧患，有火灾；侵犯执法，执法的官员要被罢黜；侵犯天庭，有王者即位；变星在翼宿，靠近太微垣的上将星，是战争、丧事；变星在西蕃，预示天命朝代更替；变星在五帝，国家灭亡君主被杀。
English: Comets invade Taimokugaki, the world changes dynasties; when they leave Taimokugaki, there is sorrow and fire in the palace; when they invade law enforcement, law enforcement officials are to be ousted; when they invade the heavenly court, a king is enthroned; when the variable star is in Tsubasa, close to Taimokugaki's Admiral Star, it is war and death; when the variable star is in Saitama, it foreshadows the fate of heaven and the replacement of dynasties; when the variable star is in the Five Emperors, the country perishes and the monarch is killed.

古文：流星出太微，大臣有外事；出南门甚众，贵人有死者；纵横太微宫，主弱臣强；由端门入翼，光照地有声，有立王。
现代文：流星从太微垣出去，大臣将有国外之事；从南门出去的流星很多，有贵人死亡；在太微垣内恣肆横行，是君主软弱臣下强悍；从端门进入翼宿，星光照耀大地有声，有被扶立之王。
English: Meteors go out from the Taibo hedge, and ministers will have affairs abroad; many meteors go out from the south gate, and nobles have died; in the Taibo hedge, the monarch is weak and the vassals are strong; from the end gate into the wing lodging, the starlight shines on the earth, there is a voice, and there is a king who is supported.

古文：云气出入，色微青，君失位。
现代文：云气出入，星色微青，君主失去皇位。
English: Clouds come and go, stars fade, monarchs lose their throne.

古文：青白黑云气入左右掖，为丧；出，无咎。
现代文：青白黑云气进入左右掖门，是丧事；出去，没有凶险。
English: When the blue-white-black clouds enter the left and right gates, it is a sad event; when they go out, there is no danger.

古文：赤气入东掖门，内兵起。
现代文：赤色的云气进入束掖门，国内有战争爆发。
English: A red cloud entered Sokcho, and war broke out in the country.

古文：黄白云气入太微垣，人主喜，年寿长。
现代文：黄白色的云气进入太微垣，君主有喜事，寿命延长。
English: The yellow and white clouds enter the Taibai Mountains, the monarch has a happy event, and his life expectancy is extended.

古文：入左右掖门，天子有德令。
现代文：进入左右掖门，天子施行有德行的政令。
English: Entering the left and right gates, the heavenly son carried out the virtuous decree.

古文：黑及苍白气入，天子忧，出则无咎。
现代文：黑色及苍白色昀云气进入，天子有忧患，出去就没有凶险。
English: The black and pale clouds enter, the son of heaven is troubled, and there is no danger when he goes out.

古文：黑气如蛇入垣门，有丧。
现代文：黑色的云气像蛇一样进入垣门，有丧事。
English: A black cloud of gas entered the gate like a snake. There was a funeral.

古文：内五帝坐五星，内一星在太微中，黄帝坐，含枢纽之神也。
现代文：内五帝座五颗星，内一星在太微垣中，黄帝座位，是含枢纽之神。
English: Five stars in the inner five emperors, one star in the inner five emperors, the Yellow Emperor's seat, is the god of the hub.

古文：天子动得天度，止得地意，从容中道则明以光，不明则人主当求贤以辅法；不则夺势。
现代文：天子行动合乎天的法度，停止合乎地的意愿，行为从容符合天道就明亮而光辉，如果不明亮，君主就应当访求贤能以辅助法度；否则就会争权夺势。
English: If the Son of Heaven acts according to the laws of Heaven, ceases to act according to the will of the earth, and behaves in accordance with the laws of Heaven, it will be bright and brilliant. If it is not bright, the monarch should seek virtue to supplement the laws; otherwise, it will compete for power.

古文：四帝星夹黄帝坐，四方各去二度。
现代文：四颗帝星夹着黄帝座位，四方各距离黄帝座位二度。
English: Four imperial stars hold the Yellow Emperor's seat, and the distance from the Yellow Emperor's seat is two degrees in all directions.

古文：东方，苍帝灵威仰之神也。
现代文：东方，是苍帝灵威仰之神。
English: The East is the god of the Emperor's spiritual authority.

古文：南方，赤帝赤熛怒之神也。
现代文：南方，是赤帝赤煤怒之神。
English: Nanfang is the god of red coal wrath.

古文：西方，白帝白招拒之神也。
现代文：西方，是白帝白招拒之神。
English: The West is the god of rejection.

古文：北方，黑帝叶光纪之神也。
现代文：北方，是黑帝时光纪之神。
English: Kitakata is the god of the Heian period.

古文：黄帝坐明，天子寿，威令行；小，则反是，势在臣下；若亡，大人当之。
现代文：黄帝座位明亮，天子长寿，威严的旨令施行；微小，那么与此相反，权势在臣下；如果消亡，大人担当责任。
English: The seat of the Yellow Emperor is bright, the Son of Heaven is long-lived, and the command of majesty is carried out; if it is small, then, on the contrary, the power is in the vassals; if it dies, the adults are responsible.

古文：月出坐北，祸大；出坐南，祸小；出近之，大臣诛，或饥；犯黄帝坐，有乱臣。
现代文：月亮出现在黄帝座位北边，祸患大；出现在黄帝座位南边，祸患小；出现的地方靠近它，大臣被杀，或者饥荒；侵犯黄帝座位，将有乱臣。
English: If the moon appears to the north of the Yellow Emperor's throne, the calamity will be great; if it appears to the south of the Yellow Emperor's throne, the calamity will be small; if it appears close to it, the minister will be killed, or there will be famine; if it encroaches on the Yellow Emperor's throne, there will be disorderly ministers.

古文：抵帝坐，有土功事。
现代文：到达黄帝座位，有土木工程的事情。
English: Arriving at the Yellow Emperor's seat, there is a matter of civil engineering.

古文：月晕帝坐，有赦。
现代文：月晕出现在黄帝座位周围，有赦免。
English: Moon halos appear around the Yellow Emperor's seat, and there is an amnesty.

古文：《海中占》：月犯帝坐，人主恶之。
现代文：《海中占》：月亮侵犯黄帝座位，君主厌恶这事。
English: "Occupy the Sea": The moon encroaches on the seat of the Yellow Emperor, and the monarch is disgusted by this.

古文：五星守黄帝坐，大人忧。
现代文：五星占据黄帝座位，大人有忧患。
English: Five stars occupy the Yellow Emperor's seat, and adults are worried.

古文：荧惑、太白入，有强臣。
现代文：荧惑星、太白星进入，有强悍的臣下。
English: Fluorescent planet, too white star enter, there are strong vassals.

古文：岁星犯，有非其主立。
现代文：岁星凌犯，有不是君主的人被扶立。
English: Those who were not monarchs were made to stand up for those who committed crimes.

古文：荧惑犯，兵乱；入天庭，至帝坐，有赦。
现代文：荧惑星凌犯，军队动乱；进入天庭，到达黄帝座位，有赦免。
English: Infringement of the fluorescent planet, army turmoil; enter the heavenly court, reach the Yellow Emperor's seat, there is amnesty.

古文：太白入之，兵在宫中。
现代文：太白星进入，战事发生在宫中。
English: When Tai Baoxing entered, the battle took place in the palace.

古文：填逆行，守黄帝坐，亡君之戒。
现代文：镇星逆向运行，占据黄帝座位，是亡国之君的警戒。
English: Zhenxing running in reverse, occupying the seat of the Yellow Emperor, is the vigilance of the ruler of the lost country.

古文：五星入，色白，为乱。
现代文：五星进入，星色白，是动乱。
English: Five stars enter, the stars turn white, and there is turmoil.

古文：客星色黄白抵帝坐，臣献美女。
现代文：客星的星色黄白，到达黄帝座位，臣下贡献美女。
English: The guest star's star color is yellow and white, reaching the Yellow Emperor's seat, the vassal contributes a beautiful woman.

古文：彗星入，宫乱；抵帝坐，或如粉絮，兵、丧并起。
现代文：彗星进入，宫内动乱；到达黄帝座位，有的像粉絮，战争、丧事一起发生。
English: When the comet enters, the palace is in turmoil; when it reaches the Yellow Emperor's seat, some are like chalk dust, and war and mourning occur together.

古文：流星犯之，大臣忧；抵四帝坐，辅臣忧，人多死。
现代文：流星凌犯，大臣忧患；到达四帝的座位，辅佐大臣有忧患，死人多。
English: If a meteor strikes, the minister is worried; if it reaches the seat of the four emperors, the assistant minister is worried, and there are many deaths.

古文：苍白气抵帝坐，天子有丧；青赤，近臣欲谋其主；黄白，天子有子孙喜。
现代文：苍白色云气到达黄帝座位，天子有丧事；青赤色，近臣要图谋他们的君主；黄白色，天子有子孙的喜事。
English: Pale-white clouds reach the Yellow Emperor's seat, and the heavenly son has a funeral; blue-red, and the courtiers want to plot against their monarch; yellow-white, and the heavenly son has a happy event for his descendants.

古文：月犯四帝，天下有丧，诸侯有忧。
现代文：月亮凌犯四帝，天下有丧事，诸侯有忧患。
English: If the moon offends the four emperors, the world will be in mourning, and the princes will be troubled.

古文：五星犯四帝，为忧。
现代文：五星凌犯四帝，是忧患。
English: A five-star general who offends four emperors is a cause for concern.

古文：太子一星，在帝坐北，帝储也。
现代文：太子一颗星，在黄帝座位北，是皇帝的皇储。
English: The crown prince, a star to the north of the Yellow Emperor's seat, is the emperor's crown prince.

古文：储有德，则星明润。
现代文：皇储有德行，那么星色明亮润泽。
English: The crown prince is virtuous, so the stars are bright and shiny.

古文：云气入，黄为喜，黑为忧。
现代文：云气侵入，星色黄是喜事，星色黑是忧患。
English: Cloud intrusion, star yellow is a happy event, star black is a sorrow.

古文：太白、荧惑、客星、流星守、犯，皆为忧。
现代文：太白星、荧惑星、客星、流星侵占凌犯，都是忧患。
English: Too-white stars, fluorescent planets, guest stars, and meteors encroaching on intruders are all worries.

古文：一云金、火守之，或入，太子不废则为篡逆之事。
现代文：一说金星、火星占据太子，或者进入，如果太子不废掉，就要做篡位叛逆的事情。
English: Once Venus and Mars occupy the crown prince, or enter, if the crown prince is not abolished, it is necessary to do something usurpation and rebellion.

古文：内五诸侯五星，在九卿西，内侍天子，不之国也。
现代文：内五诸侯五颗星，在九卿西面，在宫内侍奉天子，不到诸侯王国去。
English: The five stars of the five provinces are west of the nine princes. They serve the Son of Heaven in the palace and do not go to the kingdom of the provinces.

古文：《乾象新书》：在郎位南，辟雍礼得，则星明；亡，则诸侯黜。
现代文：《干象新书》：在郎位南面，如果贵族子弟学校的礼教合适，那么星色明亮；如果诸侯五星消失，那么诸侯被罢黜。
English: "Ganxiang New Book": In the south of the lordship, if the etiquette of the aristocratic children's school is appropriate, then the stars are bright; if the five stars of the princes disappear, then the princes are ousted.

古文：从官一星，在太子北，侍臣也。
现代文：从官一颗星，在太子北面，是侍臣。
English: From the official one star, in the north of the prince, is the courtier.

古文：以不见为安，一曰不见则帝不安，如常则吉。
现代文：以不出现为平安，一说不出现，皇帝就不平安，如果正常就吉利。
English: It is safe not to appear. If you say you will not appear, the emperor will not be safe. If you are normal, you will be lucky.

古文：幸臣一星，在帝坐东北，常侍太子，以暗为吉。
现代文：幸臣一颗星，在黄帝座位东北，日常侍奉太子，以暗淡为吉利。
English: A lucky star, in the northeast of the Yellow Emperor's seat, daily serves the prince, with dimness as good luck.

古文：《新书》：在太子东，青、赤气入之，近臣谋君不成。
现代文：《新书》：在太子东面，青赤包的云气进入，近臣图谋君位不成功。
English: "New book": In the east of the prince, the clouds of blue and red enveloped him, and his close vassals tried unsuccessfully to seize the throne.

古文：内屏四星，在端门内，近右执法。
现代文：内屏四颗星，在端门内，靠近右执法。
English: Four stars on the inner screen, inside the end door, close to the right enforcement.

古文：屏者，所以拥蔽帝庭也。
现代文：屏障是用来包围掩蔽帝庭的。
English: The barrier was designed to enclose and conceal the imperial court.

古文：左右执法各一星，在端门两旁，左为廷尉之象，右为御史大夫之象，主举刺凶奸。
现代文：左右执法各一颗星，在端门两旁，左执法星是廷尉的象征，右执法星是御史大夫的象征，主管检举讽刺凶恶奸邪的人。
English: On both sides of the front door, the left enforcement star is the symbol of the court lieutenant, the right enforcement star is the symbol of the magistrate, and the supervisor prosecutes the cruel and evil person.

古文：君臣有礼，则光明润泽。
现代文：君臣之间有礼节，那么执法星就光明润泽。
English: If there is etiquette between officials, then the law enforcement star will shine brightly.

古文：《乾象新书》：在中台南，明，则法令平。
现代文：《干象新书》：在中台南面，星色明亮，那么法令就公平。
English: "Hengxiang New Book": In the south of Zhongtai, the stars are bright, so the law is fair.

古文：月、五星及客星犯守，则君臣失礼、辅臣黜。
现代文：月亮、五星以及客星凌犯占据执法星，那么君臣之间失去礼节，辅佐大臣被罢黜。
English: If the moon, the five stars, and the guest star transgressor occupy the law enforcement star, then the etiquette between the monarch and the minister will be lost, and the assistant minister will be ousted.

古文：荧惑、太白入，为兵。
现代文：荧惑星、太白星进入，是战争。
English: Fluorescent planet, too white star entered, is war.

古文：流星犯之，尚书忧。
现代文：流星侵犯，尚书有忧患。
English: Meteor invades, Shang Shuxu is troubled.

古文：郎位十五星，在帝坐东北，一曰依乌郎府也。
现代文：郎位十五颗星，在黄帝座位东北，一说是偎依着乌郎府。
English: There are fifteen stars in the row, in the northeast of the Yellow Emperor's seat, and one is said to be attached to the Ulangfu.

古文：周之元士，汉之光禄、中散、谏议、议郎、郎中是其职，主卫守也。
现代文：周代的元士，汉代的光禄卿、中散大夫、谏议大夫、议郎、郎中都是它的官职，主管保卫守护。
English: The Yuan Shih of the Zhou Dynasty, the Guangluqing of the Han Dynasty, the Zhongshan Dafu, the Zheng He Dafu, the He Rong, and the Rongzhong are all its official positions, supervising and guarding.

古文：其星不具，后妃灾，幸臣诛。
现代文：它的星不全，后妃有灾祸，宠幸之臣被杀。
English: Its star is incomplete, its empress is plagued with misfortune, and its favorite vassal is killed.

古文：星明大，或客星入之，大臣为乱，元士忧。
现代文：星色明亮广大，或有客星进入，大臣作乱，元十有忧患。
English: The stars are bright and vast, or there is a guest star entering, the minister makes a mess, and the original ten are in trouble.

古文：彗、孛犯，郎官失势。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，郎官失去权势。
English: Comets and variable stars invade, and vassals lose their power.

古文：彗星、枉矢出其次，郎佐谋叛。
现代文：彗星、枉矢星出现在它的位次，郎官和佐吏图谋反叛。
English: The comet, the false arrow star appeared in its order, and the vassal and the attendant plotted to rebel.

古文：荧惑守之，兵、丧。
现代文：荧惑星占据，有战争、丧事。
English: Fluorescent planets occupy, there are wars, funerals.

古文：赤气入，兵起；黄白，吉；黑，凶。
现代文：赤色云气进入，战争爆发；星色黄白，吉利；星色黑，凶险。
English: Red clouds enter and war breaks out; yellow and white stars are auspicious; black stars are dangerous.

古文：郎将一星，在郎位北，主阅具，以为武备也。
现代文：郎将一颗星，在郎位北面，主管检阅器具，用作军备。
English: The lord places a star, on the north side of the rooster, in charge of inspecting equipment to be used as armaments.

古文：若今之左、右中郎将。
现代文：像现在的左右中郎将。
English: Like the current left and right midfielders.

古文：《新书》曰：在太微垣东北。
现代文：《新书》说：在太微垣东北。
English: "New book" says: in the northeast of Taibugaki.

古文：明，大臣叛。
现代文：星色明亮，大臣反叛。
English: Stars bright, ministers mutinous.

古文：客星犯、守，郎将诛。
现代文：客星凌犯占据，郎将被杀。
English: The guest star is occupied by the criminal, and the rooster will be killed.

古文：黄、白气入，则受赐。
现代文：黄白色的云气进入，那么郎将受到赏赐。
English: If the yellow and white cloud enters, then the rooster will be rewarded.

古文：流星犯，将军忧。
现代文：流星凌犯，将军有忧患。
English: If a meteor hits, the general will be in trouble.

古文：常陈七星，如毕状，在帝坐北，天子宿卫虎贲之士，以设强御也。
现代文：常陈七颗星，像毕宿的形状，在五帝座位北面，天子的值宿警卫的勇猛武士，用来防备强暴。
English: On the north side of the Five Emperors' Seat, there are seven stars, shaped like an inn, used to guard against violence by the brave warriors who are on duty as guards for the Son of Heaven.

古文：星摇动，天子自出将；明，则武兵用；微，则弱。
现代文：星体摇动，天子自己带兵；星色明亮，那么就用勇猛士兵；星色微细，那么士兵薄弱。
English: When the stars are wavering, the Son of God himself leads the army; when the stars are bright, the soldiers are brave; when the stars are faint, the soldiers are weak.

古文：客星犯，王者行诛。
现代文：客星侵犯，王者实行诛杀。
English: The guest star encroached, and the king carried out the battle.

古文：九卿三星，在三公北，主治万事，今九卿之象也。
现代文：九卿三颗星，在三公北面，主管治理各种事情，当今九卿的象征。
English: Jiuqing three stars, in the north of the three kings, in charge of governing all kinds of things, the symbol of today's Jiuqing.

古文：《乾象新书》：在内五诸侯南，占与天纪同。
现代文：《干象新书》：在内五诸侯南面，占法与天纪相同。
English: "Ganxiang New Book": In the south of the five provinces, the occupation law is the same as the natural law.

古文：三公三星，在谒者东北，内坐朝会之所居也。
现代文：三公三颗星，在谒者东北，是内座朝会所在的地方。
English: The Three Kings and Three Stars, in the northeastern part of the country, is where the Inner Seat of the Imperial Court is located.

古文：《乾象新书》：在九卿南，其占与紫微垣三公同。
现代文：《干象新书》：在九卿南面，它的占法与紫微垣三公相同。
English: "Ganxiang New Book": In the south of Jiuqing, its occupation method is the same as that of Zi Weigaki San Gong.

古文：谒者一星，在左执法东北，主赞宾客、辨疑惑。
现代文：谒者一颗星，在左执法星东北，主管引导宾客，辨析疑惑。
English: One star for the cheater, one star for the law enforcement in the northeast, and a supervisor to guide the guests and sort out any doubts.

古文：《乾象新书》：在太微垣门内，左执法北。
现代文：《干象新书》：在太微垣弓内，左执法星北边。
English: "Ganxiang New Book": in the bow of the Taibo fence, north of the left law enforcement star.

古文：明盛，则四夷朝贡。
现代文：星色明亮强盛，那么四方的少数民族来朝拜进贡。
English: If the stars are bright and powerful, then the ethnic minorities of the four directions will come to pay tribute.

古文：三台六星，两两而居，起文昌，列抵太微。
现代文：三台六颗星，每两颗处在一起，从文昌开始，排列到太微垣。
English: Three sets of six stars, two two together, starting from Wenchang, have been arranged until they are too small.

古文：一曰天柱，三公之位也。
现代文：一说叫天柱，是三公的职位。
English: One of them is called Tianzhu, which is the position of the Three Princes.

古文：在人曰三公，在天曰三台，主开德宣符。
现代文：在人间叫三公，在天上叫三台，主管扩大德行宣布旨令。
English: In the human world, they are called the Three Princes, and in heaven, they are called the Three Divisions.

古文：西近文昌二星，曰上台，为司命，主寿；次二星曰中台，为司中，主宗室；东二星曰下台，为司禄，主兵，所以昭德塞违也。
现代文：西边靠近文昌的两颗星，叫上台，是司命，主管人的寿命；其次的两颗叫中台，是司中，主管宗族家室；东边两颗星叫下台，是司禄，主管军队：它们都是用来昭明德行堵塞邪恶的。
English: The two stars on the west side near Wenchang are called the rising star, which is the steward of life and the life expectancy of the person in charge; the next two stars are called the middle star, which is the steward of the middle, which is the steward of the family; and the two stars on the east side are called the descending star, which is the steward of the army: they are all used to show virtue and block evil.

古文：又曰三台为天阶，太一蹑以上下。
现代文：又说三台是天的台阶，太一踩着它来登上降下。
English: It is also said that the three-pointed star is the ladder of heaven, and Taichi star treads it up and down.

古文：一曰泰阶，上阶上星为天子，下星为女主；中阶上星为诸侯三公，下星为卿大夫；下阶上星为士，下星为庶人，所以和阴阳而理万物也。
现代文：一说是泰阶，上阶的上星是天子，下星是女主；中阶的上星是诸侯三公，下星是卿大夫；下阶的上星是士，下星是庶人：它们都是用来调和阴阳而且治理万物的。
English: The first is the Tai level, the upper star is the heavenly son, the lower star is the mistress; the middle level of the upper star is the three princes, the lower star is the doctor; the lower level of the upper star is the scholar, and the lower star is the commoner: they are all used to reconcile the yin and yang and govern all things.

古文：又曰上台上星主兖、豫，下星主荆、扬；中台上星主梁、雍，下星主冀；下台上星主青，下星主徐。
现代文：又说是上台，它的上星主管充州、豫州，下星主管剂州、扬州；中台的上星主管梁州、雍州，下星主管冀州；下台的上星主管青州，下星主管徐州。
English: It is also said that when it comes to power, its rising star supervisors are Chenzhou and Yuzhou, and its falling star supervisors are Jiazhou and Yangzhou; the rising star supervisors of the middle stage are Liangzhou and Yongzhou, and the falling star supervisor is Jizhou; the rising star supervisor of the lower stage is Qingzhou, and the falling star supervisor is Xuzhou.

古文：人主好兵，则上阶上星疏而色赤。
现代文：人丰喜欢战争，那么上阶的上星稀疏而星色赤红。
English: Many people like war, so the upper stars are sparse and starry red.

古文：修宫广囿，肆声色，则上阶合而横。
现代文：修建宫室扩大园囿，放纵声色，那么上阶合拢而成横行。
English: When the palace was built, the garden was expanded, and the tone and color of the palace were indulged, so the upper echelons were closed and became rampant.

古文：君弱则上阶迫而色暗。
现代文：君主软弱那么上阶逼近而星色暗淡。
English: The monarch is weak, so the upper echelon is approaching, and the stars are dim.

古文：公侯皆叛，率部动兵，则中阶上星赤。
现代文：王公诸侯背叛天子，率领部队发动战争，那么中阶的上星呈赤色。
English: If princes and lords betray the Son of Heaven and lead their troops to war, then the middle-ranking star is red.

古文：外夷来侵，边国骚动，则中阶下星疏而横，色白。
现代文：境外的少数民族来侵犯，边疆郡国骚乱动荡，那么中阶下星稀疏而且成横行，星色白。
English: Foreign ethnic minorities invade, border counties and countries are in turmoil, so the middle and lower classes are sparse and rampant, and the stars are white.

古文：卿大夫废正向邪，则中阶下星疏而色赤。
现代文：卿大夫废止正道走向邪路，那么中阶的下星稀疏而星色赤红。
English: If the noble doctor abrogates the right way and goes to the wrong way, then the lower star of the middle step is sparse and the star color is red.

古文：民不从令，犯刑为盗，则上阶下星色黑。
现代文：人民不听从命令，触犯刑律作强盗，那么上阶的下星呈黑色。
English: If the people disobey orders, violate the criminal law and act as robbers, then the lower star of the upper level is black.

古文：去本就末，奢侈相尚，则下阶上星阔而横，色白。
现代文：舍去本业从事末业，竞柏崇尚奢侈，那么下阶的上星开阔而成横行，星色白。
English: If one gives up one's own profession to engage in a dead-end career, and if one worships luxury, then the lower-level stars will become open and rampant, and the stars will become white.

古文：君臣有道，赋省刑清，则上阶为之戚。
现代文：君臣的政治有道，赋税碱省刑罚清正，那么上阶因此而亲近。
English: The politics of the princes and ministers are virtuous, the taxes are low, the punishments are just, so the upper echelons are close to them.

古文：诸侯贡聘，公卿尽忠，则中阶为之比。
现代文：诸侯进贡聘问，公卿竭尽忠诚，那么中阶因此而接近。
English: The lords pay tribute, the nobles are loyal, and the middle class is therefore close.

古文：庶人奉化，徭役有叙，则下阶为之密。
现代文：庶人敬奉教化，徭役分派有序，那么下阶因此而亲密。
English: The common people respect and follow the teachings, the cadres are assigned in an orderly manner, so the lower ranks are therefore intimate.

古文：若主奢欲，数夺民时，则上阶为之夺。
现代文：如果君主骄奢淫欲，屡次侵夺人民农时，那么上阶因此而争夺。
English: If the monarch is arrogant and lustful and repeatedly encroaches on the people's farmland, then the upper echelons will compete for it.

古文：诸侯僭强，公卿专贪，则中阶为之疏。
现代文：诸侯僭越势强，公卿专权贪婪，那么中阶因此而疏远。
English: Princes and lords became more and more powerful, and nobles became greedy for absolute power. As a result, the middle class became alienated.

古文：士庶逐末，豪杰相凌，则下阶为之阔。
现代文：士人和庶人追逐末业，豪杰之士互相欺凌，那么下阶因此而扩大距离。
English: The scholar and the commoner pursue the last cause, the great men bully each other, so the lower ranks widen the distance as a result.

古文：三阶平，则阴阳和，风雨时，谷丰世泰；不平，则反是。
现代文：三阶平整，那么阴阳调和，风雨适时，谷物丰收世界太平；不平整，那么与此相反。
English: If the third order is balanced, then yin and yang will be harmonized, wind and rain will be timely, grain harvest will be abundant and the world will be peaceful; if it is not balanced, then it will be the opposite.

古文：三台不具，天下失计。
现代文：三台不全，天下失策。
English: Three incomplete, the world blunders.

古文：色明齐等，君臣和而政令行；微细，反是。
现代文：星色明亮整齐均等，君臣和睦而且政令施行；星色细微，与此相反。
English: The stars are bright, neat and even, the monarchs and the ministers are harmonious and the government orders are carried out; the stars are subtle, on the contrary.

古文：一曰天柱不见，王者恶之。
现代文：一说天柱不出现，王者厌恶这种情况。
English: The king was disgusted by the fact that the pillar did not appear.

古文：司命星亡，春不得耕。
现代文：司命星消失，春天不能够耕作。
English: If the life star disappears, it will be impossible to farm in the spring.

古文：司中不具，夏不得耨。
现代文：词中星不全，夏天不能够耕耨。
English: The star is not complete in the word, and it cannot be cultivated in the summer.

古文：司禄不具，秋不得获。
现代文：司禄星不全，秋天不能收获。
English: Silo star incomplete, autumn can not harvest.

古文：一曰三台色青，天下疾；赤，为兵；黄润，为德；白，为丧；黑，为忧。
现代文：一说三台星色青，天下有疾病；星色赤红，是战争；星色黄而润泽，是恩德；星色白，是丧事；星色黑，是忧患。
English: It is said that the three stars are blue and blue, there are diseases in the world; the star is red and red, it is war; the star is yellow and moist, it is benevolence; the star is white, it is mourning; the star is black, it is sorrow.

古文：月入，君忧，臣乱，公族叛。
现代文：月亮进入，君主忧患，臣下作乱，公族要叛变。
English: The moon is setting, the monarch is worried, his vassals are rioting, and members of the nobility are mutinying.

古文：月入而晕，三公下狱。
现代文：月亮进入并发生月晕，三公入狱。
English: The moon came in and caused a lunar eclipse, and the three princes went to prison.

古文：客星入之，贵臣赐爵邑；出而色苍，臣夺爵；守之，大臣黜，或贵臣多病。
现代文：客星进入，赏赐给贵臣爵位封邑；客星出去而星色青，臣下被剥夺爵位；占据三台，大臣被罢黜，或是贵臣多病。
English: When a guest star enters, a peerage is awarded to the vassal; when the guest star leaves, the vassal is deprived of the peerage; when the guest star occupies the third seat, the minister is dismissed, or the vassal is ill.

古文：彗星犯，三公黜。
现代文：彗星凌犯，三公被罢黜。
English: If the comet transgresses, the three princes will be ousted.

古文：流星入，天下兵将忧；抵中台，将相忧，人主恶之。
现代文：流星进入，天下的兵士和将官有忧患；流星到达中台，将相有忧患，人主厌恶这种情况。
English: When the meteor enters, the soldiers and generals of the world will be in distress; when the meteor reaches the mid-table, they will be in distress, and this situation is abhorrent to human beings.

古文：云气入，苍白，民多伤；黄白润泽，民安君喜；黄，将相喜；赤，为忧；青黑，忧在三公；苍白，三公黜。
现代文：云气进入，星色苍白，人民多被伤害；星色黄白润泽，人民平安君主高兴；星色黄，将相高兴；星色赤红，是忧患；星色青黑，忧患在三公；星色苍白，三公被罢黜。
English: The clouds enter, the stars are pale, the people are mostly hurt; the stars are yellow and white, the people are safe and the monarch is happy; the stars are yellow, the emperor is happy; the stars are red and red, it is a sorrow; the stars are blue and black, the sorrow is in the three princes; the stars are pale, the three princes are deposed.

古文：按上台二星在柳北，其北星入柳六度。
现代文：考察上台两颗星在柳宿北面，它北面的星进入柳宿六度。
English: According to the survey, the two stars on the stage are on the north side of Yagyuku, and the star on the north side enters Yagyuku six degrees.

古文：中台二星，其北入张二度。
现代文：中台两颗星中北面的星进入张宿二度。
English: The northern star of the two stars in the middle of the table enters Zhangjuku twice.

古文：下台二星在太微垣西蕃北，其北星入翼二度。
现代文：下台两颗星在太微垣西蕃的北边，它北面的星进入翼宿二度。
English: The two stars on the lower stage are on the north side of the west ridge of Taiyukagaki, and the star on the north side of it enters Tsubasa twice.

古文：武密书：三台属鬼，又属柳、属张。
现代文：武密写道：三台属于鬼宿，又属于柳宿、属于张宿。
English: Wu Mi wrote: San Tai belongs to Ghost Town, and also belongs to Willow Town and Zhang Town.

古文：《乾象新书》：上台属柳，中台属张，下台属翼。
现代文：《干象新书》：上台属于柳宿，中台属于张宿，下台属于翼宿。
English: "Ganxiang New Book": the upper stage belongs to Yanjuku, the middle stage belongs to Zhangjuku, and the lower stage belongs to Yingjuku.

古文：长垣四星，在少微星南，主界域，及北方。
现代文：长垣四颗星，在少微星南面，主管国界疆域，以及北方。
English: Nagagaki four stars, in the south of a few stars, in charge of national boundaries, as well as the north.

古文：荧惑入之，北人入中国。
现代文：荧惑星进入，北方民族侵入我国中原。
English: Fluorescent planets enter, and northern peoples invade the central plains of our country.

古文：太白入，九卿谋，边将叛。
现代文：太白星进入，九卿有图谋边疆的将官叛变。
English: When Tai Baixing entered, the nine nobles plotted a mutiny against the generals on the frontier.

古文：彗、孛犯之，北地不安。
现代文：彗星、变星凌犯，北方地区不安定。
English: Comets and variable stars are intruders, and the northern region is unstable.

古文：流星入，北方兵起，将入中国。
现代文：流星进入，北方爆发战争，要侵入我国中原。
English: A meteor enters, a war breaks out in the north, and they want to invade the central plains of our country.

古文：少微四星，在太微西，士大夫之位也。
现代文：少微四颗星，在太微西面，是士大夫的位置。
English: A little less than four stars, in the west of Taimiao, is the location of Shidafu.

古文：一名处士，亦天子副主，或曰博士官，一曰主卫掖门。
现代文：又叫处士，也是天子的太子，有的说是博士官，一说主管保卫掖门。
English: He is also called the steward, and is also the crown prince of the heavenly son. Or he is called the doctor, and is said to be responsible for guarding the side gate of the palace.

古文：南第一星处士，第二星议士，第三星博士，第四星大夫。
现代文：南边第一颗星叫处士，第二颗星叫议士，第三颗星叫博士，第四颗星叫大夫。
English: In the south, the first star is the clerk, the second star is the knight, the third star is the doctor, and the fourth star is the doctor.

古文：明大而黄，则贤士举。
现代文：星色明亮广大而呈黄色，那么贤能之士被推举。
English: The stars are bright, vast, and yellow, and the good are chosen.

古文：月五星犯守处士，女主忧，宰相易。
现代文：月亮、五星凌犯占据处士星，女主有忧患，宰相被更换。
English: The moon, the five-star offender occupies the official star, the mistress is in distress, and the prime minister is replaced.

古文：岁犯，小人用，忠臣危。
现代文：岁星侵犯，小人被任用，忠臣有危险。
English: The year star encroaches, the villain is appointed, and the loyal vassal is in danger.

古文：火犯，贤德退。
现代文：火星侵犯，贤德的人引退。
English: Mars encroaches, virtuous people retire.

古文：土犯，宰相易，女主忧。
现代文：土星侵犯，宰相被更换，女主有忧患。
English: Saturn encroaches, the prime minister is replaced, the mistress is troubled.

古文：金犯，大臣诛，又曰以所居主占之。
现代文：金星侵犯，大臣被杀，又说用金星所处位置的主星来占验它。
English: Venus invaded, the minister was killed, and it was said that the main star in the position of Venus was used to test it.

古文：客星、孛星犯之，王者忧，奸臣众。彗星犯，功臣有罪，一曰法令臣诛。
现代文：客星、变星侵犯，王者有忧患，奸佞之臣太多，彗星侵犯，功臣获罪，一说执掌法令的大臣枝杀。
English: Invaded by a guest star or a variable star, the king is in distress, there are too many treacherous ministers, invaded by a comet, the meritorious minister is convicted, and the minister in charge of the decree is killed.

古文：流星出，贤良进，道术用。
现代文：流星出去，贤良之士进用，他们的道理方略被采用。
English: When the shooting stars go out, the virtuous people advance, and their principles and strategies are adopted.

古文：云气入，色苍白，贤士忧，大臣黜。
现代文：云气进入，星色苍白，贤能之士有忧患，大臣被罢黜。
English: The clouds are coming in, the stars are fading, the wise men are in trouble, and the minister has been ousted.

古文：灵台三星，在明堂西，神之精明曰灵，四方而高曰台，主观云物，察符瑞，候灾变也。
现代文：灵台三颗星，在明堂西面，神的精明叫灵，四面方正而高的建筑物叫台，主管观测云气物象，察看祥瑞的征兆，占验灾异变故。
English: Lingdai three stars, in the west of the Ming Hall, the god's shrewdness is called the spirit, the square and tall buildings on all sides are called the table, the person in charge observes the clouds and objects, observes the signs of auspiciousness, and accounts for the occurrence of disasters.

古文：武密曰：与司怪占同。
现代文：武密说：与司怪占法相同。
English: Wu Mi said, "It's the same as the method of divination.

古文：虎贲一星，在下台星南，一曰在太微西蕃北、下台南，静室旄头之骑官也。
现代文：虎贲一颗星，在下台星南面，一说在太微垣西蕃北面，下台星南面，是静室旄头的骑官。
English: One star is in the tiger's beak, the next star is in the south, and one star is in the north of the west tower of Taiyukaki, and the next star is in the south, and it is the cavalry officer of Shizukuma Shantou.

古文：明，则臣顺，与车骑星同占。
现代文：星色明亮，那么臣下恭顺，与车骑星同样的占法。
English: The stars are bright, so the vassals are obedient, the same as the stars of the car and bicycle.

古文：明堂三星，在太微西南角外，天子布政之宫。
现代文：明堂三颗星，在太微垣西南角的外边，天子发布政令的宫殿。
English: The three stars of Myeongdong, outside the southwest corner of Taewoo-gaki, is the palace where the emperor issued his decree.

古文：明吉，暗凶。
现代文：星色明亮就吉利，暗淡就凶险。
English: Bright stars are auspicious, while dim stars are dangerous.

古文：五星、客星及彗犯之，主不安其宫。
现代文：五星、客星及彗星凌犯，君主不能够安居在他的皇宫里。
English: Five stars, guest stars and comets intrude, and the monarch cannot live in peace in his royal palace.

古文：右上元太微宫常星一十九坐，积数七十有八，而《晋志》所载，少微、长垣各四星，属天市垣，与《步天歌》不同。
现代文：上面上元太微垣的常星有十九座，累积星数七十八颗，而《晋书，天文志》所记载的，少微、长垣各四星，属于天市垣，和《步天歌》的记载不同。
English: There are nineteen permanent stars in the upper part of the Mototai-gaki, with a cumulative number of seventy-eight stars. However, the records of "Jinshu, Astronomy" show that the four stars in the Sho-gaki and Naga-gaki belong to the heavenly city wall, which is different from the records of "Walking Heavenly Songs."

古文：天市垣天市垣二十二星，在氐、房、心、尾、箕、斗内宫之内。
现代文：天市垣二十二颗星，在氐宿、房宿、心宿、尾宿、箕宿、斗宿的内宫里面。
English: There are twenty-two stars in the heavenly city wall, in the inner palace of the mansion, the room, the heart, the tail, the mansion, and the battle.

古文：东蕃十一星：南一曰宋，二曰南海，三曰燕，四曰东海，五曰徐，六曰吴越，七曰齐，八曰中山，九曰九河，十曰赵，十一曰魏。
现代文：束蕃十一颗星：南面第一颗叫宋，第二颗叫南海，第三颗叫燕，第四颗叫东海，第五颗叫徐，第六颗叫昊越，第七颗叫齐，第八颗叫中山，第九颗叫九河，第十颗叫趟，第十一颗叫魏。
English: There are eleven stars in a cluster: the first star in the south is called Song, the second is called Nanhai, the third is called Yan, the fourth is called Donghai, the fifth is called Xu, the sixth is called Haoyue, the seventh is called Qi, the eighth is called Zhongshan, the ninth is called Jiuhe, the tenth is called Trip, and the eleventh is called Wei.

古文：西蕃十一星：南一曰韩，二曰楚，三曰梁，四曰巴，五曰蜀，六曰秦，七曰周，八曰郑，九曰晋，十曰河间，十一曰河中。
现代文：西蕃十一颗星：南面第一颗叫韩，第二颗叫楚，第三颗叫梁，第四颗叫巴，第五颗叫蜀，第六颗叫秦，第七颗叫周，第八颗叫郑，第九颗叫晋，第十颗叫河间，第十一颗叫河中。
English: There are eleven stars in Xi'an: the first one in the south is called Han, the second one is called Chu, the third one is called Liang, the fourth one is called Ba, the fifth one is called Shu, the sixth one is called Qin, the seventh one is called Zhou, the eighth one is called Zheng, the ninth one is called Jin, the tenth one is called He, and the eleventh one is called Hezhong.

古文：象天王在上，诸侯朝王，王出皋门大朝会，西方诸侯在应门左，东方诸侯在应门右。
现代文：象征天王在上头，诸侯来朝见天王，天王走出皋门举行盛大的朝会，西方的诸侯在应门左边，东方的诸侯在应门右边。
English: The symbol of the heavenly king is at the top, the princes came to the court to see the heavenly king, the heavenly king went out of the gate to hold a grand imperial meeting, the princes of the West were on the left side of the gate, and the princes of the East were on the right side of the gate.

古文：其率诸侯幸都市也亦然。
现代文：天王率领诸侯巡幸都市也是这样。
English: This is also the case with the emperor leading the princes on a sightseeing tour of the city.

古文：一曰在房、心东北，主权衡，主聚众。
现代文：一说在房宿、心宿东北，主管衡器，主持聚集民众。
English: One said that in the lodging, the heart of the Northeast, the person in charge of the weighing machine, presided over the gathering of the people.

古文：又曰天旗庭，主斩戮事。《乾象新书》曰：市中星众润泽，则岁实。
现代文：又说它是天旗庭，主管斩首杀戮的事《干象新书》说：天市里面星辰众多润泽，那么年成丰实。
English: It is also said to be the heaven's banner yard. "Gengxiang New Book," which is in charge of the beheading and killing, said: "There are many stars in the heaven's city, so the year will be fruitful."

古文：荧惑守之，戮不忠之臣。
现代文：荧惑星占据天市垣，杀不忠的臣下。
English: If Mars enters this sector, he will kill disloyal vassals.

古文：彗星扫之，为徙市易都。
现代文：替星扫遇天市垣，是迁徙街市改换都城。
English: To sweep for the stars and meet the heavenly city wall is to change the capital city from a migratory city.

古文：客星入，为兵起；出，为贵丧。
现代文：客星进入，是战争爆发；出去，是贵人有丧事。
English: When a guest star enters, it's the outbreak of war; when he leaves, it's a dignitary's funeral.

古文：《天文录》曰：天子之市，天下所会也。
现代文：《天文录》说：天子的街市，是天下集会的地方。
English: "The Book of Astronomy" says: "The market of the Son of Heaven is the place where the whole world gathers."

古文：星明大，则市吏急，商人无利；小，则反是；忽然不明，籴贵；中多小星，则民富。
现代文：星色明亮广大，那么街市上的官吏苛急，商人无利可图；星色细小，那么与此相反；忽然不明亮，买粮食价贵；天市垣里小星多，那么人民富足。
English: If the stars are bright and vast, then the officials in the street market are demanding and the merchants are unprofitable; if the stars are small, then the opposite is true; if the stars are suddenly not bright, it is expensive to buy grain; if there are many small stars in the sky, then the people are rich.

古文：月入天市，易政更弊，近臣有抵罪，兵起。
现代文：月亮进入天市垣，变换政策改革弊端，近臣有获罪受罚的，战争爆发。
English: The moon enters the celestial city wall, the malpractice of changing policies and reforms, the close vassals have been punished, and the war broke out.

古文：月守其中，女主忧，大臣灾。
现代文：月亮占据天市垣中，女主有忧患，大臣有灾祸。
English: The moon dominates the sky, the mistress is troubled, and the minister is plagued.

古文：五星入，将相忧，五官灾；守之，主市惊更弊。
现代文：五星进入，将相有忧患，五官有灾祸；占据在垣中，主市官吏因改革弊端而震惊。
English: When the five stars enter, there will be sorrow for each other and disaster for the five officials; when they occupy the middle, the main city officials will be shocked by the shortcomings of the reform.

古文：又曰：五星入，兵起。
现代文：又说：五星进入，战争爆发。
English: He also said: "Five stars enter, war breaks out."

古文：荧惑守，大饥，火灾。
现代文：荧惑星占据，要有大饥荒，火灾。
English: Fluorescent planets occupy, there must be great famine, fire.

古文：或芒角色赤如血，市臣叛。
现代文：或者星的光芒色泽红得像血一样，街市的臣子背叛。
English: Or the light of a star, red as blood, betrays the courtiers of the city.

古文：填星守，籴贵。
现代文：镇星占据，买粮食价贵。
English: Towns are occupied, and it is expensive to buy grain.

古文：太白入，起兵，籴贵。
现代文：太白星进入，发动战争，买粮食价贵。
English: Too white star enters, start a war, buy grain is expensive.

古文：辰星守，蛮夷君死。
现代文：辰星占据，蛮夷等少数民族的君主死。
English: The monarchs of ethnic minorities such as the barbarians and barbarians died.

古文：客星守，度量不平；星色白，市乱；出天市，有丧。
现代文：客星占据，长度重量不公平；星色白，街市混乱；客星从天市垣出去，有丧事。
English: The guest star occupies, the length and weight are unfair; the star is white, the street market is chaotic; the guest star goes out from the sky market, and there is a funeral.

古文：彗星守，谷贵；出天市，豪杰起，徙易市都；扫帝坐，出天市，除旧布新。
现代文：彗星占据，谷物价格昂贵；彗星从天市垣出去，豪杰之士并起，迁徙改换街市都城；彗星扫遇帝座，从天市垣出去，除旧布新。
English: Comets occupy, grain prices are expensive; comets go out from the heavenly city wall, heroes and heroines go together, migration changes the capital city; comets sweep the imperial throne, go out from the heavenly city wall, remove old cloth and make new.

古文：流星入，色苍白，物贵；赤，火灾，民疫。一曰出天市，为外兵。
现代文：流星进入，星色苍白。物价昂贵；星色赤红，有火灾，民间有瘟疫，一说从天市垣出去，是外族有战争。
English: The meteor enters, the star is pale, the price is expensive, the star is red, there is a fire, the people have a plague, and it is said that from the heavenly city wall, there is a foreign war.

古文：云气入，色苍白，民多疾；苍黑，物贵；出，物贱；黄白，物贱；黑，为啬夫死。
现代文：云气进入，星色苍白，民间多疾病；星色青黑，物价昂贵；出去，物价便宜；星色黄白，物价便宜；星色黑，是农夫死。
English: The clouds come in, the stars are pale, and the people have many diseases; the stars are blue and black, and the prices are expensive; the clouds go out, and the prices are cheap; the stars are yellow and white, and the prices are cheap; the stars are black, and the farmers die.

古文：帝坐一星，在天市中，天皇大帝外坐也。
现代文：帝座一颗星，在天市垣中，是天皇大帝的外座。
English: A star in the constellation of the Emperor, in the heavenly city, is the outer seat of the Emperor.

古文：光而润泽，主吉，威令行；微小，大人忧。
现代文：星色光明而且润泽，君主吉利，权威法令施行；星色微小，大人有忧患。
English: The star is bright and moist, the monarch is lucky, the authoritative decree is implemented; the star is small, and the adults are worried.

古文：月犯之，人主忧。
现代文：月亮侵犯，人主有忧患。
English: When the moon encroaches, people are troubled.

古文：五星犯，臣谋主，下有叛；荧惑，尤甚。
现代文：五星侵犯，臣下图谋君主，臣下有叛乱；荧惑星侵犯，尤其厉害。
English: Five-star encroachment, vassals plotting against the monarch, vassals rebelling; fluorine planet encroachment, especially severe.

古文：客星入，色赤，有兵；守之，大臣为乱。
现代文：客星进入，星色赤红，有战争；占据帝座，大臣作乱。
English: The guest star enters, the star is red, there is a war; occupy the imperial throne, the minister makes a disturbance.

古文：彗、孛犯，人民乱，宫庙徙。
现代文：彗星、变星侵犯，人民动乱，宫室宗庙迁移。
English: Invaded by comets and variable stars, the people were in turmoil, and the imperial family's ancestral temple was relocated.

古文：流星犯，诸侯兵起，臣谋主，贵人更令。
现代文：流星侵犯，诸侯发动战争，臣下图谋君主，贵人更改法令。
English: Meteors invade, lords wage war, vassals plot against the monarch, and nobles change the law.

古文：候一星，在帝坐东北候，一作后。
现代文：候一颗星，在帝座东北，候，一本写作后。
English: Waiting for a star, in the northeast of the constellation of the emperor, waiting for a book to be written.

古文：主伺阴阳也。
现代文：主管观察阴阳。
English: Supervisor observes yin and yang.

古文：明大，辅臣强；细微，国安；亡，则主失位；移，则不安居。
现代文：星色明亮广大，辅佐大臣强悍；星色细微，国家安定；星消失，那么君主失去皇位；移动，那么君主居住不安定。
English: The star is bright and vast, the assistant minister is strong; the star is subtle, the country is stable; the star disappears, then the monarch loses the throne; moving, then the monarch's residence is unstable.

古文：太阴犯之，辅臣忧。
现代文：太阴凌犯，辅佐大臣有忧患。
English: The Minister of State for Foreign Affairs is in trouble because of a woman abuser.

古文：客、彗守之，辅臣黜。
现代文：客星、彗星占据候星，辅佐大臣被罢黜。
English: A guest star and a comet occupy the horizon, and the assistant minister is ousted.

古文：孛犯，臣谋叛。
现代文：变星侵犯，臣下阴谋叛乱。
English: Mutable stars invade, vassals plot rebellion.

古文：宦者四星，在帝坐西南侍，主刑余之臣也。
现代文：宦者四颗星，在帝座西南侍奉，主管受过腐刑的臣子。
English: He has four stars, serves in the southwest of the imperial seat, and is in charge of the courtiers who have been subjected to corruption.

古文：星微，吉；失常，宦者有忧。
现代文：星色微细，吉利；失去常态，宦官有忧患。
English: The stars are faint, it is auspicious; the eunuchs are worried when they lose their normal state.

古文：斗五星，在宦者南，主平量。
现代文：斗五颗星，在宦者南面，主管公平称量。
English: In the south of the five stars, the supervisor will weigh the stars fairly.

古文：《乾象新书》：在帝坐西，覆则岁熟，仰则荒。
现代文：《干象新书》：在帝座西面，如果斗形覆盖，那么年成好，斗形仰放就有饥荒。
English: "Ganxiang New Book": In the west of the imperial seat, if the bucket is covered, then the year will be good, and if the bucket is raised, there will be famine.

古文：客、彗犯，为饥。
现代文：客星、彗星侵犯，是饥荒。
English: Invaded by a guest star, a comet, there is famine.

古文：斛四星，在斗南，主度量、分铢、算数。
现代文：斛座四星，在斗座南，主管长度重量、一分一跦、计算数目。
English: There are four stars in Capricorn, with Capricorn South in charge of length, weight, minutes, seconds, and counting.

古文：其星不明，凶；亡，则年饥。
现代文：它的星不明亮，凶险；消失，那么年成饥荒。
English: Its star is dim and dangerous; it disappears, and then comes famine.

古文：一曰在市楼北，名天斛。
现代文：一说在市楼北面，名叫天斛。
English: One is said to be on the north side of the city hall and is called Tianzhuang.

古文：列肆二星，在斛西北，主货金、玉、珠、玑。
现代文：列肆二颗星，在斛的西北面，主管买卖金、玉、珠、玑。
English: Listed with two stars, it is in charge of buying and selling gold, jade, beads, and enamel in the northwest of the country.

古文：屠肆二星，在帛度东北，主屠宰、烹杀。
现代文：屠肆二颗星，在帛度的东北面，主管屠宰、烹饪宰杀。
English: A butcher with two stars, in the north-eastern part of Shunde, in charge of slaughtering and cooking.

古文：《乾象新书》：在天市垣内十五度。
现代文：《干象新书》：在天市垣内十五度。
English: "Gensho Shinsho": It is fifteen degrees inside the heavenly city wall.

古文：车肆二星，在天市门中，主百货。
现代文：车肆二颗星，在天市垣的门中，主管各种货物。
English: The car has two stars, in the gate of the sky city wall, in charge of all kinds of goods.

古文：星不明，则车盖尽行；明，则吉。
现代文：星色不明亮，那么货车全都张开车盖上路行走；星色明亮，就吉利。
English: If the stars are not bright, then all the trucks will drive on the road with the hood up; if the stars are bright, it's good luck.

古文：客星、彗星守之，天下兵车尽发。
现代文：客星、彗星占据车肆，天下的兵车都调动起来。
English: Guest stars and comets occupy the carriage house, and the world's chariots are mobilized.

古文：《乾象新书》：在天市垣南门偏东。
现代文：《干象新书》：在天市垣南门偏束的地方。
English: "Ganxiang New Book": In the place of the south gate of Tianshi Walled City.

古文：宗正二星，在帝坐东南，宗大夫也。
现代文：宗正二颗星，在帝座的东南，是宗大夫。
English: Zongzheng star two, in the southeast side of the star of the emperor, is a symbol of the doctor who is the same as the monarch.

古文：武密曰：主囗司宗得失之官。
现代文：武密说：主管口司宗得失的官。
English: Wu Mi said, "The officer in charge of the mouth is the one who gains and loses."

古文：《乾象新书》：在宗人西。
现代文：《干象新书》：在宗人的西面。
English: "Gensho Shinsho": Set in the west of Sojin.

古文：彗星守之，若失色，宗正有事。
现代文：彗星占据宗正，如果失去色彩，宗正有变故。
English: The comet occupies Zongzheng, if it loses its color, Zongzheng will change.

古文：客星守之，更号令也；犯之，主不亲宗庙。
现代文：客星占据宗正，是改变号令；凌犯宗正，君主不亲自到宗庙。
English: If a guest star occupies the Zongzheng, it is an order to change; if the guest star violates the Zongzheng, the monarch will not personally go to the ancestral temple.

古文：星孛其分，宗正黜。
现代文：星体变色，它分野地区的宗正被罢黜。
English: The star discolored, and Zong Zheng of the area was ousted.

古文：宗人四星，在宗正东，主录亲疏享祀。
现代文：宗人四颗星，在宗正东面，主管登记亲近疏远的宗族的上供祭祀。
English: There are four So Ren stars, and on the east side of the So Jeong star, the supervisor records the matter of kinship and worship.

古文：宗族有序，则星如绮文而明正；动，则天子亲属有变。
现代文：宗族有次序，那么宗人星像绮罗的文彩而且明亮端正；星体插动，那么天子的亲属有变故。
English: If the lineage of the clan is in order, then the lineage of the star is bright and correct; if the stars are interspersed, then the relatives of the heavenly son have changed.

古文：客星守之，贵人死。
现代文：客星占据宗人，贵人死。
English: The guest stars occupy the living, the dignitaries die.

古文：宗星二星，在候星东，宗室之象，帝辅血脉之臣。
现代文：宗星二颗星，在候星束面，是宗室的象征，是皇帝辅佐宗室血脉的大臣。
English: The two stars of the Zoshin, on the surface of the star cluster, are the symbol of the family, and the emperor is the minister who assists the family line.

古文：《乾象新书》：在宗人北。
现代文：《干象新书》：在宗人北面。
English: "Gensho Shinsho": in the north of Sojin.

古文：客星守之，宗支不和；暗，则宗支弱。
现代文：客星占据，宗族的支系不和；星色暗淡，那么宗族的支系削弱。
English: If the guest star dominates, the branch line of the clan will not be harmonious; if the star is dim, the branch line of the clan will be weakened.

古文：帛度二星，在宗星东北，主度量买卖平货易者。
现代文：帛度二颗星，在宗星东北面，是主管长度重量、买卖公平、货物交易的。
English: The two stars, in the northeast of the constellation, are responsible for length and weight, fair trade, and trade in goods.

古文：《乾象新书》：在屠肆南。
现代文：《干象新书》：在屠肆南面。
English: "Ganxiang New Book": in the south of the butcher's shop.

古文：星明大，尺量平，商人不欺。
现代文：星色明亮广大，说明尺度重量公平，商人不欺骗。
English: The stars are bright and vast, indicating that the scale and weight are fair, and merchants do not cheat.

古文：客星、彗星守之，丝绵大贵。
现代文：客星、彗星占据帛度，丝绵非常贵。
English: The guest stars and comets dominate the turbidity, and the silk is very expensive.

古文：市楼六星，在天市中，临箕星之上，市府也，主市贾律度。
现代文：市楼六颗星，在天市垣中，临于箕星之上，是街市的官府，主管市价律令和度量。
English: The six-star city hall, in the middle of the sky city wall, next to the bright star, is the government office of the city, in charge of market price regulation and measurement.

古文：其阳为金钱，阴为珠玉，变见，各以其所占之。
现代文：它的阳面是金钱，阴面是珠玉，出现各种变化都用它的位置来占骏它。
English: Its bright side is money, its dark side is jewels, and all kinds of changes use its position to occupy it.

古文：《乾象新书》：主阛阓，度律制令，在天市中。
现代文：《干象新书》：主管街市，执行法律制定法令，在天市垣中。
English: "Ganxiang New Book": in charge of the street market, the implementation of laws and regulations, in the sky market.

古文：星明，吉；暗，则市吏不理。
现代文：星色明亮，吉利；暗淡，那么街市的官吏不能治理。
English: The stars are bright, auspicious; if they are dim, then the officials of the city cannot govern.

古文：彗星、客星守之，市门多闭。
现代文：彗星、客星占据市楼，街市店门关闭很多。
English: Comets and guest stars occupy the city hall, and many stores in the city are closed.

古文：七公七星，在招摇东，为天相，三公之象也，主七政。
现代文：七公七颗星，在招摇束面，是天的丞相，三公的象征，主管七政。
English: The seven princes and seven stars, in the swaggering bunch, are the heavenly ministers, the symbols of the three princes, and the heads of the seven governments.

古文：明，则辅佐强；大而动，为兵；齐政，则国法平；戾，则狱多囚；连贯索，则世乱；入河中，籴贵，民饥。
现代文：星色明亮，那么辅佐很强；星色广大而摇动，是战争；星齐整，那么国家法律公平；星不正常，那么监狱中多囚犯：如果连接贯索，那磨世界动乱；如果进入银河，买粮食价贵，人民饥饿。
English: If the star is bright, then the assistant is very strong; if the star is vast and shakes, it is war; if the star is even, then the national law is fair; if the star is abnormal, then there are many prisoners in the prison; if the connection is through the cable, then the world is in turmoil; if it enters the Milky Way, it is expensive to buy grain, and the people are hungry.

古文：太白守之，天下乱，兵起。
现代文：太白星占据，天下动乱，战争爆发。
English: Too white stars occupy, the world is in turmoil, war breaks out.

古文：客星守，岁饥，主危。
现代文：客星占据，年成饥荒，君主危急。
English: The guest star occupies, the year is famine, the monarch is in danger.

古文：流星出其分，主将黜。
现代文：流星从七公出来，它分野地区的主将被罢免。
English: If a shooting star comes out of the seven kingdoms, the lord of its field area will be deposed.

古文：贯索九星，在七公星前，贱人之牢也。
现代文：贯索九颗星，在七公星前面，是卑贱的人的监牢。
English: Nine stars run through it, and in front of the seven public stars is a prison for the lowly.

古文：一曰连索，一曰连营，一曰天牢，主法律，禁强暴。
现代文：一个名称叫连索，一个名称叫连营，一个名称叫天牢，主持法律，禁止强暴。
English: One name is Liansuo, one name is Lianying, one name is Tianye, presiding over the law, prohibiting rape.

古文：牢口一星为门，欲其开也。
现代文：监牢口的一颗星是门，是要它开启。
English: The one star at the mouth of the cell is the door. I hope it's open.

古文：星在天市垣北。
现代文：贯索星在天市垣的北面。
English: The star-crossed rope is on the north side of the heavenly city wall.

古文：星皆明，天下狱繁；七星见，小赦；五星、六星，大赦；动，则斧锧用；中空，改元。
现代文：九颗星都明亮，天下的讼案繁多；七颗星出现，有小的赦免；五颗星、六颗星出现，有大赦；星摇动，就动用斧头砧板等刑具；星中间是空的，改换纪元。
English: Nine stars are bright, there are many lawsuits in the world; seven stars appear, there is a small pardon; five stars, six stars appear, there is an amnesty; when the star shakes, they use axes, cutting boards and other instruments of torture; the middle of the star is empty, changing the era.

古文：石申曰：一星亡，则有赐爵；三星亡，大赦，远期八十日；入河中，为饥；中星众，则囚多。
现代文：石申说：一颗星消失，就有人被赏赐爵禄；三颗星消失，有大赦，长达八十天；进入银河，是饥荒；贯索里星众多，囚犯就多。
English: Shishen said: If one star disappears, someone will be awarded a peerage; if three stars disappear, there will be an amnesty for up to eighty days; if the galaxy is invaded, there will be famine; if there are many planets, there will be many prisoners.

古文：辰星犯之，主水，米贵。
现代文：辰星侵犯，预示水灾，米价贵。
English: If the star is violated, it indicates a flood, and the price of rice will be high.

古文：彗星出，其分中外豪杰起。
现代文：彗星从贯索出来，它分野地区的海内外豪杰一起涌现。
English: The comet emerges from the rope, and domestic and foreign heroes in its field emerge together.

古文：客星入，有枉死者；色黄，诸侯献地；青，为忧；赤，为兵；白，乃为吉。
现代文：客星进入，有冤枉而死的人；星色黄，诸侯献出领地；青色，是忧患；赤色，是战争；白色，纔是吉利。
English: When the guest star enters, there are people who have died unjustly; when the star is yellow, the princes offer their territories; when the star is blue, there is sorrow; when the star is red, there is war; when the star is white, there is good luck.

古文：流星入，女主忧，或赦；出，则贵女死。
现代文：流星进入，女主有忧患，或有赦免；流星从贯索出去，那么贵妇死。
English: If a meteor enters, the mistress will have sorrow or be pardoned; if the meteor goes out through the noose, the lady will die.

古文：云气入，色苍白，天子亡地；青，兵起；黑，狱多枉死；白，天子喜。
现代文：云气进入，星色苍白，天子丧失土地；星青色，战争爆发；黑色，监狱中多有冤枉而死的人；白色，天子高兴。
English: The clouds are coming in, the stars are pale, the Son of Heaven has lost his land; the stars are blue, a war has broken out; black, there are many people in prison who have died unjustly; white, the Son of Heaven is happy.

古文：天纪九星，在贯索东，九卿之象，万事纲纪，主狱讼。
现代文：天纪九颗星，在贯索束面，是九卿的象征，天下万事的纲纪，主管案件诉讼。
English: The nine stars of the celestial calendar, on the surface of the intersecting cord, are the symbol of the nine lords, the discipline of all things in the world, and the head of case litigation.

古文：星明，则天下多讼；亡，则政理坏，国纪乱；散绝，则地震山崩；与女床合，则君失礼，女谒行。
现代文：星色明亮，天下就多讼案；消失，政治就败坏，国家法纪混乱；星色散乱断绝；就地震山崩；如果与女床会合，君主就失去礼节，女谒者通行。
English: If the stars are bright, there will be many lawsuits in the world; if they disappear, politics will be corrupted, and the country's legal system will be in chaos; if the stars are scattered and cut off, there will be earthquakes and landslides; if they meet with a woman, the monarch will lose etiquette, and women will pass.

古文：客星守之，主危，民饥。
现代文：客星占据天纪，君主危急，人民饥荒。
English: The guest star occupies the celestial discipline, the monarch is in danger, and the people are starving.

古文：客星犯，诸侯举兵。
现代文：客星凌犯，诸侯发动战争。
English: When a guest star commits a crime, the lords start a war.

古文：彗、孛犯之，地震。
现代文：彗星、变星凌犯，地震。
English: Comets, variable star transits, earthquakes.

古文：客星、彗星合守，天下狱讼不理。
现代文：客星、彗星一起占据，天下的讼案不审判。
English: The guest star and the comet occupy the same place, and the world's lawsuits do not go to trial.

古文：女床三星，在天纪北，后宫御女侍从官也，主女事。
现代文：女床三颗星，在天纪北面，是后官御女的侍从官，主管妇女的事情。
English: The three stars on the woman's bed, in the northern part of the zodiac, are the attendants of the consort's daughter, in charge of women's affairs.

古文：明，则宫人恣；舒，则妾代女主；不动，则吉；不见，女子多疾。
现代文：星色明亮，宫人就恣虐；星舒展，妾就取代女主；星不动，就吉利；隐匿不出现，女子多病。
English: If the star is bright, the palace attendant will be abusive; if the star is stretched, the concubine will replace the mistress; if the star does not move, it is lucky; if it does not appear, the woman is sick.

古文：客星、彗星守之，宫人谋上。
现代文：客星、彗星占据，宫人图谋犯上。
English: The guest stars and comets occupy, and the palace people are plotting.

古文：客星入，女子忧，后宫恣动，女谒行。
现代文：客星进入，女子有忧患，后宫妄动，女谒者通行。
English: The guest star enters, the woman is in distress, the harem is in a frenzy, and the concubine passes.

古文：云气出，色黄，后宫有福；白，为丧；黑，凶；青，女多疾。
现代文：云气出现，星色黄，后宫有福分；星色白，是丧事；星色黑，凶险；星色青，妇女多病。
English: Cloud appears, star yellow, the harem has good luck; star white, is a funeral; star black, dangerous; star blue, women are sick.

古文：右天市垣常星可名者一十七坐，积数八十有八。
现代文：上面天市垣的常星可以叫出名称的有十七座，累积总数八十八颗星。
English: There are seventeen stars in the sky above that can be named, for a total of eighty-eight stars.

古文：而市楼、天斛、列肆、车肆、斗、帛度、屠肆等星，《晋志》皆不载，《隋志》有之，属天市垣，与《步天歌》合。
现代文：而市楼、天斛、列肆、车肆、斗、帛度、屠肆等星，《晋书，天文志》都不记载，《隋书，天文志》有记载，属于天市垣，与《步天歌》的记载符合。
English: However, the stars such as the City Tower, Heaven's Gate, Heaven's Gate, Heaven's Gate, Heaven's Gate, Heaven's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's Gate, Hell's

古文：又贯索，七公、女床、天纪，《晋志》属太微垣。
现代文：又贯索、七公、女床、天纪，《晋书，天文志》把它们属于太微垣。
English: In addition, Chenso, Shichigong, Nyocho, Tianji, and "Jin Shu, Astronomy" belong to the Taibugaki.

古文：按《乾象新书》：天纪在天市垣北，女床属箕宿，贯索属房宿，七公属氐宿。
现代文：按《干象新书》：天纪在天市垣北面，女床属于箕宿，贯索属于房宿，七公属于氐宿。
English: According to the "Ganxiang New Book": Tianji is in the north of Tianshi Walled City, the bed belongs to the lodging, the rope belongs to the room, and the seven kings belong to the lodging.

古文：武密以七公属房，又属尾；贯索属房，又属氐、属心；女床属于尾、箕。
现代文：武密认为七公属于房宿，又属于尾宿；贯索属于房宿，又属于氐宿、属于心宿；女床属于尾宿、箕宿。
English: Wu Mi believes that the seven kings belong to the room, but also belong to the tail; the cable belongs to the room, but also belongs to the cocoon, belongs to the heart; the bed belongs to the tail, the cocoon.

古文：说皆不同。
现代文：说法都不相同。
English: The stories are all different.

