古文：大将军卫青者，平阳人也。其父郑季，为吏，给事平阳侯家，与侯妾卫媪通，生青。
现代文：大将军卫青是平阳县人，他的父亲郑季充当县中小吏，在平阳侯曹寿家供事，曾与平阳侯的小妾卫媪通奸，生下了卫青。
English: General Wei Qing is a native of Pingyang County. His father, Zheng Ji, served as the county's junior and middle-level officials. He worked for the Cao Shou family of Pingyang County. He had an affair with Wei Xuan, the concubine of Pingyang County, and gave birth to Wei Qing.

古文：青同母兄卫长子，而姊卫子夫自平阳公主家得幸天子，故冒姓为卫氏。字仲卿。
现代文：卫青的同母哥哥叫卫长子，同母姐姐叫卫子夫，卫子夫在平阳公主家得到汉武帝的宠爱，所以冒充姓卫。卫青，字叫仲卿。
English: Wei Qing's older brother by the same mother was called Wei Changzong, and his older sister by the same mother was called Wei Zifu. Wei Zifu was favored by Emperor Han at the Pingyang Princess's home, so he assumed the surname Wei. Wei Qing, the character was called Zhongqing.

古文：长子更字长君。
现代文：卫长子改表字叫长君。
English: Wei's eldest son changed his name to Changjun.

古文：长君母号为卫媪。
现代文：长君的母亲叫卫媪。
English: Nagakimi's mother's name is Weizhou.

古文：媪长女卫孺，次女少兒，次女卫子夫。
现代文：卫媪的大女儿叫卫孺，二女儿叫卫少几，三女儿就是卫子夫。
English: Wei Yao's eldest daughter is Wei Yao Wu, his second daughter is Wei Shao Jia, and his third daughter is Wei Zifu.

古文：後子夫男弟步、广皆冒卫氏。
现代文：后来卫子夫的弟弟步和广都冒充姓卫。
English: Later, Wei Zifu's younger brother Bu He Guang passed himself off as Wei.

古文：青为侯家人，少时归其父，其父使牧羊。
现代文：卫青是平阳侯家的仆人，小的时候回到父亲郑季家里，他父亲让他牧羊。
English: Wei Qing was a servant of the Pingyang Hou family. When he was a child, he returned to his father Zheng Ji's house. His father asked him to shepherd sheep.

古文：先母之子皆奴畜之，不以为兄弟数。
现代文：郑季前妻生的儿子们都把他当作奴仆来对待，不把他当作兄弟。
English: The sons of Zheng Qi's ex-wife all treated him as a servant, not as a brother.

古文：青尝从入至甘泉居室，有一钳徒相青曰： 贵人也，官至封侯。 
现代文：卫青曾经跟人来到甘泉宫的居室，有个脖子上戴着铁枷的犯人给卫青相面说： 你是个贵人，将来能当大官，封侯！ 
English: Wei Qing once came to the living room of Ganquan Palace with someone. A prisoner with an iron shackle around his neck said to Wei Qing face to face: You are a noble, in the future you can be a high official, a feudal lord!

古文：青笑曰： 人奴之生，得毋笞骂即足矣，安得封侯事乎！ 
现代文：卫青笑一笑说： 我是奴婢所生，能不挨他人打骂就心满意足了，怎能想到封侯的事呢！ 
English: Wei Qing smiled and said, "I was born as a slave, and I am satisfied if I do not get scolded by others. How can I think about being put under house arrest?"

古文：青壮，为侯家骑，从平阳主。
现代文：卫青长大后，当了平阳侯家的骑兵，时常跟随平阳公主。
English: After Wei Qing grew up, he became a cavalryman of the Pingyang family, and often followed the Pingyang princess.

古文：建元二年春，青姊子夫得入宫幸上。
现代文：汉武帝建元二年的春天，卫青的姐姐卫子夫进入皇宫，受到武帝的宠幸。
English: In the spring of the second year of the reign of Emperor Wu of Han, Wei Qing's sister, Wei Zifu, entered the imperial palace and was favored by Emperor Wu.

古文：皇后，堂邑大长公主女也，无子，妒。
现代文：皇后陈阿娇是堂邑大长公主刘嫖的女儿，没有儿子，有嫉妒心。
English: Empress Chen Ajiao is the daughter of the eldest princess of Tongyi, Liu Yao. She has no son and is jealous.

古文：大长公主闻卫子夫幸，有身，妒之，乃使人捕青。
现代文：大长公主听说卫子夫受到武帝宠幸，且有了身孕，很嫉妒她，就派人逮捕了卫青。
English: When the eldest princess heard that Emperor Wu favored Wei Zifu and that she was pregnant, she was very jealous of her and sent someone to arrest Wei Qing.

古文：青时给事建章，未知名。
现代文：当时卫青在建章宫供职，尚不出名。
English: At that time, Wei Qing served in the construction of the Zhang Palace and was not yet famous.

古文：大长公主执囚青，欲杀之。
现代文：大长公主逮捕囚禁卫青，想杀死他。
English: The eldest princess arrested and imprisoned Wei Qing and tried to kill him.

古文：其友骑郎公孙敖与壮士往篡取之，以故得不死。
现代文：卫青的朋友骑郎公孙敖就和一些壮士把他抢了出来，因为这个原因，卫青没有死。
English: Wei Qing's friend, the horseman Gongsun Yao, and some strong men snatched him away. For this reason, Wei Qing did not die.

古文：上闻，乃召青为建章监，侍中，及同母昆弟贵，赏赐数日间累千金。
现代文：武帝听到这消息，就召来卫青，任命他当建章监，加侍中官衔。连同他的同母兄弟们都得到显贵，皇上给他们的赏赐，数日之间竟累积千金之多。
English: When Emperor Wu heard the news, he summoned Wei Qing and appointed him to be the building inspector, and he was also given the rank of vice-commander. Together with his brothers of the same mother, they all became distinguished, and the rewards given to them by the emperor amounted to thousands of dollars in just a few days.

古文：孺为太仆公孙贺妻。
现代文：卫孺做了太仆公孙贺的妻子。
English: Wei Wei became the wife of Sun He, the great retainer.

古文：少兒故与陈掌通，上召贵掌。
现代文：卫少儿原来同陈掌私通，武帝便召来陈掌，使他显贵。
English: Wei Shao'er had been having an affair with Chen Shao, so Emperor Wu summoned Chen Shao to make him more prominent.

古文：公孙敖由此益贵。
现代文：公孙敖因此也越来越显贵。
English: As a result, Gongsun Yao became more and more prominent.

古文：子夫为夫人。
现代文：卫子夫做了武帝的夫人。
English: The tutelary deity became Emperor Wu's wife.

古文：青为大中大夫。
现代文：卫青升为大中大夫。
English: Wei Qing was promoted to senior middle school doctor.

古文：元光五年，青为车骑将军，击匈奴，出上谷；太仆公孙贺为轻车将军，出云中；大中大夫公孙敖为骑将军，出代郡；卫尉李广为骁骑将军，出雁门：军各万骑。
现代文：元光五年，卫青当了车骑将军，攻打匈奴，从上谷出塞；太仆公孙贺做轻车将军，由云中出塞；大中大夫公孙敖做骑将军，由代郡出塞；卫尉李广当骁骑将军，由雁门出塞；每军各有一万骑兵。
English: In the fifth year of Yuan Guang, Wei Qing became the general of chariot and cavalry, attacked the Xiongnu, and marched out of Shanggu; the eunuch Gong Sun He became the general of light chariot, and marched out of Yunzhong; the senior doctor Gong Sun Qi became the general of cavalry, and marched out of Dai County; the guard lieutenant Li Guang became the general of horse and cavalry, and marched out of Ganmen; each army had ten thousand cavalry.

古文：青至茏城，斩首虏数百。
现代文：卫青领兵到达茏城，斩杀敌人数百人。
English: Wei Qing led the troops to arrive in Lucheng and killed hundreds of enemies.

古文：骑将军敖亡七千骑；卫尉李广为虏所得，得脱归：皆当斩，赎为庶人。
现代文：骑将军公孙敖损失七千名骑兵，卫尉李广被敌人俘获，逃脱而回。公孙敖和李广都被判为死刑，都交了赎金，免了死刑，成为平民。
English: The cavalry general Gong Sun Rong lost seven thousand cavalrymen, the guard lieutenant Li Guang was captured by the enemy, escaped and returned. Gong Sun Rong and Li Guang were both sentenced to death, paid a ransom, were spared the death penalty, and became civilians.

古文：贺亦无功。
现代文：公孙贺也没有功劳。
English: Gongsun He did not deserve any credit either.

古文：元朔元年春，卫夫人有男，立为皇后。
现代文：元朔元年春天，卫子夫生了男孩子，被立为皇后。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Empress Dowager gave birth to a baby boy and was enthroned as empress.

古文：其秋，青为车骑将军，出雁门，三万骑击匈奴，斩首虏数千人。
现代文：这年秋天，卫青当车骑将军，从雁门出塞，率领三万骑兵攻打匈奴，斩杀敌人几千人。
English: In the autumn of that year, Wei Qing, as a general riding a chariot, led 30,000 cavalry to attack the Xiongnu, killing thousands of the enemy.

古文：明年，匈奴入杀辽西太守，虏略渔阳二千馀人，败韩将军军。
现代文：第二年，匈奴侵入边境，杀死辽西郡的太守，掳掠渔阳郡二千多人，打败了韩安国将军的军队。
English: The following year, the Huns invaded the border, killed the governor of Liaoxi County, captured more than two thousand people in Yuyang County, and defeated the army of General Han An Guo.

古文：汉令将军李息击之，出代；令车骑将军青出云中以西至高阙。
现代文：汉朝命令李息将军攻打匈奴，从代郡出兵；又命令车骑将军卫青从云中出发，向西去攻打匈奴，直到高阙。
English: The Han Dynasty ordered General Li Xi to attack the Xiongnu, and dispatched troops from Dai County; he also ordered the chariot and cavalry General Wei Qing to set out from the clouds and go west to attack the Xiongnu until Gaochun.

古文：遂略河南地，至于陇西，捕首虏数千，畜数十万，走白羊、楼烦王。
现代文：于是攻取了河南地区，直到陇西，捕获敌人几千名，缴获牲畜十万头，打跑了白羊王和楼烦王。
English: As a result, they conquered the Henan region up to Shaanxi, captured several thousand enemies, seized one hundred thousand heads of livestock, and drove away the King of Aries and the King of Rou.

古文：遂以河南地为朔方郡。以三千八百户封青为长平侯。
现代文：汉朝就把河南地区改设为朔方郡，并划定三千八百户封卫青为长平侯。
English: The Han Dynasty changed the name of the Henan region to Shuofang County, and designated 3,800 households of Fengweiqing as Changping County.

古文：青校尉苏建有功，以千一百户封建为平陵侯。使建筑朔方城。
现代文：卫青的校尉苏建有军功，朝廷也划定一千一百户封苏建为平陵侯，并派苏建修筑朔方城。
English: Wei Qing's captain, Su Jian, had military merit, and the imperial court also designated 1100 households to be fiefed to Su Jian as Pingling Hou, and sent Su Jian to build Shuo Fangcheng.

古文：青校尉张次公有功，封为岸头侯。
现代文：卫青的校尉张次公有军功，被封为岸头侯。
English: Zhang Zikong, the captain of Weiqing, was awarded the title of "Kishi Touhou" for his military service.

古文：天子曰： 匈奴逆天理，乱人伦，暴长虐老，以盗窃为务，行诈诸蛮夷，造谋藉兵，数为边害，故兴师遣将，以征厥罪。
现代文：天子说： 匈奴背逆天理，悖乱人伦，侵凌长辈，虐待老人，专以盗窃为事，欺诈各个蛮夷之国，策划阴谋，凭借其武力，屡次侵害汉朝边境，所以朝廷才调动军队，派遣将领，去讨伐它的罪恶。
English: The heavenly son said: The Hun rebels against the principles of heaven, disturbs human relations, abuses elders, mistreats the elderly, engages exclusively in theft, cheats various barbarian countries, plans conspiracies, and repeatedly violates the border of the Han Dynasty by means of its armed forces. That is why the imperial court has mobilized troops and dispatched generals to fight its evil.

古文：诗不云乎， 薄伐玁狁，至于太原 ， 出车彭彭，城彼朔方 。
现代文：《经》上不是说吗： 征讨狁，直到太原 ， 出征的战车，万马奔腾 ， 修筑那座朔方城 。
English: Isn't it said in the "Ching" that: to collect money, to Taiyuan, the chariot of the expedition, thousands of horses galloping, to build that square city.

古文：今车骑将军青度西河至高阙，获首虏二千三百级，车辎畜产毕收为卤，已封为列侯，遂西定河南地，按榆谿旧塞，绝梓领，梁北河，讨蒲泥，破符离，斩轻锐之卒，捕伏听者三千七十一级，执讯获丑，驱马牛羊百有馀万，全甲兵而还，益封青三千户。 
现代文：如今车骑将军卫青越过西河地区，直到高阙，斩杀敌军二千三百人，缴获他们的全部战车、辎重和牲畜，已被封为列侯，于是往西平定了河南地区，巡行榆谿的古代要塞，越过梓领，架设北河的桥梁，讨伐蒲泥，攻破符离，斩杀敌人的轻捷精锐的士卒，捕获敌人的侦察兵三千零七十一人，捉到敌人的间谋，割下死敌的左耳以计功劳，赶回敌人的一百多万只马、牛和羊，保全大军，胜利回师，增封卫青三千户。 
English: Now the cavalry general Wei Qing has crossed the West River area to Gaocheng, killed 2,300 enemy soldiers, captured all their chariots, baggage and livestock, and has been made a vassal, so he went west to level the Henan region, patrolled the ancient fortresses, crossed the Zi collar, built bridges on the North River, fought the mud, broke the lines, killed the enemy's light and sharp soldiers, captured 3,071 enemy scouts, caught the enemy's ambush, cut off the left ear of the dead enemy with merit, drove back more than one million horses, cattle and sheep of the enemy, and preserved the army.

古文：其明年，匈奴入杀代郡太守友，入略雁门千馀人。
现代文：第二年，匈奴侵入边境，杀死代郡太守共友，侵入雁门，抢掠一千余人。
English: The following year, the Xiongnu invaded the border, killed the deputy county governor and his comrades, invaded Yanmen, and robbed more than a thousand people.

古文：其明年，匈奴大入代、定襄、上郡，杀略汉数千人。
现代文：第二年，匈奴大规模入侵代郡、定襄、上郡、斩杀抢掠汉朝百姓几千人。
English: The following year, the Xiongnu made a large-scale invasion of Dai County, Dingxiang, and Shang County, slaughtering and looting several thousand Han people.

古文：其明年，元朔之五年春，汉令车骑将军青将三万骑，出高阙；卫尉苏建为游击将军，左内史李沮为彊弩将军，太仆公孙贺为骑将军，代相李蔡为轻车将军，皆领属车骑将军，俱出朔方；大行李息、岸头侯张次公为将军，出右北平：咸击匈奴。
现代文：第二年，即元朔五年春天，朝廷命令车骑将军卫青率领三万骑兵，从高阙出兵；命令卫尉苏建做游击将军，左内史李沮当强弩将军，太仆公孙贺当骑将军，代国之相李蔡当轻车将军，他们都隶属车骑将军卫青，一同从朔方出兵；朝廷又命令大行李息、岸头侯张次公为将军，从右北平出兵。
English: In the second year, that is, in the spring of the fifth year of the Yuan Shao dynasty, the imperial court ordered the cavalry general Wei Qing to lead 30,000 cavalrymen and send troops from Gaocheng; ordered the guard lieutenant Su Jian to be the guerrilla general, the left inner history Li Shizhen to be the strong general, the servant Gongsun He to be the cavalry general, and the representative of the country, Li Cai, to be the light vehicle general. They were all subordinate to the cavalry general Wei Qing and sent troops from the Shuo side; the imperial court also ordered the big luggage breath and the shore lord Zhang Zigong to be the general and sent

古文：匈奴右贤王当卫青等兵，以为汉兵不能至此，饮醉。
现代文：他们全都去攻打匈奴。匈奴右贤王正对着卫青等人的大兵，以为汉朝军队不能到达这里，便喝起酒来。
English: They all went to fight the Xiongnu. The Xiongnu Uxian Wang was facing the soldiers of Wei Qing and others, and thought that the Han Dynasty army could not reach here, so he drank wine.

古文：汉兵夜至，围右贤王，右贤王惊，夜逃，独与其爱妾一人壮骑数百驰，溃围北去。
现代文：晚上，汉军来到，包围了右贤王；右贤王大惊，连夜逃跑，独自同他的一个爱妾和几百个精壮的骑兵，急驰突围，向北而去。
English: In the evening, the Chinese army came and surrounded King Ugyen. King Ugyen was so shocked that he ran away in the middle of the night. He was alone with one of his mistresses and several hundred strong cavalrymen. He quickly broke through the encirclement and headed north.

古文：汉轻骑校尉郭成等逐数百里，不及，得右贤裨王十馀人，众男女万五千馀人，畜数千百万，於是引兵而还。
现代文：汉朝的轻骑校尉郭成等追赶了几百里，没有追上。汉军捕获了右贤王的小王十多人，男女民众一万五千余人，牲畜数千百万头，于是卫青便领兵凯旋。
English: The light cavalry captain Guo Cheng and others of the Han Dynasty chased the crane for several hundred miles, but did not catch up. The Chinese army captured more than ten people of the right king, more than fifteen thousand men and women, and thousands of millions of livestock, so Wei Qing led the soldiers to a triumphant return.

古文：至塞，天子使使者持大将军印，即军中拜车骑将军青为大将军，诸将皆以兵属大将军，大将军立号而归。
现代文：卫青的军队走到边塞，武帝派遣使者拿着大将军的官印，就在军中任命车骑将军卫青为大将军，其他将军都率兵隶属于大将军卫青，大将军确立名号，班师回京。
English: Wei Qing's army went to the frontier fortress, Emperor Wu sent an envoy to take the general's official seal and appointed the cavalry general Wei Qing as the general in the army. The other generals led the soldiers and were subordinate to General Wei Qing. The general established the name and the squadron returned to Beijing.

古文：天子曰： 大将军青躬率戎士，师大捷，获匈奴王十有馀人，益封青六千户。 
现代文：武帝说： 大将军卫青亲自率领战士攻杀，军队获得大捷，俘虏匈奴之王十多人，加封卫青六千户。 
English: Emperor Wu said: General Wei Qing personally led the soldiers to attack and kill, the army won a great victory, captured more than ten people of the king of the Xiongnu, and sealed six thousand households of Wei Qing.

古文：而封青子伉为宜春侯，青子不疑为阴安侯，青子登为发干侯。
现代文：又封卫青的儿子卫伉为宜春侯，卫青的儿子卫不疑为阴安侯，卫青的儿子卫登为发干侯。
English: He also named Wei Qing's son Wei Xuan as Yichun Marquis, Wei Qing's son Wei Doubtless as Yinan Marquis, and Wei Qing's son Wei Deng as Fagan Marquis.

古文：青固谢曰： 臣幸得待罪行间，赖陛下神灵，军大捷，皆诸校尉力战之功也。
现代文：卫青坚决推辞说： 我侥幸地能在军队中当官，依赖陛下的神圣威灵，才使军队获得大捷，同时这也是各位校尉拚力奋战的功劳。
English: Wei Qing firmly refused, saying, "I was lucky enough to become an officer in the army, and I relied on His Majesty's holy will to make the army achieve great success. At the same time, this is also the merit of the lieutenants who fought hard.

古文：陛下幸已益封臣青。
现代文：陛下已经降恩加封我的食邑。
English: Your Majesty has graciously sealed my food.

古文：臣青子在唡褓中，未有勤劳，上幸列地封为三侯，非臣待罪行间所以劝士力战之意也。
现代文：臣子卫青的儿子们年龄还小，没有征战的劳苦和功绩，皇上降恩，割地封他们三人为侯，这不是我在军队中当官，用来鼓励战士奋力打仗的本意啊！
English: The young sons of the courtier, Wei Qing, are still young and have not yet experienced the hardships and merits of war. The emperor has shown his grace and granted land to the three of them. This was not my intention when I was an officer in the army, to encourage soldiers to fight hard!

古文：伉等三人何敢受封！ 
现代文：卫伉等三人怎敢接受封赏。 
English: How dare Wei Wei and the other three accept the award.

古文：天子曰： 我非忘诸校尉功也，今固且图之。 
现代文：天子说： 我并非忘却各位校尉的功劳，现在本来就要考虑他们的奖赏。 
English: Tenshi said, "I have not forgotten the merits of the lieutenants, and now I have to consider their reward.

古文：乃诏御史曰： 护军都尉公孙敖三从大将军击匈奴，常护军，傅校获王，以千五百户封敖为合骑侯。
现代文：武帝就下令御史说： 护军都尉三次随大将军出击匈奴，经常接应各军，率领一校人马，捕获匈奴小王，划定一千五百户封公孙敖为合骑侯。
English: Emperor Wu then ordered the historian to say: "The captain of the escort went out three times with the general to attack the Xiongnu, often responded to each army, led a school of men and women, captured the Xiongnu king, and designated fifteen hundred households to be fiefed to the Xiongnu.

古文：都尉韩说从大将军出窳浑，至匈奴右贤王庭，为麾下搏战获王，以千三百户封说为龙嵒侯。
现代文：都尉韩说随从大将军从窳浑塞出兵，直打到匈奴右贤王的王庭，在大将军的指挥之下搏杀奋战，俘获匈奴小王，划定一千三百户封韩说为龙侯。
English: The captain Han said that he followed the general and sent troops from Hunse to the royal court of the Hun king Ugyen. Under the command of the general, he fought hard, captured the Hun king, and delineated 1300 households. Han said that he was the Dragon Prince.

古文：骑将军公孙贺从大将军获王，以千三百户封贺为南窌侯。
现代文：骑将军公孙贺跟随大将军俘获匈奴小王，划定一千三百户封公孙贺为南窌侯。
English: The cavalry general Gongsun He followed the great general to capture the Xiongnu Xiao Wang, and delineated thirteen hundred households for Gongsun He to be the Nanluo.

古文：轻车将军李蔡再从大将军获王，以千六百户封蔡为乐安侯。
现代文：轻车将军李蔡两次随大将军俘获匈奴小王，划定一千六百户封李蔡为乐安侯。
English: Li Cai, the general of light vehicles, captured Xiongnu Xiao Wang twice with the general, and delimited 1600 households to make Li Cai the prince of Le'an.

古文：校尉李朔，校尉赵不虞，校尉公孙戎奴，各三从大将军获王，以千三百户封朔为涉轵侯，以千三百户封不虞为随成侯，以千三百户封戎奴为从平侯。
现代文：校尉李朔、校尉赵不虞、校尉公孙戎奴，每人都三次跟随大将军俘获匈奴小王，划定一千三百户封李朔为涉轵侯，划定一千三百户封赵不虞为随成侯，划定一千三百户封公孙戎奴为从平侯。
English: Captain Li Shuo, Captain Zhao Bouguo, and Captain Gongsun Rongnu, each of them followed the general to capture the Xiongnu Xiaowang three times, and designated 1300 households to be Li Shuo, 1300 households to be Zanggu, 1300 households to be Zhao Bouguo, and 1300 households to be Gongsun Rongnu.

古文：将军李沮、李息及校尉豆如意有功，赐爵关内侯，食邑各三百户。 
现代文：将军李沮、李息及校尉豆如意有军功，赐给关内侯的爵位，每人食邑三百户。 
English: Generals Li De, Li Xi and Lieutenant Doudou Ruyi were awarded the title of Kuanai Marquis for their military achievements, and each of them was given 300 households.

古文：其秋，匈奴入代，杀都尉硃英。
现代文：这年秋天，匈奴侵入代郡，杀死都尉朱英。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Xiongnu invaded Dai County and killed Captain Zhu Ying.

古文：其明年春，大将军青出定襄，合骑侯敖为中将军，太仆贺为左将军，翕侯赵信为前将军，卫尉苏建为右将军，郎中令李广为後将军，右内史李沮为彊弩将军，咸属大将军，斩首数千级而还。
现代文：第二年春天，大将军卫青从定襄出兵。合骑侯公孙敖做中将军，太仆公孙贺为左将军，翕侯赵信为前将军，卫尉苏建做右将军，郎中令李广做后将军，左内史李沮做强弩将军。他们都隶属大将军，斩杀敌人几千人而回。
English: In the spring of the following year, the great general Wei Qing sent troops from Dingxiang. The co-rider Hou Gongsun Yao was the middle general, the eunuch Gongsun He was the left general, the eunuch Hou Zhaoxin was the former general, the guard lieutenant Su Jian was the right general, the lieutenant general Li Guang was the rear general, and the left internal historian Li De was the strong general. They all belonged to the great general and killed thousands of enemies.

古文：月馀，悉复出定襄击匈奴，斩首虏万馀人。
现代文：一个多月后，他们又全都从定襄出兵攻打匈奴，杀敌一万多人。
English: More than a month later, they all sent troops from Dingxiang to attack the Huns, killing more than 10,000 of the enemy.

古文：右将军建、前将军信并军三千馀骑，独逢单于兵，与战一日馀，汉兵且尽。
现代文：右将军苏建、前将军赵信的军队合为一军，共三千多骑兵，独遇匈奴单于的军队，同他们交战一天多的时间，汉军将要全军被歼。
English: The armies of the right general, Soviet Jian, and the former general, Zhao Xin, were combined into one army, with a total of more than three thousand cavalry. The Huns alone encountered the army of Yu, and fought with them for more than a day. The entire Chinese army was about to be wiped out.

古文：前将军故胡人，降为翕侯，见急，匈奴诱之，遂将其馀骑可八百，饹降单于。
现代文：前将军赵信原本是匈奴人，投降汉朝被封为翕侯，如今看到军情危急，匈奴人又引诱他，于是他率领剩余的大约八百骑兵，跑到单于那儿投降。
English: The former general Zhao Xin was originally a Hun, who surrendered to the Han Dynasty and was made a warlord. Now that he saw that the military situation was critical, the Huns lured him again, so he led the remaining about eight hundred cavalry and ran there to surrender.

古文：右将军苏建尽亡其军，独以身得亡去，自归大将军。
现代文：右将军苏建把他的军队全部损失了，独自一人逃回，自己来到大将军卫青那里。
English: The right-hand general, Su Jian, lost all his troops and fled back alone. He came to the general, Wei Qing.

古文：大将军问其罪正闳、长史安、议郎周霸等： 建当云何？ 
现代文：大将军卫青就苏建的罪过向军正闳、长史安和议郎周霸等征询意见，说： 怎样定苏建的罪过？ 
English: General Wei Qing solicited opinions on the Soviet Union's crimes from General Zheng Yao, General Chang Shi An, and General Zhou Ba, saying, "How should the Soviet Union's crimes be determined?

古文：霸曰： 自大将军出，未尝斩裨将。
现代文：周霸说道： 自从大将军出征，不曾杀过副将。
English: Zhou Ba said, "Since the general went to war, I have never killed a vice-general."

古文：今建弃军，可斩以明将军之威。 
现代文：如今苏建弃军而回，可以杀苏建以表明大将军的威严。 
English: Now that Soviet Jian abandoned the army and returned, he can kill Soviet Jian to show the majesty of the great general.

古文：闳、安曰： 不然。
现代文：闳和安都说： 不能这样。
English: Both Zou and An said, "This can't be done."

古文：兵法 小敌之坚，大敌之禽也 。
现代文：兵法书上说 两军交锋，军队少的一方既使坚决拚搏，也要被军队多的一方打败 。
English: According to the book of the Art of War, when two armies clash, even if the side with fewer troops fights resolutely, it will still be defeated by the side with more troops.

古文：今建以数千当单于数万，力战一日馀，士尽，不敢有二心，自归。
现代文：如今苏建率几千军队抵御单于的几万军队，奋力战斗了一天多的时间，战士全部牺牲，仍然不敢有背叛汉朝的心意，自己归来。
English: Today, the Soviet Union has led thousands of troops to resist tens of thousands of troops from the Han Dynasty. They have fought hard for more than a day, and all the soldiers have been sacrificed. They still dare not have the intention of betraying the Han Dynasty and return themselves.

古文：自归而斩之，是示後无反意也。不当斩。 
现代文：自己归来而被杀死，这是告诉战士今后若要失败且不可返回汉朝。不应当杀苏建。 
English: He was killed when he returned. This was to tell the soldiers that if they were to fail in the future, they must not return to the Han Dynasty. They should not kill Su Jian.

古文：大将军曰： 青幸得以肺腑待罪行间，不患无威，而霸说我以明威，甚失臣意。
现代文：大将军卫青说： 卫青我侥幸以皇帝亲戚的身分在军队中当官，不忧虑没有威严，而周霸劝我树立个人的威严，大失做人臣的旨意。
English: General Wei Qing said: "Wei Qing, I was lucky enough to become an officer in the army as a relative of the emperor. I had no worries and no dignity. But Zhou Ba advised me to establish personal dignity, which was far from being the will of a vassal.

古文：且使臣职虽当斩将，以臣之尊宠而不敢自擅专诛於境外，而具归天子，天子自裁之，於是以见为人臣不敢专权，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：况且假使我的职权允许我斩杀有罪的将军，但是凭我尊宠的地位不敢在国境外擅自诛杀，而把情况向天子详细报告，让天子自己裁决，由此表现出做臣子的不敢专权，不也是可以的吗？ 
English: Moreover, if my authority allows me to kill a guilty general, but I dare not kill outside the national borders due to my position of honor and favor, and I report the situation to the Son of Heaven in detail and let the Son of Heaven make his own decision, thereby showing that I dare not be a vassal, is it not also possible?

古文：军吏皆曰 善 。
现代文：军中官吏们都说： 好！ 
English: The officers in the army all said, "Good!

古文：遂囚建诣行在所。
现代文：于是就把苏建关押起来，送往皇帝的行在所。
English: So he had Su Jian arrested and sent to the emperor's place of residence.

古文：入塞罢兵。
现代文：卫青领兵进入边塞，停止了对匈奴的征伐。
English: The leader of the Wei Youth Army entered the border fortress and stopped the conquest of the Xiongnu.

古文：是岁也，大将军姊子霍去病年十八，幸，为天子侍中。
现代文：这一年，大将军卫青姐姐的儿子霍去病十八岁，受到武帝宠爱，当了皇帝的侍中。
English: In the same year, General Wei Qing's sister's son, Huo, fell ill at the age of eighteen. He was favored by Emperor Wu and became the emperor's attendant.

古文：善骑射，再从大将军，受诏与壮士，为剽姚校尉，与轻勇骑八百直弃大军数百里赴利，斩捕首虏过当。
现代文：霍去病善于骑马射箭，两次随从大将军出征，大将军奉皇上之命，拨给他一些壮勇的战士，任命他为剽姚校尉。他同八百名轻捷勇敢的骑兵，径直抛开大军几百里，寻找有利的机会攻杀敌人，他们所斩杀的敌兵数量超过了他们的损失。
English: He was good at horse riding and archery, and twice went to war with the general. The general, on the emperor's orders, assigned him some brave soldiers and appointed him to be the captain of the Yao. He and eight hundred light and brave cavalrymen went hundreds of miles away from the army, looking for favorable opportunities to attack and kill the enemy. The number of enemy soldiers they killed exceeded their losses.

古文：於是天子曰： 剽姚校尉去病斩首虏二千二十八级，及相国、当户，斩单于大父行籍若侯产，生捕季父罗姑比，再冠军，以千六百户封去病为冠军侯。
现代文：于是皇上说： 剽姚校尉霍去病杀敌二千零二十八人，其中包括匈奴相国和当户，杀死单于祖父一辈的籍若侯产，活捉单于叔父罗姑比，他的功劳，两次在全军中获第一，划定一千六百户封霍去病为冠军侯。
English: Then the emperor said, "Colonel Yao Huo went to the disease and killed 2,028 enemies, including the Xiongnu's fatherland and the head family, killed his grandfather's generation, captured his uncle Luo Gubi alive, and won the first place in the whole army twice, and designated 1,600 households as the champion.

古文：上谷太守郝贤四从大将军，捕斩首虏二千馀人，以千一百户封贤为众利侯。 
现代文：上谷太守郝贤四次随大将军出征，斩获敌军二千余名，划定一千一百户封郝贤为众利侯。 
English: Kamitani Taishu Shoken went to war four times with the general, captured more than two thousand enemy soldiers, and designated eleven hundred households to be Shoken's vassals.

古文：是岁，失两将军军，亡翕侯，军功不多，故大将军不益封。
现代文：这一年，损失了两位将军的军队，翕侯赵信逃亡，军功不多，所以大将军卫青没有增封。
English: In this year, the army lost two generals, the warlord Zhao Xin fled, and there was not much military merit, so the general Wei Qing did not increase the seal.

古文：右将军建至，天子不诛，赦其罪，赎为庶人。
现代文：右将军苏建回来后，天子没有杀他，赦免了他的罪过，交了赎金，成为平民百姓。
English: After the Right General Su Jian returned, the Heavenly Son did not kill him, forgave his sins, paid the ransom, and became a commoner.

古文：大将军既还，赐千金。
现代文：大将军卫青回到京城，皇上赏赐他千金。
English: General Wei Qing returned to Beijing, and the emperor rewarded him with thousands of gold.

古文：是时王夫人方幸於上，甯乘说大将军曰： 将军所以功未甚多，身食万户，三子皆为侯者，徒以皇后故也。
现代文：这时，王夫人正受到汉武帝的宠幸，宁乘就劝说卫青道： 将军您所以军功还不太多，自己却食邑万户，三个儿子都受封为侯的原因，只是因卫皇后的缘故。
English: At this time, Mrs. Wang was being favored by Emperor Han, and Ning Rong persuaded Wei Qing: General, your military service is not too much, but you have eaten up thousands of households, and the reason why all three sons were given the title of marquess is only because of Empress Wei.

古文：今王夫人幸而宗族未富贵，原将军奉所赐千金为王夫人亲寿。 
现代文：如今王夫人得幸，而她的同姓亲戚还没有富贵，希望将军捧着皇上赏赐的千金，去给王夫人的双亲祝寿。 
English: Now that Mrs. Wang is fortunate, and her relatives with the same surname are not yet rich, I hope that the general will take the money given by the emperor and go to wish Mrs. Wang's parents a happy birthday.

古文：大将军乃以五百金为寿。
现代文：于是大将军卫青就用五百金给王夫人的双亲祝寿。
English: As a result, General Wei Qing used five hundred gold to wish Mrs. Wang's parents a happy birthday.

古文：天子闻之，问大将军，大将军以实言，上乃拜甯乘为东海都尉。
现代文：武帝听到这消息，就问大将军卫青，大将军卫青把事实报告了皇上，皇上就任命宁乘做东海都尉。
English: When Emperor Wu heard the news, he asked General Wei Qing. General Wei Qing reported the facts to the emperor, who appointed Ning Xuan as the captain of the East Sea.

古文：张骞从大将军，以尝使大夏，留匈奴中久，导军，知善水草处，军得以无饥渴，因前使绝国功，封骞博望侯。
现代文：张骞跟随大将军出征，因为他曾经出使大夏，被扣留在匈奴很长时间，这次他为大军作向导，熟知有水草的好地方，因而使大军免于饥渴，再加上他以前出使遥远国家的功劳，封张骞为博望侯。
English: Zhang Xuan followed the general to go to war, because he had been sent to Baxia and was detained in the Huns for a long time. This time, he served as a guide for the large army, and was familiar with the good places where there were aquatic plants, thus saving the large army from hunger and thirst. In addition to his previous achievements in dispatching to distant countries, Zhang Xuan was awarded the title of Bohanghou.

古文：冠军侯去病既侯三岁，元狩二年春，以冠军侯去病为骠骑将军，将万骑出陇西，有功。
现代文：冠军侯霍去病被封侯三年，在元狩二年春天，皇帝命冠军侯霍去病做骠骑将军，率领一万骑兵，从陇西出击匈奴，有军功。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, the emperor ordered the champion Hou Huo to go to the sick as a cavalry general, led ten thousand cavalry, and attacked the Xiongnu from Shaanxi. He had military achievements.

古文：天子曰： 骠骑将军率戎士逾乌盭，讨濮，涉狐奴，历五王国，辎重人众慑慴者弗取，冀获单于子。
现代文：武帝说： 骠骑将军亲自率领战士越过乌盭山，讨伐遬濮，渡过狐奴河，经过五个匈奴的王国，不掠取畏惧顺从者的财物和民众，只希望捕获单于的儿子。
English: Emperor Wu said: General Zhi Rong personally led the soldiers to cross the Wulong Mountain, fight against the Xiongnu, cross the Fox River, pass through the five Xiongnu kingdoms, and did not plunder the property and people of the fearful followers, but only hoped to capture the son of the Xiongnu.

古文：转战六日，过焉支山千有馀里，合短兵，杀折兰王，斩卢胡王，诛全甲，执浑邪王子及相国、都尉，首虏八千馀级，收休屠祭天金人，益封去病二千户。 
现代文：转战六天，越过焉支山一千余里，与敌人短兵相接，杀死了折兰王，砍掉卢胡王的头，诛杀全副武装的敌兵，抓获了浑邪王的儿子及匈奴相国、都尉，歼敌八千余人，缴获了休屠王的祭天金人。加封霍去病二千户。 
English: He fought for six days, crossed more than a thousand miles of the Yanzhishan Mountains, encountered the enemy's short soldiers, killed King Orilan, cut off the head of King Luhu, killed the fully armed enemy soldiers, captured the son of King Hunza and the Hunnu's sister country, the captain, destroyed more than eight thousand enemy people, and captured the King Xiu Tuo's sacrificial gold person. He also went to two thousand households.

古文：其夏，骠骑将军与合骑侯敖俱出北地，异道；博望侯张骞、郎中令李广俱出右北平，异道：皆击匈奴。
现代文：这年夏天，骠骑将军与合骑侯公孙敖都从北地出兵，分道进军；博望侯张骞、郎中令李广都从右北平出兵，分道进军。
English: In the summer of that year, the general Zou and his co-riding vassal, the vassal lord Sun Yat-sen, both sent troops from the north and marched in separate directions; the vassal lord Zhang Ye and his vassal lord Li Guang both sent troops from the north and marched in separate directions.

古文：郎中令将四千骑先至，博望侯将万骑在後至。
现代文：他们都去攻打匈奴。郎中令率领四千骑兵首先到达，博望侯率领一万骑兵随后到达。
English: They all went to fight the Xiongnu. Langzhongling arrived first with four thousand cavalry, and Bohanghou arrived later with ten thousand cavalry.

古文：匈奴左贤王将数万骑围郎中令，郎中令与战二日，死者过半，所杀亦过当。
现代文：匈奴左贤王率领几万骑兵围攻郎中令李广，郎中令与敌兵战斗了两天，损失了大半人马，他们杀死敌人的数目超过了他们损失的人数。
English: King Zuoxian of the Xiongnu led tens of thousands of cavalry to besiege the second-in-command Li Guang. The second-in-command fought with the enemy soldiers for two days and lost most of his men. The number of enemies they killed exceeded the number of people they lost.

古文：博望侯至，匈奴兵引去。
现代文：博望侯领兵赶到时，匈奴的军队已撤走。
English: The Hun troops had already retreated by the time Bohanghor arrived to lead the troops.

古文：博望侯坐行留，当斩，赎为庶人。
现代文：博望侯犯有行军滞留而延误军机的罪过，被判为死刑，交了赎金，成为平民百姓。
English: Bohanghou was found guilty of delaying a military plane by delaying the march. He was sentenced to death, paid a ransom, and became a civilian.

古文：而骠骑将军出北地，已遂深入，与合骑侯失道，不相得，骠骑将军逾居延至祁连山，捕首虏甚多。
现代文：骠骑将军出了北地后，已深入匈奴之中，因合骑侯公孙敖走错了路，没能相会。骠骑将军越过居延泽，到达祁连山，捕获了很多敌人。
English: After the general rode out of the north, he had already penetrated deep into the Xiongnu, but because he rode together with Hou Gongsun Yao, they went the wrong way and could not meet. The general rode over Jiyan Ze and reached Qilian Mountain, capturing many enemies.

古文：天子曰： 骠骑将军逾居延，遂过小月氏，攻祁连山，得酋涂王，以众降者二千五百人，斩首虏三万二百级，获五王，五王母，单于阏氏、王子五十九人，相国、将军、当户、都尉六十三人，师大率减什三，益封去病五千户。
现代文：天子说： 骠骑将军越过居延泽，于是经过小月氏，攻到祁连山，俘虏酋涂王，率众投降的有二千五百人，杀敌三万零二百人，俘获五个匈奴小王、五个匈奴小王的母亲、单于的妻子、匈奴王子五十九个，还俘获匈奴相国、将军、当户、都尉等共六十三人，汉朝军队大概减损十分之三，增封霍去病五千户。
English: Tianzi said: The general of the Xiongnu cavalry crossed Ji Yanze, then passed through the Xiao Yue clan and attacked Qilian Mountain, captured the king of the chiefs, led the people to surrender, and there were 2,500 people, killed 30,200 enemies, captured five Hun kings, five Hun kings' mothers, one wife, and fifty-nine Hun princes, and also captured a total of 63 Hun statesmen, generals, heads of households, and captains. The Han Dynasty army was reduced by about three-tenths, and an additional five thousand households went sick.

古文：赐校尉从至小月氏爵左庶长。
现代文：赏赐随霍去病到达小月氏的校尉们左庶长的爵位。
English: The school captains who followed Huo to the illness and reached the Kogetsu clan were rewarded with the title of left vice-chairman.

古文：鹰击司马破奴再从骠骑将军斩濮王，捕稽沮王，千骑将得王、王母各一人，王子以下四十一人，捕虏三千三百三十人，前行捕虏千四百人，以千五百户封破奴为从骠侯。
现代文：鹰击司马赵破奴两次跟随骠骑将军出征，斩杀了遬濮王，俘获了稽且王，千骑将捉到匈奴小王和小王母各一人，王子以下四十一人，俘虏敌兵三千三百三十人，先头部队俘虏敌兵一千四百人，划定一千五百户封赵破奴为从骠侯。
English: Zhao Bonu, the eagle-beating horse, twice followed the cavalry general to go to war, killed the cavalry king, and captured the cavalry king. The cavalry will capture one Xiongnu Xiaowang and one Xiaowangmai each, and forty-one princes, capture three thousand three hundred and thirty enemy soldiers, the leading troops capture one thousand four hundred enemy soldiers, and delineate one thousand five hundred households to fief Zhao Bonu as a vassal.

古文：校尉句王高不识，从骠骑将军捕呼于屠王王子以下十一人，捕虏千七百六十八人，以千一百户封不识为宜冠侯。
现代文：校尉句王高不识，跟随骠骑将军霍去病俘虏呼于屠王和王子以下共十一人，俘虏敌兵一千七百六十八人，划定一千一百户封高不识为宜冠侯。
English: Colonel Gu Wang Gao did not know, followed the cavalry general Huo to the sick prisoners Huo Tuo Wang and Prince, a total of eleven people, captured enemy soldiers one thousand seven hundred and sixty-eight people, delineated one thousand one hundred households of Fong Gao did not know as the crown prince.

古文：校尉仆多有功，封为煇渠侯。 
现代文：校尉仆多有军功，封为煇渠侯。 
English: Many of the school's lieutenants had distinguished military service, and were awarded the title of "渠侯."

古文：合骑侯敖坐行留不与骠骑会，当斩，赎为庶人。
现代文：合骑侯公孙敖犯了行军滞留而未能与骠骑将军会师的罪过，判为死刑，交了赎金，成为平民百姓。
English: The co-rider, Hou Gongsun, was sentenced to death for the crime of staying behind during the march and failing to join the division with the co-rider. He paid the ransom and became a commoner.

古文：诸宿将所将士马兵亦不如骠骑，骠骑所将常选，然亦敢深入，常与壮骑先其大军，军亦有天幸，未尝困绝也。
现代文：各位老将军所率领的兵士和马匹武器也不如骠骑将军的，骠骑将军所率领的是经常挑选的士兵。但他敢于深入敌军境内作战，常常和壮健的骑兵跑在大军的前面，他的军队也有好运气，未曾遇到绝大的困境。
English: The soldiers and horses led by the old generals were not as well armed as those of the cavalry generals, who were always led by selected soldiers, but he dared to fight deep into the enemy's territory, often running ahead of the large army with strong cavalry, and his army also had good luck and never encountered great difficulties.

古文：然而诸宿将常坐留落不遇。
现代文：但各位老将却经常因为行军迟缓落后，遇不到好的战机。
English: However, the veterans are often lagging behind due to the slowness of the march, and they do not encounter good fighters.

古文：由此骠骑日以亲贵，比大将军。
现代文：从此以后，骠骑将军与皇上一天比一天亲近，更加显贵，跟大将军卫青相仿。
English: From then on, the general and the emperor became closer and closer day by day, becoming more and more distinguished, similar to the general Wei Qing.

古文：其秋，单于怒浑邪王居西方数为汉所破，亡数万人，以骠骑之兵也。
现代文：这年秋天，单于因为浑邪王居守在西方，多次被汉朝打败，损失了几万人，而这全是因为骠骑将军的军队，觉得十分气愤。
English: This autumn, just because the evil king Hun stayed in the west, he was repeatedly defeated by the Han Dynasty, losing tens of thousands of people, all because of the general's army, I felt very angry.

古文：单于怒，欲召诛浑邪王。
现代文：单于发怒，想召来浑邪王，把他杀死。
English: Out of sheer anger, he wanted to summon the evil king Hun and kill him.

古文：浑邪王与休屠王等谋欲降汉，使人先要边。
现代文：因此浑邪王和休屠王等想投降汉朝，就先派人到边境上等候。
English: Therefore, King Hunjia and King Xiu Tu, who wanted to surrender to the Han Dynasty, first sent people to wait at the border.

古文：是时大行李息将城河上，得浑邪王使，即驰传以闻。
现代文：这时，大行李息率兵在黄河岸边筑城，见到浑邪王的使者，立即就命令传车急驰而归，向皇帝报告。
English: At this time, a large contingent of soldiers began to build a city on the banks of the Yellow River. When they saw the envoy of the evil king, they immediately ordered the car to rush back and report to the emperor.

古文：天子闻之，於是恐其以诈降而袭边，乃令骠骑将军将兵往迎之。
现代文：皇上听过汇报后，怕浑邪王用诈降的办法偷袭边境，于是就命令骠骑将军领兵前去迎接浑邪王和休屠王。
English: After hearing the report, the emperor was afraid that King Hunjia would use the method of deception to attack the border, so he ordered the cavalry general to lead the troops to meet King Hunjia and King Xiu Tu.

古文：骠骑既渡河，与浑邪王众相望。
现代文：骠骑将军已经渡过黄河，与浑邪王的部队相互远望着。
English: General Zou has already crossed the Yellow River, and he and the evil king's troops are looking at each other from afar.

古文：浑邪王裨将见汉军而多欲不降者，颇遁去。
现代文：浑邪王的副将们看到汉朝军队，多数不想投降，有好多人逃遁而去。
English: When the vice-commanders of King Hunjia saw the Han Dynasty army, most of them did not want to surrender, and many fled.

古文：骠骑乃驰入与浑邪王相见，斩其欲亡者八千人，遂独遣浑邪王乘传先诣行在所，尽将其众渡河，降者数万，号称十万。
现代文：骠骑将军霍去病就打马奔入敌阵，同浑邪王相见，杀了想逃走的八千人，于是命浑邪王一个人乘着转车，先到皇帝的行在所，然后由他领着浑邪王的全部军队渡过黄河，投降者有几万人，号称十万。
English: When General Huo fell ill, he rode his horse into the enemy lines, met with King Hun, and killed eight thousand people who wanted to escape. So he ordered King Hun to take a car to go to the emperor's place of residence, and then he led King Hun's entire army across the Yellow River. There were tens of thousands of people who surrendered, known as one hundred thousand.

古文：既至长安，天子所以赏赐者数十巨万。
现代文：他们到达长安后，天子用来赏赐的钱有几十万。
English: After they arrived in Chang'an, the son of heaven used to reward them with hundreds of thousands of money.

古文：封浑邪王万户，为漯阴侯。
现代文：划定一万户封浑邪王为漯阴侯。
English: Ten thousand households of Hunzao were designated as Hunyin villages.

古文：封其裨王呼毒尼为下摩侯，鹰庇为煇渠侯，禽犁为河綦侯，大当户铜离为常乐侯。
现代文：封他的小王呼毒尼为下摩侯，鹰庇为煇渠侯，禽梨为河綦侯，大当户铜离为常乐侯。
English: He named his little king, Hoo Dang Nee, as the lord of Shimoma, Ying Bi as the lord of the Yangtze River, Ying Li as the lord of the Yangtze River, and the great lord, Tong Li, as the lord of Changle.

古文：於是天子嘉骠骑之功曰： 骠骑将军去病率师攻匈奴西域王浑邪，王及厥众萌咸相饹，率以军粮接食，并将控弦万有馀人，诛獟駻，获首虏八千馀级，降异国之王三十二人，战士不离伤，十万之众咸怀集服，仍与之劳，爰及河塞，庶几无患，幸既永绥矣。
现代文：于是天子称赞骠骑侯霍去病的功劳说： 骠骑将军霍去病率领军队攻打匈奴西域浑邪王，浑邪王及其部队与民众都相互投奔汉朝，用军粮接济汉军。骠骑将军一并率领他们的善射兵卒一万余人，诛杀了妄图逃亡的凶悍之人，斩杀八千多人，使敌国之王三十二人投降汉朝。汉军士卒没有伤亡，十万大军全部归来。骠骑将军接连出征，不辞辛劳，使河塞地区几乎消除了边患，有幸将永保安宁。
English: Therefore, the heavenly son praised the merits of the cavalry general Huo, saying: "The cavalry general Huo went sick and led the army to attack the Hun king of the Western Regions. The Hun king and his troops and the people all went to the Han Dynasty and supported the Han Army with military food. The cavalry general led their good shooters and killed more than 10,000 people, killed the fierce people who tried to escape in vain, killed more than 8,000 people, and made the king of the enemy surrender to the Han Dynasty. There were no casualties among the Han soldiers, and all the 100,000 troops returned. The cavalry general went to war one after another, worked hard, and almost eliminated the border

古文：以千七百户益封骠骑将军。 
现代文：划定一千七百户增封骠骑将军。 
English: One thousand seven hundred households were designated to receive additional seal and horseback generals.

古文：减陇西、北地、上郡戍卒之半，以宽天下之繇。
现代文：于是就减少了陇西、北地、上郡戍守之兵的一半，以此使全国百姓的徭役负担得到宽缓。
English: As a result, the number of soldiers stationed in Shaanxi, Hubei, and Shangguan was reduced by half, thereby easing the burden of guard duty on the people of the whole country.

古文：居顷之，乃分徙降者边五郡故塞外，而皆在河南，因其故俗，为属国。
现代文：过了不久，朝廷就把归降的匈奴人分别迁徙到边境五郡原先的边塞以外，但都在河南地区，并按照他们原有的习俗，作为汉王朝的属国。
English: Soon after, the imperial court relocated the returned Huns to five counties outside the original border fortress, but all in Henan, and in accordance with their original customs, as a vassal state of the Han Dynasty.

古文：其明年，匈奴入右北平、定襄，杀略汉千馀人。
现代文：第二年，匈奴侵入右北平、定襄，杀掠汉朝一千多人。
English: In the second year, the Xiongnu invaded Right Beiping and Dingxiang, killing and plundering more than a thousand people of the Han Dynasty.

古文：其明年，天子与诸将议曰： 翕侯赵信为单于画计，常以为汉兵不能度幕轻留，今大发士卒，其势必得所欲。 
现代文：第二年，汉武帝同诸位将军们商议说： 翕侯赵信替匈奴单于出谋画策，常常认为汉朝军队不能越过沙漠轻易留在那里，现在派大军出击，势必能实现我们的愿望。 
English: In the second year, Emperor Hanwu discussed with the generals and said, "The warlord Zhao Xin has been plotting for the Xiongnu to attack alone. He often thought that the Han Dynasty army could not easily cross the desert and stay there. If he sent a large army to attack now, he would surely be able to realize our wish."

古文：是岁元狩四年也。
现代文：这一年是元狩四年。
English: This year is the fourth year of Genkari.

古文：元狩四年春，上令大将军青、骠骑将军去病将各五万骑，步兵转者踵军数十万，而敢力战深入之士皆属骠骑。
现代文：元狩四年春天，武帝命令大将军卫青、骠骑将军霍去病各率五万骑兵，几十万步兵和转运物资的人跟随其后，而那些敢于奋力战斗和勇于深入的士兵都隶属于骠骑将军。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Wu ordered the general Wei Qing and the cavalry general Huo to go on sick leave with 50,000 cavalry each, followed by hundreds of thousands of infantrymen and material transporters, and those soldiers who dared to fight hard and go deep were subordinated to the cavalry general.

古文：骠骑始为出定襄，当单于。
现代文：骠骑将军开始要从定襄出兵，迎击单于。
English: The general began to send troops from Dingxiang to meet the attack.

古文：捕虏言单于东，乃更令骠骑出代郡，令大将军出定襄。
现代文：后来捕到的匈奴俘虏说单于向东而去，于是就改令骠骑将军从代郡出兵，命令大将军卫青从定襄出兵。
English: Later, the captured Huns prisoners said that Shan Yu went to the east, so he changed his order and ordered the cavalry general to send troops from Dai County, and ordered the general Wei Qing to send troops from Dingxiang.

古文：郎中令为前将军，太仆为左将军，主爵赵食其为右将军，平阳侯襄为後将军，皆属大将军。
现代文：郎中令李广做前将军，太仆公孙贺任左将军，主爵都尉赵食其任右将军，平阳侯曹襄任后将军，他们都隶属大将军。
English: His second-in-command, Li Guang, was the former general, his servant, Sun He, was the left-hand general, the lord's lieutenant, Zhao Shiji, was the right-hand general, and the lord of Pingyang, Cao Xiang, was the second-hand general. All of them were subordinate to the general.

古文：兵即度幕，人马凡五万骑，与骠骑等咸击匈奴单于。
现代文：大军随即越过沙漠，连人带马共五万骑兵，同骠骑将军等都攻打匈奴的单于。
English: The large army immediately crossed the desert, and together with men and horses, a total of fifty thousand cavalrymen, along with cavalry generals, etc. all attacked the Huns alone.

古文：赵信为单于谋曰： 汉兵既度幕，人马罢，匈奴可坐收虏耳。 
现代文：赵信替单于出谋划策说： 汉军已越过沙漠，人困马疲，匈奴可以坐收汉军俘虏了。 
English: Zhao Xin substituted the strategy of going out alone and said: The Chinese army has crossed the desert, the people are exhausted, and the Xiongnu can take the prisoners of the Chinese army.

古文：乃悉远北其辎重，皆以精兵待幕北。
现代文：于是把他们的辎重全部运到遥远的北方，全把精兵安排在大漠以北等待汉军。
English: As a result, they transported all of their baggage to the far north, and arranged all of their elite soldiers to wait for the Chinese army north of the desert.

古文：而適值大将军军出塞千馀里，见单于兵陈而待，於是大将军令武刚车自环为营，而纵五千骑往当匈奴。
现代文：正碰上大将军卫青的军队开出塞外一千多里，看见单于的军队排成阵势等在那里，于是大将军下令让武刚车排成环形营垒，又命五千骑兵纵马奔驰，抵挡匈奴。
English: General Wei Qing's army, which had just met him, was more than a thousand miles away from the fortress, and when he saw Yan Yu's army lined up and waiting there, the general ordered the wagons to line up in a ring and ordered five thousand cavalrymen to gallop against the Huns.

古文：匈奴亦纵可万骑。
现代文：匈奴也有大约一万骑兵奔驰而来。
English: The Huns also came with about ten thousand cavalry.

古文：会日且入，大风起，沙砾击面，两军不相见，汉益纵左右翼绕单于。
现代文：恰巧太阳将落，刮起大风，沙石打在人们的脸上，两军都无法看见对方，汉军又命左右两翼急驰向前，包抄单于。
English: Coincidentally, the sun was about to set, a strong wind was blowing, and sand and stones were hitting people's faces. Both armies could not see each other, and the Chinese army was ordered to rush forward on the left and right wings, encircling each other.

古文：单于视汉兵多，而士马尚彊，战而匈奴不利，薄莫，单于遂乘六，壮骑可数百，直冒汉围西北驰去。
现代文：单于看到汉朝军队很多，而且战士和战马还很强大，若是交战，对匈奴不利。因此，在傍晚时单于就乘着六头骡子拉的车子，同大约几百名壮健的骑兵，径直冲开汉军包围圈，向西北奔驰而去。
English: Seeing that the Han Dynasty had a large number of troops, and the soldiers and horses were still very strong, if there was a battle, it would be unfavorable to the Xiongnu. Therefore, in the evening, Zeng Yu took a six-horse mule-drawn carriage with about several hundred strong cavalrymen, drove straight through the encirclement of the Han Army, and galloped to the northwest.

古文：时已昏，汉匈奴相纷挐，杀伤大当。
现代文：这时，天已黄昏，汉朝军队和匈奴人相互扭打，杀伤人数大致相同。
English: At this time, it was already dusk, the Han Dynasty army and the Huns were fighting with each other, and the number of casualties was about the same.

古文：汉军左校捕虏言单于未昏而去，汉军因发轻骑夜追之，大将军军因随其後。
现代文：汉军左校尉捕到匈奴俘虏，说单于在天未黑时已离去，于是汉军就派出轻骑兵连夜追击，大将军的军队也跟随其后。
English: Chinese Lieutenant Zuo captured a Hun prisoner and said that he had left before dark, so the Chinese army sent light cavalry to chase him overnight, followed by the general's army.

古文：匈奴兵亦散走。
现代文：匈奴的兵士四散奔逃。
English: The Hun soldiers scattered and fled.

古文：迟明，行二百馀里，不得单于，颇捕斩首虏万馀级，遂至窴颜山赵信城，得匈奴积粟食军。
现代文：直到天快亮时，汉军已行走二百余里，没有追到单于，却俘获和斩杀敌兵一万多人，于是到达了窴颜山赵信城，获得匈奴积存的粮食以供军队食用。
English: Until dawn, the Chinese army had walked more than two hundred miles. They didn't catch up with the Xiongnu, but they captured and killed more than ten thousand enemy soldiers. They then reached Zhaoxin City on Mount Yan, and obtained grain stored by the Xiongnu for the army to eat.

古文：军留一日而还，悉烧其城馀粟以归。
现代文：汉军留住一日而回，把城中剩余的粮食全部烧掉才归来。
English: The Chinese army stayed for a day and then returned, burning all the remaining grain in the city before returning.

古文：大将军之与单于会也，而前将军广、右将军食其军别从东道，或失道，後击单于。
现代文：在大将军卫青同单于会战时，前将军李广和右将军赵食其的军队从东方的道路进军，因为迷了路，没能如期同卫青同攻单于。
English: At the time of the battle between General Wei Qing and Shan, the former General Li Guang and the right General Zhao Shiji's army marched from the eastern road, because they lost their way and failed to attack Shan as scheduled.

古文：大将军引还过幕南，乃得前将军、右将军。
现代文：直到大将军卫青领兵回到大漠以南时，才遇到前将军和右将军。
English: It was not until the general Wei Qing led the troops back to the south of the desert that he met the former general and the right general.

古文：大将军欲使使归报，令长史簿责前将军广，广自杀。
现代文：大将军想派使者回京报告天子，就命令长史去按文书所列罪状审问前将军李广，李广自杀。
English: When the great general wanted to send an envoy back to Beijing to report on Tianzi, he ordered Changshi to interrogate the former general Li Guang according to the charges listed in the document. Li Guang committed suicide.

古文：右将军至，下吏，赎为庶人。
现代文：右将军回到京城，被交给法官，赵食其交了赎金，成为平民百姓。
English: General Right returned to Beijing and was handed over to a judge. Zhao Shikichi paid the ransom and became a commoner.

古文：大将军军入塞，凡斩捕首虏万九千级。
现代文：大将军卫青进入边塞，此次总共斩获敌兵一万九千人。
English: General Wei Qing entered the border fortress and this time captured a total of 19,000 enemy soldiers.

古文：是时匈奴众失单于十馀日，右谷蠡王闻之，自立为单于。
现代文：这时，匈奴的部众失去单于十多天，右谷蠡王听到这消息后，就自己当了单于。
English: At this time, the Xiongnu's subordinates lost more than ten days of solitude. After hearing this news, Ugu Yingwang himself became a solitaire.

古文：单于後得其众，右王乃去单于之号。
现代文：单于后来又与他的部众相会合，右谷蠡王就去掉自立的单于之名。
English: But later, when he met with his subordinates again, Yuya Shao Wang removed the independent name of Yuya Shao Wang.

古文：骠骑将军亦将五万骑，车重与大将军军等，而无裨将。
现代文：骠骑将军也率领五万骑兵，所带军需物资也与大将军卫青的相同，但却没有副将。
English: General Xie Jia also led fifty thousand cavalry, and brought the same military supplies as General Wei Qing, but without a vice-general.

古文：悉以李敢等为大校，当裨将，出代、右北平千馀里，直左方兵，所斩捕功已多大将军。
现代文：他就任用李敢等人做大校，充当副将，从代郡、右北平出兵一千余里，遇上左贤王的军队，他们斩获敌兵的功劳已经远远超过了大将军卫青。
English: He appointed Li Gang and others as senior colonels and vice generals, and sent troops more than a thousand miles from Dayi County and Right Beiping to meet the army of Zuoxian Wang. Their achievements in capturing enemy soldiers have far exceeded those of General Wei Qing.

古文：军既还，天子曰： 骠骑将军去病率师，躬将所获荤粥之士，约轻赍，绝大幕，涉获章渠，以诛比车耆，转击左大将，斩获旗鼓，历涉离侯。
现代文：出征的大军全部归来时，武帝说： 骠骑将军霍去病率领军队出征，又亲自率领所俘虏的匈奴士兵，携带少量军需物资，越过大沙漠，渡河捕获单于近臣章渠，诛杀匈奴小王比车耆转而攻击匈奴左大将，斩杀敌将，夺取其军旗和战鼓。
English: When all the troops returned from the campaign, Emperor Wu said: "I rode on the back of General Huo to lead the army out of the war, and I personally led the captured Hun soldiers, carrying a small amount of munitions, crossed the desert, crossed the river and captured the single in the vassal Zhangqiu, killed the Hun Xiaowang Bicheng and attacked the Hun Zuo general, killed the enemy general, and captured his flag and war drums.

古文：济弓闾，获屯头王、韩王等三人，将军、相国、当户、都尉八十三人，封狼居胥山，禅於姑衍，登临翰海。
现代文：翻越离侯山，渡过弓闾河，捕获匈奴屯头王和韩王等三人，以及将军、相国、当户、都尉等八十三人。然后在狼居胥山祭天，在姑衍山祭地，并且登上高山以望大沙漠。
English: They climbed over the Hou Mountain, crossed the Yulun River, and captured three Huns, including King Tun and King Han, as well as eighty-three generals, brothers-in-arms, heads of households, and captains. Then they went to the Wolongju Lushan Festival and the Guyan Mountain Festival, and climbed up the mountain to see the great desert.

古文：执卤获丑七万有四百四十三级，师率减什三，取食於敌，逴行殊远而粮不绝，以五千八百户益封骠骑将军。 
现代文：共捕获俘虏和杀敌七万零四百四十三人，汉军大概减损十分之三。他们从敌人那里取得粮食，所以能够远行到极远的地方而没有断绝军粮。划定五千八百户增封骠骑将军霍去病。 
English: A total of 70,443 people were captured and killed by the enemy, and the Chinese army lost about three-tenths of its strength. They obtained grain from the enemy, so they were able to travel far and wide without being cut off from military grain. 5,800 households were designated for additional sealing, and General Huo became ill.

古文：右北平太守路博德属骠骑将军，会与城，不失期，从至檮余山，斩首捕虏二千七百级，以千六百户封博德为符离侯。
现代文：右北平太守路博德隶属于骠骑将军，与骠骑将军在与城会师，没有错过日期，跟随骠骑将军到达梼余山，俘虏和斩杀匈奴二千七百人，划定一千六百户封路博德为符离侯。
English: The right north pingtao governor Lubo De was subordinate to the cavalry general, and he and the cavalry general joined the division in the city, and did not miss the date, followed the cavalry general to arrive at Shanyu Mountain, captured and killed 2,700 Huns, and designated 1,600 households to seal Lubo De as fugitives.

古文：北地都尉邢山从骠骑将军获王，以千二百户封山为义阳侯。
现代文：北地都尉邢山随骠骑将军捕获匈奴小王，划定一千二百户封邢山为义阳侯。
English: The governor of the north, Lushan, accompanied by the general of the cavalry, captured the young king of the Xiongnu, and designated 1200 households to be the crown princes of Yiyang.

古文：故归义因淳王复陆支、楼专王伊即靬皆从骠骑将军有功，以千三百户封复陆支为壮侯，以千八百户封伊即靬为众利侯。
现代文：从前投降汉朝的匈奴因淳王复陆支、楼专王伊即靬皆随骠骑将军攻匈奴有功，划定一千三百户封复陆支为壮侯，划定一千八百户封伊即靬为众利侯。
English: The Huns, who had previously surrendered to the Han Dynasty, were able to defeat the Huns with the help of the cavalry general, because King Jun and the commander of the garrison, King Yi, both contributed to the victory. The Huns designated 1300 households to be the strongholds for the strongholds, and 1800 households to be the strongholds for the strongholds.

古文：从骠侯破奴、昌武侯安稽从骠骑有功，益封各三百户。
现代文：从骠侯赵破奴、昌武侯赵安稽都跟随骠骑将军打匈奴有功，各增封三百户。
English: Zhao Bonu, the lord of Zengwu, and Zhao Anqi, the lord of Changwu, both followed the general to fight the Xiongnu, and each of them received an additional 300 households.

古文：校尉敢得旗鼓，为关内侯，食邑二百户。
现代文：校尉李敢夺取了敌军的军旗战鼓，封为关内侯，赐食邑二百户。
English: The school captain Li Gan captured the enemy's battle flag and war drum, was made the governor of Guanai, and was given food to 200 households in Guanai.

古文：校尉自为爵大庶长。
现代文：校尉徐自为被授予大庶长的爵位。
English: School Lieutenant Xu Zi was awarded the title of grand vice-chairman.

古文：军吏卒为官，赏赐甚多。
现代文：另外骠骑将军霍去病属下的小吏士卒当官和受赏的人很多。
English: In addition, there are many officials and awardees of the minor officials under the command of General Huo Jia.

古文：而大将军不得益封，军吏卒皆无封侯者。
现代文：而大将军卫青没能得到加封，军中的官员和士卒没有被封侯的。
English: However, General Wei Qing was not able to get the additional seal, and the officials and soldiers in the army were not sealed.

古文：两军之出塞，塞阅官及私马凡十四万匹，而复入塞者不满三万匹。
现代文：当卫青和霍去病所率领的两支大军出塞时，曾在边塞阅兵，当时官府和私人马匹共十四万匹，而他们重回塞内时，所剩战马不满三万匹。
English: When the two large armies led by Wei Qing and Huo Qidong marched out of the fortress, there was a military parade at the border fortress. At that time, the government and private horses totaled 140,000, and when they returned to the fortress, the remaining horses were less than 30,000.

古文：乃益置大司马位，大将军、骠骑将军皆为大司马。
现代文：于是朝廷增置大司马官位，大将军和骠骑将军都当了大司马。
English: As a result, the imperial court added the position of grand steed official, and the general and the general of the cavalry became the grand steed.

古文：定令，令骠骑将军秩禄与大将军等。
现代文：而且定下法令，让骠骑将军的官阶和俸禄同大将军相等。
English: Moreover, a decree was issued to make the official rank and salary of the cavalry general equal to that of the general.

古文：自是之後，大将军青日退，而骠骑日益贵。
现代文：从此以后，大将军卫青的权势日日减退，而骠骑将军一天比一天显贵。
English: From then on, the power of General Wei Qing waned day by day, while the general riding the horse became more and more prominent day by day.

古文：举大将军故人门下多去事骠骑，辄得官爵，唯任安不肯。
现代文：大将军的老友和门客多半离开了他，而去奉事骠骑将军，这些人常常因此而得到官爵，只有任安不肯这样做。
English: Most of the general's old friends and clients left him and went to serve the general, and these people often received peerages as a result. Only Ren An refused to do so.

古文：骠骑将军为人少言不泄，有气敢任。
现代文：骠骑将军为人寡言少语，不露声色，有气魄，敢做敢为。
English: General Zou Jie is a man of few words, no show of emotion, with courage and daring to do things.

古文：天子尝欲教之孙吴兵法，对曰： 顾方略何如耳，不至学古兵法。 
现代文：武帝曾想教他孙子和吴起的兵法，他回答说： 战争只看方针策略如何就行了，不必学习古代兵法。 
English: Emperor Wu had wanted to teach his grandson and Wu Zhi the art of war, he replied: War only depends on the strategy, there is no need to learn the ancient art of war.

古文：天子为治第，令骠骑视之，对曰： 匈奴未灭，无以家为也。 
现代文：武帝为他修盖府第，让骠骑将军去看看，他回答说： 匈奴还没有消灭，无心考虑私家的事情。 
English: Emperor Wu built a palace for him and sent the general to see it. He replied, "The Xiongnu have not yet been exterminated. I have no intention of considering private matters."

古文：由此上益重爱之。
现代文：从此以后，武帝更加重用和喜爱骠骑将军霍去病。
English: From then on, Emperor Wu put more emphasis on and loved riding General Huo to go to the hospital.

古文：然少而侍中，贵，不省士。
现代文：但是，霍去病从少年时代起，就在宫中侍候皇帝，得到显贵，却不知体恤士卒。
English: However, since he was a young boy, he waited for the emperor in the palace and became a dignitary, but he did not know how to be a gentleman.

古文：其从军，天子为遣太官赍数十乘，既还，重车馀弃粱肉，而士有饥者。
现代文：他出兵打仗时，天子派遣太官赠送他几十车食物，待他回来时，辎重车上丢弃了许多剩余的米和肉，而他的士卒还有忍饥挨饿的。
English: When he went out to fight, the Son of Heaven sent an eunuch to present him with dozens of carts of food. When he returned, many leftover rice and meat were discarded on the cart, and his soldiers were still starving.

古文：其在塞外，卒乏粮，或不能自振，而骠骑尚穿域蹋鞠。
现代文：他在塞外打仗时，士卒缺粮，有的人饿得站不起来，而骠骑将军还在画定球场，踢球游戏。
English: When he was fighting outside of Serbia, his soldiers were short of food, some of them were too hungry to stand up, while the general was still painting the pitch and playing football.

古文：事多此类。
现代文：他做的事多是这样。
English: That's pretty much what he does.

古文：大将军为人仁善退让，以和柔自媚於上，然天下未有称也。
现代文：大将军卫青为人却是仁爱善良，有退让的精神，以宽和柔顺取悦皇上，可是天下没有人称赞他。
English: General Wei Qing was a benevolent and kind person, with a spirit of concession, pleasing the emperor with broadness and flexibility, but no one in the world praised him.

古文：骠骑将军自四年军後三年，元狩六年而卒。
现代文：骠骑将军自元狩四年出击匈奴后三年，即元狩六年就去世了。
English: He died three years later, that is, six years after the attack on the Xiongnu.

古文：天子悼之，发属国玄甲军，陈自长安至茂陵，为冢象祁连山。
现代文：武帝对他的死很悲伤，调遣边境五郡的铁甲军，从长安到茂陵排列成阵，给霍去病修的坟墓外形象祈连山的样子。
English: Emperor Wu was very sad about his death. He dispatched the iron-clad army of the five counties along the border to line up from Chang'an to Muryang, and prayed for the appearance of Mount Qilian outside the tomb where Huo had gone for treatment.

古文：谥之，并武与广地曰景桓侯。
现代文：给他命名谥号，把勇武与扩地两个原则加以合并，称他为景桓侯。
English: He was given a nickname, combining the two principles of bravery and expansion, and was called Jinghuang.

古文：子嬗代侯。
现代文：霍去病的儿子嬗接替了冠军侯的爵位。
English: Huo's ailing son Zhai succeeded the title of champion marquis.

古文：嬗少，字子侯，上爱之，幸其壮而将之。
现代文：霍嬗年纪小，字子侯，皇上喜爱他，希望长大后任命他为将军。
English: The emperor loved him and hoped to appoint him as a general when he grew up.

古文：居六岁，元封元年，嬗卒，谥哀侯。
现代文：过了六年，即元封元年，霍嬗去世，皇上封赐他哀侯的谥号。
English: After six years, that is, in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Huo Xi passed away, and the emperor gave him a mournful nickname.

古文：无子，绝，国除。
现代文：他没有儿子，因而后代断绝了，封国被废除。
English: He had no son, so the descendants were cut off, and the feudal state was abolished.

古文：自骠骑将军死後，大将军长子宜春侯伉坐法失侯。
现代文：自从骠骑将军死后，大将军的长子宜春侯卫伉因犯法而失掉侯爵。
English: Since the death of General Zou, the eldest son of the general, Yichun Houwei, lost his marquis for breaking the law.

古文：後五岁，伉弟二人，阴安侯不疑及发干侯登皆坐酎金失侯。
现代文：五年以后，卫伉的两个弟弟阴安侯卫不疑和发干侯卫登，都因为犯了助祭金成色不足和分量不够的罪而失掉侯爵。
English: Five years later, Wei Wei's two younger brothers, Yinan Hou Wei Doubtless and Fangan Hou Wei Deng, both lost their marquis because they committed the crime of insufficient gold color and weight.

古文：失侯後二岁，冠军侯国除。
现代文：失掉侯爵后二年，冠军侯的封国被废除。
English: Two years after the loss of the marquis, the fiefdom of the champion marquis was abolished.

古文：其後四年，大将军青卒，谥为烈侯。
现代文：这以后四年，大将军卫青去世，朝廷加封他的谥号是烈侯。
English: Four years later, General Wei Qing died, and the imperial court added his nickname, "Rehu" (烈侯).

古文：子伉代为长平侯。
现代文：卫青儿子卫伉接替爵位作长平侯。
English: Wei Qing's son Wei Xuan succeeded to the title of nobility as the head of the Taira clan.

古文：自大将军围单于之後，十四年而卒。竟不复击匈奴者，以汉马少，而方南诛两越，东伐朝鲜，击羌、西南夷，以故久不伐胡。
现代文：自从大将军围攻单于以后，过了十四年而去世，这期间没有再攻打匈奴的原因，是因为汉朝马匹少，而且正在讨伐南方的东越和南越，讨伐东方的朝鲜，攻击羌人和西南夷，因此长时间没有讨伐匈奴。
English: The reason why there was no attack on the Huns during this period was because the Han Dynasty had few horses and was fighting against East Vietnam and South Vietnam in the south, Korea in the east, and attacking the Xiongnu and Xuanxi Yi. Therefore, there was no attack on the Huns for a long time.

古文：大将军以其得尚平阳长公主故，长平侯伉代侯。
现代文：因为大将军卫青娶了平阳公主的原因，所以长平侯卫伉才能接替侯爵。
English: Because General Wei Qing married Princess Pingyang, only Changping Hou Wei Wei could succeed the marquis.

古文：六岁，坐法失侯。
现代文：但是六年后，他又因犯法而失掉侯爵。
English: But six years later he lost his marquisate for breaking the law.

古文：左方两大将军及诸裨将名：
现代文：下面是两位大将军及其诸位副将的名单：
English: Here is a list of the two generals and their deputies:

古文：最大将军青，凡七出击匈奴，斩捕首虏五万馀级。
现代文：总计大将军卫青出击匈奴共有七次，斩获敌兵五万余人。
English: In total, General Wei Qing attacked the Huns a total of seven times, capturing more than 50,000 enemy soldiers.

古文：一与单于战，收河南地，遂置朔方郡，再益封，凡万一千八百户。
现代文：他同单于交战一次，收复河南地区，于是设置了朔方郡，两次增封，共受封一万一千八百户。
English: He single-handedly fought once and recovered the Henan region, and then set up Shuofang County, twice increased the number of counties, and received a total of 11,800 counties.

古文：封三子为侯，侯千三百户。
现代文：他的三个儿子都被封侯，每人受封一千三百户。
English: All three of his sons were made feudal lords, and each of them received 1,300 households.

古文：并之，万五千七百户。
现代文：卫家受封的户数合并起来，共有一万五千七百户。
English: Combined, the number of households that received the title of Wei family totaled 15,700.

古文：其校尉裨将以从大将军侯者九人。其裨将及校尉已为将者十四人。
现代文：卫青的校尉副将因为跟随卫青有功而被封侯的共有九个人，他的副将及校尉已经当了将军的共十四人。
English: There are a total of nine people who have been knighted for their merits in following Wei Qing, and his vice-captain and captain have become a total of fourteen generals.

古文：为裨将者曰李广，自有传。
现代文：当副将的有位李广，自有传记。
English: Li Guang, a vice admiral, has his own biography.

古文：无传者曰：
现代文：其他没有传的有：
English: Others that have not been reported include:

古文：将军公孙贺。
现代文：将军公孙贺。
English: General Gongsun He is gone.

古文：贺，义渠人，其先胡种。
现代文：他是义渠人，他的祖先是匈奴奴人。
English: He is a Yixian, and his ancestor was a Xiongnu.

古文：贺父浑邪，景帝时为平曲侯，坐法失侯。
现代文：公孙贺的父亲浑邪，汉景帝时代被封为平曲侯，因为犯法而失掉侯爵。
English: Gongsun He's father was an evil man. During the Han Dynasty, he was given the title of Heiquo, and lost his marquisate for breaking the law.

古文：贺，武帝为太子时舍人。
现代文：公孙贺在汉武帝当太子时做舍人。
English: Gongsun He served as a concubine to Emperor Hanwu when he was crown prince.

古文：武帝立八岁，以太仆为轻车将军，军马邑。
现代文：汉武帝即位八年，公孙贺以太仆身份做了轻车将军，驻军在马邑。
English: Eight years after the enthronement of Emperor Hanwu, the grandson of Emperor He, as a servant, became a light vehicle general and stationed troops in Maye.

古文：後四岁，以轻车将军出云中。
现代文：过了四年，公孙贺以轻车将军的身份从云中出发攻打匈奴。
English: Four years later, Gongsun He set out from the clouds as a light vehicle general to attack the Xiongnu.

古文：後五岁，以骑将军从大将军有功，封为南窌侯。
现代文：又过了五年，公孙贺以骑将军的身份跟随大将军打匈奴有功，被封为南窌侯。
English: Five years later, Gongsun He, as a cavalry general, followed the general to fight the Xiongnu and was awarded the title of Nanluo.

古文：後一岁，以左将军再从大将军出定襄，无功。
现代文：过了一年，公孙贺以左将军的身份两次跟随大将军从定襄出兵打匈奴，没有功劳。
English: A year later, Gongsun He, as the left general, twice followed the general from Dingxiang to fight the Xiongnu, without merit.

古文：後四岁，以坐酎金失侯。
现代文：过了四年，因为犯了助祭金成色不足和分量不够的罪而失掉侯爵。
English: Four years later, he lost the marquis for the sin of insufficient gold color and weight.

古文：後八岁，以浮沮将军出五原二千馀里，无功。
现代文：过了八年，以浮沮将军的身份从五原出兵，远征两千余里打匈奴，没有功劳。
English: Eight years later, he sent troops from the Wuhuan as General Fubo, and went on an expedition of more than two thousand miles to fight the Xiongnu, to no avail.

古文：後八岁，以太仆为丞相，封葛绎侯。
现代文：过了八年，以太仆的身份出任丞相，受封葛绎侯。
English: Eight years later, he was appointed chancellor as an ethereal servant and received the title of prince.

古文：贺七为将军，出击匈奴无大功，而再侯，为丞相。
现代文：公孙贺七次当将军，出击匈奴没有建立大功，而两次被封侯，当了丞相。
English: Gongsun He was a general seven times. He did not achieve great success in attacking the Xiongnu, but he was twice made a feudal lord and became chancellor.

古文：坐子敬声与阳石公主奸，为巫蛊，族灭，无後。
现代文：后来因儿子公孙敬声与阳石公主通，又搞巫蛊之事，被灭族，没有留下后代。
English: Later, because his son, Gongsun Keisho, had an affair with Princess Yangseki and was involved in witchcraft and sorcery, he was exterminated, leaving no descendants.

古文：将军李息，郁郅人。
现代文：将军李息是郁郅人。
English: General Li Xi is an Ikuhata man.

古文：事景帝。至武帝立八岁，为材官将军，军马邑；後六岁，为将军，出代；後三岁，为将军，从大将军出朔方：皆无功。
现代文：他曾经服事过汉景帝，到汉武帝即位八年时，当了材官将军，驻军在马邑。过了六年，他当了将军，从代郡出兵打匈奴。过了三年，李息当了将军，跟随大将军从朔方出兵打匈奴。
English: He once served Emperor Han Jing. When Emperor Han Wu ascended to the throne eight years later, he became a general officer and garrisoned troops in Maiyi. Six years later, he became a general and sent troops from Dai County to fight the Huns. Three years later, Li Xi became a general and followed the great general to send troops from Shuo Fang to fight the Huns.

古文：凡三为将军，其後常为大行。
现代文：都没有功劳。李息共三次当将军，后来他常常担任大行之职。
English: Li Xi was a general three times in total, and later he often held the post of Da Xing.

古文：将军公孙敖，义渠人。
现代文：将军公孙敖是义渠人。
English: General Gongsun Qi was a righteous man.

古文：以郎事武帝。
现代文：最初以郎官身份服事汉武帝。
English: He initially served Emperor Han as a retainer.

古文：武帝立十二岁，为骑将军，出代，亡卒七千人，当斩，赎为庶人。
现代文：汉武帝即位十二年，他当了骑将军，从代郡出兵打匈奴，损失了七千士兵，被判为死刑，他交了赎金，成了平民百姓。
English: In the twelfth year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, he became a cavalry general, sent troops from Dai County to fight the Huns, lost seven thousand soldiers, and was sentenced to death. He paid the ransom and became a commoner.

古文：後五岁，以校尉从大将军有功，封为合骑侯。
现代文：过了五年，他以校尉身份跟随大将军打匈奴有功，被封为合骑侯。
English: Five years later, as a lieutenant, he followed the general to fight the Huns, and was awarded the title of He Jiu Hou.

古文：後一岁，以中将军从大将军，再出定襄，无功。
现代文：过了一年，以中将军身份随大将军两次从定襄出兵打匈奴，没有功劳。
English: A year later, as a middle-ranking general, he sent troops from Dingxiang to fight the Xiongnu with the general twice, but to no avail.

古文：後二岁，以将军出北地，後骠骑期，当斩，赎为庶人。
现代文：过了二年，他以将军身份从北地出兵，延误了同骠骑将军约定的时间，被判死刑，交了赎金，成为平民百姓。
English: Two years later, he sent troops from the North as a general, delayed the time agreed upon by his fellow cavalry generals, was sentenced to death, paid a ransom, and became a commoner.

古文：後二岁，以校尉从大将军，无功。
现代文：过了二年，他以校尉的身份跟随大将军打匈奴，没有战功。
English: Two years later, as a lieutenant, he followed the general to fight the Huns, but achieved no military success.

古文：後十四岁，以因杅将军筑受降城。
现代文：过了十四年，他以因杅将军的身份负责修筑受降城。
English: Fourteen years later, he was put in charge of rebuilding the defeated city in his capacity as the general of Incheon.

古文：七岁，复以因杅将军再出击匈奴，至余吾，亡士卒多，下吏，当斩，诈死，亡居民间五六岁。
现代文：七年后，他又以因杅将军的身份再次出兵打匈奴，进军到余吾，因为损失士卒多，被交付法官，判处死刑，他却诈称已死，逃亡到民间五六年。
English: Seven years later, he again sent troops to fight the Xiongnu as General Ying Rong and marched into Yuwu. Because he lost many soldiers, he was handed over to the judge and sentenced to death. However, he falsely claimed to be dead and fled to the countryside for five or six years.

古文：後发觉，复系。
现代文：后来，这件事被发觉了，又逮捕了他。
English: Later, the matter came to light and he was arrested.

古文：坐妻为巫蛊，族。
现代文：因他妻子搞巫蛊事件，他的全家都被杀死。
English: His entire family was killed because of his wife's involvement in witchcraft.

古文：凡四为将军，出击匈奴，一侯。
现代文：他共当过四次将军，出击匈奴，一次被封侯。
English: He served as a general a total of four times, went on sorties against the Huns, and was once made a feudal lord.

古文：将军李沮，云中人。事景帝。
现代文：将军李沮是云中人，曾服侍汉景帝。
English: General Li De was from Yunnan and had served Emperor Han Jing.

古文：武帝立十七岁，以左内史为彊弩将军。
现代文：汉武帝即位十七年时，他以左内史的身份当了强弩将军。
English: When Emperor Hanwu ascended to the throne in the 17th year, he became the general of Qiangye in the capacity of Zuo Naishi.

古文：後一岁，复为彊弩将军。
现代文：一年后，他又当了强弩将军。
English: A year later, he became a strong general.

古文：将军李蔡，成纪人也。事孝文帝、景帝、武帝。
现代文：将军李蔡是成纪人，服事过汉文帝、汉景帝和汉武帝。
English: General Li Cai is a man of long standing, having served Emperor Hanwen, Emperor Hanjing and Emperor Hanwu.

古文：以轻车将军从大将军有功，封为乐安侯。
现代文：曾以轻车将军身份跟随大将军打匈奴有功，被封为乐安侯。
English: He served as a general of light vehicles and fought against the Huns with great success, and was awarded the title of Le An Hou.

古文：已为丞相，坐法死。
现代文：以后当了丞相，因犯法而被杀。
English: He later became chancellor and was killed for breaking the law.

古文：将军张次公，河东人。以校尉从卫将军青有功，封为岸头侯。
现代文：将军张次公是河车人，曾以校尉身份随从卫青将军打匈奴有功，封为岸头侯。
English: General Zhang Zigong was from Hechuan. As a lieutenant, he followed General Wei Qing to fight against the Huns and was awarded the title of "Kishi Touhou."

古文：其後太后崩，为将军，军北军。
现代文：后来王太后死去，他当了将军，驻守在北军的军部所在地。
English: Later, when the Queen Mother died, he became a general and was stationed at the headquarters of the Northern Army.

古文：後一岁，为将军，从大将军，再为将军，坐法失侯。
现代文：过了一年，他当将军，跟随大将军卫青打匈奴。他两次当将军，因犯法而失掉侯爵。
English: A year later, he became a general and fought the Huns with General Wei Qing. He became a general twice and lost his marquis for breaking the law.

古文：次公父隆，轻车武射也。
现代文：张次公的父亲张隆，是驾驭轻便战车的勇敢射手。
English: Zhang Zigong's father, Zhang Long, was a brave archer who drove a light chariot.

古文：以善射，景帝幸近之也。
现代文：因为他善于射箭，汉景帝就喜欢和亲近他。
English: Because he was good at archery, Emperor Han Jing liked and was close to him.

古文：将军苏建，杜陵人。以校尉从卫将军青，有功，为平陵侯，以将军筑朔方。
现代文：将军苏建是杜陵人，以校尉身份跟随卫青将军打匈奴，因为有战功而被封为平陵侯，并且以将军身份负责修筑朔方城。
English: General Su Jian was a native of Duling. As a lieutenant, he followed General Wei Qing to fight against the Huns. Because of his military exploits, he was named the Prince of Pingling. As a general, he was responsible for building Shuo Fangcheng.

古文：後四岁，为游击将军，从大将军出朔方。
现代文：过了四年，他当游击将军，跟随大将军卫青从朔方出兵打匈奴。
English: Four years later, as a guerrilla general, he followed General Wei Qing and sent troops from the Shuo side to fight the Huns.

古文：後一岁，以右将军再从大将军出定襄，亡翕侯，失军，当斩，赎为庶人。
现代文：过了一年，他以右将军的身份再次随大将军从定襄出兵打匈奴，结果翕侯叛逃匈奴，大军蒙受了损失，他被判为死刑，交出赎金，成为平民百姓。
English: A year later, in his capacity as the right-hand general, he once again accompanied the general from Dingxiang to send troops to fight the Huns. As a result, Yan Hou defected to the Huns, and the army suffered losses. He was sentenced to death, paid a ransom, and became a commoner.

古文：其後为代郡太守，卒，冢在大犹乡。
现代文：这之后，他当了代郡太守。他死后，坟墓在大犹乡。
English: After that, he became the acting county governor. After his death, his grave is in Daju Township.

古文：将军赵信，以匈奴相国降，为翕侯。
现代文：将军赵信，以匈奴相国的身份投降汉朝，当了翕侯。
English: General Zhao Xin surrendered to the Han Dynasty as a fellow countryman of the Xiongnu and became a vassal.

古文：武帝立十七岁，为前将军，与单于战，败，降匈奴。
现代文：汉武帝即位十七年，赵信当了前将军，同匈奴单于打仗，失败后投降了匈奴。
English: In the 17th year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, Zhao Xin became a former general. He fought alone with the Xiongnu, and surrendered to the Xiongnu after defeat.

古文：将军张骞，以使通大夏，还，为校尉。
现代文：将军张骞，以使者的身份出访大夏，回来后当了校尉。
English: General Zhang Ye visited Daxia as an envoy, and became a lieutenant after returning.

古文：从大将军有功，封为博望侯。
现代文：他随大将军卫青攻打匈奴有功，被封为博望侯。
English: He fought against the Xiongnu with General Wei Qing and was awarded the title of Bohanghou.

古文：後三岁，为将军，出右北平，失期，当斩，赎为庶人。
现代文：过了三年，他当了将军，从右北平出击匈奴，因为误了约定的军期，被判处死刑，他交了赎罪金，成为平民百姓。
English: After three years, he became a general and attacked the Xiongnu from the right Beiping. Because he missed the agreed military term, he was sentenced to death. He paid the ransom and became a commoner.

古文：其後使通乌孙，为大行而卒，冢在汉中。
现代文：这以后，他做为使者出使乌孙，后来又当了大行，便死去了。他的坟墓在汉中。
English: After this, he sent Uson as an envoy, and later became a great success, and died. His grave is in Hanzhong.

古文：将军赵食其，祋祤人也。
现代文：将军赵食其是祋祤人。
English: General Zhao Shikichi is a coward.

古文：武帝立二十二岁，以主爵为右将军，从大将军出定襄，迷失道，当斩，赎为庶人。
现代文：汉武帝即位二十二年，他以主爵都尉的身份当了右将军，跟随大将军卫青从定襄出兵打匈奴，因为迷了路延误了军期，被判处死刑，他交了赎罪金，成为平民百姓。
English: In the 22nd year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, he became the right general with the status of a lord lieutenant. He followed the general Wei Qing from Dingxiang to send troops to fight the Huns. Because he lost his way, he delayed his military service and was sentenced to death. He paid the ransom and became a commoner.

古文：将军曹襄，以平阳侯为後将军，从大将军出定襄。
现代文：将军曹襄，以平阳侯的身份当了后将军，跟随大将军卫青从定襄出兵打匈奴。
English: The general sergeant Cao Xiang, with the status of the prince of Pingyang, became the general, followed the general Wei Qing from Dingxiang to fight the Huns.

古文：襄，曹参孙也。
现代文：曹襄是曹参的孙子。
English: Cao Xiang is Cao San's grandson.

古文：将军韩说，弓高侯庶孙也。
现代文：将军韩说是弓高侯韩颓当的庶出孙子。
English: General Han is said to be the great-great-grandson of Han Xudang, a high-ranking military commander.

古文：以校尉从大将军有功，为龙嵒侯，坐酎金失侯。
现代文：他以校尉的身份跟随大将军卫青打匈奴有功，被封为龙侯，后因犯了助祭金成色不足分量不够的罪行而失掉侯爵。
English: As a captain, he followed the general Wei Qing to fight the Huns, and was awarded the title of Longyuan Hou. Later, he lost his marquis for the crime of not having enough gold to make a sacrificial offering.

古文：元鼎六年，以待诏为横海将军，击东越有功，为按道侯。
现代文：元鼎六年，韩说以待诏的身份做了横海将军，领兵攻打东越有功，被封为按道侯。
English: In the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Han said that he became the general of Henghai with the status of waiting for the edict, and led the troops to attack East Vietnam. He was awarded the title of Hou.

古文：以太初三年为游击将军，屯於五原外列城。
现代文：在太初三年，他当了游击将军，驻军在五原以外的一些城堡。
English: In the first three years of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he became a guerrilla general and garrisoned some castles outside Wuhuan.

古文：为光禄勋，掘蛊太子宫，卫太子杀之。
现代文：后来，他当了光禄勋，因为到太子宫挖掘巫蛊罪证，被卫太子杀死。
English: Later, he became a member of the Order of the Star, because he went to the Crown Prince's palace to dig up evidence of Wusong's crimes, and was killed by Prince Wei.

古文：将军郭昌，云中人也。
现代文：将军郭昌是云中人。
English: General Guo Chang is a man of the clouds.

古文：以校尉从大将军。
现代文：他以校尉身份跟随大将军卫青打匈奴。
English: As a lieutenant, he followed General Wei Qing to fight the Huns.

古文：元封四年，以太中大夫为拔胡将军，屯朔方。
现代文：元封四年，他以太中大夫的身份当了拔胡将军，驻军朔方。
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he assumed the identity of the ethereal middle-aged doctor and became General Prabhu, garrisoning the Shuo side.

古文：还击昆明，毋功，夺印。
现代文：回来以后，他领兵去攻打昆明，没有功劳，被收回官印罢了官。
English: After his return, he led an army to attack Kunming, without merit, and was stripped of his official seal.

古文：将军荀彘，太原广武人。
现代文：将军荀彘是太原郡广武人。
English: General Zou is from Guangwu, Taiyuan County.

古文：以御见，侍中，为校尉，数从大将军。
现代文：他以善于驾车的本领求见皇上，被任命为侍中，又当了校尉，屡次随从大将军卫青打匈奴。
English: With his driving skills, he asked to see the emperor, was appointed as an attendant, and became a captain. He repeatedly followed the general Wei Qing to fight the Huns.

古文：以元封三年为左将军击朝鲜，毋功。
现代文：在元封三年时，他当了左将军，领兵攻打朝鲜，没有功劳。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, he became a left-wing general and led the army to attack Korea, without merit.

古文：以捕楼船将军坐法死。
现代文：因为捕楼船将军杨仆犯了罪，他被处死。
English: He was put to death because the general of the convict ship, Yang Bu, had committed a crime.

古文：最骠骑将军去病，凡六出击匈奴，其四出以将军，斩捕首虏十一万馀级。
现代文：总计骠骑将军霍去病共六次出击匈奴，其中四次出击是以将军的身份，共斩获匈奴兵士十一万多人。
English: In total, he led a total of six sorties against the Huns, four of which were as a general, and captured more than 110,000 Hun soldiers.

古文：及浑邪王以众降数万，遂开河西酒泉之地，西方益少胡寇。
现代文：待浑邪王率几百万人投降后，于是开拓了河西和酒泉等地，使西部地区匈奴侵扰的活动愈益减少。
English: After the surrender of several million people led by King Hun, he opened up places such as Hexi and Jiuquan, so that the activities of the Hun invasion in the western region were increasingly reduced.

古文：四益封，凡万五千一百户。
现代文：他被四次加封，共食邑一万五千一百户。
English: He was capped four times, feeding a total of 15,100 households.

古文：其校吏有功为侯者凡六人，而後为将军二人。
现代文：他的校尉因有功被封侯的共有六人，以后成为将军的有两人。
English: A total of six of his lieutenants were knighted for meritorious service, and two later became generals.

古文：将军路博德，平州人。
现代文：将军路博德是平州人。
English: General Lu Bode was from Pingzhou.

古文：以右北平太守从骠骑将军有功，为符离侯。
现代文：他以右北平太守的身份跟随骠骑将军打匈奴有功，被封为符离侯。
English: He followed the general on horseback to fight the Xiongnu, and was awarded the title of Fuyihou.

古文：骠骑死後，博德以卫尉为伏波将军，伐破南越，益封。
现代文：骠骑将军霍去病死后，路博德以卫尉的身份当了伏波将军，讨伐并打败南越，朝廷给予加封。
English: After the death of the cavalry general Huo De from illness, Lubo De became the general of Fubao as a guard lieutenant, fought and defeated South Vietnam, and was given a seal of approval by the court.

古文：其後坐法失侯。
现代文：这以后他因犯法而失掉侯爵。
English: He then lost his marquisate for breaking the law.

古文：为彊弩都尉，屯居延，卒。
现代文：后来，他当了强弩都尉，驻军居延，直到死去。
English: Later, he became a captain of the Qiangye Army and stayed in the garrison until his death.

古文：将军赵破奴，故九原人。尝亡入匈奴，已而归汉，为骠骑将军司马。
现代文：将军赵破奴原来是九原人，曾经逃到匈奴，后来又回归汉朝，当了骠骑将军霍去病的司马。
English: General Zhao Bonu was originally a native of Jiuyuan. He once fled to the Xiongnu, and later returned to the Han Dynasty, and became the steed for General Huo to ride to the hospital.

古文：出北地时有功，封为从骠侯。
现代文：他领兵从北地出击匈奴，时常有功军，被封为从骠侯。
English: He led an army from the north to attack the Xiongnu, and was often praised for his military exploits. He was given the title of "Junior Warlord."

古文：坐酎金失侯。後一岁，为匈河将军，攻胡至匈河水，无功。
现代文：后来他犯了助祭金成色不足分量不够的罪行而失掉侯爵。一年后，他当了匈河将军，攻打匈奴直到匈河水，没有战功。
English: Later, he committed the crime of helping the sacrificial offering to be of insufficient weight and lost the marquis. A year later, he became the general of the Hun River, attacking the Huns up to the Hun River, with no military merit.

古文：後二岁，击虏楼兰王，复封为浞野侯。
现代文：过了两年，他攻打并俘虏了楼兰王，又被封为浞野侯。
English: Two years later, he attacked and captured the King of Loulan, and was once again crowned the Prince of Shenyang.

古文：後六岁，为浚稽将军，将二万骑击匈奴左贤王，左贤王与战，兵八万骑围破奴，破奴生为虏所得，遂没其军。
现代文：六年后，他当了浚稽将军，率领两万骑兵攻打匈奴左贤王，左贤王同他交战，用八万骑兵围困了赵破奴，赵破奴被敌人所活捉，他的军队全部覆灭。
English: Six years later, he became a dredging general and led twenty thousand cavalry to attack the Hun Zuoxian Wang. Zuoxian Wang fought with him and besieged Zhao Bonu with eighty thousand cavalry. Zhao Bonu was captured alive by the enemy, and his army was all destroyed.

古文：居匈奴中十岁，复与其太子安国亡入汉。
现代文：他在匈奴住了十年，又同他的长子安国逃回汉朝。
English: He lived in Xiongnu for ten years, and then fled back to the Han Dynasty with his eldest son, Anguo.

古文：後坐巫蛊，族。
现代文：后来，他因为犯了巫蛊罪，被灭族。
English: Later, he was exterminated for committing the crime of witchcraft and sorcery.

古文：自卫氏兴，大将军青首封，其後枝属为五侯。
现代文：自从卫氏兴起，大将军卫青首先被封侯，后来他的子孙有五人被封侯。
English: Since the rise of the Wei dynasty, the great general Wei Qing was the first to be made a prince, and later five of his descendants were made princes.

古文：凡二十四岁而五侯尽夺，卫氏无为侯者。
现代文：总共经历了二十四年，而五个侯爵全被剥夺，卫氏没有人再被封侯。
English: A total of twenty-four years have passed, and all five marquesses have been deprived, and no one from the Wei clan has been made a marquess.

古文：太史公曰：苏建语余曰： 吾尝责大将军至尊重，而天下之贤大夫毋称焉，原将军观古名将所招选择贤者，勉之哉。
现代文：太史公说：苏建曾对我说： 我曾经责备大将军卫青极尊贵，而全国的贤士大夫却不称赞他，希望将军能够效法古代那些招选贤人的名将，努力去做吧。
English: Taishigong said, "Sujian once said to me, 'I once reproached General Wei Qing with being extremely honorable, but the wise doctors throughout the country did not praise him. I hope that the general can follow the example of those famous generals who recruited wise men in ancient times, and work hard to do it.

古文：大将军谢曰： 自魏其、武安之厚宾客，天子常切齿。
现代文：大将军拒绝说： 自从魏其侯窦婴和武安侯田蚡厚待宾客，皇帝常切齿痛恨。
English: The general refused, saying, "Ever since Wei, Qi, Hou, Dou and Wu'an, Hou and Tian treated their guests well, the emperor has always hated them.

古文：彼亲附士大夫，招贤绌不肖者，人主之柄也。
现代文：那亲近和安抚士大夫，招选贤才，废除不肖者的事，是国君的权柄。
English: It is the sovereign's prerogative to approach and pacify the nobles, to recruit the wise and to abolish the wicked.

古文：人臣奉法遵职而已，何与招士！  骠骑亦放此意，其为将如此。
现代文：当大臣的只须遵守法度干好本职的工作，何必参与招选贤士的事呢？  骠骑将军霍去病也仿效这种想法，他们当将军的做法就是这样。
English: When a minister only has to abide by the law and do his job well, why should he be involved in the selection of sages?

