古文：昔者圣人拟宸极以运璿玑，揆天行而序景曜，分辰野，辨躔历，敬农时，兴物利，皆以系顺两仪，纪纲万物者也。
现代文：从前，圣人用璇玑模拟北极星的运行，观测天的运行以考察日影的长短、日月五星的运动状况，划分天在地上对应的区域，辨明历法，敬授农时，使万物兴盛，逭关系到调和阴阳，治理万物。
English: Once upon a time, sages used the compass to simulate the movement of the North Star, observed the movement of the sky to examine the length of the shadow and the movement of the sun, moon and five stars, divided the sky into regions corresponding to the earth, identified the calendar, respectfully taught agricultural time, and made all things flourish. The compass is related to the harmony of yin and yang and the governance of all things.

古文：然则观象设卦，扐闰成爻，历数之原，存乎此也。
现代文：那么观测天象以设立卦象，增加闰月以描述季节运动，历敷的本末，就在于此。
English: Then, the observation of celestial objects is based on the establishment of the Chinese zodiac, the leap month is added to describe the seasonal movement, and this is the beginning and end of the history.

古文：逮乎炎帝，分八节以始农功，轩辕纪三纲而阐书契，乃使羲和占日，常仪占月，臾区占星气，伶伦造律吕，大挠造甲子，隶首作算数。
现代文：炎帝区分八个时节以指导农业，轩辕设立三种原则而阐明文字，委派羲和负责占日，常仪占月，臾区占星气，伶伦制造律吕，大挠首创甲子计时法，隶首作算数。
English: Emperor Yan distinguished eight time periods to guide agriculture, Emperor Xuanzong set up three principles to clarify the characters, and appointed Zhou He to be responsible for counting the days, Chang Yi to count the months, Zhou Zhou to count the stars, Zhou Lun to make the laws, Dazhao to create the Jiazi time method, and Zhu Xi to do the calculation.

古文：容成综斯六术，考定气象，建五行，察发敛，起消息，正闰余，述而著焉，谓之《调历》。
现代文：容成综合上述六家的方法，考定节气天象，建立五行，考察日、月的运动，正闰余，着为《调历》。
English: The author of "Adjusting the Calendar" synthesized the above-mentioned six methods, ascertained the solar terms, established the five elements, examined the movement of the day and the month, and the intercalary period.

古文：洎于少昊则凤鸟司历，颛顼则南正司天，陶唐则分命羲和，虞舜则因循尧法。
现代文：到少吴时由凤鸟负责历法，颛顼时由南正负责天文，陶唐分派羲与和负责，虞舜则继承了尧时的历法。
English: At the time of Xiao Wu, the phoenix bird was in charge of the calendar, at the time of Zhou, Nan Zheng was in charge of astronomy, and the Tao and Tang dynasties were assigned to be in charge of Zhou and He, while the state of Yu inherited the calendar of Zhou.

古文：及夏殷承运，周氏应期，正朔既殊，创法斯异。
现代文：到夏、商、周时，它们的正朔和历法都不同。
English: To summer, Shang, Zhou, their Zhengshuo and calendar are different.

古文：《传》曰： 火出，于夏为三月，于商为四月，于周为五月。 
现代文：《传》上说： 大火星出，在夏代为三月，在商代为四月，在周代为五月。 
English: "Zhuan" said: The great Mars rises, in the summer it is March, in the Shang Dynasty it is April, and in the Zhou Dynasty it is May.

古文：是故天子置日官，诸侯有日御，以和万国，以协三辰。
现代文：所以天子设置日官，诸侯设置日御，以亲睦万国，协调日、月、星辰。
English: Therefore, the Son of Heaven set up the Nikkan, and the lords set up the Nichigyo, in order to reconcile all nations and harmonize the sun, moon, and stars.

古文：至乎寒暑晦明之徵，阴阳生杀之数，启闭升降之纪，消息盈虚之节，皆应躔次而无淫流，故能该浃生灵，堪舆天地。
现代文：以至于寒暑晦明的现象，阴阳生杀的定数，每纪的开始与结束，节气的变更，都与日所在位置相一致而无差错，所以能和洽生灵，贯通天地。
English: So much so that the phenomena of cold and hot weather, the constants of yin and yang, the beginning and end of each era, and the changes in the solar terms are all consistent with the position of the sun without error, so they can harmonize the living beings and penetrate the heaven and earth.

古文：周德既衰，史官失职，畴人分散，禨祥不理。
现代文：随着周代的衰落，史官失职，从事天文历法工作的人员分散，使有关吉凶的现象得不到监理。
English: With the decline of the Zhou Dynasty, historians failed in their duties, and the personnel engaged in astronomical calendar work dispersed, so that the phenomenon of good luck and bad luck could not be supervised.

古文：秦并天下，颇推五胜，自以获水德之瑞，用十月为正。
现代文：秦国吞并天下，很推崇五行相生相克之理，自认为获得水德之瑞应，以十月为正月。
English: Qin State absorbed the whole world, and highly respected the principle that the five elements are interrelated, and believed that it was auspicious to obtain water virtue, with October as the first month.

古文：汉氏初兴，多所未暇，百有余载，袭秦正朔。
现代文：汉氏刚刚兴起，很多事情都未暇顾及，沿用秦朝的历法达一百多年。
English: The Han Dynasty had just emerged, and many things were not taken into account, and the calendar of the Qin Dynasty was used for more than a hundred years.

古文：爰及武帝，始诏司马迁等议造《汉历》，乃行夏正。
现代文：一直到汉武帝，才诏令司马迁等人讨论造《汉历》的事宜，决定行用夏正。
English: It was not until Emperor Hanwu that he ordered Sima Qian and others to discuss the matter of creating the "Han Calendar" and decided to use Xia Zheng.

古文：其后刘歆更造夏《三统》，以说《左传》，辩而非实，班固惑之，采以为志。
现代文：其后刘歆又造《三统历》，并以之解说《左传》，他的解说看起来很雄辩，但实际上不真实，班固被他所迷惑，把《三统历》及其对《左传》的解释写进了《漠书》中。
English: Later, Liu Bei also created the "Three Hierarchical Calendars" and used it to explain the "Left Biography." His explanation looked eloquent, but it was actually untrue. Pan Gu was confused by him and wrote the "Three Hierarchical Calendars" and his interpretation of the "Left Biography" into the "Book of the Desert."

古文：逮光武中兴，太仆硃浮数言历有乖谬，于时天下初定，未能详考。
现代文：到光武帝建立束汉，太仆朱浮多次上书说行用的历法有错误，由于当时天下刚刚安定，所以没能详细考定。
English: When Emperor Guangwu established the Han Dynasty, Zhu Fu wrote to Emperor Guangwu several times to say that the calendar in use was wrong. Since the world was just stable at that time, it could not be determined in detail.

古文：至永平之末，改行《四分》，七十余年，仪式乃备。
现代文：一直到永平末年，改用《四分历》，七十多年后，才得以完备。
English: It was not until the last years of the Yongping Dynasty that the "Quarterly Calendar" was used, and more than seventy years later, it was completed.

古文：及光和中，乃命刘洪、蔡邕共修律历，其后司马彪因之，以继班史。
现代文：光和年间，委派刘洪、蔡邕修订律历，其后司马彪依据他们的工作，编撰《后汉书。
English: During the Guangwa era, Liu Hong and Cai Jun were appointed to revise the legal calendar, and later Sima Biao compiled the "Post-Chinese Book" based on their work.

古文：今采魏文黄初已后言历数行事者，以续司马彪云。汉灵帝时，会稽东部尉刘洪，考史官自古迄今历注，原其进退之行，察其出入之验，视其往来，度其终始，始悟《四分》于天疏阔，皆斗分太多故也。
现代文：天文志》，以承继班固的《汉书。天文志》。现采集魏文帝黄初以后谈论历法的言行，以承继司马彪的工作。汉灵帝时，会稽东部尉刘洪，研究自古至今的历法及注释，考察日、月、五星的运动状况，发现《四分历》与天象不符的原因是因为斗分太多。
English: When Han Lingdi was emperor, he invited the Eastern Lieutenant Liu Hong to study the calendar and commentary from ancient times to the present, to examine the movement of the sun, moon, and five stars, and found that the reason why the "four-point calendar" did not match the celestial phenomenon was because there were too many points.

古文：更以五百八十九为纪法，百四十五为斗分，作《乾象法》，冬至日日在斗二十二度，以术追日、月、五星之行，推而上则合于古，引而下则应于今。
现代文：于是刘洪以五百八十九为纪法，一百四十五为斗分，作《干象法》，冬至日太阳在斗宿二十二度，以他的历术推算日、月、五大行星的运动情况，上与古代记录相符，下则与现在的观测相应。
English: Therefore, Liu Hong used 589 as the chronology and 145 as the meridian to make "The Law of the Dry Elephant." The winter solstice sun is 22 degrees in the meridian. Using his almanac to calculate the movement of the sun, moon and five planets, the above is consistent with ancient records, and the below is consistent with current observations.

古文：其为之也，依《易》立数，遁行相号，潜处相求，名为《乾象历》。
现代文：《干象历》的制定，依据《易》确立基本数据，依据天体的运行求解变数，称为《干象历》。
English: The formulation of the "Hangul Calendar" established the basic data according to "Yi" and the solution variables according to the operation of the celestial body, which is called the "Hangul Calendar."

古文：又创制日行迟速，兼考月行，阴阳交错于黄道表里，日行黄道，于赤道宿度复有进退。
现代文：又创立日行迟速术，并考定月的运行，白道与黄道相交，曰运行于黄道表裹，在赤道上复有进退。
English: He also created the diurnal retardation method, and determined the movement of the moon, the white road intersected with the ecliptic, that is, the movement was wrapped in the ecliptic table, and there were advances and retreats on the equator.

古文：方于前法，转为精密矣。
现代文：对比以前的历法，更为精密。
English: Compared with the previous calendar, it is more precise.

古文：献帝建安元年，郑玄受其法，以为穷幽极微，又加注释焉。
现代文：汉献帝建安元年，郑玄学习了刘洪的历法，认为它很精密，对其作了注释。
English: In the first year of Emperor Jianan of the Han Dynasty, Zheng Xuan studied Liu Hong's calendar, thought it was very precise, and commented on it.

古文：魏文帝黄初中，太史令高堂隆复详议历数，更有改革。
现代文：魏文帝黄初年间，太史令高堂隆再次详细论述历法，并作了一些变革。
English: In the early years of Emperor Wen of Wei and Emperor Huang, Emperor Taishi ordered Gaodanglong to elaborate the calendar again, and made some changes.

古文：太史丞韩翊以为《乾象》减斗分太过，后当先天，造《黄初历》，以四千八百八十三为纪法，千二百五为斗分。
现代文：太史丞韩翊认为《干象历》减斗分太多，一段时间过后，推算结果必然先于实际天象，于是造《黄初历》，以四千八百八十三为纪法，一千二百零五为斗分。
English: Han Zheng, the great historian, thought that there were too many subtraction and subtraction points in the "Dried Elephant Calendar" and that after a period of time, the calculation results would inevitably precede the actual celestial objects, so he created the "Yellow Primary Calendar" with 4883 as the chronology and 1205 as the subtraction points.

古文：其后尚书令陈群奏，以为： 历数难明，前代通儒多共纷争。
现代文：其后尚书令陈群上奏，认为： 历法艰深难懂，前代的通儒已有过多次争论。
English: Later, he ordered Chen Qun to recite it, saying: The calendar is difficult to understand, and the previous generation of Confucian scholars have had many disputes.

古文：《黄初》之元以《四分历》久远疏阔，大魏受命，宜改历明时，韩翊首建，犹巩不审，故以《乾象》互相参校。
现代文：黄初元年，因为《四分历》行用了很长时间，与实际天象有了误差，大魏受命，应该改历以明时，韩翊首次造历，担心出差错，所以用《干象历》与其所造之历相互对照校正。
English: In the first year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, because the "Quarterly Calendar" had been used for a long time and there was an error with the actual celestial object, the Great Wei was ordered to change the calendar to the Ming Dynasty, and Han Zheng made the calendar for the first time. He was worried about making a mistake, so he used the "Dry Elephant Calendar" to calibrate it against the calendar he had made.

古文：其所校日月行度，弦望朔晦，历三年，更相是非，无时而决。
现代文：他研究对比据两历推算的日、月运动状况，弦、望、朔、晦出现的时间，花了三年时间，对两历的不同之处，仍然无法决定其取舍。
English: It took him three years to study and compare the movement of the sun and the moon calculated from the two calendars, and the time of the appearance of the chord, the sight, the new moon, and the twilight. He still can't decide what to do about the differences between the two calendars.

古文：案三公议皆综尽典理，殊涂同归，欲使效之璿玑，各尽其法，一年之间，得失足定。 
现代文：三公的论述虽然各有不同，但都符合典籍和历理，最后殊途同归，应该用天文仪器来检验不同历法的准确性，衹需一年的时间，足以证明其得失。 
English: Although the discussion of the three princes is different, they all conform to the classics and the theory of history. In the end, they are the same. Astronomical instruments should be used to test the accuracy of different calendars. It will take one year to prove their gains and losses.

古文：奏可。
现代文：皇帝下令采用上述方法。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：太史令许芝云： 刘洪月行术用以来且四十余年，以复觉失一辰有奇。 
现代文：太史令许芝认为： 刘洪创立的推算月运动的方法行用了四十多年，推算结果舆实际天象相差了一个多时辰。 
English: Tai Shi Ling Xu Zhi thought: Liu Hong's method of calculating the movement of the moon has been in use for more than forty years, and the results of the calculation are more than an hour different from the actual celestial phenomenon.

古文：孙饮议： 史迁造《太初》，其后刘歆以为疏，复为《三统》。
现代文：孙钦认为： 司马迁撰写造《太初历》，其后刘歆以为《太初历》粗疏，因此又造《三统历》。
English: Sun Qin believes that: Sima Qian wrote and created the "First Calendar," and then Liu Ye thought that the "First Calendar" was rough, so he also created the "Three Calendars."

古文：章和中，改为《四分》，以仪天度，考合符应，时有差跌，日蚀觉过半日。
现代文：章和年间，改用《四分历》，用仪器校验，用效验检核，发现经常出现差错，食的出现与推算相差半天。
English: During the chapter and year, it was changed to the "Quarterly Calendar," which was checked with instruments and checked with an efficiency test. It was found that there were often errors, and the appearance of food was half a day different from the estimate.

古文：至熹平中，刘洪改为《乾象》，推天七曜之符，与天地合其叙。 
现代文：到熹平年间，刘洪改用干象历》，推算、月、五大行星的运动状况，均与实际天象相符。 
English: By the end of the Zouping era, Liu Hong changed to the dry-elephant calendar, and his calculations, as well as the movements of the moon and the five planets, were all consistent with the actual celestial phenomena.

古文：董巴议云： 圣人迹太阳于晷景，效太阴于弦望，明五星于见伏，正是非于晦朔。
现代文：董巴认为： 圣人用晷影考察太阳，以弦、望检验月亮的运行，以见、伏考证五大行星的运动，用晦、朔作为判断历法准确与否的标准。
English: Dongba believed that: the sages used the mirage to observe the sun, the chord and the watch to check the movement of the moon, and the movement of the five planets to see and observe the movement of the five planets, and used the twilight and the new moon as the standard to judge whether the calendar was accurate or not.

古文：弦望伏见者，历数之纲纪，检验之明者也。 
现代文：弦、望、见、伏是历法的关键所在，可作为检验历法优劣的标志。 
English: Chord, hope, see, volt are the key to the calendar, which can be used as a sign to test the merits of the calendar.

古文：徐岳议： 刘洪以历后天，潜精内思二十余载，参校汉家《太初》、《三统》、《四分》历术，课弦望于两仪郭间。
现代文：徐岳认为： 因为当时历法推算结果落后于实际天象，刘选潜心研究了二十多年，参照汉代的《太初》、《三统》、《四分》历，用两仪郭间考察月相。
English: Xu Yue believes: Because the results of calendar calculation at that time lagged behind the actual celestial phenomena, Liu Xuan devoted himself to studying for more than 20 years. Referring to the Han Dynasty's "Great Beginning," "Three Kingdoms" and "Four Divisions" calendar, he used two charts to examine the moon phase.

古文：而月行九岁一终，谓之九道；九章，百七十一岁，九道小终；九九八十一章，五百六十七分而九终，进退牛前四度五分。
现代文：而月运行九年一终，称之为九道；九章包含一百七十一年，九道小终之数；九九八十一章，五百六十七分为九终，在牛宿前四度零五分进退。
English: However, the first ending of the ninth year of the moon's orbit is called the ninth road; the nine chapters contain 171, the number of small endings of the nine roads; the 9981 chapters, 567 are divided into nine endings, advancing and retreating four degrees and five minutes before the cattle inn.

古文：学者务追合《四分》，但减一道六十三分，分不下通，是以疏阔，皆由斗分多故也。
现代文：学者们想要使之与《四分历》相符，衹需从中减去一道六十三分，分以下不通，因此粗疏，都是由于斗分太多的缘故。
English: Scholars want to make it consistent with the "Quarterly Calendar," but they need to subtract one sixty-three points from it. The points below do not pass, so it is rough, all due to too many points.

古文：课弦望当以昏明度月所在，则知加时先后之意，不宜用两仪郭间。
现代文：考察弦、望应在早晚测量月的位置，则知道加时先后的含意，不宜用两仪郭间。
English: If you want to measure the position of the moon in the morning and evening, you should know the meaning of overtime. It is not appropriate to use the interval between the two instruments.

古文：洪加《太初》元十二纪，减十斗下分，元起己丑，又为月行迟疾交会及黄道去极度、五星术，理实粹密，信可长行。
现代文：刘洪《干象历》历元在《太初历》历元的基础上加了十二纪，斗下分减了十，历元起自己丑，又创立了推算月行迟疾交会及黄道去极度、五大行星运动的方法，从理论上来说确实很精密，相信可以长久行用。
English: Liu Hong's "dry elephant calendar" calendar added twelve years to the foundation of the "too early calendar" calendar, and subtracted ten years. The calendar itself was ugly from the beginning, and he also created a method for calculating the lunar latency meeting and the ecliptic to the extreme, and the movement of the five planets. In theory, it is indeed very precise, and it is believed that it can be used for a long time.

古文：今韩翊所造，皆用洪法，小益斗下分，所错无几。
现代文：现在韩翊所造历法，使用的都是刘洪的方法，祇不过稍微增加了一些斗下分而已，两者相差无几。
English: Now, all the calendars created by Han Zheng use Liu Hong's method, with only a slight increase in the number of points under the bucket, and there is little difference between the two.

古文：翊所增减，致亦留思，然十术新立，犹未就悉，至于日蚀，有不尽效。
现代文：韩翊的增减，也颇费了一番心思，然而历术新立，不可能马上就很完备，以至于日食的预报与实际不完全一致。
English: The addition and subtraction of hanja also took a lot of effort. However, the calendar was newly established and could not be completed immediately, so that the forecast of the solar eclipse was not completely consistent with reality.

古文：效历之要，要在日蚀。
现代文：而检验历法，关键在于日食。
English: But the key to testing the calendar is the solar eclipse.

古文：熹平之际，时洪为郎，欲改《四分》，先上验日蚀：日蚀在晏，加时在辰，蚀从下上，三分侵二。
现代文：熹平年间，刘洪为郎官，想修改《四分历》，于是先上奏对日食的检验，他推算了将要发生的一次日食，据初步推算，这次食的发生在辰时，日食从下往上，蚀了三分之二。
English: During the Qin and Ping Dynasties, Liu Hong, a vassal, wanted to revise the "Quarterly Calendar," so he first played a test of the solar eclipse. He calculated an eclipse that would occur. According to preliminary calculations, this eclipse occurred at the hour, the eclipse from the bottom up, eroded two-thirds.

古文：事御之后如洪言，海内识真，莫不闻见，刘歆以来，未有洪比。
现代文：经过观测证明，这次食果然舆刘洪预测的一样，刘洪因此名声大震，自刘歆以来，没有能与之比肩的。
English: Observations proved that this meal was exactly as Liu Hong had predicted. As a result, Liu Hong's reputation was shaken to the core. Since Liu Bei, there has been no one to match him.

古文：夫以黄初二年六月二十九日戊辰加时未日蚀，《乾象术》加时申半强，于消息就加未，《黄初》以为加辛强，《乾象》后天一辰半强为近，《黄初》二辰半为远，消息与天近。
现代文：比如，黄初二年六月二十九日戊辰未时食，按《干象历》推算在申时半强，加上消息改正后在未时，按《黄初历》推算在辛时强，《干象历》的推算结果落后于实际天象一辰半强，近天，《黄初历》落后二辰半，远天，加上消息改正则与实际天象接近。
English: For example, on June 29, the 2nd year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, the waxing and waning of the waxing and waning of the waxing and waning of the waxing and waning of the waxing and waning of the waxing and waning of the waxing and waning of the waxing and waning of the waxing and waning of the waxing and waning of the waxing and waning of the waxing and waning of the waxing and waning of the waxing and waning of the waxing and waning of the waxing and waning of the waxing and waning of the waxing and waning of the waxing and

古文：三年正月丙寅朔加时申北日蚀，《黄初》加酉弱，《乾象》加午少，消息加未，《黄初》后天半辰近，《乾象》先天二辰少弱，于消息先天一辰强，为远天。
现代文：三年正月丙寅朔申时北日食，按《黄初历》推算在酉时弱，按《干象历》推算在午时少，加上消息改正后在未时，《黄初历》后天半个时辰，近天，《干象历》先天二辰少弱，加上消息改正后天一辰强，均远天。
English: In the first month of the third year, the northern solar eclipse occurred at the time of the waxing gibbous and waning gibbous. According to the calculation of the "Yellow Primary Calendar," it was weak at the hour of the waning gibbous, and according to the calculation of the "Dry Elephant Calendar," it was weak at the hour of the afternoon. With the correction of the information, it was weak at the time of the evening. With the correction of the information, it was weak at the time of the evening gibbous. With the correction of the information, it was weak at the time of the evening gibbous and waning gibbous. With the correction of

古文：三年十一月二十九日庚申加时西南维日蚀，《乾象》加未初，消息加申，《黄初》加未强，《乾象》先天一辰远，《黄初》先天半辰近，消息《乾象》近中天。
现代文：三年十一月二十九日庚申加时西南维日食，按《干象历》推算在未时初，加消息改正后在申时，按《黄初历》推算在未时强，《干象历》先天一辰，远天，《黄初历》先天半辰，近天，《干象历》加上消息改正后近中天。
English: On November 29 of the third year, the southwest-oriented solar eclipse was predicted to occur at the beginning of the day according to the "Dry Elephant Calendar," and at the beginning of the day according to the corrected information. According to the "Yellow First Calendar," it was predicted to occur at the beginning of the day. The "Dry Elephant Calendar" was predicted to occur at the first hour of the day, the "Yellow First Calendar" was predicted to occur at the first half hour of the day, and the "Dry Elephant Calendar" was predicted to occur at the middle of the day.

古文：二年七月十五日癸未，日加壬月加丙蚀，《乾象》月加申，消息加未，《黄初》月加子强，入甲申日，《乾象》后天二辰，消息后一辰为近，《黄初》后天六辰远。
现代文：二年七月十五日癸未，加壬月加丙蚀，《干象历》月加申，消息加未，《黄初历》月加子强，入甲申，《干象历》后天二个时辰，加消息改正后后天一个时辰，近天，《黄初历》后天六个时辰，远天。
English: On July 15, two years ago, the following day, the following month, the following eclipse, the following day of the "Dry Elephant Calendar," the following day of the "Yellow First Calendar," the following day of the "Dry Elephant Calendar," the following day of the "Yellow First Calendar," the following day of the "Yellow First Calendar," the following day of the "Yellow First Calendar," the following day of the "Yellow First Calendar," the following day of the "Yellow First Calendar," the following day of the "Yellow First Calendar," the following day of the "Yellow First Calendar," the following day of the "Yellow First Calendar," the following day of the "Y

古文：三年十一月十五日乙巳，日加丑月加未蚀，《乾象》月加巳半，于消息加午，《黄初》以丙午月加酉强，《乾象》先天二辰近，《黄初》后天二辰强为远，于消息于《乾象》先一辰。
现代文：三年十一月十五日乙巳，日加丑月加未蚀，《干象历》月加巳半，于消息加午，《黄初历》以丙午月加酉强，《干象历》先天二个时辰，近天，《黄初历》后天二个时辰强，远天，《干象历》加上消息改正后先天一个时辰。
English: On November 15 of the third year, the day plus the ugly moon plus the non-eclipse, the "dry elephant calendar" month plus half a day, the news plus the afternoon, the "yellow first calendar" with the c-midnight moon plus the obstinacy, the "dry elephant calendar" two hours a day, the near day, the day after the "yellow first calendar" two hours strong, the distant day, the "dry elephant calendar" plus the news after correction one hour a day.

古文：凡课日月蚀五事，《乾象》四远，《黄初》一近。 
现代文：总共检验了五次日、月食，《干象历》四次远天，《黄初厝》一次近天。 
English: In total, five solar and lunar eclipses were examined, four distant eclipses in the "Dry Elephant Calendar" and one near eclipse in the "Yellow Moon Calendar."

古文：翊于课难徐岳： 《乾象》消息但可减，不可加。
现代文：韩翊向徐岳发难： 《干象历》的消息改正衹可减，不可加。
English: Han Zheng sent a challenge to Xu Yue: The information of "Dry Elephant Calendar" can be corrected and reduced, but not added.

古文：加之无可说，不可用。 
现代文：没有办法加，不可用。 
English: Can't add, can't use.

古文：岳云：本术自有消息，受师法，以消息为奇，辞不能改，故列之正法消息。
现代文：徐岳回答：《干象历》本身就有消息改正法，承受师法，消息改正为其特有，不能更改，故将消息列为正法。
English: Xu Yue replied: "The Dry Elephant Calendar" itself has a message correction method and a receiving teacher method. The message correction is unique to it and cannot be changed. Therefore, the message is listed as a positive method.

古文：翊术自疏。
现代文：韩翊的历法本身就粗疏。
English: Han Zheng's calendar itself is crude.

古文：木以三年五月二十四日丁亥晨见；《黄初》五月十七日庚辰见，先七日；《乾象》五月十五日戊寅见，先九日。
现代文：木星三年五月二十四日丁亥早晨出现。按黄初历》推算，五月十七日庚辰出现，先天七日；按《干象历》推算，五月十五日戊寅出现，先天九日。
English: Jupiter appeared in the morning of the 24th day of Dinghai in May. According to the calculation of the "Yellow First Calendar," it appeared on the 17th day of May, the 7th day before yesterday; according to the "Dry Elephant Calendar," it appeared on the 15th day of May, the 9th day before yesterday.

古文：土以二年十一月二十六日壬辰见；《乾象》十一月二十一日丁亥见，先五日；《黄初》十一月十八日甲申见，先八日。
现代文：土星二年十一月二十六日壬辰出现。按干象历》推算，十一月二十一日丁亥出现，先天五日；按《黄初历》推算，十一月十八日甲申出现，先天八日。
English: According to the calculation of the "Dry Elephant Calendar," Ding Hai appeared on November 21st, five days ago; according to the "Yellow First Calendar," Jia Shen appeared on November 18th, eight days ago.

古文：土以三年十月十一日壬申伏；《乾象》同，壬申伏；《黄初》已下十月七日戊辰伏，先四日。
现代文：土星三年十月十一日壬申伏。按干象历》推算为壬申伏；按黄初历》推算，十月七日戊辰伏，先天四日。
English: Saturn retrogrades on October 11 of the third year. According to the calculation of the "dry elephant calendar," it is retrograded; according to the calculation of the "yellow primary calendar," it retrogrades on October 7 and the day before yesterday.

古文：土以三年十一月二十二日壬子见；《乾象》十一月十五日乙巳见，先七日；《黄初》十一月十二日壬寅见，先十日。
现代文：土星三年十一月二十二日壬子出现。按干象历》推算，十一月十五日乙巳出现，先天七日；按黄初历》推算，十一月十二壬寅出现，先天十日。
English: According to the calculation of the "dry elephant calendar," the 15th day of the 11th month was the 7th day of the previous month; according to the calculation of the "yellow first calendar," the 12th month was the 10th day of the previous month.

古文：金以三年闰六月十五日丁丑晨伏；《乾象》六月二十五日戊午伏，先十九日；《黄初》六月二十二日乙卯伏，先二十三日。
现代文：金星三年闰六月十五日丁丑早晨伏。按干象历》推算，六月二十五戊午伏，先天十九日；按《黄初厝》推算，六月二十二日乙卯伏，先天二十三日。
English: According to the calculation of the "Dry Elephant Calendar," the 25th day of the 6th month, the 19th day of the previous month, and the 22nd day of the 6th month, the 23rd day of the previous month.

古文：金以三年九月十一日壬寅见；《乾象》以八月十八日庚辰见，先二十三日；《黄初》八月十五日丁丑见，先二十五日。
现代文：金星三年九月十一日壬寅出现。按《干象历》推算，八月十八日庚辰出现，先天二十三日；按《黄初历》推算，八月十五日丁丑出现，先天二十五日。
English: According to the calculation of the "dry elephant calendar," Geng Chen appeared on August 18th, the 23rd of the previous day; according to the calculation of the "yellow lunar calendar," Ding Jiu appeared on August 15th, the 25th of the previous day.

古文：水以二年十一月十七日癸未晨见；《乾象》十一月十三日己卯见，先四日；《黄初》十一月十二日戊寅见，先五日。
现代文：水星二年十一月十七日癸未早晨出现。按干象历》推算，十一月十三日己卯出现，先天四日；按《黄初历》推算，十一月十二戊寅出现，先天五日。
English: Mercury appeared before dawn on November 17th, the second year. According to the calculation of the "dry elephant calendar," it appeared on November 13th, the day before yesterday; according to the calculation of the "yellow first calendar," it appeared on November 12th, the day before yesterday.

古文：水以二年十二月十三日己酉晨伏；《乾象》十二月十五日辛亥伏，后二日；《黄初》十二月十四日庚戌伏，后一日。
现代文：水星二年十二月十三日己酉早晨伏。按干象历》推算，十二月十五日辛亥伏，后天二日；《黄初历》推算，十二月十四日庚戌伏，后天一日。
English: Mercury sets on the morning of December 13 in the second year. According to the calculation of the "dry elephant calendar," it sets on December 15 and sets two days later; according to the calculation of the "yellow lunar calendar," it sets on December 14 and sets one day later.

古文：水以三年五月十八日辛巳夕见；《乾象》亦以五月十八日见；《黄初》五月十七日庚辰见，先一日。
现代文：水星三年五月十八日辛巳傍晚出现。按干象历》推算同样为五月十八日出现；按《黄初历》推算，五月十七日庚辰出现，先天一日。
English: Mercury appeared in the evening of the 18th day of the 5th month of the 3rd year. According to the calculation of the "dry elephant calendar," it also appeared on the 18th day of the 5th month; according to the calculation of the "yellow first calendar," it appeared on the 17th day of the 5th month, the day before yesterday.

古文：水以三年六月十三日丙午伏；《乾象》六月二十日癸丑伏，后七日；《黄初》六月十九日壬子伏，后六日。
现代文：水星三年六月十三日丙午伏。按干象历》推算，六月二十日癸丑伏，后天七日；按黄初历推算，六月十九日壬子伏，后天六日。
English: According to the calculation of the "dry elephant calendar," June 20 is the first day of the year, and the day after tomorrow is the seventh day; according to the calculation of the yellow solar calendar, June 19 is the first day of the year, and the day after tomorrow is the sixth day.

古文：水以三年闰六月二十五日丁亥晨见；《乾象》以闰月九日辛未见，先十六日；《黄初》闰月八日庚午见，先十七日。
现代文：水星三年闰六月二十五日丁亥早晨出现。按干象历推算，闰月九日辛未出现，先天十六日；按黄初厝》推算，闰月八日庚午出现，先天十七日。
English: Mercury appeared in the morning of the 25th day of Dinghai in the leap year of June. According to the calculation of the dry elephant calendar, it did not appear on the 9th day of the leap month, but on the 16th day of the previous day; according to the calculation of the "Huangchuo" calendar, it appeared in the afternoon of the 8th day of the leap month, and on the 17th day of the previous day.

古文：水以三年七月七日己亥伏；《乾象》七月十一日癸卯伏，后四日；《黄初》以七月十日壬寅伏，后三日。
现代文：水星三年七月七日己亥伏。按推算，七月十一癸卯伏，后天四；按黄初历》推算，七月十日壬寅伏，后天三。
English: Mercury will be retrograde on July 7th. According to calculations, July 11th will be retrograde, and the day after tomorrow will be retrograde. According to the calculation of the "Yellow Lunar Calendar," July 10th will be retrograde, and the day after tomorrow will be retrograde.

古文：水以三年十一月日于晷度十四日甲辰伏；《乾象》以十一月九日己亥伏，先五日；《黄初》十一月八日戊戌伏，先六日。
现代文：水星三年十一月于晷度十四日甲辰伏。按干象历》推算，十一月九日己亥伏，先天五；按黄初历》推算，十一月八日戊戌伏，先天六。
English: Mercury turns retrograde on the 14th day of the 11th month in the 3rd year of the 11th month. According to the calculation of the "dry elephant calendar," it turns retrograde on the 9th day of the 11th month, and turns retrograde on the 5th day of the previous month; according to the calculation of the "yellow lunar calendar," it turns retrograde on the 8th day of the 11th month, and turns retrograde on the 6th day of the previous month.

古文：水以三年十二月二十八日戊子夕见；二历同以十二月壬申见，俱先十六日。
现代文：水星三年十二月二十八日戊子傍晚出现。按僦象历》、《黄初历》推算均为十二月壬申出现，先天十六日。
English: Mercury appeared in the evening of the 28th day of the 12th month of the 3rd year of Bo Zi. According to the calculations of the Chinese Zodiac and the "Yellow First Calendar," it appeared in December in Jinshin, on the 16th day of the previous month.

古文：凡四星见伏十五；《乾象》七近二中，《黄初》五近一中。
现代文：以上列举土星、木星、金星、水星的出现和隐伏共十五次。其中，干象厝》七次近天，二次与实际天象在同一天，黄初历》五次近天，一次舆实际天象在同一天。
English: The appearance and occultation of Saturn, Jupiter, Venus, and Mercury are listed above for a total of fifteen times. Among them, the "dry" zodiac is close to the sky seven times, twice on the same day as the actual celestial object, the "yellow" solar calendar is close to the sky five times, and the "actual" celestial object is on the same day once.

古文：郎中李恩议： 以太史天度与相覆校，二年七月、三年十一月望与天度日皆差异，月蚀加时乃后天六时半，非从三度之谓，定为后天过半日也。 
现代文：郎中李恩认为： 以太史推算的天象与实际天象互相比较发现，二年七月、三年十一月望与推算天度均有差异，推算的月食发生时刻落后实际天象六个半时辰，与相差三度的说法不一样，应定为后天过半天多。 
English: Brother-in-law Li En said: A comparison of the celestial objects calculated from the history of the universe and the actual celestial objects found that the celestial objects observed in July of the second year and November of the third year were different from the calculated celestial objects. The estimated time of occurrence of the lunar eclipse lagged behind the actual celestial objects by six and a half hours, which is different from the difference of three degrees. It should be set as more than half a day after the day after tomorrow.

古文：董巴议曰： 昔伏羲始造八卦，作三画，以象二十四气。
现代文：董巴认为： 从前伏羲首创八卦，作三画，以比照二十四节气。
English: Dongba said: In the past, Fuxi was the first to create eight tales, and made three paintings to compare the twenty-four solar terms.

古文：黄帝因之，初作《调历》。
现代文：黄帝继承了这种方法，初次作《调历》。
English: The Yellow Emperor inherited this method and made the first "Calendar Adjustment."

古文：历代十一，更年五千，凡有七历。
现代文：经历十一代，五千年中共行用了七种历法。
English: After eleven generations, a total of seven calendars have been used for five thousand years.

古文：颛顼以今之孟春正月为元，其时正月朔旦立春，五星会于庙，营室也，冰冻始泮，蛰虫始发，鸡始三号，天曰作时，地曰作昌，人曰作乐，鸟兽万物莫不应和，故颛顼圣人为历宗也。
现代文：颛顼以现在的孟春正月为历元，当时正月朔日早晨立春，五大行星相会于天庙即营室，冰冻开始融解，冬眠的动物开始出来活动，雄鸡开始在白天来临之前叫三遍，在天表示风调雨顺，在地表示万物繁荣，在人表示幸福欢乐，乌兽万物都应和着天地的变化，所以颛顼这个圣人可以说是历法的祖宗。
English: He took the current Mengchun New Year's Day as the calendar. At that time, the New Year's Day morning marked the beginning of spring, the five planets met in the temple of heaven, that is, the camp room. The ice began to melt, the hibernating animals began to come out and move. The rooster began to crow three times before the dawn of the day. In heaven, it means good weather, in earth, it means prosperity of all things, in man, it means happiness and joy. All things should be in harmony with the changes of heaven and earth. Therefore, this sage can be said to be the ancestor of the calendar.

古文：汤作《殷历》弗复以正月朔旦立春为节也，更以十一月朔旦冬至为元首，下至周鲁及汉，皆从其节，据正四时。
现代文：汤制作《殷历》，没有以正月朔早晨立春为历元，而是改为以十一月朔日早晨冬至作为历元之首，下至周、鲁直到汉代，都行用这种方法，并据以制定时节。
English: Tang produced the Yin calendar, which did not take the first day of the first month and the morning of the first day of the first month as the beginning of the calendar, but changed it to take the first day of the first month and the morning of the first day of the first month as the beginning of the calendar. This method was used from the first day of the first month to the first day of the first month, from the first day of the first month to the first day of the first month, and from the first day of the first month to the first day of the first month.

古文：夏为得天，以承尧舜，从颛顼故也。
现代文：夏承继尧、舜，历法舆天时相符，是由于继承了颛顼的方法。
English: The reason why the summer succeeds the autumn and the winter, and the calendar coincides with the solar calendar, is due to the method of inheriting the winter.

古文：《礼记》大戴曰虞夏之历，建正于孟春，此之谓也。 
现代文：《礼记》大戴上所说的 虞、夏之历，建正于孟春 ，讲的就是这回事。 
English: "The Book of Rites" is based on Mengchun, and the so-called "state" and "summer" calendars are put on. This is what is being talked about.

古文：杨伟请： 六十日中疏密可知，不待十年。
现代文：杨伟认为： 在六十天之内，历法的粗疏精密就可知道，用不着等十年。
English: Yang Wei believes: Within sixty days, the coarse precision of the calendar can be known, and there is no need to wait ten years.

古文：若不从法，是校方员弃规矩，考轻重背权衡，课长短废尺寸，论是非违分理。
现代文：但如果不按照历法本身的规律办理，那就等于想不用规和矩校正方圆，不用秤确定物体的轻重，不用尺子确定物体的长短，不按一定的道理论断事物的是非。
English: But if you don't follow the rules of the calendar itself, it's like trying to square a circle without using a rule and a moment, determining the weight of an object without using a scale, determining the length of an object without using a ruler, and deciding the rights and wrongs of things without following a certain theory.

古文：若不先定校历之本法，而悬听弃法之末争，则孟轲所谓 方寸之基，可使高于岑楼 者也。
现代文：如果不先确定检验历法的方法，而祇在口头上争来争去，造就会使得孟轲所说 方寸之基，可使高于岑楼，的荒谬情况出现。
English: If you do not first determine the method of testing the calendar, but only verbally fight, it will make the absurd situation that the foundation of the square can be higher than the mirage, as Meng Wei said.

古文：今韩翊据刘洪术者，知贵其术，珍其法。
现代文：现在韩翊依据刘洪的方法制定历法，是由于他知道刘洪历术方法的珍贵。
English: Now Han Zheng uses Liu Hong's method to set the calendar, because he knows the preciousness of Liu Hong's calendar method.

古文：而弃其论，背其术，废其言，违其事，是非必使洪奇妙之式不传来世。
现代文：而他却遣弃刘洪的历论，违背刘洪的历术，废弃刘洪的言论，违背刘洪的行事，这样是必使得刘洪历法的奇妙之处不传于来世。
English: However, he abandoned Liu Hong's theory of history, went against Liu Hong's calendar, abandoned Liu Hong's speech, and went against Liu Hong's actions. This will surely prevent the wonders of Liu Hong's calendar from being passed down to future generations.

古文：若知而违之，是挟故而背师也；若不知而据之，是为挟不知而罔知也。 
现代文：如果韩翊确实知道而违背刘洪，那就是故意违背老师；如果是不知刘洪的历法而据之，那就是真正的无知。 
English: If Han Zheng really knew and disobeyed Liu Hong, that would be deliberately disobeying the teacher; if he did not know Liu Hong's calendar and followed it, that would be true ignorance.

古文：校议未定，会帝崩而寝。
现代文：校验的建议没有确定，正好皇帝去世，逭件事也就搁置下来。
English: The proposal for verification was not confirmed, and the matter was shelved when the emperor died.

古文：至明帝景初元年，尚书郎杨伟造《景初历》。
现代文：到明帝景初元年，尚书郎杨伟制定《景初历》。
English: In the first year of the Ming Emperor Jing, Shang Shulang Yang Wei formulated the "Jing New Year's Calendar."

古文：表上，帝遂改正朔，施行伟历，以建丑之月为正，改其年三月为孟夏，其孟、仲、季月虽与夏正不同，至于郊祀蒐狩，班宣时令，皆以建寅为正。
现代文：改历的建议呈上后，皇帝马上决定改正朔，施行杨伟所造的历法，以丑月为正月，把当年的三月改为孟夏，其孟、仲、季月虽然与夏正不同，但举行郊祀仪式、狩猎，颁布时令，都以建寅为正月。
English: After the proposal to change the calendar was submitted, the emperor immediately decided to correct the new moon, implement the calendar created by Yang Wei, with the ugly moon as the first month, and change the March of that year to Mengxia. Although the Meng, Zhong and Ji months are different from the summer, the town worship ceremony, hunting, and promulgation of the season are all held with Jianyin as the first month.

古文：三年正月帝崩，复用夏正。
现代文：三年正月皇帝去世，复用夏正。
English: In the first month of the third year, the emperor died, and Xia Zheng was reinstated.

古文：其刘氏在蜀，仍汉《四分历》。
现代文：刘氏在蜀国，仍用汉代《四分历》。
English: In Shu Province, the Liu clan still uses the Han Dynasty "Quarterly Calendar."

古文：吴中书令阚泽受刘洪《乾象法》于东莱徐岳，又加解注。
现代文：吴国中书令阐泽从东莱徐岳那裹学习了刘洪的《干象历》，并且加以注解。
English: In the middle of Wu's reign, Shuling Yanze learned Liu Hong's "Gan Xiang Calendar" from Donglai Xu Yue Nanbu, and annotated it.

古文：中常待王蕃以洪术精妙，用推浑天之理，以制仪象及论，故孙氏用《乾象历》，至吴亡。
现代文：中常侍王蕃认为刘洪的历术很精妙，因此用它来推演浑天说的原理，并且据以造浑仪、浑象及浑天论，所以孙氏的吴国使用《干象历》，一直到吴国灭亡。
English: The middle-ranking attendant Wang Qi thought that Liu Hong's almanac was very exquisite, so he used it to deduce the principle of Hun Tian's theory, and used it to create Hun Yi, Hun Zi and Hun Tian's theory, so Sun's Wuxi used "Dry Elephant Almanac" until the demise of Wuxi.

古文：武帝践阼，泰始元年，因魏之《景初历》，改名《泰始历》。
现代文：晋武帝获得皇位，泰始元年，沿袭魏朝的《景初历》，改名为《泰始历》。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, the "Jingzhu Calendar" inherited from the Wei Dynasty was renamed the "Thai New Year's Calendar."

古文：杨伟推五星尤疏阔，故元帝渡江左以后，更以《乾象》五星法代伟历。
现代文：杨伟的《景初历》推算五大行星的位置尤其不准确，所以晋元帝南渡建国后，以《干象历》中推算五大行星位置的方法替代了杨伟《景初历》中的推算方法。
English: Yang Wei's "Lunar Calendar" is particularly inaccurate in calculating the positions of the five planets, so after the founding of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Jin Yuan replaced the calculation method in Yang Wei's "Lunar Calendar" with the method of calculating the positions of the five planets in the "Dry Elephant Calendar."

古文：乾象历上元己丑以来，至建安十一年丙戌，岁积七千三百七十八年。
现代文：自黄初年间以来，凡是制造修改历法，都参考《干象历》，在其斗分、朔余、月运动速率的变化等基本数据上进行增减，以求折衷。刘洪的历术为后世历法的师表，所以先列之如下。上元己丑至垩谜十一年丙戌，共积七千三百七十八年。
English: Since the beginning of the Yellow Emperor's reign, all calendars have been made and modified by referring to the "Dry Elephant Calendar" and making additions and subtractions to its basic data such as the doubling, the leap second, and the change in the moon's movement rate, in order to seek a compromise. Liu Hong's calendar is the teacher's table for future generations of calendars, so it is listed first as follows. Shangyuan has been a mystery for 11 years, with a total of 7,378 years.

古文：乾法，千一百七十八。
现代文：干法：一千一百七十八。
English: Dry: 1,178.

古文：会通，七千一百七十一。
现代文：会通：七千一百七十一。
English: Membership: 7,171.

古文：纪法，五百八十九。
现代文：纪法：五百八十九。
English: Discipline: Five hundred and eighty-nine.

古文：周天，二十一万五千一百三十。
现代文：周天：二十一万五千一百三十。
English: Zhou Tian: two hundred fifteen thousand one hundred and thirty.

古文：通法，四万三千二十六。
现代文：通法：四万三千零二十六。
English: Total: 43,026.

古文：通数，三十一。
现代文：通数：三十一。
English: Total: thirty-one.

古文：日法，千四百五十七。
现代文：曰法：一千四百五十七。
English: Japan and France: 1,457.

古文：岁中，十二。
现代文：岁中：十二。
English: Middle years: twelfth.

古文：余数，三千九十。
现代文：余数：三千零九十。
English: Remaining: three thousand and ninety.

古文：章岁，十九。
现代文：章岁：十九。
English: Chapter years: nineteen.

古文：没法，百三。
现代文：没法：一百零三。
English: Impossible: one hundred and three.

古文：章闰，七。
现代文：章闰：七。
English: Chapter: Seven.

古文：会数，四十七。
现代文：会数：四十七。
English: Number of meetings: forty-seven.

古文：会岁，八百九十三。
现代文：会岁：八百九十三。
English: Age of the congregation: eight hundred and ninety-three.

古文：章月，二百三十五。
现代文：章月：二百三十五。
English: Chapter Month: Two hundred thirty-five.

古文：会率，千八百八十二。
现代文：会率：一千八百八十二。
English: Membership: 1,882.

古文：朔望合数，九百四十一。
现代文：朔望合数：九百四十一。
English: The total number of confirmed cases now stands at 941.

古文：会月，万一千四十五。
现代文：会月：一万一千零四十五。
English: Monthly attendance: 11,045.

古文：纪月，七千二百八十五。
现代文：纪月：七千二百八十五。
English: Ji Yue: seven thousand two hundred eighty-five.

古文：元月，一万四千五百七十。
现代文：元月：一万四千五百七十。
English: January: 14,570.

古文：月周，七千八百七十四。
现代文：月周：七千八百七十四。
English: Weeks of the month: 7,874.

古文：小周，二百五十四。
现代文：小周：二百五十四。
English: Xiao Zhou: Two hundred and fifty-four.

古文：推入纪
现代文：推入纪：
English: Pushing into a new era:

古文：置上元尽所求年，以乾法除之，不满乾法，以纪法除之，余不满纪法者，入内纪甲子年也。
现代文：用所求年距上元的积年数除以干法，小于干法的余数除以纪法，如果余数小于纪法，则余数即为所求年入内纪甲子年之数。
English: Divide the product of the number of years from the upper element to the lower element by the dry method, and divide the remainder less than the dry method by the disciplinary method. If the remainder is less than the disciplinary method, then the remainder is the number of years from the year of entry into the internal discipline.

古文：满法去之，入外纪甲午年也。推朔
现代文：如果余数大于纪法，以余数除以纪法，去掉商敷，则所得余数即为所求年入外纪甲午年之敷。推朔：
English: If the remainder is greater than the criterion, divide the remainder by the criterion, and remove the business, then the remaining number is the desired year of entry into the foreign discipline.

古文：置入纪年，外所求，以章月乘之，章岁而一，所得为定积月，不尽为闰余。
现代文：用所求年入纪年数减去一，乘以章月，再除以章岁，所得商敷为定积月，余数为闰余。
English: Subtract one from the required number of years of age, multiply by the month of the chapter, and then divide by the year of the chapter. The result is the month of the month, and the remainder is the remainder.

古文：闰余十二以上，岁有闰。
现代文：如果闰余在十二以上，则所求年有闰月。
English: If the remainder is 12 or more, the year has a leap month.

古文：以通法乘定积月，为假积日，满日法为定积日，不尽为小余。
现代文：用通法乘以定积月，所得乘积为假积曰，以假积日除以日法，所得商数为定积日，余数为小余。
English: Multiply the common method by the fixed accumulation month, and the resulting product is the assumed product, and divide the assumed accumulation day by the daily method, and the resulting quotient is the fixed accumulation day, and the remainder is the small remainder.

古文：以六旬去积日为大余，命以所入纪，算外，所求年天正十一月朔日也。
现代文：以定积日除以六十，所得余数为大余，从其入纪起算，算外，即为所求年天正十一月朔日。
English: Divide the fixed accumulation day by sixty, and the remaining number is a large surplus. From the time of its entry into the era, it is extrapolated, that is, the requested year is Tensho November New Year's Day.

古文：求次月，加大余二十九，小余七百七十三，小余满日法从大余。
现代文：求次月朔日：在上月大余的基础上加二十九，小余的基础上加七百七十三，如果所得小余大于日法，化入大余。
English: Ask for the new moon day of the next month: add 29 on the basis of the last month's surplus, and add 773 on the basis of the small surplus. If the small surplus is greater than the daily surplus, it will turn into a large surplus.

古文：小余六百八十四已上，其月大。
现代文：小余大于六百八十四，则本月为大月。
English: If the small remainder is greater than six hundred and eighty-four, then this month is a big month.

古文：推冬至
现代文：推冬至：
English: Pushing the winter solstice:

古文：置入纪年，外所求，以余数乘之，满纪法为大余，不尽为小余。
现代文：用所求年入纪年数减去一，乘以余数，以其乘积除以纪法，所得商数为大余，余数为小余。
English: Subtract one from the required number of years to enter the age of retirement, multiply by the remaining number, and divide the product by the age of retirement. The resulting quotient is a large remainder, and the remaining number is a small remainder.

古文：以六旬去之，命以纪，算外，天正冬至日也。
现代文：用大余除以六十，保留余数，从其入纪起算，算外，即为所求年天正冬至日。
English: Divide the remainder by sixty, keep the remainder, and count from the beginning of the era, excluding, that is, the desired year is the day of the winter solstice.

古文：求二十四气
现代文：求二十四气：
English: Ask for twenty-four breaths:

古文：置冬至小余，加大余十五，小余五百一十五，满二千三百五十六从大余，命如法。
现代文：先列出冬至大余，冬至小余乘以四，大余加十五得新的大余，冬至小余的四倍加五百一十五，以其和除以二千三百五十六，所得商数再加大余，其和为所求节气之大余数，命名方法与求冬至时一样。
English: First, list the winter solstice large remainder, the winter solstice small remainder multiplied by four, the large remainder plus fifteen to get a new large remainder, the winter solstice small remainder four times plus five hundred and fifteen, divide by two thousand three hundred and fifty-six, the resulting quotient and then increase the remainder, and the sum is the large remainder of the desired solar terms, the naming method is the same as for the winter solstice.

古文：推闰月
现代文：推闰月：
English: Pushing the leap month:

古文：以闰余减章岁，余以岁中乘之，满章闰为一月。
现代文：用闰余减去章岁，乘以岁中，以乘积除以章闰，所得商敷为闰月所在之月。
English: Subtract the leap year by the remainder of the leap year, multiply by the year, and divide by the leap year by the product of the product of the two. The result is the month in which the leap month occurs.

古文：不尽，半法己上亦一，有进退，以无中月。
现代文：除不尽的话，如果余数大于章闰的一半，则闰月所在之月再加一月，上述方法有时会有出入，更为准确的方法是以无中气之月置闰。
English: In addition, if the remainder is greater than half of the intercalary month, then the month in which the intercalary month is located is added to the first month. The above method sometimes has discrepancies, and the more accurate method is the intercalary month with no midpoint.

古文：推弦望
现代文：推弦望：
English: Watch the chord progression:

古文：加大余七，小余五百五十七半，小余如日法从大余，余命如前，得上弦。
现代文：在天正十一月朔大余的基础上加七，小余加五百五十七点五，以小余除以日法，所得商数加入大余，余数即为新的小余，余下的方法与前面推朔时一样，所得为上弦日。
English: On the basis of the Tensho November New Year's Day surplus, add seven, add 557.05 to the small surplus, divide the small surplus by the day method, add the resulting quotient to the large surplus, and the remaining number is the new small surplus. The remaining method is the same as the previous New Year's Day, and the income is the first day.

古文：又加得望，又加得下弦，又加得后月朔。
现代文：按同样的方法再加一次，得望日，又加一次得下弦日，再加得下一月的朔日。
English: According to the same method, add one more time to get the first day of the month, add one more time to get the last day of the month, and add the first day of the next month.

古文：其弦望定小余四百一以下，以百刻乘之，满日法得一刻，不尽什之，求分，以课所近节气夜漏未尽，以算上为日。
现代文：弦、望时刻的确定，如果弦、望时的小余小于四百零一，以一百刻乘以小余，以其乘积除以日法，所得商数为刻，小数部分乘以十，化为分，考察所近节气的夜漏，以算上为曰。
English: To determine the hour and minute of the hour, if the small remainder of the hour and minute is less than four hundred and one, multiply the small remainder by one hundred and divide the product by the Japanese number, and the quotient is the hour, and the fractional part is multiplied by ten, and converted into a fraction.

古文：推没
现代文：推没：
English: He said:

古文：置入纪年，外所求，以余数乘之，满纪法为积没，有余加尽积为一。
现代文：以所求年入纪年数减去一，乘以余数三千零九十，再除以纪法五百八十九，所得商数为积没，如果有余数则加之使得等于纪法，积没再加一。
English: Subtract one from the required number of years of service and multiply by the remaining 390, and then divide by 589 years of service. The resulting quotient is accumulated, and if there is a remaining number, it is added so that it is equal to the number of years of service, and the accumulated amount is not added.

古文：以会通乘之，满没法为大余，不尽为小余。
现代文：以会通七千一百七十一乘以积没，除以没法一百零三，所得商数为大余，余数为小余。
English: The quotient of 7,171 multiplied by the accumulation of noughts and divided by the noughts and crosses of 103 is a large remainder, and the remainder is a small remainder.

古文：大余命以纪，算外，冬至后没日。
现代文：大余从其入纪起算，算外，即为冬至后没日。
English: Most of them are counted from the time of their entry into the era, and are not counted, that is, there is no day after the winter solstice.

古文：求次没，加大余六十九，小余六十四，满其法从大余，无分为灭。
现代文：求次没：在上次没日的基础上加大余六十九得到新的大余，小余加六十四，加后小余在没法一百零三以上，化入大余，如果没有余数，则为灭日。
English: Ask for the next remainder: on the basis of the previous remainder, increase the remainder by sixty-nine to get a new large remainder, add sixty-four to the small remainder, add more than one hundred and three to the small remainder, and turn it into a large remainder, and if there is no remainder, it is a ruin.

古文：推日度
现代文：推度：
English: Thrust:

古文：以纪法乘积日，满周天去之，余以纪法除之，所得为度。
现代文：以纪法五百八十九乘以积，乘积在周天二十一万五千一百三十以上减之，余下不足周天部分除以纪法五百八十九，所得为度。
English: By multiplying the product of five hundred and eighty-nine times according to the law of discipline, the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the

古文：命度以牛前五度起，宿次除之，不满宿，即天正朔夜半日所在。
现代文：曰度从牛宿前五度起算，依次减去所历宿的度数，直至其小于某一宿度数，则此即为天正朔日夜半太阳所在的宿度。
English: The degree of the sun is calculated from the first five degrees of the cow's lodging, and the number of degrees of the previous lodging is subtracted until it is less than a certain degree of lodging, then this is the degree of lodging where the sun is at midnight on the first day of the new year.

古文：求次日，加一度，经斗除分；分少，损一度为纪法，加焉。
现代文：求次太阳所在：在前一天基础上加一度。经过斗宿时，还需减去斗宿分；如果余分小于斗宿分，则减一度化为纪法五百八十九，加上后再减斗宿分。
English: To find the location of the next sun: add one degree to the previous day. When passing through Douyou, you also need to subtract Douyou points; if the excess is less than Douyou points, then the reduction of one degree is converted into Ji Fa 589 and then subtract Douyou points.

古文：推月度
现代文：推月度：
English: Monthly forecast:

古文：以月周乘积日，满周天去之，余满纪法为度，不尽为分，命如上，则天正朔夜半月所在度。
现代文：以月周七千八百七十四乘以积，乘积在周天二十一万五千一百三十以上减之，余下不足周天部分除以纪法五百八十九，所得商敷为月度，余数为分，剩下的方法与推算日度时一样，则可得天正朔日夜半月亮所在宿度。
English: Multiply the lunar week of 7,874 by the product, multiply the product by the day of the week of 2,151,030 or more and subtract it. Divide the remaining less than the day of the week by the number of days of the year 589. The result is the month and the remainder is the number of minutes. The remaining method is the same as the calculation of the time of the day. Then you can get the time of the day when the half moon is located.

古文：求次月，小月加度二十二，分二百五十八。
现代文：求次月朔月亮宿度：如果是小月，则在上月月度的基础上加二十二，月分加二百五十八。
English: If it is a small moon, add 22 to the previous month's moon phase, and 258 to the moon phase.

古文：大月又加一日，度十三，分二百一十七，满法得一度。
现代文：如果是大月则多一天，月度再加十三，月分一一百一十七，如果分在纪法以上，化入度。
English: If it is a large moon, it will be one day more, the monthly period will be increased by thirteen, the monthly fraction will be eleven hundred and seventeen, and if the fraction is above the law of discipline, it will be the degree of incarnation.

古文：其冬下旬，月在张、心署之。
现代文：其冬下旬，月在张宿、心宿之作出标记。
English: In late winter, the moon is marked at the Zhangjuku and Xinjuku.

古文：推合朔度
现代文：推合朔度：
English: Convergence factor:

古文：以章岁乘朔小余，满会数为大分；不尽，小分。
现代文：以章岁十九乘以天正朔小余，除以会数四十七，所得商数为大分；余数为小分。
English: The quotient obtained by multiplying the number of chapters by nineteen and the number of days by forty-seven is a large fraction; the remainder is a small fraction.

古文：以大分从朔夜半日分，满纪法从度，命如前，天正合朔日月所共会也。
现代文：以大分加朔日夜半日分，如果其和在纪法五百八十九以上，化入度，推算所在宿度的方法与前面一样，所得宿度为天正合朔时日、月交会时的位置。
English: Taking Oita and adding half a day of the New Year's Day and half a day of the New Year's Eve, if it is more than five hundred and eighty-nine in the calendar, the degree of integration, the method of calculating the location of the deposit is the same as before, and the resulting deposit is the position at the time of the Tensho New Year's Day and the lunar fair.

古文：求次月，加度二十九，大分三百一十二，小分满会数从大分，大分满纪法后度，经斗除大分。
现代文：求次月合朔日、月位置：在上月合朔的基础上日度加二十九，大分加三百一十二，小分加二十五，小分在会敷四十七以上，化入大分，大分在纪法五百八十九以上，化入度，经过斗宿时还需除去斗宿大分。
English: Ask for the next new moon day and the position of the moon: on the basis of the previous month's new moon, the daily degree plus 29, the Oita degree plus 312, the Oita degree plus 25, the Oita degree above 47, the Oita degree above 589, the Oita degree, and the Oita degree to be removed when passing through Douju.

古文：求弦望日所在度，加合朔度七，分二百二十五，小分十七半，大小分及度命如前，则上弦日所在度。
现代文：求弦、望时所在宿度：在上月合朔的基础上度加七，大分加二百二十五，小分加十七点五，大分、小分及度之间的换算，宿度的确定方法如前，则可得上弦时所在宿度。
English: Seeking chord, the degree of stay at the time of looking: on the basis of the last month's new moon, the degree plus seven, the major point plus 225, the minor point plus 17.5, the conversion between the major point, the minor point and the degree, the method of determining the degree of stay as before, the degree of stay at the time of winding can be obtained.

古文：又加得望、下弦、后月合。
现代文：累加可分别得望、下弦、下月合朔日时所在宿度。
English: Accumulation can be made of the position of the moon at sunrise, sunset, and new moon, respectively.

古文：求弦望月行所在度，加合朔度九十八，大分四百八，小分四十一，大小分及度命如前合朔，则上弦月所在。
现代文：求弦、望时月所在宿度：在上月合朔的基础上日度加九十八，大分加四百零八，小分加四十一，大分、小分及度之间的换算，宿度的确定方法如前，则可得上弦时月所在宿度。
English: The degree of the position of the moon at the time of seeking the chord and looking at the chord: on the basis of the previous month, the degree of the day plus ninety-eight, the ounce plus four hundred and eight, the decimal plus forty-one, the conversion between the ounce, the decimal and the degree, the determination method of the degree as before, the degree of the position of the moon at the time of the chord can be obtained.

古文：又加得望、下弦、后月合。
现代文：累加可分别得望、下弦、下月合朔时月所在宿度。
English: Accumulation can be made of the position of the moon at sunrise, sunset, and new moon, respectively.

古文：求日月昏明度，日以纪法，月以月周，乘所近节气夜漏，二百而一为明分。
现代文：求日、月昏明时所在度：推算日昏明度用纪法，推算月昏明度用月周，乘以最靠近的那个节气的夜漏，除以二百，所得分别为曰、月的明分。
English: Find the degree of the sun and the moon when they are dim: calculate the degree of the sun's dimness using the chronological method, calculate the degree of the moon's dimness using the lunar week, multiply by the closest solar eclipse, divide by two hundred, and the result is the degree of the sun and the moon respectively.

古文：日以减纪法，月以减月周，余为昏分。
现代文：以纪法减日明分得昏分，以月周减月明分得月亮昏分。
English: According to the discipline method, subtract the day's bright points to get the dim points, and subtract the moon's bright points from the lunar week to get the moon's dim points.

古文：各以加夜半，如法为度。
现代文：分别加上夜半分，除以纪法或月周，化为度。
English: Add half of the night, divide by the lunar calendar or the lunar week, and convert to degrees.

古文：推月蚀
现代文：推月蚀：
English: Pushing the eclipse:

古文：置上元年，外所求，以会岁去之，其余年以会率乘之，如会岁为积蚀，有余加积一。
现代文：以所求年至上元积年数减一，除以会岁八百九十三，以其余数即余年乘以会率一千八百八十二，再除以会岁八百九十三，所得商数为积蚀，如果有余数，则积蚀加一。
English: By subtracting one from the number of years of accumulation from the requested year to Shangyuan, dividing it by 893 years of meeting, and multiplying the remaining number, that is, the remaining years, by the meeting rate of 1,882, and then dividing it by 893 years of meeting, the resulting quotient is the accumulation, and if there is a surplus, the accumulation is plus one.

古文：会月乘之，如会率为积月，不尽为月余。
现代文：以会月一万一千零四十五乘以积蚀，除以会率一千八百八十二，所得商敷为积月，余数为月余。
English: Multiply the number of meeting months by 11,045 and divide it by the membership rate of 1,882. The number of meeting months will be the number of business months and the remaining number will be the number of remaining months.

古文：以章闰乘余年，满章岁为积闰，以减积月，余以岁中去之，不尽，数起天正。
现代文：以章闰七乘以余年，除以章岁十九，所得商数为积闰，以积月减之，所得差数除以岁中十二，去掉商敷，留取余数，从天正十一月起算。
English: Take the leap year seven times the remaining year, divide it by the leap year nineteen, the income quotient is the product of the leap years, subtract it by the product of the months, the income difference is divided by the middle twelve years, remove the merchants, retain the remaining number, and start from November.

古文：求次蚀，加五月，月余千六百三十五，满会率得一月，月以望。
现代文：求次食：在上次月食的基础上月敷加五，月余加一千六百三十五，如果月余在会率以上，化入月，望时有月食。
English: Ask for the next eclipse: on the basis of the last lunar eclipse, the time of the month is increased by five, and the remainder of the month is increased by 1,635; if the remainder of the month is above the meeting rate, it will turn into the moon, and there will be a lunar eclipse at the time of observation.

古文：推卦用事日
现代文：推卦用事日：
English: Date of tweet:

古文：因冬至大余，倍其小余，坎用事日也。加小余千七十五，满乾法从大余，中孚用事日也。
现代文：沿用冬至大余，小余加倍，以之确定的时间为坎用事日,余一千零七十五，如果小余在干法一千一百七十八以上，化入大余，所确定之时间为中孚用事日。
English: If the winter solstice is followed by a big surplus, the small surplus is doubled, and the time determined by the surplus is the Kan event day, and the surplus is 1,075; if the small surplus is above the dry method of 1,178, it turns into a big surplus, and the time determined is the Zhongfu event day.

古文：求次卦，各加大余六，小余百三。
现代文：求次卦：各加大余六，小余一百零三。
English: Query: each major remainder is six, minor remainder is one hundred and three.

古文：其四正各因共中日，而倍其小余。推五行用事
现代文：四正各因其中日，小余加倍。推五行用事：
English: For each of the four cardinal directions, the number of days in the middle is doubled.

古文：置冬至大小余，加大余二十七，小余九百二十七，满二千三百五十六从大余，得土用事日也。
现代文：置冬至大余，小余乘以四，大余；十七。小余加九百二十七，如果加后小余大于等于二千三百五十六，减之，大余加一，所得为土星用事。
English: If you set the winter solstice as the big surplus, multiply the small surplus by four to get the big surplus; seventeen. Add the small surplus to 927 and if the small surplus is equal to or greater than 2356, subtract the big surplus and add one, and the result is Saturn's business.

古文：加大余十八，小余六百一十八，得立春木用事日。
现代文：大余加十八，小余加六百一十八，所得为立春木星用事日。
English: The large surplus plus eighteen, the small surplus plus six hundred and eighteen, the income is the spring of Jupiter.

古文：加大余七十三，小余百一十六，复得土。
现代文：加大余七十三，小余一百一十六，又得土星用事。
English: Increase the remainder by seventy-three, decrease the remainder by a hundred and sixteen, and Saturn will be busy.

古文：又加土如得其火，金、水放此。推加时
现代文：又在此土星用事日的基础上加，得火星用事日。金星、水星用事日的推算仿照上述办法。推加时：
English: And on the basis of this Saturn day, a Mars day is added. The calculation of Venus and Mercury days is similar to the above method.

古文：以十二乘小余，满其法得一辰，数从子起，算外，朔、弦、望以定小余。
现代文：以十二乘以小余，所得乘积除以法，所得商数即为辰敷，从子时起算，算外，朔、弦、望时以定小余计算。
English: Twelve multiplied by the small remainder, the product of the product divided by the remainder, and the quotient of the product is the chinshi, which is calculated from the zi, and the yang, zheng, and pang by the fixed small remainder.

古文：推漏刻
现代文：推漏刻：
English: Missed deadline:

古文：以百乘小余，满其法得一刻，不尽什之，求分，课所近节气，起夜分尽；夜上水未尽，以所近言之。
现代文：以一百乘以小余，除以法，所得商数即为刻数，如果还有余数，乘以十，再除以日法，所得为分，考察所近节气，起夜分尽；上水未尽，以所近言之。
English: Take one hundred times the small surplus, divide by the method, and the resulting quotient is a fraction. If there is a surplus, multiply by ten, then divide by the Japanese method, and the result is a fraction.

古文：推有进退，进加退减所得也。
现代文：推有进退，是进加退减所得。
English: If there are advances and retreats, it is the increase, decrease and decrease of income.

古文：进退有差，起二分度后，率四度转增少，少每半者，三而转之，差满三止，历五度而减如初。
现代文：进退有差。从二分度后起，都是四度转增少，少每半者，三而转之，差满三止，历五度而减如初。
English: There is a difference in advance and retreat. From the second degree, it is a four-degree increase and decrease, and if it is less than half, it is a three-degree increase, a three-degree decrease, and a five-degree decrease as at the beginning.

古文：月行三道术
现代文：月行三道术：
English: The Three Moon Rites:

古文：月行迟疾，周进有恆。
现代文：月亮的运行有快有慢，但在每周内走遇的天度是恒定的。
English: The moon's movement is fast and slow, but the weather it encounters in a week is constant.

古文：会数从天地凡数，乘余率自乘，如会数而一，为过周分。
现代文：会数四十七加上天地凡敷五十五，乘以余率二十九的平方，除以会数四十七，所得为过周分。
English: Forty-seven congregations plus fifty-five in the world, multiplied by the square of the remainder rate of twenty-nine, divided by forty-seven congregations, the result is the excess weekly percentage.

古文：以从周天，月周除之，历日数也。
现代文：以过周分加周天二十一万五千一百三十，除以月周七千八百七十四，所得为月行一周的历数。
English: Take the number of minutes in a week plus the number of days in a week, which is 215,130, and divide it by the number of days in a month, which is 7,874. The result is the number of days in a month.

古文：迟疾有衰，其变者势也。
现代文：月亮运行的变化率本身也会改变，这是势在改变。
English: The rate of change of the moon's orbit itself will also change, which is a change in momentum.

古文：以衰减加月行率，为日转度分。
现代文：以月亮每的衰减数加平行分，所得为月亮每转度分。
English: Taking the number of fades per moon and adding the parallel minutes, the result is the number of minutes per revolution of the moon.

古文：衰左右相加，为损益率。
现代文：衰左右相加，所得为损益率。
English: Add up the left and right sides, and the result is the profit and loss ratio.

古文：益转相益，损转相损，盈缩积也。
现代文：损益率为益则盈缩积增加，损益率为损则盈缩积减少。
English: The profit and loss ratio increased by the product of profit and loss, and the profit and loss ratio increased by the product of loss and gain.

古文：三分四进减益四缩六十七二百五十二十二日十三度
现代文：小周的一半一百二十七乘以通法四万三千零二十六，除以通数三十一，减去历周十六万四千四百六十六，所得为朔行分。
English: The half of the minor cycle, 127, multiplied by the common divisor, 43,026, divided by the common divisor, 31, and subtracted by the calendar cycle, 164,466, gives the new moon.

古文：七分四进加损缩七十一二百五十四二十三日十三度十一分四进加损四缩七十一二百五十八二十四日十三度十五分四进加损八缩六十七二百六十二二十五日十四度四进加损十二缩五十九二百六十六二十六日十四度
现代文：损益率益二十二益二十一益十九益十六益十二益八益四损损四损八盈缩积盈初盈二十二盈四十三盈六十二盈七十八盈九十盈九十八盈百二盈百二盈九十八月行分二百七十六二百七十五二百七十三二百七十二百六十六二百六十二二百五十八二百五十四二百五十二百四十六损十一损十五损十八损二十损二十一损二十损不足反减五为益，盈有五谓益而损缩初二十，故不足。
English: Profit and loss ratio gain 22 gain 21 gain 19 gain 16 gain 12 gain 8 gain 4 loss 4 loss 8 gain shrinkage gain initial gain 22 gain 43 gain 62 gain 78 gain 90 gain 98 gain 122 gain 122 gain 98 month line divided by 276 275 273 276 262 258 254 252 46 loss 11 loss 15 loss 18 loss 20 loss 21 loss 20 loss shortfall but reduced by 5 is a gain, there is a gain of 5 and a shortfall of the first 20, therefore insufficient.

古文：四分三进加损十六缩四十七二百七十二十七日十四度七分三历初进加损十九缩三十一二百七十三三大周日周日十四度九分少进加损二十一缩十二二百七十五周日分，三千三百三。
现代文：益十八益十五益十一益八益四损损四损八损十二损十六大周日损十九损二十一盈九十盈七十九盈六十四盈四十六盈二十六盈五缩初缩十五缩二十三缩四十八缩五十九缩六十七缩七十一缩七十一缩六十七缩五十九缩四十七缩三十一缩十二二百四十三二百三十九二百三十六二百三十四二百三十三二百三十四二百三十六二百三十九二百四十三二百四十六二百五十二百五十四二百五十八二百六十二二百六十六二百七十二百七十三二百七十五周分：三千三百零三。
English: gain of 18 gain of 15 gain of 11 gain of 8 gain of 4 loss of 4 loss of 8 loss of 12 loss of 16 big Sunday loss of 19 loss of 21 gain of 90 gain of 79 gain of 64 gain of 46 gain of 26 gain of 5 shrinkage of 15 shrinkage of 23 shrinkage of 48 shrinkage of 59 shrinkage of 67 shrinkage of 71 shrinkage of 71 shrinkage of 67 shrinkage of 59 shrinkage of 47 shrinkage of 31 shrinkage of 12

古文：周虚，二千六百六十六。
现代文：周虚：二千六百六十六。
English: Zhou Qiu: Two thousand six hundred and sixty-six.

古文：周日法，五千九百六十九。
现代文：周日法：五千九百六十九。
English: Sunday: 5,969.

古文：通周，十八万五千三十九。
现代文：通周：十八万五千零三十九。
English: Weekly: 185,039.

古文：历周，十六万四千四百六十六。
现代文：历周：十六万四千四百六十六。
English: Liturgical weeks: one hundred and sixty-four thousand four hundred sixty-six.

古文：少大法，一千一百一。
现代文：少大法：一千一百零一。
English: Minor and Major Fa: 1,1001.

古文：朔行大分，万一千八百一。
现代文：朔行大分：一万一千八百零一。
English: The number of new arrivals in Oita: 11,801.

古文：小分，二十五。
现代文：小分：二十五。
English: Minutes: twenty-five.

古文：周半，一百二十七。
现代文：周半：一百二十七。
English: Midweek: One hundred and twenty-seven.

古文：推合朔入历
现代文：推合朔入历：
English: According to the new lunar calendar:

古文：以上元积月乘朔行大小分，小分满通数三十一从大分，大分满历周去之，余满周法得一日，不尽为日余。
现代文：以上元至所求年积月数乘以朔行大、小分，其积为新的大、小分，小分在通数三十一以上，化入大分，去掉大分中大于历周十六万四千四百六十六的部分，余下不满历周部分除以周日法。
English: The product of the above elements to the required number of years and months multiplied by the new moon line and the large and small fractions is the new large and small fractions. The small fractions have a total number of 31 or more and are converted into large fractions. The part of the large fractions that is greater than 164,466 in the calendar cycle is removed, and the remaining unsatisfactory part of the calendar cycle is divided by the Sunday method.

古文：日余命算外，所求合朔入历也。
现代文：所得商数为合朔入历天数，余数为余。余命为算外那一天，所求得的即为合朔入历的时间。
English: The quotient obtained is the number of days to complete the new calendar, and the remainder is the remainder. If the remaining life is a day not included in the calculation, the time to complete the new calendar is obtained.

古文：求次月，加一日，日余五千八百三十二，小分二十五。
现代文：求次月：在上月合朔入历的基础上加一天。曰余加五千八百三十二，小分十五。
English: For the next month: add one day to the previous month's lunar calendar. That is, add 5,832 days and add 15 minutes.

古文：求弦望，各加七日，日余二千二百八十三，小分二十九半，分各如法成日，日满二十七日去之。
现代文：求弦、望时入历，各在上一次的基础上加七天，日余加二千二百八十三，小分二十九点五，把小分和日余各自除以相应的分母，化为天，如果所得天数大于二十七，减之。
English: On the basis of the previous calculation, add seven days to the equation of the chord and seven days to the lunar calendar, and add 22,083 days to the remaining days, which is 29.5 minutes. Divide the fractional part and the remaining days by the corresponding denominator, and convert it into days. If the number of days obtained is greater than 27, subtract it.

古文：余如周分。不足除，减一日，加周虚。
现代文：以日余减去周日分三千三百零三，如果日余小于周日分，从入历天数中减去一，日余加周虚二千六百六十六。
English: The remainder of the day minus the Sunday is 3,303. If the remainder of the day is less than the Sunday, subtract one from the number of days in the lunar calendar. The remainder of the day plus the week is 2,666.

古文：求弦望定大小余
现代文：求弦望定大小余：
English: The rest of the scale is as follows:

古文：置所入历盈缩积，以通周乘之为实。
现代文：置弦、望时所入历对应的盈缩积，乘以通周十八万五千零三十九所得为实。
English: The product of the gain and loss corresponding to the incoming data at the time of setting the chord and looking up is multiplied by the total period of 185,039.

古文：令通数乘日余分，以乘损益率，以损益实，为加时盈缩也。
现代文：用通数三十一乘以余分，以其积再乘以对应天数的损益率，以增减 实 ，所得为加时盈缩。
English: Multiply the total number of thirty-one by the excess, multiply the product by the corresponding days' profit and loss rate, and multiply by the actual increase and decrease, and the result is the increase and decrease of overtime.

古文：章岁减月行分，乘周半为差法，以除之，所得盈减缩加大小余，如日法盈不足，朔加时在前后日。
现代文：用章岁十九减月行分，乘以周半一百二十七，所得为差法，以加时盈缩除以差法，所得为平弦、望大小余的校正值，其中盈减缩加，如果平朔小余小于校正值，则朔加时在前一天。
English: Using the year of the chapter, nineteen minus the month, multiplied by the half of the week, one hundred and twenty-seven, the result is the difference method, divided by the difference method, the result is the correction value of the flat chord, the expected size, where the gain and loss are added, and if the square root is less than the correction value, the square root is added the day before.

古文：弦望进退大余，为定小余。求朔弦望加时定度
现代文：推弦、望定大、小余时，可加减平弦、望大余以定之。求朔弦望加时定度：
English: When the push string, the look-up string, and the small remainder are large, the flat string and the look-up string can be added and subtracted to determine the remaining time.

古文：以章岁乘加时盈缩，差法除之，所得满会数为盈缩大小分，以盈减缩加本日月所在，盈不足，以纪法进退度，为日月所在定度分。
现代文：以章岁十九乘以加时盈缩，除以差法，所得商数再除以会敷四十七，得盈缩大、小分。以盈减缩加平朔、弦、望时日、月度分，如果子朔、弦、望时日、月所在大、小分小于盈大、小分，则减度，以纪法作为分母化为分，再减盈分，所得为太阳、月亮所在定度分。
English: Multiply the age of the chapter by nineteen and multiply by the time gain and contraction, divide by the difference method, and then divide the quotient of the income by the membership of forty-seven, to get the gain and contraction of large and small points. With the gain and contraction, add the flat new year, the chord, the observation time day, and the monthly degree, and if the new year, the chord, the observation time day, and the month are large and the small points are less than the gain and large points, then the degree is reduced. With the chronology as the denominator, the degree is divided, and then the gain is reduced, and the income is the

古文：推月行夜半入历
现代文：推月行夜半入历：
English: Lunar New Year's Eve:

古文：以周半乘朔小余，如通数而一，以减入历日余。余不足，加周法而减焉，却一日。
现代文：以周半一百二十七乘以朔小余，除以通数三十一，以合朔入历日余减之，如果日余不足减，则加上周法五千九百六十九后再减，入历天数中减一天。
English: Multiply the number of days in the lunar calendar by the number of days in the lunar calendar divided by the number of days in the lunar calendar divided by the number of days in the lunar calendar divided by the number of days in the lunar calendar divided by the number of days in the lunar calendar divided by the number of days in the lunar calendar.

古文：却得周日加其分，即得夜半入历。
现代文：减掉一天以后的入历天数与前面减后所得分，即得月亮夜半入历的天数。
English: Subtract the number of calendar days after the first day from the number obtained after the previous subtraction, that is, the number of days after the moon enters the calendar at midnight.

古文：求次日，转一日，因日余到二十七日，日余满周日分去之，不直周日也。
现代文：求第二天月行夜半入历：在前一天入历天数的基础上加一天，因余十七日，如果日余在周日分以上，减之，直到其差在周日分以下。
English: Ask the next day for the lunar calendar: add one day to the number of days entered the previous day, because the remaining seventeenth day, if the remaining day is more than Sunday, reduce it until the difference is less than Sunday.

古文：其不满直之，加周虚于余，余皆次日入历日余也。
现代文：如果日余在周日分以下，则余再加周虚，所得为次日入历余。
English: If the day's surplus is less than the Sunday's surplus, then the surplus is added to the weekly surplus, and the result is the next day's surplus.

古文：求月夜半定度
现代文：求月夜半定度：
English: Moon-seeking night semi-fixed degree:

古文：以夜半入历日余，乘损益率，如周法得一，不尽为余，以损益缩积，余无所损，破全为法损之，为夜半盈缩也。
现代文：以夜半入历日余，乘以损益率，除以周法五千九百六十九，除不尽的为余数，以所得商数增减入历天对应的盈缩积，余数没有对应的来减，则从盈缩积中拿出一乘以周法五千九百六十九，再减之，最后所得即为夜半盈缩。
English: Take the remainder of the calendar day in the middle of the night, multiply it by the rate of profit and loss, divide it by the weekly method of 5969, and the remainder is the remainder if the remainder is not exhausted. Add and subtract the resulting quotient into the profit and loss product corresponding to the calendar day. If there is no corresponding remainder to subtract, then take one out of the profit and loss product, multiply it by the weekly method of 5969, and then subtract it. The final result is the midnight profit and loss.

古文：满章岁为度，不尽为分。通数乘分及余，余如周法从分，分满纪法从度，以盈加缩减本夜半度及余，为定度。
现代文：以所求夜半盈缩除以章岁十九，所得商数为盈缩度数，余数为盈缩分数，以通数三十一乘以上所得盈缩分数及盈缩余数，通敷与盈缩余数的乘积除以周法五千九百六十九，所得加上通数与盈缩分数的乘积，如果其和大于等于纪法五百八十九，则减之，盈缩度数加一，最后得到盈缩校正度分，盈加缩减当天夜半平度分。即为定度分。
English: Divide the desired half-yearly profit and loss by nineteen years of age, the coefficient of the result is the profit and loss ratio, the remainder is the profit and loss fraction, the total number is multiplied by thirty-one times or more, the profit and loss fraction and the profit and loss remainder, the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of the product of

古文：求变衰法
现代文：求变衰法：
English: Variational decay method:

古文：以入历日余乘列衰，如周法得一，不尽为余，即谷知其日变衰也。
现代文：以入历天的曰余乘以列衰，除以周法五千九百六十九，除不尽的为余数，即可知各天的变衰。
English: Take the remainder of the day of the calendar day multiplied by the decay of the series, divide by 5,969 of the weekly method, and divide by the remainder of the inexhaustible, you can know the decay of each day.

古文：求次历
现代文：求次历：
English: Date of birth:

古文：以周虚乘列衰，如周法为常数，历竟，辄以加变衰，满列衰去之，转为次历变衰也。
现代文：以周虚二千六百六十六乘以列衰，除以周法五千九百六十九得到一个常数，一个历周过后，即以此常数加变衰，如果其和大于列衰则减之，剩下的转为次历变衰。
English: By multiplying 2666 by the period decay and dividing by 5969, a constant is obtained. After one calendar cycle, this constant is added to the decay, and if it is greater than the period decay, it is subtracted, and the remainder is converted to the second calendar decay.

古文：求次日夜半定度
现代文：求次日夜半定度：
English: Ask the next day at half past midnight:

古文：以变衰进加退减历日转分，分盈不足，章岁出入度也。
现代文：以变衰进加或退减对应历的日转分，如果日转分不足减，则以章岁十九做分母，从转度中拿出一度化为分，再减之。
English: The daily revolution of the corresponding calendar is incremented or decremented by the variable decay, and if the daily revolution is insufficiently decremented, the denominator is the 19th day of the 19th month, and the conversion factor is taken from the revolution and then reduced.

古文：通数乘分及余，而日转加夜定度，为次日也。
现代文：以通数三十一乘以分及余，而日转度分加前一天夜半定度，为次日夜半定度。
English: Multiply the total number of thirty-one by the minute and the remainder, while the daily rotation rate is divided by the previous day's half-hourly rate and the next day's half-hourly rate.

古文：竟历不直周日，减余三十八，乃以通数乘之，直周日者加余八百三十七，又以少大分八百九十九，加次历变衰，转求如前。
现代文：历竟不直周日，减余一千零三十八，以通敷乘之；直周日则加余八百三十七，又以少大分八百九十九，加次历变衰，转求与前面一样。
English: If the calendar does not fall on a Sunday, subtract 1038 and multiply by the common divisor; if it does fall on a Sunday, add 837 and subtract 899 and multiply by the common divisor. The result is the same as before.

古文：求次日夜半盈缩
现代文：求次日夜半盈缩：
English: The next day, at half past midnight, there was a contraction:

古文：以变衰减加损益率，为变损益率，而以转损益夜半盈缩。
现代文：以变衰减或加损益率，所得为变损益率，以之加或减夜半盈缩。
English: With the variable attenuation or added profit and loss ratio, the result is the variable profit and loss ratio, with the addition or subtraction of the overnight half profit and contraction.

古文：历竟损不足，反减为入次历，减加余如上数。
现代文：历竟减损不足，反减为入次历，减加余如上数。
English: However, the reduction is not enough, and the counter-reduction is the addition of the second calendar, and the addition and subtraction are the same as above.

古文：求昏明月度
现代文：求昏明月度：
English: Ask for the moonlight moon:

古文：以历月行分乘所近节气夜漏，二百而一为明分。
现代文：以历月行分乘以与之靠近的节气的夜漏，除以二百，所得为明分。
English: Multiply the number of days in the lunar calendar by the day of the solar term that is closest to it, and divide by two hundred. The result is a clear score.

古文：以减月行分为昏分。
现代文：以月行分减明分，所得为昏分。
English: Subtract the clear points from the monthly line points, and the result is the confused points.

古文：分如章岁为度，以通数乘分，以加夜半定度，为昏明定度。
现代文：明分或昏分除以章岁十九，所得为度，以通敷乘以分，加上夜半定度，所得昏明定度。
English: Dividing the bright or dim points by the age of nineteen, the income is the degree, and multiplying the total amount by the points, plus the midnight fixed degree, the income is the dim and bright fixed degree.

古文：余分半法以上成，不满废之。
现代文：余分在半法以上乃化为一，在半法以下则舍去。
English: The surplus above the half-way point is reduced to one, and the surplus below the half-way point is discarded.

古文：求月行迟疾
现代文：求月行迟疾：
English: Causes of delayed ejaculation:

古文：月经四表，出入三道，交错分天，以月率除之，为历之日。
现代文：月亮运行四方，出入三道，交错而分割周天，周天除以月周七千八百七十四，所得为朔望月天数。
English: The moon moves in four directions, enters and exits in three, interlaces and divides the week day. The week day is divided by the lunar week of 7,874, and the result is the number of days in the lunar month.

古文：周天乘朔望合，如会月而一，朔合分也。
现代文：周天二十一万五千一百三十乘以朔望合敷九百四十一，除以会月一万一千零四十五，所得为朔合分。
English: Twenty-one thousand, five hundred and thirty (215,130) days of the week multiplied by nine hundred and forty-one (941) days of the month, divided by eleven thousand and forty-five (11,045) days of the month, and the result is nine hundred and forty-one (941) days of the month.

古文：通数乘合数，余如会数而一，退分也。
现代文：通数三十一乘以合数，除以会数四十七，所得为退分。
English: Multiply the total number of thirty-one by the composite number, divide by the number of forty-seven, and the result is a loss of points.

古文：以从月周，为日进分。
现代文：以之加月周七千八百七十四，所得为月进分。
English: Then add 7,874 weeks to the month and the result is the monthly installment.

古文：十三日限余三千九百一十二，微分一千七百五十二。
现代文：损二过桶损之，谓月行半周，度已过杨，则当损之。
English: If the loss is two times the loss of the barrel, it means that the month is half a week, and if the degree has passed Yang, it should be lost.

古文：此为后限一加历初大，分日。损十六二十七分日五千二百而三少加少者损十六大十一少大法，四百七十三。
现代文：损六损十损十三损十五损十六者损十六大兼数初十七=山=四十八六十六十八七十二七十三七十一六十五五十五四十二二十七少大法：四百七十三。
English: Loss of six, loss of ten, loss of thirteen, loss of fifteen, loss of sixteen, loss of the sixteenth and the first seventeenth = mountain = forty-eight, sixty-six, eighteen, seventy-two, seventy-three, seventy-one, sixty-five, forty-two, twenty-seven, junior high school: four hundred and seventy-three.

古文：历周，十万七千五百六十五。
现代文：历周：十万七千五百六十五。
English: Liturgical weeks: one hundred and seventy-five thousand five hundred and sixty-five.

古文：差率，万一千九百八十六。
现代文：差率：一万一千九百八十六。
English: Difference: 11,986.

古文：朔合分，万八千三百二十八。
现代文：朔合分：一万八千三百二十八。
English: As of the end of the month, the total stood at 18,328.

古文：微分，九百一十四。
现代文：微分：九百一十四。
English: Differential: nine hundred and fourteen.

古文：微分法，二千二百九。
现代文：微分法：二千二百零九。
English: Differential: two thousand two hundred and nine.

古文：推朔入阴阳历
现代文：推朔入阴阳历：
English: Pushing into the lunisolar calendar:

古文：以会月去上元积月，余以朔合分及微分各乘之，微分满其法从合分，合分满周天去之，其余不满历周者，为入阳历；满去之，余为入阴历。
现代文：以上元积月减去会月，余下小于会月部分各乘以该星朔合分和微分，所得微分如果大于微分法，化入朔合分，朔合分大于周天则减之，余下如果小于历周，即为入阳历朔合分；如果大于历周，减之，余下即为入阴历朔合分。
English: If the resulting differential is greater than the differential method, it is converted into the new moon integral, and if the new moon integral is greater than the solar day, it is subtracted. If the remaining differential is less than the calendar week, it is the solar calendar new moon integral; if it is greater than the calendar week, it is subtracted, and the remaining differential is the lunar calendar new moon integral.

古文：余皆如月周得一日，算外，所求月合朔入历，不尽为日余。
现代文：以上述入阴阳历朔合分除以月周，所得商敷算外，为所求月合朔入历，余数为余。
English: The above-mentioned input yin and yang calendar is divided by the lunar week, and the income is calculated by the merchant. It is the required lunar calendar, and the remaining number is the remainder.

古文：求次月加二日，日余二千五百八十，微分九百一十四，如法成日，满十三去之，除余如分日。
现代文：求次月：在上月合朔入阴阳历的基础上日，余千五百八十，微分加九百一十四，所得日余和微分化为，大于十三则减之，日余再减分五千二百零三。
English: For the next month: On the basis of the previous month's new moon into the lunisolar calendar, the day is increased by one thousand five hundred and eighty, the differential is increased by nine hundred and fourteen, the resulting day's surplus and differential is, if greater than thirteen, it is reduced, and the day's surplus is further reduced by five thousand two hundred and three.

古文：阴阳历竟互入端，入历在前限余前，后限余后者月行中道也。
现代文：阴历结束入阳历，阳历结束入阴历，入历在前限则余前，在后限则余后，这是月行中道之故。
English: The end of the lunar calendar is the beginning of the solar calendar, the end of the solar calendar is the beginning of the lunar calendar, the beginning of the lunar calendar is before the limit, and after the limit, which is the reason for the middle of the month.

古文：求朔望定数
现代文：求朔望定数：
English: Finding the expectation constant:

古文：各置入迟疾历盈缩大小分，会数乘小分为微分，盈减缩加阴阳日余，日余盈不足，进退日而定。
现代文：各列出入迟疾历盈、缩大分和小分，会数乘以小分所得为微分，盈减、缩加入阴阳历余，如果日余不足减盈，则从入历日中减之，所得为定日余。
English: In each case, the date of entry into the calendar is listed, the date of entry into the calendar is listed, the date of entry into the calendar is listed, the date of entry into the calendar is listed, the date of entry into the calendar is listed, the date of entry into the calendar is listed, the date of entry into the calendar is listed, the date of entry into the calendar is listed, the date of entry into the calendar is listed.

古文：以定日余乘损益率，如月周得一，以损益兼数，为加时定数。
现代文：以定曰余乘以对应入历日的损益率，除以月周，所得减或加入兼敷，为加时定敷。
English: The overtime rate is determined by multiplying the day's surplus by the profit and loss ratio of the corresponding calendar day, dividing by the month and week, and subtracting or adding the income.

古文：推夜半入历
现代文：推夜半入历：
English: Pushing midnight into the calendar:

古文：以差率乘朔小余，如微分法得一，以减入历日余，不足，加月周而减之，却一日。
现代文：以差率乘以朔小余，除以微分法，以入历余减之，如果不足减，则加上月周后再减之，入历减去一日。
English: Multiply the difference rate by the smallest remainder, divide by the differential method, subtract the remainder of the lunar month by the lunar month, and if the remainder is less than or equal to the lunar month, add the lunar month and subtract it, and subtract one day from the lunar month.

古文：却得分日加其分，以会数约微分为小分，即朔日夜半入历。
现代文：如果减去的那一正好为分日，则加其分，以微分除以会数为小分，即得朔日夜半入历。
English: If the subtracted one is exactly a minute, then add its fraction, and divide the difference by the number of meetings as a fraction, that is, get a new day and a half of the calendar.

古文：求次日，加一日，日余三十一，小分三十一，小分如会数从余，余满月周去之，又加一日，历竟下，日余满分日去之，为入历初也。
现代文：求次入历：在前一入历的基础上加一日，日余三十一，小分三十一，小分除以会敷，所得加入余，日余大于月周则减之，再加一，如果入历日在一个阴阳十三日以上，减之，余在分以上，减之，所得为入历初。
English: To calculate the second lunar month: add one day to the previous lunar month, and the remaining days add up to 31.31 minutes. Divide the remaining minutes by the membership fee, and add the remaining income. If the remaining days are greater than the lunar month, subtract the remaining income. If the lunar month is more than 13 days, subtract the remaining minutes, and subtract the remaining minutes, and the income will be the beginning of the lunar month.

古文：不满分日者直之，加余二千七百二，小分三十一，为入次历。
现代文：如果日余在分日以下，直之，加余二千七百零二，小分三十一，所得为入次历。
English: If the number of days is less than or equal to the number of minutes, it is rounded to the nearest whole number. If the number of days is less than or equal to the number of minutes, it is rounded to the nearest whole number. If the number of days is less than or equal to the number of minutes, it is rounded to the nearest whole number.

古文：求夜半定日
现代文：求夜半定：
English: After midnight:

古文：以通数乘入迟疾历夜半盈缩及余，余满周半为小分，以盈加缩减入阴阳日余，日余盈不足，以月周进退日而定也。
现代文：以通数乘以入迟疾历夜半盈缩及余，余在周半以上化入小分，盈加、缩减入阴阳历余，如果余不足减盈分，入阴阳历数减一，日余加月周后再减之。
English: Take the total number and multiply it by the delay of the lunar calendar, half of the day and half of the night, the surplus and the surplus. If the surplus is more than half of the week, the surplus will be converted into a fraction, the surplus will be added, the contraction will be converted into the surplus of the lunar calendar, if the surplus is less than the surplus, the surplus of the lunar calendar will be reduced by one, and the surplus of the day will be added to the surplus of the month and the surplus of the month will be reduced.

古文：以定日余乘损益率，如月周得一，以损益兼数，为夜半定数也。
现代文：以定日余乘以损益率，除以月周，所得商减或加兼数，为夜半定敷。
English: Multiply the day's balance by the profit and loss ratio, divide by the month and week, and add or subtract the number of income merchants to arrive at the midnight fixed rate.

古文：求昏明数
现代文：求昏明数：
English: Find the number of faints:

古文：以损益率乘所近节气夜漏，二百而一为明，以减损益率为昏，而以损益夜半数为昏明定数。
现代文：以损益率乘以舆之最近的节气的夜漏，除以二百，所得为明，以减损益率，所得为昏，以上述方法所得昏明数加或减夜半敷，为夜半定数。
English: Multiply the loss-gain ratio by the nightfall of the most recent solar terms, divide by two hundred, and the result is clear. Subtract the loss-gain ratio, and the result is dimness. The dimness number obtained by the above method, plus or minus half a night, is half a night constant.

古文：求月去极度
现代文：求月去极度：
English: Seeking the moon to go to extremes:

古文：置加时若昏明定数，以十二除之为度，其余三而一为少，不尽一为强，二少弱也，所得为月去黄道度也。
现代文：把加时化为昏明定敷的形式，除以十二为度，余数为三则余少，余数为一则余强，余数为二则余少弱，所得为月去黄道度。
English: Convert the extra time into the form of twilight time, divide by twelve for the degree, the remainder is three for the degree, the remainder is one for the degree, the remainder is two for the degree, the remainder is one for the degree, the remainder is three for the degree, the remainder is three for the degree.

古文：其阳历以加日所在黄道历去极度，阴历以减之，则月去极度。
现代文：如果月处在阳历，加上所在黄道历去极度，如果月处在阴历，则减之，所得为月去极度。
English: If the month is in the solar calendar, add the extreme of the ecliptic, if the month is in the lunar calendar, then subtract, and the result is the extreme of the moon.

古文：强正弱负，强弱相并，同名相从，异名相消。
现代文：强正弱负，强弱合并，符号相同则相加，符号不同则减少。
English: Strength is positive, weakness is negative, strength and weakness are combined, the same sign is added, and the different sign is reduced.

古文：其相减也，同名相消，异名相从，无对互之，二强进少而弱。
现代文：两数相减，如果符号相同则减少，符号不同则增加，无对互之，二强进少而弱。
English: Two numbers are subtracted, if the signs are the same, they are reduced, if the signs are different, they are increased, if there is no pair, the two strong ones are less and weaker.

古文：上元己丑以来，至建安十一年丙戌，岁积七千三百七十八。
现代文：丁丑
English: Ding Chuxing

古文：己丑戊寅丁卯丙辰乙巳甲午癸未
现代文：癸未
English: 

古文：壬申辛酉庚戌己亥戊子丁丑丙寅
现代文：丙寅
English: Cui Yin

古文：推五星
现代文：推五星：
English: Pushing five stars:

古文：五行：木，岁星；火，荧惑；土，填星；金，太白；水，辰星。
现代文：五行：木，岁星；火，荧惑；土，镇星；金，太白；水，辰星。
English: Five elements: wood, year star; fire, fluorescence; earth, town star; gold, white; water, hour star.

古文：各以终日与天度相约，为周率、日率。
现代文：以各行星的终日数与天度五百八十九分之二十一万五千一百三十相约，所得分母、分子分别为周率、日率。
English: Taking the number of days of each planet to be approximately equal to 215,130/589, the denominator and numerator are the period and daily rate, respectively.

古文：章岁乘周，为月法。
现代文：章岁十九乘以周率，所得为月法。
English: Multiply the number of months by the number of years by the number of weeks, and the result is the lunar calendar.

古文：章月乘日，为月分。
现代文：章月二百三十五乘以日率，所得为月分。
English: The monthly income is calculated by multiplying the 235th day of the month by the daily rate.

古文：分如法，为月数。
现代文：月分除以合月法，所得商数为月数。
English: The quotient of the month divided by the number of months is the number of months.

古文：通数乘月法，日度法也。
现代文：通数三十一乘以合月法，所得为日度法。
English: Multiply the number 31 by the lunar calendar, and the result is the solar calendar.

古文：斗分乘周率，为斗分。
现代文：斗分一百四十五乘以周率，所得为斗分。
English: One hundred and forty-five bu points multiplied by the weekly rate, the result is a bu point.

古文：日度法用纪法乘周率，故此同以分乘之。
现代文：度法等于纪法五百八十九乘以周率，所以同以分乘之。
English: The degree method is equal to the degree method 589 times the frequency rate, so it is the same as the division method.

古文：五星朔大余、小余。
现代文：五大行星各自的朔大余、小余计算法。
English: Each of the five major planets is calculated by the method of adding and subtracting.

古文：以通法各乘月数，日法各除之，为大余，不尽为小余。
现代文：以通法四万三千零二十六乘以行星各自的月敷。除以法一千四百五十七，所得商敷为大余，余数为小余。
English: Multiply the common factor of 43,026 by the lunar month of each planet. Divide by the common factor of 1,457, and the result is a large remainder, and the remainder is a small remainder.

古文：减多为度余分，以周天乘之，以日度法约之，所得为度，不尽为度余，过周天去之及斗分。纪月，七千二百八十五。章闰，七。
现代文：以各自率减周率，乘以周天二十一万五千一百三十，除以各自日度法，所得商敷为度，余数为度余，如果大于周天五百八十九分之二十一万五千一百三十。则减之，最后所得为该星度数及度余。纪月：七千二百八十五。章闰：七。
English: By subtracting the weekly rate from the respective rate, multiplying the day-of-the-week by the day-of-the-week by 215,130, and dividing by the day-of-the-week by the day-of-the-week method, the result is the degree, and the remainder is the remainder, if it is greater than 215,130 of 589 of the day-of-the-week. If it is less, the final result is the degree and the remainder of the star.

古文：章月，二百三十五。
现代文：章月：二百三十五。
English: Chapter Month: Two hundred thirty-five.

古文：岁中，十二。
现代文：岁中：十二。
English: Middle years: twelfth.

古文：通法，四万三千二十六。
现代文：通法：四万三千零二十六。
English: Total: 43,026.

古文：日法，千四百五十七。
现代文：日法：一千四百五十七。
English: Japan and France: 1,457.

古文：会数，四十七。
现代文：会数：四十七。
English: Number of meetings: forty-seven.

古文：周天，二十一万五千一百三十。
现代文：周天：二十一万五千一百三十。
English: Zhou Tian: two hundred fifteen thousand one hundred and thirty.

古文：斗分，一百四十五。
现代文：斗分：一百四十五。
English: Score: One hundred and forty-five.

古文：木：周率，六千七百二十二。
现代文：木星：周率：六千七百二十二。
English: Jupiter: Period: Six thousand seven hundred twenty two.

古文：日率，七千三百四十一。
现代文：日率：七千三百四十一。
English: Daily rate: 7,341.

古文：合月数，十三。
现代文：合月数：十三。
English: Total number of months: thirteen.

古文：月余，六万四千八百一。
现代文：月余：六万四千八百零一。
English: Remaining months: 64,8001.

古文：合月法，十二万七千七百一十八。
现代文：合月法：十二万七千七百一十八。
English: The number of the months of the year is 127,718.

古文：日度法，三百九十五万九千二百五十八。
现代文：曰度法：三百九十五万九千二百五十八。
English: Daily cases: up to 3,959,258.

古文：朔大余，二十三。
现代文：朔大余：二十三。
English: New Year's Eve: the 23rd.

古文：朔小余，一千三百七。
现代文：朔小余：一千三百零七。
English: Shuo Xiaoyu: One thousand three hundred and seven.

古文：入月日，十五。
现代文：入月日：十五。
English: Moonrise: The fifteenth.

古文：日余，三百四十八万四千六百四十六。
现代文：日余：三百四十八万四千六百四十六。
English: Remaining days: 3,484,646.

古文：朔虚分，一百五十。
现代文：朔虚分：一百五十。
English: Shuo imaginary score: a hundred and fifty.

古文：斗分，九十七万四千六百九十。
现代文：斗分：九十七万四千六百九十。
English: The number of men who died from the plague was 974,690.

古文：度数，三十三。
现代文：度数：三十三。
English: Frequency: thirty-three.

古文：度余，二百五十万九千九百五十六。
现代文：度余：二百五十万九千九百五十六。
English: Excess deaths: 2,59,956.

古文：火：周率，三千四百七。
现代文：火星：周率：三千四百零七。
English: Mars: Circulation: 3,407.

古文：日率，七千二百七十一。
现代文：日率：七千二百七十一。
English: Daily rate: 7,271.

古文：合月数，二十六。
现代文：合月数：二十六。
English: Number of months: twenty-six.

古文：月余，二万五千六百二十七。
现代文：月余：二万五千六百二十七。
English: Remaining months: 25,627.

古文：合月法，六万四千七百三十三。
现代文：合月法：六万四千七百三十三。
English: The number of the first month of the year: 64,733.

古文：日度法，二百万六千七百二十三。
现代文：日度法：二百万六千七百二十三。
English: Daily rate: 2,67,233.

古文：朔大余，四十七。
现代文：朔大余：四十七。
English: New Year's Eve: 47.

古文：朔小余，一千一百五十七。
现代文：朔小余：一千一百五十七。
English: Shuo Xiaoyu: One thousand one hundred and fifty-seven.

古文：入月日，十二。
现代文：入月曰：十二。
English: The first day of the month: twelfth.

古文：日余，九十七万三千一十三。
现代文：曰余：九十七万三千零一十三。
English: Remaining: 973 thousand and 133.

古文：朔虚分，三百。
现代文：朔虚分：三百。
English: Shuo imaginary score: three hundred.

古文：斗分，四十九万四千一十五。
现代文：斗分：四十九万四千零一十五。
English: Total score: 494,015.

古文：度数，四十八。
现代文：度数：四十八。
English: Frequency: Forty-eight.

古文：度余，一百九十九万一千七百六。
现代文：度余：一百九十九万一千七百零六。
English: Excess deaths: 1,991,706.

古文：土：周度，三千五百二十九。
现代文：土星：周率：三千五百二十九。
English: Saturn: Period: three thousand five hundred twenty-nine.

古文：日率，三千六百五十三。
现代文：日率：三千六百五十三。
English: Daily rate: up three thousand six hundred fifty-three.

古文：合月数，十二。
现代文：合月数：十二。
English: Total number of months: twelve.

古文：月余，五万三千八百四十三。
现代文：月余：五万三千八百四十三。
English: Remaining months: 53,843.

古文：合月法，六万七千五十一。
现代文：合月法：六万七千零五十一。
English: Moonrise: 67,051

古文：日度法，二百七万八千五百八十一。
现代文：日度法：二百零七万八千五百八十一。
English: Daily: 2,078,581.

古文：朔大余，五十四。
现代文：朔大余：五十四。
English: New Year's Eve: Fifty-four.

古文：朔小余，五百三十四。
现代文：朔小余：五百三十四。
English: Shuo Xiaoyu: Five hundred and thirty-four.

古文：入月日，二十四。
现代文：入月曰：二十四。
English: On the first day of the month: It is the 24th.

古文：日余，十六万六千二百七十二。
现代文：曰余：十六万六千二百七十二。
English: Remaining: 166,272.

古文：朔虚分，九百二十三。
现代文：朔虚分：九百二十三。
English: New Zealand imaginary part: nine hundred and twenty-three.

古文：斗分，五十一万一千七百五。
现代文：斗分：五十一万一千七百零五。
English: The total score was 5,111,705.

古文：度数，十二。
现代文：度数：十二。
English: Frequency: twelve.

古文：度余，一百七十三万三千一百四十八。
现代文：度余：一百七十三万三干一百四十八。
English: Surplus: 1.73 trillion to 1.48 trillion.

古文：金：周率，九千二十二。
现代文：金星：周率：九千零二十二。
English: Venus: Period: nine thousand and twenty-two.

古文：日率，七千二百一十三。
现代文：日率：七千二百一十三。
English: Daily rate: 7,213.

古文：合月数，九。
现代文：合月数：九。
English: Total number of months: nine.

古文：月余，十五万二千二百九十三。
现代文：月余：十五万二千二百九十三。
English: Remaining months: 152,293.

古文：合月法，十七万一千四百一十八。
现代文：合月法：十七万一千四百一十八。
English: Lunar New Year: 171,418

古文：日度法，五百三十一万三千九百五十八。
现代文：日度法：五百三十一万三千九百五十八。
English: Daily cases: 5,313,958.

古文：朔大余，二十五。
现代文：朔大余：二十五。
English: New Year's Eve: Twenty-five.

古文：朔小余，一千一百二十九。
现代文：朔小余：一千一百二十九。
English: Shuo Xiaoyu: One hundred and twenty-nine.

古文：入月日，二十七。
现代文：入月日：二十七。
English: Moonrise: the 27th.

古文：日余，五万六千九百五十四。
现代文：日余：五万六千九百五十四。
English: Remaining days: 56,954.

古文：朔虚分，三百二十八。
现代文：朔虚分：三百二十八。
English: Shuo imaginary score: three hundred and twenty-eight.

古文：斗分，一百三十万八千一百九十。
现代文：斗分：一百三十万八千一百九十。
English: Points: 1,38,190.

古文：度数，二百九十二。
现代文：度数：二百九十二。
English: Magnitude: 292.

古文：度余，五万六千九百五十四。
现代文：度余：五万六千九百五十四。
English: Excess deaths: 56,954.

古文：水：周率，一万一千五百六十一。
现代文：水星：周率：一万一千五百六十一。
English: Mercury: Period: 11,561.

古文：日率，一千八百三十四。
现代文：日率：一千八百三十四。
English: Daily rate: one thousand eight hundred and thirty-four.

古文：合月数，一。
现代文：合月数：一。
English: Consecutive months: one.

古文：月余，二十一万一千三百三十一。
现代文：月余：二十一万一千三百三十一。
English: Remaining months: 211,331.

古文：合月法，二十一万九千六百五十九。
现代文：合月法：二十一万九千六百五十九。
English: Moonrise: up to 219,659.

古文：日度法，六百八十万九千四百二十九。
现代文：日度法：六百八十万九千四百二十九。
English: Daily cases: 6,809,429.

古文：朔大余，二十九。
现代文：朔大余：二十九。
English: New Year's Eve: 29.

古文：朔小余，七百七十三。
现代文：朔小余：七百七十三。
English: Shuo Xiaoyu: Seven hundred and seventy-three.

古文：入月日，二十八。
现代文：入月：二十八。
English: Moonrise: the 28th.

古文：日余，六百四十一万九百六十七。
现代文：余：六百四十一万零九百六十七。
English: Remainder: 6,410,967

古文：朔虚分，六百八十四。
现代文：朔虚分：六百八十四。
English: Shuo imaginary score: six hundred and eighty-four.

古文：斗分，一百六十七万六千三百四十五。
现代文：斗分：一百六十七万六千三百四十五。
English: Dou score: one million six hundred seventy six thousand three hundred and forty five.

古文：度数，五十七。
现代文：度数：五十七。
English: Frequency: fifty-seven.

古文：度余，六百四十一万九百六十七。
现代文：度余：六百四十一万零九百六十七。
English: Excess deaths: 6,410,967.

古文：推五星
现代文：推五星：
English: Pushing five stars:

古文：置上元尽所求年，以周率乘之，满日率得一，名积合，不尽为合余。
现代文：置上元到所求年年数，乘以周率，除以日率，所得商敷命名为积合，余数命名为合余。
English: Put the original to the required number of years, multiply by the weekly rate, divide by the daily rate, the result is called the accumulation, and the remaining number is called the surplus.

古文：以周率除之，得一，星合往年。
现代文：合余除以周率，如果所得商数为一，则该星前一年与太阳会合。
English: If the quotient obtained is one, then the star was in conjunction with the sun the previous year.

古文：二，合前往年。
现代文：如果所得商数为二，则该星前两年舆太阳会合。
English: If the coefficient of the result is two, then the star has had two years of solar conjunction.

古文：无所得，合其年。
现代文：如果商敷无，则该星当年舆太阳会合。
English: If there is no store, then the star is that year's public solar meeting.

古文：合余减周率为度分。
现代文：周率减去合余，所得为度分。
English: Subtract the remainder from the frequency, and the result is the degree.

古文：金、水积合，奇为晨，耦为夕。
现代文：金星、水星，积合为奇数时是早晨与太阳会合，积合为偶数时是晚上舆太阳会合。
English: Venus, Mercury, when the product is an odd number, it is the morning meeting with the sun, and when the product is an even number, it is the evening meeting with the sun.

古文：推星合月
现代文：推星合月：
English: The star-crossed moon:

古文：以月数、月余各乘积合，满合月法从月，不尽为月余。以纪月去积月，余为入纪月。
现代文：以月数、月余各自乘以积合，得到积月和新的月余，如果新的月余大于等于合月法，减之，同时积月加一，差敷为最后的月余。
English: Multiply the number of months and the remaining months by the product respectively to get the accumulated month and the new remaining month. If the new remaining month is greater than or equal to the monthly method, subtract it and add one to the accumulated month. The difference is the final remaining month.

古文：副以章闰乘之，满章月得一闰，以减入纪月，余以岁中去之，命以天正算外，合月也。
现代文：从积月中减去纪月的整数倍，余下不满纪月部分为入纪月。以章闰乘以入纪月，乘积满章月为一闰，以入纪月减去所有闰数，差数减去岁中十二的整数倍，余下不足岁中十二部分，以天正十一月起算，算外，即为该行星会合时所在月份。
English: Subtract the integer multiple of the month of record from the month of accumulation, and the remaining part of the dissatisfied month of record is the month of record. Multiply the month of record by the month of record, multiply the month of record by the full month of record for a leap, subtract all the leap numbers with the month of record, subtract the integer multiple of 12 in the middle of the year by the difference, and the remaining part of 12 in the middle of the year that is less than 12 years old, starting from November, that is, the month in which the planet is located at the time of the meeting.

古文：其在闰交际，以朔御之。
现代文：在闰月时，以朔日确定。
English: In the case of a leap month, the new moon day is determined.

古文：推入月日
现代文：推入月日：
English: Push-in date:

古文：以通法乘月余，合月法乘朔小余，并以会数约之，所得满日度法得一，则星合入月日也。
现代文：以通法乘以行星各自的月余，以合月法乘以朔小余，二者合并，与会数四十七相约，所得除以曰度法，商数为入月日，余数为日余。
English: Multiply the remainder of the month of each planet by the common method, multiply the remainder of the month by the common method, and multiply the remainder of the month by the common method. The two are combined, and the number of participants is 47, which is approximately the same. The result is divided by the degree of the day, the quotient is the day of the month, and the remainder is the remainder of the day.

古文：求后合月
现代文：求后合月：
English: The next full moon:

古文：以月数加月数，以月余加月余，满合月法得一月，不满岁中，即合其年，满去之，有闰计焉，余为后年；再满，在后二年。
现代文：以一合月数加上上次会合时的月敷，一合月余加上上次会合时的月余，月余之和满合月法则除之，所得商数加入月数，余数为月余，所得即为该次会合时的月数、月余，如果月敷小于岁中十二，则会合在当年，如果月敷满岁中十二则减之，有闰月亦减之，余下月数不满十二，则会合在明年；余下月数还满十二，则会合在后年。
English: If the number of months in a leap year is less than twelve, the meeting will be held in the current year; if the number of months in a leap year is more than twelve, the meeting will be held in the current year; if the number of months in a leap year is less than twelve, the meeting will be held in the next year; if the number of months in a leap year is less than twelve, the meeting will be held in the next year; if the number of months in a leap year is less than twelve, the meeting will be held in the next year; if the number of months in a leap year is more than twelve, the meeting will be held in the following year.

古文：金、水加晨得夕，加夕得晨。求后合朔日
现代文：金星、水星加一次会合后由早晨合变为晚上合，晚上合变为早上合。求后合朔日：
English: After Venus, Mercury and another conjunction, the morning conjunction turns into the evening conjunction, and the evening conjunction turns into the morning conjunction.

古文：以朔大小余，加合月大小余，上成月者，又加大余二十九，小余七百七十三，小余满日法从大余，命如前。
现代文：以朔大余、朔小余，加上次合月大余、小余，此数满一个月，再加大余二十九，小余七百七十三，小余满日法一千四百五十七部分，化为大余，余下命名方法如前。
English: According to the lunar calendar, the lunar month is divided into two parts: the lunar month is divided into two parts: the lunar month is divided into two parts: the lunar month is divided into two parts: the lunar month is divided into two parts: the lunar month is divided into two parts: the lunar month is divided into two parts: the lunar month is divided into two parts: the lunar month is divided into two parts: the lunar month is divided into two parts: the lunar month is divided into two parts: the lunar month is divided into two parts: the lunar month is divided into two parts: the lunar month is divided into two parts: the lunar month is divided into two parts: the lunar month is divided into two

古文：求后入月日术
现代文：求后入月曰术：
English: After the moon has set, the following ritual takes place:

古文：以入月日、日余，加合入月日及余，余满日度法得一日，其前合朔小余满其虚分者，减一日后小余满七百七十三以上者，去二十九日，不满，去三十日，其余则后合，入月日也。
现代文：以入月日、日余，加上次会合时入月日、日余，日余满日度法化为日，如果上次会合朔小余满虚分，则减一日。如果本次合小余大于七百七十三，减去二十九日，小于七百七十三，减去三十日，余下的则为本次会合时入月日。
English: The first day of the month, the last day of the month, and the first day of the month, the last day of the month, and the last day of the month at the time of the next meeting shall be counted as days, and if the last meeting is less than the first day of the month, less than the first day of the month, and less than the first day of the month at the time of the next meeting, then one day shall be subtracted. If the current sum is greater than seven hundred seventy-three, subtract twenty-nine days, less than seven hundred seventy-three, subtract thirty days, and the remainder shall be the first day of the month at the time of this

古文：求后度
现代文：求后度：
English: Desired degree:

古文：以度加度，度余加度余，满日度法得一度。
现代文：以度数加上次会合时度数，度余加上次会合时度余，度余满日度法化为度。
English: The frequency plus the frequency at the next meeting, the remaining frequency plus the remaining frequency at the next meeting, and the remaining frequency at the end of the day are legalized as the degree.

古文：木：伏三十二日。
现代文：所得即为本次会合时行星所在天度。
English: The result is the degree to which the planet is located at the time of this meeting.

古文：三百四十八万四千六百四十六分。
现代文：木星：伏三十二天三百四十八万四千六百四十六分。
English: Jupiter: Thirty-two days, three hundred forty-eight thousand four hundred and sixty-six minutes.

古文：见三百六十六日。
现代文：见三百六十六。
English: See three hundred and sixty-six.

古文：伏行五度。二百五十万九千九百五十六分。
现代文：伏时行五度二百五十万九千九百五十六分。
English: At the stroke of midnight, it was five minutes past two and a half million nine thousand nine hundred and fifty-six.

古文：见行四十度。
现代文：见时，湏行四十度。
English: When I see you, my limp is at forty degrees.

古文：除逆退十二度，定行二十八度。
现代文：除去逆行所退十二度，实际行二十八度。
English: Excluding the retrograde, the retrograde is 12 degrees, while the actual retrograde is 28 degrees.

古文：火：伏百四十三日。九十七万三千一十三分。
现代文：火星：伏一百四十三天九十七万三千零一十三分。
English: Mars: One hundred forty-three days, nine hundred seventy-three thousand, one hundred and thirteen minutes.

古文：见六百三十六日。
现代文：见六百三十六天。
English: See 636 days.

古文：伏行一百一十度。四十七万八千九百九十八分。
现代文：伏时顺行一百一十度四十七万八干九百九十八分。
English: The hour hand rose to one hundred and ten degrees, four hundred and seventy-eight hours, nine hundred and ninety-eight minutes.

古文：见行三百二十度。
现代文：见时顺行三百二十度。
English: It's three hundred and twenty degrees right now.

古文：除逆十七度，定行三百三度。
现代文：除去逆行所退十七度，实际行三百零三度。
English: Excluding the retrograde, the retrograde was 17 degrees, while the actual retrograde was 303 degrees.

古文：土：伏三十三日。十六万六千二百七十二分。
现代文：土星：伏三十三天十六万六千二百七十二分。
English: Saturn: Up to 33 days 166,272 minutes.

古文：见三百四十五日。
现代文：见三百四十五天。
English: See three hundred and forty-five days.

古文：伏行三度。一百七十三万三千一百四十八分。
现代文：伏时顺行三度一百七十三万三千一百四十八分。
English: three times one million seven hundred thirty-three thousand one hundred forty-eight minutes.

古文：见行十五度。
现代文：见时顷行十五度。
English: It was 15 degrees centigrade at the time.

古文：除逆六度，定行九度。
现代文：除去逆行所退六度，实际行九度。
English: Excluding the retrograde, the retrograde is six degrees, and the actual retrograde is nine degrees.

古文：金：晨伏东方八十二日。十一万三千九百八分。
现代文：金星：晨伏东方八十二天十一万三千九百零八分。
English: Venus: 82 days, 113,908 minutes in the east.

古文：见西方。
现代文：见于西方。
English: It is found in the West.

古文：二百四十六日。
现代文：二百四十六天。
English: Two hundred and forty six days.

古文：除逆六度，定行二百四十六度。
现代文：除去逆行所退六度，实际行二百四十六度。
English: After subtracting six degrees from the retrograde, the actual retrograde is 246 degrees.

古文：晨伏行百度。十一万三千九百八分。
现代文：晨伏，行一百度十一万三千九百零八分。
English: Morning prostration, one hundred degrees, one hundred and thirteen thousand nine hundred and eight minutes.

古文：见东方。
现代文：见于东方。
English: Seen in the East.

古文：日度加西。伏十日，退八度。
现代文：随着太阳向西运行，伏十天，退行八度。
English: As the sun moves westward, it sets for ten days and moves back an octave.

古文：水：晨伏三十三日。六百一万二千五百五分。
现代文：水星：晨伏三十三天六百零一万二千五百零五分。
English: Mercury: Thirty-three days and six hundred and twelve thousand five hundred and five minutes after sunrise.

古文：见西方。
现代文：见于西方。
English: It is found in the West.

古文：三十二日。
现代文：三十二天。
English: Thirty-two days.

古文：除逆一度，定行三十二度。
现代文：除去逆行所退一度，实际行三十二度。
English: If we remove the retrograde one degree, the actual retrograde is thirty-two degrees.

古文：伏行六十五度。六百一万二千五百五分。
现代文：伏时行六十五度六百零一万二千五百零五分。
English: Sixty-five degrees six hundred and twelve thousand five hundred and five minutes.

古文：见东方。
现代文：见于东方。
English: Seen in the East.

古文：日度如西，伏十八日，退十四度
现代文：随着太阳向西运行。伏十八天，退行十四度。
English: As the sun moves westward, it sets for eighteen days and rises fourteen degrees.

古文：五星历步术
现代文：五星历步术：
English: Five Star Trek:

古文：留者承前，递则减之，伏不尽度，经斗除分，以行母为率，分有损益，前后相御。
现代文：把给定行星伏时的天数、度数及其余数，加入到此行星会合时的时间、所在天度及其余数，余数大于度法则化为天数、度数加之，命名的方法与前面一样，即可得到此行星出现的时间和所在天度。
English: Add the number of days, the degree and the remaining number of the given planet volt, the time, the degree of the planet and the remaining number at the time of the planet meeting, and the remaining number is converted to the number of days and the degree. The naming method is the same as before, and the time and degree of the planet can be obtained.

古文：凡言如盈约满，皆求实之除也；去及除之，取尽之除也。木：晨与日合，伏，顺，十六日百七十四万二千三百二十三分，行星二度三百二十三万四千六百七分，而晨见东方，在日后。
现代文：以行星每天运行分数的分母乘以该星首次出现时的度数，度余除以日度法得一，即使度余没有达到度法的一半以上也得一；每天加上所运行的分数，分数满其对应之分母得一度，逆行和顺行时所用分母不同，以现行的对应分母乘以前面的运行分，除以前面运行分对应的分母，所得为对应于现行分母的运行分。当行星留时，天度沿用前面的不变，逆行则减之，伏时不写出每天运行的度数，经过斗宿时除去斗宿分，以现行分母作为比率，运行分有增有减，前后相互照应。木星：早晨舆太阳会合，伏，顺行，十六天十四万二千三百二十三分，共运行二度三百二十三万四千六百零七分，转而早晨在东方出现，在太阳之后。
English: Take the denominator of the fraction of the planet's daily movement and multiply it by the number of degrees at the time of the star's first appearance. Divide the remainder of the degree by the daily degree method to get one, even if the remainder does not reach more than half of the degree method; add the fraction of the movement every day, and the fraction that is full of its corresponding denominator is one. The denominator used for retrograde and forward movement is different. Take the current corresponding denominator and multiply it by the previous movement fraction. Divide the previous movement fraction by the corresponding denominator, and the result is the movement fraction corresponding to the current denominator. When the planet remains, the cel

古文：顺，疾，日行五十八分之十一，五十八日行十一度。
现代文：顺行，快，每天运行五十八分之十一度，五十八天共运行十一度。
English: Forward, fast, run every day once every fifty-eight, and run once every fifty-eight days.

古文：更顺，迟，日行九分，五十八日行九度。
现代文：再顺行，慢，每天运行九分，五十八天共运行九度。
English: Then go forward, slow, run nine minutes a day, and run nine degrees for a total of fifty-eight days.

古文：留，不行二十五日而旋。
现代文：留，二十五天不动而转向。
English: Stay, twenty-five days without moving and turn around.

古文：逆，日行七分之一，八十四日退十二度。
现代文：逆行，每天运行七分之一度，八十四天共退行十二度。
English: retrograde, running one-seventh of a degree every day, and retrograde a total of twelve degrees in eighty-four days.

古文：复留，二十五日而顺，日行五十八分之九，五十八日行九度。
现代文：再留，二十五天后转而顺行，每天运行五十八分之九度，五十八天共运行九度。
English: After another stay, after 25 days, it will turn to a straight line, running 9 degrees every day, and running 9 degrees in total for 58 days.

古文：顺，疾，日行十一分，五十八日行十一度，在日前，夕伏西方。
现代文：顺行，快，每天运行五十八分之十一度，五十八天共运行十一度，在太阳之前，晚上伏于西方。
English: Running forward, fast, running every day for 11/58ths of a day, running for a total of 11/58 days, before the sun, facing west in the evening.

古文：十六日百七十四万二千三百二十三分，行星二度三百二十三万四千六百七分，而与日合。
现代文：十六天一百七十四万二千三百二十三分，共运行二度三百二十三万四千六百零七分，与太阳会合。
English: Sixteen days, one million seven hundred forty-two thousand three hundred and twenty-three minutes, running a total of two times three million two hundred thirty-four thousand six hundred and seven minutes, meeting with the sun.

古文：凡一终，三百九十八日三百四十八万四千六百四十六分，行星四十三度二百五十万九千九百五十六分。
现代文：总计一终，三百九十八天三百四十八万四千六百四十六分，运行三十三度二百五十万九千九百五十六分。
English: The final total was 3,484,646 minutes in three hundred and ninety-eight days, and the running time was 332,599,956 minutes.

古文：火：晨与日合，伏，顺，七十一日百四十八万九千八百六十八分，行星五十五度百二十四万二千八百六十分半，而晨见东方，在日后。
现代文：火星：早晨与太阳会合，伏，顺行，七十一天一百四十八万九千八百六十八分，运行五十五度一百二十四万二千八百六十点五分，转而早晨在东方出现，在太阳之后。
English: Mars: morning rendezvous with the sun, declination, prograde, 71 days, 1,489,868 minutes, orbit 55 degrees, 1,242,860.5 minutes, and morning appears in the east, behind the sun.

古文：顺，日行二十三分之十四，百八十四日行一百一十二度。
现代文：顺行，每天运行二十三分之十四度，一百八十四天运行一百一十二度。
English: Running in a clockwise direction, it runs at twenty-three-four degrees every day, and at one hundred and twelve degrees for one hundred and eighty-four days.

古文：更顺，迟，日行二十三分之十二，九十二日行四十八度。
现代文：再顺行，慢，每天运行二十三分之十二度，九十二天运行四十八度。
English: Then go forward, slow, run twenty-three degrees every day, and run forty-eight degrees for ninety-two days.

古文：留，不行十一日。
现代文：留，十一天不动。
English: Stay, do not move for eleven days.

古文：旋，逆，日行六十二分之十七，六十二日退十七度。
现代文：转向，逆行，每天运行六十二分之十七。六十二天退行十七度。
English: Turn, retrograde, every day run seventeen sixty-second. Sixty-two days retrograde seventeen degrees.

古文：复留，十一日而顺，日行十二分，九十二日行四十八度。
现代文：再留，十一天后转为顺行，每天运行二十三分之十二度，九十二天运行四十八度。
English: After 11 days, it will be shifted to the forward direction, running 23/2 degrees every day, and running 48 degrees every 92 days.

古文：复顺，疾，日行十四分，百八十四日行百一十二度，在日前，夕伏西方。
现代文：再顺行，快，每天运行二十三分之十四度，一百八十四天运行一百一十二度，在太阳之前，晚上伏于西方。
English: Then go forward, fast, run twenty-three-four degrees every day, run one hundred and twelve degrees for one hundred and eighty-four days, before the sun, and face the west in the evening.

古文：七十一日百四十八万九千八百六十八分，行星五十五度百二十四万二千八百六十分半，而与日合。
现代文：七十一天一百四十八万九千八百六十八分，运行五十五度一百二十四万二千八百六十点五分，与太阳会合。
English: On the 71st day of the year, it moves from one hundred forty-eight thousand nine thousand eight hundred and sixty-eight minutes to fifty-five degrees one hundred twenty-four thousand two thousand eight hundred and sixty-five minutes, when it meets the sun.

古文：凡一终，七百七十九日九十七万三千一十三分，行星四百一十四度四十七万八千九百九十八分。
现代文：总计一终，七百七十九天九十七万三千零一十三分，运行四百一十四度四十七万八千九百九十八分。
English: The final total was 973,013 minutes in 779 days, and the running time was 414 minutes, 478,998 minutes.

古文：土：晨与日合，伏，顺，十六日百一十二万二千四百二十六分半，行星一度百九十九万五千八百六十四分半，而晨见东方，在日后。
现代文：土星：早晨与太阳会合，伏，顺行，十六天一百一十二万二千四百二十六点五分，运行一度一百九十九万五千八百六十四点五分，转而早晨在东方出现，在太阳之后。
English: Saturn: morning conjunction with the sun, declination, prograde motion, 16 days from 11:12:24:26:5, orbit once at 19:95:86:5, then morning appears in the east, behind the sun.

古文：顺，日行三十五分之三，八十七日半行七度半。
现代文：顺行，每天运行三十五分之三度，八十七点五天运行七点五度。
English: Running in a clockwise direction, it runs three-fifths of a degree every day, and seven-fifths of a degree every eighty-seven days.

古文：留，不行三十四日。
现代文：留，三十四天不动。
English: Don't move for thirty-four days.

古文：旋，逆，日行十七分之一，百二日退六度。
现代文：转向，逆行，每天运行十七分之一度，一百零二天退行六度。
English: Turn, retrograde, every day run one seventeenth of a degree, one hundred and two days retrograde six degrees.

古文：复三十四日而顺，日行三分，八十七日行七度半，在日前，夕伏西方。
现代文：再留，三十四天后转而顺行，每天运行三十五分之三度，八十七点五天运行七点五度，在太阳前面，晚上伏于西方。
English: After another stay, after thirty-four days, it turned to go along, running three-fifths of a degree every day, running seven-fifths of a degree every eighty-seven days, in front of the sun, and facing west in the evening.

古文：十六日百一十二万二千四百二十六分半，行星一度百九十万五千八百六十四分半，而与日合也。
现代文：十六天一百一十二万二千四百二十六点五分，运行一度一百九十万五千八百六十四点五分，与太阳会合。
English: Sixteen days and one thousand one hundred and twelve thousand two hundred and four hundred and twenty-six minutes and five minutes, running once one thousand nine hundred and fifty-five thousand eight hundred and sixty-four minutes and five minutes, meeting with the sun.

古文：凡一终，三百七十八日十六万六千二百七十二分，行星十二度百七十三万三千一百四十八分。
现代文：总计一终，共三百七十八天十六万六千二百七十二分，运行十二度一百七十三万三千一百四十八分。
English: In total, there were a total of 378 days, 166,272 minutes, and 12 operations, 1,733,000 1,148 minutes.

古文：金：晨与日合，伏，逆，五日退四度，而晨见东方，在日后。
现代文：金星：早晨与太阳会合，伏，逆行，五天退行四度，转而早晨在东方出现，在太阳之后。
English: Venus: morning conjunction with the sun, waxing, waning, retrograde, five days retrograde four degrees, then morning emergence in the east, after the sun.

古文：逆，日行五分度之三，十日退六度。
现代文：逆行，每天运行五分之三度，十天退行六度。
English: Retrograde, running three-fifths of a degree every day, and retreating six degrees in ten days.

古文：留，不行八日。
现代文：留，八天不动。
English: Don't move for eight days.

古文：旋，顺，迟，日行四十六分之三十三，四十六日行三十三度而顺。
现代文：转向，顺行，慢，每天运行四十六分之三十三度，四十六天运行三十三度。
English: Steer, go forward, slow down, run every day for thirty-three-forty-six degrees, run forty-six days for thirty-three degrees.

古文：疾，日行一度九十一分之十五，九十一日行一百六度。
现代文：快，每天运行一又九十一分之十五度，九十一天运行一百零六度。
English: Fast, every day running one and one-fifteenth of ninety-one degrees, ninety-one days running one hundred and six degrees.

古文：更顺，益疾，日行一度九十一分之二十二，九十一日行百一十三度，在日后，晨伏东方。
现代文：再顺行，更快，每天运行一又九十一分之二十二度，九十一天运行一百一十三度，在太阳之后，早晨伏于束方。
English: Further along, faster, it runs once every twenty-two ninety-one degrees, once every ninety-one days it runs one hundred and thirteen degrees, after the sun, in the morning it sets.

古文：顺，四十一日五万六千九百五十四分，行星五十度五万六千九百五十四分，而与日合。
现代文：顺行，四十一天五万六干九百五十四分运行五十度五万六千九百五十四分，与太阳会合。
English: Proceeding clockwise, it rises to forty-one days, fifty-six thousand, nine hundred and fifty-four minutes, orbits at fifty degrees, fifty-six thousand, nine hundred and fifty-four minutes, and meets the sun.

古文：一合，二百九十二日五万六千九百五十四分，行星亦如之。
现代文：一合，总计二百九十二天五万六千九百五十四分，运行数量亦为二百九十二度五万六千九百五十四分。
English: A total of 292 days, 569,054 minutes, and 292 degrees, 569,054 minutes of operation.

古文：金：夕与日合，伏，顺，四十一日五万六千九百五十四分，行星五十度五万九千九百五十四分，而夕见西方，在日前。
现代文：金星：晚上舆太阳会合，伏，顺行，四十一天五万六千九百五十四分运行五十度五万九千九百五十四应为五万六千九百五十四，转而晚上在西方出现，在太阳之前。
English: Venus: Conjunction with the Sun in the evening, waxing, waning, 41 days, 56,954 minutes, orbit 50 degrees, 59,954 should be 56,954, and then appear in the west in the evening, before the sun.

古文：顺，疾，日行一度九十一分之二十二，九十一日行百一十三度。
现代文：顺行，快，每天运行一又九十一分之二十二度，九十一天运行一百一十三度。
English: Forward, fast, every day run one and twenty-two ninety-one degrees, ninety-one days run one hundred and thirteen degrees.

古文：更顺，减疾，日行一度十五分，九十一日行百六度而顺。
现代文：再顺行，变慢，每天运行一度十五分，九十一天运行一百零六度。
English: Then go forward, slow down, run once a day for fifteen minutes, and run one hundred and six degrees for ninety-one days.

古文：迟，日行四十六分之三十三，四十六日行三十三度。
现代文：慢，每天运行四十六分之三十三度，四十六天运行三十三度。
English: Slow, every day running thirty-three degrees forty-six, forty-six days running thirty-three degrees.

古文：留，不行八日。
现代文：留，八天不动。
English: Don't move for eight days.

古文：旋，逆，日行五分之三，十日退六度，在日前，夕伏西方，逆，疾，五日退四度，而与日合。
现代文：转向，逆行，每天运行五分之三度，十天退行六度，在太阳之前。晚上伏于西方，逆行，快，五天退行四度，与太阳会合。
English: Turn, retrograde, run three-fifths of a degree every day, retrograde six degrees in ten days, before the sun. Fall to the west in the evening, retrograde, fast, retrograde four degrees in five days, meet the sun.

古文：凡再合一终，五百八十四日十一万三千九百八分，行星亦如之。
现代文：总计二次会合一终，五百八十四天十一万三千九百零八分，运行敷量亦为五百八十四度十一万三千九百零八分。
English: By the end of the second meeting, the total time was 584 days, 113,908 minutes, and the operating load was 584 degrees, 113,908 minutes.

古文：水：晨与日合，伏，逆，九日退七度，而晨见东方，在日后。
现代文：水星：早晨与太阳会合，伏，逆行，九天退行七度，早晨在东方出现，在太阳之后。
English: Mercury: morning conjunction with the sun, v, retrograde, nine days retrograde seven degrees, morning appears in the east, after the sun.

古文：更逆，疾，一日退一度。
现代文：继续逆行，快，一天退行一度。
English: Continue to retrograde, fast, retrograde once a day.

古文：留，不行二日。
现代文：留，二天不动。
English: Don't move for two days.

古文：旋，顺，迟，日行九分之八，九日行八度而顺。
现代文：转向，顺行，慢，每天运行九分之八度，九天运行八度。
English: Steer, go forward, slow down, run nine-eighths of a degree every day, run nine-eighths of a degree every day.

古文：疾，日行一度四分之一，二十日行二十五度，在日后。
现代文：快，每天运行一又四分之一度，二十天运行二十五度，在太阳之后。
English: Fast, running one and a quarter degrees every day, twenty days running twenty-five degrees, after the sun.

古文：晨伏东方，顺，十六日六百四十一万九百六十七分，行星三十二度六百四十一万九百六十七分，而与日合，一合，五十七日六百四十一万九百六十七分，行星亦如之。
现代文：早晨伏于东方，顺行，十六天六百四十一万零九百六十七分运行三十二度六百四十一万零九百六十七分，与太阳会合。一合，共五十七天六百四十一万零九百六十七分，运行数量也为五十七度六百四十一万零九百六十七分。
English: In the morning, it sets in the east and travels along for 16 days and 6,410,967 minutes, traveling 32 degrees and 6,410,967 minutes to meet the sun. At the same time, it travels for 57 days and 6,410,967 minutes, traveling 57 degrees and 6,410,967 minutes.

古文：水：夕与日合，伏，顺，十六日六百四十一万九百六十七分行星三十二度六百四十一万九百六十七分，而夕见西方，在日前。
现代文：水星：晚上舆太阳会合，伏，顺行，十六天六百四十一万零九百六十七分运行三十二度六百四十一万零九百六十七分，晚上在西方出现。
English: Mercury: Conjunction with the Sun in the evening, waxing and waning, 16 days, 6,410,967 minutes, moving 32 degrees, 6,410,967 minutes, appearing in the west in the evening.

古文：顺，疾，日行一度四分之一，二十日行二十五度而顺。
现代文：在太阳之前。顺行，快，每天运行一又四分之一度，二十天运行二十五度。
English: In front of the sun. Prograde, fast, running one and a quarter degrees a day, twenty days running twenty-five degrees.

古文：迟，日行九分之八，九日行八度。
现代文：慢，每天运行九分之八度，九天运行八度。
English: slowly, running nine-eighths of an octave every day, and running an octave every nine days.

古文：留，不行二日。
现代文：留，二天不动。
English: Don't move for two days.

古文：旋，逆，一日退一度，在日前，夕伏西方。
现代文：转向，逆行，一天退行一度，在太阳之前，晚上伏于西方。
English: Turning, retrograde, retrograde once a day, before the sun, at night facing west.

古文：逆，迟，九日退七度，与日合。
现代文：逆行，慢，九天退行七度，舆太阳会合。
English: Retrograde, slow, nine days retrograde seven degrees, the sun and moon meet.

古文：凡再合一终，一百一十五日六百一万二千五百五分，行星亦如之。
现代文：总计二次会合一终，一百一十五天六百零一万二千五百零五分，运行一百一十五度六百零一万二千五百零五分。
English: By the end of the second session, a total of 60122505 minutes had passed in 115 days, and 60122505 minutes had passed in 115 sessions.

