古文：五行三《五行传》曰： 弃法律，逐功臣，杀太子，以妾为妻，则火不炎上。 
现代文：《五行传》说： 废弃法律，放逐功臣，杀死太子，以妾为妻，那么就会出现火不炎上的现象。 
English: "The Legend of the Five Elements" says: Abolish the law, banish the hero, kill the prince, take a concubine as a wife, then there will be a phenomenon of fire not on fire.

古文：谓火失其性而为灾也。
现代文：这是说火失其本性而造成灾害。
English: This is to say that fire loses its nature and causes disasters.

古文：又曰： 视之不明，是谓不哲。
现代文：又说： 眼光不明，这就叫做不哲。
English: He also said, "If your eyesight is unclear, it's called ignorance."

古文：厥咎舒，厥罚恆燠，厥极疾。
现代文：它的罪过是知罪而不罚，给它的惩罚是长期干旱炎热，给它的惩处足灾害。
English: Its crime is impunity, its punishment is prolonged drought and heat, and its punishment is foot-and-mouth disease.

古文：时则有草妖，时则有裸虫之孽，时则有羊祸，时则有目疴，时则有赤眚、赤祥。
现代文：有时出现草木异常的妖孽，有时出现裸虫之孽，有时出现怪异之羊的灾祸，有时出现目病，有时出现赤眚、赤祥。
English: Sometimes there is the evil of abnormal plants and trees, sometimes the evil of naked worms, sometimes the evil of strange sheep, sometimes eye diseases, sometimes red gills and red cheeks.

古文：惟水沴火。 
现代文：惟水克火。 
English: It's water versus fire.

古文：裸虫，刘歆传以为羽虫。
现代文：裸虫，刘歆解释，认为是羽虫。
English: Naked worms, Liu Wei explained, are considered to be caterpillars.

古文：火不炎上：魏明帝太和五年五月，清商殿灾。
现代文：魏明帝太和五年五月，清商殿发生火灾。
English: In May of the fifth year of Emperor Wei Ming's reign, a fire broke out in a Qing dynasty trading hall.

古文：初，帝为平原王，纳河南虞氏为妃。
现代文：当初，明帝还是平原王的时候，娶河南虞氏为妃。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Wei Ming was the king of the plains, and Nan Yu of the Na River was his wife.

古文：及即位，不以为后，更立典虞车工卒毛嘉女，是为悼皇后。
现代文：到即位为帝，他不以虞氏为后，改立所娶的典虞车工隶卒毛嘉之女为后，这就是悼皇后。
English: When he ascended the throne as emperor, he did not choose the Yu clan as his heir, but instead chose the daughter of Mao Jia, a wheelwright of the Yu clan, whom he had married. This was the mourning of the empress.

古文：后本仄微，非所宜升。
现代文：悼皇后本来地位卑贱，不应当立为皇后。
English: The mourning empress was originally of lowly status and should not have been made empress.

古文：以妾为妻之罚也。
现代文：火灾就是对以妾为妻的惩罚。
English: Fire is the punishment for taking a concubine as a wife.

古文：魏明帝青龙元年六月，洛阳宫鞠室灾。
现代文：魏明帝青龙元年六月，洛阳宫鞠室发生火灾。
English: In June of the first year of the Wei Ming Dynasty, a fire broke out in the bowing room of Luoyang Palace.

古文：二年四月，崇华殿灾，延于南阁。
现代文：二年四月，崇华殿发生火灾，延烧到南合。
English: In April of the second year, a fire broke out in the Chonghua Hall and spread to Nanhe.

古文：缮复之。至三年七月，此殿又灾。
现代文：修复之后，到三年七月，这殿又发生火灾。
English: After the restoration, a fire broke out in the hall again in July of the following year.

古文：帝问高堂隆： 此何咎也？
现代文：旦嬷问直堂建： 这是什么灾祸?
English: Wei Mingdi asked Gaodanglong: What's wrong with sending him?

古文：于礼宁有祈禳之义乎？ 
现代文：在礼上有祈祷求福消灾的方法吗? 
English: Is there a saying in the etiquette about praying for good fortune and for calamity?

古文：对曰： 夫灾变之发，皆所以明教诫也。
现代文：高堂隆回答说： 灾变发生，都是用以表示警戒的方式。
English: Gao Donglong replied, "When a catastrophe occurs, it is a way to express caution.

古文：唯率礼修德，可以胜之。
现代文：衹有遵循礼法。整饬德政，可以制服灾变。
English: There is no need to follow the etiquette. The rectification of the etiquette can subdue the disaster.

古文：《易传》曰： 上不俭，下不节，孽火烧其室。 
现代文：《易传》说： 上不行节俭，下不遵节度，孽火烧其室。 
English: "I Chuan" said: The upper cannot be frugal, the lower does not follow the rules, and the iniquity burns his room.

古文：又曰： 君高其台，天火为灾。 
现代文：又说： 君主加高他的楼台，天火降灾。 
English: And he said, The Lord hath exalted his throne above the heavens, and given it to the beast.

古文：此人君苟饰宫室，不知百姓空竭，故天应之以旱，火从高殿起也。
现代文：这是说君王衹知道修饰宫室，不知百姓财力空竭，所以上天用旱灾作这种行为的应验，火灾先从高殿烧起。
English: This is to say that the king and queen knew how to decorate the palace, but did not know that the people's financial resources were exhausted. Therefore, the heavens used the drought to fulfill this behavior. The fire first started from the high temple.

古文：案旧占，灾火之发，皆以台榭宫室为诫。
现代文：据以前的事验证，灾火发生，都在台榭宫室，以示儆戒。
English: According to the previous verification, all the fires occurred in the palace room of the Grand Duke of Taizhou, to show the discipline.

古文：今宜罢散民役，务从节约，清扫所灾之处，不敢于此有所营造。
现代文：现在应当停止征役，遣散役夫，全力实行节制，厉行俭约，清扫受灾的地方，不再在这地方营造宫殿。
English: Now is the time to stop conscription, dismiss servicemen, make every effort to exercise restraint, practice frugality, clean up the affected areas, and no longer build palaces in this area.

古文：莆嘉禾，必生此地，以报陛下虔恭之德。 
现代文：预示吉祥的神草趸莆和吉祥禾苗，一定会在这地方长出，以酬报陛下虔诚恭敬的德行。 
English: The auspicious sacred grass and the auspicious grain seedlings will surely grow in this place to reward His Majesty's pious and respectful virtue.

古文：不从。
现代文：魏明帝不听从。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：遂复崇华殿，改曰九龙。
现代文：于是重修崇华殿，改称九龙殿。
English: As a result, Chonghua Hall was restored and renamed Kowloon Hall.

古文：以郡国前后言龙见者九，故以为名。
现代文：郡国先后呈报龙出现一共九次，所以用 九龙 为殿名。
English: It was named after the nine times a dragon was said to have appeared in each county.

古文：多弃法度，疲民逞欲，以妾为妻之应也。
现代文：火灾正是多次废弃法度，使百姓疲惫劳苦以逞己私欲、以妾为妻的应验。
English: The fire was the fulfillment of many abandoned laws, which made the people tired and worked hard to be selfish and take a concubine as a wife.

古文：吴孙亮建兴元年十二月，武昌端门灾；改作端门，又灾内殿。
现代文：吴孙亮建兴元年十二月，武昌端门发生火灾。改建端门，火灾又在内殿发生。
English: In December of the first year of Wu Sun Liang's reign, a fire broke out at the Wuchang end gate. After the end gate was rebuilt, another fire broke out in the inner hall.

古文：案《春秋》鲁雉门及两观灾，董仲舒以为天意欲使定公诛季氏，若曰去其高显而奢僭者也。
现代文：考察《春秋》记载，鲁国雉门及两观发生火灾。董仲舒认为这是天意要使鲁定公诛除季氏，如同说要除去权势贵盛而又奢费僭越的人。
English: Examining the records of "Spring and Autumn," there was a fire at the gate of Lu and the two views. Dong Zhongshu believed that this was the will of heaven to make Lu Dinggong banish the Ji clan, just as it was said to remove those who were powerful and extravagant.

古文：汉武帝世，辽东高庙灾，其说又同。
现代文：汉武帝时代，辽塞直庙发生火灾，董仲舒的解说又相同。
English: In the era of Emperor Hanwu, a fire broke out in the Liao Sai Chao Temple, and Dong Zhongshu's explanation is the same.

古文：今此与二事颇类也。
现代文：现在遍胆火灾同这两件史实十分类似。
English: The current fire is very similar to these two historical facts.

古文：且门者，号令所出；殿者，听政之所。
现代文：况且，门是号令发布的地方，殿是听政治政的地方。
English: Moreover, the door is the place where orders are issued, and the hall is the place to listen to politics.

古文：是时诸恪属秉政，而矜慢放肆；孙峻总禁旅，而险害终著。
现代文：当时诸葛坦掌政，但他却骄矜傲慢，放纵妄为；孙峻总领禁军，而阴险残忍最终显露。
English: Zhu Ge Tan was in power at the time, but he was arrogant and indulgent; Sun Jun led the forbidden army, and the insidious cruelty was finally revealed.

古文：武昌，孙氏尊号所始，天戒若曰，宜除其贵耍之首者。
现代文：武昌是孙氏称帝的发迹之地，上天儆戒说，应当除去首要的权贵之臣。
English: Wuchang is the birthplace of Sun Tse-tung, and Heaven decreed that the most important and powerful vassals should be removed.

古文：恪果丧众殄民，峻授政于綝，綝废亮也。
现代文：诸葛恪果然战败丧师，殄害百姓，孙峻把政权交给还缈，噩继后来废黜茎壶。
English: Zhuge Ke really defeated the enemy and harmed the people. Sun Jun handed over the political power to Hoan Kiem, and Hoan Kiem was subsequently deposed.

古文：或曰孙权毁彻武昌，以增太初宫，诸葛恪有迁都意，更起门殿，事非时宜，故见灾也。
现代文：有人说珏护毁损亘娼，扩建立翅宣，谴姜搔有迁都的打算，因此改建门殿，办事与时令不合，所以遭受火灾。
English: Some people said that Gongguo destroyed and damaged Wengxuan, expanded the establishment of Yingxuan, and ordered Jiangxi to have the intention of moving the capital, so they rebuilt the gate, and the work was not in accordance with the season, so it suffered a fire.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 君不思道，厥妖火烧宫。 
现代文：塞庆《易传》说： 君主不考虑道义，其妖异是火烧宫殿。 
English: "I Chuan" said: The monarch does not think about morality, and the demon fire burns the palace.

古文：吴孙亮太平元年二月朔，建业火。
现代文：吴孙亮太平元年二月朔，建业起火。
English: Wu Sunliang In February of the first year of the Taiping Dynasty, Jianye caught fire.

古文：人火之也。
现代文：是人放的火。
English: It was a human-caused fire.

古文：是秋，孙綝始秉政，矫以亮诏杀吕据、滕胤。明年，又辄杀硃异。
现代文：这年秋天，孙琳开始掌政，假称孙亮诏命杀死吕据、滕胤，第二年，又擅自作主杀死叁里。
English: In the autumn of that year, Sun Lin began to take over the government. It was assumed that Sun Liang had given the order to kill Liushen and Tengyin. The following year, he took it upon himself to kill Baoli.

古文：弃法律、逐功臣之罚也。
现代文：火灾是对废弃法律、逐除功臣罪行的惩罚。
English: Fire is the punishment for the crime of abandoning the law and expelling heroes.

古文：吴孙休永安五年二月，白虎门北楼灾。
现代文：吴孙休永安五年二月，白虎门北楼发生火灾。
English: In February of the fifth year of the Yong'an era, a fire broke out in the north tower of Baihumen.

古文：六年十月，石头小城火，烧西南百八十丈。
现代文：永安六年十月，互头小城起火，延烧西南一百八十丈远。
English: In October of the sixth year, the stone town caught fire and burned 180 meters to the southwest.

古文：是时嬖人张布专擅国势，多行无礼，而韦昭、盛冲终斥不用，兼遣察战等为使，惊扰州郡，致使交趾反乱。
现代文：这时候嬖人张布独揽国家大权，干了很多违背礼法的事，而韦昭、盛冲终被排斥，不受任用，又派察战等官员作使者，惊扰所到各州郡，致使交耻发生叛乱。
English: At this time, Zhang Bu, the person in charge, monopolized the power of the state and did a lot of things that violated the etiquette, while Wei Zhao and Sheng Chong were eventually ostracized and not appointed. He also sent officials such as the inspector of war to be envoys to disturb the government to various states and counties, causing the rebellion to occur.

古文：是其咎也。
现代文：火灾就是这些情况带来的灾祸。
English: Fire is the scourge of these conditions.

古文：吴孙皓建衡二年三月，大火，烧万余家，死者七百人。
现代文：吴孙皓建衡二年三月，起大火，延烧一万余家，死了七百人。
English: In March of the second year of Wu Sun Ying Jianheng, a large fire broke out, burning more than ten thousand homes and killing seven hundred people.

古文：案《春秋》，齐火，刘向以为桓公好内，听女口，妻妾数更之罚也。
现代文：根据《春秋》，齐国曾大火，刘向认为，这是齐桓公喜欢女色，听信女人的话、妻妾频频更换的罪过。
English: According to "Spring and Autumn," there was a big fire in Qi, and Liu Xiang believed that this was the fault of Qi Huan Gong's liking for women, listening to women's words, and frequently changing wives and concubines.

古文：皓制令诡暴，荡弃法度，劳臣名士，诛斥甚众。
现代文：孙皓的法制诡诈而又残暴，丢弃法度，功臣名士，很多人被他斥退诛杀。
English: Sun Yat-sen's legal system was deceitful and cruel. He discarded laws and regulations. He had many meritorious heroes, and many people were killed by him.

古文：后宫万余，女谒数行，其中隆宠佩皇后玺者又多矣。
现代文：后宫有万余人，宠姬干求请托，屡屡得以成功，后宫中得到隆厚的恩宠而身佩皇后玺印的嫔妃有很多。
English: There are more than ten thousand people in the harem. There are many concubines in the harem who have received generous grace and wear the queen's seal.

古文：故有大火。
现代文：所以出现大火。
English: That's why there's a fire.

古文：晋武帝太康八年三月乙丑，震灾西阁、楚王所止坊，及临商观窗。
现代文：晋武帝太康八年三月乙丑，地震造成火灾，从西阁、楚王居住的坊，烧到临商观窗户。
English: In March of the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, an earthquake caused a fire that burned from the West Pavilion, the living room of King Chu, to the windows facing the merchants.

古文：十年四月癸丑，崇贤殿灾。
现代文：太康十年四月癸丑曰，崇贤殿发生火灾。
English: In April of the 10th year, a fire broke out in the Soken-den.

古文：十月庚辰，含章鞠室、修成堂前庑、内坊东屋、辉章殿南阁火。
现代文：十月庚辰曰，含章殿鞠室、脩成堂前廉、丙坊东屋、捏童压南阁起火。
English: In October, Geng Chen said that the fire broke out in the bowing room of the Hall of Honor, the front hall of the Hall of Honor, the east wing of the Hall of Honor, and the south pavilion of the Hall of Honor.

古文：时有上书者曰： 汉王氏五侯兄弟迭任，今杨氏三公并在大位，天变屡见，窃为陛下忧之。 
现代文：当时有人上书说： 汉代王氏五兄弟为侯，相继被任用，现在杨氏弟兄三人为公，都处在高位。天变屡屡出现，我替陛下为此担忧。 
English: At that time, someone wrote: "In the Han Dynasty, the five brothers of the Wang clan were princes and were successively appointed, and now the three brothers of the Yang clan are princes and are all in high positions. Natural changes have repeatedly occurred, and I am worried about this for His Majesty.

古文：杨珧由是乞退。
现代文：杨珧因此自己请求让位。
English: As a result, Yang Hui requested to give up his seat.

古文：是时帝纳冯紞之间，废张华之功；听杨骏之谗，离卫瓘之宠。
现代文：当时皇帝接纳冯沈的离间之言，没有充分发挥张华的治国才能；听信查瞪的谗言，疏远了卫罐这样的忠直之臣。
English: At that time, the emperor accepted the divisive words of Feng Shen and did not give full play to Zhang Hua's ability to govern the country; listening to the criticism of the investigation alienated Wei Can, such a loyal and upright minister.

古文：此逐功臣之罚也。
现代文：火灾是对弃逐功臣的惩罚。
English: The fire was the punishment for abandoning and expelling the meritorious vassals.

古文：明年，宫车晏驾。
现代文：第二年，皇上驾崩。
English: The following year, Miyake died.

古文：其后楚王承窃发之旨，戮害二公，身亦不免。
现代文：这以后楚王凭藉暗中送来的诏书，杀害汝直王旦墨毫、堑弯两位大臣，自己也难逃一死。
English: After that, King Chu carried out the secretly conveyed intention to kill the two princes, and he himself was not spared.

古文：震灾其坊，又天意乎！
现代文：地震，所居之坊发生火灾，又正是天意吧。
English: An earthquake, a fire in the house you live in, it's just God's will.

古文：晋惠帝元康五年闰月庚寅，武库火。
现代文：晋惠帝元康五年闰月庚寅曰，武库起火。
English: In the leap month of the fifth year of Emperor Jingu's reign, Geng Yin said that the arsenal was on fire.

古文：张华疑有乱，先固守，然后救灾。
现代文：张华怀疑有人作乱，先加强守备，然后才去救火。
English: Suspecting that someone was causing a disturbance, Zhang Hua first strengthened his defenses and then went to put out the fire.

古文：是以累代异宝，王莽头，孔子履，汉高断白蛇剑及二百万人器械，一时荡尽。
现代文：因此历代的珍奇宝物，王莽的头颅，孑子的履，还壶担斩白蛇的剑以及可供二百万人使用的军械，一下子全都烧光了。
English: As a result, the rare treasures of all ages, Wang Mang's head, the mule's shoes, the sword that carried and cut the white snake, and the military equipment that could be used by two million people, were all burned at once.

古文：是后愍怀见杀，杀太子之罚也。
现代文：这以后愍怀太子被杀，火灾是对杀太子的罪过的惩罚。
English: After this, Prince Yan Huai was killed, and the fire was the punishment for the crime of killing the prince.

古文：天戒若曰，夫设险击柝，所以固其国；储积戎器，所以戒不虞。
现代文：天儆戒说，设立关隘，击柝巡逻，是固守国家的办法；储积兵器，是防备意外事故的措施。
English: Tian Rongjie said that setting up checkpoints and patrolling is a way to protect the country; storing weapons is a measure to prevent accidents.

古文：今冢嗣将倾，社稷将泯，禁兵无所复施，皇旅又将谁卫！
现代文：现在朝廷将要倾覆，国家将要败亡，禁军没有使用的兵器，朝廷又将怎样保卫。
English: Now that the imperial court is about to be overthrown and the country is about to be defeated, how will the imperial court defend itself with weapons that were not used by the forbidden army?

古文：帝后不悟，终丧四海，是其应也。
现代文：皇帝不醒悟，最终丢失丁天下，灾异就是这罪过的应验。
English: Empress Dowager did not wake up, finally lost the world, this is its response.

古文：张华、阎纂皆曰，武库火而氐、羌反，太子见废，则四海可知矣。
现代文：张华、阎纂都说，武库起火。氐、差反叛，太子被废黜，那天下形势可想而知了。
English: Zhang Hua and Yan Xuan both said that the arsenal caught fire, the princes rebelled, and the crown prince was deposed. The situation in the world at that time can be imagined.

古文：元康八年十一月，高原陵火。
现代文：元康八年十一月，高原陵起火。
English: In November of the eighth year of the Yuan Kang, the Highland Mausoleum caught fire.

古文：是时贾后凶恣，贾谧擅朝，恶积罪稔，宜见诛绝。
现代文：遣时候贾后凶残恣肆，贾后独揽朝政，恶贯满盈，应当诛灭他们。
English: The cruel and arbitrary way in which Jia Zhang arbitrarily decided on the policies of the dynasty was a serious crime that should be eradicated.

古文：天戒若曰，臣妾之不可者，虽亲贵莫比，犹宜忍而诛之，如吾燔高原陵也。
现代文：天儆戒说，臣下、妻妾不守臣道、妇道，即使亲贵也不能庇护，就应当下决心诛杀他们，就像我燔烧矗厦陆一样。
English: Thus says the heavenly precept, the bad ones among the vassals and concubines, even if they are extremely intimate and honorable, should still restrain their feelings and reduce them, just as the sky burns the highland mausoleum.

古文：帝既眊弱，而张华又不纳裴頠、刘卞之谋，故后遂与谧诬杀太子也。
现代文：皇帝昏聩懦弱，张华又不采纳裴憔、刘卞的计谋，所以贾后终于和贾谧合谋诬陷杀害太子。
English: The emperor was weak and weak, and Zhang Hua did not adopt the strategies of Pei Jun and Liu Jun. Therefore, Jia Hou finally conspired with Jia Jun to frame and kill the prince.

古文：干宝云： 高原陵火，太子废，其应也。
现代文：干实说： 高原陵起火，太子被废就是其应验。
English: To be honest: the fire at the plateau mausoleum and the dethronement of the crown prince are its fulfillment.

古文：汉武帝世，高园便殿火，董仲舒对与此占同。 
现代文：汉武帝时代，高园便殿起火，董仲舒的对答与这预测相同。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwu, the Gaoyuan Ben Hall caught fire, and Dong Zhongshu's response was the same as this prediction.

古文：晋惠帝永康元年，帝纳皇后羊氏。
现代文：晋惠帝永康元年，惠帝娶皇后羊氏。
English: In the first year of Emperor Yongkang's reign, Emperor Hui married Empress Yang.

古文：后将入宫，衣中忽有火，众咸怪之。
现代文：羊后将入宫的时候，衣服中突然有火，众人都感到奇怪。
English: When the Queen of Sheep was about to enter the palace, there was a sudden fire in her clothes, and everyone was surprised.

古文：太安二年，后父玄之以成都之逼，忧死。
现代文：太安二年，羊后之父羊玄之因为受到成都王的威逼，忧惧而死。
English: In the second year of the Taian era, Yang Xuanzhi, the father of the Sheep Queen, died of fear because he was threatened by the king of Chengdu.

古文：永兴元年，成都遂废后，处之金墉城，而杀其叔父同之。
现代文：永兴元年，成都王废黜羊后，把她安置在金墉城，而杀死羊后的叔父羊同主。
English: In the first year of Yongxing, after the king of Chengdu dethroned the ewe, he placed her in Jinyu City, and killed the ewe's uncle, the ewe's owner.

古文：是后还立，立而复废者四，又诏赐死，荀籓表全之。
现代文：以后羊后又回来被立为后，不久被废黜，造样反复了四次，又曾被下诏赐死，荀藩上奏表保全了羊后。
English: Later, Sheep Queen came back again and was appointed as the Empress, but was soon dethroned, and the pattern was repeated four times. She was also given death by imperial edict, and the Shan clan preserved Sheep Queen on the report card.

古文：虽末还在位，然忧逼折辱，终古未闻。
现代文：虽羊后晚年还是在后位，但遭受的胁迫灾祸，经历的折磨屈辱，自古以来未曾有过。
English: Although in her later years, the Empress Dowager was still in the last rank, the calamity of being coerced, the torture and humiliation she experienced were unprecedented since ancient times.

古文：此孽火之应。
现代文：这是孽火的应验。
English: This is the fulfillment of the fire of iniquity.

古文：晋惠帝永兴二年七月甲午，尚书诸曹火，延崇礼闼及阁道。
现代文：晋惠帝永兴二年七月甲午曰，尚书各官署起火，火势延及崇礼阖及阁道。
English: On the afternoon of July 1st, the second year of the reign of Emperor Yongxing, all the government offices of Shangshu caught fire, and the fire spread to Chongli and Goudao.

古文：夫百揆王化之本，王者弃法律之应也。
现代文：百揆总理国政，是圣王施行教化的根本，百揆官署起火，是王者丢弃法律的应验。
English: The national politics of the prime minister of Baekje is the foundation of the edification of the holy king, and the fire of the Baekje government office is the fulfillment of the king's abandonment of the law.

古文：清河王覃入为晋嗣，不终于位，又杀太子之罚也。
现代文：清河王司马覃入朝成为晋的嗣君，但在嗣君之位不得善终，尚书各官署起火是杀太子之罪带来的惩罚。
English: The king of the Qing River, Sima Qian, entered the court to become the heir of Jin, but he did not have a good end in the position of the heir. Shangshu's punishment for the crime of killing the prince was to set fire to all government offices.

古文：晋孝怀帝永嘉四年十一月，襄阳火，死者三千余人。
现代文：晋孝怀帝永嘉四年十一月，襄阳起火，死去的有三千余人。
English: In November of the 4th year of Jin Xiao Huai Di Yongjia, Xiangyang caught fire, killing more than three thousand people.

古文：是时王如自号大将军、司雍二州牧，众四五万，攻略郡县，以为己邑。
现代文：当时王如自称大将军、司雍二州牧，拥有四五万军队，他攻占郡县，收为自己的属邑。
English: At that time, Wang Ru claimed to be a great general and the leader of two states, with 450,000 troops. He conquered counties and made them his vassals.

古文：都督力屈，婴城自守，贼遂攻逼襄阳。
现代文：都督力量不足，据城自守，叛贼于是进逼襄阳。
English: The governor was not strong enough, so the city defended itself, and the traitors forced their way into Xiangyang.

古文：此下陵上，阳失节，火灾出也。
现代文：这是因为下欺凌上，阳失去节度，所以火灾出现。
English: This is because under the bullying, the yang lost control, so the fire appeared.

古文：晋元帝太兴中，王敦镇武昌。
现代文：晋元帝太兴年间，王敦镇守武昌。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taheung of the Jin Dynasty, Wang Dunzhen guarded Wuchang.

古文：武昌火起，兴众救之。
现代文：武昌起火，王麸调动军队救火。
English: Wuchang caught fire, and Wang Hui mobilized the army to put out the fire.

古文：救于此而发于彼，东西南北数十处俱应，数日不绝。
现代文：在这裹扑救而另一个地方又起火，东西南北有数十处火势相互呼应，好多天都不停息。
English: While there is a fire in one place, there is a fire in another. There are dozens of fires in the east, west, north and south, and they do not stop for many days.

古文：班固所谓滥炎妄起，虽兴师不能救之之谓也。
现代文：这就是班固说的，蔓延的火。四处发生，即使动用军队也不能扑救。
English: This is what Bangu was talking about, a fire that spreads. It happens everywhere, and cannot be put out even with the use of the army.

古文：干宝曰： 此臣而君行，亢阳失节之灾也。 
现代文：干实说： 这是身为臣下却有僭越的行为，是亢阳自大，骄横寡恩，失去节度带来的灾祸。 
English: Genuinely said: This is the behavior of being a subject but having arrogance, it is the scourge brought about by arrogance, arrogance and lack of discipline.

古文：晋元帝永昌二年正月癸巳，京都大火。
现代文：晋元帝永昌二年正月癸巳，京城起大火。
English: In the first month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Yongchang, a great fire broke out in the capital.

古文：三月，饶安、东光、安陵三县火，烧七千余家，死者万五千人。
现代文：三月，饶安、东光、安陵三县起火，烧毁七千余家，死一万五千人。
English: In March, fires in three counties of Raoan, Dongguang and Anling burned more than 7,000 homes and killed 15,000 people.

古文：晋明帝太宁元年正月，京都火。
现代文：晋明帝太宁元年正月，京城起火。
English: In the first month of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taining of the Jin and Ming dynasties, the capital city caught fire.

古文：是时王敦威侮朝廷，多行无礼，内外臣下，咸怀怨毒。
现代文：当时王圣威逼欺侮朝廷，多行不遵礼义之事，朝廷内外、君臣上下，都怀有对王敦的怨恨。
English: At that time, Wang Shengwei forced and bullied the imperial court, and did many things that did not follow etiquette and justice. Both inside and outside the imperial court, monarchs and ministers, all harbored resentment against Wang Dun.

古文：极阴生阳，故有火灾。
现代文：极阴生阳，所以有火灾。
English: Extreme yin gives birth to yang, which is why there are fires.

古文：与董仲舒说《春秋》陈火同事也。
现代文：这和董仲舒解说《春秋》中记载的陈国起火的事情相同。
English: This is the same as the fire in Chen Guo recorded by Dong Zhongshu in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：晋穆帝永和五年六月，震灾石虎太武殿及两厢、端门，光烂照天，金石皆尽，火月余乃灭。
现代文：晋穆帝永和五年六月，地震，石虎太武殿以及两庙、端门都发生火灾，火光映照天空，金石都被烧尽，火烧了一个多月才熄灭。
English: In June of the 5th year of the reign of Emperor Jinmu and the 6th year of the reign of Emperor Wu, there was an earthquake, and a fire broke out in the Shihu Taiwu Hall, as well as the two temples and the main gate. The fire reflected the sky, and the gold and stones were all burned out. The fire burned for more than a month before it was extinguished.

古文：是年四月，石虎死矣。
现代文：这年四月，石虎死去。
English: In April of this year, Shihuang died.

古文：其后胡遂灭亡。
现代文：以后胡最终灭亡。
English: After that, Hu finally perished.

古文：晋海西太和中，郗愔为会稽。
现代文：晋海西公太和年间，郗情任会稽太守。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi of the Jin Dynasty, he was appointed to the position of Censor of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：六月，大旱灾，火烧数千家，延及山阴仓米数百万斛。
现代文：六月，大旱，并出现火灾，大火延烧数千家，并延及山坠粮仓，烧去数百万斛米。
English: In June, there was a drought, and fires broke out. The fires burned thousands of homes, and spread to mountain grain silos, burning millions of stalks of rice.

古文：炎烟蔽天，不可扑灭。
现代文：火焰遮蔽天空，无法扑灭。
English: The flames cover the sky and cannot be extinguished.

古文：晋孝武帝宁康元年三月，京都风，火大起。
现代文：晋孝武帝宁康元年三月，京城起大风，又起火，火势大规模蔓延。
English: In March of the first year of the reign of Emperor Ningkang, the capital city was hit by high winds and a fire, which spread on a large scale.

古文：是时桓温入朝，志在陵上；少主践位，人怀忧恐。
现代文：当时桓温入朝掌政，存有欺凌主上之心，年幼的皇帝登位，人人担忧害怕。
English: At that time, when Emperor Kuan-Wen came to power, there was a bullying spirit, a young emperor ascended to the throne, and everyone was worried and afraid.

古文：此与太宁火同事。
现代文：这和太宁元年的起火原因相同。
English: This is the same as the cause of the fire in the first year of Taining.

古文：晋孝武帝太元十年正月，立国子学。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元十年正月，建立国子学。
English: In the first month of the 10th year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, Kuniko-gaku was established.

古文：学生多顽嚚，因风放火，焚房百余间。
现代文：学生多顽劣愚恶，藉着风势玩火，以致烧掉一百余间房屋。
English: The students were so evil and stupid that they used the wind to play with fire, causing more than 100 houses to burn down.

古文：是后考课不厉，赏黜无章，有育才之名，无收贤之实。
现代文：以后国子学考核学生不严格，赏罚没有法规，空有育才之名，却没有起到收容贤者的实效。
English: In the future, the examination of students in Chinese kindergartens will not be strict, there will be no rules for rewards and punishments, and the name of nurturing talents will be empty, but it will not have the effect of accommodating sages.

古文：《书》云： 知人则哲。 
现代文：《书》中说： 能够鉴家人的品行才能，才可算是明哲。 
English: "The Book" says: Only those who can judge a family member's character and talent can be regarded as sages.

古文：此不哲之罚先兆也。
现代文：国子学起火是不明哲惩罚的先兆。
English: The fire started by Kuniko-gakuen is a harbinger of punishment for the unwise.

古文：太元十三年十二月乙未，延贤堂灾。
现代文：太元十三年十二月乙末日，延贤堂发生火灾。
English: On the last day of December the 13th, a fire broke out in Yan Xian Hall.

古文：丙申，螽斯、则百堂及客馆、骠骑库皆灾。
现代文：丙申日，螽堑、则百堂以及客馆、骠骑库都发生火灾。
English: On the same day, a fire broke out in a hundred churches in Handan and Zhejiang, as well as a guesthouse and a riding hall.

古文：于时朝多弊政，衰陵日兆。
现代文：当时朝廷多有弊政，衰败的征兆天天出现。
English: At that time, the imperial court had a lot of maladministration, and signs of decay appeared every day.

古文：不哲之罚，皆有象类。主相不悟，终至乱亡云。
现代文：不明哲的罪过，都有具体的表现，宰相不省悟，最终导致动乱和衰亡。
English: The sin of not knowing the philosopher has a specific manifestation, the prime minister does not reflect, and eventually leads to turmoil and decline.

古文：晋安帝隆安二年三月，龙舟二乘灾。
现代文：晋安帝隆安二年三月，两艘龙舟发生火灾。
English: In March of the second year of the Jin and Qin Dynasties, two dragon boats caught fire.

古文：是水沴火也。
现代文：这是水克火之灾。
English: This is a water and fire disaster.

古文：晋安帝元兴元年八月庚子，尚书下舍曹火。
现代文：晋安帝元兴元年八月庚子日，尚书私舍衙署起火。
English: In August of the first year of Emperor Jian of the Andean Dynasty, Geng Zi Day, Shang Shuxi's residence and the imperial residences caught fire.

古文：元兴三年，卢循攻略广州，刺史吴隐之闭城固守。
现代文：元兴三年，卢循攻打广州，刺史吴隐主闭城固守。
English: In the third year of the Yuanxing Dynasty, Lu Xun attacked Guangzhou, but Wu Yingru closed the city and defended it.

古文：是年十月壬戌夜，大火起。
现代文：这年十月壬戌日夜晚，广州城内起大火。
English: In October of that year, on the evening of the Fourth of July, a large fire broke out in the city of Guangzhou.

古文：时民人避寇，盈满城内。
现代文：当时为躲避贼寇，百姓逃进广州的很多，充满全城。
English: At that time, in order to avoid the bandits, many people fled into Guangzhou, filling the whole city.

古文：隐之惧有应贼，但务严兵，不先救火，由是府舍焚烧荡尽，死者万余人，因遂散溃，悉为贼擒。
现代文：起火之后，吴隐之担心有人作贼寇的内应，祇是部署军兵，严密防守，不先去救火，因此官舍房屋焚烧一空，死一万余人，广州城守军也就因此溃败，全部被贼寇擒获。
English: After the fire broke out, Wu Yingzhi was worried that someone would make a secret response to the bandit. He only deployed soldiers, closely defended, and did not go to the fire first. As a result, the government house was burned to the ground, more than 10,000 people died, and the Guangzhou city defenders were defeated as a result, and all were captured by the bandit.

古文：殆与襄阳火同占也。
现代文：这大概和襄阳城起火是同样的应验。
English: This is probably the same as the fire in Xiangyang City.

古文：晋安帝义熙四年七月丁酉，尚书殿中吏部曹火。
现代文：晋安帝义熙四年七月丁酉，尚书殿中吏部官署起火。
English: In July of the 4th year of Emperor Jian of the Jin and Yixi dynasties, the government office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office caught fire.

古文：义熙十一年，京都所在大行火灾，吴界尤甚。
现代文：义熙十一年，京城所在的地区火灾大规模出现，吴郡境内特别严重。
English: In the eleventh year of Yixi, a large-scale fire occurred in the area where the capital city is located, and it was particularly serious in Wuxi County.

古文：火防甚峻，犹自不绝。
现代文：防范火灾措施很严，但火灾还是不能禁绝。
English: Fire prevention is very strict and still cannot be eliminated.

古文：王弘时为吴郡，白日在听事上，见天上有一赤物下，状如信幡，径集路南人家屋上，火即复大发。
现代文：王弘当时任吴郡太守，白天坐在厅堂上，他见到天上有一赤色的东西下来，形状如同题表官号的信幡，直落到路南一百姓家的屋上，火立即又再烧起来。
English: Wang Hong, who was the governor of Wu County at the time, was sitting in the hall during the day. He saw a red object fall from the sky, shaped like a letter banner with an official's name inscribed on it. It fell straight onto the roof of a villager's house in the south of Lu. The fire immediately reignited.

古文：弘知天为之灾，不罪火主。
现代文：王弘知道这是上天降下的火灾，不怪罪首先起火的那家人家。
English: Wang Hong knows that this is a fire sent down from heaven, and does not blame the family that started the fire.

古文：宋文帝元嘉五年正月戊子，京邑大火。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉五年正月戊子，京城起大火。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of Emperor Yuanjia of the Song Dynasty, a great fire broke out in Beijing.

古文：元嘉七年十二月乙亥，京邑火，延烧太社北墙。
现代文：元嘉七年十二月乙亥曰，京城起大火，延烧太社北墙。
English: In December of the seventh year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, in the year of the boar, a great fire broke out in the capital, and the northern wall of Taisha was burnt down.

古文：元嘉二十九年三月壬午，京邑大火，风雷甚壮。
现代文：元嘉二十九年三月壬午日，京城起大火，风疾雷猛。
English: On the afternoon of March 29th, Yuan Jia, a large fire broke out in Beijing, accompanied by strong winds.

古文：后废帝元徽三年正月己巳，京邑大火。
现代文：后废帝元徽三年正月己巳，京城起大火。
English: In the first month of the third year after Emperor Yuanhui was dethroned, a great fire broke out in the capital.

古文：元徽三年三月戊辰，京邑大火，烧二岸数千家。
现代文：元徽三年三月戊辰日，京城起大火，焚烧江两岸敷千家房屋。
English: On the third day of the third month of the third year of the Yuanhui Dynasty, the capital city caught fire, incinerating thousands of houses on both sides of the river.

古文：恆燠：庶征之恆燠，刘向、班固以冬亡冰及霜不杀草应之。
现代文：各种征候中的恒燠，刘向、班固认为冬天不结冰、降霜却冻不死草是它的应验。
English: Among the various symptoms of the evergreens, Liu Xiang and Ban Gu believe that the winter does not freeze and the frost does not freeze the dead grass is its fulfillment.

古文：京房《易传》又曰： 夏则暑杀人，冬则物华实。 
现代文：京房《易鳓又说： 如出现恒燠，夏天就会因暑热而死人，冬天植物会开花结果。 
English: Jingfang "Yi Yao also said: If there is a cold snap, people will die in the summer due to the heat, and plants will bloom in winter.

古文：吴孙亮建兴元年九月，桃李华。
现代文：吴孙亮建兴元年九月，桃李开花。
English: In September of the first year of Wusunliang Jianxing, the peach and plum blossomed.

古文：孙权世，政烦赋重，民雕于役。
现代文：孙权在世时，政令烦苛，赋税繁重，百姓苦于劳役，民生凋敝。
English: When Sun Quan was alive, government decrees were cumbersome, taxes were heavy, the people suffered from labor service, and people's livelihoods withered.

古文：是时诸葛恪始辅政，息校官，原逋责，除关梁，崇宽厚。
现代文：孙权继位时诸葛恪监才开始辅佐孙权理政事，他除去刺探官事民情的校事官之职，宽宥欠债之人，撤关卡和桥梁的税卡，崇尚宽厚之政。
English: When Sun Quan succeeded to the throne, Zhuge Keqian only began to assist Sun Quan in political affairs. He removed the position of the school official who probed officials and people's feelings, pardoned debtors, removed the tax cards of customs posts and bridges, and advocated a lenient policy.

古文：此舒缓之应也。
现代文：九月桃李开花就正是舒缓之政的应验。
English: The blossoming of peach and plum trees in September is the fulfillment of the policy of relaxation.

古文：一说桃李寒华为草妖，或属华孽。
现代文：一说桃李在寒冷季节开花是草妖，有人说是属花孽。
English: Some say that the peach and plum blossom in the cold season is a grass demon, or belongs to the flower evil.

古文：魏元帝景元三年十月，桃李华。
现代文：魏元帝景元三年十月，桃李开花。
English: In October of the third year of Emperor Jingyuan of the Wei and Yuan Dynasties, the peach and plum trees bloomed.

古文：自高贵弑死之后，晋文王深树恩德，事崇优缓，此其应也。
现代文：从高贵经公被弑之后，晋文王厚树恩德，事事提倡宽厚。
English: After the death of the noble Jing Gong, the King of Jin and Wenzhou was kind and benevolent, and advocated clemency in all matters.

古文：晋穆帝永和九年十二月，桃李华。
现代文：这桃李十月开花就是宽缓之政的应验。晋穆帝永和九年十二月，桃李开花。
English: This peach and plum blossom in October is the fulfillment of the lenient policy. In December of the ninth year of Jin Mu Di Yonghe, the peach and plum blossom.

古文：是时简文辅政，事多弛略，舒缓之应也。
现代文：当时个简文辅佐皇上，主持政事，事事宽松简略。桃李十二月开花就是舒缓之政的应验。
English: At that time, the first jianwen assisted the emperor, presided over political affairs, and everything was relaxed and simple. The peach and plum blossom in December is the fulfillment of the relaxation of politics.

古文：宋顺帝升明元年十月，于潜桃、李、柰结实。
现代文：宋顺帝升明元年十月，于潜桃、李、柰果都结出果实。
English: When Emperor Song Shun ascended to the throne in October of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the hidden peaches, plums, and goji berries all bore fruit.

古文：草妖：汉献帝建安二十五年春正月，魏武帝在洛阳，将起建始殿，伐濯龙祠树而血出；又掘徙梨，根伤亦血出。
现代文：汉献帝建安二十五年春正月，魏武帝在洛阳，将要起造建始殿，砍伐濯龙祠的树，树身上流出血来；又挖掘梨树准备移种，树根受伤后也流出了血。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 25th year of the Han Emperor Jian'an, Emperor Wu of Wei was in Luoyang, where he was about to begin construction of the First Temple. He cut down the tree of the Dragon Temple, and the tree bled; he also dug up a pear tree to prepare for transplanting, and blood also flowed out after the tree's roots were injured.

古文：帝恶之，遂寝疾，是月崩。
现代文：魏武帝忌讳这事，于是生病，当月就驾崩。
English: Emperor Wu was so disgusted that he became bedridden and died in the following month.

古文：盖草妖，又赤祥也。
现代文：这是草妖，又是赤祥。
English: This is a grass demon, and it is also an Akasho.

古文：是岁，魏文帝黄初元年也。
现代文：这一年，是魏文帝黄初元年。
English: This year is the first year of Emperor Weiwen's reign.

古文：吴孙亮五凤元年六月，交趾稗草化为稻。
现代文：吴孙亮五凤元年六月，交趾有稗草变成稻。
English: Wu Sunliang Wufeng In June of the first year of the year, there was alfalfa grass turning into rice.

古文：昔三苗将亡，五谷变种。
现代文：从前三苗将要灭亡，五谷互变。
English: Once upon a time, the three seedlings were about to perish, and everything was about to change.

古文：此草妖也。
现代文：这是草妖。
English: It's a grass demon.

古文：其后亮废。
现代文：逭以后孙亮被废黜。
English: After that, Sun Liang was deposed.

古文：蜀刘禅景耀五年，宫中大树无故自折。
现代文：蜀刘禅景耀五年，宫中大树无缘无故自己折断。
English: In the fifth year of Shu Liu Zenking's reign, a large tree in the palace broke off without reason.

古文：谯周忧之，无所与之言，乃书柱曰： 众而大，其之会，具而授，若何复。 
现代文：盏羞因为遣事忧虑，但没有人能与其谈论这事，于是就在屋柱上写道： 众而大，其之会，具而授，若何复。 
English: Qian Shiyi was worried about the matter, but no one could talk to him about it, so he wrote on the pillar of the house: "Many are great, but few are wise.

古文：言曹者众也；魏者大也。众而大，天下其当会也；具而授，如何复有立者乎。
现代文：这话是说，曹魏的曹，意思是众；萱魏的毯，意思是大；众而大，天下将会集在萱墓；具而授，全都交出去了，蜀怎么还能有再立为帝的人呢?
English: This is to say that Cao Wei's Cao, means the masses; Wei Wei's blanket, means the great; the masses and the great, the whole world will be gathered in the tomb of Shu; with Zhu, everything has been handed over, how can Shu still have people who are re-established as emperors?

古文：蜀果亡，如周言。
现代文：蜀果然被灭亡，正如谯周所言。
English: Shu was indeed destroyed, just as Zou Zhou said.

古文：此草妖也。
现代文：这是草妖。
English: It's a grass demon.

古文：吴孙皓天玺元年，吴郡临平湖自汉末秽塞，是时一夕忽开除无草。长老相传，此湖塞，天下乱；此湖开，天下平。
现代文：吴郡临平湖从汉末就已堵塞，吴孙皓天玺元年一天夜晚，忽然豁开，没有杂草。年长的人相互传说：遣湖堵塞，天下动乱；这湖豁开，天下太平。
English: Linping Lake in Wuxi County has been blocked since the end of the Han Dynasty. On the evening of the first day of the first year of the reign of Wu Sun Yat-sen, it suddenly opened up and there were no weeds. Elderly people told each other: the lake was blocked and the world was in turmoil; the lake opened up and the world was at peace.

古文：吴寻亡，而九服为一。
现代文：星不久就灭亡，全国各地得以统一。
English: Soon after, Hoshi died, and the whole country was unified.

古文：吴孙皓天纪三年八月，建业有鬼目菜生工黄狗家，依缘枣树，长丈余，茎广四寸，厚三分。
现代文：吴孙皓天纪三年八月，在建业，有鬼目菜长在工匠黄狗家，依附攀缘在枣树上，长一丈余，茎广四寸，厚三分。
English: In August of the 3rd year of the 8th month of the 3rd year of the 7th month of the 8th year of the 8th month of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of

古文：又有荬菜生工吴平家，高四尺，如枇杷形，上圆径一尺八寸，下茎广五寸，两边生叶绿色。
现代文：又有贾菜长在工匠吴平家，高四尺，形状如同枇杷，上圆，径一尺八寸，下茎宽五寸，两边长出绿色的叶。
English: There is also a Jia cucumber grown at the home of the craftsman Wu Ping, four feet tall, shaped like a beak, round at the top, one foot eight inches in diameter, the lower stem is five inches wide, and green leaves grow on both sides.

古文：东观案图，名鬼目作芝草，荬菜作平虑。
现代文：朝廷派人在塞塑查考图籍，鬼目菜称作芝草，买菜称作平虑。
English: The imperial court sent people to study the books of the Tang Dynasty in Jiezhuang, and the ghost vegetable was called shibaso (芝草), and the vegetable to buy was called Pingxian (平虑).

古文：遂以狗为侍芝郎，平为平虑郎，皆银印青绶。
现代文：于是命茎狍为侍芝郎，昱垩为平虑郎，都是银印青绶。
English: As a result, the life stem  is Samurai Shiro,  is Peaceful Shiro, and both are Silver Seal Blue.

古文：干宝曰： 明年晋平吴，王浚止船，正得平渚，姓名显然，指事之征也。
现代文：王童说： 第二年晋平定吴，王浚正在：芒渣停船，姓名地名都和菜名相符，菜的出现是王荡平昱的征兆。
English: Wang Tong said: In the second year of Jin's conquest of Dingwu, Wang Jian stopped the ship at Mengjia. The names and place names all matched the names of the dishes. The appearance of the dishes was a sign of Wang Xuanping's decline.

古文：黄狗者，吴以土运承汉，故初有黄龙之瑞，及其季年，而有鬼目之妖，托黄狗之家，黄称不改，而贵贱大殊。
现代文：和黄狗发生关系，是因为吴凭藉土德承继了违的天运，所以开国初年有黄龙出现的祥瑞，到了它的末年，而有鬼目菜出现的妖异，寄托在董狍家中，黄的颜色没有改变，而黄龙与黄狗的贵贱却悬殊很远。
English: The relationship with the yellow dog occurred because Wu inherited the bad fortune of heaven by virtue of local customs. Therefore, in the first year of the founding of the country, there was the auspiciousness of the yellow dragon, and at the end of the year, there was the strange appearance of the ghost vegetables. The yellow color did not change, but the difference between the yellow dragon and the yellow dog was very far.

古文：天道精微之应也。 
现代文：这是天道精微的应验。 
English: This is a subtle fulfillment of the heavenly way.

古文：晋惠帝元康二年春，巴西郡界竹生花，紫色，结实如麦，外皮青，中赤白，味甘。
现代文：晋惠帝元康二年春，巴西郡境内竹开花，花为紫色，结出的果实似麦，外面皮是青色，中间是赤白色，味甘甜。
English: In the spring of the second year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, a bamboo shoot bloomed in the territory of Brazil County. The flower was purple, and the fruit was similar to wheat. The outer skin was blue, the middle was red and white, and the taste was sweet.

古文：元康九年六月庚子，有桑生东宫西厢，日长尺余；甲辰，枯死。
现代文：元康九年六月庚子曰，有桑树从束宫西厢中长出来，每天长一尺多；甲辰，桑树枯死。
English: In June of the ninth year of the Yuan Kang, Geng Zi said that there was a mulberry tree growing out of the west wing of the palace, growing more than a foot a day; in the first hour, the mulberry tree withered.

古文：此与殷太戊同妖。
现代文：这和殷帝太戊时的妖异相同。
English: This is the same as the phenomenon that occurred during the reign of Emperor Yin.

古文：太子不能悟，故至废戮也。
现代文：太子不能领悟逭妖异的警示，所以被废黜杀害。
English: The prince was unable to comprehend the ominous warning, so he was deposed and killed.

古文：班固称 野木生朝而暴长，小人将暴居大臣之位，危亡国家，象朝将为墟也 。
现代文：班固称这种现象是 野生的树却生在朝廷里猛长，是因为小人将要突然地居于大臣之位，使国家受危害，这预示朝廷将要变为丘墟 。
English: Ban firmly said that this phenomenon was a wild tree, but it was born in the imperial court, because the villain would suddenly be in the position of minister, endangering the country, which foreshadowed that the imperial court would turn into a hill.

古文：是后孙秀、张林寻用事，遂至大乱。
现代文：这以后不久，孙秀、张林把持朝政，于是招致大乱。
English: Soon after this, Sun Xiu and Zhang Lin took control of the imperial government, which led to chaos.

古文：晋惠帝永康元年四月丁巳，立皇孙臧为皇太孙。
现代文：晋惠帝永康元年四月丁巳，立皇孙司马臧为皇太孙。
English: In April of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, the grandson of Emperor Jingu, Sima Yi, was appointed the grandson of Emperor Jingu.

古文：五月甲子，就东宫。
现代文：五月甲子日，司马臧进东宫。
English: On May 1st, Sima Ye entered the East Palace.

古文：桑又生于西厢。
现代文：桑树又从西厢长出来。
English: The mulberry tree has grown out of the west wing.

古文：明年，赵伦篡位，鸩杀臧。
现代文：第二年，赵王司马伦篡位，用毒酒毒杀司马臧。
English: The following year, Zhao Wang Sima Lun usurped the throne and poisoned Sima Ye with poisoned wine.

古文：此与愍怀同妖也。
现代文：逭和愍怀去王在东宫时妖异相同。
English: and  are eerily similar to each other when King Huai went to the East Palace.

古文：永康元年四月，壮武国有桑化为柏。
现代文：永康元年四月，壮武国有桑树变为柏树。
English: In April of the first year of Yongkang, the mulberry tree in Zhuangwu Province turned into a cypress tree.

古文：是月，张华遇害。
现代文：这个月，张华遇害。
English: This month, Zhang Hua was killed.

古文：晋孝怀帝永嘉三年冬，项县桑树有声如解材，民谓之桑林哭。
现代文：晋孝怀帝永嘉三年冬，项县有桑树发出声音，声音如同解锯木材，百姓称之为桑林哭。
English: In the winter of the third year of Jinxiao Huai Di Yongjia, there were mulberry trees in Xiang County that made a sound, the sound was like sawing wood, and the people called it the mulberry cry.

古文：案刘向说，桑者丧也，又为哭声，不祥之甚。
现代文：据型直说，桑的谐音是丧，又发出哭声，不吉祥到了最厉害的程度。
English: According to the stereotype, the homophonic sound of the mulberry is mourning, and it also emits a cry, which is not auspicious to the most severe degree.

古文：是时京师虚弱，胡寇交逼，司马越无卫上国之心。
现代文：当时京城空虚，胡寇一次又一次进逼，司马越没有效忠皇上保卫国家之心。
English: At that time, the capital was empty, Huko was advancing again and again, and Sima Yue was not loyal to the emperor to defend the country's heart.

古文：四年冬，委而南出，至五年春，薨于此城。
现代文：永台四年冬，他弃城南逃，到丞嘉五年春，司马越死在玺锤。
English: In the winter of Yongtai four years ago, he abandoned the south of the city and fled to the spring of Zhengjia five years ago. Sima Yue died in the hammer.

古文：石勒邀其众，围而射之，王公以下至庶人，死者十余万人，又剖越棺焚其尸。
现代文：互垫拦截旦墨越的部众，包围起来用箭射，王公以下直到百姓，共有十几万人被杀死，曲寇又剖开旦屋越的棺木焚烧他的尸骨。
English: They intercepted Tang Mo Yue's followers, surrounded them and shot them with arrows. From the prince down to the common people, a total of more than 100,000 people were killed. Quqo also cut open Tang Mo Yue's coffin and burned his bones.

古文：是败也，中原无所请命，洛京寻没。
现代文：这次大败之后，皇室南迁，中原人士无处请命效忠，遥直不久就失陷。
English: After this defeat, the imperial family moved to the south, and the Central Plains people had nowhere to ask for allegiance, and the Far East soon fell.

古文：桑哭之应也。
现代文：这就是桑哭的应验。
English: This is the fulfillment of Mulberry's cry.

古文：永嘉六年五月，无锡县有四株茱萸树，相樛而生，状若连理。
现代文：永嘉六年五月，无锡县有四株茱萸树，互相纠缠着生长，形状如同连理树。
English: In May of the sixth year of Yongjia, there were four dogwood trees in Wuxi County, growing entangled with each other, with a shape similar to that of a juniper tree.

古文：先是，郭景纯筮延陵偃鼠，遇《临》之《益》，曰： 后当复有妖树生，若瑞而非，辛螫之木也。
现代文：逭以前，郭景纯为亘昵偃鼠的事占卜，得到六十四卦之一的《临》之《益》卦，说： 以后将有妖树长出，像瑞树却不是瑞树，是辛螫之树。
English: Earlier, Guo Jingshun divined the matter of the eternal weasel, and obtained the "ben" of the "benefit" of one of the sixty-four sagas, saying: In the future, there will be a monster tree, like a tree, but it is not a tree, it is a cinnamon tree.

古文：傥有此，东南数百里必有作逆者。 
现代文：如若有这种妖异出现，东南数百里处一定有造反叛乱的人。 
English: If such a monster were to appear, there would certainly be people rebelling hundreds of miles to the southeast.

古文：其后徐馥作乱。
现代文：以后途堕发动叛乱。
English: Later, the rebels launched a rebellion.

古文：此草妖也，郭以为木不曲直。
现代文：这是草妖，郭景纯认为是木不曲直的妖异。
English: This is a grass demon, which Guo Jingshun believes to be a tree-like monster.

古文：永嘉六年七月，豫章郡有樟树久枯，是月忽更荣茂，与昌邑枯社复生同占。
现代文：豫章郡有樟树枯死很久，永嘉六年七月，逭枯死的樟树突然又长得繁茂。这和汉代昌邑王国社中的枯树复活是同样的征兆。
English: Yuzhang County has eucalyptus trees that have been dead for a long time. In July of the sixth year of Yongjia, the dead eucalyptus trees suddenly grew and flourished. This is the same sign as the revival of dead trees in the Han Dynasty Changyi Kingdom.

古文：怀帝不终其祚，元帝由支族兴之应也。
现代文：晋怀帝不能始终守住帝位，而元帝本是皇室支族却能勃然兴起，继承帝业，逭正是枯树复活的应验。
English: Emperor Jinhuai could not always keep the imperial throne, but the former emperor, who was originally a branch of the imperial family, was able to rise up and inherit the empire. This is the fulfillment of the resurrection of the dead tree.

古文：晋明帝太宁元年九月，会稽剡县木生如人面。
现代文：晋明帝太宁元年九月，会稽剡县有树长得如同人面。
English: In September of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taining of the Jin and Ming dynasties, there was a tree growing like a human face in Jixian County.

古文：是后王敦称兵作逆，祸败无成。
现代文：以后王敦发兵叛乱，但最终失败。
English: After that, Wang Dun rebelled and failed.

古文：汉哀、灵之世，并有此妖，而人貌备具，故其祸亦大。
现代文：汉代哀帝、灵帝之时，也都有这种妖异出现，而那时妖树人的形貌全都具备，所以那时出现的祸害也就大。
English: In the Han Dynasty, at the time of Emperor Ming and Emperor Ling, this kind of monster also appeared, and at that time the appearance of the monster tree people was all present, so the evil that occurred at that time was also great.

古文：今此但人面而已，故其变亦轻。
现代文：现在妖树衹长得像人面，所以祸害也较轻。
English: Now the elm tree fern looks like a human face, so the scourge is also lighter.

古文：晋成帝咸和六年五月癸亥，曲阿有柳树倒地六载，是月忽复起生。
现代文：曲阿有棵柳树倒在地下已经六年，晋成帝咸和六年五月癸亥，这棵柳树忽然又立起来，复活了。
English: Qu'ao had a willow tree that had fallen to the ground for six years. After the accession of Emperor Jinsheng to the throne and the six-year reign of Emperor Wu, this willow tree suddenly stood up again and was revived.

古文：咸和九年五月甲戌，吴雄家有死榆树，是日因风雨起生。
现代文：咸和九年五月甲戌，吴雄家有棵死去的榆树，忽然因为一场大风雨而复活。
English: In May of the ninth year of Xianhe, the Wu Xiong family had a dead eucalyptus tree, which was suddenly revived due to a heavy storm.

古文：与汉上林断柳起生同象。
现代文：这和汉代上林苑中折断倒地的柳树忽然立起复活是同样的征兆。
English: This is the same sign as the willow tree that suddenly rose from the ground in Shanglin Yuan in the Han Dynasty.

古文：初，康帝为吴王，于时虽改封琅邪，而犹食吴郡为邑。
现代文：起初，康帝被封为吴王，在遣时虽然改封为琅邪王，而县璺仍然是他的封邑。
English: At first, Emperor Kangxi was given the title of King of Wu, but at the time of his death, he was given the title of King of Evil, but County An is still his fiefdom.

古文：是帝越正体飨国之象也。
现代文：死树复生，正是座壶越过嫡长子而为帝的征兆。
English: The resurrection of a dead tree is a sign that the throne has passed to the eldest son.

古文：曲阿先亦吴地，象见吴邑雄舍，又天意也。
现代文：曲阿以前也是呈地，而征兆在县邑昱雄家出现，又是天意。
English: Qu'ao used to be a village, and the signs appeared in the county town of Shixiong, which was also the will of heaven.

古文：晋哀帝兴宁三年五月癸卯，庐陵西昌县修明家有死栗树，是日忽起生。
现代文：晋哀帝兴宁三年五月癸卯曰，庐陵西昌县修明家有棵死栗树忽然复活。
English: In May of the third year of Emperor Xingning's reign, there was a sudden revival of a dead chestnut tree in the Shumei family in Xichang County, Fuling.

古文：时孝武年四岁，而简文居蕃，四海宅心。
现代文：当时孝武帝年仅四岁，而个塞童居于藩臣之位，天下民心都寄托在他身上。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaowu was only four years old, and a young boy lived in the position of a vassal of the domain, and the hearts of the people all over the world were pinned on him.

古文：及得位垂统，则祚隆孝武。
现代文：到登上帝位，传下帝业，晋朝基业在孝武帝时很隆盛。
English: When he ascended to the throne, he passed down the imperial heritage, and when he ascended to the throne, the imperial heritage was very prosperous.

古文：识者窃曰，西昌修明之祥，帝讳实应之矣。
现代文：有见识的人私下说，西昌脩明的祥瑞，孝武帝的名讳实在与之相应。
English: Privately, people with insight said that Xichang Xuming's name of Xiangrui and Xiaowu Di really corresponded to it.

古文：是与汉宣帝颇同象也。
现代文：遣事和汉宣帝时的征兆颇为相同。
English: The signs are quite the same as those at the time of Emperor Han Xuan.

古文：晋海西太和元年，凉州杨树生松。
现代文：晋海西太和元年，凉州一棵杨树上长了松树。
English: In the first year of the Jinhai Xitaiwa, a poplar tree in Liangzhou had a pine tree growing on it.

古文：天戒若曰，松不改柯易叶，杨者柔脆之木，此永久之业，将集危亡之地。
现代文：上天儆戒说，松树枝叶不会凋败，而杨树是柔弱的树。松树长在杨树上，这是本应长久的帝业，将要处在危急败亡的险境中。
English: Heaven's precepts say that the pine tree's branches and leaves will not wither, while the poplar tree is a weak tree. The pine tree grows on the poplar tree, which is supposed to be a long-term imperial cause, and will be in a critical situation.

古文：是后张天锡降氐。
现代文：以后张天锡向氐投降。
English: Later, Zhang Tianxi surrendered to Yu.

古文：晋孝武太元十四年六月，建宁同乐县枯木断折，忽然自立相属。
现代文：晋孝武帝左五十四年六月，建宁同乐县一棵断折的枯树，忽然自己立起来，折断的枝茎也连接起来。
English: In June of the fifty-fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, a broken dead tree in Tongle County, Jianning, suddenly stood up on its own, and the broken branches and stems were connected.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 弃正作淫，厥妖木断自属。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 丢弃正道，行邪僻之事，出现的妖异就是树木折断后自己又连接起来。
English: Jing Fang's "I Chuan" said: "If one forsakes the righteous path and engages in sexual misconduct, his yōki will break and he will be chained."

古文：妃后有专，木仆反立。 
现代文：妃后有专房之宠，出现的妖异就是树木仆倒却又自己立起来。 
English: The queen of concubines has a special pet, the trees fall down and stand up.

古文：是时治道方僻，多失其正。
现代文：这时候施政邪僻，多失正道。
English: At this time, the administration of politics is perverse and often misses the right path.

古文：其后张夫人专宠，及帝崩，兆庶归咎张氏焉。
现代文：以后亟去人有专房之宠，皇帝驾崩之后，万民都归咎于张氏。
English: After the emperor died, everyone blamed the Zhang family.

古文：晋安帝元兴三年，荆、江二界生竹实如麦。
现代文：晋安帝元兴三年，荆、江二州境内竹子长出果实，形状似麦。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Yuanxing of the Jin and An dynasties, in the territory of the two states of Jing and Jiang, the bamboo grew fruit, the shape of which resembled wheat.

古文：晋安帝义熙二年九月，扬州营扬武将军营士陈盖家有苦荬菜，茎高四尺六寸，广三尺二寸。
现代文：晋安帝义熙二年九月，缰州营扬武将军手下的士兵陈盖家中长出苦赀菜，茎高四尺六寸，宽三尺二寸。
English: In September of the second year of the reign of Emperor Yixi of the Jin Dynasty, Chen Gai, a soldier under the command of General Yangwu of the Zhangzhou Battalion, grew bitter gourd at home. The stem was four feet and six inches high and three feet and two inches wide.

古文：此殆与吴终同象也。
现代文：这大概与吴国灭亡时吴乎家中长出贾菜是同样的征兆。
English: This is probably the same sign as the Jia cucumber that grew up in Wu Hu's home when the State of Wu was overthrown.

古文：义熙中，宫城上御道左右皆生蒺藜，草妖也。
现代文：义熙年间，宫城墙上、专供皇上车驾通行的御道左右都长出蒺藜。这是草妖。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yixi, grasshoppers sprouted on the walls of the Imperial Palace on both sides of the Imperial Driveway, which was used exclusively for the Emperor's motorcade.

古文：蒺藜有刺，不可践而行，生宫墙及驰道，天戒若曰，人君拱默不能听政，虽居宸极，犹若空宫；虽有御道，未尝驰骋，皆生蒺藜若空废也。
现代文：蒺藜有刺，不能踩在上面行走，长在宫墙以及御道上，正是上天儆戒说，帝主拱手沉默不能主政，虽然处在帝位，居住宫廷，还是如同帝位虚空，即使有御道，也未曾在道上驾车驰骋，所以都长出蒺藜，如同虚空、弃置。
English: Toadstools have thorns and cannot be walked on. They grow on palace walls and imperial roads. It is God's commandment that emperors cannot rule in silence. Although they are on the throne and live in the court, they are still empty like the throne. Even if they have imperial roads, they have never driven on the roads. Therefore, they all grow thorns, like emptiness and abandonment.

古文：义熙八年，太社生薰树于坛侧。
现代文：义熙八年，太社坛侧长出一棵薰树。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, a lotus tree sprouted on the side of the Great Hall.

古文：薰于文尚黑，宋水德将王之符也。
现代文：薰遣个字的结构中强调黑，薰树长在太社坛侧，是具备水德的宋将要称帝的征兆。
English: The black color is emphasized in the structure of the incense sticks, and the incense tree grows on the side of the altar, which is a sign that Song, who has the virtue of water, will become emperor.

古文：羽虫之孽：魏文帝黄初四年五月，有鹈鹕鸟集灵芝池。
现代文：魏文帝黄初四年五月，有鹊鹕乌聚集在灵芝迤。
English: In May of the first year of Emperor Wen of Wei and the first year of Emperor Huang of Wu, there was a gathering in Lingzhi.

古文：案刘向说，此羽虫之孽，又青祥也。
现代文：查核刘向的说法，这是羽虫之孽，又属青祥。
English: Check Liu Xiang's statement, this is the evil of the featherworm, but also belongs to the auspicious youth.

古文：诏曰： 此诗人所谓污泽者也。
现代文：下韶说： 鹃鹕乌，就是诗人称为污泽的鸟。
English: The lower beak said, "It is the blackbird, which the poet called the blackbird.

古文：《曹诗》刺恭公远君子，近小人。
现代文：《曹诗》指责恭公疏远君子，亲近小人。
English: "Cao Shi" accused Jing Gong of alienating the gentleman and getting close to the villain.

古文：今岂有贤智之士，处于下位，否则斯鸟胡为而至哉？
现代文：现在莫非有贤能士人，还处在低下的地位吧，否则造鸟为什么来这儿呢?
English: Now there must be able-bodied people, still in a lowly position, otherwise why did the bird come here?

古文：其博举天下俊德茂才，独行君子，以答曹人之刺。 
现代文：希望百官广泛荐举天下的俊德茂才之士，节操高尚、不随俗浮沉的君子，以应曹人的指责。 
English: It is hoped that a hundred officials will widely recommend the world's most virtuous and talented people, the virtuous and noble, the gentleman who does not follow the ups and downs of the world, to respond to the accusations of the scoundrels.

古文：于是杨彪、管宁之徒，咸见荐举。
现代文：于是杨彪、管宁之类的贤人，都被荐举。
English: As a result, wise men such as Yang Biao and Guanning were recommended for promotion.

古文：此谓睹妖知惧者也。
现代文：造就叫做见到妖异而知道畏惧。
English: It's called being able to see a monster and know fear.

古文：虽然不能优容亮直，而多溺偏私矣。
现代文：即使这样，文帝不能宽容正直诚实之人，而常常沉溺在偏袒私情之中。
English: Even so, Emperor Wen could not tolerate honest people, and often indulged in favoritism.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 辟退有德，厥妖水鸟集于国井。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 屏退有德之人，其妖异是水鸟在京城居住区聚集。 
English: Jing Fang's "Easy Biography" said: The eerie thing about the virtuous people of Pingwei is that the water birds gather in the residential areas of Beijing.

古文：黄初末，宫中有生鹰，口爪俱赤。
现代文：黄初末年，宫中有燕生出鹰，嘴爪都是赤色。
English: At the end of the Yellow Emperor's reign, a swallow gave birth to an eagle, whose beak and talons were red.

古文：此与商纣、宋隐同象。
现代文：这和商纣王、宋隐公时的征兆相同。
English: This is the same as the signs of the Shang Dynasty and the Song Dynasty.

古文：景初元年，又有生钜彀于卫国涓桃里李盖家，形若鹰，吻似燕。
现代文：景初元年，在卫国涓桃里李盖家，又有燕生出巨觳。巨觳形状像鹰，乌嘴像燕。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Jing Dynasty, a giant dragonfly was born in the Li Gai family in the Peach Garden of the Imperial Palace. The giant dragonfly was shaped like an eagle, and its beak was like a swallow.

古文：案刘向说，此羽虫之孽，又赤眚也。
现代文：查考刘向之说，这是羽虫之孽，又属赤眚。
English: Liu Xiang told him that this was the fault of the caterpillars, and also belonged to the red dragonfly.

古文：高堂隆曰： 此魏室之大异，宜防鹰扬之臣于萧墙之内。 
现代文：高堂隆说： 这是秀蝗出现的大的妖异，应当防止勇猛的武臣在萧墙之内作乱。 
English: Gaodong Long said: This is a big anomaly in Wei's room. We should beware of the disaster of the collapsed wall caused by the chief ministers who are ancillary to the government.

古文：其后晋宣王起，遂有魏室。
现代文：以后晋宣王崛起，最终掌握了魏室大权。
English: Later, King Jinxuan rose to power and eventually gained control of the imperial court.

古文：汉献帝建安二十三年，秃鹙鸟集鄴宫文昌殿后池。
现代文：汉献帝建安二十三年，秃骛鸟在邺宫文昌殿后池中聚集。
English: In the 23rd year of Emperor Jian'an, the vultures gathered in the pond behind the Wenchang Hall of the Lucheng Palace.

古文：明年，魏武王薨。
现代文：第二年，魏武王去世。
English: In the second year, Wei Wu Wang.

古文：魏文帝黄初三年，又集雒阳芳林园池。
现代文：魏文帝黄初三年，秃惊乌又在雒阳芳林园池中聚集。
English: In the first three years of Emperor Wei Wenhuang, they gathered again in the pond of the Energy Fang Forest Park.

古文：七年，又集。
现代文：黄初七年，秃骛乌又聚集。
English: Seven years later, they gathered again.

古文：其夏，文帝崩。
现代文：遣年夏天，文帝驾崩。
English: In the summer of that year, Emperor Wen died.

古文：景初末，又集芳林园池。
现代文：景初末年，秃骛乌又在芳林园池中聚集。
English: At the end of the first half of the year, they gathered again in the middle of the pond.

古文：前世再至，辄有大丧，帝恶之。
现代文：前代皇帝在位时，秃骛乌两次聚集，国家就出现大丧，旦嘘忌讳这事。
English: When the previous emperor was on the throne, the vultures gathered twice, and the country suffered a great loss. It was taboo to lie about it.

古文：其年，明帝崩。
现代文：这一年，旦眯驾崩。
English: In the same year, he passed away.

古文：蜀刘禅建兴九年十月，江阳至江州有鸟从江南飞渡江北，不能达，堕水死者以千余。
现代文：蜀刘掸建兴九年十月，在江阳到江州之间有鸟从江南飞渡江北，但不能到达对岸，有千余只鸟堕水而死。
English: In October of the ninth year, between Jiangyang and Jiangzhou, a bird flew from the south of the river to the north of the river, but could not reach the opposite bank. More than a thousand birds fell into the water and died.

古文：是时诸葛亮连年动众，志吞中夏，而终死渭南，所图不遂。
现代文：当时诸葛亮连年动用军队，志在吞并华夏，而最终死在渭南，他的计划不能成功。
English: At this time, Zhuge Liang sent troops year after year, determined to annex the Central Plains, but eventually died in the south of Surabaya, his great cause was not successful.

古文：又诸将分争，颇丧徒旅。
现代文：他手下众将互相争权，使军队受到很大损失。
English: His subordinates will compete with each other for power, causing the army to suffer great losses.

古文：鸟北飞不能达，堕水死者，皆有其象也。
现代文：鸟向北飞而不能到达北岸，堕水而死，都是有所预兆的。
English: Birds flying north and failing to reach the north shore, and fish dying from falling into the water, are all signs of things to come.

古文：亮竟不能过渭，又其应乎！
现代文：诸葛亮最终不能跨过渭水，正是鸟堕水死的应验。
English: Zhuge Liang's eventual failure to cross the Surabaya River was another warning sign.

古文：此与汉、楚国乌斗堕泗水粗类矣。
现代文：造和漠时楚国白乌与黑乌斗而堕水死的事大体上相似。
English: The story of Bai Wu and Hei Wu of Chu falling into the water and dying is generally similar.

古文：魏明帝青龙三年，戴頠巢钜鹿人张臶家。
现代文：魏明帝青龙三年，戴鸶乌在昼噬人堡堑家筑巢。
English: In the third year of Emperor Ming's reign, Emperor Wei and Empress Dowager Wu built a nest in the house of the day-eating dragon.

古文：臶博学有高节，不应袁绍、高干之命，魏太祖辟亦不至，优游嘉遁，门徒数百，太守王肃雅敬焉。
现代文：张臶博学，又有很高尚的节操，袁绍、高干命他出仕，他不遵从，逸主祖征召他为官，他也不应召，隐居家中，悠然自得，几百名门徒向他学习，太守王肃很敬重他。
English: Zhang Zibo was well-educated and had a high degree of integrity. Yuan Shao and Gao Ganmei served him, but he did not obey. His master and ancestor called him to be an official, but he did not respond to the call. He secluded himself at home and enjoyed himself. Several hundred disciples learned from him, and the eunuch Wang Su respected him very much.

古文：时年百余岁，谓门人曰： 戴頠阳鸟，而巢于门阴，此凶祥也。 
现代文：当时张臶年纪已有一百余岁，他对门人说： 戴骂乌属阳乌，而在门阴筑巢，这是凶兆。 
English: At that time, Zhang Qian was already more than a hundred years old. He said to the gatekeeper: "It is a bad omen for a blackbird to build its nest in the shade of the gate."

古文：乃援琴歌咏，作诗一首，旬日而卒。
现代文：于是边弹琴边歌咏，并写了一首诗，十天之内就去世了。
English: So he played the piano and sang, and wrote a poem, and died within ten days.

古文：按占，羽虫之孽也。
现代文：根据应验看，这是羽虫之孽。
English: According to the fulfillment, this is the iniquity of the winged insects.

古文：魏明帝景初元年，陵霄阁始构，有鹊巢其上。
现代文：魏明帝景初元年，陵霄合开始建造，就有鹊在它上面筑巢。
English: In the first year of Emperor Jing of the Wei and Ming Dynasties, when the construction of the mausoleum began, there was a dragonfly building a nest on it.

古文：鹊体白黑杂色。
现代文：鹊体颜色是白黑相杂。
English: The body colour is a mixture of white and black.

古文：此羽虫之孽，又白黑祥也。
现代文：这是羽虫之孽，又属白黑祥。
English: This is the evil of the caterpillar and the virtue of the white and black.

古文：帝以问高堂隆，对曰： 《诗》云： 惟鹊有巢，惟鸠居之。 今兴起宫室，而鹊来巢，此宫室未成，身不得居之之象。
现代文：明帝向高堂隆问到这事，高堂隆回答说： 《诗》中说： 惟鹊有巢，惟鸠居之，现在开始建造宫室，而鹊却来筑巢，这是宫室还没建成，自己就不能再居于其中的征兆。
English: Emperor Ming asked Gaotang Long about this, and Gaotang Long replied, "In the poem, it says, 'Only the stork has a nest, only the cormorant lives there. Now they are beginning to build a palace, but the cormorant comes to build a nest. This is a sign that the palace has not yet been built, and they can no longer live in it.

古文：天意若曰，宫室未成，将有它姓制御之，不可不深虑。 
现代文：上天的意思是说，宫室还没建成，将有别姓的人要控制驾驭你了，不能不慎重考虑这事。 
English: Heaven's meaning is that the palace has not yet been built, and there will be people with different surnames who want to control and control you. You must carefully consider this matter.

古文：于是帝改容动色。
现代文：于是砠壶深受震动，脸色都变了。
English: As a result, the crucible was deeply shaken, and his face changed.

古文：吴孙权赤乌十二年四月，有两乌衔鹊堕东馆。
现代文：吴孙权赤乌十二年四月，有两只乌衔着鹊堕落在墓铛。
English: In April of the 12th year of the reign of Emperor Wu Sun Quan, two yakitori were found in a tomb.

古文：权使领丞相硃据燎鹊以祭。
现代文：还护命领丞相塞瘗焚鹊而祭。
English: He also held a memorial service for the late prime minister.

古文：案刘歆说，此羽虫之孽，又黑祥也。
现代文：据刘逖的说法，这是羽虫之孽，又属黑祥。
English: According to Liu Wei, this is the witchcraft of the caterpillars, and it is also a bad omen.

古文：视不明，听不聪之罚也。
现代文：出现这种妖异，是对眼光不明、听力不敏罪过的惩罚。
English: The appearance of this monster is a punishment for the sins of not being able to see or hear.

古文：是时权意溢德衰，信谗好杀，二子将危，将相俱殆。
现代文：当时逐权志得意满，德行衰败，听信谗言，残忍而喜欢杀人，遂护的两个儿子，他手下的将相，都处在危险之中。
English: At that time, he was full of power, moral decay, listening to advice, cruel and liked to kill, and his two sons, his generals, were in danger.

古文：睹妖不悟，加之以燎，昧道之甚者也。
现代文：珏护见到这妖异却不能醒悟，并且用火来焚烧妖物，真是不明道理到了极点。
English: When the guardian sees the monster, he can't wake up, and he uses fire to burn the monster. This is the height of irrationality.

古文：明年，太子和废，鲁王霸赐死，硃据左迁，陆议忧卒，是其应也。
现代文：第二年，太子孙和被废黜，鲁王孙霸被赐死，朱据被贬职，陆议因为忧惧而死，就是这一妖异的应验。
English: In the second year, the crown prince and his descendants were deposed, the king of Lu, Sun Ba, died, Zhu Jian was demoted, and Lu Wei died of anxiety. This was a sign.

古文：东馆，典教之府；鹊堕东馆，又天意乎！
现代文：束馆是主管教化的宫府，鹊堕死在柬馆，又是天意吧。
English: Sokkan is the palace in charge of education, and it was God's will that she died in Kamgakkan.

古文：吴孙权太元二年正月，封前太子和为南阳王，遣之长沙。
现代文：吴孙权太元二年正月，封前太子孙和为南阳王，把他发遣到长沙。
English: In the first month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Wu Sun Quan, he was sent to Changsha as the crown prince of Nanyang.

古文：有鹊巢其帆樯。
现代文：有鹊在孙和船只的帆樯上筑巢。
English: Some dragonflies build their nests on the masts of sun and ships.

古文：和故宫僚闻之，皆忧惨，以为樯末倾危，非久安之象。
现代文：孙和任太子时的属官听说造情形，都忧愁哀伤，认为帆樯的顶端容易倾侧，处境危险，鹊在帆樯上筑巢不是久安的征兆。
English: Hearing this, both Sun and the subordinate officials in the front palace were worried and sad, believing that the dangerous tilt of the end of the beak was not a sign of long-term peace.

古文：是后果不得其死。
现代文：此后孙和果然被害死。
English: The result was a tragic death.

古文：吴孙亮建兴二年十一月，大鸟五见于春申。
现代文：吴孙亮建兴二年十一月，五只大鸟在春申出现。
English: In November of the second year of Wusunliang Jianxing, the big bird appeared five times in Chunshen.

古文：吴人以为凤凰，明年，改元为五凤。
现代文：吴人认为是凤凰，第二年，就把年号改为五凤。
English: The Wu people thought it was a phoenix. The next year, they changed the year to Wu Feng.

古文：汉桓帝时，有五色大鸟。
现代文：漠桓帝时出现五色大鸟。
English: The five-colored large bird appeared in the time of Emperor Mo Kwan.

古文：司马彪云： 政治衰缺，无以致凤，乃羽虫孽耳。 
现代文：司马彪说： 政治衰败，缺少德政，没有理由招致凤凰，这祇是羽虫之孽罢了。 
English: Sima Biao said: Political decline, lack of virtue, there is no reason to invite the phoenix, this is only the evil of the caterpillar.

古文：孙亮未有德政，孙峻骄暴方甚，此与桓帝同事也。
现代文：孙亮没有德政，孙峻骄横残暴正厉害，遣时大鸟出现和漠桓帝时的五色鸟是同样的事。
English: Sun Liang did not have a virtuous government, Sun Jun was extremely arrogant and tyrannical, and the same was true of Emperor Han.

古文：案《瑞应图》，大鸟似凤而为孽者非一，疑皆是也。
现代文：查考《瑞应图》，大鸟形似凤凰而实际是妖孽的不止一种，恐怕汉桓帝时的大乌和孙亮时的大乌都是这种妖孽。
English: According to the "Rui Ying Tu," there is more than one kind of witchcraft in which a large bird shaped like a phoenix is actually a witch. I'm afraid that the Great Worm at the time of Emperor Han Huan and the Great Worm at the time of Sun Liang are both such witchcraft.

古文：吴孙皓建衡三年，西苑言凤凰集，以之改元。
现代文：吴孙皓建衡三年，酉苞说是凤凰聚集其上，据此而更改年号为凤皇。
English: In the third year of the reign of Wusun Emperor Jianheng, it was said that the phoenix gathered on it, and the year name was changed to Fenghuang.

古文：义同于亮。
现代文：逭事和孙亮时的事相同。
English: The anecdote is the same as that of Sun Liang.

古文：晋武帝泰始四年八月，翟雉飞上阊阖门。
现代文：晋武帝泰始四年八月，翟雉飞上闾阖门。
English: In August of the fourth year of Emperor Jinwu's reign, the dragonfly flew up to the gate.

古文：赵伦既篡，洛阳得异鸟，莫能名。
现代文：司马伦篡位之后，在荡陨抓获一种奇怪的鸟，没有人能说出这种鸟的名称。
English: After Smalen's usurpation, a strange bird, which no one could name, was caught in a meteorite shower.

古文：伦使人持出，周旋城邑匝以问人。
现代文：司马伦派人拿着鸟出去，在城裹转着圈向人间乌名。
English: Smalen sent someone out with the bird, and they circled it around the city to make a name for themselves.

古文：积日，宫西有小兒见之，逆自言曰： 服留鸟翳。 
现代文：很多天之后，宫西有个小孩子见着鸟，迎上去自己说道： 服留乌翳。 
English: Many days later, a small child in Miyanishi saw a bird and went to greet it, saying to himself: "Stay away from cormorants."

古文：持者即还白伦。
现代文：拿乌的人就返回去报告司马伦。
English: So the men of Nauvoo went back to tell Simeon.

古文：伦使更求小兒。
现代文：司屋俭派人再去寻找小孩。
English: Siya Jian sent someone to look for the child again.

古文：至，又见之，将入宫，密笼鸟，闭兒户中。
现代文：到宫西，又见到那个小孩，就把他带入宫中。
English: When he got to the west side of the palace and saw the little boy again, he brought him into the palace.

古文：明日视，悉不见。此羽虫之孽，又妖之甚者也。
现代文：司马伦命人用密笼装着乌，把小孩关在房中。
English: Smalen ordered someone to put the children in a room with a cage filled with ashes.

古文：赵伦篡位，有鹑入太极殿，雉集东堂。
现代文：第二天去看，乌和小孩都不见了。这是羽虫之孽，是妖孽中最为凶恶的。赵王司马伦篡位，有鹑飞进太极殿，野鸡栖息在束堂。
English: The next day, Wu and the child were gone. This was the evil of the caterpillars, the most evil of the evil spirits. Zhao Wang Simaren usurped the throne, there were maggots flying into the Taiji Hall, and pheasants roosting in the Bundang Hall.

古文：按太极、东堂，皆朝享听政之所。而鹑、雉同日集之者，天意若曰，不当居此位也。
现代文：按，立捶压、束堂，是天子朝享听政的场所，而鹑、野鶸同一天栖息在遣两个地方，上天的意思是说，司马伦不应当居天子位。
English: According to the legend, the standing yakitori press and the bundling hall are the places where the heavenly sons enjoy listening to the government, while the yakitori and the wild yakitori inhabit two places on the same day. The heavenly meaning is that Simarun should not be the heavenly son.

古文：《诗》云 鹊之疆疆，鹑之奔奔。
现代文：《诗》中说 鹊之彊彊，鹑之奔奔。
English: In the poem, it is said, "The grasshopper perches, and the rooster runs."

古文：人之无良，我以为君。 
现代文：人之无良，我以为君 。
English: I thought you were a bad person.

古文：其此之谓乎！
现代文：逭大概就是指的这种情况吧。
English: This is exactly the situation.

古文：昔殷宗感雉雊，惧而修德；伦睹二物，曾不知戒，故至灭亡也。
现代文：从前殷高宗因野鸡登鼎耳而鸣有所感触，于是惧而施行德政，司马伦看到鹑和野鶸飞进殿堂，竟然不知道戒惧，所以最终被诛灭。
English: Once upon a time, Yin Gaozong was moved by the sound of a pheasant's crowing in his ears, so he was afraid and implemented a policy of virtue. Sima Lun saw a stork and a wild stork fly into the hall of fame, but he did not know fear, so he was eventually annihilated.

古文：晋孝怀帝永嘉元年二月，洛阳东北步广里地陷，有鹅出，苍色者飞翔冲天，白者止焉。
现代文：晋孝怀帝永嘉元年二月，洛阳东北步广里地面沉陷，有鹅从下陷的地裹出来，苍色的鹅飞起来直冲青天，白色的鹅就停留在那个地方。
English: In February of the first year of the Jin Xiao Huai Emperor Yongjia, the ground sank in the northeast of Luoyang, and a goose was wrapped out of the sinking ground. The pale goose flew straight into the blue sky, and the white goose stayed in that place.

古文：此羽虫之孽，又黑白祥也。
现代文：这是羽虫之孽，又属黑白祥。
English: This is the witchcraft of the caterpillar, and it is also the black and white victory.

古文：董养曰： 步广，周之狄泉，盟会地也。
现代文：董养说： 步广里就是周时的狄泉，是盟会之地。
English: Dong Yao said: Bu Guangli is the Diquan of Zhou, the place of the League.

古文：白者金色，苍为胡象，其可尽言乎。 
现代文：白，是五行中金的颜色，苍是胡的象征，这种征兆预示的事情岂能说清楚。 
English: White is the color of gold in the Five Elements, and Heaven is the symbol of Hu. How can this omen be explained clearly?

古文：是后刘渊、石勒相继擅华，怀、愍二帝沦灭非所。
现代文：以后刘渊、石勒相继占据华夏，怀帝、愍帝两个皇帝沦为囚虏，死非其所。
English: After that, Liu Yuan and Shi Le successively occupied Huaxia, and the two emperors, Emperor Huai and Emperor Qian, were taken prisoner. They did not deserve to die.

古文：晋孝怀帝世，周家有鹅在笼中，而头断笼外。
现代文：晋孝怀帝时代，周记家有只鹅在笼中，而头断在笼外。
English: In the era of Emperor Jinxiao and Emperor Huai, the Zhou family had a goose in a cage with its head cut off outside the cage.

古文：亡后家诛。
现代文：周王己死后他全家被杀。
English: After Zhou Wangji's death, his entire family was killed.

古文：晋明帝太宁三年八月庚戌，有鸟二，苍黑色，翼广一丈四尺。
现代文：晋明帝太宁三年八月庚戌日，有两只苍黑色的鸟，翼展开后宽有一丈四尺。
English: On the day of Geng Xu in August of the third year of the reign of Emperor Taining of the Jin Dynasty, there were two pale black birds with wings spread four feet wide.

古文：其一集司徒府，射而杀之；其一集市北家人舍，亦获焉。
现代文：其中一只栖息在司徒府，人们把它射杀了；另外一只栖息在集市北一人家的房子上，也被捕获了。
English: One of them roosted in Szczecin and was shot dead; another roosted on a man's house north of the market and was also captured.

古文：此羽虫之孽，又黑祥也。
现代文：这是羽虫之孽，又属黑祥。
English: This is the witchcraft of the featherworm, and it is also the black exorcism.

古文：闰月戊子，帝崩。
现代文：闰八月戊子，明帝去世。
English: In late August, Emperor Ming died.

古文：后有苏峻、祖约之乱。
现代文：后来出现苏峻、祖约之乱。
English: Later, the Sushun and Zuyo Revolts occurred.

古文：晋成帝咸和二年正月，有五鸥鸟集殿庭。
现代文：晋成帝咸和二年正月，有五只鸥鸟栖息在殿庭。
English: In the first month of the second year of Emperor Jincheng's reign, there were five ostriches roosting in the palace garden.

古文：此又白祥也。
现代文：这又是白祥。
English: This is Bai Xiang again.

古文：是时庾亮苟违众谋，将召苏峻，有言不从之咎，故白祥先见也。
现代文：当时庾亮随意违背众人的谋划，将要征召趣堕入京，有言之不从的罪过，所以白祥事先出现。
English: At this time, Yao Liang rashly went against the opinions of many people and prepared to summon the Blue and Red Dragon, which was a bad omen, so Bai Xiang appeared first.

古文：三年二月，峻果作乱，宫室焚毁，化为污莱，其应也。
现代文：咸和三年二月，苏峻果然发动叛乱，宫室被焚毁，化为荒墟，造就是鸥乌栖息殿庭的应验。
English: In February of the third year of the Heian period, Su Jun finally launched a rebellion, the palace was burned down and turned into ruins, and the palace was built as a fulfillment of the palace garden where Emperor Wu resided.

古文：晋成帝咸康八年七月，白鹭集殿屋。
现代文：晋成帝咸康八年七月，白鹭栖息在殿屋上。
English: In July of the eighth year of Emperor Jiancheng's reign, egrets roosted on the roof of the palace.

古文：是时康帝始即位，此不永之祥也。
现代文：当时康帝刚刚即位，白鹭在殿屋出现是在位时间难以长久的征兆。
English: At that time, Emperor Kangxi had just ascended the throne, and the appearance of egrets in the palace was a sign that his reign would not last long.

古文：后涉再期而帝崩。
现代文：后来过了两年而康帝去世。
English: Two years later, Kang Di passed away.

古文：刘向曰： 野鸟入处，宫室将空。 
现代文：刘直说： 野鸟飞进来栖息，宫室将空。 
English: Liu Zhi said: Wild birds fly in to roost, and the palace becomes empty.

古文：张瓘在凉州正朝，放隹雀诸鸟，出手便死；左右放者悉飞去。
现代文：张罐在凉蛆时，正月初一为各种鸟雀放生，张罐放的鸟出手就死，而他左右随从放出手的鸟全都飞走。
English: At the beginning of the first month of the year, when Zhang Can was in the cool, he released all kinds of birds and finches. The birds released by Zhang Can died when he released them, and all the birds released by him flew away.

古文：晋孝武帝太元十六年正月，鹊巢太极东头鸱尾，又巢国子学堂西头。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元十六年正月，鹊在太极殿东边屋顶装饰上筑巢，又在国子学堂西头屋顶筑巢。
English: In the first month of the 16th year of the reign of Emperor Jinxiao Wu, the dragonfly began to build a nest on the roof decoration of the east side of the Taiji Hall, and also built a nest on the west roof of the Kuniko School.

古文：十八年，东宫始成。
现代文：左五十八年，东宫刚建成。
English: Fifty-eight years ago, the East Palace had just been completed.

古文：十九年正月，鹊又巢其西门。
现代文：十九年正月，鹊又在束宫西门筑巢。
English: In the first month of the 19th year, the cormorant started to build a nest in the west gate of the palace.

古文：此殆与魏景初同占。
现代文：这大概和魏景初年间鹊在陵霄阁上筑巢的事是同样的征兆。
English: This is the same as the situation at the beginning of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：学堂，风教所聚；西门，金行之祥也。
现代文：学堂，是聚集学生进行教育的地方；西门，是五行中金的象征。
English: The school hall is the place where students gather for education; the west gate is the symbol of gold in the five elements.

古文：晋安帝义熙三年，龙骧将军硃猗戍寿阳。
现代文：晋安帝义熙三年，龙骧将军朱猗戍守寿阳。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Yixi of the Jin and An dynasties, General Zhu Xi of the Long March came to defend Shouyang.

古文：婢炊饭，忽有群乌集灶，竞来啄啖，婢驱逐不去。
现代文：朱猗家的婢女煮饭，忽然有一群乌鹊飞集灶上，竞相来啄食米饭，婢女赶也赶不走。
English: The maidservant of Zhu Xi's family was cooking rice. Suddenly, a group of black flies gathered on the stove, competing to eat the rice. The maidservant couldn't chase them away.

古文：有猎狗咋杀乌鹊，余者因共啄狗即死，又啖其肉，唯余骨存。
现代文：有条猎狗咬死了乌鹊，剩下的乌鹊就一起飞来啄狗，当场就把猎狗啄死了，又啄食狗肉，吃得衹剩下骨头。
English: A hunting dog bit a blackbird to death, and the rest of the blackbirds flew to join the dog walkers. They choked the hunting dog to death on the spot, ate the dog meat, and devoured the remaining bones.

古文：五年六月，猗死。
现代文：义熙五年六月，朱猗死。
English: In June of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, Zhu Xi died.

古文：宋武帝永初三年，临轩拜徐羡之为司空，百僚陪位，有二野鹳集太极鸱尾鸣呼。
现代文：宋武帝永初三年，武帝在前殿授徐羡之为司空，百官在陪位上，有两只野鹳栖息在太极殿屋顶装饰上呜叫。
English: In the first three years of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Wu bestowed the title of Xuxian (徐羡) to Siku (司空) in the front hall, with hundreds of officials in attendance, and two wild baboons perched on the roof decoration of the Taiji Hall, howling.

古文：少帝景平二年春，鹳巢太庙西鸱尾，驱去复还。
现代文：少帝景平二年春，鹳在太庙西边屋顶装饰上筑巢，把它赶走后，不久又飞回来。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Young Emperor Jingping, the dragonfly built a nest on the roof decoration on the west side of the Great Temple. After driving it away, it soon flew back.

古文：文帝元嘉二年春，有江鸥鸟数百，集太极殿前小阶内。
现代文：文帝元嘉二年春，有数百只江鸥鸟，在太捶毖前小台阶裹聚集栖息。
English: In the spring of the second year of Emperor Wen's reign, there were hundreds of ostriches gathering on the small steps in front of the Great Pagoda.

古文：明年，诛徐羡之等。
现代文：第二年，朝廷诛杀徐羡之等人。
English: The following year, the imperial court ordered the execution of Xu Enzhi and others.

古文：羊祸：晋成帝咸和二年五月，司徒王导厩，羊生无后足。
现代文：晋成帝咸和二年五月，司徒玉导家的牲棚裹，一只羊出生后没有后足。
English: In May of the second year of Emperor Jincheng's reign, a sheep was born without hind legs in the stable of the house of the head of the House of St. Peter and St. Paul.

古文：此羊祸也。
现代文：这是羊祸。
English: It's a plague of sheep.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 足少者，下不胜任也。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 足少，是说明臣下不能承担重任。 
English: Sayaka "I Chuan" said: If you lack legs, you are not competent.

古文：明年，苏峻入京都，导与成帝俱幽石头，仅乃免身。是其应也。
现代文：第二年，麸些叛军攻入京城，王导和成帝都被幽禁在五更球，衹是勉强保住了性命。
English: In the second year, some rebels invaded Beijing. Wang Du and Cheng Di were both imprisoned in Wuzhen. Wang Du barely escaped with his life.

古文：宋孝武帝大明七年，永平郡献三角羊。
现代文：造就是羊祸的应验。宋孝武帝大明七年，永平郡贡献三角羊。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Song Xiaowu, Yongping County contributed triangular sheep.

古文：羊祸也。
现代文：这是羊祸。
English: It's a plague of sheep.

古文：赤眚赤祥：公孙渊时，襄平北市生肉，长围各数尺，有头目口喙，无手足，而动摇。
现代文：公孙渊时，襄平北市中长出一块肉，高和周长都各有数尺，有头、眼、嘴，没有手和足，自己会摇动。
English: When Gongsunyuan was born, a piece of meat sprouted in the middle of the northern city of Yangping. It was several feet tall and several feet in circumference. It had a head, eyes, and a mouth, but no hands or feet. It could move on its own.

古文：此赤眚也。
现代文：这是赤眚。
English: This is red snapper.

古文：占曰： 有形不成，有体无声，其国灭亡。 
现代文：占卜的结果说： 有形却不完整，有体却无声音，他的国家会灭亡。 
English: The result of the divination said: Tangible but incomplete, corporeal but voiceless, his country will perish.

古文：渊寻为魏所诛。
现代文：公孙渊不久就被魏诛杀。
English: Gongsun Yuan was soon killed by Wei Xi.

古文：吴戍将邓嘉杀猪祠神，治毕县之，忽见一人头往食肉。嘉引弓射中之，咋咋作声，绕屋三日。
现代文：吴戍守边境的将领邓嘉杀猪祭神，把猪肉清洗干净悬挂起来，忽然看见一个人头过去吃肉，塑台开弓放箭射中了那人头，人头发出咋咋的声音，围着房子转了三天。
English: Deng Jia, the general of Wuyi who guarded the border, killed a pig as a sacrifice to the gods, cleaned the pork and hung it up. Suddenly, he saw a man's head eating meat. The sculptor opened his bow and shot an arrow into the man's head. The man's head made a whirring sound and circled around the house for three days.

古文：近赤祥也。
现代文：这近于赤祥。
English: That's close to akasho.

古文：后人白嘉谋北叛，阖门被诛。
现代文：后来有人报告塑墓阴谋向北叛逃，邓嘉全家因此被杀。
English: Later, there were reports of a tomb-building plot to defect to the north, and Deng Jia's entire family was killed as a result.

古文：京房《易妖》曰： 山见葆，江于邑，邑有兵，状如人头赤色。 
现代文：京崖《易妖》说： 山上杂草丛生，江水呜咽悲泣，城中有预示兵祸的妖孽，状如人头色赤。 
English: Jingyao's "Easy Demon" says: The mountains are overgrown with weeds, the rivers are weeping and wailing, and there is a witch in the city that portends military disaster. It is as red as a human head.

古文：吴诸葛恪将见诛，盥洗水血臭；侍者授衣，衣亦臭。
现代文：呈诸葛恪将被杀的时候，他盥洗用的水发出血的腥臭味；侍者把衣服交给他，衣服也有腥臭味。
English: When Zheng Zhuge was about to be killed, the water he used for washing smelled of blood; the waiter handed him his clothes, which also smelled of blood.

古文：此近赤祥也。
现代文：这和赤祥相近。
English: This is similar to Akasho.

古文：晋武帝太康七年十一月，河阴有赤雪二顷。
现代文：晋武帝太康七年十一月，河阴出现二顷地的赤雪。
English: In November of the seventh year of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, two hectares of red snow appeared in Heyin.

古文：此赤祥也。
现代文：这是赤祥。
English: Four years later, he died, and the royal family fell into civil strife.

古文：后涉四载而帝崩，王宫遂乱。
现代文：后来过了四年武帝去世，王室于是发生内乱。
English: Four years later, Emperor Wu died, and civil unrest broke out in the royal family.

古文：晋惠帝元康五年三月，吕县有流血，东西百余步。
现代文：晋惠帝元康五年三月，吕县出现血在东西百余步范围内流动。
English: In March of the fifth year of Emperor Jingu's reign, blood flowed in the range of more than a hundred paces from east to west in Lu County.

古文：此赤祥也。
现代文：这是赤祥。
English: Four years later, he died, and the royal family fell into civil strife.

古文：元康末，穷凶极乱，僵尸流血之应也。
现代文：元康末年，司马伦穷凶极恶，扰乱朝廷，造就是僵尸流血的应验。
English: In the last years of the Yuan Kang, Sima Lun became extremely evil and disturbed the imperial court, which was the fulfillment of the zombie bloodshed.

古文：干宝以为后八载而封云乱徐州，杀伤数万人，是其应也。
现代文：干宝认为是遣以后八年，封云在徐州叛乱，杀死数万人，就是僵尸流血的应验。
English: Gan Bao believes that eight years after the Emperor's dispatch, Fengyun rebelled in Xuzhou and killed tens of thousands of people, which is the fulfillment of the zombie bloodshed.

古文：晋惠帝永康元年三月，尉氏雨血。
现代文：晋惠帝永康元年三月，尉氏出现天降下血雨的现象。
English: In March of the first year of Emperor Yongkang's reign, the phenomenon of blood rain falling from the sky occurred.

古文：夫政刑舒缓，则有常燠赤祥之妖。
现代文：政令刑法宽缓，就会出现恒燠赤祥之类的妖异。
English: If the political punishment is lax, there will be a long-lasting hot and red spell.

古文：此岁正月，送愍怀太子幽于许宫。
现代文：这年正月，愍怀太子被送到许宫幽禁。
English: In the first month of this year, Prince Yan Huai was sent to Xu Palace for confinement.

古文：天戒若曰，不宜缓恣奸人，将使太子冤死。
现代文：上天儆戒说，不应当宽容奸人，让他们恣意妄为，奸人将使愍怀太子冤屈而死。
English: Heaven's decree says that those who indulge in evil should not be pardoned, and will cause the crown prince to die unjustly.

古文：惠帝愚眊不悟，是月愍怀遂毙。
现代文：惠帝愚昧昏聩，不能省悟，当月愍怀太子终被害死。
English: Hui Di was stupid and dim-witted, unable to reflect, and that month, Huai Taishi was finally killed.

古文：于是王室衅成，祸流天下。
现代文：于是王室的祸乱形成，灾祸遍布天下。
English: So the royal calamity came to pass, and the calamity spread over all the earth.

古文：淖齿杀齐闵王日，天雨血沾衣，天以告也，此之谓乎？
现代文：淖齿杀害齐闵王那天，天降血雨，沾染人们的衣服。
English: On the day of the murder of King Qi of Qi, the sky rained blood, staining people's clothes.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 归狱不解，兹谓追非，厥咎天雨血，兹谓不亲，民有怨心，不出三年，无其宗人。 
现代文：上天把情况告诉天下人，指的就是这种情况吧。京房《易传》说： 把罪过推诿给无罪的平民，造就叫做因循错误，它的灾祸是天上降下血雨，造就叫做不亲睦百姓，百姓有怨恨之心，不过三年，便没有同族之人。 
English: It is this situation that Heaven is referring to when it tells the people of the world about the situation. Jing Fang's "I Chuan" says: To blame the innocent civilians for their sins is called following the wrong path. Its calamity is the sky raining blood. It is called not having a good relationship with the people. The people have resentment, but for three years, they have not had anyone of the same race.

古文：又曰： 佞人禄，功臣戮，天雨血。 
现代文：又说： 佞人食俸禄，功臣被杀戮，天上降雨血。 
English: He also said: "Worthless people eat bounty, heroes are killed, and blood rains down from the sky.

古文：晋愍帝建兴四年十二月丙寅，丞相府斩督运令史淳于伯，血逆流上柱二丈三尺。
现代文：晋愍帝建兴四年十二月丙寅日，丞相府处斩督运令史淳于伯，他的血由下往上倒着流，流到屋柱上二丈三尺高的地方。
English: In December of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jianxing of the Jin Dynasty, the chancellor's office ordered the execution of the governor, Shi Junyubo, and his blood flowed backwards from the bottom to the top, flowing to a place two and three feet high on the pillar.

古文：此赤祥也。
现代文：这是赤样。
English: Four years later, he died, and the royal family fell into civil strife.

古文：是时后将军褚裒镇广陵，丞相扬声北伐，伯以督运稽留及役使臧罪，依征军法戮之。
现代文：当时后将军!拯镇守卢堕，丞相扬言说要北伐，淳于伯因为督运粮草延误以及收受役夫赃物之罪，依照出征军法杀了他。
English: At that time, General! Zheng Zhen Shou Lu fell, the prime minister threatened to go to the Northern Expedition, and Jun Yu Bo killed him in accordance with the law of the expeditionary force because of the delay in the transportation of grain and grass and the crime of receiving stolen goods from the service man.

古文：其息诉称： 伯督运事讫，无所稽乏，受赇役使，罪不及死。
现代文：淳于伯的儿子上诉说： 淳于侦督运事已完成，没有出现延误，接受役夫的贿赂，不至于犯死罪。
English: Chunyu Bo's son appealed: Chunyu Bo's investigation has been completed, there is no delay, he accepted bribes from the porter, and he will not commit a capital crime.

古文：兵家之势，先声后实，实是屯戍，非为征军。
现代文：兵家用兵的规律，总是先传播风声造成声势然后再实施具体行动，这次运粮，实际上是为了屯戍，并不是真的出征。
English: The action of the army is to build up the momentum first, and then the actual action. The actual action is to guard the garrison, not to march into the army.

古文：自四年以来，运漕稽停，皆不以军兴法论。 
现代文：从建璺四年以来，运送粮草的人延误停留，都没有按出征的军法判罪。 
English: In the four years since Jianye, no one has been convicted of delaying the stay of people transporting grain and grass according to the military law.

古文：僚佐莫之理。
现代文：但丞相属官没有人受理他的诉状。
English: The officials paid no attention to him.

古文：及有此变，司直弹劾众官，元帝又无所问。
现代文：到发生这妖变之后，司直上疏弹劾处理淳王迫案件的众官，五童又不加追究。
English: After this strange turn of events, the chief magistrate impeached the officials who handled the forced labor case against Jun Wang, and the five boys were not investigated.

古文：于是频旱三年。
现代文：于是连续三年都发生旱灾。
English: As a result, droughts have occurred for three consecutive years.

古文：干宝以为冤气之应也。
现代文：王宣认为旱灾是冤气的应验。
English: The royal family believes it is the result of a grudge.

古文：郭景纯曰： 血者水类，同属于《坎》，《坎》为法家。
现代文：郭星缍说： 血是水一类，和水同属于《周易》八卦之一的《坎》，《坎》是法家。
English: Guo Xingyao said: "Blood is a type of water, and water also belongs to "Can," one of the "Zhou Yi" gossips. "Can" is a legalist.

古文：水平润下，不宜逆流。
现代文：水势平稳而往下流以滋润万物，不应当由下往上流。
English: Water flows smoothly downwards to nourish all things, it should not flow upwards.

古文：此政有咎失之征也。 
现代文：而血逆流是政令有失误的征兆。
English: This is a sign of the fallacy of the imperial government.

