古文：后主讳禅，字公嗣，先主子也。
现代文：后主名禅，字公嗣，先主刘备之子。
English: Later, he was called Zen and became Kinshi, the son of the previous master Liu Bei.

古文：建安二十四年，先主为汉中王，立为王太子。及即尊号，册曰： 惟章武元年五月辛巳，皇帝若曰：太子禅，朕遭汉运艰难，贼臣篡盗，社稷无主，格人群正，以天明命，朕继大统。
现代文：汉献帝建安二十四年，先祖做了汉中王，立刘禅为王太子，等到先主登基后，册封刘禅说： 章武元年五月十二日，皇帝诏示：太子刘禅，我遭遇汉室国运艰难，奸臣谋权篡位，国家没有主管之人，有识之士还有文武百官认为上天已经明示，朕就继承了大统。
English: In the 24th year of the Hanzhong Emperor Jian'an, the ancestors became the middle king of the Han Dynasty and established Liu Zhen as the crown prince. After the ancestor ascended to the throne, Liu Zhen said: On May 12th, 1801, the emperor made an imperial edict: Prince Liu Zhen, I have encountered the difficulties of the Han Dynasty, treacherous vassals are plotting to usurp power, the country has no competent person, people of insight and literary and military officials believe that God has made it clear that I will inherit the throne.

古文：今以禅为皇太子，以承宗庙，祗肃社稷。
现代文：现在册立刘禅为皇太子，以承继宗庙，安定社稷。
English: Now Liu Zen is listed as the crown prince to succeed the ancestral temple and stabilize the community.

古文：使使持节丞相亮授印缓，敬听师傅，行一物而三善皆得焉，可不勉与！ 
现代文：委派使者持符节丞相诸葛亮授予印绶，听受师父的教诲，每行一件事都要考虑到尊君、敬师、爱友这三种美德，怎么能不勉励自己呢？ 
English: How can you not encourage yourself to appoint an emissary to carry the seal of the prime minister Zhuge Liang to confer the seal, listen to the teachings of the master, and take into account the three virtues of respect for the emperor, respect for the teacher, and love for the friend in every action?

古文：三年夏四月，先主殂于永安宫。
现代文：章武三年夏四月，先主在永安宫崩逝。
English: In the summer and April of the third year of Zhang Wu's reign, his predecessor passed away at Yongan Palace.

古文：五月，后主袭位於成都，时年十七。
现代文：五月，后主在成都继位，当时年仅十七岁。
English: In May, the empress dowager succeeded to the throne in Chengdu, when she was only 17 years old.

古文：尊皇后曰皇太后。大赦，改元。是岁魏黄初四年也。
现代文：尊先皇皇后为皇太后，大赦天下，改换年号，这一年是魏文帝黄初四年。
English: The revered emperor and empress became the empress dowager, pardoned the world, and changed the year. This year was the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Wen of Wei and Emperor Huang.

古文：建兴元年夏，牂牁太守朱褒拥郡反。
现代文：后主建兴元年夏，牂牁郡太守朱褒占据本郡反叛。
English: After the main Jianxing in the summer of the first year of the year, Zhu Bo, the governor of Handan County, occupied the county and rebelled.

古文：先是，益州郡有大姓雍闿反，流太守张裔於吴，据郡不宾，越隽夷王高定亦背叛。
现代文：之前，益州郡有大姓雍闿反叛，将郡中的太守张裔流放到东吴，占据该郡拒绝臣服，越隽夷王高定也起兵叛乱。
English: Previously, there was a rebellion in Yizhou County led by a man named Yong Xing, who exiled Zhang Zi, the governor of the county, to Dongwu, occupied the county and refused to submit, and Gaoding, the king of Yue, also rebelled.

古文：是岁，立皇后张氏。
现代文：当年，后主册立张氏为皇后。
English: In that year, the Zhang family, who later became the head of the family, became the empress.

古文：遣尚书郎邓芝固好於吴，吴王孙权与蜀和亲使聘，是岁通好。
现代文：派尚书郎邓芝与东吴交好，吴王孙权与西蜀和亲，并派使者互相送聘礼，当年，两国开始交好。
English: He sent Shang Shulang Deng Zhi to make friends with East Wu, and Wu Wang Sun Quan to make peace with West Shu, and sent envoys to give each other engagement gifts. That year, the two countries began to make friends.

古文：二年春，务农殖谷，闭关息民。
现代文：建兴二年春，蜀国以发展农业种植为要务，停止征战让百姓休养生息。
English: In the spring of the second year of Jianxing, Shu took the development of agricultural planting as a priority, and stopped the war to let the people rest and recuperate.

古文：三年春三月，丞相亮南征四郡，四郡皆平。改益州郡为建宁郡，分建宁、永昌郡为云南郡，又分建宁、牂牁为兴古郡。
现代文：建兴三年春三月，丞相诸葛亮率军征讨南方四郡，四郡都被平定，于是改益州郡为建宁郡，分建宁、永昌二郡合为云南郡，又分建宁、牂牁二郡合为兴古郡。
English: In the spring and March of the third year of Jianxing, the prime minister Zhuge Liang led the army to conquer four counties in the south, and all four counties were pacified, so the county of Yizhou was changed to Jianning County, the two counties of Jianning and Yongchang were divided into Yunnan County, and the two counties of Jianning and Handan were divided into Xinggu County.

古文：十二月，亮还成都。
现代文：十二月诸葛亮率军返回成都。
English: In December, Zhuge Liang and his army returned to Chengdu.

古文：四年春，都护李严自永安还住江州，筑大城。
现代文：建兴四年春，都护李严从永安县返回江州，在江州修筑大城。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of Jianxing, the governor Li Yan returned from Yong'an County to Jiangzhou to build a big city in Jiangzhou.

古文：五年春，丞相亮出屯汉中，营沔北阳平石马。
现代文：建兴五年春，丞相诸葛亮出兵成都驻扎汉中，在沔水北岸阳平、石马一带安营。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Jianxing, the chancellor Zhuge Liang sent troops to Chengdu to be stationed in Hanzhong, and camped in the areas of Yangping and Shima on the north coast of Surabaya.

古文：六年春，亮出攻祁山，不克。
现代文：建兴六年春，诸葛亮出兵攻打祁山，没有攻克。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Jianxing, Zhuge Liang sent troops to attack Lushan, but failed to conquer it.

古文：冬，复出散关，围陈仓，粮尽退。
现代文：同年冬，再出兵散关，包围陈仓县，因粮草用完而撤退。
English: In the winter of the same year, troops were sent to Sankuan again to encircle Chencang County, but they withdrew because they had run out of grain and grass.

古文：魏将王双率军追亮，亮与战，破之，斩双，还汉中。
现代文：魏国将军王双率军追击诸葛亮，诸葛亮军与之交战，大破魏军，斩杀王双，随后返回汉中。
English: The Wei general Wang Shuang led the army to chase Zhuge Liang, Zhuge Liang's army fought with it, broke the Wei army, killed Wang Shuang, and then returned to Hanzhong.

古文：七年春，亮遣陈式攻武都、阴平，遂克定二郡。
现代文：建兴七年春，诸葛亮派陈式进攻武都、阴平，攻占了二郡。
English: In the spring of the seventh year of Jianxing, Zhuge Liang sent Chen style to attack Wudu and Yinping, and captured two counties.

古文：冬，亮徙府营於南山下原上，筑汉、乐二城。
现代文：同年冬，诸葛亮将官署行营迁移至南山下平原地带，修建了汉、乐二城。
English: In the winter of the same year, Zhuge Liang moved the camp of the government office to the lower plain of the South Mountain, and built the Han and Le two cities.

古文：是岁，孙权称帝，与蜀约盟，共交分天下。
现代文：同年，孙权称帝，与蜀国订立盟约，两国平分天下。
English: In the same year, Sun Quan proclaimed himself emperor and signed a treaty with Shu, dividing the country equally between the two countries.

古文：八年秋，魏使司马懿由西城，张郃由子午，曹真由斜谷，欲攻汉中。
现代文：建兴八年秋。魏国派遣司马懿从西城、张郃从子午谷、曹真从斜谷出兵，准备进攻汉中。
English: In the autumn of the eighth year of Jianxing, Wei dispatched Sima Jie from Xicheng, Zhang Jie from Zihu Valley, and Cao Zhen from Xizhou Valley to prepare to attack Hanzhong.

古文：丞相亮待之於城固、赤阪，大雨道绝，真等皆还。
现代文：蜀丞相诸葛亮率军在城固、赤坂一带防守，因大雨断绝道路，曹真等都率军退回。
English: Shu chancellor Zhuge Liang led the army to defend around Chenggu and Akasaka. Due to heavy rain, the roads were cut off, and Cao Zhen led the army to retreat.

古文：是岁，魏延破魏雍州刺史郭淮于阳谿。
现代文：同年，魏延在阳溪击败魏雍州刺史郭淮。
English: In the same year, Wei Yan defeated Wei Yongzhou assassin Guo Huai in Yangxi.

古文：徙鲁王永为甘陵王。梁王理为安平王，皆以鲁、梁在吴分界故也。
现代文：后主将鲁王刘永转封为甘陵王，梁王刘理为安平王，都是因为鲁、梁两地地望在吴国境内。
English: Later, Liu Yong, the king of Lu, was turned into the king of Ganling, and Liu Li, the king of Liang, into the king of Anping, because both Lu and Liang were in the territory of Wu.

古文：九年春二月，亮复出军围祁山，始以木牛运。
现代文：建兴九年春二月，诸葛亮再次出兵围攻祁山，开始创用木牛运送粮草。
English: In the spring and February of the ninth year of Jianxing, Zhuge Liang once again sent troops to besiege Lushan and began to use wooden oxen to transport grain and grass.

古文：魏司马懿、张郃救祁山。
现代文：魏将司马懿、张郃救援祁山。
English: Wei generals Sima Ye and Zhang Ye rescue Lushan.

古文：夏六月，亮粮尽退军，郃追至青封，与亮交战，被箭死。
现代文：夏六月，诸葛亮因粮尽而退兵，张郃领兵追至青封，与诸葛亮军交战，被箭射死。
English: In the summer of June, Zhuge Liang withdrew from the army due to running out of food. Zhang Xi led the army to Qingfeng, fought with Zhuge Liang's army, and was shot dead by an arrow.

古文：秋八月，都护李平废徙梓潼郡。
现代文：秋八月，都护李平被废为庶民，迁住梓潼郡。
English: In autumn and August, the tutelary Li Ping was abolished as a commoner and moved to Zizhi County.

古文：十年，亮休士劝农於黄沙，作流马木牛毕，教兵讲武。
现代文：建兴十年，诸葛亮在黄沙休整军队，劝课农桑，木牛流马制造完毕后，就训练士兵，讲习武事。
English: After ten years of construction, Zhuge Liang rested and reorganized the army in Huangsha, exhorted the class of farmers and mulberry trees, and after the production of wooden cattle and horses, he trained soldiers and studied martial arts.

古文：十一年冬，亮使诸军运米，集於斜谷口，治斜谷邸阁。
现代文：建兴十一年冬，诸葛亮指示各军运送粮食，在斜谷口聚集，建造斜谷粮囤。
English: In the winter of the eleventh year of Jianxing, Zhuge Liang instructed the armies to transport grain, gather at the mouth of the valley, and build the valley grain market.

古文：是岁，南夷刘胄反，将军马忠破平之。
现代文：同年，南夷首领刘胄反叛，将军马忠攻破并平定了他。
English: In the same year, the leader of the Nanyi, Liu Bei, rebelled and defeated General Ma Zhong and subdued him.

古文：十二年春二月，亮由斜谷出，始以流马运。
现代文：建兴十二年春二月，诸葛亮从斜谷出兵，开始用流马运粮草。
English: In the spring and February of the twelfth year of Jianxing, Zhuge Liang sent troops from the valley and began to transport grain and grass with flowing horses.

古文：秋八月，亮卒于渭滨。
现代文：秋八月，诸葛亮在渭滨病逝。
English: In autumn and August, Zhuge Liang died of illness in Binzhou.

古文：征西大将军魏延与丞相长史杨仪争权不和，举兵相攻，延败走；斩延首，仪率诸军还成都。
现代文：征西大将军魏延与丞相长史杨仪因争夺权力不和，率兵交战，魏延兵败逃走；杨仪斩杀魏延，随后率军返回成都。
English: Wei Yan, the general of the Western Expedition, and Shi Yang Yi, the prime minister of the Joseon Dynasty, quarreled over power and led their armies into battle. Wei Yan was defeated and fled; Yang Yi killed Wei Yan and then led his army back to Chengdu.

古文：大赦。以左将军吴壹为车骑将军，假节督汉中。
现代文：后主大赦天下，任命左将军吴壹为车骑将军，持符节督领汉中事务。
English: After the emperor pardoned the world, he appointed the left general Wu Yi as the general of chariots and cavalry, and led the affairs of the Han Dynasty.

古文：以丞相留府长史蒋琬为尚书令，总统国事。
现代文：任命丞相留府长史蒋琬为尚书令，总管国家政事。
English: He appointed the chancellor, minister-in-residence, and prefect of the prefectural government, Shi Jiangyu, as Shang Shuling, in charge of the country's political affairs.

古文：十三年春正月，中军师杨仪废徙汉嘉郡。
现代文：建兴十三年春正月，中军师杨仪被废除官职并迁住汉嘉郡。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 13th year of Jianxing, Yang Yi, a Chinese military instructor, was dismissed from his post and moved to Hanjia County.

古文：夏四月，进蒋琬位为大将军。
现代文：夏四月，提拔蒋琬为大将军。
English: In the summer of April, Chiang Kai-shek was promoted to general.

古文：十四年夏四月，后主至湔，登观阪，看汶水之流，旬日还成都。
现代文：建兴十四年夏四月，后主前往湔县登临观阪，观看汶水水流，十天后返归成都。
English: In the summer and April of the 14th year of Jianxing, the heir to the throne went to Shixian County to visit the scenic area, watch the flow of water in Wenshui, and returned to Chengdu ten days later.

古文：徙武都氐王苻健及氐民四百馀户於广都。
现代文：指示武都氐王苻健率领氐民四百多户迁移到广都。
English: He instructed the King of Wudang, Wu Jian, to lead more than 400 households of Wu people to migrate to Guangdu.

古文：十五年夏六月，皇后张氏薨。
现代文：建兴十五年夏六月，皇后张氏逝世。
English: In June of the summer of the 15th year of Jianxing, Empress Zhang passed away.

古文：延熙元年春正月，立皇后张氏。
现代文：延熙元年春正月，后主册立前皇后之妹张氏为皇后。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of Yanxi, the Zhang family, the sister of the former empress, became the empress.

古文：大赦，改元。
现代文：大赦天下，更改年号。
English: An amnesty will be implemented and the year will be changed.

古文：立子璿为太子，子瑶为安定王。
现代文：立皇子刘璿为皇太子，皇子刘瑶为安定王。
English: He appointed Prince Liu Bei as crown prince, and Prince Liu Bei as the Prince of Stability.

古文：冬十一月，大将军蒋琬出屯汉中。
现代文：冬十一月，大将军蒋琬率军出成都进驻汉中。
English: In the winter of November, General Chiang Kai-shek led his troops out of Chengdu and stationed them in Hanzhong.

古文：二年春三月，进蒋琬位为大司马。
现代文：延熙二年春三月，升任蒋琬为大司马。
English: In the spring and March of the second year of Yanxi, Jiang Jie was promoted to the position of chief secretary.

古文：三年春，使越隽太守张嶷平定越隽郡。
现代文：延熙三年春，命越隽太守张嶷平定越隽郡叛乱。
English: In the spring of the third year of Yanxi, the commander of Yue County, Zhang Ye, was ordered to suppress the rebellion in Yue County.

古文：四年冬十月，尚书令费祎至汉中，与蒋琬谘论事计，岁尽还。
现代文：延熙四年冬十月，尚书令费祎到达汉中，与蒋琬讨论军国大事，岁末返回成都。
English: In the winter and October of the fourth year of Yanxi, Shang Shuling ordered Fei Yao to arrive in Hanzhong to discuss military affairs with Jiang Yao, and returned to Chengdu at the end of the year.

古文：五年春正月，监军姜维督偏军，自汉中还屯涪县。
现代文：延熙五年春正月，监军姜维率领一部兵马，自汉中南返回涪县驻守。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fifth year of Yanxi, the supervisor of the army, Jiang Wei, led a troop of soldiers and horses to return from the central and southern part of the Han Dynasty to be stationed in Jixian.

古文：六年冬十月，大司马蒋琬自汉中还，住涪。
现代文：延熙六年冬十月，大司马蒋琬从汉中返回，留住涪县。
English: In the winter of October of the sixth year of Yanxi, the chief secretary Ma Jiangyao returned from Hanzhong and stayed in Jixian.

古文：十一月，大赦。
现代文：十一月，后主大赦天下。
English: In November, the empress was pardoned.

古文：以尚书令费祎为大将军。
现代文：任命尚书令费祎为大将军。
English: Shang Shuling appointed Fei Yao as the general.

古文：七年闰月，魏大将军曹爽、夏侯玄等向汉中，镇北大将军王平拒兴势围，大将军费祎督诸军往赴救，魏军退。
现代文：延熙七年闰月，魏国大将军曹爽、夏侯玄等率军进逼汉中，蜀镇北大将军王平抗击兴势的围困，大将军费祎督率各军奔赴救援，魏军退走。
English: In the leap month of the seventh year of Yanxi, Cao Shuang, Xia Hou Xuan and other generals of the Great General of the State of Wei led the army into the middle of Hanzhong, Wang Ping, the general of the Great General of the State of Shu, resisted the siege of the rising tide, the great general Fei Xuan led the army to rescue, and the Wei army retreated.

古文：夏四月，安平王理卒。
现代文：夏四月，安平王刘理去世。
English: In April, Anping King Liu Li passed away.

古文：秋九月，祎还成都。
现代文：秋九月，费祎返回成都。
English: In autumn and September, Fei Yao returned to Chengdu.

古文：八年秋八月，皇太后薨。
现代文：延熙八年秋八月，皇太后逝世。
English: In the autumn and August of the eighth year of Yanxi, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：十二月，大将军费祎至汉中，行围守。
现代文：十二月，大将军费祎来到汉中，加强设围防守。
English: In December, General Fei Long came to Hanzhong to strengthen the siege defense.

古文：九年夏六月，费祎还成都。
现代文：延熙九年夏六月，费祎返还成都。
English: In the summer and June of the ninth year of Yanxi, Fei Yao returned to Chengdu.

古文：秋，大赦。
现代文：秋天，后主大赦天下。
English: In autumn, the empress will grant amnesty to the whole country.

古文：冬十一月，大司马蒋琬卒。
现代文：冬十一月，大司马蒋琬去世。
English: In the winter of November, the Chief Secretary Ma Jiangyao passed away.

古文：十年，凉州胡王白虎文、治无戴等率众降，卫将军姜维迎逆安抚，居之于繁县。
现代文：延熙十年，凉州少数民族首领白虎文、治无戴等率部众归降，卫将军姜维前往迎接安抚，将他们安置在繁县。
English: In the tenth year of Yanxi, the leaders of the ethnic minorities in Liangzhou, including Bai Huwen and Zhi Wu Dai, led the troops to surrender, and the Wei general Jiang Wei went to meet the pacification and resettled them in the rural counties.

古文：是岁，汶山平康夷反，维往讨，破平之。
现代文：同年，汶山平康一带少数民族叛乱，姜维前往征讨，攻破并平定叛乱。
English: In the same year, there was a rebellion of ethnic minorities in the Pingkang area of Wenshan. Jiang Wei went there to fight, defeat and quell the rebellion.

古文：十一年夏五月，大将军费祎出屯汉中。
现代文：延熙十一年夏五月，大将军费祎出兵驻扎汉中。
English: In the summer and May of the eleventh year of Yanxi, General Fei Long sent troops to be stationed in Hanzhong.

古文：秋，涪陵属国民夷反，车骑将军邓芝往讨，皆破平之。
现代文：秋天，涪陵附属国的少数民族反叛，车骑将军邓芝前往征讨，平息了叛乱。
English: In the autumn, when the ethnic minorities in the Fuling Province rebelled, the cavalry general Deng Zhi went to subdue them and quell the rebellion.

古文：十二年春正月，魏诛大将军曹爽等，右将军夏侯霸来降。
现代文：延熙十二年春正月，魏国诛杀大将军曹爽等，右将军夏侯霸前来归降。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 12th year of Yanxi, Cao Shuang, the great general of Wei, and the right general Xia Houba came to surrender.

古文：夏四月，大赦。
现代文：夏四月，后主大赦天下。
English: In the summer of April, there was a general amnesty.

古文：秋，卫将军姜维出攻雍州，不克而还。
现代文：秋天，卫将军姜维出兵攻打雍州，没有攻克，撤兵返回。
English: In autumn, the Wei general Jiang Wei sent troops to attack Yongzhou, but failed to conquer it. The troops withdrew and returned.

古文：将军句安、李韶降魏。
现代文：蜀将军句安、李韶投降魏国。
English: Shu generals Guan An and Li Xi surrendered to Wei.

古文：十三年，姜维复出西平，不克而还。
现代文：延熙十三年，姜维再次出兵攻打西平，未能取胜而撤回。
English: In the thirteenth year of Yanxi, Jiang Wei once again sent troops to attack Xiping, failed to win and withdrew.

古文：十四年夏，大将军费祎还成都。
现代文：延熙十四年，大将军费祎回到成都。
English: In the 14th year of Yanxi, General Fei Yao returned to Chengdu.

古文：冬，复北驻汉寿。
现代文：冬天，费祎又北上驻守汉寿县。
English: In winter, Fei Yao went north again to garrison Han Shou County.

古文：大赦。
现代文：后主大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：十五年，吴王孙权薨。
现代文：延熙十五年，吴王孙权逝世。
English: In the 15th year of Yanxi, King Sun Quan of Wu died.

古文：立子琮为西河王。
现代文：后主立其子刘琮为西河王。
English: Later, the lord appointed his son Liu Ye as the King of the West River.

古文：十六年春正月，大将军费祎为魏降人郭脩所杀于汉寿。
现代文：延熙十六年春正月，大将军费祎在汉寿县被魏国投降过来的郭修杀害。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 16th year of Yanxi, General Fei Yao was killed in Hanshou County by Guo Xiu, who had surrendered from Wei.

古文：夏四月，卫将军姜维复率众围南安，不克而还。
现代文：夏四月，卫将军姜维再次率军围攻南安，没有攻克，撤兵返回。
English: In the summer of April, Wei general Jiang Wei once again led the army to besiege Nan'an, but failed to conquer it, and withdrew.

古文：十七年春正月，姜维还成都。
现代文：延熙十七年春正月，姜维回到成都。
English: In the first month of the 17th year of Yanxi, Jiang Wei returned to Chengdu.

古文：大赦。
现代文：后主大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：夏六月，维复率众出陇西。
现代文：夏六月，姜维又率军出陇西。
English: In the summer of June, Jiang Wei led the army out of Shaanxi.

古文：冬，拔狄道、河关、临洮县民，居于绵竹、繁县。
现代文：冬天，迫令狄道、河关、临洮三县百姓迁居绵竹、繁县一带。
English: In winter, the people of the three counties of Didao, Heguan and Linyi moved to Mianzhu and the area around the county.

古文：十八年春，姜维还成都。
现代文：延熙十八年春，姜维回到成都。
English: In the spring of the 18th year of Yanxi, Jiang Wei returned to Chengdu.

古文：夏，复率诸军出狄道，与魏雍州刺史王经战于洮西，大破之。
现代文：夏天，姜维再次率领各军出兵狄道，与魏国雍州刺史王经在洮西交战，大获全胜。
English: In the summer, Jiang Wei once again led the army to send troops to Dido, and fought with the Wei state Yongzhou Sisi Wangjing in Shaanxi, and won a complete victory.

古文：经退保狄道城，维卻住锺题。
现代文：王经退守狄道县城，姜维后撤驻军钟题。
English: Wang Jing retreated to the county seat of Dido, and the withdrawal of the garrison after Jiang Wei was a matter of hours.

古文：十九年春，进姜维位为大将军，督戎马，与镇西将军胡济期会上邽，济失誓不至。
现代文：延熙十九年春，后主升任姜维为大将军，统率全国军队。姜维与镇西将军胡济约定会兵上圭阝县，胡济失信没有前来。
English: In the spring of the 19th year of Yanxi, his successor, Jiang Wei, was promoted to general and led the national army. Jiang Wei and Zhenxi General Hu Jie agreed to send soldiers to Guizhou County, but Hu Jie did not come.

古文：秋八月，维为魏大将军邓艾所破于上邽。
现代文：秋八月，姜维在上圭阝被魏国大将军邓艾所打败。
English: In autumn and August, Jiang Wei was defeated by the Wei general Deng Ai in Shangguiyuan.

古文：维退军还成都。
现代文：姜维撤军退回成都。
English: Jiang Wei withdrew his troops back to Chengdu.

古文：是岁，立子瓒为新平王。大赦。
现代文：同年，后主立其子刘瓒为新平王，大赦天下。
English: In the same year, the Empress Dowager appointed her son Liu Bei as the new King of Ping and pardoned the world.

古文：二十年，闻魏大将军诸葛诞据寿春以叛，姜维复率众出骆谷，至芒水。
现代文：延熙二十年，探知魏国大将军诸葛诞占据寿春叛魏，姜维再率军出骆谷，抵达芒水。
English: In the 20th year of Yanxi, Jiang Wei led his army out of Luogu and arrived in Mangshui after discovering that Zhuge, the great general of Wei, had occupied Shuchun and rebelled against Wei.

古文：是岁大赦。
现代文：同年后主大赦天下。
English: That year, there was a general amnesty.

古文：景耀元年，姜维还成都。
现代文：景耀元年，姜维回到成都。
English: In the first year of Jingyao, Jiang Wei returned to Chengdu.

古文：史官言景星见，於是大赦，改年。
现代文：史官报告天上出现瑞星，于是后主大赦天下，更改年号。
English: The historian reported the appearance of the rising star in the sky, so the emperor pardoned the world and changed the year.

古文：宦人黄皓始专政。
现代文：宦官黄皓开始把持朝政。
English: The eunuch Huang Qi began to take control of the imperial government.

古文：吴大将军孙綝废其主亮，立琅邪王休。
现代文：吴国大将军孙綝废吴主孙亮，改立琅邪王孙休为君。
English: Sun Quan, the general of the Grand National Assembly of Wu, overthrew Sun Liang, the ruler of Wu, and replaced him with Sun Xiu, the evil king.

古文：二年夏六月，立子谌为北地王，恂为新兴王，虔为上党王。
现代文：景耀二年夏六月，后主立其子刘谌为北地王，刘恂为新兴王，刘虔为上党王。
English: In the summer and June of the second year of King Jingyao, the Empress Dowager appointed her son Liu Ye as the King of the North, Liu Ye as the Emerging King, and Liu Qian as the Upper Party King.

古文：三年秋九月，追谥故将军关羽、张飞、马超、庞统、黄忠。
现代文：景耀三年秋九月，为已故将军关羽、张飞、马超、庞统、黄忠追封谥号。
English: In the autumn and September of the third year of Jingyao, the late generals Guan Yu, Zhang Fei, Ma Chao, Pang Tong and Huang Zhong were posthumously awarded the honorary titles.

古文：四年春三月，追谥故将军赵云。
现代文：景耀四年春三月，为已故将军赵云追封谥号。
English: In March of the spring of the fourth year of Jingyao, the late general Zhao Yun was awarded the posthumous title.

古文：冬十月，大赦。
现代文：冬十月，后主大赦天下。
English: In the winter of October, the emperor pardoned the whole country.

古文：五年春正月，西河王琮卒。
现代文：景耀五年春正月，西河王刘琮去世。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fifth year of Jingyao, the king of the West River, Liu Ye, passed away.

古文：是岁，姜维复率众出侯和，为邓艾所破，还住沓中。
现代文：同年，姜维又率军出侯和，被邓艾击败，退兵驻守沓中。
English: In the same year, Jiang Wei once again led the army to march out to make peace, was defeated by Deng Ai, and retired to stay in Yuzhong.

古文：六年夏，魏大兴徒众，命征西将军邓艾、镇西将军锺会、雍州刺史诸葛绪数道并攻。
现代文：景耀六年夏，魏国兴师出兵，朝廷命征西将军邓艾、镇西将军钟会、雍州刺史诸葛绪。
English: In the summer of the sixth year of Jingyao, the Wei Guoxing Division sent troops, and the imperial court ordered the recruitment of the Western General Deng Ai, the Western General Zhong Hui, and the Yongzhou Jishi Zhugexu.

古文：於是遣左右车骑将军张翼、廖化、辅国大将军董厥等拒之。
现代文：兵分几路进攻蜀国后主就调派左右车骑将军张翼、廖化、辅国大将军董阙等抗击。
English: After several detachments of soldiers attacked Shu, the lord dispatched the left and right cavalry generals Zhang Ying, Liao Hua, and the auxiliary national general Dong Jun to fight back.

古文：大赦。改元为炎兴。
现代文：后主大赦天下，改年号为炎兴。
English: Later, he was pardoned by the emperor and his era name was changed to Yanxing.

古文：冬，邓艾破卫将军诸葛瞻於绵竹。
现代文：冬天，邓艾在绵竹攻破魏将军诸葛瞻。
English: In winter, Deng Ai defeated the Wei general Zhuge Zhan in Mianzhu.

古文：用光禄大夫谯周策，降於艾，奉书曰： 限分江、汉，遇值深远，阶缘蜀土，斗绝一隅，干运犯冒，渐苒历载，遂与京畿攸隔万里。
现代文：后主采用光禄大夫谯周的计策，向邓艾投降，并奉上降书说： 因受到江汉两岸水的阻隔，相遇是山高水远，蜀地地方狭小，负隅顽抗，冒犯天威，随着岁月推移而与京城隔离万里。
English: The successor-in-chief used the strategy of the Guanglu doctor Zhou Zhou to surrender to Deng Ai, and was presented with a letter of surrender saying: Due to the obstruction of the water on both sides of the Han River, the mountains are high and the water is far away, the Shudi region is narrow, the negative corner is stubborn, it offends heaven, and over the years it has been isolated from the capital.

古文：每惟黄初中，文皇帝命虎牙将军鲜于辅，宣温密之诏，申三好之恩，开示门户，大义炳然，而否德暗弱，窃贪遗绪，俯仰累纪，未率大教。
现代文：每每想到黄初年间，文皇帝命虎牙将军鲜于辅前来宣示温和真诚的诏令，多次声明善逸的恩德，打开归顺的道路，大义凛然，但鄙人却德行浅薄，不识大体，贪图先人所创的微博功业，挣扎抗拒多年，没有服从国家的教化。
English: Every time I think of the early years of the Yellow Emperor, Emperor Wen ordered General Huya to come to the auxiliary to proclaim a gentle and sincere edict, repeatedly declared the benevolence of kindness, opened the path of submission, and was full of righteousness. However, he was shallow in virtue, ignorant, coveted the microblogging achievements created by his predecessors, struggled and resisted for many years, and did not obey the state's indoctrination.

古文：天威既震，人鬼归能之数，怖骇王师，神武所次，敢不革面，顺以从命！
现代文：现在天威已经震怒，人鬼有归顺之时，对于朝廷的大军感到恐惧，神威所到之处，哪里敢不洗心革命，顺从天命呢。
English: Now that the power of heaven has been enraged, when people and ghosts have surrendered, they are afraid of the army of the imperial court. Wherever the divine power has gone, where dare they not wash their hearts with revolution and obey the fate of heaven?

古文：辄敕群帅投戈释甲，官府帑藏一无所毁。
现代文：现在下令各军将领放下兵器，解除武装，官府国库没有损毁。
English: Now he ordered the generals of all armies to lay down their weapons and disarm. The government treasury was not destroyed.

古文：百姓布野，馀粮栖亩，以俟后来之惠，全元元之命。
现代文：百姓在郊野列队，所有的粮食都留在田间，以等待天朝的恩惠，保全百姓的性命。
English: The people lined up in the countryside, and all the grain was left in the fields to wait for the grace of the heavenly government and to preserve the lives of the people.

古文：伏惟大魏布德施化，宰辅伊、周，含覆藏疾。
现代文：俯首思虑大魏施加恩德广布教化，有伊尹、周公那样的贤相良臣辅佐，恩泽广被天下。
English: He bowed his head and thought that the Great Wei Dynasty had spread benevolence and enlightenment, and there were sages and ministers such as Yi Yin and Zhou Gong as assistants, and the world was greatly benefited.

古文：谨遣私署侍中张绍、光禄大夫谯周、驸马都尉邓良奉赍印缓，请命告诚，敬输忠款，存亡敕赐，惟所裁之。
现代文：谨派属员侍中张绍、光禄大夫谯周、驸马都尉邓良奉交印绶，恭请指命，献忠输诚，存亡生死，全凭将军裁决。
English: I have the honor to dispatch my subordinates, the chamberlain Zhang Shao, the Guanglu doctor Yu Zhou, and the cavalry captain Deng Liang, to submit the seal, respectfully ask for orders, offer loyalty and sacrifice sincerity, and live and die according to the general's ruling.

古文：舆榇在近，不复缕陈。 是日，北地王谌伤国之亡，先杀妻子，次以自杀。
现代文：在下即将载棺材前来请罪，其余的就不赘述了。 当天，北地王刘谌感伤国家灭亡，先杀死妻子孩子，随后自杀。
English: On the same day, the king of the Northland, Liu Bei, grieved the death of the country, killed his wife and children first, and then committed suicide.

古文：绍、良与艾相遇於雒县。
现代文：张绍、邓良与邓艾在雒县相见。
English: Zhang Shao, Deng Liang and Deng Ai meet in Handan County.

古文：艾得书，大喜，即报书，遣绍、良先还。
现代文：邓艾得到蜀国的降书，很欣喜，随即回复书信，并派张绍邓良先返回程成都。
English: Deng Ai was very pleased to receive the letter of surrender from Shu, immediately replied to the letter, and sent Zhang Shao and Deng Liang back to Chengdu.

古文：艾至城北，后主舆榇自缚，诣军垒门。
现代文：邓艾抵达成都城北，后主绳索自缚、载着棺材前至魏军军营前门。
English: Deng Ai arrived at the north of the capital, after the main rope self-tied, carrying the coffin to the front gate of the Wei army camp.

古文：艾解缚焚榇，延请相见。
现代文：邓艾解开他的绳索，烧毁棺材，请他入营相见。
English: Deng Ai untied his ropes, burned the coffin and invited him into the camp to meet him.

古文：因承制拜后主为骠骑将军。
现代文：邓艾依照魏主旨意，任命后主为骠骑将军。
English: Deng Ai, in accordance with the will of the Lord of Wei, appointed the Lord to be the general of the cavalry.

古文：诸围守悉被后主敕，然后降下。
现代文：那些守城的将领都收到后主诏令，随后投降。
English: The generals who were defending the city received the posthumous imperial edict and then surrendered.

古文：艾使后主止其故宫，身往造焉。
现代文：邓艾让后主居住在原来的宫殿中，自己亲自前去拜访。
English: Deng Aijang's heir lived in the original palace, and he went to visit in person.

古文：资严未发，明年春正月，艾见收。
现代文：邓艾因擅权任意行事，在第二年正月被收押。
English: Deng Ai was detained in the first month of the following year for acting arbitrarily without authority.

古文：锺会自涪至成都作乱。
现代文：钟会从涪县直到成都作乱。
English: Bell-ringing groups from Jixian County to Chengdu rioted.

古文：会既死，蜀中军众钞略，死丧狼籍，数日乃安集。
现代文：钟会去世后，蜀中军队四处劫掠，城中一片狼藉，几天之后才恢复安定。
English: After the death of Zhonghui, the Shu troops looted everywhere, the city was in chaos, and stability was restored only a few days later.

古文：后主举家东迁，既至洛阳，策命之曰： 惟景元五年三月丁亥。皇帝临轩，使太常嘉命刘禅为安乐县公。
现代文：后主带着全家迁到洛阳，魏主随后诏令说： 景元五年三月十七日，皇帝临朝，派太常赐封刘禅为安乐县公。
English: Afterward, the lord moved to Luoyang with his whole family, and the lord of Wei subsequently issued a decree saying: On March 17th of the fifth year of the Jing Dynasty, the emperor Lin Dynasty, sent the emperor Taizang to grant Liu Zen the title of Anle County.

古文：於戏，其进听朕命！
现代文：啊，刘禅上前听朕的诏令！
English: Ah, Liu Zhen, come forward and listen to my edict!

古文：盖统天载物，以咸宁为大，光宅天下，以时雍为盛。
现代文：治理天下，以安定为大，使国家兴盛，以和平为大。
English: To govern the world, stability is the most important, to make the country prosperous, peace is the most important.

古文：故孕育群生者，君人之道也，乃顺承天者，坤元之义也。
现代文：所以养育天下百姓，是做君王的准则，你顺承天意，是《周易》中 坤元 的义理。
English: Therefore, nurturing the people of the world is the criterion for being a king, and your obedience to the will of heaven is the righteousness of Kunyuan in "Zhou Yi."

古文：上下交畅，然后万物协和，庶类获乂。
现代文：上下之间和睦通畅，然后万物才能协调，才能得到治理。
English: If there is harmony and smooth flow between the upper and lower levels, then all things can be coordinated and governed.

古文：乃者汉氏失统，六合震扰。
现代文：过去汉朝失去正统延续，天下震动纷扰。
English: In the past, the Han Dynasty lost the continuation of orthodoxy, and the world was shaken and disturbed.

古文：我太祖承运龙兴，弘济八极，是用应天顺民，抚有区夏。
现代文：我朝太祖顺应天命，兼济天下，所以顺承天意民心，安定天下。
English: I and my ancestors obeyed Heaven's will and helped the world. Therefore, we must obey Heaven's will and the people's will to keep the world stable.

古文：于时乃考因群杰虎争，九服不静，乘间阻远，保据庸蜀，遂使西隅殊封，方外壅隔。
现代文：当时你的父亲趁着天下英杰龙虎相争，天下不安定的时候，利用间隙，占据蜀地，使得西部边境远离中央，与四方阻隔。
English: At that time, your father took advantage of the fact that the world was in turmoil, and when the world was unsettled, he took advantage of the gap to occupy Shunde, making the western border far from the center and blocking it from the four directions.

古文：自是以来，干戈不戢，元元之民，不得保安其性，几将五纪。
现代文：从那以来，战乱不止，天下万民，不能休养生息，大概已经有六十年了。
English: Since then, the war has not stopped, and all the people in the world have not been able to rest and recuperate. It has been about sixty years.

古文：朕永惟祖考遗志，思在绥缉四海，率土同轨，故爰整六师，耀威梁、益。
现代文：朕一直牢记祖先遗训，志在安定四海，使得天下归心，所以整顿朝廷大军，在梁州、益州之地展示威势。
English: I have always kept in mind the teachings of our ancestors and aspired to stabilize the four seas and make the world come to its senses. Therefore, I will rectify the imperial army and display its power in Liangzhou and Yizhou.

古文：公恢崇德度，深秉大正，不惮屈身委质，以爱民全国为贵，降心回虑，应机豹变，履言思顺，以享左右无疆之休，岂不远欤！
现代文：你气度宏大德行贵重，秉持中正大义，不惧怕屈身前来，看重爱护百姓保全国家之事，顺应潮流，随时变通，多次表达恭顺之意，以享有千秋万世的名声，怎么能说没有远见呢！
English: You are dignified and noble, uphold the great principles, are not afraid to bend forward, attach importance to the protection of the people and the preservation of the country, follow the trend, be flexible at any time, express your obedience many times, and enjoy a reputation for thousands of years. How can you say that you have no vision?

古文：朕嘉与君公长飨显禄，用考咨前训，开国胙土，率遵旧典，钖兹玄牡，苴以白茅，永为魏藩辅，往钦哉！
现代文：朕赏赐你长久享有丰厚的俸禄，依照前代先例，为你建立封国，赏赐你用黑色公牛祭祀祖庙，以白茅包土，永远成为大魏的藩属，须多敬重啊!
English: I reward you with a rich salary for a long time. In accordance with the precedent of the previous generation, I establish a fiefdom for you. I reward you with a black bull to worship the ancestral temple, with a white cape to wrap the soil, and forever become a member of the Wei clan. You must be respected!

古文：公其祗服朕命，克广德心，以终乃显烈。 食邑万户，赐绢万匹，奴婢百人，他物称是。
现代文：你要恭顺地服从朕的命令，发扬自己的仁德之心，以修成自己的功名事业。 随后赐给后主一万户食邑，绢帛万匹，奴婢百人，其他的物品也是如此。
English: Obediently obey my order, and develop your benevolence to accomplish your meritorious cause, and then give the queen mother ten thousand households, ten thousand horses, one hundred slaves and maidservants, and other goods.

古文：子孙为三都尉封侯者五十馀人。
现代文：后主的子孙中，担任三都尉或者被封侯的有五十多人。
English: Among the descendants of the late lord, there are more than fifty people who have served as three captains or have been given the title of feudal lord.

古文：尚书令樊建、侍中张绍、光禄大夫谯周、秘书令郤正、殿中督张通并封列侯。
现代文：尚书令樊建、侍中张绍、光禄大夫谯周、秘书令郃正、殿中督张通都被封为列侯。
English: Shang Shuling Yu Jian, Chamberlain Zhang Shao, Guanglu Doctor Yu Zhou, Secretary Ling Yu Zheng, and Grand Steward Zhang Tong were all made princes.

古文：公泰始七年薨於洛阳。
现代文：后主在泰始七年在洛阳去世。
English: His successor died in Luoyang in the seventh year of Taizhi.

古文：评曰：后主任贤相则为循理之君，惑阉竖则为昬闇之后，传曰 素丝无常，唯所染之 ，信矣哉！
现代文：评说：后主如果能任用贤相就是遵循理法的君主，被奸邪小人迷惑就是昏聩的君主，《左传》中说 素色的丝没有颜色，只是被颜色所染 ，实在是正确啊！
English: Comment: If the successor can appoint a wise man, he is a ruler who follows the laws of reason. If he is deceived by evil villains, he is a deluded ruler. According to "Left Handed," plain-colored silk has no color, but is dyed by color, which is really true!

古文：礼，国君继体，逾年改元，而章武之三年，则革称建兴，考之古义，体理为违。
现代文：按照礼节，国君继位，到第二年更改年号，而章武三年，就改变为建兴年号，考察古来的义理，实在是有违礼法。
English: According to the etiquette, the year of the emperor's succession is changed to the second year, and the third year of Zhangwu is changed to the year of Jianxing, which is a violation of the etiquette.

古文：又国不置史，注记无官，是以行事多遗，灾异靡书。
现代文：再加上国家不设置史官，日常起居没有记录的官员，所以各种事情大多遗漏了，但各种灾祸事情很多。
English: Coupled with the fact that the state does not set up historians, officials who do not have records of daily life, so all kinds of things are mostly omitted, but there are many kinds of disasters.

古文：诸葛亮虽达於为政，凡此之类，犹有未周焉。
现代文：诸葛亮虽然处理政事很通达，但对于这些事情，还是有不能周全的。
English: Although Zhuge Liang is well-versed in handling political affairs, he is still not well-versed in these matters.

古文：然经载十二而年名不易，军旅屡兴而赦不妄下，不亦卓乎！
现代文：但是经过十二年而年号没有改换，多次兴兵作战而不胡乱颁布赦令，不也很卓越吗！
English: But after twelve years without changing the name of the year, and repeatedly raising troops to fight without arbitrarily issuing a pardon, isn't it also remarkable!

古文：自亮没后，兹制渐亏，优劣著矣。
现代文：自从诸葛亮去世之后，这些制度渐渐荒废，优秀劣势都体现出来了。
English: Since the death of Zhuge Liang, these systems have been gradually abandoned, and their advantages and disadvantages have all been reflected.

