古文：自初九日别台山，初十日抵黄岩。
现代文：我初九离开天台山，初十就抵达了黄岩。
English: I left Tiantai Mountain at the age of nine and arrived at Huangyan Mountain at the age of ten.

古文：日已西，出南门三十里，宿于八岙。
现代文：太阳已偏西，从南门走出三十里，歇宿于八番的旅舍。
English: The sun has gone west, and has traveled thirty leagues from the south gate, and is resting in the hostel of the eighth.

古文：十一日二十里，登盘山岭。
现代文：十一日走过二十里路，登上盘山岭。
English: On the 11th day, he walked 20 miles and climbed Pan Mountain.

古文：望雁山诸峰，芙蓉插天，片片扑人眉宇。
现代文：遥望雁荡山的那些山峰，就像木芙蓉直插蓝天，片片花瓣般的景色扑进人的眼里。
English: Looking at the peaks of the geese in the distance, they are like hibiscus straight into the blue sky, pieces of petal-like scenery plunge into the human eye.

古文：又二十里，饭大荆驿。
现代文：又前行二十里路，在大荆驿用饭。
English: They also traveled twenty miles to have dinner in Dajingluo.

古文：南涉一溪，见西峰上缀圆石，奴辈指为两头陀，余疑即老僧岩，但不甚肖。
现代文：饭后向南渡过一条溪水，便看到西边的山峰上点缀着一块圆石，奴仆们认定是两头陀岩，我则怀疑它是老僧岩，但又不是很像。
English: After dinner, we crossed a stream to the south and saw a boulder dotted on the western peak. The servants thought it was the Two-Headed Rock, but I suspected it was the Old Monk Rock, but it didn't look like much.

古文：五里，过章家楼，始见老僧真面目：袈衣秃顶，宛然兀立，高可百尺。
现代文：走了五里路，经过章家楼，才看清楚老僧岩的真实面目：它穿着袭装，头上秃顶，栩栩如生地直立着，高约百尺。
English: After walking five miles and passing through Zhangjia Lou, it was clear to see the true face of the old monk rock: it was dressed in armor, bald on the head, lifelike upright, about a hundred feet high.

古文：侧又一小童伛偻于后，向为老僧所掩耳。
现代文：它的旁边还有一块岩石，像一小孩童弯腰曲背地跟随在后面，不过平时被老僧所遮掩罢了。
English: There is also a rock next to it, like a child following behind, but it is usually covered by the old monk.

古文：自章楼二里，山半得石梁洞。
现代文：从章家楼走出二里路，在山半腰处找到石梁洞。
English: After walking two miles from Zhangjia Lou, I found Shiliang Cave halfway up the mountain.

古文：洞门东向，门口一梁，自顶斜插于地，如飞虹下垂。
现代文：洞门东向，洞门口有一石桥，从洞顶斜插于地上，有如飞虹下垂。
English: The cave entrance faces east, and there is a stone bridge at the entrance of the cave, which is obliquely inserted into the ground from the top of the cave and hangs down like a flying rainbow.

古文：由梁侧隙中层级而上，高敞空豁。
现代文：由石桥侧面 尸的缝隙中一层一层地拾级而上，上面高而宽敞、空阔。
English: From the side of the stone bridge, in the crevice of the corpse, climb up the stairs one layer at a time, the top is high, spacious and open.

古文：坐顷之，下山。
现代文：坐下休息了好一会，才下山而去。
English: I sat down and rested for quite a while before heading down the mountain.

古文：由右麓逾谢公岭，渡一涧，循涧西行，即灵峰道也。
现代文：由右边的山麓越过谢公岭，渡过一条溪涧，顺着溪涧岸向西走，就是去灵峰的道路。
English: From the foot of the mountain on the right, cross Xie Gongling, cross a creek, and walk west along the bank of the creek. This is the road to Lingfeng.

古文：一转山腋，两壁峭立亘天，危峰乱叠，如削如攒，如骈笋，如挺芝，如笔之卓挺立，如幞头巾之欹倾斜。
现代文：刚一转过山腋，就见两边的岩壁陡峭笔立，直亘云天，险峰重重叠叠，形态万千，有的像刀削般直立，有的像群峰簇拥，有的像并列的竹笋，有的像挺拔的灵芝，有的像笔一般直立，有的像头巾一样倾斜。
English: As soon as you turn around the ridge, you will see the rock walls on both sides of the steep pen stand, straight to the sky, dangerous peaks overlap and overlap, thousands of forms, some stand upright like a knife, some like a cluster of peaks, some like parallel bamboo shoots, some like erect reishi, some like a pen, and some like a headscarf.

古文：洞有口如卷幕者，潭有碧如澄靛者。
现代文：山洞洞口有的像卷起的帷帐，水潭有的碧绿得像澄清的蓝靛一般。
English: Some of the cave openings look like rolled-up curtains, and some of the pools are so green that they look like clear blue ripples.

古文：双鸾、五老，按翼联肩。
现代文：双莺峰如羽翼相接的双飞莺犷五老峰酷似五位联肩并行的老翁。
English: The two pinnacles like wings touching each other and the five old pinnacles resemble five old men walking side by side.

古文：如此里许，抵灵峰寺。
现代文：走过景致如此幽奇的一里多路，到达灵峰寺。
English: After walking more than a kilometer through such a mysterious landscape, we arrived at Lingfeng Temple.

古文：循寺侧登灵峰洞。
现代文：顺灵峰寺侧的山道登上灵峰洞。
English: The mountain path on the side of Shun Lingfeng Temple leads to Lingfeng Cave.

古文：峰中空，特立寺后，侧有隙可入。
现代文：灵峰中部是空的，很特异地耸立于灵峰寺后，其侧面有缝隙可以进入。
English: The middle of Lingfeng is empty. It stands very peculiarly behind Lingfeng Temple, and there is a gap on its side that can be entered.

古文：由隙历磴数十级，直至窝顶洞。则窅然平台圆敞，中有罗汉诸像。
现代文：从缝隙处走过数十级石瞪，直达窝顶上，深远处的平台方圆而宽敞，其中有十八罗汉等塑像。
English: From the crevice, I walked through dozens of stone steps, reaching the top of the cave. The platform in the far distance was round and spacious, with eighteen statues of arhats.

古文：坐玩至暝色，返寺。
现代文：坐在平台上玩赏景色，直到暮色降临才返回灵峰寺。
English: Sit on the platform and enjoy the scenery before returning to Lingfeng Temple at dusk.

古文：十二日饭后，从灵峰右趾觅碧霄洞。
现代文：十二日饭后，从灵峰右侧山脚去寻觅碧霄洞。
English: After lunch on the twelfth day, I went to look for the Bixia Cave from the foot of the mountain on the right side of Lingfeng.

古文：返旧路，抵谢公岭下。
现代文：返回原路走，到达谢公岭下。
English: Return to the original path and walk to the foot of Xie Gongling Mountain.

古文：南过响岩，五里，至净名寺路口。
现代文：从南边经过响岩，走五里路，到净名寺路口。
English: From the south, go through the Loud Rock and take the Wuli Road to the Junmei Temple intersection.

古文：入觅水帘谷，乃两崖相夹，水从崖顶飘下也。
现代文：再走进去寻觅水帘岩，所谓水帘岩，就是两崖相夹，流水从崖顶上飘落而下。
English: Then go in search of water curtain rock, the so-called water curtain rock, that is, two cliffs sandwiched, flowing water falling down from the cliff top.

古文：山谷五里，至灵岩寺。
现代文：走出水帘谷五里路，就到了灵岩寺。
English: After walking out of Shui Zhen Gu Wuli Road, I arrived at Lingyan Temple.

古文：绝壁四合，摩天劈地，曲折而入，如另辟一寰界。
现代文：这里四面围合着绝壁，摩天臂地，通过曲折的小道进去，仿佛是另外开辟幽来的一个广阔世界。
English: It is surrounded on all sides by steep cliffs, soaring skyward, and you enter it through winding paths, as if it were a vast world that opened up separately.

古文：寺居其中，南向，背向屏霞嶂。
现代文：灵岩寺位居其中间，南向，背后则是屏霞嶂。
English: Lingyan Temple is in the middle, facing south, with the Pingxia Mountains behind.

古文：嶂齐而色紫，高数百丈，阔亦称之。
现代文：屏霞嶂顶部平而整齐，岩石呈紫色，高有数百丈，宽与高相称。
English: The top of Pingxia is flat and neat, the rocks are purple, hundreds of meters high, and the width is commensurate with the height.

古文：嶂之最南，左为展旗峰，右为天柱峰。
现代文：屏霞嶂的最高处，左面是展旗峰，右面是天柱峰。
English: The highest point of Pingxia, on the left is Zhanqi Peak, on the right is Tianzhu Peak.

古文：嶂之右胁介于天柱者，先为龙鼻水。
现代文：介于屏霞嶂右胁与天柱峰当中的地方，最先看见的是龙鼻水。
English: In the area between the right side of Pingxia and the right side of Tianzhu Peak, the first thing I saw was dragon snot.

古文：龙鼻之穴从石罅直上，似灵峰洞而小。
现代文：龙鼻水的出水洞穴，从岩石缝隙一直向上，像灵峰洞，但小一些。
English: Dragon snot water outflow cave, from the rock crevice all the way up, like Lingfeng Cave, but smaller.

古文：穴内石色俱黄紫，独罅口石纹一缕，青绀润泽，颇有鳞爪之状。自顶贯入洞底，垂下一端如鼻，鼻端孔可容指，水自内滴下注石盆。
现代文：洞穴内岩石的颜色都呈黄紫色，唯独缝隙口有石纹一缕是青红色而又湿润，很像龙鳞龙爪的形状，从洞顶部连贯到洞底，落下的一端很像人的鼻子，鼻尖端的石孔可以容纳手指，水就从石孔内滴下来：注入石盆中。
English: The colors of the rocks in the cave are yellow-purple, except for the crevices, which are streaked with bluish-red and wet, much like the shape of a dragon's claw, running from the top of the cave to the bottom, the falling end is much like a human nose, the stone hole at the tip of the nose can hold fingers, and water drips down from the stone hole: injected into the stone basin.

古文：此嶂右第一奇也。
现代文：这就是屏霞嶂右边的第一奇景了。
English: This is the first miracle scene on the right side of Pingxia Road.

古文：西南为独秀峰，小于天柱，而高锐不相下。
现代文：屏霞嶂西南面是独秀峰，比天柱峰小，但高度和岩石的尖锐却不相上下。
English: To the southwest of Pingxia, there is Duxiu Peak, which is smaller than Tianzhu Peak, but its height is comparable to the sharpness of the rock.

古文：独秀之下为卓笔峰，高半独秀，锐亦如之。
现代文：独秀峰之下是卓笔峰，高度有独秀峰的一半，岩石的锋锐却与两峰一般。
English: Beneath Duxiu Peak is Zhuo Pen Peak, half the height of Duxiu Peak, but the sharpness of the rock is the same as that of the two peaks.

古文：两峰南坳，轰然下泻者，小龙湫也。
现代文：南面的山坳间，轰然向下飞泻的，就是小龙漱瀑布了。
English: In the mountains to the south, the waterfall that cascades down with a roar is the Xiaolongsu Waterfall.

古文：隔龙湫与独秀相对者，玉女峰也。
现代文：隔小龙漱瀑布与独秀峰相对的，是玉女峰。
English: Opposite the Seki-Kokuryu Waterfall and the Doushuo Peak is the Tamago Peak.

古文：顶有春花，宛然插髻，自此过双鸾，即极于天柱。
现代文：玉女峰顶开满鲜艳的春花，很像是播在玉女发髻上的装饰。从此经过双莺峰，即以天柱峰为尽头。
English: The top of the Jade Lady Peak is full of bright spring flowers, much like the decoration on the Jade Lady's hairpin. From here, it passes through the twin peaks, ending with Tianzhu Peak.

古文：双鸾止两峰并起，峰际有 僧拜石 ，袈裟伛偻，肖矣。
现代文：双莺峰仅止有两座山峰并列耸起，峰际有 僧拜石 ，身穿袭装，讴楼着躯体的样子，很像老僧人。
English: The twin peaks are just two peaks rising side by side. Between the peaks, there is a "monk worship stone," wearing a suit of armor and looking like an old monk.

古文：由嶂之左胁，介于展旗者，先为安禅谷，谷即屏霞之下岩。
现代文：由屏霞嶂的左胁，介于展旗峰的中间地方，最前是安禅谷，安禅谷即屏霞嶂的下岩。
English: From the left cliff of Pingxia Yao, in the middle of Zhanqi Peak, there is Anzen Valley at the very front. Anzen Valley is the lower rock of Pingxia Yao.

古文：东南为石屏风，形如屏霞，高阔各得其半，正插屏霞尽处。
现代文：东南面是石屏风，形状相似屏霞嶂，高度、宽处各为屏霞嶂的一半，正好插在屏霞嶂的尽头处。
English: To the south-east is a stone screen, similar in shape to a screen, half the height and half the width of a screen, right at the end of the screen.

古文：屏风顶有 蟾蜍石 ，与嶂侧 玉龟 相向。
现代文：石屏风峰顶有 蟾蛛石 ，与屏霞嶂侧面的 玉龟石 相对。
English: The peak of Shi Fenfeng Peak is topped with 蜘蛛石, as opposed to 玉龟石 on the side of Pingxiahe.

古文：屏风南去，展旗侧褶中，有径直上，磴级尽处，石阈限之。
现代文：从石屏风向南去，展旗峰侧面的褶皱中，有小径一直通向峰顶上，石瞪级的尽头处，有石门坎阻隔着。
English: From the stone screen to the south, in the folds on the side of the peak, there are paths leading all the way to the top of the peak. At the end of the stone steps, there is a stone doorway.

古文：俯阈而窥，下临无地，上嵌崆峒。
现代文：俯身石门坎而窥看，下临似乎看不到地，头顶上嵌镶着高高的天空。
English: I leaned over the stone door and peeked in. It seemed that I couldn't see the ground below, and the sky was high above my head.

古文：外有二圆穴，侧有一长穴，光自穴中射入，别有一境，是为天聪洞，则嶂左第一奇也。
现代文：展旗峰外有两个圆孔，侧面有一个长孔，亮光从孔中射进来，别有一种境界，这就是天聪洞，是屏霞嶂左方的第一奇景。
English: There are two round holes outside Zhanqi Peak, and there is a long hole on the side. Bright light shines in from the hole. There is a different kind of realm. This is Tiancong Cave, which is the first wonder on the left side of Pingxia.

古文：锐峰叠嶂，左右环向，奇巧百出，真天下奇观！
现代文：尖峰与高山重重叠叠，左右回环相对，奇异精巧的景致层出不穷，真不愧为天下奇观！
English: The sharp peaks and high mountains overlap and overlap, the left and right loops are opposite, the strange and exquisite scenery is endless, it is truly a wonder of the world!

古文：而小龙湫下流，经天柱、展旗，桥跨其上，山门临之。
现代文：而小龙揪瀑布的水向下流，流经天柱峰、展旗峰，有石桥横跨溪流之上，灵岩寺的山门则面对石桥。
English: The water of the Xiaolongyi Waterfall flows downwards, flowing through Tianzhu Peak and Zhanqi Peak. There is a stone bridge across the stream, and the gate of Lingyan Temple faces the stone bridge.

古文：桥外含珠岩在天柱之麓，顶珠峰在展旗之上。
现代文：石桥外面，可看见含珠岩在天柱峰麓，顶珠峰则在展旗峰之上。
English: On the outside of the stone bridge, you can see the pearl-bearing rock at the foot of the Tianzhu Peak, and the top of Mount Everest is above the Zhanqi Peak.

古文：此又灵岩之外观也。
现代文：这又是灵岩寺的外观了。
English: This is the exterior of Lingyan Temple.

古文：十三日出山门，循麓而右，一路崖壁参差，流霞映彩。
现代文：十三日从灵岩寺山门出来，顺山麓向右走，一路上只见山崖、岩壁参差不齐，流霞与山间的色彩相辉映。
English: On the 13th, I came out of the mountain gate of Lingyan Temple and walked along the foot of the mountain to the right. Along the way, I only saw cliffs and uneven rock walls, and the haze and the colors of the mountains were reflected.

古文：高而展者，为板嶂岩。
现代文：高峻而顶部平展的，是板嶂岩。
English: Tall and flat-topped, it is schist.

古文：岩下危立而尖夹者，为小剪刀峰。
现代文：板嶂岩下耸立而又尖又窄狭的，是小剪刀峰。
English: The small scissor peak is a narrow, sharp peak that rises up from under the plateau rock.

古文：更前，重岩之上，一峰亭亭插天，为观音岩。
现代文：再往前，重重叠叠的山岩之上，一座亭亭玉立的山峰直插云天，那就是观音岩。
English: Further ahead, on top of the overlapping mountain rocks, a majestic mountain peak juts straight into the sky, that is Guanyin Rock.

古文：岩侧则马鞍岭横亘于前。
现代文：观音岩侧面则是马鞍岭横亘在前方。
English: On the side of Guanyin Rock, Ma'anshanling is in the foreground.

古文：鸟道形容道路险绝盘折，逾坳右转，溪流汤汤，涧底石平如砥。
现代文：险要的山道盘旋、曲折，越过山坳向右转，有溪流浩浩荡荡，山涧底部的石头平坦得像细磨刀石。
English: The mountain road spirals and twists dangerously, turns right over the ridge, there are huge streams, and the stones at the bottom of the ridge are flat like whetstones.

古文：沿涧深入，约去灵岩十余里，过常云峰，则大剪刀峰介立涧旁。
现代文：沿着山涧深处前进，大约离开灵岩寺十余里，经过常云峰，就见大剪刀峰介立于涧旁。
English: Advancing along the depths of the mountains, about ten miles away from Lingyan Temple, passing through Changyun Peak, you can see the Great Scissors Peak standing next to the cormorant.

古文：剪刀之北，重岩陡起，是名连云峰。
现代文：大剪刀峰北面，重岩陡然耸起，它的名称叫连云峰。
English: To the north of the Great Scissors Peak, a heavy rock rises abruptly. It is called Lianyun Peak.

古文：从此环绕回合，岩穷矣。
现代文：从这里，山环水绕，峰回壁合，岩崖穷尽了。
English: From here, the mountains are surrounded by water, the peaks are surrounded by walls, and the cliffs are exhausted.

古文：龙湫之瀑，轰然下捣潭中，岩势开张峭削，水无所着，腾空飘荡，顿令心目眩怖。
现代文：大龙漱瀑布的流水，轰然下泻，直捣潭中。山岩的态势开展而陡峭，而流水没有河床承受，于是腾空飘荡而下，顿时令人目眩而心有恐惧。
English: The flowing water of the Dalongsu Waterfall cascades down with a roar and plunges straight into the pool. The mountain rock is developed and steep, and the flowing water cannot be borne by the riverbed, so it drifts down in the air, and suddenly it is dizzying and frightening.

古文：潭上有堂，相传为诺讵观泉之所。
现代文：水潭上方建有庙堂，相传是诺诅那罗汉观赏流泉的地方。
English: There is a temple above the pool, which is said to be the place where the people of Nokkanarohan can watch the flowing springs.

古文：堂后层级直上，有亭翼然。
现代文：从庙堂后面沿石级直上，有座建在岩壁上的亭榭犹如鸟儿展翅一般。
English: From the back of the temple straight up the stone steps, there is a pavilion built on the rock wall like a bird spreading its wings.

古文：面瀑踞坐久之，下饭庵中，雨廉纤不止细雨下个不停，然余已神飞雁湖山顶。
现代文：面对瀑布踞坐着观赏了很久，才走下山岩回到庵中吃饭。蒙蒙细雨下个不止，然而我的心神早已飞到雁湖山顶。
English: I sat facing the waterfall and watched it for a long time before I walked down the mountain rock and returned to the hermitage to eat. It was drizzling, but my heart had already flown to the top of the Wild Goose Lake.

古文：遂冒雨至常云峰，由峰半道松洞外，攀绝磴三里，趋白云庵。
现代文：于是，冒雨到达常云峰，从常云峰半腰的道松洞外，攀登非常陡险的石瞪有三里之多，奔赴白云庵。
English: As a result, they braved the rain to reach Changyun Peak. From outside the Dousong Cave, which is halfway up Changyun Peak, they had to climb a very steep and dangerous rock face for more than three miles to get to Baiyun An.

古文：人空庵圮，一道人在草莽中，见客至，望去。
现代文：人已空而庵已坍塌，一个和尚在草莽中，见有客人到来，望了望就离开了。
English: The people were already empty and the hermitage had collapsed. A monk in the grass saw a guest arrive, looked at him and left.

古文：再入一里，有云静庵，乃投宿焉。
现代文：再进入一里路，有云静庵，于是在此投宿。
English: One mile further on, there is Yunjingan, so we stayed there.

古文：道人清隐，卧床数十年，尚能与客谈笑。
现代文：清隐和尚已病卧在床数十年，还能与客人谈笑。
English: Qingyin Monk has been ill in bed for decades, but he can still talk and laugh with guests.

古文：余见四山云雨凄凄、不能不为明晨忧也。
现代文：我见四周山峰乌云笼罩，细雨不止，凄凉寒冷，不能不为明天早晨的旅程担忧。
English: I can't help but worry about tomorrow morning's journey when I see the dark clouds shrouding the mountain peaks all around me, the incessant drizzle, the bleak cold.

古文：十四日天忽晴朗，乃强清隐徒为导。
现代文：十四日天忽然间晴朗起来，于是强请清隐和尚的徒弟作向导。
English: On the 14th day, the sky suddenly became clear, so I asked a disciple of a monk to be my guide.

古文：清隐谓湖中草满，已成芜田，徒复有他行，但可送至峰顶。
现代文：清隐说，雁湖中长满了草，已变成荒芜之田，清隐和尚有别地要去，但也可以送我们到峰顶。
English: Qingyin said that the wild goose lake was overgrown with grass and had become a barren field. Qingyin still had other places to go, but he could also take us to the peak.

古文：余意至顶，湖可坐得，于是人捉一杖，跻攀深草中，一步一喘，数里，始历高巅。
现代文：我想，只要到达峰顶，便可得以游览雁湖。于是每人手握一根拐杖，在深草中攀登，一步一喘地走了数里路，才到达高峰之巅。
English: I thought that as long as I reached the peak, I would be able to visit the Wild Goose Lake. So each person held a cane, climbed in the deep grass, and walked several miles step by step to reach the top of the peak.

古文：四望白云，迷漫一色，平铺峰下。
现代文：四下一望，白云弥漫，一片白色平铺山峰下面。
English: Looking around, the white clouds are thick, and a white tiled mountain peaks below.

古文：诸峰朵朵，仅露一顶，日光映之，如冰壶瑶界，不辨海陆。
现代文：各座山峰就途吞咚电的朵朵鲜花，仅只露出一点峰顶，阳光辉映在峰顶之上，这景致就好像盛冰的玉壶、清净洁白的瑶台神仙世界一般，让人不能辨别哪是云海、哪是山川陆地！
English: Each mountain peak swallows the flowers of electricity on the way, only a little peak is exposed, and the sun shines on the peak. This scenery is like a jade pot filled with ice, a pure and white world of Xingtai Immortals. People can't distinguish which is the sea of clouds and which is the land of mountains and rivers!

古文：然海中玉环一抹，若可俯而拾也。
现代文：然而，那云海中的玉环山有如轻微的一抹飘带，似乎可以俯身去拾起来。
English: However, the Jade Ring Mountain in the sea of clouds is like a light streamer, it seems that you can bend down to pick it up.

古文：北瞰山坳壁立，内石笋森森，参差不一。三面翠崖环绕，更胜灵岩。
现代文：向北远望，山坳中岩壁削立，里面石笋茂盛繁畴差不一三面有布满绿树的山崖环绕，景致更比灵岩寺优美。
English: Looking far to the north, the rock wall stands in the middle of the mountain, and the lush and prosperous areas inside the rock are surrounded by cliffs covered with green trees on more than one side. The scenery is even more beautiful than Lingyan Temple.

古文：但谷幽境绝，惟闻水声潺潺，莫辨何地。
现代文：但山谷幽深而境地非常陡险，只听见潺潺的流水声，无法辨别出是从什么地方传来。
English: But the valley is deep and very steep, only the sound of rushing water can be heard, and it is impossible to tell where it is coming from.

古文：望四面峰峦累累，下伏如丘垤，惟东峰昂然独上，最东之常云，犹堪比肩。
现代文：遥望四周，峰峦累累，低伏的有如小土堆，又有东面的山峰昂然独自向上高耸，最东边的常云峰，还能够与之相当。
English: Looking around from afar, the peaks are crowded and low-lying like small mounds, and the peaks in the east stand tall and stand alone. The easternmost peak, Changyun Peak, is comparable to it.

古文：导者告退，指湖在西腋一峰，尚须越三尖。
现代文：当向导的和尚告退时，指点说雁湖在西面中部的一山峰上，还需要翻越三道尖山。
English: When the guide monk retreated, he pointed out that the Wild Goose Lake is on a mountain peak in the middle of the west, and it still needs to climb over three sharp mountains.

古文：余从之，及越一尖，路已绝；再越一尖，而所登顶已在天半。
现代文：我听从向导的话，等到翻越过一座尖山，路已绝断；再越过一座尖山，一看所要登临的山顶，已经在天的中间。
English: I listened to the words of the guide until I crossed a sharp mountain and the road was cut off; then I crossed a sharp mountain and saw that the peak I wanted to climb was already in the middle of the sky.

古文：自念《志》云： 宕在山顶，龙湫之水，即自宕来。 
现代文：自己想，《大明一统志》说： 雁荡在山顶，龙揪瀑布的流水，就是从雁荡而来。 
English: I thought to myself, "Daming Yitong Zhi" said: The geese are flying on the top of the mountain, and the flowing water of Longjing Waterfall is coming from the geese.

古文：今山势渐下，而上湫之涧，却自东高峰发脉，去此已隔二谷。
现代文：现在山的地势逐渐下降，而上龙揪的山涧，却是从东面的一宣些燮礼距离这里已隔开两道山谷。
English: Now the topography of the mountain is gradually descending, but the mountains of Shanglonglu are separated by two valleys from the east.

古文：遂返辙而东，望东峰之高者趋之，莲舟疲不能从。由旧路下，余与二奴东越二岭，人迹绝矣。
现代文：于是改变行走路线向东走，望着东面诸峰中的高峻山峰趋赴。莲舟和尚感到疲劳，不能跟上前面的山越来越高，山脊越来越狭窄，两边相夹的岩壁置立，使人感到像在刀背上行走。
English: Therefore, he changed his walking route to the east, looking at the high mountain peaks among the peaks in the east. The Lotus Boat Monk felt tired and could not keep up with the mountains ahead, which were getting higher and higher, the ridges were getting narrower and narrower, and the clamped rock walls on both sides made people feel like they were walking on the back of a knife.

古文：已而山愈高，脊愈狭，两边夹立，如行刀背。又石片棱棱怒起，每过一脊，即一峭峰，皆从刀剑隙中攀援而上。
现代文：而且石片的棱威锋芒非常突出，每越过一道山脊，即遇到一座陡峭的山峰，都是从如刀剑般锋利的石片的缝隙中攀援而上。
English: Moreover, the sharp edges of the stone are very prominent. Every time you cross a ridge, you encounter a steep mountain peak. You climb up from the gap of the sharp stone like a sword.

古文：如是者三，但见境不容足，安能容湖？
现代文：就像这样地攀越了多次，但见所经境地难以容足，又怎么能容纳下一个湖泊呢？
English: Just like this, I climbed over many times, but when I saw the situation I was in, it was unbearable. How could I accommodate the next lake?

古文：既而高峰尽处，一石如劈，向惧石锋撩人，至是且无锋置足矣！
现代文：接着就是高峰的尽头处，一座石壁如刀劈一般陡峭，我一向惧怕石片锋利逼人，而到这里已经是没有锋利的石片可以放置脚了！
English: Next is the end of the peak, a stone wall as steep as a knife. I have always been afraid of sharp stones, but here there are no sharp stones to put your feet on!

古文：踌躇崖上，不敢复向故道。
现代文：在山崖上踌躇再三，不敢再由原来的小道返回。
English: On the cliff, I hesitated again and again, not daring to return from the original trail.

古文：俯瞰南面石壁下有一级，遂脱奴足布四条，悬崖垂空，先下一奴，余次从之，意可得攀援之路。
现代文：俯瞰南面的岩壁上有一石级，于是叫奴仆们脱下四条裹脚布接成布绳，从悬崖上悬空垂下，先让一奴仆顺布缝下去，我第二个跟从他缝下，想着可以找到攀缓的路。
English: There was a stone staircase on the cliff overlooking the south, so I asked the servants to take off four foot-wraps, join them into a rope, and dangle from the cliff. First, let one servant sew down the cloth, and the second one sew down after him, thinking that I could find a slow way to climb.

古文：及下，仅容足，无余地。
现代文：等下到石级处，仅仅能容纳脚，再没有多余的地方。
English: When you get down to the stone steps, there's only enough room for your feet, and then there's no more room.

古文：望岩下斗同 陡 ，下同深百丈，欲谋复上，而上岩亦嵌空三丈余，不能飞陟。
现代文：遥望岩壁下面，非常陡峭，深有百丈，想要设法再攀援上去，而上面的岩石嵌在空中三丈多高的地方，不能飞越登高上去。
English: Looking at the rock wall from afar, it is very steep and deep, and I want to try to climb up again, but the rock above is embedded in the sky three times higher, and I can't fly over it to climb up.

古文：持布上试，布为突石所勒，忽中断。
现代文：手拉布绳试着往上攀登，布绳被凸突的锋利石头所紧勒，忽然中断。
English: A hand-pulled rope tries to climb up, but is snagged by a jutting, sharp rock and suddenly breaks.

古文：复续悬之，竭力腾挽，得复登上岩。
现代文：重新把布绳续接好使它悬空，竭尽全力挽布绳腾空跳跃，得以再次攀登到上面的岩石上。
English: He reattached the rope so that it was suspended in the air, and tried his best to pull the rope and jump into the air, so that he could climb back onto the rock above.

古文：出险，还云静庵，日已渐西。
现代文：脱离险境，回到云静庵时，太阳已渐渐西坠。
English: When I got out of the dangerous situation and returned to Yunjingan, the sun had gradually set.

古文：主仆衣履俱敝破，寻湖之兴衰矣。
现代文：主人及奴仆们的衣服和鞋子全都弄得破敝不堪，寻觅雁湖的兴致大为衰落。
English: The clothes and shoes of the master and the servants were all in tatters, and the interest in searching for the wild goose lake was greatly diminished.

古文：遂别而下，复至龙湫，则积雨之后，怒涛倾注，变幻极势，轰雷喷雪，大倍于昨。
现代文：于是，告别清隐师徒下山，再次到龙揪瀑布。而溪水积攒了雨水后，怒涛奔腾，倾泻而下，态势变幻极大，瀑布如喷雪，声大如雷轰鸣，水势比昨天增大一倍。
English: As a result, we bid farewell to Qingyin teachers and students, went down the mountain, and went to Longyu Waterfall again. After the rainwater accumulated in the stream, the storm surged and poured down, and the situation changed dramatically. The waterfall was like spraying snow, loud as thunder, and the water potential doubled compared to yesterday.

古文：坐至暝日落始出，南行四里，宿能仁寺。
现代文：一直坐到天黑才出山门，南行四里路，宿歇于能仁寺。
English: I sat there until it was dark before leaving the mountain gate, traveling south on Shili Road, and resting at Nengren Temple.

古文：十五日寺后觅方竹数握，细如枝；林中新条，大可径寸，柔不中杖太柔软不宜作拐杖，老柯斩伐殆尽矣！
现代文：十五日在能仁寺后寻觅到方竹好几把，竹细如树枝。竹林中新长的竹条，大的径围可达一寸，比较柔软，不适合做手杖，而老的竹杖已经砍伐殆尽了！
English: On the fifteenth day, after Nohin-ji Temple, we found several pairs of square bamboo shoots. The bamboo shoots were as thin as twigs. The new bamboo shoots in the bamboo forest, with a large diameter of up to one inch, are relatively soft and not suitable for making canes, while the old bamboo canes have been cut down completely!

古文：遂从岐度四十九盘，一路遵海而南，逾窑岙岭，往乐清。
现代文：于是，从岔道度过四十九盘岭，一路顺着东海边向南行，翻越窑番岭，往乐清县而去。
English: As a result, they went through the 49 Panling Mountains from the pass, followed the East China Sea all the way to the south, climbed over the Yaoban Mountains, and went to Yueqing County.

