古文：魏文帝受禅，欲以杨彪为太尉，彪辞曰： 彪备汉三公，耄年被病，岂可赞惟新之朝？ 
现代文：魏文帝受禅称帝，想让杨彪当太尉，杨彪推辞说 我愧任过汉朝的三公之职，现在年老遭受疾病，怎么可赞助新的朝代？ 
English: Emperor Weiwen was called emperor by Zen and wanted to make Yang Biao the first lieutenant. Yang Biao declined, saying, "I am ashamed to have served as the Third Prince of the Han Dynasty. Now I am old and suffer from illness. How can I sponsor a new dynasty?"

古文：乃授光禄大夫。
现代文：魏文帝就授予他光禄大夫。
English: Emperor Wei granted him the title of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：相国华歆以形色忤旨，徒为司徒而不进爵。
现代文：相国华歆因为表情脸色不高兴违背了圣旨，调动为司徒而不提升封爵。
English: Huayu of the opposite country violated the holy will because of his unhappy expression, and was transferred to the status of a disciple without being promoted to a knighthood.

古文：帝久不怿，以问尚书令陈群曰： 我应天受禅，相国及公独不怡，何也？ 
现代文：魏文帝很长时间不开心，就问尚书令陈群说： 我应天命接受皇位，相国和您偏偏不愉快，这是为什么？ 
English: Wei Wendi was unhappy for a long time, so he asked Shang Shuling Chen Qun, saying: I accept the throne according to my destiny, but my country and you are not happy, why is that?

古文：群对曰： 臣与相国，曾臣汉朝，心虽悦喜，犹义形于色。 
现代文：陈群回答说： 我跟相国，曾经作过汉朝的大臣，心中即使喜悦，仍然不免在神色上表现道义来。 
English: Chen Qun replied: I and my compatriots, who were once ministers of the Han Dynasty, even if we are happy in our hearts, we still have to show morality in our countenance.

古文：夫曹氏篡汉，忠臣义士之所宜痛心疾首，纵力不能讨，忍复仕其朝为公卿乎？
现代文：那曹氏篡夺汉朝政权，是忠诚的臣子、正义的士人所应该痛心疾首的，即使力量不能够征讨他，难道忍心再在他的朝中做公卿大官吗？
English: That Cao usurped the power of the Han Dynasty, a loyal vassal and a righteous statesman should be heartbroken. Even if his strength could not conquer him, would he have the heart to become a noble and high-ranking official in his court?

古文：歆、群为一世之贤，所立不过如是。彪逊辞以免祸，亦不敢一言及曹氏之所以得。
现代文：华歆、陈群是一代贤良，他们的立身之本却不过如此，杨彪谦恭地推辞以避免灾祸，也不敢有一句话说到曹氏的得失所在。
English: Hua Wei and Chen Qun are a generation of virtuous people, but their foundation is nothing more than that. Yang Biao humbly declined to avoid disaster, and did not dare to say a word about Cao's gains and losses.

古文：盖自党锢祸起，天下贤士大夫如李膺、范滂之徒，屠戮殆尽，故所存者如是而已。
现代文：自从宦官迫害士大夫的党锢之祸以后，李膺、范滂之类的忠义士大夫，被屠杀得将要尽绝，因此活下来的人只有这样了。
English: Ever since the eunuchs persecuted the Party cadres, loyalist cadres such as Li Jun and Fan Jun have been slaughtered almost to extinction, so this is the only way to survive.

古文：士风不竞，悲夫！
现代文：士人的风气不强盛，可悲呀！
English: It is a pity that the morale of the officers is not strong.

古文：章惇、蔡京为政，欲殄灭元祐善类，正士禁锢者三十年，以致靖康之祸，其不为歆，群者几希矣。
现代文：彰惇、蔡京主持政事，想要杀尽宋朝元祐时的忠良之臣，正义人士被禁银锢达三十年，因而导致了靖康年间的祸乱，士人不象华歆、陈群的几乎极少有了。
English: Zhangye and Caijing presided over political affairs and wanted to kill all the loyal vassals of the Song Dynasty and Yuan Rong. Righteous people were banned for up to thirty years, which led to the calamity of the Jingkang period. There were almost no scholars like Hua Wei and Chen Qun.

