古文：别儿怯不花，字大用，燕只吉氏。
现代文：别儿怯不花字大用，姓燕只吉氏。
English: Her surname is Yandakichi, and she is not afraid to use big words.

古文：曾祖忙怯秃以千户从宪宗南征有功。
现代文：曾祖忙怯秃为千户，随宪宗南征有功。
English: Zengzu was busy and timid for a thousand households, and made a great contribution to the southern expedition of the Jianzong.

古文：父阿忽台事成宗为丞相，被诛，后赠和宁忠献王。
现代文：父阿忽台，成宗时为丞相，被诛，后赠和宁忠献王。
English: His father, Akutai, was chancellor of the court at the time of Emperor Chengzong, was executed, and was later given to King He Ningzhong.

古文：别儿怯不花蚤孤，八岁，以兴圣太后及武宗命，侍明宗于藩邸。寻入国子学为诸生。
现代文：别儿怯不花年幼丧父，八岁时即受兴圣太后及武宗之命侍奉明宗，不久入国子学学习。
English: He lost his father at a young age, and at the age of eight he was ordered by Empress Dowager Heung and Emperor Wu to serve the Ming Dynasty. He soon entered the Imperial Academy to study.

古文：会明宗以周王出镇云南，别儿怯不花从行，至大同而还。
现代文：明宗出镇云南，别儿怯不花随行，至大同而还。
English: Ming Zong went to Yunnan, accompanied by other children, and returned to Datong.

古文：仁宗召入宿卫。
现代文：仁宗召入朝充近卫亲军。
English: Ninsong was called up to the Imperial Guard.

古文：别儿怯不花以其事入奏，天子嘉而留之。
现代文：英宗授他怀远大将军、八番宣抚司达鲁花赤。
English: Emperor Yingzong bestowed him with the title of General Huaiyuan and the eighth-ranked prefectural governor, Siddhartha, with the title of Red Flower.

古文：泰定三年，特授同知太常礼仪院事，益从耆老文学之士雍容议论。
现代文：别儿怯不花到八番后，宣布国家对当地人民的恩惠，人民十分高兴，就是那些多年不肯顺从的人，也表示不敢违命，并率领十四部来受别儿怯不花约束。泰定三年，特授别儿怯不花为同知太常礼仪院事，他更加向年高的文学之士学习。
English: After the eighth time, he announced the state's benevolence to the local people, and the people were very happy. Even those who refused to obey for many years also said that they did not dare to disobey the order, and led the 14 departments to be constrained by him. In the past three years, he has been specially taught by him to be a scholar of the too-common etiquette academy, and he has learned more from older literary people.

古文：寻拜监察御史。
现代文：很快又拜为监察御史。
English: He was soon appointed Inspector-General of History.

古文：明年，迁中书右司郎中。又明年，升参议中书省事。
现代文：泰定四年，调任中书右司郎中，第二年升参议中书省事。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Taiding, he was transferred to the position of the Right Secretary of the Central Committee of the CPC, and the next year he was promoted to the position of the Vice-Minister of the Central Committee of the CPC.

古文：宣徽所造酒，横索者众，岁费陶瓶甚多。
现代文：两年后任吏部尚书。至顺元年，出任广西两江道宣慰史司都元帅。但不久因母亲去世服丧还京。
English: Two years later, he was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs. Until the first year of Shun, he served as the marshal of the Guangxi Liangjiang Expressway. However, he returned to Beijing shortly after his mother's death.

古文：别儿怯不怯花奏制银瓶以贮，而索者遂止。至元四年，拜御史大夫、知经筵事，寻迁中书平章。
现代文：后又起用为江浙行省参知政事，负责将江浙每年漕米由海道运达京师。随即委为礼部尚书，又调任徽政院副使，升侍御史，统领近卫亲军。后又升荣禄大夫、宣徽使，加开府仪同三司。至元四年拜御史大夫、知经筵事，不久又调任中书平章政事。
English: Later, he was appointed as the political advisor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, responsible for the annual transportation of rice from Jiangsu and Zhejiang to Beijing. He was immediately appointed as the ceremonial secretary of the Ministry of Culture, and was transferred to the vice minister of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, promoted to the minister of history, and commanded the troops of the Imperial Guards. Later, he was promoted to the doctor of honor, the minister of heraldry, and the three departments of the prefectural government. He was promoted to the minister of history and the secretary of history in the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, and was soon transferred to the minister of politics of the State Council of the People

古文：至正二年，拜江浙行省左丞相。
现代文：至正二年拜江浙行省左丞相。
English: He became the Minister of the Left for Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province two years later.

古文：行至淮东，闻杭城大火烧官廨民庐几尽，仰天挥涕曰： 杭，浙省所治，吾被命出镇，而火如此，是我不德累杭人也。 
现代文：行至淮东，闻杭州遭火灾，官衙民舍烧毁几尽，别儿怯不花仰天挥泪叹息道： 杭州是浙省的省会，我受命去镇守，而遭此大火，是我的德性不好而连累了杭城百姓。 
English: After traveling to Huadong and hearing that Hangzhou had been hit by a fire and that many government and private residences had been burned to the ground, Bei'er was too afraid to look up at the sky and shed tears. He sighed, "Hangzhou is the capital of Zhejiang Province. I was ordered to guard the town, and I was hit by this fire. It was my bad moral character that affected the people of Hangzhou.

古文：疾驰赴镇，即下令录被灾者二万三千余户，户给钞一锭，焚死者亦如之，人给月米二斗，幼稚给其半。
现代文：迅速赶到杭州，下令调查登记受灾者二万三千余户，每户给钞一锭，焚死者也一样，每人每月给米二斗，幼儿减半。
English: He quickly rushed to Hangzhou and ordered an investigation and registration of more than 23,000 households affected by the disaster. Each household was given a banknote, as were the victims of the fire. Each person was given two buckets of rice per month, and the amount for infants was halved.

古文：又请日减酒课，为钱千二百五十缗，织坊减元额之半，军器、漆器权停一年，泛税皆停。
现代文：又奏请减征酒课一千二百五十缗，纺织作坊课税按原额减半，军器、漆器的征发暂停一年，政府规定以外的课税，一律停征。
English: He also requested that the levy on liquor be reduced to 1250 baht, the levy on textile workshops be reduced by half of the original amount, the levy on military equipment and lacquerware be suspended for one year, and the levy on taxes other than those stipulated by the government be suspended.

古文：事闻，朝廷从之。
现代文：他把这些措施报告朝廷，都得到批准。
English: He reported these measures to the imperial court, and they were all approved.

古文：又大作省治，民居附其旁者，增直买其基，募民就役，则厚其佣直。
现代文：又大建省府衙门，将附近居民的屋基增价收买，募民建造，多给工钱。
English: They also built the provincial capital gate, bought the nearby residents' house foundations at a higher price, recruited people to build, and paid more for labor.

古文：或遇淫雨亢旱，辄出祷于神祠，所祷无不应。在镇二年，虽儿童女妇莫不感其恩。
现代文：又请减少每年江浙、福建盐课十三万引。别儿怯不花在江浙任职两年，虽妇女儿童莫不感恩戴德。
English: In addition, please reduce the annual import of salt from Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Fujian by 130,000. Do not be afraid to spend two years in Jiangsu and Zhejiang, although women and children are grateful.

古文：召还，除翰林学士承旨，仍掌宿卫。
现代文：两年后召还回京，委任翰林学士承旨，仍掌管近卫亲军。
English: Two years later, he was recalled back to Beijing, and Hanlin was appointed to succeed him. He was still in charge of the Imperial Guards.

古文：四年，拜中书左丞相。
现代文：至正四年，拜中书左丞相。
English: In the fourth year of the Heian period, he became the chancellor.

古文：朝廷议选奉使宣抚，使问民疾苦，察吏贪廉，且选习北藩风土及知典故者，俾别儿怯不花周行沙漠，洗冤除弊，不可胜计。
现代文：朝廷计划选派宣抚使至各地访问民间疾苦，考察官吏之贪廉。要选派习惯于北方风土及熟悉典章制度的人，别儿怯不花是合宜人选。他遍行沙漠各地，洗雪冤情，革除弊端，不可胜计。
English: The imperial court planned to send an envoy to various regions to visit the hardships of the people and investigate the corruption of officials. It was necessary to choose a person who was accustomed to the northern culture and familiar with the award system. He was a suitable candidate. He traveled all over the desert to wash away the grievances and eliminate the drawbacks. There was no way to beat him.

古文：又录在京贫民，日粜以粮。
现代文：又奏请朝廷遣使晓谕诸王，各安抚所管百姓，不要违法乱纪。
English: He also requested the imperial court to send an envoy to tell the kings to pacify the people under their jurisdiction and not to violate the law and discipline.

古文：帝还自上都，遣中使数辈趣使迎谒，比见，帝亲酌酒劳之。
现代文：至正五年是个大灾荒年，人民到处流浪，别儿怯不花令官府出粮赈济，愿还乡者给途中口粮。又登记在京贫民，每天向他们出售口粮。
English: The first five years of the Taisho era were a year of great disaster and famine. People were wandering all over the place. They were so scared that they ordered the government to provide them with food rations. Those who wanted to return to their hometowns were given rations on the way. They also registered themselves as poor people in Beijing and sold rations to them every day.

古文：七年，进右丞相。
现代文：至正七年晋升为右丞相。
English: Promoted to the post of Ujosho seven years later.

古文：明年，御史劾奏别儿怯不花，而徽政院使高龙卜在帝侧为解，帝遂不允。
现代文：八年，御史台臣弹劾别儿怯不花，而徽政院使高龙卜为之辩解。顺帝不仅未治别儿怯不花的罪，反而加太保之职。
English: In the eighth year, Emperor Shun was impeached by the Grand Historian, and the State Council of Hebei Province asked Gao Longbo to defend the impeachment. Emperor Shun not only did not deal with the crime committed by the Grand Historian, but he was promoted to the position of Tai Bao.

古文：乃出御史大夫亦怜真班为江浙左丞相，中丞以下皆辞职。
现代文：朝廷贬御史大夫懿怜真班出京为江浙左丞相，御史中丞以下皆辞职。
English: The Imperial Court demoted the Imperial Historian, Zou Erizhenban, to the position of Jiang Zhe Zuo Rong, and everyone below the Imperial Historian, Zhong Rong, resigned.

古文：诏复加太保。于是两台各道言章交至，别儿怯不花益不自安，寻谪居渤海县。
现代文：这事引起御史台和各道御史的不满，纷纷弹劾，使别儿怯不花更觉不安，不久贬谪到渤海县。
English: This caused dissatisfaction among the historians and historians of various provinces, and they impeached him one after another, which made him more uneasy. He was soon banished to Bohai County.

古文：初，胜以非罪死，太平年尚幼，泰定帝雪其父冤而抚恤之。
现代文：十年正月卒。后赠弘仁辅治秉文守正寅亮同德功臣、开府仪同三司、上柱国、太师，追封冀王，谥 忠宣 。太平字允中，初姓贺氏，名惟一，后赐姓蒙古氏，名太平。祖贺仁杰，父贺胜。
English: After the first month of the tenth year, he was posthumously given the title of Hongren Fu Zhi Bing Wen Shou Zheng Yin Liang Tong De Gong Cun, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, Shang Zhuo Guo, Taishi, and the posthumous title of Ji Wang, and was given the middle name of Taiping Ziyong, the first name of He, the only name, and later the surname of Mongolia, the name of Taiping. His ancestor was He Ringer, and his father was He Sheng.

古文：太平资性开朗正大，虽在弱龄，俨然如老成人。尝受业于赵孟頫，又师事云中吕弼。
现代文：贺胜受冤而死时，太平尚年幼，泰定帝为其父雪冤并抚恤太平。太平性情开朗，为人正大，虽年幼却如老成人，曾拜赵孟兆页及云中吕弼为师。
English: At the time of He Sheng's death, Taiping was still a young boy. Emperor Taiding was his father and had pardoned him. Taiping had a cheerful disposition and was an upright person. Although he was young, he was like an old man. He had studied under Zhao Mengzhao and Yunzhong Lv Ying.

古文：太平始袭父职，为虎贲亲军都指挥使，寻擢陕西汉中道廉访副使。
现代文：太平起初是承袭父职为虎贲亲军都指挥使，不久升为陕西汉中道廉访副使。
English: At the beginning, Taiping inherited his father's position as the commanding envoy of the pro-Tibetan troops, and soon rose to the deputy envoy of the Shaanxi-Hanzhong Railway.

古文：文宗召为工部尚书，都主管奎章阁工事，又除上都留守同知。
现代文：文宗召为工部尚书，总管奎章阁工事。又委任为上都留守同知。
English: Wen Zongxiao was appointed as the secretary of the engineering department and the general manager of the construction of Kuizhangge. He was also appointed as the top left-behind friend.

古文：顺帝元统初，命为枢密副使，寻升同知枢密院事，迁御史中丞。
现代文：顺帝元统初年，任命为枢密副使，不久升为同知枢密院事，调任御史中丞。
English: In the first year of Emperor Shun's reign, he was appointed as a Privy Vice-Minister, and soon rose to the position of Tongzhi Privy Councillor, and was transferred to the position of Goshi Chujo.

古文：时中书有参议佛家闾者，憸人也。御史劾其罪，时宰庇之，事寝不行。太平辞疾卧家。
现代文：当时中书省有个参议叫佛家闾，是个奸佞小人，御史台臣弹劾其罪，而宰臣包庇他，弹劾无效，太平因此借病辞职住家中。
English: At that time, there was a councillor in the Ministry of Education and Culture named Fojiakira, who was a traitorous villain. The minister of history impeached him for his crime, but the vice-minister covered up for him. The impeachment was invalid, and Taiping resigned due to illness and stayed at home.

古文：至正二年，诏起为中书参知政事，辞。进右丞，又辞。
现代文：至正二年，朝廷委任他为中书参知政事，辞谢；又晋升他为中书右丞，还是辞谢。
English: Two years later, the Imperial Court appointed him to the post of the Vice-Chairman of the Chinese Academy of Letters, but he declined the appointment; he was also promoted to Vice-Chairman of the Chinese Academy of Letters, but he still declined the appointment.

古文：会御史祁君璧复劾佛家闾，黜之，乃起就职。
现代文：直到御史祁君璧再度弹劾佛家闾并罢他的官，太平这才入朝就职。
English: It was not until Emperor Shi Jianjun Bi once again impeached Buddha Jiaxuan and dismissed his officials that Taiping entered the imperial court and took office.

古文：宗室诸王岁赐廪食衣币不均，太平请于帝，均其厚薄。守令多失职，请选台阁名臣充之。仍遣使核其治行，其治最者则增秩，赐金币。辽、金、宋三史久未克修，至是太平力赞其事，为总裁官，修成之。时粟贵而金银贱，太平请出官本，委官收市之，所得不赀，其后兵兴，卒获其用。
现代文：就任后实行一系列措施：宗室诸王每年所赐禄米、衣料不均，太平奏请皇上赏赐厚薄要平均；守令多失职，奏请以台阁名臣充任；遣使考核各地官吏的政绩，最好的增加俸禄，赏赐金银布帛；辽、金、宋三朝历史未修纂成功，太平竭力赞助并亲任总裁，完成其编修；市上粟贵银贱，太平用官府的钱派人收购，所得不少，其后用兵，粮饷充足。
English: After taking office, a series of measures were implemented: the amount of rice and clothing given by the royal families each year was uneven, and Taiping asked the emperor to reward the thickness and thinness to be average; the guards were often derelict in their duties, and they were asked to fill the posts with cabinet ministers; the envoys were sent to assess the political achievements of officials from all over the country, and the best ones were rewarded with gold and silver cloth; the history of the three dynasties of Liao, Jin and Song was not successfully compiled, and Taiping tried his best to sponsor and personally served as president to complete its compilation; the market was low, and Taiping sent

古文：四年，升中书平章政事。
现代文：四年，升中书平章政事。
English: Four years later, he was promoted to Shuhei chapter of politics.

古文：七年，迁中书平章政事，班同列上。
现代文：五年，调任宣徽院使。至正六年，拜御史大夫。
English: In the fifth year, he was transferred to the position of the envoy of the Emperor's Emblem Academy, and in the sixth year, he was promoted to the position of the Grand Historian.

古文：国王朵而只为左丞相，请于帝曰： 臣藉先臣之荫，蚤袭位国王，昧于国家之理，今备位宰相，非得太平不足与共事。 十一月，拜太平左丞相，朵而只为右丞相。
现代文：按朝廷惯例，御史一职非蒙古皇族之姓不授，太平因而推辞，皇帝特诏赐蒙古姓并改其名。七年，任中书平章政事，国王朵而只为左丞相。朵而只提出 非得太平不与共事 ，于是这年十一月拜太平为左丞相，朵而只为右丞相。
English: According to the practice of the imperial court, the post of imperial historian was not awarded to a non-Mongolian royal family member, so Taiping declined, and the emperor issued a special edict to give the Mongolian family name and change its name. For seven years, when he was in charge of government affairs, King Do was only the left chancellor. Do only proposed that Taiping should not work with him, so in November of this year, Bai Taiping was the left chancellor, and Do was only the right chancellor.

古文：太平辞，帝不允，仍诏示天下。明年正月，诏修后妃、功臣传，特命太平同监修国史，盖异数也。
现代文：至正七年，顺帝诏令修纂《后妃传》、《功臣传》，特命太平同监修国史，这是对他的特殊优遇。
English: In the seventh year of the Heian period, Emperor Shun issued a decree to revise "The Tale of the Empress Dowager" and "The Tale of a Heroic Subject," and specifically ordered Taiping to supervise the national history, which was a special privilege for him.

古文：太平请僧道有妻子者勒为民以减蠹耗，给校官俸以防虚冒，请赐经筵讲官坐以崇圣学，立行都水监以治黄河。
现代文：太平奏请：对于有妻室儿女的僧道，勒令还俗为民，以减少国家无谓的消耗；核实官俸，以防冒领；请赐经筵讲官坐，以尊崇圣贤之学；设立行都水监，以治理黄河。
English: The Taiping report requested: to reduce the unnecessary consumption of the state, the monks with wives and children should be ordered to return to the people; to verify the official salary to prevent embezzlement; to honor the wisdom of the sages, please give the seat to the lecturer; and to establish the Gangdu Water Inspector to control the Yellow River.

古文：举隐士完者笃、执礼哈郎、董立、张枢、李孝光。
现代文：他还荐举隐士完者笃、执礼哈郎、董立、张枢、李孝光等人。
English: He also recommended the promotion of hermit-performers such as Tutu, Haro, Dong Li, Zhang Zu, and Li Xiaoguang.

古文：是时，天下无事，朝廷稽古礼文之典，有坠必举。
现代文：当时天下无事，朝廷稽考古代典礼制度，凡被废者再兴办起来。
English: At that time, there was no trouble in the world. The imperial court reviewed the ancient ceremonial system and reinstated everything that had been abolished.

古文：平生好访问人才，不问南北，必记录于册，至是多进用之。
现代文：太平平时好采访人才，不问南北都记录于册，届时推荐任用。
English: Taiping is good at interviewing talent in normal times, regardless of whether the north and south are recorded in the register, and the appointment is recommended at that time.

古文：初，脱脱既罢相，出居西土。
现代文：原先，脱脱被罢相位，居于西部。
English: Originally, it was located in the western part of the country.

古文：会其父马札儿台卒，太平力请令脱脱归葬，以全孝道。
现代文：其父马札儿台卒，太平奏请让脱脱归葬其父，以全孝道。
English: His father was a member of the Mazzar children's troupe. Taiping said, "Please let Dudu go and bury his father, with full filial piety."

古文：左右以为难，太平曰： 脱脱乃心王室，大义灭亲，今父殁而不克奔讣，为善者不几于怠乎！ 
现代文：中书省一些人感到为难，太平道 ：脱脱忠于王室，大义灭亲，今父亲病逝而不归葬，这岂不是怠慢了他。 
English: Some people in Zhongshu Province are puzzled, Taiping said, "You have abandoned your loyalty to the royal family and killed your relatives for the sake of justice. Now that your father passed away without being buried, isn't that neglecting him?"

古文：为之固请，以故脱脱得还。
现代文：再三向皇上请求，终于使脱脱能归家葬父。
English: After repeated requests to the emperor, he finally allowed him to return home to bury his father.

古文：脱脱既得还朝，即拜为太傅，然不知太平之有德于己也，因汝中柏谗间成隙，遽欲中伤之。
现代文：脱脱还朝拜为太傅，并不知道是太平为他出的力，反而听信汝中柏的谗言而与太平不和，要中伤太平。
English: He also worshipped Taifu, and did not know that it was Taiping who gave him power. On the contrary, he listened to You Zhongbai's advice and did not get along with Taiping. He wanted to slander Taiping.

古文：是时，中书参政孔思立等皆一时名人，太平所拔用者，悉诬以罪黜去。
现代文：中书参政孔思立等，都是当时名士，为太平提拔任用，均被脱脱诬告而罢官。
English: The Chinese writer and politician Kong Sili and others, all of whom were celebrities at the time, were promoted and appointed for the sake of peace, and all of them were dismissed from their posts on the basis of false accusations.

古文：九年七月，罢为翰林学士承旨，既又诬劾其过失，而并论其子也先忽都不宜僣娶宗室女。
现代文：至正九年七月，降太平为翰林学士承旨，又诬劾他有过失，说他的儿子也先忽都不应越分娶宗室女为妻。
English: In July of the ninth year of the reign of Taiping, he issued an order to the scholar Hanlin, and falsely accused him of negligence, saying that his son should not marry his stepmother.

古文：脱脱之母闻之，谓脱脱兄弟曰： 太平好人也，何害于汝而欲去之。
现代文：脱脱之母知道这些事后对脱脱兄弟说： 太平是好人，对你们有何害而要除去他而后快！
English: Knowing this, the Mother of Deliverance said to the Brothers of Deliverance afterwards: Taiping is a good man, what harm can it do you to get rid of him, and quickly!

古文：汝兄弟若违吾言，非吾子也。 
现代文：汝兄弟若违背我的话，那就不是我的儿子。 
English: If your brother does not keep my word, he is not my son.

古文：侍御史撒马笃扬言于朝曰： 御史欲害正人，坏台纲，如天下后世何？ 
现代文：侍御史撒马笃在朝中扬言道： 御史欲害正人君子，败坏御史台的纲纪，天下以后将怎么治理？ 
English: Samaduk, the steward of history, raised his voice in the middle of the court and said: History wants to harm the righteous gentleman, corrupt the discipline of history, how will the world be governed in the future?

古文：即卧病不起。
现代文：太平因而卧病不起。
English: As a result, Taiping was bedridden.

古文：故吏田复劝太平自裁，太平曰： 吾无罪，当听于天，若自杀，则诚有慊矣。 
现代文：太平的旧幕僚劝太平自杀，太平说： 我本无罪，当听命于天，若自杀，反而被认为我真有罪了。 
English: Taiping's old staff members advised him to commit suicide. Taiping said, "I am not guilty. I should obey God's order. If I commit suicide, I will be considered guilty."

古文：遂还奉元，杜门谢客，以书史自适。
现代文：还至奉元，杜门谢客，以读书论史而自娱。
English: He also went to Fengyuan, Dumen Xieguang, and amused himself by reading about history.

古文：河南盗起，十五年，诏命太平为江浙行省左丞相。
现代文：河南人民掀起反元斗争。至正十五年诏命太平为江浙行省左丞相。
English: The people of Henan launched an anti-Yuan struggle. By the 15th year of the Taiping Emperor's reign, Taiping was appointed as the Minister of the Left for Jiangsu and Zhejiang.

古文：未行，改为淮南行省左丞相，兼知行枢密院事，总制诸军，驻于济宁。
现代文：尚未启程又改为淮南行省左丞相兼知行枢密院事，总领各路兵马，屯驻于济宁。
English: Before he set off, he changed his title to Minister of the Left of Huainan Province and Privy Councillor of Zhixing Province, and was stationed in Jining.

古文：时诸军久出，粮饷苦不继。太平命有司给牛具以种麦，自济宁达于海州，民不扰而兵赖以济。
现代文：当时诸军在外日久，苦于粮饷不足，太平命官府给驻军发给耕牛、农具、麦种，自给自足，所以从济宁到海州，不扰民而军饷充足。
English: At that time, the troops had been away from home for a long time and were suffering from a shortage of grain. The Taiping ordered the government to provide the garrison with oxen, farm tools, and wheat seeds, so they were self-sufficient. Therefore, from Jining to Haizhou, they did not disturb the people and the military supplies were sufficient.

古文：议立土兵元帅府，轮番耕战。
现代文：计划设立士兵元帅府，士兵轮流耕田作战。
English: It is planned to set up a marshal's office for soldiers, and soldiers will take turns to work the fields.

古文：十六年，移镇益都。未几，除辽阳行省左丞相。
现代文：至正十六年，移镇益都，不久委任为辽阳行省左丞相。
English: In the 16th year of the Ming Dynasty, he moved to the town of Yidu, and was soon appointed as the Minister of Liaoyang Province.

古文：籴粟以给京师，处置有法，所致甚多而民不扰。
现代文：他籴粟供给京师，处置有方，从不扰害百姓。
English: He supplied opium poppies to the Beijing division, handled the situation well, and never disturbed the people.

古文：十七年五月，召为中书左丞相。
现代文：至正十七年五月，召太平回朝任中书左丞相。
English: In May of the 17th year of the Heian period, Taiping was called back to the imperial court to serve as the Minister of the Left for Central Affairs.

古文：时毛贵据山东，明年，由河间入寇，官军屡败，渐逼京都，中外大骇，廷议迁都以避之，和者如出一口。太平力争以为不可，起同知枢密院事刘哈剌不花于彰德，引兵击之，大败贼众，京城遂安。
现代文：这时毛贵占据山东，由河间进逼京师，朝廷内外惊骇异常，有人提出迁都，附和者异口同声。太平竭力反对，起用同知枢密院事刘哈剌不花于彰德，领兵抗击，大败毛贵军，京城得以安然无事。
English: At this time, Mao Gui occupied Shandong, marched from Kawama to force the Beijing division, the imperial court and outside were shocked. Some people proposed to move the capital, and those who agreed were unanimous. Taiping strenuously opposed it, appointed Liu Harun, a fellow Privy Councillor, to fight against Mao Gui, led the troops to fight back, defeated Mao Gui's army, and the capital was safe and sound.

古文：会张士诚以浙西降，而晋、冀、关陕之间，察罕铁木儿屡以捷奏闻。于是中外人心翕然，有中兴之望矣。
现代文：与此同时，浙西义军张士诚降，晋、冀、关陕一带，察罕铁木儿屡奏捷报，京城人心一致，有中兴之望。
English: At the same time, Zhang Shicheng of the Western Zhejiang Uyghur Army surrendered, the areas of Jin, Hebei and Guanshan, and Chahan Tiemu'er repeatedly achieved success, and the people of Beijing are unanimous and have the hope of ZTE.

古文：太平又考求，凡死节之臣，虽布衣亦加赠谥，有官者就官其子孙，人尤感动。
现代文：太平提出，对于为国捐躯的忠节之臣，虽原为一般平民也应加赠谥号，有官者其子孙承袭为官。
English: Taiping proposed that for the loyal subjects who died for the country, although they were ordinary civilians, they should be given a nickname, and the descendants of officials should succeed to officials.

古文：当时右丞相搠思监家人以造伪钞事觉，刑部欲连逮搠思监。
现代文：这些措置尤使人感动。当时右丞相搠思监的家人造伪钞事被查出，刑部欲逮捕搠思监。
English: These measures are particularly moving. At that time, the family of the Minister of the Right, Gong Sijun, was found to be counterfeiting banknotes, and the criminal department wanted to arrest Gong Sijun.

古文：太平力为解之，曰： 堂堂宰相乌得有此事，四海闻之，若国体何！ 
现代文：太平竭力为之辩解说： 堂堂宰相怎会干这等事，四海闻之，于国体有损。 
English: Taiping tried his best to justify it, saying: How could the Prime Minister of China do such a thing, it has been heard from all over the world, and it is detrimental to the National Sports Festival.

古文：搠思监既劾罢，太平所得俸禄多分馈之。
现代文：搠思监终被弹劾罢官，太平将自己的俸禄分些给他养家饣胡口。
English: Zou Si Jian was eventually impeached and dismissed, and Taiping gave him some of his salary to support his family.

古文：二皇后奇氏与皇太子谋，欲内禅，遣宦者资正院使朴不花谕意于太平，太平不答。
现代文：二皇后奇氏与皇太子策划，逼迫顺帝让位给皇太子。派宦官资正院使朴不花去示意于太平，太平默不做声。
English: The Second Empress Ki and the Crown Prince plotted to force Emperor Shun to abdicate in favor of the Crown Prince. They sent a eunuch official, Zheng Yuan, to persuade Pak Fuxi to make overtures to Taiping, but Taiping remained silent.

古文：皇后又召太平至宫中，举酒申前意，太平依违而已。
现代文：皇后又召太平至宫中，设宴敬酒，重申前意，太平仍模棱两可。
English: The empress also summoned Taiping to the palace, set up a banquet and toast, and reiterated the previous intention. Taiping was still ambiguous.

古文：是时，皇太子欲尽逐帝近臣，又令监察御史劾帝亲昵臣御史中丞秃鲁铁木儿，未及奏而所劾御史被迁为他官，皇太子疑也先忽都泄其事，益决意去太平政柄。
现代文：这时，皇太子欲把顺帝身边的臣僚都赶走，又令监察御史弹劾顺帝最亲近的御史中丞秃鲁铁木儿，但还未及劾奏，这位御史中丞被调任他官。皇太子怀疑是太平儿子也先忽都泄露其事，更加决心要夺取太平权柄。
English: At this time, the crown prince wanted to drive away the ministers around Emperor Shun, and ordered the inspector of imperial history to impeach Emperor Shun's closest imperial historian, Zhao Lu Tiemu, but before the impeachment, the imperial historian was transferred to another official. The crown prince suspected that it was Taiping's son who first leaked the matter, and was even more determined to seize Taiping's power.

古文：知枢密院事纽的该闻而叹曰： 善人国之纪也，苟去之，国将何赖乎！ 
现代文：知枢密院事纽的该知道后叹息说 ：好人是国家的纲纪，如果除掉他，治国安邦将依靠何人？ 
English: After knowing the situation of the Privy Council, he sighed and said, "A good man is the discipline of the country. If we get rid of him, who will we rely on to govern the country?"

古文：数于帝前左右之，以故皇太子之志未及逞。
现代文：他多次提醒顺帝，这才使皇太子的意图未能实现。
English: He reminded Emperor Shun many times, which made the crown prince's intention not come true.

古文：会纽的该死，皇太子遂令监察御史买住、桑哥失理劾左丞成遵、参政赵中等下狱死，以二人为太平党也。
现代文：纽的该死后，皇太子令监察御史买住、桑哥失理弹劾受太平提拔重用的左丞成遵、参政赵中等人，将二人下狱致死。
English: After the death of New Year's Day, the crown prince ordered the inspector of the history to buy a house, Sango irrational impeachment promoted by the Taiping heavy-duty Zuo Chengzun, Zhao political participation, and the two were sent to prison to death.

古文：太平知势有不可留，数以疾辞位。
现代文：太平知大势不可挽救，多次称病辞职。
English: Taiping knew that the situation could not be salvaged, and repeatedly resigned, saying he was ill.

古文：二十年二月，拜太保，俾养疾于家。
现代文：至正二十年二月，拜为太保，在家养病。
English: In February of the 20th year of the Heian period, he was granted Taiho and recuperated at home.

古文：台臣奏言以谓当时事之艰危，政赖贤材之宏济，太平以师保兼相职为宜。帝不能从。
现代文：台臣们认为，当此国家危艰之时，正需要贤才来执政济世，太平应以太保兼为宰相。顺帝不听从。
English: The Taiwanese courtiers believed that at a time when the country was in peril, it was in need of a wise man to govern and benefit the world, and that Taiping should be both the protector and the prime minister. Emperor Shun did not listen.

古文：会阳翟王阿鲁辉铁木儿倡乱，骚动北边，势逼上都，皇太子乃言于帝，命太平留守上都，实欲置之死地。
现代文：阳翟王阿鲁辉铁木儿在北边叛乱，逼进上都，皇太子奏请派太平去留守上都，实际上是要置他于死地。
English: The impotent king, Aru Hui Tiemu Er, rebelled in the north and forced his way into Shangdu. The crown prince requested that Taiping be sent to stay in Shangdu, in fact, he wanted to put him to death.

古文：太平遂往。
现代文：太平去了。
English: Taiping is gone.

古文：有同知太常院事脱欢者，也先忽都故将也，闻阳翟王将至，乃引兵缚王至军前，太平不受，令生致阙下，北边以宁。太平终不以为己功。
现代文：同知太常院事脱欢，原为也先忽都的部将，听说阳翟王将至，率兵去把他生擒回来，太平把他送到朝廷，北边得以安宁，但太平并不以为是他自己功劳。
English: When he heard that the King of Impotence was coming, he led an army to bring him back alive. Taiping sent him to the imperial court, and the north side was pacified. However, Taiping did not consider it to be his own achievement.

古文：未几，诏拜太傅，赐田若干顷，俾归奉元。
现代文：不久，诏拜太傅，赐田若干顷，使他回归奉元。
English: Not long after, Emperor Taifu granted him several hectares of farmland, which enabled him to return to Bongyuan.

古文：帝欲以伯撒里为丞相，伯撒里辞曰： 臣老不足以任宰相，陛下必以命臣，非得太平同事不可。 
现代文：顺帝要任伯撒里为丞相，伯撒里推辞说： 臣老了，不能胜任丞相之职，若陛下一定命我为相，那非得太平同事不可。 
English: Emperor Shun wanted to appoint Besari as chancellor, but Besari declined, saying, "The minister is old and not up to the post of chancellor. If His Majesty must appoint me as chancellor, it must be a colleague of Taiping."

古文：于是密旨令伯撒里留太平毋行。
现代文：于是密令伯撒里留太平于京都。
English: As a result, he secretly ordered Bethari to stay in Kyoto.

古文：太平至沙井，闻命而止，宿留久之。
现代文：这时太平已启程赴奉元，行至沙井，闻皇帝有命留他，便不再前行了。
English: At this time, Taiping had already set off for Fengyuan and traveled to Shajing. When he heard that the emperor had ordered him to stay, he did not go any further.

古文：皇太子恶其既去而复留也，二十三年，令御史大夫普化劾太平故违上命，当正其罪。诏乃悉拘所授宣命及所赐物，俾往陕西之西居焉。
现代文：皇太子深恶太平去而复留，于至正二十三年令御史大夫普化，弹劾太平故意违背圣意，当治其罪，并下令扣压留任命令和赏赐物品，令他到陕西以西的地方去居住。
English: The crown prince abhorred Taiping's return to power, and in the 23rd year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he ordered the generalization of Dr. Guo Shi, impeached Taiping for deliberately violating the sacred will, and punished him, and ordered the withholding of the order to remain in office and the reward items, and ordered him to live in a place west of Shaanxi.

古文：搠思监因诬奏之，安置土蕃，寻遣使者逼令自裁。
现代文：因搠思监的诬告，又把他安置于土蕃，不久，朝廷遣使者去逼太平自杀。
English: As a result of the false accusation, he was placed in a dungeon. Soon, the imperial court sent an emissary to compel Taiping to commit suicide.

古文：太平至东胜，赋诗一篇，乃自杀。年六十三。
现代文：太平至东胜，赋诗一篇，自杀，年六十三岁。
English: Taiping to Dongsheng, a poem, suicide, 63 years old.

古文：执政知其故，奏也先忽都违命，杖死之。
现代文：至元二十七年，监察御史为他伸冤，请加褒赠。
English: In the 27th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Inspector-General of History took up his cause, and I would like to commend him.

古文：年四十四。有诗集十卷。铁木儿塔识
现代文：其子也先忽都，名均，字公秉，太平为宰期间，也先忽都也多为朝廷效力，但终为搠思监陷害而死，年四十四岁，有诗集十卷。
English: His son, Kudu, was also named Kudo, and his family name was Kobing. During the Taiping era, Kudu also worked for the imperial court, but eventually died at the age of forty-four after being framed by the Shishi Prison. He had a ten-volume poetry collection.

古文：铁木儿塔识，字九龄，国王脱脱之子。
现代文：铁木儿塔识，字九龄，康国王脱脱之子。
English: Tie Mu Er Ta Zhi, nine years old, is the son of King Kang.

古文：资禀宏伟，补国子学诸生，读书颖悟绝人。
现代文：其人气度宏伟，入国子学学习，聪颖过人。
English: His popularity is magnificent, he went abroad to study, and he is brilliant.

古文：事明宗于潜邸。文宗初，由同知都护府事累迁礼部尚书，进参议中书省事，擢陕西行台侍御史，留为奎章阁侍书学士，除大都留守，寻同知枢密院事。
现代文：文宗初年，由同知都护府事升为礼部尚书，进参议中书省事，升陕西行御史台侍御史，但留京任奎章阁侍书学士，后出任大都留守，不久委任为同知枢密院事。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wenzong's reign, he was promoted from the post of Tongzhi tutelary governor to the post of ceremonial secretary, and then to the post of vice-governor, and then to the post of vice-governor of Shaanxi province, and then to the post of vice-governor of Shaanxi province, but he remained in Beijing as the vice-governor of Kuizhang Academy, and then he served as the vice-governor of Tongzhi province, and soon he was appointed as the vice-governor of Tongzhi Privy Council.

古文：后至元六年，拜中书右丞。至正改元，升平章政事。
现代文：后至元六年拜中书右丞，至正元年升中书平章政事。
English: Later, in the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was given the title of Zhongshu Yujo (中書右丞), and in the first year of the Zhengyuan Dynasty, he was promoted to Zhongshu Pingzhang (中書平章政事).

古文：伯颜罢相，庶务多所更张，铁木儿塔识尽心辅赞。
现代文：伯颜罢相之后，政务多有所改进，铁木儿塔识尽心竭力地筹划。
English: After Bo Yan's retirement, the government affairs were mostly improved, and Tie Mu Er Ta Zheng made every effort to plan.

古文：每入番直，帝为出宿宣文阁，赐坐榻前，询以政道，必夜分乃罢。
现代文：皇帝常到宣文阁向铁木儿塔识询问政事和治国方略，总是谈到深夜。
English: The emperor often went to Xuanwen Pavilion to inquire about politics and statecraft from Tiemu Er Tower, and always talked about the late night.

古文：二年，郊，铁木儿塔识言大祀竣事，必有实惠及民，以当天心，乃赐民明年田租之半。
现代文：至正三年，铁木儿塔识认为，祭祀天地之后，必有实惠于民，这样才顺天意，于是朝廷决定减半征收第二年百姓田赋。
English: In the third year of the Taisho era, Temur Tachi believed that after the sacrifice of heaven and earth, there must be real benefits for the people, so that it would be in accordance with the will of heaven, so the imperial court decided to halve the collection of the second year's people's rice field.

古文：岭北地寒，不任穑事，岁募富民和籴为边饷，民虽稍利，而费官盐为多。
现代文：岭北地方寒冷，不能种庄稼，每年都是官府用盐换取富民的粮食运往北部边疆，这样人民虽多少得些利益，但官府则需要出大量食盐。
English: The northern part of Lingbei is cold and cannot grow crops. Every year, the government exchanges salt with the rich people's grain and sends it to the northern border. In this way, the people get some benefits, but the government needs to produce a lot of salt.

古文：铁木儿塔识乃请别输京仓米百万斛，储于和林以为备。
现代文：铁木儿塔识则请求将输送到京师的米粟，分出一百万斛储于和林以备不时之需。
English: Temueri Tower requested that the rice poppy be transported to Beijing Division, and allocated one million hoes to be stored in He Lin in case of emergency.

古文：日本商百余人遇风漂入高丽，高丽掠其货，表请没入其人以为奴。
现代文：日本商人百余人在海上遇风漂至高丽，高丽掠夺其货物，上表元朝，请求将日本人没为奴隶。
English: More than a hundred Japanese merchants were caught by the wind at sea and drifted to Goryeo. Goryeo plundered their goods, and petitioned the Yuan Dynasty not to enslave the Japanese.

古文：已而日本果上表称谢。俄有日本僧告其国遣人刺探国事者。
现代文：铁木儿塔识坚持不可，他说 ：天子要一视同仁，岂能乘人之险而图利，应发给他们路费，让他们回国。 过后，日本上表向元朝称谢。忽有日本僧人报告说，他们国家派人来刺探中国国事。
English: Tiemu Er Ta Zi couldn't resist, he said, "If the Son of Heaven wants to treat everyone the same, how can He take advantage of people's danger and seek profit? He should give them travel expenses so that they can return to their country." Later, Japan publicly thanked the Yuan Dynasty. Suddenly, some Japanese monks reported that their country had sent someone to spy on China's state affairs.

古文：铁木儿塔识曰： 刺探在敌国固有之，今六合一家，何以刺探为？
现代文：铁木儿塔识说 ：刺探在敌国之间是固有的事，今四海一家，刺探别人干什么呢？
English: Tie Mu'er Ta Zi said: Spying is an inherent thing between enemy countries. Now all the four seas are one. What is the use of spying on others?

古文：设果有之，正可令睹中国之盛，归告其主，使知向化。 
现代文：如果真有人刺探，正可让他亲眼看看中国之盛，回去报告国王，使日本向往和学习中国文化。 
English: If someone really spies, he can let him see the glory of China with his own eyes, go back and report to the king, and make Japan yearn for and learn about Chinese culture.

古文：两浙、闽盐额累增而课愈亏，江浙行省请减额，铁木儿塔识奏岁减十三万引。
现代文：两浙、福建盐产量日增，而盐课更亏，江浙行省请求减少课额，铁木儿塔识奏请每年减征十三万引。
English: The production of salt in Zhejiang and Fujian is increasing day by day, but the salt class is even more disadvantageous. Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces request a reduction in the amount of the course, and Tiemu Erta Senseo requests an annual reduction of 130,000 yuan.

古文：五年，拜御史大夫。
现代文：至正五年，拜御史大夫。
English: In the fifth year of the Shōgō era, he became a doctor of history.

古文：务以静重持大体，不为苛娆以立声威。
现代文：他讲求稳重，顾大体，不以苛求、烦扰来树立自己的声威。
English: He insists on being steady and cautious, and does not seek to establish his reputation by demanding or bothering others.

古文：建言： 近岁大臣获罪，重者族灭，轻者籍其妻孥。
现代文：他建议： 近年来大臣获罪，重者灭族，轻者没其妻子儿女为奴。
English: He suggested: In recent years, ministers have been convicted of crimes, with the most serious being the extermination of ethnic groups, and the least being the enslavement of their wives and children.

古文：祖宗圣训，父子罪不相及。
现代文：祖宗圣训：父子有罪不相株连。
English: Ancestral hadith: The sins of the father and son are not connected.

古文：请除之。 
现代文：请废除灭族及没妻子为奴之法。 
English: Please repeal the law of extermination and no wife as a slave.

古文：著为令。
现代文：朝廷采纳并定为成法。
English: This article shall be construed as a ritsuryo.

古文：近畿饥民争赴京城，奏出赃罚钞，籴米万石，即近郊寺观为糜食之，所活不可胜计。
现代文：近畿饥民争赴京城乞食，铁木儿塔识奏请官府用罚贪赃犯的钱来卖米万石，交给近郊寺观为饥民施粥，所活者不可胜计。
English: The starving people of the Kinki region were competing to go to the capital to beg, and Temur Tasso asked the government to use the money from the punishment of the embezzlers to sell rice and rice flour, and to give it to the temples in the suburbs to make porridge for the starving people.

古文：贪民买其筹贴以为利。
现代文：一年后，调任平章政事，且位列第一。
English: A year later, he was transferred to Pingzhang Political Affairs, and ranked first.

古文：铁木儿塔识请别发米二十万石，遣官坐市肆，使人持五十文即得米一升，奸弊遂绝。
现代文：皇帝巡视外省时，他留镇大都。按旧法：百姓向官仓买粮，因方式不同，价格亦不同，贪民从中谋利。铁木儿塔识请发米二十万石，遣官于市上售卖，五十文得米一升，使奸邪之人不能从中渔利。
English: When the emperor toured the provinces, he stayed in the capital of the town. According to the old law: the people bought grain from the official storehouse, because the method was different, the price was also different, and the greedy people made profit from it. Tie Mu Er Tower sent rice of 200,000 koku, sent officials to sell in the market, and received 50 mon of rice per liter, so that the evil-doers could not make profit from it.

古文：七年，首相去位，帝召铁木儿塔识谕旨，若曰： 尔先人事我先朝，显有劳绩，尔实能世其家，今命汝为左丞相。 
现代文：至正七年，丞相缺人，顺帝召铁木儿塔识面谕道： 你先祖为我朝效力，成绩卓著，你能承继你祖上的职位，今命你为左丞相。 
English: In the seventh year of the Heian period, there was a shortage of chancellors, so Emperor Shun summoned Temur Tachibana to meet him and said, "Your ancestors have worked hard for my dynasty, and their achievements are outstanding. You can succeed your ancestor's position. I hereby appoint you as chancellor of the Left Chancellery."

古文：铁木儿塔识叩头固辞，不允，乃拜命。
现代文：铁木儿塔识叩头辞谢，顺帝不允，只得受命。
English: Tiemu'er Ta Zhi kowtowed and resigned, but Emperor Shun did not approve, so he had to accept the order.

古文：铁木儿塔识修饬纲纪，立内外通调之法：朝官外补，许得陛辞，亲授帝训，责以成效；郡邑贤能吏，次第甄拔，入补朝阙。
现代文：受命后，整顿朝廷纲纪，建立朝廷内外官员调剂之法：朝廷官员外出任职者，许面辞皇帝，听取皇帝的教训，责成政有实效；各州郡官吏贤能者，可依次提拔到朝廷任职。
English: After receiving the order, he rectified the discipline of the imperial court and established the law of the adjustment of officials inside and outside the imperial court: the officials of the imperial court who are out of the office should swear allegiance to the emperor, listen to the emperor's lessons, and have the effect of entrusting the government; the officials of the states and counties who are capable can be promoted to the imperial court in turn.

古文：分海漕米四十万石置沿河诸仓，以备凶荒。
现代文：他将每年海运到京师的粮食，分出四十万石置于沿河各仓，以备荒年之需。
English: Every year, he would ship grain to Beijing and allocate 400,000 koku to be stored in warehouses along the river in preparation for the lean years.

古文：先是，僧人与齐民均受役于官，其法中变，至是奏复其旧。
现代文：原先规定，僧侣与一般平民都要为官府服劳役。中间有变化，僧侣不服役。
English: Originally, it was stipulated that both monks and ordinary civilians had to perform labor service for the government. There was a change in the middle, and monks did not serve.

古文：孔子后袭封衍圣公，阶止四品，奏升为三品。
现代文：现在又恢复原来的规定。孔子的后裔封为 衍圣公 ，官阶为三品，铁木儿塔识奏请升为二品。
English: Now, the original regulations have been reinstated. The descendants of Confucius are given the title of "Yan Sheng Gong," the official ranks are three, and the "Timuer Tower Seersong" is promoted to two.

古文：岁一再诣国学，进诸生而奖励之。
现代文：他每年两次去国子学鼓励诸生学习。
English: Twice a year, he goes to Kuniko Gakuen to encourage students to study.

古文：中书故事，用老臣预议大政，久废不设，铁木儿塔识奏复其规，起腆合、张元朴等四人为议事平章。
现代文：中书省惯例，用老臣参议大政方针，但已久不实行，铁木儿塔识请求恢复旧例，并起用腆合、张元朴等四人为议事平章。
English: According to the practice of the People's Republic of China and the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Education and Culture, it is customary to use a senior minister to advise on major policies, but this has not been practiced for a long time. Tiemu Ertai requested that the old practice be restored, and appointed four people, including Yuhe and Zhang Yuanpu, to serve as mediators.

古文：曾未半年，救偏补弊之政以次兴举，中外咸悦。
现代文：这一制度行之不到半年，朝廷救偏补弊之政逐渐兴起，大家都为之高兴。
English: This system has been in place for less than half a year, and the policy of the imperial court to remedy the shortcomings is gradually emerging, and everyone is happy about it.

古文：从幸上京还，入政事堂甫一日，俄感暴疾薨。年四十六。
现代文：随皇帝到上京回来，入政事堂刚一日，忽然病卒，年四十六岁。
English: He came back to Kyoto with the emperor, and just one day after entering the government, he suddenly fell ill and died at the age of 46.

古文：赠开诚济美同德翊运功臣、太师、中书右丞相，追封冀宁王，谥文忠。
现代文：赠开诚济美同德翊运功臣、太师、中书右丞相，追封冀宁王，谥 文忠 。
English: He presented Honest Jimei, Hero of the Great Patriotic War, Grand Master, the Minister of the Right of the Central Government, the posthumous title of Jining King, and the title of Wenzhong.

古文：铁木儿塔识天性忠亮，学术正大，伊、洛诸儒之书，深所研究。
现代文：铁木儿塔识天性忠义，学术端正，对宋代程颐、程颢的著作深有研究。
English: Tiemu Erta is loyal and scholarly, and has done extensive research on the works of the Song Dynasty's Cheng Hui and Cheng Xi.

古文：帝尝问为治何先，对曰： 法祖宗。 
现代文：顺帝曾问他治国以何者为先，他回答说： 效法祖宗。 
English: Emperor Shun once asked him who should be the first to rule the country, and he replied: "Follow the example of our ancestors."

古文：时修辽、金、宋三史，铁木儿塔识为总裁官，多所协赞云。
现代文：他重视征用隐士，认为应该优待提拔。修辽、金、宋三史，铁木儿塔识为总裁官，尽了他的努力，促使 三史 相继纂成。
English: He attached importance to the requisition of hermits, and believed that they should be given preferential treatment and promotion. Shuliao, Jin, and Song made three histories, and Temuer Taxi was the president. He did his best to promote the three histories successively.

古文：达识帖睦迩达识帖睦迩，字九成。幼与其兄铁木儿塔识俱入国学为诸生，读经史，悉能通大义，尤好学书。
现代文：达识帖睦迩，字九成，幼与其兄铁木儿塔识都入国子学学习，读经史，尤好读书。
English: He was able to read and write 90% of the time. As a child, he and his older brother, Tiemu Er Ta Xuan, went to study Chinese classics and read the history of scripture. They were particularly good at reading.

古文：初以世胄补官，为太府监提点，擢治书侍御史，以言罢。
现代文：初因出身于官宦之家而补官，任太府监提点，后升为治书侍御史，由于进谏违背了皇帝的旨意被罢官。
English: At first, because he was born in the family of an official, he was promoted to the post of Taifu supervisor, later he was promoted to the post of secretary, and was dismissed because he violated the emperor's will.

古文：除枢密院同知，升中书右丞、翰林承旨，迁大司农。
现代文：其后任枢密院同知，又升为中书右丞、翰林承旨、大司农。
English: He later became a privy councillor, and was promoted to Chushujojo, Kanrin Shoji, and Daisho Nong.

古文：至正七年，出为江浙行省平章政事。
现代文：至正七年，出朝任江浙行省平章政事。
English: In the seventh year of the Taisho era, he entered the imperial court and was appointed to govern the province of Jiangsu and Zhejiang.

古文：明年，又入为大司农。
现代文：八年，又入朝为大司农。
English: Eight years later, he returned to the imperial court as the Grand Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：九年，为湖广行省平章政事。
现代文：九年，任湖广行省平章政事。
English: For nine years, he served as the governor of Pingzhang, Hubei Province.

古文：沅、靖、柳、桂等路徭、獠窃发，朝廷以溪洞险阻，下诏招谕之。
现代文：沅州、靖州、柳州、桂阳等路的少数民族反元朝统治，朝廷认为山地险阻，下诏招安。
English: Ethnic minorities in Bozhou, Jingzhou, Liuzhou, Guiyang and other areas opposed the Yuan Dynasty's rule. The imperial court considered the mountainous areas to be dangerous and issued an edict calling for peace.

古文：达识帖睦迩谓： 寇情不可料，请置三分省，一治静江，一治沅、靖，一治柳、桂，以左右丞、参政分兵镇其地。
现代文：达识帖睦迩主张分而治之，分为三部：一为静江，一为沅、靖，一为柳、桂，以左右丞、参政分别镇守其地。
English: Daxingjie Muxun advocated divide and rule, divided into three parts: one for Jingjiang, one for Zhai and Jing, one for Liu and Guilin, with the left and right Jie and the participation in politics respectively.

古文：罢靖州路总管府，改立靖州军民安抚司，设万户府，益以戍兵。 
现代文：罢靖州路总管府，改设靖州军民安抚司，设万户府，增兵戍守。
English: The General Administration Office of Jingzhou Road was abolished and replaced by the Military and Civilian Pacification Department of Jingzhou, the Wanyu Prefecture was established, and the number of soldiers was increased.

古文：朝廷皆如其言。
现代文：朝廷采纳他的意见。
English: The court accepted his opinion.

古文：已而诸徭、獠悉降，召还，复为大司农。
现代文：不久，这些少数民族都归顺。达识帖睦迩被召回京再任大司农。
English: Not long after, these ethnic minorities all surrendered. Daxingjie Muxuan was recalled to Beijing and reappointed as the Chief Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture.

古文：十一年，台州方国珍起海上。
现代文：至正十一年，台州方国珍在海上起义反元。
English: In the eleventh year of the year, Taizhou Fang Guozhen rebelled at sea.

古文：达识帖睦迩奉诏与江浙行省参知政事樊执敬往招谕之。
现代文：达识帖睦迩奉诏与江浙行省参知政事樊执敬一同去招安。
English: After receiving the edict, Daxingjie Muxuan went to recruit An together with Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial Party Secretary Xizhong Xizhong.

古文：明年，盗起河南。拜河南行省平章政事。
现代文：十二年，河南人民也掀起反元斗争，拜达识帖睦迩为河南行省平章政事。
English: In the 12th year, the people of Henan also launched an anti-Yuan struggle, and Baida Xingzhe Muxuan became the governor of Henan Province.

古文：至则修城池，饬备御，贼不敢犯其境。
现代文：到任后赶修城池，领军防御，义军不敢轻易入境。
English: After taking office, he hurriedly repaired the castle and led the army in defense. The rebels did not dare to enter the country easily.

古文：迁淮南行省平章政事。
现代文：后调任淮南行省平章政事。
English: Later, he was transferred to Pingzhang Government of Huainan Province.

古文：十五年，入为中书平章政事。
现代文：十五年入京为中书平章政事。
English: After fifteen years in Beijing, he entered politics as a member of the Taira clan.

古文：时中书庶务多为吏胥迟留，至则责委提控掾史二人分督左右曹，悉为剖决。
现代文：当时中书省政务多被一班官吏压着不办，达识帖睦迩到任后责令分头办理。
English: At that time, the government affairs of the Ministry of Education and Culture were mostly suppressed by a group of officials, and after Daxuentie Muxuan took office, he was ordered to divide the work.

古文：出为江浙行省左丞相，寻兼知行枢密院事，许以便宜行事。
现代文：出任江浙行省左丞相，不久又兼任知行枢密院事，授权他自行处理一切事务。
English: He served as the Minister of the Left for Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, and soon also served as the Privy Councillor for Zhigang Province, authorizing him to handle all affairs on his own.

古文：万户普贤奴力拒之，而苗军帅杨完者时驻嘉兴，亦引兵至，败走张士诚，达识帖睦迩乃还。
现代文：江淮地区人民的反元烽火日盛，南北交通阻隔。达识帖睦迩专权一方，而又用人不当，贿赂公行，卖官鬻爵。批评者议论纷纷，所管领的州郡相继为义军占领，他却全然不放在心上。至正十六年二月，张士诚攻下平江。七月进逼杭州，达识帖睦迩逃往富阳，直到苗军元帅杨完者从嘉兴来击败张士诚，他才回到杭城。
English: The anti-Yuan rebellion of the people in the Jianghuai region was on the rise, and transportation between the north and the south was blocked. Daju Xizhe Mucun, on the other hand, was an authoritarian, and he employed people improperly, bribed officials, and sold officials. Critics talked about it, and the states and counties under his control were successively occupied by the rebels, but he did not care at all. In February of the 16th year, Zhang Shicheng conquered Pingjiang. In July, he advanced to Hangzhou, and Daju Xizhe Mucun fled to Fuyang. He did not return to Hangzhou until the Miao army marshal Yang

古文：初，达识帖睦迩以完者为海北宣慰使都元帅，寻升江浙行省参政，至是遂升右丞。
现代文：早先，达识帖睦迩任命杨完者为海北宣慰使都元帅，不久又升他为江浙行省参政，现在又升为左丞。
English: In the early days, Yang Wan was appointed as the Marshal of the North China Sea, soon he was promoted to participate in the politics of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, and now he is promoted to the position of the Vice-Admiral.

古文：而苗军素无纪律，肆为钞掠，所过荡然无遗。达识帖睦迩方倚完者以为重，莫敢禁遏，故完者矜骄日肆而不可制。
现代文：杨完者所领导的苗军素无纪律，肆意抢劫，达识帖睦迩正要依靠杨完者，所以对苗军的不法行为不敢禁止，杨完者更加骄矜而不可控制了。
English: The Miao troops led by Yang Guanzhong were undisciplined and robbed at will. As they had to rely on Yang Guanzhong, they did not dare to forbid the illegal acts of the Miao troops. Yang Guanzhong became more arrogant and uncontrollable.

古文：明年，士诚寇嘉兴，屡为完者所败。
现代文：至正十七年，张士诚进攻嘉兴，多次为杨完者所败。
English: In the 17th year of the Taisho era, Zhang Shicheng attacked Jiaxing and was repeatedly defeated by Yang Gan.

古文：士诚始要王爵，达识帖睦迩不许。又请爵为三公，达识帖睦迩曰： 三公非有司所定，今我虽便宜行事，然不敢专也。 
现代文：士诚遣蛮子海牙致书诈降。蛮子海牙原是元朝南行御史台御史中丞，在采石为大明军所败，投向张士诚，故士诚派他诈降。
English: Shicheng sent a letter to the barbarian son of Hague to defraud. The barbarian son of Hague was originally the former imperial court in the south, and was defeated by the Daming army in quarrying. He threw in his lot with Zhang Shicheng, and the late emperor Shicheng sent him to defraud.

古文：完者又力以为请，达识帖睦迩虽外为正词，然实幸其降，又恐忤完者意，遂授士诚太尉，其弟士德淮南行省平章政事，士信同知行枢密院事，其党皆授官有差。
现代文：杨完者准备接受士诚的投降，达识帖睦迩不同意，经完者再三劝说便答应了。士诚开始要王爵，达识帖睦迩不许。士诚又要求为三公，达识帖睦迩说 ：三公非地方官吏所能授与的，今我虽有权处理一切事务，但也不敢专断独行。 完者又加劝说，达识帖睦迩对张士诚投降内心已感庆幸，又恐违反完者的意愿，于是授张士诚为太尉，其弟张士德为淮南行省平章政事，士信为同知行枢密院事，其他人也授有官职。
English: Yang Guanzhong was ready to accept Zhicheng's surrender, but Dazhong did not agree, and after repeated persuasion, Guanzhong agreed. Zhicheng began to ask for a peerage, but Dazhong did not allow it. Zhicheng also asked to be the three princes, and Dazhong said: The three princes cannot be awarded by local officials, and now I have the right to handle all affairs, but I do not dare to arbitrarily go it alone. Guanzhong also added persuasion. Dazhong was glad to see Zhang Shicheng surrender, and was afraid to violate the wishes of the finisher, so he awarded

古文：士德寻为大明兵所擒。
现代文：后来张士德为大明军所擒。
English: Later, Zhang Shide was captured by the Great Ming Army.

古文：复升士信淮南行省平章政事。
现代文：达识帖睦迩又升士信为淮南行省平章政事。
English: Daxingjie Muxuan and Shengzixin became the governors of Pingzhang in Huainan Province.

古文：然士诚虽降，而城池府库甲兵钱谷皆自据如故。
现代文：张士诚虽降，而其城池、府库、军械、兵卒、钱粮仍为他所据有。
English: Although Zhang Shicheng fell, his castle, treasury, armaments, soldiers, and money were still his.

古文：于是朝廷以招安张士诚为达识帖木儿功，诏加太尉。
现代文：朝廷认为达识帖睦迩招安张士诚有功，诏令加他为太尉。
English: The imperial court believed that Daxingzhi Muxun recruited Zhang Shicheng, and the imperial order added him as a lieutenant.

古文：当是时，徽州、建德皆已陷，完者屡出师不利。
现代文：反元义军攻克徽州、建德，多次挫败杨完者的苗军。
English: The anti-Yuan rebels conquered Huizhou and Jiande, and repeatedly defeated the seedling army of Yang Guanzhong.

古文：士诚素欲图完者，而完者时又强娶平章政事庆童女，达识帖木儿虽主其婚，然亦甚厌之，乃阴与士诚定计除完者。
现代文：士诚一直想除掉完者。完者强娶平章政事庆童女为妻，达识帖睦迩虽主其婚，但内心对杨非常厌恶，暗中与张士诚定计除掉杨完者。
English: Shicheng always wanted to get rid of the finisher. The finisher forcibly married the daughter of Pingzhang Zhengjiqing as his wife. Although Daxu Jie Mucun was married, his heart was very disgusted with Yang. He secretly plotted with Zhang Shicheng to get rid of the Yang finisher.

古文：扬言使士诚出兵复建德，完者营在杭城北，不为备，遂被围，苗军悉溃，完者与其弟伯颜皆自杀。
现代文：扬言令士诚出兵去收复建德，实际是袭击驻扎在杭城北的完者。完者没有防备，被围，苗军溃，杨完者与其弟伯颜皆自杀。
English: He threatened to send soldiers to recapture Jiande, but in fact attacked the Wan who was stationed in the north of Hangzhou. The Wan was unprepared and was surrounded, the Miao army was routed, and Yang Wan and his brother Bo Yan both committed suicide.

古文：其后事闻于朝，赠完者潭国忠愍公，伯颜衡国忠烈公。
现代文：其后将此事上报于朝廷，朝廷赠完者为潭国忠愍公，伯颜为衡国忠烈公。
English: After that, the matter was reported to the imperial court. The recipient of the gift from the imperial court was Tan Guo Zhongxuan and Bo Yan was Heng Guo Zhongxuan.

古文：完者既死，士诚兵遂据杭州。
现代文：完者死后，张士诚占据杭州。
English: After the death of the finisher, Zhang Shicheng occupied Hangzhou.

古文：十九年，朝廷因授士信江浙行省平章政事。
现代文：至正十九年，朝廷授士信为江浙行省平章政事。
English: In the 19th year of the Heian period, the imperial court conferred the title of nobility on Pingzhang, the governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang.

古文：士信乃大发浙西诸郡民筑杭城。
现代文：士信大量征发浙西诸郡百姓建筑杭州城。
English: Shixin solicited and dispatched a large number of people from counties in western Zhejiang to build Hangzhou City.

古文：先是，海漕久不通，朝廷遣使来征粮，士诚运米十余万石达京师。
现代文：在此之前，海道航运已很久不通，朝廷遣使征粮，士诚运米十余万石至京师。
English: Prior to this, shipping on the sea route had been impassable for a long time. The imperial court sent emissaries to collect grain, and Shicheng transported more than 100,000 koku of rice to Beijing.

古文：方面之权，悉归张氏，达识帖睦迩徒存虚名而已。
现代文：江浙方面的军政大权，都为张氏兄弟所有，达识帖睦迩徒有虚名。
English: The military and political power in Jiangsu and Zhejiang are all owned by the Zhang brothers, and the Daxingjie Mucu followers have a false name.

古文：俄而士诚令其部属自颂功德，必欲求王爵。
现代文：不久，张士诚令其部属歌颂他的功德，一定要朝廷授与他王爵。
English: Soon after, Zhang Shicheng ordered his subordinates to sing his praises and make sure the court awarded him a peerage.

古文：达识帖睦迩谓左右曰： 我承制居此，徒籍口舌以驭此辈。今张氏复要王爵，朝廷虽微，终不为其所胁，但我今若逆其意，则目前必受害，当忍耻含垢以从之耳。 
现代文：达识帖睦迩对其左右说： 我奉朝之命居此，只是靠口舌来驾驭他们，今张氏再要王爵，朝廷虽然无力，但受不到他的威胁，而我若违反他的意愿，则立刻受害，只有忍耻含垢来屈从于他。 
English: Dazhongjie said to his entourage: I am here at the behest of the court, and I only use my tongue to control them. Now the Zhang clan wants another crown prince. Although the court is powerless, it cannot be threatened by him. If I violate his wishes, I will immediately suffer, and I can only submit to him with shame.

古文：乃为具文书闻于朝，至再三，不报。
现代文：于是上书朝廷，虽再二再三，廷臣始终未报告皇帝。
English: As a result, although letters were repeatedly sent to the imperial court, courtiers never reported to the emperor.

古文：士诚遂自立为吴王，即平江治宫阙，立官属。
现代文：士诚便自立为吴王，在平江建宫室，设官属。
English: Shicheng then established himself as the king of Wu, built a palace in Pingjiang, and set up an official retinue.

古文：时答兰帖木儿为江浙行省右丞，真保为左右司郎中，二人谄事士诚，多受金帛，数媒孽达识帖睦迩之短，以故张氏遂有不相容之势。
现代文：当时答兰帖木儿为江浙行省右丞，真保为左右司郎中，二人谄媚张士诚，挑拨张士诚与达识帖睦迩的关系，使二人有不相容之势。
English: At that time, Tahlan Timur was the right-hand man of Jiangsu and Zhejiang, and Zhenbao was the left-hand man. The two flattered Zhang Shicheng, and provoked the relationship between Zhang Shicheng and Daxue Jie, so that the two were incompatible.

古文：二十四年，士信乃使王晟等面数达识帖睦迩过失，勒其移咨省院，自陈老病愿退。又言： 丞相之任非士信不可。 
现代文：至正二十四年，张士信指使王晟当面斥责达识帖睦迩的过失，强迫他自陈老病辞官，又称： 丞相之职非士信不可。 
English: In the 24th year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Zhang Shixin ordered Wang Xizang to reprimand the fault of Daju Xizhe Muxuan in person, and forced him to resign from his post due to old age and illness.

古文：士信即逼取其诸所掌符印，而自为江浙行省左丞相，徙达识帖睦迩居嘉兴。
现代文：士信向达识帖睦迩逼取符印，自任江浙行省左丞相，将达识帖睦迩迁到嘉兴居住。
English: Shixin coerced the seal from Dajuitei Mucuo, appointed himself as the Minister of the Left for Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, and moved Dajuitei Mucuo to Jiaxing.

古文：士诚令有司公牍皆首称 吴王令旨 ，又讽行台为请实授于朝，行台御史大夫普化帖木儿皆不从。
现代文：朝廷闻知，也就任命张士信为江浙行省左丞相。达识帖睦迩到嘉兴后，张士信把他严密地监禁起来。达识帖睦迩毫不在意，每天与妻妾饮酒作乐。士诚令官府衙门的公文都称 吴王令旨 ，又暗示江浙行台向朝廷奏请实授他为吴王。行台御史大夫普化帖木儿不听从。
English: When the imperial court heard of this, it also appointed Zhang Shixin as the acting governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province. After Dazhongjie Mutsumi arrived in Jiaxing, Zhang Shixin imprisoned him. Dazhongjie Mutsumi did not care at all, he drank alcohol and played music with his wife and concubine every day. The official documents of the official government gate were all called "Wu Wang Lingzhi," and also implied that Jiangsu and Zhejiang should ask the imperial court to grant him the title of Wu Wang. The official governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, Puhua Timur, did not obey.

古文：至是，既拘达识帖睦迩，即使人至绍兴从普化帖木儿索行台印章。
现代文：张氏兄弟监禁了达识帖睦迩后，立即派人去绍兴向普化帖木儿索取行台印章。
English: After the Zhang brothers imprisoned Dajuentie Muxun, they immediately sent someone to Shaoxing to request the seal from Puhua Timur.

古文：普化帖木儿封其印置诸库，曰： 我头可断，印不可与。 又迫之登舟，曰： 我可死，不可辱也。 
现代文：普化帖木儿声色俱厉地说： 我头可断，印不可给。 又强迫他登船，他说： 我可杀而不可辱！ 
English: "My head can be cut off, but I cannot be branded," Purva Timur said in a strained voice, and they forced him onto the ship, where he said, "I can be killed, but not humiliated!"

古文：从容沐浴更衣，与妻子诀，赋诗二章，乃仰药而死。
现代文：从容沐浴更衣，与妻子诀别赋诗二章，服药自杀。
English: Leisurely showering, changing clothes, bidding farewell to his wife, and taking medicine to commit suicide.

古文：后数日，达识帖睦迩闻之，叹曰： 大夫且死，吾不死何为！ 
现代文：数日后，达识帖睦迩闻普化帖木儿自尽，仰天叹息道： 大夫且死，我不死何为！ 
English: A few days later, after hearing of the suicide of the doctor, Daxuetie Muntu, the doctor, Puhua Timur, sighed to the heavens, "Doctor, you can die, but what if I don't die!"

古文：士诚乃使载其柩及妻孥北返于京师。
现代文：士诚使人载其灵柩及妻子儿女北返京师。
English: Shicheng had his coffin and his wife and children carried north to Beijing.

