古文：二十有三年春，王二月癸酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：二十三年春季，周历二月癸酉初一这天，有日食。
English: In the spring of 233, on the first day of the second month of the lunar calendar, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：三月己巳，杞伯匄卒。
现代文：三月己巳日，杞孝公去世。
English: On March 6th, Shigetaka passed away.

古文：夏，邾畀我来奔。
现代文：夏季，邾畀我逃到鲁国。
English: In the summer, I fled to Russia.

古文：葬杞孝公。
现代文：安葬杞孝公。
English: A peaceful funeral service was held for Shun Takahiro.

古文：陈杀其大夫庆虎及庆寅。
现代文：陈国杀了自己的大夫庆虎和庆寅。
English: Chen Guo killed his doctors Qinghu and Qingyin.

古文：陈侯之弟黄自楚归于陈。
现代文：陈侯的弟弟公子黄从楚国回到陈国。
English: Chen Hou's younger brother, Gongzi Huang, returned to Chen from Chu.

古文：晋栾盈复入于晋，入于曲沃。
现代文：晋国的栾盈又进入晋国，进入曲沃这个地方。
English: The prosperity of Jin Province has also entered Jin Province and entered this place in Quwo.

古文：秋，齐侯伐卫，遂伐晋。
现代文：秋季，齐侯出兵攻打卫国，接着攻打晋国。
English: In the autumn, Qi Hou sent troops to attack and defend the country, and then attacked Jin.

古文：八月，叔孙豹帅师救晋，次于雍榆。
现代文：八月，叔孙豹率领军队援救晋国，驻扎在雍榆。
English: In August, Uncle Sun Leopard led the army to rescue Jin Province and was stationed in Yongle.

古文：己卯，仲孙速卒。
现代文：己卯日，仲孙速去世。
English: On the same day, Nakasunsaku passed away.

古文：冬十月乙亥，臧孙纥出奔邾。
现代文：冬季十月乙亥日，臧孙纥逃到邾国。
English: In the winter of October, on the day of the Chinese lunar new year, Sun Yat-sen fled to Shandong Province.

古文：晋人杀栾盈。
现代文：晋国人杀死了栾盈。
English: The people of Jin killed Hao Ying.

古文：齐侯袭莒。
现代文：齐侯出兵突袭了莒国。
English: Qi Hou sent troops and raided Shandong Province.

古文：二十三年春，杞孝公卒，晋悼夫人丧之。
现代文：二十三年春季，杞孝公死去，晋悼夫人为他服丧。
English: In the spring of the 23rd year of the Heian period, Prince Suetaka died, and his wife Jin mourned for him.

古文：平公不彻乐，非礼也。
现代文：晋平公不撤除音乐，这是不合于礼的。
English: It is not proper for Jinping Gong not to remove the music.

古文：礼，为邻国阙。
现代文：按照礼，应该为邻国的丧事撤除音乐。
English: According to etiquette, music should be turned down for the funeral of a neighbor.

古文：陈侯如楚。公子黄愬二庆于楚，楚人召之。使庆乐往。杀之。
现代文：陈哀公到达楚国，公子黄在楚国对二庆提出控诉，楚国人召见二庆，二庆让庆乐前往，楚国人杀了庆乐。
English: Chen Aigong arrived in Chu, and his son Huang filed a complaint against Erqing in Chu. The people of Chu summoned Erqing, Erqing sent Qingle to the court, and the people of Chu killed Qingle.

古文：庆氏以陈叛。
现代文：庆氏带领陈国背叛楚国。
English: Qing led Chen to betray Chu.

古文：夏，屈建从陈侯围陈。
现代文：夏季，屈建跟从陈哀公包围陈国。
English: In the summer, Qu Jian followed Chen Aigong to encircle Chen Guo.

古文：陈人城，板队而杀人。
现代文：陈国人筑城，夹板掉下来，庆氏就杀死了筑城人。
English: The people of Chen built the city, the splint fell down, and Qing killed the people who built the city.

古文：役人相命，各杀其长。遂杀庆虎、庆寅。
现代文：筑城的人互相传令，各自杀死他们的工头，于是乘机杀死了庆虎、庆寅。
English: The people building the city sent orders to each other to kill their foremen one by one, so they took the opportunity to kill Qinghu and Qingyin.

古文：楚人纳公子黄。
现代文：楚国人把公子黄送回陈国。
English: The people of Chu sent Prince Huang back to Chen.

古文：君子谓： 庆氏不义，不可肆也。
现代文：君子认为： 庆氏行动不合于道义，就不能放肆。
English: Nobles believed: If the actions of Keiji were immoral, they could not be reckless.

古文：故《书》曰： 惟命不于常。  
现代文：所以《书》说： 天命不能常在。  
English: Therefore, the "Book" says: The Mandate of Heaven cannot always be present.

古文：晋将嫁女于吴，齐侯使析归父媵之，以藩载栾盈及其士，纳诸曲沃。
现代文：晋国将要把女儿嫁给吴国，齐庄公让析归父致送妾媵，用篷车装着栾盈和他的士，把他安置在曲沃。
English: Jin was about to marry his daughter to Wu, and Qizhuang allowed his father to return home with a concubine, and sent a caravan with Yao Ying and his men to settle him in Quwuo.

古文：栾盈夜见胥午而告之，对曰： 不可。
现代文：栾盈夜里进见胥午并把情况告诉他。胥午回答说： 不能那么做。
English: In the middle of the night, Gong Ying went to see Gong Niang and told him the situation. Gong Niang replied, "I can't do that.

古文：天之所废，谁能兴之。
现代文：上天所废弃的，谁能够把他兴起？
English: Who can resurrect what God has abandoned?

古文：子必不免。
现代文：您必然不免于死。
English: You're going to die.

古文：吾非爱死也，知不集也。 
现代文：我不是爱惜一死，明知事情是不能成功的。 
English: I didn't want to die, I knew it wasn't going to work.

古文：盈曰： 虽然，因子而死，吾无悔矣。
现代文：栾盈说： 尽管这样，依靠您而死去，我不后悔。
English: Hao Ying said: In spite of this, I don't regret dying while relying on you.

古文：我实不天，子无咎焉。 
现代文：我确实不为上天保佑，您没有过错。 
English: I really don't for heaven's sake, you're not at fault.

古文：许诺。
现代文：胥午答应了。
English: Han Yu Qui agreed.

古文：伏之，而觞曲沃人。乐作，午言曰： 今也得栾孺子，何如？ 
现代文：把栾盈藏起来以后就请曲沃人喝酒，音乐开始演奏，胥午发话说： 现在要是找到栾孺子，怎么办？ 
English: After he had hidden her, he invited the Quvo people to drink, the music began to play, and in the afternoon he said: "What if I find the mule now?

古文：对曰： 得主而为之死，犹不死也。 
现代文：人们回答说： 找到了主人而为他死，虽死犹生。 
English: And they said, We have found him, and we will die for him, even though we are dead.

古文：皆叹，有泣者。
现代文：大家都叹息，还有哭泣的。
English: Everyone was sighing and crying.

古文：爵行，又言。
现代文：举杯，胥午又说栾盈回来的话。
English: Raise a glass, and in the afternoon say the words of Hao Ying's return.

古文：皆曰： 得主，何贰之有？ 
现代文：大家都说： 找到了主人，还有什么二心的！ 
English: Everyone said: We have found the owner, what else is there to do!

古文：盈出，徧拜之。
现代文：栾盈走出来，对大家一一拜谢。
English: Hao Ying came out and thanked everyone one by one.

古文：四月，栾盈帅曲沃之甲，因魏献子以昼入绛。
现代文：四月，栾盈率领曲沃的甲兵，靠着魏献子，在白天进入绛地。
English: In April, Zou Ying led the armored soldiers of Quwo, relying on Wei Xianzi, to enter the ploughed land in the daytime.

古文：初，栾盈佐魏庄子于下军，献子私焉，故因之。
现代文：当初，栾盈在下军中辅佐魏庄子，魏献子和他私下里很要好，所以依靠他。
English: At the beginning, Zou Ying assisted Wei Zhuangzi in the departure of the army. Wei Xianzi was very friendly with him in private, so she relied on him.

古文：赵氏以原、屏之难怨栾氏，韩、赵方睦。
现代文：赵氏由于原、屏的祸难怨恨栾氏，韩氏、赵氏刚刚和睦。
English: The Zhao clan resented the Zou clan because of the calamity of the original and the screen, and the Han clan and the Zhao clan have just been reconciled.

古文：中行氏以伐秦之役怨栾氏，而固与范氏和亲。
现代文：中行氏由于攻打秦国的那次战役怨恨栾氏，本来和范宣子亲近。
English: The Chukyo clan resented the Min clan because of the battle against Qin, and was originally close to Fan Xunzi.

古文：知悼子少，而听于中行氏。
现代文：知悼子年纪小，因此听从中行氏的话。
English: Knowing that the mourners were young, they listened to Mr. Zhongxing.

古文：程郑嬖于公。
现代文：程郑受到晋平公的宠信。
English: Cheng Zheng was favored by Jin Ping Gong.

古文：唯魏氏及七舆大夫与之。
现代文：只有魏氏和七舆大夫帮助栾氏。
English: Only Mr. Wei and Dr. Qi Minzhu helped Mr. Zou.

古文：乐王鲋侍坐于范宣子。
现代文：乐王鲋陪侍在范宣子旁边。
English: Le Wangya accompanies Fan Xuanzi.

古文：或告曰： 栾氏至矣！ 
现代文：有人报告说： 栾氏来了。 
English: Someone reported: Mr. Zou is coming.

古文：宣子惧。
现代文：宣子恐惧。
English: Nobuko is terrified.

古文：桓子曰： 奉君以走固宫，必无害也。
现代文：乐王鲋说： 奉事国君逃到固宫，一定没有危害。
English: Le Wangyao said, "There must be no harm in serving the king and escaping to Gogu.

古文：且栾氏多怨，子为政；栾氏自外，子在位。其利多矣。
现代文：而栾氏怨敌很多，您主持国政，栾氏从外边来的，您处在掌权的地位，这有利的条件就多了。
English: On the other hand, there are many enemies of the Nie clan, you are in charge of state affairs, the Nie clan came from outside, and you are in a position of power, so there are more favorable conditions.

古文：既有利权，又执民柄，将何惧焉？
现代文：既然有利有权，又掌握着对百姓的赏罚，还害怕什么？
English: What is there to be afraid of, since they have the advantage and power, and control the rewards and punishments of the people?

古文：栾氏所得，其唯魏氏乎！
现代文：栾氏所得到的，不就仅仅魏氏吗！
English: What Mr. Zou gained, only Mr. Wei gained!

古文：而可强取也。
现代文：而且魏氏是可以用强力争取过来的。
English: Moreover, the Wei clan can use force to win.

古文：夫克乱在权，子无懈矣。 
现代文：平定叛乱在于有权力，您不要懈怠！ 
English: To put down the rebellion is to have power, you should not slack off!

古文：公有姻丧，王鲋使宣子墨缞冒绖，二妇人辇以如公，奉公以如固宫。
现代文：晋平公有亲戚的丧事，乐王鲋让范宣子穿着黑色的丧服，和两个女人坐上手拉车去到晋平公那里，陪侍晋平公去到固宫。
English: On the occasion of the funeral of a relative of Emperor Jinpyeong, the king of music asked Fan Xuan Zi, dressed in black mourning clothes, and two women to go to Emperor Jinpyeong's place in a hand-pulled carriage, and to accompany Emperor Jinpyeong to the Imperial Palace.

古文：范鞅逆魏舒，则成列既乘，将逆栾氏矣。
现代文：范鞅去迎接魏献子，魏献子的军队已经排成行列、登上战车，准备去迎接栾氏了。
English: Fan Ye went to meet Wei Xianzi, and Wei Xianzi's army had already lined up, boarded the chariot, and were ready to meet Yu Shi.

古文：趋进，曰： 栾氏帅贼以入，鞅之父与二三子在君所矣。使鞅逆吾子。鞅请骖乘持带。 
现代文：范鞅快步走进，说： 栾氏率领叛乱分子进入国都，鞅的父亲和几位大夫都在国君那里，派鞅来迎接您，鞅请求在车上作为骖乘。 
English: Fan Ye walked quickly in and said: "The rebels led by Mr. Ye have entered the national capital. Ye's father and several doctors are with the sovereign. They have sent Ye to meet you, and Ye has requested to ride in the car as Ye."

古文：遂超乘，右抚剑，左援带，命驱之出。
现代文：拉着带子，就跳上魏献子的战车。范鞅右手摸着剑，左手拉着带子，下令驱车离开行列。
English: Pulling the strap, he jumped onto Wei Xianzi's chariot. Fan Qi touched his sword with his right hand, pulled the strap with his left hand, and ordered the chariot to leave the line.

古文：仆请，鞅曰： 之公。 
现代文：驾车的人请问到哪里去，范鞅说： 到国君那里。 
English: When the driver asked where to go, Fan Ye said, "To the sovereign."

古文：宣子逆诸阶，执其手，赂之以曲沃。
现代文：范宣子在阶前迎接魏献子，拉着他的手，答应把曲沃送给他。
English: Fan Xuan Zi greeted Wei Xian Zi in front of the steps, took him by the hand, and promised to give Qu Wo to him.

古文：初，斐豹隶也，著于丹书。栾氏之力臣曰督戎，国人惧之。
现代文：当初，斐豹是一个奴隶，用红字记载在竹简上，栾氏有一个大力士叫督戎，国内的人们都害怕他。
English: At the beginning, Feipao was a slave, recorded in red letters on a piece of bamboo, and the Min clan had a strongman named Du Rong, who was feared by everyone in the country.

古文：斐豹谓宣子曰： 苟焚丹书，我杀督戎。 
现代文：斐豹对范宣子说： 如果烧掉这竹简，我去杀死督戎。 
English: Fei Pao said to Fan Xuan Zi: If you burn this bamboo, I will kill Du Rong.

古文：宣子喜曰： 而杀之，所不请于君焚丹书者，有如日！ 
现代文：范宣子很高兴，说： 你杀了他，如果不请求国君烧掉这竹简，太阳可作明证！ 
English: Fan Xuan Zi was very happy and said, "You killed him. If you don't ask the sovereign to burn this piece of bamboo, the sun can prove it!"

古文：乃出豹而闭之，督戎从之。
现代文：于是就让斐豹出宫门，然后关上宫门，督戎跟上他。
English: So he let Figaro out of the palace gate, then closed the palace gate, and Du Rong followed him.

古文：踰隐而待之，督戎踰入，豹自后击而杀之。
现代文：斐豹翻进矮墙等着督戎，督戎翻进墙来，斐豹从后面猛击而杀死了他。
English: The cheetah climbed into the low wall and waited for Du Rong. Du Rong climbed into the wall, and the cheetah struck him from behind, killing him.

古文：范氏之徒在台后，栾氏乘公门。
现代文：范氏的手下人在公台的后面，栾氏登上宫门。
English: Fan's men were at the back of the dais, and Zou's were at the palace gate.

古文：宣子谓鞅曰： 矢及君屋，死之！ 
现代文：范宣子对范鞅说： 箭要射到国君的屋子，你就死去！ 
English: Fan Xuan Zi said to Fan Yao: If you shoot an arrow into the emperor's house, you will die!

古文：鞅用剑以帅卒，栾氏退。摄车从之，遇栾乐，曰： 乐免之，死将讼女于天。 
现代文：范鞅用剑带领步兵迎战，栾氏败退，范鞅跳上战车追击，遇到栾乐，范鞅说： 乐，别打了，我死了将会向上天控告你。 
English: Fan Ye used his sword to lead the infantry into battle. The Xiong clan was defeated and fled. Fan Ye jumped on a chariot to chase after them. When he met Pu Le, Fan Ye said: "Le, stop fighting. If I die, I will sue you to the heavens."

古文：乐射之，不中。又注，则乘槐本而覆。
现代文：栾乐用箭射他，没有射中，又把箭搭上弓弦，车轮碰上槐树根而翻了车。
English: Hao Le shot him with an arrow, but missed. He then attached the arrow to the bowstring. The wheel hit the root of the eucalyptus tree and overturned the car.

古文：或以戟鉤之，断肘而死。
现代文：有人用戟钩打他，把他的手臂打断，他就死了。
English: Someone hit him with a grappling hook, breaking his arm, and he died.

古文：栾鲂伤。
现代文：栾鲂受伤。
English: The baboon was injured.

古文：栾盈奔曲沃，晋人围之。
现代文：栾盈逃到曲沃，晋国人包围了他。
English: Hao Ying fled to Quwo, and the Jin people surrounded him.

古文：秋，齐侯伐卫。
现代文：秋季，齐庄公发兵攻打卫国。
English: In autumn, Qizhuang Gong sent troops to attack and defend the country.

古文：先驱：穀荣御王孙挥，召扬为右。
现代文：第一前锋，穀荣驾御王孙挥的战车，召扬作为车右。
English: The first striker, Gu Rong, driving the chariot of Wang Sun, called Yang to the right.

古文：申驱：成秩御莒恒，申鲜虞之傅挚为右。
现代文：第二前锋，成秩驾御莒恒的战车，申鲜虞的儿子傅挚作为车右。
English: The second striker, Seichitsuko driving the chariot of Omineko, with Shin Sangyo's son Fu Zhin as the chariot's right.

古文：曹开御戎，晏父戎为右。
现代文：曹开驾御齐庄公的战车，晏父戎作为车右。
English: Cao Kai is driving the chariot of Gu Qi Zhuanggong, and his father Rong is on the right.

古文：贰广：上之登御邢公，卢蒲癸为右。启：牢成御襄罢师，狼蘧为右。
现代文：齐庄公的副车，上之登驾御邢公的战车，卢蒲癸作为车右，左翼部队，牢成驾御襄罢师的战车，狼蘧疏作为车右。
English: The secondary chariot of Lord Qizhuang, the chariot of Lord Guoqin on the top, the right chariot of Lu Puxu, the chariot of the left wing troops, the chariot of Lord Guoqin, and the right chariot of Lu Xunxu.

古文：胠：商子车御侯朝，桓跳为右。
现代文：右翼部队，商子车驾御侯朝的战车，桓跳作为车右。
English: The troops on the right, a merchant's carriage driving a vassal's chariot, and the horse-drawn carriage on the right.

古文：大殿：商子游御夏之御寇，崔如为右，烛庸之越驷乘。
现代文：后军，商子游驾御夏之御寇的战车，崔如作为车右，烛庸之越等四人共乘一辆车殿后。
English: After the army, the merchant Yu drove the chariot of Misha's robber, Cui Ru as the right of the car, and Candlemas Yue and other four people shared a car.

古文：自卫将遂伐晋。
现代文：从卫国出发并将由此进攻晋国。
English: They will start from the homeland and attack Jin Province from there.

古文：晏平仲曰： 君恃勇力以伐盟主，若不济，国之福也。
现代文：晏平仲说： 君王依靠勇力，来进攻盟主。如果不成功，这是国家的福气。
English: Zou Pingzhong said: The king relies on courage to attack the commander. If it does not succeed, it is a blessing for the country.

古文：不德而有功，忧必及君。 
现代文：没有德行而有功劳，忧患必然会降到君王身上。 
English: Where there is no virtue, but merit, sorrow must come upon the prince.

古文：崔杼谏曰： 不可。
现代文：崔杼劝谏说： 不行。
English: Cui Zhe advised Zhe: No.

古文：臣闻之，小国间大国之败而毁焉，必受其咎。
现代文：下臣听说： 小国钻了大国败坏的空子而加之以武力，一定要受到灾祸。 
English: A vassal heard: A small country that takes advantage of the corruption of a big country and uses force is sure to suffer disaster.

古文：君其图之！ 
现代文：君王还是考虑一下。 
English: I hope you will give it some thought.

古文：弗听。
现代文：齐庄公不听。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：陈文子见崔武子，曰： 将如君何？ 
现代文：陈文子进见崔杼，说： 打算把国君怎么办？ 
English: Chen Wenzi went to see Cui Rong and said, "What are you going to do with the king?

古文：武子曰： 吾言于君，君弗听也。
现代文：崔杼说： 我对国君说了，国君不听。
English: Cui Wei said: I told the sovereign, but he didn't listen.

古文：以为盟主，而利其难。
现代文：把晋国奉为盟主，反而以它的祸难为利。
English: Instead of regarding Jin as the leader, he took advantage of its misfortunes.

古文：群臣若急，君于何有？
现代文：下臣们如果急了，哪里还能顾及国君？您暂且不用管了。 
English: If subordinates are in a hurry, how can they take care of the sovereign? You don't have to worry about it for the time being.

古文：子姑止之。 文子退，告其人曰： 崔子将死乎！
现代文：陈文子退出，告诉他的手下人说： 崔子将要死了吧！
English: Chen Wenzi withdrew and told his men to say: "Cui Zi is about to die!

古文：谓君甚，而又过之，不得其死。
现代文：指责国君太狠而所作所为又超过国君所为，会得不到善终的。
English: If you accuse the sovereign of being too harsh, but your actions exceed those of the sovereign, you will not have a happy ending.

古文：过君以义，犹自抑也，况以恶乎？ 
现代文：用道义超过国君，还需要自己抑制，何况自己将作恶呢？ 
English: If you use morality to surpass the sovereign, do you still need to restrain yourself, not to mention that you will do evil?

古文：齐侯遂伐晋，取朝歌。
现代文：齐庄公因此而进攻晋国，占取朝歌。
English: As a result, Prince Qizhuang attacked Jin and seized the morning song.

古文：为二队，入孟门，登大行，张武军于荧庭。戍郫邵，封少水，以报平阴之役。
现代文：兵分两路，一路进入孟门，一路上太行山口，在荧庭建筑纪念物，派人戍守郫邵，在少水收集晋军尸体合于一坑筑成大坟，以报复平阴那次战役，这才收兵回去，赵胜领着东阳的军队追赶上，俘虏了晏氂。
English: The soldiers were divided into two groups. One group went all the way to Mengmen, the other to Taihang Pass. At the Fu Ting monument, they sent people to guard Zhishao. At Xiaoshui, they collected the bodies of the Jin army, put them in a pit, and built a large grave to take revenge for the Pingyin battle. Only then did they withdraw. Zhao Sheng led the Dongyang army to catch up and captured Yao.

古文：八月，叔孙豹帅师救晋，次于雍榆，礼也。
现代文：八月，叔孙豹领兵救援晋国，驻扎在雍榆，这是合于礼的。
English: In August, Uncle Sun Leopard led troops to rescue Jin Province and was stationed in Yongle, which was appropriate.

古文：季武子无適子，公弥长，而爱悼子，欲立之。
现代文：季武子没有嫡子，公弥年长，但是季武子喜欢悼子，想立他为继承人。
English: Kiyotake had no legitimate son and Koya was older, but Kiyotake liked Yoriko and wanted to make him his heir.

古文：访于申豐，曰： 弥与纥，吾皆爱之，欲择才焉而立之。 
现代文：向申丰说： 弥和纥，我都喜欢，想要选择有才能的立为继承人。 
English: Xiang Shenfeng said, "I like both Ya and Yao, and I want to choose a talented person to be the successor.

古文：申豐趋退，归，尽室将行。
现代文：申丰快步走出，回家，打算全家出走。
English: Shen Feng walked out quickly, went home, and planned to run away with his whole family.

古文：他日，又访焉，对曰： 其然！将具敝车而行。 
现代文：过了几天，季武子又问申丰。申丰回答说： 如果这样，我准备套上我的车走了。 
English: A few days later, Ji Wu Zi asked Shen Feng again. Shen Feng replied, "In that case, I am ready to hitch up my car and leave."

古文：乃止。
现代文：季武子就不说了。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：访于臧纥，臧纥曰： 饮我酒，吾为子立之。 
现代文：季武子又去问臧纥。臧纥说： 招待我喝酒，我为您立他。 
English: Jiwuko went to ask again. He said, "Invite me for a drink, and I'll set him up for you."

古文：季氏饮大夫酒，臧纥为客。
现代文：季氏招待大夫们喝酒，臧纥是上宾。
English: Ji invited the doctors to drink, and Zou was the guest of honor.

古文：既献，臧孙命北面重席，新樽絜之。召悼子，降逆之。
现代文：向宾客献酒完毕，臧纥命令朝北铺上两层席子，换上洗净的酒杯，召见悼子，走下台阶迎接他。
English: After presenting the wine to the guests, the urn ordered the two-tiered mat to be laid to the north, replaced with a washed wine glass, summoned the mourner, and walked down the steps to meet him.

古文：大夫皆起。及旅，而召公鉏，使与之齿。
现代文：大夫们都站起来，等到宾主互相敬酒酬答以后，才召见公鉏，让他和别人按年龄大小排列座位。
English: The doctors all stood up and waited for the guests to reciprocate with a toast before summoning the usher and having him and the others arrange the seats by age.

古文：季孙失色。
现代文：季武子感到突然，脸上都变了颜色。
English: Ji Wu Zi suddenly felt dizzy and her face changed color.

古文：季氏以公鉏为马正，愠而不出。
现代文：季氏让公鉏担任马正，公鉏怨恨，不肯做。
English: Ji asked Gong Li to serve as Ma Zheng, but Gong Li resented and refused to do so.

古文：闵子马见之，曰： 子无然！祸福无门，唯人所召。
现代文：闵子马见到公鉏，说： 您不要这样，祸和福没有门，在于人们所召唤。
English: When the mule saw the donkey, he said, "Don't do that. Misfortune and good fortune have no gate. They lie in what people call for."

古文：为人子者，患不孝，不患无所。
现代文：做儿子的，只怕不孝，而不怕没有地位。
English: A son is only afraid of being unfilial, not of losing his position.

古文：敬共父命，何常之有？
现代文：恭敬地对待父亲的命令，难道会没有变化吗？
English: Will there be no change in the father's command to treat him with respect?

古文：若能孝敬，富倍季氏可也。
现代文：如果能够孝顺恭敬，富有可以比季氏增加一倍。
English: If you can be filial and respectful, you can be twice as rich as Ji.

古文：奸回不轨，祸倍下民可也。 
现代文：邪乱不合法度，祸患可以比老百姓增加一倍。 
English: The degree of wickedness and illegality, the scourge can be doubled than the common people.

古文：公鉏然之。敬共朝夕，恪居官次。
现代文：公鉏同意他的话，就恭敬地早晚问父亲安，谨慎地执行任务。
English: Gongyan agreed with him, respectfully greeted his father in the morning and evening, and carefully carried out the task.

古文：季孙喜，使饮己酒，而以具往，尽舍旃。故公鉏氏富，又出为公左宰。
现代文：季武子高兴了，让他招待自己喝酒，而带着饮宴的器具前往，季氏把器具全部留下给他，公鉏氏因此致富。又做了鲁襄公的左宰。
English: Ji Wuzi was pleased, and asked him to invite himself to drink, and went with the banquet utensils. Ji left all the utensils to him, and Gong Li thus became rich. He also became Lu Xianggong's left-hand man.

古文：孟孙恶臧孙，季孙爱之。
现代文：孟庄子讨厌臧孙，但季武子喜欢他。
English: Meng Zhuangzi hates his grandson, but Ji Wu Zi likes him.

古文：孟氏之御驺豐点好羯也，曰： 从余言，必为孟孙。 
现代文：孟氏的车马官丰点，喜欢羯，说： 听从我的话，你一定成为孟氏的继承人。 
English: Meng's chariot and horse officer Abundance, who liked the dragonfly, said: "Listen to my words, you must become Meng's heir.

古文：再三云，羯从之。
现代文：再三地说，羯就听从了他。
English: He said it again and again, and the baboon obeyed him.

古文：孟庄子疾，豐点谓公鉏： 苟立羯，请仇臧氏。 
现代文：孟庄子生病，丰点对公鉏说： 如果立了羯，就是报复了臧氏。 
English: When Meng Zhuangzi fell ill, Fengtuo said to Gongjun, "If you set up a gong, you will be taking revenge on the gong clan."

古文：公鉏谓季孙曰： 孺子秩，固其所也。
现代文：公鉏对季武子说： 孺子秩本来应当做孟氏的继承人。
English: Gong Li said to Ji Wu Zi: Zang Zi Rank should have been Meng's successor.

古文：若羯立，则季氏信有力于臧氏矣。 
现代文：如果羯能够改立为继承人，那么季氏就确实比臧氏有力量了。 
English: If Zhai can be reinstated as the heir, then the Ji clan will indeed have more power than the Zhai clan.

古文：弗应。
现代文：季武子不答应。
English: Ji Takeko did not agree.

古文：己卯，孟孙卒，公鉏奉羯立于户侧。
现代文：八月初十日，孟孙死了。公鉏奉事羯立在门边接受宾客来吊唁。
English: On the 10th day of the 8th month, Meng Sun died. A public servant stood at the door to receive guests to offer condolences.

古文：季孙至，入哭而出，曰： 秩焉在？ 
现代文：季武子来到，进门就哭，出门，说： 秩在哪里？ 
English: When Jiwuko came, she cried when she entered the door, and when she left, she said, "What's your rank?"

古文：公鉏曰： 羯在此矣！ 
现代文：公鉏说： 羯在这里了。 
English: The public prosecutor said: "Here we go.

古文：季孙曰： 孺子长。 
现代文：季孙说： 孺子年长。 
English: Qisun said, "Mushi is older.

古文：公鉏曰： 何长之有？
现代文：公鉏说： 有什么年长不年长？
English: Gong Li said: What is old but not old?

古文：唯其才也。且夫子之命也。 
现代文：只要他有才能，而且是他老人家的命令。 
English: As long as he's got the talent, and it's his old man's call.

古文：遂立羯。秩奔邾。
现代文：孟庄子死了，我的灭亡也没有多少日子了。 
English: Meng Zhuangzi is dead, and my demise is not far off.

古文：孟氏闭门告于季孙曰： 臧氏将为乱，不使我葬。 
现代文：孟氏关起大门，告诉季武子说： 臧氏准备发动变乱，不让我家安葬。 
English: Mr. Meng closed the door and told Ms. Ji: Mr. Zou is preparing to start a riot and will not allow my family to be buried in peace.

古文：季孙不信。
现代文：季武子不相信。
English: Ji Takeko didn't believe it.

古文：臧孙闻之，戒。
现代文：臧孙听到了，实行戒备。
English: When his grandson heard this, he went on high alert.

古文：冬十月，孟氏将辟，藉除于臧氏。
现代文：冬季，十月，孟氏准备挖开墓道，在臧氏那里借用役夫。
English: In the winter, in October, Mr. Meng was preparing to dig up the graveyard and borrowed a porter from Mr. Zou.

古文：臧孙使正夫助之，除于东门，甲从己而视之。
现代文：臧孙让正夫去帮忙，在东门挖掘墓道，让甲士跟随着自己前去视察。
English: The grandson asked his father-in-law to help, digging a cemetery path at the east gate, and letting the warrior follow him to inspect it.

古文：孟氏又告季孙。
现代文：孟氏又告诉季武子。
English: Mr. Meng also told Ms. Ji.

古文：季孙怒，命攻臧氏。
现代文：季武子生气，命令进攻臧氏。
English: Jiwuko got angry and ordered an attack on the Min clan.

古文：乙亥，臧纥斩鹿门之关以出，奔邾。
现代文：十月初七日，臧孙砍断鹿门的门栓逃亡到邾国。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of October, the grandson cut off the bolt of the deer gate and fled to Shandong.

古文：初，臧宣叔娶于铸，生贾及为而死。
现代文：当初，臧宣叔在铸国娶妻，她生了臧贾和臧为就死了。
English: At the beginning, Uncle Zou Xuan married a wife in Foundry Country. She gave birth to Zou Jia and Zou Wei and died.

古文：继室以其姪，穆姜之姨子也。生纥，长于公宫。
现代文：臧宣叔以妻子的侄女作为继室，就是穆姜妹妹的女儿，生了纥，长在鲁公的宫中。
English: Uncle Zou Xuan took his wife's niece as a step-sister, that is, the daughter of Mu Jiang's sister, gave birth to a calf, and grew up in the palace of Lu Gong.

古文：姜氏爱之，故立之。
现代文：穆姜喜欢他，所以立为臧宣叔的继承人。
English: Mu Jiang liked him, so he appointed him as the successor of Uncle Yu Xuan.

古文：臧贾、臧为出在铸。
现代文：臧贾、臧为离开家住在铸国。
English: Hao Jia and Hao Wei left home to live in Foundry Country.

古文：臧武仲自邾使告臧贾，且致大蔡焉，曰： 纥不佞，失守宗祧，敢告不吊。
现代文：臧孙从邾国派人告诉臧贾，同时送去大龟说： 纥没有才能，不能祭祀宗庙，谨向您报告不善。
English: Gong Jia's grandson sent someone from Gong Guo to inform Gong Jia, and at the same time sent a big turtle to Gong Jia, saying: "Gong Jia has no talent, he can't make offerings to the ancestral temple. I have to report to you that this is not good.

古文：纥之罪，不及不祀。子以大蔡纳请，其可。 
现代文：纥的罪过不至于断绝后代，您把大龟进献而请求立为我家的继承人，看是否可行。 
English: The sin of the turtle will not lead to the extinction of future generations. If it is possible, please offer the turtle as an offering and request that it be made the heir of our family.

古文：贾曰： 是家之祸也，非子之过也。贾闻命矣。 
现代文：臧贾说： 这是家里的灾祸，不是您的过错，贾听到命令了。 
English: Hao Jia said: This is a disaster at home, not your fault, Jia heard the order.

古文：再拜受龟。使为以纳请，遂自为也。
现代文：再拜，接受了大龟，让臧为去代他进献大龟并请求，臧为却请求立自己为继承人。
English: Bye-bye, accepted the tortoise, let the tortoise go to present the tortoise on his behalf and ask, but the tortoise asked to establish himself as the heir.

古文：臧孙如防，使来告曰： 纥非能害也，知不足也。
现代文：臧纥去到防地，派人来报告说： 纥并不能伤害别人，而是由于智谋不足的缘故。
English: He went to the defense site and sent someone to report: "He can't hurt others, but it's because of his lack of wit.

古文：非敢私请！
现代文：纥并不敢为个人请求。
English: didn't dare to make a personal request.

古文：苟守先祀，无废二勋，敢不辟邑。 
现代文：如果保存先人的祭祀，不废掉两位先人的勋劳，岂敢不离开防地？ 
English: If we preserve the sacrificial rites of our ancestors and do not discard the distinguished service of our two forefathers, how dare we not leave the defensive position?

古文：乃立臧为。
现代文：于是就立了臧为。
English: That's why we set up the company.

古文：臧纥致防而奔齐。
现代文：臧纥献出了防地而逃亡到齐国。
English: He abandoned his post and fled to Qi Province.

古文：其人曰： 其盟我乎？ 
现代文：他的手下人说： 他们能为我们盟誓吗？ 
English: His men said, "Can they swear for us?"

古文：臧孙曰： 无辞。 
现代文：臧纥说： 不好写盟辞。 
English: Zou said, "It's not good to write a pledge."

古文：将盟臧氏，季孙召外史掌恶臣，而问盟首焉，对曰： 盟东门氏也，曰： 毋或如东门遂，不听公命，杀適立庶。 
现代文：打算为臧氏盟誓。
English: He was going to take an oath for the Min clan.

古文：盟叔孙氏也，曰： 毋或如叔孙侨如，欲废国常，荡覆公室。  
现代文：季武子召见掌管逃亡臣子的外史而询问盟辞的写法。外史回答说： 为东门氏盟誓，说： 不要有人像东门遂那样，不听国君的命令，杀嫡子、立庶子。 
English: Jiwuko summoned Gaishi, who was in charge of the fleeing vassals, and asked him how to write the oath. Gaishi replied, "I swore an oath for the Dongmen clan, saying, 'Let no one disobey the order of the sovereign, kill the legitimate son, and raise the illegitimate son, as Dongmen Sui did.

古文：季孙曰： 臧孙之罪，皆不及此。 
现代文：为叔孙氏盟誓，说 不要有人像叔孙侨如那样，想要废弃国家的常道，颠覆公室！ 季武子说： 臧纥的罪过都不至于此。 
English: I swore an oath for my uncles and grandsons, saying, "Let no one be like my uncles and grandsons, who want to abandon the normal course of the country and subvert the public office!" Ji Wuxi said, "My sins are nothing compared to this."

古文：孟椒曰： 盍以其犯门斩关？ 
现代文：孟椒说： 何不把他攻砍城门栓写进盟辞？ 
English: Mengfei said, "Why don't you write that he attacked and cut the bolts of the city gate into the oath?"

古文：季孙用之。乃盟臧氏曰： 无或如臧孙纥，干国之纪，犯门斩关。 
现代文：季武子采用，就和臧氏盟誓，说： 不要像臧孙纥那样触犯国家的法纪，进城门砍门栓！ 
English: When Ji Wuzi adopted it, he swore an oath to the Xing clan, saying: "Don't violate the country's laws and regulations like Sun Yat-sen did, and don't enter the city gate and cut the bolts!

古文：臧孙闻之，曰： 国有人焉！
现代文：臧纥听到了，说： 国内有人才啊！
English: Zou heard this and said: There is talent in this country!

古文：谁居？
现代文：是谁呀？
English: Who is it?

古文：其孟椒乎！ 
现代文：恐怕是孟椒吧！ 
English: I'm afraid it's peppermint!

古文：晋人克栾盈于曲沃，尽杀栾氏之族党。
现代文：晋国人在曲沃战胜栾盈，把栾氏的亲族全部杀完。
English: The Jin people defeated the Yao in Quwo and killed all the relatives of the Yao clan.

古文：栾鲂出奔宋。
现代文：栾鲂逃亡到宋国。
English: He fled to Song.

古文：书曰： 晋人杀栾盈。 不言大夫，言自外也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 晋人杀栾盈 ，不说大夫，这是说他从国外进入国内发动叛乱。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that Jin people killed Zou Ying, not to mention the doctor, which means that he entered the country from abroad to launch a rebellion.

古文：齐侯还自晋，不入。遂袭莒，门于且于，伤股而退。
现代文：齐庄公从晋国回来，不进入国都，就袭击莒国，攻打且于，大腿受伤而退却。
English: When Prince Qizhuang came back from Jin, he did not enter the capital, but attacked Shandong Province. He fought and was wounded in the thigh, and then retreated.

古文：明日，将复战，期于寿舒。
现代文：第二天，准备再战，约定军队在寿舒集中。
English: The next day, ready to fight again, the army concentrated in Shoushu.

古文：杞殖、华还载甲，夜入且于之隧，宿于莒郊。
现代文：杞梁、华还用战车装载甲士夜里进入且于的狭路，宿在莒国郊外。
English: Zou Liang and Hua also used a chariot to load soldiers to enter the narrow road at night, and stayed in the suburbs of Zou.

古文：明日，先遇莒子于蒲侯氏。
现代文：第二天，先和莒子在蒲侯氏相遇。
English: The next day, I first met Maki at Puhou's.

古文：莒子重赂之，使无死，曰： 请有盟。 
现代文：莒子赠给他们以重礼，让他们不要死，说： 请和你们结盟。 
English: The donkey gave them a great present, so that they would not die, and said, "Let us make a covenant with you."

古文：华周对曰： 贪货弃命，亦君所恶也。
现代文：华还回答说： 贪得财货丢弃命令，这也是君王所厌恶的。
English: Hua also replied: Greedy for wealth and goods, and abandoning orders, which is also abhorrent to the king.

古文：昏而受命，日未中而弃之，何以事君？ 
现代文：昨天晚上接受命令，今天太阳没有正午就丢掉，还用什么事奉君王？ 
English: What is the use of serving the king if you received an order last night to throw away the sun before noon today?

古文：莒子亲鼓之，从而伐之，获杞梁。
现代文：莒子亲自击鼓，追击齐军，杀死了杞梁。
English: Xunzi himself beat the drum, chased the Qi army, and killed Zou Liang.

古文：莒人行成。
现代文：莒国人就和齐国讲和。
English: The Shan people made peace with the Qi people.

古文：齐侯归，遇杞梁之妻于郊，使吊之。辞曰： 殖之有罪，何辱命焉？
现代文：齐庄公回国以后，在郊外遇到杞梁的妻子，派人向他吊唁，她辞谢说： 杞梁有罪，岂敢劳动国君派人吊唁？
English: After Qizhuangguo returned to China, he met Zou Liang's wife in the suburbs and sent condolences to him. She declined and said: Zou Liang is guilty, how dare the laboring monarch send condolences?

古文：若免于罪，犹有先人之敝庐在，下妾不得与郊吊。 
现代文：如果能够免罪，还有先人的破屋在那里，下妾不能在郊外接受吊唁。 
English: If you can be exonerated, there is still the broken house of the ancestors there, and the concubine cannot receive condolences in the suburbs.

古文：齐侯吊诸其室。
现代文：于是齐庄公又到杞梁家去吊唁。
English: As a result, Qizhuanggong went to Yan Liang's home to express his condolences.

古文：齐侯将为臧纥田。
现代文：齐庄公准备封给臧纥土地。
English: Qizhuangguo is preparing to grant land to Zou.

古文：臧孙闻之，见齐侯。
现代文：臧纥听说了，来见齐庄公。
English: When I heard about it, I came to see Lord Qizhuang.

古文：与之言伐晋。对曰： 多则多矣！抑君似鼠。夫鼠昼伏夜动，不穴于寝庙，畏人故也。
现代文：齐庄公对他说起进攻晋国的事，他回答说： 功劳太多了，可是君王却像老鼠，白天藏起来，夜里出动，不在宗庙里打洞，这是由于怕人的缘故。
English: When Prince Qizhuang told him about the attack on Jin, he replied, "It's a lot of work, but the king is like a mouse. He hides during the day and goes out at night. He doesn't dig holes in the ancestral temple because he's afraid of people.

古文：今君闻晋之乱而后作焉。宁将事之，非鼠如何？ 
现代文：现在君王听说晋国有了动乱然后出兵，一旦晋国安宁又准备事奉晋国，这不是老鼠又是什么？ 
English: Now the king heard that there was turmoil in Jin Province and sent troops. Once Jin Province was peaceful, he was ready to serve Jin Province. Wasn't it a rat?

古文：乃弗与田。
现代文：齐庄公听了就不赏赐臧纥田地了。
English: After listening to this, Qizhuangguo did not reward the farmer with the ploughed field.

古文：仲尼曰： 知之难也。
现代文：孔子说： 聪明是很难做到的啊。
English: Confucius said: It is difficult to be clever.

古文：有臧武仲之知，而不容于鲁国，抑有由也。作不顺而施不恕也。
现代文：有了臧武仲的聪明，而不能为鲁国容纳，这是有原因的，因为他的所作不顺于事理而所施不合于恕道。
English: There is a reason why the cleverness of Zou Wuzhong cannot be accepted by Lu, because what he did was not in accordance with reason, and what he did was not in accordance with the Way of Tolerance.

古文：《夏书》曰： 念兹在兹。 顺事恕施也。 
现代文：《夏书》说： 想着这个，一心在于这个 ，这就是顺于事理，合于恕道啊。 
English: "Summer Book" said: Thinking about this, concentrating on this, this is following the facts and following the path.

