古文：唐懿宗咸通二年二月，以杜悰为相。
现代文：唐懿宗咸通二年，任命杜悰为宰相。
English: In the second year of Emperor Tang Xizong's reign, Du Xi was appointed prime minister.

古文：一日，两枢密使诣中书，宣徽使杨公庆继至，独揖悰受宣，三相起避。
现代文：有一天，有两个枢密使来到中书省，接着宣徽使杨公庆也来了，杨公庆单独向杜徐传达皇帝的意见，另外三位宰相都回避了当时，杨公庆拿出一封信交给杜悰。
English: One day, two confidential envoys came to the People's Republic of China, followed by Yang Gongqing, who was sent by the emperor to proclaim the imperial seal. Yang Gongqing conveyed the emperor's opinion to Du Xu alone. The other three prime ministers avoided the occasion. Yang Gongqing took out a letter and handed it to Du Juan.

古文：公庆出书授悰，发之，乃宣宗大渐时，宦官请郓王监国秦也。
现代文：杜悰打开一看，里面是宣宗病重之时，宦官们请郑王监国的奏章。
English: Upon opening the cuckoo clock, the eunuchs found a record of the time when Emperor Xuanzong was seriously ill, and they asked King Zheng to supervise the performance.

古文：且曰： 当时宰相无名者，当以反法处之。 
现代文：杨公庆还对杜棕说： 当时宰相没有在奏章上签名的人，应当以反对皇上处置。 
English: Yang Gongqing also said to Duhamel: If the prime minister at that time did not sign the record, he should oppose the emperor's disposition.

古文：悰反复读，复封以授公庆，曰： 主上欲罪宰相，当于延英面示圣旨。 
现代文：意在暗示杜棕弹勤没有签名的宰相。杜悰反复读了奏章的以后，又封起来交还给了杨公庆，对杨说： 皇上要是想治那些宰相的罪，应当在延英殿当面发布圣旨。 
English: It was meant to imply that Du Palm played a prime minister who did not sign. After Du Yu repeatedly read the record, he sealed it again and handed it back to Yang Gongqing, saying to Yang: If the emperor wants to cure the sins of those prime ministers, he should issue a decree in front of Yan Ying Dian.

古文：公庆去，悰谓两枢密曰： 内外之臣，事犹一体。今主上新践阼，固当以仁爱为先，岂得遽赞成杀宰相事！
现代文：拒绝了对他的暗示。杨公庆走后，杜悰对两位枢密使说： 内外大臣所办的事情目标是一致的，现在皇上刚登上皇位，应该把仁爱放在前面，怎么能赞成杀宰相这类事。
English: After Yang Gongqing left, Du Juan said to the two confidential envoys: The goals of the things done by the Minister of the Interior and the Minister of Foreign Affairs are the same. Now that the Emperor has just ascended the throne, he should put benevolence in front. How can he approve of such a thing as killing the Prime Minister?

古文：若习以性成，则中尉、枢密岂得不自忧乎！ 
现代文：如果这类事习以为常，连中尉、枢密这些官员中的大臣也得忧虑自己的命运。 
English: If this sort of thing becomes the norm, even ministers - lieutenants, privy councillors - will have to worry about their own fates.

古文：两枢密相顾默然，徐曰： 当具以公言白至尊，非公重德，无人及此。 
现代文：两位枢密使相互看看，默默无言。停了一会就慢慢地说： 我们应当把你的话告诉皇上，你对大局的重视是没有人能够赶上的。 
English: The two emissaries looked at each other, speechless. They paused for a moment and then said slowly: "We should tell your words to the emperor. No one can match your attention to the overall situation."

古文：三相复来见悰，微请宣意，悾无言。
现代文：枢密使走后，另外三位宰相来到杜悰的面前，想知道宣徽使来说了些什么，杜悰不言语。
English: After the envoy left, the other three prime ministers came to Du Juan and wanted to know what the envoy had said. Du Juan was speechless.

古文：三相惶怖，乞存家族。悰曰： 勿为他虑。 
现代文：三位宰相惶恐不安，恳求杜悰替他们求情以保全家族，杜说： 不必忧虑太多。 
English: Panicked, the three prime ministers begged Du Juan to intercede on their behalf to save their families. Du said, "Don't worry too much.

古文：既而寂然。
现代文：之后又沉默了。
English: Then there was silence again.

古文：及延英开，上色甚悦。
现代文：等到延英殿召见群臣时，皇上满面喜悦之情。
English: By the time Prince Yan Ying summoned his courtiers, the emperor's face was filled with joy.

古文：此《资治通鉴》所载也。
现代文：这件事是《资治通鉴》的记载。
English: This matter is recorded in the "Capital General Reference."

古文：《新唐史》云： 宣宗世，夔王处大明宫，而郓王居十六宅。
现代文：《新唐书》的记载是：唐宣宗时，夔王住在大明宫，那王住在十六宅，待宣宗病重时，立下遗诏要夔王继承皇位。
English: The "New Tang Dynasty Book" records: When Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, King Yao lived in the Daming Palace, and that king lived in the Sixteen Mansions. When Emperor Xuanzong was seriously ill, he issued a posthumous edict asking King Yao to succeed to the throne.

古文：帝大渐，遗诏立夔王，而中尉王宗贯迎郓王立之，是为懿宗。
现代文：可是，总领御林军的中尉王宗贯却把那王迎回来立为皇帝，这就是唐懿宗。
English: However, the commander-in-chief of the Goryeo army, Lieutenant Wang Zongran, welcomed the king back and made him emperor. This was Tang Xizong.

古文：久之，遣枢密使杨庆诣中书独揖悰。他宰相毕諴、杜审权，蒋伸不敢进，乃授悰中人请帝监国秦，因谕悰劾大臣名不在者。悰语之如前所云，庆色沮去，帝怒亦释。
现代文：停了很久以后，就派枢密使杨庆到中书省单独见杜，另外三位宰相毕诚、杜审权，蒋伸不敢走近，于是杨庆把宦官请皇上监国的奏章交给杜悰，并转达皇上的意见，要他弹劾没在奏章上签名的大臣，于是杜惊就说了前面已经说过的那一段话，杨庆泄气地走了，皇上的愤怒也随之消失了。
English: After stopping for a long time, he sent a confidential envoy, Yang Qing, to Zhongshu to see Du alone. The other three prime ministers, Bi Cheng, Du Xuanquan, and Jiang Shin, did not dare to approach, so Yang Qing handed the eunuch's petition to the emperor to supervise the country to Du Xuan, and conveyed the emperor's opinion, asking him to impeach the minister who did not sign the petition, so Du Xuan said the above-mentioned paragraph. Yang Qing walked away dejected, and the emperor's anger disappeared.

古文：予以史考之，懿宗即位之日，宰相四人，曰令狐绹、曰萧邺、曰夏侯孜、曰蒋伸，到是时唯有伸在，三人者罢去矣。
现代文：我根据考证的结果是：懿宗在位的时候，原来的令狐绹、萧邺、夏侯孜、曰蒋伸四位宰相，只有蒋伸还在职，其余三人都已免职。
English: According to my research, the results are as follows: When Emperor Taizong was on the throne, the original four prime ministers were Ling Xuzong, Xiao Tong, Xia Houzhe, and Jiang Sheng. Only Jiang Sheng is still in office, and the other three have been dismissed.

古文：諴及审权乃懿宗自用者，无由有斯事。盖野史之妄，而二书误采之。
现代文：毕诚和杜审权是唐懿宗自己选用的宰相，因之前面叙述的那件事，根本没有可能发生，这大约是野史中胡乱记载，《资治通鉴》和《新唐书》又把它们选进来造成的错误。
English: Bi Cheng and Du Xuanquan were the prime ministers chosen by Tang Xizong himself, and because of the incident described above, it could not have happened at all. This is probably the result of the erroneous records in the field history, and the mistakes caused by the selection of them in "Zizhi Tongjian" and "New Tang Book."

古文：温公以唐事属之范祖禹，其审取可谓详尽，尚如此。信乎，修史之难哉！
现代文：司马温公能把唐朝的史事交给范祖禹来撰写，足见对材料的鉴别是十分严谨详尽的，即使如此，也会发生这类错误，可见，写历史实实在在是太难了。
English: Sima Wen Gong could have entrusted Fan Zuyu to write the history of the Tang Dynasty. It can be seen that the identification of materials is very rigorous and detailed. Even so, such errors can occur. It can be seen that writing history is really too difficult.

