古文：黄帝问岐伯曰：余欲无视色持脉，独调其尺，以言其病，从外知内，为之奈何？
现代文：黄帝问岐伯说：我想不经过望色、切脉，只诊察患者的尺肤部，就可以说出疾病的原因，从外表了解内里的变化，怎样才能够做到呢？
English: Huang Di asked Qibo, "I think I can tell the cause of the disease and understand the internal changes from the outside without looking at the color and cutting the veins, just by examining the patient's skin. How can I do that?"

古文：岐伯曰：审其尺之缓急、小大、滑涩，肉之坚脆，而病形定矣。
现代文：岐伯说：审察尺肤部的缓急、大小、滑涩，以及肌肉的坚实脆弱，疾病的性质、状况就可以确定了。
English: Qi Bo said: the nature and condition of the disease can be determined by examining the size, smoothness and firmness of the skin and the fragility of the muscles.

古文：视人之目窠上微痈，如新卧起状，其颈脉动，时咳，按其手足上，窅而不起者，风水肤胀也。
现代文：如果人的眼睑上微微浮肿，好像刚刚睡醒起床的样子，颈部人迎脉搏动明显，并且时时咳嗽，再用手指按压患者的手背和足背部，被按之处凹陷不能随着手的离去而复起，具备了这样几个条件，就可以确诊为风水肤胀症。
English: If the person's eyelids are slightly puffy, as if they have just woken up from sleep, the neck has a pronounced pulse, and they cough all the time, and then press the patient's back of the hand and the back of the foot with their fingers. The depression where it was pressed cannot recur with the departure of the hand. If these conditions are met, it can be diagnosed as Feng Shui skin swelling.

古文：尺肤滑，其淖泽者，风也。
现代文：尺肤部的皮肤表面滑润而有光泽，是风病。
English: The smooth and shiny surface of the skin in the skin of the feet is wind disease.

古文：尺肉弱者，解㑊，安卧，脱肉者，寒热不治。
现代文：尺肤部肌肉瘦弱松软，身体倦怠，嗜睡，卧床不起，肌肉消瘦，是寒热虚劳的病症，不容易治愈。
English: Skin muscles are thin and floppy, body fatigue, lethargy, bedridden, muscle wasting, is a cold and heat wasting disease, not easy to cure.

古文：尺肤滑而泽脂者，风也。
现代文：尺肤部肌肤滑润如膏脂的，是风病。
English: If the skin of the feet and ankles is smooth and greasy, it is rheumatism.

古文：尺肤涩者，风痹也。
现代文：尺肤部肌肤涩滞不润的，是风痹。
English: If the skin of the feet and ankles is astringent and dull, it is wind-palsy.

古文：尺肤麤如枯鱼之鳞者，水泆饮也。
现代文：尺肤部肌肤粗糙不润，像干枯的鱼鳞，是脾土虚衰、水饮不化的溢饮病。
English: The skin of the ulnar skin area is rough and not moist, like dry fish scales. It is a spleen deficiency, and it is an overdrinking disease that cannot be cured by water.

古文：尺肤热甚，脉盛躁者，病温也；其脉甚而滑者，病且出也。
现代文：尺肤部肌肤灼热，脉盛大而躁动，是温病；如果脉虽盛大但不躁动而表现滑利的，是病邪将被驱除，正气渐复，病将痊愈的佳兆。
English: If the pulse is large but not agitated, but smooth, it is a good sign that the disease will be eliminated, the positive energy will gradually return, and the disease will be cured.

古文：尺肤寒，其脉小者，泄、少气。
现代文：尺肤部肌肤寒冷不温，脉细小无力，是泄泻或气虚的病症。
English: The skin of the ulnar skin is cold and not warm, the pulse is small and weak, and it is a disease of diarrhea or qi deficiency.

古文：尺肤炬然，先热后寒者，寒热也。
现代文：尺肤部肌肤高热灼手，先发热后发冷的，属于寒热往来一类的疾病。
English: The skin of the shank skin is hot and burning, and it is a cold after the first heat, which belongs to the cold and heat exchange type of disease.

古文：尺肤先寒，久大之而热者，亦寒热也。
现代文：尺肤部肌肤先觉寒冷，但久按之后感觉发热的，也是寒热往来一类的疾病。
English: It is also a cold-heat circulation type of disease that the skin of the foot skin feels cold at first, but feels hot after long pressing.

古文：肘所独热者，腰以上热；手所独热者，腰以下热。
现代文：肘部皮肤单独发热，标志着腰以上有热象；手部单独发热，标志着腰以下有热象。
English: The skin of the elbow heats up separately, indicating a heat spot above the waist; the hand heats up separately, indicating a heat spot below the waist.

古文：肘前独热者，膺前热；肘后独热者，肩背热。
现代文：肘关节前面发热，标志着胸膺部有热象；肘关节后面发热，标志着肩背部有热象。
English: Heat in front of the elbow joint indicates heat in the chest and hips; heat behind the elbow joint indicates heat in the back of the shoulders.

古文：臂中独热者，腰腹热；肘后麤，以下三四寸热者，肠中有虫。
现代文：手臂的中部发热，标志着腰腹部有热象；肘后皮肤粗糙，而且以下三四寸处发热，标志着肠道中有寄生虫存在。
English: Heat in the middle of the arm indicates heat in the lower abdomen; rough skin on the back of the elbow and heat three or four inches below indicate the presence of parasites in the intestine.

古文：掌中热者，腹中热；掌中寒者，腹中寒。
现代文：掌心发热，是腹中有热象的表现；掌心寒冷，是腹中有寒象的表现。
English: A hot palm is a sign of heat in the abdomen; a cold palm is a sign of cold in the abdomen.

古文：鱼上白肉有青血脉者，胃中有寒。
现代文：手鱼际白肉处显青紫脉络的，标志着胃中有寒邪。
English: A bluish-purple vein in the white flesh of the handfish indicates a cold sore in the stomach.

古文：尺炬然热，人迎大者，当夺血。
现代文：尺肤部肌肤高热炙手，并且颈部人迎脉盛大，属于热盛伤阴，营血亏耗的失血症。
English: The skin of the ulnar skin is hot and hot, and the neck has a large pulse, which belongs to the anemia of heat, injury, and blood loss.

古文：尺坚大，脉小甚，少气；悗有加，立死。
现代文：尺肤部肌肤坚紧，人迎脉细小，则见于气虚元阳不足；如果加有烦闷现象，并且日趋严重，是阴阳俱绝的症候，在短时间内就会死亡。
English: If the skin of the ulnar skin is tight and the person's pulse is small, it is due to qi deficiency and yang deficiency; if it is accompanied by boredom and becomes more and more serious, it is a symptom of yin and yang, and it will die in a short time.

古文：目赤色者病在心，白在肺，青在肝，黄在脾，黑在肾。
现代文：眼睛发红色，说明病在心；眼睛发白色，病在肺；眼睛发青色，病在肝；眼睛发黄色，病在脾；眼睛发黑色，病在肾。
English: Red eyes mean heart disease; white eyes, lung disease; blue eyes, liver disease; yellow eyes, spleen disease; black eyes, kidney disease.

古文：黄色不可名者，病在胸中。
现代文：眼睛发黄色而兼有其他颜色，并且难以名状形容的，说明病在胸中。
English: If the eyes are yellow with other colors and are hard to describe, the disease is in the chest.

古文：诊目痛，赤脉从上下者，太阳病；从下上者，阳明病；从外走内者，少阳病。
现代文：诊察眼睛疼痛的病症时，如果有赤色的脉络，从上向下发展的，属于足太阳膀胱经的病；从下向上发展的，属于足阳明胃经的病；从目外眦向内走行的，属于足少阳胆经的病。
English: When diagnosing the disease of eye pain, if there is a red vein, developing from top to bottom, it belongs to the disease of the foot-sun-bladder meridian; developing from bottom to top, it belongs to the disease of the foot-sun-bright-stomach meridian; walking from the outer eyelid inward, it belongs to the disease of the foot-less-sun-bile meridian.

古文：诊寒热，赤脉上下至瞳子，见一脉一岁死；见一脉半，一岁半死；见二脉，二岁死；见二脉半，二岁半死；见三脉，三岁死。
现代文：诊查有寒热发作的瘰疬病时，如果目中有赤色的脉络，上下贯瞳子，见一条赤脉的，一年死；见一条半赤脉的，一年半死；见两条赤脉的，两年死；见两条半赤脉的，两年半死；见三条赤脉的，三年死。
English: When diagnosing rickets with cold and fever, if there is a red vein in the eye, and the pupil is penetrated from top to bottom, if you see a red vein, you will die in one year; if you see one and a half red veins, you will die in one and a half years; if you see two red veins, you will die in two years; if you see two and a half red veins, you will die in two and a half years; if you see three red veins, you will die in three years.

古文：诊龋齿痛，按其阳之来，有过者独热，在左左热，在右右热，在上上热，在下下热。
现代文：诊察龋齿导致的疼痛，要按压通过两侧面颊而交叉环绕于口周围的手足阳明经脉，有经气太过的部位必然单独发热，热邪在左侧的左边阳明脉热，在右的右边阳明脉热，在上的上边阳明脉热，在下的下边阳明脉热。
English: To diagnose the pain caused by dental caries, it is necessary to press the yangming meridians of the hands and feet through the two sides of the cheeks and cross around the mouth. The parts with too much meridians must have heat separately. The heat is on the left side of the left side of the heat, on the right side of the right side of the heat, on the upper side of the upper side of the heat, on the lower side of the lower side of the heat.

古文：诊血脉者，多赤多热，多青多痛，多黑为久痹，多赤、多黑、多青皆见者，寒热。
现代文：诊察皮肤上浅表络脉，赤色愈多，热象愈重；青色愈多，疼痛愈重；黑色愈多，说明是经久不愈的痹症；如果青色、黑色、赤色多处夹杂相见的，为寒热相兼的病症。
English: Examine the superficial veins on the skin, the more red, the heavier the heat; the more blue, the heavier the pain; the more black, the more persistent the paralysis; if the blue, black, and red are mixed in many places, it is a cold and hot disease.

古文：身痛而色微黄，齿垢黄，爪甲上黄，黄疸也。
现代文：身体困乏隐痛而肤色微黄，牙垢发黄，指甲也呈现黄色，是黄疸病。
English: The body is lethargic with dull pain, and the skin color is slightly yellow, the tartar is yellow, and the nails are also yellow. This is jaundice.

古文：安卧，小便黄赤，脉小而涩者不嗜食。
现代文：如果神疲嗜睡，小便黄赤，脉小而又艰涩不滑利，就会有不欲饮食的症状。
English: If you are tired and sleepy, your urine is yellow and red, and your pulse is small and not smooth, you will have symptoms of not wanting to eat.

古文：人病，其寸口之脉，与人迎之脉小大等，及其浮沉等者，病难已也。
现代文：人患病以后，在手桡骨部位的寸口脉和颈部的人迎脉搏动力量大小齐等，浮沉现象表现又相一致的，是难以治疗的病症。
English: After a person falls ill, the pulse at the base of the hand and the pulse at the base of the neck are of the same magnitude, and the phenomenon of floating and sinking is consistent. This is a disease that is difficult to treat.

古文：女子手少阴脉动甚者，妊子。
现代文：掌后尺骨侧凹陷的部位为神门穴，是手少阴心经的动脉所在之处。
English: The site of the lateral depression of the ulna at the back of the hand is the portal sinus, which is the location of the carotid artery.

古文：婴儿病，其头毛皆逆上者必死。耳间青脉起者掣痛。
现代文：这条动脉平时细小而隐潜，如果妇女的这条动脉搏动明显增强，是怀孕的征象。婴儿有病时，其头发如果蓬乱枯槁，并且向上竖立的，为不治之症。
English: This artery is usually small and hidden. If a woman's pulse is significantly increased, it is a sign of pregnancy. When a baby is sick, if its hair is unkempt and withered, and stands up, it is an incurable disease.

古文：大便赤瓣，飧泄，脉小者，手足寒，难已；飧泄，脉小，手足温，泄易也。
现代文：观察耳廓间细小络脉，如果出现脉色青黑紫暗，并且有隆起的现象，说明有筋肉抽搐、腹痛的症状。
English: Observe the small vas deferens between the auricles. If the color of the vein is bluish-blackish-purple, and there is a bulge, it indicates muscle twitching and abdominal pain.

古文：四时之变，寒暑之胜，重阴必阳，重阳必阴。故阴主寒，阳主热，故寒甚则热，热甚则寒，故曰： 寒生热，热生寒 ，此阴阳之变也。
现代文：若大便泄泻呈青绿色而有乳瓣，是脾胃虚寒完谷不化的飧泄病，如果脉细小无力，手足冰冷，是脾胃阳气欲竭，其病难以治愈；如果脉细小，然而手足却温暖，这样的飧泄病就容易治疗。一年四季的气候变化，暑往寒来，更替变迁，其规律是，阴盛至极则转变为阳，阳盛至极则转变为阴。阴主寒，阳主热，所以寒冷到一定程度就会变热，热到极点就会变冷，因此说： 寒极则生热，热极则生寒 ，这就是天地间阴阳相互消长转化的道理。
English: If the stool discharge is blue-green and has a milk flap, it is spleen-stomach hypothermia. If the pulse is small and weak, and the hands and feet are cold, it is spleen-stomach yang qi exhaustion, and the disease is difficult to cure; if the pulse is small, but the hands and feet are warm, such a diarrhea disease is easy to treat. The climate changes throughout the year, hot to cold, and the replacement changes. The rule is that the yin to the extreme is transformed into yang, and the yang to the extreme is transformed into yin. The yin is mainly cold, and the yang is mainly hot, so

古文：故曰： 冬伤于寒，春生病热；春伤于风，夏生飧泄肠僻，夏伤于暑，秋生痎疟；秋伤于湿，冬生咳嗽。 
现代文：所以说： 冬天感受了寒邪，不即刻发病，隐潜于人体内部形成伏邪，到春天就会形成温热病；春天伤于风邪，不即刻发病，到了夏天就会发生飧泄、痢疾之类的疾病；夏天感受了暑邪，不即刻发病，到了秋天就会发生疟疾；秋天感受了湿邪而潜伏体内，冬天就会发生咳嗽症。 
English: Therefore, it is said that: in winter, if you feel the cold evil, if you do not have the disease immediately, the latent evil will be formed in the human body, and the fever will be formed in the spring; in spring, if you are affected by the cold evil, if you do not have the disease immediately, the diseases such as exudation and dysentery will occur in the summer; in summer, if you feel the heat evil, if you do not have the disease immediately, malaria will occur in the autumn; in autumn, if you feel the damp evil and it lurks in the body, the cough disease will occur in the winter.

古文：是谓四时之序也。
现代文：这就是四时气候变化影响人体而形成的发病规律。
English: This is the pathogenesis pattern formed by the influence of climate change on the human body.

