古文：世祖九王高宗二十九王后主十一子世祖十三男：沈皇后生废帝、始兴王伯茂，严淑媛生鄱阳王伯山、晋安王伯恭，潘容华生新安王伯固，刘昭华生衡阳王伯信，王充华生庐陵王伯仁，张修容生江夏王伯义，韩修华生武陵王伯礼，江贵妃生永阳王伯智，孔贵妃生桂阳王伯谋。
现代文：世祖有十三个儿子：沈皇后生了废帝、始兴王伯茂，严淑媛生了鄱阳王伯山、晋安王伯恭，潘容华生了新安王伯固，刘昭华生了衡阳王伯信，王充华生了庐陵王伯仁，张脩容生了江夏王伯义，韩脩华生了武陵王伯礼，江贵妃生了永阳王伯智，孔贵妃生了桂阳王伯谋。
English: The founder of the world had thirteen sons: Empress Shen gave birth to Wang Bomao, the deposed emperor, and Shi Xing; Yan Shuyuan gave birth to Wang Bozhan of Shenyang and Wang Bokong of Jin'an; Pan Ronghua gave birth to Wang Bogao of Xin'an; Liu Zhaohua gave birth to Wang Buxin of Hengyang; Wang Chonghua gave birth to Wang Boren of Fuling; Zhang Rongrong gave birth to King Bo Yi of Jiangxia; Han Ronghua gave birth to King Bo Li of Wuling; Empress Jiang Guifei gave birth to King Bo Zhi of Yongyang; Empress Kong

古文：其伯固犯逆别有传。
现代文：其中伯固犯上为逆，另有传记。
English: Among them, Bao Guo's crime is reversed, and there is another biography.

古文：二男早卒，本书无名。
现代文：另有二个儿子早死，本书无名
English: Two other sons died young, the book is nameless.

古文：始兴王伯茂，字郁之，世祖第二子也。
现代文：始兴王伯茂，字郁之，世祖的第二个儿子。
English: Shixing Wang Bomao, also known as Yu Zhi, was the second son of Shizu.

古文：初，高祖兄始兴昭烈王道谈仕于梁世，为东宫直阁将军，侯景之乱，领弩手二千援台，于城中中流矢卒。
现代文：当初，高祖的哥哥始兴昭烈王道谈在梁朝任官，为束宫直合将军，侯景作乱时，他率领弓箭手二千人支援台城，在城中被流箭射中而死。
English: At the beginning, Gao Zu's brother Shi Xing Zhaorong Wang Dao Tong served as an official in the Liang Dynasty, and he led 2,000 archers to support Taicheng during the rebellion of General Sokong Zhaohai and General Hou Jing. He was shot by a stray arrow and died in the city.

古文：太平二年，追赠侍中、使持节、都督南兗州诸军事、南兗州刺史，封长城县公，谥曰昭烈。
现代文：太平二年，被追赠侍中、使持节、都督南兖州诸军事、南兖州刺史，封长城县公，谧号昭烈。
English: In the 2nd year of the Taiping era, he was posthumously awarded the titles of chamberlain, envoy, military commander, and governor of Nan'anzhou Province, and was awarded the title of Great Wall County official, with the posthumous name of Zhaoling.

古文：高祖受禅，重赠骠骑大将军、太傅、扬州牧，改封始兴郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：高祖受禅，又赠骠骑大将军、太傅、扬州牧，改封始兴郡王，食邑二千户。
English: Gao Zu received Zen, and was also presented with the title of Shixing County King, and 2,000 households in Shixing County.

古文：王生世祖及高宗。
现代文：昭烈王生世祖舆高宗。
English: Shōrei Wang was the progenitor of the Myōkō sect.

古文：高宗以梁承圣末迁于关右，至是高祖遥以高宗袭封始兴嗣王，以奉昭烈王祀。
现代文：高宗在梁朝承圣末年移迁关右，此时高祖远以高宗袭封始兴嗣王，以奉昭烈王祀。
English: Gaozong moved to Guanzhong in the last years of the Liang Dynasty. At that time, Gaozong was worshipped as the successor of King Heungseong, and King Heungseong was worshipped as the successor of King Heungseong.

古文：永定三年六月，高祖崩，是月世祖入纂帝位。
现代文：永定三年六月，高祖崩，此月世祖入宫继承帝位。
English: In June of the third year of Yongding, Gao Zu passed away, and in this month, the great ancestor entered the palace to inherit the imperial throne.

古文：时高宗在周未还，世祖以本宗乏飨，其年十月下诏曰： 日者皇基肇建，封树枝戚，朕亲地攸在，特启大邦。
现代文：其时高宗在北周末回还，世祖以本宗缺乏祭祀，在当年十月下诏书道： 往日皇基始建，分封各亲戚，我亲使土地长远存在，特开启大邦。
English: At that time, Gaozong returned to the north at the end of the week. The ancestor complained about the lack of sacrificial rites of this sect. In October of that year, he issued an edict saying: In the past, the imperial foundation was built, the relatives were divided, I personally made the land exist for a long time, and the great state was opened.

古文：弟顼嗣承门祀，虽土宇开建，荐飨莫由。
现代文：弟陈顼继承门祀，虽然土宇开建，然祭祀无由。
English: His younger brother, Chen Qi, succeeded him as a disciple, and although the temple was built, there was no reason for the sacrifice.

古文：重以遭家不造，闵凶夙遘，储贰遐隔，轊车未返。
现代文：又加上遭到家庭不测，遇到凶事宿怨，皇太子远隔，车驾没回。
English: In addition, he suffered a family accident, encountered a grudge, the crown prince was far away, and the car did not return.

古文：猥以眇身，膺兹景命，式循龟鼎，冰谷载怀。
现代文：我以渺小身份，荣受此大命，因循帝位，须虚怀若谷。
English: I, as a petty person, have been honored with this great destiny, and since I am the heir to the throne, I must be humble.

古文：今既入奉大宗，事绝籓裸，始兴国庙蒸尝无主，瞻言霜露，感寻恸绝。
现代文：如今既然已入奉大宗，应事绝于藩邦祭礼，始兴国庙祭祀无主，瞻言之高洁，感而悲恸。
English: Now that he has entered the priesthood, he has no choice but to participate in the festivals of the domain and the state, and he has no choice but to participate in the festivals of the newly founded national temple. He speaks highly of them, and is filled with emotion and sadness.

古文：其徙封嗣王顼为安成王，封第二子伯茂为始兴王，以奉昭烈王祀。
现代文：改封嗣王陈顼为安成王，封第二个儿子伯茂为始兴王，以奉昭烈王祀。
English: He changed the title of his heir, King Chen Xi, to King Ancheng, and the title of his second son, King Bo Mao, to King Shi Xing.

古文：赐天下为父后者爵一级。
现代文：赐天下为父后者爵一级。
English: Give the world a first-class knighthood to a man who has become a father and has an heir.

古文：庶申罔极之情，永保山河之祚。 
现代文：藉以申发无尽之情，永保山河之运。 
English: By applying for endless feelings, Yongbao mountain and river luck.

古文：旧制诸王受封，未加戎号者，不置佐史，于是尚书八座奏曰： 夫增崇徽号，饰表车服，所以阐彰厥德，下变民望。
现代文：按旧制，诸王受封，没有加戎号者，不设置佐史，于是尚书八座上奏道： 增加崇尚徽号，装饰外表车服，目的在于彰显他的德行，对下改变民间声望。
English: According to the old system, the kings were given titles, and those who did not have a jade badge did not set up a history, so Shangshu eight-seat sang: Increase the reverence for the emblem, decorate the outer clothing, the purpose is to highlight his virtue, and change the folk reputation.

古文：第二皇子新除始兴王伯茂，体自尊极，神姿明颖，玉暎觿辰，兰芬绮岁，清晖美誉，日茂月升，道郁平、河，声超衮、植。
现代文：皇帝的第二个儿子伯茂，新封始兴王，体自至尊，神采姿态聪敏，正当玉映佩鲷之俊年，兰花芬芳之佳岁，清晖美誉，如日茂月升，道德可蕴平、河，声望可超衮、植。
English: The emperor's second son, Emperor Bomao, the newly enthroned King Shixing, was supremely dignified in body and mind, with a brilliant and intelligent demeanor. He was justly crowned as the most handsome, the most fragrant of the orchids, and had a reputation as pure as the rising of the sun and the moon. His morality was as pure as the river, and his reputation was beyond praise.

古文：皇情追感，圣性天深，以本宗阙绪，纂承籓嗣，虽圭社是膺，而戎章未袭，岂所以光崇睿哲，宠树皇枝。
现代文：皇情追感，圣性天深，由于本宗缺乏继业者，就让他继承藩邦后嗣，虽然珪器与社宫已受，但是戎章未袭，这哪裹是光崇贤哲宠立皇室子弟的做法呢。
English: Due to the lack of successors in this sect, he was allowed to succeed to the heirs of the domain and the state. Although the imperial regalia and the shrine and palace had been received, the military insignia had not been received. This was the practice of setting up the royal children under the patronage of Guang Chong Xian Zhe.

古文：臣等参议，宜加宁远将军，置佐史。 
现代文：臣等参议，宜加伯茂宁远将军，置佐史。 
English: Vassals and other councillors, General Yigabo Maoningyo, and Okisashi.

古文：诏曰 可 。
现代文：皇上下诏道： 可以。 
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict approving the request.

古文：寻除使持节、都督南琅邪彭城二郡诸军事、彭城太守。
现代文：不久任使持节、都督南琅邪彭城二郡诸军事、彭城太守。
English: He was soon appointed as the envoy, the governor of Nanxun, the military of the two counties of Pengcheng, and the governor of Pengcheng.

古文：天嘉二年，进号宣惠将军、扬州刺史。
现代文：天嘉二年，进号宣惠将军、扬州刺史。
English: In the second year of Tian Jia, he was promoted to General Xuan Hui and became the Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：伯茂性聪敏，好学，谦恭下士，又以太子母弟，世祖深爱重之。
现代文：伯茂生性聪敏，好学，对下士谦恭有礼，又是太子的同母之弟，世祖对他非常爱重。
English: Biao Maosheng was intelligent, eager to learn, and courteous to the corporal. He was also the prince's younger brother by the same mother, and the ancestor was very fond of him.

古文：是时征北军人于丹徒盗发晋郗昙墓，大获晋右将军王羲之书及诸名贤遗迹。
现代文：此时征讨北方的军人在丹徒盗窃晋郗昙墓，盗得大批晋右将军王羲之的书法作品舆当时不少名贤的遗迹。
English: At this time, the soldiers from the north who were in Dantou to investigate the theft of the Jin Dynasty tomb, stole a large number of calligraphy works of the Jin Dynasty general Wang Xizhi and the relics of many famous people at that time.

古文：事觉，其书并没县官，藏于秘府，世祖以伯茂好古，多以赐之，由是伯茂大工草隶，甚得右军之法。
现代文：事情被发觉，这些书法手迹一并被县官没收，藏于秘府之中，世祖因为伯茂喜好古物，多子赐赠，由此伯茂得以工于草隶，颇得王右军书法之神髓。
English: The matter was discovered, and all these calligraphy manuscripts were confiscated by the county officials and hidden in a secret place. The ancestor, because Hōmō was fond of antiques, gave him many sons, and thus Hōmō was able to work in Kusanagi, gaining the essence of the calligraphy of the right wing army.

古文：三年，除镇东将军、开府仪同三司、东扬州刺史。
现代文：天嘉三年，任镇东将军、开府仪同三司、东扬州刺史。
English: In the third year of Tian Jia, he was appointed as the general of Zhendong, the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong, and the chief historian of Dongyangzhou.

古文：废帝即位，时伯茂在都，刘师知等矫诏出高宗也，伯茂劝成之。
现代文：废帝登位，此时伯茂在京城，刘师知等假造韶书要使高宗出朝，伯茂从中劝成。
English: The deposed emperor ascended to the throne. At this time, Bo Mao was in Beijing. Liu Shizhi and others forged the imperial edict to make Gao Zong ascend to the throne, and Bo Mao persuaded him to do so.

古文：师知等诛后，高宗恐伯茂扇动朝廷，光大元年，乃进号中卫将军，令入居禁中，专与废帝游处。
现代文：刘师知等被杀后，高宗恐怕伯茂在朝廷煽动，光大元年，便给他进号中卫将军，命令他入居禁宫中，专门与废帝相游相处。
English: After Liu Shizhi and others were killed, Gaozong feared that Bo Mao was instigating at the imperial court. In the first year of the Guangda era, he gave him the title of General of the Middle Guard and ordered him to live in the Forbidden Palace, specifically to travel with the deposed emperor.

古文：是时四海之望，咸归高宗，伯茂深不平，日夕愤怨，数肆恶言，高宗以其无能，不以为意。
现代文：此时四海之内的声望都已归向高宗，伯茂深感不平，朝夕愤怒，屡出恶言，高宗以他无能，不以为意。
English: At this time, the reputation of the four seas has been attributed to Gao Zong. Bo Mao is deeply dissatisfied, angry morning and evening, and often makes bad words. Gao Zong is not impressed with his incompetence.

古文：及建安人蒋裕与韩子高等谋反，伯茂并阴豫其事。
现代文：到建安人蒋裕舆韩子高等谋反，伯茂同时暗地参预其事。
English: When the Jianan people, Chiang Yu-ming and Han Zi Gao, plotted a rebellion, Bo Mao secretly took part in the plot.

古文：二年十一月，皇太后令黜废帝为临海王，其日又下令曰： 伯茂轻薄，爰自弱龄，辜负严训，弥肆凶狡。
现代文：光大二年十一月，皇太后命令罢黜废帝为临海王，当又下令道： 伯茂轻薄，从幼时起，就辜负了皇上严训，后来越加放肆凶狠狡猾。
English: In November of the second year of Guangda, the empress dowager ordered the dethronement of the deposed emperor as the king of Linhai, and then ordered: "Homo is light and thin. From a young age, he failed to live up to the emperor's strict training, and later became more and more reckless, fierce and cunning.

古文：常以次居介弟，宜秉国权，不涯年德，逾逞狂躁，图为祸乱，扇动宫闱，要招粗险，觖望台阁，嗣君丧道，由此乱阶，是诸凶德，咸作谋主。
现代文：常以为自己位居太子之弟，应该秉承国权，不约束自己的年岁德行，愈加狂妄急躁，图谋引祸作乱，煽动宫廷，招惹凶险，怨望台阁，继位君主丧失道德，由此祸端，凡凶德之事，他都作谋主。
English: He often thought that he was the younger brother of the crown prince and should uphold the sovereignty of the country. He did not restrain his age-old virtue. He became more and more arrogant and impatient. He plotted to cause trouble and disorder, incited the court, invited danger, complained about the throne, and lost the morality of the succeeding monarch. As a result, he was the mastermind of all evil things.

古文：允宜罄彼司甸，刑斯蠙人。言念皇支，尚怀悲懑，可特降为温麻侯，宜加禁止，别遣就第。
现代文：按理应交付司法官，照刑法处置念他是皇族之一，尚怀悲痛，可特予降为温麻侯，对他的行为加以禁止，另遣派地方居住。
English: He should be handed over to a judicial officer, and according to the criminal law, if he is considered to be one of the royal family and is still grieving, he can be specially reduced to a warm-hearted marquis, his behavior should be prohibited, and he should be sent to another place to live.

古文：不意如此，言增泫叹。 
现代文：此实出于无奈，言而倍增悲叹。 
English: This is really out of helplessness, and the words multiply the lament.

古文：时六门之外有别馆，以为诸王冠婚之所，名为婚第，至是命伯茂出居之。
现代文：此时六门之外有别馆，是诸王加冠婚娶场所，名为婚第，由此命伯茂出宫居住。
English: At this time, there was another hall outside the six gates, which was a place for kings and queens to get married. It was called the wedding hall, which led to the order for Hōmō to leave the palace and live there.

古文：于路遇盗，殒于车中，时年十八。
现代文：中途遇强盗，死于车中，其时十八岁。
English: He was 18 years old when he was robbed and died in his car.

古文：鄱阳王伯山，字静之，世祖第三子也。
现代文：鄱阳王伯山，字静之，世祖的第三个儿子。
English: The third son of King Bozan of Shenyang, Zi Jingzhi.

古文：伟容仪，举止闲雅，喜愠不形于色，世祖深器之。
现代文：容貌仪态伟岸，举止娴静文雅，喜怒不形于色，世担对他深为器重。
English: His appearance and manners are great, his demeanour is quiet and elegant, his emotions are impervious to colour, and the cares of the world weigh heavily on him.

古文：初高祖时，天下草创，诸王受封仪注多阙，及伯山受封，世祖欲重其事，天嘉元年七月丙辰，尚书八座奏曰： 臣闻本枝惟允，宗周之业以弘，盘石既建，皇汉之基斯远，故能协宣五运，规范百王，式固灵根，克隆卜世。
现代文：当初直担时，天下草创之际，诸王受封的仪礼多缺，到伯山受封，世祖想郑重其事，天嘉元年七月丙辰，尚书八座上奏道： 臣听闻，本枝均予允存，宗周之业以此弘盛，磐石既建，皇汉之基乃久远，故而能协宣五运，规范百王，强固皇灵之根，隆盛永世。
English: At the time of the founding of the world, there was a shortage of ceremonies for the kings to be crowned. When the kings were crowned on Mt. Haku, the ancestors wanted to take the matter seriously. In July of the first year of the Heian period, the eighth chapter of the Book of the Dead was read aloud: "This branch is allowed to remain, and Zong Zhou's career will prosper as a result. The rock has been built, and the foundation of the emperor and emperors is long-standing. Therefore, it is possible to jointly promote the five misfortunes, standardize the hundred kings, strengthen the root of the emperor's spirit, and prosper forever."

古文：第三皇子伯山，发睿德于龆年，表歧姿于丱日，光昭丹掖，晖暎青闱，而玉圭未秉，金锡靡驾，岂所以敦序维翰，建树籓戚。
现代文：第三皇子值山，幼年即发现睿智美德，早期即表现与众不同的姿容，光照红宫墙，晖映青合闱，但玉圭之器没有秉握，金锡之车没有驾驭，怎么能分次第顺序而亲之，连结翰林，建树于外藩亲戚。
English: The third prince is valuable. He discovered wisdom and virtue at a young age, and showed a distinctive appearance at an early age. The walls of the Red Palace were illuminated, and the blue sky was reflected in the blue sky. However, he did not hold the utensils of the Jade Emperor, and he did not drive the car of the Gold and Tin Emperor. How could he be close to them in a sequential order, connect the Han Forest, and build a tree for relatives outside the domain?

古文：臣等参议，宜封鄱阳郡王。 
现代文：臣等参议，应封伯山为鄱阳郡王。 
English: The vassals and others should be consulted, and Boshan should be crowned as the king of Shenyang County.

古文：诏曰 可 。
现代文：皇帝下诏道： 可以。 
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict approving the request.

古文：乃遣散骑常侍、度支尚书萧睿持节兼太宰告于太庙；又遣五兵尚书王质持节兼太宰告于太社。
现代文：于是派遣散骑常侍、度支尚书萧睿持节兼太宰告于太庙；又派遣五兵尚书王质持节兼太宰告于太社。
English: Therefore, he dispatched the knights-errant, Du Zhi Shangshu Xiao Rui and Dazai to the Great Temple; he also dispatched five soldiers, Du Zhi Wangzhong and Dazai to the Great Shrine.

古文：其年十月，上临轩策命之曰： 於戏！夫建树籓屏，翼奖王室，钦若前典，咸必由之。
现代文：当年十月，皇帝临轩策命道： 呜呼建树外藩之屏，奖掖王室，以前朝之典为钦命，都必须从其而行。
English: In October of that year, Emperor Lin Xuan issued an order: "Build a tree outside the palace, and reward the royal family. Previously, the edict of the emperor was the order of honor, and everyone must follow it."

古文：惟尔夙挺圭璋，生知孝敬，令德茂亲，佥誉所集，启建大邦，实惟伦序，是用敬遵民瞻，锡此圭瑞。
现代文：惟你早握珪璋国器，生而知孝敬，是有美德的亲属，聚敛美誉，启建大邦，此是伦理之序，用此敬遵民之瞻望，故赐此珪器祥瑞。
English: However, if you have held the imperial scepter for a long time, if you are born with knowledge of filial piety, if you are a virtuous relative, if you accumulate good reputation and build a great nation, this is the order of ethics, and if you use this scepter with respect and follow the people's expectations, then this scepter will bring you good luck.

古文：往钦哉！其勉树声业，永保宗社，可不慎欤！ 
现代文：往日钦命啊为勉励树立声誉业绩，永保宗庙社稷，岂可不谨慎! 
English: In the past, it was the duty of the emperor to encourage the establishment of a reputation for performance, and Yongbo Zongmiao Company should not be careless!

古文：策讫，敕令王公已下并宴于王第。
现代文：策毕，下令王公以下同宴于王宫。
English: He ordered the prince and his entourage to have a banquet at the royal palace.

古文：仍授东中郎将、吴郡太守。
现代文：仍授伯山东中郎将、吴郡太守。
English: He was still given the titles of Baoshan Dongzhongro General and Wu County Governor.

古文：六年，为缘江都督、平北将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：天嘉六年，封为缘江都督、平北将军、南徐州刺史。
English: In the sixth year of Tian Jia, he was appointed the governor of Jiangsu, the general of Pingbei, and the governor of South Xuzhou.

古文：天康元年，进号镇北将军。
现代文：天康元年，进号镇北将军。
English: In the first year of Tian Kang, he was promoted to the position of General of the North.

古文：高宗辅政，不欲令伯山处边，光大元年，徙为镇东将军、东扬州刺史。
现代文：高宗辅政，不想让伯山处于边地，光大元年，转为镇束将军、柬扬州刺史。
English: Gao Zongfu, the assistant governor, did not want to leave Heshan on the sidelines. In the first year of the Guangda era, he was transferred to the post of Zhenzoku general and became the history of Yangzhou in Cambodia.

古文：太建元年，征为中卫将军、中领军。
现代文：太建元年，征为中卫将军、中领军。
English: In the first year of Tai Jian, he was enlisted as a middle guard general and the leader of the middle army.

古文：六年，又为征北将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：六年，又为征北将军、南徐州刺史。
English: Six years later, he became a general of the Northern Expedition and a historian of Southern Xuzhou.

古文：寻为征南将军、江州刺史。
现代文：不久为征南将军、江州刺史。
English: He soon became a general of the Southern Expedition, and made history in Jiangzhou.

古文：十一年，入为护军将军，加开府仪同三司，仍给鼓吹并扶。
现代文：十一年，入为护军将军，加开府仪同三司，仍给鼓吹并扶。
English: In the eleventh year, he was promoted to the general of the escorting army, and he was awarded the prefectural award and promoted to the Third Division.

古文：后主即位，进号中权大将军。
现代文：后主即位，进号中权大将军。
English: After the Lord's enthronement, the name of the emperor was changed to General Kwon.

古文：至德四年，出为持节、都督东扬、豊二州诸军事、东扬州刺史，加侍中，馀并如故。
现代文：至德四年，出为持节、都督束扬丰二州诸军事、束扬州刺史，加侍中，其余都照旧。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Dezong, the festival was held, and Yangfeng, the military of the two states, was appointed as the military governor, and Yangzhou was appointed as the military governor, and the attendants were added, and the rest were as before.

古文：祯明元年，丁所生母忧，去职。
现代文：祯明元年，因母丧，离职。
English: In 1901, due to the death of his mother, he left the company.

古文：明年，起为镇卫大将军、开府仪同三司，给班剑十人。
现代文：第二年，起用为镇卫大将军、开府仪同三司，给班剑十人。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as Zhenwei General, Kaifu Yi and three divisions, and given a squad of ten swordsmen.

古文：三年正月薨，时年四十。
现代文：祯明三年正月薨，其时四十岁。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Ming Dynasty, he was forty years old.

古文：伯山性宽厚，美风仪，又于诸王最长，后主深敬重之，每朝廷有冠婚飨宴之事，恒使伯山为主。
现代文：伯山性格宽厚，风度仪表很美，又在诸王中最年长，后主深为敬重他，每当朝廷有加冠婚嫁宴请的事，常派伯山为主事。
English: Baoshan had a generous personality, and his manners and appearance were very beautiful. He was also the oldest among the kings, and the queen deeply respected him. Whenever the imperial court had a crowned wedding banquet, they often assigned Baoshan to be the main event.

古文：及丁所生母忧，居丧以孝闻。
现代文：到其母丧，他居丧而以孝闻名。
English: He was known for his filial piety until his mother's death.

古文：后主尝幸吏部尚书蔡徵宅，因往吊之，伯山号恸殆绝，因起为镇卫将军，仍谓群臣曰： 鄱阳王至性可嘉，又是西第之长，豫章已兼司空，其亦须迁太尉。 
现代文：后主曾驾临吏部尚书蔡征家宅，于是前往凭吊，伯山号啕大哭、悲痛欲绝，便起用他为镇卫将军，并对群臣说： 鄱阳王纯厚性情可嘉，又是西宫中最年长者，豫章已兼司空，他也应改任太尉。 
English: After the lord had arrived at the residence of the official Shangshu Cai Zheng family, he went to the hanging, the Bishan number cried loudly and was overwhelmed with grief, then he appointed him as the general of the town guard, and said to the courtiers: The King of Shenyang is pure and generous, and he is the oldest in the West Palace. Yu Zhang has also been the secretary of the sky, and he should also be reappointed as the captain.

古文：未及发诏而伯山薨，寻值陈亡，遂无赠谥。
现代文：没等到发诏书，伯山已薨，不久正值陈朝灭亡，于是没有赠谧。
English: Before the imperial edict was issued, Heshan was already dead, and the Chen Dynasty was about to fall, so the imperial edict was not issued.

古文：长子君范，太建中拜鄱阳国世子，寻为贞威将军、晋陵太守，未袭爵而隋师至。
现代文：长子君范，太建年中拜为鄱阳国世子，不久为贞威将军、晋陵太守，没有承袭爵位而隋军已到。
English: The eldest son, Jun Fan, became the heir of the state of Shenyang in the middle of the Jian dynasty, and soon became General Zhen Wei and the governor of Jinling. He did not inherit the title, but the Sui army had already arrived.

古文：是时宗室王侯在都者百馀人，后主恐其为变，乃并召入，令屯朝堂，使豫章王叔英总督之，而又阴为之备。
现代文：此时宗室王侯在京都的有一百多人，后主恐怕有变，便都召入宫，命令屯聚朝堂之上，派豫章王叔英总督他们，而又暗地裹有所防备。
English: At this time, there were more than a hundred members of the prince's family in Kyoto, and fearing that there might be a change in the heir, they were all summoned to the palace, ordered to gather at the top of the imperial hall, and sent Yuanzhang Wangshuying as their governor, while secretly taking precautions.

古文：及六军败绩，相率出降，因从后主入关。
现代文：到六军败北，相继投降，便随从后主人关。
English: When the six armies were defeated and surrendered one after another, they followed their master Guan.

古文：至长安，隋文帝并配于陇右及河西诸州，各给田业以处之。
现代文：到长安，隋文帝把他们全部发配到陇右和河西各州，各给田业而处置。
English: After arriving in Chang'an, Emperor Sui distributed all of them to the provinces of Shiyu and Hexi, each to be used for farming.

古文：初，君范与尚书仆射江总友善，至是总赠君范书五言诗，以叙他乡离别之意，辞甚酸切，当世文士咸讽诵之。
现代文：当初，君范与尚书仆射江总友好，此时江总赠送君范手书五言诗，叙述他乡离别之情意，辞句十分辛酸，当世文士都诵读它。
English: At the beginning, Jun Fan and Shang Shuxu's servant Sho Jiang were on friendly terms. At this time, Jiang gave Jun Fan a handwritten five-character poem, describing the feelings of parting from his hometown. The words are very poignant, and contemporary scribes all recite it.

古文：大业二年，隋炀帝以后主第六女女婤为贵人，绝爱幸，因召陈氏子弟尽还京师，随才叙用，由是并为守宰，遍于天下。
现代文：大业二年，隋炀帝以后主第六女女蜩为贵人，非常喜爱宠幸，便召陈氏子弟都回京城，根据才能录用，于是都为守宰之官，遍布于天下。
English: In the second year of the Taiei era, after the Sui and Qian dynasties, the lord's sixth daughter, Nian Nian, was a noblewoman, very loved and favored, so he called all the sons and daughters of the Chen clan back to Beijing and hired them according to their talents. As a result, they were all guards, spread all over the world.

古文：其年君范为温令。
现代文：此年君范为温令。
English: In this year, Jun Fan was promoted to Wenling.

古文：晋安王伯恭字肃之，世祖第六子也。
现代文：晋安王伯恭，字肃之，世祖的第六个儿子。
English: Jinan Wang Bokong, also known as Su Zhi, was the sixth son of the patriarch.

古文：天嘉六年，立为晋安王。
现代文：天嘉六年，被立为晋安王。
English: In the sixth year of Tianjia, he was appointed as the King of Jin'an.

古文：寻为平东将军、吴郡太守，置佐史。
现代文：不久为平东将军、吴娶太守，置佐史。
English: Soon after, General Pingdong and Empress Dowager Wu married, and Okisashi was born.

古文：时伯恭年十馀岁，便留心政事，官曹治理。
现代文：其时，伯恭十余岁，便留心政事，宫曹治理。
English: At that time, Bo Qiong was more than ten years old, so he paid attention to politics and the governance of the palace.

古文：太建元年，入为安前将军、中护军，迁中领军。
现代文：太建元年，入为安前将军、中护军，改中领军。
English: In the first year of the Tai Jian era, he was promoted to the Anzen general, the middle protection force, and the leader of the middle protection force.

古文：寻为中卫将军、扬州刺史，以公事免。
现代文：不久为中卫将军、扬州刺史，因公事免职。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of Zhongwei general and Yangzhou chief historian, but was removed from his post for official business.

古文：四年，起为安左将军，寻为镇右将军、特进，给扶。
现代文：太建四年，起用为安左将军，不久为镇右将军、特进，给扶。
English: After four years of construction, he was appointed as General An Zuo, and soon became General Zhen Yu, Special Advancement, and Assistant.

古文：六年，出为安南将军、南豫州刺史。
现代文：太建六年，出为安南将军、南豫州刺史。
English: Six years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, General Annan and the history of Southern Yuzhou were made.

古文：九年，入为安前将军、祠部尚书。
现代文：九年，入为安前将军、祠部尚书。
English: In the ninth year, he was promoted to Anzen Shogun and became a member of the ancestral hall.

古文：十一年，进号军师将军、尚书右仆射。
现代文：十一年，进号军师将军、尚书右仆射。
English: In the eleventh year of his reign, Shang Shuxu, the general of the army division, and Shang Shuxu, the right-hand man, were promoted.

古文：十二年，迁仆射。
现代文：十二年，改仆射。
English: Twelve years later, he changed his profession to shooting.

古文：十三年，迁左仆射。
现代文：十三年，改左仆射。
English: Thirteen years old, a left-footed striker.

古文：十四年，出为安南将军、湘州剌史，未拜。
现代文：十四年，出为安南将军、湘州刺史，未拜任。
English: Fourteen years later, he was promoted to General Annan, the governor of Hunan Province, but did not take up the post.

古文：至德元年，为侍中、中卫将军、光禄大夫，丁所生母忧，去职。
现代文：至德元年，为侍中、中卫将军、光禄大夫，母丧，离职。
English: By the first year of the Tokugawa Shogunate, he was a chamberlain, middle guard general, and doctor of the Imperial Household Agency. After his mother's death, he left the position.

古文：祯明元年，起为中卫将军、右光禄大夫，置佐史、扶并如故。
现代文：祯明元年，起用为中卫将军、右光禄大夫，置佐史、扶均照旧。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he was appointed as the general of the middle guard and the doctor of the right light, and Okisashi and Fuchun remained the same.

古文：三年入关。
现代文：祯明三年入关。
English: Three years passed.

古文：隋大业初，为成州刺史、太常卿。
现代文：隋朝大业初年，为成州刺史、太常卿。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, he was the chief historian of the state of Chengdu and the grand chancellor.

古文：衡阳王伯信，字孚之，世祖第七子也。
现代文：衡阳王伯信，字孚之，世祖的第七个儿子。
English: Hengyang Wang Buxin, Zifu Zhi, the seventh son of the patriarch.

古文：天嘉元年，衡阳献王昌自周还朝，于道薨，其年世祖立伯信为衡阳王，奉献王祀。
现代文：玉台元年，衡阳献王速旦自韭眉还朝，于中途薨，这一年世祖立伯信为衡阳王，奉献王祀。
English: In the first year of the Jade Emperor's reign, Hengyang offered its king to the emperor, and the emperor quickly raised his eyebrows and bowed to the emperor. In the same year, the founder of the dynasty, Buxin, became the king of Hengyang and was dedicated to the king.

古文：寻为宣惠将军、丹阳尹，置佐史。
现代文：不久为宣惠将军、丹阳尹，置佐史。
English: Soon it was General Xuan Hui, Danyang Yin, and Okisa Shi.

古文：太建四年，为中护军。
现代文：太建四年，为中护军。
English: Tai Jian four years, for the middle protection force.

古文：六年，为宣毅将军、扬州刺史。
现代文：六年，为宣毅将军、扬州刺史。
English: In six years, he became the general of Xuan Yi and the history of Yangzhou.

古文：寻加侍中、散骑常侍。
现代文：不久加侍中、散骑常侍。
English: He was soon promoted to Samurai Junior, and then to Sanshaku (free-riding) Samurai.

古文：十一年，进号镇前将军，太子詹事，馀并如故。
现代文：十一年，进号镇前将军，太子詹事，其余均照旧。
English: In the eleventh year, the former general of Jinbei Town, the prince Zhan Zhi, and the rest are as before.

古文：祯明元年，出为镇南将军、西衡州刺史。
现代文：祯明元年，出为镇南将军、酉盐州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he was promoted to the post of Zhenan general and the post of Zouyanzhou chief historian.

古文：三年，隋军济江，与临汝侯方庆并为东衡州刺史王勇所害，事在方庆传。
现代文：三年，臆军渡红，与堕叠卢立庆同被束衡州刺史王勇所害，事载方庆传。
English: In the third year, the cowardly army of Wujihong, together with the fallen Lu Liqing, was victimized by the shackle of Hengzhou assassin Wang Yong, and the matter was passed on to Fang Qing.

古文：庐陵王伯仁，字寿之，世祖第八子也。
现代文：庐陵王伯仁，字寿之，世祖的第八个儿子。
English: The eighth son of King Boryeong, the founder of the dynasty.

古文：天嘉六年，立为庐陵王。
现代文：天嘉六年，被立为庐陵王。
English: In the sixth year of Tianjia, he was appointed as the King of Fuling.

古文：太建初，为轻车将军，置佐史。
现代文：太建初年，为轻车将军，置佐史。
English: In the first year of Taiken, Okisashi became the general of light vehicles.

古文：七年，迁冠军将军、中领军。
现代文：七年，改任冠军将军、中领军。
English: Seven years later, he was promoted to champion general and middle leader.

古文：寻为平北将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：不久为平北将军、亩涂业刺史。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of General of the North, and became a famous painter.

古文：十二年，为翊左将军、中领军。
现代文：十二年，为翊左将军、中领军。
English: In 1912, he became the commander of the middle-ranking troops under the command of General Gong Zuo.

古文：贞明元年，加侍中、国子祭酒，领太子中庶子。
现代文：祯明元年，加侍中、国子祭酒，领太子中庶子。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the middle-ranking attendant, Kuniko Matsuzake, and the middle-ranking illegitimate child of the crown prince were added.

古文：三年入关，卒于长安。
现代文：祯明三年入关，死于长安。
English: After three years of imprisonment, he died in Chang'an.

古文：长子番，先封湘滨侯，隋大业中，不资阳令。
现代文：长子王番，先被封为湘滨侯，隋大业年中，为资阳令。
English: Wang Fan, the eldest son, was first named the Marquis of Hunan, and in the middle of the Sui Dynasty, he was named Ziyang.

古文：江夏王伯义，字坚之，世祖第九子也。
现代文：江夏王伯义，字坚之，世祖的第九个儿子。
English: King Bo Yi of Jiangxia, the ninth son of King Jianzhi, the founder of the dynasty.

古文：天嘉六年，立为江夏王。
现代文：天嘉六年，被立为江夏王。
English: In the sixth year of Tianjia, he was crowned King of Jiangxia.

古文：太建初，为宣惠将军、东扬州刺史，置佐史。
现代文：太建初年，为宣惠将军、东扬州刺史，置佐史。
English: In the first year of Tai Jian, it was General Xuan Hui, Dong Yang Zhou Zhishi, and Okisa Shi.

古文：寻为宣毅将军、持节、散骑常侍、都督合、霍二州诸军事、合州刺史。
现代文：不久为宣毅将军、持节、散骑常侍、都督合霍二州诸军事、合州刺史。
English: Soon, he became General Xuan Yi, Jixi, Zangjie, the imperial governor, the military commander of the two states, and the historian of the two states.

古文：十四年，征为侍中、忠武将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：天嘉十四年，被征为侍中、忠武将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: In the 14th year of Tianjia, he was enlisted as a chamberlain, a general of the loyal army, and a doctor of the Golden Purple Light.

古文：祯明三年入关，迁于瓜州，于道卒。
现代文：祯明三年入关，迁居于瓜州，在道中死去。
English: He entered the customs three years later, moved to Guazhou, and died on the road.

古文：长子元基，先封湘潭侯，隋大业中为谷熟县令。
现代文：长子元基，先被封为湘潭侯，堕左箠年中为谷熟县令。
English: The eldest son, Motoki, was first given the title of Hunan marquis, and later became the county magistrate of Guju County.

古文：武陵王伯礼，字用之，世祖第十子也。
现代文：武陵王伯礼，字用之，世祖的第十个儿子。
English: Wuling Wang Bolei, the tenth son of the patriarch.

古文：天嘉六年，立为武陵王。
现代文：天嘉六年，被立为武陵王。
English: In the sixth year of Tianjia, he was appointed King of Wuling.

古文：太建初，为云旗将军、持节、都督吴兴诸军事、吴兴太守。
现代文：太建初年，为云旗将军、持节、都督吴兴诸军事、吴兴太守。
English: In the first year of Tai Jian, it was General Yunqi, Ji Jie, the military governor Wu Xing, and Wu Xing, the governor.

古文：在郡恣行暴掠，驱录民下，逼夺财货，前后委积，百姓患之。
现代文：伯礼在郡中恣意行暴掠夺，驱逐百姓，逼人财货，前后囤积，百姓视他为患。
English: In the county, Bolei arbitrarily carried out violent plunder, expelled people, forced people to hoard goods, and hoarded goods back and forth. People regarded him as a pest.

古文：太建九年，为有司所劾，上曰： 王年少，未达治道，皆由佐史不能匡弼所致，特降军号，后若更犯，必致之以法，有司不言与同罪。 
现代文：太建九年，被有司弹劾，皇上道： 逮陵王年纪小，未能通达治政之道，都因为佐史不能辅助所导致，特降军号，以后如再犯，一定绳之以法，有司如不言则与其同罪。 
English: In the ninth year of the Jiajing era, he was impeached by a magistrate, and the emperor said: The arrest of King Ling, who was young and unable to reach the way of governance, was caused by Sashi's inability to assist, the special demotion of the army, if repeated in the future, will certainly be brought to justice, if the magistrate does not speak, it will be the same crime.

古文：十一年春，被代征还，伯礼遂迁延不发。
现代文：基建十一年春，被人替代征还，值擅于是迁延不出发。
English: In the spring of the 11th year of the foundation, it was replaced by a person to collect and return, and the value was arbitrarily delayed.

古文：其年十月，散骑常侍、御史中丞徐君敷奏曰： 臣闻车屦不俟，君命之通规，夙夜匪懈，臣子之恒节。
现代文：这年十月，散骑常侍、御史中丞徐君敷奏道： 臣听闻，车履不等待，是君命的通规，早晚不懈怠，是臣子的常节。
English: In October of the same year, Xu Junzhi, a knight-errant and a regular attendant of the imperial court, recited the following: As a vassal has heard, it is the general rule of a vassal's life not to wait to ride, and it is a vassal's duty not to slack off in the morning or in the evening.

古文：谨案云旗将军、持节、都督吴兴诸军事、吴兴太守武陵王伯礼，早擅英猷，久驰令问，惟良寄重，枌乡是属。
现代文：云旗将军、持节、都督县兴诸军事、吴兴太守武陵王伯礼，早年擅长英明谋划，久有好名声，惟良者寄重，凡帝乡的人皆为属下。
English: General Yunqi, Ji Jie, the military leaders of Xingzhu in Tudou County, and Wu Xingtao, the governor of Wuling Wangbolei, were good at wise planning in the early years, and had a good reputation for a long time. Only the good people were important, and all the people in the imperial village were subordinates.

古文：圣上爱育黔黎，留情政本，共化求瘼，早赴皇心，遂复稽缓归骖，取移凉燠，迟回去鹢，空淹载路，淑慎未彰，违惰斯在，绳愆检迹，以为惩诫。
现代文：圣上爱育百姓黎民，留心于治政之本，共同化育询求百姓疾苦，早赴皇心，他却又延滞缓归的车马，取移凉暖，徘徊不上路。淑善恭慎未颢，违背惰性仍在，必绳法检迹，以为惩罚警戒。
English: The Holy One, blessed be He, loves and educates the people, pays attention to the fundamentals of governance, and jointly educates and inquires into the sufferings of the people. He went to the heart of the emperor early, but he delayed the slow return of the chariot and horse, took away the warmth and cold, and lingered on the road. Shuxian and Guancheng are not yet exhausted, and they are still violating the inertia, and the rope method should be checked for traces, so as to be on the alert for punishment.

古文：臣等参议以见事免伯礼所居官，以王还第，谨以白简奏闻。 
现代文：臣等参议，以所见事免去伯礼的官职，让他以王的身份还宫，谨以此上奏。 
English: I would like to take this opportunity to appeal to my ministers and others to use what they have seen to remove Bolei from his official position and allow him to return to the palace as king.

古文：诏曰： 可 。
现代文：皇上下韶道： 可以。 
English: Empress Dowager: That's fine.

古文：祯明三年入关，隋大业中为散骑侍郎、临洮太守。
现代文：祯明三年伯礼入关，隋大业年中为散骑侍郎、临洮太守。
English: In the 3rd year of the Ming Dynasty, Borei entered the customs, and in the middle of the Sui Dynasty, he was a horseback riding attendant and the governor of Linyi.

古文：永阳王伯智，字策之，世祖第十二子也。
现代文：永阳王伯智，字策之，世祖的第十二个儿子。
English: Yongyang Wang Bo Zhi, the twelfth son of the patriarch.

古文：少敦厚，有器局，博涉经史。
现代文：年幼时敦厚，有才识舆度量，博览经史。
English: When he was young, he was strong-willed, talented, and well-versed in history.

古文：太建中，立为永阳王。
现代文：太建年中，被立为永阳王。
English: In the middle of the Jianli era, he was appointed as the Yongyang King.

古文：寻为侍中，加明威将军，置佐史。
现代文：不久为侍中，加明威将军，置佐史。
English: He soon became a chamberlain to General Kamehameha I, Okisashi.

古文：寻加散骑常侍，累迁尚书左仆射，出为使持节、都督东扬、豊二州诸军事、平东将军，领会稽内史。
现代文：不久加散骑常侍，多次升迁任尚书左仆射，出为使持节、都督东扬丰二州诸军事、平东将军，领会稽内史。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of knight-errant, promoted several times to the post of Shangshu Zuopu, and was appointed as the envoy of the Jisi Festival, the military governor of the two states of Dongyangfeng, and the general of Pingdong. He understood the history of internal audit.

古文：至德二年，入为侍中、翊左将军，加特进。
现代文：至德二年，入焉侍中、翊左将军，加特进。
English: In the second year of the Tokugawa Shogunate, the middle-ranking samurai, Shiza no shogun, Gatetsu, came to power.

古文：祯明三年入关。
现代文：祯明三年入关。
English: Entered the customs three years after the Ming Dynasty.

古文：隋大业中，为岐州司马，迁国子司业。
现代文：隋大业年中，为岐州司马，改国子司业。
English: In the middle of the Sui Dynasty, he became the Qizhou Sima and changed the country to Sima.

古文：桂阳王伯谋，字深之，世祖第十三子也。
现代文：桂阳王伯谋，字深之，世祖的第十三个儿子。
English: Guiyang Wang Bohmou, the thirteenth son of the founder of the dynasty.

古文：太建中，立为桂阳王。
现代文：太建年中，被立为桂阳王。
English: In the middle of the Jianli era, he was appointed as the King of Guiyang.

古文：七年，为明威将军，置佐史。
现代文：太建七年，为明威将军，置佐史。
English: Tai Jian for seven years, as Ming Wei general, Okisashi.

古文：寻为信威将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：不久为信威将军、丹阳尹。
English: He was soon replaced by General Xinwei and Danyang Yin.

古文：十年，加侍中。
现代文：太建十年，加侍中。
English: Tai Jian was ten years old, and he was in the middle.

古文：出为持节、都督吴兴诸军事、东中郎将、吴兴太守。
现代文：出为持节、都督吴兴诸军事、东中郎将、吴兴太守。
English: It was a military festival, and Wu Xing, the military governor, Dong Zhong Lang Zheng, and Wu Xing, the governor-general, were present.

古文：十一年，加散骑常侍。
现代文：太建十一年，加散骑常侍。
English: In the eleventh year of the Tai Jian era, he was promoted to the rank of samurai.

古文：至德元年薨。
现代文：至德元年薨。
English: It premiered in the first year of the German calendar.

古文：子豊嗣，大业中，为番禾令。高宗四十二男：柳皇后生后主，彭贵人生始兴王叔陵，曹淑华生豫章王叔英，何淑仪生长沙王叔坚、宜都王叔明，魏昭容生建安王叔卿，钱贵妃生河东王叔献，刘昭仪生新蔡王叔齐，袁昭容生晋熙王叔文、义阳王叔达、新会王叔坦，王姬生淮南王叔彪、巴山王叔雄，吴姬生始兴王叔重，徐姬生寻阳王叔俨，淳于姬生岳阳王叔慎，王修华生武昌王叔虞，韦修容生湘东王叔平，施姬生临贺王叔敖、沅陵王叔兴，曾姬生阳山王叔宣，杨姬生西阳王叔穆，申婕妤生南安王叔俭、南郡王叔澄、岳山王叔韶、太原王叔匡，袁姬生新兴王叔纯，吴姬生巴东王叔谟，刘姬生临江王叔显，秦姬生新宁王叔隆、新昌王叔荣。
现代文：高宗有四十二个儿子：柳皇后生后主，彭贵人生始兴王叔陵，曹淑华生豫章王叔英，何淑仪生长沙王叔坚、宜都王叔明，魏昭容生建安王叔卿，钱贵妃生河东王叔献，刘昭仪生新蔡王叔齐，袁昭容生晋熙王叔文、义阳王叔达、新会王叔坦，王姬生淮南王叔彪、巴山王叔雄，吴姬生始兴王叔重，徐姬生寻阳王叔俨，淳于姬生岳阳王叔慎，王脩华生武昌王叔虞，韦脩容生湘东王叔平，施姬生临贺王叔敖、沅陵王叔兴，曾姬生阳山王叔宣，杨姬生西阳王叔穆，申婕妤生南安王叔俭、南郡王叔澄、岳山王叔韶、太原王叔匡，袁姬生新兴王叔纯，吴姬生巴束王叔谟，刘姬生临江王叔显，秦姬生新宁王查瞠、面旦王赵茔。
English: Gao Zong had forty-two sons: Empress Liu gave birth to Queen Dowager, Peng Gui gave birth to Wang Shuling, Cao Shuhua gave birth to Yu Zhang Wang Shuying, He Shuyi gave birth to Sha Wang Shujian, Yidu Wang Shuming, Wei Zhaorong gave birth to Jian An Wang Shujing, Qian Guifei gave birth to He Dong Wang Shujing, Liu Zhaorong gave birth to Xin Cai Wang Shujing, Yuan Zhaorong gave birth to Jin Xi Wang Shujing, Yiyang Wang Shuda, Xinhui Wang Shutan, Wang Ji gave birth to Huainan Wang Sh

古文：其皇子叔叡、叔忠、叔弘、叔毅、叔训、叔武、叔处、叔封等八人，并未及封。
现代文：产塞的皇子查邀、查皑、赵弘、扭堑、扭剀、圭通、毖疃、圭递等八人，都未及封。
English: The eight sons of the prince who gave birth to Jie, including Zhaoying, Zhaojun, Zhao Hong, Tuanjun, Tuanjun, Guitong, Zou and Gui Di, have not yet been sealed.

古文：叔陵犯逆，别有传。
现代文：童瞪犯上逆乱，另有传。
English: Another legend has it that Tongzhao committed mutiny.

古文：三子早卒，本书无名。
现代文：三个儿子早死，本书无名。
English: Three sons die early, the book is nameless.

古文：豫章王叔英，字子烈，高宗第三子也。
现代文：豫章王叔英，字子烈，高宗第三个儿子。
English: Yuanzhang Wang Shuying, the third son of Gaozong.

古文：少宽厚仁爱。
现代文：幼时宽厚仁爱。
English: Generosity and benevolence in childhood.

古文：天嘉元年，封建安侯。
现代文：丢嘉元年，被封为建安侯。
English: In the first year of Duijia, he was given the title of Jian'an Hou.

古文：太建元年，改封豫章王，仍为宣惠将军、都督东扬州诸军事、东扬州刺史。
现代文：太建元年，改封豫章王，仍为宣惠将军、都督束扬州诸军事、塞扰州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Tai Jian period, he changed his title to Yu Zhang Wang, but he was still the general of Xuan Hui, the governor of Yangzhou, the military and the history of the state.

古文：五年，进号平北将军、南豫州刺史。
现代文：太建五年，进号平北将军、南豫州刺史。
English: In the fifth year of Tai Jian, he was promoted to the title of General of North Pyongan Province and the title of General of South Henan Province.

古文：十一年，为镇前将军、江州刺史。
现代文：太建十一年，为镇前将军、江塑刺史。
English: It's been 11 years since Tai Jian was built, and he is a former general of Zhen and a history of Jiangsu Province.

古文：后主即位，进号征南将军，寻加开府仪同三司、中卫大将军，馀并如故。
现代文：篷圭登位，进号征南将军，不久加开府仪同三司、中卫大将军，其余都照旧。
English: Tang Gui ascended the throne, was given the title of General of the Southern Expedition, and was soon given the title of General of the Kaifu, the Third Division, and the Central Guards, and the rest were the same as before.

古文：四年，进号骠骑大将军。
现代文：至德四年，进号骠骑大将军。
English: After four years in Germany, he was promoted to General of Cavalry.

古文：祯明元年，给鼓吹一部，班剑十人。
现代文：祯明元年，给鼓吹一部，班剑十人。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, there was a ten-member team of drummers.

古文：其年，迁司空。
现代文：遣一年，改任司空。
English: After one year of service, he was transferred to the position of Jikku.

古文：三年，隋师济江，叔英知石头军戍事。
现代文：祯明三年，隋军渡逗，扭墓知亘头军戍事。
English: In the third year of the Ming Dynasty, the Sui army was amused by the military anecdote of the head of the army.

古文：寻令入屯朝堂。
现代文：不久被命令入屯朝堂。
English: He was soon ordered to enter the imperial court.

古文：及六军败绩，降于隋将韩擒虎。
现代文：到六军败北，投降于隋将韩擒虎。
English: By the time the Sixth Army was defeated and surrendered to the Sui Dynasty, Han Xinghu was no more.

古文：其年入关。
现代文：遣年入关。
English: This year, I passed the entrance examination.

古文：隋大业中为涪陵太守。
现代文：隋大业年中为涪陵太守。
English: In the middle of the Sui Dynasty, he became the governor of Fuling.

古文：长子弘，至德元年，拜豫章国世子。
现代文：长子速弘，至德元年，被封为豫章国世子。
English: The eldest son, Hayahiro, became the heir of Yosho Province in the first year of the Tokugawa shogunate.

古文：长沙王叔坚，字子成，高宗第四子也。
现代文：长沙王叔坚，字子成，高宗第四个儿子。
English: Changsha Wang Shujian, also known as Zicheng, was Gaozong's fourth son.

古文：母本吴中酒家隶，高宗微时，尝往饮，遂与通，及贵，召拜淑仪。
现代文：他的母亲本是吴中酒家奴隶，高宗未登位时，曾经去那家酒家饮酒，便与她通奸，到高宗显贵时，召封她为淑仪。
English: His mother used to be a slave of a wine house in Wuzhong. When Gaozong was not on the throne, she used to go to the wine house to drink, and then she committed adultery with her. When Gaozong was a dignitary, she was given the title of Shouyi.

古文：叔坚少杰黠，凶虐使酒，尤好数术、卜筮、祝禁，钅容金琢玉，并究其妙。
现代文：叔坚年幼时凶顽狡诈，爱耍酒性，尤其喜好数术、卜筮、祝禁之类，熔金琢玉，都要追究其中的奥妙。
English: When Uncle Jian was young, he was fierce and cunning, loved to play with alcohol, and was especially fond of mathematics, divination, and the like, as well as smelting gold and gems, all of which should be investigated.

古文：天嘉中，封豊城侯。
现代文：天嘉年中，被封为丰继堡。
English: In the middle of the year of heaven and earth, it was named Fengji Fort.

古文：太建元年，立为长沙王，仍为东中郎将、吴郡太守。
现代文：左建元年，被立为长沙王，仍为束中郎将、昱迎太守。
English: In the first year of Zuo Jian, he was established as the king of Changsha, and he was still the middle-ranking general of the clique and the grand marshal of the imperial court.

古文：四年，为宣毅将军、江州刺史，置佐史。
现代文：越艺四年，为宣毅将军、丝赵刺史，置佐史。
English: In the four years of Yueyi, it was General Xuan Yi, Si Zhao, Zushi, and Okisa.

古文：七年，进号云麾将军、郢州刺史，未拜，转为平越中郎将、广州刺史。
现代文：左建七年，进号云麾将军、郢州刺史，未拜官，又转为平越中郎将、广州刺史。
English: Zuo Jian was seven years old, he was promoted to General Yun Qi, Zhangzhou Sisi, and did not serve as an official, and then he was transferred to Pingyue Zhong Lang Zheng, Guangzhou Sisi.

古文：寻为平北将军、合州刺史。
现代文：不久为平北将军、合州刺史。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of General of the North, and the history of Hezhou was written.

古文：八年，复为平西将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：太建八年，又为平西将军、垫出刺史。
English: After eight years of construction, it was the turn of General Pingxi to make history.

古文：十一年，入为翊左将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：主建十一年，入为翊左将军、旦昼尹。
English: It has been eleven years since the main building was built, and it is now occupied by General Xie Zuo and General Tan Rong Yin.

古文：初，叔坚与始兴王叔陵并招聚宾客，各争权宠，甚不平。
现代文：当初，叔坚与始兴王叔陵都招聚宾客，互相争夺权宠，很为不和。
English: At the beginning, both Shu Jian and Shi Xing Wang Shuling invited guests and competed with each other for power and favors. They were at odds with each other.

古文：每朝会卤簿，不肯为先后，必分道而趋，左右或争道而斗，至有死者。
现代文：每次朝会或仪仗队列，谁都不肯居后，必定分道而行，手下人有的为争道而斗，以致有死者。
English: Every time there is a meeting of the imperial court or an honor guard, no one wants to be left behind, and they are bound to go their separate ways. Some of their subordinates fight over which way to go, resulting in deaths.

古文：及高宗弗豫，叔坚、叔陵等并从后主侍疾。
现代文：到高宗患疾，叔坚、叔陵等都随从后主侍奉。
English: When Gaozong fell ill, Shujian, Shuling and others followed and served the master.

古文：叔陵阴有异志，乃命典药吏曰： 切药刀甚钝，可砺之。 
现代文：叔陵暗有异志，便命典药吏道： 切药刀很钝，可将它磨一下。 
English: Shuling had a secret ambition, so he told the pharmacist: The cutting knife is very blunt, but it can be sharpened.

古文：及高宗崩，仓卒之际，又命其左右于外取剑，左右弗悟，乃取朝服所佩木剑以进，叔陵怒。
现代文：到高宗崩，仓猝之际，又命令他手下人在外面取剑，左右不悟，取了朝服所佩的木剑进来，叔陵大怒。
English: At the time of Gao Zong's sudden death, he also ordered his subordinates to take swords outside, but they did not understand, so they took the wooden sword worn by the imperial robe and came in. Shuling was furious.

古文：叔坚在侧闻之，疑有变，伺其所为。
现代文：叔坚在一旁听闻，怀疑有变，观候他的所为。
English: Uncle Jian listened on the sidelines, suspected that something had changed, and watched what he was doing.

古文：及翌日小敛，叔陵袖锉药刀趋进，斫后主，中项，后主闷绝于地，皇太后与后主乳母乐安君吴氏俱以身捍之，获免。
现代文：到第二天小殓，叔陵袖中藏药刀进来，斩后主，砍中后颈项，后主合倒地上，皇太后舆后主乳母乐安君吴氏都以身捍卫后主，使后主获免一死。
English: On the next day, Xiao Yao, Shuling's assistant, came in with a Tibetan knife and cut off the queen's hair, cut off the queen's neck, and the queen fell to the ground. The empress dowager, the queen mother's wet nurse, and Le Anjun of the Wu clan all defended the queen mother and saved her from death.

古文：叔坚自后扼叔陵，擒之，并夺其刀，将杀之，问后主曰： 即尽之，为待也？ 
现代文：叔坚从后面扼住叔陵，擒住了他，并夺了他的刀，要将他杀死，叔坚问后主： 就要杀掉他，等你的话。 
English: Shujian grabbed Shuling from behind, choked him, and took his sword to kill him. Shujian asked Houya, "Just kill him, wait for your word."

古文：后主不能应。
现代文：后主不能答应。
English: The landlord could not agree to this.

古文：叔陵旧多力，须臾，自奋得脱，出云龙门，入于东府城，召左右断青溪桥道，放东城囚以充战士。
现代文：叔陵早年力大，不一会儿，即奋力挣脱，逃出云龙门，奔入束府城，召左右兵士断绝青溪桥道，释放束城囚犯以充当战士。
English: In his early years, Shuling was very strong. Soon, he struggled to break free, escaped from Yunlongmen, rushed into Shoufu City, called on soldiers from both sides to cut off the Qingxi Bridge Road, and released Shoufu prisoners to serve as soldiers.

古文：又遣人往新林，追其所部兵马，仍自被甲，著白布帽，登城西门，招募百姓。
现代文：又派人到新林，追召他的部下兵马，同时亲自披上盔甲，戴上白布帽，登上西城门，招募百姓。
English: He also sent someone to Xinlin to summon his men and horses, and at the same time he personally put on armor and a white cloth cap, climbed the West Gate, and recruited people.

古文：是时众军并缘江防守，台内空虚，叔坚乃白太后使太子舍人司马申以后主命召萧摩诃，令讨之。
现代文：此时众军都沿江防守，台内空虚，叔坚便告诉太后派太子舍人司马申以后主的命令召萧摩诃，令他征讨叔陵。
English: At this time, all the troops were defending along the river, and Taichung was empty. Uncle Jian then told the empress dowager to send the prince's concubine, Sima Shen, to summon Xiao Miao after the lord's order, and ordered him to requisition his uncle's tomb.

古文：即日擒其将戴温、谭骐驎等，送台，斩于尚书阁下，持其首徇于东城。
现代文：当日便擒获叔陵的将领戴温、谭骐膦等，送往台阁，斩首于尚书阁下，将他们的首级巡行于束城。
English: On the same day, the generals Dai Wen and Tan Xuan, who were captured in Shuling, were sent to Taige, beheaded His Excellency Shang Shu, and paraded their heads in Sokcheng.

古文：叔陵恇扰不知所为，乃尽杀其妻妾，率左右数百人走趋新林。摩诃追之，斩于丹阳郡，馀党悉擒。
现代文：叔陵恐惧慌张不知所措，便杀尽了他的妻妾，率领手下敷百人逃往新林，萧摩诃追赶他，斩首于丹阳郡，余党都被擒捉。
English: Overwhelmed by fear and panic, Shuling killed his wife and concubine, and led hundreds of subordinates to flee to Xinlin. Xiao Maqi chased him and beheaded him in Danyang County. The rest of the party were captured.

古文：其年，以功进号骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史。
现代文：逭一年，叔坚以功进号骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史。
English: In the same year, Shujian won the title of "Meritorious Achievement" in the cavalry general, Kaifu ceremony with three divisions, and Yangzhou history.

古文：寻迁司空，将军、刺史如故。
现代文：接着改任司空，将军、刺史照旧。
English: Then he was reassigned to the position of Siku, the general, and Sashi as before.

古文：是时后主患创，不能视事，政无小大，悉委叔坚决之，于是势倾朝廷。
现代文：此时后主患疾，不能理事，政事不论大小，都委托叔坚决断，于是叔坚的势力倾倒朝廷。
English: After this time, the master fell ill and was unable to serve as a director. He entrusted his uncle with all political affairs, no matter how big or small. As a result, his uncle's power overturned the imperial court.

古文：叔坚因肆骄纵，事多不法，后主由是疏而忌之。
现代文：叔坚由此肆意骄横纵行，做出许多不法之事，后主于是疏远忌恨他了。
English: As a result, Shujian behaved arrogantly and arrogantly, and did many illegal things. As a result, his successor became estranged from him and hated him.

古文：孔范、管斌、施文庆之徒，并东宫旧臣，日夜阴持其短。
现代文：孔范、管斌、施文庆等人。都是束宫旧臣，日夜暗中把持他的短处。
English: Kong Fan, Guan Bin, Shi Wenqing and others are all former retainers of Sokgong, who secretly control his weaknesses day and night.

古文：至德元年，乃诏令即本号用三司之仪，出为江州刺史。
现代文：至德元年，后主下韶，令叔坚就本号用三司之仪，出为江州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Republic of China, after the emperor's abdication, he ordered Shujian to use the title of the three emperors and become the crown prince of Jiangsu Province.

古文：未发，寻有诏又以为骠骑将军，重为司空，实欲去其权势。
现代文：未出发，接着有诏书，又任他为骠骑将军，重又为司空，实际想要去除他的权势。
English: Before he set off, there followed an imperial edict, appointing him as the general of cavalry and cavalry, and re-designating him as the commander of the cavalry and cavalry, and actually wanting to remove his power.

古文：叔坚不自安，稍怨望，乃为左道厌魅以求福助，刻木为偶人，衣以道士之服，施机关，能拜跪，昼夜于日月下醮之，祝诅于上。
现代文：叔坚有些不安，稍有怨气，于是便搞巫蛊、方术祈祷鬼神以求福助，刻木做木偶人，穿道士服装，施用机关，能跪拜，日夜在日月之下祭祀，向上天祝愿诅咒。
English: Shujian was a little uneasy and a little resentful, so he engaged in witchcraft and sorcery, prayed to ghosts and gods to seek blessings, carved wood to make puppets, wore Taoist clothing, used organs, could kneel, sacrificed day and night under the sun and moon, and wished curses on heaven.

古文：其年冬，有人上书告其事，案验并实，后主召叔坚囚于西省，将杀之。
现代文：造年冬天，有人上书告发此事，案查验证俱实，后主命囚禁叔坚于西省，将要杀他。
English: In the winter of last year, someone wrote a letter to report the incident. The investigation proved that it was true. Later, the master ordered Uncle Jian to be imprisoned in West Province and was going to kill him.

古文：其夜，令近侍宣敕，数之以罪，叔坚对曰： 臣之本心，非有他故，但欲求亲媚耳。
现代文：逭一夜，后主命近侍宣布韶令，敷述他的罪行，叔坚对答道： 臣的本心，没有其他原因。衹是想求亲媚罢了。
English: One night, after the lord's close attendant announced the imperial edict and laid out his crimes, Shu Jian replied: There is no other reason for the minister's true heart. He is just trying to be popular.

古文：臣既犯天宪，罪当万死，臣死之日，必见叔陵，愿宣明诏，责于九泉之下。 
现代文：臣既已犯了天意宪法。罪该万死，臣死的日子，必要见叔陵，愿能宣明诏，责其于九泉之下。 
English: The vassal has already violated the Constitution of Heaven's Will. The crime deserves death. On the day of the vassal's death, it is necessary to visit his uncle's tomb. I would like to issue an edict and condemn him to the bottom of the world.

古文：后主感其前功，乃赦之，特免所居官，以王还第。
现代文：后主感念他的前功，便赦免了他，特免去他所任的官，以王的身份回府第。
English: Later, the lord was moved by his service and pardoned him, exempting him from the post he held, and he returned to the palace as king.

古文：寻起为侍中、镇左将军。
现代文：接着起用为侍中、镇左将军。
English: He was then appointed as Samurai Middle Captain and General Zhenza.

古文：二年，又给鼓吹，油幢车。
现代文：至德二年，又给叔坚鼓吹、油幢车。
English: Two years later, he again preached to Shujian and built an oil tanker.

古文：三年，出为征西将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：至德三年，出为征西将军、荆州刺史。
English: In the third year of Zhi De's reign, he became the general of the Western Conquest and the leader of the attack on Jingzhou.

古文：四年，进号中军大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：四年，进号中军大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the fourth year, he was promoted to General of the Chinese Army and appointed to the Kaifu Rites and Three Departments.

古文：祯明二年，秩满还都。
现代文：祯明二年，任期满返回京城。
English: Two years later, he returned to Beijing at the end of his term.

古文：三年入关，迁于瓜州，更名叔贤。
现代文：三年入关，迁居于瓜州，更名叔贤。
English: He entered the customs three years later, moved to Guazhou, and changed his name to Shuxian.

古文：叔贤素贵，不知家人生产，至是与妃沈氏酤酒，以佣保为事。
现代文：叔贤一向显贵，不懂家人生产，此时同妃子选旦卖酒，以雇工为事。
English: Uncles have always been prominent, do not understand family production, at this time with the concubine to sell wine, to hire workers.

古文：隋大业中，为遂宁郡太守。
现代文：鹰左墓年中，为堡空璺太守。
English: In the year of the eagle's left tomb, he became the governor of the castle.

古文：建安王叔卿，字子弼，高宗第五子也。
现代文：建安王叔卿，字子弼，高宗第五个儿子。
English: Uncle of King Jian'an, the fifth son of Emperor Gaozong.

古文：性质直有材器，容貌甚伟。
现代文：性格质直而有才气，客貌十分伟岸。
English: He has an upright and talented personality, and is very handsome.

古文：太建四年，立为建安王，授东中郎将、东扬州刺史。
现代文：太建四年，被立为建安王，授予束中郎将、束扬州刺史。
English: In the fourth year of Taiken, he was appointed King of Jian'an, and was awarded the titles of Sokuchungrojo and Sokoyangzhoushishi.

古文：七年，为云麾将军、郢州刺史，置佐史。
现代文：七年，为云麾将军、郢州刺史，置佐史。
English: In seven years, he became the general of Yunnan Province, the governor of Zhangzhou Province, and the governor of Zhejiang Province.

古文：九年，进号平南将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：九年，进号平南将军、翅业刺史。
English: In the ninth year, he was promoted to Pingnan General and became the Wing Industry Historian.

古文：后主即位，进号安南将军。
现代文：箠王即位，进号安南将军。
English: Shao Wang is enthroned, and General Annan is promoted.

古文：又为侍中、镇右将军、中书令。
现代文：又为侍中、镇右将军、中书令。
English: He was also a Samurai Middle Captain, Zhenyu General, and Chushirei.

古文：迁中书监。
现代文：改任中书监。
English: Reassigned to the position of middle school librarian.

古文：祯明三年入关，隋大业中，为都官郎、上党通守。
现代文：桢明三年入关，隋大业年中，为都官郎、上党通守。
English: He entered the customs in the third year of the Ming Dynasty, and in the middle of the Sui Dynasty, he was an official of the capital and the general manager of the upper party.

古文：宜都王叔明，字子昭，高宗第六子也。
现代文：宜都王叔明，字子昭，高宗第六个儿子。
English: Yi Du Wang Shuming, Zizi Zhao, Gao Zong's sixth son.

古文：仪容美丽，举止和弱，状似妇人。
现代文：仪表容貌美丽，举止和气柔弱，看上去像妇人。
English: She has a beautiful appearance, gentle demeanor, and looks like a woman.

古文：太建五年，立为宜都王，寻授宣惠将军，置佐史。
现代文：太建五年，被立为宜都王，接着授为宣惠将军，置佐史。
English: In the fifth year of Tai Jian, he was appointed as the King of Yidu, and then he was awarded as the General of Xuan Hui, and appointed as the Minister of History.

古文：七年，授东中郎将、东扬州刺史，寻为轻车将军、卫尉卿。
现代文：七年，授为束中郎将、束扬州刺史，接着为轻车将军、卫尉卿。
English: In the seventh year, he was awarded the titles of Sokuchujo Churoshige (束中郎将) and Sokuchiyanzhou Shishi (束扬州刺史), followed by the titles of Light Vehicle General and Captain of the Imperial Guard.

古文：十三年，出为使持节、云麾将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：十三年，出为使持节、云麾将军、南徐州刺史。
English: In the thirteenth year, he appeared as the envoy of Ji Jie, the general of Yunnan Province, and the governor of South Xuzhou Province.

古文：又为侍中、翊右将军。
现代文：又为侍中、翊右将军。
English: He was also a member of the Privy Council and a general of the Shizuoka Shogunate.

古文：至德四年，进号安右将军。
现代文：至德四年，进号安右将军。
English: After four years in Germany, he was promoted to General An Yu.

古文：祯明三年入关，隋大业中为鸿胪少卿。
现代文：祯明三年入关，隋大业年中为鸿胪少卿。
English: He entered the customs in the third year of the Ming Dynasty, and in the middle of the Sui Dynasty, he became the Young Master of Hongyao.

古文：河东王叔献，字子恭，高宗第九子也。
现代文：河东王叔献，字子恭，高宗第九个儿子。
English: He was the ninth son of Gaozong.

古文：性恭谨，聪敏好学。
现代文：性格恭敬谨慎，聪敏好学。
English: His personality is respectful and cautious, and he is bright and eager to learn.

古文：太建五年，立为河东王。
现代文：太建五年，被立为河东王。
English: After five years of construction, he was crowned the King of Hedong.

古文：七年，授宣毅将军，置佐史。
现代文：七年，授予宣毅将军，置佐史。
English: Seven years later, he was awarded the title of General Xuan Yi.

古文：寻为散骑常侍、军师将军、都督南徐州诸军事、南徐州刺史。
现代文：接着为散骑常侍、军师将军、都督南徐州诸军事、南徐州刺史。
English: Next, the parade of knights, generals, military governors of South Xuzhou, and the history of South Xuzhou.

古文：十二年薨，年十三。
现代文：太建十二年薨，年方十三岁。
English: Tai Jian was 12 years old, and Fang was 13 years old.

古文：赠侍中、中抚将军、司空，谥曰康简。
现代文：赠侍中、中抚将军、司空，谧号康简。
English: He was given the titles of Samurai, General, and Empress Dowager, and his posthumous name was Kang Jian.

古文：子孝宽嗣。
现代文：他的儿子孝宽继职。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Takahiro.

古文：孝宽以至德元年，袭爵河东王。
现代文：孝宽在至德元年承袭爵号河东王。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Takahiro inherited the title of King of Hedong.

古文：祯明三年入关，隋大业中为汶城令。
现代文：祯明三年入关，隋大业年中为汶城令。
English: He entered the customs in the third year of the Ming Dynasty, and became the ruler of Wencheng in the middle of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：新蔡王叔齐，字子肃，高宗第十一子也。
现代文：新蔡王叔齐，字子肃，高宗第十一个儿子。
English: New Cai Wangshuqi, Zizi Su, Gao Zong's 11th son.

古文：风彩明赡，博涉经史，善属文。
现代文：叔齐风采照人，博览经史，擅长写文章。
English: Uncle Qi is a brilliant person, well-versed in history, and good at writing articles.

古文：太建七年，立为新蔡王，寻为智武将军，置佐史。
现代文：太建七年，被立为新蔡王，接着为智武将军，置佐史。
English: In the seventh year of Tai Jian, he was appointed as the new Cai Wang, and then as the general of Zhiwu, and appointed as Sasifu.

古文：出为东中郎将、东扬州刺史。
现代文：出为东中郎将、束扬州刺史。
English: He was promoted to Higashi churoshige and became a member of the Yangshuo clan.

古文：至德二年，入为侍中，将军、佐史如故。
现代文：至德二年，入为侍中，将军、佐史照旧。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to the rank of samurai, with the rank of shogun and Sashi remaining the same.

古文：祯明元年，除国子祭酒，侍中、将军、佐史如故。
现代文：祯明元年，任国子祭酒，侍中、将军、佐史照旧。
English: In the first year of the Shōmei era, he was appointed to the position of Kuniko Matsuri Sake, and continued to serve as a chamberlain, general, and Sashi.

古文：三年入关。
现代文：祯明三年入关。
English: Three years passed.

古文：隋大业中为尚书主客郎。
现代文：隋大业年中为尚书主客郎。
English: In the middle of the Sui Dynasty, he became a guest of Shang Shushi.

古文：晋熙王叔文，字子才，高宗第十二子也。
现代文：晋熙王叔文，字子才，高宗第十二个儿子。
English: The twelfth son of Emperor Gaozong.

古文：性轻险，好虚誉，颇涉书史。
现代文：性格轻浮阴险，好虚荣，颇涉书史。
English: He has a flirtatious and sinister personality, is very vain, and is quite involved in the history of books.

古文：太建七年，立为晋熙王。
现代文：太建七年，被立为置塞王。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Tai Jian, he was appointed king of Jise.

古文：寻为侍中、散骑常侍、宣惠将军，置佐史。
现代文：不久为侍中、散骑常侍、宣惠将军，置佐史。
English: Before long, Okisashi became a chamberlain, strolling equerry, and general of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：进号轻车将军、扬州刺史。
现代文：进号轻车将军、扬州刺史。
English: The general of light vehicles, Yangzhou's history.

古文：至德元年，授持节、都督江州诸军事、江州刺史。
现代文：至德元年，授持节、都督江州诸军事、江州刺史。
English: By the first year of the German era, the conferring festival, the military governor of Jiangzhou and the history of Jiangzhou had begun.

古文：二年，迁信威将军、督湘、衡、武、桂四州诸军事、湘州刺史。
现代文：二年，改任信威将军、督湘衡武桂四州诸军事、挝塑刺史。
English: Two years later, he was reappointed as General Xinwei and Governor of Hunan, Heng, Wu and Gui Provinces.

古文：祯明二年，秩满，征为侍中、宣毅将军，佐史如故。
现代文：擅塱二年，任期满，被征为侍中、宣毅将军，佐史照旧。
English: He served for two years, and at the end of his term, he was conscripted as an aide-de-camp to General Xuan Yi, and Sashi remained as before.

古文：未还，而隋军济江，破台城，隋汉东道行军元帅秦王至于汉口。
现代文：未还，而隋军渡江，攻破台坛，膻汉束道行军元帅耋王到达。
English: Not yet, but the Sui army crossed the river, broke through the platform, and the marching marshal Shao Wang of the Han Shuo Road arrived.

古文：时叔文自湘州还朝，至巴州，乃率巴州刺史毕宝等请降，致书于秦王曰： 窃以天无二日，晦明之序不差，土无二王，尊卑之位乃别。
现代文：此时抠塞从挝业还朝，到旦业，便率领旦州刺史里宣等请求投降，致书信于秦王道： 我以为天上没有两个太阳，暗明的顺序才不错，地上没有两个王，尊卑的位置才有分别。
English: At this time, Yan Xie went from Lao Ye to Tang Ye, and then he led Tang Zhou, Zi Shi, Li Xuan and others to request surrender, and sent a letter to Qin Wang Dao: I thought that there were no two suns in the sky, the implicit order was good, there were no two kings on the ground, and only the positions of superiority and inferiority were different.

古文：今车书混壹，文轨大同，敢披丹款，申其屈膝。 
现代文：今天车舆书混合，文与轨大同，我敢以赤诚之心，申明屈膝投降之意。 
English: Today, the car and the book are mixed, and the text and the track are the same. I dare to declare with a sincere heart that I bow down and surrender.

古文：秦王得书，因遣行军吏部柳庄与元帅府僚属等往巴州迎劳叔文。
现代文：台玉得到此书信，便派行军吏部柳庄舆元帅府僚属等往巴州迎接慰劳叔文。
English: When Taiwan received this letter, it sent marching officers from Liuzhuang, the marshal's subordinates, etc. to Bazhou to receive the letter of condolence.

古文：叔文于是与毕宝、荆州刺史陈纪及文武将吏赴于汉口，秦王并厚待之，置于宾馆。
现代文：叔文于是舆毕宣、回蛆刺史速堑及文武将吏奔赴莲旦，台王一并优厚对待，安置在宾馆。
English: Therefore, Zhu Wen, Mubi Xuan, Hui Xuan, Zhishi Huan and Wenwu generals rushed to Liantan. The king of Taiwan treated them all with kindness and placed them in a hotel.

古文：隋开皇九年三月，众军凯旋，文帝亲幸温汤劳之，叔文与陈纪、周罗睺、荀法尚等并诸降人，见于路次。
现代文：隋开皇九年三月，众军凯旋，文帝亲自到温汤慰劳，叔文与陈纪、周罗喉、荀法尚等及各位投降的人，拜见文帝于路旁。
English: In March of the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Sui, when the troops made a triumphant return, Emperor Wen himself came to the warm soup to offer consolation. Uncle Wen, Chen Ji, Zhou Luoguo, Zou Fa Shang, and all those who had surrendered came to see Emperor Wen on the side of the road.

古文：数日，叔文从后主及诸王侯将相并乘舆、服御、天文图籍等，并以次行列，仍以铁骑围之，随晋王、秦王等献凯而入，列于庙庭。
现代文：数日后，叔文随从后主及各王侯将相并车子、服装、天文图籍等，一同以次排列，仍然以铁骑作外围，跟随晋王、秦王等奏凯而入，列于庙庭。
English: A few days later, Zhu Wen followed his master and all the princes and queens, together with the chariots, clothing, astronomical books, etc., were arranged in the following order, still with the iron horse as the periphery, followed by Jin Wang, Qin Wang and others, and were listed in the temple garden.

古文：明日，隋文帝坐于广阳门观，叔文又从后主至朝堂南。文帝使内史令李德林宣旨，责其君臣不能相弼，以致丧亡。
现代文：第二天，隋文帝坐在广阳门观看，叔文又随从后主到朝堂南面，文帝派内史令李德林宣读圣旨，责备他们君臣不能相辅助，以致使国家丧亡。
English: The next day, Emperor Sui and Emperor Wen sat at the Guangyang Gate to watch, and Uncle Wen followed his master to the south of the imperial hall. Emperor Wen sent Li Delin to read out the sacred edict, and reproached them for not being able to assist each other, resulting in the country's demise.

古文：后主与其群臣并惭惧拜伏，莫能仰视，叔文独欣然而有自得之志。
现代文：后主与他的群臣都惭愧恐惧地拜伏于地，不敢仰视，惟独叔文高兴而有自得之态。
English: The late lord and his courtiers all bowed to the ground in shame and fear, not daring to look up, except for Uncle Wen, who was happy and self-satisfied.

古文：旬有六日，乃上表曰： 昔在巴州，已先送款，乞知此情，望异常例。 
现代文：十六天后，就上奏道： 过去在巴州，已先送款了，乞求了解此情况，望能与常例不同。 
English: Sixteen days later, he wrote: In the past, in Bazhou, I have sent money first, begging to know the situation, hoping to be different from the usual.

古文：文帝虽嫌其不忠，而方欲怀柔江表，乃授开府，拜宜州刺史。
现代文：文帝虽然嫌他不忠，但正想要安抚江表，便授他开府，封他为宜州刺史。
English: Although Emperor Wen disliked his disloyalty, he was trying to appease Jiang, so he gave him the title of the first governor of Yizhou and appointed him as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：淮南王叔彪，字子华，高宗第十三子也。
现代文：淮南王陈彪，字子华，高宗第十三个儿子。
English: Huainan Wang Chen Biao, Zihua, Gao Zong's thirteenth son.

古文：少聪惠，善属文。
现代文：少年时聪敏和顺，擅长写文章。
English: When he was a boy, he was smart and obedient, and good at writing articles.

古文：太建八年，立为淮南王。
现代文：太建八年，被立淮南王。
English: Eight years after the founding of Taijian, King Huainan was established.

古文：寻位侍中、仁威将军，置佐史。
现代文：接着任侍中、仁威将军，置佐史。
English: Next, he served as a chamberlain and general of the Jinwei army, and became Okisashi.

古文：祯明三年入关，卒于长安。
现代文：祯明三年入关，死于星叁。
English: He died in Chang'an after three years of imprisonment.

古文：始兴王叔重，字子厚，高宗第十四子也。
现代文：始兴王陈重，字子厚，高宗第十四个儿子。
English: Shi Xing Wang Chen Jie, the character thick, Gao Zong's fourteenth son.

古文：性质朴，无伎艺。
现代文：性格质朴，无才艺。
English: Simple character, no talent.

古文：高宗崩，始兴王叔陵为逆。诛死，其年立叔重为始兴王，以奉昭烈王后。
现代文：高宗崩，始兴王叔陵作乱，被杀，这年立叔重为始兴王，以奉昭烈王后。
English: Gao Zong passed away, Shixing Wang's uncle's tomb was ransacked and he was killed. This year, Shixing Wang was reinstated as Shixing King, with Bong Zhaoling as his queen.

古文：至德元年，为仁威将军、扬州刺史，置佐史。
现代文：至垄元年，为仁威将军、扬州刺史，置佐史。
English: Until the first year of the year of the ridge, he was General Ren Wei, Yangzhou Shishi, and Okisa Shishi.

古文：二年，加使持节、都督江州诸军事、江州刺史。
现代文：二年，加使持节、都督江州诸军事、江州刺史。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the military governor of Jiangsu Province and the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：祯明三年入关。
现代文：祯明三年入关。
English: Entered the customs three years after the Ming Dynasty.

古文：隋大业中为太府少卿，卒。
现代文：隋大业年中为太府少卿，死。
English: In the middle of the Sui Dynasty, he was promoted to Taifu Shaoqing and died.

古文：寻阳王叔俨，字子思，高宗第十五子也。
现代文：寻阳王陈子敬，字子思，高宗第十五个儿子。
English: The fifteenth son of Emperor Gaozong.

古文：性凝重，举止方正。
现代文：性格凝重，举止大方正派。
English: He is a dignified person with a generous and decent demeanor.

古文：后主即位，立为寻阳王。
现代文：篷王登位，被立为曼垦旺。
English: Tuo Wang ascended to the throne and was established as Mianzhongwang.

古文：至德元年，为侍中、仁武将军，置佐史。
现代文：至垄元年，为侍中、仁武将军，置佐史。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Ryoma, Okisashi was promoted to Samurai Junior-Commander and General Ninmu.

古文：祯明三年入关，寻卒。
现代文：祯明三年入关，不久即死。
English: He entered the customs in the third year of the Ming Dynasty and died soon after.

古文：岳阳王叔慎，字子敬，高宗第十六子也。
现代文：岳阳王陈慎，字子敬，高宗第十六个儿子。
English: Yueyang King Chen Shen, Zizi Kei, Gao Zong's sixteenth son.

古文：少聪敏，十岁能属文。
现代文：少年聪敏，十岁能写文章。
English: The boy is bright and can write articles at the age of ten.

古文：太建十四年，立为岳阳王，时年十一。
现代文：太建十四年，被立为岳阳王，其时年纪十一岁。
English: He was eleven years old when he was enthroned as the King of Yueyang in the 14th year of the Taijian era.

古文：至德四年，拜侍中、智武将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：至德四年，任侍中、智武将军、丹阳尹。
English: He served as a chamberlain for four years, and was also known as General Zhimu and Danyang Yin.

古文：是时，后主尤爱文章，叔慎与衡阳王伯信、新蔡王叔齐等日夕陪侍，每应诏赋诗，恒被嗟赏。
现代文：此时，后主尤其喜爱文章，叔慎舆衡阳王伯信、新蔡王叔齐等朝夕陪侍在旁，每有应诏赋诗，常被赞叹称赏。
English: At this time, the empress dowager was particularly fond of articles. Shushin Shou, Hengyang Wangboxin, New Cai Wangshuqi and others accompanied her in the morning and evening, and each poem was often praised and appreciated.

古文：祯明元年，出为使持节、都督湘、衡、桂、武四州诸军事、智武将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：祯明元年，出为使持节、都督湘衡桂武四州诸军事、智武将军、湘州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the military of the four states of Hunan, Guizhou and Hunan, the military commander of Hunan and Guizhou, the military commander of Hunan and Guizhou, the military commander of Hunan and Guizhou, the military commander of Hunan and Guizhou, the military commander of Hunan and Guizhou, the military commander of Hunan and Guizhou, the military commander of Hunan and Guizhou, the military commander of Hunan and Guizhou, the military commander of Hunan and Guizhou, the military commander of Hunan and Guizhou, and the military commander of Hunan and Guizhou.

古文：三年，隋师济江，破台城，前刺史晋熙王叔文还至巴州，与巴州刺史毕宝、荆州刺史陈纪并降。
现代文：祯明三年，隋军渡江，攻破台城，前刺史晋熙王叔文返回巴州，舆巴州刺史毕宝、荆州刺史陈纪一同投降。
English: In the third year of the Ming Dynasty, the Sui army crossed the Yangtze River and conquered Taicheng. Wang Shouwen, the former governor of Jinxi Province, returned to Bazhou. Bi Bao, the governor of Mubazhou Province, and Chen Ji, the governor of Jingzhou Province, surrendered together.

古文：隋行军元帅清河公杨素兵下荆门，别遣其将庞晖将兵略地，南至湘州，城内将士，莫有固志，克日请降。
现代文：隋行军元帅清河公杨素兵下荆门，另派他的将领庞晖率兵略地，南下到湘州，城内将士没有固守之志，不几日即请求投降。
English: The Sui marching marshal, Qinghe Gong Yang Su, marched his soldiers to Jingmen. He also sent his general, Pang Jun, to march south to Xiangzhou. The soldiers in the city did not have the will to hold out, and after a few days they asked to surrender.

古文：叔慎乃置酒会文武僚吏，酒酣，叔慎叹曰 君臣之义，尽于此乎！ 
现代文：叔慎便置酒会合文武官吏，酒酣之时，叔慎叹道： 君臣之义，尽于此也! 
English: When Shushin was pouring the wine for the meeting of civil and military officials, Shushin sighed and said, "The righteousness of princes and ministers can be found in this!"

古文：长史谢基伏而流涕，湘州助防遂兴侯正理在坐，乃起曰： 主辱臣死，诸君独非陈国之臣乎？
现代文：长史谢基伏在地上流涕，湘州助防遂兴侯正理在座，便起身说： 主受辱臣应死，各位难道不是陈国的臣子吗?
English: Changshi Xieqi prostrated on the ground and shed tears. Xiangzhou Sui and Xinghou Zhengli were present, and they stood up and said: "The lord deserves to be insulted, and the vassal deserves to die. Aren't you all vassals of Chen Guo?"

古文：今天下有难，实是致命之秋也。
现代文：如今天下有难，实是致命之时。
English: If today is difficult, it is indeed a fatal time.

古文：纵其无成，犹见臣节，青门之外，有死不能。
现代文：纵然事情不成，还应见臣子的节气，青门之外，有死的不能做到。
English: Even if things don't work out, it should be seen as the season of the vassal. Outside the youth gate, there is death that can't be done.

古文：今日之机，不可犹豫，后应者斩。 
现代文：今的机会，不可以再犹豫了，后应的人斩首。 
English: Now's the chance, we can't hesitate any longer, the next person to be beheaded.

古文：众咸许诺，乃刑牲结盟。
现代文：众人都许诺，于是杀牲口结盟。
English: They all promised, so they formed an alliance to kill the animal.

古文：仍遣人诈奉降书于庞晖，晖信之，克期而入，叔慎伏甲待之。
现代文：同时仍派人假奉降书给庞晖，庞晖相信了，按日期而入城，叔慎埋伏了兵士等待他。
English: At the same time, he still sent someone to give Pang Jun a fake surrender letter. Pang Jun believed him and entered the city on time. Shuxin ambushed the soldiers and waited for him.

古文：晖令数百人屯于城门，自将左右数十人入于厅事，俄而伏兵发，缚晖以徇，尽擒其党，皆斩之。
现代文：庞晖命令敷百人屯集于城门口，自己率领随从敷十人进入厅内，即刻，伏兵出现，缚住庞晖宣布命令，全部擒获他的手下将士，都杀了。
English: Pang Si ordered a hundred people to gather at the gate of the city. He led his ten followers into the hall. Immediately, an ambush appeared, tied up Pang Si and announced the order. All of his captured soldiers were killed.

古文：叔慎坐于射堂，招合士众，数日之中，兵至五千人。
现代文：叔慎坐在射堂内，招合士众，几天之内，士兵人数达到五千人。
English: Shushan sat in the shooting hall and recruited soldiers. Within a few days, the number of soldiers reached five thousand.

古文：衡阳太守樊通、武州刺史邬居业，皆请赴难。
现代文：衡阳太守樊通、武州刺史邬居业，都请求赴难。
English: Hengyang Taishu Shantong and Wuzhou Shishi Shujie both requested to go to the battlefield.

古文：未至，隋遣中牟公薛胄为湘州刺史，闻庞晖死，乃益请兵，隋又遣行军总管刘仁恩救之。
现代文：未到，隋派中牟公薛胄为湘州刺史，听说庞晖死，便再请增兵，隋又派行军总管刘仁恩作救兵。
English: Before they arrived, the Sui Dynasty sent Zhongmou Gong Xue Ying to record the history of Hunan. When they heard that Pang Xuan had died, they asked for more soldiers. The Sui Dynasty also sent Liu Rien, the general manager of the march, to rescue the soldiers.

古文：未至，薛胄兵次鹅羊山，叔慎遣正理及樊通等拒之，因大合战，自旦至于日昃，隋军迭息迭战，而正理兵少不敌，于是大败。
现代文：未到，薛胄兵已抵鹅羊山，叔慎派正理及樊通等抵拒他们，于是大会战，从早晨到太阳偏西，隋军屡息屡战，而正理兵少，不敌隋军，于是大败。
English: Before they arrived, Xue Er's soldiers had already arrived at Goose and Goat Mountain. Uncle Shen sent Zheng Li and Zhaotong to resist them. As a result, in the great battle, from the morning to the west of the sun, the Sui army fought repeatedly, but Zheng Li had fewer soldiers and lost to the Sui army, so it was a big defeat.

古文：胄乘胜入城，生擒叔慎。
现代文：薛胄乘胜入城，活捉叔慎。
English: Xue Yuxin entered the city and captured Shushan alive.

古文：是时，邬居业率其众自武州来赴，出横桥江，闻叔慎败绩，乃顿于新康口。
现代文：此时，鄢居业率他的众兵从武州来参战，出横桥江，听说叔慎败北，便停顿于新康口。
English: At this time, Gong Juye led his soldiers from Wuzhou to participate in the war, out of the Hengqiao River, heard that Shushan was defeated, and then stopped at Xinkangkou.

古文：隋总管刘仁恩兵亦至横桥，据水置营，相持信宿，因合战，居业又败。
现代文：隋总管刘仁恩军队也到了横桥，据水边安置军营，相持两夜，便交战，鄢居业又败。
English: The Sui general Liu Rien's army also arrived at Hengqiao, and set up a military camp by the water's edge. They held out for two nights, then fought, and were defeated again.

古文：仁恩虏叔慎、正理、居业及其党与十馀人，秦王斩之于汉口。
现代文：刘仁墨俘虏了圭岖、正理、鄞星墓及他们的部将十多人，耋王将他们全斩首于龃。
English: Liu Renmo captured Guigou, Zheng Li, Xing Xing Tomb and more than ten of their subordinates, and Xing Wang beheaded all of them.

古文：叔慎时年十八。
现代文：其时，赵坦十八岁。
English: At that time, Zhao Tan was 18 years old.

古文：义阳王叔达，字子聪，高宗第十七子也。
现代文：义阳王陈达，字子聪，高宗第十七个儿子。
English: Yiyang King Chen Da, also known as Zi Cong, was the 17th son of Emperor Gaozong.

古文：太建十四年，立为义阳王，寻拜仁武将军，置佐史。
现代文：太建十四年，被立为义阳王，接着任仁武将军，置佐史。
English: In the 14th year of the Taijian era, he was appointed as the King of Yiyang, then as the General of Renwu, and finally as the Prince of Sasa.

古文：祯明元年，除丹阳尹。
现代文：祯明元年，封丹阳尹。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he was given the title of Danyang Yin.

古文：三年入关。
现代文：三年入关。
English: Three years passed.

古文：隋大业中为内史，至绛郡通守。
现代文：隋大业中为内史，绛郡通守。
English: In the Sui Dynasty, he was in charge of internal affairs, and was the governor of Shixian County.

古文：巴山王叔雄，字子猛，高宗第十八子也。
现代文：巴山王陈雄，宇子猛，高宗第十八个儿子。
English: Bashan King Chen Xiong, Uzi Meng, Gao Zong's 18th son.

古文：太建十四年，立为巴山王。
现代文：太建十四年，被立为巴山王。
English: In the 14th year of Taijian, he was appointed as the king of Bashan.

古文：祯明三年入关，卒于长安。
现代文：祯明三年入关，死于长安。
English: He died in Chang'an after three years of imprisonment.

古文：武昌王叔虞，字子安，高宗第十九子也。
现代文：武昌王叔陈虞，字子安，高宗第十九个儿子。
English: Wuchang Wang's uncle Chen Yu, Zi An, Gao Zong's 19th son.

古文：太建十四年，立为武昌王，寻为壮武将军，置佐史。
现代文：太建十四年，被立为武昌王，接着为壮武将军，置佐史。
English: In the 14th year of the Taijian era, he was appointed as the King of Wuchang, then as the General of Zhuangwu, and later as the General of Sasa.

古文：祯明三年入关。
现代文：祯明三年入关。
English: Entered the customs three years after the Ming Dynasty.

古文：隋大业中为高苑令。
现代文：隋主大业中为高苑令。
English: In the Sui Dynasty, the main cause was Gao Yuanling.

古文：湘东王叔平，字子康，高宗第二十子也。
现代文：湘东王陈平，字子康，高宗第二十个儿子。
English: Chen Ping, the king of eastern Hunan, and Zi Kang, the 20th son of Gaozong.

古文：至德元年，立为湘东王。
现代文：至德元年，被立为湘东王。
English: In the first year of the Tokugawa shogunate, he was made the king of eastern Honshu.

古文：祯明三年入关。隋大业中为胡苏令。
现代文：祯明三年入关，隋大业年中为胡苏令。
English: He entered the customs in the third year of the Ming Dynasty, and in the middle of the Sui Dynasty, he was ordered by Emperor Hus.

古文：临贺王叔敖，字子仁，高宗第二十一子也。
现代文：临贺王陈敖，字子仁，高宗第二十一个儿子。
English: Lin He Wang Chen Zhi, Zizi Ren, Gao Zong's 21st son.

古文：至德元年，立为临贺王，寻为仁武将军，置佐史。
现代文：至德元年，被立为临贺王，不久为仁武将军，置佐史。
English: In the first year of the Tokugawa Shogunate, he was appointed as the King of Linhe, and soon after, as the General of the Imperial Japanese Army, Okisashi.

古文：祯明三年入关。
现代文：祯明三年入关。
English: Entered the customs three years after the Ming Dynasty.

古文：隋大业初拜仪同三司。
现代文：堕大业初年任仪同三司。
English: In his first year at the fallen university, he was appointed to the Third Division.

古文：阳山王叔宣，字子通，高宗第二十二子也。
现代文：阳山王陈宣，字子通，高宗第二十二个儿子。
English: Yangshan King Chen Xuan, Zizi Tong, Gao Zong's 22nd son.

古文：至德元年，立为阳山王。
现代文：至德元年，被立为阳山王。
English: In the first year of the Republic of China, he was appointed as the King of Yangshan.

古文：祯明三年入关。
现代文：祯明三年入关。
English: Entered the customs three years after the Ming Dynasty.

古文：隋大业中为泾城令。
现代文：隋大业年中为泾城令。
English: In the middle of the Sui Dynasty, the city of Shicheng was founded.

古文：西阳王叔穆，字子和，高宗第二十三子也。
现代文：西阳王陈穆，字子和，高宗第二十三个儿子。
English: Xiyang King Chen Mu, Zizi, Gaozong's 23rd son.

古文：至德元年，立为西阳王。
现代文：至德元年，被立为西阳王。
English: In the first year of the German era, he was crowned the King of Xiyang.

古文：祯明三年入关，卒于长安。
现代文：祯明三年入关，死于长安。
English: He died in Chang'an after three years of imprisonment.

古文：南安王叔俭，字子约，高宗第二十四子也。
现代文：南安王陈俭，字子约，高宗第二十四个儿子。
English: Nan'an King Chen Jian, also known as Zizi You, was Gao Zong's 24th son.

古文：至德元年，立为南安王。
现代文：至德元年，被立为南安王。
English: In the first year of the German era, he was crowned King of Nan'an.

古文：祯明三年入关，卒于长安。
现代文：祯明三年入关，死于长安。
English: He died in Chang'an after three years of imprisonment.

古文：南郡王叔澄，字子泉，高宗第二十五子也。
现代文：南郡王陈澄，字子泉，高宗第二十五个儿子。
English: Nan County King Chen Cheng, Zi Quan, Gao Zong's 25th son.

古文：至德元年，立为南郡王。
现代文：至德元年，被立为南郡王。
English: In the first year of the Republic of Germany, he was appointed the king of Minami-gun.

古文：祯明三年入关。
现代文：祯明三年入关。
English: Entered the customs three years after the Ming Dynasty.

古文：隋大业中为灵武令。
现代文：隋大业年中为灵武令。
English: In the middle of the Sui Dynasty, the Lingwu Order was issued.

古文：沅陵王叔兴，字子推，高宗第二十六子也。
现代文：沅陵王陈兴，字子推，高宗第二十六个儿子。
English: King Chen Xing of Fuling, the 26th son of Emperor Gaozong.

古文：至德元年，立为沅陵王。
现代文：至德元年，被立为沅陵王。
English: In the first year of the Republic of China, he was appointed as the King of Fuling.

古文：祯明三年入关。
现代文：祯明三年入关。
English: Entered the customs three years after the Ming Dynasty.

古文：隋大业中为给事郎。
现代文：隋大业年中为给事郎。
English: In the middle of the Sui Dynasty, he became a courtier.

古文：岳山王叔韶，字子钦，高宗第二十七子也。
现代文：岳山王陈韶，字子钦，高宗第二十七个儿子。
English: Yue Shan King Chen Zi, also known as Zi Qin, was the 27th son of Emperor Gaozong.

古文：至德元年，立为岳山王，寻为智武将军，置佐史。
现代文：至德元年，被立为岳山王，接着为智武将军，置佐史。
English: In the first year of the Tokugawa Shogunate, he was appointed King of Mt. Yaku, followed by General Chibu, and then Okisashi.

古文：四年，除丹阳尹。
现代文：四年，封为丹阳尹。
English: Four years later, he was given the title of Danyang Yin.

古文：祯明三年入关，卒于长安。
现代文：祯明三年入关，死于长安。
English: He died in Chang'an after three years of imprisonment.

古文：新兴王叔纯，字子共，高宗第二十八子也。
现代文：新兴王陈纯，字子共，高宗第二十八个儿子。
English: Xinxing Wang Chen Chun, the twenty-eighth son of Gaozong.

古文：至德元年，立为新兴王。
现代文：至德元年，被立为新兴王。
English: By the first year of the German era, it was established as an emerging king.

古文：祯明三年入关。
现代文：祯明三年入关。
English: Entered the customs three years after the Ming Dynasty.

古文：隋大业中为河北令。
现代文：隋大业年中为河北令。
English: In the middle of the Sui Dynasty, it was ruled by Hebei.

古文：巴东王叔谟，字子轨，高宗第二十九子也。
现代文：巴东王陈谟，字子轨，高宗第二十九个儿子。
English: Chen Mu, the king of Padang, was the 29th son of Gaozong.

古文：至德四年，立为巴东王。
现代文：至德四年，被立为巴东王。
English: Four years later, he was crowned King of Padang.

古文：祯明三年入关。
现代文：祯明三年入关。
English: Entered the customs three years after the Ming Dynasty.

古文：隋大业中为岍阳令。
现代文：隋大业中为岍阳令。
English: In the Sui Dynasty, it was the Fenyang Ruling.

古文：临江王叔显，字子明，高宗第三十子也。
现代文：临江王陈显，字子明，高宗第三十个儿子。
English: Linjiang King Chen Xian, Zizi Ming, the thirtieth son of Gaozong.

古文：至德四年，立为临江王。
现代文：至德四年，被立为临江王。
English: In the fourth year of Zhi De, he was appointed the King of Linjiang.

古文：祯明三年入关。
现代文：祯明三年入关。
English: Entered the customs three years after the Ming Dynasty.

古文：隋大业中为鹑觚令。
现代文：隋大业年中为鹑觚令。
English: The imperial edict was issued in the middle of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：新会王叔坦，字子开，高宗第三十一子也。
现代文：新会王陈坦，字子开，高宗第三十一个儿子。
English: The king of the new association, Chen Tan, was the thirty-first son of Gaozong.

古文：至德四年，立为新会王。
现代文：至德四年，被立为新会王。
English: Four years later, he was appointed as the new king of the church.

古文：祯明三年入关。
现代文：祯明三年入关。
English: Entered the customs three years after the Ming Dynasty.

古文：隋大业中为涉令。
现代文：隋大业年中为涉令。
English: In the middle of the Sui Dynasty, it was ruled by the Tang Dynasty.

古文：新宁王叔隆，字子远，高宗第三十二子也。
现代文：新宁王陈隆，字子远，高宗第三十二个儿子。
English: Chen Long, the 32nd son of Gaozong, the king of Xinning.

古文：至德四年，立为新宁王。
现代文：至德四年，被立为新宁王。
English: In the fourth year of Zhi De, he was appointed as the king of Xinning.

古文：祯明三年入关。卒于长安。
现代文：祯明三年入关，死于长安。
English: He died in Chang'an after three years of imprisonment.

古文：新昌王叔荣，字子彻，高宗第三十三子也。
现代文：新昌王陈荣，字子彻，高宗第三十三个儿子。
English: Xinchang King Chen Rong, Zizi Che, Gao Zong's thirty-third son.

古文：祯明二年，立为新昌王。
现代文：祯明二年，被立为新昌王。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, he was crowned the King of Xinchang.

古文：三年入关。
现代文：三年入关。
English: Three years passed.

古文：隋大业中为内黄令。
现代文：隋大业年中为内黄令。
English: In the middle of the Sui Dynasty, it was ruled by the Inner Yellow Emperor.

古文：太原王叔匡，字子佐，高宗第三十四子也。
现代文：太原王陈匡，字子佐，高宗第三十四个儿子。
English: Chen Kuang, King of Taiyuan, Zizi Zuo, the thirty-fourth son of Gaozong.

古文：祯明二年，立为太原王。
现代文：祯明二年，被立为太原王。
English: He was enthroned as the King of Taiyuan in the second year of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：三年入关。
现代文：三年入关。
English: Three years passed.

古文：隋大业中为寿光令。
现代文：隋大业年中为寿光令。
English: In the middle of the Sui Dynasty, Shouguang was founded.

古文：后主二十二男：张贵妃生皇太子深、会稽王庄，孙姬生吴兴王胤，高昭仪生南平王嶷，吕淑媛生永嘉王彦、邵陵王兢，龚贵嫔生南海王虔、钱塘王恬，张叔华生信义王祗，徐淑仪生东阳王恮，孔贵人生吴郡王蕃。
现代文：后主有二十二个儿子：张贵妃生了皇太子陈深、会稽王陈庄，孙姬生了吴兴王陈胤，高昭仪生了南平王陈嶷，吕淑媛生了永嘉王叔彦、邵陵王陈兢，龚贵嫔生了南海王陈虔、钱塘王陈恬，张叔华生了信义王陈祗，徐淑仪生了东阳王陈恮，孔贵人生了吴郡王陈蕃。
English: The queen mother had twenty-two sons: Zhang Guifei gave birth to the crown prince Chen Sheng, the party secretary Wang Chen Zhuang, Sun Ji gave birth to Wu Xing Wang Chen Yin, Gao Zhaoyi gave birth to Nanping King Chen Yao, Lu Shuyuan gave birth to Yongjia King Shuhang, Shaoling King Chen Yao, Zou Guifei gave birth to Nanhai King Chen Qian, Qiantang King Chen Yao, Zhang Shuhua gave birth to Xinyi King Chen Yao, Xu Shuyi gave birth to Dongyang King Chen Yao, Kong Gui gave birth to Wu County King Chen Yao.

古文：其皇子总、观、明、纲、统、冲、洽、縚、绰、威、辩十一人，并未及封。
现代文：其皇子总、观、明、纲、统、冲、洽、縚、绰、威、辩十一人，都没有受封。
English: None of his eleven princes, including Zong, Guan, Ming, Gang, Tong, Chong, Cha, Zi, Zhuo, Wei, and Dian, received the title.

古文：皇太子深，字承源，后主第四子也。
现代文：皇太子陈深，字承源，后主第四个儿子。
English: Crown Prince Chen Sheng, the fourth son of the Heir Apparent.

古文：少聪惠，有志操，容止俨然，虽左右近侍，未尝见其喜愠。
现代文：少年时聪敏和顺，有志向操守，容貌举止庄严，即使左右近侍，都不曾见他有喜怒之色。
English: When he was a young boy, he was intelligent and well-behaved. He had ambition and integrity, and his appearance and demeanor were solemn. Even his closest attendants never saw him angry or happy.

古文：以母张贵妃故，特为后主所爱。
现代文：由于母亲亟岂堑的缘故，特别为篷主所宠爱。
English: Because of his mother's strictness, he was especially loved by the owner of the tent.

古文：至德元年，封始安王，邑二千户。
现代文：至德元年，封为蛆塞王，食邑二千户。
English: By the first year of the Tokugawa Shogunate, he was crowned the King of Yusei, and had 2,000 households in his domain.

古文：寻为军师将军、扬州刺史，置佐史。
现代文：不久为军师将军、扬蛆刺史，置佐史。
English: He soon became the general of the military division, Yang Xizhi, and Okisa.

古文：祯明二年，皇太子胤废，后主乃立深为皇太子。
现代文：祯明二年，皇太子陈胤被废，后主便立陈深为皇太子。
English: In the second year of the reign of the Ming Dynasty, Crown Prince Chen Yan was abolished, and his successor, Chen Sheng, was appointed Crown Prince.

古文：三年，隋师济江，六军败绩，隋将韩擒虎自南掖门入，百僚逃散。
现代文：三年，隋军渡江，六军败北，堕将排阁进入，百官逃散。
English: In three years, the Sui army crossed the Yangtze River, the six armies were defeated, the corrupt generals entered the cabinet, and hundreds of officials fled.

古文：深时年十馀岁，闭阁而坐，舍人孔伯鱼侍焉。隋军排阁而入，深使宣令劳之曰： 军旅在途，不乃劳也？ 
现代文：陈遝逭时才十多岁，却闭门而坐，舍人孔伯鱼侍奉一边，膪军推门而入，速遝派人宣令慰劳说： 军旅在途中，不该慰劳吗? 
English: Chen Xi was only ten years old at the time, but he sat behind closed doors. He did not want to serve Kong Bo Yu. The Wei army pushed the door open, and Hefei sent someone to comfort him, saying: "A military journey is on the way. Shouldn't I comfort you?"

古文：军人咸敬焉。
现代文：军中人都十分敬重他。
English: He was held in high esteem by all in the military.

古文：其年入关。
现代文：这年入关。
English: This year, I passed the entrance examination.

古文：隋大业中为枹罕太守。
现代文：隋大业年中篇抱罕太守。
English: In the middle of the Sui Dynasty, he was crowned emperor.

古文：吴兴王胤，字承业，后主长子也。
现代文：吴兴王陈胤，字承业，后主的长子。
English: Wu Xingwang Chenyin, the eldest son of Wu Xingwang's heir apparent.

古文：太建五年二月乙丑生于东宫，母孙姬因产卒，沈皇后哀而养之，以为己子。
现代文：太建五年二月乙丑，生于东宫，他的母亲孙姬因难产死去，沈皇后可怜他收养了他，枧为自己的儿子。
English: Tai Jian was born in the East Palace in February of the second year of the ugly, his mother Sun Ji died of childbirth, the Queen of Shen took pity on him and adopted him as her son.

古文：时后主年长，未有胤嗣，高宗因命以为嫡孙，其日下诏曰： 皇孙初诞，国祚方熙，思与群臣，共同斯庆，内外文武赐帛各有差，为父后者赐爵一级。 
现代文：此时厘王年长，没有子孙，高宗便命他为嫡孙，那天下诏道： 皇孙刚诞生，国家正兴盛，想舆群臣们一起庆贺，内外文武百官赐帛各有等级，为父后的人赐爵一级。 
English: At this time, King Li was older and had no children, so Emperor Gaozong appointed him as his legitimate grandson. On that day, the emperor decreed: The emperor's grandson has just been born, the country is flourishing, and I would like all my ministers to celebrate together. Hundreds of civil and military officials at home and abroad have each given him a rank, and those who follow in their father's footsteps are given a first-class knighthood.

古文：十年，封为永康公。
现代文：太建十年，封陈胤为永康公。
English: After ten years of construction, Chen Tan was given the title of Yongkang.

古文：后主即位，立为皇太子。
现代文：后主登位，立陈胤为皇太子。
English: After the Lord ascended to the throne, Chen Tan was appointed crown prince.

古文：胤性聪敏，好学，执经肄业，终日不倦，博通大义，兼善属文。
现代文：陈胤生性聪敏，好学，他执经习业，终日不倦，且博通大义，兼擅写文章。
English: Chen Yan is intelligent and eager to learn. He is dedicated to his studies, tireless all day long, and well-versed in justice. He is also good at writing articles.

古文：至德三年，躬出太学讲《孝经》，讲毕，又释奠于先圣先师。
现代文：至德三年，陈胤亲自到太学讲《孝经》，讲完，又置爵于先圣先师前而祭。
English: Three years later, Chen Yan himself came to Taishu to give a lecture on the "Book of Filial Piety." After the lecture, he was awarded a knighthood in front of his predecessor.

古文：其日设金石之乐于太学，王公卿士及太学生并预宴。
现代文：那天设金石之乐于太学，王公卿士及太学生都参预宴会。
English: On that day, Wang Gongningshi and Dai students all attended the pre-event banquet.

古文：是时张贵妃、孔贵嫔并爱幸，沈皇后无宠，而近侍左右数于东宫往来，太子亦数使人至后所，后主疑其怨望，甚恶之。
现代文：此时张贵妃、孔贵嫔都受宠爱，沈皇后不受宠，而近侍左右数度在束宫往来，太子也多次派人到后所，后主怀疑他心怀不满，十分厌恶他。
English: At this time, Zhang Guifei and Kong Guijie were both favored, but Empress Shen was not favored, and the aides-de-camp made several visits to Sok Palace. The crown prince also sent people to the imperial palace many times. The empress suspected that he was dissatisfied and detested him very much.

古文：而张、孔二贵妃又日夜构成后及太子之短，孔范之徒又于外合成其事，祯明二年，废为吴兴王，仍加侍中、中卫将军。
现代文：而张、孔两个贵妃又日夜捏造沈皇后与太子的短处，孔范之流又在外面合成这些事，祯明二年，陈胤被废为吴兴王，仍加侍中、中卫将军。
English: However, Zhang and Kong, the two empresses, day and night fabricated the shortcomings of the Queen of Shen and the prince, and the Kong Fan family also synthesized these things outside. In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, Chen Yin was abolished as the King of Wu Xing, but he was still made the Vice-Admiral and the General of the Middle Guard.

古文：三年入关，卒于长安。
现代文：祯明三年入关，死于长安。
English: After three years of imprisonment, he died in Chang'an.

古文：南平王嶷，字承岳，后主第二子也。
现代文：南平王陈嶷，字承岳，后主第二个儿子。
English: Nanping King Chen Yao, surnamed Cheng Yue, was the second son of the queen mother.

古文：方正有器局，年数岁，风采举动，有若成人。
现代文：陈嶷品行正直，有才识度量，年纪几岁时，风采举动就像成人一样。
English: Chen Yao is honest, talented and measured. When he was a few years old, he behaved like an adult.

古文：至德元年，立为南平王。
现代文：至德元年，被立为南平王。
English: In the first year of the German era, he was crowned King of Nanping.

古文：寻除信武将军、南琅邪、彭城二郡太守，置佐史。
现代文：不久封信武将军、南琅邪彭城二郡太守，置佐史。
English: Not long after, he sent a letter to General Takeshi, the governor of the two counties of Nanlu and Pengcheng, and Okisashi.

古文：迁扬州刺史，进号镇南将军。
现代文：改任扬州刺史，进号镇南将军。
English: He was reappointed as Yangzhou chief historian and promoted to Zhenan general.

古文：寻为使持节、都督郢、荆、湘三州诸军事、征西将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：接着为使持节、都督郢荆湘三州诸军事、征西将军、郢州刺史。
English: Then, for the Enabling Festival, the military of the three states of Hunan, the general of the Western Conquest, and the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：未行而隋军济江。
现代文：未行而隋军渡江。
English: The Sui army crossed the Yangtze River before they left.

古文：祯明三年入关，卒于长安。
现代文：祯明三年入关，死于长安。
English: He died in Chang'an after three years of imprisonment.

古文：永嘉王彦，字承懿，后主第三子也。
现代文：永嘉王陈彦，字承懿，后主第三个儿子。
English: Yongjia Wang Chen Yan, the third son of the queen mother.

古文：至德元年，立为永嘉王。
现代文：至德元年，被立为永嘉王。
English: In the first year of the German era, he was crowned King Yongjia.

古文：寻为忠武将军、南徐州刺史，进号安南将军。
现代文：不久为忠武将军、南徐州刺史，进号安南将军。
English: He was soon promoted to General Zhongwu, South Xuzhou, and General Annan.

古文：授散骑常侍、使持节、都督江、巴、东衡三州诸军事、平南将军、江州刺史。未行，隋师济江。
现代文：授散骑常侍、使持节、都督江巴束衡三州诸军事、平南将军、江州刺史。未行，隋军渡过江。
English: The equestrian knights, envoys, and the military of the three states, the governor of Jiangba, Sokheng, the general of Pingnan, and the history of Jiangzhou were dispersed.

古文：祯明三年入关。
现代文：祯明三年入关。
English: Entered the customs three years after the Ming Dynasty.

古文：隋大业中为襄武令。
现代文：隋大业中为襄武令。
English: In the Sui Dynasty, it was the Xiangwu Ruling.

古文：南海王虔，字承恪，后主第五子也。
现代文：南海王陈虔，字承恪，后主第五个儿子。
English: Chen Qian, the king of the South China Sea, was the fifth son of the queen mother.

古文：至德元年，立为南海王。
现代文：至德元年，被立为南海王。
English: In the first year of the Republic of Germany, it was established as the king of the South Sea.

古文：寻为武毅将军，置佐史，进号军师将军。
现代文：不久为武毅将军，置佐史，进号军师将军。
English: He was soon promoted to General Wu Yi, then to General Okisashi, and finally to General Junshi.

古文：祯明二年，出为平北将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：祯明二年，出为平北将军、南徐州刺史。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, he was promoted to the rank of General of the North, and to the rank of General of the South of Xuzhou.

古文：三年入关。
现代文：祯明三年入关。
English: Three years passed.

古文：隋大业中为涿令。
现代文：隋大业年中为涿令。
English: The imperial edict was issued in the middle of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：信义王祗，字承敬，后主第六子也。
现代文：信义王陈抵，字丞邀，缒第六个儿子。
English: Xinyi Wang Chen arrived, was invited by Zizheng, and became the sixth son.

古文：至德元年，立为信义王。
现代文：至德元年，被立为信义王。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong, he was appointed as the Prince of Xinyi.

古文：寻为壮武将军，置佐史。
现代文：接着为壮武将军，置佐史。
English: Next is Gen. Zhuangwu, followed by Okisashi.

古文：授使持节、都督、智武将军、琅邪、彭城二郡太守。
现代文：授使持节、都督、智武将军、里迎茎球二郡太守。
English: He was awarded the title of Jisetsu, the governor of the capital, the general of Chibu, and the governor of the two counties of Liying and Zhuge.

古文：祯明三年入关。
现代文：擅塱三年入关。
English: Entered the customs three years after the Ming Dynasty.

古文：隋大业中为通议郎。
现代文：堕左箠年中为通议郎。
English: In the year of his death, he was reinstated as a member of the Diet.

古文：邵陵王兢，字承检，后主第七子也。
现代文：邵陵王豌耋，宇丞并，厘王第七个儿子。
English: Shao Ling Wang Yao, Yu Zhengyi, Li Wang's seventh son.

古文：祯明元年，立为邵陵王，邑一千户。
现代文：擅塱元年，被立为邵堕王，邑一千户。
English: In the first year of the year, it was established as Shao Kui Wang, with a total of one thousand households.

古文：寻为仁武将军，置佐史。
现代文：接着为仁武将军，置佐史。
English: Next is General Ninmu, Okisashi.

古文：三年入关。
现代文：三年入关。
English: Three years passed.

古文：隋大业中为国子监丞。
现代文：堕大业年中为国子监丞。
English: In the middle of his university career, he became Kuniko Jojo.

古文：会稽王庄，字承肃，后主第八子也。
现代文：会稽王陈庄，字承肃，后主第八个儿子。
English: He was the eighth son of Chenzhuang, the king of the eunuchs, surnamed Chengsu.

古文：容貌蕞陋，性严酷，数岁，左右有不如意，辄剟刺其面，或加烧爇。
现代文：容貌小而丑陋，生性严酷，几岁时，左右人中有不如意的，他就会刺人的面孔。或者加以烧灼。
English: His appearance is small and ugly, his nature is harsh. When he was a few years old, he would stab people's faces if they were not to his liking. Or burn them.

古文：以母张贵妃有宠，后主甚爱之。
现代文：因母亲张贵妃受宠爱，故而后主非常喜爱他。
English: Because his mother, Zhang Guifei, was favored, the Lord loved him very much.

古文：至德四年，立为会稽王。
现代文：至德四年，被立为会稽王。
English: Four years later, he was appointed as the king of the association.

古文：寻为翊前将军，置佐史。
现代文：不久为翊前将军，置佐史。
English: He was soon promoted to Shomae no shogun and became Okisashi.

古文：除使持节、都督扬州诸军事、扬州刺史。
现代文：封使持节、都督扬州诸军事、扬州刺史。
English: Yangzhou Military Commander, Yangzhou Military Historian, Yangzhou Governor.

古文：祯明三年入关。
现代文：祯明三年入关。
English: Entered the customs three years after the Ming Dynasty.

古文：隋大业中为昌隆令。
现代文：隋大业年中为昌隆令。
English: The middle of the Sui Dynasty was ruled by Changlong.

古文：东阳王恮，字承厚，后主第九子也。
现代文：东阳王陈佺，字承厚，后主第九个儿子。
English: Dongyang King Chen Xi, surnamed Cheng Hou, was the ninth son of the queen mother.

古文：祯明二年，立为东阳王，邑一千户。
现代文：圭蝈二年，被立为东阳王，邑一千户。
English: In the second year of Guizhong, it was established as the King of Dongyang, with a thousand households in the county.

古文：未拜，三年入关。
现代文：未拜官，祯明三年入关。
English: He did not become an officer, but entered the customs three years later.

古文：隋大业中为通议郎。
现代文：堕左墓年中为通议郎。
English: In the year of his death, he was reinstated as a member of the Diet.

古文：吴郡王蕃，字承广，后主第十子也。
现代文：吴郡王陈蕃，字承广，后主第十个儿子。
English: The king of Wu County, Chen Yao, surnamed Chengguang, was the tenth son of the queen mother.

古文：祯明二年，封吴郡王。
现代文：祯明二年，被封为吴郡王。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, he was named the King of Wu County.

古文：三年入关。
现代文：三年入关。
English: Three years passed.

古文：隋大业中为涪城令。
现代文：隋大业年中为涪城令。
English: In the middle of the Sui Dynasty, the city of Shicheng was founded.

古文：钱塘王恬，字承惔，后主第十一子也。
现代文：钱塘王陈恬，字承惔，后主第十一个儿子。
English: Qiantang King Chen Yao, surnamed Cheng Yao, was the 11th son of the queen mother.

古文：祯明二年，立为钱塘王，邑一千户。
现代文：祯明二年，被立为钱塘王，邑一千户。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, it was established as the King of Qiantang, with a thousand households in the county.

古文：三年入关，卒于长安。
现代文：三年入关，死于长安。
English: After three years of imprisonment, he died in Chang'an.

古文：江左自西晋相承，诸王开国，并以户数相差为大小三品。
现代文：江左从西晋相承接，诸王开国，都以户敷相差分为大小三品。
English: Jiang Zuo succeeded from West Jin Dynasty, and all the kings who founded the country were divided into three classes according to the size of the house.

古文：大国置上、中、下三将军，又置司马一人；次国置中、下二将军；小国置将军一人。
现代文：大国置上、中、下三将军，又置司马一人；次国置中、下二将军；小国置将军一人。
English: The big country set up three generals at the top, middle and bottom, and also set up one Sima; the second country set up two generals at the middle and bottom; the small country set up one general.

古文：馀官亦准此为差。
现代文：其余官吏也都以此为标准分差别。
English: The rest of the officials also use this as a standard score.

古文：高祖受命，自永定讫于祯明，唯衡阳王昌特加殊宠，至五千户。
现代文：直担受命，自永定年到祯明，惟有衡阳王重陈昌特别受宠遇，达到五千户。
English: Directly responsible for receiving orders, from Yongding to Shuming, only Hengyang Wang Chong Chenchang was particularly favored, reaching 5,000 households.

古文：自馀大国不过二千户，小国即千户。
现代文：其余大国不过二千户，小国衹有千户。
English: The rest of the large countries have only 2,000 households, and the small countries have 1,000 households.

古文：而旧史残缺，不能别知其国户数，故缀其遗事附于此。
现代文：因旧史残缺，不能另外知晓其国户数，故而附写遣事于此。
English: Due to the lack of old history, it is not possible to know the number of households in other countries, so it is appended here.

古文：史臣曰：世祖、高宗、后主并建籓屏，以树懿亲，固乃本根，隆斯盘石。
现代文：史臣曰：世祖、高宗、后主都建藩屏，以树立至亲，巩固他们的本根，隆盛自己的磐石。
English: The historian said: The ancestor, Gaozong, and the successor all built Hanping to establish relatives, consolidate their roots, and flourish their own rock.

古文：鄱阳王伯山有风采德器，亦一代令籓矣。
现代文：鄱阳王伯山有风采德器，也是一代强藩。
English: Wangboshan of Fenyang is a man of style and virtue, and is also a strong clan.

古文：岳阳王叔慎属社稷倾危，情哀家国，竭诚赴敌，志不图生。
现代文：岳阳王叔慎在社稷倾危之时，内心悲哀国家，竭诚奔赴战场迎敌，其志不在于为个人图生。
English: When Yueyang Wang Shushan was at the time of the social crisis, his heart was sad for the country, and he wholeheartedly rushed to the battlefield to meet the enemy. His goal was not to make a living for himself.

古文：古之忠烈致命，斯之谓也。
现代文：啊!古代的忠烈致命者，即此种人。
English: Ah! the ancient faithful and deadly, that is such a man.

