古文：一曰：仲春之月，日在奎，昏弧中，旦建星中。
现代文：仲春仲春二月，太阳的位置在奎宿。初昏时刻，弧矢星座出现在南方中天。
English: Mid-spring Mid-spring In February, the sun's position is in the Kuijuku. At the time of the first twilight, the constellation of the Arc appears in the southern sky.

古文：其日甲乙，其帝太皞，其神句芒，其虫鳞，其音角，律中夹钟，其数八，其味酸，其臭膻，其祀户，祭先脾。
现代文：拂晓时刻，建星出现在南方中天。这个月在天干中属甲乙，它的主宰之帝是太皞，佐帝之神是句芒，它的应时的动物是龙鱼之类的鳞族，声音士中和的声音，音律与太蔟相应。这个月的数字是八，味道是酸味，气味是膻气，要举行的祭祀是户祭，祭祀的时候，祭品以脾脏为尊。
English: At the time of dawn, Jian Xing appeared in the south central sky. This month belongs to A and B in the heavenly stem. Its ruling emperor is Taishan, the god of Zedi is Jumang, and its corresponding animal is a dragonfish-like squid. The sound and rhythm of the sound and rhythm correspond to Taishan. The number of this month is eight, the taste is sour, the smell is miasma, and the sacrifice to be held is the house sacrifice. When the sacrifice is held, the sacrifice is the spleen.

古文：始雨水，桃李华，苍庚鸣，鹰化为鸠。
现代文：这个月开始下雨，桃李开始开花，黄鹂开始鸣叫，天空中的鹰逐渐为布谷乌取代。
English: This month, it began to rain, peach and plum trees began to bloom, the yellow dragonfly began to sing, and the eagle in the sky gradually replaced the cuckoo.

古文：天子居青阳太庙，乘鸾辂，驾苍龙，载青旗，衣青衣，服青玉，食麦与羊，其器疏以达。
现代文：天子居住在东向明堂的左侧室，乘坐饰有用青凤命名的响铃的车子，车前驾着青色的马，车上插着绘有龙纹的青色的旗帜。天子穿着青色衣服，佩戴着青色玉饰，吃的食物是麦子和羊，使用的器物的纹理空疏而通达。
English: Tianzi lives in a room on the left side of Dongxiangming Hall. He rides in a car with a bell decorated with the name of Qingfeng. A blue horse is driven in front of the car, and a blue flag with a dragon pattern is placed on the car. Tianzi wears blue clothes, wears blue jade ornaments, and eats wheat and sheep. The texture of the utensils used is sparse and transparent.

古文：是月也，安萌牙，养幼少，存诸孤；择元日，命人社；命有司，省囹圄，去桎梏，无肆掠，止狱讼。
现代文：这个月，要保护植物的萌芽，养育儿童和少年，抚恤众多的孤儿。选择好的日子，命令老百姓祭祀土神。命令司法官减少关押的人犯，去掉手铐脚镣，不要杀人陈尸和鞭打犯人，制止诉讼之类的事情。
English: This month, it is necessary to protect the buds of plants, raise children and adolescents, and support numerous orphans. Choose a good day, order the people to worship the earth god. Order the judicial officer to reduce the number of prisoners, remove handcuffs and shackles, do not kill corpses and whip prisoners, and stop litigation and other things.

古文：是月也，玄鸟至，至之日，以太牢祀于高衤某。
现代文：这个月，燕子来到。燕子来到的那天，用牛羊豕三牲祭祀高禖之神。
English: This month, swallows arrived. On the day the swallows arrived, they sacrificed to the god of sorghum with cattle, sheep and donkeys.

古文：天子亲往，后妃率九嫔御，乃礼天子所御，带以弓韣，授以弓矢，于高衤某之前。是月也，日夜分，雷乃发声，始电。
现代文：天子亲自前往，后妃率领宫中所有女眷陪从，在高禖神前为天子所御幸而有孕的女眷举行礼仪，给她带上弓套，并授给她弓和箭。这个月，日夜平分，开始打雷，闪电。
English: The heavenly son himself went there, the empress led all the female relatives in the palace, and held a ceremony for the pregnant female relatives blessed by the heavenly son in front of Takahata no Kami, bringing her a bow, and giving her a bow and arrow. This month, day and night are equally divided, and thunder and lightning began to strike.

古文：蛰虫咸动，开户始出，先雷三日，奋铎以令于兆民曰： 雷且发声，有不戒其容止者，生子不备，必有凶灾。 
现代文：蛰伏的动物开始苏醒，开始从洞穴中钻出来。打雷的前三天，振动木铎向老百姓发布命令说； 凡是不警戒房中之事，在响雷时交合的，他生下的孩子必定会先天残疾，而自己也必有凶险和灾祸。 
English: Animals that had been lying dormant began to wake up and come out of their burrows. Three days before the first clap of thunder, the vibrating raft issued an order to the common people: "If anyone does not keep an eye on what is going on in his house and has sexual intercourse at the time of the clap of thunder, his child will certainly be born with congenital disabilities, and he himself will also have dangers and disasters."

古文：日夜分，则同度量，钧衡石，角斗桶，正权概。
现代文：日夜平分，所以要统一和校正各种度量衡器具。这个月，耕作的农夫稍事休息。
English: The day and night are equally divided, so it is necessary to unify and calibrate all kinds of measuring instruments. This month, farmers working on the farm will take a short break.

古文：是月也，耕者少舍，乃修阖扇。寝庙必备。
现代文：整治一下门户。祭祀先祖的寝庙一定要完整齐备而投有毁坏。
English: Let's rectify the portal. The sleeping temple for worshiping ancestors must be fully prepared and not destroyed.

古文：无作大事，以妨农功。
现代文：不要兴兵征伐，以免妨害农事。
English: Don't raise an army to fight, so as not to interfere with farming.

古文：是月也，无竭川泽，无漉陂池，无焚山林。
现代文：这个月，不要弄干河川沼泽及蓄水的池塘，不要焚烧山林。
English: This month, do not dry up rivers, swamps and reservoirs, and do not burn mountain forests.

古文：天子乃献羔开冰，先荐寝庙。
现代文：天子向司寒之神献上羔羊，打开冰窖，然后把冰先献给祖先。
English: The heavenly son offered a lamb to the god of cold, opened the ice cellar, and then offered the ice first to the ancestors.

古文：上丁，命乐正入舞舍采，天子乃率三公、九卿、诸侯，亲往视之。
现代文：上旬的丁日，命令乐正进入国学教练舞蹈，把彩帛放在前边行祭祀先师的礼节。天子率领三公、九卿、诸侯亲自去观看。
English: In the early part of the 3rd day of the 3rd month, the emperor ordered Le Zheng to enter the dance of the coach of the Chinese classics, and he placed the painted urn in front of him to perform the etiquette of the sacrificial mentor. The emperor led the three princes, nine nobles, and princes to watch.

古文：中丁，又命乐正入学习乐。
现代文：中旬的丁日，又命令乐正进入国学教练音乐。
English: In the middle of the day, he also ordered Le Zheng to enter the music of the Chinese coach.

古文：是月也，祀不用牺牲，用圭璧，更皮币。
现代文：这个月，一般的祭祀不用牲畜作祭品，而用玉圭、玉壁，或者用皮毛束帛来代替。
English: This month, instead of using livestock as a sacrificial offering, people usually use cow hide.

古文：仲春行秋令，则其国大水，寒气总至，寇戎来征；行冬令，则阳气不胜，麦乃不熟，民多相掠；行夏令，则国乃大旱，暖气早来，虫螟为害。
现代文：仲春二月如果发布应在秋天发布的政令，那么国家就会洪水泛滥，寒气就会突然到来，敌寇就舍来侵犯。如果发布应在冬天发布的政令，阳气就经受不住，麦子就无法成熟，百姓之间就会频繁的出现劫掠之事。如果发布应在夏天发布的政令，国家就会遭受干旱，热气太早来到，庄稼就会遭到虫害。
English: In mid-spring, in February, if a decree is issued that should be issued in autumn, then the country will be flooded, the cold will suddenly come, and the enemy will invade. If a decree is issued that should be issued in winter, the yang will be unbearable, the wheat will not mature, and there will be frequent robberies among the people. If a decree is issued that should be issued in summer, the country will suffer drought, the heat will come too early, and the crops will be plagued by insects.

古文：二曰：圣人深虑天下，莫贵於生。
现代文：贵生圣人深思熟虑天下的事，认为没有什么比生命更宝贵。
English: The venerable sage pondered the affairs of the world and believed that nothing is more precious than life.

古文：夫耳目鼻口，生之役也。
现代文：耳目鼻口是受生命支配的。
English: Ears, eyes, nose and mouth are governed by life.

古文：耳虽欲声，目虽欲色，鼻虽欲芬香，口虽欲滋味，害於生则止。
现代文：耳朵虽然想听音乐，眼睛虽然想看彩色，鼻子虽然想嗅芳香，嘴巴虽然想尝美昧，但只要对生命有害就会被禁止。
English: Although the ears want to listen to music, the eyes want to see color, the nose wants to smell fragrance, and the mouth wants to taste beauty, as long as it is harmful to life, it will be banned.

古文：在四官者不欲，利於生者则弗为。
现代文：对于这四种器官来说，即使本身不想做，但只要有利于生命就会去做。
English: For these four organs, even if they do not want to do it, they will do it as long as it is conducive to life.

古文：由此观之，耳目鼻口不得擅行，必有所制。
现代文：由此看来，耳目鼻口不能任意独行，必须有所制约。
English: From this point of view, the ears, eyes, nose and mouth cannot arbitrarily go it alone, and must be restricted.

古文：譬之若官职，不得擅为，必有所制。
现代文：这就像各种职官，不得独断专行，一定要有所制约一样。
English: This is just like all kinds of officials, who must not act arbitrarily, and must be subject to certain restrictions.

古文：此贵生之术也。
现代文：这就是珍惜生命的方法。
English: This is the way to cherish life.

古文：尧以天下让於子州支父，子州支父对曰： 以我为天子犹可也。虽然，我适有幽忧之病，方将治之，未暇在天下也。 
现代文：尧把天下让给子州支父，子州支父回答说； 让我做天子还是可以的，虽是这样，我现在正害着忧劳深重的病，正要治疗，没有余暇顾及天下。 
English: "If you give the world to Zizhou Zifu," Zizhou Zifu replied, "it is still possible for me to be a godson, but even so, I am now suffering from a serious illness, I am about to be treated, and I have no spare time to take care of the world."

古文：天下，重物也，而不以害其生，又况於他物乎？
现代文：天下是最珍贵的，可是圣人不因它而危害自己的生命，又何况其它的东西呢?
English: The world is the most precious thing, but a sage does not risk his life for it, and what about other things?

古文：惟不以天下害其生者也，可以托天下。
现代文：只有不因天下而危害自己生命的人，才可以把天下托付给他。
English: Only those who do not endanger their own lives for the sake of the world can entrust the world to him.

古文：越人三世杀其君，王子搜患之，逃乎丹穴。
现代文：越国八连续三代杀了他们的国君，芏子搜对此很忧惧，于是逃到一个山嗣里。
English: Yue Guo eight successive three generations killed their sovereigns, Zou Zisou was very worried about this, so he fled to a mountain village.

古文：越国无君，求王子搜而不得，从之丹穴。
现代文：越国没有国君，找不到王子搜，一直追寻到山洞。
English: There is no king in Yue, so they couldn't find the prince, so they tracked him all the way to the cave.

古文：王子搜不肯出。越人薰之以艾，乘之以王舆。
现代文：王子搜不肯出来，越国人就用燃着的艾草熏他出来，让他乘坐国君的车。
English: Prince So did not want to come out, so the Yue people smoked him out with burning wormwood and let him ride in the sovereign's car.

古文：王子搜援绥登车，仰天而呼曰： 君乎！
现代文：王子搜拉着登车的绳子上车，仰望上天呼喊道： 国君啊，国君啊！
English: The prince pulled the rope to get on the train, looked up to heaven and shouted: "O sovereign, O sovereign!

古文：独不可以舍我乎？ 
现代文：这个职位怎么偏偏让我来做啊！ 
English: How can I be asked to do this position!

古文：王子搜非恶为君也，恶为君之患也。
现代文：王子搜并不是厌恶做国君，而是害怕做国君招来的祸患。
English: Prince Sou is not disgusted with being the sovereign, but is afraid of the calamity that comes with being the sovereign.

古文：若王子搜者，可谓不以国伤其生矣。
现代文：像王子搜这样的人，可说是不肯因国家伤害自己生命的了。
English: People like Oji Sou can be said to be unwilling to harm their own lives for the sake of the country.

古文：此固越人之所欲得而为君也。
现代文：这也正是越国人想要找他做国君的原因。
English: This is exactly why the Vietnamese want him to be their king.

古文：鲁君闻颜阖得道之人也，使人以币先焉。
现代文：鲁国国君听说颜阖是个有道之人，想要请他出来做官，就派人带着礼物先去致意。
English: Lu Guo Guojun heard that Yan Xuan was a virtuous man, and wanted to invite him to become an official, so he sent someone to greet him first with a gift.

古文：颜阖守闾，鹿布之衣，而自饭牛。
现代文：颜阖住在陋巷，穿着粗布衣裳，自己在喂牛。
English: Yan Xuan lives in a back alley, wears coarse cloth clothes, and feeds cattle herself.

古文：鲁君之使者至，颜阖自对之。
现代文：鲁君的使者来了，颜阖亲自接待他。
English: Lu Jun's emissary arrived, and Yan Xun personally received him.

古文：使者曰： 此颜阖之家邪？ 
现代文：使者问： 这是颜阖的家吗? 
English: The messenger asked, "Is this Yan Xuan's home?"

古文：颜阖对曰： 此阖之家也。 
现代文：颜阖回答说： 正是我的家。 
English: Yan Xuan replied, "It is my home."

古文：使者致币，颜阖对曰： 恐听缪而遗使者罪，不若审之。 
现代文：使者送上礼物，颜阖说； 怕您把名字听错了而会给您带来处罚，不如搞清楚再说。 
English: The messenger is bringing a gift, Yan Xuan said; if you mishear the name and it will bring you punishment, it's better to figure it out.

古文：使者还反审之，复来求之，则不得已。
现代文：使者回去查问清楚了，再来找颜阖，却找不到了。
English: The envoy went back to investigate and came back looking for Yancheng, but couldn't find him.

古文：故若颜阖者，非恶富贵也，由重生恶之也。
现代文：像颜阖这样的人，并不是本来就厌恶富贵，而是由于看重生生命才厌恶它。
English: People like Yan Xuan do not inherently dislike wealth, but dislike it because they value life.

古文：世之人主多以富贵骄得道之人，其不相知，岂不悲哉？
现代文：世上的君主，大多凭借富贵傲视有道之人，他们如此地不了解有道之人，难道不太可悲了吗?
English: Isn't it sad that most of the world's monarchs, by virtue of their wealth and arrogance, look down on the virtuous, and that they are so ignorant of the virtuous?

古文：故曰：道之真，以持身；其绪馀，以为国家；其土苴，以治天下。
现代文：所以说：道的实体用来保垒身体，它的剩余用来治理国家，它的渣滓用来治理天下。
English: Therefore, it is said that the substance of the Tao is used to protect the body, its surplus is used to govern the country, and its dregs are used to govern the world.

古文：由此观之，帝王之功，圣人之馀事也，非所以完身养生之道也。
现代文：由此看来，帝王的功业是圣人闲暇之余的事，并不是用以全身养生的方法。
English: From this point of view, the emperor's work is a matter of leisure for saints, and is not a method used for the health of the whole body.

古文：今世俗之君子，危身弃生以徇物，彼且奚以此之也？
现代文：如今世俗所谓的君子损害身体舍弃生命来追求外物，他们这样做将达到什么目的呢？
English: Nowadays, worldly so-called gentlemen harm their bodies and give up their lives in pursuit of external things. What will they achieve by doing so?

古文：彼且奚以此为也？
现代文：他们又将采用什么手段达到目的呢?
English: What means will they use to achieve their goal?

古文：凡圣人之动作也，必察其所以之与其所以为。
现代文：大凡圣人有所举动的时候，必定明确知道所要达到的目的耜达到目的所应采用的手段。
English: When a great sage takes action, he must clearly know the goal to be achieved and the means to be used to achieve the goal.

古文：今有人於此，以随侯之珠弹千仞之雀，世必笑之。
现代文：假如有这样一个人，用随侯之珠去弹射千仞高的飞鸟，世上的人肯定会嘲笑他。
English: If there were such a person, who would use a dowel to catapult a thousand-feet-tall bird, the people of the world would surely laugh at him.

古文：是何也？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：所用重，所要轻也。
现代文：这是因为他所耗费的，所追求太贵重的太轻微了啊。
English: This is because what he spends, what he pursues, is too precious and too light.

古文：夫生，岂特随侯珠之重也哉！
现代文：至于生命，其价值岂止象随侯珠那样贵重呢？
English: As for life, is its value not more precious than that of a pearl?

古文：子华子曰： 全生为上，亏生次之，死次之，迫生为下。 
现代文：子华子说： 全生是最上等，亏生次一等，死又次一等，迫生是最低下的。 
English: Zihua Zi said: "The whole life is the highest grade, the loss of life is the second grade, the death is the second grade, and the forced birth is the lowest grade.

古文：故所谓尊生者，全生之谓；所谓全生者，六欲皆得其宜也。
现代文：所以，所谓尊生，说的就是全生。所谓全生，是指六欲都能得适宜。
English: Therefore, the so-called virtuous life refers to the whole life. The so-called whole life means that all six desires can be appropriate.

古文：所谓亏生者，六欲分得其宜也。
现代文：所谓亏生，是指六欲只有部分得到适宜。
English: The so-called deficiency refers to the fact that only part of the six desires are appropriate.

古文：亏生则於其尊之者薄矣。其亏弥甚者也，其尊弥薄。
现代文：生命受到亏损，生命的天性就会削弱，生命亏损得越厉害，生命的天性削弱得也就越厉害。
English: The more life is lost, the weaker the nature of life becomes, and the more life is lost, the weaker the nature of life becomes.

古文：所谓死者，无有所以知，复其未生也。
现代文：所谓死，是指没有办法知道六欲，等于又回到它来生时的状态。
English: The so-called death means that there is no way to know the six desires, which is equivalent to returning to its state in the next life.

古文：所谓迫生者，六欲莫得其宜也，皆获其所甚恶者。
现代文：所谓追生，是指六欲没有一样得到适宜，六欲所得到的都是它们十分厌恶的东西。
English: The so-called pursuit of life refers to the fact that the six desires have not obtained anything suitable, and all the six desires have obtained are things that they dislike very much.

古文：服是也，辱是也。
现代文：屈服属于这一粪，耻辱属于这一类。
English: Submission belongs to this excrement, humiliation belongs to this class.

古文：辱莫大於不义，故不义，迫生也。
现代文：在耻辱当中没有比不义更大的了。所以，行不义之事就是迫生。
English: For there is no greater disgrace than to be unjust, and to do injustice is to bring about one's death.

古文：而迫生非独不义也，故曰迫生不若死。
现代文：但是构成追生的不仅仅是不义，所以说，迫生不如死。
English: But it is not only injustice that constitutes the pursuit of life, so that it is better to die than to live.

古文：奚以知其然也？
现代文：根据什么知道是这样呢?
English: How can you be so sure?

古文：耳闻所恶，不若无闻；目见所恶，不若无见。
现代文：比如，耳朵听到讨厌的声音，就不如什么也没听判，眼睛看到讨厌的东西，就不如什么也没见到。
English: For example, if the ear hears an unpleasant sound, it is better not to hear anything, and if the eye sees something unpleasant, it is better not to see anything.

古文：故雷则掩耳，电则掩目，此其比也。
现代文：所以打雷的时候人们就会捂住耳朵，打闪的时候人们就会遮住眼睛。
English: So when it thunders, people cover their ears, and when it flashes, people cover their eyes.

古文：凡六欲者，皆知其所甚恶，而必不得免，不若无有所以知。
现代文：迫生不如死就象这类现象一样。六欲都知道自己十分厌恶的东西是什幺，如果这些东西一定不可避免，那以就不如根本没有办法妇道六欲。
English: Like all such phenomena, it is better to die than to live. All six desires know what they really hate, and if these things are inevitable, then it is better not to have sex at all.

古文：无有所以知者，死之谓也，故迫生不若死。
现代文：没有办法如道六欲就是死。因此迫生不如死。
English: There is no way to live like a Taoist. To live is to die. Therefore, it is better to die than to live.

古文：嗜肉者，非腐鼠之谓也；嗜酒者，非败酒之谓也；尊生者，非迫生之谓也。
现代文：嗜好吃肉，不是说连腐臭的老鼠也吃，嗜好嚼酒，不是说连变质的酒也喝。珍惜生命，不是说连迫生也算。情欲
English: Addiction to meat-eating does not mean eating even rancid rats, addiction to wine-chewing does not mean drinking even spoiled wine, cherishing life does not mean living under duress, and lust

古文：三曰：天生人而使有贪有欲。
现代文：天生育人而使人有贪心有欲望。
English: Nature gives birth to man and makes him greedy and desirous.

古文：欲有情，情有节。
现代文：欲望产生感情，感情具有节度。
English: Desires give rise to emotions, and emotions have moderation.

古文：圣人修节以止欲，故不过行其情也。
现代文：圣人遵循节度以克制欲望，所以不会放纵自己的感情。
English: A sage follows moderation by restraining his desires, so he does not indulge his emotions.

古文：故耳之欲五声，目之欲五色，口之欲五味，情也。
现代文：耳朵想听乐音，眼睛想看彩色，嘴巴想吃美味，这些都是情欲。
English: The ears want to hear music, the eyes want to see colors, the mouth wants to eat delicious food, these are all passions.

古文：此三者，贵贱、愚智、贤不肖欲之若一，虽神农、黄帝，其与桀、纣同。
现代文：这三方面，人们无论是高贵的，还是卑贱的，愚笨的，还是聪明的、贤明的，还是不肖的，欲望都是同样的。即使是神农，黄帝。他们的情欲也跟夏桀、商纣相同。
English: In these three aspects, whether people are noble or lowly, stupid or clever, wise or ugly, their desires are the same. Even Shennong and Huangdi. Their passions are also the same as Xia Yao and Shang Yao.

古文：圣人之所以异者，得其情也。
现代文：圣人之所以不同干一般人，是由于他们具有适度的盛情。
English: The reason why saints are different from ordinary people is that they have a moderate enthusiasm.

古文：由贵生动，则得其情矣；不由贵生动，则失其情矣。
现代文：从尊生出发，就会具备适度的感情，不从尊生出发，就会失掉适度的感情。
English: If you start from the Son, you will have moderate feelings; if you don't start from the Son, you will lose moderate feelings.

古文：此二者，死生存亡之本也。
现代文：这两种情况是决定死生存亡的根本。
English: These two situations are fundamental in determining life and death.

古文：俗主亏情，故每动为亡败。
现代文：世俗的君主缺乏适度的感情，所以动辄灭亡。
English: Secular monarchs lack the proper emotions, so they are likely to perish.

古文：耳不可赡，目不可厌，口不可满；身尽府种，筋骨沈滞，血脉壅塞，九窍寥寥，曲失其宜，虽有彭祖，犹不能为也。
现代文：他们耳朵的欲望不可满足，眼睛的欲望不可满足，嘴巴的欲望不可请足，以致全身浮舯，筋骨积滞不通，血脉阻塞不畅，九窍空虚，全都丧失了正常的机能。到了这个地步，即使有彭祖在，也是无能为力的。
English: The desires of their ears can't be satisfied, the desires of their eyes can't be satisfied, and the desires of their mouths can't be satisfied. As a result, their whole bodies are swollen, their bones and muscles are stagnant, their blood vessels are blocked, and their genitals are empty. They have all lost their normal functions. At this point, even if Peng Zu is there, he can't do anything.

古文：其於物也，不可得之为欲，不可足之为求，大失生本；民人怨谤，又树大雠；意气易动，跷然不固；矜势好智，胸中欺诈；德义之缓，邪利之急。
现代文：俗主对于外物，总是想得到不可得到的东西，追求不可满足的欲望，这样必然大大丧失生命的根本，又会招致百姓怨恨指责，给自己树起大敌。他们意志容易动摇，变化迅速而不坚定，他们夸耀权势，好弄智谋，胸怀欺诈，不顾道德正义，追逐邪恶私利，最后搞得自己走投无路。
English: With regard to external things, the laity always want to obtain the unobtainable and pursue the insatiable desire. In this way, they will inevitably lose the foundation of their lives. They will also incur the resentment and criticism of the people and make great enemies for themselves. Their wills are easily shaken, they change rapidly but not firmly. They boast of their power, they are clever and cunning, they are deceitful, they do not care about moral justice, they pursue evil and selfish interests, and finally they have no way out.

古文：身以困穷，虽後悔之，尚将奚及？
现代文：即使事后对此悔恨，还怎么来得及?
English: Even if you regret it afterwards, how can you do it in time?

古文：巧佞之近，端直之远，国家大危，悔前之过，犹不可反。
现代文：他们亲近巧诈的人，疏远正直的人，致使国家处于极危险的境地，这时即使后悔以前的过错，已然不可挽回。
English: They have drawn close to the deceitful and distanced themselves from the honest, placing the country in a perilous position from which there can be no return, even if previous mistakes are regretted.

古文：闻言而惊，不得所由。
现代文：闻知自己即将灭亡的话这才惊恐，却仍然不知这种后果由何而至。
English: It's scary to know you're going to die, but you don't know where it's going to come from.

古文：百病怒起，乱难时至。
现代文：各种疾病暴发出来，反叛内乱时发不断。
English: All kinds of diseases have broken out, and rebellions and civil strife continue to break out.

古文：以此君人，为身大忧。
现代文：靠这些治理百姓，只能给自身带来极大的忧患。
English: Relying on these to govern the people can only bring great sorrow to oneself.

古文：耳不乐声，目不乐色，口不甘味，与死无择。
现代文：以至耳听乐音而不觉得快乐，眼看彩色而不觉得高兴，口吃美味而不觉得香甜，实际上跟死没什么区别。
English: So much so that listening to music without feeling happy, looking at colors without feeling happy, and stuttering without feeling sweet are actually no different from death.

古文：古人得道者，生以寿长，声色滋味能久乐之，奚故？
现代文：古代的得道之人，生命得以长寿，乐音、彩色、美味能长久地享受，这是什么缘故?
English: What is the reason for the ancient sages to live a long life and enjoy music, color, and delicious food for a long time?

古文：论早定也。
现代文：这是由于尊生的信念早就确立的缘故啊！
English: This is due to the fact that Sonny's belief has long been established!

古文：论早定则知早啬，知早啬则精不竭。
现代文：尊生的信念早确立，就可以知道早爱惜生命，知道早爱惜生命，精种就不会衰竭。
English: As long as the belief of cherishing life is established, one can know to cherish life early. As long as one knows to cherish life early, the fine seeds will not fail.

古文：秋早寒则冬必暖矣，春多雨则夏必旱矣。
现代文：秋天早寒，冬天就必定温暖，春天多雨，夏天就必定干旱。
English: Autumn will be cold early, winter will be warm, spring will be rainy, and summer will be dry.

古文：天地不能两，而况於人类乎？
现代文：天地尚且不能两全，又何况人类呢?
English: Heaven and earth cannot be made perfect, let alone human beings.

古文：人之与天地也同。
现代文：在这一点上人跟天地相同。
English: In this respect, man is like the heavens and the earth.

古文：万物之形虽异，其情一体也。
现代文：万物形状虽然各异，但它们的生丰是一样的。
English: Although the shapes of all things are different, their fertility is the same.

古文：故古之治身与天下者，必法天地也。
现代文：所以，古代修养身心与治理天下的人一定效法天地。
English: Therefore, people who cultivated their mind and body and governed the world in ancient times must follow the example of heaven and earth.

古文：尊，酌者众则速尽。
现代文：酒樽中的酒，舀的人多，完的就快。
English: The wine in the barrel is drunk by many people, and it is finished quickly.

古文：万物之酌大贵之生者众矣。故大贵之生常速尽。
现代文：万物消耗君主生命的太多了，所以君主的生命常常很快耗尽。
English: All things consume too much of the monarch's life, so the monarch's life is often quickly exhausted.

古文：非徒万物酌之也，又损其生以资天下之人，而终不自知。
现代文：不仅万物消耗它，君主自己又损耗它亲为天下人操劳，而自己却始终不察觉。
English: Not only do all things consume it, but the monarch himself consumes it himself, toiling for the people of the world, but he is never aware of it.

古文：功虽成乎外，而生亏乎内。
现代文：在外虽然功成名就，可是自身生命却已损耗。
English: Although he has achieved fame and success in the outside world, his own life has been wasted.

古文：耳不可以听，目不可以视，口不可以食，胸中大扰，妄言想见，临死之上，颠倒惊惧，不知所为。
现代文：以至耳不能听，眼不能看，嘴不能吃，心中大乱，口说胡话，精神恍忽，临死之前，神经错乱，惊恐万状，行动失常。
English: So much so that the ears cannot hear, the eyes cannot see, the mouth cannot eat, the heart is in turmoil, the mouth speaks nonsense, the spirit is in a daze, before death, the nerves are deranged, the fear is omnipresent, and the actions are abnormal.

古文：用心如此，岂不悲哉？
现代文：耗费心力嘲了这个地步，难道不可悲吗?
English: Isn't it sad that it took so much effort to get to this point?

古文：世人之事君者，皆以孙叔敖之遇荆庄王为幸。
现代文：世上侍奉君主的人都把孙叔敖受到楚庄壬的常识看作是幸运的事。
English: All those who serve the monarchs in the world regard it as a fortunate thing that Sun Shuxuan received the common sense of Chu Zhuang Ren.

古文：自有道者论之则不然，此荆国之幸。
现代文：但是由有道之人来评论却不是这样。他们认为这是楚国的幸运。
English: However, this is not the case when it comes to comments from people with morals. They believe that this is the luck of the land of Chu.

古文：荆庄王好周游田猎，驰骋弋射，欢乐无遗，尽傅其境内之劳与诸侯之忧於孙叔敖。
现代文：楚庄王喜好四处游玩打措，跑马射箭，欢乐无余，而把冶国的辛苦和作诸侯的忧劳都推给了孙叔敖。
English: The king of Chuzhuang liked to travel around and play horse-riding, horse-racing and archery, and he was full of joy. However, he put the hard work of developing the country and the worries of being a prince on Sun Shuxuan.

古文：孙叔敖日夜不息，不得以便生为故，故使庄王功迹著乎竹帛，传乎後世。
现代文：孙叔敖日夜操劳不止，无法顾及养生之事。正因为这样，才使楚庄王的功绩载于史册，流传于后代。
English: Sun Shuxuan worked tirelessly day and night, unable to take care of his health. It is for this reason that the exploits of King Chu Zhuang are recorded in the annals of history and passed down to future generations.

古文：四曰：墨子见染素丝者而叹曰： 染於苍则苍，染於黄则黄，所以入者变，其色亦变，五入而以为五色矣。 
现代文：当染墨子曾看到染素素丝的而叹息说： 放入青色染料，素丝就变成青色，放人黄色染料，素丝就变成黄色，染料变了，素丝的馘色也随着变化，染五次就会变出五种颜色了。 
English: When Dyeing Ink once saw the dyeing silk, he sighed and said: Put the blue dye into the roller, the dyeing silk will become blue, put the yellow dye, the dyeing silk will become yellow, the dye will change, and the color of the dyeing silk will also change, and five times of dyeing will produce five colors.

古文：故染不可不慎也。
现代文：所以，染色不可不慎重啊。
English: Therefore, dyeing should not be careless.

古文：非独染丝然也，国亦有染。
现代文：不仅染丝这样，国家也有类似于染丝的情形。
English: Not only silk dyeing, the country also has a situation similar to silk dyeing.

古文：舜染於许由、伯阳，禹染於皋陶、伯益，汤染於伊尹、仲虺，武王染於太公望、周公旦。
现代文：舜受到许由、伯阳的熏陶，禹受到皋陶、伯益的熏陶，商汤受到伊尹、仲虺的熏陶，武壬受到太公望、周公旦的熏陶。
English: Xing was influenced by Xu Yu and Boyang, Yu was influenced by Xing Tao and Bo Yi, Shang Tang was influenced by Yi Yin and Zhong Qi, and Wu Ren was influenced by Tai Gongwang and Zhou Gongdan.

古文：此四王者，所染当，故王天下，立为天子，功名蔽天地。
现代文：这四位帝王，因为所受的熏陶合台宜得当，所以能够统治天下，立为天子，功名盖天地。
English: These four emperors were able to rule the world, establish themselves as the sons of heaven, and achieve fame and glory because they were properly trained.

古文：举天下之仁义显人，必称此四王者。
现代文：凡列举天下仁义、显达之人，一定都推举这四位帝王。
English: Anyone who enumerates the world's benevolent, righteous, and illustrious people will surely choose these four emperors.

古文：夏桀染於干辛、岐踵戎，殷纣染於崇侯、恶来，周厉王染於虢公长父、荣夷终，幽王染於虢公鼓、祭公敦。
现代文：夏桀受到干辛、畦踵戎的熏染，殷纣受到寨侯、恶来的熏染，周厉王受到虢公长父、荣夷终的熏染，周幽王受到虢公鼓、祭公敦的熏染。
English: Xia Yao was affected by the dryness and coldness, Yin Yao was affected by the coldness and badness, Zhou Li Wang was affected by the death of his father, Rong Yi, and Zhou Yu Wang was affected by the coldness of the drum and the sacrifice of Dong.

古文：此四王者，所染不当，故国残身死，为天下僇。
现代文：这四位君王，因为所受的熏染不得当，结果国破身死，被天下人耻笑。
English: These four emperors, because of the bad influence they received, ended up ruining the country and were ridiculed by the world.

古文：举天下之不义辱人，必称此四王者。
现代文：凡列举天下不义，蒙受耻辱之人，一定都举这四位君壬。
English: Whoever enumerates the injustices of the world and the people who have suffered humiliation must enumerate these four gentlemen.

古文：齐桓公染於管仲、鲍叔，晋文公染於咎犯、郄偃，荆庄王染於孙叔敖、沈尹蒸，吴王阖庐染於伍员、文之仪，越王勾践染於范蠡、大夫种。
现代文：齐桓公受到管仲、鲍权牙的熏陶，晋文公受到咎犯、卜偃的熏陶，楚庄王受到孙般敖，沈尹篮的熏陶，吴王阖庐受到伍员、文之仪的熏陶，越王勾践受到范蠡，文种的熏陶。
English: King Qi Huan was influenced by Guanzhong and Bao Quanzha, King Jinwen was influenced by Guanzhong and Bu Yao, King Chu Zhuang was influenced by Sun Panyu and Shen Yinshan, King Wu was influenced by Wu Jun and Wen Zhi Yi, and King Yue was influenced by Fan Yao and Wen Zhuang.

古文：此五君者，所染当，故霸诸侯，功名传於後世。
现代文：这五位君主，因为所受的熏陶合宜得当，所以称雄诸侯，功业盛名流传到后代。
English: These five monarchs, because of the appropriate influence they received, became great lords, and their achievements were passed down to future generations.

古文：范吉射染於张柳朔、王生，中行寅染於黄籍秦、高强，吴王夫差染於王孙雄、太宰嚭，智伯瑶染於智国、张武，中山尚染於魏义、椻长，宋康王染於唐鞅、田不禋。
现代文：范吉射受到张柳期，王生的熏染，中行寅受到黄藉秦、高强的熏染，吴王夫差受到王孙雒、太宰嚭的熏染，智伯瑶受到智国、张武的熏染，中山尚受到魏义、援长韵熏染，来康壬受到唐鞅、田不禋的熏染。
English: Fan Jisha was influenced by Zhang Liuzhi and Wang Sheng, Zhonggyu Ting was influenced by Huang Rong Qin and Gao Qiang, Wu Wangfusha was influenced by Wang Sun Rong and Dazai Rong, Zhi Bo Rong was influenced by Zhi Guo and Zhang Wu, Zhongshan Shang was influenced by Wei Yi and Yuan Chang Rong, and Lai Kang Ren was influenced by Tang Xi and Tian Fu Rong.

古文：此六君者，所染不当，故国皆残亡，身或死辱，宗庙不血食，绝其後类，君臣离散，民人流亡。
现代文：这六位君主，因为所受的熏染不得当，结果国家都破灭了，他们有的被杀，有的受辱，亲庙毁灭不能再享受祭祀，子孙断绝，君臣离散，人民流亡。
English: These six monarchs, because of the improper influence they received, as a result, the country was destroyed, some of them were killed, some were humiliated, their family temples were destroyed, they could no longer enjoy sacrifices, their children and grandchildren were cut off, the monarchs and ministers were scattered, and the people were exiled.

古文：举天下之贪暴可羞人，必称此六君者。
现代文：凡列举天下贪垫残暴、蒙受耻辱之人，一定都举逸六位君主。
English: Anyone who enumerates the world's greediest, most brutal and most disgraced people will surely come up with six monarchs.

古文：凡为君，非为君而因荣也，非为君而因安也，以为行理也。
现代文：大凡做君，不是为的做君从而获得显荣，也不是为的做君从而获得安适，做君为的是实施大道。
English: Being a great ruler is not for the sake of being a ruler to gain glory, nor is it for the sake of being a ruler to gain comfort, it is for the sake of implementing the road.

古文：行理生於当染。
现代文：大道的实施产生于感染合宜得当。
English: The implementation of the avenue arises from the infection of the appropriate channels.

古文：故古之善为君者，劳於论人而佚於官事，得其经也。
现代文：所以古代善于做君的把精力花费在选贤任能上，而对于官署政事则采取安然置之的态度，这是掌握了做君的正确方法。
English: Therefore, in ancient times, those who were good at being a prince spent their energy on selecting the best, while taking a relaxed attitude towards government affairs. This was the correct way to become a prince.

古文：不能为君者，伤形费神，愁心劳耳目，国愈危，身愈辱，不知要故也。
现代文：不善于做君的，伤身劳神，心中愁苦，耳目劳累，而国家却越来越危险，自身却蒙受越来越多的耻辱，这是由于不知道做君的关键所在的缘故。
English: Those who are not good at being a prince are worn out, their hearts are sad, their ears and eyes are tired, while the country is becoming more and more dangerous, and they are suffering more and more humiliation, because they do not know the key to being a prince.

古文：不知要故，则所染不当；所染不当，理奚由至？
现代文：不知道做君的关键，所受的感染就不会得当。所受的感染不得当，大道从何而至？
English: If you don't know the key to being a leader, you won't be properly infected. If you're not properly infected, where does the road come from?

古文：六君者是已。
现代文：以上六个君主就是这样。
English: The above six monarchs are just that.

古文：六君者，非不重其国、爱其身也，所染不当也。
现代文：以上六位君主不是不看重自己的国家，也不是不爱惜自己，而是由于他们所受的感染不得当啊！
English: The above-mentioned six monarchs did not fail to value their country, nor did they fail to take care of themselves, but because of the infection they were infected with!

古文：存亡故不独是也，帝王亦然。
现代文：所受的感染适当与否关系到存亡，不但诸侯如此，帝王也是这样。
English: The appropriateness of the infection received was related to survival, not only for princes, but also for emperors.

古文：非独国有染也。
现代文：不仅国家有受染的情形，士也是这样。
English: Not only has the country been affected, but also the judiciary.

古文：孔子学於老聃、孟苏、夔靖叔。
现代文：孔子向老聃、孟苏、夔靖叔学习。
English: Confucius learned from Lao Zi, Meng Su and Uncle Sui Jing.

古文：鲁惠公使宰让请郊庙之礼於天子，桓王使史角往，惠公止之。其後在於鲁，墨子学焉。
现代文：鲁惠公派宰让向天子请示郑祭、庙祭的礼仪，平王派名叫角的史官前往，惠公把他留了下来，他的后代在鲁国，墨子向他的后代学习。
English: Lu Huigong sent his vizier to ask the heavenly son for the etiquette of the Zheng Festival and the temple festival. Pingwang sent a historian named Horn to go. Huigong left him behind. His descendants are in Lu, and Mozi is learning from his descendants.

古文：此二士者，无爵位以显人，无赏禄以利人。举天下之显荣者，必称此二士也。
现代文：孔子、墨子这两位贤士，没有爵位来使别人显赫，没有赏赐俸禄来给别人带来好处，但是，列举天下显赫荣耀之人，一定都称举这二位贤士。
English: Confucius and Mozi, the two sages, did not receive a title to make others famous, nor did they receive a salary to bring benefits to others. However, if you list the world's prominent and glorious people, you must praise these two sages.

古文：皆死久矣，从属弥众，弟子弥丰，充满天下。
现代文：这二位贤士都死了很久了，可是追随他们的人更多了，他们的弟子越来越多，遍布天下。
English: These two sages have been dead for a long time, but there are more people following them, and their disciples are more and more, all over the world.

古文：王公大人从而显之；有爱子弟者，随而学焉，无时乏绝。
现代文：王公贵族因而宣扬他们。有爱子弟的，让他们的子弟跟随孔墨的门徒学习，没有一时中断过。
English: Princes and aristocrats therefore preached them. Those who loved their children, let their children study with the disciples of Confucius, without a moment's interruption.

古文：子贡、子夏、曾子学於孔子，田子方学於子贡，段干木学於子夏，吴起学於曾子；禽滑絭学於墨子，许犯学於禽滑絭，田系学於许犯。
现代文：子贡、子夏、曾子向孔子学习，田子方向子贡学习，段干术向子夏学习，吴起向曾子学习，禽滑絭向墨子学习，许犯向禽滑絭学习，田系向许犯学习。
English: Zigong, Zixia and Zengzi learned from Confucius, Tianzi learned from Zigong, Duan Gan learned from Zixia, Wu Qi learned from Zengzi, Yingluo learned from Mozi, Xu Guo learned from Yingluo, and Tian Jie learned from Xu Guo.

古文：孔墨之後学显荣於天下者众矣，不可胜数，皆所染者得当也。
现代文：孔墨后学在天下显贵尊荣的太多了，数也数不尽，这都是由于熏陶他们的人得当啊。
English: There are too many eminent and honorable Confucian scholars in the world, and the number is inexhaustible. This is all due to the people who have influenced them.

古文：五曰：由其道，功名之不可得逃，犹表之与影，若呼之与响。
现代文：功名道循一定的途径猎取功名，功名就无法逃脱，正象日影无法摆脱测日影用的标竿，回声必然伴随呼声一样。
English: Achievement follows a certain path to hunt for achievement, achievement can not escape, just as the sun shadow can not get rid of the benchmark for measuring the sun shadow, the echo must accompany the call.

古文：善钓者，出鱼乎十仞之下，饵香也；善弋者，下鸟乎百仞之上，弓良也；善为君者，蛮夷反舌殊俗异习皆服之，德厚也。
现代文：善于钓鱼的人能把鱼从十仞探的水下钓出来，这是由于钓饵香美的缘故，善于射猎的人能把鸟从百仞高的空中射下来，这是由于弓箭好的缘故；善于做君主的人能够使四方各族归顺他，这是由于恩德崇厚的缘故。
English: A good fisherman can catch fish from ten fathoms of water because of the beauty of fishing musk, a good hunter can shoot birds from a hundred fathoms of the sky because of the good bow and arrow, and a good ruler can make all the people in the four directions submit to him because of the noble grace.

古文：水泉深则鱼鳖归之，树木盛则飞鸟归之，庶草茂则禽兽归之，人主贤则豪杰归之。
现代文：水泉很深，鱼鳖就会游向那里，树木繁盛，飞鸟就会飞向那里，百草茂密，禽兽就会奔向那里，君主贤明，豪杰就会归依他。
English: If the spring is deep, the fish will swim there, if the trees are flourishing, the birds will fly there, if the grass is thick, the animals will run there, if the monarch is wise, the heroes will turn to him.

古文：故圣王不务归之者，而务其所以归。
现代文：所以，圣明的君主不勉强使人们归依，而是尽力创造使人们归依的条件。
English: Therefore, a saintly ruler does not force people to convert, but tries to create the conditions for people to convert.

古文：强令之笑不乐；强令之哭不悲；强令之为道也，可以成小，而不可以成大。
现代文：强制出来的笑不快乐，强制出来的哭不悲哀，强制命令这种作法只可以成就虚名，而不能成就大业。
English: Forced laughter is not happy, forced crying is not sad, and forced orders can only achieve a false reputation, but not a great cause.

古文：缶醯黄，蚋聚之，有酸；徒水则必不可。
现代文：瓦器中的醋黄了，蚊子之类就聚在那里了，那是因为有酸味的缘故。如果只是水，就一定招不来它们。
English: The vinegar in the earthenware has turned yellow, and mosquitoes and the like have gathered there, because of the sour taste. If it's just water, they won't be attracted.

古文：以狸致鼠，以冰致蝇，虽工，不能。
现代文：用猫招引老鼠，用冰招引苍蝇，纵然作法再巧妙，也达不到目的。
English: Using a cat to attract mice or ice to attract flies, no matter how clever the method, will not achieve the goal.

古文：以茹鱼去蝇，蝇愈至，不可禁，以致之之道去之也。
现代文：用臭鱼驱除苍蝇，苍蝇会越来越多，不可禁止，这是由于用招引它们的方法去驱除它们的缘故。
English: Use smelly fish to repel flies. Flies will increase more and more and cannot be banned. This is due to the method of attracting them to repel them.

古文：桀、纣以去之之道致之也，罚虽重，刑虽严，何益？
现代文：桀纣企图用破坏太平安定的暴政求得太平安定的局面，惩罚即使再重，刑法即使再严，又有什么益处。
English: If you try to use the tyranny that undermines peace and stability to seek peace and stability, even if the punishment is heavy, even if the criminal law is strict, what is the benefit?

古文：大寒既致，民暖是利；大热在上，民清是走。
现代文：严寒到了，人民就追求温暖；酷暑当头，人民就奔向清凉之地。
English: When the bitter cold arrives, the people pursue warmth; when the intense heat comes, the people run to a cool place.

古文：故民无常处，见利之聚，无之去。
现代文：因此，人民没有固定的居处，他们总是聚集在可以看到利益的地方，离开那些没有利益的地方。
English: Therefore, people do not have a fixed place of residence, they always gather in places where they can see the benefits, and leave those places where there are no benefits.

古文：欲为天子，民之所走，不可不察。
现代文：想要作天子的，对于人民奔走的缘因不可币仔细察辨。
English: If you want to be the son of heaven, you must carefully investigate the causes of the people's running.

古文：今之世，至寒矣，至热矣，而民无走者，取则行钧也。欲为天子，所以示民，不可不异也。
现代文：如今的人世，寒冷到极点了，炎热到极点了，而人民之所以不奔向谁，是由于天下君主所怍所为都是同样的坏啊!
English: In today's world, the cold is extreme, the heat is extreme, and the reason why people don't run to anyone is because everything the rulers of the world do is equally bad!

古文：行不异，乱虽倍行，民犹无走。民无走，则王者废矣，暴君幸矣，民绝望矣。故当今之世，有仁人在焉，不可而不此务；有贤主，不可而不此事。
现代文：所以，想作天子的人，他显示给人民的不可不与此有区别，如果君主的言行与暴乱之君没有什么不同，那么即使下命令，人民也不会趋附他。
English: Therefore, he who would be the Son of God must be different from what he shows to the people. If the words and deeds of a monarch are no different from those of a tyrant, then even if he gives an order, the people will not follow him.

古文：贤不肖不可以不相分，若命之不可易，若美恶之不可移。
现代文：如果人民不趋附谁。那么，成就王业的人就不会出现，暴君就庆幸了，人民就绝望了。所以，在今天的世上如果有仁义之人在，不可不勉力从事这件事，如果有贤明的君主在，不可不致力于这件事。
English: If the people do not adhere to anyone, then no one who has accomplished the royal cause will appear, the tyrant will be happy, and the people will be in despair. Therefore, in today's world, if there is a benevolent person, it is necessary to work hard on this matter, and if there is a wise monarch, it is necessary to devote oneself to this matter.

古文：桀、纣贵为天子，富有天下，能尽害天下之民，而不能得贤名之。
现代文：贤明的名声与不肖的名声全由自己的言行而定，不能由别人给予，这就象命运不可更改，美恶不可移易一样。桀纣贵为天子，富有天下，能遍害天下的人，但是却不能为白己博得一个好名声。
English: Wise reputation and bad reputation are all determined by one's own words and deeds, and cannot be given by others. This is just like fate cannot be changed, and good and evil cannot be transferred. He is noble, rich, and can harm people all over the world, but he cannot win a good reputation for himself.

古文：关龙逢、王子比干能以要领之死争其上之过，而不能与之贤名。
现代文：关龙逢、王子比干能以死谏诤其君的过错，却不能给他们争得好名声。
English: At the end of the day, a prince can atone for the faults of his princes by death, but he cannot give them a good reputation.

古文：名固不可以相分，必由其理。
现代文：名声本来就不能由别人给予，它只能遵循一定的途径获得。
English: Reputation cannot be given by others, it can only be acquired in a certain way.

