古文：《周书》曰：神农之时，天雨粟，神农遂耕而种之。
现代文：《周书》说：神农氏时，天上降下粟谷，神农于是翻耕土地，将它种下。
English: "Zhou Shu" said: When Shennong was alive, the sky rained millet, so Shennong plowed the land and planted it.

古文：《白虎通》： 古之人民，皆食禽兽肉。
现代文：《白虎通》： 远古时代的人们，大都以鸟兽的肉为食物。
English: "White Tiger Pass": People in ancient times mostly ate the meat of birds and beasts.

古文：至于神农，因天之时，分地之利，制耒耜，教民农作。
现代文：到了神农氏，根据一年四季天气的变化，以及地势条件的便利，制作耒耜等农具，教万民从事农业耕作。
English: To Shennong, according to the changes in the weather throughout the year, as well as the convenience of the terrain conditions, make ploughs and other agricultural tools, and teach the people to engage in agricultural farming.

古文：神而化之，使民宜之。故谓之 神农 。 
现代文：他通晓农事的神理奥秘，并能从实际出发灵活地施行教化，使百姓都乐意从事农业生产。大家尊称他为 神农 。 
English: He is familiar with the theological mysteries of agriculture, and can flexibly carry out enlightenment from a practical perspective, so that the people are willing to engage in agricultural production. Everyone calls him Shennong.

古文：《典语》： 神农尝草别谷，烝民乃粒食。 《世本》： 倕作耒耜。
现代文：《典语》： 神农曾经亲自品尝过各种各样的野草，从中分辨出可以食用的五谷，此后百姓才能够以五谷为食。 《世本》： 倕制作耒耜。
English: "Analects": Shennong once personally tasted all kinds of wild grasses and distinguished edible grain from them, after which the people were able to eat grain. "World Book": 制作.

古文：倕，神农之臣也。 
现代文：倕是神农的大臣。 
English: He was the minister of Shennong.

古文：《周本纪》： 弃为儿时，其游戏好种植麻、麦。
现代文：《周本纪》： 弃在儿童时代，就喜欢将模仿种植农作物麻麦等作为游戏。
English: "Zhou Benji": Abandoned in childhood, they like to imitate the planting of crops such as hemp as a game.

古文：及为成人，遂好耕农、相地之宜，宜谷者稼穑之。
现代文：等到长大成人，便非常喜爱农耕种植。他观察土地肥瘠或地形地物看它们适宜种植什么，凡是适合种植谷物的，就马上耕地播种。
English: When he became an adult, he was very fond of agricultural planting. He observed the soil fertility or terrain features to see what they were suitable for planting. If it was suitable for planting cereals, he would immediately sow the cultivated land.

古文：民皆法之。尧举以为农师。 
现代文：百姓们都以他为榜样，为此帝尧便起用他为 农师 。 
English: The people all followed his example, and for this reason the emperor appointed him as an agronomist.

古文：《汉·食货志》： 后稷始纍田，以二耜为耦。 
现代文：《汉书·食货志》： 后稷开始创行纍田法，把两耜合并成耦。 
English: "Hanshu·Shifangzhi": Houyi began to implement the method of coupling fields, combining the two fields into a coupling.

古文：纍，畎同，垄也。
现代文：纍，同 畎 ，指垄作。
English: , the same as, refers to ridge work.

古文：《艺文志》： 农九家，百四十一篇。
现代文：《艺文志》： 农家共有九家，著作一共有一百一十四篇。
English: "Geibunshi": There are a total of nine farming families, with a total of one hundred and fourteen works.

古文：农家者流，盖出农稷之官，播百谷，劝耕桑，以足衣食。 
现代文：农家这一学派，源自像后稷那样的农官。书的内容多是讲播种各种谷物的方法，主张劝导百姓致力于农业和蚕桑生产从而取得丰衣足食。
English: This school of farmers originated from agricultural officials like Hou Yi. The content of the book is mostly about the method of sowing and planting various grains, advocating that the people should be persuaded to devote themselves to agriculture and silkworm production in order to obtain abundant clothing and food.

