古文：小宰之职，掌建邦之宫刑，以治王宫之政令，凡宫之纠禁。
现代文：小宰的职责，是掌管建立有关王宫中官吏的刑法，施行王宫中的政令，纠察一切违反王宫禁令的人。
English: The responsibilities of the Junior Clerk are to supervise the establishment of the criminal law concerning the officials in the royal palace, to implement the royal decree in the royal palace, and to picket all those who violate the royal ban.

古文：掌邦之六典、八法、八则之贰，以逆邦国、都鄙、官府之治。
现代文：掌管国家六典、八法、八则的副本，以辅佐大宰考核天下各国、王畿、朝廷官府的政事。
English: He was in charge of the copies of the Six Classics, Eight Laws, and Eight Principles of the State, and assisted the Grand Vizier in examining the political affairs of various countries, kingdoms, and imperial government offices.

古文：执邦之九贡、九赋、九式之贰，以均财节邦用。
现代文：掌管国家九贡、九赋、九式的副本，以辅佐大宰使国家均财节用。
English: In charge of the copy of the national nine tributes, nine tributes, and nine forms, and used as an assistant to the general secretary of the national average financial savings.

古文：以官府之六叙正群吏。
现代文：依照官府六个方面的尊卑次序规正官吏们。
English: In accordance with the hierarchy of the six aspects of the government, the officials were promoted.

古文：一曰以叙正其位，二曰以叙进其治，三曰以叙作其事，四曰以叙制其食，五曰以叙受其会，六曰以叙听其情。
现代文：一是依照尊卑次序规正朝位，二是依照尊卑次序排定上报政绩的先后，三是依照尊卑次序分派所做事情的大小，四是依照尊卑次序制定俸禄的多少，五是依照尊卑次序接受所上报的年终会计总账，六是依照尊卑次序安排向王陈述或提出请求的先后。
English: First, according to the order of precedence and inferiority, there is the position of the emperor, second, according to the order of precedence and inferiority, there is the order of reporting the performance of the government, third, according to the order of precedence and inferiority, there is the size of the things done, fourth, according to the order of precedence and inferiority, there is the amount of salary, fifth, according to the order of precedence and inferiority, there is the acceptance of the year-end accounting general ledger, and sixth, according to the order of precedence and inferiority, there is the order of presentation or request to the king.

古文：以官府之六属举邦治。
现代文：用官府的有关六类属官的法则辅佐大宰开展国家的政事。
English: To assist the Dazai in carrying out the state's political affairs in accordance with the relevant six categories of subordinate officials of the government.

古文：一曰天官，其属六十，掌邦治，大事则从其长，小事则专达。
现代文：第一类是天官，它的属官有六十名，掌管国家的治理，大事听从各自长官的指挥，不设长官的小官的小事可自行向王报告。
English: The first category is the celestial officials. There are sixty subordinate officials, who are in charge of the governance of the country. They obey the commands of their respective superiors in major matters. Minor officials who do not have superiors can report minor matters to the king on their own.

古文：二曰地官，其属六十，掌邦教，大事则从其长，小事则专达。
现代文：第二类是地官，它的属官有六十名，掌管国家的教育，大事听从各自长官的指挥，不设长官的小官的小事可自行向王报告。
English: The second category is the local officials. There are sixty subordinate officials, who are in charge of the country's education. They obey the commands of their respective superiors in major matters. Minor officials without superiors can report minor matters to the king on their own.

古文：三曰春官，其属六十，掌邦礼，大事则从其长，小事则专达。
现代文：第三类是春官，它的属官一共有六十名，掌管国家的礼制，大事听从各自长官的指挥，不设长官的小官的小事可自行向王报告。
English: The third category is the Spring Officials. There are a total of sixty subordinate officials. They are in charge of the country's etiquette, and obey the commands of their respective superiors in major matters. Minor officials who do not have superiors can report minor matters to the king on their own.

古文：四曰夏官，其属六十，掌邦政，大事则从其长，小事则专达。
现代文：第四类是夏官，它的属官有六十名，掌管国家的军政，大事听从各自长官的指挥，不设长官的小官的小事可自行向王报告。
English: The fourth category is the Xia officials. There are sixty subordinate officials, who are in charge of the country's military and political affairs. They obey the commands of their respective superiors in major matters, and minor officials without superiors can report minor matters to the king on their own.

古文：五曰秋官，其属六十，掌邦刑，大事则从其长，小事则专达。
现代文：第五类是秋官，它的属官有六十名，掌管国家的刑法，大事听从各自长官的指挥，不设长官的小官的小事可白行向王报告。
English: The fifth category is the autumn official. There are sixty subordinate officials, who are in charge of the country's criminal law. They obey the commands of their respective superiors in major matters. Minor officials who do not have superiors can report minor matters to the king.

古文：六曰冬官，其属六十，掌邦事，大事则从其长，小事则专达。
现代文：第六类是冬官，它的属官有六十名，掌管国家的生产事务，大事听从各自长官的指挥，不设长官的小官的小事可自行向王报告。
English: The sixth category is the Winter Officials. There are sixty subordinate officials, who are in charge of the country's production affairs. They obey the command of their respective superiors in major matters, and minor officials without superiors can report minor matters to the king on their own.

古文：以官府之六职辨邦治。
现代文：用官府有关六类职责的规定辅佐大宰分辨国家的政事。
English: Assist the Dazai in sorting out the country's political affairs in accordance with the government's regulations on the six types of duties.

古文：一曰治职，以平邦国，以均万民，以节财用。
现代文：第一是治理的职责，以使天下各国政治公平，以使民众赋役平均，以调节财物开支。
English: The first is the duty of governance, in order to make the politics of all countries in the world fair, to make the people's service average, and to regulate the expenditure of property.

古文：二曰教职，以安邦国，以宁万民，以怀宾客。
现代文：第二是教育的职责，以安定天下各国，安定民众，安定来朝的宾客。
English: The second is the responsibility of education, in order to stabilize the countries of the world, stabilize the people, and stabilize the guests coming to North Korea.

古文：三曰礼职，以和邦国，以谐万民，以事鬼神。
现代文：第三是掌管礼制的职责，以和谐天下各国，和谐民众，祭祀鬼神。
English: The third is the duty to administer the ritual system, to harmonize all countries in the world, to harmonize the people, and to worship ghosts and gods.

古文：四曰政职，以服邦国，以正万民，以聚百物。
现代文：第四是掌管军政的职责，以使天下各国顺服，以使民众遵循正道，以征集进贡的各种财物。
English: The fourth is the duty to administer military and political affairs, to make all countries in the world obey, to make the people follow the right path, and to collect all kinds of property from tributes.

古文：五曰刑职，以诘邦国，以纠万民，以除盗贼。
现代文：第五是掌管刑法的职责，以禁止天下各国的叛逆，纠察民众，除去盗贼。
English: The fifth is the duty to administer criminal law, to prohibit the rebellion of all countries in the world, to picket the people, and to remove thieves.

古文：六曰事职，以富邦国，以养万民，以生百物。
现代文：第六是掌管生产事务的职责，以使天下各国富庶，以养育民众，以增殖各种财物。
English: The sixth is the duty of administering the affairs of production in order to make all countries in the world prosperous, to nurture the people, and to increase all kinds of wealth.

古文：以官府之六联合邦治。
现代文：用官府的六项联合办事的法则辅佐大宰会同各官合办国家的事务。
English: Assist the Dazai-kai in co-organizing the affairs of the state with various officials in accordance with the six rules of co-operation between government and government.

古文：一曰祭祀之联事，二曰宾客之联事，三曰丧荒之联事，四曰军旅之联事，五曰田役之联事，六曰敛弛之联事。
现代文：一是祭祀之事的合办，二是接待来朝宾客之事的合办，三是王丧和赈济灾荒之事的合办，四是军事的合办，五是征发役徒进行田猎之事的合办，六是征赋和施惠之事的合办。
English: The first is the joint organization of sacrificial rites, the second is the joint organization of the reception of guests coming to the DPRK, the third is the joint organization of the king's funeral and the relief of the famine, the fourth is the joint organization of the military, the fifth is the joint organization of the recruitment and dispatch of cadres to carry out field hunting, and the sixth is the joint organization of the recruitment and benefit.

古文：凡小事皆有联。
现代文：凡小事也都有合办的。
English: Every little thing is co-organized.

古文：以官府之八成经邦治。
现代文：七是评断买卖方面的争讼，就依据买卖质剂。
English: The seventh is to judge the disputes in the aspect of purchase and sale, which is based on the quality of purchase and sale.

古文：一曰听政役以比居，二曰听师田以简稽，三曰听闾里以版图，四曰听称责以傅别，五曰听禄位以礼命，六曰听取予以书契，七曰听卖买以质剂，八曰听出入以要会。以听官府之六计，弊群吏之治。一曰廉善，二曰廉能，三曰廉敬，四曰廉正，五曰廉法，六曰廉辨。
现代文：八是评断财物收支方面的争讼，就依据会计账册。用公平治理官府的六项评断官吏的标准，辅佐大宰评断吏治。一是廉洁而又能做好工作，二是廉洁而又能推行政令，三是廉洁而又勤勉努力，四是廉洁而又处事公正，五是廉洁而又执法无误，六是廉洁而又明辨是非。
English: The eighth is to judge disputes in the area of financial income and expenditure, based on accounting books. The six standards for judging officials in the fair governance of government offices are used to assist the grand vizier in judging officials. The first is to be honest and able to do a good job, the second is to be honest and able to promote executive orders, the third is to be honest and diligent, the fourth is to be honest and fair, the fifth is to be honest and able to enforce the law, and the sixth is to be honest and able to distinguish right from wrong.

古文：以法掌祭祀、朝觐、会同、宾客之戒具，军旅、田役、丧荒亦如之。
现代文：依据礼法掌管祭祀、朝觐、会同以及接待宾客时告诫有关官吏具备用品，如有军事、田猎和徒役、死丧和灾荒的事，也这样做。
English: According to the etiquette, officials in charge of rituals, pilgrimages, gatherings, and reception of guests should warn the relevant officials to have supplies, and do the same in the event of military, field hunting and voluntary service, death and disaster.

古文：七事者，令百官府共其财用；治其施舍，听其治讼。
现代文：以上七事，都命令有关官府供给财物用具；决定免于服役的人，评断各官府的有关事项和争讼。
English: For the above seven matters, the relevant government offices are ordered to provide property and equipment; the person who decides to be exempted from military service will judge the relevant matters and disputes of each government office.

古文：凡祭祀，赞王币爵之事，祼将之事。
现代文：凡祭祀，跟从大宰协助王拿玉器、币帛和爵，协助王献尸行裸礼的事情。
English: In all sacrificial rites, follow the dazai to assist the king in taking the jade, money and jewels, and assist the king in offering the corpse and performing the naked ritual.

古文：凡宾客赞祼；凡受爵之事，凡受币之事。
现代文：凡接待宾客时协助大宗伯向宾客行裸礼；凡接受宾客向王酢酒之爵的事，凡接受宾客向王所献币帛的事，都协助大宰去做。
English: Whenever he received guests, he would assist the grand patriarch to perform a naked salute to the guests; whenever he received guests to offer wine to the king, and whenever he received guests to offer coins to the king, he would assist the grand vizier to do it.

古文：丧荒，受其含、襚、币、玉之事。
现代文：遇王丧或荒年，负责接受诸侯、诸臣赠送的含玉、衣服、币帛、玉器的事。
English: In the event of the king's death or a year of famine, he is responsible for accepting gifts from lords and vassals, including jade, clothing, money, and jade.

古文：月终，则以官府之叙，受群吏之要。
现代文：每月月底，依照官府的尊卑次序，接受官吏们当月的会计总账。
English: At the end of each month, in accordance with the hierarchy of the government, officials receive the accounting general ledger for the month.

古文：赞冢宰受岁会。
现代文：协助大宰接受一年的会计总账。
English: Assisted Dazai to receive a one-year accounting general ledger.

古文：岁终，则令群吏致事。
现代文：年终，命令穹吏们汇报当年的政绩。
English: At the end of the year, the officials were ordered to report on the achievements of the year.

古文：正岁，帅治官之属，而观治象之法，徇以木铎，曰： 不用法者，国有常刑。 
现代文：夏历正月，协助大宰率领治官的属官观看悬挂在象魏上的治典，边走边摇动木铎，说： 不执行法令的，国家自有常刑。 
English: In the first month of the lunar calendar, the subordinate officers who assisted the Dazai and led the magistrate watched the code hanging on the elephant Wei, shaking the raft as they walked, saying: If you do not enforce the law, the country has its own capital punishment.

古文：乃退，以宫刑宪，禁于王宫。
现代文：于是退下，把有关王宫中的刑法悬挂公布，纠察王宫中违反禁令者。
English: So he withdrew, posted the criminal law in the palace, and picketed those who violated the ban in the palace.

古文：令于百官府曰： 各修乃职，考乃法，待乃事，以听王命。
现代文：下令各官府说： 各自遵循你们的职守，遵守你们的规章制度，完备你们的职事，而听从王的命令。
English: And he commanded them, saying, Stand ye still, and hear the words of the LORD your God, and do all his commandments, which I command you this day.

古文：其有不共，则国有大刑。
现代文：有不尽职的，国家自有重刑。 
English: If there is any dereliction of duty, the state has its own severe punishment.

