古文：王茂字休连，一字茂先，太原祁人也。
现代文：王茂字休连，又字茂先，太原祁县人。
English: Wang Maozi, also known as Shuxian, was from Shixian County, Taiyuan.

古文：祖深，北中郎司马。
现代文：祖父王深，在北朝任中郎司马。
English: His grandfather, Wang Sheng, was a middle-ranking official in the Northern Dynasty.

古文：父天生，宋末爲列将，克司徒袁粲，以勋历位郡守，封上黄县男。
现代文：父亲王天生，宋末任列将，攻杀司徒袁粲，凭功劳历任郡守，封上黄县男。
English: His father, Wang Tian Sheng, was a general at the end of the Song Dynasty. He attacked and killed the scholar Yuan Qi, served as county governor, and was awarded the title of Huangxian Man.

古文：茂年数岁，爲大父深所异，常曰： 此吾家千里驹，成门户者必此儿也。 
现代文：王茂几岁时，就被祖父王深认为与众不同，曾经说： 这是我家的千里驹，将来光耀门庭的一定是这孩子。 
English: When Wang Mao was just a few years old, he was considered to be unique by his grandfather Wang Sheng. He once said, "This is the pinnacle of my family. This child will surely shine in the future."

古文：及长，好读兵书，究其大指。
现代文：长大后，好读兵书，但只通其大意。
English: When I grew up, I liked to read military books, but I only understood their gist.

古文：性隐不交游，身长八尺，洁白美容仪。
现代文：性情孤僻不爱交游，身长八尺，皮肤白皙仪表堂堂。
English: He has a solitary nature and does not like to socialize. He is eight feet tall, with fair skin and an imposing appearance.

古文：齐武帝布衣时尝见之，叹曰： 王茂先年少堂堂如此，必爲公辅。 
现代文：齐武帝未登基时曾见到他，感叹说： 王茂先年少时就如此卓然出众，日后必然位至三公。 
English: When Emperor Qiwu saw him before he ascended to the throne, he sighed and said, "Wang Mao was so outstanding when he was young, and he will inevitably become the third prince in the future."

古文：后爲台郎，累年不调。
现代文：后来任尚书郎，多年不得迁转。
English: Later, he was appointed as Sho Shuro, and was not allowed to move for many years.

古文：亦知齐之将亡，求爲边职。
现代文：他看出齐朝将亡，请求担任边地的职务。
English: He saw that the Qi dynasty was about to die and asked to take a position on the periphery.

古文：久之，爲雍州长史、襄阳太守。
现代文：过了很久，派任雍州长史、襄阳太守。
English: After a long time, he appointed Yong Guan Shi and Xiangyang Taishu.

古文：梁武便以王佐许之，事无大小皆询焉。
现代文：梁武帝把他视为左膀右臂，事无大小都征询他的意见。
English: Emperor Liangwu regarded him as his right-hand man and consulted him on all matters.

古文：人或谮茂反，帝弗之信。
现代文：有人进谗言说王茂要谋反，武帝不信。
English: Someone insinuated that Wang Mao was plotting a rebellion, but Emperor Wu did not believe him.

古文：谮者骤言之，遣视其甲矟，则虫网焉，乃诛言者。
现代文：后来谗言多了，武帝派人去查看他的盔甲兵器，都已经结了蛛网，于是就杀了进谗言的人。
English: Later, Emperor Wu sent someone to inspect his armour and weapons, which were all covered in cobwebs, so he killed the person who had been criticising him.

古文：或云茂与帝不睦，帝诸腹心并劝除之。
现代文：有人传说王茂和武帝有矛盾，武帝的心腹都劝武帝除了他。
English: Some people say that Wang Mao and Emperor Wu had a conflict, and Emperor Wu's confidants all advised Emperor Wu to exclude him.

古文：而茂少有骁名，帝又惜其用，曰： 将举大事，便害健将，此非上策。 
现代文：而王茂从小就有骁勇之名，武帝又爱惜他的人才干，说： 将要举大事，却先害健将，这不是上策。 
English: Wang Mao, on the other hand, had a reputation for bravery since he was a child, and Emperor Wu also cherished his talent, saying: "If you are going to do something big, you should sacrifice a good general first. This is not the best strategy."

古文：乃令腹心郑绍叔往候之。
现代文：于是派心腹郑绍叔去探望他。
English: So he sent his confidant Zheng Shao Rong to visit him.

古文：遇其卧，因问疾。茂曰： 我病可耳。 
现代文：遇上他正躺在床上，就问他病情，王茂说： 我的病已好了。 
English: When he found him lying on the bed, he asked him about his illness. Wang Mao said, "My illness is over."

古文：绍叔曰： 都下杀害日甚，使君家门涂炭，今欲起义，长史那犹卧。 
现代文：绍叔说： 京城里杀人越来越凶，萧使君家门遭难，如今正打算举义兵，长史怎么还躺在这里呢？ 
English: Uncle Shao said, "The killings in Beijing are getting more and more ferocious. Xiao has brought misfortune to your family. Now he is planning to raise a volunteer army. Why is Changshi still lying here?"

古文：茂因掷枕起，即袴褶随绍叔入见。武帝大喜，下床迎，因结兄弟，被推赤心，遂得尽力。
现代文：王茂于是推枕起身，马上穿上衣服随绍叔去见萧衍，武帝大喜，下床相迎，于是结为兄弟，武帝对他推心置腹，得到他的尽力报效。
English: Wang Mao then pushed his pillow up and immediately put on his clothes to follow Uncle Shao to see Xiao Yan. Emperor Wu was overjoyed and got out of bed to greet him. As a result, they became brothers. Emperor Wu put his heart and soul into him and was rewarded for his efforts.

古文：发雍部，遣茂爲前驱。
现代文：武帝萧衍发雍州兵马，派王茂为先锋。
English: Emperor Wu Xiao Yan raised the Yongzhou army and sent Wang Mao as the vanguard.

古文：郢、鲁既平，从武帝东下爲军锋。
现代文：打下郢州、鲁山后，随武帝东下为前军先锋。
English: After defeating Bozhou and Lushan, he followed Emperor Wu to the east and became the vanguard of the vanguard.

古文：师次秣陵，东昏遣大将王珍国盛兵朱雀门，衆号二十万。
现代文：驻军秣陵，东昏侯派大将王珍国屯兵朱雀门，号称二十万。
English: The garrison was in Fuling, and Dongdimou sent the general Wang Zhenguo to garrison the Suzaku Gate, which was reputed to have 200,000 soldiers.

古文：及战，梁武军引却，茂下马单刀直前，外甥韦欣庆勇力绝人，执铁缠矟翼茂而进，故大破之。
现代文：双方交战时，武帝军队顶不住向后退却，这时王茂下马挥单刀奋勇向前，他的外甥韦欣庆勇力绝人，手执铁矛与他并肩而进，因此大败齐军。
English: When the two sides were at war, Emperor Wu's army could not resist retreating backwards. At this time, Wang Mao dismounted and swung a single sword forward. His nephew Wei Xinqing was extremely courageous and marched alongside him holding an iron spear. As a result, the Qi army was defeated.

古文：茂勋第一，欣庆力也。
现代文：王茂功列第一，主要靠了欣庆之力。
English: Wang Mao ranks first in merit, mainly relying on the strength of Xinqing.

古文：建康城平，以茂爲护军将军，迁侍中、领军将军。
现代文：平定了建康城，武帝任命王茂为护军将军，又改任侍中、领军将军。
English: Jiankang City was leveled, and Emperor Wu appointed Wang Mao as the general of the escorting army, and he was also appointed as the general of the leading army.

古文：时东昏妃潘玉儿有国色，武帝将留之，以问茂。茂曰： 亡齐者此物，留之恐贻外议。 
现代文：当时东昏侯妃潘玉儿美貌无比，武帝想自己留下来，问王茂，王茂说： 亡齐的就是这东西，留下来恐怕让外人非议。 
English: At that time, the Dowager Empress Dowager Pan Yul's beauty was incomparable. Emperor Wu wanted to stay and asked Wang Mao. Wang Mao said, "It is this thing that is doomed. If I stay, I am afraid that outsiders will criticize me."

古文：帝乃出之。
现代文：武帝就没有收留她。
English: Emperor Wu did not take her in.

古文：军主田安啓求爲妇，玉儿泣曰： 昔者见遇时主，今岂下匹非类。
现代文：军官田安奏请给自己作配偶，玉儿哭道： 以前受君主恩遇，如今怎么能匹配给下人。
English: Officer Tian Anso, please make yourself a spouse, Yule cried: Once you were favored by the monarch, but now how can you be a match for a subordinate.

古文：死而后已，义不受辱。 
现代文：我只有一死了之，决不再受辱。 
English: I've only got one life to live, and I'll never be humiliated again.

古文：及见缢，洁美如生。
现代文：她被勒死以后，光洁美艳一如生前。
English: After she was strangled, she was as bright and beautiful as she had been in life.

古文：舆出，尉吏俱行非礼。
现代文：用车把她的尸体拉出去时，将校们居然都按捺不住，做出许多猥亵行为。
English: When they pulled her body out of the car, the officers couldn't contain themselves and performed a number of lewd acts.

古文：乃以馀妃赐茂，亦潘之亚也。
现代文：武帝把东昏侯的余妃赐给王茂，其容貌仅次于潘玉儿。
English: Emperor Wu bestowed the Dowager Empress of Dongwu to Wang Shao, whose appearance was second only to that of Pan Yuer.

古文：群盗之烧神兽门，茂率所领应赴，爲盗所射。茂跃马而进，群盗反走。
现代文：孙文明作乱在神兽门纵火时，王茂率领其部下赶去，被盗贼用箭乱射，王茂跃马前进，群盗返身逃跑。
English: When Sun Yat-sen rioted and set fire to the Gate of Divine Beasts, Wang Mao led his men to rush there. The thieves shot arrows at them, Wang Mao leaped forward, and the group of thieves turned around and fled.

古文：茂以不能式遏奸盗，自表解职，优诏不许。加镇军将军，封望蔡县公。
现代文：王茂因为不能防止奸盗作乱，自己上表请求解除职务，下诏不准所请，以示优待，并加封镇军将军，封望蔡县公。
English: Because Wang Mao could not prevent the ruffians from creating a disturbance, he made a request to be relieved of his duties, and then issued an edict not to accept the request, in order to show preferential treatment, and also sealed the general of the town army, and sealed the general of Cai County.

古文：是岁，江州刺史陈伯之叛，茂出爲江州刺史，南讨之。
现代文：当年，江州刺史陈伯之背叛朝廷，王茂出京作江州刺史，南下讨伐陈伯之。
English: In that year, Chen Bochi, the governor of Jiangzhou, betrayed the imperial court. Wang Mao went to Beijing to make the governor of Jiangzhou, and went south to fight Chen Bochi.

古文：伯之奔魏。
现代文：伯之投奔魏国。
English: He fled to Wei.

古文：时九江新经军寇，茂务农省役，百姓安之。
现代文：当时九江刚经历了战乱，王茂重视农耕，减轻劳役，百姓得以安居。
English: At that time, Jiujiang had just experienced the war. Wang Mao attached great importance to agriculture, reduced labor service, and the people were able to live in peace.

古文：四年，魏攻汉中，茂受诏西御，魏乃班师。
现代文：天监四年，魏国进攻汉中，王茂受命到西部御敌，魏国于是退兵。
English: In the fourth year of Tianjing, Wei attacked Hanzhong. Wang Mao was ordered to go to the west to resist the enemy, and Wei then withdrew.

古文：历位侍中，中卫将军，太子詹事，车骑将军，开府仪同三司，丹阳尹。
现代文：王茂历任侍中，中卫将军，太子詹事，车骑将军，开府仪同三司，丹阳尹。
English: Wang Maozhi successively held the posts of Vice Admiral, General of the Middle Guard, Prince Zhan Zhi, General of the Cavalry, Kaifu Yi and the Three Departments, and Danyang Yin.

古文：时天下无事，武帝方敦文雅，茂心颇怏怏，侍宴醉后，每见言色。武帝宥而不责。
现代文：当时天下太平无事，武帝正重视修治文学，王茂心里很不痛快，陪武帝饮宴喝醉后，每每溢于言表，武帝也都宽容并不责备。
English: At that time, the world was at peace, Emperor Wu was paying attention to the cultivation of literature, and Wang Mao was very unhappy in his heart. After accompanying Emperor Wu to a banquet and getting drunk, he was always full of words, and Emperor Wu was also tolerant and did not reproach.

古文：进位司空。
现代文：又进位为司空。
English: Go ahead, Sora.

古文：茂性宽厚，居官虽无美誉，亦爲吏人所安。
现代文：王茂性情宽厚，作官虽没有什么好声誉，也还能让吏民安稳过日子。
English: Wang Mao had a generous nature. Although he did not have a good reputation as an official, he was able to let the officials and people live a stable life.

古文：居处方正，在一室衣冠俨然，虽仆妾莫见其惰容。
现代文：他举止行为方正，自己独处一室也是衣冠端正，即使他身边的仆妾也没有见过他露出懒散的样子。
English: He is fair and honest in his dealings at home. Even when he is indoors, he is very serious about dressing and wearing a hat. Even his servants and concubines can't see his lazy appearance.

古文：姿表瑰丽，须眉如画，爲衆所瞻望。
现代文：王茂仪表很美，须眉如画，为众人所景仰。
English: Wang Mao's appearance is very beautiful, his eyebrows are like paintings, and he is admired by many people.

古文：徙骠骑将军、开府同三司之仪、江州刺史。
现代文：改任骠骑将军、开府同三司之仪、江州刺史。
English: He was reappointed as the general of the cavalry, the head of the prefecture and the three departments, and the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：在州不取奉，狱无滞囚，居处被服，同于儒者。
现代文：在州任上不受贿，监狱里没有滞而未决的囚犯，他家中陈设和穿戴用具，像个读书人的样子。
English: He does not accept bribes in his state post, there are no pending prisoners in the prison, and his home is furnished and equipped like that of a bookworm.

古文：諡曰威。
现代文：谥为 威 。
English: It's the will of the people.

