古文：耶律乙辛，字胡睹衮，五院部人。
现代文：耶律乙辛，字胡睹衮，五院部人。
English: Yelu Yixin, surnamed Hu Jian, a member of the Fifth Division of the General Hospital.

古文：父迭剌，家贫，服用不给，部人号 穷迭剌 。
现代文：父迭剌，家中贫穷，吃穿都不能自给，部人称之 穷迭剌 。
English: His father was poor, and the family could not feed and clothe themselves. His subordinates called him "poor, poor, poor."

古文：初，乙辛母方娠，夜梦手搏羖羊，拔其角尾。
现代文：起先，乙辛的母亲正当怀孕之时，于夜里梦见与黑羊搏斗，拔断其角与尾。
English: At first, when Yixin's mother was pregnant, she dreamed at night of fighting a black sheep and tearing off its horns and tail.

古文：既寤占之，术者曰： 此吉兆也。
现代文：醒来后占梦，术士说： 这是吉兆。
English: Waking up from the dream, the sorcerer said, "This is a good omen.

古文：羊去角尾为王字，汝后有子当王。 
现代文：羊去掉角、尾为王字，你将来有子当为王。 
English: Remove the ram's horns, and make a king's robe for yourself; and your son shall be king.

古文：及乙辛生，适在路，无水以浴，回车破辙，忽见涌泉。
现代文：待到乙辛出生，正好在路途中，没有水用来浴身，车轮旋转，碾乱了车辙，忽然间就涌出一股泉水。
English: By the time Yixin was born, there was no water to bathe in on the road, the wheels were spinning, the ruts were disturbed, and suddenly a stream of spring water gushed out.

古文：迭剌自以得子，欲酒以庆，闻酒香，于草棘间得二榼，因祭东焉。
现代文：迭剌因为生了个好儿子，想找酒来庆贺，闻得酒香，在草丛中得到两只酒木盍，于是东向而祭。
English: Because she gave birth to a good son, she wanted to find some wine to celebrate. She smelled the scent of wine and found two wine bushes in the grass, so she went to the east to make a sacrifice.

古文：乙辛幼慧黠。
现代文：乙辛幼时机智灵巧。
English: Etsuko is a clever child.

古文：尝牧羊至日昃，迭剌视之，乙辛熟寝。
现代文：曾经牧羊到日已偏西，迭剌去看他，乙辛正熟睡。
English: Once he was herding sheep and the sun had already set, so he hurried to see him. Bixin was fast asleep.

古文：迭剌触之觉，乙辛怒曰： 何遽惊我！
现代文：迭剌碰醒了他，乙辛发怒说： 怎么吵醒我！
English: When she woke him up, Yixin said angrily, "How dare you wake me up!

古文：适梦人手执日月以食我，我已食月，啖日方半而觉，惜不尽食之。 
现代文：刚刚梦见神人手持太阳和月亮喂给我吃，我已吃了月亮，吃太阳刚刚吃了一半就醒了，可惜没有吃完。 
English: I just had a dream that a godman was holding the sun and moon in his hand and feeding them to me. I had already eaten the moon, and I woke up after eating just half of the sun. Unfortunately, I didn't finish eating it.

古文：迭剌自是不令牧羊。
现代文：迭剌从此不让他牧羊了。
English: Since then, Dyehye has not allowed him to herd sheep.

古文：及长，美风仪，外和内狡。
现代文：成年后，容貌隽美，外表和顺，内心狡黠。
English: After adulthood, her appearance is beautiful, outwardly harmonious, and inwardly cunning.

古文：重熙中，为文班吏，掌太保印，陪从入宫。
现代文：重熙年间，为文班吏，掌太保印，陪从入宫。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongxi, he served as a clerk, palatine and guardian of the imperial seal, and accompanied the emperor into the palace.

古文：皇后见乙辛详雅如素宦，令补笔砚吏；帝亦爱之，累迁护卫太保。
现代文：皇后见乙辛安详文雅却在做无实权的闲官，便将他补为笔砚吏；皇上也喜欢他，累迁到护卫太保。
English: When the empress saw that Yixing, who was quiet and elegant, was working as an idle official without real power, she made him a copy clerk; the emperor also liked him and moved him to the escort.

古文：道宗即位，以乙辛先朝任使，赐汉人户四十，同知点检司事，常召决疑议，升北院同知，历枢密副使。
现代文：道宗即位，因乙辛为先朝任用之人，赐予汉人四十户，同知点检司事，常常召见他处理疑难议案，升之为北院同知，又任过枢密副使。
English: When Emperor Daozong ascended to the throne, because Yixing was the person appointed by the previous emperor, he gave the Han people forty households, the same magistrate, often summoned him to deal with difficult motions, promoted him to the Northern Court, and also served as a Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：清宁五年，为南院枢密使，改知北院，封赵王。九年，耶律仁先为南院枢密使，时驸马都尉萧胡睹与重元党，恶仁先在朝，奏曰： 仁先可任西北路招讨使。 
现代文：清宁九年，耶律仁先为南院枢密使，当时驸马都尉萧胡睹与重元结党，忌恨仁先在朝中执政，上奏说 ：仁先可以担任西北路招讨使。 皇上准备听从。
English: In the ninth year of the Qing Dynasty, when Ye Lu Rensen was the envoy of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, Xiao Hu Jian, the captain of the imperial horse, formed a party with Chong Yuan, who was jealous of Rensen's ruling in the middle of the court, and said: Rensen can serve as the envoy of the northwest road. The emperor was ready to obey.

古文：帝将从之。乙辛奏曰： 臣新参国政，未知治体。
现代文：乙辛上奏说 ：臣新近参预国政，不知治事之体。
English: Etsuko Shinjo said, "The minister has recently joined the prefectural government and does not know how to govern."

古文：仁先乃先帝旧臣，不可遽离朝廷。 
现代文：仁先乃是先帝旧臣，不能这么快就离开了朝廷。 
English: Rensen was an old retainer of the former emperor and could not leave the imperial court so quickly.

古文：帝然之。
现代文：皇上认为有理。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：重元乱平，拜北院枢密使，进王魏，赐匡时翊圣竭忠平乱功臣。
现代文：重元乱平，拜为北院枢密使，进封为魏王，赐为匡时翊圣竭忠平乱功臣。
English: He was awarded the title of Wei King, and was given the title of Kuang Shijie Sheng Zu Zhong Ping Tang.

古文：咸雍五年，加守太师。
现代文：咸雍五年，加守太师。
English: In the 5th year of the reign of Emperor Xianyong, he was promoted to the position of Custodian Grand Master.

古文：诏四方有军旅，许以便宜从事，势震中外，门下馈赂不绝。
现代文：诏令若四方有军事，特准他便宜行事，于是威势震慑朝廷内外，门下送礼及行贿的接连不断。
English: The edict specifically allowed him to act cheaply if there was a military presence on the four sides, so his power shocked both inside and outside the imperial court, and gifts and bribes continued to flow under his door.

古文：凡阿顺者蒙荐擢，忠直者被斥窜。
现代文：凡是阿附他的人都得到荐举提拔，忠直不阿的人则被贬斥、放逐。
English: Those who followed him were recommended and promoted, while those who were not loyal were denounced and exiled.

古文：大康元年，皇太子始预朝政，法度修明。
现代文：大康元年，皇太子开始参预朝政，法令制度整饬清明。
English: In the first year of the Taikang era, the crown prince began to participate in pre-imperial politics, and the legal system was rectified and clarified.

古文：乙辛不得逞，谋以事诬皇后。
现代文：乙辛不能得志，阴谋找个借口诬告皇后。
English: Unable to find a way out, Yixin hatched a plot to frame the empress.

古文：后既死，乙辛不自安，又欲害太子。
现代文：皇后死了，乙辛心中不安，又想害太子。
English: The empress is dead, and Yixin is worried and wants to harm the crown prince.

古文：乘间入奏曰： 帝与后如天地并位，中宫岂可旷？ 
现代文：他找个机会入宫上奏说 ：帝与后正如天、地并立，中宫怎能无人呢？ 
English: He looked for an opportunity to enter the palace and said: Emperor and Empress stand side by side like heaven and earth, how can there be no one in the middle?

古文：盛称其党驸马都尉萧霞抹之妹美而贤。
现代文：盛赞其党人驸马都尉萧霞抹之妹美丽且贤惠。
English: Party members praised the beauty and virtue of Xiao Xia, the younger sister of Xiama Duifeng.

古文：上信之，纳于宫，寻册为皇后。
现代文：皇上听信他的话，纳于宫中，不久册立为皇后。
English: The emperor listened to his words, took her into the palace, and soon she was crowned empress.

古文：时护卫萧忽古知乙辛奸状，伏桥下，欲杀之。
现代文：当时护卫萧忽古知道乙辛奸恶之状，埋伏于桥下，想杀掉他。
English: At that time, guard Xiao Huko knew of Yixin's treachery and ambushed him under the bridge, intending to kill him.

古文：俄暴雨坏桥，谋不遂。
现代文：不一会儿暴雨冲坏了桥，计划没有得逞。
English: A short time later, torrential rain washed away the bridge, and the plan failed.

古文：林牙萧岩寿密奏曰： 乙辛自皇太子预政，内怀疑惧，又与宰相张孝杰相附会。
现代文：林牙萧岩寿上奏说 ：乙辛从皇太子参预政事起，心怀疑惧，又与宰相张孝杰互相依附。
English: Lin Ya Xiao Yan Shou said in his report: Yixin has been suspicious and afraid since the crown prince participated in the pre-election political affairs, and he and the prime minister Zhang Xiaojie have been attached to each other.

古文：恐有异图，不可使居要地。 
现代文：恐怕有反叛之图谋，不能让他身居要职。 
English: I'm afraid there are plans for a rebellion, and he can't be allowed to hold an important position.

古文：出为中京留守。
现代文：皇上便出之为中京留守。
English: The Emperor then left for Chukyo.

古文：乙辛泣谓人曰： 乙辛无过，因谗见出。 
现代文：乙辛哭着对人说 ：乙辛没什么过错，因为谗言被贬出京。 
English: Yixin cried and told people: Yixin did not do anything wrong, because the criticism was thrown out of Beijing.

古文：其党萧霞抹辈以其言闻于上。
现代文：其党人萧霞抹之流将他的话说给皇上听。
English: His party member, Xiao Xia and others, brought his words to the emperor's attention.

古文：上悔之。
现代文：皇上后悔了。
English: The Emperor regretted it.

古文：无何，出萧岩寿为顺义军节度使，诏近臣议召乙辛事。
现代文：不久，出萧岩寿为顺义军节度使，诏令近臣商议召回乙辛之事。
English: Soon, Xiao Yanshou was appointed as the Shunyi Army's envoy to the festival, and he ordered his close vassals to discuss the matter of recalling Yixin.

古文：北面官属无敢言者，耶律撒剌曰： 初以萧岩寿奏出乙辛，若所言不当，宜坐以罪，若当，则不可复召。 
现代文：一应臣僚无人敢言，耶律撒剌说： 当初因为萧岩寿上奏，贬出乙辛。如果所奏不对，就该将他治罪；如果说的对，就不该再召回乙辛。 
English: When none of his ministers dared to say anything, Yerushalayim said: At first, because of Xiao Yanshou's performance, Yitsin was dismissed. If the performance was not right, he should be punished; if it was right, Yitsin should not be recalled.

古文：累谏不从。
现代文：多次上谏，皇上不从。
English: The Emperor refused to be enthroned several times.

古文：乃复召为北院枢密使。
现代文：竟又召回乙辛任北院枢密使。
English: In fact, he recalled Yixin to serve as the Privy Envoy of the Northern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：时皇太子以母后之故，忧见颜色。
现代文：当时皇太子因为母后的去世，忧形于色。
English: At the time, the crown prince was overcome with grief over the death of his mother.

古文：乙辛党欣跃相庆，谗谤沸腾，忠良之士，斥逐殆尽。
现代文：乙辛党人喜不自胜，纷纷进谗言诽谤，忠直善良之士差不多都被贬逐尽净。
English: The members of the Yixing Party were overjoyed, and began to slander and defame one after another. Virtually all the good and loyal people were completely discredited.

古文：乙辛因萧十三之言，夜召萧得里特谋构太子，令护卫太保耶律查剌诬告耶律撒剌等同谋立皇太子。
现代文：乙辛依萧十三之言，夜里召见萧得里特阴谋设计陷害太子，让护卫太保耶律查剌诬告耶律撒剌等人一起商议扶立皇太子。
English: According to the words of Xiao XIII, Yixin was summoned by Xiao Derrit in the night with a plot to frame the prince, so that the guards of the eunuch Yeludzha Zang would falsely accuse Yeludzha Zang and others to discuss the crown prince.

古文：诏按无迹而罢。
现代文：诏令审查，因没有证据而作罢。
English: The case was examined by imperial edict and dismissed for lack of evidence.

古文：又令牌印郎君萧讹都斡诣上诬首： 耶律查剌前告耶律撒剌等事皆实，臣亦与其谋。
现代文：又让牌印郎君萧讹都斡到皇上那里自首 ：耶律查剌上次告发耶律撒剌等，其事体均属事实，我也参与其谋划。
English: He also asked the master of the seal, Xiao Tongdu, to go to the emperor and surrender himself: the last time that Yeluda Zhao was denounced by Yeluda Zhao, the facts were true, and I was also involved in its planning.

古文：本欲杀乙辛等而立太子。
现代文：本来想杀乙辛等人而立太子。
English: Originally, he wanted to kill Atsuko Atsuko and others and install himself as crown prince.

古文：臣等若不言，恐事白连坐。 
现代文：我们几人如果不来说明，恐怕事情败露受到株连。 
English: If a few of us don't clarify, I'm afraid things will be exposed by the shareholders.

古文：诏使鞫劾，乙辛迫令具伏。
现代文：诏令加以审讯，使揭发他人，乙辛迫使他们全部承认。
English: He ordered that they be interrogated, that others be denounced, and that Atsin force them to confess everything.

古文：上怒，命诛撒剌及速撒等。
现代文：皇上动了怒，命令诛杀撒剌及速撒等人。
English: The emperor was angered and ordered his soldiers to kill Satsuma and Hayao.

古文：乙辛恐帝疑，引数人庭诘，各令荷重校，绳系其颈，不能出气，人人不堪其酷，惟求速死。
现代文：乙辛恐怕引起皇上怀疑，便领几个人到法庭上盘问，让他们戴上沉重的枷具，用绳索缠缚其颈，不能出气，人人都无法忍受酷刑，只求早点死去。
English: Afraid of arousing the emperor's suspicions, Yixin brought several people to the court for cross-examination. They were made to wear heavy shackles, and their necks were tied with ropes so that they could not lash out. All of them could not bear the torture and only wanted to die sooner.

古文：反奏曰： 别无异辞。 
现代文：乙辛回过头来上奏说 ：与原告所招完全相同。 
English: Yixin turned around and said, "It's exactly the same as what the plaintiff said."

古文：时方暑，尸不得瘗，以至地臭。
现代文：当时天气正热，尸首不得下葬，以至连地都臭了。
English: At that time, the weather was hot, the bodies could not be buried, and even the ground stank.

古文：乃囚皇太子于上京，监卫者皆其党。
现代文：于是将皇太子囚禁于上京，看守的人都是乙辛之党。
English: As a result, the crown prince was imprisoned in Kamigyo, and the guards were all members of Atsin's party.

古文：寻遣萧达鲁古、撒把害太子。
现代文：不久又派萧达鲁古、撒把等人去杀皇太子。
English: Soon, he sent Shodarugu, Satchidan and others to kill the crown prince.

古文：乙辛党大喜，聚饮数日。
现代文：乙辛党人大喜，欢聚饮酒数日。
English: The members of the Yixing Party were overjoyed and gathered to drink alcohol for several days.

古文：上京留守萧挞得以卒闻。
现代文：上京留守萧挞得报告太子已死。
English: Xiao Yan, who was in Beijing, was the first to report that the crown prince had died.

古文：上哀悼，欲召其妻，乙辛阴遣人杀之，以灭其口。
现代文：皇上哀痛伤心，想召回其妻子，乙辛暗里派人杀了她以灭口。
English: Sorrowful and heartbroken, the emperor wanted to recall his wife, but Yixin secretly sent someone to kill her to silence her.

古文：五年正月，上将出猎，乙辛奏留皇孙，上欲从之。
现代文：五年正月，皇上要出外狩猎，乙辛奏请留下皇孙，皇上想听他的。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, the emperor wanted to go out hunting. Please leave the grandson of the emperor to play the Yixing. The emperor wanted to listen to him.

古文：同知点检萧兀纳谏曰： 陛下若从乙辛留皇孙，皇孙尚幼，左右无人，愿留臣保护，以防不测。 
现代文：同知点检萧兀纳上谏说 ：陛下如果听乙辛的话留下皇孙，皇孙年纪尚幼小，左右无人，请留下我来保护，以防不测。 
English: Xiao Xunna, a fellow scholar, said: "Your Majesty, if you listen to Yixin's words and leave your grandchild behind, the grandchild is still young and there is no one around, please leave me to protect him in case of an accident."

古文：遂与皇孙俱行。
现代文：于是与皇孙一同出行。
English: As a result, they traveled together with the grandson.

古文：由是上始疑乙辛，颇知其奸。
现代文：从此皇上开始怀疑乙辛，渐渐察觉其奸邪。
English: From then on, the emperor began to suspect Yixing and gradually became aware of his treachery.

古文：会北幸，将次黑山之平淀，上适见扈从官属多随乙辛后，恶之，出乙辛知南院大王事。
现代文：适逢皇上北上，将要驻扎于黑山之平淀，看见随从众官大多跟在乙辛后面，厌恨起来，便出乙辛知南院大王事。
English: When the emperor went to the north, he was going to be stationed in Pingyong, Montenegro, and when he saw that most of the attendants were following Yixin, he was disgusted and came out of the palace.

古文：及例削一字王爵，改王混同，意稍自安。
现代文：按例削去一字王爵，改为混同王，心里才稍稍自宽。
English: According to the example, the word "Wangzhe" was removed, and it was changed to "Mingzhe Wang," which made me feel a little more at ease.

古文：及赴阙入谢，帝即日遣还，改知兴中府事。
现代文：待到乙辛入宫中称谢时，皇上于当日遣回，改为知兴中府事。
English: While waiting for Yixing to enter the palace to express her thanks, the emperor sent her back on the same day and changed it to Chixing.

古文：七年冬，坐以禁物鬻入外国，下有司议，法当死。
现代文：七年冬，因犯将违禁物品卖入外国之罪，下有司议罪，依法当处死。
English: In the winter of 2007, he was sentenced to death for the crime of selling prohibited items into a foreign country.

古文：乙辛党耶律燕哥独奏当入八议，得减死论，击以铁骨朵，幽于来州。
现代文：乙辛党人耶律燕哥独奏应该定为八议之罪，得以免死论处，以铁骨朵击之，幽禁于来州。
English: Yeludyan Solo, a member of Yeltsin's party, should have been convicted of eight counts of sedition, spared the death penalty, beaten with an iron rod, and banned from coming to the state.

古文：后谋奔宋及私藏兵甲事觉，缢杀之。
现代文：后来阴谋逃奔入宋，又加以私藏兵甲之事败露，被缢杀。
English: Later, he conspired to escape to the Song Dynasty, but was discovered to be hiding a suit of armor, and was killed.

古文：乾统二年，发冢，戮其尸。
现代文：乾统二年，挖开其坟墓，开棺戮尸。
English: In the second year of Emperor Qianlong's reign, his grave was dug up and his coffin opened.

古文：张孝杰，建州永霸县人。
现代文：张孝杰，建州永霸县人。
English: Zhang Xiaojie is from Yongba County, Jianzhou.

古文：家贫，好学。
现代文：家境贫穷，好学。
English: His family was poor, but he was eager to learn.

古文：重熙二十四年，擢进士第一。
现代文：重熙二十四年，擢拔进士第一。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Chongxi, he was promoted to the first rank.

古文：清宁间，累迁枢密直学士。
现代文：清宁年间，累迁为枢密直学士。
English: During the Qing and Ning Dynasties, he was successively transferred to the Privy Academy.

古文：咸雍初，坐误奏事，出为惠州刺史。
现代文：咸雍初，因误奏事情获罪，出贬为惠州刺史。
English: At the beginning of Xian Yong, he was found guilty of misreporting the matter, and was demoted to Huizhou stabbing history.

古文：俄召复旧职，兼知户部司事。
现代文：不久召回恢复原职，兼知户部司事。
English: He was soon recalled to resume his original post, and also became the secretary of the Household Department.

古文：三年，参知政事，同知枢密院事，加工部侍郎。
现代文：三年，任参知政事，同知枢密院事，加工部侍郎。
English: For three years, he served as a member of the prefectural government, a member of the Privy Council, and a chamberlain of the processing department.

古文：八年，封陈国公。
现代文：八年，封陈国公。
English: Eight years later, he was given the title of Chen Guogong.

古文：上以孝杰勤干，数问以事，为北府宰相。
现代文：道宗因为孝杰勤勉干练，多次向他询问事务，任北府宰相。
English: Because of his diligence and ability, Daozong inquired many times about the affairs of Xiaojie and appointed him as the prime minister of Beifu.

古文：汉人贵幸无比。
现代文：汉人之中无人可比其贵显宠幸。
English: Among the Han people, no one can compare to him.

古文：大康元年，赐国姓。
现代文：大康元年，赐给国姓。
English: In the first year of the Taikang era, it was given the national surname of Tsuru.

古文：明年秋猎，帝一日射鹿三十，燕从官。
现代文：次年秋猎，皇上一日之中射得三十只鹿，宴饮从行官员。
English: The following year, on an autumn hunt, the emperor shot thirty deer in one day, and the officials in attendance were wined and dined.

古文：酒酣，命赋《云上于天诗》，诏孝杰坐御榻旁。
现代文：酒至尽兴，命孝杰做《云上于天诗》，诏令孝杰坐于御榻旁边。
English: After drinking wine to the fullest, he ordered Xiaojie to write "Clouds Above the Heavenly Poem" and ordered Xiaojie to sit next to him on the couch.

古文：上诵《黍离》诗： 知我者谓我心忧，不知我者谓我何求。 
现代文：皇上朗诵了《离黍》诗： 知我者谓我心忧，不知我者谓我何求。 
English: The emperor recited a poem from "The Parting": Those who know me call me anxious; those who don't know me call me pious.

古文：孝杰奏曰： 今天下太平，陛下何忧？
现代文：孝杰奏道 ：当今天下太平，陛下何忧？
English: Xiao Jie recited: When today is peaceful, what worries your majesty?

古文：富有四海，陛下何求？ 
现代文：皇上您富有四海，您又何求？ 
English: Emperor, you are rich in the four seas, what do you want?

古文：帝大悦。
现代文：皇上大喜。
English: The emperor was very happy to hear this.

古文：三年，群臣侍燕，上曰： 先帝用仁先、化葛，以贤智也。
现代文：三年，群臣侍宴，皇上说 ：先帝任用仁先、化葛，因为他们贤德有才智。
English: Three years later, at a banquet for a group of courtiers, the emperor said, "The former emperor appointed Rinsen and Hakuge because they were wise and talented."

古文：朕有孝杰、乙辛，不在仁先、化葛下，诚为得人。 
现代文：我如今有孝杰和乙辛，不在仁先、化葛之下，确实是用人用得得当。 
English: Now that I have Xiaojie and Yixin, I am no longer under the influence of benevolence and covetousness. I am truly a person who uses people properly.

古文：欢饮至夜，乃罢。
现代文：畅快地饮酒，直到深夜才撤席。
English: They drank merrily until late in the evening.

古文：是年夏，乙辛谮皇太子，孝杰同力相济。
现代文：这年夏天，乙辛诬陷皇太子，孝杰与他同力相助。
English: This summer, Yixin framed the crown prince, and Xiaojie helped him.

古文：及乙辛受诏按皇太子党人，诬害忠良，孝杰之谋居多。
现代文：及至乙辛受诏究治皇太子党人，诬蔑陷害忠良，孝杰之谋划居多。
English: As far as Yixin was investigated by the imperial edict, the crown prince's party members were slandered and framed, and there were many plots of the filial piety.

古文：乙辛荐孝杰忠于社稷，帝谓孝杰可比狄仁杰，赐名仁杰，乃许放海东青鹘。
现代文：乙辛推荐称赞孝杰忠于社稷，皇上说孝杰可与狄仁杰相比拟，赐名为仁杰，又准许他放海东青鹘。
English: Yixin recommended and praised Xiaojie's loyalty to the society, and the emperor said that Xiaojie could be compared to Di Renjie, gave him the name of Renjie, and allowed him to release the East China Sea youth.

古文：六年，既出乙辛，上亦悟孝杰奸佞，寻出为武定军节度使。
现代文：六年，皇上既已出贬乙辛，也醒悟到孝杰也是奸佞之辈，不久出贬为武定军节度使。
English: In the sixth year, the emperor, who had already been demoted to second-in-command, also realized that Xiaojie was also a traitor, and soon he was demoted to the festival envoy of the Wuding Army.

古文：坐私贩广济湖盐及擅改诏旨，削爵，贬安肃州，数年乃归。
现代文：因私自贩卖广济湖盐以及擅自涂改诏书获罪，削去爵位，贬为安肃知州，几年之后才回。
English: He was convicted of illegally selling salt from Lake Guangji and altering an imperial edict without permission, stripped of his title and demoted to Anshu Zhizhou, only to return a few years later.

古文：大安中，死于乡。
现代文：大安年间，在家乡死去。
English: He died in his hometown in the Taian era.

古文：乾统初，剖棺戮尸，以族产分赐臣下。
现代文：乾统初，被剖棺戮尸，并将其家族的财产分赐给臣下。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Qian, his body was dissected and his family's property was given to his vassals.

古文：孝杰久在相位，贪货无厌，时与亲戚会饮，尝曰： 无百万两黄金，不足为宰相家。 
现代文：孝杰久居相位，贪求财物，贪得无厌，当时与亲戚相聚饮酒，曾经说道 ：没有百万两黄金，不足以称为宰相之家。 
English: Xiao Jie has been in the limelight for a long time, greedy for wealth, insatiable greed. At that time, he gathered with relatives to drink alcohol. He once said: There is no million two gold, not enough to be called the prime minister's home.

古文：大安三年，为西京留守，致仕。寿隆初，以疾卒。萧十三，蔑古乃部人。
现代文：当初，孝杰中了进士，前往佛寺，忽然一阵疾风吹落了孝杰的幞头，与佛像平齐，坠到地上便粉碎了。有个老僧说 ：此人必定会骤然贵显，然而也不得善终。 
English: At the beginning, Xiao Jie won the prize and went to the Buddhist temple. Suddenly, a gust of wind blew down Xiao Jie's steeple, which was level with the Buddha statue and fell to the ground and shattered. An old monk said, "This person will certainly suddenly appear noble, but he will not end well."

古文：父铎鲁斡，历官节度使。
现代文：最终如其所言。萧十三，蔑古乃部人。父铎鲁斡，历任节度使。
English: In the end, it was as he had said. Xiao Zhouzhong, who defied the ancients and became a member of the imperial court, and his father, Zhaoluo, who served as the chief of the imperial court.

古文：十三辨黠，善揣摩人意。
现代文：十三能言善辩，灵巧聪明，善于揣摩他人之心意。
English: Thirteen can be eloquent, deft and clever, and good at guessing the intentions of others.

古文：清宁间，以年劳迁护卫太保。
现代文：清宁年间，根据任职的年数和劳绩迁任为护卫太保。
English: During the Qing Dynasty, according to the number of years of service and performance, he was appointed as an escort.

古文：大康初，耶律乙辛复入枢府，益横恣。
现代文：大康初，耶律乙辛再度进入枢密府，更加骄横无忌。
English: At the beginning of the Great Prosperity, Yelu Yixin once again entered the Privy Council, even more arrogant.

古文：时十三出入乙辛家，以朝臣不附者辄使出之，十三由宿卫迁殿前副点检。
现代文：当时萧十三出入于耶律乙辛家中，觉得哪个朝臣不阿附于他们便将他贬至京外任职，十三由宿卫迁任殿前副点检。
English: At that time, Xiao XIII went in and out of Yelu Yixin's home, and felt that if any courtier did not adhere to them, he would be demoted to a post outside Beijing, and XIII was transferred from the palace guard to the deputy inspector.

古文：三年夏，护卫萧忽古等谋杀乙辛，事觉下狱。
现代文：三年夏，护卫萧忽古等人图谋杀乙辛，事情败露被关入监牢。
English: In the summer of the third year, escort Xiao Hu Gu and others attempted to murder Yixing, but the affair was exposed and they were put in prison.

古文：十三谓乙辛曰： 今太子犹在，臣民属心。
现代文：十三对乙辛说： 如今太子还活着，臣民归心于他。
English: The thirteenth said to Yixing, "Now that the prince is still alive, his subjects are inclined to him."

古文：大王素无根柢之助，复有诬皇后之怨。
现代文：大王您在国中一向没有稳固的根基，又有诬害皇后的怨仇。
English: Great King, you have never had a solid foundation in the country, and you have a grudge against the Queen.

古文：若太子立，王置身何地？
现代文：如果太子即位，大王您何处容身呢？应该仔细地加以考虑。 
English: If the crown prince ascends to the throne, where will you, the great king, fit in? This should be carefully considered.

古文：宜熟计之。 乙辛曰： 吾忧此久矣！ 
现代文：乙辛说 ：我担心这一点已经好久了！ 
English: Etsin said: I've been worried about this for a long time!

古文：是夜，召萧得里特谋所以构太子事。
现代文：当天夜里，召来萧得里特商议如何陷害太子之事。
English: In the evening of the same day, Shauderite was summoned to discuss how to frame the prince.

古文：十三计既行，寻迁殿前都点检，兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：十三之策略既已得到采行，不久便迁任殿前都点检，兼同知枢密院事。
English: The Thirteenth's strategy having been adopted, it was not long before he was transferred to the Privy Council.

古文：复令萧讹都斡等诬首耶律查剌前告耶律撒剌等事皆实，诏究其事。
现代文：十三又命令萧讹都斡等人诬告说，耶律查剌上次告发耶律撒剌等人之事都是实情，皇上下令查究其事，太子不服。
English: He also ordered Xiao Yuduo and others to make a false accusation, saying that what Yerutchao had accused Yerutsao and others of the last time was the truth. The emperor ordered an investigation into the matter, and the prince was not satisfied.

古文：太子不服，别遣夷离毕耶律燕哥问太子，太子具陈所以见诬之状。
现代文：另派夷离毕耶律燕哥审问太子，太子详细地陈说了如何遭到诬陷的情形。
English: Another exile, Bijelj Yengge, interrogated the prince, who gave a detailed account of how he had been framed.

古文：十三闻之，谓燕哥曰： 如此奏，则大事去矣，当易其辞为伏款。 
现代文：十三听说后，对燕哥说： 像这样陈奏于皇上，则大事去矣！应当将他所说的话改为招认罪状。 
English: After hearing this, he said to Yan Ge: "If you play tricks on the emperor like this, you will be in big trouble! You should change what he said to a confession of guilt."

古文：燕哥入，如十三言奏之。
现代文：燕哥入宫，依十三所言禀奏。
English: When the swan enters the palace, it is played according to thirteen precepts.

古文：上大怒，废太子。
现代文：皇上大怒，废去太子。
English: The emperor flew into a rage and deposed the crown prince.

古文：太子将出，曰： 我何罪至是！ 
现代文：太子将要出京，说： 我有何罪该受如此处罚！ 
English: The crown prince will go to Beijing and say: What crime have I committed to be punished like this!

古文：十三叱令登车，遣卫卒阖车门。
现代文：十三呵叱让他上车，派卫兵关上车门。
English: Thirteen scolded him to get on the bus and sent a guard to close the door.

古文：是年，迁北院枢密副使，复陈阴害太子计，乙辛从之。
现代文：同年，十三迁任北院枢密副使，又陈说暗中谋害太子的计策，乙辛从之。
English: In the same year, he was transferred to the position of Privy Vice-Minister of the Northern Court on the 13th, and he also said that he secretly plotted to kill the crown prince, and Yixin followed him.

古文：及乙辛出知南院大王事，亦出十三为保州统军使，卒。
现代文：及至乙辛被出贬为知南院大王事，也出贬十三为保州统军使，去世。
English: Yixin was demoted to the position of Grand Prince of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, and he was also demoted to the position of the 13th envoy of the Unified Army of Bozhou, and he passed away.

古文：乾统间，剖棺戮尸。
现代文：乾统年间，被剖棺斩戮尸体。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qianlong, the bodies were dissected and chopped up.

古文：二子：的里得、念经，皆伏诛。
现代文：有二子：的里得、念经，均被诛杀。
English: He had two sons: Doride and Nyozen, both of whom were killed in battle.

