古文：入禾倉，萬石一積而比黎之為戶。
现代文：谷物入仓，以一万石为一积而隔以荆笆，设置仓门。
English: Grain into the warehouse, with ten thousand stones as an accumulation and separated by a bushel, set up a warehouse door.

古文：縣嗇夫若丞及倉、鄉相雜以印之，而遺倉嗇夫及離邑倉佐主稟者各一戶以氣，自封印，皆輒出，餘之索而更為發戶。
现代文：由县啬夫或丞和仓、乡主管人员共同封缄，而给仓啬夫和乡主管稟给的仓佐各一门，以便发放粮食，由他们独自封印，就可以出仓，到仓中没有剩余时才再给他们开另一仓门。
English: The officials in charge of the county, township, and township jointly seal the storehouses, while the officials in charge of the township and township seal one door of the storehouse and one door of the storehouse, respectively, in order to distribute the grain. They can seal the door of the storehouse by themselves, and when there is no surplus in the storehouse, they can open another door of the storehouse.

古文：嗇夫免，效者發，見雜封者，以隄效之，而復雜封之，勿度縣，唯倉自封印者是度縣。
现代文：啬夫免职，对仓进行核验的人开仓，验视共同的封缄，不必称量，只称量原由仓主管人员独自封印的仓。
English: If the miser is relieved of his duties, the person who carried out the verification of the warehouse shall open the warehouse, inspect the common seal, do not need to weigh, only weigh the warehouse that was originally sealed by the warehouse supervisor alone.

古文：出禾，非入者是出之，令度之，度之當堤，令出之。
现代文：谷物出仓，如果不是原入仓人员来出仓，要令加称量，称量结果与题识符合，即令出仓。
English: Cereals out of the warehouse, if it is not the original warehouse personnel to come out of the warehouse, it is necessary to order additional weighing, the weighing result is consistent with the subject, and then it is ordered out of the warehouse.

古文：其不備，出者負之；其贏者，入之。
现代文：此后如有不足数，由出仓者赔偿；如有剩余，则应上缴。
English: Thereafter, if there is a shortfall, the seller shall compensate; if there is a surplus, it shall be handed over.

古文：雜出禾者勿更。
现代文：共同出仓的人员中途不要更换。
English: Do not change the personnel of the joint delivery in the middle.

古文：入禾未盈萬石而欲增積焉，其前入者是增積，可；其它人是增積，積者必先度故積，當堤，乃入焉。
现代文：谷物入仓不满万石而要增积的，由原来入仓的人增积，是可以的；其他人要赠积，增积者必须先称量原积谷物，与题识符合，然后入仓。
English: If the grain entering the warehouse is less than 10,000 kilos and needs to be added, it is possible for the person who originally entered the warehouse to add the grain; others should add the grain as a gift. The person who wants to add the grain must first weigh the original grain, which is consistent with the subject, and then enter the warehouse.

古文：後節不備，後入者獨負之；而書入禾增積者之名事邑里於廥籍。
现代文：此后如有不足数，由后来入仓者单独赔偿；要把入仓增积者的姓名、职务、籍贯记在仓的簿册上。
English: After that, if there is a shortfall, the person who entered the warehouse later shall compensate for it separately; the name, position, and address of the person who entered the warehouse to accumulate shall be recorded in the warehouse's book.

古文：萬石之積及未盈萬石而被出者，毋敢增積。
现代文：已满万石的积和虽未满万石但正在零散出仓的，不准增积。
English: It is not allowed to increase the volume of a warehouse that has reached 10,000 koku and is in the process of being unloaded piecemeal, even though the total volume is less than 10,000 koku.

古文：櫟陽二萬石一積，咸陽十萬一積，其出入禾、增積如律令。
现代文：在栎阳，以二万石为一积，在咸阳，以十万石为一积，其出仓、入仓和增积的手续，均同上述律文规定。
English: In Shuyang, 20,000 koku is the maximum, and in Xianyang, 100,000 koku is the maximum. The procedures for leaving the warehouse, entering the warehouse and increasing the volume are all the same as the above-mentioned legal provisions.

古文：長吏相雜以入禾倉及發，見之粟積，義積之，勿令敗。入禾稼、芻，輒為廥籍，上內史。
现代文：长吏共同入仓和开仓，如发现有小虫到了粮堆上，应重加堆积，不要使谷物败坏。谷物，芻稾入仓，就要记入仓的薄籍上报内史，芻稾都以万石一积。
English: The chiefs entered and opened the storehouse together. If any small insects are found on the grain heap, they should be piled up again, so as not to spoil the grain. If the grain is taken into the storehouse, it should be recorded in the storehouse's ledger and reported in the internal history. The grain is piled up by the thousands.

古文：芻各萬石一積，咸陽二萬一積，其出入、增積及效如禾。禾、芻積出日，上贏不備縣廷。
现代文：在咸阳以二万石一积。其出仓，入仓、增积和核验均同上条关于谷物的规定。一积谷物，芻稾出尽和时候，应向县迁上报多余或不足之数。
English: In Xianyang, there is a storage area of 20,000 koku. Its out-of-storage, in-storage, increase and verification are all the same as the above provisions on grain. When the grain is exhausted, it should be transferred to the county to report the number of surplus or shortage.

古文：出之未而已備者，言縣廷，廷令長吏雜封其廥，與出之，輒上數廷；其少，欲一縣之，可。
现代文：如未出尽而数额已足，应报告县廷，由县廷命长吏会同一起将仓封缄，并参预出仓，向县庭报告所出的数量，如余数较少可以整个称量。
English: If it is not exhausted and the amount is sufficient, it should be reported to the county court. The county court appointed officials will seal the warehouse together, and participate in the advance release of the warehouse, and report the quantity to the county court. If the remaining quantity is less, the entire quantity can be weighed.

古文：□□□□□不備，令其故吏與新吏雜先出之。
现代文：仓如在都邑，应由参预共同出仓。不足数，令原任的吏和新任的吏一起将仓出尽。
English: If the warehouse is located in the capital city, the warehouse shall be vacated jointly by the participants. If the number is insufficient, the original officials and the newly appointed officials shall vacate the warehouse together.

古文：其故吏弗欲，勿強。
现代文：如原任的吏不同意，不要勉强。
English: If the original official does not agree, do not reluctantly resign.

古文：其毋故吏者，令有秩之吏、令史主，與倉□雜出之，而論不備。
现代文：如没有原任的吏，则令有秩的吏，令史主管和共同出仓，出尽后再处理不足数的问题。
English: If there is no official in the original position, then the official with the rank, the director of history and the person in charge of history will be sent out together, and the problem of the insufficient number will be dealt with after they are exhausted.

古文：雜者勿更；更之而不備，令令、丞與賞不備。
现代文：共同出仓的人员中途不要更换，如更换而出现不足数的情况，要责令令、丞同他们一起赔偿。
English: Do not replace the personnel who leave the warehouse together in the middle. If there is a shortage due to replacement, they should be ordered to pay compensation together with them.

古文：程禾、黍□□□□以書言年，別其數，以稟人。
现代文：计量谷子，黍子要以文书其产年，分别记数，以便发放给人。
English: Grains and hazelnuts should be counted separately according to the year of production, so that they can be distributed to people.

古文：計禾，別黃、白、青。勿以稟人。
现代文：算谷子的帐，要把黄、白、青三种区别开来，黏谷不要发放给人。
English: When counting the number of grains, it is necessary to distinguish between yellow, white and blue grains. Do not give out the viscous grains to others.

古文：稻後禾孰，計稻後年。已穫上數，別粲、稻。別粲、之襄，歲異積之，勿增積，以給客，到十月牒書數，上內史。
现代文：稻如在谷子之后成熟，应把稻计算在下一年的帐上，收获后上报产量时，应将籼稻和糯稻区别开来，要把用以酿酒的籼稻和糯稻区别开来，每年单独贮积，不要增积，用来供给宾客。到十月用牍写明数量，上报内史。
English: If the rice ripens after the grain, the rice should be counted in the next year's account. When reporting the output after harvest, the indica rice should be distinguished from the indica rice. The indica rice used for brewing should be distinguished from the indica rice. It should be stored separately every year, without accumulation, and used to supply guests. By October, the quantity should be written in ink, and the internal history should be reported.

古文：縣上食者籍及它費大倉，與計偕。都官以計時讎食者籍。
现代文：各县太仓上报领取口粮人员的名藉和其它费用，就与每年的帐簿同时缴送，都官应在每年结帐时核对领取口粮人员的名藉。
English: The names of the persons receiving the rations and other expenses reported by each county Taicang shall be paid at the same time as the annual account book. The city government shall check the names of the persons receiving the rations at the time of annual settlement.

古文：種：稻、麻畝用二斗大半斗，禾、麥畝一斗，黍、荅畝大半斗，叔畝半斗。利田疇，其有不盡此數者，可。
现代文：种子，稻、麻每亩用二又三分之二斗，谷子、麦子每亩一斗，黍子、小豆每亩三分之二斗，大豆每亩半斗，如果是良田用不到这样的数量，也是可以的。
English: Two and two-thirds of a bucket of seeds, rice and hemp per mu, one bucket of millet and wheat per mu, two-thirds of a bucket of hazelnuts and red beans per mu, and half a bucket of soybeans per mu. If a good field cannot use such an amount, it is also possible.

古文：其有本者，稱議種之。
现代文：田中已有作物，可酌情播种。
English: There are already crops in the field, which can be sown as appropriate.

古文：縣遺麥以為種用者，殽禾以臧之。
现代文：各县留作种子的麦子，应和谷子一样收藏。
English: Wheat set aside as seed in each prefecture should be collected in the same way as millet.

古文：粟一石六斗大半斗，舂之為米一石；米一石為鑿米九斗；九斗為毀米八斗。
现代文：谷子一石又三分之二斗舂成粝米一石，粝米一石舂成鑿米九斗，鑿米九斗舂成毇米八斗。
English: One stone of grain and two-thirds of a bucket of rice are made into one stone of glutinous rice, one stone of glutinous rice is made into nine buckets of chiseled rice, and nine buckets of chiseled rice are made into eight buckets of glutinous rice.

古文：稻禾一石。有米委賜，稟禾稼公，盡九月，其人弗取之，勿鼠。
现代文：有赏赐的米或向官府领取谷物，到九月底该人尚未领取，不再发给。
English: If a person has received rice or grain from the government, but has not received it by the end of September, it will no longer be issued.

古文：為粟廿斗，舂為米十斗；十斗粲，毀米六斗大半斗。
现代文：稻谷二十斗，舂成米十斗，十斗的粲舂成毇米六又三分之二斗。
English: 20 tbsp. of rice, 10 tbsp. of milled rice, and 6 2/3 tbsp. of milled glutinous rice from 10 tbsp.

古文：麥十斗，為三斗。
现代文：麦十斗出三斗。
English: Three dippers from ten dippers of barley.

古文：叔、荅、麻十五斗為一石。稟毀粺者，以十斗為石。
现代文：大豆、小豆、麻以十五斗为一石，领取毇、粺的，以十斗为一石。
English: Soybeans, azuki beans, and hemp shall be valued at 15 doe per stone, and those receiving straw and bran shall be valued at 10 doe per stone.

古文：宦者、都官吏、都官人有事上為將，令縣貣之，輒移其稟縣，稟縣以其稟。
现代文：宦者，都官的吏或都官的一般人员为朝廷办事而来督送，令所到县垫发口粮，应即用文书通知原发这些人粮食的县，据以扣除他们的粮食。
English: If, for the sake of the imperial court, officials of the government or ordinary personnel of the government come to supervise the delivery of food rations, and the government sends them to the county to distribute the food rations, the government should immediately notify the county that originally distributed the food to these people, and deduct their food rations accordingly.

古文：已稟者，移居縣責之。
现代文：如在原发粮食的县已经领过了，应以文书通知所到的县责令赔偿。
English: If it has already been received in the county from which the grain was originally sent, the county to which it came shall be ordered to pay compensation.

古文：有事軍及下縣者，齎食，毋以傳貣縣。
现代文：到军中或属县办事的，应自带口粮，不得发符传向所到的县借取。
English: Those who go to work in the army or belong to a county should bring their own rations, and should not borrow from the county they come from.

古文：月食者已致稟而公使有傳食，及告歸盡月不來者，止其後朔食，而以其來日致其食；有秩吏不止。
现代文：按月领取口粮的人员，粮食已经发给而因公出差，由沿途驿站供给饭食。以及休假到月底仍不归来的，应停发其口粮，直到回来的时候再行发给，有秩的吏则不停发。
English: For those who receive monthly rations, the rations have already been distributed, and they are on a business trip, and meals are provided from stations along the way. As well as those who do not return from vacation by the end of the month, their rations should be suspended until they return, and then distributed again. For officials with rank, the rations will continue to be distributed.

古文：駕傳馬，一食禾，其顧來有一食禾，皆八馬共。
现代文：每次驾用传马，喂饲二次粮食，回程再喂饲一次粮食，都要八匹马一起喂。
English: Eight horses should be fed together each time the driving horse is used, the second grain is fed, and the grain is fed again on the return journey.

古文：其數駕，毋過日一食。
现代文：如果连驾九次，不得超过每天饲粮一次。
English: If you drive nine times in a row, you must not feed more than once a day.

古文：駕縣馬勞，有益壺〈壹〉禾之。
现代文：如驾车路远，马疲劳了，可再加喂一次。
English: If the driving distance is far and the horse is tired, it can be fed again.

古文：妾未使而衣食公，百姓有欲者，之，令就衣食焉，吏輒柀事之。
现代文：未到役使年龄而由官府给予衣食的妾，如有百姓要借，可以借给，叫妾到他那里取得衣服，此后官吏就不再役使。
English: If a commoner wants to borrow a concubine who has been given food and clothing by the government because she is too old to serve, she can borrow it and ask the concubine to go to him to get clothes. After that, the official will no longer serve.

古文：隸臣妾其從事公，隸臣月禾二石，隸妾一石半；其不從事，勿稟。
现代文：隶臣妾为官府服役，隶臣每月发粮二石，隶妾一石半。如不服役，不得发给。
English: If a subordinate vassal or concubine serves in the government, the subordinate vassal shall be paid two koku of grain per month, and the subordinate concubine shall be paid one and a half koku. If they do not serve, they shall not be paid.

古文：小城旦、隸臣作者，月禾一石半石；未能作者，月禾一石。
现代文：小城旦或隶臣劳作的，每月发粮一石半，不能劳作的，每月发粮一石。
English: A commoner or a vassal who labors shall receive one and a half stone of grain per month, while one who is unable to work shall receive one stone of grain per month.

古文：小妾、舂作者，月禾一石二斗半斗；未能作者，月禾一石。
现代文：小城旦、隶妾或舂劳作的，每月发粮一石二斗半，不能劳作的，每月发粮一石。
English: Those who worked in small towns, as servants or concubines, were paid one stone and two and a half dowels of grain per month. Those who could not work were paid one stone and one half dowels of grain per month.

古文：嬰兒之毋母者各半石；雖有母而與其母冗居公者，亦稟之，禾月半石。
现代文：没有母亲的婴儿每人发粮半石，虽有母亲而随其母为官府服役的，也发给粮食，每月半石。
English: Infants without a mother were each given half a stone of grain, while those who had a mother and served the government with her were also given half a stone of grain each month.

古文：隸臣田者，以二月月稟二石半石，到九月盡而止其半石。
现代文：隶臣作农业劳动的，从二月起每月发粮二石半，到九月底停发其中加发的半石。
English: If a subordinate worked as an agricultural laborer, he would receive two and a half koku of grain per month from February, and the additional half koku of grain would not be paid until the end of September.

古文：舂，月一石半石。隸臣、城旦高不盈六尺五寸，隸妾、舂高不盈六尺二寸，皆為小；高五尺二寸，皆作之。
现代文：舂每月发一石半，隶臣、城旦身高不满六尺五寸，隶妾、舂身高不满六尺二寸，都属于小。身高达到五尺二才，都要劳作
English: An eunuch was to be paid one and a half koku of rice per month. A vassal and a eunuch who was less than six feet five inches tall, and a vassal and a eunuch who was less than six feet two inches tall, all belonged to the small class. Those who were five feet two inches tall had to work hard.

古文：小隸臣妾以八月傅為大隸臣妾，以十月益食。
现代文：小隶臣成年，在八月登记为大隶臣，从十月起加发口粮。
English: Minor vassals came of age and were registered as major vassals in August. From October, they received additional rations.

古文：更隸妾節有急事，總冗，以律稟食；不急勿總。
现代文：更隶妾若有紧急差役，集合起来，应按法律规定发给口粮，不急勿需集合。
English: Moreover, if there are emergency dispatchers, they should be given rations according to the law when they gather. There is no urgent need to gather.

古文：城旦之垣及它事而勞與垣等者，旦半夕參；其守署及為它事者，參食之。
现代文：城旦筑墙和作其它与筑墙相当的劳作，早饭半斗，晚饭三分之一斗，站岗和作其它事的，早晚饭各三分之一斗。
English: For the construction of the city wall and other work equivalent to the construction of the wall, half a bucket for breakfast, one-third of a bucket for dinner, one-third of a bucket for standing guard and other work, and one-third of a bucket for breakfast and dinner.

古文：其病者，稱議食之，令吏主。
现代文：有病的，酌情给予口粮，由吏主管。
English: If they are sick, they will be given rations as appropriate, and will be supervised by officials.

古文：城旦舂、舂司寇、白粲操土攻，參食之；不操土攻，以律食之。
现代文：城旦、舂、舂司寇，白粲作土工，早晚饭各三分之一斗，不作土工，按法律规定给予口粮。
English: City Dan, Zou, Zou Sikou, and Bai Zou will work as earthmovers, with one-third of a bucket each for breakfast and dinner. They will not work as earthmovers, and will be given rations according to the law.

古文：日食城旦，盡月而以其餘益為後九月稟所。城旦為安事而益其食，以犯令律論吏主者。
现代文：应按天发给城旦口粮，到月底将剩余的粮食移作九月的口粮，城旦作轻劳作而增加口粮，应按犯令的法律对主管的吏进行论处。
English: Rations should be distributed to the urban poor according to the day, and the remaining grain should be transferred to the September rations by the end of the month, and the urban poor should increase their rations by doing light labor, and the officials in charge should be punished according to the law of violating orders.

古文：舂城旦月不盈之稟。
现代文：舂、城旦服役不满月，其口粮应予扣除。
English: , if a citizen has served for less than a month, his rations shall be deducted.

古文：免隸臣妾、隸臣妾垣及為它事與垣等者，食男子旦半夕參，女子參。食囚，日少半斗。
现代文：免隶臣，隶臣妾筑墙和作其他与筑墙相当劳作的，给予男子早饭半斗，晚饭三分之一斗，女子早晚饭各三分之一斗。
English: Free subordinate vassals, subordinate vassals and concubines to build walls and do other labor equivalent to building walls, give men half a bucket of breakfast, one-third of a bucket of dinner, and one-third of a bucket of women's breakfast and dinner.

古文：隸臣欲以人丁粼者二人贖，許之。
现代文：给受饥饿惩罚的囚犯每天三分之一斗。
English: Prisoners on hunger strike are given a third of a loaf of bread a day.

古文：其老當免老、小高五尺以下及隸妾欲以丁粼者一人贖，許之。
现代文：要求以壮年二人赎一个隶臣，可以允许。要求以壮年一人赎一个已当免老的老年隶臣、身高在五尺以下的小隶臣及妻子，可以允许。用来赎的必须是男子，就用赎的人作隶臣。
English: It is permissible to demand that two men of prime age be used to ransom a vassal. It is permissible to demand that one man of prime age be used to ransom an old vassal who has become senile, a minor vassal who is less than five feet tall, and his wife. The vassal to be ransomed must be a man, and the person to be ransomed is to be used as a vassal.

古文：贖者皆以男子，以其贖為隸臣。女子操紅及服者，不得贖。
现代文：从事文绣女红和制作衣服的女子不准赎，原籍在边远县的被赎后应将户籍迁回原籍。
English: Women who are engaged in embroidering and making clothes are not allowed to be redeemed, and those whose place of origin is in remote counties should move their household registration back to their place of origin after being redeemed.

古文：邊縣者，復數其縣。
现代文：养鸡应离开粮仓，用狗的所养的狗以够用为度。
English: Chickens should be kept out of the granary, and dogs should only be used to the extent necessary.

古文：畜離倉。用犬者，畜犬期足。
现代文：小猪、小鸡不需用的应卖掉，单独记帐。
English: If piglets or chicks are not needed, they should be sold and accounted for separately.

