古文：山高而不崩，则祈羊至矣；渊深而不涸，则沈玉极矣，天不变其常，地不易其则，春秋冬夏，不更其节，古今一也。
现代文：山高而不崩颓，就有人烹羊设祭；渊深而不枯竭，就有人投玉求神。天不改变它的常规，地不改变它的法则，春秋冬夏不改变它的节令，从古到今都是一样的。
English: If the mountain is high and does not collapse, someone will cook a sheep and set up a sacrifice; if the abyss is deep and not exhausted, someone will cast a ball and pray to God. Heaven does not change its routine, the earth does not change its laws, spring, autumn, winter and summer do not change its festivals, and it has been the same from ancient times to the present.

古文：蛟龙得水，而神可立也；虎豹得幽，而威可载也。
现代文：蛟龙得水，才可以树立神灵；虎豹凭借深山幽谷，才可以保持威力。
English: It is only by obtaining water that dragons can establish deities; it is only by virtue of the deep mountains and valleys that tigers and leopards can maintain their power.

古文：风雨无乡，而怨怒不及也。
现代文：风雨没有既定的方向，谁也不会埋怨它。
English: There is no set direction for wind and rain, and no one will complain about it.

古文：贵有以行令，贱有以忘卑，寿夭贫富，无徒归也。
现代文：位高的人发号施令，位低的人忘掉卑贱，长寿、短命、贫穷、富有等等，都不是无因而至的。
English: High-ranking people give orders, low-ranking people forget lowliness, long life, short life, poverty, wealth, etc. are not without reason.

古文：衔命者，君之尊也。受辞者，名之鉉也。
现代文：臣下能奉行命令，是由于君主地位的尊严；臣下能接受指示，是由于君臣名分的作用。
English: The ability of a subject to follow orders is due to the dignity of the monarch's position; the ability of a subject to receive instructions is due to the role of the monarch.

古文：上无事，则民自试。抱蜀不言，而庙堂既修。
现代文：君主不亲自过问，人民就会自己去做事；手执祭器不说话，朝政也会普遍地修明。
English: If the monarch does not personally inquire, the people will do things on their own; if the hand-holding altar does not speak, the government will generally be amended.

古文：槛鹄锵锵，唯民歌之。
现代文：天鹅发出动听的声音，人们会齐声赞美；西周人材济济，殷遗民也会被感化。
English: The swan emits a beautiful sound, and people will praise it in unison; the West Zhou people are rich in talent, and the Yan people will also be influenced.

古文：济济多士，殷民化之，纣之失也。
现代文：对于没有根据的言论，不必听从；对于燕雀聚集的小事，行道者不屑一顾。
English: There is no need to listen to unfounded remarks; pedestrians do not pay attention to the small matter of birds gathering.

古文：飞蓬之问，不在所宾；燕雀之集，道行不顾。
现代文：用牛羊玉器来供奉鬼神，不一定得到鬼神的保佑，只要君主的功业有根基，何必使用珍贵的祭品!
English: Using cow, sheep and jade objects to offer to ghosts and gods does not necessarily receive the blessing of ghosts and gods. As long as the work of the monarch has a foundation, why use precious offerings!

古文：牺牷圭璧，不足以飨鬼神。主功有素，宝币奚为？羿之道，非射也；造父之术，非驭也；奚仲之巧，非斫削也。
现代文：后羿射箭的功夫，不在射箭的表面动作；造父驾车的技术，不在驾车的表面动作；奚仲的技巧，也不在木材的砍削上。
English: The skill of archery is not on the surface of archery; the skill of driving a car is not on the surface of driving a car; the skill of woodworking is not on the cutting of wood.

古文：召远者使无为焉，亲近者言无事焉，唯夜行者独有也。
现代文：召徕远方的人，单靠使者是没有用的；亲近国内的人，光说空话也无济于事。
English: It is of no profit to a man to send a messenger to call a man from a far country: neither is it profitable for him that is near to come with empty words.

古文：平原之隰，奚有于高？
现代文：只有内心里认真行德的君主，才能够独得治国的功效。
English: Only a monarch who is conscientiously virtuous in his heart can gain the effectiveness of governing the country.

古文：大山之隈，奚有于深？
现代文：平原上的小坡，怎么能够算作高？大山上的小沟，怎么能够算作深？
English: How can the small slope on the plain be counted as high? How can the small ditch on the mountain be counted as deep?

古文：訾讆之人，勿与任大。
现代文：专挑好人毛病专说坏人好话的人，是不能委之以重任的。
English: Those who only find fault with good people and only say good things about bad people cannot be entrusted with important tasks.

古文：譕臣者可以远举。顾忧者可与致道。
现代文：谋虑远大的人，可以同他共图大事；见识高超的人，可以同他共行治国之道。
English: A man of great foresight can work with him to achieve great things; a man of great insight can work with him to govern the country.

古文：其计也速而忧在近者，往而勿召也举长者可远见也；裁大者众之所比也。美人之怀，定服而勿厌也。
现代文：但是，对于那种贪图速效而只顾眼前利害的人，走开了就不要召他回来；注重长远利益的人，影响也就深远；材器伟大的人，会得到众人的依赖；要人们感怀自己，一定要行德而不可厌倦。
English: However, for those who are greedy for quick results and only care about their immediate interests, don't call them back when they leave; those who focus on long-term interests will have a far-reaching impact; those with great materials will be relied on by many people; for people to feel themselves, they must be virtuous and not get tired.

古文：必得之事，不足赖也；必诺之言，不足信也。
现代文：不应得而求必得的事情，是靠不住的；不应承诺而完全承诺的语言，是信不得的。
English: Things that are not deserved and must be obtained are unreliable; words that are not promised and fully promised cannot be trusted.

古文：小谨者不大立，訾食者不肥体；有无弃之言者，必参于天地也。
现代文：谨小慎微也不能成大事，就好比挑拣食物不能使身体胖起来一样。能够不放弃以上这些格言的，就能与天地媲美了。
English: A little prudence goes a long way, just as choosing the right food doesn't make you fat. If you don't give up these maxims, you'll be as good as heaven and earth.

古文：坠岸三仞，人之所大难也，而猿猱饮焉，故曰伐矜好专，举事之祸也。
现代文：从三仍高的崖岸上跳下来，人是很难做到的，但猴子却毫不在乎地跳下来喝水。所以说，骄傲自大，独断专行，乃是行事的祸患。
English: It is difficult for a man to jump down from a cliff that is still three stories high, but a monkey jumps down to drink water without a care in the world. Therefore, arrogance and arbitrariness are the scourge of action.

古文：不行其野，不违其马；能予而无取者，天地之配也。
现代文：虽不到野外跑路，也不要把马丢掉。能够做到只给人们好处而不向人们索取报酬的，那就同天地一样伟大了。
English: Even if you don't get to run wild, don't throw your horse away. To be able to only give people benefits without asking people for compensation is as great as heaven and earth.

古文：怠倦者不及，无广者疑神，神者在内，不及者在门，在内者将假，在门者将待。
现代文：懒惰的人总是落后，勤奋的人总是办事神速有效。如果说，办事神速的已经进入室内，那么，落后的还在门外。进入室内的可以从容不迫，在门外的必将疲惫不堪。
English: Lazy people always lag behind, hard-working people are always quick and effective. If the quick-witted have already entered the room, then the laggards are still outside the door. Entering the room can be unhurried, outside the door will be exhausted.

古文：曙戒勿怠，后稚逢殃。
现代文：所以，黎明时玩忽怠惰，日暮时就要遭殃。
English: Therefore, be negligent and lazy at dawn, and you will suffer at dusk.

古文：朝忘其事，夕失其功。
现代文：早上忘掉了应作的事情，晚上就什么成果也没有。
English: In the morning I forgot what I was supposed to do, and in the evening I didn't get anything done.

古文：邪气入内，正色乃衰。
现代文：一个人邪气侵袭到体内，正色就要衰退。
English: When a person's evil spirit invades the body, the positive color will fade.

古文：君不君，则臣不臣。父不父，则子不子。
现代文：君主不像君主的样子，臣子当然就不像臣子；父亲不像父亲的样子，儿子当然就不像儿子。
English: If the sovereign does not look like a sovereign, the vassal will certainly not look like a vassal; if the father does not look like a father, the son will certainly not look like a son.

古文：上失其位，则下踰其节。上下不和，令乃不行。
现代文：君主不按照他的身份办事，臣子就会超越应守的规范。上下不和，政令就无法推行。
English: If the monarch does not act in accordance with his status, the courtier will exceed the norms to be observed. If there is discord between the upper and lower levels, the decree cannot be implemented.

古文：衣冠不正，则宾者不肃；进退无仪，则政令不行。
现代文：君主的衣冠不端正，礼宾的官吏就不会严肃。君主的举动不合乎仪式，政策法令就不容易贯彻。
English: If the crown of the monarch is not correct, the protocol officials will not be serious. The actions of the monarch are not in accordance with the ceremony, and the policies and decrees are not easy to implement.

古文：且怀且威，则君道备矣。
现代文：一方面关怀臣民，另方面再有威严，为君之道，才算完备。
English: On the one hand, the care of subjects, on the other hand, the majesty, the way of the king, is complete.

古文：莫乐之，则莫哀之。莫生之，则莫死之。往者不至，来者不极。
现代文：君主不能使臣民安乐，臣民也就不会为君主分忧；君主不能使臣民生长繁息，臣民也就不会为君主牺牲生命。
English: If the monarch cannot make the subjects happy, the subjects will not worry about the monarch; if the monarch cannot make the subjects grow and prosper, the subjects will not sacrifice their lives for the monarch.

古文：道之所言者一也，而用之者异。
现代文：君主给予臣民的，不确实兑现；臣民对待君主，也是不会全力以赴的。
English: What the monarch gives to his subjects, he does not really fulfill; what the subjects do to the monarch, they do not do their best.

古文：有闻道而好为家者，一家之人也；有闻道而好为乡者，一乡之人也；有闻道而好为国者，一国之人也；有闻道而好为天下者，天下之人也；有闻道而好定万物者，天下之配也。
现代文：关于 道 ，它的理论是一致的，但运用起来则各有不同。有的人懂得道而能治家，他便是治家的人材；有的人懂得道而能治乡，他便是一乡的人材；有的人懂得道而能治国，他便是一国的人材；有的人懂得道而能治天下，他便是天下的人材；有的人懂得道而能使万物各得其所，那便和天地一样伟大了。
English: Regarding the Tao, its theory is consistent, but its application is different. Some people understand the Tao and can govern a family, he is the talent to govern a family; some people understand the Tao and can govern a village, he is the talent to govern a village; some people understand the Tao and can govern a country, he is the talent to govern a country; some people understand the Tao and can govern the world, he is the talent to govern the world; some people understand the Tao and can put everything in its place, that is as great as heaven and earth.

古文：道往者，其人莫来；道来者，其人莫往；道之所设，身之化也。
现代文：失道者，人民不肯来投；得道者，人民不肯离去。道之所在，自身就应该与之同化。 
English: The people are not willing to vote for those who have lost their way, and the people are not willing to leave those who have gained their way. Where the way is, they should assimilate themselves with it.

古文：持满者与天，安危者与人。
现代文：凡是始终保持强盛的，就因为顺从天道；凡是能安危存亡的，就因为顺从人心。
English: Those who always remain strong do so because they follow the heavenly way; those who are able to survive safely do so because they follow their hearts.

古文：失天之度，虽满必涸。上下不和，虽安必危。
现代文：违背天的法则，虽然暂时丰满，最终必然枯竭；上下不和，虽然暂时安定，最终也必然危亡。
English: In violation of the laws of heaven, although temporarily full, it will eventually be exhausted; the discord between the upper and lower levels, although temporarily stable, will eventually be endangered.

古文：欲王天下，而失天之道，天下不可得而王也。
现代文：想要统一天下而违背天道，天下就不可能被他统一起来。
English: If you want to unify the world and go against the heavenly way, it is impossible for the world to be unified by him.

古文：得天之道。其事若自然。失天之道，虽立不安。
现代文：掌握了天道，成事就很自然；违背了天道，虽然成功也不能保持。
English: If you have mastered the heavenly way, it is natural to accomplish things; if you violate the heavenly way, although you are successful, you cannot maintain it.

古文：其道既得，莫知其为之。其功既成，莫知其释之。藏之无刑，天之道也。
现代文：已经得道的，往往不觉察自己是怎样做的；已经成功了，往往又不觉察道是怎样离开的。就好像隐藏起来而没有形体，这就是 天道 。
English: Those who have attained the Way are often unaware of how they have done it; those who have succeeded are often unaware of how the Way left them. It is as if the Way is hidden and has no form. This is the Way of Heaven.

古文：疑今者，察之古不知来者，视之往，万事之生也，异趣而同归，古今一也。
现代文：但是，对当今有怀疑则可以考察古代，对未来不了解，则可以查阅历史。万事的本性，内容虽有不同，但总是同归一理，从古到今都是一样的。
English: However, if you have doubts about the present, you can examine ancient times, and if you do not understand the future, you can consult history. The nature of all things, although different in content, is always the same, and has been the same from ancient times to the present.

古文：生栋覆屋。怨怒不及；弱子下瓦，慈母操棰。
现代文：用新伐的木材做屋柱而房子倒坍，谁也不怨恨木材；小孩子把屋瓦拆下来，慈母也会打棍子。
English: No one grudges the timber when a house collapses because it was built with newly felled timber for pillars; the children tear down the roof tiles, and the loving mother beats a stick.

古文：天道之极，远者自亲。人事之起，近亲造怨。
现代文：顺天道去做，远者都会来亲近；事起于人为，近亲也要怨恨。
English: If you do things the right way, those who are far away will be close to you; if you do things the wrong way, your close relatives will resent you.

古文：万物之于人也，无私近也，无私远也；巧者有余，而拙者不足；其功顺天者天助之，其功逆天者天违之；天之所助，虽小必大；天之所违，虽成必败；顺天者有其功，逆天者怀其兇，不可复振也。
现代文：万物之于人，是没有远近亲疏之分的。高明的人用起来就有余，愚笨的人用起来就不足。顺乎天道去做，天就帮助他；反乎天道去做，天就违背他。天之所助，弱小可以变得强大；天之所弃，成功可以变为失败。顺应天道的可以得其成效，违背天道的就要招致灾祸，且无可挽救。
English: For man, all things are not distantly related. A clever man has more than he can use, but a stupid man has less than he can use. If he follows the heavenly way, heaven will help him; if he goes against the heavenly way, heaven will oppose him. With the help of heaven, the weak can become strong; with the abandonment of heaven, success can turn into failure. Following the heavenly way can be effective, but going against the heavenly way will bring disaster and is irredeemable.

古文：乌鸟之狡，虽善不亲。不重之结，虽固必解；道之用也，贵其重也。
现代文：乌鸦般的交谊，看着友善，其实并不亲密；不重合的绳结，即使坚固，也一定松脱开解。所以，道在实际运用的时候，贵在慎重。
English: Crow-like companionship, looking friendly, is actually not intimate; non-overlapping knots, even if they are strong, must be loosened. Therefore, when practicing the Tao, you should be careful.

古文：毋与不可，毋彊不能，毋告不知；与不可，彊不能，告不知，谓之劳而无功。
现代文：不要交与不可靠的人，不要强给做不到的人，不要告知不明事理的人。交与不可靠的、强予做不到的、告知不明事理的人，就叫作劳而无功。
English: Don't make friends with unreliable people, don't force people who can't do it, and don't inform people who don't know what to do.

古文：见与之交，几于不亲；见哀之役，几于不结；见施之德，几于不报；四方所归，心行者也。
现代文：表面上显示友好的朋友，也就接近于不亲密了；表面上显示亲爱的交谊，也就接近于不结好了；表面上显示慷慨的恩赐，也就接近于不得所报了。只有内心里认真行德，四面八方才会归附。
English: A friendly friend on the surface is close to not being intimate; a dear friend on the surface is close to not being intimate; a generous gift on the surface is close to not being reported.

古文：独王之国，劳而多祸；独国之君，卑而不威；自媒之女，丑而不信，未之见而亲焉，可以往矣；久而不忘焉，可以来矣。
现代文：独断专横的国家，必然疲于奔命而祸事多端；独断专横国家的君主，必然卑鄙而没有威望。这就好比独自议定婚姻的妇女，一定名声不好而没有信誉。但对于尚未见面就令人仰慕的君主，应该去投奔；对于久别而令人难忘的君主，应该来辅佐。
English: A despotic state must be desperate and full of mischief; a despotic prince must be base and without honour; just as a woman who enters into a marriage of her own accord must be disreputable and without credit; but the admirable prince, whom she has not yet seen, she should run to; the memorable prince, whom she has not seen for a long time, she should come to the aid of.

古文：日月不明，天不易也；山高而不见，地不易也。
现代文：日月有不明的时候，但天不会变；山高有看不见的时候，但地不会变。
English: There are times when the sun and moon are unclear, but the sky does not change; there are times when the mountain height is not visible, but the ground does not change.

古文：言而不可复者，君不言也；行而不可再者，君不行也。
现代文：说起话来，那种只说一次而不可再说的错话，人君就不应该说；做起事来，那种只做一次而不可再做的错事，人君就不应该做。
English: When it comes to speaking, people should not say the wrong thing that can only be said once and cannot be said again; when it comes to doing things, people should not do the wrong thing that can only be done once and cannot be done again.

古文：凡言而不可复，行而不可再者，有国者之大禁也。
现代文：凡是重复那些不可再说的言论和那些不可再做的事情，都是一国之君的最大禁忌。
English: The repetition of things that can no longer be said and things that can no longer be done is the greatest taboo for a sovereign.

