古文：梦游下元稹段成式邢凤沈亚之张生刘道济郑昌图韩确
现代文：梦游下元稹段成式邢凤沈亚之张生刘道济郑昌图韩确
English: Sleepwalking in the Yuan Dynasty, the first stage of the formation of the phoenix, Shen Ya's Zhang Sheng, Liu Daoji, Zheng Changtu, Han Ji

古文：梦游下
现代文：梦游下
English: While sleepwalking

古文：元稹
现代文：元稹
English: Yuanxuan

古文：元相稹为御史，鞫狱梓潼。
现代文：唐相元稹做御史的时候，曾到梓潼郡勘察冤狱。
English: When the Emperor of Tang Dynasty, Yuan Shao, was the imperial historian, he went to Zizhi County to investigate the wrongful imprisonment.

古文：时白乐天在京，与名辈游慈恩寺，小酌花下，为诗寄元曰：花时同辞破春愁。醉折花枝作酒筹。
现代文：当时，白居易正在京城与名流们游览慈恩寺。他在花前饮酒时，写诗一首寄语元稹：花时同辞破春愁，醉折花枝作酒筹。
English: At that time, Bai Juyi was touring the Cien Temple with celebrities in Beijing. When he was drinking in front of the flowers, he wrote a poem to send a message to the source: When the flowers are blooming, the same words will break the spring sadness, and when he is drunk, he will break the flower branches to make a wine goblet.

古文：忽忆故人天际去，计程今日到梁州。
现代文：忽忆故人天际去，计程今日到梁州。
English: Forgetting the deceased and going to the sky, I plan to go to Liangzhou today.

古文：时元果及褒城，亦寄《梦游》诗曰：梦君兄弟曲江头，也向慈恩院里游。
现代文：这时的元稹果然到达梁州的褒城。他也寄给白居易一首《梦游》诗：梦君兄弟曲江头，也向慈恩院里游。
English: At this time, Geng Yao finally arrived at Baocheng, Liangzhou. He also sent Bai Juyi a poem of "Sleepwalking": "Meng Jun's brothers head for the Qujiang River, and also travel to Cien Yuan."

古文：驿吏唤人排马去，忽惊身在古梁州。
现代文：驿吏唤人排马去，忽惊身在古梁州。
English: The magistrate called for people to line up and suddenly found himself in Guryangzhou.

古文：千里魂交，合若符契也。
现代文：这对老友真是千里魂交，两首诗和得多么符契呵。
English: This pair of old friends are really soul mates, and the two poems fit together so well.

古文：段成式
现代文：段成式
English: Sectional staircase

古文：段成式常言：闻于医曰：藏气阴多则梦数，阳壮则少梦，梦亦不复记。
现代文：段成式曾经说：我听医生讲，人体内存的阴气多作梦自然就多；人体内存的阳气壮作梦就少，即使作了梦也记不住。
English: Duan Chengshie once said: I heard a doctor say that the more yin qi in the human body's memory, the more dreams will naturally occur; the less yang qi in the human body's memory, the fewer dreams will occur. Even if you have a dream, you can't remember it.

古文：夫瞽者无梦，则知者习也。
现代文：盲人不会作梦，这是因为人所梦见的必须是他熟悉的事物。
English: Blind people can't dream, because what they dream about must be familiar to them.

古文：成式表兄卢有则，梦看击鼓，及觉，小弟戏叩门为衙鼓也。
现代文：段成式的表兄卢有则，梦见击鼓时惊醒，原来是小弟弟跟他开玩笑，把门当作衙门的大鼓敲。
English: Lu Youze, a cousin of Duan Cheng style, woke up when he dreamed of drumming. It turned out that his little brother was joking with him, knocking on the door as a big drum.

古文：又姊婿裴元裕言，群从中有悦邻女者，梦妓遗二樱桃，食之。及觉，核坠枕侧。
现代文：另外，他姐夫裴元裕说，在族中的子侄里，有一个小子迷恋邻居家的女儿，遂梦见妓女送给他两颗樱桃，他吃下后便醒了，樱桃核掉在枕头旁边。
English: In addition, his brother-in-law Pei Yuanyu said that among the sons and nephews in the clan, there was a boy who was infatuated with a neighbor's daughter, and then dreamed that a prostitute gave him two cherries. He woke up after eating, and the cherry stone fell next to the pillow.

古文：李铉著《李子正辩》，言至精之梦，则梦中之身可见。
现代文：李铉写的《李子正辩》中说：至精至诚之梦，梦中的人物形体是可以看见的。
English: In the "Plum Debate" written by Li Wei, he said: "In the most sincere dream, the figure in the dream can be seen.

古文：如刘幽求见妻梦中身也。
现代文：如刘幽想看见妻子在梦中的样子，结果如愿以偿。
English: If Liu Yuxuan saw his wife's appearance in a dream, the result was as he wished.

古文：则知梦不可以一事推矣。
现代文：要知道，作梦不可以从一件事上去独立地推断。
English: You see, dreaming cannot be deduced independently from a single event.

古文：愚者少梦，不独至人，闻之驺皂，百夕无一梦也。邢凤
现代文：愚笨的人很少作梦，梦就偏偏不到他那里去。听说，喂马的驾车的差役们，一百天晚上也作不了一个梦。邢凤
English: Stupid people rarely dream, dreams just don't go their way. I've heard that the drivers who feed the horses can't have a dream for a hundred nights.

古文：元和十年，沈亚之始以记室从事陇西公军泾州，而长安中贤士皆来客之。
现代文：唐宪宗元和十年，沈亚之随从陇西公驻守泾州，任记室从事，长安城里的贤士们都来拜访作客。
English: Tang Xian Zongyuan and ten years, Shen Ya's entourage stationed in Ganzhou, engaged in the registration office, and the sages in Chang'an City all came to visit as guests.

古文：五月十八日，陇西公与客期宴于东池便馆。
现代文：五月十八日，陇西公与客人们如期赴宴于东池便馆。
English: On May 18th, Shaanxi Gong and his guests went to the banquet at Dongchi Banquet Hall as scheduled.

古文：既半，陇西公曰：余少从邢凤游，记得其异，请言之。
现代文：宴会进行了一半，陇西公说道：我小时候，曾跟一个叫邢凤的人出去游玩，遇见一件怪事，想说一说。
English: Halfway through the banquet, Shaanxi Gong said: When I was a child, I went out to play with a man named Yao Feng. I encountered a strange thing and would like to talk about it.

古文：客曰：愿听。
现代文：客人们说：请你讲讲吧，我们都很愿意听。
English: The guests said, "Please speak, we are all willing to listen."

古文：公曰：凤帅家子，无他能。后寓居长安平康里南，以钱百万，买故豪洞门曲房之第。
现代文：陇西公说：邢凤是元帅家的儿子，没有什么才能，后居住在长安城平康里南头，用百万之巨的钱，买下一座已故富豪的宅院，洞门曲房，幽雅僻静。
English: Shaanxi Gong said: Hao Feng is the son of a marshal family, has little talent, and later lived in the south end of Ping Kangli in Chang'an City. With a huge amount of money, he bought a deceased rich man's mansion, a cave-door curved room, elegant and secluded.

古文：即其寝而昼偃，梦一美人，自西楹来，环步从容，执卷且吟，为古妆，而高鬟长眉，衣方领、绣带，被广袖之襦。
现代文：当天，他就搬进去躺倒在床上。接着，他梦见一个美人，从西门走进来，脚步轻盈而从容，手捧书卷在吟诵着。她长长的眉毛，头上扎着高高的环形发髻，穿着方领衣服，系着绣带，披着宽袖小短袄，完全是古装打扮。
English: That same day, he moved in and lay down on the bed. Next, he dreamed of a beautiful woman walking in through the west door, her steps light and unhurried, holding a scroll and chanting. She had long eyebrows, a high ring-shaped bun on her head, wore a square-necked dress with an embroidered belt, and a wide-sleeved miniskirt, all in period dress.

古文：凤大悦曰：丽者何自而临我哉？
现代文：邢凤非常高兴，说： 美人为什么来到我的身边？ 
English: Yao Feng was very happy and said, "Why did the beautiful woman come to me?

古文：美人曰： 此妾家也。
现代文：美人说： 这是我的家呵。
English: The beauty said, "This is my home."

古文：妾好诗，而常缀此。
现代文：我喜欢诗，并常常写几句。
English: I like poetry and often write a few lines.

古文：凤曰： 幸少留，得观览。
现代文：邢凤说： 那么，请你小坐，我想欣赏欣赏。
English: Yao Feng said, "Well, please sit down. I want to enjoy the show."

古文：于是美人授诗，坐西床，凤发卷，视首篇，题之曰《春阳曲》，终四句。
现代文：于是，那美人坐在西床，把自己写的诗递给邢凤。邢凤接过来，先看首篇，题目叫《春阳曲》，一共四句。
English: As a result, the beauty sat on the west bed and handed the poem she had written to Yao Feng. Yao Feng took it over and read the first chapter, entitled "Spring Song," a total of four sentences.

古文：其后他篇，皆类此数十句。
现代文：以后几篇计几十句，都跟前几句类似。
English: The next few articles, totaling dozens of sentences, are similar to the previous ones.

古文：美人曰： 君必欲传，无令过一篇。
现代文：美人说： 你一定想把它传播出去，那我何不记你一篇呢？ 
English: The beautiful woman said, "You must want to spread the word, so why don't I write one for you?"

古文：凤即起，从东庑下几上，取彩笺，传《春阳曲》。其词曰： 长安少女玩春阳，何处春阳不断肠？
现代文：邢凤当即站起来，从东屋的案上取下彩笺，抄写《春阳曲》，这诗写道： 长安少女玩春阳，何处春阳不断肠！
English: Zou Feng immediately stood up, took down the colored pencils from the case of the east building, and copied the "Spring Sun Song." This poem wrote: Chang'an girls play with the spring sun, where the spring sun keeps the intestines!

古文：舞袖弓弯浑忘却，罗帷空度九秋霜。
现代文：舞袖弓弯浑忘却，罗帷空度九秋霜。
English: Dance sleeves and bows are forgotten, and the drapery is empty.

古文：凤卒吟，请曰： 何谓弓弯？ 
现代文：邢凤吟罢，请教问什么是 弓弯 ？
English: What is a bow bend?

古文：曰： 妾昔年父母使教妾此舞。
现代文：美人答道： 这是一种舞蹈，小时候父母让人教的。
English: Beauty replied, "This is a dance that my parents had me learn when I was a child.

古文：美人乃起，整衣张袖，舞数拍，为弯弓状以示凤。既罢，美人低头良久，既辞去。
现代文：她说完站起身，整衣张袖，舞了几拍，做弯弓状让邢凤看，舞罢，美人低头良久，欲告辞而去。
English: After she finished speaking, she stood up, straightened her dress, opened her sleeves, danced a few beats, and made a bow to show the phoenix. After the dance, the beauty bowed her head for a long time and left to say goodbye.

古文：凤曰： 愿复少留。
现代文：邢凤说： 请你再稍坐一会儿。
English: Yao Feng said, "Please sit down a little longer."

古文：须臾间竟去，凤亦寻觉，昏然忘有所记。
现代文：须臾间那美人已不知去向。
English: The beautiful woman in the corner of my eye has disappeared.

古文：及更，于襟袖得其辞，惊视，复省所梦，事在贞元中，后凤为余言如是。
现代文：邢凤惊醒过来，昏昏沉沉，似乎什么也没记住，一更天后，他从自己的衣袖间找出那首《春阳曲》，这才回忆起梦中的一切。事情发生在贞元年间，后来邢凤对我把这件事讲了一遍。
English: Zou Feng woke up in a daze, drowsy, and seemed to remember nothing. A day later, he found the "Spring Song" from his sleeve, which recalled everything in the dream. It happened in the first year of Zhengyuan, and later Zou Feng told me about it again.

古文：是日，监军使与宾府郡佐，及宴陇西独狐铉、范阳卢简辞、常山张又新、武功苏涤皆叹息曰：可记。
现代文：这一天，监军使与宾府郡佐及陇西独孤铉、范阳卢简辞、常山张又新、武功苏涤都叹息说：值得写啊！
English: On this day, the supervising envoy and the deputy governor of Binfu County and the governor of Shaanxi, Fan Yanglu, Changshan Zhang Yaxin, and the martial arts hero Su Ya all sighed and said: It is worth writing!

古文：故亚之退而著录。
现代文：所以沈亚之便回去奋笔著书。
English: So Shen Yazhi went back to work on his book.

古文：明日，客复有至者，渤海高元中、京兆韦谅、晋昌唐炎、广汉李镯、吴兴姚合，洎亚之复集于明玉泉。
现代文：第二天，客人中的渤海高元中、京兆韦谅、晋昌唐炎、广汉李镯、吴兴姚合等又与沈亚之来到明玉泉。
English: On the second day, guests including Bohai Gaoyuan Junior High School, Beijing Zhaowei Peng, Jinchang Tangyan, Guanghan Li Yao, Wu Xingyao He and others came to Mingyuquan with Shen Yazhi.

古文：因出所著以示之。
现代文：沈亚之拿出作品给大家看。
English: Shen Yazhi brought out his work for everyone to see.

古文：于是姚合曰：吾友王生者，元和初，夕梦游吴，侍吴王。
现代文：于是姚合说：我的朋友王生，在元和初年一天晚上作梦游吴国并侍奉吴王夫差。
English: So Yao He said, "My friend Wang Sheng, one night in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was sleepwalking in the State of Wu and serving the King of Wu.

古文：生应教为词曰： 西望吴王阙，云书凤字牌。
现代文：很久后的一天，见宫中辇车出动，吹箫击鼓，说是要葬西施。夫差悲悼不已，让门客们作挽歌。王生写道： 西望吴王阙，云书凤字牌。
English: One day, a long time later, Wang Sheng saw the carriage in the palace drive out, blowing gongs and beating drums, saying that they were going to bury Xi Shi. The husband was sad and mournful, and asked the guests to make an elegy. Wang Sheng wrote: Xi Wang Wu Wang Qian, Yun Shu Feng Zhai.

古文：连江起珠帐，择土葬金钗。
现代文：连江起珠帐，择土葬金钗。
English: Lianjiang from the pearl account, the choice of land for the burial of gold ingots.

古文：满地红心草，三层碧玉阶。
现代文：满地红心草，三层碧玉阶。
English: Heartwort all over the floor, three layers of jasper steps.

古文：春风无处所，凄恨不胜怀。
现代文：春风无处所，凄恨不胜怀。
English: There is no place for the spring breeze.

古文：词进，王甚佳之。
现代文：王生写完诗并将它献上去，吴王夫差深为赞赏。
English: After Wang Sheng finished writing the poem and presented it, Wu Wangfu deeply appreciated it.

古文：及寤，能记其事。
现代文：然后他就醒了，但能把梦中的事情记录下来。
English: He then woke up but was able to write down what happened in the dream.

古文：王生本太原人也。
现代文：这个王生，本是太原人呵！
English: This Wang Sheng is originally from Taiyuan!

古文：沈亚之
现代文：沈亚之
English: Shen Yazhi

古文：太和初，沈亚之将之邠，出长安城，客索泉邸舍。
现代文：唐文宗太和初年，沈亚之要到邠州去，出了长安城，住在索泉旅舍。
English: In the first year of the reign of Empress Dowager Tang Wenzong, Shen Yazhi wanted to go to Zhangzhou. He left Chang'an City and stayed at the Soquan Hostel.

古文：春时，昼梦入秦。
现代文：那是春天，他大白天作梦，梦见自己到了秦国。
English: It was spring, and he had a dream in broad daylight, dreaming that he had arrived in Qin.

古文：主内史廖，举亚之。
现代文：一位姓廖的主内史，竭力向秦公举荐沈亚之。
English: A leading historian, surnamed Liao, tried his best to recommend Shen Ya to Qin.

古文：秦公召至殿前，膝前席曰：寡人欲强国，愿知其方，先生何以教寡人？
现代文：秦公将沈亚之召到殿前，迎面而坐说：我想使国家强大起来，想听听你有何良策，能不能传授于我？
English: Qin Gong called Shen Yazhi to the front of the hall and sat facing him and said: I want to make the country strong, I want to hear what good policies you have, can you teach me?

古文：亚之以昆、彭、齐桓对，公悦，遂试补中涓，使佐西乞术伐河西。亚之率将卒前，攻下五城。
现代文：沈亚之以昆、彭、齐桓公作例子回答他的问题，秦穆公听了很高兴，随即任他中涓之职，派他辅佐西乞术去讨伐河西，沈亚之身先士卒，冲锋陷阵，连攻下五座城池。
English: Shen Ya took Kun, Peng, and Qi Huan as examples to answer his question. Qin Mu Gong was very pleased to hear this, and immediately appointed him to the position of Vice Admiral, and sent him to assist Soshi Kishi to fight west of the river. Shen Ya was the first to charge into the battle, and captured five castles in succession.

古文：还报，公大悦，起劳曰：大夫良苦，休矣。
现代文：穆公得知这一战报，十分兴奋，起身慰劳他说：你辛苦了，好好休息一下吧。
English: When Mu Gong heard the news, he was very excited. He got up to console him and said, "You've worked hard, take a good rest."

古文：居久之，公幼女弄玉婿萧史先死。
现代文：他在宫中住了好长时间，秦穆公的小女儿叫弄玉，她的丈夫萧史已经死了。
English: He had lived in the palace for a long time. Qin Mu Gong's little daughter, Zhaoyu, and her husband, Xiao Shi, had died.

古文：公谓亚之曰：微大夫，晋五城非寡人有，甚德大夫。
现代文：穆公对沈亚之说：没有你，晋国的五座城池不会为秦所有，你立大功了。
English: Mu Gong said to Shen Yazhi, "Without you, the five cities in Jin Province would not be owned by Qin. You have done a great service.

古文：寡人有爱女，而欲与大夫备洒扫，可乎？亚之少自立，雅不欲遇幸臣蓄之，固辞，不得请。
现代文：我有个爱女，想让她侍奉于你，如何？沈亚之少年就自立自强，不愿受人之恩而臣服之，便推辞，但没有推辞掉。
English: I have a beloved daughter, and I want her to serve you, how about that? Shen Ya's boy is self-reliant and self-reliant, and does not want to be subjugated by the grace of others, so he refused, but he did not refuse.

古文：拜左庶长，尚公主，赐金二百斤。
现代文：于是，他被拜为左庶长，赐金二百斤，并将公主许配给了她。
English: As a result, he was worshipped as the second-in-command, given two hundred kilos of gold, and the princess was betrothed to her.

古文：民间犹谓萧家公主。
现代文：老百姓还称弄玉为萧家公主。
English: The common people also call her Xiao Jia Princess.

古文：其日有黄衣人中贵，疾骑马来，延亚之入宫阙。
现代文：一天，一个穿黄衣服有权势的太监骑着马疾速跑来，请沈亚之进宫。
English: One day, a powerful eunuch dressed in yellow and riding a horse came running to invite Shen Ya into the palace.

古文：甚严。
现代文：宫殿上下十分威严。
English: The palace is majestic from top to bottom.

古文：呼公主出，髻发，著偏袖衣，装不多饰，其芳殊明媚，笔不可模样。
现代文：公主弄玉被呼唤出来。她穿着偏袖长衣，头发黑而稠密，尽管没有着意妆饰，却显得殊丽妩媚，难以描绘。
English: Princess Tamaki is called out. She is wearing a long-sleeved dress, her hair is dark and thick, and although she is not wearing any make-up, she is so beautiful that it is hard to describe.

古文：侍女祗承，分立左右者数百人。
现代文：侍女们恭恭敬敬地分立两旁，共有数百人之多。
English: The ladies-in-waiting, several hundred in all, stand respectfully apart on either side.

古文：召见亚之便馆，居亚之于宫，题其门曰翠微宫。
现代文：穆公在便馆召见了沈亚之，并让他住进宫中，门上题了翠微宫三个字。
English: Mu Gong called Shen Yazhi in the guest house and let him live in the palace. The door was inscribed with the words "Tsui Weiguang" (翠微宫).

古文：宫人呼为沈郎院。
现代文：宫中的人们称这里为沈郎院。
English: The people in the palace call this place Shen Rong Yuan.

古文：虽备位下大夫，繇公主故，公入禁卫。
现代文：虽然他位居下大夫，但由于公主的原因，可以在宫禁中自由出入。
English: Although he is a junior doctor, he can freely enter and leave the palace due to the princess's reasons.

古文：公主喜凤箫，每吹箫，必翠微宫高楼上。
现代文：公主喜欢凤箫，每次吹箫，必然要坐在翠微宫的高楼顶上。
English: The princess likes to whistle, and every time she does, she has to sit on the top of a tall building in the Tsui Wai Court.

古文：声调远逸，能悲人，闻者莫不身废。
现代文：那箫声悠远动情，催人泪下，听到者莫不进入忘我之境界。
English: That beeping sound is long and emotional, it brings people to tears, and those who hear it can't help but enter the realm of self-forgetfulness.

古文：公主七月七日生，亚之当无祝寿。
现代文：公主是七月七日出生的，沈亚之不知道拿什么为她祝寿才好。
English: The princess was born on July 7, and Shen Yazhi didn't know what to do to wish her a happy birthday.

古文：穆公遇亚之之礼兼同列，恩赐相望于道。
现代文：内史廖曾受秦国派遣把一批歌伎赠给西戎，西戎回赠水犀小合。沈亚之从廖处得到了它，就把它献给了公主。
English: Inner historian Liao was sent by Qin to present a batch of kabuki plays to Xi Rong, and Xi Rong returned the gift of a water rhinoceros. Shen Yazhi received it from Liao and dedicated it to the princess.

古文：复一年春，公之始平，公主忽无疾卒，公追伤不已。
现代文：公主十分欣赏喜爱，便系在了裙带上。穆公对待沈亚之像对待女儿一样，恩赐有加，众人有目其睹。第二年春天，穆公的心情刚刚平静下来，弄玉公主忽然无病而死。
English: The princess was very appreciative and attached to her crony. Mu Gong treated Shen Ya Rong as if she were his daughter. He was very generous with gifts, which was witnessed by many people. In the spring of the following year, when Mu Gong's mood had just calmed down, Princess Noryu suddenly died without any illness.

古文：将葬咸阳原，公命亚之作挽歌。应教而作曰：泣葬一枝红，生同死不同。
现代文：穆公追伤不已，准备埋葬在咸阳原上。穆公让沈亚之写挽歌，他奉命写道：泣葬一枝红，生同死不同。
English: Mu Gong was injured and ready to be buried in Xianyang Plain. Mu Gong asked Shen Ya to write an elegy, and he was ordered to write: Crying and burying a red twig, life and death are different.

古文：金钿坠芳草，香绣满春风。
现代文：金钿坠芳草，香绣满春风。
English: The grass is golden and fragrant, and the fragrance is full of spring breeze.

古文：旧日闻箫处，高楼当月中。
现代文：旧日闻箫处，高楼当月中。
English: At the site of the former Nichibunken, the high-rise building is still standing.

古文：梨花寒食夜，深闭翠微宫。
现代文：梨花寒食夜，深闭翠微宫。
English: On cold nights, the pear blossoms are in full bloom.

古文：进公，公读词善之。
现代文：写完之后呈送上去，穆公读完连声称好。
English: After writing, he submitted it, and Mu Gong read it and said it was good.

古文：时宫中有出声若不忍者，公随泣下。
现代文：这时，见宫中不少人都忍不住而哭出声满脸是泪，穆公也随之抽泣起来。
English: At this time, seeing that many people in the palace could not help but cry out, his face was full of tears, and Mu Gong also began to sob.

古文：又使亚之作墓志铭，独忆其铭曰：白杨风哭兮石甃髯莎，杂英满地兮春色烟和。
现代文：他又让沈亚之作墓志铭，只记得上面写道：白杨风哭兮石甃髯莎，杂英满地兮春色烟和。
English: He also asked Shen Ya to write an epitaph, but he only remembered that it said: "The poplars are weeping, the rocks are rustling, and the ground is covered with spring-colored smoke."

古文：珠愁纷瘦兮不生绮罗，深深埋玉兮其恨如何。
现代文：珠愁纷瘦兮不生绮罗，深深埋玉兮其恨如何？
English: What is the hatred of a thin, thin, thin, thin, deeply buried gemstone?

古文：亚之亦送葬咸阳原，宫中十四人殉。
现代文：他也到咸阳原上为弄玉送葬，有十四个宫女作了人殉。
English: He also went to the Xianyang Plain to attend the funeral of Noryu, and fourteen court ladies were killed.

古文：亚之以悼怅过戚，被病。
现代文：沈亚之悲伤惆怅过度，病倒了。
English: Shen Ya's grief was too much and he fell ill.

古文：犹在翠微宫，然处殿外特室，不宫中矣。
现代文：他虽然还在翠微宫中，却被安置殿外特室，实际上不算在宫中了。
English: Although he was still in the Imperial Palace, he was placed in a special room outside the palace, and was not actually in the palace.

古文：居月余，病良已。公谓亚之曰：本以小女相托久要，不谓不得周奉君子，而先物故。
现代文：住了一个多月后，病渐渐好了，穆公对他说道：本来想把小女的终生都托付给你，不料她尚未侍奉于你，却先死去了。
English: After staying for more than a month, his illness gradually improved, and Mu Gong said to him, "I originally wanted to entrust my little girl to you for the rest of her life, but she died before she could serve you.

古文：弊秦区区小国，不足辱大夫。然寡人每见子，即不能不悲悼。
现代文：我们这个小小的秦国，虽然不能辱没你，但我一看见你，就不能不为死去的小女而悲哀。
English: Although our small Qin state cannot humiliate you, when I see you, I cannot help but mourn for the little girl who died.

古文：大夫盍适大国乎？
现代文：你何不去投奔大国呢？
English: Why don't you go to a big country?

古文：亚之对曰：臣无状，肺腑申公室，待罪左庶长。
现代文：沈亚之回答说：臣没什么才能。但赤心报君，待罪左庶长。
English: Shen Yazhi replied, "I have no talent, but I am willing to repay you with my whole heart. I am willing to be punished."

古文：不能从死公主，君免罪戾，使得归骨父母国，臣不忘君恩如日。
现代文：我没有随公主一起去死，你却免罪于我，使我能归骨于自己的祖国，你这太阳一般的恩德我将永记不忘。
English: I did not die with the princess, but you absolved me, so that I could return to my homeland. I will never forget your sun-like kindness.

古文：将去，公追酒高会，声秦声，舞秦舞。舞者击髆附髀呜呜，而音有不快，声甚怨。
现代文：临行之前，穆公设酒相送，唱秦腔，跳秦舞，跳舞的人击髆拍腿呜呜地叫，听起来不愉快，似有一股幽怨之气。
English: Before leaving, Mu Gong set up a wine delivery, sang the Qin opera, danced the Qin dance, and the dancers pounded their gongs and tapped their feet. It sounded unpleasant, as if there was a sense of bitterness.

古文：公执酒亚之前曰：寿。
现代文：穆公举杯来到沈亚之面前说：先祝你长寿。
English: Mu Gong raised his glass in front of Shen Ya and said, "First, I wish you a long life."

古文：予顾此声少善，愿沈郎赓杨歌以塞别。
现代文：我听这声音不善，希望你作一首歌来纠正弥补一下吧。
English: I don't listen well to this sound, I hope you make a song to correct and make up for it.

古文：公命趣进笔砚，亚之受命，立为歌辞曰：击髆舞，恨满烟光无处所。泪如雨，欲拟著词不成语。
现代文：穆公催促人拿来笔砚，沈亚之受命，当即写下一首歌词：击髆舞，恨满烟光无处所；泪如雨，欲拟著辞不成语。
English: Mu Gong urged someone to bring a pen, and Shen Yazhi was ordered to immediately write a song lyric: "Hitting the gong dance, hate filled with smoke and light, nowhere to go; tears like rain, I want to write a poem."

古文：金凤衔红旧绣衣，几度宫中同看舞。
现代文：金凤衔红旧绣衣，几度宫中同看舞。
English: Gold phoenix rank red old embroidered clothes, several times in the palace to watch the dance.

古文：人间春日正欢乐，日暮东风何处去。
现代文：人间春日正欢乐，日暮东风何处去？
English: The spring day is joyous in the human world. Where will the east wind go at dusk?

古文：歌卒，授舞者，杂其声而道之，四座皆泣。
现代文：写完，送给跳舞的人。在七嘴八舌的嘈杂声中，他把歌词念了一遍，四周都抽泣不已。
English: When he had written it, he gave it to the dancers. Amidst the cacophony of voices, he recited the lyrics, and everyone around him was sobbing.

古文：既再拜辞去，公复命至翠微宫，与公主侍人别。
现代文：沈亚之再次向穆公拜别，穆公又让他去翠微宫同公主的侍从们告别。
English: Shen Yazhi once again bade farewell to Mu Gong, and Mu Gong let him go to Cui Wei Palace to bid farewell to the princess's attendants.

古文：重入殿内时，见珠翠遗碎青阶下，窗纱檀点依然。
现代文：重新走进殿内时，只见公主留下的珠翠散落在石阶上，纱窗上的浅红色小点依然如故。
English: When I re-entered the hall, I saw the pearls left by the princess scattered on the stone steps, and the light red dots on the screen window were still there.

古文：宫人泣对亚之，亚之感咽良久，因题宫门诗曰：君王多感放东归，从此秦宫不复期。
现代文：宫女们哭泣着面对着亚之，亚之也感动地呜咽良久，于是在宫门上题诗一首：君王多感放东归，从此秦宫不复期。
English: The court ladies wept in front of him, and he was moved to sob for a long time, so he inscribed a poem on the palace gate: "The king is more than willing to return to the East. From now on, the Qin Palace will never return."

古文：春景自伤秦丧主，落花如雨泪燕脂。
现代文：春景自伤秦丧主，落花如雨泪燕脂。
English: The spring scene self-inflicted Qin's death, and the falling flowers are like tears of rain.

古文：竟别去。
现代文：然后告别而去。
English: Then he said goodbye and left.

古文：命车驾送出函谷关，出关已，送吏曰：公命尽此，且去。
现代文：穆公派人用车把他送出函谷关。出关后，送行的小吏说：穆公让送到这里就回去。
English: Mu Gong sent someone with a car to take him out of Han Valley Pass. After leaving the pass, the escorting minor official said: "Mu Gong, let me take you here and then go back."

古文：亚之与别，语未卒，忽惊觉，卧邸舍。
现代文：沈亚之与他告别，话未说完，忽然惊醒了。
English: Shen Yazhi said goodbye to him, but before he could finish his speech, he suddenly woke up.

古文：明日，亚之为友人崔九万具道之。九万博陵人，谙古。
现代文：原来自己仍躺在索泉邸舍里。第二天，沈亚之把这件事告诉了朋友崔九万。崔九万是博陵县人，对历史颇有研究。
English: Originally, he was still lying in the Soquan residence. The next day, Shen Yazhi told his friend Cui Jiuwan about this. Cui Jiuwan is from Boling County and is quite a student of history.

古文：谓余曰：《皇览》云，秦穆公葬雍橐泉祈年宫下，非其神灵凭乎？
现代文：他对沈亚之说：关于写皇帝的书上说，秦穆公死后葬在雍橐泉祈年宫下面，这不是神灵显圣的凭证吗？
English: He said to Shen Yazhi, "According to the book about writing the emperor, Qin Mu Gong died and was buried under the Yongle Spring Prayer Palace. Isn't this proof of the manifestation of the divine spirit?

古文：亚之更求得秦时地志，说：如九万言，呜呼！弄玉既仙矣，恶又死乎？
现代文：沈亚之得到秦代的地理志书，说：如果像崔九万说的那样，哎呀，弄玉既然是神仙，怎么又会死了呢？
English: Shen Yazhi got hold of a geography book from the Qin Dynasty and said, "If, as Cui Jiuyuan said, ah, since jade-making is divine, how can it die?

古文：张生
现代文：张生
English: Zhang Sheng

古文：有张生者，家在汴州中牟县东北赤城坂。
现代文：有个叫张生的人，家住在汴州中牟县东北角的赤城坂。
English: There is a man named Zhang Sheng, who lives on Akagi Slope in the northeast corner of Zhongmou County, Luzhou.

古文：以饥寒，一旦别妻子游河朔，五年方还。
现代文：因为饥寒交迫，一天告别妻子去了黄河以北，五年之后才返来。
English: Because of hunger and cold, one day he said goodbye to his wife and went north of the Yellow River, only to return five years later.

古文：自河朔还汴州，晚出郑州门，到板桥，已昏黑矣。
现代文：傍晚。他出了郑州的城门，到板桥的时候，天已昏黑。
English: In the evening, he left the city gate of Zhengzhou. When he arrived at Banqiao, it was already dark.

古文：乃下道，取陂中径路而归。
现代文：于是，他下了大道，沿小路匆匆而行。
English: So he got off the main road and hurried along the side road.

古文：忽于草莽中，见灯火荧煌。宾客五六人，方宴饮次。生乃下驴以诣之。
现代文：忽然。只见草莽中灯光闪耀，有五六个人正在饮酒，张生就跳下驴来向前行去。
English: Suddenly, he saw the lights shining in the grass, and five or six people were drinking. Zhang Sheng jumped off the donkey and walked forward.

古文：相去十余步，见其妻亦在坐中，与宾客语笑方洽。
现代文：走了十来步。他见自己的妻子也在那伙人当中，同那伙人说说笑笑挺热乎。
English: After walking about ten steps, he saw that his wife was also in the group, and it was very warm to talk and laugh with the group.

古文：生乃蔽形于白杨树间，以窥之。
现代文：张生就掩蔽在白杨树间，偷偷观察。
English: Zhang Sheng took cover among the poplar trees and secretly observed.

古文：见有长须者持杯：请措大夫人歌。
现代文：有个长着大胡子的人。举起酒杯道：请夫人为我们唱歌。
English: There was a man with a long beard. He raised his glass and said, "Please have your wife sing for us."

古文：生之妻，文学之家，幼学诗书，甚有篇咏。
现代文：张生的妻子，出身文学世家，少年学习诗书，且写过不少篇章。
English: Zhang Sheng's wife, from a literary family, studied poetry books as a boy, and has written many chapters.

古文：欲不为唱，四座勤请。乃歌曰：叹衰草，络纬声切切。
现代文：她不想唱。那些人便恳请不已，没办法，她便唱道：叹衰草，络纬声切切。
English: She didn't want to sing. The people pleaded with her to sing, but she couldn't do it, so she sang: "Sighing grass, weeping grass, weeping grass."

古文：良人一去不复还，今夕坐愁鬓如雪。
现代文：良人一去不复还，今夕坐愁鬓如雪。
English: My lover is gone forever, and tonight I'm as sad as snow.

古文：长须云：劳歌一杯。
现代文：那个大胡子说：有劳你唱歌，我干了这杯。
English: The bearded man said: "You're welcome to sing. I've had it.

古文：饮讫。酒至白面年少，复请歌。
现代文：喝完之后，那酒杯又传到一个白脸少年手中，他请张生的妻子再唱一首。
English: After drinking, the glass was passed to a white-faced boy, who asked Zhang Sheng's wife to sing another song.

古文：张妻曰：一之谓甚，其可再乎？
现代文：张妻说：唱一首都有点过份，岂能再唱？
English: Zhang Zuma said, "Singing one song is a bit too much, can't you sing again?"

古文：长须持一筹筷云：请置觥。有拒请歌者，饮一钟。
现代文：大胡子拿着一双筷子说：请拿个杯来，有不想唱歌的，就喝一盅。
English: The bearded man took a pair of chopsticks and said, "Please bring a glass. If you don't want to sing, just drink a sip."

古文：歌旧词中笑语，准此罚。
现代文：唱旧歌如果有笑的，也这样罚。
English: If you laugh while singing old songs, you will be punished in the same way.

古文：于是张妻又歌曰：劝君酒，君莫辞。落花徒绕枝，流水无返期。
现代文：于是，张妻又唱道：劝君酒，君莫辞，落花徒绕枝，流水无返期。
English: As a result, Zhang Zhe also sang: "Persuade you to drink, you can't refuse, the fallen flowers are twisted around the branches, and there is no return period for running water."

古文：莫恃少年时，少年能几时？
现代文：莫恃少年时，少年能几时？
English: When you are a boy, how long can a boy dance?

古文：酒至紫衣者，复持杯请歌。
现代文：酒杯传到紫衣人手里，他也端杯请张妻唱歌。
English: The wine glass passed into the hands of the man in purple, and he also held out his glass and invited Zhang Zhe to sing.

古文：张妻不悦，沉吟良久，乃歌曰：怨空闺，秋日亦难暮。
现代文：张妻不高兴了，沉吟好久，就又唱道：怨空闺，秋日亦难暮。
English: Zhang Zuma was not happy, and after chanting for a long time, she sang again, "Complaining is futile, autumn is also difficult."

古文：夫婿断音书，遥天雁空度。
现代文：夫婿断音书，遥天雁空度。
English: The husband-and-wife break-up story, far away in the sky.

古文：酒至黑衣胡人，复请歌。
现代文：酒杯传到黑衣胡人手上，又请张妻唱歌。
English: The wine glass passed into the hands of the black-clad bearded man, and he asked Zhang Zhe to sing.

古文：张妻连唱三四曲，声气不续。沉吟未唱间，长须抛觥云：不合推辞。
现代文：她连续唱了三四首，有点上气不接下气了，沉吟未唱时，大胡子抛过酒杯说：你不应该推辞。
English: She sang three or four songs in a row, a little out of breath, and when she was not singing, the bearded man threw a glass of wine and said: "You should not refuse."

古文：乃酌一钟。
现代文：就斟满一盅。
English: Just fill it to the brim.

古文：张妻涕泣而饮，复唱送胡人酒曰：切切夕风急，露滋庭草湿。
现代文：张妻哭泣着把酒喝下去，为那黑衣胡人唱道：切切夕风急，露滋庭草湿。
English: Zhang Zhan wept as she drank the wine and sang a song for the black-clad bearded man: "The evening breeze is strong, and the grass in the garden is wet."

古文：良人去不回，焉知掩闺泣。
现代文：良人去不回，焉知掩闺泣。
English: A good man can't go back, I can't hide my tears.

古文：酒至绿衣少年，持杯曰：夜已久，恐不得从容。
现代文：酒杯传到绿衣少年手上，他举杯说：夜已深了，恐怕不能再这样不慌不忙了。
English: A glass of wine was passed to the young man in green. He raised his glass and said, "It's late at night, I'm afraid I can't be this unhurried anymore.

古文：即当睽索，无辞一曲，便望歌之。
现代文：既然要分别了，可是还没有一首歌呢！便希望张妻再唱一首。
English: Since they are going to separate, but they don't have a song yet, they want Zhang Zhe to sing one more song.

古文：又唱云：萤火穿白杨，悲风入荒草。
现代文：她又唱道：萤火穿白杨，悲风入荒草。
English: She also sang: "Fireflies pierce the poplars, and the gloomy wind blows into the weeds."

古文：疑是梦中游，愁迷故园道。
现代文：疑是梦中游，愁迷故园道。
English: Doubt is a dream midstream, melancholy is the old garden path.

古文：酒至张妻，长须歌以送之曰：花前始相见，花下又相送。
现代文：酒杯传到张妻手上，大胡子唱了一首歌送给她：花前始相见，花下又相送。
English: The wine glass was passed to Zhang Zhen's hand, and the bearded man sang a song to give to her: See each other before the flowers bloom, and send each other flowers after the flowers bloom.

古文：何必言梦中，人生尽如梦。
现代文：何必言梦中，人生尽如梦。
English: In a dream, life is like a dream.

古文：酒至紫衣胡人，复请歌云：须有艳意。
现代文：酒杯传到紫衣胡人手里，请张妻再唱一首，并要有艳词艳意。
English: The wine glass passes into the hands of the bearded man in purple, and he asks his wife Zhang to sing one more song, and make sure the lyrics are bright.

古文：张妻低头未唱间，长须又抛一觥。
现代文：张妻低头未唱间，大胡子又抛过一只酒杯。
English: Zhang Zifu bowed her head and did not sing, and the bearded man threw another wine glass.

古文：于是张生怒，扪足下得一瓦，击之。中长须头。
现代文：这时候，张生怒火中烧忍无可忍，从脚下摸起一块瓦，砸去，正中大胡子的脑袋。
English: At this time, Zhang Sheng's patience was burned beyond endurance in his rage. He picked up a piece of tile from under his feet and smashed it, hitting the bearded man's head.

古文：再发一瓦，中妻额。
现代文：他又扔了一块瓦，打中了妻子的额头。
English: He threw another shingle, hitting his wife in the forehead.

古文：阒然无所见。
现代文：突然。所有的人都不见了踪影。
English: Suddenly, everyone was gone.

古文：张君谓其妻已卒，恸哭连夜而归。
现代文：张生颇为惊异，认为妻子已经死了，连夜恸哭而归。
English: Zhang Sheng was quite surprised. He thought his wife was dead and returned home crying all night.

古文：及明至门，家人惊喜出迎。
现代文：到家天已经亮了，家人惊喜地迎出门来。
English: It was already daylight when I got home, and my family greeted me with surprise.

古文：君问其妻，婢仆曰：娘子夜来头痛。
现代文：张生问妻子现在怎样，婢仆们说：娘子昨晚头痛得厉害。
English: Zhang Sheng asked his wife how she was now, and the maids said, "My daughter had a bad headache last night.

古文：张君入室。问其妻病之由。曰：昨夜梦草莽之处，有六七人。遍令饮酒，各请歌。
现代文：张生进屋，问妻子头痛的原因，妻子说：昨天晚上梦见了到了一堆杂草丛生的地方，他们共有六七个人，轮番让我喝酒，每个人各让我唱一首歌，我一共唱了六七首。
English: Zhang Sheng went into the house and asked his wife the reason for his headache. His wife said: "Last night, I dreamt of a place full of weeds. There were six or seven of them, and they took turns to get me to drink. Each one asked me to sing a song. I sang a total of 67 songs."

古文：孥凡歌六七曲，有长须者频抛觥。方饮次，外有发瓦来，第二中孥额。因惊觉，乃头痛。
现代文：有一个大胡子频频抛酒杯给我，我刚喝了第二杯，忽然有瓦块飞来，第二块打中了我的额头，于是惊醒了，就开始头痛。
English: A bearded man kept throwing glasses of wine at me. I had just finished my second glass when suddenly a brick came flying. The second hit my forehead and I woke up with a headache.

古文：张君因知昨夜所见，乃妻梦也。
现代文：张生这才知道自己昨夜所看到的情景，乃是妻子的梦呵。
English: It was only then that Zhang Sheng knew that what he saw last night was his wife's dream.

古文：刘道济
现代文：刘道济
English: Liu Daoji

古文：光化中，有文士刘道济，止于天台山国清寺。
现代文：唐昭宗光化年间。有位文士叫刘道济，住在天台山国清寺。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhaozong of Tang, a scribe named Liu Daoji lived in Guoxing Temple on Mount Tiantai.

古文：尝梦见一女子，引生入窗下，有侧柏树葵花，遂为伉俪。
现代文：他曾经梦见一个女子，领着他来到窗前，旁边有一片柏树和葵花。接着，二人结为夫妻。
English: He once dreamed of a woman who led him to a window, next to a field of cypress and sunflowers, and the two became husband and wife.

古文：后频于梦中相遇，自不晓其故。
现代文：后来，刘道济常常同她在梦中相遇。自己却不知道其中的原因，实在是无可奈何。
English: Later, Liu Daoji often encountered her in his dreams. He didn't know the reason, but he had no choice.

古文：无何，于明州奉化县古寺内，见有一窗，侧柏葵花，宛若梦中所游。有一客官人，寄寓于此室，女有美才，贫而未聘，近中心疾，而生所遇，乃女子之魂也。
现代文：近来患了心病。而刘道济所梦见的那个女子，乃是她的魂呵。
English: She had recently suffered from a heart disease, and the woman Liu Daoji saw in his dream was her soul.

古文：又有彭城刘生，梦入一倡楼，与诸辈狎饮。
现代文：还有，彭城的刘生，梦见自己进了一个妓院，与其同类边玩妓女边喝酒。
English: Also, Liu Sheng from Pengcheng dreamed that he entered a brothel and drank alcohol with his peers while playing with prostitutes.

古文：尔后但梦，便及彼处。
现代文：后来他一作梦就到那个地方去了。
English: Then he went to that place in a dream.

古文：自疑非梦，所遇之姬，芳香常袭衣，亦心邪所致。
现代文：他自己怀疑这不是梦，因为他所遇见的妓女把香气留在了他的衣服上，常常使他心痴神迷。这也是由于他心邪所致呵。
English: He himself suspected that this was not a dream, because the prostitutes he met left their scent on his clothes, often making him infatuated, which was also due to his evil heart.

古文：闻于刘山甫也。
现代文：这个故事是听刘山甫讲的。
English: This story was told by Liu Shanfu.

古文：郑昌图
现代文：郑昌图
English: Zheng Changtu

古文：郑昌图登第岁，居长安。
现代文：郑昌图登第那年，住在长安城里。
English: Zheng Chang lived in the city of Chang'an in the first year of his rise to power.

古文：夜后纳凉于庭，梦为人殴击，擒出春明门，至合大路处石桥上，乃得解。
现代文：他晚上到庭间纳凉，梦见被人殴打，用绳子绑紧押出春明门，到该上大路的一座石桥上，才得以脱身。
English: In the evening, he went to the courtyard to cool off, dreamed of being beaten, tied with a rope and pushed out of the Spring Gate, to a stone bridge on the highway, and was able to escape.

古文：遗其紫罗履一双，奔及居而寤。
现代文：他甩掉脚上穿的那双紫罗鞋，急忙跑回家。这才从梦中醒来。
English: He threw off the pair of violet shoes he was wearing and hurried home. Only then did he wake up from his dream.

古文：甚困，言于弟兄，而床前果失一履。
现代文：他很困惑，对兄弟们讲了，而床前果然丢了一只鞋。
English: Confused, he told his brothers, and sure enough, he lost a shoe at the foot of the bed.

古文：旦今人于石桥上追寻，得之。
现代文：白天他让人去石桥寻找，真的找到了。
English: During the day, he had people go to the stone bridge to look for it, and they did find it.

古文：韩确
现代文：韩确
English: Han Ji-woo

古文：越州有卢册者，举秀才，家贫，未及入京。
现代文：越州有个人叫卢册，中了秀才，他家里很穷，没有到京城去。
English: In Yuezhou, there was a man named Lu Chuan, who was a gifted student. His family was very poor, so he did not go to Beijing.

古文：在山阴县顾树村知堰，与表兄韩确同居。
现代文：在山阴县顾树村管理河坝，与表哥韩确住在一起。
English: He manages a dam in Gu Shu Village, Sanyin County, and lives with his cousin Han Ju.

古文：自幼嗜鲙，尝凭吏求鱼。
现代文：韩确自幼特别喜欢吃鱼，曾经向一个买鱼的小吏要鱼。
English: Han Zhen particularly likes to eat fish since he was a child. He once asked a fishmonger for fish.

古文：韩方寐，梦身为鱼。在潭有相忘之乐。
现代文：韩确刚刚睡下，梦见自己变成了鱼，在潭中有忘乎所以的乐趣。
English: Han Zhen just fell asleep and dreamed that he had turned into a fish and was having unforgettable fun in the pond.

古文：见二渔人，乘艇张网，不觉身入网，被取掷桶中。覆之以苇。
现代文：这时，有两个渔民乘船而来并撒下了网，韩确不知不觉钻进网中，又被取出扔进桶里，上头盖上了芦苇。
English: At this time, two fishermen came by boat and cast a net. Han Zhengyi unknowingly got into the net, was taken out and thrown into a barrel, and his head was covered with reeds.

古文：复睹所凭吏，就潭商价。
现代文：他又看见那位买鱼的小吏站在潭边商量鱼价。
English: He also saw the fishmonger standing at the edge of the pond, haggling over the price of fish.

古文：吏即揭鳃贯绠，楚痛殆不可忍。
现代文：那小吏揭开鱼鳃，又拽拽穿在上面的绳子，痛得他实在忍不住了。
English: The little official opened the bait and tugged at the rope that was attached to it. It was so painful that he could not bear it.

古文：及至舍，历认妻子奴仆。
现代文：小吏把鱼带回家，让妻子奴仆一一观看。
English: The clerk took the fish home and let his wife and servant watch.

古文：有顷，置砧斫之，苦若脱肤，首落方觉。
现代文：有顷，他被放到砧板上，用刀斧砍起来，疼得像是被剥了皮，直到头被砍掉方才醒来。
English: At one point, he was put on the chopping block and chopped up with a knife and axe. It hurt like being skinned, and he didn't wake up until his head was chopped off.

古文：神痴良久，卢惊问之，具述所梦。
现代文：他痴呆呆地坐了好长时间，卢册吃了一惊，问他是怎么回事。
English: He sat in a daze for a long time. Lu Chuan was taken aback and asked him what was going on.

古文：遽呼吏，访所市鱼处，洎渔子形状，与梦不差。
现代文：韩确把这个梦对他讲了，然后立刻喊来那个小吏，到市场的鱼摊上寻访那两个卖鱼人。那两个渔民终于找到了，看他们的模样，与他梦中所见丝毫不差。
English: Han did tell him about the dream, and then immediately called the petty official to go to the fish stall in the market to look for the two fish sellers. The two fishermen were finally found, and their appearance was no different from what he had seen in his dream.

古文：韩后入释，住祗园寺，时开成二年也。
现代文：后来韩确皈依了佛门，住在祗园寺。当时是唐文宗开成二年。
English: Later, Han Zhengyi took refuge in Buddhism and lived in the Yuyuan Temple. At that time, it was the second year of the founding of the Tang Wen Sect.

