古文：中方本图
现代文：中方本图
English: Chinese side of this map

古文：若因处虚守静人物，人物则皇。
现代文：遵守虚静原则，让人人物物自得其适，如此，可成皇业。
English: Adhering to the principle of emptiness and tranquility, letting people and things take their own course, in this way, can become an imperial cause.

古文：五和时节，君服黄色，味甘味，听宫声，治和气，用五数，饮于黄后之井，以倮兽之火爨，藏温濡，行敺养，坦气修通，凡物开静，形生理。
现代文：遵循常道，顺从天命，尊重贤士，授官于有德之人，如此，可成帝业。
English: To follow the common path, to obey the destiny, to respect the sages, and to give positions to those with virtue, in this way, one can become an emperor.

古文：常至命，尊贤授德，则帝。
现代文：以身作则，实行仁义忠信，如此，可成王业。
English: Lead by example, practice benevolence, righteousness and loyalty, so that you can become a king.

古文：身仁行义，服忠用信，则王。审谋章礼，选士利械，则霸。
现代文：审虑战争谋略，彰明攻伐之理，精选兵士，修利武器，如此，可成霸业。
English: Consider the strategy of war, clarify the principle of attack, select soldiers, and improve weapons, so as to achieve hegemony.

古文：定生处死，谨贤修伍，则众。
现代文：安定民生，安葬民死，敬重贤者，修睦百姓，可以赢得群众。
English: Stable people's livelihood, peaceful burial of the dead, respect for the wise, and reconciliation of the people can win the masses.

古文：信赏审罚，爵材禄能，则强。
现代文：赏功有信，罚过审明，把爵禄授给良材与能者，可以带来国强。
English: Rewarding credit with credit, punishing with judgment, and awarding peerage to good and capable people can bring about a strong country.

古文：计凡付终，务本饬末，则富。
现代文：注重筹算，致力于农业并管好工商末业，可以带来国富。
English: Paying attention to budgeting, devoting oneself to agriculture and managing the industrial and commercial sectors well can bring about national wealth.

古文：明法审数，立常备能，则治。
现代文：修明法度，详审政策，建立常规，配备能臣，可以带来国治。
English: Clarifying laws and regulations, reviewing policies in detail, establishing rules and regulations, and equipping capable ministers can bring about national governance.

古文：同异分官，则安。
现代文：按照不同职务，实行分官而治，可以带来国安。
English: According to different positions, the implementation of sub-officials and governance can bring national security.

古文：通之以道，畜之以惠，亲之以仁，养之以义，报之以德，结之以信，接之以礼，和之以乐，期之以事，攻之以官，发之以力，威之以诚。
现代文：用道理开导人们，用恩惠笼络人们，用仁爱团结人们，用道义培养人们，用施德对待人们，用信用交结人们，用礼节接待人们，用音乐和悦人们，从工作上考核人们，从言论上考察人们，用强力推动人们，用戒律威服人们。
English: Use reason to enlighten people, use grace to entice people, use benevolence to unite people, use morality to cultivate people, use generosity to treat people, use credit to connect people, use etiquette to receive people, use music to entertain people, use work to evaluate people, use speech to examine people, use force to push people, and use discipline to coerce people.

古文：一举而上下得终，再举而民无不从，三举而地辟散成，四举而农佚粟十，五举而务轻金九，六举而絜知事变，七举而外内为用，八举而胜行威立，九举而帝事成形。
现代文：这样，第一年施政的结果，上下都取得好的政绩；第二年施政的结果，人民就没有不服从的；第三年施政的结果，土地开垦，五谷有了收成；第四年施政的结果，农民安乐而粮食富裕；第五年施政的结果，徭役减轻而国库充足；第六年施政的结果，做到了先知国事的变化；第七年施政的结果，做到了内外都为我所用；第八年施政的结果，胜局实现，国威树立；第九年施政的结果，帝业就算是初具规模了。
English: Thus, as a result of the first year's administration, both the upper and lower levels achieved good political results; as a result of the second year's administration, the people did not disobey; as a result of the third year's administration, the land was reclaimed and the crops were harvested; as a result of the fourth year's administration, the farmers were happy and the grain was rich; as a result of the fifth year's administration, the laborers were relieved and the state treasury was sufficient; as a result of the sixth year's administration, the prophetic changes in national affairs were achieved; as a result of the seventh year's administration, both domestic and foreign affairs were

古文：九本搏大，人主之守也。八分有职，卿相之守也。七官饰胜备威，将军之守也。六纪审密，贤人之守也。五纪不解，庶人之守也。
现代文：有九项根本原则，内容宏博广大，是人君必须遵守的；使八个方面，各尽常规，是卿相必须做到的；有七条制胜之道，足以立威，是将军必须遵守的；有六条纲纪，详审严密，是贤人必须遵守的；有五条总则，不可懈怠，是百姓必须遵守的。
English: There are nine fundamental principles, the content of which is vast and extensive, which must be observed by the people; eight aspects, each with its own rules, must be achieved by the noblemen; there are seven ways to win, which are sufficient to establish authority, which must be observed by the general; there are six principles, detailed and rigorous, which must be observed by the wise; there are five general rules, which must not be slackened, which must be observed by the people.

古文：动而无不从，静而无不同。治乱之本三，尊卑之交四，富贫之经五，盛衰之纪六，安危之机七，强弱之应八，存亡之数九。
现代文：决定国家治乱有三个根本，决定国家安危有四个关键，决定国家贫富有五条总则，决定国家盛衰有六条纲纪，决定国家地位高低的有七项有效因素，检查国家强弱的有八条验证，决定国家存亡的有九条规律。
English: There are three fundamentals for determining whether a country is in a state of chaos, four keys for determining whether a country is in a state of security, five general principles for determining whether a country is rich or poor, six principles and disciplines for determining whether a country is prosperous or impoverished, seven effective factors for determining whether a country has a high or low status, eight verifications for checking whether a country is strong or weak, and nine laws for determining whether a country survives.

古文：练之以散群傰署。
现代文：统用这些，使国人不立朋党而协力同心，风教也就显著了。
English: All of these have been used to make the Chinese people not to form a party, but to work together, and the teaching of morality has also become obvious.

古文：凡数财署，杀僇以聚财，劝勉以选众，使二分具本。
现代文：杀戮罪人以聚集财物，奖励好人以移风易俗。要使两方面都有所本。
English: Kill the sinners to accumulate wealth, reward the good people to change the customs.

古文：此居图方中。
现代文：行赏一定要细密地审查，行刑一定要申明于国内。
English: The reward must be carefully reviewed, and the punishment must be declared in the country.

古文：中方副图
现代文：中方副图
English: Chinese side sub-map

古文：必得文威武官习，胜之，务时因，胜之。
现代文：一定要文官有德，武官有威；为官者应熟习胜敌之务。
English: Civil servants must have virtue, military officers must have dignity; officials should be familiar with the task of defeating the enemy.

古文：终无方，胜之。几行义，胜之。理名实，胜之。急时分，胜之。事察伐，胜之。行备具，胜之。原无象，胜之。
现代文：因时而动，是制胜的总则；敌众无防，是制胜的时机；兵行正义，是制胜的正理；表彰将士名实，是胜敌的急务；确立等级名分，是制胜的大事；研讨征伐过程，是制胜的行动；战具完备，是制胜的起因；军行隐蔽，是制胜的根本。
English: Acting in accordance with the times is the general principle of victory; when the enemy is defenseless, it is the time to win; justice in military operations is the right principle of victory; commending the soldiers' names and deeds is the urgent task of defeating the enemy; establishing the rank and title is the important matter of victory; studying the process of conquest is the action of victory; complete war equipment is the cause of victory; military operations are hidden, which is the fundamental of victory.

古文：定闻知，胜。定选士，胜。定制禄，胜。定方用，胜。定纶理，胜。定死生，胜。定成败，胜。定依奇，胜。定实虚，胜。定盛衰，胜。
现代文：能确定统一权威的，可以制胜；能确定计算财用的，可以制胜；能审定敌军情报的，可以制胜；能确定选择将士的，可以制胜；能确定禄赏制度的，可以制胜；能审定军器制造方案的，可以制胜；能审定事物伦类次序的，可以制胜；能审定死生的，可以制胜；能审定成败的，可以制胜；能审定正兵与奇兵的，可以制胜；能审定虚实的，可以制胜；能审定盛衰形势的，可以制胜。
English: If you can determine the unified authority, you can win; if you can determine the financial calculation, you can win; if you can verify the enemy's intelligence, you can win; if you can determine the selection of soldiers, you can win; if you can determine the reward system, you can win; if you can determine the military equipment manufacturing plan, you can win; if you can determine the order of things, you can win; if you can determine the dead and the living, you can win; if you can determine the success and failure, you can win; if you can determine the regular soldiers and the special soldiers, you can win; if you can determine the false, you can win; if you can determine

古文：举机诚要，则敌不量。用利至诚，则敌不校。
现代文：所掌握的战机，确实是紧要的，敌人便无法估量；所运用的有利条件，完全是真实的，敌人便无法抗拒。
English: The aircraft at one's disposal is truly critical, and the enemy cannot estimate it; the favorable conditions used are completely real, and the enemy cannot resist.

古文：明名章实，则士死节。奇举发不意，则士欢用。
现代文：显耀名声，表彰战绩，将士就计心死节；运用奇兵，出敌不意，将士就乐于为用。
English: Shining reputation, awarding achievements, soldiers are ready to die; using extraordinary soldiers, unexpected enemy, soldiers are happy to use.

古文：交物因方，则械器备。因能利备，则求必得。
现代文：考核军备，研讨其制造方案，兵器就能完备；根据才能，用人在胜任之处，人材就有求必得。
English: Assess the armament, study its manufacturing plan, and the weapon will be complete; according to the talent, where the employer is competent, the talent will have to be obtained.

古文：执务明本，则士不偷。备具无常，无方应也。
现代文：掌握将士职务，明定本分，将士就不会苟且敷衍；军备和战具无尚优越，敌人就无法应付了。
English: If the duties and responsibilities of soldiers are clearly defined, soldiers will not be overzealous; if the armaments and war equipment are superior, the enemy will not be able to cope.

古文：听于钞，故能闻未极。视于新，故能见未形，思于濬，故能知未始。发于惊，故能至无量。动于昌，故能得其宝。立于谋，故能实不可故也。
现代文：听得细致，所以能听到还没有到来的声音；看在极早，所以能观察还没有形成的事物；想得深远，所以能想到还没有开始的事情；动得急骤，所以能出乎敌人的意料；干得冒险，所以能夺得敌国的宝器；立足于运筹谋划，所以能兵力坚实而不被敌国攻破了。
English: If you listen carefully, you can hear sounds that have not yet arrived; if you look very early, you can observe things that have not yet been formed; if you think far ahead, you can think of things that have not yet begun; if you move abruptly, you can surprise the enemy; if you take risks, you can seize the enemy's treasure; if you are based on operational planning, you can have a solid military force and not be broken by the enemy.

古文：器成教守，则不远道里。号审教施，则不险山河。
现代文：武器完好又严守教令，就不伯远道行军；号令严明又经过训练，就不怕山河险阻。
English: If the weapons are in good condition and the instructions are strictly followed, the troops can march a long way; if the orders are clear and the troops are trained, they will not be afraid of mountains and rivers.

古文：博一纯固，则独行而无敌。慎号审章，则其攻不待权与。
现代文：意志专一而纯实坚定，就可以所向无敌；微号严谨而旗帜分明，就可以一破敌而不靠外援了。
English: If one's will is single-minded, pure and firm, one can become invincible; if one's microneedle is strict and one's banner is clear, one can defeat the enemy without relying on foreign aid.

古文：明必胜，则慈者勇。器无方，则愚者智。攻不守，则拙者巧。
现代文：指明必胜的道理，慈软的人也会变得勇猛；握有无法防御的武器，愚蠢的人也会变得精明；攻打没有守备的敌军，笨拙的人也会变得巧妙。
English: By pointing out the principle of inevitable victory, the soft-hearted person will also become brave; holding an indefensible weapon, the stupid person will also become shrewd; attacking an unguarded enemy army, the clumsy person will also become clever.

古文：数也。
现代文：这都是必然的道理。
English: This is all inevitable.

古文：动慎十号。明审九章。饰习十器。善习五官。谨修三官。
现代文：要勤慎对待十种号令，明确分辨九种旗章，监督操练十种兵器，充分演习 五教 ，严格训练 三官 。
English: It is necessary to diligently deal with ten kinds of calls, clearly distinguish nine kinds of flags, supervise the exercise of ten kinds of weapons, fully exercise the five teachings, and strictly train the three officials.

古文：必设常主。计必先定。
现代文：兵中主帅一定要常设不缺，作战计划必须事前定好。
English: There must be no shortage of permanent commanders among the soldiers, and the battle plan must be set in advance.

古文：求天下之精材。论百工之锐器。器成，角试否臧。
现代文：要征集天下的精良器材，评审各种工匠的精锐武器；武器制成后要比试优劣。
English: It is necessary to collect the world's fine equipment and review the elite weapons of various craftsmen; after the weapons are made, they will be compared.

古文：收天下之豪杰，有天下之称材。
现代文：要招收天下的豪杰，拥有天下的能手。
English: To recruit the world's heroes, to have the world's experts.

古文：说行若风雨，发如雷电。
现代文：行军应该像风雨一般地迅速，发兵应该像雷电一般地猛烈。
English: The march should be as swift as the wind and rain, and the sending of troops should be as violent as lightning.

古文：此居于图方中。东方本图
现代文：东方本图
English: Eastern part of this map

古文：春行冬政，肃。
现代文：天下各地，强国成为亲眷，弱国成为藩属。
English: In all parts of the world, strong countries have become relatives, and weak countries have become vassals.

古文：行秋政，雷。行夏政，阉。
现代文：有所行动，他们无不从命；平时无事，他们也没有分歧。
English: If there is an action, they are ready to fight to the death; if there is no action, they are not divided.

古文：十二，地气发，戒春事。
现代文：举事动兵要有理所据，处在有理地位则举事必有所得。
English: There must be a reasonable basis for raising an army, and if you are in a reasonable position, you must have something to gain from raising an army.

古文：十二，小卯，出耕。
现代文：要保持和好而不生嫌隙，贵贱都没有纷争，意外的事变就会堵塞住了。
English: It is necessary to maintain harmony without creating a rift, there are no disputes between the rich and the poor, and unexpected events will be blocked.

古文：十二，天气下，赐与。
现代文：东方副图兵器完好，不如入境而敌军不知；教练再熟，不如动兵而出敌不意。
English: If the weapons are in good condition, it is better to enter the country without the enemy knowing; if the coach is more experienced, it is better to mobilize the troops and take the enemy by surprise.

古文：十二，义气至，修门闾。
现代文：入境而敌人不知，敌人就无法防御我们；动兵能出敌不意，敌人就无法应付我们。
English: If we enter the territory without the enemy's knowledge, the enemy will not be able to defend us; if the enemy mobilizes unexpectedly, the enemy will not be able to deal with us.

古文：十二，清明，发禁。十二，始卯，合男女。
现代文：敌人无法应付，我军就全胜而没有伤害；敌人无法防御，我军就必胜而所向无敌。
English: If the enemy cannot cope with it, our army will win a complete victory without being harmed; if the enemy cannot defend itself, our army will be victorious and invincible.

古文：十二，中卯。
现代文：不了解四项机要，不过九天则军心游离惊恐；不注意防御工事，不过八天则外敌有隙可乘；戒备不谨慎，不过七天则内部出现谗谋；防范不加强，不过六天则出现窃盗之徒；不犒赏死战的将士，不过四天，我军财物就要落入敌军之手了。
English: Because, raising soldiers with morality means harmony among the people, and raising soldiers with virtue means unity among the people.

古文：十二，下卯。
现代文：南方本图
English: Harmony and unity can make forces converge, and convergence can be coordinated.

古文：三卯同事，八举时节。君服青色，味酸味，听角声，治燥气，用八数，饮于青后之井。
现代文：确定大小官阶，明确上下名分，而且对群臣有司都有所监督，这样就下不越上，贱不越贵了。
English: Determine the size of the official rank, clear the upper and lower grades, and supervise the group of ministers and officials. In this way, the lower does not become higher, and the lower does not become more expensive.

古文：以羽兽之火爨。藏不忍，行敺养。
现代文：法制确立，办法得当，而且没有结党营私的人们，这样就上尊下卑，远近都不会有越轨行为了。
English: With the establishment of the legal system, proper measures, and people who are not partisan, there will be no deviant behavior.

古文：必明其一，必明其将，必明其政，必明其士。
现代文：南方副图必须了解敌情，必须了解敌将，必须了解敌方政事，必须了解敌方士兵。
English: We must understand the enemy situation, we must understand the enemy general, we must understand the enemy's political affairs, and we must understand the enemy's soldiers.

古文：四者备，则以治击乱，以成击败。
现代文：掌握了这四个方面，就可能作到以治击乱，以成击败了。
English: Once these four aspects are mastered, it will be possible to fight chaos with law and order, and defeat chaos with success.

古文：数战则士疲，数胜则君骄，骄君使疲民，则国危。
现代文：多次出战则战士疲劳，多次得胜则君主骄傲。骄傲的君主驱使疲劳的人民作战，国家就危险了。
English: Many battles make soldiers tired, many victories make the monarch proud. The proud monarch drives the tired people to fight, and the country is in danger.

古文：至善不战，其次一之。
现代文：最高水平的用兵是不需作战而定胜局，次好的才是一战而定。
English: The highest-level use of troops is to win the game without fighting, and the next best is to win the war.

古文：大胜者积众。胜无非义者，焉可以为大胜。
现代文：所谓大胜，指的是积累多次胜利而没有非正义的战争，才能算得上大胜。
English: The so-called great victory refers to the accumulation of multiple victories without an unjust war, in order to be considered a great victory.

古文：大胜，无不胜也。
现代文：能作到大胜，那是无往而不胜利的。
English: If you can achieve a great victory, then it is inevitable and not a victory.

古文：此居于图南方方外。西方本图
现代文：西方本图
English: Western part of this map

古文：秋行夏政，叶。
现代文：要视察男女的生养情况，要修治乡间的什伍编制，要计算物资贮备的增减，要核定各级官职的数字，要养老恤弱而不可遗弃，要申明利害而不藏私心。
English: It is necessary to inspect the status of men's and women's birth and upbringing, to rectify the distribution of peasants in the countryside, to calculate the increase and decrease of material reserves, to verify the number of officials at all levels, to provide old-age pensions for the weak and not abandon them, and to declare interests without concealing selfishness.

古文：行春政，华。
现代文：西方副图
English: Western sub-map

古文：行冬政，秏。十二，期风至，戒秋事。
现代文：战争起始要使人不知开端，战争结束要使人不知末尾。起始不见开端好比 道 ，结束不见末尾好比 德 。
English: The beginning of the war should make people not know the beginning, and the end of the war should make people not know the end. The beginning without the beginning is like the Tao, and the end without the end is like virtue.

古文：十二，小卯，薄百爵。
现代文：道是不可量度的，德是不可测算的。
English: Tao is immeasurable, virtue is incalculable.

古文：十二，白露下，收聚。十二，复理，赐与。
现代文：不可量度，所以敌军强大也无法图谋我军；不可测算，所以敌军伪诈也不敢对抗我军。
English: It is immeasurable, so the enemy's powerful army can't plot against our army; it is immeasurable, so the enemy's deception can't stand up against our army.

古文：十二，始节赋事。十二，始卯，合男女。
现代文：两者兼而施之，无论动兵或息兵，都能取得有效的结果；养兵要合于道德。
English: A combination of the two, whether mobilisation or de-mobilisation, can achieve effective results; the raising of troops should be ethical.

古文：十二，中卯。
现代文：因为，养兵以道则人民和睦，养兵以德则人民团结。
English: Because, raising soldiers with morality means harmony among the people, and raising soldiers with virtue means unity among the people.

古文：十二，下卯。
现代文：和睦团结就能使力量聚合，聚合就能协调。
English: Harmony and unity can make forces converge, and convergence can be coordinated.

古文：此居于图西方方外。北方本图
现代文：普遍地协调相聚，那就谁也不能伤害了。北方本图
English: If everyone cooperates with each other, then no one can be harmed.

古文：冬行秋政，雾。行夏政，雷。行春政，烝泄。
现代文：如果秋季推行冬季的政令，就会阴雾弥漫；推行夏季政令，就会雷声阵阵；推行春季时的政令，就会地气蒸发泄漏。
English: If the winter decree is implemented in the fall, it will be foggy; if the summer decree is implemented, it will be thunder; if the spring decree is implemented, it will evaporate and leak.

古文：十二，始寒，尽刑。
现代文：十二天，天气始寒，适宜施行刑杀，使死罪之人不羁在狱中。
English: On the twelfth day, the weather turned cold, and it was appropriate to carry out capital punishment, so that those who committed capital crimes would not be restrained in prison.

古文：十二，小榆，赐予。
现代文：十二天，是越冬的小榆节，君主应颁行赏赐于臣民。
English: On the twelfth day, it is the Little Egret Festival of wintering, and the monarch should award rewards to his subjects.

古文：十二，中寒，收聚。
现代文：十二天，是中寒节气，命令民众收聚谷物、敛藏果实。
English: On the twelfth day, the midwinter solstice, the people were ordered to collect grain and hoard fruit.

古文：十二，中榆，大收。
现代文：十二天，是中榆的节气，当命令民众全面地收藏。
English: Twelve days, is the Mid-Autumn Festival, when the public is ordered to collect comprehensively.

古文：十二，寒至，静。十二，大寒，之阴。
现代文：十二天，大寒节气，即冬至节到，君主应当颁令停止农事，使农民得以进入静养以求无事而安心。十二天，大寒至阴节气。
English: On the twelfth day, the coldest day of the year, that is, the winter solstice, the monarch should issue an order to stop farming, so that farmers can enter the retreat to seek peace of mind.

古文：十二，大寒终三寒同事。
现代文：十二天，大寒终节气。三寒期间，行事相同。
English: On the twelfth day, the Great Cold is the last solar term. During the Three Colds, it is the same.

古文：六行时节，君服黑色，味咸味，听征声，治阴气，用六数，饮于黑后之井。以鳞兽之火爨。
现代文：寒冬正值水气运行时节，君主宜穿戴黑色服饰，品尝咸味的食物，静心欣赏徵调音乐，调理盛阴之气，取用六数，遵循六行时令要求，饮用北方黑后之井的水，取用东方鳞兽之火来使用或炊煮，以迎接阳春之气到来。
English: The cold winter is the season of water and gas operation. The monarch should wear black clothing, taste salty food, meditate to appreciate the music, adjust the yin and yang, use six numbers, follow the six lines of seasonal requirements, drink the water from the well of the northern black queen, and use or cook with the fire of the oriental scaly beast to welcome the arrival of the spring breeze.

古文：藏慈厚，行薄纯。坦气修通，凡物开静，形生理。器成于僇，教行于钞。
现代文：应当心怀仁慈淳厚，身行省薄纯俭，以保持言行纯朴仁厚，使平和之气循环流通；地气畅通，万物和顺安宁，顺其自然生理、自然生成形体，顺乎自然天理。
English: One should be benevolent and chaste in mind, practice thrift and frugality in order to keep one's words and deeds pure and benevolent, and circulate the peaceful qi; the earth's qi should flow smoothly, all things should be peaceful and tranquil, and should follow their natural physiology, naturally generated form, and natural providence.

古文：动静不记，行止无量。
现代文：器物制做得好，在于工艺周到；教化实行得好，在于施教仔细。
English: If the utensil system is well done, it is because the craftsmanship is thoughtful; if the education is well implemented, it is because the teaching is careful.

古文：戒审四时以别息，异出入以两易，明养生以解固，审取予以总之。
现代文：动与静失去纪律，行与止就没有规则。所以，要慎重根据四时来变化作息，分理财物出入来整饬交易，要明白休养生息以解除凶灾，审查财物取予来进行总算。
English: Movement and stillness lose discipline, and there is no rule for action and rest. Therefore, it is necessary to carefully change the schedule according to the four o'clock, sort out the inflow and outflow of property to rectify the transaction, understand the rest and recuperation to relieve the disaster, and review the acquisition of property to carry out the final calculation.

古文：一会诸侯，令曰： 非玄帝之命，毋有一日之师役 。
现代文：第一次会集诸侯下令说：没有玄帝的命令，不许有一天战争。
English: The first gathering of princes decreed: "Without the Emperor's order, there must not be a war."

古文：再会诸侯，令曰：养孤老，食常疾，收孤寡。
现代文：第二次会集诸侯下令说：要供养孤老，供养常病者并收养孤儿寡妇。
English: The second meeting of the princes ordered: to support the elderly, to support the sick and to adopt orphans and widows.

古文：三会诸侯，令曰：田租百取五。市赋百取二。关赋百取一。毋乏耕织之器。
现代文：第三次会集诸侯下令说：田租只收取百分之五，市场收税百分之二，关卡收税百分之一，不要使人民缺乏耕织的生产工具。
English: The third meeting of the princes ordered: only five percent of the land rent should be collected, two percent of the market tax should be collected, and one percent of the checkpoint tax should be collected, so as not to make the people lack the production tools for farming and weaving.

古文：四会诸侯，令曰：修道路，偕度量，一称数。薮泽以时禁发之。
现代文：第四次会集诸侯下令说：要修筑道路，划一度量标准，统一重量计算；林薮湖泽要按规定时问封禁开放。
English: The fourth meeting of the princes ordered that: roads should be built, a standard of quantity should be set, and a uniform weight should be calculated; Linfen Lake should be opened according to regulations.

古文：五会诸侯，令曰：修春秋冬夏之常祭，食。天壤山川之故祀，必以时。
现代文：第五次会集诸侯下令说：春秋冬夏的经常祭祀，天地山川的例行祭祀，都必须按时进行。
English: The fifth assembly of princes decreed that the regular sacrifices of spring, autumn, winter and summer, as well as the routine sacrifices of heaven, earth, mountains and rivers, must be carried out on time.

古文：六会诸侯，令曰：以尔壤生物共玄官，请四辅，将以礼上帝。
现代文：第六次会集诸侯下令说：把你们地方的产品，贡进于玄宫，并且请四辅主持，礼祭上天。
English: At the sixth meeting, the princes ordered: "Take the products of your region to the Imperial Palace, and ask the four assistants to preside over the ceremony.

古文：七会诸侯，令曰：官处四体而无礼者。流之焉莠命。
现代文：第七次会集诸侯下令说：为官而在视、言、貌、听方面无礼的，以秽乱教命论处，流放之。
English: The seventh assembly of the princes decreed: Those officials who are disrespectful in terms of appearance, speech, appearance, and listening will be punished with defilement, disruption of religious life, and exile.

古文：八会诸侯，令曰：立四义而毋议者，尚之于玄官，听于三公。
现代文：第八次会集诸侯下令说：在视、言、貌、听方面可以立为表率而无邪僻行为的，在玄宫进行赏赐，由三公主持。
English: The eighth meeting of the princes ordered: "In terms of seeing, speaking, looking, and listening, if you can set an example without evil behavior, you will be rewarded at the Xuan Palace, presided over by the three princes.

古文：九会诸侯，令曰：以尔封内之财物，国之所有为币。
现代文：第九次会集诸侯下令说：用你们封国之内的财物和国内特有的东西；作为币贡之物进献。
English: The ninth meeting of the princes ordered: "Use the property within your fiefdom and things unique to the country; donate them as tribute."

古文：九会，大命焉出，常至。千里之外，二千里之内。
现代文：九会的大令发布出去以后，诸侯是照章必到的。
English: After the edict of the Nine Associations was issued, the lords had to follow suit.

古文：诸侯三年而朝习命。二年，三卿使四辅。一年正月朔日，令大夫来修。受命三公。
现代文：除此，一千里以外，二千里以内的诸侯，每三年来朝一次，学习命令；每二年则派遣三卿来朝，把情况报告给四辅；每年的正月初一日，还要派大夫前来修好，受命于三公即可。
English: In addition, every three years, the lords of the provinces that are more than one thousand miles away and less than two thousand miles away come to the court to learn the order; every two years, they send the three nobles to the court to report the situation to the four assistants; on the first day of the first month of each year, they also send a doctor to come and fix it, and it is enough to be ordered by the three princes.

古文：二千里之外，三千里之内，诸侯五年而会至习命。三年，名卿请事。二年，大夫通吉兇。
现代文：二干里以外，三干里以内的诸侯，每五年来朝一次，学习命令；每三年有特命之卿前来办事；每二年也要派大夫前来，通讯吉凶。
English: The lords of the provinces outside the two dry miles and within the three dry miles come to the court once every five years to learn the orders; every three years, a specially appointed lord comes to do business; every two years, a doctor is also sent to communicate the fortunes.

古文：三千里之外，诸侯世一至，置大夫以为廷安，入，共受命焉。
现代文：三千里以外的诸侯，三十年来朝一次；十年，则有嫡子来朝，以正礼仪；五年又派大夫来朝，请求接受政策法令的学习。
English: In the past thirty years, princes who lived more than three thousand miles away came to the imperial court only once; in ten years, their legitimate sons came to the imperial court, with proper etiquette; in five years, they sent a doctor to the imperial court, requesting to study the policies and decrees.

古文：此居于图北方方外。
现代文：还要委派一个大夫作为常驻朝廷的官吏，负责纳入贡物和接受天子的命令。
English: A doctor was also to be appointed as a permanent official of the imperial court, responsible for the collection of tribute and receiving orders from the emperor.

古文：北方副图
现代文：北方副图
English: North sub-map

古文：旗物尚黑，兵尚胁盾。刑则游仰灌流。察数而知治，审器而识胜。明谋而适胜。通德而天下定。
现代文：考察治兵方法，可以了解治军水平；审查武器状况，可以认识战胜原因；懂得谋算，就可以制胜敌人；通晓行德，就可以安定天下。
English: Examine the methods of military administration, you can understand the level of military administration; review the status of weapons, you can understand the reasons for victory; know how to calculate, you can defeat the enemy; know morality, you can stabilize the world.

古文：定宗庙。育男女。官四分，则可以立威、行、德、制法仪、出号令。
现代文：能作到安定宗庙，繁育儿女，四民分业治事，就可以确立权威、实行德政、制定仪法、颁行号令了。
English: If you can establish a stable family temple, breed children, and divide the affairs of the four people, you can establish authority, implement moral government, formulate rituals and laws, and issue orders.

古文：立义而加之以胜，至威而实之以德。
现代文：最高水平的用兵，不是为了占领别国的土地，也不是为了统治别国的人民。
English: The use of military force at the highest level is not for the purpose of occupying the land of other countries, nor is it for the purpose of ruling the people of other countries.

古文：守之而后修，胜心焚海内。
现代文：实行正义而以战胜为保证，给予威慑而以德政为内容；保持战果并扩展胜利果实，立意在控制天下。
English: The implementation of justice and victory as a guarantee, to give deterrence and German politics as the content; to maintain the results of the war and expand the fruits of victory, determined to control the world.

古文：民之所利立之，所害除之，则民人从。
现代文：兴人民所利，除人民所害，则各国百姓服从。
English: The people of all countries should obey, except for those who are harmed by the people.

古文：立为六千里之侯。则大人从。
现代文：立作六千里的侯爵，则大臣服从。
English: If you set up a marquis of six thousand miles, the minister will obey.

古文：使国君得其治。
现代文：保证其治理内部的权限，别国的国君就会服从。
English: The sovereigns of other countries will obey if their internal powers of governance are guaranteed.

古文：则人君从会。请命于天地，知气和，则生物从。
现代文：祭天除病，水土合宜，那么，一切生物也都能够服从了。
English: Sacrificing nature to eliminate diseases, water and soil are appropriate, then all living things can also obey.

古文：计缓急之事。则危危而无难。
现代文：安排好事情的缓急，遇到极度危险也不会陷于灾难。
English: If you arrange your priorities well, you will not be caught in a disaster in the event of extreme danger.

古文：明于器械之利，则涉难而不变。
现代文：重视武器的作用，遇到灾难也不会惊惶失措。
English: Pay attention to the role of weapons, and you will not be panicked in the event of a disaster.

古文：察于先后之理，则兵出而不困。
现代文：通晓先发后发的道理，兵出国外也不会陷于困境。
English: Aware of the principle of first-come-first-served, soldiers will not be in a predicament when they go abroad.

古文：通于出入之度，则深入而不危。
现代文：懂得出境入境的节度，深入敌境也不会陷于危局。
English: If you know the rules for leaving and entering the country, you will not be in danger if you go deep into the enemy's territory.

古文：审于动静之务，则功得而无害。
现代文：审于动静的安排，成功而不会带来危害。
English: Examine the dynamic arrangement, success and will not bring harm.

古文：著于取与之分，则得地而不执。
现代文：明确取予的界限，得地也没有忧患。
English: There is no need to worry as long as the boundaries of taking and giving are clear.

古文：慎于号令之官。则举事而有功。
现代文：严肃号令的管理，举事就可以收到成效。
English: Serious management of orders can lead to effective results.

