古文：茅君孔安国尹轨介象苏仙公成仙公郭璞尹思
现代文：茅君孔安国尹轨介象苏仙公成仙公郭璞尹思
English: Mao Jun, Kong An Guo, Yin Rail, Su Xian Gong, Cheng Xian Gong, Guo Jian Yin Si

古文：茅君
现代文：茅君
English: Mao Jun

古文：茅君者，幽州人。
现代文：茅君是幽州人。
English: Mao Jun is from Yuzhou.

古文：学道于齐，二十年道成归家。
现代文：在山东学道学了二十年终于学成。
English: After 20 years of studying Taoism in Shandong, he finally achieved his goal.

古文：父母见之大怒曰： 汝不孝，不亲供养，寻求妖妄，流走四方。 
现代文：回家以后，父母看见他大怒说： 你这个不孝的东西，不好好侍奉我们，跑出去四处漂泊学什么鬼道术！ 
English: After returning home, his parents saw him furious and said: "You unfilial thing, you don't serve us well, you run off to wander around and learn what kind of evil magic!

古文：欲笞之，茅君长跪谢曰： 某受命上天，当应得道，事不两遂，违远供养，虽日多无益，今乃能使家门平安，父母寿考。
现代文：骂着不解气，还要鞭打茅君。茅君挺直了身子跪着赔罪说： 儿子受了上天之命，应该得道，学道和孝顺父母难以兼顾。虽然儿子长期远行没能供养二老，给双亲增添了烦恼，但如今儿子学成道术，就能使全家平安，使父母长寿。
English: Maojun straightened his body and kneeled down to make amends, saying, "My son received the order from heaven, and he should learn the Tao. It is difficult to balance learning the Tao and being dutiful to one's parents. Although my son was unable to provide for his parents for a long time, which added to the troubles of his parents, but now that my son has learned the Taoism, he will be able to keep the whole family safe and make his parents live longer.

古文：其道已成，不可鞭辱，恐非小故。 
现代文：现在我已得道，不能再受你们的鞭打了。如果再鞭打我，恐怕会出大事的！ 
English: Now that I have obtained the Fa, I can no longer be whipped by you. If you whip me again, I'm afraid something terrible will happen!

古文：父怒不已，操杖向之。
现代文：他父亲越听越来气，拿起拐杖就要打。
English: The more his father listened, the angrier he became. He picked up his cane to beat him.

古文：适欲举杖，杖即摧成数十段，皆飞，如弓激矢，中壁壁穿，中柱柱陷，父乃止。
现代文：可是刚要举起拐杖来，拐杖就断成了好几十节向四方飞去，像射出了很多箭头，射穿了墙壁，射断了房柱。
English: But just as he was about to lift the crutch, it broke into dozens of pieces and flew in all directions, as if it had shot out a lot of arrows, shot through the walls, and shot down the pillar.

古文：茅君曰： 向所言正虑如此，邂逅中伤人耳。 
现代文：他父亲吓得只好住手，茅君说： 我刚才说的怕出大事就是说的这个，怕无意中伤害了人。 
English: His father was so scared that he had to stop, and Maojun said, "What I just said about being afraid of something happening is exactly what I was talking about. I'm afraid of unintentionally hurting someone.

古文：父曰： 汝言得道。能起死人否？ 
现代文：他父亲问他： 你说得了道，那你能让死人复活吗？ 
English: And his father said unto him, If thou hast understanding, canst thou give life to the dead?

古文：茅君曰： 死人罪重恶积，不可得生。
现代文：茅君说： 死人一生中积累的罪孽深重，不可能复活。
English: Maojun said, "The accumulated sins of a dead person during his lifetime are so heavy that it is impossible for him to be resurrected.

古文：横伤短折，即可起耳。 
现代文：如果遭了横祸而死或短寿、夭折的，我可以让他复活。 
English: If he died of natural causes, or was short-lived or died young, I can bring him back to life.

古文：父使为之有验，茅君弟在宦至二千石，当之官，乡里送者数百人，茅君亦在座。
现代文：他父亲不太相信，让茅君验证一下。茅君的弟弟刚被任命为年俸两千石的官，赴任时好几百乡亲欢送，茅君也在场。
English: His father didn't quite believe it, so he asked Maojun to verify it. Maojun's younger brother had just been appointed an official with an annual salary of two thousand koku, and when he took office, several hundred townspeople came to see him off, and Maojun was also present.

古文：乃曰： 余虽不作二千石，亦当有神灵之职，某月某日当之官。 
现代文：他说： 我虽然没有在人间当上年俸两千石的官，但却会在仙界获得官职。某月某日，我也要到仙界去上任做官的。 
English: He said: Although I did not become an official with an annual salary of two thousand koku in the human world, I will receive an official position in the celestial world. On a certain day of a certain month, I will also go to the celestial world to assume an official position.

古文：宾客皆曰： 愿奉送。 
现代文：宾客们都说： 如果真是那样，我们到时一定欢送。 
English: The guests all said: "If that's really the case, we'll definitely have a farewell party when we arrive."

古文：茅君曰： 顾肯送，诚君甚厚意。
现代文：茅君说： 如果真送我，我太感谢你们的盛情了。
English: Maojun said, "If you really sent me, I would be so grateful for your generosity.

古文：但当空来，不须有所损费，吾当有以供待之。 
现代文：但我要求你们送我时不要破费，别给我带礼品。 
English: But I do ask that when you give me away, you don't break the bank, you don't bring me gifts.

古文：至期，宾客并至，大作宴会，皆青缣帐幄，下铺重白毡，奇馔异果，芬芳罗列，妓女音乐，金石俱奏，声震天地，闻于数里。随从千余人，莫不醉饱。
现代文：到了茅公说的那天宾客们都来了。茅公大摆宴席，搭起了青布帐幕，地下铺着很厚的白毡子，席上罗列着珍奇的果品佳肴，发出阵阵的芳香气味，金钟、石罄奏起了美妙的音乐，声震天地，传到几里之外，舞伎随着音乐翩翩起舞，赏心悦目。
English: On the day that Mao Gong said, the guests all came. Mao Gong held a grand banquet, set up a blue cloth tent, and laid a very thick white satin under the ground. The table was lined with rare fruits and delicacies, emitting bursts of aromatic scents. The golden bell and the stone burst played wonderful music. The sound shook the world and was transmitted to several miles away. The dance troupe danced with the music, pleasing the eyes.

古文：及迎官来，文官则朱衣素带数百人，武官则甲兵旌旗，器仗耀日，结营数里。
现代文：在座的上千人都酒足饭饱十分痛快。后来，迎接茅公到仙界上任的官员们到了。好几百名文官都是大红袍腰系白玉带，武官们顶盔贯甲，旌旗飘扬，刀枪闪光，扎下了几里的营帐。
English: The thousands of people present were very happy with the food and wine. Later, the officials who welcomed Mao Gong to the celestial world arrived. Several hundred civil servants were dressed in large red robes with white jade belts around their waists, and the military officers wore armor, waved flags, and flashed their swords and guns, and set up camp a few kilometers away.

古文：茅君与父母亲族辞别，乃登羽盖车而去。麾幡蓊郁，骖虬驾虎，飞禽翔兽，跃覆其上，流云彩霞，霏霏绕其左右。
现代文：茅君和父母乡亲们告别，登上了一辆有羽毛伞盖的车子，在前后旗幡蔽日，还有祥云缠绕天马、无角龙、白虎以及各种能飞的兽和鸟在车上翻飞腾跃，五色祥云缭绕蒸腾。
English: Mao Jun said goodbye to his parents and fellow villagers and boarded a car with a feathered umbrella cover, with flags in front and behind to cover the sun, as well as auspicious clouds entangled with heavenly horses, hornless dragons, white tigers, and various flying beasts and birds flipping and leaping on the car, with five-colored auspicious clouds swirling and transpiring.

古文：去家十余里，忽然不见。
现代文：欢迎的大队人马离家十多里以后就忽然消失了。
English: After more than ten miles away from home, the welcoming brigade suddenly disappeared.

古文：远近为之立庙奉事之。
现代文：从此以后，远近的百姓建了庙供奉茅公。
English: Since then, people from near and far have built temples to worship Mao.

古文：茅君在帐中，与人言语，其出入，或发人马。或化为白鹤。
现代文：茅公常常在庙中神座帐后和人对话，他每次来去，有时带着人马，有时则变成一只白鹤飞去飞来。
English: Mao Gong often talks to people behind the tabernacle in the temple. Every time he comes and goes, sometimes he brings people and horses, sometimes he turns into a white crane and flies away.

古文：人有病者，往请福，常煮鸡子十枚，以内帐中，须臾，一一掷出还之，归破之。
现代文：有些生了病的人去请茅公施福诊治，他们常常煮十个鸡蛋，放进茅公的神帐里，不一会儿，鸡蛋就被茅公一个个扔出来。
English: Some sick people go to ask Mao Gong for blessing and treatment. They often boil ten eggs and put them in Mao Gong's shrine. After a while, the eggs are thrown out one by one by Mao Gong.

古文：若其中黄者，病人当愈。
现代文：把鸡蛋带回去后打开看，如果鸡蛋里面是黄色的，病人就能痊愈。
English: If the inside of the egg is yellow, the patient will be cured.

古文：若有土者，即不愈。常以此为候。
现代文：如果鸡蛋里面有泥土，病就不能好了，人们常常用这种办法来预测吉凶祸福。
English: If there is soil inside the egg, the disease will not be cured. People often use this method to predict good or bad luck.

古文：孔安国
现代文：孔安国
English: Kong An Guo

古文：孔安国者，鲁人也。常行气服铅丹，年三百岁，色如童子。
现代文：孔安国是山东人，经常练运气闭气，服用铅炼的丹，活到三百岁面容还像儿童。
English: Kong An Guo was from Shandong Province. He often practised holding his breath for good luck and took lead-pure herbal tea. He lived to be three hundred years old, but his face still looked like that of a child.

古文：隐潜山，弟子随之数百人，每断谷入室，一年半复出，益少。
现代文：追随他的弟子有好几百。他常常绝食后关在屋里修身养性，一年半后才出屋，却变得更年轻了。
English: He had hundreds of disciples following him. He often went on a hunger strike and was confined to his house to improve his health. After a year and a half, he came out of the house, but he had become younger.

古文：其不入室，则饮食如常，与世人无异。
现代文：如果不入室修炼，就和平常人一样的进食。
English: If you do not enter the room to cultivate, you should eat like an ordinary person.

古文：安国为人沉重，尤宝惜道要。不肯轻传。
现代文：没有什么和人不同之处。孔安国为人老成持重，尤其非常珍惜道术的秘密，不肯轻易传授给别人。
English: There is no difference between him and other people. Kong Anguko places great importance on personal growth. In particular, he cherishes the secrets of Taoism and is not willing to easily teach it to others.

古文：其奉事者五六年，审其为人志性，乃传之。
现代文：有个别侍奉他五六年的弟子，如果他认为这个弟子品格志向都很好，才把道术传授给他。
English: There are some disciples who have served him for five or six years, and if he thinks that the disciple's character and aspirations are good, he will teach him the Taoism.

古文：有陈伯者，安乐人也。求事安国，安国以为弟子。留三年，知其执信。乃谓之曰： 吾亦少更勤苦，寻求道术，无所不至，遂不能得神丹八石登天之法。唯受地仙之方，适可以不死。
现代文：有个叫陈伯的安乐县人，要求侍奉孔安国，安国就收他为弟子，考察了三年，看他学道的志向坚定，就对他说： 我从小就勤奋刻苦地寻求道术，什么地方都去过了，但仍没有得到 八石登天 的神丹和成仙的方术，只得到了可成地仙的方术，只能不死而已。
English: There was a man from Anle County named Chen Bo, who asked to serve Kong An Guo. An Guo accepted him as a disciple and examined him for three years. Seeing that his aspiration to learn the Tao was firm, he said to him: I have been diligently searching for Taoism since I was a child. I have been everywhere, but I still haven't obtained the eight-rock-ascending-to-the-heavens Shintang and the method of becoming a god. I have only obtained the method of becoming a god, but I can't die.

古文：而昔事海滨渔父，渔父者，故越相范蠡也。
现代文：我过去曾拜一位海边的渔翁为师，这渔翁就是战国时越国的宰相范蠡。
English: In the past, I was taught by a fisherman by the sea. This fisherman was the prime minister of Vietnam at the time of the Warring States Period, Fan Zong.

古文：乃易姓名隐，以避凶世。
现代文：他改姓埋名以躲开乱世，在海边当了渔人。
English: He changed his surname to a pseudonym to escape the chaos of the world and became a fisherman on the coast.

古文：哀我有志，授我秘万服饵之法，以得度世。
现代文：他看我修道志坚，传授给我服用丹药的秘方，使我能超脱人世。
English: He saw me as a religious man and taught me the secret of taking herbal medicine, so that I could transcend the human world.

古文：则大伍、司诚、子期、姜伯、涂山，皆千岁之后更少壮。
现代文：就是像大但、司诚、子期、姜伯、涂山这些人，都是活到千岁以上，而且越来越年轻。
English: Just like Dandan, Shicheng, Zihe, Jiang Bo and Tu Shan, these people all lived to be more than 1,000 years old, and they are getting younger and younger.

古文：吾受道以来，服药三百余年，以其一方授崔仲卿，卿年八十四，服来已三十三年矣，视其肌体气力甚健，须发不白，口齿完坚。
现代文：我得道以来服药三百多年，曾给过崔仲卿一个仙方，当时他八十四岁，已经服药三十三年了，我看他现在身体强壮精力充沛，头发胡须都不白，牙一颗也没掉，你可以去找崔仲卿向他学道。 
English: It's been more than 300 years since I started taking medicine. I once gave Cui Zhongqing a potion of immortality. At that time, he was 84 years old and had been taking medicine for 33 years. I see that he is now strong and energetic, his hair and beard are not white, and not a single tooth has fallen out. You can go to Cui Zhongqing and learn from him.

古文：子往与相见视之。 陈伯遂往事之，受其方，亦度世不老。
现代文：于是陈伯就去侍奉崔仲卿，得到了他的仙方，结果也得以长生不老。
English: So Chen Bo went to serve Cui Zhongqing, obtained his immortality, and as a result was able to live forever.

古文：又有张合妻，年五十，服之反如二十许人，一县怪之，八十六生一男。
现代文：还有一个叫张合的人，他妻子已经五十岁了，服了崔仲卿的药后，竟变成了二十多岁的人，八十六岁上又生了个儿子。
English: There is also a man named Zhang He, whose wife is already fifty years old. After taking Cui Zhongqing's medicine, she turned into a twenty-something and gave birth to a son at the age of eighty-six.

古文：又教数人，皆四百岁，后入山去，亦有不度世者，由于房中之术故也。
现代文：孔安国又传授了几个人，都活到四百岁，后来都进山继续修炼去了。也有吃了仙药仍不能得道成仙的，那是由于他们夫妻房事没有节制的原因。
English: Kong An Guo also taught several people, all of whom lived to be four hundred years old, and later went into the mountains to continue their cultivation. There are also people who have eaten the elixir and still cannot attain immortality, which is due to the reason that their marital affairs were uncontrolled.

古文：尹轨
现代文：尹轨
English: Yin Rail

古文：尹轨者，字公度，太原人也。
现代文：尹轨字公度，山西太原人。
English: Yin Ke Zi Zi Gong Du, a native of Taiyuan, Shanxi.

古文：博学五经，尤明天文星气，河洛谶纬，无不精微。
现代文：他精通《诗经》、《尚书》、《礼》、《易》、《春秋》这五经，尤其擅长天文星象和河洛图解方面的学问。
English: He is proficient in the Five Classics of Poetry, Song, Rite, Yi, and Spring and Autumn, and is especially good at astronomy and horoscopes.

古文：晚乃学道。
现代文：晚年他专心学道。
English: In his later years, he devoted himself to studying the Tao.

古文：常服黄精华，日三合，计年数百岁。
现代文：经常服用黄精粉，每天服三盒，已经活了上百岁。
English: He often takes Huangjing powder, taking three boxes a day, and has lived for more than a hundred years.

古文：其言天下盛衰，安危吉凶，未尝不效。
现代文：他常常预言天下的兴盛或衰亡，别人的安危吉凶，都非常灵验。
English: He often predicted the prosperity or decline of the world, the safety and well-being of others, are very effective.

古文：腰佩漆竹筒十数枚，中皆有药，言可辟兵疫。
现代文：尹轨平时腰里挂着十几个上了漆的小竹筒，里面全装的药，他说他的药可以使人免受兵祸和瘟疫之灾。
English: At other times, more than a dozen small lacquered bamboo tubes hang from his waist. They are full of medicine, which he says can protect people from the scourge of war and plague.

古文：常与人一丸，令佩之。
现代文：有一次他给人一丸，让那人把药带在身上。
English: On one occasion he gave someone a pill and asked them to carry it with them.

古文：会世大乱，乡里多罹其难，唯此家免厄。
现代文：当时世道很乱，那人的乡亲都遭到了祸事，只有那人免除了祸患。
English: At that time, the world was in turmoil, and the man's fellow villagers all suffered misfortune, but the man was spared.

古文：又大疫时，或得粒许大涂门，则一家不病。
现代文：瘟疫流行时，如果能把尹轨的药一小粒涂在门上，全家就不会被传染上瘟疫。
English: When the plague is prevalent, if you can apply a small grain of Yin rail medicine to the door, the whole family will not be infected with the plague.

古文：弟子黄理，居陆浑山中。
现代文：他有个弟子叫黄理，住在陆浑山中。
English: He has a disciple named Huang Li, who lives in Luhun Mountain.

古文：患虎暴。
现代文：山中有个老虎经常出来祸害人。
English: There is a tiger in the mountains that often comes out to wreak havoc.

古文：公度使其断木为柱，去家五里，四方各埋一柱，公度即印封之，虎即绝迹，到五里辄还。
现代文：尹轨让黄理把树锯成柱子，离他家五里的地方，在东西南北四方各埋一根木柱，埋好后，尹度在柱子上打上封印，此地老虎便绝迹了。老虎如果来也是走到五里地埋柱子的地方就不敢再往前走。
English: Yin Rail asked Huang Li to saw the tree into a pillar. Five miles away from his home, a wooden pillar was buried in the east, west, south and north. After it was buried, Yin Du put a seal on the pillar, and the tigers disappeared from this place. If the tigers came to the place where the pillar was buried five miles away, they would not dare to go any further.

古文：有怪鸟止屋上者，以白公度，公度为书一符，着鸟所鸣处。
现代文：有一家屋上停着一只怪鸟，这家人来找尹轨，尹轨就写了一道符，让哪家人把符贴在怪鸟叫的地方。
English: There was a strange bird parked on the roof of a house. The family came to find Yin Rail, and Yin Rail wrote a sign, asking which family member to stick the sign where the strange bird was calling.

古文：至夕，鸟伏死符下。
现代文：到了晚上哪怪鸟死在了符下。
English: In the evening, the strange bird died.

古文：或有人遭丧，当葬而贫，汲汲无以办。
现代文：有一家死了人，由于太穷没法办理丧事。
English: One dead family was too poor to pay for a funeral.

古文：公度过省之，孝子逐说其孤苦，公度为之怆然，令求一片铅。
现代文：尹轨前去这家看望，孝子向他哭诉家中的困境，尹轨心里很难过，就让孝子找了一小块铅来。
English: Yin Rail went to visit the family, and Xiao Zi cried to him about the difficulties at home. Yin Rail felt very sad, so he asked Xiao Zi to find a small piece of lead.

古文：公使入荆山，架小屋，于炉火中销铅，以所带药如米大，投铅中搅之，乃成好银。
现代文：尹轨带着铅进了荆山，在山中搭了个小屋，在小屋中生起炉火把铅熔化，然后把自己所带的药弄了米粒大的一点投进铅水里，搅了一阵，铅就变成了好银子。
English: Yin Rail took the lead into the Jing Mountain, built a hut in the mountain, built a fire in the hut to melt the lead, and then threw the medicine he brought into the lead water to make a point the size of a grain of rice, stirred for a while, and the lead turned into good silver.

古文：与之，告曰： 吾念汝贫困，不能营葬，故以拯救。
现代文：尹轨把银子送给那孝子，并对他说： 我可怜你家里太穷不能治丧，所以帮你一把。
English: Yin Rail gave the silver to the filial son and said to him: I am sorry that your family is too poor to mourn, so I will help you.

古文：慎勿多言也。 
现代文：你千万不要对别人说我用铅炼银的事！ 
English: You must not tell anyone that I use lead to make silver!

古文：有人负官钱百万，身见收缚。公度于富人借数千钱与之，令致锡，得百两。
现代文：有个人欠了官府百万钱，官府要捉住他，尹轨就从富人那里借了几千钱给那人，让他买来一百两锡。
English: There was a man who owed the government a million dollars. The government wanted to catch him, so Yin Luo borrowed a few thousand dollars from a rich man and gave it to the man so that he could buy a hundred and two pennies.

古文：复销之，以药方寸匕投之，成金，还官。
现代文：尹轨把这一百两锡用火熔化了，然后留了一方寸那么大的一匙药投进去，锡就变成了一百两黄金，让他还给了官府。
English: Yin Rail melted the one hundred and two pennies with fire, and then left a spoonful of medicine as big as a square inch to put in. The tin turned into one hundred and two gold, and he returned it to the government.

古文：后到太和山中仙去也。介象
现代文：后来尹轨进了太和山成仙而去。介象
English: Later, Yin Rail entered Taihe Mountain and went to Chengxian.

古文：介象者，字元则，会稽人也。
现代文：介象字元则，是会稽人。
English: In the case of the introduction character, it is the auditor.

古文：学通五经，博览一家之言，能属文，后学道入东山。
现代文：精通 五经 ，博览诸子百家的著作，文章也写得好，后来进入东山学道。
English: He was well versed in the Five Classics, read widely the works of hundreds of scholars, and wrote good articles. Later, he entered the Dongshan School.

古文：善度世禁气之术。
现代文：他擅长闭气术，得到了成仙的秘诀。
English: He is good at the art of shutting off the breath and has obtained the secret of immortality.

古文：能于茅上燃火煮鸡而不焦；令一里内人家炊不熟，鸡犬三日不鸣不吠；令一市人皆坐不能起；隐形变化为草木鸟兽。
现代文：他能点起茅草火煮鸡肉，鸡肉熟了茅草却没烧焦。他能做起法来让一里内的人家全都做不熟饭，让家家的鸡狗三天不会叫不会咬。他还能让全城的人都坐着动不了，能隐身，能把自己变成草木鸟兽。
English: He could light a thatch fire to cook chicken, and the chicken would be cooked, but the thatch would not be burned. He could do things to make all the people within a mile cook undercooked rice, so that the family's chicken dog would not bark or bite for three days. He could also make all the people in the city sit still, be invisible, and turn himself into a plant or a bird or a beast.

古文：闻有《五丹经》，周旋天下寻求之。
现代文：他听说有部《五丹经》对成仙特别重要，就遍天下寻找这部经。
English: He heard that there was a part of the "Five Classics of Confucianism" that was particularly important to Cheng Xian, so he searched for this book all over the world.

古文：不得其师，乃入山精思，冀遇神仙。
现代文：他学道一直找不到仙师，就自己进山苦苦修炼，希望能遇见神仙。
English: He has never been able to find a spiritual teacher to learn the Tao, so he goes into the mountains to practice hard, hoping to meet a divine being.

古文：惫极卧石上，有一虎往舐象额，象寤见虎，乃谓之曰： 天使汝来侍卫我，汝且停；若山神使汝试我，即疾去。 
现代文：有一次累极了躺在山石上，有一只老虎来舔他的额头，他惊醒后对老虎说： 如果是天帝让你来保护我，你就留在我身边，如果是山神让你来考验我的胆量，你就快滚吧！ 
English: Once, when he was very tired and lying on a rock, a tiger came to lick his forehead. He woke up and said to the tiger: "If the Heavenly Emperor asks you to protect me, you stay with me. If the Mountain God asks you to test my courage, you get out!"

古文：虎乃去，象入山，谷上有石子，紫色，光绿甚好，大如鸡子，不可称数。
现代文：老虎就跑掉了。介象进山后，看见山谷中有很多鸡蛋大的紫色石头光彩夺目，就拣了两枚，因为山谷太深不能再往前走，就回来了。
English: The tiger ran away. After the elephant entered the mountain, he saw that there were many egg-sized purple stones in the valley that were dazzling. He picked two of them, because the valley was too deep to go any further, and came back.

古文：乃取两枚。谷深不能前，乃还。
现代文：他在山里遇见一个十五六岁的美女，十分秀丽，穿着五彩的衣服，原来这位美女就是神仙。
English: In the mountains, he met a beautiful girl of fifteen or sixteen, very beautiful, dressed in colorful clothes. It turned out that this beautiful girl was a fairy godmother.

古文：于山中见一美女，年十五六许，颜色非常，被服五彩，盖神仙也。
现代文：介象向仙女请教长生之道，仙女说： 你先把你手里的两个圆石子放回原处再说。
English: He asked the fairy for advice on how to live a long life. The fairy said, "First, put the two round stones in your hand back to their original place.

古文：象乞长生之方，女曰： 子可送手中物着故处，乃可。
现代文：因为你不应该得到那东西，所以我才在这里等着你哩。 
English: Because you don't deserve that, that's why I'm here waiting for you.

古文：汝未应取此物，吾故止待汝。 
现代文：介象把两块石头送回山谷，回来后见仙女还站在前面等他。
English: After he had sent the two stones back to the valley, he came back to find the fairy still standing in front of him.

古文：象送石还，见女子在前处，语象曰： 汝血食之气未尽，断谷三年更来，吾止此。 象归，断谷三年复往，见此女故在前处。
现代文：仙女说： 你身上凡人的气味还没脱尽，回去绝食三年后再来，我仍在这里等你。 介象回家后，三年没吃五谷，然后又进了山，见那仙女果然还在原地站着。
English: The fairy said, "You haven't got rid of the smell of mortal on your body, go back and come back after three years of hunger strike, I'll still be here waiting for you. However, after returning home, I didn't eat any grain for three years, and then I went back into the mountains, and saw that the fairy was still standing in the same place.

古文：乃以《还丹经》一首投象，告之曰： 得此便得仙，勿复他为也。 
现代文：仙女把一卷《还丹经》给了他。并对他说： 你得了这卷仙经就能成仙了，不要再去求什么别的仙经道术了。 
English: The fairy gave him a volume of "The Book of Return" and said to him, "If you get this book, you will become a fairy godmother. Don't ask for any other fairy godmother magic."

古文：乃辞归。
现代文：介象就辞别了仙女回去了。
English: After the introduction, the fairy said goodbye and went back.

古文：象常住弟子骆廷雅舍，帷下屏床中，有数生论左传义，不平。
现代文：介象有一次住在弟子骆廷雅的家里，听到他帐外屏风后面的床榻上有几个书生在议论《左传》里的一些论点，争论得不分高下，谁也不服谁。
English: Once, when he was staying at the home of his disciple Luo Tingya, he heard several scholars discussing some of the arguments in Zuo Zhuan on the bed behind the screen outside his room. The arguments were not divided into high and low, and no one was satisfied with anyone.

古文：象傍闻之不能忍，乃忿然为决。
现代文：介象看这几个书生这么浅薄，就忽然地为他们的争论作了结论。
English: Seeing that these students were so shallow, he suddenly drew a conclusion to their argument.

古文：书生知非常人，密表荐于吴主。
现代文：书生看出来介象不是一般人，就偷偷上表密奏给吴国的君主，推荐介象做官。
English: When the scholar saw that Jie Xiang was not an ordinary person, he secretly played a secret recital for the monarch of Wu, and recommended Jie Xiang to be an official.

古文：象知之欲去。曰： 恐官事拘束我耳。 
现代文：介象知道后打算躲出去，说： 我最怕做官，官务缠身太不自由了。 
English: After learning this, Kaesho planned to go into hiding, saying, "I'm most afraid of being an official, it's too much work and not enough freedom.

古文：廷雅固留。
现代文：骆廷雅苦苦挽留才留住了介象。
English: It took Luo Tingya's painstaking efforts to hold back the midges.

古文：吴王征至武昌，甚尊敬之，称为 介君 。诏令立宅，供帐皆是绮绣，遗黄金千镒。
现代文：吴王把介象召到武昌，对他非常尊重，尊称他为 介君 ，并下诏给他盖了府宅，宅子里的帐幕都是绸缎锦绣，送给他上千镒黄金。
English: King Wu summoned Jiexiang to Wuchang, held him in high esteem, called him Jiejun, and built him a mansion. The tents in the mansion were all made of silk and brocade, and he was given thousands of ingots of gold.

古文：从象学隐形之术，试还后宫，出入闺闼，莫有见者。
现代文：吴王跟介象学会了隐形术，出入宫殿和嫔妃的内宫人们都看不见他。
English: King Wu learned the art of invisibility with the mediums, and people could not see him when he went in and out of the palace or the inner palace of the empress Dowager.

古文：如此幻法，种种变化，不可胜数。
现代文：介象的这些变化的方术不可胜数。
English: There are countless ways to achieve these changes in appearance.

古文：后告言病，帝遣左右姬侍，以美梨一奁赐象。象食之，须臾便死，帝埋葬之。
现代文：后来介象说自己有病要求回去，吴王就让左右的侍从宫女送给介象一筐非常好的梨，介象吃了梨，立刻就死了，吴王就把他埋葬了。
English: Later, when Jie Zi said that he was ill and asked to go back, King Wu asked the attendants to give Jie Zi a basket of very good pears. Jie Zi ate the pears and died immediately, and King Wu buried him.

古文：以日中时死，晡时已至建业，所赐梨付苑吏种之。
现代文：介象是中午时死的，下午却到了建业，介象把梨核交给管园林的官员种下，这官员就向吴王奏说介象未死。
English: The elephant died at noon, but arrived at Jianye in the afternoon. The elephant gave the pear kernel to the official in charge of the garden to plant, and the official told Wu Wang that the elephant was not dead.

古文：吏后以表闻，先主即发棺视之，唯一符耳。帝思之，与立庙，时时躬往祭之。
现代文：吴王打开棺材，里面只有一张符。吴王想念他就为他立了庙，常亲自去祭祀。
English: King Wu opened the coffin, and there was only one token inside. When King Wu missed him, he built a temple for him, and often went to offer sacrifices in person.

古文：常有白鹤来集座上，迟回复去。
现代文：常有白鹤飞来在庙中盘旋后飞走。
English: White cranes often come to hover in the temple and then fly away.

古文：后弟子见在盖竹山中，颜色转少。
现代文：后来他的弟子见他在盖竹山中，更加年轻了。
English: Later, his disciples saw him in the Gezhu Mountain, looking even younger.

古文：苏仙公
现代文：苏仙公
English: Su Xian Gong

古文：苏仙公者，桂阳人也，汉文帝时得道。
现代文：苏仙公是桂阳人，汉文帝时得道。
English: Su Xian Gong was from Guiyang. Emperor Wen of the Han Dynasty was a Taoist.

古文：先生早丧所怙，乡中以仁孝闻。
现代文：他早年丧父，在乡亲中以仁义孝敬闻名。
English: He lost his father at an early age and was well known among his fellow villagers for his kindness, loyalty and filial piety.

古文：宅在郡城东北，出入往来，不避燥湿。
现代文：他家住桂阳城东北，每天奔波劳累，不管是阴天还是酷热的暑天。
English: His family lives in the northeast of Guiyang City, and they are exhausted every day, whether it is cloudy or hot.

古文：至于食物，不惮精粗。
现代文：吃饭也从不挑食，粗茶淡饭就很满足了。
English: I've never been picky when it comes to eating, and I'm very satisfied with the coarse tea and light meal.

古文：先生家贫，常自牧牛，与里中小儿，更日为牛郎。先生牧之，牛则徘徊侧近，不驱自归。
现代文：他曾经放过牛，和邻居孩子轮流当牧童。苏仙公放牛时，牛都不离他身边左右，到了晚上不用驱赶牛群就自己回家。
English: He used to herd cattle, taking turns with a neighbor's child as a herd boy. When Su Xian Gong was herding cattle, the cattle would not leave his side. At night, he would go home without having to drive the cattle.

古文：余小儿牧牛，牛则四散，跨冈越险。诸儿问曰： 尔何术也？ 
现代文：其他的小牧童放牛，牛就四处乱跑，奔到山岗和峡谷里去了。
English: Other young herdsmen were herding cattle, and the cattle were running around, running into the mountains and canyons.

古文：先生曰： 非汝辈所知。 
现代文：孩子们问苏仙公有什么高招使牛不散，先生说： 这不该让你们知道。 
English: When the children asked Su Xiangong what his secret was for keeping the cows together, the master said, "I shouldn't let you know that."

古文：常乘一鹿。
现代文：先生常乘着一头鹿。
English: The teacher often rides a deer.

古文：先生常与母共食，母曰： 食无鲊，他日可往市买也。 
现代文：有一次他和母亲一起吃饭，母亲说： 我想吃鲊鱼，明天你到街上买几条吧。 
English: Once he was having dinner with his mother, who said, "I want to eat eel. Tomorrow, go to the street and buy some."

古文：先生于是以箸插饭中，携钱而去，斯须即以鲊至。
现代文：先生听后立刻把筷子放在饭里拿着钱走了，不一会儿就把鲊鱼买来了。
English: After hearing this, the teacher immediately put his chopsticks in his meal, took the money and left, and bought the eel in no time.

古文：母食去毕，母曰： 何处买来？ 对曰： 便县市也。 
现代文：他母亲边吃边问是从哪儿买来的鱼，先生说是从县城街上买的。
English: While eating, his mother asked him where he bought the fish from. He said he bought it on the county road.

古文：母曰： 便县去此百二十里，道途径险，往来遽至，汝欺我也！ 
现代文：母亲说： 咱家离县城一百二十里远，还尽是险峻的小路，你这么快就去了又回来怎么可能呢？你不是骗我吧？ 
English: My mother said, "Our home is a hundred and twenty miles away from the county seat, and it's all steep paths. How is it possible for you to go and come back so quickly? You're not lying to me, are you?

古文：欲杖之。
现代文：说完就要用棍子打他。
English: After that, you have to beat him with a stick.

古文：先生跪曰： 买鲊之时，见舅在市，与我语云，明日来此，请待舅至，以验虚实。 
现代文：先生给母亲跪下说： 我买鱼的时候在街上碰见了我舅舅，他说明天要到咱家来，等明天他来后母亲一问就知道了。 
English: The teacher knelt down to his mother and said: I met my uncle on the street when I was buying fish. He said that he would come to our house tomorrow. When he comes tomorrow, my mother will know as soon as she asks.

古文：母遂宽之。
现代文：母亲就没有打他。
English: His mother didn't beat him.

古文：明晓，舅果到。云昨见先生便县市买鲊。
现代文：第二天早上舅舅果然到家来了，说昨天看见先生在县城街上买鲊鱼。
English: The next morning, my uncle came home and said that yesterday he saw my husband buying eels on the streets of the county town.

古文：母即惊骇，方知其神异。
现代文：母亲听后又惊奇又害怕，这才知道儿子是神人。
English: Hearing this, the mother was surprised and frightened, and only then did she know that her son was a godman.

古文：先生曾持一竹杖，时人谓曰： 苏生竹杖，固是龙也。 
现代文：先生曾拿着一个竹杖，当时的人都说，苏仙公的竹杖其实是一条龙。
English: The teacher once held a bamboo cane, and people at the time said that Su Xiangong's bamboo cane was actually a dragon.

古文：数岁之后，先生洒扫门庭，修饰墙宇。友人曰： 有何邀迎？ 答曰： 仙侣当降。 
现代文：几年之后，苏仙公有一天清扫院子和门外，修理房子和院墙，有朋友问他这是要请什么人来作客，苏仙公回答说神仙要降临了。
English: A few years later, one day Su Xian Gong was sweeping the courtyard and outside the door, repairing the house and the courtyard wall. A friend asked him who he was going to invite as a guest. Su Xian Gong replied that the gods were coming.

古文：俄顷之间，乃见天西北隅，紫云氤氲，有数十白鹤，飞翔其中，翩翩然降于苏氏之门，皆化为少年，仪形端美，如十八九岁人，怡然轻举。
现代文：过了不久，只见天空西北角下紫云翻滚，有几十只白鹤在云中飞翔，然后翩翩然降在苏家门前，白鹤都变成了俊美的少年，仪态潇洒，都是十七八岁，神态自若举止很有风度。
English: After a short while, I saw the purple clouds rolling in the northwest corner of the sky. There were dozens of white cranes flying in the clouds, and then they glided down in front of Su Jia's door. The white cranes all turned into handsome boys, with a dashing demeanor. They were all seventeen or eight years old, with a confident demeanor.

古文：先生敛容逢迎，乃跪白母曰： 某受命当仙，被召有期，仪卫已至，当违色养，即便拜辞。 
现代文：苏仙公很郑重地上前迎接，然后对母亲跪着说： 儿子受天命当成仙而去，接我的仪杖已经来了，我就要走了，今后不能再供养母亲了！ 
English: Su Xian Gong very solemnly stepped forward to greet him, and then kneeled down to his mother and said: "My son was destined by heaven to become a celestial being, and he has come to pick up my scepter. I am leaving, and I will no longer be able to support my mother in the future!"

古文：母子歔欷。母曰： 汝去之后，使我如何存活？ 
现代文：说罢就向母亲叩拜辞别，母子二人都悲伤哭泣起来。母亲说： 你走之后，我将依靠谁啊！ 
English: As soon as he said it, he bowed and said goodbye to his mother, and both mother and son began to cry with sadness. His mother said, "Who will I rely on after you are gone?"

古文：先生曰： 明年天下疾疫，庭中井水，檐边桔树，可以代养，井水一升，桔叶一枚，可疗一人。
现代文：先生说： 明年天下将发生瘟疫，咱家院里的井水和房子旁的桔树都能替儿子养活母亲，母亲只要打一升井水摘一片桔叶，就能救活一个得瘟疫的人。
English: The teacher said: Next year there will be a plague in the world. The well water in our courtyard and the orange trees next to the house can feed the mother for her son. As long as the mother takes a liter of well water to pick an orange leaf, she can save a person who has the plague.

古文：兼封一柜留之，有所阙之，可以扣柜言之，所须当至，慎勿开也。 
现代文：我还给母亲留了一个柜子，如果缺什么东西，您只要敲敲柜子告诉它，它就可以把您要的东西给您送来。柜子我封住了，请母亲千万别打开它。 
English: I also left a cupboard for my mother. If something is missing, you just have to knock on the cupboard to tell it, and it can bring you what you want. I sealed the cupboard, and asked my mother not to open it.

古文：言毕即出门，踟蹰顾望，耸身入云，紫云捧足，众鹤翱翔，遂升云汉而去。
现代文：说完就出了大门，几次徘徊回头看母亲，然后耸身腾空入云而去，只见他脚踏紫云，鹤群在他左右翻飞，一直升上天空消失了。
English: After he finished speaking, he went out of the gate, paused a few times to look back at his mother, and then he soared into the sky and went away. I saw him step on the purple cloud, the cranes flew around him, and disappeared into the sky.

古文：来年，果有疾疫，远近悉求母疗之，皆以水及桔叶，无不愈者。
现代文：第二年果然发生了瘟疫，远近的病人都来求苏仙公的母亲治病，母亲就用井水和桔叶给他们治疗，没有治不好的。
English: The following year, a plague did indeed occur, and patients from near and far came to ask Su Xiangong's mother to cure them. The mother treated them with well water and orange leaves, and nothing was incurable.

古文：有所阙乏，即扣柜，所须即至。
现代文：如果缺什么东西，母亲就敲柜子，所要的东西立刻就来。
English: If something is missing, my mother knocks on the cupboard and what she wants comes immediately.

古文：三年之后，母心疑，因即开之，见双白鹤飞去。自后扣之。
现代文：三年之后，母亲因为好奇心太盛，就把柜子打开了，只见两只白鹤从柜子里飞走了，以后再敲柜子，就不灵了。
English: Three years later, her mother was so curious that she opened the cupboard and saw two white cranes flying away from the cupboard. If she knocked on the cupboard again, it wouldn't work.

古文：无复有应。母年百余岁，一旦无疾而终。
现代文：母亲活了一百多岁，有一天没什么病就去世了。
English: My mother lived for more than a hundred years, and one day she passed away without any illness.

古文：乡人共葬之，如世人之礼。
现代文：乡亲们按世俗的礼仪把她埋葬了。
English: The villagers buried her according to secular rites.

古文：葬后，忽见州东北牛脾山，紫云盖上，有号哭之声，咸知苏君之神也。
现代文：埋葬以后，忽然看见州的东北牛脾山头被紫云覆盖，云中传出号哭的声音，都知道这是苏仙公在哭他的母亲。
English: After the burial, he suddenly saw that the northeastern part of the state was covered with purple clouds, and the sound of crying was heard in the clouds. Everyone knew that this was Su Xiangong crying for his mother.

古文：郡守乡人，皆就山吊慰，但闻哭声，不见其形。郡守乡人，苦请相见，空中答曰： 出俗日久，形容殊凡，若当露见，诚恐惊怪。 
现代文：郡里的太守和老百姓就都来到山下祭祀凭吊，但是只听见苏仙公的哭声看不见他本人，老百姓就苦苦请求和苏仙公见上一面，只听苏仙公在云中说： 我脱离人间很久了，已经不是在人世时的模样，如果现形相见，怕你们会害怕的。 
English: The governor of the county and the common people all came to the foot of the mountain to offer sacrifices. However, they only heard Su Xiangong's cries and could not see him in person. The common people pleaded with Su Xiangong to see them, only to hear Su Xiangong say in the clouds: I have been away from the world for a long time, I am no longer the same as I was when I was alive. If I see you now, I am afraid you will be afraid.

古文：固请不已，即出半面，示一手，皆有细毛，异常人也。
现代文：乡亲们还是苦苦哀求，苏仙公就露出半边脸一只手，脸上和手上都长满了细毛，的确和凡人不一样。
English: The villagers still pleaded hard, and Lord Su Xian showed half of his face and one hand. His face and hands were covered with fine hair. He was indeed different from ordinary people.

古文：因请郡守乡人曰： 远劳见慰，途径险阻，可从直路而还，不须回顾。 
现代文：苏仙公就对太守和百姓们说： 有劳你们走了这么崎岖的山路来慰问我，你们回去时就不要走山路了，我让你们走大路回去，但千万不要回头看。 
English: Su Xian Gong then said to the governor and the people, "You have gone through such a rough mountain path to console me. When you go back, don't take the mountain path. I will let you go back by the main road, but don't look back."

古文：言毕，即见桥亘岭傍，直至郡城。
现代文：话音刚落，只见一座大桥从山中伸延出来一直通到郡城，人们就从桥上往城里走。
English: As soon as the speech was over, I saw a large bridge stretching out of the mountains all the way to the county seat, and people were walking from the bridge into the city.

古文：行次，有一官吏辄回顾，遂失桥所，堕落江滨，乃见一赤龙于脚下，宛转而去。
现代文：人们都走到城门口之后，有一个官员在桥上回头看了一下，那大桥突然堕落在江边消失了，同时见一条青龙在人们脚下盘旋腾空而去。
English: After the people all went to the gate of the city, an official on the bridge looked back for a moment, the bridge suddenly fell to the river and disappeared, and at the same time saw a blue dragon hovering at the foot of the people and flying away.

古文：先生哭处，有桂竹两枝，无风自扫，其地恒净。
现代文：苏仙公哭母亲的地方长出两枝桂竹，就是没风桂竹也俯下来不断地拂扫地面，使地面长久保持洁净。
English: In the place where Su Xiangong cried for his mother, two cinnamon bamboos grew up. Even when there was no wind, the cinnamon bamboos bent down and continuously swept the ground, keeping the ground clean for a long time.

古文：三年之后，无复哭声，因见白马常在岭上，遂改牛脾山为白马岭。
现代文：三年之后，云中再也听不见苏仙公的哭声了，但常看见一只白马立在山头，大家就把牛脾山改为白马岭了。
English: Three years later, Su Xiangong's cries could no longer be heard in the clouds, but a white horse was often seen standing at the top of the mountain, and everyone changed the Ox Spleen Mountain to the White Horse Ridge.

古文：自后有白鹤来止郡城东北楼上，人或挟弹弹之，鹤以瓜攫楼板，似漆书云：城郭是，人民非，三百甲子一来归，吾是苏君弹何为？ 
现代文：后来有一只白鹤飞来，停在郡城东北的城楼上，有人用弹弓打那白鹤，白鹤就用爪子抓楼上的横匾，爪子的印迹好像是写下的漆字，大意是： 城还是旧城，人已不是原来的人了。我一万八千年回来看一次，我是苏仙公，你为什么要用弹弓打我呢？ 
English: Later, a white crane flew in and landed on the castle tower in the northeast of the county seat. Someone hit the white crane with a slingshot, and the white crane clawed at the crossbeam on the upper floor. The imprint of the claw seemed to be written in lacquer, to the effect that: The city is still the old city, and people are no longer the original people. I will come back to see it once in eighteen thousand years. I am Su Xian Gong, why are you hitting me with a slingshot?

古文：至今修道之人，每至甲子日，焚香礼于仙公之故第也。
现代文：至今凡是修道的人每到六十年甲子这一天，都要到苏仙公的故居烧香礼拜。
English: To this day, all monastics have to go to the former residence of Su Xiangong to burn incense and worship on this day every sixty years.

古文：又一说云：苏耽者，桂阳人也。
现代文：还有一种传说。
English: There is another legend.

古文：少以至孝著称，母食欲得鱼羹，耽出湖。州市买，去家一千四百里，俄顷便返。
现代文：说苏耽是桂阳人，少年时以特别孝顺闻名，他母亲想吃鱼汤，苏耽就到湖州街上去买，离家一千四百里，立刻就回来了。
English: He said that Su Tan was from Guiyang and was famous for his filial piety when he was young. When his mother wanted to eat fish soup, Su Tan went to Huzhou Street to buy it. He was 1,400 miles away from home and immediately returned.

古文：耽叔父为州吏，于市见耽，因书还家，家人大惊。
现代文：他的叔父是州里的官员，在湖州街上遇见了他，就写信告诉他家，家里人大惊。
English: His uncle, a state official, met him on the street in Huzhou and wrote a letter to his family. The family was shocked.

古文：耽后白母，耽受命应仙，方违远供养，以两盘留家中。
现代文：后来苏耽告诉母亲说他要成仙升天，不能亲自供奉，走时留下两个盘子。
English: Later, Su Tan told his mother that he wanted to become an immortal and ascend to heaven, and that he could not make the offering in person. He left two plates behind when he left.

古文：若须食，扣小盘；欲得钱帛，扣大盘，是所须皆立至。
现代文：母亲要吃饭就敲小盘，要用钱就敲大盘，果然所要的都应声而至。
English: When my mother wants to eat, she knocks on the small plate, and when she wants to spend money, she knocks on the large plate, and everything she wants comes to her.

古文：乡里共怪其如此，白官，遣吏检盘无物，而耽母用之如神。
现代文：乡亲们都觉得十分奇怪，就报告了官府，官府派人验看，盘子里什么也没有，只有苏耽的母亲用它才好使。
English: The villagers thought it was very strange, so they reported it to the government. The government sent someone to inspect it. There was nothing on the plate, and only Sudan's mother could use it.

古文：先是，耽初去时云： 今年大疫，死者略半，家中井水，饮之无恙。 
现代文：苏耽走前对母亲： 今年要有大瘟灾，要死一半人，家里的井水，喝了就不会得病。 
English: Before she left, Su said to her mother, "If there is a great plague this year, half of the people will die. If you drink the well water at home, you won't get sick."

古文：果如所言，阖门元吉。
现代文：结果苏耽的预言完全应验，全家平安地度过了瘟灾。
English: As a result, Su Tan's prophecy was completely fulfilled, and the whole family survived the plague in peace.

古文：母年百余岁终，闻山上有人哭声，服除乃止。
现代文：苏耽的母亲一百多岁去世，人们听见山上有苏耽的哭声，一直哭到为母亲穿三年孝服后哭声才停。
English: Su Tan's mother died when she was more than a hundred years old. People heard Su Tan's cries on the mountain, and she cried until she had worn three years of filial piety for her mother.

古文：百姓为之立祠。
现代文：后来百姓们为苏耽修了祠庙供奉苏耽。
English: Later, the people built an ancestral temple to worship Su Tan.

古文：成仙公
现代文：成仙公
English: Cheng Xian Gong

古文：成仙公者，讳武丁，桂阳临武乌里人也。
现代文：成仙公名叫武丁，是桂阳郡临武县乌里人。
English: Cheng Xian Gong's name was Wuding. He was from Wuli, Linwu County, Guiyang County.

古文：后汉时年十三，身长七尺。
现代文：后汉时他才十三岁，就身高七尺了。
English: In the late Han Dynasty, when he was only thirteen years old, he was seven feet tall.

古文：为县小吏，有异姿，少言大度，不附人，人谓之痴。
现代文：他当时在县衙当个小官吏，但风度潇洒，心胸宽广，沉默寡言，也从不依附什么有势力的人，常被人看作傻子。
English: At that time, he was a minor official at the county magistrate's office, but he had a dashing demeanor, a broad mind, was taciturn, and never attached himself to anyone with power. He was often regarded as a fool.

古文：少有经学，不授于师，但有自然之性。
现代文：他少年时就对道家经典有研究，没有经人指点过，但由于天性聪慧而无师自通。
English: When he was a teenager, he studied Taoist classics. He had never been instructed by anyone, but because of his natural intelligence, he was self-taught.

古文：时先被使京，还过长沙郡，投邮舍不及，遂宿于野树下，忽闻树上人语云： 向长沙市药。 平旦视之，乃二白鹤，仙公异之。
现代文：有一次他被派到京城出差，回来后经过长沙郡时，没赶上到驿站住宿，就在野外一棵树下休息。忽然他听见树上有人说： 到长沙买药去 到了早晨，他抬头一看，见树上有两只白鹤，心里很奇怪，就到长沙街上去了。
English: Once he was sent to Beijing on a business trip. When he came back and passed through Changsha County, he did not have time to stay at the station and rested under a tree in the open. Suddenly he heard someone in the tree say: "Go to Changsha to buy medicine." In the morning, he looked up and saw two white cranes in the tree. He felt very strange and went to Changsha Street.

古文：遂往市，见二人罩白伞，相从而行。
现代文：在街上他看见两个人打着白伞一起走。
English: On the street he saw two people walking together with white umbrellas.

古文：先生遂呼之设食。
现代文：成仙公就请他俩吃饭。
English: Chengxian invited them both to dinner.

古文：食讫便去，曾不顾谢。
现代文：吃完了饭，那两个人连道谢都不道谢就走了。
English: After finishing the meal, the two men left without even saying thank you.

古文：先生乃随之行数里，二人顾见先生，语曰： 子有何求而随不止？ 先生曰： 仆少出陋贱，闻君有济生之术，是以侍从耳。 
现代文：仙公就跟着他俩走了几里地，两个人回头看见仙公，就问： 你一直跟着我们，是有什么要求吗？ 仙公说： 我是个很卑陋的人，听说你们有道术，所以才追随你们。 
English: The fairy godmother followed the two of them for several miles. When the two looked back and saw the fairy godmother, they asked, "Have you been following us all this time, and do you have any requests?" The fairy godmother said, "I am a very lowly person. I heard that you have Taoism, so I followed you.

古文：二人相向而笑，遂出玉函，看素书，果有武丁姓名，于是与药二丸，令服之。
现代文：两个人相视一笑，就拿出一个玉石匣子中的本子翻看，见上面果然有仙公武丁的名字，于是就给了他两枚药丸让他吃下去。
English: The two men smiled at each other, took out a book from a jade box and looked through it. They saw that there was indeed the name of the Immortal Lord Wu Ding on it, so they gave him two pills and let him eat them.

古文：二人语先生曰： 君当得地仙。 
现代文：两个人对仙公说： 你应该得道成为地仙。 
English: Two people said to the Immortal: You should become an Earth Immortal.

古文：遂令还家。
现代文：然后就让他回家。
English: Then they let him go home.

古文：明照万物，兽声鸟鸣，悉能解之。
现代文：从此仙公能洞悉世间万物的奥秘，连野兽的吼叫和鸟儿的鸣声他都能听懂。
English: From then on, he was able to understand the secrets of all things in the world. He could even understand the roar of beasts and the song of birds.

古文：先生到家后，县使送饷府君。
现代文：仙公到家以后，县里让他给府君送礼品。
English: After Sengong arrived home, the county asked him to send gifts to the prefectural governor.

古文：府君周昕，有知人之鉴，见先生，呼曰： 汝何姓名也？ 对曰： 姓成名武丁，县司小吏。 
现代文：府君名叫周昕，特别能识别人才，看见仙公就问他的姓名，仙公回答说姓成叫武丁，在县里当小吏。
English: The prefectural governor's name was Zhou Yu, who was particularly good at recognizing talent. When he saw Xiangong, he asked his name. Xiangong replied that his surname was Cheng Wuding, and that he was a minor official in the county.

古文：府君异之，乃留在左右。久之，署为文学主薄。
现代文：府君很赏识他，就把他留在身边，后来任命他当文学主薄。
English: Fuchun appreciated him very much, so he kept him around and later appointed him as the chief of literature.

古文：尝与众共坐，闻群雀鸣而笑之。
现代文：有时仙公和同僚们在一起坐着闲谈，听见一群麻雀叫，仙公就笑了起来。
English: Sometimes he sits and chats with his colleagues. When he hears a group of sparrows chirping, he laughs.

古文：众问其故，答曰： 市东车翻覆米，群雀相呼往食。 
现代文：大家问他笑什么，他说，东街有辆车翻了，车上的米洒了一地，麻雀们互相招呼要到那里去吃米呢。 
English: Everyone asked him what he was laughing about, and he said that a car had overturned on Higashi-dori Street, and the rice on the car had spilled all over the ground, and the sparrows were calling to each other where to go to eat the rice.

古文：遣视之，信然也。
现代文：派人到东街看，真像仙公说的一样。
English: Send someone to East Street to have a look. It's just like the fairy godmother said.

古文：时郡中寮吏豪族，皆怪不应引寒小之人、以乱职位。府君曰： 此非卿辈知也。 
现代文：当时郡府中有些官员瞧不起仙公，怨怪府君不该把仙公这样出身微贱的人破格提拨到郡府里来。府君说： 这不是你们能知道的事。 
English: At that time, some officials in the prefectural government looked down on Sengong, and complained that the prefectural governor should not have appointed such a low-born person as Sengong to the prefectural government. The prefectural governor said: This is not something you can know.

古文：经旬曰： 乃与先生居阁直。
现代文：过了十几天，府君干脆把仙公请到自己的府宅同住。
English: After a dozen days, the governor simply invited the hermit to live with him in his mansion.

古文：至年初元会之日，三百余人，令先生行酒。
现代文：到了年初官员们团拜宴会的那天，三百多人聚会宴饮，让仙公行酒令。
English: On the day of the officials' group banquet at the beginning of the year, more than three hundred people gathered to feast and let Sengong make wine.

古文：酒巡遍讫，先生忽以杯酒向东南噀之，众客愕然怪之。府君曰： 必有所以。 
现代文：酒令行了一巡时，仙公忽然喝了一杯酒向东南方向喷去，满座人都惊讶地责怪他，只有府君说： 他这样做一定是有什么原因的。 
English: When the wine steward made a tour, the hermit suddenly drank a glass of wine and sprayed it in the southeast direction. Everyone in the room was surprised and blamed him. Only the governor said: There must be some reason for him to do so.

古文：因问其故。
现代文：就问仙公怎么回事。
English: I asked the fairy godmother what was going on.

古文：先生曰： 临武县火，以此救之。 
现代文：仙公说： 临武县城失火了，我喷酒是为了救火。 
English: Sengong said, "The city of Linwu County is on fire. I'm spraying alcohol to put out the fire.

古文：众客皆笑。
现代文：宾客们都嘲笑他。
English: The guests laughed at him.

古文：明日司议上事，称武丁不敬，即遣使往临武县验之。
现代文：第二天司仪官向上司报告说仙公在宴会上的行为是大不敬，府君就派人到临武县去调查。
English: The next day, the master of ceremonies reported to his superiors that Sengong's behavior at the banquet was very disrespectful, and the governor sent someone to Linwu County to investigate.

古文：县人张济上书，称 元日庆集饮酒，晡时火忽延烧厅事，从西北起，时天气清澄，南风极烈。
现代文：结果临为县的张济上书说： 正月初一县府举办节日宴会，下午三点多钟县衙忽然起了大火，火从西北方向烧起。当时天气很好，南风很猛，火势越来越大。
English: Results Zhang Jizhong, from Linwei County, said in a letter: On the first day of the first month of the year, the county government held a festival banquet. At around 3 p.m., a large fire suddenly broke out in Zhongxian County. The fire started from the northwest. At that time, the weather was very good, the south wind was very strong, and the fire was getting bigger and bigger.

古文：见阵云自西北直耸而上，径止县，大雨，火即灭，雨中皆有酒气。 
现代文：忽然看见西北天空涌起阵阵乌云，一直向县城卷来，接着下起了大雨，把火浇灭，雨水中散发出阵阵酒气。 
English: Suddenly, he saw dark clouds rising in the northwest sky, rolling all the way to the county seat, followed by heavy rain, which extinguished the fire and emitted bursts of alcohol in the rain.

古文：众疑异之，乃知先生盖非凡人也。
现代文：大家更加惊奇了，这才知道成仙公不是凡人。
English: Everyone was even more surprised when they learned that Cheng Xiangong was not an ordinary person.

古文：后府君令先生出郡城西，立宅居止，只有母一小弟及两小儿。
现代文：后来府君给成仙公在郡城西盖了府宅，请他搬进去住，仙公就和母亲、弟弟和两个孩子搬了进去。
English: Later, the governor built a mansion for Cheng Xiangang in the west of the county seat and asked him to move in. Xiangang moved in with his mother, younger brother and two children.

古文：比及二年，先生告病，四宿而殒，府君自临殡之。
现代文：这样过了两年，仙公向府君告病，四天后就死了，府君亲自主持了他的葬礼。
English: Two years later, Sengong fell ill and died four days later. Fuchun personally presided over his funeral.

古文：经两日，犹未成服，先生友人从临武来，于武昌冈上，逢先生乘白骡西行。
现代文：两天后，丧服还没有脱，仙公的朋友从临武到郡里来，说他在武昌的山岗上遇见成仙公骑着白骡子往西走。
English: Two days later, with his mourning clothes still on, a friend of Cheng Xiangong came to the county from Linwu, saying that he had met Cheng Xiangong riding a white mule westward on a hill in Wuchang.

古文：友人问曰： 日将暮，何所之也？ 
现代文：他问仙公： 天快黑了，你要去哪里？ 
English: He asked the fairy godmother: It's getting dark, where are you going?

古文：答曰： 暂往迷溪。
现代文：仙公说： 我到迷溪去一趟，很快就回来。
English: The fairy godmother said, "I am going to Maoxi to fish, and I will be back soon."

古文：闻哭声，大惊曰： 吾向来于武昌冈逢先生共语，云暂至迷溪，斯须当返，令过语家人，收刀并履，何得尔乎？ 其家人云： 刀履并入棺中，那应在外？ 
现代文：我走时把大刀忘在了我家门旁，还有一双鞋放在鸡窝上，你回去给我家里人捎信让他们收好。 朋友来到仙公家，听到一片哭声，大吃一惊说： 我刚在武昌岗上和仙公相遇，还谈了半天话，他说他到迷溪去一趟很快就回来，还让我告诉家里把他的刀和鞋收起来，怎么能说他死了呢？ 家里人说： 刀和鞋都在他棺材里，怎么能在外面呢？ 
English: When I left, I left my big knife by the door of my house, and a pair of shoes on the chicken coop, you go back and send a letter to my family to let them collect it. A friend came to Xiangong's house, heard a cry, and was surprised to say: I just met Xiangong on Wuchang Hill, and talked for half a day. He said that he would go to Meixi and come back soon, and asked me to tell the family to put away his knife and shoes. How can he be dead? The family said: The knife and shoes are in his coffin, how can they be outside?

古文：即以此事往启府君。府君遵令发棺视之，不复见尸，棺中唯一青竹杖，长七尺许。方知先生托形仙去。
现代文：他们把这事报告给府君，府君就命令打开棺材，尸首不见了，只有一支青竹七尺多长，这才知道成仙公脱离肉身升仙了。
English: They reported this to the prefect, who ordered the coffin to be opened. The corpse was gone, only a piece of green bamboo more than seven feet long remained. Only then did they know that Cheng Xiang had become immortal.

古文：时人谓先生乘骡于武昌冈，乃改为骡冈，在郡西十里也。
现代文：人们把他骑骡走过的武昌岗改名叫骡岗，骡岗就在郡城西面十里的地方。
English: People changed the name of Wuchang Hill, which he rode through on a donkey, to Yigang Hill. Yigang Hill is located ten miles west of the county seat.

古文：郭璞
现代文：郭璞
English: Guo Wei

古文：郭璞字景纯，河东人也。
现代文：郭璞字景纯，河东郡人。
English: Guo Yao, also known as Jing Jun, is from Hedong County.

古文：周识博闻，有出世之道鉴，天文地理，龟书龙图，爻象谶纬，安墓卜宅，莫不穷微。
现代文：他见识很广，博学多闻，懂得超脱凡节的道学真谛，对于天文地理、大禹时神龟背上六十五个字的 洛书 ，龙马从黄河中负出的 河图 、占卜、星象、预言未来的《谶书》和《纬书》、以及给阴宅和阳宅看风水定位置，他没有不懂的。
English: He was very knowledgeable, learned a lot, and understood the transcendent truth of Taoism. He did not understand the astronomical geography, the sixty-five-character Luo book on the back of the turtle, the river map drawn by Longma from the Yellow River, the divination, the stars, the future prediction of the "Book of Zou" and the "Book of Latitude," and the feng shui fixed position for the yin house and the yang house.

古文：善测人鬼之情状。
现代文：他还善于观测人鬼的情状。
English: He is also good at observing the moods of people and ghosts.

古文：李弘、范林明道论，景纯善于遥寄，缀文之士，皆同宗之。晋中兴，王导受其成旨，以建国社稷。
现代文：李弘、范翰林明道论，景纯善于遥寄，作学问的人都以他为宗师，晋代中兴时，丞相王导接受了他们的学说，作为建国家保社稷的理论基础。
English: Li Hong and Fan Hanlin were well versed in Taoism, Jing Chun was good at long-distance mail, and scholars regarded him as their master. During the reign of the Jin Dynasty, Wang Tao, the prime minister, accepted their teachings as the theoretical basis for building a national social security system.

古文：璞尽规矩制度，仰范太微星辰，俯则河洛黄图，夫帝王之作，必有天人之助者矣。
现代文：郭璞精通国家的制度规范，他仰知天上星辰对帝王的佑护，下知《洛书》、《河图》对社稷的保障，认为帝王的大业如成，必须有天神的佑助。
English: Guo Wei was well versed in the country's system and norms. He knew that the stars in the sky protected the emperor, and he knew that the "Book of Luo" and the "River Chart" protected the social order. He believed that the emperor's great cause could only be accomplished with the help of the angels.

古文：王敦镇南州。
现代文：丞相王导的表弟王敦当时任荆州和江州刺史。
English: At that time, Wang Dun, the cousin of the prime minister Wang Du, was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou and Jiangzhou.

古文：欲谋大逆，乃召璞为佐。
现代文：想要造反推翻晋元帝，就召郭璞辅佐他。
English: If he wanted to rebel and overthrow Emperor Jin Yuan, he would call Guo Sheng to assist him.

古文：时明帝年十五。
现代文：当时晋明帝才十五岁。
English: At that time, Emperor Jinming was only fifteen years old.

古文：一夕集朝士，问太史： 王敦果得天下邪？ 
现代文：有一天，明帝召来了朝臣们，问太史说： 你看王敦造反能得天下吗？ 
English: One day, Emperor Ming summoned his courtiers and asked Emperor Taishi: Do you think Wang Dun's rebellion can conquer the world?

古文：史臣曰： 王敦致天子，非能得天下。 
现代文：太史说： 王敦只是想挟制天下，并不能得天下。 
English: Taishi said, "Wang Dun just wants to control the world, but he can't control the world.

古文：明帝遂单骑微行，直入姑熟城。
现代文：于是明帝骑上一匹马，换了衣服，一个人进了姑熟城。
English: So Emperor Ming rode a horse, changed his clothes, and rode alone into the city of Guju.

古文：敦正与璞食，璞久之不白敦。
现代文：当时王敦正和郭璞一起吃饭，郭璞始终一言不发。
English: At that time, Wang Dun was having a meal with Guo Gan. Guo Gan never said a word.

古文：敦惊曰： 吾今同议定大计，卿何不即言？ 
现代文：王敦生气地问， 我请你来是和你商定夺天下的大计，你怎么总不说话？ 
English: Wang Dun asked angrily, "I invited you here to agree on a grand plan to take over the world. Why don't you talk?"

古文：璞曰： 向见日月星辰之精灵，五岳四海之神祗，皆为道从翌卫，下官震悸失守，不即得白将军。 
现代文：郭璞说： 我刚刚看见天上的日月星辰的精灵和地上五岳四海的神仙都侍卫着一个人进了姑熟城，我十分震惊，走了神儿，才没和你说话。 
English: Guo Yao said, "I just saw the spirits of the sun, moon and stars in the sky and the immortals of the five mountains and four seas on the ground all guarding a person who entered the familiar city. I was very shocked. The gods have left, so I didn't talk to you."

古文：敦使闻，谓是小奚戏马。
现代文：王敦就非让郭璞说清楚是怎么回事。
English: Wang Dun didn't have to let Guo Qi explain clearly what was going on.

古文：检定非也，遣三十骑追，不及。
现代文：郭璞就骗王敦说： 我刚才是说有一个小奴仆在姑熟街上跑马嬉耍呢。 
English: Guo Yao lied to Wang Dun and said: I just said that there was a little servant playing horse racing in the streets of Guzhuang.

古文：敦曰： 吾昨夜梦在石头城外江中，扶犁而耕，占之。 
现代文：王敦越想越不对，觉得郭璞说的绝不是这个意思，就派了三十名骑兵去追，到底没追上。王敦又问郭璞： 我昨夜做了个梦，梦见我在石头城外的江中扶犁耕田，请你算一算是吉是凶？ 
English: The more Wang Dun thought about it, the more wrong it was. He felt that this was not what Guo Gan meant, so he sent thirty horsemen to chase after them, but they never caught up. Wang Dun also asked Guo Gan: I had a dream last night, I dreamt that I was ploughing a field in the middle of the river outside the Stone Town. Could you please calculate whether it was good or bad luck?

古文：璞曰： 大江扶犁耕，亦自不成反，反亦无所成。 
现代文：郭璞说： 在江里耕田，意思是不能反，反也不会成事。 
English: Guo Wei said: "Cultivating fields in the river means that you can't do the opposite, but it won't work.

古文：敦怒谓璞曰： 卿命尽几何？ 
现代文：王敦大怒，又问郭璞： 你算算你什么时候死？ 
English: Wang Dun was furious and asked Guo Yao: When do you think you will die?

古文：璞曰： 下官命尽今日。 
现代文：郭璞说： 我算过了，今天我就会死！ 
English: Guo Wei said, "I've done the math, I'm going to die today!"

古文：敦诛璞。
现代文：王敦就杀了郭璞。
English: Wang Dun then killed Guo Yao.

古文：江水暴上市。
现代文：郭璞刚被杀，江水就暴涨进了街市。
English: As soon as Guo Tong was killed, the river water surged into the streets.

古文：璞尸出城南坑，见璞家载棺器及送终之具，已在坑侧，两松树间上有鹊巢，璞逆报家书所言也。
现代文：郭璞的尸体被冲到城南一个坑内，就看见他家中早就在墓地准备好了棺木和送终的用品，两棵松树上有个鹊鸟的窝，这是因为郭璞事先就写信告诉家里，说他某日某时会被杀，将葬在有鸟窝的两棵松树下，所以家人才按他信上说的把棺木运到他指定的地点。
English: Guo Wei's body was washed into a pit in the south of the city, and his family saw that his family had already prepared a coffin and funeral supplies in the cemetery. There was an ostrich's nest on two pine trees. This was because Guo Wei had written to his family in advance, saying that he would be killed one day at a time and would be buried under two pine trees with a bird's nest, so his family transported the coffin to his designated location as he said in his letter.

古文：谓伍伯曰： 吾年十三时，于栅塘脱袍与汝，吾命应在汝手中，可用吾刀。 
现代文：郭璞被杀前对行刑的刽子手说： 我十三岁那年，在栅塘脱下袍子送给你，那时我就知道我的命应该送在你手里，只是请你用我的刀杀我吧。 
English: Before he was killed, Guo Gan said to the executioner: "When I was 13 years old, I took off my robe in the stockade to give it to you. At that time, I knew that my life should be in your hands. Just please kill me with my sword."

古文：伍伯感昔念惠，衔涕行法。
现代文：刽子手感念过去郭璞对他的恩惠，流着泪行了刑。
English: The executioner was moved by Guo Yao's kindness to him in the past and carried out the sentence in tears.

古文：殡后三日，南州市人，见璞货其平生服饰，与相识共语，非但一人。
现代文：郭璞埋葬后三天，南州街上的人看见他卖自己过去穿的衣服，并和认识的人交谈，不只一个人见到了郭璞。
English: Three days after Guo Jun's burial, people on the streets of Nanzhou saw him selling the clothes he used to wear and talking to people he knew. More than one person saw Guo Jun.

古文：敦不信，开棺无尸。
现代文：王敦听说后不相信，打开郭璞的棺材一看，里面根本没有尸首。
English: Wang Dun didn't believe it when he heard about it. When he opened Guo Jun's coffin, he saw that there was no corpse inside.

古文：璞得兵解之道。
现代文：这是因为郭璞借兵解成仙去了。
English: This is because Guo Gan was demobilized and became a hermit.

古文：今为水仙伯，注《山海经》、《夏小正》、《尔雅》、《方言》，著《游仙诗》、《江赋》、《卜繇》、《客傲》、《洞林云》。
现代文：现在郭璞作了水仙伯，注解过《山海经》、《夏小正》、《尔雅》、《方言》，他的著作有《游仙诗》、《江赋》、《卜繇》、《客傲》、《洞林云》等等。
English: Now Guo Wei has become a narcissus expert. He has annotated "Mountain and Sea Classic," "Summer Xiaozheng," "Er Ya" and "Dialect." His works include "Traveling Immortal Poems," "Jiang Fu," "Bao Zi," "Guest Pride" and "Cave Cloud."

古文：《晋书》有传。
现代文：《晋书》中有他的传记。
English: "Jinshu" has his biography.

古文：尹思
现代文：尹思
English: Yin Si

古文：尹思者，字小龙，安定人也。
现代文：尹思字小龙，安定人。
English: Yin Si Zi Xiaolong, a stable person.

古文：晋元康五年正月十五夜，坐屋中，遣儿视月中有异物否。
现代文：晋代元康五年正月十五的夜晚，尹思坐在屋里，让他的儿子出去看看月亮里有没有不正常的东西。
English: On the night of the fifteenth day of the first month of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, Yin Si sat in the house and asked his son to go out to see if there was anything abnormal in the moon.

古文：儿曰： 今年当大水，中有一人被蓑带剑。 
现代文：儿子看后对他说： 今年会发大水，月亮里有一个披着蓑衣佩着宝剑的人。 
English: When his son saw it, he said to him, "This year there will be a great flood, and in the moon there will be a man wearing a long robe and carrying a sword.

古文：思目视之曰： 将有乱卒至。 
现代文：尹思看了看月亮说： 你说得不对。今年将有乱兵祸害百姓。 
English: Yin Si looked at the moon and said, "You're not right. This year, there will be soldiers wreaking havoc on the people.

古文：儿曰： 何以知之？ 曰： 月中人乃带甲仗矛。
现代文：儿子问他怎么知道的，他说： 月亮里的那个人不是披着蓑衣，而是披着铠甲执着长矛。
English: When his son asked him how he knew, he said, "The man in the moon is not wearing armor, he is wearing armor and holding a spear."

古文：当大乱三十年，复当小清耳。 
现代文：天下将会大乱三十年，然后才能稍稍太平一些。 
English: The world will be in turmoil for thirty years, and then it will be a little more peaceful.

古文：后果如其言。
现代文：后来果然像尹思说的那样。
English: And then it happened.

