古文：柳惔，字文通，河东解人也。父世隆，齐司空。
现代文：柳惔字文通，河东解县人。父亲世隆，齐朝司空。
English: Yanukovych's surname was Buntong, and he was from He Dongliao County. His father was Shilong, and his mother was Qi Chaozi.

古文：惔年十七，齐武帝为中军，命为参军，转主簿。
现代文：柳惔十七岁时，齐武帝尚为中军，任用他为参军，转任主簿。
English: At the age of seventeen, when Emperor Qiwu was still in the Chinese army, he was appointed to join the army and became the chief accountant.

古文：齐初，入为尚书三公郎，累迁太子中舍人，巴东王子响友。
现代文：齐朝初年，获任尚书三公郎，累迁太子中舍人，成为巴东王子响的朋友。
English: In the first year of the Qi Dynasty, he was appointed as the third prince of Shangshu, and became a friend of the prince of Badong.

古文：子响为荆州，惔随之镇。
现代文：子响管理荆州时，柳惔跟随前往。
English: When Zi Xiang was in charge of Jingzhou, Liu Xuan followed him.

古文：子响昵近小人，惔知将为祸，称疾还京。
现代文：子响喜欢亲近小人，柳惔料知这样要成为灾难，称病返京。
English: Zi Xiang likes to be close to villains. Liu Xuan knew that this would be a disaster and returned to Beijing, saying that he was ill.

古文：及难作，惔以先归得免。
现代文：等到灾难发作，柳惔因先返京而得以免罪。
English: When the disaster struck, Yanagisawa was exonerated because he had returned to Kyoto first.

古文：历中书侍郎，中护军长史。
现代文：历任中书侍郎、中护军长史。
English: The history of successive Chushushisajiro and Chugo Choshu follows.

古文：出为新安太守，居郡，以无政绩，免归。
现代文：出任新安太守，居郡，以无政绩为由，被罢免归家。
English: He was appointed as the new governor of An, lived in the county, and was dismissed and returned home on the grounds that he had no political achievements.

古文：久之，为右军谘议参军事。
现代文：一段时间后，任为右军咨议参军事。
English: After a period of time, he was appointed to the Right Army Advisory Council to participate in the military.

古文：建武末，为西戎校尉、梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：建武末年，任西戎校尉、梁南秦二州刺史。
English: In the last years of Jianwu's life, he served as Xijun school captain and Liangnan Qin Erzhou magistrate.

古文：及高祖起兵，惔举汉中应义。
现代文：等到高祖举兵起事时，柳惔率汉中兵响应。
English: When Gao Zu raised an army to revolt, Liu Bei led the Han soldiers to respond.

古文：和帝即位，以为侍中，领前军将军。
现代文：和帝即位，任之为侍中，领前军将军。
English: Emperor Go-Shirakawa ascended the throne, appointing Go-Shirakawa as an aide-de-camp to lead the front-line generals.

古文：高祖践阼，征为护军将军，未拜，仍迁太子詹事，加散骑常侍。论功封曲江县侯，邑千户。
现代文：高祖为帝时，征为护军将军，未拜任，仍迁任太子詹事，加散骑常侍，论功封曲江县侯，食邑千户。
English: When Gao Zu was the emperor, he was conscripted as a general of the escort army. He did not take the post, but was still transferred to the post of prince Zhanji, with the addition of a free-riding equerry, and was awarded the post of magistrate of Qujiang County and a thousand households of food villages.

古文：高祖因宴为诗以贻惔曰： 尔实冠群后，惟余实念功。 
现代文：高祖在宴会上作诗赠给柳惔，诗云： 尔宴冠群后，惟余实念功。 
English: At the banquet, Gao Zu wrote a poem and presented it to Liu Bei. The poem read, "After the banquet crowns, but after the real recitation."

古文：又尝侍座，高祖曰： 徐元瑜违命岭南，《周书》罪不相及，朕已宥其诸子，何如？ 
现代文：又曾陪高祖闲谈，高祖说； 徐元瑜在岑南违命，《周书》罪不相及，我已赦免其诸子，怎么样？ 
English: He also chatted with Gao Zu, Gao Zu said; Xu Yuanyu disobeyed orders in southern Fujian, "Zhou Shu" is not a crime, I have pardoned his sons, how about it?

古文：惔对曰： 罚不及嗣，赏延于世，今复见之圣朝。 
现代文：柳惔回答说： 惩罚不加于其后代，赏赐延续至后世，今再次见到圣朝。 
English: Liu Yao replied, "The punishment will not be inflicted on his descendants, and the reward will continue to the next generation. Now we can see the Holy Dynasty again.

古文：时以为知言。
现代文：当时人们称之为智言。
English: At that time, people called it wisdom.

古文：寻迁尚书右仆射。
现代文：不久迁任尚书右仆射。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Shangshu Rongsha.

古文：天监四年，大举北伐，临川王宏都督众军，以惔为副。
现代文：天监四年，大举北伐，临川王梁宏都督众军，以柳惔为副手。
English: In the fourth year of Tianjun, the Northern Expedition was carried out on a large scale, with the governor of Linchuan, Wang Lianghong, leading the troops, with Liu Ye as his deputy.

古文：军还，复为仆射。
现代文：军队返回后，仍任仆射。
English: After the troops returned, they continued to fire.

古文：以久疾，转金紫光禄大夫，加散骑常侍，给亲信二十人。
现代文：因久病，转任金紫光禄大夫，加散骑常侍，配亲信二十人。
English: Due to a long-term illness, he was transferred to the post of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, and was accompanied by 20 relatives.

古文：未拜，出为使持节、安南将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：未拜官，出任使持节、安南将军、湘州刺史。
English: He did not hold any official position, but served as the envoy of Jichijisai, General Annan, and the governor of Xiangzhou.

古文：六年十月，卒于州，时年四十六。
现代文：六年十月死于任上，时年四十六岁。
English: He died in office in October 2006, at the age of 46.

古文：高祖为素服举哀。
现代文：高祖着素服举哀。
English: Gao Zu wore plain clothes to mourn.

古文：赠侍中、抚军将军，给鼓吹一部。谥曰穆。
现代文：赠侍中、抚军将军，给鼓吹一部，谥号曰穆。
English: He was given the titles of "chamberlain" and "army general" and was assigned to the propaganda department. His nickname was "Mu."

古文：惔著《仁政传》及诸诗赋，粗有辞义。
现代文：柳惔著有《仁政传》及许多诗赋，粗有辞义。
English: Liu Xi wrote "The Biography of Yan Zheng" and many poems, which are coarse in meaning.

古文：子照嗣。
现代文：儿子柳照继承。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Liu Zhao.

古文：惔第四弟憕，亦有美誉，历侍中、镇西长史。
现代文：柳惔的第四弟柳憕，亦有美誉，历任侍中、镇西长史。
English: Yanagimaro, the fourth brother of Yanagimaro, also has a good reputation, and has served as a chamberlain and the mayor of the western part of the town.

古文：天监十二年，卒，赠宁远将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：天监十二年卒，赠宁远将军、豫州刺史。
English: Tianjun was 12 years old when he was given the gifts of Ningyuan General and Yuzhou History.

古文：忱字文若，惔第五弟也。
现代文：柳忱字文若，是柳惔的第五个弟弟。
English: Liu Zhen is the fifth younger brother of Liu Yao.

古文：年数岁，父世隆及母阎氏时寝疾，忱不解带经年。
现代文：年龄才几岁时，父亲柳世隆和母亲阎氏常常卧病在床，柳忱没有宽衣睡觉好几年。
English: When she was just a few years old, her father, Liu Shilong, and mother, Yan, were often sick in bed, and Liu Zhen did not sleep in a loose-fitting robe for several years.

古文：及居丧，以毁闻。
现代文：在居丧守孝期间，因过度悲哀而闻名。
English: During the mourning period, it is famous for its excessive sadness.

古文：起家为司徒行参军，累迁太子中舍人，西中郎主簿，功曹史。
现代文：起家任司徒行参军，累迁太子中舍人，西中郎主簿，功曹史。
English: The founder of the family, Ren Sittu, joined the army, and was successively transferred to the prince's junior subordinate, the master of the West Middle School, and the meritorious history.

古文：齐东昏遣巴西太守刘山阳由荆袭高祖，西中郎长史萧颖胄计未有定，召忱及其所亲席阐文等夜入议之。
现代文：齐东昏侯派遣巴西太守刘山阳从荆州袭击高祖，西中郎长史萧颖胄想不出什么良策妙计，夜裹，叫来柳忱以及亲信席阐文等人一起商议对策。
English: In the middle of the night, Liu Shanyang, the governor of Brazil, was dispatched from Jingzhou to attack Gao Zu by the dim-witted governor of Eastern Qi, and Liu Zhen and his close confidant, Shi Xiaoying, were called in to discuss the countermeasures.

古文：忱曰： 朝廷狂悖，为恶日滋。
现代文：柳忱说： 当今皇帝昏庸狂悖，一天比一天作恶多端。
English: Liu Zhen said: Today's emperor is delusional and insane, and he is doing more and more evil every day.

古文：顷闻京师长者，莫不重足累息；今幸在远，得假日自安。
现代文：前不久听说京城中的大臣们人人胆战心惊，吓得连大气也不敢出；现在，我们幸好远离朝廷，得以暂时的安全。
English: Not long ago, I heard that the ministers in the capital were so frightened that they did not dare to come out; now, fortunately, we are far away from the imperial court and have temporary safety.

古文：雍州之事，且藉以相毙耳。
现代文：朝廷命令我们袭击雍州，衹不过藉此而让双方互相残杀罢了。
English: The imperial court ordered us to attack Yongzhou, but all we did was let the two sides kill each other.

古文：独不见萧令君乎？以精兵数千，破崔氏十万众，竟为群邪所陷，祸酷相寻。
现代文：难道没看到萧令君的下场吗他以几千精兵，打败了崔氏十万大军，然而竟被那帮邪恶的小人所陷害，以致灾祸及身。
English: Didn't he see what happened to Xiao Lingjun? He defeated Cui's 100,000-strong army with a few thousand elite soldiers. However, he was framed by those evil villains, which brought disaster to him.

古文：前事之不忘，后事之师也。
现代文：前事不忘，后事之师。
English: Don't forget the past, but learn from the future.

古文：若使彼凶心已逞，岂知使君不系踵而及？
现代文：假如那帮小人的阴谋得逞，怎么知道您不会步其后尘呢?
English: If the plot of those villains succeeds, how do you know you won't follow in their footsteps?

古文：且雍州士锐粮多，萧使君雄姿冠世，必非山阳所能拟；若破山阳，荆州复受失律之责。
现代文：再说雍州兵精粮多，萧使君雄姿盖世，刘山阳一定不是他的对手；如果他打败了刘山阳，我们荆州也会因没有执行朝廷命令而受到责难。
English: Moreover, the soldiers in Yongzhou had more refined grain, and Xiao had made him a hero. Liu Shanyang must not have been his rival. If he had defeated Liu Shanyang, we in Jingzhou would have been blamed for not carrying out the order of the imperial court.

古文：进退无可，且深虑之。 
现代文：真是进退两难，所以应该认真加以考虑。 
English: It's a real dilemma, so it should be seriously considered.

古文：阐文亦深劝同高祖。
现代文：阐文也极力劝说题胄随同高祖起兵举事。
English: The exposition also tried its best to persuade them to follow Gao Zu in raising an army.

古文：颖胄乃诱斩山阳，以忱为宁朔将军。
现代文：颖胄就诱斩了刘山阳，任命柳忱为宁朔将军。
English: Ying Zang beheaded Liu Shanyang and appointed Liu Zhen as the general of Ningshuo.

古文：和帝即位，为尚书吏部郎，进号辅国将军、南平太守。
现代文：齐和帝即位，柳忱为尚书吏部郎，进号辅国将军、南平太守。
English: When Emperor Qihe ascended to the throne, Liu Zhen was appointed as Shang Shuliriburo, promoted to Vice-Governor General and Nanping Dazhu.

古文：寻迁侍中、冠军将军，太守如故。
现代文：不久迁任侍中、冠军将军，担任太守如故。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of Samurai Middle Rank and Champion General, and continued to serve as Dajo.

古文：转吏部尚书，不拜。
现代文：转吏部尚书，没有接受官职。
English: He did not accept an official post.

古文：郢州平，颖胄议迁都夏口，忱复固谏，以为巴硖未宾，不宜轻舍根本，摇动民志。
现代文：郢州被攻克后，颖胄准备迁都至夏，柳忱又坚持谏阻，他认为巴、陕两地还没有归顺，不应该轻易放弃根据地，动摇民心。
English: After Bozhou was conquered, Ying Zheng prepared to move the capital to Xia, and Liu Zhen insisted on resisting. He believed that Ba and Shaanxi had not yet surrendered, and should not easily give up the base and shake the people's hearts.

古文：颖胄不从。
现代文：颖胄不听从。
English: Ying Qi did not listen.

古文：俄而巴东兵至硖口，迁都之议乃息。
现代文：不久巴束敌兵攻至硖口，迁都的打算才取消。
English: Not long after, the enemy's soldiers from Batuque attacked the Hukou, and the plan to move the capital was cancelled.

古文：论者以为见机。
现代文：大家都说他有先见之明。
English: Everyone said he was a visionary.

古文：高祖践阼，以忱为五兵尚书，领骁骑将军。
现代文：高祖即位，任命柳忱为五兵尚书，领骁骑将军。
English: Gao Zu ascended the throne, and appointed Liu Zhen as the general of the five soldiers and the general of the cavalry.

古文：论建义功，封州陵伯，邑七百户。
现代文：因为建国有功，封为州陵伯，食邑七百户。
English: Because of its contribution to the founding of the country, it was awarded the title of prefectural imperial mausoleum.

古文：天监二年，出为安西长史、冠军将军、南郡太守。
现代文：天监二年，出为安西长史、冠军将军、南郡太守。
English: In the second year of Tianjun, he was promoted to Anxi Changshi, Champion General, and Nan County Governor.

古文：六年，征为员外散骑常侍、太子右卫率。
现代文：六年，征为员外散骑常侍、太子右卫率。
English: In the sixth year, he was enlisted as a non-commissioned officer, horseback rider, and prince's right guard.

古文：未发，迁持节、督湘州诸军事、辅国将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：还未出发，又迁持节、督湘州诸军事、辅国将军、湘州刺史。
English: Before they left, they also moved the festival, the military governors of Xiangzhou, the generals of the auxiliary states, and the history of Xiangzhou.

古文：八年，坐辄放从军丁免。
现代文：八年，由于擅自放纵军士而被免职。
English: Eight years later, he was dismissed from his post for indulging a non-commissioned officer.

古文：俄入为秘书监，迁散骑常侍，转祠部尚书，未拜遇疾，诏改授给事中、光禄大夫，疾笃不拜。
现代文：不久入为秘书监，迁散骑常侍，转祠部尚书，还未拜官就生病，朝廷下诏改授他为给事中、光禄大夫，由于病情加重而没有拜官。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of secretary superintendent, moved to the position of riding attendant, and transferred to the position of temple secretary. However, he fell ill before he could take the oath of office, and the Imperial Court issued an edict to change his title to that of doctor of the middle and upper classes. Due to his worsening condition, he did not take the oath of office.

古文：十年，卒于家，时年四十一。
现代文：十年，在家中去世，时年四十一岁。
English: Ten years later, he died at home at the age of forty-one.

古文：追赠中书令，谥曰穆。
现代文：追赠中书令，谧为穆。
English: After the gift of Chinese calligraphy, he became a monk.

古文：子范嗣。
现代文：儿子柳范继承爵位。
English: His son Liu Fan succeeded to the title.

古文：席阐文，安定临泾人也。
现代文：席阐文，安定郡临泾县人。
English: He is from Linyi County, Anding County.

古文：少孤贫，涉猎书史。
现代文：幼年失去父母，生活贫困，从小喜欢浏览群书。齐初。
English: He lost his parents at a young age, lived in poverty, and liked to browse through books from an early age.

古文：齐初，为雍州刺史萧赤斧中兵参军，由是与其子颖胄善。
现代文：担任雍州刺史萧赤斧的中兵参军，因此跟他的儿子萧颖胄很友好。
English: He served as a middle-ranking soldier in the army of Xiao Chiaxing, the Yangzhou assassin, so he was very friendly with his son Xiao Yingyao.

古文：复历西中郎中兵参军，领城局。
现代文：又历任西中郎中兵参军，领城局。
English: In addition, successive West Zhongluo soldiers joined the army, leading the city.

古文：高祖之将起义也，阐文深劝之，颖胄同焉，仍遣田祖恭私报高祖，并献银装刀，高祖报以金如意。
现代文：高祖将起兵反抗束昏侯，阐文极力劝说，萧颖胄同意响应高祖一同举事，又派田祖恭密报高祖，并贡献银装刀，高祖回赠他金如意。
English: Gao Zu will raise an army to resist the encirclement, and Yanwen will try to persuade him. Xiao Yingyao agreed to respond to Gao Zu and raise the matter together. He also sent Tian Zu to respectfully report to Gao Zu, and contributed a silver-plated knife. Gao Zu gave him back the money.

古文：和帝称尊号，为给事黄门侍郎，寻迁卫尉卿。
现代文：齐和帝即位，任命他为给事黄门侍郎，不久迁卫尉卿。
English: When Emperor Qihe ascended to the throne, he appointed him as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and he was soon transferred to the position of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards.

古文：颖胄暴卒，州府骚扰，阐文以和帝幼弱，中流任重，时始兴王憺留镇雍部，用与西朝群臣迎王总州事，故赖以宁辑。
现代文：颖胄突然去世，州府动乱不安，阐文以为和帝年幼，而长江中游一带任务艰巨，当时始兴王萧怆正留守雍州，就与西朝江陵的文武百官共迎萧怆前去总管荆州府的事务，因此百姓得以安定。
English: Ying Zheng died suddenly, the prefecture was in turmoil, and Yanwen thought that Emperor He was young, while the middle reaches of the Yangtze River had a difficult task. At that time, Prince Xing Wang Xiao Zheng was staying in Yongzhou, and he and hundreds of civil and military officials of the Western Dynasty Jiangling welcomed Xiao Zheng to head the affairs of Jingzhou Prefecture, so the people could be stable.

古文：高祖受禅，除都官尚书、辅国将军。
现代文：高祖受禅登基，阐文任都官尚书、辅国将军。
English: Gaozhu was enthroned by Emperor Zhen and appointed as the official of the capital, Shangshu, and the general of the auxiliary province.

古文：封山阳伯，邑七百户。
现代文：封为山阳伯，食邑七百户。
English: He was given the title of Sanyangbo and served 700 households.

古文：出为东阳太守，又改封湘西，户邑如故。
现代文：出为束阳太守，又改封于湘西，食邑照旧。
English: He was appointed Sokuyo Taishu, and the castle was moved to the west of Honshu, but the food remained the same.

古文：视事二年，以清白著称，卒于官。
现代文：任官两年，以清白而著称，死于任官期间。
English: He was in office for two years and was known for his innocence. He died while in office.

古文：诏赙钱三万，布五十匹。
现代文：高祖下诏赠钱三万，布五十匹助办丧事。
English: Gao Zu issued an edict to donate 30,000 yuan and 50 cloth horses to help with the funeral.

古文：谥曰威。
现代文：谧号为威。
English: 号威.

古文：韦睿，字怀文，京兆杜陵人也。
现代文：韦睿，字怀文，京兆杜陵人。
English: Wei Rui, Zhaowaiwen, Jingzhao Tulingren.

古文：自汉丞相贤以后，世为三辅著姓。祖玄，避吏隐于长安南山。
现代文：自为丞相以后，辅佐了三姓。祖父韦玄，不愿为官，隐居在长安南山。
English: After serving as chancellor, he assisted three families. Grandfather Wei Xuan, who did not want to be an official, lived in seclusion in the South Mountain of Chang'an.

古文：宋武帝入关，以太尉掾征，不至。
现代文：宋武帝在位，曾为太尉掾征，但被拒绝。
English: During the reign of Emperor Songwu, he was once promoted to the rank of eunuch, but he was rejected.

古文：伯父祖征，宋末为光禄勋。
现代文：伯父韦祖征，宋末为光禄勋。
English: Uncle Wei Zuzheng was awarded the Guanglu Medal at the end of the Song Dynasty.

古文：父祖归，宁远长史。
现代文：父亲韦祖归，为宁远长史。
English: His father Wei Zu Gui has a long history with Ningyuan.

古文：睿事继母以孝闻。
现代文：韦睿对继母十分孝敬，因此受到乡里人的称赞。
English: Wei Rui is very filial to his stepmother, so he is praised by the villagers.

古文：睿兄纂、阐，并早知名。
现代文：兄长韦睿、韦阐更早有名声。
English: His elder brothers, Wei Rui and Wei Yan, were famous earlier.

古文：纂、睿皆好学，阐有清操。
现代文：韦纂、韦睿非常好学，韦操有清操。
English: Wei Zuo and Wei Rui are very good at learning, and Wei Shao has a clear practice.

古文：祖征累为郡守，每携睿之职，视之如子。
现代文：韦祖征为郡守，常带韦叡去办理公事，视之如子。
English: Wei Zuzheng is the county governor, and he often takes Wei E to handle public affairs, and regards him as a son.

古文：时睿内兄王憕、姨弟杜恽，并有乡里盛名。
现代文：当时韦睿的妻兄王橙、姨弟杜恽，在乡里都有很大的名声。
English: At that time, Wei Rui's brother-in-law, Wang Yanzhang, and his uncle, Du Jun, had a great reputation in the village.

古文：祖征谓睿曰： 汝自谓何如憕、恽？ 
现代文：韦祖征对韦睿说： 与橙、恽相比，你自己认为怎么样? 
English: Wei Zu Zheng said to Wei Rui: Compared with the orange and the dragonfly, what do you think?

古文：睿谦不敢对。
现代文：韦睿谦逊不敢回答。
English: Wei Rui modestly did not dare to answer.

古文：祖征曰： 汝文章或小减，学识当过之；然而干国家，成功业，皆莫汝逮也。 
现代文：祖征说： 你的文章比起他们来或许略为逊色，但学识应该超过他们，而且在参与国家大事、为国建功立业方面，他们都比不上你啊。 
English: Zu Zheng said: Your articles may be slightly inferior to them, but your knowledge should exceed them, and they are not as good as you in participating in national affairs and making contributions to national construction.

古文：外兄杜幼文为梁州刺史，要睿俱行。
现代文：外兄杜幼文为梁州刺史，要韦叡和他同去。
English: His brother-in-law, Du Yuwen, was the governor of Liangzhou, and he wanted Wei E to go with him.

古文：梁土富饶，往者多以贿败；睿时虽幼，独用廉闻。
现代文：梁州当时十分富饶，到那里做官的人多因为贪财而被免职，而韦叡虽年纪很小，却以清廉闻名。
English: Liangzhou was very rich at the time, and most of the officials who worked there were dismissed for greed, but Wei Ei, although he was very young, was known for his integrity.

古文：宋永光初，袁抃为雍州刺史，见而异之，引为主簿。
现代文：宋永光初年，袁韵任雍州刺史，一见到韦睿就觉得他非同寻常，引为主簿。
English: In the first year of Song Yongguang, Yuan Yun was appointed as a historian of Yongzhou. As soon as he saw Wei Rui, he thought he was extraordinary, and brought him as his main book.

古文：抃到州，与邓琬起兵，睿求出为义成郡，故免抃之祸。
现代文：袁颛到雍州后，与邓琬起兵反叛朝廷，韦睿事先请求到义成郡任职，因而免遭袁韵之祸。
English: After Yuan Rong arrived in Yongzhou, he and Deng Rong raised an army to rebel against the imperial court. Wei Rui requested to work in Yicheng County in advance, thus avoiding the calamity of Yuan Rong.

古文：后为晋平王左常侍，迁司空桂阳王行参军，随齐司空柳世隆守郢城，拒荆州刺史沈攸之。
现代文：之后担任晋平王左常侍，迁司空桂阳王行参军，跟随齐司空柳世隆防守郢城，抵抗荆州刺史沈攸之的进攻。
English: After that, he served as the left attendant of Jinping Wang Zuo, joined the army as the transfer officer of Guiyang Wang Xing, and followed Qi Jiu Liu Shilong to defend Shicheng, resisting the attack of Jingzhou stabber Shen Youzhi.

古文：攸之平，迁前军中兵参军。
现代文：攸之之乱被平定之后，迁前军中兵参军。
English: After the Yuanshi Rebellion was quelled, soldiers from the relocated former army joined the army.

古文：久之，为广德令。
现代文：很久以后，任广德县令。
English: A long time later, he became the Guangde County magistrate.

古文：累迁齐兴太守、本州别驾、长水校尉、右军将军。
现代文：累迁齐兴太守、本州别驾、长水校尉、右军将军。
English: He was successively transferred to the position of Qi Xing's governor, Honshu governor, Changshui captain, and general of the right army.

古文：齐末多故，不欲远乡里，求为上庸太守，加建威将军。
现代文：齐末年时局动乱，韦睿不想远离家乡，请求担任上庸太守，加建威将军。
English: At the end of the Qi Dynasty, the situation was turbulent. Wei Rui did not want to be far away from his hometown, so he asked General Jia Jianwei to serve as Shangyong governor.

古文：俄而太尉陈显达、护军将军崔慧景频逼京师，民心遑骇，未有所定，西土人谋之于睿。
现代文：不久太尉陈颢达、护军将军崔慧景反叛朝廷，频频进逼京师建康，人人惊惶害怕，不知所措。
English: Soon after, the captain Chen Bingda and the escort general Cui Huijing rebelled against the imperial court and frequently forced Jiankang into Beijing. Everyone was terrified and at a loss.

古文：睿曰： 陈虽旧将，非命世才；崔颇更事，懦而不武。其取赤族也，宜哉！
现代文：蜀地人士向韦散询问时局问题，韦数说： 陈显达虽然是一员老将，但不是治世之才；崔慧景颇懂些事理，但怯懦而缺少勇武之气，他们该是落个减族的下场。
English: Shu people asked Wei San about the current situation. Wei Zhuang said: Chen Xianda, although a veteran, is not a world-class talent; Cui Huiqing knows a lot of things, but he is cowardly and lacks courage. They should be reduced.

古文：天下真人，殆兴于吾州矣。 
现代文：平定天下的人，大概会产生于我们州裹。 
English: The man who will set the world to rights will probably come from our state.

古文：乃遣其二子，自结于高祖。
现代文：于是，就派遣他的两个儿子主动前去结交高祖。
English: As a result, he sent his two sons on their own initiative to make friends with Gaozu.

古文：义兵檄至，睿率郡人伐竹为筏，倍道来赴，有众二千，马二百匹。
现代文：高祖起兵的檄书传来，韦散率领郡兵砍伐竹子做成竹筏，日夜兼程赶来参加，共带来二千多人，骏马二百匹。
English: When Gao Zu's call to arms came, Wei San led the county soldiers to cut down bamboo to make bamboo rafts. They came to participate day and night, bringing a total of more than two thousand people and two hundred horses.

古文：高祖见睿甚悦，拊几曰： 他日见君之面，今日见君之心，吾事就矣。 
现代文：高祖见到前来投奔的韦散非常高兴，拍着几案说： 以前我见到你的人，今天见到的却是你的真心，我的大事一定会成功了。 
English: Gao Zu was very happy to see Wei San, who had come to run away, and said with a few cases: I have seen your people before, but what I saw today was your true heart. My big event will surely succeed.

古文：义师克郢、鲁，平加湖，睿多建谋策，皆见纳用。
现代文：义军攻克郢、鲁，平定加湖，韦观提出很多计策，都被高祖采用。
English: Wei Guan put forward many strategies for the rebels to conquer Kunlun and Lu, and pacify Dingga Lake, all of which were adopted by Gaozu.

古文：大军发郢，谋留守将，高祖难其人；久之，顾睿曰： 弃骐骥而不乘，焉遑遑而更索？ 
现代文：东征大军将从郢城出发，商议留守郢城的将领人选时，高祖觉得很难确定。很久以后才回头对韦散说： 放弃良马而不乘。匆匆忙忙地再到哪裹去寻找呢? 
English: When the Eastern Expeditionary Force set out from Lucheng to discuss the selection of the general who would stay behind in Lucheng, Gaozu found it difficult to be certain. It was not until much later that he turned back to Wei San and said, "Give up the good horse and don't ride it. Where should I rush to look for it?"

古文：即日以为冠军将军、江夏太守，行郢府事。初，郢城之拒守也，男女口垂十万，闭垒经年，疾疫死者十七八，皆积尸于床下，而生者寝处其上，每屋辄盈满。
现代文：当日就任命他为冠军将军、江夏太守，行郢府事，当初，郢城据险坚守之时，有士人百姓男女近十万人，关闭城门将近一年，城内瘟疫流行，每十个人中就有七八个染病死去，尸体都堆积在床底下，而活人睡在床上，家家户户都这样堆满了尸体。
English: On the same day, he appointed him as the champion general, the governor of Jiangxia, to carry out the affairs of the government. At the beginning, when the city of Handan held out against all odds, there were nearly one hundred thousand men and women, closed the city gates for nearly a year, the plague was prevalent in the city, and seven or eight out of every ten people died of the disease. Bodies were piled up under the bed, while the living slept on the bed, and every house was filled with bodies.

古文：睿料简隐恤，咸为营理，于是死者得埋藏，生者反居业，百姓赖之。
现代文：韦敷亲自清点察看，安抚还活着的人。都为之经营料理，这样死者才得以收埋，生者能返乡安居乐业，因此百姓都依赖于他。
English: Weishiki personally checks and reassures those who are still alive. They all cook for him, so that the dead can be buried and the living can return home to live and work in peace, so the people all depend on him.

古文：梁台建，征为大理。
现代文：梁朝建立后，韦饭被征为大理。
English: After the establishment of the Liang Dynasty, Wei's rice was requisitioned for Dali.

古文：高祖即位，迁廷尉，封都梁子，邑三百户。
现代文：高祖即位后，迁为廷尉，分封为都梁子，食邑三百户。
English: After Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, he was transferred to the position of courtier, and was assigned to the capital Ryangzi, with 300 households in the capital.

古文：天监二年，改封永昌，户邑如先。
现代文：天监二年，改封永昌，食邑如先。
English: In the second year of Tianjun, it was renamed Yongchang, and the food was the same as before.

古文：东宫建，迁太子右卫率，出为辅国将军、豫州刺史、领历阳太守。
现代文：太子立。迁太子右卫率，出为辅国将军、豫州刺史、领历阳太守。
English: The crown prince was established. The crown prince was transferred to the position of the right guard, and promoted to the position of the auxiliary general, the governor of Yuzhou, and the governor of Liyang.

古文：三年，魏遣众来寇，率州兵击走之。
现代文：三年，北魏军队进犯边疆，韦散率领州兵击退敌兵。
English: Three years later, the Northern Wei army invaded the frontier, and Wei San led the National Guard to repel the enemy soldiers.

古文：四年，王师北伐，诏睿都督众军。
现代文：天监四年，王师北伐，诏令韦散统率众军。
English: In the fourth year of Tianjun, Wang Shih led the Northern Expedition, and ordered Wei San to lead the army.

古文：睿遣长史王超宗、梁郡太守冯道根攻魏小岘城，未能拔。
现代文：韦觳派遣长史王超宗、梁郡太守冯道根进攻北魏的小岘城，未能攻克。
English: Wei Wei dispatched the warlord Wang Chaozong and the governor of Liang County, Feng Dogen, to attack the Northern Wei's Xiaohui City, but failed to conquer it.

古文：睿巡行围栅，魏城中忽出数百人陈于门外，睿欲击之，诸将皆曰： 向本轻来，未有战备，徐还授甲，乃可进耳。 
现代文：韦散正在巡枧阵地时，魏城中忽然冲出数百敌兵，在城门外摆开阵势，韦壑想要攻击他们，诸位将领都说： 我们本是轻装而来，没有很好地备战，还是先回去给士兵发授甲衣，然后才可以进攻。 
English: When Wei San was patrolling the position, hundreds of enemy soldiers suddenly rushed out of Wei City and took up positions outside the city gate. Wei San wanted to attack them. All the generals said: We came lightly armed and did not prepare well for the battle. We should first go back and issue armor to the soldiers before we can attack.

古文：睿曰： 不然。
现代文：韦散说： 不对。
English: Wei San said, "That's not right."

古文：魏城中二千余人，闭门坚守，足以自保，无故出人于外，必其骁勇者也，若能挫之，其城自拔。 
现代文：魏城中有守敌二千多人，如果闭门坚守，足以自我保全，现在无缘无故冲出城外，必定是他们的精兵勇士，如果能挫败他们，敌城就会不攻白破。 
English: There are more than two thousand enemy defenders in Weicheng. If they stay behind closed doors, it is enough for self-preservation. If they rush out of the city without any reason, they must be their elite soldiers. If they can defeat them, the enemy city will be destroyed without attacking.

古文：众犹迟疑，睿指其节曰； 朝廷授此，非以为饰，韦睿之法，不可犯也。 
现代文：众将领仍然迟疑不从，韦数指着符节说： 朝廷授我此物，不是用来装饰的，我韦敏的军令是不得违抗的。 
English: The generals still hesitated to obey, Wei Zi pointed to the rune and said: The court gave me this thing, not for decoration, I can't disobey Wei Min's military order.

古文：乃进兵。
现代文：于是进兵攻击。
English: So the marching troops attacked.

古文：士皆殊死战，魏军果败走，因急攻之，中宿而城拔。
现代文：将士都殊死决战，苏军果然败逃，因此便对小岘城发起猛烈攻击，到半夜就攻占了小岘城。
English: The soldiers fought to the bitter end, and the Soviet army was defeated and fled, so they launched a fierce attack on Xiaohui City, and captured Xiaohui City by midnight.

古文：遂进讨合肥。
现代文：接着，又进军讨伐合胆。
English: Next, they marched to fight against the Mongols.

古文：先是，右军司马胡略等至合肥，久未能下，睿按行山川，曰： 吾闻 汾水可以灌平阳，绛水可以灌安邑 ，即此是也。 
现代文：原先，右军司马超略等攻打合肥，久攻不下，韦壑巡视了当地的山川地势。说： 我听说 可用来浇灌芒阳，缝迷可以用来浇灌安垦 。造裹的地形就是这样。 
English: Originally, the right-wing army led by Sima Chaoli and others attacked Hefei, but could not conquer it for a long time. Wei Wei inspected the local mountains and rivers. He said: I heard that it can be used to water Mangyang, and that it can be used to water Anhui. This is how the terrain looks like.

古文：乃堰肥水，亲自表率，顷之，堰成水通，舟舰继至。
现代文：于是决定修堰阻拦旦眯，亲属表率，很快，堰坝筑成，水路连通，舟船相继而至。
English: As a result, it was decided to repair the weir to block the dam, and the relatives set an example. Soon, the dam was built, the waterway was connected, and the boats came one after another.

古文：魏初分筑东西小城夹合肥，睿先攻二城。
现代文：北魏当初修筑了束、西小城用以夹护金胆，童壑先攻下这两座小城。
English: At the beginning, the Northern Wei Dynasty built the Bund and the West Town to protect the Jinyi, and Tonglu first captured the two small towns.

古文：既而魏援将扬灵胤帅军五万奄至，众惧不敌，请表益兵。
现代文：不久北魏援兵的将领杨灵胤率领五万军队忽然到达，众人害怕不敌魏军，请求上表朝廷增派援兵。
English: Soon, the general of the Northern Wei reinforcements, Yang Lingyan, suddenly arrived with fifty thousand troops. Everyone was afraid of losing to the Wei army and asked the imperial court to send reinforcements.

古文：睿笑曰： 贼已至城下，方复求军，临难铸兵，岂及马腹？
现代文：韦数笑着说： 敌军已至城下，方才请求增兵，就像临到急难之时，才去铸造武器，哪裹还来得及呢?
English: Wei Zi said with a smile: The enemy army had already reached the bottom of the city before they asked for more soldiers. It's like casting weapons in a time of emergency. How much time do we have?

古文：且吾求济师，彼亦征众，犹如吴益巴丘，蜀增白帝耳。 师克在和不在众 ，古之义也。 
现代文：况且我请求增兵，对方也增兵，就像吴国加高了巴丘。蜀国加高白帝一样。 用兵之法贵在出奇制胜，而不在人数众多 ，这是自古以来的道理。 
English: Moreover, I asked for more troops, and the other side also increased its troops, just as the State of Wu increased the Baqiu, and the State of Shu increased the Baibai. The use of military methods is valuable in surprising victory, but not in a large number of people, which is a truth since ancient times.

古文：因与战，破之，军人少安。
现代文：于是跟杨灵胤交战，打败了他，使军心稍为安定。
English: So he fought with Yang Lingyin, defeated him, and stabilized the morale of the army.

古文：初，肥水堰立，使军主王怀静筑城于岸守之，魏攻陷怀静城，千余人皆没。
现代文：当初，韦散修好肥水堰后，派军主王怀静在岸边修筑城堡守护堰坝，北魏军攻陷了怀静城，一千多人全部陷没。
English: At the beginning, after Wei San had repaired the Fertile Water Weir, he sent the leader of the army, Wang Huai Jing, to build a castle to guard the weir on the shore. The Northern Wei Army captured Huai Jing City, and more than a thousand people were all trapped.

古文：魏人乘胜至睿堤下，其势甚盛，军监潘灵祐劝睿退还巢湖，诸将又请走保三叉。
现代文：魏兵乘胜攻至韦散堤下，兵势非常凶猛，军监潘灵佑劝说韦散退守巢湖，诸位将领又请求撤退以保三叉。
English: The Wei soldiers took advantage of the victory to attack Wei San below the dike, and the troops were very fierce. The military overseer Pan Lingyou persuaded Wei San to retreat to defend the lake, and the generals also requested to retreat to protect the trident.

古文：睿怒曰： 宁有此邪！将军死绥，有前无却。 
现代文：韦散大怒，说： 怎么有这样的道理率领军队就要血战到底，衹准前进，不准后退。 
English: Wei San was furious and said, "How can there be such a reason for leading an army to fight a bloody battle to the end? You are only allowed to advance, not retreat."

古文：因令取伞扇麾幢，树之堤下，示无动志。
现代文：就命人取来伞扇和军旗，树立在堤下，表示毫不动摇的决心。
English: He ordered someone to fetch an umbrella fan and a military flag and set them up under the embankment, expressing his unwavering determination.

古文：睿素羸，每战未尝骑马，以板舆自载，督厉众军。
现代文：韦散身体一向很虚弱，每次战斗都不能骑马指挥，而是乘坐在板舆上监督激励将士们。
English: Wei San has always been very weak, and cannot ride a horse to command every battle. Instead, he sits on a board to supervise and inspire the soldiers.

古文：魏兵来凿堤，睿亲与争之，魏军少却，因筑垒于堤以自固。
现代文：魏军来攻凿堤堰，韦散亲自指挥官兵舆魏军展开争夺战，魏军稍一退却，就立即在堤上筑了堡垒，以便固守。
English: The Wei army came to attack and dig the dike, and Wei San personally commanded the soldiers of the Wei army to fight for the battle. As soon as the Wei army retreated, they immediately built a fortress on the dike in order to hold on.

古文：睿起斗舰，高与合肥城等，四面临之。
现代文：韦散建成斗舰，其高低跟合肥城墙相等，以四面围攻合肥城。
English: Wei San built a battleship, the height of which was equal to the Hefei city wall, and besieged Hefei City on all sides.

古文：魏人计穷，相与悲哭。
现代文：魏人无计可施，只好相对悲哭。
English: Wei people had no choice but to cry.

古文：睿攻具既成，堰水又满，魏救兵无所用。
现代文：韦散准备好了攻城器具，堰中的水也积蓄得满满的，北魏的救兵又发挥不了作用。
English: Wei San prepared the siege equipment, the water in the weir was also fully accumulated, and the Northern Wei's rescuers could not play a role.

古文：魏守将杜元伦登城督战，中弩死，城遂溃。
现代文：魏守将杜元伦亲自登城督战，被弩箭射中而身亡，遂兵溃而城陷。
English: Du Yuanlun, the Wei governor, personally went to the city to supervise the battle, was shot and killed by a crossbow, and the army was routed and the city fell.

古文：俘获万余级，牛马万数，绢满十间屋，悉充军赏。
现代文：梁军俘虏魏兵一万多人，缴获牛马以万计数，绢可以堆满十间屋子，都充作军赏。
English: Liang's army captured more than ten thousand Wei soldiers, seized tens of thousands of cattle and horses, and the straw could fill ten houses, all of which were used as military rewards.

古文：睿每昼接客旅，夜算军书，三更起张灯达曙，抚循其众，常如不及，故投募之士争归之。
现代文：韦散常常白天接待来访者，夜晚研读兵书，三更又起床张灯读书直至天亮，安抚众兵士，总是无微不至常恐不及，因此应募投奔之士争相归附于他。
English: Wei San often received visitors during the day, studied military books at night, and three times got up and lit a lamp to read until dawn, to appease the soldiers. He was always fearless, so the recruits rushed to join him.

古文：所至顿舍修立，馆宇籓篱墙壁，皆应准绳。
现代文：他所到达之处住的地方，房屋馆舍的围墙，其规格和标准都合乎规定。
English: Everywhere he went, the places he stayed, the houses, the fences of the buildings, the specifications and standards were in accordance with the regulations.

古文：合肥既平，高祖诏众军进次东陵。
现代文：合肥城平定后，高祖诏令各路军马进兵抵达束陵。
English: After Hefei City was subdued, Gao Zu's edict ordered all armies and horses to march to Sokne.

古文：东陵去魏甓城二十里，将会战，有诏班师。
现代文：束陵距离北魏甓城二十里，两军将要会战，有诏令传来让班师而返。
English: Sokneung is twenty miles away from the Northern Wei's Lucheng. The two armies are going to fight, and there is a decree to let the squadron return.

古文：去贼既近，惧为所蹑，睿悉遣辎重居前，身乘小舆殿后，魏人服睿威名，望之不敢逼，全军而还。
现代文：距离敌军已经很近，众将领们担心北魏军队随后追击，韦散安排全部辎重在前，自己乘坐小车殿后，北魏军队慑服于韦觳的威名，眼看着梁军退走而不敢逼近，梁军全部安然而返。
English: The distance to the enemy was already very close. The generals were worried that the Northern Wei army would attack and chase them. Wei San arranged for all his troops to be in front. After he took a small carriage, the Northern Wei army submitted to Wei Xuan's prestige. They watched Liang's army retreat and did not dare to approach. Liang's army all returned safely.

古文：至是迁豫州于合肥。
现代文：于是，梁朝把豫州治所迁到合肥。
English: As a result, Liang moved the Henan Provincial Government to Hefei.

古文：五年，魏中山王元英寇北徐州，围刺史昌义之于钟离，众号百万，连城四十余。
现代文：五年，魏史山王盂墓侵犯韭途业，将刺史垦盏主围困在堡整，盘军号称百万，筑起四十多座城堡。
English: In the fifth year, the tomb of Wei Shishan Wang Qian invaded the tomb business and besieged the master of the tomb in the fortification. The army was known as a million, and more than forty castles were built.

古文：高祖遣征北将军曹景宗，都督众军二十万以拒之。
现代文：产担派征北将军萱基塞率领二十万大军前去救援。
English: The procurator sent the general of the Northern Expedition, Xing Jise, to lead a 200,000-strong army to the rescue.

古文：次邵阳洲，筑垒相守，高祖诏睿率豫州之众会焉。
现代文：萱基塞率军临时驻扎在迎垦壁溯，筑起营垒，观望固守，高祖诏令韦数率领豫州的军队与之会合。
English: Yan Jisei led the army temporarily stationed in Yingluo, built a camp, waited and held fast, and Gao Zuo ordered Wei Zi to lead the army of Yuzhou to meet him.

古文：睿自合肥迳道由阴陵大泽行，值涧谷，辄飞桥以济。
现代文：皇壑从金胆取直道，经由坠陆大泽而行，遇到山涧峡谷，就架设飞桥让军队通过。
English: The imperial eunuch took a straight route from Jinyi, passing through the landfall of Osawa, and when he encountered the hawthorn canyon, he erected a flying bridge to let the army pass.

古文：师人畏魏军盛，多劝睿缓行。
现代文：大家害怕韭盘兵势强盛，都劝说童壑放慢行军速度。
English: Everyone was afraid of the strong military power of Xuanpan, and they all persuaded Tonglu to slow down the speed of the march.

古文：睿曰： 钟离今凿穴而处，负户而汲，车驰卒奔，犹恐其后，而况缓乎！魏人已堕吾腹中，卿曹勿忧也。 
现代文：童壑却说： 钟整城现在正挖穴而住，负户而汲，处境极其危急，我们即使车马飞驰，士卒奔跑，还恐怕来不及，更别说减速行进了北魏人已在我的掌握中了，各位不必担忧。 
English: However, Tong Yao said, "The whole city is now digging a hole to live in, losing a house to move, and the situation is extremely critical. Even if the horses and carriages are speeding and the officials are running, we may not be able to catch up. Not to mention that the people of the Northern Wei Dynasty who have slowed down are already in my grasp. You don't have to worry.

古文：旬日而至邵阳。
现代文：大军十日就到达了旦困。
English: On the tenth day, the large army arrived in Tsumo.

古文：初，高祖敕景宗曰： 韦睿，卿之乡望，宜善敬之。 
现代文：当初，产担告诫茎墨基说： 皇壑是你们乡里有名望的人，应该好好地敬重他。 
English: At first, the production supervisor admonished Tsuchimoki, saying, "Kohaku is a well-known person in your village, and you should respect him.

古文：景宗见睿，礼甚谨。
现代文：量塞见了皇壑，礼节甚为恭谨。
English: I saw the imperial scepter, and the etiquette was very respectful.

古文：高祖闻之，曰： 二将和，师必济矣。 
现代文：高祖得知后，说： 两位将领和好，军队必定能取胜。 
English: After learning of this, Gaozu said, "The two generals have made peace, and the army is sure to win.

古文：睿于景宗营前二十里，夜掘长堑，树鹿角，截洲为城，比晓而营立。
现代文：童壑在曹景宗营前二十里处，连夜挖掘长沟，把鹿角竖立其中，拦截邵阳洲，构筑城垒，等到天亮的时候，军营就修筑好了。
English: At twenty miles in front of Cao Jingzong's camp, Tonglu dug a long ditch overnight, erected antlers in it, intercepted Shaoyangzhou, and built a fortress. By dawn, the military camp was built.

古文：元英大惊，以杖击地曰： 是何神也！ 
现代文：元英见了，大吃一惊，用杖敲打着地面说： 这是哪路的神仙啊! 
English: When Yuan Ying saw this, she was taken aback. She beat the ground with her cane and said, "What kind of fairy godmother is this?"

古文：明旦，英自率众来战，睿乘素木舆，执白角如意麾军，一日数合，英甚惮其强。
现代文：第二天早晨，元英亲自率部前来交战，童壑乘坐没有上漆的木头车子，手执白角如意指挥军队，一天之内交战了好几个回合，元英深畏凿军的强大。
English: The next morning, Yuan Ying himself led his troops to the battle. Tong Yao rode in an unpainted wooden carriage, holding a white horn in his hand to command the army. They fought several rounds in one day, and Yuan Ying was deeply afraid of the powerful army.

古文：魏军又夜来攻城，飞矢雨集，睿子黯请下城以避箭，睿不许。
现代文：幽继军队在夜襄又来攻城，流箭像雨一般密集，童壑的儿子韦叠请求下城墙去避箭，童壑不准许。
English: Yuji's army attacked the city again at night. Streams of arrows were as dense as rain. Tonglu's son Wei Jia requested to go under the city wall to avoid the arrows, but Tonglu did not allow it.

古文：军中惊，睿于城上厉声呵之，乃定。
现代文：军中上下惊慌，韦散在城墙上厉声呵叱，军心才安定下来。
English: The troops panicked, and Wei San scolded them harshly on the city wall. Only then did the military spirit settle down.

古文：魏人先于邵阳洲两岸为两桥，树栅数百步，跨淮通道。
现代文：开战前，墓军在巡垒酗两岸架设两座桥，竖立起百步宽的栅栏，跨越淮河，连结两岸。
English: Before the war, the tomb army erected two bridges on both sides of the river and erected a hundred-step-wide fence to cross the Huaihe River and connect the two sides.

古文：睿装大舰，使梁郡太守冯道根、庐江太守裴邃、秦郡太守李文钊等为水军。
现代文：韦散装备好高大船腥，派梁郡太守冯道根、庐江太守盏邃、台型太守李文钊等为水军。
English: Wei San was well-equipped with tall ships, and sent Liang County Governor Feng Dogen, Liang River Governor Zhan Qi, and Table-type Governor Li Wenqi as naval forces.

古文：值淮水暴长，睿即遣之，斗舰竞发，皆临敌垒。以小船载草，灌之以膏，从而焚其桥。
现代文：正值淮水暴涨，童壑立即让他们进攻，大小船只竞相向魏军进发，驶临敌方营垒，又用小船载着柴草，浇灌上膏油，纵船放火去烧毁敌军的桥梁。
English: At the time of the sudden rise of the Huai River, Tong Yao immediately let them attack. Large and small ships raced towards the Wei army and approached the enemy camp. They also used small boats to carry firewood, pour oil and set fire to burn the enemy's bridges.

古文：风怒火盛，烟尘晦冥，敢死之士，拔栅斫桥，水又漂疾，倏忽之间，桥栅尽坏。
现代文：风劲火盛，烟尘遮天蔽日，敢死之士将敌军的栅栏拔去，桥梁砍断，水流又特别湍急，倏忽之间，桥和栅栏都被破坏了。
English: The wind was fierce, smoke and dust covered the sky, the enemy's fences were torn down, bridges were cut off, the water flowed particularly fast, and bridges and fences were destroyed in an instant.

古文：而道根等皆身自搏战，军人奋勇，呼声动天地，无不一当百，魏人大溃。
现代文：而冯道根等人都亲自搏战。官兵们人人奋勇争先，以一当百，喊杀声震天动地，魏军大败。
English: But von Dogen and others fought personally. The officers and soldiers all fought bravely for the first place, with one hundred, shouting, the Wei army was defeated.

古文：元英见桥绝，脱身遁去。
现代文：五茎见桥已断，就脱身逃跑了。
English: When the five saw that the bridge was broken, they got out and ran away.

古文：魏军趋水死者十余万，斩首亦如之。
现代文：魏军兵士争相投水而逃。结果溺死的有十多万，被斩首的也有这么多。
English: As a result, more than a hundred thousand soldiers of the Wei army drowned, and many were beheaded.

古文：其余释甲稽颡，乞为囚奴，犹数十万。
现代文：其余的丢盔弃甲跪地磕头，乞求被收为囚奴的还有几十万人。
English: The rest threw down their armor and kneeled, begging to be taken prisoner, along with hundreds of thousands of others.

古文：所获军实牛马，不可胜纪。
现代文：梁军缴获的军用器械，粮饷和牛马等不可胜数。
English: Liang's army captured an incalculable number of military equipment, grain, cattle and horses.

古文：睿遣报昌义之，义之且悲且喜，不暇答语，但叫曰： 更生！更生！ 
现代文：韦钗派人报告昌义之，昌义之悲喜交加，激动得说不出话，衹是叫道： 得以新生得以新生! 
English: Wei Wei sent someone to report to Changyi. Changyi was so excited that he was speechless. He cried out, "I want to be reborn! I want to be reborn!"

古文：高祖遣中书郎周舍劳于淮上，睿积所获于军门，舍观之，谓睿曰： 君此获复与熊耳山等。 
现代文：高祖派遣中书郎周舍到淮水边慰劳全军，韦散将所缴获的物资堆积于军门前，周舍看了后，对韦散说： 将军您此次缴获的战利品又可跟熊耳山相等高啊。 
English: Gaozu dispatched Zhongshuro Zhou She to Huai Shui to comfort the whole army. Wei San piled up the captured materials in front of the army gate. After Zhou She saw it, he said to Wei San: General, the trophies you captured this time can be as high as Xiong Er Mountain.

古文：以功增封七百户，进爵为侯，征通直散骑常侍、右卫将军。
现代文：按功增封给韦散食邑七百户，进升爵位为侯，征召为通直散骑常侍、右卫将军。
English: According to his merits, he was awarded the title of Wei Sanzhongwu 700 households, promoted to the peerage as a marquis, and conscripted as a straight horseman and general of the right guard.

古文：七年，迁左卫将军，俄为安西长史、南郡太守，秩中二千石。
现代文：天监七年，韦数迁左卫将军，不久担任安西长史、南郡太守，秩中二千石。
English: In the seventh year of Tianjun, Wei was transferred to the left guard general, and soon served as Anxi Changshi and Nan County Governor, with a rank of 2,000 koku.

古文：会司州刺史马仙琕北伐还军，为魏人所蹑，三关扰动，诏睿督众军援焉。
现代文：适逢司州刺史马仙碑北伐回师，被魏军所追赶，致使三关守军骚动不安，銮直担韶令童赵率兵援救星仙避。
English: At the same time, the northward retreating division of Sizhou, Ma Xianbei, was chased by the Wei army, causing the Sankuan defenders to be agitated and uneasy. He ordered Tong Zhao to lead the troops to rescue Xingxian.

古文：睿至安陆，增筑城二丈余，更开大堑，起高楼，众颇讥其示弱。睿曰： 不然，为将当有怯时，不可专勇。 
现代文：皇壑一到达安陆，加筑城墙，加高到两丈多，又挖大壕沟，起造高楼，众人颇为讥笑韦敷这是显示怯弱韦散说： 不对，当将领的应当有胆怯的时候，不可以专逞一时之勇。 
English: As soon as the emperor arrived in Anlu, he built up the city wall, raising it to more than two feet, dug a large trench, and built a high-rise building. The people laughed at Wei San, saying that this was a sign of cowardice. Wei San said: No, when generals should be timid, they should not try to be brave for a moment.

古文：是时元英复追仙琕，将复邵阳之耻，闻睿至，乃退。帝亦诏罢军。
现代文：遣时元英又急迫马仙避，要报复旦困之耻，听说皇壑到来，就撤退了，武帝也下诏命令罢兵。
English: Yuan Ying also urged Ma Xian to retreat, to avenge the shame of being trapped. When he heard that the imperial edict had arrived, he retreated, and Emperor Wu also issued an edict ordering a military strike.

古文：明年，迁信武将军、江州刺史。
现代文：第二年，迁信武将军、辽州刺史。
English: In the second year, General Nobutake moved to Liaozhou.

古文：九年，征员外散骑常侍、右卫将军，累迁左卫将军、太子詹事，寻加通直散骑常侍。
现代文：九年，征员外散骑常侍、右卫将军，屡次迁为左卫将军、太子詹事，不久担任通直散骑常侍。
English: In the ninth year, he was transferred several times from being a non-commissioned officer to a non-commissioned officer, a general of the Right Division, to a general of the Left Division, to Prince Zhan Zhi, and soon became a non-commissioned officer.

古文：十三年，迁智武将军、丹阳尹，以公事免。
现代文：十三年，官迁智武将军、丹阳尹，由于公事被免官。
English: In the thirteenth year, General Zhiwu, Danyang Yin, was removed from office due to official business.

古文：顷之，起为中护军。
现代文：不久，又起用为中护军。
English: Soon after, he was assigned to the Middle Protectorate.

古文：十四年，出为平北将军、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
现代文：丢监十四年，茎壑出为平北将军、宁蛮校尉、壅州刺史。
English: After 14 years of imprisonment, he was promoted to the ranks of General Pingbei, Captain Ningman, and Governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：初，睿起兵乡中，客阴俊光泣止睿，睿还为州，俊光道候睿，睿笑谓之曰： 若从公言，乞食于路矣。 
现代文：当初，韦散在乡中起兵之时，门客堕尴韭哭着劝阻童壑，皇壑回家担任州官，尴光在路旁迎候，童壑笑着对他说： 当初如果听你的话，我今天可要靠乞讨为生了。 
English: At the beginning, when Wei San raised an army in the countryside, his disciple, the fallen Bo Xuan, wept and dissuaded Tong Xuan. Emperor Xuan went home to serve as a state official. Bo Xuan was waiting by the roadside. Tong Xuan smiled and said to him: "If I had listened to you, I would have to live by begging today."

古文：饷耕牛十头。
现代文：送给他耕牛十头。
English: He was given ten head of oxen.

古文：睿于故旧，无所遗惜，士大夫年七十以上，多与假板县令，乡里甚怀之。
现代文：垒壑对待老朋友，从不因吝惜而遗漏任何人，年龄在七十岁以上的士大夫，多任命为假板县令，乡里人都归向他。
English: He treated his old friends well, and never missed anyone out because of his miserliness. The shidafu, who was over seventy years old, was often appointed as the shampan county magistrate, and the villagers all turned to him.

古文：十五年，拜表致仕，优诏不许。
现代文：天监十五年，上表朝廷，请求辞去官职，高祖下韶褒奖并不准许他辞官。
English: In the 15th year of Heaven's Inspector, he petitioned the Imperial Court to resign from his post, but Emperor Gaozhu did not allow him to resign.

古文：十七年，征散骑常侍、护军将军，寻给鼓吹一部，入直殿省。
现代文：在朝廷上，韦秋极其温顺恭谨，从来不敢仰面直视皇上，高祖对他也十分礼敬。
English: At the imperial court, Wei Qiu was extremely meek and respectful, never daring to look up at the emperor, and Gao Zu was also very respectful to him.

古文：居朝廷，恂恂未尝忤视，高祖甚礼敬之。性慈爱，抚孤兄子过于己子，历官所得禄赐，皆散之亲故，家无余财。
现代文：童塑性情仁慈和蔼，抚养兄长的遗孤比自己的儿子还要周到，历任官职所得的俸禄、赏赐，全都艮芝有门富敦，三笋陵客吴良，良年菱。敦匿除。分散给亲朋故旧，家裹没有多余的财物。
English: He had a kind and gentle disposition, and was more thoughtful in raising his brother's orphan than his own son. All the salaries and rewards earned by successive officials were distributed to relatives and friends, and there was no extra wealth in the family.

古文：后为护军，居家无事，慕万石、陆贾之为人，因画之于壁以自玩。
现代文：后来担任护军，在家裹没事，敬慕万石、陆买的为人，因而将他们的像画在墒上自己欣赏。
English: Later, he served as a bodyguard, stayed at home, admired the people of Wanshi and Lumai, and thus admired their portraits on the roller.

古文：时虽老，暇日犹课诸儿以学。
现代文：当时虽已年老，空闲的日子仍然亲自教授几个儿子学习。
English: At that time, although he was already old, he still taught several sons to study in his free time.

古文：第三子棱，尤明经史，世称其洽闻，睿每坐棱使说书，其所发擿，棱犹弗之逮也。
现代文：第三个儿子韦棱，尤其精通经史，当时的人都认为他广闻博识。韦散常常在座中而韦棱请他讲解书经，他所阐发的内容，往往比韦棱更加精辟。
English: The third son, Wei Ren, was particularly well versed in the history of the sutras, and people at that time thought that he was well-known and knowledgeable. Wei San was often present and Wei Ren asked him to explain the sutras, and the content he explained was often more incisive than Wei Ren.

古文：高祖方锐意释氏，天下咸从风而化；睿自以信受素薄，位居大臣，不欲与俗俯仰，所行略如他日。
现代文：高祖当时正专心信奉佛教，天下百姓也都从风而化；韦散素来在信仰方面比较淡薄，而且又官居大臣，不愿意被世俗所左右，其举止跟往日没有两样。
English: At that time, Gaozu was devoting himself to Buddhism, and the people of the world were also changing with the times; Weishan had always been rather weak in faith, and he was also a minister, unwilling to be swayed by the secular world, and his demeanor was no different from the past.

古文：普通元年夏，迁侍中、车骑将军，以疾未拜。
现代文：梁普通元年夏天。韦散迁任侍中、车骑将军。因病而没有拜官。
English: In the summer of the first year of Liang's reign, Wei Shanzhang was appointed as an aide-de-camp and chariot and cavalry general. Due to illness, he did not take up the post.

古文：八月，卒于家，时年七十九。
现代文：八月，死于家裹，时年七十九岁。
English: He died at home in August, aged 79.

古文：遗令薄葬，敛以时服。
现代文：遗嘱要求将他薄葬，用一般的服装将其收殓。
English: The will requested that he be buried in a shallow grave and that he be dressed in ordinary clothing.

古文：高祖即日临哭甚恸。
现代文：高祖即日亲临吊唁，痛哭哀悼。
English: On the same day, Gao Zu came to pay his condolences in person, weeping and mourning.

古文：赐钱十万，布二百匹，东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭，丧事取给于官，遣中书舍人监护。
现代文：赐给钱十万，布二百匹束园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭，丧事的费用由官府支付，并派中书舍人监护执行。
English: He gave 100,000 yuan in money, 200 cloth bundles of secret garden tools, one imperial robe, one set of clothes, the funeral expenses were paid by the government, and a Chinese scholar was sent to supervise the execution.

古文：赠侍中、车骑将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：追赠侍中、车骑将军、开府仪同三司。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Junior Officer, General of Chariot and Cavalry, and Kaifu Ceremonial Officer.

古文：谥曰严。
现代文：谧号为严。
English: His nickname was Yan.

古文：初，邵阳之役，昌义之甚德睿，请曹景宗与睿会，因设钱二十万官赌之，景宗掷得雉，睿徐掷得卢，遽取一子反之，曰 异事 ，遂作塞。
现代文：当初，邵阳之战，昌义之非常感激韦散，请曹景宗和韦散二人一起聚会，设下二十万钱，在官府裹掷樗蒲赌博。景宗掷得 雉 ，韦散慢慢地掷得 卢 ，立即取一子翻过来，说道： 真是怪事呀。 于是变成了 塞 。
English: At the beginning of the Battle of Shaoyang, Chang Yizhi was very grateful to Wei San. He asked Cao Jingzong and Wei San to get together, set up two hundred thousand yuan, and play gambling in the government office. Jingzong threw a pigeon, Wei San slowly threw a pigeon, immediately turned one over and said: What a strange thing. Then it became a cork.

古文：景宗时与群帅争先启之捷，睿独居后，其不尚胜，率多如是，世尤以此贤之。
现代文：曹景宗当时同其他将帅争着先去告捷，韦数独居其后，他不爱夸耀自己的胜利，大多是如此，世人尤其因这一点而称赞他。
English: At that time, Cao Jingzong competed with other generals to be the first to achieve success, and Wei Shu lived alone afterwards. He did not like to boast of his victory, which was mostly the case, and the world praised him especially for this.

古文：子放、正、棱、黯，放别有传。
现代文：韦散的儿子有韦放、韦正、韦棱、韦黯，韦放另外有传。
English: The sons of Wei San included Wei Fang, Wei Zheng, Wei Ren and Wei Qian, and Wei Fang also had a son named Wu.

古文：正字敬直，起家南康王行参军，稍迁中书侍郎，出为襄阳太守。
现代文：韦正字敬直，起家南康王行参军，不久迁中书侍郎，出为襄阳太守。
English: Wei Zhengzhi Qian Zhi, the founder of Nan Kang Wang Xing, joined the army, soon moved to the position of secretary, and became the governor of Yangyang.

古文：初，正与东海王僧孺友善，及僧孺为尚书吏部郎，参掌大选，宾友故人莫不倾意，正独澹然。
现代文：以前，韦正跟束海王僧孺很友好，当僧孺为尚书吏部郎，参与掌管朝廷大选时，宾客朋友没有不倾意奉承的，惟独韦正淡然处之。
English: In the past, Wei Zheng was very friendly with Seng Ye, the Prince of Sokha. When Seng Ye was the minister of the imperial secretary and participated in the general election of the imperial court, there was no guest friend who did not flatter him, but Wei Zheng treated him indifferently.

古文：及僧孺摈废之后，正复笃素分，有逾曩日，论者称焉。
现代文：等到僧孺被斥逐罢官以后，韦正又加深了平日与他的情分，甚至超过从前，人们都称颂他的行为。
English: After the monk was expelled and dismissed, Wei Zheng deepened his relationship with him, and even more than before, people praised his actions.

古文：历官至给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：历任官职至给事黄门侍郎。
English: He rose through the ranks to the position of Yellow Gate Attendant.

古文：棱字威直，性恬素，以书史为业，博物强记，当世之士，咸就质疑。
现代文：韦棱字威直，性情恬淡而朴素，担任记事的史官，博闻强记，见多识广，当时的士人都请他解答疑难不清的问题。
English: Wei Ren was dignified and upright, with a light and simple temperament. He served as a historian of records, and was well-read and knowledgeable. At that time, scholars asked him to answer difficult questions.

古文：起家安成王府行参军，稍迁治书侍御史，太子仆，光禄卿。
现代文：韦棱起家安成王府行参军，不久迁任治书侍御史，太子仆，光禄卿。
English: Wei Ren started his family in Ancheng Wangfu to join the army, and was soon transferred to the post of secretary, prince's servant, and Guangluqing.

古文：著《汉书续训》三卷。
现代文：着有《汉书续训》三卷。
English: He is the author of the three-volume "Continuation of Chinese Classics."

古文：黯字务直，性强正，少习经史，有文词。
现代文：韦黯字务直，性格刚正不阿，少年时代学习经史，颇有文采。
English: Wei Han's character is straightforward, his personality is upright, he studied history as a boy, and he is quite literate.

古文：起家太子舍人，稍迁太仆卿，南豫州刺史，太府卿。
现代文：起家太子舍人，不久迁太仆卿，南豫州刺史，太府卿。
English: He started his family as a prince, but soon moved to the position of eunuch, governor of Southern Yuzhou, and grand minister.

古文：侯景济江，黯屯六门，寻改为都督城西面诸军事。
现代文：侯景渡过长江，韦黯屯兵六门，不久改任为都督城西冈储军事。
English: Hou Jing crossed the Yangtze River, Wei Ying garrisoned six gates, and was soon appointed as the military governor of the city of Xi'an.

古文：时景于城外起东西二土山，城内亦作以应之，太宗亲自负土，哀太子以下躬执畚锸。
现代文：当时侯景在城外筑起东西两座土山，城内也修筑两座土山来与之相对抗，太宗亲自背土，哀太子以下官员都亲手拿起箕畚铁锹参加筑土。
English: At that time, Hou Jing built two earthen mounds outside the city, one to the east and one to the west, and also built two earthen mounds inside the city to compete with them. Taizong personally carried the soil, and officials from the Prince of Aye on down took up the plow with their own hands to participate in the soil-building.

古文：黯守西土山，昼夜苦战，以功授轻车将军，加持节。
现代文：韦黯负责防守城西的土山，昼夜苦战，因抗敌有功被授予轻车将军，加持节。
English: Wei Ying was responsible for the defense of the hills west of the city, fighting day and night, and was awarded the title of Light Vehicle General for his service against the enemy.

古文：卒于城内，赠散骑常侍、左卫将军。
现代文：死于城内，追赠散骑常侍、左卫将军。
English: He died in the city, and was posthumously given the title of Sanzhi (free rider) and General of the Left Division.

古文：睿族弟爱。
现代文：韦散族弟韦爱。
English: Wei San's younger brother Wei Ai.

古文：爱字孝友，沈静有器局。
现代文：韦爱字孝友，沉静而有器量。
English: Wei Ai Zi Xiaotong, calm and competent.

古文：高祖父广，晋后军将军、北平太守。
现代文：他的高祖父韦广，是晋朝的后军将军、北平太守。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Wei Guang, was a rear-army general of the Jin Dynasty and the governor of Beiping.

古文：曾祖轨，以孝武太元之初，南迁襄阳，为本州别驾，散骑侍郎。
现代文：曾祖父韦轨，在东置圭武帝太元初年，南迁襄阳，担任本州别驾，散骑侍郎。
English: Great-grandfather Wei Liao, in the first year of the Eastern Emperor Keiwu, moved south to Xiangyang, served as Honshu's second-in-command, and rode horseback.

古文：祖公循，宋义阳太守。
现代文：祖父韦公循，任宋义阳太守。
English: His grandfather, Wei Gongxun, became the regent of Song Yiyang.

古文：父义正，早卒。
现代文：父亲韦义正，早年便去世了。
English: His father, Wei Yizheng, died at an early age.

古文：爱少而偏孤，事母以孝闻。
现代文：韦爱年幼就失去父亲，侍奉母亲很孝顺，并由此知名。
English: Wei Ai lost her father at a young age and was known for serving her mother very dutifully.

古文：性清介，不妄交游，而笃志好学，每虚室独坐，游心坟素，而埃尘满席，寂若无人。
现代文：韦爱清高耿直，不妄交往，专心好学，总是独坐陋室，一心攻读古书，屋内桌椅结满灰尘，寂静得像没有人一样。
English: Wei Ai is tall and straight-backed, does not want to socialize, is eager to learn, always sits alone in a cramped room, concentrates on studying ancient books, the indoor tables and chairs are full of dust, and the silence is like no one.

古文：年十二，尝游京师，值天子出游南苑，邑里喧哗，老幼争观，爱独端坐读书，手不释卷，宗族见者，莫不异焉。
现代文：十二岁那年，曾游京城，正好赶上天子出游南苑，大街小巷热闹非凡，老幼争看，衹有韦爱一人仍然端坐读书，手不释卷，族人看见他这样，无不惊异。
English: At the age of twelve, he visited Beijing, just in time for the heavenly son to visit the South Garden. The streets and alleys were very lively, and the old and the young were fighting to see who was the only one who was still sitting down to read, with a book in his hand. The tribesmen were surprised to see him like this.

古文：及长，博学有文才，尤善《周易》及《春秋左氏》义。
现代文：长大成人后，博学有文才，尤其精通《周易》和《春秋左氏》的义理。
English: When he grew up, he was an erudite and talented writer, especially proficient in the meaning of "Zhou Yi" and "Spring and Autumn Left-Handed."

古文：袁抃为雍州刺史，辟为主簿。
现代文：袁颛为雍州刺史时，征召他为主簿。
English: When Yuan Xuan was writing the history of Yongzhou, he called him to be the chief accountant.

古文：遭母忧，庐于墓侧，负土起坟。
现代文：母亲去世，他在墓旁搭盖小屋居住，亲自背土筑坟。
English: When his mother died, he built a hut next to the grave and lived there, digging the grave himself.

古文：高祖临雍州，闻之，亲往临吊。
现代文：高祖到雍州，听到这件事后，亲自前去吊唁。
English: Gaozu went to Yongzhou to offer his condolences in person after hearing about the incident.

古文：服阕，引为中兵参军。
现代文：三年服丧期满，被引为中兵参军。
English: At the end of the three-year mourning period, he was inducted into the army as a middle-ranking soldier.

古文：义师之起也，以爱为壮武将军、冠军南平王司马，带襄阳令。
现代文：高祖义军刚起之时，任命韦爱为壮武将军、冠军南平王司马，带襄阳县令。
English: At the time of the founding of the Gaozu Volunteer Army, Wei Ai was appointed as Zhuangwu General and champion of Nanping Wang Sima, with the order of Xiangyang County.

古文：时京邑未定，雍州空虚，魏兴太守颜僧都等据郡反，州内惊扰，百姓携贰。
现代文：当时京师还未平定，雍州军备空虚，魏兴太守颜僧都等人又占据州郡反抗义军，州内百姓惊慌失措，怀有二心。
English: At that time, the Beijing division was not yet pacified, the armament of Yongzhou was empty, and Wei Xingta Shou Yan Sengdu and others occupied the state and county to resist the rebels. The people in the state panicked and had second thoughts.

古文：爱沉敏有谋，素为州里信伏，乃推心抚御，晓示逆顺；兼率募乡里，得千余人，与僧都等战于始平郡南，大破之，百姓乃安。
现代文：韦爱沉着机敏又有谋略，一向为州裹军民所信服，就推心置腹以安抚百姓，分析敌我形势的变化；并招募乡里勇士，得到一千多人，在始平郡南部与僧都等人的叛军展开激战，大败敌军，百姓才得以安定。
English: Wei Ai was calm, quick-witted and strategic. He had always been convinced by the military and the people of the state. He put his heart and soul into appeasing the people and analyzing the changes in the situation between the enemy and us. He also recruited more than a thousand warriors from the village and fought a fierce battle with the rebels of the capital and others in the south of Xiping County. He defeated the enemy army, and the people were able to stabilize.

古文：萧颖胄之死也，和帝征兵襄阳，爱从始兴王憺赴焉。
现代文：萧颖胄去世后，齐和帝在襄阳征集士兵，韦爱跟随始兴王萧儋前去应征。
English: After Xiao Yingyao's death, Qi He Di recruited soldiers in Xiangyang, and Wei Ai followed Shi Xingwang Xiao Yao to enlist.

古文：先是，巴东太守萧璝、巴东太守鲁休烈举兵来逼荆州，及憺至，令爱书谕之，璝即日请降。
现代文：在造之前，巴东太守萧琐、巴西太守鲁休烈举兵进犯荆州，萧怆到了以后，命令韦爱写信谕示萧琐，萧琐当就请求投降。
English: Prior to the construction, the Padong Taishu Xiao Zuo and the Brazilian Taishu Lu Xiu Rong raised an army to invade Jingzhou. After Xiao Rui arrived, he ordered Wei Ai to write a letter to Xiao Zuo, and Xiao Zuo immediately asked for surrender.

古文：中兴二年，从和帝东下。
现代文：齐中兴二年，跟随和帝沿江束下。
English: Qi Zhongxing for two years, followed the emperor along the river.

古文：高祖受禅，进号辅国将军，仍为骁骑将军，寻除宁蜀太守，与益州刺史邓元起西上袭刘季连，行至公安，道病卒，赠卫尉卿。
现代文：高祖受禅登基，韦爱进号辅国将军，仍为骁骑将军，不久任宁蜀太守，跟益州刺史邓元起一同西上袭击刘季连，行军到公安时，韦爱半路上因病而去世，蹭卫尉卿。
English: Gao Zu was enthroned by Emperor Zhen, Wei Ai Jin was promoted to General of the Auxiliary State, he was still the general of the cavalry, he was soon appointed as the governor of Ningshu, and together with the governor of Yizhou, Deng Yuanqi, he went to the west to attack Liu Jilian. When he marched to the public security, Wei Ai died halfway due to illness.

古文：子乾向，官至骁骑将军，征北长史，汝阴、钟离二郡太守。
现代文：儿子韦干向，官至骁骑将军，征北长史和汝阴、钟离两郡的太守。
English: His son, Wei Gangxiang, rose to the rank of cavalry general and became the governor of the two counties of Changshi, Ruyin and Zhongli.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：昔窦融以河右归汉，终为盛族；柳惔举南郑响从，而家声弗霣，时哉！忱之谋画，亦用有成，智矣。
现代文：陈吏部尚书姚察说：昔窦融举河右之地归顺汉朝，最终成为豪门大族；柳恢率领南郑响应高祖义举，而其家族世代的名声美誉并没有毁坏，都是符合时代潮流的缘故啊柳忱的谋虑计划，也是卓有成效，这是他智慧的体现。
English: Chen Li Bu Shang Shu Yao said: In the past, Dou Rong Jiu River was transferred to Shun Han Dynasty, and eventually became a big family; Liu Wei led Nan Zheng to respond to Gao Zu Yi Jiu, and the reputation of his family generation was not destroyed. It was all in line with the trend of the times. Liu Zhen's thoughtful plan was also highly effective, which was the embodiment of his wisdom.

古文：韦睿起上庸以附义，其地比惔则薄，及合肥、邵阳之役，其功甚盛，推而弗有，君子哉！
现代文：韦散率领上庸人马归附高祖，他的地方比柳恢还小，而到合肥、邵阳之战后，其功绩更为显著，他却不居功自傲，真是君子啊！
English: Wei San led Shang Yong Renma to attach Gaozu, his place is smaller than Liu Wei, but after the battle of Hefei and Shaoyang, his achievements are more significant, but he is not proud of his achievements, what a gentleman!

