古文：叶法善邢和璞
现代文：叶法善邢和璞
English: Ye Fa Zensheng and Zheng Zheng

古文：叶法善
现代文：叶法善
English: by Ye Fa-zen

古文：叶法善字道元，本出南阳叶邑，今居处州松阳县。
现代文：叶法善，字道元，出生在南阳的叶邑，现在住在处州松阳县。
English: Ye Fa-zen, Ye Dogen, was born in Ye-eup, Nanyang, and now lives in Wenzhou, Songyang County.

古文：四代修道，皆以阴功密行及劾召之术救物济人。
现代文：叶家四代修道，都凭着做好事积阴德以及揭发、寻找邪恶的法术救物济人。
English: The four generations of monks of the Ye family, all rely on good deeds to accumulate virtue and to expose and search for evil spells to save people.

古文：母刘，因昼寐，梦流星入口，吞之乃孕，十五月而生。
现代文：他母亲姓刘，因为白天睡觉，梦见流星进入口中，吞下之后就怀孕了。怀孕十五个月才生下他。
English: His mother, surnamed Liu, because she slept during the day, dreamed of a meteor entering her mouth, swallowed it and became pregnant. She was only 15 months pregnant when she gave birth to him.

古文：年七岁，溺于江中，三年不还。
现代文：他七岁那年，淹死在江中，三年后回来。
English: When he was seven years old, he drowned in the river and came back three years later.

古文：父母问其故，曰： 青童引我，饮以云浆，故少留耳。 
现代文：父母问他为什么去了这么久，他说： 一个穿青衣服的童子领着我，给我云浆喝，所以我就逗留了一会儿。 
English: When his parents asked him why he had stayed so long, he said, "A boy dressed in blue led me and gave me a drink, so I stayed for a while."

古文：亦言青童引朝太上，太上颔而留之。
现代文：又说： 穿青衣服的童子领他去见太上，太上允许他留下来。 
English: And he said, The young man clothed in blue hath brought him to the lady, and she hath suffered him to remain.

古文：弱冠身长九尺，额有二午。
现代文：他成年之后身高九尺，额头上有两个 午 字。
English: He was nine feet tall as an adult, with two "a"s on his forehead.

古文：性淳和洁白，不茹荤辛。
现代文：他性情醇和，肤色洁白，不吃荤腥辛辣之物。
English: He has a mellow temperament, a fair complexion, and does not eat spicy food.

古文：常独处幽室，或游林泽，或访云泉。
现代文：他常常独自处在幽室之中。或者云游林泽，或者寻访云泉。
English: He is often alone in a secluded room, or wandering through the woods, or searching for a cloud spring.

古文：自仙府归还，已有役使之术矣，遂入居卯酉山。
现代文：从仙府回来，他已经有役使鬼神的道术了。于是他住进卯酉山。
English: When he came back from Senfu, he had already mastered the art of summoning ghosts and gods, so he moved to Mt. Usuki.

古文：其门近山，巨石当路，每环回为径以避之。
现代文：他的家门离山很近，当路有一块巨石，常常要绕着走避开它。
English: His house is very close to the mountain, and there is a boulder on the road, so he often has to walk around it to avoid it.

古文：师投符起石，须臾飞去，路乃平坦。
现代文：他扔出一道符搬起那巨石，巨石顷刻间便飞走了。路就平坦了。
English: He threw a flag to lift the boulder, and in an instant the boulder flew away, and the road was smooth.

古文：众共惊异。
现代文：众人都感到惊奇。
English: Everyone was surprised.

古文：常游括苍白马山，石室内遇三神人，皆锦衣宝冠，谓师曰： 我奉太上命，以密旨告子。
现代文：他曾经到括苍白马山游览，在一所石室内遇见过三位神人。三位神人都穿着锦衣，戴着宝冠。神人对叶法善说： 我奉太上的命令，把密旨告诉你。
English: He once went on an excursion to the Pale Horse Mountain and met three divine beings in a stone room. All three divine beings were dressed in brocade and wearing crowns. The divine being said to Ye Fa-shan: I have been ordered by the Empress Dowager to tell you the secret.

古文：子本太极紫微左仙卿，以校录不勤，谪于人世，速宜立功济人，佐国功满，当复旧任。
现代文：你本来是太极宫紫微殿左仙卿，因为校录不勤，被谪贬到人间。你应该赶快立功，济世救人，辅佐国家，功满之后，就会再恢复旧职。
English: Originally, you were the Left Immortal of the Purple and White Hall of the Taiji Temple, but because you were not diligent in your school records, you were demoted to the human world. You should quickly make meritorious contributions, save the world, and assist the country. After your achievements are complete, you will resume your old position.

古文：以正一三五之法，令授于子。
现代文：太上还让我把 正一三五 的法术，传授给你。
English: The Empress also asked me to teach you the spell of Zheng 135.

古文：又勤行助化。宜勉之焉。 
现代文：你还要勤于修行，帮助众生，好好勉励自己吧。 
English: You should also diligently practice, help sentient beings, and encourage yourself.

古文：言讫而去。
现代文：神人说完便离去了。
English: After Bao Jiu's daughter finished speaking, Saburo left.

古文：自是诛荡精怪，扫馘凶妖，所在经行，以救人为志。
现代文：从此，叶法善诛杀扫荡精怪，斩杀凶妖。他所有的行为，都是以救人为目的。
English: From then on, Ye Fa-zheng would kill evil spirits and monsters. All of his actions were aimed at saving people.

古文：叔祖靖能，颇有神术，高宗时，入直翰林，为国子祭酒。
现代文：他的叔祖父叶靖能，很有神术。高宗的时候，在翰林院做官，是国子祭酒。
English: His great-uncle, Ye Jingneng, was very skilled in the art of divination. When Gaozong was an official at Hanlin Academy, he was made the national son's sacrificial wine.

古文：武后监国，南迁而终。
现代文：武则天代理国政，把他贬到南方，死在那里。
English: Wu Zetian took charge of state affairs, exiled him to the south, and he died there.

古文：初高宗征师至京，拜上卿，不就，请度为道士，出入禁门。
现代文：当初高宗把叶法善征召到京城，拜他做上卿，他不干，请求引度他做道士，出入在禁宫中。
English: At first, Gaozong summoned Ye Fasen to the capital, worshipped him as Shangnian, but he refused to do so, and requested that he be made a Taoist, entering and leaving the Forbidden City.

古文：乃欲告成中岳，扈从者多疾，凡噀咒，病皆愈。
现代文：等到中宗要去中岳嵩山去祭天的时候，随从们大多数都病了。经过他喷水念咒治疗，病都好了。
English: By the time Zhongzong went to Zhongyue Songshan to offer sacrifices to the heavens, most of his followers had fallen ill, but they all recovered after he sprayed water and chanted mantras to cure them.

古文：二京受道箓者，文武中外男女弟子千余人。
现代文：二京之中接受道家符箓图诀的，文的武的，宫内的宫外的，男的女的，共有弟子一千多人。
English: In Kyoto, there are more than a thousand disciples who accept the Taoist teachings, both men and women, both inside and outside the Imperial Palace.

古文：所得金帛，并修宫观，恤孤贫，无爱惜。
现代文：他所得到的金银丝帛，全都用来修宫观，救济孤寡穷人，不吝惜钱财。
English: All the gold, silver and silk that he obtained were used to repair the palace, to help the poor and the lonely, and he did not spare money.

古文：久之，辞归松阳，经过之地，救人无数。
现代文：过了挺长时间，他告辞回到松阳县。他经过的地方，有许多人得到救助。
English: After a long time, he said goodbye and returned to Songyang County. Many people were rescued in the area he passed through.

古文：蜀川张尉之妻，死而复生，复为夫妇。
现代文：蜀川张尉的妻子，死而复生，又恢复了夫妻生活。
English: The wife of Shu-Chuan Zhang-Fei was resurrected from the dead, and they resumed their married life.

古文：师识之曰： 尸媚之疾也，不速除之，张死矣。 
现代文：叶法善识破了她的真相，说： 这是一种死尸媚病，不赶快除掉它，张尉也会死了。 
English: Ye Fa-sensei broke the truth about her and said, "This is a corpse fetish, if you don't get rid of it soon, Zhang Li will also die."

古文：师投符而化为黑气焉。
现代文：他投出一道符，把她化成一股黑烟。
English: He cast a spell that turned her into a puff of black smoke.

古文：相国姚崇已终之女，钟念弥深，投符起之。
现代文：相国姚崇的女儿已经死了，但是相国钟爱、思念女儿的心情更强烈了，叶法善就投一道符把她救活了。
English: Yao Chong's daughter had already died, but Yao Chong's feelings of loving and missing his daughter were even stronger. Ye Faxian cast a charm to bring her back to life.

古文：钱塘江有巨蜃，时为人害，沦溺舟楫，行旅苦之。
现代文：钱塘江里有一只大蛤蜊，时常害人，把船弄翻，把人淹死，行旅之人都害怕。
English: There is a giant salamander in the Qiantang River. It often harms people, overturning boats and drowning people. Travelers are afraid of it.

古文：投符江中，使神人斩之。
现代文：叶法善把符投到江中，让神人把大蛤蜊斩了。
English: Ye Fa-zen threw the charm into the river and asked the godman to cut off the giant salamander.

古文：除害殄凶，玄功遐被，各具本传。
现代文：他除害灭凶，修道的功夫远近闻名。
English: He is well-known for his efforts in eliminating evil and cultivating virtue.

古文：于四海六合，名山洞天，咸所周历。
现代文：他的各种事迹都记载在他本人的传里。对四海六合的名山洞天他都游历过。
English: His various deeds are recorded in his own biography. He traveled to all the famous mountain caves in the world.

古文：师年十五，中毒殆死，见青童曰： 天台苗君，飞印相救。 
现代文：叶法善十五岁那年，曾经中毒几乎要死了。他见到一位穿青衣的童子，童子对他说： 天台山上的苗君，飞印救你。 
English: When Ye Fa Shan was fifteen years old, he was poisoned and almost died. He saw a boy in a blue robe. The boy said to him: "Miao Jun on Tiantai Mountain, Fei Yin will save you."

古文：于是获苏。
现代文：于是他就复苏了。
English: And he recovered.

古文：又师青城山赵元阳，受遁甲。
现代文：他又拜青城山的赵元阳为师，学到了遁甲术。
English: He also studied under Zhao Yuanyang of Qingcheng Mountain and learned the art of armour-piercing.

古文：与嵩阳韦善俊传八史，东入蒙山，神人授书。
现代文：他向嵩阳的韦善俊学习《八史》。他东入蒙山，神人送给他天书。
English: He learned the "Eight Histories" from Wei Zhenjun of Songyang. When he went to Mengshan, the man of God gave him a heavenly book.

古文：诣嵩山，神仙授剑。
现代文：他到嵩山去，神仙送给他宝剑。
English: He went to Mount Song, and the gods gave him a sword.

古文：常行涉大水，忽沉波中，谓已溺死，七日复出，衣履不濡，云： 暂与河伯游蓬莱。 
现代文：他曾经在水面上行走，忽然沉到水中，人们以为他被淹死了。七天之后他又出来了，衣服都没湿。他说： 暂时和河伯游了一趟蓬莱。 
English: He once walked on the surface of the water, suddenly sank into the water, people thought he was drowned. Seven days later he came out again, his clothes were not wet. He said: I temporarily swam with Hebei to Penglai.

古文：则天徵至神都，请于诸名岳投奠龙璧。
现代文：武则天把他召到京都，他请求在各大名山上投放龙璧。
English: Wu Zetian called him to Kyoto, and he requested that dragons be placed on famous mountains.

古文：中宗复位，武三思尚秉国权。
现代文：中宗复位以后，武三思还继续掌权。
English: After the restoration of Zhongzong, Wu Sansi continued to hold power.

古文：师以频察袄祥，保护中宗相王及玄宗，为三思所忌，窜于南海。
现代文：叶法善因为多次察觉祅祥，保护了中宗相王和玄宗，武三思十分忌恨，把他流放到南海。
English: Ye Faxian protected the Chinese King and Emperor Xuanzong because he had repeatedly noticed Yu Xiang. Wu Sansi hated him very much and exiled him to the South Sea.

古文：广州人庶，夙仰其名，北向候之。
现代文：广州的百姓，一向仰慕他的名字，面向着北方等候着他。
English: The people of Guangzhou, who have always admired his name, are waiting for him facing north.

古文：师乘白鹿，自海上而至，止于龙兴新观。
现代文：他骑着白鹿，从海上来到，住在龙兴新观。
English: He rode a white deer and came from the sea to live in Longxing New View.

古文：远近礼敬，舍施丰多，尽修观宇焉。
现代文：远近的人们都来礼敬他，施舍的钱财极多。他把这些钱物全都用来修观宇了。
English: People from near and far came to pay homage to him, and there was a great deal of money and goods given in charity. He used all of this money and goods to practice Buddhism.

古文：岁余，入洪州西山，养神修道。
现代文：一年以后，他进到洪州的西山里养神修道。
English: A year later, he went to the western mountains of Hongzhou to cultivate spiritual practice.

古文：景龙四年辛亥三月九日，括苍三神人又降，传太上之命： 汝当辅我睿宗及开元圣帝，未可隐迹山岩，以旷委任。 
现代文：景龙四年辛亥三月九日，括苍山的三位神人又下来，传达太上的命令： 你应当辅佐我们的睿宗皇帝和开元圣帝，不可隐居在山中而耽误荒废了对你的委任。 
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month of Xinhai in the 4th year of Jinglong, the three godmen, including Cangshan, came down again to convey the order of the emperor: You should assist our Emperor Ruizong and Holy Emperor Kaiyuan, you should not live in seclusion in the mountains and waste your appointment.

古文：言讫而去。
现代文：说完就离开了。
English: After Bao Jiu's daughter finished speaking, Saburo left.

古文：时二帝未立，而庙号年号，皆以先知。
现代文：当时这两位皇帝还没有登位，而他们的庙号年号，叶法善全都事先知道了。
English: At that time, these two emperors had not yet ascended to the throne, and their temple names, year names, and names were all known in advance.

古文：其年八月，果有诏徵入京。
现代文：那年八月，果然有诏书召他回京。
English: In August of that year, an imperial edict was issued summoning him to return to Kyoto.

古文：迨后平韦后，立相王睿宗，玄宗承祚继统，师于上京，佐佑圣主。
现代文：等到后来平定了韦皇后，相王李旦成为睿宗皇帝。后来，玄宗继承了帝位。叶法善在京城辅佐圣主。
English: Later, Queen Wei was subdued, and King Li Dan became Emperor Ruizong. Later, Emperor Xuanzong succeeded to the throne. Ye Faxian assisted the saint in the capital.

古文：凡吉凶动静，必予奏闻。
现代文：凡是吉凶动静，他都能预先向皇上奏明。
English: He could inform the emperor in advance of any auspicious or inauspicious developments.

古文：会吐蕃遣使进宝函封，曰： 请陛下自开，无令他人知机密。 
现代文：正赶上吐蕃国派使者来献宝，宝被封在匣子里。使者说： 请陛下自己开，不要让别人知道其中的机密。 
English: Just in time, Tubo sent an envoy to offer the treasure. The treasure was sealed in a box. The envoy said, "Please open it yourself, Your Majesty, and do not let others know the secret."

古文：朝廷默然，唯法善曰： 此是凶函，请陛下勿开，宜令蕃使自开。 
现代文：朝廷一片默然，只有叶法善说： 这是个凶匣子，请陛下不要开。应该让吐蕃的来使自己开。 
English: The court was silent, only Ye Fa-zen said: "This is a dangerous box, please don't open it. You should let the spitfire open it for you."

古文：玄宗从之。
现代文：玄宗听了他的话。
English: Tang Xuan Zong listened to his words.

古文：及令蕃使自开，函中弩发，中番使死，果如法善言。
现代文：等到让蕃使自己打开，匣子里的暗箭射出来，正好把番使射死了。果然像叶法善说的那样。
English: When he opened the box, the hidden arrow in the box shot out and killed the messenger, just as Ye Fazen had said.

古文：俄授银青光禄大夫鸿胪卿越国公景龙观主。
现代文：不久，皇帝封他为银青光禄大夫、鸿胪卿、越国公、景龙观主。
English: Soon after, the emperor appointed him as the doctor of the Silver Qing Guanglu, the Lord of Hongye, the Prince of Yue, and the King of Dragon Watching.

古文：祖重，精于术数，明于考召，有功于江湖间，谥有道先生，自有传。
现代文：他的祖父叶重，术数很精到，善于考察吉凶，呼唤鬼神，在江湖之间很有功绩，谥号叫 有道先生 ，正史里有传。
English: His grandfather, Ye Jie, was very skilled in the number of operations, was good at examining the fortunes and misfortunes, calling ghosts and gods, and had a lot of achievements among the various ethnic groups. His nickname was Mr. You Dao, which has been passed down in history.

古文：父慧明，赠歙州刺史。
现代文：叶法善的父亲叫叶慧明，皇帝曾经把歙州刺史的官职赠送给他。
English: Ye Fa-zen's father was Ye Huiming. The emperor once presented him with the official post of the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：师请以松阳宅为观，赐号淳和，御制碑书额，以荣乡里。
现代文：叶法善请求把松阳县老家的宅子作为道观，皇帝赠号为 淳和观 ，观上有御制的碑书匾额，使叶家在乡里之间更显得光荣。
English: Ye Fa-zen requested that the house of his hometown in Songyang County be used as a Taoist temple, and the emperor gave it the name of Jun Huan, and there was a royal inscription on the temple, which made Ye's family appear more glorious in the countryside.

古文：明年正月二十七日，忽友云鹤数百，行列北来，翔集故山，徘徊三日，瑞云五色，覆其所居。
现代文：第二年正月二十七日，忽然有几百只云鹤排成行列从北边飞来，飞翔聚集在叶法善故居的山上。仙鹤徘徊了三天，五色的瑞云覆盖了他的住处。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the second year, hundreds of cranes suddenly flew in rows from the north and gathered on the mountain of Ye Fa Shan's former residence. The cranes wandered for three days, and five-colored clouds covered his residence.

古文：是岁庚申六月三日甲申，告化于上都景龙观。
现代文：这一年庚申六月三日甲申时，他在京都景龙观坐化。
English: This year, on June 3rd, Koshin, when Koshin, he was in Kyoto watching the dragon.

古文：弟子既齐物、尹愔，睹真仙下降之事，秘而不言。
现代文：他的弟子既齐物、尹愔，见到了神仙下来的事，但是他们保密，不往外讲。
English: His disciples, Yao Qiwu and Yin Qi, saw what happened, but they kept it a secret and didn't tell anyone.

古文：二十一日。诏赠金紫光禄大夫越州都督。
现代文：二十一日，皇帝下诏书，赠他金紫光禄大夫、越州都督的称号。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor issued an imperial decree, giving him the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor and Yuezhou Governor.

古文：春秋百有七岁。
现代文：他活了一百零七岁。
English: He lived to be 107 years old.

古文：所居院异香芬郁，仙乐缤纷，有青烟直上烛天，竟日方灭。
现代文：他所住的那个院子里，异香浓郁，仙乐声声，有一股青烟直上，映照天空，整整一天才消失。
English: In the courtyard where he lived, there was a strong smell of incense and the sound of celestial music. A stream of blue smoke rose straight up, reflecting the sky, and only disappeared for a whole day.

古文：师请归葬故乡。
现代文：叶法善死前曾请求归葬故乡。
English: Before his death, Ye Fa Shan had requested to be buried in his hometown.

古文：敕度其侄润州司马仲容为道士，与中使监护，葬于松阳。
现代文：皇上下令把他的侄子一一润州司马叶仲容引度为道士，和中使一块监护着他的灵柩，葬到松阳县。
English: The emperor ordered his nephew, Runchu Sima Ye Zhongrong, to be ordained as a Taoist priest, and the Chinese envoy guarded his coffin and buried him in Songyang County.

古文：诏衢、婺、括三州助葬。供给所须。
现代文：并且诏令衢、婺、括三州协助操办葬礼，供给所需要的钱物。
English: In addition, the emperor ordered the three states to assist in the funeral and provide the necessary money and goods.

古文：发引日，敕官缟衣祖送于国门之外。
现代文：出殡那天，皇上又敕令官吏们穿上白色丧服在国门外送灵。
English: On the day of the funeral, the emperor also ordered officials to wear white mourning clothes to send the soul outside the country.

古文：开元初，正月望夜，玄宗移仗于上阳宫以观灯。
现代文：叶法善的事迹很多。开元年初，正月十五夜里，唐玄宗把仪仗移到上阳宫观灯。
English: At the beginning of the first year, on the 15th night of the first month, Tang Xuan Zong moved the ceremonial battle to Shangyang Palace to watch the lanterns.

古文：尚方匠毛顺心，结构彩楼三十余间，金翠珠玉，间厕其内。
现代文：尚方署的工匠毛顺心，结构了三十多间彩楼，还放上金翠珠玉，楼高一百五十尺。
English: Mao Shunxin, the craftsman of the Shangfang Department, constructed more than thirty color houses, and also put on gold and jade, with a building height of one hundred and fifty feet.

古文：楼高百五十尺，微风所触，锵然成韵。以灯为龙、凤、螭、豹腾踯之状，似非人力。
现代文：微风吹来，锵然有声，很有韵味。用灯做成龙、凤、螭、豹跳跃的样子，好像不是人所能完成的。
English: The breeze is blowing, it's loud and has a lot of charm. Using lights to make dragons, phoenixes, dragonflies, and leopards look like they're jumping doesn't seem to be something that can be done by humans.

古文：玄宗见大悦，促召师观于楼下，人莫知之。
现代文：唐玄宗看了非常高兴，派人把叶法善找来在楼下看，别人都不知道。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was very happy to see it. He sent someone to look for Ye Fa Shan downstairs. No one else knew about it.

古文：师曰： 灯影之盛，固无比矣；然西凉府今夕之灯，亦亚于此。 
现代文：叶法善说： 灯景的盛况，固然是无比的。但是西凉府今夜的灯，也仅次于这里。 
English: Ye Fazen said, "The magnificence of the light show is, of course, incomparable. However, the lights of Xiliangfu tonight are second only to this.

古文：玄宗曰： 师顷尝游乎？ 
现代文：玄宗说： 法师刚才曾经去过？ 
English: Xuanzong said, "Did the master go there just now?"

古文：曰： 适自彼来，便蒙急召。 
现代文：叶法善说： 我刚从那回来，就受到陛下的紧急召见。 
English: I had just returned from there when I received an urgent summons from His Majesty.

古文：玄宗异其言，曰： 今欲一往，得乎？ 
现代文：玄宗对他的话感到奇怪，说道： 现在我也想去，行吗？ 
English: Surprised by his words, Xuanzong said, "Now I want to go, too, okay?"

古文：曰： 此易耳。 
现代文：叶法善说： 这很容易。 
English: Ye Fazen said, "It's easy.

古文：于是令玄宗闭目，约曰： 必不得妄视，若误有所视，必有非常惊骇。 
现代文：于是他让玄宗闭上眼睛，约定说： 一定不要随便乱看，如果误看了什么，一定会受到不寻常的惊吓。
English: So he asked Xuanzong to close his eyes and agreed: "Be sure not to look randomly, if you see something by mistake, you will definitely get an unusual shock."

古文：如其言，闭目距跃，已在霄汉。
现代文：玄宗照他说的那样做，闭着眼睛用力一跳，已跃上高空。
English: Xuan Zong did as he said, closed his eyes and jumped with force. He leapt into the sky.

古文：俄而足已及地。
现代文：不一会儿就觉得脚已触到地面。
English: Soon I felt my feet touch the ground.

古文：曰： 可以观矣。 
现代文：叶法善说： 可以睁眼看了！ 
English: Ye Fazen said, "I can watch it with my eyes open!"

古文：既睹影灯，连亘数十里，车马骈阗，士女纷委。
现代文：只见灯火辉映，连绵几十里，有接连不断的车马，又有纷然众多的士女。
English: I could see the lights shining brightly, stretching for dozens of miles, with a succession of cars and horses, and a large number of men and women.

古文：玄宗称其盛者久之，乃请回。
现代文：玄宗称赞这里的盛况，赞叹了好久。
English: Xuanzong praised the grandeur of this place and admired it for a long time.

古文：复闭目腾空而上，顷之已在楼下，而歌舞之曲未终。
现代文：于是，叶法善就请他回去，又闭上眼睛腾空而上，一会儿便已经回到彩楼之下了。那支歌舞的曲子还没有结束。
English: So Ye Fa-shan asked him to go back, closed his eyes again, and soared into the sky. In a moment, he was back under the pavilion. The song and dance had not yet ended.

古文：玄宗于凉州，以镂铁如意质酒，翌日命中使，托以他事，使于凉州，因求如意以还，验之非谬。
现代文：玄宗到凉州的时候，用镂铁如意换了酒喝。第二天他派出一位中使，以办别的事为名到凉州去，找到了镂铁如意带了回来，证明叶法善带他去凉州的事不假。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong went to Liangzhou, he exchanged a piece of ferruginous iron for wine. The next day, he sent a middle-ranking envoy to Liangzhou on the pretext of doing something else. He found the piece of ferruginous iron and brought it back, proving that Ye Fa-shan was right to take him to Liangzhou.

古文：又尝因八月望夜，师与玄宗游月宫，聆月中天乐。问其曲名，曰： 《紫云曲》。 
现代文：另外，又曾经在八月十五夜里，叶法善和唐玄宗一块到月宫去游览。玄宗听了月中的天乐，打听曲子叫什么名，人家告诉他是《紫云曲》。
English: In addition, once on the 15th night of August, Ye Fa Shan and Tang Xuan Zong went to visit the Moon Palace together. Xuan Zong listened to the celestial music in the middle of the month, asked what the name of the music was, and was told that it was "Purple Cloud Music."

古文：玄宗素晓音律，默记其声，归传其音。名之曰《霓裳羽衣》。
现代文：玄宗一向精通音乐，暗中记下它的声调，回来写出曲谱，起名《霓裳羽衣曲》。
English: Xuanzong has always been proficient in music, secretly recorded its tone, came back to write a score, and named it "Dragon Dance."

古文：自月宫还，过潞州城上，俯视城郭悄然，而月光如昼。师因请玄宗以玉笛奏曲。
现代文：从月宫回来的时候，路过潞州城上，俯看城中一片寂静，而月光照如白昼，叶法善就请玄宗用笛子演奏一支曲子。
English: When he returned from the Moon Palace, he passed by the castle of Zhangzhou and looked down at the silence in the city, while the moonlight shone like broad daylight. Ye Fa-zen asked Xuanzong to play a piece of music with a flute.

古文：时玉笛在寝殿中，师命人取，顷之而至。
现代文：当时玉笛放在寝殿里，叶法善派人去取，顷刻间就取回来了。
English: At that time, the jade flute was placed in the bed chamber. Ye Fa-shan sent someone to retrieve it, and it was returned in an instant.

古文：奏曲既，投金钱于城中而还。
现代文：奏完曲，把一枚金钱扔到城里就回来。
English: After playing the piece, throw a coin into the city and come back.

古文：旬日，潞州奏八月望夜，有天乐临城，兼获金钱以进。
现代文：十天以后，潞州进奏章报告说，八月十五夜里，有天乐降临潞州城，而且还在城中拾到一枚金钱，现在把这枚金钱献给皇上。
English: Ten days later, the Zhangzhou Marching Band reported that on the 15th night of August, a heavenly music descended on the city of Zhangzhou, and also found a piece of money in the city, and now this money is dedicated to the emperor.

古文：玄宗累与近臣试师道术，不可殚尽，而所验显然，皆非幻妄，故特加礼敬。
现代文：唐玄宗屡次与近臣们试验叶法善的道术，他的道术无穷无尽，而且所试验的都很灵验，都不是虚幻的。所以对他很尊敬。
English: Tang Xuan Zong repeatedly tested Ye Fa-Zen's Daoism with his close vassals. His Daoism was inexhaustible, and what he tested was very effective and not illusory. Therefore, he was highly respected.

古文：其余追岳神，致风雨，烹龙肉，祛妖伪，灵效之事，具在本传，此不备录。
现代文：其余诸如追赶岳神、呼风唤雨、烹煮龙肉、剪除妖伪等灵验之事，全都在他的传记里，这里不作详细记录。
English: The rest, such as chasing the mountain god, calling the wind and calling the rain, cooking dragon meat, and cutting out the evil spirits, are all in his biography, and are not recorded in detail here.

古文：又燕国公张说，尝诣观谒，师命酒。
现代文：另外，燕国公张说，曾经到观中拜谒过叶法善。
English: In addition, Yan Guo Gongzhang said that he once went to the observation center to worship Ye Fazen.

古文：说曰： 既无他客。 师曰： 此有曲处士者，久隐山林，性谨而讷，颇耽于酒，钟石可也。 
现代文：叶法善摆酒款待他，他说： 没有别的客人 叶法善说： 这地方有一位姓曲的处士，长期在山林里隐居，性情谨慎，不善言谈，很喜欢喝酒，能喝一钟或者一石。 
English: Ye Fa-shan served him wine, and he said, "There are no other guests." Ye Fa-shan said, "There is a steward named Qu in this place. He has been living in seclusion in the mountains and forests for a long time. He is cautious, not good at talking, and likes to drink a lot. He can drink for an hour or a stone.

古文：说请召之，斯须而至。
现代文：张说请叶法善把曲处士找来。
English: Zhang said that he asked Ye Fasen to find a composer.

古文：其形不及三尺，而腰带数围，使坐于下，拜揖之礼，颇亦鲁朴。
现代文：他很快就把曲处士找来了。曲处士的身材不足三尺高，而腰带却有几围长。叶法善让曲处士坐在下首。曲处士行揖拜之礼，显得很粗鲁。
English: He quickly found the music director, who was less than three feet tall with a belt several inches long. Ye Fa-zen made the music director sit down at the beginning of the next song. The music director bowed and was very rude.

古文：酒至，杯盂皆尽，而神色不动。
现代文：酒端上来之后，曲处士把杯里的盂里的全喝光了，神色却仍然如故，一点没变。
English: After the wine was served, Officer Qu drank the entire contents of the gourd in the glass, but his expression remained unchanged.

古文：燕公将去。师忽奋剑叱曲生曰： 曾无高谈广论，唯沉湎于酒，亦何用哉！ 
现代文：燕国公要离开的时候，叶法善忽然挺着剑斥责曲处士说： 你居然什么高谈阔论也没有，只知道喝酒，还有什么用呢？ 
English: When Yan Guo Gong was about to leave, Ye Fasen suddenly raised his sword and rebuked the official, saying: "You don't have any lofty talk, you only know how to drink, what else is there to do?

古文：因斩之，乃巨榼而已。
现代文：于是就斩杀了他。一看，原来这位曲处士是一个盛酒的器具变的。
English: So they beheaded him. At first glance, it turned out that the composer had been turned into a tool for holding wine.

古文：尝谓门人曰： 百六十年后，当有术过我者，来居卯酉山矣。
现代文：叶法善曾经对门人说： 一百六十年以后，能有一个道术比我强的人，到卯酉山来居住。 
English: Ye Fa-zen once said to his disciples, "In one hundred and sixty years, can a person who is better at Taoism than me come to live in Mount Usu?"

古文：初，师居四明之下，在天台之东，数年。
现代文：当初，叶法善住在四明山下。四明山在天台山之东。
English: At first, Ye Fa-zen lived at the foot of Shimei Mountain, which rises to the east of Mount Tiantai.

古文：忽于五月一日，有老叟诣门，号泣求救。
现代文：住了几年，忽然在五月一日这一天，有一位老头到门前，号哭着求救。
English: After living there for a few years, suddenly on May 1st, an old man came to the door crying for help.

古文：门人谓其有疾也。
现代文：门人以为这老头有病。
English: The doorkeepers thought the old man was ill.

古文：师引而问之，曰： 某东海龙也。
现代文：叶法善拉着老头问他怎么了，老头说： 我是东海的一条龙，天帝命令我主管八海的宝。
English: Ye Fa Shan pulled the old man aside and asked him what was wrong. The old man said, "I am a dragon of the East Sea. Heavenly Emperor ordered me to be in charge of the treasures of the Eight Seas.

古文：天帝所敕，主八海之宝，一千年一更其任，无过者超证仙品。
现代文：职位一千年更换一次。这一十年中没有过错的，就能超度成仙了。
English: Positions are changed once in a thousand years. If you haven't made any mistakes in the last ten years, you'll be able to become an immortal.

古文：某已九百七十年矣，微绩垂成，有婆罗门逞其幻法，住于海峰，昼夜禁咒，积三十年矣。
现代文：我已经干了九百七十年了，我的功业眼看就要成功。可是，有一位和尚显示他的魔幻法术，住在海边山峰上，昼夜念咒，已经三十年了。
English: I have worked for nine hundred and seventy years, and my work is on the verge of success. However, there is a monk who has been performing his magical spells for thirty years, living on a mountain by the sea and chanting day and night.

古文：其法将成，海水如云，卷在天半，五月五日，海将竭矣。统天镇海之宝，上帝制灵之物，必为幻僧所取。
现代文：他的法术将要炼成。炼成之后，海水将像云一样被卷到空中，五月五日海将枯干，那么，全天下的镇海之宝，上天号令神灵之物，一定会被幻术和尚得去。
English: His magic will be refined. After refinement, the seawater will be rolled into the air like a cloud, and the sea will dry up on May 5. Then, the treasure of the whole world, the heavenly call of the gods, will definitely be possessed by the illusion and the monk.

古文：五日午时，乞赐丹符垂救。
现代文：五月五日的正晌午时，请您赐一道丹符救救我。 
English: At noon on May 5th, please give me a danfu to save me.

古文：至期，师敕丹符，飞往救之，海水复旧。
现代文：到了五月五日，叶法善命令一道丹符飞到东海去救那龙。海水恢复原样。
English: On May 5th, Ye Faxian ordered a danfu to fly to the East Sea to rescue the dragon. The sea water was restored to its original state.

古文：其僧愧恨，赴海而死。
现代文：那和尚又愧又恨，跳进大海自杀了。
English: The monk was so ashamed and disgusted that he jumped into the sea and committed suicide.

古文：明日，龙辇宝货珍奇以来报。
现代文：第二天，那龙用车拉着珍珠等宝贝来报答叶法善。
English: The next day, the dragon used the car to pull pearls and other treasures to repay Ye Fa-zen.

古文：师拒曰： 林野之中，栖神之所，不以珠玑宝货为用。 
现代文：叶法善拒绝接受，说道： 神仙居于山林旷野中，不认为珠玑宝物有什么大用。 
English: Ye Fa-zen refused to accept it, saying, "The gods live in the mountains and forests, and they don't think the beaded treasures are of much use."

古文：一无所受，因谓龙曰： 此崖石之上，去水且远，但致一清泉，即为惠也。 
现代文：他什么也没接受。于是他对龙说： 这里的崖石之上，离水很远，只要你在这上面留下一个清泉，就是对我的报答了。 
English: He did not accept anything, so he said to the dragon: "Here on the cliff, far away from the water, if you leave a clear spring here, it will be my reward."

古文：是夕，闻风雨之声，及明，绕山麓四面，成一道石渠，泉水流注，经冬不竭。
现代文：这天晚上，人们听到了风雨之声。等到天明，人们出门一看，围绕着山根，四面出现一道石渠，泉水流淌，经冬不干。
English: That evening, people heard the sound of wind and rain. When it was daylight, people went out and saw that a stone canal appeared on all sides around the base of the mountain, with spring water flowing and not drying out in the winter.

古文：至今谓之天师渠。
现代文：到现在这渠还叫天师渠。
English: To this day, this canal is still called the Tenshitoro Canal.

古文：又一说云，显庆中，法善奉命修黄箓斋于天台山，道由广陵，明晨将济瓜州，是日，江干渡人，舣舟而候，时方春暮，浦溆晴暖，忽有黄白二叟相谓曰： 乘间可以围棋为适乎。 即向空召冥儿。
现代文：当时正是春暮，水边又晴又暖。忽然有黄白两个老头互相说： 趁此机会可以下一盘棋，挺合适吧？ 
English: It was the end of spring, and it was sunny and warm by the water's edge. Suddenly, two old men, one white and one yellow, said to each other, "Wouldn't it be nice to take this opportunity to play a game of chess?"

古文：俄有丱童擘波而出，衣无沾湿。
现代文：于是他们向着空中呼唤仙童。不一会儿，有一个仙童从江水里出来，他的衣服居然没有沾湿。
English: So they called to a fairy godmother in the air. Soon, a fairy godmother came out of the river, and his clothes were not wet at all.

古文：一叟曰： 挈棋局与席偕来。 
现代文：一个老头对仙童说： 把棋局和坐席一块拿来！ 
English: An old man said to Fairchild, "Bring the board and the seat together!"

古文：须臾，丱童如命，设席沙上。
现代文：一会儿，仙童遵命办到，把棋局和坐席放到沙地上。
English: After a while, Fairchild complied with the order and placed the board and the seat on the sandy ground.

古文：对坐约曰： 赌胜者食明日北来道士。 
现代文：两个老头相对而坐，约定说： 谁下胜了，谁就吃掉明天从北边来的那个道士。 
English: The two old men sat opposite each other and agreed that whoever won would eat the Taoist from the north the next day.

古文：因大笑而下子。
现代文：于是二人大笑着开始下棋。
English: So the two of them began to play chess, laughing loudly.

古文：良久，白衣叟曰： 卿北矣！幸无以味美见侵也？ 
现代文：下了好长时间，白衣老头说： 你败了，希望你不要因为那道士味道好就来抢！ 
English: After a long time, the old man in white said, "You've lost. I hope you didn't come to rob that Taoist because he had good taste!"

古文：旷望逡巡，徐步凌波，远远而没。
现代文：两个老头向远处望了一会儿，慢慢走在水面上，远远地消逝了。
English: The two old men looked into the distance for a moment, walked slowly on the water, and disappeared far away.

古文：舟人知其将害法善也，惶惑不宁。
现代文：摆船人知道他们要害叶法善，惶惑不安。
English: The boatmen knew that they wanted to harm Ye Fa Zhen, and they were confused and uneasy.

古文：及旦，则有内官驰马前至，督各舟楫。舟人则以昨日之所见具列焉。内官惊骇不悦。
现代文：等到第二天早晨，就有宫中的官吏骑着马来到，督促准备船只，摆船人就把昨天见到的情形详细向官吏述说了。那官吏又惊又怕不大高兴。
English: The next morning, officials from the palace arrived on horseback to supervise the preparation of the boats, and the boatman told the officials in detail what he had seen yesterday. The officials were shocked and not very happy.

古文：法善寻续而来，内官复以舟人之辞以启法善。
现代文：不多时叶法善也到了。那官吏又把摆船人说的话告诉了叶法善。
English: Not long after, Ye Fa-zen also arrived. The official also told Ye Fa-zen what the boatman had said.

古文：法善微哂曰： 有是乎？
现代文：叶法善微笑道： 有这样的事吗？
English: Ye Fa-zen smiled and said: Is there such a thing?

古文：幸无挂意。 
现代文：请不要在意！ 
English: Please don't mind!

古文：时法善符术神验，贤愚共知，然内官洎舟人从行之辈，忧轸靡遑。
现代文：当时叶法善的符术和神一样灵验，无论贤者愚者全都知道。但是宫内的官吏、摆船人，以及其他随从人员，忧痛惶急。
English: At that time, Ye Fa-Zen's charms were as effective as God's, and were known by all, whether they were wise or foolish. However, the palace officials, boatmen, and other attendants were worried and anxious.

古文：法善知之而促解缆，发岸咫尺，而暴风狂浪，天日昏晦。
现代文：叶法善知道大家的心情，就催促解缆开船。刚开船离岸不远，暴风狂浪大作，天日昏暗。
English: Ye Fa-zen knew everyone's mood, so he urged everyone to untie the ropes and set sail. As soon as the ship set sail, it was not far from the shore, the storm was raging, and the sky was dark.

古文：舟中之人，相顾失色。
现代文：船里的人面面相觑，大惊失色。
English: People on the boat looked at each other, stunned.

古文：法善徐谓侍者曰： 取我黑符，投之鹢首。 
现代文：叶法善慢吞吞对侍者说： 拿出我的黑符，扔到船头上。 
English: Ye Fa Zhen slowly said to the waiter: Take out my black flag and throw it on the bow.

古文：既投而波流静谧，有顷既济。
现代文：扔了黑符之后，江水立即风平浪静。
English: After the black flag was thrown, the river was immediately calm.

古文：法善顾舟人曰： 尔可广召宗侣，沿流十里间，或芦洲菼渚，有巨鳞在焉，尔可取之，当大获其资矣。 
现代文：不多时到了对岸，叶法善看着摆船人说： 你可以多找一些同伴来，沿江十里之间，也许是长有水草的小岛上，有大鱼在那里边，你可以拿回去。能发一笔小财了！ 
English: Not long after arriving at the opposite bank, Ye Fasen looked at the boatman and said, "You can find some more companions. Ten miles along the river, perhaps on a small island with aquatic plants, there is a big fish there, you can take it back. You can make a small fortune!"

古文：舟人承教，不数里，果有白鱼长百尺许，周三十余围，僵暴沙上。
现代文：摆船人按照叶法善教的去做，寻了不几里，果然有一条长百尺左右，粗三十多围的大鱼，暴死在沙滩上。
English: The boatman followed Ye Fa's instructions and searched for a few miles, and sure enough, there was a large fish about a hundred feet long and more than thirty times as thick, which died violently on the beach.

古文：就而视，脑有穴嵌然流膏。
现代文：走近一看，鱼头上有一个洞往外流着脑汁。
English: On closer inspection, there was a hole in the fish's head with brain juice flowing out.

古文：舟人因脔割载归，左近村闾，食鱼累月。
现代文：摆船人于是把大鱼割成一块一块的肉载运回去。左右的村庄，全都吃了一个来月的鱼。
English: The boatman then cut the big fish into pieces and carried the meat back. All the villages around ate fish for the next month.

古文：邢和璞
现代文：邢和璞
English: and

古文：邢先生名和璞。
现代文：邢先生的名字叫和璞。
English: Mr. Zou's name is He Zou.

古文：善方术，常携竹算数计，算长六寸。
现代文：他善长方术，身边常常带有计数的竹签。竹签长六寸。
English: He is good at cubism and often carries a bamboo stick with a count on it. The stick is six inches long.

古文：人有请者，到则布算为卦，纵横布列，动用算数百，布之满床。
现代文：如果有人请他算命，他来到便用竹签摆成卦形，纵的横的都有，一共要动用一百多根，摆满一床。
English: If someone asks him to tell fortunes, he comes and uses bamboo sticks to arrange them into a hexagon shape, both vertically and horizontally. In total, he has to use more than a hundred sticks to fill a bed.

古文：布数已，乃告家之休咎，言其人年命长短及官禄，如神。
现代文：摆完之后，就告诉人家是吉是凶，是福是祸，说出那人的年龄寿命大小以及官禄什么的，说得极准，像神一般。
English: After the performance, he would tell people whether they were lucky or unlucky, whether they were blessed or cursed, and he would tell them the person's age, life expectancy, and official rank. He was very precise, like a god.

古文：先生貌清羸，服气，时饵少药。
现代文：邢先生面相清瘦。他食气养身，有时候少吃一点药。
English: Mr. Zou's face is clear and thin. He eats well and sometimes takes less medicine.

古文：人亦不详所生。
现代文：也不知他是什么地方出生的。
English: I don't know where he was born.

古文：唐开元二十年至都，朝贵候之，其门如市。
现代文：唐朝开元二十年他来到京都。朝中的权贵都去求他算命，要按先来后到的顺序等候。他的门庭若市。
English: In the 20th year of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, he came to Kyoto. The nobility in the court all went to ask him to tell their fortunes, and they had to wait in order of arrival. His doors were wide open.

古文：能增人算寿，又能活其死者。
现代文：他能算出人的寿命长短，帮人增寿。又能起死回生，把死人救活。
English: He can calculate the length of a person's lifespan and help people live longer. He can also bring the dead back to life and bring the dead back to life.

古文：先生尝至白马坂下，过友人。友人已死信宿，其母哭而求之。和璞乃出亡人置于床，引其衾，解衣同寝。
现代文：有一次他到白马坂去看望一个友人，那友人已经死去两夜了，友人的母亲哭着求他，他便把死人抬出来放在床上，拽过友人的被子，脱了衣服和友人睡到一起。
English: Once he went to visit a friend in Hakuba-zaka, the friend had been dead for two nights. The friend's mother cried and begged him, so he carried the dead man out and put him on the bed, pulled the friend's quilt, undressed and slept with his friend.

古文：令闭户，眠熟。
现代文：还让人把门关上。
English: They also had the door closed.

古文：良久起，具汤，而友人犹死。
现代文：熟睡了好久他才起来。早已有人准备好了热水，但是友人还是死的。
English: He woke up after a long sleep. Someone had already prepared hot water, but his friend was still dead.

古文：和璞长叹曰： 大人与我约而妄，何也？ 
现代文：邢和璞长叹一声说： 大人和我约好了却又胡乱失约，为什么呢？ 
English: Zou and Zou said with a long sigh, "The adults made an appointment with me, but they broke it. Why?

古文：复令闭户。又寝。俄而起曰： 活矣！ 
现代文：他又让人关上门，又睡，不一会儿起来说： 活了！ 
English: He had the door closed again, went back to sleep, and soon got up and said: "I'm alive!

古文：母入视之，其子已苏矣。
现代文：友人母亲进去一看，儿子已经苏醒了。
English: My friend's mother went in and saw that her son had woken up.

古文：母问之。其子曰： 被箓在牢禁系，拷讯正苦，忽闻外曰： 王唤其人。 
现代文：母亲问儿子是怎么回事，儿子说： 我被关在阴间的牢房里拷问得正苦的时候，忽听外面喊道： 大王叫这个人！ 
English: The mother asked her son what was going on. The son said: "I was locked up in a hellish cell and being tortured, when I suddenly heard someone outside shout: 'The Great King is calling for this man!'

古文：官不肯曰： 讯未毕，不使去。 
现代文：负责拷问的官吏不肯，说： 审讯没完，不能去！ 
English: The official in charge of the interrogation refused, saying: "The interrogation is not over, I can't go!"

古文：少顷，又惊走至者曰： 邢仙人自来唤其人。 
现代文：过了一会儿，又有一个惊慌跑来的人说： 邢仙人亲自来叫这个人！ 
English: After a while, another person who had come running in panic said, "The fairy godmother herself came to call this person!"

古文：官吏出迎，再拜恐惧。
现代文：那官吏出去迎接，连连下拜，很害怕的样子。
English: The official went out to meet them, bowing repeatedly, looking very scared.

古文：遂令从仙人归，故生。 
现代文：于是就让我跟着邢仙人回来了。所以又活了。 
English: So they let me come back with the hermit. So I'm alive again.

古文：又有纳少妾，妾善歌舞而暴死者，请和璞活之。
现代文：另外，有一个人娶了一个年轻的小老婆，小老婆能歌善舞却突然死了，这个人就请邢和璞救活他的小老婆。
English: In addition, there was a man who married a young little wife. The little wife could sing and dance, but suddenly died. This man asked Toad and Toad to save his little wife.

古文：和璞墨书一符，使置妾卧处。
现代文：邢和璞用墨写了一道符，让他放在小老婆躺着的地方。
English: Toad and Toad wrote a sign in ink for him to put where the little wife lay.

古文：俄而言曰： 墨符无益。 
现代文：过了片刻又说墨符没用处，又用朱砂写了一道符。
English: After a while, he said that the ink was useless, and wrote another sign with cinnabar.

古文：又朱书一符，复命置于床。俄而又曰： 此山神取之，可令追之。 
现代文：又让那人放到床上。过了片刻又说： 她被山神捉去了，可以写符追她！ 
English: After a while, he said, "She's been caught by the mountain god, you can write symbols to chase her!"

古文：又书一大符焚之。
现代文：于是又写了一道大符烧了。
English: So I wrote another big note and burned it.

古文：俄而妾活。
现代文：不一会儿小老婆活了。
English: In a moment the little wife came to life.

古文：言曰： 为一胡神领从者数百人拘去，闭宫门，作乐酣饮。
现代文：她说道： 我被一个胡神领着几百名随从捉了去，关着宫门，让我唱歌陪他畅饮。
English: She said: "I was captured by a wolf god with hundreds of followers, who closed the palace gates and made me sing and drink with him.

古文：忽有排户者曰： 五道大使呼歌者。 
现代文：忽然有人推门进来说： 五道大使叫唱歌的女子回去！ 
English: Suddenly someone pushed through the door and said: "The ambassador of the five provinces is calling for the singing woman to go back!"

古文：神不应。
现代文：胡神不答应。
English: Hu Shen did not agree.

古文：顷又曰： 罗大王使召歌者。 
现代文：过了片刻又有人说： 罗大王派人来叫唱歌的女子！ 
English: After a while, someone else said: King Luo Da Wang sent someone to summon the singing girl!

古文：方骇。仍曰： 且留少时。 
现代文：胡神这才害怕，但他仍然说： 再少呆一会儿！ 
English: Hu Shen was afraid of this, but he still said, "Stay a little longer!"

古文：须臾，数百骑驰入宫中，大呼曰： 天帝诏，何敢辄取歌人。 令曳神下，杖一百，仍放歌人还。
现代文：不一会儿，几百名骑兵奔入宫中，大声喊道： 天帝下诏，你胆敢擅自捉拿唱歌女子， 下令把他拉下来，打了一百大板，并命令放唱歌的女子回去！
English: Not long after, several hundred cavalrymen rushed into the palace and shouted loudly: The heavenly emperor decreed that you dare to take the singing woman without permission, ordered him to be pulled down, hit a hundred large boards, and ordered the singing woman to go back!

古文：于是遂生。 
现代文：于是我就又活了。 
English: So I came back to life.

古文：和璞此事至多。
现代文：邢和璞这类事极多。
English: This sort of thing happens a lot.

古文：后不知所适。
现代文：后来不知他到哪儿去了。
English: I don't know where he went after that.

