古文：○太宗一太宗神功圣德文武皇帝讳炅，初名匡乂，改赐光义，即位之二年改今讳，宣祖第三子也，母曰昭宪皇后杜氏。
现代文：太宗神功圣德文武皇帝，名灵，初名匡义，后改赐为光义，即皇帝位的第二年，改为今名，宣祖的第三个儿子，母亲为昭宪皇后杜氏。
English: Emperor Taizong Shengong Shengde Wenwu, Meiling, first name Kuangyi, later changed to Guangyi, that is, the second year of the emperor's reign, changed to the current name, the third son of Xuanzu, his mother was the Empress Zhaoxian Du.

古文：初，后梦神人捧日以授，已而有娠，遂生帝于浚仪官舍。
现代文：开始，杜太后梦见神人授给帝位，不久怀孕，于是在浚仪官舍生下太宗。
English: In the beginning, Empress Dowager Du dreamed of a divine being bestowing the imperial throne on her, and soon became pregnant, giving birth to Emperor Taizong in the official residence.

古文：是夜，赤光上腾如火，闾巷闻有异香，时晋天福四年十月七日甲辰也。
现代文：这天晚上，红光如火升腾，间巷闻到特殊奇异的香味，那是后晋天福四年十月七日。
English: That evening, the red light was soaring like fire, and the alley smelled a special, strange scent. It was October 7th of the fourth year of Emperor Jintian's reign.

古文：帝幼不群，与他儿戏，皆畏服。
现代文：太宗自幼卓尔不群，与其他小孩游戏玩耍，大家都害怕地服从他。
English: Ever since he was a child, Taizong had always been different from the others. He played games with other children, and they all obeyed him fearfully.

古文：及长，隆准龙颜，望之知为大人，俨如也。
现代文：长大后，高高鼻梁有真龙之象，一看就知道是大人物，一副庄重威严的样子。
English: When he grew up, the high bridge of his nose looked like a real dragon. At a glance, he was a big man, with a dignified and majestic appearance.

古文：性嗜学，宣祖总兵淮南，破州县，财物悉不取，第求古书遗帝，恒饬厉之，帝由是工文业，多艺能。
现代文：天性喜欢学习，他父亲宣祖统兵淮南，攻破州县，财物全不取，只是搜求古书给太宗，并且经常告诫、勉励他，太宗因此学问精深，多才多艺。
English: Taizong liked to study by nature. His father, Xuan Zu, led the unified army of Huainan and conquered the prefectures. He did not take any property, but only searched for ancient books to give to Taizong, and often admonished and encouraged him. Therefore, Taizong was well-educated and versatile.

古文：仕周至供奉官都知。
现代文：后周时官至供奉官都知。
English: After a week, both the time officials and the offering officials knew about it.

古文：太祖即位，以帝为殿前都虞候，领睦州防御使。
现代文：太祖赵匡撤建立宋朝，任命太宗为殿前都虞候，领睦州防御使。
English: The great-grandfather Zhao Kuangyu established the Song Dynasty, appointed Taizong as the prefectural governor of the palace, and appointed him as the defense envoy of Mutsu Province.

古文：亲征泽、潞，帝以大内点检留镇，寻领泰宁军节度使。
现代文：太祖亲征泽州、潞州，太宗以大内点检的身份留守东京，不久领任泰宁军节度使。
English: Taizong's great-grandfather personally led the expedition to conquer Zezhou and Zhangzhou, while Taizong stayed in Tokyo as a university inspector, and soon assumed the post of commander of the Taining Army.

古文：征李重进，为大内都部署，加同平章事、行开封尹，再加兼中书令。
现代文：太祖亲征李重进，太宗为大内都部署，加给同平章事，行使开封尹的职权，又加官兼中书令。
English: The great-great-grandfather personally recruited Li Chongjin, and the great-grandfather was deployed to Daini, and was given the title of Tongping, exercised the authority of Kaifeng Yin, and was also promoted to the post of official and middle-ranking official.

古文：征太原，改东都留守，别赐门戟，封晋王，序班宰相上。
现代文：太祖亲征太原，太宗改为东都留守，另外赐给他府第，门前可列仪仗，封为晋王，位次排在宰相之上。
English: The great-grandfather personally conquered Taiyuan, and the emperor changed the capital to Dongdu and left it there. In addition, he was given a palace, a ceremonial battle could be held in front of the gate, he was named the king of Jin, and his rank was higher than that of the prime minister.

古文：开宝九年冬十月癸丑，太祖崩，帝遂即皇帝位。
现代文：开宝九年冬十月二十日，太祖逝世，太宗于是即皇帝位。
English: On October 20th, the winter of the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Kibo, Emperor Taizu died, and Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne.

古文：乙卯，大赦，常赦所不原者咸除之。
现代文：二十二日，大赦全国，常规赦免得不到原谅者也予以赦免。
English: On the 22nd, there was a nationwide amnesty, and those who could not be pardoned by the regular amnesty were also pardoned.

古文：丙辰，群臣表请听政，不许。丁巳，宰相薛居正等固请，乃许，即日移御长春殿。
现代文：二十三日，大臣们上奏请太宗上朝处理政事，没被应允；二十四日，宰相薛居正等人坚决请求，才应允，当天到长春殿。
English: On the 23rd, the ministers petitioned Emperor Taizong to deal with political affairs, but were not granted; on the 24th, Prime Minister Xue Jizheng and others made a firm request, only to be granted, and went to Changchun Palace on the same day.

古文：庚申，以弟廷美为开封尹兼中书令，封齐王；先帝子德昭为永兴军节度使兼侍中，封武功郡王；德芳为山南西道节度使、兴元尹、同平章事。
现代文：二十七日，任命弟弟赵廷美为开封尹兼中书令，封为齐王；太祖儿子赵德昭为永兴军节度使兼侍中，封为武功郡王；赵德芳为山南西道节度使、兴元尹、同平章事。
English: On the 27th, he appointed his younger brother Zhao Tingmei as Kaifeng Yin and Chung Shuling, and named him King of Qi; his great-grandfather's son Zhao Dezhao as Yongxing Army Festival Envoy and Attendant, and named him King of Wugong County; and Zhao Defang as Shannan West Road Festival Envoy, Xingyuan Yin, and Tongping Chapter.

古文：薛居正加左仆射，沈伦加右仆射，卢多逊为中书侍郎，曹彬仍枢密使，并同平章事。楚昭辅为枢密使，潘美为宣徽南院使，内外官进秩有差。
现代文：薛居正加官为左仆射，沈伦加官为右仆射，卢多逊为中书侍郎，曹彬继续担任枢密使，并同平章事，楚昭辅为枢密使，潘美为宣徽南院使，内外官员都不同程度地升官晋爵。
English: Xue Juzheng was appointed as the left footman, Shen Lun was appointed as the right footman, Ludosun was appointed as the secretary of the Central Committee, Cao Bin continued to serve as the privy councilor, and was appointed as the same rank, Chu Zhaowu was appointed as the privy councilor, Pan Mei was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Yuan of Xuanhui, and both domestic and foreign officials were promoted to various degrees.

古文：诏茶、盐、榷酤用开宝八年额。
现代文：下诏茶、盐、榷酣沿用开宝八年数额。
English: The following is the amount of tea, salt and ginger used by Kaibao for eight years.

古文：十一月癸亥朔，帝不视朝。
现代文：十一月初一，太宗不上朝处理政事。
English: On the first day of November, Emperor Taizong did not go to the North to deal with political affairs.

古文：甲子，追册故尹氏为淑德皇后，越国夫人符氏为懿德皇后。
现代文：初二，追册已故尹氏为淑德皇后，越国夫人符氏为爵德皇后。
English: On the second day of the new school year, the late Yin was posthumously registered as Empress Shude, and Lady Yue as Empress Shude.

古文：戊辰，罢州县奉户。
现代文：初六，罢除州县奉户为足官棒输纳的络钱。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the state and county of Fenghu were removed from the network money for the foot official stick.

古文：庚午，诏诸道转运使察州县官吏能否，第为三等，岁终以闻。
现代文：初八，诏令各道转运使核察州县官吏能否，定为三等，年末上报朝迁。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict ordered that officials of all provinces and prefectures should check whether they could be transferred to the imperial court, which was classified as the third grade, and reported at the end of the year.

古文：命诸州大索知天文术数人送阙下，匿者论死。
现代文：命令各州大规模搜索通晓天文术数的人送到朝廷，藏匿隐瞒者以死罪论处。
English: He ordered the states to conduct a large-scale search for people who knew astronomical numbers and bring them to the imperial court. Those who hid them would be sentenced to death.

古文：乙亥，命权知高丽国事王伷为高丽国王。
现代文：十三日，委任权知高丽国事王了由为高丽国王。
English: On the thirteenth day of the month, the King of Goryeo was appointed as the King of Goryeo.

古文：癸未，幸相国寺。
现代文：二十一日，太宗到相国寺。
English: On the 21st, Taizong went to Shokoku-ji Temple.

古文：己丑，遣著作郎冯正、佐郎张巳使契丹告哀。
现代文：二十七日，派遣著作郎冯正、著作佐郎张巳出使契丹报丧。
English: On the 27th, Feng Zheng, the author's brother, and Zhang Mi, the author's brother, were dispatched to bid farewell to Khitan.

古文：诏文武官由谴累不齿者，有司毋得更论前过。
现代文：诏令文官武官由于滴降受到极端鄙视者，有关部门不得再论从前的过失。
English: The edict said that if a civilian official or military attaché was extremely despised due to the drip-down, the relevant departments must not discuss the previous mistakes.

古文：十二月己亥，置直舍人院。
现代文：十二月初七，设立直舍人院。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month, the Zhisheng People's Hospital was established.

古文：甲寅，御乾元殿受朝，乐县而不作。
现代文：二十二日，到乾元殿接受朝拜，乐挂起来但不作。
English: On the twenty-second day, he went to the Qianyuan Hall to receive worship, but he did not play music.

古文：大赦，改是岁为太平兴国元年。
现代文：大赦，改这年为太平兴国元年。
English: The year of the amnesty was changed to the first year of the Taiping Xingguo.

古文：命太祖子及齐王廷美子并称皇子，女并称皇女。
现代文：命令太祖的儿子及齐王廷美的儿子都称为皇子，女儿都称为皇女。
English: He ordered that the son of the great-grandfather and the son of King Tingmei of Qi should be called the prince, and the daughter should be called the princess.

古文：丁巳，置三司副使。
现代文：二十五日，设置三司副使。
English: On the 25th, the Third Division of Vice Envoys was set up.

古文：戊午，契丹遣使来赙。
现代文：二十六日，契丹派遣使臣送来财物助丧。
English: On the 26th, Khitan dispatched envoys to bring money and goods to help with the funeral.

古文：己未，幸讲武池，遂幸玉津园。
现代文：二十七日，太宗到讲武池，于是到玉津园。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Taizong went to the battlefield, and then went to the Tamatsuen Garden.

古文：庚申，节度使赵普、向拱、张永德、高怀德、冯继业、张美、刘廷让来朝。
现代文：二十八日，节度使赵普、向拱、张永德、高怀德、冯继业、张美、刘廷让来朝贺。
English: On the 28th, the festival made Zhao Pu, Xiang Gong, Zhang Yongde, Gao Huide, Feng Jiye, Zhang Mei, and Liu Ting come to congratulate.

古文：二年春正月壬戌，以大行殡，不视朝。
现代文：太平兴国二年春正月初一，因太祖皇帝停枢，不上朝处理政事。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Taiping Xingguo, because the great-grandfather emperor stopped the pivot, he did not go to the court to deal with political affairs.

古文：丙寅，禁居官出使者行商贾事。
现代文：初五，禁止臣僚出使者进行商业贸易。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, ministers were prohibited from sending envoys to engage in commercial trade.

古文：戊辰，亲试礼部举人。
现代文：初七，亲自策试礼部举人。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, he personally organized a dress rehearsal.

古文：甲戌，上大行皇帝谥曰英武圣文神德，庙号太祖。
现代文：十三日，上太祖皇帝溢号为英武圣文神德，庙号太祖。
English: On the 13th, Emperor Taizu's posthumous name was changed to Yingwu Shenwen Shinde, and his temple name was Taizu.

古文：丙子，幸相国寺，还，御东华门观灯。
现代文：十五日，到相国寺，回来时到东华门观灯。
English: On the 15th, I went to Shokoku-ji Temple, and when I came back, I went to Donghua Gate to see the lanterns.

古文：庚辰，阅礼部贡士十举至十五举者百二十人，并赐出身。
现代文：十九日，阅礼部贡士十举至十五举者一百二十人，都赐给出身。
English: On the 19th, one hundred and twenty people from the tenth to the fifteenth of the reading of the Ministry of Ceremonies were awarded.

古文：戊子，命邕州广源州酋长坦坦绰侬民富为检校司空、御史大夫、上柱国。
现代文：二十七日，命令琶州广源州酋长坦坦绰侬民富为检校司空、御史大夫、上柱国。
English: On the 27th, he ordered the chief of Wazhou-Guangyuan County, Tantan, to name Minfu as the school inspector, the chief historian, and the head of the provincial government.

古文：辛卯，幸讲武池。
现代文：三十日，到讲武池。
English: On the 30th, I went to Wuchih.

古文：置江南榷茶场。
现代文：设置江南榷茶场。
English: Set up the Jiangnanluo teahouse.

古文：二月甲午，契丹遣使来贺即位及正旦。
现代文：二月初三，契丹派遣使臣来祝贺太宗即位和新春。
English: On the third day of February, Khitan sent envoys to congratulate Emperor Taizong on his enthronement and the new year.

古文：吴越国遣使来贡。
现代文：吴越国派遣使臣来进贡。
English: Wuyue sent envoys to collect the tribute.

古文：罢南唐铁钱。
现代文：罢废南唐铁钱。
English: The Southern Tang Iron Money was abolished.

古文：庚子，帝改名炅。
现代文：初九，太宗改名为灵。
English: At the age of nine, Taizong changed his name to Ling.

古文：壬寅，大宴崇德殿，不作乐。
现代文：十一日，大宴崇德殿，不作乐。
English: On the 11th day, the grand banquet of the Chongde Hall began, but no music was played.

古文：乙巳，幸新凿池，遂幸讲武池，宴射玉津园。
现代文：十四日，到新凿池，于是到讲武池，在玉津园设宴射箭。
English: On the 14th, they went to Shinjiike Pond, and then to Kenmuike Pond, where they held an archery banquet in Tamatsuen Garden.

古文：丁未，占城国遣使来贡。
现代文：十六日，占城国派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the 16th, Zhancheng dispatched envoys to pay tribute.

古文：己酉，令江南诸州盐先通商处悉禁之。
现代文：十八日，命令江南各州盐从前通商的地方现在全部禁止。
English: On the 18th, it was ordered that all salt trading places in the south of the Yangtze River should be banned.

古文：戊午，幸太平兴国寺，遂幸造船务。还，幸建隆观。
现代文：二十七日，到太平兴国寺，于是到造船务，回来时到建隆观。
English: On the 27th, he went to the Taiping Xingguo Temple, then went to the shipyard, and when he came back, he went to the Jianlong Temple.

古文：三月壬戌朔，始立试官衔选限。
现代文：三月初一，开始确立六等试衔官七选赴集，可以候选人官。
English: On the first day of March, it began to establish that the sixth-class probationary title officers would go to the meeting for seven elections, and they could be candidate officers.

古文：己卯，以河阳节度使赵普为太子少保。
现代文：十八日，任命河阳节度使赵普为太子少保。
English: On the 18th, Heyang Jiedu was appointed to make Zhao Pu the prince's minor protector.

古文：己丑，幸开宝寺。
现代文：二十八日，到开宝寺。
English: On the 28th, he went to Kaiboji Temple.

古文：置威胜军。
现代文：设置威胜军。
English: Set up a victorious army.

古文：禁江南诸州铜。
现代文：禁止江南各州炼铜。
English: Copper smelting was banned in all provinces south of the Yangtze River.

古文：许契丹互市。
现代文：允许与契丹互市贸易。
English: Permits reciprocal trade with Khitan.

古文：夏四月辛卯，大食国遣使来贡。
现代文：夏四月初一，大食国派遣使臣来进贡。
English: In the summer, on the first day of April, the big-eating country sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：丁酉，契丹遣使来会葬。
现代文：初七，契丹派遣使臣来助葬。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Khitan dispatched envoys to assist in the funeral.

古文：乙卯，葬太祖于永昌陵。
现代文：二十五日，葬太祖于永昌陵。
English: On the 25th, Emperor Taizu was buried in Yongchang Mausoleum.

古文：五月壬戌，河南法曹参军高丕、伊阙县主簿翟嶙、郑州荥泽令申廷温坐不勤事，并免。
现代文：五月初二，河南法曹参军高巫、伊网县主簿翟嶙、郑州荣泽县令申廷温因不勤于政事获罪，都被罢免。
English: On the second day of May, Gao Wu, a Henan legal officer who had joined the army, the chief bookkeeper of Yiwu County, and Shen Ting Wen, the governor of Rongze County in Zhengzhou, were all dismissed after being found guilty of not being diligent in political affairs.

古文：癸亥，向拱、张永德、张美、刘廷让皆罢节镇，为诸卫上将军。
现代文：初三，向拱、张永德、张美、刘廷让都罢节度，为诸卫上将军。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Xiang Gong, Zhang Yongde, Zhang Mei, and Liu Ting were promoted to the ranks of generals.

古文：乙丑，幸新水硙，遂幸玉津园宴射。
现代文：初五，到新水，于是到玉津园设宴射箭。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, I went to Shinsui, so I went to Tamatsuen Garden to hold a banquet and shoot arrows.

古文：丙寅，诏继母杀子及妇者同杀人论。
现代文：初六，诏令继母杀死丈夫前妻之子和母亲者，都同杀死凡人论罪。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the emperor issued an edict that if a stepmother killed her husband's ex-wife's son or mother, she would be guilty of killing a human being.

古文：庚午，宴崇德殿，不作乐。
现代文：初十，在崇德殿设宴，不作乐。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, a banquet was held at the Chungdeokgung Palace, but no music was played.

古文：遣辛仲甫使契丹。
现代文：派遣辛仲甫出使契丹。
English: Xin Zhongfu sent an envoy to Khitan.

古文：甲戌，以十月七日为乾明节。
现代文：十四日，以十月七日为乾明节。
English: On the 14th, October 7th was changed to Qianming Festival.

古文：己卯，祔太祖神主于庙，以孝明皇后王氏配，又以懿德皇后符氏、淑德皇后尹氏祔别庙。
现代文：十九日，在庙附祭太祖神主，以孝明皇后王氏配享。又以爵德皇后符氏、淑德皇后尹氏附祭别庙。
English: On the 19th, a memorial service was held at the temple for the great ancestor of the gods, which was attended by Empress Wang of the Xiaoming clan, Empress Fu of the Zhude clan, and Empress Yin of the Shu De clan.

古文：庚辰，诏作北帝宫于终南山。癸未，幸新水硙，遂宴射玉津园。
现代文：二十日，诏令在终南山建造北帝宫。二十三日，到新水，于是在玉津园设宴射箭。
English: On the 20th, the imperial edict ordered the construction of the Northern Imperial Palace in Zonanshan. On the 23rd, they went to Xinshui, whereupon they held a banquet and played archery in the Yutsuen Garden.

古文：六月辛卯朔，白龙见邠州要策池中。
现代文：六月初一，白龙出现在州要策池中。
English: On the first day of June, the white dragon appeared in the state key policy pool.

古文：乙卯，幸开宝寺，遂幸飞龙院，赐从官马。
现代文：二十五日，到开宝寺，于是到飞龙院，赐给随从官员马匹。
English: On the 25th, he went to Kaiboji Temple, then to Fei Long Yuan, where he gave horses to the officials accompanying him.

古文：是月，磁州保安等县墨虫生，食桑叶殆尽。颍州大水。
现代文：这个月，磁州保安等县出现黑虫，几乎把桑叶吃完；颖州发生大水灾。
English: This month, black worms appeared in counties such as Magizhou Security and almost ate up the mulberry leaves; Yingzhou suffered a major flood.

古文：秋七月庚午，诏诸库藏敢变权衡以取羡余者死。
现代文：秋七月十一日，诏令各库藏胆敢变换衡器以求多取者处以死罪。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the emperor ordered that anyone who dared to change the scales in the storerooms in order to take more would be sentenced to death.

古文：癸未，钜鹿、沙河步屈食桑、麦，河决荥泽、顿丘、白马、温县。
现代文：二十四日，巨鹿、沙河尺蟆虫吃桑、麦，黄河在荣泽、顿丘、白马、温县决口。
English: On the 24th, the giant deer and sandworm ate mulberry and wheat, and the Yellow River broke through Rongze, Dongqiu, Baima and Wenshan.

古文：闰月己亥，幸白鹘桥，临金水河。
现代文：闰七月初十，到白鹊桥，到金水河边。
English: On the tenth day of the seventh lunar month, I went to Baekje Bridge and the Jinshui River.

古文：己酉，河溢开封等八县，害稼。
现代文：二十日，河水满溢开封等八县，损害庄稼。
English: On the 20th, the river overflowed in eight counties including Kaifeng, damaging crops.

古文：甲寅，诏发潭州兵击梅山洞贼。
现代文：二十五日，诏令调发潭州兵力镇压梅山洞贼。
English: On the 25th, the imperial edict dispatched troops from Tanzhou to suppress the Meishan cave thieves.

古文：丁巳，有司上闰年舆地版籍之图。
现代文：二十八日，有关部门呈上闰年舆地版籍图。
English: On the 28th, the relevant departments submitted the leap year land ownership map.

古文：令支郡得专奏事。
现代文：命令支郡得以直接奏事。
English: The order allows the county to file the case directly.

古文：八月癸亥，黎州两林蛮来贡。
现代文：八月初五，黎州两林蛮来进贡。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month, the tributes from the two forests in Lizhou arrived.

古文：乙丑，平海军节度使陈洪进来朝。
现代文：初七，平海军节度使陈洪进来朝拜。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the Ping naval festival made Chen Hong come to worship.

古文：癸酉，以观灯，遂幸相国寺。
现代文：十五日，因观灯于是到相国寺。
English: On the 15th, he went to Shokoku-ji Temple to see the lanterns.

古文：戊寅，诏作崇圣殿。
现代文：二十日，诏令建造崇圣殿。
English: On the 20th, the imperial edict ordered the construction of the Chongseongjeon.

古文：是月，陕、澶、道、忠、寿诸州大水，钜鹿步蝻生，景城县雹。
现代文：这个月，陕、擅、道、忠、寿各州大水，巨鹿出现步纳，景城县降冰雹。
English: This month, the provinces of Shaanxi, Shanshan, Shandong, Zhongshan, and Shou witnessed floods, the appearance of huge deer, and hail in Jingcheng County.

古文：九月乙未，幸弓箭院，遂幸新修三馆。
现代文：九月初七，到弓箭院，于是到新修建的三馆。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, I went to the Archery Hall, and then to the newly built three halls.

古文：壬寅，幸新水硙，遂幸西御园宴射。
现代文：十四日，到新水，于是到西御园设宴射箭。
English: On the 14th, they went to Shinsui, whereupon they set up a banquet in the West Imperial Garden and went archery.

古文：丁未，渤尼国遣使来贡，山后两林蛮来献马。
现代文：十九日，渤尼国派遣使臣来进贡，山后两林蛮来献马。
English: On the 19th, the state of Zuni sent envoys to pay tribute, and the barbarians from the two forests behind the mountain came to offer horses.

古文：辛亥，幸讲武台大阅。
现代文：二十三日，到讲武台检阅军队。
English: On the 23rd, he went to the podium to review the troops.

古文：容州初贡珠。
现代文：容州初次贡纳蛋珠。
English: Yonshu's first egg bead competition.

古文：乙卯，镇海、镇东军节度使钱惟濬来朝。
现代文：二十七日，镇海、镇东节度使钱惟浚来朝拜。
English: On the 27th, the Zhenhai and Zhendong festivals made Qian Weijun come to worship.

古文：丙辰，狩近郊。
现代文：二十八日，在近郊狩猎。
English: On the 28th, they went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：丁巳，吴越王遣使乞呼名，不允。
现代文：二十九日，吴越王派遣使臣请求呼名，没有允准。
English: On the 29th, King Wu Yue sent an envoy to request a name, but it was not granted.

古文：是月，兴州江水溢，濮州大水，汴水溢。
现代文：这个月，兴州长江水溢出河道，攫州发生大水，汁水溢出河道。
English: This month, the Xingchuang River overflowed its course, and the Luzhou River overflowed its course.

古文：冬十月戊午朔，赐百官及在外将校、长吏冬服。
现代文：冬十月初一，赐给百官及在外将校、长吏冬服。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, winter uniforms were given to centaurs, overseas officers and chief officers.

古文：辛酉，契丹来贺乾明节。
现代文：初四，契丹来祝贺乾明节。
English: On the 4th day of the first month, Khitan came to congratulate the Qianming Festival.

古文：己巳，幸京城西北，观卫士与契丹使骑射，遂宴苑中。
现代文：十二日，到京城西北，观赏卫士与契丹使臣骑射，于是宴请苑中。
English: On the twelfth day, he went to the northwest of Beijing to watch the guards and Khitan envoys ride and shoot, and then the banquet was held in the courtyard.

古文：己巳，群臣请举乐，表三上，从之。
现代文：己巳日，大臣们请求举乐，上表三次，太宗答应了。
English: On the same day, the ministers asked for a parade, and Taizong agreed to the request three times.

古文：丙子，诏禁天文卜相等书，私习者斩。
现代文：十九日，诏令禁止天文卜相等书籍，私自研习者斩。
English: On the 19th, the imperial edict banned books such as astronomy and divination, and those who studied privately were punished.

古文：辛巳，畋近郊。
现代文：二十四日，在近郊打猎。
English: On the 24th, they went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：初榷酒酤。
现代文：开始对酒实行榷酣。
English: For the first time, the sale of alcohol by government officials was stipulated.

古文：十一月丁亥朔，日有食之，既。庚寅，日南至，帝始受朝。
现代文：十一月初一，日食，食尽。初四，冬至日，太宗开始接受朝拜。
English: On the first day of November, the solar eclipse, the food ran out. On the fourth day of the first month, the winter solstice, Taizong began to receive worship.

古文：甲午，遣李渎等贺契丹正旦。
现代文：初八，派遣李读等祝贺契丹正旦。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Li Yue and others were dispatched to congratulate Khitan Zhengtang.

古文：丁酉，禁江南诸州新小钱，私铸者弃市。
现代文：十一日，禁止江南各州新小钱，私铸者弃市。
English: On the 11th, new small money was banned from all the states in the south of the Yangtze River, and the private minters abandoned the market.

古文：癸丑，幸御龙弓箭直营，赐军士钱帛有差。
现代文：二十七日，到御龙弓箭直营，赐给军士钱帛不等。
English: On the 27th, he went to the Goryongyu and Jiaoying, and gave the soldiers money and gifts.

古文：十二月丁巳朔，试诸州所送天文术士，隶司天台，无取者黥配海岛。
现代文：十二月初一，考校各州送来的天文术士，隶属司天台，没有用处者刺配海岛。
English: On the first day of December, the astronomical magicians sent by the states of the examination schools, belonging to the Tiantai Division, had no use for the island.

古文：庚午，畋近郊。
现代文：十四日，在近郊打猎。
English: On the 19th, they went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：癸酉，诏定晋州矾法，私煮及私贩易者罪有差。
现代文：十七日，下诏定晋州盐法，私煮和私贩者论罪不等。
English: On the 17th, the Jinzhou Salt Law was promulgated, and the crimes of self-cooking and self-dealing ranged widely.

古文：辛巳，幸新水硙。
现代文：二十五日，到新水。
English: On the 25th, to Xinshui.

古文：高丽国王使其子元辅来贺即位。
现代文：高丽国王派他的儿子元辅来祝贺太宗即位。
English: King Goryeo sent his son Yuan Fu to congratulate Emperor Taizong on his accession to the throne.

古文：三年春正月丙戌朔，不受朝，群臣诣阁贺。
现代文：太平兴国三年春正月初一，不接受朝拜，大臣们到门上表祝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Taiping Xingguo, they did not accept worship, and the ministers came to the door to congratulate.

古文：庚寅，殿直霍琼坐募兵劫民财，腰斩。
现代文：初五，殿直霍琼因募兵劫掠民财获罪，将其肢体折为两截。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Denzhong Huoqiong was found guilty of recruiting soldiers and plundering people's money, and his limbs were broken into two pieces.

古文：甲午，浚汾河。
现代文：初九，疏浚汾河。
English: Early September, dredging of the Yangtze River.

古文：雅州西山野川路蛮来朝。
现代文：雅州西山野川路蛮来朝拜。
English: Nishiyama-Nogawa Road in Yashu is a popular route for pilgrims.

古文：戊戌，开襄、汉漕渠，渠成而水不上，卒废。
现代文：十三日，开凿襄、汉槽渠，渠成而水上不来，最终废止。
English: On the 13th, the Xiang and Han channels were excavated, and the canal was completed, but the water did not come, and it was finally abolished.

古文：己亥，光禄丞李之才坐擅入酒邀同列饮殿中，除名。
现代文：十四日，光禄承李之才因擅自拿进酒邀同列在殿中饮酒获罪，被除名。
English: On the 14th, Guanglu Cheng Li Zi Cai was removed from the list because he was found guilty of drinking alcohol in the hall without permission.

古文：庚子，罢陈州蔡河舟算。
现代文：十五日，罢陈州蔡河舟税。
English: On the 15th, Chenzhou Caihe boat tax was abolished.

古文：辛丑，浚广济、惠民及蔡三河，治黄河堤。
现代文：十六日，疏浚广济河、惠民河、蔡河。整治黄河堤坝。
English: On the 16th, the Guangji River, Huimin River and Cai River were dredged, and the Yellow River levees were repaired.

古文：乙巳，浚汴口。
现代文：二十日，疏浚汁口。
English: On the 20th, dredge the spout.

古文：己酉，命修《太祖实录》。
现代文：二十四日，命令修撰太祖实录。
English: On the 24th, he ordered the compilation of the real record of the great ancestor.

古文：辛亥，命群臣祷雨。
现代文：二十六日，命令大臣们祈祷降雨。
English: On the 26th, he ordered his ministers to pray for rain.

古文：癸丑，京畿雨足。
现代文：二十八日，京瓷雨量充足。
English: On the 28th, Kyocera received a sufficient amount of rain.

古文：二月丙辰，幸郑国公主第。
现代文：二月初一，到郑国公府第。
English: On the first day of February, I went to the Zheng Guo Gongfu No.

古文：以三馆新修书院为崇文院。
现代文：以三馆新修书院为崇文院。
English: Sangakukan Shinshu Academy was renamed as Chongwen Academy.

古文：丁巳，诏班诸州录事、县令、簿尉历子合书式。
现代文：初二，下诏颁布各州录事、县令、簿尉历子合书式。
English: On the second day of the new year, the following edict promulgated the state record, county ordinance, and bookkeeper calendar.

古文：甲子，罢昌州七井虚额盐。
现代文：初九。罢除昌州七井虚额盐。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the Supreme People's Procuratorate of Changzhou removed the seven wells of false salt.

古文：丙寅，泗州录事参军徐璧坐监仓受贿出虚券，弃市。
现代文：十一日，泅州录事参军徐璧因监仓受贿出虚券获罪，被斩首于市。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Xu Bi, a member of the military in Zhangzhou, was found guilty of accepting bribes and issuing fake coupons, and was beheaded in the city.

古文：辛未，幸西绫锦院，命近臣观织室机杼，还，幸崇文院观书。
现代文：十六日，到西绩锦院，命令近臣观看织室机抒，回时到崇文院观书。
English: On the 16th, he went to Xishuijin Academy and ordered his close vassals to watch the weaving room, and then to Chongwen Academy.

古文：诏凿金明池。
现代文：诏令开凿金明池。
English: The imperial edict ordered the digging of Kinmei Pond.

古文：甲申，禁沿边诸郡阑出铜钱。
现代文：二十九日，禁止沿边各郡不得擅自运出铜钱。
English: On the 29th, it was forbidden for counties along the border to transport copper money without authorization.

古文：制西京新修殿名。
现代文：制西京新修殿名。
English: It became known as the Saikyo Shinshu-den.

古文：三月乙酉朔，贝州清河民田祚十世同居，诏旌其门闾，复其家。
现代文：三月初一，贝州清河民田柞十世同居，诏令表彰，免除其家赋役。
English: On the first day of March, the 10th generation of the Beizhou Qinghe people, Tian Yao, lived together, and was commended by the imperial edict, exempting his family from military service.

古文：辛丑，监海门戍、殿直武裕坐奸赃弃市。
现代文：十七日，监海门戍、殿直武裕因奸赃获罪，被斩首于市。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the prison warden Haimen Yao and the warden Naotake Yutaka were found guilty of treason and beheaded in the city.

古文：壬寅，秦州言，戎酋王泥猪寇八狼戍，巡检刘崇让击败之，枭其首以徇。
现代文：十八日，秦州报告说，戎酋王泥猪攻打八狼戍，巡检刘崇让击败他，斩首示众。
English: On the 18th, Qinzhou reported that Ronghu chief Wang Diogu attacked eight wolf cubs, and the inspector Liu Chongzhen defeated him and beheaded him.

古文：己酉，吴越国王钱俶来朝。
现代文：二十五日，吴越国王钱来朝拜。
English: On the 25th, King Qian of Wuyue came to pay homage.

古文：壬子，幸开宝寺。
现代文：二十八日，到开宝寺。
English: On the 28th, he went to Kaiboji Temple.

古文：是月，寿州甘露降。
现代文：这个月，寿州降甘露。
English: This month, Shoushu drops its sweet nectar.

古文：夏四月乙卯朔，命群臣祷雨。
现代文：夏四月初一，命令大臣们祈祷降雨。
English: On the first day of summer in April, he ordered his ministers to pray for rain.

古文：召华山道士丁少微。
现代文：召见华山道士丁少微。
English: Summoning Huashan Daoist Ding Shaowei.

古文：丙辰，禁民自春及秋毋捕猎。
现代文：初二，禁止百姓在春到秋期间捕猎。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, people are prohibited from hunting during the spring and autumn.

古文：庚午，幸建隆观，遂幸西染院，又幸造船务。
现代文：十六日，到建隆观，于是到西染院，又到造船务。
English: On the 16th, he went to Jianlongguan, then to Xizengyuan, and then to Shipbuilding.

古文：乙亥，置诸道转运判官。
现代文：二十一日，设置各道转运判官。
English: On the 21st, transportation adjudicators will be set up in each province.

古文：己卯，陈洪进献漳、泉二州，凡得县十四、户十五万一千九百七十八、兵万八千七百二十七。
现代文：二十五日，陈洪进献纳漳、泉二州，共得十四县、十五万一千九百七十八户、一万八千七百二十七名士兵。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Chen Hongjin offered tribute, Quan two states, a total of 14 counties, 151,978 households, and 18,727 soldiers.

古文：庚辰，幸城南观麦，遂幸玉津园宴射。
现代文：二十六日，到城南观麦。于是到玉津园设宴射箭。
English: On the 26th, I went to the south of the city to watch the barley grow. So I went to the Tamatsuen Garden to have a banquet and shoot arrows.

古文：辛巳，侍御史赵承嗣坐监市征隐官钱，弃市。
现代文：二十七日，侍御史赵承嗣因监市征隐没官钱获罪，被斩首于市。
English: On the 27th, the courtier Zhao Chengzhi was found guilty of embezzling public money and was beheaded in the city.

古文：癸未，以陈洪进为武宁军节度使、同平章事。
现代文：二十九日，任命陈洪进为武宁军节度使、同平章事。
English: On the 29th, Chen Hongjin was appointed as the military envoy of the Wu Ning Army, and was given the title of Tong Ping.

古文：钱俶乞罢所封吴越国王，及解天下兵马大元帅，并寝书诏不名之命，归其兵甲，求还，不许。
现代文：钱请求罢除封给的吴越国王称号，并解除天下兵马大元帅的职衔，并停止书诏不名之制，归还献给的兵甲，求归本道，太宗不允许。
English: Qian requested that the title of King of Wuyue be revoked, that the title of Grand Marshal of the world's armies and horses be revoked, that the system of not mentioning names in official documents be stopped, that the armour dedicated to him be returned, and that he be allowed to return to his original path, but Taizong would not allow it.

古文：是月，河决获嘉县。
现代文：这个月，黄河在获嘉县决口。
English: This month, the Yellow River burst its banks in Hujia County.

古文：五月乙酉，赦漳、泉，仍给复一年。
现代文：五月初一，赦免彰、泉二州，并且免除一年的赋役。
English: On the first day of May, Akira and Izumi were pardoned and exempted from military service for one year.

古文：钱俶献其两浙诸州，凡得州十三、军一、县八十六、户五十五万六百八十、兵一十一万五千三十六。
现代文：钱献纳拥有的两浙各州，共得十三州、一军、八十六县、五十五万零六百八十户、一十一万五千零三十六名士兵。
English: The two Zhejiang states owned by Qian Xianlu won a total of 13 states, one army, 86 counties, 550,680 households, and 115,036 soldiers.

古文：丁亥，封钱俶为淮海国王，其子惟濬徙淮南军节度使，惟治徙镇国军节度使。
现代文：初三，封钱为淮海国王，他的儿子钱惟浚改为淮南军节度使，钱惟治改为镇国军节度使。
English: On the third day of the first month, Feng Qian was the king of Huaihai, and his son Qian Weijun was changed to the commander of the Huainan Army, and Qian Weizhi was changed to the commander of the Zhenguo Army.

古文：戊子，赦两浙，给复如漳、泉。
现代文：初四，赦免两浙，像漳、泉州一样免除一年的赋役。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the two Zhejiang provinces were pardoned, and like Handan and Quanzhou, they were exempted from one year of military service.

古文：癸巳，遣李从吉等使契丹。
现代文：初九，派遣李从吉等出使契丹。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Li Congji and others were dispatched to Khitan.

古文：乙未，占城国遣使献方物。
现代文：十一日，占城国派遣使臣贡纳土特产。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhancheng dispatched envoys to bring back local specialties.

古文：壬寅，定难军节度使李克睿卒，子继筠立。
现代文：十八日，定难军节度使李克睿去世，其子李继箔继立。
English: On the 18th, the Dingan Army Festival caused Li Ke Rui to pass away, and his son Li Jifao Jiri.

古文：乙巳，以继筠袭定难军节度使。
现代文：二十一日，任命李继箔继承定难军节度使的封爵。
English: On the twenty-first day, Li Jifao was appointed to inherit the knighthood of the commander of the Dingan Army.

古文：幸殿前都指挥使杨信第视疾。
现代文：到殿前都指挥使杨信家探视病情。
English: Before arriving at the hall, the commanding officer sent Yang Xinjia to visit the sick.

古文：戊申，以秦州节度判官李若愚子飞雄矫制乘驿至清水县，缚都巡检周承瑨及刘文裕、马知节等七人，将劫守卒据城为叛，文裕觉其诈，禽缚飞雄按之，尽得其状，诏诛飞雄及其父母妻子同产，而哀若愚宗奠无主，申戒中外臣庶，自今子弟有素怀凶险、屡戒不悛者，尊长闻诸州县，锢送阙下，配隶远处，隐不以闻，坐及期功以上。
现代文：二十四日，因秦州节度判官李若愚、子李飞雄矫制乘骚马到清水县，捕拿都巡检周承晋及刘文裕、马知节等七人，还准备劫掠守卒据城叛乱，刘文裕觉察到其中有假，擒获李飞雄，进行审讯，细节全部明白，诏令诛杀李飞雄三族，却又考虑到李若愚宗奠无主；于是把李飞雄事件布告全国，令中外臣庶，从今以后子弟有向来凶险残暴、屡教不改者，家长要报告州县，由州县押送朝廷，配隶远方，隐瞒不报者，期功以上亲属都要连坐治罪。
English: On the 24th, because of the Qin State Festival, the judge Li Ruogu and his son Li Feixiong took a horse and carriage to Qingshui County to arrest seven people, including Zhou Chengjin, Liu Wenyu and Ma Ji Jie, who were on a inspection tour of the capital, and were also preparing to loot and defend the rebel city. Liu Wenyu noticed that some of them were fake, captured Li Feixiong, and conducted an interrogation. The details were all clear. The edict killed Li Ruogu's three ethnic groups, but took into account that Li Ruogu had no master. Therefore, Li Feixiong's

古文：六月戊午，复给乘驿银牌。
现代文：六月初五，乘骚出使者恢复给银牌。
English: On the fifth day of the sixth month of the lunar calendar, Emperor Xuanzong restored the silver medal.

古文：壬午，秦州清水监军田仁朗击破西羌，斩获甚众。
现代文：二十九日，秦州清水监军田仁朗击破西羌，斩获甚众。
English: On the 29th, Tian Renlang, the Qin State Water Conservancy Supervisor, defeated Xidi and gained a lot.

古文：癸未，诏太平兴国元年十月乙卯以来诸职官以赃致罪者，虽会赦不得叙，永为定制。
现代文：三十日，下诏：太平兴国元年十月二十二日以来各官员因贪赃治罪者，虽遇到赦免也不得录用，永为定制。
English: On the 30th, the following edict was issued: Since October 22nd of the year of Taiping Xingguo, officials who have been punished for corruption are not allowed to be hired, even if they are pardoned, and they will always be hired.

古文：是月，泗州大水，汴水决宁陵县。
现代文：这个月，泅州大水，汁水在宁陵县决口。
English: This month, Zhangzhou Dashui, juice water in Ningling County breakthrough.

古文：秋七月乙酉，大雨震电，西窑务藁聚焚。
现代文：秋七月初二，降大雨，电闪雷鸣，西窑务堆积的干草被烧掉。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, it rained heavily, lightning and thunder were heard, and the hay accumulated in the west kiln was burned.

古文：壬辰，右千牛卫上将军李煜卒，追封吴王。
现代文：初九，右千牛卫上将军李煌去世，追封为吴王。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, Li Huang, the general of the Right Qian Niu Wei, died and was posthumously crowned as the King of Wu.

古文：戊戌，金乡县民李光袭十世同居，诏旌其门。
现代文：十五日，金乡县民李光袭十世同居，诏令表彰。
English: On the 15th, Li Guangyi, the 10th generation of residents of Jinxiang County, lived together and was commended by imperial edict.

古文：庚戌，改明德门为丹凤门。
现代文：二十七日，改明德门为丹凤门。
English: On the 27th, the Mingde Gate was changed to the Danfeng Gate.

古文：壬子，中书令史李知古坐受赇擅改刑部所定法，杖杀之。
现代文：二十九日，中书令史李知古因受贿擅自更改刑部确立的法令获罪，被杖杀。
English: On the 29th, Censorship Minister Shi Lichigu was found guilty of accepting bribes to change the law established by the Criminal Law Department without authorization, and was caned to death.

古文：八月癸丑，幸南造船务，遂幸玉津园宴射。
现代文：八月初一，到南造船务，于是到玉津园设宴射箭。
English: On the first day of August, I went to Minami Shipbuilding, so I went to Tamatsuen Garden to hold a banquet and shoot arrows.

古文：滑州黄河清。
现代文：滑州段黄河清澈见底。
English: The bottom of the Yellow River in the Nanzhou section is crystal clear.

古文：丙辰，诏两浙发淮海王缌麻以上亲及管内官吏赴阙。
现代文：初四，诏令两浙发送淮海王钱绍麻以上的亲属及管属下的官吏到朝廷。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict ordered the two states to send the relatives of Huaihai King Qian Shoma and above and the officials under their supervision to the imperial court.

古文：辛未，夷州蛮任朗政来贡。
现代文：十九日，夷州蛮任朗政来进贡。
English: On the 19th, the governor of Yizhou Province, Lang Zheng, came to pay tribute.

古文：癸酉，詹事丞徐选坐赃，杖杀之。
现代文：二十一日，詹事承徐选因贪赃获罪，被杖杀。
English: On the 21st, Zhan Shicheng Xu Xuan was found guilty of corruption and was caned to death.

古文：甲戌，群臣请上尊号曰应运统天圣明文武皇帝，许之。
现代文：二十二日，大臣们请上尊号为应运统天圣明文武皇帝，允准。
English: On the 22nd, the ministers asked the Emperor Mingwenwu to grant them permission.

古文：九月甲申，亲试礼部举人。
现代文：九月初二，亲自策试礼部举人。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, he personally organized the audition.

古文：壬子，以布衣张遁为襄邑县主簿，张文旦濮阳县主簿。
现代文：三十日，任命布衣张为襄邑县主簿，张文旦为攫阳县主簿。
English: On the 30th, Zhang Buyi was appointed as the chief accountant of Xiangyi County, and Zhang Wentan was appointed as the chief accountant of Poyang County.

古文：冬十月癸丑朔，契丹遣使来贺乾明节。
现代文：冬十月初一，契丹派遣使臣来祝贺乾明节。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, the Khitan sent envoys to congratulate the Qianming Festival.

古文：高丽国王遣使来贡。
现代文：高丽国王派遣使臣来进贡。
English: The King of Goryeo sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：庚申，幸武功郡王德昭邸，遂幸齐王邸，赐齐王银万两、绢万匹，德昭、德芳有差。
现代文：初八，到武功郡王赵德昭府邸；于是到齐王府邸，赐给齐王一万两银、一万匹绢，德昭、德芳受赐不等。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he went to the residence of the king of Wugong County, Zhao Dezhao; then he went to the residence of the king of Qi, and gave the king of Qi ten thousand taels of silver and ten thousand horses. Dezhao and Defang received different gifts.

古文：辛酉，复兖州曲阜县袭封文宣公家。
现代文：初九，免除充州曲阜县袭封文宣公家赋役。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, he was exempted from serving as a public official of Wenzhen in Qufu County, Chenzhou.

古文：庚午，畋近郊。
现代文：十八日，在近郊打猎。
English: On the 19th, they went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：是月，河决灵河县。
现代文：这个月，黄河在灵河县决口。
English: This month, the Yellow River burst its banks in Linghe County.

古文：十一月丙申，祀天地于圜丘，大赦。
现代文：十一月十五日，在圆丘祭祀天地，大赦。
English: On November 15th, at the round mound, the heavens and the earth will be sacrificed, and there will be an amnesty.

古文：御乾元殿受尊号。
现代文：到乾元殿接受尊号。
English: He went to the Hall of Emperor Qianyuan to receive the honorary title.

古文：庚子，幸齐王邸。
现代文：十九日，到齐王府邸。
English: On the 19th, they arrived at the residence of King Qi.

古文：丙午，以郊祀，中外文武加恩。
现代文：二十五日，因郊祀，朝廷内外文武官都加恩赏。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, because of the suburb worship, the courtiers and military attachés inside and outside the imperial court were all rewarded.

古文：十二月乙丑，幸讲武台观机石连弩。
现代文：十二月十四日，到讲武台观赏机石连弩。
English: On December 14th, Shi Lianyao went to the lecture hall to watch the performance.

古文：庚午，畋近郊。
现代文：十九日，在近郊狩猎。
English: On the 19th, they went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：戊寅，契丹遣使来贺正旦。
现代文：二十七日，契丹派遣使臣来祝贺新春。
English: On the 27th, Khitan sent envoys to congratulate the new spring.

古文：己卯，置三司推官、巡官。
现代文：二十八日，设置三司推官、巡官。
English: On the 28th, the establishment of three divisions of inspectors and inspectors.

古文：四年春正月丁亥，命太子中允张洎、著作佐郎句中正使高丽，告以北伐。
现代文：太平兴国四年正月初七，命令太子中允张泊、著作佐郎句中正出使高丽，告诉高丽朝廷将北伐北汉。
English: On the 7th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of Taiping Xingguo, he ordered the crown prince Zhong Yun Zhangbo to go to Goryeo and send an envoy to tell the Goryeo court to invade northern Han.

古文：遣官分督诸州军储输太原行营。
现代文：派官员分别督促各州将军储输往太原行营。
English: Officials were dispatched separately to urge the states to transport their reserves to Taiyuan for encampment.

古文：庚寅，以宣徽南院使潘美为北路都招讨制置使，分命节度使河阳崔彦进、彰德李汉琼、彰信刘遇、桂州观察使曹翰，副以卫府将直，四面进讨。
现代文：初十，任命宣徽南院使潘美为北路都招讨制置使，分命节度使河阳崔彦进、彰德李汉琼、彰信刘遇、桂州观察使曹翰，副以卫府将直，四面进讨。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the Southern Court of Xuanhui was appointed to make Pan Mei the northern capital to invite and set up envoys, and the division of tasks was made to make Heyang Cui Yanjin, Zhangde Li Hanqiong, Zhangxin Liu Yu, Guizhou Observation Envoy Cao Han, and Vice-Minister of the People's Liberation Army to advance the discussion in all directions.

古文：侍卫马军都虞候米信、步军虞候田重进并为行营指挥使，将其军以从，西上阁门使郭守文、顺州团练使梁迥监护之。
现代文：侍卫马军都虞候米信、步军都虞候田重进为行营指挥使，率领所统率的军队跟随进讨，西上阎门使郭守文、顺州团练使梁迥监护他们。
English: The attendants and guards of the horse army, Dugu, awaited Yixin, and the infantry army, Dugu, awaited Tian, marched forward as the camp commanding envoy, leading the army led by the commander-in-chief to follow the march-in, West Shangyamen sent Guo Shouwen, and Shunzhou Rehearsal sent Liang Qi to supervise them.

古文：辛卯，命云州观察使郭进为太原石岭关都部署，以断燕蓟援师。
现代文：十一日，命令云州观察使郭进为太原石岭关都部署，以断燕蓟方面的援军。
English: On the 11th day, Guo Jin was ordered to observe from Yunnan and deploy to Shiling Pass in Taiyuan to cut off reinforcements from Yancheng.

古文：癸巳，置签署枢密院事，以石熙载为之。
现代文：十三日，设置签署枢密院事，任命石熙载担任。
English: On the 13th, the establishment of the Privy Council was signed, and Shi Xizai was appointed to the post.

古文：乙未，宴潘美等于长春殿，赐以袭衣、金带、鞍马。
现代文：十五日，在长春殿宴请潘美等将官，赐给整套衣服、金带、鞍马。
English: On the fifteenth day, Pan Mei and other generals were invited to a banquet at the Changchun Palace, where they were given a complete set of clothes, a gold belt, and a pommel horse.

古文：癸卯，新浑仪成。
现代文：二十三日，制成新浑仪。
English: On the 23rd, a new Hun instrument was made.

古文：二月壬子，幸国子监，遂幸玉津园宴射。
现代文：二月初三，到国子监，于是到玉津园设宴射箭。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, I went to the provincial overseer, so I went to the Tamatsuen garden to set up a banquet for archery.

古文：甲寅，以齐王廷美子德恭为贵州防御使。
现代文：初五，任命齐王赵廷美子赵德恭为贵州防御使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, King Qi appointed Zhao Tingmei's daughter, Zhao Deqong, as the defense envoy of Guizhou.

古文：丙辰，以中书侍郎、尚书右仆射、同平章事沈伦为东京留守兼判开封府事，宣徽北院使王仁赡为大内都部署，枢密承旨陈从信副之。
现代文：初七，任命中书侍郎、尚书右仆射、同平章事沈伦为东京留守兼判开封府事，宣徽北院使王仁赡为大内都部署，枢密承旨陈从信为副。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the school year, Chushushushijiro, Shoshu Umenosuke, and Tongping Zhangji Shenlun were appointed to stay in Tokyo and judge the opening of the Imperial Palace, and Wang Renyi, an envoy of Xuanhui North Courthouse, was deployed to Daini Capital, and Chen Congxin, a privy councilor, was appointed as a deputy.

古文：癸亥，赐扈从近臣鞍马、衣服、金玉带有差。
现代文：十四日，赐给启从近臣鞍马、衣服、金玉带不等。
English: On the 14th, he gave Kai's close vassal a pommel horse, clothes, and a golden sash.

古文：甲子，帝发京师。
现代文：十五日，太宗从京城出发。
English: On the 15th, Taizong set off from Beijing.

古文：戊寅，次澶州，观鱼于河。三月庚辰朔，次镇州。
现代文：二十九日，到达擅州，在黄河观鱼。三月初一，太宗驻扎镇州。
English: On the 29th, he arrived in Skopje to watch fish in the Yellow River. On the first day of March, Taizong was stationed in Zhenzhou.

古文：丁亥，郭进破北汉西龙门砦，禽获甚众。
现代文：初八，郭进攻破北汉西龙门寨，擒获很多。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Guo attacked and broke through the Northern Han Dynasty, Longmenzhai, and captured a lot.

古文：乙未，郭进大破契丹于关南。
现代文：十六日，郭进在关南大败契丹军。
English: On the 16th, Guo Jin defeated the Khitan army in Guannan.

古文：庚子，左飞龙使史业破北汉鹰扬军，俘百人来献。
现代文：二十一日，左飞龙使史业攻败北汉鹰扬军，俘虏一百人来献。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zuo Fei Long led Shiye to defeat the North Han's Yanyang Army, and took a hundred prisoners as a gift.

古文：乙巳，夏州李继筠乞帅所部助讨北汉。
现代文：二十六日，夏州李继箔请求率所部军队助讨北汉。
English: On the 26th, Li Jifao of Xiazhou requested the army of the headquarters to help fight against the Northern Han Dynasty.

古文：诏泉州发兵护送陈洪进亲属赴阙。
现代文：诏令泉州发兵护送陈洪进亲属到朝廷。
English: The emperor ordered Quanzhou to send troops to escort Chen Hongjin's relatives to the imperial court.

古文：夏四月己酉朔，岚州行营与北汉军战，破之。
现代文：夏四月初一，岚州行营与北汉军交战，打败北汉军。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of summer, the Bozhou camp fought with the Northern Han Army and defeated the Northern Han Army.

古文：庚戌，盂县降。
现代文：初二，盂县降附朝廷。
English: On the second day of the first month, Jixian County was annexed to the imperial court.

古文：以石熙载为枢密副使。
现代文：任命石熙载为枢密副使。
English: Appointed Shi Xizai as the vice-minister of the privy council.

古文：辛酉，以孟玄哲、刘廷翰为兵马都钤辖，崔翰总马步军，并驻泊镇州。
现代文：十三日，任命孟玄翁、刘廷翰为兵马都铃辖，崔翰总领马步军，驻泊镇州。
English: On the 13th, Meng Xuanwong and Liu Tinghan were appointed as the commanders of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses of Dujing, and Cui Han as the commander of the Horse Infantry, stationed in Buzhou.

古文：壬戌，帝发镇州。
现代文：十四日，太宗从镇州出发。
English: On the 14th, Taizong set off from Zhenzhou.

古文：折御卿克岢岚军，获其军使折令图。
现代文：折御卿攻克奇岚军，俘获军使折令图。
English: Orimikyo defeated the Chihiro army and captured the envoy Orimeitu.

古文：乙丑，克隆州，获其招讨使李询等六人。
现代文：十七日，攻克隆州，俘获招讨使李询等六人。
English: On the 17th, they invaded Khlongju and captured six people, including the recruiting officer, Li Zhen.

古文：己巳，折御卿克岚州，杀其宪州刺史郭翊，获夔州节度使马延忠。
现代文：二十一日，折御卿攻克岚州，杀其宪州刺史郭诩，俘获夔州节度使马延忠。
English: On the twenty-first day, Orimikyo conquered Bozhou, killed Guo Jun, the governor of Bozhou, and captured Ma Yanzhong, the governor of Bozhou.

古文：庚午，次太原，驻跸汾东行营。
现代文：二十二日，太宗到太原，驻哗汾东行营。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Taizong went to Taiyuan and camped in the east.

古文：辛未，幸太原城，诏谕北汉主刘继元使降。
现代文：二十三日，到达太原城，诏谕北汉主刘继元投降。
English: On the 23rd, he arrived at Taiyuan City and ordered Liu Jiyuan, the ruler of Northern Han, to surrender.

古文：壬申夜，帝幸城西，督诸将发机石攻城。
现代文：二十四日夜，太宗到城西，督促各将领发机石攻城。
English: On the evening of the twenty-fourth day, Taizong went to the west of the city and urged the generals to attack the city.

古文：甲戌，幸诸砦。
现代文：二十六日，到各寨。
English: On the 26th, to each village.

古文：乙亥，幸连城，视攻城诸洞。
现代文：二十七日，到连城，视察攻城各洞。
English: On the 27th, he went to Liancheng and inspected all the caves of the siege.

古文：五月己卯朔，攻城西南，遂陷羊马城，获其宣徽使范超，斩纛下。
现代文：五月初一，攻城西南，于是攻陷羊马城；俘获北汉宣徽使范超，斩死在太宗所乘车的装饰物下。
English: On the first day of May, the southwestern part of the city was attacked, resulting in the fall of Yangma City; the Northern Han Emperor's heraldic envoy, Fan Chao, was captured, and he was beheaded under the decorations of Taizong's car.

古文：辛巳，攻城西北。
现代文：初三，攻城西北。
English: On the third day of the first month, attack the northwest part of the city.

古文：壬午，其骑帅郭万超来降，遂移幸城南，手诏赐继元。
现代文：初三，北汉骑帅郭万超来投降，于是改到城南，赐给刘继元手诏。
English: On the third day of the first month, the Northern Han cavalry commander Guo Wanchao came to surrender, so he changed to the south of the city and gave Liu Jiyuan a handshake.

古文：癸未，进攻将士尽奋，若将屠之。
现代文：初五，进攻，将士情绪和士气全部调动起来，好像将要屠灭太原城。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the attack mobilized all the emotions and morale of the soldiers, as if they were going to slaughter Taiyuan City.

古文：是夜，继元遣使纳款。
现代文：这天晚上，刘继元派人纳款顺服。
English: That evening, Liu Jiyuan sent someone to collect the money.

古文：甲申，继元降，北汉平，凡得州十、县四十、户三万五千二百二十。
现代文：初六，刘继元投降，北汉平定，共得到十州、十四县、三万五千二百二十户。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Liu Jiyuan surrendered and Northern Han was pacified, gaining a total of ten prefectures, fourteen counties, and thirty-five thousand two hundred and twenty households.

古文：命祠部郎中刘保勋知太原府。
现代文：命令祠部郎中刘保勋为太原知府。
English: He ordered Liu Baoxun, a retainer of the ancestral hall, to become the governor of Taiyuan.

古文：乙酉，赦河东常赦所不原者，命录死事将校子孙，瘗战士。
现代文：初七，赦免河东常赦得不到原谅者，命令录用战死将校的子孙，埋葬战士阵亡者尸体。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, he pardoned those who could not be pardoned by Hedong Changpeng, ordered the sons and grandsons of officers killed in battle to be hired, and buried the bodies of soldiers who died in battle.

古文：戊子，以榆次县为新并州。
现代文：初十，以榆次县为新并州。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the newly merged prefecture was topped by Ganzi County.

古文：优赏归顺将校，尽括僧道隶西京寺观，官吏及高赀户授田河南。
现代文：优惠赏赐归顺将校，搜索所有的僧道隶属西京寺观，官吏及高货户授给河南田。
English: Concessionary rewards were given to officers who surrendered, all monks and nuns belonging to the Saikyo Sect were searched for, and officials and high-ranking merchants were awarded to Henan Tian.

古文：北汉节度使蔚进卢遂以汾州降。
现代文：北汉节度使蔚进卢于是据汾州投降。
English: The Northern Han Festival made Wei Jinlu surrender to Zhangzhou.

古文：己丑，以继元为右卫上将军、彭城郡公。
现代文：十一日，任命刘继元为右卫上将军、彭城郡公。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Liu Jiyuan was appointed as the right guard general and the Pengcheng county magistrate.

古文：帝作《平晋诗》，令从臣和。
现代文：太宗作平晋诗，令从臣唱和。
English: Emperor Taizong composed the poem of the Heian period, and ordered his vassals to sing the chorus.

古文：辛卯，继元献官妓百余，以赐将校。
现代文：十三日，刘继元献上一百多名官妓，用来赏赐将校。
English: On the 13th, Liu Jiyuan presented more than one hundred courtesans to reward the officers.

古文：乙未，筑新城。
现代文：十七日，筑新城。
English: On the 17th, the construction of the new city began.

古文：送刘继元缌麻以上亲赴阙。
现代文：送刘继元绍麻以上亲属到朝廷。
English: Send Liu Jiyuan Shaoma and above relatives to the imperial court.

古文：丙申，幸城北，御沙河门楼。
现代文：十八日，到城北，到沙河门楼。
English: On the 18th, I went to the north of the city, to the Shahe Gate Tower.

古文：尽徙余民于新城，遣使督之，既出，即命纵火。
现代文：把剩下的百姓全部迁到新城，派遣使者督促，百姓一出来，就命令纵火烧掉原来的庐舍。
English: He moved all the remaining people to the new city and sent an envoy to urge them. As soon as the people came out, he ordered them to set fire to the original huts.

古文：丁酉，以行宫为平晋寺，帝作《平晋记》刻寺中。
现代文：十九日，以行宫为平晋寺，太宗作平晋主己刻在寺中。
English: On the 19th, the temple was renamed Heishin-ji Temple, and Taizong's portrait of Heishin himself was carved in the temple.

古文：废隆州，隳其城。
现代文：废罢隆州，毁坏其城。
English: Abolished Longzhou and destroyed its city.

古文：庚子，发太原。
现代文：二十二日，太宗从太原出发。
English: On the 22nd, Taizong set out from Taiyuan.

古文：丁未，次镇州。
现代文：二十九日，到达镇州。
English: On the 29th, they arrived in Zhenzhou.

古文：六月甲寅，以将伐幽、蓟，遣发京东、河北诸州军储赴北面行营。
现代文：六月初七，因为将要攻打幽蓟，派人发送京东、河北各州军储到北面行营。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the year, because they were going to attack Yuxuan, they sent people to send the military storehouses of Jingdong and Hebei provinces to the north.

古文：庚申，帝复自将伐契丹。
现代文：十三日，太宗又亲自率众攻伐契丹。
English: On the 13th, Emperor Taizong personally led the troops to attack Khitan.

古文：丙寅，次金台顿，募民为乡导者百人。
现代文：十九日，在金台顿停留，募召一百人作为向导。
English: On the 19th, they stopped in Kindai Tong to recruit 100 people as guides.

古文：丁卯，次东易州，刺史刘宇以城降，留兵千人守之。
现代文：二十日，停留东易州，刺史刘宁投降，留兵一千人守城。
English: On the 20th, he stopped at Dongyizhou, forced Liu Ning to surrender, and left a thousand soldiers to defend the city.

古文：戊辰，次涿州，判官刘厚德以城降。
现代文：二十一日，驻屯琢州，判官刘厚德投降。
English: On the 21st, Judge Liu Houde, stationed in Takuzhou, surrendered.

古文：己巳，次盐沟顿，民得近界马来献，赐以束帛。
现代文：二十二日，停留盐沟顿，百姓在附近边界弄得马匹来献，太宗赐给束帛。
English: On the twenty-second day, they stopped at Yancheng, and the people got horses from the nearby border to offer, and Emperor Taizong gave them to Zonglu.

古文：庚午，次幽州城南，驻跸宝光寺。
现代文：二十三日，到达幽州城南，驻哗宝光寺。
English: On the 23rd, it arrived in the south of Yuzhou City and was stationed at Wa Baoguang Temple.

古文：契丹军城北，帝率众击走之。
现代文：契丹军驻城北，太宗率众击退辽军。
English: The Khitan army was stationed to the north of the city, and Taizong led the crowd to repel the Liao army.

古文：壬申，命节度使定国宋偓、河阳崔彦进、彰信刘遇、定武孟玄哲四面分兵攻城。
现代文：二十五日，命令节度使定国宋侵、河阳崔彦进、彰信刘遇、定武孟玄洁言四面分兵攻城。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, he ordered Jiedu to send the Song invasion of Dinggu, Cui Yanjin of Heyang, Liu Yu of Zhangxin, and Meng Xuan Jieyan of Dingwu to attack the city.

古文：以潘美知幽州行府事。
现代文：任命潘美为知幽州行府事。
English: Appointed Pan Mei as Chiyu prefectural governor.

古文：契丹铁林厢主李札卢存以所部来降。
现代文：契丹铁林厢主李札卢存率所率来投降。
English: Led by the surviving leader of the Khitan railway, Li Zhalu, they surrendered.

古文：癸酉，移幸城北，督诸将进兵，获马三百。
现代文：二十六日，太宗改到城北，督促各将进兵，获三百匹马。
English: On the 26th, Taizong moved to the north of the city, urged the generals to enter the army, and received three hundred horses.

古文：幽州神武厅直并乡兵四百人来降。
现代文：幽州神武厅直并乡兵四百人来投降。
English: The Yuzhou Shenwu Office and 400 local soldiers came to surrender.

古文：乙亥，范阳民以牛酒犒师。
现代文：二十八日，范阳百姓用牛酒搞劳宋军。
English: On the 28th, the people of Fanyang used cow wine to lure the Song and Song armies.

古文：丁丑，帝乘辇督攻城。
现代文：三十日，太宗乘车督促攻城。
English: On the 30th, Taizong rode in a car to urge the siege of the city.

古文：秋七月庚辰，契丹建雄军节度使、知顺州刘廷素来降。
现代文：秋七月初三，契丹建雄军节度使、顺州知州刘廷素来投降。
English: On the third day of early July in autumn, Liu Tingsu, the military envoy of Khitan Jianxiong, surrendered to Shunzhou Chizhou.

古文：壬午，知蓟州刘守恩来降。
现代文：初五，蓟州知州刘守恩来投降。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Liu Shouen from Zhangzhou and Chizhou surrendered.

古文：癸未，帝督诸军及契丹大战于高梁河，败绩。甲申，班师。
现代文：初六，太宗督促各军在高梁河与契丹大战，惨遭失败。初七，班师。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Taizong urged the army to fight against Khitan in Gaolianghe, but failed miserably. In the seventh year of junior high school, the class division came.

古文：庚寅，命孟玄哲屯定州，崔彦进屯关南。
现代文：十三日，命令孟鱿都屯定州，崔彦进驻屯关南。
English: On the 13th, he ordered Meng Rongdu to be stationed in Dingzhou and Cui Yan to be stationed in Guannan.

古文：乙巳，帝至自范阳。
现代文：二十八日，太宗从范阳回京师。
English: On the 28th, Taizong returned to Beijing from Fanyang.

古文：八月壬子，西京留守石守信坐从征失律，贬崇信军节度使。
现代文：八月初五，西京留守石守信因为从征燕京失利，被贬为崇信军节度使。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month, Shishishin, who was left behind in West Beijing, was demoted to the position of the festival envoy of the Chongxin Army because he had failed in the conquest of Yanjing.

古文：甲寅，彰信军节度使刘遇贬宿州观察使。
现代文：初七，彰信军节度使刘遇贬为宿州观察使。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Zhangxin Army Festival caused Liu Yu to be demoted to Suizhou Observer.

古文：癸亥，命潘美屯河东三交口。
现代文：十六日，命令潘美驻屯河东三交口。
English: On the 16th, Pan Mei was ordered to be stationed at the Tunhe Dongsan Interchange.

古文：甲戌，汴水决宋城县。
现代文：二十七日，汁水在宋城县决口。
English: On the 27th, the juice and water flowed into the Songcheng County outlet.

古文：武功郡王德昭自杀。
现代文：武功郡王赵德昭自杀。
English: The king of Wugong County, Zhao Dezhao, committed suicide.

古文：诏作太清楼。
现代文：诏令修建太清楼。
English: The imperial edict ordered the construction of the Taiqing Building.

古文：是月，秦州大水。
现代文：这个月，秦州发大水。
English: This month, Qinzhou was hit by floods.

古文：九月己卯，河决汲县。
现代文：九月初三，黄河在汲县决口。
English: On the third day of the ninth lunar month, the Yellow River burst its banks in Kyu County.

古文：丁亥，置皇子侍读。
现代文：十一日，设置皇子侍读。
English: On the eleventh day, the prince was set to read.

古文：己亥，幸新城，观铁林军人射强弩。
现代文：二十三日，到新城，观看铁林军人射强弩。
English: On the 23rd, I went to Xincheng to watch Tielin soldiers shoot powerful crossbows.

古文：庚子，华山道士丁少微诣阙，献金丹及巨胜、南芝、玄芝。
现代文：二十四日，华山道士丁少微到朝廷呈献金丹和巨胜、南芝、玄芝。
English: On the 24th, the Huashan Daoist Ding Shaowei went to the imperial court to present the jujube, giant victory, nanzhi and ginseng.

古文：癸卯，山后两林蛮以名马来献。
现代文：二十七日，山后两林蛮以名马献给朝廷。
English: On the 27th, the two forests behind the mountain were dedicated to the imperial court with famous horses.

古文：丙午，镇州都钤辖刘廷翰及契丹战于遂城西，大败之，斩首万三百级，获三将、马万匹。
现代文：三十日，镇州都铃辖刘廷翰在遂城西与契丹交战，大败契丹军，斩首三百级，俘获三个将领和一万匹马。
English: On the 30th, Liu Tinghan, the governor of Zhenzhou's capital city of Ling, fought against the Khitan in the west of Suicheng. He defeated the Khitan army, beheaded 300 generals, and captured three generals and 10,000 horses.

古文：冬十月乙亥，以平北汉功，齐王廷美进封秦王，薛居正加司空，沈伦加左仆射，卢多逊兼兵部尚书，曹彬兼侍中，白进超、崔翰、刘廷翰、田重进、米信并领诸军节度使，楚昭辅、崔彦进、李汉琼并加检校太尉，潘美加检校太师，王仁赡加检校太傅，石熙载加刑部侍郎，文武从臣进秩有差。
现代文：冬十月二十九日，因平定北汉有功，齐王赵廷美进封为秦王，薛居正加官司空，沈伦加官左仆射，卢多逊兼兵部尚书，曹彬兼侍中，白进超、崔翰、刘廷翰、田重进、米信都领诸军节度使，楚昭辅、崔彦进、李汉琼都加官检校太尉，潘美加官检校太师，王仁赡加官检校太傅，石熙载加官刑部侍郎，文武从臣升官晋爵不等。
English: On the 29th day of October in winter, due to his great contribution to the pacification of Northern Han, Zhao Tingmei, the king of Qi, was appointed as the king of Qin, Xue Jizheng was appointed as the second-in-command, Shen Reng was appointed as the second-in-command, Ludosun was appointed as the second-in-command, Cao Bin was appointed as the second-in-command, Bai Jinchao, Cui Han, Liu Tinghan, Tian Chongjin, and Meixin were appointed as the military envoys, Chu Zhaowu, Cui Yanjin, and Li Hanq

古文：十一月庚辰，放道士丁少微归华山。
现代文：十一月初四，放道士丁少微回华山。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, he was released and returned to Huashan.

古文：己丑，畋近郊。
现代文：十三日，在近郊狩猎。
English: On the 13th, they went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：辛卯，忻州言与契丹战，破之。关南言破契丹，斩首万余级。
现代文：十五日，忻州报告说与契丹交战，打败契丹军；关南报告说攻破契丹，斩首级一万多。
English: On the 15th, Zhangzhou reported that it had fought against the Khitan and defeated the Khitan army; Guannan reported that it had defeated the Khitan and beheaded more than ten thousand.

古文：十二月丁未，占城国遣使来贡。
现代文：十二月初二，占城国遣使来进贡。
English: On the 2nd day of the 12th month, the envoys from Zhancheng came to pay tribute.

古文：丁卯，畋近郊。
现代文：二十二日，在近郊狩猎。
English: On the 25th, the emperor went hunting in the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：置诸州司理判官。
现代文：设置各州司理判官。
English: The establishment of a magistrate judge in each state.

古文：五年春正月庚辰，诏宣慰河东诸州。
现代文：太平兴国五年春正月初五，诏令慰问河东各州。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of the first month of the fifth year of the Taiping Xingguo, the imperial decree sent condolences to all the states in the eastern part of China.

古文：壬午，新作天驷左、右监，以左、右飞龙使为左、右天厩使，闲厩使为崇仪使。庚寅，改端明殿学士为文明殿学士。
现代文：初七，新作天驯左右监，任命左右飞龙使为左右天厩使，闲厩使为崇仪使。十五日，改端明殿学士为文明殿学士。
English: On the 7th day of the first month, the new work "Heaven's Tamer" was supervised by the left and right overseers, and the "Flying Dragon" was appointed by the left and right overseers as the "Heaven's Stallion" and the "Idle Stallion" as the "Worshiper." On the 15th day, the "Bachelor of the Ming Dynasty" was changed to the "Bachelor of the Civilization Dynasty."

古文：二月戊辰，斩徐州妖贼李绪等七人。废顺化军。
现代文：二月二十四日，斩杀徐州妖贼李绪等七人，废罢顺化军。
English: On February 24, seven people, including Xuzhou thief Li Xu, were killed, and the Shunhua Army was abolished.

古文：三月戊子，会亲王、宰相、淮海国王及从臣蹴鞠大明殿。
现代文：三月十五日，会集亲王、宰相、淮海国王和从臣在大明殿玩踢球游戏。
English: On March 15th, the Prince, the Prime Minister, the King of Huaihai, and his courtiers gathered to play a game of football in the Great Hall of the People.

古文：己丑，左监门卫上将军刘鋹卒，追封南越王。
现代文：十六日，左监门卫上将军刘米去世，追封为南越王。
English: On the 16th, General Liu Mi, the left overseer and gatekeeper, died and was posthumously crowned King of South Vietnam.

古文：癸巳，代州言宣徽南院使潘美败契丹之师于雁门，杀其驸马侍中萧咄李，获都指挥使李重诲。
现代文：二十日，代州报告说，宣徽南院使潘美在雁门打败契丹军，杀死驹马侍中萧咄李，俘获都指挥使李重诲。
English: On the 20th, Daizhou reported that the Southern Yuan of Xuanhui ordered Pan Mei to defeat the Khitan army at the Wild Goose Gate, kill Xiao Yi Li, the attendant of the Horse Guards, and capture the commander Li Chongyun.

古文：闰三月丙午，幸水硙，因观鱼。
现代文：闰三月初三，到水，于是观鱼。
English: On the third day of the third month, I went to the water to watch fish.

古文：甲寅，亲试礼部举人。
现代文：十一日，亲自策试礼部举人。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he personally organized the ceremonial parade.

古文：丁巳，亲试诸科举人。
现代文：十四日，亲自策试各科举人。
English: On the 14th, he personally tested the candidates for each subject.

古文：庚午，幸讲武池观习楼船。
现代文：二十七日，到讲武池观习楼船。
English: On the 27th, they went to the Kenmu Pond to watch the ro-ro boat.

古文：辛未，甘、沙州回鹘遣使以橐驼名马来献。
现代文：二十八日，甘州、沙州回鹊派遣使臣来贡献寞驼名马。
English: On the 28th, Ganzhou and Shazhou sent envoys to Huizhou to contribute famous horses.

古文：夏四月癸未，亲试应百篇举赵昌国，赐及第。
现代文：夏四月十一日，亲自策试应百篇举赵昌国，赐及第。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of the summer, Zhao Changguo, who was personally responsible for the 100 essays, was awarded the first place.

古文：壅汾河晋祠水灌太原，隳其故城。
现代文：堵塞汾河晋祠水灌注太原，毁坏故城。
English: Blocking the Minhe River, the water of the Jin ancestral hall poured into Taiyuan, destroying the old city.

古文：是月，寿州风雹，冠氏县雨雹。
现代文：这个月，寿州大风降冰雹，冠氏县降冰雹。
English: This month, heavy wind and hail fell in Shoushu, and hail fell in Guanxi County.

古文：五月癸卯朔，大霖雨。
现代文：五月初一，连绵大雨。
English: On the first day of May, there was continuous heavy rain.

古文：辛酉，命宰相祈晴。
现代文：十九日，命令宰相祈祷天晴。
English: On the 19th, the prime minister was ordered to pray for good weather.

古文：六月壬午，高丽国王遣使来贡。
现代文：六月十一日，高丽国王遣使来进贡。
English: On June 11, the King of Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：是月，颍州大水，徐州白沟溢入城。
现代文：这个月，颖州发大水，徐州白沟溢出进城。
English: This month, Yingzhou was flooded, and the Xuzhou White Ditch overflowed into the city.

古文：秋七月丁未，讨交州黎桓，命兰州团练使孙全兴、八作使张濬、左监门卫将军崔亮、宁州刺史刘澄、军器库副使贾湜、阁门祗候王僎并为部署。
现代文：秋七月初六，讨伐交州黎桓，命令兰州团练使孙全兴、八作使张浚、左监门卫将军崔亮、宁州刺史刘澄、军器库副使贾、阎门抵候王撰都为部署。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Li Huan, the commander of Jiaozhou, ordered Sun Quanxing, the commander of Lanzhou Regiment, Zhang Jun, the commander of the 8th Division, Cui Liang, the left guard, Liu Cheng, the commander of Ningzhou Garrison, Jia, the vice-commander of the Armory, and Wangsen, the commander of the 9th Division, to be deployed.

古文：全兴、濬、亮由邕州，澄、湜、僎由廉州，各以其众致讨。
现代文：孙全兴、张浚、崔亮从琶州，刘澄、贾、王撰从廉州，各自率所部进讨。
English: Sun Quanxing, Zhang Jun, and Cui Liang from Pazhou, and Liu Cheng, Jia, and Wang Zhen from Lianzhou, led their respective departments to advance the discussion.

古文：庚申，北海虸蚄生。
现代文：十九日，北海出现曳纺 。
English: On the 19th, dragline appeared in the North Sea.

古文：八月甲申，西南蕃主龙琼琚使其子罗若从并诸州蛮来贡。
现代文：八月十四日，西南藩主龙琼据派其子罗若从与诸州蛮一起来进贡。
English: On August 14th, Long Qiong, the lord of the Southwest Domain, sent his son Luo Ruo from Zhuzhou to bring tribute.

古文：九月癸卯，黎桓遣使为丁璿上表求袭位。
现代文：九月初三，黎桓派遣使臣为丁上表请求袭位。
English: On the third day of the first month of September, Emperor Li Huan dispatched an envoy to petition for Ding Shangbo to succeed to the throne.

古文：甲辰，史馆上《太祖实录》。
现代文：初四，史馆呈上太祖实录。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the history museum presented the real record of the great ancestor.

古文：壬戌，畋近郊。
现代文：二十二日，在近郊打猎。
English: On the 22nd, they went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：冬十月戊寅，大发兵屯关南及镇、定州。
现代文：冬十月初八，大规模进兵驻屯关南和镇州、定州。
English: On the eighth day of the tenth month of winter, large-scale troops were stationed in Guannan, Zhenzhou and Dingzhou.

古文：己丑，发京师，至雄州，民治道。
现代文：十九日，征发京师至雄州百姓整治道路。
English: On the 19th, the Beijing division was sent to the people of Yungzhou to rectify the road.

古文：甲午，命侍卫马军都指挥使米信护定州屯兵。
现代文：二十四日，命令侍卫马军都指挥使米信护送定州屯兵。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, he ordered the guards of the Horse Army to command the Americans to escort the Dingzhou garrison.

古文：十一月庚子朔，安南静海军节度行军司马、权知州事丁璿上表求袭位，不报。
现代文：十一月初一，安南静海军节度行军司马、权知州事丁上表请求袭位，没有回答。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, Annan Jing marched in the naval festival, and the secretary of the army and the secretary of the governor of the province requested to occupy the position on the table, but there was no answer.

古文：丙午，以秦王廷美为东京留守，王仁赡为大内都部署，陈从信副之。
现代文：初七，任命秦王赵廷美为东京留守，王仁赡为大内都部署，陈从信为副。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Qin Wang Zhao Tingmei was appointed to stay in Tokyo, Wang Renyi was deployed to Daini, and Chen Congxin was appointed as deputy.

古文：己酉，帝伐契丹。
现代文：初十，太宗攻伐契丹。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Emperor Taizong invaded Khitan.

古文：壬子，发京师。
现代文：十三日，太宗从京城出发。
English: On the 13th, Taizong set off from Beijing.

古文：癸丑，次长垣县。
现代文：十四日，到达长垣县。
English: On the 14th, they arrived in Nagagaki Prefecture.

古文：关南与契丹战，大破之。
现代文：关南与契丹交战，大败契丹。
English: Guannan fought with Khitan and defeated Khitan.

古文：以河阳三城节度使崔彦进为关南都部署。
现代文：任命河阳三城节度使崔彦进为关南都部署。
English: The appointment of the governor of the three cities of Heyang made Cui Yanjin deploy to the southern part of Guan.

古文：戊午，驻跸大名府。
现代文：十九日，太宗停留大名府。
English: On the 19th, Taizong stopped at Daimyo-fu.

古文：诸军及契丹大战于莫州，败绩。
现代文：宋各军在莫州与契丹军大战，失败。
English: The Song armies fought a great battle with the Khitan army in Mozhou and were defeated.

古文：十二月甲戌，大阅，遂宴幄殿。
现代文：十二月初五，对军队大检阅，于是在用帷幕搭成的临时宫殿中宴请。
English: On the fifth day of the twelfth month, after a grand review of the troops, a banquet was held in a temporary palace made of curtains.

古文：卫士有盗获獐者当坐，诏特释之。
现代文：卫士有盗获赃者，应当治罪，诏令特释放他。
English: If a bodyguard steals someone's bag, he should be punished, and the imperial edict should be issued to release him.

古文：戊寅，以保静军节度使刘遇、威塞军节度使曹翰为幽州东、西路部署。
现代文：初九，任命保静军节度使刘遇、威塞军节度使曹翰为幽州东、西路部署。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Liu Yu was appointed as the commander of the Baoding Army, and Cao Han was appointed as the commander of the Wuxi Army to deploy to the east and west of Yuzhou.

古文：庚辰，发大名府，因校猎。
现代文：十一日，太宗从大名府出发，于是架设围栏猎取野兽。
English: On the 11th day, Taizong set out from Damingfu, so he erected a fence to hunt the beast.

古文：乙酉，帝至自大名府。
现代文：十六日，太宗从大名府回京师。
English: On the 16th, Taizong returned to Beijing from Damingfu.

古文：交州行营与贼战，大破之。
现代文：交州行营与贼军作战，大破贼军。
English: The Jiaozhou encampment fought against the bandit army, and the bandit army was defeated.

古文：六年春正月癸卯，置平塞、静戎二军。
现代文：太平兴国六年春正月初四，设置平塞军、静戎军。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the sixth year of Taiping Xingguo, the Pingxi Army and the Jingong Army were set up.

古文：辛亥，易州破契丹数千众。
现代文：十二日，易州打败契丹军数千人。
English: On the 12th, thousands of people from Ezhou defeated the Khitan army.

古文：丙寅，改静戎军为安静军。
现代文：二十七日，改静戎军为安静军。
English: On the 27th, the Quiet Army was renamed the Quiet Army.

古文：二月己卯，命宰臣祷雨。
现代文：二月十一日，命令宰臣祈祷降雨。
English: On February 11, he ordered his aides-de-camp to pray for rain.

古文：三月己酉，兴元尹德芳薨，追封岐王。
现代文：三月十二日，兴元尹赵德芳逝世，追封为岐王。
English: On March 12th, Xingyuan Yin Zhao Defang passed away and was posthumously crowned King of Qi.

古文：癸丑，诏令诸路转运使察官吏贤否以闻。
现代文：十六日，诏令各路转运使考察官吏贤能与否报告朝廷。
English: On the 16th, the imperial edict ordered the inspectors to report to the imperial court on the merits of the officials.

古文：丙辰，置破虏、平戎二军。
现代文：十九日，设置破虏军、平戎军。
English: On the 19th, the army for defeating the invaders and the army for leveling the battlefield were set up.

古文：丁巳，高昌国遣使来贡。
现代文：二十日，高昌国派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the 20th, Gaochang dispatched an envoy to collect the tribute.

古文：壬戌，交州行营破贼于白藤江口，获战舰二百艘，知邕州侯仁宝死之。会炎瘴，军士多死者，转运使许仲宣驿闻，诏班师。
现代文：二十五日，交州行营在白藤江口打败贼军，获战舰二百艘，琶州知州侯仁宝战死；时值炎瘴，军队士兵很多染病而死，转运使许仲宣通过骚传报告朝廷，皇帝下诏班师。
English: On the 25th, the Jiaozhou expedition defeated the invaders at the mouth of the Baidu River and captured 200 warships. Wazhou Chizhou Hou Rimpao died in the battle. The time was very hot and many soldiers died of diseases. Xu Zhongxuan passed the report to the imperial court, and the emperor issued an edict.

古文：诏斩刘澄、贾湜于军中，征孙全兴下狱。
现代文：下诏在军中斩杀刘澄、贾混，召孙全兴下狱。
English: He issued an edict to kill Liu Cheng and Jia Ming in the army, and called Sun Quanxing out of prison.

古文：令诸州长吏五日一虑囚。
现代文：命令各州长吏五日讯察记录一次囚犯的罪状。
English: The prefects were ordered to make a five-day inspection and record the prisoner's charges.

古文：夏四月辛未，幸太平兴国寺祷雨。
现代文：夏四月初四，到太平兴国寺祈祷降雨。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of summer, I went to Taiping Xingguo Temple to pray for rain.

古文：丙戌，高丽国遣使来贡。
现代文：十九日，高丽国派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the 19th, Korea sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：禁西川诸州白衣巫师。
现代文：严禁西川各州白衣巫师。
English: It is strictly forbidden for white-clad wizards from all the prefectures in Nishikawa.

古文：罢湖州织罗，放女工。
现代文：罢除湖州织罗，放归女工。
English: Huzhou weaver dismissed, released to female workers.

古文：五月己未，雨。
现代文：五月二十三日，降雨。
English: On May 23rd, it rained.

古文：降死罪囚，流以下释之。
现代文：减轻死罪囚犯罪刑，流刑以下释放。
English: commute the sentences of death-row prisoners, and release them after exile.

古文：平塞军与契丹战，破之。
现代文：平塞军与契丹军作战，打败契丹军。
English: The Phinsai army fought against the Khitan army and defeated the Khitan army.

古文：六月甲戌，司空、平章事薛居正薨。
现代文：六月初九，司空、平章事薛居正逝世。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month of the year, Siku and Pingzhang's son Xue Juzheng passed away.

古文：七月丙午，诏渤海琰府王助讨契丹。
现代文：七月十一日，诏令渤海淡府王帮助讨伐契丹。
English: On July 11, he ordered the king of Bohai Tanf to help fight against the Khitan.

古文：是月，延州、鄜、宁、河中大水，宋州蝗。
现代文：这个月，延州握霹、宁、河中等地发大水，宋州发蝗灾。
English: This month, Yanzhou, Ning and Hebei provinces were hit by floods, while Songzhou was hit by locusts.

古文：九月乙未朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of September, a solar eclipse.

古文：甲辰，左拾遗田锡上疏极谏，诏嘉奖之。
现代文：十一日，左拾遗田锡上疏极谏，诏令奖励。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the left-over fields were found to be extremely sparse, and a reward was issued.

古文：丙午，置京朝官差遣院，初令中书舍人郭贽等考校课绩。
现代文：十三日，设置京朝官差遣院，开始命令中书舍人郭赞等人考察比较官吏治绩的好坏。
English: On the 13th, the Beijing Court Officials Dispatching Institute was set up, and Guo Zan, a Chinese scholar, and others were ordered to investigate the relative performance of officials.

古文：辛亥，以赵普为司徒，石熙载为枢密使。
现代文：十八日，任命赵普为司徒，石熙载为枢密使。
English: On the 18th, Zhao Pu was appointed as an aide-de-camp, and Shi Xizai as a confidential envoy.

古文：壬子，诏求直言。
现代文：十九日，诏求直言。
English: On the 19th, the emperor asked for a direct speech.

古文：丙辰，易州言破契丹。斩绵州妖贼王禧等十人。
现代文：二十三日，易州报告说打败了契丹军队，斩杀绵州妖贼王禧等十人。
English: On the 23rd, Yizhou reported that it had defeated the Khitan army and killed ten people, including the Mengzhou thief Wang Xi.

古文：冬十月癸酉，群臣三奉表上尊号曰应运统睿文英武大圣至明广孝皇帝，许之。
现代文：冬十月初九，大臣们三次奉表上尊号为应运统天睿文英武大圣至明广孝皇帝，太宗允准。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of the winter, the ministers were three times given the honorific title of Emperor Taizong of the Ming and Guangxi Dynasties.

古文：甲申，以河阳三城节度使崔彦进为关南都部署，侍卫马军都指挥使米信为定州都部署。
现代文：二十日，任命河阳三城节度使崔彦进为关南都部署，侍卫马军都指挥使米信为定州都部署。
English: On the 20th, the governor of the three cities of Heyang was appointed to deploy Cui Yanjin to Guannan, and the commander of the bodyguards and horse troops was appointed to deploy Yixin to Dingzhou.

古文：丙戌，校历代医书。
现代文：二十二日，考校历代医书。
English: On the 22nd, the medical books of past generations were examined.

古文：甲午，诏作苏州太一宫成。
现代文：三十日，诏令修造苏州太一宫。
English: On the 30th, the imperial edict ordered the construction of the Suzhou Taiyi Palace.

古文：十一月丁酉，监察御史张白坐知蔡州日假官钱籴粜，弃市。
现代文：十一月初三，监察御史张白因任蔡州知州期间借官钱来桌获罪，被斩杀于市。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Zhang Bai, the inspector-general of history, was found guilty of borrowing money from officials to pay for meals while he was in charge of Caizhou and Zhizhou, and was beheaded in the city.

古文：甲辰，改武德司为皇城司。
现代文：十一日，改武德司为皇城司。
English: On the 11th day, the Department of Martial Arts was changed to the Department of Imperial Cities.

古文：女真遣使来贡。
现代文：女真派遣使臣来进贡。
English: Nyoshin dispatched envoys to pay tribute.

古文：辛亥，祀天地于圜丘，大赦。
现代文：十八日，在圆丘祭祀天地，举行大赦。
English: On the 18th, an amnesty was held at the round mound to celebrate heaven and earth.

古文：御乾元殿受尊号，内外文武加恩。
现代文：到乾元殿接受尊号，内外文武官员得到恩赏。
English: They went to the Qianyuan Hall to receive the honorary title, and the domestic and foreign civil and military officials were rewarded.

古文：壬子，令诸州监临官有所闻见传闻须面陈者，俟报。
现代文：十九日，命令各州监临官有所闻见传闻需要面陈者，听候命令。
English: On the 19th, it ordered the procurators of each state to listen to the order if they heard or heard that they needed to meet.

古文：丁巳，交州行营部署孙全兴弃市。
现代文：二十四日，交州行营部署孙全兴被斩杀于市。
English: On the 24th, Sun Quanxing, who was deployed to Jiaozhou, was killed in the city.

古文：辛酉，以枢密使楚昭辅为左骁卫上将军。
现代文：二十八日，任命枢密使楚昭辅为左晓卫上将军。
English: On the 28th, the envoy Chu Zhaoyu was appointed as Zuo Xiao Wei Shangzheng.

古文：十二月癸酉，购求医书。
现代文：十二月十日，购求医书。
English: On December 10th, I went to buy a medical book.

古文：己卯，畋近郊。
现代文：十六日，在近郊打猎。
English: On the 16th, they went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：己丑，诸道节度州置观察支使，奉料同掌书记，仍不得并置。
现代文：二十六日，各道节度支州设置观察支使，棒禄同掌书记，但不得二者并置。
English: On the 26th, each province and prefecture set up an observer and a secretary for the festival, but the two cannot be placed together.

古文：辛卯，禁民私市近界部落马。
现代文：二十八日，禁止百姓私自购买相邻近部落的马匹。
English: On the 28th, the people were prohibited from buying horses from neighboring tribes.

古文：七年春正月甲午朔，不受朝，群臣诣阁称贺。
现代文：太平兴国七年春正月初一，不接受朝拜，大臣们到阎门称庆祝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of Taiping Xingguo, worship was not accepted, and the ministers went to the gate of hell to celebrate.

古文：壬戌，定舆服等差及婚取丧葬仪制。
现代文：二十九日，确定舆服等级和婚娶丧葬仪制。
English: On the 29th, the public dress grade and the marriage and funeral ceremony system were determined.

古文：二月甲申，改关南为高阳关，徙并州治唐明镇。
现代文：二月二十一日，改关南为高阳关，并州治所迁徙至唐明镇。
English: On February 21, Gaoyang Guan was changed to Gaoyang Guan, and the State Administration Office moved to Tangming Town.

古文：乙酉，特贳庐州管内逋米万七千二百四十石。
现代文：二十二日，特地宽免庐州管辖区内积累拖欠米一万七千二百四十石。
English: On the 22nd, the accumulation of arrears of rice in the jurisdiction area of Zhangzhou was specially pardoned and exempted from 17,240 koku.

古文：三月癸巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of March, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：乙未，以秦王廷美为西京留守。
现代文：初三，任命秦王赵廷美为西京留守。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Qin King Zhao Tingmei was appointed to stay in West Beijing.

古文：乙巳，以旱分遣中黄门遍祷方岳。
现代文：十三日，因早灾分别派遣太监遍祷五岳。
English: On the 13th, due to an early disaster, eunuchs were dispatched to pray through the five mountains.

古文：交州以王师致讨，遣使来谢。
现代文：交州因宋军讨伐派遣使臣来谢罪。
English: As a result of the Song Army's campaign, Jiaozhou sent an envoy to Xie Sin.

古文：壬子，赐秦王袭衣、通犀带、钱十万。
现代文：二十日，赐给秦王一套衣服、通犀带、钱十万。
English: On the 20th, he gave King Qin a set of clothes, a fine sash, and 100,000 yuan.

古文：是月，舒州上玄石有白文曰 丙子年出赵号二十一帝 。
现代文：这个月，舒州献上黑石，有白字为 丙子年出赵号二十一帝 。
English: This month, Shuzhou presented a black stone, with white characters for the 21st Emperor Zhao of the Year of the Heel.

古文：宣州雪霜，杀桑害稼。
现代文：宣州雪霜损害桑苗和庄稼。
English: Snow and frost damage mulberry seedlings and crops in Xuanzhou.

古文：北阳县蝗，飞鸟数万食之尽。
现代文：北阳县发生蝗灾，数万只飞鸟把蝗虫全部吃了。
English: A locust plague occurred in Beiyang County. Tens of thousands of flying birds ate all the locusts.

古文：夏四月甲子，以枢密直学士窦偁、中书舍人郭贽并参知政事，如京使柴禹锡为宣徽北院使兼枢密副使。
现代文：夏四月初三，任命枢密直学士窦翱、中书舍人郭赞为参知政事，如京使柴禹锡为宣徽北院使兼枢密副使。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, the Privy Council appointed Dou Jun, a direct scholar, and Guo Zan, a Chinese scholar, as political advisors. For example, the Beijing envoy Chai Yuxi was the envoy of the Northern Yuan Dynasty and the vice-envoy of the Privy Council.

古文：戊辰，中书侍郎兼兵部尚书、平章事卢多逊罢为兵部尚书。
现代文：初七，中书侍郎兼兵部尚书、平章事卢多逊罢为兵部尚书。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, the junior secretary of the middle school and the senior secretary of the military department, Ping Zhangji Ludoson became the senior secretary of the military department.

古文：丁丑，西京留守、秦王廷美罢归第，复其子德恭、德隆名皇侄，女韩氏妇落皇女、云阳公主之号。
现代文：十六日，西京留守、秦王赵廷美罢官回家，他的儿子赵德恭、赵德隆恢复为皇侄，女韩氏妇除去皇女、云阳公主的称号。
English: On the 16th, Qin King Zhao Tingmei returned home after being absent in Xijing. His sons, Zhao Deqong and Zhao Delong, were reinstated as the emperor's nephews, and the title of princess and Yunyang princess was removed from Lady Han.

古文：卢多逊褫职流崖州，并徙其家，期周以上亲悉配远裔。
现代文：卢多逊革职流放崖州，并徙其家，期周以上亲戚全部流配远方。
English: Ludo Sun Quan was exiled to Fuzhou, and his family was also exiled. All of his relatives who were more than a week old were exiled to distant places.

古文：庚辰，左仆射、平章事沈伦罢为工部尚书。
现代文：十九日，左仆射、平章事沈伦罢为工部尚书。
English: On the 19th, Zuo Shuai and Ping Zhang were promoted to the Ministry of Industry.

古文：禁河南诸州私铸铅锡恶钱及轻小钱。
现代文：禁止河南各州私铸铅锡恶钱和轻小钱。
English: It is forbidden for states in Henan to privately mint lead and tin evil money and light money.

古文：是月，润州大水。
现代文：这个月，润州发大水。
English: This month, there was a big flood in Renzhou.

古文：五月辛丑，崔彦进败契丹于唐兴。
现代文：五月十日，崔彦进在唐兴打败契丹军。
English: On May 10, Cui Yanjin defeated the Khitan army in Tangxing.

古文：戊申，虑囚。
现代文：十七日，讯察记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 17th, the criminal status of the prisoner was recorded.

古文：己酉，夏州留后李继捧献其银、夏、绥、宥四州。
现代文：十八日，夏州留后李继捧献其银、夏、绥、肴四州。
English: On the 18th, after staying in Xiazhou, Li Jizhi presented his silver, summer, candy and dishes to the four states.

古文：辛亥，三交行营言，潘美败契丹之师于雁门，破其垒三十六。
现代文：二十日，三交行营报告说，潘美在雁门打败契丹军，攻破契丹三十六垒。
English: On the 20th, the Sanjiao camp reported that Pan Mei defeated the Khitan army at the Wild Goose Gate and broke through the 36th base of the Khitan army.

古文：丙辰，秦王廷美降封涪陵县公、房州安置。
现代文：二十五日，秦王赵廷美降封为涪陵县公，送房州安置。
English: On the 25th, Qin King Zhao Tingmei was demoted to be the governor of Fuling County and sent to live in Fangzhou.

古文：以崇仪副使阎彦进知房州，监察御史袁廓通判军州事，各赐白金三百两。
现代文：任命崇仪副使阎彦进为房州知州，监察御史袁廓通判军州事，各赐给三百两白金。
English: The deputy envoy of Chongyi, Yan Yanjin, was appointed as the chizhou of Fangzhou, and the inspector of the imperial historian, Yuan Guotong, was appointed as the judge of the military affairs of Fangzhou, and each was given three hundred and two white gold.

古文：己未，府州破契丹于新泽砦，获其将校以下百人。
现代文：二十八日，府州在新泽寨打破契丹军，俘获将校以上官兵一百人。
English: On the 28th, Fuzhou broke the Khitan army in Xinzhezhai and captured a hundred officers and soldiers.

古文：是月，陕州蝗，芜湖县雨雹。
现代文：这个月，陕州发生蝗灾，芜湖县降冰雹。
English: This month, a locust plague occurred in Shaanxi Province, and hail fell in Wuhu County.

古文：六月乙亥，遣使发李继捧缌麻巳上亲赴阙，其弟继迁奔地斤泽。
现代文：六月十五日，派遣使臣发送李继捧绍麻以上亲属到朝廷，他的弟弟李继迁逃奔地斤泽。
English: On June 15, envoys were dispatched to send Li Jizhi's relatives above Shoma to the imperial court, and his younger brother Li Jizhi fled to Jinze.

古文：丙子，置译经院。
现代文：十六日，设置译经院。
English: On the 16th, the Translated Bible Institute was established.

古文：是月，河决临济县。汉阳军大水。
现代文：这个月，临济县黄河决口，汉阳军发大水。
English: This month, at the mouth of the Yellow River in Linji County, the Hanyang Army encountered heavy water.

古文：秋七月甲午，以子德崇为检校太保、同平章事，封卫王；德明为检校太保、同平章事，封广平郡王。
现代文：秋七月初五，任命儿子赵德崇为检校太傅、同平章事，封为卫王；赵德明为检校太保、同平章事，封为广平郡王。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of autumn, he appointed his son Zhao Dezhong as the school inspector, the same level official, and the king of Wei; Zhao Deming as the school inspector, the same level official, and the king of Guangping County.

古文：乙卯，工部尚书沈伦以左仆射致仕。
现代文：二十六日，工部尚书沈伦以左仆射身份退休。
English: On the 26th, Shangshu Shenlun, the leader of the Ministry of Industry, retired as a left-handed shooter.

古文：是月，河决范济口。淮水、汉水、易水皆溢。阳谷县蝗。关、陕诸州大水。
现代文：这个月，黄河在范济口决堤，淮水、汉水、易水都溢出河道，阳谷县发生蝗灾，关、陕各州发大水。
English: This month, the Yellow River broke through the dike at Fan Jikou, and the Huai River, Han River, and Yishui River all overflowed the river. Locust plagues occurred in Yanggu County, and Guan and Shaanxi Provinces were flooded.

古文：八月庚申朔，太子太师王溥薨。
现代文：八月初一，太子太师王溥逝世。
English: On the first day of August, the Crown Prince and Grand Master Wang Xuan passed away.

古文：己卯，诏川、峡诸州官织锦绮、鹿胎、透背、六铢、欹正、龟壳等悉罢之，民间勿禁。
现代文：二十一日，诏令川陕各州官织锦绮、鹿胎、透背、六铣、歌正、龟壳等全部废除，民间织造不禁止。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the imperial edict decreed that officials in all prefectures of Sichuan and Shaanxi should abolish the weaving of brocade, deer skin, transparent back, six-leaf clover, song, turtle shell, etc. Civil weaving is not prohibited.

古文：九月己丑朔，西京诸道系籍沙弥，令祠部给牒。
现代文：九月初一，西京各道系籍沙弥，令祠部给碟。
English: On the first day of September, Shami priests from all the sects in West Beijing were ordered to leave the ancestral shrine.

古文：甲寅，贵妃孙氏薨。邠州蝗。
现代文：二十六日，贵妃孙氏逝世，州发生蝗灾。
English: On the 26th, Guifei Sun died, and a locust plague broke out in Guizhou.

古文：冬十月癸亥，诏河南吏民不得阑出边关侵挠略夺，违者论罪，有得羊马生口者还之。
现代文：冬十月初五，下诏：河南吏民不得擅自出边关侵扰掠夺，违者论罪；有得到羊马牲口者归还。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of October in winter, the following edict was issued: Henan officials and people were not allowed to go out of the border gate to intrude and plunder without authorization, and violators would be punished; those who had obtained sheep and horses were returned.

古文：戊辰，幸金明池，御龙舟观习水战。
现代文：初十，到金明池，登上龙舟观习水战。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, I went to Jinming Pond and boarded a dragon boat to watch the water fight.

古文：河决武德县，蠲临河民租。
现代文：黄河在武德县决口，免除沿河地区百姓租税。
English: The Yellow River is at the mouth of Wude County, and the people along the river are exempt from tax.

古文：己卯，左谏议大夫、参知政事窦偁卒。
现代文：二十一日，左谏议大夫、参知政事窦翱去世。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Zuo Jianli, a doctor of deliberation and a member of the Council of State, passed away.

古文：癸卯，《乾元历》成。
现代文：癸卯日，乾元厉修成。
English: On the same day, Emperor Qian Yuanli was enthroned.

古文：是月，岳州田鼠食稼。
现代文：这个月，岳州田鼠吃庄稼。
English: This month, Yuezhou voles eat crops.

古文：十一月己酉，以李继捧为彰德军节度使。
现代文：十一月二十一日，任命李继捧为彰德军节度使。
English: On November 21st, Li Jitang was appointed as the special envoy to the German army.

古文：禁民丧葬作乐。
现代文：禁止百姓丧葬作乐。
English: It is forbidden for the people to make fun of funerals.

古文：十二月戊午朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of December, a solar eclipse.

古文：庚午，蠲两浙诸州太平兴国六年以前逋租。
现代文：十三日，免除两浙各州太平兴国六年以前拖欠租税。
English: On the 13th, Taiping and Xingguo, two Zhejiang states, were exempted from tax arrears six years ago.

古文：戊寅，高丽国王伷卒，其弟治遣使求袭位，诏立治为高丽国王。
现代文：二十一日，高丽王伯逝世。他的弟弟治派遣使臣来请求继承王位，诏令立治为高丽国王。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the king of Goryeo passed away. His younger brother, Je, sent an envoy to request succession to the throne, and the king of Goryeo was enthroned.

古文：闰月戊子朔，丰州与契丹战，破之，获其天德军节度使萧太。
现代文：闰十二月初一，丰州与契丹交战，打破契丹军，俘获契丹天德军节度使萧太。
English: On the first day of the leap month of December, Fuzhou fought with Khitan, broke the Khitan army, and captured the German army of the Khitan army.

古文：占城国献驯象。
现代文：占城国贡献驯象。
English: Zhancheng contributed to the training of elephants.

古文：丙申，狩近郊。
现代文：初九，在近郊狩猎。
English: At the age of nine, I went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：辛亥，诏赦银、夏等州常赦所不原者。
现代文：二十四日，诏令赦免银州、夏州等地常赦而得不到赦免的人。
English: On the 24th, the imperial edict pardoned people in Yinzhou, Xiazhou and other places who were pardoned but could not be pardoned.

古文：诸州置农师。
现代文：各州设置农师。
English: Each state set up an agronomist.

古文：八年春正月己卯，以东上阁门使王显为宣徽南院使，酒坊使弭德超为北院使，并兼枢密副使。
现代文：太平兴国八年春正月二十二日，任命东上阁门使王显为宣徽南院使，酒坊使弧德超为北院使，都兼为枢密副使。
English: On the 22nd day of the first month of the 8th year of Taiping Xingguo, Wang Xian, the envoy of the Eastern Pavilion Gate, was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Yuan of the State Council of Hunan Province, and Arc De Chao, the envoy of the Tavern, was appointed as the envoy of the Northern Yuan of the State Council of Hunan Province. Both of them were concurrently appointed as the vice-envoys of the Privy Council.

古文：癸未，诏令州、县长吏延问高年耆德。
现代文：二十六日，诏令州县长吏接待慰问高年鲁德的人。
English: On the 26th, the prefectural governor ordered the prefectural officials to receive the people who came to offer condolences to the elderly Rud.

古文：二月戊子朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of February, a solar eclipse.

古文：丁酉，禁内属部落私市女口。
现代文：初八，禁止内属部落私市女口。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month, it is forbidden for the tribe to have a private women's mouth.

古文：三月庚申，以右谏议大夫宋琪为参知政事。
现代文：三月初四，任命右谏议大夫宋琪为参知政事。
English: On the fourth day of the third month of the year, Song Qi, a doctor of right-wing politics, was appointed to be a member of the Council of State.

古文：丰州破契丹兵，降三千余帐。
现代文：丰州打败契丹军，三千多帐投降。
English: Fuzhou defeated the Khitan army, and more than three thousand troops surrendered.

古文：癸亥，分三司，各置使。
现代文：初七，分三司，各置使。
English: Junior seven, divided into three divisions, each with an envoy.

古文：癸酉，幸金明池，观习水战。
现代文：十七日，到金明池观习水战。
English: On the 17th, they went to Jinming Pond to watch the water fight.

古文：丙子，亲试礼部举人。
现代文：二十日亲自考试礼部举人。
English: On the 20th, I personally held a ceremony for the examination.

古文：甲申，除福建诸州盐禁。
现代文：二十八日废除福建各州禁盐令。
English: On the 28th, the ban on salt in all states of Fujian was abolished.

古文：夏四月壬寅，班《外官戒谕辞》。
现代文：夏四月十七日，颁布汐卜官戒谕辞。
English: On the 17th day of the 4th month of the summer, the speech of the commanding officer of Shiobuku was issued.

古文：壬子，流枢密副使弭德超于琼州，并徙其家。
现代文：二十七日，枢密副使弧德超被流放琼州，并徙其家。
English: On the 27th, the vice-secretary of the Privy Council, Arc De Chao, was exiled to Qiongzhou and moved to his home.

古文：乙卯，幸枢密使石熙载第视疾。
现代文：三十日，到枢密使石熙载家探视病情。
English: On the 30th, the imperial envoy Shi Xizhe came to the family to visit the sick.

古文：五月丁卯，诏作太一宫于都城南。
现代文：五月十二日，诏令在都城南修建太一宫。
English: On May 12, the Imperial edict ordered the construction of Taichung Palace in the south of the capital.

古文：黎桓自称三使留后，遣使来贡，并上丁璿让表。
现代文：黎桓自称三使留后，派遣使臣来进贡，并让厂睿上表。
English: Li Huan claimed that after the three envoys left, he sent envoys to pay tribute, and let the factory and the watch.

古文：诏谕桓送璿母子赴阙，不听。
现代文：诏谕黎桓遣送丁睿母子到朝廷，没有听命。
English: Li Huan sent Ding Rui's mother and son to the imperial court, but they did not follow his orders.

古文：丁亥，流威塞军节度使曹翰于登州。
现代文：丁亥日，威塞军节度使曹翰流放登州。
English: On the day of Dinghai, the Wei and Xie armies made Cao Han go into exile in Danzhou.

古文：乙亥，诏长吏诱致关、陇流亡。
现代文：二十日，诏令长吏诱致关、陇流亡。
English: On the 20th, the imperial edict ordered the chief officials to induce Guan and Zou to go into exile.

古文：是月，河决滑州，过澶、濮、曹、济，东南入于淮。
现代文：这个月，黄河在滑州决口，经过擅、攫、曹、济，东南流人淮水。
English: This month, the Yellow River at the mouth of the city of Leshou, after passing through the counties of Min, Qu, Cao and Jie, the southeast flowed into Huai Shui.

古文：相州风雹。
现代文：相州大风，降冰雹。
English: Seongju high winds, hail.

古文：六月己亥，以王显为枢密使，柴禹锡为宣徵南院使兼枢密副使。
现代文：六月十五日，任命王显为枢密使，柴禹锡为宣徽南院使兼枢密副使。
English: On June 15, Wang Xian was appointed as the envoy of the privy council, and Chai Yuxi was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Yuan of the State Council and the deputy envoy of the privy council.

古文：己酉，兖州泰山父老及瑕丘等七县民诣阙请封禅。
现代文：二十五日，充州泰山父老及瑕丘等七县百姓到朝廷请求封禅。
English: On the 25th, the people of seven counties, including Taishan's father and grandfather and Kokeoka, went to the imperial court to request the sealing of Zen.

古文：是月，谷、洛、瀍、涧溢，坏官民舍万余区，溺死者以万计，巩县坏殆尽。
现代文：这个月，谷、洛、镍、涧水溢出河道，毁坏官民屋舍一万多间，溺死者数以万计，巩县几乎全部毁坏。
English: This month, water from the Gu, Luo, Ni and Shao rivers overflowed, destroying more than 10,000 government and private houses, drowning tens of thousands of people, and destroying almost all of Gongxian.

古文：秋七月辛未，参知政事郭贽罢为秘书少监。
现代文：秋七月十八日，参知政事郭赞罢为秘书少监。
English: On the 18th of July, Guo Zhanba, a political advisor to the governor, became the secretary of the junior inspector.

古文：庚辰，加宋琪刑部尚书，以工部尚书李昉参知政事。
现代文：二十七日，加宋琪官刑部尚书，任命工部尚书李意参知政事。
English: On the 27th, Song Qi promoted the official of the Criminal Law Department, Shang Shu, and appointed the official of the Engineering Department, Li Yishan, as the political leader.

古文：是月，河、江、汉、滹沱及祁之资、沧之胡卢、雄之易恶池水皆溢为患。
现代文：这个月，黄河、长江、汉水、淳沱河及祁州之资、沧州之胡卢、雄之易和恶池水，都溢出河道，酿成祸患。
English: This month, the Yellow River, the Yangtze River, the Han River, the Chunhui River and the Yangtze River of Zhangzhou, the Hulu River of Cangzhou, the Xiongziyi River and the Wicked Pond Water all overflowed their channels, creating a disaster.

古文：八月壬辰，以大水故，释死罪以下。
现代文：八月初九，因大水的缘故，释放死罪以下囚犯。
English: On the 9th of August, due to the high water, prisoners under the death penalty were released.

古文：丁酉，山后两林蛮来贡。
现代文：十四日，山后两林蛮来进贡。
English: On the 14th, the two forests behind the mountain came to pay tribute.

古文：溪、锦、叙、富四州蛮来附。
现代文：溪、锦、叙、富四州蛮来归附朝廷。
English: The four prefectures of Xixi, Jin, Shuxi and Fuzhou were annexed to the imperial court.

古文：庚戌，以枢密使石熙载为右仆射。
现代文：二十七日，任命枢密使石熙载为右仆射。
English: On the 27th, he appointed the imperial envoy Shi Xizang as his right-hand man.

古文：辛亥，增《谥法》。
现代文：二十八日，增溢法。
English: On the 28th, the overflow method was used.

古文：诏军国政要令参知政事李昉及枢密院副使一人录送史馆。
现代文：下诏：军国政要令参知政事李意和枢密副使一人录送史馆。
English: The following edict was issued: The military and political dignitaries, along with the chancellor, the minister of state, Li Yi, and the vice-minister of the privy council, were recorded and sent to the history museum.

古文：九月癸丑朔，占城国献驯象。
现代文：九月初一，占城国贡献驯象。
English: On the first day of September, Zhancheng contributed to the training of elephants.

古文：初置水陆路发运于京师。
现代文：在京师初置水陆发运使。
English: The first water and land freight forwarders were set up in Beijing.

古文：是月，睢溢，浸田六十里。
现代文：这个月，雅水溢出，浸淹田地六十里。
English: This month, the river overflowed and flooded 60 miles of fields.

古文：冬十月戊戌，改卫王德崇名元佐，广平郡王德明名元祐，德昌名元休，德严名元隽，德和名元杰。
现代文：冬十月十六日，改卫王赵德崇名赵元佐，广平郡王赵德明名赵元，赵德昌名赵元休，赵德严名赵元隽，赵德和名赵元杰。
English: In the winter of October 16th, Wang Zhao De Chong was renamed Zhao Yuan Zuo, Guangping County King Zhao De Ming was named Zhao Yuan, Zhao De Chang was named Zhao Yuan Xiu, Zhao De Yan was named Zhao Yuan Jie, Zhao De He was named Zhao Yuan Jie.

古文：已酉，进元佐为楚王、元祐陈王，封元休韩王、元隽冀王、元杰益王，并检校太保、同平章事。
现代文：二十七日，进封赵元佐为楚王，元为陈王，封赵元休为韩王，元隽为冀王，元杰为益王，都为检校太保、同平章事。
English: On the 27th, Zhao Yuan Zuo was appointed as the King of Chu, Yuan Yuan as the King of Chen, Zhao Yuan Xiu as the King of Han, Yuan Yu as the King of Ji, and Yuan Jie as the King of Yi, all of which were the inspection of the school and the same level.

古文：司徒兼侍中赵普罢为武胜军节度使。
现代文：司徒兼侍中赵普罢为武胜军节度使。
English: Zhao Pubei, an aide-de-camp and a chamberlain, was appointed as the festival envoy of the victorious army.

古文：十一月壬子朔，以参知政事宋琪、李昉并平章事。
现代文：十一月初一，任命参知政事宋琪、李意为平章事。
English: On the first day of November, Song Qi and Li Yi, both of whom were political advisors to the governor, were appointed to the Taira no Shoji.

古文：癸丑，除川、峡民祖父母父母在别籍异财弃市律。
现代文：初二，废除川陕百姓祖父母、父母在别籍异财弃市的律令。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the ordinance of the grandparents and parents of the people of Sichuan and Shaanxi abandoning their property in other countries was abolished.

古文：己未，太一宫成。
现代文：初八，太一宫修成。
English: Hatsuhachi, Taichinomiya, completed.

古文：壬申，以翰林学士李穆、吕蒙正、李至并参知政事，枢密直学士张齐贤、王沔并同签署枢密院事。
现代文：二十一日，任命翰林学士李穆、吕蒙正、李至参知政事，枢密直学士张齐贤、王洒同签署枢密院事。
English: On the 21st, Hanlin scholars Li Mu, Lv Mengzheng, and Li Zhi were appointed as political advisors, and scholars Zhang Qixian and Wang Shulong were appointed as Privy Councilors.

古文：庚辰，置侍读官。
现代文：二十九日，设置侍读官。
English: On the 29th, a reading room attendant was set up.

古文：十二月壬午朔，诏绥、银、夏等州官吏招诱没界外民归业，仍给复三年。
现代文：十二月初一，诏令绥、银、夏州等地官吏招诱没界外民归业，并且免除三年赋役。
English: On the first day of December, local officials in Handan, Yin, and Xiazhou issued an edict to lure the missing people to return to work, and exempted them from three years of forced labor.

古文：丁亥，赐河北、河东缘边戍卒襦，京城诸军米。
现代文：初六，赐给河北、河东缘边戍卒短衣袄和京城各军米。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, short coats and rice were given to soldiers in Hebei and the eastern edge of the river, as well as soldiers in the capital.

古文：淮海国王钱俶三上表乞解兵马大元帅、国王、尚书中书令、太师等官。
现代文：淮海国王钱三次上表请求解除兵马大元帅、国王、尚书中书令、太师等官。
English: King Qian of Huaihai petitioned three times for the dismissal of the grand marshal of the army and the cavalry, the king, the commander-in-chief, the grand master and other officials.

古文：罢元帅名，余不许。
现代文：罢除钱元帅名，其他不许。
English: Remove the name of Marshal Qian and do not allow anyone else to succeed him.

古文：西人寇宥州，巡检使李谒击走之。
现代文：西人攻打肴州，巡检使李询击退他们。
English: The Westerners attacked Shanzhu, and the patrol made Li Zheng repel them.

古文：是月，醴泉县水中草变为稻。滑州河决。
现代文：这个月，醛泉县水中草变为稻，滑州段黄河决口。
English: This month, the weeds in the water of Yuqingquan County turned into rice, and the Yellow River in the Luzhou section broke through.

古文：雍熙元年春正月壬子朔，不受朝，群臣诣阁拜表称贺。
现代文：雍熙元年春正月初一，不受朝拜，大臣们到阁门上表称庆祝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Yongxi Dynasty, the ministers went to the attic door to express their congratulations.

古文：戊午，右仆射石熙载薨。
现代文：初七，右仆射石熙载逝世。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, his right-hand man Sho Seki died.

古文：壬戌，购逸书。
现代文：十一日，购逸亡书籍。
English: On the 11th day, he bought books about the death.

古文：丁卯，涪陵县公廷美薨，追封涪陵王。
现代文：十六日，涪陵县公赵廷美逝世，追封为涪陵王。
English: On the 16th, Gong Zhao Tingmei of Fuling County died and was posthumously crowned King of Fuling.

古文：壬申，蠲诸州民去年官所贷粟。
现代文：二十一日，免除各州百姓去年官府所贷给的粟。
English: On the 21st, the people of all states were exempted from the loan of millet given by the government last year.

古文：癸酉，左谏议大夫、参知政事李穆卒。
现代文：二十二日，左谏议大夫、参知政事李穆逝世。
English: On the 22nd, Li Mu, a doctor of the Left Division of the Chinese Academy of Sciences and a political advisor to the governor, passed away.

古文：三月丁巳，滑州河决既塞，帝作《平河歌》赐近臣，蠲水所及州县今年租。
现代文：三月初七，滑州段黄河决口刚刚塞筑好，太宗作平河歌赐给近臣，免除大水淹没州县今年的租税。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month, the mouth of the Yellow River in the Lishu section of the Yellow River had just been completed. Taizong made a song of the Pinghe River and gave it to his close vassal, exempting the county from this year's tax.

古文：癸未，以涪陵王子德恭、德隆为刺史，婿韩崇业为静难军司马。
现代文：十三日，任命涪陵王儿子赵德恭、赵德隆为刺史，婿韩崇业为静难军司马。
English: On the 13th, Zhao Deqong and Zhao Delong, the sons of the King of Fuling, were appointed as the scribes, and Han Chongye, the son-in-law, was appointed as the secretary of the Jingnan Army.

古文：是月，甘露降太一宫庭。
现代文：这个月，太一宫廷降甘露。
English: This month, the Emperor Taichi's court sent down the nectar.

古文：夏四月乙酉，泰山父老诣阙请封禅。
现代文：夏四月初五，泰山父老到朝廷请求封禅。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth month of the summer, Taishan's father went to the imperial court to request the seal of Zen.

古文：戊子，群臣表请凡三上，许之。
现代文：初八，大臣们上表请求共三次，太宗允准。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the ministers made a total of three requests on the table, and Taizong agreed.

古文：甲午，幸金明池，观习水战，因幸讲武台观射，赐武士帛。
现代文：十四日，到金明池观习水战，于是到讲武台观赏射箭，赐给武士帛。
English: On the 14th, he went to the Jinming Pond to watch the water fight, and then went to the lecture hall to watch archery, and was given a samurai sword.

古文：五月庚戌朔，除江南盐禁。
现代文：五月初一，废除江南盐禁。
English: On the first day of May, the salt ban in the south of the Yangtze River was abolished.

古文：辛亥，幸城南观麦，赐刈者钱帛。
现代文：初二，到城南观麦，赐给收割者钱帛。
English: On the second day of the first month, he went to the south of the city to see the wheat, and gave money to the harvesters.

古文：罢诸州农师。
现代文：罢除各州农师。
English: Dismiss the state agronomists.

古文：壬子，西州回鹘与波斯外道来贡。
现代文：初三，西州回鹊与波斯外道来进贡。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, Xizhou Eluan and Persian Gaido came to pay tribute.

古文：丁丑，乾元、文明二殿灾。
现代文：二十八日，乾元殿、文明殿发生火灾。
English: On the 28th, a fire broke out in the Qianyuan Hall and the Civilization Hall.

古文：己卯，以京官充堂后官。
现代文：三十日，以京官充堂后官。
English: On the 30th, he was appointed to the post of Beijing official.

古文：六月丁亥，诏求直言。
现代文：六月初八，诏求直言。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, let's speak frankly.

古文：己丑，遣使按察两浙、淮南、西川、广南狱讼。
现代文：初十，派遣使臣视察两浙、淮南、西川、广南狱讼。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, envoys were dispatched to inspect the prison cases in Zhejiang, Huainan, Xichuan and Guangnan.

古文：镇安军节度使、守中书令石守信薨。
现代文：镇安军节度使、守中书令石守信逝世。
English: Shi Shushin, the Zhen'an Army's festival envoy and Shuchu Shurei, passed away.

古文：庚子，令诸州长吏十日一虑囚。
现代文：二十一日，命令各州长吏十日一次讯察记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 21st, the prefectural governors were ordered to inspect and record the criminal status of prisoners on the 10th.

古文：壬寅，诏罢封泰山。
现代文：二十三日，诏令罢除封禅泰山。
English: On the 23rd, the imperial edict revoked the fief of Mount Tai.

古文：甲辰，禁边臣境外种莳。
现代文：二十五日，禁止边臣境外种植。
English: On the 25th, it was forbidden to grow hemp outside the borders of Japan.

古文：秋七月壬子，改乾元殿为朝元殿，文明殿为文德殿，丹凤门为乾元门；改匦院为登闻鼓院，东延恩匦为崇仁检院，南招谏匦为思谏检院，西申冤匦为申明检院，北通玄匦为招贤检院。
现代文：秋七月初四，改乾元殿为朝元殿，文明殿为文德殿，丹凤门为乾元门；改巨院为登闻鼓院，东延恩巨为崇仁检院，南招谏巨为思谏检院，西申冤巨为申明检院，北通玄巨为招贤检院。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the Qianyuan Hall was changed to the Chouyuan Hall, the Civilization Hall was changed to the Wende Hall, and the Danfeng Gate was changed to the Qianyuan Gate. The Qianyuan Courtyard was changed to the Dengwen Drum Courtyard, the East Yan'en Courtyard was changed to the Chongren Courtyard, the South Zhouzhuang Courtyard was changed to the Zhouzhuang Courtyard, the West Shengnian Courtyard was changed to the Shenming Courtyard, and the North Tongyuan Courtyard was changed to the Zhaoxian Courtyard.

古文：八月丁酉，亲祠太一宫。
现代文：八月二十日，亲自祠祀太一宫。
English: On August 20th, he personally visited the ancestral shrine of Taichung.

古文：壬寅，河水溢。
现代文：二十五日，黄河溢出河道。
English: On the 25th, the Yellow River overflowed its course.

古文：是月，淄州大水。
现代文：这个月，淄州发大水。
English: This month, there was a big flood in Zhangzhou.

古文：九月壬戌，群臣表三上尊号曰应运统天睿文英武大圣至仁明德广孝皇帝，不许，宰相叩头固请，终不许。
现代文：九月十五日，大臣三次上表献上尊号为应运统天睿文英武大圣至仁明德广孝皇帝，太宗没有允准；宰相叩头坚决请求，最终还是未允准。
English: On September 15th, the minister presented his honorary title three times to the Emperor Taizong, but the Emperor did not approve; the prime minister made a firm request, but it was not approved in the end.

古文：丙寅，幸并河新仓。
现代文：十九日，到并河新仓。
English: On the 19th, they arrived at Nihe Xincang.

古文：冬十月甲申，赐华山隐士陈抟号希夷先生。
现代文：冬十月初八，赐给华山隐士陈传号为希夷先生。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of winter, Chen Chuanzhong, the hermit of Huashan, was given the name Mr. Xi'er.

古文：夏州言掩击李继迁，获其母妻，俘千四百余帐，继迁走。
现代文：夏州报告说，突然袭击李继迁，俘获其母妻，俘一千四百余帐，李继迁逃走。
English: Xiazhou reported that Li Jiquan was suddenly attacked, his mother and wife were captured, more than 1,400 accounts were captured, and Li Jiquan fled.

古文：壬辰，禁布帛不中度者。
现代文：十六日，严禁布帛不符合规定者。
English: On the 16th, it is strictly forbidden for those who do not comply with the regulations.

古文：癸巳，岚州献牝兽，一角，并瑞物六十三种图付史馆。
现代文：十七日，岚州贡献化兽一角，与瑞物六十三种图交付史馆。
English: On the 17th, Zhangzhou contributed one piece of the beasts, and 63 kinds of pictures were delivered to the history museum.

古文：戊戌，忠州录事参军卜元干坐受赇枉法，杖杀之。
现代文：二十二日，忠州录事参军卜元干因受赂枉法获罪，被杖杀。
English: On the 22nd day of the month, Bu Yuangan, a member of the army, was found guilty of bribery and was killed with a cane.

古文：十一月壬子，高丽国王遣使来贡。
现代文：十一月初六，高丽国王派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month, King Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丁巳，祀天地于圜丘，大赦，改元，中外文武官进秩有差。
现代文：十一日，在圆丘祭祀天地，大赦，改元，中外文武官员进秩不等。
English: On the 11th day, in the round mound, the heaven and earth were sacrificed, the amnesty was granted, the era was changed, and Chinese and foreign civil and military officials were promoted to higher ranks.

古文：癸酉，以浦城童子杨亿为秘书省正字。
现代文：二十七日，任命浦城童子杨亿为秘书省正字。
English: On the 27th, Yang Yili, a boy from Pucheng, was appointed as the secretary of the provincial government.

古文：十二月庚辰，淮海国王钱俶徙封汉南国王。
现代文：十二月初五，淮海国王钱徙封汉南国王。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, Qian Yu, the king of Huaihai, was crowned the king of Hannan.

古文：癸未，赐京畿高年帛。
现代文：初八，赐给京瓷高年帛。
English: At the age of eight, he was given the Kyocera senior high school diploma.

古文：丁亥，罢岭南采珠场。
现代文：十二日，罢除岭南采珠场。
English: On the 12th, the Lingnan Pearl Mine was closed.

古文：壬辰，立德妃李氏为皇后。
现代文：十七日，立德妃李氏为皇后。
English: On the 17th, Empress Dowager Li became empress.

古文：丙申，御乾元门，赐京师大酺三日。
现代文：二十一日，到乾元门，赐给京师臣民聚饮三天。
English: On the twenty-first day, he went to the Qianyuan Gate and gave three days to the subjects of Beijing to gather and drink.

古文：戊戌，大雨雪。
现代文：二十三日，降大雪。
English: On the 23rd, heavy snow began to fall.

