古文：黄庭坚字鲁直，洪州分宁人。
现代文：黄庭坚字鲁直，洪州分宁人。
English: Huang Tingjian is a man of integrity, a citizen of Hongzhou.

古文：幼警悟，读书数过辄成诵。
现代文：幼年即机警聪明，读书数遍就能背诵。
English: They are alert and clever at an early age, and can recite books several times.

古文：舅李常过其家，取架上书问之，无不通，常惊，以为一日千里。
现代文：他舅舅李常到他家，取架上的书问他，他没有不知道的。李常非常惊奇，以为他是一日千里之才。
English: His uncle, Li Chang, often came to his house, took the books on the shelf and asked him, he did not know. Li Chang was very surprised, thinking that he was a genius.

古文：举进士，调叶县尉。
现代文：后黄庭坚考中了进士，任叶县县尉。
English: After Huang Tingjian passed the entrance examination, he was appointed as the county lieutenant of Ye County.

古文：熙宁初，举四京学官，第文为优，教授北京国子监，留守文彦博才之，留再任。
现代文：熙宁初参加四京学官的考试。由于及第的文章是优等，担任了北京国子监教授，留守文彦博看中了他的才华，留他再任教。
English: At the beginning, Xi Ning participated in the examination of the four Beijing academicians. Since the article of the first place was excellent, he served as the professor of the Beijing State Children's Supervisor, and the left-behind Fenyangbo took a fancy to his talent and left him to teach again.

古文：苏轼尝见其诗文，以为超轶绝尘，独立万物之表，世久无此作，由是声名始震。
现代文：苏轼曾见到他的诗文，以为他的诗文超凡绝尘，屹然独立于千万诗文之中，世上好久已没有这样的佳作。由此他的名声开始震动四方。
English: Su Shi once saw his poems and thought that his poems were extraordinary, standing independently among tens of thousands of poems, and there had not been such a masterpiece in the world for a long time. As a result, his reputation began to shake in all directions.

古文：知太和县，以平易治。
现代文：黄庭坚担任太和县知县，以平易治理该县。
English: Huang Tingjian served as the prefectural governor of Taihe County, leading the administration of the county with simplicity.

古文：时课颁盐筴，诸县争占多数，太和独否，吏不悦，而民安之。
现代文：当时课颁盐芓，其他县都争着占多数，太和县独不这样，县吏们不高兴，可是该县的老百姓都喜欢。
English: At that time, the class awarded salt ingots, other counties are competing to occupy the majority, Taihe County alone is not so, county officials are not happy, but the people of the county like it.

古文：哲宗立，召为校书郎、《神宗实录》检讨官。
现代文：哲宗即位后，召黄庭坚为校书郎、《神宗实录》检讨官。
English: After Tetsuzo's enthronement, Huang Tingjian was called to be the school scribe and the reviewer of "Shinzō Shitsuroku."

古文：逾年，迁著作佐郎，加集贤校理。
现代文：过了一年，迁著作佐郎，加集贤校理。
English: A year later, the school moved to Shososaro, with Katsujisen as principal.

古文：《实录》成，擢起居舍人。
现代文：《实录》修成后，提拔为起居舍人。
English: After the completion of the "Real Record," he was promoted to the position of a layman.

古文：丁母艰。
现代文：遭母丧。
English: He lost his mother.

古文：庭坚性笃孝，母病弥年，昼夜视颜色，衣不解带。及亡，庐墓下，哀毁得疾几殆。
现代文：黄庭坚性情至孝，母亲病了一年，他日夜察看颜色，衣不解带，及死，筑室于墓旁守孝，哀伤成疾几乎丧命。
English: Huang Tingjian had a very filial nature. His mother had been ill for a year. He spent his days and nights inspecting the color of her clothes. When she died, he built a room next to her grave to honor her. He nearly died from grief-induced illness.

古文：服除，为秘书丞，提点明道宫兼国史编修官。
现代文：丧服解除后，任秘书丞，提点明道宫，兼国史编修官。
English: After the removal of the mourning clothes, he was appointed secretary-general, raised the point of the Ming Palace, and was also the national history editor.

古文：绍圣初，出知宣州，改鄂州。
现代文：绍圣初，黄庭坚出任宣州知州，改知鄂州。
English: At the beginning of Shaosheng, Huang Tingjian took up the post of Xuanzhou Chizhou, and changed it to Ezhou.

古文：章惇、蔡卞与其党论《实录》多诬，俾前史官分居畿邑以待问，摘千余条示之，谓为无验证。
现代文：章、蔡卞与其党羽认为《实录》多诬陷不实之辞，使前修史官都分别居于京城附近各处以备盘问，摘录了千余条内容宣示他们，说这些没有验证。
English: Zhang, Cai Wei and their followers believed that the "Real Record" was full of false accusations, so the former revisionist historians all lived separately in various places near the capital to prepare for cross-examination, and extracted more than a thousand pieces of content to declare them, saying that these were not verified.

古文：既而院吏考阅，悉有据依，所余才三十二事。
现代文：不久，经院吏考察审阅，却都有事实依据，所剩下的只有三十二件事。
English: Soon, after being inspected and reviewed by hospital officials, all of them were found to have factual basis, leaving only thirty-two cases.

古文：庭坚书 用铁龙爪治河，有同儿戏 ，至是首问焉。
现代文：黄庭坚在《实录》中写有 用铁龙爪治河，有同儿戏 的话，于是首先盘问他。
English: Huang Tingjian wrote in "Real Record" about using iron claws to control rivers and playing with children, so he first interrogated him.

古文：对曰： 庭坚时官北都，尝亲见之，真儿戏耳。 凡有问，皆直辞以对，闻者壮之。
现代文：黄庭坚回答道 ：庭坚当时在北都做官，曾亲眼看到这件事，当时的确如同儿戏。 凡是有所查问，他都照直回答，毫无顾忌，听到的人都称赞他胆气豪壮。
English: Huang Tingjian replied, "Tingjian was an official in Beijing at the time, and he saw the incident with his own eyes. It was indeed like a child's play at the time. Whenever he was asked questions, he answered them straightforwardly, without any scruples, and everyone who heard him praised him for his courage.

古文：贬涪州别驾、黔州安置，言者犹以处善地为〈有丸〉法。
现代文：但黄庭坚因此贬为涪州别驾，黔州安置，攻击他的人还认为他去的是好地方，诬他枉法。
English: However, Huang Tingjian was therefore relegated to the category of "stay away from Zhangzhou" and "resettled in Zhangzhou." His attackers also thought that he had gone to a good place, accusing him of having broken the law.

古文：以亲嫌，遂移戎州。庭坚泊然，不以迁谪介意。
现代文：后以亲属之嫌，于是移至戎州，黄庭坚对此像没事一样，毫不以贬谪介意。
English: After that, he moved to Ebisuchu because of his relatives' disapproval. Huang Tingjian treated this as if it were nothing, and did not mind at all.

古文：蜀士慕从之游，讲学不倦，凡经指授，下笔皆可观。
现代文：四川的士子都仰慕他，乐意和他亲近。他向他们讲学不倦，凡经他指点的文章都有可观。
English: The scholar-sons of Sichuan all admired him and were happy to be close to him. He never tired of lecturing to them, and all the articles he pointed out were worth reading.

古文：徽宗即位，起监鄂州税，签书宁国军判官，知舒州，以吏部员外郎召，皆辞不行。丐郡，得知太平州，至之九日，罢主管玉隆观。
现代文：徽宗即位，起任黄庭坚为监鄂州税，签书宁国军判官、舒州知州，又以吏部员外郎召用，他都推辞不就，请求为郡官，得任太平知州，上任九日就被罢免，主管玉隆观。
English: Huizong ascended to the throne, Huang Tingjian was appointed as the inspector of Huzhou tax, the judge of the Ningguo Army and Shuzhou Chizhou signed a letter, and he was also called as the clerk's assistant. He refused to resign, requested to be a county official, and was appointed to Taiping Chizhou. He was dismissed on the ninth day of his appointment, and the supervisor was Yu Longguan.

古文：庭坚在河北与赵挺之有微隙，挺之执政，转运判官陈举承风旨，上其所作《荆南承天院记》，指为幸灾，复除名、羁管宜州。
现代文：黄庭坚在河北时与赵挺之有些不和，赵挺之执政，转运判官陈举秉承他的意向，呈上黄庭坚写的《荆南承天院记》，指斥他对灾祸庆幸，再一次被除名，送到宜州管制。
English: When Huang Tingjian was in Hebei, he had some disagreements with Zhao Ting. When Zhao Tingjian was in power, the judge of transit, Chen Jiu, adhered to his intention and submitted Huang Tingjian's "Jingnan Heung Tian Yuan Ji," accusing him of celebrating the disaster. He was once again removed from the list and sent to Yizhou for control.

古文：三年，徙永州，未闻命而卒，年六十一。
现代文：三年后徙永州，黄庭坚未听到宣布命令就死了，终年六十一岁。
English: Three years later, in Yongzhou, Huang Tingjian died without hearing the announcement of the order. He was 61 years old.

古文：庭坚学问文章，天成性得，陈师道谓其诗得法杜甫，学甫而不为者。
现代文：黄庭坚的学问文章，是天性生成的，陈师道说他的诗得法于杜甫，学杜甫而又不模仿杜甫的诗。
English: Huang Tingjian's scholarly articles are the product of nature. Chen Shidao said that his poems were inspired by Du Fu, and that he learned from Du Fu without imitating Du Fu's poems.

古文：善行、草书，楷法亦自成一家。
现代文：他善行书、草书，书法自成一家。
English: He is good at calligraphy and cursive, and calligraphy has become a family.

古文：与张耒、晁补之、秦观俱游苏轼门，天下称为四学士，而庭坚于文章尤长于诗，蜀、江西君子以庭坚配轼，故称 苏、黄 。
现代文：与张耒、晁补之、秦观都游学于苏轼门下，天下称为四学士。而黄庭坚对于文章尤长于诗，四川和江西的有德君子都以黄庭坚配享苏轼，并称 苏黄 。
English: Huang Tingjian is especially good at writing essays than poems. Virtuous gentlemen in Sichuan and Jiangxi all enjoy Su Shi with Huang Tingjian and call him Su Huang.

古文：轼为侍从时，举以自代，其词有 瑰伟之文，妙绝当世，孝友之行，追配古人 之语，其重之也如此。
现代文：苏轼做侍从官时，曾举荐黄庭坚代替自己，推荐词中有 瑰伟之文，妙绝当世；孝友之行，追配古人 的话，他看重黄庭坚竟到这种地步。
English: When Su Shi was an attendant, he recommended Huang Tingjian to replace him. In his recommendation, he said that Huang Tingjian was a great man and a wonderful person. He valued Huang Tingjian to such an extent that he considered him as a filial friend and a follower of the ancients.

古文：初，游灊皖山谷寺、石牛洞，乐其林泉之胜，因自号山谷道人云。
现代文：起初，黄庭坚游飅皖的山谷寺、石牛洞，喜欢该地方林泉优美，因自号为山谷道人。
English: At first, Huangting Jianyou's Valley Temple and Stone Cow Cave liked the place for its beautiful forest springs, because they called themselves Valley Taoists.

古文：晁补之，字无咎，济州钜野人，太子少傅迥五世孙，宗悫之曾孙也。
现代文：晁补之字无咎，济州巨野人，太子少傅晁迥的五世孙，晁宗悫的曾孙。
English: He is the fifth generation grandchild of the youngest prince of Jeju, Fu Ye, and the great-grandson of the founder of Jeju Seongyeon.

古文：父端友，工于诗。
现代文：晁补之的父亲叫晁端友，擅长于做诗。
English: Zou Fu Zhi's father is called Zou Duan You, and he is good at writing poetry.

古文：补之聪敏强记，才解事即善属文，王安国一见奇之。
现代文：晁补之生性聪敏，有很强的记忆力，他刚懂事就会写文章，王安国一见到他就感到很惊奇。
English: Wang Anguo was very surprised to meet him. He is very intelligent and has a strong memory. As soon as he understands something, he can write an article.

古文：十七岁从父官杭州，稡钱塘山川风物之丽，著《七述》以谒州通判苏轼。
现代文：他十七岁那年，父亲到杭州做官，他随同前往，他荟萃了钱塘山川风景人物的秀丽，写成《七述》一书，带去见杭州的通判苏轼。
English: When he was seventeen years old, his father went to Hangzhou to work as an official, and he went with him. He gathered the beauty of the Qiantang mountain and river scenery characters, wrote a book "Seven Stories," and took it to Hangzhou's Tongzhan Suyi.

古文：轼先欲有所赋，读之叹曰： 吾可以阁笔矣！ 又称其文博辩隽伟，绝人远甚，必显于世。由是知名。
现代文：苏轼原先也想有所感赋，读了他的书赞叹说 ：我可以搁笔了！ 苏轼又称赞他的文章写得博雅隽永瑰伟很有说服力，超过一般人甚远，以后一定会显名于世，因此人人知道了晁补之的名字。
English: Su Shi originally also wanted to be impressed, and after reading his book, he said with admiration, "I can put down my pen!" Su Shi also praised his article for being written in an elegant, timeless and magnificent way, very persuasive, far beyond the average person, and will certainly be famous in the future, so everyone knows the name of Gong Fu.

古文：举进士，试开封及礼部别院，皆第一。
现代文：晁补之后来考中了进士，参加了开封府考试和礼部别院的考试，他都第一。
English: He took the Kaifeng prefectural examination and the examination of the school of etiquette, and he ranked first in both.

古文：神宗阅其文曰： 是深于经术者，可革浮薄。 调澶州司户参军，北京国子监教授。
现代文：宋神宗看了他的文章后说 ：这是深于经术的，可以革除现在的浮藻风气。 他被调为澶州的司户参军、北京国子监教授。
English: After reading his article, Song Shenzong said, "This is deeper than the teachings of the sutras, and can eliminate the current floating algae culture." He was transferred to be the governor of Zhangzhou to join the army, and the professor of Beijing to supervise the children of the state.

古文：元祐初，为太学正，李清臣荐堪馆阁，召试，除秘书省正字，迁校书郎，以秘阁校理通判扬州，召还，为著作佐郎。
现代文：哲宗元初年，他任太学正，李清臣推荐他可任馆阁，皇帝召他面试，他被升为秘书省正字，又迁校书郎，以秘阁校理通判扬州，召回朝廷后，任著作佐郎。
English: In the first year of Zhe Zongyuan, he was appointed as Taishu Zheng, Li Qingchen recommended him to be appointed to the cabinet, the emperor called him for an interview, he was promoted to the secretary of the Ministry of Zheng Zi, and moved to the school scribe, and was sentenced to Yangzhou by the secret cabinet scribe, and after being recalled to the court, he was appointed as the book scribe.

古文：章惇当国，出知齐州，群盗昼掠途巷。
现代文：章专擅朝政，他被遣出知齐州，当时有一群强盗白天抢劫街巷，晁补之暗中记住他们的姓名，并对他们的行装都记得很清楚。
English: Zhang Zhan was good at politics. He was sent out of Chizhi and Qizhou. At that time, there was a group of robbers who robbed streets and alleys during the day. He secretly memorized their names and remembered their costumes very clearly.

古文：补之默得其姓名、囊橐皆审，一日宴客，召贼曹以方略授之，酒行未竟，悉擒以来，一府为彻警。
现代文：一天，他设宴请客，传召贼曹官，并以捕贼的方法教给他，席间依次斟酒还没有斟完，贼曹官就已经把盗贼全部抓来了，整个府城为此撤除了警戒。
English: One day, he invited guests to a banquet, summoned the thief sergeant, and taught him the method of catching thieves. The wine was not finished pouring between the tables, and the thief sergeant had already caught all the thieves. The entire capital city lifted the alert for this reason.

古文：坐修《神宗实录》失实，降通判应天府、亳州，又贬监处、信二州酒税。
现代文：后晁补之犯修神宗实录失实的罪，降职通判应天府和亳州，又贬职监督处、信二州的酒科。
English: Later, he was punished for the crime of falsifying the records of the Shenzong, and was demoted to Tianfu and Zhangzhou, and demoted to the supervision department and the liquor department of Xinzhou.

古文：徽宗立，复以著作召。
现代文：宋徽宗即位，又召他为著作佐郎。
English: When Song Huizong ascended to the throne, he also called him to be his literary guardian.

古文：既至，拜吏部员外郎、礼部郎中，兼国史编修、实录检讨官。
现代文：他到朝廷后，被提升为吏部员外郎、礼部郎中，并兼史馆编修、实录检讨官。
English: After he arrived at the Imperial Court, he was promoted to the position of the secretary's younger brother, the secretary's younger brother, and also served as the editor of the history museum and the official reviewer of historical records.

古文：党论起，为谏官管师仁所论，出知河中府，修河桥以便民，民画祠其像。
现代文：党论之祸起，他为谏官管师仁所弹劾，出知河中府，他在河中府修河桥以便民，老百姓都画了他的像进行祭拜。
English: The calamity of the party began. He was impeached by the eunuch-manager, Jin, and was banished to Hechu Prefecture. He built a bridge in Hechu Prefecture for the people, and the people painted his image for worship.

古文：徙湖州、密州、果州，遂主管鸿庆宫。
现代文：但他又被徙任湖州、密州和果州，后竟主管鸿庆宫。
English: However, he was transferred to Huzhou, Mizhou and Guozhou, and later he was put in charge of Hongqing Palace.

古文：还家，葺归来园，自号归来子，忘情仕进，慕陶潜为人。
现代文：最后令他回家。他修筑了一座归来园以自娱，自号归来子，忘情于仕途，羡慕陶渊明的为人。
English: Finally, he was sent home. He built a homecoming garden to entertain himself, calling himself a homecoming son, oblivious to his career, and envious of Tao Yuanming.

古文：大观末，出党籍，起知达州，改泗州，卒，年五十八。
现代文：徽宗大观末年，他才出党籍，复起用为达州的知州，后改知泗州，不久，便逝世，年五十八。
English: He only renounced his party membership in the final years of the Great View of the Huizong Dynasty. He was reinstated as Chizhou of Dazhou, and later changed to Chizhou of Zhangzhou. He died not long after, at the age of 58.

古文：补之才气飘逸，嗜学不知倦，文章温润典缛，其凌丽奇卓出于天成。
现代文：晁补之才气纵横飘逸，好学不知道疲倦，他的文章温润典雅瑰丽，至于它的超脱艳丽奇伟卓越似乎是出自于天成，非人工所能至。
English: His writing is warm, elegant, and magnificent. As for his extraordinary brilliance, it seems to be a result of nature, not artificial ability.

古文：尤精《楚词》，论集屈、宋以来赋咏为《变离骚》等三书。
现代文：他尤其精于楚词，曾写了论述自屈、宋以来赋咏的《变离骚》等三本书。
English: He was especially good at Chu Ci, and once wrote three books, including "Changing from Shuo," which discussed Fu Xi since the Qiu and Song dynasties.

古文：为河中教授，元符末，应诏上书论事，罢官。
现代文：宋对安南用兵，他写了《罪言》一篇，文章的大意是要选择仁厚勇略的官吏做五管郡的郡守，以加强海上诸郡的武备等，谈论的人都认为他非常通达世务。
English: Song used soldiers against Annan. He wrote a "sentence," the gist of which was to choose a benevolent and courageous official to be the county governor of the five counties to strengthen the military preparedness of the counties on the sea. The people who talked about it thought that he was very knowledgeable about world affairs.

古文：久之，为京兆府司录事，秩满，提点崇福宫，卒，年五十二，有文集五十卷。
现代文：晁补之的从弟叫晁咏之。
English: The younger brother of 补之 is called 之.

古文：秦观，字少游，一字太虚，扬州高邮人。
现代文：秦观字少游，一字太虚，扬州高邮人。
English: Qin Guan's character Shao Yu, one word is too vague, Yangzhou high postman.

古文：少豪隽，慷慨溢于文词，举进士不中。
现代文：少时豪放俊秀，慷慨之情溢于文词之间，曾举进士不中。
English: At a young age, Gao Fangjunxiu, generous feelings overflowing between the words, had been nominated for a medal.

古文：强志盛气，好大而见奇，读兵家书与己意合。
现代文：但其志向远，气度不凡，读兵家之书别有畅快之意。
English: However, his ambition is far-reaching and his demeanor is extraordinary. Reading the soldier's book has a sense of enjoyment.

古文：见苏轼于徐，为赋黄楼，轼以为有屈、宋才。又介其诗于王安石，安石亦谓清新似鲍、谢。
现代文：他在徐州拜见了苏轼，并赋《黄楼》诗一首，苏轼认为秦观有屈原、宋玉之才，并将其诗介绍给王安石，王安石也认为秦观的诗清新隽永，像鲍照和谢灵运。
English: He met Su Shi in Xuzhou and gave him a poem of "The Yellow Tower." Su Shi thought that Qin Guan had the talent of Qu Yuan and Song Yu, and introduced his poem to Wang Anshi. Wang Anshi also thought that Qin Guan's poem was fresh and eternal, like Baozhao and Xie Lingyun.

古文：轼勉以应举为亲养，始登第，调定海主簿、蔡州教授。
现代文：苏轼勉励秦观再次应举以为亲养，于是，秦观不负厚望，一举登第。之后，秦观任定海主簿、蔡州教授。
English: Su Hao encouraged Qin Guan to be promoted again as a close relative, so Qin Guan did not live up to the high expectations and was promoted to the first place. After that, Qin Guan was appointed as the master of the sea and the professor of Caizhou.

古文：元祐初，轼以贤良方正荐于朝，除太学博士，校正秘书省书籍。迁正字，而复为兼国史院编修官，上日有砚墨器币之赐。
现代文：元初年，苏轼以贤良方正之名将秦观举荐给朝廷，秦观得以为太学博士，负责校正秘书省书籍，迁正字，而复为兼国史院编修官，并常得皇上砚墨器等赏赐。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Su Shi recommended Qin Guan to the imperial court in the name of Xian Liang Fang Zheng. Qin Guan was thought to be the best doctor of science, responsible for correcting the secretaries of the provincial books and transferring the official characters, but he was also the editor-in-chief of the Academy of National History, and often received the emperor's inkwells and other rewards.

古文：绍圣初，坐党籍，出通判杭州。以御史刘拯论其增损实录，贬监处州酒税。
现代文：绍圣初年，秦观遭党锢之祸，离朝通判杭州，又因为御史大夫刘拯指责其任意增损实录，再次受贬而监处州酒税。
English: In the first year of Shaosheng, Qin Guan suffered the misfortune of the party's instigation, and was sentenced to Hangzhou for leaving the court, and was again demoted and supervised by the state liquor tax because the chief historian Liu Zheng accused him of arbitrarily increasing the loss record.

古文：使者承风望指，候伺过失，既而无所得，则以谒告写佛书为罪，削秩徙郴州，继编管横州，又徙雷州。
现代文：有人专门受指使寻找秦观过失，然终无所得，最后竟告秦观写佛书犯罪，将秦观削级降品徙往郴州，既而编管横州，再徙雷州。
English: Some people were specifically instructed to look for Qin Guan's fault, but in the end there was no income. Finally, they accused Qin Guan of writing Buddhist books, and moved Qin Guan's downgraded products to Zhangzhou, and then to Hengzhou, and then to Leizhou.

古文：徽宗立，复宣德郎，放还。至藤州，出游华光亭，为客道梦中长短句，索水欲饮，水至，笑视之而卒。
现代文：徽宗即位后，复召秦观为宣德郎，秦观从流放之地返还，至藤州时，秦观游览了华光亭，并为游客道出了自己梦中所做之词，秦观感到口渴，向人要水喝，水到之后，秦观微笑着视水而卒。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Huizong, Qinqun was recalled to be Xuan Delang. Qinqun was returned from the place of exile. When he arrived in Fujian, Qinqun toured the Hua Guang Pavilion and spoke the words he had made in his dream for the tourists. Qinqun felt thirsty and asked people for water. After the water arrived, Qinqun smiled at the water and passed away.

古文：先自作挽词，其语哀甚，读者悲伤之。
现代文：秦观去世前有预感，故先自做挽词，其语哀切，读之叫人悲伤。
English: Before Qin Guan's death, he had a premonition, so he first made his own eulogy, his words were sad, and it was sad to read.

古文：年五十三，有文集四十卷。
现代文：秦观去世时五十三岁，留有文集四十卷。
English: Qin Guan was fifty-three years old at the time of his death and left behind forty volumes of literary works.

古文：观长于议论，文丽而思深。
现代文：秦观长于议论，诗文华丽且深邃。
English: Qin Guan is good at discussion, and his poetry is gorgeous and profound.

古文：及死，轼闻之叹曰： 少游不幸死道路，哀哉！
现代文：苏轼闻知秦观死讯后哀叹道 ：秦观不幸死于路途，实在可悲！
English: After hearing the news of Qinqan's death, Su Yao lamented: Qinqan unfortunately died on the road, it's really sad!

古文：世岂复有斯人乎！ 弟觌字少章，覯字少仪，皆能文。
现代文：世上难道还会再有这样的人吗？ 其弟觌字少章，觏字少仪，皆能文。
English: Will there ever be another person like him in the world? His younger brothers, Hanzi Shosho and Hanzi Shoni, can all write.

古文：张耒，字文潜，楚州淮阴人。
现代文：张耒，字文潜，楚州淮阴人。
English: Zhang Qian, Zhiwenqian, a native of Huaiyin, Chuzhou.

古文：幼颖异，十三岁能为文，十七时作《函关赋》，已传人口。
现代文：幼时即显得聪颖奇异，十三岁便能写作文章，十七岁所做《函关赋》，已为众人传诵。
English: At a young age, he appeared to be brilliant and strange. At the age of thirteen, he was able to write articles. At the age of seventeen, he wrote "Hankuan Fu" and has been recited by everyone.

古文：游学于陈，学官苏辙爱之，因得从轼游，轼亦深知之，称其文汪洋冲澹，有一倡三叹之声。
现代文：张耒游学于陈州时，受到学官苏辙的钟爱，因而，能够结识苏轼，苏轼也赏识张耒，称其文章恣意洒脱，淡雅情真，有一唱三叹之声。
English: When Zhang Qiyu was studying in Chenzhou, he was loved by the scholar Su Ruzhu. As a result, he was able to get to know Su Yao. Su Yao also appreciated Zhang Qiyu, saying that his article was free and easy, elegant and sincere, and had a song and three sighs.

古文：弱冠第进士，历临淮主簿、寿安尉、咸平县丞。
现代文：张耒于弱冠之年考中进士，历任临淮主簿、寿安县尉、咸平县丞等官职。
English: Zhang Rong entered the junior high school examination in the year of weak crown, and successively held official positions such as Linhuai Master, Shouan County Lieutenant, and Hamping County Junior.

古文：入为太学录，范纯仁以馆阁荐试，迁秘书省正字、著作佐郎、秘书丞、著作郎、史馆检讨。
现代文：后入朝为太学录，得范纯仁举荐，迁秘书省正字、著作佐郎、秘书丞、著作郎、史馆检讨。
English: Later, he entered the imperial court as Taishu-ro, and was recommended by Fan Junren, and was transferred to the post of secretary of the Ministry of Justice, the post of secretary of the Ministry of Justice, the post of secretary of the Ministry of Justice, the post of secretary of the Ministry of Justice, the post of secretary of the Ministry of Justice, and the post of secretary of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：居三馆八年，顾义自守，泊如也。
现代文：张耒任馆阁之职达八年之久，始终重义自律，淡泊行事。
English: Zhang Jun has been in the cabinet for eight years, and he has always been self-disciplined and light-hearted.

古文：擢起居舍人。
现代文：后擢升为起居舍人。
English: Promoted to live-in caregiver.

古文：绍圣初，请郡，以直龙图阁知润州。
现代文：绍圣初年，以直龙图阁知润州。
English: In the first year of Shaosheng, Zhilong Tukge was used to explore Runzhou.

古文：坐党籍，徙宣州，谪监黄州酒税，徙复州。
现代文：因坐党籍之罪徙往宣州，再遭贬谪而监黄州酒税，徙复州。
English: Due to the crime of being a member of the party, he moved to Xuanzhou. He was then demoted and imprisoned for Huangzhou liquor tax. He moved back to Huangzhou.

古文：徽宗立，起为通判黄州，知兖州，召为太常少卿，甫数月，复出知颍州、汝州。
现代文：徽宗即位后，张耒被起用为黄州通判，知兖州，既而被召为太常少卿，数月后，再次出知颍、汝二州。
English: After Emperor Huizong ascended to the throne, Zhang Ye was appointed as the Huangzhou magistrate, Zhishangzhou, and was also called the Taizhang minor lord. A few months later, he was again appointed as the Zhishang and Ruyi states.

古文：崇宁初，复坐党籍落职，主管明道宫。
现代文：崇宁初年，张耒又坐党籍之罪，被削夺官职，主管明道宫。
English: In the first year of Chongning, Zhang Ye was stripped of his official position for the crime of being a member of the Communist Party, and became the head of the Mingdao Palace.

古文：初，耒在颍，闻苏轼讣，为举哀行服，言者以为言，遂贬房州别驾，安置于黄。
现代文：起初，张耒在颍州时，闻知苏轼去世，便为苏轼举哀行服，遭到言官攻击，因而被贬为房州别驾，安置于黄州。
English: At first, when Zhang Ye was in Zhangzhou, when he heard that Su Ye had died, he held up a mourning robe for Su Ye. He was attacked by the speech officials, and was thus demoted to the rank of Fangzhou villager and placed in Huangzhou.

古文：五年，得自便，居陈州。
现代文：崇宁五年，张耒得以自便迁居陈州。
English: After five years in Chongning, Zhang Ye was able to move to Chenzhou at his own convenience.

古文：耒仪观甚伟，有雄才，笔力绝健，于骚词尤长。
现代文：张耒仪表堂堂，有雄才大略，笔锋强健，长于诗词。
English: Zhang Ye has a dignified appearance, great talent, a strong pen, and is good at poetry.

古文：时二苏及黄庭坚、晁补之辈相继没，耒独存，士人就学者众，分日载酒肴饮食之。
现代文：在苏辙、苏轼、黄庭坚、晁补之等人相继去世后，只有张耒独生于世，因此，许多士人争相师从于他，并且分日载酒菜与之饮食。
English: After the successive deaths of Su Ruz, Su Shi, Huang Ting Jian and Gong Muzhi, only Zhang Xuan was born in the world. As a result, many scholars followed him and ate and drank with him on a daily basis.

古文：诲人作文以理为主，尝著论云： 自《六经》以下，至于诸子百氏骚人辩士论述，大抵皆将以为寓理之具也。
现代文：张耒教人做文强调以理为主，曾著文阐发说： 从六经以下，到诸子百家及诗人辩士的论述来看，其大概都遵循着文以载理、文以载道的原则。
English: Zhang Xuan's teachers emphasized the importance of reason in writing, and once wrote: From the Six Classics and below, to the hundreds of poets and polemicists, they probably all follow the principle of writing the text to carry the reason, and writing the text to carry the path.

古文：故学文之端，急于明理，如知文而不务理，求文之工，世未尝有也。
现代文：因此学做文章，首先要注意明了事理。如果只知做文，不知求理，或者只求做文的技巧，这是前人所不曾有过的。
English: Therefore, when learning to write an article, first of all, it is necessary to pay attention to making things clear. If you only know how to write, do not know how to reason, or only know how to write, this is unprecedented.

古文：夫决水于江、河、淮、海也，顺道而行，滔滔汨汨，日夜不止，冲砥柱，绝吕梁，放于江湖而纳之海，其舒为沦涟，鼓为波涛，激之为风飙，怒之为雷霆，蛟龙鱼鳖，喷薄出没，是水之奇变也。
现代文：放水于江、河、淮、海，水顺道而行，浩浩荡荡，日夜不停，冲击砥柱，越过高山，到达江湖，归于大海。水流平缓，荡起涟漪；水势汹涌，骤起波涛、风飙、雷霆，致使蛟龙鱼鳖，翻腾出没，这都展示了水的变幻魔力。
English: Water is released into rivers, streams, ponds, and the sea. The water runs alongside the road, swells and swirls, day and night, without stopping, hits the pillar, crosses the mountains, reaches the rivers and lakes, and returns to the sea. The water flow is smooth, swells and ripples; the water is turbulent, the waves suddenly rise, the wind rushes, and the thunder causes the dragon fish to swim, and swirls out, all of which show the changing magic of water.

古文：水之初，岂若是哉！顺道而决之，因其所遇而变生焉。
现代文：然而，最初之细水，并不如此，尽管用心开导，但终因其势不足而难遂人愿。
English: However, this was not the case in the beginning. Although they tried to enlighten people, they were ultimately unable to do so due to their lack of potential.

古文：沟渎东决而西竭，下满而上虚，日夜激之，欲见其奇，彼其所至者，蛙蛭之玩耳。
现代文：沟渠之中，此处有水，彼处又干竭，即便你日夜激水，也不能见到奇异水势，水之所至处，不过是为蛙蛭提供了玩游的天地。
English: In the ditch, there is water here, and it is dry elsewhere. Even if you splash water day and night, you cannot see the strange water potential. The water is everywhere, but it provides a world for frogs and toads to play.

古文：江、河、淮、海之水，理达之文也，不求奇而奇至矣。
现代文：江、河、淮、海之水，犹如载理之文，不求奇而奇至。
English: The water of rivers, streams, ponds, and the sea is like a literary text. It is full of surprises.

古文：激沟渎而求水之奇，此无见于理，而欲以言语句读为奇，反覆咀嚼，卒亦无有，文之陋也。 学者以为至言。
现代文：激沟渠之水而求水之奇，是不知理之所在。做文如想以词句见奇，纵然你反复推敲，终究也不会有好效果。这也是做文的一大陋习。 学者认为张耒所讲乃至理名言。
English: It is unreasonable to ask for water by stirring up the water of the ditch. If you want to make a sentence with words, even if you repeatedly think about it, it will not have a good effect. This is also a bad habit of writing. Scholars believe that what Zhang Ye said is even a famous saying.

古文：作诗晚岁益务平淡，效白居易体，而乐府效张籍。
现代文：张耒晚年做诗崇求平淡，喜欢仿效白居易诗体，而在做词方面，主要仿效张籍。
English: In his later years, Zhang Qi's poems were prosaic, and he liked to imitate Bai Juyi's poetic style, but in terms of lyrics, he mainly imitated Zhang Qi.

古文：久于投闲，家益贫，郡守翟汝文欲为买公田，谢不取。
现代文：张耒一生长期闲居，家境清贫，郡守翟汝文打算为他购买公田，却被他谢绝了。
English: Zhang Ye has been idle for a long time in his life, and his family is poor. The county governor, Ye Ruwen, planned to buy public land for him, but he turned him down.

古文：晚监南岳庙，主管崇福宫，卒，年六十一。
现代文：张耒晚年监南岳庙，主管崇福宫，去世时，享年六十一岁。
English: In his later years, Zhang Ye supervised the Nanyue Temple and was in charge of the Chongfu Palace. When he died, he was 61 years old.

古文：建炎初，赠集英殿修撰。
现代文：建炎初年，张耒被追赠为集英殿修撰。
English: In the first year of its construction, Zhang Ye was posthumously awarded the title of Shuxian of the Shuei Palace.

古文：陈师道，字履常，一字无己，彭城人。
现代文：陈师道字履常，又字无己，彭城人。
English: Chen Shidao is a Pengcheng native.

古文：少而好学苦志，年十六，摎以文谒曾巩，巩一见奇之，许其以文著，时人未之知也，留受业。
现代文：他少年时期即勤奋好学，苦练意志，十六岁时，早已经以文章拜见当时的文章泰斗曾巩，曾巩一看到他的文章就惊奇，称赞他将以文章著名，当时的人都还没有一个人了解他。
English: When he was a boy, he was studious and eager to learn. At the age of 16, he was already familiar with the articles of the time of Tai Do Zeng Gong. When Zeng Gong saw his articles, he was surprised and praised that he would be famous for his articles. At that time, no one knew him.

古文：熙宁中，王氏经学盛行，师道心非其说，遂绝意进取。
现代文：曾巩于是留着陈师道，让他在他的门下读书。宋神宗熙宁中，王安石的经学盛行，陈师道对他的说法不以为然，遂决心不做官。
English: Zeng Gong then kept Chen Shidao and let him study under him. In the Song Dynasty, Wang Anshi's study of scripture was popular, but Chen Shidao did not agree with what he said, so he decided not to become an official.

古文：巩典五朝史事，得自择其属，朝廷以白衣难之。
现代文：曾巩掌管五朝史事，有权能够自己选择僚属，就推荐陈师道，朝廷以陈师道是一个普通平民感到为难。
English: Zeng Gong, who was in charge of the historical affairs of the Five Dynasties and had the right to choose his own subordinates, recommended Chen Shidao. The imperial court found it difficult to accept that Chen Shidao was an ordinary commoner.

古文：元祐初，苏轼、傅尧俞、孙觉荐其文行，起为徐州教援，又用梁焘荐，为太学博士。
现代文：哲宗元初年，苏轼、傅尧俞、孙觉都向朝廷推荐陈师道的文章和德行，他被起用为徐州教授，又因梁焘的推荐，担任了太学博士。
English: In the first year of Zhe Zongyuan, Su Qian, Fu Qian, and Sun Jue all recommended Chen Shiduo's articles and virtues to the imperial court. He was appointed as a professor of Xuzhou, and because of Liang Qian's recommendation, he served as a doctor of taixue.

古文：言者谓在官尝越境出南京见轼，改教授颍州。
现代文：可是谏官却劾奏他在徐州做官时经常越州界去南京见苏轼，这样他又被改任教授颍州。
English: However, when he was an official in Xuzhou, the eunuchs reproached him for frequently crossing the state border to visit Su Shi in Nanjing, so he was reassigned as a professor in Zhangzhou.

古文：又论其进非科第，罢归。
现代文：谏官又弹劾他做官不是由科第晋升，因而他被罢官回家。
English: The eunuch also impeached him for not being promoted by Kodi, so he was dismissed and returned home.

古文：调彭泽令，不赴。
现代文：后又调他为彭泽令，他拒不赴任。
English: Later, he was transferred to Pengze, but he refused to take up the post.

古文：家素贫，或经日不炊，妻子愠见，弗恤也。
现代文：陈师道的家素来贫困，有时整天不炊爨，他的妻子因此怒形于色，但是陈师道却毫不忧虑，很久以后，朝廷又召他为秘书省正字。
English: Chen Shidao's family had always been poor and sometimes did not cook all day. His wife was furious, but Chen Shidao was not worried. After a long time, the court called him to be the secretary of the Ministry of orthography.

古文：久之，召为秘书省正字，卒，年四十九，友人邹浩买棺敛之。
现代文：但不久他就逝世，死年四十九岁，他的朋友邹浩为他出钱买棺材安葬。
English: But he died soon after, at the age of forty-nine, and his friend Hao Hao paid for a coffin for his burial.

古文：师道高介有节，安贫乐道。
现代文：陈师道高尚正直有节操，能够安贫乐道。
English: Teacher Chen's way is noble, honest and disciplined, and can lead to a peaceful and happy life.

古文：于诸经尤邃《诗》、《礼》，为文精深雅奥。
现代文：他对各种经书都有研究，尤以对《诗经》、《礼经》的研究深刻。
English: He has studied all kinds of scriptures, especially the "Book of Songs" and "Book of Rites."

古文：喜作诗，自云学黄庭坚，至其高处，或谓过之，然小不中意，辄焚去，今存者才十一。
现代文：他写的文章精美深刻典雅玄妙。他喜欢写诗，自己说是学的黄庭坚，至于其高超处，有人说甚至超过了黄庭坚，但是他只要稍微一不中意，就把诗稿烧掉，因此他的诗稿今天保留下来的只有十分之一。
English: The articles he wrote were exquisite, profound, elegant and subtle. He liked to write poetry, and he said that he was a learned Huang Tingjian. As for his excellence, some people said that he even surpassed Huang Tingjian. However, as soon as he was a little disappointed, he would burn the poem manuscript. Therefore, only one-tenth of his poem manuscript remains today.

古文：世徒喜诵其诗文，至若奥学至行，或莫之闻也。
现代文：世界上的人只晓得喜欢诵读陈师道的诗和文章，至于他的深奥的学问和高尚的品行，有的人甚至是听都没有听到过。
English: People around the world only know that he likes to recite Chen Shiduo's poems and articles. As for his profound knowledge and noble conduct, some people have not even heard of it.

古文：尝铭黄楼，曾子固谓如秦石。
现代文：陈师道曾经为黄楼刻铭，曾子固认为它的古奥典雅像秦朝的石刻。
English: Chen Shidao was once inscribed on the Yellow Pagoda, and Zeng Zi Gu thought that it was as ancient and elegant as the stone carvings of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：初，游京师逾年，未尝一至贵人之门，傅尧俞欲识之，先以问秦观，观曰： 是人非持刺字、俯颜色、伺候乎公卿之门者，殆难至也。 尧俞曰： 非所望也，吾将见之，惧其不吾见也，子能介于陈君乎？ 知其贫，怀金欲为馈，比至，听其论议，益敬畏，不敢出。
现代文：起初，陈师道到京师游学一年多，却从未进过贵人的门。傅尧俞想认识他，先问秦观，秦观说： 这个人不是手里拿着门帖，低着头和颜悦色，等候在公卿门外的那种人，他大概是很难以招致的。 傅尧俞说： 招致他可不是我所敢希望的，我想亲自去见他，就是怕他不愿意和我相见。你能不能把我介绍给陈君呢？ 傅尧俞知道陈师道很穷，就揣着黄金想作为馈赠，等到他到了陈师道的住处，听到了他的谈论，就更加敬畏不敢拿出来了。
English: At first, Chen Shidao went to Beijing to study for more than a year, but he never entered the door of a noble. Fu Xun wanted to know him, and first asked Qin Guan. Qin Guan said: This person is not the kind of person who holds a doorpost in his hand, bows his head and has a pleasant face, waiting outside the door of a noble. He is probably difficult to invite. Fu Xun said: Inviting him is not what I dare to hope for. I want to meet him in person, but I am afraid that he does not want to meet me. Can you introduce me to Chen Jun? Fu Xun knew that Chen Shidao was

古文：章惇在枢府，将荐于朝，亦属观延致。
现代文：章在枢密府，将把陈师道推荐给朝廷，也托付秦观为他延请致意。
English: Zhang was in the Privy Council and would recommend Chen Shidao to the imperial court. He also asked Qin Guan to extend his greetings to him.

古文：师道答曰： 辱书，谕以章公降屈年德，以礼见招，不佞何以得此，岂侯尝欺之耶？
现代文：陈师道在回给秦观的信中说 ：蒙你屈辱写给我信，信中告诉我章公不惜降屈自己的年龄和资德，以礼招致我，像我这样的不才何以能得到这种殊荣，难道是君侯曾欺骗他吗？
English: In his letter back to Qin Guan, Chen Shidao said, "You humiliated me by writing me a letter. In the letter, you told me that Zhang Gong invited me with courtesy, despite his age and resources. How could a nobody like me receive such an honor? Was it the prince who deceived him?

古文：公卿不下士，尚矣，乃特见于今而亲于其身，幸孰大焉。
现代文：公卿不拜见士，这是从古以来就如此，可是竟特别出现在今天而且是对于我本人，这种荣幸有什么比它更大呢？
English: It has always been the case since time immemorial that the Lord High Commissioner does not receive visitors, but what greater honour could there be than for him to make a special appearance today, and for me personally?

古文：愚虽不足以齿士，犹当从侯之后，顺下风以成公之名。
现代文：我生性愚昧虽然不足以列于士，但是应该追随君侯之后，顺目前的风气以成章公之名。
English: Although my natural stupidity is not enough to be listed as a scholar, I should follow the prince and follow the current trend to become a public figure.

古文：然先王之制，士不传贽为臣，则不见于王公，所以成礼而其敝必至自鬻，故先王谨其始以为之防，而为士者世守焉。
现代文：可是先王的制度，士不经过王命召见为臣，王公就不能见他，这已经成了一种礼制，而它的弊病就是使得有的人一定会想办法推荐自己。所以先王从这个制度的制订一开始就谨为之防备，而作为士子的人则必须世世代代忠实地遵守。
English: However, the former king's system, in which a courtier could not be seen by the prince unless he was summoned by order of the king, has become a form of etiquette, and its drawback is that some people will certainly try to recommend themselves. Therefore, the former king was careful to guard against this system from the very beginning, and as a courtier, he must faithfully abide by it for generations.

古文：师道于公，前有贵贱之嫌，后无平生之旧，公虽可见，礼可去乎？
现代文：师道对于章公，就先王之礼来说，有贵贱的嫌疑，而就自己推荐自己来说又不是平生的旧交，章公虽然可以见，可是礼能够去掉吗？
English: For Zhang Gong, as far as the king's gift is concerned, there is a suspicion of nobility, but as far as he recommends himself, it is not a lifelong old friend. Although Zhang Gong can be seen, can the gift be removed?

古文：且公之见招，盖以能守区区之礼也，若昧冒法义，闻命走门，则失其所以见招，公又何取焉。
现代文：况且章公招见我，大概认为我能遵守区区的礼节，假如我愚昧地冒犯法制和礼义，听到命令就奔走于公卿之门，那就失掉了所以能够召见的品质，章公对我又有什么可取的呢？
English: Moreover, Zhang Gong invited me to see him, probably thinking that I would be able to observe the local etiquette. If I foolishly offend the rule of law and etiquette, and run to the door of the noble when I hear the order, then I will lose the quality that I can summon. What does Zhang Gong have to offer me?

古文：虽然，有一于此，幸公之他日成功谢事，幅巾东归，师道当御款段，乘下泽，候公于东门外，尚未晚也。 及惇为相，又致意焉，终不往。
现代文：但虽然这样，却还有一个机会在这里，那就是庆幸章公以后功成身退，头戴幅巾东归，那时师道当骑款段马，乘下泽车，候章公于东门之外，时间那还不算是太晚。 等到章做了宰相，章又向陈师道致意想推荐他，可是陈师道始终没有去。
English: But in spite of this, there is still an opportunity here, that is, to be grateful for Zhang Gong's retirement after his achievement and to return to the East with a broad headscarf. At that time, Shidao was riding a horse, taking the Shimozawa car, waiting for Zhang Gong outside the East Gate, and the time was not too late. When Zhang became the prime minister, Zhang also paid his respects to Chen Shidao and wanted to recommend him, but Chen Shidao never went.

古文：官颍时，苏轼知州事，待之绝席，欲参诸门弟子间，而师道赋诗有 向来一瓣香，敬为曾南丰 之语，其自守如是。
现代文：陈师道在颍州做官时，苏轼是颍州的知州，对他特别照顾，让他独坐一席，想要他参加门弟子的行列，陈师道却写诗表明他的意愿，诗中有 向来一瓣香，敬为曾南丰 之句，他的自我要求就是这样严谨。
English: When Chen Shidao was an official in Zhangzhou, Suzhou was the leading city in Zhangzhou. He took special care of him, let him sit alone, and wanted him to join the ranks of his disciples. However, Chen Shidao wrote a poem to express his wishes. In the poem, there is always a piece of incense, which is the phrase of Zeng Nanfeng. His self-requirement is so strict.

古文：欧阳修与涣，同年进士也，高其节，作《庐山高》诗以美之。涣居庐山三十余年，环堵萧然，饘粥以为食，而游心尘垢之外，超然无戚戚意，以寿终。
现代文：陈师道与赵挺之的女婿是朋友，他素来厌恶赵挺之的为人，恰逢他参加一次郊祀典礼，这一天天气非常冷，他由于家里太穷，穿的衣服没有棉絮，他的妻子就跑到赵挺之的家里去借，借来以后，陈师道问是从什么地方借来的，当他得知是从赵挺之家里借的，就非常生气，坚决拒绝不肯穿，他竟因此得了寒病去世。刘恕字道原，筠州人。
English: Chen Shidao was friends with Zhao Tingzhi's son-in-law. He had always disliked Zhao Tingzhi as a person. It happened that he was attending a suburban worship ceremony. On this day, the weather was very cold. Since his family was too poor, he did not have cotton wool to wear. His wife ran to Zhao Tingzhi's house to borrow it. After borrowing it, Chen Shidao asked where he had borrowed it from. When he learned that he had borrowed it from Zhao Tingzhi's family, he was very angry and resolutely refused to wear it. As a result, he died of a cold

古文：恕少颖悟，书过目即成诵。
现代文：从小聪颖悟性高，读书一遍即能背诵出来。
English: Xiao Congying has a high level of comprehension and can recite a book after reading it once.

古文：八岁时，坐客有言孔子无兄弟者，恕应声曰： 以其兄之子妻之。 一坐惊异。
现代文：八岁时，刘恕听到家里来客中有人说孔子没有兄弟，于是马上接过话题说： 以其兄之子妻之。 使在座的人都感到很惊异。
English: At the age of eight, Liu Shou was surprised to hear someone in the audience say that Confucius did not have a brother, so he immediately took up the topic and said, "His brother's son's wife."

古文：年十三，欲应制科，从人假《汉》、《唐书》，阅月皆归之。
现代文：刘恕十三岁的时候准备应试制科，于是向人借了《汉书》和《唐书》，只用一个月的时间就阅完了。
English: When Liu Shou was 13 years old, he was preparing to take a typing exam, so he borrowed "Hanshu" and "Tangshu" from someone and finished reading them in just one month.

古文：谒丞相晏殊，问以事，反覆诘难，殊不能对。
现代文：刘恕拜谒丞相晏殊，反复向晏殊提出一些问题，使得晏殊茫然不知作答。
English: Liu Shubai repeatedly asked the prime minister some questions, leaving the prime minister at a loss for answers.

古文：恕在钜鹿时，召至府，重礼之，使讲《春秋》，殊亲帅官属往听。
现代文：刘恕在巨鹿时，被朝廷召用，并以重礼相待，他在讲解《春秋》时，丞相晏殊亲自率官属前去洗耳恭听。
English: When Liu Shou was in Julu, he was summoned by the imperial court and treated with great courtesy. When he was explaining "Spring and Autumn," the prime minister personally led the officials to listen attentively.

古文：未冠，举进士，时有诏，能讲经义者别奏名，应诏者才数十人，恕以《春秋》、《礼记》对，先列注疏，次引先儒异说，末乃断以己意，凡二十问，所对皆然，主司异之，擢为第一。
现代文：刘恕未受成人冠礼前，参加进士应考。当时皇帝有诏说，能讲经义的人单列考试，所以刘恕和其他数十人得以应诏。在应考中，刘恕以《春秋》、《礼记》对答，他先列出有关《春秋》、《礼记》的注疏，接着援引先儒们的各派学说，最后提出自己的观点和见解，对于试题中的二十个提问，刘恕都以这种形式作答，主考官因此而十分惊异他的才华，擢其为第一名。
English: Before Liu Shou was crowned as an adult, he took part in the entrance examination. At that time, the emperor had a edict saying that those who could teach the classics should take a separate examination, so Liu Shou and dozens of others were able to take the edict. In the entrance examination, Liu Shou answered with "Spring and Autumn" and "Rituals." He first listed the notes on "Spring and Autumn" and "Rituals," then quoted the teachings of the various schools of the early Confucians, and finally put forward his own views and opinions. For the twenty questions in the exam, Liu Shou answered in this form. The examiner was very surprised by

古文：他文亦入高等，而廷试不中格，更下国子试讲经，复第一，遂赐第。
现代文：其他文章也不错，但廷试时不中格，所以下国子试讲经，刘恕又得第一名，因而被赐进士第。
English: Other essays were also good, but he did not pass the imperial examination, so he went to China to give a sermon, and Liu Shou won the first place, so he was awarded the first place.

古文：调钜鹿主簿、和川令，发强擿伏，一时能吏自以为不及。
现代文：其后，刘恕被调任巨鹿主簿、和川令。任职期间，他大胆揭发奸邪，使之无可隐藏。一时间，许多有能力的官吏都自愧不如刘恕。
English: After that, Liu Shou was transferred to the post of the main bookkeeper of the giant deer and the order of the river. During his tenure, he boldly exposed the treachery and evil, making it impossible to hide. For a time, many capable officials were ashamed to be inferior to Liu Shou.

古文：恕为人重意义，急然诺。
现代文：刘恕为人重义气，讲信用。
English: Liu Shou is a man of integrity and trustworthiness.

古文：郡守得罪被劾，属吏皆连坐下狱，恕独恤其妻子，如己骨肉，又面数转运使深文峻诋。
现代文：当时郡守得罪被弹劾，属吏皆连坐而下狱，刘恕对他们的妻子儿女独行抚恤，有如对待自己的骨肉。还当面数落转运使夸大言辞、处置不当。
English: At that time, the county magistrate was impeached for committing a crime, and all the subordinate officials were sent to prison. Liu Shou single-handedly supported their wives and children, as if they were his own flesh and blood. He was also accused of exaggerated words and improper treatment.

古文：笃好史学，自太史公所记，下至周显德末，纪传之外至私记杂说，无所不览，上下数千载间，钜微之事，如指诸掌。
现代文：刘恕特别爱好史学，从太史公所记起，到后周显德末年，除纪传之外以至于私记杂说，无所不览。上下数千年之史事无论大小，皆了如指掌。
English: Liu Shou was particularly fond of history. From the time he was a student at the Tai Shi Public School to the last years of the late Zhou Xiande, he read everything except biographies, and even read personal anecdotes. He knew everything about thousands of years of history, no matter how big or small.

古文：司马光编次《资治通鉴》，英宗命自择馆阁英才共修之。
现代文：司马光编《资治通鉴》时，宋英宗命司马光自己选择馆阁中的英才与之共修。
English: When Sima Guangren was compiling the "Capitalism General Study," Song Yingzong ordered Sima Guangren to choose the great talents in the museum to study with him.

古文：光对曰： 馆阁文学之士诚多，至于专精史学，臣得而知者，唯刘恕耳。
现代文：司马光对英宗说 ：馆阁文学之士诚然很多，至于专精史学者，据我所知只有刘恕一个人。 
English: Sima Guang said to Ying Zong: There are indeed many literary figures in the cabinet, but as far as I know, Liu Shou is the only one who is a specialist in history.

古文：即召为局僚，遇史事纷错难治者，辄以诿恕。
现代文：于是司马光将刘恕召为局僚，凡遇到纷错难治的史事，皆委其考证。
English: As a result, Sima Guang called Liu Shumei as a member of the bureau, and all historical events that were difficult to deal with were examined by him.

古文：恕于魏、晋以后事，考证差缪，最为精详。
现代文：刘恕对魏晋及以后历史最为精熟，其考证也最为得心应手。
English: Liu Shou is most familiar with the history of Wei, Jin and later, and his research is also the most handy.

古文：王安石与之有旧，欲引置三司条例。
现代文：王安石与刘恕有隔阂。
English: Wang Anshi is estranged from Liu Shou.

古文：恕以不习金谷为辞，因言天子方属公大政，宜恢张尧、舜之道以佐明主，不应以利为先。
现代文：在变法过程中，王安石欲引刘恕置三司条例，刘恕辞而不就，并劝王安石要发扬尧舜之道以辅佐皇帝，而不应该以利为先。
English: In the process of changing the law, Wang Anshi wanted to introduce Liu Shouji to the Three Departments Regulations, but Liu Shouji did not accept, and advised Wang Anshi to carry forward the noble way to assist the emperor, and should not take advantage of the first.

古文：又条陈所更法令不合众心者，劝使复旧，至面刺其过，安石怒，变色如铁，恕不少屈。
现代文：还条陈王安石恢复旧法。
English: He also ordered Chen Wang Anshi to restore the old law.

古文：或稠人广坐，抗言其失无所避，遂与之绝。
现代文：甚至当面指责王安石之过，气得王安石脸色铁青。刘恕还在大庭广众之中，大声攻击王安石之过，毫无所避。这样一来，刘恕与王安石的关系完全断绝了。
English: Liu Shou even accused Wang Anshi of wrongdoing to his face, making Wang Anshi turn ashen-faced with anger. Liu Shou was still in the large crowd, loudly attacking Wang Anshi's wrongdoing, and there was no avoiding it. As a result, Liu Shou's relationship with Wang Anshi was completely severed.

古文：方安石用事，呼吸成祸福，高论之士，始异而终附之，面誉而背毁之，口顺而心非之者，皆是也。
现代文：当时王安石意气用事，对持不同意见的人加以排挤，造成人人自危的情景，所以有些开始反对变法的人后来终于附合王安石，有些当面赞扬变法的人却在背地里捣王安石的鬼，至于口是心非者更是比比皆是。
English: At that time, Wang Anshi was full of ambition and pushed out those who held different opinions, causing a situation where everyone was at risk. Therefore, some people who began to oppose the change of law eventually joined Wang Anshi, some people who praised the change of law in person were working on Wang Anshi's ghost behind the scenes, and as for those who were duplicitous, they were everywhere.

古文：恕奋厉不顾，直指其事，得失无所隐。
现代文：但刘恕却能始终无所顾忌，不计得失，敢于直接指责王安石变法之误。
English: However, Liu Shou has always been able to act without scruples, without calculating gains and losses, and dared to directly accuse Wang Anshi of changing the law.

古文：光出知永兴军，恕亦以亲老，求监南康军酒以就养，许即官修书。
现代文：司马光出知永兴军时，刘恕以亲人年老为由，求监南康军酒税以就养，朝廷允许他带官修书。
English: When Sima Guang betrayed the Yongxing Army, Liu Shou, on the grounds that his relatives were old, asked for the supervision of the Nankang Army's liquor tax to support himself. The court allowed him to take officials to study.

古文：光判西京御史台，恕请诣光，留数月而归。
现代文：司马光判西京御史台，刘恕请求到司马光处走一走，后在那儿留住数月而归，可是在途中得中风之疾，以至于右手右足偏瘫。
English: Sima Guang judged the West Beijing Imperial History Station, Liu Shun requested to go to Sima Guang's place for a walk, then stay there for several months and return, but on the way he suffered a stroke, so that his right hand and right foot were hemiplegic.

古文：道得风挛疾，右手足废，然苦学如故，少间，辄修书，病亟乃止。官至秘书丞，卒，年四十七。
现代文：但刘恕仍然苦学如常，且修书不辍，直到病情危急时才停止。刘恕官至秘书丞，去世的时候，只有四十七岁。
English: However, Liu Shou continued to study hard as usual and continued to revise until his condition became critical. Liu Shou, who rose from clerk to secretary, was only forty-seven years old when he died.

古文：恕为学，自历数、地里、官职、族姓至前代公府案牍，皆取以审证。
现代文：刘恕做学问，从历数、地理、官职、族姓到前代公府案牍，都详研细考。
English: As a scholar, Liu Shou studied everything in detail, from calendar, geography, official positions, family names to the previous government documents.

古文：求书不远数百里，身就之读且抄，殆忘寝食。
现代文：为求一本书，他不怕走数万里去阅读抄录，往往是废寝忘食。
English: In search of a book, he is not afraid to travel tens of thousands of miles to read transcripts, often losing sleep.

古文：偕司马光游万安山，道旁有碑，读之，乃五代列将，人所不知名者，恕能言其行事始终，归验旧史，信然。
现代文：刘恕曾与司马光一道游历万山，看见山道旁有碑，读后才知道碑是专为五代列将所立。对于别人不知其名的将领，刘恕都能一一说出其生平事迹，回来后验之于旧史，果如其言。
English: Liu Shou had traveled all over the mountains with Sima Guang, and saw a monument next to the mountain road. After reading it, he knew that the monument was specially erected for the five generations of generals. For the generals whose names were unknown to others, Liu Shou could tell the story of his life and deeds one by one. After returning, he examined it in the old history, and the result was as he said.

古文：宋次道知亳州，家多书，恕枉道借览。
现代文：宋次道是亳州的知县，他家藏书很多，吸引了刘恕前来借阅。
English: Song Zidao is a county magistrate in Ganzhou. His family has a large collection of books, which attracted Liu Shou to come and borrow them.

古文：次道日具馔为主人礼，恕曰： 此非吾所为来也，殊废吾事。 悉去之。
现代文：宋次道每天备上美味佳肴款待刘恕，而刘恕却说： 我并不是为了美味佳肴而来，请不要因此误了我的读书之事。 
English: Song Zidao prepared delicious dishes every day to entertain Liu Shou, but Liu Shou said: I didn't come for the delicious food, please don't mistake my reading for that.

古文：独闭阁，昼夜口诵手抄，留旬日，尽其书而去，目为之翳。
现代文：宋次道听后，就免去那些繁文缛节，刘恕独自闭门读书，昼夜口诵手抄，十天之后，将宋次道家藏之书全部转到自己的脑海里和笔记中，但眼睛视力为此锐减。
English: After listening to Songtsi Dao, he was freed from all the red tape. Liu Shou read alone behind closed doors, reciting handwritten transcripts day and night. Ten days later, he transferred all the books in Songtsi Dao's family collection into his mind and notes, but his eyesight was sharply reduced.

古文：著《五代十国纪年》以拟《十六国春秋》，又采太古以来至周威烈王时事，《史记》、《左氏传》所不载者，为《通鉴外纪》。
现代文：刘恕著有《五代十国纪年》，以之比拟《十六国春秋》。另外，刘恕还采摘上古以来到周威烈王时期为《史记》、《左传》所不载的史料，编有一部《通鉴外纪》。
English: Liu Shou is the author of "The Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms," which is used as a comparison for "The Spring and Autumn of the Sixteen Kingdoms." In addition, Liu Shou also collected historical materials that were not included in "Histories" and "Zhuan" from ancient times to the period of King Zhou Weili, and compiled a "Comprehensive External History."

古文：家素贫，无以给旨甘，一毫不妄取于人。自洛南归，时方冬，无寒具。司马光遗以衣袜及故茵褥，辞不获，强受而别，行及颍，悉封还之。
现代文：刘恕家境清贫，但一毫也不妄取于人，他从洛阳回家时正值冬天，没有挡寒之衣，司马光将自己的衣袄旧褥送给他，他拒绝接受，后来在司马光的强迫下，他勉强接受了，但行至颍水一带，他马上将衣袄寄给司马光。
English: Liu Shou's family was poor, but he didn't take advantage of others at all. When he came home from Luoyang, it was winter and he didn't have a coat to keep out the cold. Sima Guang gave him his old coat, but he refused to accept it. Later, under Sima Guang's coercion, he reluctantly accepted it, but when he went to the Surabaya area, he immediately sent the coat to Sima Guang.

古文：尤不信浮屠说，以为必无是事，曰： 人如居逆旅，一物不可乏，去则尽弃之矣，岂得赍以自随哉？ 好攻人之恶，每自讼平生有二十失、十八蔽，作文以自警，亦终不能改也。
现代文：刘恕特别不信浮屠之说，认为那是子虚乌有，他说 ：人们居家旅行，一物不可缺少。人死之后，身外之物可以完全抛弃了，有什么必要带一些随葬品呢？ 刘恕好揭人之短，他自己也知道。每每自讼平生有二十失、十八蔽，并曾做文以自警，但就是始终改不掉这个习惯。
English: Liu Shou especially did not believe the rumor and thought that it was a myth. He said: People travel at home, one thing is indispensable. After death, the things outside the body can be completely abandoned, what is the need to bring some funerary goods? Liu Shou was good at revealing people's shortcomings, and he knew it himself. He had twenty losses and eighteen cover-ups in his life, and had written a letter to self-police, but he could not break this habit.

古文：才逾月，以草御史幸义责词不称，罢为显谟阁待制、知明州，言者又论其包藏异意，非议辟雍以为不当立，夺职，提举洞霄宫。
现代文：刘恕死后七年，《资治通鉴》编成，皇帝追录其劳，封其子刘羲仲为郊社斋郎。次子刘和仲，有超绝才能，做诗清新深奥，刻意追求，想自成一家，为文仰慕石介，有侠气，也早死。
English: Seven years after Liu Shou's death, the "Capitalism General Guide" was compiled, the emperor recorded his hard work, and his son Liu Shuzhong was appointed as a suburban office worker. The second son, Liu Wenzhong, had extraordinary talent, made poetry fresh and profound, deliberately pursued, wanted to become a family, admired Shi Jie for his writing, had chivalry, and also died early.

古文：会赦，复之，卒。李格非，字文叔，济南人。
现代文：李格非字文叔，济南人。
English: Li Gefei is a Jinan native.

古文：其幼时，俊警异甚。
现代文：他幼时，非常清秀聪明机灵。
English: When he was young, he was very handsome, clever and witty.

古文：有司方以诗赋取士，格非独用意经学，著《礼记说》至数十万言，遂登进士第。
现代文：当时官府正以诗赋取士，李格非却独自一人用心于经学，写有《礼记说》数十万言，遂登上了进士第。
English: At that time, the government was awarding scholarships for poetry, but Li Gefe was the only one to devote himself to studying, writing hundreds of thousands of words of "The Book of Etiquette," and he was awarded a scholarship.

古文：调冀州司户参军，试学官，为郓州教授，郡守以其贫，欲使兼他官，谢不可。
现代文：他被委任为冀州司户参军，又参加了学官考试，担任了郓州的教授，郡守因为他很贫困，就想让他兼其他官，李格非婉言谢绝，认为不可。
English: He was appointed as the Jizhou governor to join the army, he also took the examination for academic officers, and served as a professor in Zhangzhou. The county governor, because he was very poor, wanted him to serve as other officials. Li Gefei politely declined, saying that it was impossible.

古文：入补太学录，再转博士，以文章受知于苏轼。
现代文：后入朝补太学录，再转博士，由于文章写得很好受到了苏轼的赏识。
English: After that, he was enrolled in the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and then became a doctor. Because the article was well written, it was appreciated by Su Wei.

古文：尝著《洛阳名园记》，谓 洛阳之盛衰，天下治乱之候也 。
现代文：他曾写有《洛阳名园记》，说： 洛阳的盛衰，是国家治乱的征候。 
English: He once wrote "A Record of Famous Gardens in Luoyang" and said: "The rise and fall of Luoyang is a symptom of the country's turmoil.

古文：其后洛阳陷于金，人以为知言。
现代文：以后洛阳被金人占领，人家都以为他说的非常灵验。
English: After Luoyang was occupied by the Jin, people thought that what he said was very effective.

古文：绍圣立局编元祐章奏，以为检讨，不就，戾执政意，通判广信军。
现代文：宋哲宗绍圣时期设立馆局编辑元时期的奏章，任命李格非为检讨，李格非不就任，违反了宰相的意愿，被迫离开朝廷通判广信军。
English: Song Zhezong, during the reign of Emperor Shosheng, set up a museum bureau to edit the records of the Yuan Dynasty, and appointed Li Gefei as a reviewer. Li Gefei did not take office, violating the wishes of the prime minister, and was forced to leave the imperial court to pass judgment on the Guangxin Army.

古文：有道士说人祸福或中，出必乘车，氓俗信惑，格非遇之途，叱左右取车中道士来，穷治其奸，杖而出诸境。
现代文：有一个道士说人的祸福有时能够说中，他出去一定要乘车，民间风俗喜欢迷信，许多人被他迷糊住。李格非和这个道士在路上恰巧遇上，他就命令左右差役把这个道士从车上抓下来，彻底追究他的奸诈欺骗老百姓的罪行，对他施以杖刑，然后把他驱逐出境。
English: There was a Taoist who said that a person's misfortune and good fortune can sometimes coincide, and that he must take a car to go out. Folk customs like superstition, and many people were confused by him. Li Gefei happened to meet this Taoist on the road, and he ordered the left and right guards to catch this Taoist from the car, thoroughly investigate his crime of treachery and deception of the common people, punish him with a cane, and then expel him.

古文：召为校书郎，迁著作佐郎、礼部员外郎，提点京东刑狱，以党籍罢，卒，年六十一。
现代文：后来李格非被召回朝廷任校书郎，又迁著作佐郎、礼部员外郎，提点京东的刑狱，不久，以党籍之祸罢官。死的时候，年六十一。
English: Later, Li Gefei was called back to the imperial court to serve as a school scribe, and he was also transferred to work as a scribe, a member of the etiquette department, and was sent to prison in Jingdong. Soon after, he was dismissed from his post due to the misfortune of being a member of the party. At the time of his death, he was 61.

古文：格非苦心工于词章，陵轹直前，无难易可否，笔力不少滞。
现代文：李格非苦心孤诣精通词章，勇往直前，不管难易可否什么情况，他的笔力从不稍停。
English: Li Ge is not painstakingly single-minded, he is proficient in the word chapter, he goes forward bravely, no matter what the situation is, his writing power never stops.

古文：尝言： 文不可以苟作，诚不著焉，则不能工。
现代文：他曾经说： 文章不可以随便写，诚心不具备，就不可能把文章写得很好。
English: He once said: An article should not be written casually. If sincerity is not present, it is impossible to write an article well.

古文：且晋人能文者多矣，至刘伯伦《酒德颂》、陶渊明《归去来辞》，字字如肺肝出，遂高步晋人之上，其诚著也。 
现代文：我考察晋朝人会写文章的人很多，到刘伯伦写的《酒德颂》，陶渊明写的《归去来辞》，字字句句像从肺腑中流出来的，遂高出于众晋人之上，原因是他们的诚心具备。 
English: I have examined a lot of people who could write articles during the Jin Dynasty, such as the "Song of Wine and Virtue" written by Liu Bolen and the "Return Speech" written by Tao Yuanming. The words flowed out of their guts, so they were higher than all the Jin people, because they had sincerity.

古文：时祥正从章惇察访辟，闻之，遂以殿中丞致仕。
现代文：李格非的妻子王氏，是王拱辰的孙女，也善于写文章。
English: Li Gefei's wife Wang, the granddaughter of Wang Gongchen, is also good at writing articles.

古文：后复出，通判汀州。知端州，又弃去，隐于县青山，卒。米芾，字元章，吴人也。
现代文：他的女儿李清照，诗和文章更有名于当时，嫁给赵挺之的儿子赵明诚为妻，自称为易安居士。米芾字元章，吴人。
English: His daughter Li Qingzhao, whose poems and articles were even more famous at the time, married Zhao Mingcheng, the son of Zhao Tianzhi, and called herself an Yi'an lay practitioner.

古文：以母侍宣仁后藩邸旧恩，补浛光尉。历知雍丘县、涟水军，太常博士，知无为军，召为书画学博士，赐对便殿，上其子友仁所作《楚山清晓图》，擢礼部员外郎，出知淮阳军。卒，年四十九。
现代文：因其母亲侍奉过宣仁后藩邸旧恩，补为氵含光尉，先后任雍丘知县、涟水知军、太常博士、无为知军等官，后召为书画学博士，赐对便殿，米芾呈上儿子米友仁所做《楚山清晓图》，被擢外为礼部员外郎，出知淮阳军，去世的时候，只有四十九岁。
English: Because his mother had served the old grace of the clan residence after Xuanren, he was promoted to the second lieutenant of Zou Han Guang, successively served as the officer of Yongqiu Zhixian, Lishui Zhijun, Dr. Tai Chang, Muzhe Zhijun and so on, and was later called to be a doctor of calligraphy and painting, and was given to the hall of honor, and presented the "Chu Mountain Qingxiao Map" made by his son Yiyongren to his son, and was promoted to the member of the ceremonial department, and was found out to be the Huaiyang Army. When he died, he was only forty-n

古文：芾为文奇险，不蹈袭前人轨辙。特妙于翰墨，沈著飞翥，得王献之笔意。
现代文：米芾做文章构思奇巧，从不蹈袭前人旧辙，其书法特别精妙，可以说得到王献之笔意。
English: Mi Yao's composition is ingenious, and he never follows in the footsteps of his predecessors. His calligraphy is particularly exquisite, and can be said to have the penmanship of Wang Xuanwu.

古文：画山水人物，自名一家，尤工临移，至乱真不可辨。精于鉴裁，遇古器物书画则极力求取，必得乃已。
现代文：米芾画山水人物，自成一家，且特别能临摹古画，甚至可以达到以假乱真的地步，他对文物鉴定也特别在行，遇有古代器物书画则极力求取，直到得手为止。
English: He is especially good at copying ancient paintings, and can even achieve the level of falsification and confusion. He is also particularly good at identifying cultural relics, and in the case of ancient artifacts such as calligraphy and painting, he tries his best to obtain them until he succeeds.

古文：王安石尝摘其诗句书扇上，苏轼亦喜誉之。冠服效唐人，风神萧散，音吐清畅，所至人聚观之。
现代文：王安石曾经摘取米芾的诗句写于扇子上，苏轼对米芾也多有夸奖，米芾穿衣戴帽仿效唐人，风韵潇洒，声音清亮，他每到一个地方，都有许多慕名者前来一睹他的容颜和风采。
English: Wang Anshi once wrote a poem on a fan, which was taken from the poems of the poet Mei Yao. Su Yao also praised Mei Yao a lot. Mei Yao dressed and wore a hat to imitate the Chinese, had a dashing style and a clear voice. Whenever he went to a place, many admirers came to see his face and style.

古文：而好洁成癖，至不与人同巾器。
现代文：米芾好洁成癖，以至于不与他人共用器物。
English: Rice bran is so particular about cleanliness that it does not share utensils with others.

古文：所为谲异，时有可传笑者。
现代文：他的所做所为也时显怪异，并为后世留下了诸多笑话。
English: What he did and how he did it also seemed strange at the time, and he left many jokes for posterity.

古文：无为州治有巨石，状奇丑，芾见大喜曰： 此足以当吾拜！ 具衣冠拜之，呼之为兄。
现代文：例如，无为州有一块大石头，形状奇丑，米芾见之后大为高兴，说 ：这块石头完全可以受我一拜。 
English: For example, there is a big stone in Wuzhong County with a very ugly shape. When Mi Yan saw it, she was very happy and said, "This stone can be worshipped by me."

古文：又不能与世俯仰，故从仕数困。
现代文：于是真的开始叩拜，并念念有词地喊石头大哥。米芾向来厌恶世俗，故他在仕途中总遇挫折。
English: As a result, he really began to bow, and repeatedly and eloquently called the stone elder brother. Rice bran has always been averse to the world, so he always encounters setbacks in his work.

古文：尝奉诏仿《黄庭》小楷作周兴嗣《千字韵语》。又入宣和殿观禁内所藏，人以为宠。
现代文：曾奉诏仿黄庭坚小楷做周兴嗣的《千字韵语》，又曾进入宣和殿观看禁内所藏之书，别人都据此认为米芾是很受宠的。
English: It was said that he had copied Huang Ting Jian Xiao Kai to make Zhou Xing Ci's "Thousand Character Rhyme," and that he had entered the Xuanhe Hall to see the books stored in the Forbidden City. According to this, others thought that he was very popular.

古文：疏隽少检，不为州里推重，而博涉百家之书。
现代文：米芾的儿子米友仁，字无晖，潜心古学，也善于书法绘画，世号 小米 ，官至兵部侍郎、敷文阁直学士。
English: Yoneyuchi's son, Yoneyujin, was a wordsmith, devoted himself to ancient studies, and was also good at calligraphy and painting. He was given the posthumous name of "Xiaomi," and rose through the ranks to become an attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs and a direct graduate of Shikibunkaku.

古文：元丰初，游京师，献《汴都赋》余万言，神宗异之，命侍臣读于迩英阁，召赴政事堂，自太学诸生一命为正，居五岁不迁，益尽力于辞章。出教授庐州，知溧水县，还为国子主簿。
现代文：周邦彦字美成，钱塘人。其言行粗疏，少有检束，故不为州里推重，但他有好学的特点，曾博涉百家之书。元丰初年，周邦彦到都城开封，献上了万余言的《汴都赋》，使神宗大为惊叹。神宗命侍臣在迩英阁学习《汴都赋》。周邦彦也因此被召赴政事堂，自太学诸生一命为正，虽然周邦彦五年之间都没有被升迁，但他依然尽力于辞章写作，后出为庐州教授、知溧水县，并再次回朝为国子主簿。
English: Zhou Bangyan was a native of Qiantang. His words and deeds were rough, and he had few formalities, so he was not valued by the state. However, he had a penchant for learning, and had read hundreds of books. In the first year of Yuanfeng, Zhou Bangyan went to the capital city of Kaifeng and presented the more than 10,000-word "Dao Du Fu," which greatly amazed Shenzong. Shenzong's personal attendant studied "Dao Du Fu" at Su Yingge. Zhou Bangyan was also called to the State Council for this reason, and since then, his life has been devoted to learning. Although Zhou Bangyan was

古文：哲宗召对，使诵前赋，除秘书省正字。
现代文：哲宗即位后召见周邦彦，让他诵以前所写诗赋，并将他升为秘书省正字。
English: After the enthronement of Zhezong, he summoned Zhou Bangyan, asked him to recite the poems he had written before, and promoted him to the secretary of the provincial government.

古文：历校书郎、考功员外郎，卫尉、宗正少卿，兼议礼局检讨，以直龙图阁知河中府。徽宗欲使毕礼书，复留之。
现代文：此后，历任校书郎、考功员外郎、卫尉、宗正少卿，兼议礼局检讨等官，以直龙图阁知河中府，当时徽宗即位后打算修整礼书，所以周邦彦即被留下来。
English: After that, successive school librarians, examiners, guards, and lords of the court, as well as officials who also reviewed the etiquette bureau, visited Chuo-fu, Chuo, Chuo-fu, Chuo-fu, Chuo-fu, Chuo-fu, Chuo-fu, Chuo-fu, Chuo-fu, Chuo-fu, Chuo-fu, Chuo-fu, Chuo-fu, Chuo-fu, Chuo-fu, Chuo-fu, Chuo-fu, Chuo-fu, Chuo-fu, Chuo-fu, Chuo-fu, Chuo-fu, Chuo-

古文：逾年，乃知隆德府，徙明州，入拜秘书监，进徽猷阁待制、提举大晟府。
现代文：第二年才知隆德府，改知明州。周邦彦入朝拜为秘书监，进为徽猷阁待制，提举大晟府。
English: The following year, Longdefu was renamed Mingshou. Zhou Bangyan was promoted to the position of secretary-supervisor, and then to the position of grand secretary-supervisor.

古文：未几，知顺昌府，徙处州，卒，年六十六，赠宣奉大夫。
现代文：不久，又出知顺昌府，改知处州，去世时六十六岁。被赠宣奉大夫。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to Shunchang Prefecture and later to Zhanshou Province. He was 66 years old at the time of his death. He was given the title of Xuanbong Doctor.

古文：邦彦好音乐，能自度曲，制乐府长短句，词韵清蔚，传于世。
现代文：周邦彦喜欢音乐，能自己做曲，制乐府长短句，其词韵清蔚，流传于世。
English: Zhou Bangyan likes music, can compose his own music, composes long phrases, and his words have a clear rhyme, which has been passed down to the world.

