古文：二十七日余见前路渐翳，而支间有迹，可蹑石而上，遂北上攀陟之。
现代文：二十七日我看见前边的路渐渐被遮敝了，而旁边有痕迹，可以踩着石头而上，于是往北向上攀登。
English: On the 27th, I saw that the road ahead was gradually obscured, and there were traces next to it, so I climbed northward.

古文：屡悬峻梯空，从崖石间作猿猴升。
现代文：多次悬空在陡峻的石梯上，顺着崖石像猿猴一样升登。
English: Several times, he was suspended in the air on a steep stone staircase, climbing up the cliff like an ape.

古文：一里半，则两崖前突，皆纯石撑霄，拔壑而起，自下望之，若建标竖物作表识空中，自上凌之，复有一线连脊，又如琼台中悬，双阙并倚也。
现代文：一里半，则两边的崖壁向前突出，都是纯粹的石壁撑向云霄，从壑谷中拔地而起，从下面望，像在空中竖物作为表识，从上面登攀，又有一线连接的山脊，像琼台悬在中间，两座宫网并列相靠。
English: For a mile and a half, the cliff walls on both sides protrude forward. They are pure stone walls propped up to the sky. They rise up from the valley. From below, it looks like a vertical object in the air as a symbol. From above, it climbs. There is also a ridge connected by a line. It hangs in the middle like Qiongtai. The two palace nets are side by side.

古文：后即为横亘大脊。
现代文：背后就是横亘的大山脊。
English: Behind it is the wide ridge of Mt.

古文：披丛莽而上，有大道东西横山脊，即东自鸡坪关山西上而达于绝顶者。
现代文：披开丛密的草莽而上，有条大路从东到西横穿山脊，就是从东边的鸡坪关山往西上而到达绝顶的路。
English: There is a road from east to west across the ridge, which is the road from the east side of the Jipingguan Mountain to the west to reach the very top.

古文：因昔年运砖，造城绝顶，开此以通驴马。
现代文：因往年运砖到绝顶建墙，开辟出这条路让驴马通行。
English: Due to the fact that in previous years bricks were transported to the very top to build the wall, this road was opened up to allow donkeys and horses to pass.

古文：余乃反从其东半里，凌重崖而上。
现代文：我于是返回来顺大路往东走半里，登攀重崖叠嶂而上。
English: I then returned and walked half a mile east along the main road, climbing up the cliffs.

古文：然其处上平下嵌，俯瞰莫可见，不若点头峰之突耸而出，可以一览全收也。
现代文：然而这里上平下嵌，俯身下视什么也不能看到，不像点头峰那样突立而出，可以一览无遗。
English: However, it is set on a flat base, so you can't see anything when you look down, and it doesn't stick out like a nodding peak, so you can see everything at a glance.

古文：其脊两旁皆古木深翳，通道于中，有开处下瞰山后。
现代文：山脊两边被古树遮蔽了，道路从其中通过，有开阔的地方往下看到山背后。
English: Both sides of the ridge are shaded by ancient trees, the road passes through them, and there is an open place to see behind the mountain.

古文：其东北又峙山一围，如箕南向，所谓摩尼山也，即此山余脉所结者。
现代文：东北又峙立着一围山，如同朝南的箕，所说的摩尼山，就是此山的其余支脉所聚成的。
English: To the north-east stands another encircling mountain, like a south-facing cocoon, the so-called Mani Mountain, formed by the remaining branches of this mountain.

古文：其西北横拖之支，所谓后趾也，即南耸而起为绝顶者。
现代文：西北横伸的支脉，所说的后趾，就是往南耸立而形成绝顶的山脉。
English: The northwest-stretching branch, the so-called hind toe, rises to the south and forms the highest mountains.

古文：故绝顶自南壑望之，如展旗西立，罗汉九层之脊，则如展旗东立；自北脊望之，则如展旗南立，后趾之脊，则如展旗北立。
现代文：所以从南壑看绝顶，如同伸展的旗帜立在西边，罗汉壁的九层山脊，则如同伸展的旗帜立在东边；从北边的山脊看，则如同伸展的旗帜立在南边；后趾的山脊，则如同伸展的旗帜立庄北边。
English: Therefore, from the south ridge, the highest peak stands in the west like an extended banner, and the nine-story ridge of the Luohan Wall stands in the east like an extended banner; from the north ridge, it stands in the south like an extended banner; and the ridge of the hind toe stands in the north of Zhuang like an extended banner.

古文：此一山大势也。
现代文：这是一架山的大致形势。
English: This is the general situation of a mountain.

古文：若桃花箐过脊，又在绝顶西南峡中，南起为香木坪之岭，东亘为禾字孔之脊，与罗汉壁、点头峰南北峙为两界。
现代文：至于越过桃花臀的山脊，又在绝顶西南的峡谷中，南边起自香木坪之岭，往东延伸为盒子孔的山脊，与罗汉壁、点头峰南北对峙，分成两部分。
English: As for the ridge over the peach blossom rump, in the canyon in the southwest of the peak, the ridge extending from the Xiangwuping Ridge in the south to the east is a box hole, facing the Luohan Wall and the nodding peak from north to south, and is divided into two parts.

古文：此在三距西南支之外，乃对山而非鸡足矣。
现代文：那是在鸡足山三峰的西南峰之外，是对面的山而不是鸡足山。
English: It is outside the southwest peak of the three peaks of Jiu Jiao Mountain, and it is the opposite mountain, not Jiu Jiao Mountain.

古文：若南条老脊，自香木而南走乌龙坝、罗汉壁、点头峰，又其东出之支，非老干矣。
现代文：至于南部的那支主脊，从香木坪往南走向乌龙坝，罗汉壁、点头峰又是其往东分出的支脉，不是主干。
English: As for the main ridge in the south, it stretches from Xiangwuping to the south towards Wulongba, while the Luohan Wall and Dingpu Peak are its branches to the east, not the main trunk.

古文：山后即为罗川地，北至南衙，皆邓川属，与宾川以此山脊为界，故绝顶即属邓川，而曹溪、华首，犹隶宾川焉。
现代文：山后就是罗川地，往北到南衙，都是邓川州的属地，与宾川州以此座山脊分界，所以绝顶就属于邓川州，而曹溪寺、华首门仍隶属于宾川州。
English: The back of the mountain is Luochuan, and from the north to the south, it is the territory of Dengchuan. It is the ridge that separates it from Binchuan. Therefore, the highest peak belongs to Dengchuan, while Caoxi Temple and Huashoumen still belong to Binchuan.

古文：若东出之摩尼，则北胜、浪沧之所辖，此又以山之东麓鸡坪山为界者也。
现代文：至于东北边的摩尼山，则是北胜州、浪沧卫所辖，那又是以鸡足山东麓的鸡坪山为分界的。
English: As for Mani Mountain on the northeastern side, it is under the jurisdiction of Beisenshou and Langcangwei, and it is delimited by Gyping Mountain at the eastern foot of Gypi Mountain.

古文：从脊直北眺，雪山一指竖立天外，若隐若现。
现代文：顺山脊直北眺望，一指雪山竖立在天外，若隐若现。
English: Looking straight north along the ridge, a finger of snow-capped mountain stands out against the sky, looming.

古文：此在丽江境内，尚隔一鹤庆府于其中，而雪山之东，金沙江实透腋南注，但其处逼夹仅丈余，不可得而望也。
现代文：那是在丽江府境内，其中还隔着一个鹤庆府，而雪山的东边，金沙江穿过山侧往南流，但其处狭窄得只有一丈多，无法看到。
English: It was in the territory of Lijiang Prefecture, which is also separated by a crane Qingfu, and on the east side of the Snow Mountain, the Jinsha River flows through the mountainside to the south, but its place is too narrow to see.

古文：由脊道西行，再隆再起，五里，有路自南而上者，此罗汉壁东旃檀岭道也；交脊而西北去者，此循后趾北下鹤庆道也；交脊而东北下者，此罗川道也，随脊而西者，绝顶道也。
现代文：顺山脊上的路往西走，山脊又二次隆起，五里，有路从南边往上延伸，这是去罗汉壁东边旎檀岭的路；和脊交会而往西北去的，是沿后趾北面去鹤庆府的路；和脊交会而往东北下的，是去罗川的路；顺脊往西去的，是上绝顶的路。
English: Walking west along the road on the ridge, the ridge rises again for the second time. For five miles, there is a road extending upward from the south, which is the road to the east of Luohan Wall, Shantanling. If you cross the ridge and go northwest, it is the road to Heqingfu along the north side; if you cross the ridge and go northeast, it is the road to Luochuan; if you go west along the ridge, it is the highest road.

古文：于是再上，再纡而北，又二里余而抵绝顶之下。
现代文：于是再往上走，再迂回向北，又走二里多就来到绝顶之下。
English: So I walked further up, then took a detour to the north, and walked more than two miles to get to the very top.

古文：其北崖雪痕皑皑，不知何日所积也。
现代文：北面山崖上雪迹皑皑，不知道是什么时候积起的。
English: There are traces of snow on the cliffs to the north. I don't know when it started to pile up.

古文：又南上半里，入其南门。
现代文：又往南上半里，进入南门。
English: Go south half a mile and enter the South Gate.

古文：门外坠壑而下者，猢狲梯出铜佛殿道；由北门出，陟后脊转而西南下者，束身峡出礼佛台，从华首门会铜佛殿道。
现代文：门外从沟壑中坠下去的，是瑚孙梯出到铜佛殿的路；从北门出去，登上后山脊而往西南下，从束身峡出到礼佛台，是从华首门会铜佛殿的路。
English: Outside the gate, it is the road from the Hu Sun Ladder to the Bronze Buddha Hall that falls down from the ravine; from the north gate, it climbs the back ridge and descends to the southwest, and from the Sokushin Gorge to the Reverend Buddha Hall, it is the road from the First Gate of China to the Bronze Buddha Hall.

古文：而猢狲梯在东南，由脊上；束身峡在西北，由霤中。
现代文：而瑚娜梯在东南，顺脊往上走；束身峡在西北，顺水槽中去。
English: But Hu Na Di is in the southeast, going up along the ridge; Sokushin Gorge is in the northwest, going along the water trough.

古文：岁丁丑，张按君谓绝顶不可不奉迦叶，遂捐资建此，而移土主于殿左。
现代文：这是攀登顶峰的两处险景，而从脊上过来就一处也没有。进门就是迦叶殿。这里原来是土主庙的地基，原迎叶殿在山腰。
English: These are two dangerous places to climb the peak, but there is no place to go from the ridge. The entrance is the Ka Yeh Hall. This was originally the foundation of the landlord's temple, and the original Ying Yeh Hall was on the mountainside.

古文：其前之天长阁，则天启七年海盐朱按君所建。后有观风台，亦阁也，为天启初年广东潘按君所建，今易名多宝楼。
现代文：丁丑年海盐县人朱巡按所修建的。背后有观风台，也是阁，是天启初年广东省潘巡按所修建的，如今改名为多宝楼。
English: It was built by Zhu Junan, a resident of Haiyan County, in the year of Ding Qiu. There is a wind observation platform behind it, which is also a pavilion. It was built by Pan Junan, a resident of Guangdong Province, in the first year of the Apocalypse. Nowadays, it has been renamed as Taobao Tower.

古文：后又有善雨亭，亦张按君所建，今貌其像于中。
现代文：后面还有善雨亭，也是张巡按修建的，如今亭中画有他的像。
English: In the back, there is also the Zhenyu Pavilion, which was also built by Zhang Xuanping, and now there is a portrait of him in the pavilion.

古文：后西川倪按君易名西脚蘧庐，语意大含讥讽。
现代文：后来西川倪巡按改名为西脚蓬庐，大有讥讽的含义。
English: Later, the Nishikawa Ni Junan was renamed the West Foot Pontoon, with a great sense of irony.

古文：殿亭四围，筑城环之，复四面架楼为门：南曰云观，指云南县昔有彩云之异也；东曰日观，则泰山日观之义；北曰雪观，指丽江府雪山也；西曰海观，则苍山、洱海所在也。
现代文：殿亭四周，筑墙环绕，在四边盖楼为门：南面名云观，是指云南县从前有彩云的奇异景观；东面名日观，则是取泰山日观的含义；北面名雪观，是指丽江府的雪山；西面名海观，则是苍山、洱海所在之琴。
English: Around the pavilion, surrounded by walls, the four sides are covered with buildings: the famous cloud view in the south refers to the strange landscape of colored clouds in Yunnan County; the famous sun view in the east is the meaning of Mount Tai's sun view; the famous snow view in the north refers to the snowy mountains in Lijiang Prefecture; the famous sea view in the west is Cangshan, where the Bohai Sea is located.

古文：张君于万山绝顶兴此巨役，而沐府亦伺其意，移中和山铜殿运致之，盖以和在省城东，而铜乃西方之属，能剋即刻木，故去彼移此。
现代文：张君在万山丛中的绝顶兴建此巨大工程，而沐府也顺应他的心意，把太和山铜殿搬移过来，大概因为太和山在省城东，而铜是西方的属相，能刘木，所以从那里移到这里。
English: Zhang Jun built this huge project at the very top of the mountains, and Mufu also complied with his wishes and moved the Taihe Mountain Copper Hall here, probably because Taihe Mountain is in the east of the province, while copper is a western genus and can be found in Liu Mu, so it was moved from there to here.

古文：有造流言以阻之者，谓鸡山为丽府之脉，丽江公亦姓木，忌剋剋，将移师鸡山，今先杀其首事僧矣。
现代文：有人制造流言以阻止迁移，说鸡足山是丽江府的山脉，丽江知府也姓木，忌讳金克，要调动军队到鸡足山，如今先杀了那首先倡导的僧人。
English: Someone made up a rumor to stop the relocation, saying that Jiu Jiao Mountain is a mountain range in Lijiang Prefecture, Lijiang Prefecture is also surnamed Mu, and Jin Ke is a taboo. They wanted to mobilize the army to Jiu Jiao Mountain, and now they killed the monk who first advocated it.

古文：余在黔闻之，谓其说甚谬。
现代文：我在贵州省时听到后，认为这种说法十分荒谬。
English: When I heard this in Guizhou Province, I thought it was completely absurd.

古文：丽北鸡南，闻鸡之脉自丽来，不闻丽自鸡来，姓与地各不相涉，何剋之有？
现代文：丽江府在北、鸡足山在南，只听说鸡足山脉从丽江府伸来，没有听说丽江府山脉从鸡足山伸来，姓氏与地名各不相干，有什么相刘的？
English: Lijiang Prefecture is in the north, and Jiufei Mountain is in the south. We only heard that the Jiufei Mountains extend from Lijiang Prefecture, but we did not hear that the mountains of Lijiang Prefecture extend from Jiufei Mountain. Surnames and place names are not related. What is the connection?

古文：及至此而见铜殿具堆积迦叶殿中，止无地以竖，尚候沐府相度，非有阻也。
现代文：等到了这里就看见铜殿器具堆积在迎叶殿中，只是没有地方竖起来，还等沐府前来选择位置，没有受到阻碍。
English: When I got here, I saw that the bronze hall equipment was piled up in the Yingye hall, but there was no place to stand up. I waited for Mu Fu to come and choose a position, and was not hindered.

古文：但一城之内，天长以后，为河南僧所主，前新建之迦叶殿，又陕西僧所主，以张按君同乡故，沐府亦以铜殿属之，惜两僧无道气，不免事事参商不和睦，非山门之福也。
现代文：只是一道墙以内，天长阁之后，是河南省的僧人主持，前面新建的迎叶殿、又是陕西省的僧人主持，陕西僧人因为和按察使张君是同乡的原故，沐府也把铜殿交给他，可惜两个僧人道气不同，不免事事不和睦，不是佛门之福。
English: Within just one wall, after the Tianchang Pavilion, it was presided over by a monk from Henan Province, and the newly built Yingye Hall in front of it was presided over by a monk from Shaanxi Province. The Shaanxi monk, because he was a fellow villager of Zhang Jun, was also given the Bronze Hall by Mu Prefecture. Unfortunately, the two monks had different temperaments, which inevitably led to disharmony and was not a blessing for Buddhism.

古文：余一入山，即闻河南、陕西二僧名，及抵绝顶，将暮，见陕西僧之叔在迦叶殿，遂以行李置之。
现代文：我一进山，就听说河南、陕西二位僧人的名字，等到了顶峰时，太阳即将落山，看见陕西僧人的叔父在迩叶殿，于是把行李放在那里。
English: As soon as I entered the mountain, I heard the names of the two monks from Henan and Shaanxi. When I reached the peak, the sun was about to set, and I saw the uncle of the Shaanxi monk in the Hall of Nine Leaves, so I put my luggage there.

古文：其侄明空，尚在罗汉壁西来寺。
现代文：他的侄儿明空还在罗汉壁的西来寺。
English: His nephew Akizora is still at Sairai-ji Temple in Luohanbi.

古文：由殿侧入天长阁，盖陕僧以铜殿具支绝迦叶殿后正门，毋令从中出入也。
现代文：我是从殿旁进天长阁的，因为陕西僧人把铜殿器具支撑起来，隔断了迩叶殿后的正门，不让从正门进入。
English: I entered Tianchangge from the side of the hall, because the Shaanxi monks propped up the equipment of the Bronze Hall and cut off the main gate behind the Suye Hall, preventing entry from the main gate.

古文：观其意殊特别愤愤。
现代文：河南僧人住在多宝楼下面，留我吃晚饭。
English: A monk from Henan Province, who lives below the Dobao Building, invited me to stay for dinner.

古文：余于是皆腹诽口头上不说而心中不以不为然之。
现代文：看到他心中特别愤愤不平，我对此口里不说，心中不以为然。
English: Seeing that he was particularly indignant in his heart, I did not say anything about it, and I did not agree with it in my heart.

古文：还至土主庙中，寒甚。
现代文：回到土主庙中，很冷。
English: Back in the local temple, it was very cold.

古文：陕僧爇火供果，为余谈其侄明空前募铜殿事甚悉。 今现在西来，可一顾也。 
现代文：陕西僧人点燃火、摆出果点，对我很详细地谈论其侄明空在前为铜殿募化的事。说 现在在西来寺，可去会一会他 。
English: The Shaanxi monk lit a fire, put out the fruit, and talked to me in detail about his nephew Ming Kuo's previous enlistment for the Bronze Hall, saying that now he was at Xilai Temple, he could visit him for a while.

古文：余唯唯应答声。
现代文：我答应着。
English: I said yes.

古文：二十八日晨起寒甚，亟披衣从南楼观日出，已皎然上升矣。
现代文：二十八日早晨起来很冷，急忙披衣到南楼观看日出，明亮的太阳已经升起来了。
English: On the morning of the 28th, it was very cold when I got up. I hurriedly put on my clothes and went to the south tower to watch the sunrise. The bright sun had already risen.

古文：晨餐后，即录碑文于天长、善雨之间。
现代文：早餐后，就在天长阁、善雨亭之间录碑文。
English: After breakfast, he inscribed an inscription between the Tianchang Pavilion and the Good Rain Pavilion.

古文：指僵，有张宪副二碑最长，独单独一人不及录。
现代文：手指冻僵了，有张副都御史的两块碑文最长，唯独来不及录。
English: My fingers are frozen, and the two inscriptions with the names of vice-governors of the capital are the longest, but I am too late to record them.

古文：还饭迦叶殿。
现代文：回到迎叶殿吃饭。
English: Back to Yingye Hall for dinner.

古文：乃从北门出。
现代文：于是从北门出去。
English: So I went out through the north gate.

古文：门外冈脊之上，多卖浆瀹粉者。
现代文：门外的冈梁上，有很多卖浆煮粉的人。
English: On the hillside outside the door, there are many people selling cooking powder.

古文：脊之西皆削崖下覆，岂即向所谓舍身崖者耶？
现代文：脊西都是向下覆盖的陡崖，难道就是从前所说的舍身崖吗？
English: To the west of the ridge, there are steep cliffs that are covered downwards. Is this the cliff that was once called the cliff of self-denial?

古文：北由脊上行者一里，乃折而西下，过一敝阁，乃南下束身峡。
现代文：往北从脊上走一里，于是转向西下，经过一处破阁，就往南下束身峡。
English: Walk north from the ridge for one mile, then turn west, pass a cabin, and go south to Bamboo Gorge.

古文：巨石双迸，中嵧成坑，路由中下，两崖逼束而下坠甚峻，宛转峡中，旁无余地，所谓 束身 也。
现代文：巨石向两边裂开，中间的洞穴成为坑，路从中下去，两旁的石崖紧紧约束而且很陡地往下坠，在峡谷中辗转，旁边没有余地，就是所说的 束身 之意。
English: The boulder splits on both sides, the cave in the middle becomes a pit, the road descends from it, the stone cliffs on both sides are tightly bound and fall very steeply, turning around in the canyon, there is no room next to it, that is, the meaning of "bondage."

古文：下半里，得小坪，伏虎庵倚之。
现代文：下半里，来到一块小平地，伏虎庵傍靠在这里。
English: In the second half of the journey, we came to a small flat area, where the Hokko-an rested.

古文：庵南向，从其前，多卖香草者，其草生于山脊。
现代文：庵向南，在庵前面，有很多卖香草的人，这种草生长在山脊。
English: The hermitage faces south. In front of the hermitage, there are many people selling herbs, which grow on the ridge.

古文：循舍身崖东南转，为曹溪、华首之道；绕庵西转，盘绝壁之上，是为礼佛台、太子过玄关。
现代文：沿舍身崖往东南转，是去曹溪寺、华首门的路；绕庵往西转，盘旋绝壁而上，那是礼佛台、太子过玄关。
English: Turning southeast along the Shoshin Cliff is the way to Caoxi Temple and Huashu Gate; turning west around the hermitage, circling up the cliff, is the Buddhist altar, and the prince passes through the entrance.

古文：余乃先过礼佛台。
现代文：我于是先去拜访礼佛台。
English: So I first went to visit the Buddhist altar.

古文：有亭在台东，亦中记，台峙其前石丛起中，悬绝壑之上。
现代文：台东有亭，中间也坍塌了，礼佛台峙立在其前丛丛耸起的乱石中，悬空于深壑的绝壁上。
English: There is a pavilion in Taitung, the middle of which has also collapsed. The Buddhist altar stands amidst the jumble of rocks that rise up in front of it, suspended over a deep cliff.

古文：北眺危崖，倒插于深壑中，乃绝顶北尽处也，其下即桃花箐，但突不能俯窥耳。
现代文：往北眺望陡直的石崖，倒插在深壑中，是绝顶北边尽头处，其下就是桃花警，只是石崖突出而不能俯视。
English: Looking to the north, the steep cliff is stuck upside down in the depths. It is at the very top, at the northern end. Below it is the Peach Blossom Guard, but the cliff is protruding and cannot be looked down on.

古文：其东南壑中，则放光寺在焉，其西隔坞相对者，香木坪也。
现代文：其东南的壑谷中，则放光寺在那里；其西隔坞相对的地方，是香木坪。
English: In the southeastern part of Shibuya, there is Hoko-ji Temple; on the opposite side of the west dock, there is Shokubo.

古文：是台当绝顶西北隅悬绝处，凌虚倒影，若浮舟之驾壑，为一山胜处，而亭既倾敝，不容无慨。
现代文：这礼佛台位于绝顶西北边尽头处，凌空倒影，像浮舟驾于深壑之上，是全山的著名胜景，然而亭已经倒塌废坏，不容不产生感慨。
English: This Buddhist altar is located at the end of the northwest side of the highest peak. The reflection of the sky, like a pontoon floating on the deep, is a famous scenic spot of the whole mountain. However, the pavilion has collapsed and been destroyed. It is impossible not to feel emotion.

古文：台之北，崖壁倒悬，磴道斩绝，而西崖之瞰壑中者，萼瓣上迸，若蒂斯启。
现代文：台北，崖壁倒挂，石阶路断绝，而从西边崖上俯瞰深壑中，石瓣朝上裂开，像要开放的花蒂。
English: Taipei, the cliff wall is upside down, the stone steps are broken, and from the west cliff overlooking the deep, the stone petals are cracked upwards, like a flower bud to open.

古文：遥向无路，乃栈木横崖端，飞虬接翼于层峦之上，遂分蒂而蹈，如入药房，中空外透，欲合欲分。
现代文：向远处去没有路，而栈道横在崖端，像飞虫从层层山峦之上连接两边，于是踩着裂开的石花蒂，如同进入芍药花冠，中空外透，欲合欲分。
English: There is no way to go to the distance, but the boardwalk runs across the cliff edge, connecting the two sides like a flying insect from the layers of hawthorn, so stepping on the cracked stone flower petals, as if entering the medicinal flower crown, the hollow is transparent, and the desire is divided.

古文：穿其奥窟，正当佛台之下，乃外石之附内石而成者，上连下迸，裂透两头。
现代文：穿进其深窟，正好位于礼佛台之下，深窟是外石靠近内石而形成的，上连下开，裂缝穿透两头。
English: It penetrates into its deep grotto, which is located just below the altar. The deep grotto is formed by the outer stone being close to the inner stone. It is split from top to bottom, with cracks penetrating both ends.

古文：侧身而进，披隙而出，复登南台之上。
现代文：侧身进去，穿裂隙而出，又登到南台之上。
English: He went in sideways, came out through a crack, and climbed up onto the south platform.

古文：仍东过伏虎，循岩傍壁，盘其壑顶。
现代文：仍然往东经过伏虎庵，沿岩靠壁，盘绕其壑顶。
English: It still went east past Fuguo-an, along the rock against the wall, and coiled around the top of its beak.

古文：仰视矗崖，忽忽欲堕，而孰知即向所振衣蹑履于其上者耶。
现代文：抬头看矗崖，恍忽摇摇欲堕，而谁知道就是刚才行走在上面、抖衣去尘的地方呢。
English: Looking up at the cliff, you suddenly feel like you're falling, and who knows if that's where you've just been walking, shaking your clothes to the dust.

古文：东南傍崖者一里余，有室倚崖，曰曹溪寺，以其侧有水一泓，在矗崖之下，引流坠壑，为众派之源，有似宗门法脉也。
现代文：往东南沿着崖壁走一里多，有房屋靠在崖上，名曹溪寺。因为寺旁有一塘水，在矗崖之下，分出水流坠入沟壑，是各股水流的源头，有如禅宗法门之脉。
English: Walk southeast along the cliff wall for more than a mile, there are houses leaning against the cliff, famous Caoxi Temple. Because there is a pond of water next to the temple, under the cliff, the branching flow of water falls into the gully, which is the source of each stream, like the vein of Zen Buddhism.

古文：稍下，路分为二，正道东南循崖平去，小径西下危坡。
现代文：逐渐下，路分成两条，正路向东南沿崖壁平去，小路往西下陡坡。
English: Gradually, the road splits into two. The main road flattens out along the cliff wall to the southeast, while the side road climbs down the steep slope to the west.

古文：余睇放光在西南壑，便疑从此小径为是。
现代文：我看到放光寺在西南边的壑谷，便以为从这条小路走对。
English: When I saw Hōkō-ji Temple in Shibuya on the southwest side, I thought it was the right path to take.

古文：西循之一里余，转而北逾一嘴，已盘礼佛台之下，其西北乃桃花箐路，而东南壑底，终无下处，乃从旧路返。
现代文：往西顺小路走一里多，转向北翻一道山口，已经绕到礼佛台之下，其西北是去桃花青的路，而东南的壑谷底下，最终没有下脚的地方，于是从原路返回。
English: I walked more than a mile to the west along the path, turned north across a mountain pass, and had already circled under the Liibutai. To the northwest was the road to Taohuaqing, and to the southeast, under the Shugu Valley, there was finally no place to set foot, so I returned from the original road.

古文：二里，出循崖正道，过八功德水，于是崖路愈逼仄，线底缘嵌绝壁上，仰眺只觉崇崇隆隆而不见其顶，下瞰只觉窅窅冥冥而莫晰其根，如悬一幅万仞苍崖图，而缀身其间，不辨身在何际也。
现代文：二里，出到沿崖壁走的正路，经过八功德水，这里崖上的路越来越狭窄，线一样环绕、镶嵌在绝壁上，抬头看只觉得高大弯隆而看不见其顶，往下俯瞰只觉得幽远深隐而无法看清其底，如悬挂着的一幅万初苍崖图，而置身图中，分辨不出自己是在什么地方。
English: After two miles, you come to the right path along the cliff wall, passing through the Eight Merits and Virtues. Here, the path on the cliff is getting narrower and narrower. It is surrounded by lines and embedded in the cliff. Looking up, you only feel tall and can't see the top. Looking down, you only feel far away and can't see the bottom. It's like a hanging picture of the cliff in the beginning, and you can't tell where you are in the picture.

古文：东一里，崖势上飞，高穹如檐，覆环其下，如户阈形，其内壁立如掩扉，盖其石齿齿皆堕而不尽堕之余，所谓华首门也。
现代文：往东一里，崖势向上飞，像屋檐般的高高弯隆，环盖其下，如门如槛，其内崖壁耸立，如同关着的门扇，原来崖石齿状排列，全往下堕落，而堕落不尽的剩余部分，是所谓的华首门。
English: One mile to the east, the cliff's momentum flies upward. A high, high, curved hill like a eaves surrounds it, like a door, like a threshold. Its inner cliff wall rises, like a closed door. Originally, the cliffs were arranged in a jagged manner, and they all fell down. The remaining part of the fall is the so-called Huashou Gate.

古文：其高二十丈，其上穹覆者，又不知凡几，盖即绝顶观海门下危崖也。
现代文：门高二十丈，上面弯隆覆盖的部分，又不知一共有多高，大概就是绝顶上看到的海门下的陡崖。
English: The gate is twenty stories high, and the part covered by the crag above, and I don't know how high it is altogether, is probably the steep cliff under the sea gate seen at the very top.

古文：门之下，倚壁为亭，两旁建小砖塔襄之，即经所称迦叶受衣入定处，待六十百千岁以付弥勒者也。
现代文：华首门之下，傍靠壁建有亭，两旁建有小砖塔相配，就是经书所说的迎叶尊者受衣入定处，等到六十百千岁时交给弥勒佛。
English: Under the Huashou Gate, next to the wall, there is a pavilion, and small brick towers are built on both sides. This is the place where, according to the scriptures, the Venerable Yingye was clothed and enshrined before being handed over to Maitreya Buddha at the age of sixty thousand years.

古文：天台王十岳士性宪副诗偈镌壁间，而倪按院大书 石状奇绝 四字，横镌而朱丹之。其效颦效仿耶？
现代文：天台县人王十岳副都御史题写的诗渴镌刻在壁间，而倪巡按书写的 石状奇绝 四个大字，横刻并且涂成红色，是效肇呢？
English: The poem "Thirst" inscribed by the Tiantai County people's king "Ten Mountains" and vice-governor "History" is engraved on the wall, while the "Stone" inscribed by Ni Junpin Four large characters, engraved horizontally and painted red, are they effective?

古文：黥面耶比喻模仿？在束身书 石状大奇 ，在袈裟书 石状又奇 ，在兜率峡口书 石状始奇 ，凡四处，各换一字，山灵何罪而受此耶？
现代文：还是黔面呢？在束身崖书写 石状大奇 ，在架装石书写 石状又奇 在兜率缺口书写 石状始奇 ，一共四处，各处换一个字，山灵有什么罪要受这种惩罚呢？
English: Or is it a mask? In the bundled cliff, write "Stone Great Wonder," in the erected stone, write "Stone and Strange," in the gap of the cart, write "Stone Beginning Wonder," altogether four places, change a word everywhere, what crime does the mountain spirit have to suffer this punishment?

古文：又半里，矗崖东尽，石脊下垂，有寺倚其东，是为铜佛殿，今扁其门曰传灯寺，盖即绝顶东突，由猢狲梯下坠为此，再下即迦叶寺，而为西南支发脉者。
现代文：又半里，矗崖东边尽头处，石脊往下垂，东面傍靠着寺，这是铜佛殿，如今殿的扁额上写着传灯寺，原来就是绝顶向东突起、从瑚娜梯下坠到的地方，再下就是逝叶寺，从而成为鸡足山西南支的发起山脉。
English: Another half-mile away, at the eastern end of the cliff, the stone ridge sags downward, with a temple next to it to the east. This is the Bronze Buddha Hall. On the slab of the hall today is written the Lantern Transmission Temple. Originally, it was the place where the very top protruded to the east and fell from the Hu Na Ladder, and then it was the Passing Leaf Temple, thus becoming the origin of the southwestern branch of the Chicken Foot Mountain.

古文：寺东向，大路自下而来，抵寺前分两歧：由其北峡登寺后猢狲梯，为绝顶前门道，余昨从上所瞰者，由寺前循崖西转，过华首门，上束身峡，为绝顶后门道，余兹下所从来者。
现代文：寺向东，大路从下面而来，到寺前分成两条：顺其北峡攀登寺后的瑚孙梯，是去绝顶前门的路，也是我昨天从上面所俯瞰到的路；从寺前沿崖往西转，经过华首门，上束身峡，是去绝顶后门的路，也是我现在往下所走来的路。
English: Temple to the east, the road coming from below, to the front of the temple is divided into two: along the North Gorge to climb the Hunsun Ladder after the temple, is the road to the front door of the top, which is also the road I overlooked from above yesterday; from the cliff at the front of the temple to the west, through the Huashou Gate, the upper bundle gorge, is the road to the back door of the top, which is also the road I am walking down now.

古文：盖寺北为峡，寺西为崖，寺后猢狲梯由绝顶垂脊而下，乃崖之所东尽而峡之所南环者也。
现代文：原来寺北是峡谷，寺西为崖壁，寺后瑚孙梯顺绝顶垂脊而下，是矗崖东边尽头而峡谷向南绕的地方。
English: Originally, the north of the temple was a canyon, the west of the temple was a cliff wall, and the back of the temple was the place where the Hu Sun Di went down along the top of the ridge, the east end of the cliff and the canyon to the south.

古文：寺北有石峰突踞峡中，有庵倚其上，是为袈裟石。
现代文：寺北有石峰在峡谷中夹起，石峰上傍靠有庵，那是架装石。
English: To the north of the temple, there is a stone peak clamped in the canyon, and there is a hermitage next to the stone peak, which is a set stone.

古文：余初不知其为袈裟石也，望之有异，遂不入铜佛殿而登此石。至则庵僧迎余坐石上。
现代文：我开初不知道它是架装石，看着有些异常，就没进铜佛殿而登此石、到达时庵里的僧人迎接我坐在石上。
English: At first, I didn't know it was a set stone. Seeing something unusual, I climbed the stone without entering the Bronze Buddha Hall. When I arrived, the monks in the hermitage greeted me and sat on the stone.

古文：石纹离披作两叠痕，而上有圆孔。
现代文：石纹分散出两层痕迹，而上部有圆孔。
English: There are two layers of marks in the stone pattern, and a round hole in the upper part.

古文：僧指其纹为迦叶袈裟，指其孔为迦叶卓锡之迹。
现代文：僧人说，石纹为迎叶尊者的架装，圆孔为迩叶尊者插放锡杖的遗迹。
English: The monk said that the stone pattern is the framework of the Yingye Venerable, and the round hole is the relic of the Yingye Venerable inserting the tin cane.

古文：即无遗迹，然其处回崖外绕，坠壑中盘，此石缀崖瞰壑，固自奇也。
现代文：即使没有迎叶的遗迹，这里曲折的山崖往外绕，下坠的壑谷盘在中间，缀连山崖，能俯瞰深壑，本来就是奇观。
English: Even without the remains of the Yingye, the twisting cliffs here wind outward, the sinking valley plate is in the middle, adjoining the cliffs, overlooking the deep, it is a wonder.

古文：僧瀹米花为献，甚润枯肠。
现代文：僧人泡米花给我吃，饥肠大为滋润。
English: The monk made me eat the steamed rice flowers, which was very nourishing for my hungry stomach.

古文：余时欲下放光、圣峰诸寺，而不能忘情于猢狲梯，遂循石右上。
现代文：我当时准备下放光、圣峰等寺，但不能忘情于瑚琳梯，于是沿架装石往右边上。
English: At that time, I was preparing to lower the light, the sacred peak and other temples, but I couldn't forget the Hu Lin Di, so I went up the right side of the stone shelf.

古文：半里，升梯。
现代文：半里，登梯。
English: Half a mile, climb the stairs.

古文：梯乃自然石级，有叠磴痕可以衔趾，而痕间石芒齿齿，著足甚难。
现代文：梯是自然生成的石阶，有层叠的阶痕能够衔住脚趾，但阶痕石尖齿状排列，很难落脚。
English: Ladders are naturally formed stone steps, with cascading step marks able to hold the toes, but the step marks are arranged like cusps, making it difficult to land.

古文：脊左瞰即华首矗崖之上，右瞰即袈裟坠壑之端，其齿齿之石，华首门乃垂而下，此梯乃错而上者，然质则同也。
现代文：往脊左俯瞰就是华首门矗崖之上，往右俯瞰就是架装石下坠的壑谷口，那种齿状排列的石崖，在华首门是往下垂，此瑚娜梯是倒转为向上升，而石质则是相同的。
English: Looking down the ridge to the left, it is above the Huashoumen cliff, and looking down to the right, it is the Shibuya mouth where the stones are set. The jagged stone cliff at the Huashoumen is hanging down, while the Huana ladder is upside down and the stone quality is the same.

古文：上半里，数折而梯尽，仍从峡上。
现代文：上半里，数次转折而石梯已尽，仍然顺峡谷上。
English: In the first half-mile, after several twists and turns, the stone staircase was exhausted, but still continued up the canyon.

古文：问去顶迥绝，乃返步下梯，由铜佛殿北东下峡中。
现代文：询问距离绝顶很远，于是返回顺石梯往下走，从铜佛殿北往东下到峡谷中。
English: He asked how far it was from the very top, so he returned and walked down the stone staircase, from the Bronze Buddha Hall north to east into the canyon.

古文：一里，横盘峡底，有庵当其中，所谓兜率庵也，已半倾。
现代文：一里，横绕峡谷底，有庵位于其中，是所说的兜率庵，已经倒塌了一半。
English: For one kilometer, around the bottom of the canyon, there is a hermitage in the middle of it, it is the so-called "tramp's hermitage," which is already half collapsed.

古文：其后即绝顶与罗汉壁分支前突处，庵前峡复深坠。
现代文：庵后就是绝顶与罗汉壁分支前突出的地方，庵前峡谷又深深下坠。
English: Behind the hermitage is the place where the peak and the front of the branch of the Rohan wall protrude, and the canyon in front of the hermitage falls deeply.

古文：循庵横度，循左崖下半里，崖根有洼内嵌，前有巨树流荫，并鹤峋居士诗碑。
现代文：沿庵横穿峡谷，顺左边山崖下半里，崖底有洼坑往内嵌，前后有巨大的树荫飘动，有鹤峋居士的诗碑。
English: Along the hermitage across the canyon, along the lower half of the left cliff, there are depressions at the bottom of the cliff, there are huge shadows fluttering back and forth, and there is a poem monument of the cranes.

古文：其前峡遂深蟠，路从其上，又分为两：循右峡中西南下者，为迦叶寺、圣峰寺西支大道；循左崖下东向行者，为西来寺、碧云寺、罗汉壁间道。
现代文：前边的峡谷于是弯曲得很厉害，道路从峡谷往上，又分成两条：沿右峡谷中间往西南下，是去迎叶寺、圣峰寺西支山脉的大路；沿左崖下往东行，是去西来寺、碧云寺、罗汉壁的小路。
English: As a result, the canyon in the foreground was severely curved, and the road leading up from the canyon was divided into two: along the middle of the right canyon to the southwest was the main road to Yingye Temple and Shengfeng Temple in the West Branch Mountains; along the left cliff to the east was the path to Xilai Temple, Biyun Temple and Luo Hanbi.

古文：余时身随西峡下，而一步一回眺，未尝不神飞罗汉壁间也。
现代文：我当时虽然身子顺西峡谷而下，却一步一回头看，思想完全飞到罗汉壁间了。
English: At that time, although I was descending along the west canyon, I looked back step by step, and my thoughts completely flew to the walls of Luohan.

古文：下半里为仰高亭，在悬峡中，因圮未入。
现代文：下半里为仰高亭，悬在峡谷中，因坝塌而没进去。
English: The lower half is the Yanggao Pavilion, suspended in the canyon, which was not entered due to the dam collapse.

古文：既下，又半里出峡，为迦叶寺，其门东向，中亦高敞。
现代文：下完之后，又走半里出峡，为迦叶寺，寺门向东，寺中也高大宽敞。
English: After descending, I walked another half-mile out of the gorge, to Ka Yeh Temple. The temple gate faces east, and the temple is tall and spacious.

古文：此古迦叶殿，近因顶有新构，遂称此为寺云。
现代文：这是古迩叶殿，近来因在绝顶上新建了迎叶殿，于是称这里为寺。
English: This is the ancient Yingye Hall. Recently, the Yingye Hall has been newly built on the top of the mountain, so it is called a temple.

古文：入谒拜见尊者。
现代文：进去拜迎叶尊者。
English: Let's go in and pay homage to the venerable Ip.

古文：从其前南向循岐而下，其路峻而大。
现代文：从寺前往南沿岔路而下，其路陡但宽大。
English: Heading south from the temple, the path descends along a ridge, steep but wide.

古文：两丐者覆松为棚。
现代文：两个乞丐用松树搭成棚。
English: Two beggars make a shed out of pine trees.

古文：曲折夹道数十折，一里余而至会灯寺。
现代文：曲折狭窄的路转了数十道弯，一里多就到会灯寺。
English: After dozens of twists and turns on the narrow road, it was just over a mile to Kyoenji Temple.

古文：寺南向，入谒而出。
现代文：寺向南，进去叩拜而出。
English: Temple to the south, go in and worship and go out.

古文：东下半里，有岐西去者，放光寺道也。
现代文：往东下半里，有向西去的岔路，是去放光寺的路。
English: Half a mile to the east, there is a side road to the west, which is the road to Hoko-ji Temple.

古文：恐日昃ｚè太阳西斜不及行，遂不西向而东趋。
现代文：怕太阳落山来不及走到，就不向西走而往东赶路。
English: Afraid that the sun might not be up in time for sunset, they do not go west but hurry east.

古文：其路坦而大，一里为圣峰寺。
现代文：道路平坦而宽大，一里到圣峰寺。
English: The road is flat and wide, and it's a mile to Shifeng Temple.

古文：寺东向，踞分支之上。前有巨坊，后有杰阁，其势甚雄拓。
现代文：寺向东，坐落在分支山脉上，前面有巨大的牌坊，后面有高高的阁，气势十分雄伟开阔。
English: The temple faces east and is located on a branch of the mountain range. There is a huge archway in front and a tall pavilion behind. It is very majestic and open.

古文：阁祀玉皇，今皆以玉皇阁称之。
现代文：阁祭祀玉皇，如今都称其为玉皇阁。
English: The pavilion was dedicated to the Jade Emperor, and is now known as the Jade Emperor Pavilion.

古文：从此北瞻西来寺，高缀层崖之上，屏霞亘壁，飘渺天半，其景甚异。
现代文：从这里往北看西来寺，高高点缀在层层崖壁之上，屏障云霞，横贯崖壁，飘渺于天空中，景致非常奇异。
English: Looking north from here, Xilai Temple is dotted high above the layers of cliff walls. A barrier of clouds and haze stretches across the cliff walls, floating in the sky. The scenery is very strange.

古文：出寺，东随陇行，二里，过白云寺。
现代文：走出寺，往东顺陇行，二里，经过白云寺。
English: Go out of the temple and walk east along the footpath for two miles, passing by Baiyun Temple.

古文：又从其右东行一里半，过慧林庵，则左右两溪合于前而陇尽。
现代文：又顺寺右往东走一里半，经过慧林庵，于是左右两条溪在前面会合而陇尽。
English: I walked east along the right side of the temple for a mile and a half, passing through Huilin Temple, whereupon the two streams met in front of me and ran out.

古文：遂渡其左峡，东过大觉寺蔬园，一里，从息阴后逾中支之脊，从千佛阁前观街子。
现代文：就穿过庵左边的峡谷，往东经过大觉寺菜园，一里，从息阴轩后翻越中支的山梁，走千佛阁前观览街子。
English: I walked through the canyon on the left side of the hermitage, eastward past the vegetable garden of Daikyo-ji Temple, one mile, and then climbed over the mountain ridge of the middle branch from Shiyinshen, and walked in front of the Thousand Buddha Pagodas to view the town.

古文：街子者，惟腊底年底集山中，为朝山佛教徒到名山进行拜佛之节，昔在石钟寺前，今移此以近大觉，为诸寺之中也。
现代文：赶街的人只有年底才在山中聚 集，是朝山的节日，从前在石钟寺前面，如今移到这里以便靠近大觉寺，也处于各寺的正中。
English: People on the streets only gather in the mountains at the end of the year. It's the morning mountain festival. It used to be in front of the Stone Bell Temple, but now it's moved here to be closer to the Daikeiji Temple, and it's also in the middle of all the temples.

古文：由街子东半里，过西竺寺，又二里余，入悉檀。
现代文：顺街子往东走半里，经过西竺寺，又走二里多，进入悉檀寺。
English: Walk east along the street for half a mile, pass by Saiho-ji Temple, and then walk two more miles to Siddan-ji Temple.

古文：具餐后，知沈公事莘野乃翁。来叩，尚留待寺间，亟下楼而沈公至，各道表达倾慕之意。
现代文：吃晚餐后，知道沈公来叩拜，就留在寺中等待，急忙下楼而沈公来到，各自诉说倾心仰慕的心意。
English: After dinner, knowing that Shen Gong was coming to worship, they stayed in the temple to wait. They hurried downstairs when Shen Gong arrived, and each of them expressed their admiration.

古文：时已暮，寺中具池汤热水候浴，遂与四长老及沈公就浴池中。
现代文：天已经黑了，寺中准备了热水等候沐浴，于是和四位住持僧以及沈公在池中沐浴。
English: It was already dark and the temple had prepared hot water for bathing, so he and the four resident monks and Shen Gong took a bath in the pool.

古文：池以砖甃，长丈五、阔八尺，汤深四尺，炊从隔壁釜中，竟日一整天乃温。
现代文：池子是砖砌的，一丈五长、八尺宽，热水有四尺深，在隔壁大锅中烧水，一整天才热。
English: The pool is made of bricks. It is five feet long and eight feet wide. The hot water is four feet deep. The water is boiled in a cauldron next door and is hot for a whole day.

古文：浴者先从池外挽水涤体，然后入池，坐水中浸一时，复出池外，擦而涤之，再浸再擦，浸时不一动，恐垢落池中也。
现代文：沐浴的人先在池子外用水洗身子，然后进入池子，坐在水中泡一段时间，又出到池外，边擦边洗，再泡再擦，泡的时候一动不动，怕污垢落进池中。
English: Bathers first rinse themselves with water outside the pool, then enter the pool, sit in the water and soak for a while, then go outside the pool, scrub and wash, then soak and wipe, and do not move while soaking, for fear of dirt falling into the pool.

古文：余自三里盘浴后，入滇只澡于温泉，如此番之浴，遇亦罕矣。
现代文：我从在三里盘沐浴后，进入云南省只在温泉洗澡，这种方式的沐浴，也是很少遇到过啊。
English: After bathing in Sanlitun, I went to Yunnan Province to bathe only in hot springs. I have rarely encountered this kind of bathing.

古文：二十九日饭于悉檀，同沈公及体极之侄同游街子。
现代文：二十九日在悉檀寺吃饭，和沈公以及体极的侄儿一同游览街子。
English: On the 29th, I had dinner at Siddan-ji Temple and toured the town with Shengong and my extremely fit nephew.

古文：余市鞋，顾仆市帽。
现代文：我买鞋，顾仆买帽。
English: I buy shoes, my servant buys a hat.

古文：遇大觉、遍周亦出游，欲拉与俱。
现代文：遇到大觉寺的遍周也出来游览，想拉我和他一齐游。
English: When I came across Daikaku-ji Temple, Henshu also came out to visit, wanting to take me on a tour with him.

古文：余辞岁朝往祝，盖以其届七旬也。
现代文：我以过年再去祝寿辞谢了他，因为到时他满七十岁。
English: I thanked him by saying that I would visit him again in the New Year to wish him a happy birthday, because by then he would be seventy years old.

古文：既午，沈公先别去，余食市面一瓯ōｕ小盆。
现代文：过了中午，沈公先告别而去，我吃了一小盆面。
English: After noon, Shen Gong said goodbye and left. I ate a small bowl of noodles.

古文：一里余，从大乘庵上幻住。
现代文：走一里多，顺大乘庵上幻住庵。
English: After walking for more than a kilometer, Shundaijian went to live in an imaginary hermitage.

古文：一里入幻住，见其额为福宁寺，问道而出，犹不知为幻住也。
现代文：走，里进入幻住庵，看见庵的扁额是福宁寺，问路后就出来，还不知就是幻住庵。
English: Go inside, enter the hallucinatory hermitage, see the flat of the hermitage is Funing Temple, ask the way and come out, still do not know it is the hallucinatory hermitage.

古文：由其右过峡西北行，一里而入兰陀寺，寺南向。
现代文：从庵右穿过峡谷往西北行，走一里就进入兰陀寺，寺向南。
English: From the right side of the hermitage, walk through the canyon to the northwest. After walking one mile, you will enter the Lando Temple. The temple faces south.

古文：由正殿入其东楼，艮一师出迎。
现代文：从正殿进到其东楼，良一法师出来迎接。
English: Entering from the main hall to its east building, Master Ryoichi came out to greet them.

古文：问殿前所卧石碑。
现代文：询问殿前平卧的石碑。
English: Ask about the stone tablet lying flat in front of the hall.

古文：曰： 此先师所撰迦叶事迹记也。 
现代文：良一回答说： 这是先师所撰写的迎叶事迹碑记。 
English: Liang Yi replied, "This is the record of the deeds of welcoming leaves written by the previous teacher.

古文：昔竖华首门亭中，潘按君建绝顶观风台，当事者曳之顶，将摩镌新记，艮一师闻而往止之，得免，以华首路峻不得下，因纡道置此。
现代文：从前立在华首门的亭中，潘巡按在绝顶建观风台，办事的人把碑拖到顶上，准备磨掉刻新碑记，良一法师闻知后前去制止，碑得以幸免于毁，因为华首门路陡难以下来，于是绕道放在这里。
English: From the pavilion that stood in front of the Huashou Gate, Pan Junan built a wind observation platform at the very top. The person in charge dragged the monument to the top, ready to rub off the newly engraved monument. Liang Yi Mage heard about it and went to stop it. The monument was spared from destruction, because the Huashou Gate Road is steep and difficult to get down, so it was placed here by a detour.

古文：余欲录之，其碑两面镌字，而前半篇在下。
现代文：我准备录下来，其碑两面刻字，而前半篇在下面。
English: I'm going to record it, and it's going to be inscribed on both sides of the tablet, and the first half is below.

古文：艮一指壁间挂轴云： 此即其文，从碑誉写而出者。 
现代文：良一指着壁间的挂轴云： 这就是碑文，从碑上誊写下来的。 
English: Liang Yi pointed to the hanging scroll cloud between the walls: This is the inscription, copied from the tablet.

古文：余因低悬其轴，以案就录之。
现代文：我于是把卷轴挂低，把书案移近录写碑文。
English: So I hung the scroll low and moved the bookcase closer to record the inscription.

古文：艮一供斋，沈公亦至。
现代文：良一供应斋饭，沈公也来了。
English: Liang Yi served fried rice, and Shen Gong also came.

古文：斋后，余度文长不能竟，令顾仆下取卧具。
现代文：吃斋饭后，我估计碑文长不能录完，让顾仆下去取卧具。
English: After eating the meal, I estimated that the chief of the inscription could not finish the recording, and let the attendant go down to get the bedding.

古文：沈公别去，余订以明日当往叩也。
现代文：沈公告别离去，我约定明天要去叩拜。
English: Shen announced, "Don't leave, I've made an appointment to go and prostrate myself tomorrow."

古文：迨暮，录犹未竟，顾仆以卧具至，遂卧兰陀禅榻。
现代文：到傍晚，碑文还没录完，顾仆把卧具拿来了，于是在兰陀寺禅榻睡卧。
English: In the late afternoon, before the inscription had been recorded, Gu's servant brought the bedding, so Gu slept on a Zen mat in the Lando Temple.

古文：顾仆传弘辨、安仁语曰： 明日是除夕，幸尔主早返寺，毋令人悬望也。 
现代文：顾仆转告弘辨、安仁的话说： 明天是除夕，希望你的主人早点回寺，不要让人悬挂盼望。 
English: Gu's servant relayed the words of Hongban and Anren, saying, "Tomorrow is New Year's Eve. I hope your master returns to the temple early. Don't let people get their hopes up."

古文：余闻之，为凄然者久之。
现代文：我听后心里凄然了很久。
English: I was stunned for a long time after hearing that.

古文：三十日早起盥栉梳头而莘野至，相见甚慰。
现代文：三十日早晨起床梳洗而萃野来到，相见十分快慰。
English: On the morning of the 30th, I got up to freshen up, and Mochino arrived. It was a great pleasure to meet him.

古文：同饭于兰陀。
现代文：一同在兰陀寺吃饭。
English: They eat together at Landa Temple.

古文：余乃录碑，完而莘野已去。
现代文：我仍然录碑文，录完后萃野已经离去。
English: I still recorded the inscription, but after I finished recording, Sukeno had already left.

古文：遂由寺循脊北上，其道较坦，一里，转而东，一里出莘野庐前小静室。
现代文：于是从兰陀寺沿山脊往北上，道路较平，一里，转向东，一里出到萃野庐前的小静室。
English: So, from Lando Temple, I walked north along the ridge, the road was relatively flat, one mile, turned east, and walked one mile to the small quiet room in front of the Sukenobaru.

古文：又半里而入莘野楼，则沈公在而莘野未还。
现代文：又半里就到萃野楼，而沈公在但萃野还没回来。
English: Another half-mile to the Suyeong building, and Shengong is there, but Suyeong hasn't returned yet.

古文：沈公为具食，莘野适至，遂燕通 宴 招待客人其楼。
现代文：沈公为我准备饭，苹野恰好回来，于是在他的楼上吃饭。
English: Shengong was preparing dinner for me, and Pingye just happened to come back, so we had dinner on his floor.

古文：义子躬执爂，煨芋煮蔬，甚乐也。
现代文：父子一起自己做饭，偎芋煮菜，十分快乐。
English: Father and son cook their own meals together, and are very happy when they cook dishes with sweet potatoes.

古文：莘野恳令顾仆取卧具于兰陀曰： 同是天涯，何必以常住静室为分。 
现代文：萃野请我让顾仆去兰陀寺取卧具，说： 同样是天涯地角，何必以寺院、静室为界限。 
English: Tsuchino asked me to let the attendant go to the Lando Temple to get the bedding, saying: It is also the end of the world, why should the temple and the seclusion room be the boundary.

古文：余从之，遂停寝其楼之北楹。
现代文：我听从了，就住宿在他楼上的北间。
English: I obeyed and stayed in the north room upstairs from him.

古文：其楼东南向，前瞰重壑，左右抱两峰，甚舒而称。
现代文：楼向东南，前面俯瞰重重山壑，左右怀抱两座山峰，十分舒坦而且对称。
English: The building faces south-east, overlooking the mountains in front, and hugging two peaks on the left and right. It is very comfortable and symmetrical.

古文：楼前以桫松连皮为栏，制朴而雅，楼窗疏棂明净。
现代文：楼前用连皮的渺松为栏，制作简朴而雅致，楼窗宽大明净。
English: The front of the building is lined with thin pine boards, the production is simple and elegant, and the windows are wide and clear.

古文：度除夕于万峰深处，此一宵胜人间千百宵。
现代文：在万山深处度过除夕，这一夜胜过世间千百夜。
English: Spending New Year's Eve in the depths of the mountains, this night is better than a thousand nights in the world.

古文：薄暮，凭窗前，瞰星辰烨烨下垂，坞底火光，远近纷挐ｎá相著牵引，皆朝山者，彻夜荧然不绝，与瑶池月下，又一观矣。
现代文：将近傍晚，靠在窗前，看着晨辰垂下的明亮星光，而坞底的火光，远近相互牵引，都是朝山的人，通宵光亮不断，和月光下的瑶池一样，又是一大观啊！
English: Near evening, leaning in front of the window, watching the bright starlight of the morning, and the firelight at the bottom of the dock, pulling each other from far and near, are morning people, shining all night long, just like Dianchi Lake under the moonlight, it's another great view!

