古文：陈复休殷天祥闾丘子张卓
现代文：陈复休殷天祥闾丘子张卓
English: Chen Fuxiu, Yin Tianxiang, Zou Qiaozi, Zhang Zhuo

古文：陈复休
现代文：陈复休
English: Chen Fuxiu resigns

古文：陈复休者，号陈七子。
现代文：陈复休，号陈七子。
English: Chen Fuxiu, known as Chen Qizi.

古文：贞元中，来居褒城，耕农樵采，与常无异，如五十许人，多变化之术。
现代文：贞元年间，来到褒城居住。
English: In the first year of her reign, she came to live in Baocheng.

古文：褒人有好事少年，承奉之者五六人，常为设酒食，以求学其术，勤勤不已。
现代文：耕地打柴，与平常人没有什么不同。他像五十多岁的人，有很多变化的法术。褒城有喜欢多事的青年人，奉承陈复休的有五六人，他们常常为陈复休安排酒食，以求学到他的法术，总是很殷勤。
English: He is no different from ordinary people. He is like a man in his fifties and has many different spells. There are young people in Baocheng who like to be busy. There are five or six people who flatter Chen Fuxiu. They often arrange food and drink for Chen Fuxiu in order to learn his spells. They are always very attentive.

古文：复休约之曰： 我出西郊，行及我者，授以术。 
现代文：陈复休与他们约定说： 我出西郊，走路能赶上我的人，我就把法术教给他。 
English: Chen Fuxiu made an agreement with them, saying, "When I leave the western suburbs, I will teach magic to anyone who can catch up with me on foot."

古文：复休徐行，群少年奔走追之，终不能及，遂止，无得其术者。
现代文：陈复休慢慢走，一群年轻人奔跑着追赶他，始终没能赶上，就停止了，所以没有学到他的法术的人。
English: Chen Fuxiu walked slowly, a group of young people ran after him, but they could not catch up and stopped, so they did not learn his magic.

古文：后入市，众复奉之不已，复休与出郊外，坐大树下。
现代文：后来陈复休进入街市，众人又不停地讨好他，陈复休与他们一起走到郊外，坐在大树下。
English: Later, Chen Fuxiu entered the street market, and the crowd continued to flatter him. Chen Fuxiu walked with them to the outskirts and sat under a big tree.

古文：语道未竟，忽然暴卒，须臾臭败。
现代文：道术还没传完毕，陈复休忽然暴死，一会儿的工夫就发臭变坏了。
English: Before the transmission of Taoism was complete, Chen Fuxiu suddenly died violently, and within a short period of time, the stench worsened.

古文：众皆惊走，莫敢回视。
现代文：大家都吓跑了，没有人敢回去看他。
English: Everyone was scared away and no one dared to go back to see him.

古文：自此诸少年不敢干之，常狂醉市中。
现代文：从此众位年轻人都不敢求他。他还常常在市中饮得狂醉。
English: Since then, many young people have not dared to approach him, and he often drinks himself into a rage in the city.

古文：褒帅李谠，怒而系于狱中，欲加其罪。
现代文：褒帅李谠发怒把他关押在狱中，想要治他的罪。
English: In a fit of rage, the commissary, Li Xuan, locked him up in prison to punish him for his crime.

古文：桎梏甚严，忽不食而死，寻即臭烂，虫蛆流出。弃之郊外。
现代文：陈复休被刑具锁得很严密，忽然不吃东西而死去，不久就臭烂了，虫蛆随脓血流出，就被弃于郊外。
English: Chen Fuxiu was locked up very tightly by the torture device, suddenly died without eating, soon stank, and the maggots flowed out with the blood, and was abandoned in the suburbs.

古文：旋亦还家，复在市中。
现代文：但不久陈复休又回到家里，又在市中。
English: But soon Chen Fuxiu was back at home and in the city.

古文：谠时加礼异，为筑室于褒城江之南岸，遗与甚多，略无受者。
现代文：李谠时时以特殊礼节相待，为他在褒城江南岸修筑房屋，送给他很多东西，陈复休一点也不收受。
English: Li Lan always treated Chen Fuxiu with special courtesy. He built a house for him on the south bank of the Baocheng River and gave him many things. Chen Fuxiu did not accept them at all.

古文：河东柳公仲郢、相国周墀、燕国公高骈，拥旄三州，皆威望严重，而深加礼敬，书币相属，复休亦无所受。
现代文：河东柳仲郢、相国崔墀、燕国公高骈，指挥三州，都有很高的威望，而对他深加礼敬，不断给他写信送礼，陈复休也是什么也不接受。
English: The commanders of the Three Provinces, Liu Zhongyao of Hedong, Cui Yao of Xiangguo, and Gao Yao of Yan Guoguo, were all highly respected, and they treated him with deep respect, constantly sending him letters and gifts. Chen Fuxiu also did not accept anything.

古文：唯鹤氅布裘，受而贮之，亦未尝衣着也。
现代文：只接受了鹤氅布袍却把它放在那里，也不曾穿着。
English: He only accepted the craneskin robe, but left it there and did not wear it.

古文：昌明令胡仿，常师事之，将赴任，留钱五千，为复休市酒。
现代文：昌明县令胡仿平常以师侍事奉他，将赴任，留下五千钱，为陈复休买酒。
English: The Changming County magistrate Hu Fong, who usually served Chen Fuxiu as his mentor, will leave behind five thousand yuan to buy alcohol for Chen Fuxiu.

古文：笑而不取曰： 吾金玉甚多，恨不能用耳。 
现代文：陈复休笑而不取，他说： 我的金玉很多，遗憾的是不能用。 
English: Chen Fuxiu laughed but did not take it, he said: I have a lot of gold and unfortunately I cannot use it.

古文：以锄授仿，使之劚地，不二三寸，金玉钱货。随劚而出。
现代文：把锄头交给胡仿让他刨地，不到二三寸，金玉钱货就随着锄头刨出。
English: He gave the shovel to Hu Fong and let him shovel the ground. Less than two or three inches later, the gold and money goods were shoveled out with the shovel.

古文：曰： 人间之物，固若是矣，但世人赋分有定，不合多取。
现代文：他说： 人间的东西，本来就像这样遍地都有，只是世人天赋本分有一定，不该多取。
English: He said, "Human things, like this, are everywhere, but the world's natural talents have a certain duty, and should not be taken more.

古文：若吾用之，岂有限约乎？ 
现代文：如果我用钱财，难道有限度约束吗？ 
English: If I use money, is there a limit?

古文：仿之昌明，复休祖之于仙流江上，指砂中，令仿取酒器。
现代文：胡仿去昌明，陈复休在仙流江上为他饯行。陈复休手指沙中，让胡仿取酒器。
English: Hu Yiming went to Changming, Chen Fuxiu accompanied him on the Xianliu River. Chen Fuxiu finger sand, let Hu Yiming take the wine container.

古文：仿攫砂数寸，得器皿五六事。
现代文：胡仿抓沙有几寸深，找到五六件器皿。
English: Hu imitated scratching the sand a few inches deep and found five or six utensils.

古文：饮酒毕，复埋砂中。
现代文：喝完酒，又把器皿埋在沙中。
English: After drinking the wine, he buried the utensils in the sand.

古文：又戏曰： 吾于砂中尝藏果子，今亦应在。 
现代文：又戏谑地说： 我在沙中曾经藏着果子，现在也应当还在。 
English: He also jokingly said: I once hid fruit in the sand, and it should still be there now.

古文：又令取之，皆得。
现代文：又让胡仿取果子，都得到了。
English: He also asked Hu Yiming to pick some fruit, and he got them all.

古文：蜀相燕公，使人致书至褒城所居延召，复休同时离褒城，使人经旬方达，复休当日已至成都，而又有一复休与使者偕行，未尝相舍。
现代文：蜀相燕公派人送书信到褒城住所召请他，陈复休和使者同一天离开褒城，但使者十多天以后才到，陈复休当天已经到了成都，而又拿出一个陈复休与使者一起走，不曾相舍。
English: Shu Xiangyan sent someone to send a letter to Baocheng's residence to summon him. Chen Fuxiu and the envoy left Baocheng on the same day, but the envoy did not arrive until more than ten days later. Chen Fuxiu had already arrived in Chengdu on the same day, and took out a Chen Fuxiu to go with the envoy, and they did not sleep together.

古文：燕公诘于使者，益奇待之。
现代文：燕公盘问使者，更加以奇人对待陈复休。
English: Yan Gong cross-examined the messenger and treated Chen Fuxiu even more strangely.

古文：常于巴南太守筵中，为酒妓所侮，复休笑视其面，须臾妓者髯长数尺。
现代文：陈复休曾在巴南太守筵席中被酒妓所侮，陈复休笑着看酒妓的脸，不一会儿，酒妓的脸上就长出数尺长的胡子。
English: Chen Fuxiu was once insulted by a wine prostitute at the Banan governor's banquet. Chen Fuxiu smiled as he looked at the wine prostitute's face. Within a short time, the wine prostitute's face sprouted a mustache several feet long.

古文：泣诉于守，为祈谢，复休咒酒一杯，使饮之，良久如旧。
现代文：酒妓向太守哭诉，太守替酒妓道歉求情，陈复休拿来一杯酒念了咒语，让酒妓喝下去，很久，酒妓颜面如旧。
English: The wine whore cried to the daimyō, the daimyō apologized for the wine whore and begged for mercy. Chen Fuxiu brought a glass of wine, recited a spell, and let the wine whore drink it. For a long time, the wine whore's face remained the same.

古文：又有药一丸，投水中，沉浮旋转，任人指呼，变化隐显。
现代文：又有一丸药，投到水中，沉浮旋转，任凭人们指挥呼叫，或隐或显随意变化。
English: Another pill, thrown into the water, floats and swirls, allowing people to direct the call, or implicitly or explicitly change at will.

古文：其类极多，不可备载。
现代文：类似的法术极多，不能全记载下来。
English: There are so many similar spells that it would be impossible to record them all.

古文：中和五年，大驾还京，复休亦至阙下。
现代文：中和五年，皇帝回京，陈复休也来到京城。
English: In the middle and fifth years, the emperor returned to Beijing, and Chen Fuxiu also came to Beijing.

古文：田晋公军容，问至京国几年安宁，曰： 二十。 
现代文：晋公田军容问京国有几年安宁，他说： 二十。 
English: When Jin Gong Tian Jun Rong asked how many years of peace there had been in Beijing, he said, "Twenty."

古文：果自问后二十日，再幸陈仓。
现代文：果然从问话后二十天，皇帝再次出行陈仓。
English: Sure enough, twenty days after the interview, the emperor traveled to Chencang again.

古文：后于道中寄诗与田晋公曰： 夜坐空庭月色微，一树寒梅发两枝。 
现代文：后来在路途中，陈复休给田晋公寄诗说： 夜坐空庭月色微，一树寒梅发两枝。 
English: Later, on the way, Chen Fuxiu sent a poem to Tian Shingong, saying: "At night, sitting in an empty garden, the moon is faint, and a tree has two branches.

古文：及驾至梁洋。邠帅朱玫立襄王监国，寒梅两枝验矣。
现代文：等到皇帝到梁洋，邠帅朱玫立襄王监国，寒梅两枝应验了。
English: When the emperor arrived in Liangyang, Zhu Mei appointed Xiang Wang to supervise the country, and the two branches of Ganmei were fulfilled.

古文：自是卫驾诣都，多在西县三泉褒斜以来屯驻。
现代文：自从护卫皇帝到都城，多半在西县三泉褒斜附近驻扎。
English: Since they escorted the emperor to the capital, most of them have been stationed in the vicinity of Sanzhenbo slope in Xixian County.

古文：复休之术，素为人所传。
现代文：陈复休的法术，一向为人所传说。
English: Chen Fuxiu's magic has always been legendary.

古文：俄为人钉其手于柱上，寻有人救而拔之，竟亦无患。
现代文：后来陈复休被人把手钉在柱子上，马上就有人把钉子拔掉救他，竟没有伤痕。
English: Later, Chen Fuxiu's hand was nailed to a post. Someone immediately pulled out the nail to save him, and there were no scars.

古文：岁余，卒于家，葬于江南山下。
现代文：一年以后，陈复休死在家里，葬于江南山下。
English: A year later, Chen Fuxiu died at home and was buried under a mountain south of the Yangtze River.

古文：数月，好事者掘其墓，无复所有。
现代文：过了几个月，好事的人掘开他的墓，什么也没有。
English: After a few months, a good man dug up his grave and found nothing.

古文：见复休在长安。
现代文：有人看见陈复休在长安。
English: Chen Fuxiu was spotted in Chang'an.

古文：驾驻华州，复休亦至兴德府矣。
现代文：皇帝车驾驻在华州，陈复休也到兴德府了。
English: The emperor's carriage is stationed in Huazhou, and Chen Fuxiu has also arrived in Xingde.

古文：殷天祥
现代文：殷天祥
English: Yin Tianxiang

古文：殷七七，名天祥，又名道筌，尝自称七七，俗多呼之，不知何所人也。
现代文：殷七七，名叫天祥，又名叫道筌，曾经自称七七，俗人多数叫他七七，不知是哪里人。
English: Yin Qishan, also known as Tianxiang and Daojun, used to call himself Qishan, but most of the common people called him Qishan. I don't know where he came from.

古文：游行天下，人言久见之，不测其年寿。
现代文：他在全国到处走，有人说很久前见过他，估计不出他的年龄。
English: He travels all over the country, and some people say they saw him a long time ago and can't estimate his age.

古文：面光白，若四十许人，到处或易其姓名不定。
现代文：他脸白有光，好像四十多岁的人。他每到一处有时更换姓名没有一定。
English: His face is white and shiny, like a man in his forties. He sometimes changes his name when he goes somewhere.

古文：曾于泾州卖药，时灵台蕃汉，疫疠俱甚，得药者入口即愈，皆谓之神圣，得钱却施于人。
现代文：曾经在泾州卖药，当时灵台蕃汉瘟疫盛行，得到药的人，药入口病就好，都把殷七七称作神圣，殷七七得到钱却把它施舍给别人。
English: There was a time when he was selling medicine in Ganzhou. At that time, the Yingtao-Han plague was prevalent. The people who got the medicine, the medicine was good for the disease of the mouth, and they all called it sacred. However, when he got the money, he gave it to others.

古文：又尝醉于城市间，周宝旧于长安识之。
现代文：又曾经醉于城市间。周宝过去在长安就认识他。
English: Zhou Bao used to know him in Chang'an.

古文：寻为泾原节度，延之礼重，慕其道术房中之事。
现代文：不久，周宝作了泾原节度使，以重礼筵请殷七七，想学到他的道术房中之事。
English: Soon after, Zhou Bao became the ambassador to the Imperial Palace and, with great courtesy, invited Yin Qixi to learn from him what was going on in the dojo.

古文：及宝移镇浙西，数年后，七七忽到，复卖药。
现代文：等到周宝奉调镇守浙西，几年后，殷七七忽然来到，还是卖药。
English: Wait until Zhou Bao was transferred to guard the western part of Zhejiang Province, and a few years later, Yin Qiqi suddenly came, still selling medicine.

古文：宝闻之惊喜，召之，师敬益甚。
现代文：周宝听说殷七七来到又惊又喜，召他前去，以师礼尊敬得更加隆重。
English: Zhou Bao was surprised and delighted to hear that Yin Qianqian had come. He called him forward and respected him even more grandly as a teacher.

古文：每日醉歌曰： 弹琴碧玉调，药炼白朱砂。
现代文：殷七七每天醉了就唱道： 弹琴碧玉调，药炼白朱砂。
English: Every day, when drunk, Yin Qizhe would sing: "Play the piano to the tune of jasper, and distill white cinnabar."

古文：解酝顷刻酒，能开非时花。 
现代文：解酝顷刻酒，能开非时花。 
English: The brewing time of wine can be solved, and it can bloom at any time.

古文：宝常试之，悉有验。
现代文：周宝常让他试验，全都有灵验。
English: Zhou Bao often let him experiment, and everything worked.

古文：复求种瓜钓鱼，若葛仙翁也。
现代文：殷七七又请求种瓜钓鱼，好像葛仙翁似的。
English: Yin Qixi also asked to grow gourds and fish, just like Ge Xianweng.

古文：鹤林寺杜鹃，高丈余，每春末花烂漫。
现代文：鹤林寺的杜鹃树，高一丈多，每到春末花开烂漫。
English: The rhododendron trees of Hokurinji Temple are more than a meter tall, and bloom profusely at the end of spring.

古文：寺僧相传，言贞元中，有外国僧自天台来，盂中以药养其根来种之，自后构饰，花院锁闭。
现代文：寺里的和尚互相传说：贞元年间，有个外国和尚从天台来，盂钵中用药养着杜鹃花根来种它，自那以后遮蔽掩饰，花院上锁紧闭。
English: The monks in the temple told each other a legend: In the first year of the reign of Zhen, a foreign monk came from the rooftop. He used medicine to grow the rhododendron root to plant it. Since then, it has been covered up and the flower garden has been locked tightly.

古文：时或窥见三女子，红裳艳丽，共游树下。
现代文：当时有人窥见三个女子，红裳艳丽，一起在树下漫步。
English: At the time, someone caught a glimpse of three women, resplendent in red, strolling together under a tree.

古文：人有辄采花枝者，必为所祟，俗传女子花神也。
现代文：有擅自采花折枝的人，一定被女子作怪致祸。
English: A person who picks flowers or twigs without permission is sure to be made a fool of by a woman.

古文：是以人共宝惜，故繁盛异于常花。
现代文：俗人传说女子是花神，所以人们共同像爱惜宝贝一样爱惜杜鹃，因此繁盛超过普通花卉。
English: According to folklore, women are the goddesses of flowers, so people cherish rhododendrons as if they were precious treasures. As a result, they are more popular than ordinary flowers.

古文：其花欲开，探报分数，节使宾僚官属，继日赏玩。
现代文：杜鹃花要开时，周宝就派人探报分数，节度使衙门中的宾客幕僚和官属，就连日观赏。
English: When the rhododendrons were about to bloom, Zhou Bao sent someone to find out the score, which made the guests, staff members and officials in the palace watch the day.

古文：其后一城士女，四方之人，无不载酒乐游纵。
现代文：其后全城男女以及四方之人，无不载酒以纵情漫游为乐。
English: After that, men and women from all over the city, as well as people from all over the country, were all carrying alcohol and enjoying a leisurely stroll.

古文：连春入夏，自旦及昏，闾里之间，殆于废业。
现代文：连春入夏，从早到晚，里巷之间，近于荒废正业。
English: From spring to summer, from morning to night, between the alleys, it is close to the abandoned industry.

古文：宝一日谓七七曰： 鹤林之花，天下奇绝。
现代文：有一天，周宝对殷七七说： 鹤林寺的杜鹃花，天下奇绝。
English: One day, Zhou Bao said to Yin Qixi, "The rhododendrons at Hulin Temple are the most amazing flowers in the world.

古文：常闻能开非时花，此花可开否？ 
现代文：常听您说能使不到时令的花开，这杜鹃花能开吗？ 
English: I have often heard you say that you can make flowers that are not in season bloom. Can this rhododendron bloom?

古文：七七曰： 可也。 
现代文：殷七七说： 可以。 
English: Yin Qiqi said, "Yes."

古文：宝曰： 今重九将近，能副此日乎？ 
现代文：周宝说： 现在重九将近，能符合这一天吗？ 
English: Zhou Bao said: Now that the 9th lunar month is approaching, can we meet this day?

古文：七七乃前二日往鹤林宿焉。
现代文：殷七七就提前两天前往鹤林寺，住在那里。
English: Two days ahead of schedule, Yin Qixi went to He Lin Temple and lived there.

古文：中夜，女子来谓七七曰： 道者欲开此花耶？ 
现代文：中夜，有女子来对殷七七说： 道者要让这杜鹃花开吗？ 
English: In the middle of the night, a woman came to Yin Qiao and said, "Does the sage want this rhododendron to bloom?

古文：七七乃问女子何人，深夜到此，女子曰： 妾为上玄所命，下司此花。
现代文：殷七七就问女子是什么人，深夜到这里来，女子说： 我被上天所命，下界管理此花。
English: Yin Qianqian asked the woman who she was, and came here late at night. The woman said, "I was ordered by heaven to manage this flower.

古文：然此花在人间已逾百年，非久即归阆苑去。
现代文：然而此花在人间已超过百年，不久就让它回阆苑去。
English: However, this flower has been in the human world for more than a hundred years, and it will soon return to the garden.

古文：今与道者共开之，非道者无以感妾。 
现代文：现在为有道者使它开花，不是有道者没有谁能来感动我。 
English: Now it is for those who have the Way to make it blossom, but for those who do not, there is no one who can move me.

古文：于是女子瞥然不见。
现代文：于是女子一瞬间就不见了。
English: As a result, the woman disappeared in an instant.

古文：来日晨起，寺僧忽讶花渐折蕊。
现代文：来日早晨起来，寺里的和尚们一下子被花蕊初绽惊呆了。
English: When they got up the next morning, the monks in the temple were stunned by the first blossoms.

古文：及九日，烂漫如春。
现代文：到初九那天，花开得烂漫如春。
English: By the ninth day of the first month, the flowers were blooming like spring.

古文：乃以闻，宝与一城士庶惊异之，游赏复如春间。
现代文：于是把这件事报告了周宝，周宝与全城官民都感到惊异，游赏又如春天期间。
English: So he reported the matter to Zhou Bao. Zhou Bao and all the officials and citizens of the city were surprised. The tour was like that of spring.

古文：数日，花俄不见，亦无落花在地。
现代文：几天以后，花一下子都不见了，也没有落花在地上。
English: After a few days, the flowers suddenly disappeared, and there were no fallen flowers on the ground.

古文：后七七偶到官僚家，适值宾会次，主与宾趋而迎奉之。
现代文：后来殷七七偶然到一官僚家，正赶上会聚宾客，主人和客人都跑来簇拥他。
English: Later, Yin Qiqi happened to be at a bureaucrat's house, just in time for a gathering of guests, and both the host and the guests ran to embrace him.

古文：有佐酒倡优，甚轻侮之。
现代文：有劝酒的歌妓，对殷七七很轻视侮慢。
English: The courtesan, who had the power of persuasion, treated Yin Qixi with contempt and mockery.

古文：七七乃白主人： 欲以二栗为令，可乎？ 
现代文：殷七七就对主人说： 想要用两个栗子作为酒令，可以吗？ 
English: Yin Qianqian said to his host, "If you want to use two chestnuts as the liquor, is that okay?

古文：咸喜，谓必有戏术，资于欢笑。
现代文：大家都很欢喜，认为一定有好玩的法术，有助于欢乐。
English: Everyone was delighted and thought that there must be a fun spell to help with the fun.

古文：乃以栗巡行，接者皆闻异香惊叹，唯佐酒笑七七者二人，作石缀于鼻，掣拽不落，但言秽气不可堪。
现代文：于是用栗子传巡，接到栗子的人都闻到异香而惊叹，唯有劝酒时讥笑殷七七的两个人，接到栗子后，变作石子粘在鼻子上，拉扯不掉，只说污秽的气味不可忍受。
English: The chestnuts were then passed around, and everyone who received them smelled the strange aroma and marveled. Only two people, both in their seventies, scoffed at the suggestion of alcohol. After receiving the chestnuts, they turned into stones that stuck to their noses and could not be removed. They only said that the foul smell was unbearable.

古文：二人共起狂舞，花钿委地，相次悲啼，粉黛交下，及优伶辈一时乱舞，鼓乐皆自作声，颇合节奏，曲止而舞不已。一席之人，笑皆绝倒。
现代文：两个人一同起来狂舞，花钿首饰掉落地上，相次悲啼，脸上的胭粉颜料纷纷淌下来，正当优伶们一时乱舞，鼓乐都自动发声，还很合乎节奏，曲子终了而舞仍旧不停，整个入席的人都笑得绝倒。
English: Two people got up together and danced wildly. The brocade jewelry fell to the ground, and they were sad one after another. The vermilion paint on their faces ran down one after another. The noblewomen danced wildly for a while. The drum music sounded automatically, and it was very rhythmic. When the music ended, the dance still continued, and the entire audience was laughing their heads off.

古文：久之，主人祈谢于七七。
现代文：过了一会儿，主人向殷七七道歉祈求。
English: After a while, the owner asked for an apology from Yin Qizhe.

古文：有顷，石自鼻落，复为栗，嗅之异香，及花钿粉黛悉如旧，略无所损，咸敬事之。
现代文：又过一会儿，石子从歌妓鼻子上掉落，又变为栗子，嗅之有奇异的香味，至于花钿首饰和粉黛又全都像原来那样，毫无缺损，大家全都恭恭敬敬地侍奉他。
English: After a while, the pebbles fell from the geisha's nose and turned into chestnuts, which smelled strangely fragrant. As for the chrysanthemum jewelry and powdered daisies, they were all the same as before, without any defects, and everyone served him respectfully.

古文：又七七酌水为酒，削木为脯，使人退行，指船即驻，呼鸟自坠，唾鱼即活。
现代文：殷七七又斟水变酒，削木变脯，让人退着走，指船船就停，呼鸟鸟自坠，唾鱼鱼就活。
English: Yin Qiqi also changed water into wine, whittled wood into straw, made people retreat, stopped boats by pointing at them, called birds from falling, and spit fish to live.

古文：撮土画地，状山川形势，折茅聚蚁，变成城市。
现代文：撮土画地，描绘出山川形势，折茅聚蚁，变为城市。
English: Take a picture of the landscape, depict the mountain and river situation, fold the grass and gather the ants, and turn it into a city.

古文：人有曾经行处，见之历历皆似，但少狭耳。
现代文：人们有曾经去过的地方，见到殷七七的画变成的城市，觉得历历在目全都很像，只不过稍微狭小罢了。
English: People who have been to places and seen the city transformed into a painting by Yin Qianqian feel that it is very similar in every way, except that it is slightly narrower.

古文：凡诸术不可胜纪。
现代文：所有各种法术不可胜记。
English: All kinds of spells can not be defeated.

古文：后二十年，薛朗、刘浩乱。宝南奔杭州，而宝总成为政，刑杀无辜。
现代文：以后二十年，薛明、刘浩作乱，周宝向南奔到杭州，而周宝总管军务和政务，用刑杀死无罪的人。
English: In the next twenty years, Xue Ming and Liu Hao made a riot, Zhou Bao ran south to Hangzhou, and Zhou Bao, who was in charge of military affairs and government affairs, killed innocent people with punishment.

古文：前上饶牧陈全裕经其境，构之以祸，尽赤其族。
现代文：前任上饶州牧陈全裕经过周宝辖区，就罗网罪名杀害了他，把陈全裕全家老小全部杀光。
English: The previous Raozhou herdsman Chen Quanyu passed through Zhou Bao's jurisdiction, killed him on the charge of soliciting, and killed Chen Quanyu's entire family.

古文：宝八十三，筋力尤壮，女妓百数，尽得七七之术。
现代文：周宝八十三岁时，筋力还很健壮，妻妾上百，他把殷七七的法术全学到了。
English: When Zhou Bao was eighty-three years old, his muscle strength was still very strong, he had hundreds of wives and concubines, and he had learned all the spells of Yin and Yang.

古文：后为无辜及全裕作厉，一旦忽殂。
现代文：后来因为无辜而死的人以及陈全裕作祟，有一天周宝突然死了。
English: Later, because of the people who died innocently and Chen Quanyu, one day Zhou Bao suddenly died.

古文：七七、刘浩军变之时，甘露寺为众推落北岸，谓坠江死矣。
现代文：殷七七在刘浩军变的时候，在甘露寺被推落北崖，掉到江中死了。
English: At the time of Liu Hao's coup d'état, Yin Qishan was pushed off the north cliff at Kanlu Temple and fell into the river, where he died.

古文：其后人见在江西十余年卖药，入蜀，莫知所之。
现代文：其后，有人看见他在江西十余年卖药，入蜀以后，没有人知道他到哪里去了。
English: After that, someone saw him selling medicine in Jiangxi for more than ten years. After he moved to Shu, no one knew where he went.

古文：鹤林、犯兵火焚寺。树失根株，信归阆苑矣。
现代文：鹤林寺犯兵火被烧掉，杜鹃树也失去了根株，真回阆苑了。
English: The war criminal's fire at Hailin Temple was burned down, and the rhododendron tree also lost its roots. It's really back to Gyeongwon.

古文：闾丘子
现代文：闾丘子
English: Tsukiji

古文：有荥阳郑又玄，名家子也。居长安中，自小与邻舍闾丘氏子，偕读书于师氏。
现代文：有个荥阳人郑又玄，是名门家子弟，住在长安城中，从小和邻舍闾丘氏的儿子一起在师氏那里读书。
English: There was a man from Shenyang, Zheng Mata Xuan, who was the son of a prominent family. He lived in Chang'an City, and from an early age he went to school with the son of his neighbor, the Shenqiu family.

古文：又玄性骄，率以门望清贵，而闾丘氏寒贱者，往往戏而骂之曰： 闾丘氏非吾类也，而我偕学于师氏，我虽不语，汝宁不愧于心乎？ 
现代文：又玄性情骄傲，大抵因为自己门第声望清高尊贵，而闾丘氏贫寒低贱的缘故，往往戏耍而且嘲骂闾丘子说： 闾丘氏不是我的同类，而我和你一起向老师学习，我即便不说，你难道心里不惭愧吗？ 
English: He was also proud of his mysterious nature, mostly because of his family's high reputation, but because of the poverty and lowliness of the Shanyu clan, he often teased and mocked the Shanyu clan, saying: The Shanyu clan is not my kindred, and I am learning from the teacher together with you, even if I do not say it, are you not ashamed in your heart?

古文：闾丘子嘿然有惭色，后数岁，闾丘子病死。
现代文：闾丘子默然流露出惭愧的神色。过后几年，闾丘子病死。
English: A few years later, Tsuchuko died of illness.

古文：及十年，又玄以明经上第，其后调补参军于唐安郡。
现代文：过了几年，郑又玄以明经科考得中，其后调补到唐安郡任参军。
English: A few years later, Zheng Yuexuan passed the middle school entrance examination of Ming Dynasty, and then transferred to Tang'an County to join the army.

古文：既至官，郡守命假尉唐兴。
现代文：到官以后，郡守命他代理唐兴县尉。
English: After he came to office, he acted as the deputy of Tangxing County Lieutenant.

古文：有同舍仇生者，大贾之子，年始冠，其家资产万计。
现代文：同舍有个仇生，是大商人儿子，年纪刚够二十，他家的资产数用万计。
English: My roommate has an estranged son, the son of a big businessman, just twenty years old, and his family's assets are in the tens of thousands.

古文：日与又玄会，又玄累受其金钱赂遗，常与宴游。
现代文：每天与又玄见面，又玄累次接受他赠送的金钱财物，常与他聚饮出游。
English: He met with Yataharu every day, and Yataharu repeatedly accepted his gifts of money and property, and often went out drinking with him.

古文：然仇生非士族，未尝以礼貌接之。
现代文：然而仇生不是士族子弟，所以郑又玄也不曾礼貌与仇生交往。
English: However, Chuseong was not the son of a warrior, so Zheng and Xuan did not have the courtesy to interact with Chuseong.

古文：尝一日，又玄置酒高会，而仇生不得预。
现代文：曾经有一天，又玄设酒席聚会高朋，而仇生没得到邀请。
English: Once upon a time, there was a party for high school friends at a secret banquet, but Meng Sheng was not invited.

古文：及酒阑，有谓又玄者曰： 仇生与子同舍会宴，而仇生不得预，岂非有罪乎？ 
现代文：等酒喝尽兴，有人对又玄说： 仇生和您一起住一起宴会，而仇生没能参与这次聚会，难道你没有过失吗？ 
English: After drinking and enjoying themselves to the full, someone said to Yataharu, "You and your cousin live together and have a banquet together, but your cousin was not able to participate in this gathering. Aren't you at fault?

古文：又玄惭，即召仇生。
现代文：又玄觉得惭愧，就去召仇生。
English: Again, Xuan felt ashamed, so he went to summon his nemesis.

古文：生至，又玄以卮饮之，生辞不能引满，固谢。
现代文：仇生来了，又玄用大杯斟酒给仇生喝，仇生推辞说不能全饮，坚持辞谢。
English: Qian Sheng came, and Xuan used a large cup to pour wine for Qian Sheng to drink. Qian Sheng said that he could not drink it all, and insisted on thanking him.

古文：又玄怒骂曰： 汝市井之民，徒知锥刀尔，何为僭居官秩邪？
现代文：又玄发怒骂道： 你是个市井之民，只知锥子和刀罢了，为什么超越本分住在官舍呢？
English: Again, Xuanfa scolded angrily, "You are a commoner who only knows how to use a cone and a sword. Why do you live in an official residence beyond your duty?

古文：且吾与汝为伍，实汝之幸，又何敢辞酒乎？ 
现代文：况且，我和你为伍，实在是你的幸运，又怎么敢辞酒呢？ 
English: Besides, I'm with you, it's really your luck, and how dare you quit drinking?

古文：因振衣起，仇生羞且甚，俯而退，遂弃官闭门，不与人往来，经数月病卒。
现代文：于是振衣而起，仇生羞愧得很，低着头退出去，立刻辞去官职关起门来，不与人往来，经过几个月就病死了。
English: So he got up, was very ashamed, bowed his head and left, immediately resigned from his post, closed the door, did not socialize with people, and died of illness after a few months.

古文：明年，郑罢官，侨居濛阳郡佛寺。
现代文：第二年，郑又玄罢了官，在濛阳郡的佛寺侨居。
English: The following year, Zheng and Xuan retired from the government and went to live in a Buddhist temple in Fenyang County.

古文：郑常好黄老之道。
现代文：郑又玄平素喜好黄老之道。
English: Zheng Mata Xuanping likes the way of Huang Lao.

古文：时有吴道士者，以道艺闻，庐于蜀门山。
现代文：当时有个吴道士，凭道艺出名，住在蜀门山。
English: At that time, there was a Wu Daoist, famous for his Daoism, who lived in Shumen Mountain.

古文：又玄高其风，即驱而就谒，愿为门弟子。
现代文：又玄认为吴道士风格高尚，就骑马跑去拜见，希望做吴道士的门下弟子。
English: Yue Xuan thought that Wu Daoshi's style was noble, so he rode to meet him, hoping to become a disciple of Wu Daoshi.

古文：吴道士曰： 子既慕神仙，当且居山林，无为汲汲于尘俗间。 
现代文：吴道士说： 您既然敬慕神仙，应当在山林里居住，不要在尘俗之中做伪诈之事。 
English: Wu Daoist said: Since you worship gods and spirits, you should live in the mountains and forests, and not do fraudulent things in the mundane world.

古文：又玄喜谢曰： 先生真有道者，某愿为隶于左右，其可乎？ 
现代文：又玄高高兴兴地拜谢说： 先生真是有道之人，我愿在您左右作差使，那可以吗？ 
English: Again, Xuan Gao happily thanked him and said: Sir, you really are a virtuous person. I would like to be an envoy around you. Is that okay?

古文：道士许而留之。
现代文：道士答应了，就把他留下来。
English: The Taoist priest agreed and let him stay.

古文：凡十五年，又玄志稍惰，吴道士曰： 子不能固其心，徒为居山林中，无补矣。 
现代文：前后十五年，又玄学道的志向渐渐松懈下来。吴道士说： 你不能坚定学道之心，白白地住在山林之中，没有什么补益了。 
English: Around the fifteenth year, the ambition of the metaphysical path gradually slackened. Wu Daoshi said: You can't strengthen the heart of the path, living in the mountains and forests in vain, there is no benefit.

古文：又玄即辞去。
现代文：又玄就告辞离去。
English: Xuan also said goodbye and left.

古文：宴游濛阳郡久之。其后东入长安，次褒城，舍逆旅氏，遇一童儿十余岁，貌甚秀。
现代文：在濛阳郡嬉游很久，其后向东走去长安，途经褒城，住在旅馆里，遇到一个十多岁的小童，相貌很清秀。
English: I spent a long time in Poyang County, and then went east to Chang'an. Passing through Baocheng, I stayed in a hotel and met a boy in his late teens who was very handsome.

古文：又玄与之语，其辨慧千转万化，又玄自谓不能及。
现代文：又玄跟小童说话，那个小童很有智慧和辩才，千转万化，又玄自己认为不能赶上他。
English: Xuan also talked to a child. The child was very intelligent and eloquent, and Xuan himself thought that he could not catch up with him.

古文：已而谓又玄曰： 我与君故人有年矣，君省之乎？ 又玄曰： 忘矣。 
现代文：不久，小童对又玄说： 我和您是多年的老朋友了，您记得我吗？ 又玄说： 忘了。 
English: Before long, the child said to Yataharu, "I've been an old friend of yours for many years. Do you remember me?" Yataharu said, "I forgot."

古文：童儿曰： 吾尝生闾丘氏之门，居长安中，与子偕学于师氏，子以我寒贱，且曰非吾类也。后又为仇氏子，尉于唐兴，与子同舍。
现代文：小童说： 我曾经生于闾丘氏门中，住在长安，与您一起跟老师学习，您因为我贫寒低贱，就说 不是我的同类 ，后来，我又作仇家的儿子，在唐兴县作县尉，与您住在同舍。
English: The child said: I was once born into the Minqiu family, lived in Chang'an, and studied with you. Because I was poor and lowly, you said that I was not of my kind. Later, I was the son of an enemy family, and lived in the same house with you in Tangxing County as a county official.

古文：子受我金钱赂遗甚多，然子未尝以礼貌遇我，骂我市井之民。
现代文：您接受我金钱财物很多，然而您不曾以礼貌待我，骂我是市井之民。
English: You have accepted a lot of money and property from me, but you have never treated me with courtesy, calling me a commoner.

古文：何吾子骄傲之甚邪。 
现代文：为什么您骄傲得如此过分呢？ 
English: Why are you so proud?

古文：又玄惊，因再拜谢曰： 诚吾之罪也。
现代文：又玄很惊讶，于是拜了两拜道歉说： 这实在是我的罪过啊。
English: Yue Xuan was very surprised, so he apologized twice and said, "This is really my fault."

古文：然子非圣人，安得知三生事乎？ 
现代文：然而您不是圣人，哪能知道三辈子的事情呢？ 
English: However, you are not a saint, how can you know the things of three lifetimes?

古文：童儿曰： 我太清真人。
现代文：小童说： 我是太清真人。
English: The child said: I am too honest.

古文：上帝以汝有道气，故生我于人间，与汝为友，将授真仙之诀，而汝以性骄傲，终不能得其道。
现代文：上天因为你有道气，特意派我降生到人间，与你作朋友，将要传授真仙的诀窍，但是你因为性情骄傲，总不能得其道。
English: Heaven, because you have the spirit of morality, specially sent me to be born into the human world, to be your friend, to teach you the know-how of the true immortals, but because of your proud nature, you will never be able to attain their way.

古文：吁，可悲乎！ 
现代文：唉，可悲呀！ 
English: Alas, how sad!

古文：言讫，忽亡所见。
现代文：说完话，小童忽然不见了。
English: After saying this, he suddenly did not know where to go.

古文：又玄既寤其事，甚惭恚，竟以忧卒。
现代文：又玄明白了那些事以后，很惭愧怨恨自己，终于因为忧愁而死。
English: After Xuan also understood those things, he was very ashamed and hated himself, and finally died of sorrow.

古文：张卓
现代文：张卓
English: Zhang Zhuo

古文：张卓者，蜀人，唐开元中，明经及第，归蜀觐省。
现代文：张卓是蜀州人，唐朝开元年间以明经科考取进士，回蜀探亲。
English: Zhang Zhuo is a native of Shuzhou. During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, he took the Ming and Jing Science Examination and went back to Shuzhou to visit his relatives.

古文：唯有一驴，衣与书悉背在上，不暇乘，但驱而行。
现代文：他只有一头驴，衣服和书籍都放在驴背上，没有空闲可骑，只得赶着走。
English: He had only one donkey, clothes and books were put on the donkey's back, there was no free time to ride, he had to hurry away.

古文：取便路，自斜谷中，数日，将至洋州，驴忽然奔掷入深箐中，寻之不得。
现代文：取便道从斜谷中走了几天，将要到洋州，驴忽然狂奔进入竹林深处，找不到它。
English: After taking the footpath for a few days from the valley, the donkey suddenly ran into the depths of the bamboo forest and couldn't find it.

古文：天将暮，又无人家，欲宿林下，且惧狼虎。
现代文：这时天色将晚，又没有人家，张卓想睡在林子里，又怕虎狼。
English: At this time, it was getting late, and no one was home. Zhang Zhuo wanted to sleep in the forest, but was afraid of tigers and wolves.

古文：是夜月明，约行数十里，得大路。
现代文：这天夜晚月光明亮，大约走了几十里，找到了大路。
English: On this night, the moon was bright and bright. I walked about a few dozen miles and found the main road.

古文：更三二里。见大宅，朱门西开。
现代文：再走三二里，看见一个大宅院，红色的大门朝西开。
English: After walking another thirty-two miles, I saw a large mansion with a red gate facing west.

古文：天既明，有山童自宅中出，卓问求水。
现代文：天亮以后，有个小童从大宅出来，张卓就去讨水喝。
English: After dawn, a little boy came out of the mansion, and Zhang Zhuo went to get water.

古文：童归，逡巡见一人，朱冠高履，曳杖而出。
现代文：童子回去，一会儿，看见一个人戴着红色帽子穿着高底鞋，拄着手杖出来。
English: The boy went back, and after a while, he saw a man wearing a red cap, high-heeled shoes, and a cane come out.

古文：卓趋而拜之，大仙曰： 观子尘中之人，何为至此？ 
现代文：张卓快步上前向他行礼，大仙说： 我看你是尘世中的人，为什么到这里来？ 
English: Zhang Zhuo quickly stepped forward and bowed to him. The Great Immortal said, "I see that you are a man of the world. Why did you come here?

古文：卓具陈之。
现代文：张卓就详细地向他叙述了一遍经过。
English: Zhang Zhuo recounted the incident to him in detail.

古文：仙曰： 有缘耳。 
现代文：大仙说： 这是有缘啊！ 
English: The Great Immortal said, "It's fate!

古文：乃命坐，赐杯水。
现代文：就让他坐下，给他一杯水。
English: Just sit him down and give him a glass of water.

古文：香滑清冷，身觉轻健。
现代文：这水香滑清冷，张卓喝了，觉得身体轻健。
English: The fragrant water was smooth and cold. Zhang Zhuo drank it and felt light and healthy.

古文：又设美馔讫，就西院沐浴，以衣一箱衣之。
现代文：又摆设美味让他吃完，到西院去沐浴，拿一箱衣服让他穿。
English: He also arranged delicacies for him to eat, went to the West Courtyard to take a bath, and took a box of clothes for him to wear.

古文：仙曰： 子骨未成就，分当留此。
现代文：大仙说： 你的仙骨没有成，按缘分应当留在这里。
English: The Great Immortal said, "Your Immortal Bone did not make it. According to your destiny, you should stay here.

古文：某有一女，兼欲聘之。 
现代文：我有个女儿，打算把她许给你。 
English: I have a daughter, and I'm going to give her to you.

古文：卓起拜谢，是夕成礼。
现代文：张卓起身拜谢，这天夜里完成婚礼。
English: Zhang Zhuo got up to say thank you, and the wedding was completed that night.

古文：数日，卓忽思家，仙人与卓二朱符、二黑符： 一黑符可置于头，入人家能隐形；一黑符可置左臂，千里之内，引手取之；一朱符可置舌上，有不可却者，开口示之；一朱符可置左足，即能蹙地脉及拒非常。
现代文：过了几天，张卓忽然想起家来。仙人给张卓两道朱符两道黑符： 一道黑符可以贴到头上，进入人家能够隐形；一道黑符可以贴在左臂上，千里以内的东西，可以伸手把它取来；一道朱符可以放在舌头上，如果有不能打退的人，就张开口给他看；另一道朱符可贴在左足上，就能缩地脉以及抵拒不同寻常的人。
English: After a few days, Zhang Zhuo suddenly remembered home. The hermit gave Zhang Zhuo two red and two black amulets: one black amulet can be attached to the head, so that it can be invisible when entering someone's home; one black amulet can be attached to the left arm, and if it is within a thousand miles, you can reach out and take it; one red amulet can be placed on the tongue, and if there is someone who cannot be repelled, it will open its mouth to show him; the other red amulet can be attached to the left foot, so that it can contract the veins and resist unusual people.

古文：然勿恃灵符，自颠狂耳。 
现代文：但是不要依仗灵符，自己就颠狂起来呀！ 
English: But don't rely on spells, you'll drive yourself crazy!

古文：卓至京师，见一大宅，人马骈阗，穷极华盛。
现代文：张卓来到京城，看见一个大宅院，人马骈盛。
English: Zhang Zhuo came to Beijing and saw a large mansion, full of people and horses.

古文：卓入之，经数门，至厅事，见铺陈罗列，宾客满堂。
现代文：张卓进入大宅，经过好几道门，到了厅堂，看见铺陈罗列，满堂宾客。
English: Zhang Zhuo entered the mansion, went through several doors, arrived at the hall, saw the booths lined up, and the hall was full of guests.

古文：又于帐内妆饰一女，年可十五六。
现代文：又在帐子里看到一个盛装打扮的女郎，年纪约有十五六岁。
English: He also saw a well-dressed girl in a headscarf, aged about 15 or 16.

古文：卓领之，潜于中门。
现代文：张卓就领着她，潜藏在中门以内。
English: Zhang Zhuo took her and hid inside the middle gate.

古文：闻一宅切切之声云： 相公失小娘子。 具事闻奏，敕罗叶二师就宅寻之。
现代文：这时，听见整个宅子都嘈杂喧哗，说是相公丢失了小娘子，把这件事奏报皇帝，皇帝下令让罗公远、叶法善二位天师到宅寻找。
English: At this time, the whole house was heard to be noisy and noisy. It was said that the father-in-law had lost his little daughter and reported the matter to the emperor. The emperor ordered Luo Gongyuan and Ye Fazen, two celestial masters, to go to the house to look for her.

古文：叶公踏步叩齿，喷水化成一条黑气，直至卓前，见一少年执女衣襟。
现代文：叶天师踏步念咒，喷水化成一条黑气，直到张卓面前，看见一个年轻人拉着女郎的衣襟。
English: Ye Tianshi recited a spell step by step, and the spray of water turned into a black gas, until he saw a young man holding the girl's collar in front of Zhang Zhuo.

古文：右座一见怒极，令前擒之。
现代文：相公一见大怒已极，命人上前捉拿他。
English: At the first sight of his father-in-law, he was furious to the extreme and ordered someone to come forward and catch him.

古文：卓因举臂，如抵墙壁，终不能近。
现代文：张卓就举起左臂，捉他的人好像被墙壁隔挡，始终不能靠近他。
English: Zhang Zhuo raised his left arm, and his captors seemed to be blocked by the wall, unable to get close to him.

古文：遽以狗马血泼之，又以刀剑击刺之，卓乃开口，锋刃断折。
现代文：人们急忙用狗马的血去泼他，又用刀剑去击刺他。张卓就张开口，刀锋剑刃被折断。
English: People rushed to splash him with the blood of dogs and horses, and stabbed him with swords. Zhang Zhuo opened his mouth, and the blade of the sword was broken.

古文：续又敕使宣云，断颈进上，卓闻而惧，因脱左鞋，伸足推之。
现代文：接着皇帝又命使者传宣旨意，说要将人头进献皇上。张卓听到就害怕了，于是脱下左脚上的鞋，伸出脚去推他们。
English: Then the emperor ordered the messenger to proclaim the will, saying that the heads of the people should be presented to the emperor. Zhang Zhuo was afraid when he heard this, so he took off his left shoe and stretched out his foot to push them.

古文：右座及罗叶二师暨敕使，皆仰仆焉。
现代文：相公以及罗叶二位天师，连同宣诏的使者，都仰面倒在地上。
English: Soonggong and Luo Ye, the two celestial teachers, together with the messenger who announced the edict, all fell to the ground.

古文：叶公曰： 向来入门，见非常之气，及其开口，果有太乙使者。
现代文：叶天师说： 刚才来时我一进门，就见到一股不同寻常之气，等到他张开口，果然有太乙真人的使者。
English: Ye Tianshi said, "When I came here just now, as soon as I entered the door, I saw an unusual aura. When he opened his mouth, there was indeed a messenger from Taibizhen.

古文：相公但获爱女，何苦相害。 
现代文：相公只要找到爱女，何必苦苦害他。 
English: As long as the father-in-law finds his beloved daughter, there is no need to torment him.

古文：卓因纵女，上使卫兵送归旧山。
现代文：张卓就放开女郎。皇上派卫兵把他送回原来的那座山。
English: Zhang Zhuo let the girl go. The emperor sent guards to escort him back to the original mountain.

古文：仙人曳杖途中曰： 张郎不听吾语。遽遭罗网也。 
现代文：仙人曳杖在途中说： 张郎不听我的话，马上就遭受罗网了。 
English: On the way, the hermit said, "Zhang Lang did not listen to my words and was immediately ensnared.

古文：侍卫兵士尚随之，仙人以拄杖画地，化为大江，波涛浩淼，阔三二里。
现代文：侍卫的兵士还跟着他，仙人就用拄着的拐杖在地上一画，变成一条大江，波涛浩淼，有二三里地宽。
English: The soldiers of the guards still followed him, and the hermit drew a picture on the ground with the crutch he was carrying, turning it into a large river with vast waves, two or three miles wide.

古文：妻以霞帔搭于水上，须臾化一飞桥，在半天之上。
现代文：张卓的妻子把霞帔搭在水上，片刻之间，就变成一座飞桥，在半天空上。
English: Zhang Zhuo's wife put the reed on the water, and in a moment, it turned into a flying bridge, halfway across the sky.

古文：仙人前行，卓次之，妻又次之，三人登桥而过。
现代文：仙人在前边走，张卓跟着，他的妻子在后面，三个人登桥而过。
English: The hermit walked in front, Zhang Zhuo followed, his wife was behind, and the three of them walked across the bridge.

古文：随步旋收，但见苍山四合，削壁万重，人皆遥礼。
现代文：空中飞桥随着他们的脚步，走过之处马上就收回。只见苍莽群山从四处围合，万重峭壁刀削一般，人们都远远地给他们行礼。
English: The flying bridge in the air followed their footsteps and immediately retreated wherever they went. I could see the rugged mountains surrounding them from all directions, the towering cliffs were as sharp as knives, and people were bowing to them from afar.

古文：归奏玄宗，俄发使就山祭醮之。
现代文：卫士回去奏报唐玄宗，不久，唐玄宗打发使者到山里祭祀他们。
English: The guards went back to report to Tang Xuan Zong, and soon Tang Xuan Zong sent an envoy to the mountains to sacrifice to them.

古文：因呼为隔仙山，在洋州西六十里。
现代文：于是人们把这座山叫作隔仙山，在洋州西六十里，现在还在那里。
English: Therefore, people called this mountain, which is sixty miles west of Yangzhou, the "Separate Immortal Mountain," and it is still there now.

