古文：张俭邢抱朴马得臣萧朴耶律八哥
现代文：张俭，宛平人，生性正直诚谨，不喜虚夸矫饰。
English: Zhang Jian, a Wanping person, is honest and sincere by nature, and does not like pretentiousness.

古文：张俭，宛平人，性端悫，不事外饰。统和十四年，举进士第一，调云州幕官。
现代文：统和十四年，举进士第一，调任云州幕官。
English: In the 14th year of unification, he was the first to be promoted to the rank of officer and was transferred to the Yunnan Shogunate.

古文：故事，车驾经行，长吏当有所献。
现代文：按旧例，皇上经过之处，当地长官应该有所贡献。
English: According to the old practice, where the emperor passes, the local magistrate should make a contribution.

古文：圣宗猎云中，节度使进曰： 臣境无他产，惟幕僚张俭，一代之宝，愿以为献。 
现代文：圣宗到云中游猎，节度使奏称： 臣辖区内没有什么特产，只有幕僚张俭，为一代之宝物，希望能将他献上。 
English: The Holy Sect went hunting in the clouds, and the festival envoy said: There is no special product in the jurisdiction area, only the staff member Zhang Jian, a treasure of a generation, hoping to present him.

古文：先是，上梦四人侍侧，赐食人二口，至闻俭名，始悟。
现代文：在此之前，皇上曾梦见有四人侍奉于身旁，赐给他们食物每人两口，待到听说了张俭之名 俭 字，方才恍然大悟梦兆应在张俭身上。
English: Prior to this, the emperor had dreamed of four people serving him, giving them two mouthfuls of food each. It was only when he heard the name of Zhang Jian, "Jian," that he suddenly realized that the dream was about Zhang Jian.

古文：召见，容止朴野。访及世务，占奏三十余事。
现代文：于是召见他，他仪容举止质朴无华；问及谋身治世之事，便当面口奏三十多件事。
English: So he summoned him, and his appearance and demeanor were simple and unadorned. When asked about the matter of seeking to rule the world, he blurted out more than thirty things to his face.

古文：由此顾遇特异，践历清华，号称明干。
现代文：从此特别受皇上青睐，历任清高显贵之职，号称明智干练。
English: Since then, he has been particularly favored by the emperor, and has served in high-ranking and prestigious positions. He is known as a wise and capable person.

古文：开泰中，累迁同知枢密院事。
现代文：开泰年间，累迁同知枢密院事。
English: During the reign of Emperor Keitai, Tongzhi Privy Council was established.

古文：太平五年，出为武定军节度使，移镇大同。
现代文：太平五年，出京任武定军节度使，移镇于大同。
English: In the 5th year of the Taiping era, he went to Beijing to serve as the military commander of the Wuding Army, and moved to Datong.

古文：六年，入为南院枢密使。
现代文：六年，入京任南院枢密使。
English: Six years later, he entered Beijing as the Privy Councilor of the Southern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：帝方眷倚，参知政事吴叔达与俭不相能，帝怒，出叔达为康州刺史，拜俭左丞相，封韩王。
现代文：皇上正宠爱倚重于他，参知政事吴叔达与张俭不合，皇上发怒，出贬叔达为康州刺史，拜张俭为左丞相，封韩王。
English: The emperor loved Zheng Zheng more than him. Wu Shuda, the political advisor of the prefectural governor, and Zhang Jian did not get along. The emperor was angry and denounced Shuda as the governor of Kangzhou, Zhang Jian as the minister of the left, and Han Wang as the king.

古文：帝不豫，受遗诏辅立太子，是为兴宗，赐贞亮弘靖保义守节耆德功臣，拜太师、中书令，加尚父，徙王陈。
现代文：皇上病重，张俭接受遗诏辅立太子，这便是兴宗，赐张俭为贞亮弘靖保义守节耆德功臣，拜为太师、中书令，又加尚父，改封为陈王。
English: The emperor was seriously ill, and Zhang Jian accepted his last will and testament to support the establishment of the crown prince. This was Xingzong, who gave Zhang Jian the title of Zhenglang Huanjing Boiyi Shoujie Zhengde Gongshen, the title of Taishi, Zhongshurong, and the title of Shangfu, and changed his title to Chen Wang.

古文：重熙五年，帝幸礼部贡院及亲试进士，皆俭发之。
现代文：重熙五年，兴宗皇上亲临礼部贡院以及亲自考试进士，都是张俭打点。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Chongxi, Emperor Xingzong personally visited the ceremonial department of the tribute academy and personally took the examination to become a scholar, all of which were made by Zhang Jian.

古文：进见不名，赐诗褒美。
现代文：进见时不直呼其名，并且赐诗加以褒奖称美。
English: Do not call his name directly when you see him, and give him a poem to praise him.

古文：俭衣唯帛，食不重味，月俸有余，赒给亲旧。
现代文：张俭只穿粗丝织成的绢帛，每餐只食一菜，按月发的俸禄有节余的，便拿来接济亲朋旧友。
English: Zhang Jian only wears a cocoon made of coarse silk. He only eats one dish at each meal. If there is any money left from his monthly salary, he uses it to help relatives, friends and old acquaintances.

古文：方冬，奏事便殿，帝见衣袍弊恶，密令近侍以火夹穿孔记之，屡见不易。
现代文：一次正当冬天，在皇上歇息之便殿奏报事务，皇上见他袍子破旧，暗里派近侍用火夹穿个洞做上记号，每次见到他都没有换下来。
English: Once, during the winter, when the emperor was in the hall of rest, attending to the matter of the report, the emperor saw that his robe was worn out, and secretly sent an attendant to make a mark with a hole with a fire clip. Every time he saw him, he did not change it.

古文：帝问其故，俭对曰： 臣服此袍已三十年。 
现代文：皇上问其缘故，张俭回答说： 我穿这件袍子已经三十年了。 
English: When the emperor asked the reason, Zhang Jian replied, "I have been wearing this robe for thirty years.

古文：时尚奢靡，故以此微讽喻之。
现代文：当时崇尚奢侈华丽，所以用这种做法微言讽喻皇上。
English: At that time, luxury and splendor were highly valued, so this practice was used as a subtle allusion to the emperor.

古文：上怜其清贫，令恣取内府物，俭奉诏持布三端而出，益见奖重。
现代文：皇上怜悯他清贫，让他任意取用内府物品，张俭奉诏后只拿了三匹布出来，因此更加受到嘉许重用。
English: The emperor took pity on his poverty and allowed him to use the palace goods at will. Zhang Jian only took out three pieces of cloth after receiving the edict, so he was even more praised for his heavy use.

古文：俭弟五人，上欲俱赐进士第，固辞。
现代文：张俭有五个弟弟，皇上想一并赐给他们进士及第出身，张俭坚决推辞。
English: Zhang Jian had five younger brothers. The emperor wanted to give them both the title of Jin Shi and the title of Zheng Shi, but Zhang Jian resolutely refused.

古文：有司获盗八人，既戮之，乃获正贼。
现代文：有司捉住了八个盗贼，已经斩首之后，才又捉拿到正犯。
English: Yushi caught eight thieves, and only after they had been beheaded did he catch the real culprits.

古文：家人诉冤，俭三乞申理。
现代文：被斩首者的家人申诉冤曲，张俭接连三次请求审理。
English: The family members of the beheaded person complained of injustice, and Zhang Jian made three consecutive requests for a hearing.

古文：上勃然曰： 卿欲朕偿命耶！ 
现代文：皇上大怒说 ：你难道想要朕偿命不成？ 
English: The emperor said angrily, "Do you really want me to die for nothing?

古文：俭曰： 八家老稚无告，少加存恤，使得收葬，足慰存没矣。 
现代文：张俭说 ：八家老小冤苦无告，如果能稍稍加以存问抚恤，使他们能够收尸下葬，就足以安抚活着和死去的人了。 
English: Zhang Jian said, "Eight families have suffered grievances without complaint. If we can give them a little allowance so that they can collect the bodies and bury them, it will be enough to appease the living and the dead.

古文：及耶律休哥留守南京，又多滞狱，复诏抱朴平决之，人无冤者。
现代文：皇上于是听从了他的建议。张俭任丞相二十多年，对皇上大有辅弼补益之功。辞官归家，适逢宋人来信文辞不按礼节，皇上准备亲征。
English: The emperor then heeded his advice. Zhang Jian served as chancellor for more than 20 years, and was of great help and benefit to the emperor. When the chancellor returned home, it was a time when the Song people came to write letters and did not follow etiquette, and the emperor was preparing to enlist himself.

古文：改南院枢密使，卒，赠侍中。
现代文：到张俭家中，尚食官吏先前往准备膳食，张俭推辞；进献葵羹汤饭，皇上吃得很美。
English: At Zhang Jian's home, Shang food officials first went to prepare the meal, Zhang Jian declined; they presented sunflower soup soup, and the emperor ate it beautifully.

古文：初，抱朴与弟抱质受经于母陈氏，皆以儒术显，抱质亦官至侍中，时人荣之。
现代文：然后便问他以对策，张俭极言陈说战事利害，并且说： 只需派一名使者责问就行了，何必劳驾皇上远征？ 
English: Then he asked him what countermeasures he should take. Zhang Jian made a strong statement about the interests of the war, and said: It is enough to send an envoy to reprimand him. Why bother to lead the imperial expedition?

古文：马得臣，南京人，好学博古，善属文，尤长于诗。
现代文：皇上听了很高兴，就作罢了。又亲临其家中赐宴，用过的器物珍玩都送给他。二十二年逝世，终年九十一岁，敕令葬于宛平县。马得臣，南京人。好学，博通古事，尤其擅长做诗。
English: The Emperor was very pleased to hear this, so he stopped making it. He also came to his home to give a banquet, and all the used utensils and rare toys were given to him. He died in 1922, aged ninety-one, and was buried in Wanping County. Ma Desen, a native of Nanjing. Studious, well-versed in antiquities, especially good at making poetry.

古文：保宁间，累迁政事舍人、翰林学士，常预朝议，以正直称。
现代文：保宁间，历任政事舍人、翰林学士，常常参与朝议，以正直著称。
English: During the Boryeong era, successive politicians and scholars of Hanlin University often participated in discussions with the Korean government, and were known for their honesty.

古文：乾亨初，宋师屡犯边，命为南京副留守，复拜翰林学士承旨。
现代文：乾亨初，宋国军队多次侵犯我国边境，皇上命他为南京副留守，又拜为翰林学士承旨。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Qianheng, the Song Dynasty army repeatedly invaded China's borders. The emperor ordered him to stay in Nanjing as a vice-emperor, and he also served as the Hanlin Scholar.

古文：圣宗即位，皇太后称制，兼侍读学士。
现代文：圣宗即位，皇太后临朝称制，马得臣兼侍读学士。
English: Emperor Shenzong ascended to the throne, Empress Dowager Lin was enthroned, and Ma Desen was appointed as an attendant bachelor.

古文：上阅唐高祖、太宗、玄宗三《纪》，得臣乃录其行事可法者进之。
现代文：皇上阅览唐高祖、太宗、玄宗三朝《本纪》，得臣便摘录其行为值得效法者进呈之。
English: The emperor read the "Honki" of the three dynasties of Tang Gaozu, Taizong, and Xuanzong, and the vassal extracted the behavior worthy of imitation and submitted it.

古文：及扈从伐宋，进言降不可杀，亡不可追，二三其德者别议。
现代文：待到随从皇上伐宋，进言对投降的不可杀，逃走的不可追，二三其德者则另当别论。
English: When it came to following the emperor to fight the Song Dynasty, the emperor said that those who surrendered should not be killed, those who ran away should not be chased, and those who had two or three virtues should be treated differently.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：诏令依他所说去做。
English: He complied.

古文：俄兼谏议大夫，知宣徽院事。
现代文：不久兼任谏议大夫，知宣徽院事。
English: Soon, he also held the position of the doctor of consultation, and became the secretary of the Zhixuan Hui Academy.

古文：时上击鞠无度，上书谏曰：臣窃观房玄龄、杜如晦，隋季书生，向不遇太宗，安能为一代名相？
现代文：当时皇上打鞠没有节制，得臣上书谏曰 ：臣私下里考察房玄龄、杜如晦，隋末的书生，先前未遇太宗，怎能成为一代名相？
English: At that time, the emperor had no restraint in playing marbles, so he had his ministers go to the study hall and say, "Minister, privately examine Fong Xuanling, Du Rugao, the students at the end of the Sui Dynasty, who had not previously met the Emperor Taizong, how can they become a generation of celebrities?"

古文：臣虽不才，陛下在东宫，幸列侍从，今又得侍圣读，未有裨补圣明。
现代文：臣尽管不才，陛下在东宫时，有幸列为侍从，现在又得以伴圣上读书，可惜对于您的圣明没有什么补益。
English: Although I am not a minister, I had the honor of serving as an attendant when Your Majesty was in the East Palace, and now I am able to accompany Your Holiness to school. Unfortunately, this is of no benefit to Your Holiness.

古文：陛下尝问臣以贞观、开元之事，臣请略陈之。
现代文：陛下曾经以贞观、开元之事问臣，臣请大略陈述之。
English: His Majesty once asked a vassal about the concept of chastity and the founding of the Republic, and the vassal was asked to give a brief explanation.

古文：臣闻唐太宗侍太上皇宴罢，则挽辇至内殿；玄宗与兄弟欢饮，尽家人礼。
现代文：臣听说唐太宗事奉太上皇宴饮结束，则挽辇车至内殿；玄宗与兄弟们欢饮，尽一家人之礼节。
English: When the vassal heard that Emperor Taizong of Tang had finished serving the Emperor's banquet, he hitched a ride to the inner hall; Emperor Xuanzong and his brothers drank happily, fulfilling the etiquette of a family.

古文：陛下嗣祖考之祚，躬侍太后，可谓至孝。
现代文：陛下继承祖先之大任，亲身侍奉太后，可谓至孝。
English: His Majesty inherits the great responsibility of his ancestors and personally serves the empress dowager, which can be described as filial piety.

古文：臣更望定省之余，睦六亲，加爱敬，则陛下亲亲之道，比隆二帝矣。
现代文：臣仍希望皇上能在早晚向双亲问安之外，亲睦六亲，加倍爱敬，那么陛下敬爱亲人之道，就超过太宗玄宗二帝了。
English: The minister still hopes that the emperor can, in addition to greeting his parents in the morning and evening, make friends with six relatives and redouble his love and respect. Then his majesty's way of respecting relatives will exceed that of Emperor Taizong Xuanzong II.

古文：臣又闻二帝耽玩经史，数引公卿讲学，至于日昃。
现代文：臣又听说二帝潜心爱好经史，多次引导公卿讲学，以至于日暮。
English: The minister also heard that the two emperors were deeply interested in history and guided the nobles to lecture many times, so much so that the sun set.

古文：故当时天下翕然向风，以隆文治。
现代文：所以当时天下纷纷向往，蔚成风气，因此得以兴隆文治。
English: Therefore, at that time, the whole world yearned for it, and it became a culture, so it was able to flourish.

古文：今陛下游心典籍，分解章句，臣愿研究经理，深造而笃行之，二帝之治，不难致矣。
现代文：现在陛下醉心于典籍，研习章句之学，臣希望陛下能研究经书之理，深加体会，诚心实行，那么像二帝那样的治世不难实现。
English: Now that His Majesty is engrossed in the classics and studying the study of chapters and verses, I hope that His Majesty can study the principles of the scriptures, deepen his understanding, and sincerely practice, so that it is not difficult to achieve a reign like that of the two emperors.

古文：臣又闻太宗射豕，唐俭谏之；玄宗臂鹰，韩休言之；二帝莫不乐从。
现代文：臣又听说太宗射野猪，唐俭谏之；玄宗射鹰，韩休劝说；二帝没有不乐于听从的。
English: The vassal also heard that Emperor Taizong shot wild boar, which was recommended by Emperor Tang, Emperor Xuanzong shot eagle, which was advised by Emperor Han; the two emperors were not unwilling to obey.

古文：今陛下以球马为乐，愚臣思之，有不宜者三，故不避斧钺言之：窃以君臣同戏，不免分争，君得臣愧，彼负此喜，一不宜。
现代文：现在陛下以击走马为乐，依愚臣看来，有三不宜，所以不避刑罚陈说之。窃以为君与臣一同游戏，免不了会有争夺，为君的得手则为臣的愧赧，彼方败了此方高兴，这是一不宜。
English: Now His Majesty is taking pleasure in driving away the horse. According to the foolish minister, there are three things that are not appropriate, so he does not avoid the punishment of saying it. It is not appropriate to think that you are playing with the minister, there will inevitably be a competition, and if you win, it will be the minister's shame, and if the other side loses, this side will be happy.

古文：跃马挥杖，纵横驰骛，不顾上下之分，争先取胜，失人臣礼，二不宜。
现代文：跃马挥杖，纵横驰骋，不顾上下之分别，争先求胜，失人臣之礼，二不宜。
English: It is not appropriate to jump on the horse, wave the wand, gallop vertically and horizontally, ignore the differences between the upper and lower ranks, strive for victory, and lose the courtesy of the minister.

古文：轻万乘之尊，图一时之乐，万一有衔勒之失，其如社稷、太后何？
现代文：轻弃万乘之主的尊贵，贪图一时之快乐，万一在马上有什么闪失，那我们怎么向社稷和太后交待呢？
English: If we disregard the dignity of the Lord of the World and seek momentary happiness, what will we say to the empress dowager and empress dowager?

古文：三不宜。
现代文：此是三不宜。
English: Here are the three unsuitables.

古文：傥陛下不以臣言为迂，少赐省览，天下之福，群臣之愿也。
现代文：倘若陛下不以臣之言论为迂腐，能抽出时间看一下，这就是天下之福，群臣之愿了。 
English: If His Majesty does not take the words of his ministers as pedantry, and can take the time to look at it, this is the blessing of the world and the wish of his ministers.

古文：书奏，帝嘉叹良久。
现代文：谏书上达，皇上嘉赏、感叹了好久。
English: The imperial edict was issued, and the emperor praised and sighed for a long time.

古文：未几卒，赠太子太保，诏有司给葬。
现代文：不久得臣去世，赠太子太保，诏令有司资助葬事。
English: Soon after, his father-in-law died, and he was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo. The imperial edict ordered the Imperial Household Agency to fund the funeral.

古文：萧朴，字延宁，国舅少父房之族。
现代文：萧朴，字延宁，国舅少父房之族。
English: Xiao Pu, also known as Yan Ning, is the younger brother of Guo Fang.

古文：父劳古，以善属文为圣宗诗友。
现代文：父萧劳古，因为擅长做文，成为圣宗的诗友。
English: Father Xiao Laogu, because he was good at writing, became a poet friend of the Holy Sect.

古文：朴幼如老成人。
现代文：萧朴幼时便显得像个练达持重的人。
English: When Xiao Pu was a child, he seemed to be a person who practiced and held on to things.

古文：及长，博学多智。
现代文：成年之后，博学多智。
English: After reaching adulthood, they become more knowledgeable and wiser.

古文：开泰初，补牌印郎君，为南院承旨，权知转运事，寻改南面林牙。
现代文：开泰初，补为牌印郎君，任南院承旨，暂管转运事，不久改任南面林牙。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was appointed as the second-in-command of the Southern Yuan, temporarily in charge of transportation, and was soon transferred to the Southern Mian Lin Ya.

古文：帝问以政，朴具陈百姓疾苦，国用丰耗，帝悦曰： 吾得人矣！ 
现代文：皇上以政事问他，萧朴详细地陈说百姓之疾苦，国家用度之充盈与短少，皇上高兴地说 ：我得到德才兼备的人了！ 
English: The emperor asked him about political affairs. Xiao Pu gave a detailed account of the sufferings of the people, the abundance and scarcity of the country's resources. The emperor said happily: I have found a man who is both virtuous and talented!

古文：擢左夷离毕。
现代文：提升为左夷离毕。
English: He has been promoted to the position of Zuoying.

古文：时萧合卓为枢密使，朴知部署院事，以酒废事，出为兴国军节度使，俄召为南面林牙。
现代文：当时萧合卓任枢密使，萧朴知部署院事，因为饮酒旷废公事，出贬为兴国军节度使，不久召任为南面林牙。
English: At that time, Xiao Hezhuo was appointed as a privy councilor, Xiao Pu Zhi was appointed as an academician, because drinking alcohol was a waste of public affairs, he was demoted as a festival delegate of the Hongguo Army, and was soon appointed as the south side of Lin Ya.

古文：太平三年，守太子太傅。
现代文：太平三年，任守太子太傅。
English: In the third year of the Taiping era, he was appointed as the prince's daifu.

古文：明年，拜北府宰相，迁北院枢密使。
现代文：次年，拜为北府宰相，迁任北院枢密使。
English: The following year, Bae became the prime minister of the Northern Prefecture and was transferred to the position of the Privy Councilor of the Northern Court.

古文：时太平日久，帝留心翰墨，始画谱牒以别嫡庶，由是争讼纷起。
现代文：当时太平已久，皇上留心于笔墨，开始制作谱牒以区分嫡出庶出，因此因争论嫡庶而诉讼之事纷起。
English: At that time, the situation had been peaceful for a long time, and the emperor, paying attention to his pen and ink, began to make a record to distinguish between legitimate and illegitimate children. As a result, lawsuits arose due to disputes over legitimate children.

古文：朴有吏才，能知人主意，敷奏称旨，朝议多取决之。
现代文：萧朴有为政之才，能窥知皇上之心意，陈奏总是合乎皇上之意，朝廷大政议事大多由他来决断。
English: Xiao Pu had a talent for politics and was able to read the emperor's mind. He always acted in accordance with the emperor's will, and most of the major political affairs of the imperial court were decided by him.

古文：封兰陵郡王，进王恒，加中书令。
现代文：封为兰陵郡王，进位为恒王，加中书令。
English: He was given the title of Lanling County King, promoted to the position of Heng King, and was awarded the Order of the Rising Sun.

古文：及大延琳叛，诏安抚东京，以便宜从事。
现代文：及至大延琳叛乱，诏令萧朴安抚东京，可以不必请示而便宜行事。
English: As far as the rebellion of the Great Yanlin, the Emperor ordered Xiao Pu to pacify Tokyo, and he could act cheaply without having to ask for instructions.

古文：兴宗即位，皇太后称制，国事一委弟孝先。
现代文：兴宗即位，皇太后摄政，国家大事一律托付其弟萧孝先。
English: Emperor Xingzong ascended the throne, the empress dowager became regent, and all state affairs were entrusted to his younger brother Xiao Xiaoxian.

古文：方仁德皇后以冯家奴所诬被害，朴屡言其冤，不报。
现代文：正逢仁德皇后因为冯家奴诬陷而被杀害，萧朴多次上奏陈说其冤枉，皇太后没有答复。
English: At the time when Empress Rende was killed because she had been framed by Feng Jianlu, Xiao Pu repeatedly appealed to her, saying that she had been wronged, but the Empress Dowager did not reply.

古文：每念至此，为之呕血。
现代文：萧朴每当想到此事，往往为之呕血。
English: Whenever Xiao Pu thought about it, she often vomited blood.

古文：重熙初，改王韩，拜东京留守。
现代文：重熙初年，改封为韩王，拜为东京留守。
English: In the first year of Chongxi, he changed his title to Han Wang and stayed in Tokyo.

古文：及迁太后于庆州，朴徙王楚，升南院枢密使。
现代文：及至迁太后于庆州，萧朴徙封为楚王，升任南院枢密使。
English: When the empress dowager moved to Gyeongju, Xiao Pu was given the title of King of Chu and promoted to the position of Privy Councilor of the Southern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：四年，王魏。
现代文：四年，封为魏王。
English: Four years later, he was crowned King of Wei.

古文：薨，年五十，赠齐王。
现代文：不久逝世，终年五十岁，赠封齐王。
English: He died soon after, at the age of fifty, and was given the title of King Qi.

古文：子铎剌，国舅详稳。
现代文：子萧铎剌，国舅详稳。
English: His son was Xiao Yao, and his uncle was Ji Gang.

古文：耶律八哥，字乌古邻，五院部人。
现代文：耶律八哥，字乌古邻，五院部人。
English: Yelu eight brothers, the word Wu ancient neighbors, five hospital staff.

古文：幼聪慧，书一览辄成诵。
现代文：幼时聪明敏慧，看书时过一遍便能背诵下来。
English: When he was young, he was smart and keen. When he read a book, he could recite it after reading it once.

古文：统和中，以世业为本部吏。未几，升闸撒狘，寻转枢密院侍御。
现代文：统和年间，因先人业绩任为本部吏，不久，升任闸撒犭戊，接着又转任枢密院侍御。
English: During the Unification Era, he was appointed as the head clerk due to the performance of his predecessors, and soon after, he was promoted to the post of palace secretary, and then he was transferred to the post of Privy Council chamberlain.

古文：会宋将曹彬、米信侵燕，八哥以扈从有功，擢上京留守。
现代文：适逢宋将曹彬、米信侵犯燕地，八哥因为随驾作战有功，提升为上京留守。
English: At the right time, Song invaded Yan's territory with Cao Bin and Yixin, and because of his outstanding performance in the follow-up battle, he was promoted to stay in Beijing.

古文：开泰四年，召为北院枢密副使。
现代文：开泰四年，召为北院枢密副使。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Keitai, he was called to be the Privy Vice-Minister of the Northern Court.

古文：顷之，留守东京。
现代文：不久，留守东京。
English: Soon after, he left for Tokyo.

古文：七年，上命东平王萧排押帅师伐高丽，八哥为都监，至开京，大掠而还。
现代文：七年，皇上命东平王萧排押率军攻高丽，八哥担任都监，到开京，大肆抢掠而回。
English: In the seventh year, the emperor ordered Dongping Wang Xiao to lead an army to attack Goryeo, and Mynhe served as the inspector of the capital. He went to Beijing and returned with a large amount of plunder.

古文：济茶、陀二河，高丽追兵至。
现代文：渡茶、陀二河时，高丽追兵赶到。
English: At the time of the crossing of the Tea and Daji Rivers, the Koryo chased the soldiers and caught up with them.

古文：诸将皆欲使敌渡两河击之，独八哥以为不可，曰： 敌若渡两河，必殊死战，乃危道也；不若击于两河之间。 
现代文：诸将都想让敌人渡过两河再行攻击，只有八哥认为不好，说： 敌人如果渡过两河，必定拼死作战，这是个冒险措施；不如在两河之间攻击之。 
English: All the generals wanted to let the enemy cross the two rivers and then attack, but only Mynheer thought it was a bad idea, saying, "If the enemy crosses the two rivers, he will fight to the death. This is a risky measure; it is better to attack between the two rivers."

古文：排押从之，战，败绩。
现代文：排押听从他的话，与敌交战，失败。
English: The platoon obeyed him, engaged the enemy, and lost.

古文：明年，还东京，奏渤海承奉官宜有以统领之，上从其言，置都知押班。
现代文：次年，回到东京，奏称渤海承奉官应该设官加以统领，皇上听从他的话，设置了都知押班。
English: The following year, back in Tokyo, he made a report saying that the Bokkai Shobunkan should appoint an official to lead it, and the Emperor obeyed his words and set up a tutsuoban.

古文：后以茶、陀之败，削使相，降西北路都监，卒。
现代文：后来因为追论茶、陀之战的失败，削夺其使相之职，降为西北路都监，不久去世。
English: Later, because of the failure of the war of pursuing tea and toa, he was stripped of his post of envoy, reduced to the northwest road inspector, and died soon after.

