古文：程咸字咸休。
现代文：程咸字延祚。
English: Cheng Xianzi extended his hand.

古文：其母始怀咸，梦老公投药与之： 服此当生贵子。 晋武帝时，历位至侍中，有名于世。
现代文：他的母亲在刚刚怀上程咸的时候，梦到一位老翁赠送给她一种药： 你吃了这种药，就能生下一个尊贵的儿子。 晋武帝在位的时候，程咸历任官职直至侍中，在世上很有名望。
English: When his mother was just pregnant with Cheng Xian, she dreamed that an old man gave her a medicine: If you take this medicine, you will give birth to a noble son.During the reign of Emperor Jinwu, Cheng Xian served as an official until he became an attendant, and he was very famous in the world.

古文：袁真在豫州，遣女妓纪陵送阿薛、阿郭、阿马三妓与桓宣武。
现代文：袁真在豫州的时候，有一次派一个叫纪陵的女妓，把阿薛、阿郭、阿马三个妓女赠送给桓宣武。
English: When Yuan Zhen was in Yuzhou, he once sent a prostitute named Jiling to present three prostitutes, Ashe, Aguo and Ama, to Huan Xuanwu.

古文：既至经时，三人半夜共出庭前月下观望，有铜瓮水在其侧。
现代文：她们到那里过了一些时间，有一次三个人在半夜一起走出房间，在屋前的庭院前的月光下赏月，有一个装满水的铜瓮放在她们身边。
English: They spent some time there, and once the three of them went out of the room together in the middle of the night to watch the moon in the moonlight in front of the courtyard in front of the house, with a gong full of water placed beside them.

古文：忽见一流星，夜从天直堕瓮中。
现代文：忽然它们看见一颗流星，在夜空里从天而降直掉进铜瓮之中。
English: Suddenly, they saw a shooting star, falling from the sky in the night sky and falling straight into the gong.

古文：惊喜共视，忽如二寸火珠，流于水底，炯然明净，乃相谓曰： 此吉祥也，当谁应之。 于是薛郭二人更以瓢杓接取，并不得。
现代文：她们惊喜之余一起观看，那流星犹如一颗两寸大的火珠，沉在铜瓮的水底，闪闪发亮，光洁剔透。她们就互相说开了： 这是一颗吉祥的东西，但谁有缘能够得到它呢？ 于是，阿薛、阿郭轮流用瓢杓去舀取这颗火珠，都没有舀到。
English: They were so surprised that they looked at it together. The meteor was like a two-inch-tall ball of fire, sinking to the bottom of the brazen water, shining brightly and shining brightly. They said to each other: This is an auspicious thing, but who has the chance to get it? So, Ashe and Ago took turns to catch the ball of fire with their shovels, but they did not catch it.

古文：阿马最后取，星正入瓢中，便饮之。
现代文：最后阿马去舀取，那颗火珠正好舀进了瓢杓之中，阿马就把它喝了下去。
English: Finally, Amma went to scoop it up. The ball of fire fell right into the bowl, and Amma drank it down.

古文：既而若有感焉，俄而怀桓玄。
现代文：喝了之后腹中就像是有了感觉，没过多久就怀上了桓玄。
English: After drinking it, it felt like I had a feeling in my stomach, and it didn't take long for me to become pregnant with Kangen.

古文：玄虽篡位不终，而数年之中，荣贵极矣。
现代文：桓玄虽然篡夺了皇位没过多久，但在篡位的数年中，极尽了荣华富贵。
English: Although it didn't take long for Kuan Xuan to usurp the throne, he was extremely wealthy during the years of his usurpation.

古文：临淮公荀序，字休玄。母华夫人，怜爱过常。
现代文：临淮公荀序，字号休元，其母亲华夫人，对他不是一般的怜爱。
English: Lin Huaigong, surnamed Huiyuan, and his mother, Lady Hua, did not show him ordinary love.

古文：年十岁，从南临归，经青草湖，时正帆风驶，序出塞郭，忽落水。
现代文：在他十岁的时候，从南方的临淮回归北方。在经过青草湖的时候，荀序乘坐的船正扬帆乘风破浪行驶，当船驶出城关之后，荀序忽然掉进水中。
English: When he was ten years old, he was returning to the north from Linhuai in the south. While passing through Qingcao Lake, the boat he was on was sailing through the wind and waves. When the boat sailed out of the city gate, he suddenly fell into the water.

古文：比得下帆，已行数十里，洪波淼漫，母抚膺远望。
现代文：等到船降下风帆来，已经驶出数十里了。大水波涛一望无际，荀序的母亲只有槌胸远远地望着湖水。
English: By the time the ship lowered its sails, it had already sailed dozens of miles. The water waves were endless, and the mother of the queue only had a hammer chest looking at the lake from a distance.

古文：少顷，见一掘头船，渔父以楫棹船如飞，载序还之，云： 送府君还。 荀后位至常伯、长沙相，故云府君也。
现代文：但没多久，只见一条掘头船，一个老渔翁奋力划动着船桨飞快驶来，那船载着荀序来送还，老渔翁说： 我把府君送回来了。 荀序后来官至常伯、长沙郡长官，所以就称他为 府君 了。
English: However, it wasn't long before they saw a dredger. An old fisherman was paddling his oar with all his might as it came speeding towards them. The boat was returning with an egret, and the old fisherman said, "I've brought back Fujun." The egret later became a high-ranking official, the governor of Changsha County, so they called him Fujun.

古文：庐陵巴邱人文晁者，世以田作为业。
现代文：庐陵郡巴邱县有一个人叫文晁，祖祖辈辈以种地耕田为家业。
English: In Baqiu County, Fuling County, there is a man named Wen Qi, whose family has been engaged in farming for generations.

古文：年常田数十顷，家渐富。
现代文：他家每年所耕种的田地常有数十顷，家境日渐富裕起来。
English: His family often cultivates dozens of hectares of fields every year, and the family is becoming increasingly affluent.

古文：晋太元初，秋收已过，刈获都毕，明旦至田，禾悉复满，湛然如初。
现代文：东晋太元初年的时候，秋收的季节已经过去了，所有的庄稼都已经收获完成了，但文晁第二天到地里去，看见田地里又长满了稻谷，就像还没有收割时一样茂盛。
English: In the first year of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, the autumn harvest season had already passed, and all the crops had been harvested. However, Wen Xuan went to the fields the next day and saw that the fields were full of rice again, just as lush as before the harvest.

古文：昔有一人，与奴同时得腹瘕病，治不能愈。
现代文：于是文晁又进行收割，收获的粮食装满了粮仓，从此就变成为了巨富人家。从前有一个人与他的仆人都同时患了腹瘕病，无论怎样医治都不见好转。
English: As a result, Wenju carried out the harvest again, the harvested grain filled the granary, and from then on it became a very rich family. Once upon a time, a man and his servant both suffered from diarrhea, and no matter how they were treated, they did not get better.

古文：奴既死，乃剖腹视之，得一白鳖，赤眼，甚鲜明。
现代文：后来仆人死了，他就剖开仆人的肚腹查看，在仆人的肚腹中得到一只白色的甲鱼。这甲鱼的眼睛是红色的，非常鲜亮。
English: And when the servant was dead, he opened his belly, and looked, and, behold, in his belly was a white turtle; and the eyes of the turtle were red and bright.

古文：乃试以诸毒药浇灌之，并内药于鳖口，悉无损动，乃系鳖于床脚。
现代文：他就试着用种种毒药来浇洒这只甲鱼，并从甲鱼的嘴里灌进毒药，都没有使甲鱼受到任何伤害。于是他只得把这只甲鱼拴在床脚上。
English: He tried to douse the turtle with various poisons, and poured poison from the turtle's mouth, but did not cause the turtle any harm. So he had to tie the turtle to the foot of the bed.

古文：忽有一客来看之，乘一白马。
现代文：忽然有一个客人来看这只甲鱼，客人乘坐的是一匹白马。
English: Suddenly, a guest came to see the turtle. The guest was riding a white horse.

古文：既而马尿溅鳖，鳖乃惶骇，欲疾走避尿，因系之不得去，乃缩藏头颈足焉。
现代文：随后白马撒的尿溅在了这只甲鱼身上，甲鱼就感到惊慌害怕，想赶快跑开以躲避马尿，但因为被拴在床脚而不能跑开，只得缩回头、颈、脚，藏起来。
English: Then the horse's urine splashed on the turtle, and the turtle felt panicked and scared and wanted to run away to avoid the horse's urine, but because it was tied to the foot of the bed, it couldn't run away, so it had to retract its head, neck, and feet and hide.

古文：病者察之，谓其子曰： 吾病或可以救矣。 乃试取白马尿以灌鳖上，须臾便消成数升水。
现代文：患腹瘕病的人观察到了这个情形，对自己的儿子说： 我患的病可能可以救治了。 于是他就取来白马的尿浇灌在甲鱼身上，不一会儿甲鱼就溶化成了数升水。
English: A man suffering from diarrhoea and dysentery observed this and said to his son, "This illness of mine may be curable," so he took white horse urine and poured it on the turtle, and soon the turtle dissolved into several litres of water.

古文：病者乃顿服升余白马尿，病豁然愈。
现代文：患腹瘕病的人顿时就服用了约有一升的白马尿，病情一下就痊愈了。
English: People suffering from diarrheal diseases immediately took about one liter of white horse urine, and the disease was cured in an instant.

古文：太尉郗鉴，字道徽，镇丹徒。
现代文：太尉郗鉴，字号道徽，在丹徒县镇守。
English: Second-Lieutenant Yu Jian, alias Dao Hui, is the town guard of Dantu County.

古文：曾出猎，时二月中，蕨始生。
现代文：他有一次曾率士兵去打猎，当时正值二月中旬，蕨菜刚刚开始长出来。
English: He once led soldiers on a hunting trip in mid-February, when the amaranth was just beginning to grow.

古文：有一甲士，折食一茎，即觉心中淡淡欲吐。
现代文：有一个兵士，摘了一根蕨菜的茎来吃了，顿时觉得腹中翻肠倒肚想呕吐。
English: One soldier, picking a leek stem to eat, suddenly felt sick to his stomach and wanted to vomit.

古文：因归，乃成心腹疼痛。
现代文：因此回来以后，就患上了心腹疼痛的疾病。
English: As a result, after returning, he developed a painful disease of the heart and abdomen.

古文：经半年许，忽大吐，吐出一赤蛇，长尺余，尚活动摇。
现代文：大约经过了半年时间，有一天突然剧烈呕吐，吐出来一条红色的蛇，约有一尺长，还是活着的，能动弹。
English: After about half a year, one day he suddenly vomited violently, spitting out a red snake, about a foot long, still alive and able to move.

古文：乃挂著屋檐前，汁稍稍出，蛇渐焦小。
现代文：兵士就把这条蛇挂在屋檐的前面，稍稍滴出些汁液，蛇就逐渐干燥而变小了。
English: The soldier then hung the snake in front of the eaves. A few drops of juice came out, and the snake gradually dried out and became smaller.

古文：夫妇心怖不已。少时，夫忽得疾，性理乖错，终身不愈。董寿之被诛，其家尚未知。
现代文：过了一夜之后再看这条蛇，就变成了一根蕨菜的茎，就像以前那次他所吃下去的蕨茎一样，他的病也就从此消失了。董寿之被杀害了，他的家人还不知道。
English: When he looked at the snake again after a night, it had turned into a stalk of leek, just like the stalk he had eaten the night before, and his illness had disappeared. Dong Shuzhi had been killed, and his family still didn't know.

古文：妻夜坐，忽见寿之居其侧，叹息不已。
现代文：这天夜里他的妻子坐在家里，忽然看到董寿之站在自己的身边，还在叹息不巳。
English: That night, his wife was sitting at home when she suddenly saw Dong Shuzhi standing next to her, still sighing.

古文：妻问： 夜间何得而归？ 寿之都不应答。
现代文：妻子问他： 这么晚了你是怎样回来的呢？ 董寿之总是不作回答。
English: His wife asked him, "How did you come back so late?" Dong Shuzhi always refused to answer.

古文：有顷，出门绕鸡笼而行，笼中鸡惊叫。
现代文：过了一会儿，董寿之走出门去围绕着鸡笼行走，笼子中的鸡都惊叫起来。
English: After a while, Dong Shouzhi walked out of the door to walk around the chicken cage, and the chickens in the cage started to scream.

古文：妻疑有异，持火出户视之，见血数升，而寿之失所在。
现代文：妻子感觉到情况不对劲，拿着火把走出房门去查看，只看见地上有数升鲜血，而董寿之却不见了。
English: Sensing something was wrong, his wife took a torch and went out the door to investigate. She saw several liters of blood on the floor, but Dong Shuzhi was gone.

古文：遂以告姑，因与大小号哭，知有变，及晨，果得凶问。
现代文：妻子于是就把这事告诉了婆母，因此和一家老小嚎啕大哭，知道董寿之遭遇了变故。
English: His wife then told her mother-in-law about this, and she and the family burst into tears, knowing that something had happened to Dong Shou.

古文：宋时有诸生远学。
现代文：到了第二天早晨，果然就传来了董寿之死亡的消息。
English: In the morning of the next day, the news of Dong Shou's death came.

