古文：太宗下
现代文：太宗本纪
English: Taizong Hongji

古文：四年春正月乙亥，定襄道行军总管李靖大破突厥，获隋皇后萧氏及炀帝之孙正道，送至京师。
现代文：四年春正月九日，定襄道行军总管李靖大破突厥，捕获隋朝皇后萧氏以及隋炀帝之孙正道，送到京师。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of Spring, Li Jing, the general manager of the Dingxiang Road March, defeated the Turks, captured the Sui Dynasty Empress Xiao and the grandson of the Sui Dynasty Emperor Zhengdao, and sent them to the Beijing Division.

古文：癸巳，武德殿北院火。
现代文：二十七日，武德殿北院火灾。
English: On the 27th, a fire broke out in the northern courtyard of Wude Hall.

古文：二月己亥，幸温汤。
现代文：二月三日，驾到温汤。
English: On the third day of February, Taizong visited the hot spring.

古文：甲辰，李靖又破突厥于阴山，颉利可汗轻骑远遁。
现代文：八日，李靖又在阴山大破突厥，颉利可汗轻装骑马向远地逃跑。
English: On the eighth day, Li Jing again defeated the Turks on Mount Yin, and Meli Khan fled far away on horseback, lightly armed.

古文：丙午，至自温汤。
现代文：十日，皇上从温汤来。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Taizong returned to the capital from the hot springs.

古文：甲寅，大赦，赐酺五日。
现代文：十八日，大赦。赐大宴五天。
English: On the 18th, an amnesty was implemented, allowing the people to gather and drink for five days.

古文：民部尚书戴胄以本官检校吏部尚书，参预朝政。
现代文：民部尚书戴胄凭本官兼吏部尚书的加官、参议朝政。
English: The people's secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Shang Shuxiu, was promoted to a higher position and a member of the Council of State by virtue of his position as an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs and Shang Shuxiu.

古文：太常卿萧瑀为御史大夫，与宰臣参议朝政。
现代文：太常卿萧王禹为御史大夫，与宰相参议朝政。
English: Grand Councilor Xiao Wangyu was the chief historian and consulted with the prime minister on imperial politics.

古文：御史大夫、西河郡公温彦博为中书令。
现代文：御史大夫、西河郡公温彦博为中书令。
English: Goshi taifu, Saikawa County public official Atsu Hikohiro is the chushiro.

古文：三月庚辰，大同道行军副总管张宝相生擒颉利可汗，献于京师。
现代文：三月十五日，大同道行军副总管张宝相活捉颉利可汗，献到京师。
English: On March 15th, Zhang Baoxiang, the deputy head of the Datong Road Marching Corps, captured Qili Khan alive and presented him to the Beijing Division.

古文：甲申，尚书右仆射、蔡国公杜如晦薨。
现代文：十九日，尚书右仆射、蔡国公杜如晦去世。
English: On the 19th, Shoshu Umenosuke and Cai Guogong Du passed away.

古文：甲午，以俘颉利告于太庙。夏四月丁酉，御顺天门，军吏执颉利以献捷。
现代文：二十九日，向太庙报告俘虏了颉利可汗。夏四月二日，驾到顺天门，军官捉住颉利来献捷。
English: On the 29th, it was reported to the Imperial Temple that the Qili Khan had been captured. On the 2nd of April in the summer, when they arrived at the Shun Tianmen Gate, the officers captured the Qili Khan to celebrate their victory.

古文：自是西北诸蕃咸请上尊号为 天可汗 ，于是降玺书册命其君长，则兼称之。秋七月甲子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：自此西北蕃邦都请求奉给皇上尊号为 天可汗 ，于是皇上降下玺书封立他们的君长。秋七月一日，是朔日，有日蚀。
English: Since then, the northwestern Shan States have all requested to be given the Emperor's honorific title of Tiankhan, so the Emperor issued an imperial edict to seal their monarchs. The first day of autumn, July 1, is the new moon day, with a solar eclipse.

古文：上谓房玄龄、萧瑀曰： 隋文何等主？ 
现代文：皇上对房玄龄、萧王禹道： 隋文帝是怎么个皇上？ 
English: The Emperor to Fang Xuanling and Xiao Wangyu: What kind of Emperor was the Sui Emperor?

古文：对曰： 克己复礼，勤劳思政，每一坐朝，或至日昃。
现代文：他们对答道： 隋文帝约束自己，使言行符合于礼，勤劳地考虑政事，每一次坐朝，有时直到太阳偏西。
English: They replied: Sui Wen Di restrained himself, made his words and deeds conform to etiquette, diligently considered political affairs, and sat in the throne every time, sometimes until the sun was westward.

古文：五品已上，引之论事。
现代文：五品以上官员，引导他们议论国事评议朝政。
English: officials of the Fifth Rank and above, and guide them to discuss state affairs and review the government of the DPRK.

古文：宿卫之人，传餐而食。
现代文：宿卫的人，传送饭食来吃。
English: The night watchman brought food to eat.

古文：虽非性体仁明，亦励精之主也。 
现代文：即使他的性格不能体现仁义明察，也是励精图治的皇帝。 
English: Even if his character does not embody benevolence and righteousness, he is a diligent emperor.

古文：上曰： 公得其一，未知其二。
现代文：皇上曰： 你们只得到其一，不知其二。
English: The emperor said, "You only got one, I don't know what the other one is."

古文：此人性至察而心不明。
现代文：隋文帝的性格很明察然而内心不明。
English: Although Sui Wendi was a cautious and meticulous person, he could not see clearly in his heart.

古文：夫心暗则照有不通，至察则多疑于物。
现代文：内心不明那么照耀便有所不通，非常明察则对事物多疑。
English: It's easy to make mistakes if you can't see things clearly in your heart, and it's easy to be suspicious even if you're careful.

古文：自以欺孤寡得之，谓群下不可信任，事皆自决，虽劳神苦形，未能尽合于理。
现代文：自己认为是欺负孤儿寡母得到的天下，认为臣下不可信任，事情都自我决断，即使劳累心神、困苦形体，也不能全部合情合理。
English: They think that they can bully orphans and widows to get the world, that their subjects cannot be trusted, that things are self-determined, and that even if their minds and bodies are exhausted, they cannot all be reasonable.

古文：朝臣既知上意，亦复不敢直言，宰相已下，承受而已。
现代文：朝臣既然知道皇上不信任的意思，也就再不敢直言，宰相及其以下官员，只是秉承意旨罢了。
English: Since the courtier knew the meaning of the emperor's distrust, he no longer dared to speak out. The prime minister and the officials below him were just following the emperor's will.

古文：朕意不然。
现代文：朕意则不是这样。
English: That's not what I meant.

古文：以天下之广，岂可独断一人之虑？
现代文：以天下的广大，岂可凭一人的思虑独断专行？
English: In view of the vastness of the world, can one man's thoughts dictate everything?

古文：朕方选天下之才，为天下之务，委任责成，各尽其用，庶几于理也。 
现代文：朕正选拔天下之英才，为朝廷工作，委任并责成人们办事，各尽其才来使用，这才差不多合于情理。 
English: It almost makes sense that I am selecting the world's best talent to work for the court, appointing and instructing people to do things, and using them to the best of their abilities.

古文：因令有司： 诏敕不便于时，即宜执奏，不得顺旨施行。 
现代文：因而命令有关部门 ：诏令如对时尚不适合，即应拿来奏明，不能顺承皇上旨意施行。 
English: Therefore, he ordered the relevant departments: If the imperial edict is not suitable for fashion, it should be made clear, and it cannot be implemented in accordance with the emperor's will.

古文：八月丙午，诏三品已上服紫，五品已上服绯，六品七品以绿，八品九品以青；妇人从夫色。
现代文：八月十四日，诏令三品以上官员穿紫色官服，五品以上穿大红色官服，六品七品穿绿色官服，八品九品官员穿青色官服；妇人跟从丈夫的颜色穿衣服。
English: On August 14, it was decreed that officials with three or more official ranks should wear purple official uniforms, officials with five or more official ranks should wear red official uniforms, officials with six or seven official ranks should wear green official uniforms, and officials with eight or nine official ranks should wear blue official uniforms; women should dress in the same color as their husbands.

古文：甲寅，兵部尚书、代国公李靖为尚书左仆射。
现代文：二十二日，兵部尚书、代国公李靖为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 22nd, Hyobusho Shoshu and the acting governor Li Jing were Shoshu's right-hand men.

古文：九月庚午，令收瘗长城之南骸骨，仍令致祭。
现代文：九月八日，命令收埋长城以南的尸骨，仍然令人致以祭祀。
English: On September 8th, the order to bury the bones south of the Great Wall was issued, and people still made sacrifices.

古文：壬午，令自古明王圣帝、贤臣烈士坟墓无得刍牧，春秋致祭。
现代文：二十日，命令从古时以来的英明的君王、圣明的皇帝、贤臣英烈的坟墓不能割草放牧，春秋致以祭祀。
English: On the 20th, it was ordered that the tombs of the wise kings, holy emperors, and wise ministers and heroes from ancient times should not be mowed and grazed, but should be sacrificed in spring and autumn.

古文：冬十月壬辰，幸陇州，曲赦陇、岐二州，给复一年。
现代文：冬十月一日，驾到陇州，因特殊情况而赦免陇、岐二州，免除赋税徭役一年。
English: On the first day of October in winter, he drove to Ganzhou and, due to special circumstances, pardoned the two states of Handan and Qi, exempting them from tax and labor for one year.

古文：辛丑，校猎于贵泉谷。
现代文：十日，在贵泉谷设木栏遮拦野兽而打猎。
English: On the 10th, a wooden fence was set up in Guizhen Valley to block the beast from hunting.

古文：甲辰，校猎于鱼龙川，自射鹿，献于大安宫。
现代文：十三日，在鱼龙川设木栏遮拦野兽以打猎，亲自射鹿，向大安宫高祖进献。
English: On the 13th, he set up a wooden fence in the Yulong River to prevent wild animals from hunting, and personally shot a deer to present it to Gao Zu of the Da'an Palace.

古文：甲子，至自陇州。
现代文：十一月三日，从陇州到来。
English: On his third day of junior high school, Taizong returned to Beijing from Zhangzhou.

古文：戊寅，制决罪人不得鞭背，以明堂孔穴针灸之所。
现代文：十七日，命令判决罪人不得鞭打脊背，因为 明堂 这个针灸孔穴就在脊背上。
English: On the 17th, the court ordered that the guilty should not be whipped on the spine, because the acupuncture hole was on the spine.

古文：兵部尚书侯君集参议朝政。
现代文：兵部尚书侯君集参议朝政。
English: Hyobusho Shohokunji became a councillor in the Imperial Court.

古文：十二月辛亥，开府仪同三司、淮安王神通薨。
现代文：十二月二十一日，开府仪司三司、淮安王神通去世。
English: On December 21, the third secretary of the Kaifu Ceremonial Department, Huai'an Wang Shengtong, passed away.

古文：甲寅，高昌王麹文泰来朝。
现代文：二十四日，高昌王麴文泰前来朝见。
English: On the 24th, Gaochang Wang Qianwen Tai came to see the emperor.

古文：是岁，断死刑二十九人，几致刑措。
现代文：这年，判决死刑二十九人，刑法几乎搁置不用。
English: Twenty-nine people were sentenced to death that year, and the criminal law was almost abandoned.

古文：东至于海，南至于岭，皆外户不闭，行旅不赉粮焉。
现代文：东边到海，南边到岭外，出外都不闭门，来往旅客不带干粮。
English: From the east to the sea, from the south to Lingwai, the door is not closed when going out, and passengers do not bring dry food.

古文：五年正月癸酉，大蒐于昆明池，蕃夷君长咸从。
现代文：五年春正月十三日，在昆明池大检阅，少数民族地区的君长都跟从。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, a grand review was held in Kunming Lake, and the leaders of ethnic minority areas followed.

古文：丙子，亲献禽于大安宫。
现代文：十六日，皇上亲自献禽鸟到大安宫给高祖。
English: On the 16th, the emperor personally donated birds to the Daan Palace for Gao Zu.

古文：己卯，幸左藏库，赐三品已上帛，任其轻重。
现代文：十九日，驾到左藏库，赐给三品以上官员绸缎，任他们拿多或拿少。
English: On the 19th, he drove to the left storehouse and gave silk and satin to officials with three or more goods, allowing them to take more or less.

古文：癸未，朝集使请封禅。
现代文：二十三日，朝集使请求在泰山筑坛祭天，在梁父山祭地。
English: On the 23rd, the Choshu envoy requested that the altar be built on Mount Taishan and the sacrificial altar be built on Mount Liangchishan.

古文：己酉，封皇弟元裕为郐王，元名为谯王，灵夔为魏王，元祥为许王，元晓为密王。
现代文：二月十九日，封皇弟元裕为郐王，元名为谯王，灵夔为魏王，元祥为许王，元晓为密王。
English: On February 19, the emperor's younger brother, Yuan Yu, was crowned King of Wei, Yuan Yuan was named King of Wei, Lingya was crowned King of Wei, Yuan Xiang was crowned King of Xu, and Yuan Xiao was crowned King of Mi.

古文：庚戌，封皇子愔为梁王，贞为汉王，恽为郯王，治为晋王，慎为申王，嚣为江王，简为代王。
现代文：二十日，封皇子忄音为梁王，贞为汉王，恽为郯王，治为晋王，慎为申王，嚣为江王，简为代王。
English: On the 20th day of the month, the emperors named Gu Yin as the king of Liang, Zhen as the king of Han, Zhou as the king of Zhou, Zhi as the king of Jin, Shen as the king of Shen, Han as the king of Jiang, and Jian as the acting king.

古文：夏四月壬辰，代王简薨。
现代文：夏四月十三日，代王简去世。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of summer, Wang Jian passed away.

古文：以金帛购中国人因隋乱没突厥者男女八万人，尽还其家属。
现代文：用金银绸缎赎回中原因为隋末战乱而陷落突厥的男女八万人，全部归还给他们的家属。
English: The Central Plains used gold, silver and silk to ransom 80,000 men and women who had fallen to the Turks as a result of the war at the end of the Sui Dynasty, and all of them were returned to their families.

古文：六月甲寅，太子少师、新昌县公李纲薨。
现代文：六月二十六日，太子少师、新昌县公李纲去世。
English: On June 26, Li Gang, the prince's apprentice and the public official of Xinchang County, passed away.

古文：七月甲辰，遣使毁高丽所立京观，收隋人骸骨，祭而葬之。
现代文：秋八月十七日，派遣使者毁坏高丽所建立的京观，收集隋人尸骨，祭祀埋葬。
English: On the 17th day of the 8th month of the autumn, an envoy was sent to destroy the view of Beijing established by Goryeo, to collect the bones of the Sui people, and to bury them.

古文：戊申，初令天下决死刑必三覆奏，在京诸司五覆奏，其日尚食进蔬食，内教坊及太常不举乐。
现代文：二十一日，首次命令天下判决死刑必须三次复核上奏，在京各有关部门五次复核上奏，判决死刑的当天，掌管皇帝膳食的官员进蔬食，内教坊及太常不奏乐。
English: On the twenty-first day, for the first time, the world ordered that the death sentence must be reviewed three times, and the relevant departments in Beijing were reviewed five times. On the day of the death sentence, the officials in charge of the emperor's diet ate vegetables, and did not play music.

古文：九月乙丑，赐群官大射于武德殿。
现代文：九月九日，赐群官在武德殿为祭祀而举行射礼。
English: On September 9th, officials from the imperial court held a shooting ceremony for the ritual at Wude Hall.

古文：冬十月，右卫大将军、顺州都督、北平郡王阿史那什钵苾卒。
现代文：冬十月，右卫大将军、顺州都督、北平郡王阿史那什钵艹必去世。
English: In the winter of October, General Uwei, Governor of Shunzhou, and King of Beiping County, Ashina Shizhen, passed away.

古文：十二月壬寅，幸温汤。
现代文：十二月十七日，驾到温汤。
English: On December 17th, I drove to the hot spring.

古文：癸卯，猎于骊山。
现代文：十八日，在骊山打猎。
English: On the 18th, they went hunting in Lushan.

古文：丙午，赐新丰高年帛有差。
现代文：二十一日，按等级赐给新丰高年人绸缎。
English: On the 21st, Xinfeng senior citizens were given silk coats according to their rank.

古文：戊申，至自温汤。
现代文：二十三日，从温汤回来。
English: On the 27th, Taizong returned to Beijing from the hot springs.

古文：六年春正月乙卯朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：六年春正月一日，是朔日，有日蚀。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring in the sixth year, it was the new moon, and there was a solar eclipse.

古文：二月丙戌，置三师官员。
现代文：二月二日，设置太师、太傅、太保官员。
English: On February 2, Taishi, Taifu, and Taiho officials were set up.

古文：戊子，初置律学。
现代文：四日，开始设置律学。
English: On the fourth day, the law school began to be set up.

古文：三月戊辰，幸九成宫。
现代文：三月十五日，驾到九成宫。
English: On March 15th, I drove to Jiucheng Palace.

古文：六月己亥，酆王元亨薨。
现代文：六月十七日，酆王元亨去世。
English: On June 17th, Wang Yuanheng passed away.

古文：辛亥，江王嚣薨。
现代文：二十九日，江王嚣去世。
English: On the 29th, Jiang Wang Li Ren passed away.

古文：冬十月乙卯，至自九成宫。
现代文：冬十月五日，从九成宫到来。
English: Winter October 5th, arrived from Jiucheng Palace.

古文：十二月辛未，亲录囚徒，归死罪者二百九十人于家，令明年秋末就刑。
现代文：十二月二十二日，皇上亲自审查并记录囚犯的罪状。把死罪犯人二百九十人归送到家，命令他们明年秋末来受刑。
English: On December 22nd, the emperor personally reviewed and recorded the charges against the prisoners, and sent home 290 death-row prisoners, ordering them to come to serve their sentences by the end of next autumn.

古文：其后应期毕至，诏悉原之。
现代文：以后死罪犯按期到来受刑，皇上诏令全部宽恕。
English: From then on, all death-row prisoners were pardoned by imperial edict.

古文：是岁，党项羌前后内属者三十万口。
现代文：这年，党项羌归附者三十万人。
English: In that year, 300,000 people joined the party.

古文：七年春正月戊子，诏曰： 宇文化及弟智及、司马德戡、裴虔通、孟景、元礼、杨览、唐奉义、牛方裕、元敏、薛良、马举、元武达、李孝本、李孝质、张恺、许弘仁、令狐行达、席德方、李覆等，大业季年，咸居列职，或恩结一代，任重一时；乃包藏凶慝，罔思忠义，爰在江都，遂行弑逆，罪百阎、赵，衅深枭獍。
现代文：七年春正月十日，诏曰： 宇文化及及其弟智及、司马德戡、裴虔通、孟景、元礼、杨览、唐奉义、牛方裕、元敏、薛良、马举、元武达、李孝本、李孝质、张恺、许弘仁、令狐行达、席德方、李覆等，大业末年，都担任各种官职，有的人在隋朝结一代之恩情，担负重任于一时；竟然包藏祸心，不思忠义，竟在江都施行叛逆杀了皇帝，罪行超过阎乐、赵高百倍，罪恶比食父母不仁不义的枭獍还要深。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, the edict said: "U Bunka and his brother Zhizhi, Sima Deyao, Pei Qiantong, Meng Jing, Yuan Li, Yang Chean, Tang Bongyi, Niu Fangyu, Yuan Min, Xue Liang, Ma Guo, Yuan Wuda, Li Xiaobeng, Li Xiaojing, Zhang Hui, Xu Hongren, Ling Foo Xingda, Xi Defang, Li Zi, etc. all held various official positions in the final years of the great cause. Some people in the Sui Dynasty were beholden to the generation and shouldered heavy

古文：虽事是前代，岁月已久，而天下之恶，古今同弃，宜置重典，以励臣节。
现代文：虽然罪恶是前代的事，岁月已久，然而天下的大恶，古往今来都要抛弃，应该将他们处以重刑，以勉励臣子之节概。
English: Although evil is a thing of the past and the time has long passed, the great evils of the world should be abandoned from ancient times to the present. They should be punished with severe punishment to encourage the discipline of the vassals.

古文：其子孙并宜禁锢，勿令齿叙。 是日，上制《破阵乐舞图》。
现代文：他们的子孙都不准做官，不要录用议定官爵。 这天，皇上制《破阵乐舞图》。
English: Their children and grandchildren are not allowed to be government officials, and they are not allowed to be appointed as court nobles. On this day, the emperor issued the "Breaking the Battle Music and Dance Chart."

古文：辛丑，赐京城酺三日。
现代文：二十三日，赐京城宴饮三天。
English: On the 23rd, the people of Beijing were given permission to gather and drink for three days.

古文：丁卯，雨土。
现代文：二月十九日，天上降下黄土。
English: On February 19th, the sky rained down loess.

古文：乙酉，薛延陀遣使来朝。
现代文：三月八日，薛延陀派使者前来朝见。
English: On March 8th, Xue Yanta sent an envoy to see the emperor.

古文：庚寅，秘书监、检校侍中魏徵为侍中。
现代文：三月十三日，秘书监、检校侍中魏征被任命为侍中。
English: On March 13th, Wei Zheng, secretary supervisor and school inspector, was appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：癸巳，直太史、将仕郎李淳风铸浑天黄道仪，奏之，置于凝晖阁。
现代文：三月十六日，直太史、将仕郎李淳风铸造成浑天黄道仪，上奏皇帝，放置在凝晖阁。
English: On March 16th, Zhengtai Shi and his servant Li Chunfeng cast the Hun Tian Zodiac, presented it to the emperor, and placed it in the Gelu Pavilion.

古文：夏五月癸未，幸九成宫。
现代文：夏五月七日，驾到九成宫。
English: On the 7th day of the 5th month of summer, I drove to Jiucheng Palace.

古文：八月，山东、河南三十州大水，遣使赈恤。
现代文：八月，山东、河南三十个州大水，派使者救济抚恤。
English: In August, thirty states in Shandong and Henan were flooded, and envoys were sent to provide relief and pensions.

古文：冬十月庚申，至自九成宫。
现代文：冬十月十六日，皇上从九成宫回来。
English: On the 16th day of the 10th month of winter, the emperor returned from the Jiu Cheng Palace.

古文：十一月丁丑，颁新定《五经》。
现代文：十一月三日，颁布新定的《五经》。
English: On November 3, the newly formulated Five Classics was promulgated.

古文：壬辰，开府仪同三司、齐国公长孙无忌为司空。
现代文：十八日，开府仪同三司、齐国公长孙无忌为司空。
English: On the 18th day of the month, Kaifu Yi, along with the three officials, and the eldest son of Qi Guo Gong, all became the empty-handed officials.

古文：十二月丙辰，狩于少陵原，诏以少牢祭杜如晦、杜淹、李纲之墓。
现代文：十二月十三日，在少陵原打猎，诏命用猪和羊祭祀杜如晦、杜淹、李纲的坟墓。
English: On December 13th, while hunting in Shaolingyuan, he was ordered to use pigs and sheep to sacrifice the graves of Du Rugao, Du Yan and Li Gang.

古文：八年正月癸未，右卫大将军阿史那吐苾卒。
现代文：八年春正月十日，右卫大将军阿史那吐艹必去世。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the eighth year of the Spring, the great general of the Right Division, Ashinattoo, passed away.

古文：辛丑，右屯卫大将军张士贵讨东、西五洞反獠，平之。
现代文：二十八日，右屯卫大将军张士贵讨伐东、西五洞反叛的獠族，平定了他们。
English: On the 28th, Zhang Shigui, the general of the Right Tun Guards, led a crusade against the rebellious Yi people in East and West Wudong and pacified them.

古文：壬寅，命尚书右仆射李靖、特进萧瑀杨恭仁、礼部尚书王珪、御史大夫韦挺、鄜州大都督府长史皇甫无逸、扬州大都督府长史李袭誉、幽州大都督府长史张亮、凉州大都督李大亮、右领军大将军窦诞、太子左庶子杜正伦、绵州刺史刘德威、黄门侍郎赵弘智使于四方，观省风俗。
现代文：二十九日，命令尚书右仆射李靖、特进萧王禹、杨恭仁、礼部尚书王王圭、御史大夫韦挺、州大都督长史皇甫无逸、扬州大都督府长史李袭誉、幽州大都督府长史张亮、凉州大都督李大亮、右领军大将军窦诞、太子左庶子杜正伦、绵州刺史刘德威、黄门侍郎赵弘智出使四方，观察民间风俗。
English: On the 29th, he ordered Shangshu's right-hand servant Li Jing, the special envoy Xiao Wang Yu, Yang Guoren, the ceremonial department Shangshu Wang Gui, the chief historian Wei Ting, the governor of the State Great Capital Shi Huangfu, the governor of the State Great Capital Yangzhou Shi Li Haoyuan, the governor of the State Great Capital Yuzhou Shi Zhang Liang, the governor of the State Great Capital Yangzhou Li Dailiang, the right-hand leading general Dou Xue, the prince's illegitimate son Du Zhenglun, the prince of Mengzhou Liu Dewi, and the Huangmen waiter Zhao Hongz

古文：二月乙巳，皇太子加元服。丙午，赐天下酺三日。
现代文：二月三日，皇太子加冠。四日，赐天下宴饮三天。
English: On February 3, the crown prince was crowned. On the 4th, the world was given three days of feasting.

古文：三月庚辰，幸九成宫。
现代文：三月八日，驾到九成宫。
English: On March 8th, I drove to Jiucheng Palace.

古文：五月辛未朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：五月一日，有日蚀。
English: On May 1st, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：丁丑，上初服翼善冠，贵臣服进德冠。
现代文：七日，皇上首次戴翼善冠，贵臣戴进德冠。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor wore the winged crown for the first time, and the dignitaries wore the German crown.

古文：八月甲子，有星孛于虚、危，历于氐，十一月上旬乃灭。
现代文：七月，开始以云麾将军阶为从三品。陇右山崩，大蛇屡次出现。
English: In July, it began to take the general rank of the general rank of the general rank of the general rank of the general rank of the general rank.

古文：九月丁丑，皇太子来朝。
现代文：山东、河南、淮南大水，派遣使者救济抚恤。九月八日，皇太子前来朝见。
English: Shandong, Henan and Huainan Dashui sent emissaries to provide relief and pensions. On September 8, the crown prince came to see the emperor.

古文：冬十月，右骁卫大将军、褒国公段志玄击吐谷浑，破之，追奔八百余里。
现代文：冬十月，右骁卫大将军、褒国公段志玄击吐谷浑，击破之，追逐八百多里。
English: In the winter of October, Shih-hsien, the general of the Right Division of the National Guard and the commissar of Baoguo Province, struck the mud of the valley, broke it, and chased it for more than eight hundred miles.

古文：甲子，至自九成宫。
现代文：二十九日，皇上从九成宫到来。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Taizong returned to Beijing from Jiu Chenggong.

古文：十一月辛未，右仆射、代国公李靖以疾辞官，授特进。
现代文：十一月三日，右仆射、代国公李靖因病辞官，授予特进。
English: On November 3rd, Li Jing, the right-hand man and acting head of state, resigned from his post due to illness and was awarded a special promotion.

古文：丁亥，吐谷浑寇凉州。
现代文：十九日，吐谷浑入侵凉州。
English: On the 19th, the Tuyuhun invaded Liangzhou.

古文：己丑，吐谷浑拘我行入赵道德。
现代文：二十一日，吐谷浑拘留我使者赵德楷。
English: On the 21st, my emissary, Zhao Dekai, was detained in Tugu Hun.

古文：十二月辛丑，命特进李靖、兵部尚书侯君集、刑部尚书任城王道宗、凉州都督李大亮等为大总管，各帅师分道以讨吐谷浑。
现代文：十二月三日，命令特进李靖、兵部尚书侯君集、刑部尚书任城王道宗、凉州都督李大亮等为大总管，各率军队分途讨伐吐谷浑。
English: On December 3rd, he ordered Li Jing, a special envoy, Shang Shuxuan of the Military Department, Shang Shuyuan of the Criminal Department, and Li Dailiang, the governor of Liangzhou, to be the general managers, and each army led separate ways to fight against Tuyugun.

古文：壬子，越王泰为雍州牧。
现代文：十四日，越王泰为雍州牧。
English: On the 14th, Yue Wang Tai became the Yongzhou herdsman.

古文：乙卯，帝从太上皇阅武于城西。
现代文：十七日，皇帝跟从太上皇在城西阅兵演武。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor followed the empress dowager in a military parade in the west of the city.

古文：是岁，龟兹、吐蕃、高昌、女国、石国遣使朝贡。
现代文：这年，龟兹、吐番、高昌、女国、石国派使者前来朝贡。
English: In that year, Kamezi, Tuban, Gaochang, Ye, and Shikoku sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：九年春三月，洮州羌叛，杀刺史孔长秀。
现代文：九年春三月，洮州羌叛乱，杀刺史孔长秀。
English: In March of the spring of the ninth year, there was a rebellion in Zhangzhou and the assassination of Kong Changxiu.

古文：庚寅，敕天下户立三等，未尽升降，置为九等。
现代文：十六日，大赦。每乡设置乡长一人，辅佐官二人。
English: On the 16th, there was an amnesty. Each township was set up with one township chief and two assistant officers.

古文：夏四月壬寅，康国献狮子。
现代文：十九日，盐泽道总管高甑生大破众多的叛乱羌人。夏四月六日，康国贡献狮子。
English: On the 19th, Gao Xing Sheng, the chief administrator of Yanze Road, defeated many rebels. On the 6th of April in summer, Kangguo contributed a lion.

古文：闰月丁卯，日有蚀之。
现代文：闰四月二日，有日蚀。
English: On Leap April 2, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：癸巳，大总管李靖、侯君集、李大亮、任城王道宗破吐谷浑于牛心堆。
现代文：二十八日，大总管李靖、侯君集、李大亮、任城王道宗在牛心堆大破吐谷浑。
English: On the 28th, the general superintendents Li Jing, Hou Junshi, Li Dayang, and Rencheng Wang Daozong went to Tuyugun in the Niu Xin Heap.

古文：五月乙未，又破之于乌海，追奔至柏海。
现代文：五月一日，又在乌海大破吐谷浑，追逐打击直到柏海。
English: On May 1st, it broke out again in the Wuhai River, chasing the attack until the Baihai River.

古文：副总管薛万均、薛万彻又破之于赤水源，获其名王二十人。
现代文：副总管薛万均、薛万彻在赤水源又大破吐谷浑，捉住吐谷浑名王二十人。
English: Xue Wanzhong and Xue Wanchie, the deputy chiefs, made another big break in the red water source and caught twenty Tuyun kings.

古文：庚子，太上皇崩于大安宫。
现代文：六日，太上皇在大安宫去世。
English: On the 6th, the Emperor died at the Daan Palace.

古文：壬子，李靖平吐谷浑于西海之上，获其王慕容伏允。
现代文：十八日，李靖在西海之上平定吐谷浑，捉住了吐谷浑王慕容伏允。
English: On the 18th, Li Jing subdued the Tuyugun on the West Sea and captured the Tuyugun King Murong Fuxiong.

古文：以其子慕容顺光降，封为西平郡王，复其本国。
现代文：因为其子慕容顺光投降，封为西平郡王，恢复吐谷浑本国。
English: Because his son, Murong Shunguang, surrendered, he was named the king of Xiping County and restored his homeland of Tugu Hun.

古文：秋七月甲寅，增修太庙为六室。
现代文：秋七月二十一日，增修太庙为六室。
English: On the 21st day of the 7th month of autumn, six rooms were added to the temple.

古文：冬十月庚寅，葬高祖太武皇帝于献陵。
现代文：冬十月二十七日，在献陵安葬高祖太武皇帝。
English: In winter, on October 27th, Emperor Gaozhu Taibu was buried in the mausoleum.

古文：戊申，祔于太庙。
现代文：十一月十六日，奉高祖之神主祭于祖庙。
English: On November 16th, the main festival in honor of Gao Zu's god was held at the ancestral temple.

古文：辛丑，左仆射、魏国公房玄龄加开府仪同三司，余如故。
现代文：十一月九日，左仆射、魏国公房玄龄加任开府仪同三司，其余官职依旧。
English: On November 9th, Zuo Fuxia and Wei Guo Guo Xuanling were appointed as Kaifu Yi and three departments, and the rest of the official positions remained the same.

古文：十二月甲戌，吐谷浑西平郡王慕容顺光为其下所弑，遣兵部尚书侯君集率师安抚之，仍封顺光子诺曷钵为河源郡王，使统其众。
现代文：十二月十二日，吐谷浑西平郡王慕容顺光被其部下所杀，派遣兵部尚书侯君集率军队安抚，仍然封慕容顺光之子诺曷钵为河源郡王，使他统率吐谷浑部众。
English: On December 12th, Murong Shunguang, the king of Hunsiping County in Tugu, was killed by his subordinates. Shang Shukun, the warlord, was dispatched to gather an army to pacify the situation. However, he still made Murong Shunguang's son, Nuo Yuan, the king of Heyuan County, and put him in charge of the people of Tugu.

古文：右光禄大夫、宋国公萧瑀依旧特进，复令参预朝政。
现代文：右光禄大夫、宋国公萧王禹依旧为特进，再次令他参预朝政。
English: Xiao Wang Yu, doctor of the Right Guanglu and Song Guogong, was still a special envoy, and he was once again ordered to participate in pre-imperial politics.

古文：十年春正月壬子，尚书左仆射房玄龄、侍中魏徵上梁、陈、齐、周、隋五代史，诏藏于秘阁。
现代文：十年春正月二十一日，尚书左仆射、侍中魏征奉上梁、陈、齐、周、隋五代史，诏令藏在宫中秘阁。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of the 10th year of the Spring, Shang Shuxu Zuofu shot, and Wei Zhengbo, the 5th generation of Shang Liang, Chen, Qi, Zhou, and Sui, were appointed as attendants. The imperial edict was hidden in a secret cabinet in the palace.

古文：癸丑，徙封赵王元景为荆王，鲁王元昌为汉王，郑王元礼为徐王，徐王元嘉为韩王，荆王元则为彭王，滕王元懿为郑王，吴王元轨为霍王，豳王元凤为虢王，陈王元庆为道王，魏王灵夔为燕王，蜀王恪为吴王，越王泰为魏王，燕王祐为齐王，梁王愔为蜀王，郯王恽为蒋王，汉王贞为越王，申王慎为纪王。
现代文：二十二日，迁徙改封赵王元景为荆王，鲁王元昌为汉王，郑王元礼为徐王，徐王元嘉为韩王，荆王元则为彭王，滕王元懿为郑王，吴王元轨为霍王，王元凤为虢王，陈王元庆为道王，魏王灵夔为燕王，蜀王恪为吴王，越王泰为魏王，燕王为齐王，梁王忄音为蜀王，郯王恽为蒋王，汉王贞为越王，申王慎为纪王。
English: On the 22nd, Zhao Wang Yuanjing was renamed King of Jing, Lu Wang Yuanchang was renamed King of Han, Zheng Wang Yuanli was renamed King of Xu, Xu King Yuanjia was renamed King of Han, King of Jing was renamed King of Peng, King of Teng was renamed King of Zheng, King of Wu was renamed King of Huo, King of Zhai was renamed King of Feng, King of Chen was renamed King of Tao, King of Wei was renamed King of Yan, King of Shu was renamed King of Wu, King of Yue was renamed King of Wei, King of Yan was renamed King of Qi, King of Liang was renamed King of Shu, King of Zhai

古文：夏六月，以侍中魏徵为特进，仍知门下省事。
现代文：夏六月，以侍中魏征为特进，仍旧主持门下省事务。
English: In the summer of June, Wei Zheng, who was an aide-de-camp, was promoted to the position of special adviser, and still presided over the affairs of the province under his supervision.

古文：壬申，中书令温彦博为尚书右仆射。
现代文：十四日，中书令温彦博为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 14th day of the month, the Chinese government ordered Wen Yanbo to become Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：甲戌，太常卿、安德郡公杨师道为侍中。
现代文：十六日，太常卿、安德郡公杨师道为侍中。
English: On the 16th, Yang Shidao, Tai Changqing and Ander County Gong, became a chamberlain.

古文：己卯，皇后长孙氏崩于立政殿。
现代文：二十一日，皇后长孙氏在立政殿去世。
English: On the 21st, Empress Chosun passed away at the Rissho-den Hall.

古文：冬十一月庚寅，葬文德皇后于昭陵。
现代文：冬十一月四日，在昭陵安葬文德皇后。
English: In winter, on November 4, Empress Wende was buried in Zhaoling.

古文：十二月壬申，吐谷浑河源郡王慕容诺曷钵来朝。
现代文：十二月十六日，吐谷浑河源郡王慕容诺曷钵前来朝见。
English: On December 16th, King Murong Norodom of Huncheon County came to see the emperor.

古文：乙亥，亲录京师囚徒。
现代文：十九日，皇上亲自审查并记录囚徒的罪状。
English: On the 19th, the emperor personally reviewed and recorded the prisoners' charges.

古文：是岁，关内、河东疾病，命医赉药疗之。
现代文：这年，关内、河东流行疾病，皇上命医生拿药治疗他们。
English: In that year, there was an epidemic disease in Guennai and Hedong, and the doctor ordered by the emperor took medicine to treat them.

古文：十一年春正月丁亥朔，徙郐王元裕为邓王，谯王元名为舒王。
现代文：十一年春正月一日，是朔日，迁徙郐王元裕为邓王，谯王元名为舒王。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eleventh year of the Spring, it was the New Year's Day. The migrated King Yuanyu was called King Deng, and the King Yuan was called King Shu.

古文：癸巳，加魏王泰为雍州牧、左武候大将军。
现代文：七日，加魏王泰为雍州牧、左武侯大将军。
English: On the seventh day, Wei Wangtai was promoted to the rank of Yongzhou Muc, Zuowu grand marshal.

古文：所司依此营备，称朕意焉。
现代文：十四日，向天下颁布新法令。
English: On the 14th, a new decree was promulgated to the world.

古文：甲子，幸洛阳宫，命祭汉文帝。三月丙戌朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：建造飞山宫。二十八日，房玄龄等人奉上所修订的《五礼》，诏令有关部门施行。三月一日是朔日，有日蚀。
English: On the 28th, Fang Xuanling and others presented the revised "Five Rites" and ordered the relevant departments to implement it. March 1 is the new moon day, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：丁亥，车驾至洛阳。
现代文：二日，皇上车驾到洛阳。
English: On the second day, the imperial car drove to Luoyang.

古文：丙申，改洛州为洛阳宫。
现代文：十一日，改洛州为洛阳宫。
English: On the 11th, Luozhou was renamed Luoyang Palace.

古文：辛亥，大蒐于广城泽。
现代文：二十六日，在广城泽检阅军队。
English: On the 26th, the troops were inspected in Guangcheng.

古文：癸丑，还宫。
现代文：二十八日，回宫。
English: On the 28th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：夏四月甲子，震乾元殿前槐树。
现代文：夏四月十日，雷震动乾元殿前槐树。
English: On the 10th day of the 4th month of summer, thunder shook the eucalyptus tree in front of the Qianyuan Hall.

古文：丙寅，诏河北、淮南举孝悌淳笃，兼闲时务；儒术该通，可为师范；文辞秀美，才堪著述；明识政体，可委字人：并志行修立，为乡闾所推者，给传诣洛阳宫。
现代文：十二日，诏令河北淮南举荐孝敬父母尊敬兄长禀性淳厚，并且熟悉时事；儒家学术完备，可以为人之楷模；文辞秀逸优美，具有著述之才干；通晓理解国家之政策法令，可以托付尊敬的人；并且品行修养有所成就，被乡里闾巷所推崇的人，给予专车将他们送到洛阳宫。
English: On the 12th, Huainan, Hebei Province, was ordered to commend those who are filial, respect their parents, respect their elder brothers, have a pure and honest nature, and are familiar with current affairs; have a complete Confucian scholarship, and can be a model for others; have a beautiful writing style, and have the ability to write; are familiar with and understand the country's policies and decrees, and can be entrusted to respected people; and have made achievements in moral cultivation, and are respected by the people in the countryside, and are given a special car to take them to Luoyang Palace.

古文：六月甲寅，尚书右仆射、虞国公温彦博薨。
现代文：六月一日，尚书右仆射、虞国公温彦博去世。
English: On June 1st, Shangshu's right-hand man Zhao, and Yu Guogong Atsuhiko passed away.

古文：丁巳，幸明德宫。
现代文：四日，皇上驾到明德宫。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Emperor Taizong personally visited the Mingde Palace.

古文：己未，定制诸王为世封刺史。
现代文：六日，规定制度，诸王为世袭封赠的刺史。
English: On the 6th, the system was stipulated, and the kings became the history of hereditary gifts.

古文：戊辰，定制勋臣为世封刺史。
现代文：十五日，规定制度，大功臣为世袭封赠刺史。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the system was established, and the great hero was awarded the hereditary seal.

古文：改封任城王道宗为江夏郡王，赵郡王孝恭为河间郡王。
现代文：改封任城王道宗为江夏郡王，赵郡王孝恭为河间郡王。
English: Rencheng Wang Daozong was renamed as the King of Jiangxia County, and Zhao County King Xiaogong was renamed as the King of Kawama County.

古文：己巳，改封许王元祥为江王。
现代文：十六日，改封许王元祥为江王。
English: On the 16th, Xu Wang Yuanxiang was renamed Jiang Wang.

古文：秋七月癸未，大霪雨。谷水溢入洛阳宫，深四尺，坏左掖门，毁宫寺十九所；洛水溢，漂六百家。
现代文：秋七月一日，长期下大雨，谷水漫入了洛阳宫，水深四尺，毁坏了左掖门，毁坏宫寺十九所；洛水涨满，冲漂了六百家。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, after a long period of heavy rain, the valley water seeped into Luoyang Palace. The water was four feet deep, destroying the left gate and nineteen palaces and temples. The Luoyang Palace was flooded, and six hundred houses were washed away.

古文：庚寅，诏以灾命百官上封事，极言得失。
现代文：八日，诏命因为水灾命百官上封章奏事，尽情说明朝政得失。
English: On the 8th, because of the flood disaster, the imperial edict ordered hundreds of officials to report to the emperor and explain the merits and demerits of the imperial government.

古文：丁酉，车驾还宫。
现代文：十五日，车驾回宫。
English: On the 15th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：壬寅，废明德宫及飞山宫之玄圃院，分给遭水之家，仍赐帛有差。
现代文：二十日，废弃明德宫及飞山宫之玄圃院，分配给遭水灾之家，又按等级分赐绸缎。
English: On the 20th, the garden plots of the Mingde Palace and Feishan Palace were abandoned and allocated to the flood-stricken families, and the silk cocoons were distributed according to rank.

古文：丙午，修老君庙于亳州，宣尼庙于兗州，各给二十户享祀焉。
现代文：二十四日，在亳州修老君庙，在兖州修宣尼庙，各给二十户的租税来祭祀。
English: On the 24th, in Zhangzhou Shulojun Temple and in Zhangzhou Xuanni Temple, 20 households were each given tax money to make offerings.

古文：凉武昭王复近墓二十户充守卫，仍禁刍牧樵采。
现代文：凉武昭王墓接近坟墓的二十户被免除赋税充当守卫，又禁止放牧打草砍柴。
English: Twenty households near the tomb of King Yangmu Zhao were exempted from paying taxes to act as guards, and were prohibited from grazing, cutting grass, and chopping wood.

古文：九月丁亥；河溢，坏陕州河北县，毁河阳中潭。
现代文：九月六日，黄河泛滥，冲坏了陕州河北县，毁坏了河阳中氵单等地。
English: On September 6, the Yellow River overflowed, washing away Hebei County in Shaanxi Province, and ruining the cities of Heyang and Zhongshan.

古文：幸白司马坂以观之，赐遭水之家粟帛有差。
现代文：皇上驾到白司马坂观察水灾，按等级赐给遭水灾之家粮食布匹。
English: The emperor drove to Baishima Slope to observe the floods, and gave out food cloths to the flood victims according to their ranks.

古文：冬十一月辛卯，幸怀州。
现代文：冬十一月十一日，皇上驾到怀州。
English: In the winter, on November 11, the emperor drove to Waizhou.

古文：乙未，狩于济源。
现代文：十五日，皇上在济源打猎。
English: On the 15th, the emperor went hunting in Jiyuan.

古文：丙午，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十六日，车驾回宫。
English: On the 26th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：十二月辛酉，百济王遣其太子隆来朝。
现代文：十二月十一日，百济王派他的太子隆前来朝见。
English: On December 11, King Baekje sent his son, Prince Takashi, to meet the emperor.

古文：十二年春正月乙未，吏部尚书高士廉等上《氏族志》一百三十卷。
现代文：十二年春正月十五，吏部尚书高士廉等人奉上《氏族志》一百三十卷。
English: On the 15th day of the first month of the 12th year of the Spring, Shang Shuxu Gao Shilian and others from the cadre department submitted 130 volumes of "The History of the Clan."

古文：壬寅，松、丛二州地震，坏人庐舍，有压死者。
现代文：二十二日，松、丛二州地震，毁坏了百姓房屋，有人被压死。
English: On the 22nd, there was an earthquake in Songzhu and Danzhou, which destroyed people's houses and some people were crushed to death.

古文：二月乙卯，车驾还京。
现代文：二月五日，车驾回京。
English: On February 5th, I drove back to Beijing.

古文：癸亥，观砥柱，勒铭以纪功德。
现代文：十三日，皇上视察砥柱，刻铭文以纪功德。
English: On the thirteenth day, the emperor inspected the pillar and engraved the inscription with the words "Discipline and Merit."

古文：甲子，夜郎獠反，夔州都督齐善行讨平之。
现代文：十四日，夜郎獠造反，夔州都督齐善行将他们讨伐平定。
English: On the 14th, Yelangzhu rebelled, and the governor of Zhangzhou made a concerted effort to pacify them.

古文：乙丑，次陕州，自新桥幸河北县，祀夏禹庙。
现代文：十五日，皇上驻扎陕州，从新桥驾到河北县，祭祀夏禹庙。
English: On the fifteenth day, the emperor stationed in Shaanxi, drove from Xinqiao to Hebei County, and worshiped at the Xia Yu Temple.

古文：丁卯，次柳谷顿，观盐池。
现代文：十七日，驻扎柳谷顿，视察盐池。
English: On the 17th, it was stationed at Liugutong and inspected Yanchi.

古文：戊寅，以隋鹰扬郎将尧君素忠于本朝，赠蒲州刺史，仍录其子孙。
现代文：二十八日，因为隋鹰扬郎将尧君素忠于本朝，封赠为蒲州刺史，又任用他的子孙。
English: On the 28th, because Sui Ying Yang Lang was loyal to this dynasty, he bestowed the title of "Puzhou Sashishi" and appointed his descendants.

古文：闰二月庚辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：闰二月一日，是朔日，有日蚀。
English: The first day of leap February is the new moon, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：丙戌，至自洛阳宫。
现代文：七日，皇上从洛阳宫回来。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor returned from Luoyang Palace.

古文：夏五月壬申，银青光禄大夫、永兴县公虞世南卒。
现代文：夏五月二十五日，银青光禄大夫、永兴县公虞世南去世。
English: On the 25th day of the fifth month of the summer, the silver Qing Guanglu doctor, Yongxing County Gongyu Shennan passed away.

古文：六月庚子，初置玄武门左右飞骑。
现代文：六月二十三日，开始设置玄武门左飞骑与右飞骑。
English: On June 23rd, the left wing and right wing of the Xuanwu Gate were set up.

古文：秋七月癸酉，吏部尚书、申国公高士廉为尚书右仆射。
现代文：秋七月二十七日，吏部尚书、申国公高士廉为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 27th day of the 7th month of autumn, Shangshu from the cadre department and Shen Guo Gong Gao Shi Ren became Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：冬十月己卯，狩于始平，赐高年粟帛有差。
现代文：冬十月五日，在始平打猎，按等级赐给老年人粮食布匹。
English: In winter, on October 5th, the elderly were given grain cloths according to their rank.

古文：乙未，至自始平。
现代文：二十一日，从始平到来。
English: On the 21st, he returned to Kyoto from Shihei.

古文：己亥，百济遣使贡金甲雕斧。
现代文：二十五日，百济国派遣使者进贡黄金甲和刻有花纹之斧。
English: On the 25th, Baekje dispatched an envoy to pay tribute in the form of gold armor and an axe engraved with patterns.

古文：十二月辛巳，右武候将军上官怀仁大破山獠于壁州。
现代文：十二月七日，右武侯将军上官怀仁在壁州大破山獠。
English: On December 7th, Huairen, the commander-in-chief of the Right Wuhou general army, led a large-scale mountain raid in Bishu.

古文：十三年春正月乙巳朔，谒献陵。
现代文：十三年春正月一日，是朔日，晋见献陵。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring in the thirteenth year, it was the new year's day, and the tomb was dedicated.

古文：曲赦三原县及行从大辟罪。
现代文：特赦三原县囚犯以及应判为死刑的犯人。
English: He granted amnesty to prisoners in Mihara County and those who should have been sentenced to death.

古文：丁未，至自献陵。
现代文：三日，皇上从献陵来。
English: On the third day of the first month, Taizong returned to Beijing from the dedication of the mausoleum.

古文：戊午，加房玄龄为太子少师。
现代文：十四日，加房玄龄为太子少师。
English: On the 14th, Kaifang Xuanling became the prince's apprentice.

古文：壬寅，云阳石燃者方丈，昼如灰，夜则有光，投草木于上则焚，历年而止。
现代文：二月三日，停止世袭刺史。夏四月五日，皇上驾到九成宫。十一日，阿史那结社尔冒犯禁军军营，判以死刑。
English: On the 3rd of February, the hereditary history was stopped. In the summer, on the 5th of April, the emperor drove to the Jiu Chenggong Palace. On the 11th, the Ashina Association violated the forbidden army camp and was sentenced to death.

古文：自去冬不雨至于五月。
现代文：从去年冬天不下雨直到今年五月。
English: From last winter, there was no rain until May this year.

古文：甲寅，避正殿，令五品以上上封事，减膳罢役，分使赈恤，申理冤屈，乃雨。
现代文：十二日，皇上避开正殿，命令五品以上官员上封章奏事，自己减少膳食免除徭役，分派使者救济抚恤，申理冤屈，这才下雨。
English: On the twelfth day, the emperor avoided the main hall, ordered the officials above the fifth grade to seal the seal and report the matter, reduce their own meals to exempt themselves from serving, and dispatched emissaries to provide relief and redress grievances. It was only then that it rained.

古文：六月丙申，封皇弟元婴为滕王。
现代文：六月二十五日，封皇弟元婴为滕王。
English: On June 25th, the emperor's younger brother Yuan Zi was named King Teng.

古文：秋八月辛未朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：秋八月一日是朔日，有日蚀。
English: The first day of autumn in August is the new moon, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：庚辰，立右武候大将军、化州都督、怀化郡王李思摩为突厥可汗，率所部建牙于河北。
现代文：十日，立右武候大将军、化州都督、怀化郡王李思摩为突厥可汗，率领所部在黄河以北建立将军的大旗。
English: On the 10th, Li Sima, General of the Right Armies, Governor of Huazhou, and King of Huaihua County, was appointed as the Turkic Khan, and led his troops to establish the general's banner north of the Yellow River.

古文：冬十月甲申，至自九成宫。
现代文：冬十月十五日，皇上从九成宫回来。
English: On the 15th day of the 10th month of winter, the emperor returned from the Jiu Cheng Palace.

古文：十一月辛亥，侍中、安德郡公杨师道为中书令。
现代文：十一月十三日，侍中、安德郡公杨师道为中书令。
English: On November 13th, Yang Shidao, the Vice-Chamberlain of Ande County, was promoted to the position of the Vice-Chamberlain.

古文：十二月丁丑，吏部尚书、陈国公侯君集为交河道行军大总管，帅师伐高昌。
现代文：十二月九日，吏部尚书、陈国公侯君集为交河道行军大总管，率军队讨伐高昌。
English: On December 9th, Shangshu and Chen Guogongjun set out as the general manager of the cross-river march and led the army to fight Gaochang.

古文：乙亥，封皇子福为赵王。
现代文：七日，封皇子福为赵王。
English: On the seventh day, Emperor Fuxi was enthroned as King Zhao.

古文：壬午，巂州都督王志远有罪，伏诛。
现代文：十四日，州都督王志远有罪被处死。
English: On the 14th, the provincial governor Wang Zhiyuan was found guilty and executed.

古文：诏于洛、相、幽、徐、齐、并、秦、蒲等州并置常平仓。
现代文：诏令在洛、相、幽、徐、齐、并、秦、蒲等州都设置常平仓。
English: The edict set up permanent warehouses in the provinces of Luo, Sang, Yu, Xu, Qi, Bian, Qin and Pu.

古文：己丑，吐谷浑河源郡王慕容诺曷钵来逆女。
现代文：二十一日，吐谷浑河源郡王慕容诺曷钵前来迎接未婚妻子。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, King Murong Norodom of Huncheon County came to welcome his unmarried wife.

古文：壬辰，狩于咸阳。
现代文：二十四日，皇上在咸阳打猎。
English: On the 24th, the emperor went hunting in Xianyang.

古文：是岁，滁州言： 野蚕食槲叶，成茧大如柰，其色绿，凡六千五百七十石。 
现代文：这年，滁州上报： 野蚕吃槲树叶，结成的茧大得像柰果，绿色，总计六千五百七十石。 
English: This year, Luzhou reported: Wild silkworms eat eucalyptus leaves, and the resulting cocoons are as big as hazelnuts, green, and weigh a total of 6,570 kilos.

古文：高丽、新罗、西突厥、吐火罗、康国、安国、波斯、疏勒、于阗、焉耆、高昌、林邑、昆明及荒服蛮酋，相次遣使朝贡。
现代文：高丽、新罗、西突厥、吐火罗、康国、安国、波斯、疏勒、于阗、焉耆、高昌、林邑、昆明及边远地区的蛮夷酋长，相继派遣使者前来朝贡。
English: The barbarian chieftains of Goryeo, Silla, West Turkistan, Tuvalu, Kham, Angkor, Persia, Shule, Yunnan, Yunnan, Gochang, Lin'up, Kunming and outlying regions successively sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：十四年春正月庚子，初命有司读时令。
现代文：十四年春正月二日，开始命令有关官员读时令。
English: On the second day of the first month of spring in 2014, the relevant officials were ordered to read the time.

古文：甲寅，幸魏王泰宅。
现代文：十六日，皇上驾到魏王泰之住宅。
English: On the 16th, the emperor drove to Wei Wang Tai's residence.

古文：赦雍州及长安狱大辟罪已下。
现代文：赦免雍州、长安狱中死罪以下的犯人。
English: Yangzhou and Chang'an prison inmates with crimes punishable by death or less were pardoned.

古文：二月丁丑，幸国子学，亲释奠，赦大理、万年系囚，国子祭酒以下及学生高第精勤者加一级，赐帛有差。
现代文：二月十日，皇上到国子学，陈设酒食以祭祀先圣先师，赦免大理寺、万年县关押的囚犯。国子祭酒以下及学业成绩优秀精进勤奋者加一级，按等级赐给绸缎。
English: On February 10th, the emperor went to Kuniko's school, where he offered food and wine as a sacrifice to the holy priest, and pardoned the prisoners held in Dali Temple and Mannen County. Those who were diligent and diligent and had excellent academic performance and less than Kuniko's sacrificial wine were given an extra grade, and silk brocade was given according to their grade.

古文：庚辰，左骁卫将军、淮阳王道明送弘化公主归于吐谷浑。
现代文：十三日，左骁卫将军、淮阳王道明送弘化公主嫁到吐谷浑。
English: On the 13th, General Zuo Jianwei and King Huaiyang Daoming sent Princess Honghua to be married in Tuyagun.

古文：壬午，幸温汤。
现代文：十五日，皇上到温汤。
English: On the 15th, I went to a hot spring.

古文：辛卯，至自温汤。
现代文：二十四日，从温汤回来。
English: On the 24th, I returned to Kyoto from the hot springs.

古文：乙未，诏以梁皇侃、褚仲都，周熊安生、沈重，陈沈文阿、周弘正、张机，隋何妥、刘焯、刘炫等前代名儒，学徒多行其义，命求其后。
现代文：二十八日，皇上诏令，由于梁朝皇侃、褚仲都，周朝熊安生、沈重，陈朝沈文阿、周弘正、张讥，隋朝何妥、刘焯、刘炫等前代著名儒家，学生徒众大多按他们的儒家道义行事，命人寻访他们的后人。
English: On the 28th, the emperor decreed that, due to the previous famous Confucians such as Emperor Kan in the Liang Dynasty, Shizhongdu in the Zhou Dynasty, Xiong Ansheng and Shen Chong in the Zhou Dynasty, Shen Wenya, Zhou Hongzheng and Zhang Qian in the Chen Dynasty, and He Tuo, Liu Hui and Liu Xuan in the Sui Dynasty, most of the student disciples would act according to their Confucian morality and order people to search for their descendants.

古文：三月戊午，置宁朔大使，以护突厥。
现代文：三月二十一日，设置宁朔大使，以监督统领突厥。
English: On March 21, the ambassador of Ningshuo was set up to supervise the leadership of the Turks.

古文：夏五月壬戌，徙封燕王灵夔为鲁王。
现代文：夏五月二十六日，迁徙改封燕王灵夔为鲁王。
English: On the 26th day of the 5th month of the summer, the migration changed the title of Yan Wang Lingyao to Lu Wang.

古文：六月乙酉，大风拔木。
现代文：六月十九日，大风拔起树木。
English: On the eighth day of the sixth month, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：己丑，薛延陀遣使求婚。
现代文：二十三日，薛延陀派遣使者前来求婚。
English: On the 23rd, Xue Yantuo sent an envoy to propose marriage.

古文：乙未，滁州野蚕成茧，凡收八千三百石。
现代文：二十九日，滁州野蚕结成了茧，总计收了八千三百石蚕茧。
English: On the 29th, the Luzhou wild silkworms formed cocoons, and a total of 8,300 stone cocoons were collected.

古文：八月庚午，新作襄城宫。
现代文：八月五日，新建襄城宫。
English: On August 5th, the new Xiangcheng Palace was completed.

古文：癸巳，交河道行军大总管侯君集平高昌，以其地置西州。
现代文：二十八日，交河道行军大总管侯君集平定高昌，并在高昌设置了西州。
English: On the 28th, Hou Junji, the commander-in-chief of the cross-river march, set out to pacify Gaochang and set up Xizhou in Gaochang.

古文：九月癸卯，曲赦西州大辟罪。
现代文：九月九日，因特殊情况赦免西州死刑罪犯。
English: On September 9, he pardoned the death penalty criminals in Xizhou due to special circumstances.

古文：乙卯，于西州置安西都护府。
现代文：二十一日，在西州设置安西都护府。
English: On the 21st, the Anxi Capital Protectorate was set up in Xizhou.

古文：冬十月己卯，诏以赠司空、河间元王孝恭，赠陕东道大行台尚书右仆射、郧节公殷开山，赠民部尚书、渝襄公刘政会等配飨高祖庙庭。
现代文：冬十月十五日，诏以司空赠河间元王孝恭，以陕东道大行台尚书右仆射赠郧节公殷开山，以民部尚书赠渝襄公刘政会等功臣在高祖庙配祭。
English: On the 15th day of winter in October, the imperial edict bestowed the title of "Sikong" to Geng Wang Xiaoqong of Hebei Province, the title of "Shangshu" to Dangdai Shangshu of Shaanxi Province, the title of "Ubudu" to Xie Gongyin of Kaishan Province, the title of "Shangshu" to Xianggong Liu of the People's Republic of China, and other meritorious servicemen and women were enshrined at the Gaozhu Temple.

古文：闰月乙未，幸同州。
现代文：闰十月二日，驾到同州。
English: On October 2nd, he drove to the same state.

古文：甲辰，狩于尧山。
现代文：十一日，在尧山打猎。
English: On the 11th day, I went hunting in Lushan.

古文：庚戌，至自同州。
现代文：十七日，从同州回来。
English: On the 17th, he returned to Beijing from the same state.

古文：丙辰，吐蕃遣使献黄金器千斤以求婚。
现代文：二十三日，吐蕃派遣使者献黄金器皿一千斤来求婚和亲。
English: On the twenty-third day, Tubo sent an envoy to offer a thousand catties of gold utensils to Zhou to propose marriage and a relative.

古文：十一月甲子朔，日南至。
现代文：十一月一日是朔日，冬至，在圆丘举行祭祀。
English: The first day of November is the new moon, the winter solstice, and sacrifices are held at the round mound.

古文：有事于圆丘。十二月丁酉，交河道旋师。
现代文：十二月五日，交河道行军大总管侯君集凯旋班师。
English: On December 5th, Hou Junji, the grand marshal of the Cross-Strait River Campaign, led a triumphal parade.

古文：吏部尚书、陈国公侯君集执高昌王麹智盛，献捷于观德殿，行饮至之礼，赐酺三日。
现代文：吏部尚书、陈国公侯君集活捉高昌王麴智盛，在观德殿献捷，回到宗庙行饮酒庆贺之礼，赐宴饮三日。
English: The officials Shang Shu and Chen Guogong Junji captured Gaochang Wang Shizhisheng alive, presented the victory in the Kuangde Hall, and returned to the ancestral temple to drink alcohol to celebrate, and gave a banquet for three days.

古文：乙卯，高丽世子相权来朝。
现代文：二十二日，高丽王的世子相权前来朝见。
English: On the 22nd, the heir apparent of King Goryeo came to see the emperor.

古文：十五年春正月丁卯，吐蕃遣其国相禄东赞来逆女。
现代文：十五年春正月五日，吐蕃派遣国相禄东赞前来迎接未婚妻。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 15th year of the Spring, Minister Luo Dongzan, who was sent by Tuvalu, came to meet his fiancée.

古文：丁丑，礼部尚书、江夏王道宗送文成公主归吐蕃。
现代文：十五日，礼部尚书、江夏王道宗送文成公主嫁到吐蕃。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the princess was married in Tuyn with a letter from the Reverend Shang Shu and the King of Jiangxia, King Daozong.

古文：辛巳，幸洛阳宫。
现代文：十九日，皇上驾到洛阳宫。
English: On the 19th, the emperor drove to Luoyang Palace.

古文：三月戊申，幸襄城宫。
现代文：三月七日，驾到襄城宫。
English: On March 7, he drove to the Xiangcheng Palace.

古文：庚午，发襄城宫。
现代文：九日，废弃襄城宫。
English: On the 9th, the Xiangcheng Palace was abandoned.

古文：夏四月辛卯，诏以来年二月有事泰山，所司详定仪制。
现代文：夏四月一日，诏命明年二月在泰山举行祭祀，有关部门拟定仪礼制度。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, the imperial edict ordered a ritual to be held on Mount Tai in February next year, and the relevant departments worked out a ritual system.

古文：五月壬申，并州僧道及老人等抗表，以太原王业所因，明年登封已后，愿时临幸。
现代文：五月十二日，并州僧道及老人等上疏极力劝谏，认为太原是皇上基业的依靠，明年登泰山封禅以后，希望时时光临太原。
English: On May 12th, together with the state monks and elders, they strongly advised him, saying that Taiyuan was the foundation of the emperor's inheritance, and that after the enthronement of Mount Tai next year, he hoped to visit Taiyuan from time to time.

古文：上于武成殿赐宴，因从容谓侍臣曰： 朕少在太原，喜群聚博戏，暑往寒逝，将三十年矣。 
现代文：皇上在武成殿赐予宴饮，因趁机随意对侍臣道： 朕少时在太原，喜欢众多的人在一起做弈棋的游戏，寒来暑往，将近三十年了。 
English: The Emperor gave a banquet at the Imperial Palace, taking the opportunity to say to his attendants: "When I was young in Taiyuan, I liked to play chess with many people. I have been coming and going for nearly thirty years.

古文：时会中有旧识上者，相与道旧以为笑乐。
现代文：恰巧宴会之中有旧认识皇上的人，互相之间亲话旧事以为谈笑取乐。
English: It so happened that at the banquet there were people who had known the Emperor for a long time, and they were chatting about old times with each other, thinking it would be fun.

古文：因谓之曰： 他人之言，或有面谀。
现代文：因而对他道： 其他人说话，或许有人是当面奉承。
English: So he said to him, "When others speak, perhaps someone is flattering you to your face.

古文：公等朕之故人，实以告朕，即日政教，于百姓何如？
现代文：你们是朕的老朋友，应以实际情况告诉朕，今天的政事，对百姓如何？
English: You are my old friends. You should tell me the actual situation. How are today's political affairs for the people?

古文：人间得无疾苦耶？ 
现代文：人间莫非没有疾苦吗？ 
English: Isn't there enough suffering in the world?

古文：皆奏： 即日四海太平，百姓欢乐，陛下力也。
现代文：都上奏道 ：今天四海太平，百姓欢乐，这是陛下的力量。
English: "Today, the four seas are peaceful and the people are happy. This is the power of your majesty," the emperor intoned.

古文：臣等余年，日惜一日，但眷恋圣化，不知疾苦。 
现代文：臣等只剩残年，过一天痛惜少一天，但是我们留恋圣朝的恩情教化，不知有疾苦。 
English: Our vassals only have a few years left, and with each passing day, we regret the loss of one day. However, we still miss the benevolence and enlightenment of the Holy Dynasty, and we are not aware of any hardships.

古文：因固请过并州。
现代文：因而趁机坚决请求皇上访问并州。
English: Therefore, he took the opportunity to firmly request the emperor to visit and annex the state.

古文：上谓曰： 飞鸟过故乡，犹踯躅徘徊；况朕于太原起义，遂定天下，复少小游观，诚所不忘。
现代文：皇上对他们说： 飞鸟过故乡，留恋徘徊；何况朕在太原起义，终于安定天下，另外太原是我少小游玩观赏之地，确是我不能忘记的。
English: The emperor said to them, "Birds fly over their hometowns and linger; moreover, I rebelled in Taiyuan and finally stabilized the world. In addition, Taiyuan is a place I visit and enjoy from time to time. I really can't forget it."

古文：岱礼若毕，或冀与公等相见。 
现代文：泰山封禅完毕，可望与你们相见。 
English: I hope to see you again after the conclusion of Taishan Fuzhen.

古文：于是赐物各有差。
现代文：于是按各个等级赐给物品。
English: They were then given items according to their rank.

古文：丙子，百济王扶余璋卒。
现代文：十六日，百济王扶余璋去世。
English: On the 16th, King Fuyu of Baekje passed away.

古文：诏立其世子扶余义慈嗣其父位，仍封为带方郡王。
现代文：诏令立他的儿子扶余义慈继承他的父位，仍旧封为带方郡王。
English: The imperial edict appointed his son, Fuyu Yizi, to succeed his father, and he was still named the county king of Bifang.

古文：六月戊申，诏天下诸州，举学综古今及孝悌淳笃、文章秀异者，并以来年二月总集泰山。
现代文：六月十八日，诏令天下各州，举荐学贯古今及孝敬父母尊敬兄长以及禀性淳厚、文章辞采清秀者，都在明年二月一齐集中在泰山。
English: On June 18th, it was decreed that all the states in the world would gather at Mount Tai in February of the next year to commend those who had studied throughout the ages, respected their parents, and respected their elders, as well as those who were honest, hardworking, and good at writing.

古文：己酉，有星孛于太微，犯郎位。
现代文：十九日，有彗星入太微垣。
English: On the 19th, a comet entered Taikogaki.

古文：丙辰，停封泰山，避正殿以思咎，命食减膳。
现代文：二十六日，停止祭祀泰山，避开正殿以思考有何过错，命令掌管皇上膳食的官员减少膳食。
English: On the 26th, he stopped the worship of Mount Tai, avoided the main hall to think about what was wrong, and ordered the officials in charge of the emperor's meals to reduce the meals.

古文：秋七月甲戌，孛星灭。
现代文：秋七月十五日，彗星灭。
English: On the 15th day of the 7th month of autumn, the comet disappeared.

古文：冬十月辛卯，大阅于伊阙。
现代文：冬十月三日，在伊阙大检阅军队。
English: On the 3rd of October in winter, there was a military review at Yili University.

古文：壬辰，幸嵩阳。
现代文：四日，驾到嵩阳。
English: On the fourth day, I drove to Songyang.

古文：辛丑，还宫。
现代文：十三日，还宫。
English: On the 13th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：十一月壬戌，废乡长。
现代文：十一月五日，废乡长。
English: On November 5th, the head of the abandoned township resigned.

古文：壬申，还京师。
现代文：十五日，还京师。
English: On the 15th, he returned to Beijing.

古文：癸酉，薛延陀以同罗、仆骨、回纥、靺鞨、之众度漠，屯于白道川。
现代文：十六日，薛延陀率同罗、仆骨、回纥？靅之部众渡过沙漠，在白道川屯军。
English: On the 16th, Xue Yanta, together with Luo, Huko, and Hui, crossed the desert and set up a garrison in Baidu River.

古文：命营州都督张俭统所部兵压其东境；兵部尚书李勣为朔方行军总管，右卫大将军李大亮为灵州道行军总管，凉州都督李袭誉为凉州道行军总管，分道以御之。
现代文：命营州都督张俭统率所部军迫近东边边境。兵部尚书李责力为朔方军行军总管，右卫大将军李大亮为灵州道行军总管，凉州都督李袭誉为凉州道行军总管，分道以抵御薛延陀。
English: It was ordered by Zhang Jian, the governor of Yingzhou, to lead the army of the headquarters to approach the eastern border. The general of the military department, Shangshu Li Rongli, was the general manager of the march of the Shuo army, the general of the right guard, Li Dailiang, was the general manager of the march of the Lingzhou road, and the governor of Liangzhou, Li Haoyu, was the general manager of the march of the Liangzhou road. They divided the road to resist Xue Yandu.

古文：十二月戊子朔，至自洛阳宫。
现代文：十二月一日是朔日，皇上从洛阳宫回来。
English: December 1 was New Year's Day, and the emperor returned from Luoyang Palace.

古文：甲辰，李勣及薛延陀战于诺真水，大破之，斩首三千余级，获马万五千匹，薛延陀跳身而遁。
现代文：十七日，李责力与薛延陀在诺真水作战，大破薛延陀，斩首级三千多个，缴获马匹一万五千匹，薛延陀本人遁逃。
English: On the 17th, Li Rongli fought with Xue Yantuo in Nozhenshui, defeated Xue Yantuo, beheaded more than three thousand, captured fifteen thousand horses, and Xue Yantuo himself fled.

古文：勣旋破突厥思结于五台县，虏其男女千余口，获羊马称是。
现代文：李责力接着在五台县打败突厥思结，俘获其男女一千多人，缴获马匹一千多匹。
English: Li Zheili then defeated Turk Sijie in Wutai County, capturing more than a thousand men and women and more than a thousand horses.

古文：十六年春正月辛未，诏在京及诸州死罪囚徒，配西州为户；流人未达前所者，徙防西州。
现代文：十六年春正月十五日，诏命在京及各州死刑罪犯，流放到西州落户；流放者未达到先前指定处所者，迁移到西州防边。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of spring in the 16th year of the Heian period, the imperial edict ordered the criminals sentenced to death in Beijing and various states to be exiled to settle in Xizhou; if the exiles did not reach the previously designated place, they were moved to the Xizhou border.

古文：兼中书侍郎、江陵子岑文本为中书侍郎，专知机密。
现代文：兼中书侍郎、江陵子岑文本为中书侍郎，专门主持机密。
English: He was also the chancellery secretary, and Jiangling Zixuan was the chancellery secretary, especially presiding over confidential matters.

古文：夏六月辛卯，诏复隐王建成曰隐太子，改封海陵剌王元吉曰巢剌主。
现代文：夏六月七日，诏命恢复隐王建成为隐太子，改封海陵剌王元吉为巢剌王。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the summer, the imperial edict ordered the reinstatement of Yin Wang Jian as Yin Prince, and the change of the title of Hai Ling Zi Wang Yuan Ji to Xiao Zi Wang.

古文：秋七月戊午，司空、赵国公无忌为司徒，尚书左仆射、梁国公玄龄为司空。
现代文：秋七月五日，司空、赵国公长孙无忌为司徒，尚书左仆射、梁国公房玄龄为司空。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of autumn, Siku and Zhao Guogong's eldest son, Sun Muyi, became Siku, Shang Shuxi's second-in-command, and Liang Guogong's second-in-command, Xuan Ling, became Siku.

古文：九月丁巳，特进、郑国公魏徵为太子太师，知门下省事如故。
现代文：九月四日，特进、郑国公魏征为太子太师，主持门下省政事如先前一样。
English: On September 4, Tejin and Zheng Guogong Wei Zheng became the Crown Prince and Grand Master, presiding over the provincial government as before.

古文：冬十一月丙辰，狩于岐山。
现代文：冬十一月四日，在岐山打猎。
English: November 4th, winter, hunting in Qishan.

古文：辛酉，使祭隋文帝陵。
现代文：九日，派人祭祀隋文帝陵墓。
English: On the 9th, people were sent to worship the Sui Emperor's mausoleum.

古文：丁卯，宴武功士女于庆善宫南门。
现代文：十五日，皇上在庆善宫南门宴请武功未婚之男女。
English: On the 15th, the emperor held a banquet for unmarried men and women of martial arts at the south gate of the Qing Son Palace.

古文：酒酣，上与父老等涕泣论旧事，老人等递起为舞，争上万岁寿，上各尽一杯。
现代文：饮酒酣畅，皇上与父老流泪论叙旧事，老人们一个接一个起舞，争着祝皇上万寿无疆，皇上为各父老尽一杯酒。
English: The drinking went smoothly. The emperor and his father tearfully talked about old times. The old people danced one after another, competing to wish the emperor eternal life. The emperor made a glass of wine for each father.

古文：庚午，至自岐州。
现代文：十八日，皇上从岐州回来。
English: On the 18th, the emperor returned from Qizhou.

古文：十二月癸卯，幸温汤。
现代文：十二月二十二日，驾到温汤。
English: On December 22, Taizong went to a hot spring.

古文：甲辰，狩于骊山，时阴寒晦冥，围兵断绝。
现代文：二十三日，在骊山打猎，当时阴气寒冷昏暗，打猎围场的警戒士兵没有了。
English: On the 23rd, when hunting in Lushan, the weather was gloomy, cold and dark, and there were no soldiers on guard in the hunting paddock.

古文：上乘高望见之，欲舍其罚，恐亏军令，乃回辔入谷以避之。
现代文：皇上登高见此情况，想不处罚，恐怕有损军令，于是回马入谷而回避之。
English: Emperor Denggao saw this situation and did not want to punish, fearing that it would damage the military order, so he turned back to the valley and avoided it.

古文：是岁，高丽大臣盖苏文弑其君高武，而立武兄子藏为王。
现代文：这年，高丽大臣盖苏文杀他的君主高武，而立高武兄之子高藏为高丽王。
English: In that year, Goryeo Minister Gye Soo Man killed his monarch, Goh Moo, and installed Goh Moo's brother's son, Gojang, as king of Goryeo.

古文：十七年春正月戊辰，右卫将军、代州都督刘兰谋反，腰斩。
现代文：十七年春正月十七日，右卫将军、代州都督刘兰谋反，被腰斩。
English: On the seventeenth day of the first month of the seventeenth year of the Spring, the general of the Right Division and the governor of Daizhou, Liu Lan, plotted a rebellion and was beheaded.

古文：太子太师、郑国公魏徵薨。
现代文：太子太师、郑国公魏征去世。
English: Prince and Grandmaster Zheng Guogong Wei Zheng passed away.

古文：戊申，诏图画司徒、赵国公无忌等勋臣二十四人于凌烟阁。
现代文：二月二十八日，诏令图工在凌烟阁画司徒、赵国公长孙无忌等功臣二十四人像。
English: On February 28th, the official ordered the artist to paint the portraits of 24 heroes such as Sito, Zhao Guogong and Sun Mujie at Lingyan Pavilion.

古文：三月丙辰，齐州都督齐王祐杀长史权万纪、典军韦文振，据齐州自守，诏兵部尚书李勣、刑部尚书刘德威发兵讨之。
现代文：三月六日，齐州都督齐王杀长史权万纪，典军韦文振占据齐州守卫自己。诏令兵部尚书李责力、刑部尚书刘德威发兵讨伐他们。
English: On March 6, Qi Wang, the governor of Qizhou, assassinated Long Shi Quan Wan Ji, and Wei Wen Zhen, the army of Wei, occupied Qizhou to defend himself. He ordered Li Youli, the secretary of the military department, and Liu Dewei, the secretary of the criminal department, to send soldiers to fight them.

古文：兵未至，兵曹杜行敏执之而降，遂赐死于内侍省。
现代文：讨伐之兵未到，兵曹杜行敏捉住齐王投降，于是在内侍省赐齐王自尽。
English: Before the crusading soldiers arrived, Petty Officer Du Xingmin captured Qi Wang and made him surrender, so he gave Qi Wang the go-ahead to commit suicide in Naishi Province.

古文：丁巳，荧惑守心前星，十九日而退。夏四月庚辰朔，皇太子有罪，废为庶人。
现代文：夏四月一日是朔日，皇太子有罪，废为庶人。
English: Summer April 1st is a new day, the crown prince is guilty, abolished as a commoner.

古文：汉王元昌、吏部尚书侯君集并坐与连谋，伏诛。
现代文：汉王元昌、吏部尚书侯君集都犯了与太子勾结之罪，处以死刑。
English: Han Wang Yuanchang and the official Shang Shuhou Junji both committed the crime of colluding with the prince and were sentenced to death.

古文：丙戌，立晋王治为皇太子，大赦，赐酺三日。
现代文：七日，立晋王治为皇太子，大赦。赐聚饮三天。
English: On the seventh day, Wang Zhi Jin was crowned crown prince, and he was granted amnesty. He was allowed to drink for three days.

古文：丁亥，中书令杨师道为吏部尚书。
现代文：八日，中书令杨师道为吏部尚书。
English: On the 8th, the Chinese government ordered Yang Shidao to be removed from the cadre.

古文：己丑，加司徒、赵国公长孙无忌太子太师，司空、梁国公房玄龄太子太傅；特进、宋国公萧瑀太子太保，兵部尚书、英国公李勣为太子詹事，仍同中书门下三品。
现代文：十日，加司徒、赵国公长孙无忌为太子太师。加司空、梁国公房玄龄为太子太傅。加特进、宋国公萧王禹为太子太保。加兵部尚书、英国公李责力为詹事，仍旧同中书门下三品。
English: On the 10th, Ga Shitou and Zhao Guogong's eldest son Sun Mudu became the prince's daishi. Ga Shikong and Liang Guogong's Gongbo Xuanling became the prince's daifu. Gat Jin and Song Guogong Xiao Wang Yu became the prince's daibo. The addition of the military department's Shang Shu and the British public Li Li Li Li Li Li were minor matters, but they were still the same as the three items under the Chinese book.

古文：庚寅，上亲谒太庙，以谢承乾之过。
现代文：十一日，皇上亲自晋见太庙，为废太子承乾之过错而谢罪。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Emperor personally visited the Imperial Temple to express his remorse for the wrongs committed by the deposed Crown Prince.

古文：癸巳，魏王泰以罪降爵为东莱郡王。
现代文：十四日，魏王泰因罪降爵为东莱郡王。
English: On the 14th, Wei Wang Tai was knighted for his crime and became the king of Donglai County.

古文：五月乙丑，手诏举孝廉茂才异能之士。
现代文：五月十七日，皇上手诏令举荐孝廉、秀才和特殊才能之士。
English: On May 17th, the emperor issued an imperial edict to recommend men of filial piety, talent and special ability.

古文：六月己卯朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：六月一日，是朔日，有日蚀。
English: The first day of June is the new moon, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：壬午，改葬隋恭帝。
现代文：四日，改葬隋恭帝。
English: On the fourth day, Sui Kyong's funeral was rescheduled.

古文：丁酉，尚书右仆射高士廉请致仕，诏以为开府仪同三司、同中书门下三品。
现代文：十九日，尚书右仆射高士廉请求辞官，诏令以他为开府仪同三司、同中书门下三品。
English: On the 19th, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Shao Gao Shilian, requested to be demoted, and the imperial edict named him as Kaifu Yi, Tong San Shi, Tong Zhong Shumen, and Shang San Pin.

古文：闰月戊午，薛延陀遣其兄子突利设献马五万匹、牛驼一万、羊十万以请婚，许之。
现代文：闰六月十一日，薛延陀派遣其兄之子突利设献马五万匹、牛、驼合共一万，羊十万只以求和亲，皇上同意。
English: On leap June 11, Xue Yanta sent his brother's son, Tu Li, to offer 50,000 horses, 10,000 cattle and camels, and 100,000 sheep to seek peace, and the emperor agreed.

古文：丙子，徙封东莱郡王泰为顺阳王。
现代文：二十九日，迁徙改封东莱郡王泰为顺阳王。
English: On the 29th, Wang Tai of Donglai County was transferred to Shunyang.

古文：秋七月庚辰，京城讹言云： 上遣枨枨取人心肝，以祠天狗。 
现代文：秋七月三日，京城谣传道： 皇上派遣穿狗皮铁爪的人取人心肝，以祭祀天狗。 
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of autumn, the Beijing folk tale preached: The emperor sent a man wearing a dog's skin and iron claws to take people's hearts and souls and sacrifice them to the Tengu.

古文：递相惊悚。
现代文：互相惊惧。
English: Scared of each other.

古文：上遣使遍加宣谕，月余乃止。
现代文：皇上派遣使者到处加以说明抚慰，一个多月才停止谣传。
English: The emperor sent emissaries everywhere to explain and soothe, and it took more than a month for the rumors to stop.

古文：丁酉，司空、太子太傅、梁国公房玄龄以母忧罢职。
现代文：二十日，司空、太子太傅、梁国公房玄龄因为母丧免职。
English: On the 20th, Siku, Taifu Taizi, and Xuanling Liangguo were relieved of their duties because of their mother's death.

古文：八月，工部尚书、郧国公张亮为刑部尚书，参预朝政。
现代文：八月，工部尚书、郧国公张亮为刑部尚书，参预朝政。
English: In August, Shangshu from the Ministry of Industry and Zhang Liang from the Ministry of State Security became Shangshu from the Ministry of Justice and participated in the pre-imperial government.

古文：九月癸未，徙庶人承乾于黔州。
现代文：九月七日，迁徙庶人废太子承乾到黔州。
English: On September 7th, the commoner and former crown prince Cheng Qian migrated to Zhangzhou.

古文：冬十月丁巳，房玄龄起复本职。
现代文：冬十月十一日，房玄龄起复本职。
English: In the winter, on October 11th, Fang Xuanling resumed his duties.

古文：十一月己卯，有事于南郊。
现代文：十一月三日，在南郊祭天。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, a grand festival was held in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：壬午，赐天下酺三日。
现代文：六日，赐天下宴饮三天。
English: On the sixth day, give the world three days of feasting.

古文：以凉州获瑞石，曲赦凉州，并录京城及诸州系囚，多所原宥。
现代文：因为凉州获得了吉祥的宝石，由于这特殊情况特别赦免了凉州囚犯，并且皇上亲自审读记录京城及各州关押的囚犯，大多宽恕。
English: Because Liangzhou obtained the auspicious gemstone, Liangzhou prisoners were specially pardoned due to this special situation, and the emperor personally reviewed the records of prisoners detained in Beijing and various states, and most of them were pardoned.

古文：十八年春正月壬寅，幸温汤。
现代文：十八年春正月二十七日，驾到温泉。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the 18th year of spring, I drove to a hot spring.

古文：夏四月辛亥，幸九成宫。
现代文：夏四月八日，驾到九成宫。
English: Summer On April 8th, I drove to Kuching Palace.

古文：秋八月甲子，至自九成宫。
现代文：秋八月二十三日，皇上从九成宫回来。
English: On the 23rd day of the 8th month of autumn, the emperor returned from the Jiu Cheng Palace.

古文：丁卯，散骑常侍清苑男刘洎为侍中，中书侍郎江陵子岑文本、中书侍郎马周并为中书令。
现代文：二十六日，散骑常侍清苑男刘洎为侍中，中书侍郎江陵子岑文本、中书侍郎马周同时任中书令。
English: On the 26th, Liu Jian, a man from Qingyuan who was a knight-errant, was appointed as a vice-chamberlain, and the vice-chamberlain, Jiang Lingzi, and the vice-chamberlain, Ma Zhou, were also appointed as vice-chamberlains.

古文：九月，黄门侍郎褚遂良参预朝政。
现代文：九月，黄门侍郎褚遂良参预朝政。
English: In September, Huangmen's chamberlain Zou Suiliang took part in the pre-imperial government.

古文：冬十月辛丑朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬十月一日是朔日，有日蚀。
English: In winter, the first day of October is New Year's Day, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：甲辰，初置太子司议郎官员。
现代文：四日，初设置太子司议郎官员。
English: On the 4th, an official of the Crown Prince's Council was set up for the first time.

古文：甲寅，幸洛阳宫。
现代文：十四日，驾到洛阳宫。
English: On the 14th, I drove to Luoyang Palace.

古文：安西都护郭孝恪帅师灭焉耆，执其王突骑支送行在所。
现代文：安西都护郭孝恪率军队消灭了焉耆，活捉了焉耆王突骑支送到了皇上所在的地方。
English: Anxi Governor Guo Xiao led the army to eliminate Yan Xuan, captured Yan Xuan alive and sent him to the place where the emperor was.

古文：十一月壬寅，车驾至洛阳宫。
现代文：十一月，车驾到洛阳宫。
English: In November, I drove to Luoyang Palace.

古文：庚子，命太子詹事、英国公李勣为辽东道行军总管，出柳城，礼部尚书、江夏郡王道宗副之；刑部尚书、郧国公张亮为平壤道行军总管，以舟师出莱州，左领军常何、泸州都督左难当副之。
现代文：三十日，命令太子詹事、英国公李责力为辽东行军总管，从柳城出发，礼部尚书、江夏郡王道宗为副；刑部尚书、郧国公张亮为平壤道行军总管，率水军从莱州出发，左领军常何、泸州都督左难当为副。
English: On the 30th, he ordered the prince Zhan Zhi and the British governor Li Rongli to be the general manager of the Liaodong March, starting from Liucheng, with the vice-governor of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Wang Daozong of Jiangxia County; the vice-governor of the Ministry of Justice, Zhang Liang, the general manager of the Pyongyang March, leading the navy from Laizhou, with the vice-governor of the Left Army, Chang Ho, and the governor of Zhangzhou, Zuo Nan.

古文：发天下甲士，召募十万，并趣平壤，以伐高丽。
现代文：发动天下甲士，招募兵十万，同时奔赴平壤，讨伐高丽。
English: He mobilized all the warriors in the world, recruited 100,000 soldiers, and at the same time rushed to Pyongyang to fight against Korea.

古文：十二月辛丑，庶人承乾死。
现代文：十二月一日，庶人废太子承乾死。
English: On December 1st, the commoner wastrel Crown Prince Shoko died.

古文：十九年春二月庚戌，上亲统六军发洛阳。
现代文：十九年春二月十二日，皇上亲统六军从洛阳出发。
English: On the 12th day of February in the spring of the 19th year, the six armies of the emperor's relatives set out from Luoyang.

古文：乙卯，诏皇太子留定州监国；开府仪同三司、申国公高士廉摄太子太傅，与侍中刘洎、中书令马周、太子少詹事张行成、太子右庶子高季辅五人同掌机务；以吏部尚书、安德郡公杨师道为中书令。
现代文：十七日，诏令皇太子留在定州代管国事；开府仪同三司、申国公高士廉代理太子太傅，与侍中刘洎、中书令马周、太子少詹事张行成、太子右庶子高季辅五人同掌政务；以吏部尚书、安德郡公杨师道为中书令。
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict ordered the crown prince to stay in Dingzhou to take charge of state affairs; Kaifu Yi, along with the third secretary, Shen Guogong Gao Shilian, acting as the prince's grand steward, and the five attendants Liu Wei, Ma Zhou, Zhang Xingcheng, and Gao Ji Fu, the prince's son-in-law, were in charge of government affairs; Shang Shu of the Personnel Department and Yang Shido of the Andean County were the grand stewards.

古文：赠殷比干为太师，谥曰忠烈，命所司封墓，葺祠堂，春秋祠以少牢，上自为文以祭之。
现代文：赠殷朝比干为太师，谥号曰忠烈，命有关部门对坟墓加土，以表礼敬，修葺祠堂，春秋两季用猪和羊祭祀，皇上亲写祭文来祭祀他。
English: In the Yin Dynasty, Bi Gan was given the title of Grand Master, with the posthumous title of "Faithful and Loyal," and the relevant departments were ordered to add soil to the tomb, pay tribute, repair the ancestral hall, and use pigs and sheep for sacrifices in spring and autumn. The emperor himself wrote a ritual to worship him.

古文：三月壬辰，上发定州，以司徒、太子太师兼检校侍中、赵国公长孙无忌，中书令岑文本、杨师道从。
现代文：三月二十四日，皇上从定州出发，以司徒、太子太师兼检校侍中、赵国公长孙无忌，中书令岑文本、杨师道跟从前往。
English: On March 24th, the emperor set out from Dingzhou, accompanied by Sitoru, Prince Daishi (太子太師) (兼检校侍中), Zhao Guogong (赵国公長孙無忌), the text of the Chinese edict, and Yang Shidao.

古文：夏四月癸卯，誓师于幽州城南，因大飨六军以遣之。
现代文：夏四月六日，在幽州城南誓师，因而用酒肉款待六军而后派遣他们出发。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, he swore an oath to the division in the south of Yuzhou City, so he treated the six armies with wine and meat and then sent them off.

古文：丁未，中书令岑文本卒于师。
现代文：十日，中书令岑文本在军中去世。
English: On the 10th day of the month, he passed away in the army.

古文：癸亥，辽东道行军大总管、英国公李勣攻盖牟城，破之。
现代文：二十六日，辽东道行军大总管、英国公李责力攻破盖牟城。
English: On the 26th, Liao Daodu, the general manager of the marching army, and British Gong Li took the responsibility to break through the city of Gaimu.

古文：五月丁丑，车驾渡辽。
现代文：五月十日，皇上车驾渡过辽河。
English: On May 10, the imperial carriage drove across the Liao River.

古文：甲申，上亲率铁骑与李勣会围辽东城，因烈风发火弩，斯须城上屋及楼皆尽，麾战士令登，乃拔之。
现代文：十七日，皇上亲率精锐骑兵与李责力会合包围辽东城。借助大风发火箭，一会儿城上平房及楼房都烧光，然后指挥战士登城，这才攻克辽东城。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor's relatives led the elite cavalry and Li Ruili to encircle the Liaodong City. With the help of the strong winds and rockets, the bungalows and buildings on the city were burned out for a while, and then the soldiers were commanded to go to the city. Only then did they conquer the Liaodong City.

古文：六月丙辰，师至安市城。
现代文：六月二十日，王师到达安市城。
English: On June 20, Teacher Wang arrived in An City.

古文：丁巳，高丽别将高延寿、高惠真帅兵十五万来援安市，以拒王师。
现代文：二十一日，高丽的大将高延寿、高惠真率兵十五万来援救安市，以抗拒王师。
English: On the twenty-first day, Goryeo generals Gao Yanju and Gao Huizhen led 150,000 soldiers to rescue Anshi in order to resist Wang Shi.

古文：李勣率兵奋击，上自高峰引军临之，高丽大溃，杀获不可胜纪。
现代文：李责力率兵奋力攻击，皇上率军从高峰往下冲锋，高丽军队崩溃，所杀及所俘虏的人数也数不清。
English: The Goryeo army collapsed, and the number of people killed and captured was countless.

古文：延寿等以其众降，因名所幸山为驻跸山，刻石纪功焉。赐天下大酺二日。
现代文：高延寿等人率其部众投降，因而命名皇上所驾到的山为驻马毕山，刻石纪功，赐天下大饮宴两天。
English: Gao Yanshou and others led their subordinates to surrender, thus naming the mountain that the emperor drove to as Zhubi Mountain, engraving stone records, and giving the world a grand banquet for two days.

古文：秋七月，李勣进军攻安市城，至九月不克，乃班师。
现代文：秋七月，李责力进军攻打安市城，到九月不能攻下，于是班师回朝。
English: In autumn and July, Li Youli marched to attack Anshi City, but was unable to capture it by September, so the team returned to the North.

古文：冬十月丙辰，入临渝关，皇太子自定州迎谒。
现代文：冬十月二十一日，王师回到临渝关，皇太子从定州出迎晋见。
English: In winter, on October 21, Wang Shi returned to Linyuguan, and the crown prince came from Dingzhou to meet him.

古文：戊午，次汉武台，刻石以纪功德。
现代文：二十三日，驻扎在汉武台，刻石以纪功德。
English: On the 23rd, he was stationed in Hanwutai and carved his name in stone.

古文：十一月辛未，幸幽州。
现代文：十一月七日，皇上驾到幽州。
English: On November 7, the emperor arrived in Yuzhou.

古文：癸酉，大飨，还师。
现代文：九日，大大用酒肉款待士兵，凯旋回军。
English: On the 9th, he treated the soldiers with meat and wine, and they returned to the army in triumph.

古文：十二月戊申，幸并州。
现代文：十二月十四日，皇上驾到并州。
English: On December 14, the emperor arrived in Wenzhou.

古文：侍中、清苑男刘洎以罪赐死。
现代文：侍中、清苑男刘洎因为犯罪被赐自杀。
English: Liu Xuan, a chamberlain and a man from Qingyuan, was given the power to commit suicide for his crimes.

古文：是岁，薛延陀真珠毗伽可汗死。
现代文：这年，薛延陀真珠田比伽可汗死。
English: In the same year, Xue Yan Dua Zhu Tian Bigak Khan died.

古文：二十年春正月，上在并州。
现代文：二十年春正月，皇上在并州。
English: In the first month of the 20th year of the Spring, the Emperor was in Bianzhou.

古文：丁丑，遣大理卿孙伏伽、黄门侍郎褚遂良等二十二人，以六条巡察四方，黜陟官吏。
现代文：十四日，派大理卿孙伏伽、黄门侍郎褚遂良等二十二人，凭借六条诏令巡察四方，贬黜升降官吏。
English: On the 14th, he sent twenty-two people, including Sun Fugu, the Secretary of Dali, and Su Sui Liang, the Chamberlain of Huangmen, to inspect the four directions with the help of six imperial decrees, and to demote, promote and demote officials.

古文：庚辰，曲赦并州，宴从官及起义元从，赐粟帛、给复有差。
现代文：十七日，因特殊情况赦免并州囚犯，宴请跟从官员及起义首从官员，按照官员等级赐给粮食绸缎和免除赋税徭役。
English: On the 17th, due to special circumstances, the state prisoners were pardoned, the officials who followed the officials and the leaders of the uprising were invited to the banquet, and the food and clothing were given according to the rank of the officials and the tax and service were exempted.

古文：三月己巳，车驾至京师。
现代文：三月七日，皇上车驾到京师。
English: On March 7, the imperial carriage arrived in Kyoto.

古文：己丑，刑部尚书、郑国公张亮谋反，诛。
现代文：二十七日，刑部尚书、郧国公张亮谋反，被杀。
English: On the 27th, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shang Shu, and Zhang Liang, the public official of Shandong Province, plotted a rebellion and were killed.

古文：闰月癸巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：闰三月一日是朔日，有日蚀。
English: The first day of leap March is the new moon, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：夏四月甲子，太子太师、赵国公长孙无忌，太子太傅、梁国公房玄龄，太子太保、宋国公萧瑀各辞调护之职，诏许之。
现代文：夏四月三日，太子太师、赵国公长孙无忌，太子太傅、梁国公房玄龄，太子太保、宋国公萧王禹各人都辞去太子太师、太子太傅、太子太保的职务，皇上诏令同意。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of summer, Prince Daishi, Zhao Guogong Changsun Mubui, Prince Daifu, Liang Guogong Gongbo Xuanling, Prince Daibao, and Song Guogong Xiaowang Yu all resigned from the positions of Prince Daishi, Prince Daifu, and Prince Daibao, and the Emperor's edict agreed.

古文：六月，遣兵部尚书、固安公崔敦礼，特进、英国公李勣击破薛延陀于郁督军山北，前后斩首五千余级，虏男女三万余人。
现代文：六月，派遣兵部尚书、固安公崔敦礼，特进、英国公李责力在郁督军山北击破薛延陀，前后共斩敌人首级五千余个，掳获男女三万余人。
English: In June, he dispatched Shang Shu, Guan Gong, Cui Dunli, Tuanjin, and British Gong Li to break through Xue Yantuo in the north of Ikutu's army, beheading more than five thousand enemies and capturing more than thirty thousand men and women.

古文：秋八月甲子，封皇孙为陈王。
现代文：秋八月五日，封皇孙忠为陈王。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month of autumn, Emperor Sun Zhong was enthroned as King Chen.

古文：己巳，幸灵州。
现代文：十月，驾到灵州。
English: In October, I drove to Lingshou.

古文：庚午，次泾阳顿。
现代文：十一日，驻扎泾阳顿。
English: On the 11th, it was stationed in Shenyang.

古文：铁勒回纥、拔野古、同罗、仆骨、多滥葛、思结、阿跌、契苾、跌结、浑、斛薛等十一姓各遣使朝贡，奏称： 延陀可汗不事大国，部落乌散，不知所之。
现代文：铁勒回纥、拔野古、同罗、仆骨、多滥葛、思结、阿跌、契艹必、跌结、浑、斛薛等十一姓少数民族各派遣使者来朝贡，上奏说： 延陀可汗不事奉大国，部落像乌鸦一样散乱，不知他们到哪里去了。
English: Each of the eleven ethnic minorities sent envoys to pay tribute to the emperor, including Tillekui, Batanoko, Dongluo, Drokotsu, Dojangge, Sujie, Ahdup, Kejangbe, Dujie, Hun, and Xuexue. The envoys said, "Yanduakhan does not serve a great power, the tribes are scattered like crows, and I don't know where they have gone.

古文：奴等各有分地，不能逐延陀去，归命天子，乞置汉官。 
现代文：奴才等各有分得的土地，不能驱逐延陀离去，归顺大唐天子，请求设置汉人官员。 
English: Slaves and others have their own land, they cannot expel Yunda and leave, submit to the Great Tang Emperor, and request the establishment of Han officials.

古文：诏遣会灵州。
现代文：皇上诏命他们在灵州会集。
English: The emperor ordered them to assemble in Lingzhou.

古文：九月甲辰，铁勒诸部落俟斤、颉利发等遣使相继而至灵州者数千人，来贡方物，因请置吏，咸请至尊为可汗。
现代文：九月十五日，铁勒各部落俟斤、颉利发等酋长派遣使者陆续到达灵州者数千人，前来进贡土特产，趁机请求设置官员，都请求大唐皇上封他们为可汗。
English: On September 15, several thousand envoys were sent to Lingzhou successively by the chiefs of various tribes in the Tielu, such as the Jujin and Jialifa, who came to pay tribute to local special products and took the opportunity to request the establishment of officials. They all requested the Emperor Datang to appoint them as khans.

古文：于是北荒悉平，为五言诗勒石以序其事。
现代文：于是北面蛮夷之邦全部平伏，皇上作五言诗刻石以记叙此事。
English: As a result, all the barbarian states in the north surrendered, and the emperor wrote a five-character poem on stone to record the event.

古文：辛亥，灵州地震有声。
现代文：二十二日，灵州发生强烈地震，声音很大。
English: On the 22nd, a strong earthquake occurred in Lingzhou. The sound was very loud.

古文：冬十月，前太子太保、宋国公萧瑀贬商州刺史。
现代文：冬十月，前太子太保、宋国公萧王禹贬为商州刺史。
English: In the winter of October, Xiao Wang Yu, the former crown prince Taibo and Song Guogong, was relegated to the history of Shangzhou.

古文：丙戌，至自灵州。
现代文：二十八日，皇上从灵州来。
English: On the 27th, Taizong returned to Beijing from Lingzhou.

古文：二十一年春正月壬辰，开府仪同三司、申国公高士廉薨。
现代文：二十一年春正月五日，开府仪同三司、申国公高士廉去世。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the 21st year of the Spring, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si and Shen Guo Gong Gao Shilian passed away.

古文：丁酉，诏以来年二月有事泰山。
现代文：十日，诏命明年二月在泰山祭祀天地。
English: On the 10th, the imperial edict ordered that the heaven and earth should be sacrificed on Mount Tai in February next year.

古文：甲寅，赐京师酺三日。
现代文：二十七日，赐京师宴饮三天。
English: On the 27th, he gave the Grand Master a three-day banquet.

古文：二月壬申，诏以左丘明、卜子夏、公羊高、谷梁赤、伏胜、高堂生、戴圣、毛苌、孔安国、刘向、郑众、杜子春、马融、卢植、郑康成、服子慎、何休、王肃、王辅嗣、杜元凯、范宁等二十一人，代用其书，垂于国胄，自今有事于太学，并命配享宣尼庙堂。
现代文：二月十五日，诏命以左丘明、卜子夏、公羊高、谷梁赤、伏胜、高堂生、戴圣、毛苌、孔安国、刘向、郑众、杜子春、马融、卢植、郑康成、服子慎、何休、王肃、王辅嗣、杜元凯、范宁等二十一人，代代用他们的书，流传给公卿王侯之子，从今以后凡在太学有重大事情，都命令他们在孔子庙堂配祭。
English: On February 15, the imperial edict ordered twenty-one people, including Zuo Quming, Bu Zixia, Gongyang Gao, Gu Liang Chia, Fuxing, Gaodang Sheng, Dai Sheng, Mao Kun, Kong An Guo, Liu Xiang, Zheng Zong, Du Zichun, Ma Rong, Lu Zhi, Zheng Kangcheng, Fuxi Sheng, He Xiu, Wang Su, Wang Suizi, Du Yuankai, and Fanning, to use their books on behalf and pass them on to the sons of princes and princes. From now on, whenever there is a major event in Taixu, they are ordered to hold

古文：丁丑，皇太子于国学释菜。
现代文：二十日，皇太子在国学用芹藻一类菜蔬敬先师。
English: On the 20th, the Crown Prince paid his respects to his former teacher by eating vegetables such as celery.

古文：夏四月乙丑，营太和宫于终南之上，改为翠微宫。
现代文：夏四月九日，在终南山上建造太和宫，改为翠微宫。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of summer, the Taihe Palace was built on the South Mountain, and it was changed to the Tsuiweigu Palace.

古文：五月戊子，幸翠微宫。
现代文：五月三日，皇上驾到翠微宫。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, Emperor Taizong personally visited Tsuiweigu.

古文：六月癸亥，司徒、赵国公无忌加授扬州都督。
现代文：六月八日，司徒、赵国公长孙无忌加授扬州都督。
English: On June 8, Szeto and Zhao Guogong's eldest grandson were awarded the title of Yangzhou governor.

古文：秋七月庚子，建玉华宫于宜君县之凤凰谷。
现代文：秋七月十七，在宜君县之凤凰谷建筑玉华宫。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Jade Palace was built in Yijun County's Phoenix Valley.

古文：庚戌，至自翠微宫。
现代文：二十六日，皇上从翠微宫归来。
English: On the 26th, Emperor Taizong returned to Beijing from the Suiwe Palace.

古文：八月壬戌，诏以河北大水，停封禅。
现代文：八月八日，诏令由于河北大水，停止在泰山筑坛祭祀天地。
English: On August 8th, due to the floods in Hebei Province, the Emperor issued an order to stop the construction of the altar and the worship of heaven and earth in Mount Tai.

古文：辛未，骨利干国遣使贡名马。
现代文：十七日，骨利干国派使者进贡名马。
English: On the seventeenth day, the bone dry country sent an envoy to bring tribute horses.

古文：丁酉，封皇子明为曹王。
现代文：九月十四日，封皇子明为曹王。
English: On September 14th, it became clear that the crown prince was Cao Wang.

古文：冬十一月癸卯，徙封顺阳王泰为濮王。
现代文：冬十一月二十一日，迁徙改封顺阳王泰为濮王。
English: In winter, on November 21st, Shunyang Wang Tai was moved and renamed Shunwang.

古文：十二月戊寅，左骁卫大将军阿史那社尔、右骁卫大将军契苾何力、安西都护郭孝恪、司农卿杨弘礼为琯山道行军大总管，以伐龟兹。
现代文：十二月二十六日，左骁卫大将军阿史那社尔、右骁卫大将军契艹必何力、安西都护郭孝恪、司农卿杨弘礼为山道行军大总管，以讨伐龟兹。
English: On December 26th, General of the Left Division Ashinashal, General of the Right Division Kichibin Ho Li, Anxi Governor Guo Xiaoqi, and Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture Yang Hongli were appointed as the general managers of the mountain road march to fight against the turtles.

古文：是岁，堕婆登、乙利、鼻林送、都播、羊同、石、波斯、康国、吐火罗、阿悉吉等远夷十九国，并遣使朝贡。
现代文：这年，堕婆登、乙利、鼻林送、都播、羊同、石、波斯、康国、吐火罗、阿悉吉等边远蛮夷之国，都派遣使者前来朝贡。
English: In that year, envoys from faraway barbarian countries, such as Padang, Bili, Nalin, Dobang, Yodong, Shek, Persia, Kham, Tuharo, and Aserji, all sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：又于突厥之北至于回纥部落，置驿六十六所，以通北荒焉。
现代文：又在突厥之北直到回纥部落之间，设置驿站六十六处，以沟通北面边远地区。
English: In addition, 66 post stations were set up between the Turkic north and the Uighur tribes to communicate with the remote areas in the north.

古文：二十二年春正月庚寅，中书令马周卒。
现代文：二十二年春正月九日，中书令马周去世。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the spring of the 22nd year, Ma Zhou passed away.

古文：司徒、赵国公无忌兼检校中书令，知尚书门下二省事。
现代文：司徒、赵国公长孙无忌兼检校中书令，主持尚书、门下二省之事。
English: Stow and Zhao Guogong's eldest son, Sun Mugu, also served as the inspector of the school's middle school, presided over the school and the two provinces under the school.

古文：已亥，刑部侍郎崔仁师为中书侍郎，参知机务。
现代文：十八日，刑部侍郎崔仁师为中书侍郎，参加主持政务。
English: On the 18th, Cui Renshi, the attendant of the Department of Criminal Law, became the attendant of the Department of Central Affairs and took part in presiding over government affairs.

古文：戊戌，幸温汤。
现代文：十七日，皇上驾到温汤。
English: On the 17th, Taizong personally visited the hot spring.

古文：戊申，还宫。
现代文：二十七日，回宫。
English: On the 27th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：二月，前黄门侍郎褚遂良起复黄门侍郎。
现代文：二月，前黄门侍郎褚遂良重新起用为黄门侍郎。
English: In February, former Huangmen waiter Zou Suiliang was reappointed as Huangmen waiter.

古文：中书侍郎崔仁师除名，配流连州。
现代文：中书侍郎崔仁师除去做官的资格，流放到连州。
English: In addition to his qualification to be an official, Choe Jin, the attendant of the Chinese classics, was exiled to Lianzhou.

古文：癸丑，西番沙钵罗叶护率众归附，以其俟斤屈裴禄为忠武将军，兼大俟斤。
现代文：二日，西面少数民族沙钵罗叶护率众归附。以他的俟斤屈裴禄为忠武将军，兼大俟斤。
English: On the second day, the West Minority People's Shajiao Luo Ye Gu led the crowd to join. With his banner, Qu Pei Luo became the loyal general, and also the great banner.

古文：戊午，以结骨部置坚昆都督。
现代文：七日，在结骨设置坚昆都督。
English: On the seventh day, Jiankun Tudou was set up in the ossuary.

古文：乙亥，幸玉华宫，乙卯，赐所经高年笃疾粟帛有差。
现代文：二十四日，皇上驾到玉华宫。四日，按等级赐给所经过的地方年纪老大病势沉重者粮食布匹。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the emperor drove to the Jade Palace. On the fourth day, according to the level, he gave food cloths to those who were old, sick and heavy in the places he passed.

古文：己卯，蒐于华原。
现代文：二十八日，在华原打猎。
English: On the 28th, I went hunting in Hua Yuan.

古文：四月甲寅，碛外蕃人争牧马出界，上亲临断决，然后咸服。
现代文：四月四日，沙漠外少数民族为争夺在草原放马出了边界，皇上亲自驾临判断，这样以后才都顺服。
English: On April 4th, the ethnic minorities outside the desert set up a border to compete for horses in the grasslands. The emperor himself came to judge, so that they would all obey.

古文：丁巳，右武候将军梁建方击松外蛮，下其部落七十二所。
现代文：七日，右武候将军梁建方打击松外蛮，攻下他的部落七十二处。
English: On the seventh day, the Right Military Governor General Liang Jianfang cracked down on the Matsugai Barbarians and captured seventy-two of his tribe.

古文：五月庚子，右卫率长史王玄策击帝那伏帝国，大破之，获其王阿罗那顺及王妃、子等，虏男女万二千人、牛马二万余以诣阙。
现代文：五月二十日，右卫率长史王玄策打击帝那伏帝国，大破之，活捉其国王阿罗那顺及王妃、王子等人，掳获男女一万二千人，牛马二万多匹送到宫阙。
English: On May 20th, the head of the Right Guards, Shi Wang Xuan Zhao, attacked the Nahua Empire. He captured its king, Arona Shun, his queen and princes alive, captured twelve thousand men and women, and sent more than twenty thousand horses and oxen to the palace.

古文：使方土那罗迩娑婆于金飚门造延年之药。
现代文：皇上命方术之士那罗迩娑婆在金飙门造延长寿命之药。
English: Narasimha, the sorcerer of the Imperial Oracle, created a medicine to prolong life in the Golden Gate.

古文：吐蕃赞普击破中天竺国，遣使献捷。
现代文：吐番赞普击破中天竺国，派遣使者献上捷报。
English: Tufan Zampu defeated the Middle Heavenly Kingdom and sent an envoy to present the successful report.

古文：六月癸酉，特进、宋国公萧瑀薨。
现代文：六月二十四日，特进、宋国公萧王禹去世。
English: On June 24th, Song Guogong Xiao Wangyu passed away.

古文：秋七月癸卯，司空、梁国公房玄龄薨。
现代文：秋七月二十四日，司空、梁国公房玄龄去世。
English: On the 24th day of the 7th month of autumn, Siku and Liang Guo died at an advanced age.

古文：八月己酉朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：八月一日是朔日，有日蚀。
English: The first day of August is New Year's Day, and there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：九月己亥，黄门侍郎褚遂良为中书令。
现代文：九月二十一日，黄门侍郎褚遂良为中书令。
English: On September 21st, Huangmen waiter Zou Suiliang was promoted to the rank of middle-ranking official.

古文：十月癸亥，至自玉华宫。
现代文：十月十六日，皇上从玉华宫归来。
English: On October 16th, the Emperor returned from the Jade Palace.

古文：十一月戊戌，眉、邛、雅三州獠反，右卫将军梁建方讨平之。
现代文：十一月二十一日，眉、邛、雅三州獠造反，右卫将军梁建方讨伐平定了他们。
English: On November 21st, Meizhou, Handan and Yaxuanzhou rebelled, and the right guard general Liang Jianfang crushed them.

古文：庚子，契丹帅窟哥、奚帅可度者并率其部内属。
现代文：二十三日，契丹帅窟哥、奚帅可度者都率其部属归附。
English: On the 23rd, the leaders of the Khitan Shuai Grotto and the Hun Shuai Kodu led their subordinates to annexation.

古文：以契丹部为松漠都督，以奚部置饶乐都督。
现代文：以契丹部为松漠都督，在奚部设置饶乐都督。
English: With the Khitan part as the Songpan governor, and the Raole governor set up in the Southern part.

古文：十二月乙卯，增置殿中侍御史、监察御史各二员，大理寺置平事十员。
现代文：十二月九日，增设殿中侍御史、监察御史各二员，大理寺设置平事十名。
English: On December 9th, two members of the palace attendants and supervisors were added, and ten lay people were set up at Dali Temple.

古文：闰月丁丑朔，昆山道总管阿史那社尔降处密、处月，破龟兹大拨等五十城，虏数万口，执龟兹王诃黎布失毕以归，龟兹平，西域震骇。副将薛万彻胁于阗王伏阇信入朝。
现代文：闰十二月一日，山道总管阿史那社尔降服处密、处月，攻破龟兹大拨五十个城，俘虏人口数万。活捉龟兹王诃黎布失毕而归，龟兹平定，西域震惊，副将薛万彻胁迫于阗王伏信入朝。
English: On the first day of the intercalary month of December, the general manager of the mountain road, Ashinashal, surrendered to the imperial court and the imperial court, and broke through fifty cities, capturing tens of thousands of prisoners. The king of the tortoise, Li Bu, was captured alive and returned, the tortoise was pacified, the western region was shocked, and the vice-commander Xue Wanchie coerced the king of the tortoise, Fuxin, into the imperial court.

古文：癸未，新罗王遣其相伊赞千金春秋及其子文王来朝。
现代文：七日，新罗王派遣他的相国伊赞干金春秋及其子文王来朝见。
English: On the seventh day, the king of Silla sent his compatriot Izangan Jinchunqiu and his son King Wen to the imperial court.

古文：是岁，新罗女王金善德死，遣册立其妹真德为新罗王。
现代文：这年，新罗女王金善德死，唐朝派人封立其妹真德为新罗王。
English: In this year, the Queen of Silla, Jin Shan De, died, and the Tang Dynasty sent someone to appoint her sister, Zhen De, as the King of Silla.

古文：二十三年春正月辛亥，俘龟兹王诃黎布失毕及其相那利等，献于社庙。
现代文：二十三年春正月六日，俘获龟兹王诃黎布失毕及其相国那利等人，献到社庙以祭祀土神。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of spring in the 23rd year of the Heian period, King Kamezi and his consort Nari, who had been captured and killed, were presented to the shrine and temple as an offering to the earth god.

古文：二月丙戌，置瑶池都督府，隶安西都护府。
现代文：二月十一日，设置瑶池都督府，隶属安西都护府。
English: On February 11, the Tsugaike Governor's Office was established, subordinate to the Anzai Governor's Office.

古文：丁亥，西突厥肆叶护可汗遣使来朝。
现代文：十二日，西突厥肆叶护可汗遣使者来朝见唐皇帝。
English: On the 12th, the Western Turk leader Ye Guo Khan sent an envoy to the court to meet the Tang Emperor.

古文：三月丙辰，置丰州都督府。
现代文：三月十二日，设置丰州都督府。
English: On March 12, the Toyosu Governor's Office was established.

古文：自去冬不雨，至于此月己未乃雨。
现代文：自从去年冬天不下雨，直到这月十五日才下雨。
English: It hasn't rained since last winter, until the 15th of this month.

古文：辛酉，大赦。
现代文：十七日，大赦。
English: On the 17th, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：丁卯，敕皇太子于金液门听政。
现代文：二十三日，命令皇太子在金液门听政。
English: On the 23rd, the crown prince was ordered to listen to the government at Jinzhu Gate.

古文：是月，日赤无光。
现代文：这月，太阳赤红但无光。
English: This month, the sun is red but without light.

古文：四月己亥，幸翠微宫。
现代文：四月二十五日，皇上驾到翠微宫。
English: On the 25th of April, the Emperor drove to the Tsui-Wei Palace.

古文：五月戊午，太子詹事、英国公李勣为叠州都督。
现代文：五月十五日，太子詹事、英国公李责力任迭州都督。
English: On May 15th, Prince Zhan Zhi, the British prince, was appointed governor of Dezhou.

古文：辛酉，开府仪同三司、卫国公李靖薨。
现代文：十八日，开府仪同三司、卫国公李靖去世。
English: On the 18th day of the month, Li Jing, the keeper of the Great Hall of the People and the third secretary of the Central Military Commission, passed away.

古文：己巳，上崩于含风殿，年五十二。
现代文：二十六日，皇上在含风殿去世，享年五十二岁。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the Emperor died at the age of fifty-two in the Hall of the Winds.

古文：遗诏皇太子即位于柩前，丧纪宜用汉制。
现代文：遗诏皇太子在灵柩前即位，丧事应采用汉朝制度。
English: The will decreed that the crown prince would ascend the throne before the coffin, and that the Han Dynasty system should be used for the funeral.

古文：秘不发丧。
现代文：保密而不发布丧事。
English: There will be no obituary.

古文：庚午，遣旧将统飞骑劲兵从皇太子先还京，发六府甲士四千人，分列于道及安化门，翼从乃入；大行御马舆，从官侍御如常。
现代文：二十七日，派遣老部下将领们率领精锐骑兵跟从皇太子先回京城，调发六府铁甲卫士四千人，排列在道路两旁及安化门，加以护从这才进入；刚去世的皇帝乘坐马车，侍坐官员侍候御驾与往常一样。
English: On the 27th, the old subordinate generals were dispatched to lead the elite cavalry to follow the crown prince back to Beijing first. Four thousand iron-clad guards from six prefectures were dispatched and lined up on both sides of the road and at the Anhua Gate to protect him from entering. The just-deceased emperor rode in a carriage, with attendant officials waiting for his ride as usual.

古文：壬申，发丧。
现代文：二十九日，发布丧事。
English: On the 29th, the funeral notice was issued.

古文：六月甲戌朔，殡于太极殿。
现代文：六月一日，灵柩放置在太极殿。
English: On June 1, the casket was placed in the Taiji Hall.

古文：八月丙子，百僚上谥曰文皇帝，庙号太宗。
现代文：八月四日，百官奉上谥号曰文皇帝，庙号太宗。
English: On August 4, the centurion was given the posthumous title of "Emperor Wen" and the temple name of Taizong.

古文：庚寅，葬昭陵。
现代文：十八日，葬在昭陵。
English: On the 18th, he was buried in the Shoryo Mausoleum.

古文：上元元年八月，改上尊号曰文武圣皇帝。
现代文：上元元年八月，改上尊号曰文武圣皇帝。
English: In August of the first year of the Shang Dynasty, he was renamed Emperor Wenwusheng.

古文：天宝十三载二月，改上尊号为文武大圣大广孝皇帝。
现代文：天宝十三年二月，改上尊号为文武大圣大广孝皇帝。
English: In February of the 13th year of Tianbao, he changed his honorific to Emperor Wenwu Da Sheng Da Guangxiao.

古文：史臣曰：臣观文皇帝发迹多奇，聪明神武。
现代文：史臣道：臣看文皇帝，聪明神武，得志不同一般。
English: Shi Zhen Dao: The emperor was a scholar, a clever man, and a warrior, but his aspirations were not the same.

古文：拔人物则不私于党，负志业则咸尽其才。
现代文：选拔人才不结党，托负大业都人尽其才。
English: The selection of talents does not form a party, and everyone does their best to do a great job.

古文：所以屈突、尉迟，由仇敌而愿倾心膂；马周、刘洎，自疏远而卒委钧衡。
现代文：所以屈突通、尉迟敬德，从仇敌转而倾心交结愿作心腹；马周、刘洎，从疏远的关系而终于委任他们评量人才。
English: Therefore, Qu Jutong and Fei Chi Jingde have turned from enemies to friends; Ma Zhou and Liu Ye have finally appointed them to evaluate talents from an estranged relationship.

古文：终平泰阶，谅由斯道。
现代文：终于平定国家，确实是由于这些用人之道。
English: It was indeed due to these employment methods that the country was finally pacified.

古文：尝试论之：础润云兴，虫鸣螽跃。
现代文：现在我试着论述一下：石基润湿，白云兴起；虫子鸣叫，蝗虫跳跃。
English: Now I'll try to explain: the ground is wet, white clouds are rising; worms are chirping, locusts are jumping.

古文：虽尧、舜之圣，不能用檮杌、穷奇而治平；伊、吕之贤，不能为夏桀、殷辛而昌盛。
现代文：即使尧、舜这样的圣人，不能用木寿杌、穷奇这样凶恶的人治理平定天下；伊尹、吕尚的贤能，不能辅佐残暴的君王夏桀、殷纣而使国家昌盛。
English: Even if sages such as Yao and Zou could not rule and pacify the world with such vicious people as Mu Shou and Quan Qi; the wisdom of Yi Yin and Lushang could not help the cruel kings Xia Zou and Yin Zou to make the country prosperous.

古文：君臣之际，遭遇斯难，以至抉目剖心，虫流筋擢，良由遭值之异也。
现代文：君臣的良好关系，遭遇是这样难啊！以至于挖眼、剖心、抽筋、喂蛇，确实是由于遭遇的君王不同啊。
English: A good relationship between a prince and a vassal, the encounter is so difficult! So much so that eye gouging, heart-cutting, cramps, and snake feeding are really due to the different kings encountered.

古文：以房、魏之智，不逾于丘、轲，遂能尊主庇民者，遭时也。
现代文：凭借房玄龄、魏征的才智，不超过孔丘、孟轲，但能够遵从皇上庇护民众，这是遇到好的时机啊！
English: With the talent of Fang Xuanling and Wei Zheng, no more than Confucius and Mencius, but able to follow the emperor to protect the people, this is a good opportunity!

古文：或曰：以太宗之贤，失爱于昆弟，失教于诸子，何也？
现代文：有人说：凭借太宗的贤德，不被兄弟所爱，不能给儿子以良好的教育，什么原因呢？曰：是的！
English: Some people say, "By virtue of the virtue of Taizong, he is not loved by his brothers, he cannot give his son a good education, what is the reason?" They say, "Yes!

古文：曰：然，舜不能仁四罪，尧不能训丹硃，斯前志也。
现代文：舜不能给四个罪人以仁爱，尧不能教育好儿子丹朱，这是先前的历史记载。
English: If you can't treat four sinners with kindness, and if you can't educate your son Dan Zhu well, this is the previous historical record.

古文：当神尧任谗之年，建成忌功之日，苟除畏逼，孰顾分崩，变故之兴，间不容发，方惧 毁巢 之祸，宁虞 尺布 之谣？
现代文：正当神尧受谗言的年代，当建成忌妒太宗功绩的时候，暂且除去畏惧、威逼，谁还能顾上分崩离析。变故的兴起，灾祸马上临头，不忧虑倾巢覆灭之祸，难道会考虑 尺布 童谣兄弟手足之情吗？
English: At a time when the gods are being criticized, when envy of the emperor's achievements is building, if we remove fear and intimidation for the time being, who can take care of falling apart. The rise of change, disaster is imminent, do not worry about the disaster of the destruction of the nest, will you consider the feeling of brothers and sisters in children's songs?

古文：承乾之愚，圣父不能移也。
现代文：废太子承乾之愚昧，圣贤的父亲文皇帝也不能改变啊！
English: The former crown prince inherited the stupidity of Qian, and the sage's father, Emperor Wen, could not change it!

古文：若文皇自定储于哲嗣，不骋志于高丽；用人如贞观之初，纳谏比魏徵之日。
现代文：假若文皇帝自己在儿子中确定继承人，不在高丽扩大领土，放纵欲望，用人惟才像贞观初年，听取意见能像对待魏征的时候。
English: If Emperor Wen himself had determined the successor among his sons, he would not have expanded the territory in Korea, indulged in desires, employed people only like the first year of Zhenguan, and listened to opinions like when he treated Wei Zheng.

古文：况周发、周成之世袭，我有遗妍；较汉文、汉武之恢弘，彼多惭德。
现代文：这样较之世袭的周武王姬发、周成王，还会有更多的美德；较之汉文帝、汉武帝的宽大胸怀，他们也会感到德行有亏而惭愧。
English: In this way, compared with the hereditary Zhouwu Wang Jifa and Zhoucheng Wang, there will be more virtues; compared with the magnanimity of Emperor Hanwen and Emperor Hanwu, they will also feel ashamed of the lack of virtue.

古文：迹其听断不惑，从善如流，千载可称，一人而已！
现代文：根据文皇帝的一生能当机立断而不疑惑，能很好地听取意见，千载以来值得称赞的，只有文皇帝一人罢了。
English: According to the life of Emperor Wen, he is the only one who can make decisions without hesitation and listen to opinions well, which has been commendable for thousands of years.

古文：赞曰：昌、发启国，一门三圣。
现代文：赞曰：姬昌、姬发开国，一门有三位圣人。
English: Zang said: Ji Chang, Ji Fa founded the country, there are three saints in one family.

古文：文定高位，友于不令。
现代文：周文姬昌定了周武王的君王地位，兄弟友爱之情便不好了。
English: Zhou Wenji Chang determined the royal status of King Zhou Wu, and the brotherly love was not good.

古文：管、蔡既诛，成、康道正。
现代文：管叔、蔡叔已经被杀，周成王、周康王的王道才成为正统。
English: Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai have already been killed, and it is only now that the royal road of King Zhoucheng and King Zhoukang has become orthodox.

古文：贞观之风，到今歌咏。
现代文：贞观的风气，到今天人们还歌咏。
English: The culture of chastity is still celebrated to this day.

