古文：张仪为秦连横说韩王曰： 韩地险恶，山居，五谷所生，非麦而豆；民之所食，大抵豆饭藿羹；一岁不收，民不餍糟糠；地方不满九百里，无二岁之所食。
现代文：张仪为秦国推行连横政策游说韩王说： 韩国地势险恶，处于山区，出产的粮食不是麦子就是豆子；老百姓吃的，大部分是豆做的饭和豆叶做的汤；如果哪一年收成不好，百姓就连酒糟和谷皮都吃不上。土地纵横不到九百里，粮食储备也不够吃两年。
English: Zhang Yi lobbied Han Wang for the Qin State to implement the policy of continuous horizontal movement, saying: Korea's terrain is treacherous, it is located in a mountainous area, and the grain produced is either wheat or beans; the people eat mostly bean-made rice and bean-leaf soup; if the harvest is bad in any year, the people can't even eat wine lees and cereal husks. The land is less than nine hundred miles in length and breadth, and the grain reserve is not enough to eat for two years.

古文：料大王之卒，悉之不过三十万，而厮徒负养在其中矣，为除守徼亭鄣塞，见卒不过二十万而已矣。
现代文：估计大王的兵力总共不到三十万，其中连杂役和苦力也算在内了，如果除去守卫边境哨所的人，现有的土兵最多不过二十万。而秦国的军队有百余万，战车千辆，战马万匹。
English: It is estimated that the total strength of the Great King's army is less than three hundred thousand, which even includes the servants and coolies. If you remove the people guarding the border post, the existing local soldiers are only two hundred thousand at most. And the army of Qin has more than one million, one thousand chariots, and ten thousand horses.

古文：秦带甲百余万，车千乘，骑万匹，虎挚之士，跿跔科头、贯颐奋戟者，至不可胜计也。秦马之良，戎兵之众，探前趹后，蹄间三寻者，不可称数也。
现代文：奔腾跳跃，高擎战戟，甚至不带铠甲冲人敌阵的战士不可胜数。秦国战马优良，士兵众多。战马探起前蹄蹬起后腿，两蹄之间一跃可达三寻，这样的战马不在少数。
English: There are innumerable warriors who gallop and leap, with high-powered war chariots and even without armor, charging into enemy lines. Qin war horses are excellent, and there are many soldiers. The war horse lifts the front hoof and lifts the hind leg, and one jump between the two hooves can reach three fathoms. There are not a few such war horses.

古文：山东之卒，被甲冒胄以会战，秦人捐甲徒裎以趋敌，左挈人头，右挟生虏。
现代文：崤山以东的诸侯军队，披盔戴甲来会战，秦军却可以不穿铠甲赤身露体地冲锋上阵，左手提着人头，右手抓着俘虏凯旋而归。
English: The armies of the princes to the east of Mount Lushan wore armor and armor to fight, but the Qin Army could charge into battle without wearing armor and naked, holding a human head in his left hand and a prisoner in his right hand.

古文：夫秦卒之与山东之卒也，犹孟贲之与怯夫也；以重力相压，犹乌获之与婴儿也。
现代文：由此可见，秦国的士兵与山东六国的士兵相比，犹如勇士和懦夫相比；用重兵压服六国，就像大力土乌获对付婴儿一般容易。
English: From this, it can be seen that the soldiers of Qin compared to the soldiers of Shandong Six Kingdoms are like warriors compared to cowards; it is generally easy to conquer the Six Kingdoms with heavy troops, just as it is easy to conquer babies with strong troops.

古文：夫战孟贲、乌获之士，以攻不服之弱国，无以异于堕千钧之重，集于鸟卵之上，必无幸矣。
现代文：用孟贲和乌获这样的勇士去攻打不驯服的弱国，无异于把千钧重量压在鸟蛋上，肯定无一幸免。
English: To use such warriors as Meng Xuan and Wu Guo to attack an unruly and weak country is tantamount to putting a thousand pounds of weight on a bird's egg. No one will be spared.

古文： 诸侯不料兵之弱，食之寡，而听从人之甘言好辞，比周以相饰也，皆言曰： 听吾计则可以强霸天下。 
现代文：各国诸侯根本不考虑自己兵力弱、粮食少的现状，却听信鼓吹合纵者的甜言蜜语，合纵家们互相勾结，标榜欺骗，都说什么： 听从我的计谋就可以雄霸天下了。
English: Princes and lords of various countries do not at all consider the current situation of their weak military strength and less grain, but they listen to the sweet words of the conspirators. The conspirators collude with each other, flaunt deception, and say: If you follow my strategy, you can dominate the world.

古文：夫不顾社稷之长利，而听须臾之说，诖误人主者，无过于此者矣。
现代文：却并不顾及国家的长远利益，只听信一时的空话，贻误君主，这太严重了。
English: However, they did not consider the long-term interests of the country, only listened to the empty words of the moment, and misled the monarch. This is too serious.

古文：大王不事秦，秦下甲据宜阳，断绝韩之上地；东取成皋、宜阳，则鸿台之宫，桑林之苑，非王之有已。
现代文：大王如果不归顺秦国，秦必定发兵占领宜阳，断绝韩国上党的交通；东进夺取成皋和宜阳，那大王就将失去鸿台宫、桑林苑。
English: If the great king does not return to Shun Qin, Qin will certainly send troops to occupy Yiyang and cut off the party's communication with South Korea; if he goes east to capture Chengdu and Yiyang, then the great king will lose Hongtai Palace and Mulberry Garden.

古文：夫塞成皋，绝上地，则王之国分矣。
现代文：秦军封锁成皋、截断上党，那大王的国土岂不是被分割开来了？
English: Moreover, by blocking the canal and cutting off the upper land, the great king's land was divided.

古文：先事秦则安矣，不事秦则危矣。
现代文：先归顺秦国就能安全，否则就会招来祸患。
English: If you go to Shun Qin first, you will be safe, otherwise you will bring disaster.

古文： 夫造祸而求福，计浅而怨深。逆秦而顺楚，虽欲无亡，不可得也。
现代文：那种正在制造灾祸却又想得到好报，计谋浅陋而结怨太深，违背秦国去顺从楚国的做法，哪里能不灭亡呢？
English: That kind of practice that is creating a disaster but wants to get a good report, a shallow strategy but too deep a grudge, and disobeying the Qin State to obey the Chu State, where can it not perish?

古文：故为大王计，莫如事秦。
现代文：所以替大王您考虑，不如归顺秦国。
English: Therefore, for your consideration, it is better to submit to Qin.

古文：秦之所欲，莫如弱楚，而能弱楚者莫如韩。
现代文：秦国所希望的，不过是削弱楚国，而能削弱楚国的，非韩国莫属。
English: What Qin hoped for was to weaken Chu, and the only country that could weaken Chu was Korea.

古文：非以韩能强于楚也，其地势然也。
现代文：不是因为韩国比楚国强大，而是韩国占据了地理优势。
English: This is not because South Korea is stronger than Chu, but because South Korea has a geographical advantage.

古文：今王西面而事秦以攻楚，为敝邑，秦王必喜。
现代文：如今大王可到西方归服秦国，为敝国攻打楚国，秦王一定很高兴。
English: Now the great king can go to the west to submit to the Qin state, and fight for the Han state against the Chu state. The Qin king must be very happy.

古文：夫攻楚而私其地，转祸而说秦，计无便于此者也。
现代文：这样，攻打楚国而占有它的土地，不但转祸为福，而且取悦了秦王，没有比这更有利的计策了。
English: In this way, attacking Chu and occupying its land not only turned misfortune into good fortune, but also pleased King Qin. There is no more advantageous strategy than this.

古文：是故秦王使使臣献书大王御史，须以决事。 
现代文：因此秦王派使臣献书信一封给大王的御史，但愿大王能有明智的裁决。 
English: Therefore, King Qin sent an envoy to write a letter to the great king, hoping that the great king would have a wise ruling.

古文：韩王曰： 客幸而教之，请比郡县，筑帝宫，祠春秋，称东藩，效宜阳。 
现代文：韩王说： 幸承您的教诲，我愿意让韩国做秦国的一个郡县，修建秦王行宫，春秋助祭，作东方的藩臣，并将宜阳献给秦国。 
English: Han Wang said: Fortunately, following your teachings, I am willing to make South Korea a county of Qin, build the Qin Wangxing Palace, the Spring and Autumn Auxiliary Festival, be a vassal of the East, and dedicate Yiyang to Qin.

