古文：起屠维大渊献，尽上章困敦，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。
English: From start to finish, a total of two years.

古文：安皇帝丙隆安三年
现代文：晋安帝隆安三年
English: The Third Year of Emperor Yongan's Reign

古文：春，正月，辛酉，大赦。
现代文：春季，正月，辛酉，东晋实行大赦。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, Xinjiang, and the Eastern Jin implemented amnesty.

古文：戊辰，燕昌黎尹留忠谋反，诛，事连尚书令东阳公根、尚书段成，皆坐死；遣中卫将军卫双就诛忠弟幽州刺史志于凡城。
现代文：戊辰，后燕昌黎尹留忠阴谋叛变，被处死。事情牵连到了尚书令东阳公慕容根、尚书段成，也都被处死。慕容盛派中卫将军卫双去凡城诛杀留忠的弟弟幽州刺史留志。
English: Wu Chen, later Yan Chang, Li Yin and Li Zhizhong conspired to mutiny and were executed. The matter involved Shang Shuling, Dongyang Gong Muronggen and Shang Shulancheng, who were also executed. Murong Sheng sent the middle guard general Wei Shuang to Fancheng to kill Li Zhizhong's younger brother Yuzhou Shishi.

古文：以卫将军平原公元为司徒、尚书令。
现代文：任命卫将军平原公慕容元为司徒、尚书令。
English: He appointed the general of the Imperial Guards, Hirahara no Kimiyori, as a member of the Council of State, and Shosho Rei.

古文：庚午，魏主珪北巡，分命大将军常山王遵等三军东道出长川，镇北将军高凉王乐真等七军从西道出牛川，珪自将大军从中道出駮髯水以袭高车。
现代文：庚午，北魏国主拓跋去北方巡视，分别命令大将军常山王拓跋遵等三支军队从东路向长川进发，镇北将军高凉王拓跋乐真等七支军队从西路向牛川进发，拓跋则自己带领大军从中路在髯水出发，准备袭击高车部落。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Tuoba, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, went on a tour of the north. He ordered three armies, including the general Changshan Wang Tuoba Zun, to advance from the east to the Yangtze River, and seven armies, including the general Gao Liang Wang Tuoba Lecheng from the west to the Niu River. Tuoba himself led the army from the middle to Surabaya, preparing to attack the Gaochao tribe.

古文：壬午，燕右将军张真、城门校尉和翰坐谋反诛。
现代文：壬午，后燕右将军张真、城门校尉和翰因谋反罪被杀。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, Zhang Zhen, the general of Houyan Yu, the captain of the city gate and Han were killed for plotting against the state.

古文：癸未，燕大赦，改元长乐。
现代文：癸未，后燕大赦，改年号为长乐。
English: 未, After Yan amnesty, change the year name to Changle.

古文：燕主盛每十日一自决狱，不加拷掠，多得其情。
现代文：后燕国主慕容盛每隔十天，亲自审理判决一次讼事，虽然并不加以严刑拷打，但也能获得很多真实情况。
English: Later, the ruler of Yan Province, Mu Rongsheng, personally tried and adjudicated a case every ten days. Although he did not torture them severely, he was able to obtain a lot of true information.

古文：武威王乌孤徙治乐都，以其弟西平公利鹿孤镇安夷，广武公傉檀镇西平，叔父素渥镇湟河，若留镇浇河，从弟替引镇岭南，洛回镇廉川，从叔吐若留镇浩亹；夷、夏俊杰，随才授任，内居显位，外典郡县，咸得其宜。
现代文：南凉武威王秃发乌孤把都城迁到乐都，派遣他的弟弟西平公秃发利鹿孤镇守安夷，广武公秃发檀镇守西平，他的叔叔秃发素渥镇守湟河，另一个叔叔秃发若留镇守浇河，堂弟秃发替引镇守洪池岭以南的地区，另一个堂弟秃发洛回镇守廉川，派堂叔秃发吐若留镇守浩。对于其他夷族和汉族的一些贤俊杰出人士，也都根据他们的才能分别任命职务，或者在朝中官居显要位置，或者在地方上掌管郡县的事务，都得到了合适的安排。
English: King of the Southern Liangwu and Wuwei, Baldfa Wukong, moved the capital to Le Du, and sent his younger brother, Xiping Gong, Baldfa Lixiao Zhen, to guard Anyi, Guangwu Gong, Baldfa Danzhen, to guard Xiping, his uncle, Baldfa Suwo Zhen, to guard Wuhe, another uncle, Baldfa Ru Ru Ru Ru, to guard Gihe, his cousin, Baldfa Zhen, to guard the area south of Hongchiling, and another cousin, Baldfa Luo, to guard Lianchuan, and sent his uncle, Baldfa Tu Ru, to guard Gao. According to their

古文：乌孤谓群臣曰： 陇右、河西，本数郡之地，遭乱分裂至十馀国，吕氏、乞伏氏、段氏最强。
现代文：秃发乌孤对大臣们说： 陇右、河西，本来不过就是几个郡大的地方，经受动乱之后，分裂成了十几个国家，吕氏、乞伏氏、段氏这三家势力最强大。
English: Bald-faced Wu Guo said to the ministers: Shiyu and Hexi were originally just a few county-level regions. After experiencing turmoil, they were divided into more than a dozen countries. The three most powerful families were the Lv, Kifu and Duan families.

古文：今欲取之，三者何先？ 
现代文：现在我打算去攻取他们，应该先打哪一个？ 
English: Now I'm going to attack them, which one should I attack first?

古文：杨统曰： 乞伏氏本吾之部落，终当服从。
现代文：杨统说： 乞伏氏本来是我们的一个部落，终究会归附我们。
English: Yang Tong said, "The Beggars were originally one of our tribes, and they will eventually join us.

古文：段氏书生，无能为患，且结好于我，攻之不义。
现代文：段业是一介书生，根本没有什么能力制造祸患，而且跟我们有很好的关系，进攻他不合道义。
English: Duan Ye is a scholar, he has no ability to create disasters, and he has a good relationship with us. It is immoral to attack him.

古文：吕光衰耄，嗣子微弱，纂、弘虽有才而内相猜忌，若使浩亹、廉川乘虚迭出，彼必疲于奔命，不过二年，兵劳民困，则姑臧可图也。
现代文：吕光衰老不堪，他的儿子吕绍又懦弱无能。
English: Lü Guang was old and feeble, and his son Lü Shao Wu was weak and incompetent.

古文：姑臧举，则二寇不待攻而服矣。 乌孤曰： 善。 二月，丁亥朔，魏军大破高车二十馀部，获七万馀口，马三十馀万匹，牛羊百四十馀万头。
现代文：秃发乌孤说： 好！ 二月，丁亥朔，北魏北征的军队将高车的三十多个部落打得大败，俘虏七万多人，缴获马三十多万匹，牛羊一百四十多万头。
English: The bald-headed Wu Guo said, "Good! In February, at Dinghai Shuo, the army of the Northern Wei Northern Expedition defeated more than 30 tribes in Gaochu, captured more than 70,000 people, captured more than 300,000 horses, and more than 1.4 million cattle and sheep.

古文：卫王仪别将三万骑绝漠千馀里，破其七部，获二万馀口，马五万馀匹，牛羊二万馀头。
现代文：卫王拓跋仪另外带领三万骑兵，深入沙漠一千多里，攻破了高车的七个余部，俘虏两万多人，缴获马五万多匹，牛羊二万多头。
English: In addition, Wei Wang Tuoba Yi led 30,000 cavalrymen more than 1,000 miles deep into the desert, broke through the seven remaining parts of the chariot, captured more than 20,000 people, captured more than 50,000 horses, and more than 20,000 cattle and sheep.

古文：高车诸部大震。
现代文：高车的各个部落非常震惊、恐慌。
English: The various tribes of the cart were very shocked and panicked.

古文：林邑王范达陷日南、九真，遂寇交趾，太守杜瑗击破之。
现代文：南方的林邑国国王范达攻克了东晋日南、九真两个郡，于是进犯交趾郡。交趾太守杜瑷领兵将他打败。
English: In the south, King Fanda of the Lin County conquered the two counties of Nichinan and Jiuzhen in East Jin, and then attacked Koji County. He was defeated by the leader of Koji Taishu Dugong.

古文：庚戌，魏征虏将军庾岳破张超于勃海，斩之。
现代文：庚戌，北魏征虏将军庾岳在勃海攻破了张超率领的变民部队，并把张超斩首。
English: Geng Xuan, the Northern Wei conquering general, defeated Zhang Chao's mutinous troops in the Bohai Sea and beheaded him.

古文：段业即凉王位，改元天玺。
现代文：段业即北凉王位，改年号为天玺。
English: Dangye, that is, the throne of Beilang, changed its name to Tianzhu.

古文：以沮渠蒙逊为尚书左丞，梁中庸为右丞。
现代文：任命沮渠蒙逊为尚书左丞，梁中庸为尚书右丞。
English: He appointed Deqiu Mengxun as Shangshu Zojo and Liang Zhongyong as Shangshu Yuojo.

古文：魏主珪大猎于牛川之南，以高车人为围，周七百馀里；因驱其禽兽，南抵平城，使高车筑鹿苑，广数十里。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋在牛川以南的地方大规模打猎，让高车人作为围子，周围七百多里。这样，他把圈子里的走兽向南驱赶到平城，又让高车人修筑起鹿苑，鹿苑方圆达数十里。
English: Tuoba, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, hunted crows on a large scale in the area south of the Niuchuan River, and let Gaochun people act as enclosures, more than seven hundred miles around. In this way, he drove the beasts in the circle south to Pingcheng, and let Gaochun people build a deer park, the deer park is dozens of miles in circumference.

古文：三月，己未，珪还平城。
现代文：三月，己未，拓跋回到平城。
English: In March, Tuoba returned to Pingcheng.

古文：甲子，珪分尚书三十六曹及外署，凡置三百六十曹，令八部大夫主之。
现代文：甲子，拓跋将原尚书三十六曹以及一些京外官署整理划分为三百六十曹，派设八部大夫主管。
English: At the same time, Tuoba divided the original 36 Cao of Shangshu and some of the Beijing Foreign Affairs Office into 360 Cao, and assigned eight doctors in charge.

古文：吏部尚书崔宏通署三十六曹，如令、仆统事。
现代文：吏部尚书崔宏负责统领原来的三十六曹，像令、仆射那样管辖事务。
English: Shangshu Cuihong, the head of the personnel department, was responsible for leading the original thirty-six Cao, and he was in charge of affairs like the commander and the aide-de-camp.

古文：置五经博士，增国子太学生员合三千人。
现代文：又设置了五经博士，增加国子太学生的名额，共达三千人。
English: It also set up the Five Classics Doctorate, increasing the number of students of Kunitachi University to a total of three thousand.

古文：珪问博士李先曰： 天下何物最善，可以益人神智？ 
现代文：拓跋向博士李先询问说： 天下什么东西最好，可以用来补益人的智慧、精神？ 
English: Tuoba asked Dr. Li Xianwu: What is the best thing in the world that can be used to supplement people's wisdom and spirit?

古文：对曰： 莫若书籍。 
现代文：李先回答他说： 没有什么能比得上书籍。 
English: Li Xian answered him, "Nothing can be compared to books.

古文：珪曰： 书籍凡有几何，如何可集？ 
现代文：拓跋说： 书籍一共能有多少，怎样才能把他们搜集到一起呢？ 
English: Tuoba said: How many books can there be altogether, and how can they be collected together?

古文：对曰： 自书契以来，世有滋益，以至于今，不可胜计。
现代文：李先又回答说： 自从文字产生，一直到现在，图书的数量每代都有发展增加，已经不可能准确统计了。
English: Li Xian also replied: Since the creation of writing, until now, the number of books has increased with each generation, and it is impossible to accurately count.

古文：苟人主所好，何忧不集！ 
现代文：如果陛下有这方面的爱好，何必忧虑不能搜集呢？ 
English: If your majesty has this hobby, why worry about not being able to collect?

古文：珪从之，命郡县大索书籍，悉送平城。
现代文：拓跋听了他的话，命令各地郡县大规模索求、搜集书籍，全部送到平城。
English: Tuoba listened to his words and ordered all counties to request and collect books on a large scale and send them all to Pingcheng.

古文：初，秦王登之弟广帅众三千依南燕王德，德以为冠军将军，处之乞活堡。
现代文：当初，前秦王苻登的弟弟苻广率兵众三千人投顺了南燕王慕容德，慕容德任命他为冠军将军，安置在乞活堡。
English: At first, the younger brother of the former Qin King Jenden, Jiguang, led 3,000 soldiers to vote for the Southern Yan King Murongde. Murongde appointed him as the champion general and placed him in the Beggar's Fort.

古文：会荧惑守东井，或言秦当复兴，广乃自称为秦王，击南燕北地王钟，破之。
现代文：正赶上火星侵入井宿，有人说这种星象表示前秦应当复兴，苻广于是自称秦王，进攻南燕北地王慕容钟，并将他们打败。
English: It was just in time for Mars to invade Jingju, and some people said that this kind of constellation indicated that the former Qin Dynasty should be revived. Therefore, Gongguang called himself the Qin King, attacked the Southern Yan and Northern King Murong Zhong, and defeated them.

古文：是时，滑台孤弱，土无十城，众不过一万，钟既败，附德者多去德而附广。
现代文：这时候，南燕慕容德驻地的滑台势单力薄，所辖治的地方不到十个城池，军队也不过一万人，慕容钟失败之后，依附慕容德的人大都离开了慕容德而依附苻广。
English: At this time, Nanyan Murongde's encampment was weak, with less than ten cities under its jurisdiction and an army of no more than ten thousand. After the defeat of Murongde, most of the people who supported Murongde left Murongde and supported Gongguang.

古文：德乃留鲁阳王和守滑台，自帅众讨广，斩之。
现代文：慕容德留下鲁阳王慕容和驻守滑台，亲自统帅兵众去讨伐苻广，并把他斩了。
English: Murongde left Luyang King Murong and stationed at the slide, and personally commanded the soldiers to go to fight against Gongguang, and beheaded him.

古文：燕主宝之至黎阳也，鲁阳王和长史李辨劝和纳之，和不从。
现代文：国主慕容宝来到黎阳的时候，鲁阳王慕容和的长史李辩劝说慕容和接纳他，慕容和不同意。
English: When the sovereign Murong Bao came to Liyang, the Luyang King Murong He and the Long History Li Dian persuaded Murong He to accept him, but Murong He did not agree.

古文：辨惧，故潜引晋军至管城，欲因德出战而作乱。
现代文：李辩非常害怕，就暗地里招引东晋的军队来到管城，打算趁慕容德出外作战时发动叛乱。
English: Li Yan was very afraid and secretly invited the Eastern Jin army to Guanzhong, intending to take advantage of Murongde's absence to launch a rebellion.

古文：既而德不出，辨愈不自安。
现代文：后来慕容德并没有出外作战，李辩心里更加焦虑不安。
English: Later, Murongde did not go out to fight, and Li Dian was even more anxious.

古文：及德讨苻广，辨复劝和反。和不从，辨乃杀和，以滑台降魏。
现代文：到这次慕容德出兵讨伐苻广，李辩再一次劝说慕容和反叛，慕容和仍然不听，李辩便杀了慕容和，献出滑台城，投降了北魏。
English: At this time, Murongde sent troops to fight against Fenguang, Li Yan once again persuaded Murong and rebel, Murong and still did not listen, Li Yan then killed Murong and, presented the city of Slide, and surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏行台尚书和跋在鄴，帅轻骑自鄴赴之。既至，辨悔之，闭门拒守。
现代文：北魏国行台尚书和跋正在邺城，便带领一支轻装骑兵部队，从邺城奔赴滑台，赶到的时候，李辩却又后悔了，赶忙关紧城门拒绝他们进城。
English: When the Northern Wei Emperor Shang Shuxu and his entourage arrived in Lucheng, he led a light cavalry unit from Lucheng to the slide. When they arrived, Li Yan regretted it and quickly closed the gate to refuse them entry into the city.

古文：跋使尚书郎邓晖说之，辨乃开门内跋，跋悉收德宫人府库。
现代文：和跋派遣尚书郎邓晖前去劝说，李辩开门把和跋迎入城内。和跋收缴了慕容德的所有姬妾宫女、府库资财。
English: Wotan sent Shang Shulang Deng Yao to persuade him, and Li Dian opened the door to welcome Wotan into the city. Wotan confiscated all of Murongde's concubines, palace maids, and treasury funds.

古文：德遣兵击跋，跋逆击，破之，又破德将桂阳王镇，俘获千馀人。
现代文：慕容德派兵进攻和跋，和跋反击，把燕军打败，又击败了赶来增援的慕容德的大将桂阳王慕容镇，俘虏了一千多人。
English: Murongde sent troops to attack and counterattack, defeated the Yan army, and defeated Murongde's general Guiyang Wang Murongzhen, who came to reinforce, and captured more than a thousand people.

古文：陈、颍之民多附于魏。
现代文：陈郡、颍川郡的民众大多数便都归附了北魏。
English: Most of the people in Chen County and Luochuan County were annexed to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：南燕右卫将军慕容云斩李辨，帅将士家属二万馀口出滑台赴德。
现代文：南燕右卫将军慕容云斩杀了李辩，率领将士的家属共二万多口人冲出滑台城，去投奔慕容德。
English: Nanyan Right Guard General Murong Yun killed Li Fen and led more than 20,000 of the general's family members to rush out of Slide Town to join Murong De.

古文：德欲攻滑台，韩范曰； 向也魏为客，吾为主人；今也吾为客，魏为主人。
现代文：慕容德打算进攻滑台，部将韩范说： 过去魏人是客人，我们是主人；现在我们是客人，魏人却变成了主人。
English: When Murongde was about to attack the slide, the captain Han Fan said: In the past, the Wei people were guests, but we were the masters; now we are the guests, but the Wei people have become the masters.

古文：人心危惧，不可复战，不如先据一方，自立基本，乃图进取。 
现代文：我们军中人人都非常害怕，不可以再让他们去打仗了。不如先据守一个地方，自己重新创立根本基业，然后才能再筹划考虑发展壮大进取的事情。 
English: Everyone in our army is very scared, and we can't let them go to war again. It's better to stay in one place and re-establish a basic foundation on our own before we can plan and consider things to grow and develop.

古文：张华曰： 彭城，楚之旧都，可攻而据之。 
现代文：部将张华说： 彭城是西楚霸王的旧都城，可以把它攻下来占据它。 
English: General Zhang Hua said: Pengcheng is the old capital city of the Western Chu King, it can be attacked and occupied.

古文：北地王钟等皆劝德攻滑台。
现代文：但是北地王慕容钟等人都劝说慕容德进攻滑台。
English: However, the King of the North, Murong Zhong, and others persuaded Murong De to attack the slide.

古文：尚书潘聪曰： 滑台四通八达之地，北有魏，南有晋，西有秦，居之未尝一日安也。
现代文：尚书潘聪说： 滑台是一个四通八达的地方，北有魏，南有晋，西有秦，居住在那里没有一天感到是安全的。
English: Shangshu Pancong said: "The slide is a place that can be reached in all directions. There are Wei in the north, Jin in the south, and Qin in the west. No one can feel safe living there.

古文：彭城土旷人稀，平夷无险，且晋之旧镇，未易可取。
现代文：彭城地广人稀，一片平原，没有什么险要可以据守。而且那里是晋的旧有重镇，未必很容易就可以攻取下来。
English: Pengcheng is a vast and sparsely populated area, a plain, and there is no danger to defend. Moreover, it is an old important town in Jin, and it may not be easy to capture it.

古文：又密迩江、淮，夏秋多水。
现代文：这地方又距长江、淮河很近，夏季、秋季降雨很多。
English: This place is also very close to the Yangtze River and the Huai River, and there is a lot of rainfall in summer and autumn.

古文：乘舟而战者，吴之所长，我之所短也。
现代文：乘舟在水上作战，那是吴地之人所最擅长的，而恰恰又是我们的短处。
English: Fighting on the water by boat is what the people of Wudi are best at, but it is also our weakness.

古文：青州沃野二千里，精兵十馀万，左有负海之饶，右有山河之固，广固城曹嶷所筑，地形阻峻，足为帝王之都。
现代文：青州既拥有二千里的肥沃土地，又拥有十多万精锐的部队，左边有紧挨着大海的富饶，右边有依靠高山大河的险要，广固城是当年曹嶷所兴筑，地势险峻，足可以作为帝王的都城。
English: Qingzhou not only has two thousand miles of fertile land, but also has more than one hundred thousand elite troops. On the left is the richness next to the sea, on the right is the danger of relying on the Gaoshan River. Guanggu City was built by Cao Pi that year. The terrain is steep and can be used as the capital of the emperor.

古文：三齐英杰，思得明主以立功于世久矣。
现代文：三齐地方的英才俊杰，希望得到一个圣明的君主，拥戴他在世上建立宏伟的功业，已经有很长时间了。
English: It has been a long time since the talented young men and women of the Sanqi region have hoped for a saintly monarch to support them in building a magnificent career in the world.

古文：辟闾浑昔为燕臣，今宜遣辨士驰说于前，大兵继踵于后，若其不服，取之如拾芥耳。
现代文：青州刺史辟闾浑以前也曾是燕的臣子，现在应该派遣能言善辩之士赶到他那里游说，紧接着再派遣大军进逼，如果他不听从我们的奉劝，击败他并夺取青州也不过像弯腰拣草那么容易罢了。
English: Qingzhou Zhi Shi Binghun used to be Yan's vassal. Now, we should send an eloquent person to lobby him, and then send a large army to attack him. If he does not listen to our advice, defeating him and seizing Qingzhou will be as easy as bending down to pick grass.

古文：既得其地，然后闭关养锐，伺隙而动，此乃陛下之关中、河内也。 
现代文：得到那里之后，封锁关隘，养精蓄锐，等待时机而有所建树，这才是陛下的关中、河内呀！ 
English: After getting there, sealing off the pass, conserving energy, and waiting for the opportunity to build something, this is His Majesty's pass, Hanoi!

古文：德犹豫未决。
现代文：慕容德犹豫再三，委决不下。
English: Murong De hesitated again and again, but the committee would not give up.

古文：沙门竺朗素善占候，德使牙门苏抚问之，朗曰： 敬览三策，潘尚书之议，兴邦之言也。
现代文：一个叫竺朗的和尚一向善于占卜征候，慕容德遣使牙门苏抚前去探问，竺朗说： 我恭敬地看了他们提出的这三种策略，潘尚书的建议，才是兴邦立国的言论。
English: A monk by the name of Yulang had always been good at divination. Murongde sent his disciple Su Fu to inquire. Yulang said, "I respectfully looked at the three strategies they proposed. The proposal of Pan Shangshu is the speech of rejuvenating the country."

古文：且今岁之初，彗星起奎、娄，扫虚、危；彗者，除旧布新之象，奎、娄为鲁，虚、危为齐。
现代文：而且今年年初的时候，彗星起自奎宿、娄宿，其尾扫过虚宿、危宿。彗星的出现，乃是消除陈腐、新机将布的星象，奎宿、娄宿天区为鲁国疆域，虚宿、危宿天区为齐国疆域。
English: Moreover, at the beginning of this year, the comet started from Kweijuku and Poyangjuku, and its tail swept through Huludao and Jiejuku. The appearance of the comet is to eliminate the stale and new stars. The Kweijuku and Poyangjuku celestial regions are the territory of Lu, and the Huludao and Jiejuku celestial regions are the territory of Qi.

古文：宜先取兗州，巡抚琅邪，至秋乃北徇齐地，此天道也。 
现代文：应该先去夺取兖州，再去安抚琅邪，到秋天的时候再向北攻占齐地，这是上天的旨意呀。 
English: It is Heaven's will that we should first capture Zhangzhou, then pacify the evil forces, and in the autumn, advance northward to occupy Qi.

古文：抚又密问以年世，朗以《周易》筮之曰： 燕衰庚戌，年则一纪，世则及子。 
现代文：苏抚又偷偷地问他燕国的寿命如何，竺朗根据《周易》推算之后说： 燕国将在庚戌年衰亡，寿命为一纪，并可以把王位传给儿子。 
English: Su Fu also secretly asked him about the longevity of Yan Guo. According to the calculation of "Zhou Yi," Yu Lang said: "Yan Guo will decline and die in the year of the rooster, with a life expectancy of one year, and can pass the throne to his son.

古文：抚还报德，德乃引师而南，兗州北鄙诸郡县皆降之。
现代文：苏抚回去向慕容德汇报，慕容德才率领大军向南进发，兖州以北偏远地区的郡县都投降了他。
English: Su Fu went back to report to Murong De. Murong De then led a large army to the south, and the counties in the remote areas north of Zhangzhou surrendered to him.

古文：德置守宰以抚之，禁军士无得虏掠。
现代文：慕容德分别设置地方官员安抚百姓，严禁军队到处虏掠抢夺。
English: Murongde separately set up local officials to appease the people, and strictly prohibited the army from looting and robbing everywhere.

古文：百姓大悦，牛酒属路。
现代文：百姓们非常高兴，一路上不断地有人送来慰劳大军的牛肉美酒。
English: The people were very happy. Along the way, people kept bringing the army of laborers consolation gifts of beef and wine.

古文：丙子，魏主珪遣建义将军庾真、越骑校尉奚斤击库狄、宥连、侯莫陈三部，皆破之，追奔至大峨谷，置戍而还。
现代文：丙子，北魏国主拓跋派遣建义将军庾真、越骑校尉奚斤率兵袭击库狄、宥连、侯莫陈三个部落，并且把它们全部击破，追击奔袭到大峨谷，在那里安置了守卫部队之后才返回。
English: Bongzi, the Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba dispatched the Jianyi general Tong Zhen and the Yue cavalry lieutenant Xujin to attack the three tribes of Ku Di, Yulian and Hou Mo Chen, and broke them all, pursued and raided into the Great Valley, where the guard troops were stationed before returning.

古文：己卯，追尊帝所生母陈夫人为德皇太后。
现代文：己卯，安帝追尊他的亲生母亲陈夫人为德皇太后。
English: At the same time, Emperor An honored his biological mother, Lady Chen, as the German Empress Dowager.

古文：夏，四月，鲜卑叠掘河内帅户五千降于西秦。
现代文：夏季，四月，鲜卑族叠掘部落的首领河内率他所辖属的五千户居民，向西秦投降。
English: In the summer, in April, the leader of the Xianbei ethnic group, Hanoi, led 5,000 residents under his jurisdiction to surrender to the West Qin.

古文：西秦王乾归以河内为叠掘都统，以宗女妻之。
现代文：西秦王乞伏乾归任命河内为叠掘都统，并把自己宗族的一个女儿嫁给他做妻子。
English: The king of Western Qin begged Emperor Qianfu to appoint Hanoi as the capital of Jiankui, and married a daughter of his own clan to him.

古文：甲午，燕大赦。
现代文：甲午，后燕实行大赦。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, Houyan implemented an amnesty.

古文：会稽王道子有疾，且无日不醉。
现代文：会稽王司马道子有病，而且又嗜酒成癖，没有一天不酩酊大醉。
English: Wang Sima Daozi, the auditor, is ill and has an addiction to alcohol. He can't go a day without getting drunk.

古文：世子元显知朝望去之，乃讽朝廷解道子司徒、扬州刺史。
现代文：他的嫡长子司马元显知道他在朝廷已经没有声望。于是便委婉地劝说，请求朝廷解去了司马道子的司徒、扬州刺史职务。
English: His eldest legitimate son, Sima Yuanxian, knew that he was no longer popular in the imperial court, so he gently persuaded and requested the imperial court to dismiss Sima Daozi's post of tutor and Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：乙未，以元显为扬州刺史。
现代文：乙未，安帝任命司马元显为扬州刺史。
English: Two years later, Emperor An appointed Sima Yuanxian as Yangzhou's chief historian.

古文：道子醒而后知之，大怒，无如之何。
现代文：司马道子清醒之后知道了这件事，虽然忍不住暴跳如雷，但也没有办法。
English: After sobering up, Sima Daozi learned about the incident. Although she couldn't help jumping up and down, there was nothing she could do.

古文：元显以庐江太守会稽张法顺为谋主，多引树亲党，朝贵皆畏事之。
现代文：司马元显把庐江太守、会稽人张法顺作为自己的主要谋士，并且大量地引用亲信，树立党羽，朝中地位显贵的官员都以畏惧的心情对待他。
English: Sima Yuanxian regarded Zhang Foshun, the governor of the Minjiang River and auditor of the imperial court, as his chief strategist, and he made extensive use of his close confidants to build up his party. Prominent officials in the court treated him with fear.

古文：燕散骑常侍馀超、左将军高和等坐谋反诛。
现代文：后燕散骑常侍馀超、左将军高和等人，以谋反罪被杀。
English: Houyan Sanzhijizhong attendant Yu Chao, Left General Gao He and others were killed for plotting treason.

古文：凉太子绍、太原公纂将兵伐北凉，北凉王业求救于武威王乌孤，乌孤遣骠骑大将军利鹿孤及杨轨救之。
现代文：后凉太子吕绍、太原公吕纂率军讨伐北凉，北凉王段业向南凉武威王秃发乌孤求救，秃发乌孤派遣骠骑大将军秃发利鹿孤，与杨轨一起前去救援。
English: Later Liang Prince Lü Shao and Taiyuan Prince Lü Zuo led the army to fight against the Northern Liang, and the Northern Liang King Duan Ye went to the Southern Liang Wuwei King Bald Fa Wukong for help. Bald Fa Wukong sent the cavalry general Bald Fa Li Shukong to go to the rescue together with Yang Lu.

古文：业将战，沮渠蒙逊谏曰： 杨轨恃鲜卑之强，有窥窬之志，绍、纂深入，置兵死地，不可敌也。
现代文：段业准备迎战，沮渠蒙逊劝阻他说： 杨轨这个人依仗着鲜卑人的强大，有对我趁机动手的野心，吕绍、吕纂此次敢于率军深入，已经把军队置之死地，我们抵挡不过。
English: Duan Ye prepared to meet the battle, but was discouraged and dissuaded by Mengxun, who said: "Yang Liguo, a man who relies on the strength of a humble person, has the ambition to take advantage of me. This time, Lü Shao and Lü Zuo dared to lead the army deeper, and have already put the army to death. We can't resist.

古文：今不战则有泰山之安，战则有累卵之危。 
现代文：现在我们不出战，还有像泰山那样的安稳，出战，就会有累卵之危。 
English: Now that we don't go to war, we still have stability like that of Mount Tai. If we go to war, there will be the danger of being overburdened.

古文：业从之，案兵不战。
现代文：段业听从了他的劝告，按兵不动。
English: Duan Ye listened to his advice and did not move.

古文：绍、纂引兵归。
现代文：吕绍、吕纂只好带着大军回去。
English: Lü Shao and Lü Zuo had to return with a large army.

古文：六月，乌孤以利鹿孤为凉州牧，镇西平，召车骑大将军傉檀入录府国事。
现代文：六月，秃发乌孤任命秃发利鹿孤为凉州牧，镇守西平，召回车骑大将军秃发檀，叫他入朝处理国家的大事。
English: In June, Bald Fa Wu Guo appointed Bald Fa Lishu Guo as the herdsman of Liangzhou and the town guard of Xiping, and recalled the cavalry general Bald Fa Dan and ordered him to go to the North to deal with the important affairs of the country.

古文：会稽世子元显自以少年，不欲顿居重任；戊子，以琅邪王德文为司徒。
现代文：会稽王的嫡长子司马元显，知道自己还年轻，不打算马上担负起国家的重大责任。戊子，朝廷任命琅邪王司马德文为司徒。
English: Sima Yuanxian, the eldest legitimate son of the Grand Inquisitor, knew that he was still young and did not intend to immediately assume the important responsibilities of the state. Therefore, the court appointed the evil king Sima Dewen as a disciple.

古文：魏前河间太守范阳卢溥帅其部曲数千家，就食渔阳，遂据有数郡。
现代文：北魏前河间太守范阳人卢溥统率他手下的人几千家到渔阳谋生，于是占据了几个郡的土地。
English: Before the Northern Wei Dynasty, Lu Xun led thousands of his subordinates to Yuyang to make a living, and occupied several counties of land.

古文：秋，七月，己未，燕主盛遣使拜溥幽州刺史。
现代文：秋季，七月，己未，后燕国主慕容盛派遣使节任命卢溥为幽州刺史。
English: In the autumn, in July, the late Yan sovereign Mu Rongsheng dispatched an envoy to appoint Lu Wei as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：辛酉，燕主盛下诏曰： 法例律，公侯有罪，得以金帛赎，此不足以惩恶而利于王府，甚无谓也。
现代文：辛酉，后燕国主慕容盛下诏书说： 法令判例规定，公、侯如果犯了罪，可以用金钱、布帛来赎罪，这不能达到惩罚罪恶的目的，却有利于王府，因此，毫无意义。
English: At that time, Murong Sheng, the ruler of Houyan Province, issued an edict saying, "Legislation and case law stipulate that if a prince or marquis commits a crime, he can use money or cloth to atone for the crime. This cannot achieve the purpose of punishing the crime, but it is beneficial to the royal court, so it is meaningless.

古文：自今皆令立功以自赎。勿复输金帛。
现代文：从今往后，犯罪的人必须立功才能赎清自己的罪责，不得再收取金钱、布帛。 
English: From now on, people who commit crimes must make meritorious deeds in order to atone for their guilt. They are no longer allowed to receive money or cloth.

古文：西秦丞相南川宣公出连乞都卒。
现代文：西秦丞相、南川宣公出连乞都去世。
English: Nishikata no joisho minister, Minamikawa no Nobuko died after begging.

古文：秦齐公崇、镇东将军杨佛嵩寇洛阳，河南太守陇西辛恭靖婴城固守。
现代文：后秦齐公姚崇、镇东将军杨佛嵩进犯东晋的洛阳，河南太守陇西人辛恭靖围绕城池加固防守。
English: After Qin Qigong Yao Chong and Zhendong General Yang Fosong invaded Luoyang in the Eastern Jin Dynasty, Xin Jiajing, the governor of Henan Province and a native of Shaanxi Province, reinforced the defense around the city.

古文：雍州刺史杨佺期遣使求救于魏常山王遵，魏主珪以散骑侍郎西河张济为遵从事中郎以报之。
现代文：雍州刺史杨期派遣使节向北魏常山王拓跋遵请求援助，北魏国主拓跋派散骑侍郎西河人张济作为拓跋遵的从事中郎前往。
English: Yang Zhi Shi Yang of Yongzhou sent envoys to the Northern Wei Mountain King Tuoba Zun to request assistance, and the Northern Wei ruler Tuoba sent Zhang Ji, a horseman from the West River, to serve as a middle man for Tuoba Zun.

古文：佺期问于济曰： 魏之伐中山，戎士几何？ 济曰： 四十馀万 。
现代文：杨期向张济问道： 你们魏国去征伐中山，有多少军士？ 张济说： 四十多万。 
English: Yang Zi asked Zhang Jie: How many soldiers did you Wei go to conquer Zhongshan? Zhang Jie said: More than 400,000.

古文：佺期曰： 以魏之强，小羌不足灭也。
现代文：杨期说： 就你们魏国如此的强大来说，姚崇一伙小小的羌贼实在不值得你们去消灭。
English: Yang Ci said: As far as your Wei state is so powerful, Yao Chong and a group of small bandits are really not worth you to destroy.

古文：且晋之与魏，本为一家，今既结好，义无所隐。
现代文：况且晋与魏之间，本来就是一家，现在既然已经结成友好关系，便不应该有什么隐瞒的。
English: Moreover, Jin and Wei are originally a family, and now that they have formed a friendly relationship, there should be nothing to hide.

古文：此间兵弱粮寡，洛阳之救，恃魏而已。
现代文：我这里兵力微弱，粮草也很少，救助洛阳的事，就依赖你们魏国了。
English: My troops here are weak, and there is little grain and grass. The matter of rescuing Luoyang depends on you, Wei.

古文：若其保全，必有厚报；若其不守，与其使羌得之，不若使魏得之。 
现代文：如果洛阳可以完美无缺，对你们一定会有丰厚的报答；如果坚守不住，与其让羌人得到，还不如让你们得到！ 
English: If Luoyang can be perfect, there will be a rich reward for you; if you can't hold on, it's better for you to get it than for others to get it!

古文：济还报。
现代文：张济回国汇报了杨期的态度。
English: Zhang Jie returned to China and reported on Yang Jiechi's attitude.

古文：八月，珪遣太尉穆崇将六万骑往救之。
现代文：八月，拓跋派遣太尉穆崇带领六万骑兵前往援助杨期。
English: In August, Tuoba dispatched Lieutenant Mu Chong to lead 60,000 cavalry to aid Yang.

古文：燕辽西太守李朗在郡十年，威行境内，恐燕主盛疑之，累征不赴。
现代文：后燕辽西太守李朗，担任郡守十年，在郡内威信很高，他害怕后燕国主慕容盛猜疑忌恨，因此几次被征召都不去。
English: Later, Li Lang, the governor of the western part of Yan Liao, served as the county governor for ten years, and his prestige in the county was very high. He was afraid of the suspicion and hatred of Murong Sheng, the ruler of Later Yan, so he was called up several times but did not go.

古文：以其家在龙城，未敢显叛，阴召魏兵，许以郡降魏；遣使驰诣龙城，广张寇势。
现代文：因为自己的家眷全在龙城，没有公开叛变，只是私下里招引北魏大军前来，答应统领全郡向北魏投降。他于是派遣信使跑到龙城去禀报，夸张辽西那里受到寇贼侵犯的形势。
English: Because all his family members were in Longcheng, he did not openly rebel, but secretly invited the Northern Wei army to come and promised to lead the whole county to surrender to the Northern Wei. He then sent a messenger to Longcheng to report, exaggerating the situation of Liaoxi being invaded by the bandits.

古文：盛曰： 此必诈也。 
现代文：慕容盛说： 这一定是骗局。 
English: Murongsheng said: This must be a scam.

古文：召使者诘问，果无事实。
现代文：把那个信使召来仔细审问，果然没有那么一回事。
English: When the courier was called in for questioning, it turned out to be nothing of the sort.

古文：盛尽灭朗族，丁酉，遣辅国将军李旱讨之。
现代文：慕容盛把李朗的家人全部杀掉；丁酉，派遣辅国将军李旱前去讨伐。
English: Murong Sheng killed all of Li Lang's family members; Ding Xi, sent the auxiliary general Li Suan to go to the crusade.

古文：初，魏奋武将军张衮以才谋为魏主珪所信重，委以腹心。
现代文：当初，北魏奋武将军张衮因为才干出众、谋略过人而得到北魏国主拓跋的信任与重用，把他当做心腹。
English: At the beginning, Zhang Ye, the Northern Wei general, was trusted and used by Tuoba, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, as his confidant because of his outstanding talent and superior strategy.

古文：珪问中州士人于衮，衮荐卢溥及崔逞，珪皆用之。
现代文：拓跋向张衮询问中州的读书人谁比较有名，张衮荐举了卢溥和崔逞，拓跋都加以任用。
English: Tuoba asked Zhang Rong who was the more famous reader in Zhongzhou. Zhang Rong recommended Lu Rong and Cui Gang, and Tuoba appointed both of them.

古文：珪围中山，久未下，军食乏，问计于群臣。逞为御史中丞，对曰： 桑椹可以佐粮。
现代文：那时，拓跋围困中山城很长时间也没有攻克，部队的粮食非常缺乏，向群臣询问办法，当时崔逞是御史中丞，他回答说： 桑椹可以用来做辅助粮食。
English: At that time, Tuoba besieged Zhongshan City for a long time without conquering it, and the troops were very short of food. They asked the ministers how to do it. At that time, Cui Gang was the imperial historian, and he replied: Mulberry can be used as auxiliary food.

古文：飞鸮食椹而改音，诗人所称也。 
现代文：飞来飞去的猫头鹰吃了桑椹而改变了叫声，这是诗人说的。 
English: An owl flying around ate a mulberry and changed its call, the poet said.

古文：珪虽用其言，听民以椹当租，然以逞为侮慢，心衔之。
现代文：拓跋虽然采纳了他的意见，允许百姓用桑椹充当地租交纳，但是却认为崔逞有意侮辱轻慢自己，记恨在心。
English: Although Tuoba accepted his opinion and allowed the people to use mulberry straw to pay the local rent, he thought that Cui Gang intentionally insulted and belittled himself, and held a grudge.

古文：秦人寇襄阳，雍州刺史郗恢以书求救于魏常山王遵曰： 览兄虎步中原。 
现代文：后来后秦的军队进犯襄阳，东晋雍州刺史郗恢写信向北魏常山王拓跋遵求援说： 贤兄像猛虎那样纵横中原。 
English: Later, after the Qin Dynasty's army invaded Xiangyang, the Eastern Jin Dynasty sent a letter to the Northern Wei Dynasty's Changshan King Tuoba Zun to ask for help, saying: "The wise elder brother is like a fierce tiger across the Central Plains.

古文：珪以恢无君臣之礼，命衮及逞为复书，必贬其主。
现代文：拓跋认为郗恢没有遵奉君臣之间的礼法，让张衮和崔逞代写回信，一定要贬斥东晋的君主。
English: Tuoba believed that Zheng He did not follow the etiquette between monarchs and subjects, and let Zhang Ye and Cui Gang write a reply on his behalf. He must disparage the East Jin monarchs.

古文：兗、逞谓帝为贵主，珪怒曰： 命汝贬之，而谓之 贵主 ，何如 贤兄 也！ 
现代文：但张衮、崔逞在信中称东晋皇帝为 贵主 。拓跋见此，勃然大怒说： 我命令你们贬低他，你们却称他为 贵主 ，这怎么能和他叫我 贤兄 相比呢！ 
English: But Zhang Ye and Cui Gang called the Eastern Jin Emperor "Your Lord" in the letter. Seeing this, Tuoba flew into a rage and said: I ordered you to disparage him, but you call him "Your Lord," how can this be compared to him calling me "My wise brother"!

古文：逞之降魏也，以天下方乱，恐我复遗种，使其妻张氏与四子留冀州，逞独与幼子赜诣平城，所留妻子遂奔南燕。
现代文：崔逞投降北魏的时候，天下正处在动乱之中，恐怕不再能遗留下后代，所以让他的妻子张氏和四个儿子留在冀州老家，崔逞自己与最小的儿子崔赜来到平城，他的妻子张氏和四个儿子便投奔了南燕。
English: When Cui Gang surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty, the world was in turmoil, and it was feared that he would not be able to leave any descendants, so he left his wife Zhang and four sons at home in Jizhou. Cui Gang himself and his youngest son Cui Yao came to Pingcheng, and his wife Zhang and four sons fled to Nanyan.

古文：珪并以是责逞，赐逞死。
现代文：拓跋把这几件事加在一起责问崔逞，下令让他自杀。
English: Tuoba put these several things together, scolded Cui Gang and ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：卢溥受燕爵命，侵掠魏郡县，杀魏幽州刺史封沓干。
现代文：卢溥接受后燕的官位和命令，侵犯袭掠北魏的郡县，又杀了北魏幽州刺史封沓干。
English: Lu Wei accepted the official rank and order of Hou Yan, invaded and plundered the counties of the Northern Wei Dynasty, and killed the Northern Wei Yuzhou Zhi Feng Yogan.

古文：珪谓衮所举皆非其人，黜衮为尚书令史。
现代文：拓跋认为张衮所举荐的人都不好，因此把张衮贬为尚书令史。
English: Tuoba thought that the people recommended by Zhang Ye were not good, so he relegated Zhang Ye to the history of Shang Shuling.

古文：衮乃阖门不通人事，惟手校经籍，岁馀而终。
现代文：张衮于是从此紧闭大门，不与外边来往，只是整天地校勘经史典藉，一年多之后去世。
English: Zhang Xuan then closed the gate tightly and did not have any contact with the outside world. He just spent all day studying the classics and passed away more than a year later.

古文：燕主宝之败也，中书令、民部尚书封懿降于魏。
现代文：国主慕容宝失败的时候，中书令、民部尚书封懿向北魏投降。
English: When the ruler of the country, Murong Bao, failed, the Central Shuling and the People's Department, Shang Shufeng, surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：珪以懿为给事黄门侍郎、都坐大官。
现代文：拓跋任命封懿为给事黄门侍郎、都坐大官。
English: Tuoba appointed Fong Yao to be the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and both of them became high officials.

古文：珪问懿以燕氏旧事，懿应对疏慢，亦坐废于家。
现代文：拓跋向封懿询问燕氏政权过去的一些事情，封懿在回答时，疏略而且傲慢，也被免去一切官职，在家闲居。
English: Tuoba asked Fong Yu about some things in the past of the Yan regime. In his answer, Fong Yu was evasive and arrogant. He was also removed from all official positions and idled at home.

古文：武威王秃发乌孤醉，走马伤胁而卒，遗令立长君。
现代文：南凉武威王秃发乌孤醉酒之后，骑马奔驰，伤了肋骨而死。
English: King Wuwei of the Southern Liang Dynasty was a balding, black-haired loner. After getting drunk, he rode a horse to a gallop, broke his ribs and died.

古文：国人立其弟利鹿孤，谥乌孤曰武王，庙号列祖。
现代文：留下遗命让年纪大的人为国君。国人拥立他的弟弟秃发利鹿孤，追谥秃发乌孤为武王，庙号烈祖。
English: He left instructions for the older man to become the sovereign. The people of the country supported his younger brother, Bald-Faced Li Shiguo, and pursued Bald-Faced Wu Guo to become the King of Wu and the founder of the temple.

古文：利鹿孤大赦，徙治西平。
现代文：秃发利鹿孤下令大赦，把都城迁到西平。
English: Bald-headed Lixia Guo ordered an amnesty and moved the capital to Xiping.

古文：南燕王德遣使说幽州刺史辟闾浑，欲下之，浑不从。
现代文：南燕王慕容德派遣使节前去游说东晋幽州刺史辟闾浑，打算拿下幽州，辟闾浑没有听从他们的劝告。
English: Southern Yan King Murongde sent envoys to persuade Dongjin to attack Yuzhou, intending to take Yuzhou, but Yuzhou did not listen to their advice.

古文：德遣北地王钟帅步骑二万击之，德进据琅邪，徐、兗之民归附者十馀万。
现代文：慕容德派遣北地王慕容钟率领步、骑兵共两万人进攻辟闾浑。慕容德向前推进占据琅邪，徐州、兖州的百姓归附他的有十多万人。
English: Murongde dispatched the King of the Northland, Murong Zhong, to lead the way, and a total of twenty thousand cavalry attacked and drove out the Qigong. Murongde pushed forward to occupy the Qigong, and more than one hundred thousand people from Xuzhou and Zhangzhou joined him.

古文：德自琅邪引兵而北，以南海王法为兗州刺史，镇梁父。
现代文：慕容德带兵从琅邪向北进发，任命南海王慕容法为兖州刺史，镇守梁父。
English: Murong De led the troops to advance northward from Shiyan, and appointed the South Sea King Murong Fa as the governor of Shanzhou and the town guard.

古文：进攻莒城，守将任安委城走。德以潘聪为徐州刺史，镇莒城。
现代文：然后又进攻莒城，东晋守将任安放弃城池逃走，慕容德任命潘聪为徐州刺史，镇守莒城。
English: Then he attacked Lucheng again. The East Jin governor Ren An abandoned the city and fled. Murong De appointed Pan Cong as the governor of Xuzhou and the governor of Lucheng.

古文：兰汗之乱，燕吏部尚书封孚南奔辟闾浑，浑表为勃海太守；及德至，孚出降，德大喜曰： 孤得青州不为喜，喜得卿耳！ 
现代文：当年兰汗之乱时，后燕吏部尚书封孚向南投奔辟闾浑，辟闾浑向朝廷奏报，任命他做了勃海太守。慕容德来到的时候，封孚出城投降，慕容德非常高兴地说： 孤得到青州并不觉得是大喜的事，可喜的是我得到了你。 
English: At the time of the Lanhan Rebellion, the post-Yan cadre Shang Shufu went to Nantou to report to the imperial court, which appointed him as the governor of Bohai. When Murongde arrived, Fufu left the city and surrendered. Murongde was very happy to say: I don't think it's a great thing to get Qingzhou alone, but I'm glad I got you.

古文：遂委以机密。
现代文：于是，把朝廷机密要事交给封孚掌管处理。
English: As a result, important matters of imperial secrets were handed over to Fong Fu to handle.

古文：北地王钟传檄青州诸郡，谕以祸福，辟闾浑徙八千馀家入守广固，遣司马崔诞戊薄荀固，平原太守张豁戌柳泉；诞、豁承檄皆降于德。
现代文：后燕北地王慕容钟向青州的各郡传布檄文，向他们申明祸福、利害关系。辟闾浑把八千多户居民迁徒到广固去据守，又派司马崔诞去戍守薄荀固，派平原太守张豁戍守柳泉。崔诞、张豁接到慕容钟的檄文后，都向慕容德投降。
English: Later, the king of Yanbei, Murong Zhong, spread the imperial edict to all counties in Qingzhou, affirming to them the relationship between good and evil, and the interests of the people. He ordered more than eight thousand households to move to Guanggu to defend themselves, and also sent Sima Cui Xing to defend Bo Xinggu, and sent the governor of the plain, Zhang Hui Xing, to defend Liuquan. After receiving the imperial edict from Murong Zhong, Cui Xing and Zhang Hui Xing both surrendered to Murong De.

古文：浑惧，携妻子奔魏，德遣射声校尉刘纲追之，及于莒城，斩之。
现代文：辟闾浑非常害怕，便携带着妻子儿女，向北魏奔逃，慕容德派遣射声校尉刘纲前去追赶他，追到莒城把他杀了。
English: He was very scared and fled to the Northern Wei Dynasty with his wife and children. Murong De sent Lieutenant Liu Gang to chase him and killed him in Shicheng.

古文：浑子道秀自诣德，请与父俱死。
现代文：辟闾浑的儿子辟闾道秀，自己去面见慕容德，请求让他与他的父亲一块死。
English: Pi Pi's son, Pi Pi Daoxiu, went to see Murong De himself and begged him to let him die with his father.

古文：德曰： 父虽不忠，而子能孝。 
现代文：慕容德叹息说： 父亲虽然不忠，但是他的儿子却能尽孝。 
English: Murongde sighed and said: Although the father is unfaithful, his son is able to fulfill his filial duty.

古文：特赦之。
现代文：特地赦免了辟闾道秀。
English: He specifically pardoned the ringleader, Tao Xiu.

古文：浑参军张瑛为浑作檄，辞多不逊，德执而让之。
现代文：辟闾浑的参军张瑛曾经为辟闾浑草拟檄文，文中措辞大多不逊，慕容德把他抓住后谴责他。
English: Zhang Ying, who had joined the army to fight the enemy, once wrote a poem for the enemy. Most of the words in the poem were harsh, and Murong De caught him and condemned him.

古文：瑛神色自若，徐曰： 浑之有臣，犹韩信之有蒯通。
现代文：但张瑛神色自然，慢慢地说： 辟闾浑有我，就好像韩信有蒯通一样。
English: But Zhang Ying was naturally delighted and slowly said, "I am as close to you as Han Xin is to you."

古文：通遇汉祖而生，臣遭陛下而死。比之古人，窃为不幸耳！ 
现代文：蒯通遇到了汉高祖刘邦而能生存，我与陛下遭遇却要死，与古人相比，我只能觉得是一种不幸罢了！ 
English: Compared to the ancients, I can only think of it as a misfortune!

古文：德杀之。
现代文：慕容德把他杀了。
English: Murong De killed him.

古文：遂定都广固。
现代文：于是，南燕定都在广固。
English: As a result, Nanyangding are all in Guanggu.

古文：燕李旱行至建安，燕主盛急召之，君臣莫测其故。
现代文：后燕辅国将军李旱，讨伐李朗行进到建安，后燕国主慕容盛把他紧急召回，大臣们都不知道是什么缘故。
English: Later, Yan's assistant general Li Han marched to Jian'an to fight against Li Lang. Later, Yan's ruler Mu Rongsheng urgently recalled him. The ministers did not know the reason.

古文：九月，辛未，复遣之。
现代文：九月，辛未，又派他出征。
English: In September, Xinwei sent him to the front again.

古文：李朗闻其家被诛，拥二千馀户以自固；及闻旱还，谓有内变，不复设备，留其子养守令支，自迎魏师于北平。
现代文：李朗听说他的家眷全部被杀害，便集结二千多户居民，用以固守自己的城池，等到听说李旱突然回去，认为后燕国内部一定出现变化，所以不再设防，只是留下他的儿子李养据守令支，自己却去北平迎接北魏军。
English: When Li Lang heard that all his family members had been killed, he gathered more than two thousand residents to defend his castle. When he heard that Li Shan suddenly returned, he thought that there must be changes in the interior of Houyan, so he no longer set up defenses, but left his son Li Yang to guard the order, while he went to Beiping to meet the Northern Wei Army.

古文：壬子，旱袭令支，克之，遣广威将军孟广平追及朗于无终，斩之。
现代文：壬子，李旱袭击并攻破了令支，马上又派广威将军孟广平去追击李朗，在无终追上并把他杀了。
English: In Imzi, Li Han attacked and defeated Lingzhi, and immediately sent Guangwei General Meng Guangping to pursue Li Lang, and finally caught up and killed him.

古文：秦主兴以灾异屡见，降号称王，下诏令群公、卿士、将牧、守宰各降一等；大赦，改元弘始。
现代文：后秦国主姚兴因为天灾和异兆多次出现，降低名号，由皇帝改称王，并下达诏书，命令诸公卿、将帅、地方官吏，全部降职一级。
English: Later, the ruler of Qin, Yao Xing, appeared several times due to natural disasters and omens, lowered his name, changed his title from emperor to king, and issued an edict ordering all nobles, generals, and local officials to be demoted by one level.

古文：存问孤贫，举拔贤俊，简省法令，清察狱讼，守令之有政迹者赏之，贪残者诛之，远近肃然。
现代文：下令大赦，改年号为弘始；安抚慰问孤寡之人与贫苦百姓，选举荐拔贤才俊士；简化缓和法令制度，清正明确地处理诉讼案件。地方官吏有政绩的奖赏，贪婪残暴的人诛杀。国中无论远近，秩序井然。
English: An amnesty was ordered, and the year was changed to Hongshan; the lonely and the poor were comforted and consoled, and the election was recommended for the promotion of talents and good men; the legal system was simplified and relaxed, and the litigation cases were handled in a clear and precise manner. Local officials were rewarded for their political achievements, and greedy and cruel people fought and killed. The country was in good order, both near and far.

古文：冬，十月，甲午，燕中卫将军卫双有罪，赐死。
现代文：冬季，十月，甲午，后燕中卫将军卫双因罪被赐死。
English: In the winter, in October, in the afternoon of the first day of the month, Houyan middle guard general Wei Shuang was sentenced to death for his crime.

古文：李旱还，闻双死，惧，弃军而亡，至板陉，复还归罪。
现代文：李旱回朝之后，听说卫双已死，非常害怕，便抛下军队，只身逃亡，到板陉之后，又回去自首认罪。
English: After Li Han returned to the North, he heard that Wei Shuang had died, and was very afraid. He left the army and fled alone. After he arrived at Panchen, he went back and confessed.

古文：燕主盛复其爵位，谓侍中孙勍曰： 旱为将而弃军，罪在不赦。
现代文：后燕国主慕容盛恢复了他的爵位和职务，对侍中孙说： 李旱作为将军却抛弃了自己的军队，他的罪过绝对是不可饶恕的。
English: Later, the lord of Yan, Mu Rongsheng, restored his title and position, and said to his son-in-law: Li Han, as a general, abandoned his army, and his sin is absolutely unforgivable.

古文：然昔先帝蒙尘，骨肉离心，公卿失节，惟旱以宦者忠勤不懈，始终如一，故吾念其功而赦之耳。
现代文：但是过去先帝遭受挫折、流亡的时候，自己的骨肉都离心离德，公卿们失去节操，只有李旱一人，虽然身为宦官，却能忠贞勤勉地护佑先帝，始终如一。我正是感念他的这些功劳，所以才赦免他的呀！ 
English: However, in the past, when the former emperor suffered setbacks and went into exile, his own flesh and blood were alienated from virtue, the nobles lost their integrity, and only Li Zhanzhong, although he was a eunuch, was able to faithfully and diligently protect the former emperor, consistently. It is precisely these merits that I miss him, so I pardon him!

古文：辛恭靖固守百馀日，魏救未至，秦兵拔洛阳，获恭靖。
现代文：东晋辛恭靖在洛阳坚守了一百多天，北魏的救援部队仍然没有到。后秦军攻克了洛阳，抓获了辛恭靖。
English: Eastern Jin Emperor Xin Jiajing held out in Luoyang for more than a hundred days, and the Northern Wei rescue force still did not arrive. Later, the Qin Army conquered Luoyang and captured Xin Jiajing.

古文：恭靖见秦王兴，不拜，曰： 吾不为羌贼臣！ 
现代文：辛恭靖被押解去见后秦王姚兴，不肯跪拜，说： 吾决不做羌贼的臣民！ 
English: Xin Gongjing was sent to see the next Qin king, Yao Xing, and refused to kneel, saying, "I will never be a subject of a thief!

古文：兴囚之，恭靖逃归。
现代文：姚兴把他囚禁起来，辛恭靖趁机逃了回去。
English: Yao Xing imprisoned him, while Xin Qianjing took the opportunity to escape back home.

古文：自淮、汉以北，诸城多请降，送任于秦。
现代文：这样，从淮河、汉水以北地区各城，有很多都请求投降，并向后秦送去担保。
English: As a result, many cities in the regions north of the Huaihe River and Hanshui River requested to surrender and sent guarantees to Houqin.

古文：魏主珪以穆崇为豫州刺史，镇野王。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋任命穆崇为豫州刺史，镇守野王。
English: Tuoba, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, appointed Mu Chong as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：会稽世子元显，性苛刻，生杀任意；发东土诸郡免奴为客者，号曰乐属，移置京师，以充兵役，东土嚣然苦之。
现代文：会稽王的嫡长子司马元显，生性严酷刻薄，对人的生死，随心所欲地处置。他下令征召东方各郡中解除奴户身分而变成客户的人，把他们称为乐属，迁移到京师去居住，用做后备兵源，忧愁笼罩在东方各郡的广大土地之上，百姓深感痛苦。
English: Sima Yuanxian, the eldest legitimate son of the King of Censors, was by nature harsh and mean, and he disposed of people's lives and deaths as he pleased. He ordered the recruitment of people in the eastern counties who had been relieved of their slave status and had become customers, called them Lezhuan, moved to Beijing to live, and used them as a reserve source of soldiers. Sadness enveloped the vast land of the eastern counties, and the people were deeply pained.

古文：孙恩因民心骚动，自海岛帅其党杀上虞令，遂攻会稽。
现代文：逃到海上去的孙恩因为百姓骚动不安，从海岛上率领他的部众，杀死了上虞令，进而对会稽发起了猛攻。
English: Sun En, who fled to the sea because of the unrest and anxiety of the people, led his subordinates from the island, killed Shang Yu Ling, and then launched a fierce attack on the court.

古文：会稽内史王凝之，羲之之子也，世奉天师道，不出兵，亦不设备，日于道室稽颡跪咒。
现代文：会稽内史王凝之，是王羲之的儿子，世代信奉天师道，他既不出兵也不设防戒备，只是每天去道堂上磕头念咒。
English: The auditor of the inner history of the association, Wang Xizhi, is the son of Wang Xizhi, who has believed in the heavenly teacher's way for generations. He neither goes to war nor sets up defenses, but only goes to the dojo every day to recite mantras.

古文：官属请出兵讨恩，凝之曰： 我已请大道，借鬼兵守诸津要，各数万，贼不足忧也。 
现代文：手下官员请求派兵出城讨伐孙恩，王凝之说： 我已请来了得道大仙，借来了鬼兵把守各个险要关卡，每个地方都有几万鬼兵，盗贼不值得担忧。 
English: Wang Genzhi said, "I have invited a great sage and borrowed ghost soldiers to guard various dangerous checkpoints. There are tens of thousands of ghost soldiers in every place. Thieves are not worth worrying about."

古文：及恩渐近，乃听出兵，恩已至郡下。
现代文：等到孙恩的兵马越来越近，才允许发兵抵敌，可是孙恩的大军已经到了郡城之下。
English: It was not until Sun En's soldiers and horses were getting closer and closer that he was allowed to send troops to fight the enemy, but Sun En's army had already reached the county seat.

古文：甲寅，恩陷会稽，凝之出走，恩执而杀之，并其诸子。
现代文：甲寅，孙恩攻克了会稽城，王凝之逃出城去，被孙恩抓住杀了，同时还杀了他的几个儿子。
English: Sun Yat-sen and Sun Enlai conquered Hefei, and Wang Gengzhi fled the city. He was caught and killed by Sun Enlai, who also killed several of his sons.

古文：凝之妻谢道蕴，弈之女也，闻寇至，举措自若，命婢肩舆，抽刀出门，手杀数人，乃被执。
现代文：王凝之的妻子谢道蕴，是谢奕的女儿，听说强盗来到，一举一动跟平常一样，从容不迫，她命令婢女们抬着她乘坐的轿子，拔出佩刀来到家门之外，亲手杀死了几个人，才被抓住。
English: Wang Xunzhi's wife Xie Daoyun, who is the daughter of Xie Yi, heard that the robbers were coming and, as usual, did not force her to do anything. She ordered her maids to carry the palanquin she was riding in, pulled out her sword and went outside the house and killed several people with her own hands before she was caught.

古文：吴国内史桓谦、临海太守新秦王崇、义兴太守魏隐皆弃郡走。
现代文：吴国内史桓谦、临海太守新蔡王司马崇、义兴太守魏隐等人都放弃了郡城逃走。
English: Wuzhong Guozhong Shi Huanqian, Linhai Daju Xin Cai Wang Sima Chong, Yixing Daju Wei Yin and others all abandoned the county seat and fled.

古文：于是会稽谢鍼，吴郡陆瑰、吴兴丘尪、义兴许充之、临海周胄、永嘉张永等及东阳、新安凡八郡人，一时起兵，杀长吏以应恩，旬日之中，众数十万。
现代文：一时之间，会稽人谢针、吴郡人陆、吴兴人丘、义兴人许允之、临海人周胄、永嘉人张永等，以及东阳、新安等共八个郡的百姓，同时拉起队伍，杀掉本地官员而响应孙恩。十天之内，聚集了几十万人。
English: Within a short period of time, people from eight counties, including Xie Ji, the auditor of the association, Renlu of Wu County, Renqiu of Wu County, Xingrenqiu of Wu County, Xu Yunzhi of Yixing County, Zhou Qi of Linhai County, Zhang Yong of Yongjia County, as well as Dongyang and Xin'an counties, raised a team to kill local officials in response to Sun En. Within ten days, hundreds of thousands of people gathered.

古文：吴兴太守谢邈、永嘉太守司马逸、嘉兴公顾胤、南康公谢明慧、黄门郎谢冲、张琨、中书郎孔道等皆为恩党所杀。
现代文：吴兴太守谢邈、永嘉太守司马逸、嘉兴公顾胤、南康公谢明慧、黄门郎谢冲、张琨、中书郎孔道等人都被孙恩的部队杀死。
English: Wu Xing Daju Xie Qian, Yongjia Daju Sima Yi, Jiaxing Gong Gu Tan, Nankanggong Xie Minghui, Huangmen Lang Xie Chong, Zhang Qian, Zhongshuroong Kondo and others were all killed by Sun En's troops.

古文：邈、冲，皆安之弟子也。
现代文：谢邈、谢冲都是谢安的侄儿。
English: Xie Jun and Xie Chong are all Xie An's nephews.

古文：时三吴承平日久，民不习战，故郡县兵皆望风奔溃。
现代文：这时，三吴一带过太平的日子已经很久，百姓不善于打仗，所以郡县的守兵听见一点风声，便都奔逃溃散。
English: At this time, the days of peace in the Sanwu area had been over for a long time, and the people were not good at fighting, so the county guards heard a bit of wind and ran away.

古文：恩据会稽，自称征东将军，逼人士为官属，号其党曰 长生人 ，民有不与之同者，戮及婴孩，死者什七、八。
现代文：孙恩占据了会稽，自称为征东将军，逼迫士人充当他的属官，并把手下的人称作 长生人 ，百姓中如果有不跟随他的人，就连婴孩一起杀掉，因此，民众死在他的刀下的有十分之七八。
English: Sun En took over the leadership of the council, called himself the General of the Expedition to the East, forced the scholars to serve as his subordinates, and called the people under his command the Immortals. If there were people who did not follow him, he would kill them, even babies. As a result, seven out of ten people died under his sword.

古文：醢诸县令以食其妻子，不肯食者，辄支解之。
现代文：他甚至把一些县令的尸体剁成肉酱，集合他们自己的妻子儿女吃下去，如果拒绝吃，便被支解分尸。
English: He even chopped up the corpses of some county magistrates into meat sauce, gathered their own wives and children to eat it, and if they refused to eat it, they were dismembered.

古文：所过掠财物，烧邑屋，焚仓廪，刊木，堙井，相帅聚于会稽；妇人有婴儿不能去者，投于水中，曰： 贺汝先登仙堂，我当寻后就汝。 
现代文：他们路过一个地方便抢掠财物，烧毁房屋和官府的仓库，砍伐树木、填堵水井，民众相随着来到会稽聚集，有的妇女怀中有婴儿，不能跟他们一起去的，便被投到水中，说： 恭喜你先走一步登上天堂仙境，我一定会随后来找你的。 
English: They passed through a place and plundered property, burned houses and government warehouses, cut down trees, and blocked wells. The people followed them to gather for the meeting. Some women had babies in their arms and could not go with them, so they were thrown into the water and said: "Congratulations, you have taken the first step to ascend to the heavenly wonderland. I will definitely follow you later."

古文：恩表会稽王道子及世子元显之罪，请诛之。
现代文：孙恩向安帝上表，历数会稽王司马道子和他的嫡长子司马元显的罪状，请求杀掉他们。
English: Sun En made a request to Emperor An that he should investigate the crimes of Wang Sima Daozi and his eldest son, Sima Yuanxian, and kill them.

古文：自帝即位以来，内外乖异，石头以南皆为荆、江所据，以西皆豫州所专，京口及江北皆刘牢之及广陵相同雅之所制，朝廷所行，惟三吴而已。
现代文：自从安帝即位以来，朝内朝外都是变乱丛生，石头城以南的地区都被荆州、江州所占据，以西的地区又全都归豫州所专有，京口地区以及长江以北都是刘牢之以及广陵相高雅之控制的地盘，朝廷政令所能达到、通行的地方，只有三吴这一小片地域。
English: Since the enthronement of Emperor An, there has been a lot of turmoil inside and outside the imperial court. The areas south of the Stone Town were occupied by Jingzhou and Jiangzhou, and the areas to the west were all exclusively owned by Yuzhou. The Jingkou area and the north of the Yangtze River were controlled by Liu Diao and Guangling Gao Ya. The only place where imperial decrees could reach and pass was the small area of Sanwu.

古文：及孙恩作乱，八郡皆为恩有，畿内诸县，盗贼处处蜂起，恩党亦有潜伏在建康者，人情危惧。常虑窃发，于是内外戒严。加道子黄钺，元为领中军将军，命徐州刺史谢琰兼督吴兴、义兴军事以讨恩；刘牢之亦发兵讨恩，拜表辄行。
现代文：孙恩作乱之后，三吴的八郡又都被孙恩攻占，京畿几个县，也盗贼祸乱四起，孙恩的党羽也有潜伏在建康城中的人，因此人们心情恐惧，经常担心会发生什么意想不到的变乱，朝廷只好宣布全国戒严，安帝加授给司马道子黄钺，任命司马元显为中军将军，徐州刺史谢琰兼督吴兴、义兴等郡军事，来讨伐孙恩。刘牢之也出动军队征讨孙恩，向朝廷呈上奏章之后立即出师。
English: After Sun En's rebellion, eight counties in Sanwu were occupied by Sun En. There were also robberies in several counties in Gyeonggi Province. Sun En's followers also had people lurking in Jiankang City. As a result, people were fearful and often worried about unexpected upheavals. The imperial court had no choice but to declare martial law across the country. Andijan was awarded to Sima Daozi Huang Di, Sima Yuan Xian was appointed as the general of the Chinese army, and Xuzhou Zhishi Xie Di was also the military governor of Wu Xing, Yixing and other counties to fight against Sun En. Liu Duozhi

古文：西秦以金城太守辛静为右丞相。
现代文：西秦任命金城太守辛静为右丞相。
English: The Western Qin Dynasty appointed Jincheng Daju Xinjing as the Minister of the Right.

古文：十二月，甲午，燕燕郡太守高湖帅户三千降魏。
现代文：十二月，甲午，后燕燕郡太守高湖率部属三千多户居民投降北魏。
English: On the afternoon of December 1st, more than 3,000 residents belonging to the Tai Shou Gaohu rate unit in Houyanyan County surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：湖，泰之子也。
现代文：高湖是高泰的儿子。
English: Gao Hu is the son of Gao Tai.

古文：丙午，燕主盛封弟渊为章武公，虔为博陵公，子定为辽西公。
现代文：丙午，后燕国主慕容盛封他的弟弟慕容渊为章武公，慕容虔为博陵公，封他的儿子慕容定为辽西公。
English: In the afternoon of the 4th day of the 4th month, Murong Sheng, the lord of Houyan, appointed his brother Murong Yuan as Zhangwu, Murong Qian as Boling, and his son Murong as Liaoxi.

古文：丁未，燕太后段氏卒，谥曰惠德皇后。
现代文：丁未，后燕皇太后段氏去世，谥号叫惠德皇后。
English: Ding Wei, the Dowager Empress Dowager Duan passed away, her nickname was Empress Huide.

古文：谢琰击斩许允之，迎魏隐还郡，进击丘尪，破之，与刘牢之转斗而前，所向辄克。
现代文：东晋徐州刺史谢琰击杀了许允之，迎接魏隐回到了郡城，然后进军，袭败丘。谢琰与刘牢之边战边前进，所到之处，每攻必克。
English: East Jin Xuzhou assassin Shi Xieqi killed Xu Yunzhu, welcomed Wei Yin back to the county seat, and then marched to attack and defeat Qiu. Xieqi and Liu Diao advanced side by side, and wherever they went, they attacked.

古文：琰留屯乌程，遣司马高素助牢之，进临浙江。
现代文：谢琰留在乌程屯扎，派遣司马高素前去为刘牢之助战，开进到浙江附近。
English: Xie Jun stayed in Wucheng Tunza and sent Sima Gao Su to go to Liu Diao's aid, and drove into the vicinity of Zhejiang.

古文：诏以牢之都督吴都诸军事。
现代文：这时，朝廷下诏，任命刘牢之都督吴郡诸军事。
English: At this time, the imperial court issued an edict, appointing the military governor of Wu County, the capital of Liuye.

古文：初，彭城刘裕，生而母死，父翘侨居京口，家贫，将弃之。
现代文：当初，彭城人刘裕生下来后，母亲便死了。他的父亲刘翘客居京口，家境贫苦，想把他扔掉。
English: At first, Pengcheng resident Liu Yu's mother died after he was born, and his father, Liu Gaoqi, who lived in Jingkou and was from a poor family, wanted to throw him away.

古文：同郡刘怀敬之母，裕之从母也，生怀敬未期，走往救之，断怀敬乳而乳之。
现代文：同郡人刘怀敬的母亲是刘裕的姨母，她生下刘怀敬还不到一年，便来到刘裕的家把刘裕救了下来，断了刘怀敬的奶来喂养刘裕。
English: The mother of Liu Huaiqing, a fellow county resident, was Liu Yu's aunt. Less than a year after she gave birth to Liu Huaiqing, she came to Liu Yu's home to save Liu Yu and cut off Liu Huaijing's milk to feed Liu Yu.

古文：及长，勇健有大志。
现代文：刘裕长大后，异常勇武健壮，胸怀远大志向。
English: After Liu Yu grew up, he was unusually brave and robust, with great ambitions.

古文：仅识文字，以卖履为业，好樗蒲，为乡闾所贱。
现代文：他识字不多，依靠贩卖鞋子维持生计，又爱好樗蒲这种赌博游戏，被同村的人们所轻视。
English: He is not very literate, relies on selling shoes to make a living, and is fond of gambling games such as shovel, which is despised by the people of the same village.

古文：刘牢之击孙恩，引裕参军事，使将数十人觇贼。
现代文：刘牢之征讨孙恩，把刘裕征召来任参军事，派他带几十个人去探听变民军队的动静。
English: Sun En called for Liu Dole's enlistment, drafted Liu Yu to join the military, and sent him with dozens of people to listen to the movements of the mutinous army.

古文：遇贼数千人，即迎击之，从者皆死，裕坠岸下。
现代文：遇上一支数千人的变民军队，便立即迎上前去攻击，跟他同来的士兵全部被杀死，刘裕跌进岸下。
English: Encountering an army of thousands of mutineers, he immediately charged forward to attack. All the soldiers who came with him were killed, and Liu Yu fell overboard.

古文：贼临岸欲下，裕奋长刀仰斫杀数人，乃得登岸，仍大呼逐之，贼皆走，裕所杀伤甚众。
现代文：变民士兵来到河岸边准备下去，刘裕奋勇地挥舞长杆大刀，仰面朝上砍杀了数名敌人，才得以重新登上岸来，仍然大声吼叫着追杀敌人，敌人全部逃走。刘裕杀死杀伤的人非常之多。
English: The mutineers came to the riverbank and prepared to go down. Liu Yu bravely brandished a long-handled big knife and slashed several enemies on his back, only to be able to re-board the bank, still shouting loudly and chasing the enemy. All the enemies fled. Liu Yu killed and injured a lot of people.

古文：刘敬宣怪裕久不返，引兵寻之，见裕独驱数千人，咸共叹息。因进击贼，大破之，斩获千馀人。
现代文：刘敬宣奇怪刘裕为什么这么久没有回来，带着兵出去寻找他，正好看见刘裕一个人驱赶砍杀几千人的敌兵，大家同声感叹，于是趁机冲上前去一起追杀变民军队，将他们打得大败，斩杀的与抓获的加走来有一千多人。
English: Liu Jingxuan wondered why Liu Yu hadn't returned for such a long time, and went out to look for him with his soldiers. He happened to see Liu Yu driving away an enemy soldier who had slashed and killed several thousand people. Everyone sighed in unison, so he took the opportunity to rush forward to chase and kill the mutineer army together, and beat them badly. There were more than a thousand people killed and captured.

古文：初，恩闻八郡响应，谓其属曰： 天下无复事矣，当与诸君朝服至建康。 
现代文：当初，孙恩听说八个郡的变民起来响应他，对他的僚属说： 天下再也不会有什么大事了，我将与诸位一起穿着朝廷的官服，到建康去。 
English: At first, Sun En heard that the mutineers in eight counties rose up in response to him and said to his colleagues: There will never be anything important in the world again. I will go to Jiankang with you, wearing the official uniform of the imperial court.

古文：既而闻牢之临江，曰： 我割浙江以东，不失作句践！ 
现代文：不久听说刘牢之带兵来到浙江边上，他说： 我即使割据浙江以东的地区，不失作越王勾践。 
English: Soon after, he heard that Liu Diaozhi had led an army to the edge of Zhejiang. He said, "Even if I were to occupy the area east of Zhejiang, I would not fail to achieve the goal of surpassing the king."

古文：戊申，牢之引兵济江，恩闻之，曰： 孤不羞走。 
现代文：戊申，刘牢之带领大军渡过浙江，孙恩听说后说： 我并不觉得逃走就是羞辱。 
English: When Sun En heard that Liu Du led an army across Zhejiang, he said, "I don't think running away is humiliating.

古文：遂驱男女二十馀万口东走，多弃宝物、子女于道，官军竞取之，恩由是得脱，复逃入海岛。
现代文：于是驱赶裹胁男女百姓二十多万人向东逃走，一路上扔掉了许多金银财宝和妇女孩童，官军在路上竞相争抢拣取他们扔下的东西，孙恩因此才得以逃脱，再一次跑进了海岛。
English: So he drove more than two hundred thousand people, both men and women, to flee to the east, throwing away a lot of gold, silver, treasures, women and children along the way. The government troops competed on the road to pick up what they threw down. This is how Sun En was able to escape and once again ran into the island.

古文：高素破恩党于山阴，斩恩所署吴郡太守陆瑰、吴兴太守丘尪、馀姚令吴兴沈穆夫。
现代文：高素在山阴击败了孙恩的党羽，杀了孙恩委任的吴郡太守陆，吴兴太守丘、馀姚令吴兴人沈穆夫。
English: Gao Su defeated Sun En's faction in Shanyin, and killed Sun En's appointees Wu County Grand Marshal Lu, Wu Xing Grand Marshal Qiu, and Yuyao Ling Wu Xingren Shen Mufu.

古文：东土遭乱，企望官军之至，既而牢之等纵军士暴掠，士民失望，郡县城中无复人迹，月馀乃稍有还者。
现代文：东部地区的几个郡遭逢战乱，盼望朝廷官军到来。不久，刘牢之等人放纵军士大肆抢掠，士人、百姓大失所望，各郡各县城中再也看不见人的踪迹，一个多月之后才渐渐有人回来。
English: Several counties in the eastern region were at war, hoping for the arrival of the imperial army. Soon, Liu Diao and others indulged the soldiers to loot and plunder. The soldiers and the people were greatly disappointed, and no trace of people could be seen in the counties and county towns. It took more than a month for people to gradually return.

古文：朝廷忧恩复至，以谢琰为会稽太守、都督五郡军事，帅徐州文武戍海浦。
现代文：朝廷担心孙恩再来，任命谢琰为会稽太守、都督五郡军事，统率他的徐州旧部文武官员在东海沿线统驻防戍守。
English: The imperial court was worried that Sun En would come again, and appointed Xie Jun as the comptroller general and military governor of the five counties. He led his civil and military officials from Xuzhou's old ministry in a unified garrison along the East China Sea.

古文：以元显录尚书事。
现代文：安帝任命司马元显录尚书事。
English: Emperor An appointed Sima Yuanhan to record the proceedings.

古文：时人谓道子为东录，元显为西录；西府车骑填凑，东第门可张罗矣。
现代文：当时的人称司马道子是东录，司马元显是西录。西录府门前车马拥挤不堪；东录府门前却冷落得可以张开罗网捕雀。
English: At that time, people said that Sima Daozi was Donglu and Sima Yuanxian was Xilu. The front of Xilu was crowded with cars and horses; the front of Donglu was so deserted that it was possible to catch birds with a net.

古文：元显无良师友，所亲信者率皆佞谀之人，或以为一时英杰，或以为风流名士。
现代文：司马元显没有一个正派的老师或者朋友，他亲信的人都是阿谀奸佞的小人，有的说他是举世无双的英杰，有的说他是风流潇洒的名士。
English: Sima Yuanxian did not have a decent teacher or friend. His closest confidants were all petty crooks. Some said that he was a peerless hero, while others said that he was a fashionable celebrity.

古文：由是元显日益骄侈，讽礼官立议，以己德隆望重，既录百揆，百揆皆应尽敬。
现代文：从此，司马元显是一天比一天骄纵奢侈，竟暗示礼官提议，说因为他自己德性隆高，深孚众望，既然已经统领文武百官，文武百官便应该对他示敬。
English: From then on, Sima Yuanxian became more and more arrogant and extravagant day by day. He even hinted at the etiquette officer's suggestion, saying that because of his own lofty moral character and profound popularity, since he had already commanded hundreds of civil and military officials, hundreds of civil and military officials should show him respect.

古文：于是公卿以下，见元显皆拜。
现代文：从此公卿以下的所有官员，见到司马元显都实行跪拜之礼。
English: From then on, all officials below the rank of Kugyo would kneel when they saw Sima Yuanxian.

古文：时军旅数起，国用虚竭，自司徒以下，日廪七升，而元显聚敛不已，富逾帝室。
现代文：当时军队几次征伐，国库空虚枯竭，司徒以下的官员，每天只能领七升粮食，但司马元显却仍然不停地搜刮民财、聚敛钱物。其富有竟然超过帝室。
English: At that time, the army had made several conquests, the treasury was empty and depleted, and officials below the rank of Sitoru could only receive seven liters of grain per day, but Sima Yuanhan still constantly scrounged people's wealth and collected money. His wealth even exceeded that of the imperial family.

古文：殷仲堪恐桓玄跋扈，乃与杨佺期结昏为援。
现代文：殷仲堪担心桓玄过于专横暴戾，就与杨期结成姻亲，互为助援。
English: Yin Zhongkan was worried that Huan Xuan was too domineering and violent, so he and Yang Jie became in-laws and supported each other.

古文：佺期屡欲攻玄，仲堪每抑止之。
现代文：杨期几次打算进攻桓玄，每次都是殷仲堪竭力阻止。
English: Yang Zi planned to attack Huan Xuan several times, but each time Yin Zhong could not stop him.

古文：玄恐终为殷、杨所灭，乃告执政，求广其所统；执政亦欲交构，使之乖离，乃加玄都督荆州四郡军事，又以玄兄伟代佺期兄广为南蛮校尉。
现代文：桓玄也恐怕自己最终被殷仲堪、杨期剿灭，于是向朝中的掌权者要求扩大他所统领的地区。朝中掌权者也打算在他们之间制造矛盾，使他们的联盟解体，于是加任桓玄为都督荆州四郡军事，同时，让桓玄的哥哥桓伟代替杨期的哥哥杨广做了南蛮校尉。
English: Huan Xuan also feared that he would eventually be annihilated by Yin Zhongkang and Yang Jiuquan, so he asked the rulers of the dynasty to expand the area he ruled. The rulers of the dynasty also intended to create conflicts between them and break up their alliance, so Huan Xuan was appointed as the military governor of four counties in Jingzhou. At the same time, Huan Xuan's brother, Huan Wei, replaced Yang Jiuquan's brother, Yang Guang, as the Nanban lieutenant.

古文：佺期忿惧。
现代文：杨期既气愤又害怕。
English: Yang Jie was both angry and scared.

古文：杨广欲拒桓伟，仲堪不听，出广为宜都、建平二郡太守。
现代文：杨广本想拒绝桓伟前来接任，但殷仲堪不允许，把杨广调出做宜都、建平两个郡的太守。
English: Yang Guang originally wanted to refuse Huan Wei to take over, but Yin Zhongkan did not allow it, and transferred Yang Guang to be the governor of Yidu and Jianping two counties.

古文：杨孜敬先为江夏相，玄以兵袭而劫之，以为咨议参军。
现代文：杨孜敬原来是江夏相，桓玄派兵去袭击，并劫持了他，任命他做了自己的咨议参军。
English: Yang Zeking was originally Jiang Xia's minister, but Huan Xuan sent soldiers to attack him, kidnapped him, and appointed him as his adviser to join the army.

古文：佺期勒兵建牙，声云援洛，欲与仲堪共袭玄。
现代文：杨期整顿部队，建立军旗，声称要去援救洛阳，打算与殷仲堪一起去进攻桓玄。
English: Yang rectified the troops, established the military flag, claimed to rescue Luoyang, and planned to attack Huanxuan with Yin Zhongkan.

古文：仲堪虽外结佺期而内疑其心，苦止之；犹虎弗能禁，遣从弟遹屯于北境，以遏佺期。
现代文：殷仲堪虽然外表是与杨期结交，内心里却怀疑他的用心，所以对杨期苦苦劝阻，还担心不能阻止杨期的行动，又派遣他的堂弟殷去北部地区驻扎，用来遏止杨期。
English: Although outwardly Yin Zhongkan was friends with Yang Jie, in his heart he doubted his intentions. Therefore, he tried hard to dissuade Yang Jie, worried that he could not stop Yang Jie's actions, and sent his cousin Yin to stay in the northern region to stop Yang Jie.

古文：佺期既不能独举，又不测仲堪本意，乃解兵。
现代文：杨期既无法自己独立起事，又推测不出殷仲堪的真实用意，只好停止行动。
English: Since Yang Jie was not able to start his own business independently and could not guess the true intention of Yin Zhongkan, he had to stop the action.

古文：仲堪多疑少决，咨议参军罗企生谓其弟遵生曰： 殷侯仁而无断，必及于难。
现代文：殷仲堪生性多疑，办事缺少决断。他的谘议参军罗企生对他的弟弟罗遵生说： 殷侯为人仁慈，却优柔寡断，一定会遭逢大难。
English: His advisor, Luo Qisheng, who joined the army, said to his brother, Luo Zun, "Yin Hou is a kind person, but he is indecisive, and he is sure to encounter great difficulties."

古文：吾蒙知遇，义不可去，必将死之。 
现代文：我承蒙他的知遇之恩，在道义上是不能离开他的，将来一定会因他而死。 
English: I am indebted to him for his kindness. Morally, I cannot leave him, and I will surely die because of him.

古文：是岁，荆州大水，平地三丈，仲堪竭仓廪以赈饥民。
现代文：这一年，荆州暴雨成灾，洪水泛滥，平地的水达三丈。殷仲堪把府库中的储备粮食全部拿出来赈济饥民。
English: That year, Jingzhou was hit by torrential rains and flooding, and the floodwaters in the plain reached as high as three meters. Yin Zhongkang was able to take out all the grain reserves in the government storehouse to feed the hungry.

古文：桓玄欲乘其虚而伐之，乃发兵西上，亦声言救洛，与仲堪书曰： 佺期受国恩而弃山陵，宜共罪之。
现代文：桓玄打算趁他内部空虚的时候征讨他，于是发动军队向西进发，也声言要去救助洛阳，并给殷仲堪写信说： 杨期接受国家的恩宠，但是放弃帝王的坟墓陵寝不管，我们应该一起向他兴师问罪。
English: Huan Xuan planned to take advantage of his inner emptiness to solicit him, so he launched an army to the west, also claiming to rescue Luoyang, and wrote a letter to Yin Zhongkan saying: Yang accepted the grace of the state, but regardless of giving up the emperor's tomb and mausoleum, we should together ask him about the crime.

古文：今当入沔讨除佺期，已顿兵江口。
现代文：现在应当进入沔水讨伐杨期，我已经在沔水入长江口这一带集结了兵力。
English: Now it is time to enter the Yang period in Surabaya. I have already gathered forces in the area of Surabaya into the Yangtze River.

古文：若见与无贰，可收杨广杀之；如其不尔，便当帅兵入江。 
现代文：如果你的看法与我没有差别，可将杨广抓起来杀掉；如果不这样做，我就要率大军进入长江，攻击江陵。 
English: If your opinion is no different from mine, you can arrest Yang Guang and kill him; if not, I will lead a large army into the Yangtze River and attack Jiangling.

古文：时巴陵有积谷，玄先遣兵袭取之。
现代文：这时，巴陵还有积存的粮食，桓玄首先派兵去袭击夺取。
English: At this time, there was still grain stored in Baling, and Huan Xuan first sent troops to attack and seize it.

古文：梁州刺史郭铨当之官，路经夏口，玄诈称朝廷遣铨为己前锋，乃授以江夏之众，使督军诸军并进，密报兄伟令为内应。
现代文：梁州刺史郭铨正赶去上任，途中经过夏口，桓玄骗殷仲堪说，朝廷派遣郭铨担任自己的前锋，于是把江夏的部队全部交给他管理，并让他监督统领各支队一起前进，暗中又告诉他的哥哥桓伟作为内应。
English: Liang Zhou's aide-de-camp, Guo Wei, was on his way to take office, passing through Xiakou on the way. Huan Xuan lied to Yin Zhongkan and said that the imperial court had sent Guo Wei to serve as his forward, so he was put in charge of all of Jiangxia's troops, and let him supervise and lead all the detachments to advance together. He also secretly told his brother, Huan Wei, to act as his inside man.

古文：伟遑遽不知所为，自赍疏示仲堪。
现代文：桓伟既惊慌又害怕，不知道应该干些什么，后来把桓玄的密信送交给殷仲堪看。
English: Panicked and afraid, Huan Wei didn't know what to do. Later, he sent Huan Xuan's secret letter to Yin Zhongkan.

古文：仲堪执伟为质，令与玄书，辞甚苦至。
现代文：殷仲堪扣下作为人质，命令他给桓玄写信，文辞凄苦到极点。
English: He took Yin Zhongkan as a hostage and ordered him to write a letter to Huan Xuan. The letter was extremely bitter.

古文：玄曰： 仲堪为人无决，常怀成败之计，为儿子作虑，我兄必无忧也。
现代文：桓玄说： 殷仲堪为人没有决断，常常在打仗之前患得患失、计较成败，为自己的儿子考虑，留后路，我哥哥一定安全，不必忧虑。 
English: Huan Xuan said, "Yin Zhong is indecisive. He often worries about the pros and cons before going to war. He thinks about his success and failure. He thinks about his son and leaves the way open. My brother will be safe and there is no need to worry.

古文：仲堪遣殷遹帅水军七千至西江口，玄使郭铨、苻宏击之，遹等败走。
现代文：殷仲堪派殷率领水军七千人到达西江口，桓玄派郭铨、苻宏进攻他，殷等败走。
English: Yin Zhongkang sent Yin to lead seven thousand sailors to the mouth of the Xijiang River, while Huan Xuan sent Guo Wei and Zhi Hong to attack him, and Yin was defeated.

古文：玄顿巴陵，食其谷；仲堪遣杨广及弟子道护等拒之，皆为玄所败。
现代文：桓玄驻扎在巴陵，吃的是殷仲堪留下的粮食。殷仲堪派遣杨广和自己的侄儿殷道护等人带兵抵抗，全部被桓玄打败。
English: Huan Xuan was stationed in Baling and ate the grain left by Yin Zhongkan. Yin Zhongkan sent Yang Guang and his nephew Yin Daogu to lead the resistance, but they were all defeated by Huan Xuan.

古文：江陵震骇。
现代文：江陵一带为此大为震惊恐惧。
English: The area around Gangneung was shocked and frightened.

古文：城中乏食，以胡麻廪军士。
现代文：江陵城中缺乏粮食，只能把胡麻发给士兵充饥。
English: There was a shortage of grain in the city of Gangneung, and soldiers could only be given sesame seeds to stave off hunger.

古文：玄乘胜至零口，去江陵二十里，仲堪急召杨佺期以自救。
现代文：桓玄乘胜到达零口，距离江陵只有二十里远。殷仲堪急忙写信召请杨期前来救援自己。
English: Huan Xuan took advantage of the victory to reach the mouth of the river, only twenty miles away from Gangneung. Yin Zhongkan hurriedly wrote a letter to summon Yang Cui to come to his rescue.

古文：佺期曰： 江陵无食，何以待敌！
现代文：杨期却说： 江陵没有粮草，用什么来对付敌人！
English: But Yang Ci said, "There is no grain and grass in Gangneung. What should we use to deal with the enemy?"

古文：可来见就，共守襄阳。 
现代文：你可以屈尊到我这里来，我们一起据守襄阳。 
English: You can deign to come to me, and together we will defend Xiangyang.

古文：仲堪志在全军保境，不欲弃州逆走，乃绐之曰： 比来收集，已有储矣。 
现代文：殷仲堪的愿望在于保全自己的部队和地盘，不打算放弃自己的州属到别处流亡，于是欺骗杨期说： 最近我们征集到了许多粮草，已经有所储备了。 
English: Yin Zhongkan's desire was to preserve his troops and territory, and he did not intend to abandon his state to exile elsewhere, so he deceived Yang Ji and said: Recently, we have collected a lot of grain and grass, and we have some reserves.

古文：佺期信之，帅步骑八千，精甲耀日，至江陵，仲堪唯以饭饷其军。
现代文：杨期相信了他，率步、骑兵共八千人，兵士精壮，铠甲闪光，到达江陵后，殷仲堪只能用一些米饭来犒饷他的军队。
English: Yang Zi believed him. He led a total of eight thousand cavalry, soldiers, and armor. After arriving in Gangneung, Yin Zhongkan could only use some rice to feed his army.

古文：佺期大怒曰： 今兹败矣！ 
现代文：杨期十分生气地说： 这一次必败无疑了！ 
English: Yang Jie said very angrily, "There is no doubt that we will lose this time!"

古文：不见仲堪，与其兄广共击玄。
现代文：连殷仲堪也不去会见，便与他的哥哥杨广一起向桓玄发动进攻。
English: Even Yin Zhongkan did not go to meet him, so he and his brother Yang Guang launched an attack on Huan Xuan.

古文：玄畏其锐，退军马头。
现代文：桓玄害怕他的锐气，把部队退到马头。
English: Kuan Xuan was afraid of his courage and withdrew his troops to Ma Tau.

古文：明日，佺期引兵急击郭铨，几获之。会玄兵至，佺期大败，单骑奔襄阳。
现代文：第二天，杨期又带兵紧急攻打郭铨，几乎抓到了郭铨，恰好赶上桓玄的兵马来到，杨期军队大败溃散，他一个人骑着马逃奔襄阳。
English: The next day, Yang Zi led his soldiers to urgently attack Guo Gan. He almost caught Guo Gan, just in time for Huan Xuan's soldiers and horses to arrive. Yang Zi's army was defeated and dispersed, and he fled to Xiangyang alone on horseback.

古文：仲堪出奔酂城。
现代文：殷仲堪也逃奔城。
English: Yin Zhongkan also fled the city.

古文：玄遣将军冯该追佺期及广，皆获而杀之，传首建康。
现代文：桓玄派遣将军冯该追捕杨期和杨广，把他们全部抓住杀掉了，又把他们的人头送到建康。
English: Huan Xuan dispatched General Feng Jia to hunt down Yang Zhi and Yang Guang, caught and killed them all, and sent their heads to Jian Kang.

古文：佺期弟思平、从弟尚保、孜敬逃入蛮中。
现代文：杨期的弟弟杨思平，堂弟杨尚保、杨孜敬逃到蛮族地区。
English: Yang Cui's younger brother, Yang Siping, and his cousins, Yang Shangbao and Yang Zeking, fled to the barbarian regions.

古文：仲堪闻佺期死，将数百人将奔长安，至冠军城，该追获之，还至柞溪，逼令自杀，并杀殷道护。
现代文：殷仲堪听说杨期已死，带着几百人正要投奔长安，走到冠军城，冯该带兵追上并把他抓了起来，回到柞溪，逼迫他自杀，并且杀死了殷道护。
English: When Yin Zhongkang heard that Yang Jie had died, he and several hundred people were about to rush to Chang'an and go to Champion City. Feng Jia and his soldiers caught up with him and arrested him. They returned to Luoxi, forced him to commit suicide, and killed Yin Daozhou.

古文：仲堪奉天师道，祷请鬼神，不吝财贿，而啬于周急。
现代文：殷仲堪也信奉天师道，向鬼神祈祷祭祀从不吝惜钱财，对周济急需帮助的人却过于小气。
English: Yin Zhongkan also believes in the way of the heavenly teacher. He never spares money for prayers and sacrifices to ghosts and gods, but he is too stingy to help people in urgent need.

古文：好为小惠以悦人，病者自为诊脉分药，用计倚伏烦密，而短于鉴略，故至于败。
现代文：他喜欢用一些小恩惠来取得别人的欢心，遇到有病的人亲自为他把脉诊治，开方分药。他工于心计，使用计谋时过于烦琐缜密，但是却缺乏远见卓识和雄才大略。所以导致惨败。
English: He likes to use some small favors to win the favor of others, and when he encounters a sick person, he personally diagnoses and prescribes medicine for him. He is a schemer, and he is too tedious and meticulous when using strategies, but he lacks foresight and talent. So it led to a fiasco.

古文：仲堪之走也，文武无送者，惟罗企生从之。
现代文：殷仲堪逃走的时候，文武官员没有出来送行的人，只有罗企生一个跟他走。
English: When Yin Zhongkan ran away, the civil and military officials did not come out to see him off, only Luo Qisheng went with him.

古文：路经家门，弟遵生曰： 作如此分离，何可不一执手！ 
现代文：罗企生路过家门时，他的弟弟罗遵生说： 我们现在这样分别，怎么能不握一下手？ 
English: When Luo Qinsheng passed by his home, his younger brother Luo Zunsheng said, "We are separated like this now, how can we not shake hands?"

古文：企生旋马授手，遵生有力，因牵下之，曰； 家有老母，去将何之？ 
现代文：罗企生把马转回来，伸手给弟弟，罗遵生非常有力，所以把他从马上拉了下来，说： 家里还有年迈的母亲，你要跑到哪里去？ 
English: Luo Qinsheng turned his horse back and reached out to his brother. Luo Zunsheng was very powerful, so he pulled him off the horse and said: There is still an elderly mother at home, where are you going?

古文：企生挥泪曰： 今日之事，我必死之，汝等奉养，不失子道。
现代文：罗企生有甩了一把眼泪说： 今天这事，我一定是要去死了。由你供养老母，不会失去儿子的孝道。
English: Luo Qinsheng shed a tear and said: Today, I am sure to die. If you provide for your elderly mother, you will not lose your son's filial piety.

古文：一门之中，有忠与孝，亦复何恨！ 
现代文：我们一家之中，既有忠于主上的，也有尽孝道的，这还有什么可遗憾的呢？ 
English: In our family, there are those who are loyal to the Lord and those who are filial, so what is there to regret?

古文：遵生抱之愈急，仲堪于路待之，见企生无脱理，策马而去。
现代文：罗遵生把他抱得越发紧了。殷仲堪在路上等着，看到罗企生根本没有挣脱的希望，就独自打马走了。
English: Luo Zun Sheng held him tighter and tighter. Yin Zhongkan waited on the road and saw that Luo Qinsheng had no hope of breaking free, so he rode away alone.

古文：及玄至，荆州人士无不诣玄者，企生独不往，而营理仲堪家事。
现代文：桓玄来到这里的时候，荆州的人士没有不去拜见桓玄的，只有罗企生一个人不去，却在料理殷仲堪家里的事。
English: When Kuan Xuan came here, there was no one from Jingzhou who did not go to pay homage to Kuan Xuan. Only Luo Qisheng did not go, but he was busy with the affairs of the family.

古文：或曰： 如此，祸必至矣！ 
现代文：有人说： 你这样做，一定会大祸临头！ 
English: Some people say, "If you do this, you're sure to have a big disaster on your hands!"

古文：企生曰： 殷侯遇我以国土，为弟所制，不得随之共殄丑逆，复何面目就桓求生乎！ 
现代文：罗企生说： 殷侯用对待国家栋梁那样的厚礼来对待重用我，我只是被弟弟牵制，才不能跟他一起去杀灭那些丑恶的叛逆之徒，还有什么脸面去桓玄那里，乞求保全性命呢！ 
English: Luo Qinsheng said: Yin Hou treated me with the same generous gift as he treated the pillars of the country. I was only held back by my brother, so I couldn't go with him to kill those ugly traitors. How could I go to Huan Xuan and beg for my life to be spared?

古文：玄闻之，怒，然待企生素厚，先遣人谓曰： 若谢我，当释汝。 
现代文：桓玄闻听了这番话，很生气，但对待罗企生一直很好，他先是派人告诉罗企生说： 你如果向我道歉，我就会放过你。 
English: When Huan Xuanwen heard this, he was very angry, but he had always treated Luo Qisheng well. First, he sent someone to tell Luo Qisheng: "If you apologize to me, I will let you go."

古文：企生曰： 吾为殷荆州吏，荆州败，不能救，尚何谢为！ 
现代文：罗企生却说： 我是殷仲堪手下的一员官吏，殷仲堪失败，我不能救助他，还有什么可以道歉的呢？ 
English: However, Luo Qisheng said: I am a government official who is a worthy subordinate of Yin Zhong, Yin Zhong is a failure, I can't help him, what else can I apologize for?

古文：玄乃收之，复遣人问企生欲何言。企生曰； 文帝杀嵇康，嵇绍为晋忠臣。
现代文：桓玄这才把他抓了起来，又派人去向罗企生还有什么话想说，罗企生说： 文帝杀了嵇康，他的儿子嵇绍却是晋朝的忠臣。
English: It was only then that Kuan Xuan arrested him and sent someone to ask Luo Qisheng what else he wanted to say. Luo Qisheng said: Emperor Wen killed Xikang, but his son Xinshao was a loyal subject of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：从公乞一弟以养老母！ ；玄乃杀企生而赦其弟。
现代文：我只向你请求，留下我的一个弟弟，让他侍奉我的老母！ 桓玄于是杀了罗企生，而赦免了他的弟弟。
English: I only ask you to spare one of my brothers, and let him serve my old mother! Huan Xuan then killed Luo Qisheng, and pardoned his brother.

古文：凉王光疾甚，立太子绍为天王，自号太上皇帝，以太原公纂为太尉，常山公弘为司徒，谓绍曰； 今国家多难，三邻伺隙，吾没之后，使纂统六军，弘管朝政，汝恭己无为，委重二兄，庶几可济。
现代文：后凉王吕光病势沉重，立太子吕绍为天王，自己号称太上皇帝，并任命太原公吕纂为太尉，常山公吕弘为司徒。他对吕绍说： 现在国家正处在多灾多难的时候，秃发氏、乞伏氏和段氏这三个强邻，正在等待时机吞并我们。
English: After Liangyang King Luguang was gravely ill, he set up Prince Liushao as the heavenly king, calling himself the supreme emperor, and appointed Taiyuan Gong Liushao as the first lieutenant, and Changshan Gong Luhong as the tutor. He said to Liushao: Now the country is in a time of many disasters and difficulties, and the three strong neighbors, the Bald Clan, the Beggar Clan and the Duan Clan, are waiting for the opportunity to annex us.

古文：若内相猜忌，则萧墙之变，旦夕至矣。 
现代文：我死之后，让吕纂统领六军，吕弘主管朝廷政事，你自己恭顺谨慎地坐在那里，不做什么事，只把大权交给两位哥哥，或许可以渡过难关。
English: After my death, let Lutsang lead the six armies, and Luhong be in charge of the government affairs of the imperial court, and you yourself sit there obediently and cautiously, doing nothing, only handing over the power to the two brothers, perhaps you can get through the difficulties.

古文：又谓纂、弘曰： 永业才非拨乱，直以立嫡有常，猥居元首。
现代文：如果在自己内部互相猜疑忌恨，家门内的大祸，早晚会发生！ 又对吕纂、吕弘说： 吕绍他不是具有拨乱反正之才的人，只因为让嫡出儿子即位符合常规，苟且居于君位。
English: If there is mutual suspicion and hatred within oneself, a great calamity within the family will happen sooner or later! He also said to Lu Shao and Lu Hong: Lu Shao is not a person with the ability to stir up chaos and chaos, but only because it is in line with the rules to let his legitimate son ascend the throne, and he is still in the throne.

古文：今外有强寇，人心未宁，汝兄弟缉睦，则祚流万世；若内自相图，则祸不旋踵矣。 
现代文：现在外有强大的敌人，人心又动荡不平，你们兄弟之间如果能紧密联合，精诚团结，皇位就可以流传万代。如果内部互相图谋，大祸就在转眼之间！ 
English: Now, there are powerful enemies outside, and people's hearts are turbulent and unequal. If your brothers can be closely united and sincerely united, the imperial throne can be passed down for generations. If they conspire with each other inside, disaster will be just around the corner!

古文：纂、弘泣曰： 不敢。 
现代文：吕纂、吕弘都哭着说： 我们不敢。 
English: Lu Xuan and Lu Hong both cried and said, "We don't dare."

古文：又执纂手戒之曰： 汝性粗暴，深为吾忧。
现代文：吕光又抓住吕纂的手，特别告诫他说： 你性格粗鲁暴躁，是我最担忧的。
English: Lu Guang also grabbed Lu Zuo's hand and admonished him in particular, saying, "I am most worried about your rude and irascible personality.

古文：善辅永业，勿听谗言！ 是日，光卒。
现代文：你一定要好好地辅佐吕绍，千万不要听别人的挑拔离间啊！ 这天，吕光去世。
English: You must support Lü Shao well, and must not listen to other people's provocations! On this day, Lü Guang passed away.

古文：绍秘不发丧，纂排阁入器，尽哀而出。
现代文：吕绍封锁消息，暂时不办丧事。吕纂推开东侧小门，进去恸哭不已，发泄完心中的哀痛才出来。
English: Liushao blocked the news and did not hold a funeral for the time being. Liusao pushed open the small door on the east side, went in and cried, and only came out after venting his grief.

古文：绍惧，以位让之，曰： 兄功高年长，宜承大统。 
现代文：吕绍很害怕，要把皇位让给他，说： 兄长功劳既高，年纪又大，应该继承皇位。 
English: Lü Shao was very afraid and wanted to give the throne to him first, saying, "My elder brother has made great contributions and is old, so he should inherit the throne."

古文：纂曰： 陛下国之冢嫡，臣敢奸之？ 
现代文：吕纂说： 陛下是国家的嫡子，臣怎么敢干犯呢！ 
English: Lu Xuan said, "Your Majesty is the legitimate son of the state, how dare the vassal commit a crime!"

古文：绍固让，纂不许。
现代文：吕绍坚持让位，吕纂只是不答应。
English: Lü Shao insisted on giving up his seat, but Lü Zuo did not agree.

古文：骠骑将军吕超谓绍曰： 纂为将积年，威震内外，临丧不安，步高视远，必有异志，宜早除之。 
现代文：骠骑将军吕超对吕绍说： 吕纂当大军的统帅已经很多年，声威震撼内外，面对老父亲的丧事，他并不悲哀，反而昂首阔步，心中一定有叛逆的想法，应该早点把他除掉。 
English: General Lü Chao said to Lü Shao: "Luzan has been the commander of a large army for many years, and his reputation has shaken both inside and outside. Faced with the death of his old father, he is not sad, but struts with his head held high. He must have rebellious thoughts in his heart, and he should have been eliminated earlier.

古文：绍曰： 先帝言犹在耳，奈何弃之！
现代文：吕绍说： 先帝说的话好像还在耳边回响，我怎么能不听呢！
English: Lü Shao said: The words of the former emperor still seem to reverberate in my ears, how can I not listen to them!

古文：吾以弱年负荷大任，方赖二兄以宁家国，纵其图我，我视死如归，终不忍有些意也。
现代文：我以这么小的年龄来担负国家的大任，正要依赖两位哥哥的帮助，而使国家安定，纵然他们真的要图谋我，我也视死如归，怎么也不忍心有这种想法。
English: At such a young age, I was entrusted with the great responsibility of the country, and I was about to rely on the help of my two brothers to stabilize the country. Even if they really wanted to plot against me, I was so desperate that I couldn't bear the thought.

古文：卿勿复言！ 
现代文：你不要再说了！ 
English: Don't you say another word!

古文：纂见绍于湛露堂；超执刀侍侧，目纂请收之，绍弗许，超，光弟宝之子也。
现代文：吕纂到湛露堂拜见吕绍，吕超手里拿着刀侍立在吕纂的身旁，用眼睛示意吕绍允许自己把吕纂抓起来，吕绍不答应。吕超是吕光的弟弟，吕宝的儿子。
English: Lyu Tsang went to Zhanlu Hall to meet Lyu Sho. Lyu Chao stood next to Lyu Tsang with a sword in his hand. He gestured with his eyes for Lyu Shao to allow him to arrest Lyu Tsang. Lyu Shao did not agree. Lyu Chao was Lyu Guang's younger brother, Lyu Bao's son.

古文：弘密遣尚书姜纪谓纂曰： 主上暗弱，未堪多难。
现代文：吕弘秘密派尚书姜纪对吕纂说： 主上昏庸懦弱，承受不住灾难。
English: Lv Hong secretly sent Shang Shu Jiang Ji to Lv Cao, who said, "Master, you are weak and feeble, and cannot bear the calamity.

古文：兄威恩素著，宜为社稷计，不可徇小节也。 
现代文：大哥威望恩德向来都很著名，应该为国家社稷考虑，万万不可拘泥小节呀。 
English: Big brother prestige and prestige have always been famous, and should be considered for the national society, and must not be restrained.

古文：纂于是夜帅壮士数百逾北城，攻广夏门，弘帅东苑之众斧洪范门。
现代文：吕纂于是当天夜里，带领几百个身强力壮的兵士翻跃过北城，进攻皇城的广夏门。吕弘也带着东苑的兵众，用斧头砍开皇城的洪范门。
English: On the night of the same day, Lu Xuan led several hundred able-bodied soldiers to leap over Beicheng and attack the Guangxia Gate of the Imperial City. Lu Hong also took the soldiers from Dongyuan and cut open the Hongfan Gate of the Imperial City with an axe.

古文：左卫将军齐从守融明观，逆问之曰： 谁也？ 
现代文：左卫将军齐从据守融明观，迎面喝问对面的来人说： 谁？ 
English: The left-wing generals all came from the defensive, harmonious and clear-sighted. They shouted to the people on the opposite side and said: Who?

古文：众曰： 太原公。 
现代文：众人说： 太原公。 
English: The crowd said, "Let's go, Lord Taiyuan."

古文：从曰： 国有大故，主上新立，太原公行不由道，夜入禁城，将为乱邪？  因抽剑直前斫纂，中额，纂左右禽之。
现代文：齐从说： 国家正面临大的变故，主上刚刚即位，太原公不从正道上行走，深更半夜深入禁城，难道要谋反叛乱吗？ 于是，抽出佩剑迎上前来，砍杀吕纂，砍中了他的前额，吕纂的左右侍从把齐从抓住。
English: Qi Cong said: The country is facing great changes. The Lord has just ascended to the throne. Taiyuan Gong does not walk on the right path and goes deep into the Forbidden City in the middle of the night. Is it to plot a counter-rebellion? Therefore, he drew his sword and came forward to cut down Lyu Cong and hit his forehead. Lyu Cong's right and left attendants grabbed Qi Cong.

古文：纂曰： 义士也，勿杀！ ；绍遣虎贲中郎将吕开帅禁兵拒战于端门，吕超帅卒二千赴之；众素惮纂，皆不战而溃。
现代文：吕纂说： 真是忠义的好汉，不要杀他！ 吕绍派遣虎贲中郎将吕开率领宫廷禁军，在端门抵抗他们，吕超也率兵士二千人赶到。兵士们一向都很害怕吕纂，没有交手便自行溃散。
English: Lu Chao also arrived with two thousand soldiers. The soldiers had always been very afraid of Lu Chao and dispersed on their own without a fight.

古文：纂入自青角门，升谦光殿。
现代文：吕纂从青角门进入禁城，登上谦光殿。
English: Liusan entered the Forbidden City from the Qingjiao Gate and ascended the Qian Guang Palace.

古文：绍登紫阁自杀。
现代文：吕绍逃到紫阁自杀。
English: Lü Shao fled to the Purple Pavilion and committed suicide.

古文：吕超奔广武。
现代文：吕超逃奔广武。
English: Lü Chao fled to Guangwu.

古文：纂惮弘兵强，以位让弘。
现代文：吕纂要把皇位让给吕弘。
English: Emperor Lyu wants to abdicate the throne to Emperor Luhong.

古文：弘曰： 弘以绍弟也，而承大统，众心不顺，是以违先帝遗命而废之，惭负黄泉！
现代文：吕弘说： 我因为吕绍作为弟弟却继承国家的大业，大家心里不会畅顺，才违背先帝的遗命，把他废黜，不惜愧对九泉之下的父亲！
English: Lv Hong said: Because Lv Shao, as a younger brother, inherited the great cause of the country, everyone's heart would not be smooth, so I violated the last emperor's last will and testament, deposed him, and did not hesitate to the father under the nine springs!

古文：今复逾兄而立，岂弘之本志乎！ 
现代文：现在如果再越过哥哥而当皇帝，那哪里是我吕弘的本来的愿望啊！ 
English: Now, if I were to surpass my brother and become emperor, what would happen to my original wish?

古文：纂乃使弘出告众曰： 先帝临终，受诏如此。 
现代文：吕纂才让吕弘出宫告诉众人，说： 先帝临终的时候，我们接受了诏书，要我们这样做。 
English: It was only then that Lu Xun let Lu Hong leave the palace to tell everyone, saying, "When the late emperor was dying, we accepted the imperial edict and were asked to do this.

古文：群臣皆曰： 苟社稷有主，谁敢违者！ 
现代文：文武大臣们都说： 只要国家社稷有人主持，我们谁敢违背！ 
English: The ministers of education and armed forces all said: As long as someone is presiding over the national social contract, who among us would dare to violate it!

古文：纂遂即天王位。
现代文：吕纂于是即天王位。
English: As a result, Lu Xuan ascended to the throne.

古文：大赦，改元咸宁，谥光曰懿武皇帝，庙号太祖；谥绍曰隐王。
现代文：下令大赦，改年号为咸宁，追谥吕光为懿武皇帝，庙号太祖；追谥吕绍为隐王。
English: An amnesty was ordered, and the name of the year was changed to Xianning, and the emperor who was chased away was Luguang, and the temple was called Taizu; and the king who was chased away was Liushao.

古文：以弘为大都督、督中外诸军事、大司马、车骑大将军、司隶校尉、录尚书事，改封番禾郡公。
现代文：他又任命吕弘为大都督、督中外诸军事、大司马、车骑大将军、司隶校尉、录尚书事，改封他为番乐郡公。
English: He also appointed Lü Hong as the grand governor of the capital, the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, the grand steward of horses, the general of chariots and cavalry, the lieutenant of officers, and the recorder of deeds, and changed his title to the governor of Banle County.

古文：纂谓齐从曰： 卿前斫我，一何甚也！ 
现代文：吕纂对齐从说： 你前次砍我，岂不是太过分了吗？ 
English: Lu Xuan and Qi Cong said, "The last time you cut me, wasn't it too much?

古文：从泣曰： 隐王，先帝所立；陛下虽应天顺人，而微心未达，唯恐陛下不死，何谓甚也！ 
现代文：齐从流着泪说： 隐王是先帝所立。陛下虽然应合天理顺乎人心，我区区之心没有想通，因此，怕的只是砍不死陛下，怎么能说是过分了呢？ 
English: Qi Cong said with tears streaming down his face, "Hidden King was set up by the former emperor. Although Your Majesty should follow the laws of nature and please the hearts of the people, I did not think it through in my heart. Therefore, I am only afraid that Your Majesty will not die. How can I say that this is too much?

古文：纂赏其忠，善遇之。
现代文：吕纂赏识他的忠诚，待他很好。
English: Lu Xuan appreciated his loyalty and treated him well.

古文：纂叔父征东将军方镇广武，纂遣使谓方曰： 超实忠臣，义勇可嘉，但不识国家大体，权变之宜。
现代文：吕纂的叔父、征东将军吕方镇守广武。吕纂派遣信使去对吕方说： 吕超确实是忠臣，他的道义与勇武，都值得嘉许。但是他不了解国家大事，也不懂得通达地考虑问题。
English: Lu Chao's uncle, the Eastern Expeditionary General Lu Fang Zhengu Guangwu, sent a messenger to Lu Fang to say: Lu Chao is indeed a loyal subject, and his morality and bravery are worthy of praise. However, he does not understand national affairs, nor does he know how to think about problems intelligently.

古文：方赖其用，以济世难，可以此意谕之。 
现代文：我现在正要倚重任用他，共同渡过国家的难关。你可以把我的这些意思转告他。 
English: I am now leaning towards appointing him to steer the country through difficult times. You can convey my sentiments to him.

古文：超上疏陈谢，纂复其爵位。
现代文：吕超上疏奏诉歉疚之意，吕纂恢复了他的爵位。
English: Lyu Chao apologized for his actions, and Lyu Zuo restored his title.

古文：是岁，燕主盛以河间公熙为都督中外诸军事、尚书左仆射，领中领军。
现代文：这一年，后燕国主慕容盛任命河间公慕容熙为都督中外诸军事、尚书左仆射，兼中领军。
English: In the same year, Mu Rong Sheng, the ruler of the Later Yan Kingdom, appointed Kawakami Gong Mu Rong Xi as the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, and Shang Shuzha as his subordinate and the leader of the Middle and Outer Provinces.

古文：刘卫辰子文陈降魏；魏主珪妻以宗女，拜上将军，赐姓宿氏。
现代文：原匈奴部落首领刘卫辰的儿子刘文陈，投降北魏。北魏国主拓跋把一个同族的女儿嫁给他，任命他为上将军，赐他姓氏为宿。
English: Liu Wen Chen, the son of the former Hun tribal leader Liu Weichen, surrendered to the Northern Wei. The Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba married a daughter of the same ethnic group to him, appointed him as a senior general, and gave him his surname as a place of residence.

古文：安皇帝丙隆安四年
现代文：隆安四年
English: The Fourth Year of Longan

古文：春，正月，壬子朔，燕主盛大赦，自贬号为庶人天王。
现代文：春季，正月，壬子朔，后燕国主慕容盛实行大赦，并贬低了自己的名号，称为庶人天王。
English: In the spring, in the first month, in the new year, after Yan, Mu Rongsheng, the lord of Yan, implemented an amnesty, and belittled his own name, called the commoner Tianwang.

古文：魏材官将军和跋袭卢溥于辽西，戊午，克之，禽溥及其子焕，送平城，车裂之。
现代文：北魏材官将军和跋，在辽西向叛将卢溥发起进攻。戊午，攻克，俘获了卢溥和他的儿子卢焕，押送到平城，用车裂把他们处死。
English: The Northern Wei Lumber Officer General Watan launched an attack on the traitor Lu Han in western Liaoning Province. At noon, he captured Lu Han and his son Lu Han, took them to Pingcheng, and killed them with a chariot chisel.

古文：燕主盛遣广威将军孟广平救溥，不及，斩魏辽西守宰而还。
现代文：后燕国主慕容盛派遣广威将军孟广平前去救卢溥，没有赶上，只斩了北魏国的辽西地方官吏，便回去了。
English: Later, Mu Rongsheng, the ruler of Yan, sent Guangwei General Meng Guangping to rescue Lu Yao, but he did not catch up with Lu Yao. He only beheaded the local officials of Liaoxi in Northern Wei and then went back.

古文：乙亥，大赦。
现代文：乙亥，东晋实行大赦。
English: Eihei, Eastern Jin implemented amnesty.

古文：西秦王乾归迁都苑川。
现代文：西秦王乞伏乾归把都城迁到苑川。
English: The king of Western Qin begged Emperor Qian to move the capital to Yuanchuan.

古文：秃发利鹿孤大赦，改元建和。
现代文：秃发利鹿孤实行大赦，改年号为建和。
English: An amnesty was granted to Bald-Faced Deerslayer, and the year was changed to Jianhe.

古文：高句丽王安事燕礼慢；二月，丙申，燕王盛自将兵三万袭之，以骠骑大将国熙为前锋，拔新城、南苏二城，开境七百馀里，徙五千馀户而还。
现代文：高句丽王高安对待后燕的礼数有些怠慢，二月，丙申，后燕国主慕容盛亲自带领三万兵马前去袭击，任命骠骑大将军慕容熙为前锋，攻克新城、南苏两座城池，扩大疆界七百多里，迁移裹胁五千多户居民之后回师。
English: Goguryeo King Gao An treated Houyan's propriety with some negligence. In February, according to Hsin, the ruler of Houyan, Mu Rongsheng, personally led 30,000 soldiers and horses to attack, appointed the cavalry general Mu Rongxi as the vanguard, conquered Xincheng and two cities in southern Soviet Union, expanded the border by more than seven hundred miles, and relocated more than five thousand residents to return to the division.

古文：熙勇冠诸将，盛曰： 叔父雄果，有世祖之风，但弘略不如耳！ 
现代文：慕容熙的勇猛骠悍超出众将领，慕容盛说： 叔父英雄果决，真有世祖的风度，不过在宏图大略方面稍逊一筹！ 
English: Murongxi's bravery and valor surpasses that of other generals. Murong Sheng said, "Uncle Hero Decisive, you really have the demeanor of an ancestor, but you are a little inferior in the grand scheme of things!

古文：及克中山，获燕主宝之幼女。将立皇后，用其国故事，铸金人以卜之，刘氏所铸不成，慕容氏成，三月，戊午，立慕容氏为皇后。
现代文：当初，北魏国主拓跋纳娶匈奴部落首领刘头眷的女儿，在所有的后宫妃嫔中，她最受宠爱，生下了儿子拓跋嗣。攻克后燕都城中山的时候，拓跋又抓获、收娶了后燕前国主慕容宝最小的女儿。拓跋准备把她立为皇后，便遵照他们民族部落的传统，铸塑金人以卜问天意。刘氏没有铸成。慕容氏铸成了。三月，戊午，拓跋正式立慕容氏为皇后。
English: At first, the Northern Wei ruler Tuoba Na married the daughter of the Hun tribal leader Liu Toukin. Of all the harem concubines, she was the most favored and gave birth to a son, Tuoba Zi. After conquering Yanzhong Mountain, Tuoba also captured and married the youngest daughter of the former ruler of Yanzhong, Murong Bao. When Tuoba was ready to make her the queen, he followed the tradition of their ethnic tribe and cast a golden man to ask the will of heaven. Liu was not cast. Murong was cast. In March, at noon, Tuoba officially made Murong the queen.

古文：桓玄既克荆、雍，表求领荆、江二州。
现代文：桓玄攻克了荆州、雍州之后，向朝廷上疏请求管辖江、荆二州。
English: After conquering Jingzhou and Yongzhou, Huan Xuan requested the imperial court to govern Jiang and Jingzhou.

古文：诏以玄为都督荆、司、雍、秦、染、益、宁七州诸军事、荆州刺史，以中护军桓修为江州刺史。
现代文：安帝下诏，任命桓玄为都督荆、司、雍、秦、梁、益、宁七州诸军事，荆州刺史；任命中护军桓为江州刺史。
English: Emperor An issued an edict, appointing Huan Xuan as the military governor of Jing, Shih, Yong, Qin, Liang, Yixing and Ning seven provinces, and the military governor of Jing Province; and the military governor of Jiangsu Province, and the military governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：玄上疏固求江州，于是进玄督八州及扬、豫八部诸军事，复领江州刺史。
现代文：桓玄再次上疏，坚持要兼管江州，于是朝廷提升桓玄督八州及扬、豫等八郡诸军事，再兼江州刺史。
English: Kuan Xuan once again ascended the throne, insisting that he should also govern Jiangzhou, so the imperial court promoted Kuan Xuan to the governor of eight states and Yang, Yu and other eight counties to the military, and then to the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：玄辄以兄伟为雍州刺史，朝廷不能违。
现代文：桓玄便擅自任命他的哥哥桓伟为雍州刺史，朝廷不敢拒绝。
English: Huan Xuan then arbitrarily appointed his brother Huan Wei to be Yongzhou's regent, and the imperial court did not dare to refuse.

古文：又以从子振为淮南太守。
现代文：他又任命自己的侄儿桓振为淮南太守。
English: He also appointed his nephew, Quan Zhen, as the governor of Huainan.

古文：凉王纂以大司马弘功高地逼，忌之。
现代文：后凉王吕纂因为觉得大司马吕弘功劳高，地位逼人，很忌恨他。
English: Later, Liangwang Liusan hated him very much because he thought that his superior, Ma Luhong, was highly meritorious and had a superior status.

古文：弘亦自疑，遂以东苑之兵作乱，攻纂。
现代文：吕弘也疑心自己会受猜忌，于是，索性带着东苑军队实行叛乱，进攻吕纂。
English: Lü Hong also suspected that he would be suspected, so he led Dong Yuan's army to rebel and attack Lü Zuo.

古文：纂遣其将焦辨击之，弘众溃，出走。
现代文：吕纂派他的部将焦辨回击，吕弘的部队溃散，吕弘自己也逃走。
English: Lv Xuan sent his subordinate, Jiao Bian, to fight back, Lv Hong's troops scattered, and Lv Hong himself fled.

古文：纂纵兵大掠，悉以东苑妇女赏军，弘之妻子亦在中。
现代文：吕纂纵容士兵在城中大肆抢掠，并把东苑中的妇女全部赏赐给军卒们，吕弘的妻子女儿也在其中。
English: Lu Xun allowed the soldiers to plunder the city, and gave all the women in Dongyuan to the soldiers, including Lu Hong's wife and daughter.

古文：纂笑谓群臣曰： 今日之战何如？ 
现代文：吕纂笑着对周围的大臣们说： 今日这场战斗怎么样？ 
English: Lyu Kun smiled and said to the ministers around him, "How was the battle today?"

古文：侍中房晷对曰： 天祸凉室，忧患仍臻。
现代文：侍中房晷回答他说： 老天降灾祸给我们凉国，所以忧患灾祸才频繁不断地降临到我们头上。
English: The chamberlain, Fusang, replied to him, "God sent calamity to our cool country, so sorrow and calamity have come upon us frequently and incessantly.

古文：先帝始崩，隐王废黜；山陵甫讫，大司马称兵；京师流血，昆弟接刃。
现代文：先帝刚刚去世，隐王便被废黜；先帝坟墓刚刚掩埋完毕，大司马又发动兵变；京师血流不止，兄弟之间白刃相接。
English: The previous emperor had just died, and King Yin was dethroned; the previous emperor's tomb had just been buried, and the grand steed launched another mutiny; the bloodshed in Beijing continued, and the brothers were at each other's throats.

古文：虽弘自取夷灭，亦由陛下无棠棣之恩，当省己责躬谢百姓。乃更纵兵大掠，囚辱士女，衅自弘起，百姓何罪！
现代文：这次虽然是吕弘自取灭亡，但也是陛下没有兄弟的恩情。陛下应该反省、遣责自己，以此向老百姓们致歉谢罪才是，反而纵容士兵大肆烧杀抢掠，囚禁、侮辱官员妇女。这场祸患的事端是吕弘引起，百姓有什么罪过！
English: This time, although it was Luhong who killed himself, it was also His Majesty's lack of brotherly kindness. His Majesty should have reflected and punished himself, so that he could apologize to the people. Instead, he indulged the soldiers to kill, plunder, imprison and insult female officials. The cause of this disaster was caused by Luhong. What is the fault of the people?

古文：且弘妻，陛下之弟妇，弘女，陛下之侄也，奈何使无赖小人辱为婢妾！
现代文：况且吕弘的妻子，是陛下的弟媳妇，吕弘的女儿，是陛下的亲侄女，怎么能使她们被那些卑鄙无赖的小人们当作婢女侍妾加以侮辱呢！
English: Moreover, Luhong's wife is Your Majesty's sister-in-law, and Luhong's daughter is Your Majesty's niece, so how can they be insulted by those despicable ruffians as servants and concubines!

古文：天地神明，岂忍见此！ 
现代文：天地如果有神明，岂会忍心目睹这样的惨事！ 
English: If there were gods in heaven and on earth, how could they bear to witness such a tragedy!

古文：遂歔欷流涕。
现代文：于是，泪流满面，抽泣不已。
English: As a result, she burst into tears and sobbed uncontrollably.

古文：纂改容谢之，召弘妻子寘于东宫，厚抚之。
现代文：吕纂也耸然动容，向他表示歉意。随后，把吕弘的妻子女儿召回，安置在东宫居住，非常优厚地抚慰她们。
English: Lyu Kun was also deeply moved and apologized to him. Subsequently, he called Lyu Hong's wife and daughter back and placed them in the East Palace, where he consoled them very graciously.

古文：弘将奔秃发利鹿孤，道过广武，诣吕方。
现代文：吕弘打算投奔南凉秃发利鹿孤，途中经过广武，拜见叔父征东将军吕方。
English: Lv Hong planned to go to Nan Liang, Zhengfa, Lixia Guo. On the way, he passed Guangwu and met his uncle Lv Fang, the general of the Eastern Expedition.

古文：方见之，大哭曰： 天下甚宽，汝何为至此！ 
现代文：吕方看见他后，放声大哭，说： 天下非常之大，你为什么偏要跑到这里来呀？ 
English: After seeing him, Lü Fang burst into tears and said: The world is very big, why do you want to come here?

古文：乃执弘送狱，纂遣力士康龙就拉杀之。
现代文：于是把吕弘抓住，押进狱中。吕纂派遣大力士康龙，来到广武，把他摧折打死。
English: So he seized Lü Hong and put him in prison. Lü Cao sent the strongman Kang Long to Guangwu, who beat him to death.

古文：纂立妃杨氏为后，以后父桓为尚书左仆射、凉都尹。
现代文：吕纂立妃子杨氏为皇后，任命杨皇后的父亲杨桓为尚书左仆射、凉都尹。
English: Lyu Quan appointed his wife's son Yang as empress, and appointed Yang Huan, the father of Queen Yang, as Shang Shushi's right-hand man and Liang Duyin.

古文：辛卯，燕襄平令段登等谋反，诛。
现代文：辛卯，后燕襄平令段登等人谋反被杀。
English: Xinwu, Houyan Xiangping, and others who conspired to rebel were killed.

古文：凉王纂将伐武威王利鹿孤，中书令杨颖谏曰： 利鹿孤上下用命，国未有衅，不可伐也。 
现代文：后凉王吕纂准备讨伐南凉武威王秃发利鹿孤，中书令杨颖劝阻说： 秃发利鹿孤他们现在上下同心，严守号令，国内没有什么矛盾可以利用，不可征伐他们。 
English: After Liangyang King Lyu Zuo prepared to attack the Southern Liangyang King Wuwei, Yang Ying issued an order to dissuade him, saying: "As for the Bald-haired and Deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer-deer

古文：不从。
现代文：吕纂不听。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：利鹿孤使其弟佺檩拒之，夏，四月，傉檩败凉兵于三堆，斩首二千馀级。
现代文：秃发利鹿孤派他的弟弟秃发檀阻击后凉军队。夏季，四月，秃发檀在三堆把后凉军打败，斩首二千余级。
English: Bald-haired Deer Solitary sent his younger brother Bald-haired Sandal to block Hou Liang's army. In the summer, in April, Bald-haired Sandal defeated Hou Liang's army in three piles and beheaded more than two thousand levels.

古文：初，陇西李暠好文学，有令名。
现代文：当初，陇西人李酷爱文学，有很好的名声。
English: At first, Li, a native of Shaanxi, loved literature and had a good reputation.

古文：尝与郭黁及同母弟敦煌宋繇同宿，黁起谓繇曰： 君当位极人臣，李君终当有国家；有骒马生白额驹。此其时也。 
现代文：他曾经与郭、以及异父同母兄弟郭煌人宋繇住在一起，郭起身对宋繇说： 你将来一定官至极品，你的哥哥李君最终一定会拥有一个国家。母马生下白额毛的小马驹，就是你们出人头地的时候。 
English: He used to live with Guo and his half-brother and half-sister, Guo Guangren Song Jun. Guo stood up and said to Song Jun, "In the future, you will surely be the best official, and your brother Li Jun will eventually have a country. When a mare gives birth to a foal with white forehead hair, that's when you'll get ahead."

古文：及孟繁为沙州刺史，以暠为效谷令；宋繇事北凉王业，为中散常侍。
现代文：孟敏任沙州刺史时，提升李任效令。宋繇则为北凉王段业做事，任中散常侍。
English: When Meng Min was in charge of the history of Shazhou, he promoted Li Ren effective order. Song Xi worked for Beiliang Wang Duanye and served as Zhong San's regular attendant.

古文：孟敏卒，敦煌护军冯翊郭谦、沙州治中敦煌索仙等以暠温毅有惠政，推为敦煌太守。
现代文：孟敏死后，敦煌护军冯翊人郭谦、沙州治中敦煌人索仙等人，认为李性情温和坚毅，能够施行仁政，推举他做了敦煌太守。
English: After Meng Min's death, Guo Qian, a member of the Dunhuang garrison led by Feng Xuan, and Suo Xian, a member of the Dunhuang garrison led by Shazhou Zhizhong, believed that Li had a gentle and firm disposition and was able to carry out benevolent politics, and promoted him to be the governor of Dunhuang.

古文：暠初难之，会宋繇自张掖告归，谓暠曰： 段王无远略，终必无成。
现代文：李一开始觉得为难，正好赶上宋繇从张掖请假回家，对李说： 段王没有什么远谋大略，最后一定不会有什么成就建树。
English: Li initially found it difficult, just in time for Song Tao to go home on leave from Zhang Ye, and said to Li: Duan Wang has no long-term strategy, and there will be no achievements in the end.

古文：兄忘郭暠之言邪？
现代文：哥哥难道忘了郭说的话吗？
English: Had his brother forgotten what Guo had said?

古文：白额驹今已生矣。 
现代文：白额头的小马驹现在已经降生了。 
English: The white-fronted foal has now been born.

古文：暠乃从之，遣使请命于业；业因以暠为敦煌太守。
现代文：李听从了他的劝告，派遣信使去向段业请求任命。段业便任命李为敦煌太守。
English: Li heeded his advice and sent a messenger to Duan Ye to request the appointment. Duan Ye then appointed Li as the governor of Dunhuang.

古文：右卫将军敦煌索嗣言于业曰： 李暠不可使处敦煌。 
现代文：右卫将军、敦煌人索嗣对段业说： 李这个人，不可让他在敦煌久留。 
English: General Zuo Wei, a Dunhuang native, said to Duan Ye: Li, this person, should not be allowed to stay in Dunhuang for long.

古文：业以嗣代暠为敦煌太守，使帅五百骑之官。
现代文：段业于是让索嗣去代替李做敦煌太守，命令他带着五百名骑兵上任。
English: Duan Yip then asked Suo Ji to replace Li as the governor of Dunhuang and ordered him to take office with five hundred cavalrymen.

古文：嗣未至二十里，移暠迎己；暠惊疑，将出迎之。
现代文：索嗣到了离敦煌二十里的地方，通知李前来迎接自己。李疑虑重重，准备出城去迎接。
English: When he arrived at a place twenty miles from Dunhuang, he told Li to come and meet him. Li was full of misgivings and prepared to leave the city to meet him.

古文：效谷令张邈及宋繇止之曰： 段王暗弱，正是英豪有为之日；将军据一国成资，奈何拱手授人！
现代文：效令张邈和宋繇等人阻止他说： 段业昏庸懦弱，这正是英雄豪杰大有可为的天赐良机。将军您具有建立一个国家的现成条件，怎么能够拱手送给别人呢！
English: He effectively ordered Zhang Ye and Song Ye and others to stop him, saying: Duan Ye is stupid and cowardly, and this is a heaven-sent opportunity for heroes and heroes to do great things. General, you have the ready-made conditions for building a country, how can you give it away to others!

古文：嗣自恃本郡，谓人情附己，不意将军猝能拒之，可一战擒也。 
现代文：索嗣自己依仗是本郡的人，以为人们一定会归附他，绝对不会意料到将军能突然对他进行阻击，可以一次战斗就把他抓住。 
English: Suozhi himself was a man of the county, and he thought that people would definitely follow him. He never expected that the general would suddenly attack him and capture him in a single battle.

古文：暠从之。
现代文：李依从了他们的建议。
English: Li followed their advice.

古文：先遣繇见嗣，啖以甘言。
现代文：他先派宋繇前去拜见索嗣，用恭顺谦诚的好话将他稳住。
English: He first sent Song Jun to meet So Ji, and kept him steady with words of respect, obedience and modesty.

古文：繇还，谓暠曰： 嗣志骄兵弱，易取也。 
现代文：宋繇回来后，对李说： 索嗣骄傲轻慢，兵力极弱，容易取胜。 
English: After Song Tao came back, he said to Li, "Soshi is proud and careless, his army is very weak, and it is easy to win.

古文：暠乃遣邈、繇与其二子歆、让逆击之，嗣败走，还张掖。
现代文：李于是派遣张邈、宋繇以及他的两个儿子李歆、李让，带兵攻击索嗣，索嗣大败而走，逃回张掖。
English: Li then dispatched Zhang Ye, Song Ye and his two sons, Li Ye and Li Zhan, to lead an army to attack Suozhe. Suozhe was soundly defeated and fled back to Zhang Ye.

古文：暠素与嗣善，尤恨之，表业请诛嗣。
现代文：李向来与索嗣关系很好，所以对他这样排挤自己尤其痛恨，于是，他向段业上疏，请求处死索嗣。
English: Li had always had a good relationship with Soktsi, so he particularly hated the fact that Soktsi had excluded him in this way. Therefore, he complained to Duan Ye about this and requested that Soktsi be put to death.

古文：沮渠男成亦恶嗣，劝业除之；业乃杀嗣，遣使谢暠，进暠都督凉兴已西诸军事、镇西将军。
现代文：辅国将军沮渠男成也非常讨厌索嗣，也劝段业除掉他。段业果然杀掉索嗣，派遣使者向李去道歉，提升他为都督凉、兴以西诸军事，镇西将军。
English: The general of the Auxiliary State, Shichiku Onjo, also disliked Sawatsugu very much, and also advised Duan Ye to get rid of him. Duan Ye did indeed kill Sawatsugu, sent an envoy to Li to apologize, and promoted him to the general of the city of Liang, the military of Xing Yixi, and the general of Zhenxi.

古文：吐谷浑视罴卒，世子树洛干方九岁，弟乌纥堤立。
现代文：吐谷浑可汗视罴去世，他的嫡长子树洛于才九岁，他的弟弟乌纥堤继承王位。
English: Tugu Hunka Khan died, his eldest son Shu Luo was only nine years old, and his younger brother Wu Yudi succeeded to the throne.

古文：妻树洛干之母念氏，生慕璝、慕延。
现代文：乌纥堤把树洛于的母亲念氏又纳为自己的妻子，生下了两个儿子：慕、慕延。
English: Uluotsi took Shuloyu's mother, Nenshi, as his wife and gave birth to two sons: Mu and Muyan.

古文：乌纥堤懦弱荒淫，不能治国；念氏专制国事，有胆智，国人畏服之。
现代文：乌纥堤生性懦弱，又荒淫无道，不能治理国家，所以，念氏专权，主持国家政事。她有胆量和智慧，因此，全国的百姓对她都很敬畏佩服。
English: Uluotsi was born with a cowardly nature, and was a wild woman with no morals. She was unable to govern the country, so she assumed absolute power and presided over state affairs. She had courage and wisdom, so the people throughout the country were in awe of and admired her.

古文：燕前将军段玑，太后段氏之兄子也，为段登辞所连及，五月，壬子，逃奔辽西。
现代文：后燕前将军段玑，是皇太后段氏的侄儿，他在襄平令段登的叛乱一案中受到牵连。五月，壬子，他逃奔到辽西。
English: Duan Zi, a former general of Houyan and a nephew of the Empress Dowager Houdan, was implicated in the rebellion led by Duan Deng of Xiangping. In May, he fled to the west of Liaoning Province.

古文：丙寅，卫将军东亭献侯王珣卒。
现代文：丙寅，东晋卫将军、东亭献侯王去世。
English: Cui Yin, the general of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, and the king of the Eastern Pavilion died.

古文：己巳，魏主珪东如涿鹿，西如马邑，观灅源。
现代文：己已，北魏国主拓跋向东来到涿鹿，又向西来到马邑，沿途观看水的源流。
English: In the past, Tuoba, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, traveled east to Menglu and west to Mayu, watching the source of the water along the way.

古文：戊寅，燕段玑复还归罪；燕王盛赦之，赐号曰思悔侯，使尚公主，入直殿内。
现代文：戊寅，后燕国段玑回到都城认罪自首。后燕王慕容盛赦免了他的罪过，赐给他名号为思悔侯，并让他娶了公主，到宫中任职。
English: In Wu Yin, Emperor Yan Guoduan returned to the capital to confess and surrender. Emperor Yan's son, Emperor Murong Sheng, pardoned his sins, gave him the title of repentance, and let him marry a princess and serve in the palace.

古文：谢琰以资望镇会稽，不能绥怀，又不为武备。
现代文：东晋谢琰，因为资深望重，镇守会稽，但是他不能安定抚慰百姓，又不整顿武备。
English: East Jin Xieqi, because the senior is respected, the town guard will be audited, but he can not stabilize and comfort the people, and do not rectify the military.

古文：诸将咸谏曰： 贼近在海浦，伺人形便，宜开其自新之路。 
现代文：他手下的将领们都劝告他说： 孙恩为首的盗贼近在海边，正在窥探我们的态度，应该给他们提供一个悔过自新的道路。 
English: The generals under him all advised him, "The thieves led by Sun Enmen are close to the seashore and are spying on our attitude. We should offer them a way to repent and reform."

古文：琰不从，曰： 苻坚之众百万，尚送死淮南；孙恩小贼，败死入海，何能复出！
现代文：谢琰不以为然，说： 苻坚的军队有百万之多，还在淮南落得个送死的下场，孙恩这个小小的蟊贼，惨败之后逃到海中，怎么还能再跑出来呢？
English: Xie Rong was not convinced and said, "Huan Jian's army had more than a million soldiers, and he was still sent to his death in Huainan. How could Sun En, this petty thief, escape to the sea after his disastrous defeat?

古文：若其果出，是天欲杀之也。 
现代文：如果他真的回到陆地上来，那是老天爷准备杀他了。 
English: If he did come back to land, God was going to kill him.

古文：既而恩寇浃口，入馀姚，破上虞。
现代文：不久，孙恩果然带兵进犯浃口，插进余姚，攻破上虞，进军到了邢浦。
English: Soon after, Sun En led his troops to invade Hekou, pushed into Yuyao, broke through Shangyu, and marched into Lvpu.

古文：进及邢浦，琰遣参军刘宣之击破之，恩退走。
现代文：谢琰派遣参军刘宣之把他打败，孙恩暂时撤退回去。
English: Xie Yu sent Liu Xuanzhi to join the army to defeat him, and Sun En temporarily withdrew.

古文：少日，复寇邢浦，官军失利，恩乘胜径进。
现代文：没有几天，他又重新进犯邢浦，官军在作战中失败，孙恩乘胜径直向纵深挺进。
English: Within a few days, he re-invaded Xiangpu, the government army failed in the battle, and Sun En took advantage of the victory to advance straight and deep.

古文：己卯，至会稽。
现代文：己卯，抵达会稽城。
English: Me, arriving at the auditorium.

古文：琰尚未食，曰： 要当先灭此贼而后食。 
现代文：谢琰还没有吃饭，说： 我准备先消灭了这个贼盗之后再吃饭。 
English: Xie Yao hadn't eaten yet and said, "I'm going to kill this thief before I eat."

古文：因跨马出战，兵败，为帐下都督张猛所杀。
现代文：跨上战马，出城迎战，遭到惨败，被帐下都督张猛杀死。
English: He mounted his war horse, went out of the city to fight, suffered a crushing defeat, and was killed by his subordinate, the governor Zhang Meng.

古文：吴兴太守庾桓恐郡民复应恩，杀男女数千人。
现代文：吴兴太守庾桓恐怕当地的百姓再响应孙恩，一连杀死男女百姓几千人。
English: I am afraid that the local people will again respond to Sun En, killing thousands of men and women.

古文：恩转寇临海。
现代文：孙恩掉转方向进犯临海。
English: Sun En turned to invade the coast.

古文：朝廷大震，遣冠军将军桓不才、辅国将军孙无终、宁朔将军高雅之拒之。
现代文：东晋朝廷非常震惊，派遣冠军将军桓不才、辅国将军孙无终、宁朔将军高雅之等抵御。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty court was very shocked and dispatched champion general Huan Bucai, auxiliary general Sun Mucai, and Ningshuo general Gao Ya to resist.

古文：秦征西大将军陇西公硕德将兵五千伐西秦，入自南安峡。
现代文：后秦征西大将军陇西公姚硕德带领五千人讨伐西秦，从南安峡攻入对方国界。
English: After the Qin Dynasty conquered the West, the general of the Western Han Dynasty, Yao Shuode, led five thousand people to fight against the Western Qin Dynasty, and broke into the other country's border from Nan'an Gorge.

古文：西秦王乾归帅诸将拒之，军于陇西。
现代文：西秦王乞伏乾归率诸将抵抗，驻扎在陇西。
English: The Western Qin king begged Qian to return, and the generals led the resistance, stationed in Shaanxi.

古文：杨轨、田玄明谋杀武威王利鹿孤，利鹿孤杀之。
现代文：杨轨、田玄明等人阴谋杀害南凉武威王秃发利鹿孤，被秃发利鹿孤处死。
English: Yang Luo, Tian Xuanming and others conspired to kill the King of the Southern Liangwu Kingdom, Bald-Faced Deer Lone, who was executed by Bald-Faced Deer Lone.

古文：六月，庚辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月，庚辰朔，出现日食。
English: In June, Geng Chen Shuo, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：以琅邪王师何澄为尚书左仆射。
现代文：东晋任命琅邪王师何澄为尚书左仆射。
English: He appointed Tan Xuan, the master of the evil king, as his right-hand man.

古文：澄，准之子也。
现代文：何澄是何准的儿子。
English: He Cheng is the son of He Jun.

古文：甲子，燕大赦。
现代文：甲子，后燕实行大赦。
English: Ko and Hou Yan were granted amnesty.

古文：凉王纂将袭北凉，姜纪谏曰： 盛夏农事方殷，且宜息兵。今远出岭西，秃发氏乘虚袭京师，将若之何！ 
现代文：后凉王吕纂准备进攻北凉，尚书姜纪劝阻说： 现在正好是盛夏，农事很忙，开拔很远到岭西去作战，如果南凉秃发利鹿孤趁空虚进攻京师，怎么办呢？ 
English: After Liangyang King Liusan prepared to attack Beiliang, Shangshu Jiang Ji dissuaded him, saying: Now is the height of summer, farming is very busy, and we have to go far away to Lingxi to fight. What if Nanliang Bald Deer takes advantage of the emptiness to attack Beijing Division?

古文：不从。进围张掖，西掠建康。
现代文：吕纂不听劝阻，带领部队包围张掖，向西进扰建康。
English: Lu Xuan did not listen to the dissuasion, and led his troops to surround Zhangye and advance westward to disturb Jiankang.

古文：秃发傉檩闻之，将万骑袭姑臧，纂弟陇西公纬赁北城以自固。
现代文：秃发檀听说后，率领骑兵一万人袭击后凉姑臧城。吕纂的弟弟陇西公吕纬据守北城，坚固自己的防守。
English: After hearing of this, Bald Bald led ten thousand cavalry to attack the city of Houlianggu. Lyu Zuo's younger brother, Xi Gong Lyu Wei, defended the northern city and strengthened his defenses.

古文：傉檀置酒硃明门上，鸣钟鼓，飨将士，曜兵于青阳门，掠八千馀户而去。
现代文：秃发檀则在姑臧朱明门上摆酒，击钟敲鼓，犒赏将士，在青阳门检阅部队，炫耀兵力，抢掠裹胁八千多户人家而去。
English: On the other hand, Bald-Faced Thang placed wine on the Zhuming Gate of Guzheng, struck the bell and beat the drum, rewarded the soldiers, reviewed the troops at the Qingyang Gate, showed off the troops, robbed and plundered more than eight thousand households, and left.

古文：纂闻之，引兵还。
现代文：吕纂听说后带兵回来。
English: After hearing the news, Lu Xuan returned with an army.

古文：秋，七月，壬子，太皇太后李氏崩。
现代文：秋季，七月，壬子，东晋太皇太后李氏驾崩。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Empress Dowager Yi of the Eastern Jin Dynasty passed away in Renzi.

古文：丁卯，大赦。
现代文：丁卯，东晋实行大赦。
English: Dingwu, amnesty to the world.

古文：西秦王乾归使武卫将军慕兀等屯守，秦军樵采路绝，秦王兴潜引兵救之。
现代文：西秦王乞伏乾归，派武卫将军慕兀等人屯兵，后秦军砍柴的路被切断。后秦姚兴偷偷地带领部队前去援救。
English: The Western Qin king begged to be allowed to return home, and sent Wuwei general Mu Xi and others to garrison the city. The road for the Western Qin army to cut firewood was cut off. The Western Qin emperor Yao Xing secretly led his troops to the rescue.

古文：乾归闻之，使慕兀帅中军二万屯柏杨，镇军将军罗敦帅外军四万屯侯辰谷，乾归自将轻骑数千前候秦兵。会大风昏雾，与中军相失，为追骑所逼，入于外军。
现代文：乞伏乾归听说后，派慕兀率中军二万人去柏杨驻守，镇军将军罗敦率外军四万人去侯辰谷驻守，乞伏乾归自己带领几千名轻骑兵迎上前去探听后秦军，正赶上狂风大作，遮天蔽日，失去了中军的联络，被后秦追击的骑兵所逼，跑进了外军驻守的防地。
English: After hearing of Qianfu's arrival, he sent Mu Rong and 20,000 Chinese troops to stay in Baiyang, township general Luo Dun and 40,000 foreign troops to stay in Houtian Valley, and Qianfu himself led several thousand light cavalry to go forward to listen to the post-Qin army. He was catching up with the strong winds, covering the sky and the sun, lost contact with the Chinese army, and was forced by the cavalry chasing the post-Qin, and ran into the foreign army's garrison.

古文：旦，与秦战，大败，走归苑川，其部众三万六千皆降于秦。
现代文：第二天早晨，与秦兵展开激战，大败，逃回苑川。他的部众三万六千人都向后秦军投降。
English: The next morning, he fought a fierce battle with the Qin soldiers, suffered a crushing defeat, and fled back to Yuanchuan. All 36,000 of his followers surrendered to the Qin army.

古文：兴进军枹罕。
现代文：姚兴乘胜指挥后秦部队，进军罕。
English: Yao Xing won the command of the post-Qin troops and marched into Han.

古文：乾归奔金城，谓诸豪帅曰； 吾不才，叨窃名号，已逾一纪，今败散如此，无以待敌，欲西保允吾。
现代文：乞伏乾归逃奔金城，对各位将帅豪俊说： 我没有才能，勉强地承受这不该属于我的帝王名号，已经有十三年了，今天惨败到这样的程度，没有办法抗击敌寇，我打算到西部去据守允吾。
English: He fled to Jincheng and said to the generals: "I have no talent. I have been forced to bear the title of emperor, which does not belong to me, for thirteen years. Today, I have been defeated to such an extent that there is no way to resist the enemy. I plan to go to the west to defend Yunwu."

古文：若举国而去，必不得免；卿等留此，各以其众降秦。以全宗族，勿吾随也。 
现代文：但如果我们全国的兵马都到那里去，大家一定不能幸免。所以，你们就留在此地，各自带领着部队投降后秦，保全我们的宗嗣，千万不要再追随我了。 
English: But if all of our soldiers and horses go there, everyone will not be spared. Therefore, you should stay here, lead the troops to surrender to the Qin, protect our heirs, and never follow me again.

古文：皆曰： 死生愿从陛下。 
现代文：大家都说： 我们无论生死，都甘愿跟从您。 
English: And they all said, Whether we live or die, we will follow you.

古文：乾归曰： 吾今将寄食于人，若天未亡我，庶几异日克复旧业，复与卿等相见。
现代文：乞伏乾归说： 我现在准备去别人那里找口饭吃，如果老天不让我们亡国，说不定哪一天能重新恢复我我们的旧业，那时就可以再和你们见面了。
English: "I am now ready to go to someone else to find a meal to eat. If God does not let us perish, maybe one day I can resume our old business, and then I can meet with you again."

古文：今相随而死，无益也。 
现代文：现在你们跟着我死，没什么好处啊！ 
English: Now you're going to die with me, it's no good!

古文：乃大哭而别。
现代文：于是，君臣相对大哭，洒泪而别。
English: As a result, the monarch and his relative cried loudly, shed tears and left.

古文：乾归独引数百骑奔允吾，乞降于武威王利鹿孤，利鹿孤遣广武公傉檀迎之。置于晋兴，待以上宾之礼。
现代文：乞伏乾归只带几百名骑兵投奔允吾，向南凉武威王秃发利鹿孤请求投降。秃发利鹿孤派遣广武公秃发檀前去迎接，把他们安置在晋兴，用贵宾的礼节对待他们。
English: With only a few hundred cavalrymen, Qianfei went to Nanliangwu with a request to surrender to the king of Liangwu, Balfa Lixia Guo. Balfa Lixia Guo sent Guangwu to meet Balfa Dang, placed them in Jinxing, and treated them with the etiquette of honored guests.

古文：镇北将军秃发俱延言于利鹿孤曰： 乾归本吾之属国，因乱自尊，今势穷归命，非其诚款，若逃归姚氏，必为国患，不如徙置乙弗之间，使不得去。 
现代文：镇北将军秃发俱延对秃发利鹿孤说道： 乞伏乾归本来就是我们的附庸国，趁乱自己称王。现在他们日暮途穷，来到我们这里归附听命，绝不是出于真心。如果再逃去归附后秦姚氏，一定会成为我们的祸患。不如把他们迁移到乙弗一带，让他们没有办法逃跑。 
English: Zhenbei General Balda Guyan said to Balda Liguo: "Begging Guyan to return was originally our vassal state, and they took advantage of the chaos to make themselves kings. Now they are poor, and they came to us to return to their orders, not out of sincerity. If they escape again to return to the Qin Yao clan, they will certainly become our scourge. It is better to relocate them to the Yifu area, so that they have no way to escape.

古文：利鹿孤曰： 彼穷来归我，而逆疑其心，何以劝来者！ 
现代文：秃发利鹿孤说： 人家没有办法才跑来归附我们，我们却怀疑他的心意不诚，这样，我们以后怎么招劝别人前来归附！ 
English: Bald-haired Lixia Guo said: People have no choice but to come and join us, but we suspect that his intentions are not sincere, so how can we persuade others to come and join us in the future!

古文：俱延，利鹿孤之弟也。
现代文：秃发俱延是秃发利鹿孤的弟弟。
English: Bald-haired Kuyan is the younger brother of bald-haired Lixia Guo.

古文：秦兵既退，南羌梁戈等密招乾归，乾归将应之。
现代文：后秦军撤退之后，南羌部落的首领梁戈等人秘密派人接请乞伏乾归回去。乞伏乾归准备答应。
English: After the retreat of the Qin army, the leader of the Nanlu tribe, Liang Ge, and others secretly sent someone to ask Qian to return. Qian was ready to agree.

古文：其臣屋引阿洛以告晋兴太守阴畅，畅驰白利鹿孤，利鹿孤遣其弟吐雷帅骑三千屯扪天岭。
现代文：他的臣下屋引阿洛把这件事告诉了晋兴太守阴畅，阴畅马上去告诉秃发利鹿孤。秃发利鹿孤派遣他的弟弟秃发吐雷率领骑兵三千人进驻扪天岭。
English: His vassal Yaoyu Alo told the matter to Jinxing's eunuch Yin Chang, and Yin Chang immediately went to tell Bald Hair Lixia Guo. Bald Hair Lixia Guo sent his younger brother Bald Hair Tu Lei to lead 3,000 cavalrymen into Shantianling.

古文：乾归惧为利鹿孤所杀，谓其太子炽盘曰： 吾父子居此，必不为利鹿孤所容。
现代文：乞伏乾归害怕被秃发利鹿孤杀掉，对他的太子乞伏炽磐说： 我们父子住在这里，一定不能被秃发利鹿孤容留。
English: Kengui Kengui was afraid of being killed by the bald-headed deer. He said to his prince, Kengui Blazing Rock: Our father and son live here, we must not be left alone by the bald-headed deer.

古文：今姚氏方强，吾将归之，若尽室俱行，必为追骑所及，吾以汝兄弟及汝母为质，彼必不疑，吾在长安，彼终不敢害汝也。 
现代文：现今，姚氏的后秦正是最强大的时候，我就要去归顺他们，如果我们全家都去，一定会被追击的骑兵抓住，但我把你们兄弟和你们的母亲当人质，秃发利鹿孤一定不会怀疑，我在长安落下脚之后，他们也就不敢害你们了。 
English: Now, when Yao's Houqin is at its strongest, I'm going to submit to them. If our whole family goes, we'll be caught by the pursuing cavalry, but I'll take your brothers and your mother as hostages. Bald-haired Lulu alone will never suspect. After I set foot in Chang'an, they won't dare to harm you.

古文：乃送炽盘等于西平。
现代文：乞伏乾归便把乞伏炽磐等人送到西平。
English: Qianfu Gui then sent Qianfu Blazing Rock and others to Xiping.

古文：八月，乾归南奔枹罕，遂降于秦。
现代文：八月，乞伏乾归向南逃奔到罕，向后秦投降。
English: In August, Qian fled south to Han and surrendered to Houqin.

古文：丁亥，尚书左仆射王雅卒。
现代文：丁亥，东晋尚书左仆射王雅去世。
English: Dinghai, the Eastern Jin Dynasty, Shangshu's left-hand man, Shao Wangya passed away.

古文：九月，癸丑，地震。
现代文：九月，癸丑东晋发生地震。
English: In September, an earthquake occurred in East Jin, Shanxi Province.

古文：凉吕方降于秦，广武民三千馀户奔武威王利鹿孤。
现代文：后凉吕方向后秦投降。广武一带的三千多户居民投奔南凉武威王秃发利鹿孤。
English: In the direction of Houliang Lv, Houqin surrendered. More than three thousand households in the Guangwu area rushed to Nanliang Wuwei Wang Bald Hairy Deer.

古文：冬，十一月，高雅之与孙恩战于馀姚，雅之败，走山阴，死者什七、八。
现代文：冬季，十一月，东晋宁朔将军高雅之与孙恩在余姚交战，高雅之大败，向山阴逃跑，战死的兵卒有十分之七八。
English: In winter, in November, the Eastern Jin Ningshuo general Gao Yazhi and Sun En fought in Yuyao. Gao Yazhi was defeated and fled to the shade of the mountain. Seventy-eight out of ten soldiers died in the battle.

古文：诏以刘牢之都督会稽等五郡，帅众击恩，恩走入海。
现代文：朝廷下诏，任命刘牢之都督会稽等五个郡，统帅兵众攻击孙恩，孙恩被迫逃回大海。
English: The imperial court issued an edict, appointing Liu Diao as the governor of the five counties, the commander of the soldiers attacked Sun En, and Sun En was forced to flee back to the sea.

古文：牢之东屯上虞，使刘裕戍句章。
现代文：刘牢之向东在上虞驻扎，派遣刘裕去戍守句章。
English: Liu Ducheng was stationed in Shangyu in the east and sent Liu Yu to guard the capital.

古文：吴国内史袁崧筑沪渎垒以备恩。
现代文：吴国内史袁山松修筑沪渎垒，用来防备孙恩的袭击。
English: In the history of Wu, Yuan Shansong built a defensive wall to prevent Sun En's attack.

古文：崧，乔之孙也。
现代文：袁山松是袁乔的孙子。
English: Yuan Shansong is Yuan Qiao's grandson.

古文：会稽世子无显求领徐州，诏以元显为开府仪同三司、都督扬、豫、徐、兗、青、幽、冀、并、荆、江、司、雍、梁、益、交、广十六州诸军事、领徐州刺史，封其子彦玮为东海王。
现代文：会稽王嫡长子司马元显请求兼管徐州，朝廷下诏任命司马元显为开府仪同三司，都督扬、豫、徐、兖、青、幽、冀、并、荆、江、司、雍、梁、益、交、广十六州诸军事，领徐州刺史，封他的儿子司马彦璋为东海王。
English: At the request of Sima Yuanxian, the eldest son and heir of King He, the imperial court issued a decree appointing Sima Yuanxian as the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong, and the military governor of Yang, Yu, Xu, Min, Qing, Yu, Hebei, Bin, Jing, Jiang, Si, Yong, Liang, Yi, Jia, and Guang in 16 prefectures, leading the history of Xuzhou, and crowning his son Sima Yanxuan as the king of the East Sea.

古文：乞伏乾归至长安，秦王兴以为都督河南诸军事、河州刺史、归义侯。
现代文：乞伏乾归来到长安，后秦王姚兴让他担任都督河南诸军事、河州刺史，封为归义侯。
English: After Qin King Yao Xing made him the military governor of Henan Province and the chief historian of Hezhou Province, he was given the title of Guiyi Hou.

古文：久之，乞仗炽盘欲逃诣乾归，武威王利鹿孤追获之。
现代文：时间长了之后，在南凉国中做人质的乞伏炽磐也打算逃到父亲乞伏乾归那里去。半路上被南凉武威王秃发利鹿孤追上抓住。
English: After a long period of time, Beguiling Blazing Rock, who was a hostage in the South Liang Province, also planned to escape to his father Beguiling Qian to return there. Halfway there, he was caught by the King of the South Liang Province, King Wuwei the Bald and Deerslayer.

古文：利鹿孤将杀炽盘，广武公傉檀曰： 子而归父，无足深责，宜宥之以求大度。 
现代文：秃发利鹿孤准备杀了乞伏炽磐，广武公秃发檀说： 儿子要去归附父亲，没有什么值得过于指责的，我看应该原谅他，好显示我们气度宽宏。 
English: Bald-haired Lixia Guo was about to kill the beggar. Guangwu Gong Bald-haired Dang said: "The son wants to return to his father. Nothing is too reprehensible. I think we should forgive him to show our magnanimity."

古文：利鹿孤从之。
现代文：秃发利鹿孤听从了他的劝告。
English: The bald Deerslayer heeded his advice.

古文：秦王兴遣晋将刘嵩等二百馀人来归。
现代文：后秦王姚兴，把被他俘虏的东晋将领刘嵩等二百多人遣送回东晋。
English: Later, Qin King Yao Xing sent more than 200 East Jin generals, including Liu Song, whom he had captured, back to East Jin.

古文：北凉晋昌太守唐瑶叛，移檄六郡，推李暠为冠军大将军、沙州刺史、凉公、领敦煌太守。
现代文：北凉晋昌太守唐瑶叛变，并向其他六郡送去檄文，推举镇西将军李为冠军大将军、沙州刺史、凉公，兼任敦煌太守。
English: Beiliang Jinchang, the de facto governor of Tanggu, rebelled, and sent a letter to the other six counties, nominating Zhenxi General Li as the champion general, Shazhou Sisi, Liangong, and also serving as the governor of Dunhuang.

古文：暠赦其境内，改元庚子。
现代文：李在他所管辖的范围内实行大赦，改年号为庚子。
English: Li implemented an amnesty within the scope of his jurisdiction, and changed his name to Geng Zi.

古文：以瑶为征东将军，郭谦为军谘祭酒，索仙为左长史，张邈为右长史，尹建兴为左司马，张体顺为右司马。
现代文：任命唐瑶为征东将军，郭谦为军咨祭酒，索仙为左长史，张邈为右长史，尹建兴为左司马，张体顺为右司马。
English: He appointed Tang Jun as General of the Expedition to the East, Guo Qian as Commander of the Ceremonial Wine, Suo Xian as Commander of the Left, Zhang Jun as Commander of the Right, Yin Jianxing as Commander of the Left, and Zhang Tieshun as Commander of the Right.

古文：遣从事中郎宋繇东伐凉兴，并击玉门已西诸城，皆下之。
现代文：派遣从事中郎宋繇向东讨伐凉兴，并向玉门以西地区的那些城池发动进攻，宋繇把这些城池全部攻克。
English: He sent Song Tao, the middle son, to fight Liang Xing in the east, and launched an attack on those cities in the west of Yumen. Song Tao conquered all these cities.

古文：酒泉太守王德亦叛北凉，自称河州刺史。
现代文：酒泉太守王德也背叛了北凉，自称为河州刺史。
English: Jiuquan Daju Wang De also betrayed Beilang and called himself Hezhou Shishi.

古文：北凉王业使沮渠蒙逊讨之。
现代文：北凉王段业派沮渠蒙逊带兵前去征讨。
English: Wang Duanye of the Northern Liang Dynasty sent Meng Song to lead an army to fight.

古文：德焚城，将中曲奔唐瑶，蒙逊追至沙头，大破之，虏其妻子、部落而还。
现代文：王德烧毁了酒泉城，带领部队投奔唐瑶。沮渠蒙逊在沙头追上，把他们打得大败，俘虏了王德的妻子儿女和部落居民之后才回去。
English: Wang De burned down Jiuquan City and led his troops to Tanggu. Despondent, Mengxun caught up with them in the sand, defeated them, and only returned after capturing Wang De's wife, children, and tribal residents.

古文：十二月，戊寅，有星孛于天津。
现代文：十二月，戊寅，有异星出现在天津星旁。
English: In December, Wu Yin, a strange star appeared next to the Tianjin star.

古文：会稽世子元显以星变解录尚书事，复加尚书令。
现代文：会稽王嫡长子司马元显，因为天象变化，被解除了录尚书事的官职，但是又加授了尚书令。
English: Sima Yuanxian, the eldest son and heir of the King of the Auditors, was relieved of the official post of recording the official records because of the change of the celestial phenomenon, but he was also awarded the official records.

古文：吏部尚书车胤以元显骄恣，白会稽王道子，请禁抑之。
现代文：吏部尚书车胤因为司马元显过于骄横放纵，晋见会稽王司马道子，请求加以制约。
English: Because Sima Yuanxian was too arrogant and self-indulgent, Shang Shuheyin, the head of the cadre department, requested that Sima's arrogance be restrained.

古文：元显闻而未察，以问道子曰： 车武子屏人言及何事？ 
现代文：司马元显听说，但又不大清楚，便向司马道子说： 车武子把旁边的人都打发开，说的是什么事？ 
English: Sima Yuanxian heard about it, but he didn't know much about it, so he said to Sima Daozi: Che Wuzi sent everyone else away. What did he say?

古文：道子弗答。
现代文：司马道子没有回答。
English: Sima Daozi did not answer.

古文：固问之，道子怒曰： 尔欲幽我，不令我与朝士语耶！ 
现代文：司马元显坚持要问出个究竟，司马道子大怒地说： 你打算把我幽禁起来，不让我与朝中的官员们说话吗？ 
English: Sima Yuanxian insisted on asking what was going on. Sima Daozi said angrily, "Are you going to lock me up and not let me talk to officials from the central government?"

古文：元显出，谓其徒曰； 车胤间我父子。 
现代文：司马元显出来，对他的部下说： 车胤离间我们父子间的关系。 
English: Sima Yuan appeared and said to his subordinates: Cheya has severed the relationship between our father and son.

古文：密遣人责之。
现代文：于是，暗中派人去斥责车胤。
English: As a result, he secretly sent someone to reprimand Che Yun.

古文：胤惧，自杀。
现代文：车胤非常害怕，自杀身亡。
English: Che Tan was very scared and committed suicide.

古文：壬辰，燕主盛立燕台，统诸部杂夷。
现代文：壬辰，后燕国主慕容盛设立燕台，统领夷族各个部落。
English: After Imjin, the lord of Yan, Mu Rongsheng, established Yantai to rule over the various tribes of the Yi people.

古文：魏太史屡奏天文乖乱。
现代文：北魏太史几次奏报天上的星象错杂混乱。
English: The history of the Northern Wei Dynasty reported several times that the stars in the sky were chaotic.

古文：魏主珪自览占书，多云改王易政，乃下诏风励群下，以帝王继统，皆有天命，不可妄干。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋亲自查阅占卜的书籍，大都说这是帝王变更、改朝换代的征兆。于是下诏书，让传告下属文武百官，说帝王继承治理天下的大任，都有上天的旨意，不要妄加干预、胡乱猜想。
English: The head of the Northern Wei state, Tuoba, personally examined divination books, and most of them said that this was a sign of the emperor's change, the change of the dynasty, and the change of the generation. Therefore, he issued an edict to tell the hundreds of civil and military officials under him that the emperor inherits the great task of governing the world, and all have the will of heaven, and do not interfere or make wild guesses.

古文：又数变易官名，欲以厌塞灾异。
现代文：又几次改变官职的名称，想用这种方法禳镇阻止灾难变异的发生。
English: He also changed the name of the post several times, hoping to use this method to prevent the occurrence of catastrophic mutations.

古文：仪曹郎董谧献《服饵仙经》，珪置仙人博士，立仙坊，煮炼百药，封西山以供薪蒸。
现代文：仪郎董谧献上一部《服饵仙经》，拓跋特地设置了仙人博士，安排了仙坊，让他们在那里煮炼百药，下令把西山封了起来，把山上的木材用来做煮药的薪柴。
English: Yi Lang Dong Xi presented a copy of "The Book of Immortals." Tuoba specially set up a hermit doctor, arranged a hermitage, let them cook a hundred medicines there, ordered the West Mountain to be sealed up, and the wood on the mountain to be used as firewood for cooking medicines.

古文：药成，令死罪者试服之，多死，不验；而珪犹信之，访求不已。
现代文：药炼成之后，让那些已经被判死罪的人喝下去，结果，很多都死了，证明并不灵验。但拓跋还是相信有这种药，不停地到处访查、探求。
English: After the medicine was made, those who had been sentenced to death were made to drink it. As a result, many of them died, and the proof was not satisfactory. However, Tuoba still believed in the existence of this medicine, and kept visiting and exploring everywhere.

古文：珪常以燕主垂诸子分据势要，使权柄下移，遂至败亡，深非之。
现代文：拓跋常常认为，后燕国主慕容垂让自己的儿子分别把持要害地方，使大权下移，才导致自己的失败灭亡，他觉得这种做法非常错误。
English: Tuoba often thought that it was a big mistake for Mu Rongtiao, the ruler of Houyan, to let his son separately control the key areas and cause the great power to move down, which only led to his own defeat and death.

古文：博士公孙表希旨，上《韩非》书，劝珪以法制御下。左将军李粟性简慢，常对珪舒放不肃，咳唾任情；珪积其宿过，遂诛之，群下震栗。
现代文：博士公孙表迎合他的意思，向他呈上了《韩非子》，劝说拓跋用严格的法令制度来驾驭属下，左将军李粟性格傲慢无礼，常常对拓跋随意放纵、十分不敬，甚至咳痰吐唾沫，也是无所顾忌。
English: Dr. Gongsun table catered to his wishes, presented him with "Hanfeizi," and persuaded Tuoba to use a strict legal system to control his subordinates. Left General Li Siu was arrogant and rude, often indulging in Tuoba at will, very disrespectful, and even coughing and spitting, also without scruples.

古文：丁酉，燕王盛尊献庄后丁氏为皇太后，立辽西公定为皇太子。大赦。
现代文：拓跋把他以往的这些过失加在一起，于是把他斩了，下属百官为此震惊惧怕。丁酉，后燕国主慕容盛尊自己的母亲献庄皇后丁氏为皇太后，册立自己的儿子辽西公慕容定为皇太子，实行大赦。
English: Tuoba put all his past mistakes together and beheaded him, which shocked and frightened hundreds of subordinate officials. Dingyao, after Yan's ruler Murong Sheng honored his mother, Queen Ding, as the empress dowager, registered his son Liaoxi Gong Murong as the crown prince, and implemented an amnesty.

古文：是岁，南燕王德即皇帝位于广固，大赦，改元建平。更名备德，欲使吏民易避。
现代文：这年，南燕王慕容德，在广固即皇帝位。实行大赦，改年号为建平，把自己的名字改为慕容备德，打算让官民在以后避讳起来容易些。
English: In this year, the king of the Southern Yan Dynasty, Murong Bide, ascended to the throne in Guanggu. An amnesty was implemented, the year was changed to Jianping, and his name was changed to Murong Bide, with the intention of making it easier for officials and the public to avoid him in the future.

古文：追谥燕主暐曰幽皇帝。以北地王钟为司徒，慕舆拔为司空，封孚为左仆射，慕舆护为右仆射。
现代文：追谥前燕国主慕容为幽皇帝，任命北地王慕容钟为司徒，慕舆拔为司空，封孚为左仆射，慕舆护为右仆射。
English: He appointed Murong Zhong, the king of the Northland, as the tutor, Mu Muba as the secretary, Fu Fu as the left servant, and Mu Mubao as the right servant.

古文：立妃段氏为皇后。
现代文：立王妃段氏为皇后。
English: The Dowager Empress Dowager Duan became the Empress.

