古文：二年春，公以二军下，次于阳樊。
现代文：晋文公二年的春天，文公派左、右二军东下，驻扎在阳樊。
English: In the spring of the second year of Emperor Wengong's reign, the left and right armies of the Wengong faction went eastward and stationed in Yangpu.

古文：右师取昭叔于温，杀之于隰城。
现代文：右军在温地俘虏了昭叔，把他杀死在隰城。
English: The right-wing army captured Uncle Zhao in Warmi and killed him in Lucheng.

古文：左师迎王于郑。
现代文：左军去郑国迎接周襄王。
English: The Left Army went to Zheng to meet King Zhou Xiang.

古文：王入于成周，遂定之于郏。
现代文：襄王返回了周的东都，在郏城定居下来。
English: King Xiang returned to the eastern capital of Zhou and settled down in Lucheng.

古文：王飨礼，命公胙侑。
现代文：襄王特设甜酒款待，赐给文公祭肉、币帛。
English: King Xiang specially treated them with sweet wine, and gave them the meat and coins for the festival.

古文：公请隧，弗许。曰： 王章也，不可以二王，无若政何。 
现代文：文公请求死后用隧道墓葬，襄王没有允许，说： 这是天子所用的葬礼，国家不可以有两个天子，否则无法实施政令。 
English: Wen Gong requested to be buried in a tunnel after his death, but Xiang Wang did not allow it, saying: This is a funeral for the Son of Heaven. The country cannot have two sons of Heaven, otherwise it will not be able to implement the decree.

古文：赐公南阳阳樊、温、原、州、陉、、组、攒茅之田。
现代文：赐给文公南阳地区所属的阳樊、温、原、州、陉、、组、攒茅等八邑的田地。
English: The fields of eight townships, including Yangshuo, Wen, Yuan, Shuzhou, Shantou, Shantou, Gu, and Nanyang, which belong to the Nanyang District of Wenguang, were given.

古文：阳人不服，公围之，将残其民，仓葛呼曰： 君补王阙，以顺礼也。
现代文：阳樊人不愿归服。
English: Impotent people don't want to submit.

古文：阳人未狎君德，而未敢承命。君将残之，无乃非礼乎！
现代文：文公派军队包围了它，准备屠杀阳樊的百姓。仓葛大喊说： 你帮助周襄王恢复王位，是为了遵循周礼呀。
English: Cang Ge shouted: "You helped King Zhou Xiang regain the throne in order to follow the Zhou rituals.

古文：阳人有夏、商之嗣典，有周室之师旅，樊仲之官守焉，其非官守，则皆王之父兄甥舅也。
现代文：阳樊人由于不熟悉你的德教，而不接受你的命令。你就要屠杀他们，这不是又违反了周礼吗？阳樊人有夏、商的后代和遗留下来的法典，有周王室的军队和民众，有仲山甫一样的守官，即使不是官员，也都是王室的父兄甥舅。
English: Impotent people do not accept your order because they are not familiar with your moral teachings. You want to slaughter them. Isn't this also a violation of the Zhou Rite? Impotent people include the descendants of Xia and Shang and the legacy of the legal code, the Zhou royal army and the people, and the guards like Zhong Shanfu. Even if they are not officials, they are the fathers, brothers, and nephews of the royal family.

古文：君定王室而残其姻族，民将焉放？
现代文：你安定周王室却屠杀周的亲族，百姓怎么会依附呢？
English: If you stabilize the Zhou royal family but massacre Zhou's relatives, how will the people adhere to you?

古文：敢私布于吏，唯君图之！ 公曰： 是君子之言也。 
现代文：我私下斗胆向军吏陈说此情，请您仔细地考虑考虑！ 晋文公说： 这是君子所说的话啊。 
English: I dared to say this to the military officials in private, please think about it carefully! Jin Wengong said: This is what a gentleman said.

古文：乃出阳人。
现代文：于是就下令放阳樊的百姓出城。
English: So he ordered the people who had been caught masturbating to leave the city.

