古文：平王锡晋文侯秬鬯、圭瓒，作《文侯之命》。
现代文：周平王赐给晋文侯酒与酒具，写了《文侯之命》。
English: King Zhou Ping gave Jin Wen Hou wine and wine utensils, and wrote "Wen Hou's Life."

古文：王若曰： 父义和！
现代文：王这样说： 族父义和啊！
English: Thus says the king, "Rise up, father of the nation!

古文：丕显文、武，克慎明德，昭升于上，敷闻在下；惟时上帝，集厥命于文王。
现代文：伟大光明的文王和武王，能够慎重行德，他们的圣德能够彰显升入上天，声望广布在臣民之中。于是上天降下天命给文王、武王。
English: The great and bright King Wen and King Wu were able to be prudent in their moral conduct, and their holiness was able to be manifested and ascended to heaven, and their reputation was widely spread among their subjects. Therefore, heaven sent the Mandate of Heaven to King Wen and King Wu.

古文：亦惟先正克左右昭事厥辟，越小大谋猷罔不率从，肆先祖怀在位。
现代文：也因为先前的公卿大夫能够辅佐、指导、服事他们的君主，对于君主的大小谋略无不遵从，所以先祖能够安然在位。啊！
English: Also, because the previous noble doctors were able to assist, guide, and serve their monarchs, and they did not disobey the monarch's plans and strategies, their ancestors were able to reign safely.

古文：闵予小子嗣，造天丕愆。
现代文：不幸的是等到我继承王位的时候，上天降下了责罚。
English: Unfortunately, by the time I succeeded to the throne, God's chastisement had begun.

古文：殄资泽于下民，侵戎我国家纯。即我御事，罔或耆寿俊在厥服，予则罔克。曰惟祖惟父，其伊恤朕躬！
现代文：导致没有福利德泽施给老百姓，频频遭受外寇的侵扰。现在我的治事大臣，没有老成人长期在职，我便不能胜任了。我呼吁： 祖辈和父辈的诸侯国君，要替我担忧啊！ 啊哈！
English: As a result, there is no welfare for the common people, and they are frequently harassed by foreign invaders. Now that I am the minister of state, I cannot be competent without an old adult who has been in office for a long time. I appeal to the princes and sovereigns of my ancestors and parents to worry about me! Aha!

古文：呜呼！有绩予一人永绥在位。
现代文：果然有促成我长安在王位的人了。
English: There really is someone who contributed to my ascension to the throne.

古文：父义和！
现代文：族父义和啊！
English: The patriarch, Yoshikazu!

古文：汝克绍乃显祖，汝肇刑文、武，用会绍乃辟，追孝于前文人。
现代文：您能够继承您的显祖唐叔，您努力制御文武百官，用会合诸侯的方式延续了您的君主，追怀效法文王和武王。
English: You were able to succeed your illustrious ancestor, Emperor Tang. You worked hard to control the hundreds of civil and military officials, and continued your monarchy by means of the association of lords. You emulated the French King and King Wu.

古文：汝多修，扞我于艰，若汝，予嘉。 王曰： 父义和！
现代文：您战功赫赫，在困难的时候保护了我，像您这样，我就要赞美！ 王说： 族父义和啊！
English: Your war exploits are great, you protected me in difficult times, and like you, I want to praise you! The king said: O father of the nation, may there be peace!

古文：其归视尔师，宁尔邦。
现代文：要回去好好治理您的臣民，安定您的邦国。
English: You should go back and govern your subjects well and stabilize your country.

古文：用赉尔秬鬯一卣，彤弓一，彤矢百，卢弓一，卢矢百，马四匹。
现代文：现在我赐给您黑黍香酒一卣；红色的弓一张，红色的箭一百支；黑色的弓一张，黑色的箭一百支；四匹马。
English: And now I give you a cruse of black musk; a red bow and a hundred red arrows; a black bow and a hundred black arrows; and four horses.

古文：父往哉！
现代文：您回去吧！
English: You can go back!

古文：柔远能迩，惠康小民，无荒宁。
现代文：安抚远方，亲善近邻，爱护安定老百姓，不要荒废政事，贪图安逸。
English: We should pacify the distant places, be kind to the near neighbors, love and care for the stable people, do not waste political affairs, and be greedy for comfort.

古文：简恤尔都，用成尔显德。 
现代文：大力安定您的国家，以成就您显著的德行。 
English: Do your best to stabilize your country and achieve your remarkable virtue.

