古文：《齐民要术》：凡种麻，用白麻子。
现代文：《齐民要术》：一般种大麻，多用白麻子。
English: "Qi Min Yaoshu": the general kind of hemp, mostly used white asparagus.

古文：白麻子为雄麻，颜色虽白，啮破枯燥无膏润者，秕子也，亦不中种。
现代文：白麻子为雄麻。有的颜色虽然是白的，但咬开后，里面却干枯焦燥，没有一点油性的，是秕没有成熟好的种子，这种也是不能种的。
English: White hemp seeds are male. Although some of them are white in color, they are dry and irritated inside after being chewed. They are not at all oily. They do not have well-matured seeds, and they cannot be planted.

古文：市籴者，口含少时，颜色如旧者，佳；如变黑者，哀。
现代文：如到市上去买种子，可放到口中噙一会，颜色没有变化的是好种子；变黑的是湿热郁衰变质的种子。
English: If you go to the market to buy seeds, you can put them in your mouth and chew them for a while. The good seeds are the ones whose color has not changed; the ones that turn black are the wet, hot, decaying seeds.

古文：麻欲得良田，不用故墟。
现代文：种大麻一定要好地，但不要用故墟。
English: Marijuana must be grown in good soil, but don't use old ruins.

古文：故墟太良，有夥叶夭折之患，不任作布也。夥，丁破反，草叶坏也。
现代文：故墟太肥，会使大麻苗稼有夥叶早死的害处，麻亦不可织布。 夥 ，丁破反，指草叶变坏。
English: If the soil is too rich, it will cause the early death of hemp seedlings, and hemp can not be woven.

古文：地薄者粪之。粪宜熟。
现代文：瘠薄的土地要施肥。粪要腐熟的。
English: Thin land should be fertilized. Manure should be well-rotted.

古文：无熟者，用小豆底亦得。
现代文：没有熟粪，用小豆茬地亦可。
English: If you don't have cooked manure, you can use red beans to mop the floor.

古文：崔寔曰： 正月粪畴。 
现代文：崔寔说： 正月粪田畴。 
English: Cui Wei said: New Year's Day is the beginning of the dung field.

古文：畴，麻田也。
现代文：畴，即指麻田。
English: "Domain" refers to Asada.

古文：耕不厌熟。
现代文：耕不厌熟柔。
English: Cultivation does not get tired of ripening.

古文：纵横七遍已上，则麻无叶也。
现代文：纵耕横耕达到七遍以上，则长出的大麻叶少。
English: When longitudinal and lateral ploughing reaches seven times or more, fewer cannabis leaves grow.

古文：田欲岁易。
现代文：大麻田要年年更换。
English: Cannabis fields need to be replaced every year.

古文：抛子种，则节高。
现代文：抛子种会使大麻的节长。
English: The psyllium seed causes the cannabis plant to sprout.

古文：良田一亩，用子三升；薄田二升。
现代文：好地一亩，用种子三升；瘠薄地一亩，用种子二升。
English: One mu of good soil produces three liters of seeds; one mu of poor soil produces two liters of seeds.

古文：概则细而不长，稀则危而皮恶。
现代文：苗稠，会使茎秆细弱、不见长；苗稀，会使茎秆长得很粗，韧皮质劣。
English: If the seedlings are thick, the stalks will be thin and not long; if the seedlings are thin, the stalks will be thick and the toughness will be poor.

古文：夏至前十日，为上时，至日，为中时，至后十日，为下时。 麦黄种麻，麻黄种麦 ，亦良候也。
现代文：夏至以前十天种，为上等农时；夏至日种，为中等农时；夏至过后十日以内种，为下等农时。 冬麦黄的时候种大麻，大麻黄的时候种冬麦 ，这也是非常好的物候。
English: Sowing seeds ten days before the summer solstice is the best time for farming; sowing seeds on the day of the summer solstice is the middle time for farming; sowing seeds within ten days after the summer solstice is the worst time for farming; sowing hemp when the winter wheat is yellow, and sowing winter wheat when the winter wheat is yellow is also a very good condition.

古文：谚曰： 夏至后，不没狗。 
现代文：谚语说： 夏至以后种麻，盖不上狗。 
English: A proverb says: If you plant hemp after the summer solstice, you won't be able to cover your dog.

古文：或答曰： 但雨多，没橐駞。 
现代文：又说： 只要雨水多，可以埋没骆驼。 
English: He also said: As long as there is a lot of rain, camels can be buried.

古文：又谚曰： 五月及泽，父子不相借。 
现代文：谚语又说： 五月间趁墒，虽父子之间，不得借用人力。 
English: The proverb also says: Take advantage of the time between May and June, although it is between father and son, do not borrow manpower.

古文：言及泽急，说非辞也。
现代文：这说明趁天雨抢种迫急，故谚语也有些不近人情。
English: This shows that it is urgent to take advantage of the rain to snatch seeds, so the proverb is also somewhat unpopular.

古文：夏至后者，匪唯浅短，皮亦轻薄。
现代文：夏至后种的麻，不但低矮，麻的韧皮也又薄又轻。
English: The hemp sown after the summer solstice is not only short, but its tough skin is also thin and light.

古文：此亦趁时，不可失也。
现代文：所以必须抓紧农时，机不可失。
English: Therefore, we must pay close attention to the agricultural time, and the opportunity must not be lost.

古文：父子之间，尚不相假借，而况他人者也？
现代文：父子之间尚且不能互相帮助，对别人更不用说了。
English: The father and son are not yet able to help each other, let alone others.

古文：泽多者，先渍麻子令芽生。
现代文：地太湿时，先浸种，令麻子出芽。
English: When the ground is too wet, soak the seeds first to make the seeds sprout.

古文：取雨水浸之，生芽疾，用井水则生迟。
现代文：用雨水浸种出芽快，用井水浸出芽慢。
English: Using rainwater to soak the seed sprouts quickly, while using well water to soak the seed sprouts slowly.

古文：浸法：著水中，如炊两石米顷，漉出，著席上，布令厚三四寸。数搅之，令均得地气，一宿即芽出。
现代文：浸种的方法：将种子浸入水中，大约经过煮两石米饭的时间，滤出来放在席上，摊开三四寸厚，频频翻搅，使皆能得到地气，一夜过后便出芽。
English: Immersion method: the seeds are immersed in water, after about two stone of rice cooking time, filtered out and placed on the table, spread three or four inches thick, frequently stirred, so that everyone can get the earth gas, and sprout after one night.

古文：水若滂沛，十日亦不生。
现代文：假若用水泡着，即便过十天也不出芽。
English: If it is soaked in water, it will not sprout even after ten days.

古文：待地白背，耧耩，漫掷子，空曳劳。
现代文：等到地面泛白色，用耧耩开沟，撒播种子，拖着空劳覆土。
English: Wait until the ground is white, dig a trench with a hoe, scatter seeds, and cover the soil with soil.

古文：截雨脚即种者，地湿，麻生瘦；待白背者，麻生肥。
现代文：若雨过后便下种，地太湿，麻苗出土后非常瘦弱；待地面泛白时种，麻苗出土后非常茁壮。
English: If planted after rain, the soil is too wet, and the seedling is very thin after being unearthed; if planted when the ground is white, the seedling is very strong after being unearthed.

古文：泽少者，暂浸即出，不得待生芽，耧头中下之。不劳曳挞。
现代文：地不是很湿时，可将麻种稍微浸一下，便滤出，不能等出芽，即用耧耩播入地中。不劳摩，不拽挞。
English: When the ground is not very wet, you can soak the hemp seeds a little and then filter them out. If you can't wait for the sprouts to sprout, sow them into the ground with a hoe. No effort, no pulling the hoe.

古文：麻生数日中，常驱雀。
现代文：麻出苗后的开始几天，要常驱赶鸟雀。
English: In the first few days after the emergence of seedlings, it is often necessary to drive away birds and finches.

古文：叶青乃止。
现代文：叶子变青色时，才可以停止。
English: When the leaves turn blue, you can stop.

古文：布叶而锄。
现代文：真叶展开后，便开始锄。
English: After the true leaf unfolds, it begins to wither.

古文：频烦再遍止。
现代文：接连锄两遍，便要停止。
English: If you chant two times in a row, you have to stop.

古文：高而锄者，便伤麻。
现代文：苗高了再锄，便会伤麻。
English: If the seedlings are too tall and are replanted, they will get sick.

古文：稠弱不堪者，拔去。
现代文：麻苗过稠过弱的地方，应拔去一些。
English: Where the seedlings are too thick or too weak, some should be pulled out.

古文：勃如灰便刈。
现代文：等到花粉变得像灰尘那样，便要刈。
English: Wait until the pollen becomes like dust, then mow.

古文：刈、拔，各随乡法。
现代文：或用镰刈，或用手拔，可以根据各地的习惯。
English: It can be done either by hoeing or by hand, according to local customs.

古文：未勃者收皮不成；放勃不收，即骊。
现代文：未放粉便收刈的，韧皮纤维成长不良；散过粉还不收刈，麻纤维变骊。
English: If it is harvested before the powder is put on, the bast fiber will not grow well; if it is scattered after the powder is put on, it will not be harvested, and the hemp fiber will turn into straw.

古文：蘩，古典反，小束也。
现代文：蘩要小，蘩，古典反，小把。
English: to small,, classical contra, small handle.

古文：欲小，箐普胡反。
现代文：箐普胡反。
English: Zeng Puhuan.

古文：欲薄，为其易干。
现代文：要薄，箐薄，是为了容易干。
English: Thin, thin, thin, for easy drying.

古文：一宿辄翻之。
现代文：过一夜便要翻一遍。
English: After one night, you have to go through it all again.

古文：得霜露，则皮黄也。
现代文：霜露沾湿后不翻，麻皮会变黄。
English: If it is not turned over after getting wet with cream dew, the hemp will turn yellow.

古文：获欲净。
现代文：收获要干净。
English: Harvest should be clean.

古文：有叶者喜烂。
现代文：带叶的容易烂。
English: The cucumbers with leaves are easy to rot.

古文：沤欲清水，生熟合宜。
现代文：沤麻时水要清，沤的生熟要适度。
English: The water should be clear when using nettles, and the ripeness of the stalks should be moderate.

古文：浊水则麻黑；水少则麻脆；生则难剥；大烂则不任。
现代文：浊水沤出的麻黑；水少时麻脆没韧性；沤生了，剥麻困难；沤过了，容易腐烂，麻布耐用。
English: When the water is scarce, the hemp is brittle and not tough; when it has sprouted, it is difficult to peel off the hemp; when it has sprouted, it is easy to rot, and the linen is durable.

古文：暖泉不冰冻，冬日沤者，最为柔朋也。
现代文：如果有暖泉水，冬天不结冰，用来沤麻，最为柔软和坚韧。
English: If there is warm spring water, it will not freeze in winter. It is used for nettle, which is the softest and toughest.

古文：《氾胜之书》曰：种枲，太早，则刚坚，厚皮多节；晚，则皮不坚。
现代文：《氾胜之书》说：纤维用枲麻，种早了，便会使麻秆硬、皮厚、节多；种晚了，便会使麻纤维不坚韧。
English: "The Book of Overwhelming Victory" said: the fiber is made of nettle, and if it is planted early, it will make the nettle hard, thick-skinned, and have more knots; if it is planted late, it will make the hemp fiber not tough.

古文：宁失于早，不失于晚。
现代文：故宁可使播种偏早，不要偏晚。
English: Therefore, it is better to sow early rather than late.

古文：夏至后二十日沤枲，枲和如丝。
现代文：夏至过后二十天沤麻，麻纤维会像蚕丝一样柔和。
English: Twenty days after the summer solstice, the nettle, hemp fiber will be as soft as silk.

