古文：乐毅者，其先祖曰乐羊。
现代文：乐毅，他的祖先叫乐羊。
English: Le Yi, his ancestor is called Le Yang.

古文：乐羊为魏文侯将，伐取中山，魏文侯封乐羊以灵寿。
现代文：乐羊曾担任魏文侯的将领，曾经带兵攻下了中山国，魏文侯把灵寿作为封地赐给了乐羊。
English: Le Yang once served as the general of Wei Wen Hou, and once led an army to conquer Zhongshan Province. Wei Wen Hou gave Ling Shou as a fiefdom to Le Yang.

古文：乐羊死，葬於灵寿，其後子孙因家焉。
现代文：乐羊死后，就葬在灵寿，他的后代子孙们就在那里安了家。
English: After Le Yang's death, he was buried in Lingshou, and his descendants made their home there.

古文：中山复国，至赵武灵王时复灭中山，而乐氏後有乐毅。
现代文：后来中山复国了，到赵武灵王的时候又灭掉了中山国，而乐家的后代出了一个有名的人叫乐毅。
English: Later, Zhongshan was restored to the country, and by the time of King Zhao Wuling, Zhongshan was eliminated, and the descendants of the musicians produced a famous person called Le Yi.

古文：乐毅贤，好兵，赵人举之。
现代文：乐毅很贤能，喜好军事，赵国人曾举荐他出来做官。
English: Le Yi is very capable and likes military affairs. The people of Zhao once recommended him to become an official.

古文：及武灵王有沙丘之乱，乃去赵適魏。
现代文：到了武灵王在沙丘行宫被围困饿死后，他就离开赵国到了魏国。
English: After King Wuling was besieged and starved to death in the Sand Hill Palace, he left Zhao and went to Wei.

古文：闻燕昭王以子之之乱而齐大败燕，燕昭王怨齐，未尝一日而忘报齐也。
现代文：后来他听说燕昭王因为子之执政，燕国大乱而被齐国乘机战败，因而燕昭王恨透了齐国，没有一天忘记向齐国报仇雪恨。
English: Later, he heard that Yan Zhao Wang was defeated by Qi due to his son's rule and the Great Turmoil in Yan Province. As a result, Yan Zhao Wang hated Qi very much and never forgot to take revenge on Qi.

古文：燕国小，辟远，力不能制，於是屈身下士，先礼郭隗以招贤者。
现代文：燕国是个弱小的国家，地处偏远，国力是不能克敌制胜的，于是燕昭王降抑自己的身分，礼贤下士，他先用周到的礼仪来对待郭隗，借此招揽更多的贤人。
English: Yan's country is a weak and small country, located in a remote area, and national strength is unable to defeat the enemy. Therefore, Yan Zhao Wang lowered his status to that of a corporal. He first treated Guo Zhe with thoughtful etiquette, and used this to recruit more sages.

古文：乐毅於是为魏昭王使於燕，燕王以客礼待之。
现代文：正在这个时候，乐毅为魏昭王出使来到了燕国，燕王以宾客的礼节接待他。
English: At this time, Le Yi was sent by Wei Zhao Wang to Yan Guo. Yan Wang received him with the etiquette of a guest.

古文：乐毅辞让，遂委质为臣，燕昭王以为亚卿，久之。
现代文：乐毅推辞谦让，后来终于向燕昭王敬献了礼物表示愿意献身做臣下，燕昭王就任命他为亚卿，他担任这个职务的时间很长。
English: Le Yi refused to yield, and later finally presented a gift to Yan Zhao Wang to show his willingness to devote himself to being a vassal. Yan Zhao Wang appointed him as Yajing, and he held this position for a long time.

古文：当是时，齐湣王彊，南败楚相唐眛於重丘，西摧三晋於观津，遂与三晋击秦，助赵灭中山，破宋，广地千馀里。
现代文：当时，齐湣王很强大，南边在重丘战败了楚国宰相唐眛，西边在观津打垮了魏国和赵国，随即又联合韩、赵、魏三国攻打秦国，还曾帮助赵国灭掉中山国，又打败了宋国，使齐国的领土增加了一千多里。
English: At that time, the king of Qi and Qin was very powerful. In the south, he defeated the prime minister of Chu, Tang Jun, in Chongqiu. In the west, he defeated Wei and Zhao in Guanzhong. He then joined forces with Han, Zhao and Wei to attack Qin. He also helped Zhao to eliminate Zhongshan and defeated Song, increasing the territory of Qi by more than a thousand miles.

古文：与秦昭王争重为帝，已而复归之。
现代文：他与秦昭王共同争取尊为帝号，不久后又自行取消了东帝的称号，仍归称王。
English: Together with Qin Zhao Wang, he fought for the title of emperor, and soon after he cancelled the title of Eastern Emperor on his own, but was still referred to as king.

古文：诸侯皆欲背秦而服於齐。
现代文：各诸侯国都打算背离秦国而归服齐国。
English: All the vassal states intended to abandon Qin and submit to Qi.

古文：湣王自矜，百姓弗堪。
现代文：可是齐湣王自尊自大很是骄横，百姓们已经不能忍受了。
English: However, King Qichen's self-importance and arrogance were very arrogant, and the people could no longer tolerate it.

古文：於是燕昭王问伐齐之事。
现代文：燕昭王认为攻打齐国的机会来了，就向乐毅询问有关攻打齐国的事情。
English: Yan Zhao Wang thought that the opportunity to attack Qi had come, so he asked Le Yi about the attack on Qi.

古文：乐毅对曰： 齐，霸国之馀业也，地大人众，未易独攻也。
现代文：乐毅回答说： 齐国，它原来就是霸国如今仍留着霸国的基业，这个国家土地辽阔，人口众多，可不能轻易地单独攻打它。
English: Le Yi replied, "Qi Guo, it was originally a hegemonic power and still retains the foundation of a hegemonic power. This country has vast land and a large population, and it cannot be easily attacked alone.

古文：王必欲伐之，莫如与赵及楚、魏。 
现代文：大王若一定要攻打它，不如联合赵国以及楚国、魏国一起攻击它。 
English: If the great king must attack it, it would be better to attack it together with Zhao, Chu and Wei.

古文：於是使乐毅约赵惠文王，别使连楚、魏，令赵嚪说秦以伐齐之利。
现代文：于是燕昭王派乐毅去与赵惠文王结盟立约，另外派出使臣去联合楚国、魏国，又让赵国以攻打齐国的好处去诱劝秦国。
English: As a result, King Yan Zhao sent Le Yi to form an alliance with King Zhao Huiwen and sign a treaty. In addition, he sent envoys to unite the states of Chu and Wei, and let the state of Zhao use the advantage of attacking the state of Qi to persuade the state of Qin.

古文：诸侯害齐湣王之骄暴，皆争合从与燕伐齐。
现代文：由于诸侯们认为齐湣王骄横暴虐，对自己终究会有害，都争着跟燕国联合共同讨伐齐国。
English: As the lords believed that the arrogance and tyranny of King Qichen would eventually be harmful to themselves, they all fought for a joint crusade against Qichen with Yan.

古文：乐毅还报，燕昭王悉起兵，使乐毅为上将军，赵惠文王以相国印授乐毅。
现代文：乐毅回来汇报了出使情况，燕昭王动员了全国的兵力，派乐毅担任上将军，赵惠文王把相国大印授给了乐毅。
English: Le Yi returned to report on the situation of the dispatch, Yan Zhao Wang mobilized the troops of the whole country and sent Le Yi to serve as a general, and Zhao Huiwen Wang awarded the Great Seal of the Motherland to Le Yi.

古文：乐毅於是并护赵、楚、韩、魏、燕之兵以伐齐，破之济西。
现代文：乐毅于是统一指挥着赵、楚、韩、魏、燕五国的军队去攻打齐国，在济水西边大败齐国军队。
English: Le Yi then unifiedly commanded the armies of Zhao, Chu, Han, Wei and Yan to attack Qi, and defeated the Qi army in the west of Jishui.

古文：诸侯兵罢归，而燕军乐毅独追，至于临菑。
现代文：这时各路诸侯的军队都停止了攻击，撤回本国，而燕国军队在乐毅指挥下单独追击败逃之敌，一直追到齐国都城临淄。
English: At this time, the armies of all the princes stopped attacking and withdrew to their own countries, while the Yan army, under the command of Le Yi, pursued and defeated the fleeing enemy all the way to Linyi, the capital of Qi.

古文：齐湣王之败济西，亡走，保於莒。
现代文：齐湣王在济水西边被打败后，就逃跑到莒邑并据城固守。
English: After being defeated on the west side of Jishui, King Qizhi fled to Zouyun and held on to the city.

古文：乐毅独留徇齐，齐皆城守。
现代文：乐毅单独留下来带兵巡行占领的地方，齐国各城邑都据城坚守不肯投降。
English: Le Yi was left alone to lead the troops to patrol the occupied areas, and all the cities and towns in Qi Province refused to surrender.

古文：乐毅攻入临菑，尽取齐宝财物祭器输之燕。
现代文：乐毅集中力量攻击临淄，拿下临淄后，把齐国的珍宝财物以及宗庙祭祀的器物全部夺取过来并把它们运到燕国去。
English: Le Yi concentrated his forces to attack Linyi. After taking Linyi, he seized all the treasures and properties of Qi and the sacrificial objects of the ancestral temple and transported them to Yan.

古文：燕昭王大说，亲至济上劳军，行赏飨士，封乐毅於昌国，号为昌国君。
现代文：燕昭王大喜，亲自赶到济水岸上慰劳军队，奖赏并用酒肉犒劳军队将士，把昌国封给乐毅，封号叫昌国君。
English: Yan Zhaowang was overjoyed and personally rushed to the bank of the Jishui River to console the laboring troops. He rewarded and rewarded the laboring soldiers with wine and meat. He gave the title of Chang Guo to Le Yi, and his title was Chang Guo Jun.

古文：於是燕昭王收齐卤获以归，而使乐毅复以兵平齐城之不下者。
现代文：当是燕昭王把在齐国夺取缴获的战利品带回了燕国，而让乐毅继续带兵进攻还没拿下来的齐国城邑。
English: It was Yan Zhao Wang who brought back the trophies captured in Qi Province to Yan Province, and let Le Yi continue to lead troops to attack the cities and towns of Qi Province that had not yet been taken down.

古文：乐毅留徇齐五岁，下齐七十馀城，皆为郡县以属燕，唯独莒、即墨未服。
现代文：乐毅留在齐国巡行作战五年，攻下齐国城邑七十多座，都划为郡县归属燕国，只有莒和即墨没有收服。
English: Le Yi stayed in Qi Province for five years and captured more than 70 cities and towns in Qi Province. All of them were classified as counties belonging to Yan Province. Only Yan and Jimo did not surrender.

古文：会燕昭王死，子立为燕惠王。
现代文：这时恰逢燕昭王死去，他的儿子立为燕惠王。
English: At this time, King Yan Zhao died, and his son became King Yan Hui.

古文：惠王自为太子时尝不快於乐毅，及即位，齐之田单闻之，乃纵反间於燕，曰： 齐城不下者两城耳。
现代文：惠王从做太子时就曾对乐毅有所不满，等他即位后，齐国的田单了解到他与乐毅有矛盾，就对燕国施行反间计，造谣说： 齐国城邑没有攻下的仅只两个城邑罢了。
English: Hui Wang had been dissatisfied with Le Yi from the time he was crown prince. After he ascended to the throne, Tian Shan of Qi learned that he had a conflict with Le Yi, so he carried out a countermeasure against Yan Guo and spread a rumor saying: There are only two cities and towns in Qi that have not been conquered.

古文：然所以不早拔者，闻乐毅与燕新王有隙，欲连兵且留齐，南面而王齐。
现代文：而迟迟无法攻克的原因，听说是乐毅与燕国新即位的国君有怨仇，乐毅断断续续用兵故意拖延时间姑且留在齐国，准备在齐国称王。
English: The reason for the delay in conquering the country is said to be that Le Yi had a grudge against the newly enthroned king of Yan. Le Yi used soldiers intermittently to deliberately delay the time and stay in Qi, preparing to claim the throne in Qi.

古文：齐之所患，唯恐他将之来。 
现代文：齐国人最担心的是燕王会派别的将军来接替乐毅。 
English: What the people of Qi were most worried about was that King Yan would send another general to succeed Le Yi.

古文：於是燕惠王固已疑乐毅，得齐反间，乃使骑劫代将，而召乐毅。
现代文：当时燕惠王本来就已经怀疑乐毅，又受到齐国反间计的挑拨，就派骑劫代替乐毅任将领，并召回乐毅。
English: At that time, Yan Hui Wang had already suspected Le Yi, and was also provoked by Qi's countermeasures. He sent the cavalry to replace Le Yi as general, and recalled Le Yi.

古文：乐毅知燕惠王之不善代之，畏诛，遂西降赵。
现代文：乐毅心里明白燕惠王派人代替自己是不怀好意的，害怕回国后被杀，便向西去投降了赵国。
English: Le Yi knew in his heart that it was not kind of Yan Hui Wang to send someone to replace him. He was afraid of being killed after returning to China, so he went west and surrendered Zhao.

古文：赵封乐毅於观津，号曰望诸君。
现代文：赵国把观津这个地方封给乐毅，封号叫望诸君。
English: Zhao Guo gave this place of Guanzin to Le Yi, and the sealing number was called Wang Zhujun.

古文：尊宠乐毅以警动於燕、齐。
现代文：赵国对乐毅十分尊重优宠借此来震动威慑燕国、齐国。
English: Zhao respected and favored Le Yi very much, and used this to shock and deter Yan and Qi.

古文：齐田单後与骑劫战，果设诈诳燕军，遂破骑劫於即墨下，而转战逐燕，北至河上，尽复得齐城，而迎襄王於莒，入于临菑。
现代文：齐国田单后来与骑劫交战，果然设置骗局用计谋迷惑燕军，结果在即墨城下把骑劫的军队打得大败，接着辗转战斗追逐燕军，向北直追到黄河边上，收复了齐国的全部城邑，并且把齐襄王从莒邑迎回都城临淄。
English: Tian Shan of Qi later fought with the cavalry, and indeed set up a trick to confuse the Yan army with a trick. As a result, he defeated the cavalry army at the foot of Zhimo City, and then chased the Yan army in a battle, and chased it northward to the edge of the Yellow River. He recovered all the cities in Qi, and welcomed the king of Qi Xiang back to the capital city of Linyi.

古文：燕惠王後悔使骑劫代乐毅，以故破军亡将失齐；又怨乐毅之降赵，恐赵用乐毅而乘燕之弊以伐燕。
现代文：燕惠王很后悔派骑劫代替乐毅，致使燕军惨败损兵折将丧失了占领的齐国土地；可是又怨恨乐毅投降赵国，担心赵国任用乐毅乘着燕国兵败疲困之机攻打燕国。
English: King Yan Hui regretted very much that he had sent the cavalry to take the place of Le Yi, resulting in the disastrous defeat of the Yan army and the loss of the occupied land of Qi; however, he also resented Le Yi's surrender to Zhao, fearing that Zhao would use Le Yi to attack Yan by taking advantage of the exhaustion of Yan's defeat.

古文：燕惠王乃使人让乐毅，且谢之曰： 先王举国而委将军，将军为燕破齐，报先王之雠，天下莫不震动，寡人岂敢一日而忘将军之功哉！
现代文：燕惠王就派人去赵国责备乐毅，同时向他道歉说： 先王把整个燕国委托给将军，将军为燕国战败齐国，替先王报了深仇大恨，天下人没有不震动的，我哪里有一天敢忘记将军的功劳呢！
English: King Yan Hui sent someone to Zhao to reproach Le Yi, and at the same time apologized to him, saying: The former king entrusted the entire Yan Kingdom to the general. The general defeated Qi for the Yan Kingdom, and reported deep hatred for the former king. There is no one in the world who is not shocked. How can I one day dare to forget the merits of the general!

古文：会先王弃群臣，寡人新即位，左右误寡人。
现代文：正遇上先王辞世，我本人初即位，是左右人耽误了我。
English: Just as the former king passed away, I myself was enthroned for the first time. It was the people around me who delayed me.

古文：寡人之使骑劫代将军，为将军久暴露於外，故召将军且休，计事。
现代文：我所以派骑劫代替将军，是因为将军长年在外，风餐露宿，因此召回将军暂且休整一下，也好共商朝政大计。
English: The reason why I sent the cavalry instead of the general is because the general has been away for many years, eating and sleeping rough, so I recalled the general to take a break for a while, or to discuss the general policy of the government.

古文：将军过听，以与寡人有隙，遂捐燕归赵。
现代文：不想将军误听传言，认为跟我有不融洽的地方，就抛弃了燕国而归附赵国。
English: Not wanting the general to mishear the rumor and think that there was something incompatible with me, he abandoned Yan Province and attached himself to Zhao Province.

古文：将军自为计则可矣，而亦何以报先王之所以遇将军之意乎？ 
现代文：将军从为自己打算那是可以的，可是又怎么对得住先王待将军的一片深情厚意呢？ 
English: It was all right for the general to think for himself, but how could he live up to the former king's deep affection for the general?

古文：乐毅报遗燕惠王书曰：
现代文：乐毅写了一封回信给惠王，信中说：
English: Le Yi wrote a letter in reply to Hui Wang, saying:

古文：臣不佞，不能奉承王命，以顺左右之心，恐伤先王之明，有害足下之义，故遁逃走赵。
现代文：臣下没有才干，不能恭奉您的命令，来顺从您身边人的心愿，我害怕回国有不测之事因而有损先王的英明，对您的德行也有所损害，因此才从齐国逃跑投奔了赵国。
English: My vassals are incompetent and unable to obey your orders and follow the wishes of those around you. I am afraid that if I return to the country, something unexpected will happen, which will damage the wisdom of the former king and your virtue. Therefore, I fled from Qi Province to Zhao Province.

古文：今足下使人数之以罪，臣恐侍御者不察先王之所以畜幸臣之理，又不白臣之所以事先王之心，故敢以书对。
现代文：现在您派人来指责我的罪过，我怕先王的侍从不能体察先王收留、宠信我的道理，又不清楚我用来奉事先王的诚心，所以冒昧地用信来回答您的问题。
English: Now that you have sent someone to accuse me of sin, I am afraid that the former king's attendant cannot appreciate the reason why the former king received me and favored me, and does not know that I used to serve the former king's sincerity, so I have the audacity to answer your question by letter.

古文：臣闻贤圣之君不以禄私亲，其功多者赏之，其能当者处之。
现代文：我听说贤能圣明的君主不拿爵禄偏赏给亲近的人，功劳多的就奖赏，能力胜任的就举用他。
English: I have heard that a wise and saintly monarch does not give preferential treatment to those who are close to him, but rewards those who have done more, and promotes those who are competent.

古文：故察能而授官者，成功之君也；论行而结交者，立名之士也。
现代文：所以考察才能然后授给官职的，是能够成就功业的君主。衡量品行之后才与人结交为朋友，是可以树立声誉的贤士。
English: Therefore, it is the monarch who is able to accomplish the work who examines the talent and then confers the official position. It is the wise man who can establish a reputation who makes friends with people only after measuring the character.

古文：臣窃观先王之举也，见有高世主之心，故假节於魏，以身得察於燕。
现代文：我暗中观察先王的举止，看到他有超出一般君主的心志，所以我借为魏国出使之机，到燕国献身接受考察。
English: I secretly observed the behavior of the former king and saw that he had aspirations beyond those of an ordinary monarch, so I took advantage of the opportunity for Wei to devote myself to Yan.

古文：先王过举，厕之宾客之中，立之群臣之上，不谋父兄，以为亚卿。
现代文：先王格外抬举我，先把我列入宾客之中，又把我选拔出来高居群臣之上，没有同王室中的长辈商量，就任命我为亚卿。
English: The late king held me in high esteem. He first included me among the guests, then selected me to be higher than the other courtiers, and without consulting the elders in the royal family, he appointed me as second-in-command.

古文：臣窃不自知，自以为奉令承教，可幸无罪，故受令而不辞。
现代文：我自己也缺乏自知之明，自认为只要执行命令接受教导，就能侥幸免于犯罪，所以接受任命而不推辞。
English: I myself lacked self-awareness and thought that as long as I carried out orders and received instruction, I would be able to get away with the crime, so I accepted the appointment without hesitation.

古文：先王命之曰： 我有积怨深怒於齐，不量轻弱，而欲以齐为事。 
现代文：先王指示我说： 我跟齐国的仇恨积攒很久了，深深恼恨齐国，不去估量燕国的弱小，也要把向齐国复仇当作我自己的事情来办。 
English: The Ancestor King instructed me to say, "I've been harboring hatred for Qi for a long time. I'm deeply angry with Qi. I don't want to underestimate the weakness of Yan, and I want to take revenge on Qi as my own business.

古文：臣曰： 夫齐，霸国之馀业而最胜之遗事也。
现代文：我说： 那个齐国，至今保留着霸国的基业，而又有多次作战取胜的经验。
English: I said: That Qi country still retains the foundation of hegemony, and has the experience of winning multiple battles.

古文：练於兵甲，习於战攻。
现代文：士兵训练有素，熟练地掌握攻战方略。
English: The soldiers are well-trained and have a good grasp of the offensive strategy.

古文：王若欲伐之，必与天下图之。
现代文：大王若要攻打它，必须与天下诸侯联合共同图谋它。
English: If the great king wants to attack it, he must unite with all the princes of the world to jointly plot it.

古文：与天下图之，莫若结於赵。
现代文：若要与天下诸侯图谋它，没有比赵国更合适的了。
English: If you want to seek it with the world's princes, there is nothing more suitable than Zhao.

古文：且又淮北、宋地，楚魏之所欲也，赵若许而约四国攻之，齐可大破也。 
现代文：而且淮北、原属宋国的地区，是楚、魏两国分别想要得到的地方，赵国如果答应结盟就约好四国联合攻打它，这样齐国就可以被彻底打败。 
English: Moreover, Huaibei, the area originally belonging to Song, was a place that Chu and Wei wanted to get separately. If Zhao promised an alliance, the four countries agreed to jointly attack it, so that Qi could be completely defeated.

古文：先王以为然，具符节南使臣於赵。
现代文：先王认为我的主张对，就准备了符节派我南去赵国。
English: The previous king thought my idea was right, so he prepared a rune festival and sent me south to Zhao.

古文：顾反命，起兵击齐。
现代文：很快我就归国复命，随即发兵攻打齐国。
English: I soon returned to my country and immediately sent troops to attack Qi.

古文：以天之道，先王之灵，河北之地随先王而举之济上。
现代文：靠着上天的引导，先王的神威，黄河以北地区的赵、魏两国军队随着先王全部到达济水岸上。
English: Relying on the guidance of heaven, the divine power of the first king, the armies of Zhao and Wei in the area north of the Yellow River all arrived on the shore of Jishui with the first king.

古文：济上之军受命击齐，大败齐人。
现代文：济水岸上的军队接受命令攻击齐军，把齐国人打得大败。
English: The troops on the banks of the Jishui River received orders to attack the Qi army and defeated the Qi people.

古文：轻卒锐兵，长驱至国。
现代文：我们轻快的精锐部队，长驱直入直抵齐国国都。
English: Our nimble elite troops drove straight into the capital of Qi.

古文：齐王遁而走莒，仅以身免；珠玉财宝车甲珍器尽收入于燕。
现代文：齐王只身逃跑奔向莒邑，只有他一人免于身亡；珠玉财宝战车盔甲以及珍贵的祭祀器物全部缴获送回燕国。
English: King Qi himself fled to the city of Yan, and he was the only one to escape death; the precious treasure chariot armor and precious sacrificial objects were all seized and sent back to Yan's country.

古文：齐器设於宁台，大吕陈於元英，故鼎反乎室，蓟丘之植植於汶篁，自五伯已来，功未有及先王者也。
现代文：齐国的祭器摆设在宁台，大吕钟陈列在元英殿；被齐国掠去的原燕国宝鼎又从齐国取来放回磿室，蓟丘的植物中种植着从齐国汶水移植来的竹子，自五霸以来功业没有赶上先王的。
English: The sacrificial vessels of the State of Qi were placed in Ningdai, the Great Lu Clock was displayed in the Yuanying Hall; the original Yan Guo Baoding, which had been plundered by the State of Qi, was taken from the State of Qi and placed back in the antechamber; the bamboo transplanted from the Wen Shui of the State of Qi was planted in the plants of the reed mound. Since the Five Dynasties, the work has not caught up with that of the former king.

古文：先王以为慊於志，故裂地而封之，使得比小国诸侯。
现代文：先王认为自己的志向得到满足，所以划出一块地方赏赐给我，使我能比同小国的诸侯。
English: The previous king thought that his ambition had been satisfied, so he set aside a piece of land to reward me, so that I could compete with the princes of small countries.

古文：臣窃不自知，自以为奉命承教，可幸无罪，是以受命不辞。
现代文：我听说贤能圣明的君主，功业建立而不废驰，所以能写在《春秋》一类的史书上；有远见的贤士，名声取得后不会让它败坏，所以能被后人称颂。
English: I have heard that a wise and saintly monarch, whose achievements are built up and not wasted, can be written in history books such as "Spring and Autumn"; a far-sighted sage, who will not let his reputation deteriorate after he gains it, can be praised by future generations.

古文：臣闻贤圣之君，功立而不废，故著於春秋；蚤知之士，名成而不毁，故称於後世。若先王之报怨雪耻，夷万乘之彊国，收八百岁之蓄积，及至弃群臣之日，馀教未衰，执政任事之臣，脩法令，慎庶孽，施及乎萌隶，皆可以教後世。
现代文：像先王那样报仇雪恨，平定了具有万辆兵车的强大国家，缴获了齐国八百多年所积存的珍贵宝物，等到先王辞世之日，还留下政令训示，指示执政掌权的臣属，修整法令，慎重地对待庶出子弟，把恩泽推及到百姓身上，这些都可以拿来教导后世。
English: Like the previous king, he took revenge on his enemies, pacified a powerful country with ten thousand chariots, and seized the precious treasures accumulated by Qi for more than eight hundred years. Until the day of the death of the previous king, he also left instructions on government decrees, instructed subordinates in power, revised decrees, treated illegitimate children carefully, and extended grace to the people. All of these can be used to teach future generations.

古文：臣闻之，善作者不必善成，善始者不必善终。
现代文：我听过这种说法，善于开创的不一定善于守成，开端好的不一定结局好。
English: I've heard this saying, good at creating is not necessarily good at preserving, good at starting is not necessarily good at finishing.

古文：昔伍子胥说听於阖闾，而吴王远迹至郢；夫差弗是也，赐之鸱夷而浮之江。
现代文：从前伍子胥的主张被吴王阖闾采纳，吴王带兵一直打到楚国郢都；吴王夫差不采纳伍子胥的正确建议，却赐给他马革囊袋逼他自杀，把他的尸骨装在袋子里扔到江里漂流。
English: In the past, Wu Zixuan's proposal was adopted by Wu Wangtao, and Wu Wangtao led the troops all the way to the capital of Chu State; Wu Wangfu almost did not accept Wu Zixuan's correct suggestion, but gave him a bag of horse manure to force him to commit suicide, and put his bones in the bag and threw it into the river.

古文：吴王不寤先论之可以立功，故沈子胥而不悔；子胥不蚤见主之不同量，是以至於入江而不化。
现代文：吴王夫差不明白先前伍子胥的主张能够建立功业，所以把伍子胥沉入江里而不后悔；伍子胥也不能预见君主的气量、抱负各不相同，因此致使被沉入江里而死不瞑目。
English: Wu Wangfu did not understand that Wu Zixuan's previous claim could build a career, so he sank Wu Zixuan into the river without regret; Wu Zixuan could not foresee that the monarch's energy and ambitions were different, so he was sunk into the river and died.

古文：夫免身立功，以明先王之迹，臣之上计也。
现代文：免遭杀身之祸而建功立业，使先王的功业得到彰显，这是我的上策。
English: It is my best strategy to avoid the scourge of suicide and to make contributions and achievements, so that the achievements of the former king can be highlighted.

古文：离毁辱之诽谤，堕先王之名，臣之所大恐也。
现代文：遭到侮辱以至诽谤，毁坏先王的声誉，这是我所最害怕的事情。
English: To be insulted and slandered, and to ruin the reputation of the late king, is what I fear the most.

古文：临不测之罪，以幸为利，义之所不敢出也。
现代文：面临难以预测的罪过，把幸免于杀身之祸作为个人渔利的机会，这是恪守道义的人所不敢作出的事情。
English: Faced with an unforeseeable crime, it is something that a moral person would not dare to do, to take the opportunity of being spared from the scourge of killing as an opportunity for personal gain.

古文：臣闻古之君子，交绝不出恶声；忠臣去国，不絜其名。
现代文：我听说古代的君子，在与人断绝交往时不说别人的坏话；忠良的臣子离开原来的国家，不洗雪自己的罪过和冤屈。
English: I have heard that ancient gentlemen did not speak ill of others when they broke off relations with people; loyal courtiers left their original country and did not wash away their sins and grievances.

古文：臣虽不佞，数奉教於君子矣。
现代文：我虽然没有才能，但多次聆听君子的教导了。
English: Although I have no talent, I have listened to the gentleman's teachings many times.

古文：恐侍御者之亲左右之说，不察疏远之行，故敢献书以闻，唯君王之留意焉。
现代文：我恐怕您深信侍从所说谗言，不能体察我疏远您的原因。所以献上这封信把我的心意告诉您。希望君王留意吧。
English: I am afraid that you are convinced by your servant's words and cannot understand why I have distanced myself from you, so I am writing this letter to let you know my feelings. I hope the king will pay attention.

古文：於是燕王复以乐毅子乐间为昌国君；而乐毅往来复通燕，燕、赵以为客卿。
现代文：于是燕惠王又把乐毅的儿子乐间封为昌国君；而乐毅往来于赵国、燕国之间，与燕国重新交好，燕、赵两国都任用他为客卿。
English: As a result, King Yan Hui also crowned Leyi's son Lezhong as the prince of Chang; while Leyi went back and forth between Zhao and Yan, and renewed his friendship with Yan. Both Yan and Zhao appointed him as a guest of honor.

古文：乐毅卒於赵。
现代文：乐毅死于赵国。
English: Le Yi died in Zhao Province.

古文：乐间居燕三十馀年，燕王喜用其相栗腹之计，欲攻赵，而问昌国君乐间。
现代文：乐间住在燕国三十多年，燕王喜采用他的宰相栗腹的计策，打算攻打赵国，便询问昌国君乐间。
English: Lema lived in Yan for more than thirty years. Yan Wangxi used his prime minister's chestnut-bellied strategy to attack Zhao, and then inquired about Chang.

古文：乐间曰： 赵，四战之国也，其民习兵，伐之不可。 
现代文：乐间说： 赵国，是同四方交战的国家，它的百姓熟悉军事，攻打它是不行的。 
English: Rama said: Zhao is a country at war with four sides. Its people are familiar with military affairs. It is not possible to attack it.

古文：燕王不听，遂伐赵。
现代文：燕王喜不听，于是攻打赵国。
English: Yan Wang did not listen, so he attacked Zhao.

古文：赵使廉颇击之，大破栗腹之军於鄗，禽栗腹、乐乘。
现代文：赵国廉颇还击燕军，在鄗地把栗腹的军队打得大败，擒获了栗腹、乐乘。
English: Zhao Guoliang fought back against Yan's army, and defeated the chestnut-bellied army in Shunde, capturing Chestnut-bellied and Le Rong.

古文：乐乘者，乐间之宗也。
现代文：乐乘，与乐间是同祖。
English: Le Rong and Le Ma are cousins.

古文：於是乐间奔赵，赵遂围燕。
现代文：于是乐间逃到赵国，赵国于是攻燕国。
English: So Le fled to Zhao, and Zhao attacked Yan.

古文：燕重割地以与赵和，赵乃解而去。
现代文：燕国割让了许多土地向赵国求和。赵军才解围而去。
English: Yan ceded a lot of land to Zhao to sue for peace. Zhao's army was able to break the siege and leave.

古文：燕王恨不用乐间，乐间既在赵，乃遗乐间书曰： 纣之时，箕子不用，犯谏不怠，以冀其听；商容不达，身祇辱焉，以冀其变。
现代文：燕王悔恨没听用乐间的建议，乐间已经在赵国，就给乐间写了一封信说： 殷纣王时，箕子不被任用，但他敢于冒犯君王，直言谏诤，毫不懈怠，希望纣王听信；商容因劝谏纣王而被贬谪，他身受侮辱，仍希望纣王改弦更张。
English: Yan Wang regretted that he did not listen to the advice of Le Meng. Le Meng was already in Zhao, so he wrote a letter to Le Meng saying: When Yin was king, Zengzi was not appointed, but he dared to offend the king, spoke frankly, and did not slacken, hoping that the king would listen; Shang Rong was demeaned for persuading the king, he was insulted, and still hoped that the king would change his mind.

古文：及民志不入，狱囚自出，然後二子退隐。
现代文：等到民心涣散，狱中的囚犯纷纷逃出，国家已不可救药，然后两位先生才辞官隐居。
English: It was not until public opinion had soured, the prisoners had escaped and the country was beyond redemption that the two gentlemen resigned their posts and went into seclusion.

古文：故纣负桀暴之累，二子不失忠圣之名。
现代文：因此纣王背上了凶暴的恶名，两位先生却不失忠诚、高尚的美誉。
English: As a result, Shao Wang gained a bad reputation for violence, but the two gentlemen did not lose their reputation for loyalty and nobility.

古文：何者？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：其忧患之尽矣。
现代文：他竭尽了为君为国而忧虑的责任。
English: He has done his duty to worry about you and the country.

古文：今寡人虽愚，不若纣之暴也；燕民虽乱，不若殷民之甚也。
现代文：现在我虽然愚钝，但还不像殷纣那么凶暴；燕国百姓虽不安定，但也不像殷朝百姓那么严重。
English: Now, although I am stupid, I am not as violent as Yin Xi; although the people of Yan are unstable, they are not as serious as the people of the Yin Dynasty.

古文：室有语，不相尽，以告邻里。
现代文：有道是，家庭内部有了纷争，不尽述自己的意见，却去告诉邻里。
English: There is a way, there is a dispute within the family, do not fully disclose their own opinions, but go to tell the neighbors.

古文：二者，寡人不为君取也。 
现代文：这两种做法，我认为是不可取的。 
English: In my opinion, both of these approaches are undesirable.

古文：乐间、乐乘怨燕不听其计，二人卒留赵。
现代文：乐间、乐乘怨恨燕王不听从他们的计策，两个人终于留在赵国。
English: Le Zi, Le Rong and Yan Wang did not listen to their strategy, and the two finally stayed in Zhao.

古文：赵封乐乘为武襄君。
现代文：赵国封乐乘为武襄君。
English: Zhao Guofeng took the role of Wu Xiangjun.

古文：其明年，乐乘、廉颇为赵围燕，燕重礼以和，乃解。
现代文：第二年，乐乘、廉颇为赵国围困燕国，燕国用厚礼向赵国求和，赵军才接触对燕国的围困。
English: In the second year, Le Rong and Liang Bo besieged Yan with the help of Zhao, and Yan sued for peace with Zhao. It was only then that Zhao's army encountered the siege of Yan.

古文：後五岁，赵孝成王卒。
现代文：五年之后，赵孝成王去世。
English: Five years later, Zhao Xiaocheng Wang passed away.

古文：襄王使乐乘代廉颇。
现代文：悼襄王派乐乘代替廉颇的官职。
English: In mourning for King Xiang, he sent Le Rong to replace the corrupt official.

古文：廉颇攻乐乘，乐乘走，廉颇亡入魏。
现代文：廉颇攻打乐乘，乐乘逃奔，廉颇也逃到魏国。
English: Liang Po attacked Le Rong, Le Rong fled, Liang Po also fled to Wei.

古文：其後十六年而秦灭赵。
现代文：又过了十六年后，秦国灭掉了赵国。
English: Sixteen years later, Qin wiped out Zhao.

古文：其後二十馀年，高帝过赵，问： 乐毅有後世乎？ 
现代文：又过了二十多年，汉高帝经过原来赵国属地，问那里的人说： 乐毅有后代吗？ 
English: More than twenty years later, Emperor Han Gao passed through the former territory of Zhao, and asked the people there: "Does Le Yi have descendants?

古文：对曰： 有乐叔。 
现代文：回答说： 有个乐叔。 
English: He replied, "There is Uncle Le.

古文：高帝封之乐卿，号曰华成君。
现代文：汉高帝把乐卿封赐给他，封号称华成君。
English: Emperor Han Gao gave him the title of Leqing, and he was called Huachengjun.

古文：华成君，乐毅之孙也。
现代文：华成君就是乐毅的孙子。
English: Hua Chengjun is the grandson of Le Yi.

古文：而乐氏之族有乐瑕公、乐臣公，赵且为秦所灭，亡之齐高密。
现代文：乐氏家族还有乐瑕公、乐臣公，他们是在赵国将要被秦国灭掉时逃到齐国高密的。
English: The Le family, as well as Lord Le Ge, and Lord Le Son, fled to Gaomi in the State of Qi when the State of Zhao was about to be destroyed by the State of Qin.

古文：乐臣公善修黄帝、老子之言，显闻於齐，称贤师。
现代文：乐臣公长于研究黄帝、老子的学说，在齐国很有名气，人们称他为贤师。
English: Prince Le Zhen studied the teachings of the Yellow Emperor and Laozi. He was very famous in Qi, and people called him a wise teacher.

古文：太史公曰：始齐之蒯通及主父偃读乐毅之报燕王书，未尝不废书而泣也。
现代文：太史公说： 当初齐人蒯通和主父偃读乐毅给燕王的那封信时，都曾不禁放下书信掉下眼泪来。
English: Taishikong said: At the beginning, when Qi Rengtong and his father Zou read the letter from Le Yi to Yan Wang, they couldn't help but put down the letter and shed tears.

古文：乐臣公学黄帝、老子，其本师号曰河上丈人，不知其所出。
现代文：乐臣公钻研黄帝、老子的学说，他的宗师叫做河上丈人，现在还不清楚河上丈人是那里人。
English: Le Zheng studied the teachings of the Yellow Emperor and Laozi. His master was called Kawakami Zojin. It is still unclear where Kawakami Zojin was from.

古文：河上丈人教安期生，安期生教毛翕公，毛翕公教乐瑕公，乐瑕公教乐臣公，乐臣公教盖公。
现代文：河上丈人教安期生，安期生教毛翕公，毛翕公教乐瑕公，乐瑕公教乐臣公。乐臣教盖公。
English: Kawakami's father-in-law taught An, An taught Mao, Mao taught Le Guo, Le Guo taught Le Son, and Le Son taught Gai.

古文：盖公教於齐高密、胶西，为曹相国师。
现代文：盖公在齐地高密、胶西一带执教，是曹相国的老师。
English: Gai Gong teaches in Qidi Gaomi and Jiaoxi, and is a teacher in Cao Xiangguo.

