古文：宋隐，字处默，西河介休人也。
现代文：宋隐，字处默，是西河介休人。
English: Song Yin, whose family name means "silent," was dismissed from his post as the governor of the West River.

古文：曾祖奭，晋昌黎太守。
现代文：曾祖父宋奭，任置昌黎太守。
English: His great-grandfather, Song Xi, appointed Chang Li as the regent.

古文：后为慕容廆长史。
现代文：后来任慕容廆长史。
English: Later, he was appointed as Murong Xuan Changshi.

古文：祖活，中书监。
现代文：祖父宋活，任中书监。
English: His grandfather, Song Hu, served as the school's librarian.

古文：父恭，尚书，徐州刺史。
现代文：父亲宋恭，任尚书、徐业刺史。
English: His father Song Qiong, Ren Shangshu and Xu Ye stabbed history.

古文：慕容俊徙鄴，恭始家于广平列人焉。
现代文：慕容俊迁都邺城，在广平乏恭始家。
English: Murong Jun moved to Tudor City and started his family in Guangping.

古文：隐性至孝，年十三，便有成人之志，专精好学，不以兵难易操。
现代文：宋隐极孝顺，十三岁时，就立志成才，专心学习，没因战乱而改变。
English: Song Yin was extremely filial and obedient. At the age of thirteen, he was determined to become a scholar and concentrated on his studies. He did not change because of the war.

古文：仕慕容垂，历尚书郎、太子中舍人、本州别驾。
现代文：在慕容垂手下做官，历任尚书郎、太子中舍人、本州别驾。
English: He served as an official under Murong Tie, and successively held the positions of Shang Shuro, Prince's Junior Advisor, and Honshu Governor.

古文：太祖平中山，拜隐尚书吏部郎。
现代文：太祖平定中山，任命宋隐为尚书吏部郎。
English: Emperor Taizu subdued Zhongshan and appointed Song Yin as his secretary.

古文：车驾还北，诏隐以本官辅卫王仪镇中山。
现代文：皇上返回北方，令宋隐以本官辅佐卫王元仪镇守中山。
English: When the emperor returned to the north, he ordered Song Ying to use his own official, the assistant of King Sawei Yuan Yi, to guard Zhongshan.

古文：寻转行台右丞，领选如故。
现代文：不久改任行台右丞，领吏部如故。
English: He was soon reassigned to the post of Gangdai Ujo, and remained in charge of the Consular Section until his death.

古文：拜以老病乞骸骨，太祖不许。寻以母丧归列人。
现代文：连续多次以年老有病请求退休，太祖不答应不久因母亲去世回列入。
English: He repeatedly asked to retire due to old age and illness, but his great-grandfather did not agree to be reinstated due to his mother's death.

古文：既葬，被徵，固辞以病，而州郡切以期会，隐乃弃妻子，间行避焉。
现代文：安葬以后，被征召，以有病坚决辞谢，而州郡则让其限期赴任，宋隐于是离开妻子儿女，悄悄地躲避。
English: After his burial, he was conscripted, but he refused to go because he was ill, and the prefectural government gave him a deadline to take up the post. So Song Yin left his wife and children and quietly went into hiding.

古文：后匿于长乐之经县，数年而卒。
现代文：后来藏匿在长乐的经县，几年后去世。
English: He later hid in Jing County, Changle, and died a few years later.

古文：临终谓其子侄等曰： 苟能入顺父兄，出悌乡党，仕郡幸而至功曹史，以忠清奉之，则足矣，不劳远诣台阁。
现代文：临终对他的子侄等人说： 假使能在家孝顺父兄，在外舆乡亲和睦相处，有幸在郡中做官做到功曹史，以忠诚清廉奉职，就够了，不需远赴朝廷。
English: On his deathbed, he said to his sons and nephews, "If you can be filial to your father and brother at home, if you can live in harmony with your fellow countrymen abroad, and if you are fortunate enough to be a meritorious official in the county, and if you can perform your duties with loyalty and integrity, that will be enough. You don't have to go far to the imperial court.

古文：恐汝不能富贵，而徒延门户之累耳。
现代文：恐怕你们不能富贵，却使家庭受牵连。
English: I'm afraid you can't be rich and have your family involved.

古文：若忘吾言，是为无若父也，使鬼而有知，吾不归食矣。 
现代文：如果忘记我的话，就是没有你们的父亲，假使地下有知，我不受祭祀啊。 
English: If you forget me, you will not have your father. If the underground knew, I would not be sacrificed.

古文：有五子。
现代文：他有五个儿子。
English: He has five sons.

古文：第三子温，世祖时徵拜中书博士。
现代文：第三个儿子宋温。世祖时任中书博士。
English: The third son, Song Wen, was a professor of Chinese calligraphy at the time.

古文：卒，追赠建威将军、豫州刺史，列人定侯。
现代文：去世后被追赠为建威将军、豫州刺史、列人定侯。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the titles of General Jian Wei, Yuzhou Jishi, and Renren Dinghou.

古文：温弟演，显祖初从征彭城有功，拜明威将军、济北太守。
现代文：宋温的弟弟宋演，显祖初年跟从征讨壁继有功，被任命为明威将军、济北太守。
English: Song Wen's younger brother, Song En, was appointed as the Mingwei general and the governor of Jibei in the first year of Emperor Xuanzong's reign.

古文：演子鲋，字伯鱼。
现代文：宋演的儿子宋鲋，字伯鱼。
English: Song Song, the son of Song Yuen, is also known as Song Bo Yu.

古文：州别驾。
现代文：任州别驾。
English: It doesn't matter what state.

古文：隐弟辅，字处仁。
现代文：宋隐的弟弟宋辅，字处仁。
English: Song Yin's younger brother, Song Sui, surnamed Duan.

古文：少慷慨有大操，博览群书。
现代文：年轻时慷慨有大志，博览群书。
English: When he was young, he was generous, ambitious, and well-read.

古文：州辟别驾。
现代文：州举荐为别驾。
English: Don't rely on state recommendations.

古文：早卒。
现代文：过早去世。
English: He died at an early age.

古文：隐叔父洽，为慕容垂尚书。
现代文：宋隐的叔父宋洽，任慕容垂的尚书。
English: Song Jia, the uncle of Song Ying, is a famous poet.

古文：太祖之围中山也，洽率所领专守北围。
现代文：太祖包围虫山，宋洽率所部专守北部。
English: Taizu encircled Mushroom Mountain, and Song Chao led his troops to defend the northern part of the province.

古文：当洽所统，官军多被伤杀，太祖特深忿恨。
现代文：宋洽所辖，官军多受伤被杀，太祖对他特别忿恨。
English: Under the jurisdiction of Song Ci, the official army was injured and killed, and the great-grandfather was particularly angry with him.

古文：及城平，遂杀之。
现代文：等到城池平定，就杀了他。
English: Wait until the city is pacified, then kill him.

古文：子顺、训并下腐刑。
现代文：儿子宋顺、宋训都受腐刑。
English: His sons, Song Shun and Song Xun, were both sentenced for corruption.

古文：洽第四子宣，字道茂，时年数岁，亲人窃逃以免。
现代文：宋洽的第四个儿子宋宣，字道茂，当时衹有几岁，亲人带其逃出得免于难。
English: Song Chao's fourth son, Song Xuan, also known as Dao Mao, was only a few years old at the time, and his relatives were able to escape with him.

古文：后与范阳庐玄、勃海高允及从子愔俱被徵，拜中书博士。
现代文：后来与范阳人卢玄、勃海人高允及侄子宋情一起被征入，任中书博士。
English: Later, he was conscripted together with Lu Xuan from Fanyang, Gao Yun from Bohai, and his nephew Song Liang, and was appointed as a Doctor of Chinese Calligraphy.

古文：寻兼散骑常侍，使刘义隆。
现代文：不久兼散骑常侍，出使刘义隆。
English: Soon after, Liu Yilong, also a samurai, was dispatched.

古文：加冠军将军，赐爵中都侯，领中书侍郎，行司隶校尉。
现代文：加授冠军将军，赐爵中都侯，领中书侍郎，行司隶校尉。
English: He was additionally awarded the title of Champion General, given the title of Duke of Chu, the title of Junior Secretary, and the rank of Senior Lieutenant.

古文：真君七年卒，赠司隶，谥简侯。
现代文：真君七年去世，追赠为司隶校尉，谧号为简侯。
English: Mankun died seven years later and was posthumously awarded the rank of lieutenant of Sili, and his posthumous name was Jianhou.

古文：子谟，字乾仁，袭爵。
现代文：儿子宋谟，字乾仁，继承爵位。
English: His son Song Moo, surnamed Qianren, succeeded to the title.

古文：卒于辽西太守。
现代文：任辽西太守时去世。
English: He died while serving as Liaoxi's governor-general.

古文：子鸾，字珍和，袭爵。
现代文：儿子宋鸾，字珍和，继承爵位。
English: The son of Song Xi, Zi Zhenhe, succeeded to the title.

古文：东莞太守。
现代文：任东莞太守。
English: He was appointed governor of Dongguan.

古文：鸾弟琼，字普贤。
现代文：宋鸾的弟弟宋琼，字普贤。
English: Song Kun's younger brother Song Qiong, surnamed Pu Xian.

古文：少以孝行称，母曾病，季秋之月，思瓜不已。
现代文：年轻时以孝顺着称，母亲生病，深秋九月，想吃瓜。
English: When he was young, he was known for his filial piety. When his mother fell ill, in late autumn and September, he wanted to eat melon.

古文：琼梦想见之，求而遂获。时人称异。
现代文：塞堕梦见瓜，求而竟得，人们称为异事。
English: To see a melon in a dream, to ask for it and get it, people call it a strange thing.

古文：母终，州郡屡辟，皆不就。
现代文：母亲去世后，州郡屡次举荐，都不接受。
English: After his mother's death, Shuzhou County repeatedly recommended him, but he was not accepted.

古文：卒于家。
现代文：在家中去世。
English: He died at home.

古文：子仲美，武定末，尚书水部郎。
现代文：儿子仲美，武定末年，任尚书水部郎。
English: His son, Nakami, in the last years of the reign of Emperor Wuding, became the Minister of Education and Culture.

古文：王宪，字显则，北海剧人也。
现代文：王宪，字显则，北海剧县人。
English: Wang Xian, the character Xianzhe, is from Beichai County.

古文：祖猛，苻坚丞相。
现代文：祖父王猛，是苻坚的丞相。
English: His grandfather, Wang Meng, was a staunch chancellor.

古文：父休，河东太守。
现代文：父亲王休，任河东太守。
English: His father, Wang Xiu, served as the governor of Hedong Province.

古文：宪幼孤，随伯父永在鄴。
现代文：王宪幼年丧父，跟着伯父王永在邺城。
English: Wang Xian lost his father at a young age and followed his uncle Wang Yong in Lucheng.

古文：苻丕称尊号，复以永为丞相。
现代文：苻丕称帝，又任命王永为丞相。
English: He proclaimed himself emperor and appointed Wang Yong as chancellor.

古文：永为慕容永所杀，宪奔清河，匿于民家。
现代文：王永被慕容永杀害，王宪投奔清河，藏在百姓家。
English: Wang Yong was killed by Murong Yong, Wang Xian ran to the Qinghe River and hid in a commoner's house.

古文：皇始中，舆驾次赵郡之高邑，宪乃归诚。
现代文：皇始年间，皇上驻在趟郡的高邑，王宪于是投诚。
English: During the early years of the reign of the emperor, the emperor resided in Gaoyu, Watarishun, and Wang Xian then joined him.

古文：太祖见之，曰： 此王猛孙也。 
现代文：太祖见到他，说： 这是王猛的孙子。 
English: When the great-grandfather saw him, he said, "This is Wang Meng's grandson."

古文：厚礼待之，以为本州中正，领选曹事，兼掌门下。
现代文：厚礼相待，任命他为本州中正，领选曹事，兼掌门下省。
English: They treated each other with great courtesy, and appointed him as the head of the central government of Honshu, the chief selector, and the head of the province.

古文：世祖即位，行廷尉卿。
现代文：世祖即位，行廷尉卿。
English: The founder ascends to the throne, and the court lieutenant leaves.

古文：出为上谷太守，加中垒将军，赐爵高唐子。
现代文：出任上谷太守，加授中垒将军，赐给爵位为高唐子。
English: He was appointed the governor of Shanggu, promoted to the rank of middle general, and given the title of high Tang son.

古文：清身率下，风化大行。
现代文：清廉自律作下属的表率，风气盛行。
English: A culture of integrity and self-discipline as an example for subordinates prevails.

古文：寻拜外都大官，后为中都。
现代文：不久任外都大官，后来任中都大官。
English: He was soon appointed as a foreign major official, and later as a central major official.

古文：历任二曹，断狱称旨，进爵剧县侯，加龙骧将军。
现代文：历任二曹职官，审理和判决案件符合上意，晋爵剧县侯，加授龙骧将军。
English: Successive second sergeant officials, the trial and judgment of the case in line with the above intention, the promotion to the peerage of the drama county, and the award of the Longjing general.

古文：出为并州刺史，加安南将军，进爵北海公，境内清肃。及还京师，以宪元老，特赐锦绣、布帛、绵彩、珍羞、礼膳。
现代文：出任并州刺史，加授安南将军，晋爵北海公，境内大治及返回京师，朝廷因他是老臣，特别赐给锦绣、布帛、绵彩、珍馐、礼膳。
English: He was awarded the title of General Annan, the title of Duke of the North Sea, the title of Grand Marshal of China, and the title of Grand Master of the Imperial Court. Because he was a senior minister, the Imperial Court gave him special awards of brocade embroidery, cloth embroidery, cotton embroidery, precious brocade, and ceremonial meal.

古文：天安初卒，年八十九。
现代文：天安初年去世，终年八十九岁。
English: Tian'an died in the first year of the year, at the age of eighty-nine.

古文：赠镇南将军、青州刺史，谥曰康。
现代文：被追赠为镇南将军、青州刺史，谧号为康。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Zhenan Shogun and Qingzhou Shishi, and his nickname was Kang.

古文：子崇，袭。
现代文：儿子王崇，继承爵位。
English: His son, Wang Chong, succeeded to the title.

古文：早卒。
现代文：去世过早。
English: He died at an early age.

古文：子仲智袭。
现代文：儿子健智继承爵位。
English: His son Kenji succeeded to the peerage.

古文：历中山侍郎、安西将军、缨州刺史。
现代文：历任中书侍郎、安西将军、幽州刺史。
English: His successors include Shushiriro, Anzai Shogun, and Yuzhu Sashi.

古文：有清平之称。
现代文：有清廉公正的声誉。
English: Has a reputation for probity and fairness.

古文：崇弟嶷，字道长。
现代文：王崇的弟弟王嶷，字道长。
English: Wang Chong's younger brother, Wang Yao, is a wordsmith.

古文：少以父任为中书学生，稍迁南部大夫。
现代文：年轻时由父亲保举为中书学生，逐渐升任南部大夫。
English: When he was young, he was recommended by his father to be a student of Chinese literature, and gradually rose to the position of Nanbu-doctor.

古文：高祖初，出使巡察青、徐、兗、豫，抚慰新附，观省风俗。
现代文：高祖初年，出使巡视青、徐、兖、豫四州，安抚新近归附的人，观察风俗。
English: In the first year of Gaozu's reign, an envoy was sent to inspect the four prefectures of Qing, Xu, Min and Hen, to pacify the newly annexed people and observe their customs.

古文：还，迁南部尚书，在任十四年。
现代文：回朝，升任南部尚书，在任十四年。
English: He returned to the imperial court and was promoted to Nanbu Shangshu, where he served for fourteen years.

古文：时南州多事，文奏盈几，讼者填门。
现代文：当时南方事变很多，文书堆满几案，诉讼的人填塞门户。
English: At that time, there were a lot of events in the south, the paperwork was full of several cases, and the litigants clogged the portal.

古文：嶷性儒缓，委随不断，终日在坐，昏睡而已。
现代文：王嶷生性宽柔，软弱无能不果断，整日坐堂，衹是昏睡而已。
English: Wang Xi's nature is broad and soft, weak, incapable and indecisive. He sits in the hall all day. He is only drowsy.

古文：李诉、邓宗庆等号为明察，勤理时务，而二人终见诛戮，余十数人或黜或免，唯嶷卒得自保。
现代文：李欣、邓宗庆等号称能观察入微，勤于处理政事，但是二人最终被杀，其余十多人有的降职有的免官，衹有王嶷最终得以保全自己。
English: Li Xin, Deng Zongqing and others claimed to be able to observe details and diligently deal with political affairs, but the two were eventually killed, and the remaining more than ten people were demoted or dismissed, but Wang Qi was eventually able to save himself.

古文：时人为之语曰： 实痴实昏，终得保存。 加散骑常侍，右将军，赐爵东平侯。
现代文：当时的人因此说： 愚笨糊涂，终能保全 加授散骑常侍、右将军，赐爵束平堡。
English: As a result, people at the time said, "If you're stupid, you'll be able to save yourself." He also gave him the titles of Knight of the Horse, General of the Right, and Knight of the Pyeongbokgung Palace.

古文：未几，拜安东将军，进爵乐安公。
现代文：不久，升任安束将军，晋爵乐安公。
English: Soon, he was promoted to General Anzuk and then to the peerage as Lord Le An.

古文：出为持节、镇西将军、秦州刺史。
现代文：出任持节、镇西将军、秦州刺史。
English: Ji Jie, Zhen Xi Zhen, Qin Zhou Zhi Shi.

古文：改为华山公，散骑常侍如故。
现代文：改封华山公，散骑常侍一职照旧。
English: His title was changed to Huashan Gong, and he continued to serve as a horseback riding attendant.

古文：后入为内都大官。
现代文：后入朝任内都大官。
English: After entering the imperial court, he was appointed to the post of Inner Metropolitan Magistrate.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子祖念，袭爵。
现代文：儿子祖念，继承爵位。
English: His son, Zu Nien, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：官至东平太守。
现代文：官至东平太守。
English: He rose to the position of Eastern Taira no kami.

古文：例降爵为侯。
现代文：依例降爵为侯。
English: As usual, he was demoted to marquess.

古文：卒，赠宁朔将军、光州刺史。
现代文：去世后，追赠为宁朔将军、光州刺史。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Ningshuo General and Gwangju Historian.

古文：子庆钟，袭爵。
现代文：儿子庆钟，继承爵位。
English: His son, Qing Zhong, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：给事中。
现代文：任给事中。
English: The appointment is pending.

古文：食秽无行，坐事爵除。
现代文：贪污而没有德行，因罪被废除爵位。
English: He was stripped of his knighthood for the crime of corruption without virtue.

古文：祖念弟云，字罗汉，颇有风尚。
现代文：祖念的弟弟王云，字罗汉，很有气节。
English: Zu Neng's younger brother Wang Yun, also known as Luo Han, is very energetic.

古文：自尚书郎入为中书舍人。
现代文：自尚书郎被召入任中书舍人。
English: Since then, Sho Shuro has been called to the post of middle school teacher.

古文：转司州别驾、光禄少卿，改授卫尉少卿。
现代文：改任司州别驾、光禄少卿，改任卫尉少卿。
English: He was appointed to the posts of Shishu Beikai and Guanglu Shoshojo, and he was appointed to the post of Weijun Shoshojo.

古文：出为冠军将军、尚书、兗州刺史，寻进号征虏将军。
现代文：出任冠军将军、尚书、兖州刺史，不久进升官号为征虏将军。
English: He was appointed champion general, Shangshu, Zhangzhou stabbing history, and soon promoted to the title of conscript general.

古文：在州坐受所部荆山戍主杜虞财货，又取官绢，因染割易，御史纠劾，付廷尉。
现代文：在州中因接受属下翅山戍守头领丝虞的钱财，又拿官府的绢，因参与牟利，被御史弹劾，由廷尉收审。
English: In the middle of the state, he was impeached by the governor for accepting money and property from his subordinate, the leader of the Winged Mountain Garrison, and for taking bribes from the government, for participating in profit-making, and was tried by the courtier.

古文：遇赦免。
现代文：遇到大赦免罪。
English: He was granted a full pardon.

古文：熙平二年卒官。
现代文：里垩二年在任上去世。
English: Lijun died in his second year in office.

古文：赠平南将军、豫州刺史，谥曰文昭。
现代文：追赠为平南将军、邀业刺史，谧号为塞照。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of General Pingnan, Invited to Engrave History, and his posthumous name was Setsho.

古文：有九子。
现代文：有九个儿子。
English: They had nine sons.

古文：长子昕，字元景。
现代文：长子王昕，字元景。
English: The eldest son, Wang Yao, was named Yuanjing.

古文：武定末，太子詹事。
现代文：武定末年，任太子詹事。
English: At the end of Wuding's life, Prince Zhan Zhi was appointed.

古文：昕弟晖，字元旭。
现代文：王昕的弟弟王晖，字元旭。
English: Wang Yao's younger brother, Wang Yao, also goes by the name Yuan Xu.

古文：早称机悟。
现代文：很早就有机敏颖悟的名声。
English: Ying Gou has long had a reputation for being quick-witted.

古文：历尚书仪曹郎、中书舍人。
现代文：历任尚书仪曹郎、中书舍人。
English: Successive incumbents of Shang Shuxi, Cao Lang, and Zhong Shuxi have passed away.

古文：赠散骑常侍、镇军将军、兗州刺史。
现代文：被追赠为散骑常侍、镇军将军、兖州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of strolling equerry, general of the town's army, and chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：晖弟旰，字仲明。
现代文：王晖的弟弟王旰，字仲明。
English: Wang Yao's younger brother, Wang Yao, goes by the name Zhongming.

古文：秘书郎、司徒主簿。
现代文：任秘书郎、司徒主簿。
English: He served as secretary and chief clerk.

古文：天平中，为盗所害。
现代文：天平年间，被盗贼杀害。
English: He was killed by thieves during the Tenpyo era.

古文：屈遵，字子皮，昌黎徒河人也。
现代文：屈遵，字子皮，吕黎徒河人。
English: Kujun, Zhizi Peel, Luli Tuxhe People.

古文：博学多艺，名著当时。
现代文：博学多才，著名于当时。
English: A polymath, he was famous at the time.

古文：为慕容永尚书仆射、武垣公。
现代文：是慕容永的尚书仆射，武垣公。
English: It's Murong Yong's loyal retainer, Lord Takigaki.

古文：永灭，垂以为博陵令。
现代文：慕容永灭亡，慕容垂任命他为博陵县令。
English: After Murong Yong's death, Murong Tu appointed him as the governor of Boling County.

古文：太祖南伐，车驾幸鲁口，博陵太守申永南奔河外，高阳太守崔玄伯东走海滨，属城长吏率多逃窜。
现代文：太祖南伐，亲临鲁，博陵太守申永逃往黄河以南，高阳太守崔玄伯逃往海滨，下属的重要官员大多逃窜。
English: Emperor Taizu marched south, personally visited Lu, Boling Empress Dowager Shen Yong fled south of the Yellow River, Goyang Empress Dowager Cui Xuanbo fled to the seashore, and most of the subordinate important officials fled.

古文：遵独告其吏民曰： 往年宝师大败，今兹垂征不还，天之弃燕，人弗支也。
现代文：屈遵独自晓谕官民说： 往年慕容宝的军队大败，现在慕容垂征讨不回，上天厌弃燕国，人力不能支撑。
English: Kucun alone told the officials and the people: In the past, the army of Murong Bao suffered a great defeat. Now, Murong cannot be recovered. Heaven abhors Yan's country. Manpower cannot support it.

古文：魏帝神武命世，宽仁善纳，御众百万，号令若一，此汤武之师。
现代文：魏帝英明威武，宽厚仁爱，统率军队百万，号令如一，这如同商汤周武王的军队。
English: Emperor Wei was wise, powerful, generous and benevolent. He commanded an army of one million, and his orders were consistent. It was like the army of the Tang Dynasty's King Zhou Wu.

古文：吾欲归命，尔等勉之，勿遇嘉运而为祸先。 
现代文：我要归顺，你们也赶快行动，不要遇到好机会反而使它变为祸端。 
English: I want to submit, and you should also act quickly, do not encounter a good opportunity, but turn it into a disaster.

古文：遂归太祖。
现代文：于是归顺太祖。
English: As a result, he submitted to his great-grandfather.

古文：太祖素闻其名，厚加礼焉。
现代文：太祖早就知道他的名声，以厚礼相待。
English: The great-grandfather had long been aware of his reputation and treated him with great courtesy.

古文：拜中书令，出纳王言，兼总文诰。
现代文：任中书令，传达诏令并反映意见，兼主管朝廷的命令。
English: He was in charge of the imperial edict, conveyed the imperial edict and reflected opinions, and was also in charge of the order of the imperial court.

古文：中原既平，赐爵下蔡子。
现代文：中原平定以后，赐爵下蔡子。
English: After the pacification of the Central Plains, Tsai Zi was given a peerage.

古文：从驾还京师，卒，时年七十。
现代文：跟从皇上返京后，去世，当时七十岁。
English: After following the emperor back to Kyoto, he died at the age of seventy.

古文：子须，袭。
现代文：儿子屈须，继承爵位。
English: His son, Kusshu, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：除长乐太守，加镇远将军，进爵信都侯。
现代文：任长乐太守，加授镇远将军，晋爵信都侯。
English: He was appointed the governor of Changle, awarded the title of Zhenyuan general, and promoted to the peerage as the prince of Xindu.

古文：卒，赠宁北将军、昌黎公，谥曰恭。
现代文：去世后，追赠为宁北将军、昌黎公，谧号为恭。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Ningbei General and Changli Gong, and his posthumous name was Gong.

古文：少子处珍，袭爵。
现代文：小儿子处珍继承爵位。
English: His youngest son, Ju Zhen, will inherit the title.

古文：处珍卒，子车渠袭爵。
现代文：处珍去世，儿子车渠继承爵位。
English: Chuan Zhen passed away, and his son Chequan inherited the title.

古文：高祖初，出为东阳镇将。
现代文：高祖初年出任东阳镇将。
English: Gaozu served as Dongyang Town's mayor for the first year.

古文：卒，赠青州刺史，谥曰庄。
现代文：去世后，追赠为青州刺史，谧号为庄。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of "Qingzhou Zhishi" and his posthumous name was "Zhuang."

古文：须长子垣，字长生。沉深有局量。
现代文：屈须的长子屈垣，字长生，深沉有器量。
English: Kengaki, the eldest son of Kengushi, is a long-lived, deep and powerful man.

古文：少纂家业，尤善书计。
现代文：年轻时继承家业，尤其善于文字和筹算。
English: He inherited the family business at a young age and is particularly good at writing and calculating.

古文：太祖初，给事诸曹。
现代文：太祖初年，供职各部门。
English: In the first year of my grandfather's life, he worked in various departments.

古文：太宗世，迁将作监，统京师诸署。
现代文：太宗朝，升任将作监，统领京师各官署。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was promoted to the position of inspector and took charge of all government offices in Beijing.

古文：世祖即位，稍迁尚书右仆射，加侍中。
现代文：世祖即位，逐渐升任尚书右仆射，加授侍中。
English: The ancestor ascended the throne, and was gradually promoted to Shang Shuxu, the second-in-command of the imperial court, and was awarded the title of Junior Chamberlain.

古文：以破平凉功，赐爵济北公，加平南将军。
现代文：因打败平凉的功劳，被赐给爵位为济北公，加授平南将军。
English: For his achievement in defeating Ping Liang, he was given the title of Duke of Jibei and promoted to the rank of General of Pingnan.

古文：后转中领军。
现代文：后来改任中领军。
English: Later, he was reassigned as the middle ring leader.

古文：恭宗在东宫，垣领太子少傅。
现代文：恭宗做太子时，屈垣领太子少傅。
English: When Yasuchika became crown prince, Kugaki served as the crown prince's sous chef.

古文：后督诸军东伐，进号镇东大将军。
现代文：后来统领各路军队束伐，晋号为镇束大将军。
English: Later, he led all the armies in the Battle of Sokcho, and was given the title of General of the Town of Sokcho.

古文：师次和龙，冯文通致牛酒以犒军，献甲三千。
现代文：军队到和龙，冯文通送来牛酒犒劳军队，献铵甲三千副。
English: When the army arrived in Hailong, Feng Wentong sent oxen and wine to reward the hard-working army and presented 3,000 pairs of armor.

古文：垣责其不送侍子，数之以王命，遂掠男女六千口而还。
现代文：屈垣谴责他不送侍子入朝，根据皇上的命令责备他，于是掳掠男女六千人而回。
English: Kugaki condemned him for not sending a retainer to the imperial court, and according to the emperor's order, he reprimanded him and returned with six thousand men and women.

古文：垣在宫公正，内外称其平当。
现代文：屈垣在朝公正，内外都称赞他干允。
English: Kugaki was fair in the court, and both inside and outside praised him for his diligence.

古文：世祖信任之，委以大政，车驾出征，常居中留镇。
现代文：世祖信任他，以重要政事相托付，皇上出征，他经常在朝中留守。
English: The founder of the world trusted him, entrusted him with important political affairs, the emperor went to war, and he often stayed behind in the court.

古文：与襄城公庐鲁元俱赐甲第，世祖数临幸，赏赐隆厚。
现代文：与襄城公卢鲁元一同被赐予一等宅第，世祖多次光临，赏赐丰厚。
English: Together with Lu Luyuan, Lord of Xiangcheng, he was given a first-class residence. The ancestor visited many times and was richly rewarded.

古文：真君四年，坠马卒，时年五十五。
现代文：真君四年，坠马去世，时年五十五岁。
English: Four years later, Manjun died after falling from his horse, at the age of fifty-five.

古文：时世祖幸阴山，恭宗遣使乘传奏状，世祖甚悼惜之。谓使人曰： 汝等杀朕良臣，何用乘马！ 
现代文：当时世祖去了阴山，恭宗派遣使者乘驿马去上报丧事，世祖非常哀伤惋惜，对使者说： 你们伤害了我的良臣，为什么还骑马! 
English: At that time, the ancestor went to the gloomy mountain, and the emperor sent an envoy on a horse to report the funeral. The ancestor was very sad and said to the envoy: You hurt my good minister, why are you still riding a horse!

古文：遂令步归。
现代文：就命令步行归去。
English: He was ordered to walk back.

古文：赠征西大将军，谥曰成公。
现代文：被追赠为征西大将军，谧号为成公。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Western Expedition, and his posthumous name was Chenggong.

古文：长子观，早卒。
现代文：长子屈观，过早去世。
English: The eldest son, Kutsun, died prematurely.

古文：世祖愍之，赐其子男爵。
现代文：世祖哀怜他，赐他的儿子为男爵。
English: The patriarch took pity on him and made his son a baron.

古文：观弟道赐，袭祖爵。
现代文：屈观的弟弟道赐，继承祖父的爵位。
English: Kutsumi's younger brother, Dousaku, succeeded to his grandfather's title.

古文：道赐，少以父任，内侍左右。
现代文：道赐，年轻时由父亲推荐，在宫中侍奉皇帝左右。
English: Doshi, who was recommended by his father when he was young, served the emperor in the palace.

古文：稍迁主客，进为尚书，加散骑常侍。
现代文：逐渐升任主客，进升为尚书，加授散骑常侍。
English: He was gradually promoted to the position of host and guest. He was promoted to Shangshu (尚書) and given the title of Sanzhi (散騎) Changzhi (常侍).

古文：善骑射，机辩有辞气，世祖甚器之。
现代文：擅长骑马射箭，机智善辩有文采，世祖很器重他。
English: He was good at horseback archery, witty, eloquent, and the founder held him in high esteem.

古文：从征盖吴，迁尚书右仆射，加侍中。
现代文：跟从征讨盖吴，升任尚书右仆射，加授侍中。
English: He followed Gui Wu in the conquest and was promoted to Shang Shuxu Yuchu Zhao, and was also awarded the title of Zhengzhong.

古文：还至雁门，暴疾卒。
现代文：返回行至雁门，突发病去世。
English: He went back to Ganmen and died of sudden illness.

古文：谥曰哀公。
现代文：谧号为哀公。
English: His nickname was Aiko.

古文：子拔，袭爵。
现代文：儿子屈拔，继承爵位。
English: His son, Genpaku, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：拔少好阴阳学。
现代文：屈拔年轻时爱好阴阳学。
English: When he was young, he was fond of yin and yang.

古文：世祖追思其父祖，年十四，以为南部大夫。
现代文：世祖追念他的父亲和祖父，在他十四岁时，任命他为南部大夫。
English: In memory of his father and grandfather, when he was fourteen years old, he was appointed as the Southern Doctor.

古文：时世祖南伐，擒刘义隆将胡盛之，以付拔。
现代文：当时世祖南伐，擒获刘义隆的将领胡盛之，交付屈拔。
English: At that time, Shizhu went to the south, captured Liu Yilong's general Hu Shengzhi, and handed him over.

古文：拔酒醉，不觉盛之逃去。
现代文：屈拔喝醉了酒，没有觉察盛之逃走。
English: Kengba was drunk and did not notice Shengzhu's escape.

古文：世祖大怒，命斩之。
现代文：世祖很愤怒，下令斩杀他。
English: The patriarch was furious and ordered him to be beheaded.

古文：将伏锧，世祖怆然曰： 若鬼而有知，长生问其子孙，朕何以应之？ 
现代文：将要受死刑时，世祖悲伤地说： 如果鬼有知觉，长生询问他的子孙，我怎么回答他? 
English: When he was about to be put to death, the patriarch said sadly: "If a demon is sentient and lives forever and asks about his descendants, how should I answer him?

古文：乃赦拔，免为散大夫。
现代文：于是赦免了屈拔，降为散大夫。
English: As a result, he was pardoned and demoted to a junior doctor.

古文：后显祖以其功臣子拜营州刺史。
现代文：后来显祖因他是功臣的子弟，任命他为营州刺史。
English: Later, Emperor Xianzu, because he was the son of a meritorious vassal, appointed him to be the governor of Yingzhou.

古文：卒，子永兴袭爵。
现代文：去世后，儿子永兴继承爵位。
English: After his death, his son Yongxing inherited the title.

古文：张蒲，字玄则，河内修武人，本名谟，后改为蒲。
现代文：张蒲，字玄则，河内脩武人，原名谟，后来改为蒲。
English: Zhang Pu, also known as Xuan Zi, originally named Moo, later changed to Pu.

古文：汉太尉延之后。
现代文：是漠代太尉张延的后代。
English: He is a descendant of Zhang Yan, a captain in the desert.

古文：父攀，慕容垂御史中丞、兵部尚书，以清方称。
现代文：父亲张攀，任摹查垩的御史中丞、兵部尚书，以廉洁正直着称。
English: His father, Zhang Pang, was appointed as the Vice-Minister of History and the Secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs. He was known for his honesty.

古文：蒲少有父风，颇涉文史，以端谨见知，为慕容宝阳平、河间二郡太守，尚书左丞。
现代文：张蒲年轻时有父亲的风范，略微涉猎文史，以端正谨慎被赏识，任慕容宝的阳平、河间二郡太守，尚书左丞。
English: When Zhang Pu was young, he had his father's demeanor, dabbled in literary history, and was appreciated for his neatness and prudence. He was appointed as the Yangping of Murongbao, the governor of two counties in Kawama, and the left-hand man of Shangshu.

古文：太祖定中山，宝之官司叙用者，多降品秩。
现代文：太祖平定中山，慕容宝的旧官被任用的，多数降了品级。
English: Taizu pacified Zhongshan, the old officials of Murongbao were appointed, and most of them were downgraded.

古文：既素闻蒲名，仍拜为尚书左丞。
现代文：太祖对张蒲的名声早有所闻，便仍旧任命他为尚书左丞。
English: The great-grandfather had heard of Zhang Pu's reputation for a long time, and still appointed him as Shangshu Zuo.

古文：天兴中，以蒲清谨方正，迁东部大人。
现代文：天兴年间，因张蒲廉洁谨慎行为正直，升任东部大人。
English: During the Tianxing era, because of Zhang Buren's clean and prudent behavior and honesty, he was promoted to the eastern adult.

古文：后拜太中大夫。
现代文：后来任太中大夫。
English: Later he was appointed Taichung doctor.

古文：太宗即位，为内都大官，赐爵泰昌子，参决庶狱，私谒不行，号为公正。
现代文：太宗即位后，被任命为内都大官，赐爵泰昌子，参与判决各种刑狱诉讼，不受私下请托，号称公正。
English: After Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, he was appointed Inner Capital Grand Official, conferred a peerage on Emperor Taichang, participated in the adjudication of various prison proceedings, did not accept private requests, and claimed to be fair.

古文：泰常初，丁零翟猛雀驱逼吏民入白间山，谋为大逆。
现代文：泰常初年，丁零人翟猛雀驱赶逼迫官民入白山，图谋反叛。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizang, Ding Zi's men drove and forced officials and commoners into Baishan in an attempt to rebel.

古文：诏蒲与冀州刺史长孙道生等往讨。
现代文：诏令张蒲与冀州刺史长孙道生等去讨伐。
English: He ordered Zhang Pu and Sun Daosheng, the chief historian of Jizhou, to fight.

古文：道生等欲径以大兵击之，蒲曰： 良民所以从猛雀者，非乐乱而为，皆逼凶威，强服之耳。
现代文：道生等打算直接用军队攻打，张蒲说： 百姓之所以跟从猛雀，不是出自内心，而是被威势逼迫，勉强服从他罢了。
English: Dousheng and others plan to attack directly with the army, Zhang Pu said: The reason why the people follow the fierce sparrow is not from the heart, but they are forced by coercion to obey him reluctantly.

古文：今若直以大军临之，吏民虽欲返善，其道无由。
现代文：现在如果直接用大军攻伐，官民虽然想重返善道，却无路可通。
English: Now, if we directly attack with a large army, although officials and citizens want to return to the right path, there is no way.

古文：又惧诛夷，必并势而距官军，然后入山恃阻，诳惑愚民。
现代文：又惧怕杀戮，必定聚集势力抵抗朝廷的军队，然后入山倚仗险阻，欺骗迷惑无知的百姓。
English: They are also afraid of being killed, so they must gather forces to resist the imperial army, and then go into the mountains to rely on dangerous obstacles to deceive and confuse the ignorant people.

古文：其变未易图也。
现代文：这场变乱就难以推测。
English: It is difficult to predict the outcome of this upheaval.

古文：不如先遣使喻之，使民不与猛雀同谋者无坐，则民必喜而俱降矣。 
现代文：不如先派使者晓谕他们，使百姓中不与猛雀同谋的人无罪，那么百姓必定欢喜而都投降啊。 
English: If only a messenger had been sent to them, to absolve those of the people who had not conspired with the eagles. Then the people would have been glad and would have surrendered.

古文：道生甚以为然，具以奏闻。
现代文：道生以为很有道理，详细地向皇上报告。
English: Dousen thought it made a lot of sense and reported it in detail to the emperor.

古文：太宗诏蒲军前慰喻。
现代文：太宗诏令张蒲到前沿阵地抚慰晓谕。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered Zhang Pu to go to the front line to comfort and instruct.

古文：乃下数千家，还其本属，蒲皆安集之。
现代文：于是有几千家投降，返回他们的本部，张蒲使他们都安定和睦。
English: As a result, several thousand families surrendered and returned to their headquarters, and Zhang Pu made them all stable and harmonious.

古文：猛雀与亲党百余人奔逃。
现代文：猛雀与亲信一百多人奔逃。
English: The bird of prey fled with more than a hundred of its friends.

古文：蒲与道生等追斩猛雀首，送京师。
现代文：张蒲与道生等追击斩杀了猛雀的首级，送往京师。
English: Zhang Pu and Tao Sheng and others chased and killed the head of the fierce bird, and sent it to the Beijing Division.

古文：后刘裕寇窃河表，以蒲为南中郎将、南蛮校尉，隶平南大将军长孙嵩往御之。
现代文：后来刘裕侵占黄河洛阳地区，任命张蒲为南中郎将、南蛮校尉，隶属平南大将军长孙嵩去抵御他。
English: Later, Liu Yu invaded the Luoyang region of the Yellow River and appointed Zhang Pu as the Southern Vice Admiral, the Southern Barbarian Lieutenant, subordinate to Sun Song, the head of the Pingnan Great General, to resist him.

古文：裕入长安，乃还。
现代文：刘裕攻入长安，于是返回。
English: Liu Yu entered Chang'an and then returned.

古文：后改为寿张子，与安平公叔孙建将兵自平原东渡，徇下刘义符青兗诸郡。
现代文：后来改爵号为寿张子，与安平公叔孙建率领军队自平原束渡，掠取刘义符的青兖二州各郡。
English: Later, he changed his title to Shou Zhangzi and, together with Anping Gong's uncle Sun Jian, led an army from the plain of Sokdu to plunder Liu Yifu's Qingyuan and the counties of the two states.

古文：诏加陈兵将军、济州刺史。
现代文：诏令加授陈兵将军、济州刺史。
English: The imperial edict also conferred the title of General Chen Hei and the history of Jeju on him.

古文：又与建攻青州，不克而还。
现代文：又与叔孙建攻青州，没有攻克而返回。
English: He also invaded Qingzhou with his uncle and grandson Jian, but returned without conquering it.

古文：世祖即位，以蒲清贫，妻子衣食不给，乃出为相州刺史。
现代文：世祖即位后，因张蒲清寒贫苦，妻子儿女衣食匮乏，就使他出任相州刺史。
English: After the Emperor ascended the throne, because Zhang Puqing was cold and poor, and his wife and children lacked food and clothing, he was appointed as the crown prince of Xiangzhou.

古文：扶弱抑强，进善黜恶，教化大行。
现代文：扶弱抑强，进用贤人而黜退奸恶，政教风化普遍推行。
English: The policy of supporting the weak and suppressing the strong, the policy of promoting the wise and punishing the wicked, and the political and religious etiquette were generally implemented.

古文：始光三年卒于州，年七十二。
现代文：始光三年在州中去世，终年七十二岁。
English: Shigemitsu died in Shuzhong Middle School three years later at the age of seventy-two.

古文：吏民痛惜之。
现代文：官民痛惜他。
English: Officials and citizens alike deplored him.

古文：蒲在谋臣之列，屡出为将，朝廷清论，常为称首。
现代文：张蒲属于谋臣之列，屡次出任将帅，朝廷公论，常为第一。
English: Zhang Pu belonged to the ranks of advisers, repeatedly served as a general, and was often the first in the public opinion of the imperial court.

古文：赠平东将军、广平公，谥曰文恭。
现代文：被追赠为平东将军、广平公，谧号为文恭。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of General Pingdong and General Guangping, and his posthumous name was Wengong.

古文：子昭，有志操。
现代文：儿子张昭，有志向节操。
English: His son, Zhang Zhao, is an aspiring monk.

古文：天兴中，以功臣子为太学生。
现代文：天兴年间，因是功臣的儿子做了太学生。
English: During the Tianxing era, because he was the son of a meritorious subject, he became a great student.

古文：太宗即位，为内主书。
现代文：太宗即位后，任内主书。
English: After Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, he became the chief scribe.

古文：后袭父爵。
现代文：后来继承父亲的爵位。
English: He later inherited his father's title.

古文：神中，从征蠕蠕，以功进爵修武侯，加平远将军。
现代文：神麖年间，随从征讨蠕蠕，因功进升爵位为脩武侯，加授平远将军。
English: During the Shennong years, he followed the crusade against Crum Crum and was promoted to the peerage of the Prince of Zouwu for his achievements, and was also awarded the title of General of Pingyuan.

古文：延和二年，出为幽州刺史，开府，加宁东将军。
现代文：延塑二年，出任蛆蛆刺史，开府，加授宁东将军。
English: Two years later, he was appointed to the post of general of Ningdong Province.

古文：时幽州年谷不登，州廪虚磬，民多菜色。
现代文：当时幽业收成不好，仓库空虚，百姓脸上大多呈现菜色。
English: At that time, the Yue harvest was not good, the warehouse was empty, and the people's faces were mostly green.

古文：昭谓民吏曰： 何我之不德而遇其时乎？ 
现代文：亟坜对官民说： 我什么地方不修德行因而遇上这样的时候呢? 
English: He said to the officials and the people, "Where did I fail to cultivate virtue, and why did I encounter such a time?"

古文：乃使富人通济贫乏，车马之家籴运外境，贫弱者劝以农桑。
现代文：于是使富人接济穷人，有车马的人家到外州买米，穷人努力从事农桑。
English: As a result, the rich were made to help the poor, people with carts and horses went to other states to buy rice, and the poor made efforts to engage in agricultural mulberry.

古文：岁乃大熟。
现代文：因此获得丰收。
English: This resulted in a bumper harvest.

古文：士女称颂之。
现代文：百姓称颂他。
English: The people sing his praises.

古文：在任三年，卒。
现代文：在任三年，去世。
English: He died after three years in office.

古文：子昶，袭爵。
现代文：儿子张昶，继承爵位。
English: His son, Zhang Ye, succeeded to the title.

古文：早卒。
现代文：过早去世。
English: He died at an early age.

古文：昶弟灵符。
现代文：张昶的弟弟灵符。
English: Zhang Ye's younger brother Lingfu.

古文：真君八年，补中书博士。
现代文：真君八年，被选补为中书博士。
English: In the eighth year of Mankun, he was selected as a doctor of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：和平中，咸阳郡民赵昌聚党作逆，百姓骚动。
现代文：和平年间，咸阳郡百姓趟昌聚众作乱，百姓不安。
English: During the years of peace, the people of Xianyang County gathered in large numbers to make disturbances, and the people were uneasy.

古文：诏灵符宣旨慰喻，民乃复业。
现代文：令灵符宣布圣旨抚慰，百姓复业。
English: The holy will was comforted by the announcement of the spiritual talisman, and the people were reinstated.

古文：天安初，迁中书侍郎，赐爵昌国子。
现代文：天安初年，升任中书侍郎，赐爵昌国子。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was promoted to the position of junior secretary and given the title of peer as the son of Masakuni.

古文：延兴中，使南豫州，观察风俗。
现代文：延兴年间，出使南豫州，考察风俗。
English: During the Yanxing years, he was sent to South Yuzhou to investigate customs.

古文：太和四年，除建威将军、广平太守。
现代文：太和四年，任建威将军、广平太守。
English: In the fourth year of the Taihe era, he was appointed General Jianwei and Governor Guangping.

古文：还为尚书左丞、司州大中正。
现代文：回朝任尚书左丞、司州大中止。
English: He returned to the imperial court and was appointed to the post of Shoshu-zojo, but Sishu University was discontinued.

古文：后除镇远将军、齐州刺史。
现代文：后来任镇远将军、齐州刺史。
English: Later, he served as General Zhenyuan and Governor of Qizhou.

古文：十六年，转光州刺史，加立忠将军。
现代文：十六年，改任光州刺史，加授立忠将军。
English: Sixteen years later, he was appointed as the Gwangju Chief Historian and promoted to General Lichung.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：谷浑，字元冲，昌黎人也。
现代文：谷浑，字元冲，昌黎人。
English: Guhun, Zhiyuanchong, Changli people.

古文：父兗，膂力兼人，弯弓三百斤，勇冠一时。
现代文：父亲谷衮，体力过人，拉弓的力量达三百斤，勇力超众。
English: His father, Gu Yao, was a man of extraordinary physical strength. He could draw a bow with a strength of three hundred pounds, and his bravery was second to none.

古文：仕慕容垂，至广武将军。
现代文：在慕容垂手下做官，官至广武将军。
English: He served as an official under Murong Tie, and rose to the rank of General Guangwu.

古文：浑少有父风，任侠好气，以父母在，常自退抑。
现代文：谷浑年轻时有父亲的风范，好打抱不平逞血气之勇，因父母在世，常自我退让谦抑。
English: When he was young, Gu Hun had his father's demeanor. He was good at embracing adversity and had the courage of his convictions. Since his parents were still alive, he was often self-effacing and modest.

古文：晚乃折节受经业，遂览群籍，被服类儒者。
现代文：晚年才改变志行学习儒家经书，遂阅览群书，服用之物与儒士的相似。
English: It was only in his later years that he changed his way of life and began to study Confucian scriptures. He then read a number of books, and what he took was similar to that of a Confucian.

古文：太祖时，以善隶书为内侍左右。
现代文：太祖时，因擅长隶书任身边的内侍。
English: At the time of the great-grandfather, he was appointed as an attendant because he was good at writing.

古文：太宗世，迁前锋将军，从幸河南。
现代文：太宗朝，升任前锋将军，随从到黄河以南。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was promoted to the rank of vanguard general and followed Emperor Zong to the south of the Yellow River.

古文：还，以选给事东宫。
现代文：回朝，通过选拔在束宫供事。
English: He returned to the imperial court and was selected to serve at Sokcho.

古文：世祖即位，为中书侍郎，加振威将军。
现代文：世祖即位，任中书侍郎，加授振威将军。
English: The founder ascended to the throne, was appointed as the secretary, and was awarded the title of General Zhenwei.

古文：从征赫连昌，为骁骑将军。
现代文：随从征伐赫连昌，任骁骑将军。
English: He accompanied the conquest of Helianchang and served as a cavalry general.

古文：迁侍中、安南将军，领仪曹尚书，赐爵濮阳公。
现代文：升任侍中、安南将军，领仪曹尚书，赐爵濮阳公。
English: He was promoted to the rank of chamberlain, General Annan, received the Cao Shangshu ceremony, and was given the title of Duke of Shenyang.

古文：浑正直有操行，性不苟合，趣舍不与己同者，视之蔑如也。
现代文：谷浑正直有操行，交友不苟，取舍与自己不同的人，他根本不放在眼裹。
English: Gu Hun has an upright demeanor, is meticulous in making friends, and does not care about people who are different from him.

古文：然爱重旧故，不以富贵骄人。
现代文：然而爱惜故交，不因富贵傲视他人。
English: However, they cherish old friendships and do not look down on others because of their wealth.

古文：时人以此称之。
现代文：当时的人因此称赞他。
English: He was lauded for it at the time.

古文：在官廉直，为世祖所器重，诏以浑子孙十五以上悉补中书学生。
现代文：做官清廉正直，受到世祖器重，诏令把谷浑十五岁以上的子孙全部选补为中书学生。
English: An official who was honest and upright, and respected by the world's ancestors, issued a decree to select all of Gu Hun's children and grandchildren over the age of fifteen to be middle school students.

古文：延和二年春，卒。
现代文：延和二年春去世。
English: He passed away in the spring of 1912.

古文：世祖悼惜之，亲临其丧。
现代文：世担深感惋惜，亲临他的丧礼。
English: It was with deep regret that the Council attended his funeral.

古文：赠赐丰厚，谥曰文宣。
现代文：赏赐丰厚，谧号为文宣。
English: He was richly rewarded, and his nickname became "Wen Xuan."

古文：子阐，字崇基，小字长命，袭爵。
现代文：儿子谷阐，字崇基，小名长命，继承爵位。
English: His son, Gu Ying, surnamed Chongji, had a minor name but a long life, and succeeded to the peerage.

古文：少侍东宫，稍迁平南将军、相州刺史。
现代文：年轻时侍从东宫，逐渐升任平南将军、相州刺史。
English: When he was young, he served as an attendant at the East Palace, and gradually rose to the position of General of Pingnan and Sangju sashimi.

古文：入为外都大官。
现代文：被召入任外都大官。
English: He was called to the post of foreign capital official.

古文：延兴四年卒。
现代文：至周四年去世。
English: He died on Thursday.

古文：谥曰简公。
现代文：谧号为个公。
English: His posthumous name was Ako.

古文：阐弟季孙，袭爵。
现代文：谷阐的弟弟季孙，继承爵位。
English: Gu Ying's younger brother, Ji Sun, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：中书学生，入为秘书中散，迁中部大夫。
现代文：是中书学生，入朝任秘书中散，升任中部大夫。
English: He was a student of Chinese classics, entered the imperial court as a secretary of the middle school, and was promoted to a doctor of the middle school.

古文：出为吐京镇将。
现代文：外任旦墟镇将。
English: He was appointed as the general of Tanhu Town.

古文：阐子洪，字元孙。
现代文：谷阐的儿子谷洪，字元孙。
English: Gu Hong, son of Gu Ying, is the grandson of Zi Yuan.

古文：少受学中书。
现代文：年轻时在中书学从师学习。
English: At a young age, he studied under a teacher in Chinese calligraphy.

古文：世祖以洪机敏有祖风，令入授高宗经。
现代文：世祖因谷洪机智敏捷有祖父的风范，让他入宫教授高宗经典。
English: The ancestor, because of Gu Hong's wit and agility, had the demeanor of his grandfather, so he let him enter the palace to teach Gaozong classics.

古文：高宗即位，以旧恩为散骑常侍、南部长。
现代文：高宗即位后，因过去的恩惠任命他为散骑常侍、南部长。
English: After Emperor Gao Zong ascended the throne, he appointed him as a knight errant and minister of the south due to past favors.

古文：迁尚书，赐爵荥阳公。
现代文：升任尚书，被赐爵荣阳公。
English: He was promoted to Shangshu and given the title of Duke Rongyang.

古文：洪性贪奢，仆妾衣服锦绮，赀累千金，而求欲滋剧。
现代文：谷洪贪婪奢侈，奴仆侍妾的衣服鲜艳华丽，钱财很多，贪欲却更大。
English: Gu Hong is greedy and extravagant. The servants and concubines wear bright and gorgeous clothes. They have a lot of money, but their greed is even greater.

古文：时显祖舅李峻等初至京师，官给衣服，洪辄截没。
现代文：当时显祖的舅舅李峻等刚到京师，官府供给衣服，谷洪妄加截留。
English: At that time, Xianzu's uncle Li Jun and others had just arrived in Beijing, the government provided clothes, and Gu Hongrui was detained.

古文：为有司所纠，并穷其前后赃罪，坐以伏法。
现代文：被有关部门举报，查究他前前后后的贪污罪，被判罪处死。
English: He was reported by the relevant departments, investigated for his previous and subsequent corruption crimes, and was convicted and sentenced to death.

古文：子颖，青州、征东大将军、广陵王羽田曹参军、员外散骑侍郎、给事中、尚书郎，加威远将军。
现代文：儿子谷颖，任青州、征东大将军、广陵王元羽的田曹参军，员外散骑侍郎，给事中，尚书郎，加授威远将军。
English: His son, Gu Ying, was appointed the Qingzhou and Eastern Expeditionary General, and Tian Cao of Guangling Wang Yuan Yu joined the army, and served as a non-commissioned officer, while his son, Shang Shuro, was awarded the title of General Wei Yuan.

古文：除员外散骑常侍，寻转中散大夫。
现代文：任员外散骑常侍，不久改任中散大夫。
English: He was appointed as a non-commissioned officer, and was soon promoted to the position of a middle-ranking officer.

古文：大军伐蜀，时益州刺史傅竖眼出为别将，以颖权行州事。
现代文：大军征伐蜀地，当时益州刺史傅竖眼出任别将，用谷颖暂时代理本州事务。
English: A large army invaded Shunde. At that time, the governor of Yizhou, Shifu Hanzhong, served as the second-in-command, and temporarily used Gu Ying to manage the affairs of the province.

古文：后除假节、镇远将军、凉州刺史，不行，改授太府少卿，又加前将军。
现代文：后来任假节、镇远将军、凉州刺史，没有赴任。改任太府少卿，又加授前将军。
English: Later, he held the posts of Fuxi, Zhenyuan, and Liangzhou, but did not go to the post. He was reappointed as Taifu Shaoqing, and was also awarded the title of former general.

古文：神龟二年卒。
现代文：神龟二年去世。
English: Turtle died two years later.

古文：赠平东将军，营州刺史，谥曰贞。
现代文：追赠平东将军、营州刺史，谧号为贞。
English: He was posthumously given the titles of General Pingdong and Yingzhou Zhishi, and his nickname was Zhen.

古文：长子纂，字灵绍，颇有学涉。
现代文：长子谷纂，字灵绍，很有学识修养。
English: The eldest son, Tani Tadasu, is a well-educated person.

古文：解褐太学博士，领侍御史。
现代文：开始做官为太学博士，领侍御史。
English: He began his career as a magistrate, holding the title of Doctor of Theology.

古文：稍迁著作郎、司州治中、黄门郎、散骑常侍，又为侍中，兼殿中尚书。
现代文：逐渐升任著作郎、司州治中、黄门郎、散骑常侍。又任侍中、兼殿中尚书。
English: He gradually rose to the positions of Shoseki no ro, Shishu no chuju, Kibumonro, and Sanki no zenshi. He was also appointed to the positions of Samurai no chuju and Shoseki no chuju.

古文：迁骠骑大将军、左光禄大夫，营州大中正。
现代文：升任骠骑大将军、左光禄大夫、营业大中正。
English: He was promoted to General of the Horse Cavalry, Doctor of the Left Hand, and Vice-President of the College of Commerce.

古文：纂前为著作，又监国史，不能有所缉缀。
现代文：圭迈先前任著作郎，又监修国史，无所成就。
English: Guimei, who was previously the author and supervisor of the national history, had no achievements.

古文：纂弟士恢，字绍达。
现代文：谷纂的弟弟士恢，字绍达。
English: Gu Gu's younger brother Shi Wei, known as Shou Da.

古文：少好琴书。
现代文：年轻时喜欢弹琴写字。
English: When he was young, he liked to play the piano and write.

古文：初为世宗挽郎，除奉朝请。
现代文：起初任世宗的挽郎，任奉朝请。
English: At first, he served as Sejong's groomsman and was invited to the Imperial Court.

古文：正光中，入侍，甚为肃宗宠待。
现代文：正光年间，入宫侍从，很受肃宗赏识。
English: During the reign of Masaakira, he was an attendant at the Imperial Palace, and was highly appreciated by Sozong.

古文：元叉之出，灵太后反政，绍达预有力焉。
现代文：元叉被驱逐，灵太后重新执政，绍达参与有功。
English: Yuan Zha was ousted, Lingtao returned to power, and the participation of the Southern Dynasties played a significant role.

古文：迁谏议大夫，俄转通直散骑常侍、直阁将军、鸿胪少卿，封元城县开国侯，邑七百户。
现代文：升任谏议大夫，不久改任通直散骑常侍、直合将军、鸿胪少卿，被封为元城县开国侯，食邑七百户。
English: He was promoted to the position of the doctor of debate, and soon he was appointed to the position of Tsunetsu Shanki no Tsunezamori, the general of Tsunetsu Shanki, and the junior secretary of Hongye. He was named the founding lord of Yuancheng County, which had 700 households.

古文：太后嬖幸郑俨，惧绍达间构于帝，每因言次，导绍达为州。
现代文：太后宠爱的郑俨，惧怕绍达对皇帝挑拨离间，每每趁言谈之间，引诱绍达任州官。
English: The empress dowager's favorite, Zheng Qi, was afraid that Shouda would sow discord with the emperor, so he often took the opportunity to lure Shouda to serve as a prefect.

古文：绍达耽宠，不愿出外。
现代文：绍达沉湎于恩宠，不愿去外地。
English: Sauda is addicted to grace and does not want to go abroad.

古文：太后诬其罪而杀之。
现代文：太后虚构罪名将他杀掉。
English: The Empress Dowager had him killed on trumped-up charges.

古文：公孙表，字玄元，燕郡广阳人也。
现代文：公孙表，字玄元，是燕郡广阳人。
English: Gongsun table, character Xuan Yuan, Yan County Guangyang people.

古文：游学为诸生。
现代文：到处求学而成为有学问的人。
English: Study everywhere and become a learned man.

古文：慕容冲以为尚书郎。
现代文：慕容冲任命他为尚书郎。
English: Murong Chong appointed him as Shang Shuro.

古文：慕容垂破长子，从入中山。
现代文：慕容垂攻克长子，跟从进入中山。
English: Murongdian broke through the eldest son's city, and Gongsun watch followed into Zhongshan.

古文：慕容宝走，乃归阙。
现代文：慕容实逃跑，于是归附朝廷。
English: Murongshi ran away and joined the imperial court.

古文：以使江南称旨，拜尚书郎。
现代文：因出使长江以南符合上意，被任命为尚书郎。
English: He was appointed as Shang Shuro because his mission south of the Yangtze River met the wishes of the emperor.

古文：后为博士。
现代文：后来任博士。
English: He later became a doctor.

古文：初，太祖以慕容垂诸子分据势要，权柄推移，遂至亡灭;且国俗敦朴，嗜欲寡少，不可启其机心，而导其巧利，深非之。
现代文：起初，太祖认为慕容垂的儿子们分别占据要职，权柄移动，终于导致灭亡；而且国家风俗敦厚朴素，嗜好和欲望不多，不能开启人们的聪慧灵巧的心窍，却诱导人们诈取功利，很不以为然。
English: At first, the great-grandfather thought that the sons of Murongdeli occupied important positions separately, power shifted, and finally led to their demise; and the national customs were thick and simple, with few hobbies and desires, which could not open people's clever and dexterous minds, but induced people to defraud utilitarianism. He was very disapproving.

古文：表承指上《韩非书》二十卷，太祖称善。
现代文：公孙表便禀承旨意呈上《韩非子》书二十卷，太祖称好。
English: At the behest of his grandson, he presented 20 volumes of the "Hanfeizi" book, which was well received by the great-grandfather.

古文：太宗初，表参功劳将军元屈军事，讨吐京叛胡，为胡所败。
现代文：太宗初年，公孙表参谋功劳将军元屈的军事，讨伐吐京反叛的胡人，被胡人打败。
English: In the first year of Emperor Taizong's reign, Gongsun Watch, a staff officer of the meritorious General Yuan Quan's military, fought against the rebellious Hu people in Tujing and was defeated by the Hu people.

古文：表以先谏止屈，太宗善之，赐爵固安子。
现代文：公孙表因事先劝阻过元屈，受到太宗赞扬，赐给他爵位为固安子。
English: Gongsun Bo was praised by Emperor Taizong for having dissuaded Yuan Quan in advance, and he was given the title of Guan Zi.

古文：河西饥胡刘虎聚结流民，反于上党，南寇河内。
现代文：黄河以西受饥荒的胡人刘虎聚集流民，在上党反叛，向南侵犯河内。
English: The famine-stricken Hu people west of the Yellow River, Liu Hu, gathered the exiles, rebelled against the Shang and invaded Hanoi to the south.

古文：诏表讨虎，又令表与姚兴洛阳戍将结期，使备河南岸，然后进军讨之。
现代文：诏令公孙表讨伐刘虎，又命令公孙表与姚兴的洛阳守将约定时间，让他守备黄河南岸，然后进军讨伐。
English: He ordered Gongsun table to fight against Liu Hu, and also ordered Gongsun table to make an appointment with the Luoyang governor of Yao Xing, let him guard the south bank of the Yellow River, and then march to fight.

古文：时胡内自疑阻，更相杀害，表以其有解散之势，遂不与戍将相闻，率众讨之。
现代文：当时胡人内部自相猜疑，相互杀害，公孙表因他们有离散的势头，就不与守将通信息，率领军队讨伐。
English: At that time, the Hu people were suspicious of each other and killed each other. Gongsun table, because they had the momentum of dispersion, did not communicate with the commander and led the army to fight.

古文：法令不整，为胡所败，军人大被伤杀。
现代文：法令不整齐，被胡人打败，很多军人被伤或被杀。
English: The decrees were not in order, they were defeated by the Hu people, and many soldiers were injured or killed.

古文：太宗深衔之。
现代文：太宗对此耿耿于怀。
English: Emperor Taizong was deeply concerned about this.

古文：及刘裕征姚兴，兗州刺史尉建闻寇至，弃滑台北走，诏表随寿光侯叔孙建屯枋头。
现代文：到刘裕征讨姚兴时，兖州刺史尉建听说敌人来到，丢弃滑台向北逃跑，诏令公孙表跟随寿光侯叔孙建驻守枋头。
English: When Liu Yuzheng came to discuss with Yao Xing, Zhang Zhou's Zhang Shifu Jian heard that the enemy was coming, abandoned the slide and fled to the north, and ordered Gongsun table to follow Shuguang Hou's uncle Sun Jian to stay in Shantou.

古文：泰常七年，刘裕死，议取河南侵地。
现代文：泰常七年，刘裕死，计议夺取黄河以南被侵夺的土地。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Taizang, Liu Yu died, and plans were made to seize the land south of the Yellow River.

古文：太宗以为掠地至淮，滑台等三城自然面缚。
现代文：太宗以为掠取淮水一带的土地，滑台等三城自然投降。
English: Taizong thought that he could plunder the land around Huai Shui, and the three cities, including the slide, would naturally surrender.

古文：表固执宜先攻城，太宗从之。
现代文：公孙表坚持应当先攻城，太宗依从他。
English: Emperor Gongsun insisted that the city should be attacked first, and Emperor Taizong obeyed him.

古文：于是以奚斤为都督，以表为吴兵将军、广州刺史。
现代文：于是任命奚斤为都督，任命公锤表为吴兵将军、广州刺史。
English: As a result, He Jin was appointed as the governor of the capital, Gong Hammer Table was appointed as the general Wu Bing, and Guangzhou Jishi was appointed.

古文：斤等济河，表攻滑台，历时不拔。
现代文：奚斤等渡黄河，公孙表攻滑台，久攻不下。
English: 斤等渡黄河,公孙表攻滑台,久攻不下.

古文：太宗乃南巡，为之声援。
现代文：太宗于是南巡以示声援。
English: Emperor Taizong then made a tour to the south to show his support.

古文：表等既克滑台，引师西伐，大破刘义隆将翟广等于土楼，遂围虎牢。
现代文：公孙表等攻克滑台以后，领兵西伐，在擅大败刘义隆的将领翟庐等，随即包围虎牢。
English: After conquering the slide, the leaders of the Western Expedition, including Gongsun He, defeated Liu Yilong's generals, and then surrounded the Tiger's Stronghold.

古文：车驾次汲郡，始昌子苏坦、太史令王亮奏表置军虎牢东，不得利便之地，故令贼不时灭。
现代文：皇上屯驻汲郡，始昌子苏坦、太史令王毫报告公珏叁把军队部署在虚空束边，没有占据有利之地，因此不能及早打败贼军。
English: When the emperor was stationed in Ku County, Emperor Qianlong sent his son Su Tan and the Grand Historian Wang Zhao to report that the emperor had deployed his army on the edge of the void and did not occupy a favorable position, so he could not defeat the thief army in time.

古文：太宗雅好术数，又积前忿，及攻虎牢，士卒多伤，乃使人夜就帐中缢而杀之。
现代文：太宗爱好术数，又有以前郁积于心的愤恨，等到攻打虎牢时，士兵大多受伤，就派人在夜晚到大帐中勒死他。
English: He was very fond of magic, and had pent-up resentment in his heart. When he attacked the tiger prison, most of the soldiers were injured, so he sent someone to strangle him at night.

古文：时年六十四。
现代文：时年六十四岁。
English: He was 64 years old.

古文：太宗以贼末退，秘而不宣。
现代文：太宗因贼军未退，秘而不宣。
English: Taizong did not announce it because the bandits had not retreated.

古文：初，表与勃海封恺友善，后为子求恺从女，恺不许，表甚衔之。
现代文：起初，公孙表与勃海封恺友好，后来为儿子求娶封恺的侄女，封恺不答应，公孙表非常恨他。
English: In the past, Gongsun Table was friendly with Bohai Fongyu. Later, he proposed marriage to Fongyu's niece for his son. Fongyu did not agree, and Gongsun Table held a grudge.

古文：及封氏为司马国璠所逮，太宗以旧族欲原之，表固证其罪，乃诛封氏。
现代文：到封氏被司马国墦逮捕时，太宗因封氏是有地位的家族打算宽恕，公孙表执意检举封氏的罪过，于是诛杀封氏。
English: When Fong was arrested by Sima Guozhen, Taizong intended to pardon him because Fong was a member of a high-ranking family, but Gongsunbo insisted on prosecuting Fong's crime, so he killed Fong.

古文：表为人外和内忌，时人以此薄之。
现代文：公孙表为人外表和气而内心忌刻，当时的人因此轻视他。
English: The people of that time despised him because he was outwardly kind but inwardly cruel.

古文：表本与王亮同营署，及其出也，轻侮亮，故至于死。
现代文：公孙表原本与王亮同在营署，到他出任刺史时，轻慢王亮，因此以致于死。
English: Gongsun He was originally with Wang Liang in the battalion, but when he became the chief of staff, he slighted Wang Liang, which led to his death.

古文：第二子轨，字元庆。
现代文：第二个儿子公孙轨，字元庆。
English: Gongsun Rong, the second son of Gongsun Rong, goes by the name Yuanqing.

古文：少以文学知名，太宗时为中书郎。
现代文：年轻时因文学而知名，太宗时任中书郎。
English: At a young age, he was known for his literature, and at that time, he served as chushiro.

古文：出从征讨，补诸军司马。
现代文：外出随从征讨，被选补为诸军司马。
English: He accompanied the Emperor on his eastward and westward campaigns, supplementing the duties of the steward of the armies.

古文：世祖平赫连昌，引诸将帅入其府藏，各令任意取金玉。
现代文：世祖平定赫连昌，带领众将帅进入他的府库，令各人任取金玉。
English: The founder of the dynasty, He Lianchang, led the generals into his treasury and ordered everyone to take the gold.

古文：诸将取之盈怀，轨独不探把。
现代文：众将取得的金玉满怀，公孙轨却不伸手。
English: The generals are full of the gold and jewels they have won, but Gongsunlu does not reach out.

古文：世祖乃亲探金赐之，谓轨曰： 卿可谓临财不苟得，朕所以增赐者，欲显廉于众人。 
现代文：世祖于是亲自取金赐给他，对公孙轨说： 你可以说是面临财货而不贪，我之所以赏赐，是要向众人显示你的廉洁。 
English: The patriarch then personally took the money and gave it to him, saying to Gongsunlu: You can say that you are not greedy in the face of wealth and goods. The reason why I gave it to you is to show everyone that you are honest.

古文：后兼大鸿胪，持节拜氐王杨玄为南秦王。
现代文：后来兼任大鸿胪，持符节封氐人首领杨玄为南秦王。
English: Later, Yang Xuan, the leader of the Southern Qin Dynasty, also served as the Great Great Horned Owl.

古文：及境，玄不郊迎。轨数玄曰： 昔尉他跨据，及陆贾至，匍匐奉顺，故能垂名竹帛。
现代文：到了辖区，杨玄不到郊外迎接，公孙轨责备杨玄说： 过去尉他占有一方，及陆买到来，尽力奉承，所以能名垂史册。
English: When he arrived at the jurisdiction, Yang Xuan did not go to the suburbs to greet him. Gongsun Lu reproached Yang Xuan, saying: In the past, he had one side, and when the land buyer came, he tried his best to flatter him, so he could be famous in history.

古文：今君王无肃恭之礼，非蕃臣也。 
现代文：现在君王没有端严恭敬的礼节，不是藩臣。 
English: Now the monarch does not have a strict and respectful etiquette, he is not a vassal.

古文：玄使其属赵客子对曰： 天子以六合为家，孰非王庭？是以敢请入国，然后受谒。 
现代文：杨玄派他的下属趟客子对答说： 天子以天下为家，什么地方不属于朝廷，因此敢请入城，然后拜见。 
English: Yang Xuan sent his subordinate, Wanzi, to reply, "God's son takes the whole world as his home, and no place belongs to the imperial court. Therefore, I dare to invite you to come to the city, and then we will meet."

古文：轨答曰： 大夫入境，尚有郊劳，而况王命者乎？
现代文：公孙轨回答说： 大夫进入领地，还须到郊外迎接慰劳，何况天子的使臣呢?
English: Gongsunlu replied, "When a doctor enters the territory, he still has to go to the suburbs to receive consolation, let alone the envoys of the Son of Heaven."

古文：请奉策以还。 
现代文：请手捧策书返回。 
English: Please return with your strategy book in hand.

古文：玄惧，诣郊受命。
现代文：杨玄惧怕，就到郊外接受诏命。
English: Yang Xuan was scared and rushed to the outskirts of the city to receive the sacred life.

古文：轨使还，称旨，拜尚书，赐爵燕郡公，加平南将军。
现代文：公孙轨出使回朝，符合上意，被任命为尚书，赐爵燕郡公，加授平南将军。
English: Gongsunlu sent envoys back to the dynasty, which was in line with the wishes of the emperor. He was named Shangshu, given the title of Prince of Yan County, and promoted to the rank of General of Pingnan.

古文：及刘义隆将到彦之遣其部将姚纵夫济河，攻冶坂。
现代文：及至刘义隆的将帅到彦之派偏将姚纵夫渡黄河，攻打冶坂。
English: As far as Liu Yilong's general Shuai, Yan Yan's faction sent Yao Zongfu across the Yellow River to attack Yezhan.

古文：世祖虑更北入，遣轨屯壶关。
现代文：世祖担心更向北深入，派公孙轨驻守壶关。
English: The ancestor was worried about going further north and sent Gongsun Rail to guard Juguan.

古文：会上党丁零叛，轨讨平之。
现代文：适逢上党丁零人反叛，公孙轨讨伐平定了他们。
English: At the right time, there was a rebellion by a few members of the upper party, but they were put down by the Gongsun Rail Campaign.

古文：出为虎牢镇将。
现代文：出任虎牢镇将。
English: He will take up the post of vice-governor of Torao Town.

古文：初，世祖将北征，发民驴以运粮，使轨部诣雍州。
现代文：起初，世祖将要北征，调百姓的驴运粮，派公孙轨所部到雍州。
English: At first, the founder of the dynasty wanted to march to the north, so he transferred the people's donkeys to transport grain, and sent the Gongsun Railway Department to Yongzhou.

古文：轨令驴主皆加绢一匹，乃与受之。
现代文：公孙轨命令驴的主人增加绢一匹，才答应接受。
English: The grandson ordered the donkey's master to give the donkey a donkey, and the donkey was accepted.

古文：百姓为之语曰： 驴无强弱，辅脊自壮。 
现代文：百姓因此谈论说： 驴无强弱，脊背负绢自然高大。 
English: As a result, the common people said, "Donkeys are not strong or weak. They are naturally tall because they carry a mule on their back."

古文：众共嗤之。
现代文：众人都讥笑他。
English: He was widely despised for this.

古文：坐徵还。
现代文：于是被征召回朝。
English: As a result, he was called back to the Imperial Court.

古文：真君二年卒，时年五十一。
现代文：真君二年去世，时年五十一岁。
English: Mankun died two years later, at the age of 51.

古文：轨既死，世祖谓崔浩曰： 吾行过上党，父老皆曰：公孙轨为受货纵贼，使至今余奸不除，轨之咎也。其初来，单马执鞭;返去，从车百辆，载物而南。
现代文：公孙轨死后，世祖对崔浩说： 我经过上党，父老乡亲们都说：公孙轨因为受贿而放走贼人，使得残余的歹徒至今没有肃清，是公孙轨的罪过他来时，单人匹马；回去时，车子百辆，载物南行。
English: After the death of Gongsunlu, the ancestor said to Cui Hao: I passed through Shangdang, my father and fellow villagers all said: Gongsunlu released thieves because of taking bribes, so that the remaining gangsters have not been cleared up. It is Gongsunlu's fault that when he came, he was single-handed; when he went back, there were a hundred cars carrying goods heading south.

古文：丁零渠帅乘山骂轨，轨怒，取骂者之母，以矛刺其阴而杀之，曰： 何以生此逆子！ 
现代文：丁零人的首领登山骂公孙轨，公孙轨恼怒，捉拿咒骂者的母亲，用矛刺她的阴部把她杀死，骂道： 为什么生这逆子! 
English: The leader of the Ding Zi people climbed the mountain to curse Gong Sunlu, Gong Sunlu became angry, grabbed the mother of the curser, stabbed her pussy with a spear and killed her, and scolded: Why did you give birth to this traitor!

古文：从下到擘，分磔四支于山树上以肆其忿。
现代文：从下往上剖裂，把四肢分别钉在山树上以泄其忿。
English: He cut it from the bottom up and nailed its four limbs to a mountain tree to vent his anger.

古文：是忍行不忍之事。
现代文：这是非常残忍地做不能忍受的事情。
English: It's a very cruel thing to do, an intolerable thing to do.

古文：轨幸而早死，至今在者，吾必族而诛之。 
现代文：公孙轨幸而死得早，如果活到现在，我一定要诛灭他的家族。 
English: Fortunately, Gongsun Lu died early. If he had lived until now, I would have annihilated his family.

古文：轨终得娶于封氏，生二子：斌，叡。
现代文：公孙轨终于能与封氏结婚，生两个儿子，公孙斌、公孙敔。
English: Gongsun Lu was finally able to marry Fong and have two sons, Gongsun Bin and Gongsun Yao.

古文：斌，袭爵。
现代文：公孙斌，继承爵位。
English: Sun Bin, heir to the peerage.

古文：拜内都大官。
现代文：任内都大官。
English: He was a high-ranking official during his term of office.

古文：正光二年卒。
现代文：正光二年去世。
English: Masamitsu died two years later.

古文：赠幽州刺史。
现代文：被追赠为幽州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Yuzhou stabbing history.

古文：叡，字文叔，初为东宫吏，稍迁仪曹长，赐爵阳平公。
现代文：公孙叡，字文叔。起初任东宫官员，逐渐升任仪曹长，赐爵阳平公。
English: At the beginning, he was an official of the East Palace, and gradually rose to the position of Chief of Ceremonies, and was given the title of Prince Yang Ping.

古文：时显祖于苑内立殿，敕中秘群官制名。
现代文：当时显祖在苑内建宫殿，敕令中书省和秘书省群官制定殿名。
English: At that time, Emperor Xianzu built a palace in the courtyard, and ordered the Chinese Ministry of Literature and the secretaries of the provincial officials to formulate the name of the palace.

古文：叡曰： 臣闻至尊至贵，莫崇于帝王;天人挹损，莫大于谦光。
现代文：公孙叙说： 我听说至尊至贵，没有比帝王崇高的；圣明的人谦逊，没有尊者谦虚更能显示光明的美德。
English: Gongsun said, "I have heard that the Most Exalted is the most noble, and there is no one more noble than the emperor; the holy man is humble, and there is no one more worthy of being humble.

古文：伏惟陛下躬唐虞之德，存道颐神，逍遥物外，宫居之名，当协叡旨。
现代文：陛下具有唐尧虞舜的圣德，保全道义颐养精神，不受外物束缚，宫殿的名称，应当符合圣明的意思。
English: His Majesty is endowed with the sacred virtue of the Tang Dynasty, the preservation of morality and the cultivation of the spirit, and is not bound by external things. The name of the palace should be in line with the meaning of the sacred.

古文：臣愚以为宜曰 崇光 。 奏可。
现代文：我以为应当称 崇光， 奏请得到批准。
English: I thought it should be called "Sunguang," and it was approved.

古文：后卒于南部尚书。
现代文：后来任南部尚书时去世。
English: Later, he died while he was still in the Southern Song Dynasty.

古文：赠安东将军、幽州刺史，谥曰宣。
现代文：追赠为安东将军、幽州刺史，谧号为宣。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of General Anton and Yuzhou Zhishi, and his posthumous nickname was Xuan.

古文：叡妻，崔浩弟女也。生子良，字遵伯。
现代文：公逊叡的妻子，是崔浩弟弟的闺女，生儿子公孙良，字遵伯。
English: The wife of Gongsun Rong is the granddaughter of Cui Hao's younger brother, and the son of Gongsun Rong is named Zun Bo.

古文：聪明好学，为尚书左丞，雅有干用，为高祖所知遇。
现代文：聪明好学，任尚书左丞，很有才干，受到高祖赏识。
English: Clever and eager to learn, Ren Shangshu Zojo, very talented, appreciated by Gao Zu.

古文：良弟衡，字道津。
现代文：公孙良的弟弟公孙衡，字道津。
English: Gongsun Liang's younger brother, Gongsun Heng, surnamed Dotsu.

古文：良推爵让之，仕至司直。
现代文：公孙良把爵位推让给他，官至司直。
English: Gongsun Liang conceded the title of nobility to him, and the official became a magistrate.

古文：良以别功，赐爵昌平子。
现代文：公孙良因特殊的功劳，赐爵昌平子。
English: Gongsun Liang bestowed a peerage on Chang Pingzi for his special services.

古文：子崇基袭。
现代文：儿子崇基继承爵位。
English: His son, Chongji, succeeded to the title.

古文：轨弟质，字元直。
现代文：公孙轨的弟弟公孙质，字远直。
English: Gongsun Guo's younger brother, Gongsun Quan, is described as "far and upright."

古文：有经义，颇属文。
现代文：通晓经义，略微能写文章。
English: Familiar with the meaning of the sutras, slightly able to write articles.

古文：初为中书学生，稍迁博士。
现代文：起初是中书学生，逐渐升任博士。
English: At first he was a student of Chinese classics, and gradually rose to the rank of doctor.

古文：世祖征凉州，留宜都王穆寿辅恭宗。
现代文：世祖征讨痉业，留宜都王壬蝗辅佐茎塞。
English: The founder of the family went to the capital of Yunnan to solicit contributions, and the king of Yunnan went to the capital of Yunnan to solicit contributions.

古文：时蠕蠕乘虚犯塞，侯骑至于京师，京师大震。
现代文：当时蜢蠕趁虚侵犯边塞，侦察巡逻的骑兵到了京师，京师很惊恐。
English: At that time, the Kuomintang took advantage of the false invasion of the border fortress, and the cavalry of the reconnaissance patrol arrived at the Beijing Division. The Beijing Division was very frightened.

古文：寿雅信任质，以为谋主。
现代文：穆画很信任公逊质，用他作为主要的谋士。
English: Muga has a lot of trust in Kohei, and uses him as his chief strategist.

古文：质性好卜筮，卜筮者咸云寇必不来，故不谋备。
现代文：公孙质生性好求神问卦，占卦的人都说敌人一定不来，因此不考虑防御。
English: The sons and daughters of noble families are naturally good at asking God for advice, and those who are good at divination say that the enemy will definitely not come, so they do not consider defense.

古文：由质几致败国。
现代文：由于公孙质几乎导致亡国。
English: Because of the father-son relationship, it almost led to the downfall of the country.

古文：后深自督厉，屡进谠言，超迁尚书。
现代文：后来极力督促勉励自己，屡次进奏直言，越级升任尚书。
English: Later, he tried his best to urge and encourage himself, repeatedly played straight, and was promoted to Shangshu.

古文：真君九年卒。
现代文：真君九年去世。
English: Mankun passed away nine years ago.

古文：追赠中护军将军、光禄勋、幽州刺史、广阳侯、谥曰恭。
现代文：被追赠为中护军将军、光禄勋、幽州刺史、广阳侯，谧号为恭。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of General of the Middle Protection Army, Guanglu Xun, Yuzhou Zhishi, and Guangyang Hou, and his posthumous name was Yuanshong.

古文：第二子邃，字文庆。
现代文：第二个儿子公孙邃，字文庆。
English: The second son, Gongsun Yao, was named Wenqing.

古文：初为选部吏，以积勤，稍迁南部长。
现代文：起初任吏部官员，积功升任南部长。
English: At first, he was an official of the Ministry of Civil Service, and was promoted to Minister of the South.

古文：敷奏有称，迁南部尚书，赐爵范阳侯，加左将军。
现代文：陈奏符合上意，升任南部尚书，被赐给爵位为范阳侯，加授左将军。
English: Chen Soo complied with the wishes of the emperor and was promoted to the post of Southern Shangshu. He was given the title of Fan Yang Hou and the additional title of Zuo Geng.

古文：高祖诏邃与内都幢将、上谷公张倏率众讨萧赜舞阴戍。
现代文：高祖命令公孙邃与内都幢将、上谷公张鯈率领军队讨伐萧迹的舞阴戍。
English: Gao Zu ordered Gongsun Ren to lead the army together with the Inner Capital General and Shangguan Gongzhang Ren to fight against the invaders.

古文：后高祖与文明太后引见王公以下，高祖曰： 比年方割畿内及京城三部，于百姓颇有益否？ 
现代文：后来高祖与文明太后接见王公以下大臣。高相说： 近年把在京城管辖的地区及京城三部的流民编为当地民户，对百姓有些好处吗? 
English: Later, Gao Zu and the Empress Dowager of Civilization met with Wang Gong and other ministers. Gao Xiang said: In recent years, the displaced people in the areas under the jurisdiction of Beijing and the three parts of Beijing have been classified as local households. Is there any benefit to the people?

古文：邃对曰： 先者人民离散，主司猥多，至于督察，实难齐整。
现代文：公孙邃回答说： 先前百姓离散，主管部门繁多，即便是督察，也实在难以整齐有序。
English: Gongsun Yao replied, "Previously, the people were scattered, and there were many competent departments. Even if there were inspectors, it would be really difficult to keep things neat and orderly.

古文：自方割以来，众赋易办，实有大益。 
现代文：自从把流民编为当地民户以来，各种赋税容易办理，确实大有好处。 
English: Since the displaced people have been classified as local households, various taxes are easy to handle, which is indeed a great benefit.

古文：太后曰： 诸人多言无益，卿言可谓识治机矣。 
现代文：太后说： 众人多说没有好处，你的话可以说是认识了治理的关键啊。 
English: The empress dowager said, "It is no good for people to talk too much. Your words can be said to have recognized the key to governance."

古文：诏醴阳被掠之兵，有得还者，赐绢二十匹。
现代文：韶令在醴阳被掳掠的士兵，有能够返回的，赐给绢二十匹。
English: According to the imperial edict, the soldiers who were abducted and plundered in Fenyang, and who were able to return, were given twenty yakitori.

古文：邃奏为贵贱等级，高祖称善。
现代文：公孙邃奏请设置贵贱等级制度，高祖赞赏。
English: Please set up a nobility and lowliness grading system, Gao Zu appreciated.

古文：依例降侯，改为襄平伯。
现代文：依照惯例降低侯爵，改封襄平伯。
English: In accordance with the usual practice, the marquess was lowered and the title of Xiangping Bo was changed.

古文：出为使持节、安东将军、青州刺史。
现代文：出任使持节、安束将军、青州刺史。
English: The envoys Jisai, General Anzaku, and Aoshu Sashi were appointed.

古文：以邃在公遗迹可纪，下诏褒述。加镇东将军，领东夷校尉，刺史如故。
现代文：因公孙邃的业绩值得记载，下诏褒扬加授镇束将军，领东夷校尉，刺史一职照旧。
English: Because the performance of Gongsun Rong is worth recording, the following edict commends and awards the general Zhenzhu, the lieutenant of the leader Dongyi, and the post of the historian as before.

古文：太和十九年，卒于官。
现代文：太和十九年，在任期间去世。
English: He died during his term of office in 1929.

古文：高祖在鄴宫，为之举哀。
现代文：高祖在邺城宫中，为他号哭哀悼。
English: Gao Zu cried and mourned for him in the palace.

古文：时百度唯新，青州佐吏疑为所服。
现代文：当时各种制度才开始更新，青州的下属官吏不明白怎样为他服丧。
English: At that time, various systems were just beginning to be updated, and the subordinate officials in Qingzhou did not understand how to mourn for him.

古文：诏曰： 今古时殊，礼或隆杀。
现代文：诏令说： 时代不同，礼仪或许有厚薄。
English: The edict said: "Different times, etiquette may be thick and thin.

古文：专古也，理与今违;专今也，大乖曩义。
现代文：专用古礼，情理与当今相悖；专用今礼，又违反往的规矩。
English: Dedicated ancient rites are contrary to the current situation; dedicated modern rites are contrary to the rules of the past.

古文：当斟酌两途，商量得失，吏民之情亦不可苟顺也。
现代文：应当斟酌两种方式，商量得失，官民的感情也不能无原则地顺从。
English: It is necessary to consider two ways, discuss the pros and cons, and the feelings of officials and the public cannot be unprincipledly obeyed.

古文：主簿，近代相承服斩，过葬便除，可如故事。
现代文：主簿，近代相沿服斩衰丧服，下葬后便除去丧服，可照旧例。
English: For the main register, modern-style funeral attire should be cut off, and the funeral attire should be removed after the burial, which can be done as before.

古文：自余无服，大成寥落，可准诸境内之民，为齐衰三月。 
现代文：其他人不服丧服，很是冷落，可许境内的百姓，为他服齐衰丧服三个月。 
English: Other people do not accept mourning clothes, it is a snub, may the people of the territory, for him to wear mourning clothes for three months.

古文：子同始，袭爵。
现代文：儿子同始，继承爵位。
English: His son was born at the same time and succeeded to the peerage.

古文：卒于给事中。
现代文：在任给事中时去世。
English: He died in office.

古文：同始弟同庆，笃厚廉慎，为司徒田曹参军、李崇骠骑府外兵参军。
现代文：同始的弟弟同庆，忠实厚道廉洁谨慎，任司徒田曹参军、李崇的骠骑府外兵参军。
English: His younger brother Tong Qing, who was loyal, virtuous, incorruptible and prudent, joined the army as Sittian Cao, and Li Chong's foreign soldiers joined the army.

古文：随崇北征，有方直之称。
现代文：跟随李祟北征，有端方正直的声誉。
English: He followed Li Gan on the Northern Expedition and had a reputation for honesty.

古文：邃，叡为从父兄弟，而叡才器小优，又封氏之生，崔氏之婿；邃母雁门李氏，地望县隔。
现代文：公孙邃、公逐壑是堂兄弟，而公彊敔的才能和器识略胜一筹，又是封氏所生，崔氏的女婿，公茎邃的母亲是压盟人奎氐，地望相差很大。
English: Gongsun Yao and Gongzhu Yao are cousins, but Gongzhu Yao's talent and knowledge are slightly superior, and he was born to the Fong clan, the son-in-law of the Cui clan, and the mother of Gongzi Yao is the oppressor ally, Qui Yao. The prestige is very different.

古文：钜鹿太守祖季真，多识北方人物，每云： 士大夫当须好婚亲，二公孙同堂兄弟耳，吉凶会集，便有士庶之异。 
现代文：钜尘太守祖季真，认识很多北方人物，常常说： 士大夫必须有好姻亲，二位公孙是堂兄弟，祸福会集，便有士族和庶族的差异。 
English: Zu Jizhen, the chief abbot of Dangdang, knew many people from the north and often said, "A scholar-official must have good in-laws, two grandchildren are cousins, misfortune and good fortune will come together, and then there will be a difference between the scholars and the commoners."

古文：张济，字士度，西河人也。
现代文：张济，字士度，西河人。
English: Zhang Jizhi, Zhishi Du, Xihe Ren.

古文：父千秋，慕容永骁骑将军。
现代文：父亲张千秋，是慕容永的骁骑将军。
English: His father, Zhang Qianqiu, was Murong Yong's cavalry general.

古文：永灭，来奔。
现代文：慕容永灭亡，来投奔。
English: Murong Yong perished and came to join the army.

古文：太祖善之，拜建节将军，赐爵成纪侯。
现代文：越巳褒扬他，任命他为建节将军，赐爵成纪侯。
English: Yue Si praised him and appointed him as Jianjie General and gave him a peerage and made him a prince.

古文：随从征伐，累著功绩。
现代文：随从征伐，屡建功绩。
English: Accompanied the conquest, repeatedly built achievements.

古文：登国末，卒。
现代文：登国末年，去世。
English: He died at the end of his first year in office.

古文：济涉猎书传，清辩，美仪容。
现代文：张济涉猎儒学书籍，议论清晰明辩，仪容美好。
English: Zhang Jie dabbles in Confucianism books, speaks clearly and articulately, and has a beautiful appearance.

古文：太祖爱之，引侍左右，与公孙表等俱为行人，拜散骑侍郎，袭爵。
现代文：太祖喜欢他，招至身边侍奉，他与公孙表等人都是使者，任散骑侍郎，继承爵位。
English: The great-grandfather liked him and invited him to serve at his side. He and his son-in-law and grandson were envoys, and he was appointed as a knight's equerry and heir to a peerage.

古文：先是，姚兴遣将攻洛阳，司马德宗雍州刺史杨佺期遣使乞师于常山王遵。遵以状闻，太祖遣济为遵从事中郎报之。
现代文：先前，姚兴派遣将领攻打洛阳，司马德宗的雍州刺史杨佺期派遣使者向常山王元遵请求援兵，元遵具状奏闻，太祖派遣张济作为元遵的从事中郎回报杨佺期。
English: Previously, Yao Xing sent generals to attack Luoyang, Sima Dezong's Yongzhou Jishi sent an envoy to King Yuan Zun of Changshan to request reinforcements during the Yang Hui period, Yuan Zun presented a report, and the great-grandfather sent Zhang Jie as Yuan Zun's engaged middle-man to return during the Yang Hui period.

古文：济自襄阳还，太祖问济江南之事，济对曰： 司马昌明死，子德宗代立。所部州镇，迭相攻击，今虽小定，君弱臣强，全无纲纪。
现代文：张济从襄阳返回，太祖向张济询问长江以南的事情，张济回答说：司马昌明死后，儿子德宗继位，所属的州镇，交替着相互攻击，现在虽然稍微安定，但是君弱臣强，完全没有纲常法纪。
English: Zhang Jie returned from Xiangyang, the great-grandfather asked Zhang Jie about the situation south of the Yangtze River, Zhang Jie replied: After the death of Sima Changming, the son of Dezong succeeded to the throne, and the state towns he belonged to alternately attacked each other. Although it is slightly stable now, the prince is weak and the vassal is strong, and there is no normal legal discipline at all.

古文：臣等既至襄阳，佺期问臣： 魏初伐中山几十万众？ 
现代文：我们到襄阳以后，杨佺期间我： 魏国当初征伐中山时有几十万军队? 
English: After we arrived in Xiangyang, during the reign of Yang Pi, I asked: Did Wei initially have hundreds of thousands of troops when they conquered Zhongshan?

古文：臣答： 三十余万。 
现代文：我答道： 三十多万。 
English: I replied: More than three hundred thousand.

古文：佺期曰： 魏国被甲戎马，可有几匹？ 
现代文：杨佺期间： 魏国披甲的战马，可有几匹? 
English: During the reign of Emperor Yang Di: How many armoured war horses did Wei have?

古文：臣答曰： 中军精骑十有余万，外军无数。 
现代文：我回答： 京师的军队有精良的战马十多万匹，地方军队有战马无数。 
English: I replied: The army of the Beijing division has more than 100,000 excellent war horses, and the local army has countless war horses.

古文：佺期曰： 以此讨羌，岂足灭也？ 
现代文：杨佺期说： 用造样的兵力讨伐羌人，羌人哪裹够消灭呢。 
English: Yang Xizhi said, "If we use a sample of troops to fight against the barbarians, how can the barbarians be eliminated?

古文：又曰： 魏定中山，徙几户于北？ 
现代文：又说： 魏国平定中山，往北边迁徙了多少户? 
English: He also said: How many households migrated to the north after the Wei Dynasty conquered Zhongshan?

古文：臣答曰： 七万余家。 
现代文：我回答： 七万多家。 
English: I answered: more than seventy thousand.

古文：佺期曰： 治在何城？ 
现代文：杨佺期间： 定都在哪个城池? 
English: During the Yang diaspora: Which city will they all be in?

古文：臣答曰： 定都平城。 
现代文：我回答： 定都于平球。 
English: I replied: It's all going to be flat.

古文：佺期曰： 有如许大众，亦何用城焉？ 
现代文：说： 有这样多的士卒，哪裹用得着城池呢? 
English: He said, "With so many soldiers, what is the use of a castle?"

古文：又曰： 魏帝为欲久都平城，将复迁乎？ 
现代文：又说： 魏帝是想长久把平城作为首都，还是准备再迁都呢? 
English: He also said: Did Emperor Wei want to keep Pingcheng as the capital for a long time, or was he preparing to move the capital again?

古文：臣答： 非所知也。 
现代文：我回答： 这不是我所知道的。 
English: I said, "That's not what I know."

古文：佺期闻朝廷不都山东，貌有喜色，曰： 晋魏通和，乃在往昔，非唯今日。
现代文：杨佺期听说朝廷不在太行山以束建都，面有喜色，说： 晋魏两国互相往来和好，以前就是这样，不衹是今天。
English: Hearing that the imperial court was not building a capital in Taihang Mountain, Yang Xi said with a happy face, "The mutual exchanges and reconciliation between the two countries of the Jin and Wei dynasties were like this before, but not today.

古文：羌寇狡猾，频侵河洛，夙夜忧危。
现代文：差寇狡猾，频繁侵犯黄河洛河地区。我日夜忧虑。
English: They are cunning and frequently invade the Luohe area of the Yellow River. I am worried day and night.

古文：今此寡弱，仓库空竭，与君便为一家，义所无讳。
现代文：现在这裹兵少势弱，仓库空虚，既然与你是一家人，道义上应无所讳忌。
English: Now the army is small and weak, the warehouse is empty. Since you are a family, you should have no moral scruples.

古文：洛城救援，仰恃于魏，若获保全，当必厚报。
现代文：救援，仰赖于魏国，如果获得保全，必当厚报。
English: The rescue depends on the state of Wei, and if it is preserved, it will be a great reward.

古文：如其为羌所乘，宁使魏取。 
现代文：与其受羌人践踏，宁愿让魏国获取。 
English: Rather than being trampled on by the barbarians, they would rather let Wei obtain the top.

古文：臣等欲分向扬州。
现代文：我等想要离开襄阳趋向扬州。
English: We want to leave Yangyang and go to Yangzhou.

古文：佺期曰： 蛮贼互起，水行甚难。魏之军马，已据滑台，于此而还，从北道东下，乃更便直。
现代文：杨佺期说： 蛮贼四起，走水路很困难，魏国的兵马，已经占据滑台，由遣裹回去，从北路束下，更加方便。
English: Yang Xizhi said: The barbarian bandits are everywhere, and it is very difficult to go by water. The soldiers and horses of Wei have occupied the slipway, and it is more convenient to return from the north road.

古文：晋之法制，有异于魏。
现代文：晋国的法制，与魏国有差异。
English: The legal system of Jin was different from that of Wei.

古文：今都督襄阳，委以外事，有欲征讨，辄便兴发，然后表闻，令朝廷知之而已。
现代文：现在我统领襄阳，被托付给对外事务，想要有所征讨，随即征发调用军队，然后具表奏闻，让朝廷知道就行了。
English: Now I'm in charge of Xiangyang, and I've been entrusted with foreign affairs. If I want to solicit money, I just have to solicit and call the army, and then submit a report to let the court know.

古文：如其事势不举，亦不承台命。  
现代文：如果事情不能成功，也不承受朝廷的命令。 
English: If things don't work out, he won't take orders from the imperial court.

古文：太祖嘉其辞顺，乃厚赏其使，许救洛阳。
现代文：太祖嘉许他言之有理，于是厚赏他的出使，准予援救洛阳。
English: The great-grandfather praised his words as reasonable, so he rewarded his envoy and allowed him to rescue Luoyang.

古文：后迁谒者仆射，报使姚兴。
现代文：后来升任谒者仆射，回使姚兴。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of eunuch, and sent back to Yao Xing.

古文：以累使称旨，拜胜兵将军。
现代文：因累次出使符合朝廷旨意，任胜兵将军。
English: Due to his repeated dispatches in accordance with the will of the imperial court, he was appointed general of the victorious soldiers.

古文：频从车驾北伐，济谋功居多。
现代文：频频跟从皇上北伐，张济谋划的功劳居多。
English: He frequently followed the Emperor's Northern Expedition, and most of the credit goes to Zhang Jie's planning.

古文：赏赐奴婢百口，马牛数百，羊二十余口。
现代文：被赏赐奴婢百人，马牛数百头，羊二十多只。
English: He was rewarded with one hundred slaves, several hundred head of cattle, and more than twenty sheep.

古文：天赐五年卒。子多罗袭爵，坐事除。
现代文：天赐五年去世，儿子多罗继承爵位。
English: He died five years later, and his son Doro succeeded to the title.

古文：李先，字容仁，中山庐奴人也，本字犯高祖庙讳。
现代文：因事获罪被削除爵位。李先，字容仁，是中山卢奴人，原来的字犯高祖的名讳。
English: Li Xian, also known as Rongren, was a Luwian from Zhongshan, and the original name of the criminal Gao Zu.

古文：少好学，善占相之术，师事清河张御，御奇之。
现代文：年轻时好学，擅长观察表面现象以推断吉凶祸福，师从清河人张御，张御赏识他。
English: When he was young, he was eager to learn. He was good at observing surface phenomena to deduce auspicious and inauspicious events. He learned from Zhang You, a man from Qinghe, and Zhang You appreciated him.

古文：仕苻坚尚书郎。
现代文：在董坚手下做官，任尚书郎。
English: He worked as an official under Dong Jian and was appointed as Shang Shuro.

古文：后慕容永闻其名，迎为谋主。
现代文：后来慕容永听说他的名声，迎接他做主要的谋士。
English: Later, Murong Yong heard of his reputation and welcomed him as his chief strategist.

古文：先劝永据长子城，永遂称制，以先为黄门郎、秘书监。
现代文：李先劝慕容永占据长子城，慕容永于是称帝，任命李先为黄门郎、秘书监。
English: Li Xian advised Murong Yong to occupy the eldest son's city. Murong Yong then proclaimed himself emperor and appointed Li Xian as Huangmen Lang and Secretary Supervisor.

古文：垂灭永，徙于中山。
现代文：慕容垂消灭慕容永，李先迁徙到空山。
English: Murongdiao eliminated Murongyong, and Li Xian migrated to Qingshan.

古文：皇始初，先于井陉归顺。
现代文：皇始初年，李先在井陉归顺。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, Li Xian surrendered at Jingyao.

古文：太祖问先曰： 卿何国人？ 
现代文：太祖问李先说： 你是哪国人? 
English: The great-grandfather asked Li Xian: What nationality are you?

古文：先曰： 臣本赵郡平棘人。 
现代文：李先说： 我本是赵郡平棘人。 
English: Li Xian said: I am originally from Pingxian, Zhao County.

古文：太祖曰： 朕闻中山土广民殷，信尔以不？ 
现代文：魁旦说： 我听说史山地广民众，真是这样吗? 
English: Quidan said, "I've heard that Shishan has a large population, is that true?"

古文：先曰： 臣少官长安，仍事长子，后乃还乡，观望民士，实自殷广。 又问先曰： 朕闻长子中有李先者，卿其是乎？ 
现代文：李先说： 我年轻时在长安做官，又在长子球做官，后来才回乡，观望成年男子，确实是众多 又问奎先说： 我听说垦王球中有个叫奎先的，是你吗? 李先说： 是我。 
English: Li Xian said: When I was young, I worked as an official in Chang'an, and I also worked as an official in the eldest son's ball. Later, I returned to my hometown to watch the adult men, and there were indeed many. He also asked Kui Xian: I heard that there is a man named Kui Xian in the king of cricket's ball. Is it you? Li Xian said: It's me.

古文：太祖曰： 卿识朕不？ 
现代文：太祖说： 你认识我吗? 
English: She said, "Do you know me?"

古文：先曰： 陛下圣德膺符，泽被八表，龙颜挺特，臣安敢不识？ 
现代文：奎说： 陛下以圣德承受符命，恩泽遍布八方，容颜超群特出，我怎敢不认识。 
English: Kui said, "Your majesty has lived a life of holiness. Your grace is everywhere. Your face is outstanding. How dare I not recognize you."

古文：太祖又问曰： 卿祖父及身官悉历何官？ 
现代文：太童驭问说： 你的祖父父亲和你做官都历任什么官职? 
English: The great-grandson asked, "What official positions did your grandfather, father and you hold?"

古文：先对曰： 臣大父重，晋平阳太守、大将军右司马。
现代文：李先回答说： 我的祖父李重，任晋朝的圣扰太守、大将军右司马。
English: Li Xian replied: My grandfather, Li Chong, was appointed as the sacred disturber and governor of the Jin Dynasty, and the great general Yu Sima.

古文：父樊，石虎乐安太守、左中郎将。
现代文：父亲奎樊，任石虎的碧堕太守、左中郎将。
English: His father, Kuei Yan, was appointed as the viceregal governor of Shihuang and the left middle-rank general.

古文：臣，苻丕尚书右主客郎，慕容永秘书监、高密侯。 
现代文：我，任苻丕的尚书右主客郎，慕容永的秘书监、产蜜堡。 
English: I, the guest of the right-hand man of the Shoshu, the secretary of Murongyong, the honey-producing castle.

古文：太祖曰： 卿既宿士，屡历名官，经学所通，何典为长？ 
现代文：主担说： 你既然是老成博学之士，屡历名官，通晓经学，最擅长什么经学? 
English: The chairman said, "Since you are an accomplished scholar, have served as a high-ranking official many times, and are well-versed in the classics, what are you best at studying?

古文：先对曰： 臣才识愚暗，少习经史，年荒废忘，十犹通六。 
现代文：李先回答说： 我才识不行，少学经史，一年年荒废遗忘，仍然通晓十分之六。 
English: Li Xian replied: I can only know so much, I have studied less history and literature, and I have forgotten everything year after year, but I still know six-tenths of it.

古文：又问： 兵法风角，卿悉通不？ 
现代文：太祖又问： 兵法和以五音占四方之风而定吉凶的方法，你都通晓吗? 
English: The great-grandfather also asked, "Do you know everything about the art of war and how to determine good or bad fortune by using the five syllables to represent the four directions?"

古文：先曰： 亦曾习读，不能明解。 
现代文：李先说： 也曾研习诵读，不能够通晓。 
English: Li Xian said: I have also studied reading and reciting, but I can't understand it.

古文：太祖曰： 慕容永时，卿用兵不？ 
现代文：太祖说： 慕容永时，你用过兵吗? 
English: The great-grandfather said, "Muryong Yongji, did you ever use soldiers?

古文：先曰： 臣时蒙显任，实参兵事。 
现代文：李先说： 我当时承蒙授予显官，确实参预军事。 
English: Li Xian said: At that time, I was honored to be awarded the title of senior official, and indeed participated in the pre-military.

古文：太祖后以先为丞相卫王府左长史。
现代文：太祖后来任命李先为丞相卫王府左长史。
English: The great-grandfather later appointed Li Xian to be the chancellor of the imperial palace.

古文：从仪平鄴，到义台，破慕容驎军，回定中山。先每一进策，所向克平。
现代文：跟从元仪平定邺城，到义台，打败慕容膦的军队，回师平定中山，李先每一次献策，军队所向攻克平定。
English: He followed Yuan Yi to pacify Shicheng, to Yidai, to defeat Murong Yao's army, and to return to pacify Zhongshan. Li Xian made suggestions every time, and the army was defeated and pacified.

古文：东驾还代，以先为尚书右中兵郎。
现代文：皇上回到代地，任命李先为尚书右中兵郎。
English: The emperor returned to the vicarage and appointed Li Xian as Shangshu Yu Zhongbeiro.

古文：太祖谓先曰： 今蠕蠕屡来犯塞，朕欲讨之，卿以为何如？ 
现代文：太祖对李先说： 如今蠕蠕军屡次来侵犯边塞，我打算讨伐它，你认为怎么样? 
English: The great-grandfather said to Li Xian, "Nowadays, the Cree army has repeatedly invaded the border fortress. I plan to fight it. What do you think?

古文：先曰： 蠕蠕不识天命，窜伏荒朔，屡来偷窃，惊动边民。
现代文：李先说： 蠕蠕不懂天命，逃到荒凉的北方，屡次来偷窃，骚扰边民。
English: Li Xian said, "Creep Creep doesn't understand the fate of the world, fled to the desolate north, and repeatedly came to steal and harass the border residents.

古文：陛下神武，威德遐振，举兵征之，必将摧殄。 
现代文：陛下英明威武，威震远方，发动军队征讨它，必将摧灭。 
English: Your majesty is wise and mighty, and your might can shake the distant lands. If you launch an army to conquer it, it will surely be destroyed.

古文：车驾于是北伐，大破蠕蠕。
现代文：皇帝于是北伐，大败蠕蠕军。
English: The emperor then led the Northern Expedition and defeated the Cree army.

古文：赏先奴婢三口，马牛羊五十头。
现代文：赏赐李先奴婢三人，马牛羊五十头。
English: Li Xian was rewarded with three slaves and fifty head of cattle and sheep.

古文：转七兵郎，迁博士、定州大中正。
现代文：改任七兵郎，升任博士、定州大中正。
English: He was reassigned to Shichibeiro, promoted to doctor, and became a junior high school principal at Jozhou University.

古文：太祖问先曰： 天下何书最善，可以益人神智？ 
现代文：太祖问李先说： 天下什么书最好，可以增长人的精神智慧? 
English: The great-grandfather asked Li Xian: What is the best book in the world that can increase people's spiritual wisdom?

古文：先对曰： 唯有经书。
现代文：李先回答说： 祇有经书。
English: Li Xian replied, "Only the scriptures."

古文：三皇五帝治化之典，可以补王者神智。 
现代文：三皇五帝治理国家教化人民的经典，可以补益帝王的精神智慧。 
English: The classics of the three emperors and five emperors governing the country and enlightening the people can supplement the spiritual wisdom of the emperor.

古文：又问曰： 天下书籍，凡有几何？
现代文：太祖又问说： 天下的书籍，共有多少?
English: The great-grandfather also asked: How many books are there in the world?

古文：朕欲集之，如何可备？ 
现代文：我打算收集它，怎样能收全呢? 
English: I'm going to collect it, how can I collect it all?

古文：对曰： 伏羲创制，帝王相承，以至于今，世传国记、天文秘纬不可计数。
现代文：李先回答说： 伏盏创立制度，帝王相继承，以至于现在，世代相传的国史、天文和记述神秘事物的书不可计数。
English: Li Xian replied, "Fujian founded the system, and the emperors inherited it, so that now, there are countless books on national history, astronomy and the description of mysterious things that have been passed down from generation to generation.

古文：陛下诚欲集之，严制天下诸州郡县搜索备送，主之所好，集亦不难。 
现代文：陛下果真想收集它，可严令各州郡县索取并全部送来，既然是皇上所好，收集也不难。 
English: If His Majesty really wants to collect it, he can order all prefectures and counties to request it and send it to him. Since it is favored by the Emperor, it is not difficult to collect it.

古文：太祖于是班制天下，经籍稍集。
现代文：太祖于是向天下颁发诏令，书籍渐渐收集起来。
English: The great-grandfather then issued a decree to the world, and the books were gradually collected.

古文：太祖之讨姚兴于柴壁也，问先曰： 兴屯天渡，平据柴壁，相为表里。
现代文：太祖在柴壁讨伐姚兴，问李先说： 姚兴驻守玉遮，型泾占据丝壁，互为表裹。
English: The great-grandfather fought against Yao Xing in Chaibi, and asked Li Xian: Yao Xing stationed in Yuzha, and Shidao occupied the Silk Wall, and they were wrapped around each other.

古文：今欲殄之，计将安出？ 
现代文：现在想消灭他们，用什么计策? 
English: If you want to destroy them now, what strategy will you use?

古文：先对曰： 臣闻兵以正合，战以奇胜。
现代文：李先回答说： 我听说用兵以常法交战，战斗以出奇制胜。
English: Li Xian replied: I have heard that soldiers fight with normal methods and win battles with extraordinary methods.

古文：如闻姚兴欲屯兵天渡，利其粮道。
现代文：譬如听说姚兴打算驻军玉堕，以有利于他的粮食运道。
English: For example, it was heard that Yao Xing planned to garrison Yuping in order to benefit his grain transportation.

古文：及其未到之前，遣奇兵先邀天渡。柴壁左右，严设伏兵，备其表里。
现代文：在他未到之前，派遣奇兵先谋取天渡，在柴壁附近，严密设下伏兵，防备对方表裹呼应。
English: Before he arrived, he dispatched a special soldier to seek out Tiandu first, and set up an ambush near the wall of firewood to prevent the other side from responding.

古文：以陛下神策，观时而动，兴欲进不得，退又乏粮。
现代文：以陛下的神机妙算，观察时机而后行动，姚兴欲进不能。退又缺粮。
English: With his majesty's miraculous calculation, observing the opportunity and then acting, Yao Xing could not advance. He retreated and was short of grain.

古文：夫高者为敌所栖，深者为敌所囚，兵法所忌而兴居之，可不战而取。 
现代文：高处被敌人占据，低处被敌人围困，兵法所忌讳而姚兴就处在这种境地，可以不战而取。 
English: The high places are occupied by the enemy, the low places are besieged by the enemy, which is taboo according to military law, and Yao Xing is in this situation, and can be taken without a fight.

古文：太祖从其计，兴果败归。
现代文：太祖听从他的计策，姚兴果然失败而归。
English: The great-grandfather followed his strategy, but Yao Xing failed.

古文：太宗即位，问左右旧臣之中为先帝所亲者有谁。
现代文：太宗即位，问身边旧臣中有谁是先帝所亲信的。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, he asked who among the old vassals around him was trusted by the former emperor.

古文：时新息公王洛兒对曰： 有李先者，最为先帝所知。 
现代文：当时新息公王洛儿回答说： 有个叫李先的，最受先帝赏识。 
English: At that time, the newly crowned Prince Lore replied: There was a wrestler named Li Xian, who was most appreciated by the First Emperor.

古文：太宗召先引见，问曰： 卿有何功行，而蒙先帝所识？ 
现代文：太宗召李先来会见，问道： 你有什么功劳德行，而受到先帝赏识? 
English: Emperor Taizong called Li to meet him first, and asked: What are your merits and virtues that have been appreciated by the First Emperor?

古文：先对曰： 臣愚细，才行无闻，适以忠直奉上，更无异能。 
现代文：李先回答说： 我愚钝低微，没有出名的才能和德行，衹以忠诚正直侍奉先帝，绝没有杰出的才能。 
English: Li Xian replied: I am stupid and lowly, I have no famous talent and virtue, I served the former emperor with loyalty and honesty, and I have no outstanding talent.

古文：太宗曰： 卿试言旧事。 
现代文：太宗说： 你姑且说过去的事。 
English: Emperor Taizong said: Let me tell you about the past.

古文：先对曰： 臣闻尧舜之教，化民如子;三王任贤，天下怀服。
现代文：李先回答说： 我听说尧舜二帝的政教，教化百姓如对待儿子；商汤文王武王任用贤士，天下归附。
English: Li Xian replied, "I have heard that Emperor Xian's political and religious leaders educated the common people as if they were their sons; the merchant Tongwen Wangwu appointed sages, and the whole country followed them.

古文：今陛下躬秉劳谦，六合归德，士女能言，莫不庆抃。 
现代文：如今陛下亲理朝政勤劳谦恭，天下归顺，有见识的民众，无不庆幸喜悦。 
English: Today, His Majesty personally leads the government with diligence and modesty, the world is submissive, and the people with insight are happy and joyful.

古文：俄而召先读《韩子连珠》二十二篇、《太公兵法》十一事。
现代文：不久召来李先解说《韩子》《连珠》二十二篇、《太公兵法》十一事。
English: Soon, Li Xian was summoned to explain the 22 chapters of "Hanzi" and "Lian Zhu" and the 11 chapters of "Tai Gong Hei Fa."

古文：诏有司曰： 先所知者，皆军国大事，自今常宿于内。 
现代文：诏令有关部门说： 李先所知道的，都是统军治国的大事，从今以后常留宿宫中。 
English: The relevant departments of the imperial edict said: What Li Xian knew was all the important matters of unifying the army and governing the country. From now on, he often stayed in the palace.

古文：赐先绢五十匹、丝五十斤、杂彩五十匹、御马一匹。
现代文：赐给李先绢五十匹、丝五十斤、杂彩五十匹。御马一匹。
English: He gave Li Xianya fifty horses, fifty catties of silk, fifty pieces of miscellaneous flowers, and one horse.

古文：拜安东将军、寿春侯，赐隶户二十二。
现代文：授予安束将军、寿春侯，赐给奴隶二十二户。
English: It was awarded to General Anzuk and Prince Shuchun, and given to 22 slave families.

古文：诏先与上党王长孙道生率师袭冯跋乙连城，克之，悉虏其众。
现代文：诏令李先与上党王长孙道生率领军队袭击冯跋的乙连城，攻克它，全部俘虏该城守军。
English: The imperial edict ordered Li Xian and Sun Daosheng, the head of the upper party, to lead the army to attack the Bailian city of Fengba, conquer it, and capture all the defenders of the city.

古文：乃进讨和龙。
现代文：又进兵讨伐和龙。
English: He also sent in troops to fight the dragons.

古文：先言于道生曰： 宜密使兵人人备青草一束，各五尺围，用填城堑。
现代文：李先对道生说： 应当秘密地命令士兵人人准备一捆青草，每一捆围长五尺，以填塞城壕。
English: Li Xian said to Tao Sheng: Soldiers should be secretly ordered to each prepare a bundle of grass, each bundle five feet in circumference, to fill in the trenches.

古文：攻其西南，绝其外援，勒兵急攻，贼必可擒。 
现代文：攻打城的西南面，断绝它的外援，指挥军队急攻，贼军一定能擒获。 
English: Attack the southwest side of the city, cut off its foreign aid, and command the army to make a sudden attack. The thief army will surely be able to capture it.

古文：道生不从，遂掠民而还。
现代文：道生不依从，于是掳掠民众而回。
English: Dousheng did not obey, so he went back to plunder the people.

古文：后出为武邑太守，有治名。
现代文：后来出任武邑太守，有善于治理的名声。
English: Later, he served as the governor of Wuyi, and had a reputation for good governance.

古文：世祖即位，徵为内都大官。
现代文：世祖即位，征入任内都大官。
English: The founder ascended to the throne and was conscripted into the post of prefectural governor.

古文：神二年卒，年九十五。
现代文：神厅二年去世，享年九十五岁。
English: He died two years later at the age of 95.

古文：诏赐金缕命服一袭，赠定州刺史、中山公，谥曰文懿。
现代文：韶令赐给金丝编织的显示等级的制服一套，追赠为定州刺史、中山公，谧号为文懿。
English: The imperial edict gave a set of uniforms woven with gold thread to show rank, posthumously presented to Dingzhou Shishi and Zhongshan Gong, with the posthumous name of Wenlu.

古文：子冏，袭爵。
现代文：儿子李同，继承爵位。
English: His son, Li Tong, succeeded to the title.

古文：为京兆、济阴二郡太守。
现代文：任京兆、济阴二郡太守。
English: He was appointed the governor of two counties, Keicho and Jiiin.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子钟葵，袭爵，降为子。
现代文：儿子钟葵，继承爵位，降为子爵。
English: His son, Zhong Kwai, inherited the title and was reduced to the rank of viscount.

古文：钟葵弟凤子，凤子弟虬子，并中书博士。
现代文：钟葵的弟弟凤子，凤子的弟弟虬子，都任中书博士。
English: Zhong Khao's younger brother Feng Zi and Feng Zi's younger brother Zang Zi were both appointed as Chinese literature professors.

古文：凤子子预，字元恺。
现代文：凰王的儿子奎勇，字五恺。
English: The son of the Phoenix King, Kui Yong, is a five-syllable word.

古文：少为中书学生。
现代文：年轻时为中书学生。
English: He was a middle school student when he was young.

古文：聪敏强识，涉猎经史。
现代文：聪慧机敏记忆力强，涉猎经史。
English: He is intelligent, quick-witted, has a strong memory, and dabbles in history.

古文：太和初，历秘书令、齐郡王友。
现代文：左塑初年，历任秘书令、齐郡王友。
English: In the first year of Zuo Plastering, the successive secretaries were Wang You of Qi County.

古文：出为征西大将军长史，带冯翊太守。
现代文：出任征西大将军长史，兼任!
English: Appointed to the post of West University Conscript General Chang Shi, concurrently!

古文：积数年，府解罢郡，遂居长安。
现代文：困太守遇了几年，征西大将军府解除而冯翊郡撤销，于是居住长安。
English: After several years of hardship, when the General Headquarters of the Western Expedition was disbanded and Fengye County was revoked, he moved to Chang'an.

古文：每羡古人餐玉之法，乃采访蓝田，躬往攻掘。
现代文：常常羡慕古人服食玉屑的方法，于是探问寻访蓝田，亲自去发掘。
English: He often envied the ancient people's way of eating jade chips, so he inquired about and visited Lantian and personally went to excavate.

古文：得若环璧杂器形者大小百余，稍得粗黑者，亦箧盛以还，而至家观之，皆光润可玩。
现代文：得到玉环玉壁和形似日用器具的玉大小一百多枚，偶尔得到质粗色黑的玉，也装进箱子带回去，而到家以后观看它们，都光滑细腻值得赏玩。
English: I got more than a hundred jade rings, jade walls, and jade balls the size of everyday utensils. Occasionally, I got a coarse black jade. I also put them in a box and took them home. When I got home, I looked at them. They were all smooth and delicate and worth enjoying.

古文：预乃椎七十枚为屑，日服食之，余多惠人。
现代文：李预于是把七十枚玉敲打成碎屑，天天服用，剩下的大多赠送他人。
English: Li Yu then beat the seventy beads into crumbs, took them every day, and gave most of the rest to others.

古文：后预及闻者更求于故处，皆无所见。
现代文：后来李预和听到消息的人再到旧地寻求，都没有找到玉。
English: Later, Li Yuanyuan and those who heard the news went back to the old place to search, but did not find the jade.

古文：冯翊公源怀等得其玉，琢为器佩，皆鲜明可宝。
现代文：冯翊公源怀等人得到他的玉，雕琢成器具和玉饰，都色泽鲜明值得珍爱。
English: Feng Yu Gongyuan Huai and others got his jade, carved into utensils and jade ornaments, all of which are brightly colored and worth cherishing.

古文：预服经年，云有效验，而世事寝食不禁节，又加之好酒损志，及疾笃，谓妻子曰： 服玉屏居山林，排弃嗜欲，或当大有神力，而吾酒色不绝，自致于死，非药过也。
现代文：李预服用了一年，说有效验，但是社交应酬和寝食没有限制，又加之好酒损伤神志，到病重时，对妻儿说： 服用玉屑独居山林，抛弃嗜欲，或许将大大获得神力，但是我酒色不断，是自己走向死亡，不是仙丹的过错。
English: Li Yu took it for a year, saying that it was effective, but there was no limit to social entertainment and sleeping and eating, and it was also a good wine to damage the mind. When he was seriously ill, he said to his wife and children: Taking jade chips to live alone in the mountains and forests, abandoning cravings, may greatly gain divine power, but I keep getting drunk, it is my own death, not the fault of Cinderella.

古文：然吾尸体必当有异，勿便速殡，令后人知餐服之妙。 
现代文：然而我的尸体必将有奇特之处，不要匆忙入殓，以使后人知道服用仙丹的妙处。 
English: However, my corpse is bound to have some peculiarities. Don't be in a hurry to be cremated, so that future generations will know the beauty of taking immortelle.

古文：时七月中旬，长安毒热，预停尸四宿，而体色不变。
现代文：当时是七月中旬，长安酷热，李预的尸体停放了四夜，但是颜色不变。
English: At that time, it was the middle of July, and Chang'an was extremely hot. Li Yu's body had been parked for four nights, but its color had not changed.

古文：其妻常氏以玉珠二枚含之，口闭。
现代文：他的妻子常氏把二枚玉珠放入他的裹，而他的口闭着。
English: His wife would often wrap two jade beads around him while his mouth was closed.

古文：常谓之曰： 君自云餐玉有神验，何故不受含也？ 
现代文：常氏对他说： 你自己说服用玉有神奇的效验，为什么不接受玉珠呢? 
English: Mr. Chang said to him: You yourself said that taking jade has a magical effect, why not accept jade beads?

古文：言讫齿启，纳珠，因嘘属其口，都无秽气。
现代文：说完他的口张开，把玉珠放入他的口中，由于吐出的气聚集在他的口中，没有一点秽气。
English: After he finished speaking, he opened his mouth and put the jade bead into his mouth. Because the exhaled breath gathered in his mouth, there was no unclean breath.

古文：举敛于棺，坚直不倾委。
现代文：抬起来装进棺材，尸体挺直而没有损害衰败。
English: Lifted up and placed in a coffin, the corpse stood upright without damage or decay.

古文：死时犹有遗玉屑数斗，橐盛纳诸棺中。
现代文：死的时候还有遗留的玉屑几斗，用口袋装起来放入棺材中。
English: When he died, he still had a few buckets of leftover shards of jade, which he put in a bag and placed in the coffin.

古文：初天兴中，先子密问于先曰： 子孙永为魏臣，将复事他主也？ 
现代文：起初，天兴年间，李先的儿子悄悄地向李先询问说： 子孙是永久做魏国的臣子，还是再侍奉别的君主呢? 
English: At first, during the reign of Emperor Tianxing, Li Xian's son quietly asked Li Xian: "Will your descendants forever be the vassals of Wei, or will they serve other monarchs?"

古文：先告曰： 未也。
现代文：李先告诉说： 不必了。
English: Li Xian told him, "There is no need to do that.

古文：国家政化长远，不可卒穷。 
现代文：国家的政治和教化长远，不会有穷尽。 
English: The country's politics and indoctrination are long-term and will not be exhausted.

古文：自皇始至齐受禅，实百五十余岁矣。
现代文：从皇始年间到习 变接受禅让，实际上是一百五十多年啊。
English: In fact, it has been more than 150 years since the emperor first accepted Zen Buddhism.

古文：贾彝，字彦伦，本武威姑臧人也。
现代文：贾彝，字彦伦，原本是武威姑臧人。
English: Jia Yao, also known as Yan Lun, was originally from Wuwei Gu.

古文：六世祖敷，魏幽州刺史、广川都亭侯，子孙因家焉。
现代文：六世祖贾敷，任魏朝幽州刺史、广川都亭侯，子孙于是定居在那裹。
English: Zu Jia, the sixth generation, served as the governor of Yuzhou and the governor of Guangchuan during the Wei Dynasty, and his descendants settled there.

古文：父为苻坚钜鹿太守，坐讪谤系狱。
现代文：父亲任苻坚的钜鹿太守，因毁谤罪囚于狱。
English: His father, who served as the governor of Menglu, was jailed for defamation.

古文：彝年十岁，诣长安讼父获申，远近叹之，佥曰： 此子英俊，贾谊之后，莫之与京。 
现代文：买彝十岁那年，到长安为父亲伸冤获得昭雪，远处和近处的人赞叹他，都说： 这孩子才能出众，买谊的后代中，没有人比得上他。 
English: When he was ten years old, he went to Chang'an to seek redress for his father and won fame. People from near and far praised him, saying, "This child has outstanding talent. Among the descendants of Buyei, no one is comparable to him."

古文：弱冠，为慕容垂骠骑大将军、辽西王农记室参军。
现代文：二十岁左右，任慕容垂的骠骑大将军、辽西王慕容农的记室参军。
English: Around the age of twenty, Murongdui, the great general of horse cavalry and the record office of Murong Nong, the king of western Liaoning, joined the army.

古文：太祖先闻其名，尝遣使者求彝于垂。
现代文：先前听说他的名声，曾派遣使者向蔓容垂索求贾彝。
English: He had previously heard of his reputation and had sent an envoy to Manrong to ask for Jia Jia.

古文：垂弥增器敬，更加宠秩，迁骠骑长史，带昌黎太守。
现代文：慕容垂更加器重尊敬，又加授尊贵的官秩，升任骠骑长史，兼任昌黎太守。
English: Mu Rongtui was even more highly respected, and was given an honorable official rank, and was promoted to the post of Shaoqi Changshi, and concurrently served as the governor of Changli.

古文：垂遣其太子宝来寇，大败于参合陂，执彝及其从兄代郡太守润等。
现代文：慕容垂派遣他的太子慕容实来侵犯，在参合陂大败，魏军捉住贾彝和他的堂兄代郡太守买润等人。
English: Mu Rongtai sent his prince Mu Rongshi to invade, and suffered a crushing defeat at Sanghaewu. The Wei army captured Jia Yu and his cousin, the deputy county daimyō, Mairun.

古文：太祖即位，拜尚书左丞，参预国政，加给事中。
现代文：太祖即位，任命他为尚书左丞，参预国政，加授给事中。
English: When the great-grandfather ascended to the throne, he appointed him as Shang Shuzo Zojo, participated in pre-national politics, and was awarded an honorary degree.

古文：于鄴置行台，与尚书和跋镇鄴，招携初附。
现代文：在邺城设置代表中央的政务机构，他与尚书和跋镇守邺城，安抚刚刚归附的人。
English: He set up a government agency representing the central government in Fucheng, and together with Shangshu and Baozhen guarded Fucheng to appease the people who had just been annexed.

古文：久乃召还。
现代文：许久以后才被召回。
English: It wasn't until much later that it was recalled.

古文：天赐末，彝请诣温汤疗病，为叛胡所拘执，送于姚兴。
现代文：天赐末年，买彝请求到温泉去治病，被反叛的胡人拘捕，送给姚兴。
English: At the end of his life, he requested to go to a hot spring to cure his illness. He was arrested by the rebellious Hu people and sent to Yao Xing.

古文：积数年，遁归。
现代文：过了几年，逃回。
English: After a few years, he fled back.

古文：又为屈丐所执，与语悦之，拜秘书监。
现代文：又被屈丐抓住，与他交谈而喜欢他，任秘书监。
English: He was also caught by a beggar, talked to him and liked him, and became a secretarial supervisor.

古文：年六十一，卒。
现代文：六十一岁时去世。
English: He died at the age of sixty-one.

古文：世祖平赫连昌，子秀迎其尸柩，葬于代南。
现代文：世祖平定赫连昌，儿子贾秀迎接他的灵柩，安葬在代郡南边。
English: The founder, Hepingding Herenchang, and his son, Jiaxiu, received his coffin and were buried on the south side of Dayi County.

古文：秀，历中书博士，迁中书侍郎，太子中庶子、扬烈将军，赐爵阳都男，本州大中正。
现代文：贾秀，历任中书博士，升任中书侍郎、太子中庶子、扬烈将军，赐爵阳都男，任本州大中正。
English: Jia Xiu, successively held the title of Doctor of Chinese Literature, was promoted to the title of Secretary of Chinese Literature, Prince's illegitimate son, General Yang Rong, was given the title of Yang Du's son, and was appointed as Vice President of Honshu University.

古文：恭宗崩，以爵还第。
现代文：恭宗逝世后，以男爵的身份回到府第。
English: After the death of Yasutsune, he returned to the capital as a baron.

古文：既而掌吏曹事。
现代文：不久掌管吏曹事务。
English: Soon he was in charge of cadre affairs.

古文：高宗以秀东宫旧臣，进爵阳都子，加振威将军。
现代文：高宗因贾秀是束宫旧臣，升他的爵位为阳都子，加授振威将军。
English: Gao Zong Yingjiaxiu was an old vassal of Sokong, and was promoted to the rank of Yangduzi and awarded the title of General Zhenwei.

古文：时丞相乙浑擅作威福，多所杀害。
现代文：当时丞相乙浑擅自作威作福，杀害丁许多人。
English: At that time, the chancellor, Yi Hun, took it upon himself to act as a tyrant and kill many people.

古文：浑妻庶姓而求公主之号，屡言于秀，秀默然。
现代文：乙浑的妻子是庶族却谋求公主的称号，乙浑对买秀说过多次，贾秀都沉默不语。
English: Yixun's wife is a commoner but seeks the title of princess. Yixun has said many times to Buyxiu, but Jiaxiu has remained silent.

古文：浑曰： 公事无所不从，我请公主，不应何意？ 
现代文：乙浑说： 公家的事你无所不从，我请求公主的称号，你不说话是什么意思? 
English: Yixun said, "You are omnipotent when it comes to public affairs. I am requesting the title of princess. What do you mean by not speaking?

古文：秀慷慨大言，对曰： 公主之称，王姬之号，尊宠之极，非庶族所宜。
现代文：贾秀慷慨陈辞，回答说： 公主的称号，是帝王和诸侯之女的称号，尊贵荣宠至极，不是庶族所应当有的。
English: Jia Xiu made a generous speech and replied: The title of princess is the title of the daughter of emperors and princes. It is extremely honorable and should not be given to commoners.

古文：若假窃此号，当必自咎。
现代文：如果越分窃取这称号，必将自己招致罪过。
English: If he steals the title, he will be guilty of a crime.

古文：秀宁死于今朝，不取笑于后日。 
现代文：我宁愿死在今天，不愿曰后让他人取笑。 
English: I'd rather die today than be made fun of tomorrow.

古文：浑左右莫不失色，为之震惧，而秀神色自若。
现代文：乙运身边的人无不失色，为这事感到震惊，而买秀神色不变。
English: The people around him were shocked by this, and his expression did not change.

古文：浑夫妻默然含忿。
现代文：乙运夫妻默然怀恨。
English: The second movement husband and wife silently hold grudges.

古文：他日，乃书太医给事杨惠富臂作 老奴官悭 字，令以示秀。
现代文：有一天，竟在太医给事杨惠富的手臂上写下 老奴官樫 四个字，让他把字给买秀看。
English: One day, on the arm of Yang Huifu, who was given the task by the imperial physician, he actually wrote the four characters of "old servant, official" and asked him to show the characters to Maishou.

古文：浑每欲伺隙陷之，会浑伏诛，遂得免难。
现代文：乙浑常常想伺机陷害买秀，恰好乙浑被依法处死，买秀才得以逃脱灾难。
English: Yixun often wanted to wait for an opportunity to frame Meixiu. It just so happened that Yixun was executed in accordance with the law, and Meixiu was able to escape the disaster.

古文：秀执正守志，皆此类也。
现代文：贾秀主持公道坚守志向，都是这类事。
English: Jia Xiu presided over justice and adhered to the will of the people. These are all such things.

古文：时秀与中书令勃海高允俱以儒旧见重于时，皆选拟方岳，以询访见留，各听长子出为郡守。
现代文：当时买秀与中书令勃海人高允都因为是儒雅的旧臣受到世人的尊重，都被选拔拟任为一方重臣，在征询意见以后被留在朝中，允许各自的长子出任郡守。
English: At that time, both Maishuo and Gaoyong of Bokhaimin, both of whom were respected by the world because they were elegant old ministers, were selected to be appointed as one-side chief ministers. After soliciting opinions, they were left in the court, allowing their respective eldest sons to serve as county governors.

古文：秀辞曰： 爰自愚微，承乏累纪。少而受恩，老无成效，恐先草露，无报殊私。
现代文：贾秀辞让说： 我自己愚昧低贱，勉强任职十多年，年轻时就蒙受恩遇，到年老还投有成效，恐怕余生不多，无法报答特殊的恩宠。
English: Jia Xiu Jia said: I myself am stupid and lowly, I have been reluctantly in office for more than ten years, I received favors when I was young, and I have been effective in my old age. I am afraid that I do not have much life left to repay the special grace.

古文：岂直无功之子，超齐先达？
现代文：岂能够让没有功劳的儿子迅速与有德行学问的前辈并列。
English: Is it possible for the sons of no merit to quickly rank with the predecessors of virtue and learning?

古文：虽仰感圣慈，而俯深惊惧。
现代文：虽然感激皇上的恩慈，但是私下很惊惧。
English: Although he was grateful for the emperor's kindness, he was privately terrified.

古文：乞收成命，以安微臣。 
现代文：请求收回成命，以使我心安。 
English: Asking for my life to be taken back to give me peace of mind.

古文：遂固让不受。
现代文：于是坚决辞让而不接受。
English: As a result, he firmly refused to accept the offer.

古文：自始及终，历奉五帝，虽不至大官，常掌机要。
现代文：自始至终，历奉五位皇帝，虽然没有做到大官，但是经常掌管机要。
English: From beginning to end, he served five emperors, and although he did not attain high office, he was often in charge of important matters.

古文：而廉清俭约，不营资产。
现代文：他清廉俭省，不经营产业。
English: He is clean, frugal and thrifty, and does not run an industry.

古文：年七十三，遇疾，给医药，赐几杖。
现代文：七十三岁时，生病，皇上给予医药治疗，赐给几案和手杖。
English: When he fell ill at the age of seventy-three, the emperor gave him medical treatment and gave him a pair of scissors and a cane.

古文：时朝廷举动及大事不决，每遣尚书、高平公李敷就第访决。
现代文：当时朝廷的重大政治行动和不能决断的大事，常常派遣尚书、高平公李敷到他的府上咨询议决。
English: At that time, important political actions of the imperial court and major matters that could not be decided often sent Shang Shu and Gao Ping Gong Li Ji to his palace for consultation and resolution.

古文：皇兴三年卒。
现代文：皇兴三年去世。
English: Emperor Xing died three years later.

古文：赠本将军、冀州刺史、武邑公，谥曰简。
现代文：追赠为本将军、冀州刺史、武邑公，谧号为简。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Hon Gen, Jizhou Shishi, and Wuyi Gong, and his posthumous name was Jian.

古文：子俊，字异邻，袭爵。
现代文：儿子贾俊，字异邻，继承爵位。
English: His son Jia Jun, who is a distant relative, will inherit the title.

古文：拜秘书中散、军曹令。
现代文：任秘书中散、军曹令。
English: The secretary, Chusan, was promoted to sergeant.

古文：出为显武将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：出任显武将军、荆州刺史。
English: Appointed as Gen. Xianwu, Jingzhou stabbed history.

古文：依例降爵为伯。
现代文：依照惯例降爵位为伯。
English: In accordance with the usual practice, he was demoted in rank.

古文：先是，上洛置荆州，后改为洛州，在重山中，民不知学。
现代文：先前，在上洛设置荆州，后来改为洛州，州在重山中，百姓不知道学习。
English: Previously, Jingzhou was set up in Shangluo, but later it was changed to Luozhou. Shangluo is in a mountainous area, and the people do not know how to study.

古文：俊乃表置学官，选聪悟者以教之。
现代文：贾俊于是上表请求建学校，选派聪明颖悟的人来教导他们。
English: Jia Jun then asked the upper table to build a school and send clever and enlightened people to teach them.

古文：在州五载，清靖寡事，吏民亦安。
现代文：在州五年，清静事少，官吏百姓也安宁。
English: After five years in the state, there are few things that are quiet, and officials and people are also peaceful.

古文：迁洛后，俊朝京师，赏以素帛。
现代文：迁都困以后，贾适到京师朝见，被赏赐给白色的帛。
English: After the relocation of the capital, Jia Shi went to Beijing to see the emperor and was awarded a white gong.

古文：景明初卒。
现代文：景明初年去世。
English: He died in the first year of the reign of King Jingming.

古文：赠本将军、光州刺史。
现代文：追赠为本将军、光州刺史。
English: A posthumous award was made to the general and the history of Gwangju.

古文：子叔休，袭爵。
现代文：儿子叔休，继承爵位。
English: His son, 叔休, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：除给事中。
现代文：任给事中。
English: The court appointed him to the case.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子兴，袭爵。
现代文：儿子买兴，继承爵位。
English: His son, Bui Xing, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：兴弟宾，历尚书郎，以清素称。
现代文：买兴的弟弟买宾，历任尚书郎，以清正廉洁闻名。
English: Buy Xing's younger brother Buy Bin, successively Shang Shuro, is famous for his honesty and integrity.

古文：出为黎阳太守，卒官。
现代文：出任黎阳太守，在任期间去世。
English: Appointed as the governor of Liyang and died while in office.

古文：润曾孙祯，字叔愿。
现代文：买润的曾孙贾祯，字叔愿。
English: He is the great-grandson of Jia Rong, known as Shu Rong.

古文：学涉经史，居丧以孝闻。
现代文：学问涉及经学和史学，守丧以孝闻名。
English: Learning involves classics and history, and mourning is known for its filial piety.

古文：太和中，为中书博士，副中书侍郎高聪使于江左。
现代文：太和年间，任中书博士，辅助中书侍郎高聪出使到长江下游以东地区。
English: During the Taiwa era, he was appointed as a doctor of Chinese calligraphy, and was assisted by the attendant of Chinese calligraphy, Gao Cong, who was sent to the area east of the lower reaches of the Yangtze River.

古文：还，以母老患，辄过家定省，坐免官。久之，徵为京兆王愉郎中令，行洛阳令。
现代文：返回，因母亲年老有病，就还乡探望问候，于是被免官长时间以后，征入任京兆王元愉的郎中令，行洛阳令。
English: On his return, due to his mother's old age and illness, he went back to his hometown to visit and greet her. Therefore, after being relieved of his duties for a long time, he was enlisted as the second-in-command of King Yuan Yu of Jingzhao and went to Luoyang.

古文：转治书侍御史、国子博士，加威远将军，行鲁阳太守。
现代文：改任治书侍御史、国子博士，加授威远将军，行鲁阳太守。
English: He was reappointed to the posts of secretary of state, minister of history, and doctor of provincial science, and was also awarded the title of General Wiyuan, as well as acting governor of Luyang.

古文：清素，善抚接，得百姓情。
现代文：清正廉洁，善于安抚，得到百姓爱戴。
English: Honest and upright, good at placating, loved by the people.

古文：稍迁司徒谘议参军、通直散骑常侍，加冠军将军。
现代文：逐渐升任司徒谘议参军、通直散骑常侍，加授冠军将军。
English: Gradually, he was promoted to the position of a regular attendant of the army, and was awarded the title of champion general.

古文：正光中卒。
现代文：正光年间去世。
English: Masamitsu died in the same year.

古文：赠平北将军、齐州刺史。
现代文：追赠为平北将军、齐州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of General of North Pyongan Province and General of South Pyongan Province.

古文：子子儒，司空田曹参军。
现代文：儿子子儒，任司空田曹参军。
English: His son, Ziru, joined the army as a subordinate of Kuoda Cao.

古文：祯兄子景俊，亦以学识知名，奉朝请。
现代文：孙祯哥哥的儿子景俊，也因学识知名，任奉朝请。
English: The son of Sun Yat-sen's elder brother, Jing Jun, was also famous for his learning, and was appointed to the imperial court.

古文：迁京兆王愉府外兵参军。
现代文：升任京兆王元位的府外兵参军。
English: The foreign soldiers who were promoted to the throne of King Kyosho joined the army.

古文：愉起逆于冀州，将授其官，景俊不受，愉杀之。
现代文：亘愉在望丛起兵叛逆，将要授予他官职，他不接受，五逾将他杀害。
English: Wanyu rebelled by raising an army in Wangcong. He was about to be appointed to an official post, but he did not accept it. More than five people killed him.

古文：永平宫，赠东清河太守，谥曰贞。
现代文：水平年闾，追赠为塞渣娅太守，谧号为贞。
English: In the horizontal year, she was posthumously awarded the title of Sejaia Taishu, and her posthumous name was Zhen.

古文：景俊弟景兴。
现代文：景俊的弟弟景兴。
English: Jingjun's younger brother, Jing Xing.

古文：清峻鲠正。
现代文：廉洁高尚刚正。
English: Honest, noble and upright.

古文：少为州主簿，遂栖迟不仕。
现代文：年轻时任州主簿，却游息不理事。
English: When he was young, he was the state's chief accountant, but he never became a director.

古文：后葛荣陷冀州，为荣所虏，称疾不拜。
现代文：后来葛荣攻占冀州，被葛荣俘虏，藉口有病而小跪拜。
English: Later, Ge Rong conquered Jizhou, was captured by Ge Rong, and made a small prostration on the pretext of being ill.

古文：景兴每扪膝而言曰： 吾不负汝。 
现代文：景兴常常摸着膝盖说道： 我没有对不起你们。 
English: Jing Xing often touched his knees and said: I did not feel sorry for you.

古文：以不拜葛荣故也。
现代文：是因为没有跪拜葛荣的缘故。薛提，太原人。
English: It's because they didn't kneel and worship Ge Rong. Shetty, Taiyuan native.

古文：薛提，太原人也，皇始中，补太学生，拜侍御史。
现代文：皇始年间，被选补为太学生，任侍御史。
English: During the early years of the reign of the Emperor, he was selected to be a disciple of the Emperor and served as an attendant to the Emperor.

古文：累迁散骑常侍、太子太保，赐爵历阳侯，加晋兵将军。
现代文：多次升任散骑常侍、太子太保，赐爵历阳侯，加授晋兵将军。
English: He was promoted many times to the rank of knight errant, prince's bodyguard, given the title of prince of Liyang, and promoted to the rank of general.

古文：出为镇东大将军、冀州刺史，进爵太原公。
现代文：出任镇东大将军、冀州刺史，晋爵太原公。
English: He was appointed as the General of Zhendong County, the Governor of Jizhou Province, and the Prince of Taiyuan.

古文：所在有声绩。
现代文：所到之处有声誉和业绩。
English: Reputation and performance are everywhere.

古文：徵为侍中，治都曹事。
现代文：被征入任侍中，治理都曹事务。
English: He was conscripted to serve as a chamberlain, managing the affairs of the capital.

古文：世祖崩，秘不发丧。
现代文：世祖逝世，秘不宣布。
English: The death of the founder will not be announced.

古文：尚书左仆射兰延、侍中和匹等议，以为皇孙幼冲，宜立长君，徵秦王翰置之秘室。
现代文：尚书左仆射兰延、侍中和匹等人谋议，认为皇帝的孙子年幼，应当立年长的君主，征入秦王元翰安排在秘室。
English: Shangshu's left-hand servant Sha Lanyan, the chamberlain and the horse, and others deliberated, believing that the emperor's grandson was young and should establish an older monarch, conscripted Qin Wang Yuanhan and arranged him in the secret room.

古文：提曰： 皇孙有世嫡之重，民望所系。
现代文：薛提说： 皇帝的孙子有皇位继承人的身份，众望所归。
English: Shetty said: The emperor's grandson has the status of heir to the throne and is highly regarded.

古文：春秋虽少，令问闻于天下，成王、孝昭所以隆周汉。
现代文：年龄虽然幼小，但是美好的名声传扬于天下，周成王、孝昭帝因此使周代汉朝昌盛。
English: Despite their young age, their good reputation spread throughout the world, and King Zhou Chenggong and Emperor Xiao Zhao thus brought prosperity to the Han Dynasty.

古文：废所宜立，而更求君，必不可。 
现代文：废弃所应当立的，而另求君主，一定不行。 
English: It is certainly not possible to abandon what should be established and ask the sovereign for something else.

古文：延等犹豫未决。
现代文：兰延等人犹豫不决。
English: Lan Yan and others hesitated.

古文：中常侍宗爱知其谋，矫皇后令徵提等入，遂杀之。
现代文：中常侍宗爱得知他们的密谋，假称皇后的韶命征召薛提等人入宫，于是杀掉他们。
English: When the middle chamberlain, Zong Ai, learned of their plot, he killed them under the pretense that it was the queen's order to conscript Shetty and others into the palace.

古文：提弟浮子。
现代文：薛提的弟弟浮子。
English: Shetty's younger brother, Flounder, stars.

古文：高宗即位，以提有谋立之诚，诏袭兄爵太原公，有司奏降为侯。
现代文：高宗即位后，因为薛提有扶立他的忠诚，诏令浮子继承哥哥的爵位太原公，依有关部门奏请降为侯爵。
English: After Emperor Gao Zong ascended the throne, because of Xue Ti's loyalty to support him, the emperor ordered that Fu Zi inherit his brother's title of Prince Taiyuan, and was demoted to marquis according to the request of the relevant departments.

古文：皇兴元年卒。
现代文：皇兴元年去世。
English: Emperor Xing died in the first year of the year.

古文：提孙令保，太和中，袭爵历阳侯。
现代文：薛提的孙子令保，太和年间，继承爵位为历阳侯。
English: Xue Ti's grandson, Ling Bao, inherited the title of Prince of Liyang during the reign of the Empress Dowager.

古文：史臣曰：宋隐操行贞白，遗略荣利。
现代文：史臣曰：宋隐的操行清白，忽略功名利禄。
English: Shichen said: Song Ying's conduct is innocent, and he ignores the benefits of fame.

古文：王宪名祖之孙，老见优礼。
现代文：王童是名祖之孙，年老时受到优待礼遇。
English: Wang Tong is the grandson of a famous ancestor, and he received preferential treatment when he was old.

古文：屈遵学艺知机，垣乃局量受遇。
现代文：屈遵博学多才有预见，屈垣因有器量而受到恩遇。
English: Kutsun, a scholar, had the foresight, while Kugaki was favored because of his ability.

古文：张蒲、谷浑，文武为用，人世仍显。
现代文：张渣、垄暧能文能武，人生因此显耀。
English: Zhang Jia, Rong Jia can be literate and can be martial arts, so life is brilliant.

古文：公孙表初则一介见知，终以轻薄至戾。
现代文：公孙壶起初衹因微小的业绩受到赏识，最终因轻视鄙薄他人而招致罪过。
English: At first, Gongsun Jue was praised for his small achievements, but eventually he incurred guilt for despising others.

古文：轨始受授金之赏，末陷财利之徵。
现代文：公孙轨起初受到授予黄金的奖赏，后来陷入财货之中。
English: Gongsunlu was initially rewarded with gold, but later fell into wealth.

古文：鲜克有终，固不虚也。
现代文：人很少能够善始善终的。确实不假啊。
English: People rarely have a good beginning and a good end. It's true.

古文：张济使于四方，有延誉之美。
现代文：亟挤出使四方，长于播扬声誉。
English: It is better to push out the four parties than to promote the reputation.

古文：李先学术嘉谋，荷遇三世。
现代文：李先的学问和嘉谋，蒙受三代君主的恩遇。
English: Li Xian's learning and good advice have been favored by three generations of monarchs.

古文：贾彝早播时学，秀则不畏强御。
现代文：贾彝早年被当时的学者传扬，贾秀又不畏惧有权势的人。
English: In his early years, Jia Xuan was popularized by scholars of the time, and Jia Xiu was not afraid of powerful people.

古文：薜提正义忠谋，见害奸阉，悲夫！
现代文：薛提公正忠诚，被奸邪的宦官杀害，可悲啊!
English: Shetty, just and loyal, was killed by a treacherous eunuch. How sad!

