古文：国朝熙宁以前，秘书省无著作局，故置史馆，设修撰、直馆之职。
现代文：国朝熙宁以前，秘书省没有著作局，所以设里史馆，设修撰、直馆的职位。
English: Before the rise of the Qing Dynasty, the Ministry of Secretaries did not have a Literature Bureau, so it set up the History Museum, and the posts of revisionist and direct museum were set up.

古文：元丰官制行，有秘书官，则其职归于监、少及著作郎、佐矣。
现代文：元丰年间改革官制，有秘书官，那么其取权归于秘书监、少监及著作郎、著作佐郎。
English: During the reform of the bureaucratic system in the Yuanfeng era, there were secretaries, so the power to take it belonged to the secretary supervisor, the junior supervisor, and the author's assistant and author's assistant.

古文：而绍兴中复置史馆修撰、检讨，是与本省为二也。
现代文：而绍兴年间又设里史馆修撰、检讨的职位，这和秘书省一分为二。
English: During the Shaoxing years, the position of the author and reviewer of the History Museum of Li was set up, which was divided into two with the secretary province.

古文：宗正寺修玉牒官亦然。
现代文：宗正寺中修玉牒官也是这样。
English: This was also the case with Sosei-ji Temple's Chushu Gyokucho-kan.

古文：官制既行，其职归于卿、丞矣。
现代文：元丰年间改革官制，它的职权归于寺卿、寺丞。
English: During the Yuanfeng era, the official system was reformed, and its powers were assigned to the chief priest and the chief priest.

古文：而绍兴中复差侍从为修牒，又以他官兼检讨，是与本寺为二也。
现代文：而绍兴年间再次差侍从为修牒官，又以他官谦任检讨，这和宗正寺一分为二。
English: During the years of Shaoxing, the poor attendant was once again appointed as the revising officer, and he was also appointed as the reviewing officer, which was divided into two with Sozheng Temple.

古文：然则今有户部，可别置三司，有吏、刑部，可别置审官、审刑院矣。
现代文：今天有户部，可是另外设里三司，有吏部、刑部，可是另外设置审官、审刑院。
English: Today, there is the Household Department, but there are also the Three Departments of Justice, the Criminal Records Department, and the Criminal Investigation Department, but there is also an adjudicator and a criminal court.

古文：又玉牒旧制，每十年一进，谓甲子岁进书，由甲戌、甲申岁复然。
现代文：另外，按照玉牒旧制，每十年，进献一次玉牒，如果甲子年进献玉牒、那么甲戌年、甲申年也都进牒。
English: In addition, according to the old system of jade votive offerings, every ten years, a jade votive offering is made. If a jade votive offering is made in the year of the rooster, then a jade votive offering is made in the year of the rooster and a jade votive offering is made in the year of the rooster.

古文：今乃从建隆以来再行补修，每及十年则一进，以故不过三二年辄一行赏，书局僭赏，此最甚焉。
现代文：如今，从建隆年间以来，再次进行修补，每十年进献一次，所以不过三、二年总是统一行赏，秘书局不按惯例行赏，以此为最厉害了。
English: Nowadays, since the Jianlong era, it has been repaired again, and it is presented once every ten years, so it is always uniformly awarded in three or two years, and the Secretary Bureau does not award it according to the usual practice, which is the most powerful.

