古文：俊辨阳玠薛道衡薛收张后裔崔仁师卢庄道许敬宗胡楚宾裴琰之苏颋王勮李白柳芳王藻韩愈李程李吉甫王生辛丘度温庭筠柳公权权德舆东方朔李彪班蒙
现代文：俊辨阳玠薛道衡薛收张后裔崔仁师卢庄道许敬宗胡楚宾裴琰之苏颋王勮李白柳芳王藻韩愈李程李吉甫王生辛丘度温庭筠柳公权权德舆东方朔李彪班蒙
English: Jun Bin Yang, Xue Dao Heng, Xue Jie, Zhang Descendants, Cui Ren, Lu Zhuang, Dao Xu Jing, Zong Hu, Chu Bin, Pei Yao, Su Shi, Wang Yao, Li Bai Liu, Fang Wang, Han Yu, Li Cheng, Li Ji Fu, Wang Shengqiu, Du Wen, Ting Li, Liu Zi, Gong Quan, De Shuo, Dongfang Shuo, Li Biao, Ban Meng

古文：幼敏陈元方孙策钟毓孙齐由陆琇王绚萧遥欣房氏子张琇浑瑊
现代文：幼敏陈元方孙策钟毓孙齐由陆琇王绚萧遥欣房氏子张琇浑瑊
English: Young Sensitive Chen Yuan Fang Sun Zhe Zhong Yao Sun Qi by Lu Yao Wang Huan Xiao Yao Xin Fang's son Zhang Yao Hun Yao

古文：俊辩
现代文：俊辩
English: Shunfen

古文：阳玠
现代文：阳玠
English: Impotence

古文：隋京兆杜公瞻，卫尉台卿犹子也。尝邀阳玠过宅。酒酣，因而嘲谑。
现代文：隋朝的京兆尹杜公瞻是卫尉杜台卿的侄子，他曾经邀请阳玠到家里作客，酒喝到畅快的时候便互相开玩笑。
English: Jing Zhao Yin Du Gongzhan of the Sui Dynasty was the nephew of the guard lieutenant Du Taiqing. He once invited the impotent man to his home as a guest, and they joked with each other as they drank until they were merry.

古文：公瞻谓：兄既姓阳，阳货实辱孔子。
现代文：杜公瞻说：大哥既然姓阳，春秋时鲁国的阳货曾经污辱孔子。
English: Du Gongzhan said, "Since the eldest brother's surname is Yang, during the Spring and Autumn Period, the Yang goods in Lu once insulted Confucius.

古文：玠曰：弟既姓杜，杜伯尝射宣王。
现代文：阳玠说：老弟既然姓杜，西周时的杜伯曾经射杀宣王。
English: Impotence said: Since my brother's surname is Du, Du Bo of the Western Zhou Dynasty once shot and killed Xuan Wang.

古文：殿内将军陇西牛子充，寮友推其机辩，尝谓玠曰：君阳有玠，恐不任厨。
现代文：殿内将军陇西的牛子充被同事和朋友们公认为机敏善辩，他对阳玠说：你的阳物有疥疮，恐怕不能作菜。
English: Colleagues and friends of the general of the palace, Shansi Niu Zichong, recognized him as an astute and eloquent person. He said to the impotent man, "Your penis has scabies, I'm afraid you can't make the dish."

古文：玠曰：君牛既充，正可烹宰。
现代文：阳玠说：你这头牛既然已经充实肥腴，正好可以宰杀烹烧。
English: The impotent baboon said, "Since this cow of yours is already full of fat, you can just slaughter and cook it.

古文：又见玠食芥菹，曰：君身名玠，何得复啖芥菹？
现代文：牛子充又看见阳玠吃一种叫做芥菹的蔬菜，便对阳玠说：你的名字叫玠，为什么还吃芥菹？
English: Niu Zicheng also saw the impotent man eating a kind of vegetable called mustard, and said to the impotent man: Your name is Zou, why do you still eat mustard?

古文：对曰：君既姓牛，何得不断牛肉？
现代文：阳玠回答说：你既然姓牛，为什么仍经常吃牛肉？
English: The impotent man replied, "Since your surname is Niu, why do you still often eat beef?

古文：有太仓令张策者，在云龙门与玠议理屈，谓玠曰：卿本无德量，忽共叔宝同名。
现代文：太仓令张策在云龙门同阳玠辩论时理屈词穷。便对阳玠说：你本来就没有道德和胆量，只是和卫玠同名。
English: Zhang Ce, the magistrate of Taicang, was at a loss for words when debating with Yang Jie in Yunlongmen. He said to Yang Jie, "You don't have morals and courage, you just have the same name as Wei Jie."

古文：玠抗声曰：尔既非英雄，敢与伯符连讳。
现代文：阳玠抗议说：你既然不是英雄，怎么敢用同孙策一样的字号。
English: Impotence protested: Since you are not a hero, how dare you use the same name as Sun Ce.

古文：太子洗马兰陵萧诩爽俊有才辩，尝谓玠曰：流共工于幽州，易北恐非乐土。
现代文：太子洗马兰陵的萧诩英俊豪爽，并且有才善辩，他对阳玠说：流放凶暴的共工到幽州，易北一带恐怕不是安乐之地。
English: Xiao Yao, the prince who washed the Malan Ling, was handsome and brave, and had the ability to argue. He said to the impotent: Exile the violent co-workers to Yuzhou, I am afraid that the Elbe area is not a place of peace.

古文：玠曰：族欢兜于崇山，江南岂是胜地。
现代文：阳玠说：释放凶恶的欢兜于崇山，江南怎么会是名胜之地。
English: "How can the south of the Yangtze River be a place of scenic beauty, when the vicious hooligans are being released in the mountains of Chongshan?

古文：录尚书晋昌王唐邕闻诸省官曰：卿等宜道本州宝物。
现代文：录尚书晋昌王唐邕对各个官署的官员说：各位可以说出本州的宝物。
English: Recorded in the Shangshu, Jinchang King Tang Jun said to the officials of various government departments: You can all tell the treasures of this state.

古文：定州人以绫绮为宝，沧州人以鱼盐为宝。
现代文：定州人说当地的丝织品是宝物。沧州人说当地的水产和食盐是宝物。
English: Dingzhou people say that local silk fabrics are treasures. Cangzhou people say that local aquatic products and salt are treasures.

古文：及至玠，邕曰：卿幽州人，以何物为宝？
现代文：轮到阳玠了，唐邕说：你是幽州人，以什么东西为宝物？
English: When it was Impotence's turn, Tang Xuan said, "You are from Yuzhou. What do you treasure?

古文：答曰：刺史严明，文武奉法，此幽州之宝也。
现代文：阳玠回答说：刺史长官公正严明，文官武将遵纪守法，这就是幽州的宝物。
English: Yuzhou's treasured treasures are the justice and strictness of the chief magistrate, and the discipline and law-abidingness of the civil officers and military commanders.

古文：邕有愧色。
现代文：唐邕脸上露出了惭愧的神色。
English: A look of shame appeared on Tang Xuan's face.

古文：薛道衡
现代文：薛道衡
English: Xue Daoheng

古文：隋吏部侍郎薛道衡尝游钟山开善寺，谓小僧曰：金刚何为努目？菩萨何为低眉？
现代文：隋朝的吏部侍郎薛道衡游览钟山开善寺，他问小和尚：金刚为什么怒张其目，菩萨为什么低头垂眉？
English: When Xue Daoheng, an official of the Sui Dynasty, visited the Jingshan Kaisen Temple, he asked the little monk: "Why does King Kong have angry eyes, and why does the Bodhisattva bow his head and frown?"

古文：小僧答曰：金刚努目，所以降伏四魔，菩萨低眉，所以慈悲六道。
现代文：小和尚回答：金刚怒目，所以降服四方妖魔；菩萨低眉，所以慈悲六道众生。
English: The little monk replied: "The vajra is angry, so he surrenders to the four-sided demon; the bodhisattva is low-browed, so he is compassionate to all beings in the six realms."

古文：道衡怃然不能对。
现代文：薛道衡惊奇地说不出话来。
English: Surprised, Xue Daoheng was speechless.

古文：薛收
现代文：薛收
English: Xue Jie

古文：唐薛收在秦府，檄书露布，多出于收，占辞敏速，皆同宿构，马上即成，曾无点窜。
现代文：唐朝的薛收在秦王府充当幕僚，秦王府的公文信函，大多出自薛收的手笔。他撰写文章迅速敏捷，全都像是预先构思好了的，挥笔即成，从来不用加以修改。
English: The Tang Dynasty's Xue Hui served as an aide-de-camp in the Qin royal court, and most of the official correspondence of the Qin royal court was written by Xue Hui. He wrote articles quickly and nimbly, all of which seemed to be pre-conceived, ready to be written, and never had to be modified.

古文：张后裔
现代文：张后裔
English: Zhang Zikong

古文：张后裔在并州，太宗就受春秋左氏传。
现代文：张后裔在并州，太宗皇帝请他来讲解《春秋左氏传》。
English: Zhang's descendant was in Bianzhou, and Emperor Taizong asked him to explain "The Biography of Spring and Autumn Zuo."

古文：后因召入赐宴，言及平昔。从容谓曰：今日弟子何如？
现代文：然后设宴招待他。他们说话间谈起过去的事情，太宗皇帝从容地对他说：今天我这个学生怎么样？
English: They talked about the past, and Emperor Taizong calmly said to him, "How am I today, a student?"

古文：后裔对曰：昔孔子领徒三千，徒者无子男之位，臣翼赞一人，即为万乘主，计臣此功，愈于先圣。
现代文：张后裔回答说：昔日孔子有学生三千人，但是其中没有一个人得到过子男以上的爵位。如今我只辅佐一个人，就是万乘之主的皇帝。如此看来，我的功劳超过了古代的圣人。
English: The Zhang descendant replied, "In the past, Confucius had three thousand students, but none of them received a title of nobility higher than that of a son. Today, I only assist one person, the emperor of the Lord of Manjushri. From this point of view, my merit surpasses that of the ancient sage.

古文：太宗大悦，即赐马五匹。后为礼部尚书。
现代文：太宗皇帝觉得奇怪，命令杜正伦拿着帐本对照，然后由崔仁师大声报告，结果没有发现一笔差错。
English: Emperor Taizong found it strange and ordered Du Zhenglun to take the ledger and check it, and then Cui Renshi to report it out loud. As a result, no mistake was found.

古文：陪葬献陵。崔仁师崔仁师为度支郎中，尝陛奏度支钱物数千言没官为轻，改从死。仁师议，以为父子天属，昆季同气，诛其父子，足累其心，此而不顾，何爱兄弟。
现代文：刑部认为反叛罪犯的兄弟受牵连而要处罪，只将家产没收充公太轻，改为同罪犯一同处死。崔仁师认为，父子兄弟血缘相连，诛杀了罪犯父子，足以震撼兄弟的心。如果如此还受不到教育，怎么能说爱兄弟呢。
English: The criminal department thought that the brother of the rebel criminal was implicated and wanted to punish him, but the confiscation of family property was too light and was executed together with the criminal. Cui Renshi believed that the father and son brothers were related by blood, and killed the criminal father and son, which was enough to shake the brother's heart. If they were not educated in this way, how could they say that they loved their brother?

古文：既欲改法，请审商量。竟从仁师议。
现代文：所以要求修改法律，请求审议商量，结果竟通过了崔仁师的建议。
English: Therefore, they asked to amend the law, and requested deliberation and discussion, and as a result, the proposal of Choe In-seok was passed.

古文：卢庄道
现代文：卢庄道
English: Luzhuang Road West

古文：卢庄道，范阳人也，天下称为名家。聪慧敏悟，冠于今古。父彦与高士廉有旧。
现代文：卢庄道是范阳人，被天下公认为有学问的人，他的聪明才智超过了古今所有的人，他的父亲卢彦和高士廉的关系很好。
English: Lu Zhuangdao was from Fanyang. He was recognized as a learned person by the whole world. His intelligence surpassed that of all people from ancient times to the present. His father, Lu Yan, had a good relationship with Gao Shiliang.

古文：庄道少孤，年十二，造士廉。廉以故人子，引令坐。
现代文：卢庄道从小丧父，十二岁的时候去拜见高士廉，高士廉因为他是故人的儿子，让他坐下。
English: Lu Zhuangdao lost his father at a young age. When he was 12 years old, he went to visit Gao Shiliang. Since Gao Shiliang was the son of the deceased, he asked him to sit down.

古文：会上有上书者，庄道窃窥览，谓士廉曰：此文庄道所作。
现代文：恰巧有人送来文章向高士廉请教，卢庄道偷着观看，然后对高士廉说：这篇文章是我写的。
English: Coincidentally, someone sent an article to Gao Shillian to ask for advice. Lu Zhuangdao secretly watched it and then said to Gao Shillian: I wrote this article.

古文：士廉怪谓曰：后生勿妄言，为轻薄之行，请诵之，果通。
现代文：高士林责怪他说：小孩子不要说大话！认为他轻薄，让他背诵，卢庄道果然背下来了。
English: Gao Shilin reproached him, saying, "Kids, don't talk big! You think he is frivolous. Let him recite, and he will surely memorize the Luzhuang Road."

古文：复请倒通，又通。士廉称叹久之。
现代文：又让他倒着背诵，他又背下来了，高士廉称赞感叹不已。
English: He also asked him to recite it backwards, and he recited it again. Gao Shillian was full of praise.

古文：乃跪谢曰：此文实非庄道所作，向傍窥而记耳。
现代文：卢庄道跪下请罪说：这篇文章实在不是我作的，而是在旁边偷看时记住的。
English: Lu Zhuang said, kneeling down and pleading guilty: This article was not really written by me, but I remembered it when I peeked at it.

古文：士廉取他文及案牍，命读之，一览而倒诵。
现代文：高士廉取来其他文章和官府文书叫他读，卢庄道全都能看一遍以后就能倒背下来。
English: Gao Shiliang took other articles and government documents and asked him to read them. He was able to read all of Luzhuang Dao and recite it backwards.

古文：并呈示所撰文章。士廉具以闻。
现代文：卢庄道拿出自己所作的文章请高士廉看，高士廉上报给皇帝。
English: Lu Zhuangdao took out his own article and asked Gao Shiliang to read it. Gao Shiliang reported it to the emperor.

古文：太宗召见，策试擢第。年十六授河池尉，满二岁，制举擢甲科。
现代文：太宗皇帝召见卢庄道，考问他政事和经义问题，录用了他，十六岁便授予他河池县尉的官职。满两年以后，他参加科举考试，又考中了甲科进士。
English: Emperor Taizong summoned Lu Zhuangdao, asked him about political affairs and economic issues, and hired him. At the age of sixteen, he was awarded the official post of Hechi County Lieutenant. Two years later, he took the imperial examinations and passed the entrance examination.

古文：召见，太宗曰：此是朕聪明小儿邪？
现代文：太宗皇帝召见他时说：这就是我的聪明的小儿童。
English: When Emperor Taizong summoned him, he said, "This is my clever little child.

古文：特授长安尉。
现代文：并且特别任命他为长安县尉。
English: And specially appointed him as Chang'an County Lieutenant.

古文：太宗将省囚徒，庄道年才二十，县令以幼年，惧不举，将以他尉代之。庄道不从。
现代文：太宗皇帝将要视察牢狱，卢庄道才二十岁。县令认为他太年轻，怕他不能应付处理，想要以别的县尉代替他，卢庄道不同意。
English: Emperor Taizong was about to inspect the prison. Lu Zhuangdao was only 20 years old. The county magistrate thought that he was too young, fearing that he would not be able to handle the situation, and wanted to replace him with another county lieutenant. Lu Zhuangdao did not agree.

古文：时系囚四百余人，俱预书状。庄道但闲暇，不之省也。
现代文：当时牢狱里关押的囚犯有四百多人，全都有罪状案卷材料，卢庄道有了空闲时间也不去审理。
English: At that time, there were more than 400 prisoners held in the prison, all of whom had criminal case file materials. Lu Zhuang Road did not go to trial when it had free time.

古文：令丞等忧惧，屡以为言，庄道从容自若。
现代文：县令和县丞既忧虑又害怕，多次询问告诫他，卢庄道就是不以为然。
English: The county magistrate and the county magistrate were both worried and afraid. They asked him many times and warned him, but Lu Zhuangdao did not agree.

古文：翌日，太宗召囚。
现代文：第二天，太宗皇帝召见囚犯，卢庄道不慌不忙地拿着案卷材料引导囚犯进来。
English: The next day, Emperor Taizong summoned the prisoner, and Lu Zhuangdao unhurriedly took the case file materials and led the prisoner in.

古文：庄道乃徐书状以进，引诸囚入，庄道对御评其罪状轻重，留系月日，应对如神。
现代文：他当着皇帝的面审理评议各个罪犯的罪行轻重，关押的时间，应对处理迅速正确如神。
English: In the presence of the emperor, he judged and deliberated on the seriousness of the crimes of each criminal, the time of detention, and the swift and correct handling of the case.

古文：太宗惊叹。
现代文：太宗皇帝十分惊异赞叹。
English: Emperor Taizong was very surprised and impressed.

古文：即日拜监察御史。
现代文：过了不几天就任命卢庄道为监察御史。
English: A few days later, Lu Zhuangdao was appointed as the inspector general of history.

古文：许敬宗
现代文：许敬宗
English: Xu Jingzong

古文：高宗东封，窦德玄骑而从。
现代文：高宗皇帝云游东岳泰山，举行祭天的典礼，窦德玄骑马跟随。
English: Emperor Gaozong visited Mount Tai on Dongyue, held a ceremony to celebrate the day, and Dou Dexuan followed on horseback.

古文：上问德玄曰：濮阳古谓之帝丘，何也？
现代文：皇帝问窦德玄说：为什么古时候把濮阳叫作帝丘呢？
English: The emperor asked Dou Dexuan, "Why was Puyang called "Imperial Hill" in ancient times?

古文：德玄不能对。
现代文：窦德玄回答不上来。
English: Dou Dexuan couldn't answer.

古文：许敬宗策马前对所问，上意称善。
现代文：许敬宗上前回答了皇帝的问题，皇帝说回答得好。
English: Xu Jingzong came forward to answer the emperor's question, and the emperor said that the answer was good.

古文：敬宗退而告人曰：大臣不可无学，吾向见德玄不能对，心实羞之。
现代文：许敬宗退回去对别人说：作大臣的，不可以没有学问，我刚才看见窦德玄回答不上来，心里实在替他害羞。
English: Xu Jingzong retreated and said to others: "As a minister, you can't be uneducated. I just saw Dou Dexuan couldn't answer, and I felt really shy for him.

古文：德玄闻之曰：人各有能有不能，善守其拙，不强所不知也。
现代文：窦德玄听到以后说：人各有能和不能的，善于诚实地承认自己的笨拙，不强行假装明白自己所不知道的问题。
English: Dou Dexuan said after listening: Everyone has their strengths and weaknesses, and is good at honestly admitting their own clumsiness, and not forcibly pretending to understand problems that they do not know.

古文：李绩曰：敬宗多闻，信美矣，德玄之言，亦善也。
现代文：李绩说：许敬宗见多识广，的确很好，而窦德玄的话，也有值得称赞的地方。
English: Li Bin said: Xu Jingzong's knowledge is indeed very good, and Dou Dexuan's words are also commendable.

古文：胡楚宾
现代文：胡楚宾
English: Hu Chubin

古文：胡楚宾属文敏速，每饮酒半酣而后操笔。
现代文：胡楚宾写作时敏捷迅速，每次都是喝得半醉以后再提笔。
English: Hu Chubin writes articles quickly. He drinks until he is drunk and then writes.

古文：高宗每令作文，必以全杯盛酒，令饮，便以杯赐之。
现代文：高宗皇帝每次命令他写文章，都先用金杯装上酒给他喝，然后就把金杯赏赐给他。
English: Every time Emperor Gaozong ordered him to write an article, he would first fill a golden cup with wine for him to drink, and then give him the golden cup as a reward.

古文：裴琰之
现代文：裴琰之
English: Pei Xizhi

古文：裴琰之作同州司户，年才弱冠，但以行乐为事，略不为案牍。
现代文：裴琰之担任同州司户的时候，刚刚二十岁，每天以玩乐为主要的事，一点也不关心处理公文。
English: When Pei Yanzhi served as the governor of the same state, he was just twenty years old. He was mainly concerned with having fun every day, and was not at all concerned with dealing with official documents.

古文：刺史谯国公李崇义怪之而问户佐。佐曰：司户达官儿郎，恐不闲书判。
现代文：刺史谯国公李崇义怪罪他而去询问户佐，户佐说：司户是大家的孩子，恐怕不善于处理公文。
English: Li Chongyi, the governor of Shan State, accused him of the crime and went to inquire about Housa. Housa said: Housa is everyone's child, I am afraid he is not good at handling official documents.

古文：既数日，崇义谓琰之曰：同州事物固系，司户尤甚，公何不别求京官，无为滞此司也。
现代文：过了数日，李崇义对裴琰之说：同州的公务繁忙，司户尤为突出。你何不另外谋求个京城里的官当，没有必要滞留在这里。
English: A few days later, Li Chongyi said to Pei Xizhi: "Dongzhou's official business is busy, and the governor's household is particularly prominent. Why don't you seek another official in Beijing, there is no need to stay here."

古文：琰之唯诺。
现代文：裴琰之只好点头称是。
English: Pei Shanzhi had to nod his head in agreement.

古文：复数日，曹事委积，诸窃议以为琰之不知书，但遨游耳。
现代文：又过了数日，司户应该办理的公文堆积。大家偷偷议论，以为裴琰之不会撰写公文，只会玩乐。
English: After a few more days, the official documents that the steward should handle piled up. Everyone secretly talked, thinking that Pei Xizhi would not write official documents, but only have fun.

古文：他日，崇义召之，厉色形言，将奏免之。
现代文：后来李崇义召见裴琰之，严厉地对他说，要请示朝廷将他免职。
English: Later, Li Chongyi summoned Pei Junzhi and told him sternly that he should ask the court to remove him from his post.

古文：琰之出，谓其佐曰：文案几何？
现代文：裴琰之出来问户佐：有多少公文案卷？
English: Pei Yanzhi came out and asked Huza: How many official document files are there?

古文：对曰：遽者二百余。
现代文：户佐回答说：着急处理的有二百多份。
English: Housa replied: There are more than two hundred urgent cases.

古文：琰之曰：有何多，如此逼人。
现代文：裴琰之说：我以为有多少呢，竟如此逼迫人！
English: Pei Yanzhi said, "I thought, how many things can I do to persecute people like this!

古文：命每案后连纸十张，仍命五六人以供研墨点笔。左右勉唯而已。
现代文：他命令每件等待处理的案卷后面附上十张纸，又命令五六个人给他研墨点笔，左右的人勉强去做了。
English: He ordered ten pieces of paper to be attached to the back of each pending case file, and ordered five or six people to give him a sharpening pen, and the left and right people reluctantly did it.

古文：琰之不之听，语主案者略言事意，倚柱而断之，词理纵横，文华灿烂，手不停缀，落纸如飞。
现代文：裴琰之不听详细情况，只让主办各个案卷的事物的人员汇报事情的大概情况，他倚着柱子处理。词意奔放，文笔华美，手没有停下来的时候，写完的纸如飞落下。
English: Pei Yanzhi did not listen to the details, but only let the person in charge of each case file report the general situation of the matter, and he leaned on the pillar to deal with it. The meaning of the words was unrestrained, the writing was beautiful, and when the hand did not stop, the finished paper fell like a fly.

古文：倾州官僚，观者如堵墙，惊叹之声不已也。
现代文：州府的官员都赶来了，围观的人像墙一样，惊异赞叹声音不断。
English: Officials from the state capital have all arrived, and the onlookers are like a wall, with a constant sound of amazement and admiration.

古文：案达于崇义，崇义初曰：司户解判邪？
现代文：处理完的公文案卷送到李崇义那里，李崇义一开始还问：司户会处理公文吗？
English: The finished official document case file was sent to Li Chongyi. At the beginning, Li Chongyi also asked: Will the steward handle the official document?

古文：户佐曰：司户太高手笔，仍未之奇也，比四五十案，词彩弥精。
现代文：户佐说：司户手笔太高了！李崇义仍然不知道裴琰之的奇异才能。等到他看了四五十卷，发现词句语言非常精采。
English: Huza said: Sido's handwriting is too high! Li Chongyi still does not know Pei Xizhi's extraordinary talent. When he read forty or fifty volumes, he found that the words and language were very exquisite.

古文：崇义悚怍，召琰之，降阶谢曰：公之词翰若此，何忍藏锋，成鄙夫之过。
现代文：李崇义惊奇惭愧，将裴琰之找来，走下台阶谢罪说：你的文章如此好，何必隐藏锋芒，这都是我的过错啊！
English: Surprised and ashamed, Li Chongyi found Pei Xizhi and walked down the steps to thank him and said: Your article is so good, why hide the sharpness, it's all my fault!

古文：是日名动一州。数日，闻于京邑。寻擢授雄州司户。
现代文：当天裴琰之的声名就震动了全州，数日之后又传到京城，不久被提拔为雄州司户。
English: On the same day, Pei Xizhi's fame shook the whole state. A few days later, it spread to Beijing, and he was soon promoted to the top of the Xiongzhou family.

古文：苏颋
现代文：苏颋
English: Su Shi

古文：虽记览如神，而父瑰训励严至，常令衣青布襦，伏于床下，出其胫受柙楚。
现代文：苏颋的聪明超过了普通的人，每天能背诵数千句诗文，虽然记忆如神，然而父亲苏瑰仍严加管束和鼓励。经常命令他穿上旧衣服趴到床底下，露出小腿用木板打。
English: Su Qiu is more intelligent than the average person and can recite thousands of poems every day. Although his memory is like a god, Su Gui's father still strictly controls and encourages him. He often orders him to wear old clothes and lie under the bed, exposing his calf and beating it with a wooden board.

古文：及壮而文学该博，冠于一时。性疏俊嗜酒。
现代文：苏颋长大以后文章写得非常好，一时声名大震，然而他粗心好酗酒。
English: After Su Yao grew up, his articles were very well written, and he was famous for a while. However, he was careless and drunk a lot.

古文：及玄宗既平内难，将欲草制书，甚难其人。顾谓瑰曰：谁可为诏？
现代文：等到玄宗皇帝平定国内动乱，想要发布公告，没有找到合适的撰稿人，对苏瑰说：谁能够为我起草诏书文告？
English: When Emperor Xuanzong was trying to quell domestic unrest and wanted to issue a proclamation, he couldn't find a suitable writer, so he asked Su Gui: "Who can draft an imperial edict for me?"

古文：试为思之。
现代文：请你为我想一想。
English: Think about it for me.

古文：瑰曰：臣不知其他，臣男颋甚敏捷，可备指使。
现代文：苏瑰说：我不知道别人，我的孩子苏颋文章写得非常敏捷，可以随时指使。
English: Su Jiu said, "I don't know about others. My child, Su Yao, writes articles very quickly and can be instructed at any time.

古文：然嗜酒，幸免沾醉，足以了其事。
现代文：只是他好喝酒，如果没有喝醉，足以完成这个任务。
English: It's just that he's a good drinker, and if he's not drunk, he's well enough to complete the task.

古文：玄宗遽命召来，至时宿酲未解，粗备拜舞，尝醉呕殿下，命中人扶卧于御前，玄宗亲为举衾以覆之。
现代文：玄宗皇帝立即命令去找苏颋。苏颋来了以后，隔夜喝的酒还没醒，歪歪斜斜的勉强给皇帝磕了头，然后便吐到殿下。皇帝命令太监将他扶到跟前躺下，亲自为他盖上被子。
English: Emperor Xuanzong immediately ordered Su Shi to be found. When Su Shi arrived, the wine he had drunk the night before had not yet woken him, so he reluctantly shook his head at the emperor, and then vomited on His Imperial Highness. The emperor ordered the eunuch to lay him down in front of him and personally cover him with a quilt.

古文：既醒，授简笔，立成。
现代文：过了一会儿，苏颋醒了酒，就递给他一支笔，他接过来一挥而就。
English: After a while, Su Xuan sobered up and handed him a pen. He took it and waved it away.

古文：才藻纵横，词理典赡，玄宗大喜。抚其背曰：知子莫若父。
现代文：文章写得才思文采奔放，叙事论理明白。玄宗皇帝大喜，拍着他的脊背说：了解儿子莫过于父亲，就像这件事一样。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was overjoyed, patted him on the back and said, "There is nothing like a father to understand his son, just like this."

古文：有如此邪？
现代文：从此对苏颋很器重，准备委以重任。
English: From then on, he had a high regard for Su Shi and was prepared to entrust her with important tasks.

古文：由是器重，已注意于大用矣。韦嗣立拜中书令，瑰署官告，颋为之辞，薛稷书，时人为之三绝。
现代文：韦嗣被任命为中书令时，由苏瑰组织起草委任状，由苏颋起草修辞，薛稷书写，被当时的人们称为三绝。
English: When Wei Zhi was appointed to the Chinese Calligraphy Order, the letter of appointment was drafted by Su Rui, and the rhetoric was drafted by Su Xi, and written by Xue Xi, which was known as the "Three Strikes" by the people at that time.

古文：颋才能言，有京兆尹过瑰，命颋詠尹字。
现代文：苏颋刚刚会说话时，京兆尹去苏瑰家作家客，命令苏颋歌颋尹字。
English: When Su Shi was just able to speak, Jing Zhaoyun went to Su Jiu's house of writers and ordered Su Shi to recite the characters of Yin.

古文：乃曰：丑虽有足，甲不全身，见君无口，知伊少人。
现代文：苏廷说：丑虽有足，甲不全身，见君无口，知伊少人。
English: Su Ting said: Although ugly has feet, A is not the whole body, see you have no mouth, know you are a young man.

古文：瑰与东明观道士周彦云素相往来，周时欲为师建立碑碣，谓瑰曰：成某志，不过烦相君诸子，五郎文，六郎书，七郎致石。
现代文：苏瑰和东明观的道士周彦云平素有来往，周彦云想要为师傅立一块碑。他对苏瑰说：要实现我的愿望，只不过麻烦你的几个儿子就可以了。由五郎撰写碑文，六郎书写，七郎往碑上刻字。
English: Su Gui and Zhou Yanyunping, a Taoist monk from Dongmingguan, had been in regular contact. Zhou Yanyun wanted to erect a monument for his master. He said to Su Gui: "If you want to make my wish come true, all you have to do is to trouble your sons. Goro will write the inscription, Rokuro will write it, and Shichiro will engrave it on the monument."

古文：瑰大笑，口不言而心服其公。
现代文：苏瑰大笑，嘴上没说，心中很服周彦云。
English: Su Jiu laughed loudly, without saying anything, and was very impressed with Zhou Yanyun.

古文：瑰子颋第五，诜第六，冰第七，诜善八分书。
现代文：苏瑰的几个儿子，苏颋排行第五，苏诜第六，苏冰第七，苏诜善于书写八分体的字。
English: Su Gui's sons, Su Shi ranked fifth, Su Shi sixth, and Su Bing seventh. Su Shi was good at writing octal letters.

古文：王勮
现代文：王勮
English: Wang Yao

古文：王勮，绛州人，开元中任中书舍人。先是五王出阁，同日受册，有司忘载册文，百官在列，方知阙礼。
现代文：绛州人王勮开元年间担任中书舍人，五个皇子离开朝廷去自己的封地作藩王，当天要接受皇帝册封称号，秘书机关忘了携带册封的文书，百官已经上朝的时候才想起来。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, Wang Jian, a native of Zhangzhou, served as the official in charge of the collection of Chinese books. Five princes left the imperial court to become the kings of their own fiefdoms. On the same day, they had to accept the title of emperor. The secretarial office forgot to carry the official document. They only remembered it when the centurion had already ascended to the throne.

古文：勮召小吏五人，各执管，口授分写，一时俱毕。
现代文：王勮立即召集五个小官，每人手里拿一支笔，由王勮口授，五个人分别书写，一会功夫就将文书全部准备好了。
English: Wang Yao immediately summoned five minor officials, each with a pen in hand. Wang Yao dictated to them, and the five of them wrote separately. The paperwork was all ready in no time at all.

古文：李白
现代文：李白
English: Li Bai

古文：开元中，李翰林白应诏草白莲花开序及宫词十首，时方大醉，中贵人以冷水沃之，稍醒。
现代文：开元年间，翰林学士李白奉皇帝的命令起草白莲花盛开的序言和以宫廷生活为题材的词十首。当时李白喝得酩酊大醉，宦官用冷水将他浇醒。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, Li Bai, a scholar of Hanlin, was ordered by the emperor to draft a preface to the white lotus and ten poems on the theme of court life. At that time, Li Bai was very drunk, and the eunuch doused him with cold water.

古文：白于御前，索笔一挥，文不加点。
现代文：李白起来走到皇帝面前，要来毛笔一挥而就，不用修改。
English: Li Bai stood up and walked in front of the emperor. He could write with a single stroke of the brush and did not need to revise.

古文：柳芳
现代文：柳芳
English: Liu Fang

古文：李幼奇者，开元中，以艺干柳芳。
现代文：李幼奇在开元年间在柳芳面前显示自己的才能，对柳芳念自己所作的百句诗。
English: In the early 2000s, Li Yuqi showed his talent in front of Liu Fang, reciting a hundred poems he had written to her.

古文：尝对芳念百韵时，芳已暗记，便题之于壁，不差一字。
现代文：柳芳一边听一边记，然后用笔题在墙壁上，与李幼奇的原诗一字不差。
English: While listening, Liu Fang took notes and then wrote on the wall, which is the same as Li Yuqi's original poem.

古文：谓幼奇曰：此吾之诗也。
现代文：柳芳对李幼奇说：这是我作的诗。
English: Liu Fang said to Li Yuqi: This is my poem.

古文：幼奇大惊异之，有不平色。
现代文：李幼奇非常惊奇，脸上露出不平的神色。
English: Li Yuqi was very surprised and his face showed a grumpy expression.

古文：久之徐曰：聊相戏耳，此君所念也。
现代文：过了一会柳芳对李幼奇说：同你开个玩笑，这是你刚才念的诗。
English: After a while, Liu Fang said to Li Yuqi: "I'm just joking with you, this is the poem you just read."

古文：因请幼奇更诵所著文章，皆一遍能写。
现代文：然后又请李幼奇念他所写的其它文章，柳芳全都能听一遍就背写下来。
English: Then he asked Li Youqi to read other articles he had written. Liu Fang could listen to all of them and write them down.

古文：王藻
现代文：王藻
English: King algae

古文：王藻、王素，贞元初应举，齐名第十四。
现代文：王藻和王素在贞元初年参加科举考试，并列第十四名。
English: In the first year of Zhenyuan, Wang Mo and Wang Su took part in the imperial examinations, and ranked 14th.

古文：每偕往还通家，称十四郎，或问，曰：藻、素也。
现代文：有人问谁是十四郎，回答说王藻和王素。
English: When someone asked who the fourteenth son was, he replied that it was Wang Cao and Wang Su.

古文：韩愈
现代文：韩愈
English: Han Yu

古文：李河南素替杜公兼。
现代文：河南李素代替杜公兼，这时吏部的韩愈由河南令改任职方员外。
English: Henan Li Su replaced Du Gongqian. At this time, Han Yu of the personnel department was changed from Henan ling to an outside party member.

古文：时韩吏部愈为河南令，除职方员外，归朝，问前后之政如何，对曰：将兼来比素。
现代文：他回到朝中以后，人们问他前后官员的才能和政绩怎么样。韩愈回答说：将兼来比素。
English: After his return to the DPRK, people asked him about the talent and political achievements of officials before and after him. Han Yu replied: "I will be better than the best."

古文：李程
现代文：李程
English: Li Cheng

古文：李相国程执政时，严谟、严休皆在南省。
现代文：宰相李程主持政务时，严谟和严休都在尚书省任职。
English: When Prime Minister Li Cheng presided over government affairs, Yan Moo and Yan Hui both served in Shangshu.

古文：有万年令阙，人多属之。
现代文：万年县令出现空缺，很多人都想去。
English: There is a vacancy in the county magistrate's office, and many people want to go.

古文：李云：二年不知谟。
现代文：李程说：二年不知 谟 。
English: Li Cheng said: "I don't know what will happen in two years.

古文：李吉甫
现代文：李吉甫
English: Li Jifu

古文：宪宗久亲政事，忽问京兆尹几员。
现代文：宪宗皇帝长时间亲自处理国家政务，忽然问有几名京兆尹。
English: Emperor Gensong had been personally handling state affairs for a long time, when he suddenly asked for a few names of Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：李相吉甫对曰：京兆尹三员：一员大尹，二员少尹，以为善对。
现代文：宰相李吉甫回答说：京兆尹有三名，一名叫 大尹 ，二名叫 少尹 。人都以为对答极妙。
English: Prime Minister Li Jifu replied, "There are three names of Jing Zhaoyun, one is called Big Yin, and the other is called Little Yin. Everyone thinks the answer is excellent."

古文：王生
现代文：王生
English: Wang Sheng

古文：或问罗浮王生曰：为政难易？
现代文：有人问罗浮的王生说：主持处理政务容不容易？
English: Someone asked Luo Fu's Wang Sheng: "Is it not easy to preside over and handle government affairs?"

古文：曰：简则易。
现代文：王生说：简政则容易。
English: Wang Sheng said, "Simple politics is easy.

古文：又问儒释同否？曰。直则同。
现代文：又问儒家和佛教是否一样，王生回答说：坦诚直爽说穿了则一样。
English: When asked whether Confucianism and Buddhism are the same, Wang Sheng replied, "If you are honest, it is the same."

古文：辛丘度
现代文：辛丘度
English: Xinqiu District

古文：元和十五年，辛丘度、丘纾，杜元颖，同时为遗补。
现代文：唐朝元和十五年，辛丘度、丘纾和杜元颖同时为后补官员。
English: In the 15th year of the Tang Dynasty, Xin Qudu, Qiu Yao and Du Yuanying were also reserve officials.

古文：令史分直，故事但举其姓曰：辛、丘、杜当入。
现代文：令史为他们排列后补递进的顺序时故意按他们姓氏上的巧合排列推荐说：辛、丘、杜当入。
English: When Lingshi arranged them in the order of subsequent supplement and progression, he deliberately recommended them according to the coincidental arrangement of their surnames: Xin, Yau, Du Dang Rong.

古文：温庭筠
现代文：温庭筠
English: Wen Tingyao

古文：会昌毁寺时，分遣御史检天下所废寺，及收录金银佛像。
现代文：唐朝会昌年间大肆拆毁寺庙的时候，皇帝派御史检查各地毁寺的情况，同时收集金银佛像。
English: During the reign of Emperor Huichang of the Tang Dynasty, when temples were demolished on a large scale, the emperor sent the imperial historian to inspect the situation of destroyed temples in various regions, and at the same time collect gold and silver Buddha statues.

古文：有苏监察者不记名，巡检两街诸寺，见银佛一尺已下者，多袖之而归。
现代文：有个苏监察，已经记不清名字了。他巡视检查两条街上的各个寺庙，见到一尺以下的银佛像，便藏到袖子里带回家。
English: There was a Soviet inspector, whose name I can no longer remember, who inspected all the temples on the two streets, and when he saw a silver Buddha statue less than a foot tall, he hid it in his sleeve and took it home.

古文：人谓之苏扛佛。
现代文：人们都叫他苏扛佛。
English: People call him the "carrying Buddha."

古文：或问温庭筠：将何对好？
现代文：有人问温庭筠，以什么来对应这三个字。
English: Someone asked Wen Tingjun what the three words corresponded to.

古文：遽曰：无以过密陀僧也。
现代文：温庭筠立即回答：没有比 密陀僧 更恰当的了。
English: Wen Tingyao immediately replied: There is nothing more appropriate than Mithraism.

古文：柳公权
现代文：暗喻藏匿佛像的和尚。柳公权
English: The monk who hides the Buddha statue. Liu Gongquan

古文：柳公权，武宗朝在内庭。
现代文：唐朝的柳公权在武宗皇帝的时候是宫廷内的官员。
English: Liu Gongquan of the Tang Dynasty was an official in the court of Emperor Wuzong.

古文：上尝怒一宫嫔久之，既而复召。谓公权曰：朕怪此人，然若得学士一篇，当释然也。
现代文：皇帝很长时间对一名宫内女官生气，皇帝将她叫来后对柳公权说：我对这个人很不满意，然而如果得到你的一篇作品，我就不再怪罪她了。
English: The emperor was angry with a court lady for a long time. After summoning her, the emperor said to Liu Gongquan, "I am very dissatisfied with this person, but if I get one of your works, I will no longer blame her."

古文：目御前蜀笺数十幅授之。
现代文：说完将御案上的几十张蜀郡产的纸递给他。
English: After saying that, he handed him dozens of pieces of paper produced in Shu County.

古文：公权略不伫思，而成一绝曰：不分前时忤主恩，已甘寂寞守长门。
现代文：柳公权不加思索，立即写成一首绝句：不分前时忤主恩，已甘寂寞守长门。
English: Without thinking, Liu Gongquan immediately wrote a final sentence: "No matter what time it is, thank the Lord, I'm too lonely to guard the long gate."

古文：今朝却得君王顾，重入椒房拭泪痕。
现代文：今朝却得君王顾，重入椒房拭泪痕。
English: This morning, however, he had to return to the pepper room to wipe away tears.

古文：上大悦，锡锦彩二百匹，令宫人上前拜谢之。
现代文：皇帝很高兴，赏赐给他二百匹锦缎，并命令女官上前向他拜谢。
English: The emperor was delighted and rewarded him with two hundred brocade horses and ordered the court lady to come forward to thank him.

古文：权德舆
现代文：权德舆
English: Guan Deyin

古文：权丞相德舆言无不闻，又善廋词。
现代文：丞相权德舆没有不知道的事情，并且还善于说廋语，也就是隐语。
English: There is nothing that the chancellor, Quan Deyin, does not know, and he is also good at speaking slang, that is, hidden language.

古文：尝逢李二十六于马上，廋词问答，闻者莫知其所说焉。
现代文：他与李二十六郎在马上相遇，互相用廋语问答说话，旁边的人都听不懂他们所说的话是什么意思。
English: He and Li Twenty-Six meet at once and speak to each other in a slang question-and-answer style, and the people around them cannot understand what they are saying.

古文：或曰，廋词何也？
现代文：有人问：什么是廋语？
English: Someone asked: What is slang?

古文：曰：隐语耳。语不曰：人焉廋哉！
现代文：权德舆说：就是隐语，不明说话，人如何去寻找。
English: Kwon Tak-woo said, "It's a hidden language, it's an unknown language, how can people find it?"

古文：人焉廋哉！
现代文：人如何去寻找？
English: How does one go about finding it?

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：这就是他说的话。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：东方朔
现代文：又东方朔
English: Dongfangshuo

古文：汉武帝尝以隐语召东方朔。
现代文：汉武帝曾经招呼东方朔上殿猜隐语，当时上林献来一些枣。
English: Emperor Hanwu once invited Dongfangshuo to go to the palace to guess the cryptic, when he went to the forest to offer some jujube.

古文：时上林献枣，帝以杖击未央前殿槛曰：叱叱，先生束束。
现代文：武帝用手杖敲击未央宫前的大殿门槛，说：叱叱，先生束束。
English: Emperor Wu tapped the threshold of the Great Hall in front of the Miang Palace with his cane and said, "Teacher, I'm tired.

古文：朔至曰：上林献枣四十九枚乎？
现代文：东方朔走过来说：是不是上林献枣四十九枚？
English: Dongfang Shuo walked over and said: Isn't there forty-nine jujubes on display in the forest?

古文：朔见上以杖击槛两木，两木林也，束束枣也，叱叱四十九也。
现代文：东方朔见武帝以手杖敲击门槛两木，想到两木为林，束束相加为棗，叱叱为四十九。
English: In the East, Emperor Wu can be seen striking two trees on the threshold with a cane. The two trees are thought of as a forest, the bundles together as a cocoon, and the scold as forty-nine.

古文：东方朔常与郭舍人于帝前射覆。郭曰：臣愿问朔一事，朔得，臣愿榜百；朔穷，臣当赐帛。
现代文：东方朔经常和郭舍人在汉武帝的面前猜迷，郭舍人说：我想问东方朔一件事，东方朔猜着了，我愿意挨一百下板子；如果东方朔猜不着。请赏赐我帛布。
English: Guo Xian said: "I want to ask Dongfang Shuo one thing. If Dongfang Shuo can guess, I am willing to receive a hundred pieces of wood. If Dongfang Shuo can't guess, please reward me with a piece of cloth."

古文：曰：客来东方，歌讴且行。
现代文：接着他出谜语说：客来东方，且歌且行。
English: He then gave a riddle, saying, "If you come to the East, you must sing."

古文：不从门入，逾我垣墙。
现代文：不从门入，逾我院墙。
English: Don't enter through the door, go over my courtyard wall.

古文：游戏中庭，上入殿堂。
现代文：游戏中堂，出入殿堂。
English: In the middle of the game, in and out of the hall.

古文：击之拍拍，死者攘攘。
现代文：击之拍拍。死者纷乱。
English: The death toll is staggering.

古文：格斗而死，主人被创：是何物也？
现代文：格斗而死，主人受伤。是什么东西？
English: Killed in a fight, owner injured. What is it?

古文：朔曰：长喙细身，昼匿夜行，嗜肉恶烟，常所拍扪，臣朔愚戆，名之曰蚊，舍人辞穷，当复脱褌。
现代文：东方朔回答说：长嘴细身，昼伏夜出。喜肉怕烟，常所拍扪。臣朔愚笨，名之曰蚊。舍人辞穷，当脱裤子。
English: Dongfang Shuo replied: Long mouth, slender body, day and night. Meat-loving, afraid of smoke, often smacked. Subordinate stupid, known as mosquitoes. Resist the poor, when to take off pants.

古文：李彪
现代文：李彪
English: Li Biao

古文：后魏孝文皇帝尝殿会群臣酒酣欢极，帝因举卮属群臣及亲王等酒曰：三三横，两两纵，谁能辨之赐金钟。
现代文：北魏的孝文皇帝曾经举行盛大的文武百官宴会，当酒喝得非常畅快高兴的时候，皇帝举杯向大臣和亲王们敬酒说：三三横，两两纵，谁能猜着赐金杯。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty once held a grand banquet for hundreds of civil and military officials. When the wine was drunk very happily, the emperor raised his glass to toast the ministers and princes and said: "Three-three horizontal, two-two vertical, who can guess the gold cup."

古文：御史中尉李彪曰：沽酒老妪瓮注砙，屠儿割肉与称同。
现代文：御史中尉李彪说：沽酒老妪瓮注砙，屠儿割肉与称同。
English: Li Biao, a lieutenant of history, said: "It is the same as pouring wine into a bowl and cutting meat with a knife.

古文：尚书左丞甄琛曰：吴人浮水自云工，技儿掷袖在虚空。
现代文：尚书左丞甄琛说：吴人浮水自云工。技儿掷袖在虚空。
English: Shangshu Zuorong Zhenyao said: Wu people float from the clouds. The skill of throwing the sleeves in the void.

古文：彭城王勰曰：臣思解此是习字。
现代文：鼓城的王勰说：我猜谜底是个 習 字。
English: Wang Yao from Gucheng said, "I guess the answer to the riddle is a Chinese character.

古文：高祖即以金钟赐彪。
现代文：高祖皇帝便把金杯赏赐给了李彪。
English: Emperor Gaozu awarded the gold cup to Li Biao.

古文：朝庭服彪聪明有如。甄琛和之亦速。
现代文：官员们都佩服李彪聪明有见解，而甄琛和的也很快。
English: The officials all admired Li Biao's cleverness and insight, and he was also quick to make peace.

古文：班蒙
现代文：班蒙
English: Banmun

古文：唐太保令狐相绹，出镇淮海日支使班蒙与从事俱游大明寺之西廊。
现代文：唐朝的太保衔宰相令狐绹离开朝廷镇守淮海的时候，带领班蒙和几位从事一同游览大明寺的西廊。
English: When the Tang Dynasty's Taibao-titled prime minister, Xujuan, left the imperial court to guard the Huaihai Sea, he led Ban Meng and several others on a tour of the west corridor of the Daming Temple.

古文：尺一者十一寸，非寺字乎？点去冰，水字；二人相连，天字；不欠一边，下字；三梁四柱而烈火然，无字；两日除双勾，比字；得非大明寺水，天下无比乎？
现代文：只有班蒙说：一人不是个大字吗；二曜是日月，不是明字吗；尺一为十一寸，不是寺字吗；点去水，水字；二人相连，天字；不欠一边，下字；三梁四柱而烈火然，无字；两日除双勾，比字。连起来不就是 大明寺水，天下无比 吗！
English: Only Ban Meng said: Isn't one person a big character; Tuesday is the sun and the moon, isn't it a clear character; a shaku is eleven centimeters, isn't it a temple character; a dot is water, a water character; two people are connected, a heavenly character; don't miss a side, a lower character; three beams and four pillars are fiery, no character; two days are divided by a double hook, a contrasting character. Isn't it the water of Daming Temple, the world is incomparable!

古文：众皆洗然曰：黄绢之奇智，亦何异哉！
现代文：大家恍然大悟说：杨修破解 黄绢幼妇 隐语的奇异智慧也不过如此！
English: Everyone suddenly realized and said: Yang Xiu's cracking the strange wisdom of Huang Yao's hidden language is no more than that!

古文：称叹弥日。
现代文：大家赞叹了一整天，又去询问老和尚。
English: Everyone admired the whole day and went to inquire about the old monk.

古文：询之老僧曰：顷年有客独游，题之而去，不言姓氏。
现代文：老和尚说：去年有一个独自游览的客人题了这段隐语以后就走了，他没有说出自己的姓名。
English: The old monk said: Last year, there was a guest who visited alone and left after asking this riddle. He did not give his name.

古文：幼敏
现代文：幼敏
English: Young Sensitive

古文：陈元方
现代文：陈元方
English: Chen Yuanfang

古文：汉末，陈太丘实与友人期行，过期不至，太丘舍去。
现代文：汉末，陈太丘实与友人期行，过期不至，太丘舍去。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, Chen Taiyushi went on a date with a friend. However, the date did not pass, and Chen Taiyushi left.

古文：去后乃至，其子元方，年七岁，在门外戏。
现代文：去后乃至，其子元方，年七岁，在门外戏。
English: Even after he left, his son, seven-year-old Yuan Fang, was acting outside the door.

古文：客问元方：尊君在否？
现代文：客问元方：尊君在否？
English: A guest asked the original party: Is your son-in-law coming?

古文：答曰：待君不至，已去。
现代文：答曰：待君不至，已去。
English: He replied: "If I wait for you, I'll be gone."

古文：友人便怒曰：非人，与人期行，相委而去。
现代文：友人便怒曰：非人，与人期行，相委而去。
English: My friend angrily said: "He's not a human being, he's going on a date with a human being, he's going away."

古文：元方曰：君与家君期日中时，过申不来，则是无信，对子骂父，则是无礼。
现代文：元方曰：君与家君期日中时，过申不来，则是无信，对子骂父，则是无礼。
English: The original party said: If you and your family do not come during the day, it is bad faith, and if your son curses his father, it is rude.

古文：友人惭，下车引之，元方遂入门不顾。
现代文：友人惭，下车引之，元方遂入门不顾。
English: Shamefully, my friend got out of the car and led me to the entrance, but I didn't care.

古文：孙策吴孙策年十四，在寿陽诣袁术。
现代文：孙策东吴的孙策十四岁那年去寿阳拜见袁术。
English: At the age of fourteen, Sun Ce of Dongwu went to Shouyang to meet Yuan Shu.

古文：始至，俄而刘豫州备到，便求去。
现代文：刚到不一会儿。豫州牧刘备就来了，孙策要走。
English: Soon after arriving, Liu Bei, the herdsman of Yuzhou, arrived, and Sun Ce was about to leave.

古文：袁曰： 刘豫州何关君？ 
现代文：袁术说：刘豫州来和你有什么关系？
English: Yuan Shou said, "What does Liu Yuzhou's visit have to do with you?"

古文：答曰： 不尔，英雄忌人。 
现代文：孙策回答说：不然，英雄互相妒忌。
English: Sun Ce replied, "Otherwise, heroes are jealous of each other."

古文：即出，下东阶，而刘备从西阶上，但转顾视孙之行步，殆不复前。
现代文：说完就往外走。他从东面台阶下去，刘备从西面台阶上来，只是转头看孙策走路的资势，却不再往前走了。
English: After he finished speaking, he walked outside. He walked down from the east steps, and Liu Bei came up from the west steps. They just turned their heads to see how well Sun Ce was walking, but they didn't walk any further.

古文：钟毓
现代文：钟毓
English: The Bell Tower

古文：钟毓、钟会，少有令誉，年十三，魏文帝闻之，语其父繇曰：令卿二子来。
现代文：钟毓和钟会从小就有美名。十三岁的时候魏文帝听到了他俩的名声以后，对他们的父亲钟繇说：叫你的两个儿子来。
English: Zhong Xuan and the Bell Association have been famous since childhood. At the age of thirteen, Wei Wendi heard the fame of the two and said to their father Zhong Xuan: "Call your two sons."

古文：于是敕见。
现代文：于是钟毓和钟会按命令来朝见魏文帝。
English: Therefore, Zhong Rong and Zhong Hui were ordered to come to the court to see Emperor Weiwen.

古文：毓面有汗。帝问曰：卿面何以汗？
现代文：钟毓的脸上有汗水，魏文帝问他：你脸上为什么有汗？
English: Zhong Qi's face was covered with sweat. Emperor Wei asked him, "Why do you have sweat on your face?

古文：毓对曰：战战惶惶，汁出如浆。
现代文：钟毓回答说：战战惶惶，汗如水出。
English: Zhongyao replied, "I was panicked and sweating profusely.

古文：复问会：卿何以不汗出？
现代文：又问钟会：你为什么不出汗？
English: He also asked the bell: Why aren't you sweating?

古文：会对曰：战战栗栗，汗不得出。
现代文：钟会回答说：战战栗栗，汗出不来。
English: The bell replied, "I shudder, I can't sweat."

古文：又值其父昼寝，因共偷服散酒，其父时觉，且假寐以观之：毓拜而后饮，会饮而不拜。
现代文：有一天，他俩的父亲白天睡觉，他俩一块偷散酒喝，他们的父亲觉察到了，仍然装睡观察他俩。钟毓先行礼后喝酒，而钟会是喝酒不行礼。
English: One day, their father was sleeping during the day, and the two of them were secretly drinking together. Their father noticed, and still pretended to be asleep to observe the two of them. Zhong Yao drank before and after the ceremony, but the Bell Association was not allowed to drink.

古文：既问之，毓曰：酒以成礼，不敢不拜。
现代文：父亲询问他俩，钟毓说：酒是礼仪用品，所以不敢不行礼。
English: When his father questioned the two of them, Zhong Yao said: "Wine is a ceremonial item, so don't be impolite.

古文：又问会，何以不拜，会曰：偷本非礼，所以不拜。
现代文：又问钟会：你为什么不行礼？钟会说：偷本就是非礼的行动，所以用不着行礼。
English: He also asked the bell society: Why don't you salute? The bell society said: Stealing books is a rude action, so there is no need to salute.

古文：孙齐由
现代文：孙齐由
English: Sun Qiyu

古文：孙齐由、齐庄二人小时诣庾公。
现代文：孙齐由和孙齐庄两个人小时候拜见庾公。
English: When Sun Qiyu and Sun Qizhuang were children, the two of them went to see Gong Xuan.

古文：公问齐由何字，曰：齐由。
现代文：庾公问齐由叫什么名字，齐由说：齐由。
English: Gong Gong asked Qiyu what his name was. Qiyu said: "Qiyu."

古文：公曰：欲何齐邪？
现代文：庾公问：想要和谁 齐 啊？
English: Gong Gong asked: Who do you want to be aligned with?

古文：曰：齐许由。
现代文：齐由回答：同许由齐。
English: Qi Yu replied: "The same as Xu Yu Qi."

古文：又问齐庄何字，答曰：齐庄。
现代文：庾公又问齐庄叫什么名字，齐庄说：齐庄。
English: Zeng Gong also asked what the name of Qi Zhuang was. Qi Zhuang said: Qi Zhuang.

古文：公曰：欲齐何邪。曰：齐庄周。
现代文：庾公又问：想要向谁看齐啊！齐庄说：和庄周齐名。
English: Shao Gong also asked, "Who do you want to be equal to?" Qi Zhuang said, "To be equal to Zhuang Zhou."

古文：公曰：何不慕仲尼而慕庄周？
现代文：庾公说：为什么不羡慕孔子而羡慕庄周呢？
English: Zeng Gong said: Why not envy Confucius and admire Zhuang Zhou?

古文：答曰：圣人生知，故难慕。
现代文：回答说：圣人生而知之，所以难以羡慕。
English: He replied: It is difficult to envy a sage because he knows everything.

古文：庾公大喜小儿答对。
现代文：庾公对小孩的回答非常满意。
English: Mr. Zou was very satisfied with the child's answer.

古文：陆琇后魏东平王陆俟，代人也，聪悟有才略。
现代文：陆琇后魏东平王陆俟，代人也，聪悟有才略。
English: Lu Yao was succeeded by the Wei Dongping King Lu Yao, who was also a man of great wisdom.

古文：子馥有父风。
现代文：子馥有父风。
English: Zixuan has his father's style.

古文：高崇见而赏之，谓朝臣曰： 吾常叹其父智过其躯，此逾于父矣。 为相州刺史，迁太仆。
现代文：高崇见而赏之，谓朝臣曰：吾常叹其父智过其躯，此逾于父矣。为相州刺史，迁太仆。
English: Highly esteemed and appreciated, the so-called courtier said: "I often lament that my father is wiser than his body, which is more than my father. He is the history of the state, and he is a great servant.

古文：馥子琇，年九岁。
现代文：馥子琇，年九岁。
English: Hao Zixuan, nine years old.

古文：馥谓曰： 汝祖东平王有十二子，我为嫡长，承袭家业。
现代文：馥谓曰：汝祖东平王有十二子，我为嫡长，承袭家业。
English: He said, "Your ancestor, Dongping Wang, had twelve sons, and I am the eldest son, inheriting the family business.

古文：吾今年老，属汝幼童，讵堪为陆氏宗首乎？ 
现代文：吾今年老，属汝幼童，讵堪为陆氏宗首乎？
English: I am an old man, but I am your child. How can I be the head of the Lu Clan?

古文：琇对曰： 苟非斗力，何患童稚。 
现代文：陆琇说：又不是斗力，何必担心年龄小。
English: Lu Wei said: It's not fighting strength, why worry about being young.

古文：馥奇之，立为嫡。
现代文：陆馥很惊奇，把陆琇立为继承人。
English: Lu Xuan was very surprised and made Lu Xuan his successor.

古文：王绚
现代文：王绚
English: Wang Hualing

古文：宋王景，僧朗之子，美风貌，善玄言。
现代文：刘宋时代的王景是王僧朗的儿子，他的相貌俊美，风度高雅，善于讲精微玄妙的语言。
English: Wang Jing of the Liu Song Dynasty was the son of Wang Monk Lang. He was handsome, elegant, and good at speaking subtle and mysterious language.

古文：与谢庄、张畅、何偃，俱有盛名。
现代文：他和谢庄、张畅、何偃，都很有响亮的名声。
English: He, along with Xie Zhuang, Zhang Chang and He Yao, are all very famous.

古文：于是景文本名彧。
现代文：原来王景的名字叫王彧。
English: Originally, Wang Jing's name was Wang Yao.

古文：与明帝名同，故称字。
现代文：因为与明帝同名。所以改成景字。
English: Because it has the same name as Emperor Ming, it was changed to Jingzhu.

古文：长子绚年五六岁，警悟。
现代文：王景的长子王绚才五六岁，就非常机敏聪慧。
English: Wang Hua, the eldest son of Wang Jing, is only five or six years old, so he is very smart.

古文：外祖何尚之赏异焉。
现代文：他的外祖父何尚之很欣赏他，曾经教他读《论语》。
English: His maternal grandfather, He Shangzhi, admired him very much and once taught him to read the Analects.

古文：尝教读《论语》，至郁郁乎文哉，因戏之曰：可改邪邪乎文哉。
现代文：念到郁郁乎文哉一句，同他开玩笑说：可以改成 邪邪乎文哉 吗？
English: When he read the sentence, he joked with him, "Can you change it to 'evil and wicked and wondrous'?"

古文：绚应声答曰：尊者之名，安可为戏，便可道草翁之风则舅。
现代文：王绚应声回答说：尊贵人物的名字，怎么可以开玩笑。那么也可以说 草翁之风则舅 了。
English: Wang Huan replied in response: "How can you joke about the name of an honorable person? Then it can also be said that the wind of the grass is the uncle.

古文：论语曰：草上之风则偃，偃尚之子也。
现代文：《论语》上有草上之风则偃一句，而偃是何尚之的儿子。
English: In the Analects of Confucius, there is a sentence about the wind blowing over the grass, and the wind is the son of He Shangzhi.

古文：绚卒于秘书丞。
现代文：王绚后来担任秘书丞。
English: Wang Hua later worked as a secretary.

古文：萧遥欣
现代文：死在任职期间。萧遥欣
English: He died while in office.

古文：南齐曲江公萧遥欣少有神采干局。
现代文：南齐曲江公萧遥欣从小就有神采和办事的才能。
English: Xiao Yaoxin, the governor of the Qujiang River in southern Qi Province, has had the ability to be resourceful and do things from an early age.

古文：为童子时，有一小儿左右弹飞鸟，未尝不应弦而下。
现代文：他还是儿童时，看见有一个小孩在附近用弹弓射杀飞鸟，没有不应声而落的。
English: When he was a child, he saw a child nearby shooting birds with a slingshot, and he didn't say a word.

古文：遥欣谓之曰：凡戏多端，何急弹此？
现代文：萧遥欣对他说：游戏的玩法很多，为什么要把飞鸟打下来。
English: Xiao Yaoxin said to him, "There are many ways to play the game, why shoot down the flying bird?

古文：鸟自云中翔，何关人事？
现代文：鸟儿在云中飞翔，哪里碍着人的事了！
English: Birds fly in the clouds, what's the matter with people!

古文：小儿感之，终身不复捉弹。
现代文：孩子受了感动，终身不再打鸟。
English: The child was so moved that he stopped playing with birds for life.

古文：尔时年十一。
现代文：当时萧遥欣才十一岁。
English: At that time, Xiao Yaoxin was only eleven years old.

古文：士庶多竞此戏，遥欣一说，旬月播之，远近闻者，不复为之。
现代文：当地的民众都愿意打鸟比赛取乐，萧遥欣的话，在一个月的时间传播开来，远近的人们听了，从此不再打鸟。
English: Local people are willing to play bird-hunting games for fun. Xiao Yaoxin's words spread in a month's time. People near and far listened and stopped playing bird-hunting games.

古文：房氏子
现代文：房氏子
English: Fusa no Ujiko

古文：唐韦陟有疾，房尚书琯使子弟问之。
现代文：唐朝的韦陟生病了，尚书房琯派子弟去探望。
English: Wei Xuan of the Tang Dynasty fell ill, and Shang Shouwen sent his son Zhuo to visit him.

古文：俱为美谈。
现代文：来到韦陟的卧房，地上全都铺着毛毯。房氏子弟穿着袜子登上台阶走了进去，奴婢们全都嘲笑他们。满朝的官员都认为，韦陟的家庭尊贵富足，房琯的家庭清廉朴素，都是人们乐于称道的好事。
English: When they came to Wei Zheng's bedroom, the floor was all covered with blankets. Fang's sons and daughters walked up the steps in their socks, and all the servants and maids laughed at them. Officials throughout the dynasty believed that Wei Zheng's family was noble and rich, while Fang Zheng's family was pure and simple, which was a good thing that people were happy to praise.

古文：张琇
现代文：张琇
English: Zhang Ye

古文：张童子者名琇，审素之子也。开元二十二年，琇杀殿中侍御史杨万顷于阙下，复父仇也。
现代文：少年张琇是张审素的儿子。开元二十二年张琇在皇宫门外杀死了殿中侍御史杨万顷，报了父仇。
English: The boy Zhang Xuan was the son of Zhang Xiusu. In the 22nd year of the first century, Zhang Xuan killed the palace attendant Shi Yang Wanha outside the palace gate and took revenge on his father.

古文：初审素受赇事发，诏万顷按之。
现代文：当初张审素受贿的事情泄露，由杨万顷审理。
English: At first, Zhang Xiusu's bribe-taking was leaked, and Yang Wanha was put on trial.

古文：万顷按审素过入，故坐诛，家属徙边。
现代文：杨万顷在审理中偏激有过失。导致了张审素被诛杀，家属迁往边远地区。
English: Yang Wanhao was extremely negligent during the trial, which led to Zhang Xiusu being beaten to death and his family members being forced to move to a remote area.

古文：琇会赦得还，时未冠，乃追复前怨，与其弟瑝手刃万顷于都城。
现代文：张琇遇到大赦回到京城时，还未成年。他为了复仇和弟弟张琇把杨万顷刺杀于京城。
English: When Zhang Rong encountered the amnesty and returned to Beijing, he was still a minor. In order to take revenge, he and his brother Zhang Rong stabbed Yang Wanhao to death in Beijing.

古文：闻者骇之。
现代文：听到这个消息的人都感到惊讶。
English: Everyone was surprised to hear the news.

古文：帝嘉其孝，将释之。
现代文：皇帝赞赏他的孝心，想要释放他。
English: The emperor appreciated his filial piety and wanted to release him.

古文：有司以专杀抗论，琇坐死。时人哀之，葬于邙山，为疑冢焉：盖惧杨宗之所发也。
现代文：办案机关以他是故意杀人提出异议，最后将张琇处死，张琇被葬在邙山，没有标明坟墓的位置，因为怕杨万顷家里的人掘墓。
English: The case-handling authority raised an objection that he had committed intentional homicide, and finally put Zhang Yao to death. Zhang Yao was buried in Shaoshan. The location of the grave was not marked, for fear that people in Yang Wanhe's family would dig up the grave.

古文：故虞部员外郎顾云诔之曰：冒法复仇，信难逃于刑典，忘身徇孝，诚有契于礼经。
现代文：虞部员外郎顾云写了一篇悼念张琇的文章说：冒犯法律复仇，实在难逃刑法的追究，舍身忘死尽孝，符合仪礼周礼。
English: Wai Lang Gu Yun, a member of the Justice Department, wrote an article to mourn the memory of Zhang Xuan, saying: offending the law to take revenge, it is really difficult to escape the investigation of the criminal law, sacrificing oneself and forgetting the death of filial piety, in line with the rituals of the week.

古文：且从古以来，谁人不死？
现代文：况且从古以来，谁人不死。
English: Moreover, since ancient times, no one has died.

古文：得其死矣，夫可恨欤？浑瑊
现代文：死得其所，了却恩怨。浑瑊
English: He died in the right place, but there was a grudge.

古文：浑太师瑊年十一，随父释之防冬。朔方节度张齐丘戏问：将乳母来否？
现代文：太师浑瑊十一岁的时候，随父亲浑释之参加冬季边境防卫，朔方节度使张齐丘同他开玩笑说：带乳母来了吗？
English: When Grandmaster Hunsoo was eleven years old, he accompanied his father Hunsoo to participate in the winter border defense, which made Zhang Qiqiu joke with him: Did you bring a nanny?

古文：其年立跳荡功。
现代文：当年浑瑊就立下了突袭破敌的功劳。
English: At that time, the turbidity set up a surprise attack to break the enemy.

古文：后二年，拔石堡城，收龙驹岛，皆有奇效。
现代文：二年后，在攻破石堡城和收复龙驹岛的战役中，他都做出了重要贡献。
English: Two years later, he made an important contribution in the campaign to break through the Stone Castle and recover the Dragon Island.

