古文：臣闻人君有必胜之道，故能并兼广大，以一其制度，则威加天下。
现代文：我听说人君掌握了必胜的方法，就能兼并广大的土地，实行统一的制度，从而威震天下。
English: I have heard that if you master the method of victory, you will be able to annex a vast amount of land, implement a unified system, and thus dominate the world.

古文：有十二焉：一曰连刑，谓同罪保伍也；二曰地禁，谓禁止行道，以网外奸也；三曰全军，谓甲首相附，三五相同，以结其联也；四曰开塞，谓分地以限，各死其职而坚守也；五曰分限，谓左右相禁，前后相待，垣车为固，以逆以止也；六曰号别，谓前列务进，以别其后者，不得争先登不次也；七曰五章，谓彰明行列，始卒不乱也；八曰全曲，谓曲折相从，皆有分部也；九曰金鼓，谓兴有功，致有德也；十曰陈车，谓接连前矛，马冒其目也；十一曰死士，谓众军之中有材力者，乘于战车，前后纵横，出奇制敌也；十二曰力卒，谓经旗全曲，不麾不动也。
现代文：其方法有十二条：一是 连刑 ，即一个犯罪，全伍连坐；二是 地禁 ，即是管制交通，以防止奸细；三是 全车 ，就是说战车上的甲士和随车步卒都要在车长统一指挥下，协调一致地行动；四是 开塞 ，即划分防区，各自尽忠职责以行坚守；五是 分限 ，即营阵左右相互警卫，前后相互照顾，环列战车，形成坚固营垒，用以抗拒敌人和保障宿营安全；六是 号别 ，即前列部队进战时，与后列界限分明，后列不得抢先突进，以免次序紊乱；七是 五章 ，即用五种颜色的标记以区别行列；保持部队始终不乱；八是 全曲 ，即各部队在行动中互相连系，保持自己在战斗队形中的关系位置；九是 金鼓 ，即激励将士杀敌主功，为国牺牲；十是 阵车 ，即驻止时用战车前后连结成阵，遮蔽马的双目以免惊驰；寸一是 死士 ，即从各军中选拔有才而能勇敢的人，乘着战车，忽左忽右、忽前忽后地出奇制胜；十二是 力卒 ，即选用才力超群的人掌管军旗，指挥部队，没有命令不得擅自行动。
English: There are twelve methods: the first is "consecutive punishment," that is, one crime, the whole army sits together; the second is "ground interdiction," that is, the control of traffic to prevent spies; the third is "whole vehicle," that is, the soldiers on the chariot and the foot soldiers must act in a coordinated manner under the unified command of the captain; the fourth is "blocking," that is, the division of the defense zone, and each must perform their duties faithfully and firmly; the fifth is "division," that is, the battalion guards each other from left to right, takes care of each other before and after, and encircles the chari

古文：此十二者教成，犯令不舍。
现代文：按照以上十二条进行教育后，有效逼犯教令的决不宽容。
English: After education in accordance with the above 12 articles, there will be no tolerance for effectively enforcing the edict.

古文：兵弱能强之，主卑能尊之，令弊能起之，民流能亲之，人众能治之，地大能守之。国车不出于阃，组甲不出于橐，而威服天下矣。
现代文：这样，军队战斗力弱的可以增强，君主威望不高的可以提高，法令废弛的可以整顿，人民流散的可以归附，人口众多而庞杂的也可以治理好，土地广大的可以守得住，不必出兵打仗，也能威服天下。
English: In this way, the weak combat effectiveness of the army can be strengthened, the low prestige of the monarch can be enhanced, the decrees can be rectified, the scattered people can be returned, the large and complex population can be governed well, the vast land can be defended, and it is not necessary to send troops to fight, but it can also dominate the world.

古文：兵有五致：为将忘家，逾垠忘亲，指敌忘身，必死则生，急胜为下。
现代文：对军队有五条要求：受命为将要忘掉家庭，出国作战要忘掉父母，临阵杀敌要忘掉自己，只有抱必死的决心，才可以求得生存，急于求胜，是不好的。
English: There are five requirements for the army: to forget one's family when receiving orders, to forget one's parents when fighting abroad, to forget one's self when killing the enemy, to survive only with a death-defying determination, and to be in a hurry to win is not good.

古文：百人被刃，陷行乱陈；千人被刃，擒敌杀将；万人被刃，横行天下。
现代文：百人死战，就可以摧破敌阵。
English: If a hundred men fight to the death, they can destroy the enemy.

古文：武王问太公望曰： 吾欲少间而极用人之要。 
现代文：千人死战，就可以擒敌杀将。万人死战，犹可以横行天下。周武王问太公望说： 我想用点时间来研究一下用人的要领。 
English: If a thousand men fight to the death, it is possible to defeat the enemy and kill the general. If a thousand men fight to the death, it is possible to rule the world. King Zhou Wu asked Taigongwang and said: I want to take some time to study the essentials of employing people.

古文：望对曰： 赏如山，罚如溪。
现代文：太公望说： 奖励好人好事，要像高山那样的坚定不秽，惩罚坏人坏事，要像溪水那样的通行无阻。
English: Taigongwang said: Reward good people with good things, be as firm and immaculate as a mountain, punish bad people and bad things, and be like a stream.

古文：太上无过，其次补过。使人无得私语，诸罚而请不罚者死，诸赏而请不赏者死。 
现代文：执行赏罚最重要的是不发生差错，其次是有了差错及时纠正，这就不合使人背后议论了。凡是有罪当罚而请求不罚的处死，有功当贫而请求木常的处死。
English: The most important thing in the implementation of rewards and punishments is that no mistakes occur, and secondly, that mistakes are corrected in a timely manner, which does not allow people to talk behind each other's backs.

古文：伐国必因其变。
现代文：讨伐别的国家，必须利用它国内的变乱。
English: To make inroads in other countries, it must take advantage of the turmoil at home.

古文：示之财以观其穷，示之弊以观其病，上乖者下离，若此之类，是伐之因也。
现代文：观察它的财政情况，看它是否穷困，观察它国内的弊端，看它有何危机，看它上层是否专横暴戾，下层是否离心离德，有了这些情况就是有了可以讨我伐的因素。 
English: Observe its financial situation, see if it is impoverished, observe its domestic ills, see if it is in crisis, see if its upper echelon is tyrannical and violent, and if its lower echelon is devoid of morality. With these conditions, there are factors that can be used against us.

古文：凡兴师，必审内外之权，以计其去。
现代文：兴兵作战，必须详细研究敌我形势的变化，以计划军队的行动。
English: In order to engage in combat, it is necessary to study in detail the changes in the situation between the enemy and ourselves in order to plan the actions of the army.

古文：兵有备阙，粮食有余不足，校所出入之路，然后兴师伐乱，必能入之。
现代文：敌我战备的程度，粮食的多少，比较双方进出道路的远近险易，然后出兵进攻，必能顺利攻入敌境。
English: The degree of combat readiness of the enemy and ourselves, the amount of grain, and the distance between the entrance and exit roads of the two sides should be compared, and then the troops should be sent to attack, and they will be able to successfully invade the enemy territory.

古文：地大而城小者，必先收其地；城大而地窄者，必先攻其城；地广而人寡者，则绝其阨；地狭而人众者，则筑大堙以临之。
现代文：敌人地大而城小，必先占领广阔的土地。城大而地窄，必先攻占它的城市。土地广阔而人口少的，就要控制它的枢纽要害，城市狭小而人口稠密的，就构筑土山攻城。
English: If the enemy's territory is large but the city is small, he must first occupy the vast land. If the city is large but the land is narrow, he must first capture its city. If the land is vast but the population is small, it is necessary to control its key points. If the city is narrow but the population is dense, it is necessary to build a mound of earth to attack the city.

古文：无丧其利，无夺其时，宽其政，夷其业，救其弊，则足施天下。
现代文：对敌国不要损害其民众的利益，不要耽误民众的耕种，废除苛刻的法令，安定人民的生活，拯救民众的疾苦，这就是施恩于天下了。
English: To the enemy country, do not harm the interests of its people, do not delay the cultivation of the people, abolish the harsh laws and regulations, stabilize the people's lives, and save the people's sufferings. This is to be kind to the world.

古文：今战国相攻，大伐有德。
现代文：现今各国互相攻伐，往往仗恃强大，攻击施行德政的国家。
English: Nowadays, countries are attacking each other, often relying on the strong to attack the countries that implement German politics.

古文：自伍而两，自两而师，不一其令。
现代文：军队从 伍 到 两 ，从 两 到 师 ，命令不统一，军心不安定。
English: The army has gone from a company to two, from two to a division, the orders are not unified, and the military spirit is unstable.

古文：率俾民心不定，徒尚骄侈，谋患辨讼，吏究其事，累且败也。日暮路远，还有挫气；师老将贪，争掠易败。
现代文：崇尚骄奢，惹事生非，官吏忙于处理这些事情，徒劳精力，招致战败。成功无望，还师罢军，挫伤士气，久战疲惫，将帅贪功，士卒劫掠，这就很容易被战败了。
English: It is easy to be defeated by those who advocate arrogance, stir up trouble, and officials are busy dealing with these things, wasting their energy and leading to defeat. Hopeless success, returning division strike, demoralized, battle-weary, generals covet success, and soldiers plunder.

古文：凡将轻、垒卑、众动，可攻也。
现代文：凡是敌人将帅轻浮、营垒低矮、军心动摇的，就可以进攻它。
English: If the enemy's generals are frivolous, his camp is low, and his morale is shaky, he can be attacked.

古文：将重、垒高、众惧，可围也。
现代文：将帅稳重、营垒高大、军心恐惧的，可以围困它。
English: He that hath a great army, and a strong garrison, and feareth war, shall besiege it.

古文：凡围，必开其小利，使渐夷弱，则节吝有不食者矣。
现代文：围困敌人，必须给它展示一线希望，使它斗志逐渐削弱，时间一久，即使敌人节约粮食，也会陷于饥饿了。
English: To besiege the enemy, it is necessary to show him a ray of hope, so that his morale gradually weakens, and after a long time, even if the enemy saves food, it will fall into starvation.

古文：众夜击者，惊也；众避事者，离也；待人之救，期战而蹙，皆心失而伤气也。
现代文：敌方士兵夜间自相攻击，是军队惊恐不安的表现。士兵不听指挥，是上下离心离德的表现。等待别国救援，会战前局促不安的，是信心丧失，士气沮丧的表现。
English: Enemy soldiers attacking each other at night is a manifestation of the army's fear and anxiety. Soldiers not listening to commands is a manifestation of the top and bottom centrifugal deviation. Waiting for the rescue of other countries and being uneasy before the battle is a manifestation of loss of confidence and depressed morale.

古文：伤气败军，曲谋败国。
现代文：士气沮丧，军队就会失败；谋略错误，国家就会败亡。
English: If morale is depressed, the army will fail; if the strategy is wrong, the country will be defeated.

