古文：辛神邕唐燕士郭鄩李全质沈恭礼牛生韦齐休
现代文：辛神邕唐燕士郭鄩李全质沈恭礼牛生韦齐休
English: Tang Yan Shi Guo Jian Li Whole Quality Shen Gong Li Niu Sheng Wei Qi Xiu

古文：辛神邕
现代文：辛神邕
English: Sin Shen Yi

古文：平卢从事御史辛神邕，太和五年冬，以前白水尉调集于京师。
现代文：平卢从事御史辛神邕，在太和五年冬，从原来做白水尉调到京城任职。
English: Pinglu was engaged in the study of the Shinto gods, and in the winter of the fifth year of the Taihe era, he was transferred from his original position as a white water captain to the capital.

古文：时有佣者刘万金，与家僮自勤，同室而居。
现代文：当时京城里有个靠做工谋生的人，叫刘万金，与辛神邕的家僮自勤同住一间屋子。
English: At that time, there was a man in the capital who made a living by working, called Liu Wanjin, and he lived in a room with Xin Shenyao's family.

古文：自勤病数月，将死。
现代文：自勤得病，一连病了几个月，病重将死。
English: I got sick by my own doing. I was sick for several months in a row. I was seriously ill and on the verge of death.

古文：一日，万金他出，自勤偃于塌。
现代文：有一天，万金出门在外，自勤独自躺在床上。
English: One day, Wanjin was out of the house, lying alone in bed.

古文：忽有一人，紫衣危冠广袂，貌枯形瘠，巨准修髯，自门而入。
现代文：忽然有一个穿着紫色衣服，戴着高高的帽子，衣袖肥大的人从门外进来，这人面容枯槁，高高的鼻子，长长的胡须。
English: Suddenly a man dressed in purple, with a tall hat and fat sleeves, came in through the door. He had a withered face, a high nose and a long beard.

古文：自塌前，谓自勤曰：汝强起，疾当间矣。
现代文：到了床前，对自勤说：你勉强支撑着起来，病就悄悄地好了。
English: When she got to the bed, she said to herself, "If you can just hold yourself up, your illness will quietly get better."

古文：于是扶自勤负壁而坐。
现代文：于是扶自勤靠墙坐着。
English: So I sat leaning against the wall.

古文：先是室之东垣下，有食案，列数器。
现代文：原来这屋子的东墙下有餐桌，上面摆着各种餐具。
English: Originally, there was a dining table under the east wall of this room, with various utensils on it.

古文：紫衣人探袖中，出一掬物，状若稻实而色青，即以十数粒置食器中，谓自勤曰：吾非人间人，今奉命召万金，万金当食而死。
现代文：穿紫衣服的人从袖中取出一把东西，样子很象稻粒，青色，就把十多粒放在食器中。对自勤说：我不是人间的人，现在奉命来召万金，万金吃了这个就要死了。
English: The man in purple took from his sleeve a handful of something that looked very much like rice grains, blue in color, and placed more than a dozen grains in a dish. He said to Zifan: "I am not a human being. I have been ordered to collect ten thousand gold. If you eat this, you will die."

古文：食尔勿泄吾言，不然，则祸及矣。
现代文：他吃的时候，不要把我的话告诉他，不然，就要大祸临头了。
English: But do not speak a word to him while he is eating, or he will become very ill.

古文：言讫遂去。
现代文：说完就走了。
English: After saying this, he left.

古文：是日，万金归，脸赤而喘，且曰：我以腹虚热上，殆不可治。
现代文：这天万金回来，脸红而又气喘，并且说：我因肚子空而发热，大概不能治了。
English: On this day, Wanjin came back, blushing and panting, and said, "I have a fever due to an empty stomach, and it's probably incurable."

古文：即变其器而食，食且尽，自勤疾愈，万金果卒。
现代文：于是拿起食具就吃饭，饭将吃完的时候，自勤的病好了，万金果然死了。
English: So he picked up the utensils and ate. When the meal was over, his illness was cured, and Wanjin died.

古文：唐燕士
现代文：唐燕士
English: Tang Yanshi

古文：晋昌唐燕士，好读书，隐于九华山。
现代文：晋昌唐燕士喜欢读书，隐居在九华山。
English: Jinchang Tang Yanshi liked to read and lived in seclusion in Jihua Mountain.

古文：常日晚，天雨霁，燕士步月上山。
现代文：曾有一天傍晚，雨过天晴的时候，借着月光徒步上山。
English: Once upon a time, in the evening, when the rain had passed and the sky was clear, I hiked up the mountain by the light of the moon.

古文：夜既深，有群狼拥其道，不得归。
现代文：夜已经很深，一群狼把他围在路上不能回家。
English: It was late at night, a pack of wolves surrounded him on the road and he couldn't get home.

古文：惧既甚，遂匿于深林中。
现代文：唐燕士非常恐惧，就藏在林子深处。
English: Tang Yanshi was very scared and hid deep in the forest.

古文：俄有白衣丈夫，戴纱中，貌孤俊，年近五十，循涧而来。
现代文：不一会儿，有一个穿白衣服的男子，头戴纱巾，相貌孤傲、俊俏，年纪将近五十岁，顺着山涧走过来。
English: Soon, a man dressed in white, wearing a headscarf, looking lonely and handsome, nearly fifty years old, came along the ridge.

古文：吟步自若。
现代文：他边走边吟，样子泰然自若。
English: He chants as he walks, his face impassive.

古文：伫立且久，乃吟曰：涧水潺潺声不绝，溪垅茫茫野花发。
现代文：然后站了许久，又吟诵道：涧水潺潺声不绝，溪垅茫茫野花发。
English: Then he stood for a long time, and chanted: "The sound of rushing water is incessant, the streams are full of wildflowers.

古文：自去自来人不归，长时唯对空山月。
现代文：自去自来人不归，长时唯对空山月。
English: People do not return after they have left, and for a long time they are only attracted by the empty mountain and the moon.

古文：燕士常好为七言诗，颇称于时人。
现代文：燕士善于写七言诗，很受当时人称赞。
English: Yanshi was good at writing seven-character poems, which was highly praised at the time.

古文：闻此惊叹，将与之言，未及而没。
现代文：听到这人的吟诵惊叹不已，正要跟他搭话时，还没等开口，那人就消失了。
English: He was stunned by the man's chanting and was about to strike up a conversation when, before he could open his mouth, the man disappeared.

古文：明日，燕士归，以貌问里人，有识者曰：是吴氏子，举进士，善为诗。卒数年矣。
现代文：第二天，燕士回来，拿他的相貌向乡里人打听，有从前认识他的人说：是个姓吴的，中了进士，擅长写诗，已经死了许多年了。
English: The next day, Yanshi returned and asked the villagers about his appearance. Some people who knew him in the past said: He was surnamed Wu, he was a high school dropout, he was good at writing poetry, and he had been dead for many years.

古文：郭鄩
现代文：郭鄩
English: Guo Wei

古文：郭鄩罢栎阳县尉，久不得调，穷居京华，困甚。
现代文：郭鄩被罢了栎阳县县尉，很久未被任用，穷愁潦倒住在京城，日子很窘迫。
English: Guo Wei was dismissed from his post as the county lieutenant of Shenyang County. He had not been appointed for a long time. He lived in poverty in Beijing, and his life was very difficult.

古文：肸飨间，常有二物，如猿玃，衣青碧，出入寝兴，无不相逐。
现代文：出处之间，常有二物，像猿猴，穿着蓝色衣服。后来不论出入起卧，这二物无时无刻不跟随。
English: Between exits, there are often two things, like a monkey, wearing blue clothes. Later, regardless of going in and out of bed, these two things always follow.

古文：凡欲举意求索，必与鄩俱往。
现代文：凡外出做什么事，也一定跟着一块去。
English: Whenever they go out to do something, they always go together.

古文：所造诣，如碍枳棘。
现代文：所到之处，没有不像遇到榛针、荆棘一样妨碍着他。
English: Everywhere he went, nothing hindered him like thorns and thistles.

古文：亲友见之，俱若仇隙，或厌之以符术。
现代文：亲友讨厌他，有的用咒符驱赶，有的逃往山林躲避。
English: His relatives and friends hate him. Some use spells to drive him away, while others flee to the mountains and forests.

古文：或避之于山林，数年竟莫能绝。一夕，忽来告别，云：某等承君厄运，不相别者久，今则候晓而行，无复至矣。
现代文：这种情况几年都没有间断。一天晚上，这二物忽来告别，说：我俩趁你遭厄运，相随已经很久，现在等明早我们就要走了，不再回来了。
English: This went on for several years. One evening, the two things suddenly came to say goodbye, saying: "We have been together for a long time, taking advantage of your misfortune, and now we are leaving tomorrow morning and will not return."

古文：鄩既喜其去，遂问所诣，云：世路如某者甚多，但人不见耳，今之所诣乃胜业坊富人王氏，将往散之。
现代文：郭鄩很庆幸他们离开，就问他们到哪里去。那二物说：世间像我俩这样的很多，只是世人看不见罢了。现在我们要到胜业坊姓王的富人那里，将去败坏他的家财。
English: Guo Gan was very glad to see them leave, and asked them where they were going. The two things said, "There are many people like us in the world, but the world does not see us. Now we are going to the rich man surnamed Wang in Shengyefang, and we are going to destroy his family fortune."

古文：鄩曰：彼之聚敛丰盈，何以遽散？
现代文：郭鄩说：他家财富丰厚、殷实，怎么能很快耗尽呢？
English: Guo Wei said: His family's wealth is abundant and rich, how can it be depleted quickly?

古文：云：先得计于安品子矣。
现代文：那二物回答说：得先从安品子那想办法了。
English: The two creatures replied, "We'll have to find a way to get rid of Ahimsa first."

古文：晓鼓忽鸣，遂失所在。
现代文：五鼓击响的时候，那二物就不知去向了。
English: When the five drums sounded, the two objects disappeared.

古文：鄩既兴盥栉，便觉愁愤开豁。
现代文：郭鄩起来洗漱，便觉心胸开阔，愁闷全无。
English: Guo Gan got up to wash and felt that his heart was wide open and there was no sadness at all.

古文：试诣亲友，无不改观相接。
现代文：试去拜访亲友，亲友也无不改观相迎。
English: Try to visit relatives and friends, relatives and friends are all welcome.

古文：未旬，见宰相面白，遂除通事舍人。
现代文：未到十天，去拜见宰相，当面讲述了上述情况，于是又被授予通事舍人的官职。
English: Less than ten days later, he went to see the prime minister and told him about the above-mentioned situation in person. As a result, he was awarded the post of secretary.

古文：鄩有表弟张生者，为金吾卫佐，交游皆豪侠，少年好奇，闻之，未信之也。知胜业王氏隶左军，自是常往伺之。
现代文：郭鄩有个表弟姓张，做金吾卫佐，交往的都是豪侠之人。这人年轻好奇，听到这件事不大相信，他知道胜业王氏隶属左军管辖。从此就偷偷去那里察看。
English: Guo Wei had a cousin named Zhang, who was a member of the Jinwuwei group and associated with heroic people. This young and curious man did not believe what he heard. He knew that the Shengye Wang clan was under the jurisdiction of the Left Army. So he secretly went there to investigate.

古文：王氏性俭约，所费未常过分。
现代文：王氏为人节俭，费用也很少有过分之处。
English: Mr. Wang is a frugal man, and his expenses are rarely excessive.

古文：家有妓乐，端丽者至多，外之袨服冶容，造次莫回其意。
现代文：家中有歌舞艺妓，其中长相端庄秀丽的很多，她们外穿华丽衣服，姿容娇艳俏丽，但王氏回到房里仍然没有改变志向。
English: There are singing and dancing geisha at home, many of whom are dignified and beautiful. They wear gorgeous clothes and have a delicate and pretty appearance, but Mr. Wang still hasn't changed his mind when he returns to his room.

古文：一日，与宾朋过鸣珂曲，有妇人靓妆立于门首，王生驻马迟留，喜动颜色，因召同列者，置酒为欢，张生预焉。
现代文：有一天，他和宾朋经过鸣珂曲，有一个妇人浓汝艳抹站在门口，王生勒马停步，留连忘返，喜形于色。于是召宾朋摆酒设宴，寻欢作乐。张生也参加了。
English: One day, when he and his friends and relatives were passing a concert hall, a beautiful woman stood at the door. Wang Sheng paused and was overwhelmed with joy. He invited his friends and relatives to have a party with wine and make merry. Zhang Sheng also attended.

古文：访之，即安品子之弟也。
现代文：打听这个人，原来就是安品子的弟弟。
English: After inquiring about this person, it turned out to be the younger brother of Yasumoto.

古文：品子善歌，是日歌数曲，王生悉以金采赠之，众皆讶其广费。
现代文：品子善于唱歌，这天唱了几支曲子，王氏全拿财物馈赠。在座的人对他这样巨资耗费都非常惊讶。
English: Mr. Wang, who is good at singing, sang several songs that day, and Mr. Wang gave away all of his possessions. Everyone present was very surprised at his huge expenditure.

古文：自此舆辇资货，日输其门。未经数年，遂至贫匮耳。
现代文：从此经常看到车马载着财货从他家运出来，没过几年，他家就贫困不堪了。
English: From then on, he often saw carts and horses carrying goods being transported out of his home. Within a few years, his family was destitute.

古文：李全质
现代文：李全质
English: Li Zengjia

古文：陇西李全质，少在沂州。
现代文：陇西李全质年轻在沂州时，曾经整天玩踢球的游戏。
English: When he was young in Ganzhou, he used to play football all day.

古文：尝一日欲大蹴踘，昧爽之交，假寐于沂州城横门东庭前。忽有一衣紫衣，首戴圆笠，直造其前，曰：奉追。
现代文：一次天快亮时，在沂州的横门东庭前闭目休息。忽然有一个穿紫衣服、头戴圆斗笠的人直奔他面前来，并且说：奉命追赶。
English: Once, when it was nearly dawn, he was resting with his eyes closed in front of the east courtyard of the side gate of Zhangzhou. Suddenly, a person wearing purple clothes and a round hat ran straight in front of him and said, "I have been ordered to chase you."

古文：全质曰：何人相追？
现代文：全质问：什么人追我？
English: All question: who is chasing me?

古文：紫衣人曰：非某之追，别有人来奉追也。
现代文：穿紫衣的人说：不是我追你，另有人追你。
English: The man in purple said, "I'm not chasing you. Someone else is chasing you."

古文：须臾，一绿衣人来，曰：奉追。
现代文：不一会儿，一个穿绿衣服的人过来，说：奉命追赶。
English: Presently a man in green robes approached and said: "I have been ordered to pursue.

古文：其言忽遽，势不可遏。
现代文：那人说话时神色惶急，看情势是无法挽回的了。
English: The man looked panicked as he spoke, seeing the situation as irretrievable.

古文：全质曰：公莫有所须否？
现代文：全质说：你难道有什么需求？
English: In all seriousness, what is it that you want?

古文：绿衣人曰：奉命令追，敢言其所须？
现代文：绿衣人说：奉命追赶，怎敢说有什么需求。
English: The man in green said, "I've been ordered to catch up, how dare I say there's a demand?"

古文：紫衣人谓绿衣人曰：不用追。
现代文：紫衣人对绿衣人说：不用追。
English: The person in purple says to the person in green: Don't chase.

古文：以手麾出横门，紫衣人承间谓全质曰：适蒙问所须，岂不能终诺乎？
现代文：用手一挥，让绿衣人离开横门。紫衣人乘机对全质说：刚才蒙您所问所需，难道你能兑现你的许诺吗？
English: With a wave of his hand, he let the man in green leave the side door. The man in purple took the opportunity to say to the totality: What you just asked, can you fulfill your promise?

古文：全质曰：所须何物？
现代文：全质问：你需要什么？
English: The whole question: What do you need?

古文：答曰：犀佩带一条耳。
现代文：那人回答说：一条犀牛佩带罢了。
English: The man replied that it was just a rhinoceros.

古文：全质曰：唯。
现代文：全质回答说：行。
English: He replied emphatically: "Yes."

古文：言毕失所在，主者报蹴踘，遂令画犀带。
现代文：说完那人就不见了。主管踢球的人报说：开始踢球。全质就派人办置犀牛佩带。
English: After saying that, the man disappeared. The person in charge of football reported: "Start playing football." The whole team sent someone to buy a rhinoceros jersey.

古文：日晚，具酒脯，并纸钱佩带，于横门外焚之。
现代文：当天晚上，备办了酒肉、纸钱、和佩带，在横门外焚烧了。
English: In the evening of the same day, alcohol, paper money, and a belt were prepared and burned outside the side gate.

古文：是夜，全质才寐，即见戴圆笠紫衣人来拜谢曰：蒙赐佩带，惭愧之至，无以奉答。然公平生水厄，但危困处，某则必至焉。
现代文：这天夜里，全质刚刚入睡，就梦见穿紫衣、戴圆斗笠的人来拜谢说：承蒙您赐给我佩带，惭愧极了，无以报答，然而你这一生将要遭水难，只要你有危难的时候，我一定前来相助。
English: That night, when I had barely fallen asleep, I dreamed of a man in a purple robe and a round hat who came to thank me and said, "I'm very ashamed to have been given this belt to wear, and I can't repay you. However, you're going to be in water all your life. As long as you're in danger, I'll definitely come to help you."

古文：洎太和岁初大水，全质已为太平军裨将，兼监察。
现代文：等到太和初年涨大水，全质已经做了太平军副将，兼做监察。
English: By the time of the flood in the first year of the Taiping Rebellion, he had risen to the rank of vice-general of the Taiping Army and was also an inspector.

古文：有切务，自中都抵梁郡城，西走百歇桥二十里，水深而冰薄。素不谙委，程命峻速，片刻不可驻。
现代文：一次有紧急军务，要从中都到梁郡城，向西走到离百歇桥二十里的地方，水深而冰薄，全质平素又不熟悉水运，军命严厉紧急，片刻不可停留，随从都吓得面色如土。
English: On one occasion, there was an urgent military matter. It was necessary to go from the capital to Liangxuncheng, and walk westward to a place twenty miles from Baixie Bridge. The water was deep and thin, the whole quality was plain and unfamiliar with water transport, the military mission was severe and urgent, and it was not possible to stay for a moment. The attendants were scared and looked like dirt.

古文：行从等面如死灰，信辔委命而行。
现代文：全质只好信手拿着缰绳，听天由命地向前走。
English: All I could do was hold the reins in my hand and walk forward, resigned to my fate.

古文：才三数十步，有一人后来，大呼之曰：勿过彼而来此！
现代文：才走了三十几步远，有一个人从后面追上来，大声呼喊着：不要到那里去，往这边走！
English: He had only gone about thirty paces when a man ran up behind him, shouting loudly: "Don't go there, go this way!"

古文：吾知其径，安而且捷。
现代文：我熟悉那条路，安全而且近。
English: I know that road, it's safe and it's close.

古文：全质荷之，反辔而从焉。
现代文：全质让那人上了马，把缰绳交给他，自己跟从那人而行。
English: And he made the man get up on the horse, and gave him the bridle, and went after him.

古文：才不三里，止泥泞，而曾无尺寸之阻，得达本土。
现代文：走了还不到三里，道路只是有点泥泞，而没有丝毫阻碍，就到达了驻地。
English: After walking less than three miles, the road was just a little muddy, but without the slightest obstacle, we arrived at the station.

古文：以物酬其人，人固让不取，固与之，答曰：若仗我而来，则或不让；今因我而行，亦何所苦？
现代文：然后全质用财物去酬谢那个人，那人坚决推辞。全质又坚持要酬谢，那人回答说：你依靠我才来到这，我也许不该谦让，现在你又为了我才这样做，又何苦呢？
English: The man then tried to reward the man with all his wealth, but the man refused. The man insisted on being rewarded, but the man replied: "You came here on my account. Perhaps I shouldn't have given in. Now you're doing this for me. What's the harm?"

古文：终不肯受，全质意其鲜焉，乃益之。
现代文：终于不肯接受。全质认为这样的人很难得，就想收留他。
English: He finally refused to accept it. He thought such a person was hard to come by, so he wanted to take him in.

古文：须臾复来，已失所在。
现代文：不一会儿，再来找他，他已经不知去向了。
English: Come back for him in a minute. He's gone.

古文：却思其人，衣紫衣，戴圆笠，岂非横门之人欤？
现代文：回来后仔细回想，那人穿紫衣，头戴圆斗笠，岂不是横门外遇见的那个人吗？
English: After returning, carefully recall that the person wearing a purple robe and a round hat is not the person you met outside the side gate?

古文：开成初，衔命入关，回宿寿安县。
现代文：开成初年，奉命入关，回来后住在寿安县。
English: In the first year of opening, he was ordered to enter the customs, and lived in Shouan County after returning.

古文：夜未央而情迫，时复昏晦，不得已而出逆旅，三数里而大雨，回亦不可。
现代文：未睡到半夜，心情烦闷，当时天又非常黑暗，不得已走出旅馆。走了三里多地，天下起大雨，回旅馆已不可能。
English: I didn't get to sleep until midnight, and I was in a bad mood. It was very dark at the time, so I had no choice but to leave the hotel. I walked more than three miles, it was raining heavily, and it was impossible to get back to the hotel.

古文：须臾，马旁见一人，全质诘之：谁欤？对曰：邮牒者。
现代文：不一会儿，马前见一人，全质问他是谁，回答说是驿站传递文书的邮牒。
English: After a while, Ma Qian saw a man and asked him who he was, to which he replied that he was a courier delivering a postal order.

古文：更于马前行，寸步不可睹。
现代文：那人一直在马前走。那天夜里，前边寸步远的地方都看不清。
English: The man kept walking in front of the horse. That night, he couldn't see a single step ahead.

古文：其人每以其前路物导之，或曰树。或曰桩，或曰险，或曰培塿，或曰穷，全质皆得免咎。
现代文：那人常用前边路上的景物来引路，有时说有树，有时说有树桩，有的地方说危险，有的地方说是小土丘，有的地方说是绝路。
English: The man often used the scenery on the road ahead to lead the way, sometimes saying there were trees, sometimes saying there were stumps, sometimes saying there was danger, sometimes saying there were small mounds, and sometimes saying there was a dead end.

古文：久而至三泉驿，憩焉。
现代文：路上一切危险可能造成的伤害，全质全都避免了。
English: Any harm that could be caused by any danger on the road has been completely avoided.

古文：才下马，访邮牒者欲酬之，已不见矣。
现代文：又过了很长时间，到了三泉驿站，稍休息一下。全质刚刚下马，去查访刚才那个邮牒，想酬谢他，那人已经不见。
English: After another long time, I arrived at Sanquan Railway Station and took a short break. I had just dismounted from the horse and went to visit the postman, to thank him, but he had disappeared.

古文：问从者，形状衣服，固紫衣而首戴笠，复非横门之人欤？
现代文：问随行的人打听那人的衣着打扮，原来是穿紫衣服，头戴圆斗笠的，又不是横门外的那个人吗？
English: I asked the person accompanying me to find out what the man was wearing. It turned out that he was wearing purple clothes and a round hat. Wasn't he the man outside the side gate?

古文：会昌壬戌岁，济阴大水，谷神子与全质同舟。讶全质何惧水之甚，询其由，全质乃语此。
现代文：会昌壬戌年，济阳涨大水，谷神子与全质同坐一条船，他对水给全质造成的恐惧非常惊讶，打听原因，全质叙述了以前的事情。
English: In the year of Heichang Rinpoche, when Jiyang was flooded, Gu Shenzi was in the same boat as Quan Jia. He was very surprised by the fear that the water caused Quan Jia. He asked why, and Quan Jia recounted the previous events.

古文：又云，本性无惧水，紫衣屡有应，故兢慓之转切也。
现代文：并且又说：我本来不怕水，紫衣人屡次有应验，所以一遇到水情，就战战兢兢地反复揣度着。
English: He also said, "I am not afraid of water originally. People in purple have met the test many times, so as soon as they encounter water, they anxiously and repeatedly try to figure it out.

古文：沈恭礼
现代文：沈恭礼
English: Shen Gonglei

古文：阌乡县主簿沈恭礼，太和中，摄湖城尉。
现代文：阌县主薄沈恭礼，在太和年中，任湖城尉。
English: The lord of Min County, Bo Shengyongli, was appointed as the captain of Hucheng in the middle of the Taisho era.

古文：离阌乡日，小疾。
现代文：离开阌乡的那一天，身体有点不适。
English: The day I left Shaoshan, I felt a bit unwell.

古文：暮至湖城，堂前卧。
现代文：晚上到了湖城，就在前堂睡下了。
English: In the evening, when I arrived in Hucheng, I fell asleep in the vestibule.

古文：忽有人绕床数匝，意谓从行厅吏雷忠顺，恭礼问之，对曰：非雷忠顺，李忠义也。
现代文：忽觉得有人围床绕了几圈，沈恭礼以为是从行厅吏雷忠顺。当问他时对方却回答说：不是雷忠顺，是李忠义。
English: Suddenly, someone circled around the bed a few times, and Shen Yingli thought it was the official Lei Zhongshun. When he asked, the other party replied: "It's not Lei Zhongshun, it's Li Zhongyi."

古文：问曰：何得来此？
现代文：主薄问他：怎么来到这里？
English: The host asked him, "How did you get here?"

古文：对曰：某本江淮人，因饥寒佣于人，前月至此县，卒于逆旅。
现代文：回答说：我是江淮人，因为冻饿给别人干活，上月来到这个县，死在旅馆里。
English: He replied, "I am from Jianghuai, and I came to this county last month to work for others because I was hungry and cold, and I died in a hotel.

古文：然饥寒甚，今投君，祈一食，兼丐一小帽，可乎？
现代文：冻饿得厉害，现在投奔你要讨点吃的，再要一顶小帽，可以吗？
English: You're freezing and starving, and now you're running to get something to eat, and you want a hat, is that okay?

古文：恭礼许之，曰：遣我何处送与汝？
现代文：恭礼答应了，并说：让我到哪里送给你？
English: The salutatorian agreed, and said, "Where shall I send it to you?"

古文：对曰：来暮，遣驿中厅子张朝来取。
现代文：回答说：明天晚上让驿中厅子张朝来取。
English: He replied, "Tomorrow evening, let Zhang Chuzhong come to pick it up."

古文：语毕，立于堂之西楹。
现代文：说完，站堂中西边的柱子下，恭礼起身坐。
English: Having said that, get up and sit under the pillar on the west side of the station hall.

古文：恭礼起坐，忠义进曰：君初止此，更有事，辄敢裨补。恭礼曰：可。
现代文：忠义上前说：你刚到这个地方，再发生什么事，我就来帮助你。恭礼说：行。
English: Tadayoshi stepped forward and said, "You've just arrived at this place. If anything happens, I'll come and help you." Gyorai said, "Okay."

古文：遂言：此厅人居多不安。
现代文：那人于是说：这厅里的人住在这大多不安宁。
English: The man then said: "Most of the people in this hall don't live here peacefully.

古文：少间，有一女子，年可十七八，强来参谒。名曰 蜜陀僧 。君慎不可与之言。
现代文：一会儿将有一女子，年龄大约十七、八岁，硬要来见你，她的名字叫蜜陀僧，你千万不能与她讲话。
English: Soon there will be a girl, aged about seventeen or eight, who insists on coming to see you. Her name is Meda Monk, and you must not speak to her.

古文：或托是县尹家人，或假四邻为附，辄不可交言。言则中此物矣。
现代文：她有时假托是本县县官的家人，有时又以四邻为依靠，你就一定不要同她搭话，一搭话，就会正中她的奸计。
English: Sometimes she pretends to be a family member of the county official, and sometimes she relies on her neighbors. You must not talk to her. If you talk to her, you will be caught in her treachery.

古文：忠义语毕，却立西楹未定，堂东果有一女子，峨鬟垂鬟，肌肤悦泽，微笑转盼，谓恭礼曰：秋室寂寥，蛩啼夜月。更深风动，梧叶堕阶。如何罪责，羁囚如此耶？
现代文：忠义说完，就又站在堂中西边的柱子下面。还没等站稳，堂东果然有一女子，高高的发髻，青丝垂鬓，皮肤细腻而有光泽，面带笑容，顾盼含情，对恭礼说：秋室寂寥，明月当空，蟋蟀唧唧，夜深风动，梧叶落阶，怎奈这等寂寞，清苦，囚犯也不过如此罢了。
English: After he finished speaking, he stood again under the pillar on the west side of the hall. Before he could stand, there was indeed a woman standing in the east of the hall, with a high bun, long hair, delicate and shiny skin, a smile on her face, and a look of longing. She said to him, "The autumn room is lonely, the moon is in the sky, the wind is howling, the wind is blowing in the night, and the leaves are falling. How can this be lonely and miserable? Prisoners are just like that."

古文：恭礼不动。
现代文：恭礼不动声色。
English: The salute was muted.

古文：又曰：珍簟床空，明月满室，不饮美酒，虚称少年。
现代文：那女子又说：孤卧床席，明月满室，不饮美酒，岂不虚度青春时光。
English: The woman also said, "Isn't it a waste of youth to lie alone in bed, with the room filled with the bright moon, and not to drink good wine?"

古文：恭礼又不顾。
现代文：恭礼又不动。
English: The salute didn't move.

古文：又吟曰：黄帝上天时，鼎湖元在兹。七十二玉女，化作黄金芝。
现代文：那女子又吟道：黄帝上天时，鼎湖元在兹，七十二玉女，化作黄金芝。
English: The woman also chanted: When the Yellow Emperor ascended to heaven, Dinghu Yuan was here, and the 72 Immaculate Ladies were transformed into the Golden Grass.

古文：恭礼又不顾，逡巡而去。
现代文：恭礼又置之不理。那女人徘徊一阵，然后离去。
English: The compliment is ignored. The woman lingers for a while, then leaves.

古文：忠义又进曰：此物已去，少间，东廊下有敬寡妇、王家阿嫂。虽不敢同蜜陀僧，然亦不得与语。
现代文：忠义又上前说：此物已去，一会，东廊下还有敬寡妇、王家阿嫂，她们虽然不敢象蜜陀僧那样，然而也不能同她搭话。
English: Tadayoshi stepped forward again and said, "This object has already departed. For a while, there was also the Venerable Widow, Sister Wang Jia, under the east corridor. Although they did not dare to be like the Medo Monk, they could not speak to her.

古文：少顷果有一女郎，自东庑下，衣白衣，簪白簪，手整披袍，回命曰：王家阿嫂，何不出来？
现代文：不一会作，果然有一女郎，从东厢房出来，穿白衣服，头上插着白簪，一面用手整理着披袍，回报他人旨意说：王家阿嫂，为什么还不出来？
English: Not long after, a girl did indeed come out of the east wing, dressed in white, with an egret perched on her head, arranging her robe with her hands, and said in response to someone else's will: "Wang Jia Ya Sister-in-law, why can't you come out?

古文：俄然有曳红裙，紫袖银帔而来，步庭月数匝，却立于东庑下。
现代文：忽然有拖着红色长裙，穿着紫色上衣，银色披肩的女人，在院子里转了几圈，回身站在东厅下。
English: Suddenly, a woman wearing a long red dress, a purple blouse and a silver shawl, turned around several times in the courtyard and stood at the bottom of the East Hall.

古文：忠义又进曰：此两物已去，可高枕矣。
现代文：忠义又上前说：这两物已去，可以高枕无忧了。
English: Loyalty also came forward and said: These two things have gone, you can sleep well.

古文：少间，纵有他媚来，亦不足畏也。
现代文：一会儿即使再有女妖来，也不值得害怕了。
English: After a while, even if another succubus comes, it's not worth being afraid of.

古文：忠义辞去，恭礼止之：为我更驻，候怪物尽即去。
现代文：说完、忠义就要辞去，恭礼阻止他说：为了我再呆一会儿，等着把妖怪全部除掉你再走。
English: After saying this, Tadayoshi was about to resign, but I stopped him by saying, "For my sake, stay a little longer and wait until you have eliminated all the monsters before you leave."

古文：忠义应诺。
现代文：忠义答应了。
English: Tadayoshi agreed.

古文：而四更已，有一物，长二丈余，手持三数髑髅，若跃丸者。
现代文：四更已过，又有一物，长两丈多，手拿几块死人骨头，象扔球一样，慢慢地走近厅檐下。
English: Four more have passed, and another thing, more than two feet long, with a few dead bones in its hands, like a throwing ball, slowly approached the hall.

古文：渐近厅檐，忠义谓恭礼曰：可以枕击之。应声而击，暴然而中手，堕下髑髅。俯身掇之，忠义跳下，以棒乱殴，出门而去。
现代文：忠义又对恭礼说：可以用枕头打它，恭礼应声把枕头扔出去，啪的一声正打在那物的手上，骷髅落在地上，那物俯下身子去拾，忠义跳下，用棍棒乱打一阵，然后出门而去。
English: Zhongyi also said to Qianlei: "You can hit it with a pillow. Qianlei responded by throwing the pillow out. It hit the object's hand with a bang. The object landed on the ground. The object bent down to pick it up. Zhongyi jumped down, hit it with a club for a while, and then left the house.

古文：恭礼连呼忠义，不复见，而东方已明。与从者具语之，遂令具食及市帽子。
现代文：恭礼连喊：忠义，再也没有踪影。这时东方已发亮，恭礼向随从详细谈了昨晚的经历，命令他们准备酒席并买帽子。
English: At that time, the East had already brightened up, and Gong Li told his attendants in detail about the last night's experience, ordering them to prepare a banquet and buy a hat.

古文：恭礼两月在湖城，夜夜蜜陀僧来，终不敢对；后即归阌乡，即隔夜而至，然终亦不能为患；半年后，或三夜五夜一来；一年余，方渐稀。
现代文：又召来厅子张朝向他打听。张朝说：我本是巫人，最近为生计所迫而作了厅吏，我全知道最近有一个新客死在这里，叫李忠义。恭礼就给他帽子和饭食，然后离开了。这天夜里，恭礼梦见忠义来辞别说：蜜陀僧大需防备，大约在二、三年内还会打扰你。说完就走了。恭礼两个月来，在湖城，每晚蜜陀僧都来，恭礼始终不敢与她搭话。以后回到阌乡，就隔夜来一次，然而始终未能得逞。半年后，有时三夜、五夜来一次。一年多以后，就逐渐少了。
English: He also summoned the chamberlain, Zhang Chao, to inquire of him. Zhang Chao said, "I used to be a sorcerer, and recently I was forced to work as a clerk for a living. I know all about a new guest who recently died here, named Li Zhongyi. I gave him a hat and food, and then left. That night, I dreamed that I saw Zhongyi come to me and say, 'Don't say that: the Medusan Monk needs to be very careful, he will disturb you in about two or three years.' I finished and left. For the past two months, the Medusan Monk has come every night in Hucheng,

古文：有僧令断肉及荤辛，此后更不复来矣。
现代文：有僧人让他断肉及荤腥，此后就再也不来了。
English: A monk told him to stop eating meat and fish, and he never came back.

古文：牛生
现代文：牛生
English: Cows are born

古文：牛生自河东赴举，行至华州，去三十里，宿一村店。
现代文：牛生从河东去参加科举考试，走到华州，又继续往前走，在距离华州三十里的地方，住在一个乡村小店里。
English: Niu Sheng went from Hedong to take the entrance examination, walked to Huazhou, and continued to walk. Thirty miles away from Huazhou, he lived in a small village shop.

古文：其日，雪甚，令主人造汤饼。
现代文：那一天雪很大，就让店主人烧汤、烙饼。
English: On that day, there was a lot of snow, so the owner of the shop had to make soup and pancakes.

古文：昏时，有一人穷寒，衣服蓝缕，亦来投店。
现代文：傍晚，有一个非常贫寒，衣裳褴褛的人也来投店。
English: In the evening, a very poor, poorly dressed man also came to the store.

古文：牛生见而念之，要与同食。
现代文：牛生见了很怜悯他，要跟他一块吃。
English: When the cowherd saw him, he felt very sorry for him and wanted to eat with him.

古文：此人曰：某穷寒，不办得钱。今朝已空腹行百余里矣。
现代文：这人说：我很穷，弄不到钱，今早已空着肚子跑了一百多里路了。
English: The man said: "I'm poor, I can't get money, and I've already run more than a hundred miles on an empty stomach.

古文：遂食四五碗，便卧于床前地上，其声如牛。
现代文：于是吃了四、五碗，就躺在牛生床前的地上睡着了。鼾声像牛一样。
English: So he ate four or five bowls, lay down on the ground in front of the cow's bed, and fell asleep.

古文：至五更，此人至牛生床前曰：请公略至门外，有事要言之。
现代文：到五更天亮时，这人起来到牛生床前说：请你暂时到门外一会儿，有重要的事要跟你说。
English: At five o'clock in the morning, the man got up and went to the cow's bed and said, "Please step outside the door for a moment. I have something important to tell you."

古文：连催出门，曰：某非人，冥使耳。
现代文：那人连连催促牛生出门。牛生出门后，那人说：我不是人，是阴司里的一个差役罢了。
English: The man kept urging the cow to come out. After the cow came out, the man said, "I'm not a person, I'm just an attendant in the netherworld."

古文：深愧昨夜一餐，今有少相报。
现代文：深愧昨晚吃了你一顿饭，现在稍有报答。
English: I'm really sorry I ate your meal last night, but now I'm getting some payback.

古文：公为置三幅纸及笔砚来。
现代文：请你给我拿三张纸及笔砚来。
English: Please bring me three pieces of paper and a pen.

古文：牛生与之，此人令牛生远立，自坐树下，袖中抽一卷书，牒之。看数张，即书两行，如此三度讫。
现代文：牛生给了他。这人让牛生远远地站着，自己坐在树下，从袖中取出一卷书来，翻开书页，看几页，就写两行，像这样反复进行了三次，写完了。
English: Cowherd gave it to him. The man asked Cowherd to stand far away, sat down under the tree himself, took a book out of his sleeve, opened the page, read a few pages, and wrote two lines. He repeated this three times and finished writing.

古文：求纸封之，书云第一封，第二封，第三封。
现代文：然后要纸封上它，在上面写上：第一封，第二封，第三封的字样。
English: Then he asked for a piece of paper to seal it and write on it: "First, second, third."

古文：谓牛生曰：公若遇灾难危笃不可免者。即焚香以次开之视。若或可免，即不须开。
现代文：对牛生说：你如要遇到灾难危险非常危急无法解脱时，就烧香，然后按次序打开信看，如果可以免灾，就无需开信。
English: He said to Niu Sheng: If you are about to encounter a disaster and the danger is very critical and cannot be relieved, burn incense, and then open the letter in order. If you can avoid the disaster, you do not need to open the letter.

古文：言讫，行数步不见矣。
现代文：说完，走了几步就不见了。
English: After saying this, he took a few steps and disappeared.

古文：牛生缄置书囊中，不甚信也。
现代文：牛生拿过信默默地放在书袋里，不大相信他的话。
English: Niu Sheng took the letter and silently put it in his book bag, not quite believing his words.

古文：及至京，止客户坊，饥贫甚，绝食。忽忆此书，故开第一封，题云：可于菩提寺门前坐。
现代文：等到了京城，住在客户坊，贫困饥饿得厉害，没有一点吃的，忽然想起那封信，于是打开第一封。上面写着：可于菩提寺门前坐。
English: When I got to the capital, I was living in a client's house, desperately poor and hungry, with nothing to eat. Suddenly I remembered that letter, so I opened the first one. It said: "You can sit in front of the family temple."

古文：自客户坊至菩提寺，可三十余里。
现代文：从客户坊到菩提寺，大约三十多里。
English: It's about 30 miles from the customer service center to the family temple.

古文：饥困，且雨雪，乘驴而往，自辰至鼓声欲绝方至寺门。
现代文：牛生又乏又饿，天又下着雪，就骑着驴往前走。从早晨辰时开始走，直到晚上鼓声将尽时才赶到寺门前。
English: The oxen were tired and hungry, and it was snowing, so they rode on the donkeys. They started out in the morning and didn't reach the temple gate until the evening, when the drums were beating.

古文：坐未定，有一僧自寺内出，叱牛生曰：雨雪如此，君为何人而至此？
现代文：还没等坐稳，有一个僧人从门里出来，喝斥牛生说：下这样大雪，你是什么人来这里？
English: Before he could sit down, a monk came out of the door, shouted at Niu Sheng and said, "With such heavy snowfall, who are you to come here?

古文：若冻死，岂不见累耶？
现代文：如果冻死了。我们岂不被你连累？
English: If we freeze to death, won't you take care of us?

古文：牛生曰：某是举人，至此值夜，略借寺门前一宿，明日自去耳。
现代文：牛生说：我是举人，到这里正好天黑了，姑且借寺门前住一夜，明日自然就离开了。
English: Niu Sheng said, "I am the leader. It just got dark when I got here. Let me borrow the front of the temple for one night, and I will leave tomorrow."

古文：僧曰：不知是秀才，可止贫道院也。
现代文：僧人说：不知你是秀才，可住在贫道院里。
English: The monk said: I don't know if you are a genius, but you can live in a poor monastery.

古文：既入，僧仍为设火具食。会语久之，曰：贤宗晋阳长官，与秀才远近。
现代文：牛生进去了，僧人给他生火、准备饭食，跟他交谈了很久，说：贤宗晋阳长官与秀才关系远近？
English: The cowherd went in, the monk lit a fire for him, prepared a meal, and talked with him for a long time, saying: Is the Xianzong Jinyang prefect close to the scholar?

古文：牛生曰：是叔父也。
现代文：牛生说：那是我叔叔啊！
English: The cow said, "That's my uncle!"

古文：僧乃取晋阳手书，令识之，皆不谬。
现代文：僧人让人拿出晋阳长官的手笔，让他辨认，他都说得分毫不差。
English: The monk asked someone to take out the handwriting of the Jinyang prefect and let him identify it, and he said that the score was not bad.

古文：僧喜曰：晋阳常寄钱三千贯文在此，绝不复来取。某年老，一朝溘至，便无所付，今尽以相与。
现代文：僧人高兴地说：晋阳长官以前曾寄存三千贯文在这，一定不会再来取，我年老了，一旦突然死去，就没有地方交付这笔钱了，现在全把它交给你吧！
English: The monk said happily, "Chief Jin Yang used to deposit three thousand yuan here, and he will never come back to take it. I am old, and if I die suddenly, there will be no place to deposit this money. Now I will give it all to you."

古文：牛生先取将钱千贯，买宅，置车马，纳仆妾，遂为富人。
现代文：牛生先拿出千贯钱买了住宅，办置车马，雇用奴仆，娶妻纳妾，于是成为富户。
English: Niu Sheng first took out thousands of yuan to buy a house, set up a car and horse, hire a servant, marry a wife and concubine, and then became a rich man.

古文：又以求名失路，复开第二封书，题云：西市食店张家楼上坐。
现代文：后来又因为求功名没有门路，于是打开第二封信。上面写着：西市食店张家楼上坐。
English: Later, because there was no way for him to seek fame, he opened the second letter. It said: "Sit upstairs at the West City Restaurant Zhang Jia.

古文：牛生如言，诣张氏，独止于一室，下廉而坐。
现代文：牛生按信中说的找到张家，独自在屋中靠墙边的地方坐下。
English: According to the letter, Niu Sheng found Zhang Jia and sat down alone in the room by the wall.

古文：有数少年上楼来，中有一人白衫，坐定，忽曰：某本只有五百千，令请添至七百千，此外即力不及也。
现代文：有几个年轻人上楼来，其中有一个穿白衣服的坐下了，忽然说：我本只有五百千，如果再向家里要，可以添到七百千，其余的我就力所不及了。
English: Several young men came upstairs. One of them, dressed in white, sat down and suddenly said: "I only have five hundred thousand, and if I ask my family for more, I can get seven hundred thousand. The rest is beyond my power."

古文：一人又曰：进士及第，何惜千缗？
现代文：一个人又说：进士及第，还吝借千缗钱吗？
English: One person also said: Do you still begrudge borrowing thousands of baht even though you have made a lot of money?

古文：牛生知其货及第矣。及出揖之，白衫少年即主司之子。
现代文：牛生从他们的谈话中得知穿白衣服的人的家产与门第，等追到外面向他拱手见礼，才知那人就是省试主考官的儿子。
English: From their conversation, Niu Sheng learned the family background and lineage of the man in white, and only when he chased him outside and bowed to him did he learn that the man was the son of the provincial examiner.

古文：生曰：某以千贯奉郎君，别有二百千，奉诸公酒食之费，不烦他议也。
现代文：牛生说：我把千贯钱送给你，另外二百钱送给诸位作酒食费，其它事就不麻烦你动口舌了。
English: The cowherd said, "I'll give you a thousand crowns, and the other two hundred for your food and drink. You don't have to worry about anything else."

古文：少年许之，果登上第。
现代文：那年轻人答应了他。后来果然考中了头几名。
English: The young man agreed to do so, and later he was able to pass the first few exams.

古文：历任台省，后为河东节度副使。
现代文：历任台省、以后又做了河东李度副使。
English: He held various posts in Taiwan Province, and later became the deputy envoy of Li Du to Hedong Province.

古文：经一年，疾困，遂开第三封，题云：可处置家事。
现代文：又过了一年，牛生病得很重，就打开第三封信上写：可以处理好家事。
English: After another year, when the cow was very ill, he opened the third letter and wrote: I can take care of the housework.

古文：韦齐休，擢进士第，累官至员外郎，为王璠浙西团练副使。
现代文：等他洗完澡，才写完遗书，就死去了。韦齐休韦齐休考取了进士。不断升迁最后做了员外郎。是王璠管辖下的浙西团练副使。
English: After he took a shower, he finished writing his suicide note, and then he died. Wei Qi Xiu Wei Qi Xiu passed the entrance examination and was promoted. He was promoted continuously and finally became a foreign envoy. He was the deputy envoy of the Western Zhejiang Reunions under the jurisdiction of Wang Qi.

古文：太和八年，卒于润州之官舍。
现代文：太和八年，死在润州的官府中。
English: He died in a government office in Runzhou in 1908.

古文：三更后，将小敛，忽于西壁下大声曰：传语娘子，且止哭，当有处分。
现代文：三更后，将要给他穿衣停尸。他忽然站在西墙下大声说：转告我娘子，不要哭，我定有安排处理。
English: He suddenly stood under the Western Wall and said in a loud voice, "Tell my daughter, don't cry, I'll make arrangements."

古文：其妻大惊，仆地不苏。
现代文：他的妻子非常惊惶，倒在地上、昏死过去。
English: His wife was so frightened that she fell to the ground and passed out.

古文：齐休于衾下厉声曰：娘子今为鬼妻，闻鬼语，忽惊悸耶？
现代文：齐休又在被子下面大声说：娘子现在成为鬼妻，听到鬼说话，不要害怕呀。
English: Qi Xiu also said loudly under the quilt: "My daughter has now become a ghost wife. Don't be afraid when you hear the ghost speak."

古文：妻即起曰：非为畏悸，但不合与君遽隔幽明。孤惶无所依怙，不意神识有知，忽通言语，不觉惛绝。
现代文：他的妻子苏醒过来，从地上爬起来说：不是我害怕，只是不忍心与你骤然间分居阴阳两地，我以后的生活将孤苦惶惑没依靠，没想到你魂神有灵，忽能跟我讲话，我不自觉地昏死过去。
English: His wife woke up, got up from the ground and said, "It's not that I'm afraid, it's just that I can't bear to be separated from you all of a sudden. My future life will be lonely, confused and without support. I didn't expect you to have a soul and a spirit and suddenly be able to talk to me. I unconsciously passed out.

古文：诚俟明教，岂敢有违？
现代文：现在我真诚地期待着你的教诲，哪里敢违背你的心愿。
English: Now I sincerely look forward to your teaching, where dare I go against your wishes.

古文：齐休曰：死生之期，涉于真宰；夫妇之道，重在人伦。
现代文：齐休说：生死的期限，是上天决定的，夫妻的情份，主要决定于人间的伦理道德。
English: Qi Xiu said: the time limit for life and death is decided by heaven, and the fate of husband and wife is mainly determined by human ethics.

古文：某与娘子，情义至深，他生亦未相舍。
现代文：我与娘子间情义深重，来生也不会舍弃你。
English: My relationship with my daughter is very deep, and I will not abandon you in the next life.

古文：今某尸骸且在，足宽襟抱。
现代文：现在我的尸骸尚且在，足以使你宽心。
English: Now that my remains are still here, you can rest easy.

古文：家事大小，且须商量。不可空为儿女悲泣，使某幽冥间更忧妻孥也。
现代文：家里大大小小的事，还需商量，不要象小孩子那样白白地悲伤、哭泣，使我在阴司里再为妻儿担忧。
English: We still need to discuss the big and small things at home. Don't grieve and cry in vain like a child, making me worry about my wife and children in the womb.

古文：夜来诸事，并自劳心。总无失脱，可助仆喜。
现代文：今夜以来大大小小的事情，我都亲自用心操劳，到底还是没有疏忽和遗漏，更让我高兴。
English: Since tonight, I have personally been working hard on matters large and small. In the end, there have been no oversights and omissions, which makes me even happier.

古文：妻曰：何也？
现代文：他的妻子说：你说的是什么事？
English: His wife said, "What are you talking about?

古文：齐休曰：昨日湖州庚匕寄买口钱，苍遑之际，不免专心部署。今则一文不欠，亦足为慰。
现代文：齐休说：昨天湖州庚匕托付的人头税钱，仓猝遑急之中，免不了专心去安排布置，现在已一文不欠，也足以宽慰了。
English: Qi Xiu said: The head tax money entrusted to Huzhou Geng Yao yesterday, in the midst of the rush, inevitably concentrated on arranging the layout. Now it owes nothing, which is enough to be relieved.

古文：良久语绝，即各营丧事。
现代文：很长时间齐休不再说话了，家里人都各自办理丧事。
English: For a long time, they stopped talking altogether, and the family members all handled their own funerals.

古文：才曙，复闻呼：适到张清家，近造得三间草堂。前屋舍自足，不烦劳他人，更借下处矣。
现代文：才亮天，又听他大叫：刚才到张清象家，他最近盖了三间草屋，前边的一间就足够了，不必去麻烦别人，再寻找别处下葬。
English: It was just dawn, and I heard him shouting: "I just arrived at Zhang Qingzhang's house. He recently built three straw huts. The one in front is enough. You don't have to bother others and look for another place to be buried."

古文：其夕，张清似梦中忽见齐休曰：我昨日已死，先令买茔三亩地，可速支关布置。
现代文：那天晚上，张清好象在梦中。忽然看见齐休来说：我昨天已死，先让你给买三亩莹地，可以赶快去安排布置。
English: That night, Zhang Qing seemed to be in a dream. Suddenly he saw Qi Xiu and said: I died yesterday, first let you buy three mu of Yingdi, you can quickly go to arrange the layout.

古文：一一分明，张清悉依其命。
现代文：一样一样的都非常清楚。张清都按他的吩咐办了。
English: Everything was very clear. Zhang Qing did everything according to his instructions.

古文：及将归，自择发日。
现代文：等齐休回到家，又自己选择了发丧日期，招呼吩咐作什么事，像平时一样。
English: When they all returned home, they chose the date of the funeral themselves, greeted and ordered what to do, as usual.

古文：呼唤一如常时，婢仆将有私窃，无不发摘，随事捶挞。及至京，便之茔所，张清准拟皆毕。
现代文：奴仆有什么隐情，没有不被他发现又指出来，然后根据情况给以处治的。等到了京城，便下葬到莹地，张清安排处理完毕。
English: There was nothing hidden from the servant that he did not discover and point out, and then deal with it according to the situation. When he arrived in the capital, he was buried in Yingdi, and Zhang Qing's arrangements were completed.

古文：十数日，向三更，忽呼其下曰：速起，报堂前，萧三郎来相看。
现代文：又过了十多天，快到三更时候，忽然听到齐休在下面大声招呼他的下人说：快起来，告诉前堂的人，萧三郎来看我！
English: More than ten days passed, and it was almost 3:00 a.m. when I suddenly heard Qi Xiu calling out to his subordinates: "Hurry up, tell the people in the vestibule that Xiaosaburo is here to see me!"

古文：可随事具食，款待如法，妨他忙也。
现代文：可根据情况准备饭食。象从前一样款待，以防他着急。
English: Meals can be prepared according to the situation. Treat as before, in case he is in a hurry.

古文：二人语，历历可听。
现代文：两个人说话，听得清清楚楚。
English: Two people are talking. I can hear them clearly.

古文：萧三郎者，即职方郎中萧彻。
现代文：萧三郎，就是职方郎中萧彻。
English: Shosaburo, that is, Shouche, the middle son of a bureaucrat.

古文：是日卒于兴化里，其夕遂来。俄闻萧呼叹曰：死生之理，仆不敢恨。但有异者，仆数日前。因至少陵别墅，偶题一首诗。今思之，乃是生作鬼诗。
现代文：这一天死在兴化里，当天晚上就来了，一会听到萧三郎叹息说：死生的理数，我不敢抱怨，只是使我感到奇怪的是，我几天以前，到少陵别墅去，偶尔写了一首诗，现在想起来，竟是活人写鬼诗。
English: He died in Xinghua on the same day and came back that evening. I heard Xiao Saburo sigh and say, "The law of life and death. I don't dare to complain, but what made me feel strange was that I went to Shaoling Villa a few days ago and occasionally wrote a poem. Now that I think about it, it's actually a living person writing a ghost poem."

古文：因吟曰：新拘茅斋野涧东，松楸交影足悲风。
现代文：于是吟诵道：新拘茅斋野涧东，松楸交影足悲风。
English: Therefore, they chanted the following: Xinzheng Mao, Saino, Shandong, Songcheng, and Xingfei are the winds of sorrow.

古文：人间岁月如流水，何事频行此路中。
现代文：人间岁月如流水，何事频行此路中。
English: Human years are like flowing water, and things often happen along the way.

古文：齐休亦悲咤曰：足下此诗，盖是自识。
现代文：齐休也悲叹惊诧地说：先生的诗，是预知后事的先兆啊。
English: Qi Xiu also lamented and said in surprise: "The poem of the gentleman is a harbinger of foreknowledge.

古文：仆生前忝有科名，粗亦为人所知。死未数日，便有一无名小鬼赠一篇，殊为著钝。然虽细思之，已是落他芜境。
现代文：我生前小有科第和名气，死后没过几天，就有一个无名小鬼赠我一篇诗，我的和诗虽然非常拙劣然而是仔细想来，也是落入他荒蒙芜境之中。
English: When I was alive, I had a little fame and notoriety. A few days after my death, a nameless little ghost gave me a poem. My poem, although very poor, but after careful consideration, also fell into his desolate plight.

古文：乃咏曰：涧水溅溅流不绝，芳草绵绵野花发。
现代文：于是吟道：涧水溅溅流不绝，芳草绵绵野花发。
English: Therefore, the chant goes: the water splashes and splashes endlessly, and the grasses are covered with wildflowers.

古文：自去自来人不知，黄昏惟有青山月。
现代文：自去自来人不知，黄昏惟有青山月。
English: I don't know if anyone has been here since I left, but in the evening there is nothing but the blue mountain moon.

古文：萧亦叹羡之曰：韦四公死已多时，犹不甘此事。
现代文：萧三郎赞叹而羡慕地说道：韦四公死已多时，还不放松吟诗作赋这类事。
English: Xiao Saburo said with admiration and envy: Wei Si Gong has been dead for a long time, but he still does not relax to chant poems and do such things.

古文：仆乃适来人也，遽为游岱之魂，何以堪处？
现代文：我是刚刚来的，马上成为泰山的游魂，怎能忍受得了。
English: I've just arrived, and I immediately become the wandering soul of Tarzan. How can I bear it?

古文：即闻相别而去。
现代文：接着听到二人相别而去。
English: The pair are then heard walking away from each other.

古文：又数日，亭午间，呼曰：裴二十一郎来慰，可具食，我自迎去。
现代文：又过了几天，正午时候，又听到齐休喊：裴二十一郎来看我，可准备酒饭，我亲自去迎他。
English: A few days later, at noon, I heard Qi Xiu shouting again: "Pei Twenty-one is coming to see me, you can prepare the food and drink, I will go to meet him in person."

古文：其日，裴氏昆季果来。至启夏门外，瘁然神耸，又素闻其事，遂不敢行吊而回。
现代文：那一天，裴氏兄弟果然来了，到了启夏门外，突然悲伤恐惧，加之平素又听说有关齐休的事。于是不敢来悼念中途而回。
English: On that day, the Pei brothers did indeed come, and when they arrived outside the gate at the beginning of the summer, they were suddenly sad and afraid, and in addition, they had heard about the retirement. So they did not dare to come to mourn and return halfway.

古文：裴即长安县令，名观，齐休之妻兄也。
现代文：裴就是长安县令，名叫观，是齐休妻子的哥哥。
English: Pei is the Chang'an County magistrate, named Guan, who is the elder brother of Qi Xiu's wife.

古文：其部曲子弟，动即罪责，不堪其惧。
现代文：他的府衙里的子弟，动辄受到责罚，受不了他的淫威，到现在也还没有终止。
English: His sons in the palace were often punished, unable to bear his domineering influence, and this has not yet ended.

古文：及今未已，不知竟如之何。
现代文：不知裴公现在怎么样。
English: I don't know how Baigong is now.

