古文：潘尊师李贺张及甫郑册陈惠虚温京兆
现代文：潘尊师李贺张及甫郑册陈惠虚温京兆
English: Pan Zongshi Li He Zhang and Fu Zhengcang Chen Huihuan Jingzhao

古文：潘尊师
现代文：潘尊师
English: Pan Tsung-shih

古文：嵩山道士潘尊师名法正，盖高道者也。
现代文：嵩山道士潘尊师，名字叫法正，是一个道术高超的人。
English: Songshan Daoist Pan Zongshi, whose name is Fa Zheng, is a person who is highly skilled in Daoism.

古文：唐开元中，谓弟子司马炼师曰： 陶弘景为嵩山伯，于今百年矣。
现代文：唐开元年间，潘尊师对第子司马炼师说： 陶弘景是嵩山的首领，到现在一百年了。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Pan Zongshi said to his eldest son Sima Lingshi: "Tao Hongjing has been the leader of Songshan for a hundred years.

古文：顷自上帝求替，帝令举所知以代。
现代文：不久前自己向天帝请求派别人替换他。天帝让他推荐他所知道的合适的人来代替他。
English: Not long ago, he asked God to send someone else to replace him. God asked him to recommend the right person he knew to replace him.

古文：弘景举余，文籍已定，吾行不得久住人间矣。 
现代文：陶弘景推荐了我，名册已经定下来了。我将不能够久住人间了。
English: Tao Hongjing recommended me, and the roster has been set. I won't be able to stay on earth for long.

古文：不数日，乃尸解而去。
现代文：不几天，就尸体分解离开人世了。 
English: Within a few days, the body decomposed and died.

古文：其后登封县嵩阳观西，有龙湫，居人张辿者，以阴器于湫上洗濯，俄为人所摄。行可数里，至一甲第，门前悉是群龙。
现代文：那以后，在登封县嵩阳观西边，有一个水池，名叫 龙湫 附近有一个居民张辿因为在龙湫上洗濯阴器，顷刻被人摄去，走了大约几里，到一处贵显的宅第，门前全是群龙。
English: After that, on the west side of Songyangyuan, Dengfeng County, there is a pond called Longyu. A resident near Zhang Tui, because he was washing his penis on Longyu, was suddenly photographed. He walked about a few miles to a Guixian residence, and there were dragons all in front of the door.

古文：入门十余步，有大厅事，见法正当厅而坐。
现代文：进门十多步，有一个大厅堂，看见法正当厅坐着，手拿着丹砂红笔整理文书。
English: After more than ten steps into the door, there is a hall hall, and I saw the Dharma Hall sitting, holding a red sandpaper pen to sort out the documents.

古文：手持朱笔理书，问辿曰： 汝是观侧人，亦识我否？ 曰： 识，是潘尊师。 
现代文：他问张辿说： 你是观旁边的人，也认识我吗？ 张辿说： 认识，是潘尊师。 
English: He asked Zhang Cui, "Are you the person next to Guan, do you also know me?" Zhang Cui said, "Yes, I know Pan Zongru."

古文：法正问辿： 何以污群龙室？ 
现代文：法正问张辿说： 你因为什么玷污群龙室？ 
English: Fa Zheng asked Zhang Zui, "Why did you defile the Dragon's Den?"

古文：辿载拜谢罪。
现代文：张辿再三揖拜表示谢罪。
English: Zhang Qi repeatedly prostrated himself to express his gratitude.

古文：又问： 汝识司马道士否？ 
现代文：法正又问张辿： 你认识司马道士不？ 
English: Fa Zheng also asked Zhang Qi: Do you know Sima Taoist?

古文：辿曰： 识之。 
现代文：张辿说： 认识他。 
English: Zhang Trai said: Get to know him.

古文：法正云： 今放汝还。 
现代文：法正说： 现在放你回去。 
English: Fa Zheng said: Now let you go back.

古文：遂持几上白羽扇，谓辿曰： 为我寄司马道士，何不来而恋世间乐耶？ 
现代文：于是拿起几上的白羽扇，对张辿说： 替我寄给司马道士，问他为什么不来，却留恋人间的乐趣。 
English: So he picked up a few white feather fans and said to Zhang Qi: "Send them to Sima Taoist for me. Ask him why he doesn't come, but misses the fun of the human world."

古文：使人送辿出水上，辿见其尸卧在岸上，心恶之，奄然如梦，遂活。
现代文：法正派人把张辿送出水面。张辿看见他的尸体卧在岸的，心里厌恶他。觉得象梦一样，于是就活了。
English: Fa Zheng sent someone to carry Zhang Trai out of the water. When Zhang Trai saw his corpse lying on the shore, his heart loathed him. It felt like a dream, so he survived.

古文：司马道士见羽扇，悲涕曰： 此吾师平素所执，亡时以置棺中；今君持来，明吾师见在不虚也。 
现代文：司马道看见羽扇，悲涕说： 这是我师平常手里拿的，死的时候把它放在棺中了，现在你把它拿来，证明我师现在还在，不是虚假的。 
English: Sima Dao saw the feather fan and said sadly, "This is what my teacher used to hold in his hand. When he died, he put it in the coffin. Now you should bring it to prove that my teacher is still alive and is not a fake."

古文：乃深入山，数年而卒。
现代文：从此以后，司马道士就进入深山，几年后死了。
English: From then on, Sima Taoist went deep into the mountains and died a few years later.

古文：李贺
现代文：李贺
English: Li He

古文：陇西李贺字长吉，唐郑王之孙。
现代文：陇西李贺，表字长吉，是唐朝郑王的孙子。
English: Li He of Shaanxi Province, also known as Changji, was the grandson of King Zheng of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：稚而能文，尤善乐府词句，意新语丽。
现代文：李贺绝顶聪明，幼小的时候就能写文章。尤其善长于乐府诗词。他的乐府诗词，内容新颖，语言华丽。
English: Li He was extremely clever and could write articles when he was very young. He was especially good at Lefu poetry. The content of his Lefu poetry was novel and the language was gorgeous.

古文：当时工于词者，莫敢与贺齿，由是名闻天下。
现代文：当时擅于诗词的人，没有敢和李贺并列相比的，因此，李贺闻名全国。
English: At that time, no one who was good at poetry dared to be compared with Li He. Therefore, Li He was famous throughout the country.

古文：以父名晋肃。子故不得举进士。
现代文：因为父亲名字晋肃，儿子因此不能考举进士。
English: Because the father's name is Shinshu, the son cannot enter the examination as a scholar.

古文：卒于太常官，年二十四。
现代文：死于太常官，年龄只有二十四岁。
English: He was only twenty-four years old when he died.

古文：其先夫人郑氏，念其子深，及贺卒，夫人哀不自解。
现代文：他的先夫人郑氏，非常惦念他的儿子，等到李贺死了，夫人非常悲伤，自己不能排解。
English: His first wife, Zheng, missed his son very much. When Li He died, his wife was very sad and couldn't deal with it.

古文：一夕梦贺来，如平生时，白夫人曰： 某幸得为夫人子，而夫人念某且深，故从小奉亲命，能诗书，为文章，所以然者，非止求一位而自饰也；且欲大门族，上报夫人恩。
现代文：一天晚上，梦见李贺来了，象平常活着的时候一样。告诉夫人说： 我很幸运能够成为夫人的儿子，夫人十分惦念我。所以从小遵从父母的命令，能够读书写诗作文章。所以这样，不只是为了求得一个官位来自我修饰，并且要满足大家族的愿望，上报夫人的恩惠。
English: One night, he dreamed that Li He came, as he usually did when he was alive. He told his wife: "I am very lucky to be my wife's son. My wife misses me very much. Therefore, I have obeyed my parents' orders since I was a child, and I can read, write poems and articles. Therefore, not only in order to obtain an official position to beautify myself, but also to meet the wishes of a large family, I will report my wife's favor.

古文：岂期一日死，不得奉晨夕之养，得非天哉！
现代文：哪里料到一天死去，不能够奉陪双亲，晨夕供养呢？岂不是天命吗？
English: How can you expect to die one day and not be able to accompany your parents and provide for them in the morning and evening? Isn't it fate?

古文：然某虽死，非死也，乃上帝命。 
现代文：但是，我虽然死了，其实不是死，是天帝的命令。 
English: However, although I am dead, it is not actually death, but an order from the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：夫人讯其事。
现代文：夫人讯问是怎么回事。
English: What happened to your wife's interrogation?

古文：贺曰： 上帝神仙之居也，近者迁都于月圃，构新宫，命曰 白瑶 ，以某荣于词，故召某与文士数辈，共为新宫记。
现代文：李贺说。 天帝神仙的住处，最近迁都到月圃，构造新的宫殿，命名叫作 白瑶 。因为我辞藻华丽、丰富，所以召见我和文士多人。共同作《新宫记》。
English: Li He said, "The residence of the heavenly emperors and immortals has recently moved to the Moon Garden to build a new palace, named the White Palace. Because my words are gorgeous and rich, I invited myself and many scribes to jointly write "The New Palace."

古文：帝又作凝虚殿，使某辈篡乐章。
现代文：天帝又作凝虚殿，派我们编纂大型套曲。
English: The Heavenly Emperor sent us to compile a large-scale suite of music.

古文：今为神仙中人，甚乐，愿夫人无以为念。 
现代文：现在我是神仙中人，很快乐，希望夫人不要为我惦念不已。 
English: Now I'm in heaven, I'm very happy, I hope my wife doesn't miss me.

古文：既而告去。
现代文：说完了，就告辞离开了。
English: When he had finished, he said his farewells and left.

古文：夫人寤，甚异其梦。
现代文：夫人醒过来，很奇怪她做的梦。
English: The lady woke up, very strange dreams she had.

古文：自是哀少解。
现代文：从这以后，悲伤稍有排解。
English: Since then, the grief has eased slightly.

古文：张及甫
现代文：张及甫
English: Zhang Jifu

古文：唐元和中，青州属县，有张及甫、陈幼霞同居为学。
现代文：唐朝元和年间，青州的属县，有张及甫和陈幼霞住在一起做学问。
English: During the first and second years of the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Yifu and Chen Yuxia lived and studied together in a county belonging to Qingzhou.

古文：一夜俱梦至一处，见道士数人，令及甫等书碑，题云： 苍龙溪主欧阳某撰太皇真诀。 
现代文：一天夜里都梦见到一个地方，看见有道士几个人，让张及甫等写碑文。题云： 苍龙溪主欧阳某撰太皇真诀。 
English: One night, he dreamed of a place where he saw several Taoists, and asked Zhang and Fu to write an inscription.

古文：字作篆文，稍异于常。
现代文：字是作的篆文，稍微有些不同于平常。
English: The characters are made of rhyming couplets, slightly different from the usual.

古文：及甫等记得四句云云： 昔乘鱼车，今履瑞云。
现代文：张及甫等人记得有四句说： 过去乘坐鱼车，现在脚踩瑞云。
English: Zhang Jifu and others remember four sayings: In the past, I rode a fish cart, now I walk on the foot of Rui Yun.

古文：躅空仰途，绮错轮囷。 
现代文：足迹在空中抬头看道路，罗绮交错屈曲高大。 
English: Footprints in the air, looking up at the road, rumbles, twists and turns, tall.

古文：后题云： 五云书阁吏陈幼霞、张及甫。 
现代文：后边题云： 五云书阁吏陈幼霞、张及甫。
English: Back cover: Wuyun Shukou officials Chen Yuxia and Zhang Jifu.

古文：至晓，二人共言，悉同。
现代文：到早晨，二人共同说此事，全都相同。
English: By morning, the two of them were talking about it together, all the same.

古文：郑册
现代文：郑册
English: Zhengcang

古文：温州刺史郑册，好黄老之术，常密为之。
现代文：温州刺史郑册，喜好黄老的法术，经常秘密地作这种法术。
English: Wenzhou conjurer Zheng Shuang, who likes the magic of Huanglao, often performs this magic in secret.

古文：因疾，自见女仙三百余人。云： 迎公。 
现代文：于是得病了，他自己看见有三百多女仙，都说迎接郑公。
English: As a result, he fell ill. He saw more than three hundred nymphs, all of whom said that they would welcome Zheng Gong.

古文：乃命设馔，焚香礼拜。
现代文：郑册就命令摆设食物，焚香大礼参拜。
English: Zheng Zhan ordered the food to be set out and the incense to be burned.

古文：又邀兄冉，同于空中礼拜。
现代文：又邀请他的兄长郑冉，一同向空中大礼参拜。
English: He also invited his elder brother, Zheng Ran, to join him in paying homage to the great dragon in the sky.

古文：少顷，命烛五炬引。
现代文：过了一会儿，又命令点燃五个火把引路。
English: After a while, he gave the order to light five torches to guide the way.

古文：兄冉与左右人皆无所见。
现代文：他的兄长郑冉和他手下的人都什么也没看见。
English: His older brother Zheng Ran and his men saw nothing.

古文：明日天明。又阳官来催曰： 员外禄运见终，今请速登驾。 
现代文：第二天，天亮了，郑册又看见阳官来催促说： 员外的禄运已经没有了，现在请员外快一点上车。 
English: The next day, at dawn, Zheng Zhan again saw a young officer coming to urge him, saying, "There is no longer any lottery for non-members. Now, please get on the train as soon as possible."

古文：又命酒果祭之，云： 员外授职，六月朔视事，至午时当奉迎。 
现代文：郑册又命令用酒和果品祭祀，还说： 员外受职，六月初一就职治事，到午时应当事奉迎接。 
English: Zheng Zhuang also ordered the use of wine and fruit for the sacrifice, and said: "If you are assigned outside, you will take office on the first day of June, and you should serve and greet at noon."

古文：先是，公与天台道士金柔为方外之友。
现代文：在这之前，郑册和天台山道士金柔成为世外的朋友。
English: Prior to this, Zheng Zhuang and Tiantai Mountain Taoist Jin Rong became friends.

古文：至其日食时，造省公。
现代文：到那天上午八九点钟，到郑册那去看他。
English: At eight or nine o'clock that morning, I went to see him at Zhengzhuang.

古文：公说前事。即与柔共入净堂中礼拜。
现代文：郑册述说了以前的事，之后就和金柔一起进入净堂中大礼参拜。
English: Zheng Zhan recounted the previous events, after which he and Jin Rong entered the purification hall together to attend the grand ceremony.

古文：又曰： 受牒身一道。 
现代文：又说： 授予凭证公文一道。 
English: He also said: The awarding of the certificate should be accompanied by an official document.

古文：公空中引手接之。又自开封，以右手点笔空押之，自书六字。谓使者曰： 以有前约，的不逾时。 
现代文：郑册伸出手去向空中接，然后又自己打开，用右手点笔在空中签字画押，自己写了六个字，对使者说： 因为有前约，确实不能超过时辰。 
English: Zheng Shuang stretched out his hand to touch the bell in the air, then opened it again himself, signed and stamped it in the air with a right-hand stylus, wrote six words himself, and said to the messenger: Because there is a previous agreement, it really can't exceed an hour.

古文：便言时至，揖金柔向按，不令闭却四门。
现代文：说完就说时辰到了，揖请金柔向着各方巡视，不让关闭四门。
English: After saying that, he said that the time had come, and asked Jin Rong to inspect all parties and not allow the four doors to be closed.

古文：又催家人阿鹿下饭。先令作蒸饼。犹热。
现代文：又催家人阿鹿做饭，先让作蒸饼，还热。
English: He also urged his family, the Aka family, to cook the steamed cake first. It was still hot.

古文：唯六七牒脯及酒而已。
现代文：只有六七碟干肉、干果和酒而已。
English: There were only six or seven plates of dried meat, dried fruit and wine.

古文：遣兄冉出外。家人排床七只。
现代文：让他的兄长郑冉到外面去，让家人排摆七张床。
English: Let his elder brother Zheng Ran go outside and let the family line up seven beds.

古文：云： 六押衙来迎矣。 
现代文：并说： 六押衙来迎接了。 
English: And he said, "The six overseers have come to meet us."

古文：公命坐，如再三辞让之状。
现代文：郑册让坐，象再三推辞谦让的样子。
English: Zheng Zhan gave up his seat, as if he repeatedly refused to give in.

古文：公跪拜再三，便低头不起。
现代文：郑册再三跪拜，之后就低下头去再不抬起来了。
English: Zheng Zhan repeatedly kneeled, and then bowed his head and did not raise it again.

古文：家人走报兄冉及室人。
现代文：家人跑着去报告他的兄长郑冉和家里人。
English: Family members ran to report his older brother, Zheng Ran, and his family.

古文：少时而逝，形体柔软，颜色不改。
现代文：不长时间就死了，但身体柔软，脸色不改。
English: He died not long after, but his body was soft and his face unchanged.

古文：按《真诰》云，其有阴德及好道信仙者，此例品格盖多。
现代文：按照《真诰》上说，那些有阴德和好道信仙的人，这类情况很多。
English: According to "Zhenyao," there are many such cases for those who have yin and yang virtues and believe in immortals.

古文：睹郑公潜化之迹，虚无之位，其昭昭乎。
现代文：看郑册公潜化的踪迹，虚无的方位，那不是非常的明显吗？
English: Looking at Zheng Zhaogong's traces of submersion, the direction of nothingness, isn't that very obvious?

古文：陈惠虚
现代文：陈惠虚
English: Chen Huihu

古文：陈惠虚者，江东人也。
现代文：陈惠虚，是江东人。
English: Chen Huihu is from the eastern Jiangsu Province.

古文：为僧，居天台国清寺。
现代文：做僧人，居住在天台山国清寺。
English: As a monk, he lives in the Tiantai Mountain Kokusei Temple.

古文：曾与同侣游山，戏过石桥。
现代文：曾经和同伴游山，闹着要过石桥。
English: Once I was hiking in the mountains with a companion, and we were arguing about crossing a stone bridge.

古文：水峻苔滑，悬流万仞，下不见底。
现代文：石桥水峻苔滑，悬流万仞，深不见底。
English: The water of the stone bridge is steep and slippery with moss, the overflowing current is endless, and the depth is bottomless.

古文：众皆股栗不行，惠虚独超然而过。
现代文：众人看见都吓得大腿打颤，没人敢走。
English: Everyone was so scared that their legs were shaking, and no one dared to leave.

古文：径上石壁，至夕不回，群侣皆舍去。
现代文：独有惠虚很轻松地就过去了，取道上了石壁，到晚上也没有回来，和他一起游山的那些同伴只好舍弃他离去了。
English: Only Hui Hu passed by very easily, took the road to the stone wall, and did not come back in the evening. The companions who were hiking with him had to abandon him and leave.

古文：惠虚至石壁外，微有小径，稍稍平阔。遂及宫阙。
现代文：陈惠虚到石壁外面，发现有不太明显的小路，往前走逐渐地平坦和宽阔，终于到了宫殿处。
English: Chen Huihu went outside the stone wall and found a not-so-obvious path. Walking forward, it gradually became flat and wide, and finally reached the palace.

古文：花卉万丛，不可目识。台阁连云十里许。
现代文：那里花卉众多，繁杂，数不胜数；楼台殿阁连绵不断，大约有十多里。
English: The flowers there are numerous, intricate and innumerable; there is a continuous row of pavilions stretching for more than ten miles.

古文：见其门题额曰会真府，左门额曰金庭宫，右额曰桐柏，三门相向鼎峙，皆有金楼玉窗，高百丈。
现代文：陈惠虚看见那正门上题写的牌匾叫作； 会真府 。左门的牌匾叫做： 金庭宫 。右门的牌匾上叫做： 桐柏 。三门相向如鼎足并峙，都有金漆门楼洁白窗子，高百余丈。
English: Chen Hui-hu saw that the plaques inscribed on the main gate were called "He Zhenfu." The plaques on the left gate were called "Jinting Palace." The plaques on the right gate were called "Tongbai." The three gates faced each other as if they were standing side by side, and all had gold-lacquered gate towers with pure white windows, more than a hundred meters high.

古文：入其右内之西，又一高楼，黄门，题曰右弼宫，周顾数千间，屈曲相通。
现代文：进入那右门，门内的西边，又有一座高楼，黄门，题写的牌匾叫做： 右弼宫 。
English: Entering the right gate, on the west side of the gate, there is another tall building, the Yellow Gate, inscribed with a plaque called: Zuoying Palace.

古文：瑶阶玉陛，流渠激水，处处华丽。殆欲忘归。而了无人迹。
现代文：向周围看了看，有房子几千间，由弯弯曲曲的甬道相连，台阶都是由玉石砌成的，水道里清流激湍，处处美丽而有光彩，几乎就要让人流连忘返了，但是，没有一点人的踪迹。
English: I looked around, there were thousands of houses, connected by winding roads, the steps were made of jade, the water was crystal clear, everywhere was beautiful and glorious, it was almost forgotten, but there was no trace of people.

古文：又入一院，见青童五六人，相顾笑语而去。
现代文：又进了一座院子，看见有五六个青衣童子，相互看了看，边笑边说就离开了。
English: He entered another courtyard, saw five or six boys in blue, looked at each other, smiled and left.

古文：再三问之。应曰： 汝问张老。 
现代文：陈惠虚再三问他们，他们答应说： 你去问张老。 
English: Chen Hui-hu repeatedly asked them, and they promised: "Go and ask Zhang Lao."

古文：须臾回顾，见一叟挟杖持花而来。
现代文：一会儿，陈惠虚回过头来看，看见一个老头儿挟着拐杖拿着花走过来，这就是青衣童子说的张老。
English: After a while, Chen Huixu looked back and saw an old man holding a crutch and flowers coming over. This is what the boy in blue called Zhang Lao.

古文：讶曰： 汝凡俗人，何忽至此？ 
现代文：张老惊讶地说： 你是凡间俗人，怎么忽然到这里来了？ 
English: Zhang Lao said in surprise, "You are an ordinary layman, how did you suddenly come here?

古文：惠虚曰： 常闻过石桥即有罗汉寺，人世时闻钟声。故来寻访，干僧幸会，得至此境。不知罗汉何在？ 
现代文：陈惠虚说： 经常听说过了石桥就有罗汉寺，在人世时常听到这里的钟声，所以来寻访，冒犯僧人，有幸相会，能够到这地方来，不知道罗汉在什么地方？ 
English: Chen Huixu said: I have often heard that there is a Luohan Temple on the stone bridge, and I often heard the bells here when I was alive, so I came to visit, offend the monks, I was lucky to meet, I was able to come to this place, I don't know where Luohan is?

古文：张老曰： 此真仙之福庭，天帝之下府，号曰金庭不死之乡，养真之灵境。
现代文：张老说： 这地方是真仙的幸福宫庭，天帝的下方府第，号称 金庭不死之乡 。
English: Zhang Lao said: This place is the happiness palace of the true immortals, the emperor's residence, known as the hometown of the immortals.

古文：周回百六十里。
现代文：是修养本性的好地方，周围一百六十里。
English: It's a good place to cultivate one's nature, and it's 160 miles away.

古文：神仙右弼桐柏上真王君主之。列仙三千人，仙王力士，天童玉女。各万人。为小都会之所。
现代文：神仙右弼桐柏上真王君主宰这地方，这里列仙有三千人，仙王力士、童男玉女，各有一万人，是小都市的处所。
English: This place is ruled by the divine right-hand king Tongbai Shangzheng. There are three thousand immortals here, and ten thousand each for the king of immortals, the king of warriors, and the king of boys and girls. It is the site of a small city.

古文：太上一年三降此宫，校定天下学道之人功行品第。
现代文：太上在一年中三次降临此宫，校定全天下学道的人的功德品行的等级。
English: Three times a year, the Grand Empress Dowager descends to this palace to calibrate the levels of merit and virtue of people who study the Tao throughout the world.

古文：神仙所都，非罗汉之所也。
现代文：这里是神仙的住所，不是罗汉的住所。
English: This is the abode of the immortals, not the abode of Rohan.

古文：王君者，周灵王之子。瑶丘先生之弟子。位为上真矣。 
现代文：王君，是周灵王的儿子，瑶丘先生的弟子，仙位是 上真 了。 
English: Wang Jun is the son of King Zhou Ling and a disciple of Mr. Zouqiu. He is a true sage.

古文：惠虚曰： 神仙可学之否？ 
现代文：陈惠虚说： 神仙可以学吗？ 
English: Chen Huihu said: Can immortals learn magic?

古文：张老曰： 积功累德，肉身升天，在于立志坚久耳。汝得见此福庭，亦是有可学之望也。 
现代文：张老说： 积累功德，肉身升天，在于志向坚定持久罢了，你能够见到这幸福宫庭，也是有可以学的希望的。 
English: Zhang Lao said, "Accumulating merits and ascending to heaven in the flesh is to have a firm and lasting aspiration. If you can see this palace of happiness, there is also hope that you can learn from it."

古文：又问曰： 学仙以何门而入？ 
现代文：陈惠虚又问说： 学仙从什么地方入门？ 
English: Chen Huihu also asked: Where does a scholar start?

古文：张老曰： 内以保神炼气，外以服饵丹华，变化为仙，神丹之力也。
现代文：张老说； 内靠保神炼气，外靠服吃丹药。变化成仙，是神丹的力量。
English: Zhang Lao said: Innerly rely on Baoshen to refine qi, and externally rely on clothing to eat Dan medicine. Change into immortality is the power of Shen Dan.

古文：汝不可久住。上真适游东海，骑卫若还，恐有咨责。 
现代文：你不可以在这长时间停留，上真恰好游东海，假如车骑卫队回来，上真遇见了，恐怕要有询问责备的。 
English: You can't stay here for such a long time. Shang Zhen just happened to be swimming in the East China Sea. If the cavalry and horse guards come back and meet Shang Zhen, I'm afraid there will be questions and reproaches.

古文：因引之使出门，行十余步，已在国清矣。
现代文：说完，就领着他，让他出门。走了十多步，已经在国清寺了。
English: Having said that, he led him out and let him go. After walking more than ten steps, he was already at Kokusei-ji Temple.

古文：惠虚自此慕道，好丹石，虽衣弊履穿，不以为陋。
现代文：陈惠虚从这以后敬仰道术，爱好丹砂，虽然衣服损坏，鞋也破漏，但他不把这看做丑。
English: From then on, Chen Hui-hu admired Taoism and loved Dansha. Although his clothes were damaged and his shoes were leaking, he didn't see it as ugly.

古文：闻有炉火方术之士，不远而诣之。丹石所费，固亦多矣。
现代文：只要听说有炉火炼丹采药的道士，就不怕路远，到他那去，丹砂的费用，那也就多了。
English: As long as a Taoist hears that there is a fire to refine and collect Dansha, he will not be afraid of the long journey. If you go to him, the cost of Dansha will be more.

古文：晚居终南山捧日寺。年渐衰老，其心愈切，寝疾月余，羸惫且甚。
现代文：晚年居住终南山捧日寺，年龄渐大身体也衰老了，但他的心情更迫切了。
English: In his later years, he lived in Nanshan Hupri Temple. As he grew older, his body also aged, but his mood became more urgent.

古文：一旦暴雨后，有老叟负药囊入寺，大呼曰： 卖大还丹！ 
现代文：他有病卧床一个多月，瘦弱疲惫更厉害了。一天，暴雨之后，有一个老头儿背着药囊进到寺里来，大声呼叫说： 卖大还丹！ 
English: He had been sick in bed for more than a month, and his weakness and exhaustion were getting worse. One day, after a rainstorm, an old man came into the temple with a medicine bag on his back and called out loudly, "Sell it!

古文：绕廊数回。
现代文：绕着走廊转了几回。
English: He circled the corridor several times.

古文：众僧皆笑之，乃指病僧惠虚之门，谓老叟曰： 此叟颇好还丹，售之可也。 
现代文：众和尚都笑他，就指着有病的和尚陈惠虚的门，对老头儿说： 这个老头儿很爱好还丹，可以卖给他。 
English: All the monks laughed at him, so he pointed to the door of the sick monk Chen Hui-hu, and said to the old man, "This old man likes to pay back the money, you can sell it to him."

古文：老叟欣然诣之。
现代文：卖药的老头儿高兴地到陈惠虚那去。
English: The old man selling medicine happily went to Chen Huixu.

古文：惠虚曰： 还丹知是灵药，一剂几钱？ 
现代文：陈惠虚说： 还丹，我知道这是好药，一剂多少钱？ 
English: Chen Huihu said: I know that this is a good medicine. How much is one dose?

古文：叟曰： 随力可致耳。 
现代文：老头儿说： 随你的能力办吧，表示一下就可以了。 
English: The old man said, "Do it to the best of your ability.

古文：惠虚曰： 老病，沉困床枕月余。昨僧次到，自行不得，托邻僧代斋。得貥钱少许，可致药否？ 
现代文：陈惠虚说： 我老了，又有病，在床上困了一个多月，昨天僧次到了，我自己行动不得，托邻近的和尚代斋，得到一点儿衬钱，可以买到药吗？ 
English: Chen Hui-hu said, "I am old and sick, and have been stuck in bed for more than a month. Yesterday, the monk arrived for the third time, and I couldn't move myself. I asked a nearby monk to do the fasting for me, and got a little lining money. Can I buy medicine?"

古文：叟取其钱，而留药数丸，教其所服之法。
现代文：老头儿拿了他的钱，就留下了几丸药，教给他服用的方法。
English: The old man took his money and left him a few pills, instructing him how to take them.

古文：惠虚便吞之。老叟乃去。
现代文：陈惠虚就把药吞服了，老头儿才离开。
English: Chen Huihu swallowed the medicine and the old man left.

古文：众僧相率来问。言已买得还丹，吞服之矣。
现代文：众和尚一个接着一个来问，陈惠虚说已经买了还丹，把它吞服下去了。
English: The monks asked one after another. Chen Hui-hu said that he had bought the yakitori and swallowed it.

古文：顷间，久疾都愈，遥止众僧曰： 勿前，觉有臭，吾疾愈矣，但要新衣一两事耳。 
现代文：一会儿，很长时间的病都好了。陈惠虚在远处阻止众和尚说： 不要往前来，觉得有臭味，我的病好了，但是，要用一二件新的衣服。 
English: In a moment, her long-term illness was cured. Chen Hui-hue stopped the monks from afar and said, "Don't come forward, you smell bad. My illness is cured, but I need to use one or two new clothes."

古文：跳身起床，势若飞跃。众惊叹之。有新衣与之者，取而着焉。忽飞殿上，从容久之，挥手相别，冉冉升天而去。
现代文：说完，跳身起床，架势好像飞跃，众和尚对他无不惊讶赞叹，有给他新衣服的，他拿过来穿上，忽然飞到殿堂的上面，但是，举止行动很舒缓，挥手向众和尚告别，冉冉升天离开。
English: Having said this, he jumped out of bed with a gesture that seemed to be a leap. The monks were all amazed and admired him. When he was given new clothes, he took them and put them on, and suddenly flew to the top of the temple. However, his movements were very gentle. He waved goodbye to the monks and left ascending to heaven.

古文：时大中十二年戊寅岁。是年归桐柏观，与道流话得道之由。
现代文：当时是唐朝大中十二年戊寅年，这年回桐柏观，和道士说获得道术的缘由。
English: At that time, it was the 12th year of the middle school of the Tang Dynasty, the year of Wu Yin. This year, he went back to Tongbai Guan and talked to the Taoist about the reason for acquiring Taoism.

古文：云： 今在桐柏宫中，卖药老叟，将是张老耳。 
现代文：还说： 现在桐柏宫中，卖药的老头儿，就是张老呀！ 
English: He also said, "Nowadays, in Tongbai Palace, the old man who sells medicine is Zhang Laotong!"

古文：言讫隐去。
现代文：说完，隐去了。
English: With that, he disappeared.

古文：温京兆
现代文：温京兆
English: Wen Jingzhao

古文：温璋，唐咸通壬辰尹正天府。
现代文：温璋，唐朝咸通壬辰年任正天府府尹。
English: Wen Xuan, the Tang Dynasty's Hamantong, was appointed Zhengtianfufuyin in Imjin year.

古文：性黩货，敢杀。
现代文：温璋的性格特点，是贪污财物，敢于杀害人。
English: Wen Qi's character traits are embezzlement and daring to kill people.

古文：人亦畏其严残不犯。由是治有能名。
现代文：人们也畏惧他的严厉、残酷，不敢犯罪，由于这样，他获得了治理有才能的名声。
English: He was also feared for his sternness, cruelty and fear of crime, which earned him a reputation as a capable ruler.

古文：旧制，京兆尹之出，静通衢，闭里门，有笑其前道者，立杖杀之。
现代文：旧的制度规定，京兆尹外出，要清扫四通八达的大道，要关闭乡里的门。如果有在他前进的道路上喧哗大笑的人，立即用棍棒打死。
English: According to the old system, when Jing Zhaoyun went out, he had to sweep the highways in all directions and close the doors to the countryside. If anyone laughed loudly on his way, they were immediately clubbed to death.

古文：是秋，温公出自天街，将南抵五门。呵喝风生。
现代文：这年秋天，温公从天街出来，将要到达南面五门去，一路衙役大声呵斥，犹如行雨生风。
English: This autumn, Wen Gong came out of Tianjie and was about to reach Nanmengmen. All the way, the bailiff shouted loudly, as if it were raining.

古文：有黄冠老而且伛，弊衣曳杖，将横绝其间。驺人呵不能止。
现代文：有一个戴黄色帽子的人，年老并且驼背，穿着破衣服，拖拉着拐杖，将要从他们中间横穿过去，骑马的侍从大声喝斥，不能阻止。
English: A man in a yellow cap, old and hunchbacked, in ragged clothes and dragging a cane, was about to pass through the middle of them, and the servants on horseback shouted and could not stop him.

古文：温公命捽来，笞背二十。
现代文：温公命令手下人把他揪来，往背上打了二十竹板。
English: Wen Gong ordered his men to drag him there and beat him on the back with twenty bamboo planks.

古文：振袖而去，若无苦者。
现代文：黄冠老人挥动衣服袖子走了，好像没有一点苦楚。
English: The yellow-crowned old man waved his clothes and sleeves and walked away, as if there was no bitterness.

古文：温异之，呼老街吏，令潜而觇之，有何言。
现代文：温公感到很奇怪，就呼唤来老的街巷小吏，让他偷偷地侦察，听黄冠老人说什么。
English: Wen Gong felt very strange, so he called in an old street clerk and asked him to secretly spy and listen to what the yellow-crowned old man had to say.

古文：复命黄冠扣之，既而迹之。迨暮过兰陵里，南入小巷，中有衡门，止处也。
现代文：又命街巷小吏头上扣上黄帽子，完了，就跟着他的踪迹，到日落时，过兰陵里，向南入小胡同，中间有衡门，这是黄冠老人居住的地方。
English: He also ordered that a yellow cap be fastened on the head of a petty official in the streets and alleys. When he had finished, he followed his trail, and by sunset, he had passed through Lanlingli and entered a small alley to the south, with Hengmen Gate in the middle. This was where the yellow-crowned old man lived.

古文：吏随入关。
现代文：小吏跟随着进了门。
English: The clerk followed him through the door.

古文：有黄冠数人出谒甚谨，且曰： 真君何迟也？ 
现代文：这时有几个戴黄帽子的人出来，很谨慎地拜见黄冠老人，并且说： 真君怎么晚了呢？ 
English: At this time, several people wearing yellow hats came out, very cautiously visited the old man with the yellow crown, and said: How late is the true ruler?

古文：答曰： 为凶人所辱。可具汤水。 
现代文：真君回答说： 被凶恶的人侮辱了，可以准备一些热水。 
English: Zhenjun replied, "If you are insulted by a vicious person, you can prepare some hot water.

古文：黄冠前引，双鬟青童从而入，吏亦随之。
现代文：戴黄帽子的人在前引路，双鬟青衣童子也跟随在黄冠老人后面进去，街巷小吏也跟着进去。
English: The man in the yellow hat led the way, the boy in the blue suit also followed behind the old man in the yellow cap, and the street clerk also followed.

古文：过数门，堂宇华丽，修竹夹道，拟王公之甲第。
现代文：过了几道门，里面屋宇美丽而有光彩，修长的青竹夹路，仿佛王公大臣的住宅。
English: After a few doors, the inside of the building is beautiful and shiny, with slender green bamboo intersecting the road, as if it were the residence of an imperial minister.

古文：未及庭，真君顾曰： 何得有俗物气。 
现代文：还没走到庭院，真君回过头来说： 怎么会有俗物的气味？ 
English: Before he reached the courtyard, Manjun looked back and said, "How can there be the smell of vulgar things?"

古文：黄冠争出索之。吏无所隐，乃为所录，见真君。
现代文：戴黄帽子的人竞出来搜索，街巷小吏没有地方隐藏，就被他们逮住了。
English: Yellow-hatted men raced out to search, and when the street urchins had nowhere to hide, they caught them.

古文：吏叩头拜伏，具述温意。
现代文：见到真君，街巷小吏，一五一十地述说了温璋的意思。
English: When he saw Zhenjun, a street hawker, he told him the meaning of Wen Xuan.

古文：真君盛怒曰： 酷吏不知祸将覆族，死且将至，犹敢肆毒于人。罪在无赦！ 
现代文：真君大怒说： 这个残酷的官吏，不知道祸患将要使他的家族覆灭，他的死期马上就要到了，还敢放肆地毒害人，罪在不赦！ 
English: Zhenjun said angrily: This cruel official, not knowing that the evil would destroy his family and that his death was imminent, still dared to recklessly poison people. The crime is unforgivable!

古文：叱街吏令去。
现代文：真君大声呵斥街巷小吏，让他离开。
English: Mr. Man shouted at the street urchin, telling him to leave.

古文：吏拜谢了，趋出。遂走诣府，请见温，时则深夜矣。
现代文：街巷小吏拜谢完了，小步快走出了门，就跑到正天府去，请求见温公。
English: After the street urchin had said his thanks, he quickly walked out of the door and ran to Zhengtianfu to ask to see Wen Gong.

古文：温闻吏至，惊起，于便室召之。吏悉陈所见。温大嗟惋。
现代文：当时是深夜了，温公听说街巷小吏到来了，受到惊扰，急忙起了床，在便室召见了他，街巷小吏详尽地叙述了他所见到的一切，温公大声嗟叹惋惜。
English: At that time, it was late at night. Wen Gong heard that the street porter had arrived. He was alarmed and hurriedly got out of bed. He was summoned to the toilet room. The street porter described everything he saw in detail. Wen Gong loudly lamented and regretted.

古文：明日将暮，召吏引之。
现代文：第二天将要天黑的时候，温公招呼来街巷小吏引路，街上的更鼓声已经没有了。
English: The next day, when it was about to get dark, Wengong called for street urchins to come and lead the way. There was no more drumming in the streets.

古文：街鼓既绝，温微服，与吏同诣黄冠所居。
现代文：温公穿着平民的衣服，和街巷小吏一起到黄冠老人居住的地方去。
English: Wengong, dressed in civilian clothes, went to the place where the yellow-crowned old man lived with the street warden.

古文：至明，吏款扉。
现代文：看得十分清楚了，街巷小吏叩门。
English: You can see it very clearly, the street hawkers are knocking on the door.

古文：应门者问谁。
现代文：答应来开门的人问是谁。
English: The person who answered the door asked who it was.

古文：曰： 京兆温尚书来谒真君。 
现代文：回答说： 京兆温尚书来拜见真君。 
English: He replied, "Keizhao Wen Shangshu came to see Zhenjun.

古文：既辟重闺，吏先入拜。仍白曰： 京兆君温璋。 
现代文：不久，打开层层小门，街巷小吏先进去拜见，重复地向真君说： 京兆君温璋求见。 
English: Soon, the small doors were opened one after another, and the street clerks went ahead to pay their respects, repeatedly saying to Zhenjun: "Jing Zhao Jun, kindly come and see me."

古文：温趋入拜。
现代文：温公小步快进去拜见。
English: Wengong, take a small step. Come in and see me.

古文：真君踞坐堂上，戴远游冠，衣九霞之衣，色貌甚峻。
现代文：真君踞傲坐在大堂上，戴着远游冠，穿着九霞衣，脸色容貌很严峻。
English: Zhenjun sat proudly in the lobby, wearing a long-distance travel crown, wearing a nine-layered robe, and his face looked very serious.

古文：温伏而叙曰： 某任惣浩穰，权唯震肃；若稍畏懦，则损威声。
现代文：温公伏在地上叙述说： 我的责任是统领众多的人口，使用权力只是震慑地方严肃纲纪，如果稍有恐惧懦弱，就会损害声威。
English: Wen Gongfu, prostrate on the ground, said: My responsibility is to lead a large number of people. The use of power is only a deterrent to local discipline. If there is a little fear and cowardice, it will damage the reputation.

古文：昨日不谓凌迫大仙，自贻罪戾，故来首服，幸赐矜哀。 
现代文：昨天没想到凌辱迫害了大仙，自己留下罪过，所以来自首承当罪责，希望赏赐怜悯，给予同情。 
English: Yesterday, I didn't expect to be abused and persecuted by the Great Immortal, leaving my sins behind, so I took the blame on myself, hoping to be rewarded with mercy and sympathy.

古文：真君责曰： 君忍杀立名，专利不厌。祸将行及，犹逞凶威。 
现代文：真君斥责说： 你凭残忍杀戮树立名声，独占利益不满足，大祸将要到了，还逞凶威。 
English: Zhenjun scolded, "You have made a name for yourself through brutal killings. You are not satisfied with your monopoly profits. A great disaster is coming. You are still acting like a tyrant."

古文：温拜首求哀者数四，而真君终蓄怒不许。
现代文：温公再三再四地叩头哀求，然而真君始终是满含怒气不答应。
English: Wen Gong repeatedly begged for kowtowing, but Zhen Jun was always full of anger and did not agree.

古文：少顷，有黄冠自东序来，拱立于真君侧，乃跪启曰：尹虽得罪，亦天子亚卿；况真君洞其职所统，宜少降礼。 
现代文：一会儿，有一个戴黄帽子的人从东屋来，拱手立在真君的旁边，又跪下启奏说： 正天府府尹虽然获罪，亦是天子的高级官员，何况真君洞府还是在他的职务所管辖之内，应当稍微降低身分，给予礼遇。 
English: After a while, a person wearing a yellow hat came from the east room, stood next to Zhenjun with outstretched arms, and knelt down to say: Although Zheng Tian Fu Fu Yin was convicted, he is also a high-ranking official of the Son of Heaven, and Zhenjun Dongfu is still within the jurisdiction of his post, he should slightly lower his status and give courtesy.

古文：言讫，真君令黄冠揖温升堂，别设小榻，令坐。
现代文：说完，真君让戴黄帽子的人揖请温公上大堂，另外设置一个小的窄而低的床，让他坐，命令斟酒几巡。
English: Having said that, Zhenjun asked the man in the yellow hat to invite Wen Gong to the lobby, set up a small narrow and low bed for him to sit on, and ordered several rounds of wine to be poured.

古文：命酒数行，而真君怒色不解。
现代文：但是真君的怒气不化解。
English: However, Makimi's anger remains unresolved.

古文：黄冠复答曰： 尹之忤犯，弘宥诚难；然则真君变服尘游，俗士焉识。
现代文：戴黄帽子的人又对真君说： 正天府府尹的忤逆冒犯之罪很大，想宽恕，那实在很难，然而，真君变化服装在尘世中游览，凡俗士人怎么能认识？
English: The person wearing the yellow hat also said to Zhen Jun: Zhen Tian Fu Fu Yin's rebellion is a great offense, and it is really difficult to forgive. However, how can ordinary people recognize Zhen Tian Fu Fu Yin when he changes his clothes to travel around the world?

古文：白龙鱼服，见困豫且。
现代文：从前白龙不清冷之渊，化为鱼，尚且被渔人豫且射中眼睛，遭受困苦。
English: Once upon a time, a white dragon was turned into a fish in a cold and dark abyss. However, it was shot in the eye by a fisherman and suffered hardships.

古文：审思之。 
现代文：请慎重思考。 
English: Please think carefully.

古文：真君悄然。良久曰： 恕尔家族。
现代文：真君悄悄地思索，过了好久，真君说： 饶恕你的家族。
English: Makimi quietly pondered. After a long time, Makimi said, "Forgive your family."

古文：此间亦非淹久之所。 
现代文：这里也不是你长久停留的地方。 
English: It's also not a place you want to spend a lot of time.

古文：温遂起，于庭中拜谢而去，与街吏疾行至府，动晓钟矣。
现代文：温公于是起身，在庭院中拜谢真君后就离开了，和街巷小吏急速走到府衙，这时天亮的钟声响了。
English: Wen Gong then got up, bowed to Xie Zhenjun in the courtyard, and left. He and the street urchins quickly walked to the courtyard, at which time the morning bell rang.

古文：虽语亲近，亦秘不令言。
现代文：虽说亲近之人，也保守秘密不让说。
English: Although they were close, they kept it a secret.

古文：明年同昌主薨，懿皇伤念不已，忿药石之不徵也。医韩宗绍等四家诏府穷竟，将诛之。
现代文：第二年，同昌公主薨。懿皇感伤怀念不已，怨恨药石的不应验，医师韩宗绍等四家，诏令正天府追究到底，将要杀他们。
English: In the second year, Princess Tongchang passed away. Emperor Yao sentimental and nostalgic, resented the failure of the healing stone, and ordered four families, including doctor Han Zongshao, to be investigated to the end by Zheng Tianfu, who was going to kill them.

古文：而温鬻狱缓刑，纳宗绍等金带及余货，凡数千万，事觉，饮鸩而死。
现代文：但是温璋卖狱缓刑。温璋接受韩宗绍等人的金带和其它贿赂，总共有几千万。此事被发觉，温璋喝毒酒死了。
English: However, his prison sentence was suspended. He had accepted tens of millions in gold belts and other bribes from Han Zongshao and others. This was discovered, and he died from drinking poisoned wine.

