古文：朱燮元，字懋和，浙江山阴人。
现代文：朱燮元，字懋和，浙江山阴人。
English: Zhu Rongyuan, Zhu Ronghe, Zhejiang Shanyin people.

古文：万历二十年进士。除大理评事。
现代文：万历二十年进士，授职大理评事。
English: After twenty years of hard work, he was promoted to the post of senior science reviewer.

古文：迁苏州知府、四川副使，改广东提督学校。
现代文：提升苏州知府、四川副府，改派广东提督学校。
English: The governor of Suzhou and the vice governor of Sichuan were promoted, and the Guangdong Admiral School was reassigned.

古文：以右参政谢病归。
现代文：在任右参政时称病回家。
English: When he was a right-wing politician, he called home sick.

古文：起陕西按察使，移四川右布政使。
现代文：起用为陕西按察使，改任四川右布政使。
English: He was appointed as the inspector of Shaanxi Province and the political envoy of Sichuan Province.

古文：天启元年，就迁左。
现代文：天启元年，提升为左布政使。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, he was promoted to the left cloth political envoy.

古文：将入觐，会永宁奢崇明反，蜀王要燮元治军。
现代文：准备上京朝拜皇帝，正好永宁奢崇明叛乱，蜀王邀请朱燮元治军。
English: While preparing to go to Beijing to pay homage to the emperor, Yongning Suo-Chongming rebelled, and King Shu invited Zhu Rongyuan to lead the army.

古文：永宁，古兰州地。奢氏，倮罗种也，洪武时归附，世为宣抚使。
现代文：永宁是古蔺州之地，奢氏是倮亻罗的后裔，洪武时归附，世世代代做宣抚使。
English: Yongning is the land of ancient Shanzhou. Shuxi is a descendant of Jiao Luo. He was attached to Hongwu at the time and served as an envoy for generations.

古文：传至崇周，无子，崇明以疏属袭，外恭内阴鸷，子寅尤骁桀好乱。
现代文：传到奢崇周这一辈，没有后代。奢崇明请求世袭代理此职，他外表上很谦恭而内心却很阴险，他的儿子奢寅尤其凶猛残暴喜欢叛乱。
English: There are no descendants in the generation of Shuangzong Zhou. Shuangzong Ming requested to be the hereditary agent of this post. He was very humble on the outside but very insidious on the inside. His son, Shuangyin, was particularly ferocious and cruel and liked rebellion.

古文：时诏给事中明时举、御史李达征川兵援辽，崇明父子请行，先遣土目樊龙、樊虎以兵诣重庆。
现代文：当时下诏给事中明时举、御史李达征召四川兵支援辽东。奢崇明父子请求随军远征，先派土著头目樊龙、樊虎带兵到重庆。
English: At that time, the emperor issued an edict to Zhongming Zhiguo and Gu Shi Lida to recruit Sichuan soldiers to support Liaodong. Suo Chongming and his son requested to accompany the expedition, and first sent the indigenous leaders Jialong and Zhaohuo to Chongqing.

古文：巡抚徐可求汰其老弱，饷复不继，龙等遂反。
现代文：巡抚徐可求淘汰老弱病残，军饷又接不上来，樊龙等人于是造反了。
English: The governor, Xu Keking, sought to weed out the old, the weak, and the sick, but the army could not catch up, and so Hailong and the others rebelled.

古文：杀可求及参政孙好古、总兵官黄守魁等，时举、达负伤遁。
现代文：杀死徐可求和参政孙好古、总兵官黄守魁等人，明时举、李达受伤逃跑了。
English: After killing Xu Kegui, Sun Haogu, a member of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, and Huang Shoukui, the general officer of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, Ming Shihu and Li Daru were wounded and fled.

古文：时九月十有七日也。
现代文：这时是九月十七日。
English: It was the 17th of September.

古文：贼遂据重庆，播州遗孽及诸亡命奸人蜂起应之。
现代文：强盗于是占领了重庆，播州遗党以及各亡命的奸邪之人都纷纷起兵响应。
English: The bandits then occupied Chongqing, and the remnants of the Banzhou faction, as well as all the traitors who had fled, raised an army in response.

古文：贼党符国祯袭陷遵义，列城多不守。
现代文：强盗的同伙符国祯袭击攻陷了遵义，很多城镇都失陷了。
English: The bandits' accomplices attacked and captured Zunyi, and many towns were lost.

古文：崇明僣伪号，设丞相五府等官，统所部及徼外杂蛮数万，分道趋成都。
现代文：奢崇明僭号称王，设立丞相五府等官职，管辖他的部下和周边的少数民族数万人，分路直奔成都。
English: Suo Chongming, known as the king, set up the post of five prefectures such as chancellor, and governed his subordinates and tens of thousands of ethnic minorities in the surrounding area, and headed straight for Chengdu.

古文：陷新都、内江，尽据木椑、龙泉诸隘口。
现代文：攻陷新都、内江，全部占领了木木卑、龙泉各关隘路口。
English: They captured Xindu and Neijiang, and occupied all the intersections of Muxubi and Longquan Passes.

古文：指挥周邦太降，冉世洪、雷安世、瞿英战死。
现代文：指挥周邦太投降，冉世洪、雷安世、瞿英战死。
English: Commander Zhou Bangtao surrendered, and Ran Shihong, Lei Anshi, and Xing Ying all died in the battle.

古文：成都兵止二千，饷又绌。
现代文：成都守卫部队只有二千人，粮饷不足。
English: There are only two thousand guards in Chengdu, and there is a shortage of food.

古文：燮元檄征石砫、罗纲、龙安、松、茂诸道兵入援，敛二百里内粟入城。
现代文：朱燮元传令征调石石主、罗纲、龙安、松、茂各道兵来支援成都，搜集二百里之内的粮食运到城中。
English: Zhu Rongyuan sent a message to recruit soldiers from Shishishu, Luo Gang, Longan, Song and Mao provinces to support Chengdu, collect grain within 200 miles and transport it to the city.

古文：偕巡按御史薛敷政、右布政使周著、按察使林宰等分陴守。
现代文：和巡抚御史薛敷政、右布政使周著、按察使林宰等人分城墙防守。
English: The city wall was defended in sections by the inspector-general, Goshi Xue Shikimasa, the right-hand man, Zhou Zhao, and the inspector, Lin Zai.

古文：贼障革裹竹牌钩梯附城，垒土山，上架蓬荜，伏弩射城中。
现代文：强盗身披皮甲胄，用竹牌制成钩梯搭在城墙上，在城外用土垒成小山丘，上面架设荆木条，埋伏弓弩手向城中射箭。
English: The robbers, clad in leather armour, made a ladder out of bamboo slats and mounted it on the city wall. Outside the city, they used earthworks to create small hills, on top of which they erected strips of wicker, and ambushed archers to shoot arrows into the city.

古文：燮元用火器击却之，又遣人决都江堰水注濠。
现代文：朱燮元用火器打退了敌人的进攻，又派人挖开都江堰，利用江水灌满城外的护城河。
English: Zhu Rongyuan used firearms to repel the enemy's attack, and sent people to dig up the Dujiangyan and use the river water to fill the moat outside the city.

古文：贼治桥，得少息，因斩城中通贼者二百人，贼失内应。
现代文：强盗制造浮桥，攻城减少了，于是杀死城内勾通强盗的二百人，强盗失去了内应。
English: The robbers made a pontoon bridge, the siege of the city decreased, so they killed two hundred people in the city who were in collusion with the robbers, and the robbers lost their inner circle.

古文：贼四面立望楼，高与城齐，燮元命死士突出，击斩三贼帅，燔其楼。
现代文：强盗在四面建造望楼，跟城墙一般高。朱燮元命令敢死队突击，杀死三个强盗头目，放火烧了望楼。
English: The bandits built a watchtower on all four sides, as high as the city wall. Zhu Xiyuan ordered the death squad to attack, kill the three bandit leaders, and set fire to the watchtower.

古文：既而援兵渐集。
现代文：不久援军逐渐汇合。
English: Soon, reinforcements began to converge.

古文：登莱副使杨述程以募兵至湖广，遂合安绵副使刘芬谦、石砫女土官秦良玉军败贼牛头镇，复新都。他路援兵亦连胜贼。
现代文：登莱副使杨述程因为招募士兵来到湖广，于是联合安绵副使刘夯谦、石石主女土官秦良玉的部队在牛头镇打败强盗，收复新都，其他各路援军也接连获胜。
English: Denglai's deputy envoy Yang Shucheng came to Huguang to recruit soldiers, so the troops of the joint Amman deputy envoy Liu Qianqian and Shishi's chief land officer Qin Liangyu defeated the bandits in Niutou Town and recovered the new capital. Other reinforcements also won successively.

古文：然贼亦愈增，日发冢，掷枯骸。
现代文：然而强盗也越来越多，每天都挖掘坟墓，抛尸荒野。
English: However, robbers are also on the rise, digging up graves every day and dumping bodies in the wilderness.

古文：忽自林中大噪，数千人拥物如舟，高丈许，长五十丈，楼数重，牛革蔽左右，置板如平地。
现代文：忽然从林中传来一阵喧哗声，数千人围着一个船形物，高一丈、长五十丈、高几层楼，两旁包着牛皮，放下木板就如同平地一般。
English: Suddenly, from the forest came a clamor, thousands of people surrounded a ship-shaped object, one meter high, fifty meters long, several stories high, covered with cowhide on both sides, and the wooden planks lay down as if they were flat.

古文：一人披发仗剑，上载羽旗，中数百人挟机弩毒矢，旁翼两云楼，曳以牛，俯瞰城中，城中人皆哭。
现代文：一个人披头散发手拿长剑，上面安插着羽毛旗帜，里面有数百人拿着弓弩毒箭，旁边是两个云楼，用牛拖着，居高临下威胁城中。城内的人全都哭了。
English: A man with a long sword in his hand and a feathered banner on his head, surrounded by hundreds of people with bows and arrows, and two towers of cloud, pulled by oxen, loomed over the city and threatened it. Everyone in the city was crying.

古文：燮元曰： 此吕公车也。 
现代文：朱燮元说： 这是吕公车。 
English: Zhu Yingyuan said: This is the Lv bus.

古文：乃用巨木为机关，转索发炮，飞千钧石击之，又以大炮击牛，牛返走，败去。
现代文：于是用巨木制成机关，转着绳索发炮，发出千钧的巨石攻打它。又用大炮轰牛，牛往回跑，敌人失败离开了。
English: So they made an organ out of a huge tree, spun a rope to fire a cannon, and sent out thousands of huge boulders to attack it. They also fired a cannon at a cow, and the cow ran back, and the enemy left in defeat.

古文：有诸生陷贼中，遣人言贼将罗象乾欲反正。
现代文：有一位诸生陷入敌阵，派人说贼人将领罗乾象想要投降。
English: One of the sentient beings who had fallen into the enemy's camp sent word that the thief general Luo Qianxiang wanted to surrender.

古文：燮元令与象乾俱至，呼饮戍楼中，不脱其佩刀，与同卧酣寝。
现代文：朱燮元命令他跟罗乾象一起来，在戍楼中高喊喝酒，不解除他的武装，跟他同吃同睡。
English: Zhu Yanyuan ordered him to come with Luo Qianxiang, shout and drink in the mirage, do not disarm him, eat and sleep with him.

古文：象乾誓死报，复缒而出。
现代文：罗乾象誓死报答他，又用绳子将罗乾象放出了城。
English: Luo Qianxiang swore to die to repay him, and released Luo Qianxiang from the city with a rope.

古文：自是，贼中举动无不知。
现代文：从此之后，贼人的一举一动没有不知道的。
English: From then on, the thief's every move was known.

古文：乃遣部将诈降，诱崇明至城下。
现代文：于是派部将假装投降，把奢崇明引诱到城下。
English: So the faction will pretend to surrender and lure Shuo Chongming to the outskirts of the city.

古文：伏起，崇明跳免。
现代文：伏兵出击，奢崇明跳跃着逃走了。
English: When the ambush soldiers attacked, Shuo Chongming jumped and ran away.

古文：会诸道援军至，燮元策贼且走，投木牌数百锦江，流而下，令有司沉舟断桥，严兵待。
现代文：正好各路援军赶到，朱燮元估计强盗将要撤退了，将数百个木牌投入锦江，顺流而下，命令有关部门凿沉舟船，砍断木桥，严兵以待。
English: Just as the reinforcements arrived from all directions, Zhu Yingyuan estimated that the robbers were about to retreat, threw hundreds of wooden plaques into the Jinjiang River and down the river, ordered the relevant departments to scuttle the sunken boat, cut off the wooden bridge, and waited.

古文：象乾因自内纵火，崇明父子遁走泸州，象乾遂以众来归。
现代文：罗乾象于是在强盗内部放火，奢崇明逃往泸州，罗乾象于是率领众人来归附。
English: Luo Qianxiang then set fire to the inside of the robbers, and Shuxongming fled to Zhangzhou. Luo Qianxiang then led everyone to join him.

古文：城围百二日而解。
现代文：成都城被包围了一百零二天至此解围。
English: Chengdu City was besieged for 102 days and has now been relieved.

古文：初，朝廷闻重庆变，即擢燮元佥都御史，巡抚四川，以杨愈懋为总兵官，而擢河南巡抚张我续总督四川、贵州、云南、湖广军。
现代文：当初，朝廷听说重庆事变，立即提拔朱燮元为右副都御史，巡抚四川，任命杨愈懋为总兵官，而提拔河南巡抚张我续总督四川、贵州、云南、湖广军队。
English: At first, the imperial court heard about the Chongqing Incident, and immediately promoted Zhu Rongyuan to the right vice-governor of the capital, the governor of Sichuan, appointed Yang Yulun as the chief military officer, and promoted the governor of Henan, Zhang Yiguang, to the governor of Sichuan, Guizhou, Yunnan, and Hunan armies.

古文：未至而成都围解，官军乘势复州县卫所凡四十余，惟重庆为樊龙等所据。
现代文：还没有到任，成都的包围就解除了，官军乘机收复了十多处州、县、卫、所。只有重庆还被樊龙等人占据着。
English: Before he took office, the siege of Chengdu was lifted, and the government army took the opportunity to recover more than ten prefectures, counties, hospitals and clinics. Only Chongqing was still occupied by the Jiaolong and others.

古文：其地三面阻江，一面通陆，副使徐如珂率兵绕出佛图关后，与良玉攻拔之。
现代文：重庆三面被长江阻隔，一面与陆地相通，副使徐如珂率领部队绕到佛图关后面，跟秦良玉一起攻占了它。
English: Chongqing was cut off on three sides by the Yangtze River, with one side connected to the mainland. Vice-envoy Xu Ruga led the troops around to the back of the Buddha pass and captured it together with Qin Liangyu.

古文：崇明发卒数万来援，如珂迎战，檄同知越其杰蹑贼后，杀万余人。
现代文：奢崇明派数万士兵来救援，徐如珂迎战，传令同知越具杰尾随在敌人后面，杀死一万多人。
English: Shuxu Chongming sent tens of thousands of soldiers to rescue, Xu Rukia to meet the battle, and the heralded friend Yue Gujie followed behind the enemy, killing more than ten thousand people.

古文：监军佥事戴君恩令守备金富廉攻斩贼将张彤，樊龙亦战死。
现代文：监军佥事戴君恩命令守备金富廉攻杀贼人头子张彤，樊龙也战死了。
English: Anecdote of the supervisor of the army Dai Jun'en ordered the guard Jin Fulian to attack and kill the leader of the thieves Zhang Ye, and the dragon also died in the battle.

古文：帝告庙受贺，进君恩三官。
现代文：皇帝在庙里告祭接受朝贺，提升戴君恩三级官。
English: The emperor offered a sacrifice in the temple to receive morning greetings and promoted Dai Jun'en to the third rank.

古文：燮元所遣他将复建武、长宁，获伪丞相何若海，泸州亦旋复。
现代文：朱燮元派遣其他将领收复建武、长宁，俘获伪丞相何若海，泸州也不久收复。
English: Zhu Rongyuan sent other generals to recover Jianwu and Changning, captured the pseudo-chancellor He Ruohai, and soon recovered Zhangzhou.

古文：先是，国祯陷遵义，贵州巡抚李枟已遣兵复之。
现代文：在这之前，符国祯攻陷遵义，贵州巡抚李木云已派兵收复了。
English: Prior to this, the Guizhou governor Li Muyun had sent troops to recapture Zunyi after the fall of Fuguo.

古文：永宁人李忠臣尝为松潘副使，家居，陷贼，以书约愈懋为内应，事觉，合门遇害。
现代文：永宁人李忠臣曾担任松潘副使，在家隐居，被强盗抓获，写信约杨愈懋为内应，被发现了，全家都被杀害了。
English: Li Zhongchen, a Yongning resident, once served as a vice envoy of Songpan, lived in seclusion at home, was captured by robbers, wrote a letter about Yang Yuxuan as a confidant, was discovered, and the whole family was killed.

古文：贼即用其家僮绐愈懋，袭杀之，并杀顺庆推官郭象仪等，再陷遵义，杀推官冯凤雏。
现代文：贼人就用他家的奴仆哄骗杨愈懋，袭击杀死了他，还杀死顺庆推官郭象仪等人。再次攻陷遵义，杀死推官冯凤雏。
English: The thieves used his family's servants to trick Yang Yuxuan, attacked and killed him, and also killed Shunqing's governor, Guo Xiangyi, and others. They attacked Zunyi again and killed the governor, Feng Fengqi.

古文：当是时，崇明未平，而贵州安邦彦又起。
现代文：在这个时候，奢崇明没有平定，而贵州安邦彦又叛乱了。
English: At this time, Suo Chongming was not pacified, and Guizhou An Bangyan rebelled again.

古文：安氏世有水西，宣慰使安位方幼，邦彦以故得倡乱。
现代文：安氏世世代代拥有水西，宣慰使安位年纪还小，安邦彦因为这个原因得以煽动叛乱。
English: The An family has owned the west side of the river for generations, and because of this, An Bangyan was able to instigate a rebellion.

古文：朝议录燮元守城功，加兵部侍郎，总督四川及湖广荆、岳、郧、襄、陕西汉中五府军务，兼巡抚四川，而以杨述中总督贵州军务，兼制云南及湖广辰、常、衡、永十一府，代我续共办奢、安二贼。
现代文：朝议记录朱燮元守城的功劳，加封兵部侍郎，总督四川及湖广荆、岳、郧、襄，陕西汉中五府的军务，兼巡抚四川，而任用杨述中总督贵州军务，兼管云南及湖广辰、常、衡、永等十二府，代替张我续共同对付奢氏、安氏二强盗。
English: The imperial court deliberated and recorded the merits of Zhu Xi Yuan's defense of the city, and appointed him as the military governor of Sichuan and the five provinces of Hanzhong, Shaanxi, as well as the military governor of Sichuan, and appointed Yang Xiuzhong as the military governor of Guizhou, as well as the military governor of Yunnan and the twelve provinces of Huzhong, Chen, Chang, Heng, Yong, and so on, in place of Zhang I, to jointly deal with the two robbers of Shao and An.

古文：然两督府分阃治军，川、贵不相应，贼益得自恣。
现代文：但是两督府分别治军，川、贵二军不相呼应，强盗们更加得意放纵了。
English: However, the two governor's offices led their armies separately, and the Sichuan and Guizhou armies did not respond to each other. The robbers became more boastful and indulgent.

古文：三年，燮元谋直取永宁，集将佐曰： 我久不得志于贼，我以分，贼以合也。 
现代文：天启三年，朱燮元计划直接攻取永宁，集合将领说： 我军长期不能制服敌人，是因为我军分散，敌人集中。 
English: In the third year of the Apocalypse, Zhu Rongyuan planned to directly attack Yongning. The assembled generals said: Our army cannot subdue the enemy for a long time because our army is scattered and the enemy is concentrated.

古文：乃尽掣诸军会长宁，连破麻塘坎、观音庵、青山崖、天蓬洞诸砦。
现代文：于是抽调各军在长宁会合，接连攻占麻塘坎、观音庵、青山崖、天蓬洞各山寨。
English: As a result, the various armies were drawn together in Changning, and successively captured the villages of Matangkan, Guanyuan, Aoyama Cliff, and Tianpon-dong.

古文：与良玉兵会，进攻永宁。击败奢寅于土地坎，追至老军营、凉伞铺，尽焚其营。
现代文：跟秦良玉会合，进攻永宁，在土地坎打败奢寅，追到老军营、凉伞铺，一举焚烧了敌营。
English: He rallied with Qin Liangyu, attacked Yongning, defeated Shao Yin in the land canyon, chased him to the old military camp and the umbrella shop, and burned the enemy camp in one fell swoop.

古文：寅被二枪遁，樊虎亦中枪死。
现代文：奢寅身受二枪伤逃跑，樊虎也中枪死了。
English: Sakuin escaped with two gunshot wounds, and the tiger was also shot and killed.

古文：复追败之横山，入青岗坪，抵城下，拔之，擒叛将周邦太，降贼二万。
现代文：又追击逃敌到横山，进入青岗坪，抵达城下，攻取了它，活捉叛将周邦太，俘虏二万多人。
English: They also chased the fleeing enemy to Hengshan, entered Qinggangping, arrived at the foot of the city, captured it, captured the traitor Zhou Bangtao alive, and captured more than 20,000 people.

古文：副总兵秦衍祚等亦攻克遵义。
现代文：副总兵秦衍祚等人也攻克遵义。
English: Vice-Commander-in-Chief Qin Yanqi and others also conquered Zunyi.

古文：崇明父子逃入红崖大囤，官军蹙而拔之。
现代文：奢崇明父子逃进红崖犬囤子，官军缩小包围圈并攻占了它。
English: Shuxong Ming and his son escaped into the Red Cliff Dog Rock, and the government army narrowed the encirclement and captured it.

古文：连拔天台、白崖、楠木诸囤，抚定红潦四十八砦。
现代文：接连攻占天台、白崖、楠木各囤，安抚平定了红潦四十八砦。
English: They successively captured the rooftop, the white cliff, and the camphor trees, and pacified the forty-eight forts of Hongyao.

古文：贼奔入旧蔺州城，五月为参将罗象乾所攻克。
现代文：强盗逃奔到旧蔺州城，五月被参将罗乾象攻克了。
English: The robbers fled to the old Zhangzhou City, and were defeated by the general Luo Qianxiang in May.

古文：崇明父子率余众走水西龙场客仲坝，倚其女弟奢社辉以守。
现代文：奢崇明父子率领残余匪徒跑到水西龙场客仲坝，依靠他妹妹奢社辉来防守。
English: Shuang Chongming and his son led the remnants of the bandits to the water west dragon field, relying on his sister Shuang Shehui to defend.

古文：初，贼失永宁，即求救于安邦彦。邦彦遣二军窥遵义、永宁，燮元败走之。
现代文：当初，强盗丢失永宁，就向安邦彦求救，安邦彦派二支军队窥探遵义、永宁，朱燮元打跑了他们。
English: At first, when the robbers lost Yongning, they appealed to An Bangyan for help. An Bangyan sent two armies to spy on Zunyi and Yongning, and Zhu Rongyuan beat them and ran away.

古文：总兵官李维新等遂攻破客仲巢，崇明父子窜深箐。
现代文：总兵官李维新等人于是攻占客仲坝敌人的老巢，奢崇明父子逃进深山老林中。
English: The chief military officer Li Weixin and others then captured the enemy's old nest in Hakka Zhongba, and Shuxong Ming and his son fled into the deep mountains and old forests.

古文：维新偕副使李仙品、佥事刘可训、参将林兆鼎等捣龙场，生擒崇明妻安氏、弟崇辉，寅、国祯皆被创走。
现代文：李维新随同副使李仙品、佥事刘可训、参将林兆鼎等人捣毁龙场，活捉奢崇明的妻子安氏、弟弟奢崇辉。奢寅、符国祯都受伤逃走了。
English: Li Weixin, accompanied by the deputy envoy Li Xianpin, the anecdote Liu Kexun, the general Lin Zhaoding and others, destroyed the dragon field and captured the wife of Suo Chongming, An Ji, and the brother of Suo Chongming. Suo Yin and Fu Guojun were injured and escaped.

古文：录功，进燮元右都御史。
现代文：记录功绩，提升朱燮元为右都御史。
English: Records of achievements, promotion of Zhu Yingyuan to the right capital imperial history.

古文：时蜀中兵十六万，土、汉各半。
现代文：当时四川有十六万兵力，土著和汉人各占一半。
English: At that time, Sichuan had 160,000 soldiers, half of whom were aborigines and half Chinese.

古文：汉兵不任战，而土兵骄淫不肯尽力。
现代文：汉兵没有战斗力，而土著兵骄奢淫逸又不肯出力。
English: The Han soldiers had no fighting ability, while the aboriginal soldiers were arrogant and did not want to contribute.

古文：成都围解，不即取重庆；重庆复，不即捣永宁；及永宁、蔺州并下，贼失巢穴，又纵使远窜。
现代文：成都解围后，不立即攻占重庆，收复重庆后，又不立即捣毁永宁，等到永宁、蔺州都攻下后，强盗失去大本营，又放纵敌人远逃。
English: After the siege of Chengdu was lifted, Chongqing was not immediately captured, and after Chongqing was recovered, Yongning was not immediately destroyed. After Yongning and Zhangzhou were captured, the bandits lost their base camp and allowed the enemy to flee.

古文：大抵土官利养寇，官军效之，贼得展转为计。
现代文：大抵上土官从强盗那里获利，官军效法它，强盗才能够剿而不灭，多次逃脱。
English: For the most part, the local officials profited from the bandits, and the government army followed suit. It was only then that the bandits were able to survive, and they escaped several times.

古文：崇明父子方窘甚，燮元以蜀已无贼，遂不穷追。
现代文：奢崇明父子处境最困难时，朱燮元以为四川已没有强盗，于是不再追赶。
English: When Shu Chongming and his son were in the most difficult situation, Zhu Yingyuan thought that there were no robbers in Sichuan, so he stopped chasing them.

古文：永宁既拔，拓地千里。
现代文：攻取永宁之后，开拓土地达千里。
English: After the capture of Yongning, the development of land reached thousands of miles.

古文：燮元割膏腴地归永宁卫，以其余地为四十八屯，给诸降贼有功者，令岁输赋于官，曰 屯将 ，隶于叙州府，增设同知一人领之。
现代文：朱燮元把肥沃的土地割让给永宁卫，将其余的土地分为四十八屯，赏给各位降贼有功的人，命令他们每年向官府缴纳赋税，称为 屯将 ，隶属于叙州府，增设一名同知管理他们。
English: Zhu Bingyuan ceded the fertile land to Yongningwei and divided the rest of the land into forty-eight townships. He rewarded those who had rendered meritorious services to the rebels and ordered them to pay taxes to the government every year. They were called "township generals" and were subordinate to the Suzhou government. An additional friend was appointed to manage them.

古文：且移叙州兵备道于卫城，与贵州参将同驻，蜀中遂靖。
现代文：并且将叙州兵备道移驻于卫城，跟贵州参将驻在同一个地方，四川于是安定了。
English: In addition, the commander of the Syuzhou garrison was transferred to the Acropolis, and he was stationed in the same place as the Guizhou general. As a result, Sichuan became more stable.

古文：而邦彦张甚。
现代文：而安邦彦却更加嚣张。
English: But An Bangyan is even more arrogant.

古文：四年春陷贵州，巡抚王三善军没。
现代文：天启四年春天贵州失陷，巡抚王三善全军覆没。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of the Apocalypse, Guizhou fell, and the entire army of the governor Wang Sanshan was wiped out.

古文：明年，总理鲁钦败于织金，贵州总督蔡复一军又败。廷臣以三善等失事由川师不协助，议合两督府。
现代文：第二年，总理鲁钦在织金战败，贵州总督蔡复一的军队又失败了，廷臣以为王三善等人的失败是因为川军不协助，建议联合两督府。
English: The following year, Prime Minister Lu Qin was defeated in the Battle of Weijin, and the army of Guizhou Governor Cai Fuyi was defeated again. The courtiers thought that the defeat of Wang Sanshan and others was due to the lack of assistance from the Sichuan army, and suggested that the two governor's offices should be united.

古文：乃命燮元以兵部尚书兼督贵州、云南、广西诸军，移镇遵义；而以尹同皋代抚四川。
现代文：于是命令朱燮元以兵部尚书兼总督贵州、云南、广西各军，移镇遵义；而用尹同皋代替他巡抚四川。
English: Therefore, Zhu Rongyuan ordered the military commander and governor of Guizhou, Yunnan and Guangxi to move to Zunyi, and replaced him with Yin Tongyuan as the governor of Sichuan.

古文：燮元赴重庆，邦彦侦知之。
现代文：朱燮元前往重庆，安邦彦侦察知道了。
English: Zhu Rongyuan went to Chongqing, and An Bangyan's reconnaissance team found out.

古文：六年二月，谋乘官军未发，分犯云南、遵义，而令寅专犯永宁。
现代文：六年二月，计划乘官军还没有出发，分兵侵犯云南、遵义，而命令奢寅专门进犯永宁。
English: In February of the sixth year, the plan to take the government army had not yet set off, the detachment invaded Yunnan and Zunyi, and ordered Sakuin to specifically attack Yongning.

古文：未行，寅被杀，乃已。
现代文：没有出发，奢寅被杀死，于是取消原计划。
English: He did not set off, and Sakuin was killed, so the original plan was cancelled.

古文：寅凶淫甚，有阿引者，受燮元金钱，乘寅醉杀之。
现代文：奢寅非常好色而残暴。有一个叫阿引的，接受朱燮元的金钱，乘奢寅喝醉酒时把他杀了。
English: Shao Yin was very handsome and cruel. There was a man named Ah Bing who accepted money from Zhu Rongyuan and killed Shao Yin when he was drunk.

古文：寅既死，崇明年老无能为，邦彦亦乞抚，燮元闻于朝，许之，乃遣参将杨明辉往抚。
现代文：奢寅死后，奢崇明年老没有多少作为，安邦彦也乞求投降。朱燮元向朝廷报告，朝廷同意了，于是派参将杨明辉前往招抚。
English: After Shakuin's death, Shakuzon did not have much to do next year, and An Bangyan also begged for surrender. Zhu Shanyuan reported to the court, the court agreed, so he sent Yang Minghui to appease.

古文：燮元旋以父丧归，偏沅巡抚闵梦得来代。
现代文：朱燮元不久因为父亲丧礼回家，偏沅巡抚闵梦得来代替他。
English: Zhu Rongyuan soon returned home because of his father's funeral, and the pro-Beijing governor Zou Mengde came to replace him.

古文：先是，贵州巡抚王瑊谓督臣移镇贵阳有十便，朝议从之。
现代文：在这之前，贵州巡抚王蠨说督臣移镇贵阳有十种好处，朝廷讨论后同意了。
English: Prior to this, Guizhou's governor, Wang Qi, said that there were ten benefits to the governor moving to Guiyang, and the imperial court agreed after discussion.

古文：梦得乃陈用兵机宜，请自永宁始，次普市、摩泥、赤水，百五十里皆坦途，赤水有城可屯兵，进白岩、层台、毕节、大方仅二百余里。
现代文：闵梦得于是陈奏用兵的办法： 请求从永宁开始。经普市、摩泥、赤水，一百五十里都是平路。赤水有城可以驻军，到白岩、层台、毕节、大方只有二百余里。
English: The request started from Yongning. Through Pu City, Mody, and Chashui, there were 150 miles of flat roads. Chashui had a city where the army could be stationed, and it was only more than 200 miles to Baiyan, Zhidai, Bijie, and Dagang.

古文：我既宿重兵，诸番交通之路绝，然后贵阳、遵义军克期进，贼必不能支。
现代文：我方既然派驻重兵，各土著之间交通道路阻绝，然后贵阳、遵义的部队在约定的时间内进发，敌人一定支持不住。 
English: Since we have stationed heavy troops and blocked the traffic routes between the indigenous peoples, and then the troops from Guiyang and Zunyi will advance within the agreed time, the enemy will not be able to support us.

古文：疏未报，梦得召还，代以尚书张鹤鸣，议遂寝。
现代文：奏疏没有上报，闵梦得被召回，让尚书张鹤鸣代替他，建议于是被搁置了。
English: The report was not submitted to the government, and Zou Mengde was recalled to let Shangshu Zhang Zheming replace him. The proposal was then shelved.

古文：鹤鸣未至，明辉奉制书，仅招抚安位，不云赦邦彦。
现代文：张鹤鸣没有到任，杨明辉拿着皇帝的诏书，只招抚了安位，不说赦免安邦彦。
English: Zhang Zhenming did not take office, but Yang Minghui took the emperor's edict and only appeased An Bangyan, not to mention pardoning An Bangyan.

古文：邦彦怒，杀明辉，抚议由此绝。
现代文：安邦彦不高兴，杀死杨明辉，招抚的议论从此断绝了。
English: Unhappy with An Bangyan, he killed Yang Minghui, and the discussion of courting him was henceforth cut off.

古文：鹤鸣视师年余，未尝一战，贼得养其锐。
现代文：张鹤鸣领军一年多，未曾打过一次仗，强盗得以蓄精养锐。
English: Zhang Zhenming has been leading the army for more than a year, and has never fought a battle. The robbers have been able to keep themselves sharp.

古文：崇祯元年六月，复召燮元代之，兼巡抚贵州，仍赐尚方剑。
现代文：崇祯元年六月又召回朱燮元代替张鹤鸣，兼巡抚贵州，仍旧赐给他尚方宝剑。
English: In June of the first year of Chongzhen, Zhu Xiyuan was recalled to replace Zhang Heming, who was also the governor of Guizhou, and he was still given the Shangfang Sword.

古文：录前功，进少保，世荫锦衣指挥使。时寇乱久，里井萧条，贵阳民不及五百家，山谷悉苗仲。
现代文：记录前面的功劳，提升为少保，世代荫封锦衣指挥使，这时动乱已有很长时间了，到处都很萧条，贵阳的居民不足五百家，山谷之间全都是苗民。
English: Record the previous achievements, promoted to the minor guard, generational shadow seal brocade commander, at this time the turmoil has been a long time, everywhere is very depressed, Guiyang has less than 500 residents, and the valleys are all Miao people.

古文：而将士多杀降报功，苗不附。
现代文：而将官大多都杀死降民报军功，苗民不依附官府。
English: However, most generals killed their subordinates in return for military service, and the Miao people did not depend on the government.

古文：燮元招流移，广开垦，募勇敢；用梦得前议，檄云南兵下乌撒，四川兵出永宁，下毕节，而亲率大军驻陆广，逼大方。
现代文：朱燮元招集流民，广开荒田，招募勇敢的人；采纳闵梦得以前的建议，传令云南兵下乌撒，四川兵出永宁，下毕节，而亲自率领大军驻扎陆广，进逼大方。
English: Zhu Rongyuan called up the wandering people, opened up the wasteland, and recruited brave people. Adopting the previous suggestion of Yao Mengde, he ordered the Yunnan soldiers to march to Wusa, the Sichuan soldiers to march to Yongning, and the soldiers to march to Bijie, and personally led the army to station in Luguang, and advanced to compel the generous.

古文：总兵官许成名、参政郑朝栋由永宁复赤水。
现代文：总兵官许成名、参政郑朝栋由永宁收复赤水。
English: General Xu Rongmei and politician Zheng Chaodong of Yongning regained Chishui.

古文：邦彦闻之，分守陆广、鸭池、三岔诸要害，别以一军趋遵义，自称四裔大长老，号崇明大梁王，合兵十余万，先犯赤水。
现代文：他自称四裔大长老，号称崇明大梁王，集合十多万人的部队，先侵犯赤水。
English: He called himself the Great Elder of the Four Descendants and was known as the King of the Great Beam of Chongming. He gathered more than a hundred thousand troops and invaded Chishui first.

古文：燮元授计成名，诱贼至永宁，乃遣总兵官林兆鼎从三岔入。副将王国祯从陆广入，刘养鲲从遵义入，合倾其巢。
现代文：朱燮元传授计谋给许成名，把敌人引诱到永宁。于是派总兵官林兆鼎从三贫进军，副将王国祯从陆广进军，刘养鲲从遵义进军，汇合各路军攻击敌人的老巢。
English: Zhu Shanyuan taught the stratagem to Xu Rongren and lured the enemy to Yongning. Therefore, he sent the commander-in-chief Lin Zhaoding to march from Sanmian, the vice-commander Wang Guojun to march from Luguang, and Liu Yaojun to march from Zunyi, bringing together the various armies to attack the enemy's nest.

古文：邦彦恃勇，拟先破永宁军，还拒诸将，急索战。
现代文：安邦彦自恃很强盛，准备先击破永宁军，再回军抵抗各将，急忙要求作战。
English: An Bangyan considered himself very strong and prepared to first defeat the Yongning army, and then return to the army to resist the generals, and hastily demanded to fight.

古文：四川总兵官侯良柱、副使刘可训遇贼十万于五峰山、桃红坝，大破之。
现代文：四川总兵官侯良柱、副使刘可训在五峰山、桃红坝和十万敌人遭遇，大败敌军。
English: Hou Liangzhu, general of Sichuan, and Liu Kexun, deputy envoy, encountered 100,000 enemies in Wufeng Mountain and Taohongba Dam, and defeated the enemy army.

古文：贼奔据山巅。诸将乘雾力攻，贼复大败。
现代文：敌人奔到山上，各将乘雾大力进攻，敌人又被打得大败。
English: The enemy rushed to the mountain, each side used the fog to vigorously attack, and the enemy was defeated.

古文：又追败之红土川，邦彦、崇明皆授首，时二年八月十有七日也。
现代文：追击逃敌到红土川，安邦彦、奢崇明都投降了，时间是崇祯二年八月十七日。
English: The pursuit of the fleeing enemy reached the Red Earth River, and both An Bangyan and Suk Chongming surrendered. The time was August 17th of the second year of the Song Dynasty.

古文：捷闻，帝大喜。
现代文：捷报传来，皇帝大喜。
English: The Emperor was overjoyed at the news of the victory.

古文：以成名与良柱争功，赏久不行。
现代文：因为许成名和侯良柱争功，封赏很久没有实行。
English: Because Xu Rongmei and Hou Liangzhu competed for merit, the award has not been implemented for a long time.

古文：乌撒安效良死，其妻安氏招故沾益土酋安远弟边为夫，负固不服。
现代文：乌撒安效良死后，他的妻子招原沾益土著首领安远的弟弟安边为丈夫，顽固不肯服输。
English: After Usa's death, his wife, Zhaoyuan Zhanyi, married the native leader's estranged brother, An Bian, and stubbornly refused to accept defeat.

古文：燮元乘兵威胁走边，遂复乌撒。
现代文：朱燮元乘胜利的军威威胁赶走了安边，于是收复了乌撒。
English: Zhu Rongyuan took advantage of the threat of military victory to drive away Anbian, and then recovered Usa.

古文：燮元以境内贼略尽，不欲穷兵，乃檄招安位，位不决。
现代文：朱燮元以为境内的强盗大致平定了，不想再打仗了，于是发布檄文招降安位，安位犹豫不决。
English: Zhu Xuanyuan thought that the bandits in the territory had been roughly pacified and did not want to fight again, so he issued an imperial edict to abdicate, but he hesitated to do so.

古文：燮元集将吏议曰： 水西地深险多箐篁，蛮烟僰雨，莫辨昼夜，深入难出。
现代文：朱燮元集合将士讨论说： 水西一带深险而多丛林，雨雾茫茫，不分白天和黑夜，深入其地难以出来。
English: Zhu Rongyuan gathered the soldiers and said in discussion: The western part of the water area is dangerous and full of jungles, rain and fog are everywhere, regardless of day and night, it is difficult to get out of the area.

古文：今当扼其要害，四面迭攻，贼乏食，将自毙。 
现代文：目前应当控制交通要道，从四面不停地攻击，敌人没有粮食，将会被困死在里面。 
English: At present, it is necessary to control the major transportation routes, and constantly attack from all sides. The enemy has no food, and will be trapped and die inside.

古文：于是攻之百余日，斩级万余。
现代文：于是围攻了一百多天，斩首一万多级。
English: As a result, the siege lasted more than a hundred days, with more than ten thousand decapitations.

古文：养鲲复遣人入大方，烧其室庐。
现代文：刘养鲲又派人进入大方，烧了他的房屋。
English: Liu Yaobang also sent people to enter Dafang and burned his house.

古文：位大恐，三年春，遣使乞降。
现代文：安位非常害怕，崇祯三年春天，派使者来乞求投降。
English: Anqian was very afraid, and in the spring of the third year of Chongzhen, he sent an envoy to beg for surrender.

古文：燮元与约四事：一、贬秩，二、削水外六目地归之朝廷，三、献杀王巡抚者首，四、开毕节等九驿。
现代文：朱燮元跟他约定了四件事：一、贬除官级，二、将水外六目的土地划归朝廷，三、交出杀死王巡抚的人的首级，四、开通毕节等九座驿站。
English: Zhu Rongyuan agreed with him on four things: first, to demote the official rank, second, to allocate six overseas territories to the imperial court, third, to hand over the head of the person who killed the governor, and fourth, to open nine stations such as Bijie.

古文：位请如约，率四十八目出降。
现代文：安位全都同意了，率领四十八人出来投降。
English: They all agreed to surrender, and led forty-eight men out to surrender.

古文：燮元受之，贵州亦靖。
现代文：朱燮元受降，贵州也平定了。
English: Zhu Rongyuan surrendered and Guizhou was pacified.

古文：遂上善后疏曰： 水西自河以外，悉入版图。
现代文：于是上善后疏说： 水西从河以外，全都纳入国家版图。
English: As a result, Shang Shan Hou Zuo said, "From the west of the river to the west of the river, they are all included in the national territory.

古文：沿河要害，臣筑城三十六所，近控蛮苗，远联滇、蜀，皆立邸舍，缮邮亭，建仓廪，贼必不敢猝入为寇。鸭池、安庄傍河可屯之土，不下二千顷，人赋土使自赡，盐酪刍茭出其中。
现代文：沿河要害地带，微臣筑城三十六所，近控蛮苗，远联滇、蜀，都建立旅馆，修好邮亭，修建了仓库，贼人一定不敢冒犯进攻的，鸭池、安庄靠近河边可以耕种的土地，不下二千顷，人们耕种土地可以自给，土地出产盐、乳酪、牛羊、菱茭等物产。
English: In the key areas along the river, Weizhong has built 36 cities, close control of Miao, far control of Yao and Shu, all built hotels, repaired post offices, built warehouses, thieves must not dare to attack, Duxing and Anzhuang near the river can cultivate land, not less than two thousand hectares, people can cultivate land for self-sufficiency, the land produces salt, cheese, cattle and sheep, hawthorn and other products.

古文：诸将士身经数百战，咸愿得尺寸地长子孙，请割新疆以授之，使知所激劝。 帝报可。
现代文：各将士身经数百战，都希望得一点土地来抚养自己的子孙，请求皇帝割取新占领土地封给他们，让他们知道报答皇帝的恩典。 
English: After hundreds of battles, each soldier hoped to get a little land to raise his children and grandchildren, and asked the emperor to cut off the newly occupied land and grant it to them, so that they would know how to repay the emperor's grace.

古文：初，崇明、邦彦之死，实川中诸将功，而黔将争之。
现代文：皇帝同意了。当初，奢崇明、安邦彦的死，实际是四川将领的功劳，而贵州将领却争功。
English: The emperor agreed. At first, the death of Suk Chongming and An Bangyan was actually the merit of the Sichuan generals, while the Guizhou generals were competing for merit.

古文：燮元颇右黔将，屡奏于朝，为四川巡按御史马如蛟所劾。
现代文：朱燮元很有些袒护贵州将领，多次向朝廷报告，被四川巡抚御史马如蛟弹劾了。
English: Zhu Rongyuan was very protective of the Guizhou generals, reported to the imperial court many times, and was impeached by the Sichuan governor, Shima Rongyuan.

古文：燮元力求罢，帝慰留之。
现代文：朱燮元极力请求辞职，皇帝安慰挽留他。
English: Zhu Rongyuan strongly requested to resign, and the emperor consoled him to stay.

古文：其冬讨平定番、镇宁叛苗，乃通威清等上六卫及平越、清平、偏桥、镇远四卫道路，凡一千六百余里，缮亭障，置游徼。
现代文：这年冬天讨平定番、镇宁叛乱的苗民，于是开通了威清等上六卫和平越、清平、偏桥、镇远、四卫的道路，总共一千六百多里，修缮亭障，设置游动的巡察。
English: This winter, they tried to pacify the Miao people who rebelled against the fixed standard and Zhanning, and opened the roads of Shangliuwei, Heping Yue, Qingping, Yangqiao, Zhenyuan, and Siwei, a total of more than 1,600 miles, repaired pavilions, and set up patrols.

古文：贵阳东北有洪边十二马头，故宣慰宋嗣殷地也。
现代文：贵阳东北有洪边十二马头，是原宣慰使宋嗣殷的领地。
English: In the northeast of Guiyang, there are twelve horse heads in Hongbian, which is the original territory of Xuan Yuanzhi and Song Siyin.

古文：嗣殷以助邦彦被剿灭，乃即其地置开州，又奏复故施秉县，招流民实之。
现代文：宋嗣殷因协助安邦彦而被剿灭，于是在他的领地设置开州，又奏请恢复原施秉县，招集流民充实它。
English: Song Siyin was annihilated for assisting An Bangyan, so he set up Kaizhou in his territory, and requested the restoration of the original Shibing County and the recruitment of exiles to enrich it.

古文：四年，阿迷州土官普名声作乱，陷弥勒州曲江所，又攻临安及宁州，远近震动。
现代文：崇祯四年，阿迷州土官普名声叛乱，攻陷弥勒州曲江所，又进攻临安和宁州，远近震动。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the local officials of Amizhou revolted, captured the Qujiang Town of Miele Prefecture, and attacked Lin'an and Ningzhou, causing a shock far and wide.

古文：巡抚王伉、总兵官沐天波不能御，伉逮戍。
现代文：巡抚王伉、总兵官沐天波抵抗不住，王伉被抓获。
English: The governor Wang Yao and the general officer Mu Tianbo could not resist, and Wang Yao was captured.

古文：燮元遣兵临之，遂就抚。
现代文：朱燮元派部队进攻，于是投降了。
English: Zhu Rongyuan sent troops to attack, and then surrendered.

古文：龙场坝者，邻大方，邦彦以假崇明。
现代文：龙场坝邻近大方，安邦彦把它送给奢崇明。
English: Longchang Dam is close to Dafang, and An Bangyan gave it to Shuo Chongming.

古文：崇明既灭，总兵侯良柱欲设官屯守以自广。
现代文：奢崇明被消灭后，总兵侯良柱想派部队屯守来扩大自己的地盘。
English: After Shuo Chongming was eliminated, the commander-in-chief, General Liangzhu, wanted to expand his territory by sending troops to garrison it.

古文：而安位谓己故地，数举兵争，燮元不之禁。
现代文：而安位认为原是自己的土地，多次发动军队争夺，朱燮元不禁止他们。
English: However, Anqian believed that the land was originally his own and repeatedly launched an army to fight for it, but Zhu Rongyuan did not forbid them.

古文：会燮元劾良柱不职；良柱亦讦燮元曲庇安氏，纳其重贿。
现代文：正好朱燮元弹劾侯良柱不称职，侯良柱也攻击朱燮元有意庇护安位，接受他的重礼。
English: Just as Zhu Rongyuan impeached Hou Liangzhu for incompetence, Hou Liangzhu also attacked Zhu Rongyuan for his intention to protect and secure his position and accept his heavy gift.

古文：章下四川巡按御史刘宗祥。
现代文：疏章交给四川巡按御史刘宗祥。
English: The posthumous medal was presented to Liu Zongxiang, the chief of the Sichuan patrol.

古文：宗祥亦劾燮元受贿，且以龙场、永宁不置邑卫为欺罔。
现代文：刘宗祥也揭发朱燮元受贿，还认为龙场、永宁不设置城邑、卫所是欺骗行为。
English: Liu Zongxiang also exposed Zhu Rongyuan's bribery, and also believed that Longchang and Yongning did not set up townships and defense stations, which was a deceptive act.

古文：帝以责燮元，燮元乃上言： 御夷之法，来则安之，不专在攻取也。
现代文：皇帝以此责备朱燮元。朱燮元于是上疏说： 驾驭土著的办法，来降就安抚他们，不一定要用武力解决。
English: The emperor reproached Zhu Rongyuan for this. Zhu Rongyuan then said to Shang Shou: Use the indigenous people's methods, appease them by surrendering, and do not necessarily use force to solve the problem.

古文：今水西已纳款，惟明定疆界，俾自耕牧，以输国赋。若设官屯兵，此地四面孤悬，中限河水，不利应援，筑城守渡，转运烦费。
现代文：现在水西已向国家求和，我们的任务只是划定他们的疆界，让他们自己种田放牧，来缴纳国家赋税，假若派官屯兵，这一带地方四面悬隔，中间被河水限制，对相互呼应支援不利，筑城邑防守渡口，运费烦多。
English: Now that Shuixi has sued for peace with the country, our task is only to delineate their borders, let them cultivate and graze their own land, and pay national taxes. If they send officers and soldiers, this area will be separated on all sides, restricted by the river in the middle, which is not conducive to mutual support, build cities and towns to defend the ferry, and the freight cost will be too much.

古文：且内激蔺州必死之斗，外挑水西扼吭之嫌，兵端一开，未易猝止，非国家久远计。 
现代文：况且这样一来对内会激发蔺州的死斗，对外又挑起扼制水西咽喉要道的嫌疑，战争一旦发生，不能够轻易停止，这不是国家的长远打算。 
English: What's more, such a move would incite a fight to the death in Zhangzhou domestically, and raise suspicions of choking off the water supply to the West. Once a war occurs, it cannot be easily stopped. This is not a long-term plan of the country.

古文：帝犹未许。
现代文：皇帝还没有同意。
English: The emperor has not yet agreed.

古文：后勘其地，果如所议。
现代文：后来勘查那一带地方，果然跟朱燮元说的一样。
English: Later, when he surveyed the area, he found that it was just as Zhu Yingyuan had said.

古文：论桃红坝功，进少师，世荫锦衣指挥使。
现代文：讨论桃红坝的功劳，提升为少师，世代荫封锦衣指挥使。
English: Discussed the merits of the Taohongba Dam, promoted to Junior Instructor, and became a generational leader.

古文：一品六年满，加左柱国。
现代文：一品官六年满朝，加封左柱国。
English: He served as a court official for six years during the reign of the Manchu Emperor, and was awarded the title of Zuozhu Guo.

古文：再议平贼功，世荫锦衣指挥佥事。
现代文：再次讨论平定叛乱的功劳，世代荫封锦衣指挥佥事。
English: The merits of quelling the rebellion were discussed again, and the anecdote of generational shadowing of the commander in brocade came up.

古文：十年，安位死，无嗣，族属争立。
现代文：崇祯十年，安位死，没有后代，同族的人争着袭位。
English: After ten years of reverence, the emperor died and there were no descendants. People of the same race competed for the throne.

古文：朝议又欲郡县其地，燮元力争。
现代文：朝廷议论又想在那里设置郡县收归国有，朱燮元极力争论。
English: The imperial court also wanted to set up counties and counties to be nationalized there, and Zhu Xuanyuan vigorously argued.

古文：遂传檄土目，布上威德。
现代文：于是传令土著首领，宣布皇上的威德。
English: So the native chiefs were summoned to proclaim the emperor's virtue.

古文：诸蛮争纳土，献重器。
现代文：各土著争相交纳土地，献出重器。
English: The indigenous peoples competed with each other to receive land and donate heavy equipment.

古文：燮元乃裂疆域，众建诸蛮。
现代文：朱燮元于是划分土地，分封给各蛮民。
English: Zhu Rongyuan then divided the land and distributed it to the barbarians.

古文：复上疏曰：
现代文：又上疏说：
English: Shang Shu said again:

古文：水西有宣慰之土，有各目之土。
现代文： 水西有宣慰使的土地，有各头人的土地。
English: To the west of the water, there is the land of Xuan You Zi, and there is the land of the heads of each clan.

古文：宣慰公土，宜还朝廷。
现代文：宣慰使所有的公有土地，应该交还国家，各头人的私有土地。
English: All public land should be returned to the state, private land to the individual.

古文：各目私土，宜畀分守，籍其户口，征其赋税，殊俗内响，等之编氓。
现代文：应该交给他们分别把守，登记他们的户口，征收他们的赋税，风俗不同但心向朝廷，等于是国家登记在册的人民。
English: They should be given separate guards, their household registration should be registered, their taxes should be levied. People with different customs but with a heart for the imperial court are equal to people registered by the state.

古文：大方、西溪、谷里、北那要害之地，筑城戍兵，足销反侧。
现代文：大方、西溪、谷城、北那险要的地方。筑城派兵把守，足以制止叛乱。
English: Dafang, Xixi, Jicheng, and Beian are the most critical areas. Sending soldiers to guard Zhucheng is enough to stop the rebellion.

古文：夫西南之境，皆荒服也，杨氏反播，奢氏反蔺，安氏反水西。
现代文：西南边境，都是荒服，杨氏在播州造反，奢氏在蔺州造反，安氏在水西造反。
English: On the southwestern border, it was all plainclothes. The Yang clan rebelled in Banzhou, the Shao clan rebelled in Zhangzhou, and the An clan rebelled in the west of Shuizhou.

古文：滇之定番，小州耳，为长官司者十有七，数百年来未有反者。
现代文：云南的定番，是一个小州。有十七个长官司，数百年来没有人造反。
English: The classic of Yunnan is a small prefecture. There are seventeen prefectures, and there has been no rebellion for hundreds of years.

古文：非他苗好叛逆，而定番性忠顺也，地大者跋扈之资，势弱者保世之策。
现代文：并不是其他苗民喜欢叛乱，而是定番人性情忠顺，土地太大成了土著飞扬跋扈的资本，势力弱小就只有保全自己了。
English: It is not that other Miao people like to rebel, but that they are loyal to their core human nature. The land is too big to become the capital of the indigenous people, and if their power is weak, they only have to protect themselves.

古文：今臣分水西地，授之酋长及有功汉人，咸俾世守。
现代文：现在微臣分割水西的土地，将它分封给土著首领和有功的汉人，让他们世世代代守住土地。
English: Now, the Weizhong divided the land west of the water and assigned it to the indigenous leaders and meritorious Han people, so that they could keep the land for generations.

古文：虐政苛敛，一切蠲除，参用汉法，可为长久计。
现代文：废除所有的苛捐杂税和残暴政治，参照统治汉人的办法，可以使这里长治久安。 
English: Abolishing all harsh taxes and cruel politics, and referring to the methods of ruling the Han people, can bring long-term peace and stability here.

古文：因言其便有九：
现代文：于是陈述这样做的九种好处：
English: It then lists nine benefits of doing so:

古文：不设郡县置军卫，因其故俗，土汉相安，便一。
现代文： 不设郡县设置军卫，顺应当地的习俗，土著汉人平安相处，是好处之一。
English: One of the advantages is that there is no need to set up military guards in each county, so that the local customs can be followed and the indigenous Han people can coexist peacefully.

古文：地益垦辟，聚落日繁，经界既正，土酋不得侵轶民地，便二。
现代文：土地得到进一步开垦，部落日益繁盛，疆界已经划定，土著头目不能随便侵吞百姓的土地，是好处之二。
English: The land has been further reclaimed, the tribes are increasingly prosperous, the borders have been delineated, and the indigenous leaders cannot casually encroach on the people's land, which are two of the benefits.

古文：黔地荒确，仰给外邦，今自食其地，省转输劳，便三。
现代文：贵州土地荒凉贫瘠，仰给于外省。现在自食其地，减免了运输粮食的劳苦，是好处之三。
English: The land of Guizhou was desolate and barren, and was given to other provinces. Now they can feed themselves, and the labor of transporting grain has been relieved, which is the third benefit.

古文：有功将士，酬以金则国币方匮，酬以爵则名器将轻，锡以土田，于国无损，便四。
现代文：有功劳的将士，赏赐给金钱则国库会空虚，赏赐给官爵则贬低了爵称，赏赐给土著的田地，对国家并无损害，是好处之四。
English: If meritorious soldiers are rewarded with money, the treasury will be empty; if they are rewarded with peerage, the peerage will be devalued; if they are rewarded with native fields, there will be no harm to the country, but it will be one of the four benefits.

古文：既世其土，各图久远，为子孙计，反侧不生，便五。
现代文：既然世袭他们的封土，各自为他们的子孙做长远打算，就不会发生叛乱，是好处之五。
English: Since their fiefdoms are hereditary, and they each make long-term plans for their children and grandchildren, there will be no rebellion, which is one of the benefits.

古文：大小相维，轻重相制，无事易以安，有事易以制，便六。
现代文：让他们大小相维持，轻重相制约，没有事情时便和平相处，一旦出现事变就派兵制止，是好处之六。
English: It is the sixth benefit to let them maintain the large and small, control the important and unimportant, get along peacefully when there is no incident, and send troops to stop it in the event of an incident.

古文：训农治兵，耀武河上，俾贼遗孽不敢窥伺，便七。
现代文：训练民兵，在河上显示武力，使贼人的残余分子不敢有非份之想，是好处之七。
English: The training of the militia, the display of force on the river, so that the remnants of the thieves do not dare to think otherwise, are seven of the benefits.

古文：军民愿耕者给田，且耕且守，卫所自实，无勾军之累，便八。
现代文：军民愿意耕田的就给他田地，一边耕田一边防守，卫所自食其力，没有勾结军队的弊病，是好处之八。
English: If the military and the people are willing to cultivate the land, they will give him the land. While cultivating the land, they will defend it. The defense station will work on its own. The disadvantage of not colluding with the military is the eighth benefit.

古文：军耕抵饷，民耕输粮，以屯课耕，不拘其籍，以耕聚人，不世其伍，便九。
现代文：军队耕田作为军饷，农民耕田交纳赋税，用屯田来督促农耕，不局限他们的籍贯身份，用农耕来聚积人民，不让他们做世袭的军人，是好处之九。 
English: The army cultivates farmland as military pay, farmers cultivate farmland to pay taxes, and use farmland to supervise farming, without limiting their ancestral identity, and use farming to gather people and prevent them from becoming hereditary soldiers, are nine of the benefits.

古文：帝咸报可。
现代文：皇帝都同意了。
English: The emperor agreed.

古文：无何，所抚土目有叛者，诸将方国安等军败，燮元坐贬一秩。
现代文：不久，招抚的土著头人有的反叛了，各将领方国安等部被打败，朱燮元被贬了一级官职。
English: Soon, some of the indigenous leaders rebelled, the generals and the national security department were defeated, and Zhu Rongyuan was demoted to a first-class official post.

古文：已，竟破灭之。十一年春卒官，年七十三。
现代文：此后，最终还是消灭了叛乱者，崇祯十一年春天死在任上，终年七十三岁。
English: After that, the rebels were finally eliminated, and Chongzhen died in office in the spring of the 11th year, at the age of 73.

古文：燮元长八尺，腹大十围，饮啖兼二十人。
现代文：朱燮元身长八尺，肚大十围，有二十个人的饭量。
English: Zhu Rongyuan was eight feet tall, with a belly ten times the size of his waist. He had enough food to feed twenty people.

古文：镇西南久，军赀赎鍰，岁不下数十万，皆籍之于官。
现代文：长期镇守西南，军费赎金，每年不下数十万，全都交给官府。
English: Long-term garrison southwest, military ransom, every year no less than hundreds of thousands, all handed over to the government.

古文：治事明决，军书络绎，不假手幕佐。
现代文：办事明智，来往军事信件，不需要幕僚帮忙。
English: Work smart, send and receive military mail, don't need a staff to help.

古文：行军务持重，谋定后战，尤善用间。
现代文：在军事上老成持重，计划安排好了然后作战，尤其善长使用离间之计。
English: In the military, it is important to be mature, plan well and then fight, and it is especially good at using distraction.

古文：使人各当其材，犯法，即亲爱必诛；有功，厮养不遗赏也。
现代文：使用人才都能发挥他们的长处。犯法了，即使是自己亲近的人也一定要受罚；有了功劳，即使是奴仆也不会忘记赏赐他们。
English: If they break the law, even those who are close to them must be punished; if they are meritorious, even their slaves will not forget to reward them.

古文：驭蛮以忠信，不妄杀，苗民怀之。
现代文：用忠诚和信义管理土著民族，不随便滥杀无辜，苗民怀念他。
English: Miao people remember him for managing the indigenous people with loyalty and faithfulness, and not killing innocent people.

古文：初官陕西时，遇一老叟，载与归，尽得其风角、占候、遁甲诸术。
现代文：当初在陕西做官时，遇到一位老翁，跟他一同乘车回家，老翁将风角、占候、遁甲的技术全都传给了他。
English: When he was working as an official in Shaanxi, he met an old man and rode home with him. The old man passed on to him all the skills of wind angle, divination, and armouring.

古文：将别，语燮元曰： 幸自爱，他日西南有事，公当之矣。 
现代文：将要分别时，对朱燮元说： 希望爱惜自己，将来西南有事，恩公能主持它。 
English: When they were about to separate, he said to Zhu Rongyuan: I hope you will take care of yourself. In the future, there will be an event in Southwest China, and Mr. En can preside over it.

古文：内江牟康民者，奇士也，兵未起时，语人曰： 蜀且有变，平之者朱公乎？ 
现代文：内江牟康民是一位奇士，战争还没有发生时，对别人说： 四川将要出现大动乱，平定动乱的莫不是朱公么？ 
English: Neijiang Mukangmin was a miracle worker. Before the war broke out, he said to others, "There will be great turmoil in Sichuan. Isn't it Zhu Gong who will quell the turmoil?"

古文：后悉如其言。
现代文：后来真是这样的。
English: That's what happened later.

