古文：东坡作《石砮记》云： 《禹贡》荆州贡砺、砥、砮、丹及箘、簵、楛，梁州贡砮、磬。
现代文：苏东坡写的《石砮记》说： 《尚书•禹贡》记载，荆州向王室进贡砺、砥、砮、丹及箘、簵、楛,梁州贡砮、磐。
English: Su Dongpo's "Diary of Shi Jia" said: "Recorded in "Shang Shu • Yu Gong," Jingzhou paid tribute to the royal family in the form of, 砥,, 丹,,,,, Liangzhou paid tribute in the form of, 磐.

古文：至春秋时，隼集于陈廷，楛矢贯之，石砮长尺有咫，问于孔子，孔子不近取之荆、梁，而远取之肃慎，则荆、梁之不贡此久矣。
现代文：到春秋时，猛禽鹰华飞集陈国宫廷被射死；就是枪矢射穿的，石馨长一尺八寸，有人向孔子请教。孔子回答时不就近取荆州、梁州为例，而取远处的肃慎来说明，那么，荆、梁二州不贡此物已很久了。
English: By the Spring and Autumn Period, the bird of prey, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle, the eagle,

古文：颜师古曰：楛木堪为笴，今豳以北皆用之。 以此考之，用楛为矢，至唐犹然，而用石为砮，则自春秋以来莫识矣。 
现代文：唐人颜师古说： 楛木可做箭杆，现在幽以北地方仍然都用它 凭此话考证，用楛木做箭，到唐代仍旧这样，但是用石做箭傲，却从春秋以来没有人懂得了。 
English: An ancient Chinese painter said: "Beech wood can be used as arrow shafts, and it is still used in the far north." According to this saying, the use of beech wood for arrows was still the case in the Tang Dynasty, but the use of stone for arrows has not been understood since the Spring and Autumn Period.

古文：案《晋书•挹娄传》： 有石砮、楛矢，国有山出石，其利入铁。周武王时，献其矢、砮。魏景元末亦来贡。
现代文：按《晋书•挹娄传》记载：有石砮、楛矢，国内有座山出产的石头锋利得可刺入铁中；周武王时，挹娄族曾进贡矢、砮；魏元帝景元末年也来进贡。
English: According to the "Jinshu•Yingzhuan" records: there are stone arrowheads and arrowheads, and there is a mountain in China that produces sharp stones that can be pierced into iron; when Zhou Wu was king, the Yi people once paid tribute to arrowheads and arrowheads; Wei Yuan Emperor Jing Yuan also came to pay tribute at the end of the year.

古文：晋元帝中兴，又贡石砮。后通贡于石虎，虎以夸李寿者也。
现代文：晋元帝中兴，又来贡石砮；后来，他们又与后赵王石虎往来，向他进贡石砮，这就是石虎用来向成汉王李寿夸耀的事情。
English: Jin-Yuan Emperor Zhongxing also paid tribute to Shih Hau; later, they also had dealings with Queen Zhao Wang Shih Hau and paid tribute to him, which is what Shih Hau used to boast to Chenghan King Li Shou.

古文：《唐书•黑水靺鞨传》：其矢，石镞长二寸。
现代文：《唐书•黑水靺鞨传》部居最北方记载：他们的箭，装有石砮有二寸长。
English: "Tangshu•Black Water Margin" describes the northernmost branch: their arrows, equipped with stone picks, are two inches long.

古文：盖楛遗法，然则东坡所谓春秋以来莫识，恐不考耳。予家有一砮，正长二寸，岂黑水物乎？
现代文：看来是在古代制作楛方法的流传，那么苏东坡所说春秋以来没有人懂得，恐怕是不加考证的过错我家有一个石砮，正好二寸长，难道是黑水靺鞨部的产物吗？
English: It seems that the method of making rafts was passed down in ancient times, so no one understands what Su Dongpo said since the Spring and Autumn Period, I'm afraid it's a mistake without examination and verification. My family has a stone raft, exactly two inches long, is it a product of the Blackwater raft?

