古文：康延孝，塞北部落人也。
现代文：康延孝，塞北部落的人。
English: Kang Yanxiao, a member of the North Siberian tribe.

古文：初隶太原，因得罪，亡命于汴梁。
现代文：起初隶属于太原，因犯罪，逃亡到汴梁。
English: At first, it was subordinated to Taiyuan, but due to crime, it fled to Qilian.

古文：开平、乾化中，自队长积劳至部校。梁末帝时，频立军功。
现代文：开平、乾化年中，自队长积功劳升到部校，梁末帝时，多次立军功。
English: In the years of Kaiping and Qianhua, since the captain accumulated merits and rose to the department school, when Liang was the last emperor, he repeatedly made military achievements.

古文：同光元年八月，段凝率众五万营于王村，时延孝为右先锋指挥使，率百骑来奔。
现代文：庄宗同光元年八月，段凝率五万士兵在王村扎营，这时康延孝为右先锋指挥使，率一百骑兵前来投奔。
English: In August of the first year of Zhuangzongtongguang, Duan Zeng led fifty thousand soldiers to camp in Wangcun. At this time, Kang Yanxiao was the right vanguard commander and led a hundred cavalry to rush.

古文：庄宗得之，喜，解御衣金带以赐之。
现代文：庄宗得到他很欢喜，脱下御衣金带赐给他。
English: Zhuangzong was very pleased to get him, and took off his robe and gave him a gold belt.

古文：翌日，赐田宅于鄴，以为捧日军使兼南面招讨指挥使、检校司空，守博州刺史。
现代文：第二天，在邺城赐给田地住宅，任为捧日军使兼南面招讨指挥使、检校司空，守博州刺史。
English: The next day, he was given a field residence in Lucheng, appointed as the Japanese military envoy to the south, the commanding officer of the invitation, the school inspector, and the governor of Bozhou.

古文：庄宗屏人问梁兵机，延孝备陈利害，语在《庄宗纪》中。
现代文：庄宗屏退别人向他询问梁朝军机，康延孝详细陈述利害。庄宗平定汴州，康延孝出了不少力。
English: Zhuang Zongping retreated, others asked him about the military machine of the Liang Dynasty, and Kang Yanxiao made a detailed statement of interests. Zhuang Zong conquered Zhangzhou, and Kang Yanxiao made a lot of efforts.

古文：庄宗平汴，延孝颇有力焉，以功授检校太保、郑州防御使，赐姓，名绍琛。
现代文：因功授检校太保、郑州防御使，赐国姓，名绍琛。
English: He was awarded the title of Taibo, Zhengzhou Defense Envoy, and given the surname of Zhou, and the name of Shaoxing.

古文：明年，郊礼毕，授保义军节度使。
现代文：第二年，庄宗郊外祭天典礼结束后，授康延孝为保义军节度使。
English: In the second year, after the conclusion of the festival ceremony in the suburbs of Zhuozong, Jukang Yanxiao was appointed as the festival envoy of the Guaranty Army.

古文：三年，讨蜀，以延孝为西南行营马步军先锋、排阵斩斫等使。
现代文：同光三年，讨伐蜀地，任康延孝为西南行营马步军先锋使、排阵斩斫使。
English: In the same year, Kang Yanxiao was appointed as the vanguard envoy of the horse-marching army in the southwestern campaign and the leader of the line-up.

古文：延孝性骁健，徇利奋不顾身。
现代文：康延孝骁勇雄健，为利益奋不顾身。
English: Kang Yan, a filial son, is brave and vigorous, and will go to great lengths for the sake of profit.

古文：以前锋下凤州，收固镇，降兴州，败王衍军于三泉，所俘蜀军皆谕而释之，自是昼夜兼行。
现代文：率领前锋部队攻下凤州，收取固镇，降伏兴州，在三泉打败王衍的军队，俘虏的蜀军都在训示一通后释放了，从此昼夜兼行。
English: He led the forward troops to capture Fengzhou, took Guzhen, surrendered Xingzhou, and defeated Wang Yan's army in Sanquan. The prisoners of the Shu army were all released after one instruction. From now on, he will travel both day and night.

古文：王衍自利州奔归成都，断吉柏津浮梁，以绝诸军。延孝复造浮梁以渡，进收绵州，王衍复断绵江浮梁而去。
现代文：王衍从利州逃回成都，切断吉柏津浮桥，以阻止各军，康延孝又造浮桥渡河，进军收取绵州，王衍又弄断绵江浮桥而去。
English: Wang Yan fled from Lizhou back to Chengdu, cut off the Ji Baijin floating bridge to stop the troops, Kang Yanxiao also built a floating bridge to cross the river and march into Mianzhou, Wang Yan also broke the Mianjiang floating bridge and left.

古文：水深无舟楫可渡，延孝谓招抚使李严曰： 吾悬军深入，利在急兵。
现代文：水深没有船渡河，康延孝对招抚使李严说： 我孤军深入敌境，应用急兵才能获胜。
English: The water was not deep enough for a boat to cross the river, and Kang Yanxiao said to the recruiting officer Li Yan: My lone army has penetrated deep into the enemy territory, and we can only win if we use the emergency troops.

古文：乘王衍破胆之时，人心离沮，但得百骑过鹿头关，彼即迎降不暇。
现代文：乘王衍破胆之时，人心离散，只要用一百骑兵过鹿头关，他们就得赶紧投降。
English: When taking advantage of Wang Yan's discouragement, the hearts of the people were scattered. As long as they used a hundred cavalrymen to cross Deer's Head Pass, they had to quickly surrender.

古文：如俟修缮津梁，便留数日，若王衍坚闭近关，折吾兵势，傥延旬浃，则胜负莫可知也，宜促骑渡江。 
现代文：如果等到修好桥梁，必须要几天，若王衍坚闭附近关口，挫折我们的兵势，倘如延长十几天，胜负就不可知了，应该赶快渡过长江。 
English: If we wait until the bridge is repaired, it will take a few days. If Wang Yan closes the nearby pass and frustrates our troops, if it is extended for ten days, the outcome will be unknown. We should cross the Yangtze River as soon as possible.

古文：因与李严乘马浮江，于是得济者仅千人，步军溺死者亦千余人。
现代文：因而和李严乘马浮过长江，于是渡过长江的只有一千人，步兵淹死的也有一千多人。
English: As a result, he and Li Yan floated across the Yangtze River on horseback. As a result, only a thousand people crossed the Yangtze River, and more than a thousand infantrymen drowned.

古文：延孝既济，长驱通鹿头，进据汉州。
现代文：康延孝过江后，长驱直入经过鹿头，进据汉州。
English: After crossing the Yangtze River, Kang Yanxiao drove straight through Shantou and entered Hanzhou.

古文：居三日，部下后军方至。伪蜀六军使王宗弼令人持牛酒币马归款。
现代文：过了三天，部下后军才到，伪蜀六军使王宗弼令人带着牛酒币马归顺。
English: After three days, the army arrived after the subordinates, and the pseudo-Shu Six Army ordered Wang Zongyao to bring cattle, wine, coins and horses to submit.

古文：旬日，两川平定，延孝止汉州以俟继岌。
现代文：十来天内，两川平定，康延孝停在汉州以等待李继岌。
English: Within ten days, the two rivers were pacified, and Kang Yanxiao stopped in Hanzhou to wait for Li Jizhe.

古文：平蜀之功，延孝居最。
现代文：平定蜀地之功，康延孝是最大的。
English: Kang Yanxiao is the greatest contributor to the pacification of Shu.

古文：时邠州节度使董璋为行营右厢马步使，华州节度使毛璋为行营左厢马步使，以军礼当事延孝。
现代文：这时州节度使董璋任行营右厢马步使，华州节度使毛璋为行营左厢马步使，按军礼都应当听从康延孝。
English: At this time, the state festival appointed Dong Xuan as the right compartment horse-marching envoy, and the Huazhou festival appointed Mao Xuan as the left compartment horse-marching envoy. According to military etiquette, they should all obey Kang Yanxiao.

古文：郭崇韬以私爱董璋，及西川平定之后，崇韬每有兵机，必召璋参决，延孝不平。
现代文：郭崇韬偏爱董璋，平定西川之后，郭崇韬每当有军机大事，必定召董璋参谋决定，康延孝内心不平。
English: Guo Chongyao preferred Dong Yao. After the pacification of West River, Guo Chongyao whenever there was a military event, he would certainly call Dong Yao as a staff officer to make a decision. Kang Yanxiao felt uneasy.

古文：时延孝军于城西，毛璋军于城东，董璋军于城中。
现代文：这时康延孝在城西驻军，毛璋在城东驻军，董璋驻在城中。
English: At this time, Kang Yanxiao stationed troops in the west of the city, Mao Jun stationed troops in the east of the city, and Dong Jun stationed troops in the city.

古文：闰十二月，延孝因酒酣谓董璋曰： 吾有平蜀之功，公等仆蔌相从，反首鼠于侍中之门，谋相倾陷，吾为都将，公乃裨校，力能斩首。 
现代文：闰十二月，康延孝因喝酒喝多了，对董璋说 ：我有平蜀之功，你们像仆人一样相从，反而在郭侍中门下两头取巧，谋划陷害。我是都将，你是裨校，我能杀了你。 
English: On leap December, Kang Yanxiao drank too much because of drinking, and said to Dong Xuan: "I have the merit of Ping Shu. You follow each other like servants, but instead, under the gate of Guo Zizhong, you take advantage of each other and plot to frame me. I am the master, you are the pupil, I can kill you."

古文：璋惶恐，谢之而退。
现代文：董璋很惶恐，谢罪而退。
English: Dong Hao panicked and retreated.

古文：酒罢，璋诉于郭崇韬，崇韬阴衔之，乃署董璋为东川节度使，落军职。
现代文：酒宴结束后，董璋告诉郭崇韬，郭崇韬心里记恨此事，于是任命董璋为东川节度使，免去军职。
English: After the wine banquet, Dong Hao told Guo Chongyao that Guo Chongyao hated the incident in his heart, so he appointed Dong Hao as the Dongchuan Festival envoy and relieved him of his military duties.

古文：延孝怒，谓毛璋曰： 吾冒白刃，犯险阻，平定两川，董璋何功，遽有其地！ 
现代文：康延孝大怒，对毛璋说： 我冒着刀锋，冲破险阻，平定两川，董璋有什么功劳，突然得到那块地方！ 
English: Kang Yanxiao was furious and said to Mao Yu: I braved the blade, broke through the obstacles, and pacified the two rivers. What merit did Dong Yu have to suddenly get that piece of land!

古文：二人因谒见崇韬，曰： 东川重地，宜择良帅，工部任尚书有文武才干，甚洽众心，请表为东川帅。 
现代文：二人因而进见郭崇韬，说： 东川是重要地方，应该选择良帅，工部尚书任圜有文武才干，很适合大家心意，请任命他为东川帅。 
English: As a result, the two men went to see Guo Chongyi and said: Dongchuan is an important place, and a good general should be chosen. Shang Shuren of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce has literary and military talents, and is very suitable for everyone's mind. Please appoint him as the general of Dongchuan.

古文：崇韬怒曰： 绍琛反耶？
现代文：郭崇韬发怒道 ：绍琛要谋反吗？
English: Guo Chongyao angrily said, "Shao Yao is plotting a rebellion?

古文：敢违吾节度！ 
现代文：敢违抗我的调遣！ 
English: Don't you dare defy my orders!

古文：延孝等惶恐而退。
现代文：康延孝等人惶恐而退。
English: Kang Yanxiao and others panicked and retreated.

古文：未几，崇韬为继岌所害，二人因责董璋曰： 公复首鼠何门？ 
现代文：没多久，郭崇韬被李继岌杀害，二人因而责备董璋说： 你还能在哪个门下取巧？ 
English: Not long after, Guo Chongyao was killed by Li Jide, and the two of them reproached Dong Yao, saying: Under what other door can you succeed?

古文：璋俯首祈哀而已。
现代文：董璋只有低头哀伤而已。
English: Dong Hao only bowed his head in sorrow.

古文：四年正月甲申，大军发成都，继岌令延孝以一万二千人为后军。
现代文：同光四年正月二十七日，大军从成都出发，李继岌令康延孝以一万二千人为后军。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the same year, the great army set out from Chengdu. Li Jizhe ordered Kang Yanxiao to lead the rearguard with 12,000 men.

古文：二月癸巳，中军次武连，中使诏至，谕以西平王硃友谦有罪伏诛，命继岌杀其子遂州节度使令德，延孝大惊。俄而董璋率兵之遂州，遇延孝不谒，延孝怒，谓诸校曰： 南平梁汴，西定巴邛，画策之谋，始于郭公，而汗马之劳，力摧强敌，即吾也。
现代文：二月六日，中军到达武连，朝中使者带诏书到，告诉说西平王朱友谦有罪被处死，命李继岌杀掉他的儿子遂州节度使朱令德，康延孝大惊，接着董璋带兵到遂州，遇康延孝不进见，康延孝很愤怒，对各位军校说： 南边平定汴梁，西边平定巴邛，策划谋略是郭公做出的，但汗马之劳，力摧强敌，是我。
English: On February 6, the Chinese army arrived in Wulian. An envoy from North Korea and China arrived with an imperial edict, telling that the king of Xiping, Zhu Youqian, was guilty and was executed. Li Ji's order to kill his son, Suizhou Jiedu, shocked Zhu Lingde and Kang Yanxiao. Next, Dong Qian led the army to Suizhou. When Kang Yanxiao did not advance, Kang Yanxiao was very angry and said to the military schools: To the south is Pingding Qiliang, to the west is Pingding Bajiao. Guo Gong made the plans and strategies, but it was I who did the hard work

古文：若以背伪归国，犄角而成霸业，即西平王之功第一。
现代文：如以背弃伪朝归顺国家，辅佐而成霸业来论，就数西平王的功劳第一。
English: If we talk about turning one's back on the pseudo-Dynasty and surrendering to the country, and supporting it to become a hegemon, then the merit of King Xiping is the first.

古文：西平与郭公皆以无罪赤族，归朝之后，次当及我矣！ 
现代文：西平王和郭公都以无罪而灭族，回朝廷后，下次该轮到我了。 
English: Both Xiping Wang and Guo Gong were acquitted of genocide. After returning to the imperial court, it was my turn next time.

古文：丙申，延孝次剑州。时延孝部下皆鄜、延、河中旧将，焦武等知西平王被祸，兼诛令德，号哭军门，诉于延孝曰： 西平无罪，二百口伏诛，河中旧将，无不从坐，某等必死矣！ 
现代文：九日，康廷孝到剑州，当时康延孝部下都是、延、河中等地的旧将，焦武等人知道西平王惨遭祸害，又杀了朱令德，都在军门大声痛哭，对康延孝说： 西平王无罪，家中二百人被杀，河中旧将，没有不受牵连的，我们必死无疑。 
English: On the 9th, Kang Dingxiao went to Jianzhou. At that time, Kang Yanxiao's subordinates were all former generals in Yan and He. Jiao Wu and others knew that King Xiping had suffered a terrible disaster and killed Zhu Lingde. They all cried loudly and bitterly at the gate of the army and said to Kang Yanxiao: King Xiping is not guilty. Two hundred people in his family were killed. There are no former generals in He who are not implicated. We will undoubtedly die.

古文：时魏王继岌到泥溪，延孝报继岌云： 河中兵士号哭，欲为乱。 
现代文：这时魏王李继岌到泥溪，康延孝向李继岌报告说 ：河中士兵号哭，将作乱。 
English: At this time, the Wei king Li Jizhe went to the muddy creek, and Kang Yanxiao reported to Li Jizhe that the soldiers in the river were crying and would make trouble.

古文：丁酉，延孝至剑州，遂拥众回，自称西川节度、三川制置等使，以檄招谕蜀人，三日间，众及五万。
现代文：十日，康延孝到剑州，于是带领众兵往回走，自称西川节度使、三川制置使，用檄文向蜀人招兵，三天之内，人数达到五万。
English: On the tenth day, Kang Yanxiao went to Jianzhou, and then led the soldiers to go back, claiming to be the envoy of the West River Festival, and the envoy of the Three Rivers System, and recruited soldiers from the Shu people with a letter. Within three days, the number reached fifty thousand.

古文：己亥，继岌至利州。
现代文：十二日，李继岌到利州。
English: On the 12th, Li Jizhe arrived in Lizhou.

古文：是夜，守吉柏津使密告魏王曰： 得绍琛文字，令断吉柏浮梁。 
现代文：这一夜，守吉柏津使向魏王密告说 ：得到绍琛的文字，命令砍断吉柏浮桥。 
English: That night, the governor of Ji Baijin sent a secret message to Wei Wang, saying that he had received a letter from Shaoxing, ordering the Ji Bai floating bridge to be cut down.

古文：继岌惧，乃令梁汉颙以兵控吉柏津。
现代文：李继岌害怕，便令梁汉用兵控制吉柏津。
English: Li Ji was so scared that he ordered Liang Han to use soldiers to control Ji Baijin.

古文：延孝已拥众急趋西川，继岌遣人驰书谕之。
现代文：康延孝已带众兵赶往西川，李继岌派人骑马送信晓谕他。
English: Kang Yanxiao had rushed to the West River with many soldiers. Li Jizhe sent a messenger on horseback to tell him.

古文：夜半，令监军使李廷安召任圜，因署为副招讨使。令圜率兵七千骑，与都指挥使梁汉颙、监军李廷安讨之。
现代文：半夜，令监军使李廷安召来任圜，任他为副招讨使，令任圜率七千骑兵，和都指挥使梁汉、监军李廷安讨伐康延孝。
English: In the middle of the night, Li Ting'an, the commander-in-chief of the army, was summoned to Renjun, appointed him as the deputy recruiting officer, ordered Renjun to lead seven thousand cavalry, and commanded Lianghan, the commander-in-chief of the army, and Li Ting'an to fight against Kang Yanxiao.

古文：辛丑，先令都将何建崇击剑门，下之。
现代文：十四日，先令都将何建崇攻击剑门，攻下了。
English: On the 14th, Shilling attacked Jianmen and captured He Jianzhong.

古文：士卒忠奋者立东厢，衰疾者立西厢，无自苦也。 得请行者七百人，逐延孝西寨，斩首百余级，竟拔其城。汉州四面树竹木为栅。
现代文：二十七日，任圜带大军到达汉州，康延孝前来迎战，任圜令董璋用东川的懦弱士兵抵挡其前锋，把精兵埋伏在后面，康延孝击退东川之兵后急忙追杀，遇伏兵突起，康延孝被打败，逃回汉州，闭关不出。西川孟知祥带二万兵，与任圜联合攻打他。汉州四面树起竹木做栅栏。
English: On the 27th day of the month, Ren Yu led a large army to Hanzhou, Kang Yanxiao came to meet the battle, Ren Yu ordered Dong Xuan to use the cowardly soldiers of Dongchuan to resist his front and ambush the elite soldiers in the back, Kang Yanxiao repelled the soldiers of Dongchuan and hurriedly chased after them. When the ambushers sprang up, Kang Yanxiao was defeated and fled back to Hanzhou, unable to close the gate. West River Meng Zhixiang led 20,000 soldiers and jointly attacked him with Ren Yu. Hanzhou erected bamboo fences with trees on all sides.

古文：三月乙丑，圜阵于金雁桥，即率诸军鼓噪而进，四面纵火，风焰亘空。
现代文：三月九日，任圜在金雁桥摆下阵势，随即率各军呼喊着前进，四面放火，烈焰腾空。
English: On March 9th, Ren Hui set up a position at the Golden Goose Bridge, then immediately led the troops to advance shouting, set fire to the four sides, and the flames took off.

古文：延孝危急，引骑出战，遇阵于金雁桥，又败之，以十数骑奔绵州；何建崇追及，擒之，任圜命载以槛车。
现代文：这时康延孝十分危急，带骑兵出战，在金雁桥遇上敌阵，又失败了，带十几名骑兵逃奔到绵州，被何建崇追上抓住了他，任圜命用囚车运来。
English: At this time, Kang Yanxiao was in a very critical situation. He went to war with cavalry, encountered the enemy line at Jinyan Bridge, and failed again. He fled to Mianzhou with more than a dozen cavalry. He was caught by He Jianzong, and was transported by prisoner car.

古文：时孟知祥与任圜、董璋置酒高会，因引令延孝槛车至会。知祥问曰； 明公顷自梁朝脱身归命，才平汴水，节制陕郊，近领前锋，克平剑外，归朝之后，授爵册勋，巨镇尊官，谁与为竞！
现代文：这时孟知祥与任圜、董璋设酒宴聚会，因此令把康延孝的囚车带到酒会上，孟知祥问道： 您刚从梁朝脱身归顺，才平定汴水，节制陕郊，最近又领前锋，平定剑门以外，回归朝廷后，将授爵位封功勋，巨镇尊官，谁能与您竞争！
English: At this time, Meng Zhixiang held a wine banquet with Ren Hui and Dong Hui. Therefore, he ordered to bring Kang Yanxiao's prisoner car to the banquet. Meng Zhixiang asked: You have just escaped from the Liang Dynasty and surrendered, only to pacify Surabaya, restrain Shaanxi Suburbs, and recently lead the vanguard. In addition to pacifying Jianmen, after returning to the imperial court, you will be awarded a knighthood for meritorious service, great dignitary, who can compete with you!

古文：奈何躁愤，自毁功庸，入此槛车，还为邓艾，深可痛惜，谁肯愍之！ 
现代文：无奈您急躁怨愤，自己毁了功劳，进了这辆囚车，成为邓艾，我深深为您感到痛惜，谁肯怜悯您！ 
English: Unable to help it, you were impatient and resentful, ruined your own merits, got into this prison car, and became Deng Ai. I deeply feel sorry for you. Who would pity you!

古文：知祥因手自注杯以饮之。
现代文：孟知祥亲自倒满酒给他喝。
English: Meng Zhixiang personally poured wine for him to drink.

古文：延孝曰： 自知富贵难消，官职已足。
现代文：康延孝说 ：我自己知道富贵难以消受，官职已经满足。
English: Kang Yanxiao said: I myself know that wealth is hard to accept, and the official position has been satisfied.

古文：然郭崇韬佐命元勋，辅成大业，不动干戈，收获两川，自古殊功，但恐不及，一旦何罪，阖门被诛；延孝之徒，何保首领。
现代文：但郭崇韬是佐命元勋，辅助皇帝成就大业，不动干戈收获两川，自古以来的特殊功业恐怕谁也比不上，他并没犯下什么罪行，却全家被杀，我这类人还怎么能保住头颅？
English: But Guo Chongtao is a founding member of the Guo Family, he assisted the emperor in accomplishing a great cause, he did not hesitate to fight and harvest the two rivers. I am afraid that no one can match his special achievements since ancient times. He did not commit any crime, but his whole family was killed. How can people like me still keep their heads?

古文：以此思虑，不敢归朝，天道相违，一旦至此，亦其命也，夫复何言！ 
现代文：想到这些，我就不敢回朝廷去，天道不助我，一旦到这个地步，也是命该如此，还有什么话说呢！ 
English: When I think of these things, I dare not go back to the Imperial Court. Heaven will not help me. Once I reach this point, it is my destiny to do so. What else is there to say?

古文：及圜班师，行次凤翔，中使向延嗣赍诏至，遂诛之。
现代文：任圜回师时，走到凤翔，朝中使者向延嗣带诏书来，于是处死康延孝。
English: When he was appointed as a tutor, he went to Fengxiang. An emissary from the Chinese court came to Yanji with an imperial edict, so he executed Kang Yanxiao.

古文：部下怀其首级，瘗于昭应县民陈晖地。天成初，其子发之携去。
现代文：他的部下收藏了他的首级，埋在昭应县县民陈晖的地里，天成初年，他儿子挖出带走。
English: His subordinates collected his severed head and buried it in the land of Zhaoying County citizen Chen Qi. In the first year of Tiancheng, his son dug it up and took it away.

