古文：男子禀乾之刚，女子配坤之顺。
现代文：男子具有上天的阳刚之气，女子具有大地的柔顺之气。
English: Men have the masculinity of heaven, women have the softness of the earth.

古文：贤后称女中尧舜，烈女称女中丈夫。
现代文：贤德的皇后辅佐治国，堪称女中的尧舜。重义轻生的女子具有须眉的气概，可称为 女中的丈夫 。
English: The virtuous Empress Sui of Georgia can be said to be the best among women. A woman with a strong sense of justice and lightness of birth has the courage of a mustache, and can be called the husband of a woman.

古文：曰闺秀，曰淑媛，皆称贤女；曰阃范，曰懿德，并美佳人。
现代文： 闺秀 、 淑媛 都是称赞有贤德的女子； 阃范  懿德 ，都是赞美有才德的女子。
English: Girlfriends and wives are all praising virtuous women; wives are all praising virtuous women.

古文：妇主中馈，烹治饮食之名；女子归宁，回家省亲之谓。
现代文：妇主中馈是说女子主持家中烹饪饮食之事，可以见得内助的贤能；女子归宁，是回娘家探望父母的称谓。
English: A woman's midwife is said to be a woman who presides over the cooking and eating at home, and can be seen as a domestic helper; a woman's homecoming is the title of visiting her parents at her daughter's home.

古文：何谓三从，从父从夫从子；何谓四德，妇德妇言妇工妇容。
现代文：什么叫做 三从 ？就是在家时从父，出嫁后从夫，夫死后从子；什么叫做 四德 ？就是妇德要温柔，妇容要整洁，妇言要慎重，妇功要勤习。
English: What are the three virtues? They are the father's at home, the husband's after marriage, and the son's after the husband's death. What are the four virtues? That is, the woman should be gentle, the woman should be neat, the woman should be prudent, and the woman should be diligent.

古文：周家母仪，太王有周姜，王季有太妊，文王有太姒；三代亡国，夏桀以妺喜，商纣以妲己，周幽以褒姒。
现代文：周朝母仪天下，垂训世人的，有太王的周姜，有王季的太任，有文王的太姒。使三代亡国的宠姬荒淫，因此丧失了天下，夏桀为了妺喜，商纣为了妲己，周幽王为了褒以。
English: The Zhou Dynasty was the mother of the world, and there were Zhou Jiang, who was the great king, Zhou Ji, who was the great ruler, and Zhou Wen, who was the great ruler. They made the three generations of the country's favorite concubines to commit fornication, and thus lost the world. Xia Yao did it for pleasure, Shang Yao did it for self-gratification, and Zhou Yu Wang did it for praise.

古文：兰蕙质，柳絮才，皆女人之美誉；冰雪心，柏舟操，悉孀妇之清声。
现代文：幽兰的气质，蕙草的芳心，都是美人的赞美之辞。像柏一样的耐寒苦，像冰霜一样的志节操守，是譬谕寡妇坚贞清白的名声。
English: The temperament of the magnolia, the heart of the thistle, are all the praises of the beauty. The cold hardiness like the cypress, the integrity like the frost, are the parables of the widow's reputation for purity.

古文：女貌娇娆，谓之尤物；妇容妖媚，实可倾城。
现代文：女子的姿态聘婷称做尤物；妇人的仪容婉媚可比喻为倾城。
English: A woman's posture is said to be beautiful; a woman's graceful appearance can be likened to that of a beautiful woman.

古文：潘妃步朵朵莲花，小蛮腰纤纤杨柳。
现代文：潘妃步态美妙，脚下仿佛生出朵朵莲花；小蛮腰肢纤细，有如纤纤杨柳摇曳生姿。
English: Pan Fei's gait is wonderful, as if a lotus flower is growing at her feet; her small waist and slender limbs are like delicate willows swaying.

古文：张丽华发光可鉴，吴绛仙秀色可餐。
现代文：张丽华头发的光润，可以当作镜子来照；吴绛仙秀丽的面容，可以使人忘记饥饿。
English: Zhang Lihua's shiny hair can be used as a mirror; Wu Yuxian's beautiful face can make people forget about hunger.

古文：丽娟气馥如兰，呵气结成香雾；太真泪红于血，滴时更结红冰。
现代文：丽娟气息芬芳如同兰花，呵气能凝成香雾。杨太真的眼泪比血红，滴下时竟结成红冰。
English: Yang Taizhen's breath smells like an orchid, and can condense into a fragrant mist. Yang Taizhen's tears are redder than blood, and when they fall, they turn into red ice.

古文：孟光力大，石臼可擎；飞燕身轻，掌上可舞。
现代文：孟光力大无比，可以举起石臼；赵飞燕体态轻盈，可以在别人的手掌上跳舞。
English: Meng Guangli is incomparably strong and can lift a stone mill; Zhao Feiyan is light and can dance on the palm of someone else's hand.

古文：至若缇萦上书而救父，卢氏冒刃而卫姑，此女之孝者。
现代文：讲到缇萦的上皇帝书，愿为官婢以救父亲；卢氏面对刀刃保互婆母，这些都是女性中最孝顺的。
English: When it comes to the emperor's letter, they are willing to be officials and servants to save their father; Lu faces the sword to protect his mother-in-law, these are the most filial of women.

古文：侃母截发以延宾，村媪杀鸡而谢客，此女之贤者。
现代文：陶侃的母亲剪发换酒款待宾客；络秀备具酒肴供应宾客；这些都是女性中有贤德的。
English: Tao Kan's mother cutting hair and exchanging wine to entertain guests; Luo Xiu preparing and serving wine to guests; these are all virtuous women.

古文：韩玖英恐贼秽而自投于秽，陈仲妻恐陨德而宁陨于崖，此女之烈者。
现代文：韩玖英怕遭贼污辱而自投于粪坑，陈仲的妻子唯恐败坏德行而坠崖自杀，这些都是女中之贞烈者。
English: Han Zhiying threw herself into a cesspit for fear of being insulted by a thief, and Chen Zhong's wife committed suicide by falling off a cliff for fear of corrupting her virtue. These are all virtuous women.

古文：王凝妻被牵，断臂投地；曹令女誓志，引刀割鼻，此女之节者。
现代文：王凝的妻子李氏，被人拉了手臂，便取斧自断手臂，这是女性中最贞节的。
English: Wang Rong's wife, Li, was pulled by someone's arm, so she took an axe to cut off her arm, which is the most chaste of women.

古文：曹大家续完《汉》帙，徐惠妃援笔成文，此女之才者。
现代文：曹大家继续完成了汉书，蔡文姬誊写已散失的赐书，这是女流中最有才能的。
English: Cao and others continued to complete the Chinese book, and Cai Wenji copied the lost gift book, which is the most talented in the women's stream.

古文：戴女之练裳竹笥，孟光之荆钗裙布，此女之贫者。
现代文：荀灌的突出重围求人来救；木兰女易男装代父从军，这是女辈中最勇敢的。
English: The protruding heavy encirclement of the watering begs for someone to come to the rescue; Mulan's stepfather joins the army, which is the bravest among the women.

古文：柳氏秃妃之发，郭氏绝夫之嗣，此女之妒者。
现代文：戴良的女儿出嫁，嫁妆之中只有薄绢的衣服，和竹做的箱子；孟光的荆条钗饰粗布衣裙，这是女性中最俭朴清贫者。
English: Dai Liang's daughter is getting married, and the dowry includes only a thin dress and a bamboo box; Meng Guang's dress is made of coarse cloth decorated with thorns and thistles. This is the most frugal and poverty-stricken woman.

古文：贾女偷韩寿之香，齐女致袄庙之毁，此女之淫者。
现代文：贾牛私窃异香送给韩寿；卓文君夜奔客舍，昵就相如，这是女性中最淫荡的。
English: Jia Niu's petty theft of incense was given to Han Shou; Zhuo Wenjun's night run to the guest house, the nickname is similar, this is the most lewd among women.

古文：东施效颦而可厌，无盐刻画以难堪，此女之丑者。
现代文：东施效颦，令人看了厌恶；无盐的貌丑，一经描绘更觉得难以入目，这是女中最丑者。
English: The effect is repulsive; the unsalted ugliness, which is all the more difficult to look at once it has been described, is the ugliest of women.

古文：自古贞淫各异，人生妍丑不齐。
现代文：自古以来女子的贞淫不同，美丑各异。
English: Since ancient times, women's chastity is different, beauty and ugliness are different.

古文：是故生菩萨、九子母、鸠盘荼，谓妇态之更变可畏；钱树子、一点红、无廉耻，谓青楼之妓女殊名。
现代文：所以 生菩萨  九子母  鸠盘荼 这些词，是说女人一生的姿色变化可怕；而 钱树子  一点红  无廉耻 等词，则是对妓院里妓女的不同称呼。
English: Therefore, the words "born bodhisattva," "mother of nine children" and "fierce woman" mean that a woman's life-long changes in appearance are terrible; while the words "money tree," "a little red" and "shameless" are different names for prostitutes in brothels.

古文：此固不列于人群，亦可附之以博笑。
现代文：这些女子本来不应该被列入人群，但是也可以附带着写在后面，以博得人们一笑。
English: These women shouldn't have been included in the group, but they could have been written in the back with a wink to make people smile.

