古文：张骞，汉中人也，建元中为郎。
现代文：张骞是汉中人。建元年间被任命为郎官。
English: Zhang Qian is a native of Hanzhong. He was appointed as a vassal during the first year of the Republic of China.

古文：时，匈奴降者言匈奴破月氏王，以其头为饮器，月氏遁而怨匈奴，无与共击之。
现代文：那时匈奴投降过来的人说匈奴攻破月氏王，并且用月氏王的头颅做酒器。月氏因此逃避而且怨恨匈奴，就是苦于没有人和他们一起打击匈奴。
English: At that time, those who surrendered to the Huns said that the Huns defeated the King of the Moon Clan and used the head of the King of the Moon Clan as a drinking vessel. The Moon Clan therefore fled and resented the Huns, suffering from the fact that no one fought the Huns with them.

古文：汉方欲事灭胡，闻此言，欲通使，道必更匈奴中，乃募能使者。
现代文：汉王朝正想从事消灭匈奴的战争，听说此言，就想派人出使月氏，可匈奴国又是必经之路，于是就招募能够出使的人。
English: The Han Dynasty wanted to engage in a war to exterminate the Xiongnu. When they heard this, they wanted to send an envoy to the Yue clan, but the Xiongnu country was a necessary path, so they recruited people who could send an envoy.

古文：骞以郎应募，使月氏，与堂邑氏奴甘父俱出陇西。
现代文：张骞以郎官的身份应募出使月氏。与堂邑氏的奴仆甘父一起离开陇西。
English: Zhang Ye was recruited as a retainer to the Envoys of the Moon clan, and he left Shaanxi with Gan Fu, a servant of the Dongyi clan.

古文：径匈奴，匈奴得之，传诣单于。
现代文：途经匈奴，被匈奴人截获，用传车送到单于那里。
English: He passed through the Huns, was intercepted by the Huns, and was transported by wagon to Sanyu.

古文：单于曰： 月氏在吾北，汉何以得往使？
现代文：单于说： 月氏在我的北边，汉朝人怎么能往那儿出使呢？
English: He simply said, "Mr. Yue is to the north of me, so how can Han Dynasty emissaries go there?"

古文：吾欲使越，汉肯听我乎？ 
现代文：我如果想派人出使南越，汉朝肯任凭我们的人经过吗？ 
English: If we want to send an envoy to South Vietnam, will the Han Dynasty allow us to do so?

古文：留骞十余岁，予妻，有子，然骞持汉节不失。
现代文：扣留张骞十多年。给他娶妻，并生了儿子，然而张骞仍持汉节不失使者身分。
English: He detained Zhang Ye for more than ten years. He married him and had a son, but Zhang Ye still kept the Han Festival without losing his status as an envoy.

古文：居匈奴西，骞因与其属亡乡月氏，西走数十日，至大宛。
现代文：因居住在匈奴西部，张骞趁机带领他的部属一起向月氏逃亡。往西跑了几十天，到了大宛。
English: Because he lived in the west of the Xiongnu, Zhang Ye took the opportunity to lead his subordinates to escape to the Yue clan. He ran west for dozens of days and arrived in Dawan.

古文：大宛闻汉之饶财，欲通不得，见骞，喜，问欲何之。
现代文：大宛听说汉朝财物丰富，想和汉朝交往可找不到机会。见到张骞非常高兴，问他要到哪里去。
English: Dayuan heard that the Han Dynasty was rich in wealth and could not find an opportunity to interact with the Han Dynasty. He was very happy to see Zhang Ye and asked him where he was going.

古文：骞曰： 为汉使月氏而为匈奴所闭道，今亡，唯王使人道送我。诚得至，反汉，汉之赂遗王财物不可胜言。 
现代文：张骞说： 替汉朝出使月氏，而被匈奴封锁道路，不让通行，现在逃亡到贵国，希望大王能派人带路，送我们去，假如能够到达月氏，我们返回汉朝后，汉朝送给大王的财物，一定多得不可尽言。 
English: Zhang Ye said: I was sent to the Moon Clan on behalf of the Han Dynasty, but the road was blocked by the Huns and we were not allowed to pass. Now I have fled to your country. I hope that the Great King can send someone to lead the way and send us there. If we can reach the Moon Clan, after we return to the Han Dynasty, the wealth that the Han Dynasty has sent to the Great King will be too much to tell.

古文：大宛以为然，遣骞，为发译道，抵康居。
现代文：大宛认为可以，就送他们去，并为他们派遣了翻译和向导。
English: Dawan thought it would be a good idea to send them there, and sent them an interpreter and a guide.

古文：康居传致大月氏。
现代文：送到康居，康居用传车将他们送到大月氏。
English: They were sent to Kangju, which sent them to Mr. Otsuki by car.

古文：大月氏王已为胡所杀，立其夫人为王。
现代文：这时，原来的大月氏王已被匈奴所杀，立了他的夫人为王。
English: At this time, the original king of the Otsuki clan had been killed by the Xiongnu, and his wife was made king.

古文：既臣大夏而君之，地肥饶，少寇，志安乐。
现代文：大月氏已经使大夏臣服并统治着它。
English: The Otsuki clan has subjugated Daxia and rules it.

古文：又自以远远汉，殊无报胡之心。骞从月氏至大夏，竟不能得月氏要领。
现代文：他们那里土地肥沃，出产丰富，没有侵扰，心境悠闲安乐，又自认为距离汉朝遥远而不想亲近汉朝，全然没有向匈奴报仇的意思。张骞从月氏到大夏，始终得不到月氏王明确的表示。
English: The land there is fertile, the production is abundant, there is no intrusion, the mood is leisurely and happy, and they think that they are far away from the Han Dynasty and do not want to be close to the Han Dynasty, and they have no intention of taking revenge on the Xiongnu. From the Yue Clan to the Summer Palace, Zhang Ye has never received a clear statement from the King of the Yue Clan.

古文：留岁余，还，并南山，欲从羌中归，复为匈奴所得。
现代文：逗留一年多后，只得返程。沿着南山，想从羌人居住的地方回到汉朝，又被匈奴截获。
English: After staying for more than a year, he had to return. Along the Nanshan Mountain, he wanted to return to the Han Dynasty from the place where the Xiongnu people lived, but he was intercepted by the Xiongnu.

古文：留岁余，单于死，国内乱，骞与胡妻及堂邑父俱亡归汉。
现代文：扣留一年多，碰巧单于死了，匈奴国内混乱，张骞便带着他匈奴籍的妻子以及堂邑甘父一起逃跑回到了汉朝。
English: After being detained for more than a year, he happened to die alone, and the Huns were in chaos, so Zhang Ye fled back to the Han Dynasty with his Hunnic wife and his cousin Gan.

古文：拜骞太中大夫，堂邑父为奉使君。
现代文：朝廷授予他太中太夫官职，堂邑甘父也当上了奉使君。
English: The imperial court awarded him the official post of grand chamberlain, and his cousin Gan also became an envoy.

古文：骞为人强力，宽大信人，蛮夷爱之。
现代文：张骞为人坚强而有毅力，宽宏大量，待人真诚，少数民族人喜欢他。
English: Zhang Ye is a strong person with perseverance, a magnanimous person, and treats people sincerely. Ethnic minorities like him.

古文：堂邑父胡人，善射，穷急射禽兽给食。
现代文：堂邑父是匈奴人，善于射箭，在穷困至极的时候，就射取禽兽作为食物。
English: My cousin's father was a Hun, good at archery, and in times of extreme poverty, he would shoot animals for food.

古文：初，骞行时百余人，去十三岁，唯二人得还。
现代文：当初，张骞出行时有一百余人，去了十三年，只有他和堂邑父两人回来。
English: At first, when Zhang Ye traveled, there were more than a hundred people. He went for thirteen years, and only he and his cousin came back.

古文：骞身所至者，大宛、大月氏、大夏、康居，而传闻其旁大国五六，具为天子言其地形所有，语皆在《西域传》。
现代文：张骞亲身所到过的地方，有大宛、大月氏、大夏、康居等国，他听说在这些国家的旁边还有五六个大国，他一一向汉武帝讲述了这些国家的地形和物产。所说的内容都在《西域传》裹。
English: Zhang Ye personally visited places such as Dawan, Dazhong, Daxia, Kangju and other countries. He heard that there were five or six big countries next to these countries. He always told Emperor Hanwu about the topography and products of these countries. The content of what he said was all wrapped in "The Legend of the West."

古文：骞曰： 臣在大夏时，见邛竹杖、蜀布，问： 安得此？ 大夏国人曰： 吾贾人往市之身毒国。
现代文：张骞说： 我在大夏的时候，见到邛那个地方的竹杖和蜀郡产的细布，问他们是从哪里获得的，大夏国人说： 是我国的商人从身毒国买来的。
English: Zhang Qian said: When I was in Daxia, I saw the bamboo canes from that place and the fine cloth from Shu County. When I asked where they were obtained from, the people of Daxia said: Our merchants bought them from the country of poison.

古文：身毒国在大夏东南可数千里。
现代文：身毒国在大夏东南，大约有数千里地。
English: The poisoned country is in the southeast of Daxia, about thousands of miles away.

古文：其俗土著，与大夏同，而卑湿暑热。
现代文：那裹的风俗是过着定居的生活，和大夏相同，但地势低洼，潮湿，气候炎热。
English: The local custom is to live a settled life, similar to that of Baxia, but the land is low-lying, humid, and the weather is hot.

古文：其民乘象以战。其国临大水焉。 以骞度之，大夏去汉万二千里，居西南。
现代文：那里的人骑着大象打仗，国家滨临大水，根据我的推测，大夏距离汉朝约有一万二千里，在汉朝的西南。
English: The people there ride elephants to war, and the country is bordered by large bodies of water. According to my estimation, Daxia is about twelve thousand miles away from the Han Dynasty, in the southwest of the Han Dynasty.

古文：今身毒又居大夏东南数千里，有蜀物，此其去蜀不远矣。
现代文：现在身毒又在大夏东南数千里，有蜀郡的物产，这样看来，身毒距离蜀不远。
English: Now, the body poison is thousands of miles southeast of Daxia, and there are products from Shu County. It seems that the body poison is not far from Shu.

古文：今使大夏，从羌中，险，羌人恶之；少北，则为匈奴所得；从蜀，宜径，又无寇。 
现代文：现在出使大夏，从羌族地区经过，很危险，羌族人很厌恶汉朝；稍稍往北，则会被匈奴人俘获；如果从蜀郡走，当是方便的道路，又无侵扰。 
English: Now it is very dangerous to send Daxia to pass through the Yao region, because the Yao people detest the Han Dynasty; if you go a little north, you will be captured by the Huns; if you go from Shu County, it is a convenient road and there is no intrusion.

古文：天子既闻大宛及大夏、安息之属皆大国，多奇物，土著，颇与中国同俗，而兵弱，贵汉财物；其北则大月氏、康居之属，兵强，可以赂遗设利朝也。
现代文：漠武帝听说大宛和大夏、安息等国家都是大国，有许多奇怪的物产，又过着定居的生活，与汉朝的风俗相同。而兵力很弱，很看重汉朝的财物；其北方则是大月氏、康居等国，兵力强大，可以用赠送财物、给他们以好处的方法，诱使他们前来朝见汉天子。
English: Emperor Mo Wu heard that countries such as Dawang, Daxia, and Shifang were big countries, with many strange goods, and they lived a settled life, the same as the customs of the Han Dynasty. However, they were weak in military strength, and they valued the wealth of the Han Dynasty. In the north, countries such as the Dazhong, Kangju and other countries had strong military strength, and they could use gifts of wealth to give them a good way to entice them to come to see Han Tianzi.

古文：诚得而以义属之，则广地万里，重九译，致殊俗，威德遍于四海。
现代文：果真能够这样做并用道义的力量使他们归附汉朝，那么汉朝就可扩大疆土一万余里，有些民族的人到朝廷来，要经多重翻译才能通晓语言，一些奇风异俗的少数民族也前来归附，汉朝的威望德泽就可普及四海。
English: If they can really do this and use the power of morality to make them join the Han Dynasty, then the Han Dynasty can expand its territory by more than ten thousand miles. Some ethnic groups come to the imperial court and need multiple translations to understand the language. Some ethnic minorities with strange customs also come to join. The prestige of the Han Dynasty can spread all over the world.

古文：天子欣欣以骞言为然。
现代文：汉武帝很高兴，认为张骞说得很有道理。
English: Emperor Hanwu was very pleased and thought Zhang Ye's words were very reasonable.

古文：乃令因蜀犍为发间使，四道并出：出駹，出莋，出徙、邛，出僰，皆各行一二千里。
现代文：于是下令通过蜀郡和犍为郡派遣探路的使者，分四路同时出发。一路从冉驰出发，一路从榨都出发，一路从徙和邛出发，一路从焚出发，各有一二千里路程。
English: Therefore, he ordered to send emissaries to explore routes for the county through Shu County and Handan, and set out in four directions at the same time: all the way from Ranchi, all the way from Zhudu, all the way from Yue and Handan, and all the way from Tang, each with a distance of one to two thousand miles.

古文：其北方闭氐、莋，南方闭巂、昆明。
现代文：可是北方的通道为氏族和榨都夷所阻挡，南方的通道为岭和昆明所阻。
English: However, the northern passage was blocked by the clans and the Zhuduyi, and the southern passage was blocked by the Ling and Kunming.

古文：昆明之属无君长，善寇盗，辄杀略汉使，终莫得通。
现代文：昆明等少数民族没有君长，善于劫掠和盗窃。每每杀害过往的汉使，夺走财物，这条路终于没能打通。
English: Countries such as Kunming did not have a monarch. They were good at robbing and stealing, and often killed and robbed the Han Dynasty emissaries. After all, the Han Dynasty emissaries could not pass.

古文：然闻其西可千余里，有乘象国，名滇越，而蜀贾间出物者或至焉，于是汉以求大夏道始通滇国。
现代文：不过听说昆明西边大约千余里的地方，有乘象国，名叫滇越，蜀郡有些私自往来买卖货物的商人到过那儿。于是汉朝因寻求通往大夏的道路而开始与滇国往来。
English: However, I heard that about a thousand miles to the west of Kunming, there was a country of elephants, called Shu Yue, where some merchants from Shu County came to buy and sell goods. Therefore, the Han Dynasty began to deal with Shu in search of the road to Baxia.

古文：初，汉欲通西南夷，费多，罢之。
现代文：当初，汉朝想与西南夷通使，由于费用太多，停止了这项工作。
English: At first, the Han Dynasty wanted to send an envoy to Southwest Yiwu, but the cost was too high and the work was stopped.

古文：及骞言可以通大夏，乃复事西南夷。
现代文：及至张骞说可经西南夷通往大夏，汉朝才着手打通西南夷之路。
English: It was not until Zhang Ye said that it was possible to get to Daxia through the Southwest Yiwu that the Han Dynasty began to open the Southwest Yiwu Road.

古文：骞以校尉从大将军击匈奴，知水草处，军得以不乏，乃封骞为博望侯。
现代文：张骞以校尉的身份跟随大将军卫青出击匈奴，因为他了解水草分布的地方，军队才能不缺给养，于是封张骞为博望侯。
English: Zhang Ye, as a lieutenant, followed the general Wei Qing to attack the Huns, because he knew where there was water and grass, so the army could not be exhausted. The emperor named Zhang Ye as Bohanghou.

古文：是岁，元朔六年也。
现代文：这年是汉武帝元朔六年。
English: This year is the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Hanwu.

古文：后二年，骞为卫尉，与李广俱出右北平击匈奴。
现代文：两年以后，张骞作为卫尉，与李广将军一起从右北平出发抗击匈奴。
English: Two years later, Zhang Ye, as a guard lieutenant, together with General Li Guang, set out from the right Beiping to resist the Xiongnu.

古文：匈奴围李将军，军失亡多，而骞后期当斩，赎为庶人。
现代文：李将军被匈奴包围，汉军伤亡惨重，而张骞晚于约定的时间到达，按军法当处以斩刑，他用财物赎为平民。
English: General Li was surrounded by the Xiongnu, the Chinese army suffered heavy casualties, and Zhang Xuan arrived later than the agreed time, and according to military law, he was sentenced to beheading. He used his property to redeem himself as a civilian.

古文：是岁，骠骑将军破匈奴西边，杀数万人，至祁连山。
现代文：这一年，骠骑将军霍去病在西边打败匈奴，杀数万，直至祁连山。
English: In that year, General Huo Deguang defeated the Xiongnu in the west and killed tens of thousands of them as far as Qilian Mountain.

古文：其秋，浑邪王率众降汉，而金城、河西并南山至盐泽，空无匈奴。
现代文：秋天，匈奴浑邪王率领他的部众投降汉朝。于是，从金城、河西走廊，沿祁连山直至盐泽一带空无匈奴。
English: In autumn, the Huns led by King Hunjia surrendered to the Han Dynasty. As a result, there were no Huns from Jincheng, the Hexi Corridor, along the Qilian Mountains to Yanze.

古文：匈奴时有候者到，而希矣。
现代文：匈奴时或有侦察兵前来，但也为数甚少。
English: The Huns sometimes sent scouts here, but this rarely happened.

古文：后二年，汉击走单于于幕北。
现代文：又过了两年，汉朝击退匈奴单于并赶往漠北。
English: After another two years, the Han Dynasty defeated the Xiongnu in Shandong and rushed to the desert north.

古文：天子数问骞大夏之属。
现代文：汉武帝多次向张骞询问大夏等国的情况。
English: Emperor Hanwu repeatedly asked Zhang Ye about the situation in Daxia and other countries.

古文：骞既失侯，因曰： 臣居匈奴中，闻乌孙王号昆莫。
现代文：此时张骞已失去了侯的封号，就回答道 我住在匈奴的时候，听说乌孙王名昆莫。
English: At this time, Zhang Ye, who had already lost the title of marquis, replied, "When I lived in Xiongnu, I heard that the name of King Wusun was Kunmo.

古文：昆莫父难兜靡本与大月氏俱在祁连、敦煌间，小国也。
现代文：昆莫的父亲难兜靡本来和大月氏都住在祁连山、敦煌一带，是个小国。
English: Kunmo's father could not help but mention that both the original and the Big Moon clan lived in the Qilian Mountains and Dunhuang area. It was a small country.

古文：大月氏攻杀难兜靡，夺其地，人民亡走匈奴。
现代文：大月氏攻打杀害了难兜靡，抢占了他的土地，乌孙人逃亡投奔匈奴。
English: The Otsuki clan attacked and killed Nando, seized his land, and his descendants fled to the Xiongnu.

古文：子昆莫新生，傅父布就翕侯抱亡置草中，为求食，还，见狼乳之，又乌衔肉翔其旁，以为神，遂持归匈奴，单于爱养之。
现代文：难兜靡的儿子昆莫那时刚出生不久，傅父布就翎侯抱着他逃亡，途中将他放在草丛中，去为他寻找食物。回来时，见狼正在给他喂奶，又有乌鸦衔着肉在他旁边盘旋，以为昆莫是神，就抱着昆莫归附匈奴，单于喜欢他，将他抚养成人。
English: Kunmo, the hard-to-catch son, was just born at that time. Soon after his birth, his father, Bu Xionghou, fled with him in his arms. On the way, he left him in the grass to find food for him. When he returned, he saw a wolf feeding him milk, and a crow circling next to him holding meat. Thinking that Kunmo was a god, he embraced Kunmo and joined the Xiongnu. Just because he liked him, he raised him to adulthood.

古文：及壮，以其父民众与昆莫，使将兵，数有功。
现代文：昆莫长大后，单于把他父亲的民众交还给他，让他带兵打仗，昆莫屡次建立战功。
English: After Kunmo grew up, he returned his father's people to him and let him lead soldiers into battle. Kunmo repeatedly established his military exploits.

古文：时，月氏已为匈奴所破，西击塞王。
现代文：那时，月氏已被匈奴打败，向西进攻塞王。
English: At that time, the Yue clan had already been defeated by the Xiongnu and headed west to attack the King of Sai.

古文：塞王南走远徙，月氏居其地。
现代文：塞王南巡迁往远方，月氏人便居住在塞王的地盘上。
English: When the King of Sai traveled south, the people of the Moon clan lived on the King of Sai's land.

古文：昆莫既健，自请单于报父怨，遂西攻破大月氏。
现代文：昆莫的力量壮大后，亲自请求单于允许他替父报仇，于是向西攻败大月氏。
English: After Kunmo's strength grew, he personally requested that he be allowed to avenge his father, so he went west to defeat the Otsuki clan.

古文：大月氏复西走，徙大夏地。
现代文：大月氏人再次西逃，迁往大夏人居住的地方。
English: The people of the Otsuki clan fled west again and moved to the place where the people of the Otsuka clan lived.

古文：昆莫略其众，因留居，兵稍强，会单于死，不肯复朝事匈奴。
现代文：昆莫掠夺其民众，就留居在大月氏人的土地上，兵力逐渐强大起来，正好碰上匈奴单于死，于是不肯再入朝事奉匈奴。
English: Kunmo plundered his people, so he stayed on the land of the Otsuki clan, and his army gradually became stronger. Just as he met the Huns, he died, so he refused to re-enter the court to serve the Huns.

古文：匈奴遣兵击之，不胜，益以为神而远之。
现代文：匈奴派军队攻打他，无法战胜，更认为昆莫是神而远离他。
English: The Xiongnu sent an army to attack him, but they were unable to defeat him. Moreover, they considered Kunmo to be a god and distanced themselves from him.

古文：今单于新困于汉，而昆莫地空。
现代文：如今单于刚被汉朝打败，处于窘困的境地，而昆莫原来的地方无人居住。
English: Today, it is in a desperate situation, having just been defeated by the Han Dynasty, and the original place of Kunmo is uninhabited.

古文：蛮夷恋故地，又贪汉物，诚以此时厚赂乌孙，招以东居故地，汉遣公主为夫人，结昆弟，其势宜听，则是断匈奴右臂也。
现代文：少数民族依恋故土，又贪心汉朝的财物，如果在此时多多地送些财物给乌孙，招引他们到束边来居住在原来的土地上，汉朝送公主给乌孙王作夫人，双方结为兄弟关系，根据以上对形势的分析，乌孙一定会听从我们的建议，那么造就等于切断了匈奴的右臂。
English: Ethnic minorities are attached to their homeland and greedy for the wealth of the Han Dynasty. If, at this time, they send more and more wealth to Wusun and attract them to live in the original land, the Han Dynasty will send a princess to Wusun as his wife, and the two sides will form a brotherly relationship. According to the above analysis of the situation, Wusun will definitely follow our suggestion, then the creation is equivalent to cutting off the right arm of the Xiongnu.

古文：既连乌孙，自其西大夏之属皆可招来而为外臣。 
现代文：联合了乌孙，自乌孙以西的大夏等国，都可招来而为您的外臣。 
English: After the unification of Wusun, countries such as Daxia in the west could be invited to become foreign vassal states.

古文：天子以为然，拜骞为中郎将，将三百人，马各二匹，牛、羊以万数，赍金币帛直数千巨万，多持节副使，道可便遣之旁国。
现代文：汉武帝认为张骞说得对，授予张骞中郎将的官职，率领三百人，每人马各二匹，赶着上万计的牛羊，随身携带价值数千万万的黄金和礼物，还有许多持节副使随行，出使乌孙。
English: Emperor Hanwu thought Zhang Ye was right and appointed Zhang Ye Zhong Lang to the post of general. He led 300 men, each with two horses, drove tens of thousands of cattle and sheep, and carried with him gold and gifts worth tens of millions of yuan. He was also accompanied by many loyal deputy envoys and sent his grandson.

古文：骞既至乌孙，致赐谕指，未能得其决。
现代文：道路方便的话，就派持节副使出使乌孙旁边的国家。
English: If the road is convenient, it will send a deputy envoy to the country next to Wusun.

古文：语在《西域传》。骞即分遣副使使大宛、康居、月氏、大夏。
现代文：张骞到达乌孙后，将汉武帝的礼物送给乌孙王并转达了汉武帝的旨意，但未能获得乌孙王的明确表态。具体内容记载在《西域传》裹。张骞便分别派遣副使出使大宛、康居、月氏、大夏。
English: After Zhang Ye arrived at Wusun, he gave Emperor Hanwu's gift to King Wusun and conveyed Emperor Hanwu's will, but he was unable to obtain a clear statement from King Wusun. The specific content is recorded in the "History of the Western Regions." Zhang Ye then sent deputy envoys to Dawan, Kangju, Yueshi, and Daxia.

古文：乌孙发译道送骞，与乌孙使数十人，马数十匹。报谢，因令窥汉，知其广大。
现代文：乌孙王派翻译向导护送张骞。乌孙使者数十人，马数十匹随张骞回汉朝答谢汉武帝，趁机让他们察看汉朝的情况，了解到了汉朝的广大。
English: Emperor Wusun sent an interpreter and a guide to escort Zhang Ye. Dozens of emissaries of Emperor Wusun and dozens of horses followed Zhang Ye back to the Han Dynasty to thank Emperor Wu of Han, taking the opportunity to let them inspect the situation of the Han Dynasty and learn about the vastness of the Han Dynasty.

古文：骞还，拜为大行。
现代文：张骞返回汉朝，被授予大行官。
English: Zhang Ye returned to the Han Dynasty and was awarded the title of Grand Marshal.

古文：岁余，骞卒。
现代文：一年多后，张骞去世。
English: More than a year later, Zhang Xuan passed away.

古文：后岁余，其所遣副使通大夏之属者皆颇与其人俱来，于是西北国始通于汉矣。
现代文：又过了一年多，他所派遣去通大夏等国的副使大都与这些国家的使节一同回到汉朝，于是西北各国开始与汉朝来往。
English: More than a year later, most of the deputy envoys he sent to Tongdaxia and other countries returned to the Han Dynasty together with the envoys of these countries, so the northwest countries began to interact with the Han Dynasty.

古文：然骞凿空，诸后使往者皆称博望侯，以为质于外国，外国由是信之。
现代文：不过由于张骞开辟了通往西域的道路，后来出使西域的人都仿效张骞，称博望侯，以此来取信于外国，外国人因此而信任他们。
English: However, because Zhang Ye opened up the road to the western region, later the people sent to the western region followed Zhang Ye and called themselves Bohang Hou, in order to gain the trust of foreign countries. Foreigners therefore trusted them.

古文：其后，乌孙竟与汉结婚。
现代文：那以后，乌孙王终于与选公主结婚。
English: After that, King Wusun finally married the princess.

古文：初，天子发书《易》，曰 神马当从西北来 。
现代文：当初，汉武帝打开《易》书占卜，说： 神马当从西北来。 
English: At first, Emperor Hanwu opened the "Yi" book of divination and said, "The divine horse should come from the northwest."

古文：得乌孙马好，名曰： 天马 。
现代文：得了乌孙马觉得好，给它起名为 天马 。
English: When he got the horse, he liked it and named it Tianma.

古文：及得宛汗血马，益壮，更名乌孙马曰 西极马 ，宛马曰 天马 云。
现代文：等到又得了大宛汗血马，它比乌孙马更加膘壮，便将乌孙马改名为 西极马 ，称大宛马为 天马 。
English: When he got another Dawan Sweat Horse, which was more robust than the Usun Horse, he changed the name of the Usun Horse to the West Pole Horse, calling the Dawan Horse the Heavenly Horse.

古文：而汉始筑令居以西，初置酒泉郡，以通西北国。
现代文：并且汉朝开始从令居向西筑塞，新设酒泉郡，以便于通往西域各国。
English: Moreover, the Han Dynasty began to build a wall from Lingju to the west, and Jiuquan County was newly established to facilitate access to the countries in the western region.

古文：因《益》发使抵安息、奄蔡、犛靬、条支、身毒国。
现代文：汉朝于是增派使者到安息、奄蔡、牦轩、条支、身毒国。
English: As a result, the Han Dynasty sent additional emissaries to the provinces of Shifang, Wuchai, Juxuan, Jiaozhi, and Shituo.

古文：而天子好宛马，使者相望于道，一辈大者数百，少者百余人，所赍操，大放博望侯时。
现代文：且漠武帝喜欢大宛马，出使西域的使者相望于道，一批多者数百人，少者百余人，所携带的东西，完全仿效博望侯张骞时的盛况。
English: Moreover, Emperor Mo liked Dayuanma, and dispatched envoys from the western regions to look at each other in the road. A group of several hundred people, less than a hundred people, and the things they carried, completely imitated the pomp of Bohangou Zhangye.

古文：其后益习而衰少焉。
现代文：其后，随着对西域情况的曰益熟悉，每批使者的人数也是越来越少。
English: Later, as they became more familiar with the situation in the western region, the number of emissaries in each group became fewer and fewer.

古文：汉率一岁中使者多者十余，少者五六辈，远者八九岁，近者数岁而反。
现代文：汉朝时大概一年中使者多者十余批，少者五六批，远的八九年，近的几年就可往返。
English: During the Han Dynasty, there were more than ten batches of envoys in a year, and less than five or six batches in a year. In the distant eighty-nine years, in recent years, they can travel back and forth.

古文：是时，汉既灭越，蜀所通西南夷皆震，请吏。
现代文：这个时候，汉朝已灭了南越，与蜀郡相通的西南夷都很震动，他们请求汉朝在那儿设治并派官吏进行治理。
English: At this time, the Han Dynasty had already destroyed South Vietnam, and the Southwestern Yi, which was connected to Shu County, was very shaken. They asked the Han Dynasty to set up a government there and send officials to administer it.

古文：置牂柯、越巂、益州、沈黎、文山郡，欲地接以前通大夏。
现代文：汉朝在西南夷设置了烊柯、越岭、益州、沈黎、文山郡，想用在西南夷设郡的办法，地界相接，向前通往大夏。
English: The Han Dynasty set up the counties of Shinko, Yuegling, Yizhou, Shenli and Wenshan in Southwest Yiwu. They wanted to use the method of setting up counties in Southwest Yiwu, so that the land borders would be connected, leading to Baxia.

古文：乃遣使岁十余辈，出此初郡，皆复闭昆明，为所杀，夺币物。
现代文：于是汉朝每年派使者十余批，从这些新设置的郡出发，但都再次被昆明夷所阻绝，漠使被杀、礼品遭劫。
English: As a result, the Han Dynasty sent more than ten batches of emissaries every year to set out from these newly established counties, but they were once again blocked by the Kunming Yi, the envoys were killed, and the gifts were robbed.

古文：于是汉发兵击昆明，斩首数万。
现代文：于是汉朝发兵出击昆明，斩首数万。
English: As a result, the Han Dynasty sent troops to attack Kunming, beheading tens of thousands of people.

古文：后复遣使，竟不得通。
现代文：后来又派使者，终不能通过。
English: Later, another messenger was sent, but he was not able to pass through.

古文：语在《西南夷传》。
现代文：详情在《西南夷传》裹。
English: Details are in the "Southwest Yixuan" package.

古文：自骞开外国道以尊贵，其吏士争上书言外国奇怪利害，求使。
现代文：自从张骞开辟了通往西域的道路而获得尊贵的地位，那些吏士争着上书谈论外国物产的稀奇古怪以及通使的利害关系，请求出使。
English: Ever since Zhang Xuan opened the road to the Western Regions and gained a prestigious position, those officials have been competing to write about the strangeness of foreign products and the interests of the envoys, requesting the dispatch of envoys.

古文：天子为其绝远，非人所乐，听其言，予节，募吏民无问所从来，为具备人众遣之，以广其道。
现代文：汉武帝因为西域偏僻遥远，并非人人都乐意去，便接受他们的言论，给予出使的符节，招募官吏和百姓而不问应募者的身份资历，为这些人准备好随行人员打发他们出使，以此扩大出使西域人员的来源。
English: Because the Western Regions are remote and far away, not everyone is willing to go there. Emperor Hanwu accepted their words, gave them the symbols of the envoys, recruited officials and people without asking the identity and qualifications of the applicants, and prepared the entourage for these people to send them out, thus expanding the source of the envoys from the Western Regions.

古文：来还不能无侵盗币物，及使失指，天子为其习之，辄复按致重罪，以激怒令赎，复求使。
现代文：这些人回来时，难免有劫掠和盗窃来的财物，以及执行使命时违背汉武帝的旨意，汉武帝因为他们熟悉西域的情况，就每每审查他们并致以重罪，以激发他们发奋去立功赎罪，再次请求出使西域。
English: When these people returned, it was inevitable that there would be looting and stolen property, as well as the execution of the mission against the will of Emperor Hanwu. Emperor Hanwu, because they were familiar with the situation in the Western Regions, always reviewed them and committed a serious crime to stimulate them to work hard to make merit and atone for their sins, and once again requested to send them to the Western Regions.

古文：使端无穷，而轻犯法。
现代文：出使西域的缘由无穷无尽，且轻视犯法。
English: Since then, there have been an endless stream of incidents involving emissaries, and they have easily broken the law.

古文：其吏卒亦辄复盛推外国所有，言大者予节，言小者为副，故妄言无行之徒皆争相效。
现代文：那些吏卒也每每一再地推崇外国的物产，夸张程度大的，被给予符节，为正使，夸张程度小的为副使。故无稽之谈者及无良好品行之徒都争相仿效。
English: Those officials and cadres also repeatedly extolled foreign products, and those with a high degree of exaggeration were given the title of "senior envoy" and those with a low degree of exaggeration were given the title of "deputy envoy." Therefore, those who have no evidence and those who do not have good conduct are competing to follow suit.

古文：其使皆私县官赍物，欲贱市以私其利。
现代文：使者们大都将天子送给西域各国的礼物据为己有，想以较低的价格卖出以从中牟利。
English: Most of the envoys took possession of the gifts sent by the Son of Heaven to the countries of the Western Regions and wanted to sell them at a lower price in order to profit from them.

古文：外国亦厌汉使人人有言轻重，度汉兵远，不能至，而禁其食物，以苦汉使。
现代文：外国人也厌恶汉使人人言语轻重不实，估计路远汉军不能到达，便断绝汉使的食物供应，使他们陷于困苦的境地。
English: Foreigners were also disgusted by the lies of the Han rulers. They thought that the Han army would not be able to reach them, so they cut off the food supply to the Han rulers, leaving them in a difficult situation.

古文：汉使乏绝，责怨，至相攻击。
现代文：汉使生活穷困，谴责抱怨，以至于相互攻击。
English: The Han impoverish the living, condemn the complaining, and even attack each other.

古文：楼兰、姑师小国，当空道，攻劫汉使王恢等尤甚。而匈奴奇兵又时时遮击之。
现代文：楼兰、姑师等小国，地处交通要道，攻击、劫掠汉使王恢等尤为厉害，且匈奴奇兵更是时时截击汉使。
English: Small countries such as Loulan and Gushi are located on important transportation routes, and the attacks and looting of the Han Emperor Wang Wei are particularly severe, and the Xiongnu soldiers are always intercepting the Han Emperor.

古文：使者争言外国利害，皆有城邑，兵弱易击。
现代文：使者们争相谈论征服这些国家对汉朝有利，不讨伐它则对汉朝有害，这些国家都有城邑，军队战斗力弱，易于攻击。
English: The envoys argued that conquering these countries would be beneficial to the Han Dynasty, but not fighting against them would be harmful to the Han Dynasty. These countries all have cities, but their armies are weak and easy to attack.

古文：于是天子遣从票侯破奴将属国骑及郡兵数万以击胡，胡皆去。
现代文：于是汉武帝派从票侯赵破奴，率领西域各属国骑兵及各郡兵力数万人反击匈奴，匈奴士兵全都逃窜。
English: As a result, Emperor Hanwu sent the vassal lord Zhao Bonu, leading the cavalry of the Western Regions and tens of thousands of troops from the counties to counterattack the Xiongnu. All the Xiongnu soldiers fled.

古文：明年，击破姑师，虏楼兰王。
现代文：第二年，赵破奴击败姑师，俘虏了楼兰王。
English: In the second year, Zhao Bon defeated his sister-in-law and captured Loulan Wang.

古文：酒泉列亭障至玉门矣。
现代文：汉朝从酒泉郡起布列了边防哨所，直至玉门关。
English: The Han Dynasty set up border guard posts from Jiuquan County to Yumen Pass.

古文：而大宛诸国发使随汉使来，观汉广大，以大鸟卵及犛靬眩人献于汉，天子大说。
现代文：大宛诸国派使者随汉使来到汉朝，看到汉朝的广大，他们向汉朝献上驼鸟卵和牦轩的幻术家，汉武帝非常高兴。
English: The emissaries from all over the world came to the Han Dynasty with the Han envoys. Seeing the vastness of the Han Dynasty, they presented the camel eggs and the illusionists from Juxuan to the Han Dynasty. Emperor Wu of Han was very happy.

古文：而汉使穷河源，其山多玉石，采来，天子案古图书，名河所出山曰昆仑云。
现代文：汉使穷尽黄河的源头，那里的山多玉石，汉使采来运回汉朝，汉武帝查考了古地图书籍，将黄河源头所出之山命名为昆仑山。
English: The Han emissaries exhausted the source of the Yellow River, where there were mountains of jade. The Han emissaries collected and transported it back to the Han Dynasty. Emperor Wu of Han examined the ancient books and named the mountain at the source of the Yellow River as Mount Kunlun.

古文：是时，上方数巡狩海上，乃悉从外国客，大都多人则过之，散财帛赏赐，厚具饶给之，以览视汉富厚焉。
现代文：这时，汉武帝正好多次到海边视察，身边竟全是外国客人跟随着。凡属大的城市或人多的地方就打那儿经过，散发财物布帛进行赏赐，备办丰厚的礼物送给他们，以此来展示汉朝财力雄厚。
English: At this time, Emperor Hanwu happened to visit the seaside several times, and all around him were foreign guests. Whenever there was a big city or a place with a lot of people, they would pass by there, distribute wealth cloth to reward them, and prepare rich gifts to give them, in order to show the Han Dynasty's financial strength.

古文：大角氐，出奇戏诸怪物，多聚观者，行赏赐，酒池肉林，令外国客遍观名各仓库府臧之积，欲以见汉广大，倾骇之。
现代文：表演大角抵、奇戏等新奇的东西，引来众多的围观者，大行赏赐。让外国客人遍观汉朝各仓库府藏的储积，想以此显示汉朝的广大，使他们对汉朝的强大既佩服又诧异。
English: The performance of novelties such as big horns and magic tricks attracted a large number of onlookers and was greatly appreciated. Foreign guests were allowed to look around the storage of the Han Dynasty's warehouses, hoping to show the vastness of the Han Dynasty and make them both admire and wonder at the power of the Han Dynasty.

古文：及加其眩者之工，而角氐奇戏岁增变，其益兴，自此始。
现代文：至于增加幻术家的技艺，角抵、奇戏花样的年年增变，它们的进一步兴起，就是从汉武帝时开始的。
English: As for the increase in the skills of illusionists, the annual increase and change of horns and tricks, their further rise began from the time of Emperor Hanwu.

古文：而外国使更来更去。
现代文：且外国使者不断地交替往来，络绎不绝。
English: And foreign envoys are constantly alternating and coming and going.

古文：大宛以西皆自恃远，尚骄恣，未可诎以礼羁縻而使也。
现代文：大宛以西的国家都自恃离汉朝遥远，还是骄傲放纵，汉朝没能使他们屈服，就用礼尚往来的方式与他们保持联系，出使这些国家。
English: The countries to the west of Dawan all boasted that they were far away from the Han Dynasty, but they were still proud and self-indulgent. When the Han Dynasty failed to bring them to their knees, they kept in touch with them by exchanging courtesies and dispatched these countries.

古文：汉使往既多，其少从率进孰于天子，言大宛有善马在贰师城，匿不肯示汉使。
现代文：汉朝出使到西域的人已很多，那些少年从使多用虚美的言辞怂恿汉武帝，说大宛有好马在贰师城，藏起来不肯让汉使看到。
English: There were already many envoys sent by the Han Dynasty to the Western Regions. Those young men often mocked Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty with false and beautiful words, saying that there were good horses in Dashi City, and they would not let the Han Envoys see them.

古文：天子既好宛马，闻之甘心，使壮士车令等待千金及金马以请宛王贰师城善马。
现代文：汉武帝喜欢宛马，听说后一心想得到它，他派壮士车令等带着千金和金马去请求大宛王送给贰师城好马。
English: Emperor Hanwu liked the Wanma, and when he heard about the horse, he wanted to get it. He sent the valiant chariot commanders with thousands of gold and gold horses to ask the Great Wan Wang to give the good horse to Gushi City.

古文：宛国饶汉物，相与谋曰： 汉去我远，而盐水中数有败，出其北有胡寇，出其南乏水草，又且往往而绝邑，乏食者多。
现代文：大宛国有许多汉朝财物，他们互相商量道： 汉朝离我们很远，且人从盐泽一带经过每有死亡，从它的北面经过有匈奴的骚扰，从南面来则缺乏水草，加上沿途处处没有城邑，缺乏食物的情况经常发生。
English: They discussed with each other: The Han Dynasty is far away from us, and people from the Yanze area pass through every death, from its north through the harassment of the Xiongnu, from the south there is a lack of aquatic plants, and there are no cities along the way, so a lack of food often occurs.

古文：汉使数百人为辈来，常乏食，死者过半，是安能致大军乎？
现代文：汉使一批数百人前来，常常缺乏食物。死者过半。这样的情况怎么能派大军来呢？
English: The Han dynasty sent a group of hundreds of people, often short of food, and more than half of them died. How could they send a large army in such a situation?

古文：且贰师马，宛宝马也。 
现代文：况且贰师马是大宛的宝马啊。 
English: What's more, it's Daewon's BMW.

古文：遂不肯予汉使。
现代文：终不肯给汉使。
English: refused to give the Han Dynasty envoy.

古文：汉使怒，妄言，椎金马而去。
现代文：汉使大怒，痛骂一通，椎破金马而去。
English: The envoy of the Han Dynasty became angry and casually threatened to smash the golden horse and leave.

古文：宛中贵人怒曰： 汉使至轻我！ 
现代文：大宛国的贵臣们怒道： 汉使太轻视我们了！ 
English: The dignitaries of the great destination country said angrily: The Han envoys despise us too much!

古文：遣汉使去，令其东边郁成王遮攻，杀汉使，取其财物。
现代文：命令汉使离开大宛国，又让束边的郁成王拦击他们，杀害汉使夺取他们的财物。
English: He ordered the Han envoys to leave the great destination country, and let the shackled Yu Cheng Wang stop them, kill the Han envoys and seize their property.

古文：天子大怒。
现代文：汉武帝大怒。
English: Emperor Hanwu was furious.

古文：诸尝使宛姚定汉等言： 宛兵弱，诚以汉兵不过三千人，强弩射之，即破宛矣。 
现代文：曾出使过大宛的姚定汉等人说： 大宛兵弱，若用近三千的汉军，强弓劲弩向他们射击，便可打败他们。 
English: Yao Dinghan and others who had been sent to Dayuan said: Dayuan's soldiers are weak. If you use nearly three thousand Chinese troops to shoot at them with a strong bow and arrow, you can defeat them.

古文：天子以尝使浞野侯攻楼兰，以七百骑先至，虏其王，以定汉等言为然，而欲侯宠姬李氏，乃以李广利为将军，伐宛。
现代文：汉武帝因曾派浞野侯赵破奴攻打楼兰，以七百骑兵先到楼兰，俘虏了楼兰王，故认为姚定汉等人言之有理，而想封宠姬李夫人的兄弟为侯，便以李广利为将军讨伐大宛。
English: Emperor Wudi of Han had sent the warlord Zhao Bonu to attack Loulan, and he went to Loulan first with seven hundred cavalry and captured the king of Loulan. Therefore, he thought that Yao Dinghan and others were right, and he wanted to appoint the brother of Lady Ji Li as the warlord, so he took Li Guangli as the general to fight against Dayan.

古文：骞孙猛，字子游，有俊才，元帝时为光禄大夫，使匈奴，给事中，为石显所谮。自杀。
现代文：张骞的孙子张猛，字子游，颇有才智，元帝时为光禄大夫，出使过匈奴，加官给事中，被石显陷害而自杀。
English: Zhang Meng, the grandson of Zhang Xuan, was a talented calligrapher. He was the doctor of Guanglu at the time of the Yuan Emperor. He was sent by the Xiongnu, promoted to a higher position, and was framed by Shi Xian and committed suicide.

古文：李广利，女弟李夫人有宠于上，产昌邑哀王。
现代文：李广利的妹妹李夫人有宠于皇上，生昌邑哀王。
English: Li Guangli's younger sister, Lady Li, was favored by the emperor and was born in Chang'e.

古文：太初元年，以广利为贰师将军，发属国六千骑及郡国恶少年数万人以往，期至贰师城取善马，故号 贰师将军 。
现代文：太初元年，以广利为贰师将军，带领属国的六千骑兵和郡国那些品行恶劣的少年好几万人，以这些兵力去攻伐大宛，预期到贰师城夺取良马，所以叫他 贰师将军 。
English: At the beginning of the first year, with Guangli as the general of the division, he led the six thousand cavalry belonging to the country and the tens of thousands of young men of the county who behaved badly, and used these forces to attack Dayuan, expecting to capture good horses in the city of the division, so he was called the general of the division.

古文：故浩侯王恢使道军。
现代文：原浩侯王恢为军队带路做向导官。
English: The former great lord Wang Wei led the way for the army as a guide.

古文：既西过盐水，当道小国各坚城守，不肯给食，攻之不能下。
现代文：贰师将军的部队已经西遇盐水，沿路的那些小国家恐慌，都各自紧紧地守住自己的城堡，不供给汉军粮食，打又打不下来。
English: The troops of General Zou's division had already encountered salt water in the west, and the small countries along the way panicked, each of them tightly guarded their own castle, did not supply the Han army with grain, and could not beat down again.

古文：下者得食，不下者数日则去。
现代文：能攻下来的就有饭吃，不能攻下来的，只好几天就离开。
English: If you take the city, you'll get food, if you don't, you'll have to leave in a few days.

古文：比至郁成，士财有数千，皆饥罢。
现代文：等到达郁成，兵士只有几千人了，都饥饿疲乏。
English: By the time they reached Yucheng, there were only a few thousand soldiers left, and they were exhausted and starving.

古文：攻郁成城，郁成距之，所杀伤甚众。
现代文：攻打郁成城，大败，死伤的人很多。
English: They attacked Yucheng, suffered a crushing defeat, and many people were killed and injured.

古文：贰师将军与左右计： 至郁成尚不能举，况至其王都乎？ 
现代文：贰师将军和左右商议： 至郁成还不能攻下它，何况到大宛王都城呢？ 
English: General Zou and the left and right discussed: Even Yu Cheng could not capture it, let alone the capital city of Dawanwang.

古文：引而还。
现代文：就带着部队撤退。
English: He withdrew with his troops.

古文：往来二岁，至敦煌，士不过什一二。
现代文：往返花了两年，回到敦煌，士兵剩下不过十分之一。
English: The round trip took two years. Back in Dunhuang, only one-tenth of the soldiers remained.

古文：使使上书言： 道远，多乏食，且士卒不患战而患饥。
现代文：派遣使者给皇帝上奏章说： 路程遥远十分缺乏粮食。士兵们不怕打仗，衹怕挨饿。
English: An envoy was sent to report to the emperor: "The distance is far and there is a great shortage of food. The soldiers are not afraid of fighting, but they are afraid of starving.

古文：人少，不足以拔宛。
现代文：兵少，不能攻取宛国。
English: Few people, not enough to capture Dawan.

古文：愿且罢兵，益发而复往。 
现代文：希望暂且撤兵，多派兵后再去。 
English: It is hoped that the troops will be withdrawn for the time being, and more troops will be sent later.

古文：天子闻之，大怒，使使遮玉门关，曰： 军有敢入，斩之。 
现代文：汉武帝得知所奏，大发雷霆，派使者拦守玉门关，说军人敢有入关者立即斩了他！
English: When Emperor Hanwu learned of what had happened, he flew into a rage and sent an envoy to block the Yumen Pass, saying that if any soldier dared to enter the pass, he would be immediately beheaded!

古文：贰师恐，因留屯敦煌。
现代文：贰师将军李广利害怕了，因而留驻敦煌。
English: Li Guangli, the general of the imperial army, was afraid, so he stayed in Dunhuang.

古文：其夏，汉亡浞野之兵二万余于匈奴，公卿议者皆愿罢宛军，专力攻胡。
现代文：那年夏天，汉朝对匈奴作战，浞野侯趟破奴的士兵损失二万多人。汉朝廷高级官员商议都希望调回攻打大宛的军队，专力对付匈奴。
English: That summer, the Han Dynasty fought against the Xiongnu, losing more than twenty thousand soldiers in the fight against the Xiongnu. The high-ranking officials of the Han Dynasty all hoped to bring back the army that attacked Dawan and concentrate on dealing with the Xiongnu.

古文：天子业出兵诛宛，宛小国而不能下，则大夏之属渐轻汉，而宛善马绝不来，乌孙、轮台易苦汉使，为外国笑。
现代文：汉武帝却认为既已出兵讨伐大宛，如大宛这样的小国都打不下来，那大夏之类的国家会渐渐瞧不起汉朝，大宛的良马就断绝来汉，乌孙、轮台等国家也将随便难为汉朝的使者，就会见笑于外国。
English: However, Emperor Wudi of Han believed that since he had sent troops to fight against the Great Wan, small countries such as the Great Wan could not be defeated. Countries such as the Great Xia would gradually look down on the Han Dynasty, the good horses of the Great Wan would refuse to come to Han, and countries such as Wusun and Lintai would not be able to be the emissaries of the Han Dynasty, and would be laughed at abroad.

古文：乃案言伐宛尤不便者邓光等。
现代文：于是就惩治了议论攻打大宛尤为不当的邓光等人。
English: As a result, Deng Guang and others, who were particularly inappropriate in discussing and attacking the Great Wall, were punished.

古文：赦囚徒扞寇盗，发恶少年及边骑，岁余而出敦煌六万人，负私从者不与。
现代文：赦免了那些囚徒步卒，增发了那些品行恶劣的少年和边境的骑兵，经过一年多而从敦煌出兵六万人，私人带着粮食跟随部队参战的还不计算在内。
English: The prisoners and foot soldiers were pardoned, the boys who had behaved badly and the border cavalry were given extra pay, and after more than a year, sixty thousand soldiers were sent from Dunhuang, not counting the private soldiers who went to war with the troops.

古文：牛十万，马三万匹，驴、橐驼以万数赍粮，兵弩甚设。
现代文：这支队伍带有牛十万头，马三万匹，驴、骆驼以万数计算。
English: This team brought with them 100,000 head of cattle, 30,000 horses, and tens of thousands of donkeys and camels.

古文：天下骚动，转相奉伐宛，五十余校尉。
现代文：他们多带粮食，兵器、弓箭等极为齐备。全国骚扰动荡，相继供应征伐大宛，军队总共有五十余校尉军官出征。
English: They brought a lot of grain, and weapons, bows and arrows, etc. were extremely well-stocked. The whole country was in turmoil, and supplies for the conquest of Dawan were successively supplied. A total of more than 50 captains and officers of the army went to war.

古文：宛城中无井，汲城外流水，于是遣水工徙其城下水空以穴其城。
现代文：大宛都城内没有水井，都要从城外引进流水，于是漠军就派治水的工匠改道城下水，不使流经城下，而引水入孔穴之内，以水攻城内。
English: There were no wells in the city of Dawan, and running water had to be brought in from outside the city, so the desert army sent water control craftsmen to reroute the city's water supply, so that it would not flow under the city, but would be diverted into holes, and the city would be attacked with water.

古文：益发戍甲卒十八万酒泉、张掖北，置居延、休屠以卫酒泉。
现代文：汉朝还增派甲卒十八万人到酒泉和张掖以北驻守，并新置了居延和休屠两个县以卫护酒泉。
English: The Han Dynasty also sent an additional 180,000 soldiers to Jiuquan and Zhangye to garrison the north, and newly established two counties, Ji Yan and Xiu Tu, to guard Jiuquan.

古文：而发天下七科適，及载糒给贰师，转车人徒相连属至敦煌。
现代文：而征发天下 七科适 ，载运干粮以供给贰师将军，驱车载运的人众络绎相连到敦煌。
English: The world's seven scientific adaptations were requisitioned and dispatched, dry grain was transported to supply General Kuang Shih, and people were driven and transported to Dunhuang.

古文：而拜习马者二人为执驱马校尉，备破宛择取其善马云。
现代文：而授任两名会相马的人为执驱马校尉，准备在攻破大宛以后选取良马。
English: Instead, he appointed two people who were familiar with horses to be the captains to drive the horses, preparing to select the best horses after defeating the Great Dragon.

古文：于是贰师后复行，兵多，所至小国莫不迎，出食给军。
现代文：这时贰师将军是二次出征，队伍庞大，所至沿途各个小国无不迎接，拿出粮食供养军队。
English: At this time, General Gong Shih was on his second expedition, the team was huge, so all the small countries along the way greeted him and took out grain to feed the army.

古文：至轮台，轮台不下，攻数日，屠之。
现代文：到轮台国，轮台国不降，攻战几天，血洗了他们。
English: When it came to Taiwan, Taiwan did not surrender. They fought for a few days and were washed in blood.

古文：自此而西，平行至宛城，兵到者三万。
现代文：从此往西，平安行军到达了大宛王都，漠兵到达者三万人。
English: From here westward, the peaceful march reached the capital of Dawan, with the arrival of 30,000 desert soldiers.

古文：宛兵迎击汉兵，汉兵射败之，宛兵走入保其城。
现代文：宛军迎战汉军，汉军射败了他们，宛军逃到城堡内凭藉城墙守卫。
English: The Wan army fought against the Chinese army, the Chinese army defeated them, the Wan army fled to the castle and guarded by the city wall.

古文：贰师欲攻郁成城，恐留行而令宛益生诈，乃先至宛，决其水原，移之，则宛固已忧困。
现代文：贰师将军的部队本想进军先攻郁成城，恐怕军队滞留而使大宛人更生诈谋，于是就先攻大宛城，决开他们的水源，改变其流向，即使大宛坚守也甚感忧愁困窘。
English: General Zou's troops originally wanted to advance and attack Yucheng first, fearing that the army would stay behind and make the Dawan people alive, so they attacked Dawan City first, cut off their water source, and changed its flow direction. Even if Dawan held on, they felt very sad and embarrassed.

古文：围其城，攻之四十余日。
现代文：包围大宛的城池，攻城四十多天。
English: They encircled the city of Dawan and besieged it for more than forty days.

古文：其外城坏，虏宛贵人勇将煎靡。
现代文：他们的高级官员相互商量道： 汉朝之所以来攻打大宛，是我们国王毋寡隐藏了好马而杀害了汉朝使者。
English: Their high-ranking officials discussed among themselves: The reason why the Han Dynasty came to attack Dawan is that our king killed the Han Dynasty's envoy while he was hiding a good horse.

古文：今杀王而出善马，汉兵宜解；即不，乃力战而死，未晚也。 
现代文：如果杀掉国王毋寡并拿出好马，漠军之围当可解脱；即使不解，再奋战而死，也为时不晚。 
English: If you kill at least the king and bring out a good horse, the siege of the desert army can be relieved; even if it is not solved, it is not too late to fight and die.

古文：宛贵人皆以为然，共杀王。
现代文：大宛的高级官员们都认为这样对，共同杀死宛王毋寡。
English: The high-ranking officials of Dawan all agreed that it was right to jointly kill Wanwang.

古文：持其头，遣人使贰师，约曰： 汉无攻我，我尽出善马，恣所取，而给汉军食。
现代文：它的外城被摧毁，俘获了大宛贵人勇将煎靡。大宛人大为震惊，逃跑入守中城，相互商量说： 汉来攻打宛，是因为国王毋寡。 提着他的头派人去见贰师将军，相约说： 汉军不要攻打我们了，我们把好马全部拿出来，任凭你们选取，并且供给你们粮食。
English: Its outer city was destroyed, and the brave warriors who captured Dawan were overwhelmed. Dawan was very shocked, ran away to defend the middle city, and discussed with each other: Han came to attack Dawan because the king was too few. He sent a man with his head to see the general, and agreed to say: The Chinese army should not attack us, we will take out all the good horses, let you choose, and provide you with food.

古文：即不听我，我尽杀善马，康居之救又且至。
现代文：如若不听从，我们杀尽好马，而康居的救兵将要到达。
English: If you don't obey, we'll kill all the good horses, and Kangju's rescuers will arrive.

古文：至，我居内，康居居外，与汉军战。
现代文：一到达，我宛兵在城内，康居的救兵在城外，共同和汉军作战。
English: If their army arrives, our army will be in the city, and Kangju's army will be outside the city, fighting against the Han soldiers.

古文：孰计之，何从？ 
现代文：汉军仔细考虑吧，怎么办？ 
English: Let the Chinese army carefully consider what to do?

古文：是时，康居候视汉兵尚盛，不敢进。
现代文：这时康居侦探窥伺漠兵，汉兵还很强大，不敢进兵。
English: At this time, the Kangju detective spied on the non-Chinese soldiers. The Chinese soldiers were still very strong and did not dare to join the army.

古文：贰师闻宛城中新得汉人知穿井，而其内食尚多。
现代文：贰师将军听说大宛城内最近找到了汉人，会穿井汲水，而且城内粮食还多。
English: General Zou Shi heard that a Chinese man had recently been found in Dawan Town, that he could draw water from a well, and that there was plenty of grain in the town.

古文：计以为来诛首恶者毋寡，毋寡头已至，如此不许，则坚守，而康居候汉兵罢来救宛，破汉军必矣。
现代文：考虑到我们之所以来，就是为诛灭罪魁祸首宛王毋寡，毋寡的头已经到了，这样还不允许解开兵围，那么他们就会坚守，而康居等到汉军疲乏时而来援救大宛，那打败汉军是必然的了。
English: Considering that the reason we came was to annihilate the main culprit, Wang Wan, and that the head of Wang Wan had already arrived, so it was not allowed to open the encirclement, then they would stick to it, and Kangju would wait until the Chinese army was tired to come to the rescue of Dawan, then defeating the Chinese army was inevitable.

古文：军吏皆以为然，许宛之约。
现代文：军官们都认为对，就接受了大宛的许约。
English: The officers all agreed that what he said was right, and they agreed to Dawan's request.

古文：宛乃出其马，令汉自择之，而多出食食汉军。
现代文：大宛人就放出他们的好马，让汉兵自行挑选，还拿出许多粮食供养汉军。
English: Dawan people let out their good horses, let the Chinese soldiers choose their own, and also took out a lot of grain to feed the Chinese army.

古文：汉军取其善马数十匹，中马以下牝牡三千余匹，而立宛贵人之故时遇汉善者名昧蔡为宛王，与盟而罢兵，终不得入中城，罢而引归。
现代文：汉军挑选了好马几十匹，中等以下公马母马共三干多匹，而且立大宛高级官员中过去待汉人友好的昧蔡为大宛国王，与他订立盟约后撤兵。终于不得进入大宛内城，就结束这场战争撤兵回来了。
English: The Han army selected dozens of good horses, and a total of more than three medium-sized male horses and mares. Moreover, the high-ranking officials of Dayuan, who had been friendly to the Han people in the past, set up Cai as the king of Dayuan. After signing a treaty with him, the troops withdrew. Finally, they were not allowed to enter the inner city of Dayuan, and the troops withdrew after the war ended.

古文：初，贰师起孰煌西，为人多，道上国不能食，分为数军，从南北道。
现代文：当初，贰师将军发兵敦煌西进时，认为人多，沿路各国无法供给粮食，就分为几支队伍，从南北两路挺进。
English: At first, when General Gong sent troops from Dunhuang to the west, he thought that there were too many people and that the countries along the way could not supply grain, so he divided into several teams and advanced from the north and south.

古文：校尉王申生、故鸿胪壶充国等千余人别至郁成，城守不肯给食。
现代文：校尉王申生和原大鸿胪壶充国等统领一支千多人的队伍另到郁成，郁成人坚守城堡，不肯把粮食供给他们。
English: Wang Shensheng, the school captain, and the former Great Hungaria Kettle Chungguo led a team of more than a thousand people to Yucheng. The adults of Yucheng held fast to the castle and refused to provide them with food.

古文：申生去大军二百里，负而轻之，攻郁成急。
现代文：王申生的部队距离贰师将军的大部队二百里，他依仗大军而轻视对方，急攻郁成。
English: Wang Shensheng's troops were two hundred miles away from the large force of General Gong's division. He relied on the large army and despised the other side, suddenly attacking Yu Cheng.

古文：郁成窥知申生军少，晨用三千人攻杀申生等，数人脱亡，走贰师。
现代文：郁成人窥探得知王申生的部队少，就在一个早晨用三千人的兵力发起攻击，斩杀了王申生等人，军队大败，衹有几个人脱险逃出，跑到贰师将军那裹。
English: After learning that Wang Shensheng's troops were few, the despondent adult spies launched an attack with three thousand troops in the morning, killing Wang Shensheng and others. The army was defeated, and several people escaped and ran to General Zou.

古文：贰师令搜粟都尉上官桀往攻破郁成，郁成降。其王亡走康居，桀追至康居。
现代文：贰师将军命令搜粟都尉上宫桀去攻打郁成，郁成投降，郁成王逃走到康居国，上官桀就追到康居国。
English: General Zou ordered Lieutenant Sogou to attack Ikucheng, Ikucheng surrendered, Ikucheng fled to Kangju, and Shangguan Zou chased him to Kangju.

古文：康居闻汉已破宛，出郁成王与桀，桀令四骑士缚守诣大将军。
现代文：康居国人听说汉军已经打败大宛，就交出郁成王给上官桀。上官桀派四个骑士把他捆绑看守押送给主将李广利。
English: When the people of Kangju heard that the Han army had defeated Dayuan, they handed over Yu Cheng Wang to Shangguan Xuan. Shangguan Xuan sent four knights to tie him up and escort him to the commander Li Guangli.

古文：四人相谓 郁成，汉所毒，今生将，卒失大事。 
现代文：这四个人互相议论说： 郁成王是汉朝所痛恨的，如果把他活着送去，怕突然发生意外，贻误大事。 
English: These four people discussed with each other and said: Yu Cheng Wang is hated by the Han Dynasty, if he is sent alive, he is afraid of a sudden accident, delaying major events.

古文：欲杀，莫適先击。
现代文：想杀，没有人敢先动手。
English: If you want to kill, no one dares to do it first.

古文：上邽骑士赵弟拔剑击斩郁成王。
现代文：上邹骑士趟弟拔剑斫击，斩了郁成王。
English: The knight of the Upper Ying pulled out his sword and slashed Yu Cheng Wang.

古文：桀等遂追及大将军。
现代文：上官桀等就赶上了贰师将军的大部队。
English: Shangguan Zou and others caught up with the large force of General Zou's division.

古文：初，贰师后行，天子使使告乌孙大发兵击宛。
现代文：当初，贰师将军李广利后一次出兵，皇上派遣使者通告乌孙国，要它出兵与漠军合力攻宛。
English: At first, the general Li Guangli sent troops for the last time, and the emperor sent an envoy to inform the Wusun country that it should send troops to join forces with the Mongolian army to attack.

古文：乌孙发二千骑往，持两端，不肯前。
现代文：乌孙派遣两千名骑兵前往，徘徊观望，不敢上前。
English: Wusun dispatched two thousand cavalry to Dayuan, but took the attitude of riding the wall and did not move forward.

古文：贰师将军之东，诸所过小国闻宛破，皆使其子弟从入贡献，见天子，因为质焉。
现代文：贰师将军的队伍凯旋东归，所经过的那些小国听说大宛已被攻破，都打发自己的子弟跟随汉军去纳献贡物，谒见天子，因而作为人质。
English: The troops of General Gong Shi returned to the east in triumph. The small countries he passed through heard that the Great Wall had been breached, and they all sent their sons and daughters to follow the Chinese army to pay tribute and meet the Son of Heaven, thus becoming hostages.

古文：军还，入玉门者万余人，马千余匹。
现代文：军队返回，进入玉门关的有一万多人，军马一千多匹。
English: The army returned, and more than ten thousand people and more than a thousand horses entered Yumen Pass.

古文：后行，非乏食，战死不甚多，而将吏贪，不爱卒，侵牟之，以此物故者众。
现代文：贰师将军后一次行军，军队并非缺乏食用，牺牲的也不能算多，而是将吏们贪财，大都不爱护士兵，侵吞军饷，因此死亡很多。
English: The army did not lack food and did not sacrifice much during the last march of General Gong's division, but the generals were greedy for money, most of them did not care for the soldiers, and devoured the military pay, so many died.

古文：天子为万里征伐，不录其过，乃下诏曰： 匈奴为害久矣，今虽徙幕北，与旁国谋共要绝大月氏使，遮杀中郎将江、故雁门守攘。
现代文：天子因为是远涉万里征讨大宛，就不责问他们的过失，便下诏说： 匈奴为害很久了，如今虽远徙漠北，与旁国共谋截击大月氏国使臣，拦杀中郎将江及原雁门太守攘。
English: Since the heavenly son had traveled thousands of miles to conquer Dawan, he did not ask them about their mistakes, and issued an edict saying: The Xiongnu have been causing harm for a long time, and now, although they have migrated far away to the north, they have conspired with other countries to intercept the envoys of the State of the Otsuki clan, to stop the killing of the middle lord, to keep the river and the original wild goose gate too busy.

古文：危须以西及大宛皆合约杀期门车令、中郎将朝及身毒国使，隔东西道。
现代文：危须国以西及大宛皆合约杀期门车令、中郎将朝及身毒国使，隔断东西道路。
English: To the west of the state of emergency and to the east of the state of emergency, there is a contract to kill the gate car, and the middle man will be the morning and the poisoned state envoy, cutting off the east-west road.

古文：贰师将军广利征讨厥罪，伐胜大宛。
现代文：贰师将军广利征讨其罪，战胜大宛。
English: His general, Guangli, took up the cause and defeated Dawan.

古文：赖天之灵，从溯河山，涉流沙，通西海，山雪不积，士大夫径度，获王首虏，珍怪之物毕陈于阙。
现代文：赖天之灵，从溯河山，涉流沙，通西海，雪不积，士大夫直接穿过，获王首级，珍怪之物都陈列于庭。
English: According to the spirit of heaven, from the mountain of the river, the sand of the stream, the West Sea, the snow does not accumulate, the shidafu directly passes through, the king's head is awarded, and the rare things are displayed in the court.

古文：其封广利为海西侯，食邑八千户。 
现代文：封李广利为海西侯，食邑八千户。 
English: Li Guangli was given the title of Haixi Hou, with 8,000 households in the food village.

古文：又封斩郁成王者赵弟为新畤侯；军正赵始成功最多，为光禄大夫；上官桀敢深入，为少府；李哆有计谋，为上党太守。
现代文：又封斩杀郁成王的赵弟为新时侯；军正趟始成功最多，为光禄大夫；上官桀敢深入，为少府；李哆有计谋，为上党太守。
English: Zhao Xiao, who killed King Yucheng, was also named the new time lord; the army was the most successful at the beginning of the war, and he was the doctor of Guanglu; the superior officer, who dared to go deeper, was the minor prefect; Li Xuan had a plan, and he was the superior party leader.

古文：军官吏为九卿者三人，诸侯相、郡守、二千石百余人，千石以下千余人。
现代文：军官中被封为九卿的有三人，诸侯相、郡守、二千石级官吏的有一百多人，一千石级官吏以下的一千多人。
English: Among the officers, there were three people who were named the Nine Lords, more than a hundred officials of princes, princes, county governors, and officials of 2,000 koku, and more than a thousand officials of 1,000 koku and below.

古文：奋行者官过其望，以適过行者皆黜其劳。
现代文：自愿参加者赏封的官爵都超过他们本人的愿望，因犯罪受惩罚而去从军的人免罪但不计功劳。
English: The knighthoods awarded to those who volunteered exceeded their own wishes, and those who were punished for crimes and joined the army were exonerated, regardless of merit.

古文：士卒赐直四万钱。
现代文：士兵们所得赏赐约值四万钱。
English: The soldiers received a reward worth about forty thousand dollars.

古文：伐宛再反，凡四岁而得罢焉。
现代文：攻伐大宛两回，总共经历四年才告结束。
English: It took a total of four years to end the military operation after two major crusades.

古文：后十一岁，征和三年，贰师复将七万骑出五原，击匈奴，度郅居水。
现代文：后十一年，征和三年，贰师将军又率七万骑兵出五原，攻击匈奴，渡郅居水。
English: In the eleventh year after the war, and three years after the conclusion of the war, General Zou led seventy thousand cavalry out of the Five Plains, attacked the Xiongnu, and crossed the Yangtze River.

古文：兵败，降匈奴，为单于所杀。
现代文：兵败，投降匈奴，被单于杀死。
English: Defeated, he surrendered to the Huns and was killed.

古文：语在《匈奴传》。
现代文：事见《匈奴传》。
English: The incident is recorded in the "History of the Huns."

古文：赞曰： 《禹本纪》言河出昆仑，昆仑高二千五百里余，日月所相避隐为光明也。
现代文：赞曰：《禹本纪》记载黄河源于昆仑山，昆仑山高二千五百余里，山上的光明凭着曰月交替隐避而得到。
English: Praise: "Yubonji" records that the Yellow River originates from Mount Kunlun. Mount Kunlun is more than 2,500 miles high, and the light on the mountain is obtained by alternating between the sun and the moon.

古文：自张骞使大夏之后，穷河原，恶睹所谓昆仑者乎？
现代文：自张骞出使大夏之后，走到了黄河的尽头，没有看到所说的昆仑山吗？
English: Have you ever walked to the end of the Yellow River and not seen the said Kunlun Mountain after Zhang Xuan sent the envoy to Baxia?

古文：故言九州山川，《尚书》近之矣。
现代文：因此讲九州山川，《尚书》比较可信。
English: Therefore, when talking about the mountains and rivers of Kyushu, "Shoshu" is more credible.

古文：至《禹本纪》、《山经》所有，放哉！ 
现代文：至于《禹本纪》、《山经》所记载，无甚根据，不可信！
English: As for what is recorded in the "Uyubonji" and "Sangyo," there is little basis for it and it is not credible!

