古文：高谷胡濙王直高谷，字世用，扬州兴化人。
现代文：高谷，字世用，扬州兴化人。
English: Takaya, the word is used, Yangzhou Xinghua people.

古文：永乐十三年进士，选庶吉土，授中书舍人。
现代文：永乐十三年考中进士。选庶吉士，授官中书舍人。
English: He was promoted to junior high school teacher in the 13th year of the Yongle Examination. He was also elected as an honorary junior high school teacher and awarded the title of junior high school teacher.

古文：仁宗即位，改春坊司直郎，寻迁翰林侍讲。
现代文：仁宗登上皇位，改任春坊司直郎，不久升迁为翰林侍讲。
English: When Emperor Nizong ascended the throne, he was renamed Shunbo Sinauro, and was soon promoted to the position of Hanlin Chamberlain.

古文：英宗即位，开经筵，杨士奇荐谷及苗衷、马愉、曹鼐四人侍讲读。
现代文：英宗登上皇位，开设御前讲席，杨士奇举荐高谷和苗衷、马愉、曹鼐四个人侍奉讲读。
English: When Emperor Yingzong ascended the throne, he set up a throne lectern, and Yang Shichi recommended four attendants, Takaya, Miao Zhen, Ma Yue and Cao Pi, to give lectures.

古文：正统十年由侍讲学士进工部右侍郎，入内阁典机务。
现代文：正统十年，从侍讲学士升任工部右侍郎，进入内阁主管机要事务。
English: In the tenth year of orthodoxy, he was promoted from an attendant lecturer to the right attendant of the Ministry of Industry and entered the cabinet in charge of important affairs.

古文：景泰初，进尚书，兼翰林学士，掌阁务如故。
现代文：景泰初年，晋升焉尚书，兼任翰林学士，像以前那样掌管内阁事务。
English: In the first year of Jing Tai's reign, he was promoted to the rank of Shangshu and concurrently served as Hanlin Baccalaureate, in charge of cabinet affairs as before.

古文：英宗将还，奉迎礼薄，千户龚遂荣投书于谷，具言礼宜从厚，援唐肃宗迎上皇故事。
现代文：英宗将要回朝，迎接的礼仪简薄。千户龚遂荣寄信给高谷，详细说明礼节应该遵从丰厚，援引唐肃宗迎接上皇的旧例。
English: Emperor Yingzong was about to return to China, and the etiquette for greeting him was simple. The head of the thousand households, Sui Rong, sent a letter to Takaya, explaining in detail that the etiquette should be followed in abundance, citing the old example of the Tang and Sui Dynasties to greet the emperor.

古文：谷袖之入朝，遍示廷臣曰： 武夫尚知礼，况儒臣乎！ 
现代文：高谷把它装进衣袖内进入朝廷，普遍给朝廷大臣看，说： 武夫尚且知道礼节，何况儒臣呢！ 
English: Takaya put it in his sleeve and went to the Imperial Court, where he generally showed it to the ministers of the Imperial Court, saying, "Even a warrior knows etiquette, let alone a Confucian!"

古文：众善其言。胡濙、王直欲以闻。
现代文：大家都认为他的话很对胡淡、王直打算上报。
English: Everyone thought that his words were very right and that Wang Zhi planned to report it.

古文：谷曰： 迎复议上，上意久不决。
现代文：高谷说： 迎接上皇回来的建议呈报上去后，皇上的意见很久都没有决定。
English: Takaya said, "After the proposal to welcome the Emperor's return was submitted, the Emperor's opinion was not decided for a long time.

古文：若进此书，使上知朝野同心，亦一助也。 
现代文：如果呈进这封信，使皇上知道朝廷内外同心，也是一个帮助。 
English: If you submit this letter, it will also be a help to let the emperor know that there is a consensus inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：都御史王文不可。
现代文：都御史王文不答应。
English: Metropolitan Wang Wen did not agree.

古文：已而言官奏之。
现代文：不久谏官奏报这件事。
English: The eunuch soon reported the matter.

古文：诘所从得，谷对曰： 自臣所。 
现代文：皇上追问从什么地方得来，高谷回答说： 从臣这里。 
English: When the Emperor asked where he got it from, Takaya replied, "From a vassal here."

古文：因抗章恳请如遂荣言。帝虽不从，亦不之罪。
现代文：于是像龚遂荣所说的一样直接上奏章恳请。皇帝虽然不听从，也不怪罪。
English: Therefore, as Zou Suirong said, he directly appealed to the emperor. Although the emperor did not listen, he did not blame him.

古文：二年进少保、东阁大学士。
现代文：景泰二年，晋升为少保、束阁大学士。
English: In the second year of Jing Tai, he was promoted to Shao Bao and Sokge University Scholar.

古文：易储，加太子太傅，给二俸。
现代文：改换太子后，加官太子太傅，供给两份俸禄。
English: After changing the crown prince, he was given the additional post of crown prince taifu, and was provided with two salaries.

古文：应天、凤阳灾，命祀三陵，振贫民。
现代文：应天、凤阳发生灾荒，命令祭祀三陵，赈救灾民。
English: In response to the natural disaster and famine in Fengyang, it was ordered to sacrifice the three mausoleums to help the victims.

古文：七年进谨身殿大学士，仍兼东阁。
现代文：景泰七年，升任谨身殿大学士，仍然在柬阁兼职。
English: In the seventh year of Jing Tai's reign, he was promoted to the position of a scholar of Zhiming Hall, and still worked part-time at the Cambodian Pavilion.

古文：内阁七人，言论多龃龉。
现代文：内阁的七个人，议论大多互相抵触。
English: The seven members of the cabinet mostly contradict each other.

古文：谷清直，持议正。
现代文：高壳清正刚直，所持建议正直。
English: The high shell is clear and upright, and the advice is honest.

古文：王文由谷荐，数挤谷。
现代文：王文由高谷举荐，多次排挤高谷。
English: Wang Wen was recommended by Takaya and repeatedly ousted Takaya.

古文：谷屡请解机务，不许。
现代文：高谷多次请求解除自己参与机要事务，不被允许。
English: Takaya repeatedly requested to be relieved of his participation in important matters and was not allowed.

古文：都给事中林聪忤权要论死，谷力救，得薄谴。
现代文：都给事中林聪触怒权贵要人被判处死罪，高谷极力救援，受到轻微的责备。
English: Both of them were sentenced to death by Lin Cong, who was angry with the dignitaries, and Takaya tried his best to rescue them, and received a slight rebuke.

古文：陈循及文构考官刘俨、黄谏，帝命礼部会谷复阅试卷。
现代文：陈循和王文构陷考官刘俨、黄谏，皇帝命令礼部会同高谷重新审阅试卷。
English: Chen Xun and Wang Wen framed examiners Liu Ye and Huang Ye, and the emperor ordered the etiquette department to re-examine the examination papers together with Gao Gu.

古文：谷力言俨等无私，且曰： 贵胄与寒士竞进，已不可。况不安义命，欲因此构考官乎？ 
现代文：高谷极力进言刘俨等人没有私心，并且说： 富贵家庭的后代和贫寒的读书人竞争进入朝廷，已经不对，何况不安于法制命令，想因此构陷考官呢？ 
English: Takaya insisted that Liu Wei and others were not selfish, and said: It is no longer right for the offspring of wealthy families to compete with poor readers to enter the imperial court. What's more, they are not worried about the legal order and want to frame the examiner.

古文：帝乃赐循、文子中式，惟黜林挺一人，事得已。
现代文：皇帝于是赐陈循、王文的儿子殿试，只除去林挺一个人，事情得以停止。
English: The emperor then gave the sons of Chen Cui and Wang Wen a palace trial, only removing Lin Ting as a person, and the matter could be stopped.

古文：英宗复位，循、文等皆诛窜，谷谢病。
现代文：英宗重新登上皇位，陈循、王文等人都被诛杀放逐，高谷称病辞官。
English: Yingzong ascended the imperial throne again, Chen Xun, Wang Wen and others were killed and exiled, and Takaya was called a "dictator."

古文：英宗谓谷长者，语廷臣曰： 谷在内阁议迎驾及南内事，尝左右朕。
现代文：英宗说高谷是长者，告诉朝廷大臣说： 高谷在讨论迎驾和南宫内的事情，曾经回护朕。
English: Yingzong said that Takaya was an elder, and told the minister of the imperial court: Takaya was discussing the arrival and the things inside the Southern Court, and he once came to protect me.

古文：其赐金帛袭衣，给驿舟以归。 
现代文：赐给他金帛袭衣，提供驿车船只送他回去。 
English: He was given a gold-embroidered shirt and a boat to take him home.

古文：寻复赐敕奖谕。
现代文：不久又赐敕书褒奖告谕。
English: Soon after, he issued a proclamation of commendation.

古文：谷既去位，杜门绝宾客。
现代文：高谷离任后，关门谢绝宾客。
English: After Takaya left office, it closed its doors to guests.

古文：有问景泰、天顺间事，辄不应。
现代文：有人间到景泰、天顺年间的事情，就不回应。
English: Some people do not respond to the things that happened between Jingtai and Tianshun.

古文：天顺四年正月卒，年七十。
现代文：天顺四年正月死去，年纪七十岁。
English: Tianshun died in the first month of the fourth year, at the age of seventy.

古文：谷美丰仪，乐俭素，位至台司，敝庐瘠田而已。
现代文：高谷的风度仪表很美，以勤俭朴素焉乐，官位到达台司，也不过破屋瘠田而已。
English: Takaya's demeanor and appearance are very beautiful, with diligence, frugality, simplicity, and pleasure, the official rank reaches the stage manager, but it is nothing more than a broken house.

古文：成化初，赠太保，谥文义。
现代文：成化初年，追赠为太保，谧号文义。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he was posthumously awarded Taibo, and his nickname was Wenyi.

古文：胡濙，字源洁，武进人。
现代文：胡淡，字源洁，武进人。
English: Hu Tan, Ziyuan Jie, Wu Jinren.

古文：生而发白，弥月乃黑。
现代文：生下来头发是白的，满一个月纔变黑。
English: His hair was white when he was born, but it turned black within a month.

古文：建文二年举进士，授兵科给事中。
现代文：建文二年考中进士，授官兵科给事中。
English: In the second year of the Jianwen Middle School Entrance Examination, he was promoted to an officer, and he is now in the process of being awarded an officer's commission.

古文：永乐元年迁户科都给事中。
现代文：永乐元年，升任户科都给事中。
English: In the first year of the Yongle Dynasty, he was promoted to the post of household science.

古文：惠帝之崩于火，或言遁去，诸旧臣多从者，帝疑之。
现代文：惠帝死于火中，有人说他逃遁离去，各位旧臣中有很多跟从的，皇帝怀疑这件事。
English: Hui Di died in the fire. Some people said that he ran away. Many of his former ministers followed him. The emperor doubted it.

古文：五年遣濙颁御制诸书，并访仙人张邋遢，遍行天下州郡乡邑，隐察建文帝安在。
现代文：永乐五年，派遣胡浚颁发御制的各种书籍，并且寻访仙人张邋遢，走遍了天下的州郡乡邑，悄悄地察知建文帝在何处。
English: In the fifth year of Yongle's reign, he dispatched Hu Jun to issue all kinds of books of the imperial system, and searched for the hermit Zhang Ye, traveled all over the world's counties and townships, and quietly noticed where Emperor Jianwen was.

古文：濙以故在外最久，至十四年乃还。
现代文：胡淡因此在京城外的时间最久，到十四年纔回京。
English: As a result, Hu Tan spent the longest time outside of Beijing, and returned to the capital in 1914.

古文：所至，亦间以民隐闻。
现代文：所到之处，也间或把民间的隐情上报。
English: Wherever he goes, he sometimes reports on the private lives of ordinary people.

古文：母丧乞归，不许，擢礼部左侍郎。
现代文：母亲死后他请求回家，皇帝不允许，提升任礼部左侍郎。
English: After his mother's death, he asked to return home, but the emperor did not allow it. He was promoted to the position of the left attendant of the ceremonial department.

古文：十七年复出巡江浙、湖、湘诸府。
现代文：十七年，又出京巡按江、浙、湖、湘各府。
English: In the seventeenth year, he went to Beijing to tour the provinces of Yangtze River, Zhejiang, Hunan and Hunan.

古文：二十一年还朝，驰谒帝于宣府。
现代文：二十一年回京城，急驰在宣府拜谒皇帝。
English: On his twenty-first return to the capital, he hurried to pay homage to the emperor at Xuanfu.

古文：帝已就寝，闻濙至，急起召入。
现代文：皇帝已经睡了，听说胡淡来了，急忙起床召他进去。
English: The emperor had already fallen asleep. Hearing that Hu Tan was coming, he got up in a hurry to call him in.

古文：濙悉以所闻对，漏下四鼓乃出。
现代文：胡淡以他所听到的全部消息回答，钟漏到四鼓纔出来。
English: Hu Tan replied with all the news he had heard, and the bell rang out.

古文：先濙未至，传言建文帝蹈海去，帝分遣内臣郑和数辈浮海下西洋，至是疑始释。
现代文：胡淡没到以前，传言建文帝航海离去，皇帝分别派遣内臣郑和等几个人航海下西洋，到这时怀疑纔消释。
English: Before Hu Tan arrived, there was a rumor that Emperor Jianwen had left on a voyage, and the emperor had sent several people, including his vassal Zheng He, to sail to the West. By this time, the suspicion had been dispelled.

古文：皇太子监国南京，汉王为飞语谤太子。
现代文：皇太子在南京代理国政，汉王捏造没有根据的话诽谤太子。
English: The crown prince was in charge of state affairs in Nanjing, and Han Wang fabricated unfounded words to slander the crown prince.

古文：帝改濙官南京，因命廉之。
现代文：皇帝改派胡淡到南京任官，于是命令他访察太子。
English: The emperor reassigned Hu Tan to Nanjing and ordered him to visit the crown prince.

古文：濙至，密疏驰上监国七事，言诚敬孝谨无他，帝悦。
现代文：胡淡到达后，秘密上疏飞驰呈上太子代理国政的七件事，说太子恭敬孝顺谨慎没有别的，皇帝十分高兴。
English: After the arrival of Hu Tan, So Fei Chi secretly presented seven things about the prince's acting state affairs, saying that the prince was nothing but respectful, filial and prudent, and the emperor was very happy.

古文：仁宗即位，召为行在礼部侍郎，濙陈十事，力言建都北京非便，请还南都，省南北转运供亿之烦。
现代文：仁宗登上皇位，征召为行在礼部侍郎。胡淡陈述十件事，极力进言建都北京不便利，请求返还南都，省去南北转运供应的烦劳。
English: When Emperor Nizong ascended the throne, he conscripted attendants from the Ceremonial Department to accompany him on the journey. Hu Tan stated ten things, tried his best to argue that it was not convenient to build the capital in Beijing, and requested the return of the southern capital to save the trouble of transporting supplies from the north to the south.

古文：帝皆嘉纳。
现代文：皇帝全部嘉赏并采纳他的建议。
English: The Emperor accepted it with appreciation.

古文：既闻其尝有密疏，疑之，不果召。
现代文：不久听说他曾经有密疏后，怀疑他，结果没有召用。
English: They soon became suspicious after hearing he had a history of infidelity and did not hire him.

古文：转太子宾客，兼南京国子祭酒。
现代文：转任太子宾客，兼任南京园子祭酒。
English: He was appointed as a guest of the crown prince, and also served as the head of the Nanjing Garden Festival.

古文：宣宗即位，仍迁礼部左侍郎。
现代文：宣宗登上皇位，仍然升任礼部左侍郎。
English: When Emperor Xuan Zong ascended the throne, he was still promoted to the left attendant of the ceremonial department.

古文：明年来朝，乃留行在礼部，寻进尚书。
现代文：第二年入京朝见，于是留任行在礼部，不久升任尚书。
English: In the second year after entering the capital, he visited the Imperial Court, whereupon he remained in the ceremonial department, and was soon promoted to the position of senior clerk.

古文：汉王反，与杨荣等赞亲征。
现代文：壅王造反，他和杨荣等人协助皇上亲自出征。
English: King Gong rebelled, and he and Yang Rong and others assisted the emperor to go to war in person.

古文：事平，赉予甚厚。
现代文：事情平定后，赏赐很丰厚。
English: After the matter was settled, the reward was very rich.

古文：明年赐第长安右门外，给阍者二人，赐银章四。
现代文：第二年赏赐府第于长安右门外，给予宦官两人，赐给四个银章。
English: In the second year, the awarding ceremony was held outside the right gate of Chang'an, and two eunuchs and four silver medals were awarded.

古文：生辰，赐宴其第。
现代文：生日那天，在他的府第赐宴。
English: On the day of his birthday, there was a banquet at his residence.

古文：四年命兼理詹事府事。
现代文：四年，命令他兼管詹事府的事务。
English: Four years later, he was ordered to be in charge of the affairs of Zhan Prefecture.

古文：六年，张本卒，又兼领行在户部。
现代文：六年，张本死，他又兼管行在户部。
English: Six years later, when Zhang Ben died, he became concurrently in charge of the household department.

古文：时国用渐广，濙虑度支不足，蠲租诏下，辄沮格。
现代文：当时国库的费用渐渐增多，胡淡忧虑开支不足用，蠲免租赋的诏书下达，就阻止。
English: At that time, the cost of the treasury was gradually increasing, and people were worried that the expenditure was not enough. When the edict of rent-free property was issued, it was stopped.

古文：帝尝切戒之，然眷遇不少替。
现代文：皇帝曾经严肃告诫他，但是眷顾礼遇没有一点减少。
English: The emperor had seriously admonished him, but the courtesy did not diminish at all.

古文：尝曲宴濙及杨士奇、夏原吉、蹇义，曰： 海内无虞，卿等四人力也。 
现代文：曾经设官中私宴请胡淡和杨士奇、夏原吉、蹇义，说： 海内没有灾乱，是卿等四个人的功劳。
English: He once held a private banquet for officials, inviting Hu Tan and Yang Shiji, Xia Yuanji, and Zhai Yi, and said: "There is no disaster in the sea, it is the merit of four people such as Sir.

古文：英宗即位，诏节冗费。
现代文：英宗登上皇位，诏命节减冗余的费用。
English: When Emperor Yingzong ascended the throne, he issued an imperial edict to reduce unnecessary expenses.

古文：濙因奏减上供物，及汰法王以下番僧四五百人，浮费大省。
现代文：胡淡于是妻请减少上供的物品，以及裁减法王以下的番僧四五百人，虚浮的费用大为减省。
English: Therefore, Hu Tan's wife asked him to reduce the number of items to be donated, as well as to reduce the number of monks below the Karmapa by four or five hundred. This resulted in a significant reduction in unnecessary expenses.

古文：正统五年，山西灾，诏行宽恤，既而有采买物料之命。
现代文：正统五年？山西发生灾荒，诏命进行宽缓的抚恤，后来有采买物料的命令。
English: In the fifth year of the Juche revolution, a natural disaster occurred in Shanxi, and the emperor ordered a lenient subsidy. Later, there was an order to purchase materials.

古文：濙上疏言诏旨宜信。
现代文：胡淡上疏说诏书旨意应该守信用。
English: It is nonsense to say that the will of the imperial edict should be kept in confidence.

古文：又言军旗营求差遣，因而扰民，宜罢之。
现代文：又进言军旗谋求得到差遣，因此惊扰百姓，应该罢去。
English: He also said that the military banner sought to be sent, and therefore disturbed the people, and should be removed.

古文：皆报可。
现代文：全部答复许可。
English: All replied in the affirmative.

古文：行在礼部印失，诏弗问，命改铸。
现代文：行在礼部的官印丢失了，诏书没有责问，命令改铸。
English: The official seal of the Ministry of Ceremonies was lost, the imperial edict was not questioned, and an order was issued to recast it.

古文：已，又失，被劾下狱。
现代文：铸好了，又丢失，被弹劾关进监狱。
English: Forged, lost, impeached and imprisoned.

古文：未几，印获，复职。
现代文：汝过多久，官印找到了，恢复官职。
English: How long did it take for you to find your official seal and resume your official duties?

古文：九年，年七十，乞致仕，不许。
现代文：正统九年，满七十岁，请求退休，不被允许。
English: After nine years of orthodoxy, at the age of seventy, he asked to retire, but was not allowed.

古文：英宗北狩，群臣聚哭于朝，有议南迁者。
现代文：英宗被俘北去，群臣聚在朝廷痛哭，有建议南迁的。
English: Yingzong was captured and went to the north. A group of courtiers gathered at the imperial court to weep bitterly. There was a suggestion to move south.

古文：濙曰： 文皇定陵寝于此，示子孙以不拔之计也。 
现代文：胡淡说： 文皇决定在这里设陵寝，是向子孙指示不迁都的计策。 
English: Hu Tan said: Emperor Wen's decision to set up a mausoleum here is a strategy to instruct his descendants not to move the capital.

古文：与侍郎于谦合，中外始有固志。
现代文：和侍郎于谦相合，朝廷内外纔有了坚定的意志。
English: He and his attendant, Yu Qian, had a strong will inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：景帝即位，进太子太傅。
现代文：景帝登上皇位，升任太子太傅。
English: Emperor Jing ascended the throne and was promoted to crown prince.

古文：杨善使也先，濙言上皇蒙尘久，宜附进服食，不报。
现代文：杨善出使也先，胡淡说上皇在外流亡很久了，应当附带进献衣服和食物，不答复。
English: Yang Shan also sent an envoy first, but Hu Tan said that the emperor had been in exile for a long time and should bring clothes and food as gifts, but he did not reply.

古文：上皇将还，命礼部具奉迎仪。
现代文：上皇要返回，命令礼部准备奉迎的礼仪。
English: The Retired Emperor wanted to return and ordered the etiquette department to prepare a welcoming ceremony.

古文：濙等议遣礼部署迎于龙虎台，锦衣具法驾迎居庸关，百司迎土城外，诸将迎教场门；上皇自安定门入，进东安门，于东上北门南面坐；皇帝谒见毕，百官朝见，上皇入南城大内。
现代文：胡淡等人商议派礼部在龙虎台迎接，锦衣准备法驾在居庸关迎接，百司在土城外迎接，诸将在教场门迎接，上皇从安定门入城，进入东安门，从东方上北门之后面向南方坐，皇帝谒见完毕，百官朝见，上皇进入南城大内。
English: Hu Tan and others negotiated to have the ceremonial department meet at Longhu Square, the brocade-preparing dharma driver meet at Juyongguan, Baishi meet outside of Ducheng, all will meet at the school gate, the last emperor enters the city from the stable gate, enters Dongan Gate, and sits facing south after entering the north gate from the east. The emperor's audience is over, the officials meet, and the last emperor enters Nancheng University.

古文：议上，传旨以一轿二马迎于居庸关，至安定门易法驾，余如奏。
现代文：建议奏报上去，传旨用一辆轿子二匹马在居庸关迎接，到达安定门改乘法驾，其余依照奏报。
English: It was suggested that the report should go up, and the message should be greeted with a palanquin and two horses at Juyongguan, and the arrival of the stable door should be multiplied by the method of driving, and the rest should be in accordance with the report.

古文：给事中刘福等言礼太薄。帝报曰：朕尊大兄为太上皇帝，尊礼无加矣。
现代文：给事中刘福等人说礼仪太薄，皇帝答复说： 朕尊奉大兄为太上皇帝，尊奉的礼节无以复加了。
English: When Liu Fu and others said that the etiquette was too thin, the emperor replied: "I respect my elder brother as the supreme emperor. There is no need to add to the etiquette of respect.

古文：福等顾云太薄，其意何居？
现代文：刘福等人却说太薄，他们的用意何在？
English: Liu Fu and others, however, say it is too thin. What are their intentions?

古文：礼部其会官详察之。 
现代文：礼部要召集官员详细地审察这件事。 
English: The Ministry of Etiquette will summon officials to examine the matter in detail.

古文：濙等言： 诸臣意无他，欲陛下笃亲亲耳。 
现代文：胡淡等人说： 诸臣没有其它意思，想让陛下笃厚亲近亲人罢了。 
English: Hu Tan and others said: The ministers had no other intention but to let His Majesty be close to his relatives.

古文：帝曰： 昨得太上皇书，具言迎驾之礼宜从简损，朕岂得违之。 
现代文：皇帝说： 昨天收到太上皇的信，详细说迎驾的礼仪应该遵从简省，朕怎么能违抗他呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "Yesterday, I received a letter from the emperor, detailing that the welcoming etiquette should be simple and simple. How can I defy him?

古文：群臣乃不敢言。
现代文：群臣于是不敢进言。
English: The courtiers did not dare to say anything.

古文：会千户龚遂荣为书投大学士高谷，言奉迎宜厚，具言唐肃宗迎上皇故事。
现代文：恰逢千户龚遂荣写信给大学士高谷，说奉迎应该隆重，详细地讲述唐肃宗迎接上皇的旧例。
English: Coincidentally, Chihujang Suirong wrote a letter to the university scholar Gao Gu, saying that the welcome should be grand, detailing the old example of Tang Suizong welcoming the emperor.

古文：谷袖之以朝，与王直等共观之。
现代文：高谷把它装进衣袖进入朝廷，和王直等人一起看信。
English: Takaya put it in his sleeve and went to the imperial court, where he read the letter with Wang Zhi and others.

古文：直与濙欲闻之帝，为都御史王文所阻，而给事中叶盛竟以闻。
现代文：王直和胡淡打算上报皇上，被都御史王文所阻止，而给事中叶盛竟然把这件事上报。
English: Wang Zhi and Hu Tan planned to report to the emperor, but were stopped by the governor of the capital, Wang Wen, and in the middle of the matter, Ye Sheng actually reported the matter.

古文：盛同官林聪复劾直、濙、谷等，皆股肱大臣，有闻必告，不宜偶语窃议。
现代文：叶盛的同僚林聪又弹劾王直、胡淡、高谷等人，都是股肱大臣，有所知闻就必须上报，不应该结伙悄悄议论。
English: Ye Sheng's colleague Lin Cong also impeached Wang Zhi Rong, Hu Tan, Takaya and others, all of whom were stock market ministers. If they knew something, they had to report it. They should not discuss it quietly in groups.

古文：有诏索书。
现代文：有诏书索取信件。
English: There is an edict requesting letters.

古文：濙等因以书进，且言： 肃宗迎上皇典礼，今日正可仿行。
现代文：胡淡等人于是把信呈上去，并且说： 肃宗迎接上皇的典礼，今天正可以效仿行事。
English: Hu Tan and others then presented the letter to the emperor and said: Su Zong's ceremony of welcoming the emperor can be emulated today.

古文：陛下宜躬迎安定门外，分遣大臣迎龙虎台。 
现代文：陛下应当亲自在安定门外迎接，并分别派遣大臣在龙虎台迎接。 
English: His Majesty should personally meet them outside the stable gate, and separately dispatch ministers to meet them at Longhu Terrace.

古文：帝不悦曰： 第从朕命，无事纷更。 
现代文：里帝不高兴地说： 只管遵从朕的命令，不要做纷乱的更改。 
English: Li Di said unhappily: Just follow my orders and don't make any chaotic changes.

古文：上皇至，居南城宫。
现代文：上皇回来，住在南城的宫殿里。
English: When the emperor returned, he lived in a palace in Nancheng.

古文：濙请帝明年正旦率群臣朝延安门，不许。
现代文：胡淡请求皇帝第二年正月初一率领群臣在延安门朝拜，不许可。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year, Hu Tan asked the emperor to allow him to lead a group of courtiers to worship at Yan'an Gate.

古文：上皇万寿节，请令百官拜贺延安门，亦不许。
现代文：上皇生日那天，请求命令百官在延安门拜贺，也不许可。
English: On the day of the Emperor's birthday, it is not permitted to request or order the officials to come to Yan'an Gate to offer congratulations.

古文：三年正月与王直并进少傅。
现代文：三年正月，和王直一起升任少傅。
English: In the first month of the third year, he was promoted to Shao Fu together with Wang Zhi.

古文：易太子，加兼太子太师。
现代文：改换太子，加官兼任太子太师。
English: The title of crown prince was changed, and the post of crown prince daishi was added.

古文：王文恶林聪，文致其罪，欲杀之。
现代文：王文憎恨林聪，罗织他的罪过，想杀他。
English: Wang Wen hated Lin Cong, plotted his crimes, and wanted to kill him.

古文：濙不肯署，遂称疾，数日不朝。
现代文：胡淡不肯签署名字，于是声称有病，几天不朝见。
English: Hu Tan did not want to sign his name, so he claimed to be ill and did not show up for several days.

古文：帝使兴安问疾。
现代文：皇帝派兴安问候他的病情。
English: The emperor sent greetings to Xing'an about his illness.

古文：对曰： 老臣本无疾，闻欲杀林聪，殊惊悸耳。 
现代文：回答说： 老臣本来没有病，听说要杀林聪，十分吃惊受到惊吓罢了。 
English: He replied, "The old minister was not ill, but he was very surprised and frightened when he heard that Lin Cong was to be killed.

古文：聪由是得释。
现代文：林聪因此得到释放。
English: As a result, Lin Cong was released.

古文：英宗复位，力疾入朝，遂求去。
现代文：英宗重新登上皇位，胡淡勉强支撑病体入朝，于是请求离任。
English: Emperor Yingzong ascended the throne again, and Emperor Hu reluctantly supported Emperor Hu's accession to the throne due to his illness. Therefore, Emperor Hu asked Emperor Hu to resign.

古文：赐玺书、白金、楮币、袭衣，给驿，官其一子锦衣，世镇抚。
现代文：赐玺书、白银、纸币、成套衣服，提供驿车，他的一个儿子授官锦衣，世代承袭镇抚。
English: He bestowed imperial letters, silver, paper money, complete sets of clothes, provided an imperial carriage, one of his sons was given an official brocade robe, and generations of officials were inherited.

古文：濙历事六朝，垂六十年，中外称耆德。
现代文：胡淡先后侍奉六朝君王，接近六十年，朝廷内外称为耆德。
English: Hu Tan successively served the monarchs of six dynasties, for nearly sixty years, and was known inside and outside the imperial court as Shunde.

古文：及归，有三弟，年皆七十余，须眉皓白，燕聚一堂，因名之曰 寿恺 。
现代文：到他回家时，有三个弟弟，年纪都已七十多岁，胡须和眉毛雪白，在一间屋子里吃饭，于是取名为寿恺。
English: When he came home, there were three younger brothers, all in their seventies, with snow-white beards and eyebrows, eating in a room, so he was named Shouqi.

古文：又七年始卒，年八十九。
现代文：又遇了七年纔死，时年八十九岁。
English: He died seven years later, at the age of 89.

古文：赠太保，谥忠安。
现代文：追赠为太保，谧号忠安。
English: His posthumous name was Taibo, and his posthumous name was Zhongan.

古文：濙节俭宽厚，喜怒不形于色，能以身下人。
现代文：胡淡节俭宽厚，喜怒不形于色，能够亲自礼待不如他的人。
English: Humble, frugal and generous, he is impervious to anger and can personally treat people who are not as good as him.

古文：在礼部久，表贺祥瑞，以官当首署名，人因谓其性善承迎。
现代文：在礼部很久，上表祝贺吉祥如意，以官职论应当首先署名，别人因此说他善于奉承迎合。
English: In the etiquette department for a long time, the above table congratulates the auspicious, and the official position theory should be signed first, so others say that he is good at flattering and pandering.

古文：南城人龚谦多妖术，濙荐为天文生，又荐道士仰弥高晓阴阳兵法，使守边，时颇讥之。
现代文：南城人龚谦擅长妖术，胡淡举荐他任天文生，又举荐道士仰弥高通晓阴阳兵法，派他驻守边关，时论颇讥讽他。
English: The Nancheng people are good at magic, and Hu Tan recommended him to be an astronomer, and also recommended the Taoist Yang Gao to know the Yin and Yang warfare, and sent him to guard the border, and he was quite ridiculed.

古文：王直，字行俭，泰和人。
现代文：王直，字行俭，泰和人。
English: Wang Zhi, the character of frugality, Tai and people.

古文：父伯贞，洪武十五年以明经聘至京。
现代文：父亲王伯贞，洪武十五年，因明经聘到京城。
English: Wang Bozhen, Hongwu's 15-year-old father, was hired to work in Beijing because of his knowledge of the classics.

古文：时应诏者五百余人，伯贞对第一。
现代文：当时应诏进京的有五百多人，王伯贞对答为第一名。
English: At that time, more than five hundred people came to Beijing in response to the imperial edict, and Wang Bozhen was the first to respond.

古文：授试佥事，分巡广东雷州。
现代文：授官试用愈事，分巡广东雷州。
English: He was given a probationary appointment and assigned to patrol the Guangdong Province of Leizhou.

古文：复吕塘废渠，清盐法。
现代文：修复吕塘的废渠，清理盐法。
English: Repair the waste canal in Luitang and clean up the salt method.

古文：会罢分巡官，召还为户部主事。
现代文：正当罢去分巡官的时候，召回京城任户部主事。
English: When it was time to dismiss the sub-inspector, he was recalled to Kyoto to be the head of the household department.

古文：以父丧服阕，不时起，谪居安庆。
现代文：因为父亲死去服丧，守孝期满没有按时起程任官，贬谪迁居安庆。
English: Because of his father's death and funeral, he did not start his term of filial piety on time and was demoted and moved to Anqing.

古文：建文初，复以荐知琼州，崖州黎相仇杀，以反闻，且用兵。
现代文：建文初年，又因人举荐知琼州。崖州的黎族人相互仇杀，被当作造反上报，朝廷打算动用军队镇压。
English: In the first year of the establishment of the Republic of China, the Li people of Zhixiong Prefecture and Yalang Prefecture killed each other on the recommendation of others. This was reported as a rebellion, and the imperial court planned to use the army to suppress it.

古文：伯贞捕其首恶，兵遂罢。
现代文：王伯贞抓捕其为首作乱的人，动用军队的事于是停止。
English: Wang Bozhen arrested the person who was the first to start the disturbance, and the use of the army was stopped.

古文：琼田岁常三获，以赋军，军不时受，俟民乏，乃急敛以要利。
现代文：琼州的农田一年常常三次收获，以赋税供给军隙，军队不按时收取，等百姓缺粮时，纔急忙聚敛粮食来获取利益。
English: The farmland of Qiongzhou is often harvested three times a year, and the tax is used to supply the military gap, the army does not collect on time, and when the people are short of grain, the plow hastily collects grain to make a profit.

古文：伯贞为立期，三输之，弊始绝。
现代文：王伯贞为他们安排了时间，分三次缴税，这个弊端纔消除。
English: Wang Bozhen arranged a time for them to pay taxes in three installments, which eliminated this drawback.

古文：居数年，大治，流民占籍者万余。
现代文：过了几年，政治修明，社会安定，流亡百姓入籍定居的有一万多人。
English: A few years later, the political situation had improved, society was stable, and more than 10,000 exiled people had been naturalized and settled.

古文：忧归，卒于家。
现代文：服丧回家，死在家襄。
English: Go home in mourning, die at home.

古文：直幼而端重，家贫力学。
现代文：玉直从小就端庄稳重，家裹贫穷就勤奋于学问。
English: From an early age, Tamatsuna was dignified and steady, and despite his family's poverty, he was diligent in his studies.

古文：举永乐二年进士，改庶吉士，与曾棨、王英等二十八人同读书文渊阁。
现代文：考中永乐二年进士，改庶吉上，和曾柴、王英等二十八人一起在文渊阁读书。
English: In the second year of the middle school entrance examination, Yongle became a student, and changed his surname to Yoshigami. Together with 28 people including Zeng Chai and Wang Ying, he studied at Wenyu Pavilion.

古文：帝善其文，召入内阁，俾属草。
现代文：皇帝认为他的文章写得好，召进内阁，帮助起草文书。
English: The emperor thought his article was well written and called him into the cabinet to help draft the document.

古文：寻授修撰。
现代文：不久授官修撰。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of scribe.

古文：历事仁宗、宣宗，累迁少詹事兼侍读学士。
现代文：先后侍奉仁宗、宣宗，多次升任至少詹事兼侍读学士。
English: He successively served the Rinzong and the Xuanzong, and was promoted to at least Zhanji and attendant bachelor several times.

古文：正统三年，《宣宗实录》成。进礼部侍郎，学士如故。
现代文：玺统三年，《宣宗实录》完成，升任礼部侍郎，仍像以前那样兼任学士。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Wu, the "Proclamation of the True Faith" was completed, and he was promoted to attendant of the etiquette department, still concurrently serving as a bachelor as before.

古文：五年出莅部事。尚书胡濙悉以部政付之，直处之若素习者。
现代文：正统五年，出任管理部事，尚书胡淡把所有部事交给他办理，王直像一直很熟悉的人一样处理这些事务。
English: After five years of orthodoxy, he served as the head of the management department. Shangshu HuTan entrusted all departmental affairs to him, and Wang Zhi handled these affairs like someone he had always been familiar with.

古文：八年正月代郭琎为吏部尚书。
现代文：正统八年正月，代郭璀任吏部尚书。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of the Zhengde Emperor, the deputy Guo Jian was appointed as the secretary of the cadre department.

古文：十一年，户部侍郎奈亨附王振，构郎中赵敏，词连直及侍郎曹义、赵新，并下狱。
现代文：正统十一年，户部侍郎奈亨依附王振，诬陷郎中赵敏，诉讼牵连王直和侍郎曹义、趟新，一齐关进监狱。
English: In the eleventh year of the Zhengde Emperor's reign, Na Heng, the steward of the household, followed Wang Zhen and framed Zhao Min, the steward's son-in-law. The lawsuit implicated Wang Zhi, the steward Cao Yi, and Watan Xin, and they were all put in prison.

古文：三法司廷鞫，论亨斩，直等赎徒。
现代文：三法司在朝廷审讯，判奈亨斩刑，王直等人赎罪流放。
English: The three Justices held a trial at the Imperial Court, and sentenced Naiheng to beheading, while Wang Zhi and others were exiled to atone for their sins.

古文：帝宥直、义，夺亨、新俸。
现代文：皇帝宽恕王直、曹义，剥夺奈亨、趟新的俸禄。
English: The emperor pardoned Wang Zhi and Cao Yi, and deprived Nai Heng and Wu of their new salaries.

古文：帝将亲征也先，直率廷臣力谏曰： 国家备边最为谨严。
现代文：皇帝打算亲自征讨也先，王直率领朝廷大臣极力劝谏说： 国家防备边关最为严谨。
English: Even before the emperor planned to personally collect taxes, Wang Zhizhong, led by the minister of the imperial court, strongly urged him to do so, saying: The state is the most rigorous in guarding the border.

古文：谋臣猛将，坚甲利兵，随处充满，且耕且守，是以久安。
现代文：聪明的文臣勇猛的武将，坚实的铁甲锋利的武器，到处都充满了，一边耕种一边防守，因此长久安宁。
English: Clever ministers, brave generals, solid iron armor, and sharp weapons are everywhere. While cultivating and defending, there is long-term tranquility.

古文：今敌肆猖獗，违天悖理，陛下但宜固封疆，申号令，坚壁清野，蓄锐以待之，可图必胜。不必亲御六师，远临塞下。
现代文：现在敌人放肆猖獗，违背天理，陛下只该固守边疆，申明命令，坚壁清野，蓄积优势以等待敌人，可以预料必定会胜利，不必亲自统率军队，远遍地到边关。
English: Now that the enemy's arrogance is rampant, which is against the laws of nature, His Majesty should only firmly defend the border, declare the order, keep the walls clear, accumulate advantages to wait for the enemy, and it can be expected that victory will surely come. There is no need to personally lead the army and go far and wide to the border.

古文：况秋署未退，旱气未回，青草不丰，水泉犹塞，士马之用未充。兵凶战危，臣等以为不可。 
现代文：何况秋天的炎热没有消退，干旱的气候没有改变，青草不茂盛，河水泉水堵塞不通，要征用的士兵和马匹不充足，战争凶险，臣等认为不能那样做。 
English: Moreover, the heat of autumn has not subsided, the arid climate has not changed, the grass is not lush, the rivers and springs are not blocked, there are not enough soldiers and horses to be requisitioned, the war is dangerous, and the ministers think that it cannot be done.

古文：帝不从，命直留守。
现代文：皇帝不听从，命令王直留守。
English: The emperor did not listen and ordered Wang Zhi to stay behind.

古文：王师覆于土木。大臣群请太后立皇子为皇太子，命郕王摄政。
现代文：天子的军队在土木覆灭，大臣一起请求太后立皇帝的儿子为皇太子，命令郦王代理国政。
English: When the army of the Son of Heaven was destroyed by the earthworks, the ministers together requested the Empress Dowager to appoint the Emperor's son as the Crown Prince, and ordered the King of Sheba to act as regent.

古文：已，劝王即位，以安反侧。
现代文：不久，劝谏郦王登上皇位，以安定勤荡倾危的局面。
English: Soon after, he advised King Gong to ascend the throne in order to stabilize the precarious situation.

古文：时变起仓卒，朝臣议屡上，皆直为首。
现代文：当时变乱事端很仓猝，朝廷大臣的建议纷纷呈上，都是以王直为首。
English: At that time, the turmoil was very sudden, and the suggestions of the ministers of the Imperial Court were submitted one after another, all headed by Wang Zhi.

古文：而直自以不如于谦，每事推下之，雍容镇率而已。
现代文：但是王直自己认为比不上于谦，每件事都推举于谦，甘落其下，只是不慌不忙地安抚统领大臣罢了。
English: However, Wang Zhi himself thought that he was no match for Qian Qian, and everything was recommended to Qian Qian and subordinated to him. He was just calmly appeasing the supreme commander minister.

古文：加太子太保。
现代文：加官太子太保。
English: He was promoted to the post of crown prince and grand tutor.

古文：景泰元年，也先使使议和，且请还上皇，下礼部议未决。
现代文：景泰元年，也先派遣使者议和，并且请求归还上皇，下发到礼部讨论役有决议。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Taejo, an envoy was sent to discuss peace, and a request was made to return it to the emperor. A resolution was sent to the Ministry of Ceremonies for discussion.

古文：直率群臣上言曰： 太上皇惑细人言，轻身一出，至于蒙尘。
现代文：王直率领群臣上害说： 太上皇迷惑于见识浅薄的人说的话，轻率地亲自出征，以致失位逃难在外，蒙受风尘。
English: Wang Zhizhong led a group of courtiers to say to Shangxiang: "Your Majesty, being puzzled by the words of someone with a shallow understanding, rashly went to war himself, resulting in losing your position, fleeing abroad, and suffering the wind and dust.

古文：陛下宵衣旰食，征天下兵，与群臣兆姓同心僇力，期灭此朝食，以雪不共戴天之耻。
现代文：陛下辛勤政务，征集天下的部队，和群臣百姓同心尽力，希望迅速消灭敌人，以洗雪不共戴天的耻辱。
English: His Majesty diligently carried out government affairs, recruited troops from all over the world, and made concerted efforts with his ministers and people, hoping to quickly eliminate the enemy and wash away the shame of not sharing the heaven.

古文：乃者天诱其衷，也先有悔心之萌，而来求成于我，请还乘舆，此转祸为福之机也。
现代文：不久前上天劝导他的内心，也先萌动悔改之心，而来向我们请求讲和，请求归还上皇，逭是转祸为福的机会。
English: Not long ago, the heavens persuaded his heart, and he also sprouted a repentant heart, and came to us to ask for peace, to ask for the return of the emperor. This is an opportunity to turn misfortune into blessing.

古文：望陛下俯从其请，遣使往报，因察其诚伪而抚纳之，奉太上皇以归，少慰祖宗之心。
现代文：希望陛下答允他的请求，派遣使者去答复，乘机考察他的真假并安抚收纳他，奉迎太上皇回来，略微宽慰祖宗的心。
English: I hope that His Majesty will agree to his request, send an envoy to reply, take the opportunity to investigate his true and false and pacify him, welcome the Emperor back, and slightly ease the hearts of the ancestors.

古文：陛下天位已定，太上皇还，不复莅天下事。陛下第崇奉之，则天伦厚而天眷益隆，诚古今盛事也。 
现代文：陛下上承于天的帝位已经确定，太上皇回来，不再管理天下的事务，陛下只是尊敬奉养他，那么天伦深厚而眷爱更加隆重，实在是古往今来的重大事情。 
English: His Majesty's succession to the throne of heaven has been confirmed. The Emperor has returned and will no longer manage the affairs of heaven and earth. His Majesty only respects and cares for him. So deep is the affinity between heaven and earth, and their affection is even more grand. This is truly a momentous event from ancient times to the present.

古文：帝曰： 卿等言良然。
现代文：皇帝说： 卿等说得确实好。
English: The emperor said, "Your Excellency, you have spoken truly well.

古文：但前后使者五辈往，终不得要领。
现代文：只是前后派遣使者五次前去，始终没有达到目的。
English: However, sending envoys back and forth five times did not achieve the goal.

古文：今复遣使，设彼假送驾为名，来犯京师，岂不为苍生患。
现代文：现在又派遣使者，假设他们藉护送车驾为名义，来侵犯京城，岂不成为百姓的祸患吗？
English: Now they are sending envoys to invade the capital in the guise of escort cars. Won't this be a disaster for the people?

古文：贼诈难信，其更议之。 
现代文：贼人狡猾难以相信，还是重新商议吧。 
English: It's hard to believe that thieves are so cunning. Let's discuss it again.

古文：已而瓦剌别部阿剌使复至，胡濙等复以为言。
现代文：不久，瓦刺的另一支部落阿刺的使者又到，胡淡等人又因此进言。
English: Not long after, an emissary from another tribe of the Vazhins, the Azhins, arrived, and so Hu-Tan and the others started talking again.

古文：于是帝御文华殿门，召诸大臣及言官谕以宜绝状。
现代文：于是皇帝驾临文华殿门，召集各位大臣和谏官向他们讲明应当拒绝的情由。
English: Therefore, the emperor arrived at the gate of the Wenhua Palace and summoned the ministers and eunuchs to explain to them the reasons why they should refuse.

古文：直对曰： 必遣使，毋贻后悔。 
现代文：王直回答说： 一定要派遣使者，不要留下后悔的事。 
English: Wang Zhi replied, "Definitely send an envoy, and do not leave anything to regret."

古文：帝不悦。
现代文：皇帝不高兴。
English: Gao Di was not happy to hear this.

古文：于谦前为解，帝意释。
现代文：于谦上前为他解释，皇帝的心意缓解。
English: Yu Qian stepped forward to explain for him, and the emperor's heart was relieved.

古文：群臣既退，太监兴安匍匐出呼曰： 若等固欲遣使，有文天祥、富弼其人乎？ 
现代文：群臣已经退下，太监兴安匍匐出宫喊道： 你们这些人坚持想派遣使者，有文天祥、富弼这样的人吗？ 
English: The courtiers had already retreated, and the eunuch Xing Anyao came out of the palace and shouted: "You people insist on sending envoys, are there such people as Wen Tianxiang and Fuxi?

古文：直大言曰： 廷臣惟天子使，既食其禄，敢辞难乎！ 
现代文：王直大声说： 朝廷大臣听从天子的派遣，已经享受他的俸禄，敢推辞危难吗！ 
English: Wang Zhi said in a loud voice: The Minister of the Imperial Court has obeyed the dispatch of the Son of Heaven, has enjoyed his salary, and dares to dismiss the danger!

古文：言之再，声色愈厉。
现代文：说了两遍，声音更加严厉。
English: He said it twice, his voice harsher.

古文：安语塞，乃议遣使，命李实、罗绮往。
现代文：兴安说不出话，纔商议派遣使者，命令李寅、罗绮前去。
English: Xing'an couldn't say a word, so they discussed sending an envoy and ordered Li Ying and Luo Yao to go.

古文：既行，而瓦剌可汗脱脱不花及也先使先后至，将遣归。
现代文：使者出发后，而瓦刺可汗脱脱不花和也先的使者先后来了，打算遣送他们回去。
English: After the envoys set off, Vajrakhan and the other envoys arrived first, intending to send them back.

古文：使者谓馆伴曰： 中国关外十四城皆为我有。
现代文：使者对住宿的陪伴说： 中国关外的十四座城全都为我们所有。
English: The envoy said to the accompaniment of accommodation: The fourteen cities outside the Chinese customs are all owned by us.

古文：前阿剌知院使来，尚遣人偕往。
现代文：以前阿刺知院的使者来，尚且派人一同回去。
English: In the past, when an envoy from Asajicho-in came, he sent someone to go back with him.

古文：今亦必得大臣同行，庶有济。 
现代文：现在也一定要有大臣一起走，这纔比得上。 
English: Now there must be a minister to go with, which is comparable to the cormorant.

古文：胡濙以闻，下廷议。
现代文：胡淡把这件事报告朝廷，诏书下发到朝廷讨论。
English: Hu Tan reported the matter to the imperial court, and the imperial edict was sent to the imperial court for discussion.

古文：直等固请，乃遣杨善等报之。
现代文：王直等人坚决请求，于是派遣杨善等人回鞭。
English: Wang Zhi et al. made a firm request, so Yang Shan et al. were sent to retaliate.

古文：比实还，又以也先使至，具言也先欲和状。
现代文：等到李实回来，又因为也先的使者到来，详细陈述也先想求和的情形。
English: Wait until Li Si returns, and because the first messenger also arrives, make a detailed statement of the situation that you want to ask for sum first.

古文：直与宁阳侯陈懋等上疏，请更遣使赍礼币往迎上皇，不许。
现代文：王直和窒坠侯陈懋等人上疏，请求另外派遣使者送礼物丝帛去迎接上皇，不允许。
English: Wang Zhi and the concubine Hou Chen Yao and others were estranged and requested that another envoy be sent to send gifts of silk cocoons to greet the emperor, which was not allowed.

古文：复上疏曰： 臣等与李实语，具得彼中情事。
现代文：又上疏说： 臣等和李实交谈，详细地了解对方国内的情形。
English: He also said: Ministers and others should talk to Li Si and understand the domestic situation of the other side in detail.

古文：其所需衣物资斧者，上皇言也；而奉迎车驾，也先意也。
现代文：他们需求的衣物钱财，是上皇提出的，而奉迎上皇回来，是也先的意思。
English: The clothes, money and other things they needed were requested by the last emperor, and to welcome the emperor back meant to go first.

古文：昨者脱脱不花及阿剌知院使来，皆有报使。
现代文：以前脱脱不花和阿剌的知院使来，都有回覆的使者。
English: In the past, the emissaries of the Grandmother's and the Grandmother's family had all received a reply.

古文：今也先使以迎请为辞，乃不遣使与偕，是疑敌而召兵也。 
现代文：现在也先的使者以迎回上皇为辞，却不派遣使者和他一起回复，这会使敌人怀疑并且招致战争。 
English: Now, the former envoy is saying that he will welcome back the emperor, but he will not send an envoy to reply with him, which will make the enemy suspicious and lead to war.

古文：又不许。
现代文：又不允许。
English: Later, the owner did not agree.

古文：已而实自言于帝。
现代文：随后李实自己向皇帝进言。
English: Subsequently, Li Si himself made a speech to the emperor.

古文：帝第报也先书，就令杨善迎归而已。
现代文：皇帝祇是回复也先的信，于是命令杨善迎接上皇回来而已。
English: The emperor only replied to the previous letter, so he ordered Yang Shan to welcome the retired emperor back.

古文：直等复上言： 今北使已发，愿本上皇之心，顺臣民之愿，因彼悔心，遣使往报，以图迎复，此不待计而决者也。
现代文：王直等人又上书说： 现在北方的使者已经出发，希望依照上皇的心愿，顺应臣子百姓的要求，藉着他后悔的心理，派遣使者去答复，以图谋迎接上皇回来，这是不需要商议就可以决定的。
English: Wang Zhi et al. also wrote: Now that the envoys from the north have set out, we hope that, in accordance with the wishes of the last emperor, he will comply with the requests of the courtiers and the people, and through his feelings of regret, he will send envoys to reply, in an attempt to welcome the last emperor back. This can be decided without any discussion.

古文：不然，众志难犯，违天不祥，彼将执为兵端，边事益棘，京师亦不得高枕卧矣。 
现代文：不然的话，众志难犯，违背天理不吉祥，他会以此作为挑起战争的借口，边关的事务更加难处理，京城也不能安然无事地高枕而卧了。 
English: Otherwise, it is not auspicious to go against the will of the people, and it is not auspicious to go against the laws of nature. He will use this as an excuse to provoke a war. The border affairs will be more difficult to deal with, and the capital will not be able to sleep peacefully.

古文：帝乃命群臣择使，直与陈懋等请仍遣实。
现代文：皇帝于是命令朝廷大臣选择使者，王直和陈懋等人请求仍然派遣李实。
English: The emperor then ordered the minister of the court to choose an envoy, and Wang Zhi and Chen Yao and others requested that Li Si still be sent.

古文：报曰： 候善归议之。 
现代文：答复说： 等杨善回来再商量这件事。 
English: The reply said: Let's discuss this matter when Yang Shan returns.

古文：御史毕銮等复上疏，力言： 就令彼以诈来，我以诚往，万一不测，则我之兵力固在。 
现代文：御史毕銮等人又上疏，极力进言说： 即使对方以欺诈而来，我以诚实前往，万一有意外，我方兵力本身还在。 
English: On the other hand, some people, such as Wang Shi Bi and others, tried their best to say: Even if the other side comes with fraud, I will go with honesty. In case of an accident, our military strength itself is still there.

古文：帝终不听。
现代文：皇帝终究不听从。
English: In the end, the emperor did not listen.

古文：已而善竟奉上皇还。
现代文：不久杨善终于奉迎上皇回来。
English: Not long after, Yang Shan finally returned to welcome the emperor.

古文：二年，也先遣使入贡，且请答使。
现代文：量泰二年，也先派遣使者入朝进贡，并且请求派遣回复的使者。
English: In the second year of Jie Tai, he also sent an envoy to the North to pay tribute, and requested that a messenger be sent to reply.

古文：直屡疏言： 边备未修，刍粮未积，疮痍未复，宜如其请。
现代文：王直多次上疏说： 边关的防备没有完善，草料和粮食没有蓄积，国家的创伤还没有恢复，应该答应他的请求。
English: Wang Zhi repeatedly said: the preparation of the border is not perfect, the fodder and grain have not been accumulated, and the country's trauma has not yet recovered. We should agree to his request.

古文：遣使往以观虚实，开导其善。 
现代文：派遣使者去以观察虚实，开导对方从善。 
English: Send messengers to observe falsehood and truth, and enlighten the other side to do good.

古文：不许。
现代文：不许可。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：无何，也先遣骑入塞，以报使为辞。
现代文：役过多久，也先派遣骑兵进入边关，以回复使者为藉口。
English: After serving for a long time, they also sent cavalry into the border first, under the pretext of replying to the messenger.

古文：直与群臣复请之，卒不许。
现代文：至直和群臣又请求这件事，最后不许可。
English: Zhi Zhi and his courtiers again asked for permission to do so, but in the end it was denied.

古文：直等乃上疏言： 陛下锐意治兵，为战守计，真大有为之主。
现代文：王直等人于是上疏说： 陛下坚决治理军队，确定或战或守的策略，实在是大有作为的君主。
English: Wang Zhi and others then said to Shang Zuo: Your majesty resolutely governs the army, determines the strategy of either fighting or defending, and is really a monarch with great achievements.

古文：然使命不通，难保其不为寇。
现代文：但是使命不通畅，难以保证他不入侵。
English: But the mission is not smooth, it is difficult to ensure that he does not invade.

古文：宜敕沿边守臣，发兵游徼，有警则入保，无事则力耕。
现代文：应当敕命边疆沿线的守臣，派士兵游动巡察，有警报就入关保卫，没有战争就进行耕种。
English: The guardians along the border should be vigilant, send soldiers to patrol, enter the customs to defend if there is an alarm, and carry out farming without war.

古文：陛下于机务之暇，时召京营总督、总兵，询以方略，诚接而礼貌之，信赏罚以持其后，斯战守可言也。 帝曰 善 。
现代文：陛下在处理机要事务的空闲时间，不时召集京城兵营的总督、总兵，向他们咨询方法和篥略，真诚地接待并礼貌地对待他们，明确奖赏处罚以控制他们的后效，这样或战或守的策略可以提出来了。 皇帝说 好 。
English: In his spare time, when dealing with important matters, His Majesty would from time to time convene the governor and soldiers of the Capital Barracks, consult them on methods and strategies, sincerely receive and politely treat them, and clearly reward and punish them to control their after-effects. In this way, the strategy of either fighting or defending could be proposed. The emperor said yes.

古文：明年正月进少傅。
现代文：第二年正月，升任少傅。
English: In the first month of the following year, he was promoted to sous chef.

古文：帝欲易太子。
现代文：皇帝打算改换太子，没有提出。
English: The emperor had no intention of changing the crown prince.

古文：未发。会思明土知府黄矰以为请。
现代文：恰逢思明土知府黄珐请求这件事。
English: This coincided with the request of Huang Qi of Siming Tochi Prefecture.

古文：帝喜，下礼部议。
现代文：皇帝十分高兴，诏书下发到礼部讨论。
English: The emperor was very pleased and sent the edict to the etiquette department for discussion.

古文：胡濙唯唯，文武诸臣议者九十一人当署名，直有难色。
现代文：胡淡不敢表示不同的意见，文武诸臣讨论的九十一个人应当签名，王直显出为难的样子。
English: Hu Tan did not dare to express a different opinion. The ninety-one people discussed by the literati and military officials should sign their names. Wang Zhizhong looked puzzled.

古文：陈循濡笔强之，乃署，竟易皇太子。
现代文：陈循把笔蘸上墨强求他，于是写上名字，最终改换皇太子。
English: Chen Xun dipped his pen in the ink and begged him, so he wrote his name and eventually changed it to the crown prince.

古文：直进兼太子太师，赐金币加等。顿足叹曰： 此何等大事，乃为一蛮酋所坏，吾辈愧死矣。 
现代文：王直晋升兼任太子太师，赐予金币增加等次，他跺脚叹息说： 这是何等重要的大事，居然被一个蛮族的酋长破坏，我们这些人羞愧死了。 
English: Wang Zhi was promoted to the position of prince and grandmaster, and was given gold coins to increase his rank. He stomped his feet and sighed, "What an important matter this is. It was actually sabotaged by a barbarian chieftain. We all died of shame."

古文：景帝疾亟，直、濙等会诸大臣台谏，请复立沂王为皇太子，推大学士商辂草疏。
现代文：景帝的病情十分严重，王直、胡淡等人召集各位大臣和谏官，请求重新立沂王为皇太子，推举大学士商辖起草奏疏。
English: Emperor Jing's condition was very serious, and Wang Zhi and Hu Tan called together all the ministers and eunuchs to request the re-establishment of Emperor Jing as crown prince, and the appointment of a collegiate magistrate to draft the imperial rescript.

古文：未上，而石亨、徐有贞等夺门迎上皇复位，杀王文等。
现代文：还没有呈上去，而石亨、徐有贞等人夺得宫门迎接上皇再次登上皇位，杀了王文等人。
English: However, Shi Heng, Xu Youzhen and others seized the palace gate to welcome the last emperor to the throne again, and killed Wang Wen and others.

古文：疏草留姚夔所，尝出以示郎中陆昶，叹曰： 是疏不及进，天也。 
现代文：奏疏的草稿留在姚夔那里，曾经拿出来给郎中陆昶看，叹息说： 这封奏疏来不及呈迄，是上天的安排呀。 
English: The draft of the sonata was left with Yao Yao, and he once took it out to show it to Langzhong Lu Yao, sighing and saying: This sonata is too late to present, it is God's arrangement.

古文：直遂乞休。
现代文：王直于是请求退休。
English: Wang Zhi then asked to retire.

古文：赐玺书、金绮、楮币，给驿归。
现代文：赐予玺书、金绮、纸币，提供驿车送回家。
English: They were given books, gold coins and banknotes, and were provided with a taxi to take them home.

古文：直为人方面修髯，仪观甚伟。
现代文：玉直脸颊方正胡须很长，仪表很雄伟。
English: Square-jawed, square-cheeked, with a long beard and a majestic appearance.

古文：性严重，不苟言笑。
现代文：性格严肃庄重，不随便言笑。
English: He has a serious and dignified personality and does not make jokes.

古文：及与人交，恂恂如也。
现代文：到和别人交往时，却恭敬温和。
English: When it comes to interacting with others, they are respectful and gentle.

古文：在翰林二十余年，稽古代言编纂纪注之事，多出其手。
现代文：在翰林二十多年，考察古事，草拟诏书，编写纂集，记载注录的事，大多出自他的手笔。
English: In Hanlin for more than 20 years, the inspection of antiquities, the drafting of the edict, the compilation of the collection, the recording of the annotation, mostly from his handwriting.

古文：与金溪王英齐名，人称 二王 ，以居地目直曰 东王 ，英曰 西王 。
现代文：和金溪王英齐名，人们称为 二王 ，按居住地称王直为 柬王 ，王英为 西王 。
English: With the same name as King Ying of Jinxi, people are called the two kings, and according to the place of residence, Wang Zhi is called the King of Cambodia, and Wang Ying is the West King.

古文：直以次当入阁，杨士奇不欲也。
现代文：王直按次序应当进入内阁，杨士奇不愿意。
English: Wang Zhi should enter the cabinet in order, but Yang Shiqui does not want to.

古文：及长吏部，兼廉慎。
现代文：到他任吏部的官长时，更加廉洁谨慎。
English: When he became the head of the Personnel Department, he was more honest and prudent.

古文：时初罢廷臣荐举方面大吏，专属吏部。
现代文：当时刚刚废除朝廷大臣举荐地方大官的制度，专门归属吏部。
English: At that time, the system of imperial ministers recommending local dignitaries had just been abolished, and they belonged exclusively to the Ministry of Civil Service.

古文：直委任曹郎，严抑奔竞。
现代文：王直委任曹郎，严厉抑制奔走钻营。
English: Wang Zhi appointed Cao Lang to severely restrain the running drill battalion.

古文：凡御史巡方归者，必令具所属贤否以备选擢，称得人。
现代文：凡是御史巡视地方回来，必定命令他们报告所管辖的官员贤明能干与否来作为选拔提升的参考，人们称赞得到了合适的人选。
English: Whenever imperial historians returned from their inspection tours, they would be ordered to report on the wisdom and ability of the officials under their jurisdiction as a reference for selection and promotion. People praised that they had found a suitable candidate.

古文：其子〈禾资〉为南国子博士。考绩至部，文选郎欲留侍直，直不可，曰： 是乱法自我始也。 
现代文：他的儿子王积是南都的园子博士，考核政绩来到吏部，文选郎打算留他侍候王直，王直不同意，说： 这样的话扰乱法纪就从我开始了。 
English: His son, Wang Zhi, is a gardener and doctor in the southern capital. He came to the cadre department to have his performance appraised. Wen Xuan Lang planned to keep him to wait on Wang Zhi. Wang Zhi disagreed, saying, "If that's the case, I'm the one who's disturbed the legal discipline."

古文：朝廷以直老，命何文渊为尚书佐之。
现代文：朝廷因为王直年老，命令何文渊任尚书辅佐他。
English: Because Wang Zhi was old, the imperial court ordered He Wenyuan to be appointed as Wang Zhi's assistant.

古文：文渊去，又命王翱，部遂有二尚书。
现代文：何文渊离任，又任命王翱，部里于是有两个尚书。
English: When He Wenyuan left his post, Wang Yao was also appointed, so there were two Shangshu in the ministry.

古文：直为尚书十四年，年益高，名德日益重。
现代文：王直任尚书十四年，年岁越大，名声品德一天比一天被推崇。
English: Wang ZhiRen has been a scholar for fourteen years. The older he gets, the more he is respected for his reputation and virtue.

古文：帝优礼之，免其常朝。
现代文：皇帝优厚地礼待他，免了他一般的朝见。
English: The emperor treated him with great courtesy and spared him the usual court appearance.

古文：比家居，尝从诸佃仆耕莳，击鼓歌唱。
现代文：到他在家裹居住后，曾经跟随那些佃户仆人耕作栽种，打鼓唱歌。
English: When he came to live in the house, he used to follow the servants of the tenants to cultivate and plant, play drums and sing.

古文：诸子孙更迭举觞上寿，直叹曰： 曩者西杨抑我，令不得共事。
现代文：众位儿子孙子递相反复举杯祝寿，王直叹息说： 以前西杨压制找，使我不能和他共事。
English: On the contrary, all the sons and grandsons raised their glasses to wish him a happy birthday. Wang Zhi sighed and said, "In the past, Xiyang suppressed my search so that I could not work with him.

古文：然使我在阁，今上复辟，当不免辽阳之行，安得与汝曹为乐哉！ 
现代文：但是假使我在内阁，现在的皇上复辟，应当避免不了贬谪辽阳的远行，怎磨能和你们一起高兴呢！ 
English: But even if I were in the cabinet and the current emperor were restored, I should not be able to avoid the long journey to Liaoyang, how can I rejoice with you!

古文：天顺六年卒，年八十四。
现代文：天顺六年去世，时年八十四岁。
English: Tian Shun died six years later at the age of eighty-four.

古文：赠太保，谥文端。
现代文：追赠为太保，谧号文端。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Taiho and the posthumous name of Monduan.

古文：〈禾资〉仕至翰林检讨，亦以学行称。
现代文：玉积官至翰林检讨，也以学问品德受到称赞。
English: He was praised for his scholarly and moral qualities.

古文：曾孙思，自有传。
现代文：曾孙王思，另外有传。
English: Great-great-grandson Wang Si, also passed down.

古文：赞曰：高谷之清直，胡濙之宽厚，王直之端重，盖皆有大臣之度焉。
现代文：赞曰：高谷的清廉正直，胡淡的宽容仁厚，王直的端庄郑重，大概都有大臣的风范。
English: Zang said: Takaya's integrity and honesty, Hu's tolerance and benevolence, Wang Zhi's dignity and solemnity, probably all have the demeanor of a minister.

古文：当英、景之间，国势初更，人心观望，执政任事之臣多阿意取容。
现代文：处于英宗、景帝之间，国家的权力刚刚移交，人心处于观望的时候，把持朝政管理事务的大臣大多迎合上意求取欢心。
English: Between Emperor Yingzong and Emperor Jing, when the power of the country had just been transferred and the people were on the sidelines, most of the ministers in charge of the administration of state affairs pandered to the people in order to win their favor.

古文：而谷、濙忄卷忄卷于迎驾之仪，直侃侃于遣使之请，皆力持正议，不随众俯仰，故能身负硕望，始终一节，可谓老成人矣。
现代文：而高谷、胡淡恳切地商议奉迎上皇的礼仪，王直理直气壮地建议派遣使者的请求，都极力主持公正的议论，不跟随众人应付周旋，所以能成为有重望的人，自始至终保全品节，可以称得上是阅历多而练达世事的人了。
English: On the other hand, Takaya and Hu Tan earnestly discussed the etiquette of welcoming the emperor, and Wang Zhi Rih bravely proposed the request to send an envoy. They tried their best to preside over a fair discussion, and did not follow the crowd to deal with the entanglement. Therefore, they can become people with high expectations, and preserve the festival from beginning to end. They can be said to be people with a lot of experience and practice in the world.

