古文：刘蕡刘蕡，字去华，幽州昌平人，客梁、汴间。
现代文：刘蕡的字叫去华，是幽州昌平县人，客居在梁地、汴州一带。
English: Liu Wei's character means to go to China. He is from Changping County, Yuzhou, and lives in Liangdi and Zhangzhou.

古文：明《春秋》，能言古兴亡事，沈健于谋，浩然有救世意。
现代文：他精通《春秋》，能分析古今兴亡的原因，沉稳并擅长计谋，慷慨有拯救国家的抱负。
English: He is well versed in "Spring and Autumn," can analyze the reasons for the rise and fall of ancient and modern times, is calm and good at scheming, generous and has the ambition to save the country.

古文：擢进士第。
现代文：他考中了进士。
English: He took the entrance exam and was accepted.

古文：元和后，权纲驰迁，神策中尉王守澄负弑逆罪，更二帝不能讨，天下愤之。文宗即位，思洗元和宿耻，将翦落支党。
现代文：元和年后期，法纪混乱大权旁移，神策军中尉王守澄杀死了唐宪宗，换了两代皇帝都不能处罚他，全国人都感到愤慨，唐文宗登基，想报唐宪宗的旧仇，消灭他的党羽。
English: In the Yuan and later periods, the legal discipline was chaotic and great power was shifted to the side. Lieutenant Wang Shoucheng of the Shen Cai Army killed Tang Xianzong. Two generations of emperors could not punish him. The whole country felt indignant. Tang Wenzong ascended to the throne and wanted to report Tang Xianzong's old grudge and eliminate his followers.

古文：方宦人握兵，横制海内，号曰 北司 ，凶丑朋挻，外胁群臣，内掣侮天子，蕡常痛疾。
现代文：当时宦官掌握了兵权，随意支配全国，号称 北朝廷 ，坏人聚集，在宫外威胁百官，在宫内牵制、欺负皇帝，他常感到痛心。
English: At that time, eunuchs seized military power and ruled the whole country at will. Known as the Northern Court, bad people gathered, threatened hundreds of officials outside the palace, and restrained and bullied the emperor inside the palace. He often felt sad.

古文：太和二年，举贤良方正能直言极谏，帝引诸儒百余人于廷，策曰：朕闻古先哲王之治也，玄默无为，端拱司契，陶氓心以居简，凝日用于不宰，厚下以立本，推诚而建中，繇是天人通，阴阳和，俗跻仁寿，物无疵疠。
现代文：大和二年，举行贤良方正能直言极谏的科举考试，皇帝把一百多位儒生召到朝廷，出试题说：我听说古代圣王治理天下，清静随顺，无为而治，政不繁民心归附，不干预遇事守法，使人民富足来建立根本，用诚心建立公正，因此天意和人心相通，阴阳和谐，人民仁德长寿，万物没有疾病。啊！
English: In the 2nd year of the Yamato era, an examination was held in which the virtuous Fang Zheng was able to speak very frankly. The emperor summoned more than a hundred Confucian students to the imperial court and gave them a test, saying, "I heard that the ancient holy kings ruled the world. They were calm and obedient. They ruled without doing anything. They did not meddle in politics and adhered to the people's will. They abided by the law. They made the people rich enough to establish the foundation, and established justice with sincerity. Therefore, the will of heaven and the people are in harmony. The yin and yang are in harmony. The people are benevolent and

古文：噫！盛德之所臻，夐乎其不可及已。
现代文：那高尚仁德达到的境界，简直是无法赶上的。
English: It is simply impossible to catch up with the level of nobility and benevolence.

古文：三代令主，质文迭救，百氏滋炽，风流浸微，自汉以降，足言盖寡。
现代文：夏、商、周三代贤君，质朴和文采互相补充，诸子学说盛行，政治逐渐衰退，从汉代以后，能称道的少有。
English: Xia, Shang, and the three generations of wise men, simplicity and literature complement each other, the doctrine of all sons prevails, and politics gradually decline. Since the Han Dynasty, there are few that can be praised.

古文：朕顾唯昧道，祗荷丕构，奉若谟训，不敢怠荒，任贤惕厉，宵衣旰食，讵追三五之遐轨，庶绍祖宗之鸿绪。
现代文：我虽然不懂仁德，但继承了大业，将这些作为法则，不敢怠慢，任用贤才，兢兢业业、起早贪黑，不敢说追赶三王五霸的伟绩，只是想继承祖辈的大业。
English: Although I do not understand benevolence, I have inherited a great cause, and I take these as the rules. I dare not be negligent, appoint talents, work hard, get up early and be greedy. I dare not say that I want to catch up with the great achievements of the Three Kings and Five Heroes. I just want to inherit the great cause of my ancestors.

古文：而心有未达，行有未孚，由中及外，阙政斯广。
现代文：但心里有没想到的，政令有不能使人信服的，上从朝廷下到各地，治理上的失误很多。
English: However, there are unexpected things in my heart, decrees that are not convincing, and there are many mistakes in governance from the imperial court to various regions.

古文：是以人不率化，气或堙厄，灾旱竟岁，播植愆时。
现代文：所以人民没全都教化好，人民心情不舒畅，连年旱灾，不能按时播种种植。
English: Therefore, the people are not all well-educated, the people's mood is not comfortable, consecutive years of drought, can not be sown and planted on time.

古文：国廪罕蓄，乏九年之储；吏道多端，微三载之绩。
现代文：国家仓库储蓄很少，没有九年的储备；官吏任用五花八门，不是全经过了三年的考绩。
English: The state warehouse has very little savings and does not have a nine-year reserve; officials are appointed in a variety of ways, and not all of them have undergone a three-year performance evaluation.

古文：京师，诸夏之本也，将以观治，而豪猾逾检；太学，明教之源也，期于变风，而生徒惰业。
现代文：京城，是华夏的根本，人们从这里看全国的治理，但有豪强违法；太学，是推行教化的基地，改变风俗的希望所在，但学生有的荒废了学业。
English: The capital city is the foundation of China, and people look at the governance of the whole country from here, but there are heroes and strongmen breaking the law; Taixue is the base for the implementation of indoctrination and the hope for changing customs, but some students have wasted their studies.

古文：列郡在乎颁条，而干禁或未绝；百工在乎按度，而淫巧或未息。
现代文：治理各地重在颁行条例，但还是有人违令；工匠重在按法度施工，但不断有人变新花样。
English: The governance of various regions is focused on issuing regulations, but there are still people who violate orders; craftsmen are focused on construction in accordance with the law, but people are constantly changing new tricks.

古文：俗恬风靡，积讹成蠹。
现代文：满不在乎的风气盛行，小错积累成大祸害。
English: A culture of indifference prevails, with minor mistakes accumulating into major disasters.

古文：其择官济治也，听人以言则枝叶难辨，御下以法则耻格不形；其阜财发号也，生之寡而食之众，烦于令而鲜于治。
现代文：选择官吏治理百姓，听别人报告真假难以分辨，用法律惩罚臣民，又怕他们不知自律。在增加财富发布政令方面，生产财富的少、消耗财富的多，政令繁多但收效却甚微。
English: In choosing officials to govern the people, in listening to others' reports, it is difficult to distinguish between true and false, in punishing subjects with laws, and in fear that they do not know how to self-discipline. In terms of increasing wealth, issuing decrees produces less wealth and consumes more wealth, and there are many decrees but little effect.

古文：思所以究此缪盩，致之治平，兹心浩然，若涉渊冰。
现代文：想要根除这些弊病，建成太平盛世，心里没有把握，像涉过深水一样。
English: If you want to eradicate these ills and build a peaceful and prosperous world, there is no certainty in your heart, just like wading through deep water.

古文：故前诏有司，博延群彦，伫启宿懵，冀臻时雍。
现代文：因此下令有关部门，广招贤才，来告诉我过去不懂的道理，以期建成太平盛世。
English: Therefore, I ordered the relevant departments to recruit a wide range of talents to tell me the truth that I did not understand in the past, with a view to building a peaceful and prosperous world.

古文：子大夫皆识达古今，志在康济，造廷待问，副朕虚怀，必当箴治之阙，辨政之疵，明纲条之致紊，稽富庶之所急。
现代文：你们都博古通今，立志治好国家，到朝廷来回答问题，正合我求贤若渴的心意，一定会指出治理不足、政令不当、法令紊乱的地方，找出使国家富裕的当务之急。
English: You are all well-versed in the past and present, determined to improve the country, and come to the imperial court to answer questions. This is in line with my desire to seek talents. You will surely point out the areas of inadequate governance, improper government orders, and disordered laws and regulations, and find out the urgent tasks of enriching the country.

古文：何施革于前弊？
现代文：对以前的弊病怎样改革？怎样为百姓造福？
English: How to reform the previous ills? How to benefit the people?

古文：何泽惠于下土？何脩而治古可近？
现代文：怎样治理可接近古代盛世？怎样治理可使上下和谐？
English: How can governance approach the ancient golden age? How can governance harmonize the upper and lower levels?

古文：何道而和气克充？
现代文：找出根源，写成文章。
English: Find out the root cause and write an article.

古文：至若夷吾轻重之权，孰辅于治？
现代文：至于管仲轻重篇理论的权衡，哪些对治理有帮助？
English: As for the trade-offs between the theory of governance and the theory of governance, which ones are helpful for governance?

古文：严尤底定之策，孰叶于时？
现代文：严尤建成盛世的谋略，哪些合于现在？
English: Strictly adhering to the strategy of building a prosperous world, which ones are suitable for the present?

古文：元凯之考课何先？
现代文：人才的考察先抓什么？
English: What is the first thing talent scouts look for?

古文：叔子之克平何务？
现代文：羊祜的平定方略哪些可以实行？
English: What strategies can be implemented to quell sheep rustling?

古文：惟此龟鉴，择乎中庸，斯在洽闻，朕将亲览。
现代文：以他们作为借鉴，选择恰当的，只要能增长见识，我将亲自观看。
English: I will use them as a reference, choose the right one, and if I can gain insight, I will watch it myself.

古文：蕡对曰：臣诚不佞，有正国致君之术，无位而不得行；有犯颜敢谏之心，无路而不得达。
现代文：他答道：我确实不聪明，但有治好国家使皇帝成为圣明君主的办法，没有职位不能实行；有不怕触犯敢于劝谏的心愿，没有机会不能上达皇上。
English: He replied, "It is true that I am not clever, but there is a way to heal the country and make the emperor a saintly monarch, and there is no position that can not be implemented; there is no fear of offending the desire to dare to persuade, and there is no opportunity to reach the emperor.

古文：怀愤郁抑，思有时而发。
现代文：心怀抑郁，想有机会报效。
English: He's depressed and wants a chance to redeem himself.

古文：常欲与庶人议于道、商贾谤于市，得通上听，一悟主心，虽被袄言之罪无所悔。
现代文：常想和平民在路上、和商人在市场上议论，能传到皇上耳朵里，对皇上有点帮助，即使因奇谈怪论被判罪也不后悔。
English: He often thought that if he could talk with the common people on the road and with the merchants in the market, he would be able to reach the emperor's ear and help him a little. Even if he was convicted of bizarre talk, he would not regret it.

古文：况逢陛下询求过阙，咨访嘉谋，制诏中外，举直言极谏。
现代文：何况碰到皇上询问失误，征求良策，对朝廷内外颁诏令，举行直言进谏的考试。
English: What's more, he encountered the emperor's mistakes in inquiries, solicited good policies, issued an edict to both inside and outside the imperial court, and held an examination of blunt speech.

古文：臣辱斯举，专承大问，敢不悉意以言？
现代文：我既然参加了考试，又承蒙皇上出题，怎敢不说出所有想说的话。
English: Since I've taken the exam, and since I've been given the questions by the emperor, how dare I not say everything I want to say?

古文：至于上所忌，时所禁，权幸所讳恶，有司所与夺，臣愚不识，伏惟陛下少加优容，不使圣时有谠言受戮者，天下之幸也。
现代文：至于皇上是否忌讳，现在是否禁止，权贵幸臣是否讨厌，有关部门是否录取，我一概不考虑，希望皇上多加宽容，不使圣明时代有因说直话被处死的，就是国家的幸运了。
English: As for whether the emperor is taboo, whether it is forbidden now, whether it is repugnant to powerful and honorable ministers, whether it is accepted by the relevant departments, I do not consider it at all. I hope that the emperor will be more tolerant, and that the country will not be put to death for speaking the truth in the Ming and Qing dynasties.

古文：谨昧死以对：伏以圣策有思古先之治，念玄默之化，将欲通天地以济俗，和阴阳以煦物，见陛下虑道之深也。
现代文：我冒着死罪回答于下：皇上考题谈到思念古代圣王的治理，无为而治的教化，想沟通天意人心来改变风俗，使阴阳和谐来养育万物，可见皇上考虑治道的深入。
English: I take the risk of the death penalty to answer the following: the imperial examination questions talked about the governance of thinking about the ancient holy kings, the enlightenment of doing nothing, wanting to communicate the will of heaven and earth to change customs, and making yin and yang harmonious to nurture all things. It can be seen that the emperor is considering the depth of governance.

古文：臣以为哲王之治，其则不远，惟致之之道何如耳。
现代文：我认为古代圣王的治理，那榜样并非不可企及，只看用什么办法去达到罢了。
English: I think that the governance of the ancient holy kings, that example is not unattainable, it just depends on how to achieve it.

古文：伏以圣策有祗荷丕构而不敢荒宁，奉若谟训而罔有怠忽，见陛下忧劳之至也。
现代文：皇上考题说继承大业不敢贪图享乐，奉为法则而不敢怠慢忽略，可见皇上有为百姓操劳的志向。
English: The emperor's examination question said that inheriting the great cause dare not be greedy for pleasure, and it is regarded as a rule and dare not be neglected. It can be seen that the emperor has the ambition to work for the people.

古文：若夫任贤惕厉，宵衣旰食，宜绌左右之纤佞，进股肱之大臣。
现代文：如果任用贤才，兢兢业业，起早贪黑，就应贬逐身边的小人和奸臣，任用可做栋梁的重臣。
English: If you appoint a person who is talented, diligent, and greedy, you should despise the villains and treacherous vassals around you, and appoint a vassal who can be a pillar.

古文：若夫追踪三五，绍复祖宗，宜鉴前古之兴亡，明当代之成败。
现代文：如果要赶上三王五霸的政绩，继承祖辈的伟业，就应借鉴古代的兴衰，明晓现在的成败。
English: If we want to catch up with the political achievements of the three kings and five tyrants and inherit the great achievements of our ancestors, we should learn from the rise and fall of ancient times and know the success or failure of the present.

古文：心有未达，以下情蔽而不得上通；行有未孚，以上泽壅而不得下浃。
现代文：心里有没想到的，是因为下面的情况被阻隔没能反映上来；政令有时不能使人信服，是因为皇上的恩泽多受拦阻不能造福百姓。
English: If there is something unexpected in the mind, it is because the situation below is blocked and cannot be reflected; the decree is sometimes unconvincing, because the emperor's grace is blocked and cannot benefit the people.

古文：欲人之化，在脩己以先之；欲气之和，在遂性以导之。
现代文：想把人民都教化好，应先修身做榜样；想要人民心情舒畅，应顺应民心加以疏导。
English: If you want to educate the people well, you should first cultivate yourself as a role model; if you want to make the people feel comfortable, you should follow the people's will and guide them.

古文：救灾旱在致精诚，广播殖在视食力。
现代文：救旱灾应感动上天，想多种植那么国事应根据人民收割和耕种来安排。
English: Drought relief should be inspired by heaven, and if we want to have a variety of crops, then national affairs should be arranged according to the people's harvest and cultivation.

古文：国廪罕畜，本乎冗食尚繁；吏道多端，本乎选用失当。
现代文：国家没有储蓄，是因为吃闲饭的太多；官吏任用五花八门，是因为选择任用不恰当。
English: If the country has no savings, it is because there are too many idlers; if officials are appointed in a variety of ways, it is because the choice of appointment is inappropriate.

古文：豪猾逾检，繇中外之法殊；生徒惰业，繇学校之官废；列郡干禁，繇授任非人；百工淫巧，繇制度不立。
现代文：豪强违法，因宫廷内外法令不一致；太学学生荒废学业，是因为学校的职能废弃了；各地方违反命令，是因任用的人不好；工匠变新花样，是因为制度没建立。
English: Gao Qiang broke the law because of the inconsistency of laws and regulations inside and outside the palace; students in the Imperial Academy wasted their studies because the functions of the school were abandoned; localities violated orders because the people appointed were not good; craftsmen changed new patterns because the system was not established.

古文：伏以圣策有择官济治之心，阜财发号之叹，见陛下教化之本也。
现代文：皇上考题有选择官吏治理百姓的心愿，增加财富发布政令的感慨，可以知道皇上教化的根本。
English: The imperial examination questions have the desire to select officials to govern the people, increase wealth, and issue decrees. You can know the fundamentals of imperial education.

古文：且进人以行，则枝叶安有难辨乎？
现代文：按实绩选拔人才，真和假怎会难以分辨呢？
English: How can it be difficult to distinguish between true and false when talent is selected based on actual performance?

古文：防下以礼，则耻格安有不形乎？
现代文：用礼制要求臣民，他们怎会不知自律呢？
English: How can they not be self-disciplined when they use etiquette to request their subjects?

古文：念生寡而食众，可罢斥惰游；念令烦而治鲜，要察其行否。
现代文：知道生产财富的少消耗财富的多，应贬斥懒惰和游说的人；知道政令繁多但收效甚微，要明察政令是否执行了。
English: Knowing that less wealth is produced and more wealth is consumed, it is necessary to denounce laziness and lobbyists; knowing that the decrees are numerous but have little effect, it is necessary to check whether the decrees have been implemented.

古文：博延群彦，愿陛下必纳其言；造廷待问，则小臣安敢爱死？
现代文：广招贤才，希望皇上一定接受他们的劝谏；到朝廷来参加考试，我怎敢怕死不说？
English: I hope that the emperor will accept their advice; how can I dare not to come to the imperial court to take the exam?

古文：伏以圣策有求贤箴阙之言，审政辨疵之令，见陛下咨访之勤也。
现代文：皇上考题有求贤才指出治理不足的话，审查政令辨别不当的指示，可见皇上征求意见的心情。
English: The emperor's mood of soliciting opinions can be seen in the emperor's examination questions, which include asking for a wise person to point out governance deficiencies, and reviewing government decrees to distinguish improper instructions.

古文：遂小臣斥奸豪之志，则弊革于前；守陛下念康济之心，则惠敷于下。
现代文：如果满足了我贬逐奸臣豪强的愿望，以前的弊政就会被革除；保存皇上富国利民的志向，恩惠就会广布全国。
English: If my desire to disparage the treacherous and powerful vassals is satisfied, the previous maladministration will be eliminated; if the emperor's aspiration to enrich the country and benefit the people is preserved, the favors will spread throughout the country.

古文：邪正之道分，而治古可近；礼乐之方著，而和气克充。
现代文：能分清治理方法的好坏，可以接近古代贤君的政绩；礼乐制度得以遵行，国家就和谐了。
English: If you can distinguish between good and bad governance methods, you can approach the political achievements of ancient sages; if the ritual music system can be followed, the country will be harmonious.

古文：至若夷吾之法，非皇王之权；严尤所陈，无最上之策；元凯之所先，不若唐尧考绩；叔子之所务，不若虞舜舞干。
现代文：管仲的方法，还不是天子应取的；严尤论述的，也没有最好的谋略；人才的考察，没有比考察官吏更重要的；羊祜的平定方略，不如虞舜用文德感化。
English: The method of governing officials is not yet the one that should be chosen by the Son of Heaven; there is no best strategy for rigorously discussing things; the examination of talents is no more important than the examination of officials; the strategy of pacifying the sheepfold is not as good as Gu Ying's influence of literature and virtue.

古文：且非大德之中庸、上圣之龟鉴，又何足为陛下道之哉？
现代文：这些都不是最好的德政，皇上不需效法，哪里值得对皇上说呢？
English: These are not the best German politics, the emperor does not need to follow suit, what is worth saying to the emperor?

古文：或有以系安危之机、兆存亡之变者，臣请披肝胆为陛下别白而重言之。臣前所谓 哲王之治，其则不远 者，在陛下慎思之、力行之、始终不懈而已。
现代文：对于那些关系国家安危、预示国家存亡的，我请求为皇上竭诚分析、强调一下。我上面所说 古代圣王的治理，那榜样并非不可企及 ，是指只要皇上慎重思考，努力实行，始终不松懈就行。
English: For those that concern the safety of the country and foreshadow the country's survival, I would like to sincerely analyze and emphasize for the emperor. What I said above about the governance of ancient holy kings, that example is not unattainable, means that as long as the emperor thinks carefully, works hard, and never relaxes, it will be fine.

古文：谨按《春秋》：元者，气之始也；春者，岁之元也。
现代文：按《春秋》所说，元是万物的开始，春是一年的开始。
English: According to "Spring and Autumn," Yuan is the beginning of all things, and spring is the beginning of the year.

古文：《春秋》以元加于岁，以春加于王，明王者当奉若天道，以谨其始也。
现代文：《春秋》用元来称第一年，把春字写在王字前，是表明帝王应像奉行天道一样，来慎重地对待开端。
English: "Spring and Autumn" uses yuan to refer to the first year, and the spring character is written in front of the king character, indicating that the emperor should treat the beginning carefully as if he were following the heavenly path.

古文：又举时以终岁，举月以终时，《春秋》虽无事，必书首月以存时，明王者当承天之道，以谨其终也。
现代文：又列举季节来表示一年的终结，列举月份来表示季节的终结。《春秋》在没有事件的情况下，也一定写下起始的月份来记载季节，表明帝王应该奉行天道，来慎重地对待终结。
English: In addition, the seasons are enumerated to indicate the end of the year, and the months are enumerated to indicate the end of the season. "Spring and Autumn," in the absence of events, must also write down the starting month to record the season, indicating that the emperor should follow the heavenly way to treat the end carefully.

古文：王者动作终始必法于天者，以其运行不息也。
现代文：帝王治国的起始和终结都一定要取法于天的原因，是因为天不断运行。
English: The reason why the beginning and end of the emperor's reign must be based on the law of heaven is because heaven is constantly running.

古文：陛下能谨其始，又能谨其终，懋而脩之，勤而行之，则执契而居简，无为而不宰，广立本之大业，崇建中之盛德，安有三代循环之弊，百伪滋炽之渐乎？
现代文：皇上如能慎重地对待开端，又能慎重地对待终结，努力地治理，勤勉地施行，就能治理好国家使人民宽厚，清静随顺但不违法度，发扬使人民富足的大业，光大建立公正的高风，哪有三代贤君互相重复的弊病、诸子伪学逐渐盛行的问题呢？
English: If the emperor can carefully treat the beginning and carefully treat the end, govern diligently and diligently implement, he will be able to govern the country well and make the people generous, quiet and obedient but not illegal, carry forward the great cause of enriching the people, and establish a fair wind. What are the problems of three generations of sages repeating each other's ills and the gradual prevalence of pseudoscience?

古文：臣故曰： 唯致之之道何如耳。 
现代文：所以我说： 只看用什么办法去达到罢了。 
English: That's why I said: it's just a matter of how to achieve it.

古文：臣前所谓 若夫任贤惕厉，宵衣旰食，宜绌左右之纤佞，进股肱之大臣 ，实以陛下忧劳之至也。
现代文：我上面说到 任用贤才，兢兢业业，起早贪黑，应贬逐身边的小人和奸臣，任用可做栋梁的重臣 ，认为这是皇上应忧虑操心的大问题。
English: I mentioned above that it is important to appoint wise and diligent people, and to be greedy at an early age, and that it is necessary to despise the villains and treacherous vassals around him, and to appoint senior vassals who can serve as pillars, and I believe that this is a big problem that the emperor should worry about.

古文：臣闻不宜忧而忧者，国必衰；宜忧而不忧者，国必危。
现代文：我听说帝王忧虑不该忧虑的事，国家一定衰弱；不忧虑应该忧虑的事，国家一定危险。
English: I have heard it said that when an emperor worries about things he should not worry about, the country must be weak; when he does not worry about things he should worry about, the country must be in danger.

古文：陛下不以国家存亡、社稷安危之策而降于清问，臣未知陛下以布衣之臣不足与定大计耶？
现代文：皇上不问我们国家存亡，朝廷安危，我不知道皇上是觉得我们微贱不值得参与重大决策呢？
English: The emperor doesn't care about the survival of our country or the safety of the imperial court. I don't know, does the emperor think that we are so lowly that we don't deserve to participate in major decision-making?

古文：或万机之勤有所未至也？
现代文：还是太忙没有考虑到这上来呢？
English: Or are you too busy to think about it?

古文：不然，何宜忧而不忧乎？
现代文：否则，为什么不忧虑应该忧虑的事呢？
English: Otherwise, why not worry about things that should be worried about?

古文：臣以为陛下所先忧者，宫闱将变，社稷将危，天下将倾，四海将乱。
现代文：我认为皇上应首先忧虑的事，是宫廷将发生变乱，朝廷将出现危险，国家将遭灭亡，全国将发生动乱。
English: I think that the first thing the emperor should worry about is that there will be turmoil in the court, the court will be in danger, the country will be destroyed, and the whole country will be in turmoil.

古文：此四者，国家已然之兆，故臣谓圣虑宜先及之。
现代文：这四方面，国内已经有了苗头，所以我认为皇上应先忧虑这些。
English: In these four respects, there are already signs in our country, so I think the emperor should worry about these first.

古文：夫帝业艰难而成之，固不可容易而守之。
现代文：国家大业创始艰难，守业当然也不会容易。
English: It is difficult to start a great national cause, and it is certainly not easy to maintain it.

古文：太祖肇其基，高祖勤其绩，太宗定其业，玄宗继其明，至于陛下，二百余载，其间圣明相因，扰乱继作，未有不用贤士、近正人而能兴者。或一日不念，则颠覆大器，宗庙之耻，万古为恨。臣谨按《春秋》，人君之道，在体元以居正。
现代文：太祖皇帝奠定了基础，高祖皇帝付出了辛劳，太宗皇帝开创了大业，玄宗皇帝又发扬光大，一直到皇上，已有两百多年，中间既不断有明哲的治理，也不断有忧虑和祸乱发生，没有不任用贤人、亲近正人君子而能使国家兴盛的，只要一天不考虑这些，就有可能国家灭亡，成为祖宗的耻辱、万年的憾事，按《春秋》所说，帝王的职责，在于体察天意来正确治理。
English: Emperor Taizu laid the foundation, Emperor Gaozu worked hard, Emperor Taizong created a great cause, and Emperor Xuanzong carried it forward. It has been more than two hundred years since Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne. In between, there has been continuous wise governance, as well as constant worries and calamities. There is no way to make the country prosperous without appointing wise men and being close to upright gentlemen. As long as one day does not consider these, it is possible for the country to perish, becoming a disgrace to the ancestors and a regret for all eternity. According to "Spring and Autumn," the emperor's duty is to observe the will of heaven to govern correctly.

古文：昔董仲舒为汉武帝言之略矣，有未尽者，臣得为陛下备论之。
现代文：过去董仲舒对汉武帝把主要的都说了，有没说到的，我愿为皇上补充论述一下。
English: In the past, Dong Zhongshu said the most important things to Emperor Hanwu, and I would like to add some things for the emperor.

古文：夫继故必书即位，所以正其始也；终必书所终之地，所以正其终也。
现代文：继承先帝帝位时史官一定要写登基，这是用来表示即位是正当的；皇帝去世一定要记载去世的地点，这是表示是寿终正寝的。
English: When the historian inherits the throne of the previous emperor, he must write "ascended to the throne," which is used to indicate that the enthronement is legitimate; when the emperor dies, he must record the place of death, which indicates that he died peacefully.

古文：故为君者，所发必正言，所履必正道，所居必正位，所近必正人。《春秋》： 阍弑吴子余祭。 
现代文：所以当帝王的，他说的必定是合乎正道的举措，他掌握的必定是不折不扣的权力，他接近的必定是正派的人。《春秋》说： 守门人杀死了吴国子爵余祭。 
English: Therefore, when he was emperor, what he said must be a righteous measure, he must have absolute power, and he must be close to a decent person. "Spring and Autumn" said: The gatekeeper killed Wu Guo Viscount Yu Festival.

古文：书其名，讥疏远贤士，昵刑人，有不君之道。
现代文：直接写他的名字，是批评他疏远贤人，亲近受过刑的人，有不合君道的行为。
English: To write his name directly is to criticize him for alienating the wise, being close to those who have been punished, and acting in a manner unbecoming of a monarch.

古文：伏惟陛下思祖宗开国之勤，念《春秋》继故之诫。
现代文：希望皇上不忘祖先开创国家的辛劳，记住《春秋》继承先帝帝位的告诫。
English: It is hoped that the emperor will not forget the hard work of his ancestors in creating the country, and remember the admonition of "Spring and Autumn" to inherit the throne of the previous emperor.

古文：明法度之端，则发正言，履正道；杜篡弑之渐，则居正位，近正人。
现代文：使法令严明的开端，应说合乎正道的话，实行正道的举措；杜绝篡位杀帝王的发展，就应掌握不折不扣的权力，接近正派的人。
English: In order to make the beginning of the law strict, it is necessary to speak the right words and implement the right measures; to prevent the development of usurpation and imperial murder, it is necessary to grasp the absolute power and be close to the decent people.

古文：远刀锯之残，亲骨鲠之直，辅相得以颛其任，庶寮得以守其官。
现代文：疏远宦官，亲近正直的人，宰相们能独立掌管朝中的事务，百官能履行他们的职责。
English: Alienate eunuchs, be close to honest people, prime ministers can independently manage the affairs of the dynasty, and officials can fulfill their duties.

古文：奈何以亵近五六人总天下大政，外专陛下之命，内窃陛下之权，威慑朝廷，势倾海内，群臣莫敢指其状，天子不得制其心，祸稔萧墙，奸生帷幄，臣恐曹节、侯览复生于今日，此宫闱将变也。
现代文：为什么让身边五六个人独揽了全国的政务，对外地单独用皇上的名义发号施令，在朝内窃取了皇上的权力，在朝廷作威作福，在全国横行霸道，百官不敢指责他们的行为，皇上不能制服他们的恶意，灾祸在宫中酝酿，阴谋在身边产生，我担心曹节、侯览又产生在今天，这是宫廷将发生变乱了。
English: Why let five or six people around him monopolize the country's political affairs, issue orders to the outside world in the emperor's name alone, steal the emperor's power in the imperial court, use the imperial court as a bully, and run roughshod over the whole country. Officials do not dare to criticize their behavior, and the emperor cannot subdue their maliciousness. Disaster is brewing in the palace, and conspiracies are arising around him. I am worried that Cao Festival and Houcheng will occur again today. This is the palace will be in turmoil.

古文：臣谨按《春秋》： 定公元年春王。 
现代文：《春秋》说 ：鲁定公在第一年春天做了鲁王。 
English: "Spring and Autumn" said: Luding Gong became the king of Lu in the first spring.

古文：不言正月者，《春秋》以为先君不得正其终，则后君不得正其始，故曰 定无正 也。
现代文：没有称正月的原因，是《春秋》认为前王不能寿终正寝，那么后王也不能算是正当的，所以说 鲁定公没有正月 。
English: The reason for not calling it the first month was that "Spring and Autumn" believed that the former king could not end his life, so the queen could not be considered legitimate, so Luding didn't have the first month.

古文：今忠贤无腹心之寄，阍寺专废立之权，陷先帝不得正其终，致陛下不得正其始，况太子未立，郊祀未脩，将相之职不归，名器之宜不定，此社稷将危也。臣谨按《春秋》： 王札子杀召伯、毛伯。 
现代文：现忠臣贤人不能成为皇上的亲信，宦官独揽废黜拥立皇帝的大权，使故世皇帝不能寿终正寝，也使皇上不能正当即位，何况皇太子还没有决定，祭祀还没举行，将军宰相的权力没有归还，正确的地位尊卑没有确立，这是国家将出现危险了。《春秋》说 ：王札子杀死了召伯、毛伯。 
English: At present, loyal retainers and wise men cannot become the emperor's close confidants, eunuchs monopolize the power of dethroning and supporting the emperor, so that the deceased emperor cannot die, and the emperor cannot ascend to the throne legitimately. Moreover, the crown prince has not been decided, the sacrifice has not been held, the power of the general and prime minister has not been returned, and the correct status of dignity and inferiority has not been established. This is a danger for the country. "Spring and Autumn" said: Wang Fazi killed Zhao Bo and Mao Bo.

古文：《春秋》之义，两下相杀不书。
现代文：按《春秋》的惯例，臣子互相攻杀不记载。
English: According to the practice of "Spring and Autumn," there is no record of courtiers attacking and killing each other.

古文：此书者，重其颛王命也。
现代文：这里记载了，是看重他独占了君王的命令。
English: It is recorded here that he monopolised the king's commands.

古文：夫天之所授者在命，君之所存者在令。
现代文：上天授予的叫天命，君王发布的是命令。
English: What is bestowed by heaven is called the Mandate of Heaven, but what is issued by the king is called an order.

古文：操其命而失之者，是不君也；侵其命而专之者，是不臣也。君不君，臣不臣，此天下所以将倾也。
现代文：接受天命却又丧失了，是不合君道；侵占君王的命令并独自占有，是不合臣道，君不合君道，臣不合臣道，这是国家遭灭亡了。
English: To accept the Mandate of Heaven and then lose it is not the way of a monarch; to usurp the monarch's command and possess it alone is not the way of a subject, the prince is not the way of a monarch, the subject is not the way of a subject, this is the ruin of a country.

古文：臣谨按《春秋》，晋赵鞅以晋阳之兵叛入于晋，书其归者，能逐君侧之恶以安其君，故《春秋》善之。
现代文：《春秋》说，晋赵鞅率领晋阳的军队不按命令进入了晋都，写他进入，是因为他能驱逐国君身边的坏人来使国君安全，所以《春秋》褒奖他。
English: "Spring and Autumn" said that Jin Zhaohui led Jin Yang's army to enter Jindu without orders, writing that he entered because he could expel the bad people around the sovereign to make the sovereign safe, so "Spring and Autumn" praised him.

古文：今威柄陵夷，籓臣跋扈。
现代文：现在皇权遭侵夺，藩镇横行霸道。
English: Now the imperial power has been usurped, and the domain towns are behaving in a domineering manner.

古文：有不达人臣大节，而首乱者将以安君为名；不究《春秋》之微，称兵者在逐恶为义。
现代文：如有不懂臣下大义的，首先叛乱的将用使国家平安作为名义；不探究《春秋》深义，动武的将借口驱除恶人。
English: If there are those who do not understand the great justice of the subjects, the first to rebel will use the name of making the country safe; if they do not explore the deep meaning of "Spring and Autumn," they will use the excuse to drive out the evildoers.

古文：则典刑不繇天子，征伐必自诸侯，此海内之将乱也。
现代文：那么刑罚就不归皇上掌握了，征讨一定会由藩镇掌握，这是全国将发生动乱了。
English: Then the punishment would not be in the emperor's hands, and the collection of fines would certainly be in the hands of the townships. This would lead to unrest throughout the country.

古文：故樊哙排闼而雪涕，袁盎当车而抗辞，京房发愤以殒身，窦武不顾而毕命，此皆陛下明知之矣。
现代文：因此樊哙闯门流泪进谏，袁盎拦着车陈辞，京房因愤怒而被处死，窦武不怕献出生命，这都是皇上明明知道的。
English: As a result, Zou broke through the door and burst into tears, Yuan Ang stopped the car and made a speech, Jing Fang was executed because of anger, Dou Wu was not afraid to give his life, all of which the emperor clearly knew.

古文：臣谨按《春秋》，晋狐射姑杀阳处父，书襄公杀之者，以其君漏言也。
现代文：根据《春秋》，晋狐射姑杀死了阳处父，却记载为晋襄公杀死了他的原因，是因为他的国君泄露了他的话。
English: According to "Spring and Autumn," the reason why Jin Xingxie killed Yang Shifu, but recorded that it was Jin Xianggong who killed him, was because his sovereign had leaked his words.

古文：襄公不能固阴重之机，处父所以及残贼之祸，故《春秋》非之。
现代文：晋襄公不能保守秘密，阳处父因此被杀死了，所以《春秋》贬斥他。
English: Prince Jinxiang couldn't keep a secret, and his father Yang was killed for it, so "Spring and Autumn" denounced him.

古文：夫上漏其情，则下不敢尽意；上泄其事，则下不敢尽言。故《传》有造膝诡辞之文，《易》有失身害成之戒。
现代文：皇上泄漏意见，臣下就不敢全心全意；皇上泄漏事情，臣下就不敢都说，因此《传》有臣下受亲近却不说直话的记载，《周易》有丧失性命反而坏事的告诫。
English: If the emperor divulged his opinions, his vassals would not dare to act wholeheartedly; if the emperor divulged things, his vassals would not dare to tell all. Therefore, "Biography" has a record of his vassals being close to him but not telling the truth, and "Zhou Yi" has a warning of losing their lives but doing bad things.

古文：今公卿大臣，非不欲为陛下言之，虑陛下不能用也。
现代文：现公卿重臣，不是不想对皇上说这些，是担心皇上不能采纳。
English: The current senior courtier did not want to say these things to the emperor, but was worried that the emperor would not be able to accept them.

古文：忽而不用，必泄其言，臣下既言而不行，必婴其祸；适足钳直臣之口，而重奸臣之威。
现代文：忽略而不采纳，一定会泄漏他的话，臣子说了不被采用，一定会因此遭殃；这只会堵塞正直臣子的嘴，增加奸臣的威风。
English: If he ignores it and does not adopt it, his words will be leaked. If he does not adopt it, he will suffer. This will only block the mouth of the honest minister and increase the prestige of the treacherous minister.

古文：是以欲尽其言则有失身之惧，欲尽其意则有害成之忧，裴回郁塞，以须陛下感悟，然后尽其启沃。
现代文：所以忠臣想说出全部心里话就有丢命的担心，想说明全部意图就有反而坏事的顾虑，徘徊抑郁，想等待皇上醒悟，然后再竭诚劝谏，皇上为什么不在上朝后的闲暇时间里，不时到旁边的宫殿里，召见贤明的宰相和老臣，询问应变防祸的计谋，访求挽救危亡动乱的办法，堵塞阴谋邪恶的通道。
English: Therefore, if a loyal subject wants to say all the words in his heart, he is worried about losing his life; if he wants to explain all his intentions, he is worried about bad things; if he is depressed, he wants to wait for the emperor to wake up, and then sincerely advise him. Why doesn't the emperor, in his leisure time after ascending to the throne, go to the nearby palace from time to time, summon wise prime ministers and old ministers, inquire about contingency and disaster prevention strategies, seek ways to save danger and turmoil, and block the channels of conspiracy and evil.

古文：陛下何不听朝之余，时御便殿，召当世贤相老臣，访持变扶危之谋，求定倾救乱之术，塞阴邪之路，屏亵狎之臣，制侵陵迫胁之心，复门户扫除之役，戒其所宜戒，忧其所宜忧。既不得治其前，当治于后；不得正其始，当正其终。则可以虔奉典谟，克承丕构，终任贤之效，无宵旰之忧矣。
现代文：贬斥身边邪恶的臣子，抑制他们侵权威逼的野心，恢复他们守门清扫的劳役，遵守他们应该遵守的法纪，操心他们应该操心的事。虽已不能治理好以前的事，但应治理好以后的事；不能端正开始，应该端正终结，这样就能够虔诚地奉行前代经典，能经承先帝的大业，发挥贤才的作用，没有起早贪黑的忧虑了。
English: They should denounce the evil courtiers around them, restrain their ambitions to encroach on authority, restore their labor of gate-keeping and sweeping, abide by the laws and regulations they should abide by, and worry about the things they should worry about. Although they can no longer govern well the things before, they should govern well the things after; they can't start well, but they should end well. In this way, they can faithfully follow the classics of the previous generation, can inherit the great cause of the previous emperor, and play the role of a sage. They don't have to worry about greed.

古文：臣前所谓 追踪三五，绍复祖宗，宜鉴前古之兴亡，明当时之成败 者。臣闻尧、禹之为君而天下大治者，以能任九官、四岳、十二牧，不失其举，不贰其业，不侵其职，居官唯其能，左右唯其贤，元凯在下虽微而必举，四凶在朝虽强而必诛，考其安危，明其取舍。
现代文：我上面说到 如果要赶上三王五霸的政绩，继承祖宗的伟业，应借鉴古代的兴衰，明晓现在的成败 ，我听说唐尧、夏禹任帝王国家大治的原因，是能够任用九官、四岳、十二牧，不失时机地提拔人才，不妨碍他们履行职责，不侵夺他们的权力，任官只看他的才能，只有贤人才亲近，贤才在手下即使微贱也一定提拔，四凶在朝中即使势力大也一定要处死，考虑安危，辨明取舍。
English: I said above that if we want to catch up with the political achievements of the three kings and five overlords and inherit the great achievements of our ancestors, we should learn from the rise and fall of ancient times and know the current success or failure. I heard that the reason for the great national governance of Emperor Tang Xi and Emperor Xia Yu was to be able to appoint nine officials, four mountains and twelve herdsmen, promote talents without missing the opportunity, not hinder their performance of duties, and not encroach on their power. The appointment of officials only looks at his talent. Only the wise person is close. The wise person will be promoted even if he is lowly. The four villains must be executed even if they

古文：至秦二世、汉元成，咸愿措国如唐、虞，致身如尧、舜，而终败亡者，以其不见安危之机，不知取舍之道，不任大臣，不辨奸人，不亲忠良，不远谗佞也。
现代文：秦二世，汉元、成皇帝，都想使国家像有唐和有虞，使自己像尧和舜，但终于失败灭亡的原因，是因为他们不知道安危的关键，不知道取舍的标准，不任用重臣，没认出坏人，不亲近忠臣贤人，不疏远奸臣。
English: Qin II, Han Yuan, and Emperor Cheng all wanted to make the country look like a Tang dynasty and a dangerous one, and to make themselves look like a warlord and a vassal. However, the reason for their ultimate failure and demise was that they did not know the key to safety and security, did not know the criteria for making trade-offs, did not appoint senior ministers, did not recognize bad people, did not get close to loyal and wise ministers, and did not alienate treacherous ministers.

古文：伏惟陛下察唐、虞之所以兴，而景行于前；鉴秦、汉之所以亡，而戒惧于后。
现代文：只要皇上明察唐尧、虞舜兴盛的原因，作为自己努力的方向；借鉴秦、汉灭亡的原因，作为现在的警诫。
English: As long as the emperor clearly observes the reasons for the prosperity of Tang and Yu, as the direction of his own efforts; draws on the reasons for the demise of Qin and Han, as a warning for now.

古文：陛下无谓庙堂无贤相，庶官无贤士，今纪纲未绝，典刑犹在，人谁不欲致身为王臣，致时为升平？
现代文：皇上不要认为朝廷没有好宰相，百官没有贤才。现在法度还没废弃，刑法仍然存在，人民哪个不想做皇上的臣子，使现在成为太平盛世？
English: Emperor, don't think that the imperial court doesn't have a good prime minister, that the hundred officials don't have talents. Now that the law hasn't been abolished and the criminal law still exists, which of the people doesn't want to be the emperor's vassal and make this a peaceful and prosperous age?

古文：陛下何忽而不用邪？
现代文：皇上为什么忽视而不任用他们呢？
English: Why did the emperor ignore them and not appoint them?

古文：又有居官非其能，左右非其贤，恶如四凶，诈如赵高，奸如恭、显，陛下何惮而不去邪？
现代文：有人任官没有才能，在皇上身边却并非贤才，凶恶得像四凶，狡诈得像赵高，奸邪得像弘恭、石显，皇上为什么害怕而不除掉他们呢？
English: Some people are appointed without talent, but they are not geniuses around the emperor. They are as vicious as the four villains, as cunning as Zhao Gao, and as treacherous as Hong Gong and Shi Xian. Why is the emperor afraid of them and does not get rid of them?

古文：神器固有归，天命固有分，祖宗固有灵，忠臣固有心，陛下其念之哉！
现代文：国家已有归属，天意仍未改变，祖宗神灵保佑，贤臣怀有忠心，皇上想想这些吧！
English: The country has already been assigned, the will of heaven has not changed, the ancestors are blessed by the gods, and the wise men are loyal. Emperor, think about this!

古文：昔秦之亡也，失于强暴；汉之亡也，失于微弱。
现代文：过去秦朝灭亡，是过于残暴；汉朝灭亡，是过于软弱。
English: In the past, the downfall of the Qin Dynasty was too brutal; the downfall of the Han Dynasty was too weak.

古文：强暴则奸臣畏死而害上，微弱则强臣窃权而震主。
现代文：过于残暴奸臣怕死就谋害君主，过于软弱强暴的臣子窃取了权力就威胁君主。
English: If a vassal is too cruel and treacherous, he is afraid of death and plots to kill the monarch. If a vassal is too weak and violent, he steals power and threatens the monarch.

古文：臣伏见敬宗不虞亡秦之祸，不翦其萌。伏惟陛下深轸亡汉之忧，以杜其渐，则祖宗之洪业可绍，三五之遐轨可追矣。
现代文：我已看到敬宗皇帝不防备秦代灭亡的灾祸，不防微杜渐，希望皇上深思汉代灭亡的担忧，防止灾祸发展，那么祖宗的伟业可以继承，三王五霸的政绩就可以赶上了。
English: I have seen that Emperor Jingzong did not prevent the calamity of the Qin Dynasty's demise, and did not prevent the gradual decline. I hope that the emperor will think deeply about the concerns of the Han Dynasty's demise and prevent the development of the calamity. Then the great cause of the ancestors can be inherited, and the political achievements of the three kings and five overlords can catch up.

古文：臣前所谓陛下 心有所未达，以下情塞而不能上通；行有所未孚，以上泽壅而不得下浃 ；且百姓有涂炭之苦，陛下无繇而知；陛下有子惠之心，百姓无繇而信。
现代文：我上面说皇上 心里有没有想到的，是因为下面的情况被阻隔没能反映上来，政令有时不符合愿望，是因为皇上的恩泽受拦阻不能造福百姓 ，百姓有深重苦难，皇上不能知道，皇上有爱护百姓的心愿，但百姓不能信服。
English: I said above that whether or not the emperor has thought about it in his heart is because the following situations are blocked and cannot be reflected, the government orders sometimes do not meet the wishes, because the emperor's grace is blocked and cannot benefit the people, the people have deep suffering, the emperor cannot know, the emperor has the desire to love and protect the people, but the people cannot be convinced.

古文：臣谨按《春秋》书 梁亡 不书 取 者，梁自亡也，以其思虑昏而耳目塞，上出恶政，人为寇盗，皆不知其所以，终自取其灭亡也。
现代文：我看到《春秋》写 梁国灭亡 却不写 被攻占 ，是认为梁国是自己灭亡的，是认为当权者头脑昏乱、耳目闭塞、统治残暴，人们都当了强盗，他们却不知怎么办，终于自取灭亡。
English: I saw that "Spring and Autumn" wrote "The Fall of Liangguo" but did not write "Occupied," it was thought that Liangguo was destroyed by itself. It was thought that those in power were confused, deaf and blind, and ruled brutally. People were robbers, but they did not know what to do, and finally destroyed themselves.

古文：臣闻国君之所以尊者，重其社稷也；社稷之所以重者，存其百姓也。
现代文：我听说君王尊显的原因，是看重他的国家，看重国家的原因，是他的人民存在。
English: I have heard that the reason why a king is respected is that he cares about his country, and the reason why he cares about his country is that his people exist.

古文：苟百姓不存，则虽社稷不得固其重；社稷不重，则人君不得保其尊。
现代文：如果人民不存在，那么即使有国家也不能保证别人看重；国家不被人看重，那么君王也不能保持他的尊显。
English: If the people do not exist, then even if there is a state, it cannot ensure that others value it; if the state is not valued, then the king cannot maintain his dignity.

古文：故治天下者，不可不知百姓之情。
现代文：所以治理国家的人，不能不知道百姓的愿望。
English: Therefore, those who govern the country cannot ignore the wishes of the people.

古文：夫百姓者，陛下之赤子，陛下宜令慈仁者视育之，如保傅焉，如乳哺焉，如师之教导焉。
现代文：百姓是皇上的儿女，皇上应命慈爱、仁德的人看护、养育他们，像保姆那样关怀，像喂奶那样养育，像老师那样教诲。
English: The people are the emperor's children, and the emperor should order kind and benevolent people to take care of them, nurture them, care for them like a nanny, nurture them like a nurse, and teach them like a teacher.

古文：故人之于上也，恭之如神明，爱之如父母。
现代文：所以人民对官长，像对神灵那样恭敬，像对父母那样爱戴。
English: Therefore, the people respect the officials as if they were gods, and love them as if they were their parents.

古文：今或不然，陛下亲近贵幸，分曹建署，补除卒吏，召致宾客，因其货贿，假以声势；大者统籓方，小者为守牧，居上无清惠之政而有饕餮之害，居下无忠诚之节而有奸欺之罪。
现代文：现在有时却不是这样，皇上亲近权贵幸臣，他们按职务建立官署，任免官吏，豢养门客，皇上给他们金钱，给他们权势，大的统治一片地方，小的掌管一州，大官没有清廉慈爱的政绩却有贪婪的危害，小官没有忠诚的节操却有作恶欺骗的罪行。
English: Nowadays, however, this is sometimes not the case. The emperor is close to powerful and honored courtiers. According to their duties, they establish government offices, appoint and dismiss officials, and nurture guests. The emperor gives them money and gives them power. The big ones rule a place, the small ones control a state. The big officials do not have a clean and benevolent political record, but have the harm of greed. The petty officials do not have a loyal discipline, but have the crime of doing evil and deception.

古文：故人之于上也，畏之如豺狼，恶之如仇敌。
现代文：所以人民对于官长，像对豺狼那样害怕，像对仇敌那样厌恶。
English: That is why the people are as afraid of the officials as they are of wolves, and as disgusted as they are with their enemies.

古文：今海内困穷，处处流散，饥者不得食，寒者不得衣，鳏寡孤独不得存，老幼疾病不得养，加以国权兵柄颛于左右，贪臣聚敛以固宠，奸吏因缘而弄法，冤痛之声，上达于九天，下入于九泉，鬼神为之怨怒，阴阳为之愆错。
现代文：现全国人民贫困，到处都有流亡失散的人，挨饿的人没有吃的，受冻的人没有穿的，鳏夫、寡妇、孤儿、孤老没人抚恤，老人、小孩、患病者没人照顾，加上国家和军队的权力被皇上身边的人独掌，贪官搜刮民财来保持恩宠，污吏因为关系歪曲法令，喊冤叫苦的声音，上冲云霄，下入黄泉，鬼神为此怨恨发怒，阴阳就为此失调。
English: At present, the people of the whole country are impoverished. There are exiles and dispersed people everywhere, starving people have nothing to eat, freezing people have nothing to wear, widowers, widows, orphans, and the elderly have no pension, and the elderly, children, and the sick have no care. In addition, the power of the country and the army is in the sole hands of people around the emperor. Corrupt officials are scrounging for people's wealth to maintain grace. Corrupt officials are distorting laws and regulations because of their relationships. The voices of those crying out for injustice and suffering are soaring into the sky and descending into the abyss. Ghosts and gods

古文：君门万重，不得告诉，士人无所归化，百姓无所归命。
现代文：皇上被人阻隔，人们不能去报告，士人无处归向，人民无处效忠。
English: The emperor is blocked by people, people cannot go to report, the scholars have nowhere to turn, and the people have nowhere to be loyal to.

古文：官乱人贫，盗贼并起，土崩之势，忧在旦夕。
现代文：官吏昏乱，人民贫困，到处都有强盗，国家崩溃的局势，担心马上就会出现。
English: Officials are in a daze, the people are poor, there are robbers everywhere, the situation of the country's collapse is feared to be imminent.

古文：即不幸因之以病疠，继之以凶荒，陈胜、吴广不独起于秦，赤眉、黄巾不独生于汉，臣所以为陛下发愤扼腕、痛心泣血也。
现代文：如果不幸又有疾病流行、灾荒出现，陈胜、吴广不单出现在秦代，赤眉、黄巾起义不单产生在汉朝，这就是我为皇上感到激动、痛心的原因。
English: If, unfortunately, disease epidemics and natural disasters occur, Chen Sheng and Wu Guang Tuo will not only appear in the Qin Dynasty, and the Red Eyebrows and Yellow Turban Uprisings will not only occur in the Han Dynasty. This is the reason why I feel excited and sad for the Emperor.

古文：如此则百姓有涂炭之苦，陛下何繇而知之乎？
现代文：像这样老百姓即使有深重的苦难，皇上怎么能知道呢？
English: How could the emperor know about the deep suffering of the common people like this?

古文：陛下有子惠之心，百姓安得而信之乎？
现代文：皇上有对百姓像儿子样爱护的心愿，老百姓怎么能相信呢？
English: How can the common people believe that the emperor has the desire to love and care for the people like a son?

古文：使陛下行有所未孚，心有所未达，固其然也。
现代文：使皇上政令有不能使人信服的，心里有没有想到的，这是必然的。
English: It was inevitable that the Emperor's edict would contain something unconvincing, whether he had thought of it or not.

古文：臣闻汉元帝即位之初，更制七十余事，其心甚诚，其称甚美。
现代文：我听说汉元帝登基初期，改变了七十多项制度，他的用意非常诚恳，他的声誉非常高。
English: I heard that in the early days of enthronement, Emperor Han Yuan changed more than seventy systems. His intentions were very sincere, and his reputation was very high.

古文：然纪纲日紊，国祚日衰，奸宄日强，黎元日困，繇不能择贤明而任之，失其操柄也。
现代文：但法令日益紊乱，国家日益衰弱，坏人日益强大，百姓日益贫困，这是因为他不能选择、任用贤才，失去了对臣下的控制。
English: But the decrees are increasingly disorderly, the country is increasingly weak, the bad guys are increasingly powerful, and the people are increasingly impoverished. This is because he cannot choose and appoint talents, and has lost control of his subjects.

古文：自陛下即位，忧勤兆庶，屡降德音，四海之内，莫不抗首而长息，自喜复生于死亡之中也。
现代文：自从皇上登基，为百姓们操劳，多次颁布诏令，全国人民，没有不敬仰赞叹的，都自己庆幸又从死路上得到了再生。
English: Since the emperor ascended to the throne, worked hard for the people, and repeatedly issued imperial decrees, the people of the whole country, there is no one who does not admire and admire, are themselves fortunate and have been reborn from the dead.

古文：伏惟陛下慎终如始，以塞四方之望。
现代文：希望皇上有始有终，以满足人民的愿望。
English: It is hoped that the emperor will have a beginning and an end to meet the people's wishes.

古文：诚能揭国柄以归于相，持兵柄以归于将，去贪臣聚敛之政，除奸吏因缘之害，惟忠贤是近，惟正直是用，内宠便僻无所听焉。
现代文：如果能将国家的权力交还给宰相，将兵权交还给将领，废除贪官搜刮民财的政令，消除污吏看关系枉法的祸害，只亲近忠臣贤人，只任用正人直臣，不听信受宠奉承的人。
English: If it is possible to return the power of the state to the prime minister, to return the military power to the generals, to abolish the decrees of corrupt officials to collect people's wealth, to eliminate the scourge of corrupt officials looking at relationships in a wrong way, to only be close to loyal and wise people, to only appoint honest and direct subordinates, and not to listen to those who are favored and flattered.

古文：选清慎之官，择仁惠之长，敏之以利，煦之以和，教之以孝慈，导之以德义，去耳目之塞，通上下之情，俾万国欢康，兆庶苏息，即心无不达，而行无不孚矣。
现代文：挑选清廉、慎重、仁爱、慈惠的官员，用利益使他们勤勉，用仁爱使他们感到温暖，用孝敬和慈爱去教诲他们，引导他们遵行道德礼义，除掉堵塞耳目的人，沟通上下的愿望，使藩国欢欣，万民生息，那么就会心里没有不知道的，政令没有不使人信服的了。
English: Select officials who are clean, prudent, benevolent, and benevolent, make them diligent with benefits, make them feel warm with benevolence, teach them with filial piety and love, guide them to follow moral etiquette, get rid of those who block their ears and eyes, communicate the wishes of the upper and lower levels, make the domain happy, and let all the people live, then there will be nothing in their hearts that they do not know, and there will be no government decrees that are not convincing.

古文：臣前所谓 欲人之化也，在脩己以先之 ，臣闻德以脩己，教以导人。
现代文：我上面说到 想把人民都教化好，应先修身做榜样 ，我听说德是用来修身的，教是用来引导别人的。
English: I said above that if you want to educate the people well, you should first cultivate yourself as an example. I heard that virtue is used to cultivate oneself, and teaching is used to guide others.

古文：脩之也，则人不劝而自立；导之也，则人不教而率从。
现代文：君子修好自己的道德，人们不用劝告就会自己立德；用修身来引导他们，人们不用教诲都会跟随。
English: If a gentleman cultivates his morals, people do not need to be advised to be virtuous; if they are guided by self-cultivation, people will follow without being taught.

古文：君子欲政之必行也，故以身先之；欲人之从化也，故以道御之。
现代文：君子如希望政令必定被遵行，所以就自己做表率；想人们都听从教化，因此用道来驾御他们。
English: If a gentleman hopes that his orders will be obeyed, he sets himself up as an example; if he thinks that people will listen to his instructions, he uses the word to control them.

古文：今陛下先之以身而政未必行，御之以道而人未从化，岂立教之旨未尽其方邪？
现代文：现在皇上以身作则但政令没被必定遵行，用道驾御但人们没有听从教化，是否建立教化没有掌握方法呢？
English: Now that the emperor is leading by example, but the decrees are not necessarily followed, and the people are not listening to the enlightenment, is it possible to establish enlightenment without mastering the method?

古文：夫立教之方，在乎君以明制之，臣以忠行之。
现代文：建立教化的方法，应是君王用明智来控制，臣子尽忠心来实行。
English: The method of establishing edification should be controlled by the monarch with wisdom, and implemented by the courtiers with loyalty.

古文：君以知人为明，臣以正时为忠。
现代文：君王以了解臣子为明智，臣子以辅助时政为忠。
English: The sovereign is wise to understand the vassal, and the vassal is loyal to assist the current government.

古文：知人在任贤而去邪，正时则固本而守法。
现代文：了解臣子就应任用贤人并驱除邪恶，辅助时政就应巩固根本并遵守法纪。
English: Understand that the vassal should appoint wise men and drive out evil, and the auxiliary government should consolidate the foundation and abide by the law and discipline.

古文：贤不任则重赏不足以劝善，邪不去则严刑不足以禁非，本不固则人流，法不守则政散，而欲教之必至，化之必行，不可得也。
现代文：不任用贤人用重赏也不能够勉励善人，不驱除邪恶用重刑也不能够禁止违法，根本不巩固人民就会流离失所，不遵法纪权力就会分散，这样想要人们听从教化，按教化施行，是不可能的。
English: Without appointing sages and using rewards, it is not possible to encourage good people; without driving out evil, it is not possible to prohibit violations of the law with severe punishment; without strengthening the people at all, they will be displaced; without obeying the law and discipline, power will be dispersed. It is impossible to make people listen to and implement indoctrination.

古文：陛下能斥奸邪而不私其左右，举贤正而不遗其疏远，则化浃朝廷矣。
现代文：皇上如能贬斥奸臣而不偏袒近侍，提拔贤人不遗漏卑贱，那么教化就能在朝廷得到贯彻。
English: If the emperor can disparage treacherous vassals without favoring close attendants, and promote the wise without omitting the lowly, then enlightenment can be implemented in the imperial court.

古文：爱人而敦本，分职而奉法，脩其身以及其人，始于中而成于外，则化行天下矣。
现代文：爱护人民而重视根本，各负其责又奉公守法，注重自身修养再去要求别人，先在朝廷实行再扩大到朝外，那么教化就能在全国实施了。
English: Love and protect the people, but pay attention to the fundamentals, each bear their own responsibilities and abide by the law, pay attention to self-cultivation and then ask others, first implement in the imperial court and then expand to outside the imperial court, then enlightenment can be implemented throughout the country.

古文：臣前所谓 欲气之和也，在遂其性以导之 者，当纳人于仁寿也。
现代文：我上面说到 想要人民心情舒畅，应顺应民心加以疏导 ，是指应使人民仁德、长寿。
English: As I said above, if we want to make the people feel comfortable, we should be guided by the people's will, which means that we should make the people have benevolence and longevity.

古文：夫欲人之仁寿也，在立制度，脩教化。
现代文：要想人民仁德长寿，应建立规章，修明教化。
English: If we want people to live a long life with benevolence and virtue, we should establish regulations, clarify and educate.

古文：夫制度立则财用省，财用省则赋敛轻，赋敛轻则人富矣；教化脩则争竞息，争竞息则刑罚清，刑罚清则人安矣。
现代文：建立规章费用就会减省，费用减省赋税就会减轻，赋税减轻人民就富足了。教化修明就没有争斗，没有争斗就不用刑罚，不用刑罚人民就安宁了。
English: If regulations are established, costs will be reduced, costs will be reduced, taxes will be reduced, taxes will be reduced, and the people will be rich. If education is improved, there will be no conflict, if there is no conflict, there will be no punishment, and if there is no punishment, the people will be peaceful.

古文：既富矣，则仁义兴焉；既安矣，则寿考至焉。
现代文：人民富足了，仁义之道就兴盛了；人民安宁了，就长寿了。
English: When the people are rich, the way of benevolence and righteousness will flourish; when the people are peaceful, they will live longer.

古文：仁义之心感于下，和平之气应于上，故灾害不作，休祥存臻，四方底宁，万物咸遂矣。
现代文：仁义之道感动了大地，安宁元气感动了上天，所以灾害就不会发生，吉兆就会出现，各地就太平无事，万物就蓬勃生长。
English: The path of benevolence and righteousness has moved the earth, and peace and vitality have moved the heavens. Therefore, disasters will not occur, auspicious signs will appear, all regions will be peaceful, and all things will flourish.

古文：臣前所谓 救灾旱在乎致精诚 者。臣谨按《春秋》，鲁僖公一年之中，三书 不雨 者，以其人君有恤人之志也；文公三年之中，一书 不雨 者，以其人君无闵人之心也。
现代文：我上面说到 救旱灾应感动上天 ，据《春秋》记载，鲁僖公在一年之中，三次写了 没下雨 ，这是因为君王同情人民，鲁文公在三年中，只写了一次 没下雨 ，是因为君王不同情人民。
English: I said above that drought relief should be moved to heaven, according to the "Spring and Autumn" records, Lu Ye Gong wrote "No rain" three times in one year, because the king sympathized with the people, Lu Wen Gong wrote "No rain" only once in three years, because the king did not sympathize with the people.

古文：故僖致诚而旱不害物，文无恤闵而变则成灾。
现代文：因为鲁僖公有同情人民的诚意，所以天旱却没有影响收成，鲁文公不同情人民，天旱就成了灾害。
English: Because Lu Wei Gong had the sincerity to sympathize with the people, the drought did not affect the harvest. Lu Wen Gong did not sympathize with the people, and the drought became a disaster.

古文：陛下有闵人之志，则无成灾之变矣。
现代文：皇上同情人民，那么就不会成为灾害了。
English: If the emperor sympathizes with the people, then it won't be a disaster.

古文：臣前所谓 广播殖在乎视食力 者。臣谨按《春秋》： 君人者必时视民之所勤。
现代文：我上面说到 要想多种植，那么国事应根据人民收割和耕种来安排 ，《春秋》说 ：做君王的应随时看百姓在忙什么。
English: I said above that if we want to have a variety of crops, then the affairs of state should be arranged according to the harvest and cultivation of the people, "Spring and Autumn" said: the monarch should always see what the people are busy with.

古文：人勤于力则功筑罕，人勤于财则贡赋少，人勤于食则百事废。 
现代文：百姓在忙耕种就不要兴劳役，百姓在为财富劳碌就应减轻赋税，百姓在为饣胡口奔忙就停止一切耗费。 
English: If the people are busy cultivating, they should not engage in labor service. If the people are busy working for wealth, they should reduce their taxes. If the people are busy working for wealth, they should stop all expenditure.

古文：今财食与力皆勤矣，愿陛下废百事之用，以广三时之务，则播植不愆矣。臣前所谓 国廪罕蓄，本乎冗食尚繁 者。臣谨按《春秋》： 臧孙辰告籴于齐。 
现代文：现在百姓为了财富、饣胡口和耕种在操劳，希望皇上停止各种事务的耗费，来增加春夏秋三季的投入，那么耕种就不会有缺失了。我上面说到 国家没有储蓄，是因为吃闲饭的太多 ，《春秋》记载说 ：臧孙辰向齐国借粮。 
English: Now the people are working hard for their wealth, for ploughing and farming, and they hope that the emperor will stop the expenditure of various affairs and increase the input of the three seasons of spring, summer and autumn, so that there will be no shortage of farming. I said above that the country does not have savings because there are too many idle meals, "Spring and Autumn" records that: Sun Chen borrowed grain from Qi.

古文：《春秋》讥其无九年之蓄，一年不登而百姓饥。
现代文：《春秋》指责他没有九年的积蓄，一年收成不好老百姓就挨饿。
English: "Spring and Autumn" accused him of not having nine years of savings and starving the common people after one year of poor harvest.

古文：臣愿斥游惰之人以笃耕殖，省不急之费以赡黎元，则廪蓄不乏矣。
现代文：我希望斥退游说懒惰的人来鼓励耕种养殖，减省不急需的费用来供给人民，那么储蓄就不会缺乏了。
English: I hope to encourage farming and aquaculture by rejecting lazy lobbyists, and reduce unnecessary expenses to supply the people, so that there will be no shortage of savings.

古文：臣前所谓 吏道多端，本乎选用失当 者，繇国家取人不尽其材、任人不明其要故也。
现代文：我上面说 官吏任用五花八门，是因为选择任用不恰当 ，是因为朝廷取士不能发挥他的全部才干，任用人不知道关键。
English: I said above that officials are appointed in a variety of ways, because the choice of appointment is inappropriate, because the court usher cannot give full play to his talents, and the appointee does not know the key.

古文：今陛下之用人也，求其声而不求其实，故人之趋进也，务其末而不务其本。
现代文：现在皇上任用人才，只求声誉不管实绩，所以人们为了升官，只图虚名不管实际。
English: Now that the emperor is appointing talented people, they only seek reputation regardless of actual performance, so in order to be promoted, people only try to make a name for themselves regardless of reality.

古文：臣愿核考课之实，定迁序之制，则多端之吏息矣。
现代文：我希望考核官吏的实绩，规定官吏升迁的顺序，那么五花八门的官吏任用就停止了。
English: I hope that the performance of officials will be evaluated and the order of promotion of officials will be stipulated, so that the appointment of various officials will be stopped.

古文：臣前所谓 豪猾逾检，繇中外之法殊 者，以其官禁不一也。
现代文：我上面说 豪强违法，是因为宫廷内外法令不一致 ，是指朝廷、宫中禁令不一致。
English: When I said above that Gao Qiang violated the law, it was because of the inconsistency of laws and ordinances inside and outside the court, I was referring to the inconsistency of prohibitions in the imperial court and the palace.

古文：臣谨按《春秋》，齐桓公盟诸侯不日，而葵丘之盟特以日者，美其能宣明天子之禁，率奉王官之法，故《春秋》备而书之。
现代文：根据《春秋》，齐桓公和诸侯会盟不记载日期，但葵丘会盟却记载了日期，这是赞美他能够宣布周天子的法令，遵奉官员的规定，所以《春秋》详细地记载了这事。
English: According to "Spring and Autumn," there is no record of the date when Prince Qi Huan and the League of Princes met, but the League of Kwai Chuks recorded the date, which is to praise him for being able to announce the decree of Zhou Tianzi and comply with the requirements of officials, so "Spring and Autumn" recorded this matter in detail.

古文：然则官者，五帝、三王之所建也；法者，高祖、太宗之所制也。法宜画一，官宜正名。
现代文：官职是五帝、三王设置的；法规是高祖、太宗皇帝制定的。法规应一致，官职应合乎名分。
English: Official positions were established by the Five Emperors and Three Kings; laws and regulations were formulated by Emperor Gaozu and Emperor Taizong. Laws and regulations should be consistent, and official positions should be commensurate with their names.

古文：今又分外官、中官之员，立南司、北司之局，或犯禁于南则亡命于北，或正刑于外则破律于中，法出多门，人无所措，繇兵农势异，而中外法殊也。
现代文：现又分宫外官员、宫中官员，形成南朝廷、北朝廷的格局，有人在南朝廷犯法就逃到北朝廷去，有人被宫外判刑却被宫内赦免，法令不由一方决定，人们不知怎么办，这是因为军队和农夫制度不一致，宫里宫外法令不相同。
English: At present, officials outside the palace and officials inside the palace are also divided, forming a pattern of the Southern Court and the Northern Court. Some people broke the law in the Southern Court and fled to the Northern Court. Some people were sentenced outside the palace but were pardoned by the palace. The decree is not decided by one side, and people do not know what to do. This is because the military and the farmer system are inconsistent, and the palace and outside the palace decrees are different.

古文：臣闻古者因井田以制军赋，间农事以脩武备，提封约卒乘之数，命将在公卿之列，故兵农一致，而文武同方，以保乂邦家，式遏乱略。
现代文：我听说古代按田制来承担军费，在农闲时练兵，按封地决定军队数量，在官员中任命将领，因此军队和农夫的制度一致，文武官员一样，用这来保护国家安宁，遏制阴谋。
English: I heard that in ancient times, military expenses were borne according to the field system, soldiers were trained during the farmer's leisure time, the number of troops was determined according to the fief, and generals were appointed among the officials. Therefore, the army and the farmer's system were consistent, and the civil and military officials used this to protect the country's tranquility and curb the conspiracy.

古文：太宗置府兵台省军卫，文武参掌，闲岁则橐弓力穑，有事则释耒荷戈，所以脩复古制，不废旧物。
现代文：太宗皇帝设了各级军职，用文武官员一起掌管，没有战事就收起武器种庄稼，有战事就放下农具拿起武器，用这方法恢复古代制度，不废弃过去的制度。
English: Emperor Taizong set up military posts at all levels, and used civil and military officials to jointly manage them. When there was no war, they put away their weapons and planted crops. When there was a war, they put down their farm tools and took up weapons. In this way, they restored the ancient system without abandoning the past system.

古文：今则不然。
现代文：现在却不这样。
English: That is no longer the case.

古文：夏官不知兵籍，止于奉朝请；六军不主武事，止于养阶勋。
现代文：兵部尚书不管军队，只是上朝请安；军职不管作战，只是用来褒奖功勋。
English: The military record book does not care about the army, it is only used to send greetings to the emperor; the military post does not care about the war, it is only used to praise the merits.

古文：军容合中官之政，戎律附内臣之职。
现代文：观军容使总管宦官的事务，禁卫被宦官掌管。
English: The commander-in-chief managed the affairs of the eunuchs, and the eunuchs were in charge of the guards.

古文：首一戴武弁，疾文吏如仇雠；足一蹈军门，视农夫如草芥。
现代文：一戴上头盔，恨文官就像仇敌；一进入军队，看农夫就像尘土。
English: Once you put on the helmet, you hate the civil servants like an enemy; once you enter the army, you look at the farmers like dust.

古文：谋不足以翦除奸凶，而诈足以抑扬威福；勇不足以镇卫社稷，而暴足以侵害闾里。
现代文：不能用计谋铲除凶暴，只会用权诈作威作福；没有勇气保卫国家，只会残暴侵犯人民。
English: You can't use cunning to eradicate violence, you can only use power and deception to gain power; if you don't have the courage to defend the country, you can only brutally violate the people.

古文：羁绁籓臣，干陵宰辅，隳裂王度，汩乱朝经。
现代文：控制藩镇将领，欺负宰相，破坏制度，扰乱朝政。
English: They controlled the generals of the domains and towns, bullied the prime minister, destroyed the system, and disrupted the imperial government.

古文：张武夫之威，上以制君父；假天子之命，下以御英豪。
现代文：依靠军队的力量，向上控制了君王，假托皇上的命令，向下驾御英雄豪杰。
English: Relying on the strength of the army, he controlled the king upwards, and under the orders of the emperor, he drove the hero hero downwards.

古文：有藏奸观衅之心，无伏节死难之谊。
现代文：只知耍阴谋利用矛盾，不知按节操为国献身。
English: They only know how to play intrigue and take advantage of contradictions, but they do not know how to devote themselves to the country according to the principle.

古文：岂先王经文纬武之旨邪！
现代文：这难道与祖先安排文武官职的本意相合吗？
English: Is this consistent with the original intention of the ancestors to arrange civil and military officials?

古文：臣愿陛下贯文武之道，均兵农之功，正贵贱之名，一中外之法，还军卫之职，脩省署之官；近崇贞观之风，远复成周之制：自邦畿以刑下国，始天子而达诸侯，可以制猾奸之强，无逾检之患矣。
现代文：我希望皇上将文武官员职掌结合起来，把军队和农夫的任用结合起来，端正高贵和低贱的名分，统一宫里宫外的制度，归还军队的职能，整顿朝廷的官制，效法近代贞观年的规定，恢复远古周朝的制度，从京城推广到各地，从皇上一直到藩镇，这样就能制服强横的奸臣，没有违法的担忧了。
English: I hope that the emperor will combine the duties of civil and military officials, combine the appointment of the army and farmers, correct the noble and lowly titles, unify the system inside and outside the palace, return the functions of the army, rectify the official system of the imperial court, follow the provisions of modern Zhenguanyin, restore the ancient Zhou Dynasty system, and promote it from Beijing to all parts of the country, from the emperor all the way to the townships. In this way, it will be possible to subdue the powerful treacherous vassals, and there will be no worries about violating the law.

古文：臣前所谓 生徒惰业，繇学校之官废 者，盖国家贵其禄，贱其能，先其事，后其行，故庶官乏通经之学，诸生无脩业之心矣。
现代文：我上面说 太学学生荒废学业，是因为学校的职能废弃了 ，是指朝廷看重禄位，看轻才能，看重他的出身，看轻他的操行，所以百官不能精通学术，太学学生也没有学习的愿望了。
English: When I said above that the students of Taigaku abandoned their studies because the functions of the school were abandoned, I meant that the imperial court valued position and talent less, valued his origin more, and looked down on his conduct less. Therefore, the officials could not be proficient in academics, and the students of Taigaku had no desire to study.

古文：臣前所谓 列郡干禁，繇授任非人 者，臣以为刺史之任，治乱之根本系焉，朝廷之法制在焉，权可以御豪强，恩可以惠孤寡，强可以御奸寇，政可以移风俗。
现代文：我上面谈到 各地方违反命令，是因为任用的人不好 ，我认为州刺史的官职，是治理好坏的根本、朝廷法令的基础，他们的权力能驾御豪族，仁惠能抚恤孤儿寡妇，力量能抵御盗寇，政令能改变风俗。
English: I mentioned above that the localities violated the order because the appointees were not good, I think that the official position of the State Historian is the foundation of good governance and the foundation of the imperial decree, their power can drive the powerful, benevolence can support orphans and widows, strength can resist thieves, and decrees can change customs.

古文：其将校曾更战阵，及功臣子弟，请随宜酬赏。苟无治人之术者，不当任此官，即绝干禁之患矣。
现代文：他的将领如打过仗，和功臣的儿子弟弟一样，请让他按情况奖赏，如果没有治理人民能力的，不应任这官，这样就可以消灭违反命令的祸害了。
English: If his generals have fought in the war, let him reward them according to their merits, just like the younger brother of the son of a meritorious general. If they do not have the ability to govern the people, they should not be allowed to hold this post, so that the scourge of disobeying orders can be eliminated.

古文：臣前所谓 百工淫巧，繇制度不立 者，臣请以官位禄秩制其器用车服，禁以金银珠玉，锦绣雕镂。不蓄于私室，则无荡心之巧矣。
现代文：我上面说到 工匠变新花样，是因为制度没建立 ，我请求按官职级别规定他的用具、车辆和服装，禁止用金银、珍珠、宝玉装饰，锦绣雕刻的工匠私人不能拥有，那么就没有奢侈的新花样了。
English: I mentioned above that craftsmen change their patterns because the system has not been established, I request that his tools, vehicles and clothing be specified according to the official level, and it is forbidden to decorate with gold and silver, pearls and precious stones. Craftsmen who make embroidered carvings cannot be owned by private individuals, so there will be no luxurious new patterns.

古文：臣前所谓 辨校叶 者，繇考言以询行也；臣前所谓 形于耻格 者，繇道德而齐礼也；臣前所谓 念生寡而食众，可罢斥惰游 者，已备于前矣。
现代文：我上面所说 辨别真和假 ，是指从考查言论到考查行为；我前面所说 知道自律 ，是通过道德使他们遵行礼制。我上面所说 知道生产财富的少消耗财富的多，应贬斥懒惰和游说的人 ，已在上面详细论述了。
English: What I said above about distinguishing between truth and falsehood refers to examining from speech to behavior; what I said above about knowing self-discipline is to make them follow etiquette through morality; what I said above about knowing how to produce less wealth and consume more wealth, and how to disparage the lazy and the lobbyists, has been discussed in detail above.

古文：臣前所谓 令烦而治鲜，要察其行否 者，臣闻号令者，治国之具也。君审而出之，臣奉而行之，或亏益止留，罪在不赦。
现代文：我上面说到 政令繁多收效甚微，要明察政令是否执行了 ，我听说政令是治理国家的工具，君王审慎发布，臣下恭敬实行，如有打折扣、增加、不执行和扣留的，治罪决不轻饶。
English: I said above that the multiplicity of decrees has little effect, it is necessary to check whether the decree has been implemented, I heard that the decree is a tool for governing the country, the monarch carefully issued, the subjects respectfully implemented, if there is a discount, increase, non-implementation and detention, the crime will not be treated lightly.

古文：今陛下令烦而治鲜，得非持之者有所蔽欺乎？
现代文：现皇上政令繁多，但收效甚微，是否执行政令的人有欺骗行为呢？
English: Now the emperor's decrees are numerous, but they have little effect. Are those who implement the decrees deceitful?

古文：臣前谓 博延群彦，愿陛下必纳其言；造廷待问，则小臣其敢爱死 者。昔晁错为汉削诸侯，非不知祸之将至，忠臣之心，壮夫之节，苟利社稷，死无悔焉。
现代文：我上面说到 广招贤才，希望皇上一定接受他们的劝谏；到朝廷来参加考试，我怎敢怕死不说 ，过去晁错为汉朝削弱众王国，不是不知道灾祸将要降临，只是有忠臣的心愿、壮士的节操，只要对国家有利，死了也不后悔。
English: I mentioned above that we should recruit a wide range of talents, and I hope that the emperor will accept their advice. I would be scared to death to come to the imperial court to take the exam, not to mention that I made a mistake in the past to weaken the kingdoms for the Han Dynasty. It is not that I do not know that the disaster will come, but I have the desire of a loyal subject and the discipline of a strong man. As long as it is beneficial to the country, I will not regret dying.

古文：臣非不知言发而祸应，计行而身僇，盖痛社稷之危，哀生人之悔，岂忍姑息时忌，窃陛下一命之宠哉？
现代文：我不是不知道说了话会惹祸，计谋被采纳了也会被杀害，但对国家的危难感到悲痛，对人民的痛苦感到伤心，哪里忍心顺从现在恶人的忌讳，窃取皇上一官半职呢？
English: I am not unaware that if I say something, I will get into trouble, and if a scheme is adopted, I will be killed, but I feel saddened by the peril of the country and saddened by the suffering of the people. How can I bear to obey the current evil man's taboo and steal half of the emperor's post?

古文：昔龙逄死而启商，比干死而启周，韩非死而启汉，陈蕃死而启魏。
现代文：过去关龙逢被杀预示了商朝的建立，比干被杀预示了周朝的建立，韩非子被杀预示了汉朝的建立，陈蕃被杀预示了魏国的建立。
English: In the past, the murder of Guan Longfeng foreshadowed the establishment of the Shang Dynasty, the murder of Bi Gan foreshadowed the establishment of the Zhou Dynasty, the murder of Han Feizi foreshadowed the establishment of the Han Dynasty, and the murder of Chen Xi foreshadowed the establishment of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：今臣之来也，有司或不敢荐臣之言，陛下又无以察臣之心，退必戮于权臣之手，臣幸得从四子游于地下，固臣之愿也。所不知杀臣者，臣死之后，将孰为启之哉！
现代文：我今天到这里来，有关部门可能不敢上报我的文章，皇上又不能知道我的观点，落选后一定会被当权的臣子杀害，我如有幸能和上述四位贤臣在阴间交游，正是我的愿望，但不知道杀死我的人，在我死了以后，将为谁预示呢？
English: When I come here today, the relevant departments may not dare to publish my articles, and the emperor cannot know my views. After losing the election, I will certainly be killed by the courtiers in power. If I am fortunate enough to travel with the above-mentioned four wise ministers in the underworld, it is my wish, but I do not know who will be foreshadowed by the person who killed me after I die.

古文：至如人主之阙，政教之疵，前日之弊，臣既言之矣。
现代文：皇上治理的不足，政令教化的不当，以前的弊病，我已经说到了。
English: I have already mentioned the inadequacy of the emperor's governance, the inappropriateness of government edification, and the previous ills.

古文：若乃流下土之惠、脩近古之治而致和平者，在陛下行之而已。然上之所陈者，实以臣亲承圣问，敢不条对。虽臣之愚，以为未极教化之大端、皇王之要道。
现代文：至于为百姓造福，使治理接近古代盛世，使上下和谐，要靠皇上实行正确的政策，上面所论述的是因为我受到皇上亲自询问，不敢不说，即使像我这样愚蠢，也认为没有说完教化的主要方面、皇上治国的要点。
English: As for benefiting the people, bringing the governance closer to the ancient prosperity, and bringing harmony between the upper and lower levels, it is up to the emperor to implement the correct policy. The above discussion is because I was personally asked by the emperor, and I dare not say, even if I am stupid, I think that the main aspects of enlightenment and the main points of the emperor's governance have not been completed.

古文：伏惟陛下事天地以教人恭，奉宗庙以教人孝，养高年以教人悌长，字百姓以教人慈幼，调元气以煦育，扇大和以仁寿，可以消摇无为，垂拱成化。
现代文：希望皇上敬奉天地来教人民恭敬，敬奉祖宗来教人民行孝，瞻养长者来教人民尊敬长者，爱护百姓来教人民爱护弱小，调整阴阳来养育万物，促进和谐使人仁德长寿，就能清静随顺，安闲治理。
English: It is hoped that the emperor will worship heaven and earth to teach the people to be respectful, worship ancestors to teach the people to be filial, look after the elderly to teach the people to respect the elderly, love the people to teach the people to love and care for the weak, adjust the yin and yang to nurture all things, promote harmony and make people humane and long-lived, and be able to govern quietly and peacefully.

古文：至若念陶钧之道，在择宰相以任之，使权造化之柄；念保定之功，在择将帅以任之，使脩阃外之寄；念百度之求正，在择庶官面任之，使颛职业之守；念百姓之怨痛，在择良吏以任之，使明惠养之术。自然言足以为天下教，动足以为天下法，仁足以劝善，义足以禁非，又何必宵衣旰食，劳神惕虑，然后致治哉！
现代文：至于考虑治理措施，在于选择任用宰相，命他们代行管理；考虑保境平叛，在于选择任用将领，命他们镇守各地；考虑各部门正常运转，在于选择任用好官吏，让他们知道安抚老百姓的办法。自然而然言谈能成为全国的训诫，举动能成为全国的法则，仁德能劝勉善良，道义能制止邪恶，哪里需要起早贪黑、劳神操心、兢兢业业，才能治理好呢！
English: As for the consideration of governance measures, it lies in the choice of appointing a prime minister and ordering them to carry out management on behalf of the country; in the consideration of safeguarding the country and putting down the rebellion, in the choice of appointing generals and ordering them to guard the towns and regions; in the consideration of the normal operation of various departments, in the choice of appointing good officials and letting them know the way to appease the people. Naturally, words can become a nationwide admonition, actions can become a nationwide law, benevolence can encourage goodness, morality can stop evil, and where is the need for early rising, diligence, and hard work in order to govern well!

古文：是时，第策官左散骑常侍冯宿、太常少卿贾餗、库部郎中庞严见蕡对嗟伏，以为过古晁、董，而畏中官眦睚，不敢取。
现代文：当时，考官左散骑常侍冯宿、太常少卿贾饣束、库部郎中庞严看到他的答题后叹服，认为超过了古代的晁错、董仲舒，但是害怕宦官怀恨，不敢录取他。
English: At that time, the examiners Zuo Sanzhong riding the attendant Feng Shuku, the too often Shaoqing Jia Yingzhu, and the treasurer Lang Pang Yan saw his answer and sighed, thinking that it was more than the ancient mistake, Dong Zhongshu, but they were afraid of the eunuch's hatred and dared not admit him.

古文：士人读其辞，至感概流涕者。
现代文：士人们读了他的答题，甚至有感慨得流下了眼泪的。
English: The judges were moved to tears as they read his answers.

古文：谏官御史交章论其直。
现代文：谏官和御史不断上奏为他叫屈。
English: The eunuch and the historian are constantly calling for him to give in.

古文：于时，被选者二十有三人，所言皆冗龊常务，类得优调。
现代文：那时候，被录取的有二十三人，所说的都是平庸、拘谨的日常事务，却都高升了官职。
English: At that time, there were twenty-three people who were admitted, all of whom were mediocre, prudent daily affairs, but all of whom were promoted to official positions.

古文：河南府参军事李郃曰： 蕡逐我留，吾颜其厚邪！ 
现代文：河南府参军事李说 ：他落选我却入选了，我的脸皮不是太厚了吗！ 
English: Li, the Henan prefectural party member, said: He lost the election, but I was elected. Isn't my face too thick?

古文：乃上疏曰： 陛下御正殿求直言，使人得自奋。
现代文：就上奏说 ：皇上到正式宫殿来征求直言劝谏，使人人都很感动。
English: Regarding the above, he said, "The Emperor's visit to the official palace to solicit candid advice was very moving.

古文：臣才志懦劣，不能质今古是非，使陛下闻未闻之言，行未行之事，忽忽内思，愧羞神明。
现代文：我才能平庸胆小，不敢评价古今对错。使皇上听到没听过的话，做没做过的事，后悔反省，愧对神灵。
English: My talent is to be mediocre and timid, not to dare to evaluate the rights and wrongs of the past and present, to make the emperor hear words he has never heard, do things he has never done, regret and reflect, and feel ashamed before the gods.

古文：今蕡所对，敢空臆尽言，至皇王之成败，陛下所防闲，时政之安危，不私所料，又引《春秋》为据，汉、魏以来，无与蕡比。
现代文：他的答题，敢于说出所有心里话，包括帝王的成败、皇上应防备的、现在政局的安危，不隐瞒自己的观点。又引证《春秋》做根据，从汉朝、魏国以后，没有能比得上他的。
English: His answer, daring to say all his heart, including the success or failure of the emperor, the emperor should be prepared, and the current political situation, does not hide his point of view. He also cited "Spring and Autumn" as a basis. Since the Han Dynasty and the Wei Dynasty, there has been nothing comparable to him.

古文：有司以言涉讦忤，不敢闻。
现代文：但考官因为他所说有触犯和不合旨意处，不敢录取他。
English: However, the examiner did not dare to admit him because of what he said was a violation and non-compliance.

古文：自诏书下，万口籍籍，叹其诚鲠，至于垂泣，谓蕡指切左右，畏近臣衔怒，变兴非常，朝野惴息，诚恐忠良道穷，纲纪遂绝，季汉之乱，复兴于今。
现代文：录取诏书颁下以后，人们纷纷议论，叹服他的真诚和梗直，以至于流下了眼泪，都说他指责了皇上的近侍，怕他们怀恨，做出不合常规的事，朝廷内外都很担心，担心忠臣被害，法纪被破坏，汉末的变化又发生在今天。
English: After the imperial edict of admission was issued, people discussed one after another, marveling at his sincerity and straightforwardness, to the point of shedding tears. They all said that he had accused the emperor's close attendants, fearing that they would hold a grudge and do something unconventional. Both inside and outside the court were worried, worried that loyal subjects would be harmed, that the law and discipline would be destroyed, and that changes in the Han Dynasty would happen again today.

古文：且陛下以直言召天下士，蕡以直言副陛下所问，虽讦必容，虽过当奖，书于史策，千古光明。
现代文：因为皇上仁德圣明，近侍所以没有杀害忠臣的计划；也因为皇上祖宗有灵，近侍因此不敢自取灭亡。从这结果看，为什么怕说直话？
English: Because of the Emperor's benevolence and holiness, his attendants did not have a plan to kill loyal subjects; also because the Emperor's ancestors had a spirit, the attendants did not dare to self-destruct. Judging from this result, why are they afraid to speak the truth?

古文：使万有一蕡不幸死，天下必曰陛下阴杀谠直，结雠海内，忠义之士，皆惮诛夷，人心一摇，无以自解。
现代文：况且皇上设直言极谏科叫全国人才来考试，他说直话来满足皇上的提问，即使有触犯也应宽容，即使有过错也应奖励，载进史书，光耀万代，如果万一他遇事身亡，全国都会认为是皇上暗杀说直话的人，和全国人结仇。忠诚正直的人，都怕被杀，人心动摇，就没法辩解了。
English: Moreover, the Emperor has set forth forthrightness to the highest degree, calling the talents of the whole country to take the examination. He speaks forthrightly to satisfy the Emperor's questions. Even if there is an offense, it should be tolerated. Even if there is a mistake, it should be rewarded. He will be recorded in the history books and will shine for generations to come. If he were to die in an accident, the whole country would think that the Emperor had assassinated a person who spoke forthrightly and had a grudge against the people of the whole country. Loyal and honest people are afraid of being killed. If their hearts are shaken, they will not be able to defend themselves.

古文：况臣所对，不及蕡远甚，内怀愧耻，自谓贤良，奈人言何！
现代文：何况我都怕被杀，比他差得很远，内心非常惭愧，虽然自己认为是贤士，但人们会怎么说？
English: Besides, I'm afraid of being killed, I'm far worse than him, I'm very ashamed inside, although I think I'm a sage, but what will people say?

古文：乞回臣所授，以旌蕡直。
现代文：我请求将任命给我的官职，用来表彰他敢说直话。
English: I asked to be appointed to my post in recognition of his forthrightness.

古文：臣逃苟且之惭，朝有公正之路，陛下免天下之疑，顾不美哉！ 
现代文：我可避免苟合取容的惭愧，朝廷可有公正的录取，皇上可避免全国人的怀疑，难道不好吗？ 
English: I can avoid the shame of having been accepted, the imperial court can have a fair admission, and the emperor can avoid the suspicion of the whole country. Isn't that a good thing?

古文：帝不纳。
现代文：皇上没有采纳。
English: The emperor would not accept it.

古文：郃字子玄，后历贺州刺史。
现代文：李的字叫子玄，后来任过贺州刺史。
English: Li's character is called Zi Xuan, and he was later appointed as Hezhou Sashishi.

古文：蕡对后七年，有甘露之难。
现代文：刘蕡答题之后七年，发生了甘露之变。
English: Seven years after Liu Wei's answer to the question, the nectar of change occurred.

古文：令狐楚、牛僧孺节度山南东西道，皆表蕡幕府，授秘书郎，以师礼礼之。
现代文：令狐楚、牛僧孺任山南东、西道节度使，都请他做幕僚，任命为秘书郎，用对老师的礼节对待他。
English: Ling Xuchu and Niu Sengyu, who were appointed as the festival envoys of Shannan East and West Road, both asked him to be a staff member, appointed him as a secretary, and treated him with the etiquette of a teacher.

古文：而宦人深嫉蕡，诬以罪，贬柳州司户参军，卒。
现代文：但宦官很恨他，诬告了一个罪名，贬他为柳州司户参军，后去世了。
English: However, the eunuch hated him very much, falsely accused him of a crime, and forced him to join the army as the shogun of Liuzhou, after which he died.

古文：始，帝恭俭求治，志除凶人，然懦而不睿，臣下畏祸不敢言，故蕡对极陈晋襄公杀阳处父以戒帝，又引阍弑吴子，阴赞帝决。
现代文：当初，皇帝恭敬节俭追求治理好天下，立志除掉恶人，但懦弱不明智，臣子怕死不敢说，所以刘蕡答题极力陈述晋襄公断送了阳处父来告诫皇帝，又引用守门人杀死吴王的事例，暗中劝皇帝下决断。
English: At the beginning, the emperor respectfully and frugally pursued the good governance of the world, determined to get rid of the evildoers, but cowardly and unwise, the vassal was afraid to die, so Liu Bei's answer tried his best to state that Jin Xiangjun sent his father Yang to admonish the emperor, and also quoted the gatekeeper's killing of King Wu to secretly persuade the emperor to make a decision.

古文：帝后与宋申锡谋诛守澄不克，守澄废帝弟漳王而斥申锡，帝依违其间，不敢主也。
现代文：皇帝后来和宋申锡计划杀王守澄没成功，王守澄废黜了皇帝的弟弟漳王并把宋申锡贬到外地，皇帝在中间犹豫不定，不敢做主。
English: Later, the emperor and Song Shensi's plan to kill Wang Shoucheng did not succeed. Wang Shoucheng deposed the emperor's younger brother, Shao Wang, and banished Song Shensi to a foreign country. The emperor hesitated in the middle and did not dare to make a decision.

古文：贾餗与王涯、李训、舒元舆位宰相，以谋败，皆为中官夷其宗，而宦者益横，帝以忧崩。
现代文：后贾饣束和王涯、李训、舒元舆任宰相，因计划失败，都被宦官灭了族，所以宦官更加骄横，皇帝因忧愁去世了。
English: Later, the eunuchs killed the families of Jia Yingzook, Wang Ya, Li Xun, and Shu Yuan, who were appointed as prime ministers, due to the failure of the plan. As a result, the eunuchs became more arrogant, and the emperor died of grief.

古文：及昭宗诛韩全诲等，左拾遗罗衮上言： 蕡当太和时，宦官始炽，因直言策请夺爵土，复扫除之役，遂罹谴逐，身死异土，六十余年，正人义夫切齿饮泣。
现代文：到唐昭宗杀死了韩全诲等人，左拾遗罗衮上奏说： 刘蕡在大和年间，宦官开始横行时，借直言极谏考试答题请求剥夺他们的官爵和封地，恢复他们清扫的劳役，就被贬出京城，死在外地，六十多年来，正直忠义的人忍气吞声。
English: When Tang Zhaozong killed Han Quanzhang and others, he left a note saying: "When the eunuchs began to run rampant during the Taichung Era, Liu Bei used his blunt words to request that they be stripped of their titles and fiefs and restored to their sweeping labor service. He was banished from the capital and died in a foreign country. For more than sixty years, honest and loyal people have had to swallow their anger.

古文：比陛下幽东内，幸西州，王室几丧。
现代文：近年来皇上曾被幽禁在东宫里，又出逃到西边，国家差点灭亡了。
English: In recent years, the emperor had been confined in the East Palace, and fled to the West, and the country almost perished.

古文：使蕡策早用，则杜渐防萌，逆节可消，宁殷忧多难，远及圣世耶！
现代文：假如刘蕡的计谋早早被采纳，那么在萌芽时就防范并阻止其发展，可以制止叛逆行为，怎会使这深重的忧愁和众多的灾难，远远地蔓延到皇上的时代呢！
English: If Liu Bei's strategy had been adopted at an early stage, then it would have been possible to prevent and stop its development at the time of germination, and to stop the rebellious behavior. How could this deep sorrow and numerous disasters have spread far into the emperor's era?

古文：今天地反正，枉魄愤胔，有望于陛下。 
现代文：现皇上重登帝位，那屈死的魂魄和躯体，寄希望于皇上。 
English: Now that the Emperor has returned to the throne, the dying soul and body place their hopes in the Emperor.

古文：帝感悟，赠蕡左谏议大夫，访子孙授以官云。
现代文：据说皇帝感动、醒悟了，将刘蕡赠官为左谏议大夫，寻找任命他的子孙当了官。
English: It is said that the emperor was moved and awakened, and gave Liu Xuan the post of Zuo Xuan Wei doctor, looking for and appointing his descendants to the post.

古文：赞曰：汉武帝三策董仲舒，仲舒所对，陈天人大概，缓而不切也。
现代文：赞词说：汉武帝多次询问董仲舒，董仲舒的回答，叙述了上天和人的大致关系，但疏缓不切实用。
English: The praise said: Emperor Hanwu repeatedly inquired about Dong Zhongshu, and Dong Zhongshu's answer described the general relationship between heaven and man, but it was of no practical use.

古文：蕡与诸儒偕进，独讥切宦官，然亦太疏直矣。
现代文：刘蕡和众人一起考试，单单敢指责宦官，但也太粗心、率直了。
English: Liu Ye took the exam with everyone and dared to criticize the eunuch, but he was too careless and frank.

古文：戒帝漏言，而身诵语于廷，何邪？
现代文：告诫皇帝不要泄漏话语，自己却到朝廷上公开说，是为什么呢？
English: He admonished the emperor not to divulge what he had said, but he went to the imperial court to say it publicly. Why?

古文：其后宋申锡以谋泄贬，李训以计不臧死，宦者遂强，可不戒哉！
现代文：后来宋申锡因计谋泄漏被贬，李训因计划不周被杀，宦官就强大了，能不警惕吗！
English: Later, Song Shensi was demoted because of the leak of the plot, Li Xun was killed because of poor planning, and the eunuch became powerful. Can we not be vigilant?

古文：意蕡之贤，当先以忠结上，后为帝谋天下所以安危者，庶其纾患耶！
现代文：像他这样贤明，应先用忠心得到皇帝信任，再给皇帝谋划决定国家安危的大事，或许能挽救危难吧！
English: As wise as he is, he should first use his loyalty to gain the emperor's trust, and then give the emperor a plan to decide the important matters of the country's safety. Perhaps he can save the danger!

