古文：漾水出陇西氏道县冢山，东至武都沮县为汉水。
现代文：漾水发源于陇西郡氏道县的蟠家山，往东流到武都郡沮县，称为汉水。
English: Surabaya water originates from Shijiazhan in Shidao County, Shaanxi Province, and flows eastward to Shidao County, Wudu County, and is known as Han water.

古文：常璩《华阳国志》曰：汉水有二源，东源出武都氐道县漾山，为漾水。
现代文：常据《华阳国志》说：汉水有两个源头，东边的源头出自武都 氏道县的漾山，称为漾水。
English: According to "Hua Yang Guozhi," Chinese water has two sources. The eastern source comes from Shishan in Shidou County, Wudu, and is called Shishui.

古文：《禹贡》导漾东流为汉是也。
现代文：《禹贡》说：疏导漾水往东流是汉水，就指此水。
English: "Yugong" said: The eastward flow of dredged salty water is Chinese water, referring to this water.

古文：西源出陇西西县冢山，会白水，径葭萌入汉。始源曰沔。
现代文：西面的源头出自陇西郡西县蟠家山，汇合白水流往霞荫注入汉水，上源称为污水。
English: The source on the west side comes from Shijiazhan, Xi County, Shaanxi County. The confluence of white water flows to the shade and injects Chinese water. The upper source is called sewage.

古文：按沔水出东狼谷，径沮县入汉。
现代文：按污水发源于东狼谷，流经沮县注入汉水。
English: According to the sewage, it originated in the East Wolf Valley and flowed through Depu County to inject Chinese water.

古文：《汉中记》曰：冢以东，水皆东流，冢以西，水皆西流。
现代文：《汉中记》说：蟠家山以东，水都往东流；蟠家山以西，水就往西流。
English: "Hanzhong Ji" said: To the east of Shijiazhuang Mountain, the water flows to the east; to the west of Shijiazhuang Mountain, the water flows to the west.

古文：即其地势源流所归，故俗以冢为分水岭。
现代文：水源是循着地势而流的，因此民间都把蟠家山作为分水岭。
English: The water source flows along the topography, so the people regard Shijiazhuang Mountain as a watershed.

古文：即此推沔水无西入之理。
现代文：据此推断，污水是没有向西流的道理的。
English: From this, it can be deduced that there is no reason for the sewage to flow westward.

古文：刘澄之云：有水从阿阳县，南至梓潼、汉寿，入大穴，暗通冈山。
现代文：刘澄之说：有一条水从阿阳县南流到梓渔郡的汉寿县，注入一个大山洞，山洞暗通冈山。
English: Liu Chengzhi said: There is a stream of water flowing from the south of Ayang County to Hanshou County of Ziyu County, and it is injected into a large cave, and the cave leads to Okayama.

古文：郭景纯亦言是矣。
现代文：郭景纯也有这样的说法。
English: Guo Jingshun also had such a saying.

古文：冈山穴小，本不容水，水成大泽而流，与汉合。
现代文：冈山的洞小，本来就容不了多少水，于是水就积成一片汪洋大泽，流出去与汉水汇合。
English: Okayama's cave is small and cannot hold much water in the first place, so the water accumulates into a vast ocean, flowing out and merging with the Han River.

古文：庾仲雍又言，汉水自武遂川，南入蔓葛谷，越野牛，径至关城合西汉水。
现代文：庚仲雍又说：汉水从武遂川往南流入蔓葛谷，穿过野牛，流到关城，汇合西汉水。
English: Geng Zhongyong also said: Han water flows from Wusui River to the south into Mangge Valley, passes through the bison, flows to Guancheng, and merges with West Han water.

古文：故诸言汉者，多言西汉水至葭萌人汉。
现代文：所以诸家谈到汉水时，大都说西汉水流到霞萌注入汉水。
English: Therefore, when various families talked about Chinese water, most of them said that the Western Han water flowed to the Xia Meng to inject Chinese water.

古文：又曰：始源曰沔，是以《经》云漾水出氐道县东至沮县为汉水，东南至广魏白水。
现代文：又有人说上源叫河水，所以《水经》说：漾水发源于氏道县，东流到沮县称为汉水，往东南流到广魏白水县。
English: Some people also say that the upper source is called river water, so the "Water Divination" says: the Yunnan water originates from Shiduo County, the eastward flow to De county is called Han water, and the southeastward flow to Guang Wei Baishui County.

古文：诊其沿注，似与三说相符，而未极西汉之源矣。然东西两川，俱受沔、汉之名者，义或在兹矣。
现代文：考察水道的流向，似乎与上述三种说法相符，但都没有穷究到西汉水的源头，不过东西两条水，都有污水和汉水的名称，道理或许就在这里吧。
English: Examination of the flow direction of the waterway seems to be consistent with the above three statements, but none of them have exhaustively investigated the source of the West Han water. However, the two waters, east and west, have the names of sewage and Han water. Perhaps this is the reason.

古文：班固《地理志》、司马彪、袁山松《郡国志》，并言汉有二源，东出氐道，西出西县之冢山。
现代文：班固的《地理志》，司马彪、袁山松的《郡国志》都说汉水有两个源头，东源出自氏道县，西源出自西县的蟠家山。
English: Ban Gu's "Geography" and Sima Biao and Yuan Shansong's "County History" both say that Chinese water has two sources. The east source comes from Uji Daoxian, and the west source comes from Qijia Mountain in West County.

古文：阚駰云：汉或为漾。漾水出昆仑西北隅，至氐道，重源显发，而为漾水。
现代文：阐驰说：汉水有人称为漾水，漾水发源于昆仑山西北角，流到氏道，潜流于地下的源头才重新冒出地面，称为漾水。
English: Yanqi said: Some people call the Han Water the Surabaya Water. The Surabaya Water originates from the northwest corner of Mount Kunlun and flows to the Shidou River. The underground flow emerges from the ground at its source and is called the Surabaya Water.

古文：又言，陇西西县冢山，在西，西汉水所出，南入广魏白水。
现代文：又说，陇西郡西县蟠家山在西边，西汉水就发源在那里，往南流入广魏白水。
English: He also said that the source of the West Han Water originates from the west side of the Qijia Mountain in Xi County, Shaanxi County, and flows southward into the Guang Wei White Water.

古文：又云：漾水出豲道，东至武都入汉。
现代文：又有人说漾水发源于饭道县，往东流到武都注入汉水。
English: It is also said that Surabaya's water originates in Iido County and flows eastward to Wudu, where it is infused with Chinese water.

古文：许慎、吕忱并言，漾水出陇西豲道，东至武都为汉水，不言氐道。
现代文：许慎、吕忱都说漾水发源于陇西孤道县，往东流到武都称为汉水，并没有提到氏道。
English: Both Xu Sheng and Lü Zhen said that the Xianshui originated in the west of Shaanxi and flowed eastward to Wudu, where it was called the Han River. However, there was no mention of the clan road.

古文：然豲道在冀之西北，又隔诸川，无水南入，疑出豲道之为谬矣。
现代文：扼道县在冀县的西北，又隔着几条河流，没有南流的水，发源于板道的说法想来是错误的。
English: Zhudao County is located in the northwest of Jie County, and is separated by several rivers. There is no south-flowing water, so it is wrong to think that it originated from Pan Dao.

古文：又云：汉，漾也，东为沧浪水。
现代文：又说：汉水就是漾水，东边是沧浪水。
English: He also said: "Hanshui is Surabaya water, and the east side is Canglang water.

古文：《山海经》曰：冢之山，汉水出焉，而东南流注于江。
现代文：《山海经》说：蟠家之山是汉水的发源地，往东南流注入江水。
English: "Sanghaikyo" says: "The mountains of Shijiazhuang are the birthplace of Chinese water, and the southeastern stream is infused with river water.

古文：然东西两川，俱出冢而同为汉水者也。
现代文：然而，东西两条水都发源于蟠家山，也都同样称为汉水。
English: However, both the eastern and western waters originate from Shijiazhuang Mountain, and both are also called Han Water.

古文：孔安国曰：泉始出为漾，其犹蒙耳。
现代文：孔安国说：泉水开始流出叫漾，意思是说水流很细。
English: Kong Anguo said: "The spring water began to trickle out, which means that the water flow is very thin.

古文：而常璩专为漾山漾水，当是作者附而为山水之殊目矣。
现代文：而常据却擅自提出漾山、漾水等名，这一定是作者把山水牵连在一起而造出的异名。
English: However, according to the usual sources, the names such as Lushan and Lushui were arbitrarily proposed, which must be a different name created by the author by linking the landscape together.

古文：余按《山海经》，漾水出昆仑西北隅，而南流注于丑涂之水。
现代文：我查过《山海经》，漾水发源于昆仑山西北角，南流注入丑涂之水。
English: I checked the "Shanhai Jing" and found that the Surabhi Water originates from the northwest corner of Mount Kunlun, while the southern stream is infused with the Ugly Water.

古文：《穆天子传》曰：天子自春山西征，至于赤乌氏。己卯，北征，庚辰，济于洋水，辛巳，入于曹奴。
现代文：《穆天子传》说：穆天子从春山出发西行，到达赤乌氏；己卯日北行；庚辰日渡过洋水；辛已日进入曹奴。
English: "The Biography of Mu Tianzi" says: Mu Tianzi started from Chunshan and traveled westward to reach the Red Wu clan; he traveled northward; he crossed the Yangtze River on the day of Geng Chen; and he entered Cao Nu on the day of Xin.

古文：曹奴人戏，觞天子于洋水之上，乃献良马九百，牛羊七千，天子使逢固受之。天子乃赐之黄金之鹿，戏乃膜拜而受。
现代文：曹奴有个人名戏，在洋水上宴请天子，献上良马九百匹，牛羊七千头；天子派逢固去接受馈赠，于是回赠他黄金鹿一只，戏也恭敬地跪拜接受了。
English: Cao Nu had a famous personal play. He invited the Son of Heaven to a banquet on the ocean and offered him nine hundred fine horses, seven thousand head of cattle and sheep. The Son of Heaven sent Feng Gu to accept the gift, so he gave him a golden deer in return. The play was also respectfully bowed down and accepted.

古文：余以太和中，从高祖北巡，狄人犹有此献。
现代文：我在太和年间曾跟从高祖北巡，狄人也有此类贡献。
English: I followed Gaozu's Northern Patrol during the Taika era, and the Di people also made such contributions.

古文：虽古今世殊，而所贡不异。
现代文：虽然古今时代不同，但所贡献的东西却没有差别。
English: Although the ancient and modern times are different, there is no difference in what has been contributed.

古文：然川流隐伏，卒难详照，地理潜闷，变通无方，复不可全言阚氏之非也。
现代文：然而，川流隐伏在地下，很难详细搞清楚，地形地貌隐蔽幽深，变化莫测，没有一定的规律可循，因此也不能完全责怪阐氏的错误了。
English: However, the river flow is hidden underground, it is difficult to find out in detail, the topography is hidden and deep, it is unpredictable, and there is no certain rule to follow. Therefore, it is not possible to completely blame Ying's mistake.

古文：虽津流派别，枝渠势悬，原始要终，潜流或一，故俱受汉、漾之名，纳方土之称，是其有汉川、汉阳、广汉、汉寿之号，或因其始，或据其终，纵异名互见，犹为汉漾矣。
现代文：虽然水流有分支，支渠相隔遥远，但探究它们的源头和归宿，隐蔽的地下潜流，有时却是同属一条水的。因此，都有了汉水、漾水之名，同时又采用了一些地方名称，于是就有了汉川、汉阳、广汉、汉寿等名，有的是根据起点，有的是根据终点。纵然各书中可以看到各种异名，但指的还是汉水和漾水。
English: Although water streams have branches and branches are far apart, exploring their source and destination, hidden underground streams, sometimes belong to the same water. Therefore, they all have the names of Hanshui and Surabaya, and at the same time they have adopted some local names, so there are names such as Hanchuan, Hanyang, Guanghan, Han Shou, some according to the starting point, some according to the end point. Although various different names can be seen in each book, they still refer to Han and Surabaya.

古文：川共目殊，或亦在斯。
现代文：同一条川流，而名称各异，原因或许就在这里吧。
English: Perhaps this is the reason why the same river has different names.

古文：今西县家山，西汉水所导也，然微涓细注，若通幂历，津注而已。
现代文：今天的西县蟠家山是西汉水的发源地，然而水流细弱，只是遍布于四面八方的细水缕缕相通，汇集在一起罢了。
English: Today's Lijiashan in Xixian County is the birthplace of the Western Han Dynasty water. However, the water flow is weak, but the thin water that spreads in all directions is connected and brought together.

古文：西流与马池水合，水出上邦西南六十余里，谓之龙渊水，言神马出水，事同余吾来渊之异，故因名焉。
现代文：西汉水往西流，与马池水汇合。马池水发源于上卦西南六十多里，叫龙渊水，据说有神马从渊里出来，与余吾、来渊出现过的奇迹相类似，因而得名。
English: The West Han Water flows westward and merges with the Horse Pond Water. The Horse Pond Water originates from more than sixty miles southwest of Shanggao, called Longyuan Water. It is said that a divine horse came out of the abyss, similar to the miracle that occurred in Yuwu and Laiyuan, hence the name.

古文：《开山图》曰：陇西神马山有渊池，龙马所生。即是水也。
现代文：《开山图》说：陇西神马山有个深潭，出生过龙马，说的就是这条水。
English: "Kaishan map" said: there is a deep pool in Shemma Mountain, Shaanxi Province. Longma was born, and this water is said to be the source.

古文：其水西流，谓之马池川。又西流入西汉水。
现代文：水往西流，称为马池川，再往西流，注入西汉水。
English: The water flows westward and is called the Maike River. It then flows westward and is filled with West Han water.

古文：西汉水又西南流，左得兰渠溪水，次西有山黎谷水，次西有铁谷水，次西有石耽谷水，次西有南谷水，并出南山，扬湍北注；右得高望谷水，次西得西溪水，次西得黄花谷水，咸出北山，飞波南入西汉水，又西南，资水注之。
现代文：西汉水又往西南流，左边接纳了兰渠溪水；往西依次有山黎谷水、铁谷水、石耽谷水和南谷水―这几条水都发源于南山，急流奔腾，往北流去。右面接纳了高望谷水，往西，有西溪水，再往西，有黄花谷水，都发源于北山，浪花飞溅，南流注入西汉水。西汉水继续往西南流，资水注入。
English: The West Han River flows to the southwest and receives the Lancu River on the left; to the west, there are the Ligu River, the Tiegu River, the Shitan River and the South Valley Water, all of which originate from the Nanshan Mountains. The rapid current rushes northward. The right side receives the Gaowang Valley Water. To the west, there is the West Stream Water, and to the west, there is the Huanghua Valley Water, all of which originate from the North Mountain. The waves splash, and the south stream injects the West Han River. The West Han River continues to flow to the southwest, injecting fresh water.

古文：水北出资川，导源四壑，南至资峡，总为一水，出峡西南流，注西汉水，西汉水又西南得峡石水口，水出苑亭西草黑谷。三溪西南至峡石口，合为一渎，东南流，屈而南注西汉水。
现代文：资水发源于北方的资川、源头从四面山谷中流出，南流到资峡，合并为一条，出峡后往西南流，最后注入西汉水。西汉水又往西南流，到了峡石水口，峡石水发源于苑亭、西草、黑谷三条小溪，往西南流到峡石口，汇合成一条，然后往东南流，拐弯南流注入西汉水。
English: The Ji River originates in the north, and its source flows out of the valley on all sides. It flows south to the Ji Gorge, and merges into one stream. After leaving the gorge, it flows southwest, and is finally injected with the West Han River. The West Han River then flows southwest to the mouth of the canyon. The canyon water originates from the three small streams of Yuan Ting, West Grass, and Black Valley, flows southwest to the mouth of the canyon, and merges into one stream. It then flows southeast, and the south stream turns into the West Han River.

古文：西汉水又西南，合杨廉川水，水出西谷，众川泻流，合成一川。东南流，径西县故城北。
现代文：西汉水又往西南流，汇合了杨廉川水。杨廉川发源于西谷，许多条山涧流泻下来，汇合成一条，往东南流经西县旧城北面。
English: The West Han River flows to the southwest, merging with the Yang Lian River. The Yang Lian River originates in the West Valley, and many mountain streams cascade down and merge into one, flowing southeast through the northern part of the old city of West County.

古文：秦庄公伐西戎，破之。
现代文：秦庄公讨伐西戎，把西戎击溃。
English: Qin Zhuangguo fought against Xirong and defeated Xirong.

古文：周宣王与其先大骆犬丘之地，为西垂大夫，亦西垂宫也。
现代文：周宣王把犬丘赐给庄公祖先大骆作为封地，称为西垂大夫，西垂宫就在这里。
English: King Zhou Xuan gave Inuqiu to Zhuang Gong's ancestor Daluo as a fief, known as Xituli Doctor, and Xituli Palace is located here.

古文：王莽之西治矣。
现代文：这也就是王莽时的西治。
English: This is also the western part of Wang Mang's time.

古文：建武八年，世祖至阿阳，窦融等悉会。
现代文：建武八年世祖到阿阳，窦融等人都来会合，因此天水人心动摇。
English: In the eighth year of Jianwu, the patriarch went to Ayang, Dou Rong and other people came to the meeting, so the hearts of Tianshui people were shaken.

古文：天水震动，隗嚣将妻子奔西城，从杨广。
现代文：魄嚣带着妻子儿女逃奔西城，去投靠杨广。
English: He took his wife and children and ran away to the west of the city to seek refuge with Yang Guang.

古文：广死，嚣愁穷城守，时颍川贼起，车驾东归，留吴汉、岑彭围嚣。岑等壅西谷水，以缣幔盛土为堤，灌城，城未没丈余。
现代文：杨广死后，魄嚣因守城陷入困境，十分忧愁。当时颖川盗贼蜂起，世祖车驾东归，留下吴汉、岑彭围困魄嚣，岑彭等人堵住了西谷水，用帐幕装上泥土，筑堤淹城。
English: After the death of Yang Guang, Zhaopeng was in a difficult situation due to the defense of the city, and was very sad. At that time, the Yingchuan thieves revolted, and the ancestral car drove back east, leaving Wu Han and Zhaopeng besieging Zhaopeng. Zhaopeng and others blocked the West Valley Water, used tents to install soil, and built a dike to flood the city.

古文：水穿壅不行，地中数丈涌出，故城不坏。
现代文：但城墙还有一丈多没有淹没，水却冲破堤坝，从地下数丈处涌出来，因而城也没有毁坏。
English: However, the city wall is still more than a meter high and has not been flooded, but the water broke through the dike and gushed out from several meters underground, so the city has not been destroyed.

古文：王元请蜀救至，汉等退还上邦。
现代文：再加上王元请到了蜀地的救兵，吴汉的军队只得退回上卦。
English: In addition, Wang Yuan invited rescuers from Shu to help, and Wu Han's army had to retreat back to Shanggua.

古文：但广、廉字相状，后人因以人名名之，故习讹为杨廉也，置杨廉县焉。
现代文：后人常用人名给地方命名，魔、廉两字因字形相似误作杨廉，以讹传讹，于是设置了杨廉县。
English: Later generations often used people's names to name places, and the two characters "魔" and "廉" were mistaken for "杨廉" due to their similar glyphs, and were changed to "传," which led to the establishment of Yanglian County.

古文：又东南流，右会茅川水，水出西南戎溪，东北流，径戎丘城甫。
现代文：杨廉川水又往东南流，在右边汇合了茅川水。
English: The Yanglian River water flows to the southeast, and merges with the Mao River water on the right.

古文：吴汉之围西城，王捷登城，向汉军曰：为隗王城守者，皆必死，无二心，愿诸将亟罢，请自杀以明之。
现代文：茅川水发源于西南的戎溪，往东北流经戎丘城南面，吴汉等人围困西城的时候，守将王捷登上城头向汉军将士们说：我们这些为魄王守城的人都作了必死的准备，决无二心，希望诸位将领马上退兵。请让我们用自杀来表明我们的决心。
English: When Wu Han and others besieged the western city, the commander of the city, Wang Jie, climbed to the top of the city and said to the Chinese soldiers: "We, who are defending the city against Wang, have made preparations for death, and we have no second thoughts. We hope that you generals will immediately leave the army. Please let us use suicide to show our determination."

古文：遂刎颈而死。
现代文：说罢就刻颈而死。
English: Just say the word and you'll die of a broken neck.

古文：又东北流，注西谷水，乱流东南，入于西汉水。
现代文：茅川水又往东北流，注入西谷水，于是往东南乱流，注入西汉水。
English: The Chao River water flows to the northeast, injecting the West Valley water, and then flows to the southeast, injecting the West Han water.

古文：西汉水又西南，径始昌峡，《晋书地道记》曰：天水始昌县，故西城也。
现代文：西汉水继续往西南流往始昌峡。《晋书•地道记》说：天水始昌县，在旧城西面。
English: The West Han River continued to flow southwest to Shichang Gorge. "Jinshu • Jidoki" said: Tianshui Shichang County, in the west of the old city.

古文：亦曰清崖峡。
现代文：始昌峡也叫清崖峡。
English: Shichang Gorge is also called Qingya Gorge.

古文：西汉水又西南，径宕备戍南，左则宕备水自东南，西北注之。右则盐官水南入焉。
现代文：西汉水又往西南流，经宕备戍南面，左边有宕备水，来自东南，往西北注入；右边有盐官水往南流汇合进来。
English: The West Han Water also flows to the southwest, passing through the south side of the Tangbo Reservoir. On the left, there is the Tangbo Reservoir, which comes from the southeast and is injected to the northwest; on the right, there is the Yanquan Water, which flows to the south and merges with it.

古文：水北有盐官，在冢西五十许里，相承营煮不辍，味与海盐同。
现代文：盐官水的北面有个地方叫盐官，在蟠家山西面约五十里。人们世世代代在这里煮盐，从未停歇过，煮的盐咸味与海盐相同。
English: On the north side of the salt canal, there is a place called the salt canal, about fifty miles west of Lijiang Mountain. People have been boiling salt here for generations, never stopping. The salt boiled has the same salty taste as sea salt.

古文：故《地理志》云西县有盐官是也。
现代文：所以《地理志》说：西县有盐官。
English: Therefore, "Geography" said: There is a salt officer in West County.

古文：其水东南径宕备戍西，东南入汉水。
现代文：盐官水往东南流经宕备戍西面，往东南注入汉水。
English: Yanquan water flows to the southeast through the western side of Tangbo, and is injected into Han water to the southeast.

古文：汉水又西南，合左谷水，水出南山穷溪，北注汉水。
现代文：汉水又往西南流，汇合了左谷水。左谷水发源于南山深处的溪涧，北流注入汉水。
English: The Han River also flows to the southwest, merging with the Zuo Valley Water, which originates from a creek in the depths of the Nanshan Mountains and is fed by the north stream.

古文：又西南，兰皋水出西北五交谷，东南历祁山军，东南入汉水。
现代文：汉水又往西南流，有兰皋水发源于西北五交谷，往东南流经祁山军，往东南注入汉水。
English: Han water also flows to the southwest, and some Lancang water originates from the northwest Wujia Valley, flows to the southeast through the Lushan Army, and injects Han water to the southeast.

古文：汉水又西南，径祁山军南，鸡水南出鸡谷，北径水南县西，北流注于汉。
现代文：汉水又往西南流经祁山军南面，有鸡水发源于南方的鸡谷，往北流经水南县西，往北流，注入汉水。
English: Han water also flows to the southwest through the south of Lushanjun, and chicken water originates from the chicken valley in the south, flows northward through the west of Shuinan County, flows northward, and is injected with Han water.

古文：汉水又西，建安川水入焉。
现代文：汉水又往西流，有建安川水注入。
English: The Han River also flows to the west, with water from the Jian'an River being injected.

古文：其水导源建威西北山，白石戍东南，二源合注。
现代文：建安川水发源于建威西北山间的白石戍东南，由两个源头汇合而成，往东流经建威城南面。
English: The Jian'an River originates in the mountains of northwest Jianwei, south-east of Shiroishi Pass. It is formed by the confluence of two sources and flows eastward through the south of Jianwei City.

古文：东径建威城南，又东与兰坑水会，水出西南近溪，东北径兰坑城西，东北流注建安水。
现代文：又东流与兰坑水汇合。兰坑水发源于西南近处的溪涧，往东北流经兰坑城西，又东北流注入建安水。
English: The east stream also converges with the Lancang Water. The Lancang Water originates from the creek near the southwest, flows to the northeast through the west of Lancang City, and the northeast stream injects Jian'an Water.

古文：建安水又东径兰坑城北，建安城甫，其地故西县之历城也。
现代文：建安水又往东流经兰坑城北、建安城南，这里是旧时西县的历城地方。
English: Jian'an water also flows eastward through the north of Lankeng City and the south of Jian'an City. This is the Licheng area of the old West County.

古文：杨定自陇右徙治历城，即此处也，去仇池百二十里，后改为建安城。
现代文：杨定把治所从陇右迁到历城，就是这个地方。这里离仇池一百二十里，后来改名为建安城。
English: This is the place where Yang Ding moved the government office from Shao Zuo to Licheng, which is 120 miles away from Qiuchi and was later renamed Jian'an City.

古文：其水又东合错水，水出错水戍东南，而东北入建安水。
现代文：建安水又东流，汇合了错水。错水发源于错水戍东南面，往东北流，注入建安水。
English: Jianan water also flows to the east, merging with the wrong water. The wrong water originates from the southeast of the wrong water basin, flows to the northeast, and injects Jianan water.

古文：建安水又东北，有雉尾谷水，又东北，有大谷水，又北，有小祁山水，并出东溪，扬波西注。
现代文：建安水又往东北流，有难尾谷水，又往东北流，有太谷水，又往北流，有小祁山水，这几条水都发源于东溪，带着跳跃的水波，往西注入建安水。
English: Jian'an water also flows to the northeast, there is Nanao valley water, again to the northeast, there is Taiya water, again to the north, there is Xiaobai mountain water, these several waters all originate from Dongxi, with jumping water waves, injecting Jian'an water to the west.

古文：又北，左会胡谷水，水西出胡谷，东径金盘、历城二军北，军在水南层山上。
现代文：又往北流，左边汇合了胡谷水，胡谷水发源于西方的胡谷，往东流经金盘、历城两个军事据点北面，这两个据点都在水南层沓的山岭上。
English: It also flows northward, merging with the Hutu Water on the left. The Hutu Water originates from the Hutu Valley in the west and flows eastward through the north of the two military strongholds of Jinpan and Licheng, both of which are on the rugged mountains in the southern layer of the water.

古文：其水又东注建安水。
现代文：胡谷水又往东流，注入建安水。
English: Hutu water also flows eastward, injecting Jianan water.

古文：建安水又东北，径塞峡。
现代文：建安水又往东北流经塞峡。
English: The Jianan River flows to the northeast through the Sai Gorge.

古文：元嘉十九年，宋太祖遣龙骧将军裴方明伐杨难当，难当将妻子北奔，安西参军鲁尚期追出塞峡，即是峡矣。
现代文：元嘉十九年，宋太祖派遣龙壤将军裴方明讨伐杨难当，杨难当带着妻子儿女向北逃奔，安西参军鲁尚期追出塞峡，指的就是这个山峡。
English: In the 19th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Song Taizu dispatched Yongyeong general Pei Fangming to fight against Yang Nantang. Yang Nantang fled north with his wife and children, while Anxi joined the army and chased Lu Shang out of Sai Gorge, referring to this mountain gorge.

古文：左山侧有石穴洞，人言潜通下辨，所未详也。
现代文：山峡左边山侧有个石洞，传说暗通下辨，不知是否真的如此。
English: There is a stone cave on the left side of the canyon. According to legend, it is said to be haunted. I don't know if this is true.

古文：其水出峡西北流，注汉水。
现代文：建安水出峡后往西北流，注入汉水。
English: After the Jian'an water flows out of the gorge, it flows to the northwest and is injected with Han water.

古文：汉水北连山秀举，罗峰竞峙。祁山在冢之西七十许里，山上有城，极为严固。昔诸葛亮攻祁山，即斯城也。
现代文：汉水北面群山重峦叠嶂，险峰高高耸峙，祁山就在蟠家山西约七十里，山上有城，十分坚固险要，从前诸葛亮进攻祁山，就是这座城。
English: To the north of Hanshui, the mountains are piled on top of each other, and the dangerous peaks are towering high. Lushan is about seventy miles west of Lijiang Mountain. There is a city on the mountain, which is very strong and dangerous. Zhuge Liang attacked Lushan in the past, and it is this city.

古文：汉水径其南。
现代文：汉水就从城南流过。
English: Han water flows from the south of the city.

古文：城南三里，有亮故垒，垒之左右，犹丰茂宿草，盖亮所植也，在上邦西南二百四十里。
现代文：城南三里有诸葛亮军营的遗址，至今荒草还很茂盛，那是诸葛亮当年种植的。那地方位于上卦西南二百四十里。
English: The site of Zhuge Liang's military camp is located in the southern part of the city of Sanli, and the wild grass is still very lush. It was planted by Zhuge Liang that year. That place is 240 miles southwest of Shanggua.

古文：《开山图》曰：汉阳西南有祁山，溪径逶迤，山高岩险，九州之名阻，天下之奇峻。
现代文：《开山图》说：汉阳西南有祁山，山径盘回曲折，山高岩险，是九州著名的险要之地，天下罕见的高山峻岭。
English: "Kaishan Map" says: Southwest of Hanyang, there is Mount Lushan, with winding mountain paths and rocky mountains. It is a famous dangerous place in Kyushu and a rare high mountain in the world.

古文：今此山于众阜之中，亦非为杰矣。
现代文：但今夫看来，此山在群丘之中，也看不出特别了不起。
English: But from my husband's point of view, this mountain in the midst of the hills does not look particularly remarkable.

古文：汉水又西南，与甲谷水合，水出西南甲谷，东北流注汉水。
现代文：汉水又往西南流，与甲谷水汇合。甲谷水发源于西南的甲谷，往东北流，注入汉水。
English: The Han River flows to the southwest and merges with the Jiaotong River. The Jiaotong River originates in the southwest of Jiaotong and flows to the northeast, where it is injected with the Han River.

古文：汉水又西径南蚜北蚜中。上下有二城相对，左右坟垅低昂，亘山被阜。
现代文：汉水又往西流经南蚜与北蚜之间，上下两城相对，左右尽是高低起伏的坟墓，连绵不断地布满山陵冈阜。
English: The Han River also flows westward between Nanlu and Beilun, opposite the two cities, and is full of high and low rolling tombs on the left and right, continuously covering the mountains and hills of Gangfu.

古文：古谚云：南蚜北蚜，万有余家。
现代文：古语说：南蚜北蚜，万有余家。
English: An ancient saying goes: South is as good as north, and there is no place like home.

古文：诸葛亮《表》言：祁山去沮县五百里，有民万户，瞩其丘墟，信为殷矣。
现代文：诸葛亮《表》说：祁山距沮县五百里，有居民万余家。看看那一片坟地，可以看出这地方实在是很殷富的了。
English: Zhuge Liang of the "Watch" said: "Lushan is five hundred miles away from Shimo County, with more than ten thousand residents. Looking at that cemetery, you can see that this place is really rich.

古文：汉水西南径武植戍南。武植戌水发北山，二源奇发，合于安民戍南，又南径武植戍西，而西南流，注于汉水。
现代文：汉水往西南流经武植戍南面，武植戍水发源于北山，有两个源头一齐涌出，在安民戍南汇合，往南流经武植戍西面，然后往西南注入汉水。
English: The Han River flows to the southwest through the southern part of Wuxi. The Wuxi River originates in Beishan. Two sources gush out at the same time, converge in the southern part of Anmin, flow southward through the western part of Wuxi, and then inject the Han River to the southwest.

古文：汉水又西南，径平夷戍南，又西南，夷水注之。
现代文：汉水又往西南流经平夷戍南面，又往西南流，夷水注入。
English: The Han River also flows to the southwest through the southern part of Pingyi, and then flows to the southwest, where it is injected with the water of the Yiwu River.

古文：水出北山，南径其戍，西南入汉水。
现代文：夷水发源于北山，往南流经平夷戍西，往南注入汉水。
English: The Yishui originates from the North Mountain, flows southward through the west of Pingyi, and flows southward into the Han River.

古文：汉水又西径兰仓城南，又南，右会两溪，俱出西山，东流注于汉水。
现代文：汉水又往西流经兰仓城南面，又往南流，在右边汇合了两条溪流，溪流都发源于西山，往东流注入汉水。
English: The Han River flows westward through the southern side of Lancang City, and then flows southward, merging two streams on the right side. The streams originate from the West Mountain and flow eastward into the Han River.

古文：张华《博物志》云：温水出鸟鼠山，下注汉水。
现代文：张华《博物志》说：温水发源于鸟鼠山，往下流注入汉水。
English: Zhang Hua's "Natural History" said: The warm water originates from the Bird and Mouse Mountain, and the Chinese water is injected downstream.

古文：疑是此水，而非所详也。
现代文：可能就是这条水，但也不大清楚。
English: It could be this water, but it's not clear.

古文：汉水又南入嘉陵道，而为嘉陵水。世俗名之为阶陵水，非也。
现代文：汉水又往南流入嘉陵道，称为嘉陵水，但民间却叫阶陵水，这是搞错的。
English: Han water flows southward into Jialing Road and is called Jialing water, but the people call it Jialing water, which is a mistake.

古文：汉水又东南，得北谷水，又东南得武街水，又东南得仓谷水，右三水并出西溪，东流注汉水。
现代文：汉水又往东南流，接纳了北谷水，又往东南流，接纳了武街水；又往东南流，接纳了仓谷水。右面这三条水都发源于西溪，东流注入汉水。
English: The Han River flows to the southeast, receiving the Chatan River, to the southeast, receiving the Wu Jie River, and to the southeast, receiving the Canggu River. The three rivers on the right originate from the Xixi River, and the east stream flows into the Han River.

古文：汉水又东南径瞿堆西，又屈径瞿堆南。
现代文：汉水又往东南流经瞿堆西面，接着拐弯流经瞿堆南面。
English: The Han River flows southeast through the west side of the mound, and then turns around and flows through the south side of the mound.

古文：绝壁峭峙，孤险云高，望之形若覆唾壶，高二十余里，羊肠蟠道三十六回，《开山图》谓之仇夷，所谓积石嵯峨，嵚岑隐阿者也。
现代文：这里断崖绝壁陡峭耸峙，险峻的孤峰高入云霄，看上去好像倒置的痰孟。山高二十余里，羊肠小道盘桓曲折，有三十六弯，《开山图》称为仇夷，所谓层岩高峻巍峨，高峰遮蔽山弯，就是描写这地方。
English: Here, cliffs rise steeply, precipitous isolated peaks soar into the sky, looking like upside-down spittoons. The mountain is more than twenty miles high, the sheep's intestine trail is full of twists and turns, with thirty-six bends. "Kaishan map" is called Qiuyi, the so-called stratum rock is high and steep, the peak covers the mountain bend, is to describe this place.

古文：上有平田百顷，煮土成盐，因以百顷为号。
现代文：顶上有平坦的田地百顷，泥土可以煮盐，因而就用百顷作为地名。
English: There are 100 hectares of flat fields at the top, and the soil can boil salt, so 100 hectares is used as a place name.

古文：山上丰水泉，所谓清泉涌沸，润气上流者也。
现代文：山上水源十分丰富，正像人们所说，清泉喷涌，湿气升腾。
English: The water source on the mountain is very rich, just as people say, clear springs gush, and moisture rises.

古文：汉武帝元鼎六年开，以为武都郡。
现代文：汉武帝元鼎六年，立为武都郡。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, Wudu County was established.

古文：天池大泽在西，故以都为目矣。
现代文：因为西面是天池大泽，水泽所聚叫都，因而就以都字为名。
English: Because the west side is Amaike-Ozawa, Mizusawa-cho is called Miyako, so it is named after the capital letter.

古文：王莽更名乐平郡，县曰循虏。
现代文：王莽改名为乐平郡。县名叫循虏。
English: Wang Mang was renamed Leping County. The county was named Xunru.

古文：常璩、范晔云：郡居河池，一名仇池，地方百顷，即指此也。
现代文：常球、范哗说：郡治设在河池，又称仇池，方圆百顷，指的就是此池。
English: Changqiu and Fan said: the county seat is located in Hechi, also known as Qiuchi, with a radius of 100 hectares, referring to this pond.

古文：左右悉白马氐矣。
现代文：这一带 住的都是白马氏族人。
English: The people who live in this area are from the Baima clan.

古文：汉献帝建安中，有天水氐杨腾者，世居陇右，为氐大帅。子驹，勇健多计，徙居仇池。魏拜为百顷氐王。
现代文：汉献帝建安年间天水氏族，有一个名杨腾的人，世居陇右，做了氏族的首领，他的儿子杨驹，勇健多谋，后来迁居到仇池，魏封他为百顷氏王。
English: During the Han Dynasty, there was a man by the name of Yang Teng in the Tianshui clan. He lived in Shiyu and became the head of the clan. His son, Yang Hui, was courageous and resourceful. Later, he moved to Quching. In Wei, he was crowned the king of the Hundred Hectares clan.

古文：汉水又东合洛谷水，水有二源，同注一壑，径神蛇戍西。左右山溪多五色蛇，性驯良，不为物毒。
现代文：汉水往东流，汇合了洛谷水。洛谷水有两个源头，一同注入一条山沟，流经神蛇戍西面石这一带溪旁有许多五色蛇，生性驯良，无毒。
English: The Han River flows eastward, merging with the Luo Valley Water. The Luo Valley Water has two sources, both of which are injected into a ravine. It flows through the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West Face of the West.

古文：洛谷水又南径虎馗戍东，又南径仇池郡西，瞿堆东，西南入汉水。
现代文：洛水又往南流经虎馗戍东面，又往南流经仇池郡西面、瞿堆东面，往西南注入汉水 汉水又往东流，汇合了洛溪水。
English: Luo water also flows southward through the east of Tigris, and flows southward through the west of Qiuchi County and the east of Diandui, and injects Chinese water to the southwest. Chinese water also flows eastward, and merges with Luo Creek water.

古文：汉水又东合洛溪水，水北发洛谷，南径威武戍南，又西南与龙门水合，水出西北龙门谷，东流与横水会，东北穷溪，即水源也。
现代文：洛溪水发源于北方的洛谷，往南流经威武戍南面，又转向西南与龙门水汇合。龙门水发源于西北的龙门谷，东流与横水汇合，东北方僻远的山溪就是它的源头。
English: Luo Creek originates from the Luo Valley in the north, flows south through the south of Weiwuying, and turns to the southwest to merge with Longmen Water. Longmen Water originates from the Longmen Valley in the northwest, the east stream merges with the cross-stream, and the remote mountain stream in the northeast is its source.

古文：又南径龙门戍东，又东南入洛溪水，又东南径上禄县故城西，修源浚导，径引北溪，南总两川，单流纳汉。
现代文：龙门水又往南流经龙门戍东面，又往东南流，注入洛溪水。洛溪水又往东南流经上禄县旧城西南，洛溪源长水深，引入北溪的水，往南汇合了两条川流，合为一条，注入汉水。
English: The Longmen Water flows southward through the eastern side of Longmen Reservoir, and then flows southeastward to inject the Luo Creek Water. The Luo Creek Water also flows southeastward through the southwest of the old city of Shangluo County, the source of Luo Creek is deep, the water introduced by the North Stream, and the two rivers converge to the south, merge into one, and inject the Chinese Water.

古文：汉水又东南径浊水城南，又东南会平乐水，水出武街东北四十五里，东驰。
现代文：汉水又往东南流经浊水城南面，又往东南流，汇合了平乐水。平乐水发源于武街东北四十五里，向前滚滚奔流至南溪。
English: The Han River flows to the southeast through the south of Surabaya City, and then flows to the southeast, merging with the Pingle River. The Pingle River originates 45 miles northeast of Wu Jie and flows to Nanxi.

古文：南溪导源东北流，山侧有甘泉，涌波飞清，下注平乐水。又径甘泉戍甫，又东径平乐戍南，又东入汉，谓之会口。
现代文：南溪发源后往东北流，山边有一条甘冽的山泉，清波飞流，往下注入平乐水、平乐水又流经甘泉戍南面，又往东流经平乐戍南面，又往东注入汉水。汇流处称为会口。
English: After the origin of Nanxi, it flows to the northeast, and there is a sweet mountain spring on the mountain side. The clear waves fly, and the downpour of Pingle water is injected. Pingle water also flows through the south side of Ganquan, and flows eastward through the south side of Pingle, and injects Chinese water to the east. The confluence is called the meeting place.

古文：汉水东南径修城道南，与修水合。
现代文：汉水往东南流经惰城道南，与情水汇合。
English: The Han River flows to the southeast through the south of Lazy Town Road and merges with the Love River.

古文：水总二源，东北合汉。
现代文：惰水汇合了两条源流，往东北流，汇合于汉水。
English: The stagnant water merges the two headwaters, flows to the northeast, and merges with the Han River.

古文：汉水又东南于槃头郡南，与浊水合。
现代文：汉水又往东南流，在架头郡南与浊水汇合。
English: The Han River flows to the southeast and joins the Surabaya River in the southern part of Jiaotou County.

古文：水出浊城北，东流与丁令溪水会。
现代文：浊水发源于浊城北面，东流与丁令溪水汇合。
English: The Surabaya Water originates from the north of Surabaya, and the east stream merges with the water of Dingling Creek.

古文：其水北出丁令谷，南径武街城西，东南入浊水。
现代文：丁令溪水发源于北方的丁令谷，往南流经武街城西面，往东南注入浊水。
English: The water of Dingling Creek originates from the Dingling Valley in the north, flows southward through the west side of Wujiacheng, and is injected into the south-eastern part of Surabaya.

古文：浊水又东径武街城南，故下辨县治也。
现代文：浊水又往东流经武街城南，这是旧下辨县的治所。
English: Surabaya also flows eastward through the southern part of Wuchang, which was the former seat of Shimo Ben county.

古文：李琀、李稚以氐王杨难敌妻死，葬阴平。袭武街，为氐所杀于此矣，今广业郡治。
现代文：李珍、李稚因为氏王杨难敌的妻子死后葬在阴平，率兵去偷袭武街，结果在此处被氏人所杀。今天，这里是广业郡的治所。
English: Li Zhen and Li Zhiqi were buried in Yinping after the death of the wife of the lord of the clan Wang Yang, and led the troops to raid Wu Street. As a result, they were killed by the lord of the clan here. Today, this is the seat of Guangye County.

古文：浊水又东，宏休水注之。
现代文：浊水又东流，宏休水注入。
English: Surabaya's water also flows to the east, and the water from Hongkou is injected.

古文：水出北溪，南径武街城东，而南流注于浊水。
现代文：宏休水发源于北溪，往南流经武街城东面，然后南流注入浊水。
English: The Hongxiu Water originates from the North Stream, flows south through the eastern side of Wujiacheng, and then flows south into the Surabaya Water.

古文：浊水又东径白石县南。
现代文：浊水又往东流经白石县南。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the south of Shiroishi County.

古文：《续汉书》曰：虞诩为武都太守，下辨东三十余里有峡，峡中白水生大石，障塞水流，春夏辄濆溢，败坏城郭。
现代文：《续汉书分说：虞诩任武都太守时，下辨斗东弓十余里有一条山峡，山峡里的白水中有一块巨石，阻塞了水流、每年春夏洪水泛滥，冲毁城墙。
English: "Continuation of the Book of the Han Dynasty: When Yu Xuan was appointed as the military governor of the capital, there was a mountain gorge more than ten miles to the east of the bow. There was a huge rock in the white water in the canyon, blocking the water flow, flooding every spring and summer, and destroying the city wall.

古文：诩使人烧石，以醢灌之。石皆碎裂，因镌去焉。遂无泛溢之害。
现代文：虞诩派人用火来烧巨石，再用醋浇注，巨石碎裂，然后把它凿去，从此以后就不再有洪水泛滥之灾了。
English: The magpie sent someone to burn the boulder with fire, and then pour vinegar on it. The boulder broke, and then it was chiseled away. From then on, there were no more floods.

古文：浊水即白水之异名也。
现代文：浊水就是白水的别名。
English: Surabaya is another name for Whitewater.

古文：浊水又东南，埿阳水北出埿谷，南径白石县东，而南入浊水。
现代文：浊水又往东南流。堡阳水发源于北方的坚谷，往南流经白石县东面，往南注入浊水。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southeast. Bojang water originates in the north of the valley, flowing south through the east of Shiroishi County and injecting Surabaya water to the south.

古文：浊水又东南与仇鸠水合，水发鸠溪，南径河池县故城西，王莽之乐平亭也。其水西南流注浊水。
现代文：浊水又往东南流，与仇鸿水汇合。仇鸡水发源于鸡溪，往南流经河池县！日城西面―就是王莽时的乐平亭―往西南流，注入浊水。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southeast and merges with Chouhong water. Chouhong water originates from Chicken Creek and flows southward through Hechi County! The west side of Nichijo - that is, Wang Mangshi's Leping Pavilion - flows to the southwest, injecting Surabaya water.

古文：浊水又东南与河池水合，水出河池北谷，南径河池戍东，西南入浊水。
现代文：浊水又往东南流，与河池水汇合。河池水发源于河池县北谷，往南流经河池戍东面，然后往西南注入浊水。
English: The Hechi water originates in Chatan, Hechi County, flows southward through the eastern side of the Hechi estuary, and then injects the Hechi water to the southwest.

古文：浊水又东南，两当水注之。
现代文：浊水又往东南流，有两当水注入。
English: The floodwaters also flowed to the southeast, with two torrents of water pouring in.

古文：水出陈仓县之大散岭，西南流入故道川，谓之故道水。
现代文：一两当水发源于陈仓县的大散岭，往西南流入故道川，称为故道水，又往西南流经故道城东面。
English: The water originates from Dasanling in Chencang County, flows to the southwest into the Old Road River, known as the Old Road Water, and flows to the southwest through the east of the Old Road City.

古文：西南径故道城东，魏征仇池，筑以置戍。与马鞍山水合。
现代文：魏征讨仇池时，修筑此城驻防。故道水与马鞍山水汇合。
English: During the Wei conquest of Qi, this city was built and garrisoned. Therefore, the road water converges with the Ma'an landscape water.

古文：西南流，北川水注之，水出北洛埿山南。南流径唐仓城下，南至困冢川，入故道水。
现代文：马鞍山水发源于东方的马鞍山，穿过山谷往西流到故道城东面，往西流注入故道水，故道水往西南流，有北川水注入。北川水发源于北洛檄山南，往南流经唐仓城下，往南流到困家川，注入故道水。
English: Ma'anshan Water originates from Ma'anshan Mountain in the east, flows westward through the valley to the east of the Old Road Town, and flows westward into the Old Road Water. The Old Road Water flows to the southwest and is infused with the Beichuan Water. The Beichuan Water originates from the south of the North Luoyang Mountain, flows southward through the lower part of the Tangcang Castle, and flows southward to the Jiahe River, and is infused with the Old Road Water.

古文：故道水又西南历广香交，合广香川水，水出南田县利乔山，南流至广香川，谓之广香川水。又南注故道水，谓之广香交。
现代文：故道水又往西南流经广香交，汇合了广香川水。广香川水发源于南田县利乔山，往南流到广香川，称为广香川水；又往南注入故道水？汇流处称为广香交。
English: Therefore, the road water flowed to the southwest through the Guangxiang Junction and merged with the Guangxiang River water. The Guangxiang River water originated from the Lichao Mountain in Nantian County and flowed south to the Guangxiang River, known as the Guangxiang River water; and the southward injection of the old road water? The confluence is called the Guangxiang Junction.

古文：故道水又西南，入秦冈山，尚婆水注之。
现代文：故道水又往西南流入秦冈山，尚婆水注入。
English: Therefore, the road water flows into Qin Gangshan to the southwest, and the Shangba water is injected.

古文：山高入云，远望增状，若岭纤曦轩，峰枉月驾矣。
现代文：秦冈山高入云霄，远远望去，峰峦层层叠叠，仿佛日神和月神的车驾都要绕过这些高峰峻岭才能通过似的。
English: Qin Gangshan Mountain soars high into the sky, far away, with peaks and ridges stacked on top of each other, as if the car of the sun god and the moon god had to bypass these peaks and ridges to pass.

古文：悬崖之侧，列壁之上，有神象若图，指状妇人之容。
现代文：悬崖旁边的石壁上，有个仿佛画成的神像，形状像个女人的面容，上身红色，下身白色，人们称为圣女神。
English: On the stone wall next to the cliff, there is a statue that seems to be painted, shaped like a woman's face, with a red upper body and a white lower body. People call it the Holy Goddess.

古文：其形上赤下白，世名之曰圣女神，至于福应愆违，方俗是祈。水源北出利乔山，南径尚婆川，谓之尚婆水。历两当县之尚婆城南，魏故道郡治也。
现代文：地方民众常到此处祭祀祈祷。尚婆水发源于北方的利乔山，往南流经尚婆川，称为尚婆水，流经两当县的尚婆城南面，这是魏故道郡的治所。
English: The local people often come here to offer sacrifices and prayers. The Shangba Water originates from the Lijo Mountain in the north, flows south through the Shangba River, known as the Shangba Water, and flows through the southern side of Shangba City in Futang County, which is the administrative center of Wei Old Road County.

古文：西南至秦冈山，入故道水。
现代文：尚婆水往西南流到秦冈山，注入故道水。
English: Shangba water flows to the southwest to Qin Gangshan, injecting the old road water.

古文：故道水又右会黄卢山水，水出西北天水郡黄卢山腹，历谷南流，交注故道水。
现代文：故道水又在右边汇合了黄卢山水。黄卢山水发源于西北天水郡黄卢山中，穿过山谷南流，注入故道水。
English: Therefore, the road water also merged with the Huanglu Mountain Water on the right side. The Huanglu Mountain Water originated in the Huanglu Mountain in Northwest Tianshui County, and flowed through the southern valley to inject the road water.

古文：故道水南入东益州之广业郡界，与沮水枝津合，谓之两当溪，水上承武都沮县之沮水渎，西南流，注于两当溪。
现代文：故道水往南流入东益州的广业郡边界，与沮水支流汇合，称为两当溪，溪流上口承接武都沮县的沮水读，往西南流，注入两当溪。
English: Therefore, the water flows southward to the border of Guangye County in East Yizhou, and merges with the Desolation tributary, known as Two Dang Creek. The upper mouth of the stream receives the reading of Desolation in Wudu Desolation County, and flows to the southwest, injecting into Two Dang Creek.

古文：虞诩为郡漕谷市在沮，从沮县至下辨，山道险绝，水中多石，舟车不通，驴马负运，僦五致一。
现代文：虞诩当郡守时，要把沮县的粮食和布匹转运到下辨。这条山路险峻难行，水道中礁石很多，车船都不通行。用驴马驮运，运费高昂，运到时所得只有五分之一。
English: When Gu Yao was the county magistrate, he had to transport grain and cloth from De county to Xibei county. This mountain road was very difficult to travel, there were many rocks in the waterway, and no cars or boats could pass. The transportation was carried out by donkeys and horses, and the transportation cost was high, and the income at the time of transportation was only one-fifth.

古文：诩乃于沮受僦直，约自致之。
现代文：于是虞诩就在沮县与民佚议定运费，约定由各人自己送到。
English: As a result, the county magistrate agreed on the freight rate with the people's magistrate in Deuxian County, and agreed that each person would deliver it.

古文：即将吏民按行，皆烧石木，开漕船道。
现代文：他就率领属吏和百姓，巡行督察，点燃柴火，烧裂水中礁石 ，开辟出一条嘈运的水道。
English: He led his subordinate officials and people, patrol inspectors, lit firewood, burned reefs in the water, and opened up a noisy waterway.

古文：水运通利，岁省万计，以其僦廪与吏士，年四十余万也。
现代文：于是水运畅通，每年节省运费数以万计。他就把作为运费的存粮分给下属官吏和兵丁，年达四十余万。
English: As a result, water transport was smooth, saving tens of thousands of freight every year. He distributed the stored grain as freight to subordinate officials and soldiers, amounting to more than four hundred thousand a year.

古文：又西南，注于浊水，浊水南径槃头郡东，而南合凤溪水，水上承浊水于广业郡，南径凤溪，中有二石双高，其形若阙，汉世有凤凰止焉，故谓之风凰台，北去郡三里。
现代文：两当溪又往西南流，注入浊水。浊水往南流经梁头郡东面，然后又往南流与凤溪水汇合。凤溪水上流在广业郡承接浊水，往南流经凤溪，水中有两块并峙的巨石，形状像城网，汉朝时有凤凰飞到这里栖息，所以称为凤凰台。
English: Two Dangxi streams also flow to the southwest, injecting Surabaya water. Surabaya water flows southward through the east of Liangtou County, and then flows southward to merge with Fengxi water. The upstream of Fengxi water is connected to Surabaya water in Guangye County, and flows southward through Fengxi. There are two parallel boulders in the water, shaped like a city net. During the Han Dynasty, a phoenix flew here to roost, so it is called Phoenix Terrace.

古文：水出台下东南流，左注浊水。
现代文：此台北距郡治约三里，溪水从台下流出，往东南流，向左边注入浊水。
English: This Taipei is about three miles from the county seat. The stream flows out from the lower part of the plateau, flows to the southeast, and injects fresh water to the left.

古文：浊水又南注汉水。
现代文：浊水又往南流，注入汉水。
English: Surabaya's water then flows south, where it is injected with Chinese water.

古文：汉水又东南历汉曲，径挟崖，与挟崖水合。
现代文：汉水继续往东南流经汉曲，流过挟崖 、与挟崖水汇合。
English: The Han River continues to flow southeast through the Han River, flowing over the cliff and merging with the water of the cliff.

古文：水西出担潭交，东流入汉水。
现代文：挟崖水发源于西方的担潭交，东流注入汉水。
English: The water of the cliff originates from the western Tan Tan Jiao, and the eastern stream is infused with Chinese water.

古文：汉水又东，径武兴城南，又东南与北谷水合，水出武兴东北，而西南径武兴城北，谓之北谷水。
现代文：汉水又往东流经武兴城南面，又往东南，与北谷水汇合。北谷水发源于武兴东北，往西南流经武兴城北，称为北谷水。
English: The Han River flows to the east through the southern part of Wuxing City and to the southeast, merging with the Chatan River. The Chatan River originates in the northeast of Wuxing and flows to the southwest through the northern part of Wuxing City, known as the Chatan River.

古文：南转径其城东，而南与一水合，水出东溪，西流注北谷水。又南流，注汉水。
现代文：水流转向南边，流经武兴城东面，往西南流与一条水沦合。这条水发源于东溪，西流注入北谷水，北谷水又南流，注入汉水。
English: The water flow turned to the south and flowed east of Wuxing City, and the southwest flow merged with a water. This water originated from the East Stream, the west stream injected into the Chatan Water, and the Chatan Water also flowed south and injected into the Han Water.

古文：汉水又西南，径关城北，除水出西北除溪，东南流入于汉。
现代文：汉水又往西南流经关城北面，除水发源于西北的除溪，往东南流，注入汉水。
English: The Han River flows to the southwest through the north of Guancheng. The drainage originates from the northwest of the river and flows to the southeast, where the Han River is injected.

古文：汉水又西南，径通谷，通谷水出东北通溪，上承漾水，西南流，为西汉水。
现代文：汉水又往西南流经通谷，通谷水发源于东北的通溪，上流承接漾水，向西南流，就是西汉水。
English: The Han River flows to the southwest through the Tong Valley. The water of the Tong Valley originates from the northeastern Tong River. The upstream water is connected to the Bohai River and flows to the southwest, which is the West Han River.

古文：汉水又西南，寒水注之。
现代文：汉水又往西南流，有寒水注入。
English: The Han River flows to the southwest, and cold water is injected.

古文：水东出寒川，西流入汉。
现代文：寒水发源于东方的寒川，西流注入汉水。
English: The cold water originates from the Samcheon River in the east, and the west stream is infused with Chinese water.

古文：汉水又西，径石亭戍。
现代文：汉水又往西流经石亭戍。
English: The Han River also flows westward through Shiting.

古文：广平水西出百顷川，东南流注汉。又有平阿水，出东山，西流注汉水。
现代文：广平水发源于西方的百顷川，往东南流注入汉水；又有一条平阿水，发源于东山，西流注入汉水。
English: The Guangping Water originates from the west of the Hundred Hectare River, and the south-east flow injects Chinese water; there is also a Ping Ah Water, originating from Dongshan, and the west flow injects Chinese water.

古文：汉水又径晋寿城西，而南合汉寿水。
现代文：汉水叉流经晋寿城西面，南流与汉寿水汇合。
English: The Han River fork flows through the west side of Jinzhou City, and the south stream merges with the Han River.

古文：水源出东山，西径东晋寿故城南，而西南人于汉水也。
现代文：汉寿水发源于东山，往西流经东晋寿旧城南面，往西南注入汉水。
English: Hanshou Water originates from Dongshan, flows westward through the south of East Jinzhou Old Town, and injects Chinese water to the southwest.

古文：又东南至广魏白水县西。又东南至葭萌县东北，与羌水合。
现代文：又往东南流到广魏郡白水县西面，又往东南流到蔑萌县东北，与羌水汇合。
English: It also flows southeastward to the west of Baishui County, Guangwei County, and southeastward to the northeast of Shoumeng County, where it merges with Surabaya.

古文：白水西北出于临洮县西南西倾山，水色白浊，东南流与黑水合，水出羌中，西南径黑水城西，又西南入白水。
现代文：白水发源于西北临挑县西南的西倾山，水色白浊，往东南流，与黑水汇合。黑水发源于羌中，往西南流经黑水城西面，又往西南流，注入白水。
English: The white water originates from the Xiling Mountain in the southwest of Northwest Linqi County. The water color is white and flows southeast to meet the black water. The black water originates from the middle of the Yangtze River, flows southwest to the west of the Black Water City, and flows southwest to inject the white water.

古文：白水又东径洛和城南，洛和水西南出和溪，东北流，径南黑水城西，而北注白水。
现代文：白水又往东流经洛和城南面，洛和水发源于西南的和溪，往东北流经南黑水城西面，然后北流注入白水。
English: The white water also flows eastward through the south of the city of Luohe. Luohe and the water originate from the southwest of Hexi, flow northeastward through the west of South Heishui City, and then the north stream injects the white water.

古文：白水又东南径邓至城南。
现代文：白水又往东南流经邓至城南面，又往东南流，与大夷祝水汇合。
English: The Baishui also flows southeast through Deng to the south of the city, and then flows southeast to meet the Dayi Zhuhui.

古文：又东南与大夷祝水合，水出夷祝城西南，穷溪，北注夷水。
现代文：大夷祝水发源于夷祝城西南深山里的溪流，北流注入夷水。
English: The Taiyizhu Water originates from a stream in the deep mountains southwest of Yizhu City, and the north stream injects the water.

古文：又东北合羊洪水，水出东南羊溪，西北径夷祝城东，又西北流，屈而东北，注于夷水。
现代文：又往东北流，汇合了羊洪水。羊洪水发源于东南的羊溪，往西北流经夷祝城东面，又往西北流，然后转向东北，注入夷水。
English: It also flows to the northeast, merging with the Sheep Flood. The Sheep Flood originates in the southeastern Sheep Creek, flows to the northwest through the eastern side of Yizhu City, flows to the northwest, and then turns to the northeast, injecting water into Yizhu City.

古文：夷水又东北入白水，白水又东，与安昌水会，水源发卫大西溪，东南径邓至安昌郡甫，又东南，合无累水，无累水出东北近溪，西南入安昌水。
现代文：夷水又往东北流，注入白水。白水又往东流，与安昌水汇合。安昌水发源于卫大西溪，往东南流经邓至、安昌郡南面，又往东南流，汇合了无累水。无累水发源于东北附近的溪流，往西南注入安昌水。
English: The Yiwu River flows to the northeast, injecting white water. The white water flows to the east, merging with the Anchang River. The Anchang River originates from the West Wei River, flows to the southeast through the southern part of Dengzhi and Anchang County, flows to the southeast, and merges with the Yangtze River. The Yangtze River originates from the stream near the northeast, and injects the Anchang River to the southwest.

古文：安昌水又东南人白水，白水又东南，入阴平，得东维水，水出西北维谷，东南径维城西，东南入白水。
现代文：安昌水又往东南注入白水。白水又往东南流入阴平境内，接纳了东维水。东维水发源于西北的维谷，往东南流经维城西面，往东南注入白水。
English: Anchang water also injected white water to the southeast. White water also flowed to the southeast into Yinping territory, receiving Dongwei water. Dongwei water originated in the northwest valley, flowed to the southeast through the west of Weicheng, and injected white water to the southeast.

古文：白水又东南，径阴平道故城南。
现代文：白水又往东南流经阴平道旧城南面。
English: The white water then flows southeast through Yinping Road to the south of the old city.

古文：王莽更名摧虏矣，即广汉之北部也。
现代文：阴平道，王莽改名为摧虏，是广汉郡的北部，也是广汉属国都尉治。
English: Yinping Road, which Wang Mang renamed as Bui Rui, is located in the northern part of Guanghan County and is also the capital of Guanghan Province.

古文：广汉属国都尉治，汉安帝永初三年分广汉蛮夷置。
现代文：广汉属国都尉是汉安帝永初三年从广汉蛮夷分出来设置的。
English: Guanghan vassal state captain was set up in the first three years of Han Dynasty from Guanghan barbarian.

古文：又有白马水，出长松县西南白马溪，东北径长松县北，而东北注白水。
现代文：又有白马水，发源于长松县西南的白马溪，往东北流经长松县北面，然后往东北注入白水。
English: There is also Baima Water, which originates from Baima Creek in the southwest of Nagamatsu County, flows northeast through the north of Nagamatsu County, and then injects white water to the northeast.

古文：白水又东，径阴平大城北，盖其渠帅自故城徙居也。
现代文：白水又往东流经阴平大城北面，土人首领从旧城迁居到这里来。
English: The white water also flows eastward through the north of Yinping Great City. Native leaders moved here from the old city.

古文：白水又东，偃溪水出西南偃溪，东北流径偃城西，而东北流入白水。
现代文：白水又往东流，堰溪水发源于西南的堰溪，往东北流经堰城西面，然后往东北注入白水。
English: The white water also flows eastward. The water of the weir creek originates from the southwest weir creek, flows to the northeast through the west side of the weir, and then injects white water to the northeast.

古文：白水又东，径偃城北，又东北，径桥头。
现代文：白水又往东流经僵城北面，又往东北流经桥头。
English: The white water also flows eastward through the northern side of the gridlock, and northeastward through the bridgehead.

古文：昔姜维之将还蜀也，雍州刺史诸葛绪邀之于此，后期不及，故维得保剑阁，而钟会不能入也。
现代文：从前姜维将要回蜀时，雍州刺史诸葛绪在这里拦截他，诸葛绪迟来一步没有追上，因此姜维得以保住剑阁，使钟会不能攻入。
English: Once upon a time, when Jiang Wei was about to return to Shu, he was intercepted here by the Yongzhou assassin Zhugexu. Zhugexu was too late to catch up, so Jiang Wei was able to keep hold of Jiange, so that Zhonghui could not break in.

古文：白水又与羌水合，自下羌水又得其通称矣。
现代文：白水又与羌水汇合，从此以下，羌水又有了白水的通称了。
English: The White Water merged with the Surabaya Water, and from then on, Surabaya Water became known as the White Water.

古文：白水又东，径郭公城南。昔郭淮之攻廖化于阴平也，筑之，故因名焉。
现代文：白水又往东流经郭公城南，从前郭淮在阴平进攻廖化时，筑了这个城堡，因此得名。
English: Bai Shui also flows eastward through the south of Guo Gongcheng. Guo Huai built this castle when he attacked Liaohua in Yinping, hence the name.

古文：白水又东，雍川水出西南雍溪，东北注白水。
现代文：白水又往东流，雍川水发源于西南的雍溪，往东北流注入白水。
English: The white water also flows eastward. The water of the Yongchuan originates from the southwest of the Yongxi, and the white water is injected into the northeastern stream.

古文：白水又东，合空冷水，傍溪西南，穷谷，即川源也。
现代文：白水继续东流，汇合了空冷水，沿着溪边往西南走，到了深谷的尽头，就是它的源头了。
English: The white water continued to flow eastward, merging with the air-cooled water, moving along the stream edge to the southwest, to the end of the deep valley, which is its source.

古文：白水又东南与南五部水会。
现代文：白水又往东南流，与南五部水汇合。
English: The White Water also flows to the southeast, merging with the South Five Waters.

古文：水有二源，西源出五部溪，东南流，东源出郎谷，西南合注白水。
现代文：此水有两个源头，西源出自五部溪，往东南流；东源出自郎谷，往西南流，两水汇合后注入白水。
English: This water has two sources. The western source comes from Wubu Stream and flows to the southeast; the eastern source comes from Langgu and flows to the southwest. After the two waters meet, white water is injected.

古文：白水又东南，径建昌郡东，而北与一水合，二源同注，共成一溪，西南流入于白水。
现代文：白水又往东南流经建昌郡东面，然后北转，与一条水汇合。此水由两个源头合成一溪，往西南流入白水。
English: The Bai Shui also flows to the southeast through the east of Jianchang County, then turns north and merges with a water. This water is formed from two sources into a stream and flows into the southwest of the Bai Shui.

古文：白水又东南，径白水县故城东，即白水郡治也。
现代文：白水继续往东南流，经过白水县旧城东面，这就是白水郡的治所。
English: Baishui continued to flow to the southeast, passing the east of the old city of Baishui County, which is the seat of Baishui County.

古文：《经》云汉水出其西，非也。
现代文：《水经》说，汉水从县西流出，这是不对的。
English: "Suikei" said that Han water flows from the west of the county, which is wrong.

古文：白水又东南，与西谷水相得，水出西溪，东流径白水城南，东南入白水。
现代文：白水又往东南流，与西谷水相汇合。西谷水发源于西溪，往东流经白水城南，往东南注入白水。
English: The West Valley Water originates from the West Stream, flows eastward through the southern part of the city of Whitewater, and injects Whitewater to the southeast.

古文：白水又南，左会东流水，东入极溪，便即水源也。
现代文：白水又往南流，左边汇合了东流水，往东走，直到溪流的尽头，便是水源了。
English: The whitewater flows south again, merging with the east-flowing water on the left. Go east until you reach the end of the stream, which is the water source.

古文：白水又南径武兴城东，又东南，左得刺稽水口，溪东北出，便水源矣。
现代文：白水又往南流经武兴城东面，又往东南流，左边到刺稽水口，刺稽水从东北方流来，小溪就是它的源头。
English: The white water flows to the south through the eastern side of Wuxing City, and then flows to the southeast, to the left to the mouth of the Spiked Water. The Spiked Water flows from the northeast, and the creek is its source.

古文：白水又东南，清水左注之。庾仲雍曰：清水自祁山来，合白水，斯为盂浪也。
现代文：白水又往东南流，清水向左边注入，庚仲雍说：清水从祁山流来与白水汇合，这话说得太轻率了。
English: The white water flowed to the southeast, and the clear water flowed to the left. Geng Zhongyong said: The clear water flowed from Lushan and merged with the white water. This was too hasty.

古文：水出于平武郡东北，瞩累亘下，甫径平武城东，屈径其城南，又西历平洛郡东南，屈而南径南阳侨郡东北，又东南，径新巴县东北，又东南径始平侨郡南，又东南径小剑戍北。
现代文：清水发源于平武郡东北的瞩累亘下，往南流经平武城东面，拐弯流经城南，又往西流经平洛郡东南；转弯向南，流经南阳侨郡东北，又往东南流经新巴县东北；往东南流经始平侨郡南面，又往东南流经小剑戍北面。
English: The clear water originates from the northeast of Pingwu County, flows southward through the east of Pingwu City, turns southward through the south of the city, and flows westward through the southeast of Pingluo County; turns southward, flows through the northeast of Nanyangyakou County, and flows southeastward through the northeast of Xinba County; flows southeastward through the south of Shihpingyakou County, and flows southeastward through the north of Xiaojianye.

古文：西去大剑三十里，连山绝险，飞阁通衢，故谓之剑阁也。
现代文：这里西距大剑三十里，连绵的山脉极其险峻，凌空架设的栈道四通八达：因而称为剑阁。
English: Here, thirty miles west of the Great Sword, the continuous mountains are extremely precipitous, and the cableway erected in the sky is all-pervasive: hence the name Jiange.

古文：张载铭曰：一人守险，万夫趦趄。
现代文：张载的《剑阁铭》说：一人守住险处，千军万马也上不来。
English: "Jian Gu Ming," which is on display, says: "If one person guards a dangerous place, thousands of soldiers and horses will not come up.

古文：信然。
现代文：确实如此。
English: This is indeed the case.

古文：故李特至剑阁而叹曰：刘氏有如此地，而面缚于人，岂不奴才也？
现代文：怪不得李特到剑阁后叹道：刘氏有这样的好地方，却向人束手求降，岂不是太不中用了！
English: No wonder Li Te sighed after arriving at Jiange. Liu Clan has such a good place, but they ask for help from others. Isn't that too useless?

古文：小剑水西南出剑谷，东北流径其戍下，入清水。
现代文：小剑水发源于西南的剑谷，往东北流经边防营垒下面，注入清水。
English: Xiao Jian Shui originates from Jian Valley in the southwest and flows to the northeast under the border fortifications, injecting clear water.

古文：清水又东南，注白水。
现代文：清水又往东南流，注入白水。
English: Clear water also flows to the southeast, injecting whitewater.

古文：白水又东南，于吐费城南，即西晋寿之东北也。
现代文：白水又往东南流经吐费城南面，就是西晋寿的东北。
English: The white water also flows southeast through the south of Philadelphia, which is the northeast of West Jinzhou.

古文：东南流，注汉水。
现代文：往东南注入汉水。
English: To the southeast, Chinese water was injected.

古文：西晋寿，即蜀王弟葭萌所封，为苴侯邑，故遂名城为葭萌矣。
现代文：蜀王弟蔑萌封为直侯，西晋寿就是他的封邑，所以城也就命名为霞萌了。
English: Shu Wang's younger brother, Li Meng, was a direct vassal, and West Jinzhou was his fief, so the city was also named Xiamen.

古文：刘备改曰汉寿，太康中又曰晋寿。
现代文：刘备把它改名为汉寿，太康年间又称为晋寿。
English: Liu Bei renamed it Han Shou, and during the Taikang era, it was also called Jin Shou.

古文：水有津关。
现代文：白水上有个关口。
English: There is a pass on the whitewater.

古文：段元章善风角，弟子归，元章封笥药授之，曰：路有急难，开之。
现代文：段元章善于看风占卜，他有个弟子要回家去，段元章装了一盒药交给他说：路上遇有急难时，可以打开。
English: Duan Yuanzhang is good at reading the wind and divination. He had a disciple who wanted to go home. Duan Yuanzhang packed a box of medicine and gave it to him, saying, "In case of emergency on the road, you can open it."

古文：生到葭萌，从者与津吏诤，打伤，开笥得书，言其破头者，可以此药裹之。
现代文：弟子到了霞萌，随从与关吏发生争执，被打伤了。他打开小盒，见一张字条上写道：打破了头的人，可用此药敷上。
English: When the disciple arrived in Xiamen, his attendant got into an argument with a customs officer and was injured. He opened the small box and saw a note that read: "If you break your head, you can use this medicine on it."

古文：生乃叹服，还卒业焉。
现代文：弟子这才倾心佩服，就回去完成了学业。
English: The disciple was so impressed that he went back to complete his studies.

古文：亦廉叔度抱父柩自沉处也。
现代文：这里也是廉叔度抱着父亲灵枢自沉的地方。
English: This is also the place where Uncle Lian holds his father's spirit.

古文：又东南过巴郡阆中县。
现代文：又往东南流过巴郡阆中县
English: It also flowed southeast through Ba County and Yuzhong County.

古文：巴西郡治也，刘璋之分三巴，此其一焉。
现代文：阆中县中县是巴西郡的治所。刘璋分划三巴，这是其中之一。
English: Bozhong County Bozhong County is the administrative center of Brazil County. It is one of the three districts of Liuye.

古文：阚駰曰：强水出阴平西北强山，一曰强川。
现代文：阐驯说：强水发源于阴平县西北的强山，又叫强川。
English: Yan Tame said: The strong water originates from the strong mountain in the northwest of Yinping County, also known as the strong river.

古文：姜维之还也，邓艾遣天水太守王颀败之于强川，即是水也。
现代文：姜维回蜀时，邓艾曾派天水太守王欣在强川击败姜维，指的就是这条水。
English: When Jiang Wei returned to Shu, Deng Ai sent Wang Xin, the governor of Tianshui, to defeat Jiang Wei in Qiangchuan, referring to this water.

古文：其水东北，径武都、阴平、梓潼、南安入汉水。
现代文：水往东北流经武都、阴平、梓撞、南安，然后注入汉水。
English: The water flows to the northeast through Wudu, Yinping, Zizhuan and Nan'an, and is then injected with Chinese water.

古文：汉水又东南，径津渠戍东，又南径阆中县东。
现代文：汉水又往东南流经津渠戍东面，又往南流经间中县东面。
English: The Han River flows to the southeast through the eastern side of the Jin Canal, and flows to the south through the eastern side of Zhongxian County.

古文：阆水出阆阳县，而东径其县南，又东注汉水。
现代文：间水发源于间阳县，往东流经县南，又往东注入汉水。
English: The intermittent water originates in Mianyang County, flows eastward through the south of the county, and injects Chinese water to the east.

古文：昔刘璋之攻霍峻于葭萌也，自此水上。
现代文：从前刘璋在霞萌进攻霍峻，就是沿这条水上来的。
English: It was along this stretch of water that Liu Bei used to attack Ho Chun in Xia Meng.

古文：张达、范强害张飞于此县。
现代文：张达、范强杀害张飞也在此县。
English: Zhang Da and Fan Qiang also killed Zhang Fei in this county.

古文：汉水又东南，得东水口，水出巴岭，南历獠中，谓之东游水。
现代文：汉水又往东南流，到了东水口。东水发源于巴岭，往南流经撩人地区，叫东游水。
English: The Han River flows to the southeast, reaching the East Water Port. The East Water originates in Ba Ling and flows south through the Shiren area, called Dongyushui.

古文：李寿之时，獠自牂柯北入，所在诸郡，布满山谷。
现代文：李寿时，撩人曾从群柯北上，所到的几个郡，撩人布满山谷。
English: At the time of Li Shou, the Qin people had traveled north from Qunke to several counties, and the Qin people covered the valley.

古文：其水西南，径宋熙郡东，又东南径始平城东，又东南，径巴西郡东，又东入汉水。
现代文：水往西南流经宋熙郡东面，又往东南流经始平城东面，又往东南流经巴西郡东面，又往东流，注入汉水。
English: The water flows to the southwest through the east of Songxi County, flows to the southeast through the east of Shiping City, flows to the southeast through the east of Brazil County, and flows to the east, injecting Chinese water.

古文：汉水又东，与濩溪水合，水出獠中，世亦谓之为清水也。东南流，注汉水。
现代文：汉水又东流，与菠溪水汇合。镬溪水发源于撩中，世人也称为清水，往东南流，注入汉水。
English: The Han River flows to the east and merges with the water of the Shinao Creek. The water of the Shinao Creek originates in the middle of the Yunnan Province, and is also known to the world as clear water. It flows to the southeast and is infused with Han water.

古文：汉水又东南，径宕渠县东，又东南，合宕渠水，水西北出南郑县巴岭，与槃余水同源派注，南流，谓之北水，东南流，与难江水合，水出东北小巴山，西南注之。
现代文：汉水又往东南流经宕渠县东面，又往东南流，汇合了宕渠水。宕渠水发源于西北方南郑县的巴岭，与梁余水同出一源，分支后南流，称为北水；往东南流，与难江水汇合。难江水发源于东北的小巴山，往西南注入北水。
English: The Han River flows to the southeast through the eastern part of Dangqiu County, and then flows to the southeast, merging with the Dangqiu River. The Dangqiu River originates from Ba Ling in South Zheng County in the northwest, and has the same source as the Liang residual water. After branching, it flows to the south and is called the North Water. It flows to the southeast and merges with the Nangao River. The Nangao River originates from Xiaobashan in the northeast and flows into the North Water in the southwest.

古文：又东南流，径宕渠县，谓之宕渠水，又东南，入于汉。
现代文：北水又东南流经宕渠县，称为宕渠水，又往东南注入汉水。
English: The north water and the southeast flow through the county of Tagoqiu, known as the water of Tagoqiu, and the Han water is injected to the southeast.

古文：又东南过江州县东，东南入于江。
现代文：又往东南流过江州县东面，往东南注人江水。
English: It also flows southeast through the eastern part of Jiangzhou County, and the water of the Renren River flows southeast.

古文：涪水注之。
现代文：有涪水注入。
English: It is injected with purified water.

古文：庚仲雍所谓涪内水者也。
现代文：涪水就是庚仲雍所说的涪内水。
English: Surabaya's water is what Geng Zhongyong called Surabaya's internal water.

古文：丹水出京兆上洛县西北冢岭山，一名高猪岭也。
现代文：丹水发源于京兆郡上洛县西北的家岭山，家岭山又名高猪岭。
English: The Dan River originates from Jialing Mountain in the northwest of Shangluo County, Jingzhao County. Jialing Mountain is also known as Gaoxinling.

古文：丹水东南流，与清池水合，水源东北出清池山，西南流，入于丹水。
现代文：丹水往东南流，与清池水汇合。清池水发源于东北方的清池山，往西南流，注入丹水。
English: The Dan River flows to the southeast and merges with the Clear Pond Water, which originates from Mount Clear Pond in the northeast and flows to the southwest, where it is infused with the Dan River.

古文：东南过其县南。县故属京兆，晋分为郡。
现代文：往东南流过上洛县南，上洛县，过去隶属于京兆，晋朝时划分为郡。
English: To the southeast, it flows through the south of Shangluo County, Shangluo County, which used to belong to Jingzhao, and was divided into counties during the Jin Dynasty.

古文：《地道记》曰：郡在洛上，故以为名。
现代文：《地道记》说：郡治在洛上，因此作为郡名。
English: "The Local History" says: "Gunzhi" is in Luo, hence the name of the county.

古文：《竹书纪年》，晋烈公三年，楚人伐我南鄙，至于上洛。
现代文：《竹书纪年》记载，晋烈公三年前，楚人进攻我国南方的边境，到了上洛。
English: According to the "Chronicle of the Bamboo Cutter," the Chu people attacked the southern border of China and arrived in Shangluo three years before Emperor Jin.

古文：楚水注之，水源出上洛县西南楚山。昔四皓隐于楚山，即此山也。
现代文：楚水在这里注入。楚水发源于上洛县西南面的楚山，昔日四皓隐居在楚山，就是这座山。
English: Chushui is injected here. Chushui originates from Mount Chusan in the southwest of Shangluo County. In the past, the Four Emperors lived in seclusion on Mount Chusan, which is this mountain.

古文：其水两源，合舍于四皓庙东，又东径高车岭南，翼带众流，北转入丹水。
现代文：楚水有两条源流，汇合于四皓庙东，又往东流经高车岭南面，两边带同许多小支流，北转注入丹水。
English: There are two headwaters of the Chushui, which converge in the east of the Four Dynasties Temple, and flow eastward through the south of Gaochiling, with many small tributaries on both sides, turning north into the Danshui.

古文：岭上有四皓庙。
现代文：岭上有四皓庙。
English: There are four Taoist temples on the ridge.

古文：丹水自仓野，又东历兔和山，即春秋所谓左师军于兔和，右师军于仓野者也。
现代文：丹水从仓野又往东流经兔和山。《春秋》所说的左师驻扎在兔和，右师驻扎在仓野，指的就是这两个地方。
English: The Dan River flows eastward from Kurano through Usuwa Mountain. The left division stationed in Usuwa and the right division stationed in Kurano mentioned in "Spring and Autumn" refer to these two places.

古文：又东南过商县南，又东南至于丹水县，入于均。
现代文：又往东南流过商县南面，又往东南流到丹水县，注人均水。
English: It also flows southeast through the south of Shangxian County, and flows southeast to Danshui County, filling the per capita water.

古文：契始封商。
现代文：契最初封于商。
English: The deed was initially sealed with the merchant.

古文：《鲁连子》曰：在太华之阳。
现代文：鲁连子说：商在太华山的南面。
English: Lu Lianzi said, "The merchants are on the south side of Mount Taihua.

古文：皇甫谧、阚駰并以为上洛商县也。
现代文：而皇甫谧、阐驰都认为在上洛商县。
English: However, both Wang Fuxi and Yan Qi believed that Shangluo County was superior.

古文：殷商之名，起于此矣。
现代文：殷商这个名称，就起源于这里。
English: The name Yin Shang originated here.

古文：丹水自商县东南流注，历少习，出武关。
现代文：丹水从商县往东南奔流，经过少习，流出武关。
English: The Danshui flows from Shangxian to the southeast, and after a short period of study, it flows out of Wuguan.

古文：其水又东径其县故城北，盖《春秋》之白羽也。《左传》昭公十八年，楚使王子胜迁许于析是也。
现代文：应劭说：武关就是秦时的南关，通南阳郡。《春秋左传》：哀公四年楚派遣王子胜把许迁到析，就指这个地方。
English: Ying Yao said: Wuguan is the southern pass of Qin Dynasty, which leads to Nanyang County. "Spring and Autumn Legend": In the fourth year of King Wu's reign, the Prince of Chu was dispatched to relocate Xu to Dian, which refers to this place.

古文：郭仲产云：相承言此城汉高所筑，非也。
现代文：郭仲产说：相传此城是汉高祖修筑的，其实不是。
English: Guo Zhongyuan said: It is said that this city was built by the ancestors of the Han Dynasty, but it is not true.

古文：余按《史记》楚襄王元年，秦出武关，斩众五万，取析十五城。
现代文：我查考过《史记》，楚襄王元年前秦军出武关，杀了敌兵五万人，夺取了析十五个城。
English: I checked the "Histories" and found that before the first year of King Chu Xiang's reign, the Qin army went to Wuguan, killed fifty thousand enemy soldiers, and captured fifteen cities.

古文：汉祖入关，亦言下析、郦，非无城之言，修之则可矣。
现代文：又提到汉高祖入关后，也曾攻下析哪，并没有说以前没有城，但汉高祖修过城却是可能的。
English: He also mentioned that Henkel's ancestor, after entering the pass, had also attacked Segnon. He did not say that there was no city before, but it is possible that Henkel's ancestor built a city.

古文：析水又历其县东，王莽更名县为君亭也。
现代文：析水又流经县城东面，王莽改名为君亭。
English: The precipitated water also flowed through the eastern side of the county seat, and Wang Mang was renamed Jun Ting.

古文：而南流入丹水县，注于丹水，故丹水会均，有析口之称。
现代文：析水往南流入丹水县，注入丹水，所以丹水与均水汇合处有析口的地名。
English: Precipitated water flows southward into Danshui County and is injected into Danshui, so the confluence of Danshui and the average water has the place name of the precipitated outlet.

古文：丹水又东南，径一故城南，名曰三户城。
现代文：丹水又往东南流经一个旧城南，叫三户城。
English: The Dan River also flows southeast through an old southern part of the city, called Sannoichi.

古文：昔汉祖入关，王陵起兵丹水，以归汉祖，此城疑陵所筑也。
现代文：从前汉高祖入关时，王陵在丹水起兵，投奔高祖，这个城可能是王陵修筑的。
English: When Gaozu, the founder of the Han Dynasty, entered the pass, the royal mausoleum raised an army in Danshui and rushed to Gaozu. This city may have been built by the royal mausoleum.

古文：丹水又径丹水县故城西南。县有密阳乡，古商密之地，昔楚申息之师所戍也，《春秋》之三户矣。
现代文：丹水又流经丹水县旧城西南，该县有个密阳乡，是古代商密的地方，从前楚国申息的军队就驻守在这里，也是《春秋》说到的三户。
English: Danshui also flows through the southwest of the old city of Danshui County. There is a Miyang Township in the county, which is an ancient place of commerce. In the past, the army of Shenshi of Chu State was stationed here, and it is also the three households mentioned in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：杜预曰：县北有三户亭。
现代文：杜预说：县北面有个三户亭。
English: Du Yu said: There is a three-family pavilion in the north of the county.

古文：《竹书纪年》曰：壬寅，孙何侵楚，入三户郛者是也。
现代文：《竹书纪年》说：壬寅日，孙何侵犯楚国，打进三户城，说的就是这地方。
English: "The Bamboo Annals" says: On the day of Ren Yin, Sun He invaded the State of Chu and entered the city of Sanju. This is the place mentioned.

古文：水出丹鱼，先夏至十日夜，伺之，鱼浮水侧，赤光上照如火，网而取之，割其血以涂足，可以步行水上，长居渊中。
现代文：丹水里有一种红色的鱼，夏至前十天，夜里去守候，鱼在水岸边浮上来，红光四射像火一样，撒网捕捉，剖鱼用血涂在脚上，可以在水里行走，长期呆在深潭中。
English: There is a kind of red fish in the Dan River. Ten days before the summer solstice, the cormorant goes to wait at night. The fish floats up on the water's shore. The red light shines like fire. The net is spread to catch it. The fish is coated with blood on its feet. It can walk in the water and stay in the deep pool for a long time.

古文：丹水东南流，至其县南。黄水北出芬山黄谷，南径丹水县，南注丹水。
现代文：丹水又从东南流到县南，黄水发源于北方芬山的黄谷，往南流经丹水县，往南注入丹水。
English: The Danshui flows from the southeast to the south of the county, and the Huangshui originates in the Yellow Valley of the Fenshan Mountains in the north, flows southward through Danshui County, and flows southward into the Danshui.

古文：黄水北有墨山，山石悉黑，绩彩奋发，黝焉若墨，故谓之墨山。
现代文：黄水北有墨山，山上岩石全都呈黑色，光彩四射，黑如墨染，所以称为墨山。
English: In the north of Huangshui, there is a mountain of ink. The rocks on the mountain are all black, shiny and black as ink, so they are called ink mountains.

古文：今河南新安县有石墨山，斯其类也。
现代文：如今河南新安县有石墨山，也属于这一类。
English: Nowadays, there is a graphite mountain in Xin'an County, Henan Province, which also belongs to this category.

古文：丹水南有丹崖山，山悉赬壁霞举，若红云秀天，二岫更为殊观矣。
现代文：丹水南有丹崖山，山上全是浅红色的崖壁，巍然高耸，好像红霞映照天际。两山一黑一红，相映更为奇观了。
English: To the south of Danshui, there is the Danyan Mountain. The mountain is covered with pale red cliff walls, towering high, as if the red haze reflects the sky. The two mountains, one black and one red, reflect each other even more wonderfully.

古文：丹水又南，径南乡县故城东北。
现代文：丹水又往南流经南乡县旧城东北。
English: The Dan River also flows south through the northeastern part of the old city of Nanxiang County.

古文：汉建安中，割南阳右壤为南乡郡。
现代文：汉朝建安年间一，把南阳右边的辖地划为南乡郡。
English: In the first year of the Jianan period of the Han Dynasty, the jurisdiction on the right side of Nanyang was divided into Nanxiang County.

古文：逮晋封宣帝孙畅为顺阳王，因立为顺阳郡。
现代文：到晋朝时，封宣帝的孙子司马畅为顺阳王，就以旧地立为顺阳郡。
English: During the Jin Dynasty, the grandson of Emperor Xuan, Sima Chang, was crowned as the King of Shunyang, and Shunyang County was established on the old site.

古文：而南乡为县，旧治酇城。
现代文：南乡则是一个县，旧县治在郁城。
English: Nanxiang is a county, and the former county seat is in Iucheng.

古文：永嘉中，丹水浸没，至永和中，徙治南乡故城。
现代文：永嘉年间一，丹水淹没邯城，到永和年间一，就把县治迁到南乡旧城。
English: In the year of Yongjia, Danshui flooded Handan City, and in the year of Yonghe, the county seat was moved to Nanxiang Old Town.

古文：城南门外，旧有郡社柏树，大三十围。
现代文：城南门外，从前在社庙旁原有一棵柏树，大三十围，萧欣当郡守时把它砍掉了。
English: Outside the south gate of the city, there used to be a cypress tree next to the shrine and temple, about thirty meters tall. Xiao Xin cut it down when he was the county magistrate.

古文：萧欣为郡，伐之，言有大蛇从树腹中坠下，大数围，长三丈，群小蛇数十，随入南山，声如风雨。
现代文：据说当时有一条大蛇从树洞中坠下，蛇身大数围，长三丈，一群小蛇约数十条跟着它爬进南山里，声音有如风雨。
English: It is said that at that time, a large snake fell down from a tree hole. The snake was several meters long and three meters high. A group of dozens of small snakes followed it and crawled into the Nanshan. The sound was like wind and rain.

古文：伐树之前，见梦于欣，欣不以厝意，及伐之，更少日，果死。
现代文：砍树以前，大蛇曾经托梦萧欣，但萧欣并不在意；待砍倒树后，过不了几天，萧欣果然死了。
English: Before the tree was cut down, the snake had a dream about Xiao Xin, but Xiao Xin did not care; after the tree was cut down, Xiao Xin died a few days later.

古文：丹水又东，径南乡县北。
现代文：丹水又往东流经南乡县北面。
English: The Dan River flows eastward through the northern part of Nanxiang County.

古文：兴宁未，太守王靡之改筑今城。
现代文：兴宁末年，太守王靡之改筑了今天这座城。
English: At the end of the Xingning era, the daimyō, Wang Mianzhi, rebuilt the city into what it is today.

古文：城北半据在水中，左右夹涧深长。及春夏水涨，望若孤洲矣。
现代文：城的北半部建在水中，左右两边夹在深深的溪涧之间，到了春夏水涨时，看上去就像一座孤洲。
English: The northern half of the city is built in the water, sandwiched between deep creeks on both sides. When the water rises in spring and summer, it looks like an island.

古文：城前有晋顺阳太守丁穆碑，郡民范宁立之。
现代文：城的前面有晋朝顺阳太守丁穆碑，是郡民范宁所立。
English: In front of the city, there is a monument to Ding Mu, the governor of Shunyang in the Jin Dynasty, which was erected by Fanning, a county resident.

古文：丹水径流两县之间，历于中之北，所谓商于者也。故张仪说楚绝齐，许以商于之地六百里，谓以此矣。
现代文：丹水流经两县之间，流过于中北面，就是所谓商于，昔日张仪劝说楚国与齐国绝交，答应将商于地区六百里割让给楚国，说的就是这里。
English: The Danshui River flows between the two counties, passing through the central and northern regions. This is the so-called Shangwu. In the past, Zhang Yi persuaded the State of Chu to break off diplomatic relations with the State of Qi, and promised to cede 600 miles of the Shangwu region to the State of Chu. This is where it was said.

古文：《吕氏春秋》曰：尧有丹水之战，以服南蛮。
现代文：《吕氏春秋》说：尧经过丹水之战，征服了南蛮，说的就是这支水。
English: "Lu's Spring and Autumn" said: "He went through the Battle of Danshui and conquered Nanban, and it is this water that he is talking about.

古文：即此水也。又南合均水，谓之析口。
现代文：丹水又往南流，汇合了均水，汇流处称为析口。
English: The Dan River flows southward, merging with the average water, and the confluence is called the outlet.

