古文：李光弼李光弼，营州柳城人。
现代文：李光弼是营州柳城人。
English: Li Guangyao is from Yingzhou Liucheng.

古文：父楷洛，本契丹酋长，武后时入朝，累官左羽林大将军，封蓟郡公。
现代文：他父亲李楷洛，本是契丹酋长，武则天时进入朝廷，累官到左羽林大将军，封爵蓟郡公。
English: His father, Li Kai Luo, was originally a Khitan chieftain, and Wu Zetian entered the imperial court at the right time, and was promoted to the rank of General Zuo Yulin, and was given the title of Duke of Shixian.

古文：吐蕃寇河源，楷洛率精兵击走之。
现代文：吐蕃侵犯河源，李楷洛率精兵击退了他们。
English: When the Tubo invaded the headwaters of the river, Li Kai Luo and his elite soldiers repulsed them.

古文：初行，谓人曰： 贼平，吾不归矣。 
现代文：出征前，他对别人说： 敌人打败后，我不会回来了。 
English: Before his departure, he said to others: "I will not return after the enemy is defeated.

古文：师还，卒于道，赠营州都督，谥曰忠烈。
现代文：军队归来，他在路上去世了，赠官为营州都督，赐谥号叫忠烈。
English: When the army returned, he died on the way. He was given the post of the governor of Yingzhou and given the title of "Zhongre."

古文：光弼严毅沉果，有大略，幼不嬉弄，善骑射。
现代文：李光弼严肃坚毅沉着果断，有出色的谋略。小时候喜欢嬉戏玩耍，擅长骑马射箭。
English: Li Guangyao is serious, resolute, calm and decisive, with excellent strategy. As a child, he liked to play and was good at riding horses and archery.

古文：起家左卫亲府左郎将，累迁左清道率，兼安北都护，补河西王忠嗣府兵马使，充赤水军使。
现代文：开始任左卫亲府左郎将，多次升官后任左清道率，兼任安北都护，后任河西王忠嗣部下的兵马使。又任赤水军使。
English: He was initially appointed as the General of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards, and was promoted several times to the position of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards, and concurrently served as the Governor of Anbei Province. Later, he was appointed as an envoy of soldiers and horses under the command of King Tadatsugu of Kashi Province. He was also appointed as an envoy of the Red Water Army.

古文：忠嗣遇之厚，虽宿将莫能比。
现代文：王忠嗣对他很好，即使老将都没人比得上。
English: Wang Zhongzhi is very kind to him, even if the veteran is no match for him.

古文：尝曰： 它日得我兵者，光弼也。 
现代文：王忠嗣曾经说 ：今后得到我的军队的人是李光弼。 
English: Wang Zhongzhi once said, "The person who will get my army in the future is Li Guangyao."

古文：俄袭父封。
现代文：不久，他继承父亲的封爵。
English: He soon succeeded to his father's title.

古文：以破吐蕃、吐谷浑功，进云麾将军。
现代文：后因打败吐蕃、吐谷浑的战功，升任云麾将军。
English: Later, he was promoted to the rank of General Yun Qi due to his war exploits in defeating Tubo and Tubogun.

古文：朔方节度使安思顺表为副，知留后事，爱其材，欲以子妻之，光弼引疾去。
现代文：朔方节度使安恩顺任命他为副使，任留后，喜爱他的才干，想将女儿嫁给他，他称病离职。
English: The Shuo-Fang Festival made An Enshun appoint him as deputy envoy. After he stayed, he loved his talent and wanted to marry his daughter to him. He said he was ill and left the post.

古文：陇右节度使哥舒翰异其操，表还长安。
现代文：陇右节度使哥舒翰欣赏他的节操，上奏让他回到了长安。
English: The right-hand section made Goshukhan appreciate his discipline, and the first movement made him return to Chang'an.

古文：安禄山反，郭子仪荐其能，诏摄御史大夫，持节河东节度副大使，知节度事，兼云中太守。
现代文：安禄山反叛了，郭子仪推荐他的才能，有诏任命为代理御史大夫，持符节任河东节度副大使，代行节度使权力，兼任云中太守。
English: An Lushan rebelled, Guo Ziyi recommended his talent, and he was appointed acting chief historian, deputy ambassador of the Hedong Festival, acting festival leader, and concurrently the governor of Yunnan Province.

古文：寻加魏郡太守、河北采访使。
现代文：不久加封为魏郡太守、河北道采访使。
English: He was soon appointed as the governor of Wei County and the envoy of Hebei Province.

古文：光弼以朔方兵五千出土门，东救常山，次真定，常山团结子弟执贼将安思义降。
现代文：李光弼率朔方军队五千人从土门出兵，向东援救常山，驻扎在真定，常山团练兵抓住叛军将领安思义归降。
English: Li Guangyao led 5,000 soldiers of the Shuo army from Tu Men to the east to rescue Changshan, stationed in Zhending. The Changshan regimental drill seized the rebel general An Siyi and surrendered.

古文：自颜杲卿死，郡为战区，露胔蔽野，光弼酹而哭之，出为贼幽闭者，厚恤其家。
现代文：从颜杲卿死后，常山郡成为战场，死尸遍地，李光弼祭奠哀悼他们，释放被叛军关押的人，给他们家送去丰厚的慰问品。
English: Since the death of Yan Xuanqing, Changshan County has become a battlefield, with dead bodies everywhere. Li Guangyao paid tribute to mourn them, released those detained by the rebels, and sent rich condolences to their families.

古文：时贼将史思明、李立节、蔡希德攻饶阳，光弼得思义，不杀，问其计，答曰： 今军行疲劳，逢敌不可支，不如按军入守，料胜而出。
现代文：当时叛军将领史思明、李立节、蔡希德在进攻饶阳，李光弼得到了史忠义，没有杀他，却问他怎样抵敌，他回答说 ：现唐军行军疲惫，遇敌抵挡不住，不如收兵守城，有胜利把握再出战。
English: At that time, the rebel generals Shi Siming, Li Lijie and Cai Xide were attacking Raoyang. Li Guangya got Shi Zhongyi. He did not kill him, but asked him how to resist the enemy. He replied: The current Tang army is tired of marching and cannot resist the enemy. It is better to gather troops and defend the city, and then go to war with the certainty of victory.

古文：虏兵焱锐，弗能持重，图之万全。 光弼曰： 善。 
现代文：敌军攻击力强，但不能持久，再攻击他们就必胜。 李光弼说 ：好。 
English: The enemy's attack power is strong, but it cannot last, and if they attack again, they will win.Li Guangyao said: Good.

古文：据城待。明日，思明兵二万傅堞，光弼兵不得出，乃以劲弩五百射之，贼退，徙阵稍北。
现代文：就守城等待，第二天，史思明军队两万人攻城，李光弼的军队不能出城，就用硬弩手五百人射叛军，叛军退却了，转移到偏北处列阵。
English: The next day, 20,000 of Shi Siming's troops attacked the city, and Li Guangyao's troops could not leave the city, so they shot 500 rebels with their swords. The rebels retreated and moved to a northerly position.

古文：光弼出其南，夹滹沱而军。
现代文：李光弼军出城在叛军南边，隔沱水列阵。
English: Li Guangyao's army left the city on the south side of the rebels, separated by a water line.

古文：思明虽数困，然恃近救，解鞍休士。
现代文：史思明虽多次失败，但倚仗近处救兵，解鞍休息。
English: Although Shi Siming failed many times, he relied on nearby rescuers and dismounted to rest.

古文：是日，饶阳贼五千至九门，光弼谍知之，提轻兵，敛旗鼓，伺贼方饭，袭杀之且尽。
现代文：这天，攻饶阳的叛军五千人到了九门，李光弼探听到这事，率精兵，偃旗息鼓，乘叛军正吃饭时，突袭把叛军几乎杀光了。
English: On this day, five thousand rebels attacking Raoyang arrived at Jiu Men. When Li Guangyao heard about this, he led his elite soldiers and made a surprise attack. When the rebels were eating, the surprise attack almost killed the rebels.

古文：思明惧，引去，以奇兵断饟道。马食荐藉，光弼命将取刍行唐，贼钞击之，兵负户战，贼不能夺。
现代文：史思明因害怕退兵了，暗中派军队切断了唐军的运粮路，马无草料，李光弼令将领率兵到行唐去运草料，叛军袭击抢夺草料，唐军依托门板抵抗，叛军夺不去。
English: Shi Siming was afraid of retreating, so he secretly sent troops to cut off the grain transportation route of the Tang army. The horses had no fodder. Li Guangyao ordered the general to lead the troops to Xingtan to transport fodder. The rebels attacked and robbed the fodder. The Tang army resisted by leaning on the door plate, but the rebels could not take it.

古文：会郭子仪收云中，诏悉众出井陉，与光弼合击贼九门西，思明大败，挺身走赵郡，立节中流矢死，希德走钜鹿。
现代文：遇上郭子仪复了云中，有诏命全军开出井陉，和李光弼会合在九门西边攻击叛军，史思明被打得大败脱身逃往赵郡，李立节被流箭射死了，蔡希德逃到了巨鹿。
English: When Guo Ziyi was defeated, there was an imperial order for the whole army to come out of the well and join Li Guangyao to attack the rebels on the west side of the Nine Gates. Shi Siming was defeated and fled to Zhao County, Li Lijie was shot dead by a stray arrow, and Cai Xide fled to the Deer.

古文：收稿城等十县，遂攻赵。
现代文：收复了稿城等十个县，于是进攻赵郡。
English: After recovering ten counties including Monjo City, they attacked Zhao County.

古文：诏加光弼范阳大都督府长史、范阳节度使。
现代文：有诏加封李光弼为范阳大都督府长史、范阳节度使。
English: Li Guangyao was awarded the title of Fanyang Grand Governor and Fanyang Festival Envoy.

古文：思明繇鼓城入博陵，杀官吏。
现代文：史思明从鼓城进入博陵，杀死了当地的官员。
English: Shi Siming entered Boling from Gucheng and killed a local official.

古文：景城、河间、信都、清河、平原、博平六郡结营自守，以附光弼。
现代文：景城、河间、信都、清河、平原、博平六郡联合军队自卫，配合李光弼。
English: The six counties of Jingcheng, Hema, Xindu, Qinghe, Plains, and Boping joined forces for self-defense and cooperated with Li Guangyao.

古文：光弼急攻赵，一日拔之。
现代文：李光弼猛攻赵郡，一天就攻克了它。
English: Li Guangyao stormed Zhao County and conquered it in one day.

古文：士多卤掠，光弼坐谯门，收所获，悉归之民，城中大悦。
现代文：兵将多掳掠，李光弼坐在谯门，收缴掳获的东西，全还给了居民，城中居民大喜。
English: The soldiers plundered and pillaged a lot. Li Guangyao sat at the gate of the city to collect the plunder and returned everything to the residents. The residents of the city were overjoyed.

古文：进围博陵，未下。
现代文：他又进军包围了博陵，没能攻克。
English: He also marched into and encircled Boling, but failed to conquer Wuchang.

古文：与子仪合击思明于嘉山，大破之。
现代文：又和郭子仪会合在嘉山进攻史思明，把他打得大败。
English: He also met with Guo Ziyi to attack Shi Siming in Jiashan and beat him badly.

古文：光弼以范阳本贼巢窟，当先取之，揠贼根本。
现代文：李光弼认为范阳是叛贼巢穴，应先攻占，抄叛贼的老窝。
English: Li Guangyao thought that Fanyang was a traitor's lair, and it should be occupied first, and the traitor's old nest should be copied.

古文：会潼关失守，乃拔军入井陉。
现代文：但遇上潼关被攻破，就率军开回井陉。
English: However, if the pass was breached, he would lead the army back to Jingcheng.

古文：肃宗即位，诏以兵赴灵武，更授户部尚书、同中书门下平章事，节度如故。
现代文：唐肃宗登基，下诏命他率兵赶到灵武去，改任户部尚书、同中书门下平章事，所任节度职和过去一样。
English: When Emperor Su of Tang Dynasty ascended to the throne, he was ordered by imperial edict to rush to Lingwu with his soldiers, and he was appointed as the head of the Household Department, and the head of the Middle School, and the head of the Office of the Grand Master, and his duties were the same as in the past.

古文：光弼以景城、河间兵五千入太原。
现代文：李光弼率景城、河间的五千军队进入太原。
English: Li Guangyao led 5,000 troops from Jingcheng and Hema into Taiyuan.

古文：前此，节度使王承业政弛谬，侍御史崔众主兵太原，每侮狎承业，光弼素不平。
现代文：在这以前，节度使王承业军纪松弛混乱，侍御史崔众在太原统兵，常侮辱戏耍王承业，李光弼一向不满。
English: Prior to this, Li Guangya had always been dissatisfied with the fact that the military discipline of Wang Chengye had been loosened and disrupted by the festival, and the attendants of the general staff in Taiyuan often insulted and teased Wang Chengye.

古文：及是，诏众以兵付光弼。
现代文：到这时，有诏命崔众将军队交给李光弼。
English: At this time, Cui Zong was ordered to hand over the army to Li Guangyao.

古文：众素狂易，见光弼长揖，不即付兵，光弼怒，收系之。会使者至，拜众御史中丞。
现代文：崔众一贯狂妄傲慢，见了李光弼只长揖，又不立刻交出军队，李光弼发怒了，将他拿下捆绑了起来，遇到朝廷使者到了，任命崔众为御史中丞。
English: Cui Zong was always arrogant and arrogant. When he saw that Li Guangya was only holding a long scepter and did not immediately surrender the army, Li Guangya got angry and took him down and tied him up. When he met the imperial envoy, he appointed Cui Zong as the Vice-Minister of History.

古文：光弼曰： 众有罪，已前系，今但斩侍御史。若使者宣诏，亦斩中丞。 
现代文：李光弼说： 崔众犯了罪，已经捆绑押到外面去了，现在只杀崔侍御史，如果使者宣读了诏书，我就杀御史中丞。 
English: Li Guangyao said: "Cui Zongzong committed a crime, he has been tied up and pushed outside. Now I only want to kill Cui Zhi Guoshi. If the envoy reads out the edict, I will kill Guoshi Zhongzheng."

古文：使者内诏不敢出，乃斩众以徇，威震三军。
现代文：使者把诏书藏着不敢拿出来，于是将崔众斩首示众，威名震动了全军。
English: The envoy hid the edict and dared not take it out, so he beheaded Cui Zong and showed it to the public, which shook the whole army.

古文：至德二载，思明、希德率高秀岩、牛廷玠将兵十万攻光弼。
现代文：至德二年，史思明、蔡希德率领高秀岩、牛廷率兵十万进攻李光弼。
English: Two years later, Shi Siming and Cai Xide, led by Gao Xiuyan and Niu Ting, attacked Li Guangyao with 100,000 soldiers.

古文：时锐兵悉赴朔方，而麾下卒不满万，众议培城以守，光弼曰： 城环四十里，贼至治之，徒疲吾人。 
现代文：当时精兵都去了朔方，部下士兵不到一万，大家建议加厚城墙来防守，李光弼说 ：城墙周长四十里，敌军来了再修它，只会使我军疲劳。 
English: At that time, the elite soldiers all went to the Shuo side, and his subordinate soldiers were less than ten thousand. Everyone suggested thickening the city wall to defend. Li Guangyao said: The city wall is forty miles in circumference, and the enemy army came to repair it, which would only make our army tired.

古文：乃彻民屋为摞石车，车二百人挽之，石所及辄数十人死，贼伤十二。
现代文：于是拆居民房屋做成擂石车，每辆车用两百人起动抛石头，石头落地就砸死几十个人，敌兵被砸死十分之二。
English: As a result, the houses of the residents were demolished to make flint cars. Two hundred people were used to start each car and throw stones. When the stones fell to the ground, dozens of people were killed, and two-tenths of the enemy soldiers were killed.

古文：思明为飞楼，障以木幔，筑土山临城，光弼遣穴地颓之。
现代文：史思明造了一座飞楼，用木板遮蔽，垒土堆接近了城墙，李光弼派人从地下挖垮了土堆。
English: Shi Siming built a flying tower and shielded it with wooden planks. The mound of earth approached the city wall, and Li Guangyao sent people to dig out the mound from the ground.

古文：思明宴城下，倡优居台上靳指天子，光弼遣人隧地禽取之。
现代文：史思明在城下设宴，命艺人到台上嘲笑指责皇帝，李光弼派人挖地道抓获了他们。
English: Shi Siming held a banquet at the foot of the castle, and invited entertainers to the stage to ridicule and blame the emperor. Li Guangyao sent people to dig tunnels to catch them.

古文：思明大骇，徙牙帐远去，军中皆视地后行。
现代文：史思明很害怕，把营帐移到远处，军队都看清地下才敢走路。
English: Shi Siming was very scared and moved the camp to a distant place. The troops could only see the underground before they dared to walk.

古文：又潜沟营地，将沈其军，乃阳约降。
现代文：李光弼又悄悄在敌营下挖坑，要让敌军陷进去，于是假装约定投降。
English: Li Guangyao secretly dug a pit under the enemy camp to trap the enemy army, and then pretended to agree to surrender.

古文：至期，以甲士守陴，遣裨校出，若送款者，思明大悦。
现代文：到了约定时间，命士兵守城，派将校出城，像投降的人，史思明大喜。
English: When the appointed time came, he ordered the soldiers to defend the city and sent the officers out of the city. Like a man who surrenders, Shi Siming was overjoyed.

古文：俄而贼数千没于堑，城上鼓噪，突骑出乘之，俘斩万计。
现代文：一会儿几千名叛军跌进了陷坑，城上击鼓呐喊，城中骑兵冲出乘机攻击敌军，俘虏杀死了上万敌兵。
English: In an instant, several thousand rebels fell into the pit, drums were beating and shouts were heard in the city, the cavalry in the city rushed out to attack the enemy, and the prisoners killed tens of thousands of enemy soldiers.

古文：思明畏败，乃去，留希德攻太原。
现代文：史思明害怕打败仗，就离开了，留下蔡希德进攻太原。
English: Shi Siming, afraid of losing the battle, left, leaving Cai Xide to attack Taiyuan.

古文：光弼出敢死士搏贼，斩首七万级，希德委资粮遁走。
现代文：李光弼派不怕死的士兵出城杀敌，杀头七万颗，蔡希德丢弃军用物资和粮食逃跑了。
English: Li Guangyao sent soldiers who were not afraid of death out of the city to kill the enemy, killing seventy thousand, Cai Xide abandoned military supplies and grain and fled.

古文：初，贼至，光弼设公幄城隅以止息，经府门不顾。
现代文：当初，叛军来了，李光弼在城墙上设营帐休息，从官府门口经过时看都不看。
English: At first, when the rebels came, Li Guangyao set up a camp on the city wall to rest, and did not even look at them when they passed by the gate of the government office.

古文：围解，阅三昔乃归私寝。
现代文：解围后，过了三天才回到府第。
English: After the siege was lifted, it took three days to return to the capital.

古文：收清夷、横野等军。
现代文：收复了清夷、横野等军。
English: The armies of Qingyi and Yokono were recovered.

古文：贼别将攻好畤，破大横关，光弼追败之。
现代文：叛军偏将进攻好畴，攻破了大横关，李光弼追击打败了他们。
English: The rebels attacked a good area and broke through a large barrier, and Li Guangyao chased and defeated them.

古文：加检校司徒，寻迁司空，封郑国公，食实户八百。
现代文：被加封为检校司徒，不久升任司空，封郑国公，食实封八百户。
English: He was given the additional title of "school inspector" and soon promoted to "secretary of airspace," "governor of Zheng Guoguo" and "governor of 800 households."

古文：乾元元年，入朝，诏朝官四品以上郊谒，进兼侍中。
现代文：乾元元年，李光弼进京朝拜，皇帝下诏命朝中四品以上的官员到郊外迎接，升官兼任侍中。
English: In the first year of Qianyuan, Li Guangyao entered Beijing to pay homage, and the emperor issued an edict ordering officials with four or more court ranks to go to the suburbs to greet him, and he was promoted to the position of chamberlain.

古文：与九节度围安庆绪于相州，大战鄴西，败之。
现代文：后参加九节度在相州包围了安庆绪，在邺城西边大战，打败了叛军。
English: After participating in the Nine Festivals, he besieged Anqingxu in Xiangzhou and defeated the rebels in the great battle on the west side of Fucheng.

古文：光弼与诸将议： 思明勒兵魏州，欲以怠我，不如起军逼之。
现代文：李光弼和众节度商议说 ：史思明驻军魏州，想让我军懈怠，我军不如派兵紧逼他。
English: Li Guangyao and all the generals discussed and said: Shi Siming is stationed in Weizhou and wants our army to slack off. Our army had better send soldiers to force him.

古文：彼惩嘉山之败，不敢轻出，则庆绪可禽。 
现代文：他鉴于嘉山战败，定不敢轻易出战，那么安庆绪就可以擒获了。 
English: In view of the defeat of Jiashan, he will not dare to fight easily, then Anqingxu can be captured.

古文：观军容使鱼朝恩固谓不可。
现代文：观军容使鱼朝恩坚持说不行。
English: The sight of the troops made Yu Chaon insist that it was impossible.

古文：既而思明来援，光弼拒贼，战尤力，杀略大当。
现代文：后来史思明来救援相州，李光弼抵御他，作战非常有力，杀死敌兵大致相当。
English: Later, Shi Siming came to the rescue of Sangzhou, Li Guangyao resisted him, the battle was very powerful, and the killing of enemy soldiers was roughly equivalent.

古文：会诸将惊溃，各引归，所在剽掠，独光弼整众还太原。
现代文：遇上各节度使受惊溃逃，各自率军回辖区，一路抢劫，只有李光弼全军回到了太原。
English: In the event of a surprise rout of the various regiments, each led the army back to the jurisdiction area, robbing all the way, only Li Guangyao's entire army returned to Taiyuan.

古文：帝贷诸将罪，以光弼兼幽州大都督府长史，知诸道节度行营事。
现代文：皇帝宽恕了众节度使战败的罪，任命李光弼兼任幽州大都督府长史，知诸道节度行营事。
English: The emperor pardoned the sin of causing the defeat of many festivals, and appointed Li Guangyao to serve as the governor of Yuzhou, knowing all the festivals.

古文：又代子仪为朔方节度使。
现代文：又代替郭子仪任朔方节度使。
English: He also replaced Guo Ziyi as the envoy of the Chinese People's Liberation Army.

古文：未几，为天下兵马副元帅。
现代文：不久，任天下兵马副元帅。
English: Soon, he was appointed vice marshal of the world's soldiers and horses.

古文：光弼以河东骑五百驰东都，夜入其军，且谓贼方窥洛，当扼虎牢，帅师东出河上。
现代文：李光弼率河东五百名骑兵奔赴洛阳，夜晚到达洛阳军营，并说叛军将进犯洛阳，应扼守虎牢关，率军东进至黄河边。
English: Li Guangyao led five hundred cavalrymen from the east of the river to Luoyang, and arrived at the Luoyang military camp at night. He said that the rebels would attack Luoyang, and that they should hold fast to the tiger and lead the army east to the Yellow River.

古文：檄召兵马使张用济，用济惮光弼严，教诸将逗留其兵。
现代文：发令招兵马使张用济，张用济害怕李光弼军纪严，命部将不要进兵。
English: Issuing the order to recruit soldiers made Zhang Yizhi afraid of Li Guangyao's strict military discipline, and the Ministry of Public Security would not allow him to enter the army.

古文：用济单骑入谒，光弼斩之，以辛京杲代。
现代文：张用济只身进军营拜见，李光弼杀了他，命辛京杲代替他。
English: Zhang Yizi went into the camp to meet him, Li Guangya killed him, and Xin Jingyao took his place.

古文：复追都将仆固怀恩，怀恩惧，先期至。
现代文：又追赶都将仆固怀恩，仆固怀恩害怕了，在预定时间之前来了。
English: They both chased after Min Gu Wai Yan, but Min Gu Wai Yan got scared and came before the scheduled time.

古文：会滑汴节度使许叔冀战不利，降贼，思明乘胜西向。
现代文：当时滑汴节度使许叔冀战败，投降了叛贼，史思明乘胜西进。
English: At that time, Xu Shuji was defeated by the Slippery Knot and surrendered to the traitors. Shi Siming took advantage of the victory to advance westward.

古文：光弼敦阵徐行，趋东京，谓留守韦陟曰： 贼新胜，难与争锋，欲诎之以计。
现代文：李光弼督阵慢慢撤退，开往洛阳，对留守韦陟说 ：叛贼刚打了胜仗，不能和他们硬拼，我想用计谋打败他们。
English: Li Guangxu's vanguard slowly retreated, headed for Luoyang, and said to the remaining Wei Wei: "The traitors have just won the battle, I can't fight with them, I want to defeat them with strategies."

古文：然洛无见粮，危偪难守，公计安出？ 
现代文：但洛阳没有现成的粮食，破败狭窄难以守御，您认为应该怎样安排？ 
English: However, Luoyang does not have ready-made grain, and the dilapidated and narrow streets are difficult to maintain. What do you think should be done?

古文：陟曰： 益陕兵，公保潼关，可以持久。 
现代文：韦陟说： 增加陕州的军队，您退守潼关，可以长期坚守。 
English: Wei Wei said, "Increase the number of troops in Shaanxi Province. If you retreat to Shaoguan, you can hold out for a long time.

古文：光弼曰： 两军相敌，尺寸地必争。
现代文：李光弼说： 两边兵力相当，寸土必争。
English: Li Guangyao said: The military forces of both sides are equal, and every inch of land must be fought for.

古文：今委五百里而守关，贼得地，势益张。
现代文：现丢弃五百里地去守潼关，叛军得到领土，势力更大了。
English: Now they have abandoned five hundred miles of land to defend Shaoguan. The rebels have gained territory and become more powerful.

古文：不如移军河阳，北阻泽、潞，胜则出，败则守，表里相应，贼不得西，此猿臂势也。
现代文：不如转移驻守河阳，北边依托泽州、潞州，战胜就出击，战败就退守，内外呼应，叛军不能西进，这是像猿臂一样互相配合的态势。
English: It would be better to transfer the garrison to Heyang, and rely on the north side of Zezhou and Zhangzhou. If they win, they will attack, and if they lose, they will retreat. This will be echoed inside and outside the country, and the rebels will not be able to advance west. This is a situation of mutual cooperation like a monkey's arm.

古文：夫辨朝廷之礼，我不如公；论军旅胜负，公不如我。 
现代文：辨别朝廷的礼节，我不如您，谈军队胜败，您不如我。 
English: I am not as good as you at discerning the etiquette of the imperial court, and you are not as good as me at talking about the victory and defeat of the army.

古文：陟不能答。
现代文：韦陟无话对答。
English: Wei Yao was speechless.

古文：判官韦损曰： 东都乃帝宅，公当守之。 
现代文：判官韦损说： 洛阳是东都，您应守卫它。 
English: Judge Wei Zhao said: Luoyang is the eastern capital, you should guard it.

古文：光弼曰： 汜水、崿岭尽为贼蹊，子能尽守乎？ 
现代文：李光弼说： 汜水、萫岭都是叛军进攻的道路，你能都守住吗？ 
English: Li Guangyao said: Surabaya and Fuling are the rebels' attack routes. Can you defend them all?

古文：遂檄河南纵官吏避贼，闬无留人，督军取战守备。
现代文：于是命河南道让官吏躲避叛军，城里不要留人，督促军队搬运作战防御的物资。
English: Therefore, he ordered Henan Province to let officials avoid the rebels, not to keep people in the city, and to urge the army to carry materials for operational defense.

古文：思明至偃师，光弼悉军趋河阳，身以五百骑殿。
现代文：史思明到了偃师，李光弼率全部军队赴河阳，亲自率五百名骑兵做后卫。
English: When Shi Siming arrived at Zou's division, Li Guangya led the entire army to Heyang, personally leading five hundred cavalrymen as guards.

古文：贼游骑至石桥，诸将曰： 并城而北乎？
现代文：叛军的游骑到了石桥，众将说： 顺城墙向北走呢？
English: When the rebel cavalry reached the stone bridge, the generals said, "Shall we go north along the city wall?"

古文：当石桥进乎？ 
现代文：还是对着石桥走呢？ 
English: Or walk towards the stone bridge?

古文：光弼曰： 当石桥进。 
现代文：李光弼说 ：对着石桥走。 
English: Li Guangyao said, "Walk towards the stone bridge."

古文：夜甲，士持炬徐引，部曲重坚，贼不敢逼。
现代文：黄昏时分，兵将持火把缓缓前进，阵形严整，叛军不敢逼近。
English: At dusk, the soldiers will slowly advance with torches, the formation is strict, and the rebels dare not approach.

古文：已入三城，众二万，军才十日粮，与卒伍均少弃甘。
现代文：进入河阳三城后，军队有两万人，只有十天的军粮，李光弼和士兵同甘共苦。
English: After entering the three cities of Heyang, the army had twenty thousand people and only ten days of rations. Li Guangyao and the soldiers shared their joys and sorrows.

古文：贼惮光弼，未敢犯宫阙，顿白马祠，治堑沟，筑月城以守。
现代文：叛军怕李光弼，不敢进驻东都宫殿，驻军白马祠，挖壕沟、筑城墙防守。
English: The rebels were afraid of Li Guangyao and dared not enter the Dongdu Palace or the White Horse Shrine, but dug trenches and built walls to defend themselves.

古文：贼攻光弼，与战中氵单西，破逆党，斩千级，溺死者甚众，生执五千人。
现代文：叛军进攻李光弼，李光弼和叛军在中贖西边会战，打败了叛军，杀头一千颗，叛军淹死的很多，活捉了五千人。
English: The rebels attacked Li Guangyao. Li Guangyao and the rebels fought a battle on the west side of Zhongyuan, defeated the rebels, killed a thousand, the rebels drowned many, and captured five thousand people alive.

古文：初，光弼谓李抱玉曰： 将军能为我守南城二日乎？ 
现代文：开始，李光弼对李抱玉说 ：你能为我守两天南城吗？ 
English: At the beginning, Li Guangyao said to Li Baoyu: Can you guard Nancheng for me for two days?

古文：抱玉曰： 过期何若？ 
现代文：李抱玉说 ：过了这时间怎么办？ 
English: Li Baoyu said: What will happen after this time?

古文：曰： 弃之。 
现代文：他回答说 ：放弃它。 
English: He replied: Give it up.

古文：抱玉许诺。即绐贼曰： 吾粮尽，明日当降。 
现代文：李抱玉答应了，就骗叛军说： 我们粮食吃光了，明天将投降。 
English: Li Baoyu agreed and deceived the rebels saying, "We have run out of grain and will surrender tomorrow."

古文：贼喜，敛兵待期。
现代文：叛军高兴了，收兵等待投降的时间。
English: The rebels are happy. It's time to gather the troops and wait for the surrender.

古文：抱玉已缮完，即请战。
现代文：李抱玉修整好一切守备设施，就要求作战。
English: After Li Baoyu had repaired all the defensive facilities, he demanded to fight.

古文：贼忿欺，急攻之。
现代文：叛军因被骗生气，猛烈攻城。
English: The rebels, angry at being cheated, stormed the city.

古文：抱玉出奇兵夹击，俘获过当，贼帅周挚引却。
现代文：李抱玉派伏兵夹攻，俘虏敌兵比自己的军队还多，叛军大将周挚退兵了。
English: Li Baoyu sent an ambush, captured more enemy soldiers than his own army, and the rebel general Zhou Xin retired.

古文：光弼自将治中氵单，树壁掘堑。
现代文：李光弼亲自率军修整中贖，筑壁垒挖壕沟。
English: Li Guangyao personally led the army to repair the roads, build barriers and dig trenches.

古文：挚舍南城攻中氵单，光弼遣荔非元礼战羊马，贼大溃。
现代文：周挚放弃南城来攻这里，李光弼派荔非元礼据守羊马城作战，叛军大败。
English: Zhou earnestly abandoned Nancheng to attack here. Li Guangyao sent Lihfeyuanli to defend Yangma City, and the rebels were defeated.

古文：挚收兵复振，与安太清合众三万攻北城。
现代文：周挚招集军队再次杀来，和安太清共合兵三万进攻北城。
English: Zhou earnestly summoned the army to come again, and attacked Beicheng with a total of 30,000 soldiers from the Antae Qing Dynasty.

古文：光弼敛军入，登陴望曰： 彼军虽锐，然方阵而嚣，不足虞也，日中当破。 
现代文：李光弼收兵进城，登城望后说： 敌军虽勇猛，但列阵后随意行动，不值得害怕，中午将打败他们。 
English: Li Guangyao gathered his troops and entered the city. After looking around the city, he said, "Although the enemy troops are brave, they act at will after forming a line. It is not worth being afraid. We will defeat them at noon."

古文：乃出战，及期未决，召诸将曰： 彼强而可破者，乱也。
现代文：于是出城作战，到中午没能获胜，他把众将叫来说： 敌军强大但能打败的原因是混乱。
English: So he went out and fought, and by midday he had not won, and he called his generals to him and said, "The reason why the enemy is strong but can be defeated is chaos.

古文：今以乱击乱，宜无功。 
现代文：现我们用混乱的军队去攻击混乱的敌人，当然不能成功。 
English: Now we are using a chaotic army to attack a chaotic enemy. Of course, we cannot succeed.

古文：因问： 贼阵何所最坚？ 
现代文：他因此问道： 敌阵哪处最坚固？ 
English: He therefore asked: Where is the enemy's position strongest?

古文：曰： 西北隅。 
现代文：回答道 ：西北角。 
English: He replied, "The northwest corner."

古文：召郝廷玉曰： 为我以麾下破之。 
现代文：他把郝廷玉叫来说 ：给我率部队打败他们。 
English: He called out to Yao Tingyu, "Let me lead the troops to defeat them."

古文：曰： 廷玉所将步卒，请骑五百。 
现代文：郝廷玉说 ：我率领的是步兵，请求给我五百名骑兵。 
English: Hao Tingyu said, "I am leading the infantry, so please give me five hundred cavalry."

古文：与之三百。
现代文：他给了三百名。
English: He gave three hundred.

古文：复问其次，曰： 东南隅。 
现代文：又问其次哪处最坚固，回答说： 东南角。 
English: He was then asked where the strongest point was, to which he replied: the south-east corner.

古文：召论惟贞，辞曰： 蕃将也，不知步战，请铁骑三百。 
现代文：他把论惟贞叫来，论惟贞请求说 ：我是蕃将，不懂步兵战法，请给我骑兵三百名。 
English: He called for Onwerejo and begged her: "I am a foot soldier, I do not understand infantry warfare, please give me three hundred cavalrymen."

古文：与之二百。
现代文：他给了两百名。
English: He gave two hundred.

古文：乃出赐马四十，分给廷玉等。
现代文：他又拿出皇帝赐给他的马四十匹，分给了郝廷玉等人。
English: He also took out forty horses given to him by the emperor and distributed them to Gong Tingyu and others.

古文：光弼执大旗曰： 望吾旗，麾若缓，可观便宜。
现代文：李光弼举着大令旗说 ：注意看我的令旗，挥得缓慢，可相机行事。
English: Li Guangyao held up a large banner and said: "Pay attention to my banner, wave it slowly, but act for the camera."

古文：若三麾至地，诸军毕入，生死以之，退者斩！ 
现代文：如三次挥动到地，各军都进攻敌阵，不管死活，后退的斩首。 
English: If the flag is waved to the ground three times, each army will attack the enemy's line, regardless of life and death, and the retreating army will be decapitated.

古文：既而冯堞望廷玉军不能前，趣左右取其首来。
现代文：后来在城上看见郝廷玉的军队没能前进，催侍从去杀他的头。
English: Later, on the castle, he saw that Yan Tingyu's army had failed to advance, and he urged his attendants to kill him.

古文：廷玉曰： 马中矢，非却也。 
现代文：郝廷玉说： 战马中了箭，不是后退。 
English: Gong Tingyu said, "When a horse is hit by an arrow, it does not retreat.

古文：乃命易佗马。
现代文：于是命换别的马。
English: So another horse died.

古文：有裨将援矛刺贼，洞马腹，中数人，又有迎贼不战而却者，光弼召援矛者赐绢五百匹，不战者斩。
现代文：有位偏将持矛刺叛军，刺穿了叛军马的肚子，刺中了几名敌兵，又有位偏将迎战敌兵，没有作战却退却了，李光弼把持矛的叫来赏绢五百匹，将不敢作战的斩首。
English: One commander stabbed the rebels with a spear, pierced the belly of the rebel horse, and stabbed several enemy soldiers. Another commander confronted the enemy soldiers, but retreated without fighting. Li Guangyao called the spear-wielding commander to reward five hundred donkeys, and beheaded those who dared not fight.

古文：光弼麾旗三，诸军争奋，贼众奔败，斩首万馀级，俘八千馀人，马二千，军资器械以亿计，禽周挚、徐璜玉、李秦授，惟太清挺身走。
现代文：李光弼三次挥动令旗，众军奋勇争先，叛军战败逃走，共杀头一万多颗，俘虏八千多人，战马两千匹，军用物资兵器不计其数，活捉了周挚、徐璜玉、李秦授，只有安太清脱身逃跑了。
English: Li Guangyao waved the command flag three times, the troops fought bravely for the lead, the rebels were defeated and fled, killing a total of more than ten thousand, capturing more than eight thousand people, two thousand horses, and countless military supplies and weapons. They captured Zhou Xin, Xu Bingyu, and Li Qinju alive. Only An Taiching escaped and fled.

古文：思明未知，犹攻南城，光弼驱所俘示之，思明大惧，筑垒以拒官军。
现代文：史思明不知道，还在进攻南城，李光弼把俘虏赶来给他看，史思明很害怕，筑营垒来抵御唐军。
English: Shi Siming did not know, he was still attacking Nancheng. Li Guangyao drove the captives to show him. Shi Siming was very scared and built a camp to resist the Tang army.

古文：始，光弼将战，内刀于靴，曰： 战，危事。
现代文：开始，李光弼要作战了，把刀插在靴中，说： 作战是危险事。
English: At first, Li Guangyao wanted to fight, so he stuck a knife in his shoe and said, "Fighting is dangerous.

古文：吾位三公，不可辱于贼。万有一不捷，当自刎以谢天子。 
现代文：我官当到三公之一，不能被叛军活捉，万一战败，将自杀来向皇上谢罪。 
English: I am one of the three princes, and cannot be captured alive by the rebels. In case of defeat, I will commit suicide to apologize to the emperor.

古文：及是，西向拜舞，三军感动。
现代文：到战胜时，对着西边跪拜行礼，全军都很感动。
English: At the time of victory, they knelt and bowed to the West, and the whole army was very moved.

古文：太清袭怀州，守之。
现代文：安太清袭击怀州，占领了它。
English: The Antae Qing attacked Huizhou and occupied it.

古文：上元元年，加太尉、中书令。
现代文：上元元年，加封他为太尉、中书令。
English: In the first year of the Shang Dynasty, he was promoted to the rank of Tai Lai and Chushirei.

古文：进围怀州，思明来救，光弼再逐北。
现代文：他进兵包围了怀州，史思明来救援，李光弼再次打败了他。
English: He marched in and surrounded Waizhou, Shi Siming came to the rescue, and Li Guangyao defeated him again.

古文：思明见兵河清，声度河绝饷路。
现代文：史思明把军队开到河清，声称渡过黄河切断李光弼军的运粮路。
English: Shi Siming led the army to Heqing, claiming to have crossed the Yellow River to cut off the grain transportation route of Li Guangyao's army.

古文：光弼壁野水度，既夕还军，留牙将雍希颢守，曰： 贼将高晖、李日越，万人敌也，贼必使劫我。
现代文：李光弼在野水渡筑营垒，到晚上把军队开了回去，留下牙将雍希颢守营，对他说： 叛军将领高晖、李日越，都是能抵敌万人的人。
English: Li Guangyao set up a camp at the Wild Water Crossing, and drove the army back in the evening, leaving the commander Yong Xi to guard the camp, and said to him: The rebel generals Gao Yao and Li Riyue are all people who can resist the enemy.

古文：尔留此，贼至勿与战，若降，与偕来。 
现代文：叛贼一定派他们来抓我。你留在这里，叛军来了不要出战，他们如果投降，你就和他们一起到我这里来。 
English: The rebels must have sent them to get me. You stay here. If the rebels come, don't fight. If they surrender, come with them to me.

古文：左右窃怪语无伦。
现代文：众将私下对这没根据的话感到奇怪。
English: Privately, the generals are puzzled by this unsubstantiated claim.

古文：是日，思明果召日越曰： 光弼野次，尔以铁骑五百夜取之，不然，无归！ 
现代文：这天，史思明果然把李日越叫去说 ：李光弼驻扎在野外，你率五百名骑兵夜晚去抓住他，抓不到不要回来！ 
English: On this day, Shi Siming really called Li Riyue and said: Li Guangyao is stationed in the field, you should lead five hundred cavalrymen to catch him at night, if you can't catch him, don't come back!

古文：日越至垒，使人问曰： 太尉在乎？ 
现代文：李日越到唐军营垒边，派人问道： 太尉在吗？ 
English: Li Rongyue went to the edge of the Tang camp and sent someone to ask: Is the captain there?

古文：曰： 去矣。 
现代文：回答说： 走了。 
English: He answered, "I'm leaving."

古文： 兵几何？ 曰： 千人。 
现代文：又问： 营中军队有多少？ 回答说 ：一千人。 
English: And he said, How many soldiers are there in the camp? And he said, A thousand.

古文： 将为谁？ 
现代文：又问： 将领是谁？ 
English: He also asked: Who is the general?

古文：曰： 雍希颢。 
现代文：回答说 ：雍希颢。 
English: He replied: "Yong Xizhe."

古文：日越谓其下曰： 我受命云何，今顾获希颢，归不免死。 
现代文：李日越对他的部下说 ：我接受的命令是怎么说的？现即使抓住雍希颢，回去也不免被杀头。 
English: Li Riyue said to his subordinates, "What did the order I received say? Now, even if I catch Yong Xiyu, I will be beheaded if I go back."

古文：遂请降。
现代文：于是请求投降。
English: He then asked to surrender.

古文：希颢与俱至，光弼厚待之，表授特进，兼金吾大将军。
现代文：雍希颢和他一起去拜见，李光弼对他非常好，任命他为特进官，兼任右金吾大将军。
English: Yong Xichen went to meet him, and Li Guangya treated him very well, appointing him as a special promotion officer and concurrently serving as the right Kingu general.

古文：高晖闻，亦降。
现代文：高晖听说后，也投降了。
English: After hearing this, Gao Yao also surrendered.

古文：或问： 公降二将何易也？ 
现代文：有人问 ：你让这两位将领投降怎么这么容易呢？ 
English: Someone asked: How did you get these two generals to surrender so easily?

古文：光弼曰： 思明再败，恨不得野战，闻我野次，彼固易之，命将来袭，必许以死。
现代文：李光弼说： 史思明两次战败，只遗憾不能和我们在野外作战，听说我驻扎在野外，他一定认为容易抓到，派将领来偷袭，一定用死来提要求。
English: Li Guangyao said: Shi Siming was defeated twice, but regretted that he could not fight with us in the field. When he heard that I was stationed in the field, he must have thought it was easy to catch me. He sent generals to make a sneak attack, and he must use death to make demands.

古文：希颢无名，不足以为功。
现代文：雍希颢没有名气，不值得作为功劳。
English: Yong Xizhe is not famous and does not deserve to be praised.

古文：日越惧死，不降何待？
现代文：李日越怕死，不投降怎么办？
English: If RiRi fears death more and more, what if she doesn't surrender?

古文：高晖材出日越之右，降者见遇，贰者得不思奋乎？ 
现代文：高晖才干超过李日越，李日越投降受到宠幸，高晖动心，能不想赶上他吗？ 
English: Gao Yao's talent surpasses Li Nichiyu, Li Nichiyu's surrender is favored, Gao Yao's motivation, can you not catch up with him?

古文：诸军决丹水灌怀州，未下。
现代文：众军挖开丹水河堤淹怀州城，没攻下。
English: The troops dug up the dike of the Danshui River and flooded Huaizhou City, but failed to capture it.

古文：光弼令廷玉由地道入，得其军号，登陴大呼，王师乘城，禽太清、杨希仲，送之京师，献俘太庙。
现代文：李光弼命郝廷玉挖地道进城，探知叛军口令，登上城墙大喊，城外唐军爬上城墙，抓住了安太清、杨希仲，押送到京城，在太庙举行了献俘式。
English: Li Guangxuan risked his life to dig a tunnel into the city, detected the rebels' password, and climbed the city wall to shout. Outside the city, the Tang army climbed the city wall, caught An Taiqing and Yang Xizhong, escorted them to the capital, and held a dedication ceremony in the Great Temple.

古文：进食实户一千五百。
现代文：晋爵食实封一千五百户。
English: There are 1500 households entitled to a peerage.

古文：思明使谍宣言贼将士皆北人，讴吟思归。
现代文：史思明派间谍宣传说叛军将领都是北方人，哼着家乡的小调想回乡。
English: Shi Siming sent spies to propagandize that the rebel generals were northerners who wanted to return to their hometowns while humming their hometown tunes.

古文：朝恩信然，屡上贼可灭状。
现代文：鱼朝恩相信了，多次上奏说叛军可以消灭。
English: Yu Chaon believed it and repeatedly said that the rebels could be eliminated.

古文：诏谕光弼，光弼固言贼方锐，未可轻动。
现代文：皇帝下诏给李光弼，李光弼坚持说叛军还很强大，不能轻易出兵。
English: The emperor issued an edict to Li Guangyao. Li Guangyao insisted that the rebels were still very strong and could not easily send troops.

古文：仆固怀恩媢光弼功，阴佐朝恩陈扫除计。
现代文：仆固怀恩忌妒李光弼的功绩，暗中附和鱼朝恩定计驱逐叛军。
English: Gu Wai En's servant was jealous of Li Guangyao's achievements and secretly supported Yu Chaon En's plan to expel the rebels.

古文：使者来督战，光弼不得已，令李抱玉守河阳，出师次北邙。
现代文：皇帝派使者来督促出战，李光弼没办法，命李抱玉守卫河阳，出兵驻扎在北邙。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to urge him to go to war, but Li Guangyao had no choice. He ordered Li Baoyu to guard Heyang and stationed troops in Beilun.

古文：光弼使傅山阵，怀恩曰： 我用骑，今迫险，非便地，请阵诸原。 
现代文：李光弼命靠山列阵，仆固怀恩说 ：我率骑兵，现列阵在山边，不便调动，请求在平地列阵。 
English: Li Guangya leaned on the mountain line for his life, and his servant Gu Wai said: I am leading the cavalry, the current line is on the side of the mountain, it is inconvenient to move, please line up on flat ground.

古文：光弼曰： 有险，可以胜，可以败；阵于原，败斯歼矣。
现代文：李光弼说： 有山做依托，胜可攻，败可守；大平地列阵，战败就完了。
English: Li Guangyao said: If there is a mountain as a support, it can be attacked and defeated; if there is a flat ground, the battle is over.

古文：且贼致死于我，不如阻险。 
现代文：况且叛军是跟我们拼命，因此不如在山边列阵。 
English: Besides, the rebels are fighting us tooth and nail, so it's better to line up on the mountain side.

古文：怀恩不从。贼据高原，以长戟七百，壮士执刀随之，委物伪遁。
现代文：仆固怀恩不听，叛军占据了高地，布置七百名持长戟的士兵。命强壮的士兵拿着刀跟在后边，丢掉军用物资假装逃跑。
English: But the servant did not listen, and the rebels occupied the highlands, deploying seven hundred soldiers with halberds. The strong soldiers followed behind with knives, throwing away military supplies and pretending to flee.

古文：怀恩军争剽获，伏兵发，官军大溃。
现代文：仆固怀恩的军队争夺战利品，叛军伏兵杀出，唐军大败。
English: Gu Wei's troops fought for the spoils of war, the rebels ambushed and defeated the Tang army.

古文：怀州复陷，光弼度河保闻喜，抱玉以兵寡，弃河阳。
现代文：怀州又被攻陷了，李光弼渡过黄河守卫闻喜，李抱玉因兵少，放弃了河阳。
English: Huizhou was invaded again, Li Guangya crossed the Yellow River to guard Wensi, and Li Baoyu abandoned Heyang due to a shortage of soldiers.

古文：光弼请罪，帝以怀恩违令覆军，优诏召光弼入朝。
现代文：李光弼请求治兵败之罪，皇帝因为是仆固怀恩违反军令战败，下诏宽恕他，并招他进京朝拜。
English: Li Guangyao pleaded guilty to the crime of military defeat, and the emperor forgave him and invited him to Beijing to pay homage, because it was his lackey Gu Wai'en who violated the military order and caused the defeat.

古文：恳让太尉，更拜开府仪同三司、中书令、河中尹、晋绛等州节度使。
现代文：他恳请辞去太尉职务，改任开府仪同三司，中书令，河中尹，晋、绛等州节度使。
English: He implored him to resign from the post of captain and be reassigned to the posts of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, Zhong Shuling, Kawachuhin Yin, Jin, Zou and other state festival envoys.

古文：未几，复拜太尉，兼侍中、河南副元帅，知河南、淮南东西、山南东、荆南五道节度行营事，镇泗州。
现代文：不久，又封为太尉，兼任侍中，河南道副元帅，知河南、淮南东、淮南西、山南东、荆南五道节度行营事，镇守泗州。
English: Not long after, he was also made a captain, and concurrently served as an aide-de-camp, deputy marshal of Henan Province, and participated in festivals in five provinces including Henan, Huainan East, Huainan West, Shannan East, and Jingnan, and served as the town guard of Luzhou.

古文：帝为赋诗以饯。
现代文：皇帝为他赋诗送行。
English: The emperor gave him a poem to see him off.

古文：朝义乘邙山之捷，进略申、光等十三州，光弼舆疾就道，监军使以兵少，请保扬州。
现代文：史朝义乘邙山得胜，进兵攻打申、光等十三州，李光弼抱病命抬着他上了路，监军认为军队少，请求退保扬州。
English: Shi Chao Yi took advantage of Lushan to win, marching in troops to attack 13 states including Shen and Guang. Li Guangya took his sick life and carried him on the road. The supervisors thought that the army was small and asked to withdraw to Yangzhou.

古文：光弼曰： 朝廷以安危寄我，贼安知吾众寡？
现代文：李光弼说 ：皇上将大事托付给我，叛军怎么知道我们军队是多还是少？
English: Li Guangyao said, "The emperor has entrusted me with important matters. How can the rebels know whether our army is large or small?"

古文：若出不意，当自溃。 
现代文：如果我们在他们没料到时突然出兵，他们将自己溃退。 
English: If we swoop in when they're not expecting it, they'll beat a hasty retreat.

古文：遂疾驱入徐州。
现代文：于是快速行军进入徐州。
English: So they marched quickly into Xuzhou.

古文：时朝义围李岑于宋州，使田神功击走之。
现代文：当史朝义在宋州包围了李岑，李光弼派田神功去进攻赶跑了他。
English: When Shi Chaoyi encircled Li Gan in Songzhou, Li Guangya sent Tian Shengong to attack and drive him away.

古文：初，神功平刘展，逗留淮南，尚衡、殷仲卿相攻兗、郓间，来瑱擅襄阳，及光弼至屯，朝义走，神功还河南，瑱、衡、仲卿踵入朝，其为诸将惮服类此。
现代文：当初田神功讨平了刘展后滞留在淮南，尚衡、殷仲卿在兖、郓州之间互相攻打，来調在襄阳不听命令，等李光弼到了驻地，史朝义逃跑了，田神功回到了河南，来調、尚衡、殷仲卿相继进京朝拜，他被众将敬畏佩服到了这种地步。
English: At first, Tian Shengong stayed in Huainan after defeating Liu Zhan, Shang Heng and Yin Zhongqing fought against each other between Luzhou and Ganzhou, and Lai Tong disobeyed orders in Xiangyang. When Li Guangyao arrived at the garrison, Shi Chao Yi fled, Tian Shengong returned to Henan, and Lai Tong, Shang Heng and Yin Zhongqing successively went to Beijing to worship. He was revered and admired by the generals to such an extent.

古文：宝应元年，进封临淮郡王。光弼收许州，斩贼赢千级，缚伪将二十二人。
现代文：宝应元年，加封临淮郡王，李光弼收复了许州，杀死叛军上千人，活捉叛军将领二十二人。
English: In the first year of the Baoying Dynasty, after being crowned the king of Linhuai County, Li Guangyao recovered Huzhou, killed more than a thousand rebels, and captured 22 rebel generals alive.

古文：朝义分兵攻宋州，光弼破走之。
现代文：史朝义派军队进攻宋州，李光弼打败并赶走了他们。
English: Shi Zhaoyi sent troops to attack Songzhou, and Li Guangyao defeated and drove them away.

古文：浙东贼袁晁反台州，建元宝胜，以建丑为正月，残剽州县。
现代文：浙东袁晁在台州反叛，建年号叫宝胜，将二月作为正月，攻打掳掠各州县。
English: East Zhejiang Yuan Di rebelled in Taizhou, the founding year was called Baosheng, and took February as the first month, attacking and plundering all prefectures.

古文：光弼遣麾下破其众于衢州。
现代文：李光弼派部下在衢州打败了他的军队。
English: Li Guangyao sent his subordinates to defeat his army in Ganzhou.

古文：广德元年，遂禽晁，浙东平。
现代文：广德元年，就擒获了袁晁，浙东平定了。
English: In the first year of the Guangde era, Yuan Shao was captured and East Zhejiang was pacified.

古文：诏增实封户二千，与一子三品阶，赐铁券，名藏太庙，图形凌烟阁。
现代文：有诏晋爵食实封两千户，封他一个儿子为三品官，赐给他铁券，把名字藏进太庙，在凌烟阁上给他画像。
English: Emperor Zhao Jinshaku had two thousand households sealed, one of his sons was appointed as the third grade official, he gave him iron coupons, hid his name in the Imperial Temple, and gave him a picture on the Lingyan Pavilion.

古文：相州、北邙之败，朝恩羞其策缪，故深忌光弼切骨，而程元振尤疾之。
现代文：相州、北邙战败，鱼朝恩因自己决策错误感到羞愧，因此对李光弼忌恨入骨，而且程元振更忌妒他。
English: After the defeat of Xiangzhou and Beilun, Yu Chaon was ashamed of his decision-making mistakes, so he hated Li Guangyao to the bone, and Cheng Yuan Zhen was even more jealous of him.

古文：二人用事，日谋有以中伤者。
现代文：他们两人当权，每天筹划诬蔑他的办法。
English: The two of them are in power, and every day they devise ways to defame him.

古文：及来瑱为元振谗死，光弼愈恐。
现代文：到来調被程元振诬陷处死，李光弼更害怕了。
English: When he was framed and executed by Cheng Yuanzhen, Li Guangyao was even more afraid.

古文：吐蕃寇京师，代宗诏入援，光弼畏祸，迁延不敢行。
现代文：吐蕃进犯京城，唐代宗下诏命他来京救援，李光弼害怕被算计，犹豫不敢去。
English: When the Tubo invaded the capital, the Tang Dynasty Emperor Zong ordered him to come to Beijing for rescue. Li Guangyao was afraid of being miscalculated and hesitated to go.

古文：及帝幸陕，犹倚以为重，数存问其母，以解嫌疑。
现代文：到皇帝出逃陕州，还把他作为重要依靠，多次问候他的母亲，来消除隔阂。
English: When the emperor fled to Shaanxi, he also took him as an important support and repeatedly greeted his mother to eliminate estrangement.

古文：帝还长安，因拜东都留守，察其去就。
现代文：皇帝回到长安后，任命他为东都留守，察看他的动向。
English: After the emperor returned to Chang'an, he ordered him to stay in Dongdu to observe his movements.

古文：光弼以久须诏书不至，归徐州收租赋为解。
现代文：李光弼用等待诏书长时间没来，需回到徐州收取租赋做借口。
English: Li Guangyao used the excuse that he had been waiting for the imperial edict for a long time but it had not come and he needed to return to Xuzhou to collect the rent.

古文：帝令郭子仪自河中辇其母还京。
现代文：皇帝命郭子仪把李光弼的母亲从河中送回长安。
English: The emperor ordered Guo Ziyi to send Li Guangyao's mother back to Chang'an from the river.

古文：二年，光弼疾笃，奉表上前后所赐实封，诏不许。
现代文：广德二年，李光弼病重了，奏表呈上先后赐给他的食实封爵位，皇帝下诏不答应。
English: In the second year of Guangde, Li Guangyao was seriously ill. He submitted a report to the emperor, and the emperor refused to grant him the knighthood.

古文：将吏问后事，答曰： 吾淹军中，不得就养，为不孝子，尚何言哉！ 
现代文：部将官员问他死后的安排，他说： 我长期在军队里，不能回家奉养老人，是不孝的儿子，还说什么呢？ 
English: The general officer asked him about the arrangements after his death. He said: I have been in the army for a long time, I cannot go home to support the elderly, I am an unfilial son, what else can I say?

古文：取所余绢布分遗部将。
现代文：拿出剩下的绢绸布匹分送给部下将领。
English: Take out the rest of the silk cloth and distribute it to your subordinate generals.

古文：薨，年五十七。
现代文：去世时年仅五十七岁。
English: He was only fifty-seven when he died.

古文：部将即以其布遂为光弼行丧，号哭相问。
现代文：部下将领就用他赠送的布匹给他办了丧事，哭着互相吊唁。
English: His subordinate generals used the cloth he gave them to hold a funeral for him, weeping and commiserating with each other.

古文：帝遣使吊恤其母，赠太保，谥曰武穆，诏百官送葬延平门外。
现代文：皇帝派使者吊唁慰问他的母亲，赠官为太保，赐谥号叫武穆，下诏令群臣到延平门外送葬。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to offer condolences and condolences to his mother, bestowed an official title of Taibao, bestowed the title of Wu Mu, and ordered the courtiers to attend the funeral outside the Yanping Gate.

古文：光弼用兵，谋定而后战，能以少覆众。
现代文：李光弼带兵，定好计策然后才开战，能够以少胜多。
English: Li Guangya led the troops, set up a strategy and then went to war, and was able to win more with less.

古文：治师训整，天下服其威名，军中指顾，诸将不敢仰视。
现代文：治军严整，全国都敬畏他的威严和名望，他在军队中指一下或者瞟一眼，众将就不敢抬头看他了。
English: He ruled the army strictly, and the whole country was in awe of his majesty and fame. If he pointed or glanced at the army, the generals would not dare to look up at him.

古文：初，与郭子仪齐名，世称 李郭 ，而战功推为中兴第一。
现代文：起初，他和郭子仪名望相当，当时称为 李郭 ，但论战功被推举为平叛第一人。
English: At first, his reputation was equal to that of Guo Ziyi. At that time, he was known as Li Guo, but he was chosen as the first person to defeat the rebels because of his military exploits.

古文：其代子仪朔方也，营垒、士卒、麾帜无所更，而光弼一号令之，气色乃益精明云。
现代文：据说他接替郭子仪掌管朔方军时，军营、兵将、旗帜没有改变，但李光弼一对军队下令，军容就更加整齐严明了。
English: It is said that when he succeeded Guo Ziyi in charge of the Shuo Fang Army, the barracks, commanders and flags did not change, but Li Guangyao ordered a pair of armies, and the military appearance was more neat and clear.

