古文：先生施教，弟子是则。
现代文：先生施教，弟子遵照学习。
English: The teacher teaches, the disciple follows.

古文：温恭自虚，所受是极。
现代文：谦恭虚心，所学自能彻底。
English: Be modest and humble, and be thorough in what you learn.

古文：见善从之，闻义则服。
现代文：见善就跟着去做，见义就身体力行。
English: If you see a good deed, do it. If you see a righteous deed, do it.

古文：温柔孝悌，毋骄恃力。
现代文：性情温柔孝悌，不要骄横而自恃勇力。
English: Be gentle and filial, not arrogant and boastful.

古文：志毋虚邪，行必正直。
现代文：心志不可虚邪，行为必须正直。
English: The mind must not be false, and the behavior must be honest.

古文：游居有常，必就有德。
现代文：出外居家都要遵守常规，一定要接近有德之士。
English: When going out and staying at home, you must abide by the rules, and you must be close to virtuous people.

古文：颜色整齐，中心必式。
现代文：容色保持端正，内心必合于规范。
English: Keep your appearance neat and tidy, and your heart must conform to the norm.

古文：夙兴夜寐，衣带必饰；朝益暮习，小心翼翼。
现代文：早起迟眠。衣带必须整齐；朝学暮习，总是要小心翼翼。
English: Early to rise, late to sleep. One's belt must be neat; one must always be careful when going to school in the morning and studying in the evening.

古文：一此不解，是谓学则。
现代文：专心遵守这些而不懈怠。这就是学习规则。
English: Concentrate on these and do not slack off. These are the rules of study.

古文：少者之事，夜寐早作，既拚盥漱，执事有恪。
现代文：少年学子的本分，要注意晚睡早起。晨起清扫席前而后洗手漱口，做事要注意恭敬谨慎。
English: It is the duty of young scholars to go to bed late and get up early. In the morning, clean the table before and after washing your hands and rinsing your mouth. Be respectful and cautious when doing things.

古文：摄衣共盥，先生乃作。
现代文：轻提衣襟为先生摆设盥洗之器，先生此时正起。
English: He was just getting up when he lifted up his shirt collar to set out a basin for his teacher.

古文：沃盥彻盥，汎拚正席，先生乃坐。
现代文：服侍先生洗完便撤下盥器，又洒扫室屋摆好讲席，先生便开始坐入讲席。
English: After washing, the waiter removed the utensils, swept the room and set up the lectern, and the professor began to sit down at the lectern.

古文：出入恭敬，如见宾客。
现代文：弟子出入都要保持恭敬，其情景如同会见宾客。
English: Disciples should be respectful when entering and leaving, and the scene should be like meeting guests.

古文：危坐乡师，颜色毋怍。
现代文：端正地坐着面向老师，不可随便地改变容色。
English: Sit properly facing the teacher, and do not change your appearance at will.

古文：受业之纪，必由长始；一周则然，其余则否。
现代文：接受先生讲课的次序，一定要从年长的同学开始，第一遍这样进行，以后则不必如此。
English: The order of receiving the teacher's lecture must start with the older classmates, and this must be done for the first time, but it does not have to be so in the future.

古文：始诵必作，其次则已。
现代文：首次诵读必须站起身来，以后也无需如此。
English: The first time you recite it, you have to stand up, and you don't have to do it again.

古文：凡言与行，思中以为纪。古之将兴者，必由此始。
现代文：一切言语、行动，以牢记中和之道为准则，古之将成大事者，一定由此开始。
English: All words and actions should be based on the principle of keeping the middle way in mind. Those who will become great in the future must start from here.

古文：后至就席，狭坐则起。
现代文：后到的同学入席就坐，旁坐者就应及时站起。
English: Students who arrive later should sit when they enter the auditorium, and those who are sitting should stand up in time.

古文：若有宾客，弟子骏作。
现代文：若是有宾客来到，弟子要迅速起立。
English: If there is a guest, the disciple should stand up quickly.

古文：对客无让，应且遂行，趋进受命。
现代文：对客人不可失礼，边应边走，快进来向先生请示。
English: Don't be impolite to your guests. Walk in a courteous manner. Come in and ask for directions.

古文：所求虽不在，必以反命。
现代文：即使来宾所找的人不在。也必须回来告知。
English: Even if the person the guest is looking for is not there, they must come back and let them know.

古文：反坐复业。
现代文：然后回原位继续学习。
English: Then go back to the original position to continue learning.

古文：若有所疑，奉手问之。
现代文：学习中若有疑难，便拱手提出问题。
English: If there is any doubt or difficulty in learning, they will ask questions.

古文：师出皆起。
现代文：先生下课走出，学生一律起立。
English: When the teacher left the class, all the students stood up.

古文：至于食时，先生将食，弟子馔馈。
现代文：及至用饭之时，先生将食，弟子把饭菜送上。
English: When it was time to eat, the teacher brought the food and the disciple brought the dish.

古文：摄衽盥漱，跪坐而馈。
现代文：挽起衣袖洗漱之后，跪坐把饭菜献给师长。
English: After rolling up his sleeves to wash, he knelt down to offer the meal to the head teacher.

古文：置酱错食，陈膳毋悖。
现代文：摆放酱和饭菜，饭桌陈列不可杂乱无章。
English: When placing sauces and dishes, the table display should not be disorganized.

古文：凡置彼食：鸟兽鱼鳖，必先菜羹。
现代文：凡一般上菜程序：肉食之前，必先上蔬菜羹汤。
English: General serving procedure: Vegetable soup must be served before meat.

古文：羹胾中别，胾在酱前，其设要方。
现代文：羹与肉相间排列，肉放在酱的前方，其席面应摆成正方形状。
English: Place the soup and meat side by side, with the meat in front of the sauce, and arrange the noodles in a square shape.

古文：饭是为卒，左酒右酱。
现代文：饭则上在最后，左右放漱口用的酒、浆。
English: The meal is served at the end, and wine and syrup for gargling are placed to the left and right.

古文：告具而退，奉手而立。
现代文：饭菜上完即可退下，拱手立于一旁。
English: After the meal is served, you can step back and stand aside.

古文：三饭二斗，左执虚豆，右执挟匕，周还而贰，唯嗛之视。
现代文：一般是三碗饭和两斗酒，弟子左手拿着空碗，右手拿着筷勺，将酒饭轮流添上，注意着杯碗将空的尊长。
English: Generally, there are three bowls of rice and two buckets of wine. The disciple holds the empty bowl in his left hand and the chopsticks spoon in his right hand. He adds the wine and rice in turn, paying attention to the elder who empties the cup and bowl.

古文：同嗛以齿，周则有始，柄尺不跪，是谓贰纪。
现代文：多人空碗按年龄分别先后。周而复始，用长勺就无需跪着送上。这都是添饭的规章。
English: Empty bowls for more than one person are emptied in order of age. The process repeats itself, so there is no need to kneel when using a long spoon. These are the rules for adding rice.

古文：先生已食，弟子乃彻。
现代文：待先生吃饭完毕，弟子便撤下食具。
English: After the master finished eating, the disciple removed the utensils.

古文：趋走进漱，拚前敛祭。
现代文：赶忙为先生送来漱器，再清扫席前并把祭品收起。
English: He hurriedly brought a toilet for his teacher, before sweeping the table and putting away the offerings.

古文：先生有命，弟子乃食，以齿相要，坐必尽席。
现代文：先生吩咐之后，弟子才开始进餐。按年龄坐好，坐席要尽量靠前。
English: After the teacher's instruction, the disciple began to eat. Sit well according to your age, and sit as far forward as possible.

古文：饭必奉擥，羹不以手。
现代文：饭须用手捧食，羹汤自不能用手拿拣。
English: Rice must be served by hand, soup can not be picked up by hand.

古文：亦有据膝，毋有隐肘。
现代文：可以使两手凭靠膝头，不可使两肘依伏桌面。
English: You can put your hands on your knees, but not your elbows on the table.

古文：既食乃饱，循咡覆手，振衽扫席。已食者作，抠衣而降。
现代文：待至吃完吃饱，用手拭净嘴边。抖动衣襟移开坐垫，吃完即起，提衣而离开桌面。
English: Wait until you are full, wipe your mouth with your hand. Shake the lapels to remove the cushion, get up immediately after eating, take off your clothes and leave the table.

古文：旋而乡席，各彻其馈，如于宾客。
现代文：过一会又需回到席前，各自撤下所食，就象替宾客撤席一般。
English: After a while, they had to go back to the table and take down their food, just as if they were removing a seat for a guest.

古文：既彻并器，乃还而立。
现代文：撤席后就要把食器收起，弟子又回去垂手站立。
English: After withdrawing, the tableware should be put away, and the disciple should go back and stand with his hands down.

古文：凡拚之道：实水于盘，攘臂袂及肘，堂上则播洒，室中握手。
现代文：关于洒扫的做法：把清水打进盆里，把衣袖挽到肘部，堂屋宽广可以扬手洒水，内室窄小应当掬手近泼。
English: Regarding the practice of sprinkling: put clean water into the basin, roll up the sleeves to the elbows, the wide hall can be sprinkled with water, and the narrow inner room should be sprinkled with water.

古文：执箕膺揲，厥中有帚。
现代文：手拿畚箕使箕舌对着自身，畚箕里要同时放进扫帚。
English: Hold the broom in your hand so that the tongue of the broom is facing you. At the same time, place a broom in the broom.

古文：入户而立，其仪不忒。
现代文：然后到屋里站立一会，其仪止不容差错。
English: Then he went indoors and stood for a while, his posture unmistakable.

古文：执帚下箕，倚于户侧。
现代文：拿起扫帚就同时放下畚箕，一般是把它靠在门侧。
English: When you pick up the broom, put down the dustpan at the same time, usually leaning it against the side of the door.

古文：凡拚之纪，必由奥始。
现代文：凡按照洒扫的规矩行事，必须从西南的角落扫起。
English: Those who follow the rules of sprinkling must sweep from the southwest corner.

古文：俯仰磐折，拚毋有彻。
现代文：在屋里俯仰躬身进退，扫除时不要碰动其他东西。
English: In the house, bend over and move back and forth. Do not touch anything else when sweeping.

古文：拚前而退，聚于户内。
现代文：从前边往后边退着洒扫，最后把垃圾聚在门里。
English: He swept backwards and forwards, finally collecting the rubbish inside the door.

古文：坐板排之，以叶适己，实帚于箕。
现代文：蹲下来月木板排进垃圾，注意使箕舌对着自己，还要把扫帚放进畚箕。
English: Squat down and take out the garbage with the wooden plank. Make sure that the tongue is facing you, and put the broom in the dustbin.

古文：先生若作，乃兴而辞。
现代文：先生若此时出来做事。
English: If the teacher comes out to work at this time.

古文：坐执而立，遂出弃之。
现代文：便起来上前告止。再蹲下取箕帚又站起来，然后使出门倒掉拉圾。
English: Then squat down to pick up the trash and stand up again, and then use the trash can to take out the trash.

古文：既拚反立，是协是稽。
现代文：洒扫完仍然回来站立，这样就合乎规矩。
English: After the sprinkling, he still came back to stand, which was in accordance with the rules.

古文：暮食复礼。
现代文：晚饭时仍然要遵守礼仪。
English: There's still etiquette to observe at dinner.

古文：昏将举火，执烛隅坐。
现代文：到黄昏准备点燃火炬，弟子要执火炬坐在屋的一隅。
English: At dusk, prepare to light the torch. The disciple should hold the torch and sit in a corner of the room.

古文：错总之法，横于坐所。
现代文：要注意安放柴束的方法，应当是横放在所坐之地。
English: Pay attention to the method of placing the bundle of firewood, it should be placed horizontally at the place where you are sitting.

古文：栉之远近，乃承厥火。居句如矩，蒸间容蒸。
现代文：要看着 烛烬 的长短，对火炬进行接续，如法在原处安放上去。
English: It is necessary to look at the length of the candle flame, to continue the torch, and to place it in the same place as before.

古文：然者处下，奉椀以为绪。
现代文：柴束之间还要留有可容一柴的空隙。燃烧的灰烬落下，要捧碗来盛装火绪余灰。
English: There should also be a space between the bundles of firewood that can hold one piece of firewood. When the burning ashes fall, a bowl should be used to hold the ashes.

古文：右手执烛，左手正栉。
现代文：用右手拿着火炬，用左手修整 烛烬 。
English: Hold the torch in your right hand and trim the candle embers with your left hand.

古文：有堕代烛，交坐毋倍尊者。
现代文：一人疲倦另一人及时接替，轮番交坐不可背向老师。
English: If one of you is tired, the other should take over in time. Do not turn your back to the teacher when taking turns.

古文：乃取厥栉，遂出是去。
现代文：最后把余烬收拾起来，到外边把它们倾倒出去。
English: Finally, gather up the embers and dump them outside.

古文：先生将息，弟子皆起。
现代文：先生要休息，弟子则起身服侍。
English: The teacher should rest, the disciple should get up and serve.

古文：敬奉枕席，问所何趾；俶衽则请，有常则否。
现代文：恭敬地准备好枕席，问老师足朝何处。第一次要问清楚，此后则不必。
English: Respectfully prepare a seat cushion and ask the teacher where to put your feet. Ask clearly the first time, but not after that.

古文：先生既息，各就其友。
现代文：先生已经休息，弟子则各自找同学好友。
English: The teacher has already rested, and the disciples are looking for their classmates and friends.

古文：相切相磋，各长其仪。
现代文：相互切磋，增进各自所学的义理。
English: to learn from each other and improve what they have learned.

古文：周则复始，是谓弟子之纪。
现代文：以上要周而复始地坚持下去，这乃是弟子的规矩。
English: It is the disciple's rule to stick to the above repeatedly.

