古文：文王问太公曰： 君国主民者，其所以失之者何也？ 
现代文：文王询问太公道： 统治国家管理百姓的君主，失掉他的权利和百姓的支持的原因是什么呢？ 
English: King Wen asked King Taigong: What is the reason why the monarch, who rules the country and manages the people, has lost his rights and the support of the people?

古文：太公曰： 不慎所与也。
现代文：太公答道： 那是他用人不慎造成的。
English: The father-in-law replied, "It was caused by the carelessness of his servant."

古文：人君有六守、三宝。 
现代文：君主应该做到六守、三宝。 
English: Monarchs should fulfill the six guardianships and three treasures.

古文：文王曰： 六守何也？ 
现代文：文王问： 什么是六守？ 
English: King Wen asked: What are the Six Guarantors?

古文：太公曰： 一曰仁，二曰义，三曰忠，四曰信，五曰勇，六曰谋：是谓六守。 
现代文：太公回答说： 所谓的 六守 ：一是仁爱，二是正义，三是忠诚，四是信用，五是勇敢，六是智谋。 
English: The father-in-law replied, "The so-called six principles are: one is benevolence, two is justice, three is loyalty, four is trust, five is bravery, and six is cleverness.

古文：文王曰： 慎择六守者何？ 
现代文：文王问： 要怎样才能挑选到符合六守标准的人才呢？ 
English: Wen Wang asked: How can we select talents that meet the six standards?

古文：太公曰： 富之，而观其无犯；贵之，而观其无骄；付之，而观其无转；使之，而观其无隐；危之，而观其无恐；事之，而观其无穷。
现代文：太公说： 给他财物， 考验他是否逾越礼法；使他尊贵的地位，考验他是否骄横不驯；对他委以重任，考验他是否坚定不移地去完成；让他去处理事务，考验他是否隐瞒欺骗；让他置身于危险之中，考验他是否临危不惧；让他去处理突发事变，考验他是否应变自如。富裕而不逾礼法的。
English: The great-uncle said: Give him wealth to test whether he is above the rules of etiquette; give him a noble position to test whether he is arrogant and disobedient; give him a heavy task to test whether he is determined to complete it; let him deal with affairs to test whether he conceals deception; let him be in danger to test whether he is not afraid of danger; let him deal with emergencies to test whether he is at ease. Wealthy but not beyond the rules of etiquette.

古文：富之而不犯者，仁也；贵之而不骄者，义也；付之而不转者，忠也；使之而不隐者，信也；危之而不恐者，勇也；事之而不穷者，谋也。
现代文：是因为心中存有天理，这就是 仁爱 ；尊贵而不骄横的，这就是 正义 ；身负重任而能坚定不移去完成的，这就是 忠诚 ；处理问题而不隐瞒欺骗的，这就是 信用 ；身处危难而无所畏惧的，这就是 勇敢 ；面对突发事变而应付裕如的，这就是 智谋 。
English: It is because there is a heavenly principle in the heart, which is benevolence; honorable but not arrogant, which is justice; shouldering heavy responsibilities and being able to complete them unswervingly, which is loyalty; dealing with problems without concealing deception, which is trust; being in danger and fearless, which is courage; facing unexpected events and coping with them well, which is wisdom.

古文：人君无以三宝借人，借人则君失其威。 
现代文：君主不要把三宝交给别人，如果交给别人，君主就会丧失自己的权威。 
English: Monarchs should not hand over the Three Treasures to others. If they do, they will lose their authority.

古文：文王曰： 敢问三宝？ 
现代文：文王问： 您所指的三宝又是什么？ 
English: Wen Wang asked: What are the three treasures you are referring to?

古文：太公曰： 大农、大工、大商谓之三宝。
现代文：太公答道： 三宝就是大农、大工、大商。
English: Taigong replied, "The three treasures are a great farmer, a great carpenter, and a great merchant.

古文：农一其乡，则谷足；工一其乡，则器足；商一其乡，则货足。
现代文：把农民组织起来聚居在一地互相帮助耕耘，就不会荒废土地，粮食就会充足；把工匠组织起来聚居在一地进行生产，工具交流使用，器具就会充足；把商贾组织起来聚居在一起进行贸易，相互进行贸易，财货就会充足。
English: If farmers are organized to live together in one place and help each other to cultivate, the land will not be wasted and food will be sufficient; if craftsmen are organized to live together in one place to produce and exchange tools and utensils, the utensils will be sufficient; if merchants are organized to live together to trade and trade with each other, the goods will be sufficient.

古文：三宝各安其处，民乃不虑。
现代文：让这三大行业各安其业，百姓就不会寻思变乱。
English: Let these three major industries each secure their own business, and the people will not seek chaos.

古文：无乱其乡，无乱其族，臣无富于君，都无大于国。
现代文：不应打乱这种区域结构，不要拆散居民的家族组织。使臣民不得富于君主，城邑不得大于国都。
English: This regional structure should not be disrupted, and the family organization of the inhabitants should not be broken up, so that the subjects should not be richer than the monarch, and the towns should not be larger than the capital.

古文：六守长，则君昌；三宝完，则国安。 
现代文：具备六守标准的人得到重用，君主的事业就能昌盛发达；三宝发展完备，那么国家便可以长治久安了。 
English: If those who meet the standards of the Six Precepts are reused, the cause of the monarch can flourish and develop; if the Three Treasures are fully developed, then the country can enjoy long-term stability.

