古文：○桑维翰桑维翰，字国侨，河南人也。
现代文：桑维翰字国侨，河南人。
English: Sang Weihan is a Chinese expatriate from Henan Province.

古文：为人丑怪，身短而面长，常临鉴以自奇曰： 七尺之身，不如一尺之面。 
现代文：长得丑陋奇特，身材矮小而脸面很长，常常对着镜子自以为奇，说： 七尺长的身躯，不如一尺长的脸面。 
English: He was peculiarly ugly, with a short stature and a long face. He often looked in the mirror and said to himself, "A seven-foot body is not as good as a one-foot face."

古文：慨然有志于公辅。
现代文：慷慨激昂地有志于作公卿辅臣。
English: He ardently aspired to be a court noble's aide.

古文：初举进士，主司恶其姓，以 桑  丧 同音。
现代文：当初考进士时，主考官讨厌饱的姓氏，因为 桑 和 丧 发音相同。
English: At the time of the entrance examination, the chief examiner hated the surname "sat" because "sang" and "so" are pronounced the same way.

古文：人有劝其不必举进士，可以从佗求仕者，维翰慨然，乃著《日出扶桑赋》以见志。
现代文：有人劝他不一定考进士，可以从别的途径谋求做官，桑维翰慷慨激昂，于是写下《日出扶桑赋》来抒发志向。
English: Someone advised him that he did not necessarily need to take the entrance examination, and that he could seek to become an official in other ways. Sang Wai Han was impassioned, so he wrote "Hinode Fusang Fu" to express his aspirations.

古文：又铸铁砚以示人曰： 砚弊则改而佗仕。 
现代文：又铸成铁砚拿给人看说： 如果这个砚台用坏了就改从别的途径谋求做官。 
English: He also cast a spade and held it up for people to see, saying, "If this spade is no good, I'll find another way to become an official."

古文：卒以进士及第。
现代文：最终考中了进士。
English: In the end, he passed the entrance examination.

古文：晋高祖辟为河阳节度掌书记，其后常以自从。
现代文：晋高祖召他任河阳节度掌书记，后来就常常让他跟着自己。
English: Jin Gaozu called him to serve as the secretary of the Heyang Festival, and later he often let him follow him.

古文：高祖自太原徙天平，不受命，而有异谋，以问将佐，将佐皆恐惧不敢言，独维翰与刘知远赞成之，因使维翰为书求援于契丹。
现代文：晋高祖从太原调任天平，不接受任命，而别有打算，以此询问手下的将领，将领们都恐惧得不敢说话，只有桑维翰和刘知远赞成，于是让桑维翰写信向契丹求援。
English: Jin Gaozu was transferred from Taiyuan to Tianping. He did not accept the appointment, but had other plans, so he asked his generals. The generals were too afraid to speak. Only San Weihan and Liu Zhiyuan agreed, so he asked San Weihan to write to the Khitan for help.

古文：耶律德光已许诺，而赵德钧亦以重赂啖德光，求助己以篡唐。
现代文：耶律德光答应了，而赵德钧也用重金利诱耶律德光，请求他帮助自己篡夺唐政权。
English: Yelu Deguang agreed, and Zhao Deguan also lured Yelu Deguang with heavy interest and asked him to help him usurp the Tang regime.

古文：高祖惧事不果，乃遣维翰往见德光，为陈利害甚辩，德光意乃决，卒以灭唐而兴晋，维翰之力也。
现代文：晋高祖怕事情不成功，于是派桑维翰去见耶律德光，十分雄辩地为他陈说利害得失，耶律德光的主意纔打定，终于因此消灭唐而建立晋，这是桑维翰的功劳。
English: Jin Gao's ancestor was afraid that the matter would not succeed, so he sent San Weihan to see Yeludeguang. He eloquently explained the advantages and disadvantages for him. Yeludeguang's idea was finalized, and finally Jin was established by eliminating Tang, which was the merit of San Weihan.

古文：高祖即位，以维翰为翰林学士、礼部侍郎、知枢密院事，迁中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，兼枢密使。
现代文：晋高祖即位，任桑维翰为翰林学士、礼部侍郎、知枢密院事，升任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，兼枢密使。
English: When Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, Sang Weihan was appointed as Hanlin Scholar, Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, Secretary of the Privy Council, and promoted to the position of Secretary of the Central Committee, Secretary of the Central Committee's Secretariat, and also a Privy Councilor.

古文：天福四年，出为相州节度使，岁余，徙镇泰宁。
现代文：天福四年，出任相州节度使，一年多后，调任镇守泰宁。
English: In the fourth year of Tianfu, he served as the Songzhou Festival Commissioner, and more than a year later, he was transferred to the town of Taining.

古文：吐浑白承福为契丹所迫，附镇州安重荣以归晋，重荣因请与契丹绝好，用吐浑以攻之。
现代文：吐浑白承福被契丹逼迫，通过归附镇州安重荣来投奔晋，安重荣于是请求和契丹断绝友好关系，利用吐浑进攻他们。
English: Tuhun Bai Chengfu was persecuted by the Khitans and joined Benjin by annexing the town of An Chongrong. An Chongrong then requested to break off friendly relations with the Khitans and used Tuhun to attack them.

古文：高祖重违重荣，意未决。
现代文：晋高祖难于拒绝安重荣，没有拿定主意。
English: It was difficult for Jin Gaozu to refuse An Chongrong, and he did not make up his mind.

古文：维翰上疏言契丹未可与争者七，高祖召维翰使者至卧内，谓曰： 北面之事，方挠吾胸中，得卿此疏，计已决矣，可无忧也。 
现代文：桑维翰上疏陈述不能和契丹争斗的七个原因，晋高祖把桑维翰的使者召到卧室内，对他说： 北方的事情，正扰乱我的心，得到这个上疏，我的主意已打定了，可以不担忧了。 
English: Sangveekhan Jangso stated the seven reasons why he could not fight the Khitan. Jangko Zu summoned Sangveekhan's messenger to his bedroom and said to him: "Things in the north are disturbing my heart. With this Jangso, my mind is made up and I can stop worrying."

古文：维翰又劝高祖幸鄴都。
现代文：桑维翰又劝晋高祖到邺都。
English: Sang Wai Han also advised Jinguo Zu to go to Shidu.

古文：七年，高祖在鄴，维翰来朝，徙镇晋昌。
现代文：七年，晋高祖在邺都，桑维翰前来朝拜，调任镇守晋昌。
English: In the seventh year, the ancestor of Jin Gao came to worship in the capital of Xingdu, San Weihan, and was transferred to the town guard of Jinchang.

古文：出帝即位，召拜侍中。
现代文：晋出帝即位，召拜为侍中。
English: Promoted to Emperor and enthroned, called to be an attendant.

古文：而景延广用事，与契丹绝盟，维翰言不能入，乃阴使人说帝曰： 制契丹而安天下，非用维翰不可。 
现代文：而景延广当权，和契丹绝交，桑维翰的意见不被采纳，于是暗中派人劝晋出帝说： 制服契丹而安定天下，不用桑维翰不行。 
English: However, as Jing Yan Guan was in power and no longer had diplomatic relations with Khitan, San Wichan's opinion was not accepted, so he secretly sent someone to persuade Jin to become emperor, saying: To subdue Khitan and stabilize the world, it is not possible without San Wichan.

古文：乃出延广于河南，拜维翰中书令，复为枢密使，封魏国公，事无巨细，一以委之。
现代文：于是外调景延广到河南，拜桑维翰为中书令，又任为枢密使，封为魏国公，事情无论大小，一概托付给他。
English: As a result, Jing Yanguang was transferred to Henan Province, and Baisan Weihan was appointed as the Chinese scribe, the privy envoy, and the Wei Guogong. All matters, no matter how big or small, were entrusted to him.

古文：数月之间，百度浸理。
现代文：几个月内，各种事情都逐渐有条不紊。
English: Within a few months, things started to fall into place.

古文：初，李瀚为翰林学士，好饮而多酒过，高祖以为浮薄。
现代文：当初，李瀚任翰林学士，好饮酒而常误事，晋高祖认为他轻浮浅薄。
English: At the beginning, Li Han was a scholar of Hanlin, a good drinker who often made mistakes. Jin Gaozu thought he was frivolous and shallow.

古文：天福五年九月，诏废翰林学士，按《唐六典》归其职于中书舍人，而端明殿学士、枢密院学士皆废。
现代文：天福五年九月，下诏废除翰林学士一职，依据《唐六典》把它的职责划归中书舍人，而端明殿学士、枢密院学士也都废除了。
English: In September of the 5th year of Tianfu, the next imperial edict abolished the post of Hanlin Baccalaureate, according to the "Tang Six Classics," its duties were assigned to the middle school librarian, and the Duanmingden Baccalaureate and the Privy Council Baccalaureate were also abolished.

古文：及维翰为枢密使，复奏置学士，而悉用亲旧为之。
现代文：到桑维翰任枢密使时，又奏请设置学士，而全部任用亲朋旧友担任。
English: When he arrived in Sandwich as a Privy Counsellor, he asked for the establishment of a bachelor's degree, and all appointments were made by relatives, friends and old friends.

古文：维翰权势既盛，四方赂遗，岁积巨万。
现代文：桑维翰的权势日盛一日，四处嫔赠的财物，每年累积不计其敷。
English: Sanveighan's power was growing day by day, and every year he accumulated more and more gifts from all over the country.

古文：内客省使李彦韬、端明殿学士冯玉用事，共谗之。
现代文：内客省使李彦韬、端明殿学士冯玉当权时，一起说他的坏话。
English: When Li Yanxuan and Feng Yu, a scholar of the Duanming Palace, were in power, they spoke ill of him together.

古文：帝欲骤黜维翰，大臣刘昫、李崧皆以为不可，卒以玉为枢密使，既而以为相，维翰日益见疏。
现代文：垒帝想立即罢免桑维翰，大臣刘晌、李崧都认为不行，最后任冯玉为枢密使，不久又任为宰相，桑维翰一天天被疏远了。
English: Emperor Yodai wanted to immediately dismiss Sang Wichan, but ministers Liu Ye and Li Ye both thought it was impossible. Feng Yu was finally appointed as a confidential envoy, and soon after that as prime minister. Sang Wichan was becoming more and more alienated.

古文：帝饮酒过度得疾，维翰遣人阴白太后，请为皇弟重睿置师傅。
现代文：皇帝饮酒遇度而患病，桑维翰派人暗中禀告太后，请求为皇帝的弟弟石重睿设置师傅。
English: When the emperor fell ill due to excessive drinking, Sanvei Han sent someone to secretly inform the empress dowager, requesting that a teacher be set up for the emperor's younger brother, Shi Chongrui.

古文：帝疾愈，知之，怒，乃罢维翰以为开封尹。
现代文：皇帝病愈后，知道了这件事，发怒，于是罢免桑维翰，任他焉开封尹。
English: After the emperor recovered from his illness, he learned about this and became angry, so he dismissed San Weihan and allowed him to open Yin's seal.

古文：维翰遂称足疾，稀复朝见。
现代文：桑维翰于是称脚有病，很少再朝见皇帝。
English: Sanveigham then claimed to have a foot ailment and rarely saw the emperor again.

古文：契丹屯中渡，破栾城，杜重威等大军隔绝，维翰曰： 事急矣！ 
现代文：契丹驻守中渡，攻破乐城，杜重威等人的大军离得很远，桑维翰说： 情况危急啊！ 
English: The Khitan garrisoned Zhongdu, defeated Lecheng, and the large army of Du Chongwei and others was very far away. Sanveihan said: The situation is critical!

古文：乃见冯玉等计事，而谋不合。
现代文：于是会见冯玉等人商量事情，而意见不合。
English: So he met with Feng Yu and others to discuss the matter, but they disagreed.

古文：又求见帝，帝方调鹰于苑中，不暇见，维翰退而叹曰： 晋不血食矣！ 
现代文：又请求晋见皇帝，皇帝正在园林中训练鹰，没有空闲见他，桑维翰退下叹息说： 晋的祖先不能再受到祭祀了！ 
English: He also asked Jin to see the emperor. The emperor was training eagles in the garden and did not have time to see him. Sanveihan retreated and sighed and said: Jin's ancestors can no longer be sacrificed!

古文：自契丹与晋盟，始成于维翰，而终败于景延广，故自兵兴，契丹凡所书檄，未尝不以此两人为言。
现代文：自从契丹和晋结盟，开始时事成于桑维翰，而最终败在景延广手上，因此从两军交战以来，凡是契丹方面的书檄文告，都没有不提到这两个人的。
English: Since the alliance between the Khitan and the Jin, the beginning of the current events in Sangvikhan, and the final defeat at the hands of Jing Yanguang, so since the two armies have been at war, all of the Khitan side's inscriptions have not mentioned these two people.

古文：耶律德光犯京师，遣张彦泽遗太后书，问此两人在否，可使先来。
现代文：耶律德光侵犯京师，派张彦泽给太后送信，打听这两个人还在不在，可让他们先来。
English: Yerutdeguang violated the Beijing division and sent Zhang Yanze to the empress dowager to inquire whether the two people were still absent, but let them come first.

古文：而帝以继翰尝议毋绝盟而己违之也，不欲使维翰见德光，因讽彦泽图之，而彦泽亦利其赀产。
现代文：而皇帝因桑维翰曾主张不要和契丹绝盟而自己不听他的话，不愿让桑维翰去见耶律德光，因而暗示张彦泽算计他，而张彦泽也想占有他的财产。
English: However, the emperor did not listen to him because Sanveikhan had advocated not to break the alliance with Khitan, and he did not want to let Sanveikhan go to Yerut Deguang, thus implying that Zhang Yanzhe was counting on him, and Zhang Yanzhe also wanted to take possession of his property.

古文：维翰状貌既异，素以威严自持，晋之老将大臣，见者无不屈服，彦泽以骁捍自矜，每往候之，虽冬月未尝不流汗。
现代文：桑维翰的相貌怪异，又素来自恃威严，晋的老将大臣们，见到他没有不屈服的，张彦泽自恃勇猛刚强，每次去迎候桑维翰，即使是寒冬腊月也没有不汗流满面的。
English: Sang Wichan's appearance is strange, and he has always been dignified. The veteran ministers of the Jin Dynasty did not give up when they saw him. Zhang Yanzhe was brave and strong. Every time he went to meet Sang Wichan, even in the cold winter, he did not sweat.

古文：初，彦泽入京师，左右劝维翰避祸，维翰曰： 吾为大臣，国家至此，安所逃死邪！ 
现代文：当初，张彦泽进入京师，手下人劝桑维翰躲避灾祸，桑维翰说： 我作为大臣，国家到了这种地步，到哪里逃避死呢！ 
English: At first, Zhang Yanze entered the Beijing division, and his subordinates advised San Weihan to avoid disaster. San Weihan said: I am a minister, the country has reached this stage, where can I escape death!

古文：安坐府中不动。
现代文：静坐府中不动。
English: Sit quietly and do not move.

古文：彦泽以兵入，问： 维翰何在？ 
现代文：张彦泽率兵进来，问： 桑维翰在哪里？ 
English: Zhang Yanze led the troops in and asked: Where is San Wei Han?

古文：维翰厉声曰： 吾，晋大臣，自当死国，安得无礼邪！ 
现代文：桑维翰厉声说道： 我，是晋的大臣，自应为国而死，你怎么能无礼呢！ 
English: Sanveighan said sharply, "I, as Jin's minister, should die for my country. How can you be so disrespectful!"

古文：彦泽股栗不敢仰视，退而谓人曰： 吾不知桑维翰何如人，今日见之，犹使人恐惧如此，其可再见乎？ 
现代文：张彦泽两腿打颤不敢抬头看，退下对人说： 我不知道桑维翰是怎样一个人，今天见了，还让人如此恐惧，哪能再见他呢？ 
English: Zhang Yanzhe's legs trembled and he dared not look up. He retreated and said to the man: "I don't know what kind of person Sanveihan is. I saw him today, and he made people so afraid. How can I see him again?

古文：乃以帝命召维翰。
现代文：于是以皇帝的命令召桑维翰。
English: So, by order of the emperor, Sanveikhan was summoned.

古文：维翰行，遇李崧，立马而语，军吏前白维翰，请赴侍卫司狱。
现代文：桑维翰出发，遇见李崧，在马上交谈，军吏上前告诉桑维翰，让他去侍卫司狱中。
English: When Sanveighan set out, he met Li Yao and immediately struck up a conversation. The military official stepped forward and told Sanveighan to go and serve as a prison guard.

古文：维翰知不免，顾崧曰： 相公当国，使维翰独死？ 
现代文：桑维翰知道不能免祸，看着李崧说： 你主持国事，让我桑维翰一人去死吗？ 
English: Sanveighan knew that he could not avoid disaster. He looked at Li Yao and said, "You preside over state affairs, so let Sanveighan die alone?

古文：崧惭不能对。
现代文：李崧羞愧不能回答。
English: Li Yao was too ashamed to answer.

古文：是夜，彦泽使人缢杀之，以帛加颈，告德光曰： 维翰自缢。 
现代文：这天晚上，张彦泽派人将桑维翰勒死，又用丝绸系在桑维翰脖子上，报告耶律德光说： 桑维翰上吊自杀。 
English: That evening, Zhang Yanze sent someone to strangle Sun Weihan and tie a silk rope around his neck, telling Yelu Deguang: "Sun Weihan hanged himself."

古文：德光曰： 我本无心杀维翰，维翰何必自致。 
现代文：耶律德光说： 我原无意杀掉桑维翰，桑维翰何必自己去死。 
English: "I did not mean to kill Sanveighan. Why did Sanveighan have to die?

古文：德光至京师，使人检其尸，信为缢死，乃以尸赐其家，而赀财悉为彦泽所掠。
现代文：耶律德光到京师，派人验尸，相信是吊死的，于是把尸体赐给桑维翰的家人，而他的财产都被张彦泽所掠夺。
English: Yerudoglu went to Beijing and sent someone to conduct an autopsy, believing that he had been hanged, so he gave the body to Sanveikhan's family, and his property was plundered by Zhang Yanze.

古文：○景延广景延广，字航川，陕州人也。
现代文：景延广字航川，陕州人。
English: Jingyan Guangzhi Hangchuan, from Shaanxi Province.

古文：父建善射，尝教延广曰： 射不入铁，不如不发。 
现代文：父亲景建擅长射箭，曾教景延广说： 射箭射不进铁，不如木射。 
English: His father, Jing Jian, was good at archery, and once taught Jing Yanguang to say: "If you can't hit iron with archery, it's better to shoot wood."

古文：由是延广以挽强见称。
现代文：从此景延广以拉强弓著称。
English: Since then, Jing Yan Guan has been famous for its strong bow.

古文：事梁邵王友诲，友诲谋反被幽，延广亡去。
现代文：跟随梁邵王朱友诲，朱友诲谋反被囚禁，景延广逃亡在外。
English: Zhu Youyi followed Liang Shao Wang, Zhu Youyi plotted against being imprisoned, and Jing Yanguang escaped.

古文：后从王彦章战中都，彦章败，延广身被数创，仅以身免。
现代文：后来跟随王彦章在中都打仗，王彦章被打败，景延广身上多处受伤，仅仅得以保住性命。
English: Later, he followed Wang Hanzhang to fight in Zhongdu. Wang Hanzhang was defeated, and Jing Yanguang was injured in many places, and was only able to save his life.

古文：明宗时，硃守殷以汴州反，晋高祖为六军副使，主诛从守殷反者。
现代文：唐明宗时，朱守殷以汴州反叛，晋高祖任六军副使，主持诛杀跟随朱守殷反叛的人。
English: When Tang Mingzong, Zhu Shouyin rebelled with Zhangzhou, Jinko Zu served as deputy envoy of the Sixth Army, presided over the battle and killed the rebels who followed Zhu Shouyin.

古文：延广为汴州军校当诛，高祖惜其才，阴纵之使亡，后录以为客将。
现代文：景延广任汴州军校当杀，晋高祖爱惜他的才能，暗中放他逃走，后来录任为客将。
English: Jing Yanguang served as an assassin at the Luzhou Military Academy. His father, who was a high-ranking official, cherished his talent and secretly allowed him to escape. Later, he was enlisted as a guest captain.

古文：高祖即位，以为侍卫步军都指挥使，领果州团练使，从领宁江军节度使。
现代文：晋高祖即位，任为侍卫步军都指挥使，领果州团练使，调任宁江军节度使。
English: When Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, he was appointed as the envoy to command the Imperial Guards and Foot Guards, the envoy to lead the Guozhou Regiment, and the envoy to the Ningjiang Army.

古文：天福四年，出镇义成，又徙保义，复召为侍卫马步军都虞候，徙镇河阳三城，迁马步军都指挥使，领天平。
现代文：天福四年，出镇义成，又调任保义，又召为侍卫马步军都虞候，调任镇守河阳三城，升任马步军都指挥使，领天平军。
English: In the fourth year of Tianfu, he went out of the town of Yicheng, and was transferred to Baoyi, and was also called to be the bodyguard of the horse-marching army, and was transferred to the town guard of the three cities of Heyang, and was promoted to the commander of the horse-marching army, and the leader of the Tianping army.

古文：高祖崩，出帝立，延广有力，颇伐其功。
现代文：晋高祖去世，晋出帝即位，景延广出了力，十分夸耀自己的功劳。
English: After the death of Emperor Gaozu and the enthronement of Emperor Jin, Emperor Jing extended his power and was very proud of his achievements.

古文：初，出帝立，晋大臣议告契丹，致表称臣，延广独不肯，但致书称孙而已，大臣皆知其不可而不能夺。
现代文：当初，晋出帝即位，晋的大臣们拟议报告契丹，送上表章自称为臣子，景延广一人不同意，只是送信自称孙子罢了，大臣们都知道这样不行，而又不能强求。
English: At first, when Emperor Jin ascended to the throne, Jin's ministers proposed to report to Khitan, and sent a form to claim to be a vassal. Jing Yanguang was the only one who disagreed, but only sent a letter claiming to be a grandson. The ministers knew that this was not possible, but they could not force their way.

古文：契丹果怒，数以责晋，延广谓契丹使者乔莹曰： 先皇帝北朝所立，今卫子中国自册，可以为孙，而不可为臣。
现代文：契丹果然发怒，多次以此责备晋，景延广对契丹使臣乔莹说： 先皇帝是契丹所立的，现在的天子是中原自己册立的，可以做孙子，但不能做臣子。
English: The Khitan really got angry and repeatedly reproached Jin with this, and Jing Yanguang said to the Khitan envoy Qiao Ying: The first emperor was established by the Khitan, and the current emperor was established by Zhongyuan himself. He can be a grandson, but not a vassal.

古文：且晋有横磨大剑十万口，翁要战则来，佗日不禁孙子，取笑天下。 
现代文：而且晋有十万口横磨大剑，爷爷如果要打仗，就来，以后无法管住孙子，被天下人笑话。 
English: What's more, Jin has a hundred thousand swords. If grandpa wants to fight, he'll come. He won't be able to control his grandson in the future, and he'll be laughed at by the world.

古文：莹知其言必起两国之争，惧后无以取信也，因请载于纸，以备遗忘。
现代文：乔莹明白他的话必然引起两国争端，怕以后没有东西作凭证，于是请求写在纸上，以防遗忘。
English: Qiao Ying understood that his words would inevitably cause a dispute between the two countries, and feared that there would be nothing to prove it, so she asked to write it down on paper to prevent it from being forgotten.

古文：延广敕吏具载以授莹，莹藏其书衣领中以归，具以延广语告契丹，契丹益怒。
现代文：景延广命令官吏都记下来交给乔莹，乔莹把信藏在衣领中返回，把景延广的话全部报告给契丹，契丹更加愤怒。
English: Jing Yanguang ordered the officials to write it down and give it to Qiao Ying. Qiao Ying hid the letter in her collar and returned to report all of Jing Yanguang's words to Qidan. Qidan was even more angry.

古文：天福八年秋，出帝幸大年庄还，置酒延广第。
现代文：天福八年秋，晋出帝巡幸大年庄回来，在景延广家中摆酒宴。
English: In the autumn of 8th year of Tianfu, Emperor Jinzhi came back from his inspection tour of Danyanshuang and held a wine banquet at the home of Jing Yanguang.

古文：延广所进器服、鞍马、茶床、椅榻皆裹金银，饰以龙凤。
现代文：景延广进献的器服、鞍马、茶床、椅榻都裹上了金银，用龙凤图案作装饰。
English: The costumes, pommel horses, tea beds and chaise lounges presented by Jing Yan Guan were all wrapped in gold and silver and decorated with dragon and phoenix patterns.

古文：又进帛五千匹，绵一千四百两，马二十二匹，玉鞍、衣袭、犀玉、金带等，请赐从官，自皇弟重睿，下至伴食刺史、重睿从者各有差。
现代文：又进献五千匹丝绸，一千四百两丝绵，二十二匹马，玉鞍、衣韧、犀牛角、玉器、金带等，请求赐给随行的官吏，上自皇帝的弟弟石重睿，下至伴食刺史、石重睿的随从人员各有不同。
English: He also presented five thousand silks, one thousand four hundred and two silks, twenty-two horses, jade saddles, clothes, rhinoceros horns, jade ware, gold belts, etc., and requested that they be given to the accompanying officials, from the emperor's brother, Shi Chongrui, down to the attendant, Shi Chongrui.

古文：帝亦赐延广及其母、妻、从事、押衙、孔目官等称是。
现代文：皇帝赏赐给景延广和他的母亲、妻子、随从、押衙、孔目官等人的礼物也相等。
English: The gifts given by the emperor to Jing Yanguang and his mother, wife, attendants, courtiers, and officials are also equal.

古文：时天下旱、蝗，民饿死者岁十数万，而君臣穷极奢侈以相夸尚如此。
现代文：当时天下旱灾、蝗灾并起，饿死的老百姓一年达十多万人，而君臣如此穷奢极侈，相互夸耀攀比。
English: At that time, droughts and locust plagues occurred all over the world, and more than 100,000 people died of starvation every year. However, the monarchs and ministers were so extravagant that they boasted to each other.

古文：明年春，契丹入寇，延广从出帝北征为御营使，相拒澶、魏之间。
现代文：第二年春，契丹入侵，景延广随晋出帝北征任御营使，两军在澶、魏二州间相对峙。
English: In the spring of the following year, the Khitan invaded, and Jing Yanguang followed Jin out of the north of the empire to take up the post of imperial envoy, and the two armies confronted each other between the two states of Shu and Wei.

古文：先锋石公霸遇虏于戚城，高行周、符彦卿兵少不能救，驰骑促延广益兵，延广按兵不动。
现代文：先锋石公霸在戚城和敌军遭遇，高行周、符彦卿的兵少不能救援，飞马催景延广增兵，景延广按兵不动。
English: Pioneer Shi Gongba encountered the enemy army in Qi Cheng, Gao Xing Zhou and Fu Yanqing's soldiers were too few to rescue, Pegasus urged Jing Yan Guan to increase the number of soldiers, and Jing Yan Guan did not move.

古文：三将被围数重，帝自御军救之，三将得出，皆泣诉。
现代文：三个将领被重重包围，皇帝亲自率兵营救他们，三个将领纔得以逃出，都哭泣着诉苦。
English: The three generals were besieged, and the emperor personally led the troops to rescue them. The three generals were able to escape, all crying and complaining.

古文：然延广方握亲兵，恃功恣横，诸将皆由其节度，帝亦不能制也。
现代文：但景延广正掌握着亲兵，仗恃功劳放纵专横，将领们都由他调度，皇帝也不能控制。
English: However, Jing Yan Guan was in control of his own soldiers, he was proud of his achievements and indulged in despotism. The generals were dispatched by him, and the emperor could not control them.

古文：契丹尝呼晋人曰： 景延广唤我来，何不速战？ 
现代文：契丹曾对晋人呼叫说： 景延广叫我们来，为什么不速战速决？ 
English: Khitan once called out to the Jin people: Jing Yan Guang called us to come, why not fight quickly?

古文：是时，诸将皆力战，而延广未尝见敌。
现代文：这时，将领们都奋力作战，而景延广未曾与敌人碰面。
English: At this time, the generals were fighting hard, and Jing Yanguang had never met with the enemy.

古文：契丹已去，延广独闭壁不敢出。
现代文：契丹离去后，景延广独自躲在营垒中不敢出来。
English: After Khitan left, Jing Yanguang hid alone in the camp and did not dare to come out.

古文：自延广一言而契丹与晋交恶，凡号令征伐一出延广，晋大臣皆不得与，故契丹凡所书檄，未尝不以延广为言。
现代文：自从景延广一句话而使契丹和晋关系恶化，凡是号令征伐一概出自景延广，晋的大臣们都不能参与，因此凡是契丹的书檄文告，都无不以景延广为借口。
English: Since the words of Jing Yanguang worsened the relationship between the Khitan and the Jin, all the calls for conquest were made by Jing Yanguang, and the ministers of the Jin could not participate. Therefore, all the proclamations of the Khitan were made under the pretext of Jing Yanguang.

古文：契丹去，出帝还京师，乃出延广为河南尹，留守西京。
现代文：契丹离去后，晋出帝回到京师，于是出调景延广为河南尹，留守西京。
English: After Khitan's departure, Emperor Jinzhi returned to Beijing, so he transferred Empress Dowager Yan Guang to Henan Province and stayed in West Beijing.

古文：明年，出帝幸澶渊，以延广从，皆无功。
现代文：第二年，晋出帝到澶渊，让景延广随行，都没有功劳。
English: In the second year, Emperor Jin went to Puyuan, accompanied by Jing Yanguang, without any merit.

古文：延广居洛阳，郁郁不得志。
现代文：景延广住在洛阳，郁郁不得志。
English: Jing Yanguang lives in Luoyang and is depressed.

古文：见晋日削，度必不能支契丹，乃为长夜之饮，大治第宅，园置妓乐，惟意所为。
现代文：见晋日益削弱，估计一定不能对付契丹，于是通宵饮酒，大肆修建住宅，在园中设置歌舞艺人，为所欲为。
English: Seeing that Jin was weakening day by day, it was estimated that he would not be able to deal with Khitan, so he drank all night, built houses lavishly, set up song and dance artists in the park, and did whatever he wanted.

古文：后帝亦追悔，遣供奉官张晖奉表称臣以求和，德光报曰： 使桑维翰、景延广来，而割镇、定与我，乃可和。 
现代文：后来皇帝也后悔，派供奉官张晖奉表向契丹称臣求和，耶律德光回答说： 派桑维翰、景延广来，割让镇、定二州给我，纔可以讲和。 
English: Later, the emperor also regretted sending the tributary official Zhang Yifang to the Khitan to ask for peace. Yelu Deguang replied, "Send San Weihan and Jing Yanguang to cede the town and two prefectures to me, and then we can talk peace."

古文：晋知其不可，乃止。
现代文：晋知道逭不行，纔作罢。
English: You know you can't fake it, so stop pretending.

古文：契丹至中渡，延广屯河阳，闻杜重威降，乃还。
现代文：契丹到中渡，景延广驻守河阳，听说杜重威投降，于是返回。
English: Khitan went to Zhongdu, Jing Yan Guan was stationed in Heyang, and heard that Du Chongwei had surrendered, so he returned.

古文：德光犯京师，行至相州，遣骑兵数千杂晋军渡河趋洛，以取延广，戒曰： 延广南奔吴，西走蜀，必追而取之。 
现代文：耶律德光侵犯京师，到达相州时，派骑兵几千人混在晋军中渡过黄河直奔洛阳，以便抓获景延广，告诫说： 景延广向南逃奔到昊，向西逃奔到蜀，务必追击捉住他。 
English: Yelu Deguang invaded the Beijing Division, and when he arrived in Xiangzhou, he sent several thousand cavalry mixed with the Jin Army to cross the Yellow River and go straight to Luoyang in order to capture Jing Yanguang, and warned: Jing Yanguang fled south to Hao, fled west to Shu, be sure to chase and catch him.

古文：而延广顾虑其家，未能引决，虏骑奄至，乃与从事阎丕驰骑见德光于封丘，并丕见锁。
现代文：而景延广担心他的家人，没有自杀，契丹骑兵突然到来，于是和随从间丕驰马到封丘见耶律德光，和阎丕一起被戴上枷锁。
English: But Jing Yanguang, fearing for his family, did not commit suicide, the Khitan cavalry suddenly arrived, so he and his attendants rode to Fengqiu to see Yelu Deguang, and were put in shackles together with Yan Qi.

古文：延广曰： 丕，臣从事也，以职相随，何罪而见锁？ 
现代文：景延广说： 间丕，是我的随从，因职事跟随我，有什么罪而被戴土枷锁？ 
English: Jing Yanguang said, "Mizhao, you are my follower. You follow me because of your job. What is the crime of being shackled with earthen chains?"

古文：丕乃得释。
现代文：间丕于是获释。
English: As a result, Ms. Ma was released.

古文：德光责延广曰： 南北失欢，皆因尔也。 
现代文：耶律德光指责景延广说： 南北双方断绝友好关系，都是因为你。 
English: Yerutdeguang blamed Jing Yanguang and said: The severance of friendly relations between the north and the south is all because of you.

古文：召乔莹质其前言，延广初不服，莹从衣领中出所藏书，延广乃服。
现代文：召乔莹来对质他过去说过的话，景延广开始时不承认，乔莹从衣领中拿出收藏的信，景延广纔服罪。
English: Calling Qiao Ying to confront him about what he had said in the past, Jing Yanguang did not admit at the beginning, Qiao Ying took out a collection of letters from his collar, and Jing Yanguang accepted the crime.

古文：因以十事责延广，每服一事，授一牙筹，授至八筹，延广以面伏地，不能仰视，遂叱而锁之。
现代文：于是拿十件事责问景延广，每承认一件事，拿给他一个象牙筹码，给到第八个筹码时，景延广把脸贴在地上，不敢抬头看，于是大声呵叱他并把他囚禁起来。
English: So he questioned Jing Yanguang about ten things, and for each thing he admitted, he gave him an ivory chip. When the eighth chip was given, Jing Yanguang put his face to the ground and did not dare to look up, so he scolded him loudly and imprisoned him.

古文：将送之北行，至陈桥，止民家。
现代文：准备送他到北方去，走到陈桥时，停在老百姓家中。
English: They were preparing to send him to the north, and when they reached Chenqiao, they stopped at a local people's home.

古文：夜分，延广伺守者殆，引手扼吭而死，时年五十六。
现代文：晚上，景延广窥伺看守他的人松懈了，伸手卡住自己的脖子而死，当时五十六岁。
English: In the evening, Jing Yan Guanzhong, who was 56 years old at the time, was watching his guards slack off when he reached out and grabbed his own neck and died.

古文：汉高祖时，赠侍中。
现代文：漠高祖时，赠侍中。
English: When he was a high-ranking samurai, he was given the title of junior samurai.

古文：呜呼，自古祸福成败之理，未有如晋氏之明验也！
现代文：唉，从古到今祸福成败的道理，没有像晋氏这样的明证了！
English: Alas, from ancient times to the present, there is no such clear evidence as Jin's!

古文：其始以契丹而兴，终为契丹所灭。
现代文：它开始因契丹而兴盛，最终被契丹消灭。
English: It began to flourish as a result of the Khitan, and was eventually eliminated by the Khitan.

古文：然方其以逆抗顺，大事未集，孤城被围，外无救援，而徒将一介之命，持片舌之强，能使契丹空国兴师，应若符契，出危解难，遂成晋氏，当是之时，维翰之力为多。
现代文：但当它以叛逆对抗名正言顺者，大业未成，孤城被围，外无救援，而只是凭一个人的使命，仗恃口舌的强辩，能使契丹举国兴师动众，像符契一样应验，解除危难建立晋国，在这个时候，桑维翰的功劳最多。
English: However, when it rebelled against the righteous and obedient, the great cause was not accomplished, the lonely city was besieged, there was no rescue outside, but only on the basis of a person's mission, with the strong argument of the tongue, it could make the Khitan nation rejuvenate and motivate the masses, fulfill like a deed, relieve the danger and establish the Jin nation. At this time, Sanveehan's merit was the most.

古文：及少主新立，衅结兵连，败约起争，发自延广。
现代文：到年轻的君主刚即位，战事不断，毁约引起争端，事情起因于景延广。
English: When the young monarch had just ascended the throne, the war continued, the destruction of the treaty caused disputes, and the matter was caused by Jing Yanguang.

古文：然则晋氏之事，维翰成之，延广坏之，二人之用心者异，而其受祸也同，其故何哉？
现代文：因此晋氏的事业，桑维翰成就了，景延广又败坏了，两人的用心不同，而遭受的灾祸一样，原因是什么呢？
English: Therefore, Jin's career, Sang Weihan's achievement, Jing Yanguang's corruption, the two people's intentions are different, but the disaster suffered is the same, what is the reason?

古文：盖夫本末不顺而与夷狄共事者，常见其祸，未见其福也。
现代文：大概立国始终名义不顺，而和夷狄共事，常常见到灾祸，见不到幸运。
English: Probably the founding of the country has always been unsatisfactory in name, but working with the Yidi, we often see disaster, not luck.

古文：可不戒哉！
现代文：能不警惕吗！
English: Can we not take this as a warning?

古文：可不戒哉！
现代文：能不警惕吗！
English: Can we not take this as a warning?

古文：○吴峦吴峦，字宝川，郓州卢县人也。
现代文：昊峦字宝川，郭州卢县人。
English: He is from Lu County, Guizhou Province.

古文：少举明经不中，清泰中为大同沙彦珣节度判官。
现代文：年轻时考明经科役考中，清泰年问任大同沙彦殉的节度判官。
English: When he was young, he was asked to be the judge of the festival in the middle of the examination for the post of academic, and in the year of the Qing Dynasty, he was asked to be the judge of the festival in the year of the death of Datong Sayan.

古文：晋高祖起太原，召契丹为援，契丹过云州，彦珣出城迎谒，为契丹所虏。
现代文：晋高祖在太原起兵，召契丹援助，契丹经过云州，沙彦殉出城迎拜，被契丹俘虏。
English: Jin Gaozu raised an army in Taiyuan and called on Khitan for assistance. Khitan passed through Yunnan, and Shayan died in the battle and was captured by Khitan.

古文：城中推峦主州事，峦即闭门拒守，契丹以兵围之。
现代文：城中人推举昊峦管理州中事务，昊峦就关闭城门拒守，契丹用军队包围他。
English: The people in the city elected Hao Gan to manage the affairs of the state, Hao Gan closed the city gate and refused to defend it, and the Khitan surrounded him with troops.

古文：高祖入立，以云州入于契丹，而峦犹守城不下，契丹围之凡七月。
现代文：晋高祖即位，把云州划归契丹，而昊峦还是坚守州城不投降，契丹围城七个月。
English: When Emperor Gaozu ascended the throne, he transferred Yunnan to the Khitan, but Hao Gan still held fast to the state capital and did not surrender, and the Khitan besieged the city for seven months.

古文：高祖义峦所为，乃以书告契丹，使解兵去。
现代文：晋高祖认为昊峦的所作所为很忠义，于是写信告诉契丹，让他们解围离去。
English: Jin Gaozu thought that Hao Yao's actions were very loyal, so he wrote a letter to the Khitan and asked them to leave.

古文：高祖召峦，以为武宁军节度副使、谏议大夫、复州防御使。
现代文：晋高祖召昊峦，任他为武宁军节度副使、谏议太夫、复州防御使。
English: Jin Gaozu summoned Hao Jun, and appointed him as the vice-envoy of the Wu Ning Army for the festival, the secretary of the military council, and the defense envoy of Fuzhou.

古文：出帝即位，与契丹绝盟，河北诸州皆警，以谓贝州水陆之冲，缓急可以转饷，乃积刍粟数十万，以王令温为永清军节度使。
现代文：晋出帝即位，和契丹绝交，河北各州都戒备，认为贝州位于水陆要道，危急时可以转运军饷，于是在那里屯积粮草数十万，任王令温为永清军节度使。
English: When Emperor Jin ascended to the throne, and cut off diplomatic relations with Khitan, all the states of Hebei were on alert, believing that Bozhou was located on a major land and water route, and could transport military supplies in a crisis. Therefore, hundreds of thousands of grain and grass were stored there, and Wang Lingwen was appointed as the Yongqing Army's envoy.

古文：令温牙将邵珂，素骄很难制，令温夺其职。
现代文：王令温的牙将邵珂，一向骄横狠毒难以控制，王令温罢免了他的职务。
English: Shao Ke, Wang Lingwen's dental officer, had always been arrogant and hard to control. Wang Lingwen dismissed him from his post.

古文：珂闲居无憀，乃阴使人亡入契丹，言贝州积粟多而无兵守，可取。
现代文：邵珂闲居无聊，于是暗中派人逃到契丹，说贝州屯积的粮食很多但没有军队把守，可以夺取。
English: Shao Ke was idle and bored, so he secretly sent someone to flee to Khitan, saying that there was a lot of grain stored in Bozhou, but there was no army to guard it, so it could be seized.

古文：令温以事朝京师，心颇疑珂，乃质其子崇范以自随。
现代文：王令温因事去京师朝见，心里对邵珂很疑心，于是把他的儿子邵崇范作为人质跟随他去京师。
English: Because of this, Wang Lingwen went to Beijing to see Shao Ke for the first time. He was very suspicious of Shao Ke, so he took his son Shao Chong Fan as a hostage and followed him to Beijing.

古文：晋大臣以峦前守云州七月，契丹不能下，乃遣峦驰驿代令温守贝州。
现代文：晋的大臣们因为昊峦过去坚守云州七个月，契丹不能攻克，于是派昊峦骑驿马前去代替王令温守贝州。
English: Jin's ministers couldn't conquer Khitan because Hao Yao had held on to Yunnan for seven months, so they sent Hao Yao on horseback to replace Wang Ling Wen as governor of Bozhou.

古文：峦善抚士卒，会天大寒，裂其帷幄以衣士卒，士卒皆爱之。
现代文：昊峦善于安抚士兵，碰上天气十分寒冷，就撕掉他的帷幕做衣服给士兵穿，士兵们都很喜欢他。
English: Hao Yu was good at soothing the soldiers. When the weather was very cold, he would tear off his curtain to make clothes for the soldiers to wear. The soldiers liked him very much.

古文：珂因求见蛮，愿自效，峦推心信之。
现代文：邵珂于是求见昊峦，愿意效力，昊峦推心置腹地相信了他。
English: Shao Ke then asked to see Hao Tong, willing to work, Hao Tong wholeheartedly believed him.

古文：开运元年正月，契丹南寇，围贝州，峦命珂守南门。
现代文：开运元年正月，契丹向南侵犯，包围贝州，昊峦命令邵珂把守南门。
English: At the beginning of the first month of the first year of the year, the Khitan invaded the south and surrounded Bozhou. Hao Yu ordered Shao Ke to guard the south gate.

古文：契丹围三日，四面急攻之，峦从城上投薪草焚其梯冲殆尽。
现代文：契丹包围三天，四面猛攻，昊峦从城上投下柴草把城梯和冲车差不多烧完了。
English: The Khitan besieged the city for three days and attacked it fiercely from all sides. Hao Gan threw firewood from the top of the city to burn down almost all of the city's ladders and chariots.

古文：已而珂自南门引契丹入，峦守东门方战，而左右报珂反，峦顾城中已乱，即投井死。
现代文：不久邵珂从南门引契丹人进城，昊峦正把守束门作战，而手下人报告邵珂反叛，昊峦见城中已乱，就投井而死。
English: Soon after, Shao Ke led the Khitan from the South Gate into the city. Hao Yao was guarding and fighting at the Shackle Gate, and his men reported Shao Ke's rebellion. When Hao Yao saw that the city was in chaos, he threw himself into a well and died.

古文：而令温家属为契丹所虏，出帝悯之，以令温为武胜军节度使，后累历方镇，周显德中卒。
现代文：而王令温的家属被契丹俘虏，晋出帝哀怜他，任王令温焉武胜军节度使，后来累任方镇，周显德年问死。
English: However, Wang Lingwen's family members were captured by the Khitans, and Emperor Jin pity him. Wang Lingwen was appointed as the military commander of the victorious army, and later he was appointed to Fangzhen. Zhou Xiande died in the same year.

古文：令温，瀛州河间人也。
现代文：王令温，瀛州河间人。
English: Wang Lingwen, a native of Ganzhou.

