古文：杨修为魏武主簿。时作相国门，始构榱桷。
现代文：原文杨修担任曹操的主簿官之时，有次曹操修府邸大门，刚开始搭椽子。
English: When Yang Xiu served as Cao Cao's chief bookkeeper, there was a time when Cao Cao was repairing the gate of the mansion and had just begun to tie the latch.

古文：魏武自出看，题门作 活 字，便去。
现代文：曹操从内室走出，察看施工的情形，在门上题了一个 活 字后就离开了。
English: Cao Cao walked out of the inner room, inspected the construction, and left after putting a sign on the door.

古文：杨见，便令坏之，曰： 门中活， 阔 字，王正嫌门大也。 
现代文：杨修命令人将门拆毁，说： 门中活为 阔 字，魏王这是嫌门太宽了。 
English: Yang Xiu ordered the gate to be torn down, saying: "The middle of the gate is too wide, Wei Wang, the gate is too wide."

古文：人饷魏武一杯酪，魏武啖少许，盖头上题 合 字以示众。
现代文：有人献给曹操一杯乳酪，曹操吃了一点，在盖上写了一个 合 字，给大家看。
English: Someone dedicated a glass of cheese to Cao Cao. Cao Cao ate a little and wrote a signature on the lid for everyone to see.

古文：众莫能解，次至杨修。修便啖之，曰： 公教人啖一口也，复何疑？ 
现代文：众人不知道曹操的用意，杨修见后，便拿起杯子喝了一口，说： 曹公教 人 各喝 一口 ，各位还有什么好迟疑的呢？ 
English: People did not know Cao Cao's intention. After Yang Xiu met him, he picked up a glass and took a sip, saying: Cao Cao's followers each take a sip, what is there for you to hesitate about?

古文：魏武尝过 曹娥碑 下，杨修从。碑背上见题作 黄绢幼妇外孙薹臼 八字。
现代文：杨修有一次随曹操经过曹娥碑，见碑上题有 黄绢幼妇外孙薹臼 八个字。
English: Yang Xiu once walked with Cao Cao past the Cao E Monument. On the monument, there was a plaque with the inscription "Huang Ye's young wife, grandchild and eight characters."

古文：魏武谓修曰： 解否？ 答曰： 解。 
现代文：曹操问杨修： 知道是什么意思吗？ 杨修回答说： 知道。 
English: Cao Cao asked Yang Xiu: Do you know what it means? Yang Xiu replied: I know.

古文：魏武曰： 卿未可言，俟我思之。 
现代文：曹操说： 你先不要说出答案，让我思考一下。 
English: Cao Cao said, "Don't tell me the answer first, let me think about it."

古文：行三十里，魏武乃曰： 吾已得。 
现代文：等走了三十里路后，曹操说： 我明白了。 
English: After walking thirty miles, Cao Cao said, "I understand.

古文：令修别记所知。修曰： 黄绢，色丝，于字为 绝 ；幼妇，少女，于字为 妙 ；外孙，女子，于字为 好 ；薹臼，受五辛之器，于字为 辞 。
现代文：让杨修写下他的答案，杨修写道： 黄绢，是色丝，合为绝字；幼妇，是少女，合为 妙 字；外孙，是女儿之子，合为 好 字；薹臼，是受辛之器，合为 辞 字。
English: Asking Yang Xiu to write down his answer, Yang Xiu wrote: Huang Yao, is the color of silk, combined into the word of death; young woman, is the girl, combined into the word of beauty; grandchild, is the son of a daughter, combined into the word of good; mortar, is the vessel of suffering, combined into the word of words.

古文：所谓 绝妙好辞 也! 
现代文：因此是 绝妙好辞 。 
English: So it's a great turn of phrase.

古文：魏武亦记之，与修同，叹曰： 吾才去卿乃三十里。 
现代文：曹操也把自己的答案写下结果。曹操所写的和杨修相同。事后曹操感叹地说： 我的才华与你的相差三十里远。 
English: Cao Cao also wrote down the results of his own answer. Cao Cao's answer was the same as Yang Xiu's. Afterwards, Cao Cao sighed and said, "My talent is thirty miles away from yours."

古文：操既平汉中，欲讨刘备而不得进，欲守又难为功。
现代文：曹操平定汉中之后，想要继续讨伐刘备，却没有办法向前推进；想要坚守汉中，又很难防御得住。
English: After Cao Cao had pacified Hanzhong, he wanted to continue the crusade against Liu Bei, but there was no way to push forward; if he wanted to hold on to Hanzhong, it would be difficult to defend.

古文：护军不知进止，操出教，唯曰： 鸡肋。 
现代文：将军们也不知道该守还是该战。一天曹操发布命令，只是说： 鸡肋。 
English: The generals didn't know whether to defend or fight. One day, Cao Cao issued an order, saying simply: "Chicken ribs."

古文：外曹莫能晓，杨修曰： 夫鸡肋，食之则无所得，弃之则殊可惜，公归计决矣。 
现代文：外面的官员不知曹操的意思。杨修说： 鸡肋，吃起来没有多少肉，但是扔掉又觉得很可惜，我看曹公已经决定班师回朝了。 
English: The officials outside do not know Cao Cao's meaning. Yang Xiu said: "Chicken ribs, there is not much meat to eat, but I feel very sorry to throw it away. I think Cao Gong has decided to return to the North."

古文：乃私语营中戒装，俄操果班师。
现代文：于是私下让兵士们整理装备准备回家，不久曹操果然下令班师回朝。
English: So he privately asked the soldiers to sort out their equipment and prepare to go home, and soon Cao Cao ordered the team to return to the North.

古文：德祖聪颖太露，为操所忌，其能免乎？
现代文：杨修正是因为聪颖太露，遭到了曹操的忌恨，招致祸难。
English: Yang rectified it because Cong Ying was too dewy and was hated by Cao Cao, leading to disaster.

古文：晋、宋人主多与臣下争胜诗、字，故鲍照多累句，僧虔用拙笔，皆以避祸也。
现代文：晋、宋两朝的君主，常常喜欢和大臣在诗词书法上争胜负，因此鲍照的文章中常常会有低俗、累赘的言辞，僧虔写字时也会用拙笔，这都是为了避祸啊！
English: The monarchs of the Jin and Song dynasties often liked to compete with ministers in poetry and calligraphy, so Baozhao's articles often contained vulgar and cumbersome words, and monks would also use a poor pen when writing. This was all to avoid misfortune!

