古文：韦伦，开元、天宝中朔方节度使光乘之子。
现代文：韦伦是开元、天宝年间朔方节度使韦光乘之子。
English: Wailun was the son of Wei Guangren, who was appointed by Emperor Xuanzong during the reign of Emperor Tianbao in the first century.

古文：少以廕累授蓝田县尉。
现代文：年轻时以祖荫积官被授予蓝田县尉之职。
English: When he was young, he was awarded the post of Lantian County Lieutenant by the ancestor.

古文：以吏事勤恪，杨国忠署为铸钱内作使判官。
现代文：因为担任吏职勤恳认真，杨国忠命他暂署铸钱内作使判官。
English: Because he was diligent and conscientious in his duties as an official, Yang Guo Lianmen temporarily appointed him as a magistrate within the mint.

古文：国忠恃权宠，又邀名称，多征诸州县农人令铸钱。农夫既非本色工匠，被所由抑令就役，多遭箠罚，人不聊生。
现代文：杨国忠恃宠专权，又希求名声，大多征召各州县农民，让他们铸钱，农民既不是本行当的工匠，被差遣他们的人逼着服役，多数遭受鞭打责罚，人人都过不下去。
English: Yang Guozhong coveted exclusive power and sought fame. Most of his top officials conscripted farmers from every prefecture and county to mint money. Since farmers were not craftsmen in their own right, they were forced to serve by those who sent them. Most of them were whipped and punished, and none of them survived.

古文：伦白国忠曰： 铸钱须得本色人，今抑百姓农人为之，尤费力无功，人且兴谤。
现代文：韦伦对杨国忠说： 铸钱须得本行当的手艺人，如今逼着一般农民干这种活，特别费力却没有效果，人们还会生出议论。
English: Waylon said to Yang Guozhong, "Making money requires a skilled craftsman. Nowadays, ordinary farmers are forced to do this kind of work. It takes a lot of effort, but it doesn't work. People will still argue about it.

古文：请厚悬市估价，募工晓者为之。 
现代文：请公开在市面上以优价招募懂得这种手艺的人干这活。 
English: Please openly recruit people who know this kind of craftsmanship to do this job at a good price on the market.

古文：由是役使减少，而益铸钱之数。
现代文：从此被强派来服役的人减少了，铸的钱数却增加了。
English: Since then, the number of people forced to serve has decreased, but the amount of money minted has increased.

古文：天宝末，宫内土木之功无虚日，内作人吏因缘为奸，伦乃躬亲阅视，省费减倍。
现代文：天宝末年，皇宫内土木营造的工程一天都没有停止过，那些营造的工头、官员狼狈为奸，韦伦便亲自监督视察，节省许多钱使耗费减少了一半。
English: At the end of the Tenpo era, the civil engineering construction project in the Imperial Palace did not stop for a single day. The construction foremen and officials were in cahoots, and Wei Lun personally supervised the inspection, saving a lot of money and reducing the cost by half.

古文：改大理评事。
现代文：改任大理寺评事。
English: He was appointed as a critic of Dali Temple.

古文：会安禄山反，车驾幸蜀，拜伦监察御史、剑南节度行军司马，兼充置顿使判官，寻改屯田员外、兼侍御史。
现代文：当时正值安禄山谋反，皇上的车驾去蜀州，封韦伦为监察御史、剑南节度行军司马，兼充置顿使判官，随后又改任屯田员外郎兼侍御史。
English: At that time, it was the time of the Anlu Mountain rebellion, the emperor's car drove to Shuzhou, and Wei Lun was appointed as the inspector of the history, the secretary of the military march of the Jiannan Festival, and the judge of the Dongshi, and then he was appointed as the foreign field officer and the attendant of the history.

古文：时内官禁军相次到蜀，所在侵暴，号为难理；伦清俭，率身以化之，蜀川咸赖其理。
现代文：这时内监和禁军相继到达蜀州，他们到处侵害地方，人们都说难以治理他们。韦伦带头以清廉简朴影响他们，蜀州地区都仰赖他而得到治理。
English: At this time, the Inner Inspector and the Imperial Army arrived in Shuzhou one after another. They encroached on localities everywhere, and people said that it was difficult to govern them. Weilun took the lead in influencing them with honesty and simplicity, and the Shuzhou region all relied on him to be governed.

古文：竟遭中官毁谮，贬衡州司户。
现代文：但韦伦竟遭到太监的谗言诽谤，被贬职为衡州司户。
English: However, Waylon was slandered by the eunuch and demoted to the position of Hengzhou steward.

古文：属东都、河南并陷贼，漕运路绝，度支使第五琦荐伦有理能，拜商州刺史，充荆襄等道租庸使。
现代文：适值京都、河南都陷落于贼军之手，漕运的水路被阻断了，度支使第五琦推荐韦伦有治理地方的才能，朝廷授予韦伦商州刺史之职，并充任荆襄等道租庸使。
English: At the right time, Kyoto and Henan both fell into the hands of the bandits, and the waterway for rowing transport was blocked. The imperial envoy recommended Wei Lun to the Fifth Emperor for his ability to govern the region, and the imperial court awarded Wei Lun the post of merchant state historian, and served as Jing Xiang's and other road rent yong envoys.

古文：会襄州裨将康楚元、张嘉延聚众为叛，凶党万余人，自称东楚义王。襄州刺史王政弃城遁走。
现代文：正遇襄州的偏将康楚元、张嘉延聚合部众叛乱，凶暴的党徒达一万多人，自称为东楚义王，襄州刺史王政弃城逃走。
English: They were facing a mutiny led by Kang Chuyuan and Zhang Jiayang, the leaders of Xiangzhou, who had gathered their followers. More than ten thousand violent party members, calling themselves Dongchu Yi Wang and Xiangzhou Zhishi Wang Zheng, abandoned the city and fled.

古文：嘉延又南袭破江陵，汉、沔馈运阻绝，朝廷旰食。
现代文：张嘉延又向南进军攻破江陵，汉水、沔水的粮食运输被阻断，朝廷缺粮。
English: Zhang Jiayan also marched south to conquer Jiangling, the grain transport of Hanshui and Surabaya was blocked, and the imperial court was short of grain.

古文：伦乃调发兵甲驻邓州界，凶党有来降者，必厚加接待。
现代文：韦伦便调动军队驻扎在邓州边界，贼军有来投降的必定给优厚的接待。
English: Waylon then mobilized the army and stationed it at the border of Dengzhou. If the bandits came to surrender, they would surely be given a generous reception.

古文：数日后，楚元众颇怠，伦进军击之。生擒楚元以献，余众悉走散，收租庸钱物仅二百万贯，并不失坠。
现代文：几天以后，康楚元的部众就比较松懈了，韦伦进军对贼党进行攻击，活捉康楚元献给朝廷，其余的部众全部逃散，这次行动共收取租庸钱物将近二百万贯，并无遗漏。
English: A few days later, Kang Chuyuan's subordinates became more lax. Wei Lun marched to attack the thieves, captured Kang Chuyuan alive and presented him to the imperial court. The rest of the subordinates all fled. This operation collected a total of nearly two million yuan in rents and fees, with no omissions.

古文：荆、襄二州平。
现代文：荆州、襄州二州平定。
English: Jing and Xiang provinces were pacified.

古文：诏除崔光远为襄州节度使，征伦为卫尉卿。
现代文：皇上下诏授予崔光远襄州节度使，征召韦伦为卫尉卿。
English: The imperial edict awarded Cui Guangyuan as the Yangzhou Festival envoy, and recruited Wei Ren as the guard lieutenant.

古文：旬日，又以本官兼宁州刺史、招讨处置等使，寻又兼陇州刺史。
现代文：十天以后，韦伦又以本职兼任宁州刺史、招讨处置使等，随即又兼任陇州刺史。
English: Ten days later, Weilun also served as the secretary of Ningzhou and the secretary of invitation and disposition, and then he also served as the secretary of Zhangzhou.

古文：乾元三年，襄州大将张瑾杀节度使史翙作乱，乃以伦为襄州刺史、兼御史大夫、山南东道襄邓等十州节度使。
现代文：乾元三年，襄州大将张瑾杀害节度使史岁羽作乱，朝廷即任命韦伦为襄州刺史、兼御史大夫及山南东道、襄州、邓州等十州的节度使。
English: In the third year of Qianyuan, the imperial court appointed Wei Ren as the chief historian of Xiangzhou, as well as the chief historian and the chief historian of Shannan Host, Xiangzhou, Dengzhou and other ten states.

古文：时李辅国秉权用事，节将除拜，皆出其门。
现代文：当时李辅国掌权执政，节度使的任命都出自他的门下。
English: At that time, Li Yuxuo was in power, and the appointment of the Minister of the State Council all came from his family.

古文：伦既为朝廷公用，又不私谒辅国。伦受命未行，改秦州刺史、兼御史中丞、本州防御使。
现代文：韦伦既然是被朝廷公开任用的，私下里又不拜见李辅国，因而韦伦接受任命还没有上路，又被改任为秦州刺史，兼任御史中丞及秦州防御使。
English: Since Waylon was publicly appointed by the imperial court, he did not visit Li Yuxuo in private. Therefore, Waylon did not go on the road to accept the appointment, and was reappointed as the Qin State Historian, concurrently serving as the Vice-Minister of History and the Qin State Defense Envoy.

古文：时吐蕃、党项岁岁入寇，边将奔命不暇。
现代文：当时吐蕃族、党项族年年入侵，边防的将士疲于奔命尚且来不及。
English: At that time, the Tubo and Dangxiang tribes invaded every year, and the soldiers of the border guard were exhausted from running for their lives and it was too late.

古文：伦至秦州，屡与虏战。兵寡无援，频致败衄，连贬巴州长史、思州务川县尉。
现代文：韦伦到达秦州以后，多次和敌人作战，因为兵少又缺乏后援，以致多次失败，接连被贬为巴州长史、思州务川县尉。
English: After Waylon arrived in Qinzhou, he fought with the enemy many times. Due to the small number of soldiers and the lack of backup, he failed many times. He was successively demoted to the rank of the governor of Ba and the lieutenant of Shizhou Wuchuan County.

古文：代宗即位，起为忠州刺史，历台、饶二州。
现代文：代宗即位之后，起用韦伦为忠州刺史，又历任台州、饶州二州刺史。
English: After the enthronement of the daimyō, Waylon was appointed as the chief historian of Chungju, and successively served as the chief historian of Taizhou and Raozhou.

古文：以中官吕太一于岭南矫诏募兵为乱，乃以伦为韶州刺史、兼御史中丞、韶连柳三州都团练使。
现代文：因为太监吕太一在岭南假传皇上的诏命作乱，朝廷任命韦伦为韶州刺史，兼任御史中丞和韶州、连州、郴州三个州的都团练使。
English: Because the eunuch Lv Taiyi made a mess of the imperial edict on the fake imperial envoy in Lingnan, the imperial court appointed Wei Lun as the governor of Zhangzhou, and also served as the vice-governor of Zhangzhou and the governor of the three states of Zhangzhou, Lianzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：竟遭太一用赂反间，贬信州司马、虔州司户、隋州司户、随州司马。
现代文：后来吕太一以贿赂实行反间计，韦伦被贬为信州司马、虔州司户、隋州司户、隋州司马。
English: Later, Lü Taiyi used bribery to implement a countermeasure, and Weilun was relegated to Shinshu Sima, Gyeongju Sido, Suizhou Sido, and Suizhou Sima.

古文：遇赦，旅寓于洪州十数年。
现代文：后来被赦免，在洪州旅居十多年。
English: He was later pardoned and lived in Hongzhou for more than a decade.

古文：德宗即位，选堪使绝域者，征伦拜太常少卿、兼御史中丞，持节充通和吐蕃使。
现代文：德宗即位，要挑选一个能够出使极远地域的人，召回韦伦，拜他为太常寺少卿兼御史中丞，持节旄充任通好吐蕃的使臣。
English: When Emperor Dezong ascended to the throne, it was necessary to select a person who could dispatch envoys to far-flung regions, to recall Waylon, to worship him as the Junior Secretary of Taejō-ji Temple and the Vice-Minister of History, and to appoint him as the envoy of the Tokugawa Shogunate.

古文：伦至蕃中，初宣谕皇恩，次述国威德远振，蕃人大悦，赞普入献方物。
现代文：韦伦到达吐蕃，首先宣示皇帝的恩宠，其次叙说国家的威力，以及德政远扬的情况，吐蕃人非常高兴，国王献上当地特产。
English: When Wei Lun arrived in Tubo, he first proclaimed the emperor's favor, and then described the power of the country and the far-reaching situation of the German government. Tubo people were very happy, and the king presented local specialties.

古文：使还，迁太常卿、兼御史大夫，加银青光禄大夫。
现代文：出使回朝，升任太常寺卿兼御史大夫，加授银青光禄大夫。
English: He was sent back to the imperial court, and was promoted to the post of Lord of Taizho-ji Temple and Grand Historian, as well as the post of Silver Seiko Roku Daifu.

古文：再入吐蕃，奉使称旨，西蕃敬服。
现代文：后来再次入吐蕃，奉命出使的情况既使皇上满意，又使西蕃尊敬佩服。
English: Later, he went to Tibet again, and the fact that he was sent by order not only satisfied the emperor, but also made Xidi respect and admire him.

古文：朝廷得失，数上疏言之。
现代文：韦伦曾就朝廷的得失多次上疏谈及。
English: Waylon had dwelt on the gains and losses of the imperial court on several occasions.

古文：又为宰相卢杞所恶，改太子少保，累加开府仪同三司。
现代文：然而韦伦又被宰相卢杞所厌恶，改任太子少保，积官加授为开府仪同三司。
English: However, Waylon was also disliked by Prime Minister Roh Moo-hyun, and was reassigned to the position of the Crown Prince's Junior Bodyguard. He was also given the additional position of Kaifu-giri and Sanji.

古文：泾师之乱，驾幸奉天。
现代文：泾州军队作乱时，皇上来到奉天。
English: When the Zhangzhou army was in revolt, the emperor came to Mingtian.

古文：及卢杞、白志贞、赵赞等贬官，关播罢相为刑部尚书，伦于朝堂呜咽而言曰： 宰相不能弼谐启沃，使天下一至于此。
现代文：等到卢杞、白志贞、赵赞等人贬官降职，关播被罢免宰相而担任刑部尚书时，韦伦在朝堂上呜咽着说： 当宰相的不能辅佐朝廷以使其和谐，向皇上开诚布公地进行忠告，使国家落到这个地步！
English: When Lu Wei, Bai Zhizhen, Zhao Zhan and others were demoted and Guan Bo was removed from the post of prime minister and became the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Wei Lun said in the courtroom, sobbing: "When the prime minister cannot support the court to make it harmonious, he openly advises the emperor, and the country has fallen to this level!"

古文：仍为尚书，天下何由致理？ 
现代文：还要当尚书，天下怎能治理得好呢！ 
English: How can the world be governed well if it also has to be a textbook!

古文：闻者敬惮之。
现代文：听到这话的人对他又尊敬又畏惧。
English: He was both revered and feared by all who heard him.

古文：从驾梁州，还京，又欲擢用卢杞为饶州刺史。
现代文：跟随皇上到梁州，返回京师以后，皇上又想提升、任用卢杞为饶州刺史。
English: After following the emperor to Liangzhou and returning to Beijing, the emperor also wanted to promote and appoint Lu Wei as the crown prince of Raozhou.

古文：伦又上表切言不可，深为忠正之士所称叹。
现代文：韦伦又奉上表章，恳切地提出不可任用卢杞，深为忠良正直的人士所称赞、叹赏。
English: After receiving the award, Weilun earnestly proposed that Lu Wei should not be appointed, which was deeply praised and appreciated by loyal and honest people.

古文：以年逾七十，表请休官，改太子少师致仕，封郢国公。
现代文：因为已经年过七十，韦伦上表请求辞官，朝廷改任他为太子少师让他离任，封他为郢国公。
English: Because he was already over seventy years old, Waylon asked for his resignation at the table, and the court reassigned him as the prince's junior teacher to let him leave his post, and appointed him as the prince of the country.

古文：时李楚琳以仆射兼卫尉卿，李忠诚以尚书兼少府监，伦上言曰： 楚琳凶逆，忠诚蕃戎丑类，不合厕列清班。 
现代文：当时李楚琳以仆射兼任卫尉卿，李忠诚以尚书兼任少府监。韦伦上奏说： 李楚琳凶横悖逆，李忠诚是个胡人丑类，不应当担任重要的官职。 
English: At that time, Li Chulin was concurrently appointed to the position of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards as a servant, and Li Zhizhong was concurrently appointed to the position of Junior Prefectural Supervisor as a courtier. Wei Lun said in his report: Li Chulin was vicious and rebellious, and Li Zhizhong was ugly and ugly, and should not hold an important official post.

古文：又表请置义仓以防水旱，择贤良任之左右。又言吐蕃必无信约，专须防备，不可轻易。
现代文：又上表请求设置义仓以预防水旱灾荒，选择贤良的官员在皇上身边任职；又说吐蕃必然不守信义诺言，必须特别进行防备，不可轻视他们。
English: In addition, the above table requested the establishment of a charity warehouse to prevent floods, droughts and droughts, and the selection of virtuous officials to serve alongside the emperor; it was also said that Tubo would inevitably fail to keep his promises, and special precautions must be taken, and they should not be despised.

古文：上每善遇之。
现代文：皇上总是很友善地对待他。
English: The Emperor always treated him very kindly.

古文：伦居家孝友，抚弟侄以慈爱称。
现代文：韦伦在家中孝顺友爱，以慈爱地抚育弟弟、侄儿著称。
English: At home, Waylon was known for his filial piety and friendliness, and for lovingly raising his younger brother and nephew.

古文：贞元十四年十二月卒，时年八十三，赠扬州都督。
现代文：贞元十四年十二月去世。时年八十三岁。朝廷追赠他为扬州都督。
English: Zhenyuan died in December of the 14th year of the Zhenyuan, at the age of 83. The imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of Yangzhou governor.

