古文：满桂，蒙古人，幼入中国，家宣府。
现代文：满桂，蒙古人，自小就来到中国，家住宣府。
English: Man Gui, a Mongolian, came to China as a child and lives in Xuanfu.

古文：稍长，便骑射。每从征，多斩馘。
现代文：稍大一些的时候，就很会骑马射箭，入伍后每次参战，都斩首、截耳不少。
English: When he was a little older, he could ride a horse and shoot arrows very well. After enlisting in the army, every time he went to war, he beheaded and cut off a lot of ears.

古文：军令，获敌首一，予一官，否则赉白金五十。
现代文：按照部队中的规定，斩获敌人一颗头颅，就给一个官当，否则就赏给白银五十两。
English: According to the regulations in the army, if an enemy's head is captured, it will be given to an officer, otherwise it will be rewarded with fifty taels of silver.

古文：桂屡得金，不受职。
现代文：满桂屡次拿到赏金，却没能得到一官半职。
English: Mangui has repeatedly received rewards, but has not been able to get an official post.

古文：年及壮，始为总旗。
现代文：年近四十，才当上总旗。
English: He was nearly forty years old when he became the flag-bearer.

古文：又十余年为百户。
现代文：又过了十年才当上百户长。
English: It took another ten years before he became the head of a hundred households.

古文：后屡迁潮河川守备。
现代文：后来经几次升迁做到潮河川守备。
English: Later, after several promotions, it became Tide and River Defense.

古文：杨镐四路师败，荐小将知兵者数人，首及桂。
现代文：杨镐在四路败师的情况下推荐了几个懂得军事的小将，首先就推荐了满桂。
English: In the case of a four-way defeat, Yang Wei recommended several young generals who understand military affairs. First of all, he recommended Man Gui.

古文：移守黄土岭。
现代文：满桂于是移兵驻守黄土岭。
English: Therefore, Mangui moved his troops to garrison the Loess Mountains.

古文：为总督王象乾所知，进石塘路游击、喜峰口参将。
现代文：期间得到总督王象乾的赏识，先后提升他做了石塘路游击、喜峰口参将。
English: During this period, he won the appreciation of Governor Wang Xiangqian, who promoted him successively to become the guerrilla of Shitang Road and the general of Qifengkou.

古文：天启二年，大学士孙承宗行边，桂入谒。壮其貌，与谈兵事，大奇之。
现代文：天启二年，大学士孙承宗出任边帅，满桂进去拜见，承宗看到他相貌威武，和他谈了谈军事，对他格外称赞。
English: In the second year of the Apocalypse, the university scholar Sun Chengzong served as a border guard, and Man Gui went in to see him. Chengzong saw his powerful appearance, talked with him about military affairs, and praised him in particular.

古文：及出镇山海，即擢副总兵，领中军事。
现代文：等承宗出来镇守山海时，就提拔满桂当了副总兵，负责中军的事务。
English: When Chengzong came out to guard the mountains and seas, he promoted Man Gui to deputy general, responsible for the affairs of the Chinese army.

古文：承宗幕下，文武辐辏，独用桂。
现代文：承宗幕下，文武官员来进见的很多，承宗却单单任用了满桂。
English: Behind the scenes of the Succession of the Zong Dynasty, the officials of literature and military affairs came to see a lot, but the Succession of the Zong Dynasty only appointed Man Gui.

古文：桂椎鲁甚，然忠勇绝伦，不好声色，与士卒同甘苦。
现代文：满桂很粗鲁，但是忠诚、勇敢，不同一般，不好声色，能够和士卒同甘共苦。
English: Man Gui is very rude, but he is loyal, brave, different from the average, has a bad voice, and can share the joys and sorrows with his peers.

古文：明年，承宗议出关修复宁远。问谁可守者。
现代文：第二年，承宗打算出关修复宁远城，询问哪个可以去驻守。
English: In the second year, Chengzong planned to go out to repair Ningyuan City and asked which one he could go to.

古文：马世龙荐孙谏及李承先，承宗皆不许。
现代文：马世龙推荐了孙谏及李承先，承宗都没有同意。
English: Ma Shilong recommended Sun Yat-sen and Li Chengxian, but Chengzong did not agree.

古文：袁崇焕、茅元仪进曰： 满桂可。但为公中军，不敢请耳。 
现代文：袁崇焕、茅元仪进言说： 满桂可以，但他是您的中军，我们不敢请他出来。 
English: Yuan Chonghuan and Mao Yuanyi chimed in and said: "Mangui can, but he is your Chinese soldier, we dare not ask him to come out.

古文：承宗曰； 既可，安问中军。 
现代文：承宗说： 既然他可以，哪管他是不是中军。 
English: Chengzong said, "Since he can do it, it doesn't matter whether he is a Chinese soldier or not.

古文：呼桂语之，慨然请行。
现代文：于是唤来满桂，给他讲了，满桂慨然答应，请命而行。
English: So he summoned Man Gui, told him, and Man Gui reluctantly agreed to do as he was told.

古文：世龙犹疑其不可，承宗不听。即日置酒，亲为之饯。
现代文：世龙还怀疑他不行，承宗不听，当天就摆下酒席，替他饯行。
English: Shilong also suspected that he couldn't do it, that he didn't listen to Zhengzong, so that day he set up a wine table and waited for him.

古文：桂至宁远，与崇焕协心城筑，屹然成重镇。
现代文：满桂到宁远后和崇焕同心协力修筑城墙，使宁远巍然屹立，成为辽东的一个重镇。
English: After Mangui came to Ningyuan, he and Chonghuan worked together to build the city wall, so that Ningyuan stood tall and became a major town in Liaodong.

古文：语具《崇焕传》中。
现代文：这件事的详细叙述见于《袁崇焕传》中。
English: A detailed account of this event can be found in the "Biography of Yuan Chonghuan."

古文：时蒙古部落驻牧宁远东鄙，辽民来归者悉遭劫掠，承宗患之。
现代文：当时蒙古的一些部落驻在宁远东郊放牧，辽东百姓来归附宁远的都遭受他们的抢劫，承宗为此很费心。
English: At that time, some Mongolian tribes were stationed in the eastern suburbs of Ningyuan for grazing. The people of Liaodong who came to Ningyuan suffered from their robberies. Chengzong was very worried about this.

古文：四年二月，遣桂及总兵尤世禄袭之大凌河。
现代文：四年二月，派满桂和总兵官尤世禄在大凌河袭击了他们。
English: In February of the fourth year, the sent Man Gui and the general officer You Shilu attacked them in Dalinghe.

古文：诸部号泣西窜，东鄙以宁。
现代文：于是蒙古各部落号哭连天地向西逃窜了，宁远东郊得到了安宁。
English: As a result, the Mongolian tribes fled westward, and Ningyuan's eastern suburbs were pacified.

古文：拱兔、炒花、宰赛诸部阳受款而阴怀反侧。桂善操纵，诸部咸服，岁省抚赏银不赀。
现代文：拱兔、炒花、宰赛等部落表面上归顺而暗中想要反叛，满桂善于掌握处理，这些部落都服从了，每年还节省了无数的抚赏银。
English: On the surface, the tribes such as the Arch Rabbit, the Fried Flower, and the Zaisei were submissive, but secretly they wanted to rebel. Man Gui was good at mastering and handling. These tribes all obeyed, and also saved countless reward money every year.

古文：初，城中郭外，一望丘墟。至是军民五万余家，屯种远至五十里。
现代文：当初，城里城外满眼都是荒丘废墟，到现在五万多家军民在这里屯田，往城外耕种到五十里远。
English: At the beginning, the city and its outskirts were full of barren hills and ruins. Now, more than 50,000 soldiers and civilians have settled here and farmed up to 50 miles outside the city.

古文：承宗上其功。诏擢都督佥事，加衔总兵。
现代文：承宗报上了他的功劳，朝廷下诏提拔他做了都督佥事，加官衔为总兵。
English: Chengzong reported on his merits, and the imperial court issued an edict promoting him to the post of governor-general and to the rank of general.

古文：承宗乃令典后部，与前部赵率教相掎角。
现代文：承宗于是命令他掌管后部，与前部赵率教相掎角。
English: Zhengzong then ordered him to be in charge of the rear, and quarrelled with Zhao, the leader of the front.

古文：督饷郎中杨呈秀侵克军粮，副将徐涟激之变，围崇焕署。
现代文：督饷郎中杨里秀克扣军粮，副将徐涟激发兵变，包围了崇焕的公署。
English: Yang Lixiu, the second-in-command, cut off the army's rations, and the vice-commander, Xu Jun, instigated a mutiny and surrounded the government office in Chonghuan.

古文：惮桂家卒勇猛，不敢犯，结队东走。
现代文：大家因为害怕满桂的家兵勇猛，所以不敢来包围他，就成群结队地向东边逃走。
English: Everyone was afraid of Man Gui's brave soldiers, so they did not dare to encircle him, and fled in droves to the east.

古文：桂与崇焕追斩首恶，抚余众而还。
现代文：满桂和崇焕追上去斩了兵变的发动者，安抚余下的部众，把他们带了回来。
English: Man Gui and Chong Huan chased down and killed the instigators of the mutiny, pacified the remaining subordinates, and brought them back.

古文：六年正月，我大清以数万骑来攻，远迩大震，桂与崇焕死守。
现代文：六年正月，我大清派了几万名骑兵过来攻打，远近大震，满桂和崇焕在城里死守。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of the Great Qing Dynasty, I sent tens of thousands of cavalrymen to attack, far and near the earthquake, Man Gui and Chong Huan defended the city.

古文：始攻西南城隅，发西洋红夷炮，伤攻者甚众。
现代文：开始攻打西南城角，他们点发西洋红夷的大炮，打伤了很多攻城的人。
English: They began to attack the southwest corner of the city. They fired the cannons of the Western Red Army, wounding many of those who attacked the city.

古文：明日转攻南城，用火器拒却之，围解。
现代文：第二天转攻南边的城墙，他们又用火器打退了大清兵，于是包围给解除了。
English: The next day, they turned to attack the southern city wall, and they beat back the Qing soldiers with firearms, so the siege was lifted.

古文：帝大喜，擢都督同知，实授总兵官。
现代文：熹宗皇帝十分高兴，提拔满桂为都督同知，实际上的总兵官。
English: Emperor Taizong was very pleased and promoted Man Gui to be the governor's confidant and de facto commander-in-chief.

古文：再论功，加右都督，荫副千户，世袭。
现代文：后来又一次论功，给满桂加级为左都督，荫子副千户，世袭。
English: Later, the merit was discussed again, and Mangui was promoted to the left-hand governor, the shadow of a thousand households, hereditary.

古文：桂疏谢，并自叙前后功。
现代文：满桂上书谢恩，并且自叙自己前后立过的功劳。
English: Man Gui wrote a letter of thanks, and described his own achievements.

古文：优诏褒答，再进左都督。
现代文：熹宗下诏做了赞扬性的回答，又升他为左都督。
English: Emperor Taizong made a praiseworthy reply, and promoted him to the post of Left Governor.

古文：桂初与率教深相得。
现代文：满桂当初跟赵率教很要好。
English: At first, Man Gui was very friendly with Zhao.

古文：是役也，怒其不亲救，相责望。
现代文：这次战役中，满桂恨率教不亲自来援救自己，从此相互责怪。
English: In this battle, Man Gui hated that he did not personally come to rescue himself, and blamed each other from then on.

古文：帝闻之，下敕戒勉。
现代文：熹宗听说后，曾下诏告诫、勉励。
English: After hearing of this, Emperor Taizong issued an imperial edict to admonish and encourage them.

古文：而崇焕复与桂不和，言其意气骄矜，谩骂僚属，恐坏封疆大计，乞移之别镇，以关外事权归率教。
现代文：接着崇焕又跟满桂不和，上书说他踌躇满志，谩骂同僚，恐怕他耽误边疆的大事，请把他调到别的兵镇，把关外的事权交给率教。
English: Next, Chong Huan fell out with Man Gui again. He wrote a letter saying that he was full of ambition and abused his colleagues. He was afraid that he would delay the important affairs of the frontier. Please transfer him to another military town and give the power of affairs outside the prison to the leader.

古文：举朝皆知桂可用，虑同城或偾事，遂召还。
现代文：满朝大臣都知道满桂能胜任，但担心他们在一个城中或许会坏事，就把满桂召了回来。
English: The Manchurian ministers all knew that Man Gui was competent, but they were worried that they might do something bad in a city, so they called Man Gui back.

古文：督师王之臣力言桂不可去，而召命已下。
现代文：督师王之臣极力说满桂不能调开，但是召他回来的命令已经下达。
English: Supervisor Wang Zhichen insisted that Man Gui could not be transferred, but the order to call him back had already been issued.

古文：又请用之关门。崇焕皆不纳。
现代文：之臣又请把他安排在山海关门口，崇焕都不听从。
English: His vassal also asked him to arrange him at the gate of the Shanhaiguan Customs, but Chonghuan did not listen.

古文：闰六月乃命以故秩佥书中军府事。
现代文：闰六月，朝廷就命令满桂以原职在中军府办理佥书的事务。
English: In the intercalary month of June, the imperial court ordered Man Gui to take up his former position at the Central Military Government to handle the matter of the imperial edict.

古文：未几，崇焕亦自悔，请仍用之臣言，帝可之，命桂挂印移镇关门，兼统关外四路及燕河、建昌诸军，赐尚方剑以重事权。
现代文：不久，崇焕自己也后悔了，请采用之臣的意见，熹宗同意了，让满桂挂印移镇山海关大门兼统领关外四路及燕河、建昌等地的驻军，并赐给他尚方宝剑以便提高他的权限。
English: Soon, Chong Huan himself also regretted it. He asked to adopt the opinion of his vassal, and Emperor Taizong agreed. He asked Man Gui to move the Zhenshan Customs Gate and also command the garrisons on the four roads outside the customs and in Yanhe, Jianchang and other places. He also gave him the Shangfang Sword to improve his authority.

古文：七年五月，大清兵围锦州，分兵略宁远。
现代文：七年五月，大清兵包围了锦州，分出兵力进取宁远。
English: In May of the seventh year, the Qing soldiers surrounded Jinzhou and sent troops to attack Ningyuan.

古文：桂遣兵救，被围笊篱山。
现代文：满桂派兵援救，被包围在笊篱山。
English: Man Gui sent troops to the rescue and was besieged in Zhouzhen Mountain.

古文：桂与总兵尤世禄赴之，大战相当。
现代文：满桂和总兵尤世禄赶赴前线，大战一场，胜负相当。
English: Man Gui and the general soldier You Shilu rushed to the front line and fought a great battle, with equal victory and defeat.

古文：遂入宁远城，与崇焕为守御计。
现代文：于是进入宁远城中，和崇焕商量防御的办法。
English: So he entered the city of Ningyuan and discussed with Chong Huan the means of defense.

古文：俄大清兵进薄城下，桂率副将尤世威等出城迎，颇有杀伤，桂亦身被重创。
现代文：不久大清部队兵临城下，满桂率领副将尤世威等人出城迎战，杀伤不少大清兵，满桂自己也受了重伤。
English: Not long after, the soldiers of the Great Qing Army came to the city, and Man Gui led the vice-general Yu Shih-wei and others out of the city to fight, killing and wounding many soldiers of the Great Qing Army. Man Gui himself was also seriously injured.

古文：捷闻，加太子太师，世荫锦衣佥事。
现代文：捷报递上后，朝廷给满桂加官为太子太师，世荫锦衣佥事。
English: After the report was submitted, the imperial court promoted Man Gui to the position of crown prince.

古文：及崇焕休去，之臣再督师，盛推桂才，请仍镇宁远。
现代文：等崇焕离职走后，之臣又担任督师，很推崇满桂的才干，请朝廷仍然派他镇守宁远。
English: After Chong Huan left office, his vassal also served as superintendent. He highly respected Man Gui's talent and asked the imperial court to still send him to guard Ningyuan.

古文：会蒙古炒花诸部离散，桂与之臣多收置之麾下。
现代文：当蒙古炒花等部落分崩离散的时候，满桂与之臣召来很多蒙古人安置在自己部下。
English: When tribes such as the Mongolian Saika disintegrated and dispersed, Mangui and his vassals summoned many Mongolians and placed them under their own command.

古文：庄烈帝已嗣位，诏之臣毋蹈袁应泰、王化贞故辙，并责桂阿之臣意。
现代文：庄烈帝即位后，下诏告诫之臣注意不要再蹈袁应泰、王化贞的覆辙，并且批评满桂迎合之臣的心意。
English: After Emperor Zhuangde ascended to the throne, he issued an imperial edict warning his vassals not to repeat the mistakes of Yuan Yingtao and Wang Huazhen, and criticized Man Gui for pandering to his vassals.

古文：桂遂请病乞休，不允。
现代文：满桂于是告病，请求解职，庄烈帝不同意。
English: Man Gui then complained of illness and asked to be relieved of his duties, but Emperor Zhuang disagreed.

古文：崇祯元年七月，言官交劾之臣，因及桂。
现代文：崇祯元年七月，言官纷纷弹劾之臣，进而连及满桂。
English: In July of the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the speech officials impeached the vassals one after another, which led to the rise of Man Gui.

古文：之臣罢，桂亦召还府。
现代文：之臣被罢了官，满桂也被召回军府。
English: His vassal was dismissed from his post, and Mangui was recalled to the military government.

古文：适大同总兵渠家桢失事，命桂代之。
现代文：正好大同总兵渠家桢出了事，就让满桂去接替了他。
English: It just so happened that Datong's commander-in-chief He Jiaxuan had an accident, so he asked Man Gui to take over from him.

古文：大同久恃款弛备，插部西侵，顺义王遂入境大掠。
现代文：大同长期以来仗着议和放松了战备，插部西侵，顺义王就进入境内来大肆掳掠。
English: Datong had for a long time relaxed its war preparedness by means of deliberation and compromise. When the western invasion was about to begin, Shunyi Wang entered the territory to plunder and pillage.

古文：家桢及巡抚张翼明论死，插部遂挟赏不去。
现代文：家桢及巡抚张翼明被判死刑，插部拿了抚赏金还不离开。
English: Jiayu and patrolman Zhang Yiming were sentenced to death, but Jiebu took the reward money and refused to leave.

古文：桂至，遍阅八路七十二城堡，边备大修，军民恃以无恐。
现代文：满桂到任后，视察了八路七十二座城堡，边防战备得到了大力整顿，大同军民因此才消除了恐惧心理。
English: After Man Gui took office, he inspected 72 castles on the eighth road. The border defense preparedness was vigorously rectified, and the fear of Datong soldiers and civilians was eliminated.

古文：明年冬十月，大清兵入近畿。
现代文：第二年十月，大清兵打进京师郊区。
English: In October of the following year, the Qing soldiers entered the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：十一月诏谕勤王。
现代文：十一月朝廷颁诏指示各地勤王。
English: In November, the imperial court issued an edict instructing all regions to be loyal to the king.

古文：桂率五千骑入卫，次顺义，与宣府总兵侯世禄俱战败，遂趋都城。
现代文：满桂率领五千名骑兵进京守卫，驻扎在顺义，与宣府总兵侯世禄都打了败仗，于是奔赴都城。
English: Man Gui led five thousand cavalrymen to guard Beijing and stationed them in Shunyi. He lost the battle with the commander-in-chief of the Xuanfu army, Hou Shilou, so he rushed to the capital.

古文：帝遣官慰劳，犒万金，令与世禄俱屯德胜门。
现代文：庄烈帝派官前来慰劳，犒赏他们一万两银子，让他和世禄一起驻扎在德胜门。
English: Emperor Zhuangde sent officers to comfort them, rewarded them with ten thousand taels of silver, and stationed him and Shilu together at Toru Deshengmen.

古文：无何，合战，世禄兵溃，桂独前斗。
现代文：不久，出外交战，世禄的队伍败退下来，满桂独自向前拼杀。
English: Soon, a diplomatic war broke out, Shilu's team was defeated and retreated, and Man Gui fought forward alone.

古文：城上发大炮佐之，误伤桂军，桂亦负伤，令入休瓮城。
现代文：城墙上边发大炮配合他，却误伤了满桂的部队，满桂也负了伤，庄烈帝让他进城门外的月城中休息。
English: A cannon was fired from the top of the city wall to help him, but it accidentally wounded Man Gui's troops. Man Gui was also injured, and Emperor Zhuang allowed him to enter the Moon City outside the city gate to rest.

古文：旋与袁崇焕、祖大寿并召见，桂解衣示创，帝深嘉叹。
现代文：不久与袁崇焕、祖大寿一起得到召见，满桂解开衣襟给庄烈帝看自己的伤，庄烈帝表示了深深的赞叹。
English: Soon after, he was summoned together with Yuan Chonghuan and Zu Dashou, and Man Gui opened his collar to show Zhuang Rongdi his wounds. Zhuang Rongdi expressed his deep admiration.

古文：十二月朔复召见，下崇焕狱，赐桂酒馔，令总理关、宁将卒，营安定门外。
现代文：十二月初一又一次召见他们，把崇焕打入了监狱，赐给满桂酒食，命令他总理山海关、宁远的将士，在安定门外扎营。
English: At the beginning of December, he summoned them again and again, put Chong Huan in prison, gave Man Gui wine and food, and ordered his prime minister, Shanhaiguan, and soldiers from Ningyuan to camp outside the stable gate.

古文：桂骁勇敢战。
现代文：满桂勇猛敢战。
English: Mangui fought bravely.

古文：所部降丁间扰民，桂不能问。
现代文：他部下的降人有时搅扰百姓，满桂不加惩办。
English: The subordinates of his subordinates sometimes disturbed the people, and they were not punished.

古文：副将申甫所统多市人，桂军凌之。夜发矢，惊其营，有死者。
现代文：副将申甫所率领的队伍中有很多市民，满桂的部队欺负他们，夜间向他们的驻地射箭惊吓他们，射死了人。
English: There were many citizens in the troop led by Vice Admiral Shen Fu. The troops of Man Gui bullied them, shot arrows at their encampment at night to scare them, and shot people dead.

古文：御史金声以闻，帝亦不问。
现代文：御史金声报告上去，庄烈帝也不追究。
English: Goshikin report went up, Zhuge Liang did not pursue.

古文：及大寿军东溃，乃拜桂武经略，尽统入卫诸军，赐尚方剑，趣出师。
现代文：等大寿的军队向东逃跑后，庄烈帝就加封满桂为武经略，统领所有过来保卫京师的部队，赐给他尚方宝剑，催促他出兵作战。
English: After Dashu's army fled to the east, Zhuang Rongdi added Gui to Wu Jingli, commanded all the troops that came to defend the Beijing Division, gave him Shang Fang's sword, and urged him to send troops to fight.

古文：桂曰： 敌劲援寡，未可轻战。 
现代文：满桂说： 敌兵强大，我们援兵不多，不可轻易出去打。 
English: Man Gui said, "The enemy soldiers are strong, and we don't have many reinforcements. We can't go out to fight easily."

古文：中使趣之急，不得已，督黑云龙、麻登云、孙祖寿诸大将，以十五日移营永定门外二里许，列栅以待。
现代文：宦官紧催他，满桂迫不得已，只好指挥黑云龙、麻登云、孙祖寿等大将，于十五日那天起兵营移到离永定门二里左右的地方，树起栅栏，等待大清兵。
English: The eunuchs urged him, and Man Gui had no choice but to command generals such as Hei Yunlong, Ma Dengyun, and Sun Zu Shou. On the fifteenth day, the battalion moved to a place about two miles from Yongding Gate, erected a fence, and waited for the Great Qing soldiers.

古文：大清兵自良乡回，明日昧爽，以精骑四面蹙之。
现代文：大清兵从良乡回师后，第二天拂晓，用精锐骑兵从四面八方挤压过去，官军的将领阻挡不住，就被打得大败了。
English: After the Great Qing soldiers returned from Liangxiang to the division, at dawn the next day, they used elite cavalry to squeeze past from all directions. The generals of the government army could not stop them, and they were defeated.

古文：祖寿生，而张氏旋死，遂终身不近妇人。
现代文：满桂和祖寿阵亡，云龙、登云被活捉了。
English: Man Gui and Zu Shou were killed in battle, while Yun Long and Deng Yun were captured alive.

古文：为大帅，部将以五百金遗其子于家，却不受。
现代文：庄烈帝听说后，极为伤心，派礼部侍郎徐光启对他们进行了祭奠，追赠满桂为少师，荫封他的子孙为世袭锦衣佥事，每一代递升三级。
English: After hearing this, Emperor Zhuang was extremely sad, and sent the etiquette attendant Xu Guangqi to pay tribute to them, posthumously awarding Man Gui as a young teacher, and crowning his children and grandchildren as hereditary brocade anecdotes, with each generation rising three levels.

古文：他日来省，赐之卮酒曰： 却金一事，善体吾心，否则法不汝宥也。 
现代文：朝廷赐予祭葬，让有关部门为他修建祠堂公祭。
English: The imperial court granted him a ceremonial funeral and let the relevant departments build a shrine for him.

古文：其秉义执节如此。赵率教，陕西人。
现代文：赵率教，陕西人。
English: Zhao Zuo, a native of Shaanxi Province.

古文：万历中，历官延绥参将，屡著战功。
现代文：万历年间，他做过延绥参将，屡建战功。
English: During his long life, he served as a general of the Yancheng army and repeatedly achieved military exploits.

古文：已，劾罢。
现代文：后来受人弹劾，被罢了官。
English: He was later impeached and removed from office.

古文：辽事急，诏废将蓄家丁者赴军前立功。
现代文：辽东战事紧急，朝廷发布诏书让被罢官而养有家丁的将领带兵到前线立功。
English: The war in Liaodong was urgent, and the imperial court issued an edict to allow the general, who had been dismissed from his post but had a family, to take his soldiers to the front line to perform meritorious service.

古文：率教受知于经略袁应泰，擢副总兵，典中军事。
现代文：率教得到经略袁应泰的赏识，被提升为副总兵，掌管中军的事务。
English: His leadership and teaching were appreciated by the strategist Yuan Yingtai, and he was promoted to vice-commander-in-chief, in charge of the affairs of the Chinese army.

古文：天启元年，辽阳破，率教潜逃，罪当死，幸免。
现代文：天启元年，辽阳被打下，率教偷跑了，罪当处死，却侥幸获免。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, Liaoyang was defeated, and the leader ran away. He was sentenced to death, but was spared by a fluke.

古文：明年，王化贞弃广宁，关外诸城尽空。
现代文：第二年，王化贞放弃广宁，把关外的城镇都撤退干净了。
English: In the second year, Wang Huazhen abandoned Guangning and withdrew all the towns outside the pass.

古文：率教请于经略王在晋，愿收复前屯卫城，率家丁三十八人以往。
现代文：率教向经略王在晋申请，表示他愿意去收复前屯卫城，就带领三十八个家丁去了。
English: The leader of the teaching team applied to the King in Jin, saying that he was willing to recover the former Tunwei City, and led thirty-eight families to go.

古文：蒙古据其地，不敢进，抵中前所而止。
现代文：蒙古兵当时占据着这片地盘，率教不敢贸然进去，走到中前所就停下了。
English: Mongolian soldiers occupied this area at the time, and the head teacher did not dare to enter, but stopped when he reached the middle school.

古文：其年，游击鲁之甲以枢辅孙承宗令，救难民六千口，至前屯，尽驱蒙古于郊外。
现代文：那年，游击鲁之甲遵照枢辅孙承宗的命令，解救了六千口难民，到前屯安置，把蒙古人全部驱逐到郊外。
English: That year, the guerrilla Lu Zhijia, in accordance with the order of the Grand Prince Sun Zhengzong, rescued six thousand refugees, resettled them in the former settlement, and expelled all the Mongolians to the suburbs.

古文：率教乃得入，编次难民为兵，缮雉堞，谨斥堠，军府由是粗立。
现代文：率教才进入前屯卫城，把难民编排成部队，修缮城墙，注意侦察敌情，军府因此大致建立起来。
English: He led the teachers into the former Tunwei City, organized the refugees into troops, repaired the city wall, and paid attention to reconnaissance of the enemy situation. As a result, the military government was roughly established.

古文：既而承宗令裨将阵练以川、湖土兵来助，前屯守始固。
现代文：后来承宗命偏裨小将陈练率领川、湖士兵来帮助他，前屯卫城的防御力量才巩固了。
English: Later, Chen Lian led the soldiers of the rivers and lakes to help him, and the defense force of the former Tunwei City was consolidated.

古文：而率教所招流亡至五六万。择其壮者从军，悉加训练。
现代文：率教所召募的流亡百姓有五六万之多，从其中选择年轻力壮的编入军队，都进行了军事训练。
English: There are as many as 560,000 exiled people recruited by the leadership training institute, from which young and strong people are selected to join the army, and all of them have undergone military training.

古文：余给牛种，大兴屯田，身自督课，至手足胼胝。
现代文：余下的分给耕牛、种子，大力进行屯田，率教亲自督促、示范，以致手脚上面都长了月强子。
English: The remaining portion was given to the cultivated cattle and seeds, and they vigorously carried out the cultivation of fields, and led the teachers to personally supervise and demonstrate, so that the hands and feet were covered with crescents.

古文：承宗出关阅视，大喜，以己所乘舆赠之。
现代文：承宗出关到此视察时非常高兴，把自己所乘坐的车子赠给率教了。
English: Chojong was very happy when he came to this inspection, and he gave the car he was riding to the head teacher.

古文：蒙古虎墩兔素为总督王象乾所抚。其部下抽扣儿者，善为盗，率教捕斩四人。
现代文：蒙古虎墩兔一向接受总督王象乾的抚治，他的部下有个叫抽扣儿的，喜欢偷盗抢劫，率教捕杀了他们四个人。
English: The Mongolian tigers and jackrabbits have always been under the tutelage of the governor Wang Xiangqian. One of his subordinates, called Yu Knuckle, liked to steal and rob, and he led the teaching to kill four of them.

古文：招抚佥事万有孚与率教有隙，遂以故败款事诉之象乾。
现代文：招抚佥事万有孚和率教有矛盾，就把过去率教败逃的事向象乾讲了。
English: There is a contradiction between the instigation anecdote of Wan Yifu and the leading teaching, so he told the past leading teaching defeats and escapes to the elephant.

古文：象乾告兵部尚书董汉儒，将斩之，赖承宗贻书汉儒，得不死。
现代文：象乾又告诉了兵部尚书董汉儒，打算把率教给斩了，全靠承宗写信给汉儒替他讲情，率教才得以不死。
English: Xiang Qian also told the military commander Shang Shu Dong Han Ru that he planned to behead the leader, and it was only because Zong Zong wrote to Han Ru to intercede on his behalf that the leader did not die.

古文：时承宗分关内外为五部。以马世龙、王世钦、尤世禄领中、左、右部，而令率教与副将孙谏领前、后部，部各万五千人。
现代文：当时承宗把关内外划分为五部，让马世龙、王世钦、尤世禄守卫中、左、右部，让率教与副将孙谏守卫前、后部，每部兵力各一万五千人。
English: At that time, Zhengzong divided the gate into five parts, with Ma Shilong, Wang Shichin, and You Shilu guarding the middle, left, and right parts at the top, and the leader and vice-commander Sun Qian guarding the front and rear, with 15,000 troops in each part.

古文：率教仍驻前屯。
现代文：率教仍驻在前屯。
English: The head teacher is still stationed in Qian Tun.

古文：四年九月，承宗暴其功于朝。擢署都督佥事，加衔总兵。
现代文：四年九月，承宗向朝廷宣扬了他的功绩，朝廷就提拔率教当了都督佥事，加衔总兵。
English: In September of the same year, Emperor Chengzong announced his achievements to the imperial court, which promoted him to the rank of general.

古文：五年冬，承宗去，高第来代，诸将多所更置。
现代文：五年冬季，承宗调离，高第来接任，对各部将领有很多调换。
English: In the winter of the fifth year, Chengzong was transferred away, and Gao Di took over. There were many transfers of generals in various departments.

古文：率教善事第，第亦委信之。
现代文：率教赔着小心侍候高第，高第也信用他。
English: He carefully waits for Gaudi, and Gaudi also trusts him.

古文：六年二月，蒙古以宁远被围，乘间入犯平川、三山堡。
现代文：六年二月，蒙古因为宁远被大清兵包围，乘机进犯平川、三山堡。
English: In February of the sixth year, because Ningyuan was surrounded by Qing soldiers, Mongolia took the opportunity to attack Pingchuan and Sanzhan Fort.

古文：率教御之，斩首百余级，夺马二百匹，追至高台堡乃还。
现代文：率教带兵抗击，斩敌一百多首级，夺取马匹二百，把蒙古兵追赶到高台堡才回来。
English: He led the teaching and led the soldiers to resist, cut off more than a hundred heads of the enemy, captured two hundred horses, and chased the Mongol soldiers to Gaotai Castle before returning.

古文：捷闻，帝大喜，立擢都督同知，实授总兵官，代杨麒镇山海关。
现代文：捷报送上后，熹宗皇帝非常高兴，立即提拔他为都督同知，实际上的总兵官，让他接替杨麒镇守山海关。
English: After the victory report was sent, Emperor Taizong was very pleased and immediately promoted him as the governor's confidant, the actual commander-in-chief, and let him take over the Yangshuo town guarding the mountain customs.

古文：寻论功，再进右都督，世荫本卫副千户。
现代文：不久评定功绩时又升为右都督，世荫本卫副千户。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the right-hand governor when his achievements were evaluated, and he was promoted to the highest position in the world, the vice-mayor of Senju.

古文：时满桂守宁远，亦有盛名，与率教深相得。
现代文：当时满桂驻守宁远，名声也很大，跟率教很要好。
English: At that time, Man Gui was stationed in Ningyuan, and his reputation was also great. He was very good at leading and teaching.

古文：及宁远被围，率教遣一都司、四守备东援。
现代文：等到宁远被围困，率教派一名都司、四名守备前来援助。
English: When Ningyuan was besieged, the leader of the sect, a prefect and four guards came to help.

古文：桂恶其稽缓，拒不纳，以袁崇焕言，乃令入。
现代文：满桂嫌他们拖延时间来晚了，拒绝让他们入城，因为袁崇焕从旁解劝，才放他们进来。
English: Man Gui thought it was too late for them to procrastinate, and refused to let them enter the city, because Yuan Chonghuan tried to persuade them from the side before letting them in.

古文：既解围，率教欲分功。桂不许，且责其不亲援，两人遂有隙。
现代文：宁远之围解除后，率教想分享战功，满桂不答应，并且责怪他不亲自来助战，两个人从此产生了矛盾。
English: After the siege of Ningyuan was lifted, the leader wanted to share the war exploits, but Man Gui did not agree, and blamed him for not personally coming to help in the war. From then on, the two had a conflict.

古文：中朝闻之，下敕戒谕。
现代文：朝廷得知后，曾下诏警告了他们。
English: After the Imperial Court learned of this, it issued an edict warning them.

古文：而桂又与崇焕不和。乃召还桂，令率教尽统关内外兵，移镇宁远。
现代文：而满桂后来又跟崇焕不和，朝廷于是把满桂召回，让率教统领关内外的全部兵力，移驻宁远。
English: However, Man Gui later fell out with Chong Huan, and the imperial court recalled Man Gui and had him lead all the troops in and out of Guan and relocate to Ningyuan.

古文：七年正月，大清兵南征朝鲜。
现代文：七年正月，大清部队南征朝鲜。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, the Great Qing troops marched south to Korea.

古文：率教督兵抵三岔河为牵制，卒无功。
现代文：率教统兵进驻三岔河作为牵制，最后没有效果。
English: He led the army into the Samye River as a diversion, but in the end it had no effect.

古文：三月，崇焕议修筑锦州、大凌河、中左所三城，渐图恢复。
现代文：三月，崇焕打算修建锦州、大凌河、中左所三城，试图逐渐收复失地。
English: In March, Chong Huan planned to build the three cities of Jinzhou, Dalinghe, and CLSI, in an attempt to gradually recover the lost land.

古文：率教移镇锦州护工，再加左都督。
现代文：率教奉令移驻锦州保卫工程建设，又升官做了左都督。
English: He was ordered to move to Jinzhou to lead the construction of the defense project, and he was promoted to the left governor.

古文：五月，大清兵围锦州，率教与中官纪用、副将左辅、朱梅等婴城固守。发大炮，颇多击伤。
现代文：五月，大清兵包围了锦州，率教与宦官纪用，副将左辅、朱梅等环城固守，发射大炮，死伤了不少清兵。
English: In May, the Qing soldiers encircled Jinzhou, and the vice-commanders Zuo Fu and Zhu Mei, who were in charge of teaching and disciplining the eunuchs, defended the ring city, fired cannons, and killed and wounded many Qing soldiers.

古文：相持二十四日，围始解。
现代文：双方相持了二十四天，大清兵的包围才解除。
English: The two sides held each other for twenty-four days before the encirclement by the Qing soldiers was lifted.

古文：时桂亦著功宁远，因称 宁、锦大捷 。
现代文：当时满桂也在宁远立了大功，因此当时称为 宁锦大捷 。
English: At that time, Mangui also made great achievements in Ningyuan, so it was called Ningjin Great Victory at that time.

古文：魏忠贤等蒙重赏。
现代文：魏忠贤等人因此受到了重赏。
English: Wei Zhongxian and others were rewarded accordingly.

古文：率教加太子少傅，荫锦衣千户，世袭。
现代文：率教也加官为太子少傅，荫封子孙为锦衣千户，世袭。
English: The head teacher was also promoted to the position of the prince's junior tutor, and the children and grandchildren of the eunuchs were given thousands of brocade dresses, which was hereditary.

古文：崇祯元年八月移镇永平，兼辖蓟镇八路。
现代文：崇祯元年八月，率教移驻永平，兼辖蓟镇八路。
English: In August of the first year of the Chongzhen era, he moved to Yongping to lead the teaching, and also administered the eighth road of Yongzhen.

古文：逾月，挂平辽将军印，再移至关门。
现代文：过一个月，挂平辽将军的大印，又移驻到山海关大门口来。
English: A month later, with the seal of General Ping Liao, it was moved to the gate of the Shanhaiguan Customs.

古文：明年，大清兵由大安口南下。率教驰援，三昼夜抵三屯营。
现代文：第二年，大清兵由大安口南下，率教策马西行，三昼夜就进抵三屯营。
English: In the second year, the soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty marched southward from Da'ankou and headed westward, arriving at Santon Camp after three days and nights.

古文：总兵朱国彦不令入，遂策马而西。
现代文：总兵官朱国彦不肯放他进来，率教只好策马而西。
English: The commander-in-chief of the military, Zhu Guohan, refused to let him in, and the leader had no choice but to flee.

古文：十一月四日战于遵化，中流矢阵亡，一军尽殁。
现代文：十一月四日在遵化开战时，率教被飞来的箭射中身亡，全军覆灭了。
English: On November 4th, when the war started in Zunhua, the leader was killed by flying arrows, and the whole army was destroyed.

古文：帝闻痛悼，赐恤典，立祠奉祀。
现代文：庄烈帝听说后极为伤心，给率教进行了丧葬仪式，并建立祠堂公祭。
English: Zhuang Rongdei was extremely sad after hearing this, and held a funeral ceremony for the leader, and established an ancestral hall for public worship.

古文：率教为将廉勇，待士有恩，勤身奉公，劳而不懈，与满桂并称良将。
现代文：率教作为一名战将，他廉洁、勇猛，待人厚道，勤身奉公，劳而不懈，和满桂一起被人看作良将。
English: As a general, he was incorruptible, brave, kind, diligent, and tireless. He was regarded as a good general together with Mangui.

古文：二人既殁，益无能办东事者。
现代文：他们两个人死后，更加没有能办理辽东战事的人了。
English: After the death of the two of them, there were no more people who could manage the war in Liaodong.

