古文：韩建，字佐时，许州长社人。
现代文：韩建，字佐时，许州长社人。
English: Han Jian, Zi Sa Shi, Xu Guo Ren.

古文：父叔丰，世为牙校。
现代文：父亲韩叔丰，一生任牙校。
English: His father, Han Shufeng, was a dentist all his life.

古文：初，秦宗权之据蔡州，招合亡命，建隶为军士，累转至小校。
现代文：当初，秦宗权盘踞蔡州时，招聚亡命之人，韩建在其中做军士，接连升至小校。
English: At first, when Qin Zongquan occupied Caizhou, he gathered the exiles, and Han Jian became a sergeant and was successively promoted to a small school.

古文：唐中和初，忠武监军杨复光起兵于蔡，宗权遣其将鹿宴宏赴之，建与里人王建俱隶宴宏军，入援京师。
现代文：唐朝中和初年，忠武监军杨复光在蔡州起兵，秦宗权派他的将领鹿宴弘前往征讨，韩建与同乡王建都在鹿宴弘军中，入关援助京师。
English: In the middle and early years of the Tang Dynasty, Yang Fuguang, the loyal military inspector, raised an army in Caizhou. Qin Zongquan sent his general Lu Yinghong to collect troops. Han Jian and his countryman Wang Jian were both in Lu Yinghong's army and entered the pass to assist the Beijing division.

古文：贼平，复光暴卒。
现代文：贼寇被平定，杨复光暴死。
English: The bandits were subdued, and Yang Fuguang died suddenly.

古文：时僖宗在蜀，宴宏率所部赴行在。路出山南，因攻剽郡邑，据有兴元。宴宏自为留后，以建为蜀郡刺史。
现代文：当时唐僖宗在蜀地，鹿宴弘率领部下前往蜀地行宫，路过南山顺便攻打剽掠郡邑，占据兴元府，鹿宴弘自任留后，以韩建为蜀郡刺史。
English: At that time, Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty was in Shoudi. Lu Yenhong led his subordinates to Shoudi to visit the imperial palace. Passing Nanshan, they attacked the county town of Zhaozhuang and occupied Xingyuanfu. After Lu Yenhong stayed on his own, Han Jian became the history of Shoudi County.

古文：唐军容使田令孜密遣人诱建，啖以厚利，建时惧为宴宏所并，乃率所部归行在，令孜补为神策都校、金吾将军，出为潼关防御使兼华州刺史。
现代文：唐朝军容使田令孜秘密派人引诱韩建，许以厚利，韩建当时害怕被鹿宴弘吞并，于是率领部下投奔蜀地归顺皇帝，田令孜补任他为神策都校、金吾将军，出任潼关防御使兼华州刺史。
English: Han Jian was afraid of being swallowed up by Lu Yinghong at that time, so he led his subordinates to submit to the emperor in Shushudi, and Tian Lingzhe appointed him as the strategist of the capital, the general of Kingo, and the defense envoy of Shaoguan and the historian of Huazhou.

古文：河、潼经大寇之后，户口流散，建披荆棘，辟污莱，劝课农事，树植蔬果，出入闾里，亲问疾苦，不数年，流亡毕复，军民充实。
现代文：黄河、潼关一带在经受大寇之后，民户流离散失，韩建披荆斩棘，辟除污泽草莱，鼓励农民种田，栽种蔬菜果树，深入乡村街市，亲自抚问民间疾苦，不几年流亡的人民都回来了，军民充实富足。
English: In the Yellow River and Shaoguan areas, after suffering from the great invaders, private households were displaced and dispersed. Han Jian has made great efforts to remove the impurities, encourage farmers to cultivate fields, plant vegetables and fruit trees, go deep into rural markets, and personally inquire about the hardships of the people. In a few years, the exiled people have returned, and the military and the people are well-off.

古文：建比不知书，治郡之暇，日课学习。遣人于器皿、床榻之上各题其名，建视之既熟，乃渐通文字。
现代文：韩建全不识字，在管理郡政的闲暇时间，每天学习，派人在器具、床凳上面分别写上部下的名字，韩建在看得很熟之后，才逐渐学会了认字。
English: Han Jianquan was illiterate. In his spare time, when he was in charge of the county government, he studied every day and sent people to write the names of the upper and lower parts separately on the utensils and bedside tables. Han Jianquan gradually learned to read and write only after he was familiar with them.

古文：俄迁华商节度、潼关守捉等使，累加检校太尉、平章事。
现代文：不久迁任华州、商州节度使、潼关守捉使等，接连加封为检校太尉、平章事。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the post of Huazhou, Shangzhou festival envoy, Shiguan guard and capture envoy, etc., and was successively awarded the title of school inspection captain and the title of Ping.

古文：乾宁二年，建与凤翔李茂贞、邠州王行瑜举兵赴阙，迫昭宗请以王珙为河中帅，害大臣于都下。
现代文：乾宁二年，韩建与凤翔李茂贞、州王行瑜领兵赴京，迫使昭宗任王珙为河中主帅，在都城下杀害大臣。
English: In the second year of Qianning, Han Jian, Feng Xiang, Li Maozhen, and Zhu Wang Xingyu led the troops to Beijing, forced Zhaozong to appoint Wang Zhen as the commander of the middle of the river, and killed the minister under the capital.

古文：河中王珂召晋军以为援，及晋军渡河，昭宗幸石门。
现代文：河中王珂召来晋军作为援助，当晋军渡过黄河后，唐昭宗逃往石门。
English: When the Jin army crossed the Yellow River, Tang Zhaozong fled to Shimen.

古文：三年四月，昭宗遣延王、通王率禁兵讨李茂贞，为茂贞所败，车驾幸渭桥。
现代文：三年四月，昭宗派延王、通王率领禁军讨伐李茂贞，被李茂贞打败，御驾逃往渭桥，另日，到达富平。
English: In April of the third year, Zhaozong sent Yan Wang and Tong Wang to lead the forbidden army to fight against Li Maozhen. They were defeated by Li Maozhen and fled to Qianqiao. The next day, they arrived in Fuping.

古文：翼日，次富平，将幸河中，建奉表迎驾，俄自至渭北，恳乞东幸，许之。
现代文：将往河中时，韩建奉表迎驾，很快亲自到达渭水以北，恳请昭宗到东边去，昭宗答应了他。
English: When he was about to go to the middle of the river, Han Jian gave him a ride and soon arrived north of Surabaya in person. He implored Zhaozong to go to the east, and Zhaozong agreed.

古文：七月十五日，昭宗至华下，百官士庶相继而至。
现代文：七月十五日，昭宗到华州，百官众人相继而至。
English: On July 15, Zhaozong went to Huazhou, and hundreds of officials came one after another.

古文：建寻加兼中书令，充京畿安抚制置等使，又兼京兆尹、京城把截使。
现代文：韩建即被加封为兼中书令，充任京畿安抚制置等使，又兼京兆尹、京城把截使。
English: Han Jian was immediately given the additional title of Zhongshirong, and served as an envoy for the pacification of Gyeonggi Province, as well as an envoy for the restoration of peace and order in Gyeonggi Province, and an envoy for the restoration of order in Gyeonggi Province.

古文：昭宗久在华州，思还宫掖，每花朝月夕，游宴西溪，与群臣属咏歌诗，歔欷流涕。
现代文：昭宗久在华州，想回宫廷，每当开花的早晨和有月的夜晚，游宴于西溪，与群臣写作吟颂诗歌，欷虚欠流泪。
English: Zhaozong had been in Huazhou for a long time and wanted to return to the court. Whenever it was a flower-blooming morning or a moonlit night, he would travel to Xixi for a banquet, write poems with his courtiers, and shed tears.

古文：建每从容奏曰： 臣为陛下修营大内，结信诸侯，一二年间，必期兴复。 
现代文：韩建常常从容上奏说： 臣为陛下修建营造宫廷，与诸侯结好，一二年间，必将兴盛恢复。 
English: Han Jian often calmly said: "If you build a palace for your majesty and make friends with the princes, prosperity will surely be restored within a year or two."

古文：乃以建兼领修创京城使，建自华督役辇运工作，复治大明宫。
现代文：于是昭宗以韩建兼任修创京城使，韩建从华州督察役使运输工作，重修大明宫。
English: As a result, Zhaozong appointed Han Jian as the official in charge of rebuilding the capital city, and Han Jian as the official in charge of transportation from Huazhou to rebuild the Daming Palace.

古文：四年二月，有诣建告睦王已下八王谋杀建，建囚八王于别宅，放散随驾殿后军二万人，杀捧日都头李筠。自是天子益微，宿卫之士尽矣。
现代文：四年二月，有人密告睦王以下等八位王要谋杀韩建，韩建将八王囚禁于别宅，遣散随驾殿后军二万人，杀死捧日都头李筠，从此天子势力更加微弱，保卫他的卫士都没有了。
English: In February of the fourth year, someone tipped off eight kings, including King Mutsu, to murder Han Jian. Han Jian imprisoned the eight kings in a separate house, dismissed the twenty thousand soldiers who followed the palace, and killed Li Xi, the head of the capital. From then on, Tianzi's power was even weaker, and there were no guards to protect him.

古文：八月，建以兵围十六宅，通王以下十一王并遇害于石堤谷，以谋逆闻。
现代文：八月，韩建领兵包围十六宅，通王以下十一位王都在石堤谷遇害，韩建将他们以谋反叛逆的罪行宣告天下。
English: In August, Han Jian led his soldiers to encircle 16 houses. Eleven kings, including King Tong, were killed in Shidi Valley. Han Jian declared them guilty of plotting rebellion.

古文：又害太子詹事马道殷、将作监许岩士，贬宰相硃朴，皆昭宗宠昵者也。
现代文：又杀害太子詹事马道殷、将作监许岩士，贬谪宰相朱朴，这些人都是昭宗宠爱亲近的人。
English: He also killed Prince Zhan Shima Daoyin, imprisoned Iwatsuki, and disparaged Prime Minister Zhu Pu, all of whom were loved and close to Zhaozong.

古文：建寻兼同州节度使。
现代文：不久，韩建兼任同州节度使。
English: Soon, Han Jian also served as the envoy to the festival in the same province.

古文：光化元年，升华州为兴德府，以建为尹。
现代文：光化元年，朝廷将华州升格为兴德府，以韩建为府尹。
English: In the first year of the Gwanghwa era, the imperial court upgraded Huazhou to Xingde Prefecture, with Hanjian as Fuyin.

古文：八月，车驾还京。
现代文：八月，御驾还京。
English: In August, he returned to Kyoto.

古文：九月，册拜太傅，进封许国公，并赐铁券。
现代文：九月，韩建被册拜为太傅，进封为许国公，并赐给铁券。
English: In September, Han Jian was recorded as Taifu, enthroned as Xu Guogong, and given iron certificates.

古文：天复元年十一月，宦官韩全诲迫天子幸凤翔，建亦预其谋。
现代文：天复元年十一月，宦官韩全诲胁迫天子到凤翔，韩建也参与了他的阴谋。
English: In November of the first year of Tianfu, eunuch Han Zhengyi coerced Tianzi to go to Fengxiang. Han Jian also took part in his plot.

古文：太祖闻之，自河中引军而西。
现代文：太祖闻讯，从河中领军向西。
English: Hearing the news, Taizu led his army westward from the middle of the river.

古文：是日，全忠杀之。太祖与建素有军中昆弟之契，及见，其怒骤息，寻表建为许州节度使。
现代文：前锋抵达同州时，韩建的判官司马邺献城投降，太祖于是转移军队迫近华州，韩建害怕而请降。太祖指责他胁迫国君的罪行，韩建说这是从事李巨川的主意，太祖于是诛杀了李巨川。太祖与韩建一向有军中兄弟的情谊，到与韩建相见时，太祖的怒气骤然消失，立即上表请任韩建为许州节度使。
English: When the vanguard arrived in Tongzhou, Han Jian's judge Sima Jian surrendered the city. The great-grandfather then moved the army closer to Huazhou, and Han Jian was afraid and surrendered. The great-grandfather accused him of the crime of coercing the sovereign. Han Jian said that this was Li Juchuan's idea, and the great-grandfather then killed Li Juchuan. The great-grandfather and Han Jian always had a brotherly relationship in the army. When they met, the great-grandfather's anger suddenly disappeared, and he immediately asked the table to appoint Han Jian as the festival envoy of Huzhou.

古文：昭宗东迁，以建为佑国军节度使、京兆尹。
现代文：昭宗东迁洛阳，以韩建为佑国军节度使、京兆尹。
English: Zhaozong moved east to Luoyang, with Han Jian as the imperial envoy and Jing Zhaoyun as the regent.

古文：车驾至陕，召太祖与建侍宴，宫妓奏乐，何皇后举觞以赐太祖，建蹑足，太祖遽起曰： 臣醉不任。 
现代文：车驾从长安到达陕州时，昭宗召来太祖与韩建侍候宴饮，宫中歌妓奏起音乐，何皇后举起酒杯赐太祖饮酒，韩建暗中用脚踩着太祖的脚示意，太祖立即站起说： 臣喝醉了，不能再喝。 
English: When the car drove from Chang'an to Shaanxi, Zhaozong summoned the great-grandfather and Han Jian to wait for the banquet, the court singer played music, the queen held up a wine glass to give the great-grandfather alcohol, Han Jian secretly stepped on the great-grandfather's foot to signal, and the great-grandfather immediately stood up and said: The minister is drunk and can't drink any more.

古文：伪若颠仆即去。
现代文：假装要醉倒的样子就离去了。
English: He left pretending to be drunk.

古文：建私谓太祖曰： 上与宫人附耳而语，幕下有兵仗声，恐图王尔。 
现代文：韩建私下对太祖说 ：皇上与宫人贴着耳朵说话，帐幕后面有兵器发出的响声，恐怕要谋害您呢。 
English: Han Jian privately said to Taizu, "The Emperor is talking to the courtiers with his ear to the ground. Behind the tent, there is the sound of weapons being fired. I am afraid they are plotting to kill you."

古文：天祐三年，改青州节度使。
现代文：天三年，改任青州节度使。
English: Three years later, he was reappointed as the Qingzhou Festival Commissioner.

古文：及受禅，征为司徒、平章事，充诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：后太祖接受禅让登上帝位，征韩建为司徒、平章事，兼任各道盐铁转运使。
English: Later, the great-great-grandfather accepted the throne of Zen Zhen, recruited Han Jian as a disciple, and concurrently served as the envoy of salt and iron transportation in each province.

古文：开平二年，加侍中，充建昌宫使。
现代文：开平二年，加封为侍中，兼任建昌宫使。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, he was given the additional title of Samurai, and concurrently served as an envoy to the Jianchang Palace.

古文：三年，郊祀于洛，以建为大礼使。
现代文：三年，在洛阳郊外祭天，以韩建为大礼使。
English: Three years later, in the suburbs of Luoyang, Han Jian was appointed as the grand envoy.

古文：建为上宰，每谒见，时有直言。
现代文：韩建为上等宰臣，每次谒见太祖，时有直言以告。
English: Han Jian was a high-ranking vice-minister, and every time he met with Taizu, he would tell him straight out.

古文：太祖为性刚严，群下将迎不暇，待建稍异，故优容之。
现代文：太祖为人性情刚烈严厉，群臣奉迎不暇，而待韩建稍有不同，所以能宽容他。
English: The great-grandfather was a tough and stern man, and the courtiers were eager to welcome him, but they were a little different from Han Jian, so they could tolerate him.

古文：时朝廷命从训告国哀于陈、许，至二日军乱，与建并命。
现代文：九月，册封为太保，让他不再操劳政事。四年三月，任匡国军节度使，陈、许、蔡州观察使。乾化二年六月，朝廷新有内难，人心动摇，部将张厚乘机作乱，在衙署杀害韩建，时年五十八岁。
English: In September, he was granted the title of Tai Bao, which allowed him to no longer engage in labor and political affairs. In March of the fourth year, he was appointed as the commander of the Kuang National Army, and Chen, Xu, and Caizhou observation envoys. In June of the second year, the imperial court had new internal difficulties, and people's hearts were shaken. The minister Zhang Hou took the opportunity to make trouble and killed Han Jian at the imperial palace, at the age of fifty-eight.

古文：乾化三年，追赠太师。李罕之，陈州项城人。
现代文：李罕之，陈州项城人。
English: Li Hanzhi, a resident of Xiangcheng, Chenzhou.

古文：父文，世田家。
现代文：父亲李文，一生种田。
English: His father, Li Wen, was a farmer all his life.

古文：罕之拳勇趫捷，力兼数人。
现代文：李罕之勇敢敏捷，力气可抵数人。
English: Li Han is brave and agile, and his strength can match that of several people.

古文：少学为儒，不成，又落发为僧，以其无赖，所至不容。
现代文：小时学做儒士，不成，又削发为僧，因他无赖流浪，到哪里都不被收容。
English: He studied for an hour to become a Confucian, but failed, and then he was ordained as a monk. Because he was a rogue and a wanderer, he was not accepted anywhere.

古文：曾乞食于酸枣县，自旦至晡，无与之者，乃掷钵于地，毁弃僧衣，亡命为盗。
现代文：曾到酸枣县要饭，从早到晚，没有人给他，于是把瓦钵朝地下一摔，撕烂并扔掉僧衣，跑去做强盗。
English: Once he went to Zaozhu County to ask for food, but no one gave it to him from morning to night, so he threw the corrugated iron down to the ground, tore and threw away the monk's robe, and ran to become a robber.

古文：会黄巢起曹、濮，罕之因合徒作剽，渐至魁首。
现代文：正遇上黄巢在曹州、濮州起势，李罕之于是聚合党徒进行抢掠，逐渐成为首领。
English: Just as the Yellow Nest was rising in Caozhou and Zhangzhou, Li Hanzhi gathered party members to carry out looting and gradually became the leader.

古文：及贼巢渡江，罕之因以兵将背贼归于唐，高骈录其功，表为光州刺史。
现代文：到黄巢贼党渡过长江时，李罕之乘机领着兵将背叛贼党投奔唐朝，高骈登录他的功劳，上表推举他为光州刺史。
English: When the Yellow Thieves' Party crossed the Yangtze River, Li Hanzhi took the opportunity to lead the soldiers to betray the thieves' party to the Tang Dynasty. Gao Gan recorded his merits, and the above table nominated him as the history of Gwangju.

古文：岁余，为蔡贼秦宗权寇迫，不能守，乃弃郡归项城，收合余众，依河阳诸葛爽，爽署为怀州刺史。
现代文：一年多后，李罕之被蔡州贼寇秦宗权侵扰逼迫，不能守住光州，于是放弃州城跑到项城，收聚残余部众，依附河阳诸葛爽，诸葛爽暂任他为怀州刺史。
English: More than a year later, Li Hanzhi was harassed and persecuted by the Caizhou bandit Qin Zongquan, unable to hold Gwangju, so he abandoned the state capital and ran to Xiangcheng, gathered the remaining members, and adhered to Heyang Zhuge Shuang. Zhuge Shuang temporarily appointed him as the historian of Waizhou.

古文：光启初，僖宗以爽为东南面招讨，以击宗权，爽乃表罕之为副，令将兵屯宋州。
现代文：光启初年，唐僖宗任诸葛爽为东南面招讨，以攻击秦宗权，诸葛爽就表奏任李罕之为副手，令他领兵驻守宋州。
English: In the first year of Guangqi, Zhuge Shuang of the Tang Dynasty appointed Zhuge Shuang as the south-eastern leader to attack the Qin Dynasty. Zhuge Shuang appointed Li Han as his deputy and ordered him to lead the troops stationed in Songzhou.

古文：蔡寇凶焰日炽，兵锋不敌。
现代文：蔡州贼寇势力日盛，抵挡不住。
English: The Caizhou bandit forces are growing stronger and stronger, and it is impossible to resist them.

古文：中和四年，爽表罕之为河南尹、东都留守。
现代文：中和四年，诸葛爽表奏李罕之为河南尹、东都留守。
English: In the middle and fourth years, Zhuge Shuang played Li Han for Henan Yin and Dongdu.

古文：是岁，李克用脱上源之难，敛军西归，路由洛阳，罕之迎谒，供帐馆待甚优，因与克用厚相结托。
现代文：这年，李克用摆脱上源的险难，收军西归，路经洛阳，李罕之迎接拜谒他，供给帐篷馆舍住宿，接待很优厚，并与李克用互相结交依托。
English: This year, Li Kegui escaped from the perilous situation of Shangyuan, collected his troops and returned to the west, passing through Luoyang. Li Hanzhi greeted and bowed to him, provided tent accommodation, the reception was very generous, and he and Li Kegui supported each other.

古文：时罕之有众三千，以圣善寺为府。
现代文：当时李罕之有部众三千人，以圣善寺为帅府。
English: At that time, there were three thousand people in Li Han, with Shenzenji as their headquarters.

古文：光启元年，蔡贼秦宗权遣将孙儒来攻，罕之对垒数月，以兵少备竭，委城而遁，西保于渑池。
现代文：光启元年，蔡贼秦宗权派将领孙儒来进攻，李罕之与之对阵数月，因兵少而储备用光，弃城而逃，向西固守渑池。
English: In the first year of Guangqi, Cai Qi, the general of the Qin sectarian power faction, led the attack against Sun Ju, and Li Hanzhi fought against him for several months. Due to the small number of soldiers, he ran out of reserves, abandoned the city and fled, and held fast to the west of Dianchi.

古文：蔡贼据京城月余，焚烧宫阙，剽剥居民。
现代文：蔡贼占据京城一个多月，焚烧宫殿，剽掠居民。
English: The Tsai bandits occupied the capital for more than a month, burning palaces and plundering residents.

古文：贼既退去，鞠为煨烬，寂无鸡犬之音。罕之复引其众，筑垒于市西。
现代文：贼寇退后，京城全被踏为灰烬，静寂全无鸡犬之声，李罕之又领着他的部众，在市西修筑城堡。
English: After the bandits retreated, the capital was reduced to ashes, and the silence was deafening. Li Hanzhi led his followers to build a castle in the west of the city.

古文：明年冬，诸葛爽死，其将刘经推爽子仲方为帅，经惧罕之难制，自引兵镇洛阳。
现代文：第二年冬天，诸葛爽去世，他的将领刘经推举诸葛爽的儿子诸葛仲方为主帅，刘经怕李罕之难以控制，便自己领兵镇守洛阳。
English: In the winter of the following year, Zhuge Shuang died. His general, Liu Jing, promoted Zhuge Shuang's son, Zhuge Zhongfang, to the position of commander-in-chief. Fearing that Li Han would be difficult to control, Liu Jing led his own troops to defend Luoyang.

古文：罕之部曲有李瑭、郭璆者，情不相叶，欲相图害，罕之怒，诛璆，军情由是不睦。
现代文：李罕之有部将名叫李瑭、郭趚，感情不和，都想谋杀对方。李罕之发怒，诛杀了郭趚，军心因此不和。
English: Li Han's subordinate generals, named Li Yu and Guo Yu, were at odds with each other and wanted to murder each other. Li Han became angry and killed Guo Yu, leading to discord in the military.

古文：刘经因其有间，掩击罕之于渑池。军乱，保乾壕。
现代文：刘经趁他内部有矛盾，便在渑池掩击李罕之，李罕之军队散乱，退守乾壕。
English: Taking advantage of his internal contradictions, Liu Jing covered up Li Han in Dianchi. Li Han's army was scattered and retreated to a dry trench.

古文：经急攻之，为罕之所败，罕之乘胜追至洛阳。
现代文：刘经紧急攻打李罕之，却被李罕之打败，李罕之乘胜追到洛阳。
English: Liu Jing urgently attacked Li Hanzhi, but was defeated by Li Hanzhi. Li Hanzhi took advantage of the victory and chased Luoyang.

古文：时经保敬爱寺，罕之保苑中飞龙厩。罕之激励其众攻敬爱寺，数日，因风纵火，尽燔之，经众奔窜，追斩殆尽。
现代文：这时刘经守着敬爱寺，李罕之守着苑中飞龙厩，李罕之激励部下攻打敬爱寺，几天后，顺风放火，全部烧着了敬爱寺，刘经部众逃奔乱窜，被追杀将尽。
English: At this time, Liu Jing was guarding the Qian'ai Temple, Li Han's was guarding the flying dragon stables in the middle of the courtyard, Li Han's inspired his subordinates to attack the Qian'ai Temple, a few days later, the wind set fire, all burned the Qian'ai Temple, Liu Jing's people fled in confusion and were chased to death.

古文：罕之进逼河阳，营于巩县，陈舟于汜水，将渡，诸葛仲方遣将张言率师拒于河上。
现代文：李罕之进逼河阳，在巩县扎营，在汜水布下船只，准备过渡，诸葛仲方派将领张言率领军队在黄河岸边抵挡。
English: Li Hanzhong marched into Heyang, set up camp in Gong County, and prepared for the transition with ships under tarpaulins. Zhuge Zhongfang sent the general Zhang Yan to lead the army to resist on the banks of the Yellow River.

古文：时仲方年幼，政在刘经，诸将心多不附。
现代文：这时仲方年纪还小，大权掌握在刘经手中，将领们内心多不归附。
English: At this time, Zhongfang was still young, the power was in the hands of Liu Jing, and the generals were more attached to him.

古文：张言密与罕之修好；经知其谋，言惧，引众渡河归罕之，因合势攻河阳，为经所败，罕之与言退保怀州。
现代文：张言暗中与李罕之结好，刘经知悉他们的阴谋，张言害怕，带着部众渡过黄河归顺李罕之，于是合兵攻打河阳，被刘经打败，李罕之与张言退守怀州。
English: Zhang Yan secretly made a pact with Li Han, Liu Jing learned of their plot, Zhang Yan was afraid, and took his followers across the Yellow River to surrender to Li Han, so they joined forces to attack Heyang, were defeated by Liu Jing, and Li Han and Zhang Yan retreated to Huai Zhou.

古文：冬，蔡将孙儒陷河阳。
现代文：冬季，蔡贼将领孙儒攻陷河阳。
English: In the winter, Cai Kuai led Sun Ru to invade Hebei.

古文：仲方泛轻舟来奔，孙儒遂自称节度使。
现代文：诸葛仲方划着小船来投奔，孙儒于是自称为河阳节度使。
English: Zhuge Zhongfang rowed a small boat to make a run for it, and Sun Ru then called himself the emissary of the Kheyang Festival.

古文：俄而蔡贼为我军所败，孙儒弃河阳归蔡。
现代文：不久蔡州贼寇被梁军打败，孙儒放弃河阳回到蔡州。
English: Soon after, the Caizhou bandits were defeated by Liang's army, and Sun Ru gave up Heyang and returned to Caizhou.

古文：罕之与言收合其众，求援于太原，李克用遣泽州刺史安金俊率骑助之，遂收河阳。
现代文：李罕之与张言收聚部众，向太原晋军求援，李克用派泽州刺史安金俊率领骑兵帮助他，于是收复河阳。
English: Li Hanzhi and Zhang Yan gathered their followers and appealed to the Taiyuan Jin army for help. Li Ke sent the cavalry led by the cavalryman An Jinjun to help him, and thus regained Heyang.

古文：克用表罕之为节度、同平章事；又表言为河南尹、东都留守。
现代文：李克用任李罕之为河阳节度使、同平章事，又任张言为河南尹、东都留守。
English: Li Ke appointed Li Han as the festival envoy of Heyang and Tongping, and appointed Zhang Yan as the Henan Yin and Dongdu.

古文：罕之既与言患难交契，刻臂为盟，永同休戚，如张耳、陈余之义也。
现代文：李罕之既与张言结为患难之交，刻臂为盟，永远休戚与共，如张耳、陈余的情义。
English: Li Hanzhi and Zhang Yan are not only friends in adversity, but also allies in arms, and will always support each other, such as the feelings of Zhang Er and Chen Yu.

古文：罕之虽有胆决，雄猜翻覆，而抚民御众无方略，率多苛暴，性复贪冒，不得士心。
现代文：李罕之虽有胆量决断，但疑心极重，反复多变，而统治民众全无方略，大多苛刻残暴，性情又贪婪，不得人心。
English: Although Li Hanzhi had the courage to make decisions, he was extremely suspicious and changeable, and he had no way to rule the people. Most of them were harsh and cruel, greedy and unpopular.

古文：既得河阳，出兵攻晋、绛。
现代文：在获取河阳后，出兵攻打晋州、绛州。
English: After the capture of Heyang, troops were dispatched to attack Jinzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：时大乱之后，野无耕稼，罕之部下以俘剽为资，啖人作食。
现代文：当时在大乱之后，田野没有耕种庄稼，李罕之靠俘获抢劫为业，吃人作为粮食。
English: At that time, after the turmoil, there were no crops in the fields. Li Hanzhi relied on robberies as a business and cannibalism as food.

古文：绛州刺史王友遇以城降，罕之乃进攻晋州，河中王重盈遣使求援于太祖。
现代文：绛州刺史王友遇献城投降，李罕之于是进攻晋州，河中王重盈派使者向太祖求援。
English: When Zhangzhou Sisi Wangyou was forced to surrender, Li Hanzhi attacked Jinzhou, and King Hezhong sent an envoy to Emperor Taizu to ask for help.

古文：时张言治军有法，善积聚，勤于播植，军储不乏。
现代文：当时张言治军有方，善于积聚，勤于耕种，军粮不缺。
English: At that time, Zhang Yan ruled the army well, was good at accumulation, was diligent in cultivation, and there was no shortage of military grain.

古文：言输粟于罕之，以给其军，罕之求索无限，言颇苦之，力不能应，罕之则录河南府吏笞责之。
现代文：张言向李罕之供给粮食，以补充他的军需，李罕之索求没有止限，张言对此很觉苦恼；当张言能力不能满足李罕之的需求时，李罕之就抓住河南府吏鞭打督责他。
English: Zhang Yan supplied grain to Li Han to supplement his military needs. Li Han's demands had no limit, and Zhang Yan was very distressed about this. When Zhang Yan's ability could not meet Li Han's needs, Li Han seized the Henan government official and whipped him.

古文：东诸侯修贡行在，多为罕之邀留，王重盈苦其侵削，密结张言请图之。
现代文：东方诸侯向皇帝出行所在地进贡的财物，大都被李罕之拦截夺取，王重盈对他的侵凌深感苦恼，暗中联络张言请求共同除掉李罕之。
English: Most of the property of the Eastern princes who paid tribute to the emperor's travel location was intercepted and seized by Li Han. Wang Shigeying was deeply distressed by his encroachment and secretly contacted Zhang Yan to jointly remove Li Han.

古文：文德元年春，会罕之尽出其众攻平阳，言夜出师掩击河阳，罕之无备，单步仅免，举族为言所俘。
现代文：文德元年春天，李罕之派出他的全部兵力攻打平阳，张言夜晚出兵掩击河阳，李罕之没有防备，仅他一人徒步逃脱，全家都被张言俘获。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Wende era, Li Hanzhi sent all his troops to attack Pingyang, and Zhang Yan sent troops to cover Kheyang at night. Li Hanzhi was unprepared. He was the only one to escape on foot, and his whole family was captured by Zhang Yan.

古文：罕之奔于太原，李克用表为泽州刺史，仍领河阳节度使。
现代文：李罕之逃往太原，李克用任他为泽州刺史，仍然遥任河阳节度使。
English: Li Hanzhi fled to Taiyuan, and Li Ke used him to write the history of Zhezhou, and he was still a distant envoy to the Heyang Festival.

古文：三月，克用遣其将李存孝率师三万助之，来攻怀、孟。
现代文：三月，李克用派他的部将李存孝率领三万军队帮助李罕之，来攻打怀州、孟州。
English: In March, Li Ke used to send his subordinate Li Cunxiao to lead 30,000 troops to help Li Han, to attack Waizhou and Mengzhou.

古文：城中食尽，备豫皆竭，张言遣其孥入质，且求救于太祖；太祖遣葛从周、牛存节赴之，逆战于流河店。
现代文：城中粮食吃尽，防御工事瘫痪，张言以他儿子做人质，向太祖求援。太祖派葛从周、牛存节赴援，在流河店迎战。
English: The grain in the city was exhausted and the fortifications were paralysed. Zhang Yan took his son as a hostage and appealed to his great-grandfather for help. The great-grandfather sent Ge from Zhou and Niu Cunjie to come to his aid and fight at Liuhe.

古文：会晋将安休休以一军奔于蔡，存孝引军而退，罕之保于泽州。
现代文：遇上晋军将领安休休领着一支军队投奔蔡州，李存孝便领军而退，李罕之守卫泽州。
English: When the Jin general An Xiuxu led an army into Caizhou, Li Cunxiao led the army back, and Li Han guarded Caizhou.

古文：自是罕之日以兵寇钞怀、孟、晋、绛，数百里内，郡邑无长吏，闾里无居民。
现代文：从此李罕之每天派兵侵扰抢劫怀、孟、晋、绛各州，数百里之内，城邑没有敢为头的官吏，村巷没有敢居住的人民。
English: From then on, Li Hanzhi sent troops every day to invade and rob the states of Huai, Meng, Jin, and Qi. Within a few hundred miles, there were no officials who dared to lead the cities, and no people who dared to live in the villages and lanes.

古文：河内百姓，相结屯寨，或出樵汲，即为俘馘。
现代文：河内的百姓屯聚于村寨，有时出去打柴汲水，就被李罕之抓去。
English: The people of Hanoi gathered in the village, sometimes went out to collect firewood and water, and were arrested by Li Han.

古文：虽奇峰绝磴，梯危架险，亦为罕之部众攻取。
现代文：就是奇峰绝道、扎架设梯才能到达的险要，也被李罕之部众攻取。
English: Even the most dangerous point, which can only be reached by climbing the Qifeng Jedo and setting up a ladder, was conquered by Li Han's followers.

古文：先是，蒲、绛之间有山曰摩云，邑人立栅于上，以避寇乱；罕之以百余人攻下之，军中因号罕之为李摩云。
现代文：此前，蒲州、绛州之间有座摩云山，当地人在山上搭起房屋以避贼寇的扰乱，李罕之带领一百多人攻下了它，军队中因而称李罕之叫李摩云。
English: Previously, there was a mountain called Moyun Mountain between Puzhou and Zhangzhou. Local people built houses on the mountain to avoid the disturbance of the thieves and robbers. Li Hanzhi led more than a hundred people to conquer it. Therefore, the army called Li Hanzhi Li Moyun.

古文：自是数州之民，屠啖殆尽，荆棘蔽野，烟火断绝，凡十余年。
现代文：从此数州的人民，被杀戮啖食，几乎完尽，荆棘遍野，烟火断绝，共十多年。
English: Since then, the people of several states have been killed and eaten, almost exhausted, thorns are everywhere, and fireworks have been discontinued for a total of more than ten years.

古文：乾宁二年，李克用出师以拒邠、凤，营于渭北，天子以克用为邠州行营四面都统，克用乃表罕之为副。
现代文：乾宁二年，李克用出兵抵御州、凤翔部队，在渭水北岸扎营，天子任李克用为州行营四面都统，李克用于是表奏李罕之为副手。
English: In the second year of Qianning, Li Ke used troops to resist the troops of Shuzhou and Fengxiang, and camped on the north bank of Surabaya. Li Ke used the son of heaven to camp in Shuzhou in all directions, and Li Ke used to be the deputy of Li Hanzhong.

古文：及诛王行瑜，罕之以功授检校太尉，食邑千户。
现代文：到诛灭王行瑜后，李罕之因功授予检校太尉，食邑一千户。
English: After the annihilation of Wang Xingyu, Li Hanzhi was awarded the rank of lieutenant of the inspection of the school for his merits, and a thousand households were provided with food.

古文：罕之自以功多，私谓晋将盖寓曰： 余自河阳失守，来依巨廕，岁月滋久，功效未施。
现代文：李罕之自以为功多，私下对晋军将领盖寓说： 我自从河阳失守以后，来依附晋王这棵大树的荫庇，岁月日渐长久，未见功效。
English: Li Hanzhi thought that he had done a lot of work, and privately said to the Jin army general Gai Yu: Since I lost the defense of Kheyang, I have been relying on the shade of this big tree of the Jin king. The years are getting longer and longer, and I have not seen any effect.

古文：比年以来，倦于师旅，所谓老夫耄矣，无能为也。
现代文：近年以来，厌倦军旅之事，正所谓年纪老了，没有作为了。
English: In recent years, he has grown tired of the military tour and is now so-called old and has nothing to do.

古文：望吾王仁愍，太傅哀怜，与一小镇，休兵养疾，一二年间即归老菟裘，幸也。 
现代文：希望晋王仁悯，太傅哀怜，给我一处小镇，不再打仗，休养疾病，一二年间就归老乡里，就是有幸了。 
English: I hope Jin Wang will have mercy on me and Taifu will have pity on me, and give me a small town where I can stop fighting, recover from my illness, and return to my hometown within a year or two. That would be a blessing.

古文：寓为言之，克用不对。
现代文：盖寓为他传话，李克用不做回答。
English: Gai sent a message for him, but Li Ke did not reply.

古文：每籓镇缺帅，议所不及，罕之私心郁郁，盖寓惧其他图，亟为论之。
现代文：尽管常有藩镇缺乏统帅，在讨论委任时都不提到他，李罕之内心郁郁不乐，盖寓怕他另有所图，屡次为他抱不平。
English: Although some towns often lack a commander and do not mention him when discussing the appointment, Li Hannuo was depressed, afraid that he had other plans, and repeatedly held grievances for him.

古文：克用曰： 吾于罕之，岂惜一镇；吾有罕之，亦如董卓之有吕布，雄则雄矣，鹰鸟之性，饱则飏去，实惧翻覆毒余也。 
现代文：李克用说： 我对罕之，岂是舍不得一处藩镇？我有罕之，就像董卓有吕布，英雄倒是一位英雄，只是具有鹰的本性，吃饱了就要飞走，实在是怕他反复而加害于我啊！ 
English: Li Kegui said, "I'm not used to it, is it that I can't bear to live in a feudal town? I'm not used to it, just like Dong Zhuo has Lü Bu, a hero is a hero, but he has the nature of an eagle, he has to fly away when he's had enough, I'm really afraid of him repeatedly harming me!

古文：光化元年十二月，晋之潞帅薛志勤卒，罕之乘其丧，自泽州率众径入潞州，自称留后，以状闻于克用曰： 闻志勤之丧，新帅未至，虑为他盗所窥，不俟命，已屯于潞矣。 
现代文：光化元年十二月，晋地潞州统帅薛志勤去世，李罕之乘着他新亡，从泽州领兵直入潞州，自称潞州留后，将情况报告给李克用说： 听到志勤的死，新的统帅没到，担心被其他盗寇图取，我不等下令就已驻扎在潞州了。 
English: In December of the first year of the Guanghua dynasty, the commander of Jin's Bozhou, Xue Zhiqin, passed away. Li Hanzhi took advantage of his new death and led the troops from Zhezhou straight into Bozhou. After claiming to stay in Bozhou, he reported the situation to Li Kegui and said: Hearing of Zhiqin's death, the new commander did not arrive, fearing to be taken by other thieves, I was stationed in Bozhou without waiting for an order.

古文：克用怒，遣李昭嗣讨之，罕之执其守将马溉、伊铎、何万友，沁州刺史傅瑶等，遣其子颢拘送于太祖以求援焉。
现代文：李克用大怒，派李嗣昭讨伐他，李罕之抓住潞州守将马溉、伊铎、何万友和沁州刺史傅瑶等人，派他儿子李颢押送给太祖以求援。
English: Li Ke, with great anger, sent Li Shizhao to fight him, Li Hanzhi to seize the governor of Zhangzhou, Ma Yili, Yili, Tens of Thousands of Friends, and Zhangzhou Sashifu and others, and sent his son Li Xuan to the great-grandfather for help.

古文：其子颢以舟载柩，归葬河阴县。
现代文：这时李罕之突然生病，不能主事。
English: At this time, Li Hanzhi suddenly fell ill and was unable to work.

古文：开平二年春，诏赠中书令。冯行袭，字正臣，武当人也。
现代文：第二年六月，病重，太祖令丁会替代他，调李罕之任河阳节度使，走到怀州时，死在驿舍中，时年五十八岁。冯行袭，字正臣，武当人。
English: In June of the following year, seriously ill, the great-grandfather ordered Ding Hui to replace him and transferred Li Hanzhi to the post of Heyang Festival envoy. When he went to Huai Zhou, he died in a hermitage, at the age of 58. Feng Xinghai, the word righteous minister, was a military leader.

古文：历职为本郡都校。
现代文：历年在本郡担任都校职务。
English: Over the years, he has served as the superintendent of schools in this county.

古文：中和中，僖宗在蜀，有贼首孙喜者，聚徒数千人欲入武当，刺史吕煜惶骇无策略。
现代文：中和年间，唐僖宗在蜀地，有位叫孙喜的贼寇头目，聚集数千党徒想进入武当，均州刺史吕烨惶恐惧怕无计可施。
English: In the years between the Middle Ages and the Tang Dynasty, there was a bandit leader named Sun Xizang in Shu, who gathered thousands of party members who wanted to enter Wudang.

古文：行袭伏勇士于江南，乘小舟逆喜，谓喜曰： 郡人得良牧，众心归矣，但缘兵多，民惧掳掠。
现代文：冯行袭在江南埋伏下勇士，自己乘着小船去迎接孙喜。对孙喜说 ：我郡人民能得到您这样的好官，民心都拥戴您了，但因为您带的兵很多，人民害怕被抢掠劫夺。
English: Feng Xing attacked the warriors ambushed in the south of the Yangtze River, and he went to meet Sun Xi in a small boat. He said to Sun Xi: If the people of our county can get a good official like you, the people's hearts will embrace you, but because you have many soldiers, the people are afraid of being robbed and plundered.

古文：若驻军江北，领肘腋以赴之，使某前导，以安慰士民，可立定也。 
现代文：如果把军队驻扎在江北，只带着左右心腹到武当，让我为您做前导，以慰安本地兵士人民，武当可立即平定啊。 
English: If the army is stationed in the northern part of the Yangtze River and only brings its right and left henchmen to Wudang, let me be your guide to comfort the local soldiers and people. Wudang can be immediately pacified.

古文：喜然之。
现代文：孙喜认为说得对。
English: Sun Xie thought this was right.

古文：既渡江，军吏迎谒，伏甲奋起，行袭击喜仆地，仗剑斩之，其党尽殪，贼众在江北者悉奔溃。
现代文：渡过江后，军吏向前迎接拜见，埋伏的甲士奋然跃起，冯行袭将孙喜打倒在地，用剑杀死了他，随从的党徒都被杀死，江北的党徒们全部逃散。
English: After crossing the river, the military officials came forward to greet him, the ambushed warriors jumped up, Feng Xing attacked and knocked Sun Xi to the ground, killing him with a sword. The party members who followed him were all killed, and the party members north of the river all fled.

古文：山南节度使刘巨容以功上言，寻授均州刺史。
现代文：山南节度使刘巨容将功劳上报，马上授与冯行袭为均州刺史。
English: The Shannan Festival made Liu Jiazhong report the achievement, and immediately awarded Feng Xinggang as the history of Junzhou.

古文：州西有长山，当襄、汉、蜀路，群贼屯据，以邀劫贡奉，行袭又破之。
现代文：均州西面有一座长山，面对通往襄阳、汉中、蜀地的道路，成群的盗贼啸聚据守在那里，以拦劫向上进献的贡奉，冯行袭又击败他们。
English: There is a long mountain in the west of Junzhou, facing the road leading to Xiangyang, Hanzhong and Shudi. Hordes of thieves gathered there and guarded it to intercept the tribute going up, and Feng Xing attacked and defeated them.

古文：洋州节度使葛佐奏辟为行军司马，请将兵镇谷口，通秦、蜀道，由是益知名。
现代文：洋州节度葛佐奏请授予冯行袭行军司马的官职，请他镇守谷口，打通通向秦、蜀两地的通道，因而更加闻名。
English: In the Yangzhou Festival, Ge Zuo asked Feng Xinggang to be given the official post of Sima of the marching army, and asked him to guard the valley mouth and open the passage to Qin and Shu, thus becoming more famous.

古文：李茂贞遣养子继臻窃据金州，行袭攻下之，因授金州防御使。
现代文：李茂贞派他的养子李继臻窃据金州，冯行袭攻下了金州，因而授任他为金州防御使。
English: Li Maozhen sent his adopted son Li Jizhen to steal the base of Jinzhou, Feng Xing attacked and captured Jinzhou, thus appointing him as Jinzhou defense envoy.

古文：时兴元杨守亮将袭京师，道出金、商，行袭逆击，大破之。
现代文：这时兴元府杨守亮准备袭击京师长安，要从金州和商州路过，冯行袭迎击，大败他们。
English: At this time, Yang Shouliang of the Xingyuan prefecture was preparing to attack Chang'an of the Beijing division. He wanted to pass through Jinzhou and Shangzhou. Feng Xing attacked and defeated them.

古文：诏升金州为节镇，以戎昭军为额，即以行袭为节度使。
现代文：皇上诏令将金州升格为持节藩镇，以戎昭军作为部队的名号，就以冯行袭为节度使。
English: The Emperor's edict promoted Jinzhou to the status of a festival town, with the name of the army as the name of the army, and Feng Xinghai as the festival envoy.

古文：及太祖义旗西征，行袭遣副使鲁崇矩禀受制令。
现代文：当梁太祖举起义旗向西征伐时，冯行袭派遣副使鲁崇矩接受太祖的命令。
English: When Liang Taizu raised the banner of righteousness and marched westward, Feng Xinghai sent deputy envoy Lu Chongzhen to receive the order from the great ancestor.

古文：会唐昭宗幸凤翔，太祖帅师奉迎，久之未出。
现代文：这时唐昭宗驾临凤翔，太祖率领军队侍奉迎接，好久不见从凤翔府城出来。
English: At this time, the Tang Zhaozong arrived in Fengxiang, and the great-grandfather led the army to welcome him. It had been a long time since he had come out of Fengxiang Prefecture.

古文：中尉韩全诲遣中官郄文晏等二十余人分命矫诏，欲征江、淮兵屯于金州，以胁太祖之军，行袭定策尽杀之，收其诏敕送于太祖。
现代文：中尉韩全诲派遣中官郄文晏等二十多人假托唐昭宗的诏令，想征召江、淮一带部队屯驻金州，以威胁太祖的军队，冯行袭定计将他们全部杀死，把他们伪造的诏令送给太祖。
English: Lieutenant Han Quanzhong sent Lieutenant-General Yu Wenzhong and more than twenty other people to fake the edict of Tang Zhaozong and wanted to recruit troops from the Jiang and Huai regions to be stationed in Jinzhou to threaten the grandfather's army. Feng Xinggan planned to kill all of them and send their fake edict to the grandfather.

古文：天祐元年，兼领洋州节度使。
现代文：天元年，兼任洋州节度使。
English: In 1910, he also served as the Yangzhou Festival Commissioner.

古文：太祖之伐荆、襄，行袭令其子勖以舟师会于均、房，预收复功，迁匡国军节度使。
现代文：当太祖讨伐荆州、襄州时，冯行袭令他的儿子冯率领水军在均州、房州迎候，预先立下收复荆、襄的功劳，升迁为匡国军节度使。
English: When the great-great-grandfather fought against Jingzhou and Xiangzhou, Feng Xing ordered his son Feng to lead the navy to meet him in Junzhou and Fangzhou. He set out in advance to recover the merits of Jing and Xiang, and was promoted to the commander of the Kuang Army.

古文：到任，诛大吏张澄，暴其罪，州人莫不惴慑。
现代文：到任后，诛杀大吏张澄，公布他的暴行，许州人没有不心惊胆颤的。
English: After taking office, he killed the official Zhang Cheng and publicized his atrocities. The people of Huzhou were not surprised.

古文：在许三年，上供外，别进助军羡粮二十万石。
现代文：在许州三年，除应上交贡奉外，另外还多交纳军粮二十万石。
English: In the three years in Xuzhou, in addition to the amount of tribute that should be paid, an additional 200,000 koku of military grain was paid.

古文：及太祖郊禋，行袭请入觐，贡献巨万，恩礼殊厚。
现代文：当太祖称帝后到郊外祭天时，冯行袭请求进去见太祖，献上巨额财富，太祖赐恩礼待特别优厚。
English: When the great-grandfather called the empress to the suburbs to offer sacrifices, Feng Xingqi asked to go in to see the great-grandfather and offered a huge amount of wealth. The great-grandfather gave him special treatment.

古文：寻诏翰林学士杜晓撰德政碑以赐之，累官至兼中书令，册拜司空。
现代文：接着诏令翰林学士杜晓撰刻德政碑赐给冯行袭，接连迁升官职到兼任中书令，册封为司空。
English: Then, the Hanlin Scholar Du Xiao issued a decree to grant Feng Xingqi the right to write a political monument, and he was successively promoted to the post of vice-governor. He was also appointed to the post of vice-governor.

古文：开平中卒，辍朝一日，赠太傅，谥曰忠敬。
现代文：开平年间去世，朝廷停止朝拜一天，追封为太傅，谥号叫忠敬。
English: He died in the year of Kaiping, and the imperial court stopped worshiping him for one day. He was posthumously named Taifu, and his posthumous name was Zhongjing.

古文：行袭性严烈，为政深刻，然所至有天幸，境内尝大蝗，寻有群鸟啄食，不为害；民或艰食，必有稆谷，出于垅亩。
现代文：冯行袭性格严厉刚烈，为官峻切苛刻，然而他所到的地方都有上天相助，境内曾发生大蝗虫，接着就有成群的乌鸦啄食蝗虫，没有成为灾害；人民有时饥荒缺粮，必定就有不用栽种自生自长的稆谷出现在田地中。
English: Feng Xingan had a stern and rigid personality, and was a stern and harsh official. However, wherever he went, he was helped by heaven. Large locusts once occurred in the territory, and then there were flocks of crows eating locusts, which did not become a disaster; the people were sometimes starving and short of food, and there must have been no need to plant self-growing reed valleys in the fields.

古文：虽威福在己，而恆竭力以奉于王室，故能保其功名。
现代文：虽然自己有威有福，但总是尽心竭力奉侍王室，所以能保全他的功名。
English: Although he is powerful and blessed, he always tries his best to serve the royal family, so he can preserve his reputation.

古文：行袭魁岸雄壮，面有青志，当时目为 冯青面 。
现代文：冯行袭身材魁武雄壮，脸上有青痣，当时人们叫他 冯青面 。
English: At that time, people called him Feng Qingmeng (Feng Qingmeng means "Feng Qingmeng" in Chinese).

