古文：萧孝穆，小字胡独堇，淳钦皇后弟阿古只五世孙。
现代文：萧孝穆，乳名胡独堇，淳钦皇后弟阿古只五世孙。
English: Xiao Xiaomu, whose maiden name was Hu Duyun, and Agu, the younger brother of Empress Junqin, are only the fifth generation of grandchildren.

古文：父陶瑰，为国舅详稳。
现代文：父萧陶瑰，官居国舅详稳。
English: His father, Xiao Taoqi, was an official, and his uncle, Ji Jianwen, was also an official.

古文：孝穆廉谨有礼法。
现代文：孝穆洁身谨慎，谨守礼仪法度。
English: Filial piety, cleanliness and prudence, and strict adherence to the rules of etiquette.

古文：统和二十八年，累迁西北路招讨都监。
现代文：统和二十八年，累迁至西北路招讨都监。
English: In the 28th year of unification, it was relocated to Northwest Road to recruit supervisors.

古文：开泰元年，遥授建雄军节度使，加检校太保。
现代文：开泰元年，遥授建雄军节度使，加检校太保。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Jianxiong, the military commander of the Qing Dynasty, was awarded the title of "Distant Envoy" and was also given the title of "Inspector of Schools."

古文：是年术烈等变，孝穆击走之。
现代文：同年，术烈等猝然生变，孝穆攻打并赶走他们。
English: In the same year, there was a sudden resurgence of martial arts heroes, and Xiao Mu attacked and drove them away.

古文：冬，进军可敦城。
现代文：冬日，进军可敦城。
English: On a winter's day, they marched into the city of Koton.

古文：阻卜结五群牧长查剌、阿睹等，谋中外相应，孝穆悉诛之，乃严备御以待，余党遂溃。
现代文：阻卜纠集五群牧长查剌、阿睹等，阴谋内外互相策应，孝穆全部杀死他们，于是严整守备以待，余党于是溃散。
English: Blocking and gathering five groups of herdsmen, such as Zhaqi and Ajian, they plotted and coordinated with each other inside and outside, and all of them were killed by Xiaomu. Therefore, they kept a strict vigil, and the rest of the party dispersed.

古文：以功迁九水诸部安抚使。
现代文：因功迁九水诸部安抚使。
English: Due to his merits, he was transferred to Jiu Shui and became the pacifying envoy of various ministries.

古文：寻拜北府宰相，赐忠穆熙霸功臣，检校太师，同政事门下平章事。
现代文：不久拜北府宰相，赐为忠穆熙霸功臣，检校太师，同政事门下平章事。
English: He was soon named the prime minister of Beifu Province, given the title of "Loyal Hero of Mu Xi He," and promoted to the position of "Inspector of Schools" and "Minister of Political Affairs."

古文：八年，还京师。
现代文：八年，回京师。
English: Eight years later, he returned to Beijing to teach.

古文：太平二年，知枢密院事，充汉人行宫都部署。
现代文：太平二年，主持枢密院事务，充任汉人行宫都部署。
English: In the second year of the Taiping era, he presided over the affairs of the Privy Council and served as the head of the Han People's Court.

古文：三年，封燕王、南京留守、兵马都总管。
现代文：三年，封燕王、南京留守，为兵马都总管。
English: In three years, King Fengyan stayed in Nanjing and became the commander-in-chief of the Terracotta Army.

古文：九年，大延琳以东京叛，孝穆为都统讨之，战于蒲水。
现代文：九年，大延琳在东京叛乱，孝穆为都统讨伐之，接战于蒲水。
English: In the ninth year, Oenrin rebelled in Tokyo, and Takakazu led a crusade for the unification of Japan, which was followed by a battle in the Pudong area.

古文：中军稍却，副部署萧匹敌、都监萧蒲奴以两翼夹击，贼溃，追败之于手山北。
现代文：中军向后略退，副部署萧匹敌、都监萧蒲奴从两翼夹击，贼兵溃散，追击败之于手山北。
English: The Chinese army retreated slightly backward, the deputy deployment Xiao Biqi and the city supervisor Xiao Punu clamped down from both wings, the bandits scattered, and the pursuit defeated them in the north of Teshan.

古文：延琳走入城，深沟自卫。
现代文：延琳逃入城中，掘深沟自卫。
English: Yanlin fled into the city and dug a deep ditch to defend herself.

古文：孝穆围之，筑重城，起楼橹，使内外不相通，城中撤屋以爨。
现代文：孝穆包围之，建起重城，修造楼橹，使城内外不得相通，城中撤房屋以烧火做饭。
English: Xiao Mu encircled it, built a heavy city, built towers, so that there was no communication between inside and outside the city, and withdrew houses in the city to cook with fire.

古文：其将杨详世等擒延琳以降，辽东悉平。
现代文：其将杨详世等擒延琳而降，辽东全部平定。
English: He subdued Yang Jieshi and other Yan Yanlin, and all of Liaodong was pacified.

古文：改东京留守，赐佐国功臣。
现代文：改为东京留守，赐佐国功臣。
English: It was changed to absent in Tokyo, and he was given the title of Sasakuni meritorious vassal.

古文：为政务宽简，抚纳流徙，其民安之。
现代文：为政致力于宽厚简约，招抚流民，百姓得到安宁。
English: The government is committed to a generous and simple policy, to appease the displaced people, and the people have been pacified.

古文：兴宗即位，徙王秦，寻复为南京留守。
现代文：兴宗即位，迁为秦王，不久又为南京留守。
English: Xingzong ascended the throne, moved to Qin, and soon left for Nanjing.

古文：重熙六年，进封吴国王，拜北院枢密使。
现代文：重熙六年，进封为吴国王，拜北院枢密使。
English: In the sixth year of Chongxi, he was crowned King of Wu and became a privy councilor of the Bei Bei Yuan.

古文：八年，表请籍天下户口以均徭役，又陈诸部及舍利军利害。
现代文：八年，上表请登记天下户口以平均徭役，又陈说诸部及舍利军的好处和害处。
English: In eight years, the above table shows the benefits and harms of registering the world's household registration with the average eunuch, and the benefits and harms of various ministries and the Sheri army.

古文：从之。
现代文：从之。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：由是政赋稍平，众悦。
现代文：由此征收赋税稍稍平均了一些，众人大悦。
English: As a result, taxes were levied slightly more evenly, which pleased everyone.

古文：九年，徙王楚。
现代文：九年，迁为楚王。
English: Nine years later, he moved to Chu Wang.

古文：时天下无事，户口蕃息，上富于春秋，每言及周取十县，慨然有南伐之志。
现代文：当时天下无事，人口增殖，皇上又青春鼎盛，每每谈及后周夺取十县，总是感慨愤激，有南伐之志。
English: At that time, there was nothing going on in the world, the population was increasing, and the emperor was in the prime of his youth. Whenever he talked about seizing ten counties the following week, he was always full of emotion and indignation, and had the ambition to go to the south.

古文：群臣多顺旨。
现代文：群臣大多顺从旨意。
English: Most of the courtiers obeyed.

古文：孝穆谏曰： 昔太祖南伐，终以无功。
现代文：孝穆劝谏说 ：从前太祖南伐，最终无功。
English: Xiao Mu advised him, "Once upon a time, our great-grandfather went to the south, but in the end it was to no avail.

古文：嗣圣皇帝仆唐立晋，后以重贵叛，长驱入汴，銮驭始旋，反来侵轶。
现代文：嗣圣皇帝太宗灭唐立晋，后因重贵叛盟，长驱入汴京，皇上刚刚回师，南方反过来突袭我。
English: Emperor Taizong, the successor of the Holy Emperor, destroyed Tang and established Jin. Later, because of the treachery of the nobility, he was driven into Beijing. The emperor had just returned to his division, and the south, in turn, attacked me.

古文：自后连兵二十余年，仅得和好，蒸民乐业，南北相通。
现代文：从此以后兵连祸结达二十余年，刚刚得到和好，百姓安居乐业，南北互通有无。
English: Since then, the war has lasted for more than 20 years, the people have just been reconciled, the people live and work in peace, and the inter-Korean relations have improved.

古文：今国家比之曩日，虽曰富强，然勋臣宿将，往往物故。
现代文：现在国家比起往日，尽管变得富强了，然而功臣、老将往往已经过世。
English: Now, although the country has become richer and stronger than in the past, the heroes and veterans have often passed away.

古文：且宋人无罪，陛下不宜弃先帝盟约。 
现代文：何况宋人无罪，陛下不应该背弃先帝所订立的盟约。 
English: Moreover, the Song people are not guilty, and His Majesty should not renege on the treaty concluded by the former emperor.

古文：时上意已决，书奏不报。
现代文：当时皇上心意已决，奏书上达没有回音。
English: At that time, the emperor's mind was already made up, and there was no response to the report.

古文：以年老乞骸骨，不许。
现代文：以年老请求辞官回乡，不许。
English: It is not allowed to ask a bureaucrat to return to his hometown because he is old.

古文：十二年，复为北院枢密使，更王齐，薨。
现代文：十二年，又为北院枢密使，改为齐王，薨。
English: In the twelfth year, he was also appointed as the Privy Councilor of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, and changed his name to Qi Wang,.

古文：追赠大丞相、晋国王，谥曰贞。
现代文：追赠大丞相、晋国王，谥曰贞。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of grand chancellor and the title of Jin king.

古文：孝穆虽椒房亲，位高益畏。
现代文：孝穆尽管身为外戚之亲，职位越高，越是畏惧小心。
English: Although he is a relative of a relative, the higher the position, the more he is afraid and cautious.

古文：太后有赐，辄辞不受。
现代文：太后有赐物，则推辞不受。
English: If the empress dowager has a gift, she will not be denied.

古文：妻子无骄色。
现代文：即使在妻子儿女面前也没有骄傲之神情。
English: Even in front of his wife and children, he did not look proud.

古文：与人交，始终如一。
现代文：与人交往，始终如一。
English: Interact with people, consistently.

古文：所荐拔皆忠直士。
现代文：所荐举的都是忠直之士。
English: The recommended candidates are all loyal and upright people.

古文：尚魏国公主，拜驸马都尉，为北院宣徽使，仍总知朝廷礼仪。
现代文：曾经对人说 ：枢密选拔贤能而进用之，何事不能成功？如果亲自去处理琐碎之事，那么大事反而被耽搁了。 
English: It was once said to a man: What cannot be accomplished by the secret selection of the best and the most able? If you take care of trifles yourself, then great things will be delayed.

古文：重熙末，出为西北路招讨使、武宁郡王。
现代文：自从萧合卓因为为政有才得到进用，其后递相效尤而已，不懂得有关大局的道理。
English: Since Xiao Hezhuo was promoted because he was a politician, he only followed the example and did not understand the reason for the overall situation.

古文：居官以治称。清宁初薨，年三十九，追封齐王。
现代文：孝穆感叹说： 不能够移风易俗，身居高位却苟且偷安，为臣之道竟然是这样的吗？ 时人称孝穆为 国宝臣 ，称所著文集为《宝老集》。
English: At that time, people called him a national treasure, and the collection of his works was called the "Treasure Collection."

古文：孝先，字延宁，小字海里。
现代文：二子阿剌、撒八，弟孝先、孝忠、孝友。萧孝先，字延宁，乳名海里。
English: His second sons were Aya and Saba, and his younger brothers were Kosen, Takatada, and Takatomo. Xiao Kosen was called Yanning, and his nickname was Moromi.

古文：统和十八年，补祗候郎君。
现代文：统和十八年，补为祗候郎君。
English: In the 18th year of the unification of Korea, he was added as a son of the emperor.

古文：尚南阳公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：娶南阳公主，拜为驸马都尉。
English: He married Princess Nanyang and was given the title of Lieutenant of the Horse.

古文：开泰五年，为国舅详稳。
现代文：开泰五年，任国舅详稳。
English: After five years of Keitai, the position of the uncle of the country has been stable.

古文：将兵城东鄙。
现代文：率兵于东部边境筑城。
English: He led the troops to build a city in the east border.

古文：还，为南京统军使。
现代文：回京后担任南京统军使。
English: After returning to Beijing, he served as the envoy of the Nanjing Unification Army.

古文：太平三年，为汉人行宫都部署，寻加太子太傅。
现代文：太平三年，任汉人行宫都部署，不久升太子太傅。
English: In the third year of the Taiping era, all the officials of the Han People's Court were deployed, and soon the crown prince was promoted to daifu.

古文：五年，迁上京留守。
现代文：五年，迁上京留守。
English: Five years later, he moved to Kyoto and stayed there.

古文：以母老求侍，复为国舅详稳。
现代文：因为母亲年老请求侍亲，再度任国舅详稳。
English: Because of his elderly mother's request for a family attendant, he was once again appointed as the uncle of the country.

古文：改东京留守。
现代文：改任东京留守。
English: He was reassigned to Tokyo, where he remained.

古文：会大延琳反，被围数月，穴地而出。
现代文：适逢大延琳谋反，被围于城中几个月，挖地道得以逃出。
English: At the right time, Dai Yanlin plotted a rebellion and was besieged in the city for several months. He was able to escape by digging a tunnel.

古文：延琳平，留守上京。
现代文：延琳乱平，留守上京。
English: Yanlin ran amok and left for Tokyo.

古文：十一年，帝不豫，钦哀召孝先总禁卫事。
现代文：十一年，圣宗病重，钦哀后征召孝先总管禁卫事务。
English: In the eleventh year of his reign, Emperor Shengzong fell seriously ill. After a period of mourning, Emperor Shengzong conscripted Emperor Xiaosen to be the head of the Imperial Guard.

古文：兴宗谅阴，钦哀弑仁德皇后，孝先与萧浞卜、萧匹敌等谋居多。
现代文：兴宗居丧，钦哀杀害仁德皇后与萧浞卜、萧匹敌等人，孝先谋划居多。
English: Xing Zong mourned the death of his father, and mourned the killing of Empress Rinde, Xiao Zhibu, Xiao Biqi and others. Xiao Xian planned to live in the house.

古文：及钦哀摄政，遥授天平军节度使，加守司徒，兼政事令。
现代文：及至钦哀摄理国政，遥授孝先为天平军节度使，升守司徒，兼政事令。
English: In addition to being the regent of state affairs, Emperor Qin and Empress Dowager Cixi also conferred the title of "Distinguished Officer of the Tianping Army" on him, and promoted him to "Guardian of the Guardianship" and "Regent of State Affairs."

古文：重熙初，封楚王，为北院枢密使。
现代文：重熙初，封为楚王，任北院枢密使。
English: At the beginning of the reign of King Chongxi, he was given the title of King of Chu and served as a privy councilor of the Northern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：孝先以椒房亲，为太后所重。
现代文：孝先因系皇上姻亲，为太后所倚重。
English: As he was the Emperor's relative by marriage, he was held in high regard by the Empress Dowager.

古文：在枢府，好恶自恣，权倾人主，朝多侧目。
现代文：在枢密府，随自己的好恶任意妄为，权势几乎要压倒人主，朝臣大多愤恨他。
English: In the Privy Council, he behaved arbitrarily according to his own likes and dislikes. His power was almost overwhelming, and most courtiers resented him.

古文：三年，太后与孝先谋废立事，帝知之，勒卫兵出宫，召孝先至，谕以废太后意。
现代文：三年，太后与孝先谋划废帝另立之事，皇上得知，统率卫兵出宫，征召孝先前来，告诉他将要废太后的想法。
English: Three years later, when the empress dowager and her son were plotting to depose the emperor and establish a separate state, the emperor learned that he had led the guards out of the palace and summoned his son to come and tell him of his plans to depose the empress dowager.

古文：孝先震慑不能对。
现代文：孝先惊恐万状不能成答。
English: Xiao Xian panicked and couldn't answer.

古文：迁太后于庆州。
现代文：迁太后于庆州。
English: Empress Dowager Cixi moved to Gyeongju.

古文：孝先恒郁郁不乐。
现代文：孝先总是郁郁不乐。
English: Filial piety is always morose and unhappy.

古文：四年，徙王晋。
现代文：四年，徙封晋王。
English: Four years later, he was transferred to the court of King Jin.

古文：后为南京留守，卒，谥忠肃。
现代文：后来任南京留守，不久去世，谥为忠肃。
English: Later, he stayed in Nanjing, died soon after, and was succeeded by Chung Soo.

古文：孝友，字挞不衍，小字陈留。
现代文：萧孝友，字挞不衍，乳名陈留。
English: Xiao Xiaoyu, his name is Xiao Fuyan, but his nickname is Chen Ru.

古文：开泰初，以戚属为小将军。
现代文：开泰初，因为是皇亲，任为小将军。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Taizong, because he was a relative of the emperor, he was appointed as a minor general.

古文：太平元年，以大册，加左武卫大将军、检校太保，赐名孝友。
现代文：太平元年，因为行大册礼，升为左武卫大将军、检校太保，赐名孝友。
English: In the first year of the Taiping era, he was promoted to General of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards and Inspector of Schools, and was given the name of Takatomo.

古文：重熙元年，累迁西北路招讨使，封兰陵郡王。
现代文：重熙元年，累迁为西北路招讨使，封兰陵郡王。
English: In the first year of Chongxi, he was successively transferred to the Northwest Road Recruitment and Enlistment Envoy, and was awarded the title of Lanling County King.

古文：八年，进王陈。
现代文：八年，进封为陈王。
English: Eight years later, he was crowned King Chen.

古文：先是，萧惠为招讨使，专以威制西羌，诸夷多叛。
现代文：在此之前，萧惠任招讨使，专门以威势压服西羌，诸夷大多反叛。
English: Prior to this, Xiao Hui served as a recruiting envoy, specifically to use his power to subdue Xidi, and most of the Yi rebelled.

古文：孝友下车，厚加绥抚，每入贡，辄增其赐物，羌人以安。
现代文：孝友到任，用心加以安抚，每当其前来进贡，便增加对他们的赐物，羌人因此安定了。
English: When his friends and relatives arrived, he tried his best to appease them. Whenever they came to pay tribute, he increased his gifts to them. As a result, the Xiongnu people became stable.

古文：久之，浸成姑息，诸夷桀骜之风遂炽，议者讥其过中。
现代文：久而久之，逐渐变成了姑息，诸夷桀骜不驯之风愈演愈烈，评论他的人都认为他是绥靖太过度了。
English: Over time, it gradually turned into appeasement, and the rebellious wind of the barbarians became more and more intense. His critics all thought that his appeasement was too excessive.

古文：十年，加政事令，赐效节宣庸定远功臣，更王吴。
现代文：十年，升为政事令，赐效节宣庸定远功臣，改封吴王。
English: Ten years later, he was promoted to the position of regent and given the title of King Wu.

古文：后以葬兄孝穆、孝忠，还京师，拜南院枢密使，加赐翊圣协穆保义功臣，进王赵，拜中书令。
现代文：后来因为安葬兄长孝穆、孝忠，回到京师，拜为南院枢密使，加赐翊圣协穆保义功臣，进封为赵王，拜中书令。
English: Later, because of the burial of his elder brothers, Xiaomu and Xiaozhong, he returned to Beijing and became the Privy Councilor of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, and was awarded the title of King of Zhao.

古文：丁母忧，起复北府宰相，出知东京留守。
现代文：遭逢母丧，起复任为北府宰相，出京知东京留守。
English: On the occasion of his mother's death, he was reinstated as the prime minister of Hokufu, and left the capital for Tokyo.

古文：会伐夏，孝友与枢密使萧惠失利河南，帝欲诛之，太后救免。
现代文：适逢讨伐夏，孝友与枢密使萧惠在黄河以南失利，兴宗想杀他，太后相救得免。
English: At the time of the summer campaign, Xiao Hui was defeated south of the Yellow River by Xiao Hui's friends and confidants. Xingzong wanted to kill him, but the empress was saved.

古文：复为东京留守，徙王燕，改上京留守，更王秦。
现代文：又任东京留守，徙封燕王，改任上京留守，改封秦王。
English: He was also appointed to stay in Tokyo and was given the posthumous title of Yan Wang. He was also appointed to stay in Tokyo and was given the posthumous title of Qin Wang.

古文：清宁初，加尚父。
现代文：清宁初，加号尚父。
English: At the beginning of the Qing and Ning Dynasties, the plus sign was Shang father.

古文：顷之，复留守东京。
现代文：不久，又留守东京。
English: Soon after, he left for Tokyo again.

古文：明年，复为北府宰相。
现代文：次年，再任北府宰相。
English: The following year, he was reappointed as the prime minister of the northern prefecture.

古文：帝亲制诰词以褒宠之。
现代文：道宗皇上亲自做诰文以示褒赏荣宠。
English: Emperor Daozong personally wrote a congratulatory letter to show his appreciation.

古文：以柴册恩，遥授洛京留守，益赐纯德功臣，致仕，进封丰国王。
现代文：因为柴册而加恩，遥授为洛京留守，增赐纯德功臣，辞官归田，进封为丰国王。
English: Because of Zhaishan, he was pardoned. He was awarded the title of the King of Luojing, the title of the Hero of Pure Virtue, and the title of the King of Feng.

古文：坐子胡睹首与重元乱，伏诛，年七十三。
现代文：因为儿子萧胡睹首谋与重元作乱，孝友被牵连诛死，年七十三岁。
English: Because his son, Xiao Hujian, was the ringleader of the disturbance with Chong Yuan, Xiaotong was implicated and died at the age of seventy-three.

古文：胡睹在《逆臣传》。
现代文：胡睹事在《逆臣传》。
English: The story of Hu Jian is told in "The Story of a Traitor."

古文：萧蒲奴，字留隐，奚王楚不宁之后。
现代文：萧蒲奴，字留隐，奚王楚不宁的后裔。
English: Xiao Punu, the descendant of King Chu Bunin.

古文：幼孤贫，佣于医家牧牛。
现代文：幼时孤苦贫寒，受雇于医家放牛。
English: At a young age, he was poor and lonely, and was employed by a doctor to herd cattle.

古文：伤人稼，数遭笞辱。
现代文：因伤损别人家的庄稼，多次遭到拷打而受辱。
English: He was repeatedly tortured and humiliated for damaging other people's crops.

古文：医者尝见蒲奴熟寐，有蛇绕身，异之。
现代文：医者曾经看见蒲奴熟睡，有蛇绕身，觉得奇异。
English: A doctor once found it strange to see a sleeping wildebeest surrounded by snakes.

古文：教以读书，聪敏嗜学。
现代文：便教他读书，他聪明而酷爱学习。
English: I taught him to read. He is smart and loves to learn.

古文：不数年，涉猎经史，习骑射。
现代文：没几年，博览经史，通晓骑马射箭。
English: Within a few years, he was well-versed in history, horseback riding and archery.

古文：既冠，意气豪迈。
现代文：成年之后，意气豪迈。
English: After he became an adult, he became very spirited.

古文：开泰间，选充护卫，稍进用。
现代文：开泰年间，选任为护卫，渐渐得到升进任用。
English: During his stay in Thailand, he was appointed as an escort and was gradually promoted.

古文：俄坐罪黥流乌古部。
现代文：不久因犯罪黥面流放到乌古部。
English: He was soon exiled to Ugube for crimes committed in Mino.

古文：久之，召还，累任剧，迁奚六部大王，治有声。
现代文：过了很久，召回，接连担任事务繁重的职务，迁为奚六部大王，治理奚部很有声誉。
English: After a long time, he was recalled, successively held a heavy-duty position, and moved to be the king of the Six Departments. He has a good reputation in the management of the Six Departments.

古文：太平九年，大延琳据东京叛，蒲奴为都监，将右翼军，遇贼战蒲水。
现代文：太平九年，大延琳据东京反叛，蒲奴担任都监，统帅右翼军，遭遇贼军交战于蒲水。
English: In the 9th year of the Taiping era, Dai Yanlin rebelled against Tokyo, Putu served as the governor of the capital, commanded the right-wing army, and encountered the rebel army fighting in Putuo.

古文：中军少却，蒲奴与左翼军夹攻之。
现代文：贼中军稍有后退，蒲奴与左翼军夹攻之。
English: The Thief's army retreated slightly, and Punu attacked with the left wing army.

古文：先据高丽、女直要冲，使不得求援，又败贼于手山。
现代文：又先行据守高丽、女真要冲，使大延琳无法求援，又击败贼军于手山。
English: In addition, defending Goryeo and Yeonjin rushed ahead, so that Dayenlin could not ask for help, and defeated the thief army in the mountains.

古文：延琳走入城。
现代文：延琳逃入城中。
English: Yanlin fled into the city.

古文：蒲奴不介马而驰，追杀余贼。
现代文：蒲奴顾不上给战马披甲便急驰追杀余贼。
English: Not caring about armouring his horse, he hurried to kill the remaining thieves.

古文：已而大军围东京，蒲奴讨诸叛邑，平吼山贼，延琳坚守不敢出。
现代文：不久大军包围东京，蒲奴讨伐各反叛城邑，讨平吼山贼，延琳坚守城池不敢出战。
English: Soon, a large army encircled Tokyo. Puno fought against the rebellious towns and subdued the roaring bandits. Yanlin held fast to the castle and did not dare to go to war.

古文：既被擒，蒲奴以功加兼侍中。
现代文：延琳被擒之后，蒲奴因功升为兼侍中。
English: After Yanlin was banished, Punu was promoted to concurrent chamberlain for his service.

古文：重熙六年，改北阻卜副部署，再授奚六部大王。
现代文：重熙六年，改任北阻卜副部署，再授为奚六部大王。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Chongxi, he was transferred to the position of deputy commander of the North Blockade, and then awarded the title of the Great King of the Six Provinces.

古文：十五年，为西南面招讨使，西征夏国。
现代文：十五年，任西南面招讨使，西征夏国。
English: For fifteen years, he served as the envoy of the southwestern side, and the western expedition of Xia Guo.

古文：蒲奴以兵二千据河桥，聚巨舰数十艘，仍作大钩，人莫测。
现代文：蒲奴率兵两千据守黄河桥，齐集巨舰数十艘，又制好大钩，人们不明所以。
English: Two thousand soldiers led by Punu guarded the Yellow River Bridge, gathered dozens of huge ships, and made big hooks. People don't know why.

古文：战之日，布舟于河，绵亘三十余里。
现代文：交战之日，将船布列于河中，绵延三十余里。
English: On the day of the battle, the ships were lined up in the middle of the river, stretching for more than 30 miles.

古文：遣人伺上流，有浮物辄取之。
现代文：派人侦察上流，有浮出之物便取之。
English: Send someone to reconnoiter upstream, and if anything floats up, pick it up.

古文：大军既失利，蒲奴未知，适有大木顺流而下，势将坏浮梁，断归路，操舟者争钩致之，桥得不坏。
现代文：大军失利之后，蒲奴不知，正好有大木顺流而下，其势将要冲坏浮梁，阻断大军回归之路，驾船之人争相钩树上来，浮桥得以不坏。
English: After the defeat of the great army, Pu Nu did not know that there happened to be a large tree floating down the river, which was about to break the floating beam and block the way for the return of the great army. The boatmen scrambled to hook up the tree, so that the floating bridge would not be broken.

古文：明年，复西征，悬兵深入，大掠而还，复为奚六部大王。
现代文：次年，再次西征，孤军深入，大肆抢掠而回，再任奚六部大王。
English: The following year, he once again went to the West to lead a lone army deep into the country, returned with a large amount of plunder, and was once again appointed the king of the Six Provinces.

古文：致仕，卒。
现代文：辞官，不久去世。
English: He died shortly afterwards.

