古文：客隐游天毒国道人骞霄国画工营陵人扶娄国人徐登周眕奴赵侯天竺胡人鞫道龙阳羡书生侯子光
现代文：客隐游天毒国道人骞霄国画工营陵人扶娄国人徐登周眕奴赵侯天竺胡人鞫道龙阳羡书生侯子光
English: Hakka wanderer, wanderer, wanderer, wanderer, wanderer, wanderer, wanderer, wanderer, wanderer

古文：客隐游
现代文：客隐游
English: Guest privacy tour

古文：魏安厘王观翔鹄而乐之，曰：寡人得如鹄之飞，视天下如芥也。
现代文：魏安厘王看着正大飞翔的天鹅十分高兴，说：我如果能像天鹅这样在空中飞翔，就可以傲视人间，视天下如同草芥了。
English: King Wei Anli was very happy to see the swan flying in the sky. He said, "If I could fly in the sky like a swan, I would be able to look down on the world and see it as nothing more than grass."

古文：客有隐游者闻之，作木鹄而献王。
现代文：客人中有位隐士听了这句话，回去做了个木天鹅献给安厘王。
English: One of the guests, a hermit, heard this and went back to make a wooden swan for King Anli.

古文：王曰：此有形无用者也。
现代文：安厘王说： 这东西只有模样而无用处。
English: Anli Wang said, "This thing is only appearance and useless.

古文：夫作无用之器，世之奸民也。
现代文：他做这种无用的东西，看来一定是个奸邪谄媚之人了！ 
English: For him to do such a useless thing, it seems he must be a traitor and a sycophant!

古文：召隐游，欲加刑焉。
现代文：随即，他将那隐士唤上来，想对他动以刑罚。
English: Then he summoned the hermit and wanted to punish him.

古文：隐游曰：大王知有用之用，未悟无用之用也。
现代文：隐士说： 大王只知道有用的东西有用，却不知无用的东西也有用。
English: The hermit said: The great king only knows that useful things are useful, but he does not know that useless things are also useful.

古文：今臣请为大王翔之。
现代文：今天，我请求为大王进行一次飞翔表演。 
English: Today, I'm asking you to perform a flying act for the king.

古文：乃取而骑焉，遂翻然飞去，莫知所之也。
现代文：说完，抓过木天鹅便骑上去，那木天鹅抖抖翅膀就飞走了，没人知道飞到哪里去了。
English: Having said this, he caught a swan and rode up to it. The swan fluttered its wings and flew away. No one knows where it went.

古文：天毒国道人
现代文：天毒国道人
English: Tenpo National Taoist Choir

古文：燕昭王七年，沐骨之国来朝，则申毒国之一名也。
现代文：燕昭王即位七年的时候，沐骨之国派遣使者来朝。所谓沐骨之国，则是天竺国的另一名称。
English: When King Yan Zhao had been on the throne for seven years, the country of bones sent an envoy to the North. The so-called country of bones is another name for the Heavenly Kingdom.

古文：有道术人名尸罗。
现代文：他们来的人当中，有一位懂道术的人，名叫尸罗。
English: Among the people they came to, there was a man who understood Daoism, named Zhao Luo.

古文：问其年，云：百四十岁。
现代文：问他的年龄，他回答说一百四十岁。
English: Asked his age, he replied that he was a hundred and forty years old.

古文：荷锡持瓶，云：发其国五年，乃至燕都。
现代文：他带着锡杖持着花瓶，从天竺国出发已经五年，才来到燕国的都城。
English: Carrying a tin cane and holding a vase, it has been five years since he set out from the Land of Sky and Earth before arriving in the capital city of the Country of Swallows.

古文：喜炫惑之术。於其指端，出浮图十层，高三尺，乃诸天神仙，巧丽物绝。
现代文：尸罗擅长幻术，在他手指尖上能够现出十层佛塔，高三尺。天上的各位神仙，各露仙姿，仪态万方，打着旗子绕塔鼓舞而行。
English: Zhi Luo is good at illusion. On the tip of his finger, he can make a ten-story pagoda appear, three feet high. All the celestial beings, in all their celestial guises, and in all manner of postures, walk around the pagoda, inspired by the banner.

古文：列幢盖鼓舞，绕塔而行，人皆长五六分，歌唱之音，如真人矣。尸罗喷水为氛雾，暗数里间。
现代文：他们都五六分长，唱歌的声音，如同其人一样。尸罗喷出水来化作雾气，使数里之内都昏暗不明。
English: They were all about five or six feet long, and sang in a voice like that of a human being. The corpse spouted water and turned into mist, making it dark and unclear for several miles.

古文：俄而复吹为疾风，氛雾皆止。
现代文：顷刻，尸罗又吹出疾风，雾气全都消散了。
English: In an instant, the gale blew out of the corpse, and the mist all dissipated.

古文：又吹指上浮图，渐入云里。
现代文：接着，他又吹指上佛塔，佛塔便渐渐钻进云彩里。
English: Next, he blew his finger on the pagoda, and the pagoda gradually sank into the clouds.

古文：又于左耳出青龙，右耳出白虎。
现代文：随即，他的左耳钻出一条青龙，右耳钻出一只白虎。
English: Immediately, a blue dragon emerged from his left ear and a white tiger from his right ear.

古文：始入之时，才一二寸，稍至八九尺。
现代文：刚出来的时候，才一二寸，一会儿就到了八九尺。
English: When I first came out, it was only one or two centimeters, and soon it was up to 89 feet.

古文：俄而风至云起，即以一手挥之，即龙虎皆入耳中。
现代文：倏尔，风至云起，尸罗只用一手挥了挥，那青龙和白虎全又钻进耳朵里，尸罗又张开大口向着太阳。
English: Suddenly, the wind rose to the clouds, and Zhao Luo waved with only one hand. The blue dragon and the white tiger all got into his ears, and Zhao Luo opened his big mouth to the sun.

古文：又张口向日，则见人乘羽盖，驾螭、鹄，直入于口内。
现代文：这时，只见有人乘着羽盖，驾着龙和天鹅径直钻入尸罗的口中。
English: At this time, I saw someone riding a feather cover, driving a dragon and a swan straight into the mouth of the corpse.

古文：复以手抑胸上，而闻衣袖之中，轰轰雷声。
现代文：尸罗又把手按在胸上，可以听到他衣袖之中有轰轰雷声。
English: Zhao Luo pressed his hand on his chest again. A thunderous sound could be heard in his sleeve.

古文：更张口，则向见羽盖、螭、鹄，相随从口中而出。
现代文：尸罗张大了口。则可以看见龙和天鹅相随从他口中飞出来。
English: The corpse opened his mouth wide and the dragon and the swan could be seen flying out of his mouth.

古文：尸罗常坐日中，渐渐觉其形小，或化为老叟，或变为婴儿，倏忽而死，香气盈室，时有清风来，吹之更生，如向之形。
现代文：尸罗常常坐在太阳底下，只见他在渐渐变小，一会儿变成老头，一会儿变成婴儿，最后忽然死去了。这时，香气满室，不断有徐徐清风吹来。吹着吹着，尸罗便苏醒过来，得到了再生，模样跟先前一样。
English: Zhi Luo often sat under the sun, and he gradually became smaller and smaller, and then he became an old man, and then he became a baby, and then he suddenly died. At this time, the aroma filled the room, and a gentle breeze kept blowing. Blowing and blowing, Zhi Luo woke up and was reborn, looking the same as before.

古文：咒术炫惑，神怪无穷。
现代文：这变幻之术，真是神怪无穷啊。
English: This magic of transformation is truly amazing.

古文：骞霄国画工
现代文：骞霄国画工
English: Zeng Xiao, National Painter

古文：秦始皇元年。骞霄国献刻玉善画工名裔。
现代文：秦始皇元年，骞霄国献给他一名善于雕刻与绘画的人，他的名字叫裔。
English: In the first year of the reign of the First Emperor of the Qin Dynasty, the State of Jinsha dedicated to him a man who was good at carving and painting. His name was Yuan.

古文：使含丹青以漱地，即成魑魅及鬼怪群物之象；刻石为百兽之形，毛发宛若真矣。
现代文：他将朱砂和石青喷在地上，当即就可以变出各种鬼怪的嘴脸和各种东西的样子。他还能够用石头雕刻出各种动物，连毛发都像真的一样，栩栩如生。
English: He sprayed cinnabar and lapis lazuli on the ground and was immediately able to conjure up the faces of various ghosts and the appearance of various things. He was also able to carve all kinds of animals with stones, and even the hair was like real, lifelike.

古文：皆铭其臆前，记以年月。
现代文：另外，他还把雕刻的时间铭刻在动物们的胸前。
English: In addition, he also engraved the time of the carving on the animals' chests.

古文：工人以绢画地。方寸之内，写四渎五岳列国之图。
现代文：他把绢布铺在地上，方寸之内，便画出江、河、淮、济等四渎和五岳以及列国的地图。
English: He spread the reed cloth on the ground, and within a square inch, he drew a map of rivers, rivers, Huai, Jie and other four rivers and five mountains, as well as countries.

古文：又为龙凤，骞翥若飞。皆不得作目，作必飞走也。
现代文：他刻画出来的龙和凤凰，则飘然若飞，活灵活现，但都没有眼睛，如果刻画出眼睛，它们就会真的飞走了。
English: The dragons and phoenixes he depicted were soaring and alive, but they had no eyes. If he had depicted eyes, they would have really flown away.

古文：始皇嗟曰：刻画之形，何能飞走。
现代文：秦始皇叹道：这刻画出来的假东西，怎么能够飞走呢？
English: Qin Shihuang sighed, "How can this fake thing that was carved out fly away?"

古文：使以淳漆各点两玉虎一眼睛，旬日则失之，不知何所在。
现代文：他让那画工用漆在两只玉虎的头上各点一只眼睛，结果不到十天，这两只玉虎便失踪了，不知道到哪里去了。
English: He asked the artist to paint an eye on the head of each of the two tigers. Less than ten days later, the two tigers disappeared and it is not known where they went.

古文：山泽人云：见二白虎，各无一眼，相随而行，毛色形相，异于常见者。
现代文：深山大泽边的百姓们说，看见两只白老虎，各缺一只眼睛，总是形影不离，结伴而行，长得完全一样，连毛色都没什么差别。
English: The people on the edge of the deep mountain lake said that they saw two white tigers, each missing an eye, always inseparable, walking side by side, looking exactly the same, even the fur color is no different.

古文：至明年，西方献两白虎，皆无一眼。
现代文：经常看到这两只白老虎的人，无不感到惊奇。到了第二年，西方献来两只白老虎，都缺一只眼睛。
English: People who often see these two white tigers are always surprised. The following year, the West presented two white tigers, both missing an eye.

古文：始皇发槛视之，疑是先所失者，乃刺杀之，检其臆前，果是元年所刻玉虎也。
现代文：秦始皇命人打开槛车细看，怀疑是先前丢失的那两只玉虎，便将它们刺死了。检查它们的胸前，皆有小字，果然是去年丢失的那两只玉虎。
English: Qin Shihuang ordered someone to open the threshing machine to take a closer look, suspecting that it was the two previously lost jade tigers, and then stabbed them to death. Checking their chests, they all had small characters, and sure enough, they were the two jade tigers lost last year.

古文：营陵人
现代文：营陵人
English: Yingling people

古文：汉北海营陵有道人，能令人与已死人相见。
现代文：汉代，北海营陵这地方有位道士，能够让人和已死去的人相会。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was a Taoist monk in the Beihai Yingling Mausoleum who was able to make people meet the dead.

古文：其同郡，妇死已数年，闻而往见之曰：愿令我一见亡妇，死不恨矣。
现代文：和他同一个郡里有位先生，妻子已经死好几年了。听说了这件事，便登门拜访，对道士说到：让我看看死去的妻子吧，这样我死后也就没什么遗憾的。
English: There was a gentleman in the same county as him whose wife had been dead for several years. When he heard about this, he went to visit her and said to the priest, "Let me see my dead wife, so that when I die I won't have any regrets."

古文：道人曰：卿可往见之。若闻鼓声，即出勿留。
现代文：道士说：你可以去看她，但是如果听见鼓声，你必须立即出来，不要停留。
English: The priest said, "You can go to see her, but if you hear the drums, you must come out immediately and not stay.

古文：乃语其相见之术。
现代文：然后，就把与死人相见之术传授与他。
English: Then he taught him the art of meeting the dead.

古文：于是与妇言语悲喜，恩情如生。
现代文：这位先生见到亡妻之后，悲喜交加，恩爱如生，不知不觉过去了很长时间。
English: After this gentleman saw his deceased wife, a long time passed unknowingly, a time of sorrow, joy and love.

古文：良久，闻鼓声，恨恨不能得往。
现代文：这时候，忽然传来鼓声，他恨不得随妻子而去。
English: Suddenly, there was a drumbeat, and he couldn't wait to follow his wife.

古文：当出户时，奄忽其衣裙户间，掣绝而去。
现代文：当他出门的时候，匆忙间衣服的大襟被门夹住了，他猛地将其挣断才走了出来。
English: When he went out, in his haste, the door caught the collar of his coat, and he had to break it in order to get out.

古文：至后岁余，此人身亡。
现代文：一年多后，这人便死了。
English: More than a year later, the man died.

古文：室家葬之，开冢，见妇棺盖下有衣裾。
现代文：家人想把他同妻子埋在一起，打开他妻子的坟墓，只见棺材盖下夹着块衣服的大襟。
English: His family wanted to bury him with his wife, and when they opened her grave, they found a large piece of clothing under the coffin lid.

古文：扶娄国人
现代文：扶娄国人
English: The people of Fushun

古文：南垂有扶娄之国。
现代文：南疆有个扶娄国，那里的人都善于变幻之术，易容貌改服饰。
English: In southern Xinjiang, there is a country called Fuxi. The people there are good at the art of illusion and can easily change their appearance and clothing.

古文：能吐云喷火，鼓腹则如雷霆之声。
现代文：他们大则大到兴起云雾，小则小到钻入纤毫之中。
English: They are large enough to rise into the clouds, and small enough to burrow into the fine dust.

古文：或为巨象、狮子、龙、蛇、犬、马之状。或为虎口中生人，或于掌中备百兽之乐，宛转屈曲于指间。
现代文：他们的衣服缀金戴玉，挂着羽毛。他们能吐云喷火，鼓起肚子就会传出轰轰雷声，或者变成大象狮子龙蛇犬马的样子，或者从老虎口中钻将出来，或者让各种动物在掌上尽情欢乐，让它们盘旋舞蹈于手指之间。
English: Their clothes are adorned with gold and jade and are hung with feathers. They can spit fire and clouds, and when their stomachs swell, thunder and lightning can be heard. They can also transform themselves into elephants, lions, dragons, snakes, dogs and horses, or come out of a tiger's mouth, or make all kinds of animals have fun in their palms, and make them dance around between their fingers.

古文：人形或长数分，或复数寸，神怪倏忽，炫丽于时。
现代文：他们的身体有时长数分，有时缩数寸，神神怪怪，变化于倏忽之间。
English: Their bodies, sometimes growing a few inches, sometimes shrinking a few inches, are grotesque, changing in the blink of an eye.

古文：乐府皆传此伎，至末犹学焉，得粗得精，代代不绝，乃俗谓之婆侯伎，则扶娄之音讹耳。
现代文：他们这套变化之术，炫丽于当时，每个音乐官署里都传授此术，到了前朝末代还在学习呢。有的学得粗浅，有的学得精深，代代流传不绝。这套变幻之术，民间欲称婆侯伎。婆侯乃是扶娄二字的讹音。
English: At that time, their art of transformation was so dazzling that it was taught in every music office, and they were still learning it in the last generation of the former dynasty. Some learned it in a shallow way, some learned it in a profound way, and it has been passed down from generation to generation. This art of transformation is popularly known as "bohogi." "Boh" is the rhyme of the word "fu" (扶).

古文：徐登
现代文：徐登
English: Xu Deng

古文：闽中有徐登者，女子化为丈夫。
现代文：福建有个叫徐登的人，他是由女子变成男人的。
English: In Fujian, there is a man named Xu Deng, who changed from a woman to a man.

古文：与东阳赵并善方术。时遭兵乱，相遇于溪，各矜其所能。
现代文：他与东阳郡的赵都善于方术，当时兵荒马乱，二人在溪水边相遇。
English: He and Zhao from Dongyang County were both good at the art of the square. When the war broke out, the two of them met at the edge of a stream.

古文：登先禁溪水为不流，次禁枯柳为生稊。
现代文：他们开始都认为自己的本事大。徐登先露出一手，让溪水停住不流；赵接着施展本领，让枯死的柳树长出茂密的枝叶。
English: At first, they all thought they were good at it. Xu Deng first showed his ability to stop the flow of the stream; Zhao then showed his ability to make the dead willow tree grow thick branches and leaves.

古文：二人相视而笑。
现代文：二人不由相视一笑。
English: The two can't help but smile at each other.

古文：登年长，师事之。
现代文：徐登年龄大些，赵便拿他当作老师对待。
English: Xu Deng was older, and Zhao treated him as a teacher.

古文：后登身故，东入长安。
现代文：后来徐登死了，赵便向东进了长安城。
English: After Xu Deng died, Zhao went east into Chang'an City.

古文：百姓未知笑而不应，屋亦不损。
现代文：这里的百姓都不认识他。他便跳上房顶，用鼎来烧火煮饭。
English: The people here don't know him, so he jumps on the roof and cooks on the open fire.

古文：又尝临水求渡，船人不许。
现代文：这家的主人感到很吃惊，便大声责怪他。赵却笑而不答，房子也一点没有损坏。
English: The owner of the house was surprised and loudly blamed him, but Zhao laughed and did not answer, and the house was not damaged at all.

古文：乃张盖坐中，长啸呼风，乱流而济。
现代文：接着，他又来到河边想渡过去，船家不许他上船；他便打开雨伞坐在当中，一声长啸，呼来一阵狂风，将他送到了对岸。
English: Then he came to the river and wanted to cross it, but the boatmen would not let him on board, so he opened his umbrella and sat in the middle, and a long roar and a rush of wind sent him to the other side.

古文：于是百姓敬服，从者如归。
现代文：于是，百姓们都很敬服他，拜他为师的人如潮水般涌来。
English: As a result, the people all admired him, and people who worshiped him as a teacher flooded in.

古文：长安令恶而杀之。
现代文：长安县令对赵深恶痛绝，便将他杀害了。
English: The Chang'an County magistrate detested Zhao Sheng and killed him.

古文：民立祠于永宁，而蚊蚋不能入。
现代文：老百姓在永宁为他修了一座祠堂，连蚊蚋之类的昆虫都无法入内。
English: Ordinary people built a shrine for him in Yongning, and even insects such as mosquitoes cannot enter.

古文：周眕奴
现代文：周眕奴
English: Zhou Shinu

古文：魏时，寻阳县北山中蛮人，有术，能使人化作虎。毛色爪身悉如真虎。
现代文：魏时，寻阳县北山中居住着一伙蛮子，他们颇有法术，能把人变成老虎，全身上下跟真虎毫无二致。
English: In the Wei Dynasty, there was a group of barbarians living in Beishan, Huanyang County. They had a lot of magic and could turn people into tigers, which were exactly the same as real tigers.

古文：乡人周眕有一奴，使入山伐薪。
现代文：当地人周眕有一个奴仆，主人派他进山砍柴。
English: In the countryside, a man named Zhou Qi had a servant who was sent into the mountains by his master to collect firewood.

古文：奴有妇及妹，亦与俱行。
现代文：这奴仆还有妻子和妹妹，也一同前往。
English: The servant had a wife and a sister, who also went into the hills with him.

古文：既至山，奴语二人云：汝且上高树去，我欲有所为。
现代文：刚到山上，这奴仆便对妻子和妹妹二人说：你们暂且爬到高高的树上去，我将要有个大的举动。
English: As soon as he arrived on the mountain, the servant said to his wife and two sisters: "Climb up to the high tree for the time being. I am about to make a big move."

古文：如其言。既而入草，须臾，一大黄斑虎从草山，奋越哮吼，甚为可畏。二人大怖。
现代文：正如他所说的那样，既而钻进了草丛。有顷，一只大黄斑猛虎从草丛中蹿出来，狂奔吼啸，十分可怕，把那两个女人吓得乱叫。
English: Just as he said, he went into the bushes. Suddenly, a big yellow-spotted tiger came out of the bushes and roared wildly, very scary, scaring the two women into screaming.

古文：良久还草中，少时复还为人，语二人：归家慎勿道。后遂向等辈说之。
现代文：过了一会儿，老虎又回到草丛。倏尔又还原为人。这奴仆对妻子和妹妹说：回家千万不要把这件事说出去。
English: After a while, the tiger returned to the grass and the donkey became human again. The servant said to his wife and sister, "When you get home, don't tell anyone about this."

古文：周寻复之，乃以醇酒饮之，令熟醉。
现代文：后来，这两个女人却把此事跟同伴们说了。
English: The two women later told friends about the incident.

古文：使人解其衣服，乃身体事事祥视，了无异。唯于髻发中得一纸，画作虎，虎边有符，周密取录之。
现代文：人们商量了一下，用酒把他灌醉，然后解开他的衣服，整个身体各处都仔细看过，却未发现有什么异常，只是在发髻中找到一张纸，上面画着一只老虎，老虎旁边有咒符。有人小心翼翼抄录那咒符。
English: After some discussion, they plied him with wine and undressed him. They examined his entire body and found nothing unusual, except for a piece of paper in his hair, on which was drawn a tiger, and next to the tiger a spell. The spell was carefully copied.

古文：奴既唤醒，问之。
现代文：那奴仆被唤醒后，遭到人们的盘问，见事已败露，只好道出真相。
English: When the servant woke up, he was interrogated by the people, and when he saw that he had failed, he had no choice but to tell the truth.

古文：见事已露，遂具说本末，云：先尝于蛮中告籴，有一蛮师云有此符，以三尺布，一斗米，一只鸡，一斗酒，受得此法。
现代文：他说：我先前曾经去找那伙蛮子买粮食，有位蛮师说他有这种咒符。于是，我就用三尺布、一斗米、一只鸡、一斗酒，学成了这种法术。
English: He said: "I went to buy grain from the band of barbarians earlier, and a barbarian master said he had this spell, so I used three feet of cloth, a bucket of rice, a chicken, and a bucket of wine to learn this spell.

古文：赵侯
现代文：赵侯
English: Zhao Hou

古文：晋赵侯少好诸术，姿形悴陋，长不满数尺。
现代文：晋代，赵侯年轻时喜好各种法术，显得十分憔悴和丑陋，他身高不到数尺。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, Zhao Hou liked all kinds of magic when he was young. He was very gaunt and ugly, and he was less than a few feet tall.

古文：以盆盛水作禁，鱼龙立见。
现代文：他用盆盛水作幻术，鱼龙立刻显现出来。
English: He used a basin of water to perform the illusion, and the fish-dragon immediately appeared.

古文：侯有白米，为鼠所盗。
现代文：他有不少白米，却常被老鼠盗食。
English: He has a lot of white rice, but it is often stolen by mice.

古文：乃披发持刀，画作地狱，四面为门。
现代文：于是，赵侯就披头散发地操起刀，在地上画一座地狱城，四面是门。
English: As a result, Zhao Hou cocked his sword and drew a hell city on the ground, with doors on all sides.

古文：向东啸，群鼠俱到。
现代文：他朝东吼叫几声，一大群老鼠都赶到了。
English: He yelled a few times to the east, and a large group of mice arrived.

古文：咒之曰：凡非啖者过去，盗者令止。
现代文：念咒语道：凡是没有偷吃白米的过去，偷吃的给我站住！
English: Chanting the mantra, "For those who have not stolen white rice in the past, please stop stealing!"

古文：止者十余，剖腹看脏，有米在焉。
现代文：共有十几只老鼠站住了。他便将其剖腹查内脏，果然肚子里还有白米粒呢。
English: A total of more than a dozen mice stopped. He then dissected their entrails and found grains of white rice in their stomachs.

古文：曾徒跣须屐，因仰头微吟，双屐自至。
现代文：他有一次光着脚正需要鞋，便仰着脑袋小声叨咕了几句，一双鞋便从天而降。
English: Once, when he was barefoot and needed shoes, he raised his head and muttered a few words, and a pair of shoes fell from the sky.

古文：人有笑其形容者，便阳设，以酒杯向日，即掩鼻不脱，仍稽颡谢过。着地不举。
现代文：有人笑话他形容丑陋，他便在白天作幻术，举起酒杯朝着太阳放到鼻子上，酒杯不掉，他还能叩首致谢，着地不举。
English: Some people joked that he was ugly, so he would perform illusions during the day. He would hold a wine glass up to the sun and place it on his nose. The wine glass would not fall off, and he could also nod his head in thanks without lifting it off the ground.

古文：永康有骑石山，山上有石人骑石马，侯以印指之，人马一时落首，今犹在山下。
现代文：永康县境内有座骑石山，山上有个石人骑着一匹石马。他用自己的印章一指，那石人和石马的脑袋便同时落地，现在还在山下面。
English: In Yongkang County, there is a rock-climbing mountain. On the mountain, there is a stone man riding a stone horse. With one finger of his seal, the heads of the stone man and the stone horse fell to the ground at the same time, and are still under the mountain.

古文：天竺胡人
现代文：天竺胡人
English: Tianyao Hujin

古文：晋永嘉中，有天竺胡人来渡江南。
现代文：晋代永嘉年间，有位天竺国胡人来到江南。
English: During the Yongjia Dynasty of the Jin Dynasty, a Hu man from the State of Tianzhu came to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：有幻术，能断舌吐火，所在人士聚观。
现代文：他会作幻术，能够割断舌头吐出火来，周围的人们都来围观。
English: He could perform illusions, he could cut out his tongue and spit fire, and people would gather around to watch.

古文：将断舌，先吐以示众。然后刀截，血流覆地。乃烧取置器中，传以示人。
现代文：他先把舌头吐出来让众人看，然后用刀截断，血流遍地，又烧了一阵儿放入器皿中，让大家传看。
English: First he spat out his tongue for all to see, then he cut it off with a knife, and the blood ran all over the floor. He then burned it for a while and placed it in a vessel for all to see.

古文：视之，舌半犹在。
现代文：再一看他，还有半只舌头。
English: Look at him again, he still has half a tongue.

古文：既而还取，合续之，有顷如故，不知其实断否也。
现代文：随即，他把那半只舌头拿过来接上去，有顷便完好如初，不知道他真的截断与否。
English: Immediately, he took the half of the tongue and attached it, and for a moment it was intact, not knowing whether he had really cut it off or not.

古文：尝取绢布与人各执一头，中断之。已而取两段，合祝之，绢布还连续，故一体也。
现代文：他曾经拿出绢布让人各扯一头，中间割断，然后便拿着两块断绢闭目祈祝，那绢布当即就连为一体。
English: He used to take out a piece of cloth and ask people to pull one end at a time, cut it in the middle, and then he would close his eyes and pray with the two pieces of cloth, and the cloth would immediately become one.

古文：又取书纸及绳缕之属，投火中，众共视之，见其烧爇了尽。
现代文：又拿书纸及绳缕之类，扔入火中，大家一起看着它们燃成灰烬。
English: They also took pieces of paper and string and threw them into the fire, and we all watched them burn to ashes.

古文：乃拨灰，举而出之，故向物也。
现代文：他再一拨灰，手里举着的还是原来那些东西。
English: He shovels more ash, still holding the same things in his hands.

古文：鞫道龙
现代文：鞫道龙
English: 道龙

古文：葛洪云：余少所知有鞫道龙，善为幻术。向余说古时事。有东海人黄公，少时能乘龙御虎，佩赤金为刀，以绛缯束发。
现代文：葛洪说：我小时候知道有个叫鞫道龙的，善于幻术，他向我讲古时候的事，黄公是东海上的人，年少时能骑龙赶虎，身上佩着一把赤金刀，用深红色的丝带扎着头发。
English: Ge Hong said, "When I was a child, I knew that there was a man called Shantou Long, who was good at illusion. He told me about ancient times. Huang Gong was a man from the East Sea. When he was young, he could ride a dragon to chase away a tiger. He wore a red-gold sword and tied his hair with a crimson ribbon.

古文：立兴云雾，坐成山河。
现代文：他站起来能呼风唤云，坐下去巍然如山如河。
English: When he stands up, he can call forth the wind, and when he sits down, he is like a mountain.

古文：及衰老，气力羸惫，饮酒过度，不能行其术。
现代文：到了老年，他变得羸弱衰竭，力不能支，再加之饮酒过度，便不能行幻术了。
English: In his old age, he became frail and weak, unable to support his strength, and in addition to excessive drinking, he could not perform magic.

古文：秦末，有白虎见于东海，黄公以赤刀厌之，术既不行，为虎所杀。
现代文：秦朝末年，东海一带出现了白老虎，黄公拿着赤金刀想去制服它，结果由于不能行幻术，就被老虎吃掉了。
English: At the end of the Qin Dynasty, a white tiger appeared in the East China Sea area. Huang Gong wanted to subdue it with a red-gold sword. As a result, since he could not perform magic, he was eaten by the tiger.

古文：三辅人俗用以为戏，汉朝亦取以为角抵之戏焉。
现代文：后来，三辅一带的人把这件事编成戏给老百姓们演了。汉朝时，在歌舞杂技中还保留着这个节目。
English: Later, people in the Sanfu area made up a play about this and performed it for the people. During the Han Dynasty, this show was still preserved in song and dance acrobatics.

古文：阳羡书生
现代文：阳羡书生
English: Yang Enshuo

古文：东晋阳羡许彦于绥安山行，遇一书生，年十七八，卧路侧，云：脚痛，求寄彦鹅笼中。
现代文：东晋东间，阳羡县有位叫许彦的人正在绥安山里走，遇见一个十七八岁的书生，躺在路旁，说自己脚痛，并请求许彦打开手提的鹅笼子，他要钻进去。
English: In the eastern part of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, a man named Xu Yan from Yang Zhen County was walking in the Lu'an Mountains. He met a 178-year-old student who was lying on the roadside, saying that his feet hurt, and asked Xu Yan to open the goose cage he was carrying. He wanted to get in.

古文：彦以为戏言，书生便入笼。
现代文：许彦开始以为他开玩笑，便打开鹅笼。
English: Xu Yan thought he was joking at first and opened the goose cage.

古文：笼亦不更广，书生亦不更小。
现代文：结果，那书生真的就钻进去了。
English: As a result, the student really got into it.

古文：宛然与双鹅并坐，鹅亦不惊。
现代文：奇怪的是，那笼子也不变大，书生也没变小，他却与一对鹅并坐在一起，鹅竟然不惊。
English: Strangely, the cage did not change in size, nor did the student become smaller, but he sat with a pair of geese, and the geese were not surprised.

古文：彦负笼而去，都不觉重。
现代文：许彦提起那笼子，并不觉重。
English: Xu Yan picked up the cage, not caring how heavy it was.

古文：前息树下，书生乃出笼。谓彦曰：欲为君薄设。
现代文：来到一颗大树下休息的时候，书生才走出来，对许彦说：我想为你设一薄宴，以示感谢。
English: When he came to rest under a large tree, Shousheng came out and said to Xu Yan: "I want to hold a banquet for you to show my gratitude."

古文：彦曰：甚善。
现代文：许彦点点头说：很好。
English: Hirohiko said, "All right.

古文：乃于口中吐一铜盘奁子，奁子中具诸馔殽，海陆珍羞方丈，其器皿皆是铜物，气味芳美，世所罕见。
现代文：于是，那书生从嘴里吐出一铜盘奁子，奁子中有各种饭菜，山珍海味罗列在一起。那器皿全是铜的，气味芳美。世所罕见。
English: As a result, the student spat out a copper plate of dumplings from his mouth. The dumplings contained a variety of dishes, with mountain and sea delicacies lined up next to each other. The dishes were all made of copper and had a fragrant smell, which is rare in the world.

古文：酒数行，乃谓彦曰：向将一妇人自随，今欲暂要之。
现代文：酒喝了数巡，那书生才对许彦说道：这些日子，有一个女人总跟着我；今天，我想暂时把她唤来。
English: After drinking several rounds of wine, the student finally said to Xu Yan: These days, there is a woman who always follows me; today, I want to temporarily summon her.

古文：彦曰：甚善。
现代文：许彦说：很好。
English: Hirohiko said, "All right.

古文：又于口中吐出一女子，年可十五六，衣服绮丽，容貌绝伦，共坐宴。
现代文：于是，书生又从嘴里吐出一个女子，年纪大约十五六岁，容貌绝美，衣服华丽，同他们坐在一起饮酒。
English: As a result, the scholar spat out of his mouth a woman, about fifteen or sixteen years old, with an extremely beautiful face and gorgeous clothes, who was sitting and drinking with them.

古文：俄而书生醉卧。
现代文：有顷，书生便醉倒了。
English: Suddenly, the student fell down drunk.

古文：此女谓彦曰：虽与书生结好，而实怀外心，向亦窃将一男子同来，书生既眠，暂唤之，愿君勿言。
现代文：那女子对许彦说：我虽然与书生相好，可实际上却怀有外心，并偷偷地领来一个男子。书生既然睡着了，我想暂时把他唤来，希望你不要说。
English: The woman said to Xu Yan, "Although I am good friends with Shousheng, I actually harbored an ulterior motive and secretly brought a man. Since Shousheng is asleep, I want to temporarily summon him. I hope you don't say anything."

古文：彦曰：甚善。
现代文：许彦说：好吧。
English: Hirohiko said, "All right.

古文：女人于口中吐出一男子，年可二十三四，亦颖悟可爱，仍与彦叙寒温。
现代文：于是，女子便从口中吐出一个男人来，年纪大约二十三四岁，也显得十分聪颖可爱，并同许彦寒暄畅叙。
English: As a result, the woman vomited out of her mouth a man, aged about twenty-three or four years old, who also appeared to be very clever and lovely, and was chatting happily with Xu Yan.

古文：书生卧欲觉，女子吐一锦行幛，书生仍留女子共卧。
现代文：书生将要醒来，那女子又吐出一鲜艳华美且可移动的屏风，与他躺到一起。
English: The student will wake up, and the woman will spit out a bright, gorgeous, movable screen and lie down with him.

古文：男子谓彦曰：此女子虽有情，心亦不尽，向复窃将女人同行，今欲暂见之，愿君勿泄言。
现代文：那男人对许彦说：这女子与我虽然有情，但也非一心一意。方才我还偷着约一个女子前来，现在想趁此机会看看她。
English: The man said to Xu Yan, "Although this woman and I have feelings for each other, we are not of the same mind. Just now, I stole an appointment with a woman, and now I want to take this opportunity to see her.

古文：彦曰：善。
现代文：希望你不要泄露此事。许彦说：好。
English: I hope you won't divulge this. Xu Yan said, "Okay."

古文：男子又于口中吐一女子，年二十许，共宴酌。
现代文：于是，这男人又从口中吐出一个女子，年纪在二十岁左右。
English: The man then spat out a woman, aged around 20, from his mouth.

古文：戏调甚久，闻书生动声，男曰：二人眠已觉。
现代文：与他同宴共饮。调笑好长时间，听见屏风内的书生有动静，这男人说：他们已经睡醒了。
English: He dined and drank with him, and they laughed and joked for a long time. Hearing the movement of the books on the screen, the man said, "They've woken up."

古文：因取所吐女子，还内口中。
现代文：然后将所吐的女子吸回口中。
English: He then sucked the vomiting woman back into his mouth.

古文：须臾，书生处女子乃出，谓彦曰：书生欲起。
现代文：不一会儿，书生处的那个小女子就出来了，对许彦说：书生快要起来了！
English: After a while, the little woman at the student's desk came out and said to Xu Yan: "The student is about to get up!

古文：更吞向男子，独对彦坐。
现代文：然后将那男人吞进口中，单独与许彦对坐。
English: Then he swallowed the man into his mouth and sat alone with Xu Yan.

古文：书生然后谓彦曰：暂眠遂久，居独坐，当悒悒耶。
现代文：书生起来后对许彦说：这一小觉睡得太久了，让你单独坐着，挺难受吧？
English: After getting up, the student said to Xu Yan, "This nap is too long. It's uncomfortable for you to sit alone, isn't it?

古文：日已晚，便与君别。
现代文：天已经很晚了，只好跟你告别。
English: It's getting late and I have to say goodbye.

古文：还复吞此女子，诸铜器悉内口中。留大铜盘，可广二尺余。与彦别曰：无此藉君，与君相忆也。
现代文：说罢，便将那小女子连同所有铜的器皿又全吞进口中，只留下一个二尺多的大铜盘送给许彦，并告别道：别后咱们无所寄托，只有相互回忆吧！
English: Having said that, he swallowed the little woman, together with all the copper utensils, back into the import, leaving only a large copper dish more than two feet long to give to Xu Yan, and said goodbye: After parting, we have nothing to rely on, only mutual memories!

古文：大元中，彦为兰台令史，以盘饷侍中张散，散看其题，云是汉永平三年所作也。
现代文：太元年间，许彦任兰台令史，将那大铜盘送给侍中张散。张散看上面的字，说是东汉永平三年制作的。
English: In the first year of the Taiyuan era, Xu Yan, who was the governor of Lantai, gave the large bronze plate to Zhang San, a chamberlain. Zhang San read the above words and said that it was made in the third year of Yongping in the Eastern Han Dynasty.

古文：侯子光
现代文：侯子光
English: Hou Ziguang

古文：安定人侯子光，弱冠美姿仪。
现代文：侯子光是安定人，二十来岁，英俊潇洒。
English: Hou Ziguang is a stable person, in his twenties, handsome.

古文：自称佛太子，从大秦国来，当王小秦国。
现代文：他自称是佛的太子，从当时称为大秦国的罗马来，应当成为小秦国的主宰。
English: He claimed to be the prince of Buddha. He came from Rome, which was then called the Great Qin State, and should become the ruler of the Small Qin State.

古文：易姓名为李氏，依鄘爰赤眉家。
现代文：他改名为李氏，投奔到鄘处的爰赤眉家。
English: He changed his name to Mr. Li and went to live with the Zou Chakmei family in Shunde.

古文：颇见其妖怪，事微有验。
现代文：爰家见他十分古怪，便让他占了几卜，果然有些灵验。
English: When the family saw that he was very strange, they let him do some divining, which turned out to be somewhat effective.

古文：赤眉信之，妻以二女。
现代文：爱赤眉信服了他，并将两个女儿嫁给他作妻子。
English: Ai Chao Mei convinced him and married his two daughters to him as his wife.

古文：转相扇惑，京兆樊绥、竺龙、谨谌、谢乐等，众聚数千于杜阳山，称大皇帝。改元龙兴，立官属。
现代文：随即，他开始煽风点火，妖言惑众。京兆郡的樊绥、竺龙、谨谌、谢乐等聚众数千人，在杜阳山称侯子光为大皇帝，改年号为龙兴，任命主官的属吏。
English: Immediately, he began to fan the flames and deceive the public. Thousands of people gathered in the counties of Jingzhao, Jiaolong, Zhengyi, Xiele, etc. In Duyang Mountain, Hou Ziguang was called the great emperor, the year was changed to Longxing, and the subordinates of the chief officer were appointed.

古文：大将军镇西石广斩平之，子光颈无血，十余日面色如生。
现代文：镇西大将军石广将他们镇压下去了。杀侯子光的时候，他的脖子竟然没有血，砍下的头颅十多天都象活着时一样，脸色红润如初。
English: When Hou Ziguang was killed, there was no blood on his neck. For more than ten days, his severed head looked as if it had been alive, and his face was as rosy as ever.

