古文：危稹，字逢吉，抚州临川人。
现代文：危稹，字逢吉，抚州临川人。
English: He is a native of Fuzhou Linchuan.

古文：旧名科，淳熙十四年举进士，孝宗更名稹。
现代文：原名危科，淳熙十四年中举为进士，孝宗为他更名危稹。
English: Originally named Keike, Atsuhiro was promoted to Shinshi in his 14th year, and Takamune changed his name to Keishin.

古文：时洪迈得稹文，为之赏激。
现代文：当时洪迈得到危稹的文章，为之赞赏激动不已。
English: At that time, Hongmai got a dangerous article and was very excited to appreciate it.

古文：调南康军教授。
现代文：调至南康军担任教授。
English: He was transferred to the South Korean army as a professor.

古文：转运使杨万里按部，骤见叹奖，偕游庐山，相与酬倡。
现代文：转运使杨万里到南康军巡视，与他相见聚会，对他夸奖、叹服不已，同他一起游览庐山，互相酬唱应对。
English: Transshipment brought Yang Wanli to Nankang Army for inspection, met and gathered with him, praised and admired him, toured Shaoshan with him, and responded to each other.

古文：调广东帐司，未上，服父丧，免，调临安府教授。
现代文：调至广南东路担任账司，没有到任，因为父亲去世免去职务，调至临安府担任教授。
English: He was transferred to Guangdong East Road to serve as an accountant, but did not arrive, because he was relieved of his duties due to his father's death, and was transferred to Lin'an Prefecture to serve as a professor.

古文：倪思荐之，且语人曰： 吾得此一士，可以报国矣。 丁母忧，免，干办京西安抚司公事。
现代文：倪思推荐他，又对别人说： 我得到这样的一个儒学之士，可以报效国家了。 危稹因服母丧而免职，不久，干办京西安抚司公事。
English: Ni Si recommended him, and said to others: I got such a Confucian scholar, I can serve the country.Due to his mother's death, Gui Yao was relieved of his duties, and soon he was engaged in the public affairs of Beijing and Xi'an Pacification Department.

古文：入为武学谕，改太学录。
现代文：入朝为武学谕，改任太学录。
English: He entered the imperial court as a military scholar, and was later appointed as Taigakuro.

古文：明年，迁武学博士，又迁诸王宫教授。
现代文：第二年，迁升为武学博士，又迁升为诸王宫教授。
English: The following year, he was promoted to Doctor of Martial Arts, and then to Professor of Zhuwang Palace.

古文：稹谓以教名官，而实未尝教，请改创宗子学，立课试法如两学，从之。
现代文：危稹虽是以教职为官名，实际上并没有教授，请求改设创立宗子学，设置课试法如太学和武学两学一样，朝廷听从了他的建议。
English: Although he used the title of teacher as his official title, he did not actually have a teaching post. He requested that the school be re-established as a religious education school, and that the curriculum be set up in the same way as the Taiji and Wushu schools. The imperial court followed his suggestion.

古文：嘉定九年，新学成，改充博士，其教养之规，稹所论建。
现代文：嘉定九年，新学建成，危稹改职充任博士，这个学校的教育、修养等有关规定，都是危稹通过奏议论对要求建立起来的。
English: In the ninth year of Jiading, a new school was built, and Guo Jian changed his position to become a full-time doctor. The education, self-cultivation and other relevant regulations of this school were all established by Guo Jian through the discussion of the requirements.

古文：迁秘书郎、著作佐郎，兼吴益王府教授。
现代文：迁升秘书郎、著作佐郎，兼任吴益王府教授。
English: He was promoted to the position of secretary and author, and concurrently served as a professor at King Wuyi University.

古文：升著作郎兼屯田郎官。
现代文：升任著作郎兼任屯田郎官。
English: He was promoted to Shosho-ro and concurrently served as Tonden-rokan.

古文：稹始进对，请叙复军功之赏以立大信，抆拭功臣之罪以厉忠节，置局以立武事，遣使以省边防，厚赏以精间谍。
现代文：危稹初始进对朝廷，请求恢复按军功大小予以赏赐，表明朝廷说话算数，弄清楚功臣的罪责以表彰忠节，设置武局以提倡习练武事，遣派使者以省察边防，给予厚赏使间谍精干。
English: At the beginning of the crisis, he went to the imperial court to request the restoration of rewards according to the size of military merit, to show that the imperial court counted words, to clarify the culpability of heroes to commend loyalty, to set up a military bureau to promote the practice of martial arts, to send an envoy to inspect the border defense, and to give a heavy reward to make spies efficient.

古文：次论和、战、守利害，而请颛意于守。
现代文：其次，讨论讲和、攻战、坚守的利益与害处，为此请求专心一意坚守。
English: Secondly, the discussion of the benefits and harms of advocating peace, attacking war, and adhering to it, and the request to adhere to it single-mindedly.

古文：是岁春至夏不雨，稹应诏言： 安边所征敛之害，与无罪而籍没之害；楮币之改，以一夺二；盐钞之更，以新废旧；至于沮格军赏，放散死士，皆足以召怨而致旱。 
现代文：这年春天到夏季没有下雨，危稹应诏上奏说： 消除边防征敛的祸害，与没有罪而籍没家财的祸害；改革纸币，以一当二；盐钞更制，以新钞废除旧钞；至于阻止军赏，放散死士，都足以招致天怒人怨而导致旱灾。 
English: When there was no rain in the spring and summer of that year, the emperor issued an imperial edict: "Eliminate the scourge of collecting taxes at the border and the scourge of losing family wealth without committing a crime; reform paper money to make it more useful; change the salt note system to abolish old notes with new notes; as for preventing military rewards and scattering dead soldiers, all of these are enough to incur the wrath of heaven and lead to drought.

古文：明年又论： 谋国者欲以安靖为安靖，忧国者欲以振厉为安靖，自二议不合，是以国无成谋，人无定志。
现代文：第二年又上书议论说 ：谋求治国的人想以安逸平静为安定，为国担忧的人想以振肃、厉行为安定，二种议论不统一，因此造成了国家没有统一的治理计划，人们也缺乏固定的志向。
English: The following year, he wrote a book to discuss: Those who seek to govern the country want to achieve stability with ease and calmness, while those who are worried about the country want to achieve stability with vigilance and severity. The two types of discussions are not unified, which has resulted in the country not having a unified governance plan, and people also lack fixed aspirations.

古文：愿诏大臣合二议共图之，且欲下两淮帅臣，讲明守御之备。 最后言： 事无成规者，皆不可为。
现代文：希望皇上诏令大臣统一这两种不同的议论而共同谋求治国之策，又召集两淮的将帅臣僚，讲清楚坚守、抵御边患的准备事宜。 最后还说 ：事情没有一定成规的，都不能做。
English: It is hoped that the Emperor will order the ministers to unify these two different discussions and jointly seek the best strategy for governing the country, and also convene the two generals and ministers to clearly explain the preparations for adhering to and resisting the border problems.Finally, he also said: If there is no definite rule, things cannot be done.

古文：意向不明，无以一众听；信誓不立，无以结人心；报应不亟，无以趋事机；赏罚不果，无以作士气。 
现代文：做事的意向不明确，就不能统一大家的意见而行动一致；信用誓言不遵守，就不能团结一心；回报应对信息不及时，就不能把握事情发展的机会；赏罚不兑现，就不能鼓舞、振作士气。 
English: If the intention of doing things is not clear, it is impossible to unify everyone's opinions and act in unison; if the trust oath is not observed, it is impossible to unite as one; if the return and response information is not timely, it is impossible to grasp the opportunities for the development of things; if rewards and punishments are not fulfilled, it is impossible to encourage and boost morale.

古文：番易柴中行去国，稹赋诗送之，迕宰相，出知潮州。
现代文：番籣柴中行离开宋朝，危稹赋诗送他，违背了宰相的意愿，被贬出朝廷，担任潮州知州。
English: When Panyu Chai Zhongxing left the Song Dynasty, he was threatened with being sent a poem, which was against the wishes of the prime minister. He was expelled from the imperial court and served as the Choshu chizhou.

古文：寻以通金华徐侨书论罢，提举千秋鸿禧观。
现代文：不久，因与金华徐侨通信的文字而被议论，罢黜职务，提举千秋鸿禧观。
English: Soon, because of the text of the correspondence with Jinhua Xu Qiao, he was discussed, dismissed from his post, and the view of the Millennium was raised.

古文：久之，知漳州。
现代文：很久以后，担任漳州知州。
English: A long time later, he served as the leader of Bozhou and Chizhou.

古文：漳俗视不葬亲为常，往往栖寄僧刹，稹命营高燥地为义冢三，约期责之葬，其无主名、若有主名而力弗给者，官为葬之，凡二千三百有奇，刻石以识。
现代文：漳州的习俗以不葬亲属为常事，往往停留寄存僧庙古刹，危稹令人在高台、干燥之地开挖、填封三个义冢，规定期限，安葬死者，其中没有属主的无名死者，或有属主而亲属没有财力安葬者，官府代为安葬，一共有二千三百多，并刻石为碑，以便识别。
English: The custom in Ganzhou is not to bury relatives as a matter of course. The dead often stay in the old temple of the monastery. When in danger, the dead are dug up on a high and dry place, and three votive tablets are filled in. A time limit is set for the burial of the dead, including the nameless dead who do not belong to the master, or those who belong to the master but whose relatives do not have the financial resources to bury them. The government will bury the dead, a total of more than 2,300, and the stone will be engraved as a monument for identification.

古文：郡有临漳台，据溪山最胜处，作龙江书院其上。
现代文：漳州境内有临漳台，位处溪山最优美的名胜之地，在这上面修建龙江书院。
English: On the territory of Zhangzhou, there is Linyi Plateau, which is located in the most beautiful scenic spot of Xishan Mountain, and Longjiang Academy is built on it.

古文：既成，横经自讲，人用歆动。
现代文：建成之后，据经典自己讲习，人们为之心动、羡慕。
English: After it was built, according to the classic self-study, people were moved and envious.

古文：邑令有贿闻者，劾去之，籍其财以还民。
现代文：城邑县令贿赂听讲的人，为此被弹劾离开，没收其财产用来还给民众。
English: Township and county officials bribed listeners, for which they were impeached and removed from office, and their property was confiscated to be returned to the people.

古文：郡有经、总制无名钱岁五千缗，厉民为甚，前守赵汝谠奏蠲五之二，稹疏于朝，悉罢之。
现代文：漳州每年有经制钱、总制钱及其他无名钱五千缗，为此勒索民众特别厉害，前任漳州知州赵汝谠奏请减免五分之二，危稹又向朝廷上疏，全部罢免。
English: Zhangzhou had an annual surplus of 5,000 yuan of minted money, total minted money and other anonymous money, for which the blackmail of the people was particularly severe. The former Zhangzhou Chizhou Zhao Rongxiao asked for a reduction of two-fifths, and Guizhou Guizhou appealed to the imperial court, and all were dismissed.

古文：会常平使有言，稹不欲辩，即自请以归。
现代文：恰巧遇常平使有不同意见，危稹不想同他争辩，于是自己请求离职回家。
English: It just so happened that Changping had a different opinion. He did not want to argue with him, so he asked to go home.

古文：久之，提举崇禧观，与乡里耆艾七人为真率会。
现代文：很久以后，提举崇禧观，与乡里七十岁的几个老人为真率会。
English: After a long time, he raised the idea of Chong Xiyuan and met with several seventy-year-old people in the village.

古文：卒，年七十四。
现代文：死时，七十四岁。
English: He was 74 when he died.

古文：稹性至孝，父疾，愿损己算益亲年，疾寻愈。
现代文：危稹生性特别孝顺，父亲生病，希望减损自己的寿命来增益父亲的生年，病情不久就痊愈了。
English: When her father fell ill, she wanted to shorten her own life in order to lengthen his. She soon recovered from her illness.

古文：真德秀登从班，举稹自代，没，又为铭其墓。
现代文：真德秀荣登从班，推举危稹以代替自己。危稹死后，又为他撰写墓志铭。
English: Zhendexiu Rongdeng was promoted from his class to replace himself. After his death, he also wrote an epitaph for him.

古文：所著有《巽斋集》，诸经有讲义、集解，诸魏、晋、唐诗文皆有编，辑先贤奏议曰《玉府》、曰《药山》。
现代文：他写的著作有《巽斋集》，对于各种经书有讲义、集解，编辑了各种有关魏、晋、唐各朝时期的诗词、文章，辑录了先前各朝圣贤的奏议称 玉府 、 药山 。
English: His works include the "Collection of the Pilgrim Fathers," lectures and commentary on various scriptures, edited poems and articles related to the dynasties of Wei, Jin and Tang, and compiled the previous recitations of the saints and sages called "Yufu" and "Yushan."

古文：弟和，字祥仲。
现代文：弟弟危和，字祥仲。
English: His younger brother, Keiwa, and his younger brother, Shoshinaka.

古文：开禧元年进士，为上元主簿，大辟祠宇祀程颢，真德秀为记之。
现代文：开禧元年考中进士，担任上元县的主簿，大量修建祠庙祭祀程颢，真德秀为此做了记载。
English: In the first year of the millennium, he was admitted to the junior high school entrance examination, served as the main book of Shangyuan County, and built a large number of ancestral temples and sacrificial rites. Zhendexiu made a record for this.

古文：知德兴，振荒有惠政。
现代文：担任德兴知州时，赈救灾荒有良好的政绩。
English: When he served as Dexing Zhizhou, he had a good record in disaster relief.

古文：有《蟾塘文集》。
现代文：著有《蟾塘文集》。
English: He is the author of "Qutang Anthology."

