古文：四年春，王二月庚戌，盗杀蔡侯申。
现代文：思念春季，周历二月庚戌日，犯罪的人杀了蔡侯申。
English: Thinking of spring, on the second day of the second month of the lunar calendar, the criminal killed Cai Houshen.

古文：蔡公孙辰出奔吴。
现代文：蔡国的公孙辰逃到吴国。
English: Cai's great-grandson Chen fled to Wu.

古文：葬秦惠公。
现代文：安葬秦惠公。
English: Qin Huigong is buried peacefully.

古文：宋人执小邾子。
现代文：宋国人拘捕了小邾国的国君。
English: The people of Song arrested the sovereign of Xiaoqi.

古文：夏，蔡杀其大夫公孙姓、公孙霍。
现代文：夏季，蔡国杀掉自己的大夫公孙姓、公孙霍。
English: In the summer, Cai Guo killed his own doctor Gongsun surnamed Gongsun Huo.

古文：晋人执戎蛮子赤，归于楚。
现代文：晋国人拘捕了戎蛮子赤，并将其交给了楚国。
English: The Jin people arrested Ebisubanzi Aka and handed him over to Chu.

古文：秋八月甲寅，滕子结卒。
现代文：鲁国修筑都城西面的外城。六月辛丑日，亳社发生火灾。
English: Lu built an outer city to the west of the capital. On a bitterly cold day in June, a fire broke out in the imperial palace.

古文：冬十有二月，葬蔡昭公。
现代文：冬季十二月，安葬蔡昭公。
English: In December, Cai Zhaogong was buried.

古文：葬滕顷公。
现代文：安葬滕顷公。
English: The funeral of Teng Hao.

古文：四年春，蔡昭侯将如吴，诸大夫恐其又迁也，承。公孙翩逐而射之，入于家人而卒。
现代文：四年春季，蔡昭公准备到吴国去。大夫们恐怕他又要迁移，跟着公孙翩追赶蔡昭公并用箭射他，蔡昭公逃进百姓家里就死了。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, Cai Zhaogong was preparing to go to the State of Wu. The doctors were afraid that he was going to move again, so they chased Cai Zhaogong with Gongsun Ping and shot him with arrows. Cai Zhaogong fled into the people's home and died.

古文：以两矢门之，众莫敢进。
现代文：公孙翩拿着两支箭守在门口，大家不敢进去。
English: Gongsun Piang held two arrows and stood guard at the entrance. No one dared to enter.

古文：文之锴后至，曰： 如墙而进，多而杀二人。 
现代文：文之锴后到，说： 并排像一垛墙一样往前走，至多只能杀死我们两个人。 
English: "If we walk side by side like a wall, we can only kill two of us at the most," he said.

古文：锴执弓而先，翩射之，中肘。
现代文：文之锴拿着弓走在前面，公孙翩射他，射中肘部。
English: Wenzhong walked in front of him with a bow, Gongsun shot him and hit him in the elbow.

古文：锴遂杀之。故逐公孙辰，而杀公孙姓、公孙盱。
现代文：文之锴就杀死了公孙翩，并因此驱逐了公孙辰而杀死了公孙姓、公孙盱。
English: Wen Ziqi killed Gongsun Piang, and as a result expelled Gongsun Chen and killed Gongsun Zhe, Gongsun Zhe.

古文：夏，楚人既克夷虎，乃谋北方。
现代文：夏季，楚国人攻下夷虎以后，就策划向北方扩张。
English: In the summer, after the Chu people conquered the Yitang, they planned to expand to the north.

古文：左司马眅、申公寿馀、叶公诸梁致蔡于负函，致方城之外于缯关，曰： 吴将泝江入郢，将奔命焉。 
现代文：左司马眅、申公寿馀、叶公诸梁在负函集合蔡国人，方城山外的人在缯关集合，说： 吴国将要溯江而上进入郢都，大家都要奔走听命。 
English: Zuo Sima Qian, Shen Gong Shou Yu and Ye Gong Zhu Liang gathered the people of Cai Province in Zuo Hanzhong, and the people outside Fangcheng Mountain gathered in Shaoguan, saying, "Wu Province will go upstream and enter Shidu, and everyone must run and obey."

古文：为一昔之期，袭梁及霍。
现代文：规定一晚上的期限，袭击梁地和霍地。
English: Set a deadline of one night to attack Liangdi and Huodi.

古文：单浮馀围蛮氏，蛮氏溃。
现代文：单浮馀领兵包围蛮氏，蛮氏溃散。
English: The remaining soldiers surrounded the barbarians, and the barbarians dispersed.

古文：蛮子赤奔晋阴地。
现代文：蛮子赤逃亡到晋国的阴地。
English: Barbarian Red fled to the backwoods of Jin.

古文：司马起豐、析与狄戎，以临上雒。
现代文：司马征召丰地兵卒、析地人和狄戎入伍当兵，逼近上洛。
English: Sima enlisted soldiers from Fengdi, Seidi and Dijon as soldiers and approached Shangluo.

古文：左师军于菟和，右师军于仓野，使谓阴地之命大夫士蔑曰： 晋、楚有盟，好恶同之。
现代文：左翼部队驻扎在菟和，右翼部队驻扎在仓野，派人对阴地的命大夫士蔑说： 晋国和楚国有过盟约，喜爱和厌恶彼此相共。
English: The left-wing troops were stationed in Suwa and the right-wing troops were stationed in Kurano, and they sent people to defy the shaman's orders and say: Jin and Chu had a treaty, and they liked and disliked each other.

古文：若将不废，寡君之愿也。
现代文：如果这个盟约不废除，这是寡君的愿望。
English: If this covenant is not abrogated, it is the desideratum of a tyrant.

古文：不然，将通于少习以听命。 
现代文：不这样，我们准备打通少习山再来听取你们的命令。 
English: Otherwise, we are ready to break through Shao Xi Mountain and come back to listen to your orders.

古文：士蔑请诸赵孟。赵孟曰： 晋国未宁，安能恶于楚，必速与之。 
现代文：士蔑请示赵孟，赵孟说： 晋国没有安定，哪里能和楚国搞坏关系？
English: The scholar scornfully asked Zhao Meng for advice. Zhao Meng said: Jin is not stable, so how can it have a bad relationship with Chu?

古文：士蔑乃致九州之戎，将裂田以与蛮子而城之，且将为之卜。
现代文：一定要快点把人交给他们！ 士蔑就召集九州之戎，说将要分给蛮子土田而在那里筑城，而且准备为这件事情占卜。
English: The magistrate summoned the army of Kyushu, and said that he would give the barbarians land and build a city there, and that he was prepared to use divination in the matter.

古文：蛮子听卜，遂执之，与其五大夫，以畀楚师于三户。
现代文：蛮子前来听取占卜，就逮捕了他和他的五个大夫，在三户交给楚军。
English: The barbarians came to listen to the divination, arrested him and his five doctors, and handed them over to the Chu army in three households.

古文：司马致邑，立宗焉，以诱其遗民，而尽俘以归。
现代文：司马假装给蛮子城邑和建立宗主，来引诱分散的戎人，然后全部俘虏回去。
English: Sima pretended to give the barbarians towns and establish a suzerain, to lure the scattered soldiers, and then took them all back.

古文：秋七月，齐陈乞、弦施，卫跪救范氏。
现代文：秋季，七月，齐国的陈乞、弦施、卫国的宁跪救援范氏。
English: In the autumn, in July, Qi's Chen Beg, Zhen Shi, and Wei's Ning knelt down to rescue Fan.

古文：庚午，围五鹿。
现代文：十四日，包围五鹿。
English: On the 14th, they encircled Goka.

古文：九月，赵鞅围邯郸。
现代文：九月，赵鞅包围邯郸。
English: In September, Zhao Wei encircled Wei.

古文：冬十一月，邯郸降。
现代文：冬季，十一月，邯郸投降。
English: Winter, November,  surrender.

古文：荀寅奔鲜虞，赵稷奔临。
现代文：荀寅逃亡到鲜虞，赵稷逃奔到临地。
English: Gong Yin fled to Xiang Yu, and Zhao Yao fled to Lingang.

古文：十二月，弦施逆之，遂堕临。
现代文：十二月，弦施迎接赵稷，就拆毁了临地的城墙。
English: In December, when Zhenshi welcomed Zhao Jun, he tore down the nearby city wall.

古文：国夏伐晋，取邢、任、栾、鄗、逆畤、阴人、盂、壶口。会鲜虞，纳荀寅于柏人。
现代文：国夏攻打晋国，占取了邢地、任地、栾地、鄗地、逆畤、阴人、盂地、壶口，会合鲜虞，把荀寅送到柏人邑。
English: Guo Xia attacked Jin Province, occupied Zang Di, Ren Di, Zang Di, Zang Di, Qiji, Qiji, Yin Ren, Zang Di, and Hukou, and sent Zang Yin to Baoren.

