古文：汝水出河南梁县勉乡西天息山，《地理志》曰：出高陵山，即猛山也。
现代文：汝水发源于河南郡梁县勉乡西面的天息山，《地理志》说：汝水发源于高陵山，就是猛山。
English: Ru Shui originated from Tianxi Mountain in the west of the township of Nianzhong, Liang County, Henan County. "Geography" said: Ru Shui originated from Mount Gaoling, that is, Mount Meng.

古文：亦言出南阳鲁阳县之大盂山。又言：出弘农卢氏县还归山。
现代文：也有人说发源于南阳鲁阳县大盂山，又说是发源于弘农卢氏县的还归山。
English: Some people also say that it originated in Dafu Mountain, Luyang County, Nanyang, and that it originated in Jiafu Mountain, Lushi County, Hongnong.

古文：《博物志》曰：汝出燕泉山，并异名也。
现代文：《博物志》说：汝水发源于燕泉山。这都是一山的异名。
English: "Natural History" said: "Your water originates from Yanquan Mountain. These are all different names of a mountain.

古文：余以水平中，蒙除鲁阳太守，会上台下，列山川图，以方志参差，遂令寻其源流。
现代文：我在永平年间受命出任鲁阳太守，上任时正逢上级长官下来，要求展示各地《山川图》，因地方志说法各不相同，就命我们探寻诸水的源流。
English: During the Yongping era, I was appointed as the governor of Luyang. When I took office, the higher-ranking officials came down and asked to display the "mountain and river maps" of various regions. Because the local histories were different, they ordered us to explore the source of the waters.

古文：此等既非学徒，难以取悉，既在径见，不容不述。
现代文：参加工作的如不是专家，就很难获得详尽正确的情况；本人既是亲眼所见，就不得不作些具体的叙述了。
English: If you are not an expert, it's hard to get the details right; I had to be specific because I saw it with my own eyes.

古文：今汝水西出鲁阳县之大盂山蒙柏谷，岩鄣深高，山岫邃密，石径崎岖，人迹裁交，西即卢氏界也。
现代文：汝水发源于西面鲁阳县大盂山的蒙柏谷，那一带重峦叠嶂，山高谷深，石径崎岖，人迹罕至，西边靠近卢氏县边界。
English: Ru Water originates from the Monba Valley in the Datong Mountain of Luyang County in the west. The area is overgrown, the mountains are high and the valleys are deep, the stone paths are rugged and rarely visited, and the west side is near the border of Lu County.

古文：其水东北流，径太和城西，又东流径其城北。左右深松列植，筠柏交荫，尹公度之所栖神处也。
现代文：汝水往东北流经太和城西，又往东流经城北，左右两岸青松成行，绿竹和翠柏枝叶相接，这是尹公度栖息修炼过的地方。
English: Your water flows to the northeast through Taihe west of the city, and flows to the east through the north of the city, with young pine trees on both sides of the river, and green bamboo and cedar branches. This is the place where Yin Gongdu lived and cultivated.

古文：又东届尧山西岭下，水流两分，一水东径尧山南，为滍水也，即《经》所言滍水出尧山矣。
现代文：汝水又往东流到尧山西岭下，分为两条。一条往东流往尧山南，叫滍水。《水经》说：滍水发源于尧山，指的就是这条水。
English: Ru Shui also flows eastward to the west ridge of Lushan Mountain, and is divided into two streams. One stream flows eastward to the south of Lushan Mountain, and is called Lushui. "Water Sutra" says: Lushui originated from Lushan Mountain, referring to this water.

古文：一水东北出为汝水，历蒙柏谷，左右岫壑争深，山阜竞高，夹水层松茂柏，倾山荫渚，故世人以名也。
现代文：另一条往东北流，就是汝水，流经蒙柏谷。两边幽谷争深，山峰竞高，溪流两岸都是密层层的青松，和绿沉沉的翠柏，浓荫覆盖着山上和水滨，因而人们称为蒙柏谷。
English: On the other hand, the northeastern stream, Ru Shui, flows through the Mengbo Valley. On both sides, the valley is deep, the mountain peaks are high, the streams on both sides are densely layered with green pines and deep green cypresses, and thick shade covers the mountains and waterfront, so people call it the Mengbo Valley.

古文：津流不已，北历长白沙口，狐白溪水注之。
现代文：山上的泉流滔滔不绝，往北流经长白沙口时，狐白溪水注入。
English: The spring on the mountain flows ceaselessly, and when it flows north through the Changbai Pass, the water of the Fox White Creek is injected.

古文：夹岸沙涨若雪，因以取名。
现代文：溪水两岸流沙冲积洁白如雪，因而得名。
English: The quicksand on both banks of the stream is as white as snow, hence the name.

古文：其水南出狐白川，北流注汝水，汝水又东北趣狼皋山者也。
现代文：狐白溪水发源于南面的狐白叮，北流注入汝水；汝水又往东北流向狼皋山。
English: The water of Fuxibai Creek originates from Fuxibai Ding in the south, and the north stream injects Ye water; Ye water flows to the northeast to Wolongshan.

古文：东南过其县北，汝水自狼皋山东出峡，谓之汝阨也。
现代文：往东南流过县北，汝水从狼皋山东流出峡，山口称为汝院。
English: Flowing south-east across the north of the county, the Ru Water flows out of the Wolong Shandong Outflow Gorge, and the mountain pass is called Ruyuan.

古文：东历麻解城北，故鄤乡城也，谓之蛮中。
现代文：又往东流经麻解城北面，这就是旧时的郧乡城，叫蛮中。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern side of Anliao City, which is the old town of Yanxiang City, called Mianzhong.

古文：《左传》所谓单浮余围蛮氏，蛮氏溃者也。
现代文：《左传》说：单浮余围困蛮氏，蛮氏被击溃，就指这里。
English: "Zo Zhuan" said: "Single-float survivors besieged the barbarians, the barbarians were defeated, it refers to here."

古文：杜预曰：城在河南新城县之东南，伊洛之戎，陆浑蛮氏城也。
现代文：杜预说：城在河南新城县东南，就是伊洛之戎、陆浑蛮氏所居的城。
English: Du Yu said: The city is in the southeast of Xincheng County, Henan Province, which is the city where Ilozni Rong and Lu Hunman lived.

古文：俗以为麻解城，盖蛮、麻读声近故也。
现代文：俗称麻解城，是因为蛮、麻两字读音相近，以致音讹的缘故。
English: It is commonly known as Ma Lecheng, because the two characters "蛮" and "麻" are pronounced similarly, resulting in a different pronunciation.

古文：汝水又径周平城南。
现代文：汝水又流经周平城南。
English: Your water also flows through the south of Zhouping City.

古文：京相璠曰：霍阳山在周平城东南者也。
现代文：京相潘说：霍阳山在周平城东南。
English: Beijing Minister Pan said: Huoyang Mountain is in the southeast of Zhouping City.

古文：汝水又东，与三屯谷水合，水出南山，北流，径石碣东。柱侧刊云河南界。
现代文：汝水又往东流，与三屯谷水汇合。三屯谷水发源于南山，往北流经石竭东边，石柱边上刻着：河南界。
English: Ru Shui also flows to the east, and merges with the water of Mitun Valley. The water of Mitun Valley originates from the Nanshan Mountain, and flows northward through the eastern side of the stone. On the edge of the stone pillar is engraved: Henan Boundary.

古文：又有一碣，题言洛阳南界。
现代文：另有一块石褐题着：洛阳南界。
English: In addition, there is a piece of brown stone inscribed with: Luoyang Nanjie.

古文：碑柱相对，既无年月，竟不知何代所表也。
现代文：碑柱相对而立，未署年月，也不知是哪个朝代所立。
English: The pillar stands opposite, without a date, and it is not known which dynasty erected it.

古文：其水又北流，注于汝水。
现代文：水又北流，注入汝水。
English: The water also flows north, infusing your water.

古文：汝水又东与广成泽水合，水出狼皋山北泽中。
现代文：汝水继续东流，与广成泽水汇合。此水发源于狼皋山北面的沼泽中。
English: The Ru Water continues to flow eastward, merging with the Guangcheng Lake Water, which originates from the swamps on the north side of the Wolong Mountain.

古文：安帝永初元年，以广成游猎地假与贫民。
现代文：安帝永初元年，把广成这块游猎地给予平民。
English: At the beginning of the first year of Andi Yong, Guangcheng gave this hunting ground to civilians.

古文：元初二年，邓大后临朝，邓骘兄弟辅政。世士以为文德可兴，武功宜废，寝蒐狩之礼，息战阵之法。
现代文：元初二年，邓太后临朝，邓鹭兄弟辅政，天下士人认为文治将会兴起，武功应当废弃，皇家狩猎的礼仪、列阵作战的方法，都可束之高阁了。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, after the accession of Empress Dowager Deng to the throne and the rise of the Deng brothers to assist the government, the world's scholars believed that civil government would rise, martial arts should be abandoned, and the etiquette of royal hunting and the method of fighting in line could be shelved.

古文：于时，马融以文武之道，圣贤不坠，五材之用，无或可废，作《广成颂》云：大汉之初基也，揆厥灵囿，营于南郊。
现代文：那时，马融却认为：文武之道，圣贤从未偏废过，金、木、水、火、土五材各有所用，缺一不可，于是作了《广成颂》说：大汉建国初期，划定这个秀丽的园林，营建于南郊。
English: At that time, Ma Rong believed that the way of literature and martial arts, sages have never been wasted, and the five materials of gold, wood, water, fire and soil are all useful and indispensable, so he made "Guangcheng Ode" and said: In the early days of the founding of the Han Dynasty, this beautiful garden was delineated and the camp was built in the southern suburb.

古文：右三涂，左枕嵩岳，面据衡阴，背箕王屋，浸以波、溠，演以荣、洛。
现代文：园林右望三涂，左依篙岳，前对衡山之阴，背负王屋之麓；有港汉灌溉，有荣、洛长流。
English: The garden is three-layered on the right, with Mount Lu on the left, the shadow of Hengshan in front, and the foot of the king's house on the back; there are Hong Kong and Han irrigation, Rong and Luo Chang flow.

古文：金山、石林，殷起乎其中。神泉侧出，丹水、涅池。怪石浮磐，耀焜于其陂。
现代文：金山、石林，在中央高高耸起，神泉在旁边涌出，形成丹水、涅池，浮馨般的怪石在破塘中熠熠生辉。
English: The golden mountain and the stone forest rise high in the center, and the divine spring gushes out next to it, forming the Danshui and the Nirvana Pond, and the floating strange stones shine brightly in the broken pond.

古文：桓帝延熹元年，校猎广成，遂幸函谷关。
现代文：桓帝延熹元年，驾临广成围猎，后又巡游函谷关。
English: In the first year of Yancheng, Emperor Kan came to Guangcheng to hunt, and then went on a tour of Hantanguan.

古文：其水自泽东南流，径温泉南，与温泉水合。
现代文：水从泽中往东南流经温泉南面，与温泉水汇合。
English: Water flows from the middle of the lake to the southeast, passing through the southern side of the hot spring and merging with the hot spring water.

古文：温水数源，扬波于川左，泉上，华宇连荫，茨甍交拒，方塘石沼，错落其间。颐道者多归之。
现代文：温泉水有好几个源头、在川流左岸扬波奔流。温泉上，华丽的屋宇连成一片，屋脊纵横交错，其间错落地散布着一些方整的石砌池塘，很多修道者都喜欢到这里来。
English: The hot spring water has several sources, rushing in waves on the left bank of the river. On the hot spring, gorgeous buildings are connected, the roofs are crisscrossed, and some square stone ponds are scattered here and there. Many monks like to come here.

古文：其水东南流，注广成泽水。泽水又东南入于汝水。
现代文：温水往东南流，注入广成泽水，泽水又往东南流，注入汝水。
English: Warm water flows to the southeast, injecting Guangcheng Ze water, and Ze water flows to the southeast, injecting Ru water.

古文：汝水又东，得鲁公水口。水上承阳人城东鲁公陂。
现代文：汝水又往东流，在鲁公水口接纳了一条水，这条水上源承接阳人城东面的鲁公破。
English: Your water also flows eastward, receiving a stream of water at the mouth of the Lukong River. This water source follows the Lukong River east of Yangren City.

古文：城，古梁之阳人聚也，秦灭东周，徙其君于此。
现代文：阳人城，是古代梁国的阳人聚，秦灭东周后，将周王迁到此城。
English: Yangrencheng, is the Yangrenju of ancient Liangguo. After the Qin Dynasty destroyed the Eastern Zhou Dynasty, King Zhou moved to this city.

古文：陂水东南流，合于涧水，水出北山，南流注之，又乱流，注于汝水。
现代文：破水往东南流，与涧水汇合。涧水发源于北山，往南流，注入破水，又乱流注入汝水。
English: The broken water flows to the southeast and merges with the brackish water. The brackish water originates in Kitayama, flows southward, and is injected into the broken water, and the turbulent flow is injected into the Ru water.

古文：汝水之右，有霍阳聚。汝水径其北，东合霍阳山水，水出南山。
现代文：汝水右岸有霍阳聚，汝水流经这个聚落的北面，往东流汇合了霍阳山水。霍阳山水发源于南山。
English: On the right bank of the Ru Water, there is the Huoyang Cluster. The Ru Water flows through the north of this cluster, and the eastward flow merges with the Huoyang Landscape. The Huoyang Landscape originates from the South Mountain.

古文：杜顶曰：河南粱县有霍山者也。
现代文：杜预说：河南县有霍山。
English: Du Yu said: Henan County has Huoshan Mountain.

古文：其水东北流，径霍阳聚东。世谓之华浮城，非也。
现代文：水往东北流经霍阳聚东面，人们把这个聚落称为华浮城，其实不对。
English: The water flows to the northeast through Huoyang to the east, and people call this settlement Hua Fucheng, which is actually wrong.

古文：《春秋左传》哀公四年，楚侵梁及霍。
现代文：《春秋左传》：哀公四年前，楚国入侵梁和霍。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn": Four years ago, Chu invaded Liang and Huo.

古文：服虔曰，梁、霍，周南鄙也。
现代文：服虔说，梁和霍是周的南部边境。
English: Obedience said that Lianghe Huo is the southern border of Zhou.

古文：建武二年，世祖遣征虏将军祭遵攻蛮中山贼张满，时厌新、柏华余贼合，攻得霍阳聚，即此。
现代文：建武二年，世祖派遣征虏将军祭遵进攻蛮中山寇张满，当时厌新、柏华等余寇配合进攻，占领了霍阳聚，指的就是这地方。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, the founder of the dynasty dispatched the conquering army to attack the barbaric mid-mountain bandit Zhang Man at the General's Festival of Zun. At that time, the remaining bandits, such as Xiang Xin and Bai Hua, cooperated in the attack and occupied Huoyangju, which refers to this place.

古文：霍阳山水又径梁城西。
现代文：霍阳山水又流经梁城西面。
English: The landscape of Huoyang also flows through the western side of Liangcheng.

古文：按《春秋》，周小邑也，于战国为南梁矣。
现代文：按《春秋》：梁城是周朝的一个小城，到战国时叫南梁。
English: According to "Spring and Autumn": Liangcheng was a small city in the Zhou Dynasty, and was called Nanliang during the Warring States period.

古文：故《经》云，汝水径其县北，俗谓之治城，非也，以北有注城故也。
现代文：所以《水经》说：汝水流经县北。民间称为治城，其实不是，大概是因为北面有个注城的缘故。
English: Therefore, the "Water Sutra" says: "Your water flows through the north of the county. People call it the city government, but in fact it is not, probably because there is a city in the north.

古文：今置治城县，治霍阳山。
现代文：今天设置了治城县，治所在霍阳山。
English: Today, Zhicheng County has been set up, and the administrative center is in Huoyang Mountain.

古文：水又东北流，注于汝水。
现代文：水又往东北流，注入汝水。
English: The water then flows to the northeast, filling the river.

古文：汝水又左合三里水，水北出梁县西北，而东南流，径其县故城西，故惮狐聚也。
现代文：汝水又在左边汇合了三里水。三里水发源于北方的梁县西北，往东南流经该县老城西面，就是旧时的蕙狐聚。
English: Ru Shui also joins Sanli Shui on the left. Sanli Shui originates in the northwest of Liang County in the north and flows southeast through the west side of the old city of the county. It is the old gathering of foxes.

古文：《地理志》云：秦灭西周，徙其君于此，因乃县之。
现代文：《地理志》说：秦灭西周后，将周王迁到这里，因而设立为县。
English: "Geography" said: After the Qin Dynasty destroyed the Western Zhou Dynasty, it moved the Zhou King here, thus establishing it as a county.

古文：杜预曰：河南县西南有梁城，即是县也。
现代文：杜预说：河南县西南有梁城，就是这个县。
English: Du Yu said: There is Liangcheng in the southwest of Henan County, which is this county.

古文：水又东南，径注城南。
现代文：水又往东南流经注城南面。
English: The water then flows southeast through the southern part of the city.

古文：司马彪曰：河南梁县有注城。
现代文：司马彪说：河南梁县有注城。
English: Sima Biao said: Liang County, Henan Province, has Shucheng.

古文：《史记》魏文侯三十二年，败秦于注者也。
现代文：《史记》：魏文侯三十二年前，在注城打败了秦。
English: History: Thirty-two years ago, Wei Wenhou defeated Qin in Zhucheng.

古文：又与一水合，水发注城东坂下，东南流注三里水。三里水又乱流入于汝。
现代文：三里水又汇合了一条水，这条水发源于注城东边的山坡下，往东南流，注入三里水；三里水又乱流注入汝水。
English: Sanli water also merged with another water, this water originated from the eastern side of Shucheng at the bottom of the hillside and flowed to the southeast, injecting Sanli water; Sanli water also turbulent flowed into Your water.

古文：汝水又东径成安县故城北。
现代文：汝水又东经成安县老城北面。
English: Ru Shui is also located to the east of the old town of Cheng'an County.

古文：按《地理志》，颍川郡有成安县，侯国也。
现代文：按《地理志》，颖川郡有成安县，是个侯国。
English: According to the "Geography," Yingchuan County has Cheng'an County, which is a county.

古文：《史记。建元以来功臣侯者年表》曰：汉武帝元鼎五年，校尉韩千秋击南越，死，封其子韩延年为成安侯。
现代文：《史记•建元以来功臣侯者年表》说：汉武帝元朔五年前，校尉韩千秋打南越时战死，朝廷封他的儿子韩延年为成安侯，就是此城。
English: "Histories • Chronology of meritorious vassals since the founding of the Yuan Dynasty" says: Emperor Hanwu Yuan Shuo five years ago, Lieutenant Han Qianqiu died in battle while fighting in South Vietnam, and the court named his son Han Yan as the Prince of Cheng'an, which is this city.

古文：即此邑矣。世谓之白泉城，非也，俗谬耳。
现代文：人们称为白泉城，其实不对，这是民间讹传的结果。
English: People call it Baiquan City, but that's not true. It's the result of folk legend.

古文：汝水又东，为周公渡，藉承休之徽号，而有周公之嘉称也。
现代文：汝水又东流，就到周公渡。因为这里过去是承休侯国，凭着这个嘉号，才有周公这个美名。
English: When your water flows eastward, it reaches Zhou Gongdu. Because it used to be a retired vassal state, Zhou Gong got its good name from this honorific title.

古文：汝水又东，黄水注之。水出梁山，东南径周承休县故城东，为承休水。
现代文：汝水又往东流、黄水注入，黄水发源于梁山，往东南流经周承休县老城东面，叫承休水。
English: The yellow water originates from Liangshan Mountain and flows southeast through the eastern side of the old city of Zhoucheng County. It is called Zhoucheng water.

古文：县，故子南国也。
现代文：周承休县是旧时的子南国。
English: Zhoucheng County was the southernmost province in the old days.

古文：汉武帝元鼎四年，幸洛阳，巡省豫州，观于周室，邈而无祀。
现代文：汉武帝于元鼎四年前，临幸洛阳，巡察豫州，他看到周朝王族因年代久远，无人祭祀祖先。
English: Four years before the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Hanwu visited Luoyang and inspected Yuzhou. He saw that the royal family of the Zhou Dynasty had no one to offer sacrifices to their ancestors because of their long history.

古文：询问耆老，乃得孽子嘉，封为周子南君，以奉周把。
现代文：询间老者，结果查得周后裔庶子嘉，于是封为周子南君，让他掌管对周室宗庙的祭祀。
English: An inquiry among the elders resulted in the discovery of Zhou's descendant, the illegitimate son Ruo Jia, who was then given the title Zhou Zi Nanjun and put in charge of the sacrificial rites at Zhou's ancestral temple.

古文：按《汲冢古文》，谓卫将军文子为子南弥牟，其后有子南劲。
现代文：按《汲家古文》，说卫国将军文子，叫子南弥牟，他的后代有子南劲。
English: According to the "Kyu Family Ancient Texts," it is said that the general of the defense of the country, Wen Zi, was called Zi Nan Yimou, and his descendants were called Zi Nan Jin.

古文：《纪年》，劲朝于魏。
现代文：《纪年》里提到，子南劲向魏朝觑。
English: "Chronicle" mentioned that Zi Nan's strength was superior to Wei's.

古文：后惠成王如卫，命子南为侯。
现代文：后来惠成王到卫，封子南为侯。
English: Later, King Huicheng came to Wei, and Fushi Minami became the marquess.

古文：秦并六国，卫最后灭。疑嘉是卫后，故氏子南而称君也。
现代文：秦并六国时，卫最后被灭，嘉可能是卫的后代，因此以子南为姓氏，并且称君的。
English: When the Qin Dynasty unified the Six Kingdoms, Wei was finally exterminated. Jiayu was probably a descendant of Wei, so he took Zi Nan as his surname and called him Jun.

古文：初元五年，为周承休邑。
现代文：初元五年前，这里是周承休邑。
English: Five years ago in the first year of the 21st century, this was the center of Zhoucheng County.

古文：《地理志》曰：侯国也，元帝置。
现代文：《地理志》说，这是元帝设置的侯国。
English: "Geography" said that this was a vassal state set up by the Yuan Emperor.

古文：元始二年，更曰郑公。王莽之嘉美也。
现代文：元始二年，改名为郑公，就是王莽时的嘉美。
English: In the first two years of the Yuan Dynasty, she changed her name to Zheng Gong, which is the Jiamei of Wang Mangshi.

古文：故汝渡有周公之名，盖藉邑以纳称，世谓之黄城，水曰黄水，皆非也。
现代文：因此，汝水的渡口叫周公渡，大概就是因城而得名的。世人称城为黄城，水为黄水，都是不对的。
English: Therefore, the ferry port of Your Water is called Zhou Gongdu, which is probably named after the city. The world calls the city the Yellow City and the water the Yellow Water, both of which are incorrect.

古文：其水又东南，径白茅台东，又南径梁瞿乡西，世谓之期城，非也。
现代文：承休水又往东南流经白茅台东面，又往南流注梁瞿乡西面，人们称为期城，也是不对的。
English: It is also wrong that the water from the reservoir flows to the southeast through the eastern side of Baimoutai and flows to the south to the west of Liangye Township, and people call it the period city.

古文：按《后汉书》，世祖自颍川往梁瞿乡，冯鲂先诣行所，即是邑也。
现代文：按《后汉书》，世祖从颖川前往梁瞿乡，冯纺先到行宫，就是此城。
English: According to the "Post-Han Shu," the founder of the dynasty traveled from Yingchuan to Liangyao Township, and Fengzhuang first went to Xinggu, which is this city.

古文：水积为陂，世谓之黄陂。东转，径其城南，东流，右合汝水。
现代文：水流积聚为破塘，人们称为黄破；水往东转，经过城南往东流，在右边汇合汝水。
English: The flow of water accumulates into a broken pond, known as Huangba; the water turns to the east, flows eastward through the south of the city, and merges with your water on the right.

古文：又东南过颍川郏县南。
现代文：又往东南流过颖川郡郊县南面。
English: It also flowed southeast through the southern suburbs of Yingchuan County.

古文：汝水又东与张磨泉合，水发北阜，春夏水盛，则甫注汝水。
现代文：汝水继续东流，与张磨泉汇合。此水发源于北面的山陵，春夏水涨时，就南流注入汝水。
English: This water originates from the mountains in the north, and when the water rises in spring and summer, it is injected into the south stream.

古文：汝水又东，分为西长湖，湖水南北五十余步，东西三百步。
现代文：汝水又东流，分为西长湖，湖水南北五十余步，东西三百步。
English: Your water also flows eastward, and is divided into West Long Lake, the lake water is more than fifty steps from north to south, and three hundred steps from east to west.

古文：汝水又东，扈涧水北出大刘山，南径木蓼堆东、郊城西，南流入于汝。
现代文：汝水又东流，息涧水发源于北方的大刘山，往南流经木寥堆以东、郊城以西，往南注入汝水。
English: Your water also flows to the east. The water of the Sui River originates from the Great Liu Mountain in the north, flows southward through the east of the wood pile and the west of the suburb, and flows southward into your water.

古文：汝水又右，迤为湖。湖水南北八九十步，东西四五百步，俗谓之东长湖，湖水下入汝，古养水也。
现代文：汝水又向右岸旁出成为湖泊，湖水南北八九十步，东西四五百步，俗称东长湖。湖水往下流，注入汝水，就是古时的养水。
English: Ye water also flows out to the right bank to become a lake, the lake water rises eighty to ninety steps north and south, and four hundred and five hundred steps east and west, commonly known as the East Long Lake. The lake water flows downwards and is injected into Ye water, which is the ancient water supply.

古文：水出鲁阳县北将孤山北长冈下。数泉俱发，东历永仁三堆南。又东径沙川，世谓之沙水，历山符垒北，又东径沙亭南，故养阴里也。
现代文：此水发源于鲁阳县北将孤山北面的长冈下，几条山泉一起流出，往东流经永仁三堆南面，又往东流经沙川，人们称为沙水，流经山符垒北面，又往东流经沙亭南面，这就是旧时的养阴里。
English: This water originates from the lower reaches of the Nagaoka Mountains in the northern part of the isolated mountains in the northern part of Luyang County. Several mountain springs flow out together. It flows eastward through the southern part of the Yongren Three Piles, and then eastward through the Sha River. People call it sand water. It flows through the northern part of the mountain fortress, and then eastward through the southern part of the sand pavilion. This is the old Yangyin Village.

古文：司马彪《郡国志》曰：襄城有养阴里。
现代文：司马彪《郡国志》说：襄城有养阴里。
English: Sima Biao's "County History" said: Xiangcheng has a breeding coven.

古文：京相璠曰：在襄城郏县西南。
现代文：京相潘说：养阴里在襄城邦县西南。
English: Beijing Minister Pan said: Yangyin is located in the southwest of Xiangcheng County.

古文：养，水名也，俗以是水为沙水，故亦名之为沙城，非也。
现代文：养是水名。民间把这条水称为沙水，因而也把养阴里称为沙城，这是不对的。
English: People call this water "sand water" and thus also call Yangyinli a "sand city," which is incorrect.

古文：又城处水之阳，而以阴为称，更用惑焉。
现代文：此外，此城座落在水北，却以阴为地名，这更令人困惑不解了。
English: Moreover, it is even more puzzling that this city is located in the north of Shuibei Province, but its place name is Yin.

古文：但流杂间居，裂溉互移，致令川渠异容，津途改状，故物望疑焉。
现代文：然而，当时许多流民杂户杂居在这里，耕种时，开沟引水，位置常有移动，使得这一带沟渠面貌、河道形状发生改变，因此后世学者也弄不清楚了。
English: However, at that time, many migrants and miscellaneous households lived here, and when farming, they opened ditches to divert water, and the position often moved, causing the ditch appearance and river shape of this area to change, so later generations of scholars could not figure it out.

古文：又右会堇沟水，水出沛公垒西六十许步。
现代文：养水又在右边汇合了茧沟水。荃沟水发源于沛公垒以西约六十步。
English: The Tsuen Gou Water originates about sixty paces west of the Pei Gongye.

古文：盖汉祖入关，往征是由，故地擅斯目矣。
现代文：汉高祖入关时，出征是从这里经过的，因此取名为沛公垒。
English: When Henkel's ancestor entered the customs, the expedition passed through here, so it was named Pei Gongye.

古文：其水东北注养水，养水又东北入东长湖，乱流注汝水也。
现代文：董沟水往东北流，注入养水。养水又往东北流，注入东长湖，然后乱流注入汝水。
English: The Donggou water flows to the northeast and is injected into the water supply. The water supply also flows to the northeast and is injected into the East Long Lake, and then the turbulent flow is injected into the Jiu water.

古文：汝水又径郊县故城南，《春秋》昭公十九年，楚令尹子瑕之所城也。
现代文：汝水又流经郊县老城南面。《春秋》：昭公十九年前，楚国令尹子瑕所筑。
English: Your water also flows through the southern part of the old town of Suburban County. "Spring and Autumn": Built by Yin Zikai, the governor of Chu, nineteen years before Zhaogong.

古文：滶水注之。
现代文：傲水在这里注入。
English: Pride is injected here.

古文：水出鲁阳县之将孤山，东南流。
现代文：傲水发源于鲁阳县的将孤山，往东南流。
English: The proud water originates from the Will Solitary Mountain in Luyang County and flows southeast.

古文：许慎云：水出南阳鲁阳，入父城，从水，敖声。
现代文：许慎说：傲水发源于南阳郡鲁阳县，流入父城。傲字偏旁从水，音敖。
English: Xu Shen said: Aoshui originated in Luyang County, Nanyang County, and flowed into the father city. The word "Aoshui" comes from the water and the sound of the gong.

古文：吕忱《字林》亦言在鲁阳。
现代文：吕忱《字林》也说傲水在鲁阳。
English: Lu Zhen "Zhilin" also said that the pride of water began in Luyang.

古文：滶水东入父城县，与桓水会。
现代文：傲水往东流进父城县后，与桓水汇合。
English: After flowing eastward into Chichijo County, the Arrogant Water merged with the Kansui Water.

古文：水出鲁阳北山，水有二源，奇导于贾复城，合为一渎。
现代文：桓水发源于鲁阳北山，有两个源头，在贾复城汇合成一条，流经贾复城北面。
English: The Kuan Shui originates from the North Mountain of Luyang. It has two sources, which are merged into one in Jiafu Town, and flows through the northern side of Jiafu Town.

古文：径贾复城北，复南，击郾所筑也。俗语讹谬，谓之寡妇城，水曰寡妇水。此渎水有穷通，故有枯渠之称焉。
现代文：此城是贾复南下攻哪时所筑。民间音讹，称为寡妇城，水称寡妇水。这条水有时会干涸，因此有枯渠之称。
English: This city was built when Jia Fu went to the south to attack Zhuang. It is popularly known as the Widow's City, and the water is called the Widow's Water. This water sometimes dries up, so it is known as a dry canal.

古文：其水东北流至父城县北，右注滶水，乱流又东北至郏，入汝。
现代文：水往东北流到父城县北面，向右边注入傲水，乱流往东北到郑县注入汝水。
English: The water flows to the northeast to the north of Chicheng County, injecting proud water to the right, and turbulent flow to the northeast to Zheng County to inject your water.

古文：汝水又东南，左合蓝水。水出阳翟县重岭山，东南流，径纪氏城西，有层台，谓之纪氏台。
现代文：汝水又往东南流，在左边汇合了蓝水，蓝水发源于阳翟县重岭山，往东南流经纪氏城西面，有层台，称为纪氏台。
English: Your water flows to the southeast, where it meets the blue water on the left. The blue water originates from Chongling Mountain in Yangshuo County, and flows to the southeast to the west of Broker's Town. There is a tiered platform, known as Ki's platform.

古文：《续汉书》曰：世租车驾西征，盗贼群起。郊令冯鲂为贼延哀所攻，力屈。
现代文：《续汉书》说：世且亲自西征，当时盗贼群起，郊县县令冯妨被盗贼延哀所攻，力竭计穷。
English: "Continuation of the Book of Han" said: the world and personally went to the West, at that time the thieves swarmed, and Feng Mori, the governor of the suburbs, was attacked by the thieves, and he tried his best.

古文：上诣纪氏，群贼自降，即是处，在郏城东北十余里。
现代文：这时光武帝驾临纪氏，群贼自动投降，就是这地方，约在邦城东北十余里。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu drove Linji, and the bandits voluntarily surrendered. This is the place, about ten miles northeast of Bangcheng.

古文：其水又东南流，径黄阜东，而南入汝水。
现代文：蓝水又往东南流经黄阜东面，然后南流注入汝水。
English: The blue water flows to the southeast through the east of Huangfu, and then the south flow injects the water.

古文：汝水又东南流，与白沟水合，水出夏亭城西，又南径龙城西。
现代文：汝水又往东南流，与白沟水汇合。百沟水发源于夏亭城西面，又往南流经龙城西面。
English: The Ru Water also flows to the southeast, merging with the Baigou Water. The Baigou Water originates from the west side of Xia Tingcheng, and flows southward through the west side of Longcheng.

古文：城西北即摩陂也，纵广可十五里。
现代文：龙城西北，就是摩破，纵宽约十五里。
English: Northwest of Longcheng is Moba, with a length and width of about fifteen miles.

古文：魏青龙元年，有龙见于郊之摩陂，明帝幸陂观龙，于是改摩陂曰龙陂，其城曰龙城。
现代文：魏青龙元年，郊县的摩破有龙出现，明帝去破湖观龙，于是把摩破改名为龙破，把城称为龙城。
English: In the first year of the Wei and Qing Dynasties, a dragon appeared in the suburb of Mopar, and the Ming Emperor went to the lake to watch the dragon. Therefore, Mopar was renamed as Longba, and the city was called Longcheng.

古文：其水又南入于汝水。
现代文：水又往南注入汝水。
English: The water is then pumped south into the Ruhr.

古文：汝水又东南与龙山水会，水出龙山龙溪，北流，际父城县故城东。
现代文：汝水往东南流，与龙山水汇合。龙山水发源于龙山的龙溪，傍着父城县老城东面往北流。
English: Your water flows to the southeast and merges with Longshan water, which originates from Longxi in Longshan and flows north along the east side of the old city of Chicheng County.

古文：昔楚平王大城城父以居太子建，故杜预曰：即襄城之父城县也。
现代文：从前楚平王大兴土木修筑城父城，打算让太子建居住。所以杜预说：几城父城就是襄城的父县城。
English: Once upon a time, King Chuping initiated the construction of the city of Chicheng, intending to build a residence for the prince. Therefore, Du Yu said: the city of several cities is the county seat of Xiangcheng.

古文：冯异据之，以降世祖，用报巾车之恩也。其水又东北流，与二水合，俱出龙山，北流注之，又东北入于汝水。
现代文：冯异据有此城，投降世祖，以报答他在巾车乡开释之恩。 龙山水又往东北流，汇合了两条水，这两条水都发源于龙山，北流注入龙山水。龙山水又往东北流，注入汝水。
English: Feng Yixuan had this city and surrendered to the ancestor to repay the kindness of his release in the town of Hanzhixiang. Longshan water also flowed to the northeast, bringing together two waters, both of which originated from Longshan, and the north stream injected Longshan water. Longshan water also flowed to the northeast, injecting your water.

古文：汝水又东南，径襄城县故城南。
现代文：汝水又往东南流经襄城县老城南面。
English: Your water also flows southeast through the south of the old city of Xiangcheng County.

古文：王隐《晋书地道记》曰：楚灵王筑。
现代文：王隐《晋书•地道记》说：此城是楚灵王所筑。
English: Wang Yin's "Jinshu•Jindu Ji" said: This city was built by King Chuling.

古文：刘向《说苑》曰：襄城君始封之日，服翠衣，带玉佩，徙倚于流水之上，即是水也。
现代文：刘向《说苑》说：襄城君刚受封的那天，穿着翠绿色的衣服，戴着玉佩，徘徊在流水上，就是指此水。
English: Liu Xiangcheng said to "Saoyuan": On the day when Xiangcheng Jun was just crowned, he was wearing emerald green clothes, wearing a jade cloak, and wandering on the flowing water, which refers to this water.

古文：楚大夫庄辛所说处。后乃县之。
现代文：楚国大夫庄辛曾在此劝说过他，后来就在这里设县。
English: Chu State Doctor Zhuang Xin once persuaded him here, and later the county was established here.

古文：吕后元年，立孝惠后宫子义为侯国，王莽更名相成也。
现代文：吕后元年前，把孝惠帝后宫所生的儿子义封在这里，立为侯国，王莽改名为相成。
English: Before the first year of the reign of Empress Dowager Lv, the son born in the harem of Emperor Xiao Hui was sealed here and established as a principality, and Wang Mang changed his name to Aicheng.

古文：黄帝尝遇牧童于其野，故嵇叔夜赞曰：奇矣难测，襄城小童，倦游六合，来憩兹邦也。
现代文：黄帝曾在襄城郊野遇见一个牧童，所以秘叔夜的赞里说：黄帝倦游四方，奇事往往难测，迷路时遇襄城小童，才到这里来歇息。
English: The Yellow Emperor once met a shepherd boy in the countryside of Xiangcheng, so the secret uncle said in the praise of the night: the Yellow Emperor is tired of traveling in all directions, miracles are often difficult to predict, when he lost his way, he met a Xiangcheng boy, and came here to rest.

古文：其城南对汜城，周襄王出郑居汜，即是此城也。
现代文：襄城南对穿城，周襄王离郑，居于犯，就是此城。
English: Xiangcheng south of the city, Zhou Xiangwang away from Zheng, living in crime, is this city.

古文：《春秋》襄公二十六年，楚代郑，涉汜而归。
现代文：《春秋》：襄公二十六年前，楚军伐郑，在犯涉水而归。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Twenty-six years ago, when the Chu army attacked Zheng, he waded into the water and returned.

古文：杜预曰：涉汝水于汜城下也。
现代文：杜预说：楚军是在犯城下涉过汝水。
English: Du Yu said: The Chu army waded through the water under the city.

古文：晋襄城郡治。
现代文：晋时襄城郡的治所就在这里。
English: The administrative center of Yangcheng County in Jin Dynasty is located here.

古文：京相璠曰：周襄王居之，故曰襄城也。
现代文：京相蟠说：周襄王留居于此城，因此称为襄城。
English: Zhou Xiang Wang stayed in this city, so it is called Xiangcheng.

古文：今置关于其下。
现代文：现今在城下设关。
English: Nowadays, there is a gate under the castle.

古文：汝水又东南流，径西不羹城南。《春秋左传》昭公十二年，楚灵王曰：昔诸侯远我而畏晋，今我大城陈、蔡、不羹，赋皆千乘，诸侯其畏我乎？
现代文：汝水又往东南流经西不羹城南面，《春秋左传》：昭公十二年前，楚灵王说：昔日诸侯因我地区偏僻遥远而畏惧晋国，今天我大兴土木，修筑陈、蔡、不羹等城，这里都各有兵车千乘，现在，诸侯难道不畏惧我吗？
English: Twelve years ago, King Chuling said: In the past, the princes were afraid of Jin Province because of the remoteness and remoteness of our region. Today, I am doing a lot of civil engineering, building cities such as Chen, Cai, and Wukan. There are thousands of soldiers and chariots here. Now, aren't the princes afraid of me?

古文：《东观汉记》曰：车骑马防以前参药，勤劳省闼，增封侯国襄城羹亭千二百五十户，即此亭也。
现代文：东观汉记》说：车骑马防因为进奉参药，进宫探病很勤，以襄城羹亭一个二百五十户增封给他的侯国。
English: "Dongguan Han Ji" said: "Due to the fact that he practiced medicine by riding a horse, he was very diligent in going to the palace to investigate illnesses, and he was awarded an additional 250 households in Xiangcheng.

古文：汝水又东南，径繁丘城南，而东南出也。
现代文：说的就是此亭。汝水往东南流经繁丘城南面，然后往东南流去。
English: It is this pavilion that is spoken of. Your water flows southeast through the southern side of the prosperous hill, and then flows to the southeast.

古文：又东南，过定陵县北。
现代文：又往东南流过定陵县北面。
English: It also flows southeast through the northern part of Dingling County.

古文：湛水出犨县北鱼齿山西北，东南流，历鱼齿山下，为湛浦，方五十余步，《春秋》襄公十六年，晋伐楚，报杨梁之役。
现代文：湛水发源于擎县北面的鱼齿山西北，往东南流经鱼齿山下，就是湛浦，湛浦方圆五十余步。《春秋》：襄公十六年前，晋国伐楚，以报复杨梁之役。
English: The waterlogging originated from the northwest of Fish Tooth Mountain in the north of Jingxian County, and flowed southeast through the lower part of Fish Tooth Mountain, that is, Zhanpu, and Zhanpu is more than fifty steps. "Spring and Autumn": Sixteen years ago, Prince Xiang of Jin invaded Chu to avenge the Battle of Yang Liang.

古文：楚公子格及晋师战于湛阪，楚师败绩，遂侵方城之外。
现代文：楚国公子格的军队与晋军遭遇，在湛阪交战，楚军战败，晋军于是就侵入到方城之外。
English: The army of the prince of Chu encountered the Jin army, fought in Zhanhan, the Chu army was defeated, and the Jin army then invaded outside Fangcheng.

古文：今水北悉枕翼山阜，于父城东南，湛水之北，山有长阪，盖即湛水以名阪，故有湛阪之名也。
现代文：今天看来，湛水以北，全是一片山丘，在父城东南、湛水以北的山地间，有一条漫长的山坡，就是按湛水来命名的，因此有湛阪之称。
English: From today's point of view, north of the waterlogging, it is all a hill. Between the mountains southeast of the father city and north of the waterlogging, there is a long hillside, which is named after the waterlogging, so it is known as Zhanhan.

古文：湛水又东南径蒲城北。
现代文：湛水又往东南流经蒲城北面。
English: The floodwaters also flowed southeast through the north of Putian.

古文：京相璠曰：昆阳县北有蒲城，蒲城北有湛水者是也。
现代文：京相播说：昆阳县北面有蒲城，蒲城北面有湛水。
English: Beijing Broadcasting said: There is a puddle in the north of Kunyang County, and there is waterlogging in the north of Puddle.

古文：湛水又东，于汝水九曲北，东入汝。
现代文：湛水又东流，在汝水九曲北面往东注入汝水。
English: The waterlogged water also flows eastward, and in the north of the nine curves of the river, it flows eastward into the river.

古文：杜预亦以是水为湛水矣。
现代文：杜预也认为此水是湛水。
English: Du Yu also believes that this water is waterlogged.

古文：《周礼》：荆州，其浸颖、湛。
现代文：《周礼》说：荆州，大川有颖水、湛水。
English: "Zhou Li" said: Jingzhou, Dechuan has Yingshui, waterlogging.

古文：郑玄云未闻，盖偶有不照也。
现代文：郑玄却说没有听到过，偶然也有疏失的地方。
English: Zheng Xuan, however, said that he had not heard of it, and that there were some accidental omissions.

古文：今考地则不乖其土，言水则有符经文矣。
现代文：今天作实地考察，许多记载与当地情况并无不合之处，所记的川流也是与《水经》相一致的。
English: During today's on-site inspection, many records are consistent with the local situation, and the recorded river flow is also consistent with the "Water Sutra."

古文：汝水又东南，径定陵县故城北。汉成帝元延三年，封侍中、卫尉淳于长为侯国，王莽更之曰定城矣。
现代文：汝水又往东南流经定陵县老城北面，汉成帝元延三年前，将定陵封给侍中卫尉淳于长，立为侯国，王莽时改名为定城。
English: Your water also flows to the southeast through the north of the old city of Dingling County. Three years ago, Emperor Hanzhong Yuan Yan awarded Dingling to Lieutenant-Commander Jun Yuchang and established it as a vassal state. Wang Mang changed its name to Dingcheng.

古文：水右则滍水左入焉，左则百尺沟出矣。
现代文：《东观汉记》说：光武帝攻打王莽的两个大臣，退回时走到汝水岸边，用手捧水痛饮，洗涤脸上的尘垢。
English: "Dongguan Han Ji" said: Emperor Guangwu attacked Wang Mang's two ministers, and when he retreated, he walked to the bank of Ru Shui, drank water with his hands, and washed the dust on his face.

古文：沟水夹岸层崇，亦谓之为百尺堤也。
现代文：他对傅俊说：今天确是有点疲倦了，但诸位难道真的累垮了吗？
English: He said to Fu Jun, "It is true that I am a little tired today, but are you all really exhausted?"

古文：自定陵城北，通颍水于襄城县，颖盛则南播，汝泆则北注，沟之东有澄潭，号曰龙渊，在汝北四里许，南北百步，东西二百步，水至清深，常不耗竭，佳饶鱼笋，湖溢，则东注漷水矣。
现代文：他这话就是在这条水上说的。汝水右边，有嗤水向左注入，左边有百尺沟流出。沟水两岸有高高的河堤，也叫百尺堤，沟水从定陵城以北在襄城县与颖水相通，颖水上涨时就向南流，汝水泛滥时就向北流。沟水东面有个清澈的水潭，叫龙渊，在汝水北岸约四里；水潭南北百步，东西二百步，水极清澈幽深，常年不涸。这一带盛产鱼类和竹笋。潭水满溢时就往东注入榔水。
English: It was on this water that he said these words. On the right side of the river, there is a little water flowing to the left, and on the left there is a hundred-foot ditch flowing out. On both sides of the ditch there are high river banks, also called hundred-foot dikes. The ditch water from north of Dingling City is connected to Yingshui in Xiangcheng County. When Yingshui rises, it flows southward, and when Yingshui floods, it flows northward. On the east side of the ditch, there is a clear pool, called Longyuan, about four miles north of Yingshui; the pool is a

古文：汝水又东南，昆水注之，水出鲁阳县唐山，东南流，径昆阳县故城西。
现代文：汝水又往东南流，昆水注入。昆水发源于鲁阳县的唐山，往东南流经昆阳县老城西面。
English: Your water flows to the southeast and is infused with Kunshui. Kunshui originated in Tangshan, Luyang County, and flows to the southeast through the west of the old city of Kunyang County.

古文：更始元年，王莽征天下能为兵法者，选练武卫，招募猛士，旌旗辎重，千里不绝。又驱诸犷兽，虎豹犀象之属，以助威武。
现代文：更始元年，王莽征召天下擅长兵法的军事人才，选拔创，练武卫部队，招募猛士，族旗轴重千里不绝，作战时又驱使各种猛兽，如虎、豹、犀、象之类以助军威。
English: In the first year of the new era, Wang Mang conscripted the world's military talents who were good at the art of war, selected and trained the armed forces, and recruited warriors. The national flag is a thousand miles long, and when fighting, he drove all kinds of beasts, such as tigers, leopards, rhinoceroses, and elephants to help the military prestige.

古文：自秦、汉出师之盛，未尝有也。
现代文：从秦汉以来，出兵时的这种盛况是前所未有的。
English: Since the Qin and Han dynasties, this kind of pomp at the time of dispatching troops is unprecedented.

古文：世祖以数千兵徼之阳关，诸将见寻、邑兵盛，反走入昆阳。
现代文：世祖派数千兵马在阳关拦截敌军，诸将见王寻、王邑兵多势盛，就退回昆阳。
English: The ancestor sent thousands of soldiers and horses to intercept the enemy army in Yangguan. Seeing Wang Huan and Wang Yip's soldiers in full strength, they returned to Kunyang.

古文：世祖乃使成国上公王凤、廷尉大将军王常留守，夜与十三骑出城南门，收兵于郾。
现代文：于是世祖就派遣成国上公王凤、廷尉大将军王常留守昆阳，连夜带领十三名轻骑从南门出城，到哪县去调集军队。
English: As a result, the founder of the dynasty sent Chengguo Shangguo Wangfeng and the imperial lieutenant Wang Chang to stay in Kunyang, and led thirteen light horsemen out of the city from the south gate overnight, to which county to mobilize the army.

古文：寻、邑围城数十重，云车十余丈，瞰临城中，积弩乱发，矢下如雨。城中人负户而汲。
现代文：王寻、王邑把昆阳城围了数十重，靠近城边布置了高达十余丈的云车，居高临下地窥视着城中，并用弓弩向城中乱射，箭如雨下，城中人只得背负着门板去汲水。
English: Wang Huan and Wang Yip encircled the city of Kunyang dozens of times, and placed cloud chariots up to more than ten meters high near the edge of the city. They peered into the city from a high vantage point, and shot wildly into the city with bows and arrows. The arrows rained down, and people in the city had to carry the door plates on their backs to draw water.

古文：王凤请降，不许。
现代文：王凤请求投降，但王寻等不许。
English: Wang Feng asked to surrender, but Wang Huan was not allowed to do so.

古文：世祖帅营部俱进，频破之。乘胜，以敢死三千人，径冲寻、邑兵，败其中坚于是水之上，遂杀王寻。
现代文：世祖率各部军队一同进攻，屡次打败敌军，继而又乘胜组织了敢死队三千人，直冲王寻、王邑军队，在昆水上大败敌军主力，杀了王寻。
English: The ancestor led all the armies to attack together, repeatedly defeated the enemy army, and then organized a death squad of three thousand people, headed straight for Wang Huan and Wangyi's army, defeated the main force of the enemy army on the Kunshui, and killed Wang Huan.

古文：城中亦鼓噪而出，中外合势，震呼动天地。
现代文：此时城中守军也击鼓呐喊，冲出城外，内外夹击，喊杀声震天动地。
English: At this time, the defenders in the city also beat drums and shouted, rushed out of the city, clamped inside and outside, and the shouting was earth-shattering.

古文：会大雷风，屋瓦皆飞，莽兵大溃。
现代文：当时正逢大雷雨，狂风大作，刮得屋上瓦片乱飞，王莽军大败。
English: At that time, there was a heavy thunderstorm, strong winds, and the roof tiles were blown away, and Wang Mang's army was defeated.

古文：昆水又屈径其城南。
现代文：昆水又转弯流经昆阳城南面。
English: The Kunming River turns and flows south of Kunyang City.

古文：世祖建武中，封侍中傅俊为侯国。
现代文：世祖建武年间？把昆阳封给侍中傅俊，立为侯国。
English: During the reign of King Jianwu, the founder of the dynasty, Kunyang was assigned to the courtier Fu Jun and established as a vassal state.

古文：故《后汉郡国志》有昆阳县，盖藉水以氏县也。
现代文：所以《后汉书•郡国志》有昆阳县，是因水而取县名的。
English: Therefore, "Hou Han Shu • Gu Gu Guo Zhi" has Kunyang County, which is named after water.

古文：昆水又东，径定陵城南，又东，注汝水。
现代文：昆水又往东流经定陵城南，水往东流，注入汝水。
English: Kunshui also flows eastward through the south of Dingling City, and the water flows eastward, injecting water.

古文：汝水又东南，径奇頟城西北。今甫颍川郡治也。
现代文：汝水又往东南流经奇额城西北，现在这是南颖川郡的治所。
English: Ru Shui then flowed southeast through the northwest of Qigu City, which is now the seat of Nanyingchuan County.

古文：水出焉，世亦谓之大水。
现代文：渍水就在这里流出，人们也称为大滁水。
English: It is here that the polluted water flows out, and people also call it the "big swamp."

古文：《尔雅》曰：河有雍，汝有濆。
现代文：《尔雅》说：河水有雍水，汝水有溃水。
English: "Lya" said: "The river water has yang water, and your water has turbid water.

古文：然则濆者，汝别也。故其下夹水之色，犹流汝阳之名，是或濆、之声相近矣，亦或下合、颍，兼统厥称耳。
现代文：那么溃水其实就是汝水的分支了，因而下游两水之间的城邑，今天还留下汝阳的地名。或许是因为渍、滁两字读音相近，或许也是因为汝水下游与滁水、颖水汇合，于是也就笼统兼用这个名称吧。
English: So, Kuchimizu is actually a branch of Ruisui, and therefore the towns between the two waters downstream still have the place name of Ruyang today. Perhaps it is because the pronunciation of the two characters of 渍 and  are similar, or perhaps it is because the downstream of Ruisui converges with 水 and 颖水, so they generally use this name.

古文：又东南，过郾县北。
现代文：又往东南流过郾县北面。
English: It also flows southeast through the northern part of Handan County.

古文：汝水径奇頟城西，东南流。其城衿带两水，侧背双流。
现代文：汝水经奇领城西往东南流，城在两水之间，侧面和背后都濒临两水。
English: Ru Shui flows through the west of Qizhi Liancheng to the southeast, and the city is between the two waters. Both the side and the back are on the verge of the two waters.

古文：汝水又东南流，径郾县故城北，故魏下邑也。
现代文：汝水又往东南流经哪县老城北面，这是旧时魏的下邑。
English: Your water also flows southeast through the north side of the old city of Nian County, which is the lower town of the old Wei Dynasty.

古文：《史记》，楚昭阳伐魏，取郾是也。
现代文：《史记》说到楚国昭阳伐魏取哪，就指此城。
English: "Histories" refers to this city when it says that Zhaoyang, Chu Province, conquered Wei.

古文：汝水又东，得醴水口，水出南阳雉县，亦云导源雉衡山，即《山海经》云衡山也。
现代文：汝水又往东流，到了醛水口，醛水发源于南阳难县，也有人说导源于难衡山，就是《山海经》里说的衡山。
English: Your water also flows eastward, to the aldehyde water outlet. The aldehyde water originates from Nanyangnan County, and some people say that it originates from Nanyangshan, which is Hengshan mentioned in the "Song of Mountains and Seas."

古文：郭景纯以为南岳，非也。
现代文：郭景纯以为这就是南岳，但其实不是。
English: Guo Jingshun thought it was Nan Yue, but it wasn't.

古文：马融《广成颂》曰面据衡阴，指谓是山，在雉县界，故世谓之雉衡山。
现代文：马融《广成烦》说：前朝衡山之北，指的就是此山。山在堆县边界，所以人们叫难衡山。
English: Ma Rong "Guangcheng Bother" said: The north of Hengshan Mountain in the previous morning refers to this mountain. The mountain is on the border of He County, so people call it Nongheng Mountain.

古文：依《山海经》，不言有水。然醴水东流，历唐山下，即高凤所隐之山也。
现代文：按《山海经》，没有提到衡山有水，但醛水往东流经唐山下，就是高凤隐居过的山。
English: According to the "Shanhai Jing," there is no mention of Hengshan having water, but the aldehyde water flows eastward through the lower part of Tang Mountain, which is the mountain where Gaofeng lived in seclusion.

古文：醴水又东南，与皋水合，水发皋山。
现代文：醛水又往东南流，与皋水汇合。皋水发源于皋山，东流注入醛水。
English: The aldehyde water flows to the southeast and merges with the brackish water. The brackish water originates from Mount Lushan, and the eastern stream injects the aldehyde water.

古文：旧秦、汉之世，庙道有双阙、几筵。
现代文：郭景纯说，皋山，有人称为章山。醛水又往东南流经唐城北面，南流入城，然后西流出城，城就是因山而得名的。
English: Guo Jingchun said that Lushan, some people call it Zhangshan. The aldehyde water also flows southeast through the north of Tangcheng, flows south into the city, and then flows west out of the city. The city is named after the mountain.

古文：黄巾之乱，残毁颓阙。
现代文：酸水又折向东南流，经过叶县老城北面。
English: The acidic water flowed southeast again, passing north of the old city of Ye County.

古文：魏太和、景初中，令长修饰旧宇。后长陈晞以正始元年立碑，碑字破落，遗文殆存，事见其碑。
现代文：《春秋》；昭公十五年、景初年间，县令重新修葺了旧庙，后任县官汝南陈啼于正始元年立碑，现在碑上的字迹已有几处破损，但遗文基本上还在，所记事迹可从碑上看到。
English: "Spring and Autumn"; in the 15th year of King Zhaogong and the first year of King Jing, the county magistrate renovated the old temple. The next county official, Runan Chen, erected a monument in the first year of the first century. The writing on the monument has been damaged in several places, but the remains are basically still there. The recorded deeds can be seen on the monument.

古文：醴水又东，与叶西陂水会。县南有方城山，屈完所谓楚国方城以为城者也。
现代文：醛水又往东流，与叶县的西破水汇合，县南有座方城山，就是屈完所说楚国以方城为城的那座山。
English: The aldehyde water also flows eastward, merging with the west-breaking water of Ye County. In the south of the county, there is a Fangcheng Mountain, which is the mountain that Quanlan said was the city of Fangcheng in Chu.

古文：山有涌泉，北流，畜之以为陂，陂塘方二里。
现代文：山上有泉水涌出，往北流，积聚成破塘，破塘方圆二里。
English: There is a spring on the mountain that gushes out and flows northward, accumulating into a pond. The pond is two miles in circumference.

古文：陂水散流，又东，径叶城南，而东北注醴水。
现代文：破水散流，又往东流经叶城南面万然后往东北注入醛水。
English: The water broke and dispersed, and then flowed eastward through the southern part of Yecheng, and then injected aldehyde water to the northeast.

古文：醴水又东，注叶陂。
现代文：醛水又往东流注入叶破。
English: The aldehyde-laced water then flows eastward into the leaf cracks.

古文：陂，东西十里，南北七里，二陂，并诸梁之所堨也。
现代文：这个破塘东西十里，南北七里。两个破塘都是叶公诸梁所筑。
English: This pond is ten li from east to west and seven li from north to south. Both ponds were built by Ye Gongzhu Liang.

古文：陂水又东，径阳县故城北。又东径定陵城东南，与芹沟水合。
现代文：破水又往东流经洗阳县老城北面，又往东流经定陵城南面，东流与芹沟水汇合。
English: The broken water flowed eastward through the north of the old city of Senyang County, and eastward through the south of Dingling City, and the eastward flow converged with the water of Seringou.

古文：其水导源叶县，东径阳城北，又东径定陵县南，又东南流注醴。
现代文：芹沟水导源于叶县，往东流经抚阳城北面，又往东流经定陵县南面，然后往东南流，注入醛水。
English: The water conduit of Seringou originates in Ye County, flows eastward through the north of Fuyang City, flows eastward through the south of Dingling County, and then flows southeastward, injecting aldehyde water.

古文：其水径流昆、醴之间，缠络四县之中，疑即吕比所谓岘水也。
现代文：这支水流经昆水、醛水之间，弯弯曲曲地流过四县，可能就是吕忱所说的崛水。
English: This stream of water flows through the four counties in a meandering manner, passing between the kelp water and aldehyde water, and may be the rising water mentioned by Lü Zhen.

古文：今于定陵更无别水，惟是水可当之。
现代文：今天看来，在定陵再没有别的河流了，只有此水才可视为与晚水相当。
English: Today, it seems that there is no other river in Dingling, and only this water can be regarded as equivalent to the late water.

古文：醴水东径郾县故城南，左入汝。
现代文：醛水往东流经哪县老城南面，向左流注入汝水。
English: The aldehyde water flows eastward through the southern side of the old city of Nian County, and injects the water to the left.

古文：《山海经》曰：醴水东流注于水也。
现代文：《山海经》说：醛水往东流，注入观水。
English: The "Song of Mountains and Seas" says: aldehyde water flows eastward and is injected into the water.

古文：汝水又东南流，径邓城西。
现代文：汝水又往东流经邓城西面。
English: Your water also flows eastward through the west side of Dengcheng.

古文：《春秋左传》桓公二年，蔡侯、郑伯会于邓者也。
现代文：《春秋左传》，桓公二年前，蔡侯、郑伯在邓相会，就是这个邓城。
English: In "The Legend of Spring and Autumn," two years before Huan Gong, Cai Hou and Zheng Bo were at the Deng Xianghui, which is this Dengcheng.

古文：汝水又东南流，水注之。
现代文：汝水又往东南流，抚水注入。
English: Your water also flows to the southeast, and the water is injected.

古文：又东南，过汝甫上蔡县西。
现代文：又往东南流过汝南郡上蔡县西面。
English: It also flows southeast through the west side of Shangcai County, Runan County.

古文：汝南郡，楚之别也。汉高祖四年置，王莽改郡曰汝汾。
现代文：汝南郡原属楚国的领域，汉高祖四年设置该郡，王莽时改郡名为汝汾。
English: Runan County was originally part of the territory of the State of Chu. The county was established by Emperor Gaozu four years later, when Wang Mang changed the county's name to Runan.

古文：县故蔡国，周武王克殷，封其弟叔度于蔡。
现代文：上蔡县就是旧时的蔡国，周武王征服殷后，把蔡封给他的弟弟叔度。
English: Upper Cai County was the old Cai Kingdom. After King Zhou Wu conquered Yin, he gave Cai Feng to his younger brother Zhu Zhu.

古文：《世本》曰：上蔡也，九江有下蔡，故称上。
现代文：《世本》说：就是上蔡；因为九江有个下蔡，所以称上蔡。
English: "World Book" said: it is the upper Cai; because Jiujiang has a lower Cai, it is called the upper Cai.

古文：《竹书纪年》曰：魏章率师及郑师伐楚，取上蔡者也。
现代文：《竹书纪年》说：魏章率军并联合郑军攻楚，夺取上蔡。
English: "The Annals of the Bamboo Annals" said: Wei Zhang led the army and united with Zheng's army to attack Chu and capture Shang Cai.

古文：永初元年，安帝封邓骘为侯国。
现代文：永初元年，安帝将上蔡封给邓鹭，立为侯国。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Yongle Dynasty, Emperor An gave Shang Caifeng to Deng Wei and established it as a principality.

古文：汝水又东，径悬瓠城北。
现代文：汝水又往东流经悬瓤城北面。
English: Your water also flows eastward through the north side of the overhanging city.

古文：王智深云：汝南太守周矜起义于悬瓠者，是矣。
现代文：王智深说：汝南太守周矜在悬瓤起义，就是这地方。
English: Wang Zhishen said, "This is the place where the Southern Empress Dowager Zhou Enlai started the Hangeul Uprising.

古文：今豫州刺史汝南郡治。
现代文：今天，上蔡是豫州刺史和汝南郡的治所。
English: Today, Shangcai is the seat of Yuzhou Shishi and Runan County.

古文：城之西北，汝水枝别左出，西北流，又屈西东转，又西南会汝，形若垂瓠。
现代文：城的西北面，汝水的一条支流从左边分出，往西北流，又西折东转，又往西南流，与汝水汇合，河道弯曲状如倒挂的葫芦。
English: On the northwest side of the city, a tributary of the Ru Shui branches off from the left, flows northwest, turns west to east, and flows southwest to merge with the Ru Shui. The river is curved like an upside-down gourd.

古文：耆彦云：城北名马湾，中有地数顷，上有栗园，栗小，殊不并固安之实也。然岁贡三百石，以充天府。
现代文：老年人说：城北名叫马湾，湾中有土地数顷，还有个栗园，栗子很小，与固安的栗子相比差得远了，但每年上贡三百石，以充实朝廷的府库。
English: The old man said: The north of the city is called Horse Bay. There are several hectares of land in the bay, and there is also a chestnut orchard. The chestnuts are very small and far from the chestnuts in Gu'an. However, the annual tribute is three hundred koku to enrich the imperial treasury.

古文：水渚，即栗州也。树木高茂，望若屯云积气矣。
现代文：这个水诸就是栗洲，诸上树木参天，树荫茂密，望去好像一片绿云。
English: The water is chestnut, the trees are towering, the shade is dense, and it looks like a green cloud.

古文：林中有栗堂、射埻，甚间敞，牧宰及英彦，多所游薄。
现代文：树林中有个栗堂、靶场，十分幽静宽敞，当地州县长官和名人常来这里游乐。
English: There is a chestnut hall and a shooting range in the woods. It is very quiet and spacious. Local prefects and celebrities often come here to have fun.

古文：其城上西北隅，高祖以太和中幸悬瓠，平南王肃起高台于小城，建层楼于隅阿，下际水湄，降眺栗渚，左右列谢，四周参差竞峙，奇为佳观也。
现代文：高祖在太和年间，曾巡幸悬瓤城，平南将军王肃在小城上的西北角修筑高台，建造层楼，下临水滨，俯眺栗诸。左右两边是水榭，四周景物参差竞峙，堪称胜景了。
English: During the Taiwa era, Gao Zu made a tour of the Hanging Castle, and the Pingnan general Wang Su built a high platform in the northwest corner of the small city, built floors, and went down to the waterfront, overlooking the chestnuts. On both sides are rivulets, and the surrounding scenery is jagged and jostling, which is a great view.

古文：又东南，过平舆县南。溱水出浮石岭北青衣山，亦谓之青衣水也。东南径朗陵县故城西。
现代文：又往东南流过平舆县南面，溱水发源于浮石岭北面的青衣山，又称为青衣水，往东南流经朗陵县老城西面。
English: It also flows to the southeast through the south of Pingwu County. The stream originates from Qingyi Mountain, also known as Qingyi Water, on the north side of the pumice ridge, and flows to the southeast through the west of the old city of Langling County.

古文：应劭曰：西南有朗陵山，县以氏焉。
现代文：应肋说：西南有朗陵山，朗陵就是因山而得名的。
English: Ying Li said: There is Langling Mountain in the southwest, and Langling is named after the mountain.

古文：世祖建武中，封城门校尉臧宫为侯国也。
现代文：世祖建武年间，将该县封给城门校尉减宫，立为侯国。
English: During the reign of the founder Jianwu, the county was given to the castle gate captain Yan Gong and established as a vassal state.

古文：凑水又南屈径其县南，又东北。径北宜春县故城北。王莽更名之为宣孱也。
现代文：傣水又向南转弯流往县南，又往东北流经北宜春县老城北面，王莽时改名为宣屏。
English: Surabaya's water flowed southward to the south of the county, and northeastward to the north of the old city of North Yichun County. Wang Mangshi changed his name to Xuanping.

古文：豫章有宜春，故加北矣，元初三年，安帝封后父侍中阎畅为侯国。
现代文：豫章也有个宜春，因此这里加上北字，叫北宜春。元初三年，安帝将这地方封给皇后之父侍中阎畅，立为侯国。
English: Yuzhang also has a Yichun, so the word "Beijing" is added here, calling it North Yichun. In the first three years of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor An gave this place to the father of the queen, Zhizhong Yanchang, and established it as a principality.

古文：溱水又东北，径马香城北，又东北，入汝。
现代文：漆水又往东北流经马香城北面，又往东北注入汝水。
English: The lacquer water also flows northeast through the north side of Ma Xiangcheng, and then flows northeast into Ru Shui.

古文：汝水又东南，径平舆县南，安成县故城北。王莽更名至成也。
现代文：汝水又往东南流经平舆县南面、安城县老城北面―安城，王莽时改名为至成。
English: Ru Shui also flows southeast through the south of Pingwu County and the north of the old city of Ancheng County - Ancheng. Wang Mangshi changed his name to Shicheng.

古文：汉武帝元光六年，封长沙定王子刘苍为侯国矣。
现代文：汉武帝元光六年前，将安成封给长沙定王的儿子刘苍，立为侯国。
English: Six years ago, Emperor Yuan Guang of Hanwu assigned Ancheng to Liu Cang, the son of King Ding of Changsha, and made it a vassal state.

古文：汝水又东南，陂水注之，水首受慎水于慎阳县故城南陂。
现代文：汝水又往东南流，破水注入。破水上口在慎阳县老城旁的南破引入慎水。
English: Your water also flows to the southeast and is injected into the broken water. The broken water upstream is introduced into the broken water in the south near the old town of Shinyang County.

古文：陂水两分，一水自陂北，绕慎阳城四周城堑。
现代文：眸水分为两条，一条从破北流出，环绕慎阳城四周的城壕。
English: The eye water is divided into two, one flows out from the north, and surrounds the trenches around Shinyang City.

古文：颍川荀淑遇县人黄叔度于逆旅，与语移日，曰：子，吾师表也。
现代文：颖川荀淑曾在客舍里遇到本县同乡黄叔度，与他交谈了很久，对他说：您真是可以做我的表率啊！
English: Yingchuan Jinshuk once met Huang Shudu, a fellow villager from our county, in a guest house. She talked with him for a long time and said to him, "You really can be my role model!"

古文：范奕论曰：黄宪言论风旨，无所传闻。
现代文：范奕评论说：黄宪言论中的意旨，没有流传下来。
English: Fan Yi commented: The intention in Huang Xian's speech has not been passed down.

古文：然士君子见之者，靡不服深远，去疵吝，将以道周性全，无得而称乎？
现代文：但凡见过他的有才德之士，无不佩服他思想的深远，并借以克服自身的缺点和错误，从而使道更加周全，使性更加完美，这不是值得称颂的吗？
English: But isn't it praiseworthy that all the talented people who have seen him admire the profoundness of his thought, and use it to overcome their own shortcomings and mistakes, thus making the way more complete and the nature more perfect?

古文：堑水又自渎东北流，注北陂。
现代文：城壕水又从渠中流向东北，注入北破。
English: The trench water then flowed from the canal to the northeast and was injected into the northern breach.

古文：一水自陂东北流，积为鲷陂。
现代文：另一条水从破塘东北流出，积聚成酮破。
English: Another stream of water flows out of the northeast of the broken pond, accumulating into ketone breaks.

古文：陂水又东北，又结而为陂，世谓之窖陂。
现代文：破水又往东北流，又积聚成一个破塘，人们称为窖破。
English: The broken water then flows to the northeast and accumulates into a broken pond, which is called a broken pond.

古文：陂水上承慎阳县北陂，东北流，积而为土陂。
现代文：破水上流承接慎阳县的北破，往东北流，积聚成土破。
English: The breakwater upstream receives the north breakwater of Shinyang County and flows to the northeast, accumulating into a soil breakwater.

古文：陂水又东为窖陂。陂水又东南流，注壁陂。
现代文：破水又往东流，就是窖破；破水又往东南流，注入壁破。
English: When the water breaks, it flows to the east, that is, the cellar is broken; when the water breaks, it flows to the southeast, and is injected into the wall.

古文：陂水又东北为太陂。陂水又东，入汝。
现代文：破水又往东北流，是太破；破水又往东流，注入汝水。
English: If the water breaks and flows to the northeast, it is too broken; if the water breaks and flows to the east, it is injected into your water.

古文：汝水又东南，径平陵亭北，又东南，径阳遂乡北。
现代文：汝水又往东南流经平陵亭北面，又往东南流经阳遂乡北面。
English: Your water also flows to the southeast through the north of Pingling Pavilion, and flows to the southeast through the north of Yangsui Township.

古文：汝水又东，径栎亭北。
现代文：汝水又往东流经栋亭北面。
English: Your water flows eastward through the north side of the pavilion.

古文：《春秋》之棘栎也。
现代文：栋亭，《春秋今称为棘栋。
English: Dongting, "Spring and Autumn are now known as Thorny Dong.

古文：杜预曰：汝阴新蔡县东北有栎亭。
现代文：杜预说：汝阴郡新蔡县东北有栋亭。
English: Du Yu said: There is a pavilion in the northeast of Xin Cai County, Ruyin County.

古文：今城在新蔡故城西北，城北半沦水。
现代文：今天此城在新蔡县老城西北，城北一半已沉入水中。
English: Today, the city is located in the northwest of the old city of Xin Cai County. The northern half of the city has sunk into the water.

古文：汝水又东南，径新蔡县故城南。
现代文：汝水又往东南流经新蔡县老城南面。
English: Your water also flows southeast through the south of the old city of Xin Cai County.

古文：昔管、蔡间王室，放蔡叔而迁之。
现代文：从前管、蔡二国离间周王室，蔡叔被放逐，迁到这里。
English: In the past, Tsai II was in charge of separating the Zhou royal family, and Tsai Shulong was exiled and moved here.

古文：其子胡，能率德易行，周公举之为卿士，以见于王。王命之以蔡，申吕地也。以奉叔度祀，是为蔡仲矣。
现代文：他的儿子胡，规规矩矩地改变行为，周公推荐他做卿士，带他朝见成王，成王以原属申吕的蔡封他，让他掌管对叔度的祭祀，这就是蔡仲。
English: His son, Hu, changed his behavior in an orderly manner. Zhou Gong recommended him to be a noble and took him to see the king. The king appointed him as Cai Feng, who was originally from Shenlu, and let him be in charge of the sacrifice to his uncle. This is Cai Zhong.

古文：宋忠曰：故名其地为新蔡。
现代文：宋忠说：因为这缘故，所以把这地方称作新蔡。
English: Song Zhong said: Because of this, this place is called Xin Cai.

古文：王莽所谓新迁者也。
现代文：也就是王莽时的新迁。
English: That is, Wang Mangshi's new move.

古文：世祖建武二十八年，封吴国为侯国。
现代文：世祖建武二十八年，将新蔡封给吴国，立为侯国。
English: In the 28th year of Emperor Jianwu's reign, he gave Xin Caifeng to the State of Wu and established it as a vassal state.

古文：《汝南先贤传》曰：新蔡郑敬字次都，为郡功曹。
现代文：《汝南先贤传》说：新蔡郑敬，字次都，当郡功曹。
English: "The Biography of a Southern Scholar" said: New Cai Zhengjing, the word of the capital, is the county's hero.

古文：都尉高懿厅事前，有槐树，白露类甘露者。
现代文：都尉高巍官署厅前有槐树，树上的白露看来有点像甘露。
English: There is an eucalyptus tree in front of the office of Governor Gao Ye's office. The white dew on the tree looks a bit like nectar.

古文：懿问掾属，皆言是甘露。敬独曰：明府政未能致甘露，但树汁耳。
现代文：高璐同下属，都说是甘露，只有郑敬一人却说：您的政绩还不能使天降甘露，这只不过是树汁罢了。
English: Gao Jiong and his subordinates all said that it was nectar, but only Zheng Jiong said: Your political achievements cannot make the sky fall nectar, it is just tree sap.

古文：懿不悦，托疾而去。
现代文：高露很不高兴，借口身体不适离开了。
English: Gaolu was very unhappy and left on the pretext of feeling unwell.

古文：汝水又东南，左会澺水。
现代文：汝水又往东南流，在左边汇合了潦水。
English: The Ru Water also flows to the southeast, merging with the Lu Water on the left.

古文：水上承汝水别流于奇颔城东，东南流为练沟，径召陵具西，东南流注，至上蔡西冈北，为黄陵陂。陂水东流，于上蔡冈东为蔡塘。又东径平舆县故城南，为澺水。
现代文：潦水上流在奇额城东承接汝水分支，往东南流，叫练沟；经过召陵县西面，往东南流到上蔡西冈北面，就是黄陵破；破水往东流，在上蔡冈东积成蔡塘，又往东流经平舆县老城南面，才叫潦水。
English: The upper reaches of the Surabaya River in the east of Chiguecheng are connected to the branch of the Ye River, and flow to the southeast, which is called the Surabaya Ditch. After passing through the west of Zhaoling County, it flows to the southeast to the north of the West Hill of Shangcai County, which is the Huangling Canal. The broken water flows to the east, accumulating in the east of the West Hill of Shangcai County to form the Cai Tang, and then flows to the east through the south of the old city of Pingmyo County, which is called the Surabaya River.

古文：县，旧沈国也，有沈亭。
现代文：平舆县是昔日的沈国，有沈亭。
English: Pingwu County is the former Sheng Province, and there is a Shen Pavilion.

古文：《春秋》定公四年，蔡灭沈，以沈子嘉归。后楚以为县。《史记》曰：秦将李信攻平舆，败之者也。
现代文：《春秋》：定公四年前，蔡灭沈，把沈子嘉掳去，后来楚国把这一地方设立为县：《史记》说：秦将李信攻平舆，击败守军。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Ding Gong four years ago, Cai Shuxin, took Shen Zijia captive, and later the State of Chu set up this place as a county: "History" said: Qin attacked Li Xin and defeated the defenders.

古文：建武三十年，世祖封铫统为侯国。
现代文：建武三十年，世祖把这地方封给挑统，立为侯国。
English: In the 30th year of the Jianwu era, the ancestor gave this place to Zhaotong and established it as a principality.

古文：本妆南郡治，昔费长房为市吏，见王壶公，悬壶郡市，长房从之，因而自远，同入此壶，隐沦仙路，骨谢怀灵，无会而返。虽能役使鬼神，而终同物化。
现代文：这里本来是汝南郡的治所。从前，费长房当市吏，看见王壶公把壶挂在郡里的市场上，费长房就跟着他，因而从远处和他一同进入壶中，从此他就隐遁修仙，脱胎换骨，身怀灵气，但未学成就返回人间，虽然能遣使鬼神，但最后还是死了。
English: Formerly, Fei Changfang was a city official, and when he saw Wang Jugong hanging a jug in the county market, Fei Changfang followed him and entered the jug with him from a distance. From then on, he went into seclusion to cultivate the immortals, to change his body and soul, and to return to the human world with the spirit, but without learning. Although he was able to send ghosts and gods, he eventually died.

古文：城南里余有神庙，世谓之张明府祠，水旱之不节，则祷之。
现代文：城南一里余有神庙，人们称为张明府祠，每逢水旱失常，人们就在那里祈祷。
English: In the south of the city, there are more than a mile of temples, known as Zhang Mingfu Ancestral Hall. Whenever there is a drought, people go there to pray.

古文：庙前有《圭碑》，文字紊碎，不可复寻。碑侧有小石函。
现代文：庙前有一块上尖下方的石碑，碑上文字剥落破损，已看不清楚了，碑旁有一个小石匣。
English: In front of the temple, there is a stone tablet, the top and bottom of which are broken. The words on the tablet have been peeled off and damaged, so they are no longer legible. Next to the tablet, there is a small stone box.

古文：按《桂阳失贤画赞》，临武张熹字季智，为平舆令。
现代文：按《桂阳先贤画赞》，临武张熹，字季智，当平舆县令。
English: According to "The Guiyang Ancestor's Painting Praise," Linwu Zhangye, also known as Ji Zhi, was the leader of Dangping County.

古文：时天大旱，熹躬祷雩，未获嘉应，乃积薪自焚。主薄侯崇，小吏张化，从熹焚焉。
现代文：当时天正大旱，张熹亲自设祭祈求降雨，但并无灵验，于是他就堆了柴垛自焚；主簿侯崇、小吏张化也跟他一起自焚。
English: At that time, the weather was very dry. Zhang Qian personally set up a sacrifice to pray for rain, but it did not work, so he piled up firewood and self-immolated; the main bookkeeper Hou Chong and the minor official Zhang Hua also self-immolated with him.

古文：火既燎，天灵感应，即澍雨。此熹自焚处也。
现代文：大火熊熊烧起来时，天的神灵受了感动，立即降了一场大雨，这里就是张熹自焚的地方。
English: When the fire blazed up, the gods of heaven were moved and immediately a heavy rain fell. This is the place where Zhang Xuan set himself on fire.

古文：澺水又东南，左迤为葛陂，陂方数十里。水物含灵，多所苞育。昔费长房投杖于陂而龙变所在也，又劾东海君于是陂矣。
现代文：稳水又往东南流，左边分支流出，就是葛破，这个破湖方圆数十里，水生的动物都含有灵气，湖里所藏所生的东西很多，这里就是费长房把手杖投到湖里变成了龙的地方；他又在这里弹劝东海君。
English: The stable water flowed south-east again, and the branch on the left flowed out, that is, Ge Bao. This broken lake is dozens of miles in circumference. Aquatic animals all contain reiki, and there are many things born in the lake. This is where Fei Changfang threw his cane into the lake and turned into a dragon; he also persuaded Donghai Jun here.

古文：陂水东出为鲷水，俗谓之三丈陂，亦曰三严水。水径鲷阳县故城南。
现代文：湖水往东流出叫酮水，俗称三丈破，也叫三严水，流经酮阳县老城南面。
English: The lake water flowing eastward is called Keto Water, commonly known as Sanzhangba, also known as Sanzhan Water, flowing through the south of the old city of Keto Yang County.

古文：应劭曰：县在鲷水之阳。
现代文：应劭说：酮阳县在酮水北边。
English: Ying Yao said: Ketoyang County is in the north of Ketoshui.

古文：汉明帝水平中，封卫尉阴兴子庆为侯国也。
现代文：汉明帝永平年间，把纲阳封给卫尉阴兴的儿子阴庆，立为侯国。
English: During the Yongping era of the Han Ming Dynasty, Gangyang was given to the son of Wei lieutenant Yin Xing, Yin Qing, and established as a vassal state.

古文：县有葛陵城，建武十五年，更封安城侯铫丹为侯国。
现代文：酮阳县有葛陵城，建武十五年，把这地方改封给安成侯姚丹，立为侯国。
English: Ketang County has Guling City. Fifteen years after the founding of Jianwu, this place was renamed Ancheng Houyaodan and established as a county.

古文：城之东北，有楚武王冢，民谓之楚王琴，城北祝社里下，土中得铜鼎，铭曰楚武王，是知武王隧也。
现代文：城的东北有楚武王墓，民间称为楚王琴。在城北祝社里下的土中，挖出了一只铜鼎，上有铭文题着：楚武王。由此可知这是武王墓的隧道。
English: In the north-east of the city, there is the tomb of King Chu Wu, popularly known as the Tomb of King Chu Wangqin. In the soil beneath Zhusha in the north of the city, a bronze tripod was dug out, with an inscription reading: King Chu Wu. From this, it can be seen that this is the tunnel of King Wu's tomb.

古文：鲷陂东注为富水，水积之处，谓之陂塘，津渠交络，枝布川隰矣。
现代文：酮破水往东流叫富水，流水积聚之处叫破塘，这里的沟渠交错，遍布这一片低洼地。
English: The eastward flow of ketone-broken water is called rich water, and the place where the flowing water accumulates is called broken pond. The ditches here are intertwined, and they are all over this lowland.

古文：澺水自葛陂东南，径新蔡县故城东，而东南流注于汝，汝水又东南径下桑里，左迤为横塘陂，又东北为青陂者也。
现代文：渝水从葛破往东南流经新蔡县老城东面，往东南流，注入汝水。汝水又往东南流经下桑里，向左分支流出是横塘破，又往东北流是青阪。
English: The Chongshui flows from Ge to the southeast through the east of the old city of Xin Cai County, flows to the southeast, and injects the Ru water. The Ru water also flows to the southeast through the lower Sanli, and the outflow to the left branch is the Yokotangba, and to the northeast is the Qinghan.

古文：汝水又东南，径壶丘城北，故陈地。
现代文：汝水又往东南流经壶丘城北面，这里旧时是陈的地方。
English: The water then flows southeast through the northern part of Jugokucho, which used to be Chen's place.

古文：《春秋左传》文公九年，楚侵陈，克壶丘，以其服于晋，是也。
现代文：《春秋左传》：文公九年前，楚国入侵陈，攻下壶丘，这里因为陈臣服于晋。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn": Nine years ago, nine years ago, Chu invaded Chen and conquered Hukou, here because Chen submitted to Jin.

古文：汝水又东，与青陂合，水上承慎水于慎阳县之上慎陂，左沟北注马城陂，陂西有黄丘亭。
现代文：汝水又往东流，与青破汇合。青破水上流在慎阳县的慎破承接慎水，右沟往北流，注入马城破。马城破西有个黄丘亭。
English: Ru Shui also flows eastward, merging with Qing Hua. The upstream of Qing Hua Shui meets Shen Shui at Shen Hua Jie in Shinyang County, and the right ditch flows northward, injecting Ma Cheng Hua. There is a Huangqiu Pavilion in the west of Ma Cheng Hua.

古文：陂水又东，径新息亭北，又东为绸陂。陂水又东，径新息县，结为墙陂。陂水又东，径遂乡东南，而为壁陂。又东为青陂，陂东对大吕亭。
现代文：破水又往东流经新息亭北面，又往东流是酮破；阪水又往东流经新息县，积成墙破；破水又往东流经遂乡东南，形成壁破；又往东流积成青破，青破东对大吕亭。
English: The broken water flowed eastward through the north of Xinxi Ting, and the eastward flow was keto broken; the surrounding water flowed eastward through Xinxi County, forming a wall broken; the broken water flowed eastward through the southeast of Suixiang, forming a wall broken; and the eastward flow accumulated into Qing broken, Qing broken east to Daluluting.

古文：《春秋外传》曰：当成周时，南有荆蛮、申、吕，姜姓矣，蔡平侯始封也。
现代文：《春秋外传》说：成周的时候，南面有荆蛮、申、吕，都姓姜，最初受封在这里的是蔡平侯。
English: "Spring and Autumn Foreign Biography" said: When Cheng Zhou, there were Jing Man, Shen and Lv in the south, all surnamed Jiang. The first to be sealed here was Cai Ping Hou.

古文：西南有小吕亭，故此称大也。
现代文：因西南有小吕亭，所以这里称为大吕亭。
English: Because there is a small Luting in the southwest, it is called the Great Luting.

古文：侧陂南有青陂庙，庙前有陂，汉灵帝建宁三年，新蔡长河南缑氏李言上请修复青陂。
现代文：破塘旁边，南有青破庙，庙前有池塘。
English: Next to the broken pond, there is a blue broken temple in the south, and a pond in front of the temple.

古文：司徒臣训、尚书臣袭，奏可洛阳宫，于青陂东塘南树碑。碑称青陂在县坤地。源起桐柏淮川，别流入于潺湲。径新息墙陂，衍入褒信界，灌溉五百余顷。
现代文：汉灵帝建宁三年，河南喉氏李言当新蔡县官，向朝廷请求修复青破，司徒许训、尚书闻人袭在洛阳宫向皇帝上奏获准，在青破东塘南面立碑，碑文说青破座落在该县西南，发源于桐柏山的淮川，一条分支汇入潺援水，流经新息县的墙破，延伸流入褒信边界，灌溉田地五百余顷。
English: In the third year of Emperor Jianning of the Han Dynasty, Li Yan, a member of the Henan Throat Clan, became the new official of Cai County and requested the imperial court to repair the Qinghai Canal. The attack by Sidu Xu Xun and Shang Shuhan was reported to the emperor at the Luoyang Palace and was approved. A monument was erected on the south side of the Qinghai Canal. The inscription said that the Qinghai Canal was located in the southwest of the county, originated from the Huai River of Tongbai Mountain, a branch of which flowed into the Yunnan Relief Water, flowed through the wall of Xinxi County, extended into the border of Bohsin

古文：陂水又东，分为二水，一水南入淮，一水东南径白亭北，又东径吴城南。
现代文：破水又往东流，分成两条，一条往南流注入淮水，另一条往东南流经白亭北面，又往东流经吴城南面。
English: The breakwater then flows eastward, splitting into two streams, one flowing south into the Huai River, the other flowing southeast through the north of Baiting, and flowing east through the south of Wucheng.

古文：《史记》，楚惠王二年，子西召太子建之子胜于吴。胜入居之，故曰吴城也。
现代文：《史记》说：楚惠王二年前，子西把太子建的儿子胜召到吴国，胜来后就住在这里，所以称为吴城。
English: "History" says: Two years before King Chu Hui, Zixi summoned the son of Prince Jian to the State of Wu. After the victory, he lived here, which is why it is called Wucheng.

古文：又东北屈径壶丘东，而北流注于汝水，世谓之薄溪水。
现代文：水又向东北转弯，经过壶丘东面往北流，注入汝水。人们称为薄溪水。
English: The water then turns to the northeast, flows past the east side of the knoll to the north, and is injected into the Ru water. People call it the thin stream water.

古文：汝水又东，径褒信县故城北，而东注矣。
现代文：汝水又往东流经褒信县老城北面，然后又向东流去。
English: Your water also flows eastward through the north side of the old city of Baoxin County, and then flows eastward.

古文：又东至原鹿县，汝水又东南径县故城西。
现代文：又往东流到原鹿县，汝水又往东南流经原鹿县老城西面。
English: It also flows eastward to Yuanlu County, and your water flows southeastward through the west side of the old city of Yuanlu County.

古文：杜预《释地》曰：汝阴有原鹿县也。
现代文：杜预《释地》说：汝阴郡有原鹿县。
English: Du Yuan's "Interpretation" said: Ruyin County has the original Deer County.

古文：南入于淮。
现代文：往南注人淮水。
English: To the south, people pour water.

