古文：眭夸，一名昶，赵郡高邑人也。
现代文：眭夸，又名昶，赵郡高邑人。
English: Hao Kua, also known as Hao, is from Gaoyu, Zhao County.

古文：祖迈，晋东海王越军谋掾，后没石勒为徐州刺史。
现代文：祖父眭迈，是晋代东海王越的军谋掾，后沦落于石勒政权，任徐州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Qimai, was a military strategist of the East Sea Wang Yue in the Jin Dynasty. Later, he fell under the Shile regime and was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：父邃，字怀道，慕容宝中书令。
现代文：父亲眭邃，字怀道，官任慕容宝的中书令。
English: Vater, literally "to cherish the way," is the Chinese calligraphy of Murongbao.

古文：夸少有大度，不拘小节，耽志书传，未曾以世务经心。
现代文：眭夸少年时气度很大，不拘小节，沉溺于阅览书传，从不经心于世俗事务。
English: When he was a teenager, Zou Gua had a great temperament. He was not fussy, indulged in reading biographies, and was never concerned with worldly affairs.

古文：好饮酒，浩然物表。
现代文：喜欢饮酒，超脱于世事之外，有正大刚直之气。
English: He's a good drinker. He's a bit of an eccentric.

古文：年二十遭父丧，须鬓致白，每一悲哭，闻者为之流涕。
现代文：眭夸二十岁时父亲去世，哀伤悲痛使他鬓须都白了，每次悲伤哭号，使人听了都为之泪下。
English: When he was twenty years old, his father passed away. The grief and sorrow turned his whiskers white. Every time he cried out in grief, people were moved to tears.

古文：高尚不仕，寄情丘壑。
现代文：情操高尚而不肯出仕，终日寄情于山泉丘壑。
English: A high-spirited person does not want to work hard, and loves the hills and ravines.

古文：同郡李顺愿与之交，夸拒而不许。
现代文：同郡人李顺想要同他交结，眭夸却拒绝与他往来。
English: Li Shun, a fellow county resident, hoped to make friends with him, but Hao Qua refused.

古文：邦国少长莫不惮之。
现代文：国中老幼没有不惧怕他的。
English: Children and adults in the county have grown up fearing him.

古文：少与崔浩为莫逆之交。
现代文：眭夸年轻时与崔浩结成莫逆之交。
English: When he was young, Hao Qua formed a close friendship with Cui Hao.

古文：浩为司徒，奏征为其中郎，辞疾不赴。
现代文：崔浩任司徒时，曾上奏朝廷要征召眭夸任他的中郎，眭夸推辞有病而不赴任。
English: When Cui Hao served as a tutor, he petitioned the imperial court to recruit Zi Gua as his lieutenant, but Zi Gua was ill and did not take up the post.

古文：州郡逼遣，不得已，入京都。
现代文：州郡官府强行派遣，他才不得已而去到京师。
English: The state and county government forcibly dispatched him, and he had no choice but to go to Beijing.

古文：与浩相见，延留数日，惟饮酒谈叙平生，不及世利。
现代文：眭夸在京与崔浩相见，停留了几天，仅仅同他一起饮酒，谈叙平生，全不涉及世利之事。
English: Hao Qua met with Cui Hao in Beijing and stayed for a few days, only drinking with him and talking about his life, without involving worldly interests.

古文：浩每欲论屈之，竟不能发言。
现代文：崔浩每每想要说服他就官职，竟然连一句话也说不来。
English: Every time Cui Hao tried to persuade him to accept the post, he couldn't even say a word.

古文：其见敬惮如此。
现代文：他受人敬畏的情况可见一斑。
English: His reverence is palpable.

古文：浩后遂投诏书于夸怀，亦不开口。
现代文：崔浩后来只得把皇帝的诏书丢在眭夸怀中，也不开口说话。
English: Cui Hao later threw the imperial edict into the arms of Zou Quanguo and did not open his mouth.

古文：夸曰： 桃简，卿已为司徒，何足以此劳国士也。
现代文：眭夸对崔浩说道： 桃简，你已经当上了司徒，为什么非要以这种事情来劝勉国中的士人呢！
English: Hao Qua said to Cui Hao: Taojian, you have already become a scholar, why do you have to use this kind of thing to persuade the scholars in the country!

古文：吾便于此将别。 
现代文：我就在此和你告别了。 
English: I'm saying goodbye to you right now.

古文：桃简，浩小名也。
现代文：桃简，是崔浩的小名。
English: Taojian is a nickname for Cui Hao.

古文：浩虑夸即还。
现代文：崔浩考虑到眭夸就要回家。
English: Cui Hao considered that He Gua was about to go home.

古文：时乘一骡，更无兼骑，浩乃以夸骡内之厩中，冀相维絷。
现代文：当时眭夸骑的是一匹骡子，没有别的坐骑，崔浩就把眭夸的骡子藏在马厩里，想要用这个办法把他留住。
English: At that time, Zou Kua was riding a mule, there was no other horse, Cui Hao hid Zou Kua's mule in the stables, trying to use this method to keep him.

古文：夸遂托乡人输租者，谬为御车，乃得出关。
现代文：睦夸于是请托家乡到京送租的人，谎称自己为驾车的，混出京城。
English: Zou Gua then entrusted a fellow villager to pay the rent, pretending that he was driving, so he was able to leave the customs.

古文：浩知而叹曰： 眭夸独行士，本不应以小职辱之。
现代文：崔浩得知后感叹地说： 眭夸是一个志节高尚的士人，本来就不应该用微小的官职去侮辱他。
English: After learning of this, Cui Hao said with regret: Zou Qua is a high-minded scholar, and he should not have used his minor official position to insult him.

古文：又使其人仗策复路，吾当何辞以谢也。 
现代文：又逼得他拄着拐杖赶路回家，我应当用什么言辞去向他谢罪呢？ 
English: What words should I use to apologize to him for forcing him to walk home on crutches?

古文：时朝法甚峻，夸既私还，将有私归之咎。
现代文：当时朝廷法度非常严峻，眭夸既然私自归还故里，将会受到私归的罪责。
English: At that time, the imperial edict was very strict, saying that since I returned to my hometown, I would be guilty of returning to my hometown.

古文：浩仍相左右，始得无坐。
现代文：崔浩多次请朝廷左右帮助，才使他免于定罪。
English: Cui Hao then twisted and turned until he was acquitted.

古文：经年，送夸本骡，兼遗以所乘马，为书谢之。
现代文：过了一年，崔浩把眭夸原来所骑的骡子送还给他，又把自己所乘的马赠送给他，并写了一封书信表示道歉。
English: A year later, he returned the mule to Zou Kua, and at the same time gave him his own horse to ride, and wrote a letter of apology.

古文：夸更不受其骡马，亦不复书。
现代文：眭夸却不接受他送来的骡马，也不给他回信。
English: Zou Kua no longer accepts his horses and does not reply to his letters.

古文：及浩诛，为之素服，受乡人吊唁，经一时乃止。
现代文：到后来崔浩被杀，眭夸为他身着素服，并接受乡里之人的吊唁，过了一段时间才停止。
English: Later, when Cui Hao was killed, it took a while for the hype to die down, as he was dressed in plain clothes and received condolences from people in the countryside.

古文：叹曰： 崔公既死，谁能更容眭夸！ 
现代文：眭夸感叹地说： 崔公既死，谁能更容眭夸？ 
English: Zou Gua sighed and said, "Cui Haogong is dead, who else can contain Zou Gua?"

古文：遂作《朋友篇》，辞义为时人所称。
现代文：于是写下了《朋友篇》，文章中的言辞意义受到当时人们的称赞。
English: As a result, he wrote "Friends," and the rhetorical meaning in the article was praised by people at the time.

古文：妇父钜鹿魏攀，当时名达之士。
现代文：眭夸的岳父钜鹿人魏攀，是当时的名达之士。
English: His father-in-law, Wei Pan, was a famous person at that time.

古文：未尝备婿之尝，情同朋好。
现代文：与眭夸两人从不讲究翁婿之礼，相互之间情投意合，就像是一对好朋友。
English: He and Zou Qua never cared about being husband and wife. They had a good rapport with each other, just like a pair of good friends.

古文：或人谓夸曰： 吾闻有大才者必居贵仕，子何独在桑榆乎？ 
现代文：有人对眭夸说： 我听说极有才能的人必定身居贵官，你为什么独独要在乡间山居呢？ 
English: Someone said to Hao Qua: I have heard that people with great talent must occupy high-ranking positions. Why are you in the middle of the mulberry tree?

古文：遂著《知命论》以释之。
现代文：眭夸因此而写下了《知命论》来加以解释。
English: So he wrote "Theory of Mind" to explain why.

古文：年七十五卒。葬日，赴会者如市。
现代文：眭夸终年七十五岁，眭夸殡葬那天，各方的人赶来送葬，门庭若市。
English: He was seventy-five years old. On the day of his funeral, people from all walks of life came to pay their respects.

古文：无子。
现代文：眭夸没有子嗣。
English: Wang Jun has no son.

古文：冯亮，字灵通，南阳人，萧衍平北将军蔡道恭之甥也。
现代文：冯亮，字灵通，南阳人，是萧衍属下平北将军蔡道恭的外甥。
English: Feng Liang, Zhiling Tong, Nanyang people, is the nephew of Xiao Yan's subordinate Pingbei General Cai Daogong.

古文：少傅览诸书，又笃好佛理。
现代文：冯亮少年时博览群书，尤其喜爱研究佛家教义。
English: Feng Liang read a lot of books when he was a boy, and especially liked to study Buddhist teachings.

古文：随道恭至义阳，会中山王英平义阳而获焉。
现代文：他跟随蔡道恭到义阳，恰好遇上中山王元英平定义阳城，把冯亮也拿获了。
English: He followed Cai Daogong to Yiyang, just happened to meet Zhongshan Wang Yuan Yingping to define Yangcheng, and also won Feng Liang.

古文：英素闻其名，以礼待接。
现代文：中山王英平素就听说冯亮的名声，便对他以礼相待。
English: Zhongshan Wang usually heard about Feng Liang's reputation, so he treated him with courtesy.

古文：亮性清净，至洛，隐居崧高，感英之德，以时展勤。
现代文：冯亮性情清雅高洁，到了洛阳以后，就在崧高山隐居起来，他很感激中山王对自己厚待之德，所以有时也帮他做点事情。
English: Feng Liang's disposition is elegant and noble. After arriving in Luoyang, he lived in seclusion in the mountains. He was very grateful to Zhongshan Wang for his kindness, so he sometimes helped him do some things.

古文：及英亡，亮奔赴，尽其哀恸。
现代文：中山王去世之后，冯亮立即前往吊丧，表达自己极为哀伤悲痛的感情。
English: After the death of Zhongshan Wang, Feng Liang immediately went to the funeral to express his extremely sad and sorrowful feelings.

古文：世宗尝召以为羽林监，领中书舍人，将令侍讲《十地》诸经，因辞不拜。
现代文：世宗曾经征召冯亮充任羽林监，领中书舍人，并打算让他给自己讲《十地》等经籍，但冯亮坚决推辞不受。
English: The Sejong once conscripted Feng Liangcheng to serve as an overseer of the forest, leading the middle school students, and planned to let him read "Ten Lands" and other scriptures to himself, but Feng Liang was firmly rejected.

古文：又欲使衣帻入见，亮苦求以幅巾就朝，遂不强逼。
现代文：世宗又想让他戴上帻巾前来朝见，但冯亮却苦苦请求用幅巾束发而上朝，世宗对他也就不好强逼了。
English: Shizong also wanted him to wear a silk scarf to see the emperor, but Feng Liang pleaded with him to wear a wide scarf and go to the emperor. Shizong did not want to force him.

古文：还山数年，与僧徒礼诵为业，蔬食饮水，有终焉之志。
现代文：冯亮回山中隐居数年，整日与佛门僧人一道礼拜诵经，吃素饮水，有终身奉佛的志向。
English: Feng Liang returned to the mountains to live in seclusion for several years, praying and chanting all day with Buddhist monks, eating vegetarian food and drinking water, and aspiring to be a lifelong Buddhist.

古文：会逆人王敞事发，连山中沙门，而亮被执赴尚书省，十余日，诏特免雪。
现代文：正好叛逆之徒王敞东窗事发，株连山中佛门僧人，冯亮也被扣押送到尚书省，监押了十多天，皇帝下令特准他免罪洗雪。
English: Just as the incident of the renegade Wang Changdong window occurred, the Buddhist monk of Zhu Lian Mountain, Feng Liang, was also detained and sent to Shangshu Province. He was detained for more than ten days, and the emperor ordered him to be exonerated and wash the snow.

古文：亮不敢还山，遂寓居景明寺。
现代文：冯亮此后不敢再回到崧高山，就借住在景明寺里。
English: Feng Liang did not dare to go back to Shougaoshan after that, so he rented a room in Jingming Temple.

古文：敕给衣食及其从者数人。
现代文：世宗令人供给他衣食和几个侍从的人。
English: Sejong had people provide him with food, clothing, and a few attendants.

古文：后思其旧居，复还山室。
现代文：后来冯亮怀念他原先隐居之地，就又回到崧高的旧居。
English: Later, he missed his old home and returned to the Songshan residence.

古文：亮既雅爱山水，又兼巧思，结架岩林，甚得栖游之适，颇以此闻。
现代文：冯亮平素就酷爱山水，又兼有灵巧的头脑，他依傍着山崖林木巧妙地盖造简陋的房舍，尽得栖息游玩之乐，并因此而闻名于世。
English: Feng Liang has always loved the landscape and has a dexterous mind. He skillfully built a simple house next to the cliff and trees, enjoying the pleasure of living and playing, and is famous in the world for this.

古文：世宗给其工力，令与沙门统僧暹、河南尹甄琛等，周视崧高形胜之处，遂造闲居佛寺。
现代文：世宗就下令派给工役匠人，让他同沙门统僧暹、河南尹甄琛等人一道，四处察看崧高山地形优美的地方，为他建筑一所闲居佛寺。
English: King Sejong then ordered that a craftsman be sent to work with Samye Monk Siem, Yin Zhengyi of Henan Province, and others to inspect the beautiful mountainous terrain and build a Buddhist temple for him.

古文：林泉既奇，营制又美，曲尽山居之妙。
现代文：这个地方山林泉石异常奇特，房屋也建造得十分精美，曲尽山居之妙。
English: The mountains, forests, and springs in this area are unusually strange, and the houses are also very beautifully built. It is wonderful to live in a mountain house.

古文：亮时出京师。
现代文：冯亮也时常外出去到京师。
English: Feng Liang also often goes out to Beijing to study.

古文：延昌二年冬，因遇笃疾，世宗敕以马舆送令还山，居崧高道场寺。
现代文：延昌二年冬，冯亮在京师时得了重病，世宗敕令用马车送他回山，住在崧高道场寺。
English: In the winter of the second year of Yanchang, Feng Liang fell seriously ill while he was teaching in Beijing. Shizong Qian ordered to send him back to the mountains by carriage, and he lived in Shigao Dojo Temple.

古文：数日而卒。
现代文：过了几天他就去世了。
English: Xue Shaoyin recounted the story.

古文：诏赠帛二百匹，以供凶事。
现代文：皇帝诏令赠给帛二百尺，以供为他办丧事之用。
English: The emperor gave him two hundred yakitori to use at the funeral.

古文：遗诫兄子综，敛以衣幍，左手持板，右手执《孝经》一卷，置尸盘石上，去人数里外。
现代文：冯亮生前曾给他哥哥之子冯综留下遗言安排后事：入殓时给他穿戴衣帽，左手拿着板，右手握着一卷《孝经》，把尸体安置在离人数里之外的一块大石上。
English: Before his death, Feng Liang had left his last words to his brother's son, Feng Simi, to arrange the aftermath: when he was buried, he was to wear a cap, hold a board in his left hand, and hold a volume of "Filial Piety" in his right hand. The body was placed on a large stone away from the crowd.

古文：积十余日，乃焚于山。
现代文：冯综照这样办了，让尸体在外陈放了十多天，才在山上火化。
English: Feng Zizhao did this, and the body was left outside for more than ten days before it was cremated on the mountain.

古文：以灰烬处，起佛塔经藏。
现代文：就在他火化的灰烬的地方，盖起一座供奉经咒文字的佛塔。
English: On the very spot where his ashes were cremated, a stupa was built to enshrine the incantation.

古文：初，亮以盛冬丧，时连日骤雪，穷山荒润，鸟兽饥窘，僵尸山野，无所防护。
现代文：起初，冯亮因为是在隆冬时候去世，当时连日降下大雪，大雪封盖了穷山荒涧，鸟兽不能觅食而无比饥饿，冯亮的尸体陈放在山野，没有用任何东西加以防护。
English: At first, Feng Liang died in the middle of winter. At that time, heavy snow fell for days on end. The snow covered the barren mountains. Birds and animals could not forage for food and were extremely hungry. Feng Liang's body was placed in the mountains without any protection.

古文：时寿春道人惠需，每旦往看其尸，拂去尘霰。
现代文：那时，寿春道人惠需，每天早上都要前去照看他的尸体，扫去覆盖在他身上的积雪。
English: At that time, Shuchun Dao practitioner Hui Neng would go to look after his corpse every morning and sweep away the snow covering his body.

古文：可谓因伪饰辞，顺非而泽，谅可叹矣。
现代文：他身上到处有飞鸟虫子留下的痕迹，左右纵横交错，但尸体一点也没有受到侵蚀毁坏，身上的衣服完好如初，只是寒风吹跑了他的头巾。
English: He had bird and insect marks all over his body, criss-crossing from side to side, but his body had not been eroded or destroyed at all, and his clothes were still intact, except that the cold wind had blown away his hood.

古文：余今省被众家，委心从善，庶探其衷，不为苟异。
现代文：又因为冯亮生前好友南方法师曾送给他十颗栗子作信物，说是希望他将来能得到进入佛家十地的果因报应，惠需就扳开冯亮的手，把十颗栗子放在他手中。
English: In addition, because Feng Liang's former friend, the Southern Methodist, had given him ten chestnuts as a token, saying that he hoped that he could get the reward of entering the Buddhist ten lands in the future, Hui Bo opened Feng Liang's hand and put ten chestnuts in his hand.

古文：但是古非今，俗间之常情；爱远恶近，世中之恆事。
现代文：过了一宿，栗子被虫鸟吃掉了，皮壳全撒在地上，但也不曾伤害冯亮的肌体。
English: After one night, the chestnuts were eaten by insects and birds, and the shells were scattered all over the ground, but they did not harm Feng Liang's body.

古文：而千载之下，独论古制，惊俗之谈，固延多诮。
现代文：冯亮火化的那一天，只见白雾蓊蓊郁郁，缭绕在他的四周，从地下连接天上，一整天不曾断绝。
English: On the day of Feng Liang's cremation, the white mist was thick and heavy. It swirled around him, connecting the sky with the underground, and it never stopped for the whole day.

古文：脱有深赏君子者，览而揣之，傥或存焉。
现代文：崧高山中前来帮忙的僧道们、一般民众一百多人，无不感到奇异。
English: The monks and monks who came to help, and more than a hundred ordinary people, all felt strange.

古文：谧不饮酒，好音律，爱乐山水，高尚之情，长而弥固，一遇其赏，悠尔忘归。
现代文：李谧不饮酒，喜好音乐，酷爱山水，这种高尚的情操，时间长久而更加坚固，每见到可以欣赏的山水景物，总是悠闲自在，乐而忘归。
English: Li Wei does not drink alcohol, likes music, and loves the landscape. This noble sentiment lasts for a long time and is more solid. Whenever he sees a landscape that can be appreciated, he is always relaxed and happy, and forgets about it.

古文：乃作《神士赋》，歌曰： 周孔重儒教，庄老贵无为。
现代文：于是作《神士赋》，诗里说： 周、孔重视儒教，庄、老崇尚无为。
English: As a result, he wrote "Shen Shifu," saying in the poem: Zhou and Kong valued Confucianism, Zhuang and Laozong did nothing.

古文：二途虽如异，一是买声兒。
现代文：二者道路虽不同，都是沽名钓誉之辈。
English: Although the two roads are different, they are both famous anglers.

古文：生乎意不惬，死名用何施。
现代文：此生心意未满足，死后名声何以施。
English: If one's mind is not satisfied in this life, how can one gain fame after death?

古文：可心聊自乐，终不为人移。
现代文：适合我心聊自乐，终久不为人所移。
English: It is suitable for my heart to chat and enjoy, and I will not be moved by people for a long time.

古文：脱寻余志者，陶然正若斯。 
现代文：倘有探求我志者，陶然自得正如此。 
English: If there are those who seek my will, they will be delighted to do so.

古文：延昌四年卒，年三十二，遐迩悼惜之。
现代文：延昌四年去世，时年三十二岁，远近的人都悼念他，惋惜他。
English: Yanchang died four years ago, at the age of thirty-two. People near and far mourned him and felt sorry for him.

古文：其年，四门小学博士孔璠等学官四十五人上书曰： 窃见故处士赵郡李谧：十岁丧父，哀号罢邻人之相；幼事兄瑒，恭顺尽友于之诚。
现代文：有一年，四门小学博士孔等学官四十五人向皇帝上书说： 臣等听说已故隐士赵郡人李谧，他十岁时父亲亡故，痛哭哀号使邻里都为之动容；幼年时侍奉兄长李王易，恭敬和顺，竭尽兄弟之间友爱的诚心。
English: One year, forty-five scholars, including Dr. Kong of Shimen Elementary School, wrote to the emperor, saying: "Courtiers and others have heard of the late hermit Li Qian, a native of Zhao County. When he was ten years old, his father passed away, and all the neighbors were moved by his weeping and wailing. When he was a child, he served his elder brother, Li Wang Yi, with respect and obedience, and tried to fulfill the sincerity of friendship between brothers.

古文：十三通《孝经》、《论语》、《毛诗》、《尚书》。历数之术尤尽其长，州闾乡党有神童之号。
现代文：十三岁通读《孝经》、《论语》、《毛诗》、《尚书》，尤其擅长历数之术，在州闾乡党中有神童之称。
English: At the age of 13, he read through "The Filial Piety Sutra," "The Analects of Confucius," "Mao Poetry" and "The Classic of Confucianism." He was especially good at the art of calendar counting, and was known as a child prodigy in the Zhoushangxiang Party.

古文：年十八，诣学受业，时博士即孔璠也。
现代文：十八岁时，到学校受业，当时博士就是孔。
English: At the age of eighteen, he went to school to study, and at that time the doctor was Kong.

古文：览始要终，论端究绪，授者无不欣其言矣。
现代文：李谧对经籍从头至尾仔细研读，评论其端绪，教授他的人没有不对他的言谈感到欣喜的。
English: Li Yao carefully studied the textbook from beginning to end and commented on its outline. His professors were delighted with his speech.

古文：于是鸠集诸经，广校同异，比三《传》事例，名《春秋丛林》，十有二卷。
现代文：于是收集各种经典，广泛比较其中的异同，考校《春秋》三传中的事例，题名为《春秋丛林》，共计十二卷。
English: As a result, he collected all kinds of classics, extensively compared the differences and similarities among them, and examined the examples in the three versions of "Spring and Autumn," entitled "Spring and Autumn Jungle," a total of twelve volumes.

古文：为璠等判析隐伏，垂盈百条。
现代文：为孔等人进行辨析审订，将近一百条。
English: Nearly a hundred articles were analyzed and revised for Kong and others.

古文：滞无常滞，纤毫必举；通不长通，有枉斯屈。
现代文：发现其中有遗漏之处却也不多见，但一丝一毫都要提出来；其有不畅通的地方也并不常有，但只要有错讹就予以辨析校正。
English: If it is found that there are omissions, they are not common, but they must be brought out one by one; if there are not smooth places, they are not common, but as long as there are mistakes, they will be analyzed and corrected.

古文：不苟言以违经，弗饰辞而背理。
现代文：李谧的著述做到了不随意议论而歪曲经典的本意，不追求言辞藻饰而违背道理。
English: Li Yao's writings do not arbitrarily discuss and distort the original intention of the classics, do not pursue rhetorical embellishment and violate reason.

古文：辞气磊落，观者忘疲。
现代文：全书辞气错落分明，使人读来可以乐而不疲。
English: The tone of the whole book is clear and precise, so that people can read it with pleasure and not get tired.

古文：每曰： 丈夫拥书万卷，何假南面百城。 
现代文：李谧经常说： 大丈夫只求拥书万卷，何必要南面百城。 
English: Li Wei often said: "It's okay to ask for a million volumes of books, why do you need a hundred cities in the south?"

古文：遂绝迹下帏，杜门却扫，弃产营书，手自删削。卷无重复者四千有余矣。
现代文：于是放弃教书之业，闭门不迎宾客，抛弃家产，专心著述，亲自删削，书卷没有重复的，共有四千多。
English: As a result, he gave up his teaching career, closed the door and did not welcome guests, abandoned his family property, concentrated on writing, and personally edited and edited more than four thousand books, none of which were duplicated.

古文：犹括次专家，搜比谠议，隆冬达曙，盛暑通宵。
现代文：还搜求各种学有专长的人，收集各种公正的议论，隆冬盛暑，通宵达旦。
English: They also search for all kinds of people with academic expertise, collect all kinds of fair discussions, and stay up all night in the dead of winter.

古文：虽仲舒不窥园，君伯之闭户，高氏之遗漂，张生之忘食，方之斯人，未足为喻。
现代文：即使像仲舒的不窥园苑，君伯的闭门不出，高氏的忘记洗衣，张生的废寝忘食，较之于李谧，都不足以比拟。
English: Even if, like Zhongshu's not peeping into the garden, Junbo's not going out behind closed doors, Gao's forgetting the laundry, Zhang Sheng's forgetting to eat, compared to Li Yao, it is not enough to compare.

古文：谧尝诣故太常卿刘芳推问音义，语及中代兴废之由，芳乃叹曰： 君若遇高祖，侍中、太常非仆有也。 
现代文：李谧曾经到已故太常卿刘芳那里推求询问音义，谈到朝代兴废的原因，刘芳听了以后感叹地说： 你如果被高祖知遇，侍中、太常的官职就不会归我所有了。 
English: Li Yao once went to the late Grand Steward Liu Fang to ask him about the meaning of sounds and the reasons for the rise and fall of dynasties. After listening to him, Liu Fang said with regret: If you were met by Gao Zu, the official posts of chamberlain and Grand Steward would not belong to me.

古文：前河南尹、黄门侍郎甄琛内赞近机，朝野倾目，于时亲识求官者，答云： 赵郡李谧，耽学守道，不闷于时，常欲致言，但未有次耳。
现代文：前河南尹、黄门侍郎甄琛在朝廷参赞事务，朝野之人都注目于他，当时他的亲戚旧识中有人向他求官，他回答来人说： 赵郡人李谧，沉溺于学问，遵守常道，不为世事而烦忧，我常常想为他进言，但都没有出任官职。
English: Former Henan Yin and Huangmen chamberlain Zhen Qi was in the service of the imperial court counselor, and everyone in the court and the field paid attention to him. At that time, some of his relatives and old acquaintances asked him for a post. He replied to the caller: Li Qi, a native of Zhao County, is addicted to learning, observes the common way, and does not worry about the world. I often wanted to advise him, but I did not hold an official position.

古文：诸君何为轻自媒衒？ 
现代文：你们各位为什么不能自重而对我自矜自夸呢？ 
English: And why do ye not rather glory in me?

古文：谓其子曰： 昔郑玄、卢植不远数千里诣扶风马融，今汝明师甚迩，何不就业也？ 
现代文：甄琛对他的儿子说： 昔日里郑玄、卢植不远数千里到扶风从师马融，现在你的明师这么近，为何不去就业于李谧？ 
English: Zhen Yao said to his son: In the past, Zheng Xuan and Lu Zhi not far away thousands of miles to Fu Feng from the teacher Ma Rong, now your teacher is so close, why not go to work for Li Yao?

古文：又谓朝士曰： 甄琛行不愧时。但未荐李谧，以此负朝廷耳。 
现代文：又对朝中同僚说： 我甄琛行为无愧于时，但没有举荐李谧，因此而有负于朝廷。 
English: He also said to his colleagues in the DPRK and China, "I did a good job of vetting Ri Myong, but I did not recommend Ri Myong. Therefore, I failed the imperial court."

古文：又结宇依岩，凭崖凿室，方欲训彼青衿，宣扬坟典，冀西河之教重兴、北海之风不坠。
现代文：后来李谧又靠着山崖起盖房屋，正想要教育学子，宣扬三坟五典，希望西河子夏讲学之教重新兴起，北海孔融好士之风不致失传。
English: Later, Li Wei also built a house against the cliff. He wanted to educate students and promote the Three Graves and Five Classics. He hoped that the teaching of Xihezi Xia's lectures would re-emerge, and the style of the North Sea Confucius would not be lost.

古文：而祐善空闻，暴疾而卒。
现代文：然而空有神明佑助，李谧竟暴病而亡。
English: However, there were no gods to help him, and he died of a violent illness.

古文：邦国衔殄悴之哀，儒生结摧梁之慕。
现代文：国家含着巨大的悲痛，儒生怀着无比的思念。
English: The country is filled with great sorrow, and Confucianism students are filled with incomparable longing.

古文：况璠等或服议下风，或亲承音旨，师儒之义，其可默乎！ 
现代文：况且等服议于皇上属下，奉承圣上旨意，尊师重儒的道理，难道可以不予弘扬吗？ 
English: Moreover, such as obeying the emperor's subordinates, flattering the emperor's will, and respecting teachers and Confucianism, can we not promote it?

古文：事奏，诏曰： 谧屡辞征辟，志守冲素，儒隐之操，深可嘉美。可远傍惠、康，近准玄晏，谥曰贞静处士，并表其门闾，以旌高节。 
现代文：此事上奏之后，皇帝下诏令说： 李谧屡次推辞朝廷的征召，一贯遵守冲淡不仕的志向，隐士的操守，实在值得褒扬赞美，可以依照前人惠、康之先例，又以近人玄宴为标准，定其谥号为贞静处士，表于他的家门和乡里，以表彰他的高风亮节。 
English: After this matter was reported, the emperor issued a decree saying: Li Qiye repeatedly refused to be drafted by the imperial court, consistently adhered to the aspiration of dilution and non-conformity, and the conduct of the hermit was really worthy of praise and praise. According to the precedent of the predecessors Hui and Kang, and taking the relatives' banquet as the standard, his nickname was Zhenjing, and it was displayed at his home and in the countryside to commend his high winds and bright festivals.

古文：遣谒者奉册，于是表其门曰文德，里曰孝义云。
现代文：朝廷派遣进谒的使者送去封授的文书，表彰李谧的门第名为文德，他的乡里名为孝义。
English: The imperial court dispatched an envoy to Jinlu to send the document of conferment, commending the name of Li Xi's family as Wende, and his hometown as Xiaoyi.

