古文：杜子美《送重表侄王评事》诗云： 我之曾老姑，尔之高祖母。
现代文：杜甫《送重表侄王评事》诗说： 我之曾老姑，尔之高祖母。
English: Du Fu's poem "Commentary on the Delivery of the Weighted Watch to the Nephew of the King" says: My great-aunt, my great-grandmother.

古文：尔祖未显时，归为尚书妇。隋朝大业末，房杜俱交友。长者来在门，荒年自糊口。家贫无供给，客位但箕帚。俄顷羞颇珍，寂寥人散后。 
现代文：尔祖未显时，归为尚书妇隋朝大业末，房、杜俱交友长者来在门，荒年自糊口家贫无供给，客位但算帚，俄倾羞颇珍，寂寥人散后。 
English: At the end of the great career of the Sui Dynasty, when the founder did not appear, she was relegated to Shang Shuxu and his wife, the house, Du Club, friends and elders came to the door, in the lean years, the family was poor and there was no supply, but the guest seat was considered to be poor, the Russian was shy and quite rare, and the lonely people were scattered.

古文：云云。 上云天下乱，宜与英俊厚。
现代文：等等。 上云天下乱，宜与英俊厚。
English: Wait. The world is in turmoil, it is appropriate to be handsome and thick.

古文：向窃窥数公，经纶亦俱有。
现代文：向窃窥数公，经纶亦俱有。
English: To the eavesdropper, there is a public, and to the snooper, there is a private.

古文：次问最少年，虬髯十八九。
现代文：次问最少年，虬髯十八九。
English: The next question is the youngest, who is nineteen.

古文：子等成大名，皆因此人手。
现代文：子等成大名，皆因此人手。
English: Their children became daimyo (feudal lords), and all of them lost their jobs as a result.

古文：下云风云合。
现代文：下云风云合。
English: The clouds are gathering.

古文：龙虎一吟吼。
现代文：龙虎一吟吼。
English: The dragon and tiger roar together.

古文：愿展丈夫雄，得辞儿女丑。
现代文：愿展丈夫雄，得辞儿女丑。
English: May you make your husband strong and your children beautiful.

古文：秦王时在坐，真气惊户牖。
现代文：秦王时在坐，真气惊户牖。
English: When King Qin was sitting, he was furious.

古文：及乎贞观初，尚书践台斗。
现代文：及乎贞观初，尚书践台斗。
English: At the beginning of the Zhenguan period, he was still a scholar.

古文：夫人常肩舆，上殿称万寿。
现代文：夫人常肩舆，上殿称万寿。
English: My wife is always looking over her shoulder, and the upper hall is said to have longevity.

古文：至尊均嫂叔，盛事垂不朽。 
现代文：至尊均嫂叔，盛事垂不朽。 
English: The most revered uncle, the grand event is immortal.

古文：观此诗，疑指王珪。
现代文：看这首诗，有可能是指王硅。
English: Looking at this poem, it is possible that it refers to silicon.

古文：珪相唐太宗，赠礼部尚书。
现代文：王硅是唐太宗时的宰相，被赠礼部尚书。
English: Wang Si was the prime minister during the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty and was given a gift of a book.

古文：然细考其事，大不与史合。
现代文：然而仔细考证这件事，历史记载很不相符。
English: However, a close examination of the matter reveals that the historical record is very inconsistent.

古文：蔡绦诗话引《唐书•列女传》云： 珪母卢氏，识房、杜必贵。 
现代文：蔡绦《诗话》引《唐书•列女传》的话说： 王硅的母亲卢氏，看出房玄龄、杜如晦一定会富贵。 
English: Cai Wei's "Poetry" quoted the words of "Tangshu•Li Niuwen Biography": Wang Xi's mother, Lu, saw that Fang Xuanling and Du Rubei would certainly be rich.

古文：质之此诗，则珪母乃杜氏也。
现代文：跟这首诗对证，那么王硅的母亲竟是杜氏。
English: According to this poem, Wang Si's mother was actually Du Shi.

古文：《桐江诗话》云： 不特不姓卢，乃珪之妻，非母也。 
现代文：《桐江诗话》说： 不仅不姓卢，还是王硅的妻子，而不是母亲。 
English: "Tongjiang Poetry" says: Not only does she not have the surname Lu, but she is also the wife of Wang Si, not the mother.

古文：予按《唐列女传》元无此事，珪传末只云： 始隐居时，与房玄龄、杜如晦善，二人过其家，母李窥之，知其必贵。 
现代文：我考证，《唐列女传》原来没有这件事，王硅传末尾只说： 当初隐居的时候，跟房玄龄、杜如晦很友好，两个人到他家里，母亲李氏暗中窥看他们，知道他们一定会富贵 。
English: According to my research, "The Tang Dynasty Women's Biography" originally did not have this matter. Wang Xizhong only said at the end of the biography: At the beginning, when he was living in seclusion, he was very friendly with Fang Xuanling and Du Rugao. When the two came to his house, his mother Li secretly watched them and knew that they would be rich.

古文：蔡说妄云有传，又误以李为卢，皆不足辨。
现代文：蔡绦的话乱说有传，又把李氏说成卢氏，都不值得分辨。
English: Cai Wei's words are rumored, and the Li clan is said to be the Lu clan, which is not worth distinguishing.

古文：但唐高祖在位日，太子建成与秦王不睦，以权相倾。珪为太子中允，说建成曰： 秦王功盖天下，中外归心，殿下但以长年，位居东宫，无大功以镇服海内，今刘黑闼散亡之余，宜自击之，以取功名。 
现代文：只是唐高祖在位的时候，太子建成与秦王不和睦，使权术相互倾轧，王硅当时是太子中允，就劝说太子建成说： 秦王的功劳极大，朝内朝外都心服他，您只是因为年长，身为太子住在东宫之内，没有大的功勋使天下人信服，现在刘黑闼被打散的余部，您应该自已去攻击他们，好取得功业名望。 
English: However, when Tang Gaozu was on the throne, Prince Jiancheng did not get along with King Qin, and they used power tactics to undermine each other. At that time, Wang Si was the middle son of the prince, and he persuaded Prince Jiancheng to say: King Qin's merits are great, and both the imperial court and the outside world admire him. You are just because you are older and live in the East Palace as a prince, and you do not have great merits to convince people around the world. Now Liu Heihe is the scattered remnant, you should attack them yourself in order to gain fame for your work.

古文：建成乃请行。
现代文：建成就请求出征。
English: Jiancheng requested to go to the front.

古文：其后杨文干之事起，高祖责以兄弟不睦，归罪珪等而流之。
现代文：后来杨文干的事情发生了，唐高祖责怪他们兄弟不和，归罪于王硅等人并流放了他们。
English: Later, what happened to Yang Wengan happened. Tang Gaozu blamed their brothers for their discord, blamed Wang Si and others, and exiled them.

古文：太宗即位，乃召还任用。
现代文：唐太宗即位以后，才召回来任用。
English: It was only after Emperor Taizong of Tang ascended the throne that he was recalled and appointed.

古文：久之，宴近臣于丹霄殿，长孙无忌曰： 王珪，魏征，昔为仇雔，不谓今日得同此宴。 
现代文：很久以后，皇上在丹霄殿为身边的大臣设宴，长孙无忌说： 王硅、魏征过去是仇家，没想到现在能够一起参加这次宴会。 
English: After a long time, the emperor held a banquet for the ministers around him in the Danshao Hall. The eldest grandson said: Wang Si and Wei Zheng were enemies in the past, and I didn't expect to be able to attend this banquet together now.

古文：上曰： 珪、征尽心所事，我故用之。 
现代文：皇上说： 王硅和魏征能够对他们所服事的人尽心，所以我任用他们。 
English: The emperor said, "Wang Si and Wei Zheng can devote themselves to the people they serve, so I have appointed them."

古文：然则珪与太宗非素义明矣。
现代文：从这件事来看，王硅跟唐太宗不是早就认识的就很清楚了。
English: From this incident, it is clear that Wang Si and Tang Taizong did not know each other for a long time.

古文：《唐书》载李氏事，亦采之小说，恐未必然，而杜公称其祖姑事，不应不实。且太宗时宰相，别无姓王者，真不可晓也。
现代文：《唐书》记载的李氏的事，也是从小说中采摘来的，恐怕不一定对，而杜甫称说他祖姑的事，不应该不是事实，而且唐太宗时的宰相，没有别人是姓王的，真是不能弄明白。
English: The story of the Li clan recorded in the "Tang Shu" was also taken from a novel, and I'm afraid it's not necessarily true, while Du Fu said that the story of his great-grandmother should not be untrue, and the prime minister at the time of Emperor Taizong, no one else is surnamed Wang, I really can't figure it out.

古文：又有杜光庭《虬须客传》云，隋炀帝幸江都，命杨素留守西京，李靖以布衣往谒。窃其一妓，道遇异人，与俱至太原，因刘文静以见州将之子，言其真英主，倾家资与靖，使助创业之举，即太宗也。
现代文：另外，杜先庭《虬须客传》说，隋炀帝到江都去，命令杨素留守西京李靖以平民的身份前去拜见杨素，暗中带走了他一名妓女，路上遇见了奇异的高人，异人跟他们一起到太原，通过刘文静见州将的儿子，说他将是真正英明的君主，于是异人把所有的家产资金给了李靖，让他帮助创建国业的大事。
English: In addition, Du Xianting's "The Tale of the Mustachian Guest" said that Emperor Sui Xuan went to the Yangtze River and ordered Yang Su to stay in Xijing, Li Jing went to visit Yang Su as a commoner, secretly took away one of his prostitutes, and met a strange high-ranking person on the road. The stranger went to Taiyuan with them, and through Liu Wenzhing saw the son of the state general, saying that he would be a truly wise monarch. Therefore, the stranger gave all the family funds to Li Jing, and let him help create the great cause of national industry.

古文：按史载唐公击突厥，靖察有非常志，自囚上急变。后高祖定京师，将斩之而止，必无先识太宗之事。
现代文：州将的儿子就是唐太宗。据考证，历史记载唐公攻打突厥时，李靖察觉他有不同平常的志向，自己拘禁了皇上，发动紧急兵变，后来唐高祖平定京师，打算杀了李靖又没有杀，可见一定没有李靖事先就认识唐太宗的事。
English: The son of the provincial general is Tang Taizong. According to research, historical records show that when Tang Gong attacked the Turks, Li Jing noticed that he had different ordinary aspirations, detained the emperor himself, launched an emergency mutiny, and later Tang Gaozu suppressed the Beijing division, planned to kill Li Jing and did not kill, it can be seen that there must be no Li Jing to know Tang Taizong in advance.

古文：且炀帝在江都时，杨素死已十余年矣。
现代文：再说隋炀帝在江都的时候，杨素已经死了十多年了。
English: Besides, Yang Su had been dead for more than ten years by the time Emperor Sui was in Jiangdu.

古文：此一传，大抵皆妄云。
现代文：这一篇传奇，大概都是虚妄的。
English: This legend is probably false.

