古文：刘馥字元颖，沛国相人也。
现代文：刘馥字元颖，是沛国相城人。
English: Liu Xuan's character is original, and he is from the city of Pei Guo.

古文：避乱扬州，建安初，说袁术将戚寄、秦翊，使率众与俱诣太祖。
现代文：他曾经到扬州躲避战乱，建安初年，他游说袁术的将领戚寄、秦翊，让他们率部和他一起到太祖那里归顺。
English: He once went to Yangzhou to escape the war. In the first year of the establishment of peace, he lobbied Yuan Shuxu's generals to send their relatives, Qin Yu, and let them lead the troops with him to submit to the great-grandfather.

古文：太祖悦之，司徒辟为掾。
现代文：太祖很高兴，让司徒征召刘馥为掾史。
English: The great-grandfather was very happy to let the scholar call up Liu Ye to be his successor.

古文：后孙策所置庐江太守李述攻杀扬州刺史严象。
现代文：后来孙策任命的庐江太守李述攻打并杀死了扬州刺史严象。
English: Later, Li Su, the governor of the Li River, who was appointed by Sun Ce, attacked and killed the Yangzhou assassin Yan Zi.

古文：庐江梅乾、雷绪、陈兰等聚众数万在江、淮间，郡县残破。
现代文：庐江的梅乾、雷绪、陈兰等人在江淮之间聚集了数万人马，导致各地郡县因被劫掠而残破不堪。
English: Mei Qian, Lei Xu, Chen Lan and other people from the Li River gathered tens of thousands of horses between the Huai River and the Yangtze River, resulting in the devastation of counties and counties around the country due to looting.

古文：太祖方有袁绍之难，谓馥可任以东南之事，遂表为扬州刺史。
现代文：太祖这时候正困在袁绍的围攻中，认为可以将东南地区的事务交给刘馥，就上表请封刘馥为扬州刺史。
English: At this time, the great-grandfather was trapped in the siege of Yuan Shao. He thought that he could hand over the affairs of the southeastern region to Liu Ye, so he asked Liu Ye to make history in Yangzhou.

古文：馥既受命，单马造合肥空城，建立州治，南怀绪等，皆安集之，贡献相继。
现代文：刘馥接受任命后，只身奔赴合肥空城，建立当地的官署，对于南面的雷绪等人，都使他们安定下来，他们都相继进献礼物。
English: After Liu Wei accepted the appointment, he rushed to Hefei Sky City to establish a local government office. For Lei Xu and others in the south, they all settled down, and they all presented gifts one after another.

古文：数年中恩化大行，百姓乐其政，流民越江山而归者以万数。
现代文：几年的时间，大力推广恩惠教化，百姓对于他的治理都很满意，那些穿越山水回来依附的流亡百姓有上万之数。
English: Over the past few years, he has vigorously promoted benevolence and enlightenment, and the people are very satisfied with his governance. There are tens of thousands of exiled people who have come back through the mountains and rivers.

古文：於是聚诸生，立学校，广屯田，兴治芍陂及茄陂、七门、吴塘诸堨以溉稻田，官民有畜。
现代文：于是刘馥将诸位儒生聚集起来，建立学校，广建屯田，大力修建芍陂、茄陂、七门堰、吴塘等土堰以堵住水流方便灌溉稻田，官吏百姓都能有积蓄。
English: As a result, Liu Bei gathered all the Confucian scholars and students, established a school, built a large number of farmlands, and vigorously built earthen dams such as the Jiaojing, the Zhaojing, the Qimen Dam, and the Wutang to block the flow of water and facilitate the irrigation of rice paddies, so that officials and commoners could have savings.

古文：又高为城垒，多积木石，编作草苫数千万枚，益贮鱼膏数千斛，为战守备。
现代文：又修建很高的城垒，储备很多滚木、石头，编制成千上万枚草苫，又增加储备鱼油几千斛，为作战做准备。
English: They also built high ramparts, stockpiled a lot of logs and stones, prepared thousands of straw bales, and increased the stockpile of fish oil by several thousand bales to prepare for battle.

古文：建安十三年卒。
现代文：刘馥在建安十三年去世。
English: Liu Bei died in the thirteenth year of Jianan.

古文：孙权率十万众攻围合肥城百馀日，时天连雨，城欲崩，於是以苫蓑覆之，夜然脂照城外，视贼所作而为备，贼以破走。
现代文：孙权率十多万人马将合肥城围攻一百多天，当时连续降雨，城墙即将崩塌，于是城中守将就用草苫蓑席将城墙覆盖起来，晚上在城外点燃鱼油，观察敌军的情况然后做出相应准备，后来敌军因为被打败而撤退。
English: Sun Quan led more than one hundred thousand people to besiege Hefei City for more than one hundred days. At that time, it rained continuously and the city wall was about to collapse. Therefore, the city guard covered the city wall with straw mats, lit fish oil outside the city at night, observed the situation of the enemy army and then made corresponding preparations. Later, the enemy army retreated because it was defeated.

古文：扬州士民益追思之，以为虽董安于之守晋阳，不能过也。
现代文：扬州的士人百姓更加追念刘馥，认为即使是春秋时期董安于据守晋阳的事情，也不能超过刘馥。
English: The people of Yangzhou are even more nostalgic for Liu Hui, and believe that even if it was during the Spring and Autumn Period that Dong Anyu defended Jinyang, he could not surpass Liu Hui.

古文：及陂塘之利，至今为用。
现代文：至于他修建的水利工程，到现在还在使用。
English: As for the water conservancy project he built, it is still in use.

古文：馥子靖，黄初中从黄门侍郎迁庐江太守，诏曰： 卿父昔为彼州，今卿复据此郡，可谓克负荷者也。 
现代文：刘馥的儿子刘靖，黄初年间从黄门侍郎升迁为庐江太守，文帝下诏说： 你的父亲曾在那里担任太守，现在您又去治理这个郡，可以说得上是担当国家重任了。 
English: Liu Yao's son, Liu Jing, was promoted from the Yellow Gate chamberlain to the governor of the Li River in the early years of the Yellow Emperor. Emperor Wen issued an edict saying, "Your father once served as governor there, and now you are going to govern this county. You can say that you are worthy of taking on the important task of the country."

古文：转在河内，迁尚书，赐爵关内侯，出为河南尹。
现代文：后来刘靖调任河内太守，又被提升为太守，被赐封爵位为关内侯，出京担任河南尹。
English: Later, Liu Jing was transferred to the position of the governor of Hanoi, and was promoted to the governor, was given the title of Kuanai, and went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Henan.

古文：散骑常侍应璩书与靖曰： 入作纳言，出临京任。
现代文：散骑常侍应璩给刘靖写信说： 您入京担任纳言的官职，在京城出任官职。
English: Zangjie's regular attendant Zou wrote to Liu Jing, saying: You entered Beijing to hold the official position of Nagan, and you hold the official position in Beijing.

古文：富民之术，日引月长。
现代文：使百姓富裕的办法，在于慢慢引导滋长。
English: The way to make the people rich is to slowly guide the growth.

古文：藩落高峻，绝穿窬之心。
现代文：院墙的篱笆要又高又直，断绝那些想要打墙行窃的想法。
English: The fence of the courtyard wall should be high and straight, to cut off the thoughts of those who want to break the wall and steal.

古文：五种别出，远水火之灾。
现代文：播种时要精心挑选五种谷物的种子以避免水旱灾害。
English: When sowing, the seeds of five kinds of grains should be carefully selected to avoid floods and droughts.

古文：农器必具，无失时之阙。
现代文：农用器具一定要齐全，不要错失耕种的世界。
English: Agricultural equipment must be complete, do not miss the world of farming.

古文：蚕麦有苫备之用，无雨湿之虞。
现代文：养蚕、种植麦子要准备好苫盖，才能没有被雨淋湿的隐患。
English: When raising silkworms and planting wheat, it is necessary to prepare a straw cover in order to avoid the hidden danger of getting wet in the rain.

古文：封符指期，无流连之吏。
现代文：各位官吏的升迁要有期限，不要出现停留在原位的吏役。
English: There should be a time limit for the promotion of officials, and there should not be any officials who remain in their original positions.

古文：鳏寡孤独，蒙廪振之实。
现代文：那些鳏寡孤独的百姓，要能享受官府仓库的救济。
English: Those widowed and lonely people should be able to enjoy the relief of the government warehouse.

古文：加之以明擿幽微，重之以秉宪不挠；有司供承王命，百里垂拱仰办。
现代文：再加上能明确判断细微的事情，断案的时候要秉持律法不屈服；有关官员按照朝廷旨意处理政事，百里之内的人都会垂手听命。
English: In addition to being able to clearly judge minor matters, when deciding a case, it is necessary to uphold the law and not give in; relevant officials handle government affairs in accordance with the will of the imperial court, and everyone within a hundred miles will bow to their orders.

古文：虽昔赵、张、三王之治，未足以方也。 
现代文：即使是过去像赵广汉、张敞、王尊、王章、王骏这样有才能的人，也没有办法相比。 
English: Even talented people like Zhao Guanghan, Zhang Zhan, Wang Zun, Wang Zhang, and Wang Yao in the past have no way to compare.

古文：靖为政类如此。
现代文：刘靖处理事务的时候大多都像应璩说的那样。
English: Most of the time when Liu Jing dealt with affairs, he did as Ying Yao said.

古文：初虽如碎密，终於百姓便之，有馥遗风。
现代文：刚开始实施政策的时候虽然很琐碎繁杂，但最后都使百姓获得便利，有刘馥的风范。
English: At the beginning of the implementation of the policy, although it was very trivial and complicated, it eventually made it convenient for the people, with the style of Liu Xuan.

古文：母丧去官，后为大司农卫尉，进封广陆亭侯，邑三百户。
现代文：后来刘靖因为母亲去世辞官，后来又担任大司农卫尉，进封为广陆亭侯，食邑三百户。
English: Later, Liu Jing resigned from his post because of his mother's death, and later served as the chief of the Agricultural Guards, and was assigned to Guanglu Tinghou, with 300 households in the food village.

古文：上疏陈儒训之本曰： 夫学者，治乱之轨仪，圣人之大教也。
现代文：刘靖上疏陈述儒家教育的根本说： 所谓学问，是天下安定和动乱的准则，是圣人的教导训诫。
English: Liu Jing Shangsuo stated the fundamental saying of Confucian education: The so-called learning is the standard of stability and turmoil in the world, and is the teaching and admonition of saints.

古文：自黄初以来，崇立太学二十馀年，而寡有成者，盖由博士选轻，诸生避役，高门子弟，耻非其伦，故无学者。
现代文：自黄初初年以来，朝廷推崇设立太学已经二十多年了，但却很少有杰出成就的人，大概是博士的选拔很容易，众位儒生都是为了躲避徭役，那些名门望族的子弟，以儒生不是他们的同类人而感到耻辱，所以没有严肃治学的人。
English: Since the first year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, the imperial court has been promoting the establishment of Taiyuan University for more than 20 years. However, there are few people with outstanding achievements. Probably, the selection of doctors is easy. Many Confucians are in order to avoid conscription. The children of those famous families are ashamed that Confucians are not their peers, so there are no serious students.

古文：虽有其名而无其人，虽设其教而无其功。
现代文：虽然有这样的名声却没有这样的人才，虽然设立了教化但却没有什么成效。
English: Although there is such a reputation, there is no such talent, and although there is an indoctrination, it has little effect.

古文：宜高选博士，取行为人表，经任人师者，掌教国子。
现代文：应该用高标准来选拔博士，选择那些行为举止可以为人表率，精通经学能担任教师的人来掌管太学，教育学子。
English: The selection of doctors should be strict, and those who can act as a role model, and whose knowledge is worthy of being a teacher, should be selected.

古文：依遵古法，使二千石以上子孙，年从十五，皆入太学。
现代文：遵循古代历法，让两千石俸禄以上大臣的子孙，到了十五岁都进入太学学习。
English: In accordance with the ancient method, let the children and grandchildren of more than two thousand koku, aged fifteen, enter Taigaku.

古文：明制黜陟荣辱之路；其经明行修者，则进之以崇德；荒教废业者，则退之以惩恶；举善而教不能则劝，浮华交游，不禁自息矣。
现代文：明确制定奖罚升降的制度；那些通晓经学，品行端正的人，就提拔他们以显示对德行的推崇；那些荒废教化学业的，就将他们劝退以表示惩戒；举荐那些道德良好的学子来教育，那些比较普通的就对他们加以引导，那现在这种浮华奢侈、结交往来的风气，不用禁止也会自己停息的。
English: If a system of rewards and punishments for promotion and demotion were clearly established; if those who are well versed in the scriptures and have good moral character were promoted to show their respect for virtue; if those who have wasted their teaching and learning were dissuaded to show their discipline; if those who have good moral character were recommended to be educated, and those who are more ordinary were guided, then the present extravagant and socializing culture would stop on its own without being prohibited.

古文：阐弘大化，以绥未宾；六合承风，远人来格。
现代文：阐发弘扬圣明的教化，以安抚那些还没有安定的地区；天下百姓都承受恩惠，边远地区的百姓会前来归顺。
English: Enlighten and promote the enlightenment of the Holy Light to pacify those areas that are not yet stable; the people all over the world will receive grace, and the people in remote areas will come to submit.

古文：此圣人之教，致治之本也。 
现代文：这是圣人的教化，治理好天下的根本。 
English: This is the essence of the enlightenment of saints and the governance of the world.

古文：后迁镇北将军，假节都督河北诸军事。
现代文：后来刘靖被提升为镇北将军，持符节督领河北地区的各项军事事务。
English: Later, Liu Jing was promoted to Zhenbei General, holding the title of commander of various military affairs in Hebei Province.

古文：靖以为 经常之大法，莫善於守防，使民夷有别 。
现代文：刘靖认为 日常管理最好的办法，就在于有防有守，让百姓和外族有所区别。 
English: Liu Jing believes that the best way to manage daily life is to have prevention and defense, and to distinguish between the common people and foreigners.

古文：遂开拓边守，屯据险要。
现代文：于是刘靖拓展边境防线，在险要的地方屯兵据守。
English: As a result, Liu Jing expanded the border defense line and garrisoned troops in critical places.

古文：又修广戾陵渠大堨，水溉灌蓟南北，三更种稻，边民利之。
现代文：又修建并扩大了戾陵渠大堰，将水引入灌溉蓟州南北的土地，使当地每年能种植三次稻谷，边境百姓都从中获利。
English: He also built and expanded the large weir of the Fuling Canal, bringing water to irrigate the land of the north and south of Ganzhou, so that the local people could plant rice three times a year, and the border people all benefited from it.

古文：嘉平六年薨，追赠征北将军，进封建成乡侯，谥曰景侯。
现代文：刘靖在嘉平六年去世，朝廷追赠他为征北将军，并进封爵位为建成乡侯，谥号为景侯。
English: Liu Jing died in Jiaping six years later. The imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of "Northern Expeditionary General," and he was given the title of "Jiancheng Township Lord" and the posthumous name of "Jinghou."

古文：子熙嗣。
现代文：他的儿子刘熙承袭爵位。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Fox Hee.

古文：司马朗字伯达，河内温人也。
现代文：司马朗字伯达，河内郡温县人。
English: Sima Langzhe Boda, from Wen County, Hanoi County.

古文：九岁，人有道其父字者，朗曰： 慢人亲者，不敬其亲者也。 
现代文：他九岁的时候，有人提起他父亲称的是字，司马朗说： 轻慢他人亲人的人，也不会尊敬自己的亲长。 
English: When he was nine years old, someone mentioned his father's last name, Simaran said: "He who despises the relatives of others will not respect his own relatives."

古文：客谢之。
现代文：那个人就向他道歉。
English: The man apologized to him.

古文：十二，试经为童子郎，监试者以其身体壮大，疑朗匿年，劾问。
现代文：十二岁的时候，司马朗参加经学考试，成为了童子郎，监管考试的人因为司马朗身形健壮高大，认为他隐瞒年龄，就盘问他。
English: When Sima Lang was 12 years old, he took the school examination and became a boy scout. The person supervising the examination questioned him because Sima Lang was tall and strong and thought he was concealing his age.

古文：朗曰： 朗之内外，累世长大，朗虽稚弱，无仰高之风，损年以求早成，非志所为也。 
现代文：司马朗说： 我族中的亲戚，几代以来都长得很高大，我虽然稚嫩弱小，没有仰慕高尚的德行，但隐瞒年龄以求得学业上的早日成就，这不是我想做的。 
English: Sima Lang said: My relatives in my family have grown very tall for several generations. Although I am young and weak, I do not admire noble virtues, but hiding my age in order to achieve early academic success is not what I want to do.

古文：监试者异之。
现代文：监管考试的人认为很他很奇特。
English: The exam invigilators thought he was very peculiar.

古文：后关东兵起，故冀州刺史李邵家居野王，近山险，欲徙居温。
现代文：后来关东地区起兵，之前的冀州太守李邵住在野王县，那里靠近险要的山区，就想要搬到温县居住。
English: Later, the Kanto region raised an army. The former Jizhou governor Li Shao lived in Nio County, which is close to the dangerous mountainous area, and he wanted to move to live in Wen County.

古文：朗谓邵曰： 唇齿之喻，岂唯虞、虢，温与野王即是也；今去彼而居此，是为避朝亡之期耳。
现代文：司马朗对李邵说： 唇亡齿寒的关系，怎么会只有虞国和虢国呢，温县和野王县也是这样的；现在您离开野王县而到温县居住，只是躲避了早上灭亡的时间罢了。
English: Sima Lang said to Li Shao, "How can it be that the only countries with cold lips and cold teeth are the states of Guo and Shao, and the same is true for Wenzhou and Yiwang counties. Now that you have left Yiwang County to live in Wenzhou County, you have only avoided the time of death in the morning.

古文：且君，国人之望也，今寇未至而先徙，带山之县必骇，是摇动民之心而开奸宄之原也，窃为郡内忧之。 
现代文：况且，您是百姓的希望所在，现在敌寇还没有来到您就先搬走，山区这一带的州县一定会很惊慌，这是动摇民心并且打开的违法作乱的根源啊，我暗中为郡中百姓忧虑。 
English: Moreover, you are the hope of the people, and now the enemy has not yet come to you to move away first. The states and counties in this mountainous area will certainly be very alarmed. This is the root cause of the illegal unrest that has shaken the people's hearts and opened. I am secretly worried about the people in the county.

古文：邵不从。
现代文：李邵没有听从他。
English: Li Shao did not listen to him.

古文：边山之民果乱，内徙，或为寇钞。
现代文：边境地区的山区百姓果然发生了动乱，往内地迁移，很多人加入了劫掠的队伍中。
English: The mountain people in the border areas did indeed experience unrest and migrate inland, and many joined the marauding troops.

古文：是时董卓迁天子都长安，卓因留洛阳。
现代文：当时董卓将天子迁移到长安，董卓趁机留在洛阳。
English: At that time, Dong Zhuo moved Tianzi to Chang'an, and Dong Zhuo took the opportunity to stay in Luoyang.

古文：朗父防为治书御史，当徙西，以四方云扰，乃遣朗将家属还本县。
现代文：司马朗的父亲司马防这时担任治书御史，应当和天子前往长安，因为天下都纷纷扰扰，他就让司马朗带着家中老小返回本县。
English: Sima Lang's father, Sima Fang, was in charge of bookkeeping and history at the time, and he should have gone to Chang'an with Tianzi, because the whole world was disturbed, so he asked Sima Lang to return to the county with his family.

古文：或有告朗欲逃亡者，执以诣卓，卓谓朗曰： 卿与吾亡儿同岁，几大相负！ 
现代文：有人诬告司马朗想要逃走，将他抓起来带到董卓面前，董卓对司马朗说： 您和我死去的儿子一样大，但你却这样辜负我！ 
English: Someone falsely accused Sima Lang of trying to escape, arrested him and brought him before Dong Zhuo. Dong Zhuo said to Sima Lang: You are as old as my dead son, but you have failed me like this!

古文：朗因曰： 明公以高世之德，遭阳九之会，清除群秽，广举贤士，此诚虚心垂虑，将兴至治也。
现代文：司马朗就说： 明公凭借超出世人的德行，在现在这样动乱不安的时期清扫消除那些奸邪之人，大力推举贤才，这实在是虚心求教、深谋远虑，将要使国家得到发展的啊。
English: Sima Lang said, "Ming Gong, by virtue of surpassing the world's virtue, in such a turbulent and insecure period as now, sweeps away and eliminates those who are treacherous, and vigorously promotes talents. This is really an open-minded pursuit of knowledge and forethought, which will enable the country to develop.

古文：威德以隆，功业以著，而兵难日起，州郡鼎沸，郊境之内，民不安业，捐弃居产，流亡藏窜。
现代文：您的威势品德越来越高，功绩越来越卓著，但现在战乱越来越严重，天下州郡都混乱不堪，四境之内，百姓无法安居乐业，都抛弃自己的房屋产业，四处流离逃往。
English: Your dignity and virtue are getting higher and higher, and your achievements are getting more and more outstanding, but now the war is getting more and more serious. The whole country is in chaos. Within the four borders, the people cannot live and work in peace. They have all abandoned their housing industry and fled everywhere.

古文：虽四关设禁，重加刑戮，犹不绝息，此朗之所以於邑也。
现代文：虽然四面城门都设置了门禁，加重对这种做法的刑罚，仍然没有能断绝停息，这是我之所以忧郁的原因。
English: This is the reason why I am saddened that despite the fact that all four gates of the city have been closed and the penalties for this practice have been increased, it has not been possible to break the deadlock.

古文：愿明公监观往事，少加三思，即荣名并於日月，伊、周不足侔也。 
现代文：希望明公能观察借鉴过去的事情，多加思虑，那您的美名就能和日月相等，即使是伊尹、周公也不能和您比肩。 
English: I hope that Ming Gong can observe the things of the past and think more, then your reputation will be equal to the sun and the moon. Even Yi Yin and Zhou Gong cannot be compared to you.

古文：卓曰： 吾亦悟之，卿言有意！ 
现代文：董卓说： 我也明白了这个道理，您的话很有意义！ 
English: Dong Zhuo said: I also understand this truth, your words are very meaningful!

古文：朗知卓必亡，恐见留，即散财物以赂遗卓用事者，求归乡里。
现代文：司马朗知道董卓必定会灭亡，担心会被董卓留下，就散发钱财以贿赂董卓手下办事的人，请求让自己返回故乡。
English: Sima Lang knew that Dong Zhuo would certainly perish, and fearing that he would be left behind by Dong Zhuo, he distributed money to bribe people working under Dong Zhuo and asked to return to his hometown.

古文：到谓父老曰； 董卓悖逆，为天下所仇，此忠臣义士奋发之时也。
现代文：他回到故乡后，对乡里的父老乡亲说： 董卓违背正道，被天下人仇恨，现在正是忠臣义士振作精神有所作为的时候。
English: After returning to his hometown, he said to the parents and fellow villagers in the village: Dong Zhuo violated the right path and was hated by the world. Now is the time for loyal subjects and righteous people to work up their spirits and make a difference.

古文：郡与京都境壤相接，洛东有成皋，北界大河，天下兴义兵者若未得进，其势必停於此。
现代文：我们这个郡和京城边境相连接，洛阳的东面有成皋县，北面靠近黄河，天下那些发动义兵讨伐董卓的人如果无法前进，就一定会停留在这里。
English: Our county is connected to the Beijing-Shanghai border. To the east of Luoyang is Chengyu County, and to the north is the Yellow River. If those who have mobilized volunteers to fight against Dong Zhuo are unable to advance, they will certainly stay here.

古文：此乃四分五裂战争之地，难以自安，不如及道路尚通，举宗东到黎阳。
现代文：这是兵家必争的重要地区，是很难安定生活的，不如趁着现在道路还畅通，带领家族中人往东迁到黎阳。
English: This is an important area that soldiers must fight for, and it is difficult to live a stable life. It is better to take advantage of the fact that the road is still smooth and lead the family members to move east to Liyang.

古文：黎阳有营兵，赵威孙乡里旧婚，为监营谒者，统兵马，足以为主。
现代文：黎阳有士兵驻守，那里的赵威孙曾和我们乡里人有姻亲关系，他正是那里的监管军营的人，负责统率兵马，足够主持事宜。
English: There are soldiers stationed in Liyang, where Zhao Wisun was once related to our villagers by marriage. He is the person who oversees the military camp there, responsible for leading the soldiers and horses, and is enough to preside over matters.

古文：若后有变，徐复观望未晚也。 
现代文：如果后面再有什么变故，再慢慢观察也不算晚。 
English: If there are any changes in the future, it's not too late to take a closer look.

古文：父老恋旧，莫有从者，惟同县赵咨，将家属俱与朗往焉。
现代文：父老乡亲眷恋故土，没有人跟随他，只有同县的赵咨。带着家中亲属和司马朗一同前往。
English: My father's hometown relatives are attached to their homeland, no one follows him, only Zhao Zi from the same county. I took my relatives and Sima Lang to go together.

古文：后数月，关东诸州郡起兵，众数十万，皆集荥阳及河内。
现代文：后来过了几个月，关东地区各地州郡纷纷起兵，几十万人马都聚集在荥阳和河内。
English: A few months later, all the prefectures and counties in the Kanto region raised their armies one after another, and hundreds of thousands of people gathered in Poyang and Hanoi.

古文：诸将不能相一，纵兵钞掠，民人死者且半。
现代文：众位将领不能统一意见，纵容士兵四处劫掠，死亡的百姓超过一半。
English: The generals could not agree, and allowed the soldiers to plunder everywhere, killing more than half of the people.

古文：久之，关东兵散，太祖与吕布相持於濮阳，朗乃将家还温。
现代文：很久之后，太祖和吕布在濮阳对峙，司马朗才带着家中亲人返回温县。
English: It was not until much later, after the confrontation between Taizu and Lvbu in Shenyang, that Sima Lang returned to Wenshan with his family.

古文：时岁大饥，人相食，朗收恤宗族，教训诸弟，不为衰世解业。
现代文：那一年发生大饥荒，百姓人吃人，司马朗收留抚恤族中亲人，教导训诫各位弟弟，没有因为世道败坏就放弃自己的责任。
English: That year, there was a great famine, and people were eating each other. Sima Lang took in relatives from the poor, and taught and admonished his brothers, and did not give up his responsibilities because of the corruption of the world.

古文：年二十二，太祖辟为司空掾属，除成皋令，以病去，复为堂阳长。
现代文：司马朗二十二岁的时候，被太祖征召为司空掾史，担任成皋县令，后来他因病辞官，又重新被任命为堂阳县长。
English: When Sima Lang was twenty-two years old, he was called up by the great-grandfather to be the secretary of the Empress Dowager and served as the county magistrate of Chengdu County. Later, due to illness, he resigned from the post and was reappointed as the county governor of Doyang County.

古文：其治务宽惠，不行鞭杖，而民不犯禁。
现代文：司马朗处理政务宽厚仁德，不施行鞭刑或者杖刑，百姓也没有违反禁令。
English: Sima Lang dealt with government affairs in a lenient and benevolent manner, did not carry out flogging or caning, and the people did not violate the ban.

古文：先时，民有徙充都内者，后县调当作船，徙民恐其不办，乃相率私还助之，其见爱如此。
现代文：之前，有百姓搬迁到都城内，后来朝廷下令堂阳县制造船只，那些搬走的百姓担心司马朗不能按时完成，就相继暗中回来帮助他，他被百姓爱戴到如此地步。
English: Before, there were people who moved to the capital. Later, the imperial court ordered Dongyang County to build ships. Those people who moved away were worried that Sima Lang would not be able to complete it on time, so they secretly came back to help him. He was loved by the people to such an extent.

古文：迁元城令，入为丞相主簿。
现代文：后来司马朗被提升为元城县令，又入京担任丞相主簿。
English: Later, Sima Lang was promoted to the post of Yuancheng County magistrate, and he also entered Beijing to serve as the chief secretary of the prime minister.

古文：朗以为天下土崩之势，由秦灭五等之制，而郡国无蒐狩习战之备故也。
现代文：司马朗认为现在天下四分五裂的局势，是因为秦朝废除了五等爵位制度，而各地郡县封国也没有射猎活动以演习战争的准备。
English: Sima Lang believes that the current situation of the world being torn apart is due to the fact that the Qin Dynasty abolished the five-class nobility system, and the counties and counties around the country did not have shooting activities to practice war preparations.

古文：往者以民各有累世之业，难中夺之，是以至今。
现代文：现在虽然五等爵位制度还没有能重新施行，但可以下令各州郡都设立兵马，对外防备少数民族进犯，对内威慑那些心怀不轨的人。
English: Although the five-grade peerage system has not yet been re-implemented, it is possible to order all states and counties to set up troops and horses to guard against attacks by ethnic minorities abroad and to deter those with evil intentions at home.

古文：今承大乱之后，民人分散，土业无主，皆为公田，宜及此时复之。
现代文：他又认为应该恢复井田。过去是因为百姓各自有流传了好几代的田产，很难突然间收归国家，所以一直到今天都没能施行。
English: He also believes that the rice paddies should be restored. In the past, because it was difficult for the people to suddenly return to the country because they each had their own farms that had been passed down for several generations, it has not been implemented to this day.

古文：议虽未施行，然州郡领兵，朗本意也。
现代文：他的建议虽然没有实施，但各州郡都有统率的军队，就是司马朗原来的想法。
English: Although his suggestion has not been implemented, each state and county has a commanding army, which was Smalan's original idea.

古文：迁兖州刺史，政化大行，百姓称之。
现代文：后来司马朗升迁为衮州刺史，政策教化得到大力推行，百姓都称赞他。
English: Later, Sima Lang was promoted to be the governor of Zhangzhou, the policy of education was vigorously implemented, and the people praised him.

古文：虽在军旅，常粗衣恶食，俭以率下。
现代文：即使是在行军作战的时候，司马朗也常常是穿粗陋的衣服，吃简陋的事务，用节俭做为部下的表率。
English: Even when marching to battle, Sima Lang often wore coarse clothes, ate simple food, and used frugality as a model for his subordinates.

古文：雅好人伦典籍，乡人李觌等盛得名誉，朗常显贬下之；后觌等败，时人服焉。
现代文：他很喜欢有关礼教的经典，他的同乡李觌等人声名威望都很高，但司马朗经常贬低他们；后来李觌等人身败名裂，当时的人都很佩服他的眼光。
English: He was very fond of the classics on etiquette. His fellow townsmen Li Xuan and others had a high reputation and prestige, but Sima Lang often belittled them. Later, Li Xuan and others were discredited, and people at that time admired his vision.

古文：锺繇、王粲著论云： 非圣人不能致太平。 
现代文：锺繇、王粲在文章中说： 不是圣人就不能使天下太平。 
English: , Wang Zhe said in the article: Not a saint can not make the world peaceful.

古文：朗以为 伊、颜之徒虽非圣人，使得数世相承，太平可致 。
现代文：司马朗认为： 伊尹、颜渊等人虽然不是圣人，但让他们的思想能流传数代人，也能获得太平。 
English: Sima Lang believes: Although Yi Yin, Yan Yuan and others are not saints, if their thoughts can be passed down for several generations, peace can be achieved.

古文：建安二十二年，与夏侯惇、臧霸等征吴。
现代文：建安二十二年，司马朗与夏侯惇、臧霸等人征讨吴国。
English: In the 22nd year of Jianan, Sima Lang and Xia Houyi, Yan Ba and others went to conquer Wu.

古文：到居巢，军士大疫，朗躬巡视，致医药。
现代文：大军行进到居巢时，军中士兵遭到严重的瘟疫，司马朗亲自巡视军营，为士兵们送药。
English: When the large army marched to the nest, the soldiers in the army suffered a serious plague, Sima Lang personally inspected the military camp and sent medicine to the soldiers.

古文：遇疾卒，时年四十七。
现代文：后来他染上瘟疫去世，去世时只有四十七岁。
English: He later died of the plague, aged just 47.

古文：遗命布衣幅巾，敛以时服，州人追思之。
现代文：他去世前交代只穿布衣，束发不带冠，穿着平常的衣服入殓，州里的百姓都追念他。
English: The people of the state remember him fondly for the fact that before his death, he used to wear only a loincloth, his hair was tied up without a crown, and he was buried in ordinary clothes.

古文：明帝即位，封朗子遗昌武亭侯，邑百户。
现代文：明帝登基后，赐封司马朗的司马遗为昌武亭侯爵，封邑一百户。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he bestowed the title of Marquis of Changwuting to Sima Yu of Sima Lang, and one hundred households in the fief.

古文：朗弟孚又以子望继朗后。
现代文：司马朗的弟弟司马孚又将自己的儿子司马望过继给司马朗，以延续后代。
English: Sima Lang's brother, Sima Fu, also passed on his son, Sima Wang, to Sima Lang in order to continue the lineage.

古文：遗薨，望子洪嗣。
现代文：司马遗去世后，司马望的儿子司马洪承袭爵位。
English: After the death of Sima Yi, Sima Wang's son Sima Hong inherited the title.

古文：初朗所与俱徙赵咨，官至太常，为世好士。
现代文：当初和司马朗一起搬迁到黎阳的赵咨，做官到太常，是当时很好的官员。
English: At first, Zhao Zi, who moved to Liyang together with Sima Lang, was a very good official at that time.

古文：梁习字子虞，陈郡柘人也，为郡纲纪。
现代文：梁习字子虞，陈郡柘县人，在郡中担任主簿。
English: Liang Xi Ziziyu, a native of Qian County, Chen County, served as the chief accountant in the county.

古文：太祖为司空，辟召为漳长，累转乘氏、海西、下邳令，所在有治名。
现代文：太祖还是司空时，征召他为漳县县长，又多次调任，担任乘氏县、海西县、下邳县令，他所治理的地方都有治理得当的美名。
English: When the great-grandfather was still the Secretary of the Air Force, he was conscripted as the head of Jixian County, and was transferred several times to serve as the governor of Jixian County, Haixi County, and Lower Jixian County. The places he governed had a reputation for proper governance.

古文：还为西曹令史，迁为属。
现代文：后来返回朝中担任西曹令史，升任属官。
English: Later, he returned to the court to serve as West Cao Ling Shi and was promoted to subordinate officer.

古文：并土新附，习以别部司马领并州刺史。
现代文：并州的土地刚刚被收复，梁习以别部司马的身份兼任并州刺史。
English: The land of Yingzhou had just been recovered, and Liang Xi, as the secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, also served as the head of the history of Yingzhou.

古文：时承高幹荒乱之馀，胡狄在界，张雄跋扈，吏民亡叛，入其部落；兵家拥众，作为寇害，更相扇动，往往棋跱。
现代文：当时正是高幹作乱之后，当时有少数民族在并州境内，张扬跋扈，吏役百姓背叛逃亡，投靠他们部族；郡中有拥兵自重的人，在郡中四处劫掠，还会互相扇动，经常相持不下。
English: At that time, it was just after Gao Jian's rebellion. At that time, there were ethnic minorities in the territory of the annexed prefecture, and they made a lot of noise. The officials and the people betrayed and fled to their tribe. There were self-respecting people in the county who supported the soldiers and plundered everywhere in the county. They would also instigate each other, and they often couldn't stand each other.

古文：习到官，诱谕招纳，皆礼召其豪右，稍稍荐举，使诣幕府；豪右已尽，乃次发诸丁强以为义从；又因大军出征，分请以为勇力。
现代文：梁习到任以后，诱导、说明、招揽等办法都尝试，还按照礼节召集郡中的豪门大族，并加以推荐，让他们到幕府中任职；豪强势力消除以后，接着就发动壮丁前去参军；又趁着大军出征，分别请求他们加入军队。
English: After Liang Xi took office, he tried all means of inducing, explaining, and soliciting. According to the etiquette, he also convened the great families in the county and recommended them to serve in the shogunate. After the powerful forces were eliminated, he then launched the young men to join the army. He also took advantage of the large army to go to war and separately asked them to join the army.

古文：吏兵已去之后，稍移其家，前后送邺，凡数万口；其不从命者，兴兵致讨，斩首千数，降附者万计。
现代文：吏役和士兵离开之后，梁习又渐渐将他们的家属迁移到邺城，前后搬过去的数万人；那些不肯服从的人，就出兵攻打，被斩首的有上千人，投降依附的有上万人。
English: After the officials and soldiers left, Liang Xi gradually moved their families to Lucheng, moving tens of thousands of people back and forth. Those who refused to obey were attacked by troops, and more than a thousand people were beheaded, and tens of thousands surrendered.

古文：单于恭顺，名王稽颡，部曲服事供职，同於编户。
现代文：匈奴单于也表示恭敬顺从，各部族的首领也表示听命，和编入户籍的百姓一样。
English: The Xiongnu alone also expressed respect and obedience, and the leaders of the tribes also expressed obedience, just like the people who were registered.

古文：边境肃清，百姓布野，勤劝农桑，令行禁止。
现代文：边境地区因此肃清，百姓布满田野，勤勉地耕种养殖，有命令就执行有禁令就停止。
English: As a result, the border areas have been cleared, and the people have covered the fields and diligently cultivated and bred. If there is an order, it will be implemented; if there is a ban, it will be stopped.

古文：贡达名士，咸显於世，语在常林传。
现代文：达官贵人和有名望的贤达，都在当时显示出才干，这些在《常林传》中另有记载。
English: High-ranking dignitaries and renowned sages all displayed their talents at that time, and these are also recorded in "The Chronicles of Changlin."

古文：太祖嘉之，赐爵关内侯，更拜为真。
现代文：太祖对梁习很赞赏，赐封爵位为关内侯，又加上刺史的官职。
English: The great-grandfather was very appreciative of Liang Xi, and gave him the title of Guan Nei Hou, as well as the post of chief historian.

古文：长老称咏，以为自所闻识，刺史未有及习者。
现代文：州中的年老长辈们都称赞他，认为自从有见识以来，没有哪个刺史比得上他。
English: The elder statesmen of the state all praised him, saying that since he was enlightened, there was no guru like him.

古文：建安十八年，州并属冀州，更拜议郎、西部都督从事，统属冀州，总故部曲。
现代文：建安十八年，并州被改为隶属冀州，梁习有被任命为议郎、西部都督从事，总管冀州事务，统率原来的部队。
English: In the 18th year of Jianan, Anding Prefecture was changed to subordinate to Jizhou Province, and Liang Xi You was appointed as the speaker, the western governor, the general manager of Jizhou affairs, and the commander of the original troops.

古文：又使於上党取大材供邺宫室。
现代文：又到上党郡出使以取运大的木材以供修建邺城宫殿。
English: He also sent an envoy to Shangdang County to pick up large amounts of timber for the construction of the Shuangcheng Palace.

古文：习表置屯田都尉二人，领客六百夫，於道次耕种菽粟，以给人牛之费。
现代文：梁习上表请求设立两名屯田都尉，带领六百个民夫，在道路边耕种菽粟等粮食，以供给人畜的支出。
English: Liang Xi requested the establishment of two garrison captains at the top table, leading six hundred people to cultivate opium poppy and other grain on the roadside to supply human and animal expenditure.

古文：后单于入侍，西北无虞，习之绩也。
现代文：后来单于入朝侍奉，西北地区没有战乱，就是梁习的功绩。
English: Later, he served in the imperial court alone, and there was no war in the northwest region, which was Liang Xi's achievement.

古文：文帝践阼，复置并州，复为刺史，进封申门亭侯，邑百户；政治常为天下最。
现代文：文帝登基后，又设立了并州，梁习又担任并州刺史，进封爵位为申门亭侯，食邑一百户；他的政绩经常是当时天下间最好的。
English: After Emperor Wendi ascended to the throne, he also set up a unified state, and Liang Xi also served as the leader of the unified state, and was knighted as the lord of Shenmenting, with a hundred households; his political achievements were often the best in the world at that time.

古文：太和二年，徵拜大司农。
现代文：太和二年，梁习被朝廷征召为大司农。
English: In the 2nd year of the Taiwa era, Liang Xi was called up by the imperial court to become the Chief Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：习在州二十馀年，而居处贫穷，无方面珍物，明帝异之，礼赐甚厚。
现代文：梁习在并州二十多年，但居住的地方很是贫困，没有任何一样贵重物品，明帝很是惊异，给他的礼物赏赐很是丰厚。
English: Liang Xi has been in Bianzhou for more than 20 years, but the place where he lives is very poor, without any valuables. Emperor Ming was very surprised and gave him a very rich gift.

古文：四年，薨，子施嗣。
现代文：太和四年，梁习去世，他的儿子梁施承袭爵位。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, Liang Xi died, and his son Liang Shi inherited the title.

古文：初，济阴王思与习俱为西曹令史。
现代文：当初，梁习和济阴的王思一起担任西曹令史。
English: At first, Liang Xi and Wang Si of Jiyin served as the West Cao Ling Shi together.

古文：思因直日白事，失太祖指。
现代文：王思因为在当值那天上报事情不恰当，不符合太祖的想法。
English: Wang Si, because it was inappropriate to report the matter on the day of duty, did not conform to the great-grandfather's idea.

古文：太祖大怒，教召主者，将加重辟。
现代文：太祖大怒，下令将主管的人召来，将要加以重刑。
English: The great-grandfather was furious and ordered the person in charge to be called in. He was to be severely punished.

古文：时思近出，习代往对，已被收执矣，思乃驰还，自陈己罪，罪应受死。
现代文：当时王思不在近处，梁习代替他前往回答，一到就被收押起来，王思才骑马赶回来，自己陈述罪过，说自己的罪应该被处死。
English: At that time, Wang Si was not nearby. Liang Xi went to answer on his behalf. As soon as he arrived, he was detained. Wang Si only came back on horseback to state his guilt and say that his crime should be executed.

古文：太祖叹习之不言，思之识分，曰： 何意吾军中有二义士乎？ 
现代文：太祖感叹于梁习不为自己辩解，而王思也勇于担责，并说： 怎么能想到我军中有两位这样的义士呢？ 
English: The great-grandfather lamented that Liang Xi did not defend himself, and Wang Si also had the courage to take responsibility, and said: How can you think that there are two such righteous men in our army?

古文：后同时擢为刺史，思领豫州。
现代文：后来他们同时被提升为刺史，王思是豫州刺史。
English: Later, both of them were promoted to the post of chief historian. Wang Si was the chief historian of Yuzhou.

古文：思亦能吏，然苛碎无大体，官至九卿，封列侯。
现代文：王思也能处理政事，但苛刻琐碎，不识大体，后来官至九卿，被封为列侯。
English: Wang Si could also handle political affairs, but he was harsh, petty and ignorant. Later, he rose to the rank of Jiuqing and was made a vassal lord.

古文：张既字德容，冯翊高陵人也。
现代文：张既字德容，冯翊郡高陵县人。
English: Zhang Ye Zi De Rong, a native of Gaoling County, Fengye County.

古文：年十六，为郡小吏。
现代文：十六岁的时候是冯翊郡的一个小吏。
English: At the age of sixteen, he was a minor official in Fengye County.

古文：后历右职，举孝廉，不行。
现代文：后来担任过重要职位，又被推举为孝廉，但他没有应召。
English: Later, he held an important position and was promoted to the position of filial piety, but he did not accept the call.

古文：太祖为司空，辟，未至。
现代文：太祖担任司空时，征召他，他也没有前往。
English: When his great-grandfather was Air Vice-Marshal, he was called up, but he did not go.

古文：举茂才，除新丰令，治为三辅第一。
现代文：后来被举荐为茂才，担任新丰县令，将新丰县治理成三辅第一最好的县邑。
English: Later, he was recommended to Maocai and served as the governor of Xinfeng County, governing Xinfeng County into the first and best county town in Sanfu.

古文：袁尚拒太祖於黎阳，遣所置河东太守郭援、并州刺史高幹及匈奴单于取平阳，发使西与关中诸将合从。
现代文：袁尚在黎阳抗击太祖，派他设立的河东郡太守郭援和并州刺史高幹以及匈奴的单于前去攻取平阳，并派出使者往西和关中众位将领合军。
English: Yuan Shang fought against Taizu in Liyang. He sent Guo Yuan, the governor of Hedong County, which he had set up, and the high-ranking cadres of Shengzhou Zhishi and Xiongnu to attack Pingyang. He also sent envoys to Xiheguanzhong to join forces with the generals.

古文：司隶校尉锺繇遣既说将军马腾等，既为言利害，腾等从之。
现代文：司隶校尉锺繇派张既去游说马腾等将领，张既向他们陈述其中的利害关系，马腾等人都听从了他。
English: The officer-in-charge sent Zhang to lobby Ma Teng and other generals, and Zhang explained to them the interests involved, and Ma Teng and others listened to him.

古文：腾遣子超将兵万馀人，与繇会击幹、援，大破之，斩援首。
现代文：马腾派儿子马超率领一万多人马，和钟繇的部队合军进攻高幹、郭援，大获全胜，将郭援斩首。
English: Ma Teng sent his son Ma Chao to lead more than ten thousand horses, and joined forces with Zhong Xi's troops to attack Gao Jian and Guo Yuan, and won a complete victory, beheading Guo Yuan.

古文：幹及单于皆降。
现代文：高幹和单于都投降了。
English: Gao Jian and Shan Yu both surrendered.

古文：其后幹复举并州反。
现代文：这之后高幹又依据并州反叛。
English: After that, high-ranking officials rebelled on the basis of annexation.

古文：河内张晟众万馀人无所属，寇崤、渑间，河东卫固、弘农张琰各起兵以应之。
现代文：河内的张晟有一万多人马没有归属，崤山、渑水一带作乱，河东郡的卫固、弘农郡的张琰都率军响应张晟。
English: There were more than 10,000 people in Hanoi who did not belong to Zhang Ye, and disturbances broke out in the areas of Lushan and Surabaya. Zhang Ye's armies led by Wei Gu of Hedong County and Hongnong County responded to Zhang Ye.

古文：太祖以既为议郎，参繇军事，使西徵诸将马腾等，皆引兵会击晟等，破之。
现代文：曹操任命张既为议郎，让钟繇参与军事，派西征的众位将领如马腾等人，都率军共同进攻张晟等人，取得胜利。
English: Cao Cao appointed Zhang Ye as the mediator and allowed Zhong Xi to participate in military affairs. Many generals, such as Ma Teng and others, who were sent to the West, led the army to jointly attack Zhang Xi and others and achieved victory.

古文：斩琰、固首，幹奔荆州。
现代文：并斩杀了张琰、卫固，高幹逃奔向荆州。
English: He also killed Zhang Xuan and Wei Gu, and Gao Jian fled to Jingzhou.

古文：封既武始亭侯。
现代文：太祖封张既为武始亭侯。
English: The great-great-grandfather, Fuzhang, was also a prince of Wuxi.

古文：太祖将征荆州，而腾等分据关中。
现代文：太祖将要征讨荆州，而马腾等人又分兵据守关中。
English: Taizu is going to conquer Jingzhou, while Ma Teng and others have divided their forces to defend Guanzhong.

古文：太祖复遣既喻腾等，令释部曲求还。
现代文：太祖又派张既告知马腾等人，让他们放弃部队返回朝中。
English: The great-grandfather also sent Zhang Ye to inform Ma Teng and others to abandon their troops and return to the central government.

古文：腾已许之而更犹豫，既恐为变，乃移诸县促储偫，二千石郊迎。
现代文：马腾已经答应了但后面又由于了，张既担心会有变故，就传公文到沿路各县督促他们做好迎接准备，两千石俸禄以上的官员要到郊外迎接。
English: Ma Teng had already agreed but later backed out. Zhang was worried that things would change, so he sent official documents to the counties along the route to urge them to prepare for the reception. Officials with more than two thousand koku of salary had to go to the suburbs to greet them.

古文：腾不得已，发东。
现代文：马腾迫不得已，出发返回朝中。
English: As a last resort, Ma Teng set off to return to Chaozhong.

古文：太祖表腾为卫尉，子超为将军，统其众。
现代文：太祖上表请求封马腾为卫尉，他的儿子马超为将军，统领原来的部队。
English: The great-great-grandfather requested that Ma Teng be made a lieutenant and his son Ma Chao be made a general to lead the original troops.

古文：后超反，既从太祖破超於华阴，西定关右。
现代文：后来马超反叛，张既跟随太祖在华阴攻破马超，又往西平定关右地区。
English: Later, Ma Chao rebelled, and Zhang not only followed his great-grandfather to defeat Ma Chao in Huayin, but also went to the west to settle the Guan Yu region.

古文：以既为京兆尹，招怀流民，兴复县邑，百姓怀之。
现代文：朝廷任命张既为京兆尹，招揽抚恤流亡的百姓，恢复修建原来的县城，百姓都感怀他。
English: The imperial court appointed Zhang as the leader of Beijing Zhaoyun, invited the people in exile to receive pensions, and resumed the construction of the original county seat. The people were all impressed by him.

古文：魏国既建，为尚书，出为雍州刺史。
现代文：魏国建立以后，张既担任尚书，又出京担任雍州刺史。
English: After the establishment of Wei, Zhang not only served as Shangshu, but also went to Beijing to serve as Yongzhou Shishi.

古文：太祖谓既曰： 还君本州，可谓衣绣昼行矣。 
现代文：太祖对张既说： 会到您原来的州郡，可以说是穿着华丽的衣服在白日行走了吧。 
English: The great-grandfather said to Zhang Ye: You will go to your original state and county. You can say that you will wear gorgeous clothes and walk in the daytime.

古文：从征张鲁，别从散关入讨叛氐，收其麦以给军食。
现代文：张既又跟随太祖征讨张鲁，另外率部从散关进入前去征讨反叛的氐族人，将他们的麦子收割下来以供给军粮。
English: Zhang not only followed his great-grandfather to conquer Zhang Lu, but also led a detachment from Sankuan to conquer the rebellious Yi people and harvest their wheat to supply the army with grain.

古文：鲁降，既说太祖拔汉中民数万户以实长安及三辅。
现代文：张鲁投降，张既劝说太祖将汉中地区的几万户人家迁移到长安和三辅地区以充实当地人口。
English: Zhang Lu surrendered, and Zhang Ye persuaded Taizu to relocate tens of thousands of households in the Hanzhong area to Chang'an and Sanfu areas to enrich the local population.

古文：其后与曹洪破吴兰於下辩，又与夏侯渊讨宋建，别攻临洮、狄道，平之。
现代文：这之后张既和曹洪在下辩大败吴兰，又和夏侯渊征讨宋建，又另外率军攻打临洮、狄道两县，都平定了。
English: After that, Zhang not only defeated Wu Lan with Cao Hong in the following debate, but also conquered Song Jian with Xia Houyuan, and led another army to attack Linyi and Didao counties, all of which were leveled.

古文：是时，太祖徙民以充河北，陇西、天水、南安民相恐动，扰扰不安，既假三郡人为将吏者休课，使治屋宅，作水碓，民心遂安。
现代文：这时候，太祖将百姓迁移到河北以充实当地，陇西、天水、南安各郡的百姓都惊恐动乱，纷纷扰扰不安定，张既就给予这三郡中担任将领吏役的人免除赋税，让他们修建房屋，制作水碓，百姓才安定下来。
English: At this time, the great ancestor moved the people to Hebei to enrich the local area. The people in the counties of Shaanxi, Tianshui and Nan'an were alarmed by the turmoil and disturbed the instability one after another. Zhang gave the people who served as generals and officials in these three counties tax exemption, let them build houses and make water reservoirs, and the people settled down.

古文：太祖将拔汉中守，恐刘备北取武都氐以逼关中，问既。
现代文：太祖即将攻取汉中守卫，担心刘备往北攻取武都的氐族人进而直逼关中，就询问张既。
English: The great-grandfather was about to attack the Han central guards, and worried that Liu Bei would go north to attack the Yi people of Wudu and then go straight to Guanzhong, he asked Zhang Ye.

古文：既曰： 可劝使北出就谷以避贼，前至者厚其宠赏，则先者知利，后必慕之。 
现代文：张既说： 可以劝说氐族人往北到接近能种植粮食的地方居住以躲避战乱，首先到达的人给予丰厚的恩宠赏赐，那那些先到达的知道其中的利益，后面的人一定会追随他们。 
English: Zhang Ye said, "We can persuade the Yao people to move north to a place where they can grow food to avoid war. Those who arrive first will be given a generous reward. Those who arrive first will know the benefits, and those who come later will surely follow them."

古文：太祖从其策，乃自到汉中引出诸军，令既之武都，徙氐五万馀落出居扶风、天水界。
现代文：太祖听从了他的计策，就自己到汉中将各路人马带出，又派张既到武都，将氐族的五万多人转移到扶风、天水郡境内。
English: The great-grandfather listened to his strategy and went to Hanzhong to bring out all kinds of people and horses. He also sent Zhang to Wudu to transfer more than 50,000 people of the Yi nationality to the territory of Fufeng and Tianshui counties.

古文：是时，武威颜俊、张掖和鸾、酒泉黄华、西平麹演等并举郡反，自号将军，更相攻击。
现代文：当时，武威郡的颜俊、张掖郡的和鸾、酒泉郡的黄华、西平郡的麴演等人共同依靠郡中势力反叛，自号为将军，互相之间进攻不已。
English: At that time, Yan Jun of Wuwei County, Wotan of Zhangye County, Huang Hua of Jiuquan County, Xiping County, and others jointly relied on the forces in the county to rebel, calling themselves generals and attacking each other.

古文：俊遣使送母及子诣太祖为质，求助。
现代文：颜俊派使者将自己的母亲和儿子送到太祖那里作为人质，并向太祖请求援助。
English: Yan Jun sent an envoy to take his mother and son to his grandfather as hostages, and asked his grandfather for help.

古文：太祖问既，既曰： 俊等外假国威，内生傲悖，计定势足，后即反耳。
现代文：太祖询问张既，张既说： 颜俊等人在外假仗国家威势，内心却傲慢狂悖，等到制定好计策，势力足够强大，后面就会立即反叛了。
English: The great-grandfather asked Zhang Ye, and Zhang Ye said: Yan Jun and others are pretending to wield state power abroad, but they are arrogant and rebellious at heart. Once they have formulated a good strategy and their power is strong enough, they will immediately rebel.

古文：今方事定蜀，且宜两存而斗之，犹卞庄子之刺虎，坐收其毙也。 太祖曰： 善。 
现代文：现在您正在计划平定蜀国的事情，应该让他们这些势力都存在并互相争斗，就像卞庄子刺虎一样，我们就可以安坐等待他们的灭亡了。 太祖说： 好。 
English: Now that you are planning to pacify Shu, you should let all these forces exist and fight each other, just like a tiger, and we can sit back and wait for their demise.

古文：岁馀，鸾遂杀俊，武威王祕又杀鸾。
现代文：一年多以后，和鸾就将颜俊杀了，武威郡的王祕又将和鸾杀了。
English: More than a year later, He Yao killed Yan Jun, and Wang Xi of Wuwei County killed He Yao.

古文：是时不置凉州，自三辅拒西域，皆属雍州。
现代文：这时凉州还没有设立，从三辅地区到西域，都隶属与雍州地区。
English: At this time, Liangzhou had not yet been established, and from the Sanfu region to the western region, they were all subordinate to the Yongzhou region.

古文：文帝即王位，初置凉州，以安定太守邹岐为刺史。
现代文：文帝继位为魏王时，开始设立凉州，任命安定太守邹岐为凉州刺史。
English: When Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne as the Wei king, he began to establish Liangzhou and appointed the Stable Empress Dowager of Iki as the crown prince of Liangzhou.

古文：张掖张进执郡守举兵拒岐，黄华、麹演各逐故太守，举兵以应之。
现代文：张掖郡的张进抓了郡守，并举兵抗击邹岐，黄华、麴演等人也各自驱逐了原来的太守，起兵响应张进。
English: Zhang Jin of Zhangye County arrested the county governor and raised an army to fight against Iki. Huang Hua, Yan Yan and others also expelled the former governor and raised an army in response to Zhang Jin.

古文：既进兵为护羌校尉苏则声势，故则得以有功。
现代文：张既出兵为护羌校尉苏则的助长声势，所以苏则得以立下功劳。
English: Zhang Ye dispatched soldiers to support the growing momentum of Colonel Su Ze, so Su Ze was able to make a contribution.

古文：既进爵都乡侯。
现代文：张既被进封爵位为都乡侯。
English: Zhang was not only ennobled but also given the title of "township lord."

古文：凉州卢水胡伊健妓妾、治元多等反，河西大扰。
现代文：凉州、庐水一带的羌族人伊健妓妾、治元多等反叛，河西地区受到严重侵染。
English: In the areas of Liangzhou and Surabaya, Ijian prostitutes and concubines, and Zhimeng and many other Yi people rebelled, and the Hexi region was severely infected.

古文：帝忧之，曰： 非既莫能安凉州。 
现代文：文帝很是忧心，说： 不是张既，就没有能使凉州安定下来的人了。 
English: Emperor Wen was very worried and said, "If it were not for Zhang Ye, there would be no one who could stabilize Liangzhou."

古文：乃召邹岐，以既代之。
现代文：就召见邹岐，让张既代替他的职位。
English: He summoned Iki and asked Zhang Ye to take his place.

古文：诏曰： 昔贾复请击郾贼，光武笑曰： 执金吾击郾，吾复何忧？ 
现代文：下诏说： 过去贾复请求率军进攻郾县的盗贼，光武帝笑着说： 执金吾去攻打郾县，我还担忧什么呢？ 
English: The next edict said: In the past, Jia Fu requested to lead the army to attack the thieves in Jixian. Emperor Guangwu smiled and said: If I have the money to attack Jixian, what am I worried about?

古文：卿谋略过人，今则其时。
现代文：您的胆气谋划都超过常人，现在就是您展示才华的时候了。
English: You've plotted with more guts than most, and now it's time to showcase your talents.

古文：以便宜从事，勿复先请。 
现代文：允许您按照实际情况处理事情，不需要先向我请示。 
English: Allow you to deal with things according to the actual situation, do not need to ask me first.

古文：遣护军夏侯儒、将军费曜等继其后。
现代文：文帝还派遣护军夏侯儒、将军费曜等人率军跟随在张既后面。
English: Emperor Wen also sent the escort Xia Houru, General Feiyou and others to lead the army to follow Zhang Ye.

古文：既至金城，欲渡河，诸将守以为 兵少道险，未可深入 。
现代文：大军行进到金城，打算渡过黄河，众位将领守备都认为 我军兵力少，道路又艰险，不能深入进军。 
English: A large army marched to Jincheng, intending to cross the Yellow River. All the generals guarding the fort believed that our army was too small, and the road was too dangerous to march deeper.

古文：既曰： 道虽险，非井陉之隘，夷狄乌合，无左车之计，今武威危急，赴之宜速。 遂渡河。
现代文：张既说： 道路虽然艰险，但也没有像井陉口那样狭窄，异族部队只是乌合之众，没有像李左车那样的谋划，现在武威郡情况紧急，应该迅速奔赴那里。 
English: Zhang Ye said: Although the road is arduous and dangerous, it is not as narrow as Jingyuekou. The foreign troops are just a rabble, and there is no plan like Li Zuochuan. Now the situation in Wuwei County is urgent, and we should go there quickly.

古文：贼七千馀骑逆拒军於鹯阴口，既扬声军由鹯阴，乃潜由且次出至武威。
现代文：于是大军渡过黄河。贼军有七千多骑兵在鹯阴口抗击张既队伍，张既宣扬大军要从鹯阴口经过，实际上暗中从且次县出发到武威郡。
English: As a result, the large army crossed the Yellow River. The bandit army had more than seven thousand cavalrymen to resist Zhang Ye's team at the mouth of the Xinyi River. Zhang Ye proclaimed that the large army would pass through the mouth of the Xinyi River, but in fact secretly set out from Zhijiang County to Wuwei County.

古文：胡以为神，引还显美。
现代文：胡人都认为他很神奇，就率军退到显美县。
English: Hu people all thought he was amazing, so he retreated to Xianmei County with his army.

古文：既已据武威，曜乃至，儒等犹未达。
现代文：张既攻占了武威郡，费曜的部队才来到，而夏侯儒等人还没赶到。
English: Zhang had already captured Wuwei County, but Fei Chong's troops had just arrived, while Xia Horu and others had not yet arrived.

古文：既劳赐将士，欲进军击胡。
现代文：张既犒劳赏赐士兵士兵后，想要出兵攻打胡人。
English: After Zhang Yaobang rewarded the soldiers for their hard work, he wanted to send troops to attack the Hu people.

古文：诸将皆曰： 士卒疲倦，虏众气锐，难与争锋。 
现代文：众位将领都说： 现在我军士兵疲惫倦怠，而敌人士气还很强盛，我军很难和他们抗衡。 
English: All the generals said: Now our soldiers are tired and weary, and the enemy's morale is still strong. It is difficult for our army to compete with them.

古文：既曰： 今军无见粮，当因敌为资。
现代文：张既说： 我军现在没有多的粮草，应该从敌人那里取得物资。
English: Zhang Ye said, "Our army doesn't have much grain and grass now, so we should get supplies from the enemy."

古文：若虏见兵合，退依深山，追之则道险穷饿，兵还则出候寇钞。
现代文：如果他们看到我军联合起来，就退到深山中据守，我军追击，那里道路艰险，士兵又穷困饥饿，如果退兵不追，又会等到敌军的劫掠。
English: If they see that our army is united, they will retreat to the deep mountains to defend themselves, and our army will pursue them, where the roads are difficult, the soldiers are poor and hungry, and if they do not pursue them, they will wait for the enemy's looting.

古文：如此，兵不得解，所谓 一日纵敌，患在数世 也。 遂前军显美。
现代文：这样做，士兵得不到休息，就成为所说的 一天放纵敌人，就会成为几世的祸患。  于是率军去到显美县。
English: In this way, if the soldiers do not get rest, it will become the so-called one-day indulgence of the enemy, it will become the scourge of several lifetimes.

古文：胡骑数千，因大风欲放火烧营，将士皆恐。
现代文：胡人有几千骑兵，打算趁着大风纵火烧毁魏军军营，军中将士都很惊恐。
English: Hu's men had several thousand cavalrymen and planned to take advantage of the high winds to set fire to the Wei army camp. The lieutenant generals were terrified.

古文：既夜藏精卒三千人为伏，使参军成公英督千馀骑挑战，敕使阳退。
现代文：张既晚上埋伏了三千精锐士兵，让参军成公英率领一千多骑兵前去挑战，张既命他们假装撤退。
English: Zhang Yao ambushed three thousand elite soldiers in the evening, and let Cheng Gongying, who had joined the army, lead more than a thousand cavalry to challenge. Zhang Yao ordered them to pretend to retreat.

古文：胡果争奔之，因发伏截其后，首尾进击，大破之，斩首获生以万数。
现代文：胡人果然争相来追赶，张既趁机派出埋伏的士兵阶段敌人的退路，首尾联合进军，大获全胜，斩杀和俘虏了敌军上万人。
English: The Hu people indeed scrambled to catch up. Zhang took advantage of the opportunity to send ambushed soldiers to stage the enemy's retreat, marching in unison, winning a complete victory, killing and capturing tens of thousands of enemy troops.

古文：帝甚悦，诏曰： 卿逾河历险，以劳击逸，以寡胜众，功过南仲，勤逾吉甫。
现代文：文帝很是高兴，下诏说： 您渡过黄河深入陷阱，用疲惫的军队攻打准备充分的敌人，依靠少数士兵战胜人数众多的敌军，功绩超过了周宣王时期的南仲，勤勉超过尹吉甫。
English: Emperor Wen was very pleased and said to him: You crossed the Yellow River and went deep into the trap, attacked the well-prepared enemy with a tired army, and relied on a small number of soldiers to defeat a large number of enemy troops. Your achievements exceeded those of Nan Zhong in the period of King Zhou Xuan, and your diligence exceeded that of Yin Jifu.

古文：此勋非但破胡，乃永宁河右，使吾长无西顾之念矣。 
现代文：这个功绩不仅仅是战胜了胡人，更使得河右地区永远安定，让我再也不用对西面的事有所顾虑了。 
English: This achievement not only defeated the Hu people, but also made the Hezu region stable forever, so I no longer have to worry about things in the west.

古文：徙封西乡侯，增邑二百，并前四百户。
现代文：张既被转封为西乡侯，增加食邑两百户，加上之前的一共四百户。
English: Zhang was transferred to Xixiang, adding two hundred households to the food village, adding to the previous four hundred households.

古文：酒泉苏衡反，与羌豪邻戴及丁令胡万馀骑攻边县。
现代文：酒泉郡的苏衡反叛，和羌族的豪族邻戴还有丁令一带的一万多匈奴骑兵进攻边境的县城。
English: Jiuquan County's Su Heng rebelled, and more than ten thousand Hun cavalrymen from the vicinity of Dingling attacked the county town on the border.

古文：既与夏侯儒击破之，衡及邻戴等皆降。
现代文：张既和夏侯儒进攻并攻破了他们，苏衡和邻戴等人都投降了。
English: Zhang Ye and Xia Horu attacked and defeated them, and Su Heng and Niang Dai and others all surrendered.

古文：遂上疏请与儒治左城，筑鄣塞，置烽侯、邸阁以备胡。
现代文：张既就上疏请求和夏侯儒一起治理左城，修筑城墙要塞，设置烽火台、储粮仓库以防备胡人。
English: Zhang requested Shang Shu to govern Zuocheng together with Xia Houru, build a fortress wall, set up a campfire and grain storage warehouse to prevent the Hu people.

古文：西羌恐，率众二万馀落降。
现代文：西面的羌族惊恐，率领两万多人前来投降。
English: The Yi people in the west panicked and led more than 20,000 people to surrender.

古文：其后西平麹光等杀其郡守，诸将欲击之，既曰： 唯光等造反，郡人未必悉同。
现代文：这之后西平郡的麴光等人将郡中太守杀了，张既的部将打算进攻他们，张既说： 只有麹光等人造反，郡中的百姓不一定都赞同。
English: After this, Huan Guang and others in Xiping County killed the county's middle eunuch, and Zhang Ye's troops planned to attack them. Zhang Ye said: Only Huan Guang and others rebelled, and the people in the county did not necessarily agree.

古文：若便以军临之，吏民羌胡必谓国家不别是非，更使皆相持著，此为虎傅翼也。
现代文：如果立即率军进攻，吏役百姓还有羌人、匈奴人一定认为国家不能分辨是非，还会让他们联合起来抗拒国家，这是为老虎加上翅膀啊。
English: If you immediately lead an army to attack, the officials and the people, as well as the Xiongnu and the Huns, will certainly think that the country cannot distinguish right from wrong, and will make them unite to resist the country. This is adding wings to the tiger.

古文：光等欲以羌胡为援，今先使羌胡钞击，重其赏募，所虏获者皆以畀之。
现代文：麴光等人想要以羌人和匈奴人作为援助，现在我们先让羌人和匈奴人包抄袭击他们，加大对招募的赏赐，将那些俘虏的敌军都送给他们。
English: Huan Guang and the others want to use the Xiongnu and the Huns as assistance. Now, let the Xiongnu and the Huns encircle and attack them first, increase the reward for recruitment, and send all the captured enemy troops to them.

古文：外沮其势，内离其交，必不战而定。 
现代文：从外部遏制他们的势力，在内部离间他们之间的关系，一定能不交战就平定他们。 
English: From the outside to curb their power, from the inside to sever their relationship, we must be able to pacify them without war.

古文：乃檄告谕诸羌，为光等所诖误者原之；能斩贼帅送首者当加封赏。
现代文：张既就发出檄文明白告诉各羌人部落，凡是被麴光等人诱惑欺骗的都给予原谅；凡是能将敌军将领斩杀并将首级送来的都会加以封官赏赐。
English: As soon as Zhang issued the imperial edict, he made it clear to the Hun tribes that anyone who had been deceived by the temptations of Jiguang and others would be forgiven; anyone who could decapitate the enemy general and send the head would be rewarded with an official seal.

古文：於是光部党斩送光首，其馀咸安堵如故。
现代文：于是麴光的部将将麴光杀了并把他的首级送给张既，剩下的人都像过去一样平安无事。
English: As a result, the general of the Shuguang killed the Shuguang and gave his head to Zhang Ye, and the rest of the people were safe and sound as in the past.

古文：既临二州十馀年，政惠著闻，其所礼辟扶风庞延、天水杨阜、安定胡遵、酒泉庞淯、敦煌张恭、周生烈等，终皆有名位。
现代文：张既来到雍州、凉州并治理二十多年，理政宽厚，很是出名，他按照礼节征召的扶风郡的庞延、天水郡的杨阜、安定县的胡遵、酒泉郡的庞淯、敦煌郡的张恭、周生烈等人，最后都有官职名望。
English: Zhang not only came to Yongzhou and Liangzhou and governed for more than 20 years, but he was also known for his generous governance. He conscripted Pangyan of Fufeng County, Yangfu of Tianshui County, Hu Zun of Anding County, Pang Hao of Jiuquan County, Zhang Gong of Dunhuang County, and Zhou Shengli of Dunhuang County according to the etiquette. In the end, all of them had official positions and fame.

古文：黄初四年薨。
现代文：黄初四年张既去世。
English: Zhang died in the fourth year of the Yellow Emperor's reign.

古文：诏曰： 昔荀桓子立勋翟土，晋侯赏以千室之邑；冯异输力汉朝，光武封其二子。
现代文：朝廷下诏说： 过去荀桓子在翟土建立功勋，晋侯赏赐了一千户食邑；冯异为汉朝做出贡献，汉光武帝赐封他的两个儿子。
English: The Imperial Court issued a decree saying: In the past, Shih Huan Zi established merits in Shandong, and the prince of Jin rewarded a thousand households with food; Feng Yi made contributions to the Han Dynasty, and Emperor Guangwu of Han awarded his two sons.

古文：故凉州刺史张既，能容民畜众，使群羌归土，可谓国之良臣。
现代文：已故的梁州刺史张既，能收容百姓招揽民众，让各部落羌族归顺朝廷，可以说是国家的良臣啊。
English: The late Zhang Shizhi of Liangzhou, who was able to accommodate the people, recruit the people, and make the Yi tribes submit to the imperial court, can be said to be a good minister of the country.

古文：不幸薨陨，朕甚愍之，其赐小子翁归爵关内侯。 
现代文：不行去世，朕非常哀痛，现在赐封他小儿子张翁归的爵位为关内侯。 
English: I am very saddened by his untimely death. I now bestow upon his youngest son, Zhang Wengui, the title of Guan Nei Hou.

古文：明帝即位，追谥曰肃侯。
现代文：明帝登基后，追封张既的谥号为肃侯。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, Zhang Ye's posthumous name was Suhou.

古文：子缉嗣。
现代文：他的儿子张缉承袭爵位。
English: His son Zhang Ji inherited the title.

古文：缉以中书郎稍迁东莞太守。
现代文：张缉以中书郎的身份渐渐提升为东莞太守。
English: Zhang Zhe gradually ascended to the position of the governor of Dongguan with the status of a middle school teacher.

古文：嘉平中，女为皇后，徵拜光禄大夫，位特进，封妻向为安城乡君。
现代文：嘉平年间，张缉的女儿被册立为皇后，朝廷征召他为光禄大夫，赐位特进，将他的妻子向氏封为安城乡君。
English: During the Jiaping era, Zhang Zhe's daughter was registered as the empress, the court enlisted him as a doctor of Guanglu, gave him a special promotion, and appointed his wife to the Ancheng Township.

古文：缉与中书令李丰同谋，诛。
现代文：张缉和中书令李丰一同密谋造反，被诛杀。
English: Zhang Zhe and Li Feng, the Chinese scribe, conspired to rebel together and were beaten to death.

古文：语在夏侯玄传。
现代文：这件事在《夏侯玄传》中另有记载。
English: This incident is also recorded in "The Legend of Xia Hou Xuan."

古文：温恢字曼基，太原祁人也。
现代文：温恢字曼基，太原郡祁县人。
English: Wen Kuan Zi, also known as Manki, was from Minxian County, Taiyuan County.

古文：父恕，为涿郡太守，卒。
现代文：他的父亲叫温恕，担任涿郡太守，后来去世。
English: His father's name was Wenzhu, and he served as the governor of Jixian County. He later passed away.

古文：恢年十五，送丧还归乡里，内足於财。
现代文：温恢当时十五岁，将父亲的灵柩送回家乡，家中十分富裕。
English: Wen Wei was fifteen years old at the time, and he sent his father's coffin back to his hometown. His family was very wealthy.

古文：恢曰： 世方乱，安以富为？ 
现代文：温恢说： 天下正处在动乱中，富裕有什么用？ 
English: Wen Weiwei said: The world is in turmoil, what is the use of being rich?

古文：一朝尽散，振施宗族。
现代文：一下子就将家中钱财散尽，用以赈济族中亲戚。
English: He spent all the family's money at once to help relatives among the Qizhi people.

古文：州里高之，比之郇越。
现代文：州中百姓都称赞他，将他比作先贤郇越。
English: The people of the state have praised him and likened him to the sages of ancient times.

古文：举孝廉，为廪丘长，鄢陵、广川令，彭城、鲁相，所在见称。
现代文：温恢被举荐为孝廉，担任过廪丘县长，鄢陵、广川县的县令，彭城、鲁城的相，他在任官的地方都得到百姓称赞。
English: Wen Jian was recommended as a filial son, and served as the governor of Mengqiu County, the county magistrate of Fuling and Guangchuan Counties, and the minister of Pengcheng and Lucheng. He was praised by the people wherever he was appointed.

古文：入为丞相主簿，出为扬州刺史。
现代文：后来入京担任丞相的主簿，又出京担任扬州刺史。
English: Later, he went to Beijing to serve as the chief secretary of the prime minister, and then went to Beijing to serve as the Yangzhou chief secretary.

古文：太祖曰： 甚欲使卿在亲近，顾以为不如此州事大。
现代文：太祖说： 我非常希望您在我身边，但又认为这样做比不上扬州的事务重要。
English: The great-grandfather said: I very much want you to be by my side, but I think that doing so is not as important as the affairs of Yangzhou.

古文：故书云： 股肱良哉！庶事康哉！ 
现代文：所以《尚书》中说： 重要的大臣是良臣，所有事情都会安康的！ 
English: Therefore, "Shangshu" said: An important minister is a good minister, and everything will be fine!

古文：得无当得蒋济为治中邪？ 时济见为丹杨太守，乃遣济还州。
现代文：需要蒋济担任治中以辅佐你吗？ 当时蒋济担任丹阳太守，太祖就派蒋济返回扬州。
English: Do you need Jiang Jie to assist you as the regent? At that time, Jiang Jie served as the governor of Danyang, and the great-grandfather sent Jiang Jie back to Yangzhou.

古文：又语张辽、乐进等曰： 扬州刺史晓达军事，动静与共咨议。 
现代文：又对张辽、乐进等人说： 扬州刺史通晓明白军事事务，无论做什么都要向他咨询商议。 
English: He also said to Zhang Liao, Lejin and others: Yangzhou Jishi is well versed in military affairs, and no matter what you do, you should consult with him.

古文：建安二十四年，孙权攻合肥，是时诸州皆屯戍。
现代文：建安二十四年，孙权进攻合肥，当时各州郡都守军驻扎。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Jian'an, Sun Quan attacked Hefei. At that time, the garrisons of all states and counties were stationed.

古文：恢谓兖州刺史裴潜曰： 此间虽有贼，不足忧，而畏征南方有变。
现代文：温恢对衮州刺史裴潜说： 这里虽然有贼寇，但不足以为此忧虑，应该担心曹仁南征的军队遭遇变故。
English: Wen Weiwei said to Pei Qian, the governor of Zhangzhou: Although there are thieves and robbers here, it is not enough to worry about this, we should worry about the army of Cao Ren's Southern Expedition.

古文：今水生而子孝县军，无有远备。
现代文：现在洪水来临，但曹仁孤军深入地方地区，没有长久的准备。
English: Now the flood is coming, but Cao Ren's lone army is deep into the local area, without long-term preparation.

古文：关羽骁锐，乘利而进，必将为患。 
现代文：关羽骁勇精锐，乘着优势进攻，一定会成为祸患。 
English: Guan Yu's brave elite, taking advantage of the offensive, will surely become a scourge.

古文：於是有樊城之事。
现代文：后来就有了水淹樊城的事。
English: Then there was the flooding of the city.

古文：诏书召潜及豫州刺史吕贡等，潜等缓之。
现代文：朝廷下诏征召裴潜和豫州刺史吕贡等人，裴潜等人一直拖延。
English: The imperial court issued a decree to conscript Pei Qian and Yu Zhou Zhishi Lugong and others, but Pei Qian and others have been delaying.

古文：恢密语潜曰： 此必襄阳之急欲赴之也。
现代文：温恢暗中对裴潜说： 这一定是襄阳情况紧急，想要你们前去救援。
English: Wen Weiwei said to Pei Xuan in the dark: This must be an emergency in Xiangyang, I want you to go to the rescue.

古文：所以不为急会者，不欲惊动远众。
现代文：之所以没有直接急切地召集你们，是因为不想惊动远处的部队。
English: I didn't summon you directly and urgently because I didn't want to alarm the troops in the distance.

古文：一二日必有密书促卿进道，张辽等又将被召。
现代文：一两天内一定会有秘密诏书催促你们出发，张辽等人也会被召去支援。
English: Within a day or two, there will certainly be a secret edict urging you to set out, and Zhang Liao and others will also be called to support you.

古文：辽等素知王意，后召前至，卿受其责矣！ 
现代文：张辽等人素来了解魏王的想法，他们在后面受到诏令却比你们先到达，您一定会受到责罚的！ 
English: Zhang Liao and others have always understood the thoughts of Wei Wang. They received the imperial edict later but arrived before you. You will definitely be punished!

古文：潜受其言，置辎重，更为轻装速发，果被促令。
现代文：裴潜接受了温恢的建议，放下军用物资，改为轻装上路，迅速出发，果然收到了催促的命令。
English: Pei Qian accepted the suggestion of Wen Gui, put down military supplies, changed to light loading on the road, and quickly set off. He received the urgent order.

古文：辽等寻各见召，如恢所策。
现代文：张辽等人不久也各自收到了诏令，一切都像温恢估计的那样。
English: Zhang Liao and others soon received the edict individually, and everything went as Wen Weiwei had expected.

古文：文帝践阼，以恢为侍中，出为魏郡太守。
现代文：文帝登基后，任命温恢为侍中，又出京担任魏郡太守。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, he appointed Wen Jiao as an attendant, and went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Wei County.

古文：数年，迁凉州刺史，持节领护羌校尉。
现代文：过了几年，被提升为凉州刺史，持符节兼任护羌校尉。
English: A few years later, he was promoted to the rank of Liangzhou stabbing historian, and also served as a guard lieutenant holding a sign festival.

古文：道病卒，时年四十五。
现代文：在赴任的路上病死，年仅四十五岁。
English: He died of illness on his way to the post, aged just 45.

古文：诏曰： 恢有柱石之质，服事先帝，功勤明著。
现代文：文帝下诏说： 温恢有成为朝廷支柱的潜质，侍奉先帝，功绩和勤勉都很卓著。
English: Emperor Wen issued an edict saying: "Wen Gao has the potential to become a pillar of the imperial court. He served the former emperor, and his achievements and diligence are outstanding.

古文：及为朕执事，忠於王室，故授之以万里之任，任之以一方之事。
现代文：等到为朕做事时，对王室忠心不二，所以才将万里之外的重任任命给他，将一个地方的事情都托付给他。
English: When he came to work for me, he was loyal to the royal family, so I appointed him to important tasks thousands of miles away, entrusting him with everything in one place.

古文：如何不遂，吾甚愍之！ 
现代文：他为何如此不顺遂，我非常痛惜！ 
English: Why is he so unsuccessful, I am very sorry!

古文：赐恢子生爵关内侯。
现代文：就下诏赐封温恢的儿子温生爵位为关内侯。
English: In accordance with the following edict, the son of Wen Weiwei, Wen Sheng, was given the title of Guan Nei Hou.

古文：生早卒，爵绝。
现代文：温生早年去世，爵位就没有延续。
English: When Atsuo died early in life, his title was not renewed.

古文：恢卒后，汝南孟建为凉州刺史，有治名，官至征东将军。
现代文：温恢去世后，汝南郡的孟建担任凉州刺史，处理政事有很好的名声，官职做到征东将军。
English: After the death of Wen Hui, Meng Jian of Runan County served as the chief historian of Liangzhou. He had a good reputation for handling political affairs, and his official position was the general of the East Conquest.

古文：贾逵字梁道，河东襄陵人也。
现代文：贾逵字梁道，河东郡襄陵县人。
English: Jia Junzhi Liang Dao, a resident of Yangling County, Hedong County.

古文：自为儿童，戏弄常设部伍，祖父习异之，曰： 汝大必为将率。 
现代文：他还是儿童的时候，玩游戏经常是跟行军打仗相关的，他的祖父贾习很是惊异，说： 你长大后一定会成为将帅。 
English: When he was a child, playing games was often related to marching and fighting. His grandfather Jia Xi was very surprised and said: You will definitely become a general when you grow up.

古文：口授兵法数万言。
现代文：还向他口述了数万字的兵法。
English: He also dictated tens of thousands of words of military strategy to him.

古文：初为郡吏，守绛邑长。
现代文：贾逵刚开始在郡中担任小吏，担任守卫绛邑的长官。
English: Jia Binggang began to work as a minor official in the county and served as the commander of the guard of Yingyue.

古文：郭援之攻河东，所经城邑皆下，逵坚守，援攻之不拔，乃召单于并军急攻之。
现代文：郭援进攻河东郡，所经过的城池都被攻占，贾逵坚守守卫绛邑，郭援进攻但没有能攻克，就召集单于联合军队加速进攻。
English: Guo Yuan attacked Hedong County, and all the cities and towns he passed through were captured. Jia Wei held on to the garrison town, Guo Yuan attacked, but could not conquer it, so he called in a joint army to speed up the attack.

古文：城将溃，绛父老与援要，不害逵。
现代文：绛邑城即将被攻破的时候，城中的父老乡亲请求不要杀害贾逵。
English: When the city of Handan was about to be invaded, the parents and fellow villagers in the city begged not to kill Jia Gang.

古文：绛人既溃，援闻逵名，欲使为将，以兵劫之，逵不动。
现代文：绛邑队伍被击溃后，郭援听说贾逵的名声，想要让他担任自己军中的将领，派兵前去劫持他，贾逵没有动作。
English: After the Qianyi team was defeated, Guo Yuan heard of Jia Jun's reputation and wanted to make him a general in his army. He sent soldiers to kidnap him, but Jia Jun did not move.

古文：左右引逵使叩头，逵叱之曰： 安有国家长吏为贼叩头！ 
现代文：左右侍从拉合贾逵想要他磕头，贾逵呵斥他们说： 哪有国家官吏给贼人磕头的！ 
English: The attendants on the right and left of Lahai Jiaqi wanted him to be beheaded. Jiaqi shouted at them, "What kind of state official beheads a thief!

古文：援怒，将斩之。
现代文：郭援大怒，想要将他斩了。
English: Guo Yuan flew into a rage and wanted to behead him.

古文：绛吏民闻将杀逵，皆乘城呼曰： 负要杀我贤君，宁俱死耳！ 
现代文：绛城的吏役百姓得知郭援将要杀害贾逵，都攀上城墙大喊： 如果要背信弃义杀害我们贤能的主君，我们宁肯同归于尽！ 
English: When the officials and people of Lucheng learned that Guo Yuan was going to kill Jia Zhang, they all climbed the city wall and shouted: "If you want to treacherously kill our wise and powerful lord, we would rather die together!"

古文：左右义逵，多为请，遂得免。
现代文：郭援身边的侍从都认为贾逵很有义气，大多为他求情，贾逵才得以免于一死。
English: The attendants around Guo Yuan all thought that Jia Chen was very righteous, and most of them pleaded for him, so that Jia Chen could be spared from death.

古文：初，逵过皮氏，曰： 争地先据者胜。 
现代文：当初贾逵去到皮氏，说： 争夺地盘，先占据有利地势的那方胜利。 
English: At first, Jia Wei went to the Pi clan and said: In the competition for territory, the side that first occupies a favorable position is victorious.

古文：及围急，知不免，乃使人间行送印绶归郡，且曰 急据皮氏 。
现代文：等到郭援包围绛邑并加紧围攻，贾逵知道绛邑免不了被攻破，就派人从小路出发，将印信和绶带送回郡中，并说 赶快去占据皮氏 。
English: When Guo Yuan began to encircle and intensify the siege of Jia Yu, Jia Yu knew that Jia Yu would inevitably be broken, so he sent someone to start from the path, sent the seal and ribbon back to the county, and said, "Hurry to occupy Pi."

古文：援既并绛众，将进兵。
现代文：郭援收编了绛邑的队伍之后，才继续前行。
English: Guo Yuan continued his journey only after he had assembled the troops from the county.

古文：逵恐其先得皮氏，乃以他计疑援谋人祝奥，援由是留七日。
现代文：贾逵担心郭援先得到皮氏，就用其他的计谋使郭援的谋臣祝奥产生疑虑，郭援因此将大军停留了七天。
English: Jia Yu was worried that Guo Yuan would get to the Pi clan first, so he used other tricks to make Guo Yuan's adviser Zhuo have doubts. As a result, Guo Yuan kept the large army for seven days.

古文：郡从逵言，故得无败。
现代文：郡中听从贾逵的建议，所以没有失败。
English: The county government followed Jia Wei's suggestion, so there was no failure.

古文：后举茂才，除渑池令。
现代文：后来贾逵被推举为茂才，担任渑池县令。
English: Later, Jia Wei was promoted to Maozai and served as the magistrate of Dianchi County.

古文：高幹之反，张琰将举兵以应之。
现代文：高幹反叛之后，张琰将要率军响应他。
English: After the high-level rebellion, Zhang Ye will lead the army to respond to him.

古文：逵不知其谋，往见琰。
现代文：贾逵不知道张琰的谋划，前往去见张琰。
English: Not knowing Zhang Ye's plan, Jia Ye went to see Zhang Ye.

古文：闻变起，欲还，恐见执，乃为琰画计，如与同谋者，琰信之。
现代文：得知变故已经发生，贾逵想要返回，又担心被抓捕，就为张琰出谋划策，就好像和张琰是同谋一样，张琰也信任他。
English: When he learned that the change of circumstances had occurred, Jia Wei wanted to return and was worried about being arrested, he made a plan for Zhang Ye, as if he was an accomplice, and Zhang Ye also trusted him.

古文：时县寄治蠡城，城堑不固，逵从琰求兵脩城。
现代文：当时渑池县由蠡城暂时治理，城池和壕沟都不坚固，贾逵跟随张琰到脩城请求士兵支援。
English: At that time, Dianchi County was temporarily governed by Diancheng. Both the city and the ditch were not solid. Jia Jun followed Zhang Jun to Diancheng to request soldiers' support.

古文：诸欲为乱者皆不隐其谋，故逵得尽诛之。
现代文：那些想要作乱的人都不隐藏他们的计谋，所以贾逵得以将他们全部诛杀。
English: Those who wanted to make trouble did not hide their plans, so Jia Zhang was able to kill them all.

古文：遂脩城拒琰。
现代文：然后在脩城抗击张琰。
English: Then he fought against Zhang Xuan in Lucheng.

古文：琰败，逵以丧祖父去官，司徒辟为掾，以议郎参司隶军事。
现代文：张琰战败，贾逵因为父亲去世而辞官，司徒府征召他为掾吏，以议郎的身份参与司隶校尉的军事。
English: Zhang Ye was defeated, Jia Ye resigned because of his father's death, and the Shitou government called him to be a military officer, and he participated in the military of the Sili captain as a mediator.

古文：太祖征马超，至弘农，曰 此西道之要 ，以逵领弘农太守。
现代文：太祖征讨马超，大军到达弘农郡，说： 这是西面道路的要害之地 ，让贾逵担任弘农太守。
English: The great ancestor conquered Ma Chao, and the large army reached Hongnong County, saying: This is the key place of the west road, let Jia Wei serve as the governor of Hongnong.

古文：召见计事，大悦之，谓左右曰： 使天下二千石悉如贾逵，吾何忧？ 
现代文：太祖召见他谋划事情，非常高兴，对左右侍奉的人说： 如果天下间两千石俸禄以上的官员都像贾逵那样，我还担忧什么呢？ 
English: The great-grandfather summoned him to plan things, was very happy, and said to the attendants around him: If all the officials in the world with a salary of more than two thousand koku are like Jia Wei, what should I worry about?

古文：其后发兵，逵疑屯田都尉藏亡民。
现代文：之后就出兵，贾逵怀疑屯田都尉将流亡的百姓藏匿起来。
English: After that, troops were dispatched, and Jia Yu suspected that Captain Tonden was hiding the exiled people.

古文：都尉自以不属郡，言语不顺。
现代文：屯田都尉自认为自己不归属于弘农郡管辖，言辞间很不恭敬。
English: Captain Tonden thinks that he does not belong to the jurisdiction of Hongnong County, and his words are very disrespectful.

古文：逵怒，收之，数以罪，挝折脚，坐免。
现代文：贾逵大怒，将他收押起来，数罪并罚，将屯田都尉打断了脚，贾逵也因此事被面馆。
English: Jia Yu was furious and detained him. He was convicted of several crimes and punished. He broke the foot of Captain Tonden. Jia Yu was also arrested by the noodle restaurant for this.

古文：然太祖心善逵，以为丞相主簿。
现代文：但太祖心中对贾逵很满意，又任命他为丞相主簿。
English: However, Emperor Taizu was very pleased with Jia Jia in his heart and appointed him as the prime minister.

古文：太祖征刘备，先遣逵至斜谷观形势。
现代文：太祖征讨刘备，派贾逵先到斜谷观察那里的地形。
English: The great ancestor sent Jia Yu to the valley to observe the terrain there.

古文：道逢水衡，载囚人数十车，逵以军事急，辄竟重者一人，皆放其馀。
现代文：他在路上遇上水衡官押着几十辆载着囚犯的囚车，贾逵认为军事更紧急，最后只让水衡官将一个重罪的犯人留下，剩下的全都放走。
English: On the way, he encountered the water-weighing officer holding dozens of prison trucks carrying prisoners. Jia Wei thought that the military was more urgent. In the end, he only allowed the water-weighing officer to keep one felon prisoner, and let the rest go.

古文：太祖善之，拜谏议大夫，与夏侯尚并掌军计。
现代文：太祖认为他做得对，任命他为谏议大夫，和夏侯尚一起掌管军事事务。
English: The great-grandfather thought he was doing the right thing and appointed him as a military advisor, in charge of military affairs together with Xia Huxiang.

古文：太祖崩洛阳，逵典丧事。
现代文：太祖在洛阳去世，贾逵主持太祖的丧事。
English: The great-grandfather died in Luoyang, and Jia Wei presided over the great-grandfather's funeral.

古文：时鄢陵侯彰行越骑将军，从长安来赴，问逵先生玺绶所在。
现代文：当时鄢陵侯曹彰代理越骑将军，从长安赶来，问贾逵太祖的印玺绶带在哪里。
English: At that time, Fuling marquis Cao Chang, acting as the general of the Yue cavalry, arrived from Chang'an and asked Jia Yu where the seal ribbon of Jia Yu was.

古文：逵正色曰： 太子在邺，国有储副。
现代文：贾逵义正言辞地说： 太子现在在邺城，国家是有储君的。
English: Jia Rongyi said rhetorically: The prince is now in Handan, the country has a prince.

古文：先王玺绶，非君侯所宜问也。 遂奉梓宫还邺。
现代文：先王的印玺绶带，不是君侯您应该问到的。 于是护送太祖灵柩返回邺城。
English: Ancestor's seal ribbon is not something you should ask a prince, so he escorted the great-grandfather's coffin back to Lucheng.

古文：文帝即王位，以邺县户数万在都下，多不法，乃以逵为邺令。
现代文：文帝即位魏王，因为邺县有几万户人口都在都城，其中很多违犯律法，就让贾逵担任邺县县令。
English: Emperor Wen ascended to the throne of Wei, because there are tens of thousands of households in Jixian in the capital city, many of which violate the law, so he let Jia Wei serve as the county magistrate of Jixian.

古文：月馀，迁魏郡太守。
现代文：过了一个多月，被提升为魏郡太守。
English: After more than a month, he was promoted to the governor of Wei County.

古文：大军出征，复为丞相主簿祭酒。
现代文：朝廷大军出征，贾逵又担任丞相主簿祭酒。
English: The imperial army went to war, and Jia Jia also served as the prime minister's chief celebratory wine.

古文：逵尝坐人为罪，王曰： 叔向犹十世宥之，况逵功德亲在其身乎？ 
现代文：贾逵曾经将人牵连治罪，文帝说： 叔向那样的贤臣，应该宽恕他十代子孙的罪过，更何况贾逵的功绩都是在他自己身上的呢？ 
English: Emperor Wen said, "For such a wise minister, uncle should forgive the sins of his ten generations of descendants. What's more, all of Jia Jia's merits are his own.

古文：从至黎阳，津渡者乱行，逵斩之，乃整。
现代文：贾逵跟随文帝到黎阳，那些在渡口扰乱秩序的士兵，贾逵将他们都斩了，秩序才严整起来。
English: Jia Wei followed Emperor Wen to Liyang. Those soldiers who disrupted order at the ferry port were all beheaded by Jia Wei, and order was restored.

古文：至谯，以逵为豫州刺史。
现代文：到了谯县，文帝任命贾逵为与州刺史。
English: When he arrived in Jixian County, Emperor Wen appointed Jia Jia as the chief historian of the county.

古文：是时天下初复，州郡多不摄。
现代文：当时国家刚刚平复，各地州郡大多都没有固定的秩序。
English: At that time, the country had just been restored to peace, and there was no fixed order in most of the provinces and counties.

古文：逵曰： 州本以御史出监诸郡，以六条诏书察长吏二千石已下，故其状皆言严能鹰扬有督察之才，不言安静宽仁有恺悌之德也。
现代文：贾逵说： 州郡原本应该派御史前去监督视察各郡，用相关的六条诏书考察俸禄两千石以下的官吏，所以有关御史的奏表上都写他们很威武，有监督检查的才干，不说他们安静宽厚，有仁德，又有和乐平易的品德。
English: Jia Wei said: Originally, the prefectures should have sent magistrates to supervise and inspect the counties, and use the relevant six edicts to investigate officials with a salary of less than 2,000 koku. Therefore, the relevant magistrates' report forms all wrote that they were very powerful and had the ability to supervise and inspect, not to mention that they were quiet and generous, had benevolence, and had the character of being easy-going.

古文：今长吏慢法，盗贼公行，州知而不纠，天下复何取正乎？ 
现代文：现在各州郡长吏轻视律法，盗贼在郡中公然行动，州里知道却不加以纠正，天下又怎么取得正道呢？ 
English: Now that county magistrates despise the law, and thieves openly operate in the county, and the state knows it and does nothing to correct it, how can the world get on the right track?

古文：兵曹从事受前刺史假，逵到官数月，乃还；考竟其二千石以下阿纵不如法者，皆举奏免之。
现代文：州中有一位兵曹从事，在前人刺史准假后离开职位，贾逵到任几个月后他才回来；贾逵将俸禄二千石以下官员中那些有庇护纵容不守法行为的人都考察清楚，并将这些都上奏朝廷罢免他们。
English: In the prefecture, there was a petty officer who left his post after his predecessor was granted a leave of absence, and he did not return until a few months after Jia Yu took office; Jia Yu examined those officials with a salary of less than two thousand koku who had sheltered and condoned illegal behavior, and reported them all to the court to dismiss them.

古文：帝曰： 逵真刺史矣。 
现代文：文帝说： 贾逵真是刺史啊。 
English: Wen Di said: Jia Ye is really a prick.

古文：布告天下，当以豫州为法。
现代文：就将这件事诏告天下，让天下都以此为准则。
English: Let this matter be made known to the world, and let the world take this as a guideline.

古文：赐爵关内侯。
现代文：并给贾逵赐封爵位为关内侯。
English: He was given the title of Lord of Kwanai.

古文：州南与吴接，逵明斥候，缮甲兵，为守战之备，贼不敢犯。
现代文：豫州的南面和吴国相接，贾逵指定了明确的侦查兵，准备铠甲和兵器，作为守卫作战的准备，敌人不敢来进犯。
English: In the south of Yuzhou, which is adjacent to Wuzhou, Jia Yu designated a clear scout, prepared armor and weapons, as a preparation for guarding operations, and the enemy did not dare to attack.

古文：外修军旅，内治民事，遏鄢、汝，造新陂，又断山溜长谿水，造小弋阳陂，又通运渠二百馀里，所谓贾侯渠者也。
现代文：贾逵对外修整军队，对内整治百姓事务，阻遏鄢水和汝水，造出新的池塘，又阶段山间的溜河等长长的溪水，修造了小弋阳陂，又开通了两百多里长的运河，就是后来的贾侯渠。
English: Jia Hui reformed the army externally, and rectified the affairs of the people internally, curbed the outflow of water and water, created new ponds, and formed long streams such as mountain rivers, built small rivers, and opened a canal more than two hundred miles long, which was later the Jia Hou Canal.

古文：黄初中，与诸将并征吴，破吕范於洞浦，进封阳里亭侯，加建威将军。
现代文：黄初年间，贾逵和众位将领一起征讨吴国，在洞浦攻破吕范，贾逵被进封爵位为阳里亭侯，加封建威将军。
English: In the first year of the Yellow Emperor, Jia Wei and many generals jointly conquered Wu, and defeated Lü Fan in Dongpu. Jia Wei was given the title of Yangli Tinghou (阳里亭侯) and the title of General Jian Wei.

古文：明帝即位，增邑二百户，并前四百户。
现代文：明帝登基后，给贾逵增加两百户食邑，加上之前的一共四百户。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he added two hundred households to Jia Ye, adding to the previous total of four hundred households.

古文：时孙权在东关，当豫州南，去江四百馀里。
现代文：当时孙权在东关，正好在豫州南边，距离长江有四百多里。
English: At that time, Sun Quan was in Dongguan, just south of Yuzhou, more than four hundred miles from the Yangtze River.

古文：每出兵为寇，辄西从江夏，东从庐江。
现代文：孙权经常出兵进犯，要么从西面的江夏，要么从东面的庐江。
English: Sun Quan often sent troops to attack, either from the Jiangxia in the west or from the Li River in the east.

古文：国家征伐，亦由淮、沔。
现代文：朝廷出兵征讨，也是经由淮水、沔水。
English: When the imperial court sent soldiers to collect conscription, they also went through Huai Shui and Surabaya.

古文：是时州军在项，汝南、弋阳诸郡，守境而已。
现代文：这时候豫州的部队在项、汝南、弋阳各郡，兵力也只足够守卫边境而已。
English: At this time, the troops of Yuzhou were in Xiang, Runan, and Shenyang counties, and the troops were only enough to guard the border.

古文：权无北方之虞，东西有急，并军相救，故常少败。
现代文：孙权对北方没有顾虑，当东面或西面有紧急情况，就能合军前去救援，所以很少有失败的时候。
English: Sun Quan did not worry about the north. When there was an emergency in the east or west, he could join forces to rescue, so there was rarely a time of failure.

古文：逵以为宜开直道临江，若权自守，则二方无救；若二方无救，则东关可取。
现代文：贾逵认为应该开通一条直路直到江边，如果孙权自我防守，那东西两面就没有援兵；如果两面都没有救兵，那东关就能攻取了。
English: If Sun Quan defended himself, there would be no reinforcements on either side; if there were no reinforcements on either side, Dongguan could be taken.

古文：乃移屯潦口，陈攻取之计，帝善之。
现代文：就移军到潦口驻扎，向明帝陈述攻取的计划，明帝认为很对。
English: Emperor Ming thought it was right to move the troops to be stationed in Hekou and to present the plan of conquest to Emperor Ming.

古文：吴将张婴、王崇率众降。
现代文：吴国将领张婴、王崇率部下投降。
English: Zhang Rong and Wang Chong, the generals of the State of Wu, and their subordinates surrendered.

古文：太和二年，帝使逵督前将军满宠、东莞太守胡质等四军，从西阳直向东关，曹休从皖，司马宣王从江陵。
现代文：大和二年，明帝派贾逵督领前将军满宠、东莞太守胡质等四路人马从西阳只奔向东关，曹休从皖城，司马宣王从将领出兵。
English: In the 2nd year of the Yamato era, the Ming Emperor sent Jia Bingdu to lead the former general Manpiao, the Dongguan governor Hu Jian, and other four people and horses from Xiyang to Dongguan, Cao Xiu from Shicheng, and Sima Xuanwang from the general.

古文：逵至五将山，休更表贼有请降者，求深入应之。
现代文：贾逵到了五将山，曹休又上表说有请求投降的敌军，请求派他们深入敌军以响应贾逵。
English: When Jia Wei arrived at Wuzhong Mountain, Cao Xiu again said that there was an enemy army requesting to surrender, and requested that they be sent deep into the enemy army to respond to Jia Wei.

古文：诏宣王驻军，逵东与休合进。逵度贼无东关之备，必并军於皖；休深入与贼战，必败。
现代文：明帝诏令司马宣王安营驻扎，贾逵从东面和曹休合军前进、贾逵估计贼人在东关一定没有防备，一定会在皖城合军；曹休深入敌军地盘和贼人交战，一定会战败。
English: Emperor Mingzhao ordered Sima Xuanwang to set up camp, and Jia Xuan advanced from the east with Cao Xiu's combined army. Jia Xiu estimated that the bandits in Dongguan must be unprepared and would certainly join the army in Lucheng; Cao Xiu went deep into the enemy's territory and fought with the bandits, and would certainly be defeated.

古文：乃部署诸将，水陆并进，行二百里，得生贼，言休战败，权遣兵断夹石。
现代文：就安排了众位将领，从水路陆路一起前进，行进了二百里，抓获了一名敌军，说曹休战败，孙权派兵阻断夹石。
English: He arranged a number of generals to advance together by land and water, marched two hundred miles, captured an enemy, said that Cao Xiu was defeated, and Sun Quan sent troops to block Jiaoshi.

古文：诸将不知所出，或欲待后军。
现代文：众位将领不知道该怎么出来，有的想等待援军到来。
English: The generals didn't know how to get out. Some wanted to wait for reinforcements to arrive.

古文：逵曰： 休兵败於外，路绝於内，进不能战，退不得还，安危之机，不及终日。
现代文：贾逵说： 曹休在夹石口外战败，道路在夹石口内被阻断，前进无法作战，撤退无法返回，安全或危急的机会，不到一天就能知道了。
English: Jia Wei said: Cao Xiu was defeated outside Jiefangkou, the road was blocked inside Jiefangkou, it was impossible to advance, it was impossible to retreat, it was impossible to return, and it would take less than a day to know whether it was safe or dangerous.

古文：贼以军无后继，故至此；今疾进，出其不意，此所谓先人以夺其心也，贼见吾兵必走。
现代文：贼人认为曹休的军队没有援助，所以才这样做；现在我们趁他们没有防备的时候迅速出兵，这就是所谓的走在敌人前面争取在心理上占上风，敌军见到我军一定会退走。
English: The thieves thought that Cao Xiu's army had no support, so they did this; now we take advantage of their unpreparedness to quickly send troops, this is the so-called walking in front of the enemy to gain the upper hand psychologically, the enemy will definitely retreat when they see our army.

古文：若待后军，贼已断险，兵虽多何益！ 
现代文：如果只等来后来的救兵，贼人已经阻断了天险，再多的士兵有什么用呢！ 
English: If we only wait for the rescuers to come later, the thieves have already blocked the natural peril, what use are more soldiers!

古文：乃兼道进军，多设旗鼓为疑兵，贼见逵军，遂退。
现代文：就下令从两路进军，设置了很多旗帜战鼓作为疑兵，敌军看到贾逵的军队，就撤退了。
English: He ordered to march from two directions, set up a lot of flags and drums as suspicious soldiers, and the enemy army saw Jia Jun's army and retreated.

古文：逵据夹石，以兵粮给休，休军乃振。
现代文：贾逵占据了夹石口，将军粮送给曹休，曹休军队才振作起来。
English: Jia Wei occupied Jia Shigu, and sent general grain to Cao Xiu. Cao Xiu's army only perked up.

古文：初，逵与休不善。
现代文：当初，贾逵和曹休关系不好。
English: At first, the relationship between Jia Wei and Cao Xiu was not good.

古文：黄初中，文帝欲假逵节，休曰： 逵性刚，素侮易诸将，不可为督。 
现代文：黄初年间，文帝想要赐予贾逵符节，曹休说： 贾逵性情刚烈，向来都轻视怠慢众位将领，不能做都督。 
English: In the early years of the Yellow Emperor, when Emperor Wen wanted to bestow the Jia Kun Festival, Cao Xiu said: Jia Kun has a strong character and has always despised and neglected generals. He cannot be the governor.

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：文帝就打消了这个念头。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：及夹石之败，微逵，休军几无救也。
现代文：等到曹休在夹石战败，没有贾逵，曹休军队几乎全军覆没了。
English: By the time Cao Xiu was defeated at Jiaosi, without Jia Wei, Cao Xiu's army had almost been wiped out.

古文：会病笃，谓左右曰： 受国厚恩，恨不斩孙权以下见先帝。
现代文：适逢贾逵病重，他对左右侍从说： 我承受国家深厚的恩典，很遗憾没有能将孙权斩杀到九泉之下面见先帝。
English: When Jia Jia fell seriously ill, he said to his attendants: "I have received the profound grace of the country. I am very sorry that I was not able to kill Sun Quan and meet the former emperor face to face.

古文：丧事一不得有所脩作。 
现代文：我死之后，丧事不要大肆操办。 
English: When I die, don't make a big deal out of it.

古文：薨，谥曰肃侯。
现代文：他去世后，谥号为肃侯。
English: After Xin Pi's death, his posthumous name was Suhang.

古文：子充嗣。
现代文：他的儿子贾充继承爵位。
English: His son, Xia Houcheng, succeeded to his title.

古文：豫州吏民追思之，为刻石立祠。
现代文：豫州的官吏百姓都追念他，为他立碑并修建祠堂。
English: The officials and people of Yuzhou all remembered him, erected a monument for him and built an ancestral hall.

古文：青龙中，帝东征，乘辇入逵祠，诏曰： 昨过项，见贾逵碑像，念之怆然。
现代文：青龙年间，明帝东征，乘坐辇车进入贾逵的祠堂，下诏说： 我昨天路经项城，看到贾逵的墓碑石像，一想到他就非常悲痛。
English: During the Qinglong Dynasty, Emperor Ming's Eastern Expedition, he rode a stagecoach into Jia Jia's ancestral hall and said: I passed through Xiangcheng yesterday and saw Jia Jia's tombstone stone statue. I was very sad when I thought of him.

古文：古人有言，患名之不立，不患年之不长。
现代文：古人曾说，担心名声不能树立，不担心寿命不长。
English: The ancients once said, worry about reputation can not be established, do not worry about life is not long.

古文：逵存有忠勋，没而见思，可谓死而不朽者矣。
现代文：贾逵留存下忠于朝廷的功勋，他死之后人们还追念他，这就是死亡但永不磨灭啊。
English: Jia Jia remained loyal to the imperial court, and people still remember him after his death. This is death, but it will never be erased.

古文：其布告天下，以劝将来。 
现代文：现在将他的事迹诏告天下，以劝勉将来的人。 
English: Now he is telling his story to the world in order to encourage others in the future.

古文：充，咸熙中为中护军。
现代文：贾充，在咸熙年间担任中护军。
English: Jia Chong, who served as a middle-ranking bodyguard during the reign of Emperor Han.

古文：评曰：自汉季以来，刺史总统诸郡，赋政于外，非若曩时司察之而已。
现代文：评曰：自从汉朝建立以来，刺史们统辖着自己治下的郡县，税收政令都处于自治状态，不是像以往那样仅仅管理监督行政而已。
English: The commentary said: Since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, the princes have been in charge of the counties under their own rule, and the tax decrees are in an autonomous state, not just management and supervision of administration as in the past.

古文：太祖创基，迄终魏业，此皆其流称誉有名实者也。
现代文：太祖创下基业，最后成就了魏国的霸业。这些都是有声誉，有实际作为的人。
English: The great-grandfather created the foundation, and finally achieved the hegemony of Wei. These are people with reputation and practical actions.

古文：咸精达事机，威恩兼著，故能肃齐万里，见述于后也。
现代文：都能够精晓势力，恩威并施，所以能整肃地方政事，在后世扬名立万。
English: All of them are able to understand the power and be benevolent, so they can rectify local politics and become famous in the future.

