古文：陈遇，字中行，先世曹人。
现代文：陈遇，字中行，祖先为曹人。
English: Chen met, the characters in the row, the ancestors of Cao Ren.

古文：高祖义甫，宋翰林学士，徙居建康，子孙因家焉。
现代文：高祖义甫，是宋朝翰林学士，迁移到建康，此后子孙一直居住在这里。
English: Gao Zu Yifu, a Song Dynasty scholar of Hanlin, moved to Jiankang, and his descendants have been living here ever since.

古文：遇天资沉粹，笃学博览，精象数之学。
现代文：陈遇天资过人，笃学博览，精通象数之学。
English: Chen is gifted, well-educated, and well-versed in the study of elephant numbers.

古文：元末为温州教授，已而弃官归隐。学者称为静诚先生。
现代文：元末为温州教授，不久辞官归隐，学者们称之为静诚先生。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, he was a professor in Wenzhou, but soon resigned and went into seclusion. Scholars call him Jingcheng.

古文：太祖渡江，以秦从龙荐，发书聘之，引伊、吕、诸葛为喻。
现代文：太祖渡江，得到秦从龙的推荐，发聘书聘请陈遇，引用伊、吕、诸葛为比喻。
English: The great-grandfather, Wujiang, was recommended by Qin Conglong, issued a letter of appointment to hire Chen Rong, and quoted I, Lv, and Zhuge as metaphors.

古文：遇至，与语，大悦，遂留参密议，日见亲信。
现代文：陈遇到来，和太祖交谈，太祖十分高兴，于是留他参与密谋，逐渐成为亲信。
English: Chen met and talked with the great-grandfather. The great-grandfather was very happy, so he left him to participate in the conspiracy and gradually became a close friend.

古文：太祖为吴王，授供奉司丞，辞。
现代文：太祖担任吴王，授予他供奉司丞，他推辞了。
English: The great-grandfather served as the king of Wu and awarded him the title of "offering secretary," but he declined.

古文：即皇帝位，三授翰林学士，皆辞。
现代文：太祖即皇位，三次授予翰林学士，都予以辞退。
English: His great-grandfather, the emperor, refused to grant him the Hanlin Baccalaureate three times.

古文：乃赐肩舆一乘，卫士十人护出入，以示荣宠。
现代文：于是赐给肩舆一乘，卫士十人保护他出入，以显示荣华恩宠。
English: As a result, he gave Shoulder Meow a ride, and ten guards protected his entry and exit to show Ronghua's grace.

古文：洪武三年，奉命至浙江廉察民隐，还赐金帛。
现代文：洪武三年，奉命到浙江廉察民情，回来后赐给金银玉帛。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, he was ordered to go to Zhejiang to investigate the people's conditions, and after returning, he was given gold, silver and jade.

古文：除中书左丞，又辞。
现代文：任命为中书左丞，又辞职不就。
English: Appointed as Chushizojo, but resigned again.

古文：明年召对华盖殿，赐坐，命草《平西诏》。
现代文：第二年召对华盖殿，赐坐，命令草拟《平西诏》。
English: The following year, he summoned Hua Gai and ordered him to draft the "Pingxi Zhao."

古文：授礼部侍郎，兼弘文馆大学士，复辞。
现代文：授予礼部侍郎，兼弘文馆大学士，又辞去。
English: He was awarded the title of Reibu Jiro (waiter of the Ceremonial Division) and Kobunkan Daigaku Shihaku (graduate of the Kobunkan University) and then resigned.

古文：西域进良马，遇引汉故事以谏。
现代文：西域进贡良马，陈遇引用西汉的典故进谏。
English: Western regions pay tribute to good horses, and Chen Yu quotes the allusions of Western Han Dynasty to enter the Han Dynasty.

古文：除太常少卿，固辞。
现代文：任命为太常少卿，坚决推辞。
English: He was appointed to the position of Tai Chang Shaoqing, but he resolutely declined.

古文：强之，不可。
现代文：强迫他，也不同意。
English: If you force him, he won't agree.

古文：最后除礼部尚书，又固辞。
现代文：最后任命为礼部尚书，又坚决推辞。
English: In the end, he was appointed to the Ministry of Ceremonies, but he firmly declined.

古文：帝沉吟良久，从之。
现代文：太祖沉思很久，顺从了他。
English: The great-grandfather thought for a long time and obeyed him.

古文：自是不复强以官。
现代文：从此不再强迫他做官。
English: From then on, he was no longer forced to work as an official.

古文：帝尝从容言欲官其子，遇曰： 臣三子皆幼，学未成，请俟异日。 
现代文：太祖曾从容地说要让他儿子做官，陈遇说： 我三个儿子都还小，学业未成，等以后再说吧。 
English: The great-grandfather had calmly said that he wanted his son to become an official, Chen Yu said: My three sons are still young and have not completed their studies, let's talk about it later.

古文：帝亦弗强也。
现代文：太祖也没再强求。
English: The great-grandfather did not insist any more.

古文：遇自开基之始，即侍帷幄。
现代文：陈遇自开国之始，就一直侍候在太祖身边。
English: Chen Yu has been serving at the side of the great ancestor since the founding of the country.

古文：帝尝问保国安民至计，遇对： 以不嗜杀人，薄敛，任贤，复先王礼乐为首务。 
现代文：太祖曾问他保国安民的良策，陈遇回答说 ：不嗜杀人，减轻赋税，任用贤良，把恢复先王礼乐作为首要任务。 
English: The great-grandfather once asked him about the best way to protect the country and the people, and Chen Rong replied: not to kill, to reduce taxes, to appoint good people, and to restore the royal music as the primary task.

古文：廷臣或有过被谴责，遇力为解，多得全释。
现代文：有的廷臣因过错而遭到谴责，陈遇力争解围，使得多半人都得到谅解。
English: Some courtiers were reprimanded for their mistakes, and Chen Yu struggled to break the siege, so that most people were forgiven.

古文：其计画多秘不传，而宠礼之隆，勋戚大臣无与比者。
现代文：他计谋多，但秘而不传，极力崇礼，勋戚大臣无人可以和他相比。
English: He had many stratagems, but he kept them secret and did his best to be revered. No Minister of the Order could compare with him.

古文：时方督军至镇江，亲临哭之，厚恤其家，命有司营葬。叶兑，字良仲，宁海人。
现代文：太祖多次亲临他的住处，言必称先生，有时称之为君子。任命官职就推辞，显示出了他的高尚。十七年去世，赐葬钟山。叶兑，字良仲，宁海人。
English: The great-grandfather visited his residence many times in person, calling him "sir" and sometimes "gentleman." He showed his nobility by refusing to be appointed to an official post. He died in 17 and was buried in Zhongshan. Ye Dui, Zhe Liang Zhong, Ninghai people.

古文：以经济自负，尤精天文、地理、卜筮之书。
现代文：颇以经时济世之才自负，精通天文、地理、卜筮方面的书籍。
English: He is quite proud of his ability to adapt to the times, and is well-versed in books on astronomy, geography, and divination.

古文：元末，知天运有归，以布衣献书太祖。列一纲三目，言天下大计。
现代文：元朝末年，他预知国运将另有所归，就以布衣身份献书给太祖，列一纲三目，诉说天下大计。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, he foresaw that the national movement would have a different result, so he presented a book to the great ancestor as a cloth, ranked third, and told the world's grand plan.

古文：时太祖已定宁越，规取张士诚、方国珍。而察罕兵势甚盛，遣使至金陵招太祖，故兑书于三者筹之为详。
现代文：当时，太祖已平定宁越，规划攻打张士诚、方国珍，然而察罕的势力还很强盛，派使者至金陵召降太祖，叶兑在书中把此三者之间的关系已处理策划得十分详尽。
English: At that time, Taizu had already pacified Ningyue and planned to attack Zhang Shicheng and Fang Guozhen. However, Chahan's power was still strong, and he sent an envoy to Jinling to summon Taizu. Ye Dui has dealt with the relationship between these three in detail in his book.

古文：其略曰：
现代文：其意思如下：
English: The article said in summary:

古文：愚闻：取天下者，必有一定之规模。韩信初见高祖，画楚、汉成败；孔明卧草庐，与先主论三分形势者是也。
现代文：我听说取天下者，必有一定之规模，韩信初见高祖，就筹划着楚、汉的成败，孔明卧草庐，就与先主讨论三分天下的形势。
English: I heard that whoever takes over the world must have a certain scale. When Han Xin first saw Gao Zu, he planned the success or failure of Chu and Han. When Kong Ming was lying in the grass, he discussed the situation of the three parts of the world with his predecessor.

古文：今之规模，宜北绝李察罕，南并张九四。抚温、台，取闽、越，定都建康，拓地江、广。进则越两淮以北征，退则画长江而自守。
现代文：现在的形势，应该北面断绝李察罕，南面吞并张九四，抚慰温、台，占领闽、越，定都建康，在江、广发展势力，进则可以越过两淮北征，退则可以划长江而自守。
English: In the current situation, it is necessary to cut off Lichahan in the north, annex Zhangjiakou in the south, pacify Wen and Taiwan, occupy Yunnan and Yue, establish stability in the two capitals, and develop forces in the Yangtze River and Guangxi. In the case of advancing, it is possible to cross the two Huai and Hebei rivers, and in the case of retreating, it is possible to cross the Yangtze River and defend oneself.

古文：夫金陵，古称龙蟠虎踞帝王之都。藉其兵力资财，以攻则克，以守则固，百察罕能如吾何哉？
现代文：金陵自古就有龙蟠虎踞之称，是帝王之都，集中兵力资财，攻则能克，守则能固，一百个察罕又能把我怎么样呢。
English: Since ancient times, Jinling has been known as the dragon's lair and tiger's den. It is the capital of the emperor, concentrating troops and resources. The attack can be defeated, the code can be strengthened, and what can a hundred checks do to me?

古文：江之所备，莫急上流。
现代文：长江的防备，不要急于上游。
English: Yangtze River preparedness, do not rush upstream.

古文：今义师已克江州，足蔽全吴。况自滁、和至广陵，皆吾所有。非直守江，兼可守淮矣。
现代文：现义师已攻克江州，足以遮盖全吴，何况从滁州、和州至广陵，都被我方占领，不但可以守卫长江，而且可以兼守淮河。
English: Now the Yishui Division has conquered Jiangzhou, which is enough to cover the whole of Wu, not to mention that from Zhangzhou, Hezhou to Guangling, all of which are occupied by our side, we can not only guard the Yangtze River, but also guard the Huai River.

古文：张氏倾覆可坐而待，淮东诸郡亦将来归。
现代文：张氏的覆灭指日可待，淮东诸郡也将前来归附。
English: The downfall of the Zhang clan is just around the corner, and the counties in eastern Huai will also come to annex themselves.

古文：北略中原，李氏可并也。
现代文：北略中原，可以吞并李氏。
English: Northern Xia and Central Plains can be annexed by the Li clan.

古文：今闻察罕妄自尊大，致书明公，如曹操之招孙权。
现代文：现听说察罕妄自尊大，写信给您，就像曹操召见孙权一样。
English: Now I have heard that Cahan is arrogant and wrote to you, just as Cao Cao summoned Sun Quan.

古文：窃以元运将终，人心不属，而察罕欲效操所为，事势不侔。
现代文：我认为元朝的天运将终止，人心不向，而察罕想效法曹操，形势却是一样的了。
English: I think that the good fortune of the Yuan Dynasty will come to an end, and people's hearts will not be inclined to follow Cao Cao, but the situation will be the same.

古文：宜如鲁肃计，鼎足江东，以观天下之衅，此其大纲也。
现代文：宜用鲁肃的计策，鼎足江东，待等机遇，这就是大纲。
English: It is advisable to use the strategy of Luzhu, stand on the east bank of the Yangtze River, and wait for opportunities. This is the outline.

古文：至其目有三。
现代文：目标有三个。
English: There are three objectives.

古文：张九四之地，南包杭、绍，北跨通、泰，而以平江为巢穴。
现代文：张九四的地盘，南面包括杭、绍，北跨通、泰，以平江为巢穴。
English: Zhangjiutai's territory includes Hang, Shao in the south, Qiaotong and Tai in the north, with Pingjiang as its lair.

古文：若一军攻平江，断其粮道；一军攻杭州，绝其援兵，绍兴必拔。所攻在苏、杭，所取在绍兴，所谓多方以误之者也。
现代文：现想攻打他，不如佯称攻取杭、绍、湖、秀，而派大兵直捣平江。城坚固难以一下子攻占，则以锁城法困之。张氏的重镇在绍兴，绍兴远离江海，所以多次进攻而攻不下，它的运粮道路在三斗门。如派一支部队攻打平江，断绝它的粮道，一支部队攻打杭州，断绝它的援兵，这样绍兴就一定能攻下，进攻苏杭的目的，是在于占领绍兴，这就是所说的多方交战必定失误。
English: If you want to attack him now, it is better to pretend to attack Hang, Shao, Hu, and Xiu, and send soldiers to attack Pingjiang. The city is solid and difficult to capture at once, so it is difficult to lock the city. Zhang's stronghold is in Shaoxing. Shaoxing is far away from the river sea, so it cannot be attacked many times. Its grain transportation road is in Sandoumen. If you send a force to attack Pingjiang and cut off its food supply, and a force to attack Hangzhou and cut off its reinforcements, then Shaoxing will definitely be able to be attacked. The purpose of attacking Suhang is to occupy Shaoxing.

古文：绍兴既拔，杭城势孤，湖、秀风靡，然后进攻平江，犁其心腹，江北余孽随而瓦解。此次计也。
现代文：绍兴被攻下后，杭州就会孤立，湖、秀也会闻风而败，然后进攻平江，铲除敌人的要害，江北的余部就会随之瓦解，这是第二个计策。
English: After the capture of Shaoxing, Hangzhou will be isolated, and Hubei and Xiu will also be defeated by the wind, and then attack the Pingjiang River, eliminate the enemy's key, and the rest of the northern part of the river will collapse. This is the second strategy.

古文：方国珍狼子野心，不可驯狎。
现代文：方国珍狼子野心，不可驯狎。
English: Fang Guo rare wolf cub ambition, can not be tamed.

古文：往年大兵取婺州，彼即奉书纳款。
现代文：往年大兵攻占婺州，他即奉书纳款。
English: In previous years, when the soldiers conquered Zhangzhou, he was the one to accept the money.

古文：后遣夏煜、陈显道招谕，彼复狐疑不从。
现代文：后派夏煜、陈显道招谕，他又狐疑不归从。
English: Later, he sent summons to Xia Yao and Chen Xiandao, but he hesitated to obey.

古文：顾遣使从海道报元，谓江东委之纳款，诱令张昶赍诏而来。且遣韩叔义为说客，欲说明公奉诏。
现代文：派使者从海道报告元，说江东命他纳款，诱使张日永带着诏令而来，又派韩叔义为说客，说明自己是奉行诏令。
English: He sent an envoy from the source of the report on the sea route, saying that Jiangdong ordered him to collect the money, induced Zhang Rongyong to come with the edict, and sent Han Shiyi as a lobbyist to explain that he was following the edict.

古文：彼既降我，而反欲招我降元。其反覆狡狯如是，宜兴师问罪。
现代文：他既已降归了我，而又招我降元，他就是如此反复无常，十分狡诈，应当兴师问罪。
English: Since he has been demoted to me, and at the same time invited me to demote him, he is so capricious and cunning that he should be punished.

古文：然彼以水为命，一闻兵至，挈家航海，中原步骑无如之何。
现代文：然而他以水为命，一听说部队到来，就带领全家航行到海上去了，中原步骑奈何不了他。
English: However, he lived for the water. As soon as he heard that the troops had arrived, he led his whole family to sail out to sea. Why couldn't Nakahara ride with him?

古文：夫上兵攻心，彼言杭、赵一平，即当纳土，不过欲款我师耳。
现代文：攻战的上策是攻心，他说只要杭、越一平定，他即归顺，这不过是迷惑我军罢了。
English: The best strategy for the offensive is to attack the heart. He said that as long as Hang, the more peaceful, he will surrender. This is just to confuse our army.

古文：攻之之术，宜限以日期，责其归顺。
现代文：攻打他的战术，限定他归顺的日期。
English: Attack his tactics, and set a date for his surrender.

古文：彼自方国璋之没，自知兵不可用。又叔义还称义师之盛，气已先挫。
现代文：他自从方国璋覆灭后，就知道自己的势力不行了，就连叔义也称说我军势力强盛，可见元气大伤了。
English: Ever since Fang Guozhen was overthrown and destroyed, he knew that his own strength was no longer enough. Even his uncle Yi said that our army's strength was strong, which shows that his vitality was greatly injured.

古文：今因陈显道以自通，正可胁之而从也。
现代文：现因陈显道以自通，正可威胁他而使其顺从。
English: Now, because Chen Xindu is self-taught, it is possible to threaten him and make him obey.

古文：事宜速不宜缓。
现代文：此事宜快不宜慢。
English: This is a matter of urgency.

古文：宣谕之后，更置官吏，拘集舟舰，潜收其兵权，以消未然之变。三郡可不劳而定。
现代文：宣谕之后，更置官吏，拘集舟舰，剥夺他的兵权，以防止不测，三郡可不劳而定。
English: After the proclamation, the officials were replaced, the boats were detained, and he was deprived of his military power to prevent accidents. The three counties could be determined without difficulty.

古文：福建本浙江一道，兵脃城陋。
现代文：福建原和浙江同属一道，兵弱城市简陋。
English: Fujian and Zhejiang belong to the same country, and the cities with weak armies are simple.

古文：两浙既平，必图归附。下之一辩士力耳。
现代文：两浙平定后，他一定归附，攻下它只要一个辩士的力量。
English: After the two Zhejiang provinces are pacified, he will definitely attach, and it only takes the power of a debater to capture it.

古文：如复稽迟，则大兵自温、处入，奇兵自海道入，福州必不支。福州下，旁郡迎刃解矣。
现代文：如果收复拖延太久，则大兵自温、处州进入，奇兵从海道攻打，福州必定难以支撑，福州被攻下，附近的郡就迎刃而解。
English: If the recovery is delayed for too long, then the soldiers from Wenzhou and Wanzhou will enter, the strange soldiers will attack from the highway, Fuzhou will be difficult to support, Fuzhou will be captured, and the nearby counties will be solved.

古文：威声已震，然后进取两广，犹反掌也。
现代文：声望威震，然后进取两广，易如反掌。
English: The reputation is formidable, and then it's as easy as pie to enter the market.

古文：太祖奇其言，欲留用之，力辞去。
现代文：太祖对他的话十分惊奇，准备留用他，他力辞而去。
English: The great-grandfather was very surprised by his words and was prepared to keep him on, but he left.

古文：赐银币袭衣。
现代文：赐给金银币袭衣。
English: Give the gold and silver coins a coat of arms.

古文：后数岁，削平天下，规模次第，略如兑言。
现代文：几年以后，平定天下，规模次第基本上和叶兑说的一样。
English: A few years later, the world was pacified, and the scale was basically the same as Ye Dui said.

古文：范常，字子权，滁人。
现代文：范常，字子权，滁州人。
English: Fan Chang, Zhizi Quan, Zhangzhou people.

古文：太祖军滁，杖策谒军门。
现代文：太祖驻军滁州，杖策谒见军门。
English: The great-great-grandfather was stationed in Bozhou, and Jie Zhe saw the military gate.

古文：太祖夙知其名，与语意合，留置幕下。有疑辄问，常悉以实对。
现代文：太祖早就知道他的大名，和他说话，又情投意合，于是把他留在幕下，有疑问就询问他，范常如实回答。
English: The great-grandfather had known his daimyo's name for a long time. He spoke with him and they hit it off, so he kept him behind the curtain. If he had any questions, he asked him, and he always answered truthfully.

古文：诸将克和州，兵不戢。
现代文：诸将攻克和州，士兵四出抢掠。
English: The generals will conquer the province, and the soldiers will go out to plunder.

古文：常言于太祖曰： 得一城而使人肝脑涂地，何以成大事？ 
现代文：范常对太祖说 ：得到一座城就使百姓肝脑涂地，这样又怎么能成就大事呢？ 
English: Fan Chang said to his great-grandfather, "If you get a city, you will make the people's minds go blank, so how can you achieve great things?"

古文：太祖乃切责诸将。搜军中所掠妇女，还其家，民大悦。
现代文：太祖于是责骂了诸将，搜查军中所掠夺的妇女，把她们送回家，百姓十分高兴。
English: The great-grandfather then scolded the generals, searched the plundered women in the army, and sent them home. The people were very happy.

古文：太祖以四方割据，战争无虚日，命常为文，祷于上帝。
现代文：太祖因四方割据，战争无安宁之日，命令范常撰文，祷告上天。
English: On the day when there was no peace in the war because the four sides were divided, the great-grandfather ordered Fan Chang to write an article and pray to heaven.

古文：其辞曰： 今天下纷纭，生民涂炭，不有所属，物类尽矣。
现代文：其辞曰： 今天下纷争，生民涂炭，没有归属，物类灭绝。
English: In his speech he said: Today, there is strife, people are angry, there is no belonging, and species are extinct.

古文：倘元祚未终，则群雄当早伏其辜。某亦在群雄中，请自某始。
现代文：如果元朝的国运还没终结，则群雄就应当早日归附它的统治，我也属群雄的范围，请求从我开始。
English: If the national movement of the Yuan Dynasty has not yet ended, then the Qunxiong should return to its rule as soon as possible. I also belong to the scope of the Qunxiong, please start with me.

古文：若已厌元德，有天命者宜归之，无使斯民久阽危苦。
现代文：若上天已厌倦元朝，有天命者应归从，不要使百姓长久陷入困苦中。
English: If Heaven is tired of the Yuan Dynasty, those who have the Mandate of Heaven should submit to it, and should not make the people fall into hardship for a long time.

古文：存亡之机，验于三月。 
现代文：存亡之机，在三月灵验。 
English: The chance to survive came in March.

古文：太祖嘉其能达己意，命典文牍，授元帅府都事。
现代文：太祖赞赏他能表达自己的心意，命他掌管文牍，授予元帅府都事。
English: The great-grandfather appreciated that he was able to express his thoughts and ordered him to take charge of Wenshu, awarding him the marshal's post.

古文：取太平，命为知府，谕之曰： 太平，吾股肱郡，其民数困于兵，当令得所。 
现代文：占领太平，任命他为知府，叮嘱他说 ：太平是我股肱之郡，百姓历来困于兵乱，应当使他们有所得。 
English: He occupied Taiping, appointed him as the prefect, and admonished him: Taiping is my county, and the people have always been trapped in military turmoil, so they should have something to gain.

古文：常以简易为治，兴学恤民。
现代文：范常以简易为治，兴修学校，体恤百姓。
English: The norm is to take simplicity as the rule, build schools, and sympathize with the people.

古文：官廪有谷数千石，请给民乏种者，秋稔输官，公私皆足。
现代文：官仓积累谷子数千石，请求发放给百姓种植，秋收后还回，公私都富足。
English: The official storehouses accumulated thousands of koku of millet, requested to be distributed to the people for planting, and returned after the autumn harvest. Both the public and private sectors were rich.

古文：居三年，民亲爱之，召入为侍仪。
现代文：居留三年，得百姓喜爱，召入为侍仪。
English: He stayed there for three years, won the people's affection, and was called in as an attendant.

古文：洪武元年，擢翰林直学士兼太常卿。
现代文：洪武元年，提升为翰林直学士兼太常卿。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he was promoted to Hanlin Zhi Bao and Tai Changqing.

古文：帝锐意稽古礼文。
现代文：太祖锐意考证古代礼仪制度。
English: Grandfather Rui wanted to study the ancient etiquette system.

古文：群臣集议，间有异同。常能参合众言，委曲当上意。
现代文：群臣集议，有时有异议，范常能参合众言，从中得出最好的解释。
English: The courtiers gathered for discussion, and sometimes there were objections. Fan could always take part in the discussion and draw the best explanation from it.

古文：寻以病免归。
现代文：不久，因病回家。
English: Soon after, he was sent home due to illness.

古文：岁余，手诏征诣阙，仍故官。
现代文：一年多后，太祖手诏征他入朝，仍任原职。
English: More than a year later, the great-great-grandfather summoned him to the imperial court, and he remained in his original post.

古文：帝宴闲，辄命儒臣列坐，赋诗为乐。
现代文：太祖在宴会间，命儒臣作诗赋为乐。
English: In the banquet room, the great-grandfather ordered Confucius to write poems for fun.

古文：常每先成，语多率。
现代文：范常常常最先作成，语言简练。
English: The form is often the first to be created, and the language is concise.

古文：帝笑曰： 老范诗质朴，殊似其为人也。 
现代文：太祖笑着说： 老范的诗很质朴，就像他的为人一样。 
English: The great-grandfather smiled and said, "Lao Fan's poetry is very simple, just like his personality.

古文：迁起居注。
现代文：晋升为起居注。
English: Promoted to a living note.

古文：黼谨饬类父，而文采清雅过之。
现代文：范常的脚有毛病，多次要求回家乡，赐给安车。
English: Fan Chang has a problem with her feet. She has repeatedly asked to go back to her hometown and be given a safe car.

古文：父子皆以乡校显，时以为荣。
现代文：不久请求还乡，太祖赋诗四章送给他，赐官邸于太平。
English: He soon asked to return to his hometown, and the great-grandfather sent him four chapters of poems and gave him an official residence in Taiping.

古文：宋思颜，不知何许人。
现代文：儿子范祖，历任云南左参政，有修洁之称。宋思颜，不知是何许人。
English: His son, Fan Zu, has been a left-wing politician in Yunnan, and is known for his modesty. Song Siyan, I don't know who he is.

古文：太祖克太平，以思颜居幕府。
现代文：太祖攻克太平，任命思颜为幕府。
English: Taizu conquered Taiping and appointed Siyan as shogun.

古文：及定集庆，置江南行中书省，太祖总省事，以李善长及思颜为参议。
现代文：平定集庆，设置江南行中书省，太祖总领省事，任命李善长和思颜为参议。
English: He put down the mass celebration, set up the south of the Yangtze River as the province of calligraphy, the great-grandfather as the head of the provincial affairs, and appointed Li Shanchang and Siyan as councillors.

古文：同时所设省中官李梦庚、郭景祥、侯元善、杨元杲、陶安、阮弘道、孔克仁、王恺、栾凤、夏煜等数十人。而思颜独与善长并授参议，其任较诸人为重。
现代文：同时任用的省中官还有李梦庚、郭景祥、侯元善、杨元杲、陶安、阮弘道、孔克仁、王恺、栾凤、夏煜等数十人，而唯独思颜和善长一同被任命为参议，他们的官职比其他人更为重要。
English: At the same time, Li Meng Geng, Guo Jingxiang, Hou Yuan Shan, Yang Yuan Rong, Tao An, Nguyen Hong Dao, Kong Ke Ren, Wang Hui, Yao Feng, Xia Yao and dozens of others were also appointed as provincial vice-governors. However, only Si Yan and Shan Chang were appointed as councillors, and their official positions were more important than others.

古文：已，建大都督府，以思颜兼参军事。
现代文：不久，设立大都督府，任命思颜兼任参军事。
English: Soon after, a grand governor's office was established, and Siyan was appointed to serve concurrently in the military.

古文：太祖尝视事东阁，天暑，汗沾衣。
现代文：太祖曾视察东阁，天酷热，汗水沾衣。
English: The great-grandfather once inspected the East Pavilion. It was very hot and his clothes were soaked in sweat.

古文：左右更以衣进，皆数经浣濯者。
现代文：左右更以衣进，皆数经浣濯者。
English: On the right and left, more clothes were brought in, and all of them had been washed.

古文：思颜曰： 主公躬行节俭，真可示法子孙，惟愿终始如一。 
现代文：思颜说 ：主公躬行节俭，真可以示法子孙，唯愿能始终如一。 
English: Siyan said, "My husband's frugality is a great example for our children and grandchildren. I only wish it could be consistent."

古文：太祖嘉其直，赐之币。
现代文：太祖夸奖他正直，赐给钱物。
English: The great-grandfather praised him for his honesty and gave him money.

古文：他日又进曰： 句容虎为害，既捕获，宜除之，今豢养民间何益？ 
现代文：他日又进言： 句容老虎为害，既然捕捉了，就应该铲除，现豢养在民间又有什么好处？ 
English: The other day, he added: "Tigers are harmful. Since they have been caught, they should be eradicated. What is the benefit of keeping them in the wild?

古文：太祖欣然，即命杀虎。
现代文：太祖欣然接受，命令杀虎。
English: The great-grandfather gladly accepted and gave the order to kill the tiger.

古文：洪武元年使总制浙东诸府，与高见贤、杨宪、凌说四人以伺察搏击为事，后俱以不良死。郭景祥，濠人。与凤阳李梦庚皆从渡江，典文书，佐谋议，分任行中书省左右司郎中。既同调浙东分省，寻复同入为大都督府参军。
现代文：他的随事进言也如此。后出任河南道按察佥事，犯罪被杀。郭景祥，濠州人。与凤阳李梦庚皆从太祖渡江，主管文书，辅佐谋议，分别担任行中书省左右司郎中。一同被调往浙东分省，不久，又同时被调入，担任大都督府参军。
English: Guo Jingxiang, a native of Ganzhou, and Fengyang Li Mengge, both from Taizu Wujiang, were in charge of paperwork, assistant counselors, and served as the left and right secretary respectively. They were transferred to the East Zhejiang Branch together, and soon, they were transferred at the same time to join the army as the grand governor.

古文：景祥性谅直，博涉书史，遇事敢言，太祖亲信之。
现代文：景祥性格刚直，广泛涉猎史书，遇事敢说，太祖十分信任他。
English: Jingxiang had an upright personality, read widely in history books, and dared to speak out in times of trouble. Grandfather trusted him very much.

古文：尝曰： 景祥文吏，而有折冲御侮才，能尽忠于我，可大任也。 
现代文：曾经说 ：景祥是文吏，而有折卫御侮之才，能对我尽忠，可以委以大任。 
English: He once said: "Jingxiang is a clerk, but he has the ability to be loyal to me and can be entrusted with important duties.

古文：先是，克滁州、太平、溧阳。以城郭不完，辄命景祥董治之。
现代文：最初，攻克滁州、太平、溧阳，因城郭不完整，就命令景祥加以修治。
English: At first, after conquering Bozhou, Taiping and Fenyang, he ordered Jingxiang to repair the castle because it was incomplete.

古文：既而和州守臣言，州城久废，命景祥相度，即故址城之，九旬而工毕。
现代文：接着和州守臣说州城久已废弃，命令景祥去测量，就在旧址上修城，九十天完工。
English: Next, he told the governor that the castle had been abandoned for a long time, ordered Jing Xiang to measure it, and rebuilt the castle on the old site, which was completed in ninety days.

古文：太祖以为能，授和州总制。
现代文：太祖认为他能干，授予和州总制。
English: The great-grandfather thought he could do it, awarding and state-wide system.

古文：景祥益治城隍楼橹，广屯田，练士卒，威望肃然。
现代文：景祥对城隍楼橹加以整治，广泛屯田，操练士兵，威望很高。
English: Jingxiang rectified the castle tower, extensively cultivated fields, and drilled soldiers. His prestige was very high.

古文：和遂为重镇。玺书褒劳。
现代文：和州于是成为重镇，太祖写信予以褒奖。
English: As a result, Hezhou became an important town, and Taizu wrote a letter to praise it.

古文：仕终浙江行省参政。
现代文：最后担任浙江行省参政。
English: Finally, he served as a member of the Zhejiang Provincial Party Committee.

古文：谢再兴之守诸全也，部将私贩易吴境。
现代文：谢再兴镇守诸全，部下私自贩运货物至吴境。
English: Xie Zaixing guarded Zhuquan, and his subordinates smuggled goods to Wuzhen.

古文：捕倭浙东，斩获多，擢都督佥事，见亲任，尝掌锦衣卫事，典诏狱。
现代文：太祖大怒，杀了他的部将，召谕再兴，命梦庚前往诸全总制军事。
English: The great-grandfather flew into a rage, killed his subordinate, ordered him to be reinstated, and ordered Meng Geng to go to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：后坐胡惟庸党死。杨元杲、阮弘道，皆滁人，家世皆儒者。
现代文：再兴交出镇守之权，对梦庚权力高于自己十分愤慨，于是叛敌，并抓住梦庚一并降吴，梦庚被杀死。当时，参佐行省者，还有毛骐、王濂。杨元杲、阮弘道，都是滁州人，世代都是文人。
English: Zaixing handed over the power of the town guard, and was very indignant that Meng Geng's power was higher than his own, so he rebelled against the enemy, and seized Meng Geng and sent him to Wu, and Meng Geng was killed. At that time, those who went to Sansa Province, as well as Mao Jun, Wang Jun, Yang Yuanjun, and Ruan Hongdao, were all from Ganzhou, and all generations were literati.

古文：从渡江，同为行省左右司员外郎，与陶安等更番掌行机宜文字。
现代文：跟随太祖渡江，同时担任行省左右司员外郎，与陶安等人更番掌行机宜文字。
English: He followed the great ancestor, Wujiang, and at the same time served as the provincial secretary of the left and right, and he and Tao An and others were in charge of writing.

古文：元杲以郎中擢理军储于金华，而弘道亦于是岁以郎中从大都督文正守南昌，皆有功。
现代文：元杲任郎中在金华擢理军储，弘道也在同年任郎中跟从大都督文正镇守南昌，都立功。
English: In Jinhua, Geng Yao was appointed vice-governor to be in charge of the military reserve, and in the same year, Hong Dao was also appointed vice-governor to be in charge of the defense of Nanchang from the grand-duke Wen Zheng, both of which were highly meritorious.

古文：二年改御史台侍御史。
现代文：二人和太祖有故交，又爱好文学，练达政体，而元杲考虑问题更为周密。
English: The two had a long-standing friendship with Taizu, loved literature, and practiced the political system, while Yuan Xuan considered the issue more carefully.

古文：九年，拜晋王左相，亲御便殿谕遣之。
现代文：太祖曾经说 ：文臣从渡江，掌簿书文字，勤劳十余年，还没有超过杨元杲、阮弘道、李梦庚、侯元善、樊景昭的。 
English: The great-grandfather once said: "From crossing the Yangtze River, to holding a book and writing, Wencheng has worked hard for more than ten years, and has not surpassed Yang Yuanhui, Ruan Hongdao, Li Mengge, Hou Yuanshan, and Gong Jingzhao.

古文：居数岁，卒于官。孔克仁，句容人。
现代文：以后，元杲历任应天府尹，弘道历任福建、江西行省参政，都死于任上。孔克仁，句容人。
English: After that, the successors of Yuan Xuan, who held the post of Ying Tianfu Yin, and Hong Dao, who held the post of Fujian and Jiangxi provinces and participated in politics, all died in office.

古文：由行省都事进郎中。
现代文：由行省都事晋升为郎中。
English: He was promoted from acting provincial governor to vice-governor.

古文：尝偕宋濂侍太祖，太祖数与论天下形势及前代兴亡事。
现代文：曾和宋濂一同侍奉太祖，太祖多次和他讨论天下形势及前代兴亡的史实。
English: He had served the great-grandfather together with Song Tao, and the great-grandfather had discussed the world situation and the historical facts of the previous generation's rise and fall with him many times.

古文：陈友谅既灭，太祖志图中原，谓克仁曰： 元运既隳，豪杰互争，其衅可乘。
现代文：陈友谅已被消灭，太祖志图中原，对克仁说 ：元朝的国运已被摧毁，豪杰互争，有可乘之隙。
English: Chen You Rong has been eliminated, the great ancestor Zhitu Zhongyuan said to Keren: The national movement of the Yuan Dynasty has been destroyed, heroes are competing with each other, and there is a gap to take advantage of.

古文：吾欲督两淮、江南诸郡之民，及时耕种，加以训练。兵农兼资，进取退守。
现代文：我将督促两淮、江南诸郡的百姓，及时耕种，加以训练，兵农兼资，进取退守。
English: I will urge the people of the two Huai Mountains and the counties in the south of the Yangtze River to cultivate and train in a timely manner, to be soldiers and farmers, and to aggressively retreat.

古文：仍于两淮间馈运可通之处，储粮以俟。
现代文：再于两淮之间的可馈运之处，储粮等候时机。
English: Then, in the area between the two rivers that can be fed and transported, grain storage will wait for the right time.

古文：兵食既足，中原可图。卿以为何如？ 
现代文：兵粮充足，中原就可谋图，你认为怎样？ 
English: What do you think, is there enough food for the troops so that they can plan in the Central Plains?

古文：克仁对曰： 积粮训兵，观衅待时，此长策也。 
现代文：克仁回答说： 储粮和训兵，等待时机，这是长久的策略。 
English: Keren replied: It is a long-term strategy to store grain and train soldiers and wait for the right time.

古文：当是时，江左兵势日盛，太祖以汉高自期，尝谓克仁曰： 秦政暴虐，汉高帝起布衣，以宽大驭群雄，遂为天下主。
现代文：当时，江左的兵势日盛，太祖以汉高祖的标准来要求自己，曾对克仁说： 秦政暴虐，汉高祖起自布衣，以宽大驾驭着群雄，于是成为天下之主。
English: At that time, Jiang Zuo's army was becoming more and more powerful, and the great-grandfather demanded himself to be held to the standards of the Han Emperor Gaozu. He once said to Keren, "The Qin Dynasty was tyrannical, but the Han Emperor Gaozu rose from the cloth and controlled the masses with generosity, and thus became the master of the world."

古文：今群雄蜂起，皆不知修法度以明军政，此其所以无成也。 
现代文：现群雄蜂拥而起，但都不知制定法度以严明军政，这就是他们难以成功的原因。 
English: This is the reason why it is difficult for them to succeed, because they are swarming now, but they do not know how to enact laws to strictly enforce military rule.

古文：因感叹久之。
现代文：因而感叹很久。
English: So I sighed for a long time.

古文：又曰： 天下用兵，河北有孛罗帖木儿，河南有扩廓帖木儿，关中有李思齐、张良弼。
现代文：又说： 天下用兵，河北有孛罗帖木儿，河南有扩廓帖木儿，关中有李思齐、张良弼。
English: He also said: In the world of soldiers, Hebei has Zhao Luo Timur, Henan has Zhankuo Timur, and Guan has Li Siqi and Zhang Liangqi.

古文：然有兵而无纪律者河北也；稍有纪律而兵不振者河南也；道途不通、馈饷不继者关中也。
现代文：然而有部队而无纪律的是河北，稍有纪律但兵不振奋的是河南，道路不通、粮饷不继的是关中。
English: However, it is Hebei that has troops but no discipline, it is Henan that has a little discipline but the soldiers are not excited, and it is Guanzhong that has impassable roads and food shortages.

古文：江南则惟我与张士诚耳。
现代文：江南则唯有我和张士诚。
English: In Jiangnan, only I and Zhang Shicheng are left.

古文：士诚多奸谋，尚间谍，御众无纪律。
现代文：士诚多奸谋，崇尚间谍之术，军无纪律。
English: Shicheng was more of a schemer, advocating the art of espionage, and the army lacked discipline.

古文：我以数十万众，修军政，任将帅，相时而动，其势有不足平者。 
现代文：我率领十万之众，修军政，任用将帅，伺机而动，我们的势力将不可战胜。 
English: I will lead a hundred thousand people, improve military and political affairs, appoint generals, and wait for the opportunity to move. Our forces will be invincible.

古文：克仁顿首曰： 主上神武，当定天下于一矣。 
现代文：克仁点头说： 主上神武，一定能一统天下。 
English: Keren nodded and said, "Lord Shenwu, you will surely be able to rule the world."

古文：尝阅《汉书》，濂与克仁侍。
现代文：太祖曾阅读《汉书》，宋濂和孔克仁侍奉其旁。
English: The great-grandfather once read the "Hanshu," with Song Xi and Kong Ke Ren serving alongside him.

古文：太祖曰： 汉治道不纯者何？ 
现代文：太祖说 ：汉朝治理国政不完美在哪里？ 
English: Grandfather said: Where are the imperfections in the governance of the Han Dynasty?

古文：克仁对曰： 王霸杂故也。 
现代文：克仁说： 王霸之道杂用之故。 
English: Keren said, "The way of the king is the way of miscellaneous use."

古文：太祖曰： 谁执其咎？ 
现代文：太祖说 ：谁的错误呢？ 
English: The great-grandfather said: "Whose fault is it?

古文：克仁曰： 责在高祖。 
现代文：克仁说 ：责任在于汉高祖。 
English: Keren said: The responsibility lies with Henkel's founder.

古文：太祖曰： 高祖创业，遭秦灭学，民憔悴甫苏，礼乐之事固所未讲。
现代文：太祖说： 高祖创业，正遇上秦朝灭学，百姓憔悴以待复苏，礼乐之事还没兴起。
English: The great-grandfather said: Gao Zu's entrepreneurship is encountering the Qin Dynasty's suppression of learning, the people are eager to be revived, and the ritual music has not yet arisen.

古文：孝文为令主，正当制礼作乐，以复三代之旧。乃逡巡未遑，使汉业终于如是。
现代文：孝文为令主，修定礼乐，恢复三代旧制，但顾虑重重而无暇他顾，致使汉朝帝业终归如此。
English: Xiaowen was the ruler, revised the ritual music, and restored the three-generation old system. However, he had many concerns and had no time to attend to them, resulting in the Han Dynasty's empire ending up like this.

古文：帝王之道，贵不违时。
现代文：帝王之道，可贵的是不违背时代。
English: The emperor's way is precious because it does not go against the times.

古文：三代之王有其时而能为之，汉文有其时而不为，周世宗则无其时而为之者也。 
现代文：三代之王有时机而能为之，汉文有时机而不为，周世宗则是没时机而为之。 
English: The king of three generations has the opportunity to do it, the Chinese have the opportunity not to do it, and the Zhou dynasty has no opportunity to do it.

古文：又尝问克仁： 汉高起徒步为万乘主，所操何道？ 
现代文：又曾问克仁 ：汉高祖从平民成为万乘之主，他采用什么办法？ 
English: He also asked Keren: What method did Han Gaozu use to rise from a commoner to become the Lord of Ten Thousand Buddhas?

古文：克仁对曰： 知人善任使。 
现代文：克仁问答说 ：知人善任。 
English: Keren's Q&A: A good friend is a good friend.

古文：太祖曰： 项羽南面称孤，仁义不施，而自矜功伐。
现代文：太祖说 ：项羽在南面称王，仁义不施，而自以为功成名就。
English: The great-grandfather said, "Xiang Yu is king in the south, and he does not practice benevolence and righteousness, but thinks that he can become famous through his merits."

古文：高祖知其然，承以柔逊，济以宽仁，卒以胜之。
现代文：高祖了解他的底细，对他恭顺，待他宽仁，却最终打败了他。
English: Gaozu knew him well, was obedient to him, and treated him leniently, but eventually defeated him.

古文：今豪杰非一，我守江左，任贤抚民，以观天下之变。若徒与角力，则猝难定也。 
现代文：今豪杰非一人，我守卫在江左，任人唯贤，抚济百姓，坐观天下之变，如仅仅依靠武力，则难以平定。 
English: Now, the hero is not alone. I am guarding the left bank of the Yangtze River, appointing people of merit, helping the people, and watching the changes in the world. If we rely solely on force, it will be difficult to pacify.

古文：及徐达等下淮东、西，又谓克仁曰： 壬辰之乱，生民涂炭。
现代文：到了徐达等人攻下淮东、淮西后，太祖又对克仁说： 壬辰之乱，生民涂炭。
English: After Xu Da and others conquered Huai Dong and Huai Xi, the great-grandfather said to Keren: "In the Imjin War, the people were burned to a crisp.

古文：中原诸将，孛罗拥兵犯阙，乱伦干纪，行已夷灭。
现代文：中原诸将，孛罗拥兵犯阙，乱伦干纪，已全部灭亡。
English: All the generals of the Central Plains, including Yao Luo, who incited soldiers to commit crimes and incest, have all perished.

古文：扩廓挟太子以称戈，急私仇，无敌忾之志。
现代文：扩廓挟持太子称戈，急私仇，无敌忾之志。
English: Holding the crown prince at arm's length, calling for war, seeking personal revenge, and aspiring to be invincible.

古文：思齐辈碌碌，窃据一方，民受其害。
现代文：思齐碌碌无为，窃据一方，百姓深受其害。
English: The people have suffered a lot due to their idle thoughts and inaction.

古文：士诚外假元名，反覆两端。
现代文：士诚对外假借元名，反复无常。
English: Shicheng borrowed the original name from abroad and was capricious.

古文：明玉珍父子据蜀僣号，喜于自用而无远谋。
现代文：明玉珍父子占据蜀地称王，喜于自用而无远谋。
English: Ming Yuzhen and his son occupied Shu and called themselves kings. They were happy to use the land for themselves, but had no long-term plans.

古文：观其所为，皆不能有成。
现代文：纵观他们的所作所为，他们都不能有所成就。
English: No matter what they do, they can't get anything done.

古文：予揆天时，审人事，有可定之机。
现代文：我考察天时，审视人事，平定天下的时机成熟了。
English: The time is ripe for me to examine the times, examine the personnel, and pacify the world.

古文：今师西出襄、樊，东逾淮、泗，首尾相应，击之必胜。大事可成，天下不难定。
现代文：现部队西出襄、樊，东西跨越淮、泗，首尾相应，攻敌必胜，大事可成，天下不难平定。
English: The current troops are advancing from west to east and from east to west, and from west to east, and from east to west, and from west to east, and from east to west.

古文：既定之后，生息犹难，方劳思虑耳。 
现代文：统一天下以后，生息尚艰难，还得进一步考虑。 
English: After unification, the habitat is still difficult, and further consideration must be given.

古文：克仁侍帷幄最久，故获闻太祖谋略居多。
现代文：克仁侍奉太祖最久，所以得知太祖的谋略最多。
English: Keren served his grandfather the longest, so he learned the most about his grandfather's strategies.

古文：洪武二年四月，命克仁等授诸子经，功臣子弟亦令入学。
现代文：洪武二年四月，命令克仁等人教授诸子经书，功臣的子弟也一起学习。
English: In April of the second year of Hongwu, he ordered Keren and others to teach sutras to his sons, and the sons of meritorious vassals also studied together.

古文：已，出知江州，入为参议，坐事死。
现代文：不久，出任江州知州，入朝为参议，犯罪而死。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of Jiangzhou Zhizhou, entered the imperial court as a councillor, and died as a criminal.

