古文：论人之性，定有善有恶。
现代文：研究人的德性，一定有善有恶。
English: When studying human virtue, there must be good and evil.

古文：其善者，固自善矣；其恶者，故可教告率勉，使之为善。
现代文：善的，固然开始就善；恶的，还能经过教育、劝告、引导、勉励，使他们成为善的。
English: The good, of course, are good to begin with; the evil can also be made good through education, advice, guidance, and encouragement.

古文：凡人君父审观臣子之性，善则养育劝率，无令近恶；近恶则辅保禁防，令渐於善，善渐於恶，恶化於善，成为性行。
现代文：凡是做君主和父亲的，都会仔细观察臣与子的德性，善的就培养、教导、勉励、引导，不使他靠近恶的；恶的就教育、安抚、制止、防犯，使他向善的方面逐渐转化。善的向恶的方面逐渐转化，恶的向善的方向逐渐转化，就会成为和生就的品行一样。
English: Any ruler and father will carefully observe the virtues of his vassals and sons. The good ones will be cultivated, taught, encouraged, and guided, and will not let him get close to the evil ones; the evil ones will be educated, pacified, stopped, and prevented from committing crimes, so that he will gradually transform to the good side. The good ones will gradually transform to the evil side, and the evil ones will gradually transform to the good direction, and will become the same as the moral conduct of life.

古文：召公戒成曰： 今王初服厥命，於戏！
现代文：召公告诫成王说： 现在王开始行使自己的使命执政，呜呼！
English: The summoning announcement admonished King Cheng and said: "Now the king is beginning to exercise his mission to govern, alas!

古文：若生子罔不在厥初生。 
现代文：就像刚独立生活的人样，没有不在其刚开始的时候就打好基础的。 
English: Just like a person who has just started living independently, there is no one who does not lay a good foundation at the very beginning.

古文：生子谓十五子，初生意於善，终以善；初生意於恶，终以恶。
现代文： 生子 是说十五岁的人，刚开始独立生活就要立志向好的方向发展，最终是善的；开始独立生活就愿意向坏的方向发展，最终是恶的。
English: Son-in-law means that a 15-year-old who has just begun to live independently must aspire to develop in a good direction and ultimately be good; when he begins to live independently, he is willing to develop in a bad direction and ultimately be evil.

古文：《诗》曰： 彼姝者子，何以与之？ 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 那个美好的人，拿什么赠送他？ 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: That beautiful person, what should I give him?

古文：传言：譬犹练丝，染之蓝则青，染之丹则赤。
现代文：传注说： 比如像洁白的丝，用青色染料染它就是青色，用红色染料染它就是红色。 
English: For example, like pure white silk, dyeing it with cyan dye makes it blue, and dyeing it with red dye makes it red.

古文：十五之子其犹丝也，其有所渐化为善恶，犹蓝丹之染练丝，使之为青赤也。
现代文：十五岁的人他们像丝一样，会逐渐转化为善的或恶的，如同青色染料、红色染料染白丝，会使它变成青色、红色一样。
English: Fifteen-year-olds, they are like silk, they will gradually transform into good or evil, just as blue dye, red dye dyeing white silk, will turn it into blue and red.

古文：青赤一成，真色无异。
现代文：一旦染成青色、红色，就跟真的颜色没有区别。
English: Once dyed blue or red, there is no difference from the real color.

古文：是故扬子哭岐道，墨子哭练丝也。盖伤离本，不可复变也。
现代文：所以杨子怕走岔路而哭泣，墨子怕丝染错颜色而哭泣，这大概是伤心一旦离开了正道或本色，就不能再改变。
English: Therefore, Yang Zi is afraid of taking the wrong path and crying, Mo Zi is afraid of dyeing the wrong color and crying, which is probably sad. Once the heart leaves the right path or the true color, it can no longer change.

古文：人之性，善可变为恶，恶可变为善，犹此类也。
现代文：人的德性，善的能变成恶的，恶的也能变成善的，就像这种情况。
English: In human morality, good can turn into evil, and evil can turn into good, just like this.

古文：逢生麻间，不扶自直；白纱入缁，不练自黑。
现代文：飞蓬长在麻中间，不用扶持自然会直；白纱放进黑色的染缸，不用染色自然会黑。
English: The flycloth grows in the middle of the hemp, and will naturally straighten without support; the white yarn is put into the black dyeing tank, and will naturally darken without dyeing.

古文：彼蓬之性不直，纱之质不黑，麻扶缁染，使之直黑。
现代文：那飞蓬的生性不直，白纱的质地不黑，但由于大麻的扶持，黑色的染缸，使它们变直变黑。
English: The nature of the flying canopy is not straight, and the texture of the white gauze is not black, but due to the support of hemp and the black dyeing tank, they become straight and black.

古文：夫人之性犹蓬纱也，在所渐染而善恶变矣。
现代文：人的德性就像飞蓬和白纱一样，在逐渐浸染之下，善恶是会改变的。
English: Human virtue is like a feather duster and white gauze. Good and evil will change under gradual infiltration.

古文：王良、造父称为善御，能使不良为良也。
现代文：王良、造父被称为善于驾驭车马的好手，能把不好的马驯成好马。
English: Wang Liang, the founding father, was known as a good driver of horses and chariots, able to tame a bad horse into a good horse.

古文：如徒能御良，其不良者不能驯服，此则驵工庸师服驯技能，何奇而世称之？
现代文：如果只能驾驭好马，不好的马不能够驯服，这只能是普通马夫驾车的本领，有什么奇特的地方可以让世人称赞呢？
English: If you can only drive a good horse, and a bad horse cannot be tamed, this can only be the ordinary driver's driving skill, what is the special place that can be praised by the world?

古文：故曰：王良登车，马不罢驽；尧、舜为政，民无狂愚。
现代文：所以说：王良一登上车，马就不会疲塌跑不快；尧舜治理国家，百姓不会狂妄愚蠢。
English: Therefore, he said: Once Wang Liang gets on the car, the horse will not be tired and run badly; when governing the country, the people will not be arrogant and stupid.

古文：传曰： 尧、舜之民可比屋而封，桀、纣之民可比屋而诛。 
现代文：传注上说： 尧舜的百姓，能挨家挨户地被封赏；桀纣的百姓，要挨家挨户地被诛杀。 
English: The notice said: "The people of Handan can be rewarded from house to house; the people of Handan should be killed from house to house.

古文：斯民也，三代所以直道而行也。
现代文： 有夏、商、周这样的百姓，所以三代能够按正道而行。 
English: There are people like Xia, Shang and Zhou, so the three generations can follow the right path.

古文：圣主之民如彼，恶主之民如此，竟在化不在性也。
现代文：圣明君主的百姓像那样，凶残君主的百姓像这样，归根到底在于教化而不在于本性。
English: The people of a saintly monarch are like that, and the people of a cruel monarch are like this. In the final analysis, it is not their nature, but their upbringing.

古文：闻伯夷之风者，贪夫廉而懦夫有立志；闻柳下惠之风者，薄夫敦而鄙夫宽。
现代文：听到伯夷的品格，贪恋的人会廉洁，怯懦的人会立志；听到柳下惠的品格，刻薄的人会厚道，庸俗的人会宽容。
English: Hearing the character of Bo Yi, greedy people will be incorruptible, cowardly people will be determined; hearing the character of Liu Xi Hui, mean people will be kind, and vulgar people will be tolerant.

古文：徒闻风名，犹或变节，况亲接形面相敦告乎？
现代文：仅仅是听到他们品格崇高，就有的变得有节操，何况是亲自接触本人，面对面地诚恳地告戒呢！
English: Just by hearing of their noble character, some become self-controlled, let alone by personally contacting them and earnestly admonishing them face to face!

古文：孔门弟子七十之徒，皆任卿相之用，被服圣教，文才雕琢，知能十倍，教训之功而渐渍之力也。
现代文：孔门弟子七十人，都有胜任卿相的才能，他们蒙受圣人教诲，文才得到精心培养，智慧和才能超过常人十倍，这都是教育训导的功绩，逐渐感化的功劳。
English: The seventy disciples of Confucius all have the ability to be competent ministers. They have been taught by saints, their literary talent has been carefully cultivated, and their wisdom and talent exceed that of ordinary people tenfold. All of this is the merit of education and training, and the merit of gradual influence.

古文：未入孔子之门时，闾巷常庸无奇，其尤甚不率者，唯子路也。
现代文：他们没有进到孔子门下学习时，只是社会上平凡而不出奇的人。其中尤其最不顺服的是子路。
English: When they did not come to study under Confucius, they were just ordinary and not extraordinary people in society. Among them, the most disobedient was Zilu.

古文：世称子路无恆之庸人，未入孔门时，戴鸡佩豚，勇猛无礼，闻诵读之声，摇鸡奋豚，扬脣吻之音，聒贤圣之耳，恶至甚矣。
现代文：世人说子路是做事没有恒心的庸人，在没有到孔子门下学习时，头戴鸡冠，臂挂猪尾，凶猛无礼。听见朗读书的声音，就摇头摆尾，噘嘴怪叫，吵闹之声直刺读书人的耳朵，可恶到极点。
English: The world said that Zilu was a mediocrity who did not have the perseverance to do things. When he did not study under Confucius, he wore a chicken crown on his head and a pig's tail on his arm, which was fierce and rude. When he heard the sound of reading, he shook his head and wagged his tail, pouted and screamed, and the noisy sound pierced the reader's ears, which was abominable to the extreme.

古文：孔子引而教之，渐渍磨历，阖导牖进，猛气消损，骄节屈折，卒能政事，序在四科。
现代文：孔子把他叫来，并且教育他，逐渐感化、磨练、启发、教导、诱导、进取，这样凶暴的气势消失了，骄横的现象收敛了，终于能办理政事，列入在四科之内。
English: Confucius called him and educated him, and gradually influenced, tempered, inspired, taught, induced, and advanced. Thus, the violent momentum disappeared, and the arrogant phenomenon subsided. Finally, he was able to manage political affairs and was included in the four disciplines.

古文：斯盖变性使恶为善之明效也。
现代文：这就是改变本性把恶人变成善人的证明。
English: This is the proof of changing one's nature and turning a bad person into a good person.

古文：夫肥沃墝埆，土地之本性也。
现代文：肥沃与贫瘠，是土地的本性。
English: It is the nature of the land to be fertile or barren.

古文：肥而沃者性美，树稼丰茂。
现代文：土肥而有水浇灌的，本性美好，种庄稼长得很茂盛。
English: If the soil is fertilized and watered, the nature is beautiful, and the crops grow very luxuriantly.

古文：墝而埆者性恶，深耕细锄，厚加粪壤，勉致人功，以助地力，其树稼与彼肥沃者相似类也。
现代文：土地高低不平而瘠薄的，本性恶劣，要是深耕细锄，多加粪土，努力加上人的功夫，以帮助地力，这样种下的庄稼与那肥沃土地就会相类似。
English: The land is uneven and thin, and the nature of it is bad. If you cultivate it deeply and finely, add more manure, and try to add human effort to help the soil, the crops planted in this way will be similar to that fertile land.

古文：地之高下，亦如此焉。
现代文：地的高低，也同这道理一样。
English: The same is true of the height and depth of the earth.

古文：以锸凿地，以埤增下，则其下与高者齐；如复增锸，则夫下者不徒齐者也，反更为高，而其高者反为下。
现代文：用大锄和铁锹挖地，把高处的土填到低的地方，而那低处就会与高处平齐。如果再用大锄和铁锹继续挖下去，那么低处不仅是平齐，反而会变得更高，可是那高处反而成了低处。
English: If you dig with pick and shovel and fill the high place with the low place, the low place will be level with the high place. If you continue to dig with pick and shovel, the low place will not only be level, but will become higher, but the high place will become the low place.

古文：使人之性有善有恶，彼地有高有下，勉致其教令之善，则将善者同之矣。
现代文：假使人性有善有恶，就像地有高有低一样，如果努力使他接受教化，不善的就会和性善的人一样。
English: If a man's nature is divided into good and bad, just as the earth is divided into high and low, if efforts are made to educate him, the bad will become like the good.

古文：善以化渥，酿其教令，变更为善。善则且更宜反过於往善，犹下地增加锸更崇於高地也。
现代文：并且好德性已经变得深厚，培养着他的政教风化，使他变得善良，这种 善 就将更应该比过去的善更善，如同低处增加大锄和铁锹去继续填土，就会比高处更高一样。 端木赐没有承受禄命却做生意发了财 。
English: Moreover, the good moral character has become profound, cultivating his political and religious demeanor, making him good, and this kind of good will be more worthy of being better than the good of the past, just as adding large shovels and shovels to the low places to continue filling the soil will be higher than the high places.

古文：赐不受命而货殖焉，赐本不受天之富命，所加货财积聚，为世富人者，得货殖之术也。
现代文：端木赐本没有承受天给予的富命，所以做生意发了财并有积聚，成为社会上富有的人，是因为他掌握了做生意牟利的一套方法。
English: He did not inherit the fortune given by heaven, so he made a fortune in business and accumulated it. He became a wealthy person in society because he mastered a set of methods for making a profit in business.

古文：夫得其术，虽不受命，犹自益饶富。
现代文：掌握了这套方法，即使没有禀受禄命，还是会越来越富裕。
English: If you master this set of methods, you will get richer and richer, even if you don't get lucky.

古文：性恶之人，益不禀天善性，得圣人之教，志行变化。
现代文：性恶的人，也没有禀受天给予的善性，只要得到圣人的教导，志向和操行就能改变。
English: Evil-natured people do not have the goodness given by heaven. As long as they are taught by saints, their aspirations and behavior can be changed.

古文：世称利剑有千金之价。
现代文：世人称赞利剑有千金的价值。
English: The world praises the value of a sharp sword.

古文：棠溪、鱼肠之属，龙泉、太阿之辈，其本铤，山中之恆铁也。冶工锻炼，成为銛利，岂利剑之锻与炼，乃异质哉？
现代文：像棠谿、鱼肠、龙泉、太阿等宝剑，它们本来是未经冶炼的、山中的一般铁矿，经过冶炼工人冶炼锻造，就成了锋利的剑，难道利剑的冶炼锻造用的是特殊材料？
English: Like the precious swords of Tanggu, Yuxin, Longquan and Taia, they were originally unsmelted, ordinary iron ore in the mountains. After smelting and forging by smelting workers, they became sharp swords. Is the smelting and forging of sharp swords using special materials?

古文：工良师巧，炼一数至也。
现代文：这是因为工匠技术高明，又经过认真多次的冶炼才成功的。
English: This is because the craftsmen are highly skilled and only succeed after many times of careful smelting.

古文：试取东下直一金之剑，更熟锻炼，足其火，齐其銛，犹千金之剑也。
现代文：试拿佩在腰带下一把普通的剑，反复熟练地锻造，使锻烧的火保持足够的温度，再把它整治锋利，就如同一把值千金的宝剑了。
English: Try to wear an ordinary sword under your belt, repeatedly and skillfully forge it, keep the forging fire at a sufficient temperature, and then sharpen it, just like a precious sword.

古文：夫铁石天然，尚为锻炼者变易故质，况人含五常之性，贤圣未之熟锻炼耳，奚患性之不善哉？
现代文：铁矿石是天然的，尚且被锻炼的人改变了原来的本质，何况人还包容有仁、义、礼、智、信五种德性，只是贤圣还没有对他们加以锻炼罢了，为什么要担忧他们的天性不善呢！
English: Iron ore is natural, and even if people who have been trained have changed the original essence, what's more, people still tolerate the five virtues of benevolence, righteousness, propriety, wisdom, and faith, but the wise and saints have not yet trained them, so why worry about their bad nature!

古文：古贵良医者，能知笃剧之病所从生起，而以针药治而已之。
现代文：古人尊重良医，是因为他能知道危重的疾病从哪儿产生，并且用银针和药物治好它。
English: The ancients respected a good doctor because he could find out where a dangerous disease came from and cure it with silver needles and medicines.

古文：如徒知病之名而坐观之，何以为奇？
现代文：要是光知道病的名称就坐等它好，那有什么值得稀奇的呢？
English: If it is good to know the name of the disease and wait for it, then what is there to wonder about?

古文：夫人有不善，则乃性命之疾也，无其教治，而欲令变更，岂不难哉！
现代文：人有不好的德性，那是性与命的疾病，没有对他们进行教育和救治就想叫他们改变，岂不是太难了吗！
English: People have bad moral character, which is a disease of sex and life. Is it not too difficult to make them change without educating and curing them?

古文：天道有真伪。真者固自与天相应，伪者人加知巧，亦与真者无以异也。
现代文：道有自然形成的，有人为的，自然形成的本来一开始就与天意相符合，人为的是人施加了智慧和技巧，但它与自然形成的没有什么两样。
English: There are naturally formed roads and man-made roads. Naturally formed roads are originally in line with God's will. Man-made roads are the result of man's wisdom and skill, but they are no different from naturally formed roads.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：拿什么证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：《禹贡》曰 璆琳琅玕 ，此则土地所生真玉珠也。
现代文：《尚书·禹贡》上说的 璆琳琅玕 ，璆，是美玉。琳，是真珠。
English: "Shangshu, Yugong" says, "Linglin, Ling, is a beauty. Ling, is a pearl.

古文：然而道人消烁五石，作五色之玉，比之真玉，光不殊别，兼鱼蚌之珠，与《禹贡》璆琳皆真玉珠也。
现代文：琅玕，类似珠。这些本来是地里形成的，真的玉和珠。然而道人熔化五石，作成五色的美玉，与真正的宝玉相比，光润没有什么差别；还有鱼和蚌里的珍珠，与《禹贡》里说的璆琳，都是真正的美玉珠宝。
English: Tungsten, similar to beads. These were originally formed in the ground, real pearls and beads. However, Taoists melted five stones to make five-colored gems, and compared to real gems, the luster is no different; there are also fish and pearls in the cocoon, and the Yulin said in "Yugong," are real gems and jewels.

古文：然而随侯以药作珠，精耀如真，道士之教至，知巧之意加也。
现代文：至于随侯用药制作玉珠，光亮得像真的一样，这是道士的法术所至，已超出人的智慧和技巧范围。
English: As for the use of drugs to make jade beads, the light is as bright as the real thing. This is the magic of Taoists, and it is beyond the scope of human wisdom and skill.

古文：阳遂取火於天，五月丙午日中之时，消炼五石，铸以为器，磨历生光，仰以向日，则火来至。此真取火之道也。
现代文：阳遂是从天上取火，五月丙午这天中午的时候，熔化五石用它铸成铜镜，反复磨擦使其发亮，然后把镜面朝上向着太阳，立即火就来了，这才真是取火的方法。
English: The sun then took fire from the sky, and at noon on this day in May, the five stones were melted and used to cast a bronze mirror, which was repeatedly rubbed to make it shine, and then the mirror was turned upwards towards the sun, and immediately the fire came. This was truly the method of taking fire.

古文：今妄取刀剑月，摩拭朗白，仰以向日，亦得火焉。
现代文：现在随便用刀剑和半月形的钩把它擦得雪亮，朝上向着太阳，也能得到火。
English: Now you can use a sword and a half-moon-shaped hook to polish it until it's shiny, face up to the sun, and get fire.

古文：夫月非阳遂也，所以耐取火者，摩拭之所致也。
现代文：半月形的钩不是阳遂，它能取火的原因，是摩擦导致的。
English: The crescent-shaped hook is not a fire hydrant. The reason why it can catch fire is caused by friction.

古文：今夫性恶之人，使与性善者同类乎？
现代文：现今性恶的人，假使他们与性善的人同类？
English: Are today's sexually depraved people the same as sexually virtuous people?

古文：可率勉之令其为善；使之异类乎，亦可令与道人之所铸玉、随侯之所作珠、人之所摩刀剑月焉，教导以学，渐渍以德，亦将日有仁义之操。
现代文：可以引导勉励他们，使其变得性善；假使他们不同类？也可以使他们跟道人铸玉，跟随侯制作玉珠，像人磨刀剑和半月形的钩一样，以学习去教育开导，以德去逐渐感化，这样他们就会一天天地逐渐具备仁义的操行了。
English: It is possible to guide and encourage them to become good-natured; if they are of different types, it is also possible to make them cast jade with Taoists and make jade beads with Hou, just as people sharpen swords and half-moon-shaped hooks, to educate and enlighten them with learning, and to gradually influence them with virtue, so that they will gradually possess the practice of benevolence and righteousness day by day.

古文：黄帝与炎帝争为天子，教熊罴貔虎以战於阪泉之野，三战得志，炎帝败绩。
现代文：黄帝跟炎帝为争夺成为天子，就驯化熊、罴、貔、虎等在阪泉的郊外与炎帝的部队大战，三战得胜，炎帝大败。
English: The Yellow Emperor fought with the Flaming Emperor to become the Son of Heaven, and tamed bears, baboons, jackals, tigers, etc. in the suburbs of Hanquan and fought with the Flaming Emperor's troops. They won three battles, and the Flaming Emperor was defeated.

古文：尧以天下让舜，鲧为诸侯，欲得三公，而尧不听，怒其猛兽，欲以为乱，比兽之角可以为城，举尾以为旌，奋心盛气，阻战为强。
现代文：尧把天下让给舜，鲧当时是诸侯，想做三公，但尧不答应，于是激怒自己的猛兽，想以此作乱，把兽的角排列起来可以成墙，竖起尾巴可以作军旌，心奋气盛，想仗此打仗逞强。
English: The dragon gave up the whole world to the dragon. The dragon was a prince at the time and wanted to be the third king, but the dragon did not agree. So he angered his beast and wanted to use it to create chaos. The horns of the beast could be arranged to form a wall, and the tail could be erected to make a cocoon. He was full of energy and wanted to use it to fight bravely.

古文：夫禽兽与人殊形，犹可命战，况人同类乎？
现代文：禽兽与人是不同的形体，尚且能命它们打仗，何况人们是同类呢！
English: Animals and humans have different shapes, yet they are able to fight, and what's more, humans are the same species!

古文：推此以论， 百兽率舞 ， 潭鱼出听 ， 六马仰秣 ，不复疑矣。
现代文：以此推论，百兽能闻乐起舞，潭里的鱼会出水听瑟，六匹马会昂首边听琴边吃料，这些就没有什么可以再怀疑的了。
English: By this reasoning, there is nothing to doubt that all the beasts can smell music and dance, that the fish in the pond can come out of the water and listen to it, and that six horses can eat while listening to the piano with their heads up.

古文：异类以殊为同，同类以钧为异，所由不在於物，在於人也。
现代文：异类能由不同转为相同，同类能由相同转为不同，关键不在于事物本身，而在于人的作用。
English: The key lies not in the things themselves, but in the role of people.

古文：凡含血气者，教之所以异化也。
现代文：凡是有血气的人，教育他们是为了能使其发生变化。
English: Anyone who has a temperament, educate them to be able to change it.

古文：三苗之民，或贤或不肖，尧、舜齐之，恩教加也。
现代文：三苗的百姓，有的贤良有的不贤良，尧舜使他们都变得贤良，是施恩加以教化的结果。
English: The people of Sanmiao, some virtuous and some not virtuous, were made virtuous as a result of benevolence and enlightenment.

古文：楚、越之人，处庄、岳之间，经历岁月，变为舒缓，风俗移也。
现代文：楚国、越国的百姓，处于庄、岳之间，经过较长时间，性情变得和缓，风俗也有所改变。
English: The people of Chu and Yue states, located between Zhuang and Yue, have become gentler over time, and their customs have also changed.

古文：故曰： 齐舒缓，秦慢易，楚促急，燕戆投 。
现代文：原来说：齐人性情和缓，秦人性情傲慢，楚人性情急燥，燕人性情憨直。
English: Originally: Qi's human nature is gentle, Qin's human nature is arrogant, Chu's human nature is hasty, and Yan's human nature is straightforward.

古文：以庄、岳言之，四国之民，更相出入，久居单处，性必变易。
现代文：从楚国和越国百姓处于庄、岳之间而改变了性情来看，齐、秦、楚、燕四国百姓，相互之间往来，长时间地大家居住相处，性情必然会改变。
English: Judging from the fact that the people of Chu and Yue were located between Zhuang and Yue and changed their temperament, the people of Qi, Qin, Chu, and Yan, who came and went from each other and lived together for a long time, would inevitably change their temperament.

古文：夫性恶者，心比木石。木石犹为人用，况非木石！
现代文：性恶的人，说他们心像木石一样，木石尚且能被人利用，何况他们并不是木石呢！
English: Evil-natured people say that their hearts are like blocks of wood, and blocks of wood can be used by people, but they are not blocks of wood!

古文：在君子之迹，庶几可见。
现代文：可见，问题在于君子的教化，这大体可以清楚了。
English: Thus, the problem lies in the enlightenment of the gentleman, which is generally clear.

古文：有痴狂之疾，歌啼於路，不晓东西，不睹燥湿，不觉疾病，不知饥饱，性已毁伤，不可如何。前无所观，却无所畏也。
现代文：人有疯癫的疾病，就会在路上又唱又哭，不知道东西南北，看不见是干是湿，感觉不到自己有病，也不晓得肚子是饿是饱，性情已经受严重伤害，对其无可奈何，因为向前他没有奔头，后退也无所畏俱。
English: If a person has a mental illness, he will sing and cry on the road, not knowing north and south, not seeing whether it is dry or wet, not feeling that he is sick, and not knowing whether his stomach is hungry or full. His disposition has been seriously injured, and there is nothing he can do about it, because he does not rush forward, and he is not afraid to retreat.

古文：是故王法不废学校之官，不除狱理之吏，欲令凡众见礼仪之教。
现代文：所以国家法律不废除负责教育的官吏，不废除负责司法的官吏，就是要使大众接受礼义的教化。
English: Therefore, the national law does not abolish the officials in charge of education, and does not abolish the officials in charge of justice, it is to make the public accept the enlightenment of etiquette.

古文：学校勉其前，法禁防其後，使丹硃之志亦将可勉。
现代文：学校教育勉励他在前，法令禁止防范他们在后，即使有丹朱那样的德性，也可能通过勉励而从善。
English: School education encourages him in the front, the law prohibits preventing them in the back, even if there is a virtue like Dan Zhu, it may be possible to do good through encouragement.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什么来证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：三军之士，非能制也，勇将率勉，视死如归。
现代文：军队的士兵，不是能够容易控制的，他们的勇猛精神如果得到引导勉励，就会视死如归。
English: The soldiers of the army are not easy to control, and their spirit of valor, if guided and encouraged, will be as good as dead.

古文：且阖庐尝试其士於五湖之侧，皆加刃於肩，血流至地。
现代文：阖庐曾经在太湖边训练他的士兵，叫他们都把刀口按在肩上，让血直流到地。
English: Zhai had trained his soldiers at Taihu Lake to press the edge of their knives against their shoulders and let the blood run to the ground.

古文：句践亦试其士於寝宫之庭，赴火死者，不可胜数。
现代文：句践也在他寝宫的院子里架起火训练他的士兵，结果跳进火里死的人多得数不清。
English: Kuchan also built a fire in the courtyard of his palace to train his soldiers. As a result, countless people jumped into the fire and died.

古文：夫刃火，非人性之所贪也，二主激率，念不顾生。
现代文：刀割，火烧都不是人性所贪图的，由于二位君主的激励引导，他们顷刻间也就不顾惜自己生命了。
English: Cutting with a sword and burning with fire are not what human nature craves for. Thanks to the encouragement and guidance of the two monarchs, they suddenly did not care about their own lives.

古文：是故军之法轻刺血。孟贲勇也，闻军令惧。
现代文：所以，军法轻的处分是刺出血，重的处分是砍头，就像孟贲那样的勇士，听到军令也会害怕。
English: Therefore, according to military law, the light punishment is stabbing and bleeding, and the heavy punishment is beheading. Just like Meng Yao, a warrior will also be afraid when he hears the military order.

古文：是故叔孙通制定礼仪，拔剑争功之臣，奉礼拜伏，初骄倨而後逊顺，教威德，变易性也。
现代文：所以，叔孙通为朝庭制定了礼仪，那些拔剑争功的大臣，也只得遵奉朝仪甘愿屈服，起初傲慢的到后来也都恭顺了，这是圣人的教化和皇帝的威严，使他们改变了性情。
English: Therefore, his uncles and grandsons established the etiquette for the imperial court, and those ministers who drew their swords to compete for merit had to obey the imperial etiquette and willingly submit. At first, they were arrogant, but later they became obedient. It was the enlightenment of the saints and the majesty of the emperor that made them change their disposition.

古文：不患性恶，患其不服圣教，自遇而以生祸也。
现代文：不担心其性恶，担心的是他们不服从圣人的教化，自以为是而因此发生祸害。
English: They are not worried about their evil nature, but they are worried about their disobedience to the edification of saints, their self-righteousness, and the disasters that may occur as a result.

古文：豆麦之种，与稻梁殊，然食能去饥。
现代文：豆麦的果实与稻谷小米不同，然而吃了能消除饥饿。
English: The fruit of soybean and wheat is different from rice and millet, but eating it can eliminate hunger.

古文：小人君子，禀性异类乎？
现代文：小人与君子是禀承的天性不同吗？
English: Is there a difference between the nature of a villain and a gentleman?

古文：譬诸五谷皆为用，实不异而效殊者，禀气有厚泊，故性有善恶也。
现代文：把他们与五谷相比，五谷都是为了食用，果实都能充饥但味道不一样，人禀受的气有厚有薄，所以德性有善有恶。
English: Compare them with grain, grain is for eating, fruit can satisfy hunger but the taste is different, people's qi is thick and thin, so virtue has good and evil.

古文：残则受仁之气泊，而怒则禀勇渥也。
现代文：凶残的人则承受仁的气少，而容易发怒的人则承受勇的气多。
English: Those who are violent have less benevolence, while those who are quick to anger have more courage.

古文：仁泊则戾而少愈，勇渥则猛而无义，而又和气不足，喜怒失时，计虑轻愚。
现代文：仁气少就凶狠而缺少仁慈，勇气多就凶暴而没有情谊，再加上阴阳协调和谐的气不足，变得喜怒失常，考虑问题轻率，愚昧。
English: A lack of benevolence leads to a lack of benevolence, and a lack of benevolence leads to a lack of benevolence, and a lack of benevolence leads to a lack of benevolence, and a lack of benevolence leads to a lack of benevolence, and a lack of benevolence leads to a lack of benevolence, and a lack of benevolence.

古文：妄行之人，罪故为恶。人受五常，含五脏，皆具於身。禀之泊少，故其操行不及善人，犹酒或厚或泊也。非厚与泊殊其酿也，曲孽多少使之然也。
现代文：行为胡乱的人，并非有意作恶而是生性如此，人有仁、义、礼、智、信五常之气，包容在五脏里，都具备于人体，只因禀受的气薄而少，所以他们的操行不如善人，就像酒有的味浓有的味淡，这并非味浓味淡是由于不同酿造方法造成，而是因为酒曲的多少使它变得这样。
English: People who behave erratically do not intentionally commit evil, but are born that way. People have benevolence, righteousness, courtesy, wisdom, and faith, which are contained in the five internal organs and are all present in the human body. They are few only because they are weak, so their behavior is not as good as that of good people. Just as wine has a strong taste and a light taste. This is not due to the different brewing methods, but because of the amount of wine that makes it so.

古文：是故酒之泊厚，同一曲孽；人之善恶，共一元气，气有少多，故性有贤愚。
现代文：因此，酒味的浓淡，是同样的酒曲酿造出来的；人性的善恶，是同一元气形成的。从天承受的气有多有少，所以人性有贤有愚。
English: Therefore, the richness and lightness of the wine flavor are produced by the same brewer; the good and evil of human nature are formed by the same elemental energy. How much and how little of the energy is received from heaven, so human nature has wisdom and folly.

古文：西门豹急，佩韦以自缓；董安於缓，带弦以自促。
现代文：西门豹性情急燥，就系上皮带以提醒自己应变得和缓些；董安于性情缓慢，就佩带弓弦以提醒自己应变得急促些。
English: Ximen leopards are quick-tempered, so they wear a leash to remind themselves to be gentle; Dong An, who is slow-tempered, wears a bowstring to remind himself to be quick-tempered.

古文：急之与缓，俱失中和，然而韦弦附身，成为完具之人。
现代文：急促与缓慢，同样是失去中和，然而皮带与弓弦附着在身上随时提醒自己，使成为了性情完美的人。
English: Haste and slowness are equally out of balance, yet the belt and bow are attached to the body to remind oneself at all times, making it a perfect temperament.

古文：能纳韦弦之教，补接不足，则豹、安於之名可得参也。
现代文：如果能接受系皮带与佩弓弦的教育感化，补充上自己性情的不足，那么与西门豹，董安于齐名的就能有第三个人。
English: If you can accept the education and influence of wearing a belt and bowstring, and supplement your lack of temperament, then you can have a third person with the same name as Ximen leopard, Dong Anyu.

古文：贫劣宅屋不具墙壁宇达，人指訾之。
现代文：破房烂屋，没有完整的墙壁、屋檐、窗户，于是人们指责非议。
English: The house is in a state of disrepair, with no complete walls, eaves or windows, and people are criticising it.

古文：如财货富愈，起屋筑墙，以自蔽鄣，为之具宅，人弗复非。
现代文：如果钱财富裕，起屋筑墙，由此遮盖住原来的破烂，成为完备的住宅，人们就不再指责非议了。
English: If money and wealth are plentiful, and houses and walls are built to cover the original ruins and become complete houses, people will no longer blame and criticize.

古文：魏之行田百亩，鄴独二百，西门豹灌以漳水，成为膏腴，则亩收一锺。
现代文：魏国每个劳力分配无主荒田一百亩，邺县唯独土地贫瘠每劳力要分配二百亩，西门豹引用漳水灌溉，使之成了肥沃的土地，每亩要收庄稼一钟。
English: In Wei, each laborer was allotted one hundred mu of ownerless wasteland. In Jixian, where the only land was barren, each laborer was allotted two hundred mu. Ximen leopards were irrigated with reed water to make it fertile land. Each mu was required to harvest crops for one hour.

古文：夫人之质犹鄴田，道教犹漳水也。患不能化，不患人性之难率也。
现代文：人的本质就像邺县的荒田，仁义之道的教化如同漳水，让人担心的是不能变化，而不是担忧人性难于引导。
English: The essence of a person is like the wasteland of Shixian, and the enlightenment of the path of benevolence and righteousness is like salty water. What people worry about is the inability to change, rather than worrying that human nature is difficult to guide.

古文：雒阳城中之道无水，水工激上洛中之水，日夜驰流，水工之功也。
现代文：雒阳城中的河道里没有水，治水工人就截断雒河中的水，使它上涨，于是河道里有水日夜奔流，这是治水工人的功劳。
English: There is no water in the river in the city of Shenyang. The water control workers cut off the water in the Shenyang River and made it rise. As a result, there is water rushing in the river day and night. This is the merit of the water control workers.

古文：由此言之，迫近君子，而仁义之道数加於身，孟母之徙宅，盖得其验。
现代文：这样说来，接近君子，仁义之道就会屡次施加在你身上，孟子的母亲三次搬家，大概就能证明。
English: In this way, if you are close to a gentleman, the way of benevolence and righteousness will be repeatedly imposed on you. Mencius's mother moved three times, which can probably prove it.

古文：人间之水污浊，在野外者清洁，俱为一水，源从天涯，或浊或清，所在之势使之然也。
现代文：人聚居地方的水污浊，在野外的水清洁。同样是一种水，来源于天边，有的污浊，有的清洁，这是所处的环境使它这样。
English: The water in places where people live together is dirty, but the water in the open is clean. It is also a kind of water that comes from the edge of the sky, some dirty, some clean, this is the environment it is in.

古文：南越王赵他，本汉贤人也，化南夷之俗，背畔王制，椎髻箕坐，好之若性。
现代文：南越王赵他，本来是汉朝贤良的人，被南夷的风俗所化，背叛汉朝制度，梳成椎状发髻，两腿伸直张开地坐着，就像天生喜欢这样。
English: King Zhao of South Vietnam, originally a virtuous man of the Han Dynasty, was transformed by the customs of the Southern Yi, betrayed the Han Dynasty system, combed his hair into a spiral bun, and sat with his legs straight and splayed, as if he was born like this.

古文：陆贾说以汉德，惧以圣威，蹶然起坐，心觉改悔，奉制称蕃，其於椎髻箕坐也，恶之若性。
现代文：陆贾用汉的道德劝说，又用皇帝的威严恐吓，他就很快地起来坐好，从内心感到应该改悔，于是奉行汉朝制度，改称属国。他对于梳椎髻坐如箕，又像是天生厌恶了。
English: Lu Jia used the moral persuasion of the Han Dynasty and the intimidation of the emperor's majesty, he quickly got up and sat down, and felt that he should repent from the bottom of his heart, so he followed the Han Dynasty system and changed his name to a vassal state.

古文：前则若彼，後则若此。
现代文：前面像那样，后面却又像这样。
English: The front is like that, but the back is like this.

古文：由此言之，亦在於教，不独在性也。
现代文：这样说来，人还是在于教化，不单一在本性。
English: In this way, people are still in the enlightenment, not a single nature.

