古文：《齐民要术》：葵，《广雅》曰： 蘬，丘葵也。 
现代文：《齐民要术》： 葵 ，《广雅》说： 蘬就是葵。 
English: "Qimin Yaoshu": Aoi, "Guangya" said: Aoi is Aoi.

古文：《广志》曰： 胡葵，其花紫赤。 
现代文：《广志》说： 胡葵的花是紫红色的。 
English: "Guangzhi" said: the flowers of the geranium are purple-red.

古文：按，今世葵有紫茎、白茎二种，种别复有大小之殊。
现代文：按，现在见到的葵，有紫秆和白秆两种，每种又都有大有小。
English: As far as I know, there are two kinds of mallow that we can see now, the purple mallow and the white mallow, and each kind has its own size.

古文：又有鸭脚葵也。
现代文：另外还有一种叫 鸭脚葵 的。
English: In addition, there is also a type of wax called duck's foot wax.

古文：临种时，必燥曝葵子。
现代文：在临下种前，必须把葵子曝晒干燥。
English: Before planting, the sunflower seeds must be exposed and dried.

古文：葵子虽经岁不浥，然湿种者，疥④而不肥也。
现代文：葵子虽然经过一年也不会变质，但若湿着种下去，叶面会有颗粒状的突起如疥一样，叶子也不肥嫩。
English: Although sunflower seeds do not deteriorate after a year, if they are planted wet, they will have granular protrusions on the leaf surface, just like lettuce, and the leaves are not fat and tender.

古文：地不厌良，故墟弥善；薄即粪之，不宜妄种。
现代文：地越肥沃越好，空闲的地更好；土地如果瘠薄便应加施粪肥，不要随便将种子胡乱种下。
English: The more fertile the land, the better, idle land is better; if the land is poor, manure should be applied, and seeds should not be planted haphazardly.

古文：春必畦种水浇。
现代文：春天种葵一定要开畦下种，要浇水。
English: In spring, when planting sunflowers, it is necessary to open up the seedling and water it.

古文：春多风旱，非畦不得，且畦者省地而菜多，一畦供一口。
现代文：春天多风干旱，一定要开畦种，开畦种，既可节省土地，收葵又多，一畦葵足够一个人食用。
English: Spring is windy and dry, we must cultivate alfalfa seeds. Cultivating alfalfa seeds can save land, and there are more sunflowers. One sunflower is enough for one person to eat.

古文：畦长二步，广一步。
现代文：畦的长度大致为一丈二尺，宽六尺。
English: The yakitori is about 1.2 meters long and 6 meters wide.

古文：大则水难匀，又不用人足入。
现代文：大了，水不容易浇灌均匀，而且劳动时人的脚是不允许践踏菜畦的。
English: When it is big, it is not easy to pour water evenly, and people's feet are not allowed to trample on the dishes when working.

古文：深掘，以熟粪对半和土覆其上，令厚一寸，铁齿杷耧之令熟，足蹋使坚平。
现代文：畦要深掘，上面用熟粪和对半的土混合均匀，覆盖一寸厚。用铁齿耙子将土耙细耙平，用脚踏实。
English: The trench should be dug deep, and the top should be evenly mixed with cooked manure and half-and-half soil, covering it one inch thick. Use iron-toothed pliers to thinly level the trench, and use your feet to secure it.

古文：下水，令彻泽，水尽，下葵子；又以熟粪和土覆其上，令厚一寸余。
现代文：灌水浇透，水渗下去后，将葵子种下，再用熟粪和土将种子覆盖一寸多厚。
English: After the watering is complete and the water has seeped down, the sunflower seeds are planted, and then the seeds are covered with mulched manure and soil to a thickness of one inch or more.

古文：葵生三叶，然后浇之。
现代文：葵出苗后长出三个叶片时，再开始浇水。
English: After the sunflower seedlings have sprouted, when three leaves have grown, start watering again.

古文：浇用晨夕，日中便止。
现代文：浇水的时间应在早晨和傍晚，到中午便应停止浇。
English: Watering should be done in the morning and evening, and should be stopped by midday.

古文：每一掐，辄耙耧地令起，下水，加粪。
现代文：每掐过一次叶，随即用耙子把土耙起，灌水施肥。
English: After raking the leaves once each time, immediately rake the soil with a rake, watering and fertilizing.

古文：三掐更重。一岁之中，凡得三辈。
现代文：掐过三次叶，便要重新另种，一年当中共种三茬。
English: After three times of nibbling the leaves, it is necessary to re-plant another, and in the middle of the year, three sprouts are planted.

古文：凡畦种之物，治畦皆如种葵法，不复条列烦文。
现代文：凡是畦种的菜蔬，调治畦子的方法，皆像种葵法一样，以后便不再重复讲。
English: All the vegetable and vegetable methods for the treatment of lice are like the sunflower method, and will not be repeated in the future.

古文：早种者，必秋耕。
现代文：凡是准备早种的，必须在秋季，先将地耕好。
English: If you plan to plant early, you must first cultivate the land in the autumn.

古文：十月末，地将冻，散子劳之。
现代文：十月底，地将要冻结时，撒上子，摩平。
English: At the end of October, when the ground is about to freeze, sprinkle the seeds and mop up.

古文：一亩三升。
现代文：每亩地用三升种子。
English: Three litres of seeds are used for each mu of land.

古文：正月末散子亦得。
现代文：正月底撒子也可以。
English: At the end of the first month, you can also scatter the seeds.

古文：人足踏践之乃佳。踏者菜肥。
现代文：用脚踏实更好。踏过的畦，菜长得肥壮。
English: It's better to be steady on your feet. Once you've stepped on the stalks, the vegetables grow thicker.

古文：地释即生，锄不厌数。
现代文：地下的冰冻融化后，便会很快出苗。锄草松土的次数越多越好。
English: After the underground ice melts, the seedlings will quickly emerge. The more times you weed the pine soil, the better.

古文：五月初，更种之。
现代文：五月初，再种一茬。
English: At the beginning of May, another sprig of cress was planted.

古文：春者既老，秋叶未生，故种此相接。
现代文：春葵已经老了，秋葵尚未下种，故种这一茬作为春、秋间食。
English: The arugula is already old, and the okra has not yet been sown, so this stalk is planted as a snack between spring and autumn.

古文：六月一日，种白茎秋葵。
现代文：六月初一，种白秆的秋葵。
English: On the first day of June, plant white-budded okra.

古文：白茎者宜干，紫茎者干则黑而涩。
现代文：白秆的适宜干藏，紫秆的干了以后变得又黑又涩苦。
English: White radish is suitable for dry storage, while purple radish becomes dark and bitter after it dries.

古文：秋葵堪食，仍留五月种者取子。
现代文：秋葵长大可食，五月初种的那一茬葵，仍然应当留着，让它结子。
English: The okra will grow to be edible, but the anemone, which was planted in early May, should still be kept and allowed to germinate.

古文：春葵子熟不均，故须留中辈。
现代文：春葵结的子成熟不均匀，所以需要留五月种的中茬葵的种子。
English: The seeds of the verbena knot ripen unevenly, so it is necessary to leave the seeds of the middle anemone, which is planted in May.

古文：于此时，附地剪却春葵，令根上枋音蘖。生者，柔软至好；仍供常食，美于秋菜。
现代文：这时可贴着地面把春葵茎秆剪掉，使其重新长出嫩叶、嫩枝，令根上的芽枿音蘖生长起来，极为柔嫩好吃，仍可供日常食用，比秋葵还要好。
English: At this time, you can cut off the stalks of the arugula while it is still attached to the ground, so that the young leaves and branches will grow again, and the buds on the roots will grow. They are extremely tender and delicious, and can still be eaten daily. They are even better than okra.

古文：留之，亦中为榜簇。
现代文：把它留下来，将来可以做成榜簇储藏。
English: If you keep it, it can be stored in a pile in the future.

古文：掐秋叶，必留五六叶。不掐则茎孤，留叶则科大。
现代文：掐摘秋葵的叶时，必须留下五六个叶片，不掐叶，不易生侧枝，会使枝条减少；留下几片叶子，科丛便容易长大。
English: When picking the leaves of okra, you must leave five or six leaves. If you do not pick the leaves, it is not easy to grow side branches, which will reduce the number of branches. If you leave a few leaves, it will be easy to grow up.

古文：凡掐葵，必待露解。
现代文：掐采葵菜叶，必须要等候露水散尽。
English: When harvesting sunflower leaves, it is necessary to wait for the dew to dissipate.

古文：谚曰： 触露不掐葵，日中不剪韭。 
现代文：谚语说： 有露水，不要掐葵菜；中午，不要剪韭菜。 
English: A proverb says: Do not prune sunflower when there is dew; do not prune amaranth at noon.

古文：八月半，剪去。
现代文：八月中旬，将秋葵剪去。
English: In mid-August, the okra is cut off.

古文：留其歧，歧多者，则去地一二寸；独茎者，亦可去地四五寸。
现代文：留下贴近地面的分枝。分枝多的，离地一二寸剪掉；独茎无分枝的，可离地四五寸剪掉。
English: Leave the branches close to the ground. If there are many branches, cut them off one or two inches from the ground; if there is a single stem with no branches, cut it off four or five inches from the ground.

古文：枿生肥嫩。比至收时，高与人膝等，茎叶皆美。
现代文：根枝生长出的新枝极为肥嫩，及至到收获时，可以长到和人膝一样高，茎和叶子皆很鲜美。
English: The new shoots that grow from the roots and branches are extremely tender, and by the time of harvest, they can grow as high as the human knee, and the stems and leaves are very delicious.

古文：科虽不高，菜实倍多。
现代文：株科虽然不高，但菜叶却成倍地加多。
English: Although the stock is not high, the leaves have increased exponentially.

古文：其不剪早生者，虽高数尺，柯叶坚硬，全不中食。
现代文：如不将秋葵的老茎秆剪掉，虽然长高数尺，但长出的叶子和小枝却非常坚硬，全然不能食用。
English: If the old stem of the okra is not cut off, although it is several feet tall, the leaves and twigs that grow out are very hard and cannot be eaten at all.

古文：所可用者，唯有叶心：附叶黄涩至恶，煮亦不美。
现代文：能够供食用的只有叶心，其他的附叶，颜色发黄，煮熟后也不好。
English: Only the heart of the leaf can be eaten, the other attached leaves are yellow in color and are not good after cooking.

古文：看虽似多，其实倍少。
现代文：看来叶菜似乎很多，但能够食用的却非常少。
English: There seems to be a lot of leafy vegetables, but very few edible mushrooms.

古文：收待霜降。
现代文：收获葵菜，一定要过了霜降节以后。
English: Harvesting sunflower must be done after the Frost Festival.

古文：伤早黄烂，伤晚黑涩。
现代文：过早，叶子会变黄或腐烂；过晚，叶子会变黑，味道变涩。
English: Too early, the leaves will turn yellow or rot; too late, the leaves will turn black and the taste will become astringent.

古文：携簇皆须阴中。
现代文：做成的葵菜 榜簇 ，皆要放在背阴的地方。
English: Sunflower seeds, which are made into clusters, should be placed in the shade.

古文：见日亦涩。
现代文：菜见阳光会变涩。
English: Vegetables become astringent when exposed to sunlight.

古文：其碎者，割讫，即地中寻手纠之。
现代文：落下来的零碎枝条，收割工作完毕后，随手在地中把叶子摘下。
English: After the harvesting work is completed, pick off the leaves from the fallen branches in the ground.

古文：待萎而纠者必烂。
现代文：等到叶子萎蔫后再摘，便会腐烂。
English: Wait until the leaves wilt and then pick them, they will rot.

古文：崔寔曰：六月六日可种葵。中伏后，可种冬葵。
现代文：崔寔说：六月初六日，可以种葵；中伏以后，可以种冬葵。
English: Cui Wei said: On the 6th day of the 6th month of June, you can plant sunflowers; after the Mid-Autumn Festival, you can plant winter sunflowers.

古文：九月，作葵菹，干葵。
现代文：九月可作酸葵菜，晒干葵菜。
English: In September, you can make pickled sunflower and sun-dried sunflower.

