古文：十有五年春，王二月，葬卫定公。
现代文：十五年春季，周历二月，安葬卫定公。
English: In the spring of the fifteenth year, in February of the lunar calendar, the funeral of Wei Ding Gong took place.

古文：三月乙巳，仲婴齐卒。
现代文：三月乙巳日，仲婴齐去世。
English: On the 19th day of March, Zhongying Qi passed away.

古文：癸丑，公会晋侯、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯、宋世子成、齐国佐、邾人，同盟于戚。
现代文：葵丑日，成公与晋侯、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯、宋国世子成、齐国的佐、邾国人在戚地结盟。
English: On the day of Kwai Chou, Chenggong allied with the princes of Jin, Wei, Zheng, Cao, the heirs of Song, the princes of Qi, and the princes of Shu.

古文：晋侯执曹伯，归于京师。
现代文：晋侯逮捕了曹伯，将他送到了京师。
English: The prince of Jin arrested Cao Bo and sent him to the capital.

古文：公至自会。
现代文：成公从戚地回到鲁国。
English: Wen Gong returns from Xincheng.

古文：夏六月，宋公固卒。
现代文：夏季六月，宋共公去世。
English: In the summer of June, Song Quangong passed away.

古文：楚子伐郑。
现代文：楚国攻打郑国。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang attacked Zheng Guo.

古文：秋八月庚辰，葬宋共公。
现代文：秋季八月庚辰日，安葬宋共公。
English: In autumn, on August Gengchen Day, the funeral of Song Gongguo took place.

古文：宋华元出奔晋。
现代文：宋国的华元逃到晋国。
English: Hua Yuan of Song fled to Jin.

古文：宋华元自晋归于宋。
现代文：宋国的华元从晋国回到宋国。
English: Hua Yuan of Song returned to Song from Jin.

古文：宋杀其大夫山。
现代文：宋国杀掉自己的大夫山。
English: Song killed his own doctor mountain.

古文：宋鱼石出奔楚。
现代文：宋国的鱼石逃到楚国。
English: The Song Dynasty fled to Chu.

古文：冬十有一月，叔孙侨如会晋士燮、齐高无咎、宋华元、卫孙林父、郑公子酉、邾人会吴于钟离。
现代文：冬季十一月，叔孙侨如与晋国的士燮、齐国的高无咎、宋国的华元、卫国的孙林父、郑国公子、邾国的会吴在钟离会见。
English: In the winter of November, the uncles and grandsons of the overseas Chinese met with the scholars of Jin Province, Gao Muxin of Qi Province, Hua Yuan of Song Province, Sun Lin father of Wei Province, Zheng Guo Gongzixi of Zheng Province, and Wu Zi Zhongli of Min Province.

古文：许迁于叶。
现代文：许国迁都到叶地。
English: The national capital was moved to Ye.

古文：十五年春，会于戚，讨曹成公也。
现代文：十五年春季，鲁成公和晋厉公、卫献公、郑成公、曹成公、宋国世子成、齐国国佐、邾人在戚地会盟，这是为了讨伐曹成公。
English: In the spring of the fifteenth year, Lu Chenggong and Jin Li Gong, Wei Xian Gong, Zheng Chenggong, Cao Chenggong, Song Guo He Zicheng, Qi Guo Guo Zuo, and Xuan people formed an alliance at their relatives' place, which was to fight against Cao Chenggong.

古文：执而归诸京师。
现代文：逮捕了曹成公送到京师。
English: Cao Chenggong was arrested and sent to Beijing.

古文：书曰： 晋侯执曹伯。 不及其民也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 晋侯执曹伯 ，这是由于曹成公的罪过不及于百姓。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that Cao Chenggong, the prince of Jin, was in charge of Cao Bo, because Cao Chenggong's crime was less than that of the common people.

古文：凡君不道于其民，诸侯讨而执之，则曰某人执某侯。不然，则否。
现代文：凡是国君对百姓无道，诸侯讨伐而且逮捕了他，就说 某人执某侯 ，否则就不这样记载。
English: Whenever the ruler of a country behaves badly towards the people, and the princes attack and arrest him, it is said that "someone is in charge of a certain province," otherwise it is not recorded as such.

古文：诸侯将见子臧于王而立之，子臧辞曰： 前《志》有之，曰： 圣达节，次守节，下失节。 
现代文：诸侯要让子臧进见周王而立他为曹国国君。子臧辞谢说： 古书上有这样的话： 圣人通达节义，其次保守节义，最下失去节义 。
English: The lords wanted Zixuan to meet King Zhou and made him the prince of Cao. Zixuan said, "There is a saying in an ancient book: 'A sage achieves righteousness, maintains righteousness, and loses righteousness.'

古文：为君，非吾节也。
现代文：做国君这件事不合于我的节义。
English: Being the head of state does not suit my sense of duty.

古文：虽不能圣，敢失守乎？ 
现代文：虽然不能像圣人那样，岂敢失节呢？ 
English: Though he cannot be like a saint, how can he dare to be unholy?

古文：遂逃奔宋。
现代文：于是逃亡到宋国。
English: So he fled to Song.

古文：夏六月，宋共公卒。
现代文：夏季，六月，宋共公去世。
English: In the summer, in June, Song died.

古文：楚将北师。子囊曰： 新与晋盟而背之，无乃不可乎？ 
现代文：楚国准备向北方出兵，子囊说： 新近和晋国结盟而背弃它，恐怕不可吧！ 
English: Chu was preparing to send troops to the north, and Zizuku said, "I'm afraid we can't abandon our recent alliance with Jin.

古文：子反曰： 敌利则进，何盟之有？ 
现代文：子反说： 敌情有利于我就前进，结什么盟？ 
English: His son retorted: "If the enemy situation is favorable, I will advance. What kind of alliance should we make?"

古文：申叔时老矣，在申，闻之，曰： 子反必不免。
现代文：申叔时已经老了，住在采邑申地，听到这话，说： 子反必然不能免于祸难。
English: Uncle Shin, who was already old at the time and lived in the county seat of Shinchi, heard this and said, "Sonhan must not be spared from disaster.

古文：信以守礼，礼以庇身，信礼之亡，欲免得乎？ 
现代文：信用用来保持礼义，礼义用来保护生存，信用、礼义都没有了，想要免于祸难，行吗？ 
English: Credit is used to maintain propriety, propriety is used to protect survival, credit, propriety are gone, want to be free from disaster, okay?

古文：楚子侵郑，及暴隧，遂侵卫，及首止。
现代文：楚子入侵郑国，到达暴隧，因此入侵卫国，到达首止。
English: Chu Zi invaded Zheng Guo and reached the violent tunnel, so he invaded Wei Guo and reached the first stop.

古文：郑子罕侵楚，取新石。
现代文：郑国子罕入侵楚国，战领了新石。
English: Zheng Guo Zi Han invaded Chu and led Xinshi to victory.

古文：栾武子欲报楚，韩献子曰： 无庸。使重其罪，民将叛之。
现代文：晋将栾武子想要报复楚国，韩献子说： 不用，让他自己加重罪过，百姓将会背叛他。
English: When Jin general Han Xianzi wanted to take revenge on the state of Chu, Han Xianzi said: "No, let him add to his sins, and the people will betray him."

古文：无民孰战？ 
现代文：失了人心，谁去替他打仗。 
English: When a man loses his heart, who will fight his battles for him?

古文：秋八月，葬宋共公。
现代文：秋季，八月，安葬宋共公。
English: In the autumn, in August, the funeral of Song Zongguo took place.

古文：于是华元为右师，鱼石为左师，荡泽为司马，华喜为司徒，公孙师为司城，向为人为大司寇，鳞朱为少司寇，向为大宰，鱼府为少宰。
现代文：在这时，华元做右师，鱼石做左师，荡泽做司马，华喜做司徒，公孙师做司城，向为人做大司寇，鳞朱做少师寇，向带做太宰，鱼府做少宰。
English: At this time, Hua Yuan did the right division, Yu Shi did the left division, Xuan Ze did the Sima division, Huaxi did the Sito division, Gongsun did the Sicheng division, Xiang Ren did the big Sico division, Yu Zhu did the small Sico division, Xiang Biao did the Dazai division, Yu Fu did the small Sico division.

古文：荡泽弱公室，杀公子肥。
现代文：荡泽要削弱公室，杀了公子肥。
English: 荡泽 wanted to weaken the public office and killed 公子肥.

古文：华元曰： 我为右师，君臣之训，师所司也。
现代文：华元说： 我做右师，国君和臣下的教导，这是师所掌管的。
English: Hua Yuan said: I am the right teacher, teaching the sovereign and his subjects. This is what the teacher is in charge of.

古文：今公室卑而不能正，吾罪大矣。
现代文：现在公室的地位低下，却不能拨正，我的罪过大了。
English: Now the status of the public office is low, but it cannot be corrected. My sin is too great.

古文：不能治官，敢赖宠乎？ 
现代文：不能尽到职责，岂敢以得到宠信为利呢？ 
English: If you can't fulfill your duties, how dare you take advantage of being favored?

古文：乃出奔晋。
现代文：于是出奔晋国。
English: So he left for Jin Province.

古文：二华，戴族也。司城，庄族也。六官者，皆桓族也。
现代文：二位华氏，是戴公的后代；司城，是庄公的后代；其他六大臣都是桓公的后代。
English: The two Fahuas are descendants of Dai Gong; Shicheng is a descendant of Zhuang Gong; the other six ministers are descendants of Huan Gong.

古文：鱼石将止华元，鱼府曰： 右师反，必讨，是无桓氏也。 
现代文：鱼石准备阻止华元逃亡。鱼府说： 右师如果回来，必然要讨伐荡泽，这就会没有桓氏这一族了。 
English: Uoseki prepared to stop Hua Yuan's escape. Uofu said, "If the right division comes back, it will certainly have to fight against Wanzawa, and then there will be no Huan clan."

古文：鱼石曰： 右师苟获反，虽许之讨，必不敢。
现代文：鱼石说： 右师如果能够回来，虽然允许他讨伐，他必然不敢。
English: Yu Shi said: If the right-hand man can come back, although he is allowed to fight, he will not dare.

古文：且多大功，国人与之，不反，惧桓氏之无祀于宋也。
现代文：而且他建立了大功，国内的人们亲附他，如果他不回来，恐怕桓氏在宋国没有人祭祀了。
English: Moreover, he has established a great achievement, people in the country are attached to him, if he does not come back, I am afraid that there will be no one to worship Huan in Song.

古文：右师讨，犹有戌在，桓氏虽亡，必偏。 
现代文：右师如果讨伐，还有向戌在那里。桓氏虽然灭亡，必然只是亡掉一部分而已。 
English: If the right-hand division fought, there would still be Xiang Yu there. Although the Huan clan was destroyed, it was only a part of it that was destroyed.

古文：鱼石自止华元于河上。
现代文：鱼石自己在黄河岸上阻止华元。
English: Yu Shi himself stopped Hua Yuan on the bank of the Yellow River.

古文：请讨，许之。
现代文：华元请求讨伐荡泽，鱼石答应了。
English: Huayuan requested to fight the swarming, and Yuishi agreed.

古文：乃反，使华喜、公孙师帅国人攻荡氏，杀子山。书曰： 宋杀其大夫山。 言背其族也。
现代文：华元这才回来，派遣华喜、公孙师率领国内的人们进攻荡氏，杀了荡泽，《春秋》记载说 宋杀其大夫山 ，就是说荡泽背弃了自己的宗族。
English: It was only then that Hua Yuan returned and sent Huaxi and Gongsun Shi to lead the people of the country to attack the Wang clan and kill Wang Ze. "Spring and Autumn" records that Song killed his father, which means that Wang Ze betrayed his own clan.

古文：鱼石、向为人、鳞朱、向带、鱼府出舍于睢上。华元使止之，不可。
现代文：鱼石、向为人、鳞朱、向带、鱼府离开都城住在睢水旁边，华元派人劝阻他们，他们不同意。
English: Yu Shi, Xiang Ren, Yu Zhu, Xiang Biao, and Yu Fu left the capital to live near Surabaya. Hua Yuan sent someone to dissuade them, but they did not agree.

古文：冬十月，华元自止之，不可。
现代文：冬季，十月，华元亲自去劝阻，他们又不同意，华元就回来了。
English: In the winter, in October, Hua Yuan himself went to dissuade them, but they did not agree, and Hua Yuan came back.

古文：乃反。鱼府曰： 今不从，不得入矣。
现代文：鱼府说： 现在不听从华元的话，以后就不能进入国都了。
English: Uofu said: If you don't listen to Hua Yuan now, you won't be able to enter the capital in the future.

古文：右师视速而言疾，有异志焉。
现代文：右师眼睛转动很快而说话很急，有别的想法呀。
English: The right-hand man's eyes move quickly and his speech is hurried. He has other ideas.

古文：若不我纳，今将驰矣。 
现代文：如果不接纳我们，现在就要疾驰而去了。 
English: If they don't accept us, we're going to run away now.

古文：登丘而望之，则驰。
现代文：他们登上山头一看，就看到华元疾驰而去。
English: As soon as they reached the top of the mountain, they saw Hua Yuan galloping away.

古文：骋而从之，则决睢澨，闭门登陴矣。
现代文：这五个人驱车跟随华元，华元已经掘开睢水堤防，关闭城门登上城墙了。
English: The five men drove to follow Hua Yuan, who had already dug out the dike, closed the gate and climbed the city wall.

古文：左师、二司寇、二宰遂出奔楚。
现代文：左师、两个司寇、两个宰就逃亡到楚国。
English: The left division, two scouts, and two captains fled to Chu.

古文：华元使向戌为左师，老佐为司马，乐裔为司寇，以靖国人。
现代文：华元派向戌做左师、老佐做司马、乐裔做司寇，来安定国内的人。
English: Hua Yuan sent Xiang Yu as his left-hand man, Lao Zuo as his right-hand man, and Le Zi as his right-hand man, to stabilize the people in the country.

古文：晋三郤害伯宗，谮而杀之，及栾弗忌。
现代文：晋国三郤陷害伯宗，诬陷以后再杀了他，并且连累及于栾弗忌。
English: Sanchen of Jin Province framed Bo Zong, killed him again after the frame-up, and implicated Yu Zifu.

古文：伯州犁奔楚。
现代文：伯州犁逃亡到楚国。
English: Bozhou fled to Chu.

古文：韩献子曰： 郤氏其不免乎！
现代文：韩献子说： 郤氏恐怕不能免于祸难吧！
English: Han Xianzi said, "I'm afraid Mr. Zou is not exempt from the calamity!

古文：善人，天地之纪也，而骤绝之，不亡何待！ 
现代文：善人，是天地的纲纪，而多次加以杀害，不灭亡还等什么？ 
English: Good people are the foundation of heaven and earth, but if they are killed many times, what are they waiting for if they do not perish?

古文：初，伯宗每朝，其妻必戒之曰： 盗憎主人，民恶其上。子好直言，必及于难。 
现代文：当初，伯宗每次朝见，他的妻子一定劝戒他说： 盗贼憎恨主人，百姓讨厌统治者，您喜欢说直话，必然遭到祸难。 
English: At first, every time Bozong went to see the emperor, his wife would admonish him: "Thieves hate their masters, and the people hate their rulers. If you like to speak the truth, you are sure to meet with misfortune."

古文：十一月，会吴于钟离，始通吴也。
现代文：十一月，叔孙侨如会合晋国士燮、齐国高无咎、宋国华元、卫国孙林父、郑国公子?
English: In November, will the uncles and grandsons of the overseas Chinese like Jin Guo Shizhao, Qi Guo Gao Muxin, Song Guo Huayuan, Wei Guo Sun Lin father, and Zheng Guo Gongzi meet?

古文：许灵公畏偪于郑，请迁于楚。
现代文：和吴国在钟离会见，这是开始和吴国友好往来。许灵公害怕郑国逼迫，请求迁到楚国。
English: He met with the State of Wu in Zhongli, which was the beginning of friendly relations with the State of Wu. Xu Linggong was afraid of being persecuted by the State of Zheng and requested to move to the State of Chu.

古文：辛丑，楚公子申迁许于叶。
现代文：十一月初三日，楚国公子申把许国迁到叶地。
English: On the 3rd day of the first month of November, the prince of Chu moved his court to Ye.

