古文：二十二日晨餐后，弘辨具骑候行，余力辞之。
现代文：二十二日早餐后，弘辨备好马等候启程，我竭力推辞。
English: After breakfast on the 22nd day, I tried my best to decline the offer.

古文：遂同通事就道，以一人担轻装从，而重者姑寄寺中，拟复从此返也。
现代文：于是和通事上路，用一人挑着轻便的行李随我走，而重的行李暂时寄存在悉檀寺中，计划还从这里返回。
English: So I went on the road with the courier, with one person picking up the light luggage to follow me, while the heavy luggage was temporarily stored in the Siddan Temple, and the plan was to return from here.

古文：十里，过圣峰寺。越西支之脊而西，共四里，过放光寺，入录其藏经、圣谕。
现代文：十里，经过圣峰寺，穿越西支的山脊然后向西走，共四里，经过放光寺，进去录藏经、圣谕。
English: Ten miles, passing through the Sacred Peak Temple, crossing the ridge of the West Branch and then walking westward, a total of four miles, passing through the Hoko Temple, entering and recording the collection of scriptures and holy oracles.

古文：僧留茶，不暇啜而出。
现代文：僧人挽留喝茶，来不及喝就出来了。
English: The monk paused to drink tea, but came out before he could finish.

古文：问所谓盘陀石静室者，僧指在西北危崖之半。
现代文：询问所说的盘陀石静室，僧人指示在西北边陡崖的半山腰上。
English: On enquiring about the said Panthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthasthas

古文：仰视寺后层崖，并华首上下，合而为一，所谓九重崖者，必指此而名。
现代文：仰视寺后的层层崖壁，和华首门上下相连，合而为一，所说的九重崖，一定是据此而取名。
English: Looking up at the layered cliff wall behind the temple, connected up and down with the Huashou Gate, united as one, the so-called nine-layer cliff must have been named accordingly.

古文：开山后，人但知为华首，觅九重故迹而不得，始以点头峰左者当之，谁谓陵谷无易位哉？
现代文：寺庙创建后，人们只知道是华首门，寻找九重崖故迹却找不到，于是把点头峰左边当作九重崖，谁说山谷不会变易位置呢？
English: After the establishment of the temple, people only knew that it was the first gate of Huashou, but they couldn't find the relics of the nine-story cliff, so they took the left side of the nodding peak as the nine-story cliff. Who said that the valley would not change its position?

古文：由寺西一里余，始蹑坳而上，又一里余，其上甚峻，乃逾脊。
现代文：从寺西走一里多，于是踏着山坳而上，又走一里多，上面很陡，于是翻越山脊。
English: I walked more than a kilometer from the west side of the temple, and then I walked up the mountain, and then I walked more than a kilometer, and it was very steep, so I climbed over the ridge.

古文：脊南北相属，东西分坑下坠，所谓桃花箐也。
现代文：脊南北相连，东西分别下坠的坑，是所说的桃花著。
English: The north-south ridge is connected, and the east-west separately falling pit is the so-called peach blossom.

古文：脊有两坊，俱标为 宾邓分界 。
现代文：脊上有两座坊，都写着 宾邓分界 。
English: There are two tombs on the ridge, both inscribed with "Bing Deng Demarcation."

古文：其处陟历已高，向自礼佛台眺之，直似重渊之底云。
现代文：这里已经升登得很高了，以前从礼佛台眺望，却只像在重重深渊的底部呢。
English: It has risen so high that the view from the podium used to be like looking into the bottom of an abyss.

古文：由箐西随箐下，二里，有茅舍夹道，为前岁底朝山卖奖者所托处，今则寂然为畏途。
现代文：从箐西顺着著下，二里，道路两边有茅草房，是去年底朝山、卖浆人的安身处，现在则空无一人，成为畏途。
English: Two miles down the road from Shaanxi, there are thatched houses on both sides of the road. At the end of last year, they were the refuge of morning people and sellers of syrup. Now, there is no one, and it has become a dreaded road.

古文：其前分岐西南者，为邓川州道；直西者为罗川道，乃通丽江者。
现代文：前面向西南方分出的岔路，是去邓川州的路；直向西去的是罗川道，并通往丽江府。
English: Kushiro Road, which branches off to the southwest in front, is the road to Dengchuanzhou; Luochuan Road, which goes straight west, leads to Lijiang.

古文：遵之迤逦下二里，有庵当路北北山下，曰金花庵。
现代文：顺路曲折连绵地下二里，有庵坐落在路北的北山下，名金花庵。
English: Two miles underground, along a meandering path, there is a hermitage located at the foot of the north mountain to the north of the road. It is known as the Golden Flower Hermitage.

古文：又西下三里，连有二涧，俱自东而西注，即桃花箐之下流也，各有板桥跨之。
现代文：又往西下三里，接连有二道沟涧，涧水都是从东向西流，就是桃花著水的下游，各自都有木板桥横跨。
English: Another three miles to the west, there are two gullies in succession, the water flows from east to west, that is, the downstream of the peach blossom with water, each has a wooden bridge across.

古文：连越桥南，始循南山西向行。
现代文：接连过到桥南，就沿南山向西行。
English: After passing to the south of the bridge, we continued west along Nanshan Mountain.

古文：一里，有寺踞南山之脊，曰大圣寺，寺西向。
现代文：一里，有寺坐落在南山的脊上，名大圣寺，寺向西。
English: For one kilometer, there is a temple located on the ridge of Nanshan Mountain, a famous holy temple. The temple faces west.

古文：乃从其前逾脊南下，又值一涧亦西流，随之半里，涧与前度二桥之流，俱转峡北去，路乃西。
现代文：于是从寺前越过山脊往南下，又遇到一条也是往西流的沟涧，顺着走半里，沟涧和先前过的两座桥下的水，都转进峡谷向北流去，道路于是往西走。
English: So from Teramae, I crossed the ridge to the south, and encountered a ravine that also flowed to the west. After walking half a mile, the ravine and the water under the two bridges that I had previously passed turned into a canyon and flowed north. The road then went west.

古文：半里，逾南山北突之坳。
现代文：半里，穿越南山向北突的山拗。
English: Half a mile, through the mountains to the north of the mountains.

古文：坳西，其坡始西悬而下，路遵之。
现代文：山坳西，山坡开始往西陡直地伸下去，道路跟着下。
English: West of the mountains, the slopes begin to drop steeply to the west, and the road follows.

古文：四里，有村在南山坞四周高中间低的山谷间，是为白沙嘴。
现代文：四里，南山坞中有个村庄，那是白沙嘴。
English: Shili, there is a village in Nanshan dock, that is Bai Sha Zui.

古文：随嘴又西下二里，忽见深壑自南而北，溪流贯之，有梁东西跨其上。
现代文：顺白沙嘴又往西下二里，忽然看见深壑从南往北走向，溪流纵贯其中，桥梁从东到西横跨溪上。
English: Shun Bai Sha Zui went down to the west for another two miles, and suddenly saw the deep gorge from south to north, the stream running through it, and the bridge spanning the stream from east to west.

古文：乃坠壑而下，二里，始及梁端，所谓和光桥也。
现代文：于是坠入壑谷而下，二里，才到桥头，是所说的和光桥。
English: So I fell down into the valley and it took me two miles to get to the bridgehead, which is the so-called Warimitsu Bridge.

古文：鸡山西麓，至是而止。
现代文：鸡足山西麓，到此而止。
English: At the western foot of Mt. Chikafusa, the climbing stops here.

古文：其水南自洱海东青山北谷来，至此颇巨，北向合桃花箐水，注于大石头者也。
现代文：桥下的水南边从洱海东边的青山北谷流来，流到这里时水比较大，往北会合桃花著水，流入大石头。
English: The water south of the bridge flows from the Aoyama north valley on the east side of the Bohai Sea. When it flows here, the water is relatively large, and it meets the peach blossom water to the north and flows into the large stone.

古文：丽府生日公建悉檀之余，复建此梁，置屋数楹跨其上。
现代文：丽江府木生白公建悉檀寺余下的钱财，又修建了这座桥，在桥上盖了好几间屋，于是就在屋里吃饭。
English: Lijiang Mousheng Bai Gong built the remaining money and wealth of the temple, and built the bridge, built several houses on the bridge, and then ate in the house.

古文：遂就而饭焉。桥之西有小径，自北而南，溯流循峡者，乃浪沧卫通大理道，与大道 十 字交之。
现代文：桥的西边有小路，从北往南走，沿峡谷溯流而上，是浪沧卫通往大理府的路，和大路 十 字形交叉。
English: There is a small road on the west side of the bridge. Walking from the north to the south, along the canyon upstream, it is the road of Langcangwei to Dali Prefecture, and a zigzag intersection with the main road.

古文：大道随流少北，即西上岭，盘旋而上，或峻或夷。
现代文：大路顺流稍微往北，就往西上岭，盘旋而上，有时陡峻有时平坦。
English: The river flows slightly north along the main road, heading for the West Upland, circling up, sometimes steep and sometimes flat.

古文：五里越其坳，西北下，四里始夷，又一里为罗武城，其处坞始大开。
现代文：五里越过山坳，往西北下，四里才是平路。又走一里到罗武城，这里山坞十分开阔。
English: Five miles over the mountains, northwest down, four miles is the flat road. Another mile to the city of Luowu, here the dock is very open.

古文：自此山之西，开东西大坞，直至千户营坞分为二，始转为南北坞，皆所谓罗川也。
现代文：从此山的西部，敞开东西走向的大山坞，一直到千户营，山坞一分为二，于是转为南坞、北坞，都是所说的罗川。
English: From the western part of this mountain, the large dock that is open to the east and west, all the way to Chihujing, the dock is divided into two, so it turns into the south dock and the north dock, all of which are called Luo River.

古文：向自山顶西望，翠色袭人者即此，皆麦与蚕豆也。
现代文：以前从鸡足山顶往西眺望，翠色袭人的地方就是这里，绿的全是麦子和蚕豆。
English: In the past, when looking westward from the top of the Chicken's Foot Mountain, this was the place where the emerald color struck people, and the green was all made of wheat and broad beans.

古文：罗武无城，一小村耳。
现代文：罗武没有城郭，是个小村子罢了。
English: Luowu doesn't have a castle, it's just a small village.

古文：村北有溪，西自千户营来，即南衙河底之水，至此而东北坠峡，合和光桥下流，而东北经大石头者也。
现代文：村北有条溪，西边从千户营流来，就是南衙河底的水，流到这里往东北坠入峡谷，与和光桥下的水会合，然后往东北流过大石头。
English: There is a stream to the north of the village. It flows from Chihujing to the west, which is the water at the bottom of the Nanlu River. It flows here to the northeast, falls into a canyon, meets the water under the Waguang Bridge, and then flows to the northeast over large stones.

古文：于是循南山行溪之南，二里，有村在溪北山下，曰百户营。
现代文：于是顺南山从溪南岸行走，二里，溪北岸山下有个村子，名百户营。
English: So I walked along the Nanshan Mountain from the south bank of the creek for two miles, and there was a village at the foot of the mountain on the north bank of the creek, famous for its hundred households.

古文：又西五里，有村在溪北悬冈上，曰千户营。
现代文：又往西走五里，溪北陡冈上有个村子，名千户营。
English: Another five miles to the west, there is a village on a steep hill to the north of the creek, famous for its thousands of households.

古文：营之西，有山西自大山分支东南下，突于坞中，坞遂中分。
现代文：营的西边，有从西部大山分出支脉往东南延伸的山；突立在山坞中，山坞于是从中分开。
English: On the west side of the camp, there is a mountain branching out from the western mountain to the southeast; it protrudes in the dock, and the dock is then separated from the middle.

古文：当山之西南者，其坞回盘，其水小，为西山湾，新厂在其东南，而路出其西北。
现代文：位于山西南的坞曲折盘绕，坞中的水小，为西山湾，新厂在坞东南，而道路从坞西北出去。
English: The dock located in the southwest of the mountain twists and turns, the water in the dock is small, it is Xishan Bay, the new plant is in the southeast of the dock, and the road goes out from the northwest of the dock.

古文：当山之东北者，其坞遥达，其水大，为中所屯。
现代文：位于山东北的坞遥远通达，坞中的水大，为中所屯。
English: Located in the northeastern part of the mountain, the dockyard is called Dalian Tongda, and the dock in the middle of the dockyard is called Shuida, which is the middle of the town.

古文：南北二衙又在其西北，而路则由山之西南逾坳以入。
现代文：南、北二衙又在坞西北，而道路则从山的西南越过山坳伸进去。
English: The south and north ridges are in the northwest of the dock, and the road extends from the southwest of the mountain over the ridge.

古文：于是从千户营溪南转入南坞，一里余，至新厂。
现代文：于是沿千户营溪流往南转入南坞，走一里多，到新厂。
English: As a result, they turned south along the Chihujing Stream into the south dock and walked more than a mile to the new factory.

古文：皆淘沙煎银者。乃北一里余，抵分界山之阳，渡一小流，循山阳西北行三里，北逾过坳。
现代文：于是往北走一里多，到分界山的南面，渡过一条小河，顺山南往西北走三里，往北越过山坳。
English: So I walked north for more than a mile, to the south of the dividing mountain, crossed a small river, walked along the mountain south to northwest for three miles, and crossed the mountains to the north.

古文：于是稍下，循西大山之麓北向行，其东又成南北大坞，即千户营之上流也。
现代文：就逐渐下，顺西边大山之麓往北行，东边又形成南北走向的大山坞，是千户营的上游。
English: It gradually descends, heading north along the foot of the large mountain to the west, and forming a large mountain dock to the north and south to the east, which is the upper reaches of Senju camp.

古文：北一里，有村倚西山之坡，是为中所屯，乃邓川、鹤庆分界处，悉檀寺庄房在焉，乃入宿。
现代文：往北走一里，有村庄傍靠在西山坡上，这是中所屯，为邓川州、鹤庆府分界处，悉檀寺的庄房在这里，于是进去住宿。
English: One mile to the north, there is a village next to the west slope of the mountain. This is Zhongtun, the demarcation point of Dengchuan and Heqing. The manor house of Siddan Temple is here, so I went to stay.

古文：悉檀僧已先传谕之，故守僧不拒云。
现代文：悉檀寺僧人已经事先传告过，所以守庄房的僧人没有拒绝。
English: The monks of Siddan Monastery had been notified in advance, so the monks guarding the manor house did not refuse.

古文：二十三日晨，饭于悉檀庄，天色作阴。
现代文：二十三日早晨，在悉檀寺庄房吃饭，天气转阴。
English: On the morning of the 23rd, I was having dinner at Siddanji Manor House when the weather turned cloudy.

古文：乃东下坞中，随西山麓北行。
现代文：于是往东下到坞中，顺西山麓往北行。
English: So I headed east to the middle of the dock and north along the western foot of the mountain.

古文：二里，有支冈自西山又横突而东，乃蹑其上。
现代文：二里，有分支山冈又从西山横出，向东突立，于是登上山冈。
English: After two miles, a branching ridge emerged from the western mountain and jutted out to the east, so I climbed up the ridge.

古文：有岐西向登山者，为南衙道，腰龙洞在焉；北向逾坳者，为北衙道，鹤庆之大道随之。
现代文：有岔路，往西登上山的，是去南衙的路，腰龙洞就在在那里；向北穿山坳的，是去北衙的路，去鹤庆府的大路顺此路走。
English: There is a fork in the road. If you go up the mountain to the west, it is the road to Nanlu, and the Waist Dragon Cave is there. If you go through the mountain to the north, it is the road to Beilun, and the road to Heqingfu follows this road.

古文：余先是闻腰龙洞名，乃令行李同通事从大道行，期会于松桧，地名，大道托宿处。
现代文：我在这之前听过腰龙洞的名声，于是让行李和通事从大路走，约定在松桧碰头。
English: I had heard of the reputation of the Waist Dragon Cave before this, so I let my luggage and courier go from the main road and agreed to meet at Songtao.

古文：余同顾仆策杖携伞，遂分道从岐，由山脊西上。
现代文：我和顾仆携带竹杖和伞，就分道顺岔路走，沿山脊往西上。
English: Gu and I, carrying bamboo canes and umbrellas, split up and walked along the ridge to the west.

古文：一里，稍转而南，复有岐缘南箐而去，余惑之。
现代文：一里，逐渐转向南，又有岔路沿南著而去，我感到疑惑。
English: I was puzzled by the gradual turn to the south for one mile and the fork in the road heading south.

古文：候驱驴者至，问之，曰： 余亦往南衙者，大路从此西逾岭下，约十里。 
现代文：等有赶驴的人来到，询问路，回答说： 我也是去南衙，大路从这里往西越岭而下，大约有十里。 
English: When a man driving a donkey came and asked the way, he replied, "I am also going to Nanlu. The highway from here to Xixiaoling is about ten miles.

古文：余问南岐何路？
现代文：我问沿南警岔的路去哪里？
English: Where should I go along the South Police Road?

古文：曰： 此往鸡鸣寺者。 
现代文：回答说： 这路去鸡鸣寺。 
English: He replied, "This way to Chiming Temple."

古文：问寺何在？
现代文：我间寺在哪里？
English: Where is my temple?

古文：其人指： 南箐夹崖间者是，然此岐隘不可行。 
现代文：这人指着说： 南警中夹着的崖间就是。但这条岔路险阻难行。 
English: The man pointed and said, "That's the cliff in the middle of the South Police Station, but it's a dangerous detour.

古文：忽一人后至，曰： 此亦奇胜。即从此峡逾南坳，亦达南衙，与此路由中坳者同也。 
现代文：忽然有一个后到的人说： 这也是奇异的胜境，即使从此峡谷翻越南坳，也通到南衙，与从中坳走的这条路一样。 
English: Suddenly, a latecomer said: "This is also a strange wonderland. Even if you go over the South Col from this canyon, it will lead to the South Col, just like this road from the Middle Col.

古文：余闻之喜甚，曰： 此可兼收也。 
现代文：我听了十分高兴，说： 这样可以一举两得。 
English: I was very pleased to hear this and said, "This way we can kill two birds with one stone."

古文：谢其人，遂由岐南行。
现代文：谢过那人，就从岔路往南走。
English: After thanking the man, he walked south from Kushiro.

古文：里许，转入夹崖下，攀崖隙，透一石隙而入。
现代文：一里多，转入夹在峡谷中的崖下，攀援崖隙，穿过一条石缝而入。
English: For more than a mile, turn into the cliff under the canyon, climb the cliff gap, and enter through a stone slit.

古文：其石自崖端垂下，外插崖底，若象鼻然，中透一穴如门，穿门即由峡中上跻，亦犹鸡山之束身焉。
现代文：这石崖从顶上垂下来，往外插到崖底，好似大象鼻子一般，正中有个门一样的洞穴，穿洞就是沿峡谷中往上登，也犹如鸡足山的束身崖。
English: This rock cliff hangs down from the top and sticks out to the bottom of the cliff, like an elephant's nose. There is a door-like cave in the middle, and climbing through the hole means climbing up the canyon. It is also like the bundled cliff of Chicken Foot Mountain.

古文：登峡上，则上崖岈然横列，若洞、若龛、若门、若楼、若栈者，骈峙焉。
现代文：登峡谷而上，则上面的岩石深邃横列，像洞、像石屋、像门、像楼房、像栈道的都有，并排峙立在那里。
English: Climbing up the canyon, the rocks above are deeply lined up, like a cave, like a stone house, like a door, like a building, like a boardwalk, and stand there side by side.

古文：洞皆不甚深，僧依之为殿，左为真武阁，又左为观音龛，皆东北向下危壁。
现代文：洞都不很深，僧人傍靠洞为殿，左边是真武阁，又左边的是观音完，都是面向东北，下临陡壁。
English: The caves are not very deep, the monks stand next to the cave as a hall, on the left is Zhenwu Pavilion, and on the left is Guanyin Pavilion, all facing northeast, with a steep wall below.

古文：殿阁之间，又垂崖两重，俱若象鼻，下插崖底，而中通若门。
现代文：殿阁之间，又垂下两重崖壁，完全像大象鼻子，往下插向崖底，而中间像门一样通着。
English: Between the pavilions, two cliff walls hang down, exactly like an elephant's trunk, plunging down to the bottom of the cliff, with the middle opening like a door.

古文：有僧两人，皆各踞一龛，见客至，胡麻芝麻方熟，辄邀同饭，余为再啜两盂。
现代文：有两个僧人，都各自盘坐在一石屋中，见客人来到，芝麻刚好熟，就邀请一同吃饭，我因此又吃了两碗。
English: There were two monks, each sitting cross-legged in a stone hut, and when they saw the guests arrive and the sesame seeds were just ripe, they invited us to eat together, so I ate two more bowls.

古文：见龛后有石脊，若垂梯而上，跣而蹑之，复有洞悬其上层，中空而旁透小穴。
现代文：看见石屋后有石脊，像梯子垂下来而通向上面，我光着脚攀爬，又有洞悬在上层，中空而旁边和小洞相通。
English: After seeing the stone house, there is a ridge, like a ladder hanging down and leading to the top, I climb barefoot, and there is a hole hanging above, hollow and next to the small hole.

古文：崖之左右，由夹中升岭，即南坳道，而崖悬不通，复下，由穴门出，即转崖左西南上。仰见上崖复悬亘而中岈然，有岐细若虫迹，攀条从之，又得一大穴，其门亦东北向，前甃井壁石为台，树坊为门，曰青莲界。
现代文：从崖的左右夹缝登岭，就是去南坳的路，但崖壁陡悬走不通，又下来，从洞门出去，就转到崖左往西南上，抬头看见上面的崖石又悬空横贯而中间深邃，有条极细的羊肠小道，攀援小路走，又到了一个大洞穴，洞门也是东北向，前面砌石为台，树坊为门，名青莲界。
English: Climbing up the ridge from the left and right cracks of the cliff is the way to Nanluo, but the cliff wall is steep and impassable, and then go down, go out of the cave door, turn to the left of the cliff to the southwest, look up and see that the cliff stone above is also suspended across the sky and deep in the middle, there is a very fine sheep gut path, climb the path, and go to a large cave, the cave door is also northeast, the front stone is a table, the tree is a door, and the name is Qinglian.

古文：其左药灶碑板俱存，而无字无人，棘萝旁翳，无可问为何人未竟之业。
现代文：洞左边药灶碑板都在，但没有字、没有人。荆棘萝草四处覆盖，无法询问是什么人的未竟之业。
English: On the left side of the cave, the tablets of the medicine stoves are all there, but there is no word, no one. Thorns and grasses cover everything, and it is impossible to ask what someone's unfinished business is.

古文：其右复有象鼻外垂之门，透而南，复有悬绡之幛。
现代文：右边又有像象鼻外垂形成的门，穿门往南，又有如轻纱悬空高卷的屏嶂。
English: On the right, there is a door shaped like an elephant's protruding nose, leading south through the door, and a tall screen curtain hanging like gauze.

古文：幛之右，上崖有洞巍张，下崖即二僧结庵之处，然磴绝俱莫可通。
现代文：屏嶂的右边，上面的崖石间有高大开阔的洞，下面的崖石就是那两个僧人居住的地方，但石阶断绝，上下都无路可通。
English: On the right side of the screen, there is a large open hole between the upper cliffs. The lower cliffs are where the two monks lived, but the stone steps are broken and there is no way up or down.

古文：乃仍由青莲界出东夹，再上半里，而崖穷夹尽，山半坪开。
现代文：于是仍然从青莲界走出东峡谷，再上半里，就走到崖石、峡谷的尽头，山腰平地开阔。
English: As a result, I still walked out of the East Canyon from the Qinglian area, and after the first half mile, I walked to the cliff, the end of the canyon, and the mountainside was flat and open.

古文：又有泉自南坳东出，由坪而坠于崖之右；又分而交潆坪塍，坠于崖之左。
现代文：又有泉水从南坳往东流出，沿平地流，从崖石右边坠落；又分出一股在平地土埂间潇绕，坠入崖石左边。
English: There is also a spring water flowing from the south pier to the east, flowing along the flat ground and falling from the right side of the cliff stone; and a separate stream winding between the flat earth mounds and falling into the left side of the cliff stone.

古文：崖当其中，濯灵涤窍，遂成异幻。
现代文：崖石位于其中，水流灌灵洗窍，就形成奇异的幻景。
English: The cliff stone is located in the middle of it, and the water flows into it, forming a strange illusion.

古文：由坪上溯流半里，北向入峡，峡中之流，倾涌南向。
现代文：沿平地边溯流半里，向北进入峡谷，峡谷中的水流，向南倾泻。
English: Follow the stream for half a mile along the flatland edge, north into the canyon, and the water in the canyon flows south.

古文：溯之一里，涧形不改，而有巨石当其中。石之下，则涌水成流；而石之上，惟砾石堆涧，绝无水痕。
现代文：溯流一里，沟涧形状没变，但有巨石正处其中，巨石下面，则涌水成流；而巨石上面，只有砾石堆在涧中，绝对没有水痕。
English: One mile downstream, the shape of the gully has not changed, but there are boulders right in the middle of it. Below the boulders, water gushes into the stream; and above the boulders, only gravel is piled in the crevices, absolutely no water marks.

古文：又溯枯涧北行半里，路穷茅翳，盖其涧自西峡来，路当北去也。
现代文：又溯枯涧往北走半里，道路中断，茅草遮蔽，因为这条沟涧从西边峡谷过来，道路应当往北去。
English: The road was interrupted and covered with thatch, because this ravine came from the western canyon, and the road should go north.

古文：乃东向蹑岭，攀崖跻棘，又半里，得南来路，遂随之北。
现代文：于是往东踏上岭，攀崖穿棘，又走半里，走到从南边伸来的路上，于是顺路往北走。
English: So he set foot on the ridge to the east, climbed the cliff to pierce the thorns, and walked half a mile to the road stretching from the south, and then walked north along the road.

古文：半里，西涉一坞，复升陇而西，有岐，入西南峡中者颇小，其直北下陇者颇大。
现代文：半里，往西穿过一道山坞，又登陇往西走，有岔路，进入西南边峡谷中的较小，直北而下陇的较大。
English: Half a mile to the west, through a dockyard, and then climb the ridge to the west, there is a fork in the road, into the southwest side of the canyon is smaller, straight north and down the ridge is larger.

古文：余心知直北者为南衙道，疑腰龙洞在西南峡中，遂望峡行。
现代文：我心里明白直北是去南衙的路，怀疑腰龙洞在西南边的峡谷中，就向峡谷走去。
English: I knew in my heart that straight north was the way to Nanlu. I suspected that the waist dragon cave was in the canyon on the southwest side, so I walked towards the canyon.

古文：半里，不得路。遥听西北山巅有人语声，乃竭蹶攀岭上艰难地爬上岭，一里，得东来道。
现代文：半里，没有路，听到远处西北方向的山顶上有人讲话的声音，于是竭尽全力地攀岭而上，走了一里，来到从东边伸来的路上。
English: After half a mile, when there was no road, he heard the sound of someone talking on the top of a mountain in the far northwest, so he did his best to climb up the mountain, walked for a mile, and came to the road stretching from the east.

古文：又一里，得驱犊者问之，则此路乃西向逾脊抵焦石峒者。
现代文：又走了一里，见到赶牛的人，问路，原来这条是往西越脊抵达焦石炯的路。
English: I walked another mile, saw a cowherd and asked for directions. It turned out that this was the road to the west ridge and to Coke Rock.

古文：问腰龙洞何在？
现代文：问腰龙洞在哪里？
English: Where is the waist dragon cave?

古文：曰： 即在此支岭之北，然岭北无路，须随路仍东下山，折而北，至南衙，乃可往。 
现代文：回答说： 就在这支岭的北面，但岭北没有路，必须顺路沿东边下山，折向北，到南衙，才能去到。 
English: He replied, "It is just north of this ridge, but there is no road to the north of the ridge. You have to go down the mountain along the east side and turn north to Nanluo to get there.

古文：盖是山大脊，自北而南，脊之西为焦石峒，脊之东，一支东突，其北腋中，则腰龙洞所在，南腋中即此路也。
现代文：原来这座山的主脊，从北往南走向，山脊的西面是焦石炯，山脊的东面，一支脉向东突起，支脉的北侧正中，是腰龙洞所在处，南侧正中就是这条路。
English: Originally, the main ridge of this mountain, from north to south, the west side of the ridge is the cinder cone, the east side of the ridge, a vein protrudes to the east, the north side of the branch is the middle, is the location of the waist dragon cave, the south side is the middle of this road.

古文：余乃怅然，遂随路返。
现代文：我于是怅然不快，就顺路返回。
English: I was so disgusted that I went back on my way.

古文：东下一里，乃转而东北下，又一里，抵山麓，循之北行，又一里而至南衙。
现代文：往东下一里，便就转向东北下，又一里，抵达山麓，沿山麓往北走，又一里就到南衙。
English: One mile to the east, then turn to the northeast, another mile to the foot of the mountain, walk north along the foot of the mountain, and another mile to Nanlu.

古文：南衙之村不甚大，倚西山而东临大坞，其坞北自北衙，南抵中坳，其中甚宽。
现代文：南衙这个村庄不太大，背靠西山而东面对着大山坞，山坞北边起自北衙，南边抵达中坳，中部很宽。
English: Nanluo is not a very large village. It is backed by the West Mountain and faces the large dock to the east. The dock starts from Beilun in the north, reaches Zhongluo in the south, and is very wide in the middle.

古文：盖此中大坞，凡三曲三辟，最北者为北坞，坞南北亘，以北坳东隘为峡口；其南即中所屯坞，坞亦南北亘，以江阴村为峡口；其南即千户营、百户营坞，坞东西亘，以罗武村为峡口。
现代文：原来这一带的大坞，一共三次转折三次开阔，最北边的是北坞，坞南北走向，以北坳东边的险要之处为峡谷口；南边的就是中所屯坞，坞也是南北走向，以江阴村作为峡谷口；中所屯坞南边就是千户营、百户营坞，坞东西走向，以罗武村作为峡谷口。
English: Originally, the large dock in this area had a total of three turns and three openings. The northernmost dock was the north dock, and the dock faced north and south, with the most critical point on the east side of the north pier as the mouth of the canyon; the southern dock was the middle dock, and the dock faced north and south, with Jiangyin village as the mouth of the canyon; the middle dock on the south side was the thousand-household camp, the hundred-household camp dock, and the dock faced east and west, with Luowu village as the mouth of the canyon.

古文：总一溪所贯，皆谓之罗川云。
现代文：三道坞有一条溪流贯穿，都称为罗川。
English: There is a stream running through the three docks, and they are all called Luo River.

古文：由南衙之后西南上山，磴道甚辟。
现代文：从南衙背后往西南上山，石阶路很宽。
English: From the back of Nanlu to the southwest up the mountain, the stone steps are very wide.

古文：一里半，有亭有室，当山之中，其旁桃李烨然。
现代文：一里半，有亭有室，位于山腰上，亭、室两边桃花、李花十分灿烂。
English: A mile and a half, there are pavilions and rooms, located on the mountainside, pavilion, room on both sides of peach blossoms, plum blossoms are very brilliant.

古文：亭后蹑级而上，有寺，门榜曰 金龙寺 。
现代文：从亭后登石阶而上，有寺，门额为 金龙寺 。
English: Climbing up the stone steps from the pavilion, there is a temple, the front of which is the Golden Dragon Temple.

古文：门内有楼当洞门，其楼前临平川，后瞰洞底，甚胜也。
现代文：门内有楼坐落在洞口，这座楼前面对着平川，后面俯瞰洞底，十分美。
English: A building inside the gate is located at the entrance of the cave. This building faces the Hirakawa River in front and overlooks the bottom of the cave in the back. It is very beautiful.

古文：楼后即为洞门，洞与楼俱东向，其门悬嵌而下，极似江右之石城洞。
现代文：楼后就是洞门，洞和楼都是东向，洞门悬空镶嵌而下，和江西省的石城洞极其相似。
English: Behind the building is the cave gate. Both the cave and the building face east. The cave gate hangs in the air and is inlaid downwards. It is very similar to Shicheng Cave in Jiangxi Province.

古文：西壁上穹覆而下崆峒，南与北渐环而转，惟东面可累级下。
现代文：西壁上面弯隆覆盖而下面是空洞，南面与北面渐渐转成环形，只有东面可以累阶梯而下。
English: The top of the west wall is covered with a hill and the bottom is a hollow, the south and north sides gradually turn into a ring, and only the east side can be climbed down.

古文：下五丈，一石突起，当洞之中，西耸而东削，甃以为台，亭其上，供白衣大士。
现代文：往下五丈，一块石头突起，正当洞中，石头西边高耸而东边削下去，砌为台，在上面建亭，供奉观音菩萨。
English: Five storeys down, a stone protrudes, just like a cave, the west side of the stone is high and the east side is cut down, built as a platform, and a pavilion is built on top to worship Guanyin Bodhisattva.

古文：其亭东对层级，架木桥以登，西瞰洞底，潴水环其下，沉绀天青色映碧，光怪甚异。
现代文：亭东面对着层层台阶，架木桥登上去，往西俯瞰洞底，积水环绕下面，沉青映碧，十分光怪奇异。
English: The east side of the pavilion faces the layers of steps, the wooden bridge climbs up, overlooking the bottom of the cave to the west, the stagnant water surrounds the bottom, the dark blue reflects the blue, and the light is very strange.

古文：亟由桥返级，穿桥下，缘台左西降，十余丈而后及水。水嵌西崖足，西面阔约三丈，南北二面，渐抱而缩，然三面皆绝壁环之，无有旁窦，水渟涵滞留积聚其间，俨若月牙之抱魄月有轮廓而无光也。
现代文：急忙从桥上返回台阶，穿过桥下，沿台左边往西下，十多丈后下到水边，水嵌在西崖脚，西面宽约三丈，南北两面，渐渐抱拢缩小，但三面都是绝壁环绕，旁边没有孔，水汇聚在其中，俨然像月牙抱魄。
English: I hurriedly returned from the bridge to the steps, crossed under the bridge, along the left side of the platform to the west, after more than ten meters, I went down to the water's edge. The water was embedded in the foot of the west cliff, the west side was about three meters wide, and the north and south sides were gradually shrinking, but all three sides were surrounded by cliffs. There was no hole next to it, and the water gathered in it, resembling a crescent moon.

古文：水中深浅不一，而澄澈之极，焕然映彩，极似安宁温泉，浅者浮绿，深者沉碧，掬而尝之，甘冷异常。
现代文：水中深浅不一，但清澈到了极点，焕然映彩，和安宁温泉极其相似，浅处浮着绿色，深处沉着碧蓝，捧起来品尝，异常的甘甜清凉。
English: The water varies in depth, but it is crystal clear to the extreme, radiantly colorful, and extremely similar to Anning Hot Spring, with green floating in the shallows and blue in the depths, and it tastes unusually sweet and cool.

古文：其洞以在山之半，名为腰龙，而文之者额其寺为金龙，洵神龙之宫也。
现代文：洞因为在山腰，取名腰龙，而文雅之士为寺题额金龙，确实是神龙的宫殿。
English: Because the cave is on the mountainside, it is called the loin dragon, and the gentle man is the temple of the golden dragon, which is indeed the palace of the divine dragon.

古文：洞口如仰盂，下圆如石城，水潆三面如玦，石脊中盘如垂舌，其异于石城者，石城旁通无级，而此则一水中涵，若其光莹之异，又非他水可及也。
现代文：洞口如盂仰起，下面圆如石城洞，水绕三面如缺口的玉环，石脊盘在中间如同垂舌，和石城洞不一样的是石城洞旁通没有底，而此洞正中涵一汪水，水如此奇异的光亮晶莹，又不是其它的水所能比得上的。
English: The mouth of the cave is raised like a beak, the bottom is round like Shicheng Cave, the water surrounds the three sides like a notched jade ring, and the ridge plate in the middle is like a hanging tongue. Unlike Shicheng Cave, Shicheng Cave has no bottom, and this hole is covered with a bunch of water. The water is so strangely bright and crystal clear, and it is not comparable to other water.

古文：久之，仍上洞口，始登前楼，则前楹后轩，位置俱备，而僧人他出，扃钥不施。
现代文：过了很久，仍然上到洞口，于是登前楼，前面楹柱后面轩廊，位置都很完备，但僧人外出，没有留下门钥匙。
English: After a long time, he still reached the mouth of the cave, so he climbed the front building, the front pillar and the back porch. The location was perfect, but the monk went out and did not leave the door key.

古文：仍一里余，一至南衙，问松桧道，俱云行不能及。
现代文：仍然走一里多，下到南衙，间去松桧的路，都说来不及走到。
English: I still have more than a mile to go. The way down to Nanlu and the way to Songlu are both said to be too late to walk.

古文：乃竭蹶而趋，由南衙后傍西山而北，二里，是为北衙。
现代文：于是竭尽全力地赶路，从南衙后傍靠西山往北走，二里，这是北衙。
English: Therefore, I tried my best to hurry up and walked from the back of Nanlu to the side of Xishan to the north, two miles, this is Beilun.

古文：有神庙当北衙之南，门东向，其后大脊之上，骈崖矗夹，有小水出其中。
现代文：北衙南面有座神庙，门向东，庙后大脊之上，并列的崖石矗立在两边，小水从其中流出。
English: To the south of Beilun, there is a temple. The gate faces east, on top of the ridge behind the temple. The adjacent cliffs stand on both sides, and small water flows out of them.

古文：庙之北有公馆，市舍夹道，甚盛。
现代文：庙北有公馆，市舍夹在道路两旁，很兴盛。
English: To the north of the temple, there is a mansion, and the townhouse is sandwiched on both sides of the road. It is very prosperous.

古文：折而东，共半里，而市舍始尽，盖与南衙迥隔矣。
现代文：转向东，共半里，才走完市舍，与南衙隔得很远了。
English: Turning to the east, a total of half a mile, only after walking through the townhouse, it is very far from Nanluo.

古文：二衙俱银矿之厂，独以衙官暑称者，想其地为盛也。
现代文：南、北二衙都是银矿厂，而只称之为衙，想来是因为这里特别兴盛。
English: Both the South and North Mines are silver mines, but they are only called Mines, presumably because they are particularly prosperous here.

古文：东与南来大道合，复北行一里余，市舍复夹道，盖烹炼开炉之处也。
现代文：往东走与南边伸来的大路汇合，又往北走一里多，市舍又夹在道路两旁，是冶炼开炉的地方。
English: Walking to the east, you come to a junction with the main road stretching to the south, and then walk north for more than a mile. The town hall is sandwiched between the two sides of the road, and is the place where the smelting furnace is opened.

古文：过市舍，遂北下坡，又一里余而及其底，始知南北两衙，犹山半之坞也。
现代文：过了市舍，就往北下坡，又走一里多就到坡底，才知道南北两衙，还是山腰中的山坞。
English: After passing the town hall, I went downhill to the north, and walked more than a mile to the bottom of the slope, only to find out that the north and south ridges are still a dock in the mountainside.

古文：其峡既深，有巨涧流其间，自北而南，是为河底，盖即罗川之上流。
现代文：峡谷很深，有大涧水从其中流过，从北向南，这里是河底，大概是罗川的上游。
English: The canyon is very deep, with large rushing water flowing through it. From north to south, this is the bottom of the river, probably the upper reaches of the Luo River.

古文：有支流自西峡来入，其派颇小，置木桥于上。
现代文：有条支流从西边的峡谷流来汇合，水流较小，上面架有木桥。
English: There is a tributary coming from the western canyon flow to the confluence, the water flow is small, and there is a wooden bridge above.

古文：越之又北，见石梁跨巨涧，涧中有巨石，梁东西两跨之，就其中为阁，以供白衣大士。
现代文：过桥后又往北走，看见石桥横跨在大沟涧上，沟涧中有巨石，桥从东西两边跨在巨石上，就着巨石中间建阁，供奉观音菩萨。
English: After crossing the bridge, he walked north again and saw that the stone bridge spanned a large gully. There were huge boulders in the gully. The bridge spanned the huge boulders from east to west, and a pavilion was built in the middle of the huge boulders to worship Guanyin Bodhisattva.

古文：越桥之东，溯涧北向上，危崖倚道，盘级而登，右崖左涧，下嵌深渊，上削危壁。
现代文：越过桥东，溯沟涧往北上，道路靠着陡崖，石阶环形攀登，右边陡崖，左边沟涧，下面嵌进深渊，上面崖壁陡峭。
English: Cross the bridge to the east, follow the gully to the north, the road is close to the cliff, the stone steps climb in a circle, the right side is the cliff, the left side is the gully, the bottom is embedded in the abyss, and the upper cliff wall is steep.

古文：五里登坪脊，有枯涧堑山头，亦跨石梁。
现代文：五里登上山脊平地，山头上有枯涧形成的堑沟，也有石桥横跨。
English: Five miles up the flat ridge, there is a gully formed by dead reeds on the top of the mountain, and there is also a stone bridge across.

古文：度梁北，有殿新构，有池溢水，有亭施茶。
现代文：过到桥北，有新建的殿，有水溢出来的池，有施舍茶的亭。
English: Passing to the north of the bridge, there is a newly built hall, a pool overflowing with water, and a tea kiosk.

古文：余入亭饭，一僧以新瀹茶献，曰： 适通事与担者久待于此，前途路遥，托言速去。 
现代文：我进亭吃饭，一个僧人献上刚泡的茶，说： 刚才通事和担夫在这里等了很久，前面的旅途遥远，留下话叫速去。 
English: When I entered the pavilion for dinner, a monk offered me freshly brewed tea and said: "Just now, the courier and the porter have been waiting here for a long time. The journey ahead is far away. If you have anything to say, you should hurry.

古文：盖此殿亦丽江所构以施茶者，故其僧以通事命，候余而致之耳。余亟饭行，竟忘其地为热水桥，而殿前所流即热水也。
现代文：原来此殿也是丽江府建来施舍茶的，所以僧人因为通事命令，等候我并告诉以上的话，我急忙吃饭出发，竟忘了此地为热水桥，而殿前所流的就是热水。
English: Originally, this hall was also built by Lijiang Prefecture to give out tea, so the monks waited for me and told me the above words because of the traffic order. I hurriedly went to eat and forgot that this place was a hot water bridge, and the water flowing in front of the hall was hot water.

古文：既从其侧，又过一石梁，梁跨山头，与前梁同，而下有小水，西坠巨涧。
现代文：从热水桥旁走，又过一座石桥，桥横跨山头，和前座桥相同，桥下有小水，往西流入巨涧。
English: Walking from the side of the hot water bridge, you pass another stone bridge. The bridge spans the mountain, the same as the bridge in the foreground. There is a small stream under the bridge, which flows westward into the megalith.

古文：过梁，从中脊北向而行，东西俱有巨山夹之。
现代文：过桥，从中脊向北走，东西都有大山夹着中脊。
English: Cross the bridge and walk from the middle ridge to the north. Mountains surround the middle ridge on all sides.

古文：盖西界大山，自鹤庆南来，至七坪老脊，直南高亘于河底之西者，为鲁摆；由七坪东度，分支南下，即此中脊与东界之山，故此中脊之北，又名西邑。
现代文：西部的大山，从鹤庆府南伸来，到七坪主脊，直南高高纵贯在河底西南，为鲁摆；从七坪往东延伸，分出支脉南下，就是这道中脊与东部的山，所以此中脊的北面，又名西邑。
English: The large mountain in the west, stretching from the south of Heqing Prefecture to the main ridge of Qiping, extending straight south and high in the southwest of the river bottom, is Lu pendulum; extending from Qiping to the east, branching out to the south, is this middle ridge and the mountain in the east, so the north side of this middle ridge, also known as Xiyu.

古文：盖西邑与鲁摆皆地名，二山各近之，界坊遂以为名焉。
现代文：因为西邑和鲁摆都是地名，二山各自靠近两地，于是界坊就用地名命名了。
English: Because Xiyu and Luwang are both place names, and the two mountains are close to each other, the square was named after the place names.

古文：中脊与鲁摆老脊夹成西峡，此河底之流所自出者，盖源于七坪之南云。
现代文：中脊与鲁摆主脊夹成西峡谷。这是河底的水流出之地，大概发源于七坪南。
English: The middle ridge and the main ridge of the Lu pendulum are sandwiched into the west canyon. This is the place where the water flows out of the bottom of the river, probably originating from the south of Qiping.

古文：行中脊十里，脊东亦盘为中洼之宕，脊悬西峡东洼之间，狂风西来，欲卷人去。
现代文：在中脊上走十里，脊东又盘绕为中洼的坑，中脊悬立在西峡谷和东洼坑之间，狂风西起，像要把人卷走。
English: Walking ten miles on the middle ridge, the east ridge is also twisted into a pit of the middle depression. The middle ridge hangs between the west canyon and the east depression. A strong wind comes from the west, as if to sweep people away.

古文：又三里，乃西北上岭，一里，又蹑岭而西，半里，乃西北下。
现代文：又走三里，于是往西北上岭，一里，又踏着岭往西走，半里，于是往西北下。
English: Walk another three miles, then northwest up the ridge, one mile, then west along the ridge, half a mile, then northwest down the ridge.

古文：一里抵坞中，是为七坪，即中界所度之脊，与西界大山夹成此坪，为河底之最高处也。
现代文：一里到坞中，这是七坪，就是所越过的中部之脊，和西部大山夹成的坪，为河底的最高处。
English: One mile to the middle of the dock, this is seven ping, that is, the ridge in the middle that has been crossed, and the ping sandwiched between the mountains in the west, which is the highest place on the river bottom.

古文：由坪中北行二里，始为度脊隘口。
现代文：从坪中往北走二里，才是所过之脊的隘口。
English: Two miles north of Pingzhong is the pass through which the ridge passes.

古文：脊南有两三家当道，脊西有村落倚山，桃李灿然。
现代文：脊南有两三家人住在路旁，脊西有村落傍靠着山，桃花李花十分灿烂。
English: In the south of the ridge, there are two or three families living by the roadside. In the west of the ridge, there is a village next to the mountain. The peach blossoms and plum blossoms are very brilliant.

古文：时日已下舂，尚去松桧二十里，亟逾隘北行。
现代文：这时太阳已经下落，距离松桧还有二十里，急忙越过隘口往北走。
English: By this time the sun had set and we were still twenty miles from the pine forest, so we hurriedly crossed the pass and headed north.

古文：五里，少出西界，巨山如故，而东界亦渐夹而成洼，洼中石穴下陷，每若坑若阱。
现代文：五里，稍稍走出西部，大山如故，而东部也渐渐夹成洼地，洼地中石穴下陷，每一个都像陷坑，或者像陷阱。
English: Five miles, a little out of the west, the mountains are still there, and the east is gradually sandwiched into a depression, a depression in which stone caves sink, each one like a pit, or like a trap.

古文：路循东脊行，又数里，有数家当北峡之口，曰金井村，始悟前之下阱累累者，皆所称金井者耶。
现代文：道路顺东边山脊走，又数里，有几家人住在北峡谷口，名金井村，于是省悟到先前累累下陷的阱，都被称为金井了。
English: Walking along the ridge on the east side of the road for a few more miles, several families lived at the mouth of the north canyon, known as Kanai village, and then realized that the traps that had previously sunk down were all called Kanai.

古文：隘口桃花夹村，嫣然若笑。
现代文：隘口桃花夹村，嫣然若笑。
English: The village of narrow-mouthed peach-blossom-clutchers is smiling broadly.

古文：由村北东向下坡，一里渐夷，乃东行岭脊，脊左右渐夹而成坞。
现代文：从村北往东下坡，一里渐渐平坦，于是往东在岭脊上走，岭脊左右两边逐渐夹成山坞。
English: From the north of the village to the east downhill, one mile gradually flat, so go east on the ridge, the ridge on both sides gradually sandwiched into a dock.

古文：由脊行三里，复由脊北坠坑东下，一里抵其麓，于是坞乃大开。
现代文：顺脊走三里，又从脊北坠坑往东下，一里到山脚，于是山坞十分开阔。
English: Walk three miles along the ridge, and from the ridge north of the sinkhole to the east, one mile to the foot of the mountain, so the dock is very open.

古文：有三楹当麓之东，亦梵龛佛寺也。
现代文：有三间房屋坐落在山麓东，也是佛寺。
English: There are three houses located at the eastern foot of the mountain, which are also Buddhist temples.

古文：由其前东向径平坞而驰，望东峰南北高耸者，日光倒映其间，丹葩一点，若菡萏之擎空也。
现代文：从寺前往东取道平坦的山坞急行，眺望从南到北高耸的东峰，日光倒映在其正中间，一点丹葩，像擎在空中的荷花。
English: From the temple to the flat dock of the Dongtori Expressway, look at the towering Dongfeng from south to north, the sunlight is reflected in the middle of it, a little bit of dandelion, like a lotus flower in the air.

古文：盖西山屏亘甚高，东峰杂沓而起，日衔西山，反射东山，其低者，日已去而成碧，其高者，日尚映而流丹，丹者得碧者环簇其下，愈觉鲜妍，世传鹤庆有 石宝之异 ， 西映为朝霞，东映为晚照 ，即此意也。
现代文：因为西边山峰高高地屏障纵贯，东峰高低不一地耸起，西山衔接落日，反射东山。东山低处，阳光离去而成碧绿；东山高处，还因太阳映照而红光流转，红色得绿色环绕簇拥，更加觉得鲜艳美好，世传鹤庆府有 石宝之异 之称， 西映为朝霞，东映为晚照 ，就是这里的意境。
English: Because the high-altitude barrier of the western mountain peaks runs vertically, the eastern peak rises in different heights, the western mountain joins the setting sun and reflects the eastern mountain. At the low point of the eastern mountain, the sunlight leaves and turns green; at the high point of the eastern mountain, the red light circulates due to the sun's reflection, and the red is surrounded by green, making it feel more bright and beautiful. It is said that Heqingfu is known as the difference of stone treasure. The western reflection is the morning glow, and the eastern reflection is the evening glow, which is the artistic mood here.

古文：东驰二里，过数家之舍。
现代文：往东急行二里，经过几家房舍。
English: Two miles eastbound on the express, past several houses.

古文：又东一界，渐坠壑成涧向东南去。
现代文：又往东一里，山坞渐渐坠壑成涧而向东南伸去。
English: Another mile to the east, the dock gradually collapsed into a mound and stretched to the southeast.

古文：乃折而北度一陇，又一里，有公馆在西山之麓，其左右始有村落，知其为松桧矣，而犹未知居停何处也。
现代文：于是转北越过一道陇，又走一里，西山麓有公馆，左右开始有村落，知道这里是松桧了，但还不知道住在哪里。
English: So I turned north, crossed a ridge, and walked another mile. At the western foot of the mountain, there was a public house, and villages began to appear on the left and right. I knew this was a pine forest, but I still didn't know where to live.

古文：又北半里，担者倚闾门ｌǘ里巷的大门而呼。乃入之，已就晦矣。
现代文：又往北走半里，担夫靠着里巷的大门呼叫，于是进去，天已经将近黑了。
English: Half a mile further north, the porter called out from the gate of the alley and went in. It was almost dark.

古文：是家何姓，江右人，其先为监厂委官，遂留居此。
现代文：这家人姓何，是江西省人，他的先人为监厂委派的官员，于是定居在这里。
English: The family, surnamed He, is from Jiangxi Province. His ancestors were officials assigned to supervise factories, so they settled here.

古文：二十四日昧爽，饭于松桧，北向入山峡。
现代文：二十四日天亮，在松桧吃饭，往北走进山谷。
English: At dawn on the twenty-fourth day, I had dinner in Songtao and walked north into the valley.

古文：松桧之南，山盘大壑而无水，沟涧之形，似亦望东南去；松桧之北，山复渐夹为坞，小水犹南行。
现代文：松桧南，山盘绕成大壑谷而没有水，沟涧的情形，似乎也是往东南伸去；松桧北，山又渐渐夹成坞，小河还是往南流。
English: In the south of Songpan, the mountains are coiled into a large valley without water, and the gully seems to extend to the southeast; in the north of Songpan, the mountains are gradually clamped into a dock, and the small river still flows southward.

古文：五里登坂，为波罗庄，山从此自西大山度脊而东，脊不甚高，而水分南北。
现代文：五里上坂，名波罗庄，山从这里往西边大山翻越山脊向东延伸，山脊不太高，但水分流南北两边。
English: Five miles uphill, Meiboro Village, the mountain stretches from here to the west over the ridge, the ridge is not too high, but the water flows north and south.

古文：又北五里，望北坞村落高下，多傍西大山，是为山庄。
现代文：又往北走五里，眺望北坞中村落高低错落，大多傍靠西部大山，这是山庄。
English: I walked another five miles to the north, looking out over the villages in the middle of the north dock, mostly next to the western mountains. This is a mountain village.

古文：于是北下，随小溪北行，五里间，聚庐错出，桃杏缤纷。
现代文：于是往北下，顺小溪往北走，五里路之间，村舍错落出现，桃花杏花五彩缤纷。
English: So we headed north, following the creek to the north, and between Wuli Road, the village houses appeared one after another, and the peach and apricot blossoms were colorful.

古文：已而直抵北山下，有倚南山居者，是为三庄河底村。
现代文：不久就直达北山下，有人家傍靠南山居住，这是三庄河底村。
English: Soon it will reach the foot of the North Mountain. There are people living next to the South Mountain. This is the village of Sanjo Hadesi.

古文：村北溪自西而东，其水一自三庄西谷来，一自河底村南谷来，皆细流；一自西北大山夹中来，俱合于河底村北，东流而去，亭桥跨之，桥北即龙珠山之南麓矣。
现代文：村北的溪从西向东流，溪水一是源于三庄西谷，一是源于河底村南谷，都是小水；一是源于西北大山峡谷中，三股水一齐在河底村北会合，然后向东流去，亭桥横跨水流，桥北就是龙珠山的南麓。
English: The stream to the north of the village flows from west to east. The stream water originates from the west valley of Sanzhuang and the south valley of Hedi Village, both of which are small streams. The first originates from the northwest mountain canyon. The three streams meet together in the north of Hedi Village, and then flow eastward. The pavilion bridge spans the stream, and the north of the bridge is the southern foot of Longzhu Mountain.

古文：龙珠山者，今名象眠山，自西大山之东，分支东亘，直接东大山之西麓。
现代文：龙珠山现名象眠山，从西部大山的东面，分出支脉往东延伸，直接与东部大山的西麓相连。
English: Longzhu Mountain, now known as Xiangmingshan, extends from the eastern side of the western mountain to the east, and is directly connected to the western foot of the eastern mountain.

古文：其北之西大山，即老龙之脊，皆自北而南；其北之东大山，即峰顶山，亦皆自北而南，中夹成南北大坞。
现代文：山北的西部大山，就是主峰山脉，都是从北往南走向；山北的东部大山，就是峰顶山，也是从北往南走向，东西之间夹着南北走向的大山坞。
English: The western mountains in the north of the mountain, that is, the main peak mountains, are all moving from north to south; the eastern mountains in the north of the mountain, that is, the peak mountain, are also moving from north to south, with the north-south direction between the east and west.

古文：漾共之江，亦自丽江南下，潆鹤城之东，而南至此为龙珠所截，水无从出，于是自峰顶之麓，随龙珠西转，搜得龙珠骨节之穴。遂捣入其中，寸寸而入，凡百零八穴而止。
现代文：漾共江也从丽江府往南流，绕过鹤庆府城东，然后往南流到这里，被龙珠山阻截，水没有地方流出，于是从峰顶山麓，顺龙珠山往西转，找到龙珠山的关键洞穴，就捣入其户，一寸一寸地流进去，一共一百零八个洞才流完。
English: The Qigong River also flows from Lijiang to the south, bypassing the east of Heqing City, and then flowing south to here. It is blocked by Longzhu Mountain, and there is no place for the water to flow out. Therefore, it turns west from the foot of the peak mountain, along Longzhu Mountain, and finds the key cave of Longzhu Mountain. It breaks into its house and flows into it inch by inch, and a total of 108 holes are completed.

古文：土人云，昔有神僧倔多尊者，修道东山峰顶，以鹤川一带，俱水汇成海，无所通泄，乃发愿携锡杖念珠下山，意欲通之。
现代文：当地人说，从前有个神僧叫倔多尊者，在东部的峰顶山修道，因为鹤庆坝子一带，都被水汇积成海，没有泄流的地方，于是发愿携带锡杖到念珠下山，想要开通水路。
English: Locals said that once upon a time, there was a holy monk named Xingduo, who practiced in the eastern peak of the mountain, because the area around Heqing Dam had been accumulated by water into a sea, with no place to drain, so he made a wish to carry a tin cane to the rosary down the mountain, and wanted to open a waterway.

古文：路遇一妇人，手持瓢问： 师何往？ 师对以故。
现代文：途中遇到一位妇人，手上拿着瓢，问： 师傅去哪里？  法师回答了事情的起因。
English: On the way, he met a woman with a plough in her hand, who asked: "Where is the master going?" The sorcerer answered the cause of the matter.

古文：妇人曰： 汝愿虽宏，恐功力犹未。
现代文：妇人说： 你的心愿虽然宏大，但恐怕功力还不够。
English: The woman said, "Though your wish is great, I'm afraid it's not enough.

古文：试以此瓢掷水中，瓢还，乃可得，不然须更努力也。 
现代文：把这瓢掷到水中试试，瓢返回来，才能成功，不这样，必须更加努力。 
English: Throw it in the water, try it, and if it comes back, it's a success. If not, you have to work harder.

古文：师未信，携瓢弃水中，瓢泛泛而去。
现代文：法师不信，把瓢抛入水中，瓢漂流而去。
English: The sorcerer did not believe him and threw the toad into the water. The toad floated away.

古文：已而果不获通。
现代文：后来果然没能开通出水口。
English: Later, the outlet was indeed not opened.

古文：复还峰潜修二十年，以瓢掷水，随掷随回，乃以念珠撒水中，随珠所止，用杖戳之，无不应手通者，适得穴一百零八，随珠数也。
现代文：又返回峰顶山潜心修行二十年，再把瓢掷入水中，随掷随回。于是把念珠撒到水中，顺着念珠止住的地方，用锡杖戳，处处都随手而通，恰好通开一百零八个洞，和念珠数相同。
English: He went back to the peak of the mountain and practiced for twenty years. Then he threw the dice into the water, and the dice kept coming back. So he sprinkled the beads into the water, and he poked them with a tin cane along the place where the beads stopped, and they went everywhere, opening exactly one hundred and eight holes, the same as the number of beads.

古文：今土人感师神力，立寺众穴之上，以报德焉。
现代文：如今当地人感谢法师神力，在众洞穴上立寺，用来报德。
English: Today, the local people are grateful for the power of the sorcerer and have built temples in the caves to pay tribute to him.

古文：《一统志》作倔多，土人作摩伽陀。
现代文：《一统志》写作崛哆，当地人称为摩伽陀。
English: The local people call him "Mogatou" because he is famous for writing "Ichidoshi."

古文：众水于山腹合而为一，同泄于龙珠之东南麓。
现代文：各洞的水在山腹中合成一股，一齐从龙珠山东南麓流出。
English: The water from each hole is combined into a single stream in the mountain's belly, all flowing out from the southeastern foot of Longzhu Mountain.

古文：大路过河底桥，即逾龙珠而北，与出入诸水洞皆不相值，以俱在其东也。
现代文：大路经过河底桥，就翻越龙珠山而往北走，和水出入的各个洞都不相遇，因为洞全都在龙珠山东面。
English: After crossing the bridge under the river, the highway climbs over the Longzhu Mountain and heads north. The water does not enter or leave the caves, as they are all on the east side of the Longzhu Mountain.

古文：余乃欲从桥北，随流东下，就小径穷所出洞，令通事及担者从大路往。
现代文：我于是想从桥北顺流东下，走小路穷究出水洞，让通事和挑夫从大路走。
English: I therefore wanted to go east from the north of the bridge, along the river, and take a small path to get out of the water hole, so that the messenger and the porter could walk from the main road.

古文：担者曰： 小径难觅，不若同行， 盖其家在入水洞北，亦便于此也。
现代文：挑夫说： 小路难找，不如一同走。 因为他家住在入水洞北，从小路走也方便。
English: The porter said, "It's hard to find the path, so let's walk together," because his family lived north of the watering hole, and it was convenient to walk from the path.

古文：余益喜，遂同东向随溪行龙珠山之南。
现代文：我更加高兴，就一齐往东顺溪从龙珠山南部走。
English: I was even happier, so we all walked to Dongshun Creek from the southern part of Longzhu Mountain.

古文：一里，反越溪南，半里，又渡溪北。
现代文：一里，反而越到溪南，半里又渡到溪北。
English: One mile, on the other hand, went to the south of Xi'an and half a mile to the north of Xi'an.

古文：其路隘甚，而夹溪皆有居者。
现代文：道路十分险阻，但溪两岸都有人居住。
English: The road is very dangerous, but there are people living on both sides of the stream.

古文：又东半里，枫密河东南泻峡去，路东北逾龙珠支岭。
现代文：又往东走半里，枫密河向东南边的峡谷泻去，道路往东北翻越龙珠山支岭。
English: Another half-mile to the east, the Fengmi River dips into the canyon to the southeast, and the road climbs over the Longzhu Mountain Branch Ridge to the northeast.

古文：两下两上，东北盘岭共四里，其路渐上。
现代文：两上两下，往东北盘绕支岭一共走了四里，路渐渐高。
English: Two up and two down, we walked a total of four miles to the northeast around the branch ridge, and the road gradually became higher.

古文：俯瞰东南深峡中，有水破峡奔决，即合并出穴之水也。
现代文：俯瞰东南的峡谷深处，有水破峡奔流，就是各洞水合并后流出来的水。
English: Overlooking the depths of the southeastern canyon, there is water rushing through the canyon, which is the water that flows out after the water of each cave is combined.

古文：其水南奔峡底，与枫密之水合，而东南经峰顶山之南峡以出，下金沙大江。
现代文：水往南奔流到峡谷底，和枫密河会合，然后往东南流经峰顶山南面峡谷而出，流入金沙大江。
English: The water rushes south to the bottom of the canyon, meets the Fengmi River, and then flows southeast through the canyon on the south side of Peak Peak Mountain and flows into the Jinsha River.

古文：然行处甚高，水穴在重崖下出，俯视不见其穴。
现代文：然而所走的地方太高，水洞在重重山崖下面出水，俯视不到洞穴。
English: However, the place we walked to was too high, and the water came out of the cave under the mountain cliffs, so we couldn't look down into the cave.

古文：令通事及担者坐待道旁，余与顾仆坠壑东南下。
现代文：让通事和挑夫坐在路边等着，我和顾仆坠入壑谷往东南下。
English: I let the driver and the porter sit by the roadside and wait, while I and my companion plunged into the valley and headed south-east.

古文：下半里，不得路，踯躅徘徊草石间，转向东箐半里，又南迂半里，始下至磵ｊｉｎ两山间的水沟底。
现代文：下了半里，没有路，在草石间踉踉跄跄地行走，转向东著走半里，文往南绕半里，才下到水沟底。
English: After descending half a mile, there was no path, so I stumbled through the grass and stones. I turned east and walked half a mile, then south and circled half a mile before descending to the bottom of the ditch.

古文：乃西向溯流披棘入，共半里，则巨石磊落，堆叠磵中，水从石隙，泛溢交涌。
现代文：于是往西溯流披开荆棘进去，一共半里，就见巨石磊落，堆积在水沟中，水顺着石缝，泛泛溢出，交叉涌流。
English: So the westward-trailing stream pulled open the thorns and went in. For a total of half a mile, I saw boulders falling, piled up in the ditch, water running along the stone cracks, overflowing, and cross-flowing.

古文：余坐巨石上，止见水与石争隙，不见有余穴，雪跃雷轰，交于四旁，而不知其所从来也。
现代文：我坐在巨石上，只看见水和石头争缝隙，不见有其它的洞穴，水流如雪花跃出，雷声轰鸣，交流向四周，却不知道是从哪里流出来的。
English: Sitting on a boulder, I only saw water and stone fighting for a crevice, no other caves, water flowing out like snowflakes, thunder roaring, and running around, but I didn't know where it was coming from.

古文：久之，复迂从旧道，一里余，迂上既近，复攀石乱跃，又半里，登大道，遂东北上。
现代文：过了很久，又绕原路走，一里多，已经绕近上面了，再攀石乱跃，又走半里，登上大路，于是往东北上。
English: After a long time, I walked around the original road again, more than a mile, and I was already close to the top, and then I climbed the rock, walked another half mile, got on the highway, and then went to the northeast.

古文：半里，转一峡，见后有呼者，乃通事与担夫也。
现代文：半里，转过一道峡谷，听到背后有人叫，是通事和挑夫。
English: Half a mile away, after turning through a canyon, I heard someone calling behind me, it was a messenger and a porter.

古文：于是北半里，上攒石间，北过脊，始北望两山排闼，一坞中盘，漾共江络其东，又一小水纬其西北，皆抵脊下而不可见。
现代文：于是往北半里，从石中往上穿，往北越过山脊，才往北看到两边山如门推开，中间盘绕一道山坞，漾共江绕流在坞东，又有一条小河横在坞西北，都是流到山脊下就看不见了。
English: So I walked half a mile to the north, through the stones, and over the ridge to the north, only to see the mountains on both sides pushed open like doors to the north, with a dock coiled in the middle, the Yangtze River flowing around the dock to the east, and a small river running across the dock to the northwest, all of which flowed under the ridge and were invisible.

古文：其两山之北夹而遥控于东北隅者，是为丽府邱塘关所踞，漾共水所从出也。
现代文：两边的山夹持往北延伸，然后在远处东北隅相连接，那就是丽江府邱塘关所在之处，漾共江水从那里流出。
English: The mountains on both sides extend to the north, and then connect in the far northeast corner, which is where Qiu Tangguan, Lijiang, is located, and where the water of the Yangtze River flows out.

古文：乃北下山，一里余而及其麓，有寺悬麓间，寺门北向，其下即入水之穴也。
现代文：于是往北下山，一里多到达山麓，有寺坐落在山麓中，寺门向北，下面就是入水的洞穴。
English: So I went down the mountain to the north, more than a mile to the foot of the mountain, there is a temple located in the foot of the mountain, the temple gate to the north, below is the cave where the water enters.

古文：不及入寺，急问水。
现代文：来不及进寺，急忙询问水。
English: I couldn't get into the temple in time, so I hurried to ask about the water.

古文：先见一穴，乃西来小流所入，其东又有平土丈余隔之，东来之漾共江，屡经穴而屡分坠，至是亦遂穷，然则所谓一百八穴者，俱在东也。
现代文：先看见一个洞，是西边流来的小河流进去，洞东又有一丈多平地相隔，东边流来的漾共江，多次流过洞而多次分流坠入，到这里也分流完了，这样看来，所说的一百零八个洞，都在东面。
English: At first, I saw a hole. A small river flowing from the west entered the hole. To the east of the hole, there was a flat land. The Minzhu River, which flows from the east, has flowed through the hole many times and has been diverted many times. It has also been diverted here. It seems that the 108 holes are all in the east.

古文：余因越水北东向溯流，见其从崖下遇一穴，辄旋穴下灌，如坠瓮口，其声呜呜，每穴远者丈余，近者咫尺而已。
现代文：我于是越到水北向东溯流，看见水流在崖下遇到一个洞，就从洞中旋转着往下流，如同坠入瓮口，发出呜呜的水声，每个洞之间远的相隔一丈多，近的咫尺而已。
English: So I followed the water north and east, and when I saw the water meet a hole under the cliff, it swirled down from the hole, as if it had fallen into the mouth of a cliff, emitting the sound of rushing water. The distance between each hole was more than a foot, but only a few inches.

古文：既而复上寺前，乃北下渡西来小流，有小石梁跨之。
现代文：不久又上到寺前，于是往北下渡过西边流来的小河，河上有小石桥横跨。
English: Soon I reached the front of the temple, so I walked north and crossed a small river coming from the west, which was spanned by a small stone bridge.

古文：北一里，有村当平冈间，是曰甸尾村。
现代文：往北走一里，平冈中有个村庄，这是甸尾村。
English: One mile to the north, there is a village in Hiraoka, this is Diao Village.

古文：担者之家在焉。入而饭于桃花下。
现代文：挑夫家就在这里，进去在桃花下吃饭。
English: The Pickup family is right here, go in and have dinner under the peach blossoms.

古文：既乃西北行三里余，而入南来大道，即河底桥北上逾岭者。
现代文：饭后，往西北走三里多，然后到南边伸来的大路，就是过河度桥往北翻越岭的路。
English: After the meal, walk more than three miles to the northwest, and then the main road stretching to the south is the road over the river bridge to the north and over the ridge.

古文：于是循西山又北五里，为长康铺坊。
现代文：于是顺西山又往北走五里，名长康铺坊。
English: So he walked five miles north along the West Mountain, and found Nagachokangpu-bo.

古文：有河流自西南峡来，巨石桥跨之，有碑在桥南，称为鹤川桥。
现代文：有河从西南边峡谷流来，大石桥横跨河上，桥南有碑，称为鹤川桥。
English: There is a river flowing from the southwest side of the canyon. A large stone bridge spans the river. There is a monument to the south of the bridge, known as the Crane Bridge.

古文：盖鹤川者，一川之通名，而此桥独擅之，亦以其冠一川也。
现代文：鹤川是一条河的通名，而这座桥独享有其名，也因为此桥是这条河之冠。
English: Tsuru-gawa River is a common name for a river, and this bridge is unique in its name, also because this bridge is the crown of the river.

古文：桥北有岐，溯流西南，为大理府大道，故于此设铺焉。
现代文：桥北有岔路，溯流往西南走，是去大理府的大路，所以在这里设铺。
English: To the north of the bridge, there is a fork in the road, and if you follow the stream to the southwest, it is the main road to Dali Prefecture, so it is best to set up shop here.

古文：过桥不半里，为长康关，庐舍夹道。
现代文：过桥不到半里，为长康关，房舍夹道。
English: It is less than half a mile to cross the bridge, it is Changkang Pass, and the houses are on the same road.

古文：是日街子，市者交集。
现代文：今天是街子，赶街的人聚集。
English: Today it's a town, and people are gathering in the streets.

古文：自甸尾至此，村落散布，庐舍甚整，桃花流水环错其间。
现代文：从甸尾村到这里，村落分布，房舍十分整齐，桃花流水环绕交错其中。
English: From Dianwei Village to here, the villages are distributed, the buildings are very neat, and the peach blossoms are intertwined.

古文：其西即为朝霞寺峰，正东与石宝山对。
现代文：西边就是朝霞寺峰，正东和石宝山相对。
English: To the west is Asaka Temple Peak, directly opposite Shibaoshan to the east.

古文：由其东北行半里，稍东为郡治。
现代文：于是道路转东北走，又八里多就进入鹤庆府城南门。
English: As a result, the road turned to the northeast and went another eight miles to enter the south gate of Heqing.

古文：由其西，又北行半里，出一鼓楼，则新城之北门也。
现代文：城墙不太高，门内的文庙宏伟整齐。从文庙往东北走半里，稍东是府署。从府署西又往北行半里，从一鼓楼出去，是新城的北门。
English: The city wall is not too high, and the temple inside the gate is magnificent and neat. From the temple, walk half a mile to the northeast, slightly east is the prefectural office. From the west of the prefectural office, walk half a mile to the north, and from the drum tower, is the north gate of the new city.

古文：其北为旧城，守御所在焉。
现代文：北面是旧城，守御所在旧城。
English: To the north is the Old Town, and the castle keep is in the Old Town.

古文：又北半里而出旧城北门，稍西曲而北一里，复东曲而北四里，为演武场，在路东。
现代文：又往北半里就从旧城北门出去，稍稍西转然后往北一里，又东转然后往北四里，名演武场，在路东。
English: Go north half a mile and go out of the north gate of the old city, turn slightly west and then north one mile, turn east and then north four miles, the famous martial arts arena, in the east of the road.

古文：从其西又北五里，过一村，又五里为大板桥。
现代文：从演武场西又往北走五里，经过一个村庄，又走五里到大板桥。
English: From the west of the martial arts arena, walk another five miles to the north, pass a village, and walk another five miles to the bridge.

古文：桥下水颇大而潴，乃自西而东下漾共江者。
现代文：桥下的水比较大而且停积，从西向东流入漾共江。
English: The water under the bridge is relatively large and stagnant, flowing from west to east into the Bohai River.

古文：时所行路，当甸坞之中，东山下，江流沿之，西山下，村庐倚之，自此桥之北，甃路石皆齿齿如编，仰管之半，砾石趾难措。
现代文：此时所走的路，位于甸坞之中，东边山下，江水顺山流，西边山下，村舍傍靠山，从这座桥往北，砌路的石块都是齿状排列，如同编织，也像向上插的半枝笔，很尖利，难于下脚。
English: At this time, the road I took is located in the middle of Dian Dock, the east side is under the mountain, the river flows along the mountain stream, the west side is under the mountain, the village house is next to the mountain, from this bridge to the north, the stones of the road are arranged in a tooth-like manner, like weaving, also like a half-pencil inserted upwards, very sharp, difficult to step on.

古文：又北六里，为小板桥。
现代文：又往北走六里，到小板桥。
English: Walk another six miles north to Xiaobanqiao.

古文：桥小于前，而流亦次之，然其势似急。
现代文：桥比先前的小，而且水也没有那么大，但似乎水势急。
English: The bridge is smaller than before, and the water is not so big, but it seems that the water is urgent.

古文：若沿西山行，即可尽观。 是日欲抵冯密宿，以日暮遂止此云。二十五日昧爽，饭而行。
现代文：又往北走七里，到甸头村的新屯，是比较兴盛的村落。稍稍转东，是王贡士家，于是进去住宿。二十五日天亮，吃过饭出发。
English: They walked another seven miles north to Xintun, a relatively prosperous village in Tiantou Village. They turned slightly east to Wang Gongshi's house, where they stayed. At dawn on the 25th, they had dinner and set off.

古文：北二里为冯密村，村庐亦盛，甸头之村止此矣。
现代文：往北走二里到冯密村，房舍也多，甸头的村舍到此结束。
English: Walking two miles north to Fengmi village, there are many houses, and the village house in Diankou ends here.

古文：盖西北有高冈一支，垂而东南下，直逼东山文笔峰下，江流亦曲而东。
现代文：西北有一座高冈，垂直往东南延伸，直逼到东山文笔峰下，江水也曲折向东流。
English: There is a high hill in the northwest, extending vertically to the southeast, right up to the peak of the Higashiyama Mountains, and the river also meanders to the east.

古文：高冈分支处，其腋中有黑龙潭之水，亦自西大山出，南流而抵冯密，乃沿高冈之南而东注漾共江，鹤庆、丽江以此为界云。
现代文：高冈分支处，两山之间有黑龙潭水，也从西边大山流出，往南流到冯密，于是沿高冈南面往东注入漾共江，鹤庆府、丽江府以此为界。
English: At the branch of Gaokao, there is Heilongtan water between the two mountains, and it also flows out from the western mountain and flows south to Fengmi, so it flows eastward along the south side of Gaokao into the Minzuo River, and Heqing Prefecture and Lijiang Prefecture are bounded by it.

古文：冯密之西，有佛宇高拥崖畔，即青玄洞也。
现代文：冯密村西边，崖畔有高耸的佛寺，就是青玄洞。
English: On the west side of Fengmi Village, there is a towering Buddhist temple on the cliffside, which is Qingyuan Cave.

古文：余望之欲入，而通事苦请俟ｓì等待回日，且云： 明日逢六，主出视事，过此又静摄不即出。 
现代文：我眺望寺并想进去，但通事苦苦请求等返回时再去，并且说： 明天逢六号，主人出来理事，过了六号又静摄不出来。 
English: I looked at the temple and wanted to go in, but the secretary begged me to wait until I returned, and said: Tomorrow is the sixth day, the master will come out as a director, and after the sixth day, I can't take a still photo.

古文：余乃随之行，即北上冈。
现代文：我于是随着他继续走，就往北上冈。
English: So I continued walking with him, heading north up the hill.

古文：四里，有路横斜而成 叉 字交，是为三岔黄泥冈。
现代文：四里，道路横斜成 叉 字形交汇，这是三岔黄泥冈。
English: For four miles, the road diagonally slants into a zigzag intersection, which is the junction of three ridges of yellow mud.

古文：其西南腋中，松连箐坠，即黑龙所托也。
现代文：冈西南侧正中，松树沿着著下坠，就是黑龙潭所在的地方。
English: In the middle of the southwest side of the hill, the pine trees are falling down, which is where the Black Dragon Pool is located.

古文：于是西北之山，皆荒石濯濯，而东北之山，渐有一二小村倚其下，其冈脊则一望皆茅云。
现代文：从这里起，西北边的山，都是光秃没有草木的荒石，而东北边的山，稍稍有一二个小村子坐落在山下，冈脊上一眼望去都是茅草。
English: From here, the mountains to the northwest are barren wastelands devoid of vegetation, while the mountains to the northeast are dotted with one or two small villages at the foot of the mountains, and the ridges are covered with thatch at a glance.

古文：又北一里为哨房，四五家当冈而踞，已为丽江所辖矣。
现代文：又往北走一里到哨房，四五家人对着冈居住，已经是丽江府的辖地了。
English: Another mile north to the guardhouse, four or five families live opposite the hill, which is already under the jurisdiction of Lijiang Prefecture.

古文：七和者，丽江之地名，有九和、十和诸称。
现代文：又往北在冈上走了八里然后下冈，东北边山坞盘绕，水流曲折，田地遍布山坞。往下走一里，有数家人背靠西山居住，前面对着道路，这是七和南村。
English: Further north, I walked eight miles up the hill and then down the hill, winding around the dock on the northeast side, the water current twists and turns, the fields are all over the dock. A mile down, there are several families living with their backs to the West Mountain, facing the road in front, this is Seven and South Village.

古文：其北又有大宅新构者，乃木公次子所居也。
现代文：又往北走二里，有像官舍而且整齐的房子，这是七和查税所。查税所北又有新建的大宅院，是木公次子的住家。
English: Two miles further north, there is a neat house that looks like an official residence. This is the Shichihwa Tax Inspection Office. To the north of the tax inspection office, there is a newly built mansion, which is the home of the second son of Miko.

古文：由其前北向行，又盘一支岭而北，七里，乃渐转西北，始望见邱塘关在北山上，而漾共之水已嵌深壑中，不得见矣。
现代文：从宅前往北行，又盘绕一支岭往北走，七里，才渐渐转向西北，于是看到邱塘关在北边山上，但漾共江已经嵌入深壑中，看不到了。
English: From the house, I walked north, and then walked north around a ridge for seven miles, before gradually turning to the northwest. Then I saw Qiu Tangguan on the north side of the mountain, but the Yunnan Communist River was already embedded in the deep, and I couldn't see it.

古文：于是路北有石山横起，其崖累累，虽不高，与大山夹而成峡。
现代文：这里路北有石山横亘，崖石累累，虽然不高，却和大山相对而形成峡谷。
English: To the north of the road here, there is a long stretch of rocky mountains, cliffs and rocks. Although they are not high, they form a canyon opposite the big mountain.

古文：遂从峡间西北上，一里，逾其东度之脊。
现代文：于是从峡谷中往西北上，一里，翻越峡谷东边延伸的山脊。
English: So from the canyon to the northwest, one mile, over the ridge extending to the east of the canyon.

古文：又西北二里余，乃北下枯壑，横陟之，半里，复北上冈。
现代文：又往西北走二里多，于是往北下到枯壑，横穿过去，走半里，又往北上冈。
English: I walked another two miles to the northwest, then I went down to the north to the barren mound, crossed it, walked half a mile, and went north up the hill.

古文：西北行冈上半里，又北半里，度一小桥，半里，乃北上山。
现代文：在冈上往西北走半里，又往北走半里，过一座小桥，走半里，往北上山。
English: On the hill, walk northwest for half a mile, then walk north for half a mile, cross a small bridge, walk half a mile, and walk north up the hill.

古文：其山当西大支自西东来，至此又横叠一峰，其正支转而南下，其余支东下而横亘，直逼东山，扼丽江南北山之流，破东山之峡而出为漾共江，此山真丽之锁钥也。
现代文：这座山是西边主脉从西往东延伸，到这里又横叠成一座山峰，主脉转向南延伸，支脉往东横贯过去，一直遏近东山，丽江府南北山的水流被扼住，穿破东山峡谷而流出为羡共江，此山真是丽江府的军事要地。
English: This mountain is the western main vein extending from west to east, and here it is superimposed into a mountain peak. The main vein extends to the south, and the branch vein extends to the east across the past, and has been blocked near the East Mountain. The water flow of the North and South Mountains of Lijiang Prefecture was choked, and it broke through the East Mountain Canyon and flowed out as the Zhengyong River. This mountain is really a military important place in Lijiang Prefecture.

古文：丽江设关于岭脊，以严出入，又置塔于东垂，以镇水口。
现代文：丽江府在岭脊设关，以便严洛控制出人往来，又在东边建塔，以便镇守水口。
English: Lijiang government set up a checkpoint at the ridge, so that the city could strictly control the movement of people, and built a tower on the east side, so that the town could guard the water entrance.

古文：山下有大道，稍曲而东，由塔侧上；小道则蹑崖直北登。
现代文：山下有大路，逐渐转向东，从塔旁边上；小路则踏上山崖一直往北登。
English: There is a large road under the mountain, gradually turning to the east and going up from the side of the tower; the small road goes up the cliff and climbs all the way north.

古文：余从其小者，皆峻石累重叠垂，锋棱峭削，空悬屈曲。
现代文：我从小路走，路上全是峻石累累垂立，棱角锋利、陡峭如削，小路曲曲弯弯、悬空而上。
English: I walk from the path, the road is full of steep rocks, sharp edges, steep as if scraped, the path twists and bends, suspended in the air.

古文：一上者二里，始与东来大道合，则出之脊矣。
现代文：一上去二里，就和东边伸来的大路汇合，则已是山脊了。
English: After a two-mile ascent, it meets the main road coming from the east and is already a ridge.

古文：有室三楹，东南向而踞之，中辟为门，前列二狮，守者数家居其内。
现代文：有三间房屋，面向东南坐落，中间开成门，门前置列二个狮子，数家守门人住在屋内。
English: There are three houses, facing southeast, with a door in the middle, two lions lined up in front of the door, and several gatekeepers living inside.

古文：出入者非奉木公命不得擅行，远方来者必止，阍者入白禀报，命之入，乃得入。
现代文：出入的人如果不奉木公之命的不能擅自通行，远方来的人也必须止步，守门人进去察报，下令让你进去，才能进入。
English: If the person entering and exiting does not follow the order of the wood god, he cannot pass without authorization. People coming from far away must also stop. The gatekeeper goes in to check the newspaper and orders you to go in before you can enter.

古文：故通安诸州守，从天朝选至，皆驻省中，无有入此门者。
现代文：所以通安等州的知州，是朝廷选派来的，都住在省城里，没能进入此门。
English: Therefore, the Chizhou of Tong'an and other states were sent by the imperial court, and they all lived in the provincial capital, and could not enter this gate.

古文：即诏命至，亦俱出迎于此，无得竟达。
现代文：即使是皇帝的命令到来，也都在这里出迎，不能直接进去。
English: Even if the emperor's order arrives, it is greeted here, and it is not possible to enter directly.

古文：巡方使与查盘之委，俱不及焉。
现代文：巡方使和盘查的委员，都没到过里面。
English: Neither the patrol officers nor the members of the inventory have ever been inside.

古文：余以其使奉迎，故得直入。
现代文：我因为木公的使者奉命迎接，所以能够直接进去。
English: I was able to enter directly because I was ordered to greet the messenger of the wood god.

古文：入关随西山北行，二里，下一坑。
现代文：入关后沿西山往北走，二里，下一道坑。
English: After entering the customs, walk north along the West Mountain. After two miles, you will come to the next pit.

古文：度坑底复登坡而北，一里，稍东北下山。
现代文：越过坑底又登坡往北上，一里，逐渐往东北下山。
English: Cross the bottom of the pit and climb northward for one mile, gradually descending to the northeast.

古文：又东北横度坡间者二里，始转而北。
现代文：又往东北在坡间横穿二里，于是转向北走。
English: I went to the northeast and walked two miles across the slope, so I turned to the north.

古文：二里，过木家院东。
现代文：二里，经过木家院东边。
English: Two miles, past the east side of Kiya-in Temple.

古文：又北二里，度一小桥，则土冈一支，西南自大山之脊，分冈环而东北，直抵东山之麓，以扼漾共江上流。
现代文：又往北走二里，过一座小桥，则有一支土冈，从西南大山脊，分出后绕向东北，一直抵达东山麓，从而扼住漾共江上游。
English: Another two miles to the north, across a small bridge, there is a dirt mound, from the southwest ridge, after separation, around to the northeast, all the way to the eastern foothills, thus choking the upper reaches of the Minzong River.

古文：由冈南陟其上，是为东圆里。
现代文：沿冈南攀登，上面是东圆里。
English: Climb along Gannan, above is Dongyuanli.

古文：北行岭头，西南瞻大脊，东南瞰溪流，皆在数里之外。
现代文：往北在岭头上走，西南瞻望大山脊，东南俯瞰溪流，都在数里之外。
English: Walk north on the ridge, southwest overlooking the ridge, southeast overlooking the stream, all a few miles away.

古文：六里乃下。
现代文：行六里才下。
English: It's a six-mile hike to the top.

古文：陇北平畴大开，夹坞纵横，冈下即有一水，西自文笔峰环坞南而至，有石梁跨其上，曰三生桥。
现代文：陇北平整的田地十分开阔，峡谷山坞纵横交错，冈下就有一条河，从西边文笔峰环绕坞南而来，河上横跨石桥，名三生桥。
English: The flat fields in the north of Shandong are very open, the canyons and docks are criss-crossed, and there is a river under the ridge, coming from the west around the dock to the south, and across the river is a stone bridge, the famous Sansheng Bridge.

古文：过桥，有坊二在其北，旁有守者一二家，于是西北行平畴间矣。
现代文：过桥，桥北有两座坊，旁边有一二家守门的，于是往西北在平整的田间行走。
English: After crossing the bridge, there are two villages to the north of the bridge, and one or two gatekeepers next to them, so I walk northwest in the flat fields.

古文：北瞻雪山，在重坞之外，雪幕其顶，云气郁勃，未睹晶莹。
现代文：往北眺望雪山，在重重山坞之外，白雪覆盖山顶，云气郁勃，看不到晶莹的冰雪。
English: Looking north at the snow-capped mountains, beyond the heavy mountain docks, white snow covers the mountain tops, the clouds are thick, and you can't see the crystal ice and snow.

古文：西瞻乌龙，在大壑之南，尖峭独拔，为大脊之宗，郡中取以为文笔者也。
现代文：往西眺望乌龙，在大壑南，尖峰陡峭、独立挺拔，是大山脊之宗，府中人取名为文笔峰。
English: Looking westward from Wulong, in the south of Dalian, the peak is steep and independent. It is one of the major ridges, and the people of Fuzhong have named it Wenpeng.

古文：路北一坞，窈窕东北入，是为东坞。
现代文：路北有道山坞，窈窕地伸向东北，这是东坞。
English: To the north of the road there is a mountain dock, which juts out to the northeast. This is the east dock.

古文：中有水南下，万字桥水西北来会之，与三生桥下水同出邱塘东者也。
现代文：坞中有水往南流，万字桥的水从西北流来会合，与三生桥的水一同发源于邱塘关东。
English: In the dock, there is water flowing to the south, and the water of the Swastika Bridge flows from the northwest to meet, and together with the water of the Sansei Bridge, it originates from Kewtang Kanto.

古文：共五里，有柳径抱，耸立田间，为土人折柳送行之所。
现代文：一共走五里，有棵一抱粗的柳树，耸立在田中，是当地人折柳枝送行的地方。
English: After walking a total of five miles, there was a thick willow tree, towering in the middle of the field. It was the place where the locals would break willow branches to see them off.

古文：其家和姓。盖丽江土著，官姓为木，民姓为和，更无别姓者。
现代文：路北万字桥水向东绕流，水北象眠山延伸到这里的南端尽头处。又往西走二里，沿着象眠山的西南面，房舍相连聚集，萦绕山坡、连带山谷，这是丽江府所在地了。
English: North of the road, the water of the Wan Zi Bridge flows around to the east, and the water north of the Elephant Sleeping Mountain extends to the end of the southern end here. Another two miles to the west, along the southwest side of the Elephant Sleeping Mountain, the houses are connected and gathered, surrounding the hillside and the valley. This is the location of Lijiang Prefecture.

古文：其子即迎余之人，其父乃曾奉差入都，今以居积番货为业。坐余楼上，献酪为醴ｌǐ甜酒，余不能沾唇也。
现代文：于是走半里，过石桥往北，又往西走半里，到通事家休息。我坐在楼上，他们献上奶酪作为酒，我一点也不能沾唇。
English: So I walked half a mile, over the stone bridge to the north, and half a mile to the west, and rested at the house of the secretary. I sat upstairs, they offered cheese as wine, and I couldn't touch my lips at all.

古文：时才过午，通事即往复命，余处其家待之。
现代文：时间刚过中午，通事立即去复命，我在他家等着。
English: It was just after noon, and the dispatcher immediately went to answer the call, and I was waiting at his house.

古文：东桥之西，共一里为西桥，即万字桥也，俗又谓之玉河桥。
现代文：东桥的西边，一共一里到西桥，就是万字桥，俗名又叫玉河桥。
English: The west side of the East Bridge, a total of one mile to the West Bridge, is the Swastika Bridge, also known as the Jade River Bridge.

古文：象鼻水从桥南下，合中海之水而东泄于东桥，盖象鼻之水，土人名为玉河云。
现代文：象鼻水从桥下往南流，与中海的水汇合后流到东桥，因为象鼻水当地人称为玉河。
English: The elephant snot flows from under the bridge to the south, merges with the water of the Mediterranean Sea and flows to the East Bridge, because the locals call the elephant snot the Jade River.

古文：河之西有小山兀立，与象眠南尽处，夹溪中峙。
现代文：河西有座小山突立，和象眠山南端尽头处隔溪对峙。
English: In the west of the river, there is a small hill protruding, facing the creek at the southern end of Xiangmingshan.

古文：后幕山顶而上，所谓黄峰也，俗又称为天生寨。木氏居此二千载，宫室之丽，拟于王者。
现代文：小山背后就是开阔的北坞，小山位于坞中，像正门标记，前面对着横贯的沟壑，象鼻水夹在坞东，中海水流经坞西，背靠雪山，前耸文笔峰，但唯独这正中的山小，府署坐落在坞南，向东对着玉河，背后帘幕般的山顶上，是所说的黄峰，俗名又叫天生寨。木氏居住在这里两千年，宫室的华丽程度，可以和帝王相比。
English: Behind the hill is the open north dock, the hill is located in the dock, like the main gate mark, facing the transverse gully in front, the runny water is caught in the dock east, the seawater flows through the dock west, backed by the snow mountain, the pen peak is in front, but only this small mountain in the middle, the prefectural office is located in the dock south, facing the Jade River to the east, behind the curtain-like mountain top, is the so-called Huangfeng, also known as Tianshengzhai. The Mu family has lived here for two thousand years, and the magnificence of the palace can be compared to that of the emperor.

古文：盖大兵临则俯首受绁ｘｉè捆绑罪人的绳索，师返则夜郎自雄，故世代无大兵燹，且产矿独盛，宜其富冠诸土郡云。
现代文：如大兵来临则俯首受缚，军队返回后则夜郎自大，所以世世代代没有大的战乱破坏，而且矿产特别多，在土府中为首富是有道理的。
English: If the soldiers come, they bow their heads and are bound, but if the army returns, they become arrogant, so there has been no major war damage for generations, and there are many minerals, so it makes sense to be the richest man in the country.

古文：二十六日晨。饭于小楼。
现代文：二十六日早晨，在小楼吃饭。
English: On the morning of the 26th, we had dinner in a small building.

古文：通事父言，木公闻余至，甚喜，即命以明晨往解脱林候见。
现代文：通事的父亲说，木公听到我来了，非常高兴，就命令在明天早晨前往解脱林等候见面。
English: The father of the driver said that the wood god was very happy to hear that I was coming, and ordered him to go to the forest of liberation tomorrow morning to wait for me.

古文：逾诸从者，备七日粮以从，盖将为七日款也。二十七日微雨。
现代文：告谕各随从的人，准备七夭的粮食带去，大概将要款待七日。二十七日小雨。
English: He told his followers to prepare seven days' worth of food and take it with them. They would probably be entertained for seven days. There was light rain on the 27th.

古文：坐通事小楼，追录前记。
现代文：坐在通事的小楼里，追写前面的日记。
English: Sitting in the small building where he works, he writes a follow-up to the previous diary.

古文：其地杏花始残，桃犹初放，盖愈北而寒也。
现代文：这里杏花开始残败，而桃花还刚刚开放，因为更处北方，因且更寒冷。
English: Here, the apricot blossoms are beginning to wilt, while the peach blossoms have just opened, because it is further north and therefore colder.

古文：二十九日晨起，具饭甚早。
现代文：二十八日通事说木公命令备马，下午去解脱林。二十九日早晨起床，饭准备得很早。
English: On the 28th, the messenger said that the wood god had ordered the horses to be prepared, and they would go to the forest in the afternoon. On the 29th, they got up in the morning, and the meal was prepared very early.

古文：通事备马，候往解脱林。
现代文：通事备好马，等候去解脱林。
English: The horses are ready and waiting to leave the forest.

古文：始过西桥，由郡署前北上，挟黄峰东麓而北，由北坞而行，五里，东瞻象眠山，始与玉河上流别。
现代文：于是过西桥，从府署前往北上，靠着黄峰东麓向北，沿北坞走，五里，往东眺望象眠山，才和玉河上游分开。
English: So I crossed the West Bridge, headed north from the prefectural office, walked north along the eastern foot of the Yellow Peak, walked along the north dock, five miles, looked east to the Elephant Sleeping Mountain, and then separated from the upper reaches of the Jade River.

古文：又五里，过一枯涧石桥，西瞻中海，柳岸波潆，有大聚落临其上，是为十和院。
现代文：又走五里，过一座枯涧上的石桥，往西眺望中海，岸边垂柳，波光潦绕，有个大聚落位于海上，这是十和院。
English: After walking another five miles, crossing a stone bridge on a dead reed, looking westward at the Mediterranean Sea, the shore of the weeping willow, the sparkling waves, there is a large settlement located on the sea, this is Towa-in.

古文：其后即十和山，自雪山南下之脉也。
现代文：院后就是十和山，是从雪山往南延伸的支脉。
English: Behind the hospital is Mount Towa, a spur that extends southward from the Snowy Mountains.

古文：又北十里，有大道北去者，为白沙院路；西北度桥者，为解脱林路。
现代文：二义往北走十里，有条北去的路，是去白沙院的；往西北过桥的，是去解脱林的路。
English: If you walk ten miles north of Eryi, there is a road to the north, which is the road to Baisha Academy; if you cross the bridge to the northwest, it is the road to get rid of the forest.

古文：桥下涧颇深而无滴沥。
现代文：桥下的沟涧很深但没有一滴水。
English: The gully under the bridge is very deep but there is not a drop of water.

古文：既度桥，循西山而行，五里为崖脚院。
现代文：过桥后，沿西山行，五里到崖脚院。
English: After crossing the bridge, go along the West Mountain, five miles to the foot of the cliff.

古文：其处居庐交集，崖角俱插小双旗，乃把事之家也。
现代文：这里房屋聚集，屋角都插有小双旗的，为把事的家。
English: Houses are clustered here, and small double flags are planted in the corners of the roofs, as a family in charge.

古文：院北半里，有涧自西山峡中下，有木梁跨其上。
现代文：院北半里处，沟涧从西山峡谷中伸下来，有座木桥横跨沟涧。
English: Half a mile north of the hospital, a ravine juts down from the Xishan Gorge, with a wooden bridge spanning the ravine.

古文：度桥，西北陟岭，为忠甸大道；由桥南溯溪西上岭者，即解脱林道。
现代文：过桥，往西北登岭，是去忠甸的大路；从桥南溯溪往西上岭，是去解脱林的路。
English: Crossing the bridge and heading northwest to Dengling is the road to Zhongdian; heading south from the bridge to West Shangling is the road to break free from the forest.

古文：乃由桥南西向蹑岭，岭甚峻，二里稍夷，折入南峡，半里，则寺依西山上，其门东向，前分一支为案，即解脱林今福国寺也。
现代文：于是从桥南往西登岭，岭很陡，二里后逐渐平缓，转进南边峡谷，半里，就看到寺靠在西山上，寺门向东，前面分有一支脉作为案山，就是解脱林。
English: So, from the bridge south to Xidenling, the ridge is very steep, after two miles it gradually flattens out, turning into the south canyon, half a mile, you can see the temple leaning against the west mountain, the temple gate to the east, there is a vein in front as the mountain, that is, the liberation forest.

古文：寺南冈上，有别墅一区，近附寺后，木公憩止其间。
现代文：寺南的冈上，有一片别墅，靠近寺后，木公在里面休息住宿。
English: On the hill to the south of the temple, there is a villa, close to the back of the temple, where Miku is resting and staying.

古文：介余入。木公出二门，迎入其内室，交揖而致殷勤焉。
现代文：通事带领我到门口，有二个大把事来拱手行礼，介绍我进去。木公出到二门，迎接我进他的内室，互相行礼而殷勤致谢。
English: The passer-by led me to the door, and there were two big men who bowed and introduced me inside. The wood god came out to the two doors, welcomed me into his inner room, and bowed to each other and thanked me.

古文：布席地平板上，主人坐在平板下，其中极重礼也。
现代文：在平板上布置席位，主人坐在平板下，这是这地方最重的礼节。
English: It is the most important form of etiquette in this place to arrange the seats on the platform and the host sits under the platform.

古文：叙谈久之，茶三易，余乃起，送出外厅事门，令通事引入解脱林，寓藏经阁之右厢。
现代文：叙述交谈了很久，换了三次茶，我于是起身，木公送我出外客厅门，让通事带我进解脱林，住在藏经阁右边的厢房。
English: After a long conversation and three changes of tea, I got up. Mokong escorted me out of the living room door, and asked the messenger to take me to the forest of liberation, where I lived in a room to the right of the study pavilion.

古文：寺僧之住持佛教寺院的主持僧者为滇人，颇能体主人意款客焉。
现代文：寺里的住持僧是云南人，很能体会主人之意而款待客人。
English: The abbot of the temple is from Yunnan. He is very able to understand the owner's intentions and entertain guests.

