古文：姚元崇卢齐卿薛季昶元怀景张九龄王丘杨穆弟兄李丹郑絪苗夫人杜鸿渐杜佑梁肃吕温顾和刘禹锡韩愈顾况于邵李德裕韦岫知人僧蔡荆亚子
现代文：姚元崇卢齐卿薛季昶元怀景张九龄王丘杨穆弟兄李丹郑絪苗夫人杜鸿渐杜佑梁肃吕温顾和刘禹锡韩愈顾况于邵李德裕韦岫知人僧蔡荆亚子
English: Yao Yuan Chong Lu Qi Sir Xue Ji Yan Yuan Huai Jing Zhang Jiu Ling Wang Qiu Yang Mu Brother Li Dan Zheng Qian Miao Mrs. Du Hong Cang Du You Liang Su Lyu Wen Gu and Liu Yuxi Han Yu Gu Situations in Shao Li Deyu Wei Zi Acquaintance Monk Cai Jing Yazi

古文：姚元崇
现代文：姚元崇
English: Yao Yuan Chong

古文：姚元崇与张说同为宰辅，颇怀疑阻，屡以事相侵，张衔之颇切。姚既病，诫诸子曰：张丞相与吾不叶，爨隙甚深。然其人少怀奢侈，尤好服玩。吾身殁之后，以吾尝同僚，当来吊。汝其盛陈吾平生服玩，宝带重器，罗列于帐前。
现代文：姚元崇和张说同时为皇帝的辅政大臣，他们之间的矛盾很深，多次互相伤害，张说尤其讨厌姚元崇，姚元崇病重，告诫几个儿子说：张丞相与我不和，矛盾很深，然而这个人生活浑霍浪费，尤其喜欢服用和玩赏的东西，我死以后，他以同事的身份，必然前来吊唁，你们多拿一些我平生喜欢的东西，如饰有珍宝的带子和各种宝器，陈列到帐前。
English: Zhang said that Yao Yuan Chong and Zhang Rong, who was also the emperor's assistant minister of state, had a deep conflict between them and hurt each other many times. Zhang said that he especially hated Yao Yuan Chong. Yao Yuan Chong was seriously ill and admonished several sons, saying: Zhang Rong and I are at odds, the conflict is very deep. However, this person lives a wasteful life, especially likes to take and play with things. After my death, he, as a colleague, will certainly come to offer condolences. You should take more of my favorite things, such as belts decorated with treasures and various treasures, and display them in front of the account.

古文：若不顾，汝速计家事，举族无类矣。目此，吾属无所虞。便当录其玩用，致于张公，仍以神道碑为请。
现代文：如果他不看这些东西，你们要迅速安排家里的事情，全家人都会遭到他的迫害，如果他注意这些东西，你们就不用担心了，将他喜欢的东西送给他，然后请他撰写我墓碑的碑文。
English: If he does not look at these things, you should quickly arrange things at home, the whole family will be persecuted by him, if he pays attention to these things, you do not have to worry, give him what he likes, and then ask him to write the inscription of my tombstone.

古文：若却征碑文，以刊削为辞，当引使视其镌刻，仍告以闻上讫。
现代文：得到他写的碑文以后，立即就上报给皇帝，并先将石料准备好备用，尽快镌刻，并告诉张说已经经过皇帝同意。
English: After getting the inscription written by him, he immediately reported to the emperor, and first prepared the stone for standby, engraved it as soon as possible, and told Zhang that it had been approved by the emperor.

古文：姚既殁，张果至，目其玩服三四。姚氏诸孤悉如教诫。
现代文：姚元崇死后，张说果然来了，他非常注意姚元崇的三四件宝器，姚元崇的儿子完全按父亲嘱咐的做了。
English: After Yao Yuan Chong's death, Zhang said that he really came. He paid great attention to Yao Yuan Chong's three or four treasures. Yao Yuan Chong's son did exactly as his father ordered.

古文：不数日文成，叙述该详，时为极笔。其略曰：八柱承天，高明之位列；四时成岁，亭毒之功存。
现代文：几天以后张说送来了写好的碑文，叙述姚元崇的生平，很详细，文章写得非常好，大致的意思是称赞姚元崇像撑天的八根柱子之一，应该列在高超明智的贤人行列中，虽然岁月流逝一切成为过去，但他的教化政绩功劳永存。
English: A few days later, Zhang said that he sent a well-written inscription, describing the life of Yao Yuanchong, very detailed, the article was very well written, roughly meaning to praise Yao Yuanchong as one of the eight pillars supporting the sky, should be listed in the ranks of super-wise sages, although the years have passed and everything has become the past, but his enlightenment achievements and merits remain forever.

古文：后数日，果使使取文本，以为词未周密，欲重加删改。
现代文：几天以后，张说果然又派使者来索要碑文，说是词句没有考虑周密，想要拿回去修改。
English: A few days later, Zhang said he sent another envoy to ask for the inscription, saying that the words and phrases had not been carefully considered and that he wanted to take it back and revise it.

古文：姚氏诸子乃引使者示其碑，乃告以奏御。
现代文：姚元崇的儿子引导使者去观看已经刻制完成的石碑，并告诉已经上报给了皇帝，使者回去向张说作了报告。
English: Yao Yuan Chong's son guided the emissary to see the completed stone monument and told him that it had been reported to the emperor. The emissary went back and reported to Zhang Xuan.

古文：使者复命，悔恨拊膺曰：死姚崇犹能算生张说。吾今日方知才之不及也远矣。
现代文：张说悔恨地拍着胸说：死了的姚元崇还能算计活着的张说，我今天才知道自己的才能同姚元崇相比，还差得远呢！
English: Zhang said, regretfully patting his chest and saying: dead Yao Yuan Chong can still be counted as alive Zhang said, I only know today that my talent is far behind that of Yao Yuan Chong!

古文：卢齐卿
现代文：卢齐卿
English: Lord Lucan

古文：卢齐卿开元初为幽州刺史。
现代文：卢齐卿开元初年为幽州刺史，张守圭来担任果毅将军。
English: In the first year of the year of the founding of the Republic of China, Lu Qi was appointed as the governor of Yuzhou, and Zhang Shougui was appointed as the general of Guoyi.

古文：时张守圭为果毅，齐卿特相礼接。谓曰：十年内知节度。
现代文：卢齐卿特意去迎接他，并对他说：你十年之内升任节度使。
English: Lu Qi specifically went to meet him and said to him: You will be promoted to the position of the festival envoy within ten years.

古文：果如其言。
现代文：果然同他说的一样。
English: He really nailed it.

古文：薛季昶
现代文：薛季昶
English: Xue Jizhen

古文：左相陈希烈初进士及第，曾与人制碑文。
现代文：左丞相陈希烈当初刚刚被录取为进士时，曾经给别人撰写了一篇碑文。
English: When Minister of the Left Chen Xilei had just been admitted as a graduate, he once wrote an inscription for others.

古文：其人则天时破家，因搜家资，见其文，以为与反者通，所由便以枷杖送陈于府，见河南尹薛季昶，陈神色无惧，自辩其事百余言。
现代文：这个人在武则天时候获罪被抄家，发现了那篇碑文的手稿，以为他与造反的人是同党。办案人员便将陈希烈抓到衙门来见河南尹薛季昶。陈希烈丝毫也没有害怕的神色，自己为自己辩护讲了一百多句话。
English: This person was arrested and his home was raided at the time of Wu Zetian, and they found the manuscript of the inscription, thinking that he was a member of the same party as the rebels. The case officers then arrested Chen Xilei and brought him to Qimen to see Henan Yin Xuejian. Chen Xilei did not look scared at all, and he spoke more than a hundred words in his own defense.

古文：薛尹观而奇之，便引上厅。谓之曰：公当位极台铉，老夫当以子孙见托耳。
现代文：薛季昶见了非常惊奇，便将他请上厅来，对他说：你将来能当丞相，我要把子孙托付给你。
English: Xue Jizhe was very surprised to see him, so he invited him to the hall and said to him: You can be the prime minister in the future, I will entrust my children and grandchildren to you.

古文：后陈位果至丞相。
现代文：后来陈希烈果然当上了丞相。
English: Later, Chen Xilei indeed became the prime minister.

古文：元怀景
现代文：元怀景
English: Yuanhuaijing

古文：燕公说之少也，元怀景知其必贵，嫁女与之。后张至宰相，其男女数人婚姻荣盛，男尚公主，女为三品夫人。
现代文：燕公张九龄年少时，元怀景知道他将来必然位高显贵，把女儿嫁给了他，后来张九龄做了宰相，几个儿女的婚姻都很荣耀，男儿作公主的女婿，女儿为三品夫人。
English: When Yan Gong Zhang Jiuling was young, Yuan Huaiqing knew that he would inevitably be a high-ranking dignitary in the future and married his daughter to him. Later, Zhang Jiuling became the prime minister. Several of his children's marriages were glorious, the son-in-law of a princess and the daughter of a third-class lady.

古文：张九龄
现代文：张九龄
English: Zhang Jiuling

古文：开元二十一年，安禄山自范阳入奏。张九龄谓同列曰：乱幽州者，是胡也。
现代文：唐朝开元二十一年，安禄山从范阳来京城朝见皇帝，张九龄对别的官员说：扰乱幽州的人，就是这个北方的胡人。
English: In the 21st year of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, An Lushan came from Fanyang to the imperial court in Beijing. Zhang Juering said to other officials: "The person who disturbed Yuzhou is this Hu person from the north."

古文：其后从张守圭失利，九龄判曰：穰苴出军，必诛庄贾。孙武行令，犹戮宫嫔。
现代文：后来在张守圭手下打了败仗，张九龄在送给皇帝的公文上写到：司马穰苴带兵出征，必然诛杀庄贾，孙武发布命令，也要杀戮宫中的嫔妃。
English: Later, when Zhang Shou-Kyu's army was defeated, Zhang Jiu-Ling wrote in a document sent to the emperor: Sima Yi led an army to go to war and inevitably killed Zhuang Jia, and Sun Wu issued an order to kill the concubines in the palace.

古文：守圭军令若行，禄山不宜免死。
现代文：若要使张守圭的军令严明，安禄山的死罪不能免，请杀了安禄山。
English: If you want to make Zhang Shoukei's military order clear that Anlu Mountain's death penalty is unavoidable, please kill Anlu Mountain.

古文：请斩之。玄宗惜其勇，令白衣效命。
现代文：玄宗皇帝爱惜安禄山作战勇猛，命令免去安禄山的官职，继续留用。
English: Emperor Xuanzong cherished Anlu Mountain's bravery in battle and ordered that Anlu Mountain's official post be removed, but it was retained.

古文：九龄执谘请诛之。玄宗曰：岂以王夷甫识不勒也。
现代文：张九龄坚持请求杀了安禄山，玄宗皇帝说：怎么能以王夷甫识别石勒的例子来看待这件事？
English: Zhang Jiuling insisted on killing Anlu Mountain, Emperor Xuanzong said: How can we use Wang Yifu's example of identifying the stone to look at this matter?

古文：后至蜀，追恨不从九龄言，命使酹于墓。
现代文：后来玄宗皇帝逃到蜀郡，后悔没有听从张九龄的话，派人到张九龄的墓前祭奠他。
English: Later, Emperor Xuanzong fled to Shu County, regretting that he did not listen to Zhang Jiuling's words, and sent people to Zhang Jiuling's grave to pay tribute to him.

古文：王丘
现代文：王丘
English: Wang Qiu

古文：开元八年，侍郎王丘拔山阴县尉孙逖，进士王冷然，不数年皆掌纶诰。
现代文：唐朝开元八年，侍郎王丘选拔推荐了山阴县尉孙逖和进士王冷然。没过几年，他俩担任了为皇帝起草文件的重要职务。
English: In the eighth year of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the chamberlain Wang Qiu recommended the commander of Shanyin County, Sun Qian, and the enlisted soldier Wang Rongran. Within a few years, they both held important positions in drafting documents for the emperor.

古文：侍郎崔琳收残选人裴敦复、于特卿、卢恺等十数人，皆入台省。
现代文：侍郎崔琳选拔推荐了裴敦复、于特卿、卢恺等十多个人，全都进入中央机关。
English: More than ten people, including Pei Dunfu, Yu Te Ching, and Lu Ye, were recommended by Choi Lin, the chamberlain, for selection, and all of them entered the central organ.

古文：众以为知人。
现代文：众人都认为他们两人有识别人才的能力。
English: Everyone thinks that Cui Lin's acquaintances are useful.

古文：杨穆弟兄
现代文：杨穆弟兄
English: Brother Yang Mu

古文：贞元中，杨氏、穆氏弟兄，人物气概，不相上下。
现代文：唐朝贞元年间，杨家弟兄和穆家弟兄的人物气质都差不多。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan of the Tang Dynasty, the characters of the Yang brothers and the Mu brothers were similar.

古文：或云：杨氏弟兄。宾客皆同；穆氏弟兄，宾客皆殊。
现代文：有人说：杨家兄弟个个相同，穆家弟兄，每个人都不一样。
English: Some people say: the brothers of the Yang family are all the same, the brothers of the Mu family, everyone is different.

古文：以此优劣。穆氏弟兄四人，赞、质、员、赏。
现代文：按照优劣的顺序是：穆赞、穆质、穆员、穆赏。
English: According to the order of superiority and inferiority, they are: Muzan, Mu quality, Mu member, Mu reward.

古文：时人谓赞俗而有格为酪，质美而多仁为酥，员为醍醐，赏为乳腐。
现代文：人们说：穆赞脱俗而又有风度，可以比作奶酪；穆质貌美并且仁义，可以比作酥油；穆员可以比作美酒；穆赏可以比作乳腐。
English: People say: Muzan is refined and elegant, and can be compared to cheese; Muzan is beautiful and benevolent, and can be compared to butter; Muzan can be compared to wine; Muzan can be compared to curd.

古文：李丹
现代文：李丹
English: By Li Dan

古文：郎中李丹典濠州，萧复处士寄家楚州白田。闻丹之义，来谒之。
现代文：郎中李丹调到濠州当刺史，有个叫萧复的读书人将家迁到楚州开荒种田，他听说李丹非常仁义，便前去拜见李丹。
English: His brother-in-law, Li Dan, was transferred to Zhangzhou Dangshan History. A reader named Xiao Fu, who moved his family to Chuzhou to start farming, heard that Li Dan was very benevolent and went to meet Li Dan.

古文：且无佣保，棹小舟，唯领一卯岁女僮。
现代文：他没有雇工，自己划着一条小船，带着一个未成年的女仆。
English: He had no employees and rowed a small boat himself, accompanied by an underage maid.

古文：时方寒，衣复单弊，女僮尤甚。坐于客次，女僮门外求火燎手，且持其靴去。
现代文：天气寒冷，衣服单薄，女仆在客厅里等候感到非常寒冷，便到门外去找火烤手，将萧复的靴子也带了出去。
English: The weather was cold, the clothes were thin, the maid was waiting in the living room and felt very cold, so she went outside the door to find a fire and took Xiao Fu's boots out.

古文：客吏忽云：郎中屈处士。
现代文：接待客人的官员忽然说：郎中怠慢先生了。
English: The official who was receiving the guests suddenly said, "The steward has neglected the master."

古文：复即芒爨而入，丹揖之坐，略话平素。复忽悟足礼之阙，矍然。
现代文：然后请他进去。萧复只好穿着草鞋走了进去，李丹与萧复相互行礼以后坐下谈话。
English: Then he invited him in. Xiao Fu had to go in wearing straw sandals. Li Dan and Xiao Fu bowed to each other and then sat down to talk.

古文：乃启丹曰：某为饥冻所迫，高堂慈母处分，令入关投亲知。
现代文：萧复忽然想起自己光着脚有失礼节，非常惊慌尴尬，便对李丹说：我为饥饿寒冷所逼迫，在母亲的吩咐下，入关投靠亲友。
English: Xiao Fu suddenly remembered that it was impolite to walk barefoot, he was very panicked and embarrassed, so he said to Li Dan: I was forced by hunger and cold, and under my mother's orders, I entered the customs to help my relatives and friends.

古文：无奴仆，有一小女僮，便令将随参谒。朝至此，僮騃恐惧公衙，失所在。
现代文：我没有奴仆，只有一个未成年的女僮。说着便叫人让女僮来参拜李丹，没想到女僮害怕官府，竟然自己跑了。
English: I don't have a servant, only an underage maiden. Saying that, I asked someone to let the maiden come to visit Li Dan. It didn't occur to me that the maiden was afraid of the government and actually ran away herself.

古文：客吏已通，取靴不得，去就脱，唯惶悚而已。丹曰：靴与履，皆一时之礼。
现代文：萧复的靴子也不小心让女僮带走了，萧复显得非常狼狈。李丹说：穿靴子还是穿鞋，都只是一种礼节。
English: Xiao Fu's boots were also carelessly taken away by the maid. Xiao Fu looked very confused. Li Dan said, "Wearing boots or shoes is just a form of etiquette.

古文：古者解袜登席，即徒跣以为礼。
现代文：古时候脱了袜子坐在席子上，以光脚作为一种讲礼貌的表示。
English: In ancient times, people took off their socks and sat on the mat, with bare feet as a sign of politeness.

古文：靴，胡服也，始自赵武灵王，又有何典据？
现代文：靴子是西北少数民族的服饰，据说是从赵武灵王的时代，人们才开始穿靴子，其实又有什么根据？
English: Boots are the clothing of ethnic minorities in Northwest China. It is said that people only started wearing boots in the era of King Zhao Wuling. What is the basis for this?

古文：此不足介君子怀，但请述所求意。
现代文：这一点你不必介意，请你只管说出你来的意思。
English: You don't have to mind this, please just say what you came for.

古文：遂留从容，复颐旨趋。
现代文：并让萧复安心，遂留他住下来休息。
English: He also reassured Xiao Fu, and finally allowed him to stay and rest.

古文：乃云：足下相才，他日必领重事。
现代文：李丹还对萧复说：你有做宰相的才能，将来必然担任重要的官职。
English: Li Dan also said to Xiao Fu: You have the talent to be a prime minister, and you will inevitably hold an important post in the future.

古文：于是遣使于白田，馈遗复母甚厚。又饯复以匹马束帛，复后竟为相。
现代文：然后派人到萧复的家里，给萧复的母亲送去很多礼物，又为萧复设宴饯行，送给他马匹和布匹。后来萧复果然当了宰相。
English: Then someone was sent to Xiao Fu's home to send many gifts to Xiao Fu's mother, and a banquet was held for Xiao Fu, and horses and cloth were given to him. Later, Xiao Fu became the prime minister.

古文：郑絪
现代文：郑絪
English: Zheng Wei

古文：刘瞻之先，寒士也。
现代文：刘瞻的父亲，当初是个贫穷的读书人。
English: Liu Zhan's father was originally a poor reader.

古文：十许岁，在郑絪左右主笔砚。
现代文：十岁的时候，他就在郑絪的身旁，管理笔墨砚台等书房用具。
English: When he was ten years old, he was right next to Zheng Qi, managing the pen and ink stand and other study room equipment.

古文：十八九，絪为御史，巡荆部商山，歇马亭，俯瞰山水。
现代文：十八九岁的时候，郑絪当上了御史，前往荆部商山巡视，中途在亭子里休息。
English: At the age of eighteen or nineteen, Zheng Yi became the imperial historian, and went to Jingbu Commercial Mountain to inspect, and rested in the pavilion halfway.

古文：时雨霁，岩峦奇秀，泉石甚佳。
现代文：当时正是雨过天晴，俯瞰山水，山色非常秀美，泉水分外好看。
English: At that time, it was raining and sunny, overlooking the landscape, the mountain color was very beautiful, and the spring water was beautiful.

古文：絪坐久，起行五六里。
现代文：郑絪坐了很久，起来走了五六里地说：如此美景，却没有作诗。
English: Zheng Yao sat for a long time, got up and walked five or six miles and said: Such a beautiful view, but no poetry.

古文：曰：此胜概，不能吟咏，必晚何妨？却返于亭，欲题诗。
现代文：就是观赏到天黑又有什么关系！于是又返回亭子，想要往亭子上题一首诗。
English: So I returned to the pavilion, wanting to write a poem on the pavilion.

古文：顾见一绝，染翰尚湿。
现代文：他忽然发现亭子上已经题了一首绝句，墨迹还没有干。
English: He suddenly discovered that a final sentence had been written on the pavilion, but the ink was not yet dry.

古文：絪大讶其佳绝。时南北无行人。
现代文：郑絪惊奇这首诗作得非常好，而当时南北方向又都没有行人。
English: Surprisingly, this poem was very well done, and at that time there were no pedestrians in the north-south direction.

古文：左右曰：但向来刘景在后行二三里。
现代文：随行的人对郑絪说：刚才只有刘景走在后面，落后了二三里。
English: The people accompanying him said to Zheng Yao: Just now, only Liu Jing was walking behind, two or three miles behind.

古文：公戏之曰：莫是尔否？
现代文：郑絪同刘景开玩笑说：莫非是你题的吗？
English: Zheng Hao joked with Liu Jing and said, "Isn't it you who are the star?

古文：景拜曰：实见侍御吟赏起予，辄有寓题。
现代文：刘景行了礼说：实在是因为看见侍御您欣赏风景作诗所引起的，所以特意作了这首拙诗题在上面。
English: Liu Jing made a salute and said, "It is really because I saw the waiter you appreciate the scenery caused by poetry, so I specially made this stupid poem on it.

古文：引咎又拜。公咨嗟久之而去。
现代文：说完自我检讨又行了一个礼，郑絪赞叹很久才离开。
English: After the self-examination, another salute was made, and Zheng Yao left after a long time of praise.

古文：比回京阙，戒子弟涵、瀚已下曰：刘景他日有奇才，文学必超异。自此可令与汝共处于学院，寝馔一切，无异尔辈。
现代文：这次巡视回到了京城，郑絪对自己的后辈郑涵、郑瀚等人说：刘景将来是个出奇的人才，文学上必然有超人的成就，从今以后让他和你们共同上学院读书，住宿吃饭的标准和你们一样。
English: This inspection returned to Beijing, and Zheng Yao said to his juniors Zheng Han, Zheng Han and others: Liu Jing will be an extraordinary talent in the future, and he will inevitably have superhuman achievements in literature. From now on, let him and you go to college together, and the standard of accommodation and meals will be the same as yours.

古文：吾亦不复指使。
现代文：我也再不把他当作仆人指使。
English: I will no longer use him as a servant.

古文：至三数年，所成文章，皆辞理优壮。凡再举成名，公召辟法寺学省清级。
现代文：三年以后，刘景所做的文章词汇十分出色，经过科举考试被录取，郑絪推荐他当上了辟法寺学省清级。
English: Three years later, Liu Jing's essay vocabulary was very outstanding. He was admitted to the examination after the examination, and Zheng Qi recommended him to be the first to be promoted to the provincial level of the Ministry of Education.

古文：乃生瞻，及第作相。
现代文：刘景所生的儿子就是刘瞻，长大了参加科举考试被录取成名，最后当了宰相。
English: Liu Jing's son is Liu Zhan, who grew up to take the imperial examination, was admitted to fame, and finally became prime minister.

古文：苗夫人
现代文：苗夫人
English: Mrs. Miao

古文：张延赏累代台铉。母宴宾客，选子婿，莫有入意者。
现代文：张延赏家几辈都是做大官的，他经常举行宴会招待客人，想要从客人中挑选一个女婿，可是没有他满意的。
English: Several generations of Zhang Yan's family have been high-ranking officials. He often holds banquets to invite guests and wants to choose a son-in-law from among the guests, but he is not satisfied.

古文：其妻苗氏，太宰苗晋卿之女也。
现代文：他的妻子苗氏是太宰苗晋卿的女儿，她有识别人才的能力，挑选了秀才韦皋。
English: His wife, Miao, is the daughter of Dazai Miao Jinqing. She has the ability to recognize talent and has selected the talented Wei Lu.

古文：夫人有鉴，甚别英锐，特选韦皋秀才曰：此人之贵，无以比俦。
现代文：她说：韦皋将来的尊贵，无人能比。于是将女儿嫁给了韦皋。
English: She said, "No one can match Wei Wei's future dignity." So she married her daughter to Wei Wei.

古文：既以女妻之。不二三岁，以韦郎性度高廓，不拘小节，张公稍悔之，至不齿礼。一门婢仆，渐见轻怠。
现代文：过二三年，因为韦皋性格清高，不拘小节，张延赏有点后悔，以至于对韦皋非常无礼，家中的奴婢们也逐渐瞧不起他。
English: After two or three years, because Wei Wei's character is clear and high, no matter how small, Zhang Yanbo regretted a little, so that he was very rude to Wei Wei, and the slaves and maidservants in the family gradually looked down on him.

古文：唯苗氏待之常厚。其于众，多视之，悒快而不能制遏也。
现代文：只有苗夫人对他一直很好，其他人对他都不好，他心中的愁闷和气愤不能控制。
English: Only Mrs. Miao has always been good to him, the others are not good to him, and the sadness and anger in his heart cannot be controlled.

古文：张氏垂泣而言曰：韦郎七尺之躯，学兼文武，岂有沉滞儿家，为尊卑见诮。
现代文：妻子张氏哭着说：韦皋是个七尺男儿，又文武全才，怎么能长期呆在我们家中，让家里人和奴婢瞧不起。
English: Mr. Zhang's wife cried and said, "Wei Yao is a seven-foot-tall boy, and he is also a man of letters and martial arts. How can he stay in our home for a long time and be looked down upon by the family members and servants?

古文：良时胜境，何忍虚掷乎？
现代文：大好年华，怎么能够虚度？
English: It's a great time of year, how can you waste it?

古文：韦乃告辞东游。妻罄妆奁赠送。
现代文：韦皋向张延赏家里的人告辞，独自准备东游，妻子张氏将自己的嫁妆首饰全都送给了他。
English: Wei Wei said goodbye to Zhang Yanbo's family and prepared to travel east alone. Mr. Zhang's wife gave him all of her dowry jewelry.

古文：延赏喜其往也，赆以七驮物。
现代文：张延赏对于他的出走很是高兴，送给他用七匹马所驮的物品。
English: Zhang Yanbo was very happy to see him leave, and gave him a gift of seven horses.

古文：每之一驿，则附递一驮而还。行经七驿，所送之物，尽归之矣。其所有者，清河氏所赠妆奁及布囊书策而已。
现代文：每到一个驿站，他就叫一匹马驮着物品返回家中，经过七个驿站，所送的物品，又全回到家中，韦氏所带的东西，只剩下妻子所送的首饰和一个口袋以及一些书籍。
English: At each station, he had a horse carry the items back to his home. After seven stations, the items he had sent were all returned to his home. All that Mr. Wei took with him was the jewelry sent by his wife, a bag, and some books.

古文：延赏莫之测也。
现代文：这些是张延赏所不知道的。
English: This is what Zhang Yanbo didn't know.

古文：后权陇右军事，会德宗行幸奉天，西面之功，独居其上。
现代文：后来韦皋代理陇右军事，同德宗皇帝巡视奉天。西面的功劳，以他立的最大。
English: Later, Wei Zheng, acting as the military commander of the right wing, and Emperor Dezong inspected Fengtian. Xi Mian's contribution was the greatest.

古文：圣驾旋复之日，自金吾持节西川，以代延赏。
现代文：皇帝回到京城以后，皋以金吾将军的身份去镇守西川，以接替张延赏。
English: After the emperor returned to Beijing, Zou went to guard the West River as General Kingo to succeed Zhang Yanbo.

古文：乃改易姓名，以书作韩，以皋作翱，莫敢言之也。
现代文：这时韦皋改了姓名，将韦改作韩，皋改作翱，没有人敢叫他原来的姓名。
English: At this time, Wei Ren changed his name, changing Wei to Han, and Ren to Ren. No one dared to call him by his original name.

古文：至天回驿，去府城三十里，有人特报延赏曰：替相公者，金吾韦皋将军，非韩翱也。
现代文：他到了天回驿站，距离西川府城还有三十里。有人特意报告张延赏说：替换你的，是金吾将军韦皋，而不是韩翱。
English: He arrived at Tianhui Railway Station, still thirty miles away from Xichuan Fucheng. Someone specifically reported to Zhang Yanbo that: Your replacement is Kingo General Wei Wei, not Han Wei.

古文：苗夫人曰：若是韦皋，必韦郎也。
现代文：苗夫人说：如果是韦皋，必然是女婿韦郎。
English: Mrs. Miao said: If it is Wei Wei, it must be his son-in-law, Wei Lang.

古文：延赏笑曰：天下同姓名者何限，彼韦生应已委弃沟壑，岂能乘吾位乎？
现代文：张延赏笑着说：天下同名同姓的人何其多，那个韦皋早已经死在水沟里了，怎么会来继承我的位置？
English: Zhang Yanjun said with a smile: There are so many people with the same name in the world. That Wei Wei has already died in a ditch. How could he inherit my position?

古文：妇女之言，不足云尔。
现代文：女人说的话，不会准确。
English: Nothing a woman says is accurate.

古文：苗夫人又曰：韦郎比虽贫贱，气凌霄汉。
现代文：苗夫人又说：韦皋虽然贫贱，但是英雄气概冲天。
English: Mrs. Miao also said: Although Wei Wei is poor, his heroic spirit is sky-high.

古文：每以相公所谈，未尝一言屈媚，因而见尤。成事立功，必此人也。
现代文：当时同你说话，从来没有说过一句奉承话，因而可以看出，成事立功，必然是他。
English: When I spoke to you at that time, I never said a word of flattery, so I could see that he must be the one who accomplished the work.

古文：来早入州，方知不误。
现代文：第二天早上新官入城，才知道苗夫人说的没错。
English: The next morning, the new official entered the city, only to find out that Mrs. Miao was right.

古文：韦公侍奉外姑，过于布素之时。
现代文：韦皋对待岳母超过了当初没有当官的时候。
English: Wei Wei treated his mother-in-law worse than when he was not an official.

古文：海内贵门，不敢忽于贫贱之婿。
现代文：从此全国当官有钱的人家，不敢轻视贫贱女婿。
English: Since then, rich families of officials across the country have not dared to despise their poor sons-in-law.

古文：所以郭圆诗曰：宣父从周又适秦，昔贤谁少出风尘。当时甚讶张延赏，不识韦皋是贵人。
现代文：郭圆作了一首诗说：孔子从周又适秦，古来圣贤出风尘，可笑当日张延赏，不识韦皋是贵人。
English: Guo Yuan wrote a poem saying: Confucius was born in Zhou and became a Qin. Since ancient times, sages have emerged. It is ridiculous to award Zhang Yan on the same day without knowing that Wei Wei was a noble.

古文：杜鸿渐
现代文：杜鸿渐
English: Du Hongzhan

古文：丞相杜鸿渐，世号知人。见马燧、李抱贞、卢新州杞、陆相贽、张丞相弘靖、李相蕃，皆云并为将相。
现代文：人们都认为丞相杜鸿渐有鉴别人才的本领，他见了马燧、李抱贞、卢新州的杞、陆贽、张弘靖、李蕃之后说：这些人都会成为大将军或宰相。
English: It is generally believed that Premier Du Hongqian has the ability to recognize talent. After seeing Ma Jun, Li Baozhen, Lu Xinzhou, Lu Wei, Zhang Hongjing, and Li Wei, he said, "These people will become great generals or prime ministers."

古文：既而尽然。许郭之徒，又何以加也。
现代文：后来果然同他说的一样，许郭之辈，又怎么比得上他？
English: Later, just as he said, Xu Guo's generation, how can it be compared to him?

古文：杜佑
现代文：杜佑
English: Du You

古文：太司徒杜公，见张相弘靖曰：必为宰相。
现代文：大司徒杜佑见到宰相张弘靖说：张弘靖将来必然成为宰相。
English: Seeing the Prime Minister Zhang Hongjing, the Grand Master Tu Youyou said: Zhang Hongjing will certainly become the Prime Minister in the future.

古文：贵人多知人也如此。梁肃
现代文：贵人大多像他这样会识别人才。梁肃
English: Most of the nobles are able to recognize talent like him.

古文：唐贞元中，李元宾、韩愈、李绛、崔群同年进士。
现代文：唐朝的贞元年间，李元宾、韩愈、李绛、崔群同一年被录取为进士。
English: During the Zhengyuan period of the Tang Dynasty, Li Yuanbin, Han Yu, Li Yao and Cui Qun were admitted as scholars in the same year.

古文：先是，四君子之定交久矣，共游梁补阙肃之门。
现代文：他们四个人已经结交很长时间了，有一天他们四个人共同去拜访补阙梁肃。
English: The four of them have been friends for a long time. One day, the four of them went together to visit Zhuo Liangsu.

古文：居二岁，肃未之面，而四贤造肃多矣，靡不偕行。肃异之。
现代文：二年之内他们去了很多次都没有见到梁肃，每一次都是四个人一同去，梁肃感到很奇怪，有一天见了面，梁肃发现他们都以文学见长。
English: Within two years, they went many times without seeing Liang Su. Every time, four people went together. Liang Su felt very strange. One day when they met, Liang Su found that they were all good at literature.

古文：一旦延接，观等俱以文学为所称，复奖以交游之道。
现代文：他们在一起谈论结交朋友的事情，梁肃素来有辨别、鉴定人的官禄命运的能力。
English: They talk together about making friends. Liang Su has always had the ability to discern and assess the fate of people's official position.

古文：后二贤果如所言。
现代文：会见过后四个人要走，梁肃叫住李绛和崔群说：你们四个人都很有文学才能，将来都有很大的功名，然而你们两个能够当上最大的官，努力，努力！后来两个人果然同他说的一样。
English: After the meeting, the four of them wanted to leave. Li Qian and Cui Qun were called by Li Su and told: "You four are very talented in literature, and you will all have great achievements in the future. However, you two can become the greatest officials. Work hard, work hard!" Later, the two of you did exactly what he said.

古文：吕温
现代文：吕温
English: Lyu Wen

古文：初，李绅赴荐，常以古风求知吕温。
现代文：当初李绅被推荐去参加选拔官员的考试，他经常拿着自己所作的古风去向吕温请教。
English: At the beginning, Li Sheng was recommended to participate in the examination of the selection officials. He often took the old style he had made and went to Lu Wen for advice.

古文：温谓员外郎齐照及弟恭曰：吾观李二十秀才之文，期人必为卿相。
现代文：吕温对员外郎齐照和弟弟吕恭说：我看了李绅的文章，此人将来必然成为九卿和宰相那样的高官。
English: Lu Wen said to Wei Lang Qizhao and his brother Lu Qiong: I read Li Sheng's article, this person will inevitably become a high-ranking official like Jiujing and Prime Minister in the future.

古文：果如其言。
现代文：后来李绅果然当了宰相。
English: He really nailed it.

古文：诗曰：春种一粒粟，秋成万颗子。
现代文：李绅送给吕温看的两首诗是：春种一粒粟，秋成万颗子。
English: The two poems sent to Lu Wen by Li Sheng are: "Spring sows a grain of millet, autumn brings forth a million seeds."

古文：四海无闲田，农夫犹饿死。锄禾日当午，汗滴禾下土。
现代文：四海无闲田，农夫犹饿死；锄禾日当午，汗滴禾下土。
English: There are no idle fields in the four seas, and the farmers are starving to death.

古文：谁知盘中餐，粒粒皆辛苦。
现代文：谁知盘中餐，粒粒皆辛苦。
English: Who knows what's on the plate, it's all hard work.

古文：顾和
现代文：顾和
English: peace and security

古文：张玄之、顾敷是顾和中外孙。皆少而聪慧。和并知之，而常谓顾胜，亲重偏至，张颇不厌。
现代文：张玄之和顾敷是顾和的中表孙子，顾和知道两个人从小就很聪明，然而认为顾敷胜过张玄之，对顾敷比较偏向，对张玄之差一些。
English: Zhang Xianzhi and Gu Shiki are Gu Shiki's middle-aged grandsons. Gu Shiki knew that the two of them were very smart from a young age, but he thought that Gu Shiki was better than Zhang Xianzhi. He was more partial to Gu Shiki, and was a little different from Zhang Xianzhi.

古文：于时张年九岁，顾年七岁，和俱与至寺中，见佛般泥洹像，弟子有泣者，不泣者。和以问二孙。
现代文：张玄之九岁，顾敷七岁这一年，顾和带着他俩上庙里去，观看佛祖涅巉，也就是死亡的画像。学生中有哭的有不哭的，顾和问两个孙子，这是为什么。
English: This year, when Zhang Xuanzhi was nine years old and Gu Zhi was seven, Gu He took them both to the temple to see the Buddha's nirvana, that is, the image of death. Some of the students were crying or not crying. Gu He asked his two grandchildren why.

古文：玄之谓：彼亲故泣，彼不亲故不泣。
现代文：张玄之说：感情深的就哭，感情不深的就不哭。
English: Zhang Xianzhi said: If you have deep feelings, you will cry. If you don't have deep feelings, you won't cry.

古文：敷曰：不然，由忘情故不泣，不能忘情故泣。
现代文：顾敷说：不是这样，修行比较深的，对于喜怒哀乐之事不动感情，淡然若忘的忘情者就不哭，不忘情者就哭。
English: Gu Shiki said, "It's not like that. The practice is relatively deep, and they don't have any feelings for emotions. If they forget, they don't cry. If they don't forget, they cry."

古文：刘禹锡
现代文：刘禹锡
English: Liu Yuxi

古文：刘禹锡曰：季龙挟弹弹人，其父怒之。
现代文：刘禹锡说：季龙拿弹弓射人，他的父亲非常生气。
English: Liu Yuxi said: Ji Long took a slingshot to shoot people, his father was very angry.

古文：其母曰：健犊须走车破辕，良马须逸鞅泛驾，然后能负重致远。大言童稚，不奇不惠，必非异器定矣。
现代文：他的母亲说，强壮的牛犊会撞破车前的辕木，好马会挣脱脖子上的皮套，然后才能负重物，行远路，儿童如果不淘气，没有出格的举动，将来必然不会成为一个杰出的人才。
English: His mother said that a strong calf would break through the birch in front of the car, a good horse would break out of the holster around its neck before it could carry heavy loads and travel long distances, and if a child was not naughty and did not act out of character, he would not necessarily become an outstanding talent in the future.

古文：韩愈
现代文：韩愈
English: Han Yu

古文：李贺以歌诗谒吏部韩愈。
现代文：李贺给吏部韩愈拿出自己所作的诗歌，向韩愈请教，并以此作为结交韩愈的手段。
English: Li He took out his poems and asked Han Yu for advice, and used this as a means to make friends with Han Yu.

古文：时为国子博士分司，时送客出归，极困。门人呈卷，解带旋读之。
现代文：当时韩愈分管国子博士，他将客人送走以后感到非常困倦，这时看门的人送来了李贺的诗歌。
English: At that time, Han Yu was in charge of Dr. Guo Zi. He felt very sleepy after seeing his guests off. At that time, the doorman brought Li He's poem.

古文：首篇《雁门太守行》云：黑云压城城欲摧，甲光向日金鳞开。
现代文：韩愈一边解带一边漫不经心地阅读，第一首诗《雁门太守行》写道：黑云压城城欲摧，甲光向日金鳞开。
English: Han Yu read carelessly while untying his belt. The first poem, "Ganmen Taizhu Xing," wrote: "Dark clouds press down on the city, and the sun shines brightly."

古文：却插带，急命邀之。
现代文：韩愈急忙又把带子系上，命令立即将李贺请来。
English: Han Yu hastily tied the ribbon again and ordered Li He to come immediately.

古文：顾况
现代文：顾况
English: Status Quo

古文：尚书白居易应举，初至京，以诗谒著作顾况。
现代文：尚书白居易当初去参加科举考试，刚到京城，便拿着自己所写的诗歌去拜见著作佐郎顾况。
English: Shangshu Bai Juyi originally went to Beijing to take the imperial examinations. As soon as he arrived in the capital, he took the poems he had written with him to visit the poet Saro Guzheng.

古文：况睹姓名，熟视白公曰：米价方贵，居亦弗易。
现代文：顾况看到白居易诗稿上的名字，凝视着白居易说：长安米价很贵，居住并不容易。
English: Gu Gu saw Bai Juyi's name on the poem manuscript, stared at Bai Juyi and said: Chang'an rice is very expensive, and it is not easy to live there.

古文：乃披卷，首篇曰：离离原上草，一岁一枯荣。
现代文：然后打开诗稿，看到第一首诗是：离离原上草，一岁一枯荣。
English: Then he opened the poem manuscript and saw that the first poem was: Away from the original grass, one year old, one year old.

古文：野火烧不尽，春风吹又生。
现代文：野火烧不尽，春风吹又生。
English: Wildfires never burn out, spring winds blow and new life is born.

古文：却嗟赏曰：道得个语，居即易矣。
现代文：不由得赞叹着说：能写出这样的诗句，居住下来就容易了。
English: He couldn't help but say with admiration: "If you can write such a poem, it's easy to settle down."

古文：因为之延誉，声名大振。
现代文：由此顾况开始向别人推荐宣扬白居易的才学，使白居易的名声传播开来。
English: Based on this, he began to recommend others to promote Bai Juyi's talent, so that Bai Juyi's reputation spread.

古文：于邵
现代文：于邵
English: Yu Shao

古文：于邵性孝悌，内行修洁，老而弥笃。
现代文：于邵非常尊敬他的哥哥，在家中的言行很检点注意，并且岁数越大越坚定。
English: Yu Shao respects his elder brother very much, pays close attention to what he says and does at home, and becomes more and more determined the older he gets.

古文：初，樊泽尝举贤良方正，一见于京师，曰：将相之材也。
现代文：当初，樊泽被推荐为参加贤良方正科目的考试。于邵在京城一见到他便说：樊泽是担任大将和宰相的人才啊！
English: At first, Heze was recommended to take part in the examination of virtuous and upright subjects. As soon as Yu Shao saw him in Beijing, he said: Heze is a talent to serve as a general and prime minister!

古文：不五年，泽为节度使，崔元翰近五十，始举进士。邵异其文，擢首甲科。且曰：不十年司诰命。
现代文：没有超过五年，樊泽就当上了节度使。崔元翰快到五十岁，才被推荐参加考取进士，于邵很欣赏他的文章，录取他为甲科进士第一名，并说：不出十年，崔元翰会掌管起草皇帝发布的公文。
English: It did not take more than five years for Heze to become the festival envoy. Cui Yuanhan was almost fifty years old before he was recommended to participate in the entrance examination for scholars. Yu Shao admired his article very much and admitted him as the first place in the entrance examination for A subjects, and said: Within ten years, Cui Yuanhan will be in charge of drafting the official document issued by the emperor.

古文：竟如其言。
现代文：结果同他说的一样。
English: In the end, he did as he said.

古文：独孤绶举博学宏词，吏部考为第一，在中书，升甲科，人称允当。
现代文：独孤绶被推荐参加博学宏词科举科目的考试，被吏部录取为第一名，并推荐他参加中书省主持的科举考试，人们认为录取得公正准确。
English: Duolou was recommended to participate in the examination of the erudite and grand words subject, and was admitted to the first place by the cadre department. He was also recommended to participate in the examination of the subject under the auspices of the Ministry of Education and Culture. It was believed that the record was fair and accurate.

古文：李德裕
现代文：李德裕
English: Li Deyu

古文：中令白敏中方居郎署，未有知者。
现代文：白敏中刚刚担任中令，人们都不熟悉他，没有知名度，只有宰相李德裕将他当作国家的栋梁之材。
English: Bai Minzhong has just assumed the post of middle-ranking officer. People are not familiar with him and he is not well-known. Only Prime Minister Li Deyu regards him as a pillar of the country.

古文：唯朱崖相李德裕特以国器重之，于是缙绅间多所延誉。
现代文：十分器重，于是官员们也都开始为他宣扬传播声名。
English: He is so important that officials have begun to promote him to spread his fame.

古文：然而资用不充，无以祗奉僚友。
现代文：然而白敏中没有钱，无法宴请同事和朋友。
English: However, Bai Min has no money and cannot invite colleagues and friends to the banquet.

古文：一旦，相国遗钱十万，俾为酒肴之备。约省阁名士数人，克日同过其第。
现代文：一天宰相给了他十万文钱，作为置办酒菜的费用，邀请了一部分中书省的官员和知名人士在约定的日期到他的家中作客。
English: One day, the Prime Minister gave him 100,000 yuan as the cost of purchasing wine and vegetables, and invited a number of officials and celebrities from the Ministry of Education and Culture to visit his home on the agreed date.

古文：时秋暮沉阴，涉旬霖沥。
现代文：当时正是晚秋，连续下了一个多月的雨。
English: It was late autumn, and it had been raining for more than a month.

古文：贺跋任员外府罢，求官未遂，将欲出薄游。
现代文：贺跋被免去了员外职务，还没有谋求到新的官职，准备出外游玩。
English: Hedaba has been relieved of his outside duties, has not yet sought a new official position, and is preparing to travel abroad.

古文：与白公同年登第，羸驹就门告别。
现代文：他与白敏中是同一年考中的进士，临行前牵着马到白敏中的门前告辞。
English: He and Baimin junior high school are the same year of entrance examination. Before leaving, he took his horse to the door of Baimin junior high school to say goodbye.

古文：阍者以俟朝客，乃以他去对之。贺跋驻车留书，备述羁游之意。
现代文：看门人正等着接待宴请的客人，同贺跋对话，贺跋停下车马留下一封书信，信中叙述了要远游他乡的意思。
English: The doorman was waiting to receive the guests of the banquet, and had a dialogue with He Bao. He Bao stopped the car and left a letter, in which he described his intention to travel far away.

古文：白览书曰：丈夫处穷达，当有时命。
现代文：白敏中看了信说：大丈夫身处逆境或者顺利发达，都是命运的安排。
English: Bai Minzhong read the letter and said: it is okay to be in adversity or to develop smoothly, both are arranged by fate.

古文：苟不才者，以侥幸取容，未足为发身之道，岂得家畜饮馔，止邀当路豪贵。
现代文：没有本事的人想要靠侥幸升官，不是求得进取的正道。怎么能用给牲畜吃的草料来招待英雄豪杰呢！
English: It is not the right way for a person without ability to seek promotion by chance. How can we use grass for livestock to invite heroes and heroes!

古文：曩时登第贫交，今日闭门不接，纵使便居荣显，又安得不愧于怀？
现代文：从前考取进士的时候是好朋友，今日闭门不见，纵然就是当了大官，内心又怎能不感到羞愧。
English: Once upon a time, when I was taking the entrance examination, I was a good friend. Today, I don't see him behind closed doors. Even though I have become a high-ranking official, I can't help feeling ashamed.

古文：遽令仆者命贺跋回车，遂以杯盘同费。俄而所约朝客，联骑而至，阍者具陈与贺跋从容，无不惋愕而去。
现代文：立刻命令仆人去把贺跋追回来，两个人在家中喝酒，不一会儿，白敏中所邀请的客人一同骑着马来了，看门人告诉他们白敏中正在招待贺跋，这些人又是惊奇，又是惋惜地走了。
English: He immediately ordered his servants to go and fetch him back. The two of them had a drink at home. Soon, guests invited by Bai Minzhong arrived on horseback. The doorman told them that Bai Minzhong was inviting He Babao. They were both surprised and sad to leave.

古文：翌日，于私第谒见。相国询朝士来者为谁？
现代文：第二天白敏中去宰相的家中拜见宰相，宰相询问昨天都有哪些官员前去作客。
English: The next day, Bai Minzhong went to the prime minister's home to meet the prime minister. The prime minister asked which officials had come as guests yesterday.

古文：白公对以宾客未至。适有同年出京访别，悯其龙钟委困，不忍弃之，留饮数杯，遂阙祗接。既负吹嘘之意，甘从谴斥之罪。
现代文：白敏中回答说客人没有去，有同年考中进士的朋友离开京城之前去告别，因为同情他的境遇，不忍抛弃，留下他喝了几杯酒，所以没有迎接招待前去作客的官员，辜负了宰相抬举自己的美意，甘愿受到宰相的责备。
English: Bai Minzhong replied that the guest did not go. A friend who was a junior high school entrance examination candidate in the same year went to say goodbye before leaving Beijing, because he sympathized with his situation and could not bear to abandon him. He left him to drink a few glasses of wine, so he did not welcome the officials who were invited to be guests. He failed to live up to the prime minister's desire to elevate himself, and was willing to be reproached by the prime minister.

古文：相国称欢逾时云：此事真古人之道。由兹贵达，可以激劝浇薄。
现代文：宰相李敏求称赞他说：这件事做得真有古人的风格，由此而提拔你们，可以改造浮薄的社会风气。
English: Prime Minister Lee Min-koo praised him, saying: "This thing is really done in the style of the ancients, and by promoting you, you can transform the shallow social atmosphere.

古文：不旬日，贺跋自使下评事，先授美官。白公以库部郎中入为翰林学士。未窬三载，便秉钧衡。其后五镇藩方，再居廊庙。
现代文：没过十天，贺跋从使下评事被任命为美官，白敏中由库部郎中改任翰林学士，又过了不到三年，白敏中便担负了评价选拔官员的重要职责，后来又五次出任镇守边关的重要官职。
English: Less than ten days later, He Bao was appointed to the position of beauty officer, and Bai Minzhong was appointed to the position of Hanlin bachelor from the position of treasury assistant. Less than three years later, Bai Minzhong took on the important responsibility of evaluating and selecting officials, and later served as the town guard of the border five times.

古文：蹈义怀仁，始终一致。流芳传素，士林美之。
现代文：之后回到中央，始终按照仁义的标准行事，美好的声名四处传颂，赢得了上流知识界的赞誉。
English: After returning to the center, he always acted according to the standards of benevolence and righteousness, and his good reputation was spread everywhere, winning the praise of the upper intellectual circles.

古文：大初中，边鄙不宁，吐蕃尤恣屈强。宣宗皇帝决于致讨，延英先问宰臣。
现代文：大初年间，边关很不安宁，藏族的首领不归顺朝廷，宣宗皇帝决定进行讨伐。
English: During the early years of the Taisho era, the frontier was very restless. Tibetan leaders did not submit to the imperial court, and Emperor Xuan Zong decided to carry out a crusade.

古文：公首奏兴师，遂为统帅，率沿边藩镇兵士数万，鼓行而前。
现代文：皇帝询问宰相，得知是白敏中首先建议出兵的，便任命白敏中为征讨部队的统帅，率领边关各郡的兵马数万人，击鼓进军。
English: The emperor asked the prime minister and learned that it was Bai Minzhong who first proposed to send troops. He then appointed Bai Minzhong as the commander of the conscription force, leading tens of thousands of soldiers and horses from the border counties and marching into the army with drums.

古文：时犬戎列阵于川，以生骑马数千匹，伏藏山谷。既而得于牒者，遂设奇兵待之。
现代文：敌人的首领率队在开阔的平地摆开阵势，白敏中派出骑兵几千人，埋伏在山谷中，抓到了敌人送信的士兵，于是又增派奇兵等敌人进入圈套。
English: The leader of the enemy led the team to set up a position on the open plain. Bai Min sent several thousand cavalry to lie in wait in the valley, caught the soldiers sent by the enemy, and then sent more soldiers such as the Special Forces to enter the trap.

古文：有蕃中酋帅，衣绯茸裘，系宝装带。所乘白马，骏异无比。
现代文：敌人的阵营中有一个头目，穿着红色的衣服，披着毛皮大衣，扎着镶着珠宝的腰带，骑着一匹神骏无比的白马。
English: In the enemy's camp was a leader, dressed in red, with a fur coat, a jeweled belt, and riding a magnificent white horse.

古文：锋镝未交，扬鞭出于阵面者数四，频召汉军斗将。白公诫兵士无得而应之。
现代文：没等开战，他便四次骑马冲出阵前，向朝廷的军队挑衅，白敏中命令兵将不许随便应战。
English: Without waiting for the war to begin, he rushed out of the front on horseback four times to provoke the imperial court's army. Bai Minzhong's commanding officers would not allow him to fight casually.

古文：俄而驻军指挥，背我师百余步而立。
现代文：不一会儿，敌人指挥队伍距离白敏中的部队只有一百多步远。
English: Soon, the enemy command team was only a hundred paces away from Bai Minzhong's troops.

古文：有潞州小将骁勇善射，驰马弯弧而出，连发两箭，皆中项。跃马而前，抽短剑，踣于鞍上，以手扶挟，如斗欧之状。
现代文：潞州兵马中有一员小将勇猛善于射箭，他骑马冲出队伍，弯弓连射两箭，全都射中敌人那个首领的脖子，小将跃马上前，抽出短剑将敌人首领刺死在马上。然后用手扶持着，厮打着，敌人仍然呐喊着为自己的首领助威。
English: One of the young generals in the Bozhou soldiers and horses was brave and good at archery. He rushed out of the ranks on horseback, shot two arrows with a curved bow, all of which hit the neck of the enemy leader. The young general leapt forward, pulled out his short sword and stabbed the enemy leader to death on the horse. Then he held him by the hand and beat him. The enemy was still shouting encouragement for his leader.

古文：蕃军但呼噪助之，于鞍脱绯裘，解金带，夺马而还。
现代文：小将在马上将敌人的大衣和战袍脱下来，解下镶了珠宝的带子，夺了白马回归自己的队伍。
English: The young general immediately took off the enemy's overcoat and battle robe, untied the jewel-encrusted band, and took the white horse back to his team.

古文：师旅无不奋勇。
现代文：兵将们受到鼓舞，全都奋勇向前。
English: Emboldened, the generals all charged forward.

古文：既而大战沙漠，虏阵瓦解，乘胜追奔，几及黑山之下。所获驼马辎重，不可胜计。
现代文：接着又和敌军在沙漠中展开大战，敌人被打败，朝廷的军队乘胜追击，队伍一直追到黑山脚下，所缴获的马匹和军用物资，多得无法统计。
English: Next, a great battle was waged with the enemy in the desert. The enemy was defeated, and the imperial army took advantage of the victory to pursue them. The team chased them all the way to the foot of Montenegro, and the number of captured horses and military supplies was too great to count.

古文：束手而降四三万人。先是河湟郡界在匈奴者，自此悉为唐土。
现代文：敌人被迫投降的有三四万人，过去被敌人侵占的地区，全都收复为大唐的国土。
English: The enemy was forced to surrender 340,000 people, and all the areas occupied by the enemy in the past were recovered as the territory of Datang.

古文：宣宗初览捷书云：我知敏中必殄凶丑。
现代文：宣宗皇帝刚刚看到报捷的公文便说：我知道白敏中必然能消灭凶恶的敌人。
English: Emperor Xuanzong had just seen the document announcing the victory when he said, "I know that Bai Minzhong will certainly be able to destroy the vicious enemy.

古文：白公凯旋，与同列宰辅进诗云：一诏皇城四海颁，丑戎无数束身还。
现代文：白敏中凯旋以后和共同为辅政大臣的几位官员给皇帝献词，白敏中所作的诗是：一诏皇城四海颁，丑戎无数束身还。
English: After Bai Minzhong's triumphant return, he and several officials who were jointly vice-ministers of state gave a speech to the emperor. Bai Minzhong's poem was: "One imperial edict conquers the four seas, and countless villains are chained to death."

古文：戍楼吹笛人休战，牧野嘶风马自闲。
现代文：戍楼吹笛人休战。牧野嘶风马自闲。
English: The piper calls a truce in the mirage. The pastures hiss and the horses are at leisure.

古文：河水九盘收数曲，陇山千里诸关。
现代文：河水九盘收数曲，陇山千里诸关。
English: Nine sets of rivers and streams complete a number of songs, and thousands of miles of mountains and rivers complete a number of passages.

古文：西边北塞今无事，为报东南夷与蛮。
现代文：西边北塞今无事，为报东南夷与蛮。
English: In the west, there is nothing wrong with Beixi at the moment, while in the southeast, there is nothing wrong with Nanyi.

古文：马相植诗云：舜德尧仁化犬戎，许提河陇款皇风。指挥文武皆神算，恢拓乾坤是圣功。
现代文：宰相马植献诗说：舜德尧仁化犬戎，许提河陇款皇风，指挥文武皆神算，恢拓乾坤是圣功。
English: Prime Minister Ma Zhiqian said in a poem: "Being a virtuous and benevolent dog, Xu Tihexing is the emperor's style, commanding literature and martial arts is a divine calculation, and rejuvenating the universe is a sacred deed."

古文：四帅有征无汗马，七关虽戍已韬弓。
现代文：四帅有征无汗马，七关虽戍已韬弓。
English: The four great generals have the ability to conquer without sweat, but the seven great generals have not been able to conquer.

古文：天留此事还英主，不在他年在大中。
现代文：天留此事还英主，不在他年在大中。
English: The matter was left to the Lord, and did not come up during his years at the university.

古文：魏相扶诗云：萧关新复旧山川，古戍秦原景象鲜。
现代文：宰相魏扶献的诗是：萧关新复旧山川，古戍秦原景象鲜。
English: The poem dedicated by Prime Minister Wei Fuke is: Xiaoguan newly restored the old mountains and rivers, the ancient Qinhuangdao scenery is fresh.

古文：戎虏乞降归惠化，皇威渐被慑腥膻。
现代文：戎虏乞降归惠化，皇威渐被慑腥膻。
English: The emperor's authority was gradually undermined by his subordinates, who begged him to abdicate in favour of them.

古文：穹庐远戍烟尘灭，神武光扬竹帛传。
现代文：穹庐远戍烟尘灭，神武光扬竹帛传。
English: The smoke and dust of the far-distant dome are extinguished, and the divine light is transmitted.

古文：左衽尽知歌帝泽，从兹不更备三边。
现代文：左衽尽知歌帝泽，从兹不更备三边。
English: The left eyelid knows all about the Emperor of Song, and has never been more prepared for the three sides.

古文：崔相铉诗云：边陲万里注恩波，宇宙群方洽凯歌。有地名王争解辫，远方戎垒尽投戈。
现代文：宰相崔铉的诗是：边陲万里注恩波，宇宙群方洽凯歌，有地名王争解辫，远方戎垒尽投戈。
English: The poem of Prime Minister Cui Rong is: "Borders are thousands of miles away from Enbo, the universe is full of magnificent songs, there are kings of place names competing to solve the riddle, and distant armies are fighting.

古文：烟尘永息三秋戍，瑞气遥清九折河。
现代文：烟尘永息三秋戍，瑞气遥清九折河。
English: The smoke and dust will be gone forever in the autumn, and the fresh air will clear the Jiuli River.

古文：共偶圣明千载运，更观俗阜与时和。
现代文：共偶圣明千载运，更观俗阜与时和。
English: Shengming thousand years of marriage, it is better to look at the secular wealth and time.

古文：韦岫
现代文：韦岫
English: Wei Xuan

古文：唐丞相卢携，大中初，举进士。风貌不扬，语亦不正，呼携为慧。盖舌短也。
现代文：唐朝丞相卢携在大中初年刚刚中进士的时候，因为相貌和风度都不出众，说话又吐字不清，将携读成慧，是因为舌头短的原因。
English: In the first year of junior high school, when Lu Cui was just entering the junior high school, because his appearance and demeanor were not outstanding, and his speech was not clear, he would read into wisdom because of his short tongue.

古文：韦氏昆弟皆轻侮之，独尚书岫加敬，谓昆弟曰：卢虽人物甚陋，观其文章有首尾。
现代文：韦家兄弟都轻视和侮辱他，只有尚书韦岫对他很尊重，他对兄弟说：卢携虽然人长得丑但是他的文章写的好。
English: All the Wei brothers despised and insulted him. Only Shang Shuxu Wei Wei respected him very much. He said to his brother: Although Lu Zhi is ugly, his articles are well written.

古文：斯人也，以此卜之，他日必为大用乎？
现代文：这个人如果按照他的文章来推测，将来必然有大的作为。
English: If this person is to be inferred from his article, he is bound to do great things in the future.

古文：尔后卢果策名，竟登廊庙，奖拔岫至福建观察使。
现代文：后来卢携果然通过考问政事和经义的测试，竟然进入中央担任重要职务，他奖励提拔韦岫为福建观察使。
English: Later, Lu Zhe passed the examination of political affairs and the test of economic sense, and even entered the central government to hold important positions. He rewarded and promoted Wei Jun as the Fujian Observer.

古文：向时轻薄诸弟，率不展分。所谓以貌失人者，其韦诸季乎？
现代文：当初轻视侮辱卢携的韦家兄弟，都没有什么出息，所以说以貌取人的是韦家兄弟。
English: At first, the Wei brothers, who despised and insulted Lu Zhizhi, had nothing to offer, so it was the Wei brothers who judged people by their appearance.

古文：知人僧
现代文：知人僧
English: Acquaintance monk

古文：唐令公韦昭度少贫窭，常依左街僧录净光太师，随僧斋粥。
现代文：唐朝的中书令韦昭度年轻的时候很贫穷，经常依赖去左街僧录向净光和尚求助，同和尚在一起吃斋粥。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Wei Zhaoren was very poor when he was young. He often relied on the Zuo Jie Monk Records to seek help from the Jingguang Monk, and ate porridge with the monk.

古文：净光有人伦之鉴，恒器重之。蔡荆
现代文：净光和尚有识别人才的本领，一直对他非常器重。蔡荆
English: Jingguang Monk has the ability to recognize talent, and has always been very important to him. Cai Jing

古文：唐蔡荆尚书为天德军使，衙前有小将顾彦朗、彦晖，知使院宅市买。
现代文：唐朝的尚书蔡荆担任天德军使，他手下有两员小将顾彦朗和顾彦晖。
English: Shangshu Cai Jing of the Tang Dynasty served as a German envoy, and he had two young generals, Gu Yanlang and Gu Yanjun, under his command.

古文：荆有知人之鉴。或一日，俾其子叔向以下，备酒馔于山亭，召二顾赐宴。
现代文：蔡荆有辨别人才的能力，有一天，他让儿子蔡叔向在山上的亭子里摆上酒席，请两员小将来喝酒。
English: Cai Jing has the ability to discern talent. One day, he asked his son Cai Shuxiang to set up a banquet in a pavilion on the mountain and invite two young people to drink.

古文：荆俄亦即席，约令勿起。二顾惶惑，莫谕其意。
现代文：过了一会儿，蔡荆亲自赶来入座喝酒，并且不让两员小将站起来，顾彦朗和顾彦晖非常惶恐和疑惑，不知道蔡荆是什么意思。
English: After a while, Cai Jing himself came to sit down and drink, and did not let the two young men stand up. Gu Yichang and Gu Yixuan were very frightened and confused, and did not know what Cai Jing meant.

古文：荆勉之曰：公弟兄俱有封侯之相，善自保爱。他年愿以子孙相依。
现代文：蔡荆勉励他们两人说：你们弟兄都有封侯的相貌，要注意爱护自己，将来我要把子孙托付给你们。
English: Cai Jing encouraged the two of them, saying, "Your brothers all have the appearance of princes. Pay attention to loving yourself. In the future, I will entrust my children and grandchildren to you."

古文：因增其职级。
现代文：过后蔡荆提升了他们的职务和级别。
English: Cai Jing later promoted them to higher positions and ranks.

古文：洎黄寇犯阙，顾彦朗领本军，同立收复功，除东川，加使相。
现代文：等到黄寇侵犯边关的时候，顾彦朗率领本部人马收复失地立了功，被任命为东川节度使。
English: When the Yellow Pirates invaded the border, Gu Yanlang led the headquarters to regain the lost ground and was appointed as the Dongchuan Festival envoy.

古文：蔡叔向兄弟往依之，请叔向为节度副使，仍以丈人行拜之。军府大事，皆谘谋焉。
现代文：蔡叔向兄弟去投靠顾彦朗。顾彦朗聘任蔡叔向为节度副使，并且以对待长辈的礼节来对待他，军中和府里的大事，都征求他的意见。
English: Cai Xiang went to his brother to seek the support of Gu Yanlang. Gu Yanlang appointed Cai Xiang as the deputy envoy of the festival, and treated him with the etiquette of the elders, soliciting his opinion on important matters in the army and the government.

古文：大顾薨，其弟彦晖嗣之，亦使相。
现代文：顾彦朗死了以后，他的弟弟顾彦晖继承了哥哥的职位，仍然像哥哥一样对待蔡叔向。
English: After Gu Yanlang died, his younger brother Gu Yanqi inherited his position and still treated Cai Shuxiang like an older brother.

古文：亚子
现代文：亚子
English: Yazo

古文：后唐庄宗年十一从晋王讨王行瑜。
现代文：后唐的庄宗十一岁时跟随晋王讨伐王行瑜，每次命令他入关报捷。
English: At the age of eleven, Zhuangzong of the Later Tang Dynasty followed Jin Wang to fight Wang Xingyu, and ordered him to enter the pass every time to report his success.

古文：初令入觐献捷，昭宗一见，骇异之曰：此子有奇表。
现代文：昭宗皇帝见了他惊奇地说：这个孩子的相貌奇特。
English: Emperor Zhaozong was surprised to see him and said, "This child's appearance is peculiar.

古文：乃抚其背曰：儿将来之国栋，勿忘忠孝于吾家。
现代文：因此而拍着他的脊背说：你将来成为国家的栋梁，不要忘了忠于我们李家。
English: So he patted him on the back and said, "You will become the backbone of the country in the future. Don't forget to be loyal to our Li family."

古文：乃赐鸂鶒酒卮、翡翠盘。
现代文：并且赏赐给他鸂鶒酒杯和翡翠盘。
English: He was also given a goblet of wine and an emerald dish.

古文：十三读春秋，略知大义。骑射绝伦。其心豁如，采录善言，听纳容物，殆刘聪之比也。
现代文：庄宗十三岁读《春秋》，就知道大概意思，他骑马射箭的技艺非常高超，并且心胸开阔，善于听从正确的意见，有度量，能容人，赶上十六国时的刘聪了。
English: Zhuangzong read "Spring and Autumn" at the age of thirteen and knew the general meaning. He was very skilled in riding and archery, and was open-minded, good at listening to correct opinions, measured, and tolerant. He caught up with Liu Cong at the time of the Sixteen Kingdoms.

古文：又云，昭宗曰：此子可亚其父。
现代文：昭宗皇帝说：这个孩子可以仅次于他的父亲。
English: Emperor Zhaozong said: This child can be second only to his father.

古文：时人号曰亚子。
现代文：所以当时的人们都称他为亚子。
English: That's why people at the time called him Yasuko.

