古文：王弘弘少好学，以清悟知名。
现代文：王弘少年好学，以清悟知名。
English: Wang Hong, a studious boy, is known for his enlightenment.

古文：弱冠爲会稽王道子骠骑主簿。
现代文：二十岁担任会稽王司马道子的骠骑主簿。
English: At the age of twenty, he served as the chief inspector of the riding club of Wang Sima Daozi.

古文：珣颇好积聚，财物布在人间，及薨，弘悉燔券书，一不收责，其余旧业，悉委诸弟。
现代文：王繤很喜欢积聚，财物大量散布在社会上，等他死后，王弘把债券文书都烧掉了，全部不再收讨，其余的旧家业，全都委托给几个弟弟。
English: Wang Yao liked to accumulate a lot, and his property was widely distributed in society. After his death, Wang Hong burned all the bond documents, and all of them were no longer collected. The rest of the old family business was all entrusted to several younger brothers.

古文：时内外多难，在丧者皆不得终其哀，唯弘徵召一无所就。
现代文：当时国家内外多难，守丧的大多不能坚持到底，只有王弘，虽然受到征召，却一处也没有上任。
English: At that time, there were many difficulties at home and abroad, and most of the mourners could not stick to the end. Only Wang Hong, although he was conscripted, did not take office anywhere.

古文：桓玄克建业，收道子付廷尉，臣吏莫敢瞻送，弘时尚居丧，独道侧拜辞，攀车涕泣，论者称焉。
现代文：桓玄攻克了建业，拘捕了司马道子交付给廷尉，他的下属官吏都不敢目送，王弘当时还在守丧，单独在道旁跪拜送别，手拉着囚车哭泣，谈论的人都很称赞。
English: Huan Xuan conquered Jianye, arrested Sima Daozi and handed him over to the imperial lieutenant. His subordinate officials did not dare to see him off. Wang Hong was still in mourning at the time, kneeling alone by the roadside to say goodbye, holding the prisoner's wagon in his hand and crying. People who talked about it were very praised.

古文：宋武帝召补镇军谘议参军，以功封华容县五等侯，累迁太尉左长史。
现代文：宋武帝召他补任镇军咨议参军，因功封为华容县五等侯，逐渐升迁为太尉左长史。
English: Emperor Songwu called him to join the army as the town's military adviser, and he was awarded the title of Huarong County's fifth-ranked marquis, and was gradually promoted to the rank of lieutenant-commander.

古文：从北征，前锋已平洛阳，而未遣九锡，弘衔使还都讽朝廷。
现代文：跟随北征，前锋已经平定了洛阳，而没有赠给九锡，王弘作为使者回到京城去婉言劝说朝廷。
English: Following the Northern Expedition, the vanguard had already leveled Luoyang, but had not given it to Jiuxi. Wang Hong returned to Beijing as an envoy to gently persuade the imperial court.

古文：时刘穆之掌留任，而旨乃从北来，穆之愧惧发病，遂卒。
现代文：当时刘穆之担当留任，而圣旨却从北方来，刘穆之惭愧而恐惧，得了病，于是便死了。
English: At that time, Liu Muzhi's charge remained in office, but the sacred will came from the north. Liu Muzhi was ashamed and afraid, got sick, and then died.

古文：宋国建，爲尚书仆射掌选，领彭城太守。
现代文：宋国建立，王弘担任尚书仆射，负责选拔人材，兼任彭城太守。
English: When the Song Dynasty was established, Wang Hong served as Shangshu's aide-de-camp, responsible for selecting talent, and concurrently served as Pengcheng's governor.

古文：奏弹世子左卫率谢灵运，爲军人桂兴淫其嬖妾，灵运杀兴弃尸洪流，御史中丞王准之曾不弹举。
现代文：上表弹劾世子左卫率谢灵运，因为军人桂兴和他的宠妾淫交，谢灵运杀死了桂兴，把他的尸体扔在了洪流中，御史中丞王准之竟然不予检举。
English: The above table impeached the heir of Zuwei, Xie Lingyun, because the soldier Gui Xing and his favorite concubine had sexual intercourse. Xie Lingyun killed Gui Xing and threw his body into the torrent, but the chief historian Wang Junzhi did not report it.

古文：武帝答曰： 端右肃正风轨，诚副所期，自今以爲永制。 
现代文：武帝回答说： 尚书省长官整肃端正风俗习尚，的确符合我的期望，从今以后作为永远的制度。 
English: Emperor Wu replied, "The rectification and rectification of customs and habits by the governor of Shangshu Province is indeed in line with my expectations and will be a permanent system from now on.

古文：于是免灵运官。
现代文：于是免去了谢灵运的官职。
English: As a result, Xie Lingyun was relieved of his official position.

古文：后迁江州刺史，省赋简役，百姓安之。
现代文：后来王弘调任江州刺史，降低赋税，缩减劳役，百姓得以安定。
English: Later, Wang Hong was appointed as the governor of Jiangzhou, reduced taxes, reduced labor service, and the people were stabilized.

古文：永初元年，以佐命功，封华容县公。
现代文：永初元年，因为辅佐武帝登基的功劳，封为华容县公。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Yongle Dynasty, he was made the governor of Huarong County for his contribution to Emperor Wu's ascension to the throne.

古文：三年入朝，进号卫将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：永初三年入朝，晋升封号为卫将军、开府仪同三司。
English: He entered the imperial court three years after the enthronement of Emperor Yongzheng, and was promoted to the rank of Wei general, Kaifu official and Sanji.

古文：帝因宴集曰： 我布衣，始望不至此。 
现代文：武帝在一次宴会上说： 我是一个平民，开始并没有希望走到今天这一地步。 
English: Emperor Wu said at a banquet: I am a commoner, and at the beginning I had no hope of reaching this point.

古文：傅亮之徒并撰辞，欲盛称功德。
现代文：傅亮等人都在拟定词语，打算盛赞功德。
English: Fu Liang and others are working out the words, intending to praise the merits.

古文：弘率尔对曰： 此所谓天命，求之不可得，推之不可去。 
现代文：王弘随口回答说： 这就是所谓天命，求之不可得，推之不可去。 
English: Wang Hong casually replied: This is the so-called "Mandate of Heaven," which can neither be obtained nor pushed away.

古文：时称其简举。
现代文：当时都称赞他的简明扼要。
English: He was praised at the time for his succinctness.

古文：少帝景平二年，徐羡之等谋废立，召弘入朝。
现代文：少帝景平二年，徐羡之等人谋划废立皇帝，召王弘入朝。
English: In the second year of the young emperor Jingping, Xu Enzhi and others planned to abolish the emperor and call Wang Hong into the dynasty.

古文：文帝即位，以定策安社稷，进位司空，封建安郡公，固辞见许。
现代文：文帝即位，靠他制定策略安定国家，晋升职位为司空，封为建安郡公，坚持推辞，得到批准。
English: Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, relied on him to formulate a strategy to stabilize the country, promoted to the position of Siku, named Jian'an County, insisted on resignation, and was approved.

古文：进号车骑大将军，开府、刺史如故。
现代文：晋升封号为车骑大将军，开府、刺史职位和原来一样。
English: The promotion seal number is the General of Chariot and Cavalry, and the posts of Kaifu and Shishi are the same as before.

古文：徐羡之等以废弑罪，将及诛，弘以非首谋，且弟昙首又爲上所亲委。
现代文：徐羡之等人因为废杀皇帝的罪行，将要被处死，王弘因为不是首谋，而且弟弟王昙首又被皇上所亲信。
English: Xu Enzhi and others will be executed for the crime of dethroning the emperor, Wang Hong for not being the mastermind, and his brother Wang Xizhou for being trusted by the emperor.

古文：事将发，密使报弘。
现代文：事情将要发生的时候，秘密派人告诉了王弘。
English: When the incident was about to happen, Wang Hong was told in secret.

古文：羡之既诛，迁侍中、司徒、扬州刺史、录尚书事，给班剑三十人。
现代文：徐羡之被杀以后，王弘调任侍中、司徒、扬州刺史、录尚书事，配给仪仗三十人。
English: After Xu Enzhi was killed, Wang Hong transferred 30 people to serve as attendants, attendants, Yangzhou engravers, and recorders, and assigned them to the honor guard.

古文：上西征谢晦，与彭城王义康居守，入住中书下省，引队仗出入，司徒府权置参军。
现代文：皇上西征谢晦，他和彭城王刘义康留守，入宫住在中书下省，带领卫队出入，司徒府暂时设置参军。
English: At the end of the Western Expedition, he and Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, stayed behind and entered the palace to live in the province of Shushan. He led the guards to and from the palace, and temporarily set up a military base in Szeto.

古文：元嘉五年春，大旱，弘引咎逊位。
现代文：元嘉五年春季，天气大旱，王弘引咎退位。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Yuan Jia, the weather was very dry, and Wang Hong was blamed for his abdication.

古文：先是彭城王义康爲荆州剌史，镇江陵，平陆令河南成粲与弘书，诫以盈满，兼陈彭城王宜入知朝政，竟陵、衡阳宜出据列藩。
现代文：在此以前，彭城王刘义康做荆州刺史，镇守江陵，平陆县令河南人成粲给王弘写信，告诫他不可自满，同时陈述彭城王刘义康应该入朝执政，竟陵王、衡阳王应该出京据守各个重镇。
English: Prior to this, Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, wrote a letter to Wang Hong, warning him not to be complacent, stating that Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, should enter the imperial court, and that the king of Gangneung and the king of Hengyang should go to Beijing to defend each important town.

古文：弘由是固自陈请。
现代文：王弘由此坚持自我请求。
English: Wang Hong thus insisted on self-request.

古文：乃降爲卫将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：于是才把他降为卫将军、开府仪同三司。
English: As a result, he was demoted to the rank of General of the Guards and removed from the Kaifu Ceremony and the Three Departments.

古文：六年，弘又上表陈彭城王宜入辅，并求解州，义康由是代弘爲司徒，与之分录。
现代文：元嘉六年，王弘又上表陈述彭城王应该入朝辅政，并且要求解除自己的扬州职务，刘义康由此代替王弘为司徒，和他分管。
English: In the sixth year of Yuan Jia, Wang Hong also submitted a petition stating that Peng Cheng Wang should enter the imperial auxiliary government, and requested that he be relieved of his Yangzhou duties. Liu Yikang thus replaced Wang Hong as a disciple and was in charge of him.

古文：弘又辞分录。
现代文：王弘又辞让分管。
English: Wang Hong also resigned from his position.

古文：弘博练政体，留心庶事，斟酌时宜，每存优允。与八座丞郎疏曰： 同伍犯法，无人士不罪之科，然每至诘谪，辄有请诉。
现代文：王弘广泛地熟悉政务，留心普通事情，研究时代要求，常常力求宽和公平，他给朝廷高级官员的信中说： 同伍的人犯法，没有名人无罪的条文，然而每当审讯时，则有特殊照顾。
English: Wang Hong was widely familiar with government affairs, paid attention to ordinary matters, studied the requirements of the times, and often strived to be broad and fair. He said in a letter to a high-ranking official of the imperial court: There is no provision for the innocence of comrades-in-arms who commit crimes. However, whenever there is a trial, there is special care.

古文：若常垂恩宥，则法废不行，依事纠责，则物以爲苦。
现代文：如果常常给予宽大，则法令就废止无法执行了，依据事实进行追究，则人们会觉得苛苦。
English: If leniency is often given, the law will be abolished and cannot be enforced, and if people are prosecuted on the basis of facts, they will feel harsh.

古文：恐宜更爲其制。 
现代文：恐怕应该重新制定。 
English: I'm afraid it should be reformulated.

古文：时议多不同，弘以爲：
现代文：当时的议论大多不同意，王弘认为：
English: Most of the discussions at the time disagreed. Wang Hong believed:

古文：谓之人士，便无庶人之坐；署爲庶人，辄受人士之罚，不其颇欤？
现代文： 主张有名望的人，便不像平民那样牵连坐罪；作为平民，便要受有名望者的株连，这不是太偏谬了么？
English: Is it not preposterous to say that a man of reputation is not liable to the same punishment as a commoner, while a commoner is liable to the same punishment as a man of reputation?

古文：谓人士可不受同伍之谪，取罪其奴客，庸何伤邪？
现代文：认为有名望的人可以不受同伍牵连的处罚，而对他的家奴治罪，奴仆们多么悲苦啊？
English: How sad are the slaves of a man who thinks that he can punish a man of renown without incurring the retribution of his fellow-slaves?

古文：无奴客，可令输赎。
现代文：没有家奴的，可以用钱物赎买。
English: If you don't have a slave, you can buy one with money.

古文：有修身闾阎，与群小实隔，又或无奴僮，爲衆所明者，官长二千石便亲临列上，依事遣判。
现代文：有的人在家乡修身养性，与那些小人确实隔绝；又有的没有奴仆，官长二千石就应该亲临调查上报，根据情况进行处理。 
English: Some people practice self-cultivation in their hometowns, and are truly isolated from those villains; others do not have slaves, and officials of 2,000 koku should come in person to investigate and report, and deal with them according to the situation.

古文：又主守偷五疋，常偷四十疋，并加大辟。
现代文：又规定：主管的人偷布帛五疋，普通人偷四十疋，都要处以死刑。
English: It also stipulates that the person in charge who steals 50 baht of cloth money, and the ordinary person who steals 40 baht, shall be sentenced to death.

古文：议者咸以爲重。
现代文：谈论的人都觉得太重。
English: People who talk about it find it too heavy.

古文：弘以爲：
现代文：王弘认为：
English: Wang Hong believes:

古文：小吏无知，临财易昧。
现代文： 小吏无知，见了财货容易昏迷。
English: Petty officials are ignorant and easily go into a stupor when they see money and goods.

古文：或由疏慢，事蹈重科。
现代文：有的由于疏忽怠慢，触犯了刑律。
English: Some have violated the criminal law due to negligence.

古文：宜进主守偷十疋，常偷五十疋死，四十疋降以补兵。
现代文：应该提高限额规定主管的人偷十疋，普通人偷五十疋定为死罪，四十疋处以充军。
English: The limit should be raised to stipulate that the person in charge steals ten rupees, the ordinary person steals fifty rupees as a capital offense, and forty rupees is punished by conscription.

古文：至于官长以上，荷蒙荣禄，冒利五疋乃已爲弘，士人至此，何容复加哀矜。
现代文：至于官长以上，蒙受国家的俸禄，侵利五疋就已经是大数，士人到了这种地步，怎么还能加以同情？
English: As for officials and higher-ranking officials, they are paid by the state, and the profit of five yuan is already a large number. How can a scholar sympathize with them when they have reached this stage?

古文：且此辈人士可杀不可谪，谓宜奏闻，决之圣旨。
现代文：而且这些人士可杀不可贬，我认为应该上奏，由皇上的圣旨来决定。 
English: And these people can be killed or not, I think it should be up to the Emperor's will to decide.

古文：文帝从弘议。
现代文：文帝采纳了王弘的建议。
English: Emperor Wen accepted Wang Hong's suggestion.

古文：弘又上言： 旧制，人年十三半役，十六全役。
现代文：王弘又上书说： 旧时规定，人到了十三岁要服半役。
English: Wang Hong also wrote: According to the old regulations, people had to serve half-time when they reached the age of thirteen.

古文：今四方无事，应存消息。
现代文：现在四方无事，应该加以调整。
English: Now that the Quartet has nothing to do, it should be adjusted.

古文：请以十五至十六爲半丁，十七爲全丁。 
现代文：请以十五至十六为半丁，十七为全丁。 
English: Fifteen to sixteen is half a ding, and seventeen is a whole ding.

古文：从之。
现代文：被采纳。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：及弟昙首亡，文帝嗟悼不已，见弘流涕歔欷，弘敛容而已。
现代文：等弟弟王昙首去世，文帝哀悼不止，见了王弘流泪叹息，而王弘只是脸色严肃而已。
English: After the death of his brother Wang Xizhou, Emperor Wen mourned for him endlessly. Wang Hong shed tears and sighed when he saw him, but Wang Hong only looked serious.

古文：既而彭城王义康言于帝曰： 昙首既爲家宝，又爲国器，弘情不称，何也？ 
现代文：随后彭城王刘义康告诉皇帝说： 昙首既是家宝，又是国器，王弘的感情却不太深，为什么？ 
English: Subsequently, Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, told the emperor: The dagger is both a family treasure and a national treasure, but Wang Hong's feelings are not very deep. Why?

古文：帝曰： 贤者意不可度。 
现代文：文帝说： 贤者的心思不可猜测。 
English: Emperor Wen said, "The mind of a wise man cannot be guessed."

古文：其见体亮如此。
现代文：他就是这样地受到体谅。
English: That's how he's being treated.

古文：九年进位太保，领中书监，馀如故。
现代文：元嘉九年，晋升为太保，兼中书监，其他职务依旧。
English: In the ninth year of Yuan Jia, he was promoted to Taibao, concurrently the middle school librarian, and his other duties remained the same.

古文：其年薨。
现代文：这年去世。
English: That year, Hou Mo Chen Shun passed away.

古文：赠太保、中书监，给节，加羽葆、鼓吹，增班剑爲六十人。
现代文：追赠为太保、中书监，给予节杖，加给羽葆、乐队，增加仪仗为六十人。
English: As a follow-up gift, Taibo and Zhongshuo were given a cane, feather boas and a band, and the number of honorary soldiers was increased to 60.

古文：諡曰文昭公，配食武帝庙庭。
现代文：谥号为文昭公，配食武帝的庙庭。
English: His posthumous name was Wen Zhaogong, and he served food to Emperor Wu in the temple courtyard.

古文：弘既人望所宗，造次必存礼法。
现代文：王弘既然威望为众人所崇尚，行为必定遵循礼法。
English: Since Wang Hong's prestige is revered by many people, his behavior must follow etiquette.

古文：凡动止施爲及书翰仪体，后人皆依放之，谓爲王太保家法。
现代文：凡是他的动止行为和书信仪礼，后人都加以仿照，称为王太保家法。
English: All of his actions, movements, and letter-writing etiquette were imitated by later generations and are known as the Wang Taibao Family Law.

古文：虽历藩辅，而不营财利，薨亡之后，家无馀业。
现代文：他虽然历任地方长官，却不经营财利，去世之后，家中并没有多余的资产。
English: Although he served as a local governor, he did not engage in financial gain. After his death, his family did not have any surplus assets.

古文：而轻率少威仪。客有疑其讳者，弘曰： 家讳与苏子高同。 
现代文：他为人随便，缺少威仪，一个客人怀疑他有忌讳，王弘说： 家讳与苏子高相同。 
English: He is easy-going and lacks dignity. A guest suspected that he had a taboo. Wang Hong said, "My family's taboo is the same as Su Zigao."

古文：性褊隘,人有忤意，辄加詈辱。
现代文：他性格狭隘，如果有人违拗了他，就加以辱骂。
English: He is narrow-minded, and if someone contradicts him, he insults them.

古文：少尝摴蒱公城子野舍，及后当权，有人就弘求县。
现代文：少年时候曾在公城子野家里玩掷色子游戏，等后来当了权，有人到王弘那里要求做县官。
English: When he was a boy, he used to play a game of dice at Gongcheng Zino's home. Later, when he became an authority, someone came to Wang Hong and asked him to be a county official.

古文：此人尝以蒱戏得罪，弘诘之曰： 君得钱会戏，何用禄爲。 
现代文：这个人曾经因为掷色子犯过罪，王弘反问他说： 您可以通过游戏得到钱财，何必还要俸禄呢？ 
English: Wang Hong asked him: "You can get money through games, why do you need a salary?

古文：答曰： 不审公城子野何所在。 
现代文：回答说： 不知道公城子野现在在哪里。 
English: He replied, "I don't know where Gongcheng Zino is now."

古文：弘默然。
现代文：王弘沉默不语。
English: Wang Hong was silent.

古文：自领选及当朝总录，将加荣爵于人者，每先呵责谴辱之，然后施行；若美相盼接语欣欢者，必无所谐。
现代文：自从负责选贤和做了当朝总管，即将对人加封官爵时，常常是首先谴责斥辱他一通，然后进行；如果是态度和悦说话欢欣时，事情必然不成。
English: Ever since he was in charge of selecting sages and served as the chief administrator of the dynasty, when he was about to ennoble a person, he often first condemned and insulted him, and then proceeded; if it was an attitude and pleasant speech, things would inevitably fail.

古文：人问其故，答曰： 王爵既加于人，又相抚劳，便成与主分功，此所谓奸以事君者也。
现代文：有人问这是什么缘故，回答说： 帝王的爵位既然加封给别人，又加以抚慰，便成了与皇上分功，这便是奸猾地事奉君主。
English: Someone asked the reason for this, and he replied: Since the emperor's title of nobility has been conferred on others and comforted, it has become to share the credit with the emperor, which is to treacherously serve the monarch.

古文：僧亮弟僧衍，位侍中。弘少子僧达。僧达幼聪敏，弘爲扬州时，僧达六七岁，遇有通讼者，窃览其辞，谓爲有理。
现代文：如果来求官爵的人没有做官的可能，既然没有什么可以好处给他，又不给点好脸色，就会结成很大的怨恨，这也是我所不愿意得到的。 问者心悦诚服。○王僧达王僧达自幼聪敏，父亲王弘为扬州刺史时，王僧达六七岁，遇到有诉讼的人，偷看了他们的讼词，认为有理。
English: If there is no possibility for a person who comes to ask for a title of nobility to become an official, since there is nothing that can benefit him without giving him a good face, there will be a lot of resentment, which is what I don't want to get. The questioner is pleased and satisfied.○ Wang Zongda Wang Zongda has been intelligent since childhood. When his father Wang Hong was writing a history of Yangzhou, Wang Zongda was six or seven years old. When he encountered people who had lawsuits, he peeked at their lawsuit and thought it was reasonable.

古文：及大讼者亦进，弘意其小，留左右，僧达爲申理，闇诵不失一句。
现代文：等到处理重大案件时，也把它呈递上去，王弘认为案子小，就留在了身边。王僧达替他申辩理由，背诵讼词一句不差。
English: When it came time to deal with a major case, he also submitted it. Wang Hong thought the case was small, so he stayed by his side. Wang Sengda defended his case and recited the argument well.

古文：兄锡质讷乏风采。
现代文：他哥哥王锡朴实口讷，缺乏风采。
English: His brother Wang Xi is plain-spoken and lacks style.

古文：文帝闻僧达早慧，召见德阳殿，应对闲敏，上甚知之，妻以临川王义庆女。
现代文：文帝听说王僧达从小聪慧，在德阳殿召见了他，他应对机敏，皇上非常赏识，把临川王刘义庆的女儿许配给他为妻。
English: Emperor Wen heard that Wang Zongda had been clever since he was a child, and summoned him to Deyang Palace. He was quick to respond, and the emperor was very appreciative, and gave him the daughter of Linchuan King Liu Yiqing as his wife.

古文：少好学，善属文，爲太子舍人。
现代文：他少年好学，善于写文章，担任太子舍人。
English: He was a studious boy, good at writing articles, and served as a prince.

古文：坐属疾而于扬列桥观斗鸭，爲有司所纠，原不问。
现代文：因为托病而在扬列桥观看斗鸭，被有关部门所检举，宽大没有追究。
English: Because he feigned illness to watch a duck fight on Yanglieli Bridge, he was reported by the relevant departments, but no action was taken against him.

古文：性好鹰犬，与闾里少年相驰逐，又躬自屠牛。
现代文：他生性喜好鹰犬，和街道上的少年互相比赛，又亲自宰牛。
English: He has a natural affinity for falcons, competes with street urchins and slaughters cattle himself.

古文：义庆闻之，令周旋沙门慧观造而观之，僧达陈书满席，与论文义，慧观酬答不暇，深相称美。
现代文：刘义庆听说后，让朋友和尚慧观到他家去观看，只见王僧达书放了一席，和他讨论起了文章，慧观应答不暇，十分赞美。
English: After hearing this, Liu Yiqing asked his friend and Shang Huikan to go to his home to watch. Wang Sangdaxu took a seat and discussed the article with him. Huikan did not have time to answer and was full of praise.

古文：诉家贫求郡，文帝欲以爲秦郡。
现代文：他诉说自己家中贫穷，求做郡官，文帝想让他掌管秦郡。
English: He complained that his family was poor and asked to be a county official. Emperor Wen wanted him to be in charge of Qin County.

古文：吏部郎庾仲文曰： 王弘子既不宜作秦郡，僧达亦不堪莅人。 
现代文：吏部郎庾仲文说： 王弘的儿子既不适合做秦郡官长，王僧达也不具备做官资格。 
English: "Wang Hong's son is not suitable to be the governor of Qin County, and Wang Sonta does not have the qualifications to be the governor," said the head of the cadre department, Lang Yu Zhongwen.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是搁置下来。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：迁太子洗马，母忧去职。
现代文：调任太子洗马，为母亲守丧离职。
English: He was transferred to Prince Saima and left his post to attend his mother's funeral.

古文：与兄锡不协。
现代文：他与哥哥王锡合不来。
English: He doesn't get along with his brother Wang Xi.

古文：锡罢临海郡还，送故及奉禄百万以上，僧达一夕令奴辇取无馀。
现代文：王锡由临海郡罢任回来，送回从前的俸禄百万以上，王僧达一夜之间让奴仆用车全部拉去。
English: Wang Xi returned from Linhai County after being relieved of his duties, and sent back the former salary of more than one million yuan. Wang Sonta let the servants use the car to pull everything overnight.

古文：服阕，爲宣城太守。
现代文：服丧期满，做了宣城太守。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he became the proclamation city governor.

古文：性好游猎，而山郡无事，僧达肆意驰骋，或五日三日方归，受辞辩讼，多在猎所。
现代文：他的性格喜爱游猎，而山区的郡没有杂事，王僧达肆意驰骋，有时五天三天才回来，接受状子审理案件，大多是在打猎的地方。
English: His character is fond of hunting, and the county in the mountainous area is free of incident. Wang Sengda gallops freely, sometimes returning after five days and three days to accept the writ to hear the case, mostly in the hunting place.

古文：人或逢，不识，问府君所在。
现代文：人们有时碰上，而不认识他，问他太守在什么地方。
English: People sometimes run into him without knowing him and ask him where he is.

古文：僧达且曰： 在近。 
现代文：王僧达应付说： 在附近。 
English: Wang Songda replied, "It's nearby."

古文：其后徙义兴。
现代文：后来调往义兴。
English: Later he was transferred to Yixing.

古文：及元凶弑立，孝武发寻阳，沈庆之谓人曰： 王僧达必来赴义。 
现代文：等元凶劭杀死皇帝自己登基，孝武帝从寻阳发兵，沈庆之对别人说： 王僧达必定前来参加义举。 
English: When the emperor himself ascended to the throne after being killed by the same villain, Emperor Xiaowu sent troops from Huanyang. Shen Qingzhi said to others: Wang Sengda will definitely come to participate in the charity event.

古文：人问其所以，庆之曰： 虏马饮江，王出赴难，见其在先帝前，议论开张，执意明决，以此言之，其必至也。 
现代文：人们问这是为什么，沈庆之说： 敌寇的战马饮水长江，王僧达出兵赴难，我曾经见到他在先帝面前议论纵横，意志坚定，以此断言他必然前来。 
English: People asked why this was, and Shen Qingzhi said: The enemy's warhorse rode the Yangtze River to drink water, and Wang Sonta sent troops to the disaster. I once saw him in front of the former emperor, discussing the situation, and his will was firm, thus asserting that he would definitely come.

古文：僧达寻至，孝武即以爲长史。
现代文：王僧达很快就到来了，孝武帝就让他做长史。
English: Wang Zongda soon arrived, and Emperor Xiaowu allowed him to stay for a long time.

古文：及即位，爲尚书右仆射。
现代文：孝武帝即位以后，担任尚书右仆射。
English: After Emperor Xiaowu ascended the throne, he served as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：僧达自负才地，一二年间便望宰相。
现代文：王僧达对本身的才能十分自负，希望一二年间便做上宰相。
English: Wang Zongda is very proud of his talent and hopes to become the prime minister in a year or two.

古文：尝答诏曰： 亡父亡祖，司徒司空。 
现代文：他曾经答复诏书说： 亡父亡祖，司徒司空。 
English: He once replied to an imperial edict saying: "From my late father to my late grandfather, Satoru Siku.

古文：其自负若此。
现代文：他就是这样的自负。
English: He's just so full of himself.

古文：后爲护军将军，不得志，乃求徐州，上不许。
现代文：后来担任护军将军，不得志，便求掌管徐州，皇上没有准许。
English: Later, he served as a military escort general, and when he was discouraged, he asked to be put in charge of Xuzhou, but the emperor did not give him permission.

古文：固陈，乃以爲吴郡太守。
现代文：坚持要求，便让当了吴郡太守。
English: When he insisted on the request, he was allowed to become the governor of Wu County.

古文：时期岁五迁，弥不得意。
现代文：当时一年当中调动了五次，越发不得意。
English: At that time, he was transferred five times in one year, which made him more and more frustrated.

古文：吴郭西台寺多富沙门，僧达求须不称意，乃遣主簿顾旷率门义劫寺内沙门竺法瑶得数百万。
现代文：吴郡外城的西台寺有很多和尚，王僧达谋求所需要的东西没有如愿，便派主簿顾旷率领门生和自愿者抢劫寺内和尚竺法瑶，得钱几百万。
English: There are many monks in Xitai Temple in the outer city of Wuxian County. When Wang Sengda did not get what he wanted, he sent Gu Kuang, the head monk, to lead his protégés and volunteers to rob the monks of the temple and get millions of money.

古文：荆、江反叛，加僧达置佐领兵。
现代文：荆州、江州反叛，皇上命令王僧达设置官员领兵。
English: When Jingzhou and Jiangzhou rebelled, the emperor ordered Wang Sonta to set up officials to lead the troops.

古文：台符听置千人，而辄立三十队，队八十人。
现代文：朝廷同意他招兵千人，而他便成立了三十队，每队八十人。
English: The court agreed with him to recruit a thousand soldiers, and he set up thirty teams, each with eighty people.

古文：立宅于吴，多役功力，坐免官。
现代文：在吴地建立宅院，役使了很多的民工，因而被免官。
English: He was dismissed from his position because he had employed many migrant workers to build a residential compound in Wudi.

古文：后孝武独召见，傲然了不陈逊，唯张目而视。
现代文：后来孝武帝单独召见，态度骄傲毫不谦逊，一直瞪着眼睛看着他。
English: Later, Emperor Xiaowu was summoned to see him alone. His attitude was proud and unassuming, and he kept staring at him.

古文：及出，帝叹曰： 王僧达非狂如何？乃戴面向天子。 
现代文：出来以后，孝武帝叹息说： 王僧达不是狂是什么，竟然仰头对着天子。 
English: After he came out, Emperor Xiaowu sighed and said, "What is Wang Zongda but a madman, even raising his head to face the Son of Heaven?"

古文：后顔师伯诣之，僧达慨然曰： 大丈夫甯当玉碎，安可以没没求活。 
现代文：后来颜师伯到了他那里，王僧达愤慨地说： 大丈夫宁为玉碎，怎么能够埋没求活？ 
English: Later, Yan's uncle came to him, and Wang Songda said indignantly: "It's okay, I'd rather be crushed, how can I bury myself to survive?"

古文：师伯不答，逡巡便退。
现代文：颜师伯没有答话，犹豫地退出去了。
English: Teacher Yan did not answer, and hesitantly withdrew.

古文：初，僧达爲太子洗马在东宫，爱念军人朱灵宝，及出爲宣城，灵宝已长。
现代文：起初，王僧达在东宫做太子洗马，喜爱军人朱灵宝，等他出京担任宣城太守，朱灵宝已经长大。
English: At first, Wang Zongda was a prince in the East Palace and loved the soldier Zhu Lingbao. When he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Xuancheng, Zhu Lingbao had grown up.

古文：僧达诈列死亡，寄宣城左永之籍，注以爲子，改名元序。
现代文：王僧达作假把他列入死亡名单，转落在宣城左永之的簿籍中，注为自己的儿子，改名叫元序。
English: Wang Zongda falsely put him on the death list, which was transferred to the ledger of Xuancheng Zuoyong, marked as his own son, and changed his name to Yuan Xuan.

古文：啓文帝以爲武陵国典卫令，又以补竟陵国典书令，建平国中军将军。
现代文：请求文帝让他做武陵国的典卫令。又让他补任竟陵国的典书令，建平国的中军将军。
English: He asked Emperor Wen to make him the grand marshal of Wuling, and he also made him the grand marshal of Jingling and the general of the Chinese army in Jianping.

古文：孝建元年，事发，又加禁锢。
现代文：孝建元年，事情败露，又被拘禁。
English: In the first year of Xiao Jian, the matter was revealed, and he was detained again.

古文：表谢言不能因依左右，倾意权贵。
现代文：他上表谢罪，说是不能听信身边的人，倾向权贵。
English: He confessed his sins, saying that he could not trust the people around him, and that he was inclined to be powerful.

古文：上愈怒。
现代文：皇上更加发怒。
English: The Emperor also became more angry.

古文：僧达族子确少美姿容，僧达与之私款。
现代文：王僧达本家中的一个侄子王确，少年姿容俊美，王僧达和他私情很好。
English: Wang Zongda's nephew Wang Zhengyu is a handsome young man, and Wang Zongda has a good personal relationship with him.

古文：确叔父休爲永嘉太守，当将确之郡，僧达欲逼留之，确知其意，避不往。
现代文：王确的叔父王休为永嘉太守，准备把王确带到郡上去，王僧达想把他留下，王确知道了他的意思，避开他不去。
English: Wang Zhengyi's uncle, Wang Xiu, was the Yongjia Empress Dowager, and he was preparing to take Wang Zhengyi to the county. Wang Xanda wanted to keep him, and Wang Zhengyi knew what he wanted, and avoided him.

古文：僧达潜于所住屋后作大坑，欲诱确来别，杀埋之。
现代文：王僧达偷偷地在他所住的屋子后面挖了一个大坑，打算引诱王确前来告别，把他杀死埋掉。
English: Wang Songda secretly dug a large pit behind the house where he lived, intending to lure Wang Zhengyi to come and say goodbye, kill him and bury him.

古文：从弟僧虔知其谋，禁呵乃止。
现代文：堂弟王僧虔知道了他的阴谋，呵斥禁止，才停下来。
English: His cousin, Wang Xiangqian, found out about his plot and yelled at him to stop.

古文：御史中丞刘瑀奏请收案，上不许。
现代文：御史中丞刘蠫奏请逮捕立案，皇上不许。
English: Imperial Historian Liu Xuanxiao requested that an arrest case be filed, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：二年，除太常，意尤不悦。
现代文：孝建二年，被任命为太常，心中尤其不高兴。
English: In the second year of Xiao Jian, he was appointed as Taizang, and he was particularly unhappy.

古文：顷之，上表解职，文旨抑扬。
现代文：不久，上表请求解除职务，文章抑扬不平。
English: Soon after, the above table requested to be relieved of his duties, and the article caused an uproar.

古文：侍中何偃以其言不逊，啓付南台，又坐免官。
现代文：侍中何偃因为他出言不逊，奏表将他交付南台，又因此而被免官。
English: Because of his insolent words, chamberlain He Jian handed him over to Nantai with a report form, and was dismissed for this reason.

古文：先是，何尚之致仕，复膺朝命，于宅设八关斋，大集朝士，自行香，次至僧达曰： 愿郎且放鹰犬，勿复游猎。 
现代文：在此之前，何尚之退职离休，重又接受了朝廷的任命，在宅院中设了一场八关斋，大宴朝士，自己行香。其次到了王僧达那里说： 希望您暂且放掉鹰犬，不要再去游猎。 
English: Prior to this, He Shangzhi retired from his post and accepted the appointment of the imperial court again. He set up an eight-day banquet in the courtyard, a big banquet for the morning priest, and incense himself. Next, he went to Wang Xanda and said: I hope you will temporarily release the eagle dog and not go hunting again.

古文：僧达答曰： 家养一老狗，放无处去，已复还。 
现代文：王僧达回答说： 家中养了一条老狗，放掉无处可去，已经又回到家中。 
English: Wang Xanda replied, "We have an old dog at home. We let it go, but it had nowhere to go, so it has come back home.

古文：尚之失色。
现代文：何尚之脸色十分难看。
English: His face is very ugly.

古文：大明中，以归顺功，封宁陵县五等侯，累迁中书令。
现代文：大明年间，因为归顺的功劳，封为宁陵县五等侯，逐渐调任中书令。
English: During the Great Year of the Monkey, he was awarded the title of Ningling County's fifth-ranked magistrate for his service in converting to Buddhism, and was gradually transferred to the position of Zhongshirong.

古文：黄门郎路琼之，太后兄庆之孙也，宅与僧达门并。
现代文：黄门郎路琼之，是太后的哥哥路庆之的孙子，住宅与王僧达的门并排。
English: Huang Men Lang, Lu Qiong Zhi, is the grandson of the empress dowager's brother, Lu Qing Zhi. The house is next to the door of Wang Xanda.

古文：尝盛车服诣僧达，僧达将猎，已改服。
现代文：曾经以华贵的车子和衣服到王僧达家去，王僧达将要出去打猎，已经改换了服装。
English: Wang Zongda, who used to go to Wang Zongda's house with a luxurious car and clothes, is going to go hunting and has changed his clothes.

古文：琼之就坐，僧达了不与语，谓曰： 身昔门下驺人路庆之者，是君何亲？ 
现代文：路琼之就座后，王僧达一句话也不跟他说，然后问他： 我从前门下的开道卒路庆之，是您的什么亲戚？ 
English: After Lu Qiong took his seat, Wang Songda did not say a word to him, and then asked him: I am Lu Qiong from the opening under the front door, what is your relative?

古文：遂焚琼之所坐床。
现代文：于是烧掉了路琼之所坐的床。
English: So they burned the bed where Lu Qiongzhi was sitting.

古文：太后怒，泣涕于帝曰： 我尚在而人陵之，我死后乞食矣。 
现代文：太后很生气，在皇帝面前哭着说： 我还在别人就欺负他，我死后他就要去讨饭了。 
English: The empress dowager was very angry and wept in front of the emperor, saying, "I still bully him when I am with others, and when I die he will go begging."

古文：帝曰： 琼之年少，无事诣王僧达门，见辱乃其宜耳。
现代文：皇帝说： 琼之年少，没事到王僧达门上去，受到侮辱是应该的。
English: The emperor said, "Since Qiong is young, it is not a big deal for her to go to the gate of the royal priesthood. She deserves to be insulted.

古文：僧达贵公子，岂可以此加罪乎？ 
现代文：王僧达是贵公子，怎么可以因此而加罪呢？ 
English: Wang Zongda is a noble man. How can he be punished for this?

古文：太后又谓帝曰： 我终不与王僧达俱生。 
现代文：太后又对皇帝说： 我终究不能和王僧达共同生存。 
English: The empress dowager also said to the emperor: After all, I can't coexist with Wang Songda.

古文：先是，南彭城蕃县人高闍、沙门释昙标、道方等共相诳惑，自言有鬼神龙凤之瑞，常闻箫鼓音，与秣陵人蓝宏期等谋爲乱，又结殿中将军苗乞食等起兵攻宫门。
现代文：在这以前，南彭城蕃县人高、和尚释昙标、道方等共同互相诳骗，自己说有鬼神龙凤的祥瑞，常常听到箫鼓之声，他和秣陵人蓝宏期等阴谋作乱，又勾结殿中将军苗乞食等起兵进攻宫门。
English: Prior to this, Nan Pengcheng, Lian County, Ren Gao, Monk Xie Xuanbo, Dao Fang and others had lied to each other. They said they had the auspiciousness of ghosts and dragons, and often heard the sound of gongs and drums. He and Fuling people such as Lan Hongzhi conspired to make trouble, and also colluded with the palace general Miao Beggar and others to attack the palace gate.

古文：事发，凡党与死者数十人。
现代文：事情暴露，同党被处死的共有几十人。
English: The affair was exposed, and a total of dozens of party members were executed.

古文：僧达屡经犯忤，上以爲终无悛心，因高闍事陷之，收付廷尉，于狱赐死。
现代文：王僧达屡次违上犯罪，皇上以为终究没有悔改心意，便就着高这件事加害他，逮捕他交给了廷尉，在狱中赐他自杀。
English: Wang Songda repeatedly violated the crime, and the emperor thought that he had no intention of repenting after all, so he punished him for the high matter, arrested him and handed him over to the court lieutenant, and ordered him to commit suicide in prison.

古文：时年三十六。
现代文：当时年龄三十六岁。
English: He was thirty-six years old.

古文：帝亦以爲恨，谓江夏王义恭曰： 王僧达遂不免死，追思太保馀烈，使人慨然。 
现代文：皇帝感到遗憾，对江夏王刘义恭说： 王僧达终于不免于死，追思太保遗留的功业，使人感慨。 
English: The emperor felt regret and said to Liu Yikong, the king of Jiangxia: "The king monk finally did not escape death, and it is moving to think about the work left behind by Taibao.

古文：于是诏太保华容文昭公门爵国姻，一不贬绝。
现代文：于是诏令太保华容文昭公门下的爵位国姻，一概不加贬绝。
English: As a result, the Emperor decreed that the peerage of Taibo Huarong and the peerage of Wenzhao would be abolished without any derogation.

古文：时有苏宝者名宝生，本寒门，有文义之美，官至南台侍御史、江宁令，坐知高闍谋反，不即闻啓，亦伏诛。
现代文：当时有个苏宝名叫宝生，本是寒门，有文章之美，官至南台侍御史、江宁令，因为知道高谋反，而没有即时报告，也被处死。
English: At that time, there was a Su Bao named Bao Sheng, who was originally a cold-hearted person, had a beauty of writing, and was an official from Nantai to serve the imperial historian, Jiang Ningling. Because he knew about the high-level conspiracy, but did not report it immediately, he was also executed.

古文：僧达子道琰，徙新安。
现代文：王僧达的儿子王道琰，贬谪到新安。
English: Wang Daojun, the son of Wang Zongda, was exiled to Xin'an.

古文：元徽中，爲庐陵内史，未至郡，卒。
现代文：元徽年间，担任庐陵内史，还没到达郡上就死了。
English: During the Yuanhui era, he was in charge of Fuling's internal history, but died before reaching the county.

古文：子融。
现代文：他的儿子名叫王融。
English: His son's name is Wang Rong.

古文：融字元长，少而神明警慧。
现代文：○王融王融，字元长，少年时就神采明丽、机警聪慧。
English: ○ Wang Rong Wang Rong, the character is long, when he was a boy, he was bright, alert and clever.

古文：母临川太守谢惠宣女，性敦敏，教融书学。
现代文：他的母亲是临川太守谢惠宣的女儿，性格敦厚灵敏，教王融读书求学。
English: His mother was the daughter of Linchuan Dazhu Xie Huixuan. She was a kind and sensitive person and taught Wang Rong to study.

古文：博涉有文才，从叔俭谓人曰： 此儿至四十，名位自然及祖。 
现代文：他涉猎广博，富有文才，他的堂叔王俭对别人说： 这孩子到了四十岁，名位自然会赶上祖父。 
English: His uncle Wang Jian said to others: When this child reaches the age of forty, he will naturally catch up with his grandfather.

古文：举秀才，累迁太子舍人。
现代文：被选为秀才，逐步升迁为太子舍人。
English: He was selected as an outstanding talent and was gradually promoted to the post of crown prince.

古文：以父宦不通，弱年便欲绍兴家业，啓齐武帝求自试，迁秘书丞。
现代文：由于父亲的官运不通达，王融幼年就想继承、振兴家业，他给齐武帝写信要求自试，调任秘书丞。
English: As his father's official career was not successful, Wang Rong wanted to inherit and revitalize the family business at an early age. He wrote to Emperor Qibao to ask him to try his hand and was transferred to the position of secretary.

古文：从叔俭初有仪同之授，赠俭诗及书，俭甚奇之，笑谓人曰： 穰侯印讵便可解。 
现代文：堂叔王俭起初曾被授为仪同三司，他给王俭赠有诗和书信，王俭认为他十分奇特，笑着对别人说： 穰侯的大印难道便可以解下！ 
English: At the beginning, Wang Jian's uncle Wang Jian had been awarded the title of Jidong Sanzhi, and he presented Wang Jian with poems and letters. Wang Jian thought he was very strange, and said to others with a smile: Can the great seal of Zhou be removed?

古文：历丹阳丞，中书郎。
现代文：历任丹阳丞，中书郎。
English: Successive incumbents of Danyo-jo, Chushiro.

古文：永明末，武帝欲北侵，使毛惠秀画汉武北伐图，融因此上疏，开张北侵之议。
现代文：永明末年，武帝准备北侵，让毛惠秀画了一幅《汉武北伐图》，王融因此给皇帝上书，开始提出北侵的主张。
English: At the end of the Yongming Dynasty, Emperor Wu was preparing to invade the north, and asked Mao Huixiu to draw a "Hanwu Northern Expedition Map." Wang Rong therefore wrote to the emperor and began to put forward the idea of invading the north.

古文：图成，上置琅邪城射堂壁上，游幸辄观焉。
现代文：画成以后，皇上把它挂在琅笽城射堂的墙壁上，出游到此时就加以观赏。
English: After the painting was completed, the emperor hung it on the wall of the Shicheng Hall, and would watch it whenever he was on a trip.

古文：九年，芳林园禊宴，使融爲曲水诗序，当时称之。
现代文：永明九年，在芳林园修禊宴饮，让王融作《曲水诗序》，当时的人非常称赞。
English: In the ninth year of the Ming Dynasty, Wang Rong held a banquet in the Fanglin Garden and asked Wang Rong to write "The Water Melody," which was highly praised by the people at that time.

古文：上以融才辩，使兼主客，接魏使房景高、宋弁。
现代文：皇上根据王融的文才和辩才，让他兼任主客，接待魏国使者房景高、宋弁。
English: On the basis of Wang Rong's literary talent and debating ability, the emperor allowed him to serve as both host and guest, and received the emissaries of Wei, Fang Jinggao and Song Ben.

古文：弁见融年少，问： 主客年几？ 
现代文：宋弁见王融年少，就问他： 主客年龄多大？ 
English: When Song Ben saw that Wang Rong was young, he asked: How old is the host?

古文：融曰： 五十之年，久踰其半。 
现代文：王融说： 五十的年龄，久已经过半。 
English: Wang Rong said, "I'm 50 years old, and I've already passed the half-way point.

古文：景高又云： 在北闻主客曲水诗序胜延年，实愿一见。 
现代文：房景高又说： 在北方听说主客的《曲水诗序》胜过颜延年，实在希望一见。 
English: Fangjing Gao also said: In the north, I heard that the host and guest's "Curved Water Poem" is better than Yan Yan Nian, I really hope to see it.

古文：融乃示之。
现代文：王融于是就拿给他看。
English: Wang Rong then showed it to him.

古文：后日，宋弁于瑶池堂谓融曰： 昔观相如封禅，以知汉武之德，今览王生诗序，用见齐主之盛。 
现代文：次日，宋弁在瑶池堂对王融说： 过去看司马相如的《封禅》，因此知道汉武帝的德业，现在看了王生您的《诗序》，从而见出齐朝君主的兴隆。 
English: The next day, Song Ben said to Wang Rong at Dianchi Hall: In the past, I read "Fu Zhen" by Sima Xiangru, so I knew the virtues of Emperor Han, and now I read your "Poetic Sequence" by Wang Sheng, so I saw the prosperity of the Qi Dynasty monarch.

古文：融曰： 皇家盛明，岂直比踪汉武，更惭鄙制，无以远匹相如。 
现代文：王融说： 皇家繁盛开明，哪用跟汉代武帝直接对比，更加惭愧拙作，无法与司马相如遥相并提。 
English: Wang Rong said: The prosperity and enlightenment of the royal family cannot be directly compared with that of Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty. It is even more shamefully poor, and cannot be compared with that of Sima.

古文：上以魏所送马不称，使融问之曰： 秦西冀北，实多骏骥，而魏之良马,乃驽不若,将旦旦信誓，有时而爽，駉駉之牧，遂不能嗣？ 
现代文：皇上认为魏国所送的马匹不好，便让王融质问说： 秦地西部，冀州北方，实在出产很多骏马，而魏朝的良马，则相当愚钝不能相比，看来是誓言说得极其诚恳，却有时违背，各种骏马的畜牧，将不能继承？ 
English: The emperor thought that the horses sent by Wei were not good, so he asked Wang Rong to question: the western part of Qin and the northern part of Jizhou actually produced a lot of good horses, while the good horses of the Wei Dynasty were quite dull and could not be compared. It seems that it was an oath that was said very sincerely, but sometimes violated. Will the husbandry of various good horses not be inherited?

古文：宋弁曰： 当是不习地土。 
现代文：宋弁说： 恐怕是不熟习地方水土。 
English: Song Ben said: I'm afraid I'm not familiar with the local soil and water.

古文：融曰： 周穆马迹遍于天下，若骐骝之性，因地而迁，则造父之策，有时而踬。 
现代文：王融说： 周穆王骏马的足迹走遍天下，如果骏马的习性，随着地方而改变，那么驭马高手造父策马，也要有时绊倒了。 
English: Wang Rong said: The footprints of Zhou Mu Wang's horse-drawn carriage have traveled all over the world. If the habits of horse-drawn carriage change with the place, then the master of horse-drawn carriage will sometimes stumble.

古文：弁曰： 王主客何爲勤勤于千里？ 
现代文：宋弁说： 王主客为什么要殷勤地追求日行千里？ 
English: Song Ben said: Why should the king's guest diligently pursue a thousand miles a day?

古文：融曰： 卿国既异其优劣，聊复相访，若千里斯至，圣上当驾鼓车。 
现代文：王融说： 你们国家的马既然和别处的优劣不同，姑且也来访查一下，如果能有千里马送来，皇上一定会让它来驾载鼓之车。 
English: Wang Rong said, "Since the quality of horses in your country is different from that in other places, let's visit and investigate. If you can send thousands of horses, the emperor will definitely let them drive the drum car."

古文：弁曰： 向意既须，必不能驾鼓车也。 
现代文：宋弁说： 既然过去一直在等待，必定不会是让它大材小用去驾鼓车的吧。 
English: Song Ben said: Since it has been waiting in the past, it must not be a big deal to let it drive the drum car.

古文：融曰： 买死马之骨，亦以郭隗之故。 
现代文：王融说： 购买死千里马的骨头，也正是因为郭隗谋划的缘故。 
English: Wang Rong said, "Purchasing the bones of a dead horse is precisely because of Guo Yao's plan.

古文：弁不能答。
现代文：宋弁不能回答。
English: Song Ben could not answer.

古文：融躁于名利，自恃人地，三十内望爲公辅。
现代文：王融急于追求名利，自己倚仗人和地利，盼望三十岁以内就能成为三公或宰相。
English: Wang Rong is eager to pursue fame and fortune, he relies on people and places, hoping to become the three princes or prime minister within thirty years.

古文：初爲司徒法曹，诣王僧佑，因遇沈昭略，未相识。
现代文：起初当一个司徒法曹，去拜见王僧佑，顺便遇见了沈昭略，互不认识。
English: At first, when a scholar-lawyer went to visit Wang Senyou, he met Shen Zhaoli by chance, and they did not know each other.

古文：昭略屡顾盼，谓主人曰： 是何年少？ 
现代文：沈昭略屡次转眼看他，对主人说： 这是哪一位少年？ 
English: Shen Zhaoyu repeatedly turned to look at him and said to his master: Which boy is this?

古文：融殊不平,谓曰： 仆出于扶桑，入于汤谷，照耀天下，谁云不知，而卿此问？ 
现代文：王融非常气愤，对他说： 我从东方的扶桑升起，在西方的汤谷落下，照耀天下，谁人不知，而您却提出这样的问题！ 
English: Wang Rong was very angry and said to him: "I rise from Fusang in the East and fall in Tanggu in the West, shining the world, no one knows, and you ask such a question!

古文：昭略云： 不知许事，且食蛤蜊。 
现代文：沈昭略说： 我并不知道这些情况，咱们还是一块来吃蛤蜊吧。 
English: Shen Zhaoyu said, "I don't know about these circumstances. Let's eat the clams together."

古文：融曰： 物以群分，方以类聚，君长东隅，居然应嗜此族。 
现代文：王融说： 物以类聚，人以群分，您在东方，居然嗜好这类东西！ 
English: Wang Rong said, "Things come together in groups, and people are divided into groups. In the East, you actually have a penchant for such things!

古文：其高自标置如此。
现代文：他就是这样把自己看得非常高超。
English: That's how he thinks he's so great.

古文：及爲中书郎，尝抚案叹曰： 爲尔寂寂，邓禹笑人。 
现代文：等到做了中书郎，曾经抚着桌案叹息说： 弄得这样的寂寞，邓禹一定会笑话。 
English: When he became a middle school librarian, he once stroked the desk and sighed, saying, "Deng Yu must be joking when he makes me feel so lonely."

古文：行遇朱雀桁开，路人填塞，乃捶车壁曰： 车中乃可无七尺，车前岂可乏八驺。 
现代文：一次出行遇到朱雀桁浮桥开放，路上行人阻塞，他就捶着车壁说： 车中倒可以没有七尺汉子乘车，车前怎么能缺少八名驺卒喝道！ 
English: On one trip, when he encountered the Suzakida Floating Bridge open and pedestrians blocking the road, he put his hand on the car wall and said, "There can be no seven-foot man in the car, how can there be a lack of eight drinkers in front of the car!"

古文：及魏军动，竟陵王子良于东府募人，板融甯朔将军、军主。
现代文：等到魏军行动的时候，竟陵王萧子良在东府招募人马，任命王融为宁朔将军、军主。
English: By the time the Wei army was on the move, King Xiao Ziliang of the Ming Dynasty was recruiting men and women in Dongfu and appointed Wang Rong as the general of Ningshuo and the commander of the army.

古文：融文辞捷速，有所造作，援笔可待，子良特相友好。
现代文：王融文辞敏捷迅速，什么时候需要撰写，拿起笔来可以立等而成，萧子良对他特别友好。
English: Wang Rong's words are agile and quick. When he needs to write, he can pick up a pen and write immediately. Xiao Ziliang is particularly friendly to him.

古文：晚节大习骑马，招集江西伧楚数百人，并有干用，融特爲谋主。
现代文：晚年他大力练习骑马，招集了长江以西的楚地人数百名，全都加以重用，王融特任谋主。
English: In his later years, he vigorously practiced horseback riding, and gathered hundreds of people from Chu to the west of the Yangtze River. All of them were put to good use, with Wang Rong serving as chief adviser.

古文：武帝病笃暂绝，子良在殿内，太孙未入，融戎服绛衫，于中书省合口断东宫仗不得进，欲矫诏立子良。
现代文：武帝病危暂时休克，萧子良在殿内，皇太孙没有进入，王融身穿军服绛色衫子，在中书省的小门门口切断了东宫的仪仗，不许进入，打算假造诏书立萧子良为皇帝。
English: Emperor Wu was in temporary shock due to his critical illness, Xiao Ziliang was in the palace, the great-grandson did not enter, and Wang Rong, wearing a military uniform and a dark shirt, cut off the ceremonial battle of the East Palace at the small gate of the Chinese Book Ministry and was not allowed to enter, intending to forge a decree to establish Xiao Ziliang as emperor.

古文：诏草已立，上重苏，朝事委西昌侯鸾。
现代文：诏书的草稿已经写成，皇上又重新苏醒过来，朝中政事委托给了西昌侯萧鸾。
English: The draft of the imperial edict had already been written, the emperor had woken up again, and entrusted the political affairs of the dynasty to the lord of Xichang, Xiao Yu.

古文：梁武谓范云曰： 左手据天下图，右手刎其喉，愚夫不爲。
现代文：梁武帝对范云说： 左手拿着天下的地图，右手用刀割它的脖子，这是愚蠢人也不会干的。
English: Emperor Liangwu said to Fan Yun: "Holding a map of the world in your left hand and cutting its neck with a knife in your right hand is something that even a stupid person would not do."

古文：主上大渐，国家自有故事，道路籍籍，将有非常之举，卿闻之乎？ 
现代文：皇上病危，国家自有传统的规章，社会上盛传将有不寻常的行动，您听到过么？ 
English: The emperor is critically ill, the country has its own traditional rules and regulations, and it is rumored in society that there will be unusual actions, have you heard?

古文：云不敢答。
现代文：范云不敢回答。
English: Fan Yun did not dare to answer.

古文：俄而帝崩，融乃处分以子良兵禁诸门，西昌侯闻，急驰到云龙门，不得进，乃曰： 有敕召我。 
现代文：皇帝很快去世了，王融就部署以萧子良的亲兵封锁各个宫门。西昌侯听说后，驱马急驰到云龙门，却不能进入，便说： 有圣旨召见我。 
English: The emperor soon died, and Wang Rong deployed Xiao Ziliang's own soldiers to block all the palace gates. After hearing this, Xichang Hou drove his horse to Yunlong Gate, but he could not enter, so he said, "I have a sacred mission to see you."

古文：仍排而入，奉太孙登殿，命左右扶出子良，指麾音响如锺，殿内无不从命。
现代文：硬闯了进去，保护皇太孙登上正殿，命令左右的人把萧子良搀扶出去，指挥的声音好像洪钟，殿内的人无不听从命令。
English: He forced his way in, protected the emperor's great-grandson as he ascended to the main hall, and ordered the people around him to help Xiao Ziliang out. The commanding voice sounded like a bell, and everyone in the hall obeyed the order.

古文：融知不遂，乃释服还省，叹曰： 公误我。 
现代文：王融知道事情不能成功，才脱去军服回到中书省，叹息说： 是您妨害了我。 
English: Wang Rong knew that things could not be successful, so he took off his military uniform and returned to the Chinese Literature Ministry, sighing: "You are the one who interrupted me."

古文：郁林深怨融，即位十馀日，收下廷尉狱。
现代文：郁林王非常怨恨王融，即位十几天，就把他抓起来关进了廷尉的牢狱。
English: King Yulin was very resentful of Wang Ronglu, so he arrested him and put him in the lieutenant's prison just ten days after he ascended the throne.

古文：使中丞孔珪倚爲奏曰： 融姿性刚险，立身浮竞，动迹惊群，抗言异类。近塞外微尘，苦求将领，遂招纳不逞，扇诱荒伧。
现代文：又指使中丞孔圭配合写成奏表说： 王融性格刚强凶险，立身浮薄好争，做事惊扰众人，高谈不合同类，近来塞外小有战事，苦求充任将领，于是招纳一些不得志的人，煽惑诱骗一些荒远野民。
English: He also instructed Vice-Commander Kong Gui to cooperate in writing a report card saying: Wang Rong is of a tough and dangerous character, he stands on the edge of a precipice, he likes to fight, he disturbs people when doing things, he is not a good conversationalist, he recently had a small war outside of Serbia, and he is struggling to fill the position of general. Therefore, he recruited some people who had no ambition, and instigated and deceived some wild villagers.

古文：狡弄威声，专行权利，反复唇齿之间，倾动颊舌之内，威福自己，无所忌惮，诽谤朝政，历毁王公。谓己才流，无所推下，事暴远近，使融依源据答。 
现代文：狡猾地树立威信声誉，独断专行滥用权力，搬弄是非，诬蔑陷害，作威作福，无所顾忌，诽谤朝政，诋毁王公，认为自己的才能，无处可以容纳，经常欺压远近官吏百姓，要让王融原原本本如实交代。 
English: He cunningly established prestige and reputation, arbitrarily abused power, manipulated the rights and wrongs, slandered and framed, used his power to do good, had no scruples, slandered the imperial government, slandered the prince, thought that his talent could not be contained anywhere, and often bullied officials and people near and far, and wanted Wang Rongyuan to truthfully account for himself.

古文：融辞曰： 囚实顽蔽，触行多愆。
现代文：王融辩驳说： 囚犯我确实顽固鄙陋，待人行事有很多罪行和过失。
English: Wang Rong argued: As a prisoner, I am indeed stubborn and despicable, and I have many crimes and faults in my treatment of people.

古文：但夙忝门素，得奉教君子。
现代文：只是由于平时愧借门望，得以受到君子的教诲。
English: It was only because I was ashamed to ask for advice in ordinary times that I was able to be taught by a gentleman.

古文：爰自总发，迄将立年，州闾乡党，见许愚慎。
现代文：从童年时代，到现在已经将近三十岁，州县乡里的人们，常称许我谨慎。
English: From my childhood to now, when I am nearly thirty years old, people in the county and township have often praised my prudence.

古文：过蒙大行皇帝奖育之恩，又荷文皇帝识擢之重，司徒公赐预士林，安陆王曲垂盼接，前后陈伐虏之计，亦仰简先朝。
现代文：承蒙已故皇帝奖赏培育的大恩，又受到文皇帝赏识提拔的厚义，司徒大人让加入士林馆，安陆王屈尊接待，前后呈献讨伐敌人的谋略，也曾向先朝提出进谏。
English: Thanks to the great grace of the late emperor's reward and nurturing, and the generosity of the Emperor Wen's appreciation and promotion, the adult Stowe was allowed to join the Shilin Pavilion, and the King of Anlu condescended to receive him, and presented the strategy for fighting the enemy, and also proposed to the previous dynasty.

古文：今段犬羊乍扰，令囚草撰符诏。
现代文：现在北方的敌寇忽然来犯，朝庭责令我撰写诏书。
English: Now, enemy raiders from the north have suddenly invaded, and the Imperial Court has ordered me to write an imperial edict.

古文：及司徒宣敕招募，同例非一，实以戎事不小，不敢承教。
现代文：后来司徒宣布敕令，招募人马，同样的情况不只一处，实在是因为战事不小，不敢去接受教令。
English: Later, the bishop announced the edict to recruit men and horses, and the same situation occurred in more than one place. It was really because the war was not small that he did not dare to accept the edict.

古文：续蒙军号，赐使招集，衔敕而行，非敢虚扇。且 张弄威声 ，应有形迹。 专行权利 ，又无赃贿。 反复唇齿之间 ，未审悉与谁言？ 倾动颊舌之内 ，不容都无主此。
现代文：随后得到了军队番号，命令由我招集人马，是按圣旨行事，并不是胆敢乱加煽动，况且 大肆树立威信声誉 ，应有具体表现。 独断专行滥用权力 ，又无赃物贿赂。 搬弄是非 ，不知道都是跟谁讲的？ 诬蔑陷害 ，决不会全都没有主见。
English: Then I got the army number, and I was ordered to recruit men and women, and I acted according to the holy will, and I did not dare to instigate, and moreover, I wanted to establish prestige and reputation, and there should be specific performance; arbitrary abuse of power, and no stolen goods bribery; playing games, I do not know who they are talking to; slandering and framing, they will never all have no opinion.

古文：自上甘露颂及银瓮啓、三日诗序、接虏使语辞，竭思称扬，得非诽谤。
现代文：自己呈献了《甘露颂》和《银瓮启》、《三日诗序》、《接虏使语词》，竭力颂扬，并非诽谤。
English: He presented "Ode to Nectar" and "Silver Dragonfly," "Three-day Poem Sequence" and "Words of the Captive Envoy" himself, trying his best to praise, not slander.

古文：囚才分本劣，谬被策用，悚怍之情，夙宵兢惕，自循自省，并愧流言。
现代文：罪囚我的才分本来就低劣，误被任用，惶恐惭愧，日夜不安，自守本分，经常反省，惭愧出现流言。
English: As a criminal prisoner, my talent was inferior, I was mistakenly appointed, I was afraid and ashamed, I was uneasy day and night, I kept to my duty, I often reflected, and I was ashamed when rumors appeared.

古文：伏惟明皇临宇，普天蒙泽，戊寅赦恩，轻重必宥，百日旷期，始蒙旬日，一介罪身，独婴宪劾。 
现代文：圣明的皇帝统御宇宙，普天之下蒙受恩泽，戊寅日大赦，轻罪重罪都加以宽大，期限长达百日，而我刚刚领受十天，变成一个罪人，独自受到法令弹劾。 
English: The Holy Emperor reigns over the universe and is favored by the whole world. He grants amnesty on the 100th day of the month, and pardons minor and serious crimes for a period of 100 days. I have just received 10 days, and I have become a sinner and have been impeached by law.

古文：融被收，朋友部曲，参问北寺，相继于道；请救于子良，子良不敢救；西昌侯固争不得。
现代文：王融被拘捕，朋友部下，都到北寺狱去探望，络绎不绝。人们求救于萧子良，萧子良不敢营救；而西昌侯坚持力争没能奏效。
English: When Wang Rong was arrested, all his friends and subordinates visited him in Beijie Prison, and there was no end to the visits. People appealed to Xiao Ziliang for help, but Xiao Ziliang did not dare to rescue them; and Xichang Hou's persistent efforts did not work.

古文：诏于狱赐死，时年二十七。
现代文：诏令在狱中赐死，当时二十七岁。
English: He was twenty-seven years old when he was sentenced to death in prison.

古文：临死叹曰： 我若不爲百岁老母，当吐一言。 
现代文：临死时慨叹说： 我如果不是为了能让老母安度晚年，一定要把话说明。 
English: On his deathbed, he lamented, "If I am not doing this so that my mother can live out the rest of her life in peace, I must explain myself.

古文：融意欲指斥帝在东宫时过失也。
现代文：王融的意思是要指斥皇帝在东宫时的过失。
English: Wang Rong meant to rebuke the emperor's mistakes in the Eastern Palace.

古文：先是，太学生会稽魏准，以才学爲融所赏，既欲奉子良，而准鼓成其事。
现代文：在此以前，太学生会稽人魏准，以才学被王融所赏识，王融打算拥立萧子良，而魏准鼓动把事做成。
English: Prior to this, Wei Jun, the auditor of the Tai Students' Union, was appreciated by Wang Rong for his talent in learning. Wang Rong planned to support Xiao Ziliang, while Wei Jun encouraged him to get things done.

古文：太学生虞羲、丘国宾窃相谓曰： 竟陵才弱，王中书无断，败在眼中矣。 
现代文：太学生虞羲、丘国宾私下互相说： 竟陵王才能低弱，王中书不能决断，失败是可以看到的。 
English: The too-students, Yu Yao and Qiu Guobin, said to each other privately, "In fact, Ling Wang's ability is weak, Wang Zhongshu can't make a decision, and failure can be seen."

古文：及融诛，召准入舍人省诘问，遂惧而死，举体皆青，时人以准胆破。
现代文：等到王融被杀，召魏准到舍人省追问，于是恐惧而死，整个身体都成了青色。当时人们认为是由于魏准的胆被吓破。
English: When Wang Rong was killed, Wei Jian was summoned to Shiren Province for questioning, whereupon he died of fear, his entire body turning blue. At the time, it was thought that this was due to Wei Jian's courage being shattered.

古文：融文集行于时。
现代文：王融的文集流行在世上。
English: Wang Rong's literary works are popular all over the world.

