古文：人君居尊位，倒持太阿，政令有所不行，德泽有所不下，身为寄坐，受人指麾，危亡之形，且立至矣。
现代文：君主处在尊贵的地位，把权柄授给他人，自己反受其害，政令不能实行，恩德不能施予，自身寄在客坐，受别人的指挥，危急覆亡的情形，就要到了。
English: A situation is approaching in which the sovereign, in his exalted position, will give authority to others, and will himself be injured by them; in which he will not be able to carry out his decrees, and will not be able to bestow favours; in which he will be a guest, and will be commanded by others, and in which his life will be in danger.

古文：故《易》有 屯其膏，小贞，吉；大贞，凶 之戒，谓当以渐而正之。
现代文：因此《易经》有 屯积那些恩惠膏泽，稍作纠正，吉祥；大作改正，凶险 的戒言，说的是应当慢慢地改变地位。
English: Therefore, the "I Ching" has the admonition of "accumulating those blessings, correcting a little, auspicious; correcting a lot, dangerous," saying that the status should be changed slowly.

古文：说者多引鲁昭公、高贵乡公为比。
现代文：谈论的人多引用鲁昭公、高贵乡公作为例子。
English: Most people who talk about it cite Lu Zhaogong and Gao Guoxianggong as examples.

古文：予谓此自系一时国家之隆替，君身之祸福，盖有刚决而得志，隐忍而危亡者，不可一概而论也。
现代文：我认为这即使关系到一个时期国家的兴隆衰替，关系到君王的灾祸福份，却也有刚烈果决而实现志愿的，也有勉强忍耐而遭到危亡的，不能够一概而论。
English: I think that even if it is related to the rise and fall of a country in a period of time, it is related to the misfortune and fortune of the monarch, but there are also those who are determined to achieve voluntary, and there are those who are barely patient and are in danger of death, and cannot be generalized.

古文：汉宣帝之诛霍禹，和帝之诛窦宪，桓宗之诛梁冀，魏孝庄之诛尔朱荣，刚决而得志者也。
现代文：汉宣帝诛杀霍禹，汉和帝诛杀窦宪，汉桓帝诛杀梁冀，魏孝庄帝诛杀尔朱荣，这都是刚烈果决而实现志愿的例子。
English: Emperor Xuan of Han Dynasty killed Huoyu, Emperor He of Han Dynasty killed Dou Xian, Emperor Huan of Han Dynasty killed Liang Ji, Emperor Xiaozhuang of Wei Dynasty killed Zhu Rong, these are all examples of resolute determination and realization of volunteering.

古文：鲁昭公之讨季氏，齐简公之谋田常，高贵乡公之讨司马昭，晋元帝之征王敦，唐文宗之谋宦者，潞王之徒石敬瑭，汉隐帝之杀郭威，刚决而失者也。
现代文：鲁昭公讨伐季氏，齐简公策划对付田常，高贵乡公讨伐司马绍，晋元帝征伐王敦，唐文宗图谋诛除宦官，潞王让石敬瑭迁徒，汉隐帝杀郭威，这都是刚烈果决却失败了的。
English: Lu Zhaogong's crusade against the Jiaji clan, Qi Jiangong's plan to deal with Tian Chang, Gao Guixiang's crusade against the Marshaw clan, the Jin Yuan Emperor's campaign against Wang Dun, Tang Wenzong's attempt to remove eunuchs, the King of Qi's order to expel Shi Jing'an's migrants, and the Emperor of Han'in's killing of Guo Wei were all courageous and decisive, but they all failed.

古文：若齐郁林王知鸾之异志，欲取之而不能；汉献帝知曹操之不臣，欲图之而不果；唐昭宗知朱温之必篡，欲杀之而不克，皆翻以及亡，虽欲小正之，岂可得也？
现代文：象齐郁林王知道萧鸾有叛逆之心，想要收取他却不能够；汉献帝知道曹操不守臣道，想要除掉他却不成功；唐昭宗知道朱温一定会篡夺皇位，想要杀了他却做不到；这些人都反而导致了自己的灭亡，虽然想稍作纠正，难道可能吗？
English: Like King Qi Yulin knew that Xiao Yu had a rebellious heart, but he could not get him; Emperor Han Xian knew that Cao Cao did not keep the vassal way, but he did not succeed in getting rid of him; Emperor Tang Zhaozong knew that Zhu Wen would definitely usurp the throne, but he could not kill him; these people all led to their own demise, although they wanted to make a slight correction, is it possible?

