古文：太祖下四年春正月丙申，射虎东山。
现代文：四年春正月二十七日，射虎于东山。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, the tiger was shot in Dongshan.

古文：二月丙寅，修辽阳故城，以汉民、渤海户实之，改为东平郡，置防御使。
现代文：二月二十八日，修筑辽阳故城，以汉民、渤海民户充实之，改为东平郡，设置防御使。
English: On February 28th, Liaoyang Old Town was rebuilt with Han and Bohai residents, and was renamed Dongping County, and a defense envoy was set up.

古文：夏五月庚辰，至自东平郡。
现代文：夏五月十四日，自东平郡回宫。
English: On the 14th day of the 5th month of the summer, he returned to the palace from Dongping County.

古文：秋八月丁酉，谒孔子庙，命皇后、皇太子分谒寺观。
现代文：秋八月初三，拜谒孔子庙，命皇后、皇太子分别拜谒寺、观。
English: On the third day of the autumn and the beginning of August, they paid homage to Confucius Temple, and the empress and the crown prince were ordered to pay homage to Confucius Temple and Guan respectively.

古文：九月，征乌古部，道闻皇太后不豫，一日驰六百里还侍，太后病间，复还军中。
现代文：九月，征讨乌古部，途中听说皇太后病重，一日之间飞驰六百里赶回，侍候太后，病愈，又回到军中。
English: In September, he went to conquer Ugube. On the way, he heard that the empress dowager was seriously ill. He flew six hundred miles in one day to rush back, wait for the empress dowager, recover from his illness, and return to the army.

古文：冬十月丙午，次乌古部，天大风雪，兵不能进，上祷于天，俄顷而霁。
现代文：冬十月十二日，驻兵乌古部，天降大风雪，队伍不能前进，便向上天祈祷，不一会儿天晴了。
English: On the 12th day of October in winter, when the troops stationed in Wukou were leaving, a heavy snowstorm fell, and the troops could not advance, so they prayed to the heavens, and soon the weather cleared.

古文：命皇太子将先锋军进击，破之，俘获生口万四千二百，牛马车乘、庐帐器物二十馀万。
现代文：命皇太子率先锋军进击，破之，俘获生口一万四千二百，牛马、车辆、庐帐、器物二十余万。
English: He ordered the crown prince to lead the vanguard into the attack, broke it, and captured 14,200 mouths, and more than 200,000 cattle, horses, vehicles, receivables, and goods.

古文：自是举部来附。
现代文：从此乌古部举部来附。
English: Since then, Ukubu has been attached to the ministry.

古文：五年春正月乙丑，始制契丹大字。
现代文：五年春正月初二，开始制定契丹大字。
English: On the second day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, the development of the Khitan Great Character began.

古文：夏五月丙寅，吴越王复遗滕彦休贡犀角、珊瑚，授官以遣。
现代文：夏五月初五，吴越王又派滕彦休贡献犀角、珊瑚，授给官职打发他回去。
English: On the 5th day of the 5th month of the summer, King Wu Yue sent Teng Yanxiu to contribute rhinoceros horns and corals, and gave him an official post to send him back.

古文：庚辰，有龙见于拽剌山阳水上，上射获之，藏其骨内府。
现代文：十九日，有龙出现于拽剌山南水面上，皇上射得，收藏其骨于内府。
English: On the 19th, a dragon appeared on the southern surface of Mt. Drago, and the emperor shot it and collected its bones in Naifu.

古文：闰六月丁卯，以皇弟苏为惕隐，康默记为夷离毕。
现代文：闰六月初八，以皇弟耶律苏为惕隐，康默记为夷离毕。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the leap year, Yelisu, the younger brother of the emperor, was considered to have retired, and Kangmo was considered to have left.

古文：秋八月己未朔，党项诸部叛。
现代文：秋八月初一朔，党项诸部反叛。
English: On the first day of autumn and the first day of August, all branches of the party rebelled.

古文：辛未，上亲征。
现代文：十三日，皇上亲征。
English: On the 13th, the Emperor himself left for the front.

古文：九月己丑朔，梁遣郎公远来聘。
现代文：九月初一朔，梁遣郎公远来访。
English: At the beginning of September, Liang Qianlong paid a visit.

古文：壬寅，大字成，诏颁行之。
现代文：十四日，大字制成，诏令颁行之。
English: On the 14th, the Great Character was made, and the edict was issued.

古文：皇太子率迭剌部夷离堇污里轸等略地云内、天德。
现代文：皇太子率迭剌部夷离堇氵于里轸等掠地于云内、天德。
English: The crown prince led a series of raids in Yunnan and Tiande.

古文：冬十月辛未，攻天德。
现代文：冬十月十三日，攻天德。
English: On the 13th day of October in winter, the attack on the heavens began.

古文：癸酉，节度使宋瑶降，赐弓矢、鞍马、旗鼓，更其军曰应天。
现代文：十五日，节度使宋瑶降，赐给弓矢、鞍马、旗鼓，改其军名为应天军。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the festival made Song Xuan abdicate, gave him bows and arrows, a pommel horse, and a cymbal, and changed his army's name to Ying Tian Army.

古文：甲戌，班师。
现代文：十六日，班师。
English: On the 16th, the class teacher left.

古文：宋瑶复叛。
现代文：宋瑶又反叛。
English: Song Tao rebelled again.

古文：丙子，拔其城，擒宋瑶，俘其家属，徙其民于阴山南。
现代文：十八日，攻下天德城，擒宋瑶，俘虏其家属，迁徙其民于阴山之南。
English: On the 18th, he captured the city of Tiantecheng, the capital of Song Dynasty, captured his relatives, and moved his people to the south of Yinshan Mountain.

古文：十二月己未，师还。
现代文：十二月初二，王师回京。
English: On the second day of December, Wang Shi returned to Beijing.

古文：六年春正月丙午，以皇弟苏为南府宰相，迭里为惕隐。
现代文：六年春正月十九日，以皇弟耶律苏为南府宰相，迭里为惕隐。
English: On the 19th day of the 1st month of the 6th year of the Spring, Yelutsu, the younger brother of the emperor, was appointed as the prime minister of Nanfu, and Deri was appointed as chancellor.

古文：南府宰相自诸弟构乱，府之名族多罹其祸，故其位久虚，以锄得部辖得里、只里古摄之。
现代文：南府宰相一职，自从诸弟造乱，府中之名族多数遭祸，所以其位长期虚设，以锄得部辖得里、只里古代理。
English: The post of chancellor of Nanfu has been vacant for a long time since the younger brothers caused a disturbance and most of the famous families in the prefecture suffered misfortune. Therefore, the post of chancellor of Nanfu has been under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of the Interior and has only been acting for a long time.

古文：府中数请择任宗室，上以旧制不可辄变；请不已，乃告于宗庙而后授之。
现代文：府中多次请求择任宗室，皇上以旧制不可随意变更；请求不断，便告祭于宗庙而后授之。
English: The Imperial Household Agency repeatedly requested the selection of the family, and the Emperor could not arbitrarily change it to the old system. After repeated requests, it was announced that it would be held at the family temple and then conferred.

古文：宗室为南府宰相自此始。
现代文：宗室为南府宰相从这时开始。
English: Since then, the family has served as the chancellor of Minamifu.

古文：夏五月丙戌朔，诏定法律，正班爵。
现代文：夏五月初一朔，诏令制定法律，整饬序列爵位。
English: On the first day of the fifth month of summer, the Emperor issued a decree to enact a law to rectify the order of knighthoods.

古文：丙申，诏画前代直臣像为《招谏图》，及诏长吏四孟月询民利病。
现代文：十一日，诏令绘前代正直之臣的画像为《招谏图》，并且诏令各地长吏于四季之孟月询问百姓受惠或受害的原因所在。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the image of the previous generation of honest vassals was painted as "invitation map," and the governors of various regions were ordered to inquire about the reasons why the people benefited or suffered in the four seasons.

古文：六月乙卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一朔，日食。
English: The first day of June, a solar eclipse.

古文：冬十月癸丑朔，晋新州防御使王郁以所部山北兵马内附。
现代文：冬十月初一朔，晋新州防御使王郁率所部山北兵马内附。
English: On the first day of winter in early October, the defense of Jin and Xinzhou caused Wang Yu to lead the troops of the Shanbei Division.

古文：丙子，上率大军入居庸关。
现代文：二十四日，皇上率大军进入居庸关。
English: On the 24th, the emperor led a large army into Juyongguan.

古文：十一月癸卯，下古北口。
现代文：十一月二十二日，攻下古北口。
English: On November 22nd, they captured Gubeikou.

古文：丁未，分兵略檀、顺、安远、三河、良乡、望都、潞、满城、遂城等十馀城，俘其民徙内地。
现代文：二十六日，分兵攻掠檀、顺、安远、三河、良乡、望都、潞、满城、遂城等十余城，俘虏其民迁于我内地。
English: On the 26th, the detachment attacked and plundered more than ten cities, including Dang, Shun, Anyuan, Sanhe, Liangxiang, Bodu, Handan, Mancheng and Suicheng, and their captives were resettled in our inland.

古文：十二月癸丑，王郁率其众来朝，上呼郁为子，赏赉甚厚，而徙其众于潢水之南。
现代文：十二月初二，王郁率其人马来朝，皇上称呼王郁为子，赏赐十分丰厚，同时迁其民于潢水之南。
English: On the second day of December, Wang Yu led his people to the Malay Empire. The emperor called Wang Yu his son and rewarded him very richly. At the same time, he moved his people to the south of Surabaya.

古文：庚申，皇太子率王郁略地定州，康默记攻长芦。
现代文：初九，皇太子率王郁往定州攻城掠地，康默记攻长芦。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the crown prince led by Wang Yu went to Dingzhou to attack the city and plunder the land.

古文：唐义武军节度使王处直养子都囚其父，自称留后。
现代文：唐义武军节度使王处直养子王都囚禁其父，自称留后。
English: During the festival of the Tang Dynasty's Volunteer Army, Wang Zhizhong's foster sons all imprisoned their father, claiming to stay behind.

古文：癸亥，围涿州，有白兔缘垒而上，是日破其郛。
现代文：十二日，围涿州，有白兔沿垒而上，当日破其外城。
English: On the twelfth day of the siege of Bozhou, a white rabbit ran along the ramparts and broke through the outer city.

古文：癸酉，刺史李嗣弼以城降。
现代文：二十二日，刺史李嗣弼以城降。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty, Li Shizhen, marched into the city.

古文：乙亥，存勖至定州，王都迎谒马前。
现代文：二十四日，李存勖到定州，王都拜迎于马前。
English: On the 24th, Li Cunxu arrived in Dingzhou, and Wang Du bowed to Ma.

古文：存勖引兵趋望都，遇我军秃馁五千骑，围之，存勖力战数四，不解。
现代文：存勖率兵直趋望都，遇我军秃馁五千骑，被围，存勖奋力冲突四次，不能解围。
English: Cunxu led his troops straight to Wangdu, and when our army of five thousand vultures was surrounded, Cunxu fought hard and clashed four times, unable to break the siege.

古文：李嗣昭领三百骑来救，我军少却，存勖乃得出，大战，我军不利，引归。
现代文：李嗣昭率三百骑来救，我军略退，存勖方才得出，大战，我军失利，领兵回。
English: Li Shizhao led three hundred horsemen to the rescue, our army retreated slightly, and it was not until after the battle that our army was defeated and led back.

古文：存勖至幽州，遣二百骑蹑我军后，我军反击，悉擒之。
现代文：存勖到幽州，派二百骑紧跟我军之后，我军回头攻击，尽数擒之。
English: After sending 200 cavalrymen to Yuzhou, our army turned back and attacked.

古文：己卯，还次檀州，幽人来袭，击走之，擒其裨将。
现代文：二十八日，回军驻于檀州，幽人前来袭击，击退之，擒其偏将。
English: On the 28th, the Hui army stationed in Danzhou was attacked by unknown persons. They were repulsed and their commander was killed.

古文：诏徙檀、顺民于东平、沈州。
现代文：诏令迁檀、顺百姓于东平、沈州。
English: The edict ordered the relocation of the Dan and Shun people to Dongping and Shenzhou.

古文：天赞元年春二月庚申，复徇幽、蓟地。
现代文：天赞元年春二月初九，再度夺取幽、蓟之地。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month of the 1st year of the auspicious year of Spring, we once again conquered the land of peace and tranquility.

古文：癸酉，诏改元，赦军前殊死以下。
现代文：二十二日，诏令改元，赦军前殊死刑以下。
English: On the 22nd, the imperial edict was amended to pardon those who had been sentenced to death or less.

古文：夏四月甲寅，攻蓟州。
现代文：夏四月初四，攻蓟州。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month.

古文：戊午，拔之，擒刺史胡琼，以卢国用、涅鲁古典军民事。
现代文：初八，取之，擒刺史胡琼，由卢国用、涅鲁古主管军民事务。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, he was appointed as the military governor of Lu, and Nehru was put in charge of civil and military affairs.

古文：壬戌，大飨军士。
现代文：十二日，大宴军士。
English: On the twelfth day, a grand banquet was held for the sergeants.

古文：癸亥，李存勖围镇州，张文礼求援，命郎君迭烈、将军康末怛往击，败之，杀其将李嗣昭。
现代文：十三日，李存勖围镇州，张文礼求援，命郎君迭烈、将军康末怛前往攻击，败之，杀其将李嗣昭。
English: On the thirteenth day, Li Cunxu besieged Zhenzhou, Zhang Wenli came to ask for help, and his son-in-law, King Deli, and General Kang Miao attacked, defeated, and killed his general, Li Shizhao.

古文：辛未，攻石城县，拔之。
现代文：二十一日，攻石城县，取之。
English: On the 21st, they attacked Shicheng County and took it.

古文：五月丁未，张文礼卒，其子处瑾遣人奉表来谢。
现代文：五月二十八日，张文礼卒，其子张处瑾派人上表致谢。
English: On May 28th, Zhang Wenli died, and his son Zhang Shuzhen sent a person to the table to express his gratitude.

古文：六月，遣鹰军击西南诸部，以所获赐贫民。
现代文：六月，遣鹰军攻西南诸部，以所获财物赐给贫民。
English: In June, the Imperial Eagle Army invaded the southwestern provinces, and gave the poor with the wealth they obtained.

古文：冬十月甲子，以萧霞的为北府宰相。
现代文：冬十月十八日，以萧霞的为北府宰相。
English: In winter, on October 18th, Xiao Xia became the prime minister of Beifu.

古文：分迭剌部为二院：斜涅赤为北院夷离堇，绾思为南院夷离堇。
现代文：分迭剌部为二院：斜涅赤为北院夷离堇，绾思为南院夷离堇。
English: The division of the lower house into two houses: Shannie Chak for the North House, and Sui Si for the South House.

古文：诏分北大浓兀为二部，立两节度使以统之。
现代文：诏令分北大浓兀为二部，立两节度使以统领之。
English: The imperial edict divided the Northern Dynasties into two parts, and set up two sections to govern them.

古文：十一月壬寅，命皇子尧骨为天下兵马大元帅，略地蓟北。
现代文：十一月二十六日，命皇子尧骨为天下兵马大元帅，掠地于蓟北。
English: On November 26th, the crown prince Shibone was appointed as the grand marshal of the world's armies and horses, and seized land in the north of Shandong.

古文：二年春正月丙申，大元帅尧骨克平州，获刺史赵思温、裨将张崇。
现代文：二年春正月二十一日，大元帅尧骨攻克平州，俘虏刺史赵思温、偏将张希崇。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of the second year of the Spring, the grand marshal Shibone conquered Pingzhou, and captured the general Zhao Siwen and the general Zhang Xitong.

古文：二月，如平州。
现代文：二月，皇上到平州。
English: In February, the Emperor went to Pingzhou.

古文：甲子，以平州为卢龙军，置节度使。
现代文：十九日，以平州为卢龙军，设立节度使。
English: On the 19th, with Pingzhou as the Lulong army, the festival envoy was set up.

古文：三月戊寅，军于箭笴山，讨叛奚胡损，获之，射以鬼箭。
现代文：三月初四，列军于箭舘山，讨伐叛奚胡损，活捉了他，以鬼箭射杀之。
English: On the 4th day of the 3rd month, the army assembled at Qianlong Mountain to fight against the traitor Hu Jia. They captured him alive and shot him with a ghost arrow.

古文：诛其党三百人，沉之狗河。
现代文：诛杀其党三百人，沉之于狗河。
English: He killed 300 members of his own party and drowned himself in the Dog River.

古文：置奚堕瑰部，以勃鲁恩权总其事。
现代文：设立奚堕瑰部，以勃鲁恩暂时总理其事。
English: The Ministry of Antiquities was set up, with Bruen acting as interim prime minister.

古文：夏四月己酉，梁遣使来聘，吴越王遣使来贡。
现代文：夏四月初五，梁遣使来访，吴越王派使者前来进贡。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth month of the summer, Liang sent an envoy to pay a visit, and Wu Yue Wang sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：癸丑，命尧骨攻幽州，迭剌部夷离堇觌烈徇山西地。
现代文：初九，命尧骨进攻幽州，迭剌部夷离堇觌烈掠地山西。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, the imperial army attacked Yuzhou, and the imperial army raided Shanxi.

古文：庚申，尧骨军幽州东，节度使符存审遣人出战，败之，擒其将裴信父子。
现代文：十六日，尧骨屯军于幽州东，节度使符存审派人出战，尧骨败之，擒其将裴信父子。
English: On the 16th day of the month, the skeleton camp army was in the east of Yuzhou, and the festival made Fu Cunxin send people to fight. The skeleton army was defeated, and Pei Xin and his son were defeated.

古文：闰月庚辰，尧骨抵镇州。
现代文：闰四月初六，尧骨抵达镇州。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month, the shinbone arrived in Zhenzhou.

古文：壬午，拔曲阳。
现代文：初八，攻下曲阳。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, they captured Quyang.

古文：丙戌，下北平。
现代文：十二日，攻下北平。
English: On the 12th, they captured Beiping.

古文：是月，晋王李存勖即皇帝位，国号唐。
现代文：同日，晋王李存勖即皇帝位，国号唐。
English: On the same day, the king of Jin, Li Cunxu, became emperor, and the country was named Tang.

古文：五月戊午，尧骨师还。
现代文：五月十五日，尧骨军回京。
English: On May 15, the skeleton army returned to Beijing.

古文：癸亥，大飨军士，赏赉有差。
现代文：二十日，大宴士卒，赏赐各有等差。
English: On the 20th, after the grand banquet, the awards were equally divided.

古文：六月辛丑，波斯国来贡。
现代文：六月二十九日，波斯国前来进贡。
English: On the 29th of June, Persia came to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月，前北府宰相萧阿古只及王郁徇地燕、赵。
现代文：秋七月，前北宰相萧阿古只及王郁掠地于燕、赵。
English: In autumn and July, the former Northern Prime Minister Xiao Agu and Wang Yu raided Yan and Zhao.

古文：冬十月辛未朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬十月初一朔，日食。初九，唐军灭梁。
English: On the first day of October in winter, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：己卯，唐兵灭梁。三年春正月，遣兵略地燕南。
现代文：三年春正月，派兵掠地于燕南。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Spring, troops were sent to invade Yan'nan.

古文：夏五月丙午，以惕隐迭里为南院夷离堇。
现代文：夏五月初九，以惕隐迭里为南院夷离堇。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month of the summer, Nanin left the palace in secret.

古文：是月，徙蓟州民实辽州地。
现代文：同月，迁蓟州民户填充辽州地。
English: In the same month, the residents of Liaozhou moved to Liaozhou.

古文：渤海杀其刺史张秀实而掠其民。
现代文：渤海杀其刺史张秀实而掳掠其民。
English: Bohai killed his rival Zhang Husi and plundered his people.

古文：六月乙酉，召皇后、皇太子、大元帅及二宰相、诸部头等诏曰： 上天降监，惠及烝民。
现代文：六月十八日，召集皇后、皇太子、大元帅及两位宰相等下诏说 ：上天诞生统治者代天行政，必然要使恩惠及于百姓。
English: On June 18th, the empress, the crown prince, the grand marshal, and two prime ministers were summoned to issue the following edict: Rulers who are born of heaven should administer on behalf of heaven, and they must extend grace to the people.

古文：圣主明王，万载一遇。
现代文：圣哲英明的君王，一万年才出现一次。
English: A sage and wise king appears only once in ten thousand years.

古文：朕既上承天命，下统群生，每有征行，皆奉天意。
现代文：朕既已上承天命，于下界统治众生，每每有征战之举，均是奉行天意。
English: Since I have received the heavenly mandate to rule all beings in the netherworld, every time I go to war, I am following the will of heaven.

古文：是以机谋在己，取舍如神，国令既行，人情大附，舛讹归正，遐迩无愆。
现代文：所以自身就能智谋百出，取舍如神，国家政令已然通行，人心大附。纠正各种弊政归于正途，使各地百姓都得到平安。
English: Therefore, they are able to come up with the best ideas and make the best choices. The state decrees have already been passed, and people's hearts have been greatly moved. All kinds of maladministration have been corrected and returned to the right path, so that the people in all parts of the country have been safe.

古文：可谓大含溟海，安纳泰山矣！
现代文：可谓其德大于沧海之包涵，其安甚于泰山之屹立！
English: It can be said that its virtue is greater than that of the sea of vicissitudes, and its security is greater than that of Mount Tai!

古文：自我国之经营，为群方之父母。
现代文：自从建国立业以来，便成为四方归依的父母之邦。
English: Since the founding of the country, it has become the country of the parents of the Four Directions.

古文：宪章斯在，胤嗣何忧？升降有期，去来在我。
现代文：典章制度有在，后世子孙又有什么值得我担心的呢？升天降世原属有期，来去红尘选择在我。
English: The award system is in place, so what do future generations of descendants have to worry about? Ascension to heaven and descent into the world are predetermined, and it is up to me to choose when to come and go.

古文：良筹圣会，自有契于天人；众国群王，岂可化其凡骨？
现代文：优良的策划与超凡的会悟，天与人之间本来是有所契合的；其他各国诸王，上天岂能圣化其庸凡的本性？
English: Excellent planning and extraordinary understanding, there is a match between heaven and man; other kings, can heaven sanctify their mediocre nature?

古文：三年之后，岁在丙戌，时值初秋，必有归处。
现代文：三年之后，岁在丙戌，时值初秋，我将会有自己的归所。
English: Three years later, in early autumn, I will have my own home.

古文：然未终两事，岂负亲诚？
现代文：然而还有两件事没做完，我岂能有负亲人的忠诚？
English: However, there are still two things left undone. Will I be able to be loyal to my relatives?

古文：日月非遥，戒严是速。 
现代文：人生岁月已不是太多，该当即时戒慎戒惧地过下去。 
English: The years of life are not too many, it is time to live cautiously and fearlessly.

古文：闻诏者皆惊惧，莫识其意。
现代文：听诏之人都惊惧交加，没人知道所论是什么含意。
English: Everyone who heard the news was shocked, and no one knew what it meant.

古文：是日，大举征吐浑、党项、阻卜等部。
现代文：同日，大举征讨吐浑、党项、阻卜等部。
English: On the same day, a large-scale recruitment campaign was launched to eliminate the departments of Tuhun, Party Affairs, and Obstruction.

古文：诏皇太子监国，大元帅尧骨从行。
现代文：诏令皇太子监国，大元帅尧骨随行。
English: The imperial edict ordered the crown prince to supervise the country, and the grand marshal Shibone to accompany him.

古文：秋七月辛亥，曷剌等击素昆那山东部族，破之。
现代文：秋七月十四日，曷剌等攻素昆那山以东部族，破之。
English: On the 14th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the Eastern Clan attacked the Su Kunna Mountain and defeated it.

古文：八月乙酉，至乌孤山，以鹅祭天。
现代文：八月十九日，皇上到乌孤山，以鹅祭天。
English: On August 19th, the emperor went to Wukang Mountain to hold a goose festival.

古文：甲午，次古单于国，登阿里典压得斯山，以麃鹿祭。
现代文：二十八日，驻军于古单于国，登阿里典压得斯山，以鹿行祭。
English: On the 28th, the garrisoned troops in Guzan in the country, ascended Mount Aridus, and held a deer festival.

古文：九月丙申朔，次古回鹘城，勒石纪功。
现代文：九月初一朔，驻军于古回鹘城，刻石纪功。
English: On the first day of September, the garrison was stationed in the ancient city of Hulun.

古文：庚子，拜日于蹛林。
现代文：初五，拜日于林。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the sun sets in the forest.

古文：丙午，遣骑攻阻卜。
现代文：十一日，派骑兵攻阻卜。
English: On the eleventh day, he sent cavalry to attack and stop them.

古文：南府宰相苏、南院夷离堇迭里略地西南。
现代文：南府宰相耶律苏、南院夷离堇迭里掠地于西南。
English: The chancellor of Nanfu, Ye Lu Su, and the Southern Yuan separated from Xingdi and seized land in the southwest.

古文：乙卯，苏等献俘。
现代文：二十日，耶律苏等人献俘。
English: On the 20th, Jerushu and the others went to sacrifice the captives.

古文：丁巳，取金河水，凿乌山石，辇致潢河、木叶山，以示山川朝海宗岳之意。
现代文：二十二日，取金河水，凿乌山石，乘辇车到达潢河、木叶山，以表明百川汇海、众山宗岳之意。
English: On the 22nd, they took water from the Jinhe River, chiseled stone from the Wushan Mountain, and took a carriage to the Wushan River and Mujiashan Mountain, to show that the Baichuan River flows into the sea, and the mountains are connected to the mountains.

古文：癸亥，大食国来贡。
现代文：二十八日，大食国前来进贡。
English: On the 28th, the big food country came to pay tribute.

古文：甲子，诏砻辟遏可汗故碑，以契丹、突厥、汉字纪其功。
现代文：二十九日，诏令磨去辟遏可汗故碑，以契丹文、突厥文、汉字纪其功。
English: On the 29th, the imperial edict was issued to erase the Khan's monument, with Khitan, Turkic and Chinese characters to commemorate his achievements.

古文：是月，破胡母思山诸蕃部，次业得思山，以赤牛青马祭天地。
现代文：同月，破胡母思山诸蕃部，驻扎于业得思山，以赤牛青马祭天地。
English: In the same month, Hu Moushan was stationed in Yeduxishan, the capital of Shandong Province, and held the world's largest red ox and horse festival.

古文：回鹘霸里遣使来贡。
现代文：回鹘霸里遣使者前来进贡。
English: Huizhong Baili sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：冬十月丙寅朔，猎寓乐山，获野兽数千，以充军食。
现代文：冬十月初一朔，狩猎于寓乐山，获野兽数千，以之充军粮。
English: On the first day of winter in early October, he hunted in the Follett Mountains and obtained thousands of wild animals, which he used to fill his army with food.

古文：丁卯，军于霸离思山。
现代文：初二，驻军于霸离思山。
English: On the second day of the junior high school, the garrison was stationed in Baili Mountain.

古文：遣兵逾流沙，拔浮图城，尽取西鄙诸部。
现代文：派兵翻越流沙，攻下浮图城，尽取西部边野诸部。
English: He sent troops to cross the quicksand, capture the city of Futu, and take all parts of the western borderlands.

古文：十一月乙未朔，获甘州回鹘都督毕离遏，因遣使谕其主乌母主可汗。
现代文：十一月初一朔，获甘州回鹘都督毕离遏，于是派使者晓谕其主乌母主可汗。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, he was persuaded by the governor of Gansu Province to abdicate, so he sent an envoy to tell his master, Emperor Wuma Khan.

古文：射虎于乌剌邪里山，抵霸室山。
现代文：射虎于乌剌邪里山，直抵霸室山。
English: He shot a tiger in the mountains of Wuxi, and it went all the way to Muroyama.

古文：六百馀里且行且猎，日有鲜食，军士皆给。
现代文：六百余里边走边猎，每天都有新鲜肉食，士兵们吃的都很丰足。
English: They hunted while walking more than six hundred miles, had fresh meat every day, and the soldiers had plenty to eat.

古文：四年春正月壬寅，以捷报皇后、皇太子。
现代文：四年春正月初九，将胜利的消息报告给皇后、皇太子。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, he reported the news of the victory to the empress and the crown prince.

古文：二月丙寅，大元帅尧骨略党项。
现代文：二月初三，大元帅尧骨掠地于党项。
English: On the third day of the second month, the grand marshal's cheekbones swept the floor at the party meeting.

古文：丁卯，皇后遣康末怛问起居，进御服、酒膳。
现代文：初四，皇后派康末怛来问候起居，呈进御服、酒食。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the empress sent Kang Miao to greet the newlyweds, present them with ceremonial robes, food and drink.

古文：乙亥，萧阿古只略燕、赵还，进牙旗兵仗。
现代文：十二日，萧阿古只攻掠燕赵回还，进献牙旗兵仗。
English: On the twelfth day, Xiao Agu only attacked and plundered Yan Zhao, and then returned to the battlefield.

古文：辛卯，尧骨献党项俘。
现代文：二十八日，尧骨献党项俘虏。
English: On the 28th, the skull and crossbones were presented to the prisoners.

古文：三月丙申，飨军于水精山。
现代文：三月初四，宴饷全军于水精山。
English: On the 4th day of the 3rd month, the whole army had a banquet in Shuijie Mountain.

古文：夏四月甲子，南攻小蕃，下之。
现代文：夏四月初二，往南进攻小蕃，取之。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, they attacked Xiaotang to the south and took it.

古文：皇后、皇太子迎谒于札里河。
现代文：皇后、皇太子在札里河迎驾。
English: The Empress and the Crown Prince meet the motorcade at the Zari River.

古文：癸酉，回鹘乌母主可汗遣使贡谢。
现代文：十一日，回鹘乌母主可汗遣使者进贡谢罪。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Khan sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：五月甲寅，清暑室韦北陉。
现代文：五月二十三日，在室韦北陉消夏。
English: On May 23rd, the summer was over in Beilun, Muroto.

古文：秋九月癸巳，至自西征。
现代文：秋九月初三，西征结束，回宫。
English: Autumn On the third day of the first month of September, the Western Expedition ended, and the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：冬十月丁卯，唐以灭梁来告，即遣使报聘。
现代文：冬十月初八，唐以灭梁事来相告，当即派使者前往聘问。
English: On the eighth day of the tenth month of winter, Tang sent an envoy to inquire about Liang.

古文：庚辰，日本国来贡。
现代文：二十一日，日本国前来进贡。
English: On the 21st, Japan came to pay tribute.

古文：辛巳，高丽国来贡。
现代文：二十二日，高丽国前来进贡。
English: On the 22nd, Korea came to pay tribute.

古文：十一月丁酉，幸安国寺，饭僧，赦京师囚，纵五坊鹰鹘。
现代文：十一月初八，幸安国寺，赐寺僧以饭，赦京师囚徒，将五坊之鹰鹘放生。
English: On the 8th day of the 11th month of the year, he gave rice to the monks of the temple, pardoned the prisoners of the Beijing Division, and released the five eagles.

古文：己酉，新罗国来贡。
现代文：二十日，新罗国前来进贡。
English: On the 20th, Silla came to pay tribute.

古文：十二月乙亥，诏曰： 所谓两事，一事已毕，惟渤海世仇未雪，岂宜安驻！ 
现代文：十二月十六日，诏曰： 所谓两事，一件事已完成，只有渤海世仇不曾雪恨，我岂能按兵不动！ 
English: On December 16th, the emperor said: "The so-called two things, one thing has been completed, only Bohai's world-wide hatred has not been abated, can I not stand still!

古文：乃举兵新征渤海大諲歙。皇后、皇太子、大元帅尧骨皆从。
现代文：于是举兵亲征渤海大。皇后、皇太子、大元帅尧骨均从行。
English: The Empress, the Crown Prince, and the Grand Marshal Shibone all followed suit.

古文：闰月壬辰，祠木叶山。
现代文：闰十二月初四，祠祭木叶山。
English: On the fourth day of the twelfth lunar month, the ancestral shrine festival of Mujiyama begins.

古文：壬寅，以青牛白马祭天地于乌山。
现代文：十四日，以青牛白马祭天地于乌山。
English: On the 14th, the Qing Niu Bai Ma Festival took place in Wushan.

古文：己酉，次撒葛山，射鬼箭。
现代文：二十一日，驻军撒葛山，射鬼箭。
English: On the twenty-first day, the garrison went to Zageshan to shoot arrows.

古文：丁巳，次商岭，夜围扶馀府。
现代文：二十九日，驻军于商岭，乘夜围扶余府。
English: On the 29th, the garrison was stationed in Shangling, and they took advantage of the night to support Yu Prefecture.

古文：天显元年春正月己未，白气贯日。
现代文：天显元年春正月初二，有白气直贯红日。
English: On the second day of the first month of spring in the first year of Tian Xian, there was a white wind straight through the red sun.

古文：庚申，拔扶馀城，诛其守将。
现代文：初三，攻下扶余城，杀其守将。
English: On the third day of junior high school, he captured Buyeo City and killed its keeper.

古文：丙寅，命惕隐安端、前北府宰相萧阿古只等将万骑为先锋，遇諲歙老相兵，破之。
现代文：初九，命惕隐安端、前北府宰相萧阿古只等率一万骑为先锋，与老相之人马相遇，破之。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the former prime minister of Beifu, Xiao Agu, and ten thousand horsemen were the vanguard, and they met the old man and horse and broke it.

古文：皇太子、大元帅尧骨、南府宰相苏、北院夷离堇斜涅赤，南院夷离堇迭里是夜围忽汗城。
现代文：皇太子、大元帅尧骨、南府宰相耶律苏、北院夷离堇斜涅赤、南院夷离堇迭里在这天夜里包围了忽汗城。
English: On that night, the crown prince, the grand marshal Shibone, the chancellor of Nanfu, Yerusu, the Northern Court's ibei Nienchi, and the Southern Court's ibei Xingdi encircled the city of Kukang.

古文：己巳，諲歙请降。
现代文：十二日，请降。
English: On the 12th, please come down.

古文：庚午，驻军于忽汗城南。
现代文：十三日，驻军于忽汗城南。
English: On the 13th, the garrison was established in the south of the city of Kukhan.

古文：辛未，諲歙素服，稿索牵羊，率僚属三百馀人出降。
现代文：十四日，身着素服，以草绳肉袒自缚，率僚属三百余人出降。
English: On the 14th, dressed in plain clothes, they tied themselves with grass ropes and led more than three hundred people to surrender.

古文：上优礼而释之。
现代文：皇上优诏礼遇之，解其缚。
English: Emperor Yudahara treated him with courtesy and released him.

古文：丁丑，諲歙复叛，攻其城，破之。
现代文：十七日，下诏晓谕渤海郡县。十九日，派近侍康末怛等十三人进城索要兵器，为巡逻兵所杀。二十日，又叛，攻其城，破之。
English: On the 17th, he issued an edict to the county of Erhai County. On the 19th, he sent 13 people including his close attendant, Kang Mueang, to the city to ask for weapons, but they were killed by patrol soldiers. On the 20th, he rebelled again, attacked the city, and destroyed it.

古文：驾幸城中，諲歙请罪马前。
现代文：御驾进城，请罪于马前。
English: Go into the city and plead your case before the horse.

古文：诏以兵卫諲歙及族属以出。
现代文：诏令派兵护送及其族人出城。
English: The Emperor sent soldiers to escort him and his people out of the city.

古文：祭告天地，复还军中。
现代文：祭告天地，又回到军中。
English: He went back to the army.

古文：二月庚寅，安边、鄚颉、南海、定理等府及诸道节度、刺史来朝，慰劳遣之，以所获器币诸物赐将士。
现代文：二月初三，安边、莫阝颉、南海、定理等府及诸道节度、刺史来朝，给以抚慰劳问，打发他们回去。以所获得的器物、钱币诸物赐予将士。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, the prefectures of Anbian, Mokou, Nanhai, and Zhurong, as well as the provincial governors of various provinces, came to the DPRK to offer their condolences and send them back. The generals were presented with the acquired goods, coins, and other items.

古文：壬辰，以青牛白马祭天地。
现代文：初五，以青牛白马祭天地。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, the Qing Niu Bai Ma Festival will be held.

古文：大赦，改元天显。
现代文：大赦天下，改元天显。
English: Amnesty for the whole country, change the era.

古文：以平渤海遣使报唐。
现代文：以平定渤海事派使者告知唐廷。
English: An envoy from the Pingding Naval Base was dispatched to inform the Tang court.

古文：甲午，复幸忽汗城，阅府库物，赐从臣有差。
现代文：初七，再幸忽汗城，搜阅府库之物，赐给随从臣子各若干。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he fortunately visited the city of Khan, searched the treasury, and gave each of his attendants a certain amount.

古文：以奚部长勃鲁恩、王郁自回鹘、新罗、吐蕃、党项、室韦、沙陀、乌古等从征有功，优加赏赉。
现代文：因奚部首领勃鲁恩、王郁从征回鹘、新罗、吐蕃、党项、室韦、沙陀、乌古等地有功，给以格外优厚之赏赐。
English: Due to the meritorious service of the chiefs of the Department, Bruen and Wang Yu, from the provinces of Zhouzhuang, Silla, Tubo, Dangxiang, Murowe, Shatou, and Wugu, they were awarded with extraordinarily generous rewards.

古文：丙午，改渤海国为东丹，忽汗城为天福。
现代文：十九日，改渤海国为东丹，忽汗城为天福。
English: On the 19th, the country of Bohai was changed to Dongdan, and the city of Kukhan to Tianfu.

古文：册皇太子倍为人皇王以主之。
现代文：册封皇太子耶律倍为人皇王以主持其事。
English: The crown prince, Yerutube, was enthroned as emperor to preside over the event.

古文：以皇弟迭剌为左大相，渤海老相为右大相，渤海司徒大素贤为左次相，耶律羽之为右次相。
现代文：以皇弟迭剌为左大相，渤海老相为右大相，渤海司徒大素贤为左次相，耶律羽之为右次相。
English: With the emperor's younger brother Diyu as the left grand vizier, Erhai Lao as the right grand vizier, Erhai Sittu Da Su Xian as the left secondary vizier, and Yerut Yu as the right secondary vizier.

古文：赦其国内殊死以下。
现代文：赦免其国内殊死刑以下犯人。
English: to pardon prisoners sentenced to death or less in his country.

古文：丁未，高丽、濊貊、铁骊、靺轲来贡。
现代文：二十日，高丽、氵岁貊、铁骊、前来进贡。
English: On the 20th, Goryeo, Lop Nur, and Lop Son came to pay tribute.

古文：三月戊午，遣夷离毕康默记、左仆射韩延徽攻长岭府。
现代文：三月初二，派夷离毕康默记、左仆射韩延徽进攻长岭府。
English: On the second day of the third month, the troops led by Bi Kang Mo Ji and Zuo Shu shot Han Yanhui and attacked Changling Prefecture.

古文：甲子，祭天。
现代文：初八，祭天。
English: The first day of the eighth month, the day of the festival.

古文：丁卯，幸人皇王宫。
现代文：十一日，幸人皇王宫。
English: On the 11th day, the lucky person went to the Imperial Palace.

古文：己巳，安边、鄚颉、定理三府叛，遣安端讨之。
现代文：十三日，安边、莫阝颉、定理三府反叛，派安端讨伐之。
English: On the 13th, the three provinces of Anbian, Muxian, and Xuefu rebelled and sent troops to fight against Anduan.

古文：丁丑，三府平。
现代文：二十一日，三府乱平。
English: On the 21st, the three prefectures were leveled.

古文：壬午，安端献俘，诛安边府叛帅二人。
现代文：二十六日，安端献俘，诛杀安边府叛帅二人。
English: On the 26th, Anduan offered prisoners and killed two rebel commanders of Anbian Prefecture.

古文：癸未，宴东丹国僚佐，颁赐有差。
现代文：二十七日，宴饮东丹国僚佐，颁赏赐物各若干。
English: On the 27th, a banquet was held for Dongdan's vice-ministers of state, and a number of awards were presented.

古文：甲申，幸天福城。
现代文：二十八日，幸天福城。
English: On the 28th, the fortunes of fortune changed.

古文：乙酉，班师，以大諲歙举族行。
现代文：二十九日，班师、以大全族随行。
English: On the 29th, the class teacher and all the students accompanied the trip.

古文：夏四月丁亥朔，次伞子山。
现代文：夏四月初一朔，驻军于伞子山。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, the troops were stationed in Umbrella Mountain.

古文：辛卯，人皇王率东丹国僚属辞。
现代文：初五，人皇王率东丹国僚属辞行。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the king and queen of human beings led the Dongdan State Councilors to resign.

古文：是月，唐养子李嗣源反，郭存谦弑其主存勖，嗣源遂即位。
现代文：同月，唐养子李嗣源起事谋反，郭存谦弑其主李存勖，李嗣源便即位。
English: In the same month, Tang's adopted son, Li Siyuan, started a rebellion, Guo Cunxian overthrew his master, Li Cunxu, and Li Siyuan ascended to the throne.

古文：五月辛酉，南海、定理二府复叛，大元帅尧骨讨之。
现代文：五月初六，南海、定理二府又叛，大元帅尧骨讨伐之。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month, the South China Sea and the two prefectures rebelled again, and the Grand Marshal Shibone fought against them.

古文：六月丁酉，二府平。
现代文：六月十二日，二府乱平。
English: On June 12, the two prefectures were leveled.

古文：丙午，次慎州，唐遣姚坤以国哀来告。
现代文：二十一日，驻军于慎州，唐遣姚坤以国哀来告。
English: On the twenty-first day, troops were stationed in Shenzhou, and Tang sent Yao Kun to mourn for the country.

古文：秋七月丙辰，铁州刺史卫钧反。
现代文：秋七月初二，铁州刺史卫钧反。
English: On the second day of the first month of autumn in July, Tiezhou stabbed Wei Xuan.

古文：乙丑，尧骨攻拔铁州。
现代文：十一日，尧骨攻取铁州。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Jianbei captured the Iron State.

古文：庚午，东丹国左大相迭剌卒。
现代文：十六日，东丹国左大相迭剌卒。
English: On the 16th day of the month, Dongdan Left University graduates.

古文：辛未，卫送大諲歙于皇都西，筑城以居之。
现代文：十七日，护送大到皇都之西，筑城让他居住。
English: On the 17th, he was escorted to the west of the imperial capital, Tsukushi, where he was allowed to live.

古文：赐諲歙名曰乌鲁古，妻曰阿里只。
现代文：赐名曰乌鲁古，妻曰阿里只。
English: His given name is Urugu, and his wife's name is Ali.

古文：卢龙行军司马张崇叛，奔唐。
现代文：卢龙行军司马张崇叛，奔唐。
English: Lulong Marching Sima Zhang Chongren, went to Tang.

古文：甲戌，次扶馀府，上不豫。
现代文：二十日，驻军于扶余府，皇上染病。
English: On the 20th, the troops were stationed at Fuyufu, and the emperor fell ill.

古文：是夕，大星陨于幄前。
现代文：这天夜里，大星陨落于帐前。
English: On this night, a great star fell in front of the account.

古文：辛巳平旦，子城上见黄龙缭绕，可长一里，光耀夺目，入于行宫。
现代文：二十七日清晨，子城上出现黄龙缭绕，约长一里，光耀夺目，进入行宫。
English: In the early morning of the 27th, a yellow dragon appeared on the castle, about one mile long, dazzling, and entered the palace.

古文：有紫黑气蔽天，逾日乃散。
现代文：有紫黑之气遮蔽天空，过了一整天才散去。
English: There was a purple-black haze that covered the sky and lasted for a whole day before dissipating.

古文：是日，上崩，年五十五。
现代文：这一天，皇上崩，年五十五岁。
English: On this day, the Emperor died at the age of fifty-five.

古文：天赞三年上所谓 丙戌秋初，必有归处 ，至是乃验。
现代文：天赞三年皇上所称 丙戌秋初，必有归处 ，到这时便应验了。
English: The emperor said three years ago, "There must be a place of return," and this time it came true.

古文：壬午，皇后称制，权决军国事。
现代文：二十八日，皇后临朝称制，暂时决理军国大事。
English: On the 28th, Empress Lintong proclaimed martial law and temporarily took charge of military affairs.

古文：八月辛卯，康默记等攻下长岭府。
现代文：八月初七，康默记等攻下长岭府。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month, Kang Mei Ji and others captured Changling Prefecture.

古文：甲午，皇后奉梓宫西还。
现代文：十日，皇后奉梓宫西还。
English: On the 10th, the Empress was given the Western Imperial Crown.

古文：壬寅，尧骨讨平诸州，奔赴行在。
现代文：十八日，尧骨讨平各州，奔赴行宫所在。
English: On the eighteenth day, the shin bone was leveled in all states and rushed to the imperial palace.

古文：乙巳，人皇王倍继至。
现代文：二十一日，人皇王耶律倍随后也到了。
English: On the twenty-first day, the human king, Jeroboam, also arrived.

古文：九月壬戌，南府宰相苏薨。
现代文：九月初八，南府宰相耶律苏薨。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month, the chancellor of Nanfu, Yerusu Soen, passed away.

古文：丁卯，梓宫至皇都，权殡于子城西北。
现代文：十三日，梓宫运抵皇都，权葬于子城西北。
English: On the 13th, Zi Gong arrived in the imperial capital and was buried in the northwest of Zicheng.

古文：己巳，上谥升天皇帝，庙号太祖。
现代文：十五日，皇上受谥为升天皇帝，庙号太祖。
English: On the fifteenth day, the emperor was enthroned as the ascended emperor, and was given the title of the great ancestor.

古文：冬十月，卢龙军节度使卢国用叛，奔于唐。
现代文：冬十月，卢龙军节度使卢国用叛，逃奔至唐。
English: In the winter of October, the festival of the Lulong Army caused Lu to rebel and flee to Tang.

古文：十一月丙寅，杀南院夷离堇耶律迭里、郎君耶律匹鲁等。
现代文：十一月十三日，杀南院夷离堇耶律迭里、郎君耶律匹鲁等。
English: On November 13th, the Southern Court ordered the killing and separation of Zou Yeludyeri, his brother-in-law Yeludpiru, and others.

古文：二年八月丁酉，葬太祖皇帝于祖陵，置祖州天城军节度使以奉陵寝。
现代文：二年八月十九日，葬太祖皇帝于祖陵，设立祖州天城军节度使以奉守陵寝。
English: On August 19 of the second year, Emperor Taizu was buried in the ancestral mausoleum, and the Zhou Tiancheng Army Festival was established to honor the mausoleum.

古文：统和二十六年七月，进谥大圣大明天皇帝。
现代文：统和二十六年七月，进谥为大圣大明天皇帝。
English: In July, 26 years after the unification of the country, he was enthroned as the Emperor of the Great Holy Great Tomorrow.

古文：重熙二十一年九月，加谥大圣大明神烈天皇帝。
现代文：重熙二十一年九月，加谥大圣大明神烈天皇帝。
English: In September of the twenty-first year of the reign of King Heung-Hee, the great saint, the great god, the great heavenly emperor, was enthroned.

古文：太祖所崩行宫在扶馀城西南两河之间，后建升天殿于此，而以扶馀为黄龙府云。
现代文：太祖崩驾之行宫在扶余城西南两河之间，后来建升天殿于此，而以扶余为黄龙府。
English: The Ancestor's Palace is located between the two rivers in the southwest of Fuyucheng. Later, the Temple of Heaven was built here, and Fuyucheng became Huanglongfu.

古文：赞曰：辽之先，出自炎帝，世为审吉国，其可知者盖自奇首云。奇首生都菴山，徙潢河之滨。
现代文：赞曰：辽之先祖，出自炎帝，世为审吉国，所能了解的祖先大约从奇首开始，奇首生于都庵山，迁于黄河之滨。
English: Zang said: Liao's ancestors came from the Emperor Yan, and the world regarded it as the auspicious country. The ancestors that can be understood start from Qishou. Qishou was born in Du'an Mountain and moved to the coast of the Yellow River.

古文：传至雅里，始立制，置官属，刻木为契，穴地为牢，让阻午而不肯自立。
现代文：传至雅里，开始建立制度，设置官属，刻木以为文字，掘地穴以为牢狱。让位于阻午而不肯自立。
English: It spread to Yali, began to establish a system, set up officials, carved wood for writing, dug a hole for a prison.

古文：雅里生毗牒。
现代文：雅里生毗牒。
English: Yarisen vivisected.

古文：毗牒生颏领。
现代文：毗牒生颏领。
English: He wore a raw silk collar.

古文：颏领生耨里思，大度寡欲，令不严而人化，是为肃祖。
现代文：颏领生耨里思，仁德大度，淡泊无私欲，教令不严而百姓得到化育，这是肃祖。
English: This is the origin of solemnity, the origin of modesty, the origin of benevolence, the origin of selflessness, the origin of the people's education, and the origin of solemnity.

古文：肃祖生萨剌德，尝与黄室韦挑战，矢贯数札，是为懿祖。
现代文：肃祖生萨剌德，曾经向黄室韦挑战，身中数箭仍不下阵，这是懿祖。
English: Su Zu, who was born in Shandong, once challenged Huang Shuxuwei, but several arrows in his body still did not go into battle. This was the beginning of Su Zu.

古文：懿祖生匀德实，始教民稼穑，善畜牧，国以殷富，是为玄祖。
现代文：懿祖生匀德实，开始教导百姓种庄稼，善于放牧，国家因此变得富裕，这是玄祖。
English: Xuan Zu was born in Yin and De, and began to teach the people to grow crops and be good at grazing. As a result, the country became rich. This is Xuan Zu.

古文：玄祖生撒剌的，仁民爱物，始置铁冶，教民鼓铸，是为德祖，即太祖之父也，世为契丹遥辇氏之离堇，执其政柄。
现代文：玄祖生撒剌的，仁爱百姓，爱惜民物，开始设置铁冶，教百姓鼓风铸铁，这是德祖，也就是太祖的父亲。世代为契丹遥辇氏之夷离堇，执掌大权。
English: The great-great-great-great-grandfather, who was born a samurai, loved the people and cherished the people's property, and began to set up an iron smithy and teach the people to make iron. This is the great-great-grandfather, the father of the great-great-grandfather. The generation is the descendants of the Qidan Yanyao clan, and they hold great power.

古文：德祖之弟述澜，北征于厥、室韦，南略易、定、奚、霫，始兴板筑，置城邑，教民种桑麻，习织组，已有广土众民之志。而太祖受可汗之禅，遂建国。
现代文：德祖之弟述澜，在北征讨于厥、室韦，在南拓地于易、定、奚、靅，开始倡导版筑，建城邑，教百姓种植桑麻，学习纺织，已有拓宽疆土，增加民户的想法，而太祖接受可汗的禅位，于是建立了国家。
English: Zhu Lan, the younger brother of the great ancestor, fought in the Northern Expedition in Jie and Shurwei, and in the Southern Expedition in Yi, Ding, Yao and Yao. He began to advocate the construction of printing plates, build towns, teach the people to grow mulberry, and study textiles. He already had the idea of expanding the territory and increasing the number of households, and the great ancestor accepted the khan's position of Zen, and thus established the country.

古文：东征西讨，如折枯拉朽。
现代文：东征西讨，犹如摧枯拉朽。
English: The eastward and westward campaigns are like a tug-of-war.

古文：东自海，西至于流沙，北绝大漠，信威万里，历年二百，岂一日之故哉！
现代文：东起大海，西到流沙，北绝大漠，威声震慑万里，共历二百余年，难道是一日之威德所能造成！
English: From the east to the sea, from the west to the quicksand, and from the north to the desert, the majestic sound has been heard for thousands of miles, and it has lasted for more than two hundred years. Is this what one day's weather can do?

古文：周公诛管、蔡，人未有能非之者。
现代文：周公诛杀管叔蔡叔，后世无人敢于非议之。
English: Zhou Gongjun killed his uncle Cai Shu, and no one in later generations dared to criticize him.

古文：剌葛、安端之乱，太祖既贷其死而复用之，非人君之度乎？
现代文：剌葛、安端肇乱，太祖既已宽贷其一死，后又再度任用之，这难道不正是人君之度量吗？
English: Xingge and Ando caused the turmoil. The great-grandfather forgave their deaths and then reappointed them. Isn't this the measure of a great man?

古文：旧史扶馀之变，亦异矣夫！
现代文：旧史所谓扶余之变，真是咄咄怪事！
English: The so-called "Fuye change" in the old history is really a strange thing!

