古文：廿年四月丙戌朔丁亥，南郡守騰謂縣、道嗇夫：古者，民各有鄉俗，其所利及好惡不同，或不便於民，害於邦。
现代文：二十年四月初二日，南郡郡守腾通告各县，道负责官吏：过去，百姓各有不同的习俗，他们所爱好和厌恶的都不一样，有的不利于百姓，有害于国家。
English: On the 2nd day of the 4th month of the 2nd year of the 20th century, the county magistrate of Nanshun County issued a notice to the officials in charge of each county and province: In the past, the people had different customs, their likes and dislikes were different, and some were detrimental to the people and harmful to the country.

古文：是以聖王作為法度，以矯端民心，去其邪避，除其惡俗。
现代文：因此圣上制定了法律用以纠正百姓的思想，去掉邪恶的行为，清除坏的习俗。
English: Therefore, laws were made to correct the people's thoughts, eliminate evil behaviors, and clean up bad customs.

古文：法律未足，民多詐巧，故後有閒令下者。
现代文：由于法律不够完备，百姓中多诡诈取巧，所以后来有干扰法令的。
English: Because the law is not complete, the people are more devious and clever, so later there are interference decrees.

古文：凡法律令者，以教道民，去其淫避，除其惡俗，而使之之於為善。
现代文：所有法律令、都是教导百姓，去掉淫恶的行为，清除坏的习俗，使他们能够行善。
English: All the ordinances of the law are for the instruction of the people, to turn them from their evil ways, and to purge them from their evil doings, that they may do good.

古文：今法律令已具矣，而吏民莫用，鄉俗淫失之民不止，是即法主之明法，而長邪避淫失之民，甚害於邦，不便於民。
现代文：现在法令已经具备了，仍有一些官吏、百姓不加遵守，习俗淫侈放恣的人未能收敛，这是不执行君上的大法，助长邪恶淫侈的人，很有害于国家，不利于百姓。
English: Now that the laws and regulations are in place, there are still some officials and people who do not abide by them, and those who are licentious and unrestrained in their customs have not been able to restrain themselves. This is not carrying out the great law of the emperor, but encouraging evil and licentious people, which is very harmful to the country and detrimental to the people.

古文：故騰為是而脩法律令、田令及為閒私方而下之，令吏明布，令吏民皆明智之，毋巨於罪。
现代文：所以我把法律令、田令和惩办奸私的法规整理出来，命官吏公布于众，使官吏、百姓都清楚了解，不要违法犯罪。
English: Therefore, I have sorted out the legal decrees, field orders, and regulations for punishing and punishing selfishness, and ordered officials to publish them to the public, so that officials and the people can clearly understand, and do not violate the law and commit crimes.

古文：今法律令已布，聞吏民犯法為閒私者不止，私好、鄉俗之心不變，自從令、丞以下智而弗舉論，是即明避主之明法，而養匿邪避之民。
现代文：现在法令已经公布，听说官吏、百姓犯法有奸私行为的尚未敛迹，私自的爱好和旧有的习俗仍不改变，从县令、丞以下的官员明明知道而不加检举处罪，这是公然违背君上的大法，包庇邪恶的人。
English: Now that the decree has been promulgated, we have heard that officials and ordinary people have committed crimes of treachery and selfishness, but there is still no trace of them, and their private hobbies and old customs have not changed. Officials from the county magistrate and lower officials clearly know and do not report the crime. This is a blatant violation of the great law of the prince and covers up the evil people.

古文：如此，則為人臣亦不忠矣。
现代文：这样，作为人臣就是不忠。
English: Thus, to be a vassal is to be disloyal.

古文：若弗智，是即不勝任、不智；智而弗敢論，是即不廉。
现代文：如果不知道，是不称职、不明智；如果知道而不敢处罪，就是不正直。
English: If he does not know, he is incompetent and unwise; if he knows and does not dare to punish, he is dishonest.

古文：此皆大罪，而令、丞弗明智，甚不便。
现代文：这些都是大罪，而县令、丞还不清楚了解，是很不应该的。
English: These are serious crimes, and the county magistrate and the chief magistrate still do not clearly understand them, which is very inappropriate.

古文：今且令人案行之，舉劾不從令者，致以律，論及令、丞。
现代文：现在我要派人去巡视，检举是不服从法令的人，依法论处，对令、丞也要处分。
English: Now I am going to send someone to inspect. Those who are found to be disobeying the law will be dealt with in accordance with the law, and those who disobey orders and orders will also be dealt with.

古文：有且課縣官，獨多犯令而令、丞弗得者，以令、丞聞。
现代文：还要考核各县官吏，哪一县官吏有犯令而令、丞没有察处的，要将令、丞上报处理。
English: It is also necessary to examine the officials of each county. If there is a county official who has violated the order and the order has not been investigated, the order and the order should be reported and dealt with.

古文：以次傳；別書江陵布，以郵行。
现代文：本文书在各县依次传阅；另抄送江陵公布，由驿站派送。
English: This document will be circulated in each county in turn; another copy will be sent to Gangneung for publication, and will be sent by post.

古文：凡良吏明法律令，事無不能；有廉絜敦而好佐上；以一曹事不足獨治，故有公心；有能自端，而惡與人辨治，是以不爭書。
现代文：凡良吏都通晓法律令，没有不能办理的事务；廉洁、忠诚老实而能为君上效力；他们知道一曹的事务不能独断独行，所以有公正之心；又能够纠正自己，不愿与别人分开处理事务，因此不会在办事中争竞。
English: All good officials are familiar with laws and regulations, and there are no matters that cannot be handled; they are honest, loyal and honest, and can serve the prince; they know that they cannot do things alone, so they have a fair mind; they can correct themselves and do not want to deal with matters separately from others, so they will not compete in doing things.

古文：惡吏不明法律令，不智事，不廉絜，毋以佐上，緰隨疾事，易口舌，不羞辱，輕惡言而易病人，毋公端之心，而有冒柢之治，是以善斥事，喜爭書。
现代文：恶吏则不懂法律令，不通习事务，不廉洁，不能为君上效力，苟且懒惰，遇事推脱，容易搬弄是非，不知羞耻，轻率地口出恶言而侮辱别人，没有公正之心，而有冒犯的行为，因此善于争辩，喜欢在办事时争竞。
English: Evil officials, on the other hand, do not understand laws and regulations, do not study affairs, are not honest, cannot serve the emperor, are lazy, evade things, are easy to manipulate, do not know shame, insult others by carelessly uttering evil words, do not have a fair mind, but have offensive behavior, so they are good at arguing and like to compete in doing things.

古文：爭書，因恙瞋目扼以視力，訏詢疾言以視治，醜言麃斫以視險，阬閬強肮以視強，而上猶智之。
现代文：争竞的时候，就假装瞪起眼睛、握住手腕，显示自己勇敢；说种种假话，抬高语音，显示自己善于治理；说违背事理的话，装作愧悔和无知，显示能约束自己；自高自大，蛮横倔强，显示自己强干，而上司还认为他们有才能。
English: When competing, they pretend to stare at their eyes and hold their wrists to show that they are brave; say all kinds of lies and raise their voices to show that they are good at governing; say unreasonable things, pretend to be ashamed and ignorant to show that they can restrain themselves; arrogant, arrogant, and stubborn to show that they are strong, and their bosses also think that they have talent.

古文：故如此者不可不為罰。
现代文：这种人不能不予以惩罚。
English: Such people must not go unpunished.

古文：發書，移書曹，曹莫受，以告府，府令曹畫之。
现代文：各县、道收到本文书，应发文书到所属各曹，属曹如不受命，县、道要向郡报告，由郡官命郡的属曹进行责处。
English: Each county and province shall, upon receipt of this document, send the document to its subordinate Cao. If the subordinate Cao does not accept the order, the county and province shall report to the county, and the county official shall order the subordinate Cao of the county to take responsibility.

古文：其畫最多者，當居曹奏令、丞，令、丞以為不直，志千里使有籍書之，以為惡吏。
现代文：过失最多的吏，所在的曹向令、丞申报，令、丞认为该吏不公正，由郡官记录在薄藉上向全郡通报，作为恶吏。
English: The official who made the most mistakes was reported to the county magistrate, and the magistrate considered the official to be unfair, and the county official recorded the case on paper and reported it to the whole county as a bad official.

