古文：杨镐，商丘人。
现代文：杨镐，商丘人。
English: Yang Hui, a Shangqiu man.

古文：万历八年进士。
现代文：万历八年考中进士。
English: The eight-year-old trainee.

古文：历知南昌、蠡二县。入为御史，坐事调大理评事。
现代文：先后当过南昌、蠡县知县，然后进入朝中当御史，因事调为大理评事。
English: He successively served as the governor of Nanchang and the governor of Jixian County, and then entered the court of the emperor, and was transferred to Dali as a commentator.

古文：再迁山东参议，分守辽海道。
现代文：后来又升为山东参议，负责防守辽海道。
English: Later, he was promoted to Shandong councillor, responsible for the defense of the Liaohe Highway.

古文：尝偕大帅董一元雪夜度墨山，袭蒙古炒花帐，大获。进副使。
现代文：他曾经和大帅董一元一道在雪夜中翻越墨山去袭击蒙古炒花部的营帐，大获全胜，升任了副使。
English: He had once, together with the grand marshal Dong Yiyuan, climbed over the Ink Mountain in the middle of a snowy night to attack the camp of the Mongolian fried flower department, won a complete victory, and was promoted to deputy envoy.

古文：垦荒田百三十余顷，岁积粟万八千余石。进参政。
现代文：这期间，他开垦荒田一百三十多顷，每年储藏粮食一万八千多石，又被提升为参政。
English: During this period, he reclaimed more than 130 hectares of wasteland, stored more than 18,000 kilos of grain each year, and was promoted to participate in politics.

古文：二十五年春，偕副将李如梅出塞，失部将十人，士卒百六十余人。
现代文：二十五年春天，他和副将李如梅一道开出边塞作战，丢失了十员部将，一百六十多名士兵。
English: In the spring of 1925, he and his second-in-command, Li Rumei, fought their way out of the frontier fortress together, losing ten officers and more than a hundred and sixty soldiers.

古文：会朝鲜再用兵，命免镐罪，擢右佥都御史，经略朝鲜军务。
现代文：正好这时朝鲜又一次用兵，神宗下令免除杨镐的罪过，提拔他为右佥都御史，让他去经略朝鲜军务。
English: It was at this time that North Korea once again used soldiers, and Emperor Shenzong ordered to absolve Yang Xuan of his sins, promote him to the post of the right-hand capital governor, and let him manage North Korea's military affairs.

古文：镐未至，先奏陈十事，请令朝鲜官民输粟得增秩、授官、赎罪，及乡吏奴丁免役，大氐皆苟且之事。
现代文：杨镐尚未到达朝鲜，就先上书讲了十件事，请允许让朝鲜官民捐赠粮食后得以升官、任官和赎罪，乡吏奴丁就免除他们的劳役，大都是一些苟且的事务。
English: Yang Hui had not yet arrived in North Korea when he first wrote about ten things. Please allow North Korean officials and citizens to be promoted, appointed and atoned for after donating grain, and village officials and peasants to be exempted from labor service. Most of them are meticulous matters.

古文：又以朝鲜君臣隐藏储蓄不饷军，劾奏其罪。由是朝鲜多怨。
现代文：又因为朝鲜君臣把粮食储蓄隐藏起来，不给官军粮饷，他上书揭发朝鲜君臣的罪过。
English: He also wrote a letter exposing the sins of the North Korean monarchs and ministers because they hid their grain reserves and did not give grain to the government army.

古文：当是时，倭将行长、清正等已入据南原、全州，引兵犯全罗、庆尚，逼王京，锐甚。
现代文：因此朝鲜人对他有很大的怨气。当时，倭寇将领行长、清正等已经占领了南原、全州，又引兵进犯全罗、庆尚，势逼王京，威力很强大。
English: As a result, Koreans held a great grudge against him. At that time, the wokou warlords, led by the governor and Qing Zheng, had already occupied Nanwon and Jeonju, and they also led troops to invade Jeolla and Gyeongsang, forcing Wangjing. They were very powerful.

古文：赖沈惟敬就擒，乡导乃绝。
现代文：幸好沈惟敬被抓获，倭寇的向导才没有了。
English: Fortunately, Shen Weijing was caught, and the wokou's guide was gone.

古文：而朝鲜兵燹之余，千里萧条，贼掠无所得，故但积粟全罗，为久留计，而中国兵亦渐集。
现代文：朝鲜在兵乱之余千里萧条，敌人没什么可以掠夺的了，因此只在全罗积存军粮，做长期驻留的打算。这时中国部队也渐渐聚结过来。
English: North Korea was devastated after the war, and the enemy had nothing left to plunder, so they only stockpiled military rations in all of Korea, planning to stay there for a long time. At this time, Chinese troops also gradually gathered.

古文：九月朔，镐始抵王京。
现代文：九月初一，杨镐才到达王京。
English: On the first day of September, Yang Hui arrived in Wangjing.

古文：会副将解生等屡挫贼，朝鲜军亦数有功，倭乃退屯蔚山。
现代文：正好当时副将解生等屡次挫败倭寇，朝鲜部队也几次立了战功，倭寇于是退守蔚山。
English: It was just at that time that Vice Admiral Kaisei and others repeatedly defeated the wokou, and the Korean troops also made war achievements several times, so the wokou retreated to Ulsan.

古文：十二月，镐会总督邢玠、提督麻贵议进兵方略，分四万人为三协，副将高策将中军，李如梅将左，李芳春、解生将右，合攻蔚山。
现代文：十二月，杨镐召集总督邢、提督麻贵讨论进兵方略，决定把四万兵力分为三协，副将高策率领中军，李如梅领左边，李芳春、解生领右边，合攻蔚山。
English: In December, Yang Hui convened the governor-general Zou and the admiral Magui to discuss the strategy of entering the army, and decided to divide the 40,000 troops into three alliances, with the vice-commander Gao Ze leading the Chinese army, Li Rumei leading the left side, and Li Fangchun and Jie Sheng leading the right side, to jointly attack Ulsan.

古文：先以少兵尝贼，贼出战，大败，悉奔据岛山，结三栅城外以自固。
现代文：开始时用少量部队去尝试作战，倭寇出来交战，大败，全都到岛山去驻扎，在岛山城外修起三道栅栏来自我保护。
English: At the beginning, a small number of troops were used to try to fight, the wako came out to fight, and were defeated. They all went to Shimayama to camp, and built three fences outside Shimayama Town to protect themselves.

古文：镐官辽东时，与如梅深相得。
现代文：杨镐在辽东做官时与如梅结交得很深。
English: When Yang Lu was an official in Liaodong, he had a deep friendship with Rumei.

古文：及是，游击陈寅连破贼二栅，第三栅垂拔矣，镐以如梅未至，不欲寅功出其上，遽鸣金收军。
现代文：到这个时候游击陈寅接连打下了敌人的两道栅栏，第三道眼看就要打下来了，杨镐因为如梅还没到，不想让陈寅的功劳比如梅大，所以就鸣金收兵。
English: By this time, the guerrilla Chen Yin had successively knocked down two of the enemy's fences, and the third was about to be knocked down. Because Rumei had not yet arrived, Yang Wei did not want Chen Yin's credit to be as great as that of Rumei, so he called for reinforcements.

古文：贼乃闭城不出，坚守以待援。
现代文：倭寇从此闭城不出，坚守着等待援兵。
English: From then on, the wako did not leave the closed city, but waited for reinforcements.

古文：官兵四面围之，地泥淖，且时际穷冬，风雪裂肤，士无固志。
现代文：官兵从四面包围着，地面泥泞，并且时际严冬，风雪裂人肌肤，士兵缺乏坚强的斗志。
English: The officers and soldiers were surrounded on all sides, the ground was muddy, and it was winter, the wind and snow cracked people's skin, and the soldiers lacked a strong fighting spirit.

古文：贼日夜发炮，用药煮弹，遇者辄死，官兵攻围十日不能下。贼知官兵懈，诡乞降以缓之。
现代文：倭寇日夜放大炮，用毒药煮了弹子，被打中的必死无疑。官兵又围攻了十天打不下来，倭寇了解到官兵泄气了，就假称求降拖延时间。
English: Wako day and night amplified cannon, boiled the pellets with poison, and was undoubtedly killed. Officers and soldiers besieged for ten days and could not be beaten down. Wako learned that the officers and soldiers were discouraged, and pretended to ask for a reduction to delay the time.

古文：明年正月二日，行长救兵骤至。镐大惧，狼狈先奔，诸军继之。贼前袭击，死者无算。
现代文：第二年正月初二，行长的救兵突然来了，杨镐十分害怕，狼狈不堪地抢先逃了，各部队也跟着逃，贼兵追上前进行袭击，官兵死掉的人不计其数。
English: On the second day of the first month of the second year, the governor's rescuers suddenly came. Yang Xuan was very scared and fled in panic. All the troops also fled. The bandits caught up and attacked. There are countless dead officers and soldiers.

古文：副将吴惟忠、游击茅国器断后，贼乃还，辎重多丧失。
现代文：副将吴惟忠、游击茅国器断后，倭寇才返回去，但是官军的辎重大多丢失了。
English: The wokou returned only after the vice-commander Wu Weizhong and the guerrilla fighter Maogu were killed, but most of the official army's baggage was lost.

古文：是役也，谋之经年，倾海内全力，合朝鲜通国之众，委弃于一旦，举朝嗟恨。
现代文：这次战役谋划了几年时间，倾用国内的全部力量，联合了整个朝鲜的兵力，被杨镐一下子给败弃了，满朝文武为此叹息不已。
English: This battle was planned for several years, using all the strength of the country and uniting the forces of the entire DPRK. It was suddenly defeated by Yang Hui, and Manchong Wenwu sighed for it.

古文：镐既奔，挈贵奔趋庆州，惧贼乘袭，尽撤兵还王京，与总督玠诡以捷闻。
现代文：杨镐逃出以后，带着麻贵跑到庆州，害怕倭寇过来袭击，就把全部兵力撤回王京，与总督邢一道虚假地向朝廷告捷。
English: After Yang Pi escaped, he ran to Gyeongju with Mage Gui. Fearing that the wokou would come and attack, he withdrew all his forces to Wangjing and falsely claimed victory to the imperial court together with the governor Min.

古文：诸营上军籍，士卒死亡殆二万，镐大怒，屏不奏，止称百余人。
现代文：各营队报上人数，士兵死亡了差不多两万。杨镐大为恼火，把实际情况压下来不向朝廷汇报，只说死了一百多人。
English: Each battalion reported the number of people, and almost twenty thousand soldiers died. Yang Xuan was very annoyed and suppressed the actual situation and did not report to the imperial court, only saying that more than one hundred people died.

古文：镐遭父丧，诏夺情视事。
现代文：杨镐这时死了父亲，朝廷下诏命令他克制孝心继续办理国事。
English: At this time, Yang Xuan's father died, and the imperial court ordered him to restrain his filial piety and continue to handle state affairs.

古文：御史汪先岸尝劾其他罪，阁臣庇之，拟旨褒美，旨久不下。
现代文：御史汪先岸曾经弹劾过杨镐别的罪过，阁臣却庇护他，起草了一道圣旨对他加以称赞，这道圣旨长期未加公布。
English: Emperor Shi Wangxian had impeached Yang Xuan for other sins, but the cabinet minister sheltered him and drafted a sacred edict to praise him, which has not been published for a long time.

古文：赞画主事丁应泰闻镐败，诣镐咨后计。
现代文：赞画主事丁应泰听说杨镐打了败仗，去向杨镐询问今后的办法。
English: Ding Yingtai, the leader of the praise painting, heard that Yang Hui had lost the battle, and went to ask Yang Hui about the way forward.

古文：镐示以张位、沈一贯手书，并所拟未下旨，扬扬诩功伐。
现代文：杨镐把张位、沈一贯的亲笔信连同他们所起草的那道未经公布的圣旨给应泰看，并且扬扬得意地吹嘘自己的功绩。
English: Yang Hui showed Ying Tai Zhang and Shen's handwritten letters, along with the unpublished will they had drafted, and boasted of his achievements.

古文：应泰愤，抗疏尽列败状，言镐当罪者二十八、可羞者十，并劾位、一贯扶同作奸。
现代文：应泰感到气愤，就抗言上书讲了军队战败的情况，说杨镐应当问罪的有二十八条，可羞的有十点，并且弹劾张位、一贯同他共同作奸。
English: Ying Tai felt angry, so he wrote a letter of protest, in which he described the circumstances of the army's defeat, saying that Yang Mi should be charged with 28 articles and 10 points of shame, and that he had impeached Zhang Di and had always committed treason together with him.

古文：帝震怒，欲行法。首辅赵志皋营救，乃罢镐，令听勘，以天津巡抚万世德代之。
现代文：神宗皇帝极其恼火，想依法惩处他们，首辅赵志皋做了营救，神宗才罢免杨镐，让他听候核实，让天津巡抚万世德去接替了他。
English: Emperor Shenzong was extremely angry and wanted to punish them according to the law. His chief aide, Zhao Zhixuan, came to the rescue. It was only after Shenzong dismissed Yang Jie that he let him wait for verification and let Tianjin's governor Wan Shide succeed him.

古文：已，东征事竣，给事中杨应文叙镐功，诏许复用。
现代文：后来，东征朝鲜的事情完结了，给事中杨应文讲到杨镐的功绩，神宗下诏准予再任用他。
English: Later, when the Eastern Expedition to Korea was over, Yang Yingwen spoke about Yang Jie's achievements, and Shenzong issued an edict approving his reappointment.

古文：三十八年，起抚辽东。
现代文：三十八年，杨镐起复为辽东巡抚。
English: In 1938, Yang Xuan was reinstated as the Liaodong Governor.

古文：袭炒花于镇安，破之，御史田生金劾其开衅。
现代文：期间，他在镇安袭击了炒花部落，御史田生金弹劾他挑起争端。
English: During this period, he attacked the fried flower tribe in Zhen'an, and the governor Tian Sheng Jin impeached him for provoking a dispute.

古文：时辽左多事，镐力荐李如梅，请复用为大将，为给事中麻僖、御史杨州鹤所劾。
现代文：当时辽东战事很忙，杨镐极力推荐李如梅，请求重新任用他做大将，被给事中麻僖、御史杨鹤弹劾。
English: At that time, the war in Liaodong was very busy. Yang Xuan strongly recommended Li Rumei and requested that he be reappointed as a general. He was impeached by Zhongmao and Gu Shi Yang He.

古文：镐疏辨乞休，帝不问，镐竟引去。
现代文：杨镐上书辩解并请求离职，神宗不加过问，杨镐最后回乡去了。
English: Yang Hui wrote a letter of apology and requested to leave his post. Shen Zong did not ask any questions, and Yang Hui finally went back to his hometown.

古文：四十六年四月，我大清兵起，破抚顺，守将王命印死之。
现代文：四十六年四月，北方大清部队出征，打下抚顺，守将王命印死掉了。
English: In April of the 46th year, the Northern Great Qing troops went to war, defeated Fushun, and killed the commander Wang Mianyin.

古文：辽东巡抚李维翰趣总兵官张承允往援，与副总兵颇廷相等俱战殁，远近大震。
现代文：辽东巡抚李维翰催促总兵官张承荫前往增援，承荫与副总兵颇廷相等人都战死了，周围一带大为震惊。
English: Li Weihan, the inspector of Liaodong, urged the general officer Zhang Chengyin to go to the reinforcement. Both Chengyin and the deputy general officer Po Ting died in the battle, and the surrounding area was greatly shocked.

古文：廷议镐熟谙辽事，起兵部右侍郎往经略。
现代文：朝廷讨论认为杨镐熟悉辽东的军事，就起用他为兵部右侍郎，前去担任经略。
English: The imperial court discussed that Yang Jie was familiar with the military in Liaodong, so he was appointed as the right hand man of the military department and went to serve as a strategist.

古文：既至，申明纪律，征四方兵，图大举。
现代文：杨镐到任后，就申明纪律，征集四方部队，打算大举作战。
English: After Yang Hui took office, he declared discipline, called up troops from four directions, and intended to fight on a large scale.

古文：至七月，大清兵由鸦鹘关克清河，副将邹储贤战死。
现代文：到七月份，大清部队由鸦鹘关打下清河，副将邹储贤战死。
English: By July, the Great Qing forces had taken Qinghe from Guanzhongguan, and Vice Admiral Zou Zuoxian died in the battle.

古文：诏赐镐尚方剑，得斩总兵以下官，乃斩清河逃将陈大道、高炫徇军中。
现代文：神宗命令赐给杨镐尚方剑，允许他斩杀总兵以下的将官。杨镐就把清河逃将陈大道、高炫斩了，在军中巡回展示。
English: The Shenzong order gave Yang Xuan Shang Fang Jian, allowing him to behead generals below the general. Yang Xuan then beheaded the Qinghe general Chen Dao and Gao Xuan, and displayed them in the army.

古文：其冬，四方援兵大集，遂议进师。
现代文：这年冬天，各地援兵大批集结起来，杨镐就决定进兵。
English: This winter, reinforcements from all over the country gathered in large numbers, and Yang Mi decided to join the army.

古文：时蚩尤旗长竟天，彗见东方，星陨地震，识者以为败征。
现代文：当时蚩尤旗这颗彗星有整个天空那么长，彗星又出现在东方，天上发生陨星，地上发生地震，有见识的人认为这些是失败的征兆。
English: At that time, the Comet Youqi was as long as the entire sky, the comet appeared in the east, a meteorite occurred in the sky, an earthquake occurred on the ground, and people with insight believed that these were signs of failure.

古文：大学士方从哲、兵部尚书黄嘉善、兵科给事中赵兴邦等皆以师久饷匮，发红旗，日趣镐进兵。
现代文：大学士方从哲、兵部尚书黄嘉善、兵科给事中赵兴邦等人都认为部队驻久了粮饷缺乏，就传发红旗，天天催杨镐进兵。
English: The university scholars from Zhe, Huang Jiasen from the military department, and Zhao Xingbang from the military science department all believed that the troops had been stationed for a long time and were short of food and water, so they spread the red flag and urged Yang Jia to enter the army every day.

古文：明年正月，镐乃会总督汪可受、巡抚周永春、巡按陈王庭等定议，以二月十有一日誓师，二十一日出塞。
现代文：第二年正月，杨镐才召集总督汪可受、巡抚周永春、巡按陈王庭等决定，在二月十一日誓师，二十一日出塞开战。
English: It was not until the first month of the second year that Yang Xuan called together the governor Wang Kechu, the governor Zhou Yongchun, and the inspector Chen Wangting and decided to swear an oath on February 11 and go to war on the 21st.

古文：兵分四道：总兵官马林出开原攻北，杜松出抚顺攻西，李如柏从鸦鹘关出趋清河攻南，东南则以刘綎出宽奠，由凉马佃捣后，而以朝鲜兵助之。
现代文：兵分四路：总兵官马林出兵开原，攻打北面；杜松出兵抚顺，攻打西面，李如柏从鸦鹘关出兵直奔清河，攻打南面；东南面则让刘纟廷出兵宽甸，经凉马佃捣后，用朝鲜部队来帮助他。
English: The soldiers were divided into four groups: the commander-in-chief, Marin, sent troops to Kaibara to attack the north side; Jun Song sent troops to Fushun to attack the west side; Li Rubei sent troops from Guanzhongguan to go straight to Qinghe to attack the south side; in the southeast, Liu Bingting was allowed to send troops to help him with the Korean troops.

古文：号大兵四十七万，期三月二日会二道关并进。
现代文：号称大兵四十七万，约定三月二日在二道关集合后一起出发。
English: They called themselves 470,000 soldiers and agreed to set out together on March 2nd after assembling at Nidoseki.

古文：天大雪，兵不前，师期泄。
现代文：当时天下着大雪，部队不肯向前走，出兵的时间又泄漏出去了。
English: At that time, there was heavy snow, the troops refused to go forward, and the time for sending troops leaked out again.

古文：松欲立首功，先期渡浑河，进至二道关，伏发，军尽覆。
现代文：杜松想立个头功，先期渡过浑河，开到二道关来，伏兵大起，杜松全军覆没了。
English: Juniper wanted to make the first move, crossed the Hun River ahead of time, drove to the second pass, ambushed, and Juniper's entire army was wiped out.

古文：林统开原兵从三岔口出，闻松败，结营自固。
现代文：马林统领开原部队准备从三岔口出师，听说杜松战败，就停步不前，结营自保。
English: Marin led the Kailuan troops to prepare to march out from Samyeokou. When he heard that Juniper had been defeated, he stopped in his tracks and formed a camp to protect himself.

古文：大清兵乘高奋击，林不支，遂大败，遁去。
现代文：大清部队居高临下，奋勇出击，马林招架不住，大败而逃了。
English: The Qing Dynasty troops stood tall and bravely attacked, but Marin could not resist and fled in defeat.

古文：镐闻，急檄止如柏、綎两军，如柏遂不进。
现代文：杨镐听说后急忙传令想停下如柏、刘纟廷的两支部队，如柏就停止不前了。
English: After hearing the news, Yang Jie hurriedly sent an order to stop the two troops of Rubei and Liu Qingting, but Rubei could not stop.

古文：綎已深入三百里，至深河，大清兵击之而不动。
现代文：刘纟廷当时已经深入三百里，到了浑河，大清部队攻打他，但打不动他。
English: At that time, Liu Qingting had already penetrated three hundred miles and reached the Hunhe River. The Qing Dynasty troops attacked him, but could not beat him.

古文：已，乃张松旗帜，被其衣甲，绐綎。
现代文：后来就打着杜松的旗帜，穿着他的衣甲蒙骗刘纟廷。
English: Later, under the banner of juniper, wearing his coat of arms, he deceived Liu Bingding.

古文：既入营，营中大乱，綎力战死。
现代文：大清部队进入他的兵营以后，刘纟廷的营中大乱，刘纟廷奋力拼战而死。
English: After the Qing Dynasty troops entered his camp, there was a great disturbance in Liu Bingting's camp. Liu Bingting fought hard and died.

古文：惟如柏军获全。
现代文：只有如柏的军队得以完整保存。
English: Only Ru Bai's army has been preserved in its entirety.

古文：文武将吏前后死者三百一十余人，军士四万五千八百余人，亡失马驼甲仗无算。
现代文：文武将吏前后死去的有三百一十多人，士兵四万五千八百多人，丢掉的马匹、骆驼、兵器就多得无法计算了。
English: More than three hundred and ten generals and officers and more than forty-five thousand eight hundred soldiers died. The number of horses, camels and weapons that were lost is incalculable.

古文：败书闻，京师大震。御史杨鹤疏劾之，不报。
现代文：战败的报告递到朝廷后，京师大震，御史杨鹤上书弹劾他，神宗皇帝没有答复。
English: After the report of the defeat was submitted to the imperial court, Beijing was shaken by a great earthquake, and Emperor Shenzong did not reply.

古文：无何，开原、铁岭又相继失。
现代文：不多久，开原、铁岭又相继丢失了。
English: Not long after, Kaiyuan and Tieling were lost one after another.

古文：无何请告，竟卒于官。
现代文：言官纷纷上书弹劾杨镐，杨镐于是被逮进了皇家监狱，判为死刑。
English: The magistrates sent letters to impeach Yang Hui. Yang Hui was arrested and sent to the royal prison, where he was sentenced to death.

古文：熊廷弼，字飞百，江夏人。
现代文：崇祯二年，杨镐伏法。熊廷弼，字飞百，江夏人。
English: In the second year of Chongzheng, Yang Xifu Fa. Xiong Tingluo, the word flying hundred, Jiangxia people.

古文：万历二十五年举乡试第一。明年成进士，授保定推官，擢御史。
现代文：万历二十五年考中乡试第一名，第二年成进士，初授官为保定推官，继而升为御史。
English: In the 25th year of the Wanli era, he won the first place in the middle-township examination, and became a scholar in the second year. He was first awarded the post of Baoding magistrate, and then he was promoted to imperial historian.

古文：三十六年，巡按辽东。
现代文：三十六年外出巡按辽东。
English: Thirty-six years of outbound patrols in Liaodong.

古文：巡抚赵楫与总兵官李成梁弃宽奠新疆八百里，徙编民六万家于内地。
现代文：巡抚赵楫与总兵官李成梁放弃宽甸地方的八百里领土，把当地六万老百姓迁移到内地来安家。
English: The governor Zhao Wei and the commander-in-chief Li Chengliang abandoned the 800-mile territory of the Kuandian region and moved 60,000 local people to the mainland to settle down.

古文：已，论功受赏，给事中宋一韩论之。
现代文：过后，评定功绩竟然还要受到奖赏，给事中宋一韩上书论列了他们的罪。
English: Later, they were even rewarded for their appraised merits, and their crimes were listed in Song I Han's book on the matter.

古文：下廷弼覆勘，具得弃地驱民状，劾两人罪，及先任按臣何尔健、康丕扬党庇。
现代文：此事被下发给廷弼重新核查，全部查清了他们放弃领土、驱民迁移的事，廷弼上书弹劾他们两个的罪状，并说到前任巡按大臣何尔健、康丕扬勾结、包庇他们。
English: The matter was sent to the imperial court for re-verification, and the matter of them abandoning the territory and displacing the people was all clarified. The imperial court issued a letter to impeach the two of them, and said that the former Minister of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, Heerjian and Kanghyang, had colluded and covered up for them.

古文：疏竟不下。
现代文：但他的奏章竟未被下发给大臣讨论。
English: However, his report was not sent to the minister for discussion.

古文：时有诏兴屯，廷弼言辽多旷土，岁于额军八万中以三分屯种，可得粟百三十万石。
现代文：当时诏书要求兴办屯田，廷弼说辽地多有闲地，每年在八万兵额中用三分人力来屯田、耕种，就可以收获粟米一百三十万石。
English: At that time, the imperial edict called for the establishment of military garrisons. Tingyu said that there was plenty of idle land in Liaodong, and that if one-third of the 80,000 soldiers were to be used for military garrisons and farming every year, it would be possible to harvest 1.3 million koku of corn.

古文：帝优诏褒美，命推行于诸边。边将好捣巢，辄生衅端。
现代文：神宗皇帝特地颁布诏书表示赞成，命令在边境各处推行。当时边防将领喜欢搅扰敌营，动辄引发战斗。
English: Emperor Shenzong specially issued an edict to express his approval and ordered it to be implemented everywhere along the border. At that time, the border guards liked to disturb the enemy camp and often triggered battles.

古文：廷弼言防边以守为上，缮垣建堡，有十五利，奏行之。
现代文：廷弼说防护边疆以自守为上策，修造城堡，有十五种好处，报告皇帝后就实行起来。
English: Tingyu said that the best way to protect the frontier was to defend oneself, and that there were fifteen benefits to building a castle, which would be implemented after reporting to the emperor.

古文：岁大旱，廷弼行部金州，祷城隍神，约七日雨，不雨毁其庙。
现代文：那年大旱，廷弼巡行至于金州，就在城隍庙神像祈祷，约七日里下场雨，如若不下雨就拆毁城隍庙。
English: That year, there was a severe drought, and as far as Jinzhou was concerned, the imperial eunuchs marched in procession and prayed before the statues of gods in the City God Temple. It rained for about seven days, and if it didn't rain, the City God Temple would be demolished.

古文：及至广宁，逾三日，大书白牌，封剑，使使往斩之。未至，风雷大作，雨如注，辽人以为神。
现代文：等巡行到广宁，已过了三天，廷弼就用大字写了白牌，封了剑，派使节前去斩杀城隍神，使节还没到，就见风雷大作，暴雨如注。辽地的人以为他为神明。
English: When the procession reached Guangning, three days had already passed. Ting Tong wrote a white card with big characters, sealed the sword, and sent an envoy to kill the god of the city. Before the envoy arrived, he saw the wind and thunder, and the rainstorm. People in Liaoning thought he was a god.

古文：在辽数年，杜馈遗，核军实，按劾将吏，不事姑息，风纪大振。
现代文：他在辽地几年，杜绝送礼，核查军情，审查大将小吏，绝不姑息养奸，辽地的风尚、纲纪为之大振。
English: During his several years in Liaoning Province, he put an end to gift-giving, checked the military situation, examined the general and minor officials, and absolutely did not tolerate the breeding of traitors. Liaoning Province's customs and discipline were greatly improved.

古文：督学南畿，严明有声。
现代文：廷弼在南畿为督学，纪律严明，很有声望。
English: Tingluo is a supervisor in Nangui, with strict discipline and a good reputation.

古文：以杖死诸生事，与巡按御史荆养乔相讦奏。
现代文：后来因为棒打生员致死一事，与巡按御史荆养智相互在奏章中攻击。
English: Later, because of the incident of beating a lifeguard to death, he and the sheriff Jing Yazhi attacked each other in a musical composition.

古文：养乔投劾去，廷弼亦听勘归。
现代文：养智递上奏章弃职而去，廷弼也因听候核查回家乡去了。
English: Yao Zhizhi resigned from his post after submitting the report, and Ting Yao also went back to his hometown to wait for the verification.

古文：四十七年，杨镐既丧师，廷议以廷弼熟边事，起大理寺丞兼河南道御史，宣慰辽东。
现代文：四十七年，杨镐战败丧师以后，朝廷因为廷弼熟悉边防事务，起用他为大理寺丞兼河南道御史，前往安抚河东地带。
English: In 1947, after Yang Hui lost the war and lost his division, the imperial court appointed him as the governor of Dali Temple and the governor of Henan Province to pacify the eastern part of the river because he was familiar with border defense affairs.

古文：旋擢兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，代镐经略。
现代文：不久提升为兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，代杨镐为经略。
English: He was soon promoted to Hyobushu no Ujitsurairo and Ujitsugoto no Mishi, and was replaced by Yang Mi as Keiroku.

古文：未出京，开原失，廷弼上言： 辽左，京师肩背；河东，辽镇腹心；开原又河东根本。
现代文：他还没有离开京城，开原就失守了，廷弼上书说： 辽左，是京城的肩背，河东，是辽镇的心腹，开原又是河东的根本。
English: Before he left Beijing, Kaiyuan was lost. The imperial edict said: Liao Zuo is the shoulder of Beijing, Hedong is the heart of Liao Town, and Kaiyuan is the root of Hedong.

古文：欲保辽东则开原必不可弃。
现代文：想保住辽东的话，开原一定不能放弃。
English: If Liaodong is to be preserved, Kaiyuan must not be given up.

古文：敌未破开原时，北关、朝鲜犹足为腹背患。今已破开原，北关不敢不服，遣一介使，朝鲜不敢不从。
现代文：敌军没有打下开原的时候，北关、朝鲜还足以给他们构成腹背之患，现在开原被打下，北关不敢不向敌人屈服，敌方派一个使臣去，朝鲜不敢不附从。
English: When the enemy army had not defeated Kaigen, the attack from Beiguan and Korea was still enough to cause them problems. Now that Kaigen has been defeated, Beiguan does not dare not to surrender to the enemy, the enemy sends an envoy, and Korea does not dare not to follow.

古文：既无腹背忧，必合东西之势以交攻，然则辽、沈何可守也？
现代文：敌人没有腹背之忧，一定会联合东西两边的兵力来一起攻打我们，这样辽、沈怎么守得住呢？
English: The enemy is not worried about its back, and will certainly combine the forces of both sides to attack us together. How can Liao and Shen defend themselves in this way?

古文：乞速遣将士，备刍粮，修器械，毋窘臣用，毋缓臣期，毋中格以沮臣气，毋旁挠以掣臣肘，毋独遗臣以艰危，以致误臣、误辽，兼误国也。 
现代文：我请求朝廷赶紧派遣将士，准备粮草，修造器械，不要节制我的费用，不要延误我的时限，不要用一般的规矩来使我沮丧，不要从旁阻挠来掣我的手肘，不要把艰危只给了我一个，大家不关于心，以至于误了我、误了辽，并且误了我朝我国家。 
English: I ask the imperial court to quickly dispatch soldiers, prepare grain and grass, and repair equipment, do not restrain my expenses, do not delay my time limit, do not use general rules to frustrate me, do not obstruct from the side to bite my elbow, do not give me only one hardship, everyone is not concerned about the heart, so that I miss, I miss Liao, and I miss my country.

古文：疏入，悉报允，且赐尚方剑重其权。
现代文：奏章递上去以后，全部得到允准，神宗并赐给尚方宝剑以加大他的权力。
English: After the report was submitted, everything was approved, and the gods agreed and gave Shangfang the sword to increase his power.

古文：甫出关，铁岭复失，沈阳及诸城堡军民一时尽窜，辽阳汹汹。
现代文：廷弼刚刚走出山海关，铁岭又失守了，沈阳和其他城堡的军民一时间全都逃窜了，辽阳一带人心不安。
English: Tingtao just came out of Shanhaiguan, Tieling was lost again, the military and civilians in Shenyang and other castles all fled at once, and the people around Liaoyang were uneasy.

古文：廷弼兼程进，遇逃者，谕令归。
现代文：廷弼兼程向前，遇到逃出来的，就劝说他们回去。
English: Ting Xuan also went forward, and when he encountered those who had escaped, he persuaded them to go back.

古文：斩逃将刘遇节、王捷、王文鼎，以祭死节士。
现代文：把逃将刘遇节、王捷、王文鼎斩了头来祭奠死节的将士。
English: Liu Yu Jie, Wang Jie, and Wang Wenting, the escapees, cut off their heads to pay tribute to the dead soldiers.

古文：诛贪将陈伦，劾罢总兵官李如桢，以李怀信代。
现代文：把贪污的将领陈伦给宰了，并上书弹劾、罢免了总兵官李如桢，用李怀信替换了他。
English: He slaughtered the corrupt general Chen Lun, impeached and dismissed the chief military officer Li Ruxuan, and replaced him with Li Huaxin.

古文：督军士造战车，治火器，浚濠缮城，为守御计。
现代文：他督促士兵打造战车，置办火器，开挖战濠，修筑城墙，做御敌守城的准备。
English: He urged the soldiers to build chariots, purchase firearms, dig trenches, build walls, and prepare to defend the city against the enemy.

古文：令严法行，数月守备大固。
现代文：他的命令坚决，有法必行，几个月下来，守备大为牢固了。
English: His orders were resolute, there was a law and it had to be carried out, and after a few months the defences were much more solid.

古文：乃上方略，请集兵十八万，分布叆阳、清河、抚顺、柴河、三岔儿、镇江诸要口，首尾相应，小警自为堵御，大敌互为应援。
现代文：接着他上书皇帝进呈方略，请召集军队十八万人分布在云阳、清河、抚顺、柴河、三岔儿、镇江等战略要地，首尾呼应，小的战事各自拒敌防守，大敌来时则互相接应、援助。
English: Next, he sent a letter to the emperor to present a strategy, asking him to call up 180,000 troops distributed in strategic places such as Yunyang, Qinghe, Fushun, Chaihe, Samye, and Zhenjiang, and to respond to each other. In small battles, they would refuse to defend the enemy, and when the big enemy came, they would receive and assist each other.

古文：更挑精悍者为游徼，乘间掠零骑，扰耕牧，更番迭出，使敌疲于奔命，然后相机进剿。
现代文：另外再挑选精兵悍将组织游击，乘机出动，攻掠敌人的零散兵马，扰乱他们的耕种和放牧，轮番出击，使敌人疲于奔命，然后瞅准机会进兵剿敌。
English: In addition, the elite soldiers and warriors will be selected to organize guerrilla attacks, take the opportunity to go out, attack and plunder the enemy's scattered soldiers and horses, disrupt their farming and grazing, take turns to attack, make the enemy exhausted, and then seize the opportunity to enter the army and fight the enemy.

古文：疏入，帝从之。
现代文：奏章递上后，神宗听从了他的建议。
English: After the score was submitted, Shenzong listened to his suggestion.

古文：廷弼之初抵辽也，令佥事韩原善往抚沈阳，惮不肯行。
现代文：廷弼刚到辽地时，命令佥事韩原善前往安抚沈阳，韩原善害怕，不肯去。
English: When Ting Yao arrived in Liaocheng, he ordered Han Yuan Shan to go to appease Shenyang. Han Yuan Shan was afraid and refused to go.

古文：继命佥事阎鸣泰，至虎皮驿恸哭而返。
现代文：接着派佥事阎鸣泰去，阎鸣泰走到虎皮驿，大哭而返。
English: Next, he sent Yan Ming Tai to investigate the matter. Yan Ming Tai went to the tiger's hideout and came back crying.

古文：廷弼乃躬自巡历，自虎皮驿抵沈阳，复乘雪夜赴抚顺。
现代文：廷弼于是亲往巡视，从虎皮驿抵达沈阳，又冒雪夜往抚顺。
English: So Ting Tao personally went on a tour, arrived in Shenyang from Hupi Tao, and went to Fushun in the snow at night.

古文：总兵贺世贤以近敌沮之，廷弼曰： 冰雪满地，敌不料我来。 
现代文：总兵贺世贤用距离敌人太近来阻挠他，廷弼说： 冰雪满地，敌人想不到我会来的。 
English: General He Shixian used the fact that he was too close to the enemy to thwart him. Ting Yao said, "The ground is covered with ice and snow. The enemy didn't expect me to come.

古文：鼓吹入。
现代文：于是打鼓奏乐进入抚顺城。
English: As a result, drumming and music entered Fushun.

古文：时兵燹后，数百里无人迹，廷弼祭诸死事者而哭之。
现代文：当时正是兵祸以后，几百里地不见人影，廷弼祭祀了那些为国事死亡的将士，哭了一场。
English: At that time, just after the military disaster, no one was to be seen for hundreds of miles. Tingtao offered sacrifices to the soldiers who died for the national cause, and wept.

古文：遂耀兵奉集，相度形势而还，所至招流移，缮守具，分置士马，由是人心复固。
现代文：接着在奉集显示了一番军威，察看了当地的地理形势，然后返回。一路上所到之处都招集流民，修整防守战具，分派兵马驻扎，因此当地军民的心重新稳定下来了。
English: He then displayed military prowess in Fengji, inspected the local geographical situation, and then returned. Everywhere he went, he called up displaced people, repaired defensive war equipment, and stationed soldiers and horses, so the hearts of local soldiers and civilians were re-stabilized.

古文：廷弼身长七尺，有胆知兵，善左右射。
现代文：廷弼身高七尺，有胆量，晓军事，擅长左右开弓放箭。
English: He is seven feet tall, courageous, knows military affairs, and is good at opening the bow and shooting arrows.

古文：自按辽即持守边议，至是主守御益坚。
现代文：自前番为辽地巡按时就主张防守，到这时更加坚决地主张拒敌守城。
English: Since the previous time, the Liao patrol advocated defense on time, and at this time, it advocated more resolutely to refuse the enemy to defend the city.

古文：然性刚负气，好谩骂，不为人下，物情以故不甚附。
现代文：但是他脾气火，禀性刚直，喜欢骂人，不甘谦恭下人，因而舆论对他不太推许。
English: But he is hot-tempered, stubborn and upright, likes to curse people, and is not willing to be humble, so the public opinion is not very favorable to him.

古文：明年五月，我大清兵略地花岭。
现代文：第二年五月，我大清兵占领了地花岭。
English: In May of the following year, the soldiers of the Great Qing Army occupied Jihua-ling.

古文：六月，略王大人屯。
现代文：六月，打下了王大人屯。
English: In June, Wangdaduotun was defeated.

古文：八月，略蒲河。
现代文：八月进攻蒲河。
English: In August, they attacked Puhe.

古文：将士失亡七百余人，诸将世贤等亦有斩获功。
现代文：明朝将士散亡七百多人，不过世贤等将领也有斩敌俘敌的功劳。
English: More than seven hundred soldiers of the Ming Dynasty perished, but the sages and other generals also had the merit of defeating and capturing the enemy.

古文：而给事中姚宗文腾谤于朝，廷弼遂不安其位。
现代文：然而给事中姚宗文却在朝廷里腾舌诽谤，廷弼因此无法再安心职守了。
English: However, Yao Zongwen, who was at the center of the affair, slandered the imperial court, and Tingtao could no longer perform his duties with peace of mind.

古文：宗文者，故户科给事中，丁忧归。
现代文：宗文这个人原先任户科给事，因守丧离职回乡。
English: Zongwen, who was originally in charge of the household science department, left the post to return to his hometown due to the funeral.

古文：还朝，欲补官，而吏部题请诸疏率数年不下，宗文患之。
现代文：回朝以后想入补做官，而吏部的几次申请递给皇上以后都被放置几年，不予批准，宗文引以为忧。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he wanted to be promoted to an official post, but after several applications from the personnel department were submitted to the emperor, they were left for several years without approval, which worried the patriarch.

古文：假招徕西部名，属当事荐己。疏屡上，不得命。
现代文：又假借招来西部人民的名义，托执政的大臣推荐自己，荐章上了几次，仍得不到任用。
English: He also falsely borrowed the name of the people in the western part of the country and asked the minister in power to recommend him. He was recommended several times, but still could not be appointed.

古文：宗文计穷，致书廷弼，令代请。
现代文：宗文没法可想，就写信给廷弼，让他为自己请求一官。
English: Unable to think of anything else, Zongwen wrote to Dingyao, asking him to request a position for himself.

古文：廷弼不从，宗文由是怨。
现代文：廷弼没有随从他，宗文因此怨恨廷弼。
English: Ding Xi did not follow him, so Zongwen held a grudge against Ding Xi.

古文：后夤缘复吏科，阅视辽东士马，与廷弼议多不合。
现代文：后来他一路巴结，才复职于吏科，到辽东来检阅兵马，与廷弼议事，大多意见不一。
English: Later, he backed down all the way, only to be reinstated in the Civil Service, went to Liaodong to review the soldiers and horses, and held discussions with the imperial court, most of which were not in agreement.

古文：辽东人刘国缙先为御史，坐大计谪官。
现代文：辽东人刘国缙原先做过御史，在三年一次的考绩中受到贬职处分。
English: Liu Guozhen, a native of East Liaoning Province, had previously served as imperial historian, and was punished with demotion in the triennial performance evaluation.

古文：辽事起，廷议用辽人，遂以兵部主事赞画军务。
现代文：辽地战事起来后，朝廷决定用辽人，于是他才做了兵部主事，参与军务。
English: After the war broke out in Liao, the imperial court decided to use Liao people, so he became the head of the military department and participated in military affairs.

古文：国缙主募辽人为兵，所募万七千余人，逃亡过半。
现代文：国缙主张召募辽人为兵，按他的办法召募了一万七千多人，后来有一半以上逃跑了。
English: Guozhen advocated the recruitment of Liao people as soldiers, and more than 17,000 people were recruited according to his method. Later, more than half of them fled.

古文：廷弼闻于朝，国缙亦怨。
现代文：廷弼把此事报给朝廷知道，国缙也对廷弼产生了怨恨。
English: When Tingyao reported the matter to the imperial court, the state council also felt resentment towards Tingyao.

古文：廷弼为御史时，与国缙、宗文同在言路，意气相得，并以排东林、攻道学为事。
现代文：过去廷弼当御史的时候，与国缙、宗文一起负责进言，相互之间，意气相得，共同以排斥东林、攻击道学为职事。
English: In the past, when Ting Diao was the imperial historian, he was in charge of giving advice together with Guo Jiao and Zongwen. They shared the same spirit and worked together to exclude Donglin and attack Taoism.

古文：国缙辈以故意望廷弼，廷弼不能如前，益相失。
现代文：国缙等对廷弼寄以旧望，廷弼却不能和从前一样了，这样他们之间更两相失望了。
English: The State Council and others have pinned their hopes on Tingtao, but Tingtao cannot be the same as before, so they are even more disappointed with each other.

古文：宗文故出国缙门下，两人益相比，而倾廷弼。
现代文：宗文本出自国缙门下，他们两个从此更加勾结在一起，倾轧廷弼。
English: The text of the imperial edict came from the gate of the imperial court, and the two of them colluded more and more from then on, tearing down the imperial edict.

古文：及宗文归，疏陈辽土日蹙，诋廷弼废群策而雄独智，且曰： 军马不训练，将领不部署，人心不亲附，刑威有时穷，工作无时止。 
现代文：等到宗文回朝以后，上书陈说辽地疆土日见减少，诋毁廷弼废弃大家的计谋，夸张自己的错误，并且说： 那里的军马也不训练，将领未加部署，人心既不亲附，刑罚有时并无作用，只是军民的劳务没有停止的时候。 
English: After Zongwen returned to the imperial court, he wrote a letter to Chen saying that the territory of the Liao Dynasty had been reduced, slandering the imperial court for abandoning everyone's strategy, exaggerating his own mistakes, and saying: The horses there were not trained, the generals were not deployed, the hearts of the people were not attached, and the punishment sometimes had no effect, but only when the labor of the military and the people did not stop.

古文：复鼓其同类攻击，欲必去之。
现代文：又鼓动他那一伙人起来攻击，想非使廷弼去职不可。
English: He also incited his group to attack, thinking that it was necessary to remove Tingyao from his post.

古文：御史顾慥首劾廷弼出关逾年，漫无定画；蒲河失守，匿不上闻；荷戈之士徒供挑浚，尚方之剑逞志作威。
现代文：御史顾忄造首先起来，弹劾廷弼出关一年有余，诸事没有规划；蒲河失守，隐瞒消息不上报；带着兵器的战士不用于作战，只用来挖沟，尚方宝剑在手不求有补国事，只是供自己作威作福。
English: Gu Shizhu Gu Xuzhong was the first to rise. It had been more than a year since the impeachment of Emperor Tingtao, and there was no plan for everything. The Pu River was lost, and the news was concealed and not reported. The soldiers with weapons were not used for combat, but only for digging ditches. Shangfang Bao Jian did not seek to supplement national affairs in his hands, but only for his own power and good fortune.

古文：当是时，光宗崩，熹宗初立，朝端方多事，而封疆议起。御史冯三元劾廷弼无谋者八、欺君者三，谓不罢，辽必不保。
现代文：这个时候，光宗去世，熹宗刚刚登基，朝廷里事情正多，而对边疆大臣的议论也开始了，御史冯三元弹劾廷弼八件没有谋略的表现，三件欺瞒皇上的事，说不把他罢免，辽地终究无法保有。
English: At this time, Emperor Guangzong had just died, Emperor Jianzong had just ascended to the throne, many things were going on in the imperial court, and the discussion about the Minister of the Frontier had begun. Emperor Shifeng had impeached the Minister of the Frontier for eight cases of not having a strategy, and three cases of deceiving the emperor, saying that if he was not dismissed, Liao Di could not be preserved after all.

古文：诏下廷议。廷弼愤，抗疏极辨，且求罢。
现代文：熹宗把冯三元的奏章发给朝臣议论，廷弼恼火了，上书为自己竭力辩解，并且请求罢官回乡。
English: Emperor Taizong sent Feng Sanyuan's music chapter to the courtier for discussion. The courtier was annoyed and wrote a letter in which he tried to justify himself and asked to be dismissed and return to his hometown.

古文：而御史张修德复劾其破坏辽阳。
现代文：御史张修德又弹劾他破坏辽阳。
English: Emperor Zhang Xiude also impeached him for destroying Liaoyang.

古文：廷弼益愤，再疏自明，云 辽已转危为安，臣且之生致死。 
现代文：廷弼更加愤恨，又一次上书自白，说 辽地现已转危为安，为臣却要由生向死了 。
English: Tingyao was even more indignant, and once again confessed in a letter, saying that Liaodong had now turned the corner and was safe, but as a vassal, he had to go from life to death.

古文：遂缴还尚方剑，力求罢斥。
现代文：于是缴回尚方宝剑，竭力请将自己免职罢官。
English: As a result, he returned the sword to Shangfang and tried his best to have himself removed from office.

古文：给事中魏应嘉复劾之。朝议允廷弼去，以袁应泰代。
现代文：给事中魏应嘉又弹劾了他，朝廷终于决定准许廷弼去职，用袁应泰接替了他。
English: In the process, Wei Yingjia impeached him again, and the imperial court finally decided to allow Tingtao to resign and replaced him with Yuan Yingtao.

古文：疆场事，当听疆场吏自为之，何用拾帖括语，徒乱人意，一不从，辄怫然怒哉！ 
现代文：廷弼于是上书请求派人来调查。三元、应嘉、修德等又连章极论廷弼的过失，廷弼就请派他三个来核实，熹宗听从了他的意见。
English: Then, Emperor Taizong sent a letter requesting that someone be sent to investigate. Sanyuan, Yingjia, Shude, and others went on and on about Emperor Taizong's fault. Emperor Taizong asked them to send him three people to verify, and Emperor Taizong listened to his opinion.

古文：及童蒙还奏，备陈廷弼功状，末言： 臣入辽时，士民垂泣而道，谓数十万生灵皆廷弼一人所留，其罪何可轻议？
现代文：御史吴应奇、给事中杨涟等坚决认为不可以，于是改派兵科给事中朱童蒙前去。等童蒙回来上奏，全面陈述了廷弼的功绩，最后说： 我进入辽地的时候，士民对他垂泪称道，说几十万生灵都因为廷弼一人才得以保存，他的罪怎么能轻易确定呢？
English: When Tongmeng returned, he gave a full account of Tingyao's exploits, and finally said: "When I entered Liaodong, the scholars praised him with tears, saying that hundreds of thousands of souls were saved because of Tingyao alone. How can his crime be easily determined?"

古文：独是廷弼受知最深，蒲河之役，敌攻沈阳，策马趋救，何其壮也？及见官兵驽弱，遽尔乞骸以归，将置君恩何地？
现代文：只是廷弼最为陛下所信任，蒲河战役中敌人进攻沈阳，他驱马前往救援，胆量是何等壮大；等看到官兵懦弱，就突然告老还乡去了，这样把皇上对他的大恩置于何处了呢？
English: However, it was Tingyao who was most trusted by His Majesty. During the Battle of Puhe, the enemy attacked Shenyang. He drove his horse to the rescue. How great was his courage? When he saw that the officers and soldiers were cowardly, he suddenly announced that he was too old and returned to his hometown. So where did he place the emperor's great favor to him?

古文：廷弼功在存辽，微劳虽有可纪；罪在负君，大义实无所逃。
现代文：廷弼功在存辽，些微的成绩虽有可称；但罪在辜负了皇上，根据君臣大义而论，他是无法逃脱罪责的。
English: The merits of the imperial court are still far and wide, and although there are some small achievements, it is a crime to fail the emperor. According to the great justice of monarchs and ministers, he cannot escape the guilt.

古文：此则罪浮于功者矣。 帝以廷弼力保危城，仍议起用。
现代文：这就是罪浮于功！ 熹宗因为廷弼力保危城，仍打算以后起用他。
English: This is a case of crime outweighing merit! Shizong still intends to employ him in the future because of his efforts to keep the city safe.

古文：天启元年，沈阳破，应泰死，廷臣复思廷弼。
现代文：天启元年，沈阳陷落，应泰死去，朝廷里大臣们又想起了廷弼。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, Shenyang fell, Ying Tai died, and the ministers in the imperial court remembered Ting Yao.

古文：给事中郭巩力诋之，并及阁臣刘一燝。
现代文：给事中郭巩尽力诋毁他，并连及阁臣刘一火景。
English: Guo Gong tried his best to discredit him, and even his cabinet minister Liu Yixing.

古文：及辽阳破，河西军民尽奔，自塔山至闾阳二百馀里，烟火断绝，京师大震。
现代文：等到辽阳失守，河西军民全都奔逃而去，自塔山到闾阳方圆二百余里，荒无人烟，京城为之大为震惊。
English: When Liaoyang was lost, all the soldiers and civilians in Hexi fled. From Tashan to Shenyang, there were more than two hundred miles of uninhabited wasteland. The capital was greatly shocked.

古文：一燝曰： 使廷弼在辽，当不至此。 
现代文：一火景说： 假使廷弼在辽，想来不会弄成这样。 
English: A fire scene said: If Tingtao was in Liao, it would not have turned out like this.

古文：御史江秉谦追言廷弼保守危辽功，兼以排挤劳臣为巩罪。
现代文：御史江秉谦上书追叙廷弼以前防守辽地的功劳，并且把排挤有功之臣说成郭巩的罪过。
English: Mishi Jiang Bingqian wrote a letter to praise the merits of the defense of Liaoning before the imperial edict, and said that the expulsion of meritorious vassals was Guo Gong's fault.

古文：帝乃治前劾廷弼者，贬三元、修德、应嘉、巩三秩，除宗文名。
现代文：熹宗于是对过去弹劾廷弼的人加以治罪，三元、修德、应嘉、郭巩各贬三级，除掉了宗文的官籍。
English: Therefore, the Jianzong punished those who had impeached Tingyu in the past, and downgraded Sanyuan, Shude, Yingjia, and Guo Gong to the third level, and removed the official registration of the Jianzong.

古文：御史刘廷宣救之，亦被斥。
现代文：御史刘廷宣论救，也被罢免。
English: Liu Ting, the chief secretary of the Communist Party of China, was removed from his post.

古文：乃复诏起廷弼于家，而擢王化贞为巡抚。
现代文：于是又下达诏书从家里起用廷弼，并且提拔王化贞为巡抚。
English: As a result, an imperial decree was issued to use the imperial scepter from home, and Wang Huazhen was promoted to governor.

古文：化贞，诸城人。万历四十一年进士。
现代文：化贞是诸城人，万历四十一年进士。
English: Hua Zhen is from Zhucheng and has been a member of the Communist Party of China for 41 years.

古文：由户部主事历右参议，分守广宁。
现代文：由户部主事转右参议，分兵驻守在广宁。
English: The head of the household department became a right-wing councillor, and a detachment of soldiers was stationed in Guangning.

古文：蒙古炒花诸部长乘机窥塞下，化贞抚之，皆不敢动。
现代文：蒙古炒花等部落酋长乘机想要南侵，化贞安抚他们，他们就不敢再动了。
English: Tribal chiefs such as the Mongolian Saika took advantage of the opportunity to invade the south, pacified them, and they did not dare to move again.

古文：朱童蒙勘事还，极言化贞得西人心，勿轻调，隳抚事。
现代文：朱童蒙到东北调查回来后，极力说化贞得西部人心，不要轻易调动他，以免坏了安抚蒙古的事。
English: After Zhu Tong came back from the investigation in the Northeast, he insisted that Huazhen had won the hearts of the people in the West, and that he should not be easily mobilized, so as not to ruin the cause of appeasing Mongolia.

古文：化贞亦言辽事将坏，惟发帑金百万，亟款西人，则敌顾忌不敢深入。
现代文：化贞也说辽地战事终将失败，只有发放百万帑金，极力款待蒙古人，那么敌人就有所顾忌，不敢深入了。
English: Hua Zhen also said that the war in Liao Di will eventually fail. Only by issuing millions of gold coins and trying to entertain the Mongolians, then the enemy will have scruples and will not dare to go deeper.

古文：会辽、沈相继亡，廷议将起廷弼，御史方震孺请加化贞秩，便宜从事，令与薛国用同守河西。
现代文：恰好辽阳、沈阳相继失守，朝廷决定起用廷弼，御史方震孺请给化贞晋级，让他便宜行事，与薛国用一同驻守河西。
English: Just as Liaoyang and Shenyang lost their defense successively, the imperial court decided to use the imperial eunuch, and the imperial historian asked the imperial eunuch to promote Hua Zhen, let him act cheaply, and stationed in Hexi together with Xue Guoying.

古文：乃进化贞右佥都御史，巡抚广宁。
现代文：于是提升化贞为右佥都御史，巡抚广宁。
English: As a result, Kazuchika was promoted to the post of Utsunomiya governor, and the governor of Hironin.

古文：广宁城在山隈，登山可俯瞰城内，恃三岔河为阻，而三岔之黄泥洼又水浅可涉。
现代文：广宁城坐落在弯曲的山头上，登上山可以俯瞰城内，倚仗三岔河为险阻，而三岔河的黄泥洼又水浅可涉。
English: Guangning City is located on a curved hilltop. You can overlook the city from the top of the mountain. The Sanlu River is a dangerous obstacle, and the yellow muddy ditch of the Sanlu River is shallow.

古文：广宁止孱卒千，化贞招集散亡，复得万余人，激厉士民，联络西部，人心稍定。
现代文：广宁只有一千名弱卒，化贞招集散兵流民，得到万余人。他激励士民的斗志，联络西部的蒙古，当地人心才稍稍安定下来。
English: There were only a thousand weak soldiers in Guangning, but He Zhen called up the scattered soldiers and exiles and got more than ten thousand people. He encouraged the morale of the soldiers and exiles, contacted Mongolia in the west, and the local people's hearts settled down a little.

古文：化贞请鼓舞诸人，优以爵禄，俾自奋于功名，诏谕朝鲜，褒以忠义，勉之同仇。
现代文：辽阳刚失守时，国内远近震惊，都以为河西一定没法保住了。化贞率领一支弱军，把守孤城，斗志不减，当时他的声望真是赫然有名。朝廷也认为可以依靠他的才能，便把河西的战事全部交由他来办了。到六月份，廷弼入朝，首先请停止刚才言官的贬谪，熹宗不同意。
English: When Liaoyang had just lost its defense, the country was shocked and thought that Hexi could not be saved. Haizhen led a weak army to defend the lonely city, and his fighting spirit did not diminish. At that time, his reputation was really famous. The imperial court also believed that he could rely on his talent, and he was entrusted with all the military affairs of Hexi. By June, the imperial court had entered the country. First of all, please stop disparaging the officials who had just spoken. Xizong did not agree.

古文：帝亦从之。至六月，廷弼入朝，首请免言官贬谪，帝不可。乃建三方布置策：广宁用马步列垒河上，以形势格之，缀敌全力；天津、登、莱各置舟师，乘虚入南卫，动摇其人心，敌必内顾，而辽阳可复。
现代文：又提出分三方布置的策略：广宁用马步兵在河上设立壁垒，凭山川形势打击敌人，牵制敌人的全部兵力；天津、登、莱各港口建置水军船队，乘虚打入敌人南方的驻地，动摇他们的军心，这样敌人势必有内顾之忧，辽阳就可以收复了。
English: He also proposed a three-pronged deployment strategy: Guangning would use horse infantry to set up barriers on the river, using the mountain and river situation to strike the enemy and contain all the enemy's forces; Tianjin, Deng and Lai ports would build naval fleets to take advantage of the enemy's southern garrison and shake their military spirit. In this way, the enemy would have to worry about internal concerns, and Liaoyang could be recovered.

古文：于是登、莱议设巡抚如天津，以陶朗先为之；而山海特设经略，节制三方，一事权。
现代文：于是讨论在登、莱设立巡抚，像天津一样，由陶朗先充任；而山海关特设经略一人，管辖一方，统一事权。
English: As a result, it was discussed to set up an inspector in Deng and Lai. As in Tianjin, Tao Lang would be appointed first, while the Shan Customs would appoint one person to supervise one side and unify the powers.

古文：遂进廷弼兵部尚书，兼右副都御史，驻山海关，经略辽东军务。
现代文：于是任用廷弼为兵部尚书，兼右副都御史，驻守山海关，经略辽东军务。
English: As a result, he appointed Tingyao to be the secretary of the military department, and also the right vice-governor of the capital, stationed at the Shanhaiguan Customs, and in charge of military affairs in Liaodong.

古文：廷弼因请尚方剑，请调兵二十余万，以兵马、刍糗、器械之属责成户、兵、工三部。
现代文：廷弼借此请尚方宝剑，请调兵二十余万，以兵马、粮草、器械之类责成户、兵、工三部。
English: Taking advantage of this, the imperial court asked Shang Fang for a sword, requested the mobilization of more than 200,000 soldiers, and ordered the three departments of households, soldiers, and workers with soldiers, horses, grain and grass, and equipment.

古文：白监军道臣高出、胡嘉栋，督饷郎中傅国无罪，请复官任事。
现代文：请为监军道臣高出、胡嘉栋，督饷郎中傅国昭雪，恢复官职，让他们理事。
English: Please restore the official posts of the supervisors of the military, Daoist Gao Gao, Hu Jiadong, and the governor's son-in-law, Fu Guo Xiaoxue, and let them become directors.

古文：议用辽人故赞画主事刘国缙为登莱招练副使，夔州同知佟卜年为登莱监军佥事，故临洮推官洪敷教为职方主事，军前赞画，用收拾辽人心，并报允。
现代文：建议启用辽人原赞画主事刘国缙为登莱招练副使，夔州同知佟卜年为登莱监军佥事，原临洮推官洪敷教为职方主事，军前赞画，用以收拢辽人的心，熹宗都予以批准。
English: It is proposed to use Liu Guozhen, the Liao people's former praise painting master, as Denglai's recruiting and training deputy envoy, Zhangzhou Tongzhi, who served as Denglai's military overseer in the year of Bo, the former Linyi's overseer Hongshiki, as the party leader, and the pre-war praise painting, to win the hearts of the Liao people, all of which have been approved by Zong Zong.

古文：七月，廷弼将启行，帝特赐麒麟服一，彩币四，宴之郊外，命文武大臣陪饯，异数也。
现代文：七月，廷弼启程时，熹宗特地赐给他一身麒麟服，四枚彩币，设宴于郊外，派文武大臣为他陪酒、饯行，这是少有的礼遇。
English: In July, when Emperor Taizong sent Emperor Tingye on a journey, he specially gave Emperor Taizong a Kirin robe, four colored coins, held a banquet in the suburbs, and sent the Minister of Culture and Martial Arts to accompany him for a drink and a walk. This was a rare courtesy.

古文：又以京营选锋五千护廷弼行。
现代文：又派用五千名京营选锋护送他赴任。
English: He also dispatched five thousand soldiers to escort him to his new post.

古文：先是，袁应泰死，薛国用代为经略，病不任事。
现代文：在此之前，袁应泰死了，由薛国用代为经略，因病不能干事。
English: Prior to this, Yuan Ying-tai died, and Xue Guo-tang took over as his deputy. He was unable to serve as an official due to illness.

古文：化贞乃部署诸将，沿河设六营，营置参将一人，守备二人，画地分守；西平、镇武、柳河、盘山诸要害，各置戍设防。
现代文：化贞于是部署将领，沿河设立六所军营，每营设置参将一人，守备一人，各自画地分守。西平、镇武、柳河、盘山等要害地分别设立防哨。
English: Therefore, Kazuchika deployed generals and set up six military camps along the river. Each camp was set up with one general officer and one guard, and each camp was guarded separately. Guard posts were set up separately in key areas such as Xiping, Zhenwu, Liuhe, and Panshan.

古文：议即上，廷弼不谓然，疏言： 河窄难恃，堡小难容，今日但宜固守广宁。
现代文：此议报上后，廷弼不以为然，上书说： 河面狭窄不可靠，城堡太小难容驻兵，现在只应牢牢地守住广宁。
English: After this proposal was reported, Tingtao did not agree, and wrote: The river is narrow and unreliable, the castle is too small to accommodate the garrison, and now only Guangning should be firmly guarded.

古文：而大兵悉聚广宁，相度城外形势，掎角立营，深垒高栅以俟。
现代文：如果分兵在河上驻守，部队分散力量就弱小了。敌人用轻骑兵偷偷渡过河来，专攻一所营房，我军力量必然不支。
English: If the detachment is stationed on the river, the dispersed strength of the troops will be weak. The enemy will sneak across the river with light cavalry and focus on a barracks, and our army will inevitably lose strength.

古文：盖辽阳去广宁三百六十里，非敌骑一日能到，有声息，我必预知。断不宜分兵防河，先为自弱之计也。 
现代文：一营溃败，其他各营就都会败，西平等地的防哨也不能守住。河边只适于设立游击队，轮番出入，使敌人莫知浅深，不该屯聚一处，给敌人乘隙袭击的机会。 
English: If one battalion is routed, all the other battalions will be defeated, and the sentry posts on the west side of the equator cannot be held. The riverside is only suitable for setting up a guerrilla group, entering and leaving in turns, so that the enemy does not know the depth and breadth, and should not gather in one place, giving the enemy the opportunity to attack.

古文：疏上，优旨褒答。
现代文：奏章交上后，熹宗下诏表扬了他。
English: After handing over the score, Emperor Taizong praised him in an imperial edict.

古文：会御史方震孺亦言防河六不足恃，议乃寝。
现代文：恰好御史方震孺也说防河有六条不可靠的地方，化贞的建议就此作罢了。
English: It just so happened that the historian, Tremolo, also said that there were six unreliable parts of the river defense, and Kasei's suggestion was abandoned.

古文：而化贞以计不行，愠甚，尽委军事于廷弼。
现代文：而化贞因为自己的计策未被采纳，恨透了，把军事全推托在廷弼身上。
English: However, because her own strategy was not adopted, Kachizane hated her to the end and put the entire military on the shoulders of Ting Diao.

古文：廷弼乃请申谕化贞，不得藉口节制，坐失事机。
现代文：廷弼于是请朝廷警告化贞，不得借口有人节制，坐失战机。
English: Tingyao then asked the imperial court to warn Hua Zhen that there must be no excuse for someone to be restrained and miss the plane.

古文：先是，四方援辽之师，化贞悉改为 平辽 ，辽人多不悦。
现代文：此前，四方援辽的军队，化贞全改名号为 平辽 ，辽人很不愉快。
English: Previously, the four-party assistance to Liao's army changed its name to Pingliao, and the Liao people were very unhappy.

古文：廷弼言： 辽人未叛，乞改为 平东 或 征东 ，以慰其心。 
现代文：廷弼说： 辽人又没叛乱，请改为 平东 或 征东 ，以快慰辽人的心。 
English: Ting Yao said: Liao people did not rebel again, please change it to Pingdong or East Conquest to comfort the hearts of Liao people.

古文：其东山矿徒能结聚千人者，即署都司；五百人者，署守备。将一呼立应，而一二万劲兵可立致也。 
现代文：从此以后化贞与廷弼有了矛盾，经略、巡抚不和睦的风声也就传起来了。八月初一，廷弼上书说： 三方面布置的战略的实施，必须联络朝鲜。请抓紧时间派钦差使臣去访问朝鲜的君臣，让他们征发八道的全部兵力，在江面上设立连营，助我军的声威。 
English: From then on, there was a conflict between Kasenobu and Teikyo, and rumors of discord between the strategist and the governor began to spread. On the first day of August, Teikyo said in a letter: To implement the three-pronged strategy, it is necessary to contact North Korea. Please take the time to send envoys to visit North Korea's princes and ministers, let them conscript all the troops of the eight provinces, set up a company camp on the river, and help the prestige of our army.

古文：因荐监军副使梁之垣生长海滨，习朝鲜事，可充命使。
现代文：并举荐监军副使梁之垣，说他在海滨长大，熟知朝鲜的事情，可以充任钦差使臣。
English: He also recommended the deputy inspector general of the Korean People's Army, Liang Zhigaki, saying that he had grown up on the coast, was familiar with North Korea, and could serve as an envoy.

古文：帝立从之，且命如行人奉使故事，赐一品服以宠其行。
现代文：熹宗马上就同意了，并且按照行人奉使的惯例，赐给一品官以示宠信。
English: Emperor Taizong immediately agreed, and in accordance with the practice of serving as an envoy, he gave a favor letter to a courtier.

古文：之垣乃列上重事权、定职掌八事，帝亦报可。
现代文：之垣于是上书提出加强他们的事权、确定自己职责等八条要求，熹宗也都同意了。
English: As a result, Nogaki submitted a letter with eight demands, such as strengthening their rights and responsibilities and determining their own duties, and Shinso also agreed.

古文：之垣方与所司议兵饷，而化贞所遣都司毛文龙已袭取镇江，奏捷。
现代文：之垣正在和有关部门商议兵饷的事，化贞所派遣的都司毛文龙已经袭取了镇江，奏上了捷报。
English: Nogaki was in the process of negotiating with the relevant departments about the troop withdrawal. Mao Wenlong, the governor sent by Hua Zhen, had already attacked Zhenjiang and was reported to be victorious.

古文：举朝大喜，亟命登、莱、天津发水师二万应文龙，化贞督广宁兵四万进据河上，合蒙古军乘机进取，而廷弼居中节制。
现代文：满朝为此大喜，立即命令登、莱、天津派出两万水师接应文龙，化贞率四万广宁兵进据河上，和蒙古军一起乘机进取，由廷弼在中间调度。
English: The Manchu dynasty was overjoyed at this, and immediately ordered 20,000 sailors to be sent from Tang, Lai and Tianjin to meet Wenlong, and 40,000 Guangning soldiers, led by Hua Zhen, to enter the river and take the opportunity to advance with the Mongolian army, with the middle dispatched by Tingyu.

古文：命既下，经、抚、各镇互观望，兵不果进。
现代文：命令下达以后，经略、巡抚所辖兵镇相互观望，最终还是没有出兵。
English: After the order was issued, the strategists and the military towns under the jurisdiction of the governor's office looked at each other, but ultimately did not send troops.

古文：顷之，化贞备陈东西情形，言： 敌弃辽阳不守，河东失陷将士日夜望官军至，即执敌将以降。
现代文：不久，化贞上书详述东西两边的情况说： 敌人放弃辽阳不加守备，河东失陷地区的将士日夜盼望官军开到，就抓了敌将来投降。
English: Not long after, Hua Zhen wrote a letter detailing the situation on both sides of the East and West, saying: The enemy abandoned Liaoyang without taking precautions, and the soldiers in the area of the fall of Hedong hoped day and night for the arrival of the official army, and caught the enemy to surrender in the future.

古文：而西部虎墩兔、炒花咸愿助兵。
现代文：而西部的虎墩兔、炒花都愿意以兵助我。
English: And the tigers, jackrabbits and fried flowers in the west are willing to help me with soldiers.

古文：敌兵守海州不过二千，河上止辽卒三千，若潜师夜袭，势在必克。
现代文：敌人驻守海州的兵力不过两千人，河上只辽地士兵三千人而已。如果派军队悄悄过去夜袭，势在必克。
English: The enemy's garrison in Haizhou is only two thousand, and there are only three thousand Liao soldiers on the river. If the army is sent quietly to attack at night, it is inevitable.

古文：敌南防者闻而北归，我据险以击其惰，可尽也。 
现代文：南防的敌军得知辽阳失守一定北归，我军凭借险要的地势来打击他们惰归的军队，可以一举歼灭。 
English: When the enemy forces in the southern defense learned that Liaoyang had lost its defense and had to return to the north, our army took advantage of the critical situation to attack their lazy troops, and could annihilate them in one fell swoop.

古文：兵部尚书张鹤鸣以为然，奏言时不可失。
现代文：兵部尚书张鹤鸣认为对，上书说机不可失。
English: Zhang Zhenming, a member of the military department, thinks that it is right, and that the opportunity to submit the report should not be lost.

古文：御史徐卿伯复趣之，请令廷弼进驻广宁，蓟辽总督王象乾移镇山海。
现代文：御史徐卿伯又促成此事，奏请派廷弼进驻广宁，蓟辽总督王象乾移驻山海。
English: Gu Shi Xu Qing Bo also contributed to this matter, and requested that Ting Yao be stationed in Guangning, and Wang Xiangyan, the governor of Liaoning, be stationed in Shanhai.

古文：会化贞复驰奏： 敌因官军收复镇江，遂驱掠四卫屯民。
现代文：正好化贞又飞章上奏说： 敌人因为官军收复镇江，就驱赶、抢劫周围四卫屯民。
English: Just at that time, Huazhen also wrote on the flying scroll: "Because the government army recovered Zhenjiang, the enemy drove out and robbed the surrounding four-guard townsfolk.

古文：屯民据铁山死守，伤敌三四千人，敌围之益急。急宜赴救。 
现代文：屯民现在占据铁山死守，杀伤了敌兵三四千人，敌人把他们围困得更紧了，应该马上前往援救。 
English: The townspeople are now holding the Iron Mountain and have killed and wounded three or four thousand enemy soldiers. The enemy has besieged them more tightly, and they should immediately go to the rescue.

古文：于是兵部愈促进师。
现代文：于是兵部越发催促进兵。
English: As a result, the military department increasingly urged the promotion of soldiers.

古文：化贞即以是月渡河。
现代文：化贞就在这个月里渡过河去。
English: Just this month, Kasei crossed the river.

古文：廷弼不得已出关，次右屯，而驰奏海州取易守难，不宜轻举。
现代文：廷弼迫不得已让出山海关，驻兵右屯，而飞章上奏说海州取易守难，不该轻举妄动。
English: Ting Yao was forced to give up the customs office in Zhishan and the garrison in Yutun, but the flying sign said that Haizhou was easy to take and difficult to defend, and he should not act rashly.

古文：化贞卒无功而还。
现代文：化贞终于无功而回。
English: Kazuchika finally returns without success.

古文：化贞为人騃而愎，素不习兵，轻视大敌，好谩语。
现代文：化贞为人痴傻而且自以为是，平素不学习军事，轻视大敌，好说大话。
English: Kazuchika is foolish and self-righteous. He does not study military affairs, belittles the great enemy, and likes to talk big.

古文：文武将吏进谏悉不入，与廷弼尤牴牾。
现代文：文武将吏的规劝一点也听不进去，与廷弼尤其抵触得厉害。
English: He did not listen to any of the exhortations of the generals and admirals, and he clashed violently with Ting Diao in particular.

古文：妄意降敌者李永芳为内应，信西部言，谓虎墩兔助兵四十万，遂欲以不战取全胜。
现代文：他妄想投降敌人的李永芳会做他的内应，相信蒙古人的话，说是虎墩兔将派援兵四十万，因此想不战而获全胜。
English: He imagined that Li Yongfang, who had surrendered to the enemy, would do his bidding, and believed the Mongolians when they said that Tigress and Rabbit would send 400,000 reinforcements. Therefore, he wanted to win without fighting.

古文：一切士马、甲仗、糗粮、营垒俱置不问，务为大言罔中朝。
现代文：一切事务如兵马、甲仗、粮草、营垒等都放置一边不加过问，一意说大话蒙骗朝廷。
English: All matters such as the army and horses, the war, the grain and grass, the camp, etc. were left aside without being questioned, and the imperial court was deceived by big talk.

古文：尚书鹤鸣深信之，所请无不允，以故廷弼不得行其志。
现代文：尚书鹤鸣很相信他，他有所请无不答应，因此廷弼无法实现自己的心愿。
English: Shang Shuzhenming believed in him very much. He was willing to do anything for him, so Ting Tao was unable to realize his wish.

古文：广宁有兵十四万，而廷弼关上无一卒，徒拥经略虚号而已。
现代文：广宁有十四万部队，而廷弼的山海关上却没有一兵一卒，只是有经略这么个虚名而已。
English: Guangning has a hundred and forty thousand troops, while there is not a single soldier on the mountain customs of Tingtao, but there is only a false name such as Jingli.

古文：延绥入卫兵不堪用，廷弼请罪其帅杜文焕，鹤鸣议宽之；廷弼请用卜年，鹤鸣上驳议；廷弼奏遣之垣，鹤鸣故稽其饷。
现代文：从延绥调来的部队不能作战，廷弼请把主帅杜文焕治罪，鹤鸣却让宽恕了他。廷弼奏请任用卜年，鹤鸣递上奏章反对。廷弼奏请派遣之垣去朝鲜，鹤鸣故意扣发他的饷银。
English: The troops transferred from Yancheng could not fight. Tingtao asked for the commander Du Wenhong to be punished, but Tsuruming pardoned him. Tingtao asked for the appointment of Bu Nian, Tsuruming submitted a petition against it. Tingtao asked for the dispatch of Niwaki to Korea, Tsuruming deliberately withheld his money.

古文：两人遂相怨，事事龃龉。
现代文：于是两人之间相互怨恨，事事争吵。
English: As a result, resentment and quarrels arose between the two.

古文：而廷弼亦褊浅刚愎，有触必发，盛气相加，朝士多厌恶之。
现代文：廷弼这个人也器量狭小，刚愎自用，火气一触即发，盛气凌人，朝臣大多都厌恶他。
English: This person, Ting Xuan, was also narrow-minded, self-serving, hot-tempered, domineering, and most courtiers loathed him.

古文：毛文龙镇江之捷，化贞自谓发踪奇功。
现代文：毛文龙镇江之捷，化贞自以为立了奇功。
English: Mao Wenlong won the victory of the Zhenjiang River, and Hua Zhen thought that he had made a miraculous achievement.

古文：廷弼言： 三方兵力未集，文龙发之太早，致敌恨辽人，屠戮四卫军民殆尽，灰东山之心，寒朝鲜之胆，夺河西之气，乱三方并进之谋，误属国联络之算，目为奇功，乃奇祸耳！ 
现代文：廷弼说： 三方兵力尚未集合，文龙发动得太早，致使敌人恨辽地的人民，把周围四卫的军民屠戮殆尽，使东山军民灰心，让朝鲜君臣胆寒，令河西军队丧气，扰乱了三方并进的计划，耽误了联络朝鲜的打算，把它看作奇功，实际上是奇祸呢。 
English: Ting Qi said: The forces of the three sides had not yet assembled, and Wenlong launched too early, causing the enemy to hate the people of Liao Di, slaughtering all the soldiers and civilians around the four guards, discouraging the soldiers and civilians in Dongshan, making the Korean monarchs and ministers afraid, discouraging the troops in Hexi, disrupting the plan of simultaneous advance of the three sides, delaying the plan of liaison with Korea, and considering it as a miraculous achievement, but in fact it is a miraculous disaster.

古文：贻书京师，力诋化贞。
现代文：送信到京城，竭力批评化贞。
English: Send it to Beijing, and try your best to criticize Hua Zhen.

古文：朝士方以镇江为奇捷，闻其言，亦多不服。
现代文：朝臣们正把镇江一役看作大捷，听到他的话，心中多有不服。
English: The courtiers are looking at Zhenjiang's role as a great victory, and when they hear his words, they are not satisfied.

古文：廷弼又显诋鹤鸣，谓： 臣既任经略，四方援军宜听臣调遣，乃鹤鸣径自发戍，不令臣知。
现代文：廷弼又明显地攻击鹤鸣说： 我既然担任经略，四方援军应当听我调遣，而鹤鸣径自发动，不让我知道。
English: Ting Xi also clearly attacked Henming, saying: Since I am in charge of the economic strategy, the four-party reinforcement troops should listen to my dispatch, but Henming self-launched without letting me know.

古文：七月中，臣咨部问调军之数，经今两月，置不答。
现代文：七月里我向兵部询问军队人数，到现在两个月了，没有回答。
English: In July, I asked the Ministry of Military Affairs about the number of troops, and now, two months later, there has been no response.

古文：臣有经略名，无其实，辽左事惟枢臣与抚臣共为之。 
现代文：我有经略之名，无其实，辽左的战事都是张枢密和王抚臣一起办的。 
English: I have the reputation of being a strategist, but it's not true. Liao Zuo's war affairs were all handled by Zhang Zhiping and Wang Fuxin together.

古文：鹤鸣益恨。
现代文：鹤鸣这下更加恼恨他了。
English: Crane Song was even more angry with him now.

古文：廷弼知左右谮之，抗疏辨，语颇愤激。
现代文：到九月份，化贞还说虎墩兔的四十万部队快来了，请迅速出兵。廷弼说： 抚臣靠着蒙古人，想不虞而收战功。
English: By September, Hua Zhen also said that the four hundred thousand troops of the tiger and the hare were coming soon, please send troops quickly. Ting Tong said: Fuxin relied on the Mongols, and won the war without fear.

古文：是时，廷弼主守，谓辽人不可用，西部不可恃，永芳不可信，广宁多间谍可虞。
现代文：我不敢轻视敌人，不敢说能不战而胜。 后来蒙古军队终于没来，化贞也不敢进兵了。当时，廷弼主张防御，认为辽地人不可信用，蒙古人不可凭仗，永芳其人不可相信，广宁地方有很多间谍让人担心。
English: I didn't dare to despise the enemy, I didn't dare to say that we could win without fighting. Later, the Mongolian army finally didn't come, and Hua Zhen didn't dare to enter the army. At that time, Tingya advocated defense, believing that the Liao people couldn't be trusted, the Mongolians couldn't be trusted, Yongfang couldn't be trusted, and there were a lot of spies in Guangning.

古文：化贞一切反之，绝口不言守，谓我一渡河，河东人必内应，且腾书中朝，言仲秋之月，可高枕而听捷音。
现代文：化贞则一切相反，绝口不提防御，说我们一渡河，河东人必为内应。并且飞书报告朝廷，说八月里你们就可以高枕酣睡，而收到我的捷报。
English: Hua Zhen, on the other hand, was the complete opposite, never mentioned defense, and said that once we crossed the river, the people east of the river would have to defend themselves. He also sent a report to the imperial court, saying that in August, you can sleep soundly, and receive my successful report.

古文：鹤鸣责经、抚协心同力，而枢臣与经臣独不当协心同力乎？
现代文：有见识的人知道他一定坏事，因为疆场事关系重大，没有人敢说他的不好。到十月份，河上结了冰，广宁人认为大清兵一定渡过河来，纷纷想逃出广宁。
English: People with insight knew that he must have done something bad, because the situation in the region was very important, and no one dared to say that he was bad. By October, the river was frozen, and the Guangning people thought that the Qing soldiers must have crossed the river, and they wanted to escape from Guangning.

古文：为今日计，惟枢部俯同于臣，臣始得为陛下任东方事也。 其言甚切至，鹤鸣益不悦。
现代文：化贞于是和震孺商议，分兵把守镇武、西平、闾阳、镇宁等城堡，而以主力驻守广宁。鹤鸣也认为广宁值得担忧，请皇上命令廷弼出关。
English: Therefore, Kazuchika consulted with Shizuka, and divided the troops to guard castles such as Zhenwu, Xiping, Shenyang, and Zhenning, while the main force was stationed in Guangning. Tsurumin also thought that Guangning was worth worrying about, and asked the emperor to order the imperial court to leave the customs.

古文：廷弼乃复出关，至右屯，议以重兵内护广宁，外扼镇武、闾阳，乃令刘渠以二万人守镇武，祁秉忠以万人守闾阳。
现代文：廷弼于是又出山海关，到达右屯，考虑用重兵内护广宁，外扼镇武、闾阳，于是派刘渠以两万人驻守镇武，祁秉忠以一万人驻守闾阳。
English: Therefore, Ting Kui went out of the mountain customs and arrived at Uditun, and considered using heavy troops to protect Guangning from the inside, and Zhenwu and Shenyang from the outside. Therefore, he sent Liu Kui to guard Zhenwu with twenty thousand people, and Zou Bingzhong to guard Shenyang with ten thousand people.

古文：又令罗一贯以三千人守西平。
现代文：又派罗一贯以三千人守西平。
English: Luo also sent 3,000 men to defend Xiping.

古文：复申令曰： 敌来，越镇武一步者，文武将吏诛无赦。
现代文：又重申他的命令说： 敌人来时，跨出镇武一步的，文武将吏都有杀无赦。
English: He also reiterated his order, saying, "When the enemy comes, there will be no mercy for the generals and officers who step out of their positions."

古文：敌至广宁而镇武、闾阳不夹攻，掠右屯饷道而三路不救援者，亦如之。 
现代文：敌人到达广宁而镇武、闾阳不出兵夹攻，敌人抢劫右屯饷道而三路兵马不救援的，罪也相同。 
English: If the enemy arrives at Guangning but does not launch a pincer attack on Zhenwu or Fenyang, or if the enemy robs the right side of Tuen Mun Road but the soldiers and horses do not come to the rescue, the crime is the same.

古文：且曰： 愿请兵六万，一举荡平。
现代文：廷弼刚刚布署完毕，化贞又相信间谍的话，突然发兵袭击海州，不久又退了回来。
English: Just after the deployment of the Imperial Guard, and believing the words of the spies, Hua Zhen suddenly sent troops to attack Haizhou, and soon retreated back.

古文：臣不敢贪天功，但厚赉从征将士，辽民赐复十年，海内得免加派，臣愿足矣。即有不称，亦必杀伤相当，敌不复振，保不为河西忧。 
现代文：廷弼于是上书说： 抚臣进兵，到现在已经五次了。部队屡进屡退，敌人早看透了我方的伎俩，我的虚名也因轻易出兵而受到损伤。希望陛下明确指示抚臣，对自己的行为慎重些，不要给敌人嘲笑了。 化贞看到他的上书很不高兴，飞章上奏，为自己辩解，并且说： 我请求给我六万兵，我保证把敌人一举荡平。就是不如意，也一定能做到死伤相等，使敌人一蹶不振，管保它不再成为河西之忧！ 
English: Then Ting Zheng wrote: Fuxin has marched into the army five times so far. The troops have repeatedly marched in and out, the enemy has already seen through our tricks, and my false reputation has also been damaged due to the ease of sending troops. I hope that His Majesty will clearly instruct Fuxin to be cautious about his own behavior and not to mock the enemy. When Hua Zhen saw his letter, he was very unhappy. He played a song to justify himself, and said: I asked for sixty thousand soldiers, and I promise to level the enemy at one stroke. Even if it is not satisfactory, I will surely be able to make the death and injury equal, so that the enemy

古文：会震孺奏经、抚不和，中有化贞心慵意懒语，廷弼据以刺化贞，化贞益不悦。及化贞请一举荡平，廷弼乃言： 宜如抚臣约，亟罢臣以鼓士气。 
现代文：并请准许他便宜行事。当时叶向高掌了大权，他是化贞成进士时的主考官，很偏向化贞。等化贞请求把敌人一举荡平时，廷弼上书说： 就请按抚臣约定的办吧，应及早罢掉我的官以便于鼓舞士气。 
English: And please allow him to act cheaply. At that time, Ye Xiang held great power, and he was the chief examiner when Hua Zhen became a scholar, and he was very partial to Hua Zhen. When Hua Zhen requested that the enemy be leveled at one stroke, the imperial court said in a letter: Please do as agreed by the vassals. My official should be dismissed as soon as possible in order to boost morale.

古文：当是时，中外举知经、抚不和，必误疆事，章日上。
现代文：这个时候，中外都知道经略、巡抚两人不和，一定会坏了边疆的大事，大臣们的奏章天天讨论此事。
English: At this time, both China and the rest of the world knew that the discord between the two men, the strategist and the governor, would surely ruin the important affairs of the frontier. The ministers discussed the matter every day.

古文：而鹤鸣笃信化贞，遂欲去廷弼。
现代文：而鹤鸣笃信化贞，于是想把廷弼拿掉。
English: Tsurumine, however, believed that it would turn her into a virtuous woman, so she wanted to get rid of the courtesan.

古文：鹤鸣独言化贞一去，毛文龙必不用命，辽人为兵者必溃，西部必解体，宜赐化贞尚方剑，专委以广宁，而撤廷弼他用。议上，帝不从，责吏、兵二部再奏。
现代文：二年正月，员外郎徐大化顺承其意弹劾廷弼大言欺世，嫉能妒功，不罢免他必将有害于辽地战事。他们的奏章一并被发给各部，鹤鸣于是召集大臣们讨论。说把廷弼撤职的有几个人，其余大多主张让二人各尽其职，共谋成功。
English: In the first month of the second year, Xu Dahua, a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee, followed his intention to impeach Tingtao for his arrogant and cynical words and actions. If he was not dismissed, it would be detrimental to the war in Liaoning. Their report was sent to all ministries, and Tsurumin then convened the ministers to discuss. There were several people who said that Tingtao should be removed from office, but most of the rest advocated that the two men should do their duties and work together for success.

古文：会大清兵逼西平，遂罢议，仍兼任二臣，责以功罪一体。
现代文：正好大清兵这时逼近西平，就停止了争议，仍然兼用他们两人，责令他们共同努力，功罪一体。
English: Just as the Qing soldiers were approaching Xiping, they stopped the dispute, still using both of them, and ordered them to work together.

古文：无何，西平围急。
现代文：没过多久，西平之围吃紧。
English: It didn't take long for the siege of Xiping to tighten.

古文：化贞信中军孙得功计，尽发广宁兵，畀得功及祖大寿往会秉忠进战。
现代文：化贞相信中军孙得功的计策，发动了广宁的全部兵力，让得功和祖大寿前往和秉忠会合，然后向前去作战。
English: Hua Zhen believed in the strategy of Sun Derong of the Chinese army, and launched the full strength of Guangning, so that Derong and Zu Dashou would go to meet with Bingzhong, and then go forward to fight.

古文：廷弼亦驰檄渠撤营赴援。
现代文：廷弼也传令刘渠拔营赴援。
English: Ting Xi also sent a message to Liu Qu to pull out the battalion to help.

古文：二十二日，遇大清兵平阳桥。锋始交，得功及参将鲍承先等先奔，镇武、闾阳兵遂大溃，渠、秉忠战没沙岭，大寿走觉华岛。
现代文：二十二日在平阳桥遭遇大清部队，刚刚交锋，得功和参将鲍承先等领头逃跑，镇武、闾阳的兵力于是也被打败，刘渠、秉忠在沙岭战死，大寿逃往觉华岛去了。
English: On the 22nd, they encountered the Qing Dynasty troops at Pingyang Bridge. They had just engaged in a battle. The soldiers of Zhenwu and Shenyang were defeated. Liu Qiu and Bingzhong were killed in the battle at Sha Ling, and Dashou fled to Juehua Island.

古文：西平守将一贯待援不至，与参将黑云鹤亦战殁。
现代文：西平守将待援不至，与参将黑云鹤也战死。
English: Xiping's garrison would have to wait for reinforcements, and he and Black Cloud also died in the battle.

古文：廷弼已离右屯，次闾阳。
现代文：廷弼当时已离开右屯，驻军闾阳。
English: At that time, Tingyao had already left Uditun and was garrisoned in Fenyang.

古文：参议邢慎言劝急救广宁，为佥事韩初命所沮，遂退还。
现代文：参议邢慎言劝他紧急救援广宁，却被佥事韩初命阻挠，于是廷弼撤退了回来。
English: Councilor Zou Sheng advised him to urgently rescue Guangning, but he was thwarted by the anecdote of Han's first life, so Ting Zou withdrew and returned.

古文：时大清兵顿沙岭不进。
现代文：当时大清在沙岭停下来不再向前来。
English: At that time, Daqing stopped at Sha Ling and did not move forward.

古文：化贞素任得功为腹心，而得功潜降于大清，欲生缚化贞以为功，讹言敌已薄城。
现代文：化贞平常把得功看作心腹，而得功已偷偷地投降了大清，他想活捉化贞作为自己的功劳，就诈称敌军已到城边。
English: Huazhen usually regarded the achievement as a confidant, but Huazhen had secretly surrendered to the Great Qing Dynasty. He wanted to capture Huazhen alive as his own achievement, so he falsely claimed that the enemy army had reached the edge of the city.

古文：城中大乱奔走，参政高邦佐禁之不能止。
现代文：城中一时大乱，人各奔逃，参政高邦佐阻挡也挡不住。
English: There was a momentary turmoil in the city, people ran away, and the high-ranking statesmen who were involved in politics could not stop them.

古文：化贞方阖署理军书，不知也。
现代文：化贞正关起门办理军书，毫无所知。
English: Hua Zhen is going through military records behind closed doors and knows nothing about it.

古文：参将江朝栋排闼入，化贞怒呵之，朝栋大呼曰： 事急矣，请公速走。 
现代文：参将江朝栋推门闯进来，化贞大声训斥他。朝栋大声喊道： 事情危险了，请你快走！ 
English: Sang general Jiang Chaodong pushed the door to break in, and Hua Zhen reprimanded him loudly. Chaodong shouted loudly: The situation is dangerous, please leave quickly!

古文：化贞莫知所为。朝栋掖之出上马，二仆人徒步从，遂弃广宁，踉跄走，与廷弼遇大凌河。
现代文：化贞不知发生了什么事，朝栋就搀扶他出来骑马逃走，后边两个仆人徒步跟着，于是丢了广宁城，仓惶逃命。
English: Not knowing what had happened to Hua Zhen, Chaodong helped him to get out and escape on horseback, followed by two servants on foot. As a result, he lost Guangning City and fled in panic.

古文：化贞哭，廷弼微笑曰： 六万众一举荡平，竟何如？ 
现代文：在大凌河遇上了廷弼，廷弼微笑着说： 六万军队就可以把敌人一举荡平，到头来怎么样呢？ 
English: In the Daling River, he met Tingtao. Tingtao smiled and said, "Sixty thousand troops can flatten the enemy in one fell swoop. What will happen in the end?

古文：化贞惭，议守宁远及前屯。
现代文：化贞惭愧了，建议驻守宁远和前屯。
English: Embarrassed, Hua Zhen suggested garrisoning Ningyuan and Qiaotun.

古文：廷弼曰： 嘻，已晚，惟护溃民入关可耳。 
现代文：廷弼说： 口海！
English: Tingyao said: "Kuchai!

古文：乃以己所将五千人授化贞为殿，尽焚积聚。
现代文：已经晚了。现在只有保护老百姓入关去。 于是把自己所领的五千人交由化贞来殿后，把全部积蓄都放火烧了。
English: It was too late. The only thing to do now was to protect the common people from imprisonment. So, after handing over the five thousand people he had led to the emperor, he set fire to all his savings.

古文：二十六日，偕初命护溃民入关。化贞、出、嘉栋先后入，独邦佐自经死。
现代文：二十六日廷弼和初命一起护送难民入得关来，化贞、高出、嘉栋也先后入关，只有邦佐自杀而死。
English: On the 26th, together with the first to die, Ting Xi escorted the refugees into the Decheng Pass. Huan Zhen, Gao Gao, and Jiadong also entered the pass successively. Only Bonzo committed suicide and died.

古文：得功率广宁叛将迎大清兵入广宁，化贞逃已两日矣。
现代文：得功率领广宁城的叛将把大清兵迎入广宁时，化贞逃跑已有两天时间。
English: When the rebels who gained power and led Guangning City welcomed the Qing soldiers into Guangning, it had been two days since Hua Zhen had fled.

古文：大清兵追逐化贞等二百里，不得食，乃还。
现代文：大清兵追赶他们追了二百里，因路上没得粮食吃才回去。
English: The soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty chased them for two hundred miles, but had to turn back because they couldn't get any food on the way.

古文：报至，京师大震，鹤鸣恐，自请视师。
现代文：战败的消息传到朝廷，京城为之震惊。鹤鸣害怕了，自请前往察看军队。
English: The news of the defeat reached the imperial court, and the capital was shocked. Tsurune was afraid and invited himself to inspect the troops.

古文：二月逮化贞，罢廷弼听勘。
现代文：二月逮捕了化贞，罢了廷弼的官，让他听候查考。
English: In February, Haezhen was arrested, but the court magistrate let him wait for an investigation.

古文：四月，刑部尚书王纪、左都御史邹元标、大理寺卿周应秋等奏上狱词，廷弼、化贞并论死。
现代文：四月，刑部尚书王纪、左都御史邹元标、大理寺卿周应秋等报上判决书，廷弼、化贞都判了死刑。
English: In April, the criminal department's Shangshu Wang Ji, Zuo Goshi Shen Yuanbiao, Daliji Ching Zhou Yingqiu, and others published their verdicts, and Tingyao and Hua Zhen were all sentenced to death.

古文：后当行刑，廷弼令汪文言贿内廷四万金祈缓，既而背之。
现代文：后来快到行刑时，廷弼让汪文言用四万两金子贿赂内廷请缓期执行，后来却违背了四万金的许诺。
English: Later, when the sentence was about to be carried out, the Emperor allowed Wang Wenyan to bribe the Inner Court with 40,000 taels of gold to ask for a reprieve, but later reneged on the promise of 40,000 taels of gold.

古文：魏忠贤大恨，誓速斩廷弼。
现代文：魏忠贤大为恼恨，发誓要尽快杀掉熊廷弼。
English: Wei Zhongxian was very angry and vowed to kill Xiong Tingyu as soon as possible.

古文：及杨涟等下狱，诬以受廷弼贿，甚其罪。
现代文：等杨涟等被捕下狱，就诬蔑他曾受过廷弼的贿赂，以此加重廷弼的罪行。
English: When Yang Xi et al. were arrested and sent to prison, they slandered him as having received bribes from Ting Xi, thereby aggravating Ting Xi's crime.

古文：已，逻者获市人蒋应旸，谓与廷弼子出入禁狱，阴谋叵测。
现代文：过后，巡捕抓到市民蒋应，说他和廷弼的儿子出入监狱内外，阴谋叵测。
English: After that, the patrol arrested the citizen Jiang Ying, saying that he and Tingyao's son went in and out of the prison, plotting and scheming.

古文：忠贤愈欲速杀廷弼，其党门克新、郭兴治、石三畏、卓迈等遂希指趣之。
现代文：忠贤越发想尽早杀掉廷弼，他的党羽门克新、郭兴治、石三畏、卓迈等就迎合他的意思不断催促。
English: The more Zhongxian wanted to kill Tingyao as soon as possible, the more his followers, such as Menke Xin, Guo Xingji, Shishangui and Zhuo Mai, urged him to do so.

古文：会冯铨亦憾廷弼，与顾秉谦等侍讲筵，出市刊《辽东传》谮于帝曰： 此廷弼所作，希脱罪耳。 
现代文：恰好冯铨也曾对廷弼失望过，与顾秉谦等在讲筵上侍讲时，就拿出集市上刊印的《辽东传》向熹宗诬陷廷弼说： 这是熊廷弼自己写的，是他想为自己开脱罪名。 
English: It just so happened that Feng Liang had also been disappointed with Ting Liang. When Gu Bingqian and others were attending the lecture at the lecture hall, they took out the "Liaodong Biography" published at the fair to frame Ting Liang and said: This was written by Xiong Ting Liang himself, he wanted to exonerate himself.

古文：帝怒，遂以五年八月弃市，传首九边。
现代文：熹宗恼了，于是在五年八月把廷弼杀了，将他的首级在北方的九处军镇辗转示众。
English: Enraged, Emperor Taizong killed Tingtao in August of the fifth year and displayed his severed head in nine military towns in the north.

古文：已，御史梁梦环谓廷弼侵盗军资十七万。
现代文：后来，御史梁梦环说廷弼侵盗军费十七万两。
English: Later, the military governor Liang Menghuan said that Tingyao had stolen 170,000 taels of military funds.

古文：御史刘徽谓廷弼家资百万，宜籍以佐军。
现代文：御史刘徽说廷弼家产值百万两银子，应该没收了充作军费。
English: Liu Hui, the imperial historian, said that the output value of the Tingya family was one million taels of silver, which should have been confiscated for military expenses.

古文：忠贤即矫旨严追，罄赀不足，姻族家俱破。
现代文：忠贤便矫诏命令严加追赃，廷弼家全部资财不够，连亲戚、本家都被查抄。
English: Zhongxian then issued a correction order to severely pursue the thief. All the assets of the Tingyao family were insufficient, and even relatives and the family itself were investigated.

古文：江夏知县王尔玉责廷弼子貂裘珍玩，不获，将挞之。
现代文：东夏知县王尔玉向廷弼的儿子勒索貂裘、珍玩，得不到，就要打人。
English: Wang Eryu of Dongxia County tried to extort money from Tingyao's son. If he didn't get it, he would beat him.

古文：其长子兆珪自刭死，兆珪母称冤。尔玉去其两婢衣，挞之四十。
现代文：廷弼的长子兆王圭自杀身亡，兆王圭的母亲喊冤，尔玉就扒掉她两个丫环的衣裳，打了她们四十板。
English: Tingtao's eldest son, Zhao Wanggui, committed suicide and died. Zhao Wanggui's mother cried out for justice, and Eryu ripped off the clothes of her two maids and beat them with forty boards.

古文：远近莫不嗟愤。
现代文：无论远近知道这件事的人无不叹息、愤恨。
English: No matter how far or near, people who know about this matter are all sighing and resentful.

古文：崇祯元年，诏免追赃。
现代文：崇祯元年，庄烈帝下诏书停止追赃。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Emperor Zhuge Liang issued an edict to stop the pursuit of the imperial eunuchs.

古文：广宁兵十三万，粮数百万，尽属化贞，廷弼止援辽兵五千人，驻右屯，距广宁四十里耳。
现代文：那年秋天，工部主事徐尔一上书诉说廷弼的冤屈，说： 当年广宁兵十三万，粮草百万担，全都交由化贞管理。廷弼只有五千名援辽部队，驻守在右屯，距离广宁只四十里。
English: That autumn, the head of the Ministry of Industry, Xu Eryi, wrote a letter to complain about the grievances of Tingtao, saying: At that time, 130,000 soldiers from Guangning and a million tons of grain and grass were all managed by Hua Zhen. Tingtao had only 5,000 troops to aid Liaoning, stationed in Utun, only forty miles from Guangning.

古文：化贞忽同三四百万辽民一时尽溃，廷弼五千人，不同溃足矣，尚望其屹然坚壁哉！
现代文：化贞忽然之间同三四百万辽民一下子都败退下来，廷弼只五千人，不一起败退就够了，还能指望他屹然不动，坚壁固守吗？
English: All of a sudden, Hua Zhen and thirty-four million Liao people were defeated and retreated at once, while Tingtao had only five thousand people. It was enough for him not to be defeated and retreated together. Could he still be expected to stand still and hold fast?

古文：臣所以娓娓及此者，以兹事虽属封疆，而实阴系朝中邪正本末。
现代文：廷弼的罪在哪里呢？我请为他平反昭雪，用以激励有苦劳的大臣！ 
English: Where is Ting Tao's crime? I ask that he be vindicated, so as to encourage the hard-working minister!

古文：皇上天纵英哲，或不以臣等为大谬也。
现代文：庄烈帝不同意。第二年五月，大学士韩火广等上书说： 廷弼的尸骨至今不能拿回去安葬，根据国法是从来没有过的。 
English: Zhuang disagreed. In May of the following year, Han Huiguang, a university professor, and others sent a letter saying, "Tingyao's bones cannot be taken back and buried until now. According to the national law, this has never happened before.

古文：诏许其子持首归葬。
现代文：庄烈帝颁发诏书允许廷弼的儿子拿他的首级回去安葬。
English: Emperor Zhuge Liang issued an edict to allow the son of the Emperor to take his head back and be buried.

古文：五年，化贞始伏诛。
现代文：崇祯五年，王化贞才被处以死刑。
English: It took five years for Wang Huazhen to be sentenced to death.

古文：袁崇焕，字元素，东莞人。
现代文：袁崇焕，字元素，东莞人。
English: Yuan Chonghuan, character element, Dongguan people.

古文：万历四十七年进士。
现代文：万历四十七年，考中进士。
English: In the 47th year of Wanli, he was promoted to the top rank.

古文：授邵武知县。
现代文：被授官邵武知县。
English: Awarded to Shao Wuchi County.

古文：为人慷慨负胆略，好谈兵。
现代文：为人慷慨而富有胆略，喜欢谈论军事。
English: Generous and daring, he likes to talk about the military.

古文：遇老校退卒，辄与论塞上事，晓其厄塞情形，以边才自许。
现代文：遇到老军官和退伍的士兵，就同他们谈论边塞上的事情，得以通晓边塞地区的情况，自称有能力镇守边防。
English: When they meet old officers and retired soldiers, they talk to them about the situation on the border, get to know the situation in the border area, and claim to be able to guard the border.

古文：天启二年正月，朝觐在都，御史侯恂请破格用之，遂擢兵部职方主事。
现代文：天启二年正月，在京都朝见天子，御史侯恂请熹宗任用他，于是被提升为兵部职方主事。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Apocalypse, when he met the Emperor in the morning in Kyoto, he was promoted to be in charge of the staff of the military department.

古文：无何，广宁师溃，廷议扼山海关，崇焕即单骑出阅关内外。
现代文：没有几多时，广宁地方的军队被打败，朝廷决定派他扼守山海关，袁崇焕即单身一人骑马到山海关内外考察。
English: Not long after, the army of Guangning was defeated, and the imperial court decided to send him to guard the Shanhaiguan. Yuan Chonghuan rode alone to the Shanhaiguan to inspect its interior and exterior.

古文：部中失袁主事，讶之，家人亦莫知所往。
现代文：兵部中因袁主事失踪都感到十分惊讶，他的家人也不知道他去了哪里。
English: The military department was very surprised by Yuan's disappearance, and his family did not know where he had gone.

古文：已，还朝，具言关上形势，曰： 予我军马钱谷，我一人足守此。 
现代文：过后，他回到朝廷，具体讲述了关上的形势。说： 给我兵马钱粮，我一个就足能守住此地。 
English: Afterwards, he returned to the imperial court and gave a detailed account of the situation in Kansai, saying: "Give me soldiers and horses, money and grain, and I alone will be able to defend this place."

古文：廷臣益称其才，遂超擢佥事，监关外军，发帑金二十万，俾招募。
现代文：朝中的大臣更加赞赏他的才能，于是越级提升他为佥事，监管关外的军队；并发给他公用金二十万，让他招募士兵。
English: The ministers in the central government appreciated his talent even more, so they promoted him to a higher rank to supervise the troops outside of Guanzhong, and gave him a public fund of 200,000 yuan to recruit soldiers.

古文：时关外地悉为哈剌慎诸部所据，崇焕乃驻守关内。
现代文：当时关外的地盘全被哈剌慎的各部士兵占领，袁崇焕于是驻守关内。
English: At that time, all the territory outside Guan was occupied by soldiers from various departments of Harbin, and Yuan Chonghuan was stationed inside Guan.

古文：未几，诸部受款，经略王在晋令崇焕移驻中前所，监参将周守廉、游击左辅军，经理前屯卫事。
现代文：不多久，各部受到攻击，经略王在晋命令袁崇焕驻守中前所，监督参将周守廉及左辅的游击队，管理前屯卫的事务。
English: Not long after, all the ministries came under attack, and Emperor Liang ordered Yuan Chonghuan to be stationed at the middle forward post to supervise the guerrilla forces of General Zhou Shulian and Zuo Fu, and to manage the affairs of the forward garrison.

古文：寻令赴前屯安置辽人之失业者，崇焕即夜行荆棘虎豹中，以四鼓入城，将士莫不壮其胆。
现代文：不久又命他前往辽地安置失业人员。崇焕当夜率兵从遍布荆棘、虎豹出没的小路上行进，至四更天进城，将士们都称赞他有胆量。
English: Soon after, he was ordered to go to Liao to resettle the unemployed. That night, Chong Huan marched with his soldiers from the thorny, tiger-infested path to the city on the fourth day, and the soldiers all praised him for his courage.

古文：在晋深倚重之，题为宁前兵备佥事，然崇焕薄在晋无远略，不尽遵其令。
现代文：王在晋很器重他，在他的旗帜上题名为宁前兵备佥事。然而崇焕轻视王在晋没有长远的谋略，不大遵守他的军令。
English: King Jaejoong held him in high esteem, inscribing on his banner an anecdote about the preparation of soldiers before the battle of Ningye. However, Chong Hwan despised King Jaejoong for not having a long-term strategy and not following his military orders.

古文：及在晋议筑重城八里铺，崇焕以为非策，争不得，奏记首辅叶向高。
现代文：等到王在晋建议在八里铺修筑双层城墙时，崇焕认为这不是办法。他争王在晋不过，就把这件事记述下来上书给首辅叶向高。
English: When Wang Zhejin proposed to build a double-layered city wall in Bailifu, Chong Huan thought that this was not the way to go. He did not want to fight for the king in Jin, so he wrote down the matter and sent it to the head of the imperial palace, Ye Xianggao.

古文：十三山难民十余万，久困不能出。
现代文：十三山地方有十多万难民，长期被围困不能出来。
English: There are more than a hundred thousand refugees in the Thirteenth Mountain region, who have been besieged for a long time and cannot get out.

古文：大学士孙承宗行边，崇焕请： 将五千人驻宁远，以壮十三山势，别遣骁将救之。
现代文：大学士孙承宗来巡视边防，崇焕请求说： 派五千人驻守宁远，以壮大十三山的威势，另外派猛将前去救援。
English: Sun Chengzong, a university scholar, came to inspect the border defense, and Chong Huan requested: Send five thousand people to guard Ningyuan to strengthen the power of the thirteen mountains, and send a fierce general to rescue.

古文：宁远去山二百里，便则进据锦州，否则退守宁远，奈何委十万人置度外？ 
现代文：宁远离十三山有二百里路，如果能占便宜就进军占据锦州，否则就退守宁远，怎能把十万人放在一边不管呢？ 
English: Ning is two hundred miles away from the Thirteen Mountains. If they can take advantage of this, they can invade and occupy Jinzhou. Otherwise, they will retreat to Ningyuan. How can they ignore a hundred thousand people?

古文：承宗谋于总督王象乾。象乾以关上军方丧气，议发插部护关者三千人往，承宗以为然，告在晋。
现代文：承宗与总督王象乾谋划，象乾因关上的军队新近丧失斗志，提出让插部守关的三千人前去。承宗同意他的说法，就把此事告诉了在晋。
English: Chengzong and Governor Wang Xiangqian made a plan. As Xiangqian's troops had recently lost the will to fight due to the blockade, he proposed that the three thousand people guarding the blockade should go. Chengzong agreed with his statement and told this to Jin.

古文：在晋竟不能救，众遂没，脱归者仅六千人而已。及承宗驳重城议，集将吏谋所守。
现代文：在晋竟没能阻止，结果全军覆灭，脱险回来的军民只有六千人而已，等承宗驳斥了修筑双重城墙的建议后，聚集将吏讨论把守什么地方。
English: However, Jin failed to prevent it, and as a result, the entire army was destroyed, and only six thousand soldiers and civilians returned from the peril. After Chojong refuted the proposal to build a double city wall, the generals gathered to discuss where to guard.

古文：阎鸣泰主觉华，崇焕主宁远，在晋及张应吾、邢慎言持不可，承宗竟主崇焕议。
现代文：阎鸣泰主张守觉华，崇焕主张守宁远，在晋以及张应吾、邢慎言认为不行，承宗最后支持崇焕的意见。
English: Yan Mingtai advocated guarding Juehua, Chong Huan advocated guarding Ningyuan, while Za Jin, Zhang Yingwu and Zou Shenyan thought it was not possible, and He Zong finally supported Chong Huan's opinion.

古文：已，承宗镇关门，益倚崇焕，崇焕内拊军民，外饬边备，劳绩大著。
现代文：过后，承宗镇守关外更加依靠崇焕，崇焕对内安抚军民，在外面整治边防战备，功绩显著。
English: After that, the foreign guards of Chengzong Town relied more on Chonghuan. Chonghuan made remarkable achievements in appeasing the military and civilians at home and improving the military preparedness of the border.

古文：崇焕尝核虚伍，立斩一校。
现代文：他曾调查胆怯的队伍，立刻斩了一个军官。
English: He had surveyed the cowed ranks and immediately beheaded an officer.

古文：承宗怒曰： 监军可专杀耶？ 
现代文：承宗愤怒地说： 监军能够一个人决定杀人的事吗？ 
English: Chengzong said angrily, "Can an overseer of an army decide to kill someone all by himself?

古文：崇焕顿首谢，其果于用法类此。
现代文：崇焕叩头请罪，他在执行军法方面就是这么果断。
English: Chong Huan kowtowed and pleaded guilty, he is so decisive in the implementation of military law.

古文：三年九月，承宗决守宁远。
现代文：三年九月，承宗决定驻守宁远。
English: In September of the third year, Jochu decided to stay in Ningyuan.

古文：佥事万有孚、刘诏力阻，不听，命满桂偕崇焕往。
现代文：佥事万有孚、刘诏竭力阻止，承宗不听，命令满桂同崇焕一同前往。
English: Wang Yifu and Liu Zhao tried their best to stop it, but Zheng Zong did not listen and ordered Man Gui to go with Chong Huan.

古文：初，承宗令祖大寿筑宁远城，大寿度中朝不能远守，筑仅十一，且疏薄不中程。
现代文：当初，承宗命令祖大寿建筑宁远的城墙，大寿考虑朝中官员不能到这边远地方来防守，所以仅仅修筑了十分之一，并且简陋得不合规格。
English: At first, Emperor Chengzong ordered the ancestor Datou to build the city wall far away from Ningyuan. Considering that the officials of the DPRK and China could not go to this far away place to defend, Datou only built one-tenth of it, and it was too simple to meet the specifications.

古文：崇焕乃定规制：高三丈二尺，雉高六尺，址广三丈，上二丈四尺。
现代文：崇焕于是确定了城墙的规格，高三丈二尺，雉堞高六尺，地基宽三丈，上面宽二丈四。
English: Chong Huan then determined the specifications of the city wall, 3 feet 2 inches high, 6 feet 6 inches high, 3 feet 3 inches wide at the base, and 2 feet 4 inches wide at the top.

古文：大寿与参将高见、贺谦分督之，明年迄工，遂为关外重镇。
现代文：大寿与参将高见、贺谦分别监督工程。第二年完工，宁远就成为关外的重要城镇。
English: Dashu supervised the project separately from Gao Min and He Qian, who were also involved in the project. It was completed the following year, and Ningyuan became an important town outside of Guanzhou.

古文：桂，良将，而崇焕勤职，誓与城存亡；又善抚，将士乐为尽力。
现代文：满桂是优秀的将领，而崇焕勤于职守，发誓与城共存亡，他又能安抚官兵，所以将士都愿意为他尽力。
English: Man Gui is an excellent general, while Chong Huan is diligent in his duties, vows to live and die with the city, and he can pacify the officers and soldiers, so the soldiers are willing to do their best for him.

古文：由是商旅辐辏，流移骈集，远近望为乐士。
现代文：因此此地商旅车马往来，游民、移民成群聚集在此处，远近地方的人民都把这儿看成乐土。
English: As a result, merchants, travelers, and horse-drawn carriages come and go here, hordes of wanderers and immigrants gather here, and people from near and far regard this place as a paradise.

古文：遭父忧，夺情视事。
现代文：后来碰到父亲去世，崇焕仍然不顾孝心私情继续管理军务。
English: Later, when his father passed away, Chong Huan still continued to manage military affairs regardless of his filial piety.

古文：四年九月，偕大将马世龙、王世钦率水陆马步军万二千，东巡广宁，谒北镇祠，历十三山，抵右屯，遂由水道泛三岔河而还。
现代文：四年九月，他同大将马世龙、王世钦率领水陆马步军共一万二千人，东巡广宁，拜祭北镇祠，经过十三山，抵达右屯，然后从三岔河坐船回来。
English: In September of the fourth year, he, together with the generals Ma Shilong and Wang Shichin, led a total of twelve thousand water and land horse marching troops. They toured Guangning to the east, paid tribute to the North Town ancestral hall, passed through the Thirteen Mountains, arrived at Utun, and then returned by boat from the Samye River.

古文：寻以五防叙劳，进兵备副使，再进右参政。
现代文：不久叙论驻守的功劳，升为兵备副使，后来又升为右参政。
English: He was soon praised for his contribution to the garrison, promoted to deputy military attaché, and later to the right to participate in politics.

古文：崇焕之东巡也，请即复锦州、右屯诸城，承宗以为时未可，乃止。
现代文：崇焕到东面巡视时，请求马上收复锦州、右屯等城池，承宗认为时机未成熟，就停止了。
English: When Chong Huan went to the east to inspect, he requested the immediate recovery of Jinzhou, Uton, and other cities. He thought that the time was not ripe, so he stopped.

古文：至五年夏，承宗与崇焕计，遣将分据锦州、松山、杏山、右屯及大、小凌河，缮城郭居之。
现代文：到五年夏天，承宗与崇焕商议，派将领分别驻兵锦州、松山、杏山、右屯以及大、小凌河等地，修缮城郭居住。
English: In the summer of the fifth year, in consultation with Chong Huan, Cheng Zong sent generals to stay in Jinzhou, Matsuyama, Xingshan, U-tun, and Dai and Xiaolinghe, respectively, to repair the castle and live there.

古文：自是宁远且为内地，开疆复二百里。
现代文：从这时起宁远就成为内地了，外边又开辟疆土二百里。
English: Since then, Ningyuan has become the inland, and the outside has opened up a territory of two hundred miles.

古文：十月，承宗罢，高第来代，谓关外必不可守，令尽撤锦、右诸城守具，移其将士于关内。
现代文：十月，承宗罢官，由高第接替了他，认为关外一定不能守住，命令全盘撤去锦州、右屯各城的全部守具，把那里的官兵调进关内。
English: In October, Emperor Jianzong dismissed him and Gao Di took his place. He believed that Guanwai could not be held, and ordered the complete removal of all fortifications from the cities of Jinzhou and Uton, and the transfer of officers and soldiers from there to Guanwei.

古文：督屯通判金启倧上书崇焕曰： 锦、右、大凌三城皆前锋要地。
现代文：督理屯田的通判官金启亻宗上书崇焕说： 锦州、右屯、大凌三城都是前沿的要害之地。
English: Jin Qizhong Zong, the magistrate supervising Tongtian, wrote to Chonghuan: "Jinzhou, Yutong, and Daling are the three key cities at the forefront.

古文：倘收兵退，既安之民庶复播迁，已得之封疆再沦没，关内外堪几次退守耶！ 
现代文：如果收兵撤回，已经安居的百姓又要迁移，已得到的疆土再次沦陷，关的内外能容许有几次后撤防守！ 
English: If the troops are withdrawn, the people who have been living safely will have to move again, the territory already gained will fall again, and Guan's home and abroad can tolerate several retreats from defense!

古文：崇焕亦力争不可，言： 兵法有进无退。
现代文：崇焕尽力争辩不同意撤兵说： 用兵的方法，只有进没有退的道理。
English: Chong Huan tried his best to argue that he did not agree with the withdrawal of troops, saying: The method of using troops is only to advance and not retreat.

古文：三城已复，安可轻撤？
现代文：三座城池已恢复，怎能轻易撤回？
English: Three castles have been restored, how can they be easily withdrawn?

古文：锦、右动摇，则宁、前震惊，关门亦失保障。
现代文：锦州、右屯动摇，那么宁远、前屯卫就会受到震惊，山海关的大门也就失去了保障。
English: If Jinzhou and Utun are shaken, then Ningyuan and Qiantunwei will be shocked, and the gate of Shanhaiguan Customs will lose its protection.

古文：今但择良将守之，必无他虑。 
现代文：现在只有选择良将把守，不应有其他考虑。 
English: The only thing to do now is to choose a good goalkeeper. There should be no other considerations.

古文：第意坚，且欲并撤宁、前二城。
现代文：高第决心已定，并且还打算撤退宁远、前屯卫两城的兵力。
English: Gaudi had already made up his mind, and also planned to withdraw the troops from Ningyuan and Qiantuwei.

古文：崇焕曰： 我宁前道也，官此当死此，我必不去。 
现代文：崇焕说： 我是宁前道，在此做官，即使死在此地，我也不会离开。 
English: Chong Huan said, "I am from Ningcheng Road. I am an official here. Even if I die here, I will not leave."

古文：第无以难，乃撤锦州、右屯、大、小凌河及松山、杏山、塔山守具，尽驱屯兵入关，委弃米粟十余万，而死亡载途，哭声震野，民怨而军益不振。
现代文：高第无语反驳，于是撤退锦州，右屯，大、小凌河以及松山、杏山、塔山的全部守具，把屯田的士兵也一同驱赶进山海关来，放弃粮食十多万担。而且途中人员死亡，哭声响彻四野，百姓不满，军队的士气更加不振。
English: Gao Di was speechless, so he retreated from Jinzhou, Yutong, Dadu, Xiaolinghe, Matsuyama, Xingshan, and Tashan. He also drove the soldiers from Tontian into Shanhaiguan, abandoning more than 100,000 carts of grain. In addition, people died on the way, cries resounded throughout the countryside, the people were dissatisfied, and the morale of the army was even weaker.

古文：崇焕遂乞终制，不许。
现代文：崇焕于是请求回家服丧，没有得到允许。
English: Chong Huan then asked to go home to mourn, but was not allowed to.

古文：十二月进按察使，视事如故。
现代文：十二月，晋升为按察使，和过去一样管理军事。
English: In December, he was promoted to the post of inspector general, managing the military as in the past.

古文：我大清知经略易与，六年正月举大军西渡辽河，二十三日抵宁远。
现代文：我们大清得知经略撤退，六年正月，就大举用兵，西渡辽河。二十三日抵达宁远。
English: We Daqing learned of the slight retreat, and in the first month of the sixth year, we used a large number of soldiers to cross the Liao River to the west. We arrived in Ningyuan on the 23rd.

古文：崇焕闻，即偕大将桂，副将左辅、朱梅，参将大寿，守备何可刚等集将士誓死守。
现代文：崇焕听说，马上同大将满桂，副将左辅、朱梅，参将祖大寿，守备何可刚等聚集将士在一起，誓死守城。
English: Hearing of this, Chong Huan immediately gathered together with General Man Gui, Vice Generals Zuo Fu and Zhu Mei, General Zou Dashou, Guard He Kegang, and others, and swore to defend the city to the death.

古文：崇焕更刺血为书，激以忠义，为之下拜，将士咸请效死。
现代文：崇焕又写下血书，激励士兵忠义报国，并为之向官兵下拜，所以将士都愿意出死力。
English: Chong Huan also wrote a book of blood, encouraging soldiers to be loyal to the country, and bowing to officers and soldiers for it, so the soldiers were willing to use deadly force.

古文：乃尽焚城外民居，携守具入城，清野以待。
现代文：于是烧毁城外的全部民房，把守备器械运进城中，等候大清军。
English: As a result, all the houses outside the city were burned down, and the defensive equipment was brought into the city to await the arrival of the Qing army.

古文：令同知程维楧诘奸，通判启倧具守卒食，辟道上行人。檄前屯守将赵率教、山海守将杨麒，将士逃至者悉斩，人心始定。
现代文：命令同知程维木英拷问奸细，通判官金启亻宗管理士兵饮食，并隐蔽路上的行人，传檄前屯守将赵率教、山海守将杨麒，如有将士逃到那里去全部斩首，由此，人心才稳定下来。
English: He ordered his confidant, Cheng Wei Muying, to torture and interrogate the spies, and sent the magistrate, Jin Qi Shanzong, to manage the soldiers' diet and hide the pedestrians on the road. He also ordered the former garrison commander Zhao to lead the education, the mountain and sea commander Yang Qi to lead the education, and if any soldiers fled there, to behead them all. Thus, the people's hearts were stabilized.

古文：明日，大军进攻，载楯穴城，矢石不能退。
现代文：第二天，大清军开始攻城，戴着盾牌掘洞入城，弓箭和滚石不能打退大清军。
English: The next day, the Great Qing Army began to attack the city. Wearing shields, they dug a hole into the city. Bows and arrows and rolling stones could not beat back the Great Qing Army.

古文：崇焕令闽卒罗立，发西洋巨炮，伤城外军。
现代文：崇焕命福建士兵罗立，发放西洋大炮，击伤城外的大清军。
English: Chong Huan Rui ordered Fujian soldiers to stand up, issued Western cannons, and wounded the Qing army outside the city.

古文：明日，再攻，复被却，围遂解，而启倧亦以然炮死。
现代文：第二天，再次进攻，又被击退，于是宁远之围解除了。通判金启亻宗也因为点大炮而战死。
English: The next day, another attack was repulsed, and Ningyuan's encirclement was lifted. Tongzhan Jinqi Yanzong was also killed by artillery fire.

古文：启倧起小吏，官经历，主赏功事，勤敏有志介。
现代文：启亻宗起初是一个小官吏，官名叫经历，掌管赏功的事情，勤奋聪明而又有志向。
English: At the beginning, Kai Shanzong was a minor official. The official's name was Experience. He was in charge of awarding merit. He was diligent, intelligent and ambitious.

古文：承宗重之，用为通判，核兵马钱粮，督城工，理军民词讼，大得众心。
现代文：承宗器重他，让他做通判官，核查兵马粮食的数量，监督修城工程，办理军民的诉讼案件，深得民心。
English: His successor respected him and let him be a judge, check the amount of grain for soldiers and horses, supervise the city construction project, and handle military and civilian litigation cases, which won the hearts of the people.

古文：死，赠光禄少卿，世荫锦衣试百户。
现代文：死后，追赠为光禄少卿，后代享受世袭锦衣百户的待遇。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Guanglu Shaoqing, and his descendants enjoyed the treatment of a hundred hereditary brocade families.

古文：初，中朝闻警，兵部尚书王永光大集廷臣议战守，无善策。
现代文：起初，朝廷听到边境的警报，兵部尚书王永光召集朝中大臣讨论战守问题，没有什么好策略。
English: At first, the imperial court heard the alarm at the border, and the Minister of Military Affairs, Shoshu Wang Yongguang, convened the ministers of North Korea and China to discuss the issue of defense. There was no good strategy.

古文：经略第、总兵麒并拥兵关上，不救，中外谓宁远必不守。
现代文：经略高第、总兵杨麒在山海关上有大量的部队，却不肯援救，朝廷官员认为宁远必定把守不住。
English: Although slightly higher, the general Yang Xuan had a large number of troops in Shanhaiguan, but refused to rescue, the court officials believed that Ningyuan would not be able to defend.

古文：及崇焕以书闻，举朝大喜，立擢崇焕右佥都御史，玺书奖励，桂等进秩有差。
现代文：等崇焕奏上捷报，满朝喜气洋洋，马上提升他为右佥都御史，熹宗用加盖玉玺的诏书奖励他，满桂等人也各有晋升。
English: When Chong Huan reported the victory, the whole court was jubilant, and he was immediately promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the capital. Emperor Xizong rewarded him with an imperial edict stamped with an emerald, and Emperor Gui and others were also promoted.

古文：我大清初解围，分兵数万略觉华岛，杀参将金冠等及军民数万。
现代文：大清兵刚解围，分兵数万进攻觉华岛，杀死参将金冠等以及军民数万。
English: The Great Qing soldiers had just lifted the siege, and tens of thousands of soldiers attacked Juehua Island, killing the general Jin Guan and tens of thousands of soldiers and civilians.

古文：崇焕方完城，力竭不能救也。
现代文：崇焕刚防卫宁远城，兵力已尽不能救援。
English: Chong Huan Gang defended Ningyuan City, and the troops were unable to rescue.

古文：高第镇关门，大反承宗政务，折辱诸将，诸将咸解体，遇麒若偏裨，麒至，见侮其卒。
现代文：高第镇守关门，一反承宗的政策，屈辱将领，使得将领们都离心离德。对待杨麒就如同他的偏裨军官一样，一次杨麒到来，发现高第侮辱他的士兵。
English: Gaudi kept the gates of the town closed, went against the policy of inheriting the dynasty, humiliated the generals, and made the generals all leave the country. He treated Yang Xuan just like his subordinate officers. Once Yang Xuan arrived, he found that Gaudi had insulted his soldiers.

古文：至是，坐失援，第、麒并褫官去，而以王之臣代第，赵率教代麒。
现代文：到这个时候因为没有发兵援助宁远，高第、杨麒一齐被罢官去职，用王之臣取代高第，赵率教取代了杨麒。
English: At this time, Gao Di and Yang Xi were both dismissed from their posts for failing to send troops to aid Ningyuan. Gao Di was replaced by Wang's vassal, and Zhao Luchu replaced Yang Xi.

古文：我大清举兵，所向无不摧破，诸将罔敢议战守。
现代文：我大清发兵，所到之处没有攻不破的，明朝将领不敢议论战守。
English: When I sent out troops in the Great Qing Dynasty, there was no place that was impregnable. The Ming Dynasty generals did not dare to discuss and defend the war.

古文：议战守，自崇焕始。
现代文：讨论战守的事是从袁崇焕开始的。
English: The discussion of the war began with Yuan Chonghuan.

古文：三月，复设辽东巡抚，以崇焕为之。
现代文：三月朝廷重设辽东巡抚，让崇焕来担任。
English: In March, the imperial court re-established the Liaodong Procuratorate, allowing Chong Huan to take up the post.

古文：魏忠贤遣其党刘应坤、纪用等出镇。
现代文：魏忠贤派遣他的党羽刘应坤、纪用等前往坐镇。
English: Wei Zhongxian sent his followers Liu Yingkun, Ji Ying and others to Zizhen.

古文：崇焕抗疏谏，不纳。
现代文：崇焕大胆地上疏反对，意见不被采纳。
English: Chong Huan boldly raised objections, but his opinions were not adopted.

古文：叙功，加兵部右侍郎，赉银币，世荫锦衣千户。
现代文：后来给评定功绩，晋升为兵部右侍郎，赏赐他不少银钱，并给他世代享有锦衣千户的封赏。
English: Later, he was given a merit evaluation, promoted to the right hand man of the military department, rewarded him with a lot of money, and gave him the award of enjoying the best clothes of a thousand households for generations.

古文：崇焕既解围，志渐骄，与桂不协，请移之他镇，乃召桂还。
现代文：袁崇焕解围以后，渐渐骄傲起来，同满桂开始不和，请把他调往别处驻兵，朝廷就召满桂回去了。
English: After the siege of Yuan Chonghuan was lifted, Yuan Chonghuan gradually became proud and started a feud with Man Gui. He was asked to move his garrison to another place, and the imperial court called Man Gui back.

古文：崇焕以之臣奏留桂，又与不协。中朝虑偾事，命之臣专督关内，以关外属崇焕画关守。
现代文：因为王之臣上书挽留满桂，又与王之臣不和，朝廷担心因此坏事，就命令之臣等专管关内的事，关外让崇焕分兵把守。
English: Because the king's vassal sent a letter to retain Man Gui, and there was discord with the king's vassal, the court was worried about bad things, so they ordered the vassal and others to be in charge of matters within the Guan, and let the Chonghuan detachment guard outside the Guan.

古文：崇焕虞廷臣忌己，上言： 陛下以关内外分责二臣，用辽人守辽土，且守且战，且筑且屯。
现代文：崇焕担心朝中大臣忌妒自己，上书说： 陛下把关内外，分责给两个大臣把守，用辽人防守辽地，又要作战又要防守，又要建城又要屯田。
English: Fearing that the ministers of the two Koreas would be jealous of him, Chong Hwan wrote: "Your majesty controls the gateways in and out of the country, assigning responsibilities to two ministers to guard them, using the Liao people to defend the Liao land, to fight and to defend, to build cities and to occupy fields.

古文：屯种所入，可渐减海运。
现代文：屯田的收入，可以减少海运的需要。
English: Tonden's income can reduce the need for shipping.

古文：大要坚壁清野以为体，乘间击瑕以为用；战虽不足，守则有余；守既有余，战无不足。顾勇猛图敌，敌必仇；奋迅立功，众必忌。
现代文：关外战略的大要在于以坚壁清野为主体，趁机袭击敌人为功用。这样战虽不足，守则有余；守既有余，战无不足，但是勇猛地攻打敌军，敌军一定仇视我；奋迅立功就有很多人会妒忌。
English: The main point of Guanwei strategy is to take the strong wall and clear field as the main body, and take advantage of the opportunity to attack the enemy as a function. In this way, although the battle is insufficient, the code is more than enough; the defense is more than enough, there is no shortage of war, but if I attack the enemy bravely, the enemy will certainly hate me; many people will be jealous if I succeed.

古文：任劳则必召怨，蒙罪始可有功；怨不深则劳不著，罪不大则功不成。
现代文：不辞辛劳地干事就必定要蒙受怨恨，身被罪名的人才可能建立功勋。蒙受的怨恨不深，功劳就不显著，罪过不大，那么功勋就不能成就。
English: A hard-working officer is bound to suffer resentment, and only a person who has been accused can establish merit. If the resentment is not deep, the merit is not significant, and the crime is not serious, then the merit cannot be achieved.

古文：谤书盈箧，毁言日至，从古已然，惟圣明与廷臣始终之。 
现代文：诽谤我的奏书满箱子都是，诋毁我的话语陛下天天可以听到，自古以来就是这样了，我希望圣明的陛下您和朝廷大臣能有始有终地信任我。 
English: There are chests full of books slandering me, and His Majesty hears slanderous words about me every day. This has been the case since ancient times. I hope that Your Majesty and the ministers of the Imperial Court can trust me from beginning to end.

古文：帝优旨褒答。
现代文：熹宗皇帝用温和的诏书回答并赞扬了他。
English: Emperor Taizong replied with a mild edict and praised him.

古文：其冬，崇焕偕应坤、用、率教巡历锦州、大、小凌河，议大兴屯田，渐复第所弃旧土。
现代文：这年冬天，崇焕同应坤、纪用、率教巡视锦州，大、小凌河，讨论大规模屯田，慢慢收复了高第以前放弃的领土。
English: This winter, Chong Huan, together with Ying Kun, Ji Ying, and leading scholars, toured Jinzhou, Dalian, and Xiaolinghe, discussed large-scale military camps, and slowly recovered the territory previously abandoned by Gaudi.

古文：忠贤与应坤等并因是荫锦衣，崇焕进所荫为指挥佥事。
现代文：忠贤与应坤等一并因此得到世袭锦衣的封赏，崇焕将他们受到荫封的子孙任命为指挥佥事。
English: As a result, Zhongxian and Yingkun received the award of hereditary brocade, and Chonghuan appointed their shadowed descendants as commanders.

古文：崇焕遂言： 辽左之坏，虽人心不固，亦缘失有形之险，无以固人心。
现代文：然后上书说： 辽左的失败，固然是因为人心不稳，但也是因为失了有利的险要地势，不能稳定人心。
English: Then the letter said: Liao Zuo's failure, of course, is due to the instability of the people, but it is also due to the loss of a favorable critical situation and the inability to stabilize the people's hearts.

古文：兵不利野战，只有凭坚城、用大炮一策。今山海四城既新，当更修松山诸城，班军四万人，缺一不可。 
现代文：士兵不利于野战，只有凭借坚固的城墙用大炮这个办法来守卫，现在山海的四城已经修建完毕，应当再修松山等城市，班军四万人，缺一不可。 
English: Soldiers are not conducive to field battles, and can only be guarded by means of solid city walls and cannons. Now that the four cities of the mountains and seas have been completed, cities such as Matsuyama should be rebuilt, and an army of 40,000 is indispensable.

古文：帝报从之。
现代文：熹宗皇帝回答说同意。
English: Emperor Taizong replied that he agreed.

古文：先是，八月中，我太祖高皇帝晏驾，崇焕遣使吊，且以觇虚实。
现代文：这以前，八月中旬，清太祖高皇帝逝世，崇焕派遣使节前往吊唁，并且利用这个机会窥测清朝内部的虚实。
English: Prior to this, in mid-August, Emperor Taizu Gao of the Qing Dynasty passed away, and Chong Huan sent an envoy to pay condolences, and used this opportunity to spy on the truth within the Qing Dynasty.

古文：我太宗文皇帝遣使报之，崇焕欲议和，以书附使者还报。我大清兵将讨朝鲜，欲因此阻其兵，得一意南下。
现代文：我清太宗文皇帝派遣使者回访了他，崇焕想议和，就写了一封信让使者带回来，我们大清部队将要讨伐朝鲜，打算用议和阻止他们的军队，以便能专心南下。
English: My Qing Emperor Taizongwen sent an envoy to pay him a return visit. Chong Huan wanted to discuss peace, so he wrote a letter for the envoy to bring back. Our Qing forces were going to attack Korea, and we planned to use discussion and stop their army so that we could concentrate on going south.

古文：七年正月，再遣使答之，遂大兴兵渡鸭绿江南讨。
现代文：七年正月，又派使者回答了他，于是，派兵渡过鸭绿江向南方进攻。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, he sent an envoy to answer him, and then sent troops across the Yalu River to attack the south.

古文：朝议以崇焕、之臣不相能，召之臣还，罢经略不设，以关内外尽属崇焕，与镇守中官应坤、用并便宜从事。
现代文：朝中认为崇焕与之臣不和，召之臣回来，免除经略不再设置，关内外都交由崇焕监管，同监军的宦官应坤、纪用一起见机行事。
English: The Imperial Court thought that Chong Huan was not on good terms with his vassals, so he called his vassals back, exempted them from the military strategy and no longer set it up. Both inside and outside the gates were placed under the supervision of Chong Huan, and the eunuchs who supervised the troops, Ying Kun and Ji Ying, acted together when they saw an opportunity.

古文：崇焕锐意恢复，乃乘大军之出，遣将缮锦州、中左、大凌三城，而再使使持书议和。
现代文：崇焕坚决想要收复失地，于是趁大清军外出作战之机，调遣将士修缮锦州、中左、大凌三城，同时又派使者持书前去议和，恰巧朝鲜与毛文龙同时告急，朝廷命崇焕前去救援。
English: Chong Huan resolutely wanted to recover the lost territory, so he took advantage of the opportunity of the Qing army going out to fight, dispatched soldiers to repair the three cities of Jinzhou, Zhongzuo and Daling, and at the same time sent an envoy with a letter to discuss peace. It happened that North Korea and Mao Wenlong were in an emergency at the same time, and the court ordered Chong Huan to go to the rescue.

古文：会朝鲜及毛文龙同告急，朝命崇焕发兵援，崇焕以水师援文龙，又遣左辅、赵率教、朱梅等九将将精卒九千先后逼三岔河，为牵制之势，而朝鲜已为大清所服，诸将乃还。崇焕初议和，中朝不知。
现代文：崇焕派水军援救文龙，又派遣左辅、赵率教、朱梅等九位将领率九千精兵先后逼进三岔河，来牵制大清势力，而朝鲜已经被征服，各位将领于是返回。崇焕当初开始议和时，朝廷里不知道。
English: Chong Hwan sent a naval force to rescue Wenlong, and dispatched nine generals, including Zuo Fu, Zhao, who led the education, and Zhu Mei, who led nine thousand soldiers, to push into the Samcheon River to contain the Qing forces. North Korea had already been conquered, and the generals returned. When Chong Hwan initially began to discuss peace, the court did not know.

古文：及奏报，优旨许之，后以为非计，频旨戒谕。
现代文：等到奏章送上，熹宗皇帝以赞赏的态度颁发诏书表示同意，后来认为不是好计策，又几次传旨告诫他。
English: When the report was submitted, Emperor Taizong issued an imperial edict with an appreciative attitude to express his agreement. Later, he thought it was not a good strategy and sent several orders to warn him.

古文：崇焕欲藉是修故疆，持愈力。
现代文：崇焕打算借此机会来修整旧疆域，所以坚持要议和。
English: Chong Huan intended to take this opportunity to rectify the old territory, so he insisted on negotiating peace.

古文：而朝鲜及文龙被兵，言官因谓和议所致。
现代文：朝鲜及文龙受到大清军进攻，朝中的谏官于是说是因为崇焕议和而造成的。
English: North Korea and Wenlong were attacked by the Qing army, and the eunuchs in the court then said that it was caused by the emergence of Chonghwan.

古文：四月，崇焕上言： 关外四城虽延袤二百里，北负山，南阻海，广四十里尔。
现代文：四月，崇焕上书说： 关外的四城虽绵延二百里，北面靠山南面临海，东西宽只四十里罢了。
English: In April, Chong Huan wrote: Although the four cities outside Guanzhong stretch for two hundred miles, they are only forty miles wide from east to west, facing the sea to the north and the mountains to the south.

古文：今屯兵六万，商民数十万，地隘人稠，安所得食？
现代文：现在屯兵六万，商民数十万之多，可谓地狭人多，从哪里取得粮食呢？
English: Now there are sixty thousand soldiers and hundreds of thousands of merchants, which is a lot of people in a small place. Where will they get food from?

古文：锦州、中左、大凌三城，修筑必不可已。
现代文：锦州、中左、大凌三城的修建一定不能停止。
English: The construction of the three cities of Jinzhou, Zhongzuo and Daling must not be stopped.

古文：业移商民，广开屯种。
现代文：现在我已经迁移了部分商人和农民在那里大规模屯田。
English: Now I have relocated some of the merchants and farmers to large-scale farmlands there.

古文：倘城不完而敌至，势必撤还，是弃垂成功也。
现代文：如果城墙不坚固而敌军到来，就必须撤回，这样等于放弃了将要成功的事业。
English: If the walls are not strong and the enemy comes, it is necessary to retreat, which is tantamount to abandoning the cause that will be successful.

古文：故乘敌有事江东，姑以和之说缓之。
现代文：所以趁敌人在江东作战之际，姑且以议和来延缓时间。
English: Therefore, taking advantage of the fact that the enemy was fighting in the eastern part of the Yangtze River, they delayed the time with peace talks.

古文：敌知，则三城已完，战守又在关门四百里外，金汤益固矣。 
现代文：等敌人知道时，三城已修建完毕。或守或战都在关门以外四百里的地方，我朝的边防也就可以固如金汤了。 
English: By the time the enemy knows, the construction of the three cities will have been completed. Either the defense or the battle will be four hundred miles away from the closed gate, and the border defense of our country will be as solid as gold soup.

古文：帝优旨报闻。
现代文：熹宗以赞赏的口气回答说知道了。
English: Yeongjong replied in an appreciative tone, "I understand.

古文：时率教驻锦州，护版筑，朝命尤世禄来代，又以辅为前锋总兵官，驻大凌河。
现代文：当时率教驻军锦州，监护修筑城墙，朝廷任命尤世禄来取代他，又让左辅担任前锋总兵官，驻守大凌河。
English: At that time, he led the army stationed in Jinzhou, supervised the construction of the city wall, and the court appointed You Shilu to replace him, and let the left assistant serve as the forward chief officer, stationed in Dalinghe.

古文：世禄未至，辅未入大凌，五月十一日大清兵直抵锦州，四面合围。
现代文：世禄没有到，左辅也没有入守大凌，五月十一日，大清军兵直抵锦州，四面围城。
English: Shilu did not arrive, Zuo Fu did not enter the defense of Daling, and on May 11, the Qing soldiers arrived in Jinzhou, besieging the city on all sides.

古文：率教偕中官用婴城守，而遣使议和，欲缓师以待救，使三返不决，围益急。
现代文：率教同宦官纪用环城防守，同时派使者议和，想赢得时间等来援兵，使者往返三次没有效果，大清兵的围困更加紧了。
English: He led his eunuchs to defend the ring city with discipline, and at the same time sent envoys to negotiate peace, hoping to win time to reinforce the troops. The envoys went back and forth three times without effect, and the siege of the Qing soldiers became even tighter.

古文：崇焕以宁远兵不可动，选精骑四千，令世禄、大寿将，绕出大军后决战；别遣水师东出，相牵制；且请发蓟镇、宣、大兵，东护关门。
现代文：崇焕因为宁远的兵力不可以调动，就选精骑兵四千人，命令世禄、大寿带领，绕到大清军的后面开始决战。另外又派水兵在大清军东面作战，牵制清朝兵力。并且请求发动蓟镇、宣、大的兵力，在东面护守关门。
English: Because the troops in Ningyuan could not be mobilized, Chong Huan selected four thousand elite cavalrymen and ordered Shilok and Datou to lead them to go around the back of the Qing army to start a decisive battle. In addition, he sent sailors to fight on the east side of the Qing army to contain the Qing army. And he requested the launch of Shizhen, Xuan and a large army to guard the gate in the east.

古文：朝廷已命山海满桂移前屯，三屯孙祖寿移山海，宣府黑云龙移一片石，蓟辽总督阎鸣泰移关城；又发昌平、天津、保定兵驰赴上关；檄山西、河南、山东守臣整兵听调。
现代文：朝廷已经命令驻守山海的满桂移驻前屯，驻守三屯的孙祖寿移驻山海，驻守宣府的黑云龙移驻一片石，蓟辽总督阎鸣泰移驻关城；又派昌平、天津、保定的军队奔赴上关；发书给山西、河南、山东等地的守臣整顿队伍随时听候调遣。
English: The imperial court has ordered Man Gui stationed in Shanhai to be moved to Qian Tun, Sun Zu Shou stationed in San Tun to be moved to Shanhai, Hei Yun Long stationed in Xuanfu to be moved to Shishi, and Yan Ming Tai, the governor-general of Liao, to be moved to Guancheng; it has also sent troops from Changping, Tianjin and Baoding to Shangguan; it has issued a letter to the Shushi rectification teams in Shanxi, Henan, Shandong and other places to be ready to be dispatched.

古文：世禄等将行，大清已于二十八日分兵趋宁远。
现代文：世禄等将要出发时，大清已在二十八日分兵开往宁远。
English: When Shiroku and the others were about to set off, Daechi had already left for Ningyuan on the 28th.

古文：崇焕与中官应坤、副使毕自肃督将士登陴守，列营濠内，用炮距击；而桂、世禄、大寿大战城外，士多死，桂身被数矢，大军亦旋引去，益兵攻锦州。以溽暑不能克，士卒多损伤，六月五日亦引还，因毁大、小凌河二城。
现代文：崇焕与宦官应坤、副史毕自肃督兵登城拒敌，派兵躲在壕沟内，用大炮击敌。而满桂、世禄、大寿在城外作战，伤亡累累，满桂身中数箭。大清军不久也就引退，派更多兵力攻打锦州，因为天热无法攻下，士兵损伤众多，六月五日也率兵归还，顺势摧毁大、小凌河两座城池。
English: Chong Huan, together with eunuch Ying Kun and deputy historian Bi Zizhi, sent troops to the city to resist the enemy, hiding in a trench and using cannons to attack the enemy. Meanwhile, Mangui, Shilu and Datou fought outside the city, suffering heavy casualties. Mangui was hit by several arrows. The Qing army soon retired and sent more troops to attack Jinzhou, but they were unable to take the city because of the heat and many soldiers were injured. On June 5, they returned with their troops and destroyed the two cities of Dalinghe and Xiaolinghe.

古文：时称宁、锦大捷，桂、率教功为多。
现代文：这次战役当时被称为宁锦大捷，满桂、率教立功最多。
English: At that time, this battle was known as the Great Victory of Ningjin, with the greatest number of victories, victories and achievements.

古文：忠贤因使其党论崇焕不救锦州为暮气，崇焕遂乞休。
现代文：忠贤于是让他的党羽说崇焕不救锦州是暮年衰弱气象，崇焕于是请求辞职。
English: Zhongxian then told his followers that if Chong Huan did not save Jinzhou, it would be a sign of weakness at the end of the year. Chong Huan then asked for his resignation.

古文：中外方争颂忠贤，崇焕不得已，亦请建祠，终不为所喜。
现代文：朝廷内外正争着颂扬忠贤，崇焕没办法，也请求为他建立生祠，最终还是得不到忠贤的欢心。
English: Both inside and outside the imperial court, there was a struggle to glorify the virtuous man, and there was no way for Chong Huan to do so. He also requested that a shrine be built for him, but in the end, he did not win the favor of the virtuous man.

古文：七月，遂允其归，而以王之臣代为督师兼辽东巡抚，驻宁远。
现代文：七月朝廷允许他离职，让王之臣接替他做督师兼辽东巡抚，驻兵宁远。
English: In July, the imperial court allowed him to leave office, and let Wang's vassal succeed him as inspector and Liaodong governor, stationed in Ningyuan.

古文：及叙功，文武增秩赐荫者数百人，忠贤子亦封伯，而崇焕止增一秩。
现代文：等到论功时，文臣武将被晋级荫封者有几百人，忠贤的孙子也封了伯，而崇焕只是升了一级。
English: By the time of the merit discussion, there were several hundred people who were eclipsed by the promotion of Wenshenwu, and the grandson of Zhongxian was also awarded the title of Bo, while Chonghuan was only promoted one level.

古文：尚书霍维华不平，疏乞让荫，忠贤亦不许。
现代文：尚书霍维华不平，上疏请求辞让给自己的荫封，忠贤不允许。
English: Shangshu Hovihua was not satisfied, Shangsuo requested to give up his shadow seal, and Zhongxian did not allow it.

古文：未几，熹宗崩。庄烈帝即位，忠贤伏诛，削诸冒功者。
现代文：不多久，熹宗逝世，庄烈帝即位，忠贤被诛杀，削了过去冒领军功封赏者的官职。
English: Not long after, Emperor Taizong died, Emperor Zhuang was enthroned, and Emperor Zhongxian was killed, cutting down the official positions of those who had led the army in the past.

古文：廷臣争请召崇焕。其年十一月擢右都御史，视兵部添注左侍郎事。
现代文：朝廷大臣争着请求召回崇焕，这年十一月，袁崇焕被提升为右都御史，掌管兵部添注左侍郎的事务。
English: In November of that year, Yuan Chonghuan was promoted to the post of the Right Metropolitan Historian, in charge of the affairs of the Left Attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：崇祯元年四月，命以兵部尚书兼右副都御史，督师蓟辽、兼督登莱、天津军务，所司敦促上道。
现代文：崇祯元年四月，被任命做兵部尚书兼右副都御史，督管蓟、辽两地军队，兼登、莱、天津的军务，上司敦促他走马上任。
English: In April of the first year of the Chongzhen era, he was appointed as the head of the military department and the right vice-governor of the capital, in charge of the military affairs of the two regions of Shandong and Liao, as well as the military affairs of Deng, Lai and Tianjin. His superiors urged him to take up the post.

古文：七月，崇焕入都，先奏陈兵事，帝召见平台，慰劳甚至，咨以方略。
现代文：七月崇焕入都，先上疏陈述军事。庄烈帝在平台召见他，对他深加慰劳，并向他咨询用兵方略。
English: In July, Chong Huan entered the capital, and first made a military statement. Emperor Zhuang summoned him to the platform, consoled him deeply, and consulted him on the strategy of using soldiers.

古文：对曰： 方略已具疏中。
现代文：他说： 用兵方略已经全部写在奏章中了。
English: He said: "The strategy is all written down in the playbook.

古文：臣受陛下特眷，愿假以便宜，计五年，全辽可复。 
现代文：臣受陛下的特别宠信，希望能给我以便宜行事的权力，估计五年内，全辽可以恢复。 
English: I am particularly favored by Your Majesty, and I hope to be given the power to act as I see fit. It is estimated that within five years, all of Liao Zi can be restored.

古文：帝曰： 复辽，朕不吝封侯赏。
现代文：庄烈帝说： 你能收复辽地，我决不吝啬封侯之赏。
English: Zhuo Ledei said, "If you can recover Liaoning Province, I will by no means begrudge you the reward of the title of prince."

古文：卿努力解天下倒悬，卿子孙亦受其福。 
现代文：你努力平息天下的动乱，你的子孙也会享你的福的。 
English: If you work hard to calm the turmoil in the world, your children and grandchildren will also enjoy your blessings.

古文：崇焕顿首谢。
现代文：崇焕磕头谢恩。
English: Chonghuan Shantou is grateful.

古文：帝退少憩，给事中许誉卿叩以五年之略。
现代文：庄烈帝退朝稍事休息的时候，给事中许誉卿向崇焕询问五年内收复辽地策略。
English: When Emperor Zhuangde retired to rest for a while, Xu Rongqing asked Chong Huan about the strategy to recover Liaoning within five years.

古文：崇焕言： 圣心焦劳，聊以是相慰耳。 
现代文：崇焕说： 皇上为这事心中焦急，我姑且用这话安慰他罢了。 
English: Chong Huan said, "The Emperor is anxious about this matter. I can only comfort him with these words."

古文：誉卿曰： 上英明，安可漫对。
现代文：誉卿说： 皇上英明，你怎能随便回话呢？
English: The eulogist said, "Your Majesty is wise, how can you casually reply?

古文：异日按期责效，奈何？ 
现代文：以后按期责取成功，你怎么办？ 
English: What will you do if you fail to meet the deadline?

古文：崇焕怃然自失。
现代文：崇焕茫然不知所云。
English: Chong Huan was at a loss.

古文：顷之，帝出，即奏言： 东事本不易竣。
现代文：一会儿，皇帝出朝，崇焕上奏说： 辽东军事本来就不容易成功。
English: Soon after the emperor's accession to the throne, Chong Huan made a speech, saying: Liaodong's military is not easy to succeed.

古文：陛下既委臣，臣安敢辞难。
现代文：陛下既然交由我来办，我怎么敢因难而推辞？
English: Your Majesty, since you have entrusted me with this task, how can I refuse because of the difficulties?

古文：但五年内，户部转军饷，工部给器械，吏部用人，兵部调兵选将，须中外事事相应，方克有济。 
现代文：只是在五年内，户部转给军饷，工部供给器械，吏部选派官员，兵部调兵遣将必须朝廷内外事事相互照应，才有可能取得成功。 
English: It is only within five years that the transfer of the household department to the Imperial Household Agency, the supply of equipment from the Ministry of Industry, the selection and dispatch of officials from the Ministry of Personnel, and the dispatch of troops from the Ministry of Military Affairs will have to be coordinated with each other both inside and outside the court in order to be successful.

古文：帝为饬四部臣，如其言。
现代文：庄烈帝按他所说，发布诏书告诫了四部大臣。
English: According to him, Emperor Zhuo Liang issued an edict to admonish the four ministers.

古文：崇焕又言： 以臣之力，制全辽有余，调众口不足。
现代文：崇焕又说： 依我的能力，制服全辽的疆土有余，可是统一众人的议论力量就不足了。
English: Chong Huan also said: According to my ability, I have more than enough power to subdue the entire territory of Liao, but the power of discussion to unify everyone is not enough.

古文：一出国门，便成万里，忌能妒功，夫岂无人。
现代文：我一出国门，就踏上了万里征途。朝中忌能妒功的，总是不乏其人。
English: As soon as I left the country, I embarked on a journey of a thousand miles. There are always people who can be envied in the DPRK.

古文：即不以权力掣臣肘，亦能以意见乱臣谋。 
现代文：就是他们不能以权力牵制我，也能用意见来打乱我的谋略。 
English: Even if they can't hold me back with power, they can use their opinions to disrupt my strategy.

古文：帝起立倾听，谕之曰： 卿无疑虑，朕自有主持。 
现代文：庄烈帝站起来侧耳倾听他的话，告诉他说： 您不必为此忧虑，我自有主张。 
English: Zhuge Liang stood up, listened to his words, and told him: "You don't have to worry about this, I have my own opinion.

古文：大学士刘鸿训等请收还之臣、桂尚方剑，以赐崇焕，假之便宜。
现代文：大学士刘鸿训等请收回之臣、满桂的尚方宝剑，赐给崇焕，并给他便宜行事的权力。
English: Liu Hongxun, a university scholar, and others requested that the Shangfang sword, which was full of gui, be given to Chonghuan, and that he be given the power to act cheaply.

古文：帝悉从之，赐崇焕酒馔而出。
现代文：庄烈帝都一一答应，并赐崇焕酒馔，然后散朝而去。
English: Zhuangde Emperor agreed one by one, and gave Chonghuan wine gourd, and then dispersed.

古文：崇焕以前此熊廷弼、孙承宗皆为人排构，不得竟其志，上言： 恢复之计，不外臣昔年以辽人守辽土，以辽土养辽人，守为正著，战为奇著，和为旁著之说。
现代文：崇焕因为以前熊廷弼、孙承宗都被人诬陷、排挤，不能实现他们的抱负，上书说： 收复辽地的计策，不外乎以前我用辽人守辽土，用辽土养辽人，守为正招，战为奇招，和为旁招的说法。
English: Because both Xiong Tingtao and Sun Chengzong had been slandered and ousted in the past, and could not realize their ambitions, Chong Huan wrote: The strategy to recover Liaodong is nothing more than the saying that in the past, I used Liao people to guard Liao soil, used Liao soil to raise Liao people, and used guarding as the main strategy, fighting as a strange strategy, and as a side strategy.

古文：法在渐不在骤，在实不在虚，此臣与诸边臣所能为。
现代文：实施之法在于逐步实行而不能求快，在于实实在在而不能务虚。这是我和守边的大臣们所能做到的。
English: The method of implementation is to gradually implement and not to seek speed, to be real and not to be pragmatic. This is what I and the defense ministers can do.

古文：至用人之人，与为人用之人，皆至尊司其钥。
现代文：至于负责用人的大臣和任用有作为的官员，都由皇上您掌握其关键。
English: As for the minister in charge of employing people and the officials who have been appointed, it is up to you, the emperor, to hold the key.

古文：何以任而勿贰，信而勿疑？
现代文：怎样才能任而无贰，信而无疑？
English: How can talent be left to its own devices, unquestioned?

古文：盖驭边臣与廷臣异，军中可惊可疑者殊多，但当论成败之大局，不必摘一言一行之微瑕。
现代文：大概说来驾驭边臣与朝臣的办法不同，军队中可惊可疑的事特别多，皇上只应当看他成败的大局，没必要抓住边臣一言一行的小过错不放。
English: Presumably, there are different ways to control a vassal and a courtier, and there are many surprising and suspicious things in the army. The emperor should only look at the overall situation of his success or failure. There is no need to catch the vassal's small mistakes in every word and deed.

古文：事任既重，为怨实多，诸有利于封疆者，皆不利于此身者也。
现代文：边臣负担的责任重大，对他们的埋怨实在很多。凡是有利于边疆的举动，对将领自己都不利。
English: The responsibilities of the border guards are heavy, and there are a lot of complaints about them. Any action that is beneficial to the borderlands is detrimental to the generals themselves.

古文：况图敌之急，敌亦从而间之，是以为边臣甚难。
现代文：何况攻敌紧急，敌人也会从中离间大将，所以当边疆守臣实在很难。
English: Moreover, it is urgent to attack the enemy, and the enemy will also be distracted, so it is really difficult to be a border guard.

古文：陛下爱臣知臣，臣何必过疑惧，但中有所危，不敢不告。 
现代文：陛下爱护我信任我，我何必过多疑虑惧怕呢？只是心中意识到自己有危险，不敢不报告。 
English: Your Majesty loves me, protects me, and trusts me. Why should I have so many doubts and fears? I just know in my heart that I am in danger and dare not fail to report it.

古文：帝优诏答之，赐蟒玉、银币，疏辞蟒玉不受。
现代文：庄烈帝以安慰的诏书回答了他，并赐给他蟒玉、银币，他上书辞让蟒玉，没有接受。
English: Zhuang Rong replied to him with a consoling imperial edict, and gave him the jade and silver coins. He did not accept the imperial edict, but asked for the jade.

古文：是月，川、湖兵戍宁远者，以缺饷四月大噪，余十三营起应之，缚系巡抚毕自肃、总兵官朱梅、通判张世荣、推官苏涵淳于谯楼上。
现代文：这个月，川、湖军队戍守宁远的，因为军饷缺发达四个月之久，起来喧闹，其余的十三个营起来响应他们，把巡抚毕自肃、总兵官朱梅、通判张世荣、推官苏涵淳绑了去，囚禁在城墙上的碉楼里。
English: This month, the army of the rivers and lakes garrisoned in Ningyuan, which had been underfunded and underdeveloped for four months, rioted. The remaining thirteen battalions responded to them and tied up the governor Bi Zixun, the chief military officer Zhu Mei, the general judge Zhang Shirong, and the magistrate Su Hanchun, and imprisoned them in a mirage on the city wall.

古文：自肃伤重，兵备副使郭广初至，躬翼自肃，括抚赏及朋椿二万金以散，不厌，贷商民足五万，乃解。
现代文：自肃受重伤，兵备副使郭广刚到，亲自保护自肃，收集抚赏金和不动金二万两用以平息事态，数目不足，又从商人百姓那里借贷五万两给他们，事情才得以解决。
English: Zisshu was seriously injured. Guo Guanggang, the deputy military commander, arrived at the scene and personally protected Zisshu. He collected 20,000 taels of bounty and 20,000 taels of untouchable money to calm the situation, but the amount was insufficient. He also lent them 50,000 taels of money from merchants and common people, and the matter was resolved.

古文：自肃疏引罪，走中左所，自经死。
现代文：自肃上书自行请罪，逃往中左所，自杀而死。
English: He wrote a letter of self-condemnation and pleaded guilty. He fled to the center-left and committed suicide.

古文：崇焕以八月初抵关，闻变驰与广密谋，宥首恶张正朝、张思顺，令捕十五人戮之市；斩知谋中军吴国琦，责参将彭簪古，黜都司左良玉等四人。
现代文：崇焕在八月初抵达关防所，听说兵变就骑马前去同郭广密谋，宽恕了带头起事的杨正朝、张思顺，命令逮捕了十五人在街市上杀掉；斩知情不报的中军吴国琦，责问参将彭簪古，罢黜都司左良玉等四人。
English: Chong Huan arrived at the checkpoint at the beginning of August. When he heard about the mutiny, he rode to conspire with Guo Guang. He forgave Yang Zhengchao and Zhang Sishun, who led the uprising, and ordered the arrest of fifteen people to kill them in the street market. He also ordered Wu Guojun, a Chinese soldier who did not report the information, to be executed, interrogated the general Peng Binggu, and dismissed four people, including the governor of the capital Zuo Liangyu.

古文：发正朝、思顺前锋立功，世荣、涵淳以贪虐致变，亦斥之。
现代文：派正朝、思顺到前线立功赎罪，世荣、涵淳因贪污虐待下属导致事变，也被罢免。
English: He sent Zhengchao and Sishun to the front line to make meritorious contributions and atone for their sins. Shierong and Hanjun were also dismissed for corruption and abuse of subordinates that led to the incident.

古文：独都司程大乐一营不从变，特为奖励。
现代文：只有都司程大乐一营没有跟从兵变，特别为此给予奖励。
English: Only one battalion, that of General Cheng Dalet, did not follow the mutiny, and was specially rewarded for this.

古文：一方乃靖。
现代文：由此当地才稳定下来。
English: It was only then that the situation stabilised.

古文：关外大将四五人，事多掣肘。后定设二人，以梅镇宁远，大寿仍驻锦州。
现代文：关外大将四、五人，办起事情往往互相牵制，后来又规定只设二人，由朱梅镇守宁远，大寿仍然驻军锦州。
English: There were four or five generals in charge of foreign affairs, and they often interfered with each other. Later, it was decided that there should only be two generals, with Zhu Meizhen in charge of Ningyuan and Dashu still stationed in Jinzhou.

古文：至是，梅将解任，崇焕请合宁、锦为一镇，大寿仍驻锦州，加中军副将何可刚都督佥事，代梅驻宁远，而移蓟镇率教于关门，关内外止设二大将。
现代文：到这个时候朱梅就要卸任了，崇焕请求合宁远、锦州为一镇，大寿仍然驻军锦州，提升中军副将何可刚都督佥事，接替朱梅驻守宁远，改派蓟镇的赵率教驻军关门，关内外只设两员大将。
English: By this time, Zhu Mei was about to step down from his post. Chong Huan requested that He Ningyuan and Jinzhou be unified into one town. Dashu was still stationed in Jinzhou. He promoted the vice-general of the Chinese army, He Kogang, to the post of governor, and stationed him in Ningyuan to replace Zhu Mei. Zhao, who was reassigned to Shanzhen, led the garrison to close the gate, and only two generals were stationed inside and outside the gate.

古文：因极称三人之才，谓： 臣自期五年，专藉此三人，当与臣相终始。
现代文：就此事在上疏中极力称赞他们三人的才干，说： 我自许五年内收复，就专靠这三个人了，应当让他们从头到尾辅助我。
English: In regard to this matter, he praised the talents of the three of them at length in the lecture hall, saying, "I promise myself that I will recover within five years, so I will rely solely on these three people, and they should assist me from start to finish."

古文：届期不效，臣手戮三人，而身归死于司败。 
现代文：到时候没有成效，我就亲手杀了他们三个，我自己的命交由司法部门处理吧。 
English: If that doesn't work, I'll kill the three of them with my own hands, and leave my own life to the justice department.

古文：帝可之，崇焕遂留镇宁远。
现代文：庄烈帝同意了他的意见。崇焕于是留下来镇守宁远。
English: Emperor Zhuang agreed with his opinion. So Chong Huan stayed to defend Ningyuan.

古文：自肃既死，崇焕请停巡抚，及登莱巡抚孙国桢免，崇焕又请罢不设。
现代文：自肃已经死了，崇焕请求停止设巡抚一职。等到登莱巡抚孙国桢免职，崇焕又请求虚其位不再派人。
English: When Sun Guojun, the governor of Denglai, was relieved of his duties, Chong Huan again requested that no one be appointed to his position.

古文：帝亦报可。
现代文：庄烈帝也都回答可以。
English: Zhuo Ledei also answered yes.

古文：哈剌慎三十六家向受抚赏，后为插汉所迫，且岁饥，有叛志。
现代文：哈剌慎三十六家过去接受了明朝的安抚和封赏，后来被插汉所逼迫，又因收成不好，有叛改的意向。
English: In the past, the thirty-six families of Harbin accepted the appeasement and reward of the Ming Dynasty. Later, they were persecuted by the Han Dynasty, and because of the poor harvest, they had the intention of treason.

古文：崇焕召至于边，亲抚慰，皆听命。
现代文：崇焕召他们在边境上相见，亲自安抚慰问他们，他们都顺服了。
English: Chong Huan called them to meet at the border, and personally comforted them, and they all obeyed.

古文：二年闰四月，叙春秋两防功，加太子太保，赐蟒衣、银币，荫锦衣千户。
现代文：二年闰四月评叙春秋两防的战功，崇焕被加封太子太保，赐给蟒衣、银币，并得到荫封子孙锦衣千户的封赏。
English: In leap April of the second year, the war exploits of the Spring and Autumn Defense were evaluated, and Chong Huan was awarded the title of Crown Prince Taibao, given a silk robe and silver coins, and received a reward from the thousands of children and grandchildren of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：崇焕始受事，即欲诛毛文龙。文龙者，仁和人。
现代文：崇焕上任一开始，就想杀掉毛文龙，文龙，仁和人。
English: As soon as Chong Huan took office, he wanted to kill Mao Wenlong, Wenlong, Ren and others.

古文：以都司援朝鲜，逗留辽东，辽东失，自海道遁回，乘虚袭杀大清镇江守将，报巡抚王化贞，而不及经略熊廷弼，两人隙始开。
现代文：以都司之职率兵援助朝鲜，逗留在辽东一带，辽东失陷后，从海路逃回，乘守备空虚杀死大清镇江的守将，向巡抚王化贞做了报告，没有告诉经略熊廷弼，由此两人开始有了怨恨。
English: He assisted North Korea with troops under the command of the governor of the capital and stayed in the area of Liaodong. After the fall of Liaodong, he fled back by sea, and killed the commander of the Zhenjiang River of the Great Qing Dynasty by taking advantage of the absence of guards. He made a report to the governor, Wang Huazhen, but did not tell the governor, Xiong Tingyao. As a result, the two began to have a grudge.

古文：顾文龙所居东江，形势虽足牵制，其人本无大略，往辄败衄，而岁糜饷无算；且惟务广招商贾，贩易禁物，名济朝鲜，实阑出塞，无事则鬻参贩布为业，有事亦罕得其用。
现代文：当时朝廷里掌权的人正赏识化贞，于是授职文龙为总兵官，逐渐加升到左都督，挂起将军印，赐尚方宝剑，像内地一样在皮岛上设立军镇。皮岛又叫东江，在登、莱沿岸的大海中，全长八十里，不生长草木，远离海岸，靠近北岸，北岸与大清界只相隔八十里的海面，他的东北海就属于朝鲜了。不过，毛文龙占居的东江，形势虽然足以牵制大清兵，但他本人没有大的谋略，每次征战都失算，每年浪费的军饷无法计算，并且只顾征招商贾，贩卖禁物，名义上在援助朝鲜，实际上是妄出边塞，没有军事的时候就以变卖人参、布匹为职事，有战争，也很少得到过他的功用。
English: At that time, the people in power in the imperial court were praising Zheng Huazhen, so they appointed Wenlong as the chief military officer, gradually promoted him to the left governor, hung the general's seal, gave Shangfang the sword, and set up a military town on Pi Island like the mainland. Pi Island is also called Dongjiang. In the sea along the coast of Deng and Lai, it is eighty miles long. No plants grow there. Far from the coast, it is close to the north coast. The north coast is only eighty miles away from the Great Qing border. His Northeast Sea belongs to North Korea. However, the East River occupied by Mao Wenlong, although the situation is enough

古文：工科给事中潘士闻劾文龙糜饷杀降，尚宝卿董茂忠请撤文龙，治兵关、宁。
现代文：工科给事中潘士闻弹劾文龙浪费军饷滥杀俘虏的罪行，尚宝卿董茂忠请求撤了文龙的兵，专门整治山海关、宁远的军队。
English: In the middle of the engineering incident, Pan Shiwen impeached Wenlong for the crime of wasting military funds and indiscriminately killing prisoners. Shang Baoqing Dong Maozhong requested the withdrawal of Wenlong's soldiers, specifically to rectify the Shanhaiguan Customs and Ningyuan army.

古文：兵部议不可，而崇焕心弗善也，尝疏请遣部臣理饷。
现代文：兵部讨论认为不行。崇焕心里对文龙不高兴，曾上书请求派部臣到文龙处清理粮饷。
English: Chong Huan was not happy with Wenlong in his heart, and had written to request that a minister be sent to Wenlong's place to clean up the grain.

古文：文龙恶文臣监制，抗疏驳之，崇焕不悦。
现代文：文龙讨厌有文臣在身边牵制，上书反驳，崇焕很不高兴。
English: Wenlong hated having Wenchen around to keep him in check, and wrote a rebuttal, which made Chonghuang very unhappy.

古文：及文龙来谒，接以宾礼，文龙又不让，崇焕谋益决。
现代文：等到文龙来拜访时，崇焕按宾客之礼迎接他，文龙又不谦让，崇焕除掉毛文龙的主意更加坚决了。
English: When Wenlong came to visit, Chonghuan greeted him as a guest, Wenlong was not humble, and Chonghuan's idea of getting rid of Mao Wenlong was even more resolute.

古文：至是，遂以阅兵为名，泛海抵双岛，文龙来会。
现代文：到了这个时候，崇焕就以阅兵为名，乘船到达双岛，文龙前来会面。
English: At this time, Chong Huan arrived at Shuangdao by boat in the name of a military parade, and Wenlong came to meet him.

古文：崇焕与相燕饮，每至夜分，文龙不觉也。
现代文：崇焕同他设宴饮酒、行乐，每每到半夜才罢，文龙没有觉察崇焕的意思。
English: Chong Huan and he would have dinner, drink and have fun until midnight every night, but Wenlong did not notice Chong Huan's intention.

古文：崇焕议更营制，设监司，文龙怫然。
现代文：崇焕同他商量更改营制，设立监司，文龙很不高兴。
English: When Chong Huan discussed with him the change of business system and the establishment of a supervisor, Wenlong was very unhappy.

古文：崇焕以归乡动之，文龙曰： 向有此意，但惟我知东事，东事毕，朝鲜衰弱，可袭而有也。 
现代文：崇焕用离职返乡劝说他，文龙回答说： 以前有这个意思，但现在只有我了解东部战事，等东部战争完毕，朝鲜衰弱，可以一举而占有。 
English: When Chong Hwan tried to persuade him to return home, Wenlong replied, "I used to think so, but now I am the only one who knows about the war in the East. When the war in the East is over and Korea is weak, I can take it over in one fell swoop."

古文：崇焕益不悦。以六月五日邀文龙观将士射，先设幄山上，令参将谢尚政等伏甲士幄外。
现代文：崇焕更加不高兴，就在六月五日这天邀请文龙来观看将士们射箭，先在山上设了帷帐，命令参将谢尚政等安排身穿铠甲的士兵埋伏在帐外。
English: Chong Huan was even more displeased. On the very day of June 5, he invited Wen Long to come and watch the generals shoot arrows. First, he set up a curtain on the mountain and ordered General Xie Shang Zheng and others to arrange soldiers wearing armor to ambush outside the curtain.

古文：文龙至，其部卒不得入。
现代文：文龙来后，他手下的士兵不能进帐里来。
English: After the arrival of Wenlong, the soldiers under his command could not enter the account.

古文：崇焕曰： 予诘朝行，公当海外重寄，受予一拜。 
现代文：崇焕说： 我明天出发，海外的事情全寄托在您身上了，请受我一拜。 
English: Chong Huan said, "I am leaving tomorrow, and everything overseas is entrusted to you. Please accept my obeisances."

古文：交拜毕，登山。
现代文：互相拜见之后，一起登上山来。
English: After meeting each other, they went up the mountain together.

古文：崇焕问从官姓名，多毛姓。
现代文：崇焕问起他随从军官的姓名，多是姓毛的。
English: When Chong Huan asked the names of the officers accompanying him, most of them were surnamed Mao.

古文：文龙曰： 此皆予孙。 
现代文：文龙说： 这些人都是我的孙子。 
English: Wenlong said: These people are all my grandchildren.

古文：崇焕笑，因曰： 尔等积劳海外，月米止一斛，言之痛心，亦受予一拜，为国家尽力。 
现代文：崇焕笑了，说道： 你们在海外劳苦多日，每月禄米也只有那么一斛，说起来痛心呢，也请受我一拜，大家都为国家尽力。 
English: Chong Huan smiled and said: You have been working hard overseas for many days, and you only have so much money per month. It pains me to say it, but please accept my obeisance. Everyone is doing their best for the country.

古文：众皆顿首谢。
现代文：这些人都叩头道谢。
English: These people all bowed their heads in thanks.

古文：崇焕因诘文龙违令数事，文龙抗辩。
现代文：崇焕就此诘问文龙几桩违令的事情，文龙做了对抗性的辩解。
English: Chong Huan questioned Wenlong about several violations of the order, and Wenlong made a confrontational defense.

古文：崇焕厉色叱之，命去冠带絷缚，文龙犹倔强。
现代文：崇焕高声喝斥他，让人扒下他的帽子和袍带，把他捆了起来，文龙仍很倔强。
English: Chong Huan shouted at him, his cap and gown were pulled off, and he was tied up. Wenlong was still very stubborn.

古文：崇焕曰： 尔有十二斩罪，知之乎？
现代文：崇焕说： 你有十二条该斩头的大罪，知道吗？
English: Chong Huan said, "You have twelve capital crimes for which you should be beheaded, do you know?

古文：祖制，大将在外，必命文臣监。
现代文：按我朝祖宗定下来的制度，大将领兵在外，必须接受文官的监视。
English: According to the system set down by my ancestors, the general must accept the supervision of civil officials, except for leading soldiers.

古文：尔专制一方，军马钱粮不受核，一当斩。
现代文：你在这边一人专制，军马钱粮都不接受核查，一该杀。
English: You are the sole despot on this side, the army, horses, money and grain are not subject to inspection, and you should be killed.

古文：人臣之罪莫大欺君，尔奏报尽欺罔，杀降人难民冒功，二当斩。
现代文：大臣的罪没有比欺骗君主更大的，你送上奏章全都蒙骗，杀害投降的士兵和难民，假冒战功，二该杀。
English: There is no greater sin for a minister than to deceive the sovereign. If you send a report to deceive everyone, kill soldiers and refugees who have surrendered, and fake war exploits, you should be killed.

古文：人臣无将，将则必诛。
现代文：大臣没有自己的将领，有则必杀。
English: Ministers do not have their own generals, and some must be killed.

古文：尔奏有牧马登州取南京如反掌语，大逆不道，三当斩。
现代文：你上书说在登州驻兵取南京易如反掌，大逆不道，三该杀。
English: You wrote in your letter that it would have been easy to capture Nanking from the Dangzhou Garrison, but it would have been an act of high treason, and the three of you should be killed.

古文：每岁饷银数十万，不以给兵，月止散米三斗有半，侵盗军粮，四当斩。
现代文：每年饷银几十万，不发给士兵，每月只散发三斗半米，侵占军粮，四该杀。
English: Every year, hundreds of thousands of baht and silver are not distributed to soldiers, and only three and a half buckets of rice are distributed every month.

古文：擅开马市于皮岛，私通外番，五当斩。
现代文：擅自在皮岛开设马市，私自和外国人来往，五该杀。
English: If you open a horse market on Pi Dao without permission, and you come and go with foreigners, you should be killed.

古文：部将数千人悉冒己姓，副将以下滥给札付千，走卒、舆夫尽金绯，六当斩。
现代文：部将几千人都冒称是你的同姓，副将以下都随意发给布帛上千匹，走卒、轿夫都穿着品官官服和袍带，六该杀。
English: Several thousand generals are pretending to be your namesake, vice-generals and below are freely given thousands of cloths, porters and porters are wearing official uniforms and robes, and six should be killed.

古文：自宁远还，剽掠商船，自为盗贼，七当斩。
现代文：从宁远返回途中，劫掠商船，自己做了盗贼，七该杀。
English: On the way back from Ningyuan, he robbed a merchant ship and became a thief himself. He should be killed.

古文：强取民间子女，不知纪极，部下效尤，人不安室，八当斩。
现代文：强娶民间女子，不知法纪，部下效仿，使得百姓不安于家，八该杀。
English: Forcibly marrying a civilian woman, not knowing the law and discipline, and his subordinates following suit, makes the people uneasy at home, and should be killed.

古文：驱难民远窃人参，不从则饿死，岛上白骨如莽，九当斩。
现代文：驱使难民远远去帮你盗窃人参，不听从的就被饿死，岛上白骨累累，九该杀。
English: Drive the refugees far away to help you steal ginseng. Those who do not obey will starve to death. The island is full of white bones. Nine should be killed.

古文：辇金京师，拜魏忠贤为父，塑冕旒像于岛中，十当斩。
现代文：用车送金子到京师，拜魏忠贤为父，并在岛上雕塑他加冕冠的肖像，十该杀。
English: Using a car to send gold to Beijing Division, Bai Wei Zhongxian as a father, and sculpting a portrait of his coronation crown on the island, is a crime worthy of death.

古文：铁山之败，丧军无算，掩败为功，十一当斩。
现代文：铁山一战败北，丧师不计其数，却掩败为功，十一该杀。
English: Iron Mountain was defeated in the first battle, lost countless divisions, but made a success of defeat. Eleven should be killed.

古文：开镇八年，不能复寸土，观望养敌，十二当斩。 
现代文：设镇八年，不能收复一寸土地，坐地观望，姑息养敌，十二该杀。 
English: Eight years since the town was established, we have not been able to recover a single inch of land. We have sat and watched, tolerated and nurtured the enemy, and killed 12 of them.

古文：数毕，文龙丧魂魄不能言，但叩头乞免。
现代文：宣布完后，文龙丧魂失魄，说不出话来，只是叩头请免他一死。
English: After the announcement, Wenlong was so distraught that he could not speak. He only bowed and begged to be spared from death.

古文：崇焕召谕其部将曰： 文龙罪状当斩否？ 
现代文：崇焕召他的部将来说： 文龙这样的罪状，该不该杀他？ 
English: Chong Huan called his subordinates and said: "With such a crime as Wenlong, should we kill him?

古文：皆惶怖唯唯。
现代文：大家都怕得唯唯诺诺，谁敢反对？
English: Everyone is afraid of being too accommodating. Who would dare to object?

古文：中有称文龙数年劳苦者，崇焕叱之曰： 文龙一布衣尔，官极品，满门封荫，足酬劳，何悖逆如是！ 
现代文：中间有称道文龙数年劳苦的，崇焕训斥说： 文龙本是一个平民百姓罢了，官做得最高，全家都得以荫封，足够报他的辛劳了，他怎么就这样悖乱违逆呢！ 
English: In the middle, there was praise for Wenlong's years of hard work, but Chong Huan reprimanded: Wenlong is just a commoner, he has done his best as an official, and his whole family has been rewarded for his hard work. How could he be so rebellious?

古文：乃顿首请旨曰： 臣今诛文龙以肃军。
现代文：接着就磕头请求皇帝的旨意说： 我今天杀文龙以整顿军纪。
English: Then Shantou asked for the emperor's will and said: I killed Wenlong today to rectify military discipline.

古文：诸将中有若文龙者，悉诛。
现代文：将领中间有和文龙一样的，都要杀了他们。
English: There are generals like Wenlong among them, and they all want to kill them.

古文：臣不能成功，皇上亦以诛文龙者诛臣。 
现代文：我不能成功的话，请皇上也像杀文龙一样杀了我。 
English: If I don't succeed, please ask the emperor to kill me like he killed Wenlong.

古文：遂取尚方剑斩之帐前。
现代文：于是取下尚方宝剑在帐前把文龙的头砍了下来。
English: So he took down Shangfang's sword and chopped off Wenlong's head in front of the curtain.

古文：乃出谕其将士曰： 诛止文龙，余无罪。 
现代文：出来告诉他的将士们说： 只杀文龙一个人，其他人都没有罪。 
English: He came out and told his soldiers, "Kill only Wenlong, the others are not guilty."

古文：当是时，文龙麾下健校悍卒数万，惮崇焕威，无一敢动者，于是命棺敛文龙。
现代文：这时候，文龙麾下凶猛强悍的官兵有数万人，都怕崇焕的威风，没有一个敢乱动的。崇焕命人用棺材埋了文龙。
English: At this time, there were tens of thousands of fierce and powerful officers and soldiers under the command of Wenlong. They were all afraid of Chonghuan's authority, and no one dared to make a move. Chonghuan ordered people to bury Wenlong in a coffin.

古文：明日，具牲醴拜奠曰： 昨斩尔，朝廷大法；今祭尔，僚友私情。 
现代文：第二天，用肉酒等祭品祭奠他说： 昨天杀你，是朝廷的法律；今天我祭奠你，是出于同僚、友人的感情。 
English: The next day, he offered a sacrifice of meat and wine, saying: "Yesterday, it was the law of the court to kill you; today, I offer you a sacrifice out of the feelings of a colleague and friend.

古文：为下泪。
现代文：并为他落下了泪。
English: And shed tears for him.

古文：乃分其卒二万八千为四协，以文龙子承祚、副将陈继盛、参将徐敷奏、游击刘兴祚主之。
现代文：接着分拨文龙的士兵二万八千人为四协，任用文龙的儿子承祚、副将陈继盛、参将徐敷奏、游击刘光祚为首领。
English: Next, he assigned 28,000 of Wenlong's soldiers to form the Four Associations, and appointed Wenlong's son Ceng Yao, vice-general Chen Jisheng, senior general Xu Shikisao, and guerrilla fighter Liu Guangyao as leaders.

古文：收文龙敕印、尚方剑，令继盛代掌。
现代文：收回文龙的敕印、尚方宝剑，令继盛代他掌管。
English: He took back Wenlong's seal and Shangfang's sword, and put his successor Sheng Rong in charge.

古文：犒军士，檄抚诸岛，尽除文龙虐政。
现代文：又犒劳军士，传檄安抚各岛人民，全部废除了文龙的苛政。
English: He also worked hard to pacify the people of the islands, and completely abolished the harsh regime of Wenlong.

古文：还镇，以其状上闻，末言： 文龙大将，非臣得擅诛，谨席稿待罪。 
现代文：回到镇上以后，把文龙一事上书报告皇帝，末尾说： 文龙作为大将，不是我可以擅自诛杀的，所以我谨席橐待罪。 
English: After returning to the town, he reported the matter of Wenlong to the emperor in writing. At the end, he said, "As a general, I am not allowed to kill Wenlong without permission, so I have to be cautious.

古文：时崇祯二年五月也。
现代文：当时是崇祯二年五月。
English: At that time, it was May in the second year of Chongzhen.

古文：帝骤闻，意殊骇，念既死，且方倚崇焕，乃优旨褒答。
现代文：庄烈帝突然听到这个消息，大吃一惊，但想到文龙既已死去，当时又靠着崇焕，所以就以赞扬的态度下诏书褒奖他。
English: Emperor Zhuang was taken aback when he suddenly heard the news, but he remembered that Wenlong had already died and was relying on Chonghuan at the time, so he commended him in an imperial edict.

古文：俄传谕暴文龙罪，以安崇焕心，其爪牙伏京师者，令所司捕。
现代文：不久又传旨公开文龙的罪行，用以稳定崇焕的心；文龙埋伏在京城的爪牙，也命令法司加以搜捕。
English: Soon after, an order was issued to expose Wenlong's crimes in order to stabilize Chonghuan's heart; Wenlong also ordered the Legal Department to search for and arrest Wenlong's minions who were lying in wait in the capital.

古文：崇焕上言： 文龙一匹夫，不法至此，以海外易为乱也。
现代文：崇焕又上书说： 文龙一介匹夫，不守法竟至于这种程度，是因为海外便于作乱。
English: Chong Huan also wrote: Wen Long is a peerless person. The reason why there is such a degree of non-compliance with the law is that it is easy to make trouble overseas.

古文：其众合老稚四万七千，妄称十万，且民多，兵不能二万，妄设将领千。
现代文：他的部队连老带幼一起算有四万七千人，假称十万，并且中间有很多百姓，兵还不到两万，擅自设将领千人。
English: His troops, old and young together, numbered forty-seven thousand, let's say a hundred thousand, and there were a lot of people in the middle, less than twenty thousand soldiers, and a thousand generals without authorization.

古文：今不宜更置帅，即以继盛摄之，于计便。 
现代文：现在不便于再设总帅，就以继盛代行其事，这样算来是方便的。 
English: Now that it is inconvenient to re-establish the commander-in-chief, it is convenient to act on his behalf by succeeding him.

古文：帝报可。
现代文：庄烈帝回答可以。
English: The great-grandfather consented to the instruction.

古文：崇焕虽诛文龙，虑其部下为变，增饷银至十八万。
现代文：崇焕虽然杀了文龙，怕他的部下发动兵变，所以增加饷钱至十八万两银子。
English: Although Chong Huan killed Wenlong, he feared that his subordinates would launch a mutiny, so he increased the bounty to 180,000 taels of silver.

古文：然岛弁失主帅，心渐携，益不可用，其后致有叛去者。
现代文：然而岛上的兵失去主帅后，渐渐地散了心，越发不可征用了。以后直至有背叛投敌的。
English: However, after the soldiers on the island lost their commander, they gradually lost heart and became more and more unable to be requisitioned.

古文：崇焕言： 东江一镇，牵制所必资。
现代文：崇焕上书说： 东江一镇，想牵制敌人还必须借助它。
English: Chong Huan wrote: Dongjiang is a town, if you want to contain the enemy, you must also use it.

古文：今定两协，马军十营，步军五，岁饷银四十二万，米十三万六千。 
现代文：今定为两协，马军十营，步军五营，每年需饷银四十二万两，米十三万六千石。 
English: Now it is set as two associations, ten battalions of horse army and five battalions of infantry army, with an annual demand of 420,000 taels of silver and 136,000 koku of rice.

古文：帝颇以兵减饷增为疑，以崇焕故，特如其请。
现代文：庄烈帝因为兵减少粮饷增加很有点情绪，因为崇焕，就特别地按他的请求办了。
English: Emperor Zhuang was very emotional about the reduction of soldiers and the increase of food rations, and because of Chonghuan, he specially complied with his request.

古文：崇焕在辽，与率教、大寿、可刚定兵制，渐及登莱、天津，及定东江兵制，合四镇兵十五万三千有奇，马八万一千有奇，岁费度支四百八十余万，减旧一百二十余万。
现代文：崇焕在辽东，和率教、大寿、可刚等确定兵制，渐渐推行到登、莱、天津，等到确定东江兵制以后，合计四镇兵共十五万三千有余，马匹八万一千有余，每年耗费饷银四百八十余万两，比过去减少了一百二十万。
English: In Liaodong, the military system was determined by Chong Huan, He Zuo Jiao, Dashou and Kegang, and gradually implemented in Deng, Lai and Tianjin. By the time the East River military system was determined, the total number of soldiers in the four towns was more than 153,000, the number of horses was more than 81,000, and the annual expenditure of money and silver was more than 4.8 million taels, a decrease of 1.2 million compared with the past.

古文：帝嘉奖之。
现代文：庄烈帝很赞赏他。
English: The emperor commended them.

古文：文龙既死，甫逾三月，我大清兵数十万分道入龙井关、大安口。
现代文：文龙死后才三个月，大清兵数十万分路进入龙井关、大安口。
English: Only three months after the death of Wenlong, hundreds of thousands of soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty entered Longjing Pass and Da'an Pass.

古文：崇焕闻，即督大寿、可刚等入卫。
现代文：崇焕听说了，就督领大寿、可刚等去守卫。
English: When Chong Huan heard about this, he sent Dazhou and Kegang to stand guard.

古文：以十一月十日抵蓟州，所历抚宁、永平、迁安、丰润、玉田诸城，皆留兵守。帝闻其至，甚喜，温旨褒勉，发帑金犒将士，令尽统诸道援军。
现代文：于十一月十日抵达蓟州，经过抚宁、永平、迁安、丰润、玉田等城市，都留下队伍防守，庄烈帝听说他到了，很高兴，用温和的诏书赞扬、鼓励他，颁发公款犒赏将士，并命令他统帅各路援军。
English: On November 10, he arrived in Zhangzhou, and after passing through the cities of Fuxing, Yongping, Qian'an, Fengrun, and Tamada, he left a team to defend. Zhuang Rongdi was very happy to hear that he had arrived, praised and encouraged him with a gentle edict, issued public funds to reward soldiers, and ordered him to command reinforcements along the way.

古文：俄闻率教战殁，遵化、三屯营皆破，巡抚王元雅、总兵朱国彦自尽，大请兵越蓟州而西。
现代文：不久听说率教战死，遵化、三屯营都被攻下，巡抚王元雅、总兵朱国彦自杀，大清兵越过蓟州向西去了。
English: Soon after, it was learned that the leader and teacher had died in the battle, that the Zunhua and Sangtun camps had both been captured, that the governor Wang Yuanya and the general soldier Zhu Guobian had committed suicide, and that the soldiers of the Great Qing Army had crossed Zhangzhou and gone west.

古文：崇焕惧，急引兵入护京师，营广渠门外。
现代文：崇焕怕了，火速领兵入关保护北京，在广渠门外扎营。
English: Frightened, Chong quickly led the troops into the pass to protect Beijing and set up camp outside the gate of the broad canal.

古文：帝立召见，深加慰劳，咨以战守策，赐御馔及貂裘。
现代文：庄烈帝立刻召见他，慰劳了他一番，向他讯问战守策略，赐他御用的食品和貂裘。
English: Zhuge Liang immediately summoned him, consoled him, asked him about the battle strategy, and gave him the royal food and candy.

古文：崇焕以士马疲敝，请入休城中，不许。出与大军鏖战，互有杀伤。
现代文：崇焕由于兵马疲惫，请允许进城中来休息，庄烈帝不同意，崇焕出去与清兵大战，互有杀伤。
English: As Chong Huan's soldiers and horses were exhausted, he asked permission to enter the city to rest. Emperor Zhuang disagreed, and Chong Huan went out to fight against the Qing soldiers, killing and wounding each other.

古文：时所入隘口乃蓟辽总理刘策所辖，而崇焕甫闻变即千里赴救，自谓有功无罪。
现代文：当时大清兵所由进入的隘口是蓟辽总理刘策管辖的，崇焕听说事变就不远千里前来解救，所以自认为有功无罪。
English: At that time, the pass through which the Qing soldiers entered was under the jurisdiction of Liao Liao Premier Liu Ce. When Chong Huan heard about the incident, he came thousands of miles to come to the rescue, so he considered himself to be innocent.

古文：然都人骤遭兵，怨谤纷起，谓崇焕纵敌拥兵。
现代文：然而都城的人们突然遭到兵乱，怨言诽谤纷纷而起，说崇焕拥兵纵敌。
English: However, the people of the capital city were suddenly subjected to military turmoil, and complaints and slander arose one after another, saying that Chong Hwan supported the soldiers and incited the enemy.

古文：朝士因前通和议，诬其引敌胁和，将为城下之盟。
现代文：朝廷大臣因为以前崇焕和大清军有过议和，诬蔑他引来敌人想逼朝廷议和，将要订立城下之盟。
English: The Minister of the Imperial Court, because Chong Huan and the Great Qing Army had previously negotiated a peace, slandered him to attract the enemy to force the Imperial Court to negotiate a peace, and will conclude an alliance under the city.

古文：帝颇闻之，不能无惑。
现代文：庄烈帝听了一些这样的话，心中不能不迷惑。
English: Zhuge Liang listened to some of these words and could not help but be puzzled.

古文：会我大清设间，谓崇焕密有成约，令所获宦官知之，阴纵使去。
现代文：恰好大清军又设了离间计，说崇焕和我们有秘密的和约，让他们所抓获的宦官知道后，又故意让他逃走。
English: It just so happened that the Great Qing Army also set up a distraction, saying that Chong Huan and we had a secret peace treaty. After letting the eunuch they had captured know, they deliberately let him escape.

古文：其人奔告于帝，帝信之不疑。
现代文：那宦官跑去告诉庄烈帝，庄烈帝深信不疑。
English: The eunuch ran to tell Emperor Zhuang, who was convinced.

古文：十二月朔再召对，遂缚下诏狱。
现代文：十二月十五日又一次召崇焕问话时，就把他绑了下到京师的狱里。
English: On December 15th, when Chong Huan was summoned again for questioning, he was tied up and taken to the prison of the Beijing Division.

古文：大寿在旁，战栗失措，出即拥兵叛归。
现代文：大寿当时在旁边，浑身哆嗦，不知所措，出来以后就带兵叛逃而去。
English: At that time, Dashu was by his side, paralyzed and at a loss. After he came out, he defected with his soldiers.

古文：大寿尝有罪，孙承宗欲杀之，爱其才，密令崇焕救解。
现代文：大寿过去曾经有罪，孙承宗要杀他的时候，爱惜他的才能，就秘密地要崇焕解救他。
English: Dashou had been guilty in the past, and when Sun Chengzong wanted to kill him, he cherished his talent and secretly wanted to save him.

古文：大寿以故德崇焕，惧并诛遂叛。
现代文：大寿因此感激崇焕，怕被一齐杀了，就叛逃了。
English: As a result, Dashu was grateful to Chong Huan and, fearing that they would all be killed together, he defected.

古文：帝取崇焕狱中手书，往召大寿，乃归命。
现代文：庄烈帝拿崇焕在监狱中亲手写的信，派人前往召大寿回来，他才归顺。
English: Zhuangde Emperor took a handwritten letter from Chong Huan in prison and sent someone to summon Dashou to come back, only then did he submit.

古文：方崇焕在朝，尝与大学士钱龙锡语，微及欲杀毛文龙状。
现代文：崇焕在朝廷时，曾和大学士钱龙锡谈话中间略略说到想杀毛文龙一事。
English: When Chong Huan was in the imperial court, he had a conversation with the university scholar Qian Longxi, in the middle of which he said something about wanting to kill Mao Wenlong.

古文：及崇焕欲成和议，龙锡尝移书止之。
现代文：等崇焕想和大清兵和议时，龙锡曾写信制止他。
English: When Chong Huan wanted to make peace with the soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty, Long Xi wrote a letter to stop him.

古文：龙锡故主定逆案，魏忠贤遗党王永光、高捷、袁弘勋、史褷辈谋兴大狱，为逆党报仇，见崇焕下吏，遂以擅主和议、专戮大帅二事为两人罪。捷首疏力攻，褷、弘勋继之，必欲并诛龙锡。
现代文：龙锡过去曾主管确定魏忠贤的逆案，忠贤的残余党羽王永光、高捷、袁弘勋、史翲等人策划制造大案，就以擅自主张议和、独断专杀大帅等事作为他们两个人的罪行，高捷首先上书竭力攻击，史翲、弘勋继之于后，一心想连龙锡一齐杀掉。
English: In the past, Long Xi was in charge of determining Wei Zhongxian's reverse case. Wang Yongguang, Gao Jie, Yuan Hongxun, Shi Xun and other remnants of Wei Zhongxian's party plotted to create a big case, and took things such as arbitrarily advocating peace and arbitrarily killing the grand marshal as the crimes of the two of them. Gao Jie first wrote a letter to attack, and Shi Jie and Hongxun followed. They wanted to kill even Long Xi together.

古文：法司坐崇焕谋叛，龙锡亦论死。
现代文：法司定了崇焕谋叛的罪名，龙锡也定死罪。
English: The Department of Justice found Chong Huan guilty of plotting treason, and Long Xi was also sentenced to death.

古文：三年八月，遂磔崇焕于市，兄弟妻子流三千里，籍其家。
现代文：三年八月就把崇焕在街市上车裂而死。他的兄弟妻子都被流放三千里，并抄没了他的家。
English: In August of the same year, Chong Huan was run over and killed in a street market. His brother and his wife were both exiled 3,000 miles away, and his home was confiscated.

古文：崇焕无子，家亦无余赀，天下冤之。
现代文：崇焕没有儿子，家中也没有多余的钱财，天下人都以为他死得冤屈。
English: Chong Huan did not have a son, and there was no extra money in the family. People all over the world thought that his death was unjustified.

古文：崇焕既缚，大寿溃而去。
现代文：崇焕被捕入狱后，大寿奔逃大清军去了。
English: After Chong Huan was arrested and imprisoned, Dashou fled to the Qing army.

古文：武经略满桂以趣战急，与大清兵战，竟死，去缚崇焕时甫半月。
现代文：武经略满桂因为被催促甚急，与大清兵战斗，终于战死，这时离崇焕下狱才半个月时间。
English: Because he was urged very urgently, Wu Jinglian Mangui fought with the Great Qing soldiers and finally died in battle. At this time, it was only half a month before Chong Huan was released from prison.

古文：初，崇焕妄杀文龙，至是帝误杀崇焕。
现代文：当初崇焕妄自杀了文龙，至此庄烈帝又误杀了崇焕。
English: At first, Chong Hwan killed himself in a fit of madness, and then Emperor Zhuang killed Chong Hwan by mistake.

古文：自崇焕死，边事益无人，明亡征决矣。
现代文：自从崇焕死后，边疆的战事更加无人可靠了，明朝灭亡的征兆也已决定无疑了。
English: Since the death of Chong Huan, the war on the frontier has become even more uncertain, and the signs of the demise of the Ming Dynasty have undoubtedly been decided.

