古文：二十有四年春，王二月丙戌，仲孙貜卒。
现代文：二十四年春季，周历二月丙戌日，仲孙貜去世。
English: In the spring of the 24th year, on the second day of the second month of the lunar calendar, Sun Yat-sen passed away.

古文：婼至自晋。
现代文：鲁国大夫叔孙舍从晋国回来。
English: The uncle and grandchild of Dr. Lu Guo Guo have returned from Jin.

古文：夏五月乙未朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季五月乙未初一这天，有日食发生。
English: In summer, on the first day of May, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：秋八月，大雩。
现代文：秋季八月，举行了大的秋雨祭祀活动。
English: In August, the festival of praying for rain is held.

古文：丁酉，杞伯郁釐卒。
现代文：丁酉日，杞伯郁釐去世。
English: On the day of Ding Xi, Zibo Yucao passed away.

古文：冬，吴灭巢。
现代文：冬季，吴国灭掉巢国。
English: In the winter, Wu wiped out the nesting country.

古文：葬杞平公。
现代文：安葬杞平公。
English: Funeral of Shunping Zeng.

古文：二十四年春，王正月辛丑，召简公、南宫嚚以甘桓公见王子朝。
现代文：二十四年春季，周王朝历法的正月初五日，召简公、南宫嚚带着甘桓公进见王子朝。
English: In the spring of the twenty-fourth year, on the fifth day of the first lunar month of the Zhou dynasty calendar, Jian Gong and Nan Gongyi led Ganhuang into the prince's court.

古文：刘子谓苌弘曰： 甘氏又往矣。 
现代文：刘子对苌弘说： 甘氏又去了。 
English: Liu Zi said to Zou Hong: Mr. Gan has gone again.

古文：对曰： 何害？
现代文：苌弘回答说： 有什么妨碍？
English: Hao Hong replied: What is the obstacle?

古文：同德度义。
现代文：同心同德在于合乎正义。
English: To be of the same mind is to act justly.

古文：《大誓》曰： 纣有亿兆夷人，亦有离德。余有乱臣十人，同心同德。 
现代文：《太誓》说： 纣有亿兆人，离心离德，我有治世之臣十个人，同心同德。 
English: "The Great Oath" says: "Though there are billions and trillions of people, all of whom have different ethics, I have ten vassals, all of whom have the same ethics.

古文：此周所以兴也。君其务德，无患无人。 
现代文：这就是周朝所以兴起的原因，君王还是致力于德行，不要担心没有人。 
English: This is the reason for the rise of the Zhou Dynasty. The king is still committed to virtue. Don't worry, there is no one.

古文：戊午，王子朝入于邬。
现代文：二十二日，王子朝进入邬地。
English: On the twenty-second day, the prince's court entered the Land of Reeds.

古文：晋士弥牟逆叔孙于箕。叔孙使梁其踁待于门内，曰： 余左顾而欬，乃杀之。
现代文：晋国的士弥牟在箕地迎接叔孙，叔孙派梁其踁埋伏在门里边，说： 我向左边看并且咳嗽，就把他杀了。
English: Shimu of Jin Province met his great-uncle in Shunde. His great-uncle sent Liang Qichen to lie in wait at the door, saying, "I looked to the left and coughed, so I killed him."

古文：右顾而笑，乃止。 
现代文：向右边看并且笑笑，就不要动手。 
English: Look to your right and smile, then don't do it.

古文：叔孙见士伯，士伯曰： 寡君以为盟主之故，是以久子。不腆敝邑之礼，将致诸从者。使弥牟逆吾子。 
现代文：叔孙接见士弥牟，士弥牟说： 寡君由于作为盟主的缘故，因此把您久留在敝邑，不丰厚的敝邑的礼物，将要致送给您的左右随从，派弥牟来迎接您。 
English: When his uncle and grandson met Shimu, Shimu said, "Since you are the leader of the clan, I have kept you here for a long time. I am going to give you the gift of a small village, and I will send Shimu to meet you."

古文：叔孙受礼而归。
现代文：叔孙接受礼物回国了。
English: The uncle and grandson accepted the gift and returned to China.

古文：二月，婼至自晋，尊晋也。
现代文：二月，《春秋》记载说 婼至自晋 ，这是表示尊重晋国。
English: In February, "Spring and Autumn" recorded that "至自晋" (至自晋), which was an expression of respect for Jin.

古文：三月庚戌，晋侯使士景伯涖问周故。
现代文：三月十五日，晋顷公派士景伯到王城调查周朝发生的事故。
English: On March 15, Jin sent the official Jing Bo to Wangcheng to investigate the accident that occurred in the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：士伯立于乾祭而问于介众。晋人乃辞王子朝，不纳其使。
现代文：士景伯站在乾祭门上，向大众询问，晋国人就辞谢王子朝，不接纳他的使者。
English: Shijing Bo stood on the dry-sacrifice gate and asked the public whether the people of Jin would renounce the prince's dynasty and not accept his envoys.

古文：夏五月乙未朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，五月初一日，发生日食。
English: In summer, on the first day of May, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：梓慎曰： 将水。 
现代文：梓慎说： 将要发生水灾。 
English: Azusa said: "Floods are going to happen.

古文：昭子曰： 旱也。日过分而阳犹不克，克必甚，能无旱乎？
现代文：昭子说： 这是旱灾，太阳过了春分而阳气尚且不胜阴气，一旦胜过阴气，能不发生旱灾吗？
English: Akiko said, "This is a drought. The sun has passed the vernal equinox and the yang is still not stronger than the yin. Once it is stronger than the yin, can there be no drought?

古文：阳不克莫，将积聚也。 
现代文：阳气迟迟不能战胜阴气，这是正在积聚阳气。 
English: Yang qi is slow to overcome yin qi, which is accumulating yang qi.

古文：六月壬申，王子朝之师攻瑕及杏，皆溃。
现代文：六月初八日，王子朝的军队进攻瑕地和杏地，两地军队都溃散了。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th lunar month, the army of the Prince's Dynasty attacked Guodi and Xingdi, and the armies of both places were dispersed.

古文：郑伯如晋，子大叔相，见范献子。
现代文：郑定公到晋国去，子太叔相礼，进见范献子。
English: Zheng Dinggong went to Jin Province, and his son paid homage to his uncle and presented his son to Fan.

古文：献子曰： 若王室何？ 
现代文：范献子说： 对王室该怎么办？ 
English: Fan Xianzi said: What should be done with the royal family?

古文：对曰： 老夫其国家不能恤，敢及王室？
现代文：子太叔回答说： 我老头子对自己的国家和家族都不能操心了，哪里敢涉及王室的事情？
English: The great-uncle replied: My old man can't be bothered with his own country and family, how dare he get involved in royal affairs?

古文：抑人亦有言曰： 嫠不恤其纬，而忧宗周之陨，为将及焉。 
现代文：人们有话说： 寡妇不操心纬线，而忧虑宗周的陨落，因为恐怕祸患也会落到她头上。 
English: It has been said, "A widow is not concerned about her husband's line, but about the ruin of her children, for fear that calamity may come upon her also."

古文：今王室实蠢蠢焉，吾小国惧矣。然大国之忧也，吾侪何知焉？
现代文：现在王室确实动荡不安，我们小国害怕了，然而大国的忧虑，我们哪里知道呢？
English: Now the royal house is really in turmoil, our small country is afraid, but what do we know about the worries of the big countries?

古文：吾子其早图之！
现代文：您还是早作打算。
English: You're thinking too far ahead.

古文：《诗》曰： 缾之罄矣，惟罍之耻。 
现代文：《诗》说： 酒瓶空空，是酒坛子的耻辱。 
English: "Poem" says: Empty wine bottles are the shame of wine tasters.

古文：王室之不宁，晋之耻也。 
现代文：王室的不安宁，这是晋国的耻辱。 
English: The uneasiness of the royal family is a disgrace to Jin.

古文：献子惧，而与宣子图之。
现代文：范献子害怕，和韩宣子谋划。
English: Fan Xianzi was afraid and plotted with Han Xuanzi.

古文：乃征会于诸侯，期以明年。
现代文：于是就召集诸侯会见，时间定在明年。
English: The princes were then summoned for a meeting, which was scheduled for the following year.

古文：秋八月，大雩，旱也。
现代文：秋季，八月，举行盛大的雩祭，这是由于发生了旱灾。
English: In the autumn, in August, there is a great burnt offering, because of the drought.

古文：冬十月癸酉，王子朝用成周之宝珪于河。
现代文：冬季，十月十一日，王子朝使用成周的宝圭沉到黄河里向河神祈祷。
English: In the winter, on October 11th, the prince used the Bao Gui to sink into the Yellow River to pray to the river god.

古文：甲戌，津人得诸河上。
现代文：十二日，渡船的船工在黄河上得到了这块宝圭。
English: On the twelfth day, the ferry boatman got this treasure on the Yellow River.

古文：阴不佞以温人南侵，拘得玉者，取其玉，将卖之，则为石。
现代文：阴不佞带着温地人往南袭击王子朝，拘捕了得到玉的人，把玉拿过来，准备卖掉它，却是一块石头。
English: Yin and Yang took the people of Wen to the south to attack the Prince's Dynasty, arrested the person who got the jade, took the jade and prepared to sell it, but it was a stone.

古文：王定而献之，与之东訾。
现代文：阴不佞在王室安定以后把它奉献给周敬王，周敬王把东訾赐给他。
English: After the stability of the royal family, it was dedicated to King Zhou Jing, who gave it to him.

古文：楚子为舟师以略吴疆。
现代文：楚平王组织水军去侵略吴国的疆土。
English: King Chuping organized naval forces to invade the territory of the State of Wu.

古文：沈尹戌曰： 此行也，楚必亡邑。
现代文：沈尹戌说： 这一趟，楚国必然丢掉城邑。
English: Shen Yunyun said: This time, the state of Chu will inevitably lose its cities and towns.

古文：不抚民而劳之，吴不动而速之，吴踵楚，而疆埸无备，邑能无亡乎？ 
现代文：不安抚百姓而让他们疲惫，吴国没有动静而让他们加速出动，吴军紧紧追逐楚军，然而边境却没有戒备，城邑能够不丢掉吗？ 
English: If you don't appease the people, they will get tired; if you don't move, they will speed up the attack; if you chase the Chu army, the Wu army will chase the Chu army, but the border is not guarded. Can you keep the towns?

古文：越大夫胥犴劳王于豫章之汭，越公子仓归王乘舟。
现代文：越国的大夫胥犴在豫章的江边上慰劳楚平王，越国的公子仓把一只船赠送给楚平王。
English: Daifu Yao of Yue Province consoled King Chu Ping on the edge of the Yuzhang River, and Guozikang of Yue Province presented a boat to King Chu Ping.

古文：仓及寿梦帅师从王，王及圉阳而还。
现代文：公子仓和寿梦领兵跟随楚平王。楚平王到达圉阳而返回。
English: Kinzokura and Shumeng led the soldiers to follow King Chuping. King Chuping arrived in Shenyang and returned home.

古文：吴人踵楚，而边人不备，遂灭巢及钟离而还。
现代文：吴军紧紧追逐楚军，但是边境的守军没有戒备，吴国人就灭掉了巢和钟离而回去。
English: The Wu army chased the Chu army closely, but the defenders of the border were not alert, and the Wu people destroyed the nest and the bell and went back.

古文：沈尹戌曰： 亡郢之始，于此在矣。王壹动而亡二姓之帅，几如是而不及郢？
现代文：沈尹戌说： 丢掉郢都的开端就在这里，君王一个举动就失去了两个将领，照这样来几次，难道就不会兵临郢都城下？
English: Shen Yunyun said, "The beginning of losing the capital was here. The king lost two generals in one move. If this happens several times, won't the soldiers go to the capital?"

古文：《诗》曰： 谁生厉阶，至今为梗。 
现代文：《诗》说： 是谁制造了祸端，到今天还是灾害 ，恐怕说的就是君王吧！ 
English: "Poetry" says: Who created the disaster, to this day it is still a disaster, I'm afraid to say it is the king!

