古文：齐闵王之遇杀，其子法章变姓名。为莒太史家庸夫。
现代文：齐闵王被杀害后，他的儿子法章改名换姓，做了莒地一个姓太史人家的仆人。
English: After King Qizhi was killed, his son Fa Zheng changed his name and surname and became a servant of a family with the surname Taishi in Handan.

古文：太史敫女奇法章之状貌，以为非常人，怜而常窃衣食之，与私焉。
现代文：太史敫的女儿看见法章的相貌觉得很奇怪，认为他不是普通人，很怜爱他，而且常偷偷送给他衣服和食物，并和他私通。
English: When Taishi Yan's daughter saw Fa Zhang's appearance, she found it very strange. She thought that he was not an ordinary person, she pitied him very much, and often secretly gave him clothes and food, and had sexual intercourse with him.

古文：莒中及齐亡臣相聚，求闵王子，欲立之。
现代文：莒地的人以及从国都逃到莒地的大臣聚在一起，商量要寻找闵王的儿子，想要立他为王。
English: The people of the Shire and the ministers who had fled from the capital to the Shire gathered together to discuss the search for the son of the King of the Shire and to try to make him king.

古文：法章乃自言于莒。共立法章为襄王。
现代文：法章这时才从莒地出来自称自己是太子，于是大家立他为襄王。
English: It was only then that Fa Zheng came out of Shantian and claimed to be the crown prince, so everyone made him the crown prince.

古文：襄王立，以太史氏女为王后，生子建。
现代文：齐襄王即位，又把太史敫的女儿立为王后，后来生了一个儿子叫建。
English: King Qixiang ascended to the throne, and also made the daughter of Taishuo the queen, and later gave birth to a son named Jian.

古文：太史敫曰： 女无谋而嫁者，非吾种也，汙吾世矣。 
现代文：王后的父亲太史敫说： 女儿没有通过媒人就出嫁，不是我们家的后代，玷污了我在世上的名声。 
English: The queen's father, Tai Shih-chung, said: "My daughter's marriage without a matchmaker is not the offspring of our family and has tarnished my reputation in the world.

古文：终身不睹。
现代文：便终身不见他的女儿。
English: He never saw his daughter again.

古文：君王后贤，不以不睹之故，失人子之礼也。
现代文：王后贤惠，不因父亲和她断绝关系而不顾父女应有的礼节。
English: Queen Henrietta, not because her father broke off relations with her, disregarded the proper etiquette of father and daughter.

古文：襄王卒，子建立为齐王，君王后事秦谨，与诸侯信，以故建立四十一有余年不受兵。
现代文：齐襄王死后，他儿子建被立为齐王，王后对待秦国很谨慎，和各国诸侯来往也很诚信，因此齐王建在位的四十多年里，国家没有遭受战乱。
English: After the death of King Qixiang, his son King Jian was appointed as the King of Qi. The queen treated the Qin state very cautiously, and was very honest in her dealings with the princes of various countries. Therefore, during the more than forty years that King Jian of Qi was on the throne, the country did not suffer from war.

古文：秦始皇尝使使者遗君王后玉连环，曰： 齐多知，而解此环不? 
现代文：秦始皇曾派使臣给王后一副玉连环，说： 齐国人都很聪明，但是能解开这个玉连环吗？ 
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang once sent an envoy to give the queen a pair of jade links, saying: The people of Qi are very clever, but can they solve this jade link?

古文：君王后以示群臣，群臣不知解。
现代文：王后把玉连环拿给群臣看，群臣没有人知道如何解开。
English: The queen showed the jade link to the courtiers, but none of them knew how to untie it.

古文：君王后引椎椎破之，谢秦使曰： 谨以解矣。 
现代文：王后拿起一把锤子把它敲破，告诉秦王的使者说： 玉连环已经解开了。 
English: The queen picked up a hammer and broke it, telling the Qin king's messenger: "The jade link has been broken.

古文：及君王后病且卒，诫建口： 群臣之可用者某。 
现代文：当王后病危快死时，她告诫齐王建说： 群臣中某某人可以任用。 
English: When the queen fell ill and was on the verge of death, she admonished Qi Wangjian, saying, "Among the courtiers, someone can be appointed.

古文：建曰： 请书之。 君王后曰： 善。 
现代文：齐王建说： 请把他们的名字写下来。 王后说： 好。 
English: Qi Wangjian said, "Please write down their names." The queen said, "Okay."

古文：取笔牍受言。
现代文：于是，齐王取笔和木简准备记下来。
English: Therefore, King Qi took a pen and a wooden tablet and prepared to write it down.

古文：君王后曰： 老妇已亡矣! 
现代文：王后却说： 我已经忘记了。 
English: But the Queen said, "I have forgotten."

古文：君王后死，后后胜相齐，多受秦间金玉，使宾客入秦，皆为变辞，劝王朝秦，不修攻战之备。
现代文：王后死后，后胜担任齐的相国，收受了秦国间谍送来的金玉，派去秦国的宾客，都说符合秦国利益的诡辩的话，他们劝齐王建朝贡秦国，不修建防御战争的工事。
English: After the death of the queen, Hou Sheng served as the consort of Qi, received the gold and jade sent by the spies of Qin, and the guests sent to Qin all said the sophistry that was in line with the interests of Qin. They advised Qi Wang Jian to pay tribute to Qin and not to build the war defense construction.

