古文：二十有九年春，介葛卢来。
现代文：二十九年春季，介葛卢前来朝见。
English: In the spring of 1929, Jie Gulu came to see the emperor.

古文：公至自围许。
现代文：僖公从围困许国的地方回来。
English: Shoko returns from the siege of Hokoku.

古文：夏六月，会王人、晋人、宋人、齐人、陈人、蔡人、秦人盟于翟泉。
现代文：夏季六月，僖公与王子虎、晋国狐偃、宋国公孙固、齐国国归父、陈国辕涛涂、秦国小子在翟泉结盟。
English: In the summer of June, the Duke of Yan allied with the Prince of Tigers, the Prince of Jin, the Prince of Song, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi,

古文：秋，大雨雹。
现代文：秋季，有大雨和雹子。
English: In autumn, there is heavy rain and hail.

古文：冬，介葛卢来。
现代文：冬季，介葛卢前来。
English: In winter, come to Zheglou.

古文：二十九年春，介葛卢来朝，舍于昌衍之上。
现代文：二十九年春季，介葛卢前来朝见，让他住在昌衍山上。
English: In the spring of the 29th year, Jie Gulu came to see the emperor and asked him to live in Changyan Mountain.

古文：公在会，馈之刍米，礼也。
现代文：当时鲁僖公正在参加许国翟泉的会见，赠送给他草料、粮食等物，这是合于礼的。
English: At that time, Lord Lu Rong was attending a meeting with Xu Guo Rongquan, and presented him with grasses, grain and other items, which was in line with etiquette.

古文：夏，公会王子虎、晋狐偃、宋公孙固、齐国归父、陈辕涛涂、秦小子慭，盟于翟泉，寻践土之盟，且谋伐郑也。
现代文：夏季，僖公和王子虎、晋国狐偃、宋国公孙固、齐国国归父、陈国辕涛涂、秦国小子在翟泉结盟，重温践土的盟约，同时策划进攻郑国。
English: In the summer, the Duke of Zhai allied with the Prince of the Tiger, the Prince of Jin, the Prince of Song, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Qi, the Prince of Chen, and the Kid of Qin in the Spring of Zhai, revisited the treaty of trampling the soil, and planned to attack Zheng.

古文：卿不书，罪之也。
现代文：参加结盟的卿没有记载，这是表示谴责他们。
English: There is no record of the lords taking part in the alliance, which is a damning indictment of them.

古文：在礼，卿不会公、侯，会伯、子、男可也。
现代文：按照礼制，诸侯的卿不能参加公、侯的会见，参加伯、子、男的会见是可以的。
English: According to the etiquette, the lords of the lords can not participate in the meeting of the court and the lords, but it is possible to participate in the meeting of the father, the son and the man.

古文：秋，大雨雹，为灾也。
现代文：秋季，有大雨和雹子，成了灾害，《春秋》才加以记载。
English: In the autumn, there was heavy rain and hail, which became a disaster, and it was only recorded in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：冬，介葛卢来，以未见公，故复来朝，礼之，加燕好。
现代文：冬季，介葛卢前来，由于前次没有见到僖公，再次来朝。对他加以礼遇，再加上燕礼和赠送上等财礼。
English: In the winter, when Jie Gulu came to visit, since he had not seen Zong Gong the previous time, he came to the DPRK again. He was treated with courtesy, together with the gift of a bird's-eye salute and the gift of a first-class financial gift.

古文：介葛卢闻牛鸣，曰： 是生三牺，皆用之矣，其音云。 
现代文：介葛卢听到牛叫，说： 这头牛生了三头小牛，都用来祭祀了，所以它的声音如此。 
English: When he heard the cow lowing, he said, "This cow has given birth to three calves, all of which have been used for sacrifice, hence the lowing."

古文：问之而信。
现代文：加以询问，果然这样。
English: I asked around, and sure enough.

