古文：清河王绍字受洛拔，天兴六年封。
现代文：清河王拓跋绍，字受洛拔，天兴六年受封。
English: The king of the Qing River, Tuoba Shao, received the title of Lobat, and Tianxing received the title for six years.

古文：性凶狠险悖，好劫剥行人，斫射犬豕，以为戏乐。
现代文：他性情凶狠阴险，常作出悖逆的事情，喜欢抢掠行路人，刀砍箭射猪狗，作为游戏取乐。
English: He has a fierce and sinister disposition, often doing rebellious things. He likes to rob passers-by and shoot pigs and dogs with a knife and arrow for fun.

古文：有孕妇，绍剖观其胎。
现代文：有位孕妇，绍剖开她的肚子观看胎儿。
English: There was a pregnant woman, Xiao cut open her belly to see the fetus.

古文：道武尝怒之，倒悬井中，垂死乃出。
现代文：道武帝知道后大怒，把他倒吊在井中，眼看快死才将他拉出来。
English: When Emperor Daowu found out, he flew into a rage, hung him upside down in a well, and only pulled him out when he was about to die.

古文：明元常以义方责之，由此不协。
现代文：明元帝经常以仁义的道理来责备他，因此关系不融洽。
English: Emperor Mingyuan often reproached him with the principle of benevolence and righteousness, so the relationship was not harmonious.

古文：而绍母贺夫人有谴，帝将杀之。
现代文：而绍的母亲贺夫人受到责罚，道武帝准备杀她。
English: Shao's mother, Lady He, was punished, and Emperor Daowu prepared to kill her.

古文：会日暮，未决。
现代文：由于天快黑了，没有处置。
English: As it was getting dark, there was nothing to do.

古文：贺氏密告急于绍，绍乃与帐下及宦者数人逾宫犯禁。
现代文：贺氏秘密地向绍告急，绍便和帐下人以及几位宦官越过宫殿入犯禁地。
English: He secretly alerted Shao, who then crossed the palace and entered the restricted area with his subordinates and several eunuchs.

古文：帝惊起，求弓刀不及，暴崩。
现代文：皇帝受惊而起，来不及拿弓刀，于是暴死。
English: The emperor was startled and got up before he could take his bow and sword, and died violently.

古文：明日，宫门至日中不开，绍称诏召百寮于西宫端门前北面，绍从门扇间谓曰： 我有父，亦有兄，公卿欲从谁也？ 
现代文：第二天，宫门直到中午还没开，绍宣称有诏，召百官到西宫端门前北面。绍站在门扇中间问道 ：我有父亲，也有哥哥，公卿们准备跟谁？ 
English: The next day, the palace gates did not open until noon, and Shao proclaimed an edict, summoning hundreds of officials to the north in front of the west palace gate. Shao stood in the middle of the door and asked: I have a father and a brother, who are the nobles going to follow?

古文：王公以下皆失色，莫有对者。
现代文：王公以下官员都大惊失色，没有人回答。
English: Officials from Wang Gong down were stunned, and no one answered.

古文：良久，南平公长孙嵩曰： 臣等不审登遐状。 
现代文：过了好久，南平公长孙嵩说： 臣等不清楚皇帝仙逝的情况。 
English: After a long time, Sun Song, the governor of Nanping, said: "The ministers do not know the circumstances of Emperor Xian's death.

古文：唯阴平公元烈哭泣而去。
现代文：只有阴平王元烈哭着离开了。
English: Only Yin Ping Wang Yuan Rong left crying.

古文：于是朝野凶凶，人怀异志。
现代文：于是朝野人心惶惶，各怀异心。
English: As a result, the government and the people panicked, each harboring a different opinion.

古文：肥如侯贺护举烽于安阳城北，故贺兰部人皆往赴之。其余旧部，亦率子弟，招集故人，往往相聚。
现代文：肥如侯贺护在安阳城北举起烽火，所以贺兰部落的人都前来奔赴，其余旧部人马，也率领子弟们，招集故友，纷纷相互聚集起来。
English: Fei Ruhou He Rong held a bonfire in the north of Anyang City, so the people of the Helan tribe came and rushed there. The rest of the old men and women, also led by their children, gathered old friends and gathered one after another.

古文：绍闻人情不安，乃出布帛班赐王公以下。
现代文：绍听说人心不安，便取出布帛分别赏赐给王公以下官员。
English: When Shao heard that people were uneasy, he took out the cloth and gave it to the officials below Wang Gong.

古文：先是，明元在外，闻变乃还，潜于山中，使人夜告北新侯安同，众皆响应。
现代文：起先，明元皇帝外出，当他听说了变故的消息，立即回京，他先躲进山中，派人在夜间告诉北新侯安同，众人立即响应。
English: At first, Emperor Mingyuan went out. When he heard the news of the change of fortune, he immediately returned to Beijing. He first hid in the mountains and sent someone to tell Beixin Hou An Tong at night. Everyone immediately responded.

古文：卫士执送绍，于是赐绍母子死，诛帐下阉官、宫人为内应者十数人。
现代文：卫士们把绍捆起来送到明元皇帝那里，于是赐绍母子二人死，杀了他帐下的宦官和在宫中充当内应的共十多人。
English: The guards tied up Shao and sent him to Emperor Mingyuan, whereupon he sentenced Shao's mother and son to death, and killed the eunuchs under his command and a total of more than ten people who acted as courtiers in the palace.

古文：其先犯乘舆者，群臣于城南都街生脔食之。
现代文：最先下手杀害皇帝的人，被群臣在城南都街生割吃掉。
English: The first person to kill the emperor was eaten alive by courtiers in the streets of Seongnam.

古文：绍时年十六。
现代文：绍当时十六岁。
English: Shao was 16 years old at the time.

古文：绍母即献明皇后妹也，美而艳。
现代文：绍的母亲是献明皇后的妹妹，长得十分美丽妖艳。
English: Shao's mother was the sister of the Empress Keng Ming, and she was very beautiful.

古文：为太尉主簿，事无大小，得物然后判，或十数钱，或二十钱，得便取之，府中号为 十钱主簿。 
现代文：道武帝到贺兰部，见到以后十分喜欢，就告诉献明皇后请求纳入后宫。献明皇后说： 不行，她长得过于美丽，不是好事，况且已有了丈夫。 
English: When Emperor Daowu came to Helan, he liked her so much that he asked Empress Xianming to be included in his harem. Empress Xianming said, "No, she is too beautiful, it is not a good thing, and besides, she already has a husband."

古文：法寿弟法僧，位益州刺史，杀戮自任，威怒无恆。
现代文：道武帝偷偷地让人杀了她的丈夫，把她纳入宫中，生下绍，终于导致谋逆的大祸。法寿的弟弟法僧，官任益州刺史，他亲自杀人，喜怒无常。
English: Emperor Daowu secretly had her husband killed, brought her into the palace, and gave birth to Shao, which eventually led to the great calamity of rebellion. Faju's brother, the Dharma monk, who was appointed as the governor of Yizhou, committed suicide. He was moody.

古文：王、贾诸姓，州内人士，法僧皆召为卒伍，无所假纵。于是合境皆反，招引外寇。
现代文：王、贾各大姓及州内的名士，法僧都招他们当兵，谁也不得私下放纵，于是全境民众都起来造反，勾结外面的敌人。
English: Kings, nobles and famous people in Jia County, as well as monks and nuns, all recruited them as soldiers. No one was allowed to indulge in secret, so the people throughout the territory rebelled and colluded with the outside enemy.

古文：后拜徐州刺史。
现代文：又任徐州刺史。
English: He was also appointed as Xuzhou chief historian.

古文：法僧本附元叉，以骄恣，恐祸及己，将谋为逆。
现代文：法僧原来依附元叉，因为元叉骄横放纵，法僧恐怕有祸连累自己，就打算叛变。
English: The Dharma Monk was originally attached to Yuan Zha, but because of Yuan Zha's arrogance and self-indulgence, the Dharma Monk, fearing that he would bring misfortune upon himself, decided to rebel.

古文：时领主书兼舍人张文伯奉使徐州，法僧谓曰： 我欲与卿去危就安，能从我否？ 
现代文：当时担任主书兼舍人的张文伯奉令来到徐州，法僧对他说 ：我要和你一起离开危险投奔安全的地方，能跟从我吗？ 
English: At that time, Zhang Wenbo, who was the chief scribe and layman, was ordered to come to Xuzhou. The monk said to him: I want to leave the danger with you and go to a safe place. Can you follow me?

古文：文伯曰： 安能弃孝义而从叛逆也！ 
现代文：文伯说： 我怎么能够舍弃仁义而跟随你叛逆呢！ 
English: Wenbo said, "How can I give up righteousness and follow you in rebellion?"

古文：法僧将杀之，文伯骂曰： 仆宁死见文陵松柏，不能生作背国之虏！ 
现代文：法僧准备杀掉他。文伯大骂，说： 我宁可死去见到文陵的松柏树，也不能活着当背叛国家的罪人！ 
English: The Dharma monk prepared to kill him. Wen Bo cursed loudly, saying, "I would rather die seeing the pine trees of Wenling than live as a traitor to the country!"

古文：法僧杀之。
现代文：法僧把他杀掉了。
English: The priest killed him.

古文：孝昌元年，法僧杀行台高谅，反于彭城。自称尊号，改元天启。
现代文：孝昌元年，法僧杀死了行台高谅，在彭城反叛，自称帝号，改年号为天启。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, the legal monk killed Xingtai Gaofeng, rebelled in Pengcheng, called himself Emperor, and changed his name to Tianqi.

古文：大军致讨，法僧奔梁。
现代文：朝廷派大军讨伐，法僧投奔梁朝。
English: The imperial court sent a large army to fight, and the monks and nuns fled to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：其武官三千余人戍彭城者，法僧皆印额为奴，逼将南度。
现代文：那些戍守彭城的三千多名武官，法僧都在他们的额上加印作为奴隶，逼迫他们南渡。
English: The more than three thousand military attachés and monks who guarded Pengcheng stamped their foreheads as slaves and forced them to go south.

古文：梁武帝授法僧司空，封始安郡王，寻改封宋王，甚见优宠。
现代文：梁武帝任命法僧为司空，封为始安郡王，不久又改封宋王，对他很优待和宠信。
English: Emperor Liangwu appointed the Dharma Monk as the Secretary of the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress.

古文：又进位太尉，仍立为魏主。
现代文：又晋封为太尉，仍立为魏王。
English: He was also promoted to the rank of captain and remained the king of Wei.

古文：不行，授开府仪同三司、郢州刺史，乃征为太尉。
现代文：不久，又封为开府仪同三司、郢州刺史，乃召为太尉。
English: Soon, he was also given the titles of Kaifu Yi, Tong San Shi, and Zhangzhou Zhishi, and was promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：卒于梁，谥曰襄厉王。
现代文：他死于梁朝，谥为襄厉王。
English: He died in the Liang Dynasty and was known as the King of Xiangli.

古文：长子和，字善意，袭爵。
现代文：儿子为景隆、景仲。元和是元平原的长子，字善意，承袭父亲的王爵。
English: His sons were Jinglong and Jingzhong. Yuan He was the eldest son of Yuan Pingyuan and was named Zhengyi, inheriting his father's title of prince.

古文：初，和聘乙氏公主女为妃，生子显，薄之。
现代文：起初，元和聘乙氏公主的女儿为妻，生下儿子显。
English: At first, Yuan He hired Princess B's daughter to be his wife, and she gave birth to a son, Xian.

古文：以公主故，不得遣出。
现代文：他和妻子感情不好，但因为乙氏公主的缘故，没有办法遣送回去。
English: He and his wife are not on good terms, but because of Princess B, there is no way to send him back.

古文：因忿，遂自落发为沙门。
现代文：他因此很生气，便到佛寺中落发为僧。
English: He was so angry that he went to a Buddhist temple and became a monk.

古文：既不幸其母，乃舍显，以爵让其次弟鉴。鉴固辞。
现代文：他既然不爱妻子，也就舍去自己的儿子显，将爵位让给弟弟鉴，元鉴坚决推辞。
English: Since he did not love his wife, he also gave up his son Hsien and gave the title to his brother Kuan, which Kuan firmly refused.

古文：公主以其外孙不得袭爵，诉于孝文。
现代文：公主因自己的外孙子没有袭爵，就到孝文帝面前申诉。
English: The princess complained to Emperor Xiaowen because her grandchild did not succeed to the title of nobility.

古文：孝文诏鉴终之后，令显袭爵，鉴乃受之。
现代文：孝文帝下令，在元鉴去世之后，由显承袭爵位，元鉴这才接受了。
English: Emperor Xiaowen decreed that after the death of Yuan Jian, Yuan Jian would inherit the title, which Yuan Jian accepted.

古文：鉴字绍达，沉重少言，宽和好士。
现代文：元鉴字绍达，沉默寡言，为人宽和，喜欢结交士人。
English: Yuanzhan Zhuda, taciturn, broad-minded, likes to make friends with scholars.

古文：为齐州刺史。
现代文：任齐州刺史。
English: Appointed as the chief historian of Qizhou.

古文：时革变之始，鉴上书遵孝文之旨，采齐之旧风。轨制粲然，皆合规矩。
现代文：当时正开始变革，元鉴上书表示遵从孝文帝的旨意，他采用了齐地的旧风俗，治理得井井有条，政绩显著，做法都符合规定。
English: At that time, the revolution was just beginning, and the imperial edict stated that it was in accordance with the will of Emperor Xiaowen. He adopted the old customs of Qi, governed in an orderly manner, had remarkable political achievements, and his practices were in line with regulations.

古文：孝文下诏褒美，班之天下，一如鉴所上。
现代文：孝文帝下诏嘉奖他。孝文帝所颁布天下的各种条例，也都和元鉴上奏的相同。
English: Emperor Xiaowen issued an imperial edict to commend him. All the regulations promulgated by Emperor Xiaowen are the same as those recorded in the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：齐人爱咏，咸曰耳目更新。
现代文：齐人爱戴他并作歌赞美。
English: Qi people loved him and made songs to praise him.

古文：孝文崩后，和罢沙门归俗。弃其妻子，纳一寡妇曹氏为妻。
现代文：孝文帝去世后，元和蓄发还俗，他抛弃妻子，娶了一个寡妇曹氏当妻子。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaowen, Yuan He abandoned his wife and married a widow named Cao.

古文：曹氏年长，大和十五岁，携男女五人，随鉴至历城，干乱政事。
现代文：曹氏年长，比元和大十五岁，又带着五个儿女，他们跟元鉴一起住在历城，干扰元鉴处理政事。
English: Cao was older, fifteen years older than Yuan, and had five children with him. They lived with Yuanjian in Licheng, interfering with Yuanjian's handling of political affairs.

古文：和与曹及五子七处受纳，鉴皆顺其意，言无不从。
现代文：元和跟曹氏以及五个孩子共七人收受贿赂，元鉴也都顺从他们的心意，所说的话没有不听从的。
English: Yuanhe, Cao and their five children, a total of seven people, accepted bribes. Yuanhe also obeyed their wishes, and did not disobey what they said.

古文：于是狱以贿成，取受狼籍，齐人苦之，鉴名大损。
现代文：于是因受贿而兴冤狱，收受贿赂混乱不堪，齐人都叫苦不迭，元鉴的名声也大受损害。
English: As a result, an unjust prison was set up for accepting bribes, and the acceptance of bribes was chaotic and unbearable. All of them were in agony, and the reputation of Yuan Jian was also greatly damaged.

古文：转徐州刺史。属徐、兗大水，人多饥饿，鉴表加赈恤，人赖以济。
现代文：改任徐州刺史，正好徐州、兖州大水灾，民众多数饥荒，元鉴上表请求加以赈济，民众赖以度日。
English: He was appointed as the historian of Xuzhou, just as the great floods in Xuzhou and Zhangzhou, and the majority of the people were starving. The above table in the Yuan Dynasty book requested for relief, and the people relied on it to get through the day.

古文：先是，京兆王愉为徐州，王既年少，长史卢阳乌宽以驭下，郡县多不奉法。
现代文：起先，京兆王愉任徐州刺史，他年纪很轻，长史卢阳乌又对下属过于宽松，郡县多不守法。
English: At first, Jing Zhao Wang Yurong was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou. He was very young, and his father, Lu Yangwu, was too lenient with his subordinates. Most counties did not abide by the law.

古文：鉴表梁郡太守程灵虬虐政残人，盗寇并起。
现代文：元鉴上表说梁郡太守程灵虬为政暴虐，祸害民众，以致盗贼四起。
English: The original book said that Liang County Governor Cheng Lingyao was a tyrant and a scourge to the people, which led to the rise of thieves.

古文：诏免灵虬，于是徐境肃然。
现代文：皇帝下诏罢免了灵虬，于是徐州境内安定，秩序井然。
English: The emperor decreed the removal of Lingyao, so the territory of Xuzhou was stable and orderly.

古文：薨，谥悼王。
现代文：死时，谥为 悼王 。
English: When he died, he was mourned as a king.

古文：和与鉴子伯崇竞求承袭，诏听和袭，位东郡太守。
现代文：元和跟元鉴的儿子伯崇竞争要承袭爵位，皇帝下诏由元和袭爵，任东郡太守。
English: Yuan He competed with the son of Yuan Jian, Bao Chong, to inherit the title of nobility. The emperor decreed that Yuan He should inherit the title of nobility and become the governor of Dong County.

古文：先是，郡人孙天恩家豪富，尝与和争地，遣奴客打和垂死。
现代文：起先，同郡人孙天恩家中豪富，他曾经和元和争地，派奴仆把元和打得半死。
English: At first, the rich man of the same county, Sun Tian'en, who had once fought with Yuan He, sent his slaves to beat Yuan He half to death.

古文：至此，和诬天恩与北贼来往，父子兄弟一时俱戮，资财田宅皆没于官。
现代文：这时，元和就诬陷孙天恩和北方敌人来往，父子兄弟因此同被杀掉，家产田地房屋也都没收入官府。
English: At this time, Yuan He falsely accused Sun Tian'en of having dealings with the northern enemy. As a result, both father and son were killed, and the government did not receive any income from the family's fields and houses.

古文：天恩宗从欲诣阙诉冤，以和元叉之亲，不敢告列。
现代文：孙天恩的同族人想到朝廷申诉冤情，但因为元和是元叉的亲戚，不敢告。
English: Sun Tianen's compatriots thought of complaining to the imperial court, but because Yuan He was a relative of Yuan Zha, they did not dare to sue.

古文：和语其郡人曰： 我觅一州，亦应可得。
现代文：元和对同郡人说： 我要是想当州刺史，也是很容易得到的。
English: Yuan told the same county official: "If I want to be a state senator, it's easy to get.

古文：念此小人，痛入骨髓，故乞此郡，以报宿怨，此后更不求富贵。 
现代文：想起这个小人，就恨入骨髓，所以请求来管这个郡，以报旧怨，以后也不想富贵。 
English: Thinking of this villain, I hated him to the marrow of my bones, so I asked him to take charge of this county to settle an old grudge, and I didn't want to be rich in the future.

古文：识者曰： 王当没于此矣！ 
现代文：明白的人说： 他必将死在这里了。 
English: Those in the know say: "He's going to die here."

古文：陪葬金陵，无子，爵除。广平王连，天赐四年封。
现代文：死后，赠为相州刺史。广平王连，天赐四年所封。
English: After his death, he was given the title of "Soshu Shishi." Guangping Wang Lian, by the grace of God, was given the title for four years.

古文：薨，无子，太武以阳平王熙第二子浑为南平王，以继连后。
现代文：去世后没有儿子，太武帝将阳平王熙的二儿子浑封为南平王，以继承连。
English: After he died without a son, Emperor Taivu made Yangping Wangxi's second son Nanping Wang to succeed him.

古文：浑好弓马，射鸟辄历飞而中之，日射兔得五十头。
现代文：浑喜欢拉弓骑马，射鸟能在鸟飞起来的时候射中它，每天可射得兔子五十只。
English: He likes to pull a bow and ride a horse. He can shoot a bird when it is in flight, and can shoot fifty rabbits a day.

古文：太武尝命左右分射，胜者中的筹满，诏浑解之，三发皆中。
现代文：太武帝曾经让左右两边人分开比射箭，得胜的一方筹子已经满了。他命令元浑让他们和解，元浑连射三箭都射中目标。
English: Emperor Taibu once had the left and right sides separated for an archery competition, and the winning side had run out of chips. He ordered Yuanhun to reconcile them, and Yuanhun hit the target with all three arrows.

古文：帝大悦，器其艺能，常引侍左右。
现代文：皇帝大喜，很器重他的技艺精良，经常让他在身边侍从。
English: The emperor was overjoyed, and was very appreciative of his skill, and often had him as an attendant.

古文：累迁凉州镇将、都督西戎诸军事、领护西域校尉，恩著凉土。
现代文：历任凉州镇将、都督西戎诸军事、领护西域校尉，西凉人都感受到他的恩德。
English: Successive lords of the town of Liangzhou, the military governor of Xi Rong, and the lieutenant of the western region, all people in West Liang feel his grace.

古文：更满还京，父老皆涕泣追送，如违所亲。
现代文：任职期满换回京城，父老们都哭泣着前来追送，就像和亲人离别一样。
English: At the end of his term of office, he was transferred back to Beijing, and his parents came to see him off, crying, as if they were parting with a loved one.

古文：薨。子飞袭。
现代文：元浑去世后，儿子元飞袭爵。
English: After the death of Yuan Hun, his son Yuan Fei became a peer.

古文：后赐名霄。
现代文：后来皇帝赐名为霄。
English: Later, the emperor gave it the name Xiao.

古文：身长九尺，腰带十围，容貌魁伟，雅有风则。
现代文：他身高九尺，腰带长达十围，长得相貌魁伟，很有风度。
English: He was nine feet tall, with a girdle ten times as long. He was tall, handsome, and very personable.

古文：贞白卓然，好直言正谏，朝臣惮之。
现代文：他洁身自好，卓然不群，喜欢直言进谏，朝臣们都害怕他。
English: He is self-righteous, stands out from the crowd, likes to be outspoken, and courtiers are afraid of him.

古文：孝文特垂钦重，除宗正卿。
现代文：孝文帝特别对他敬重，任命他为宗正卿。
English: Emperor Xiaowen held him in high esteem and appointed him as Zongzhengqing.

古文：诏曰： 自今奏事，诸臣相称，可云姓名；唯南平王一人，可直言其封。 
现代文：下诏说 ：从今以后向朝廷奏事时各大臣相称呼，可说姓名；惟独南平王一人，可直称封号。 
English: The following edict said: From now on, when reporting to the imperial court, all ministers will be addressed as such, and their names may be mentioned; however, King Nanping alone may be directly referred to by his title.

古文：迁左光禄大夫。
现代文：改任为左光禄大夫。
English: He was reassigned to the position of Sakoroku doctor.

古文：薨，赐东园第一秘器。孝文缌衰临霄丧，宴不举乐，谥曰安王。
现代文：去世后，赐给他专为皇室制作葬具的东园中最好的棺材，孝文帝身穿丧服参加霄的丧事，举行宴会时也不奏乐。谥为 安王 。
English: After his death, Emperor Xiaowen gave him the best coffin in Dongyuan, which made funeral paraphernalia exclusively for the imperial family. Emperor Xiaowen wore mourning clothes to attend Xiao's funeral, and did not play music when holding a banquet. He was known as King An.

古文：献文以南平王霄第二子继字世仁为后，袭封江阳王。
现代文：他的儿子纂承袭封号。献文帝将南平王元霄的第二个儿子继、字世仁的作为江阳王吐根的后嗣。袭爵为江阳王。
English: His son Zuan inherited the title. Emperor Xianwen made the second son of Nanping King Yuanxiao, Zha Shiren, the heir of King Tugen of Jiangyang. He inherited the title of King of Jiangyang.

古文：宣武时，为青州刺史。为家僮取人女为妇妾，又以良人为婢，为御史所弹，坐免官爵。
现代文：宣武帝时，元继任青州刺史，他随便把别人家的女儿拉来给自己的家僮当妻子，又强让好人家的女子当奴婢，因而被御史弹劾，免除官爵。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanwu, Yuan succeeded to the throne of Qingzhou, and was impeached by the imperial court for taking the daughter of another family to be his wife and forcing the daughter of a good man to be his slave. He was exempted from the title of nobility.

古文：及灵太后临朝，继子叉先纳太后妹，复继本封；后徙封京兆王，历司徒，加侍中。
现代文：当灵太后临朝听政时，继的儿子叉先娶了灵太后的妹妹，恢复了元继本来的封爵。后又改封为京兆王，任司徒，加侍中。
English: When the Reverend Mother's Empress Dowager was attending the Imperial Court to listen to the government, the son of the successor married the sister of the Reverend Mother's Empress Dowager and restored the peerage of the original successor. Later, he was changed to the King of Jingzhao, serving as an attendant and an attendant.

古文：继，孝文时已历内外显任，灵太后临朝，入居心膂，历转台司。
现代文：元继在孝文帝时已经历任朝内外各种显贵的官职，灵太后临朝听政以后，又晋封成为她的心腹和依靠，历任各台司要员。
English: Following the Emperor Xiaowen, Yuan Rong served in various dignified official positions inside and outside the court. After Lingdai Hou Lin listened to the government, he was promoted to become her confidant and dependant, and successively served as an important member of various departments.

古文：频表逊位，转太保，侍中如故，加前后部鼓吹。
现代文：他多次上表请求让位。便改任太保，侍中照旧，加赐给前后部鼓吹。
English: He repeatedly went to the table to request to give up his seat. He was then reassigned to the position of the eunuch, the chamberlain as before, and was given the front and back of the drum.

古文：诏以至节，礼有朝庆，继位高年宿，可依齐郡王简故事，朝讫引坐，免其拜伏。
现代文：又下诏说，凡是最重要的节日和朝廷喜庆大典时，元继职位高年纪大，可按照齐郡王简过去的办法，朝见以后让他坐下，免去拜跪。
English: The next edict also said that whenever the most important festival and the grand celebration of the imperial court were taking place, the former successor to the post, who was old and senior, could, in accordance with the past methods of Wang Jian of Qi County, let him sit down after the morning meeting and avoid kneeling.

古文：转太傅，侍中如故。
现代文：又改任太傅，侍中如常。
English: He was also appointed taifu, but remained a chamberlain as usual.

古文：时叉执杀生之权，拜受之日，送者倾朝，有识者为之致惧。
现代文：当时，元叉握有生杀大权，当元继拜官的那天，相送的人有满朝官员，明白的人都替他感到害怕。
English: At that time, Yuan Shikai held the power of life and death. On the day when Yuan Shikai became an official, there were officials from all over the dynasty to see him off. Everyone who knew him was afraid of him.

古文：又诏令乘步挽至殿廷，两人扶侍，礼与丞相高阳王埒。
现代文：又下诏让元继乘坐步挽到宫廷，由两人扶着，礼仪和丞相高阳王相同。
English: Another edict was issued to let Yuan Jie ride to the court in a horse-drawn carriage, supported by two people, with the same etiquette as the prime minister Gaoyang Wang.

古文：后除使持节、侍中、太师、大将军、录尚书事、大都督、节度西道诸军事。
现代文：后又任使持节、侍中、太师、大将军、录尚书事、大都督、节度西道诸军事。
English: Later, he was also appointed as envoy to the Jochi Festival, chamberlain, grand master, general, secretary, grand governor, and military commander of the West Festival.

古文：及出师，车驾临饯，倾朝祖送。
现代文：当他出师时，皇帝亲来饯行，满朝设宴相送。
English: When he graduated, the emperor himself came to see him off, and the whole court held a banquet to send him off.

古文：寻加太尉公。
现代文：不久又加封太尉公。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：及班师，继启求还复封江阳，诏从之。
现代文：当回师时，元继又请求恢复江阳王的封号，下诏同意。
English: When he returned to the capital, Yuan Jie again requested that the title of Jiangyang King be restored, and the emperor agreed.

古文：继晚更贪婪，牧守令长新除赴官，无不受纳货贿，以相托付。
现代文：元继晚年更加贪婪，那些新被任命的牧守令长们前往任所时，无不送来财物，以托付他加以照顾。
English: In his later years, Yuan was even more greedy. When the newly-appointed chiefs of herdsmen went to their posts, they would all send him their belongings so that he could take care of them.

古文：妻子各别请属，至乃郡县微吏，亦不获平心选举。
现代文：他的妻子儿子们也都分别来讲情，替人求官，因此当时直至郡县中的小吏，也不是按照公平的原则选用的。
English: His wife and sons were also separately courting and seeking positions, so at that time, even minor officials in counties were not selected according to the principle of fairness.

古文：凭叉威势，法官不敢纠擿，天下患之。
现代文：慑于元叉的权势，执法的官员也不敢加以纠正弹劾，天下人都受他的祸害。
English: Deterred by Yuan Xuan's power, law enforcement officials did not dare to correct the impeachment, and the whole world suffered from his scourge.

古文：叉黜，继废于家。
现代文：元叉被废黜后，元继也废官回家。
English: After Yuan Zha was deposed, Yuan Jie also returned home.

古文：初，尔硃荣之为直寝，数以名马奉叉，叉接以恩意，荣甚德之。
现代文：起初，尔朱荣任直寝时，经常送名马给元叉，元叉也给予恩惠，尔朱荣很感激他。
English: At first, when Er Zhurong was sleeping, he often sent famous horses to Yuan Zha, and Yuan Zha also gave him favors. Er Zhurong was very grateful to him.

古文：建义初，复以继为太师、司州牧。
现代文：建义初，又任命元继为太师、司州牧。
English: At the beginning of the Jianyi era, he also appointed Yuan Jie as Taishi and Sizhou Patriarch.

古文：永安元年，薨，赠假黄钺都督九州诸军，录尚书事、大丞相如故，谥曰武烈。
现代文：永安元年去世，赠给假黄钺、都督九州诸军事、录尚书事、大丞相如故。谥为 武烈 。
English: He died in the first year of the Yong'an era, and the military, records, and grand chancellor remained the same as when he was given the false Huang Xuan, the governor of Kyushu. He was a martial artist.

古文：叉字伯俊，小字夜叉。
现代文：元叉字伯俊，小名夜叉。
English: He was formerly known as Bo Jun and his nickname was Yasha.

古文：灵太后临朝，以叉妹夫，除通直郎。
现代文：灵太后临朝听政，因元叉是妹夫，任命他为通直郎。
English: Lingdai Hou Lintao listened to the government, because Yuan Zha was his brother-in-law, he appointed him as Tong Naorong.

古文：叉妻封新平君，后迁冯翊君，拜女侍中。
现代文：叉的妻子被封为新平君，后改封冯翊君，任女侍中。
English: Fork's wife was given the title of Xinpingjun, later changed to Fengyaojun, and became a chambermaid.

古文：叉女夭，灵太后诏赠乡主。
现代文：元叉的女儿早夭，灵太后追封她为乡主。
English: Yuan Zha's daughter died at an early age, and the Dowager Empress later made her the lord of the village.

古文：叉累加侍中、领军将军。
现代文：元叉累升至加侍中、领军将军。
English: Motoharu rose to the rank of second-ranked samurai and eventually became a leading general.

古文：既在门下，兼总禁兵，深为灵太后所信委。
现代文：他在门下兼管总禁兵，深被灵太后所信任。
English: He was also in charge of the general ban on soldiers under his command, and was deeply trusted by the Empress Dowager.

古文：太傅、清河王怿以亲贤辅政，每欲斥黜之。
现代文：太傅、清河王元怿因是皇室至亲和有贤德而在朝辅政，他经常想要罢免元叉。
English: The daifu, the king of Qinghe, Geng Yao, was a close relative of the imperial family and a virtuous man, so he often wanted to remove Geng Zha.

古文：叉遂令通直郎宋维，告司染都尉韩文殊欲谋逆立怿，怿坐禁止。
现代文：元叉便让通直郎宋维出面诬告说，司染都尉韩文殊准备叛乱，立怿为帝，元怿因此连坐被关了起来。
English: Yuan Zha then asked Tong Naorang Song Wei to come forward with a false accusation, saying that Siyan Lieutenant Han Wenshu was preparing to rebel and install Yuan Zha as emperor. As a result, Yuan Zha was incarcerated.

古文：后穷案无实，怿虽得免，犹以兵卫守于宫西别馆。
现代文：后来反复审查没有实据，虽然元怿免于受责，但还是派兵士将他看守在京西别馆中。
English: Later, after repeated reviews, there was no evidence, and although Geng Yao was exempted from blame, soldiers were still sent to guard him in the West Hall of Beijing.

古文：久之，叉恐怿终为己害，乃与侍中刘腾密谋，诈取主食中黄门胡度、胡定列，诬怿云： 货度等金帛，令以毒药置御食中以害帝。 
现代文：过了好久，元叉仍害怕元怿最终成为自己的对头，便和侍中刘腾密谋，以欺诈的办法让主食中黄门胡度、胡定一起诬告元怿，说 ：元怿送给我们金帛，让把毒药放在皇帝的食物中来毒害皇帝。 
English: After a long time, Yuan Zha was still afraid that Yuan Shao would eventually become his rival, so he conspired with the chamberlain Liu Teng to fraudulently make the staple food Huangmen Hudu and Huding falsely accuse Yuan Shao, saying: Yuan Shao sent us gold ingots, let the poison be placed in the emperor's food to poison the emperor.

古文：腾以具奏。
现代文：刘腾就把他们的话转奏皇帝。
English: Liu Teng relayed their words to the emperor.

古文：明帝信之，乃御显阳殿。
现代文：明帝相信他们的话，便坐在显阳殿。
English: Emperor Ming believed their words and sat in the Hall of the Rising Sun.

古文：腾闭永巷门，灵太后不得出。
现代文：刘腾关闭了永巷门，灵太后出不来。
English: Liu Teng closed the Yongxiang Gate, and the Empress Dowager could not get out.

古文：怿入，遇叉于含章殿后，命宗士及直斋执怿衣袂，将入含章东省。
现代文：当元怿入宫时，在含章殿后面遇到元叉，元叉令宗士和直斋上前扯住元怿的衣袂，把他带到含章东省。
English: When Yuan Xuan entered the palace, he met Yuan Xuan at the back of the Hall of Han Zhang. Yuan Xuan ordered Soshi and Dosaai to come forward, grab the mantle of Yuan Xuan and take him to the province of Han Zhangdong.

古文：腾称诏集公卿议，以大逆论。
现代文：刘腾宣称皇帝有诏召集公卿议事，于是以大逆论处。
English: Liu Teng claimed that the emperor had issued an edict to convene the court nobles for deliberation, so he was punished with the theory of great treason.

古文：咸畏叉，无敢异者。
现代文：公卿们都害怕元叉，没有人敢提出异议。
English: The court nobles were all afraid of Yuan Xuan, and no one dared to raise objections.

古文：唯仆射游肇执意不同。
现代文：只有游肇坚决不同意。
English: Only You Zhao firmly disagreed.

古文：叉、腾持公卿议入奏，夜中杀怿。
现代文：元叉、刘腾只管带着公卿们的讨论结果入宫向皇帝报告，半夜里杀了元怿。
English: Yuan Zha and Liu Teng just took the results of the discussion of the nobles into the palace to report to the emperor, and in the middle of the night they killed Yuan Shao.

古文：于是假为灵太后辞逊诏，叉遂与太师、高阳王雍等辅政。
现代文：于是，他们伪造了灵太后的让位诏书，元叉便跟太师、高阳王雍等共同辅政。
English: As a result, they forged Empress Dowager Ling's imperial edict of abdication, and Yuan Zha followed in the footsteps of Emperor Taishi, Emperor Goyang, and Wang Yong to jointly support the government.

古文：常直禁中，明帝呼为姨父。
现代文：他常常在宫中值日，明帝称他为 姨父 。
English: He was often on duty in the palace, and Emperor Ming called him "uncle."

古文：自后百寮重迹。
现代文：从此以后，百官们都惶惶不安，不敢出头说话。
English: Since then, officials have been in a state of panic, afraid to speak out.

古文：后帝徙御徽音殿，叉亦入居殿右，曲尽佞媚，遂出入禁中，恆令勇士持刀剑以自先后。
现代文：皇帝移居徽音殿，元叉也住在殿的右侧，他用尽办法来取悦于皇帝，得以自由进出宫中。他总是让勇士们拿着刀剑走在他的前后。
English: The emperor moved to Huiying Hall, and Yuan Zha also lived on the right side of the hall. He did his best to please the emperor and was able to freely enter and leave the palace. He always let the warriors walk in front and behind him with their swords.

古文：叉于千秋门外厂下施木阑槛，有时出入，止息其中，腹心防守，以备窃发。
现代文：元叉又在千秋门外的厂下用木头建造了一座木栅栏，有时进入宫殿时，在里面休息，派心腹严加防守，以防备突发事件。
English: Yuan Zha also built a wooden fence with wood under the factory outside the Qian Qiu Gate. Sometimes, when entering the palace, he would take a rest inside and be on guard to prevent emergencies.

古文：初，叉之专政，矫情自饰，劳谦待士。
现代文：元叉起初专制朝政时，虚情假意自我掩饰，装出十分勤劳王事和谦虚礼待下士的模样。
English: At the beginning of the autocratic Yuan Dynasty, Yuan Zhao disguised himself with false affections, pretending to be a very hard-working royal and a humble and courteous corporal.

古文：得志之后，便自骄愎，耽酒好色，与夺任情。乃于禁中自作别库掌握之，珍宝充牣其中。
现代文：得志之后，便骄横而又刚愎自用，沉迷于酒色之中，任意封官和废黜，他在宫廷中自己私设仓库亲自掌管，里面装满金钱珍宝。
English: After his victory, he became arrogant and self-indulgent, indulging in alcohol, arbitrarily appointing and dismissing officials, and he personally managed his own private warehouse in the court, which was filled with money and treasures.

古文：叉曾卧妇人于食舆，以巴覆之。
现代文：元叉又曾经让妇女躺在送饭的车子里，上面用帕子盖住，进入宫内，出去的时候也是如此。
English: Yuan Zha also once had a woman lie down in a food delivery vehicle and cover herself with a shawl to enter the palace, and the same thing happened when she went out.

古文：舆入禁内，出亦如之，直卫虽知，莫敢言者。姑姊妇女，朋淫无别。
现代文：值班的卫士虽然知道，但没人敢说。姑姑姐姐家的女子，他都一同淫乱，不加区别。
English: Although the guards on duty knew, no one dared to say anything. The women in my aunt's and sister's family all had sex with each other, without distinction.

古文：政事怠堕，纲纪不举。
现代文：政事怠惰，制度不肯遵从。
English: The government is lazy, and the system does not want to comply.

古文：州镇多非其人，于是天下遂乱矣。
现代文：州镇官员大都不称职，于是天下便乱了起来。
English: Most of the state and town officials were incompetent, and the country was thrown into turmoil.

古文：叉自知不法，恐被废黜，乃阴遣弟洪业召武州人姬库根等与之聚宴。遂为誓盟，欲令为乱，朝廷必以己为大将军往伐，因以共为表里，如此可得自立。
现代文：元叉自知行为不合法，担心被罢免。便暗中派遣堂弟洪业，召集武州人姬库根等人一起宴饮，进而相互盟誓，要他们发动叛乱，朝廷就会委派自己当大将军前去讨伐，由此共为表里，这样可以保证站稳脚跟。
English: Knowing that his actions were illegal and fearing that he would be ousted, Yuan Zha secretly sent his cousin Hong Ye to summon the people of Wuzhou, including Ji Kugen, to a banquet, where they swore to each other that if they were to start a rebellion, the imperial court would appoint him as a general to go and fight, and thus they would all be on the same side, which would ensure that they could stand firm.

古文：根等然其言，乃厚遗根等，遣还州，与洪业买马。
现代文：姬库根等人都赞同他的话，他便厚赠姬库根等人财物，送回州里，跟洪业一起买马。
English: Hiekugen and others agreed with his words, and he generously gave Hiekugen and others property, sent them back to the prefecture, and bought a horse together with Hongye.

古文：从刘腾死后，防卫微缓。叉颇亦自宽，时宿于外，每日出游，留连他邑。
现代文：自从刘腾死后，防卫比较松懈，元叉也觉得比较安心了，经常在外面住宿，每天出游，在其他地方留连忘返。
English: Since Liu Teng's death, the defense has been relatively lax, and Yuan Xuan also feels more at ease, often staying outside, traveling every day, and staying in other places.

古文：灵太后微察知之。
现代文：灵太后也略有察觉。
English: The Dowager Empress was also slightly aware of it.

古文：正光五年秋，灵太后对明帝谓群臣，求出家于嵩山闲居寺，欲自下发。
现代文：正光五年秋，灵太后对明帝说要告诉群臣，请求出家，到嵩山的闲居寺去，要亲自削发。
English: In the autumn of the fifth year of Zhengguang, the Empress Dowager Ling told Emperor Ming that she wanted to tell the courtiers, request to become a nun, go to the leisure temple in Songshan, and cut her hair herself.

古文：帝与群臣大惧，叩头泣涕。
现代文：皇帝和群臣大惊，叩头流泪。
English: The emperor and his courtiers were shocked and bowed their heads in tears.

古文：遂与太后密谋图之。
现代文：众人便和太后密谋除掉元叉。
English: Everyone then conspired with the empress dowager to get rid of Yuan Rong.

古文：乃对叉流涕，叙太后欲出家忧怖之心。
现代文：皇帝便对元叉流着泪，说了太后想要出家，自己感到忧虑和恐惧。
English: With tears streaming down his face, the emperor told Yuan Xuan that the empress dowager wanted to become a nun, and that he was worried and afraid.

古文：叉乃劝帝从太后意。
现代文：元叉便劝皇帝顺从太后的心意。
English: Yuan Zha then advised the emperor to follow the wishes of the empress dowager.

古文：于是太后数御显阳，二宫无复禁碍。
现代文：于是，太后多次坐在显阳殿听政，二宫之间不再有障碍。
English: As a result, the empress dowager sat in the Hall of the Rising Sun many times to listen to the government, and there was no longer an obstacle between the two palaces.

古文：举其亲元法僧为徐州刺史，法僧据州反叛。
现代文：元叉举荐亲属元法僧任徐州刺史，元法僧以徐州反叛。
English: The relatives of the former legal monk recommended by Yuan Zha were appointed as Xuzhou judges, and the former legal monk rebelled in Xuzhou.

古文：灵太后数以为言，叉深愧悔。
现代文：灵太后多次提起这件事，元叉深感惭愧和后悔。
English: The Empress Dowager mentioned this matter many times, and Yuan Xuan was deeply ashamed and regretful.

古文：丞相、高阳王雍虽位重于叉，而甚畏惮。
现代文：丞相、高阳王雍虽然职位高于元叉，却很害怕他。
English: The prime minister, Goyang Wang Yong, although his position was higher than Yuan Zha, was very afraid of him.

古文：会太后与帝游洛水，遂幸雍第，定图叉之计。
现代文：正好太后和明帝出游洛水，趁便前往元雍家里，共同商量除去元叉的办法。
English: Just as the Empress Dowager and Emperor Ming were on a trip to Luoshui, they took the opportunity to go to Yuan Yong's home to discuss together how to remove the Yuan fork.

古文：后雍从帝朝太后，乃进言叉父子权重。
现代文：后来元雍跟从皇帝朝见太后，便对皇太后说，元叉父子权力太重。
English: Later, Yuan Yong went to see the empress dowager from the emperor's court, and he said to the empress dowager that the father and son of Yuan Fork had too much power.

古文：太后曰： 然。
现代文：太后说： 是的。
English: The Empress Dowager said: Yes.

古文：元郎若忠于朝廷，何故不去领军，以余官辅政？ 
现代文：元郎如果真是忠于朝廷，为什么不解除军权，以其他职务辅助朝政呢？ 
English: If Genro was really loyal to the imperial court, why didn't he disband the military and assist the imperial government with other duties?

古文：叉闻之甚惧，免冠求解。
现代文：元叉听说以后十分害怕，便脱下冠盖请求解除军权。
English: When Yuan Zha heard that he was very afraid after that, he took off his cap and asked to be relieved of his military powers.

古文：乃以叉为仪同三司、尚书令、侍中、领左右。
现代文：于是任命元叉为仪同三司、尚书令、侍中、领左右侍从。
English: As a result, Motoharu was appointed as the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency, and the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：叉虽去兵权，然总任内外，不虑黜废。
现代文：元叉虽已除去兵权，但仍总管朝廷内外大事，不担心被罢免。
English: Although Yuan Zha has been stripped of his military powers, he is still in charge of major events inside and outside the imperial court and is not worried about being dismissed.

古文：又有阉人张景嵩、刘思逸、屯弘昶、伏景谋废叉。
现代文：这时又有宦官张景嵩、刘思逸、屯弘昶、伏景一起商量要除去元叉。
English: At this time, eunuchs Zhang Jing Song, Liu Siyi, Tun Hongtao, and Fuxing also discussed the removal of Yuan Xuan.

古文：嵩以帝嫔潘外怜有幸，说云，元叉欲害之。
现代文：张景嵩因为知道皇帝的嫔妃潘外怜受到皇帝的宠爱，就对她说，元叉正准备害死她。
English: Zhang Jing Song, knowing that the emperor's concubine, Pan Gaoliang, was favored by the emperor, told her that Yuan Zha was preparing to kill her.

古文：嫔泣诉于帝云： 叉非直欲杀妾，亦将害陛下。 
现代文：女嫔就向皇帝哭诉说 ：元叉不仅想杀害我，也准备谋害陛下。 
English: The concubine cried to the emperor and said: Yuan Xuan not only wanted to kill me, but he was also preparing to assassinate His Majesty.

古文：帝信之。
现代文：皇帝相信了她的话。
English: The emperor believed her.

古文：后叉出宿，遂解其侍中。
现代文：后来元叉外出住宿，便免除他的侍中职务。
English: Later, Yuan Zha went out to stay and was relieved of his position as an attendant.

古文：旦欲入宫，门者不纳。
现代文：早晨他想要进宫，守门人不放他进去。
English: In the morning he tried to enter the palace, but the gatekeepers would not let him in.

古文：寻除名。
现代文：不久就将他除名。
English: He was soon removed.

古文：初，咸阳王禧以逆见诛，其子树，梁封为鄴王。
现代文：起初，咸阳王禧因谋逆的罪名被杀，他的儿子元树逃奔梁国，梁封他邺王。
English: At first, Xianyang Wang Xi was killed for plotting treason. His son, Yuan Shu, fled to Liang Province, and Liang crowned him king.

古文：及法僧反叛后，树遗公卿百寮书，暴叉过恶，言： 叉本名夜叉，弟罗实名罗刹。
现代文：当元法僧反叛以后，元树写信给公卿百官们，揭露元叉的罪恶，信中说 ：元叉本名为夜叉，他的弟弟元罗实名是罗刹。
English: After the former monk rebelled, Motoki wrote a letter to the nobles and officials, exposing the evil of Yuan Zha, saying in the letter: Yuan Zha's real name was Yasha, and his brother Yuan Luo's real name was Luo Zha.

古文：夜叉、罗刹，此鬼食人，非遇黑风，事同飘堕。
现代文：夜叉、罗刹，这两种鬼都吃人，如果不是遇到黑风就会一起漂起坠落。
English: Night Fork, Luo Temple, both of these ghosts eat people, and if they do not encounter the black wind, they will float and fall together.

古文：鸣呼魏境！离此二灾。
现代文：呜呼魏国，遭此二灾！
English: Woe to Wei, hit by these two calamities!

古文：恶木盗泉，不息不饮，胜名枭称，不入不为。况昆季此名，表能噬物，日露久矣，始信斯言。 
现代文：恶木下和盗泉水，不休息和不饮用，名胜之地听到枭叫，就不进去不作为，何况兄弟都起这种名字，说明能吞食万物，时间长久暴露，才会相信这些话。 
English: Under the evil tree and stealing spring water, they do not rest and do not drink, when they hear howling in the scenic spot, they do not go in and do nothing, moreover, the brothers all have this name, indicating that they can swallow all things, and time will be exposed for a long time before they believe these words.

古文：叉为远近所恶如此。
现代文：元叉被远近的人所厌恶竟然到了这种地步！
English: The Yuan fork has been loathed by people near and far to such an extent!

古文：其后灵太后顾谓侍臣曰： 刘腾、元叉昔邀朕索铁券，望得不死，朕赖不与。 
现代文：后来灵太后曾经对左右侍臣们说： 刘腾、元叉以前曾经向我索要铁券，希望能够免除死罪，我故意拖着不给他。 
English: Later, the spiritual empress Dowager Cixi once said to her attendants: Liu Teng and Yuan Zha had previously asked me for iron coupons, hoping to be exempted from the death penalty, but I deliberately delayed giving them to him.

古文：中书舍人韩子顺对曰： 臣闻杀活，岂计与否。
现代文：中书舍人韩子熙答道 ：我听说杀他或让他活下来，岂在于给或不给。
English: Han Zixi, a scholar at the Chinese Academy of Sciences, replied, "I heard that whether to kill him or let him live depends on whether to give or not to give."

古文：陛下昔虽不与，何解今日不杀？ 
现代文：陛下以前虽然不给，如何解释今天不杀？ 
English: Your Majesty, although you didn't give it to me before, how do you explain not killing me today?

古文：灵太后怃然。
现代文：灵太后听说后怅然不已。
English: When the Reverend Mother heard about it, she was stunned.

古文：未几，有人告叉及其弟爪谋反。先遣其从弟洪业率六镇降户反定州；叉令勾鲁阳诸蛮侵扰伊阙，叉兄弟为内应，起有日矣，得其手书。
现代文：不久，有人告发元叉和他弟弟元爪准备谋反，先派他的堂弟洪业率领六镇投降的民户在定州造反，元叉又让人勾结鲁阳一带的各蛮族人到伊阙骚扰，元叉兄弟作为内应，已经定好起事时间了，并且得到元叉亲自写的信件。
English: Not long after, someone reported that Yuan Zha and his brother Yuan Jiao were preparing to rebel. First, they sent his cousin Hong Ye to lead six towns of surrendering households to rebel in Dingzhou. Yuan Zha also had people collude with various barbarians in the Luyang area to harass Ili. Yuan Zha's brothers, as internal correspondents, had already set the time for the uprising, and received a letter written by Yuan Zha himself.

古文：灵太后以妹婿故，未忍便决。
现代文：灵太后因为元叉是她的妹夫，不忍心立即处决。
English: Because Yuan Zha was her brother-in-law, the Empress Dowager could not bear to have him executed immediately.

古文：群臣固执不已，明帝又以为言，太后乃从之。
现代文：群臣坚持要严办，明帝也赞同他们的意见，灵太后便听从了。
English: The courtiers insisted on strict enforcement, and Emperor Ming agreed with them. Empress Dowager Ling then obeyed.

古文：于是叉及弟爪并赐死于家。
现代文：于是元叉和他弟弟元爪被赐死在家里。
English: As a result, Yuan Zha and his younger brother, Yuan Jiao, were allowed to die at home.

古文：太后犹以妹故，复追赠尚书令、冀州刺史。
现代文：太后又因为妹妹的缘故，仍追赠元叉为尚书令、冀州刺史。
English: The empress dowager also, because of her younger sister, still posthumously bestowed Yuan Xuan with the titles of Shang Shuling and Jizhou Zhishi.

古文：叉子舒，秘书郎。
现代文：元叉的儿子名舒，任秘书郎。
English: Yuan Zha's son, Nanshu, became the secretary.

古文：叉死后，亡奔梁，官至征北大将军、青冀二州刺史。
现代文：元叉死后，他逃亡投奔梁朝，官至征北大将军，青、冀两州刺史。
English: After Yuan Zha's death, he fled to the Liang Dynasty and became a general of the Northern Expeditionary Force. He made history in Qing and Hebei Provinces.

古文：子善，亦名善住。
现代文：元善是元舒的儿子，又名善住。
English: Yuan Zhen is the son of Yuan Shu, also known as Yuan Zu.

古文：少随父至江南，性好学，通涉《五经》，尤明《左氏传》。
现代文：从小跟随父亲到江南，本性好学，通晓《五经》，尤其精通《春秋左氏传》。
English: From childhood, he followed his father to the south of the Yangtze River. He is naturally eager to learn and is familiar with the "Five Classics," especially with "The Spring and Autumn Legend of Zuo Shirowa."

古文：侯景之乱，善归周，武帝甚礼之，以为太子宫尹，赐爵江阳县公，每执经以授太子。
现代文：侯景之乱时，元善回到北周，周武帝对他很礼遇，任命他为太子宫尹，赐爵位为江阳县公，经常拿着经书教授太子。
English: At the time of the Houjing Rebellion, Yuan Shan returned to Northern Zhou. Emperor Zhou treated him with great courtesy, appointing him as Crown Prince Gong Yin, giving him the title of Duke of Jiangyang County, and often holding a sutra to teach the prince.

古文：隋开皇初，拜内史侍郎，凡有敷奏，词气抑扬，观者属目。
现代文：隋开皇初年，被任命为内史侍郎，凡有陈奏，文辞抑扬顿挫，令听的人深感兴趣。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, he was appointed as an attendant of the Inner History, and he was deeply interested in people who listened to him.

古文：陈使袁雅来聘，上令善就馆受书。
现代文：陈国使者袁雅前来问聘，皇帝让元善到馆舍去接受国书。
English: Chen's emissary Yuan Ya came to inquire about the appointment, and the emperor asked Yuan Sheng to go to the museum to receive the imperial edict.

古文：雅出门不拜。善论旧事有拜之仪，雅未能对。遂拜，成礼而去。
现代文：袁雅出门不拜，元善同他论起旧事，说明应当有礼拜的仪式，袁雅无言可答，于是拜见，成礼以后才离开。
English: Yuan Ya did not go out to worship, and Yuan Shan began to discuss old matters with him, explaining that there should be a ritual of worship. Yuan Ya had nothing to say in reply, so he went to pay his respects, and only left after completing the ritual.

古文：后迁国子祭酒。
现代文：后来转任国子祭酒。
English: It was later renamed Kuniko Matsuri Sake.

古文：上尝亲临释奠，令善讲《孝经》，于是敷陈义理，兼之以谏。上大悦曰： 闻江阳之说，更起朕心。 
现代文：皇帝曾亲临国子学校祭奠先圣先师，让元善讲解《孝经》，元善便详论义理，兼以讽谏，皇帝大喜，说： 听了江阳的讲解，更使我动心。 
English: The emperor once visited the Kuniko School in person to pay tribute to the holy forerunner, and had Yuan Zhen give a lecture on the "Filial Piety Sutra." Yuan Zhen gave a detailed exposition on the meaning of the sutra, accompanied by irony. The emperor was overjoyed and said, "After listening to Jiang Yang's lecture, I was even more moved.

古文：赍绢一百匹，衣一袭。
现代文：赏给他绢一百匹，衣物一套。
English: He was rewarded with a hundred donkeys and a set of clothes.

古文：善之通博，在何妥之下，然以风流醖藉，俯仰可观，音韵清朗，由是为后进所归。
现代文：元善的学问在通博方面，比不上何妥，可是他风雅而有器度，举止仪容可观，声音清亮明朗，所以被后起的人所仰慕。
English: The learning of Genzen is not as good as that of Zhuangbo, but he is elegant and competent, his manners and appearance are impressive, and his voice is clear and clear, so he is admired by those who come later.

古文：妥每怀不平，心欲屈善，因讲《春秋》。初发题，诸儒毕集，善私谓妥曰： 名望已定，幸无相苦。 
现代文：何妥经常心怀不满，成心想要贬低他。有一次讲解《春秋》，所有儒生全来到，元善私下对何妥说： 名望已经有了公论，不要相互为难。 
English: He Tso was often dissatisfied and tried to belittle him. Once, during a lecture on "Spring and Autumn," when all the Confucian scholars were present, Yuan Sheng said to He Tso in private, "There is already a public discussion about fame, so don't make things difficult for each other."

古文：妥然之。
现代文：何妥也答应了。
English: He readily agreed.

古文：及就讲肆，妥遂引古今滞义以难善，多不能对。二人由是有隙。
现代文：可是到讲台以后，何妥便引用许多古今争议不清的问题来为难他，元善大多回答不出，两人由此产生了仇隙。
English: However, after arriving at the podium, He Tuo cited many old and new controversial issues to embarrass him, and Yuan Sheng could not answer most of them, and the two had a feud.

古文：善以高颎有宰相之具，尝言于上曰： 杨素粗疏，苏威怯懦，元胄、元旻，正似鸭耳。
现代文：元善认为高赹是当宰相的合适人选。他曾经对皇帝说： 杨素过于粗俗，苏威为人懦弱，元胄、元正像鸭子一样。
English: He once said to the emperor: Yang Su is too vulgar, Su Wei is a coward, and Yuan Xi and Yuan Zheng are like ducks.

古文：可以付社稷者，唯独高颎。 
现代文：可以托付社稷的，只有高赹。 
English: Only sorghum can be entrusted to the company.

古文：不入京师，在宾客往来者，必厚相礼遗，豪据北方，甚有声称。以叉执权，尤不乐入仕，就拜昌平太守。
现代文：皇帝起初也赞同他的说法。当高赹得罪之后，皇帝认为元善的说法是替高赹进行游说的，便深加责备。
English: At first, the emperor also agreed with his statement. When Gao Yao was offended, the emperor thought that Yuan Shan's statement was lobbying for Gao Yao, and he was deeply reproached.

古文：明元皇帝七男：杜密皇后生太武皇帝；大慕容夫人生乐平戾王丕；安定殇王弥阙母氏；慕容夫人生乐安宣王范；尹夫人生永昌庄王健；建宁王崇、新兴王俊二王并阙母氏。乐平王丕，少有才干。
现代文：元善忧惧交加，开始得了消渴病，后来病重而死去。乐平王拓跋丕，从小就有才干。
English: Feeling worried and anxious, Yuan Sheng began to suffer from a thirst-quenching disease, and later died of a serious illness. Leping Wang Tuobao, has been talented since childhood.

古文：泰常七年封，拜车骑大将军。
现代文：泰常七年所封，被任命为车骑大将军。
English: After seven years of service, Tai Chang was appointed as the General of Chariot and Cavalry.

古文：后督河西、高平诸军讨南秦王杨难当。
现代文：后来率领河西、高平各军讨伐南秦王杨难当。
English: Later, he led the armies of Hexi and Gaoping to fight the Southern Qin King Yang Nandong.

古文：军至略阳，禁令齐肃，所过无私，百姓争致牛酒。
现代文：当军队至略阳时，军令严明，所经过的地方，没有人敢私作坏事，百姓们争先恐后送来牛酒慰劳军队。
English: When the army reached the sun, the military order was strict, and no one dared to do bad things in the places they passed through. The people rushed to send cow wine to comfort the army.

古文：难当惧，还仇池。
现代文：杨难当十分害怕，便退回仇池。
English: Yang Nandong was very scared, so he retreated back to Qiuchi.

古文：而诸将议曰： 若不诛豪帅，军还之后，必聚而为寇。 
现代文：这时众将商议说 ：如果不杀掉地方上的豪强首领们，回军以后，他们一定聚众当盗贼。 
English: At this time, the generals deliberated and said, "If we do not kill the powerful local leaders, after returning to the army, they will certainly gather together as thieves."

古文：又以大众远出，不有所掠，则无以充军实，赏将士。
现代文：又认为大军远出，不加以抢掠，就无法补充军用，奖赏兵士。
English: He also believed that if a large army was far away and did not plunder, it would be impossible to replenish the military and reward the soldiers.

古文：将从之，时中书侍郎高元参丕军事，谏曰： 今若诛之，是伤其向化之心，恐大军一还，为乱必速。 
现代文：拓跋丕准备采纳他们的意见。当时中书侍郎高允参与了丕的军事行动，便劝谏说： 如今将他们杀掉，就会有伤他们以往归化朝廷的本意，恐怕大军一走，立即就会作乱。 
English: Tuoba was ready to accept their opinion. At that time, Gao Yun, the secretary of the Central Committee, was the first to participate in Tuoba's military operations, and he advised Tuoba: If you kill them now, it will hurt their intention to naturalize the imperial court in the past. I am afraid that as soon as the army leaves, it will immediately cause chaos.

古文：丕以为然，于是绥怀初附，秋豪无犯。
现代文：丕同意他的话，于是安抚了初来归附的民众，秋毫无犯。
English: Xing agreed with his words, so he appeased the people who had first come to adhere to him, and there was no fall.

古文：初，冯弘之奔高丽，太武诏遣送之，高丽不遣。
现代文：起初，冯弘投奔高丽时，太武帝下诏让高丽遣送回来，高丽不送。
English: At first, when Feng Hongtou went to Goryeo, Emperor Taibu issued an edict to send Goryeo back, but Goryeo did not send him.

古文：太武怒，将讨之。丕上疏以为和龙新定，宜复之，使广修农殖，以饶军实，然后进图，可一举而灭。
现代文：太武帝大怒，准备讨伐，丕上表说，和龙新平定，应当恢复生产，让民众广修农田耕种，以增加军需物资，然后进讨，可以一举歼灭。
English: Emperor Taowu was furious and prepared for a crusade. He issued an edict saying that once the war was settled, production should be resumed, and the people should be allowed to cultivate farmland to increase military supplies, and then they could be annihilated in one fell swoop.

古文：帝纳之，乃止。
现代文：皇帝采纳他的意见，停止征讨的想法。
English: The emperor took his advice and put a stop to the idea of collecting taxes.

古文：后坐刘洁事，以忧薨，事在《洁传》，谥曰戾王。
现代文：后来他因刘洁的案件而连坐，因忧愁而去世。事情记载在《刘洁传》中，谥为 戾王 。
English: Later, he was detained in connection with Liu Jie's case and died of grief. The matter was recorded in "Liu Jie Biography," and he was known as the "King of Wushu."

古文：子拔袭爵。
现代文：他的儿子拔承袭爵位。
English: His son succeeded to the peerage.

古文：后坐事赐死，国除。
现代文：后来因事被赐死，封国撤销。
English: Later, he was sentenced to death for the incident, and the state seal was revoked.

古文：丕之薨及日者董道秀之死也，高元遂著《筮论》曰： 昔明元末，起白台，其高二十余丈。
现代文：丕去世和占卜的董道秀之死这二件事，高允写进《筮论》中说： 以前在明元帝末年，建了一座白台，高达二十多丈。
English: Gao Yun wrote about these two events, the death of Yao and the death of the diviner Dong Daoxiu, in the "Analects of Yao," saying: In the late years of Emperor Mingyuan, a white platform was built, more than 20 meters high.

古文：乐平王尝梦登其上，四望无所见。
现代文：乐平王曾经梦见自己登上高台，四处张望，什么也看不到。
English: King Leping once dreamed that he was on a high platform, looking around and seeing nothing.

古文：王以问日者董道秀。
现代文：乐平王便问占卜的董道秀。
English: King Leping then asked the soothsayer Dong Daoxiu.

古文：筮之，曰： 大吉 。
现代文：卜筮之后，董说： 大吉 。
English: After the blessing, Dong said, "Dakichi."

古文：王默而有喜色。
现代文：乐平王沉默而面有喜色。
English: King Leping was silent, but his face was radiant with joy.

古文：后事发，王遂忧死，而道秀弃市。
现代文：后来事情败露，乐平王忧愁而死，而董道秀也处死，尸首暴露街上。
English: Later, it was revealed that Leping Wang died of grief, while Dong Daoxiu was also executed, and his body was exposed on the street.

古文：道秀若推六爻以对王曰： 易称亢龙有悔。
现代文：董道秀假如推演六爻对乐平王说 ：《易》中称，亢龙有悔。
English: If Dong Daoxiu were to deduce the six gongs and say to King Leping: "In Yi, it is said that the dragon has regrets.

古文：居父母丧，哀号孺慕，非感行人。
现代文：极高为亢，高而看不见人，不是好事。 
English: It is not a good thing to be so tall that you can't see anyone.

古文：宣武时，复封临淮王，未拜而薨。
现代文：如果这样的话，上可以使乐平王安宁，下可以保全自己，福禄正会来，哪里还有灾祸呢？
English: If this is the case, the upper can bring peace to the king of Leping, and the lower can protect itself. Fortune will come, but where is the calamity?

古文：赠齐州刺史，谥曰康王，追改封济南王。子彧，字文若，绍封。
现代文：如今舍本而求末，祸事来临，不也是理所当然的吗？ 元彧是济南王昌的儿子，字文若，他承袭父亲的爵位。
English: Isn't it a matter of course that we should abandon our principles and hope for the best when calamity strikes? Yuan Zang is the son of King Chang of Jinan, and if the characters are correct, he will inherit his father's title.

古文：彧少有才学，当时甚美。
现代文：元彧从小很有才学，当时很受赞美。
English: Yuan Qi was very talented from an early age, and was highly praised at the time.

古文：侍中崔光见而谓人曰： 黑头三公，当此人也。 
现代文：侍中崔光见后对人说 ：黑头发就担任三公的，应当就是这个人了。 
English: After seeing him, Choe Kwang, a chambermaid, said to the people, "The black-haired man will be the third prince. This must be the man."

古文：少与从兄安丰王延明、中山王熙，并以宗室博古文学齐名，时人莫能定其优劣。
现代文：他从小跟堂兄安丰王延明、中山王熙，都是宗室中以博通古籍和有文学才华而闻名于时的，当时人难以定出他们的优劣。
English: He grew up with his cousins Anfeng Wang Yanming and Zhongshan Wang Xi, both of whom were famous in the family for their knowledge of ancient books and literary talent at a time when it was difficult to determine their strengths and weaknesses.

古文：尚书郎范阳卢道将谓吏部清河崔休曰： 三人才学虽并优美，然安丰少于造次，中山皁白太多，未若济南风流宽雅。 
现代文：尚书郎范阳的卢道将对吏部的清河人崔休说 ：三人的才学虽然都很优异，但是安丰王的不足在于急躁，中山王又是非过多，都比不上济南王风流宽雅。 
English: Lu Dao of Shang Shulang Fan Yang said to Cui Xiu of Qinghe in the cadre department: Although the talents of the three are excellent, the shortcoming of Anfeng Wang is impatience, and Zhongshan Wang is too much, all of which are not as elegant as Jinan Wang.

古文：时人为之语曰： 三王楚琳琅，未若济南备员方。 
现代文：因此，当时人又传言说： 三王美如玉，不如济南合规矩。 
English: Therefore, at that time, there was another rumor saying: the three kings are as beautiful as jewels, and they are not as good as Jinan.

古文：彧姿制闲裕，吐发流美。
现代文：元彧仪态闲雅，谈吐言辞美妙。
English: Yuan Xuan's demeanor is casual and elegant, and his speech is wonderful.

古文：琅邪王诵，有名人也，见之未尝不心醉忘疲。
现代文：琅邪王诵，也是很有名气的人，见了元彧之后，也不能不为之心醉，忘却疲劳。
English: Zou Yanzhong, also a very famous person, could not help but be intoxicated and forget his fatigue after seeing Yuan Xuan.

古文：奏郑庙歌词，时称其美。
现代文：他奏祭祀郊庙时所用歌词，当时人也大加赞美。
English: He played the lyrics used in the sacrificial rites of the suburb temple, which was highly praised by the people at the time.

古文：除给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：被任命为给事黄门侍郎。
English: He was appointed to be the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：彧本名亮，字仕明，时侍中穆绍与彧同署，避绍父讳，启求改名。
现代文：元彧原名叫亮，字仕明。当时侍中穆绍跟他同署办事，为了避开穆绍父亲的名字，他便上表请求改名。
English: At that time, the chamberlain, Musho, worked with him in the same office. In order to avoid the name of Musho's father, he requested to change his name.

古文：诏曰： 仕明风神运吐，常自以比荀文若，可名彧，以取定体相伦之美。 
现代文：皇帝下诏说 ：仕明谈吐具有风采神韵，经常自比三国时的荀文若，可改名为，以取同一体类相似之美。 
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict saying: "Shiming Danzhu has grace and verve, often comparing it to the Three Kingdoms, and it can be renamed to take the same type of similar beauty."

古文：彧求复本封，诏许复封临淮，寄食相州魏郡。
现代文：元彧又请求恢复父亲原有的封爵，皇帝下诏答应恢复临淮王的封爵，寄食邑于相州的魏郡。
English: Yuan Xuan also requested the restoration of his father's original knighthood, and the emperor issued an edict promising to restore the knighthood of Lin Huai Wang, who lived in Wei County, Xiangzhou.

古文：又长兼御史中尉。
现代文：又长期兼任御史中尉职务。
English: For a long time, he also held the position of Lieutenant of History.

古文：彧以为伦叙得之，不谢。
现代文：元彧认为这是按照顺序叙用而得的职务，没有向朝廷拜谢。
English: Yuan Shao thought that this was a post obtained in accordance with the order of appointment, and did not thank the imperial court.

古文：领军于忠忿，言之朝廷曰： 临淮虽复风流可观，而无骨鲠之操，中尉之任，恐非所堪。 
现代文：领军于忠很愤愤不平，向朝廷进言说： 临淮王虽然风度可观，但缺少刚直的情操，御史中尉的职务，恐怕不是他所能胜任的。 
English: Yu Zhong, the leader of the army, was very indignant and complained to the imperial court, saying: Although Lin Huai Wang has an admirable demeanor, he lacks a straightforward temperament. I am afraid that he is not competent for the position of Lieutenant of History.

古文：遂去威仪，单车而还，朝流为之叹息。
现代文：于是去掉了赐给他的随从，让他单车回府。朝臣们都为他感叹和惋惜。
English: So he got rid of the retinue that had been given to him and made him cycle back to the palace. The courtiers all lamented and felt sorry for him.

古文：累迁侍中、卫将军、左光禄大夫，兼尚书左仆射，摄选。
现代文：后来又累迁任侍中、卫将军、左光禄大夫、兼尚书左仆射，代管选部。
English: Later, he was successively transferred to the positions of Samurai Middle Officer, General of the Guards, Doctor of the Left Hand of the Left Hand of the Left Hand of the Left Hand of the Left Hand of the Left Hand of the Left Hand of the Right Hand of the Left Hand of the Right Hand of the Left Hand of the Right Hand of the Left Hand of the Right Hand of the Right Hand of the Left Hand of the Right Hand of the Right Hand of the Right Hand of the Left Hand of the Right Hand of the Right Hand of the Right Hand of the Right Hand of the Left Hand of the Right Hand of the Right Hand of the Right Hand of the Left Hand of the Right Hand of the Right Hand of the Right

古文：后以本官为东道行台。
现代文：后来以本官职任东道行台。
English: Later, I went to Taiwan as a host with my official position.

古文：会尔硃荣入洛，杀害元氏，彧抚膺恸哭，遂奔梁。
现代文：正值尔朱荣进入洛阳，杀害元氏族人。元彧拍胸痛哭，便投奔梁朝。
English: It was at this time that Er Zhu Rong entered Luoyang and killed the members of the Yuan clan. Yuan Yu beat his chest and wept bitterly, and then fled to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：梁武遣其舍人陈建孙迎接，并观彧为人。
现代文：梁武帝派他的舍人陈建孙前来迎接，并且观察元彧的为人。
English: Emperor Liangwu sent his concubine Chen Jiansun to meet and observe Yuan Zang.

古文：建孙称彧风神闲俊。
现代文：陈建孙称赞元彧风采神韵闲雅俊秀。
English: Chen Jiansun praised Yuan Qi's style and wit.

古文：梁武亦先闻名，深相器待。
现代文：梁武帝也早就听说了他的名声，十分敬重礼待他。
English: Emperor Liangwu had long heard of his reputation and treated him with great respect.

古文：见彧于乐游园，因设宴乐。彧闻声歔欷，涕泪交下，梁武为之不乐。
现代文：梁武帝在乐游园设宴奏乐招待他，元彧听到歌声嘘唏而哭，涕泪交加而下，梁武帝见后也感到伤心。
English: Emperor Liangwu invited him to a banquet and music performance at the Music Amusement Park. When Yuan Xuan heard the singing, he burst into tears. Emperor Liangwu also felt sad after seeing him.

古文：自前后奔叛，皆候旨称魏为伪，唯彧表启常云魏临淮王。
现代文：和元彧一样前来梁朝投奔叛降的人，在候旨时都称魏为伪，只有元彧上表时总是自称魏临淮王。
English: Like Yuan Shao, those who came to the Liang Dynasty to join the rebellion called Wei a fake when they were waiting for the imperial edict. Only when Yuan Shao was at the table, he always called himself Wei Linhuai Wang.

古文：梁武体彧雅性，不以为责。
现代文：梁武帝体谅元彧的本性如此，也不责怪他。
English: Emperor Liangwu understood Yuan Shao's true nature and did not blame him.

古文：及知庄帝践阼，彧以母老请还，辞旨恳切。
现代文：当他知道庄帝继位时，便以母亲年老为由请求回北方去，词语十分恳切。
English: When he knew that Emperor Zhuang was to succeed to the throne, he pleaded with his mother to return to the north on the grounds of her old age, and his words were very earnest.

古文：梁武惜其人才，又难违其意，遣其仆射徐勉私劝彧留。
现代文：梁武帝爱惜他是个人才，可是又难以违背他的本意，便派仆射徐逸私下去劝元彧留下。
English: Emperor Liangwu felt sorry for him because he was a talented person, but it was difficult to go against his original intention, so he sent his servant Xu Yizhi to go and persuade Yuan Xuan to stay.

古文：彧曰： 死犹愿北，况于生也？ 
现代文：元彧说 ：死去还希望回北方，何况现在还活着呢？ 
English: Yuan Zang said, "If you die, you still want to go back to the north. How is it that you are still alive?"

古文：梁武乃以礼遣。
现代文：梁武帝便以礼相送。
English: Emperor Liangwu then sent him off with a courtesy call.

古文：彧性至孝。自经违离，不进酒肉；憔悴容貌，见者伤之。
现代文：元彧非常孝顺，自从母亲去世以后，再也不吃酒肉，面容憔悴，见到的人都为之伤感。
English: Yuan Qi is very filial, since his mother died, he no longer eats meat and wine, his face is gaunt, and everyone who sees him is sad.

古文：历位尚书令、大司马，兼录尚书。
现代文：历任尚书令、大司马，兼录尚书事。
English: Successive incumbents of Shang Shuling, Dai Sima, concurrently recorded Shang Shuling.

古文：庄帝追崇武宣王为文穆皇帝，庙号肃祖，母李妃为文穆皇后。将迁神主于太庙，以孝文为伯考。
现代文：庄帝要追尊父亲武宣王为文穆皇帝，庙号肃祖，母亲李妃为文穆皇后，准备把神主迁入太庙，以孝文帝为伯考。
English: Emperor Zhuang wanted to follow his revered father, King Wu Xuan, as the Emperor of Wenshu and the founder of the temple, and his mother, Empress Li Fei, as the Empress of Wenshu. He planned to move the deity into the Great Temple, with Emperor Xiaowen as his tutor.

古文：庄帝既逼诸妹之请，此词意黄门侍郎常景、中书侍郎邢子才所赞成也。
现代文：元彧上表劝谏。这时，庄帝正一意孤行，朝臣没有人敢劝说，只有元彧和吏部尚书李神亻隽有表上奏。
English: At this time, Emperor Zhuang was determined to go his own way, and none of the courtiers dared to persuade him. Only Emperor Yuancheng and the official Shangshu Li Shenshu were able to persuade him.

古文：又追尊兄彭城王为孝宣帝。
现代文：庄帝又追尊他哥哥彭城王为孝宣帝。
English: Emperor Zhuang also revered his brother, King Pengcheng, as Emperor Xiaoxuan.

古文：彧又面谏曰： 陛下作而不法，后世何观？
现代文：元彧又当面劝谏说 ：陛下的作为不合法度，后代人将怎样看待？
English: Yuan Xuan also persuaded him in person, saying, "Your Majesty's actions are illegitimate, how will future generations regard them?"

古文：历寻书籍，未有其事。 
现代文：历来书籍中，没有这样的事情。 
English: There's never been anything like it in the history of books.

古文：帝不从。
现代文：皇帝又不肯听从。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：及神主入庙。复敕百官悉陪从，一依乘舆之式。
现代文：当神主送入太庙时，皇帝又令百官陪同，一律依照帝王的乘舆规格。
English: When the deity was brought into the imperial temple, the emperor had hundreds of officials accompany him, all in accordance with the emperor's wishes.

古文：彧上表以为： 爰自中古，迄于下叶，崇尚君亲，褒明功懿，乃有皇号，终无帝名。
现代文：元彧上表认为 ：起自中古，至于下叶，崇尚君亲，褒明功德，乃有皇号，终无帝名。
English: According to the view of the Yuan Dynasty's upper table: since the Middle Ages, as for the lower table, advocating kinship and praising merits, there is an imperial title, but there is no imperial name.

古文：今若去帝，直留皇名，求之古义，少有依准。 
现代文：今如去帝。只留皇名，求之古义，略有依准。 
English: Now it's like going to the emperor. Only the emperor's name is left, asking for the old meaning, slightly according to the standard.

古文：又不纳。
现代文：但皇帝又不肯采纳。
English: But the emperor refused to accept it.

古文：尔硃荣死，除彧司徒公。
现代文：尔朱荣死后，任元彧为司徒公。
English: After the death of Er Zhu Rong, Ren Yuanqi was appointed as Stogong.

古文：及尔硃兆率众奄至，出东掖门，为贼所获。
现代文：当尔朱兆带兵突然到京时，元彧从东掖门出城，被敌人抓获。
English: When Er Zhu Zhao suddenly arrived in Beijing with soldiers, Yuan Shao left the city through the East Gate and was captured by the enemy.

古文：见兆，辞色不屈，为群胡所殴，薨。
现代文：见到尔朱兆时，他神色不变，不肯屈服，为群胡殴打而死。
English: When he saw Lzhu Zhao, he looked unchanged, refused to give in, and died from the beating.

古文：孝武帝末，赠大将军、太师、太尉公、录尚书事，谥曰文穆。
现代文：孝武帝末年，追赠为大将军、太师、太尉公、录尚书事，谥为 文穆 。
English: In the last years of Emperor Xiaowu, he was posthumously awarded the titles of General, Grand Master, and Second Lieutenant. His name is recorded in records, and he is referred to as Wenmu.

古文：然性无骨鲠，善事权势，为正直者所讥。
现代文：元彧美于风韵，善知进退，是衣冠士族之中很有容量和规矩的人。他博览群书，但不为章句之学，所写的文章，虽然大多散失，但仍有流传在世的。
English: Yuan Xuan was beautiful in demeanor, good at advancing and retreating, and was a man of great capacity and discipline among the crowned scholars. He was well-versed in books, but not in the study of chapters and sentences. The articles he wrote, although mostly lost, are still circulating in the world.

古文：齐天保初，准例降爵，封临淮县公，拜光禄大夫。二年冬，被诏入晋阳宫，出与元晖业同被害。昌弟孚，字秀和，少有令誉。
现代文：不过他为官并不能保持清廉，所举荐任用的也不过是亲属连襟，因此被有见识的人所讥笑。没有生儿子。元昌的弟弟元孚，字秀和，从小就有美名。
English: However, he was not able to maintain his integrity as an official, and the recommended appointments were only relatives, so he was ridiculed by people with insight. He did not have a son. Yuanchang's younger brother Yuan Fu, also known as Xiuhe, had a good reputation since childhood.

古文：侍中游肇、并州刺史高聪、司徒崔光等见孚，咸曰： 此子当准的人物，恨吾徒衰暮，不及见耳。 
现代文：侍中游肇、并州刺史高聪、司徒崔光等人见到元孚以后，都说： 这是位能够成为当代楷模的人物，可惜我们都已年老体衰，来不及看到了。 
English: After seeing Yuan Fu, the samurai Zhongyou Zhao, the statesman Shi Gao Cong, and the scholar Cui Guang all said: This is a person who can become a contemporary model, but unfortunately we are too old and weak to see it.

古文：累迁兼尚书右丞。
现代文：累升至尚书右丞。
English: He rose to the rank of Shoshojo-jo.

古文：灵太后临朝，宦者干政，孚乃总括古今名妃贤后，凡为四卷，奏之。
现代文：灵太后临朝听政，宦官干政，元孚便汇总了古今名妃贤后事迹，共四卷，上奏灵太后。
English: After Lingdai's accession to the throne, the eunuchs became involved in politics, and Yuan Fu summarized the deeds of the empress dowager, a total of four volumes, on Lingdai.

古文：迁左丞。
现代文：改任为尚书左丞。
English: He was reassigned to the post of Shoshu Sojo.

古文：蠕蠕主阿那瑰既得反国，其人大饥，相率入塞，阿那瑰上表请台振给。
现代文：蠕蠕国王阿那瞔回国以后，国人饥荒，相带进入塞内，阿那瞝便上表朝廷请求给以赈济。
English: After the return of King Anaximenes, the countrymen went into famine, and Anaximenes went to the imperial court to ask for aid.

古文：诏孚为北道行台，诣彼振恤，孚陈便宜表曰：
现代文：朝廷下诏任命元孚为北道行台，前去赈济安抚，元孚便上表提出处理意见，以供选用，奏书中说：
English: The imperial court issued an edict appointing Yuan Fu as the Northern Wayfarer, to go and pacify the country. Yuan Fu then submitted a list of suggestions for selection, saying in his report:

古文：皮服之人，未尝粒食，宜从俗因利，拯其所无。
现代文： 北方身穿皮服之人，不吃粮食，应当从其习俗，因势利导，助其所无。
English: People in the north who wear leather clothes and do not eat food should follow their customs, because of snobbery, they have nothing to help them.

古文：昔汉建武中，单于款塞，时转河东米Я二万五千斛、牛羊三万六千头以给之。
现代文：往昔汉建武年间，单于叩塞门求通，当时转运干粮二万五千斛、牛羊三万六千头送给他。
English: In the past, during the Jianwu era of the Han Dynasty, when he was trying to get through at the Basseimen Gate, he was given 25,000 mu of dry grain and 36,000 heads of cattle and sheep.

古文：斯则前代和戎，抚新柔远之长策也。
现代文：这是前代和戎所采取的安抚新附者，怀柔远方的长远谋略。
English: This is the long-term strategy of appeasing the newly annexed and appeasing the distant adopted by the previous generation.

古文：乞以牸牛产羊，糊其口食。
现代文：请将母牛产羊送出，以供口食之用。
English: Please send out the cow's milk to be used for oral consumption.

古文：且畜牧繁息，是其所便；毛血之利，惠兼衣食。
现代文：况且畜牧繁衍生息，是他们便于使用的，皮毛血肉之利，兼及衣食。
English: In addition, the livestock breeding and breeding, they are easy to use, the fur of the flesh and blood, as well as food and clothing.

古文：又尚书奏云：如其仍住七州，随宽置之。
现代文： 又尚书奏称：如他们仍留在七州，听由到宽处安置。
English: Shang Shuxiao also said: If they still stay in the seven states, they should be resettled in a wider area.

古文：臣谓人情恋本，宁肯徙内？
现代文：我以为人情留恋根本，岂肯迁移内地？
English: I thought it was human nature to be nostalgic. Would they really want to move inland?

古文：若依臣请，给振杂畜，爱本重乡，必还旧土。
现代文：如依照臣下请求，赈济他们牲畜，他们爱其根本，重视故乡，必回故土。
English: If, at the request of his vassals, he feeds their livestock, they will love their roots, cherish their hometown, and return to their native land.

古文：如其不然，禁留益损。
现代文：如果不这样做，禁留下来更加不利。
English: If you don't, it's even worse to be banned.

古文：假令逼徙，事非久计。
现代文：假如逼令迁移，必非长久之计。
English: If forced to relocate, it will not be a long-term solution.

古文：何者？
现代文：什么原因？
English: Why is that?

古文：人面兽心，去留难测。
现代文：人面兽心，去留难以猜测。
English: It's hard to guess who's going to stay.

古文：既易水草，疴恙将多；忧愁致困，死亡必甚。
现代文：既改换水草，疾病将多，忧愁困顿，死亡增加。
English: As soon as the aquatic plants are changed, there will be more diseases, more sorrow, and more death.

古文：兼其余类，尚在沙碛；脱出狂勃，翻归旧巢，必残掠邑里，遗毒百姓。
现代文：何况他们的余族，仍留在沙漠，如果发生狂乱，重回旧巢，必然残害掠夺城乡，为害百姓。
English: What's more, their remaining clans still remain in the desert. If there is a riot and they return to their old nests, they will inevitably destroy and plunder the cities and countryside to the detriment of the people.

古文：乱而方塞，未若杜其未萌。
现代文：乱而堵塞，不如防于未萌生之时。
English: It is better to prevent it from getting clogged up than to prevent it from sprouting.

古文：又贸迁起于上古，交易行于中世。
现代文： 又贩运买卖，起自上古，相互交易，行于中世。
English: Trafficking and buying and selling have also been carried out since ancient times, starting with mutual trade in the Middle Ages.

古文：汉与胡通，亦立关市。
现代文：汉与胡通，也设关市。
English: Han and Hutong also set up a customs city.

古文：今北人阻饥，命悬沟壑；公给之外，必求市易。彼若愿求，宜见听许。
现代文：今北人困于饥荒，命悬于沟壑，除朝廷赈济之外，必然请求设市交易，他们如有请求，应当听允。 
English: Now the northerners are trapped in famine and their lives hang in the balance. In addition to the imperial court's aid, they will inevitably request the establishment of a market. If they have a request, they should listen to it.

古文：又云：
现代文：又说：
English: He added:

古文：营大者不计小名，图远者弗拘近利。
现代文： 办大事者不计小名，有远谋者不拘近利。
English: Those who do big things are not petty, and those who are far-sighted are not narrow-minded.

古文：虽戎狄衰盛，历代不同，叛服之情，略可论讨。
现代文：虽财戎狄衰盛，各代不同，叛服情形，略可讨论。
English: Although the prosperity and prosperity of the imperial army is declining, each generation is different, and the situation of rebellion can be discussed slightly.

古文：周之北伐，仅获中规；汉氏外攘，裁收下策。
现代文：周之北伐，仅合中规；汉代外攻，才收下策。
English: Zhou's Northern Expedition only conformed to the middle standard; the Han Dynasty's external attack only accepted the policy.

古文：昔在代京，恆为重备，将帅劳止，甲士疲力。计前世苦之，力未能致。
现代文：昔在代都，常为重备，将帅劳苦，兵士力疲，计前代之辛苦，未能使之归服。
English: In the past, the generals in the capital were often overstretched, the generals worked hard, the soldiers were exhausted, and the previous generation's hard work failed to subdue them.

古文：今天祚大魏，乱亡在彼。朝廷垂天覆之恩，廓大造之德，鸠其散亡，礼送令反，宜因此时，善思远策。
现代文：如今天盛大魏，戎狄衰亡，朝廷降垂天之恩，弘大再造之德，收集散亡之士，以礼遣送回乡，应当利用时机，善思长久之策。
English: For example, if today is the grand Wei Dynasty, and the imperial dynasty is on the decline, and the imperial court is on the decline, the grace of heaven, and the virtue of great re-creation, and the scattered people are collected and sent back to their hometowns with courtesy, it is necessary to take advantage of the opportunity and think about a long-term strategy.

古文：窃以理虽万变，可以一观；来事虽悬，易以往卜。
现代文： 我私下认为，理虽能万变，可用一法观察；未来之事虽远，容易以往事卜知。
English: Privately, I believe that although reason is ever-changing, it can be observed by a single method; although the future is far away, it is easy to predict the past.

古文：昔汉宣之世，呼韩款塞，汉遣董忠、韩昌领边郡士马，送出朔方，因留卫助。
现代文：往昔在汉室之世，呼韩邪来叩边塞，汉派董忠、韩昌率领边郡人马，送出朔方，于是留下卫助。
English: In the past, in the world of the Han Dynasty, the Han Dynasty called for the evil Han Dynasty to attack the border, and the Han Dynasty sent Dong Zhong and Han Chang to lead the people and horses of the border county to send out the Shuo side, so they left Wei Wei.

古文：又光武时，亦令中郎将段彬置安集掾史，随单于所在，参察动静。
现代文：又光武帝时，也命令中郎将段彬，设置安集掾史，随同单于所在之处，观察动静。
English: At the time of Emperor Guangwu, he also ordered Zhong Lang to assign Duan Bin, set up Anji Shishi, and accompany him to observe the movement and movement.

古文：斯皆守吉之元龟，安边之胜策。
现代文：这都是保证安宁的灵龟，安定边境的上策。
English: These are all measures to ensure peace and stability at the border.

古文：计今朝廷成功，不减曩时，蠕蠕国弊，亦同畴日。
现代文：如今朝廷的成功，不减于往日，蠕蠕国内衰败，也如同旧时。
English: Today, the success of the imperial court is no less than in the past, and the decline of the country is also the same as in the old days.

古文：宜准昔成谋，略依旧事，借其所闲地，听使田牧。
现代文：应当以过去成功的谋略为依准，略略依照旧事，借给闲置土地，听由打猎放牧。
English: It should be based on the successful strategies of the past, borrow idle land, and rely on hunting and grazing.

古文：粗置官属，示相慰抚。
现代文：粗设官吏，以示慰抚。
English: A rough-hewn official came out to offer consolation.

古文：严戒边兵，以见保卫。
现代文：严戒边境将士，以见我保卫之劳。
English: I have ordered my border guards to be on high alert to protect me.

古文：驭以仁宽，縻以久策。使亲不至矫诈，疏不容叛反。
现代文：待以仁义，宽于驾驭，羁縻作为长久之策，使亲近而不致于狡诈，疏远时不容许反叛。
English: To be treated with benevolence and righteousness, broad-mindedness, and restraint as a long-term strategy, so that closeness does not lead to cunning, and rebellion is not allowed when estranged.

古文：今北镇诸将，旧常云一人代外逻，因令防察。
现代文：如今北部边将，旧时常设一人，在云、代界外巡逻，应令其加以防察。
English: Today, the northern border general, who used to be a permanent one, patrols outside the borders of Yun and Dai, and should be ordered to prevent them.

古文：所谓天子有道，守在四夷者也。
现代文：这就是所说的天子有道，守在四夷啊！ 
English: This is what is meant by "Heaven's son has a way, guard it in Shii"!

古文：又云：
现代文：他又说：
English: He added:

古文：先人有夺人之心，待降如受强敌。
现代文： 先祖有夺人之心，对待归降者如接受强敌。
English: The forefathers had the heart of a conqueror, and treated those who surrendered as if they were accepting a strong enemy.

古文：武非寻外，亦以防内。
现代文：武力并非专用对外，也用来防内。
English: Force is not only used for external purposes, but also for internal defense.

古文：若从处分割配，诸州镇辽远，非转输可到，悔叛之情，变起难测。又居人畜业，布在原野，戎夷性贪，见则思盗；防彼肃此，少兵不堪。浑流之际，易相干犯。
现代文：如果听从处置分配各地，各州镇遥远，不是转途运送可以到达。如产生后悔和叛乱，变故发生难以预测，又居民的牲畜产业，分布在原野之中，戎夷本性贪婪，见后便起盗心，防彼肃此，兵少难以应付，混乱之际，容易相互纠纷。
English: If you listen to the disposition and distribute it to various places, the state towns are far away and can not be reached by transfer. If there is regret and rebellion, the circumstances are unpredictable, and the livestock industry of the residents is distributed in the wilderness, the soldiers are greedy by nature, and they will be greedy after seeing each other. To prevent this, it is difficult to cope with fewer soldiers, and it is easy to quarrel with each other when there is chaos.

古文：驱之还本，未必乐去，配州内徙，复不肯从。
现代文：驱赶回乡，未必愿去，内迁各州，又不听从。
English: Driven back to their hometowns, they may not want to go, moved to the interior of the states, and did not obey.

古文：既其如此，为费必大。
现代文：到此之时，耗费必将巨大。 
English: At this point, the costs are bound to be huge.

古文：朝廷不许。
现代文：可是，朝廷不肯听从他的意见。
English: However, the court would not listen to him.

古文：孚持白武幡劳阿那瑰于柔玄、怀荒二镇间。
现代文：元孚持白武幡到柔玄、怀荒两镇之间犒劳阿那瞔。
English: Between the towns of Yuanfujing, Baiwuhan, Zhuoyuan and Huaiyao, there is Luo'anashan.

古文：阿那环瑰众号三十万，阴有异意，遂拘留孚。
现代文：阿那瞔的部众号称三十万，他私下有异心，因此拘留了元孚。
English: Anaxagoras's followers were said to number three hundred thousand, but he was secretly a dissident, and so Yuan Fu was detained.

古文：载以韫车，日给酪一升、肉一段。
现代文：把他安置在密闭的车子里，每天送来一升乳酪、一段肉。
English: They put him in a closed car and brought him a litre of cheese and a piece of meat every day.

古文：每集其众，坐孚车厢，称为行台，甚加礼敬。
现代文：每次会集部众时，让元孚坐在车厢，称他为行台，对他表示很尊敬的样子。
English: Every time he gathered his followers, he would have Yuan Fu sit in the carriage, calling him "Gangdao" and showing him great respect.

古文：阿那瑰遂南过，至旧京。
现代文：阿那瞔便南侵，到达旧京城。
English: Anaximenes invaded the south and reached the old capital.

古文：后遣孚等还，因上表谢罪。
现代文：后来他把元孚等人送回朝廷，因而上表谢罪。
English: Later, he sent Yuan Fu and others back to the imperial court, and thus confessed his guilt.

古文：有司以孚事下廷尉，丞高谦之云孚辱命，处孚流罪。
现代文：有关部门将元孚的事情交给廷尉处置。廷尉丞高谦之认为元孚有辱使命，判处元孚流放之罪。
English: The relevant departments handed over the matter of Yuan Fu to the court official. The court official, Gao Qianzhi, thought that Yuan Fu had disgraced his mission and sentenced Yuan Fu to exile.

古文：后拜冀州刺史。
现代文：后来，元孚被任命为冀州刺史。
English: Later, Yuan Fu was appointed as the chief historian of Jizhou.

古文：孚劝课农桑，境内称慈父，邻州号曰神君。
现代文：他劝告和督促民众致力农桑，州内称呼他为慈父，邻州叫他为神君。
English: He advised and urged the people to devote themselves to agricultural mulberry. The state called him a loving father, and the neighboring states called him a god.

古文：先是，州人张孟都、张洪建、马潘、崔独怜、张叔绪、崔丑、张天宜、崔思哲等八人，皆屯保林野，不臣王命，州郡号曰八王。
现代文：冀州人张孟都、张洪建、马潘、崔独怜、张叔绪、崔丑、张天宜、崔思哲等八人，都聚众山林，不听朝廷之命，州郡称他们为八王。
English: Zhang Mengdu, Zhang Hongjian, Ma Pan, Cui Du Rong, Zhang Shuxu, Cui Qiu, Zhang Tianyi, Cui Shizhe and other eight people from Jizhou gathered in the mountains and did not listen to the orders of the imperial court. The county called them the eight kings.

古文：孚至，皆请入城，愿致死效力。
现代文：元孚来到冀州以后，他们都请求到城里来，表示愿意以死为他效力。
English: After Yuanfu came to Jizhou, they all asked to come to the city and expressed their willingness to die to serve him.

古文：后为葛荣所陷，为荣所执。
现代文：后来，冀州被葛荣攻破，元孚被葛荣抓住了。
English: Later, Jizhou was invaded by Ge Rong, and Yuanfu was captured by Ge Rong.

古文：兄祐为防城都督，兄子礼为录事参军。
现代文：当时，元孚的哥哥元是防城都督，另一位哥哥子礼为录事参军。
English: At that time, Yuan Fu's brother Yuan was the governor of Fangcheng, and another brother, Zili, joined the army as a conscript.

古文：荣欲先害子礼，孚请先死以赎子礼，叩头流血，荣乃舍之。
现代文：葛荣准备先杀害子礼，元孚请求让他先死，以救出子礼，他叩头直到流血，葛荣这才把子礼放了。
English: Ge Rong was ready to kill Zili first. Yuan Fu asked Mao to let him die first in order to save Zili. He bowed down until he bled. It was only then that Ge Rong released Zili.

古文：又大集将士，议其死事。
现代文：葛荣又大举召集将士，商议处死他们。
English: Ge Rong also called together a large number of soldiers to discuss and execute them.

古文：孚兄弟各诬己引过，争相为死。
现代文：元孚的兄弟都各自说自己的坏话，争替别人先死。
English: The brothers in Yuanfu all speak ill of each other and compete to be the first to die.

古文：又孟都、潘绍等数百人皆叩头就法，请活使君。
现代文：而张孟都、潘绍等几百人也都叩头请求被处死，以救元孚。
English: But Zhang Mengdu, Pan Shao and hundreds of others also bowed down and asked to be put to death to save Yuan Fu.

古文：荣曰： 此魏之诚臣义士也。 
现代文：葛荣说： 这些人真是魏国的忠臣义士啊！ 
English: Ge Rong said: These people are really loyal subjects and righteous men of Wei!

古文：凡同禁五百人，皆得免。
现代文：于是将一起拘禁的五百人都放掉了。
English: So they released all five hundred people who were detained at the same time.

古文：荣卒，还除冀州刺史。
现代文：葛荣之乱平定后，元孚仍被任命为冀州刺史。
English: After the suppression of the Ge Rong Rebellion, Yuan Fu was still appointed as the chief historian of Jizhou.

古文：元颢入洛，授孚东道行台、彭城郡王。
现代文：元颢到洛阳以后，任命元孚为东道行台、彭城郡王。
English: After Yuan Shao arrived in Luoyang, he appointed Yuan Fu as his host and the king of Pengcheng County.

古文：孚封颢逆书送朝廷，天子嘉之。
现代文：元孚把元颢送来的策反书信封好送到朝廷，皇帝很嘉许他。
English: Yuanfu delivered the envelope of the countermeasure letter sent by Yuan Hui to the imperial court, and the emperor highly praised him.

古文：颢卒，封孚万年乡男。
现代文：元颢被讨平之后，元孚被封为万年乡男。
English: After Yuan Shao was defeated, Yuan Fu was awarded the title of "Villain of the Year."

古文：永安末，乐器残缺，庄帝命孚监仪注。
现代文：永安末年，乐器残缺，庄帝任命元孚监修仪器。
English: At the end of the Yongan era, there was a shortage of musical instruments, and Zhuangdi appointed Yuan Fu to supervise the repair of instruments.

古文：孚上表曰：
现代文：元孚上表说：
English: Yuan Fu said on the table:

古文：昔太和中，中书监高闾、太乐令公孙崇修造金石，数十年间，乃奏成功。
现代文： 以前在太和年间，中书监高闾、太乐令公孙崇修造金石乐器，用数十年时间，终于成功。
English: In the past, during the Taihe era, the Chinese supervisors Gao Zheng and Taile Zheng ordered Gongsun Chong to build a gemstone musical instrument. It took decades, but it was finally successful.

古文：时大集儒生，考其得失。
现代文：当时召集大量儒生，考正得失。
English: At that time, a large number of Confucianism students were called up to test the merits and demerits.

古文：太常卿刘芳请别营造，久而方就。
现代文：太常卿刘芳请求另行营造，很久以后才修成。
English: At the request of the Grand Duke Liu Fang, it was built separately, and was only completed much later.

古文：复召公卿量校合否，论者沸腾，莫有适从。
现代文：又召集公卿大臣一起测量校正，看是不是合适，议论纷纷，无所适从。
English: He also called together the nobles and ministers to measure and correct it to see if it was appropriate. There was much discussion and no one could do anything about it.

古文：登被旨敕，并见施用。
现代文：当时传旨，同时使用。
English: At that time, the message was transmitted and used at the same time.

古文：往岁大军入洛，戎马交驰，所有乐器，亡失垂尽。
现代文：往年大军入洛，戎马交加，所有乐器，丢失将尽。
English: In previous years, the army entered Luo, the army and horses clashed, and all musical instruments would be lost.

古文：臣至太乐署，问太乐令张乾龟等，云承前以来，置宫悬四箱，栒虡六架，东北架编黄钟之磬十四。虽器名黄钟，而声实夷则；考之音制，不甚谐韵。
现代文：我到太乐署，问太乐令张乾龟等人，说是承接以前留下的东西，设有宫调器乐四箱，悬挂钟磬的木架六架，东北架上有黄钟的编磬十四个，虽然乐器名为黄钟，而声音实在不合规矩，检查音制，不很合韵。
English: I went to the Music Office and asked Zhang Qiankui and others in charge of the music. They said that they were taking over what had been left behind. There were four boxes of palace-tuned instruments, six wooden shelves with hanging bells, and fourteen yellow bells on the northeast shelf. Although the musical instrument was called a yellow bell, the sound was really irregular, the tone system was checked, and it didn't quite match the rhyme.

古文：姑洗悬于东北，太蔟编于西北，蕤宾列于西南。并皆器象差位，调律不和。
现代文：姑洗悬挂在东南，太蔟编放在西北，蕤宾排列在西南，都是器象异位，调律不和。
English: The "Gucchi" hangs in the southeast, the "Taiko" hangs in the northwest, and the "Kobin" hangs in the southwest. All of them are eccentric and do not harmonize with each other.

古文：又有仪钟十四，虡悬架首，初不叩击，今便删废，以从正则。
现代文：又有仪钟十四个，虚挂在架首，从开始时就没有敲打过，现在加以删除，以遵从正常的规则。
English: There are also fourteen bells, which were not struck at the beginning, but are now removed, so as to conform to the normal rules.

古文：臣今据《周礼凫氏》修广之规，《磬氏》倨句之法，吹律求声，叩钟求音；损除繁杂，讨论实录。
现代文： 我现在依据《周礼·凫氏》中长宽的规定，《磬氏》中倨句的法则，吹律以求声。叩钟以求音，去除繁杂，讨论并实际记录下来。
English: I am now following the rules for the length and width of the cymbals in "Zhou Li Yi Shi" and the rules of the haiku in "Zhou Li Yi Shi," blowing the rhythm to find the sound, striking the bell to find the sound, removing the complex, discussing and actually recording it.

古文：依十二月为十二宫。各准辰次，当位悬设。
现代文：依照十二月分为十二宫，各按准确的时辰和顺序，在正确的位置悬挂。
English: According to December, it is divided into twelve palaces, each hanging in the correct position according to the exact time and order.

古文：月声既备，随用击奏。
现代文：乐声完备，随时用来击奏。
English: The music is complete and ready to be played.

古文：则会还相为宫之义，又得律吕相生之体。
现代文：这样既合旋宫之义，又得律吕相生之体用。
English: In this way, it is not only compatible with the spirit of Confucius, but also compatible with the body.

古文：今量钟磬之数，各以十二架为定。
现代文：现今钟磬的数量，各按十二架为定数。 
English: Nowadays, the number of bell towers is fixed at twelve.

古文：奏可。
现代文：上奏后皇帝认为可行。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：于时搢绅之士，咸往观听，靡不咨嗟叹服而反。太傅、录尚书长孙承业妙解声律，特复称善。
现代文：当时的缙绅士人，都前往观看和听他们演奏，无不啧啧赞叹，信服地返回，太傅、录尚书事长孙承业善解声律，特别又表示确很完美。
English: The distinguished gentlemen of the time all went to watch and listen to their performance. They were all full of admiration and returned with conviction. Grandmaster Sun Chengye, the chief of the recorders, was good at solving the vocal rhythms, and especially said that it was really perfect.

古文：复从孝武帝入关，除尚书左仆射、扶风郡王。
现代文：元孚又跟孝武帝进关，被任命为尚书左仆射，封扶风郡王。
English: Yuan Fu also entered the pass with Emperor Xiaowu, and was appointed as Shang Shuxi's left-hand man, and crowned the king of Fu Feng County.

古文：寻监国史。
现代文：不久又监修国史。
English: Soon he was also supervising the national history.

古文：历位司空、兼尚书令、太保。
现代文：历任司空、兼尚书令、太保。
English: Successive Siku, Shojo Shurei, Taibo.

古文：时蠕蠕主与孚相识，先请见孚，然后遣女。
现代文：当时蠕蠕国王和元孚是旧相识，他要先见到元孚，然后再送女儿。
English: At that time, King Creep and Yuan Foo were old acquaintances. He wanted to see Yuan Foo first, and then send his daughter.

古文：于是乃使孚行。
现代文：于是便派元孚当使者到蠕蠕国去。
English: So he sent Yuan Fu as an emissary to Crum Crum.

古文：蠕蠕君臣见孚，莫不欢悦，奉皇后来归。
现代文：蠕蠕国的君臣们见到元孚，无不十分高兴。元孚护送皇后回到朝廷。
English: The princes and courtiers of the Kingdom of Crewe were all overjoyed to see Yuan Fu. Yuan Fu escorted the empress back to the imperial court.

古文：孚性机辩，好酒，貌短而秃。
现代文：元孚性格机智而又善于权变，喜爱喝酒。
English: Yuan Fu is witty and good at maneuvering, and likes to drink.

古文：周文帝偏所眷顾，尝于室内置酒十瓨，瓨余一斛，上皆加帽，欲戏孚。
现代文：周文帝特别对他优待，曾经在室内放了十缸酒，另外又剩下一斛，上面都盖上了盖子，想要和元孚开玩笑。
English: Zhou Wendi treated him especially well. He once kept ten jars of wine in the room, and there was also a jar left, all of which were covered with a lid. He wanted to play a joke on Yuan Fu.

古文：孚适入室，见即惊喜，曰： 吾兄弟辈甚无礼，何为窃入王家，匡坐相对？
现代文：元孚正好进室内，一见便又惊又喜，说道 ：我家的兄弟们这样无礼，为什么偷跑进大王家里，相对正坐？
English: Yuan Fu happened to enter the room, and was surprised and delighted at the sight, saying: "My brothers are so rude, why did they sneak into the king's house and sit opposite each other?

古文：宜早还宅也。 
现代文：应当早些回家去。 
English: You should go home earlier.

古文：因持酒归。
现代文：于是，他把酒拿回家去了。
English: So he took the wine home.

古文：周文抚手大笑。
现代文：周文帝见了以后拍手大笑。
English: Zhou Wendi clapped his hands and laughed when he saw it.

古文：后遇风患，手足不随，口不能言，乃左手画地作字，乞解所任。三奏不许。
现代文：后来，元孚中风，手脚不能随意活动，嘴也讲不出话来，他便用左手在地上划着写字，请求免去他的职务，可是三次奏请，都得不到许可。
English: Later, when Yuan Fu suffered a stroke, his hands and feet were unable to move freely, and his mouth was unable to speak. He wrote on the ground with his left hand, asking to be relieved of his duties. However, he did not get permission to write three times.

古文：迁太傅。
现代文：改任为太傅。
English: He was reassigned to Taifu.

古文：薨。帝亲临，百官赴吊。
现代文：去世时，皇帝亲临吊唁，百官们也都参加追悼。
English: When he died, the emperor came to offer his condolences in person, and hundreds of officials also took part in the mourning.

古文：赠大司马、录尚书事，谥曰文简。
现代文：追赠为大司马、录尚书事，谥为 文简 。
English: The posthumous gifts are a grand steed, a record of the proceedings, and a set of papers.

古文：子端嗣，位大行台尚书、华州刺史。
现代文：他的儿子元端为嗣子，任大行台尚书、华州刺史。
English: His son, Mototada, was the heir, and was appointed as Daigandai Shoshu and Huazhou Shishi.

古文：性疏佷，颇以基地骄物，时论鄙之。
现代文：性情粗俗凶狠。颇以自己的出身根基自傲，目中无人，当时人们对他的评价很低，瞧不起他。
English: His temper was coarse and fierce. He was rather proud of his origins and was a nobody. At that time, people had a very low opinion of him and looked down on him.

