古文：戚同文，字同文，宋之楚丘人。世为儒。
现代文：戚同文字同文，宋州楚丘人。世代为儒生。
English: He is a native of Chuqiu, Songzhou. He is a descendant of Confucianism.

古文：幼孤，祖母携育于外氏，奉养以孝闻。
现代文：他幼年失去父母，祖母携带他到娘家养育，同文奉养祖母以孝著称。
English: He lost his parents at a young age, and his grandmother took him to her daughter's home to raise him. She is known for her filial piety.

古文：祖母卒，昼夜哀号，不食数日，乡里为之感动。
现代文：祖母去世，日夜悲哀号哭，几天不吃饭，乡里人为之感动。
English: A villager was moved by the death of his grandmother, crying day and night in grief and not eating for days.

古文：始，闻邑人杨悫教授生徒，日过其学舍，因授《礼记》，随即成诵，日讽一卷，悫异而留之。
现代文：开始时，听说同县人杨悫教授学生门徒，每天经过其学舍，因此被传授《礼记》，随即成诵，每天背诵一卷，杨悫感到惊异而把同文留下来学习。
English: At the beginning, he heard that a professor and student disciple from the same county, Yang Hui, passed by his schoolhouse every day, so he was taught the "Rituals" and then recited them. He recited one volume every day. Yang Hui was surprised and kept the same text to study.

古文：不终岁毕诵《五经》，悫即妻以女弟。自是弥益勤励读书，累年不解带。
现代文：不到一年同文背诵《五经》完毕，杨悫就把妹妹嫁给他为妻，从此越加勤奋读书，多年不解衣带。
English: Less than a year after reciting the "Five Classics" in the same text, Yang Xuan married his sister to him as his wife. Since then, he has been studying more and more diligently, and has not untied his belt for many years.

古文：时晋末丧乱，绝意禄仕，且思见混一，遂以 同文 为名字。
现代文：当时后晋末年丧乱，他绝意做官，而且希望统一，于是用 同文 为名字。
English: At that time, after the turmoil at the end of the Jin Dynasty, he was determined to become an official, and hoped for unification, so he used Tongwen as his name.

古文：悫尝勉之仕，同文曰： 长者不仕，同文亦不仕。 悫依将军赵直家，遇疾不起，以家事托同文，即为葬三世数丧。
现代文：杨悫曾勉励他出仕，同文说： 长辈不做官，同文我也不做官。 杨悫依附将军赵直家，染病不起，以家事托付同文，即为他埋葬三代数人。
English: Yang Hui had encouraged him to serve, and said in the same text: "The elders do not serve as officials, and in the same text I do not serve as officials." Yang Hui was attached to General Zhao Naoie, and could not afford to get sick, so he entrusted the same text with household chores, that is, he buried three generations of people.

古文：直复厚加礼待，为筑室聚徒，请益之人不远千里而至。
现代文：赵直对同文又厚加礼待，为他修筑屋舍聚集门徒，请教的人不远千里而至。
English: Zhao Zhi treated Tongwen with great courtesy. He built a house for him and gathered disciples. People came from thousands of miles away to seek his advice.

古文：登第者五六十人，宗度、许骧、陈象舆、高象先、郭成范、王砺、滕涉皆践台阁。
现代文：他的学生考中进士的五六十人，宗度、许骧、陈象舆、高象先、郭成范、王砺、滕涉都位至尚书。
English: Fifty to sixty of his students passed the junior high school entrance examination, including Zundu, Xu Qi, Chen Xiangwu, Gao Xiangxian, Guo Chengfan, Wang Qi, and Teng Wanzhong.

古文：同文纯质尚信义，人有丧者力拯济之，宗族闾里贫乏者周给之。冬月，多解衣裘与寒者。
现代文：戚同文纯正质直崇尚信义，人家有丧事尽力拯救接济，宗族乡里贫困的人也予以周济，十二月的时候，多次脱下自己的棉衣给贫寒的人。
English: Relatives of the same text are pure, upright, and believe in truth and justice. When people have funerals, they try their best to save and give alms. The poor people in the hometown of the clan also give alms. In December, they often take off their cotton clothes to give to the poor.

古文：不积财，不营居室，或勉之，辄曰： 人生以行义为贵，焉用此为！ 由是深为乡里推服。
现代文：他不积聚钱财，不营建住房，有人劝勉他，他常常说 ：人生以行义为贵，哪里用得这样做！ 由于这样深为乡里推重佩服。
English: He did not accumulate money or build a house, and when he was advised to do so, he often said, "A life of righteousness is precious, where is the need to do so?

古文：有不循孝悌者，同文必谕以善道。
现代文：有不谨守孝悌的人，同文一定以善道去劝谕。
English: Those who do not respect filial piety should be advised to do so in a good way.

古文：颇有知人鉴，所与游皆一时名士。
现代文：他很有知人之明，所有与他交游的人都是一时名士。
English: He was a man of many acquaintances, and all his fellow-travellers were at one time celebrities.

古文：乐闻人善，未尝言人短。
现代文：喜欢听人家的好处，从不说人家的短处。
English: I like to listen to other people's advantages, and never talk about their shortcomings.

古文：与宗翼、张昉、滕知白为友。
现代文：与宗翼、张日方、滕知白为朋友。
English: He is friends with Zong Ying, Zhang Yifang and Teng Zhibai.

古文：生平不至京师。
现代文：生平没有到过京城。
English: He has never been to Kyoto in his life.

古文：长子维任随州书记，迎同文就养，卒于汉东，年七十三。
现代文：长子戚维任随州书记，迎接同文去供养，同文去世于汉东，享年七十三岁。
English: His eldest son, Wei Ren, the secretary of Suizhou, greeted Tongwen and went to support him. Tongwen died in the Han Dynasty at the age of seventy-three.

古文：好为诗，有《孟诸集》二十卷。
现代文：喜好做诗，著有《孟诸集》二十卷。
English: He likes to write poetry and is the author of "Meng Zhu Shu" (20 volumes).

古文：始四五岁，戏涡水岸侧，有青衣媪乳之，自是聪悟日益。
现代文：杨徽之曾经因为出使到达该郡，一见同文就互相友好，多与相酬唱。杨徽之曾说陶隐居号坚白先生，先生纯粹质直，以道义自许，于是与他的门人追号同文为坚素先生。陈抟字图南，亳州真源人。
English: Yang Huizhi once said that because of the envoys arrived in the county, at the sight of the same text, they were friendly to each other, and they often sang with each other. Yang Huizhi once said that the Tao hermit's name was Mr. Jianbai, the master was pure and upright, and he praised himself with morality, so he followed the same text as Mr. Jiansu with his disciple. Chen Xizhi Tunan, the person of Jingzhou Shanyuan.

古文：及长，读经史百家之言，一见成诵，悉无遗忘，颇以诗名。
现代文：才四五岁时，在涡水岸边游戏玩耍，有青衣老婆婆给他哺乳，从这以后陈抟日益聪明颖悟。等长大后，他读经史百家，一见成诵，一点都不会忘记，以诗著名。
English: When he was only four or five years old, he was playing games on the shore of the whirlpool, and an old woman in a blue dress was breastfeeding him. From then on, Chen Yao became more and more intelligent and enlightened. When he grew up, he read hundreds of books on the history of the Bible. He could recite anything at a glance, and never forgot anything. He was famous for his poetry.

古文：后唐长兴中，举进士不第，遂不求禄仕，以山水为乐。
现代文：五代后唐长兴年中，赴试进士落第，于是不求俸禄官职，以山水为乐。
English: Five generations later, in the middle of the Tang and Changxing Dynasties, he passed the entrance examination and became an official, so he did not ask for a salary and enjoyed the landscape.

古文：自言尝遇孙君仿、獐皮处士二人者，高尚之人也，语抟曰： 武当山九室岩可以隐居。 抟往栖焉。
现代文：自说曾经遇见孙君仿、鮪皮处士二人，他们道行高尚，对陈抟说 ：武当山九室岩可以隐居。 陈抟就前往栖居在那里。
English: He said that he had met two people, Sun Junmo and Yanpi, who were noble in their way of life, and said to Chen Qi that he could live in seclusion in Wudang Mountain's Jiuzhongyan Rock. Chen Qi went to live there.

古文：因服气辟谷历二十余年，但日饮酒数杯。
现代文：在那儿他服气辟谷修道二十多年，只是每天饮几杯酒而已。
English: There he was a monk for more than two decades, drinking only a few glasses of wine a day.

古文：移居华山云台观，又止少华石室。
现代文：移居华山云台观，又居少华山石洞中。
English: Moved to Huashan Yuntai view, and lived in the Shaohashan stone cave.

古文：每寝处，多百余日不起。
现代文：每当他睡觉时，多是一百多天不醒。
English: Whenever he sleeps, he stays awake for more than a hundred days.

古文：周世宗好黄白术，有以抟名闻者，显德三年，命华州送至阙下。
现代文：周世宗喜好道士烧炼丹药点化金银的法术，有人把陈抟的名上奏朝廷。
English: Zhou Shizong was fond of the Taoist's magic of burning and distilling herbs to make gold and silver, and some people played the imperial court in the name of Chen Xi.

古文：留止禁中月余，从容问其术，抟对曰： 陛下为四海之主，当以致治为念，奈何留意黄白之事乎？ 世宗不之责，命为谏议大夫，固辞不受。
现代文：显德三年，周世宗命令华州把陈抟送到朝廷，留陈抟在皇宫中居住了一个多月，周世宗从容地向陈抟询问点化金银的法术，陈抟回答说： 陛下为四海之主，应当以致力治国为念，怎么留意黄白方术这样的事情呢？ 周世宗不责怪他，任命他为谏议大夫，陈抟坚决辞谢接受这一职务。
English: In the third year of Xiande, Zhou Shizong ordered Huazhou to send Chen Qi to the imperial court, leaving Chen Qi to live in the imperial palace for more than a month. Zhou Shizong calmly asked Chen Qi about the magic of dotting gold and silver. Chen Qi replied: Your Majesty is the lord of the four seas, you should be committed to governing the country, how can you pay attention to such a thing as the yellow and white square art? Zhou Shizong did not blame him, appointed him as a doctor of debate, Chen Qi resolutely declined to accept this position.

古文：既知其无他术，放还所止，诏本州长吏岁时存问。
现代文：已经知道陈抟没有其他方术，周世宗就放他回到原来居住的地方，诏令该州长官逢年过节慰问陈抟。
English: Already knowing that Chen Xi had no other choice, Zhou Shizong let him return to his original place of residence and ordered the governor to visit Chen Xi every year for the New Year.

古文：五年，成州刺史朱宪陛辞赴任，世宗令赍帛五十匹、茶三十斤赐抟。
现代文：显德五年，成州刺史朱宪向皇帝辞别赴任时，周世宗命令他带五十匹帛、三十斤茶叶赐给陈抟。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Xiande, when Zhu Xian, the statesman of Chengdu, resigned to the emperor and took office, Zhou Shizong ordered him to bring fifty horses and thirty catties of tea leaves to Chen Xuan.

古文：太平兴国中来朝，太宗待之甚厚。
现代文：太平兴国年间陈抟来宋朝进觐，太宗对待他很优厚。
English: During the Taiping Xingguo period, Chen Xinglai came to the Song Dynasty to join the Song Dynasty, and Taizong treated him very generously.

古文：九年复来朝，上益加礼重，谓宰相宋琪等曰： 抟独善其身，不干势利，所谓方外之士也。
现代文：太平兴国九年，陈抟再次来朝觐，皇帝更加以厚礼对待他，对宰相宋琪等人说： 陈抟独善其身，不为势利所干扰，这就是所谓的世外隐士。
English: In the ninth year of Taiping Xingguo, Chen Xi again came to the imperial court, and the emperor treated him with even greater courtesy, saying to the prime minister Song Qi and others: Chen Xi is self-sufficient and is not disturbed by snobbery. This is the so-called hermit.

古文：抟居华山已四十余年，度其年近百岁。自言经承五代离乱，幸天下太平，故来朝觐。
现代文：陈抟自己说他经历五代离乱之世，庆幸现在天下太平，所以来朝廷进觐。与他交谈，很值得听一听。 
English: Chen Yu himself said that he had experienced five generations of a chaotic world and was glad that the world was now at peace, so he came to the imperial court. Talking with him is well worth listening to.

古文：与之语，甚可听。 因遣中使送至中书，琪等从容问曰： 先生得玄默修养之道，可以教人乎？ 对曰： 抟山野之人，于时无用，亦不知神仙黄白之事，吐纳养生之理，非有方术可传。
现代文：于是派中使送陈抟到中书省，宋琪等人从从容容询问陈抟说 ：先生修得玄妙静默修生养性的方法，可以教给别人吗？ 陈抟回答说： 我是一个山野隐士，对时事没有什么用处，也不知道神仙点金化银黄白术的事情以及吐气养生的道理，没有什么方术可以传授。
English: So they sent an envoy to send Chen Qi to the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. Song Qi and others calmly asked Chen Qi, "Can you teach others the method of cultivating health and fitness that you have mastered?" Chen Qi replied, "I am a mountain hermit, I have no use for current affairs, and I don't know anything about the magic point of gold, silver, yellow and white, and the principle of breathing out for health. There is no method that can be taught."

古文：假令白日冲天，亦何益于世？
现代文：假使白日冲天，对世事又有什么好处呢？
English: What good would it do to the world if we were to fly into the sky?

古文：今圣上龙颜秀异，有天人之表，博达古今，深究治乱，真有道仁圣之主也。
现代文：现在圣上龙颜伟秀俊异，具有出众的仪表，博古通今，深究治乱，真是有道德仁义圣明的君主。
English: Now, the sacred dragon Yan Wei is handsome, has an outstanding appearance, knows everything about ancient times and modern times, deeply studies chaos, and is a truly moral, benevolent and holy monarch.

古文：正君臣协心同德、兴化致治之秋，勤行修炼，无出于此。 琪等称善，以其语白上。
现代文：现在正是君臣上下同心同德，兴起改革致力于治理的时候，努力从事修炼，没有超出这个范围的。 宋琪等人称好，把陈抟的话告诉皇上。
English: Now is the time for the emperor and his ministers to be of one mind and one mind, rise up and reform and devote themselves to governance, and strive to engage in cultivation, without going beyond this scope. Song Qi and others praised and told the emperor Chen Xi's words.

古文：上益重之，下诏赐号希夷先生，仍赐紫衣一袭，留抟阙下，令有司增葺所止云台观。
现代文：皇上对陈抟更加器重，下诏赐给陈抟号希夷先生，并赐给一套紫衣，挽留他住在朝宫，命令官吏扩增修葺他所居住的云台观。
English: The emperor was more serious about Chen Xi, and issued the following edict to give Chen Xi the title of Xi Yi, and to give him a set of purple clothes, to keep him living in the Imperial Palace, and to order the officials to expand and repair the Yuntai view where he lived.

古文：上屡与之属和诗赋，数月放还山。
现代文：皇上多次与陈抟和唱诗赋，几个月后放他回山。
English: The emperor had several times danced and sung with Chen Xihe, but after a few months he was allowed to return to the mountains.

古文：端拱初，忽谓弟子贾德升曰： 汝可于张超谷凿石为室，吾将憩焉。 二年秋七月，石室成，抟手书数百言为表，其略曰： 臣抟大数有终，圣朝难恋，已于今月二十二日化形于莲花峰下张超谷中。 如期而卒，经七日支体犹温。
现代文：端拱初年，陈抟忽然对弟子贾德升说 ：你可以在张超谷凿石为室，我将要在那里休息。 端拱二年秋天七月，造室凿成，陈抟亲自写几百言作为奏表，奏表大略说 ：我气数将尽，圣朝难以依恋，随后将在这个月二十二日化形于莲花峰下张超谷中。 后果然如期逝世，经过七天四肢身体还有余温。
English: In the first year of the end arch, Chen Yu suddenly said to his disciple Jia De Sheng: You can chisel a stone house in Zhang Chaogu, and I will rest there. In the autumn of the second year of the end arch, in July, the house was chiseled, and Chen Yu personally wrote several hundred words as a report card. The report card roughly said: I am exhausted, it is difficult to cling to the holy temple, and then I will be transformed into Zhang Chaogu at the foot of the lotus peak on the 22nd day of this month. The result was that he died as scheduled, and after seven days his limbs were still warm.

古文：有五色云蔽塞洞口，弥月不散。
现代文：当时有五种颜色的彩云掩盖堵塞洞口，经月不散。
English: At that time, there were five colored clouds covering and blocking the mouth of the cave, which lasted for months.

古文：抟好读《易》，手不释卷。
现代文：陈抟喜好读《易》，手不释卷。
English: Chen Yao likes to read "Easy" and can't put it down.

古文：常自号扶摇子，著《指玄篇》八十一章，言导养及还丹之事。
现代文：常常自号扶摇子，撰写《指玄篇》八十一章，阐述引导养生及使水银还成丹的事情。
English: He often claimed to be a shaker, and wrote the eighty-first chapter of "The Antecedents," explaining how to guide health care and make mercury safe.

古文：宰相王溥亦著八十一章以笺其指。
现代文：宰相王溥也撰写了八十一章来笺注《指玄篇》的要旨。
English: Prime Minister Wang Yi also wrote eighty-one chapters to summarize the gist of "Finger Xuan Hen."

古文：抟又有《三峰寓言》及《高阳集》、《钓潭集》，诗六百余首。
现代文：陈抟又有《三峰寓言》及《高阳集》、《钓潭集》，六百多首诗。
English: Chen Yao also has "Three Peaks Fable" and "High Sun Collection," "Fishing Pool Collection," more than six hundred poems.

古文：能逆知人意，斋中有大瓢挂壁上，道士贾休复心欲之，抟已知其意，谓休复曰： 子来非有他，盖欲吾瓢尔。 呼侍者取以与之，休复大惊，以为神。
现代文：陈抟能预知人意，他的斋室中有大瓢挂在墙壁上，道士贾休复心里想要这个大瓢，陈抟旋即知道他的意思，对贾休复说 ：你来不是有其他事情，是想要我的大瓢而已。 陈抟叫侍者取瓢给贾休复。贾休复大为吃惊，认为陈抟是神仙。
English: Chen Yuxuan was able to anticipate people's wishes. In his dining room, there was a large urn hanging on the wall. The Taoist priest Jia Xufu wanted this large urn in his heart. Chen Yuxuan immediately knew what he meant and said to Jia Xufu: "Didn't you come for something else? You just wanted my urn." Chen Yuxuan asked the waiter to get the urn for Jia Xufu. Jia Xufu was very surprised and thought that Chen Yuxuan was a god.

古文：有郭沆者，少居华阴，夜宿云台观。
现代文：有个叫郭沆的人，小时候居住在华阴，曾夜宿云台观。
English: A man named Guo Jun lived in Huayin when he was a child. He once stayed at Yuntaiyuan.

古文：抟中夜呼令趣归，沆未决；有顷，复日曰： 可勿归矣。 明日，沆还家，果中夜母暴得心痛几死，食顷而愈。
现代文：陈抟半夜叫他赶快回家，郭沆犹疑不决；过了一会儿，陈抟又说： 你可以不回去了。 第二天，郭沆回到家中，果然他的母亲在那天半夜突然得心痛病几乎死去，一顿饭的功夫又好了。
English: In the middle of the night, Chen Yao told him to hurry home, but Guo Yao hesitated; after a while, Chen Yao said, "You can't go back." The next day, Guo Yao returned home, and sure enough, in the middle of the night, his mother had a sudden heart attack and almost died, and the effort of a meal was good again.

古文：华阴隐士李琪，自言唐开元中郎官，已数百岁，人罕见者；关西逸人吕洞宾有剑术，百余岁而童颜，步履轻疾，顷刻数百里，世以为神仙。
现代文：华阴隐士李琪，自己说他在唐代开元年间时任郎官，已经几百岁了，很少有人见到他；关西隐逸之人吕洞宾具有剑术，一百多岁后像儿童的样子，步行轻快迅速，顷刻行走几百里，世人把他当作神仙。
English: The Huayin hermit Li Qi, who said that he was a steward during the first year of the Tang Dynasty, was already several hundred years old, and few people saw him. Lu Dongbin, a recluse in Kansai, had swordsmanship, looked like a child after more than a hundred years old, walked briskly and quickly, and walked hundreds of miles in an instant. The world regarded him as a god.

古文：皆数来抟斋中，人咸异之。
现代文：李琪、吕洞宾都几次来到陈抟的斋室中，人们都感到惊异。
English: Li Qi and Lu Dongbin both came to Chen Yao's fasting room several times, and people were surprised.

古文：大中祥符四年，真宗幸华阴，至云台观，阅抟画像，除其观田租。
现代文：大中祥符四年，真宗临幸华阴，到云台观，参观陈抟的画像，免除云台观的田租。
English: In the fourth year of high school, Linxing Huayin, a member of the Jurchen Sect of Buddhism, went to Yuntai Guan to visit the picture of Chen Qi, and was exempted from paying the field rent for Yuntai Guan.

古文：又有许琼者，开封鄢陵人。
现代文：又有叫许琼的人，开封鄢陵人。
English: There is also a person named Xu Qiong, a resident of Kaifeng and Fuling.

古文：开宝五年，子永罢卢县尉，诣匦上言： 臣年七十五，父琼年九十九，长兄年八十一，次兄年七十九，欲乞近地一官，以就荣养。 上览奏，召永讯之，即命迎其父赴阙。
现代文：开宝五年，他的儿子许永被免去卢县县尉职务，许永前往朝堂上奏说： 我今年七十五岁，父亲许琼九十九岁，长兄八十一岁，次兄七十九岁，想请求邻近地方一个官职，以便回家侍奉父兄。 皇帝看到奏疏后，召见许永问讯，立即命令往迎他的父亲到朝廷。
English: In the fifth year of Kaibao, his son Xu Yong was removed from the post of Lu County Lieutenant. Xu Yong went to the imperial court to report: I am seventy-five years old, my father Xu Qiong is ninety-nine years old, my eldest brother is eighty-one years old, and my second brother is seventy-nine years old. I would like to request an official post in a nearby place so that I can return home to serve my father and brother. The emperor saw the report, summoned Xu Yong for questioning, and immediately ordered him to welcome his father to the imperial court.

古文：琼得对于讲武殿，上顾问久之，悉能奏对，而词气不衰，言唐末以来事，历历可听。
现代文：许琼得以在讲武殿应对，皇帝垂问了很长时间，许琼都能上奏回答，而且词气不弱，说唐朝末年以来的事情，分明可数，值得一听。
English: Xu Qiong was able to respond in the lecture hall. The emperor asked questions for a long time. Xu Qiong was able to answer, and the tone was not weak. He said that the things since the end of the Tang Dynasty were clearly countable and worth listening to.

古文：上悦其父子俱享遐寿，赐袭衣、犀带、银鞍勒马、帛三十匹、茶二十斤，授永鄢城令。
现代文：皇帝对他们父子都享有高寿表示高兴，赐给一套衣服、犀带、银鞍勒马、三十匹布帛、二十斤茶叶，授予许永鄢城县令。
English: The emperor expressed his happiness that both father and son had enjoyed a long life, and gave Xu Yongbai a set of clothes, a rhinoceros sash, a silver saddle horse, thirty cloth horses, twenty pounds of tea, and awarded Xu Yongbai the county order.

古文：是时，澶密齐沂、莱江吉万州、江阴梁山军，各奏八十已上吕继美等二十九人，并赐爵公士。
现代文：当时，澶、密、齐、沂、莱、江、吉、万州以及江阴、梁山军，各自上奏八十岁以上有吕继美等二十九人，一同赐给公士爵位。
English: At that time, twenty-nine people, including Lu Jimei, who were over eighty years old, were conferred the title of "courtier" by the military commanders of the three provinces of Min, Mi, Qi, Min, Lai, Jiang, Ji and Wanzhou, as well as Jiangyin and Liangshan.

古文：真宗时，凡老人年百岁已上者，州县以名闻，皆诏赐衣帛、米麦，长吏存抚之。
现代文：真宗时，凡是一百岁以上的老人，州县把名字上报朝廷，都下诏赐给衣服布帛、米麦，长官慰问抚恤他们。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhenzong, all centenarians whose names were reported to the imperial court by prefectures and counties were given clothing, cloth, and rice and barley by imperial edict.

古文：种放，字明逸，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：种放字明逸，河南洛阳人。
English: He is a native of Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：父诩，吏部令史，调补长安主簿。
现代文：父亲种诩，吏部令史，调补长安主簿。
English: My father was a breeder of egrets, a history of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and the main book of Chang'an.

古文：放沉默好学，七岁能属文，不与群儿戏。
现代文：种放沉默好学，七岁时能写文章，不与小孩们玩耍。
English: He is very quiet and studious. When he was seven years old, he could write articles, but he did not play with the children.

古文：父尝令举进士，放辞以业未成，不可妄动。
现代文：父亲曾令他考进士，种放以学业未成为辞，说不可以妄动。
English: His father had ordered him to take the entrance examination, but he refused to do so, saying that his studies were not a reason for his resignation and that he should not act rashly.

古文：每往来嵩、华间，慨然有山林意。
现代文：每每往来于嵩山、华山之间，慨然有隐居山林中的意思。
English: Every time they come and go between Songshan and Huashan, they obviously have the intention of secluding themselves in the mountains and forests.

古文：未几父卒，数兄皆干进，独放与母俱隐终南豹林谷之东明峰，结草为庐，仅庇风雨。
现代文：不久父亲去世，几个兄长都营谋官职地位，唯独种放与母亲一起隐居在终南山豹林谷的东明峰，结草为庐，仅仅是遮避风雨。
English: Soon after his father's death, several of his older brothers were seeking official positions. However, he and his mother lived alone in seclusion on Dongming Peak in the Leopard Forest Valley of the South Mountain, just sheltering from the wind and rain.

古文：以请习为业，从学者众，得束脩以养母，母亦乐道，薄滋味。
现代文：种放以互相讨论学习为业，从学的人很多，得到学生送的礼物来供养母亲，母亲也乐从天道，淡薄美味。
English: There are a lot of students at the nursery, and they receive gifts from the students to support their mothers. The mothers also enjoy the food, which is delicious.

古文：放得辟谷术，别为堂于峰顶，尽日望云危坐。
现代文：种放得到辟谷术，在峰顶另外构堂，整天端正坐立遥望云彩。
English: He learned the art of planting seeds in the valley, built a separate hall on the peak, and stood all day looking at the clouds.

古文：每山水暴涨，道路阻隔，粮糗乏绝，止食芋栗。
现代文：每到山水暴涨，道路阻隔，粮食缺乏断绝，只能吃芋头板栗。
English: Every time the landscape floods, roads are blocked, and food is scarce, they can only eat taro chestnuts.

古文：性嗜酒，尝种秫自酿，每曰空山清寂，聊以养和，因号云溪醉侯。
现代文：种放性嗜好饮酒，曾种植粘高粱自己酿酒，每每说空旷的山野清新寂静，借以养心净气，因号云溪醉侯。
English: He had an indulgent penchant for drinking alcohol. He used to grow sticky sorghum and brew his own alcohol. He used to say that the empty mountains and fields were fresh and quiet to nourish his heart and purify his breath, and he was intoxicated by the clouds and streams.

古文：幅巾短褐，负琴携壶，溯长溪，坐磐石，采山药以助饮，往往终日。
现代文：裹着头巾穿着短短的粗布衣服，背着琴提着壶，逆着长长的溪流而上，坐在厚重的大石头上，采摘山药来佐助饮食，往往是整天。
English: Wrapped in a headscarf, wearing short coarse cloth clothes, carrying a jug with a harp on his back, going up against a long stream, sitting on a heavy boulder, picking yams to supplement the diet, often all day long.

古文：值月夕或至宵分，自豹林抵州郭七十里，徒步与樵人往返。
现代文：在月末有时到夜半，从豹林谷抵达州的外城七十里，他与打柴的人步行来回往返。
English: At the end of the month, sometimes until the middle of the night, he walks back and forth with the woodcutter from the Leopard Forest Valley to the outer city seventy miles from the state.

古文：性不喜浮图氏，尝裂佛经以制帷帐。
现代文：性不喜欢佛教徒，曾把佛经撕开用来制作帷帐。
English: He disliked Buddhists and once tore up Buddhist scriptures to make curtains.

古文：所著《蒙书》十卷及《嗣禹说》、《表孟子上下篇》、《太一祠录》，人颇称之。
现代文：所撰写《蒙书》十卷以及《嗣禹说》、《表孟子上下篇》、《太一祠录》，人们很是称许。
English: The ten volumes of "The Book of the Mongols" as well as "The Saying of Tsogyu," "The Epitome of Mencius," and "The Ancestral Records of Taichi" are highly praised.

古文：多为歌诗，自称 退士 ，尝作传以述其志。
现代文：所写诗歌很多，自称 退士 ，曾写传以记述他的志向。
English: He wrote many poems, claimed to be a renaissance man, and once wrote a biography to describe his ambitions.

古文：淳化三年，陕西转运宋惟干言其才行，诏使召之。
现代文：淳化三年，陕西转运使宋惟干言其才能操行，诏令使人召见种放。
English: In the third year of Chunhua, the relocation of Shaanxi made Song Wei speak his talent and act, and the edict called people to see the seed release.

古文：其母恚曰： 常劝汝勿聚徒讲学。
现代文：种放的母亲抱怨说 ：我常劝你不要聚徒讲学。
English: The mother of a breeder complained: "I often advise you not to go around lecturing.

古文：身既隐矣，何用文为？
现代文：你既然已经隐居了，写文章有什么用？
English: Now that you've gone into seclusion, what's the use of writing articles?

古文：果为人知而不得安处，我将弃汝深入穷山矣。 放称疾不起。
现代文：如果你真的被人知遇而不得安身的地方，我打算离开你深入深山了。 种放称有病没有动身出发。
English: If you really are known by someone and can't find a place to live, I'm going to leave you deep in the mountains.

古文：其母尽取其笔砚焚之，与放转居穷僻，人迹罕至。
现代文：他的母亲拿出他的笔、砚台全部烧掉，与种放转移居住深山偏僻的地方，人迹罕至。
English: His mother took out his pen and inkstand, burned them all, and sent him to live in a remote place deep in the mountains, off the beaten track.

古文：太宗嘉其节，诏京兆赐以缗钱使养母，不夺其志，有司岁时存问。
现代文：太宗称赞种放的节气，诏令京兆府赐给他缗钱让他供养母亲，不强迫改变他的志向，官吏每年按季节时令抚恤慰问。
English: Emperor Taizong praised the solar terms of planting and releasing. He ordered the Beijing Zhao Prefecture to give him money so that he could support his mother, and not force him to change his aspirations. The officials gave him the condolences every year according to the season.

古文：咸平元年母卒，水浆不入口三日，庐于墓侧。
现代文：咸平元年母亲去世，三天水、米浆不入口，在墓侧边构屋居住。
English: In the first year of Xianping, after his mother died, he did not drink water or rice milk for three days and lived in a house next to the grave.

古文：翰林学士宋湜、集贤院学士钱若水、知制诰王禹偁言其贫不克葬，诏赐钱三万、帛三十匹、米三十斛以助其丧。
现代文：翰林学士宋、集贤院学士钱若水、知制诰王禹翶向朝廷诉说种放贫困不能够埋葬母亲，诏令赐给他三万缗钱、三十匹帛、三十石米帮助他办丧事。
English: Song, the scholar of Hanlin, and Wang Ufan, the scholar of Jixian Academy, told the imperial court that he was too poor to bury his mother, and the imperial edict gave him 30,000 baht, 30 horses, and 30 kilos of rice to help him with the funeral.

古文：四年，兵部尚书张齐贤言放隐居三十年，不游城市十五载，孝行纯至，可励风俗，简朴退静，无谢古人。
现代文：咸平四年，兵部尚书张齐贤说种放隐居三十年，不游览城市五十年，孝行纯正完美，可以劝勉风俗，简朴隐退清静，不逊于古人。
English: In the fourth year of the Heian period, Zhang Qixian, a military scholar, said that it was best to live in seclusion for thirty years, not to visit the city for fifty years, filial piety was pure and perfect, customs could be exhorted, simple seclusion and tranquility were not inferior to the ancients.

古文：复诏本府遣官诣山，以礼发遣赴阙，赍装钱五万，放辞不起。
现代文：再诏令洛阳府派官吏到山上，用礼遣送前往朝廷，赏赐行装钱五万缗，种放辞谢没有动身。
English: He then ordered Luoyang government to send officials to the mountain and send them to the imperial court with a gift of 50,000 baht. However, they did not leave.

古文：明年，齐贤出守京兆，复条陈放操行，请加旌贲。
现代文：第二年，张齐贤任京兆太守，又条列陈述种放的操行，请朝廷加以旌表。
English: In the second year, Zhang Qixian was appointed as the governor of Beijing, and he also made a series of statements on the practice of planting and releasing, and asked the imperial court to make a list.

古文：即赐诏曰： 汝隐居丘园，博通今古，孝悌之行，乡里所推，慕古人之遗荣，挹君子之常道。
现代文：朝廷就赐诏说： 你隐居山丘田园，博通古今，孝悌操行，乡里所推重，仰慕古人遗留下来的光耀，牵引君子之常道。
English: The imperial court issued an edict saying: You live in seclusion in the hills and countryside, are well-versed in the past and present, practice filial piety, are highly respected in the countryside, admire the glory left by the ancients, and lead the way of a gentleman.

古文：屡览守藩之奏，弥彰遁世之风，载渴来仪，副予延伫。
现代文：朕多次览阅太守藩镇的奏章，更加彰扬隐世之风，再渴望未来的表率，对你寄予殷切期望。
English: I have repeatedly read the records of the imperial governors of the provinces and towns, and I am more eager to promote the style of the hidden world, and I am eager to be a role model in the future. I have high expectations for you.

古文：今遣供奉官周旺赍诏，召汝赴阙，赐帛百匹、钱十万。 九月，放至，对崇政殿，以幅巾见，命坐与语，询以民政边事。
现代文：现在派供奉官周旺带着诏书，召你赴阙，赐给你一百匹帛、十万缗钱。 九月，种放到达朝廷，对策于崇政殿，他裹着头巾进见，皇帝命令他坐下来对话，询问民政边事。
English: Now, Zhou Wang, the official in charge of offering sacrifices, has been sent with an imperial edict to summon you to Shandong, to give you one hundred horses and one hundred thousand taels of money. In September, Zangfang arrived at the imperial court and met with the emperor at the Su Zheng palace. Wrapped in a headscarf, Zangfang was ordered by the emperor to sit down for a dialogue and to inquire about matters related to civil affairs.

古文：放曰： 明王之治，爱民而已，惟徐而化之。 余皆谦让不对。
现代文：种放说 ：贤明的君王治理国家，爱百姓而已，只有慢慢地感化。 其余的问题种放都谦让没有应对。
English: The propagandists say that a wise king governs the country and loves the people, but only slowly influences them, and the rest of the problems are left unaddressed.

古文：即日授左司谏、直昭文馆，赐巾服简带，馆于都亭驿，大官供膳。
现代文：当天任命种放为左司谏、直昭文馆，赐给头巾衣服简册腰带，寓居在都亭驿，由职位高的官员设宴款待。
English: On the same day, he was appointed as the left priest and Naoaki Library, given a headscarf, clothes, a booklet and a belt, lived in a palace, and was entertained by high-ranking officials.

古文：翌日，表辞恩命。
现代文：第二天，种放上表辞谢皇帝的恩命。
English: The next day, the seeds were planted with a sign thanking the emperor for his blessing.

古文：上知放旧与陈尧叟游，令尧叟谕意；又谓宰相曰： 朕求茂异，以广视听，资治道。
现代文：皇帝知道种放过去与陈尧叟交游，命令陈尧叟劝谕他；又对宰相说： 朕寻求才能杰出的人，以扩大视听，作为治理国家的借鉴。
English: The emperor knew that Tsuchihatsu had been in contact with Chen Xi in the past, and ordered Chen Xi to advise him. He also said to the prime minister: "I am looking for people with outstanding talents to expand audio-visual as a reference for governing the country."

古文：如放终未乐仁，亦可遂其请也。 中书传诏，放曰： 病居山林，天恩累加礼聘，岩猿溪鸟之性，固不敢以禄仕为意。
现代文：像种放既然不乐于当官，也可以满足他的请求。 中书省传下诏令，种放说： 我病居山林之中，皇恩多次加以礼聘，岩猿溪鸟的性情，坚决不敢以俸禄入仕为意。
English: Since he was not happy with being an official, it was also possible to satisfy his request. The Ministry of Education and Culture issued a decree, and the seed release said: I am ill and live in the mountains and forests, I have been rewarded many times by the imperial grace, and I am of the nature of a rock ape, and I absolutely do not dare to enter the service with a salary.

古文：然主上虚怀待士，旰食忧人之心，亦不敢以羁束为念。 遂诏不听其让。
现代文：但皇上虚怀待士，晚食忧人之心，也不敢以羁绊束缚为念。 于是下诏不顺从种放的谦让。
English: However, the emperor did not want to be treated like a servant, and he was worried about the dinner, and he did not dare to think about the shackles and restraints, so he issued an edict to disobey the gentleness.

古文：数日，复召见，赐绯衣、象简、犀带、银鱼，御制五言诗宠之，赐昭庆坊第一区，加帷帐什物，银器五百两，钱三十万。
现代文：几天后，再次召见种放，赐给绯衣、象简、犀带、银鱼，以及皇帝亲笔写的五言诗优宠他，赐予昭庆坊第一区，另加帷帐等常用器物，银器五百两，银三十万缗。
English: A few days later, he was summoned again to the seed release, and he was given a silk robe, an elephant girdle, a rhinoceros girdle, a silver fish, and a five-character poem written by the emperor himself. He was given to the first district of Zhaoqingfang, as well as curtains and other commonly used utensils. The silverware was five hundred and two, and the silver was three hundred thousand baht.

古文：中谢日，赐食学士院，自是屡得召对。
现代文：隔天谢恩，赐在学士院吃饭，从此种放多次得到皇帝召见对策。
English: The next day, he thanked them and invited them to dine at the academy. The emperor summoned him many times to find a solution.

古文：六年春，再表谢暂归故山，诏许其请。
现代文：咸平六年春天，种放又上表谢恩请求暂时返归故山，诏令准许他的请求。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of the Xianping era, after the release of the seeds and the request for temporary return to the former mountain, the imperial edict granted his request.

古文：将行，又迁起居舍人，命馆阁官宴饯于琼林苑，上赐七言诗三章，在席皆赋。
现代文：将要动身出发，又升任起居舍人，命令馆阁官在琼林苑设宴为他饯行，皇帝赏赐七言诗三章，在宴席上都被诵读。
English: When he was about to set out, he was promoted to the position of chief retainer and ordered the cabinet secretary to hold a banquet for him at Qionglin Court. The emperor rewarded him with three chapters of seven-character poems, which were recited at the banquet.

古文：十月，遣使就山抚问，图其林泉居处以献，优诏趣其入觐，放以疾未平为请。
现代文：十月，派使臣到终南山抚恤慰问，把种放所居住的林泉画成图呈献皇帝，优诏催促种放入朝觐见，种放以病未好作为答复。
English: In October, he sent envoys to Nanshan Mountain to offer condolences and condolences. He drew a picture of the forest spring where the seed was placed and presented it to the emperor. He urged the seed to be placed in the imperial court, but the seed was not well in response.

古文：景德元年十月，来朝，言归山之久，请计月不受奉，诏特给之。
现代文：景德元年十月，种放来朝觐见，说归山的时间很长，愿按月计算不受俸禄，诏令特别给予。
English: In October of the first year of King Jingde's reign, he came to the imperial court and said that it would take a long time for him to return to the mountain, and that he would not accept a monthly salary, but would be given a special salary by imperial edict.

古文：尝因观书赋诗，上曰： 放体格高古。
现代文：种放曾因看书赋诗，皇帝说： 种放的诗体例格式超过古人。
English: The Emperor said, "The style and format of the poems in the collection surpass those of the ancients.

古文：闻其归，私居终日，默坐一室。
现代文：听说他归山后，整天独自居住，在一室中默默打坐。
English: I heard that after he returned to the mountains, he lived alone all day, meditating silently in a room.

古文：山水之乐，亦天性也。
现代文：山水的快乐，也是与生俱来的性格。
English: The joy of the landscape is also an innate character.

古文：每所询问，皆据经以对，颇多裨益。
现代文：每每朕所询问，都根据经典来应对，颇多裨益，朕所以优礼待他，原因是用来激发浮躁争逐的人奋起。 
English: Every time I ask him a question, he responds according to the scriptures, which is very helpful. I treat him with courtesy because it is used to inspire impetuous contenders.

古文：朕优待之，盖以激浮竞也。 放每至京师，秦雍生徒多就而受业。
现代文：种放每到京城，秦雍等门徒多就而受业。
English: Every time the seed was released in Beijing, many disciples such as Qin Yong became disciples.

古文：二年，擢为右谏议大夫。
现代文：景德二年，提升为右谏议大夫。
English: In the second year of Jingde, he was promoted to the doctor of right palatine.

古文：表乞嵩少养疾，许之，令河南府检校。
现代文：上表请求到嵩山少林寺养病，皇帝准许他的请求，命令河南府查核。
English: He requested to recuperate at Songshan Shaolin Temple. The emperor granted his request and ordered Henan Prefecture to investigate.

古文：召对资政殿，曲宴学士院，王钦若洎当直学士、舍人、待制悉预。
现代文：召见应对资政殿，在学士院设典宴，王若钦及当值学士、舍人、侍制都预宴。
English: Wang Ruoqin was summoned to attend the ceremony at the Capital Administration Building, and a banquet was held at the Academy. Wang Ruoqin and the current bachelor, deacon, and maids of honor all attended the pre-dinner.

古文：既罢，又赐宴于钦若直庐。
现代文：宴席散了以后，又赐宴于王若钦的家里。
English: After the banquet was over, another banquet was given at Wang Ruoqin's home.

古文：表乞免都门置饯之礼。
现代文：种放上表请求免都门设宴饯行的礼节。
English: It was considered polite to put out a request to be excused from hosting a banquet in the capital.

古文：屡遣中使劳问，赐以茶药。
现代文：皇帝多次派太监慰问，赐给茶叶药物。
English: The emperor repeatedly sent eunuchs to offer condolences and give tea medicines.

古文：是冬，复来朝。
现代文：这年冬天，种放再次来朝觐见。
English: This winter, the seed release came again to see the morning glory.

古文：三年，以兄丧请告归终南营葬，复召宴赐诗。
现代文：景德三年，因兄长去世请求辞官返回终南山营葬，皇帝又召见种放并设宴赐诗。
English: In the third year of King Jingde's reign, because of his brother's death, he asked the retired official to return to Nanshan for the funeral. The emperor also summoned him to attend the planting ceremony and held a banquet to give him a poem.

古文：放山居草舍五六区，啖野蔬荞麦。
现代文：种放在山上居住茅草屋有五六处，吃野菜、荞麦。
English: They live in five or six thatched huts on the mountain and eat vegetables and buckwheat.

古文：表求太宗御书及经史音疏，悉给焉。
现代文：上表求取太宗御书以及经书史籍音义疏注，全都满足了他。
English: The above request for Taizong's book and the annotation of the phonetic meaning of the historical books all satisfied him.

古文：十月，复至，上谓宰相曰： 放比来高尚其事，每所询问，颇有可采。
现代文：十月，又到朝廷，皇帝对宰相说 ：种放近来以其事为崇高，每每有所询问，很有可以采纳的地方。
English: In October, he went to the imperial court again, and the emperor said to the prime minister, "As a matter of fact, it is a lofty matter, and there are always inquiries, and it is a place that can be adopted.

古文：朝廷虽加爵秩，而未能大用，即物议未厌，所虑放卷而怀之。 即遣内侍任文庆赍诏谕之曰： 朕临御寰区，忧勤旰昃，详延茂异，物色隐沦，思访话言，用熙庶绩。
现代文：朝廷虽然对他加封爵位官秩，但没有能够大加任用，当前众人的非议没有堵塞，所担心的是种放收山怀藏。 马上派内侍任文庆带着诏书示谕种放说 ：朕统治天下，心忧勤政到太阳西斜时才吃饭，周遍延纳才能杰出的人，物色隐士，思访话语，来兴盛各种事功。
English: Although the imperial court gave him the title of knight and official rank, it was not able to significantly increase his appointment. At present, the criticism of many people has not been blocked, and what they are worried about is the kind of release and collection of mountains and treasures. They immediately sent the chamberlain Wenqing with the edict of the edict to say: I rule the world, I am worried about and diligent in politics, I only eat when the sun sets, I accept outstanding talents all the time, I search for hermits, I think about words, and I prosper in all kinds of deeds.

古文：以卿栖心岩窦，屏迹嚣尘，蹑绮皓之遐踪，有曾、颜之至行，特举贲园之典，果符前席之心。
现代文：因为你隐居岩洞，绝迹于嘈杂而肮脏的地方，追踪绮翁的远迹，有曾、颜的美好行操，特地举行装饰园地的典礼，果然符合移坐向前之心。
English: Because you live in seclusion in a rock cave, disappear in a noisy and dirty place, track the distant traces of the dragonfly, have the beautiful practice of Zeng and Yan, and specially hold a ceremony to decorate the park, it is indeed in line with the heart of moving forward.

古文：每所谘询，备详理道，载观敷纳，蔚有材谋，深简朕怀，颇思大用。
现代文：每每有所咨询，完备详细顺乎道理，再看加以采纳，蔚然具有才能谋略，很是开阔朕的心怀，很想大加任用。
English: Every time there is a consultation, the details are complete and reasonable, and if they are adopted, they certainly have the ability to strategize, they are very open to my heart, and I would like to increase my appointment.

古文：然以群情未悉，成命是稽。
现代文：但因群情没有详悉，所以已发出的命令暂且延迟。
English: However, since the details of the situation are not known, the order that has been issued has been temporarily delayed.

古文：今四隩来同，万区思乂，方崇政本，庶厚时风。
现代文：现在四方的诸侯用来会聚，海内思念安定，正崇尚政治之本，希望敦厚时代风俗。
English: Now, it is used by the lords of the four directions to meet, and the inland thinks of stability, is advocating the principles of politics, and hopes to strengthen the customs of the times.

古文：卿必能酌斟化源，丹青王度，恢富国强兵之术，陈制礼作乐之规。返朴还淳，措刑息讼，辅予不逮，驯至太平，登用机衡，弼成寡昧。
现代文：你一定能够考虑变化事物的本源，丹青王度，周备富国强兵的办法，陈述制礼作乐的规定，返朴归真，废置刑法平息诉讼，辅助我不周到的地方，渐渐至于太平，选拔重用于主要的行政机关，辅佐愚昧的我。
English: You will certainly be able to consider changing the origin of things, the reign of Tang and Qing dynasties, the method of preparing a rich country and strong soldiers, the provisions of presenting the system of etiquette and music, returning to simplicity, abolishing the criminal law to quell litigation, assisting me in inconsiderate places, gradually becoming peaceful, selecting for the main administrative organs, and assisting me who is ignorant.

古文：卿宜体兹眷遇，罄乃诚明，叙经国之大猷，述致君之远略，尽形奏牍，以沃朕心。
现代文：你应体会这种亲厚礼遇，尽你的诚心聪明，叙述治理国家的大道术，述说致于君子的远大谋略，全都写在奏章上，以滋润我的心田。
English: You should experience this kind of cordial courtesy, do your best to be sincere and clever, describe the grand strategy of governing the country, and describe the grand strategy for the gentleman, all of which are written on the score to nourish my heart.

古文：副凉德之倚毗，褰外朝之观听，乃司枢务，式洽至公。 
现代文：辅助薄德的怪异，抓牢外朝的视听，即掌管朝廷的重要政务，浸润到最公正。 
English: Complementing the weirdness of Bo De, firmly grasping the foreign audio-visual, that is, controlling the important government affairs of the imperial court, infiltrating into the most fair.

古文：放上言曰： 臣读书业文，实自父师之诲，学古嗜退，本求山水之乐。
现代文：种放上言说： 我读书从事于写文章，实在来自父亲师父的教诲，学古人嗜好隐退，本是求得山水的欢乐。
English: He said, "I read books and write articles. It's really from my father's and master's teachings. I learned from the ancients' penchants for seclusion, and it was originally to seek the joy of the landscape.

古文：思率天性以奉至道，岂有意于麋鹿，盖无心于绂冕。
现代文：思虑遵循天性以事奉最高的道术，有意于麝鹿，无心于做官。
English: Thoughts follow nature to serve the highest Taoism, interested in elk, not interested in being an official.

古文：其所幸者，邦家化成，疆场兵偃，群黎鼓舞，庶汇胥悦。
现代文：所幸运的是，国家化成，疆场停止打仗，百姓鼓舞，庶几类聚相与欢悦。
English: Fortunately, the country has been transformed, the battlefield has stopped fighting, the people have been encouraged, and several groups have gathered and rejoiced.

古文：蒲帛之聘，宠涣岩谷，君命荐及，肃听祗受。
现代文：蒲帛的征聘，宠爱消融岩谷，君命荐及，恭听大受。
English: The recruitment of Pooh, favored by Iwatani, was highly recommended and well received.

古文：既朝象魏之下，但愧岩林之贱。
现代文：既然朝拜宫门之下，只是愧为岩林之低贱。
English: Since they worship under the palace gate, they are only ashamed of being so lowly as the rock forest.

古文：奉圣颜于咫尺，聆德音之教论。
现代文：事奉圣上于咫尺，聆听陛下的教论。
English: To serve His Holiness, to listen to His Majesty's teachings.

古文：列迹侍从，峨冠谏诤。
现代文：列迹侍从之位，戴着高帽劝谏诤讼。
English: He took the place of an attendant, wearing a top hat, and began to plead his case.

古文：虽愚者之虑，竭忠规而屡陈；而大君之明，惧瞽言之无补。
现代文：虽然是愚人的思虑，但竭尽忠心多次陈述；然而皇帝明察，我恐怕瞎说无补于世。
English: Although it was a foolish thought, I tried my best to be loyal and made many statements, but the emperor clearly saw that I was afraid that I would not be able to help the world by talking nonsense.

古文：今又访以礼乐之制，询其刑政之方，且小器微材，欲加大用。
现代文：现在又咨询以礼乐制度，询问刑法政治的方法，而且小器微材，打算加以大用。
English: Now they are consulting on the system of ceremonial music, inquiring about the methods of criminal law and politics, and intend to make extensive use of small instruments and materials.

古文：盖念沿革之攸宜，历三五而既异，弛张之体，岂一二而可述。
现代文：大抵考虑到沿革所宜，经历时间不长而已经不同，弛张之体，其一一可述。
English: Most of the time, taking into account the appropriate history, the experience time is not long and has been different, the body of relaxation, it can be described one by one.

古文：国家谋建皇极，跻纳富寿，惟二圣之光宅，总百王之阙漏，岂伊葑菲，敢预论述。
现代文：国家谋划建立得其正中可为法式的政教，升纳丰寿，只有二圣的普遍安定，总持百王的缺漏，他们是有所采取，敢于参预论述。
English: The national plan is to establish a French-style government and religion in the middle of the country, to promote longevity, to ensure the universal stability of only two saints, and to maintain the omissions of a hundred kings. They have taken some measures and dare to participate in the discussion.

古文：方今德义宣明，鸾骥戾止，如臣之才，俨尔骈列。
现代文：现在德义显示明白，皇帝亲自来临，像我这样的才能，俨然并列。
English: Now that virtue has been clearly demonstrated, the emperor himself is coming, and talents like mine are suddenly on a par.

古文：伏望洞知臣之鉴，怜守节之志，俾泛驾无覆压之害，使为器免溢荡之咎，寝此过听，遂其夙心。
现代文：伏望陛下洞察我的教训，怜惜守节的志向，命名覆驾没有翻覆压迫的危害，使为器皿免去溢满激荡的咎责，停止这种过错，终其历来的心愿。
English: I hope that His Majesty will look into my teachings, have mercy on the aspiration of keeping the festival, name the harm of oppression without overturning it, make the vessel free from the blame of overflowing excitement, stop this mistake, and end its long-standing desire.

古文：况臣首献纳之行，不为无位；预清闲之对，不为疏隔。
现代文：况且我首次献纳之行，不是为了没有职位；参预清闲的应对，不是为了疏远隔离。
English: Moreover, my first donation trip was not because I did not have a position; the response of participating in leisure was not to alienate and isolate.

古文：又安敢碌碌而依违，嘿嘿而旷素？
现代文：又怎么敢随众附合而犹豫不决，默默而空白呢？
English: How dare they follow the crowd and hesitate, silently and blankly?

古文：愿且齿于谏署，庶少观于朝制，斯亦否能有适，名器无假。
现代文：希望暂且列于谏院，庶几少观于朝制，则也或能适合，人才没有假冒的。
English: Hope is temporarily listed in the imperial court, and if it is less than the imperial system, it may also be suitable. There is no fake talent.

古文：唯兹保全之惠，仰医仁圣之赐。 
现代文：此保全的恩惠，切望仁圣赐予。 
English: This grace of preservation is greatly to be desired.

古文：时先俾陈尧叟谕旨，尧叟手笔审其意，放云： 自被聘召，及迁谏垣，无所补报，为幸多矣。
现代文：当时先派陈尧叟宣谕旨意，陈尧叟亲自询问种放的意见，种放说： 我自从被征聘召见，到迁任谏院，无所补报，被宠幸很多了。
English: At that time, Chen Yao was first sent to proclaim the will, Chen Yao personally inquired about the opinions of the seed release, and the seed release said: Since I was recruited and called to see, I have not had anything to report, and I have been favored and fortunate a lot.

古文：今主上圣明，朝无阙政，处之显位，则是重增其过。 及览表，上曰： 放能守分恳让，益可嘉也。 大中祥符元年，命判集贤院，从封泰山，拜给事中。
现代文：现在皇帝圣明，朝廷没有错误的政治，我处在显要的位置上，则是重增其过。 等到看到奏表，皇帝说： 种放能够守本分恳诚辞让，更是可嘉。 大中祥符元年，命令种放判集贤院，授予给事中。
English: Now Emperor Shengming, the imperial court has no wrong politics, I am in a prominent position, it is to increase it again.Waiting to see the report form, the emperor said: It is even more commendable for the kind of release to be able to keep the duty and sincerely make concessions.In the first year of the Great Middle Xiangfu, he ordered the kind of release to judge the Jixian Academy and award it to the middle.

古文：二年四月，求归山，宴饯于龙图阁，命学士即席赋诗，制序。
现代文：二年四月，种放请求归山，皇帝在龙图阁设宴饯行，命学士即席赋诗，皇帝亲自做序。
English: In April of the second year, the seed release requested to return to the mountain, the emperor held a banquet at the Longtu Pavilion, the scholar of the order impromptu poetry, and the emperor himself made the preface.

古文：上作诗，卒章云： 我心虚伫日，无复醉山中。 初，放作诗尝有 溪上醉眠都不知 之句，故及之。
现代文：上呈所写的诗，最后一章说： 我心虑停日，无复醉山中。 开始，种放做诗曾有 溪上醉眠都不知 的句子，因此谈到这事。
English: In the last chapter of the poem written above, it says: I am worried about stopping the sun, never again drunk in the mountains. At the beginning, there was a sentence in the poem, "Drunk on the creek, I don't know how to sleep," so I talked about it.

古文：三年正月，复召赴阙，表乞赐告，手诏优答之。
现代文：三年正月，又召种放赴朝廷，上奏表请求赐告，皇帝亲手写诏书优礼答之。
English: In the first month of the third year, he also summoned the seed to go to the imperial court, submitted a petition to the emperor, and the emperor personally wrote an imperial edict to express his gratitude.

古文：作歌赐之，乃赍衣服、器币，令京兆府每季遣幕职就山存问。
现代文：做诗歌赐给种放，同时赠送衣服、器具钱币，命令京兆府每季派官员到山上慰问。
English: Poems were made and given to those who planted and released them, while clothes, equipment and money were also given away. The Beijing Municipal Government was ordered to send officials to the mountain every season to offer condolences.

古文：四年正月，复来朝，从祠汾阴，拜工部侍郎。
现代文：四年正月，种放再次来朝觐见，从祠汾阴，被授予工部侍郎。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, the seed release again came to the imperial court to see, from the ancestral hall of the imperial court, was awarded the work department waiter.

古文：放屡至阙下，俄复还山，人有诒书嘲其出处之迹，且劝以弃位居岩谷，放不答。
现代文：种放多次到朝宫下，不久又归山，有人写信嘲讽他出仕隐退之迹，而且劝他放弃职位隐居岩谷，种放没有理会。
English: He went to the Imperial Palace many times, but soon returned to the mountains. Some people wrote letters mocking him for retiring from service, and advised him to give up his post and live in seclusion in Iwatani, but he ignored them.

古文：放终身不娶，尤恶嚣杂，故京城赐第为择僻处。
现代文：种放终身不娶，尤其讨厌喧嚣尘杂，所以京城赐宅为他挑选僻静的地方。
English: He does not want to get married for the rest of his life, and especially hates the hustle and bustle, so the Beijing Municipal People's Government has chosen a secluded place for him.

古文：然禄赐既优，晚节颇饰舆服。
现代文：但是俸禄之赐既然优厚，他晚年很注意装饰车子衣冠。
English: However, since his salary was generous, in his later years he was very careful to decorate his car and crown.

古文：于长安广置良田，岁利甚博，亦有强市者，遂致争讼，门人族属依倚恣横。
现代文：他在长安广置良田，每年获利很大，也有强迫购买的，于是导致争讼，门人族属依仗他恣肆骄横。
English: He owned large tracts of good land in Chang'an. He made a large profit every year. There were also cases of forced purchase, which led to disputes. The members of the Mon people depended on his arbitrary arrogance.

古文：王嗣宗守京兆，放尝乘醉慢骂之。
现代文：王嗣宗守京兆，种放曾趁酒醉谩骂他。
English: Wang Shizong, the abbot of Keizhao, was once verbally abused by the abbot while drunk.

古文：嗣宗屡遣人责放不法，仍条上其事。
现代文：王嗣宗多次派人责斥种放不遵守法度，乃条陈上奏其事。
English: Wang Shizong repeatedly sent people to reprimand the seed release for not abiding by the law, but the matter was not reported.

古文：诏工部郎中施护推究，会赦恩而止。
现代文：诏令工部郎中施护查究，恰逢赦恩而停止。
English: The imperial edict ordered the Ministry of Labor to protect the investigation, which coincided with the pardon and stopped.

古文：四月，求归山，又赐宴遣之。
现代文：大中祥符四年四月，种放请求返回终南山，皇帝又赐宴送他。
English: In April of the 4th year of the Daizhong Xiangfu, he was asked to return to Nanshan, and the emperor gave him a banquet.

古文：所居山林，细民多纵樵采，特诏禁止。
现代文：所居山林，很多百姓纵欲砍柴采摘，特地诏令禁止。
English: Living in the mountains, many people indulge in chopping and collecting firewood, which is specifically prohibited by the edict.

古文：放遂表徙居嵩山天封观侧，遣内侍就兴唐观基起第赐之。
现代文：种放就上奏表迁居嵩山天封观侧边，皇帝派内侍就兴唐观地基建造府第赐给他。
English: The Emperor sent his chamberlain to build the foundation of the Xing Tang Temple, and gave him the title of prefect.

古文：假逾百日，续给其奉。
现代文：请假超过一百天，继续给其俸禄。
English: If he takes leave of absence for more than 100 days, his salary will continue to be paid.

古文：然犹往来终南，按视田亩。
现代文：但种放还往来终南山，按视田地。
English: However, the sowing of seeds will continue to Nanshan, depending on the field.

古文：每行必给驿乘，在道或亲诟驿吏，规算粮具之直。
现代文：每次出行必定给驿乘，在路上有时诟骂驿吏，规算粮具的价值。
English: Every trip is bound to give me a ride. On the road, I sometimes curse the officials and calculate the value of the grain.

古文：时议浸薄之。
现代文：当时舆论逐渐鄙薄他。
English: At the time, public opinion was turning against him.

古文：尝曲宴令群臣赋诗，杜镐以素不属辞，诵《北山移文》以讥之。
现代文：皇帝曾经举行曲宴命令大臣们赋诗，杜镐以向来不写诗为辞，朗读《北山移文》来讥讽种放。
English: The emperor once held a musical banquet and ordered his ministers to compose poems. Du Xun used the excuse that he had never written poetry, and read aloud the "Beishan Transcript" to ridicule his ministers.

古文：上尝语近臣曰： 放为朕言事甚众，但外廷无知者。 因出所上《时议》十三篇，其目曰：《议道》、《议德》、《议刑》、《议器》、《议文武》、《议制度》、《议教化》、《议赏罚》、《议官司》、《议军政》、《议狱讼》、《议征赋》、《议邪正》。
现代文：皇帝告诉近臣说： 种放为朕说了很多事，但是外廷没人知道。 因而出示种放所上《时议》十三篇，其目录为：《议道》、《议德》、《议刑》、《议器》、《议文武》、《议制度》、《议教化》、《议赏罚》、《议官司》、《议军政》、《议狱讼》、《议征赋》、《议邪正》。
English: The emperor told his close vassal, "The emperor has said a lot of things for me, but no one outside the court knows. Therefore, the thirteen chapters of the "Current Opinions" on the seed depository have been published, and their catalogues are: "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion," "Discussion

古文：八年十一月乙丑，晨兴，忽取前后章疏稿悉焚之，服道士衣，召诸生会饮于次，酒数行而卒。
现代文：大中祥符八年十一月十九日，早晨起来，种放忽然取出前后奏章奏疏的草稿烧掉，穿道士衣服，召门生一起饮酒于停留处，行了几巡酒后去世。
English: On the 19th day of the 11th month of the 8th year of the Shōfu era, he got up in the morning, suddenly took out the drafts of the preceding and following movements and burned them, put on the clothes of a Taoist, invited his disciples to drink together at the bus stop, and died after several rounds of drinking.

古文：可许州助教。 敦让而不受。
现代文：死讯传到朝廷，皇帝很是感叹哀悼，亲手写祭文派内侍朱允中致祭。
English: The news of his death reached the imperial court, and the emperor was very saddened and mourned. He personally wrote a sacrificial text and sent the palace attendant Zhu Yunzhong to offer the sacrifice.

古文：乾兴元年，无疾而卒，年七十四。林逋，字君复，杭州钱塘人。
现代文：归葬终南山，赠工部尚书，录用他的侄儿世雍为同学究出身。林逋字君复，杭州钱塘县人。
English: He was buried in Nanshan, and was presented with a book by the Ministry of Industry and Trade, and his nephew Shiyong was hired as a classmate. Lin Yu Zi Junfu, from Qiantang County, Hangzhou.

古文：少孤，力学，不为章句。
现代文：幼年丧失父母，致力求学，不为句读训古之学。
English: Having lost his parents at a young age, he devoted himself to his studies, reading the teachings of the ancients.

古文：性恬淡好古，弗趋荣利，家贫衣食不足，晏如也。
现代文：性情恬淡好古，不追求荣誉利益，家里贫穷衣食不足，心安理得。
English: His disposition is light and ancient, he does not pursue honor and profit, his family is poor and lacks food and clothing, and he has peace of mind.

古文：初放游江、淮间，久之归杭州，结庐西湖之孤山，二十年足不及城市。
现代文：起初远出游览长江、淮河流域之间，很长时间才返回杭州。在西湖孤山构屋居住，二十年脚不踏及城市。
English: At first, he traveled far and wide between the Yangtze River and Huaihe River basins, and it took him a long time to return to Hangzhou. He lived in a solitary mountain house on the West Lake and did not set foot in the city for twenty years.

古文：真宗闻其名，赐粟帛，诏长吏岁时劳问。
现代文：宋真宗听说他的名字，赐给他粟米、布帛，诏令官吏一年中季节时令慰问。
English: When Song Zhenzong heard his name, he gave him corn and cloth, and ordered officials to send condolences at different times of the year.

古文：薛映、李及在杭州，每造其庐，清谈终日而去。
现代文：薛映、李及在杭州时，每次造访林逋的居室，清淡终日而离去。
English: When Xue Ying and Li Yi were in Hangzhou, every time they visited Lin Qi's room, they left after a short while.

古文：尝自为墓于其庐侧。
现代文：林逋曾自己在屋旁修造坟墓。
English: Linton himself once built a grave next to the house.

古文：临终为诗，有 茂陵他日求遗稿，犹喜曾无《封禅书》 之句。
现代文：临终时做诗，有 茂陵他日求遗稿，犹喜曾对《封禅书》 的句子。
English: At the time of his death, he composed poems, including "Mouring for His Last Day" and "Yuxi's Sentences on the Sealed Book of Zen."

古文：既卒，州为上闻，仁宗嗟悼，赐谥和靖先生，赙粟帛。
现代文：不久去世，州府向皇帝报告，宋仁宗感叹哀悼，赐给他谥号 和靖先生 ，赠送粟米、布帛以助丧事。
English: Soon after his death, the prefectural government reported to the emperor that Song Renzong lamented and mourned, gave him the nickname Mr. Hejing, and presented him with corn and cloth to help with the funeral.

古文：逋善行书，喜为诗，其词澄浃峭特，多奇句。
现代文：林逋善写行书，喜欢做诗，他的诗澄清通彻雄健独特，多有奇句。
English: Lin Yuxuan is good at writing calligraphy and likes to make poems. His poems are clear, strong and unique, with many strange sentences.

古文：既就稿，随辄弃之。
现代文：既完稿，随即丢弃。
English: Once the draft is finished, it is immediately discarded.

古文：或谓： 何不录以示后世？ 逋曰： 吾方晦迹林壑，且不欲以诗名一时，况后世乎！ 然好事者往往窃记之，今所传尚三百余篇。
现代文：有人说 ：为什么不录下以示后世？ 林逋说： 我正隐居山林沟壑，尚且不想以诗闻名一时，何况后世呢！ 但是好事的人往往私下记录诗句，现在所流传的还有三百多篇。
English: Some people say, "Why not record it for posterity?" Lin Juan said, "I'm living in seclusion in the mountains and forests, and I don't want to be famous for a poem, let alone for posterity! However, good people often record poems in private, and there are more than three hundred poems that are still circulating.

古文：逋尝客临江，时李谘方举进士，未有知者，逋谓人曰： 此公辅器也。 及逋卒，谘适罢三司使为州守，为素服，与其门人临七日，葬之，刻遗句内圹中。
现代文：林逋曾寓居临江，当时李咨刚考中进士，没有人知道他，林逋对人说 ：此人是辅佐大臣的人才。 等到林逋去世，李咨正好被解除三司使的职务任州太守，穿着白色冠服，与林逋的弟子哭吊七天，埋葬了林逋，刻上林逋的遗句放在墓中。
English: Lin Zhe once lived in Linjiang. At that time, Li Zhe had just passed the junior high school entrance examination, and no one knew him. Lin Zhe said to people, "This person is a talent of the assistant minister." When Lin Zhe passed away, Li Zhe was just relieved of the duties of the three emissaries and appointed the governor of the state. Wearing a white crown, he cried with Lin Zhe's disciples for seven days, buried Lin Zhe, and engraved Lin Zhe's last words on the grave.

古文：逋不娶，无子，教兄子宥，登进士甲科。
现代文：林逋没有娶妻，无子，教导兄长的儿子林宥，登进士甲科。
English: Lin Yao did not marry and had no children. He taught his elder brother's son, Lin Yu, and was promoted to Jia Ke.

古文：宥子大年，颇介洁自喜，英宗时，为侍御史，连被台移出治狱，拒不肯行，为中丞唐介所奏，降知蕲州，卒于官。
现代文：林宥的儿子林大年，很有操守自喜，宋英宗时，任侍御史，连连被御史台移文外出治理狱讼，拒不肯行，被御史中丞唐介所奏，降为蕲州知州，去世于任上。
English: Lin Yu's son, Lin Datian, was very disciplined and self-satisfied. When Song Yingzong was crowned, he served as the imperial historian. He was repeatedly sent by the imperial historian's office to go out to manage the prison proceedings, but he refused to go. He was played by the imperial historian, Tang Jie, and was reduced to Zhangzhou and Zhizhou, and died in office.

