古文：盛夏之时，雷电击折树木，发坏室屋，俗谓天取龙，谓龙藏於树木之中，匿於屋室之间也，雷电击折树木，发坏屋室，则龙见於外。
现代文：夏天最热的时候，雷电击断树木，劈坏房屋，世俗认为这是天来取龙，因为他们认为龙藏在树木中，藏在房屋之间。雷电击断树木，劈坏房屋，那么龙就会在外面出现。
English: In the hottest time of the summer, when thunder and lightning break the trees and damage the houses, the world thinks that this is the day to get the dragon, because they think that the dragon is hidden in the trees and between the houses.

古文：龙见，雷取以升天。
现代文：龙出现，雷就取它升天。
English: When the dragon appears, the thunder takes it and ascends into the sky.

古文：世无愚智贤不肖，皆谓之然。
现代文：世上无论是愚昧、智慧、贤良与不贤良的人，都认为是这样。
English: People of the world, whether they are foolish or wise, virtuous or vicious, all think this way.

古文：如考实之，虚妄言也。
现代文：但是如果加以考察和核实，它便是句假话。
English: But if examined and verified, it is a lie.

古文：夫天之取龙何意邪？
现代文：天取龙是什么意思呢？
English: What does Tiantailong mean?

古文：如以龙神为天使，犹贤臣为君使也，反报有时，无为取也。
现代文：如果以为龙神是上天的使者，那么就像贤臣是君主的使臣一样，会定时回去报告，用不着来取它。
English: If you think that the Dragon God is the messenger of heaven, then, just as the wise men are the emissaries of the monarch, they will return regularly to report, there is no need to pick it up.

古文：如以龙遁逃不还，非神之行，天亦无用为也。
现代文：如果认为龙会潜逃不回去，这不是神物的行为，上天也就用不着这样做。
English: If it is thought that the dragon will abscond and not return, this is not the behavior of a divine being, and Heaven does not need to do so.

古文：如龙之性当在天，在天上者固当生子，无为复在地。
现代文：要是龙的本性该在天上生活，那么在天上的本来就该在天上生子，用不着又到地上来。
English: If the dragon's nature is to live in the sky, then it should have given birth to a son in the sky, instead of coming to the earth.

古文：如龙有升降，降龙生子於地，子长大，天取之，则世名雷电为天怒，取龙之子，无为怒也。
现代文：如果龙有时升上天，有时降下地，降下地的龙在地上生子，子长大，上天来取它，然而世俗却称雷电为上天发怒。上天来取龙子，根本用不着发怒啊。
English: If the dragon sometimes ascends to heaven and sometimes descends to earth, the dragon that descends to earth will have a son on earth, the son will grow up, and heaven will come to take him. However, the world calls thunder and lightning the wrath of heaven. If heaven comes to take the dragon, there is no need to be angry.

古文：且龙之所居，常在水泽之中，不在木中屋间。
现代文：况且龙居住的地方，经常在水泽里，不在树木之中与房屋之间。
English: Moreover, the place where the dragon lives is often in the water, not among the trees and between the houses.

古文：何以知之？
现代文：怎么知道呢？
English: How do you know this?

古文：叔向之母曰： 深山大泽，实生龙蛇。 
现代文：叔向的母亲说： 深山大泽，确实有龙蛇。 
English: Uncle Xiang's mother said: "Deep mountain lake, there is indeed a dragon snake.

古文：传曰： 山致其高，云雨起焉。
现代文：传书上说： 山达到一定高度，云雨就在那里兴起。
English: According to the legend: When the mountain reaches a certain height, clouds and rain appear there.

古文：水致其深，蛟龙生焉。 
现代文：水达到一定深度，蛟与龙就在那里产生。 
English: When the water reaches a certain depth, dragonflies and dragonflies are born.

古文：传又言： 禹渡於江，黄龙负船。 
现代文：传书上又说： 禹渡长江，看见一条黄龙背着船前进。 
English: The letter also said: "Yu waded into the Yangtze River and saw a yellow dragon carrying a boat.

古文： 荆次非渡淮，两龙绕舟。 
现代文： 楚国的次非渡淮河，有两条龙绕船而行。 
English: The second non-crossing of the Huai River in Chu, there are two dragons circling the boat.

古文： 东海之上，有丘欣，勇而有力，出过神渊，使御者饮马，马饮因没。
现代文：东海上有个叫菑丘的，勇猛有力，路过神潭，让赶车的给马饮水，马一饮水就被淹没了。
English: In the East China Sea, there is a brave and powerful horse called Diao Qiu Diao, who passed by Shentan and asked the horses to drink water. As soon as the horses drank water, they were submerged.

古文：欣怒，拔剑入渊追马，见两蛟方食其马，手剑击杀两蛟。 
现代文：菑丘大怒，拔出宝剑跳入深潭中去追马，看见两条蛟正在吃他的马，于是手持剑杀死了两条蛟。 
English: Enraged, he pulled out his sword and jumped into the deep pond to chase the horse. When he saw the two mules eating his horse, he killed the two mules with his sword.

古文：由是言之，蛟与龙常在渊水之中，不在木中屋间明矣。
现代文：从这些事情说来，蛟与龙常在深水之中，不在树木中房屋间已经很清楚了。
English: From these things, it is clear that dragonflies and dragonflies often swim in deep water, not among trees and houses.

古文：在渊水之中，则鱼鳖之类。
现代文：龙在深水中，那就是鱼鳖之类。
English: The dragon is in the deep water, that is the fish fin and the like.

古文：鱼鳖之类，何为上天？
现代文：既然是鱼鳖之类，为什么要上天？
English: Since it is fish bait or the like, why go to heaven?

古文：天之取龙，何用为哉？
现代文：天来取龙，又有什么用呢？
English: What's the use of dragons?

古文：如以天神乘龙而行，神恍惚无形，出入无间，无为乘龙也。
现代文：如果以为天神是驾龙行空，但神却是恍恍惚惚没有固定形体，出入没有阻拦，根本用不着驾龙。
English: If you think that the gods are flying dragons, but the gods are in a trance without a fixed form, there is no obstacle to entry and exit, there is no need to fly a dragon.

古文：如仙人骑龙，天为仙者取龙，则仙人含天精气，形轻飞腾，若鸿鹄之状，无为骑龙也。
现代文：如果是仙人要骑龙，天为仙人来取龙，而仙人怀有天的精气，身轻能飞腾，像天鹅的形状一样，根本用不着骑龙。
English: If it is a fairy who wants to ride a dragon, the sky is for the fairy to take the dragon, and the fairy has the essence of the sky, the body is light and can fly, like the shape of a swan, there is no need to ride a dragon.

古文：世称黄帝骑龙升天，此言盖虚，犹今谓天取龙也。
现代文：世俗称颂黄帝能骑龙升天，这话大概是假的，就像现在说天要来取龙一样。
English: The worldly praise that the Yellow Emperor can ride a dragon into the sky is probably false, just as it is now said that the sky will come to take the dragon.

古文：且世谓龙升天者，必谓神龙。
现代文：况且社会上认为龙能升天，肯定是神龙。
English: Moreover, the society believes that if a dragon can ascend to heaven, it must be a divine dragon.

古文：不神，不升天；升天，神之效也。
现代文：不是神物，就不会升天；能升天，就是神物的证明。
English: If you are not a divine being, you will not ascend to heaven; if you can ascend to heaven, it is proof that you are a divine being.

古文：天地之性，人为贵，则龙贱矣。
现代文：天地间有生命的东西，人是最高贵的，相比之下而龙是低贱的。
English: Of all the living things in heaven and earth, man is the noblest, and dragons are lowly in comparison.

古文：贵者不神，贱者反神乎？
现代文：高贵的不是神物，低贱的反而是神物了吗？
English: Aren't the noble ones gods, and the lowly ones gods?

古文：如龙之性有神与不神，神者升天，不神者不能。
现代文：如果龙的生命有是神物与不是神物的，是神物的能升天，不是神物的不能升天。
English: If the dragon's life is a divine being and not a divine being, then the divine being can ascend to heaven, while the non-divine being cannot.

古文：龟蛇亦有神与不神，神龟神蛇，复升天乎？
现代文：那么龟蛇也有是神物与不是神物的，神龟神蛇是不是又能升天呢？
English: So turtles and snakes are also divine and non-divine. Can a divine turtle and snake ascend to heaven?

古文：且龙禀何气而独神？
现代文：况且龙又是承受了什么气而偏偏是神物呢？
English: Moreover, what is it about dragons that makes them divine?

古文：天有仓龙、白虎、硃鸟、玄武之象也，地亦有龙、虎、鸟、龟之物。
现代文：天有仓龙、白虎、朱鸟、玄武的星象，地也有龙、虎、鸟、龟等动物。
English: Heaven has stars such as Canglong, White Tiger, Vermilion Bird, and Xuanwu, and the earth also has animals such as dragons, tigers, birds, and turtles.

古文：四星之精，降生四兽。
现代文：天上四种星的精气，下到地上就产生了龙、虎、鸟、龟四种野兽。
English: The essence of the four kinds of stars in the sky descended to the earth and produced four kinds of beasts: dragons, tigers, birds, and turtles.

古文：虎鸟与龟不神，龙何故独神也？
现代文：虎、鸟与龟都不是神物，为什么龙偏偏是神物呢？
English: Tigers, birds and turtles are not gods, so why is the dragon a god?

古文：人为倮虫之长，龙为鳞虫之长。俱为物长，谓龙升天，人复升天乎？
现代文：人是裸露动物中的首领，龙是有鳞甲动物中的头领，都是一类动物中的领袖，为什么说龙能升天，人就不能升天呢？
English: Man is the leader among the naked animals, and the dragon is the leader among the scaly animals. They are both leaders among a class of animals. Why is it that the dragon can ascend to heaven, but man cannot?

古文：龙与人同，独谓能升天者，谓龙神也。
现代文：龙跟人一样，只说龙能升天，是不是认为龙是神物呢？
English: Dragons are just like people, but it is said that dragons can ascend to heaven. Do you think that dragons are divine?

古文：世或谓圣人神而先知，犹谓神龙能升天也。
现代文：世上有人说圣人是神能先知，就说神龙能升天。
English: Some people in the world say that saints are divine prophets, while others say that divine dragons can ascend to heaven.

古文：因谓圣人先知之明，论龙之才，谓龙升天，故其宜也。
现代文：因为错误地认为圣人有先知的高明，于是在评论龙的本领时，就说龙能升天，本来是可以的。
English: Because they mistakenly believed that sages had the wisdom of prophets, when commenting on the dragon's ability, they said that the dragon could ascend to heaven, which was possible.

古文：天地之间，恍惚无形，寒暑风雨之气乃为神。
现代文：天地之间，恍恍惚惚没有固定形体的东西，像构成寒暑风雨的气才算是神物。
English: Between heaven and earth, things without a fixed shape, like the air that makes up the cold, heat, wind and rain, are considered to be gods.

古文：今龙有形，有形则行，行则食，食则物之性也。
现代文：如今龙有形体，有形体就会行动，能行动就要吃东西，吃东西则是动物的本性。
English: Now the dragon has a body, and the body will act, and if it can act, it must eat, and eating is the nature of the animal.

古文：天地之性，有形体之类，能行食之物，不得为神。
现代文：天地的生性，有形体之类，凡能行动，会吃东西的动物，不能成为神物。
English: Any animal that can move and eat, such as the nature of heaven and earth, or a corporeal body, cannot become a god.

古文：何以言之，龙有体也。
现代文：为什么说龙是有形体的呢？
English: Why are dragons said to be corporeal?

古文：传曰： 鳞虫三百，龙为之长。 
现代文：传书上说： 有鳞甲的动物三百种，龙是它们的头。 
English: "There are three hundred kinds of scaly animals, and the dragon is the head of them all.

古文：龙为鳞虫之长，安得无体？
现代文：龙是鳞甲动物的头领，怎么会没有形体呢？
English: A dragon is the head of a scaly animal, so how can it have no body?

古文：何以言之，孔子曰： 龙食於清，游於清。龟食於清；游於浊；鱼食於浊，游於浊。
现代文：为什么说龙会行动能吃东西呢？因为孔子说： 龙在清水中觅食，在清水中游动；龟在清水中觅食，在浑水里游动；鱼在浑水中觅食，在浑水中游动。
English: Why is it said that dragons can move and eat? Because Confucius said: Dragons forage in clear water and swim in clear water; turtles forage in clear water and swim in muddy water; fish forage in muddy water and swim in muddy water.

古文：丘上不及龙，下不为鱼，中止其龟与！ 
现代文：我上不及龙，下不是鱼，处在它们中间，可能是龟吧！ 
English: I'm not a dragon, I'm not a fish, I'm in the middle of them, I might be a turtle!

古文：《山海经》言：四海之外，有乘龙蛇之人。
现代文：《山海经》上说：在遥远的地方，有会骑龙蛇的人。
English: "The Classic of Mountains and Seas" says: In faraway places, there are people who can ride dragons and snakes.

古文：世俗画龙之象，马首蛇尾。
现代文：一般人画龙的样子，是马头蛇尾。
English: Usually, people draw a dragon with a horse's head and a snake's tail.

古文：由此言之，马、蛇之类也。
现代文：像这样说来，龙是马蛇之类东西。
English: In this way, dragons are like horses and snakes.

古文：慎子曰： 蜚龙乘云，腾蛇游雾，云罢雨霁，与蚓蚁同矣。 
现代文：慎子说： 飞龙能驾云，腾蛇在雾中游，云散雨停，跟蚯蚓、蚂蚁一样。 
English: Shen Zi said, "Flying dragons can drive clouds, soaring snakes can swim in fog, and clouds can disperse rain, just like grasshoppers and ants.

古文：韩子曰： 龙之为虫也，鸣可狎而骑也。
现代文：韩非子说： 龙这种动物很温和，可以亲近并骑它。
English: Han Feizi said: "The dragon is a very gentle animal, you can get close to it and ride it.

古文：然喉下有逆鳞尺余，人或婴之，必杀人矣。 
现代文：然而喉下有一尺多长倒着长的鳞，人要是碰着它，龙一定要整死人。 
English: However, under the throat there is a foot-long upside-down long scale, if a person touches it, the dragon must heal the dead person.

古文：比之为蚓蚁，又言虫可狎而骑，蛇、马之类明矣。
现代文：他拿蚯蚓、蚂蚁来作比较，又说既然龙可以亲近而骑它，那么它是蛇、马之类的东西，是很明白的了。
English: He made a comparison with grasshoppers and ants, and said that since a dragon can be approached and ridden, then it is a snake, a horse, and the like, which is very clear.

古文：传曰： 纣作象箸而箕子泣。 
现代文：传书上说： 纣做象牙筷子箕子哭泣。 
English: The handwritten message said: "Make ivory chopsticks and cry."

古文：泣之者，痛其极也。
现代文：哭泣的原因是痛心纣做得太过分了。
English: The reason for crying is that the grieving has gone too far.

古文：夫有象箸，必有玉杯。
现代文：因为有象牙筷子，一定会有玉石杯子。
English: Because there are ivory chopsticks, there must be jade cups.

古文：玉杯所盈，象箸所挟，则必龙肝豹胎。
现代文：玉石杯子装的，象牙筷子挟的，那一定是龙肝豹胎。
English: If it's in a jade cup or between ivory chopsticks, it must be a dragon's liver and a leopard's foetus.

古文：夫龙肝可食，其龙难得。
现代文：龙肝可以吃，这龙难得。
English: Dragon's liver can be eaten. This dragon is rare.

古文：难得则愁下，愁下则祸生，故从而痛之。
现代文：龙难得就会使下面的人发愁，下人发愁就会产生灾祸，所以箕子接着就悲痛起来。
English: It is rare for a dragon to cause the people below to worry, and for the people below to worry to cause disaster, so the cripple then began to grieve.

古文：如龙神，其身不可得杀，其肝何可得食？
现代文：如果龙是神物，它的身体不可能被杀，它的肝怎么可能被吃呢？
English: If the dragon is a divine being and its body cannot be killed, how can its liver be eaten?

古文：禽兽肝胎非一，称龙肝豹胎者，人得食而知其味美也。
现代文：禽兽的肝胎不止一种，称作龙肝、豹胎的，人得吃了就知道它们的味道很鲜美。
English: There is more than one kind of animal foetus, known as dragon foetus and leopard foetus, and one only has to eat them to know that their taste is delicious.

古文：春秋之时，龙见於绛郊。
现代文：春秋时候，龙在绛城郊外出现。
English: In spring and autumn, dragons appear in the suburbs of Lucheng.

古文：魏献子问於蔡墨曰： 吾闻之，虫莫智於龙，以其不生得也。
现代文：魏献子问蔡墨说： 吾听说，动物没有比龙更聪明，因为它不会被活捉。
English: Wei Xianzi asked Cai Mo: I heard that an animal is no smarter than a dragon because it cannot be captured alive.

古文：谓之智，信乎？ 
现代文：说它聪明，是真的吗？ 
English: Is it true that it is clever?

古文：对曰： 人实不知，非龙实智。
现代文：蔡墨回答说： 是人实在不知道它的习性，并不是龙真的聪明。
English: Cai Mo replied, "It's because people don't really know its habits, not because dragons are really smart.

古文：古者畜龙，故国有豢龙氏，有御龙氏。 
现代文：古时候养龙，所以国中有豢龙氏，有御龙氏。 
English: In ancient times, dragons were raised, so the country has a dragon clan and a dragon clan.

古文：献子曰： 是二者，吾亦闻之，而不知其故。
现代文：献子说： 这二个姓氏我也听见过，但不知道他们的来历。
English: The donor said: I have heard of these two surnames, but I don't know where they came from.

古文：是何谓也？ 
现代文：这两个姓氏究竟是什么意思呢？ 
English: How can this be explained?

古文：对曰： 昔有飂叔有裔子曰董父，实甚好龙，能求其嗜欲以饮食之，龙多归之。
现代文：蔡墨回答说： 过去有飂国的国君叔安，他有个后代子孙叫董父，实在很喜欢龙，能设法知道龙的嗜好和要求来喂养它们，很多龙都归顺他。
English: Cai Mo replied, "In the past, there was the king of the State of Yao, Shu'an. He had a descendant and descendant named Dong Fai. He really liked dragons. He could find out the dragon's hobbies and requirements to feed them. Many dragons submitted to him.

古文：乃扰畜龙，以服事舜，而锡之姓曰董，氏曰豢龙，封诸鬲川，鬲夷氏是其後也。
现代文：于是他就驯养龙，以此来伺候舜，舜便赐他姓董，氏豢龙，封地在鬷川，鬷夷氏是他的后代。
English: So he tamed dragons to serve Yao, and Yao gave him the surname Dong, the family name Longlong, the fiefdom of Luchuan, and the Yao clan as his descendants.

古文：故帝舜氏世有畜龙。
现代文：因此帝舜氏时代有养龙的。
English: That's why the Imperial Family has kept dragons for generations.

古文：及有夏，孔甲扰於帝，帝赐之乘龙，河、汉各二，各有雌雄，孔甲不能食也，而未获豢龙氏。
现代文：到了夏朝，孔甲顺服上天，上天赐给他乘坐的龙，黄河与汉水各二条，各有一雌一雄，孔甲不会喂养，而又没有找到豢龙氏。
English: In the Summer Dynasty, Kong Jia submitted to Heaven, and Heaven gave him two dragons to ride. The Yellow River and the Han River each had two dragons, one male and one female. Kong Jia could not feed the dragons, and he could not find the Dragon Clan.

古文：有陶唐氏既衰，其後有刘累学扰龙於豢龙氏，以事孔甲，能饮食龙。
现代文：陶唐氏已经衰落，后来有刘累向豢龙氏学习驯龙，以此侍奉孔甲，才有了人能喂养龙。
English: The Tao-Tang Clan was already in decline. Later, Liu Lei learned how to tame dragons from the Qianlong Clan, and served Kongjia in this way. Only then was there someone who could feed the dragons.

古文：夏后嘉之，赐氏曰御龙，以更豕韦之後。
现代文：于是夏朝君主孔甲嘉奖他，赐氏叫御龙，用他来代替豕韦的后代。
English: As a result, Kong Jia, the monarch of the Xia Dynasty, praised him and gave him the title of Goryong, using him to replace the descendants of Wei.

古文：龙一雌死，潜醢以食夏后夏后之。
现代文：龙中一条雌的死了，刘累背地里剁成肉酱给夏朝君主孔甲吃。
English: One of the female dragons died, and Liu Lei secretly stewed it into meat sauce for the summer monarch Kong Jia to eat.

古文：既而使求，惧而不得，迁於鲁县，范氏其後也。 
现代文：孔甲吃了，不久又让他再找来吃。刘累害怕找不到，就迁移到鲁县，范氏就是他的后代。 
English: Kong Jia ate it, and soon asked him to find it again. Liu Lei, afraid of not being able to find it, moved to Lu County. Mr. Fan is his descendant.

古文：献子曰： 今何故无之？ 
现代文：献子说： 现在什么缘故没有了？ 
English: The offertory son said: Why is there nothing now?

古文：对曰： 夫物有其官，官修其方，朝夕思之。
现代文：蔡墨回答说： 事物都有掌管它的官，官要改进他管理的方法，早晚都在考虑它。
English: Cai Mo replied: Everything has an official in charge of it. The official should improve his management methods, and sooner or later he is considering it.

古文：一日失职，则死及之，失官不食。
现代文：要是一天失职，就死到临头，丢官不再吃俸禄。
English: If you miss one day of duty, you will die on the verge of death. If you lose your position, you will no longer receive a salary.

古文：官宿其业，其物乃至。
现代文：官要安于自己的职业，生物才会到来。
English: Officials should be satisfied with their jobs, and the creatures will come.

古文：若泯弃之，物乃低伏，郁湮不育。 
现代文：如果消灭丢弃它们，生物就会潜藏不出，郁结不能繁殖。 
English: If you destroy and discard them, the creatures will not be able to hide, and the knots will not be able to reproduce.

古文：由此言之，龙可畜又可食也。
现代文：像这样说来，龙既可以养又可以吃。
English: In this way, dragons can be both raised and eaten.

古文：可食之物，不能神矣。
现代文：可以吃的东西，不可能是神物。
English: What can be eaten cannot be divine.

古文：世无其官，又无董父、後刘之人，故潜藏伏匿，出见希疏；出又乘云，与人殊路，人谓之神。
现代文：世上没有这样的官，又没有董父、孔甲、刘累这样的人，所以龙潜藏隐伏，出现稀少，出来又都驾着云，跟人不同路，于是人就认为它是神物。
English: There is no such official in the world, and there are no people like Dong Fu, Kong Jia, Liu Lei, so the dragon lurks and hides, appears rarely, and comes out again with clouds, different from people, so people think it is a god.

古文：如存其官而有其人，则龙，牛之类也，何神之有？
现代文：如果保存驯龙的官，又有能当这个官的人，那么龙，就像牛之类，怎么会是神物呢？
English: If the post of dragon tamer is preserved, and there are people who can serve as this post, then how can a dragon, like a cow, be a god?

古文：以《山海经》言之，以慎子、韩子证之，以俗世之画验之，以箕子之泣订之，以蔡墨之对论之，知龙不能神，不能升天，天不以雷电取龙，明矣。
现代文：《山海经》的话来说，用慎子、韩非子的话来证明，用世俗画来险证，用箕子的哭泣来考订，用蔡墨的回答来评定，知道龙不能是神物，不能升天，天也不会用雷电来取龙，这已经很清楚了。
English: For the words of "Shanhai Jing," use the words of Shen Zi and Han Fei Zi to prove it, use secular paintings to prove the danger, use the crying of the mule to test it, and use Cai Mo's answer to evaluate it. Know that the dragon cannot be a god, cannot ascend to heaven, and heaven will not use lightning to take the dragon. This is already very clear.

古文：世俗言龙神而升天者，妄矣。
现代文：社会上一般人说龙是神物而且会升天，简直是胡说。
English: It is nonsense for the general public to say that dragons are gods and will ascend to heaven.

古文：世俗之言，亦有缘也。
现代文：社会上一般人的说法，也有缘故。
English: There is also a reason for the way ordinary people in society speak.

古文：短书言： 龙无尺木，无以升天。 
现代文：因为短书上说： 龙如果连一尺小树那样的凭借都没有，就不能升天。 
English: Because it says in the short book: If a dragon does not have even one foot of support like a small tree, it cannot ascend to heaven.

古文：又曰 升天 ，又言 尺木 ，谓龙从木中升天也。
现代文：又说 升天 ，又言 小树 ，所以认为龙是从树木中升天的。
English: It is also called "ascending to heaven" and "small tree," so it is thought that the dragon ascended to heaven from the trees.

古文：彼短书之家，世俗之人也。
现代文：那些写短书的人，是社会上普通的人。
English: Those who write short books are ordinary people in society.

古文：见雷电发时，龙随而起，当雷电树木之时，龙适与雷电俱在树木之侧，雷电去，龙随而上，故谓从树木之中升天也。
现代文：看见雷和电发生的时候，龙跟随着腾起，当雷电击断树木的时候，龙正好跟雷电一齐在树木的旁边，雷电消失，龙随着就向上飞升，因此说是从树木中升天的。
English: When the thunder and lightning occurred, the dragon followed the thunder. When the thunder and lightning struck the trees, the dragon was right next to the trees with the thunder and lightning. When the thunder and lightning disappeared, the dragon flew up with it, so it is said that it rose from the trees to the sky.

古文：实者雷龙同类，感气相致，故《易》曰： 云从龙，风从虎。 
现代文：实际上云与龙同类，能够用气相互感召，所以《易经·乾卦》说： 云跟着龙，风跟着虎。 
English: In fact, clouds and dragons are of the same kind, and can inspire each other with qi, so "I Ching·Qian Gua" said: Clouds follow dragons, winds follow tigers.

古文：又言： 虎啸谷风至，龙兴景云起。 
现代文：传书上又说： 老虎咆哮，山谷中会刮起大风；龙飞腾，天空中会出现彩云。 
English: The letter also said: "When the tiger roars, a strong wind will blow in the valley; when the dragon flies, colorful clouds will appear in the sky.

古文：龙与云相招，虎与风相致，故董仲舒雩祭之法，设土龙以为感也。
现代文：龙与云互相招致，虎跟风相互引致，所以董仲舒的云祭办法，是设一条土龙以此来感召云雨。
English: Dragons and clouds attract each other, and tigers follow the wind to attract each other. Therefore, Dong Zhongshu's cloud sacrifice method is to set up a soil dragon to evoke clouds and rain.

古文：夫盛夏太阳用事，云雨干之。
现代文：那炎热的夏天太阳主事，云雨来干扰。
English: That hot summer, the sun was in charge, and the clouds and rain interfered.

古文：太阳火也，云雨水也，火激薄则鸣而为雷。
现代文：太阳是火，云雨是水。水火互相冲击而发出的响声就是雷。
English: The sun is fire, clouds and rain are water. The sound of water and fire hitting each other is thunder.

古文：龙闻雷声则起，起而云至，云至而龙乘之。
现代文：龙听见雷声就腾起，一腾起云就来，云到龙就乘坐它升天。
English: When the dragon hears the thunder, it rises. When the cloud rises, it comes. When the cloud comes to the dragon, it takes the dragon up to the sky.

古文：云雨感龙，龙亦起云而升天。
现代文：云雨感召龙，龙也就驾起云升天。
English: The clouds and rain call the dragon, and the dragon drives the clouds up to the sky.

古文：天极雷高，云消复降。
现代文：升到天和云的最高处，云消失又降下来。
English: It rose to the highest part of the sky and the clouds, and the clouds disappeared and came down.

古文：人见其乘云则谓 升天 ，见天为雷电则为 天取龙 。
现代文：人看见龙乘云就说是 升天 ，看见天产生雷电就认为是 天来取龙 。
English: When people see a dragon riding on a cloud, they say that it is ascending to heaven; when they see thunder and lightning generated by the sky, they think that the sky has come to take the dragon.

古文：世儒读《易》文，见传言，皆知龙者云之类。拘俗人之议，不能通其说；又见短书为证，故遂谓 天取龙 。
现代文：世上的儒者读《易经》，看见传书上说的，都知道龙是云之类，但由于他们拘泥于庸人的议论，不能正确理解那说法；又看见短书能作证，因此就认为是 天来取龙。 
English: The world's Confucians read the I Ching and see what is said in the transmission, they all know that the dragon is a cloud or something, but because they are stuck in mediocrity, they cannot understand the statement correctly; they also see that the short book can testify, so they think that the dragon came from heaven.

古文：天不取龙，龙不升天。
现代文：其实天不会来取龙，龙也不会升天。
English: In fact, heaven will not come to take the dragon, and the dragon will not ascend to heaven.

古文：当丘欣之杀两蛟也，手把其尾，拽而出之至渊之外，雷电击之。
现代文：当年菑丘杀两条蛟的时候，是用手抓住它的尾巴，拖出来到深潭的外面，让雷电击杀它。
English: That year, when the molehill killed two earthworms, he grabbed its tail with his hand, dragged it out to the outside of the deep pool, and let the lightning strike it.

古文：蛟则龙之类也。
现代文：蛟就是龙之类。
English: A dragon is a dragon and so on.

古文：蛟龙见而云雨至，云雨至则雷电击。
现代文：蛟跟龙一出现云雨就来了，云雨一来那么雷电就击杀它。
English: Dragonflies and dragonflies come as soon as there is a cloud and rain. If there is a cloud and rain, then thunder and lightning will kill it.

古文：如以天实取龙，龙为天用，何以死蛟为取之？
现代文：如果以为天确实来取龙，龙为天使用，那么天为什么要取死蛟呢？
English: If it is true that the heavens came to take the dragon and the dragon was used by the heavens, then why did the heavens take the cocoon?

古文：且鱼在水中，亦随云雨，蜚而乘云雨非升天也。
现代文：而且鱼在水中，也随着云雨跳出水面，但乘云雨却不能升天。
English: Moreover, fish in the water also jump out of the water with the clouds and rain, but they cannot ascend to the sky with the clouds and rain.

古文：龙，鱼之类也，其乘雷电犹鱼之飞也。
现代文：龙跟鱼一类，龙驾雷电，就同鱼随云雨跳出水面一样。
English: Dragon and fish are the same, dragon driving lightning, just like fish jumping out of the water with clouds and rain.

古文：鱼随云雨，不谓之神，龙乘雷电独谓之神。
现代文：鱼随着云雨跳出水面不认为是神物，而龙驾雷电却偏偏认为是神物，可见社会上的说法，不真实。
English: A fish jumping out of the water with the clouds and rain is not considered to be a god, but a dragon driving a thunderbolt is considered to be a god, which shows that the social saying is not true.

古文：世俗之言，失其实也。物在世间，各有所乘。
现代文：动物在世界上，各有各自乘坐的东西。蛇驾雾，龙乘云，鸟御风。
English: In the world, each animal has its own ride. Snakes ride the fog, dragons ride the clouds, and birds ride the wind.

古文：水蛇乘雾，龙乘云，鸟乘风。见龙乘云，独谓之神，失龙之实，诬龙之能也。
现代文：看见龙乘云，就认为它是神物，这不符合龙的实情，而是在捏造龙的本领。
English: If you see a dragon riding on a cloud, you will think it is a god. This does not correspond to the reality of dragons, but the ability to fabricate dragons.

古文：然则龙之所以为神者，以能屈伸其体，存亡其形。
现代文：然而龙之所以被认为是神物，是因为它能收缩与伸长自己的身体，形体可以时隐时现。
English: However, the reason why the dragon is considered to be a god is because it can contract and elongate its body, and its shape can appear and disappear.

古文：屈伸其体，存亡其形，未足以为神也。
现代文：能收缩与伸长自己的身体，形体可以时隐时现，不足以认为是神物。
English: It is not enough to be able to contract and elongate one's own body, and the body can appear and disappear, to be considered a god.

古文：豫让吞炭，漆身为厉，人不识其形。
现代文：豫让吞下木炭，用漆涂身变得像得了麻风病一样，使人无法识别他的形体。
English: He swallowed charcoal and painted his body to look like he had leprosy, making his body unrecognizable.

古文：子贡灭须为妇人，人不知其状；龙变体自匿，人亦不能觉，变化藏匿者巧也。
现代文：子贡拔掉胡须装成女人，让人不晓得他原来的样子。龙变化身体自动隐藏起来，人不过不能察觉，这是由于它变化和隐藏得巧妙。
English: Zigong pulls out his beard and pretends to be a woman, so that people don't know his original appearance. The dragon changes its body and hides itself automatically, but people can't detect it, because it changes and hides itself cleverly.

古文：物性亦有自然，狌狌知往，乾鹊知来，鹦鹉能言，三怪比龙，性变化也。
现代文：动物的天性也有生下来就这样的。像猩猩知道过去的事情，喜鹊知道未来的事情，鹦鹉会说话，这三种不常见的动物跟龙一样，天性就能这样变化。
English: Like the orangutan knows the past, the magpie knows the future, and the parrot can talk, these three unusual animals, like the dragon, can change their nature in this way.

古文：如以巧为神，豫让、子贡神也。
现代文：要是以巧变为神物，豫让、子高就是神人了。
English: If cleverness is transformed into a god, then Yu Zhan and Zi Gao are godmen.

古文：孔子曰： 游者可为网，飞者可为矰。
现代文：孔子说： 水里游的东西可以用鱼线来钓，天上飞的东西可以用矰来射。
English: Confucius said: What swims in the water can be caught with a fishing line, and what flies in the sky can be shot with a crossbow.

古文：至於龙也，吾不知其乘风云上升。
现代文：至于龙，我不知道它能乘驾风云上升至天。
English: As for the dragon, I don't know if it can ride the wind and rise to the sky.

古文：今日见老子，其犹龙乎！ 
现代文：今天我看见老子，他大概就同龙一样吧！ 
English: Today I saw Laozi, he is probably the same as a dragon!

古文：夫龙乘云而上，云消而下。
现代文：龙乘驾云上天，云消失就下来。
English: The dragon rides the cloud up to the sky, and when the cloud disappears, it comes down.

古文：物类可察，上下可知；而云孔子不知。
现代文：动物一类的可以考察，上天下地可以知道，却说孔子不晓得。
English: Animals, for example, can be investigated, and the whole world can know, but Confucius did not know.

古文：以孔子之圣，尚不知龙，况俗人智浅，好奇之性，无实可之心，谓之龙神而升天，不足怪也。
现代文：以孔子的圣明，尚且不知道龙，何况庸人智慧低下，有好奇的性格，没有实事求是的精神，于是认为龙是神物而且会升天，这就不足奇怪了。
English: With Confucius's wisdom, it is not surprising that he did not know about dragons, not to mention that he was a mediocre person with low intelligence, a curious personality, and no spirit of seeking truth from facts, so he thought that dragons were gods and would ascend to heaven.

