古文：李怀光，渤海靺鞨人也。
现代文：李怀光是渤海靺鞨族人。
English: Li Huaguang is a member of the Bohai Yi ethnic group.

古文：本姓茹，其先徙于幽州，父常为朔方列将，以战功赐姓氏，更名嘉庆。
现代文：本来姓茹，他的祖先从幽州迁来。他父亲茹常任朔方将领，因战功赐姓李，改名叫嘉庆。
English: Originally surnamed Ru, his ancestors migrated from Yuzhou. His father, Ru, the permanent general of the Shuo side, was given the surname Li due to his military exploits, and changed his name to Jiaqing.

古文：怀光少从军，以武艺壮勇称，朔方节度使郭子仪礼之益厚。
现代文：李怀光从小参军，以武艺高、强壮、勇敢出名，朔方节度使郭子仪对他越来越看重。
English: Li Huaguang joined the army from a young age. He was famous for his high martial arts, strength and bravery. Guo Ziyi valued him more and more.

古文：上元中，累迁试太仆、太常卿，主右衙兵将，积功劳至开府仪同三司，为朔方军都虞候。
现代文：上元年间，官升到太仆、太常卿，主管右衙军队，爵位升到开府仪同三司，任朔方军都虞候。
English: In the first year of the new year, he was promoted to the rank of Taibo and Taizhongqing, and was in charge of the right wing army. He was also promoted to the rank of Kaifu Yi and the three departments, and was appointed as the commander of the army.

古文：永泰初，实封三百户。
现代文：永泰初年，封爵食实封三百户。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, 300 households were knighted.

古文：大历六年，兼御史中丞，间一年，兼御史大夫，加为军都虞候。
现代文：大历六年，兼任御史中丞，隔了一年，兼任御史大夫、升任军都虞候。
English: In the sixth year of the great calendar, he was also appointed as a goshi chujo, and a year later, he was also appointed as a goshi daibu and promoted to the position of a military governor.

古文：性清勤严猛，而敢诛杀，虽亲戚犯法，皆不挠避。
现代文：生性清约勤勉严厉勇猛，而且敢于执法，即使亲戚违反军法，都不宽减回避。
English: By nature, he is diligent, stern and brave, and dares to enforce the law. Even if relatives violate the military law, they will not be lenient.

古文：子仪性宽厚，不亲军事，纪纲任怀光，军中尤畏之，亦称为理。
现代文：郭子仪生性宽厚，不亲自管理军中事务，执法由李怀光掌握，军中兵将尤其敬畏他，也称赞他军队治理得好。
English: Guo Ziyi is generous by nature. He does not personally manage the affairs of the military. Law enforcement is handled by Li Huaguang. The soldiers in the military will especially revere him and praise him for the good governance of the army.

古文：十二年，以母忧罢职。
现代文：大历十二年，因母亲去世离职。
English: In the twelfth year of the lunar calendar, he left his post due to the death of his mother.

古文：明年，起复本官，仍兼邠、宁、庆三州都将。
现代文：第二年，起用他仍任原任官职，又兼任、宁、庆三州都将。
English: In the second year, he was appointed to the same post as before, and he also served as the governor of Ning and Qing three provinces.

古文：德宗即位，罢子仪节度副元帅，以其所部分隶诸将，遂以怀光起复检校刑部尚书，兼河中尹、邠州刺史、邠宁庆晋降慈隰节度支度营田观察押诸蕃部落等使。
现代文：唐德宗即皇帝位，免去郭子仪节度副元帅职务，将他管辖的地区划分给各位将领，于是封李怀光复任检校刑部尚书，兼任河中尹、州刺史、宁庆晋绛慈隰节度支度营田观察押诸蕃部落等使。
English: Tang Dezong became the emperor, relieved Guo Ziyi of the post of vice-marshal of the festival, and divided the areas under his jurisdiction among the generals. Therefore, Li Huaguang was reinstated as the inspector of the Criminal Investigation Department, and concurrently served as the envoy of the Hechu Yin, the State Historian, the Ningqing Jinyi Cixi Festival Preparation, the Camp Observation, and the Shulan Tribe.

古文：先是，怀光频岁率师城长武以处军士，城据原首，临泾水，俯瞰通道，吐蕃自是不敢南侵，为西边要防矣。
现代文：此前，李怀光连续几年带兵在长武筑城用来驻扎军队，城位于原州前端，临近泾水，俯视交通要道，吐蕃从此不敢向南入侵，成了西边的要塞。
English: Previously, for several years in a row, Li Huaiguang led soldiers in Changwu Chuxing, which was used to station troops. The city is located at the front end of the original state, near Surabaya, overlooking the main road. From then on, Tubo did not dare to invade the south and became a fortress in the west.

古文：建中初，泾原四镇节度使段秀实为宰相杨炎所恶，征为司农卿。
现代文：建中初年，泾原、四镇节度使段秀实因宰相杨炎厌恶，被征调任司农卿。
English: In the first year of the middle school, Duan Shuxi, the chief of the four towns of Suwon and Shizhen, was transferred to the post of Secretary of Agriculture due to the disgust of Prime Minister Yang Yan.

古文：上将复城原州，乃以怀光兼泾州刺史、泾原四镇北庭节度使。
现代文：皇帝将要再在原州筑城，就任命李怀光兼任泾州刺史，泾原、四镇、北庭节度使。
English: The emperor was going to build a city in Wonju again, so he appointed Li Huaiguang to be the chief of state of Wonju as well as the festival envoy of Wonwon, Sizhen and Beiting.

古文：时怀光挟私怨，亲诛杀朔方旧将温儒雅等数人，泾州军士咸畏之。
现代文：当时李怀光泄私愤，刚杀了朔方旧将温儒雅等几人，泾州兵将都害怕他。
English: At that time, Li Huaguang vented his personal anger and just killed several people, including the former general Shuo Fang Wenruya. The soldiers of Zhangzhou were all afraid of him.

古文：刘文喜因众不欲，遂以城叛。
现代文：刘文喜利用大家不想要他统率，就据城叛变。
English: Liu Wenxi took advantage of the fact that everyone did not want him to lead the city, and rebelled.

古文：诏硃泚与怀光将兵讨平之，加检校太子少师。
现代文：皇帝下诏命朱氵此和李怀光率军征服了他们。加封李怀光为检校太子少师。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Zhu Rongguo and Li Huaguang to conquer them with the army. Li Huaguang was added as the junior teacher of the crown prince.

古文：二年，迁检校左仆射，兼灵州大都督、单于镇北大都护、朔方节度支度营田观察盐池押诸蕃部落六城水运使，实封四百户。
现代文：建中二年，又加封检校左仆射，兼任灵州大都督、单于镇北大都护、朔方节度支度营田观察盐池押诸蕃部落六城水运使，封爵食实封四百户。
English: In the second year of the middle school, he was also awarded the title of "school inspector, left-handed archer," concurrently served as the governor of Lingshou, the guardian of the northern town of Shan, the water transport envoy of the six cities of the Yan tribe, and the title of "noble knight" was awarded to 400 households.

古文：邠宁节度等使如故。
现代文：宁节度等使职务同以前一样。
English: He preferred to keep his duties the same as before.

古文：时马燧、李抱真诸军同讨魏城未拔，硃滔、王武俊皆反，连兵救悦。
现代文：当时马燧、李抱真等军共同攻打魏城没攻下，朱滔、王武俊也都反叛了，合兵援救田悦。
English: At that time, Ma Jun, Li Baozhen and other troops jointly attacked Weicheng and failed to capture it. Zhu Tao and Wang Wujun also rebelled and joined forces to rescue Tian Yue.

古文：三年，诏遣怀光统朔方兵步骑一万五千同讨田悦。
现代文：建中三年，皇帝下诏派李怀光率朔方步、骑兵一万五千名去共同征讨田悦。
English: In the third year of Jianzhong, the emperor sent Li Huaiguang with 15,000 cavalry to jointly conquer Tian Yue.

古文：怀光勇而无谋，至魏城之日，营垒未设，因与滔等大战于惬山，为滔等所败。
现代文：李怀光有勇无谋，到魏城的当天，营寨还没修筑，就和朱滔等在惬山大战，被朱滔等打败。
English: Li Huaguang was brave and reckless. On the day he arrived at Weicheng, before the camp was built, he and Zhu Tao fought in Lushan Mountain and were defeated by Zhu Tao and others.

古文：复为悦决水以灌之，诸军不利，因与燧等退军于魏县。
现代文：又遭田悦决河水冲淹，各军情况不好，就和马燧等带兵退到魏县。
English: Tian Yue Du River was flooded again, and the situation of each army was not good, so he retreated to Wei County with Ma Jun and other soldiers.

古文：寻加同平章事，益实封二百户。
现代文：不久加封为同中书门下平章事，增爵食实封两百户。
English: It was soon followed by the addition of a seal of approval for the book gate of the same school, and the addition of two hundred households to the seal.

古文：自是与滔等相持不战。
现代文：从此和朱滔等对峙没有作战。
English: Since then, there has been no fighting in the confrontation with Zhu Tao and others.

古文：明年十月，泾原之卒叛，上居奉天。
现代文：第二年十月，泾原军队叛变，皇帝逃到奉天。
English: In October of the following year, the Hahara army mutinied, and the emperor fled to Mukden.

古文：硃泚既僭大号，遣中使驰告河北诸帅，怀光率军奔命。
现代文：朱氵此已自立国号，皇帝派宦官骑马告诉河北众将，李怀光带兵火速勤王。
English: Zhu Xi now had the title of an independent country. The emperor sent an eunuch on horseback to tell the generals in Hebei that Li Huai Guang was the king of rapid fire with soldiers.

古文：时属泥淖，怀光奋厉军士，道自蒲津渡河，败泚骑兵于醴泉，直赴奉天。
现代文：当时道路泥泞，李怀光激励兵将，从蒲津渡过黄河，在醴泉打败了朱氵此的骑兵，直奔奉天。
English: At that time, the road was muddy. Li Huaguang encouraged the soldiers to cross the Yellow River from Buzin and defeated Zhu Xi's cavalry in Huanquan and went straight to Fengtian.

古文：前数日，先遣裨将张韶持表封蜡丸随贼攻城，乘间逾堑，呼城上人曰： 朔方军使也。 
现代文：前几天，他先派偏将张韶带着奏章藏在蜡丸里随着叛军攻城，乘机会越过壕沟，对城上人喊道： 我是朔方军的使者。 
English: A few days ago, he first sent Zhang Xuan to take the rebels to attack the city, taking the opportunity to cross the trench and shouted to the people on the city: I am the messenger of the Shuo Fang Army.

古文：乃以绳引上城而入，比登堞，身中数十矢。
现代文：就拉着绳子爬上城去，等上了城，身上中了几十箭。
English: He pulled a rope to climb up to the city, waited until he reached the city, and was hit by dozens of arrows.

古文：时上在重围中，守拒益急，既知怀光军至，令张韶号令于城上，人心乃安。
现代文：当时皇帝在重重包围之中，守城形势非常危急，知道李怀光的军队来了，命张韶在城上宣布这消息，军心才安定了。
English: At that time, the emperor was under heavy siege, and the defense of the city was in a very critical situation. Knowing that Li Huaiguang's army was coming, he ordered Zhang Jun to announce the news on the city, and the military spirit was stabilized.

古文：怀光又败泚兵于鲁店，泚乃解兵还走入城。
现代文：李怀光又在鲁店打败了朱氵此军队，朱氵此才解围退回长安。
English: Li Huaiguang defeated Zhu Xi's army again in Lucheng, and only then did Zhu Xi leave the siege and return to Chang'an.

古文：怀光性粗厉疏愎，缘道数言卢杞、赵赞、白志贞等奸佞，且曰： 天下之乱，皆此辈也，吾见上，当请诛之。 
现代文：李怀光生性粗暴浅薄自负，一路上多次说卢杞、赵赞、白志贞都是奸臣，并且说： 天下混乱，都是因为这些人，我见了皇上，将请求杀了他们。 
English: Li Huai Guang was rude, shallow and conceited. Along the way, he repeatedly said that Lu Wei, Zhao Zhan and Bai Zhizhen were all traitors, and said: The chaos in the world is all because of these people. When I saw the emperor, I asked him to kill them.

古文：杞等微知之，惧甚，因说上令怀光乘胜逐泚，收复京师，不可许至奉天，德宗从之。
现代文：卢杞等暗地知道了，很害怕，因此劝说皇帝命李怀光乘胜追击朱氵此，收复京城，不能让他到奉天来，唐德宗同意了这意见。
English: Lu Yao and others secretly knew this and were very afraid, so they persuaded the emperor to order Li Huai Guang to take advantage of the victory to pursue Zhu Xi here and recover the capital, and not to let him come to Fengtian. Tang Dezong agreed with this opinion.

古文：怀光屯军咸阳，数上表暴扬杞等罪恶，上不得已为贬杞、赵赞、白志贞以慰安之。
现代文：李怀光在咸阳驻军，多次奏本揭露卢杞等人的罪状恶行，皇帝不得已为此贬卢杞、赵赞、白志贞的官来安抚他。
English: Li Huaguang stationed troops in Xianyang and repeatedly wrote a report exposing the crimes and misdeeds of Lu Xun and others. The emperor had no choice but to demote Lu Xun, Zhao Zhan, and Bai Zhizhen to appease him.

古文：又疏中使翟文秀，上之信任也，又杀之。
现代文：他又奏本告宦官翟文秀，他也是皇帝信任重用的，皇帝又杀了他。
English: He also wrote a report to the eunuch Jian Wenxiu, who was also trusted by the emperor, and the emperor killed him.

古文：怀光既不敢进军，迁延自疑，因谋为乱。
现代文：李怀光既不敢进兵，拖延了时间又怕受惩罚，因此想叛乱。
English: Li Huaiguang did not dare to enter the army, delayed the time and was afraid of being punished, so he wanted to rebel.

古文：初，诏遣崔汉衡使于吐蕃，出兵佐收京城，蕃相尚结赞曰： 蕃法，进军以统兵大臣为信。
现代文：先前，皇帝下诏派崔汉衡出使吐蕃，要求吐蕃派兵帮助收复京城，吐蕃宰相尚结赞说： 按吐蕃的规矩，进兵以掌兵大臣的官印和意见为凭证。
English: Previously, the emperor sent Cui Han to send an envoy to Tubo, requesting Tubo to send troops to help recover the capital. Tubo's prime minister, Shang Jizan, said: According to Tubo's rules, the entry of troops is evidenced by the official seal and opinion of the minister in charge of the army.

古文：今奉制书，无怀光名署，故不敢前。 
现代文：现接到你们的文书，没有李怀光的签名和官印，因此不敢进兵。 
English: Now I have received your document, but it does not have Li Huai Guang's signature and official seal, so I dare not join the army.

古文：上闻之，遣翰林学士陆贽诣怀光议用蕃军，怀光坚执言不可者三，不肯署制，词慢，且谓贽曰： 尔何所能？ 
现代文：皇帝听了，派翰林学士陆贽到李怀光这里来商议借用吐蕃军队，李怀光多次坚持说不行，不肯在文书上签名，言语不敬，并对陆贽说： 你有什么能耐？ 
English: After listening to this, the emperor sent Lu Wei, a scholar of Hanlin, to Li Huaiguang to discuss the loan of the Tubo army. Li Huaiguang repeatedly insisted that it was impossible, refused to sign the document, spoke disrespectfully, and said to Lu Wei: What are you capable of?

古文：兴元元年二月，诏加太尉，兼赐铁券，遣李升及中使邓鸣鹤赉券喻旨。
现代文：兴元元年二月，皇帝下诏加封他为太尉，并赐给他铁券，派李升和宦官邓鸣鹤去送铁券和宣读诏书。
English: In February of the first year of the Xingyuan, the emperor issued an edict to promote him to the rank of first lieutenant, and gave him an iron certificate. He sent Li Sheng and eunuch Deng Minghe to deliver the iron certificate and read out the edict.

古文：怀光怒甚，投券于地曰： 凡人臣反，则赐铁券，今授怀光，是使反也。 
现代文：李怀光大怒，把铁券扔到地上说： 凡是臣子反叛，才赐给铁券，现赐给我，是叫我反叛。 
English: Li Huaguang was furious and threw the iron certificate to the ground, saying, "Whenever a vassal rebels, he is given an iron certificate. Now it is given to me, it is to make me rebel."

古文：词气益悖，众为之惧。
现代文：言语态度更加放肆，众人听了感到害怕。
English: The language became more impudent, and people were frightened.

古文：时怀光部将韩游瑰掌兵在奉天，怀光乃与游瑰书，约令为变，游瑰密奏之。
现代文：当时李怀光部下将领韩腢带部队在奉天，李怀光就给他写信，约时间命他反叛，他秘密报告了这事。
English: At that time, the general of Li Huaiguang's subordinates, the leader of the Han Dynasty troops, was in Mingtian, and Li Huaiguang wrote to him, about the time he rebelled, and he secretly reported the matter.

古文：翌日，怀光又使趣之，游瑰复奏闻。
现代文：第二天，李怀光又派人催促他，他又报告了。
English: The next day, Li Huaguang sent someone to urge him, and he reported again.

古文：数日，怀光又使趣游瑰，为门者所捕。
现代文：几天后，李怀光又派人催他，被守城门的抓住了。
English: A few days later, Li Huaiguang sent someone to urge him, and he was caught by the gatekeeper.

古文：怀光且宣言曰： 吾今与硃泚连和，车驾当须引避。 
现代文：李怀光又公开说： 我现与朱氵此联合，皇帝应该躲开。 
English: Li Huaiguang also publicly said: I am now in this alliance with Zhu Xi, the emperor should stay away.

古文：由是上遽幸梁州。
现代文：因此皇帝急忙逃到梁州。
English: Therefore, the emperor hurriedly fled to Liangzhou.

古文：时李晟已移军东渭桥，怀光复劫李建徽、杨惠元等军，移于好畤，其下颇多携贰。
现代文：当时李晟已经将军队移驻东渭桥，李怀光又劫持李建徽、阳惠元等，吞并了他们的军队，移驻好田寺，他的部下很多人不想叛变。
English: At that time, Li Yu had already moved his army to Dongluqiao, and Li Huaiguang kidnapped Li Jianhui, Yang Huiyuan and others, annexed their army, and moved it to Hotan Temple. Many of his subordinates did not want to rebel.

古文：先是硃泚甚畏之，至是因欲臣之。
现代文：此前朱氵此很害怕他，到这时想乘机要他称臣。
English: Previously, Zhu Xi was very afraid of him, and at this time he wanted to take the opportunity to make him a minister.

古文：怀光虏劫无所得，益疑惧不自安，居二旬，乃驱兵分为部队，掠泾阳、三原、富平，自同州往河中。
现代文：李怀光掳掠不到东西，更加害怕站不住脚，过了二十天，就指挥军队分为几支，掳掠泾阳、三原、富平，经同州开往河中。
English: Li Huaguang could not capture anything and was even more afraid of losing his footing. After twenty days, he commanded the army to be divided into several branches, captured and plundered Fenyang, Sanyuan, and Fuping, and drove to Hezhong via Tongzhou.

古文：神策将孟涉、段威勇自三原拥兵三千余人奔归李晟，怀光不能遏。
现代文：神策军将领孟涉、段威勇率兵三千多人从三原逃离投奔李晟，李怀光无法阻拦。
English: Shenzhao's generals, Meng Wanzhou and Duan Weiyong, led more than 3,000 soldiers to flee from Sanyuan to Lishui. Li Huaguang could not stop them.

古文：韩游瑰杀怀光留后张昕，以邠州从顺。
现代文：韩腢杀死李怀光的留后张昕，率州归顺皇帝。
English: After Han Xuan killed Li Huaiqing, Zhang Ye stayed behind and led the state to submit to the emperor.

古文：戴休颜自奉天令于军曰： 怀光已反。 
现代文：戴休颜在奉天对军队宣布说： 李怀光已经反叛。 
English: Dai Xiuyan announced to the army in Mingtian: Li Huaiguang has rebelled.

古文：乃令城守驰表以闻。
现代文：就命令守城并写奏章报告。
English: He was ordered to defend the city and write a report.

古文：上于是授游瑰、休颜节度使。
现代文：皇帝于是任命韩腢、戴休颜为节度使。
English: The emperor then appointed Han Zheng and Dai Xiuyan as regents.

古文：乃除怀光太子太保，罢其余官，其所管委本军择一人功高望崇者统之，皆不奉诏。
现代文：又解除了李怀光太子太保的爵位，罢免了他其余的官职，他管辖的地区委托军队选一名功劳大威望高的人统管，但没有人响应诏书。
English: He also revoked the peerage of Li Huai Guang, the crown prince, and dismissed him from the rest of his official positions. The area under his jurisdiction entrusted the army to select a person of great merit and prestige to take charge, but no one responded to the edict.

古文：四月，怀光至河中，遂偷有同、绛等州，按兵观望。
现代文：四月份，李怀光到达河中，又窃据同、绛等州，按兵不动观望形势。
English: In April, Li Huaguang arrived in Hechu, and went to Tong, Handan and other provinces to observe the situation.

古文：李晟既收复京师，上遣给事中孔巢父、中使啖守盈持诏征之，怀光素服受命。
现代文：李晟收复了京城，皇帝派给事中孔巢父、宦官啖守盈带诏书调他进京，李怀光穿白色服装接受命令。
English: Li Huai recovered the capital, and the emperor sent the eunuch Zou Shou Ying, the father of Kong Xue, to Beijing with an edict. Li Huai Guang received the order to wear white clothes.

古文：巢父乃宣言于众： 太尉军中谁可领军事者？ 
现代文：孔巢父就对众人大声说： 李怀光军中谁能掌管军中事务？ 
English: Father Kong Xue shouted to the crowd: Who in Li Huai Guang's army can be in charge of the affairs of the army?

古文：怀光左右皆胡虏，因发怒，乱持兵杀巢父及守盈，自是缮兵益修守拒。
现代文：李怀光的侍从都是胡人，因此发怒了，乱挥兵器杀死了孔巢父和啖守盈，从此整理军备增加防御设施。
English: Li Huaiguang's attendants were all Hu people, so he became angry. He killed Kong Xuefu and Zou Shouying with indiscriminate weapons. From then on, he organized armaments and increased defense facilities.

古文：上还京师，以侍中浑瑊为河中节度副元帅，将兵讨怀光。
现代文：皇帝回到了京城，任命浑王咸为河中节度副元帅，率兵讨伐李怀光。
English: The emperor returned to Beijing and appointed Hun Wang Xian as the deputy marshal of the middle of the river and led the troops to fight against Li Huai Guang.

古文：瑊复破同州，屯军不进，数为怀光所败。
现代文：浑王咸攻占了同州，就驻守不进攻了，几次被李怀光打败。
English: When Hun Wang Xian conquered and occupied Tongzhou, he did not attack but stationed there. He was defeated several times by Li Huaiguang.

古文：时仍岁旱蝗，京师初复，经费不给，言事者多请赦怀光。
现代文：当时连年旱、蝗灾，京城刚收复，军需供应不上，上奏的人多请求赦免李怀光。
English: At that time, there were consecutive years of drought and locust plagues, the capital had just been recaptured, military supplies were not available, and many petitioners requested the pardon of Li Huaiguang.

古文：时河东、节度使马燧威名素著，乃加燧副元帅，与瑊及镇国军节度骆元光、邠宁节度韩游瑰、鄜坊节度唐朝臣会兵同讨怀光。
现代文：当时河东节度使马燧威望名声一直很高，于是加封马燧为副元帅，和浑王咸及镇国军节度骆元光、宁节度韩腢、坊节度唐朝臣合兵一起讨伐李怀光。
English: At that time, the prestige of the Hedong Festival had always been very high, so it was decided to add the title of Vice-Marshal to the title of Vice-Marshal. Together with Hun Wang Xian and the soldiers of the Zhenguo Army, the festival of Luo Yuan Guang, the Ning Festival of Han Xuan, and the Fang Festival of the Tang Dynasty, they fought against Li Huai Guang.

古文：燧率军拔绛州，至宝鼎，虑怀光西走，唐突京邑，乃舍军朝京师。
现代文：马燧率兵攻占绛州，到了宝鼎，怕李怀光西逃，侵犯京城，就离开军队进京朝拜。
English: Ma Jun led the troops to conquer Zhangzhou, and when they arrived at Baoding, fearing that Li Huai Guang would flee west and invade the capital, he left the army and went to Beijing to pay homage.

古文：既还，与瑊先自河东而降其骁将尉珪、徐庭光，统诸军以围河中。
现代文：归来后，和浑王咸先从河东召降了李怀光的勇将尉王圭、徐庭光，统率各军包围了河中。
English: After returning, he and Hun Wang Xian first summoned Li Huaiguang's brave generals Wang Gui and Xu Tingguang from the east of the river, and led the armies to surround the middle of the river.

古文：贞元元年秋，朔方部将牛名俊斩怀光首以降燧瑊隹刃其弟数人，乃自杀。
现代文：贞元元年秋天，朔方军将领牛名俊割下李怀光的头投降了马燧，李怀光的儿子李王隹用刀杀死了他的几个弟弟，就自杀了。
English: In the autumn of the first year of Zhengyuan, Shuo Fang's general Niu Mingjun cut off Li Huaiguang's head and surrendered to Ma Jun. Li Huaiguang's son Li Wangyao killed several of his brothers with a knife and then committed suicide.

古文：怀光死时年五十七。
现代文：李怀光死时享年五十七岁。
English: Li Huaguang was 57 years old when he died.

古文：寻诏以男一人为嗣，赐庄宅各一所，仍还怀光尸首，任其收葬，妻子并徙澧州。
现代文：不久皇帝下诏立一个儿子做继承人，赐给他庄园住宅各一处。又送还了李怀光的尸体和头，让他收拾安葬，把李怀光的妻子和儿子都迁到澧州。
English: Soon after, the emperor decreed that one of his sons should be the heir, and gave him one manor house each. He also returned Li Huaiqing's body and head, and told him to prepare for burial. Li Huaiqing's wife and son were moved to Zhangzhou.

古文：五年，又诏曰：
现代文：贞元五年，又下诏书说：
English: In the fifth year of the Zhengyuan era, the following imperial edict was issued:

古文：怀旧念功，仁之大也；兴灭继绝，义之弘也。
现代文： 怀念故人的功劳，是重要的仁德；兴复灭绝的家族，是重要的义举。
English: Remembering the merits of the deceased is an important benevolence; reviving the extinct family is an important act of righteousness.

古文：昔蔡叔圮族，周公封其子于东土；韩信干纪，汉后爵其孥以弓高。
现代文：过去蔡叔家族衰败，周公把他的儿子封为东方诸侯，韩王信反叛，汉文帝把他的儿子封为弓高侯。
English: In the past, Uncle Cai's family fell into decline, Zhou Gong made his son the Prince of the East, Han Wangxin rebelled, and Emperor Wen of Han made his son the Prince of the Bow.

古文：侯君集之不率景化，我太宗存其胤以主祀。
现代文：侯君集不遵王法，太宗皇帝保留他的后代主持祭祀。
English: Hou Junji did not follow the royal law, and Emperor Taizong retained his descendants to preside over the sacrificial rites.

古文：详考先王之道，洎乎烈祖之训，皆以刑佐德，俾人向方，则斧钺之诛，甲兵之伐，盖不得已而用也。
现代文：详细考查先王的做法，以至祖先的教诲，都是用刑法来辅佐仁德，使人守法，用斧钺施刑、甲兵征讨，是不得已才做的事。
English: A detailed examination of the practices of the former king, as well as the teachings of the ancestors, is to use criminal law to assist benevolence and make people abide by the law, to use axes and machetes to inflict punishment, and to conscript soldiers, is a matter of last resort.

古文：曩岁盗臣窃发，国步多虞，朕狩于近郊，指期薄伐，将振昆阳之旅，以兴涿鹿之功，征师未达于诸侯，卫士且疲于七萃。
现代文：前几年叛贼突然叛乱，国家前途堪忧，我移居京郊，约期讨伐，要调动讨逆大军，讨平叛逆，征调军队的命令没传达到各军，卫兵正遭精锐敌军进攻，情况危急。
English: A few years ago, the traitors suddenly rebelled, the future of the country was worrying, I moved to the outskirts of Beijing, I had an appointment for a crusade, I had to mobilize a large army to fight against the rebels, to quell the rebellion, the order to conscript the army had not reached all the armies, the guards were being attacked by elite enemy troops, the situation was critical.

古文：而李怀光三军夙驾，千里勤王，上假雷霆之威，下逐虎狼之众。
现代文：李怀光率军先发，从千里外来救援，上顺天意，赶走了暴虐的叛军。
English: Li Huaiguang led the advance of the army, and with the help of thousands of miles of foreign aid, he drove away the tyrannical rebel army in accordance with the will of heaven.

古文：议功方始，守节靡终，潜构祸胎，拒违朝命，弃同即异，舍顺效逆。
现代文：我正要论功行赏，可惜他不终守臣节，暗萌叛意，违背我的命令，背叛国家与叛逆勾结，放弃忠君选择叛逆。
English: I was about to give him a reward for his meritorious deeds, but unfortunately he did not keep the vassal day, he secretly rebelled, disobeyed my order, betrayed the country and colluded with the rebellion, and gave up loyalty to the prince and chose to rebel.

古文：为臣至此，在法必诛，犹示绥怀，庶其牵复。而枭音益厉，犭希突莫迁，大戮所加，曾无噍类。
现代文：做臣下到这地步，按国法定要杀头，我还招抚他，希望他回心转意，但他叛行愈显，一意孤行，大兵讨伐，竟至灭门。
English: When I became a vassal, according to the law of the country, I had to kill him. I also coaxed him, hoping that he would change his mind, but his rebellion became more and more obvious. He was determined to go his own way, and the soldiers fought against him, even to the point of exterminating him.

古文：虽自贻伊戚，与众弃之，而言念尔劳，何嗟及矣！
现代文：虽然他咎由自取、自绝于国家和人民，但怀念他有功劳，却成为孤鬼无人祭祀，想起来心里不安，因此感到难过。
English: Although he blamed himself and cut himself off from the country and the people, he was remembered for his merits, but he became a lonely ghost with no one to worship. When I think about it, I feel uneasy and sad.

古文：以其前效犹在，孤魂无归，怀之怳然，是用忄妻轸。
现代文：我想大发慈悲，用这改变风气。保持太平，希望无人违法。
English: I want to be compassionate and use this to change the culture, keep the peace and hope that no one breaks the law.

古文：予欲布陈大惠，冀以化成，保合太和，期于刑措。宜以怀光外孙燕八八赐姓李氏，名承绪，授左卫率府胄曹参军，承怀光之后。
现代文：应将李怀光外孙燕八八赐姓李，改名承绪，任命为左卫率府胄曹参军，成为李怀光继承人。
English: Li Huaiguang's grandson Yan Baiba should be given the surname Li, change his name to Chengxu, and be appointed as the leader of the left guard to join the army, and become the successor of Li Huaiguang.

古文：仍赐钱一千贯，任于怀光墓侧置立庄园，侍养怀光妻王氏，并备四时享奠之礼。
现代文：还赐钱一千贯，让他任意在李怀光墓边购地建庄园，侍奉赡养李怀光的妻子王氏，并谨守四季祭祀礼节。
English: He also gave a thousand talents of money, allowing him to purchase land and build a manor on the edge of Li Huaguang's tomb at will, to serve and support Li Huaguang's wife Wang, and to observe the four seasons' ritual etiquette.

古文：呜呼！
现代文：啊！
English: Alas!

古文：朕实不德，临于兆人，泣辜宥罪，素诚所志。
现代文：我虽不够仁德，却要管理万民，原谅别人的过失，是我的愿望。
English: Although I am not humane enough, it is my wish to govern all the people and forgive the faults of others.

古文：尔其保姓受氏，宣力承家，勉绍乃考之建国庸，无若尔父之违王命。
现代文：你应继承家业，尽力持家，努力继续像你父亲那样为国立功，不要像他那样违背命令。 
English: You should inherit the family business, do your best to maintain the family, strive to continue to serve the country as your father did, and do not disobey orders as he did.

古文：初，怀光授首，其子琟、瑗等皆死，唯妻王氏在，故上特舍其死。
现代文：当初，李怀光被杀，他的儿子李王隹、李瑗都死了，只有他的妻子王氏还在。因此皇帝特地免她一死。
English: At first, Li Huaiguang was killed, his sons Li Wangyao and Li Yao were both dead, and only his wife Wangji was still alive. Therefore, the emperor specifically spared her from death.

古文：及是又思怀光旧勋，哀其绝后，乃命承绪继之。
现代文：到这时又怀念李怀光旧日的功劳，对他没有后人感到难受，就命令李承绪继承他。
English: At this time, he also missed the old days of Li Huaguang's achievements and felt bad that he had no successor, so he ordered Li Chengxu to succeed him.

