古文：司马遹晋惠帝太子遹。
现代文：原文晋惠帝的太子叫做司马遹，从小就聪明异常。
English: The crown prince of Emperor Jinhui is called Sima Ye, who has been unusually clever since childhood.

古文：自幼聪慧，宫中尝夜失火，武帝登楼望之，太子乃牵帝衣入暗中。
现代文：晋武帝时，一天夜里宫中发生了大火，武帝登楼观看火势，司马遹拉着武帝的衣角，让武帝隐身在暗处。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jinwu, a large fire broke out in the palace one night. Emperor Wudi went upstairs to watch the fire. Sima Yu took Emperor Wudi by the scruff of the neck and let him hide in the dark.

古文：帝问其故，对曰： 暮夜仓卒，宜备非常，不可令照见人主。 
现代文：武帝问司马遹原因，司马遹说： 夜色昏暗，火场一片混乱，需要小心防范意外发生，皇上不应站在火光映照、每个人都能看得见的地方。 
English: Emperor Wu asked Sima Qian the reason, Sima Qian said: The night is dark, the fire scene is chaotic, we need to be careful to prevent accidents from happening, the emperor should not stand in the place where the firelight is reflected and everyone can see it.

古文：时遹才五岁耳，帝大奇之。
现代文：这时司马遹才五岁，武帝感觉非常惊异。
English: At this time, Sima Ye was only five years old, and Emperor Wu was very surprised.

古文：尝从帝观豕牢，言于帝曰： 豕甚肥，何不杀以养士，而令坐费五谷？ 
现代文：还有一次，司马遹随同晋武帝去检查猪圈，他指着满栏的肥猪对晋武帝说： 这些猪已经养得非常肥了，为什么不杀了来犒劳将士，反让它们白白浪费粮食呢？ 
English: On another occasion, Sima Qian accompanied Emperor Jinwu to inspect a pigsty. Pointing to a bar full of fat pigs, he said to Emperor Jinwu, "These pigs have been raised to be very fat. Why not kill the laborers and let them waste grain for nothing?"

古文：帝抚其背曰： 是儿当兴吾家。 
现代文：武帝听后，抚摸着太子的背说： 这个孩子日后必定能使我家兴旺。 
English: After listening, Emperor Wu stroked the prince's back and said, "This child will surely make my family prosperous in the future."

古文：后竟以贾后谗废死，谥愍怀。吁，真可愍可怀也!
现代文：没想到日后惠帝却因贾后的谗言使太子惨死，谥号 愍怀 ，真是一位值得怜悯、值得怀念的太子啊!
English: Unexpectedly, Hui Di later caused the tragic death of the prince due to Jia's insults. He was nicknamed "Hang Huai." He was truly a prince worthy of pity and nostalgia!

古文：此智识人，何以不禄？
现代文：太子智慧过人，可是怎么会如此短命啊？唉!
English: The prince is extremely intelligent, but how could his life be so short? Alas!

古文：噫!斯人而禄也，司马氏必昌，而天道僭矣。
现代文：如果太子能活得长些，司马氏必定会昌盛。
English: If the crown prince can live longer, the Sima clan will surely prosper.

古文：遹谥愍怀。而继惠世者，一怀一愍，马遂革而为牛，天之巧于示应乎？
现代文：然而，如果真是这样的话，是不是会违犯天道运行的正常规律呢？司马遹谥号愍怀，而惠帝死后，继承帝位的竟然分别是怀帝和愍帝。司马氏最后为牛氏所取代，难道是上天的安排，早就已经巧妙地显示出来了吗？
English: However, if that were the case, wouldn't it violate the normal laws of the operation of the heavenly way? Sima Yi was pregnant, and after Hui Di's death, the imperial throne was inherited by Emperor Hui and Emperor Zhou, respectively. Sima was finally replaced by Emperor Niu, is it God's arrangement, has it already been cleverly revealed?

