古文：刘季连陈伯之
现代文：刘季连字惠续，是彭城人。
English: Liu Ji is a native of Pengcheng.

古文：刘季连，字惠续，彭城人也。父思考，以宋高祖族弟显于宋世，位至金紫光禄大夫。季连有名誉，早历清官。
现代文：他的父亲刘思考，因为是宋高祖的族弟而在宋朝显赫一时，官至金紫光禄大夫。刘季连名誉很好，很早就担任过清官。
English: His father, Liu Jizhong, because he was the younger brother of Song Gaozu, was a prominent official in the Song Dynasty, and was even the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu. Liu Jilian had a good reputation, and had served as a Qing official very early.

古文：齐高帝受禅，悉诛宋室近属，将及季连等，太宰褚渊素善之，固请乃免。
现代文：齐高帝接受禅让登上皇帝宝座后，把宋王朝的近属全部杀掉，准备杀刘季连等人时，因太宰褚渊一向与至连很好，在他坚决恳请下，季连才免于一死。
English: After Emperor Qigong ascended to the throne, he killed all the close relatives of the Song Dynasty, and when he was preparing to kill Liu Qilian and others, because Dazai Qianyuan had always been very good with his closest relatives, he firmly and earnestly requested that Qilian be spared from death.

古文：建元中，季连为尚书左丞。
现代文：建元年间，刘季连任尚书左丞。
English: During the first year of the Jianyuan era, Liu Ji was reappointed to the post of Shangshuzojo.

古文：永明初，出为江夏内史，累迁平南长沙内史，冠军长史、广陵太守，并行府州事。
现代文：永明初年，刘委连出任江夏郡内史，并多次升迁任平南长沙郡内史，冠军长史、广陵郡太守，并掌管府州事务。
English: In the first year of Yongming, Liu Qilian served as the head of Jiangxia County's internal history, and was promoted several times as the head of Pingnan Changsha County's internal history, the champion of Changshi, the governor of Guangling County, and in charge of prefectural affairs.

古文：入为给事黄门侍郎，转太子中庶子。
现代文：后被召入任给事黄门侍郎，转任太子中庶子。
English: Later, he was called to serve as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and was transferred to the position of the Prince's middle child.

古文：建武中，又出为平西萧遥欣长史、南郡太守。
现代文：建武年间，刘季连又出任平西萧遥欣的长史、卢塑太守。
English: During the Jianwu period, Liu Qilian also served as the long history of Pingxi Xiao Yuxin and the governor of Lu Puxu.

古文：时明帝诸子幼弱，内亲则仗遥欣兄弟，外亲则倚后弟刘暄、内弟江祏。
现代文：当时旦喳的几个儿子年龄还小，那些内亲们倚仗萧遥欣兄弟，外戚们则仰仗皇后的弟弟刘暄、内弟江柘。
English: At that time, several sons of the empress were still young. Those relatives relied on Xiao Yaoxin's brothers, while the relatives relied on the empress's brother Liu Ye and brother-in-law Jiang Ye.

古文：遥欣之镇江陵也，意寄甚隆；而遥欣至州，多招宾客，厚自封殖，明帝甚恶之。
现代文：萧遥欣在镇守江陵时，明帝对他寄予很大希望；然而遥欣到了州裹，却广招宾客，私自大加封赏，明帝对此甚为厌恶。
English: When Xiao Yaoxin was in charge of the town of Jiangling, Emperor Ming pinned great hopes on him; however, when Yaoxin came to the state, he invited a wide range of guests and arrogantly increased the reward. Emperor Ming was very disgusted by this.

古文：季连族甥琅邪王会为遥欣谘议参军，美容貌，颇才辩，遥欣遇之甚厚。
现代文：刘垩连的族外甥亟型人工盒当了芦趸巫的谘议参军，王盒长得相貌俊美，雄才善辩，芦鼬对他非常看重。
English: Liu Qilian's nephew, the first type of artificial box, became the consultation of the reed witch to join the army. The king box was handsome and eloquent, and the reed was very important to him.

古文：会多所慠忽，于公座与遥欣竞侮季连，季连憾之，乃密表明帝，称遥欣有异迹。明帝纳焉，乃以遥欣为雍州刺史。
现代文：王会因此非常傲慢，竟然在众人面前与萧遥欣争着侮辱刘季连，刘季连对此很不高兴，他就秘密上表给明帝，说萧遥欣有异常迹象，明帝采纳了他的意见，就把萧遥欣调任为雍州刺史。
English: As a result, Wang Hui was so arrogant that he argued with Xiao Yaoxin and insulted Liu Jilian in front of everyone. Liu Jilian was very unhappy about this, so he secretly reported to Emperor Ming that Xiao Yaoxin showed signs of abnormality. Emperor Ming accepted his opinion and transferred Xiao Yaoxin to the post of Yongzhou prefectural governor.

古文：明帝心德季连，四年，以为辅国将军、益州刺史，令据遥欣上流。
现代文：明帝内心感激季连，四年，任命刘季连为辅调将军、益州刺史，令他据守萧遥欣的上游。
English: Emperor Ming was deeply grateful to Qilian. In four years, he appointed Liu Qilian as the second-ranking general and the governor of Yizhou, and ordered him to guard the upper reaches of Xiao Yaoxin.

古文：季连父，宋世为益州，贪鄙无政绩，州人犹以义故，善待季连。
现代文：刘季连的父亲在塞曲任董长官时，贪婪卑鄙而无政绩，但益州人民仍然以义为重，待季连很好。
English: When Liu Jilian's father was appointed as the chief of the board of directors in Saiqu, he was greedy and despicable and had no political achievements, but the people of Yizhou still valued righteousness and treated Jilian well.

古文：季连下车，存问故老，抚纳新旧，见父时故吏，皆对之流涕。
现代文：刘季连下车到任后，慰问故老官吏，抚慰结纳新旧朋友，见到他父亲时的旧官员，都对着他们流泪涕泣。
English: After Liu Qilian got off the train and arrived at his post, he consoled the old officials, comforted the new and old friends, and the old officials when he saw his father, and shed tears for them.

古文：辟遂宁人龚惬为府主簿。
现代文：刘季连任命遂宁人龚惬为州府主簿。
English: Liu Jilian appointed Suining Renren as the chief accountant of the state capital.

古文：惬，龚颖之孙，累世有学行，故引焉。
现代文：龚惬是龚颖的孙子，他家世代都是有学问有德行的人，所以引荐他做官。
English: Zhai is the grandson of Zhai Ying, and his family's generation are all learned and virtuous people, so he was recommended to become an official.

古文：东昏即位，永元元年，征季连为右卫将军，道断不至。
现代文：东昏侯即位，永元元年，征召刘季连为右卫将军，因道路阻断而未到任。
English: In the first year of Yongyuan, Liu Jilian was called up to be the right guard general, but he did not take up the post because the road was blocked.

古文：季连闻东昏失德，京师多故，稍自骄矜。
现代文：刘季连听说束昏侯有失德行，京城多有变故，于是他骄傲矜持起来。
English: Liu Jiliang heard that there was a loss of virtue in Shandong Province, and that there were many changes in Beijing, so he was proud and reserved.

古文：本以文吏知名，性忌而褊狭，至是遂严愎酷狠，土人始怀怨望。
现代文：刘季连本来以文官而知名，性情好忌妒而褊狭，到现在就变得更加严酷凶狠、刚愎自用，当地人民开始对他心怀怨恨失望。
English: Liu Jilian, who was originally known as a civil servant, with a jealous and narrow-minded temperament, has now become more harsh and fierce, and the local people have begun to harbor resentment and disappointment towards him.

古文：其年九月，季连因聚会，发人丁五千人，声以讲武，遂遣中兵参军宋买率之以袭中水。
现代文：逭一年的九月，刘季连聚集了五千人，声称是演练武艺，实际是派遣中兵参军宋买率领这些人去袭击中水。
English: In September of the same year, Liu Qilian gathered five thousand people, claiming to be practicing martial arts, but actually sending Chinese soldiers to join Song Bai's army and leading these people to attack Zhongshui.

古文：穰人李托豫知之，设备守险，买与战不利，还州，郡县多叛乱矣。
现代文：穣县人李托事先知道了这件事，就布置了防备力量守卫险要之处，宋买与李托交战不利，回到州裹，很多郡县发生了叛乱。
English: Li Tuo, a native of Jixian County, knew about this matter in advance, and he arranged the defense force to guard the critical point. Song Bai and Li Tuo were unfavorable in the war, and they returned to the state, and many counties rebelled.

古文：是月，新城人赵续伯杀五城令，逐始平太守。
现代文：当月，新城人趟续伯杀死五城县令，赶走始平郡太守。
English: That month, people from Xincheng went to Zheibo to kill the governor of Wucheng County and drive away the governor of Shiping County.

古文：十月，晋原人乐宝称、李难当杀其太守，宝称自号南秦州刺史，难当益州刺史。
现代文：十月，晋原人乐实称、李难当杀死他们郡的太守，乐实称自己封号为南秦州刺史，李难当号为益州刺史。
English: In October, the people of Jin Yuan called themselves "Leshi" and said that Li Nandu had killed the governor of their county. They called themselves "Nanqinzhou Shishi" and Li Nandu called himself "Yizhou Shishi."

古文：十二月，季连遣参军崔茂祖率众二千讨之，赍三日粮。
现代文：十二月，刘季连派遣参军崔茂祖率领二千士兵前去征讨，衹带了三天的粮食。
English: In December, Liu Qiliang dispatched the conscript Cui Maozu to lead two thousand soldiers to go and fight, bringing with him three days of grain.

古文：值岁大寒，群贼相聚，伐树塞路，军人水火无所得，大败而还，死者十七八。
现代文：当时正值这年最寒冷的季节，群贼互相聚在一起，砍伐树木，挡住通路，军人得不到水和火解渴御寒，结果大败而归，死亡者十分之七八。
English: It was the coldest season of the year, and the bandits gathered together to cut down trees and block roads. The soldiers were deprived of water and fire to quench their thirst and protect themselves from the cold. As a result, they suffered a crushing defeat, and seven out of ten of them died.

古文：明年正月，新城人帛养逐遂宁太守谯希渊。
现代文：第二年正月，新城人帛养驱逐了遂宁郡太守谯希渊。
English: In the first month of the second year, Xincheng people drove out Suining County Governor Su Xi Yuan.

古文：三月，巴西人雍道晞率群贼万余逼巴西，去郡数里，道晞称镇西将军，号建义。
现代文：三月，巴西郡人雍道晞率群贼一万多人进逼巴西郡，离郡还有数里，雍道晞自称是镇西将军，封号建义。
English: In March, a group of more than 10,000 thieves led by Yong Daojun, a resident of Brazil County, forced their way into Brazil County. A few miles away from the county, Yong Daojun claimed to be the general of Zhenxi County, with the title of Jianyi.

古文：巴西太守鲁休烈与涪令李膺婴城自守，季连遣中兵参军李奉伯率众五千救之。
现代文：巴西郡太守鲁休烈与遣县县令奎庐环城自守，刘垂连派中兵参军李奉伯率领五千士兵前去救援。
English: The governor of Brazil County, Lu Xurye, and the governor of the dispatched county, Qui Xuanhuan, defended themselves. Liu Lilian sent soldiers to join the army, and Li Fengbo led five thousand soldiers to rescue.

古文：奉伯至，与郡兵破擒道晞，斩之涪市。
现代文：奎圭伯到达后，舆郡裹兵士一起，打败并活捉了雍道晞，在涪县街市上将道晞斩首示众。
English: After Quigui Bo's arrival, soldiers from Mingshun County defeated and captured Yong Daojun alive, and beheaded him in the streets of Jixian.

古文：奉伯因独进巴西之东乡讨余贼。
现代文：李奉伯乘胜要独自进巴酉壑的束乡，去追讨余贼。
English: Li Fongbo wants to enter Baju's Sok Township on his own to pursue the remaining thieves.

古文：李膺止之曰： 卒惰将骄，乘胜履险，非良策也。
现代文：奎膺劝阻他说： 现在士兵懈怠，将领骄矜，如果乘胜去赴险境，这不是好计策啊。
English: Qui-Gon dissuaded him, saying, "Nowadays, soldiers are slack and generals are arrogant. If you take advantage of a victory to go into a dangerous situation, this is not a good strategy."

古文：不如小缓，更思后计。 
现代文：不如稍稍缓一缓，再想其他的办法。 
English: It's better to slow down a little bit and then think of other ways.

古文：奉伯不纳，悉众入山，大败而出，遂奔还州。
现代文：李奉伯没有采纳他的建议，带领大军全都进了山，结果大败而出，于是他们逃回了州襄。
English: Li Fengbo did not accept his suggestion and led the whole army into the mountains. As a result, they were defeated and fled back to Zhouzhuang.

古文：六月，江阳人程延期反，杀太守何法藏。
现代文：六月，江阳人程延期反叛，杀了太守何法藏。
English: In June, Jiangyang Rencheng postponed the rebellion and killed the grand marshal He Fangzang.

古文：鲁休烈惧不自保，奔投巴东相萧慧训。
现代文：鲁堡烈害怕自身难保，就投奔巴束郡相萧慧训。
English: Fearing for his own safety, Luborglye fled to Bac Gung County to join Siao Huixun.

古文：十月，巴西人赵续伯又反，有众二万，出广汉，乘佛舆，以五彩裹青石，诳百姓云： 天与我玉印，当王蜀。 
现代文：十月，巴西郡人赵续伯又反叛，拥有二万人，从广莲出发，乘坐佛车，用五彩布裹住青石头，诳骗老百姓说： 上天赐给我玉印，我应该当蜀王。 
English: In October, Zhao Zongbo, a resident of Brazil County, rebelled again, with 20,000 people. He set out from Guanglian, took a Buddhist chariot, wrapped the blue stone with a multicolored cloth, and deceived the common people, saying, "God has given me the jade seal, I should be the king of Shu."

古文：愚人从之者甚众。
现代文：愚蠢地跟从他的人很多。
English: There are many who foolishly follow him.

古文：季连进讨之，遣长史赵越常前驱。
现代文：刘季连进军讨伐赵续伯等，派遣长史赵越堂当前锋。
English: Liu Qilian marched to fight against Zhao Zhengbo and others, and sent the chief historian Zhao Yue Tong to the forefront.

古文：兵败，季连复遣李奉伯由涪路讨之。
现代文：被打败后，刘重连又派李奉伯从涪县这一路前去讨伐。
English: After being defeated, Liu Chulian sent Li Bongbo to go to the front from Jixian.

古文：奉伯别军自潺亭与大军会于城，进攻其栅，大破之。
现代文：李奉伯的另一支军队从湿皇与大军在城前会合，进攻赵续伯的营栅，结果大破赵军。
English: Another army of Li Fongbo from the Wet Emperor met with the large army in front of the city and attacked Zhao Zhoubo's camp gate. As a result, Zhao's army was defeated.

古文：时会稽人石文安字守休，隐居乡里，专行礼让，代季连为尚书左丞，出为江夏内史，又代季连入为御史中丞，与季连相善。
现代文：当时，有一个会稽人石文安字守休的隐居在乡里，专门施行礼让，他代替刘季连任尚书左丞，出任江夏郡内史，又代替季连被召入任御史中丞，他与季连非常要好。
English: At that time, there was an auditor of the association, Shi Wen'an, surnamed Shouyu, who lived in seclusion in the countryside, specializing in the implementation of courtesy. He replaced Liu Ji as the re-appointed Shang Shuzhanzhong, served as the internal history of Jiangxia County, and replaced Ji Lian as the appointed Mi Shizhanzhong. He and Ji Lian were very good friends.

古文：子仲渊字钦回，闻义师起，率乡人以应高祖。
现代文：刘季连的儿子叫刘仲涩，字麸厘，他听说凿直担起义后，就率领同乡前去响应直担。
English: Liu Ji Lian's son is called Liu Zhong Shun, his name is Gu Li. After he heard about the uprising, he led his fellow villagers to respond to the uprising.

古文：天监初，拜郢州别驾，从高祖平京邑。
现代文：初年，刘健揽拜官为竖妙别驾，跟从高祖平定京邑。
English: In the first year, Liu Jian was appointed to be the deputy governor of Zhimei, and followed Gao Zu to pacify Beijing.

古文：明年春，遣左右陈建孙送季连弟通直郎子渊及季连二子使蜀，喻旨慰劳。
现代文：第二年春季，皇帝派遣左右陈建孙护送刘季连的弟弟、通直郎型王赵及至连的两个儿子出使旦邓，宣布皇帝意旨慰劳。
English: In the spring of the following year, the emperor sent around Chen Jiansun to escort Liu Jilan's younger brother, Tongzhulang-type Wang Zhao, and Ziliang's two sons to dispatch Tang Deng to announce the emperor's intention of consolation.

古文：季连受命，饬还装。
现代文：刘季连接受命令后，整治行装，准备打道回府。
English: After receiving the order, Liu Jilian carried out the rectification and prepared to return to the capital.

古文：高祖以西台将邓元起为益州刺史。
现代文：高祖任命西台将邓元起为益业刺史。
English: Gaozu appointed Xidai to make Dengyuan a historical record.

古文：元起，南郡人。
现代文：邓五茎是卢璺人。
English: Deng Wuzhong is from Luye.

古文：季连为南郡之时，素薄元起。
现代文：刘重连在直邓做官时，对坚五起一直很不好。
English: When Liu Chonglian was an official in Zhaodeng, he was always very bad at dealing with Jianwu.

古文：典签硃道琛者，尝为季连府都录，无赖小人，有罪，季连欲杀之，逃叛以免。
现代文：典签官朱道琛曾经当遇刘季连的州府都绿，是个无赖小人，因有罪，刘季连要杀他，因他逃跑，免于一死。
English: Once, when encountering Liu Jilian, the signature officer Zhu Daoxuan said that the capital of the state was green, he was a scoundrel and villain. Because he was guilty, Liu Jilian wanted to kill him, but because he ran away, he was spared death.

古文：至是说元起曰： 益州乱离已久，公私府库必多秏失，刘益州临归空竭，岂办复能远遣候递。
现代文：现在他劝邓五墓说： 益业局势纷乱已经很久了，公家和私人的府库损耗一定很大，刘益州莅临一座空城，怎么能够远道运送物资呢。
English: Now he advised the Dengwu Tomb saying, "The Yiye situation has been in turmoil for a long time, the loss of public and private treasuries must be very large. Liu Yizhou came to an empty city, how could he transport materials far away?

古文：道琛请先使检校，缘路奉迎；不然，万里资粮，未易可得。 
现代文：道琛我请求先去查核，沿路奉迎他；不这样的话，万里运送的资粮，就不容易到手了。 
English: On the way, I asked him to check first and greeted him along the way; otherwise, it would not be easy to get the grain delivered from thousands of miles away.

古文：元起许之。
现代文：邓元起同意了他的请求。
English: Deng Yuanqi agreed to his request.

古文：道琛既至，言语不恭，又历造府州人士，见器物辄夺之，有不获者，语曰： 会当属人，何须苦惜。 
现代文：塞道理到了益业，言语很不恭敬，又一个一个地到府州官员家裹去，看见器皿财物就抢夺过来，遇到有不肯给的，他就说： 早晚都会属于别人的东西，何苦逭么爱惜呢。 
English: When he got to Yinye, he spoke very disrespectfully. He went to the homes of prefectural and state officials one by one, and when he saw utensils and property, he snatched them away. When he met someone who refused to give them, he said, "Something that will belong to someone else sooner or later, why should I care about it?"

古文：于是军府大惧，谓元起至必诛季连，祸及党与，竞言之于季连。
现代文：于是军府上下都非常恐慌，认为邓五起到了这裹肯定会杀刘季连，还会连累他的属下，都纷纷到季连那裹去诉说。
English: As a result, the military authorities were very panicked, thinking that Deng V would definitely kill Liu Qilian, and would also implicate his subordinates, and they all went to Qilian to tell him.

古文：季连亦以为然；又恶昔之不礼元起也，益愤懑。
现代文：刘季连也是这样认为的；他又忌讳过去自己对塑亘担的不礼敬，于是更加感到愤懑。
English: Liu Jilian also thought so; he also repudiated his past disrespect for Shouguangtang, so he felt even more indignant.

古文：司马硃士略说季连，求为巴西郡，留三子为质，季连许之。
现代文：司马朱坚劝说刘重连，请求让他担任旦西郡长官，留下三个儿子当作人质，刘季连同意了。
English: Sima Zhujian persuaded Liu Jilian and asked him to serve as the governor of Danxi County, leaving his three sons as hostages. Liu Jilian agreed.

古文：顷之，季连遂召佐史，矫称齐宣德皇后令，聚兵复反，收硃道琛杀之。
现代文：不久，刘圣连就召进佐史，谎称齐朝宣德皇后有令，要聚集兵力再次反叛，他把朱道琛抓住杀了。
English: Soon after, Liu Sheng Lian was summoned to Sashi, falsely claiming that the Empress Xuande of the Qi Dynasty had ordered him to gather troops to rebel again. He caught and killed Zhu Daojun.

古文：书报硃士略，兼召李膺。
现代文：又写信通报朱士略，同时召李膺回来。
English: He also wrote a letter to inform Zhu Shiliu, and at the same time called Li Jun to come back.

古文：膺、士略并不受使。
现代文：李膺和朱士略都不接受他的使命。
English: Neither Li Xi nor Zhu Shiliu accepted his mission.

古文：使归，元起收兵于巴西以待之，季连诛士略三子。
现代文：使者回去后，邓元起收集部队，在巴西郡等待时机，刘季连杀掉了朱士略的三个儿子。
English: After the envoy returned, Deng Yuanzhi gathered troops and waited for an opportunity in Brazil County. Liu Qilian killed Zhu Shiliu's three sons.

古文：天监元年六月，元起至巴西，季连遣其将李奉伯等拒战。
现代文：天监元年六月，邓元起到达巴西郡，刘季连派遣大将李奉伯等人去抵御作战。
English: In June of the first year of Tianjun, Deng Yuanzhi arrived in Brazil County, and Liu Qilian dispatched General Li Fengbo and others to resist the battle.

古文：兵交，互有得失，久之，奉伯乃败退还成都。
现代文：两军交战，互相有得有失，时间一长，李奉伯就败退回到成都。
English: The two armies engaged in battle, each side gained and lost. After a long time, Li Fongbo retreated to Chengdu in defeat.

古文：季连驱略居人，闭城固守。
现代文：刘季连把居民们驱赶出去，然后关闭城门坚守。
English: Liu Ji Lian drove the residents out, then closed the city gate and held on.

古文：元起稍进围之。
现代文：邓元起悄悄进军，包围了成都城。
English: Deng Yuanqi quietly marched in and surrounded Chengdu City.

古文：是冬，季连城局参军江希之等谋以城降，不果，季连诛之。
现代文：逭年冬季，刘季连的城局参军江希之等人密谋要献城投降，没有成功，刘季连把他们杀了。
English: In the winter of the year of the rooster, Liu Qilian's city bureau, Jiang Xizhi, who had joined the army, and others plotted to surrender the city. They were unsuccessful, and Liu Qilian killed them.

古文：蜀中丧乱已二年矣，城中食尽，升米三千，亦无所籴，饿死者相枕。
现代文：蜀中遭受丧乱已经有两年了，城裹的粮食吃完了，一升米用三千钱也买不到，饿死的人堆积在一起互相枕藉。
English: It has been two years since Shuzhong was devastated. The city has run out of food, a liter of rice can't be bought for 3,000 yuan, and starving people are piled up next to each other.

古文：其无亲党者，又杀而食之。
现代文：那些没有亲戚朋友的人，又杀了别人来吃。
English: Those who have no relatives or friends kill others to eat.

古文：季连食粥累月，饥窘无计。
现代文：刘季连连喝了几个月的稀粥，饥饿窘迫，无计可施。
English: Liu Ji has been drinking gruel for months. He is starving and desperate. There is nothing he can do.

古文：二年正月，高祖遣主书赵景悦宣诏降季连，季连肉袒请罪。
现代文：二年正月，高祖派遣主书赵景悦前去宣布命令，要刘季连投降，刘季连脱去上衣，袒胸请罪。
English: In the first month of the second year, Gaozu sent the main writer, Zhao Jingyue, to announce the order to Liu Jilian to surrender. Liu Jilian took off his shirt and pleaded guilty.

古文：元起迁季连于城外，俄而造焉，待之以礼。
现代文：邓元起把刘季连迁移到城外，不久就去看望他，并以礼相待。
English: Deng Yuanzhi moved Liu Qilian outside the city, and soon went to visit him and treated him with courtesy.

古文：季连谢曰： 早知如此，岂有前日之事。 
现代文：刘季连道谢说： 早知如此，哪会有前之事呢。 
English: Liu Jilian said with gratitude, "Having known this, how can there be anything before?

古文：元起诛李奉伯并诸渠帅，送季连还京师。
现代文：邓元起杀了李奉伯及其他各位将帅，把刘季连送回京师。
English: Deng Yuanqi killed Li Fengbo and other generals and sent Liu Qilian back to the Beijing Division.

古文：季连将发，人莫之视，惟龚惬送焉。
现代文：刘季连临行前，没有人去看他，祇有龚惬一个人来送他。
English: Before Liu Jilian's departure, no one went to see him, and only one person came to see him off.

古文：初，元起在道，惧事不集，无以为赏，士之至者，皆许以辟命，于是受别驾、治中檄者，将二千人。
现代文：当初，邓元起在路上时，害怕事情不成功，又没有什么东西可封赏将士的，所以祇要有人来当兵，全都许诺将给他们任命，于是，接受别驾、治中檄官的人，将近二千。
English: At first, when Deng Yuanqi was on the road, he was afraid that things would not succeed, and there was nothing to reward the soldiers, so he only wanted someone to be a soldier, and all promised to appoint them. As a result, there were nearly two thousand people who accepted the eunuchs.

古文：季连既至，诣阙谢，高祖引见之。
现代文：刘季连到了京城后，来到皇宫跟前谢罪，高祖接见了他。
English: After Liu Qilian arrived in Beijing, he came to the imperial palace to apologize, and Gaozu received him.

古文：季连自东掖门入，数步一稽颡，以至高祖前。
现代文：刘季连从东掖门进来，走几步就一磕头，就这样来到高祖跟前。
English: Liu Jilian came in from the East Gate, and after a few steps, he arrived in front of Gao Zu.

古文：高祖笑谓曰： 卿欲慕刘备而曾不及公孙述，岂无卧龙之臣乎。 
现代文：高祖笑着对他说： 卿想要学刘备却连公孙述都不及，难道是因为没有卧龙这样的臣子吗。 
English: Gao Zu smiled and said to him: Sir, you want to learn from Liu Bei, but you are not even as good as your great-grandson, is it because you don't have a vassal like Wolong?

古文：季连复稽颡谢。
现代文：刘季连再次磕头谢罪。
English: Liu Jilian once again shakes his head in apology.

古文：赦为庶人。
现代文：刘季连被赦贬为平民。
English: Liu Jilian was pardoned and reduced to a commoner.

古文：四年正月，因出建阳门，为蜀人蔺道恭所杀。
现代文：四年正月，季连在出建阳门时，被蜀人蔺道恭杀死。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, Ji Lian was killed by the Shu people Shao Daogong when he went out to build the Yangmen Gate.

古文：季连在蜀，杀道恭父，道恭出亡，至是而报复焉。
现代文：刘季连在蜀地时，杀死了道恭的父亲，道恭却出逃了，到现在算是报复了他。
English: When Liu Qilian was in Shu, he killed Dao Qiong's father, but Dao Qiong escaped, and now he is taking revenge on him.

古文：陈伯之，济阴睢陵人也。幼有膂力。
现代文：陈伯之是济阴郡继人。幼年时有膂力。
English: Chen Bozhi is the successor of Jiyin County. When he was young, he was very strong.

古文：年十三四，好著獭皮冠，带刺刀，候伺邻里稻熟，辄偷刈之。
现代文：十三四岁时，喜欢戴獭皮帽子，佩带刺刀，等到邻里的稻子成熟了，就去偷偷地割稻。
English: At the age of thirteen or fourteen, he liked to wear a mink hat and a bayonet, and when the rice in the neighborhood was ripe, he would secretly cut rice.

古文：尝为田主所见，呵之云： 楚子莫动！ 
现代文：有一次被田主看见，呵止他说： 贱小子别动! 
English: Once, when he was seen by the farmer, he scolded him and said: "Don't move, you naughty boy!

古文：伯之谓田主曰： 君稻幸多，一担何苦？ 
现代文：陈伯之对田主说： 您的稻子幸好还有很多，少一担又有什么关系呢? 
English: Chen Bozhi said to the farmer: Fortunately, you have a lot of rice, so what does it matter if you have one less load?

古文：田主将执之，伯之因杖刀而进，将刺之，曰： 楚子定何如！ 
现代文：田主要抓他走，陈伯之就持刀而进，将要刺到田主时说： 贱小子一定要又怎么样! 
English: The owner of the field grabbed him and took him away. Chen Bozhi then went in with a knife, and when he was about to stab the owner of the field, he said: "What a cheapskate!

古文：田主皆反走，伯之徐担稻而归。
现代文：田主赶紧逃回去了，陈伯之却从容地挑起稻子回家。
English: The farmer hurriedly fled back, but Chen Bozhi calmly picked up the rice and went home.

古文：及年长，在钟离数为劫盗，尝授面觇人船，船人斫之，获其左耳。
现代文：陈伯之长大后，在钟离地区经常当抢劫的盗贼，有一次，他露出脸偷看人家的船，撑船的人用刀砍他，割下了他的左耳。
English: When Chen Bozhi grew up, he often worked as a robber in the Zhongli area. On one occasion, he peeked at someone's boat with his face uncovered, and the boatman slashed him with a knife and cut off his left ear.

古文：后随乡人车骑将军王广之，广之爱其勇，每夜卧下榻，征伐尝自随。
现代文：后来他跟随了同乡人车骑将军王广之，王广之喜爱他的勇武，每天晚上都让他睡在自己的榻下，征伐作战时也经常让他跟着。
English: Later, he followed a fellow villager, the chariot-riding general Wang Guangzhi. Wang Guangzhi loved his bravery and let him sleep under his bed every night, and often had him accompany him on campaigns.

古文：齐安陆王子敬为南兗州，颇持兵自卫。
现代文：瘤齐安陆王萧子敬在南兖州任官时，拥有很多兵力来自卫。
English: When Ou Qi An Lu Wang Xiao Zi Jing was an official in Nanzhou, he had a lot of troops to defend himself.

古文：明帝遣广之讨子敬，广之至欧阳，遣伯之先驱，因城开，独入斩子敬。
现代文：明帝派遣王广之去讨伐子敬，王广之到了匦屋，派陈伯之当先锋，藉着城门开启，建旺独自进城杀了芦王蛮。
English: Emperor Ming dispatched Wang Guangzhi to fight against Fauzi Kei. When Wang Guangzhi arrived at Zhaiya, he sent Chen Bozhi as the vanguard to open the city gate. Jianwang entered the city alone and killed Lu Wangman.

古文：又频有战功，以勋累迁为冠军将军、骠骑司马，封鱼复县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：后来他又立有不少战功，陈伯之因功勋而多次升迁为冠军将军、骠骑司马，被封为鱼复县伯，食邑五百户。
English: Later, he also made a lot of war exploits. Due to his merits, Chen Bozhi was promoted many times to champion general, and was awarded the title of Yu Fu County Bozhi and 500 households of Shuei.

古文：义师起，东昏假伯之节、督前驱诸军事、豫州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：义师兴起后，塞叠堡任速迫之为假节、督前驱诸军事、豫州刺史，将军之职照旧。
English: After the rise of the righteous teachers, the Sayu Fort was forced to be a false festival, the governor was driven into the military, the history of Yuzhou was written, and the post of the general was still the same.

古文：寻转江州，据寻阳以拒义军。
现代文：不久，陈伯之转任到型吐，占据曼墨城以抵抗义军。
English: Soon after, Chen Bozhi was transferred to Ketu to occupy Manchuria to resist the rebels.

古文：郢城平，高祖得伯之幢主苏隆之，使说伯之，即以为安东将军、江州刺史。
现代文：坚撼被平定，直担俘获了速迫之的幢主蓝建之，派他去劝但之投降，并立即任命值之为安东将军、辽业刺史。
English: The uprising was quelled, and Lan Jianzhi, the owner of Hanzhu, was captured and sent to persuade Danzhi to surrender, and he was immediately appointed as General Anton and Liao Ye stabbed history.

古文：伯之虽受命，犹怀两端，伪云 大军未须便下 。
现代文：速值之虽接受了直担的任命，但仍然心怀观望之心，谎称 大军不久就下来投降 。
English: Although he accepted the direct appointment, he still had a wait-and-see attitude, falsely claiming that the large army would soon surrender.

古文：高祖谓诸将曰： 伯之此答，其心未定，及其犹豫，宜逼之。 
现代文：直担对众将说： 值之的这个回答，表明他的心还未定下来，他还在犹豫，应该逼他一逼。 
English: The direct supervisor said to the generals, "Worthy of this answer, it shows that his heart is not yet settled, he is still hesitating, and he should be forced.

古文：众军遂次寻阳，伯之退保南湖，然后归附。
现代文：于是大军驻扎在曼荡，速值之退保亩邀，然后才归附直担。
English: As a result, the large army was stationed in Manlang, and the rapid withdrawal of insurance was invited, and then the direct burden was attached.

古文：进号镇南将军，与众俱下。
现代文：速值之进号为镇南将军，与众军一起前进。
English: The speed signal was given by General Zhenan, who advanced together with the troops.

古文：伯之顿篱门，寻进西明门。
现代文：陈伯之在篚且驻军，不久进了酉旦困。
English: Chen Bozhi was stationed in Handan and soon got into difficulties.

古文：建康城未平，每降人出，伯之辄唤与耳语。
现代文：建尘越还未平定时，每当有投降的人出城，陈伯之就把他叫过来跟他耳语。
English: When the dust had not yet settled, whenever someone who had surrendered left the city, Chen Bozhi would call him over and whisper to him.

古文：高祖恐其复怀翻覆，密语伯之曰： 闻城中甚忿卿举江州降，欲遣刺客中卿，宜以为虑。 
现代文：高祖怕他又怀反覆之心，就悄悄地对伯之说： 听说城裹人对你江州投降的事非常愤怒，要派刺客来刺杀你，你应当小心为是。 
English: Gao Zu was afraid that he would have a repetitive mind, so he quietly said to Bo Zhi: I heard that the people of the city are very angry about your surrender of Jiangzhou, and they want to send assassins to assassinate you. You should be careful.

古文：伯之未之信。
现代文：伯之还不相信他的话。
English: He still didn't believe him.

古文：会东昏将郑伯伦降，高祖使过伯之，谓曰： 城中甚忿卿，欲遣信诱卿以封赏。
现代文：恰巧束昏侯的将领郑伯伦出城投降，直担派他到值主跟前，对自主说： 城裹人都很恨你，要写信诱你投降，好去封赏。
English: The general Zheng Bailun, who happened to be in a daze, came out of the city to surrender. He sent him directly to the head of the guards and told him: "The people around the city hate you very much. They want to write a letter to entice you to surrender so that they can reward you."

古文：须卿复降，当生割卿手脚；卿若不降，复欲遣刺客杀卿。
现代文：等你再次投降的时候，就活生生地割掉你的手脚；你如果不投降，就再派刺客杀你。
English: When you surrender again, I will cut off your hands and feet alive; if you do not surrender, I will send assassins to kill you again.

古文：宜深为备。 
现代文：你要多加防备。 
English: You need to be more prepared.

古文：伯之惧，自是无异志矣。
现代文：陈伯之害怕了，从此再无二心。
English: Chen Bozhi was scared, and from then on, he had no second thoughts.

古文：力战有功。
现代文：陈伯之奋力作战，立了战功。
English: Chen Bozhi fought hard and made war achievements.

古文：城平，进号征南将军，封豊城县公，邑二千户，遣还之镇。
现代文：建康城被攻下后，陈伯之进号为征南将军，被封为丰城县公，食邑二千户，被派遣回江州镇守。
English: After Jiankang City was captured, Chen Bozhi was promoted to the general of the Southern Expedition, was made the governor of Fengcheng County, and was sent back to Jiangzhou to guard the town.

古文：伯之不识书，及还江州，得文牒辞讼，惟作大诺而已。
现代文：陈伯之不识字，他回到江州后，拿到文件讼案等，都衹是大声答应而已。
English: Chen Bozhi is illiterate. After he returned to Jiangzhou, he got the documents of the lawsuit, etc. However, he only loudly agreed.

古文：有事，典签传口语，与夺决于主者。
现代文：遇到有事情，就让典签官传他的口头命令，最后的决定由主管此事的官吏作出。
English: In the event of an incident, he would ask the signing officer to transmit his verbal order, and the final decision would be made by the official in charge of the matter.

古文：伯之与豫章人邓缮、永兴人戴永忠并有旧，缮经藏伯之息英免祸，伯之尤德之。
现代文：陈伯之与豫章人邓缮、永兴人戴永忠都有旧交情，邓缮曾经隐藏过伯之的孩子陈英，使其免遭祸害，伯之对此事尤其感恩戴德。
English: Chen Bozhi had old friendships with Deng Shuang of Yuanzhang and Dai Yongzhong of Yongxing. Deng Shuang once hid Chen Ying, Bozhi's child, from harm. Bozhi was especially grateful for this.

古文：及在州，用缮为别驾，永忠记室参军。
现代文：陈伯之到州襄任职后，任用邓缮为别驾，戴永忠为记室参军。
English: After Chen Bozhi took office in Zhouzhuang, he appointed Deng Xuan as his second-in-command, and Dai Yongzhong joined the army as a recorder.

古文：河南褚緭，京师之薄行者，齐末为扬州西曹，遇乱居闾里；而轻薄互能自致，惟緭独不达。
现代文：河南人褚网，是京城裹品行轻薄之人，南齐末年当了扬州西曹，因遭逢乱世，就闲居在家裹；而其他的轻薄之人能够互相推荐做官，惟独褚网一人没有做官。
English: Henan people are the best in Beijing for being frivolous, and Nanqi was the best in Yangzhou at the end of the year. Because of the turmoil, he was idle at home. While other frivolous people can recommend each other to become officials, only one person did not become an official.

古文：高祖即位，緭频造尚书范云，云不好緭，坚距之。
现代文：高祖即位后，褚网频频拜访尚书范云，范云不喜欢褚网，坚决拒绝见他。
English: After Gao Zu ascended the throne, Fan Yun frequently visited Shang Shu. Fan Yun did not like Gao Zu and resolutely refused to see him.

古文：緭益怒，私语所知曰： 建武以后，草泽底下，悉化成贵人，吾何罪而见弃。
现代文：褚网更加愤怒，私下对朋友说： 自从建武以后，那些平民百姓，全都当了官、变成了贵人，我有什么罪过要被抛弃。
English: Yan Yan was even more angry and said to his friend in private: "Since the founding of the People's Liberation Army, all those ordinary people have become officials and nobles. How can I be blamed for being abandoned?"

古文：今天下草创，饥馑不已，丧乱未可知。
现代文：如今国家刚刚创立，饥馑荒年不断，说不定还会有丧乱，也未可知。
English: Now the country has just been founded, famine and famine continue, and there may still be turmoil, it is not known.

古文：陈伯之拥强兵在江州，非代来臣，有自疑意；且荧惑守南斗，讵非为我出。
现代文：陈伯之拥有强大的兵力，驻扎在江州，他不是代这个地方来的人，自然有疑虑；而且火星出现在南斗星宿，难道不是为我而出现的征兆吗。
English: Chen Bozhi has a strong military force, stationed in Jiangzhou, he is not the person to come on behalf of this place, naturally there are doubts; and Mars appears in the Southern Dipper, isn't it a sign for me?

古文：今者一行，事若无成，入魏，何遽减作河南郡。 
现代文：今天我要出去走一趟，如果仍然一事无成，我就到魏国去，无论如何最低限度也得当一个河南郡太守。 
English: Today I want to go out for a walk. If I still don't get anywhere, I'll go to Wei. At the very least, I'll have to become the governor of Henan County.

古文：于是遂投伯之书佐王思穆，事之，大见亲狎。
现代文：于是他就投奔了陈伯之的书佐王思穆，在他手下做事，受到非常亲昵的接待。
English: So he went to work for Chen Bo's subordinate, Wang Simu, and received a very warm welcome.

古文：及伯之乡人硃龙符为长流参军，并乘伯之愚暗，恣行奸险，刑政通塞，悉共专之。
现代文：后来，陈伯之的同乡朱龙符任长流参军，他们共同利用陈伯之的愚昧昏暗，恣意做一些奸邪险恶之事，刑法政事的开通或闭塞，全都由他们共同掌握。
English: Later, Chen Bozhi's fellow villager Zhu Longfu Ren Changlu joined the army. Together, they took advantage of Chen Bozhi's ignorance and dimness, arbitrarily doing some treacherous and sinister things. The opening or closing of the criminal law and government affairs were all controlled by them.

古文：伯之子虎牙，时为直阁将军，高祖手疏龙符罪，亲付虎牙，虎牙封示伯之；高祖又遣代江州别驾邓缮，伯之并不受命。
现代文：陈伯之的儿子叫虎牙，当时任直阁将军，高祖亲手书写了朱龙符的罪状，交给虎牙，虎牙没有拆封就给了陈伯之；高祖又派遣陈伯之替代江州别驾邓缮，但伯之并不接受任命。
English: Chen Bozhi's son was named Hu Ya. At that time, Gao Zu was appointed as the general of Zhigong. Gao Zu wrote the charges of Zhu Longpu in his own hand and handed it to Hu Ya. Hu Ya gave it to Chen Bozhi without opening the envelope. Gao Zu also sent Chen Bozhi to replace Jiangzhou Beiji Deng Xuan, but Bozhi did not accept the appointment.

古文：答高祖曰： 龙符骁勇健儿，邓缮事有绩效，台所遣别驾，请以为治中。 
现代文：他答覆高祖说： 朱龙符是个骁勇健儿，邓缮也很有功绩，皇上您所任命的别驾一职，请改为治中。 
English: He replied to Gao Zu, saying, "Zhulong Fu is a valiant and strong person, Deng Shu is also very meritorious, please change the title of the position you have appointed, please change it to Jizhong.

古文：缮于是日夜说伯之云： 台家府库空竭，复无器仗，三仓无米，东境饥流，此万代一时也，机不可失。 
现代文：邓缮在当天夜裹劝说陈伯之说： 朝廷府库空竭，又没有器物仪仗，三仓无米，束境又闸饥荒，这是万代才可一遇的时机啊，机会不可错过。 
English: Deng Shu persuaded Chen Bozhong that night, saying: "The imperial treasury is exhausted, there are no ceremonial objects, there is no rice in the storehouses, and there is famine at the gates. This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, and the opportunity should not be missed."

古文：緭、永忠等每赞成之。
现代文：褚网、永忠等也都赞成邓缮的话。
English: Shengwang, Yongzhong and others also agree with Deng Shuang's words.

古文：伯之谓缮： 今段启卿，若复不得，便与卿共下使反。 
现代文：陈伯之对邓缮说： 今天我再报告上官，如果还得不到的话，我就和你们一起反了。 
English: Chen Bozhi said to Deng Xuan, "Today I will report to my superior officers again. If I still can't get it, I will rebel with you."

古文：高祖敕部内一郡处缮，伯之于是集府州佐史谓曰： 奉齐建安王教，率江北义勇十万，已次六合，见使以江州见力运粮速下。
现代文：高祖命令将部内的一个郡交给邓缮，陈伯之于是召集府州的佐史，对他们说： 奉齐建安王的命令，他率江北义勇士兵十万，已经进驻六合，见到使者后，以江州现有的力量迅速运送粮食。
English: Gaozu ordered that a county within the ministry be handed over to Deng Xuan. Chen Brozhi then summoned the Sashi of Fuzhou and said to them: On the orders of King Qi Jian'an, he led 100,000 soldiers of the North Jiangsu Province and has been stationed in Liuhe. After seeing the messenger, he quickly transported grain with the existing strength of Jiangzhou.

古文：我荷明帝厚恩，誓死以报。
现代文：我受明帝厚恩，誓死以报。
English: I am grateful to Emperor Ming for his kindness, and I will repay him with my life.

古文：今便纂严备办。 
现代文：今天就开始戒严准备办事。 
English: Martial law preparations will begin today.

古文：使緭诈为萧宝夤书，以示僚佐。
现代文：他让褚绢伪造萧实夤的书信，拿给各位官僚佐史看。
English: He had Zou forge Xiao Shizhuo's letter and show it to the bureaucrats.

古文：于厅事前为坛，杀牲以盟。伯之先饮，长史已下次第歃血。
现代文：然后，在官府办公的堂屋前设坛，杀了牲口，作为盟誓，陈伯之先喝，长史以下依次歃血为盟。
English: Then, in front of the hall of the government office, they set up an altar and killed an animal. As an oath, Chen Bo drank first, and Chang Shi and the others drank blood in turn.

古文：緭说伯之曰： 今举大事，宜引众望，程元冲不与人同心；临川内史王观，僧虔之孙，人身不恶，便可召为长史，以代元冲。 
现代文：褚网对伯之建议说： 今天举行大事，应当招引深孚众望之人。而程元冲与大家不同心；临川郡内史王观，是王僧虔的孙子，这个人不错，可以召来任为长史，以代替程元冲。 
English: To Bo Zhi's suggestion, Fengtai said, "Today's event should attract people who are popular in Shenfu. However, Cheng Yuanchong is not popular with everyone. Wang Guan, a historian in Linchuan County, is the grandson of Wang Sangyan. He is a good person and can be called to replace Cheng Yuanchong as Changshi.

古文：伯之从之。仍以緭为寻阳太守，加讨逆将军；永忠辅义将军；龙符为豫州刺史，率五百人守大雷。
现代文：陈伯之同意了他的意见，仍然任褚网为寻阳郡太守，加讨逆将军；永忠为辅义将军；朱龙符为豫州刺史，率领五百人守卫大雷。
English: Chen Bozhi agreed with his opinion, and still appointed Qian Netting as the governor of Xiangyang County, plus the general of the counterattack; Yong Zhong as the general of the auxiliary; Zhu Longfu as the governor of Yuzhou, and led five hundred people to guard Dairi.

古文：大雷戍主沈慧休，镇南参军李延伯。
现代文：大雷的戊主是沈慧休，镇南参军是李延伯。
English: Shen Huixiu is the lord of Dairi, and Li Yanbo is the leader of Zhenan.

古文：又遣乡人孙邻、李景受龙符节度，邻为徐州，景为郢州。
现代文：陈伯之又派遣同乡人孙邻、李景受朱龙符的节度，孙邻管徐州，李景管郢州。
English: Chen Bozhi also sent fellow townsmen Sun Qiang and Li Jing to receive Zhu Longfu, with Sun Qiang in charge of Xuzhou and Li Jing in charge of Ganzhou.

古文：豫章太守郑伯伦起郡兵距守。
现代文：豫章太守郑伯伦带领郡兵进行抵抗，守卫豫州。
English: The governor of Yuzhang, Zheng Bailun, led the county soldiers to resist and defend Yuzhou.

古文：程元冲既失职，于家合率数百人，使伯之典签吕孝通、戴元则为内应。
现代文：程元冲失去官职后，在家纠合了数百人，他让陈伯之的典签官吕孝通、戴元则作内应。
English: After Cheng Yuanchong lost his official position, he entangled hundreds of people at home. He asked Chen Bozhi's signature officer Lü Xiaotong and Dai Yuan to act as his secretaries.

古文：伯之每旦常作伎，日晡辄卧，左右仗身皆休息。
现代文：陈伯之每到早晨经常要做些木工活，傍晚太阳一落下就睡觉，他的左右卫士也都休息了。
English: Chen Bozhi often does some carpentry work in the morning, and sleeps as soon as the sun sets in the evening. His left and right guards are also resting.

古文：元冲因其解弛，从北门入，径至厅事前。
现代文：程元冲趁着他们禁戒松弛时，从北门进去，径直来到堂屋前。
English: Cheng Yuanchong took advantage of their relaxation of the taboos, went in through the north gate, and went straight to the front of the hall.

古文：伯之闻叫声，自率出荡，元冲力不能敌，走逃庐山。
现代文：陈伯之听到叫声，亲自率人出来冲杀，程元冲力不能敌，逃跑进了庐山。
English: Chen Bozhi heard the shouts and personally led his men to charge and kill the enemy. Cheng Yuan's momentum was too strong and he fled into Shaoshan.

古文：初，元冲起兵，要寻阳张孝季，孝季从之。
现代文：当初，程元冲起兵时，邀约了寻阳的张孝季，圣奎跟从了他。
English: At first, when Cheng Yuan raised an army, he invited Zhang Xiaojie, who was looking for the sun, and Sheng Kui followed him.

古文：既败，伯之追孝季不得，得其母郎氏，蜡灌杀之。
现代文：事情败绩后，速值之追赶耋季没有追上，就抓住了他的母亲良巨压，给她灌蜡害死了她。
English: After the failure of the matter, the speed of the catch-up did not catch up with the third quarter, he caught his mother's good pressure, injected her with wax and killed her.

古文：遣信还都报虎牙兄弟，虎牙等走盱眙，盱眙人徐安、庄兴绍、张显明邀击之，不能禁，反见杀。
现代文：又送信回都通报儿子虎牙兄弟，虎牙等人逃到盱眙，盱眙人徐安、庄兴绍、张显明等人截击他们，但没能打败他们，反而被他们杀害。
English: He also sent a message back to the capital to inform his son Hu Ya's brothers that Hu Ya and others had fled to Handan. Handan's Xu An, Zhuang Xing Shao, Zhang Xianming and others intercepted them, but were unable to defeat them, and were instead killed by them.

古文：高祖遣王茂讨伯之。
现代文：产担派王茎讨伐速侦之。
English: Wang Shanzhan sent Wang Zhi to investigate the case quickly.

古文：伯之闻茂来，谓緭等曰： 王观既不就命，郑伯伦又不肯从，便应空手受困。
现代文：速值之听说王茎来了，就对褚网说： 王观还没有死，郑伯伦又不肯从命，便应该空手受困。
English: Hearing that Wang Shuling had arrived, Quick Value said to Fengtian: Wang Guan is not dead yet, Zheng Bailun is not willing to give up his life, so he should be trapped empty-handed.

古文：今先平豫章，开通南路，多发丁力，益运资粮，然后席卷北向，以扑饥疲之众，不忧不济也。 
现代文：如今应先平定豫章，开通南边的道路，多动员人丁，增加运输财物粮食，然后席卷到北方去，以压伏饥饿疲乏的大众，不怕不成功。 
English: Now it is necessary to first pacify Yuzhang, open the road to the south, mobilize more people, increase the transportation of goods and grain, and then sweep to the north to suppress the hungry and tired people, without fear of failure.

古文：乃留乡人唐盖人守城，遂相率趣豫章。
现代文：于是就留下同乡唐盖人守城，其他人相继奔向豫章。
English: As a result, he left his fellow townsmen, the Tangai people, to defend the city, while the others rushed to Yuanzhang one after another.

古文：太守郑伯伦坚守，伯之攻之不能下。
现代文：豫章郡太守郑伯伦坚守城池，陈伯之进攻没能攻下。
English: Zheng Bailun, the governor of Yuzhang County, held fast to the castle, and Chen Bo's attack could not be defeated.

古文：王茂前军既至，伯之表里受敌，乃败走，间道亡命出江北，与子虎牙及褚緭俱入魏。
现代文：这时，王茂的先遣部队已经到达，陈伯之内外受敌，祇能败逃，他从小路向江北逃命，与他的儿子虎牙及褚网等人一起进入魏国。
English: At this time, Wang Mao's advance troops had already arrived. Chen Bo was besieged by enemies both at home and abroad and could only flee in defeat. He ran for his life from a small road to the north of the river and entered Wei with his son Huya and others.

古文：魏以伯之为使持节、散骑常侍、都督淮南诸军事、平南将军、光禄大夫、曲江县侯。
现代文：魏国任命伯之为使持节、散骑常侍、都督淮南诸军事、平南将军、光禄大夫、曲江县侯。
English: The State of Wei appointed Bo Xizhi as Envoy of the Emperor, Cavalryman, Military Governor of Huainan Province, General of Pingnan Province, Doctor of Guanglu Province and Marquis of Qujiang County.

古文：天监四年，诏太尉、临川王宏率众军北讨，宏命记室丘迟私与伯之书曰：陈将军足下无恙，幸甚。
现代文：天监四年，皇帝下诏，命令太尉、临川王萧宏率领大军北伐，萧宏让记室丘迟私下给陈伯之写信说：陈将军足下无恙，幸甚。
English: In the fourth year of Tianjun, the emperor issued an edict, ordering the captain, Linchuan Wang Xiaohong, to lead the army of the Northern Expedition. Xiaohong let Ji Murokawa write a letter to Chen Bozhi in private, saying: "General Chen is unharmed, fortunately."

古文：将军勇冠三军，才为世出。
现代文：将军您是三军中第一勇敢之人，是当代杰出的人才。
English: General, you are the most courageous person in the three armies, and an outstanding contemporary talent.

古文：弃燕雀之小志，慕鸿鹄以高翔。
现代文：您鄙弃燕雀的渺小志向，仰慕鸿鹄的展翅高飞。
English: You despise the small ambition of the sparrow and admire the soaring wings of the great egret.

古文：昔因机变化，遭逢明主，立功立事，开国承家，硃轮华毂，拥旄万里，何其壮也！如何一旦为奔亡之虏，闻鸣镝而股战，对穹庐以屈膝，又何劣耶？寻君去就之际，非有他故，直以不能内审诸己，外受流言，沉迷猖蹶，以至于此。
现代文：当年您顺应时机的变化，遇到了明主高祖，建功立业，成为开国功臣，拥有豪华的朱轮车舆，持节统制万里疆域，这是何等壮观啊怎么一日之间就变成了亡命之徒，听到响箭的声音大腿就颤抖，而对着胡人的毡帐却要卑躬屈膝，逭又是何等卑劣啊推求您去梁而就北魏的动机，没有其他原因，仅仅因为您自己的内心不能反复思考，外加受到流言的影响，迷惑狂妄，以至于今天的地步。
English: In those days, you conformed to the changes of the times, met the bright master Gao Zu, made great achievements, became the founder of the country, had a luxurious Zhulun car, and controlled thousands of miles of territory with discipline. How spectacular is it? How did you become a desperado in one day? When you hear the sound of arrows, your thighs tremble, but you have to grovel at the expense of the Hu people. How despicable is it? There is no other reason to urge you to go to Liang and to the Northern Wei Dynasty, just because your own heart can not think over and over again, plus influenced by rumors, confused and delirious, to the

古文：圣朝赦罪论功，弃瑕录用，收赤心于天下，安反侧于万物，将军之所知，非假仆一二谈也。
现代文：圣朝一贯是让被赦的人立功赎罪，舍弃缺点，绿用有才之人，向天下招收真心为国的人，使疑惧不安的人安下心来，这些都是将军您所知道的，不用我一样一样地叙述了。
English: The Holy Dynasty has always allowed forgiven people to make merit and atone for their sins, to abandon their shortcomings, to make use of talented people, to recruit people with true hearts to the country, and to calm down those who are suspicious and anxious. These are all things that you know, and do not need me to describe them in the same way.

古文：硃鲔涉血于友于，张绣倳刃于爱子，汉主不以为疑，魏君待之若旧。
现代文：朱鲔曾经参与了杀害汉光武帝刘秀的哥哥刘縯的流血事件，张绣刺杀了曹操的爱子曹昂，而当他们投降以后，汉光武帝并不因此而猜疑朱鲔，魏君曹操对张绣仍像过去一样。
English: Zhu Xi was once involved in the bloodshed that killed Liu Xi, the brother of Han Guangwu Emperor Liu Xiu, and Zhang Xiu stabbed Cao Cao's beloved son Cao An. After they surrendered, Han Guangwu Emperor did not suspect Zhu Xi for this reason, and Wei Emperor Cao Cao still treated Zhang Xiu as he had in the past.

古文：况将军无昔人之罪，而勋重于当世。
现代文：何况将军您还没有古人的那些罪状，而您的功勋在当世是非常重大的。
English: Moreover, General, you do not have the sins of the ancients, and your merits in this world are very significant.

古文：夫迷涂知反，往哲是与；不远而复，先典攸高。
现代文：衹要迷途知返，连先贤屈原也会嘉许；误入歧途不远就返回正道，这是先典《易经》所推崇的。
English: If you want to return to the right path after going astray, even the sage Qu Yuan would commend you; if you go astray, you will return to the right path soon, which is respected by the predecessor "I Ching."

古文：主上屈法申恩，吞舟是漏。将军松柏不剪，亲戚安居；高台未倾，爱妾尚在。
现代文：现在梁武帝委屈法律，再三申明恩典，放宽法网，连吞舟的大鱼都能漏掉，对犯有重大罪恶的人也可以宽容。将军祖先的坟墓没有受到破坏，您的亲戚们也都很安全地生活着；将军您的住宅没有受到损害，您的爱妾还在等您回来。
English: Now Emperor Liangwu is abusing the law, repeatedly affirming grace, relaxing the legal net, even the big fish that swallowed the boat can be missed, and those who commit serious crimes can also be tolerated. The graves of the general's ancestors have not been damaged, and your relatives are living safely; the general's house has not been damaged, and your beloved concubine is still waiting for you to come back.

古文：悠悠尔心，亦何可述。
现代文：您在心裹仔细思量一下，还有什么可说的呢。
English: Ponder in your heart what more there is to say.

古文：今功臣名将，雁行有序。
现代文：今天，在梁朝的功臣名将，像大雁飞行的行列一样，尊卑有序。
English: Today, the great generals of the Liang Dynasty, like geese flying in a line, are ranked in order.

古文：怀黄佩紫，赞帷幄之谋；乘轺建节，奉疆埸之任。
现代文：他们有的人佩带着系紫色带子的黄金印，共同参与谋划军事行动；他们中有的人乘坐轻车，插着旄节，接受保卫边疆的重任。
English: Some of them wear a gold seal with a purple ribbon and jointly participate in the planning of military operations; some of them take a light car, insert a ribbon, and accept the important task of defending the border.

古文：并刑马作誓，传之子孙。
现代文：他们往往杀白马，取血饮之以立誓言，并把这习惯传给子孙。
English: They often kill a white horse, take blood and drink it to make a vow, and pass this habit on to their children and grandchildren.

古文：将军独靦颜借命，驱驰异域，宁不哀哉！
现代文：惟独将军一人厚着脸皮，苟且偷生，在异国他乡效力奔走，岂不悲哀吗!
English: But isn't it sad that only one general had the chutzpah to sneak away and work in a foreign country?

古文：夫以慕容超之强，身送东市；姚泓之盛，面缚西都。
现代文：再说以慕容超的强悍，仍不免被斩杀于建康城的刑场；以姚泓当年的盛大，仍落得个向西都长安缚手投降的结局。
English: Furthermore, with Murong Chao's strength, he was still inevitably beheaded at the execution site of Jiankang City; with Yao Wei's grandeur of that year, he still ended up surrendering to the western capital Chang'an.

古文：故知霜露所均，不育异类；姬汉旧邦，无取杂种。
现代文：因此可以知道天地之间，霜露所及的地方，不养育异类；周汉所在的北方中原地区，是不收留少数民族的。
English: Therefore, it can be known that between heaven and earth, where frost and dew reach, there is no breeding of outliers; the northern Central Plains region, where Zhou Han is located, does not accept ethnic minorities.

古文：北虏僭盗中原，多历年所，恶积祸盈，理至燋烂。
现代文：北魏假称帝号，盗取中原，历经多年，积恶甚多，祸害满盈，理所当然地要崩溃灭亡。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty pretended to be the emperor and stole the Central Plains. After many years, it accumulated a lot of evil and suffered a lot of calamities. It was only natural for it to collapse and perish.

古文：况伪孽昏狡，自相夷戮，部落携离，酋豪猜贰，方当系颈蛮邸，悬首藁街。
现代文：何况北魏的宣武帝昏聩狡诈，自相残杀，部落之间互相分裂，酋长之间互相猜疑，他们很快就要以绳系颈请求投降，被缚到京城杀头示众了。
English: What's more, the Northern Wei Emperor Xuanwu was devious and cunning, killing each other, dividing the tribes, and making the chiefs suspicious of each other. They were soon going to ask for surrender by tying their necks with ropes, and were bound to the capital to show their heads.

古文：而将军鱼游于沸鼎之中，燕巢于飞幕之上，不亦惑乎！
现代文：而将军您就像是鱼在煮着沸水的鼎中游弋，燕子在飞动摇荡的帐幕上筑巢一样危险，这不是让人迷惑吗?
English: Isn't it puzzling that you, General, are as dangerous as a fish swimming in a pot of boiling water, or a swallow building a nest on a flying tent?

古文：暮春三月，江南草长，杂花生树，群莺乱飞。
现代文：暮春三月，江南草长，杂花生树，群莺乱飞。
English: At the end of spring in March, the grass is long in the south of the Yangtze River, there are miscellaneous peanut trees, and flocks of crickets are flying around.

古文：见故国之旗鼓，感平生于畴日，抚弦登陴，岂不怆恨。
现代文：看见故国的战旗和战鼓，感喟昔日的生平事迹，登上城中的女墙抚弄弓弦，岂不悲恨痛苦。
English: Seeing the battle flag and war drums of the motherland, feeling the deeds of the past life, climbing the female wall in the city and stroking the bow strings, how can one not feel sorry for the pain.

古文：所以廉公之思赵将，吴子之泣西河，人之情也。
现代文：造就是当年廉颇公要想再当赵将，吴起临行时望西河而流泪的原因，这是人之常情啊。
English: This is the reason why the former Liangpo Gongbo wanted to be Zhao Zheng again, and the reason why Wu Qilin shed tears when he looked at the West River. This is a common human feeling.

古文：将军独无情哉！
现代文：将军您难道就无情吗!
English: General, are you that heartless!

古文：想早励良图，自求多福。
现代文：希望您早日作好归梁的打算，为自己取得幸福。
English: I hope that you will make plans to return home as soon as possible and find happiness for yourself.

古文：伯之乃于寿阳拥众八千归。
现代文：陈伯之于是在寿阳带着八千士兵回到梁国。
English: Chen Bozhi then returned to Liang Province in Shouyang with eight thousand soldiers.

古文：虎牙为魏人所杀。
现代文：他的儿子陈虎牙被魏国人杀害。
English: His son, Chen Hoga, was killed by the Wei.

古文：伯之既至，以为使持节、都督西豫州诸军事、平北将军、西豫州刺史，永新县侯，邑千户。
现代文：陈伯之到了梁以后，被任命为使持节、都督西豫州诸军事、平北将军、西豫州刺史，永新县侯，食邑千户。
English: After Chen Bozhi arrived in Liang, he was appointed as the envoy of the military, the military governor of West Henan Province, the general of Pingbei Province, the historian of West Henan Province, the governor of Yongxin County, and the thousand households of food villages.

古文：未之任，复以为通直散骑常侍、骁骑将军，又为太中大夫。
现代文：还没到任，又被任命为通直散骑常侍、骁骑将军，又任太中大夫。
English: Before he took office, he was also appointed to the position of Tsuchida Sanshaku (straight horseback riding) regular attendant, general of horseback riding, and also appointed to the position of Taichung doctor.

古文：久之，卒于家。
现代文：过了一段时间，陈伯之在家裹去世。
English: Some time later, Chen Bozhi passed away at home.

古文：其子犹有在魏者。
现代文：他的儿子还有的仍在魏国。
English: His other sons are still in Wei.

古文：褚緭在魏，魏人欲擢用之。
现代文：褚绢在魏国时，魏国人想提拔任用他做官。
English: When he was in Wei, the Wei people wanted to promote and appoint him as an official.

古文：魏元会，緭戏为诗曰： 帽上著笼冠，袴上著硃衣，不知是今是，不知非昔非。 
现代文：魏国皇帝在元旦朝见群臣的时候，褚网作诗戏弄说： 帽上着笼冠，裤上着朱衣，不知是今是，不知非昔非。 
English: On New Year's Day, when the Emperor of Wei met with his courtiers, Yan Yan made a poem teasingly saying: The cap is wearing a cage crown, the trousers are wearing vermilion, I don't know if it is now, I don't know if it was in the past.

古文：魏人怒，出为始平太守。
现代文：魏国人被激怒了，把他贬职出任始平郡太守。
English: Enraged, the Wei people demoted him to the position of governor of Shihping County.

古文：日日行猎，堕马死。
现代文：褚网天天出去打猎，从马上掉下来摔死了。
English: He went out hunting every day, fell off his horse and died.

古文：史臣曰：刘季连之文吏小节，而不能以自保全，习乱然也。
现代文：史臣曰：刘季连这样的文官无关大体的行为，却不能够以此保全自己，这是习惯于混乱造成的。
English: Shichen said: Liu Qilian is a civil servant who does not care about the general behavior, but he cannot protect himself in this way. This is caused by the habit of confusion.

古文：陈伯之小人而乘君子之器，群盗又诬而夺之，安能长久矣。
现代文：陈伯之本是小人却乘着君子有器度能容忍他，群盗又欺骗他改变他，怎么能长久呢。
English: Chen Bo's nature is a villain, but he is able to tolerate him by taking advantage of the gentleman's ability, and the bandits deceive him and change him, how can it last long?

