古文：纳坦谋嘉邹谷高霖孟奎乌林答与郭俣温迪罕达王扩移剌福僧奥屯忠孝蒲察思忠纥石烈胡失门完颜宇斡勒合打蒲察移剌都纳坦谋嘉，上京路牙塔懒猛安人。
现代文：纳坦谋嘉，是上京路牙塔懒猛安人。
English: Natan Moga is a lazy person who lives in Shangjing Road Tower.

古文：初习策论进士，大定二十六年，选入东宫，教郓王琮、瀛王瑰读书。
现代文：起初他学习策论而备考进士。大定二十六年，被选进东宫，教郓王琮、瀛王瑰读书。
English: At first, he studied political theory to prepare for the entrance examination. In the twenty-sixth year of his reign, he was elected to the East Palace to teach Wang Xi and Wang Gui to read.

古文：以终场举人试补上京提刑司书史，以廉能著称。
现代文：因终场参加举人考试而得到补任上京提刑司的书史，以廉洁和有才能而著称。
English: As a result of taking part in the final examination, he was appointed to the post of Criminal Investigation Department in Beijing. He is known for his integrity and talent.

古文：承安元年，契丹陀锁寇掠韩州、信州，提刑司问诸书史谁入奏者，皆难之，谋嘉请行。
现代文：承安元年，契丹的陀锁入侵韩州、信州，进行掳掠，提刑司询问各位书史 ：有谁愿意入京上奏？ 书史们都面有难色，纳坦谋嘉便请求由他去办。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, the Qidans invaded and plundered Korea and Shinshu, and the Criminal Investigation Department asked the book historians, "Who would like to go to Beijing to perform?" The book historians were puzzled, so Natan Muja requested him to do it.

古文：五年，特赐同进士出身，调东京教授、汤池主簿、太学助教。
现代文：五年，朝廷特赐他同进士出身，调任东京教授、汤池主簿、太学助教。
English: Five years later, the Imperial Court specially granted him the title of Tokyo Professor, Yuchi Principal, and Taigaku Assistant Professor.

古文：丁母忧，服阕，累除翰林修撰，兼修起居注、监察御史。
现代文：因母亲去世而守丧，服除之后，累任翰林修撰、兼修起居注、监察御史。
English: Due to the death of his mother, he was in mourning, and after his retirement, he served as a Hanlin editor, a part-time editor, and an inspector of history.

古文：贞祐初，迁吏部员外郎、翰林待制、侍御史。
现代文：贞祐初年，改任吏部员外郎、翰林待制、侍御史。
English: In the first year of Sadayuki's reign, he was reassigned to the positions of gairo, a member of the administrative department, kanrin, a trainee, and samurai goshi.

古文：完颜宇举谋嘉才行，志在匡国，可预军政。充元帅府经历官。
现代文：完颜宇举荐纳坦谋嘉有才干，志在匡辅国家，可参预军政大事，朝廷便任命他为元帅府经历官。
English: After Yan Yu's recommendation, the Imperial Court appointed Natan Mu Jia as the Marshal's Office Experienced Officer because he was talented, aspired to be in the Kuanshuo country, and could participate in military and political events.

古文：中都被围，食且尽，胥鼎奏： 京师官民能赡足贫民者，计所赡迁官，皆先给据。 
现代文：中都被围时，粮食将要吃尽，胥鼎上奏说： 京都的官员民众能够赡养贫民的，根据他所送出的粮食多少升官，都可以先给凭据。 
English: When the capital was besieged, the grain was about to be eaten up. Zhaoding Shangluo said: If the officials and people of Kyoto can support the poor, they can be promoted according to the amount of grain they send.

古文：谋嘉不受据而去。
现代文：纳坦谋嘉不收凭据便离开了。
English: Natan Mogao left without collecting his credentials.

古文：中都危急，谋嘉曰： 帅臣统数万众，不能出城一战，何如自缚请降邪？ 
现代文：中都危急时，纳坦谋嘉说： 当元帅的统率几万军队，却不能出城和敌人打一仗，还不如自缚请降呢！ 
English: When Zhongdu was in a critical situation, Natan Mogao said: When a marshal commands tens of thousands of troops, but can't go out of the city to fight the enemy, it's better to tie yourself up and surrender!

古文：宣宗议迁都，谋嘉曰： 不可。
现代文：金宣宗商议迁都，纳坦谋嘉说： 不行！
English: Jin Xuan Zong discussed the relocation of the capital, Natan Mogao said: No!

古文：河南地狭土薄，他日宋、夏交侵，河北非我有矣。
现代文：河南地狭土薄，以后宋、夏交替入侵，河北之地就非我所有了。
English: The soil in Henan Province is thin and narrow. Later, the Song Dynasty and the Xia Dynasty alternately invaded, and I no longer owned the land in Hebei Province.

古文：当选诸王分镇辽东，河南，中都不可去也。 
现代文：应当选派诸王分别镇守辽东、河南，中都不能迁离。 
English: All princes should be assigned to be the town guards of Liaodong and Henan respectively, and none of them should be allowed to move away.

古文：不听。
现代文：宣宗不听从。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：顷之，除唐州刺史。
现代文：不久，被任命为唐州刺史。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the Tangzhou chief historian.

古文：入为太常少卿兼左拾遗，迁郑州防御使。
现代文：又入朝任太常少卿兼左拾遗，迁任郑州防御使。
English: He also entered the imperial court as Tai Chang Shaoqing and Zuo Zui, and was transferred to Zhengzhou Defense Envoy.

古文：改左谕德，转少詹事，摄御史中丞，未几，摄太子詹事。
现代文：又改为左谕德，转任少詹事，代理御史中丞。不久，又代理太子詹事。
English: He also changed his title to Zuo Zhi De, and was transferred to the position of Shao Zhan Ji, acting as Goshi Chung Jie. Soon, he also acted as Prince Zhan Ji.

古文：兴定元年，潼关失守，迁河南统军使兼昌武军节度使，摄签枢密院事，行院许州，汰去冗食军士二千余人。
现代文：兴定元年，潼关失守，改任河南统军使兼昌武军节度使，代签枢密院事，行院于许州，他精简没有用处的军士二千多人。
English: In the first year of Xingding, Shiguan lost its defense, and was replaced as the Henan United Army envoy and the Changwu Army festival envoy. He signed the Privy Council on behalf of the Emperor, and the Council was held in Huzhou. He streamlined more than 2,000 useless sergeants.

古文：奥屯忠孝，字全道，本名牙哥，懿州胡土虎猛安人。
现代文：又上书进谏伐宋的事情，不被采纳。兴定三年，被降为颍州防御使。有人报告说，宋人准备偷袭颍州，后来宋兵果然来了，因为纳坦谋嘉先有了准备，宋兵便离开了。
English: It was reported that the Song people were preparing a sneak attack on Bozhou, but the Song soldiers actually came, because Natan Mogao had made preparations first, and the Song soldiers then left.

古文：幼孤，事母孝。中大定二十二年进士科，调蒲州司候，察廉，迁一官，除校书郎兼太子司经。
现代文：有关方面报功时，没有报那位事先上报消息的人，纳坦谋嘉替他请了赏。四年，召任翰林侍讲学士兼兵部侍郎、同修国史。五年去世。奥屯忠孝，字全道，本名牙哥，懿州胡土虎猛安人。从小父亲去世，对母亲很孝顺。大定二十二年中进士，调任蒲州司候。因政绩清廉而升官，任校书郎兼太子司经。
English: When the relevant parties reported their achievements, they did not report the person who reported the news in advance, and Natan Moga Jia asked for a reward for him. In four years, he was appointed as Hanlin Attendant Lecturer and Military Attendant, and studied national history. He died in five years. Otun Zhongxiao, Zha Quan Dao, his real name was Fang Ge, Zhangzhou Hutu Tiger Meng'an. His father died when he was a child, and he was very filial to his mother. He became a soldier in the 22nd year of Dading, and was transferred to the Puzhou Secretary. He was promoted due to his clean political performance,

古文：三迁礼部员外郎。
现代文：三迁任礼部员外郎。
English: He was transferred three times and became a member of the ceremonial club.

古文：迁翰林待制，权户部侍郎，佐参知政事胥持国治决河，以劳进一阶。
现代文：再迁翰林待制，权户部侍郎，辅佐参知政事胥持国治理黄河决口的事，有劳绩，进升一阶。
English: He was then transferred to the Hanlin District, where he was in charge of the household department, served as an assistant to the governor, and was in charge of the political affairs of the country. He worked hard and was promoted to the first rank.

古文：除河平军节度使，兼都水监，遂疏七祖佛河及王村、周平、道口、鸡爪、孙家港，复开东明、南阳冈、马蹄、孙村诸河。
现代文：被任命为河平军节度使、兼都水监。于是疏通了七祖佛河以及王村、周平、道口、鸡爪、孙家港，又开凿了东明、南阳冈、马蹄、孙村等河。
English: He was appointed as the festival envoy of the Heping Army and the water inspector of the capital. Therefore, he dredged the Seven Ancestors of Buddha River as well as Wangcun, Zhouping, Dogou, Zhizhu, and Sunjiagang, and also excavated the Dongming, Nanyangangang, Horseshoe, and Suncun rivers.

古文：忠孝常曰： 河之为患，不免劳民。
现代文：忠孝经常说： 河一有灾，免不了民众劳苦。
English: Zhongxiao often said: If there is a disaster in the river, the people will have to work hard.

古文：复垒石为岸十余里，民不胜其病矣。 
现代文：再垒石为岸十多里长，民众就难以承受了。 
English: If the stone wall is more than ten miles long, the people will find it unbearable.

古文：改沁南军，坐前在卫州勾集妨农军借民钱不令偿，由是贫富不相假贷，军民不相安，降宁海州刺史。
现代文：又改任沁南军节度使。由于他原在卫州时聚集妨农军曾借用民众的钱财却不让偿还，贫富民众之间就不肯相互借贷，军民关系不和睦，因而坐罪被降任宁海州刺史。
English: He was also appointed as the festival envoy of the Southern Wei Army. Because he had gathered in Weizhou to prevent the peasant army from borrowing money from the people but did not allow them to repay, the poor and rich people did not want to borrow from each other, and the military-civilian relations were not harmonious, he was demoted to the position of Ninghai State Historian.

古文：改滑州，历同知南京留守，迁定国军节度使，复为沁南军。
现代文：又改为滑州刺史，历任同知南京留守，迁任定国军节度使，又任沁南军节度使。
English: It was also changed to Slanting History of Slanting, and the successors of the same acquaintance stayed in Nanjing, and were appointed as the festival envoys of the National Army, and also as the festival envoys of the Southern Army.

古文：入为太子少傅兼礼部尚书。
现代文：入朝任太子少傅兼礼部尚书。
English: Entered the imperial court and was appointed the prince's young tutor as well as the head of the etiquette department.

古文：贞祐初，议降卫绍王，忠孝与蒲察思忠附胡沙虎议，语在思忠传。
现代文：贞祐初年，商议将卫绍王降为庶人的事时，奥屯忠孝和蒲察思忠赞同胡沙虎的意见，其事见于《思忠传》中。
English: In the first year of Zhenyu, when discussing the matter of reducing King Weishao to a commoner, Otun Zhongxiao and Putsa Sizhong agreed with Hu Shahu's opinion, which is seen in "Sizhong Biography."

古文：顷之，拜参知政事。
现代文：不久，任为参知政事。
English: Soon, he was appointed to the post of co-governor.

古文：中都围急，粮运道绝，诏忠孝搜括民间积粟，存两月食用，悉令输官，酬以银钞或僧道戒牒。
现代文：中都被围困，形势危急，粮道断绝，皇帝下诏令忠孝搜索民间积存的粮食，除了自己留存够两个月食用外，全部交给官府，用银钞或者僧人道士的戒牒作为酬报。
English: Both were besieged, the situation was critical, the food supply was cut off, and the emperor issued an edict ordering the loyal and filial to search for the grain stored by the people, and in addition to storing enough for two months of food, all of it was handed over to the government, with silver bills or a monk's humanitarian ultimatum as a reward.

古文：是时，知大兴府事胥鼎计画军食，奏许人纳粟买官，鼎已籍者，忠孝再括之，令百姓两输，欲为己功。
现代文：当时，知大兴府事胥鼎负责筹划军队粮食，他上奏朝廷，让允许民众纳粟买官，胥鼎已经收缴过一次了，又要奥屯忠孝再搜括一遍，让百姓们连缴两回，以此作为自己的功绩。
English: At that time, Zhida Xingfu Zhidong was responsible for planning the army's grain supply. He appealed to the imperial court to allow the people to buy poppies to buy officials. Zhidong had already been confiscated once, and he wanted Otun Zhongxiao to search again, and let the people pay twice in a row, as his own achievement.

古文：左谏议大夫张行信上疏论之曰： 民食止存两月，而又夺之，使当绝食，不独归咎有司，而亦怨朝廷之不察也。 
现代文：左谏议大夫张行信上疏评论说 ：民众粮食只存两个月了，而又再次夺取，当他们绝粮时，不单单怨恨官府，也必定埋怨朝廷不体察民众疾苦。 
English: Zhang Xingxin, a doctor of Zuo Wei, commented: The people only had food for two months, and when they were deprived of food again, they not only resented the government, but also complained that the imperial court did not notice the people's suffering.

古文：宣宗善行信言，命近臣与忠孝同审取焉。
现代文：金宣宗很赞同张行信的意见，便命令朝廷近臣和奥屯忠孝一起斟酌应当收取多少。
English: Jin Xuan Zong agreed with Zhang Xingxin's opinion, and ordered the imperial court courtiers and Otun Zhongxiao to consider together how much should be charged.

古文：谓忠孝曰： 国家本欲得粮，今既得矣，姑从民便可也。 
现代文：他又对忠孝说 ：国家本意是想得到一部分粮食，如今既已收到了，姑且听从民众便利行事就可以了。 
English: He also said to the loyal and filial: the state originally wanted to get a part of the grain, and now that it has received it, it is enough to listen to the people and act conveniently.

古文：顷之，行信复奏曰： 参政奥屯忠孝平生矫伪不近人情，急于功名，诡异要誉，惨刻害物，忍而不恤。
现代文：不久，张行信又上奏说： 参政奥屯忠孝平生矫揉做作不近人情，急于功名，沽名钓誉，苛刻害人，残忍不恤民情。
English: Not long after, Zhang Xingxin also made a report, saying: "Ottun Zhongxiao, who is a politician, is impolite and insincere, eager for fame, greedy for fame, harsh and harmful, and cruel and merciless to the people.

古文：勾当河防，河朔居民不胜其病。
现代文：他参与河防时，河朔的民众忍受不了他的祸害。
English: When he took part in the defense of the river, the people of Hexuo could not bear his scourge.

古文：军负民钱，抑不令偿。
现代文：军队欠民众钱财，却不让偿还。
English: The army owes the people money, but they won't let it be repaid.

古文：东海欲用胡沙虎，举朝皆曰不可，忠孝独力荐。
现代文：东海王准备任用胡沙虎，满朝官员都认为不合适，而忠孝却独自强力推荐。
English: When the East Sea King was about to appoint Hu Shahu, the Manchurian officials all thought it was inappropriate, but Zhong Xiaolu strongly recommended it on his own.

古文：及胡沙虎作难，忠孝自谓有功。
现代文：当胡沙虎发难时，忠孝却还自以为有功。
English: When the Hu Shahu was in trouble, the loyal and filial still thought they had made a contribution.

古文：诏议东海爵号，忠孝请籍没其子孙，及论特末也则云不当籍没，其偏党不公如此。
现代文：诏议东海王的爵号时，忠孝请求籍没他的子孙。可是，当论及特末也时他却说不应当籍没，他偏于私党办事不公正达到如此地步。
English: When discussing the title of the king of the East Sea, Zhongxiao requested that his descendants be removed. However, when it came to the end, he said that he should not be removed, he was biased towards his own party and it was unfair to reach such a level.

古文：无事之时，犹不容一相非才，况今多故，乃使此人与政，如社稷何！ 
现代文：平时没事时，还容不得一个不适合当丞相的人在朝廷，何况如今国家正是多事之秋，还让这个人参与朝政，社稷将如何办呢？ 
English: In normal times, when there are no problems, a person who is not suitable to be the prime minister is not tolerated in the imperial court. Moreover, now that the country is in an eventful autumn, even if this person is allowed to participate in the imperial government, how will the social council handle it?

古文：宣宗曰： 朕初即位，当以礼进退大臣，卿语其亲知，讽之求去可也。 
现代文：金宣宗说： 我初即位，自当以礼选用或罢黜大臣，你可以告诉和他亲近的人，给他透个消息让他自己请求离开就行了。 
English: Jin Xuan Zong said, "Since I ascended the throne for the first time, I should choose or dismiss ministers with courtesy. You can tell someone who is close to him, just give him a message and let him ask to leave.

古文：行信以语右司郎中把胡鲁，把胡鲁以宣宗意白忠孝，忠孝埙然不听。
现代文：张行信便将皇帝的话告诉右司郎中把胡鲁，把胡鲁又将金宣宗的意思转告奥屯忠孝，忠孝却厚着脸皮不听建议。
English: Zhang Xingxin then told the emperor's words to Hu Lu, the right-hand man of the secretary, and Hu Lu relayed the meaning of Kim Xuan Zong to Otun Zhongxiao. However, Zhongxiao had the cheek not to listen to the advice.

古文：顷之，罢为太子太保，出知济南府事，改知中山府。
现代文：不久，被免为太子太保，出知济南府事。又改知中山府事。
English: Soon after, he was relieved of his duties as Crown Prince Taibo and transferred to Jinan Prefecture. He was also transferred to Zhongshan Prefecture.

古文：寻薨，年七十，谥惠敏。
现代文：不久去世，享年七十岁，谥为惠敏。
English: He died soon after, at the age of seventy, and was succeeded by Huimin.

古文：蒲察思忠，本名畏也，隆安路合懒合兀主猛安人。
现代文：蒲察思忠，本名畏也，隆安路合懒合兀主猛安人。
English: Putsa Sizhong, whose real name is also Ai, is a Longan Lu, a lazy person, and a tyrant Meng'an.

古文：大定二十五年进士，调文德、漷阴主簿，国子助教，应奉翰林文字，太学博士，累迁涿州刺史，吏部郎中，迁潞王傅。
现代文：大定二十五年中进士，任文德、氵郭阴主簿，国子助教，应奉翰林文字，太学博士，累迁至涿州刺史、吏部郎中，改任潞王师傅。
English: In the 25th year of Dading, he was promoted to junior high school, served as the main bookkeeper of Wende and Zengguoyin, the assistant teacher of Kuniko, the writer of Yinghanlin, and the doctor of Daigaku, and was successively moved to the middle school of Zhengzhou Sishi and Liribe, and was appointed as the teacher of Zhenwang.

古文：被诏与翰林侍读学士张行简讨论武成王庙配等列，思忠奏曰： 伏见武成王庙配享诸将，不以世代为先。
现代文：朝廷下令由他和翰林侍读学士张行简一起讨论武成王庙中祭祀人员的等第排列次序，蒲察思忠上奏说： 依我所见，武成王庙中配祭的诸将，不按世代先后为序。
English: The imperial court ordered that he and Zhang Xingjian, an attendant of Hanlin, discuss the order of the sacrificial personnel in the temple of King Wucheng together. Pu Zha Sizhong said: As far as I can see, the generals in the temple of King Wucheng are not in order of generation.

古文：后按唐祀典，李靖、李勣居吴起、乐毅上。
现代文：我后来查阅了唐代的祀典，李靖、李责力的地位都在吴起、乐毅之上。
English: Later, I looked up the Tang Dynasty's ritual books. The status of Li Jing and Li Rongli was higher than that of Wu Qi and Le Yi.

古文：圣朝太祖以二千之众，破百万之师，太宗克宋，成此帝业，秦王宗翰、宋王宗望、娄室、谷神与前代之将，各以功德间列可也。 
现代文：圣朝太祖以二千人马，击败了百万军队，太宗皇帝克宋，以成此帝业，秦王宗翰、宋王宗望、娄室、谷神和前代的各将领，各以他们的功德大小加以排列次序就行了。 
English: Emperor Taizu of the Holy Dynasty defeated a million-man army with two thousand horses, Emperor Taizong of the Song Dynasty became emperor with this feat, and Qin King Zonghan, Song King Zongwang, Xishu, Gu Shen and the generals of the previous generation can be arranged in order according to their merits.

古文：思忠论多矫饰，不尽录，录其颇有理者云。
现代文：思忠的言论，大多矫饰虚伪，不必全记录，只录他讲得尚有点道理的。
English: Sizhong's remarks, most of which are pretentious and hypocritical, do not need to be recorded in full, but only recorded if he speaks a little sense.

古文：迁大理卿，兼左司谏，同修国史。
现代文：迁任大理卿、兼左谏司、同修国史。
English: He was transferred to the post of Dai Rikyo, concurrently serving as Zuo Shishi (Minister of the Left Division of Palace Storehouses), and also engaged in the study of national history.

古文：泰和六年，平章政事仆散揆宣抚河南，诏以备御攻守之法，集百官议于尚书省。
现代文：泰和六年，平章政事仆散揆到河南宣抚，诏令做好准备，确定防御和攻守的方法，集合百官在尚书省商议。
English: In the sixth year of the Taihe era, Pingzhang's political servant, Sanzhao, went to Henan to proclaim peace, prepare the imperial edict, determine the methods of defense and attack, and gather hundreds of officials to discuss in Shangshu Province.

古文：廷臣尚多异议，思忠曰： 宋人攻围城邑，动至数千，不得为小寇。
现代文：朝臣中有许多不同意见，思忠说： 宋人攻围城邑时，一出动就是几千人，不是普通小股敌人。
English: There are many different opinions among the courtiers, Sizhong said: When the Song people besieged the city, one dispatch was thousands of people, not ordinary small-scale enemies.

古文：但当选择贤将，宜攻宜守，临时制变，无不可者。 
现代文：重要在于选择贤能的将领，既能攻又能守的，临时随机应变，就没有什么问题了。 
English: The important thing is to choose a capable general who can both attack and defend, and there will be no problem with ad hoc contingency plans.

古文：上以为然。
现代文：皇帝认为他说的有理。
English: Tenshi thinks it makes sense.

古文：顷之，迁翰林侍讲学士兼左谏议大夫，大理卿、同修国史如故。
现代文：不久迁任翰林侍讲学士兼左谏议大夫，大理卿、同修国史职务如故。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Hanlin Attendant Lecturer and Doctor of the Left Division of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

古文：再阅月，兼知审官院正职，外兼四职自思忠始。
现代文：过了一个月，又兼知审官院正职，一个人而兼任四种职务是从蒲察思忠开始的。
English: A month later, he also assumed the post of chief justice of the Supreme People's Procuratorate. He was the first person to hold all four posts simultaneously since Putsasitada.

古文：宋人请和。赐银五十两、重彩十端。
现代文：宋人请求议和，朝廷赐给他银子五十两，彩帛十端。
English: Song asked for peace talks, and the imperial court gave him fifty taels of silver and ten taels of gold.

古文：丁母忧，起复侍讲学士，兼谏议、修史、知审官院，转侍读，兼兵部侍郎。
现代文：后来他为母亲服丧，服终被任命为侍讲学士，兼谏议、修史、知审官院，又转任侍读，兼兵部侍郎。
English: Later, he attended his mother's funeral. At the end of his service, he was appointed as an attendant lecturer, and concurrently served as a member of the Council of State, the Academy of History, and the Court of Chancery. He was also transferred to the post of attendant reader and attendant of the military department.

古文：贞祐初，胡沙虎请废卫绍王为庶人，思忠与奥屯忠孝阿附胡沙虎，曰： 窃人之财，犹谓之盗，况偷天位以私己乎！ 
现代文：贞祐初年，胡沙虎请求朝廷将卫绍王废黜为庶人，蒲察思忠和奥屯忠孝附和胡沙虎的意见，并说： 偷人钱财，还称为盗，何况偷窃皇帝的位置为一己之私利呢！ 
English: In the first year of Zhengyu, Hu Shahu asked the imperial court to dethrone Wang Weishao as a commoner. Pu Zha Sizhong and Otun Zhongxiao supported Hu Shahu's opinion and said: Stealing people's money and property is also called theft, not to mention stealing the emperor's position for one's own personal gain!

古文：宣宗不从。
现代文：金宣宗不肯听从。
English: Kim Sun-jong refused to listen.

古文：顷之，迁太子太保兼侍读、修国史。
现代文：不久，改任太子太保兼侍读、修国史。
English: Soon, he was reassigned to the post of prince's bodyguard and attendant, and he studied the history of the country.

古文：二年春，享于太庙，思忠摄太尉，醉殴礼直官，御史台劾奏，降秘书监兼同修国史。
现代文：二年春天，祭祀太庙时，蒲察思忠代理太尉职务，因酒醉殴打礼部值班官员，受到御史台弹劾，降为秘书监兼同修国史。
English: In the spring of the second year, during the ritual of the Great Temple, Puchasizhong acted as the acting captain, beat the duty officer of the ceremonial department due to drunkenness, was impeached by the History Department, and was reduced to the secretary and supervisor of the national history.

古文：顷之，迁翰林学士同修国史，卒。
现代文：不久，又迁任翰林学士同修国史，死于任上。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the Hanlin Academy to study the history of the country, where he died.

