古文：韦氏张嘉福宋恽房瓘孙生张嘉贞杜暹郑虔崔圆
现代文：韦氏张嘉福宋恽房瓘孙生张嘉贞杜暹郑虔崔圆
English: Wei's Zhang Jiafu, Song Yufang's grandson Zhang Jiazhen, Du Siem Zhengqian and Cui Yuan

古文：韦氏
现代文：韦氏
English: The Wei Clan

古文：唐平王诛逆韦。
现代文：唐平王追杀叛逆的韦氏。
English: King Tang Ping chased and killed the rebellious Wei clan.

古文：崔日用将兵杜曲，诛诸韦略尽，绷子中婴孩，亦捏杀之。
现代文：崔日用率兵到杜曲，把姓韦的几乎都杀光了，就连摇篮里的婴孩也都被掐死。
English: Cui Rong led his soldiers to Duqu, and killed almost all of the surnamed Wei, even the babies in the cradle were strangled to death.

古文：诸杜滥及者非一。
现代文：在杜曲被滥杀的人不止一个。
English: More than one person was indiscriminately killed in Duqu.

古文：浮休子曰： 此逆韦之罪，疏族何辜？
现代文：浮休子说： 这是姓韦的罪过，与小孩有什么关系。
English: "This is the fault of Wei, what does it have to do with the child?

古文：亦如冉闵杀胡，高鼻者横死；董卓诛阉人，无须者狂戮。
现代文：就好象冉闵杀胡人，鼻子高的人也遭惨死；董卓杀阉党，没长胡子的也被枉杀。
English: It's just like when Ran Xuan killed Hu people, people with high noses also suffered a cruel death; when Dong Zhuo killed Yao Party members, people without long beards were also unjustly killed.

古文：死生命也。 
现代文：死生真是命里注定啊。 
English: Life and death are really predestined.

古文：张嘉福
现代文：张嘉福
English: Zhang Jiafu

古文：唐逆韦之变，吏部尚书张嘉福河北道存抚使，至怀州武陟驿，有敕所至处斩之。
现代文：唐朝韦氏叛乱。吏部尚书张嘉福兼河北道存抚使。到了怀州武陟馆驿。有敕令来令在张嘉福所到之处斩首。
English: The Tang Dynasty Wei rebellion. Zhang Jiafu, the secretary of the Ministry of Personnel and the depositary of Hebei Province, arrived at the Wuyi Pavilion in Waizhou. There was an order to behead Zhang Jiafu wherever he went.

古文：寻有敕放。
现代文：不一会儿又下敕令释放。
English: A short time later, he was released by imperial order.

古文：使人马上昏睡，迟行一驿。比至，已斩讫。
现代文：使臣在马上睡了一觉，晚行了一个驿站的路，等到使臣到了，张嘉福已被斩完。
English: The envoy immediately fell asleep and took a late train to a station. By the time the envoy arrived, Zhang Jiafu had already been beheaded.

古文：命非天乎？
现代文：命是天定呢？
English: Is life predetermined?

古文：天非命乎？
现代文：还是天不定命呢？
English: Or is it fate?

古文：宋恽
现代文：宋恽
English: Song Tao

古文：明皇在府之日，与绛州刺史宋宣远兄恽有旧。
现代文：明皇还在州府的时候，曾经和绛州刺史宋宣远的哥哥宋恽有老交情。
English: When the Ming Emperor was still at the state capital, he had a long-standing friendship with Song Xuan, the elder brother of Song Xuan Yuan.

古文：及登极之后，常忆之，欲用为官。
现代文：等到他登上皇位后，经常想念他，想要给他个官作。
English: After he ascended the throne, she often missed him and wanted to give him an official portrait.

古文：恽自知命薄，乃隐匿外州，缘亲老归侍。
现代文：宋恽自己知道自己命薄，就隐藏在外州，带领自己的亲属老人回家侍奉。
English: Song Tao himself knew that his life was in danger, so he hid in out of state and led his elderly relatives back home to serve.

古文：至定鼎门外，逢一近臣。
现代文：有一天他在定鼎门外遇到了皇帝的一个近臣。
English: One day, he met a close retainer of the emperor outside the Dingding Gate.

古文：其人入奏云： 适见宋恽。 
现代文：那人就进宫奏明皇上说： 我刚才见到宋恽了。 
English: The man went into the palace to report to the emperor and said, "I just saw Song Tao.

古文：上喜，遂召入。
现代文：皇上很高兴，立刻召见。
English: The Emperor was delighted and summoned him immediately.

古文：经十数年，每欲与官，即自知无禄，奏云： 若与恽官，是速微命。 
现代文：皇上说： 经过十多年了，常常想给你个官作。 宋恽回奏说： 我自知自己没有禄相，如果让我当官，就是很快地要我的小命。 
English: The emperor said: After more than ten years, I often want to give you an official work. Song Tao replied: I know that I do not have a reward, if I am allowed to be an official, I will soon want my small life.

古文：后因国子监丞杜幼奇除左赞善大夫，诏令随例与一五品官，遂除右赞善大夫。
现代文：后来因为国子监丞杜幼奇升为左赞善大夫。皇帝下诏随贯例授予宋恽五品官。升为右赞善大夫。
English: Later, he was promoted to Zuo Zanzan Doctor because of Du Yuqi, the Guozhong Inspector. The Emperor issued an imperial edict awarding Song Qi the rank of Wuxin Officer. He was promoted to Zuo Zanzan Doctor.

古文：至夜卒。
现代文：到了晚上就死了。
English: He died in the evening.

古文：房琯
现代文：房琯
English: Chestnut

古文：开元中，房琯之宰卢氏也。
现代文：开元年间，房瓘任卢氏县令。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, Fang Yu was appointed as the Lu County magistrate.

古文：邢真人和璞自太山来。
现代文：邢真人和璞从太山来。
English: The real person and the fake person come from the mountains.

古文：房瓘虚心礼敬，因与携手闲步，不觉行数十里。至夏谷村，遇一废佛堂，松竹森映。
现代文：房瓘虚心相待以礼相迎，并与和璞携手并肩散步，不知不觉走了几十里，到了一个夏谷村，遇到一个废旧的佛堂。这佛堂内松竹茂密，日映斑烂。
English: With a humble heart, Fong Yao greeted each other with courtesy, and walked hand in hand with He Yao. Unknowingly, they walked for dozens of miles to a summer valley village, where they came across an abandoned Buddhist temple. The inside of this Buddhist temple was thick with pine and bamboo, and the sun was shining brightly.

古文：和璞坐松下，以杖叩地，令侍者掘深数尺。得一瓶，瓶中皆是娄师德与永公书。
现代文：和璞坐在松树下，用手杖敲着地，让侍从的人挖地深达几尺，挖到一瓶，瓶里都是娄师德给永公的信。
English: He and Zou sat under a pine tree, tapped the ground with a cane, and asked the attendants to dig several feet deep, digging up a bottle. Inside the bottle was Zou Shide's letter to Yonggong.

古文：和璞笑谓曰： 省此乎？ 
现代文：和璞笑着对房瓘说： 你明白吗？ 
English: With a smile, he said to Fang Yao: Do you understand?

古文：房遂洒然，方记其为僧时，永公即房之前身也。
现代文：房瓘立刻显出惊讶的样子。这才记起他当年当和尚时，永公就是房瓘的前任。
English: Fusang immediately looked surprised, remembering that when he was a monk, Yonggong was Fusang's predecessor.

古文：和璞谓房曰： 君殁之时，必因食鱼鲙。
现代文：和璞对房瓘说： 你死的时候，一定是因为吃鱼汤。
English: When you died, it must have been because of eating fish soup.

古文：既殁之后，当以梓木为棺。
现代文：死了以后，应该用梓木为棺材。
English: After death, the coffin should be made of azuki wood.

古文：然不得殁于君之私第，不处公馆，不处玄坛佛寺，不处亲友之家。 
现代文：然而不能死在你的家里，也不死在你的府衙里；还不死在寺院佛堂中，不死在亲友的家里。 
English: However, you cannot die in your home, nor can you die in your house; nor can you die in a temple, nor can you die in the home of a relative or friend.

古文：其后谴于阆州，寄居州之紫极宫。
现代文：以后房瓘被派到阆州，寄住在阆州的紫极宫。
English: Later, Fang Ye was sent to Ganzhou and lodged at the Zijiao Palace in Ganzhou.

古文：卧疾数日，使君忽具鲙，邀房于郡斋。房亦欣然命驾。
现代文：卧病在床几天了，阆州刺史忽然作了鱼汤，邀请房瓘到郡斋赴宴，房瓘也很愉快地去了。
English: After lying ill in bed for a few days, Zhangzhou Shishi suddenly made fish soup and invited Fang Tao to a county banquet. Fang Tao was also very happy to go.

古文：食竟而归，暴卒。
现代文：吃完回来，突然死了。
English: He came back after eating and suddenly died.

古文：州主命攒椟於宫中，棺得梓木为之。
现代文：州主下令在紫极宫作了棺材，棺材是用梓木作的。
English: The governor ordered a coffin to be made in the Purple Palace, and the coffin was made of azusa wood.

古文：孙生
现代文：孙生
English: Sun Sheng

古文：开元末，杭州有孙生者，善相人。
现代文：唐朝开元末年，杭州有个叫孙生的人，很会给人相面。
English: At the end of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, there was a man in Hangzhou named Sun Sheng, who was very good at giving people facial expressions.

古文：因至睦州，郡守令遍相僚吏。
现代文：有一次到了睦州，郡太守让他给部下的僚吏们都相相面。
English: Once, he came to Mutsu due to an incident, and the county governor of Mutsu asked him to meet all his colleagues.

古文：时房瓘为司户，崔涣自万年县尉贬桐庐丞。
现代文：当时房瓘是司户，崔涣从万年县的县尉贬到桐庐县作县丞。
English: At that time, Fang Yao was the steward, and Cui Yao was demoted from the county lieutenant of Mannian County to the county chancellor of Tonglu County.

古文：孙生曰： 二君位皆至台辅。
现代文：孙生说： 两位的官职都可达到台辅，然而房瓘是栋梁之才，应该在皇帝的左右。
English: Sun Sheng said: Both of their official positions can reach the level of Taiwanese assistant, but Fang Xuan is a great talent and should be on the emperor's right and left.

古文：既而房以宰辅赍册书自蜀往灵武授肃宗，崔后果为杭州刺史。
现代文：崔涣以后该当杭州刺史。我虽然见不到，但也能领受到他的好处。 不久，房瓘因为宰辅带着册书从蜀地到灵武的机会被肃宗授官，辅佐肃宗。
English: Although I can't see him, I can also receive his benefits. Soon, because of the opportunity for Zaifu to take the book from Shu to Lingwu, Fangyao was awarded the post of Su Zong and assisted Su Zong.

古文：下车访孙生，即已亡旬日矣，署其子为牙将，以粟帛赈恤其家。
现代文：崔涣后来果然当上杭州刺史，于是他下车访问孙生，但孙生已经死了十多天了。就安排孙生的儿子当牙将，并拿了很多粮食布匹赈济抚恤他的家属。
English: Afterward, Cui Wei was indeed crowned the history of Hangzhou, so he got off the bus to visit Sun Sheng, but Sun Sheng had already been dead for more than ten days. He arranged for Sun Sheng's son to become a dentist, and took a lot of grain cloth to help support his family.

古文：张嘉贞
现代文：张嘉贞
English: Zhang Jiazhen

古文：开元中，上急于为理，尤注意于宰辅，常欲用张嘉贞为相，而忘其名。
现代文：唐朝开元年间，皇上急于治理朝政，更注意宰相的人选。常常想用张嘉贞为宰相但忘了他的名字。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the emperor was anxious to govern the court and paid more attention to the choice of prime minister. He often wanted to use Zhang Jiazhen as prime minister but forgot his name.

古文：夜令中人持烛，于省中访其直宿者谁。
现代文：夜间让宫人持着蜡烛，在各省里寻找今天值宿的是谁。
English: At night, the palace staff would hold candles and search the provinces to find out who was on duty that day.

古文：还奏中书侍郎韦抗。
现代文：回奏说是中书侍郎韦抗值班。
English: The reply was that the chancellery waiter, Wei Qi, was on duty.

古文：上即令召入寝殿，上曰： 朕欲命一相，常记得风标为当时重臣，姓张而重名，今为北方侯伯，不欲访左右。旬曰念之，终忘其名，卿试言之。 
现代文：皇上马上召韦抗进寝殿。皇上说： 我想任命一个宰相，常常记得他的举止风采是个重要大臣，这个人姓张名是两个字，现在是北方的侯伯。我不想访问左右文武大臣，这十多天常常想，但还是没想起他的姓名，你说说看是谁？ 
English: The emperor immediately called Wei Yan into the bedchamber. The emperor said: I want to appoint a prime minister, I often remember his demeanor is an important minister, this man's surname Zhang is two words, now it is Hou Bo in the north. I don't want to visit the left and right ministers of literature and armed forces, I often think about this for more than ten days, but I still haven't remembered his name, can you tell me who it is?

古文：抗奏曰： 张齐丘今为朔方节度。 
现代文：韦抗回奏说： 张齐丘现在是北方节度使。 
English: Wei Guo echoed: Zhang Qiqiu is now the North Korean envoy.

古文：上即令草诏。
现代文：皇上就让他草拟诏书，仍然让宫人拿着蜡烛。
English: The emperor asked him to draft an edict, but still let the palace staff hold the candle.

古文：仍令宫人持烛，抗跪于御前，援笔而成。
现代文：韦抗跪在皇帝面前，提笔而成。皇上很称赞他才思敏捷，写得规范漂亮。
English: Wei Kang knelt in front of the emperor and took up his pen. The emperor praised him for his quick thinking and beautiful handwriting.

古文：上甚称其敏捷典丽，因促命写诏，敕抗归宿省中，上不解衣以待旦。
现代文：因此急着让他写诏书，又让他回到省中睡觉。皇上不解衣睡觉只等天亮就将下诏书。
English: Therefore, he was in a hurry to have him write the imperial edict, and let him go back to the provincial capital to sleep. The emperor did not undress and go to sleep, only to wait until dawn to issue the imperial edict.

古文：将降其诏书，夜漏未半。忽有宫人复促抗入见。
现代文：还不到一个时辰，忽然有个宫中人又催促韦抗入宫见皇帝。
English: Before an hour had passed, a person in the palace suddenly urged Wei Kang to go to the palace to see the emperor.

古文：上迎谓曰： 非张齐丘，乃太原节度张嘉贞。 
现代文：皇上迎着他说： 不是张齐丘，是太原节度张嘉贞。 
English: The emperor greeted him and said, "It's not Zhang Qiqiu, it's Zhang Jiazhen, the governor of Taiyuan."

古文：别命草诏，上谓抗曰： 谁朕志先定，可以言命矣。
现代文：又另写了个草诏。皇上又对韦抗说： 我心里考虑先定下来的，可以说是命啊！
English: The Emperor also said to Wei Keng: I have already decided in my heart, so it can be said that it is my life!

古文：适朕因阅近日大臣章疏，首举一通，乃嘉贞表也。因此洒然，方记得其名。此亦天启，非人事也。 
现代文：刚才我翻阅近几天大臣们的奏疏，拿起来的第一卷，就是张嘉贞的上表，因此而惊讶，才记得他的姓名，这也是上天启发我，并不是人为啊！ 
English: Just now, I was flipping through the record books of the ministers in recent days. The first volume I picked up was Zhang Jiazhen's watch, so I was surprised to remember his name. This was also inspired by God, not by man!

古文：上嘉其得人，复叹用舍如有人主张。
现代文：皇上很称赞他得到了人才，又感叹任用和舍弃好象鬼使神差似的。
English: The Emperor praised him highly for the talent he had acquired, and lamented the fact that his appointments and resignations seemed to have been made by the devil.

古文：杜暹
现代文：杜暹
English: Dusiam

古文：杜暹幼时，曾自蒲津济河。河流湍急。
现代文：杜暹年幼时，曾从蒲津过河，河流水势湍急。
English: When Du Siem was a child, he once crossed the river from Puting. The river was swollen with water.

古文：时入舟者众，舟人已解缆。岸上有一老人，呼杜秀才可暂下，其言极苦。
现代文：当时上船的人很多。撑船的人已经解开缆绳，这时岸上有一个老人招呼： 杜秀才可暂时下来！ 
English: At that time, there were a lot of people on board. The boatmen had already untied the cable, when an old man on the shore called out: Du Xiu can only come down temporarily!

古文：暹不得已往见，与语久之。
现代文：老人特别诚恳反复要求，杜暹没办法只好下船走过来，同老人说了很长时间。
English: The old man repeatedly and earnestly demanded that Du Siem had no choice but to get off the boat and walk over and talk to the old man for a long time.

古文：船人待暹不至，弃袱于岸便发。
现代文：船上的人等杜暹等得不耐烦了，把他的包袱扔到岸上便开船了。
English: The people on the boat got tired of waiting for Du Siam, so they threw his luggage onto the shore and set sail.

古文：暹与老人交言未尽，顾视船去，意甚恨恨。
现代文：杜暹和老人交谈还没完，回头看船已经开走了，心里挺恨这个老人。
English: Du Siam and the old man had not finished their conversation when he looked back and saw that the boat had already sailed away. In his heart, he really hated the old man.

古文：是日风急浪粗，忽见水中有数十手攀船没。徒侣皆死，唯暹获存。
现代文：那天风急浪大，忽然发现水中有几十只手攀船，船被弄翻沉没，同伴们都死了，只有杜暹活着。
English: That day, when the storm was raging, they suddenly discovered that there were dozens of hands in the water climbing on the boat. The boat was overturned and sank, and all the companions were dead. Only Du Siam was still alive.

古文：老人谓暹曰： 子卿业贵极，故来相救。 
现代文：老人对杜暹说： 您的事业贵重得很，所以才来相救。 
English: The old man said to Du Siam: Your cause is very precious, that's why I came to your rescue.

古文：言终不见。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：暹后累迁至公卿。
现代文：杜暹后来多次升迁直到公卿。
English: Du Siam was later promoted several times until he became a noble.

古文：郑虔
现代文：郑虔
English: Zheng Qian

古文：开元二十五年，郑虔为广文博士。
现代文：唐开元二十五年。
English: Twenty-five years after the founding of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：有郑相如者，年五十余，自陇右来应明经，以从子谒虔。虔待之无异礼。他日复谒，礼亦如之。
现代文：郑虔为广文博士，有个叫郑相如的，五十多岁了，从陇南来应明经科考，以侄子的身份拜谒郑虔，郑虔待他也没有特殊的礼节，另一天再拜谒，礼节也同前次相同。
English: Zheng Qian is a doctor of literature. There is a man named Zheng Xiangru, who is more than 50 years old. He came from the southern part of Fujian Province to study science. As a nephew, he paid homage to Zheng Qian. Zheng Qian did not treat him with any special etiquette. He paid homage to Zheng Qian again the next day, and the etiquette was the same as the previous time.

古文：相如因谓虔曰： 叔父颇知某之能否？
现代文：相如因此对郑虔说： 叔父知道我能考中吗？
English: Therefore, she said to Zheng Qian, "Does my uncle know that I can take the middle school entrance examination?"

古文：夫子云： 其或继周者，虽百世可知也。 
现代文：夫子说： 那有能继承周朝的，即使百代也是可以预见的。 
English: Fu Zi said: If there is someone who can succeed the Zhou Dynasty, even a hundred generations can be predicted.

古文：某亦庶几于此。若存孔门，未敢邻于颜子，如言偃、子夏之徒，固无所让。 
现代文：我虽然现在是平民百姓，若是孔门还在，不敢和颜子比，但要说偃、子夏那些人，我还是不比他们差。 
English: Although I am now a commoner, if Confucius were still alive, I would not dare to compare myself with Yan Zi, but to say that those people, I am still not worse than them.

古文：因谓之曰： 若然，君何不早为进取，而迟暮如是？ 
现代文：郑虔很惊异，就询问他会有什么应验。他回答得很痛快。郑虔于是闭门谢客，整天和他谈话很投机。趁机对他说： 若象你说的那样，你为什么不早点科考而求进取，到这么晚了才参加科考？ 
English: Surprised, Zheng Qian asked him what kind of fulfillment he would have. He answered very cheerfully. Zheng Qian then thanked the guest behind closed doors, and the conversation with him was very opportunistic all day. He took the opportunity to say to him: If, as you said, why didn't you study science early and strive for advancement, and why did you take part in the scientific examination so late?

古文：相如曰： 某来岁方合成名，所以不预来者，时未至耳。 
现代文：相如说： 我来年才该成名。所以才不早来，是因为时间没到罢了。 
English: He said, "I'm not going to be famous until next year. That's why I didn't come earlier, because I didn't have enough time."

古文：虔曰： 君当为何官？ 
现代文：郑虔说： 你该当什么官呢？ 
English: Zheng Qian said: What kind of official should you be?

古文：曰： 后七年，选授衢州信安县尉。秩满当年。 
现代文：相如说： 后七年，将被选授衢州信安县尉，到第十年就该死了。 
English: He said: In the last seven years, he will be awarded the title of Zhangzhou Xinyan County Lieutenant. By the tenth year, he should be dead.

古文：虔曰： 吾之后事，可得闻乎？ 
现代文：郑虔说： 我今后的事，可以说给我听听吗？ 
English: Zheng Qian said: Can you tell me what I should do in the future?

古文：曰： 自此五年，国家当改年号。又十五年，大盗起幽蓟，叔父此时当被玷污。如能赤诚向国，即可以迁谪，不尔，非所料矣。 
现代文：相如说： 从这以后五年，国家将改年号，再过十五年，在幽蓟一带将起大盗，叔父您这时也要被玷污，如果能对国家忠心赤诚，还可以迁谪，不然，就不是我所预料的了。 
English: So he said, "Five years from now, the country will change its name, and in another fifteen years, there will be a great robbery in the secluded area. Your uncle will also be tarnished at this time. If you can be loyal to the country, you can still relocate, otherwise, it is not what I expected.

古文：明年春，相如果明经及第。
现代文：第二年春天，相如果然考中。
English: In the spring of the second year, I took the middle school entrance examination.

古文：后七年，调改衢州信安尉。将之官，告以永诀，涕泣为别。
现代文：以后七年，调动改任为衢州信安县尉，即将去赴任时，来告诉郑虔将永远诀别了，然后就流泪告别了。
English: In the next seven years, he was transferred and reassigned as a lieutenant of Xin'an County, Zhangzhou. When he was about to go to work, he came to tell Zheng Qian that he would say goodbye forever, and then he said goodbye with tears.

古文：后三年，有考使来，虔问相知存否，曰： 替后数月，暴终于佛寺。 
现代文：三年以后，有个考察使来，郑虔问相如还在不在了？那人说， 上任后几个月，得急病死在佛寺。 
English: Three years later, an envoy came to investigate, and Zheng Qian asked if Xiangru was still absent? The man said that a few months after taking office, he suddenly fell ill and died in a Buddhist temple.

古文：至二十九年，改天宝。
现代文：到开元二十九年，改年号为天宝。
English: By the 29th year of the first century, the year name was changed to Tianbao.

古文：天宝十五年，安禄山乱东都，遣伪署西京留守张通儒至长安，驱朝官就东洛。
现代文：天宝十五年，安禄山在东都叛乱，派伪署官西京留守张通儒到长安，驱逐唐朝的官员到东都洛阳。
English: In the 15th year of Tianbao, An Lushan rebelled in Dongdu, and sent Zhang Tongru, a pseudo official of West Beijing, to stay in Chang'an, and expelled Tang Dynasty officials to the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：虔至东都，伪署水部郎中。乃思相如之言，佯中风疾，求摄市令以自污，而亦潜有章疏上。
现代文：郑虔到了东都，作了伪署水部郎中，他想到相如的话，假装疯颠，要求把他拉到街市上让他自己弄污自己。
English: When Zheng Qian arrived in Dongdu and became a middle-ranking official of the Ministry of Water Resources of the People's Republic of China, he thought of similar words, pretended to be mad, and asked to be taken to the street market to let him dirty himself.

古文：肃宗即位灵武，其年东京平，令三司以按受逆命者罪。
现代文：但又偷偷有奏疏上奏皇上，肃宗在灵武即位，那年东京也已平息叛乱，命令三司以法律审理叛乱的人的罪行。
English: However, there was also a secret report to the emperor, Su Zong ascended to the throne in Lingwu. That year, Tokyo had also quelled the rebellion and ordered the three departments to try the crimes of the rebels by law.

古文：虔以心不附贼，贬温州司户而卒。
现代文：郑虔因为身在敌营而心不附合叛贼，被贬职作温州司户后死了。
English: Because he was in the enemy camp, Zheng Qian did not sympathize with the traitors and died after being demoted to the position of Wenzhou governor.

古文：崔圆
现代文：崔圆
English: Cui Yuan

古文：崔相国圆，少贫贱落拓，家于江淮间。
现代文：宰相崔圆，少年时代家境贫寒，落迫江湖。家住在江淮一带。
English: Prime Minister Cui Yuan was born into a poor family in his youth and was forced to live in poverty. His family lived in the Huai River area.

古文：表丈人李彦允为刑部尚书。
现代文：他的表丈人叫李彦允是刑部尚书。
English: His uncle-in-law, named Li Yanjun, is a senior official of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：崔公自南方至京，候谒，将求小职。
现代文：崔圆从南方来到京城，等候拜见李彦允，准备让他给谋求个小职务。
English: Cui Yuan came to Beijing from the south, waiting to meet Li Yanjun and prepare for him to seek a small position.

古文：李公处于学院，与子弟肄业，然待之蔑如也。
现代文：李彦允当时在学院里正与学生们研习功业，对待崔圆很蔑视。
English: At that time, Li Yanjun was studying with students at the college, and treated Cui Yuan with contempt.

古文：一夜，李公梦身被桎梏，其辈三二百人，为兵杖所拥，入大府署，至厅所，皆以姓名唱入，见一紫衣人据案，彦允视之，乃崔公也，遂于阶下哀叫请命。
现代文：一天晚上，李彦允作了一个梦，梦到自己被戴上刑具，有二三百个士兵簇拥着他来到一个大官府里，到了大厅前面，都高声念着姓名传呼进去，只见一个穿紫袍的人坐在案前，李彦允一看，原来是崔圆。于是就在台阶下哀声大叫饶命。
English: One night, Li Yan Yun had a dream. He dreamed that he was put on a torture device. He was surrounded by two or three hundred soldiers. He came to a government office. When he reached the front of the hall, they all shouted their names and went in. He saw a man in a purple robe sitting in front of the case. Li Yan Yun saw that it was Cui Yuan. So he cried out for his life under the steps.

古文：紫衣笑曰： 且收禁。 
现代文：穿紫袍的人笑着说： 先关押起来。 
English: The man in the purple robe smiled and said, "First, lock him up."

古文：惊觉甚骇异，语于夫人。
现代文：惊醒后又奇怪又害怕，告诉了夫人。
English: He woke up feeling strange and scared, he told his wife.

古文：夫人曰：  宜厚待之，安知无应乎！ 
现代文：夫人说： 应该好好招待他，怎么知道不应验呢？ 
English: His wife said, "He should be invited, but how do you know he shouldn't come?"

古文：自此优礼日加，置于别院，会食中堂。
现代文：从此以后对待崔圆一天比一天好起来。让他到另一个院落里住下来，每天都在中堂请他吃饭。
English: From then on, they treated Cui Yuan better and better every day. They let him live in another compound and invited him to eat in the courtyard every day.

古文：数月，崔公请出，将求职于江南。
现代文：住了几个月，崔圆请求离开，说要到江南一带找个职务。
English: After living there for a few months, Cui Yuan asked to leave, saying that he wanted to find a job in the southern Jiangsu region.

古文：李公及夫人因具盛馔，儿女悉坐。
现代文：李彦允和夫人趁这个机会准备了丰盛的宴席，让全家儿女一块儿坐陪。
English: Li Yanjun and his wife took this opportunity to prepare a sumptuous banquet, allowing the whole family to sit together.

古文：食罢，崔公拜谢曰： 恩慈如此，不如何以报效？
现代文：吃完饭，崔圆拜谢说： 您对我恩重如此，真不知道怎么感谢才好，将来怎么报答呢？
English: After the meal, Cui Yuan said to Bai Xie: You have been so kind to me, I really don't know how to thank you, how will you repay me in the future?

古文：某每度过分，未测其故。愿丈人示之。 
现代文：我常想，这样是不是有点过分了，不知道什么原因，请丈人明白地说出来。 
English: I often wonder if this is a bit excessive. I don't know why, but I would ask my husband-in-law to say it clearly.

古文：李公笑而不为答。
现代文：李彦允只是笑不回答。
English: Li Yanjun just laughed and did not answer.

古文：夫人曰： 亲表侄与子无异，但虑不足，亦何有恩慈之事。 
现代文：夫人说： 亲表侄和自己的儿子一样，只怕招待不周，有什么恩惠呀、慈爱的事。 
English: His wife said, "A cousin is just like a son to me. I'm afraid I won't be able to invite him. What's the use of kindness?

古文：李公起，夫人因谓曰： 贤丈人昨有异梦，郎君必贵。他日丈人迍难，事在郎君，能特达免之乎？ 崔公曰： 安有是也？ 
现代文：李彦允这时起来上厕所，夫人趁机说： 你的好丈人昨天作了一个怪梦，说你将来一定会当大官，以后说不定什么时候你丈人受困遭难，事情在你的管辖范围内，能不能网开一面，给予减免呢？ 崔圆说： 哪能有那样的事！ 
English: At this time, Li Yanyun got up to go to the toilet, and his wife took the opportunity to say: Your good father-in-law had a strange dream yesterday, saying that you will definitely become a high-ranking official in the future. In the future, maybe when your father-in-law is in trouble, the matter is within your jurisdiction. Can you open a side and give relief? Cui Yuan said: How can there be such a thing!

古文：李公至，复重言之。崔公踧踖而已，不复致词。
现代文：李彦允回来，重复说了夫人的话，崔圆慌恐不安，手足无措，不知道说什么才好。
English: When Li Yanjun returned, he repeated what his wife had said. Cui Yuan was panicked and anxious, at a loss for what to say.

古文：李公云： 江淮路远，非求进之所。某素熟杨司空，以奉托。 
现代文：李彦允说： 江淮离这里太远，并且也是谋求上进的地方，我平常和杨司空较熟，我已经托付他了，到他那里谋个职务吧。 
English: Li Yanjun said: Jianghuai is too far from here, and it is also a place to seek advancement. I am usually more familiar with Yang Siku, I have entrusted him, let's find a position there.

古文：时国忠以宰相领西川节度，崔既谒见，甚为杨所礼，乃奏崔公为节度巡官，知留后事。
现代文：当时杨国忠以宰相衔领西川节度使。崔圆前去拜见，杨国忠很看重他，就奏明皇上任命崔圆为节度巡官，并掌管留后事。
English: At that time, Yang Guozhong, with the title of prime minister, led the Saikawa festival inspector. Cui Yuan went to see him, Yang Guozhong valued him very much, and sent a message to the emperor to appoint Cui Yuan as a festival inspector and take charge of the succession.

古文：发日，李公厚以金帛赠送。
现代文：临上任那天，李彦允又送给他很多钱财。
English: On the day he took office, Li Yanjun gave him a lot of money.

古文：至西川，未一岁，遇安禄山反乱。玄宗播迁，遂为节度使，旬日拜相。
现代文：到西川还不到一年，正赶上安禄山造反，玄宗迁都，就让崔圆当了节度使。又过十多天，拜为宰相。
English: Less than a year after arriving in Xichuan, just in time for the Anlu Mountain Rebellion and the relocation of the capital by Emperor Xuanzong, Cui Yuan was appointed as the festival envoy. Ten days later, he was appointed as the prime minister.

古文：时京城初克复，协从伪官陈希烈等并为诛夷。彦允在数中，既议罪。崔公为中书令，详决之，果尽以兵仗围入，具姓名唱过，判云准法。
现代文：当时京城刚刚收复，投降安禄山的官员陈希烈等人一起都应该被诛杀，李彦允也在其中，已经定罪，崔圆那时是中书令，详细审定，真的全都派兵包围捉了起来，全都过点了姓名，宣判按法治罪。
English: At that time, the capital had just been recaptured. Chen Xilei, the official who surrendered to Anlu Mountain, and others should have been killed together. Li Yanyun was also among them and had been convicted. At that time, Cui Yuan was a Chinese edict with detailed verification. In fact, all of them were surrounded and captured by soldiers. All of them had their names crossed out and were sentenced according to the rule of law.

古文：至李公，乃呼曰： 相公记昔年之梦否？ 
现代文：点到李彦允，李彦允高呼： 宰相记得当年的梦吗？ 
English: Point to Li Yanjun, Li Yanjun shouted: Prime Minister, do you remember that year's dream?

古文：崔公颔之，遂判收禁。
现代文：崔圆点了点头，然后就判先关押起来。
English: Cui Yuan nodded his head, and then he was sentenced to detention.

古文：既罢，具表其事，因请以官赎彦允之罪。
现代文：事过之后，崔圆上表奏明其事，并请求拿自己的官职赎李彦允的罪过。
English: After the incident, Cui Yuan reported the matter to the higher-ups and asked to use his official position to atone for Li Yanjun's sins.

古文：肃宗许之，特诏免死，流岭外。
现代文：肃宗批准了表奏，特别下了诏书免除李彦允的死罪，流放到岭外。
English: Su Zong approved the petition and issued a special edict exempting Li Yan Rong from the death penalty and banishing him to the outskirts of Ling.

