古文：○王峻王峻，字秀峰，相州安阳人也。
现代文：王峻字秀峰，相州安阳人。
English: Wang Junzhi Xiufeng, a native of Anyang, Xiangzhou.

古文：父丰，为乐营将。
现代文：父亲王丰，为乐营将。
English: His father, Wang Feng, is a music camp leader.

古文：峻少以善歌事梁节度使张筠。唐庄宗已下魏博，筠弃相州，走归京师。
现代文：王峻年轻时靠擅长唱歌事奉梁节度使张筠唐庄宗攻克魏博后，张筠放弃相州，逃回京师。
English: When Wang Jun was young, he relied on his ability to sing to serve Liang Jiedu to make Zhang Ye Tangzhuangzong conquer Weibo. Zhang Ye gave up Xiangzhou and fled back to Beijing.

古文：租庸使赵岩过筠家，筠命峻歌佐酒，岩见而悦之。是时岩方用事，筠因以峻遣岩。
现代文：租庸使趟岩经过张筠家，张筠让王峻唱歌助酒，趟岩见了很喜欢他这时赵岩正专权，张筠因而把王峻送给赵岩。
English: Zhaoyong sent Wangjun to Zhang Rong's house. Zhang Rong asked Wang Jun to sing and help with the wine. When he saw Wang Rong, he liked him very much. At that time, Zhao Rong had exclusive power, so Zhang Rong gave Wang Rong to Zhao Rong.

古文：梁亡，岩族诛，峻流落民间。久之，事三司使张延朗，延朗不甚爱之。
现代文：梁灭亡，趟岩被灭族，王峻流落到民间过了很久，事奉三司使张延朗，张延朗不很喜欢他。
English: It has been a long time since Liang perished, Waiyan was exterminated, and Wang Shunlu fell into the hands of the common people. He served Zhang Yanlang as the Third Envoy, but Zhang Yanlang did not like him very much.

古文：晋高祖灭唐，杀延朗，是时汉高祖从晋起兵，因悉以延朗赀产赐之，峻因得事汉高祖。
现代文：晋高祖灭唐，杀掉张延朗，这时汉高祖随着晋起兵，晋高祖就把张延朗的资产全部赏赐给汉高祖，王峻因此得以事奉汉高祖。
English: When Emperor Jin Gao Zu defeated Tang and killed Zhang Yanlang, Emperor Han Gao Zu raised an army with Emperor Jin, Emperor Jin Gao Zu awarded all of Zhang Yanlang's assets to Emperor Han Gao Zu, so Wang Jun was able to serve Emperor Han Gao Zu.

古文：高祖镇河东，峻为客将。
现代文：漠高祖镇守河束，王峻为客将。
English: Wang Gaozhen will be the keeper of Hezhu, and Wang Jun will be the guest.

古文：高祖即位，拜峻客省使。汉遣郭从义讨赵思绾，以峻监其军。
现代文：汉高祖登位，拜任王峻为客省使汉派郭从义讨伐赵思绾，派王峻监督军队。
English: Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, appointed Wang Jun as a guest province, sent Guo Zongyi to fight against Zhao Siyu, and sent Wang Jun to supervise the army.

古文：累迁宣徽北院使。
现代文：屡经升迁为宣徽北院使。
English: He was repeatedly promoted and became the highest-ranking envoy of the Northern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：周太祖镇天雄军，峻为监军。
现代文：周太祖镇守天雄军，王峻任监军。
English: Zhou Taizu guarded Tianxiong's army, and Wang Jun supervised the army.

古文：汉隐帝已杀大臣史弘肇等，又遣人杀周太祖及峻等，峻等遂与太祖举兵犯京师。
现代文：汉隐帝已杀大臣史弘肇等人，又派人杀周太祖和王峻等人，王峻等人于是和周太祖出兵进犯京师。
English: Emperor Han Yin had already killed the minister Shi Hongzhao and others, and also sent people to kill Zhou Taizu and Wang Jun and others. Wang Jun and others then sent troops with Zhou Taizu to invade the Beijing division.

古文：太祖监国，以汉太后命拜峻枢密使。
现代文：周太祖监国，假藉汉太后的命令拜任王峻为枢密使。
English: Zhou Taizong was the overseer of the country, and through the orders of the Empress Dowager of the Han Dynasty, he appointed Wang Jun as a confidential envoy.

古文：太祖将兵北出，至澶州，返军向京师。
现代文：周太祖率兵北出，到达澶州，回师杀向京城。
English: Zhou Taizu led his troops north, reached Luzhou, and returned to the capital.

古文：是时，太祖已遣冯道迎湘阴公赟于徐州，而汉宗室蔡王信在许州。
现代文：这时，周太祖已派冯道在徐州迎接湘阴公刘簧，而汉的宗室蔡王刘信在许州。
English: At this time, Zhou Taizu had already sent Feng Dao to meet Hunan Yin Prince Liu Rene in Xuzhou, while Han's ancestral home, Cai Wang Liu Xin, was in Huzhou.

古文：峻与王殷谋，遣侍卫马军指挥使郭崇率兵之宋州、前申州刺史马鐸之许州以伺变，崇、鐸遂幽赟而杀信。
现代文：王峻和王殷商计，派侍卫马军指挥使郭崇率兵到宋州、前申州刺史马铎到许州窥伺事变，郭崇、马铎于是杀掉刘赞、刘信。
English: Wang Jun and Wang Yin made a business plan. They sent the commander of the Horse Guards Corps, Guo Chong, and his soldiers to Songzhou, and the former Shenzhou commander, Shima Wei, to Xuzhou to spy on the incident. Guo Chong and Ma Wei then killed Liu Zan and Liu Xin.

古文：太祖入立，拜峻右仆射、门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事，监修国史。
现代文：周太祖登位，拜任王峻为右仆射、门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事，监修国史。
English: Zhou Taizu ascended to the throne, and Wang Jun was appointed as his right-hand man, his attendant, his junior secretary, and the supervisor of national history.

古文：刘旻攻晋州，峻为行营都部署，得以便宜从事。
现代文：刘曼进攻晋州，王峻任行营都部署，得以全权相机行事。
English: Liu Man attacked Jinzhou, and Wang Junren was deployed to the encampment, and was able to act as the camera.

古文：别遣陈思让、康延沼自乌岭出绛州与峻会。
现代文：另派陈思让、康延沼从乌岭出绛州和王峻会师。
English: In addition, Chen Sijang and Kang Yan Numa were dispatched from Wuling to come to Bozhou and Wang Jun to join the division.

古文：峻至陕州，留不进。
现代文：王峻到达陕州，停留不前。
English: Wang Jun arrived in Shaanxi and stopped.

古文：太祖遣使者翟守素驰至陕州，谕峻欲亲征。
现代文：周太祖派遣使臣翟守素驰马赶到陕州，告诉王峻说周太祖要亲自出征。
English: Zhou Taizu dispatched an envoy, Gu Shou Su Chi Ma, to rush to Shaanxi to tell Wang Jun that Zhou Taizu would personally go to war.

古文：峻屏左右谓守素曰： 晋州城坚不可近，而刘旻兵锐亦未可当，臣所以留此者，非怯也，盖有待尔。
现代文：王峻屏退手下人对翟守素说： 晋州城坚牢不可接近，而刘曼的军队也锐不可挡，我之所以留在这里，不是胆怯，是有所等待罢了。
English: Wang Junping's retiring subordinates said to Gong Shou Su: "Jinzhou City is firmly inaccessible, and Liu Man's army is also unstoppable. The reason why I stay here is not because of fear, but because of waiting.

古文：且陛下新即位，四方籓镇，未有威德以加之，岂宜轻举！
现代文：而且陛下刚登位，对四方藩镇，还没有施以威严和恩德，哪里能够轻举妄动！
English: Moreover, His Majesty has just ascended to the throne, and has not yet imposed majesty and benevolence on the four provinces and towns, where can he act rashly!

古文：而兗州慕容彦超反迹已露，若陛下出汜水，则彦超入京师，陛下何以待之？ 
现代文：而充州慕容彦超反叛的迹象已经表露，如果陛下出汜水，慕容彦超就会进入京师，陛下拿什么对付他？ 
English: However, the signs of rebellion by Murong Yanchao of Chenzhou have already been revealed. If His Majesty leaves Shandong, Murong Yanchao will enter Beijing. What will His Majesty do to deal with him?

古文：守素驰还，具道峻言。
现代文：翟守素驰马返回，把王峻的话一五一十地汇报给周太祖。
English: He rode back on his horse and reported Wang Jun's words to Zhou Taizu.

古文：是时，太祖已下诏西幸，闻峻语，遽自提其耳曰： 几败吾事！ 
现代文：适时，周太祖已下诏宣布西去，听了王峻的话，赶紧拉着自己的耳朵说： 差点壤了我的事！ 
English: At the right time, Zhou Taizu had issued an edict announcing that he was leaving for the West. After listening to Wang Jun's words, he quickly pulled his ears and said: I almost lost my job!

古文：乃止不行。
现代文：于是停止前进。
English: Then it stopped moving.

古文：峻军出自绛州，前锋报过蒙坑，峻喜，谓其属曰： 蒙坑，晋、绛之险也，旻不分兵扼之，使吾过此，可知其必败也。 
现代文：王峻的军队从绛州出发，前锋报告说已过蒙坑，王峻心喜，对他的僚属说： 蒙坑，是晋、绛二州的天险，刘曼不派兵扼守，让我们过去了，可知他必败无疑。 
English: Wang Jun's army set out from Zhangzhou. The vanguard reported that they had passed Mengken. Wang Jun was happy and said to his colleagues: Mengken is a natural hazard in Jin and Zhangzhou. Liu Man did not send troops to defend it. Let us pass, but we know that he will undoubtedly be defeated.

古文：峻军去晋州一舍，旻闻周兵大至，即解去。
现代文：王峻的军队距晋州三十里时，刘曼获知周兵大批到来，就撤军离去。
English: When Wang Jun's army was thirty miles away from Jinzhou, Liu Man learned that a large number of Zhou soldiers had arrived and withdrew his troops.

古文：诸将皆欲追之，峻犹豫不决。
现代文：将领们都想追击，王峻犹豫不决。
English: The generals all wanted to pursue, but Wang Jun hesitated.

古文：明日，遣骑兵追旻，不及而还。
现代文：第二夭，派骑兵追赶刘曼，没有追上而返回。
English: The next day, he sent cavalry to chase Liu Man, but they did not catch up and returned.

古文：从讨慕容彦超，为随驾都部署，率众先登。
现代文：王峻跟随讨伐慕容彦超，任随驾都部署，率领众兵抢先登城。
English: Wang Jun followed the crusade of Murong Yanyanchao, deployed all of his followers, and led the soldiers to the city ahead of time.

古文：峻与太祖俱起于魏，自谓佐命之功，以天下为己任。
现代文：王峻和周太祖都在魏州起家，自认为有辅佐皇帝创业的功劳，以天下马己任。
English: Both Wang Jun and Zhou Taizu started their business in Weizhou. They believed that they had the merit of assisting the emperor in starting a business, and took the world as their own responsibility.

古文：凡所论请，事无大小，期于必得，或小不如志，言色辄不逊，太祖每优容之。
现代文：凡是议论请求的事情，无论大小，都期望必能如愿，有时稍不如意，言语脸色就不恭敬，周太祖每每宽容他。
English: In all matters of discussion and request, no matter how big or small, he always hopes that he will be able to fulfill his wishes, sometimes a little unsatisfactory, his words are disrespectful, and Zhou Taizu always tolerates him.

古文：峻年长于太祖二岁，往往呼峻为兄，或称其字，峻由是益横。
现代文：王峻的年龄比周太祖大雨岁，周太祖往往称王峻为兄，有时称他的字，王峻因此更加骄横。
English: Wang Jun is much older than Zhou Taizu. Zhou Taizu often called Wang Jun his elder brother, and sometimes referred to him by his nickname, which made Wang Jun even more arrogant.

古文：郑仁诲、李重进、向训等，皆太祖故时偏裨，太祖初即位，谦抑未欲进用，而峻心忌之。
现代文：郑仁诲、李重进、向训等人，都是周太祖旧时的副将，周太祖刚登位，谦退不愿进用，而王峻心中忌恨他们。
English: Zheng Renren, Li Chongjin, Xiang Xun and others were all vice generals of Zhou Taizu in the old days. Zhou Taizu had just ascended the throne and was reluctant to use them, but Wang Jun hated them in his heart.

古文：自破慕容彦超还，即求解枢密以探上意，太祖慰劳之。
现代文：自从攻破慕容彦超回来，就请求解除枢密使的职务以便试探皇帝的心意，周太祖慰劳他。
English: After defeating Murong Yanchao and returning, he asked to be relieved of his duties as a privy envoy in order to test the emperor's will. Zhou Taizu consoled him.

古文：峻多发书诸镇，求为保荐，居数日，诸镇皆驰骑上峻书，太祖大骇。
现代文：王峻发出许多信给各藩镇，请求保荐他，过了几天，各藩镇都驰马献上王峻的信，周太祖大惊。
English: Wang Jun sent out many letters to all the provinces and towns, asking them to sponsor him. A few days later, all the provinces and towns came on horseback to present Wang Jun's letter. Zhou Taizu was shocked.

古文：峻连章求解，因不视事，太祖遣近臣召之曰： 卿若不出，吾当自往候卿。 
现代文：王峻接连上书请求解职，因而不管事，周太祖派近臣召见他说： 你如果不出来，我含亲自前来恭候你。 
English: Wang Jun successively wrote a letter requesting to be relieved of his duties, so he did not care. Zhou Taizu sent a close retainer to summon him and said: "If you do not come out, I will come and wait for you in person."

古文：峻曰： 车驾若来，是致臣有不测也。 
现代文：王峻说： 皇帝的车驾如果前来，这是让我有不测之祸。 
English: Wang Jun said, "If the emperor's chariot comes, it will be a disaster for me.

古文：然殊无出意。
现代文：但根本没有出来的意思。
English: But there was no intention of coming out at all.

古文：枢密直学士陈同与峻相善，太祖即遣同召峻。
现代文：枢密直学士陈同和王峻很友好，周太祖就派陈同去宣召王峻。
English: Chen Tong, a privy scholar, and Wang Jun were very friendly. Zhou Taizu sent Chen Tong to preach to Wang Jun.

古文：同还奏曰： 峻意少解，然请陛下声言严驾，若将幸之，则峻必出矣。 
现代文：陈同回来奏报说： 王峻的主意稍有松动，但请求陛下声称要准备车驾，像是要去请他的样子，那么王峻必定出来。 
English: Chen Tong returned with a report saying: Wang Jun's idea has slightly loosened, but he asked His Majesty to say that he wanted to prepare a chariot, as if to invite him, then Wang Jun will definitely come out.

古文：太祖僶俛从之。
现代文：周太祖尽力照办。
English: Zhou Taizu did his best to comply.

古文：峻闻太祖且来，遂驰入谒。
现代文：王峻听说周太祖要来，于是驰马进见。
English: Wang Jun heard that Zhou Taizu was coming, so he galloped to see him.

古文：峻于枢密院起事，极其华侈，邀太祖临幸，赐予甚厚。
现代文：王峻在枢密院修建厅堂，非常奢华，邀周太祖临幸，周太祖赐予十分丰厚。
English: Wang Jun built a hall in the Privy Council, which was very luxurious. He invited Zhou Taizu to visit, and Zhou Taizu gave him a very rich gift.

古文：太祖于内园起一小殿，峻辄奏曰： 宫室已多，何用此为？ 
现代文：周太祖在内院建一小殿，王峻就上奏说： 官室已经很多，修小殿做什么？ 
English: Zhou Taizu built a small hall in the inner courtyard, and Wang Jun made a report saying: There are already many government offices, what is the purpose of building a small hall?

古文：太祖曰： 枢密院屋不少，卿亦何必有作？ 
现代文：周太祖说： 枢密院的房屋不少，你又何必修建？ 
English: Zhou Taizu said: There are many houses of the Privy Council, why do you have to build?

古文：峻惭不能对。
现代文：王峻羞惭不能回答。
English: Wang Jun was too shy to answer.

古文：峻为枢密使兼宰相，又求兼领平卢。
现代文：王峻任枢密使兼宰相，又请求兼任平卢节度使。
English: Wang Jun was appointed as a privy envoy and prime minister, and he also requested to be appointed as the envoy of the Qing Dynasty to Pinglu.

古文：已受命，暂之镇，又请借左藏库绫万匹，太祖皆勉从之。
现代文：已经接受任命，刚到任所又请求借左藏库丝绸一万匹，周太祖都尽量顺从他。
English: He had already accepted the appointment, and just after arriving at the office, he asked to borrow ten thousand pieces of silk from the left bank. Zhou Taizu obeyed him as much as possible.

古文：又请用颜衎、陈同代李谷、范质为相，太祖曰： 进退宰相，岂可仓卒？
现代文：又请求任用颜衍、陈同取代李谷、范质担任宰相，周太祖说： 任用和辞退宰相，难道能仓猝行事？
English: He also requested the appointment of Yan Yan and Chen Tong to replace Li Gu and Gan Qui as prime ministers. Zhou Taizu said: Can the appointment and dismissal of prime ministers be done in haste?

古文：当徐思之。 
现代文：应当慢慢考虑。 
English: It should be considered slowly.

古文：峻论请不已，语渐不逊。
现代文：王峻不断议论请求，言语渐渐不恭敬。
English: Wang Jun kept arguing and pleading, and his words gradually became disrespectful.

古文：日亭午，太祖未食，峻争不已，是时寒食假，太祖曰： 俟假开，当为卿行。 峻乃退。太祖遂不能忍，明日御便殿，召百官皆入，即幽峻于别所。
现代文：中午时分，周太祖还未进食，王峻争执不停，这时正是寒食假，周太祖说： 等到寒食过去，会替你办， 王峻纔退下周太祖于是不能忍受，第二天到便殿，召百官都进殿，随即把王峻凶禁在别的处所。
English: At noon, Zhou Taizu had not yet eaten, and Wang Jun was still arguing. At this time, it was the cold food holiday. Zhou Taizu said: Wait until the cold food is over, I will do it for you. Wang Jun retreated the next week. Therefore, Taizu could not bear it. The next day, he went to the toilet hall, called all the officials to enter the hall, and then banned Wang Jun from other places.

古文：太祖见冯道，泣曰： 峻凌朕，不能忍！ 
现代文：周太祖见到冯道，哭泣着说： 王峻欺凌我，不能忍了！ 
English: When Zhou Taizu saw Feng Dao, he cried and said, "Wang Jun is bullying me, I can't stand it!

古文：即贬商州司马，卒于贬所。峻已被黜，太祖以峻监修国史，意其所书不实，因召史官取日历读之，史官以禁中事非外所知，惧以漏落得罪。
现代文：王峻随即被贬为商州司马，死在贬所王峻被废黜后，周太祖因王峻监修国史，估计他记载木实，因而宣召史官取来按日记录政事的册查看，史官推托说官禁中的事不是外人可以知道的，害怕因泄漏而获罪。
English: Wang Jun was immediately demoted to Shangzhou Sima. After the death of the demoted Wang Jun and his dethronement, Zhou Taizu, because of Wang Jun's supervision of national history, estimated that he recorded solid wood, and therefore summoned the historian to check the book that recorded government affairs on a daily basis. The historian said that the things under official ban were not for outsiders to know, and he was afraid of being convicted for leaking.

古文：峻贬后，李穀监修，因请命近臣录禁中事付史馆，乃命枢密直学士就枢密院录送史馆，自此始。
现代文：王峻被贬官后，李谷监修国史，因而请求命令近臣记录宫禁中的事交付史馆，于是命令枢密直学士到枢密院誊录并送交史馆，从此开始这样做。
English: After Wang Jun was demoted, Li Gu supervised the study of national history, and thus requested an order to his close vassal to record the events of the palace ban and deliver them to the history museum. He then ordered the privy council to transcribe the records and send them to the history museum, and began to do so from then on.

古文：○王殷
现代文：王殷，大名人。
English: Wang Yin, a great celebrity.

古文：王殷，大名人也。少为军卒，以军功累迁灵武马步军都指挥使。
现代文：年轻时当兵，因军功屡升为灵武马步军都指挥使。
English: When he was young, he was a soldier, and because of his military achievements, he was repeatedly promoted to command and lead the Lingwu horse infantry.

古文：唐废帝时，从范延光讨张令昭于魏，以功拜祁州刺史。
现代文：唐废帝时，随范延光在魏州讨伐张令昭，因功拜任祁州刺史。
English: When the Tang Dynasty was overthrown, he followed Fan Yanguang to fight against Zhang Lingzhao in Weizhou, and was awarded the title of Sashishi of Weizhou for his service.

古文：晋天福中，徙原州刺史。
现代文：晋天福中，调任原州刺史。
English: Jintianfu Junior High School, transferred to the original state.

古文：殷事母以孝闻，欲与人游，必先白母，母所不可者，未尝取往。
现代文：王殷事奉母亲以孝顺出名，想和人出游，必定事先告诉母亲，母亲不认可的，不曾敢去。
English: Wang Yin served his mother and was known for his filial piety. If he wanted to travel with someone, he must tell his mother in advance. If his mother did not approve, he would not dare to go.

古文：及为刺史，政事有小失，母责之，殷即取杖授婢仆，自笞于母前。
现代文：等到任刺史时，政事小有过失，母亲责备他，王殷就取来刑杖交给婢仆，在母亲面前捶打自己。
English: When it came time for Ren Zhishi to die, he made a minor mistake in a political matter. His mother scolded him, and Wang Yin took out a cane and handed it to his maid, beating himself in front of his mother.

古文：母亡服丧，晋高祖诏殷起复，以为宪州刺史，殷乞终丧。
现代文：母亲死后服丧，晋高祖下诏书让王殷起复，任命为宪州刺史，王殷请求服完丧。
English: After the death of his mother, Wang Yin went into mourning. The Emperor Jingu issued an edict to reinstate Wang Yin and appointed him as the state historian. Wang Yin requested that the mourning period be completed.

古文：服除，出帝以为奉国右厢都指挥使。
现代文：完丧后，晋出帝任命他为奉国右厢都指挥使。
English: After the funeral, Emperor Jinzei appointed him to serve the country as the right wing capital command envoy.

古文：后从汉高祖讨杜重威，先登力战，矢中其脑，镞自口出而不死，高祖嘉之，以为侍卫步军都指挥使，领宁江军节度使。
现代文：后来随汉高祖讨伐杜重威，首先登城，奋力作战，箭射中他的头，箭头从他口中穿出而没有死，汉高祖表彰他，任命为侍卫步军都指挥使，兼任宁江军节度使。
English: Later, he followed the Han Emperor Gaozu to fight against Du Chongwei. He first went to the city and fought hard. An arrow hit his head, and the arrow came out of his mouth without dying. The Han Emperor Gaozu commended him and appointed him as the commander of the Foot Guards and the commander of the Ningjiang Army.

古文：契丹犯边，汉遣殷以兵屯澶州。
现代文：契丹侵犯边境，汉派王殷率兵屯驻澶州。
English: Khitan invaded the border, and Han dispatched Wang Yin and his troops to settle in Zhangzhou.

古文：隐帝已杀杨邠等，诏镇宁军节度使李弘义杀殷于澶州，又诏郭崇杀周太祖于魏。
现代文：漠隐帝已杀掉杨郇等人，下韶让镇宁军节度使李弘义在澶州杀掉王殷，又下诏命令郭崇在魏州杀掉周太祖。
English: Emperor Muyin had already killed Yang Hui and others, and ordered Li Hongyi to kill Wang Yin in Zhangzhou, and Guo Chong to kill Zhou Taizu in Weizhou.

古文：诏书至澶州，弘义恐事不果，反以告殷，殷遣人驰至魏告周太祖，遂起兵反。
现代文：诏书到达澶州，李弘义怕不能成事，反而把事情告诉王殷，王殷派人驰马到魏州告诉周太祖，于是起兵反叛。
English: When the imperial edict arrived in Bozhou, Li Hongyi feared that he would not be able to accomplish anything, but instead told Wang Yin about the matter. Wang Yin sent a man on horseback to Weizhou to tell Zhou Taizu, and then rebelled.

古文：太祖入立，拜侍卫亲军都指挥使，出为天雄军节度使、同中书门下平章事，仍领亲军，自河以北皆受殷节度。
现代文：周太祖登位，拜任侍卫亲军都指挥使，出任天雄军节度使、同中书门下平章事，照旧统领亲军，从黄河以北都受王殷指挥。
English: When Zhou Taizu ascended the throne, he became the commander-in-chief of the Imperial Guards, the commander-in-chief of the Imperial Guards, the commander-in-chief of the Imperial Guards, the commander-in-chief of the Imperial Guards, the commander-in-chief of the Imperial Guards, the commander-in-chief of the Imperial Guards, the commander-in-chief of the Imperial Guards, the commander-in-chief of the Imperial Guards, the commander-in-chief of the Imperial Guards and the commander-in-chief of the Imperial Guards.

古文：殷颇务聚敛，太祖闻而恶之，遣人谓之曰： 吾起魏时，帑廪储畜岂少邪？
现代文：王殷致力于聚敛财富，周太祖听说后厌恶此事，派人对他说： 我在魏州起兵时，库存的钱粮难道少吗？
English: Wang Yin devoted himself to amassing wealth. When Zhou Taizu heard of this, he was disgusted and sent someone to say to him: When I raised an army in Weizhou, was there not enough money and grain in stock?

古文：汝为国家用，足矣。 
现代文：你为国为家而用，够了。 
English: You serve your country and your family. That's enough.

古文：殷不听。
现代文：王殷不听。
English: Wang Yin did not listen.

古文：殷与王峻俱从太祖起自魏，后峻得罪，殷不自安。
现代文：壬殷和王峻都随周太祖在魏州起兵，后来王峻获罪，王殷心中不安。
English: Both Jin Yin and Wang Jun followed Zhou Taizu in raising an army in Weizhou. Later, Wang Jun was found guilty, and Wang Yin felt uneasy.

古文：广顺三年秋九月永寿节，殷求入为寿，太祖许之，而惧其疑也，复遣使止之。明年，太祖有事于南郊。是冬，殷来朝，殷握兵柄，职当警卫，出入多以兵从，又求兵甲，以备非常。
现代文：广顺三年秋九月永寿节，壬殷请求进朝祝寿，周太祖同意了，而怕他疑心，又派使臣阻止他《第二年周太祖在南郊祭祀，这年冬天，王殷前来朝见，王殷手握兵权，职当警卫，进出常常带兵相随，又请求给他武器，以防万一。
English: In the autumn and September of the third year of Guangshun, on the festival of eternal life, Jinyin requested to go to the North to celebrate his birthday. Zhou Taizu agreed, but fearing his suspicion, he also sent an envoy to stop him. "In the second year, Zhou Taizu held a sacrifice in the southern suburbs. This winter, Wang Yin came to see the emperor. Wang Yin held the military power in his hand, served as a guard, and often accompanied soldiers in and out. He also requested to give him weapons, just in case.

古文：是时，太祖卧疾，疑殷有异志，乃力疾御滋德殿，殷入起居，即命执之，削夺在身官爵，长流登州。已而杀之，徙其家属于登州。
现代文：这时，周太祖因病卧床，怀疑土殷有二心，于是带病驾临滋德殿，王殷进来问候起居，周太祖就命令抓捕他，削夺在身官爵，长期流放登州不久杀掉他，把他的家属迁到登州。
English: At this time, Zhou Taizu was bedridden due to illness and suspected that Tu Yin was of two minds. Therefore, he drove to Zide Hall with illness. Wang Yin came in for greetings and moved in. Zhou Taizu ordered to arrest him, strip him of his title, and kill him soon after his long-term exile in Danzhou, and move his family members to Danzhou.

古文：○刘词刘词，字好谦，大名元城人也。
现代文：刘词字好谦，大名元城人。
English: Liu Zi Zi is very humble, and he is a big name in Yuancheng.

古文：少事杨师厚，以勇悍知名。
现代文：年轻时追随杨师厚，以勇猛强悍出名。
English: When he was young, he followed Yang Shihou and became famous for his bravery and strength.

古文：唐庄宗下魏博，与梁战夹河，词以军功为效节军使，迁长剑指挥使，坐事左迁汝州十馀年。
现代文：唐庄宗攻克魏博，和梁在黄河两岸交战，刘词因军功任效节军使，升任长剑指挥使，因事降职到汝州十多年。
English: Tang Zhuangzong conquered Weibo, and Liang fought on both sides of the Yellow River. Liu Zi was promoted to commander of the Long Sword and demoted to Ruzhou for more than ten years.

古文：废帝时，诏诸州镇选骁勇者充禁军，词得选为禁军校。
现代文：唐废帝时，下诏让各州镇挑选骁悍勇猛的人充实禁军，刘词得以被选为禁军校。
English: When Emperor Tang was overthrown, he issued an edict to let each county and town select brave and courageous people to enrich the forbidden army, and Liu Zhi was selected as a forbidden military school.

古文：从破张从宾、杨光远，以功迁奉国第一军都虞候。
现代文：参与打败张从宾、杨光速，因功升任奉国第一军都虞候。
English: He participated in the defeat of Zhang Congbin and Yang Guanghui, and was promoted to the first army of the country for his merits.

古文：从马全节破安州，以功迁指挥使。
现代文：跟随马全节攻克安州，因功升任指挥使。
English: He followed Ma Quanzhong in conquering Anzhou and was promoted to the post of commander-in-chief.

古文：从杜重威破镇州，以先登功拜泌州刺史。
现代文：随同杜重威攻克镇州，因首先登城之功拜任泌州刺史。
English: Accompanied by Du Chongwei, he conquered Zhenzhou, and was named the first to conquer Zhenzhou.

古文：晋军讨安从进，为襄州行营都虞候，以功迁泌州团练使。
现代文：晋军讨伐安从进，他担任襄州行营都虞候，因功升任泌州团练使。
English: He served as the camp commander of Xiangzhou and was promoted to be the training commander of the Zhouzhou Regiment.

古文：徙房州，岁馀，为政不苛挠，人颇便之。
现代文：调任到房州，一年多，为政不骚扰百姓，人人都觉得便利。
English: After being transferred to Fangzhou for more than a year, everyone found it convenient not to harass the people for politics.

古文：词居暇日，常被甲枕戈而卧，谓人曰： 我以此取富贵，岂可一日辄忘之？
现代文：刘词空闲时，常常穿着镗甲，头枕戈戟而卧，对人说： 我靠它们取得富贵，难道能一天忘了它们吗？
English: In his spare time, Liu Zi often wore armor and lay with his head on his pillow. He would say to people, "I have become rich and famous through them. Can I just forget about them one day?

古文：且人情易习，若一堕其筋力，有事何以报国！ 
现代文：而且人的性情容易积习难改，如果一旦筋力怠惰，有战事时拿什么报国！ 
English: Moreover, people's temperament is easy to accumulate and difficult to change, if once the muscle strength is lazy, what to take for the country when there is a war!

古文：汉高祖时，复为奉国右厢都指挥使。
现代文：汉高祖时，又任奉国右厢都指挥使。
English: When he was the founder of Henkel, he was also appointed as the commander of the right wing of the country.

古文：汉军讨李守贞于河中，词以侍卫步军都指挥使领宁江军节度使，为行营都虞候，以功拜镇国军节度使。
现代文：汉军在河中讨伐李守贞，刘词以侍卫步军都指挥使兼宁江军节度使，任行营都虞候，因功拜任镇国军节度使。
English: The Han army fought against Li Shouzhen in the middle of the river, and Liu Zi became the commander of the guards and foot soldiers and the festival envoy of the Ningjiang Army, and was appointed as the commander of the camp, and the festival envoy of the town and country army for his service.

古文：周太祖入立，加同中书门下平章事。
现代文：周太祖登位，加同中害门下平章事。
English: Zhou Taizu ascended to the throne, and Zhongyong Zhongyong was forced to abdicate.

古文：历镇安国、河阳三城。
现代文：相继镇守安国、河阳三城。
English: Successively, the town guards An Guo and the three cities of Heyang.

古文：世宗战高平，樊爱能等军败南走，遇词而止之曰： 军败矣，可无前也。 词不听，辄趣兵以进，世宗嘉之，以为随驾都部署。
现代文：周世宗在高平作战，樊爱能等军战败南逃，碰上刘词并劝阻他说： 军队败了，可以不前进了 刘词不听，反而催兵前进，周世宗嘉奖他，任命为随驾都部署。
English: Zhou Shizong was fighting in Gaoping. Zou Ailen and other troops were defeated and fled to the south. He met Liu Zi and dissuaded him saying, "The army is defeated, it can not advance. Liu Zi did not listen, but instead urged the troops to advance. Zhou Shizong praised him and appointed him to accompany the deployment.

古文：及班师，以为河东行营副都部署，徙镇永兴。
现代文：到回师后，任命为河东行营副都部署，调任镇守永兴。
English: After returning to the division, he was appointed deputy commander of the Hedong Campaign and transferred to the town of Yongxing.

古文：明年卒于镇，年六十五，赠侍中，谥忠惠。
现代文：第二年死在任上，享年六十五岁，追赠为侍中，谧号忠惠。
English: He died in office the following year, at the age of sixty-five, and was posthumously promoted to the position of chamberlain, with the posthumous title of Tadahide.

古文：○王环王环，镇州真定人也。以勇力事孟知祥为御者，及知祥僭号于蜀，使典卫兵。
现代文：王环，镇州真定人，因勇猛有力为孟知祥驾车，到孟知祥在蜀越分称帝时，让他拳管卫兵。
English: Wang Huan, a Zhenzhou Zhending person, drove for Meng Zhixiang because of his bravery and strength, and when Meng Zhixiang was crowned emperor in Shu Yue, he let him be the fist guard.

古文：晋开运之乱，秦、凤、阶、成入于蜀，孟昶以环为凤州节度使。
现代文：晋开运年间动乱时，秦、凤、阶、成四州都归入蜀，孟昶任命王环为凤州节度使。
English: During the turmoil during the Jin Dynasty, the four states of Qin, Feng, Qi, and Cheng were all incorporated into Shu. Meng Hui appointed Wang Huan as the envoy to the Fengzhou Festival.

古文：周世宗即位，明年，遣王景、向训攻秦、凤州，数为环所败，大臣皆请罢兵。
现代文：周世宗登位，第二年，派王景、向训攻打秦、凤二州，多次被王环打败，大臣们都请求停战。
English: Zhou Shizong ascended the throne, and in the second year, he sent Wang Jing and Xiang Xun to attack Qin and Feng Erzhou. They were repeatedly defeated by Wang Huan, and the ministers all requested an armistice.

古文：世宗曰： 吾欲一天下以为家，而声教不及秦、凤，今兵已出，无功而返，吾有惭焉。 
现代文：周世宗说： 我想统一天下成一家，而风声教化不能到达秦、凤二州，如今已出兵，无功而回，我对此感到羞惭。 
English: Zhou Shizong said: I want to unify the country and become one family, but the wind of enlightenment cannot reach Qin and Feng two states. Now I have sent troops and returned without success. I am ashamed of this.

古文：乃决意攻之。
现代文：于是决意进攻。
English: So they decided to attack.

古文：周兵粮道颇艰，昶遣兵五千出堂仓抵黄花谷以争粮道。
现代文：周兵运粮的路很艰险，孟昶派兵五千人出堂仓到达黄花谷争夺粮道。
English: The way of transporting grain by Zhou soldiers was very perilous. Meng Wei sent five thousand soldiers out of the warehouse to reach Huanghua Valley to compete for the grain route.

古文：景、训先知其来，命排阵使张建雄以兵二千当谷口，别遣裨将以劲兵千人出其后，伏堂仓以待其归。
现代文：王景、向训事先知道他们前来，命令排阵使张建雄率兵二干人把守谷口，另派副将率强兵一千人绕到他们后面，埋伏在堂仓等待他们返回。
English: Wang Jing and Xiang Xun knew in advance that they were coming, and ordered Zhang Jianxiong and two soldiers to form a line to guard the valley mouth, and sent a vice-general and a thousand strong soldiers to go around behind them and wait in the warehouse for them to return.

古文：蜀兵前遇建雄，战不胜，退走堂仓，伏发，尽殪之，由是蜀兵守诸城堡者皆溃。初，昶遣其秦州节度使高处俦以兵援环，未至，闻堂仓兵败，亦溃归，处俦判官赵玭闭城不内，处俦遂奔成都，玭乃以城降，成、阶二州相继亦降，独环坚守百馀日，然后克之。
现代文：蜀兵在前面遇上张建雄，交战不胜，退逃到堂仓，伏兵出动，把他们全部杀死，因此把守各城堡的蜀兵都溃散了，当初，孟昶派遣秦州节度使高处俦率兵援助王环，还没到，获知堂仓兵败，也溃逃而回，高处俦属下判官赵砒关闭城门不让他进去，高处俦于是逃奔成都，趟砒于是献城投降，成、阶二州相继也投降了，惟独王环坚守一百多天，然后纔被攻克。
English: The Shu soldiers encountered Zhang Jianxiong in the front, were defeated in battle, retreated to Dongcang, sent out ambushes, and killed them all. As a result, the Shu soldiers guarding the castles were dispersed. At the beginning, Meng Wei sent Qin Zhou Jiedu to have Gao Jian and his soldiers aid Wang Huan. Before he arrived, he learned of the defeat of the Dongcang soldiers, and also fled back. Gao Jian's subordinate judge Zhao Wei closed the gate and did not let him enter. Gao Jian then fled to Chengdu. Wuchang then surrendered the city. Cheng and the two states

古文：世宗召见环，叹曰： 三州已降，环独坚守，吾数以书招之，而环不答，至于力屈就擒，虽不能死，亦忠其所事也，用之可劝事君者。 
现代文：周世宗召见壬环，感叹说： 三个州郡都已投降，王环独力坚守，我多次写信招降他，而王环不理睬，以至于力尽被擒，虽然未能以死殉职，也还忠于他所事奉的君主，起用他可以鼓励那些事奉君主的人。 
English: Zhou Shizong summoned Renhuan and lamented, "Three states and counties have already surrendered, but Wanghuan is holding out single-handedly. I have repeatedly written letters to recruit him, but Wanghuan ignored them, so much so that he tried his best to be captured. Although he could not die in the line of duty, he was still loyal to the monarch he served, and he could be used to encourage those who served the monarch.

古文：乃拜环右骁卫将军。
现代文：于是拜任王环为右骁卫将军。
English: Therefore, he appointed Wang Huan as the general of the Right Division.

古文：是时，周师已征淮，即以环佐侯章为攻取贼城水砦副部署。
现代文：适时，后周军队已经出征淮地，就让王环协助侯章为攻取贼城水寨副部署。
English: At the right time, after Zhou's army had left for Huaiji, Wang Huan was asked to assist Hou Zhang in the sub-deployment to capture the Thief's City.

古文：其父嗣伦，为麟州刺史。从阮为人，温恭长者，居父丧，以孝闻。唐庄宗镇太原，以为牙将，后以为府州刺史。晋出帝与契丹败盟，从阮以兵攻契丹，取其城堡十馀，迁本州团练使，兼领朔州刺史、安北都护、振武军节度使、契丹西南面行营马步军都虞候。汉高祖入立，于府州建永安军，以从阮为节度使。明年，以其族朝京师，徙镇武胜，即拜从阮子德扆为府州团练使。
现代文：当初，周军南征，李景在淮河陈兵，战船很多，周军没有打水仗的战船，周世宗为此担忧，于是在京城西面设置造船务，制造几百艘战舰，又得到李景的降兵，教他们水战第一：年，周世宗再次征伐淮地，派遣王环率领水兵几千人，从蔡河进入淮河，壬环在军中，不曾有战功；和王环一道被抓获的蜀兵，周世宗小杀他们，让他们全部随军作战，后来很多人都大南方投奔李景，周世宗对王环更加深信不疑，不久李景部将许文缜、边镐等人部被抓获，周世宗全部任命他们为将军，和王环等人在京师成排修建府宅，一年四时赏赐十分鲎厚，第：年周世宗又到淮南，又让王环随行，王环患病，死在泗州。折从阮字可久，原名折从速，避汉高祖的名讳，改名阮，云中人。他的父亲折嗣伦，担任麟州刺史，折从阮约为人，像一个潍和恭谨的长者，为父亲服丧，以孝顺出名唐庄宗镇守太原，让他做牙将，后来任命他为府州刺史，晋出帝和契丹毁弃盟约，折从阮率兵攻打契丹，攻取契丹城堡十多处，升任本州岛团练使，兼任朔州刺史、安北部护、振武军节度使、契丹西南面行营马步军都虞候汉高祖登位，在府州建置永安军，任命折从阮为节度使第二年，折从阮率领他的族人到京师朝拜，调任镇守武胜，随即任命折从阮的儿子折德康为府州团练使。
English: At first, Zhou's army was marching south, and Li Jing was in the Huai River. There were many warships, and Zhou's army did not have warships for water battles. Zhou Shizong was worried about this, so he set up a shipbuilding business in the west of Beijing and made hundreds of warships. He also got Li Jing's demotion and taught them the first water battle. In the year of the Year of the Dragon, Zhou Shizong again invaded Huai, sent Wang Huan to lead thousands of sailors, and entered the Huai River from the Cai River. Ren Huan was in the army, and had no military merit; and

古文：周太祖入立，从阮历徙宣义、保义、静难三镇。
现代文：周太祖登位，折从阮依次调任宣义、保义、静难三镇节度使。
English: Zhou Taizu ascended to the throne, and was transferred from Ruan Yiji to the three towns of Xuanyi, Baoyi and Jingnan.

古文：显德二年，罢还京师，行至洛阳卒，赠中书令。
现代文：显德二年，罢任回到京师，走到洛阳时去世，赠官为中书令。
English: In the second year of Xiande, he resigned and returned to the Beijing division, and died when he went to Luoyang.

