古文：斜封官卢从愿韦抗张仁愿杜暹魏知古卢齐卿王丘崔琳裴光庭薛据李林甫张说张奭杨国忠陆贽郑余庆裴遵庆李绛李建崔安潜
现代文：斜封官卢从愿韦抗张仁愿杜暹魏知古卢齐卿王丘崔琳裴光庭薛据李林甫张说张奭杨国忠陆贽郑余庆裴遵庆李绛李建崔安潜
English: Oblique seal official Lu Zongwei Wei Zhang Ren Zong Du Siam Wei Zhigu Lu Qi Wang Qiu Cui Lin Pei Guang Ting Xue According to Li Lin Fu Zhang said Zhang Qian Yang Guozhong Lu Zheng Yu Qing Pei Zun Qing Lijian Li Jian Cui An Qian

古文：斜封官
现代文：斜封官
English: Oblique sealing officer

古文：唐景龙年中，斜封得官者二百人，从屠贩而践高位。
现代文：唐中宗景龙年间，韦后及太平、安乐、长宁等公主，仗势用权，收受贿赂，于侧门降墨敕付中书授官，得官者二百多人，人们称这种官为斜封官。一些屠夫贩卒爬上了高位。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jinglong in the Tang Dynasty, more than two hundred people were appointed to high-ranking positions by Princess Wei Hou, Princess Taiping, Princess Anle, Princess Changning, and other princesses, who used their power, accepted bribes, and inscribed their names in Chinese characters at the side gate. These officials were called oblique seal officials. Some butchers and peddlers climbed to high positions.

古文：景云践祚，尚书宋璟、御史大夫毕构，奏停斜封人官。
现代文：睿宗李旦继承了皇后位，尚书宋璟、御史大夫毕构，上奏书，停止了斜封官。
English: Ruizong Li Dan succeeded to the empress's throne, Shang Shu Song Yao, Goshi Daifu Bi Jie, Shang Song Shu, stopped the oblique seal.

古文：璟、构出后，见鬼人彭卿受斜封人贿赂，奏云：见孝和怒曰，我与人官，何因夺却？
现代文：宋璟、毕构被罢出官后，见鬼人彭卿受一些斜封官的贿赂向皇帝上奏说：我见到了死去的孝和皇帝他发怒了，他说： 我给人封的官，你们为什么都给罢了？ 
English: After Song Xi and Bi Jie were removed from office, the devil-worshiper Peng Qing was bribed by some oblique officials to report to the emperor and said: I saw the dead Xiao and the emperor He was angry, he said: I give people the title of official, why do you all give it?

古文：于是斜封皆复旧职。
现代文：于是那些斜封官又官复原职。
English: As a result, those officials who had been deprived of their posts were reinstated.

古文：伪周革命之际，十道使人，天下选残明经进士及下村教童蒙博士，皆被搜扬。不曾试练，并与美职。
现代文：武后则天篡权鹅时候，全国各地需要人，一些落榜的秀才和村中教书的先生，都被搜罗去了，不经过考试和锻炼，就给一个很美的差事。
English: When Empress Wu was usurped by the heavens, people were needed all over the country. Some talented people who had fallen off the list and teachers who taught in the village were all collected and given a very beautiful assignment without going through examinations and training.

古文：尘黩士人之品，诱悦愚夫之心。庸才者得官以为荣，有才得官以为辱。
现代文：这样做污辱了读书人的品格，而使那些无能之辈得到了欢心，庸才得到了官，感到荣耀，有才的人感到耻辱。
English: In this way, the character of the reader is slandered, and the incompetent are flattered, the mediocre are honored, and the talented are humiliated.

古文：昔赵王伦之篡也，天下孝廉秀才茂异，并不简试。
现代文：晋司马伦篡位时，国内一些品质不好、才智不佳的人，都不经考试，一样封官。
English: At the time of the usurpation of the throne by Jin Malen, some people in China who were not of good quality and talent did not pass the examination, and they were also sealed.

古文：雷同与官，市道屠沽，亡命不轨，皆封侯略尽。
现代文：一些杀猪卖酒的亡命徒，都被封了侯，做了官。
English: Some of the outlaws who killed pigs and sold alcohol have been canonized and made officials.

古文：太府之铜不供铸印，至有白版侯者。
现代文：宫廷中的铜都不够铸印用，以至于有些人只能用白板代印。
English: There wasn't enough copper in the court to use for printing, so some people had to use a whiteboard instead.

古文：朝会之服，貂者大半。
现代文：到大朝会时戴貂饰的只有一大半。
English: By the time of the grand morning assembly, only a majority of the members were wearing the ornaments.

古文：故谣云：貂不足，狗尾续。
现代文：所以有民谣说：貂不足，狗尾续。
English: That's why there is a folk song that says, "If the yakitori is not enough, the dog will follow."

古文：小人多幸，君子耻之。
现代文：小人感到高兴，君子感到耻辱。
English: The villain is pleased, the gentleman is humiliated.

古文：无道之朝，一何连类也，惜哉！
现代文：一些无道的昏君，他们怎么那么相似。令人痛惜呀！
English: Some senseless dimwits, how are they so similar. It's pitiful!

古文：卢从愿
现代文：卢从愿
English: Lu Congnian

古文：景云元年，卢从愿为侍郎，精心条理，大称平允。
现代文：唐睿宗景云元年，卢从愿任吏部侍郎，他选官认真，照章办事，人都说他办事公道。
English: In the first year of Tang Ruizong Jingyun, Lu Congyi was appointed as the secretary of the cadre department. He carefully selected officials and acted according to regulations. People said that he acted fairly.

古文：其有冒名伪选，虚增功状之类，皆能擿发其事。
现代文：有冒名参选的，或虚报功绩请赏的，他都能给以揭发。
English: He can expose anyone who runs for election under a false name, or who falsely claims to have received a reward for their achievements.

古文：典选六年，颇有声称。
现代文：他主持考选官六年，很有声誉。
English: He presided over the selection of examiners for six years and had a great reputation.

古文：时人曰：前有裴马，后有卢李。
现代文：当时人们说，前有裴马，后有卢李。
English: At that time, people said that before there was Pei Ma, after there was Lu Li.

古文：裴即行俭，马谓戴，李谓朝隐。
现代文：裴是裴行俭，马是马戴，李是李朝隐。
English: Pei is Pei Xingjian, Ma is Ma Dai, Li is Li Chaoying.

古文：韦抗
现代文：韦抗
English: Weizhou

古文：景云二年，御史中丞韦抗加京畿按察使。举奉天县尉梁升卿、新丰尉王倕、金城县尉王水、华原县尉王焘为判官。其后皆著名位。
现代文：景云二年，御史中丞韦抗担任京畿按察使，他举荐奉天县尉梁升卿、新丰尉王倕、金城县尉王水、华原县尉王焘为判官，后来这些人，都名位显赫。
English: In the second year of the Jingyun era, Grand Historian Zhongzheng Weihang served as the inspector of Gyeonggi Province. He recommended Bongtian County Lieutenant Liang Shengqing, Xinfeng County Lieutenant Wang Qi, Jincheng County Lieutenant Wang Shui, and Hua Yuan County Lieutenant Wang Qi as judges. Later, these people were all famous.

古文：张仁愿
现代文：张仁愿
English: Zhang Renzhen

古文：景云二年，朔方总管张仁愿奏用监察御史张敬忠、何奕，长安县尉寇泚，鄠县尉王易从，始平县主簿刘体微分判军事；义乌县尉晁良贞为随军。
现代文：景云二年，北方总管张仁愿上奏，选用了监察御史张敬忠、何奕、长安县尉寇泚、鄠县尉王易从、始平县主簿刘体微分管军事，义乌县尉晁良贞为随军。
English: In the second year of Jingyun, Zhang Renzhen, the general manager of the north, chose the inspector of history Zhang Jingzhong, He Yi, the Chang'an County lieutenant Kou Qi, the Shijiazhuang County lieutenant Wang Yicong, the Shihping County master book Liu Tie, the differential control of military affairs, and the Yiwu County lieutenant Yu Liangzhen as the accompanying troops.

古文：后皆至大官。
现代文：后来都当了大官。
English: Later, they all became high-ranking officials.

古文：杜暹
现代文：杜暹
English: Dusiam

古文：景云二年，卢从愿为吏部侍郎。杜暹自婺州参军调集，补郑县尉。
现代文：景云二年，卢从愿任吏部侍郎时，杜暹从婺州参军一职调到郑县任县尉，后来杜暹升为户部尚书。
English: In the second year of Jingyun, when Lu Congzhi served as the secretary of the cadre department, Du Siem was transferred from Bozhou to join the army to serve as a county lieutenant in Zheng County. Later, Du Siem was promoted to the household secretary.

古文：后暹为户部尚书，从愿自益州长史入朝。暹立在卢上，谓之曰：选人定何如？
现代文：卢从愿从益州长史调入朝廷，杜暹的官位比卢从愿高。他问卢从愿： 你选定的人怎么样？ 
English: Lu Congnian was transferred to the imperial court from the governor of Yixian, and Du Xian's official rank was higher than Lu Congnian's. He asked Lu Congnian: How are the people you have chosen?

古文：卢曰：亦由仆之藻鉴，遂使明公展千里足也。
现代文：卢从愿说： 是由我反复评选、鉴别，才能使你施展自己的才能。 
English: Lu Zongyan said: It is up to me to repeatedly select and identify, in order to enable you to exert your talents.

古文：魏知古
现代文：魏知古
English: Wei Zhiguo

古文：先天元年，侍中魏知古尝表荐洹水县令吕太一、蒲州司功参军齐瀚、右内率府骑曹柳泽。
现代文：唐玄宗先天元年，侍中魏知古曾经上表推荐洹水县令吕太一、蒲州司功参军齐瀚、右内率府骑曹柳泽。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xuanzong's reign, Wei Zhigu, a chamberlain, recommended that Lv Taiyi, the governor of Lishui County, and Puzhou Shigong join Qihan's army, and Cao Liuze, the governor of Inner Mongolia, lead the army.

古文：及为吏部尚书。又擢密县尉宋遥，左补阙袁晖、封希颜，伊阙县尉陈希烈。
现代文：魏知古当了吏部尚书后，又提升了密县尉宋遥、左补阙袁晖、封希颜、伊阙县尉陈希烈。
English: After Wei Zhigu became the head of the cadre department, he also promoted the county lieutenants Song Yao, Zuo Zhi Yao, Yuan Shao, Feng Xiyan, and Chen Xilei.

古文：其后咸居清要。
现代文：后来这些人都做了清要官。
English: Later, these people all became Qing dignitaries.

古文：卢齐卿
现代文：卢齐卿
English: Lord Lucan

古文：开元元年，卢齐卿为幽州刺史。时张守珪为果毅，特礼接之。
现代文：唐玄宗开元元年，卢齐卿任幽州刺史，当时张守珪任果毅都尉，卢齐卿很敬重他。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, Lu Qi served as the governor of Yuzhou. At that time, Zhang Shouwen served as the captain of Guoyi. Lu Qi respected him very much.

古文：谓曰：十年内当节度。
现代文：卢对张说： 十年内你准能当节度使。 
English: Lu said to Zhang, "Within ten years, you will surely be able to be a military commander."

古文：果如其言也。
现代文：后来果然和卢齐卿说的一样，张守珪做了节度使。
English: Later, just as Lord Lu Qi had said, Zhang Shouyi became the envoy to the festival.

古文：王丘
现代文：王丘
English: Wang Qiu

古文：开元八年七月，王丘为吏部侍郎，擢山阴尉孙逖、桃林尉张镜微、湖城丞张晋明、进士王冷然、李昂等。
现代文：唐玄宗开元八年七月，王丘任吏部侍郎，提拔山阴县尉孙逖、桃林县尉张镜微、湖城县丞张晋明、进士王冷然、李昂等人。
English: In July of the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, Wang Qiu was appointed as a chamberlain of the cadre department, and promoted Sanyin County Lieutenant Sun Qian, Taolin County Lieutenant Zhang Jingwei, Hucheng County Lieutenant Zhang Jinming, Jin Shi Wang Lengran, Li Ang and others.

古文：不数年，登礼闱，掌纶诰焉。
现代文：不多年，都进入尚书省，专门给皇帝缮写诏书。
English: Not many years ago, they all went to Shangshu Province to write an imperial edict specifically for the emperor.

古文：崔琳
现代文：崔琳
English: Choi Lin

古文：十一年十二月，吏部侍郎崔琳铨日，收选残人卢怡、裴敦复、於号卿等十数人。无何，皆入台省。
现代文：唐玄宗开元十一年十二月，吏部侍郎崔琳选授官员时，他收选了残疾人卢怡，裴敦复、於号卿等十多人，不久，他们都进入各部任官。
English: In December of the eleventh year of Emperor Tang Xuan Zong's reign, when Choe Lin, the steward of the personnel department, selected officials, he selected more than ten people including disabled people Lu Yi, Pei Dun Fu, and Yu Xueqing. Soon, they all entered the various departments to serve as officials.

古文：众以为知人。
现代文：大家都认为崔琳知人善用。
English: Everyone thinks that Cui Lin's acquaintances are useful.

古文：裴光庭
现代文：裴光庭
English: Pei Guangting

古文：开元十八年，苏晋为侍郎，而侍中裴光庭每过官，应批退者，但对众披簿，以朱笔点头而已。
现代文：唐玄宗开元十八年，苏晋任侍郎，侍中裴光庭在每次选官时，将应该批退的人，用朱笔在姓名上划一点，然后当众公布。
English: In the 18th year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, Su Jin served as a chamberlain, and the chamberlain, Pei Guangting, used a red pen to mark the names of those who should be rejected at each election, and then announced them to the public.

古文：晋遂榜选院：门下点头者，更引注拟。
现代文：苏晋却把名单张贴在选院，门下省点过姓名的，在名下详细的写下应选应退。
English: Su Jin, on the other hand, posted the list at the polling station. Underneath the door, his name was dotted, and under his name, he wrote in detail whether he should be elected or not.

古文：光庭以为侮己，不悦。
现代文：裴光庭认为这是侮辱自己，很不高兴。
English: Pei Guangting thought this was an insult to himself and was very unhappy.

古文：时有门下主事阎鳞之，为光庭腹心，专主吏部过官。
现代文：当时门下省主事阎鳞之和裴光庭很要好，阎专门主持吏部选官。
English: At that time, Yan Qizhi and Pei Guangting, the provincial officials under him, were very close, and Yan specially presided over the selection of officials for the cadre department.

古文：每鳞之裁定，光庭随口下笔。
现代文：每当阎鳞之决定时，裴光庭便随手用笔记下。
English: Whenever Yan Qi's decision was made, Pei Guangting would casually take notes.

古文：时人语曰：鳞之口，光庭手。
现代文：当时人们说，鳞之口，光庭手。
English: At that time, people said that the mouth of the scale is the hand of the court.

古文：薛据
现代文：薛据
English: by Xue Jian

古文：开元中，薛据自恃才名，于吏部参选，请授万年录事。
现代文：唐玄宗开元中期，薛据认为自己很有才华和名气，在吏部参选时，请求授给他万年录事一职。
English: In the middle of the first century of the Tang Dynasty, Xue Xuanzong believed that he was very talented and famous. When he was running for the election of the cadre department, he requested that he be given the post of permanent record keeper.

古文：诸流外官共见宰执诉云：录事是某等清要官，今被进士欲夺，则某等色人，无措手足矣。
现代文：一些九品以外在京师官署当吏员的人都向主持选官的宰相说： 录事是地位显贵、职司重要的官职，现在一个进士想要夺这个官位，叫我们这些人该怎么办呢？ 
English: Some people who worked as clerks at the Beijing Division of the General Office of the Communist Party of China (CPC) in addition to Jiuping said to the prime minister who presided over the selection of officials: "Recording affairs is a high-ranking official position with an important function. Now a junior official wants to seize this official position, so what should we do?

古文：遂罢。
现代文：于是这事也就免去不办了。
English: So the argument died down.

古文：李林甫
现代文：李林甫
English: Li Linfu

古文：自开元二十年，吏部置南院，始悬长名，以定留放。
现代文：自唐玄宗开元二十年，吏部才开始设置南院，把所有参选任官的人张榜公布，以决定任用和落选。
English: It was not until the 20th year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty that the cadre department began to set up the Southern Yuan, and published a list of all the candidates for the appointment of officials to decide whether to appoint or not.

古文：时李林甫知选，宁王私谒林甫曰：就中乞一人。
现代文：开元年初，当时李林甫主持选官。宁王私下对李林甫为参选的一人说情。
English: At the beginning of the year, when Li Linfu presided over the election of officials, Ning Wang privately interceded for Li Linfu as one of the candidates.

古文：林甫责之。
现代文：李林甫没答应并责备了宁王。
English: Li Linfu did not agree and scolded Ning Wang.

古文：于是榜云：据其书判，自合得留，缘属宁王，且放冬集。
现代文：于是榜上说，根据考评官的评语，那人应该留用，但是由于宁王说情，暂不任用，等到冬天考评时再考评。
English: As a result, the list said that according to the comment of the evaluator, the person should be retained, but because of Ning Wang's intercession, he would not be appointed for the time being, and would be evaluated in the winter.

古文：张说
现代文：张说
English: Zhang said.

古文：中书舍人张均知考，父左相张说知京官考。
现代文：中书舍人张均主持官员的政绩考评，他的父亲左丞相张说则主持京官的政绩考评。
English: Zhang, the chief secretary of the CPC Central Committee, presided over the performance appraisal of officials, while his father, Zhang, the minister of the left, presided over the performance appraisal of Beijing officials.

古文：特注曰：父教子忠，古之善训。
现代文：张说在张均的评语上批道：父亲教导儿子忠心为国是自古以来的训教。
English: Zhang said that he criticized Zhang Jun's comment: the father teaches his son to be loyal to the country is a training since ancient times.

古文：祁奚举子，义不务私。
现代文：战国时期晋国的祁奚年老退休，推荐他儿子祁午做国尉，是为国不是为私。
English: During the Warring States period, the eldest son of Jin retired at the age of thirty, and recommended his son to be a lieutenant in the afternoon. It was for the country, not for me.

古文：至如润色王言，章施帝载，道参坟典，例绝常功，恭闻前烈，尤难其任。
现代文：你能弘扬皇帝的丰功伟绩，按照圣明皇帝的指示认真做事，效仿前贤的做法，主持公正，不是一般的成绩。即使是明敏的前辈，也是难以做到的。
English: To be able to carry forward the emperor's great achievements, to work conscientiously in accordance with the instructions of the Holy Emperor, to emulate the practices of the sages, and to preside over justice are not ordinary achievements. Even if you are an astute predecessor, it is difficult to achieve.

古文：岂以嫌疑，敢挠纲纪？
现代文：我虽然身为张均之父，但是不能为了避嫌而败坏了国家的纲纪。
English: Although I am the father of Zhang Jun, I cannot corrupt the national discipline in order to avoid suspicion.

古文：考上下。
现代文：考张均上下。
English: The examination papers are up and down.

古文：张奭
现代文：张奭
English: Zhang Ye

古文：苗晋卿典选，御史中丞张倚男奭参选，晋卿以倚子思悦附之。
现代文：苗晋卿担任主选官。御史中丞张倚的儿子张奭参选，晋卿以为张奭参选，是讨好依附张倚的好机会。
English: Miao Jinqing served as the chief election official. The son of the Imperial Historian Zhang Jiaro, Zhang Jiaro, participated in the election. Jinqing thought that Zhang Jiaro's participation was a good opportunity to please Zhang Jiaro.

古文：考等第凡六十四人，奭在其首。
现代文：考试六十四人中将张奭列在榜首。
English: Of the sixty-four people who took the exam, Zhang Xuan ranked first.

古文：苏考蕴者为蓟令，乃以选事告禄山。
现代文：苏考蕴任蓟县县令，就以这次考试舞弊事对安禄山说了。
English: Su Kaokun, the county magistrate of Handan County, told An Lushan about this examination fraud.

古文：禄山奏之，玄宗乃集登科人于花萼楼前重试，升第者十无一二。
现代文：安禄山将这件事奏给皇帝。玄宗就召集登科人在花萼楼前重新考试，及格的升第者十无一二。
English: An Lushan reported the matter to the emperor. Xuanzong then summoned the graduates to re-take the examination in front of the Flower Palace. Those who passed the examination and were promoted to the next grade were second to none.

古文：奭手持试纸，竟日不下一字。
现代文：张奭手持考试卷，竟一天也写不出一个字。
English: Zhang Ye held an exam paper in his hand, but he couldn't write a single word all day.

古文：时人谓之拽白。
现代文：当时人们叫作拽白。
English: At that time, people called it "tugging the white."

古文：上大怒，贬倚。
现代文：玄宗大怒，贬斥张倚。
English: Xuanzong was furious and denounced Zhang Jie.

古文：敕曰：庭闱之间，不能训子；选调之际，乃以托人天下为戏谈。
现代文：下敕说： 在家里不能很好教育儿子；考试的时候，托人说情，成为天下的笑谈。 
English: "I can't educate my son well at home, so when it comes to exams, I have to intercede, which has become a joke around the world," he said.

古文：晋卿贬安康。
现代文：把苗晋卿贬官到安康。
English: He demoted Miao Jinqing to Ankang.

古文：杨国忠
现代文：杨国忠
English: Yang Guozhong

古文：天宝十载十一月，杨国忠为右相，兼吏部尚书，奏请两京选人，铨日便定留放，无少长各于宅中引注。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝十年十一月，杨国忠为右相兼吏部尚书。上奏玄宗请求在西京长安、东京洛阳两京选人授官，玄宗答应了。
English: In November of the 10th year of Tang Xuan Zong's reign, Yang Guozhong was appointed minister of the right as well as minister of the civil service. At the meeting, Xuan Zong requested that officials be selected in Chang'an, West Beijing, and Luoyang, Tokyo. Xuan Zong agreed.

古文：虢国姊妹垂帘观之。
现代文：铨选那天，便决定任官。
English: On the day of the election, I decided to take up the post.

古文：或有老病丑陋者，皆指名以笑。
现代文：杨国忠专权任官只一人说了算，叫左相陈希烈在边上坐着。
English: Yang Guozhong, the sole person with the authority to make decisions, told the leftist Chen Xilei to sit on the sidelines.

古文：虽士大夫亦遭耻。故事，兵吏部事中行列于前曰：既对注拟，即是过门下了。
现代文：门下省给事中出了行列到前边说： 既然已经授职任官，就是经过门下省这道首续了。 
English: The subordinate province gave the matter a procession to the front and said: Since you have been appointed, you have passed through the subordinate province first.

古文：希烈等腹悱而已。
现代文：陈希烈等，口中不说，心里不愿意，只是闷坐而已。
English: Chen Xilei and others, do not say it, do not want to, just sit tight.

古文：侍郎韦见素、张倚皆衣紫，与本曹郎官，藩屏外排比案牍，趋走语事。
现代文：门下侍中韦见素、张倚都穿紫衣和本衙署郎中等官员，在藩屏外并排坐桌案后，如有事叫他们还得快走向前回话。
English: The junior attendants Wei Mingsu and Zhang Yiming, both wearing purple, and the middle-ranking officials of the Benxi District Office, sat side by side at the table outside the screen, and if something happened, they would have to quickly go to the previous meeting.

古文：乃谓帘中杨氏曰：两个紫袍主事何如？
现代文：给事中对帘中的杨国忠说： 两个穿紫衣服的主办这件事怎么样？ 
English: During the presentation, Yang Guozhong, who was in the middle of the curtain, said: How about the two hosts wearing purple clothes?

古文：杨乃大噱。
现代文：杨哈哈大笑。
English: Yang laughed out loud.

古文：选人郑怤附会其旨，与二十余人率钱于勤政楼设斋，兼为国忠立碑于尚书省南。
现代文：被选官郑怤阿谀奉承杨国忠，与二十余人拿着钱在勤政楼设宴，并且在尚书省南边给杨国忠立碑。
English: The elected official, Zheng Qi, flattered Yang Guozhong, held a banquet with more than 20 people with money in the Gongzheng Building, and erected a monument to Yang Guozhong in the south of Shangshu Province.

古文：所注吏部三铨选人，专务鞅掌，不能躬亲，皆委典及令史孔目官为之。
现代文：杨国忠主管这件事，吏部三铨授职、选拔、考绩等全免了。说吏部职务繁忙，不能亲自动手，皆委典史及令史、孔目官代替。
English: Yang Guozhong, who was in charge of this matter, said that the three departments in charge of conferring posts, selecting candidates, and evaluating performance were all exempted. He said that the posts in charge of posts were busy and could not be handled personally, and that the history of the Communist Party of China, the history of the Communist Party of China, and the official of the Communist Party of China were substituted.

古文：国忠但押一字，犹不可遍
现代文：杨国忠只是签个字而已，还不一定都签。
English: Yang Guozhong only signed a few words, but not necessarily all of them.

古文：陆贽
现代文：陆贽
English: Land reclamation

古文：选人并至，文书多，不可寻勘，真伪纷杂，吏因得大为奸巧。选人一蹉跌，或十年不得官。
现代文：唐德宗贞元八年春，宰相陆贽指示吏部恢复冬集选官。本来旧时惯例，吏部每年都要冬集选官，由于安史之乱，不能正常实行，三几年才能举行一次。选官时被选的官员，一齐都来，文书多，不可能细细地审查，真伪也难以分辨，下级的属吏也会趁此机会循私舞弊。被选的官员一旦若有失误，有的就可能得不到任职。
English: In the spring of the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of the Tang Dynasty, the prime minister, Lu Xun, instructed the personnel department to resume the winter selection of officials. Originally, the old practice was that the personnel department should select officials every year, but due to the Anshi Rebellion, it could not be implemented normally, and it could only be held once every three years. The officials selected at the time of the selection of officials all came together, there were many documents, it was impossible to scrutinize them in detail, and it was difficult to distinguish the true from the false, and lower-level subordinate officials would also take advantage of this opportunity to engage in self-dealing. If there

古文：而官之缺者，或累岁无人。
现代文：可是却官的地方，竟然也多年无人任职。
English: However, there has been no one in the position for many years.

古文：贽命吏部分内外官员为三分，计缺集人，岁以为常。
现代文：陆贽根据这种情况，让吏部把内外官员分成三个类别，根据缺额数，量才授官。以后就成为常规。
English: Based on this situation, Lu Wei asked the Personnel Department to divide the domestic and foreign officials into three categories, according to the number of vacancies, the amount of officials will be awarded. Later, it became a regular practice.

古文：其弊十去七八。天下称之。
现代文：这样做，弊病基本克服，天下人都称赞他。
English: By doing so, the malady was basically overcome, and people all over the world praised him.

古文：郑余庆
现代文：郑余庆
English: Zheng Yuqing

古文：刘禹锡曰：宣平郑相之铨衡也，选人相贺，得入其铨。
现代文：刘禹锡说： 郑余庆主持铨选非常公正。被选的人，若得到他任命，是很幸运的。 
English: Liu Yuxi said: "The election presided over by Zheng Yuqing is very fair. Those who are elected will be very lucky if they are appointed by him.

古文：刘禹锡曰：予从弟某在郑铨，注湖州一尉，唱唯而出。郑呼之却回曰，如公所试，场中无五六人。一唱便受之，此而不奖，何以铨衡？
现代文：刘禹锡又说过，我的同祖兄弟某某受郑铨选，授湖州一县尉，他已经谢过出来，郑余庆又把他喊回，对他说： 这次选官，全场像你这样有成绩的，不超过五六个人，不能马虎对待，一定要褒奖你，这样才能体现铨选的公正。
English: Liu Yuxi also said that my great-uncle, Brother So-and-so, had been selected by Zheng Yu as the first lieutenant of Huzhou County. He had already thanked him, but Zheng Yuqing called him back and said to him: "This time, there are no more than five or six people in the entire selection process who have achievements like you. You cannot be treated carelessly. You must be praised, so that you can reflect the fairness of the selection.

古文：公要何官，去家稳便。
现代文：你想要什么官？ 离家近比较方便。
English: What do you want, officer? It's easier to stay close to home.

古文：曰：家住常州，乃注武进县尉。
现代文：我的从弟说，家住常州。于是就授任武进县县尉。
English: My younger brother-in-law said that he lived in Changzhou, so he was awarded the title of Wujin County Lieutenant.

古文：选人翕然，畏而爱之。
现代文：参选的官员们都很佩服、很敬畏、很爱戴他。
English: Elected officials admire, revere and love him.

古文：及后作相，过官又称第一，其有后于鲁也。
现代文：他之后做了宰相，审定兵部，吏部六品以下的职事官，做的又很公正，大家都称赞他。
English: After that, he became the prime minister, and was appointed as an official of the Ministry of the People's Armed Forces, and the Ministry of the People's Public Administration. He was also very fair, and everyone praised him.

古文：又云：陈讽、张复元各注畿县，请换县，允之。
现代文：后人把郑余庆比做汉和帝时的鲁恭。刘禹锡又说，陈讽、张复元各授京畿县的职官。他俩请求换个县，郑答应了。
English: Later generations compared Zheng Yuqing to Han Han and the emperor's Lu Gong. Liu Yuxi also said that Chen Xiao and Zhang Fugang were both officials of Gyeonggi County. They both requested to change the county, and Zheng agreed.

古文：既而张却请不换。
现代文：不久，张讽又请求不换。
English: Before long, Zhang Lin again asked not to be replaced.

古文：郑榜了。引张才入门，已定不可改。
现代文：这时，郑已发榜，严肃地责备张讽说你怎么出尔反尔，既定就不可更改。
English: At this time, Zheng had already appeared on the scene and seriously reproached Zhang Linyi, saying that if you go against the rules, the rules cannot be changed.

古文：时人服之。
现代文：人们都佩服郑余庆。
English: People admire Zheng Yuqing.

古文：裴遵庆
现代文：裴遵庆
English: Pei Zunqing

古文：裴遵庆罢相，知选。
现代文：裴遵庆罢除了宰相的职位后，让他主持选官。
English: After removing Pei Zunqing from the post of prime minister, he let him preside over the selection of officials.

古文：朝廷优其年德，令就第注官。
现代文：皇帝优待他，考虑他年高有德，让他在家里办理选官事宜。
English: The emperor treated him favorably, considering his age and virtue, and let him handle the selection of officials at home.

古文：自宣平坊榜引士子，以及东市两街。
现代文：裴遵庆没有在家办，他在宣平坊、东市两街张榜召集被选官。
English: Pei Zunqing did not do it at home, he gathered the elected officials in Xuanpingfang and Dongshi 2nd Street.

古文：时人以为盛事。
现代文：当时人们认为这是件大事。
English: At the time, people thought it was a big deal.

古文：李绛
现代文：李绛
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：长庆初，吏部尚书李绛议置郎官十人，分判南曹，吏人不便。
现代文：唐穆宗李恒长庆十年，吏部尚书李绛计议添设员外郎官十人，衙署设在南选街，员外郎官下属吏人感到办公不方便。
English: On the 10th anniversary of the Tang Mu Zong Li Heng Changqing, the cadre department Shangshu Li Yao proposed to add ten members of the foreign servants. The cadre department was located in Nan Xuan Street, and the officials under the foreign servants found it inconvenient to work.

古文：旬日出为东都留守。
现代文：十天以后出为东都留守。
English: Ten days later, he left for the East.

古文：自是选曹成状，常速毕。
现代文：从这以后选官有了一种固定的文体文书。
English: Since then, the selection of officials has had a fixed style of writing.

古文：李建
现代文：处理事情很快就办完。李建
English: Li Jian dealt with the matter quickly.

古文：李建为吏部郎中，常曰：方今秀茂，皆在进士。使仆得志，当令登第之岁，集于吏部，使尉紧县；既罢复集，稍尉望县；既罢乃尉畿县，而升于朝。
现代文：李建为吏部郎中时经常说，当今的人才，都在进士当中，如果我若能当上主考官，就在登第那年，把登第的人都集中在吏部，先让他们在小县当佐官，任期满后，再在大县当县尉，罢职之后就授职到京畿县任县令，逐步升到朝廷。
English: When Li Jian was a junior officer of the General Staff, he often said that today's talents are all in the cadets. If I could be the chief examiner, I would concentrate the cadets in the year of the enthronement, first let them be adjutants in small counties, after the expiration of their term, they would be county lieutenants in large counties, and after retirement, they would be appointed to county magistrates in Gyeonggi County, and gradually promoted to the Imperial Court.

古文：大凡中人，三十成名，四十乃至清列。
现代文：大凡人到中年，三十成名，四十做到清要官，这样的步骤才比较合适。
English: For an ordinary person to reach middle age, become famous in his thirties, and become a high-ranking official in his forties, such steps are more appropriate.

古文：迟速为宜。既登第，遂食禄，既食禄，必登朝，谁不欲也？
现代文：既然升官就要拿俸禄，既然拿俸禄，就想到朝廷任官，谁不这样想？
English: Since promotion requires a salary, and since receiving a salary calls to mind an appointment to the imperial court, who wouldn't think so?

古文：无淹翔以守常限，无纷竞以来奔捷。
现代文：不能打破常规局限，没有大家竞争就不能得到好的人才。
English: You can't break the conventional limitations, and you can't get good talent without everyone competing.

古文：下曹得其循举，上位得其更厉。
现代文：这样，下边衙署有所遵循，在上边的大官也能执掌他的权利。
English: In this way, the lower-level magistrate's office follows the rules, and the higher-level official can also exercise his rights.

古文：就而言之，其利甚博。
现代文：如果照他的话去做，好处很大。
English: If you do what he says, the benefits are huge.

古文：议者多之。
现代文：当时舆论认为他说得很对。
English: At the time, public opinion thought he was absolutely right.

古文：崔安潜
现代文：崔安潜
English: Cui Anqian

古文：崔安潜东洛掌选。
现代文：崔安潜感到很后悔。
English: Cui Anqian felt very regretful.

