古文：燕昭王卒，惠王立，与乐毅有隙。
现代文：原文战国时燕昭王去世，他的儿子惠王即位，曾和乐毅发生不愉快的事。
English: When Yan Zhao Wang died during the Warring States period and his son Hui Wang ascended to the throne, something unpleasant happened to Le Yi.

古文：田单闻之，乃纵反间于燕，宣言曰： 齐王已死，城之不拔者二耳。
现代文：田单听说此事，就施行反间计，在燕国散布谣言，说： 齐王已经去世，攻不下的城池只有莒和即墨两城罢了。
English: When Tian Shan heard about this, he took countermeasures and spread rumours in Yan's country, saying: King Qi has passed away, and the only cities that cannot be conquered are Shu and Mo.

古文：乐毅畏诛不敢归，以伐齐为名，实欲连兵南面而王齐。
现代文：乐毅和新君有嫌隙，怕被杀而不敢回国，借着攻打齐国的名义，实际上是想自立为齐王。
English: Le Yi and Xin Jun had a grudge against each other and were afraid to return home for fear of being killed. In the name of attacking Qi, they actually wanted to stand up for themselves as the king of Qi.

古文：齐人未附。故且缓攻即墨。以待其事。
现代文：只是因为齐人不肯归附，所以暂时慢慢攻打即墨，等待时机的成熟。
English: Only because the Qi people refused to be annexed, so for the time being, they slowly attacked the Ming, waiting for the time to be ripe.

古文：齐人所惧，唯恐他将来，即墨残矣。 
现代文：现在齐国人最怕换其他将军来攻打，那么即墨就保不住了。 
English: Now the people of Qi are most afraid of changing other generals to attack, then the ink will not be preserved.

古文：燕王以为然，使骑劫代毅。
现代文：燕王本就疑心乐毅，又中了齐国的反间计，就派骑劫代替乐毅为将军，召回乐毅。
English: Yan Wang was originally suspicious of Le Yi, and when he fell into the anti-foreign plot of Qi, he sent a cavalry to replace Le Yi as a general and recalled Le Yi.

古文：毅归赵，燕军共忿。
现代文：乐毅怕昭王对他不怀好意，于是投奔赵国，燕国的将士惋惜不已，群情愤恨。
English: Le Yi was afraid that King Zhao would not be kind to him, so he went to Zhao Province. The soldiers of Yan Province were saddened and angry.

古文：而田单乃令城中，食必祭其先祖于庭，飞鸟悉翔舞下食，燕人怪之，田单因宣言曰： 神来下教我。 
现代文：这时田单命城中百姓吃饭时，要在庭院中祭拜祖先，于是飞鸟都聚集飞旋在两城的上空，燕人觉得很奇怪。田单散布谣言说： 有神师降临城中，教导齐国百姓。 
English: At this time, Tian Shan ordered the people in the city to worship their ancestors in the courtyard when they were eating, so the birds gathered and flew over the two cities. The swallows felt very strange. Tian Shan spread the rumor that: A priest came to the city to teach the people of Qi.

古文：乃令城中曰： 当有神人为我师。 
现代文：有一名士兵开玩笑地说： 我可以当神师吗？ 
English: One soldier jokingly said: "Can I be a priest?"

古文：有一卒曰： 臣可以为师乎？ 
现代文：说完不好意思地转身走开，田单立即起身叫他回来，请他坐在神师的座位，以神师之礼对待他。
English: One soldier said, "Can I be your drill sergeant?"

古文：因反走。田单乃起，引还，东向坐。
现代文：士兵说： 刚才我是随口胡说骗将军的，我真的什么也不懂。 田单说： 你什么也不要说。 
English: The soldier said, "Just now, I was lying to the general with random nonsense, I really don't understand anything." Tian Shan said, "Don't say anything.

古文：师事之，卒曰： 臣欺君，实无能也。 
现代文：仍以神师礼待他，每次出去巡察时，必称他为神师。
English: He still treats him with the reverence of a priest, and every time he goes out on inspection, he must call him a priest.

古文：单曰： 子勿言。 因师之，每出约束，必称神师。乃宣言曰： 君唯惧燕军之劓所得齐卒，置之前行与我战，即墨败矣。 
现代文：接着，田单又散布谣言说： 我们只怕燕国军队把所俘虏的齐兵割掉鼻子，要他们排列在燕军的阵前，那么即墨必会攻破。 
English: Then, Tian Shan spread the rumor again, saying: We are only afraid that the Yan army will cut off the noses of the captured Qi soldiers, and ask them to line up in front of the Yan army, then the ink will surely break through.

古文：燕人闻之，如其言。城中人见齐诸降者悉劓，皆坚守，唯恐见得。
现代文：燕人听说此事，果真按着去做，城中人见投降的人都被割掉鼻子，更坚定守城的决心，惟恐被燕军擒获。
English: Yan people heard about this and did as they were told. People in the city saw that those who surrendered had their noses cut off. They became more determined to defend the city, fearing that they would be captured by Yan's army.

古文：单又宣言： 君惧燕人掘君城外冢墓，戮先人，可为寒心。 
现代文：田单又派人散布谣言说： 我们怕燕国人挖掘齐人城外的祖坟，侮辱我们的祖先，看见先人受到侮辱会使我们心惊胆寒。 
English: Tian Shan also sent people to spread rumors, saying: We are afraid that the Yan people will dig up the ancestral graves outside the city of Qi and insult our ancestors. Seeing our ancestors being insulted will make our hearts shudder.

古文：燕军尽掘垄墓、烧死人。
现代文：结果燕军又中计，挖开坟墓，烧毁尸骨。
English: As a result, Yan Jun's army had another plan, digging up the grave and burning the bones.

古文：即墨人从城上望见，皆涕泣，俱欲出战，怒自十倍。
现代文：即墨在城上看见燕军的所为，没有不伤心悲泣，急于出城与燕军决一死战。
English: When the Mexicans saw this scene from the top of the city, they all cried and begged to be allowed to leave the city to fight. They were very angry.

古文：田单知士卒之可用，乃身操版锸，与士卒分功，妻妾编于行伍之间。尽散饮食飨士，令甲卒皆伏。
现代文：田单知道时机成熟，士兵可以上阵作战了，就亲自拿着工具和士兵一同工作，妻妾也编在工作队伍中，把好吃的食物都拿出来与士兵分享。
English: Tian Shan knew that the time was ripe for the soldiers to go into battle, so he personally took the tools and worked with the soldiers. His wife and concubine were also included in the work team, and they brought out delicious food to share with the soldiers.

古文：使老弱女子乘城，遣使约降于燕。燕皆呼 万岁 。
现代文：田单命令武装的士兵都埋伏起来，改派老弱妇女登城守卫，并且派使者在燕国商议投降。燕军兵士高呼万岁。
English: Tian Shan ordered all armed soldiers to lie in ambush, reassigned old and weak women to guard the city, and sent envoys to negotiate surrender in Yan Guo. Yan soldiers shouted long live.

古文：田单乃收民金，得千镒，令即墨富豪遗燕将，曰： 即墨即降，愿无掳掠吾族家妻妾。 
现代文：田单又募集民家的捐款，筹集到千镒黄金，请即墨城的富豪赠送给燕国将军，说： 齐人马上就要投降了，希望你们不要虏掠我们的妻妾。 
English: Tian Shan also solicited donations from private households, and collected thousands of ingots of gold. He then asked the rich man in Mocheng to give it to General Yan Guo, saying, "Qi people are about to surrender, I hope you will not kidnap our wives and concubines."

古文：燕将大喜，许之，燕军由此益懈。
现代文：燕将十分高兴，答应他们的请求，从此燕军防备松懈，毫无斗志。
English: Yan was very pleased and agreed to their request. From then on, Yan's army was unprepared and lacked fighting spirit.

古文：单乃收城中，得千余牛，为绛缯衣，画以五采龙文，束兵刃于其角。而灌脂束苇于尾，烧其端，凿城数十穴，夜纵牛，壮士五千人随其后，牛尾热，怒而奔，燕军夜大惊，牛尾炬火光炫耀，燕军视之。
现代文：田单在城中征集一千多头牛，为牛缝制绛色丝衣，画上五彩龙纹，在牛角上绑上锋利的刀刃，另在牛尾上扎上苇草，灌上油脂，然后在城墙上挖掘几十个洞穴，趁着夜晚，把牛群赶往洞口，这时点燃牛尾上的苇草，牛只受不了火烧的疼痛，发怒向前狂奔，直冲燕军营地，五千士兵跟在牛后奋勇杀出。
English: Tian Shan recruited more than a thousand cattle in the city, sewed cocoon-colored silk clothes for the cattle, painted them with multicolored dragon patterns, tied sharp blades on the horns of the cattle, and tied rushes on the tails of the cattle, poured oil, and then dug dozens of caves on the city wall. Taking advantage of the night, he drove the cattle to the mouth of the cave. At this time, he ignited the rushes on the tails of the cattle. The cattle could not bear the pain of the fire, and rushed forward in anger, straight to the camp of the Yan army. Five thousand soldiers followed the cow and fought bravely.

古文：皆龙文，所触尽死伤，五千人因衔枚击之，城中鼓噪从之，老弱皆击铜器为声，声动天地。燕军大骇，败走，遂杀骑劫。
现代文：燕军大吃一惊，看见牛只都是龙纹，凡是碰触到的立即死亡，伤亦五千余人。城中百姓喊杀震天，不断敲击铜器，发出震耳的声响，燕军深受惊吓，溃散奔逃，齐军乘胜杀了骑劫，一雪耻恨。
English: Yan's army was taken aback. They saw that all the cattle had dragon stripes. Anyone who touched them died immediately, and more than five thousand people were injured. The people in the city shouted to the heavens, constantly struck the copperware, and made a deafening sound. Yan's army was deeply frightened, broke up and fled. The Qi army took advantage of the victory to kill the horse thieves, a snow of shame.

