古文：益柔字胜之。
现代文：王益柔，字胜之。
English: Wang Yijiao, Zhaosheng.

古文：为人伉直尚气，喜论天下事。
现代文：为人刚直尚气节，喜谈论天下大事。
English: He is a forthright person and likes to talk about world events.

古文：用荫至殿中丞。
现代文：因荫庇入仕，官至殿中丞。
English: Because of the shadow of the eaves, he entered the service, and was promoted to middle-ranked officer.

古文：元昊叛，上备边选将之策。
现代文：西夏赵元昊叛乱时，上奏边防选将之策。
English: When Zhao Yuanhao rebelled in the Western Xia, it was a strategy to play the role of a border defense general.

古文：杜衍、丁度宣抚河东，益柔寓书言： 河外兵饷无法，非易帅臣、转运使不可。 因条其可任者。
现代文：杜衍、丁度宣抚河东时，益柔写信给他们说： 河外兵饷无法筹措，非要换帅臣、转运使不可。 并推荐可胜任的人。
English: When Du Yan was just proclaiming the pacification of Hedong, Yi Rong wrote to them saying: It is impossible to raise soldiers from outside the river, it is necessary to change commanders and transport them, and recommend competent people.

古文：衍、度使还，以学术政事荐，知介丘县。
现代文：杜衍、丁度完成使命回来后，以学术和政事才能推荐益柔任介丘知县。
English: Du Yan, just after returning from completing his mission, recommended Yijo to Yuchi County with academic and political ability.

古文：庆历更用执政，异意者指为朋党，仁宗下诏戒敕，益柔上书论辨，言尤切直。
现代文：庆历时执政者换人，反对派指认他是旧派的朋党，宋仁宗因此下诏警告。益柔上书辩论，言辞仍然切直。
English: At the time of the celebration, the ruler changed, the opposition identified him as a friend of the old faction, and Song Renzong issued a warning. Yijo submitted a letter for debate, and his words were still forthright.

古文：尹洙与刘沪争城水洛事，自泾原贬庆州。
现代文：尹洙刘沪在是否在水洛筑城上发生争执，被从泾原贬到庆州。
English: In a dispute over whether or not to build a city in Shuiluo, Yin Qi and Liu Hu were relegated from Yuyuan to Gyeongju.

古文：益柔讼之曰： 水洛一障耳，不足以拒贼。
现代文：王益柔为他辩护说 ：水洛只不过一小屏障，不足以拒敌。
English: Wang Yiruo defended him, saying: "Shuiluo is just a small barrier, not enough to resist the enemy.

古文：沪裨将，洙为将军，以天子命呼之不至，戮之不为过；顾不敢专执之以听命，是洙不伸将军之职而上尊朝廷，未见其有罪也。 不听。
现代文：刘沪只是个小裨将，而尹洙是将军，他以天子的命令呼刘沪而不来，就是杀了刘沪也不算过分；但尹洙却不敢专权而听命于朝廷，这是他不滥用将军之职而尊重朝廷，没见他有什么罪。 
English: Liu Hoo was only a minor general, while Yin Xi was a general. He called Liu Hoo with the order of the Son of Heaven and did not come. Even if he killed Liu Hoo, it would not be too much. However, Yin Xi did not dare to be an autocrat and obeyed the order of the imperial court. This was because he did not abuse his position as a general and respected the imperial court. He did not see any guilt in him.

古文：范仲淹未识面，以馆阁荐之，除集贤校理。
现代文：朝廷没有听取他的意见。范仲淹没见过王益柔的面，但推荐他入馆阁，他因此任集贤院校理。
English: The court did not listen to his opinion. Fan Zhong had never met Wang Yirou, but recommended him to join the cabinet, so he was appointed as the secretary of Jixian Academy.

古文：预苏舜钦奏邸会，醉作《傲歌》。
现代文：参加苏舜钦在进奏院举行的宴会，醉酒后作《傲歌》。
English: He took part in a banquet held by Su Shiqin at the Chinese Academy of Music and composed "The Proud Song" after getting drunk.

古文：时诸人欲遂倾正党，宰相章得象、晏殊不可否，参政贾昌朝阴主之，张方平、宋祁、王拱辰攻排不遗力，至列状言益柔罪当诛。
现代文：当时众人正想推翻正党，宰相章得象、晏殊对此不置可否，由参政贾昌朝暗中主谋，而张方平、宋祁、王拱辰则不遗余力地大肆抨击，甚至列举王益柔罪状，说他罪该杀头。
English: At that time, many people were trying to overthrow the official party. The prime ministers, Zhang Dexiang and Zou Shu, did not say whether or not to do so. The Jia Chang Dynasty, which was involved in politics, was secretly the mastermind, while Zhang Fangping, Song Tao and Wang Gongchen spared no effort to criticize, and even listed Wang Yijo's crimes, saying that he should be killed.

古文：韩琦为帝言： 益柔狂语何足深计。
现代文：韩琦对皇帝说： 王益柔的狂语何足深深计较。
English: Han Zheng said to the emperor: Wang Yirong's rhapsody is so profound.

古文：方平等皆陛下近臣，今西陲用兵，大事何限，一不为陛下论列，而同状攻一王益柔，此其意可见矣。 帝感悟，但黜监复州酒。
现代文：方平等人都是陛下心腹近臣，今西方边陲用兵，国家大事何等险阻，他们都不为陛下讨论，却一同来列状攻击一个王益柔，其心意如何由此可见。 皇帝觉悟，只将王益柔降黜做复州酒监。
English: People from both sides were close vassals of his majesty's heart, and now that the Western Front was mobilizing troops, no matter how dangerous the national events were, they would not discuss them for his majesty, but they all lined up to attack Wang Yijiao. This shows how their intentions were. The emperor realized his mistake and only demoted Wang Yijiao to the position of Fuzhou's wine inspector.

古文：久之，为开封府推官、盐铁判官。
现代文：过了较长一段时间，又任开封府推官、盐铁判官。
English: After a long period of time, he was also appointed as the deputy governor of Kaifeng and the judge of salt and iron.

古文：凡中旨所需不应法式，有司迎合以求进者，悉论之不置。
现代文：凡宫中所需却不符合法令规定，官员为迎合上方之意请求进献，他都置之不论。
English: He does not care if what is needed in the palace does not meet the legal requirements, or if officials ask for donations to meet the wishes of the higher authorities.

古文：出为两浙、京东西转运使。
现代文：由京官出任两浙、京东西转运使。
English: Beijing officials will act as transportation envoys for the two Zhejiang provinces and the eastern and western parts of Beijing.

古文：上言： 今考课法区别长吏能否，必明有显状，显状必取其更置兴作大利。
现代文：上书说： 今国家考察区别官吏能干与否，都必定要看他是否有明显的功绩政状，而看政状是否显著又势必依据他革旧更新和兴起的有大效益的措施。
English: The petition said: The current national examination to distinguish whether an official is capable or not must depend on whether he has obvious merits and political status, and whether the political status is significant is bound to be based on his revolutionary renewal and the emergence of highly effective measures.

古文：夫小政小善，积而不已，然后能成其大。
现代文：其实小政小善，积累不停，然后才能成其为大善。
English: In fact, petty politics is petty goodness, and it needs to be constantly accumulated before it can become great goodness.

古文：取其大而遗其细，将竞利图功，恐事之不举者日多，而虚名无实之风日起。
现代文：如果只取其大政而忽略小政，将导致竞利贪功，恐怕不做实事者日多，而虚名无实的风气日起。
English: If we only look at the big things and ignore the small things, it will lead to competition and greed. I'm afraid that those who don't do real things will become more and more common, and the fictitious culture will become more and more prevalent.

古文：愿参以唐四善，兼取行实，列为三等。 不行。
现代文：希望参照唐时的四善制，并依据官吏的实际事迹，列为三个等级。 
English: It is hoped that it will be classified into three grades in accordance with the Tang Dynasty's four virtues system and based on the actual deeds of officials.

古文：熙宁元年，入判度支审院。
现代文：此建议没有实行。熙宁元年，任判度支审院。
English: This proposal was not implemented. In the first year of Xi'ning, he was appointed to the Judiciary Intermediate People's Court.

古文：诏百官转对，益柔言： 人君之难，莫大于辨邪正；邪正之辨，莫大于置相。
现代文：皇上下诏百官上书言事。益柔说 ：人君的困难，莫大于分辨正邪；分辨正邪，最重要的莫过于选择宰相。
English: Emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors.

古文：相之忠邪，百官之贤否也。
现代文：宰相的忠与邪，也就是百官的贤与不贤。
English: The loyalty and evil of the prime minister, that is, the virtue and vice of a hundred officials.

古文：若唐高宗之李义甫，明皇之李林甫，德宗之卢杞，宪宗之皇甫镈，帝王之鉴也。
现代文：如唐高宗的宰相李义甫、唐明皇的李林甫、唐德宗的卢杞、唐宪宗的皇甫，便是帝王的明鉴。
English: For example, Li Yifu, the prime minister of the Tang Gaozong, Li Linfu of the Tang Ming Emperor, Lu Xun of the Tang De Zong, and Huang Fu of the Tang Xian Zong, are examples of emperors.

古文：高宗、德宗之昏蒙，固无足论；明皇、宪宗之聪明，乃蔽于二人如此。
现代文：唐高宗、德宗昏庸蒙昧，固然不足谈论；唐明皇、宪宗聪明睿智，却仍受二人蒙蔽如此。
English: Emperor Gaozong of Tang and Emperor Dezong of Dezong were dim-witted and ignorant, but it is not enough to talk about it; Emperor Ming of Tang and Emperor Xianzong were intelligent and wise, but they were still blinded by the two.

古文：以二人之庸，犹足以致祸，况诵六艺、挟才智以文致其奸说者哉！ 意盖指王安石也。
现代文：以李林甫、皇甫二人的庸才，也足以带来祸患，更何况是那些诵六艺、挟才智而能用文章宣扬其奸恶学说的人呢！ 此意大概是指王安石。
English: The mediocre talents of Li Linfu and Wang Fu are also enough to bring disaster, let alone those who can recite the six arts and extort talents and can use articles to promote their treacherous and evil doctrines!

古文：判吏部流内铨。
现代文：判吏部流内铨。
English: It is a variation of the style of the Judiciary Department.

古文：旧制，选人当改京官，满十人乃引见。
现代文：旧制规定，选人应是改任京官，且满十个人才向皇上引见。
English: According to the provisions of the old system, the candidate should be reappointed as a Beijing official, and no more than ten people should be introduced to the emperor.

古文：由是士多困滞，且遇举者有故，辄不用。
现代文：因此士子多困滞不能晋升，且遇到推举官出了事，便一概不重用。
English: As a result, many samurai are too poor to be promoted, and if something happens to the promotion officer, they are not reused at all.

古文：益柔请才二人即引见，众论翕然称之。
现代文：王益柔请求，有二人以上便向上引见，舆论一致称赞此举。
English: At the request of Wang Yirou, more than two people have been promoted, and the public opinion has unanimously praised this move.

古文：直舍人院、知制诰兼直学士院。
现代文：置舍人院、知制诰兼直学士院。
English: He was educated at the Institute for Orphans and the Institute for Intellectuals and Academics.

古文：董毡遇明堂恩，中书熟状加光禄大夫，而旧阶已特进，益柔以闻。
现代文：董毡遇明堂恩典，中书省拟状准备给他加封光禄大夫，而董的旧阶已是特进，王益柔将此告诉皇帝。
English: When Dong Xuan met with the grace of the Ming Dynasty, the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy prepared to give him the title of Guanglu Doctor, while Dong's old rank was already advanced, and Wang Yirou told the emperor about this.

古文：帝谓中书曰： 非翰林，几何不为羌夷所笑。 宰相怒其不申堂，用他事罢其兼直。
现代文：皇帝对中书省说： 不是翰林提醒，怎么不会被羌夷讥笑呢？ 宰相恨王益柔没事先向他申明，便以其他事将他兼直的职位罢免。
English: The emperor said to the Chinese Ministry of Education and Culture: If Hanlin did not remind you, how could you not be ridiculed? The Prime Minister hated Wang Yirou and dismissed him from his post for other reasons without telling him in advance.

古文：迁龙图阁直学士、秘书监，知蔡扬亳州、江宁应天府。
现代文：升龙图阁直学士、秘书监，出知蔡州、扬州、亳州及江宁应天府。
English: Shenglong Tukge, a direct bachelor and a supervisor of secretaries, was educated in Caizhou, Yangzhou, Zhangzhou and Jiangning Yingtianfu.

古文：卒，年七十二。
现代文：去世时，年七十二岁。
English: He was 72 when he died.

古文：益柔少力学，通群书，为文日数千言。
现代文：王益柔少时努力好学，博通群书，一日能写数千言的文章。
English: When she was young, Wang Yizhuo was a diligent student, well-versed in books, and could write thousands of words a day.

古文：尹洙见之曰： 赡而不流，制而不窘，语淳而厉，气壮而长，未可量也。 时方以诗赋取士，益柔去不为。
现代文：尹洙见到他后说 ：充足而不外流，受制而不窘迫，语言淳厚而又严厉，气质威壮而又长厚，不可估量呀。 当时正实行以考试诗赋择取士子。王益柔却不为此事。
English: After seeing him, Yin Xi said, "Sufficient but not effluent, restrained but not embarrassed, straightforward but stern in speech, dignified but long in temperament, immeasurable." At that time, the selection of scholars was being carried out by means of a poetry examination. However, Wang Yijou did not do this.

古文：范仲淹荐试馆职，以其不善词赋，乞试以策论，特听之。
现代文：范仲淹推荐他考试馆职，因他不善于词赋，乞请改以策论来考试，朝廷特别允许。
English: Fan Zhongyun recommended him for the position of an examiner. Since he was not good at writing, he asked for the exam to be changed to strategy theory. The court gave special permission.

古文：司马光尝语人曰： 自吾为《资治通鉴》，人多欲求观读，未终一纸，已欠伸思睡。
现代文：司马光曾对人说 ：自我著《资治通鉴》，人们多请求读看，但未看完一张纸，便已打呵欠想瞌睡。
English: Sima Guang once said to someone: I wrote "Capitalism General Knowledge." People often asked to read it, but before they finished reading a piece of paper, they were yawning and wanted to fall asleep.

古文：能阅之终篇者，惟王胜之耳。 其好学类此。
现代文：能够把它全部读完的人，只有一个王胜之。 他的勤奋好学到如此地步。
English: There is only one Wang Shengzhi who can read it all, and his diligence to learn is so advanced.

