古文：张释之字季，南阳堵阳人也。
现代文：张释之，字季，南阳堵阳人。
English: Zhang Xizhi, Zeki, Nanyang Douyangren.

古文：与兄仲同居，以赀为骑郎，事文帝，十年不得调，亡所知名。
现代文：和哥哥张仲一起生活。他用家财买了个骑郎之职，事奉汉文帝，卜年来未能升迁，没有名气。
English: He lived with his brother Zhang Zhong. He used his family's money to buy a job as a horseman and served Emperor Hanwen. He failed to be promoted and had no reputation.

古文：释之曰： 久宦减仲之产，不遂。 
现代文：张释之说： 长久做郎官耗减哥哥的家产，于心不安。 
English: Zhang Xizhi said, "Being a steward for a long time has depleted my brother's wealth, which makes people uneasy.

古文：欲免归。
现代文：想自动请求免职回家。
English: I want to automatically request a leave of absence to go home.

古文：中郎将爰盎知其贤，惜其去，乃请徙释之补谒者。
现代文：中郎将袁盎知道他贤能，舍不得他离去，于是奏请调迁张释之，补谒者缺职。
English: The middle-ranking official knew that Yuan Ang was a capable person and was reluctant for him to leave, so he requested the transfer of Zhang Xizhi to fill the vacancy.

古文：释之既朝毕，因前言便宜事。
现代文：张释之朝见完毕，趁此上前陈述便国宜民的事。
English: After Zhang Xie's morning meeting, he took the opportunity to make a statement about what is good for the country and the people.

古文：文帝曰： 卑之，毋甚高论，令今可行也。 
现代文：文帝说： 现实一些，不要多说远古的事，要讲当前能够实行的。 
English: Wen Di said: Be more realistic, don't talk more about ancient things, talk about what can be implemented at present.

古文：于是释之言秦、汉之间事，秦所以失，汉所以兴者。
现代文：于是，张释之就谈论起秦、漠之间的事，讲起秦朝灭亡和汉朝兴起的原因。
English: As a result, Zhang Xizhi talked about the relationship between the Qin Dynasty and the Mongol Empire, and the reasons for the fall of the Qin Dynasty and the rise of the Han Dynasty.

古文：文帝称善，拜释之为谒者仆射。
现代文：文帝称赞好，便提升张释之为谒者仆射。
English: Emperor Wen praised him, and promoted Zhang Xie to the rank of "devotee."

古文：从行，上登虎圈，问上林尉禽兽簿，十余问，尉左右视，尽不能对。
现代文：张释之跟随皇上出行，临观虎圈，皇上询问上林尉登记各种禽兽册子的情况，提了十几个问题，上林尉左右瞧看，都回答不出来。
English: Zhang Xizhi traveled with the emperor and observed the tiger enclosure. The emperor inquired about the status of the registration of various animals and beasts by the lieutenant, and asked more than a dozen questions. The lieutenant looked around and could not answer.

古文：虎圈啬夫从旁代尉对上所问禽兽簿甚悉，欲以观其能口对向应亡穷者。
现代文：看管虎圈的啬夫从旁代替上林尉回答了皇上所问，很详细，想以此来显示自己对答如流犹如回响应舞一样无穷。
English: The miserly man in charge of the tiger enclosure answered the emperor's question from the side, in place of the lieutenant, in great detail, trying to show that his answer was as endless as the response dance.

古文：文帝曰： 吏不当如此邪？
现代文：文帝说： 官吏不应该像这样吗？
English: Wendi said, "Shouldn't officials dress like this?"

古文：尉亡赖！ 
现代文：上林尉不行！ 
English: Captain Lin can't do it!

古文：诏释之拜啬夫为上林令。
现代文：于是命张释之宣布啬夫为上林令。
English: As a result, the sheriff declared that the miser was to be sent to the forest.

古文：释之前曰： 陛下以绛侯周勃何如人也？ 
现代文：张释之上前说： 陛下认为绛侯周勃是什么样的人物呢？ 
English: Zhang Xie stepped forward and said, "What kind of person does Your Majesty think Prince Zhou Bo is?"

古文：上曰： 上者。 
现代文：皇上答： 忠厚长者。 
English: Empress Dowager replied: Loyal elders.

古文：又复问： 东阳侯张相如何如人也？ 
现代文：又再问： 柬阳侯张相如是什么样的人物呢？ 
English: Once again, I would like to ask: What kind of person is Dongyang marquis Zhang Xiangru?

古文：上复曰： 长者。 
现代文：皇上仍答： 忠厚长者。 
English: Once again, Emperor Wen replied, "He is an old man."

古文：释之曰： 夫绛侯、东阳侯称为长者，此两人言事曾不能出口，岂效此啬夫喋喋利口捷给哉！
现代文：张释之说： 像那绛侯、柬阳侯被称为忠厚长者，可这两个人谈论事情时竟连话也说不出。难道让人们去学这个啬夫如此喋喋不休的伶牙利嘴吗！
English: Zhang Xizhi said, "Like that Yan Hou and Kamyang Hou, they are called loyal elders, but when these two people talk about things, they can't even say a word. Is it possible for people to learn from this miser's incessant chatter?

古文：且秦以任刀笔之吏，争以亟疾苛察相高，其敝徒文具，亡恻隐之实。
现代文：况且秦朝因为任用那些舞文弄墨的书吏，书吏们争着拿办事急快和督过苛刻来互比高低，然而那样作的弊病衹是照章行事罢了，一点也没有仁慈的实情。
English: Moreover, because the Qin Dynasty appointed those clerks who danced and danced, the clerks competed to get things done quickly and to be too harsh to compete with each other. However, the malpractice of doing so was just following the rules, and there was no benevolent truth at all.

古文：以故不闻其过，陵夷至于二世，天下土崩。
现代文：因为这个缘故皇上听不到自己的过失，日益衰败，传至二世，天下便土崩瓦解了。
English: Because of this, the emperor could not hear his own mistakes, and the country fell apart.

古文：今陛下以啬夫口辩而超迁之，臣恐天下随风靡，争口辩，亡其实。
现代文：如今陛下因啬夫口齿伶俐就越级提拔他，我担心天下人会随风附和，争相浮夸而不讲求实际。
English: Now that His Majesty has promoted the miserly man to a higher rank because of his eloquence, I am afraid that the world will follow suit, competing for pomposity rather than practicality.

古文：且下之化上，疾于景，举错不可不察也。 文帝曰： 善。 
现代文：况且下面仿效上面快于影子随形和回响之应声，陛下办什么不办什么，不能不谨慎啊！ 文帝答应说： 好！ 
English: Moreover, the following imitation of the above is faster than the shadow of the shape and the echo of the echo, what His Majesty does or does not do, cannot but be cautious! Emperor Wen promised to say: Good!

古文：乃止不拜啬夫。
现代文：于是不再提拔啬夫。
English: As a result, the original plan was cancelled, and the miser was no longer appointed as the forester.

古文：就车，召释之骖乘，徐行，行问释之秦之敝。
现代文：皇上上车，召张释之陪乘。车子缓缓地前行，皇上问秦朝的弊病，张释之都如实作了回答。
English: The emperor got on the car and called Zhang Xizhi to accompany him. The car slowly moved forward. The emperor asked about the ills of the Qin Dynasty, and Zhang Xizhi answered truthfully.

古文：具以质言。至宫，上拜释之为公车令。
现代文：到了宫中，皇上授张释之为公车令。
English: Emperor Wen asked Zhang Xizhi about the drawbacks of the Qin government, and Zhang Xizhi said that it was true. When he arrived at the palace, Emperor Wen made an official order to appoint Zhang Xizhi.

古文：顷之，太子与梁王共车入朝，不下司马门，于是释之追止太子、梁王毋入殿门。
现代文：不久，太子与梁王同乘一辆车入朝，经过司马门没有下车，当时张释之追上去制止太子、梁王不得进入殿门。
English: Soon after, the crown prince and Liang Wang rode into the imperial palace in a car and passed through the Sima Gate without getting off. At that time, Zhang Xizhi chased after the prince to stop the prince and Liang Wang from entering the palace gate.

古文：遂劾不下公门不敬，奏之。
现代文：便检举他俩在司马门不下车为不敬罪，汇报上去。
English: They were reported to the emperor for committing the crime of disrespect by not getting off the train outside the palace gate.

古文：薄太后闻之，文帝免冠谢曰： 教儿子不谨。 
现代文：薄太后知道了这事，文帝摘下帽子陪罪道： 怪我教导儿子不严。 
English: When the Empress Dowager Bo learned of this, Emperor Wen took off his hat and apologized, saying, "I hurt my son by not being strict with him."

古文：薄太后使使承诏赦太子、梁王，然后得入。
现代文：薄太后这才派使者传令赦免太子、梁王，他俩然后才得以进宫。
English: It was only then that Empress Dowager Bo sent an envoy to pardon the prince and King Liang, and only then were they able to enter the palace.

古文：文帝繇是奇释之，拜为中大夫。
现代文：文帝从这件事认为张释之与众不同，任为中大夫。
English: From this incident, Emperor Wen thought that Zhang Xizhi was unique and appointed him as a middle doctor.

古文：顷之，至中郎将。
现代文：不久，张释之官至中郎将。
English: Some time later, Zhang Xizhi was promoted to the position of vice-commander.

古文：从行至霸陵，上居外临厕。
现代文：他随从皇上到霸陵。皇上坐在自己陵墓上头的北边远望。
English: He followed the emperor to the mausoleum. The emperor sat on the north side of his mausoleum and gazed into the distance.

古文：时慎夫人从，上指视慎夫人新丰道，曰： 此走邯郸道也。 
现代文：这时慎夫人跟随，皇上指着去新丰县的路对慎夫人说： 这便是向邯郸去的路啊！ 
English: At this time, Lady Shan followed, and the emperor pointed to the road to Xinfeng County and said to Lady Shan: This is the road to Xiangyao!

古文：使慎夫人鼓瑟，上自倚瑟而歌，意凄怆悲怀，顾谓群臣曰： 嗟乎！以北山石为椁，用纻絮斫陈漆其间，岂可动哉！ 
现代文：皇上让慎夫人瑟，自己和着瑟的曲调唱歌，情意凄凉悲伤，回头对群臣说道： 唉，拿北山的好石头做外棺，把贮苏、绵絮剁捆充塞在石椁的缝隙，再用漆粘合起来，难道还能打得开么！ 近侍都说： 好。 
English: The emperor let Lady Shen and himself sing to the tune of the song, the sentiment was desolate and sad, and he turned back to the courtiers and said: Alas, using the good stones of the North Mountain to make an outer coffin, filling the gaps in the stone coffin with bundles of caustic soda and lint, and then gluing them together with paint, can it still be opened? Close attendants all said: Good.

古文：左右皆曰： 善。 释之前曰： 使其中有可欲，虽锢南山犹有隙；使其中亡可欲，虽亡石椁，又何戚焉？ 
现代文：张释之上前说道： 假使它裹面有能够引起贪欲的东西，即使封闭南山作为棺，也还有缝隙；如果裹面没有能够引起贪欲的东西，即使没有石棺，又何必忧虑呢？ 
English: Zhang Xie stepped forward and said, "If there is something in the shroud that can arouse desire, even if Nanshan is sealed as a coffin, there will still be a gap; if there is nothing in the shroud that can arouse desire, even if there is no sarcophagus, why worry?

古文：文帝称善。
现代文：文帝称赞说得对。
English: Emperor Wen praised him for speaking well.

古文：其后，拜释之为廷尉。
现代文：此后，升张释之为廷尉。
English: After that, he was promoted to court lieutenant.

古文：顷之，上行出中渭桥，有一人从桥下走，乘舆马惊。
现代文：不久，皇上行经中？胃桥，有一个人从桥下跑出来，使皇上驾车的马受了惊。
English: Not long after, during the emperor's visit to the Stomach Bridge, a man ran out from under the bridge, startling the emperor's horse.

古文：于是使骑捕之，属廷尉。
现代文：于是令骑士把那人逮捕，交付给廷尉治罪。
English: So the knight ordered the man to be arrested and handed over to the lieutenant for punishment.

古文：释之治问。
现代文：张释之审问那人。
English: Zhang Xizhi's interrogation of the man.

古文：曰： 县人来，闻跸，匿桥下。
现代文：那人回答说： 我是长安县乡下人，来这里，听到清道戒严，急忙躲到桥下。
English: The man said, "I am a villager from Chang'an County. When I heard the order to keep the roads clear, I hid under the bridge.

古文：久，以为行过，既出，见车骑，即走耳。 
现代文：过了好久，以为皇上已经过去，便从桥下出来，见到皇上的车马和仪仗队就在眼前，立即转身跑了。 
English: After a long time, thinking that the emperor had already passed, he came out from under the bridge, saw the emperor's carriage and honor guard in front of him, and immediately turned around and ran away.

古文：释之奏当： 此人犯跸，当罚金。 
现代文：张释之据此上奏应得的刑罚，说： 此人违反了清道戒严的号令，应处以罚金。 
English: Zhang Xizhi said: "This person violated the order of the martial law and should be fined.

古文：上怒曰： 此人亲惊吾马，马赖和柔，令它马，固不败伤我乎？
现代文：文帝大怒道： 这个人惊了我的马，幸亏我的马脾性温和，假若是别的马，不早就摔伤我了吗？
English: Emperor Wen said angrily, "This man has scared my horse. Fortunately, my horse is mild-tempered. If it were another horse, wouldn't it have hurt me sooner?"

古文：而廷尉乃当之罚金！ 
现代文：可廷尉却仅衹处以罚金！ 
English: However, Lieutenant Ting only imposed a fine!

古文：释之曰： 法者，天子所与天下公共也。
现代文：张释之说： 法律是天子与天下人共同遵从的。
English: Zhang Xizhi said: The law is obeyed by the Son of Heaven and the people of the world.

古文：今法如是，更重之，是法不信于民也。
现代文：如今法律是这样规定的却要加重处罚，这样法律就不能取信于民了。
English: Today, the law stipulates this, but the punishment must be increased, so that the law cannot gain the trust of the people.

古文：且方其时，上使使诛之则已。
现代文：况且在当时，皇上令人就地杀掉他也就罢了。
English: Moreover, at that time, the emperor had him killed on the spot.

古文：今已下廷尉，廷尉，天下之平也，壹倾，天下用法皆为之轻重，民安所错其手足？
现代文：如今既然交付给廷尉，而廷尉是天下公平的象征，一旦有偏，天下使用法律时都会任意或轻或重，老百姓往哪儿安放他们的手脚？
English: Now that it has been handed over to the imperial lieutenant, and the imperial lieutenant is the symbol of fairness in the world, once there is a bias, the world will use the law arbitrarily or lightly or heavily, where will the people place their hands and feet?

古文：唯陛下察之。 
现代文：望陛下明察。 
English: May His Majesty see this.

古文：上良久曰： 廷尉当是也。 
现代文：好久，皇上说： 还是廷尉办得对。 
English: For a long time, the emperor said, "The imperial lieutenant did the right thing."

古文：其后人有盗高庙座前玉环，得，文帝怒，下廷尉治。
现代文：那以后，有人偷了高祖庙内神座前的玉环，被捕。文帝大怒，交给廷尉治罪。
English: After that, someone stole the jade ring in front of the throne in Gaozu Temple and was arrested. Emperor Wen was furious and handed it over to a court official to deal with the crime.

古文：案盗宗庙服御物者为奏，当弃市。
现代文：张释之依照法律中偷盗宗庙服饰器物的条文，奏请判处斩首。
English: Zhang Xizhi was sentenced to beheading in accordance with the provisions of the law on stealing the clothing and utensils of the family temple.

古文：上大怒曰： 人亡道，乃盗先帝器！
现代文：皇上勃然大怒道： 那人胡作非为，居然偷盗先帝宗庙中的器物！
English: The Emperor flew into a rage and said, "That man has done something outrageous by stealing the utensils from the former emperor's ancestral temple!

古文：吾属廷尉者，欲致之族，而君以法奏之，非吾所以共承宗庙意也。 
现代文：我之所以交付给你廷尉审理，是想使他灭族，而你却按照通常的法律条文奏请，这不是我所用来恭敬承奉先人的本意。 
English: It is not my intention to honorably serve my ancestors when I put you in charge of the imperial lieutenant with the intention of exterminating him, but you are asking me to act in accordance with the usual legal provisions.

古文：释之免冠顿首谢曰： 法如是足也。
现代文：张释之脱帽叩头解释说： 按照法令这样判处已经到极限了。
English: Zhang Xiezhi took off his hat and bowed to Xie Sin, saying: According to the law, this punishment is enough.

古文：且罪等，然以逆顺为基。
现代文：况且斩首与灭族同是死罪，但以逆顺轻重的程度为根据。
English: Moreover, beheading and genocide are both capital offenses, but on the basis of the degree of severity.

古文：今盗宗庙器而族之，有如万分一，假令愚民取长陵一抔土，陛下且何以加其法乎？ 
现代文：今日偷盗宗庙的器物便诛灭他的全族，假设愚民偷挖了长陵上的一捧土，陛下将又怎样施加给他刑罚呢？ 
English: Today, stealing the artifacts of his ancestral temple would destroy his entire family. Supposing that the fools had secretly dug up a handful of earth from the Long Mausoleum, how would His Majesty punish him?

古文：文帝与太后言之，乃许廷尉当。
现代文：后来文帝和薄太后谈论了这件事，于是便批准了廷尉的判决。
English: Later, Emperor Wen and Empress Dowager Bo discussed the matter and approved the court lieutenant's decision.

古文：是时，中尉条侯周亚夫与梁相山都侯王恬启见释之持议平，乃结为亲友。
现代文：当时，中尉条侯周亚夫和梁相山都侯王恬启看到张释之议论公正，就同他结为亲密朋友。
English: At that time, Lieutenant Zhou Yafu and Liang Xiangshan Prince Wang Qiqi saw the fairness of Zhang Xie's discussion and became close friends with him.

古文：张廷尉繇此天下称之。
现代文：张释之由此受到天下人的称颂。
English: As a result, Zhang Xizhi was praised by people all over the world.

古文：文帝崩，景帝立，释之恐，称疾。
现代文：后来文帝驾崩，景帝即位，张释之想起得罪过景帝而心中害怕，便托病请假。
English: Later, Emperor Wen passed away and Emperor Jing ascended to the throne. Zhang Xizhi was afraid of offending Emperor Jing and took sick leave.

古文：欲免去，惧大诛至；欲见，则未知何如。
现代文：他想辞职离开，怕会随即招来更大更重的刑罚；想进宫当面谢罪，却又不知走什么门路。
English: He wanted to resign and leave, fearing that he would immediately incur a greater and heavier punishment; he wanted to enter the palace to apologize in person, but he didn't know which way to go.

古文：用王生计，卒见谢，景帝不过也。
现代文：后来他采用王生的计策，终于进见景帝当面道歉。
English: Using Wang Sheng's strategy, he finally saw Emperor Jing apologize and apologize, and Emperor Jing did not blame him.

古文：王生者，善为黄、老言，处士。
现代文：景帝没有责怪他。王生擅长黄老学术，是位隐士。
English: Emperor Jing did not blame him. Wang Sheng was good at ancient learning and was a hermit.

古文：尝召居廷中，公卿尽会立。
现代文：曾经被召进殿廷中，当时公卿大臣都相聚而立。
English: I was once summoned to the Imperial Court, where the nobles and ministers were all standing together.

古文：王生老人，曰 吾袜解 ，顾谓释之： 为我结袜！ 
现代文：王生是老年人，说： 我的袜带子松脱了！ 回头看张廷尉说： 请给我把袜带子系好！ 
English: Wang Sheng, an elderly man, said: My garter belt is loose! Looking back, Lieutenant Zhang Ting said: Please tie my garter belt properly!

古文：释之跪而结之，既已，人或让王生： 独奈何廷辱张廷尉如此？ 
现代文：张释之跪在地上给他把袜带子系好了。过后有人责问王生说： 怎么偏偏在朝廷上当众侮辱张廷尉？ 
English: Zhang Xizhi knelt down on the ground and tied his garter for him. Afterward, someone scolded Wang Sheng and said, "How dare you publicly insult Lieutenant Zhang Ting in the imperial court?"

古文：王生曰： 吾老且贱，自度终亡益于张廷尉。
现代文：王生说： 我年老并且地位卑贱，自料终究不会有什么好处给张廷尉。
English: Wang Sheng said: I am old and my position is lowly, so I don't expect to be of any benefit to Lieutenant Zhang Ting.

古文：廷尉方天下名臣，吾故聊使结袜，欲以重之。 
现代文：张廷尉正是当今天下名臣，我姑且委屈他一下，让他跪下给我绑袜带子，是想以此来抬举他。 
English: It was Lieutenant Zhang Ting who was the next minister today. I let him down, let him kneel down and tie my garter belt for me. I wanted to use this to elevate him.

古文：诸公闻之，贤王生而重释之。
现代文：各公卿听了这话，都称贤王生而敬重张廷尉。
English: Upon hearing this, all the nobles praised the virtuous Wang Sheng and respected Zhang Tingli.

古文：释之事景帝岁余，为淮南相，犹尚以前过也。
现代文：张廷尉奉事景帝一年多，被降为淮南王相，也还是因为从前得罪遇景帝的缘故。
English: Zhang Tingfei served Emperor Jing for more than a year and was demoted to the position of Huainan's prime minister, also because he had offended Emperor Jing in the past.

古文：年老病卒。
现代文：张释之年老得病去世。
English: Zhang Xizhi died of old age.

古文：其子挚，字长公，官至大夫，免。
现代文：他的儿子叫张挚，字长公，官做到大夫，被免职。
English: His son is called Zhang Zhengyi, his official title is "Chang Gong," but he is a doctor and has been dismissed from his post.

古文：以不能取容当世，故终身不仕。
现代文：由于他不善于讨好当权者，所直到身死再没有做官。
English: Because he couldn't pander to the high and mighty of the time, he never held public office again until his death.

古文：冯唐，祖父赵人也。
现代文：冯唐，他的祖父是从前趟国人。
English: Feng Tang, his grandfather is a former Chinese national.

古文：父徙代。
现代文：父亲移居到代郡。
English: His father moved to a new place.

古文：汉兴徙安陵。
现代文：汉朝建立后，迁到了安陵。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, it was moved to Anling.

古文：唐以孝著，为郎中署长，事文帝。
现代文：冯唐以孝行着名，被推举为郎中署长，事奉汉文帝。
English: Feng Tang was famous for his filial piety. He was promoted to the post of chief steward and served Emperor Hanwen.

古文：帝辇过，问唐曰： 父老何自为郎？
现代文：文帝乘车经过郎中官署时，问冯唐说： 老人家为何还在做郎官？
English: Wen Di asked Feng Tang when he passed the liaison office by car: Why is the old man still a liaison officer?

古文：家安在？ 
现代文：家住在哪裹？ 
English: Where does your family live?

古文：具以实言。
现代文：冯唐都作了如实回答。
English: Feng Tang answered truthfully.

古文：文帝曰： 吾居代时，吾尚食监高祛数为我言赵将李齐之贤，战于巨鹿下。
现代文：文帝说： 我居代地时，我的尚食监高祛多次对我称赞趟将李齐贤能，讲述鏖战于钜鹿城下的故事。
English: Wen Di said: When I lived in the place, my food inspector Gao Yao praised me many times for my ability to tell the story of the battle at the foot of the Elk Castle.

古文：吾每饮食，意未尝不在巨鹿也。
现代文：如今我每逢进餐，都要想到李齐鏖战钜鹿的情景。
English: Now, every time I have dinner, I have to think of the scene of Li Qiye's battle with the elk.

古文：父老知之乎？ 
现代文：老人家知道李齐这个人吗？ 
English: Does the old man know Li Qi?

古文：唐对曰： 齐尚不如廉颇、李牧之为将也。 
现代文：冯唐回答说： 李齐为将带兵还不如廉颇、李牧。 皇上问： 根据什么？ 
English: Feng Tang replied, "Li Qi is not as honest as Li Mu, for he will lead the troops." The emperor asked, "On what basis?"

古文：上曰： 何已？ 唐曰： 臣大父在赵时，为官帅将，善李牧。臣父故为代相，善李齐，知其为人也。 
现代文：冯唐说： 我祖父在赵国时，官职是帅将，熟交李牧。我的父亲从前当代王相，密交赵将李齐，了解他的为人。 
English: Feng Tang said, "When my grandfather was in Zhao, he was a handsome general and familiar with Li Mu. My father was a former contemporary of Wang Xiang, a close friend of Zhao, Li Qi, and knew him as a person.

古文：上既闻廉颇、李牧为人，良说，乃拊髀曰： 嗟乎！吾独不得廉颇、李牧为将，岂忧匈奴哉！ 
现代文：皇上听完冯唐讲述廉颇、李牧的为人，很高兴，于是拍打着大腿说： 唉，可惜我偏偏得不到廉颇、李牧这样的人来作我的将领，不然，我还担忧匈奴吗！ 
English: After listening to Feng Tang's description of the character of Renpo and Li Mu, the emperor was very happy, so he slapped his thigh and said: Alas, it's a pity that I can't get a person like Renpo and Li Mu to be my general, otherwise, would I still be worried about the Xiongnu!

古文：唐曰： 主臣！
现代文：冯唐说： 惶恐惭愧！
English: Feng Tang said, "Be afraid and ashamed!

古文：陛下虽有廉颇、李牧，不能用也。 
现代文：陛下即使得到了廉颇、李牧，也不可能任用。 
English: Even if His Majesty were to get hold of the corrupt Li Mu, he would not be able to appoint him.

古文：上怒，起入禁中。
现代文：皇上大怒，起身回宫。
English: Enraged, Emperor Hanwen got up and returned to the palace.

古文：良久，召唐让曰： 公众辱我，独亡间处乎？ 
现代文：许久，召见冯唐埋怨说： 你为什么当着众人的面侮辱我？难道没有僻静处吗？ 
English: For a long time, Feng Tang was summoned to complain: Why did you insult me in front of everyone? Isn't there a secluded place?

古文：唐谢曰： 鄙人不知忌讳。 
现代文：冯唐谢罪说： 我这个粗鄙人不懂忌讳。 
English: Feng Tang Xie Sin said: I am a despicable person who does not know how to avoid taboos.

古文：当是时，匈奴新大入朝那，杀北地都尉卬。
现代文：当时，匈奴新近大举入侵朝那，杀死了北地郡都尉孙印。
English: At that time, the Xiongnu had recently invaded North Korea on a large scale, killing the captain of the Hokkien County, Sun Yin.

古文：上以胡寇为意，乃卒复问唐曰： 公何以言吾不能用颇、牧也？ 
现代文：皇上忧虑匈奴的入侵，于是终于又问冯唐说： 你怎么知道我不能任用廉颇、李牧呢？ 
English: The emperor was worried about the invasion of the Xiongnu, so he finally asked Feng Tang: "How do you know that I can't appoint the corrupt Li Mu?"

古文：唐对曰， 臣闻上古王者遣将也，跪而推毂，曰： 闑以内寡人制之，闑以外将军制之；军功爵赏，皆决于外，归而奏之。 此非空言也。
现代文：冯唐答道： 我听说上古时君王遣将出征，临行跪下推着车子，说： 国门以内的事我来决定，国门以外的事情将军决定；军功、爵位和赏赐都决定于将军，归来再奏朝廷，这不是空话啊。
English: Feng Tang replied, "I heard that in ancient times, when a king sent a general out to war, he would kneel down and push the chariot, saying, 'I will decide on matters within the gate of the country, and the general will decide on matters outside the gate of the country; military merit, peerage and reward are all decided by the general, and then report back to the court. This is not empty talk.

古文：臣大父言李牧之为赵将居边，军市之租皆自用飨士，赏赐决于外，不从中复也。
现代文：我的祖父说，李牧给趟国领兵守边时，把从军中交易市场上征收的租税都用来犒赏将士，赏赐由将军决定，朝廷不从中干预。
English: My grandfather said that when Li Mu led the troops to defend the border, the taxes collected from the military trading market were used to reward the soldiers. The reward was decided by the general, and the court did not intervene.

古文：委任而责成功，故李牧乃得尽其知能，选车千三百乘，彀骑万三千匹，百金之士十万，是以北逐单于，破东胡，灭澹林，西抑强秦，南支韩、魏。
现代文：托付给他重任而责令他成功，因此李牧才能尽他的智慧和才能，挑选合格的战车一千三百辆，善射的骑兵一万三千，精锐的士卒十万，依靠这支部队在北面驱逐匈奴单于，打败束胡，灭掉澹林；在西面抑制强秦；在南面抗拒韩、魏。
English: He was entrusted with a heavy task and ordered to succeed. Therefore, Li Mu was able to use his wisdom and talent to the best of his ability to select 1,300 qualified chariots, 13,000 skilled cavalry, and 100,000 elite soldiers. He relied on this army to expel the Huns from the north, defeat the Sokhu, and eliminate the Yulin; to suppress the strong Qin in the west; and to resist the Han and Wei in the south.

古文：当是时，赵几伯。
现代文：当此之时，趟国几乎成为霸主。
English: At that time, Watanakuni almost became the overlord.

古文：后会赵王迁立，其母倡也，用郭开谗，而诛李牧，令颜聚代之。
现代文：此后恰遇趟王迁即位，他的母亲原是个卖唱的艺人。趟王迁即位听信宠臣郭开的谗言，终于诛杀了李牧，让颜聚代替他。
English: After that, Wang Qian ascended to the throne. His mother was originally a singer. Wang Qian, listening to the advice of his favorite Guo Kai, finally killed Li Mu and let Yan Ju replace him.

古文：是以为秦所灭。
现代文：因此军败卒逃被秦国消灭。
English: As a result, the defeated army was annihilated by Qin.

古文：今臣窃闻魏尚为云中守，军市租尽以给士卒，出私养钱，五日壹杀牛，以飨宾客军吏舍人，是以匈奴远避，不近云中之塞。
现代文：如今我私下听说魏尚任云中太守，把军市交易的税收全部拿来犒赏将士，还拿出私人的俸钱，每五天杀一次牛，宴请宾客、军吏和亲近的属官。因此匈奴远远躲避不敢接近云中要塞。
English: Now I have heard in private that Wei Shang was the governor of Yunzhong, and he used all the taxes from the military market transactions to reward the soldiers. He also took out private salaries, killed a cow every five days, and invited guests, military officials and close subordinate officials. Therefore, the Xiongnu did not dare to approach the Yunzhong fortress.

古文：虏尝一入，尚帅车骑击之，所杀甚众。
现代文：匈奴曾经入侵一次，魏尚率领兵马抗击，所杀死的敌军很多。
English: The Xiongnu once invaded, and Wei Shang led the troops and horses to fight back, killing many enemy troops.

古文：夫士卒尽家人子，起田中从军，安知尺籍伍符？
现代文：那些士卒都是平民百姓家的子弟，从田问来参军的，哪里知道什么 尺籍 、 伍符 这类军法条令。
English: Those soldiers were the children of commoners, who had come from the countryside to join the army. How could they know anything about military regulations and orders such as ranks, ranks and insignia?

古文：终日力战，斩首捕虏，上功莫府，一言不相应，文吏以法绳之。
现代文：整天努力作战，斩敌首，捕俘虏，可向衙门报功时，衹要一句话不符合，司法官们就援引法令来制裁他们。
English: All they know is to fight hard all day, kill and capture enemies, and report their exploits to the shogunate. As long as there is a sentence that does not correspond to the actual situation, the judge will use the law to sanction them.

古文：其赏不行，吏奉法必用。
现代文：他们的赏赐未能兑现而司法官所奉行的法令却必定执行。
English: Their reward was not fulfilled, but the decree of the magistrate was carried out.

古文：愚以为陛下法太明，赏太轻，罚太重。
现代文：我认为陛下法令太吹毛求疵，赏赐太轻，惩罚太重。
English: I think your majesty's decree is too picky, the reward is too light, and the punishment is too heavy.

古文：且云中守尚坐上功首虏差六级，陛下下之吏，削其爵，罚作之。
现代文：况且云中郡守魏尚仅由于上报斩杀敌军的数目差了六个首级，陛下就把他交付给司法官治罪，削夺了他的爵位，判处一年徒刑。
English: Moreover, just because Wei Shang, the governor of Yunzhong County, was six heads short of the number of enemy soldiers reported to have been killed, His Majesty handed him over to the judicial officer to be punished, stripped him of his title and sentenced him to one year in prison.

古文：繇此言之，陛下虽得李牧，不能用也。
现代文：由此说来，陛下即使得到了李牧，也是不可能重用的。
English: Therefore, even if His Majesty obtains the Li Mu, it is impossible to reuse it.

古文：臣诚愚，触忌讳，死罪！ 
现代文：我的确愚蠢，触犯了忌讳，死罪死罪！ 
English: I'm really stupid, I've broken the taboo, capital punishment, capital punishment!

古文：文帝说。
现代文：文帝听罢高兴。
English: Emperor Wen was delighted to hear this.

古文：是日，令唐持节赦魏尚，复以为云中守，而拜唐为车骑都尉，主中尉及郡国车士。
现代文：当天就令冯唐持节出使赦免魏尚，重新让他担任云中郡守，并起用冯唐为车骑都尉，掌管中尉和各郡、国的车战之士。
English: On the same day, he ordered Feng Tang to pardon Wei Shang by sending an envoy to Yunnan, reinstating him as the county governor of Yunnan, and appointed Feng Tang as the cavalry captain, in charge of the lieutenant and the cavalry soldiers of each county and country.

古文：十年，景帝立，以唐为楚相。
现代文：十年，汉景帝即位，让冯唐去做楚国的丞相。
English: Ten years later, Emperor Han Jing ascended to the throne and made Feng Tang the prime minister of Chu.

古文：武帝即位，求贤良，举唐。
现代文：汉武帝即位后，诏举贤良，推举冯唐。
English: After Emperor Hanwu ascended to the throne, he issued an edict to promote the virtuous and to promote Feng Tang.

古文：唐时年九十余，不能为官，乃以子遂为郎。
现代文：冯唐当时已九十多岁了，不能再任官职，便让他的儿子冯遂做郎官。
English: At that time, Feng Tang was over ninety years old and could no longer hold an official position, so he asked his son Feng Sui to become his vassal.

古文：遂字王孙，亦奇士。
现代文：冯遂字王孙，也是个杰出的人才。
English: Feng Sui Zi Wang Sun is also an outstanding talent.

古文：魏尚，槐里人也。
现代文：魏尚，槐里人。
English: Wei Shang, a Balinese.

古文：汲黯字长孺，濮阳人也。
现代文：汲黯，字长孺，濮阳人。
English: He is a native of Jinyang County.

古文：其行有宠于古之卫君也。
现代文：他的祖先受到古时龌的宠爱。
English: His ancestors were the darlings of ancient dynasties.

古文：至黯十世，世为卿大夫。
现代文：到滥章是十代，世代任卿大夫。
English: There have been ten generations of shamans, each of whom has been appointed to the post of doctor.

古文：以父任，孝景时为太子洗马，以严见惮。
现代文：汲黯受益于父亲的职位，孝景帝时作太子洗马，因为办事严肃被人敬畏。
English: While benefiting from his father's position, Emperor Xiaojing was a prince who washed horses, and was revered for his seriousness.

古文：武帝即位，黯为谒者。
现代文：武帝登上帝位，汲黯作谒者。
English: Emperor Wu ascended to the throne of God, and he was the one who created the darkness.

古文：东粤相攻，上使黯往视之。
现代文：东越部族内部互相攻战，皇上派汲黯前往视察。
English: The East Vietnamese tribes were at war with each other, and the Emperor sent Chu Chu to inspect the situation.

古文：至吴而还，报曰： 粤人相攻，固其俗，不足以辱天子使者。 
现代文：他没到束越，仅到会稽郡界就回来，汇报说： 束越人相互攻战，他们的习俗本来是这样的，不值得烦劳天子的使者。 
English: He did not go to Sokue, but returned only to the bounds of the county and reported: Sokue people fight each other, their customs are like this, it is not worth bothering the messenger of the Son of Heaven.

古文：河内失火，烧千余家，上使黯往视之。
现代文：河内郡失火，烧了一千多家，皇上派汲黯前往视察。
English: A fire broke out in Hanoi County, burning more than a thousand houses. The emperor sent Zhu Xi to inspect the situation.

古文：还报曰： 家人失火，屋比延烧，不足忧。
现代文：回来汇报说： 平民家庭不慎起火，由于房屋毗连，以致火势蔓延燃烧，不值得发愁。
English: He came back to report: It is not worth worrying about the spread of the fire because the houses are adjacent to each other.

古文：臣过河内，河内贫人伤水旱万余家，或父子相食，臣谨以便宜，持节发河内仓粟以振贫民。
现代文：我经过河内郡，河内郡的贫民受水灾旱灾的有一万多家，有的甚至父亲吃儿子或儿子吃父亲的尸体。我衹是见机行事，凭着所持的符信把河内郡官仓储积的谷米发放出来，赈济了当地的贫民。
English: I passed through Hanoi County. There are more than 10,000 poor people in Hanoi County who have been affected by floods and droughts. Some have even seen fathers eat their sons or sons eat the corpses of their fathers. I took advantage of the opportunity to distribute the grain stored in the official warehouse of Hanoi County with the help of the certificates I held, and helped the local poor.

古文：请归节，伏矫制罚。 
现代文：我请求让我归还符节，受假藉皇上命令的处分。 
English: I request that I be allowed to return the amulet and be punished by order of the emperor.

古文：上贤而释之，迁为荥阳令。
现代文：皇上认为他贤良，免予处分，调他作荣阳县令。
English: The emperor thought that he was a virtuous man and absolved him of his guilt, and he was transferred to be the highest-ranking official in Shenyang County.

古文：黯耻为令，称疾归田里。
现代文：汲黯以作县令为耻辱，托病请假回归老家。
English: He was ashamed to be a county magistrate and returned to his hometown on sick leave.

古文：上闻，乃召为中大夫。
现代文：皇帝听到了就召见他任命为中大夫。
English: When the emperor heard this, he summoned him and appointed him as a middle doctor.

古文：以数切谏，不得久留内，迁为东海太守。
现代文：由于多次向皇帝直言极谏，不能久留在宫廷内做官，外调为束海郡的太守。
English: Due to his repeated outspokenness to the emperor, he still had to stay in the court for a long time and was banished to become the governor of Tokaigun.

古文：黯学黄、老言，治官民，好清静，择丞史任之，责大指而已，不细苛。
现代文：汲黯学习黄帝、老子的言论，治理官府和民众事务。爱好清静无为，选择郡丞和能干的书史，把郡中的事务都委托给他们。
English: He studied the sayings of the Yellow Emperor and Laozi, and managed the affairs of the government and the people. He loved peace and quiet and did nothing. He chose the county magistrate and the competent book historian, and entrusted the affairs of the county to them.

古文：黯多病，卧阁内不出。
现代文：他治理郡政，衹是掌握与督责检查大事，不苛求琐碎细节。
English: He governs the county government, is good at grasping and supervising and inspecting major events, and is not demanding trivial details.

古文：岁余，东海大治，称之。
现代文：汲黯经常发病，躺在寝室裹面不出门。过了一年多，东海郡大为安定，大家都称赞他。
English: After more than a year, Tokaigun was very stable, and everyone praised him.

古文：上闻，召为主爵都尉，列于九卿。
现代文：皇上听到了，召他来任主爵都尉，位列九卿。
English: When the emperor heard this, he called him to be a lord lieutenant, ranking him among the nine nobles.

古文：治务在无为而已，引大体，不拘文法。
现代文：他办事力求清静无为，注重大政方针，不拘泥于法令教条。
English: He tries to do things quietly, pays attention to major policies, and does not adhere to laws and regulations.

古文：为人性倨，少礼，面折，不能容人之过。
现代文：汲黯为人性情倨傲，缺少礼节，当面指责对方，不能容忍人家的过失。
English: He is proud of his human nature, lacks etiquette, blames others in person, and cannot tolerate others' faults.

古文：合己者善待之，不合者弗能忍见，士亦以此不附焉。
现代文：与自己合得来的，很好地对待他们；与自己合不来的，不能耐心接见，士人也因此不依附他。
English: If you get along with them, treat them well; if you don't get along with them, you can't be patient with them, so they don't cling to you.

古文：然好游侠，任气节，行修洁。
现代文：但他爱好学习游侠之士，信任有声气和节操的人，平日家居的操行高尚纯洁。
English: However, he likes to study the knights of the realm, trusts those who are vocal and disciplined, and maintains a noble and pure household on a daily basis.

古文：其谏，犯主之颜色。
现代文：喜欢直爽地规劝君主改正错误，多次冒犯了君主的威严。
English: He liked to bluntly persuade the monarch to correct his mistakes, and offended the majesty of the monarch many times.

古文：常慕傅伯、爰盎之为人。
现代文：常常羡慕傅伯、袁盎的为人处世。
English: He often envied Fu Bo and Yuan Ang for their good manners.

古文：善灌夫、郑当时及宗正刘弃疾。
现代文：跟灌夫、郑当时以及宗正刘弃疾友好。
English: He is on friendly terms with Ganfu, Zheng Dangdang and Zongzheng Liu.

古文：亦以数直谏，不得久居位。
现代文：也因为多次直言进谏，不能长久在京居九卿之位。
English: They also had to stay in their posts for a long time because they were dismissed several times.

古文：是时，太后弟武安侯田蚡为丞相，中二千石拜谒，蚡弗为礼。
现代文：当汲黯做京官的这个时候，太后的弟弟武安侯田蚣为丞相，中二千石的官员拜见他，田蚣却傲不答礼。
English: At this time, when Kuching was the Beijing official, the empress dowager's brother, Buan Hou Tien Ho, was the prime minister. The middle-ranking official of 2,000 koku paid him a visit, but Tien Ho proudly refused to bow.

古文：黯见蚡，未尝拜，揖之。
现代文：但汲黯会见田纷不曾行过拜礼，经常拱手行礼。
English: However, when I met Tian Lian, he had never performed a religious service, and he would often bow his head.

古文：上方招文学儒者，上曰吾欲云云，默对曰： 陛下内多欲而外施仁义，奈何欲效唐、虞之治乎！ 
现代文：天子正招选贤良文学和信奉孔子学说的儒者，皇上说我想要怎样怎样。汲黯对答说： 陛下内心有很多欲望，而外面却装作施行仁义的样子，能效法唐尧、虞舜的政治吗！ 
English: The Son of Heaven is recruiting virtuous literature and Confucianists who believe in the teachings of Confucius, and the emperor said, "What do I want?" Ku Ying replied, "Your Majesty has many desires in his heart, but on the outside he pretends to practice benevolence and righteousness. Can he emulate the politics of Tang Xuan and Gu Yao?"

古文：上怒，变色而罢朝。
现代文：皇上发怒，改变脸色而宣布停止朝会。
English: Enraged, the emperor changed his face and announced the suspension of the imperial meeting.

古文：公卿皆为黯惧。
现代文：公卿们都替逛艳担惊受怕。
English: The nobles were terrified of the wandering whore.

古文：上退，谓人曰： 甚矣，汲黯之戆心！ 
现代文：皇上退朝，对近臣们说： 太过分了，汲黯真蠢！ 
English: The Emperor retired and said to his courtiers: "This is too much, you are so stupid!

古文：群臣或数黯，黯曰： 天子置公卿辅弼之臣，宁令从谀承意，陷主于不谊乎？
现代文：群臣中有人责怪汲黯，汲黯说： 天子设置公卿等辅佐的臣子，难道能让他们奉承阿谀，迎合意旨，使君主陷入不合正道的地步吗？
English: Some of the courtiers blamed Qiu Qiu, and Qiu Qiu said: If the Son of Heaven sets up courtiers such as court nobles as assistants, can he make them flatter the grandma, meet the emperor's will, and make the monarch fall into the wrong path?

古文：且已在其位，纵爱身，奈辱朝廷何！ 
现代文：况且我既已位居公卿，虽然爱惜自己的身体，那损害国家利益又怎么办！ 
English: Moreover, since I am already a noble, even though I take care of my body, what about harming the interests of the country!

古文：黯多病，病且满三月，上常赐告者数，终不愈。
现代文：汲黯多病，病了将近三个月，皇上经常赐给休假时间，还是没有痊愈。
English: Although he was often ill, and had been ill for three months, the emperor repeatedly granted him leave to recuperate, but his illness never went away.

古文：最后，严助为请告。
现代文：最后一次发病时，严助替他请假。
English: The last time he fell ill, Yan Sui took time off to care for him.

古文：上曰： 汲黯何如人也？ 
现代文：皇上说： 汲黯是什么样的人物呀？ 
English: The emperor said, "What kind of person is Kyubei?"

古文：曰： 使黯任职居官，亡以愈人，然至其辅少主守成，虽自谓贲、育弗能夺也。 上曰： 然。
现代文：严助说： 让汲黯当官行事，没有什么超越别人的地方。但是论到他辅助年少的主上，却能沉着坚定地守护已定的事业，即使有人自以为有孟贲、夏育那样的勇力也不可能强迫他放弃。 皇上说： 对。
English: Yan Sui said, "There is nothing superior about having a gloomy official act. However, when it comes to assisting his young master, he can calmly and firmly guard the predetermined cause. Even if someone thinks he has the courage of Meng Xuan and Xia Yu, it is impossible to force him to give up. The emperor said, "That's right."

古文：古有社稷之臣，至如汲黯，近之矣！ 
现代文：古时有所谓与国家共患难的社稷之臣，至于汲黯，近似他们了。 
English: In ancient times, there were so-called social vassals who shared the hardships of the country, but as far as Kuching is concerned, they are similar.

古文：大将军青侍中，上踞厕视之。
现代文：大将军卫青侍中，皇帝踞坐在榻上接见他。
English: Among the attendants of the great general Wei Qing, the emperor Zou sat on the bed to meet him.

古文：丞相弘宴见，上或时不冠。
现代文：丞相公孙弘平常因事进见，皇上有时不戴帽子。
English: The Emperor sometimes does not wear a hat, and the Prime Minister, Sun Hong, is usually very forward-thinking.

古文：至如见黯，不冠不见也。
现代文：至于汲黯进见，皇上不戴帽就不接见。
English: As for Chu Ying Jin's opinion, the emperor would not receive him without wearing a hat.

古文：上尝坐武帐，黯前奏事，上不冠，望见黯，避帷中，使人可其奏。
现代文：皇上曾经坐在武帐中，汲黯走上前去面奏公事，皇上没有戴帽子，远远看到了汲黯，立即避入帷帐中，派近侍的人传言，批准了他所奏的事。
English: Once, the Emperor was sitting in his armoury, and Kuchika stepped forward to play a piece of music. The Emperor was not wearing a hat, and saw Kuchika from afar. He immediately ducked into the curtain, sent his attendants to spread the rumour, and approved of the piece he was playing.

古文：其见敬礼如此。
现代文：他被皇上敬畏、礼遇到了这种地步。
English: This was the extent of the respect shown to him by the emperor.

古文：张汤以更定律令为廷尉，黯质责汤于上前，曰： 公为正卿，上不能褒先帝之功业，下不能化天下之邪心，安国富民，使囹圄空虚，何空取高皇帝约束纷更之为？
现代文：张汤因改定刑律法令做了廷尉，汲黯多次在皇上面前质问、指责张汤，说： 您是正卿，上面不能够发扬先帝们的功业，下面不能够化解天下人的邪心，让国家安定人民富足和降低犯罪率使监狱空虚，竟然把高皇帝所定律令乱改一气做什么？
English: Zhang Tang became a courtier due to the amendment of the criminal law decree. He repeatedly questioned and accused Zhang Tang in front of the emperor, saying: You are a righteous lord. Above, you cannot carry forward the achievements of the emperors. Below, you cannot dissolve the evil hearts of the people of the world, stabilize the country, enrich the people, reduce the crime rate, and empty the prison. What are you doing to change the laws of the high emperor?

古文：而公以此无种矣！ 
现代文：您也将因此而断绝子孙后代！ 
English: You will also destroy future generations because of this!

古文：黯时与汤论议，汤辩常在文深小苛，黯愤发，骂曰： 天下谓刀笔吏不可为公卿，果然。
现代文：汲黯时常跟张汤辩论争议，张汤言词动听，常在条文上求深，在小节上过细，汲黯忿怒进发，骂他说： 天下之人说刀笔吏不可以做公卿大官，果真如此。
English: He often debated and argued with Zhang Tang. Zhang Tang's words were beautiful, he often sought depth in the text and was too detailed in the subsection. He became angry and scolded him, saying, "People around the world say that a clerk cannot be a court noble, and it is true.

古文：必汤也，令天下重足而立，仄目而视矣！ 
现代文：如果按照张汤讲的行事，将使天下人叠足而立，斜着眼睛看东西了！ 
English: If you act according to what Zhang Tang said, you will make the whole world stand on its feet and look at things with slanted eyes!

古文：是时，汉方征匈奴，招怀四夷。
现代文：这时，汉朝正在征伐匈奴，招纳安抚四方民族。
English: At this time, the Han Dynasty was trying to conquer the Xiongnu and appease ethnic minorities around the country.

古文：黯务少事，间常言与胡和亲，毋起兵。
现代文：汲黯力求省事，趁皇帝有空闲，经常进言跟匈奴联姻，不要兴兵征伐。
English: He tried to save trouble, taking advantage of the emperor's free time, often advising him to ally with the Xiongnu and not to raise an army.

古文：上方乡儒术，尊公孙弘，及事益多，吏民巧。
现代文：皇上正在向往儒家学术，尊重公孙弘，及至事情更多，下层官吏舞文弄法，百姓取巧逃避。
English: The emperor is yearning for Confucian scholarship, respecting Gongsunhiro, and to things more, lower-level officials are dancing and playing tricks, and the people are cleverly evading.

古文：上分别文法，汤等数奏决谳以幸。
现代文：皇上分析律条，另增法律，张汤等人便多次奏上廷尉所定案件请皇上裁决，藉此取得宠信。
English: The emperor analyzed the code and added more laws, and Zhang Tang and others repeatedly appealed to the emperor for a ruling on the cases determined by the captain of the court, thereby gaining favor.

古文：而黯常毁儒，面触弘等徒怀诈饰智以阿人主取容，而刀笔之吏专深文巧诋，陷人于罔，以自为功。
现代文：而汲黯时常诋毁儒术，当面指责公孙弘等一味内挟欺诈外饰智巧，以迎合主上的意图，取得主上的欢心；刀笔吏专门片面深析法律条文巧妙诋毁，陷害人入法网，并因此而自认为有功。
English: On the other hand, Ku Ying often slandered Confucianism, and accused Gongsun Hong and others of insider fraud and cleverness in order to meet the Lord's intention and win the Lord's favor; the sword writers specialized in one-sided deep analysis of legal provisions, cleverly slandering, and trapping people into the legal network, and therefore considered themselves to be meritorious.

古文：上愈益贵弘、汤，弘、汤心疾黯，虽上亦不说也，欲诛之以事。
现代文：皇上更加看重公孙弘、张汤，公孙弘、张汤两人内心深恨汲黯，即使是天子也不喜欢他，想藉故杀他。
English: The emperor placed more importance on Gongsunhong and Zhang Tang. Gongsunhong and Zhang Tang both had deep hatred in their hearts. Even the heavenly son did not like him and wanted to kill him.

古文：弘为丞相，乃言上曰： 右内史界部中多贵人宗室，难治，非素重臣弗能任，请徙黯。 
现代文：公孙弘做了丞相，就向皇上进言说： 右内史所辖治的地面住了很多大官和皇族，很难治理，不是平素著名的在朝廷中居重要职位的大臣不能胜任，请调汲黯去任右内史。 
English: When Gongsunhong became chancellor, he made a suggestion to the emperor, saying, "Many high-ranking officials and members of the imperial family live in the area governed by Uchinishi. It is difficult to govern. It is not the usual case that a minister who holds an important position in the imperial court is incompetent. Please transfer him to Uchinishi."

古文：为右内史数岁，官事不废。
现代文：汲黯为右内史有几年，居官政事没有废弛。
English: Ku Ying served as the Minister of Internal Affairs for several years. During his tenure, the government affairs were well-organized, and there was never any waste.

古文：大将军青既益尊，姊为皇后，然黯与亢礼。
现代文：大将军卫青已经更加尊贵，姐姐卫子夫做了皇后，但汲黯对卫青行平等礼节。
English: General Wei Qing has become more and more distinguished. His sister, Wei Zifu, has become the empress, but Qi Ying still performs equal salutes with him.

古文：或说黯曰： 自天子欲令群臣下大将军，大将军尊贵，诚重，君不可以不拜。 
现代文：有人规劝汲黯说： 过去天子想要群臣都对大将军谦恭自下，现在大将军被天子尊敬看重，更加地位高贵了，您不可以不行跪拜礼。 
English: Some people tried to persuade Qiu Qiao, saying: In the past, the emperor wanted his ministers to be humble to the general. Now, the general is respected by the emperor and has a higher status. You should not kneel to pray.

古文：黯曰： 夫以大将军有揖客，反不重耶？ 
现代文：汲黯说： 让大将军有拱手行平等礼的客人，倒不是敬重他吗？ 
English: "Wouldn't it be respectful to the great general to have a guest who offers the equal-salute salute?

古文：大将军闻，愈贤黯，数请问以朝廷所疑，遇黯加于平日。
现代文：大将军听到了，更加认为汲黯贤良，多次向他请教有关国家朝廷的疑难大事，厚待汲黯超过平时。
English: When the general heard this, he thought even more highly of him, and repeatedly asked him for advice on difficult matters concerning the national court. He treated him with more kindness than usual.

古文：淮南王谋反，惮黯，曰： 黯好直谏，守节死义；至说公孙弘等，如发蒙耳。 
现代文：淮南王刘安阴谋反叛，畏惧汲黯，说： 这人喜欢讲直话规劝，坚守节操，为了义可以牺牲生命；至于说服丞相公孙弘，像教儿童办事一样容易。 
English: Liu An, the king of Huainan, who was afraid of the dark and plotted to rebel, said, "This man likes to speak plainly and give advice, adhere to discipline, and can sacrifice his life for the sake of righteousness; as for convincing the prime minister, Sun Hong, it is as easy as teaching children to do things.

古文：上既数征匈奴有功，黯言益不用。
现代文：天子已经多次征伐匈奴有了成就，汲黯的话更加不采用了。
English: The Son of Heaven has conquered the Xiongnu many times and achieved great things, and he has never used such words.

古文：始黯列九卿矣，而公孙弘、张汤为小吏。
现代文：当初汲黯列位于九卿的时候，公孙弘、张汤做下层小吏。
English: At the beginning, when Ku Ying Que was in the Nine Lords, Gongsun Hong and Zhang Tang were lower-level minor officials.

古文：及弘、汤稍贵，与黯同位，黯又非毁弘、汤。
现代文：等到公孙弘、张汤逐渐高贵，跟汲黯同级，汲黯又责难诋毁公孙弘、张汤。
English: When Gongsun Hong and Zhang Tang gradually became noble, they were on the same level as Gu Ying, and Gu Ying was also accused of slandering Gongsun Hong and Zhang Tang.

古文：已而弘至丞相，封侯，汤御史大夫，黯时丞史皆与同列，或尊用过之。
现代文：不久，公孙弘升到丞相，封为平滓侯；张汤升到御史大夫；从前汲黯管辖的丞、史等助手都升到跟汲黯同等地位，有的竞被重用得超过了他。
English: Soon after, Gongsun Hong was promoted to chancellor and given the title of Pingluo; Zhang Tang was promoted to goshi taifu; and the chancellors, historians, and other assistants who had previously been under his jurisdiction were all promoted to the same status as him, and some of them were used more than him.

古文：黯褊心，不能无少望，见上，言曰： 陛下用群臣如积薪耳，后来者居上。 
现代文：汲黯心地狭窄，不能不稍微有些埋怨，朝见皇上时，说： 陛下使用群臣像堆积柴垛一样，后来的居上。 
English: When he came to see the Emperor, he said, "Your Majesty uses his courtiers like heaps of firewood, and the last one is the best.

古文：黯罢，上曰： 人果不可以无学，观汲黯之言，日益甚矣。 
现代文：汲黯退出去后，皇上说： 一个人确实不可以没有学识，玩味汲黯的话，愚蠢得曰甚一日。 
English: After Chu Ying retired, the emperor said: "A person really cannot be without knowledge. If you play with Chu Ying, you will be stupid for a very long time."

古文：居无何，匈奴浑邪王帅众来降，汉发车二万乘。
现代文：过了不久，匈奴浑邪王率领部众来投降，汉朝征发车辆两万乘去接运。
English: Not long after, the Xiongnu Hunjia Wang led his troops to surrender, and the Han Dynasty requisitioned and dispatched twenty thousand vehicles to pick them up.

古文：县官亡钱，从民贳马。
现代文：公家府库没有钱，只好向百姓借马。
English: The public treasury had no money and had to borrow horses from the people.

古文：民或匿马，马不具。
现代文：百姓有的把马隐藏起来，马不能凑足。
English: Some people hide their horses, and the horses can't get together.

古文：上怒，欲斩长安令。
现代文：皇上发怒，要杀长安县令。
English: The emperor was furious and wanted to kill the Chang'an County magistrate.

古文：黯曰： 长安令亡罪，独斩臣黯，民乃肯出马。
现代文：汲黯说： 长安县令没有罪，衹有杀了我汲黯，百姓才肯献出马匹。
English: "The Chang'an County magistrate is not guilty of any crime, but he did kill me, so the people are willing to donate their horses," said Qiu Qiu.

古文：且匈奴畔其主而降汉，徐以县次传之，何至令天下骚动，罢中国，甘心夷狄之人乎！ 
现代文：况且这些匈奴人背叛他们的单于投降汉朝，如果汉朝慢慢地由沿路各县挨次给他们提供驿车运送他们，怎会致使全国惊扰，使本国人民疲劳困乏来事奉这些匈奴人呢！ 
English: Moreover, these Huns betrayed them only by surrendering to the Han Dynasty. If the Han Dynasty slowly provided them with carts to transport them from one county to another along the road, how could it cause the whole country to be alarmed and the people of the country to be tired and exhausted to serve these Huns!

古文：上默然。
现代文：皇上沉默了。
English: The Emperor was speechless.

古文：后浑邪王至，贾人与市者，坐当死五百余人。
现代文：等到浑邪王来了，跟匈奴来降者做交易买卖的商人中间，犯罪判处死刑的有五百多人。
English: By the time King Hun came, more than five hundred merchants had been sentenced to death for trading with the Huns.

古文：黯入，请间，见高门，曰： 夫匈奴攻当路塞，绝和亲，中国举兵诛之，死伤不可胜计，而费以巨万百数。
现代文：汲黯入宫，请求利用空闲时避开众人奏事，在未央宫内的高门殿见到皇上说： 过去匈奴人进攻我国当路的边疆要塞，断绝了和亲的友好关系，我们大汉兴兵讨伐，死伤的人多到计算不清，耗费的钱财用好几百亿来计算。
English: He entered the palace at dusk and asked to use his free time to avoid the crowd and attend to matters. When he saw the emperor at the high gate of the Weiyang Palace, he said: In the past, the Huns attacked the frontier fortresses that served as roads for our country, and broke off the friendly relations between relatives and friends. We great men led the crusade, and the number of dead and wounded was too many to count. The money and wealth consumed was calculated in tens of billions.

古文：臣愚以为陛下得胡人，皆以为奴婢，赐从军死者家；卤获，因与之，以谢天下，塞百姓之心。
现代文：我汲黯愚蠢，认为陪下获得匈奴人，都会把他们作为奴仆婢女赐给服军役而死于战事者的家属；破敌后所缴获的财物，也便分给这些人，来慰问天下人的劳苦，满足百姓的心。
English: Stupidly, I thought that if I was accompanied by the Huns, they would give them as slaves to the families of those who died in the war while serving in the military; the property captured after the enemy was defeated would also be distributed to these people, to console the hard work of the people of the world and satisfy the hearts of the people.

古文：今纵不能，浑邪帅数万之众来，虚府库赏赐，发良民侍养，若奉骄子。
现代文：如今虽不能这样，浑邪王率领几万部众来投降，却亏空了国家府库来赏赐他们，征发了善良的百姓来服侍他们，如同奉养骄子。
English: Although this is not possible today, King Hunjong led tens of thousands of troops to surrender, but he emptied the national treasury to reward them, and conscripted good people to serve them, as if he were raising a proud son.

古文：愚民安知市买长安中而文吏绳以为阑出财物如边关乎？
现代文：无知的老百姓哪里知道让他们购买长安当地用品而舞文弄墨的法吏就用禁运物走私出边关的罪名来处分他们的呢？
English: How did the ignorant people know to let them buy local goods in Chang'an, and how did the legal officials punish them with the charge of smuggling prohibited goods out of the border?

古文：陛下纵不能得匈奴之赢以谢天下，又以微文杀无知者五百余人，臣窃为陛下弗取也。 
现代文：陛下纵然不能拿缴获匈奴的物资来慰劳天下人，又用隐约不明的法令条文杀无知百姓五百多人，我认为陛下不宜如此处罚。 
English: Even though His Majesty cannot comfort the people of the world with the materials captured from the Xiongnu, and kill more than five hundred ignorant people with vaguely unclear legal provisions, I do not think it is appropriate for His Majesty to impose such a punishment.

古文：上弗许，曰： 吾久不闻汲黯之言，今又复妄发矣。 
现代文：皇上不听从，说： 我很久没听到汲黯的话，现在又来乱说一气了。 
English: The Emperor did not listen, and said, "I have not heard you for a long time, and now you are talking nonsense again."

古文：后数月，黯坐小法，会赦，免官。
现代文：过后几个月，汲黯犯了不大的罪，恰逢大赦，衹免除官职。
English: A few months later, Ji Ying committed a minor crime, coincided with the amnesty, and was removed from office.

古文：于是黯隐于田园者数年。
现代文：于是汲黯隐居于农村数年。
English: As a result, he lived in seclusion in the countryside for several years.

古文：会更立五铢钱，民多盗铸钱者，楚地尤甚。
现代文：遇了几年，碰上改铸五铢钱，百姓中有很多人私铸钱币，楚国故地尤其严重。
English: In the past few years, when it came to the issue of recasting five-baht coins, there were many people among the people who minted coins without authorization. The situation in the ancestral land of Chu was particularly serious.

古文：上以为淮阳，楚地之郊也，召黯拜为淮阳太守。
现代文：皇上以为淮阳郡，是楚地领域，就遣使召汲黯任命他为淮阳郡太守。
English: The emperor thought that Huaiyang County was the territory of Chu, so he sent an envoy to summon Qiu Qiu and appointed him as the governor of Huaiyang County.

古文：黯伏谢不受印绶，诏数强予，然后奉诏。
现代文：汲黯拜伏于地辞谢不接受印信，诏书多次强迫给他，然后接受诏命。
English: He bowed to the ground and refused to accept the seal letter. The imperial rescript forced him many times, and then he accepted the imperial rescript.

古文：召上殿，黯泣曰： 臣自以为填沟壑，不复见陛下，不意陛下复收之。
现代文：下诏召见汲黯，汲黯对着皇上流着泪说： 我自己以为尸首会填山沟，不再看到陛下了，没料到陛下又收录使用。
English: The next emperor summoned him to see the Empress, and the Empress said to the emperor with tears: I myself thought that the corpse would fill the ravine, and I would no longer see His Majesty, but I did not expect that His Majesty would be included and used again.

古文：臣常有狗马之病，今病，力不能任郡事。
现代文：我常有疾病，如今生病，精力不能胜任一个郡的工作。
English: I used to get sick a lot, and now I'm sick, and I don't have the energy to do the work of a county.

古文：臣愿为中郎，出入禁闼，补过拾遗，臣之愿也。 上曰： 君薄淮阳邪？
现代文：我愿意做中郎一类的近诗人员，能够出入宫禁小门，替陛下补救过失或提示疏忽的事项，是我的志愿。 皇上说： 您轻视淮阳郡吗？
English: I am willing to serve as a kind of middle-man of the court poet, to be able to enter and leave the small gate of the palace, and to remedy the fault or suggest negligence for His Majesty, which is my voluntary.The emperor said: Do you despise Huaiyang County?

古文：吾今召君矣。
现代文：我曰后即将召您回来。
English: I'm calling you now to appoint you.

古文：顾淮阳吏民不相得，吾徒得君重，卧而治之。 
现代文：衹是淮阳郡官吏和百姓不相融洽，我仅仅藉重您的威名德望，请您躺着治理。 
English: It's because the officials and people of Huaiyang County are not in harmony. I'm only asking you to govern while lying down because of your prestige and moral authority.

古文：黯既辞，过大行李息，曰： 黯弃逐居郡，不得与朝廷议矣。
现代文：汲黯已经向皇上告别，探望大行令李息，说： 我被抛弃到外郡去，不能参加朝廷大事的议论了。
English: He had already bid farewell to the emperor and visited Li Xi, the grand marshal, saying, "I have been abandoned to the outer counties and can no longer participate in the discussion of major events at the imperial court."

古文：然御史大夫汤智足以距谏，诈足以饰非，非肯正为天下言，专阿主意。
现代文：但御史大夫张汤，他的智巧完全可以拒绝人家对他的批评，他的诡计完全可以掩饰他的错误，不愿意根据正道替天下人说话，专门迎合主上的心意。
English: However, Grand Historian Zhang Tang, whose cleverness can completely reject people's criticism of him, and whose trickery can completely cover up his mistakes, is unwilling to speak for the world according to the right path, and only caters to the Lord's will.

古文：主意所不欲，因而毁之；主意所欲，因而誉之。
现代文：主上心裹所不想要的，就毁谤；主上心裹所想要的，就称赞。
English: If the emperor did not want it, he slandered it to his heart's content; if the emperor wanted it, he took the opportunity to praise it.

古文：好兴事，舞文法，内怀诈以御主心，外挟贼吏以为重。
现代文：喜欢制造事端，玩弄条文法令，在朝廷内心怀奸诈来迎合主上的心意，在朝廷外就挟制残忍贪婪的恶吏来维护自己的威严。
English: He likes to create troubles, play with the articles and laws, and harbor treachery in the heart of the court to cater to the Lord's will, and extort cruel and greedy evil officials outside the court to maintain his dignity.

古文：公列九卿不早言之何？
现代文：您列位于九卿，为何不趁早向皇上进言？
English: You are listed as one of the nine lords, why don't you speak to the emperor as soon as possible?

古文：公与之俱受其戮矣！ 
现代文：您跟他都将会受到诛戮了。 
English: You and he are going to get slaughtered.

古文：息畏汤，终不敢言。
现代文：李息畏惧张汤，终于不敢进言。
English: Li Xi was afraid of Zhang Tang and never dared to approach the emperor.

古文：黯居郡如其故治，淮阳政清。
现代文：汲黯处理郡政仍然按照过去的治理方法，淮阳郡政事清明。
English: Huaiyang County's governance is still in accordance with the past governance methods, and Huaiyang County's governance is very clear.

古文：后张汤败，上闻黯与息言，抵息罪。
现代文：后来张汤果然遭败，皇上听到了汲黯对李息讲过的话，判处了李息的罪。
English: Later, Zhang Tang was indeed defeated, and the emperor heard the words that Qi Ying had spoken to Li Xi, and sentenced Li Xi to death.

古文：令黯以诸侯相秩居淮阳。
现代文：指令汲黯在淮阳太守任内与诸侯王国相地位待遇相同。
English: During the Huaiyang Daju's term of office, he was given the same status and treatment as the princes of the kingdom.

古文：居淮阳十岁而卒。
现代文：过十年汲黯去世了。
English: Ten years later, she passed away.

古文：卒后，上以黯故，官其弟仁至九卿，子偃至诸侯相。
现代文：汲黯去世以后，皇上因为汲黯的缘故，让他的弟弟汲仁官至九卿，儿子汲偃做到诸侯王国的相。
English: After the death of Kyuhye, the emperor, because of Kyuhye, made his younger brother Kyujin the ninth lord and his son Kyuhye the prince of the kingdom.

古文：黯姊子司马安亦少与黯为太子洗马。
现代文：汲黯姐姐的儿子司马安年轻时也跟汲黯做太子洗马。
English: When he was young, Sima An, the son of Kumi's older sister, also washed horses with Kumi as a prince.

古文：安文深巧善宦，四至九卿，以河南太守卒。
现代文：司马安解释法律条文深刻巧诈善于做官，他的官位四次到九卿，在河南郡太守任上去世。
English: Sima An was good at interpreting legal provisions, and was good at being an official. He rose to the rank of Jiuqing four times, and died in the position of Henan County Governor.

古文：昆弟以安故，同时至二千石十人。
现代文：兄弟们因为司马安的缘故，同时为官到二千石职位的有十个人。
English: Brothers, because of Simaan, there are ten people who have been promoted to positions of 2,000 koku.

古文：濮阳段宏始事盖侯信，信任宏，官亦再至九卿。
现代文：濮阳人段宏起初事奉盖侯王信，王信保举段宏，段宏官位也两次到九卿。
English: Duan Hong, a native of Shiyang, initially served as the vassal of Prince Wang Xin. Wang Xin Bao promoted Duan Hong, and Duan Hong's official rank was raised to Jiuqing twice.

古文：然卫人仕者皆严惮汲黯，出其下。
现代文：然而卫人做官的都很敬畏汲黯，官位都在汲黯之下。
English: However, the officials in Shenyang are very much in awe of him, and are willing to live under him.

古文：郑当时字庄，陈人也。
现代文：郑当时，字庄，陈县人。
English: At that time, Zheng was from Zhouzhuang, Chen County.

古文：其先郑君尝事项籍，籍死而属汉。
现代文：他的先人郑君曾经做过项籍的将领，项籍死后他归属汉朝。
English: His ancestor, Zheng Jun, had once been a general of Xiangzi, and after Xiangzi's death, he belonged to the Han Dynasty.

古文：高祖令诸故项籍臣名籍，郑君独不奉诏。
现代文：漠高祖刘邦命令所有过去项籍的臣子直呼项籍的名讳，衹有郑君一人不接受韶令。
English: Gaozu ordered all his former subordinates to call him by his first name when mentioning his family name, and Zheng Jun alone did not accept the edict.

古文：诏尽拜名籍者为大夫，而逐郑君。
现代文：诏书把那些肯呼项籍名讳的人都拜为大夫，而驱逐郑君。
English: Gao Zu decreed that those who were willing to call out their names would be worshipped as doctors, and drove away Zheng Jun.

古文：郑君死孝文时。
现代文：郑君死在孝文帝时。
English: Zheng Jun died during the reign of Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：当时以任侠自喜，脱张羽于厄，声闻梁、楚间。
现代文：郑当时以行侠义之事自豪，解脱了梁孝王之将张羽的患难，名声传播于梁楚地区。
English: At that time, Zheng was proud of his chivalrous deeds, and he freed Zhang Yu, the general of Liang Xiao Wang, from the hardships. His fame spread to Liangchu area.

古文：孝景时，为太子舍人。
现代文：孝景帝时为太子舍人。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing, he was a reluctant prince.

古文：每五日洗沐，常置驿马长安诸郊，请谢宾客，夜以继日，至明旦，常恐不遍。
现代文：每逢五日一次休假，经常在长安四郊配置驿马，请谒或拜谢宾客们，夜以继，直至天亮，时常恐怕不周到。
English: Every five days a vacation, often in the four suburbs of Chang'an set up a horse-drawn carriage, please or thank guests, night after night, until dawn, often I am afraid not thoughtful.

古文：当时好黄、老言，其慕长者，如恐不称。
现代文：郑庄喜欢黄帝、老子的学说，他爱慕年高有德的人，惟恐老人不称意。
English: Zheng Zhuang likes the teachings of the Yellow Emperor and Laozi. He admires people who are old and virtuous, but fears that the old people will not be satisfied.

古文：自见年少官薄，然其知友皆大父行，天下有名之士也。
现代文：自己虽然年轻官卑，但他所往来交好的知友都是他祖父辈，全国有名的士人。
English: Although he is a low-ranking young official, his best friends are his grandfathers, famous statesmen throughout the country.

古文：武帝即位，当时稍迁为鲁中尉，济南太守，江都相，至九卿为右内史。
现代文：武帝刘彻登上帝位，郑庄先后调升为鲁国的中尉、济南郡的太守、江都国的相，一直升到九卿担任右内史。
English: Wu Emperor Liu Che ascended to the throne, Zheng Zhuang was successively promoted to the lieutenant of Lu, the governor of Jinan County, and the minister of Jiangdu Province, and was promoted to the ninth lord as the right internal historian.

古文：以武安魏其时议，贬秩为詹事，迁为大司农。
现代文：由于参与武安侯田蚧、魏其侯窦婴争议，被降职为詹事，后来调升为大司农。
English: As a result of his participation in the Wu'an Hou Tianjun and Wei Qihou Dou Yu controversy, he was demoted to Zhanji, and later promoted to Daisho Nongri.

古文：当时为大吏，戒门下： 客至，亡贵贱亡留门者。 
现代文：郑庄为大吏，告诫守门人： 客人到来要立刻请进，无论是贵是贱都不要停在门口等候。 
English: Zheng Zhuang, the chief clerk, admonished the gatekeeper: When the guests arrive, please enter immediately. Whether it is expensive or cheap, do not stop at the door to wait.

古文：执宾主之礼，以其贵下人。
现代文：他执行主人敬待客人之礼，能够拿自己的高贵身份谦恭地对待客人。
English: He respected the host's hospitality and bowed to the guests with his noble status.

古文：性廉，又不治产，卬奉赐给诸公。
现代文：郑庄品质廉洁，又不添置私产，依赖俸禄和所得的赏赐来供应诸位年长友人。
English: Zhengzhuang is honest, does not add private property, and relies on salary and income rewards to supply his elderly friends.

古文：然其馈遗人，不过具器食。
现代文：但他赠送人的礼物，不过是一盘食品。
English: But his gift was just a plate of food.

古文：每朝，候上间说，未尝不言天下长者。
现代文：每次朝见，等到皇上的空闲，进言时从来没有不称道天下的贤人。
English: Every time he appeared before the emperor, and whenever the emperor was free, he was never anything less than the wisest man on earth.

古文：其推毂士及官属丞史，诚有味其言也。常引以为贤于己。
现代文：推荐士人和丞、史等属吏时，他称道他们确实津津有味，时常提及认为比他自己贤能。
English: When recommending subordinate officials such as Shi Ren, Zheng Zheng and Shi, he praised that they were really enthusiastic, and often mentioned that he thought they were more capable than himself.

古文：未尝名吏，与官属言，若恐伤之。
现代文：从来没有直呼过属吏的名讳，跟所属官吏谈话，好像生怕伤害了他们。
English: He never called officers by their first names, and when talking to subordinates, he was as humble as if he were afraid of hurting the other person.

古文：闻人之善言，进之上，唯恐后。
现代文：听到了别人讲的善言，向皇上推荐，生怕慢了。
English: Having heard the kind words spoken by others and recommended to the Emperor, I am afraid I am too slow.

古文：山东诸公为此翕然称郑庄。
现代文：敬山以束士人因此都异口同声地称赞郑庄。
English: As a result, people from Keishan and Sokcho praised Zhengzhuang with one voice.

古文：使视决河，自请治行五日。
现代文：郑庄被派遣视察黄河的决口，自己申请因整治行装给假五天。
English: Zheng Zhuang was sent to inspect the mouth of the Yellow River, and he applied for a five-day leave of absence due to the rectification.

古文：上曰： 吾闻郑庄行，千里不赍粮，治行者何也？ 
现代文：皇上说： 我听说郑庄远行，千里不带粮，现在申请给假整治行装，为什么呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "I heard that Zhengzhuang traveled thousands of miles without grain, and now I am applying for a fake rectification. Why?

古文：然当时以朝，常趋和承意，不敢甚斥臧否。
现代文：然而郑庄在朝廷议事，常常随声附和与逢迎皇上的意旨，不敢明确表态对或不对。
English: However, Zheng Zhuang in the deliberation of the imperial court, often echoed the will of the emperor, and did not dare to make a clear statement of right or wrong.

古文：汉征匈奴，招四夷，天下费多，财用益屈。
现代文：汉朝征伐匈奴，招抚四方夷族，全国耗费多，财力物力越发空乏。
English: The Han Dynasty conquered the Xiongnu and invited the barbarians from four directions. The whole country spent a lot of money, and the financial and material resources were increasingly depleted.

古文：当时为大司农，任人宾客僦，入多逋负。
现代文：郑庄任大司农，所保举的人和与他熟识的宾客有给大司农搞运输的，亏欠款项很多。
English: Zheng Zhuang served as the chief secretary of farmers, and the people he sponsored and the guests who were familiar with him had engaged in transportation for the chief secretary of farmers, and owed a lot of money.

古文：司马安为淮阳太守，发其事，当时在此陷罪，赎为庶人。
现代文：司马安做淮阳郡太守，揭发了这件事，郑庄因此犯罪，纳粟赎罪后降为平民。
English: Sima An, the governor-general of Huaiyang County, exposed the affair. Zheng Zhuang committed a crime as a result, and was reduced to a commoner after atoning for the crime with poppies.

古文：顷之，守长史。
现代文：不久，在丞相府暂时担任长史职务。
English: Soon after, he assumed the position of provisional chief historian at the Chosho-fu.

古文：迁汝南太守，数岁，以官卒。
现代文：又升任汝南郡太守。几年后，在任上去世。
English: He was also promoted to the position of the governor of Runan County. A few years later, he died in office.

古文：昆弟以当时故，至二千石者六七人。
现代文：兄弟们因郑当时的地位，官至二千石的有六七人。
English: Due to Zheng's status at the time, there were 67 brothers who rose to the rank of 2,000 koku.

古文：当时始与汲黯列为九卿，内行修。
现代文：鄞庄、汲黯当初列位于九卿，注意个人品德修养。
English: At the beginning, Shanzhuang and Jiuyuan were ranked in the nine nobles, and attention should be paid to personal moral cultivation.

古文：两人中废，宾客益落。
现代文：这两人中途罢官，宾客越发零落。
English: The two men left the table midway, and the guests became more and more scattered.

古文：当时死，家亡余财。
现代文：郑当时去世后家裹没有剩一点儿财产。
English: After Zheng's death at that time, the family did not have any property left.

古文：先是，下刲翟公为廷尉，宾客亦填门，及废，门外可设爵罗。
现代文：早先下邦人翟公任廷尉，宾客也是盈门，丢官后，门外可以设置捕雀罗网。
English: Earlier, the guest of honor was a public courtier, and the guest was Yingmen. After losing his position, a net can be set up outside the door to catch the cheaters.

古文：后复为廷尉，客欲往，翟公大署其门，曰： 一死一生，乃知交情；一贫一富，乃知交态；一贵一贱，交情乃见。 
现代文：后来官复原职，宾客想前去，翟公大字写在门上，说： 一生一死，可知交情深浅；一贫一富，可知人情世态；一贵一贱，交情可见。 
English: Later, when the official was reinstated, the guests wanted to go forward, and a large letter was written on the door, saying: "In life and death, you can know the depth of friendship; in poverty and wealth, you can know the state of the world; in wealth and poverty, you can see friendship."

古文：赞曰：张释之之守法，冯唐之论将，汲黯之正直，郑当时之推士，不如是，亦何以成名哉！
现代文：赞曰：张释之恪守法律，引古论今的直言郎官，君臣信任的用将之道，汲黯性情刚直，郑当时推荐贤士，不如此，何以成名呢！
English: Zhang Xizhi was a law-abiding, straight-talking vassal of the emperor, trusted by princes and ministers, and had a straightforward temperament. Zheng recommended him as a wise man at that time. Otherwise, how did he become famous?

古文：扬子以为孝文帝诎帝尊以信亚夫之军，曷为不能用颇、牧？
现代文：扬子认为孝文帝放下皇帝尊贵的身份，表彰周亚夫的军队，为什么不能用廉颇、李牧呢？
English: Yangzi thought that Emperor Xiaowen had given up his status as an emperor and commended Zhou Yafu's army. Why couldn't he have used Renpo or Li Mu?

古文：彼将有激云尔。
现代文：冯唐欲理魏尚而对文帝用了激将法。
English: Feng Tang wanted to control Wei Shang and used the method of incitement against Emperor Wen.

