古文：汾水出太原汾阳县北管涔山。
现代文：汾水发源于矢原郡汾阳县以北的管涔山。
English: Surabaya's water originates in Yabara County, north of Shinyang County.

古文：《山海经》曰：《北次二经》之首，在河之东，其首枕汾，曰管涔之山，其上无木，而下多玉，汾水出焉，西流注于河。
现代文：《山海经》说：北次二经头一座山，在大河东边，头靠汾水，叫管滓之山，山上没有树木，山下多玉，汾水就发源在这里，西流注入大河。
English: "Mountains and Seas Sutra" says: The first mountain in the Northern Tripitaka, on the east side of the great river, with its head close to Surabaya, is called the Mountain of Surabaya. There are no trees on the mountain, but there are many jewels below. Surabaya's water originates here, and the west stream flows into the great river.

古文：《十三州志》曰：出武州之燕京山。亦管涔之异名也。
现代文：《十三州志》说：汾水发源于武州的燕京山，这也是管滓山的异名。
English: "The History of the Thirteen Provinces" said: "Shanshui originated from Wuzhou's Yanjing Mountain, which is also a different name for Guanlishan Mountain.

古文：其山重阜修岩，有草无木，泉源导于南麓之下，盖稚水蒙流耳。
现代文：这座山冈峦层沓，危岩高耸，只有蔓草，却没有树木，源泉就在南麓冒出，不过是一道涓涓细流而已。
English: The mountain is a ridge with steep cliffs and only vines but no trees. The spring rises at the southern foot of the mountain, but it is only a trickle.

古文：又西南，夹岸连山，联峰接势。
现代文：又往西南流，两岸山脉连绵，峰峦相接。
English: It also flows to the southwest, the mountains on both sides are continuous, and the peaks are connected.

古文：刘渊族子曜尝隐避于管涔之山，夜中忽有二童子入，跪曰：管涔王使小臣奉谒赵皇帝。
现代文：刘渊的同宗侄儿刘耀曾隐避在管滓之山。夜间忽然进来两个孩子，跪着说：管滓王派我们俩来拜见赵皇帝，献上宝剑一把。
English: Liu Yuan's great-nephew Liu Yao once hid in the mountains of Guanzhang. At night, two children suddenly came in, kneeling and saying: Guanzhang sent us both to visit Emperor Zhao and present a sword.

古文：献剑一口，置前，再拜而去。
现代文：于是把剑放在面前，拜了两拜然后离去。
English: So he put the sword in front of him, bowed twice and left.

古文：以烛视之，剑长二尺，光泽非常，背有铭曰：神剑御，除众毒。
现代文：刘暇擎着蜡烛去看，剑长两尺，非常光亮；背面有铭文，刻的是：佩上神剑，可除各种邪毒。
English: Liu Yuqing held a candle to see. The sword was two feet long and very bright. On the back, there was an inscription, which read: "Wearing the divine sword can remove all kinds of evil poisons."

古文：曜遂服之，剑随时变为五色也。
现代文：刘耀于是就佩上它，宝剑随时会变幻出五色光芒。
English: Liu Yao then put it on, and the sword would turn into a five-colored light at any time.

古文：后曜遂为胡王矣。
现代文：以后刘耀就做了胡王。
English: After that, Liu Yao became King Hu.

古文：汾水又南，与东、西温溪合。水出左右近溪，声流翼注，水上杂树交荫，云垂烟接。
现代文：汾水又南流，与东温溪和西温溪汇合，这两条水都出自邻近一带的小溪，在两边涂涂地奔流。水上各种树木繁荫交错，就像一片云烟似的。
English: Surabaya's water also flows south, merging with Dongwen Creek and Xiweng Creek, both of which originate from nearby streams, and flows smoothly on both sides. The shade of various trees interlaces on the water, like a cloud of smoke.

古文：自是水流潭涨，波襄转泛。
现代文：二水汇入后，水流高涨起来，波浪升腾，流转泛涌。
English: After the confluence of the two rivers, the water flow is high, the waves are rising, and the currents are surging.

古文：又南径一城东。凭墉积石，侧枕汾水，俗谓之代城。
现代文：又往南流经一座城邑东边，城脚堆积了许多石块，城临汾水之滨，俗称代城。
English: Further south, it flows past the eastern edge of a town, at the foot of which many stones have been piled up. The town borders the coast of Surabaya, and is commonly known as Daicheng.

古文：又南出二城间。其城角倚，翼枕汾流，世谓之侯莫干城。盖语出戎方，传呼失实也。
现代文：汾水往南又从两城中间流过，这两座城左右相对，坐落在汾水两边，世人称为侯莫干城，地名大概源出戎语，口头相传，因而造成音讹。
English: Surabaya to the south and flowed through the middle of the two cities, the two cities opposite each other, located on both sides of Surabaya, the world known as Hou Mogan City, the place name probably originated from the military language, passed down orally, thus causing the sound.

古文：汾水又南径汾阳县故城东，川土宽平，峘山夷水。
现代文：汾水又往南流经汾阳县老城东边，这里地势广阔平坦，山小而高，水缓而静。
English: Surabaya also flows southward through the eastern side of the old city of Poyang County. Here, the terrain is vast and flat, the mountains are small and high, and the water is gentle and quiet.

古文：汉永平中，治呼沱、石臼河。
现代文：《地理志》说：汾水发源于汾阳县的北山，往西南流。汉高帝十一年浚治呼沱石臼河。
English: "Geography" said: "The Surabaya water originates from the North Mountain of Shiyang County and flows to the southwest. In the eleventh year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Gao Jian dredged the Shisu River.

古文：案司马彪《后汉郡国志》，常山南行唐县有石臼谷，盖资承呼沱之水，转山东之漕，自都虑至羊肠仓，将凭汾水以漕太原。
现代文：按司马彪的《后汉书•郡国志》：常山郡南行唐县有石臼谷，当时想引导呼沱之水，来转运常山以东的粮食；从都虑到羊肠仓，经汾水从太原运粮，以补秦晋的不足。
English: According to Sima Biao's "History of the Later Han Dynasty • History of the County": Changshan County south of Tang County has Shek Us Valley. At that time, he wanted to guide Hulun's water to transport grain east of Changshan; from Duxian to Sheep Gut Warehouse, grain was transported from Taiyuan via Hulun Water to make up for the shortage of Qin Jin.

古文：用实秦、晋，苦役连年，转运所经，凡三百八十九隘，死者无算。
现代文：这项工程使人民连年苦役，而转运所经的地方，共有三百八十九处险隘，以致死了无数人。
English: This project has forced the people to work hard for years, and the transportation has passed through a total of three hundred and eighty-nine dangerous places, resulting in the death of countless people.

古文：拜邓训为谒者，监护水功。
现代文：后来任命邓训为渴者，来督察这项水利工程。
English: Later, Deng Xun was appointed as a thirsty person to inspect this water conservancy project.

古文：训隐括知其难，立具言肃宗，肃宗从之，全活数千人。
现代文：邓训修改计划，知道工程很难建得起来，就详详细细地向肃宗作了报告。肃宗接受了他的意见，停止了工程，因而使数千服役的民工得以活命。
English: Deng Xun revised the plan, knowing that the project would be difficult to build, and made a detailed report to Su Zong. Su Zong accepted his opinion and stopped the project, thus allowing thousands of servicemen to survive.

古文：和熹邓后之立，叔父陔以为训积善所致也。
现代文：和帝时他女儿立为邓后，叔父邓陕认为这是邓训行善积德的结果。
English: At the time of Emperor He, his daughter was enthroned as the Empress of Deng. Uncle Deng Shan believed that this was the result of Deng Xun's virtuous deeds.

古文：羊肠即此仓也。又南径秀容城东。
现代文：这里提到的就是这羊肠仓。汾水又往南流经秀容城东。
English: This is the sheep's intestine storage mentioned here. The floodwaters flowed south through the eastern part of Xiurong City.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：秀容，胡人徙居之，立秀容护军治。东去汾水六十里。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：秀容有胡人迁来居住，设立秀容护军治所，东距汾水六十里。
English: "Wei Zhi Ji" said: There were Hu people who moved to live in Xiurong and set up the Xiurong Military Protection and Administration Center, sixty miles east of Surabaya.

古文：南与酸水合，水源西出少阳之山，东南流注于汾水。
现代文：汾水南流与酸水汇合。酸水源头出自西边的少阳之山，往东南流，注入汾水。
English: Surabaya's southern stream converges with the acidic water. The source of the acidic water comes from the Shoyang Mountains in the west and flows southeast, injecting Surabaya's water.

古文：汾水又南出山，东南流，洛阴水注之。
现代文：汾水又往南从山间流出，往东南流，洛阴水注入。
English: Surabaya water flows southward from the mountains, flows to the southeast, and is injected by Luoyang water.

古文：水出新兴郡，西流径洛阴城北，又西径盂县故城南。
现代文：洛阴水发源于新兴郡，西流经洛阴城北边，又往西流经盂县老城南边。
English: The water of Luoyang originates from Xingxing County, flows westward through the north of Luoyang City, and flows westward through the south of the old city of Handan County.

古文：《春秋左传》昭公二十八年，分祁氏七县为大夫之邑，以盂丙为盂大夫。
现代文：《春秋左传》：昭公二十八年前妇，把祁氏的田分成七县，作为大夫的食邑，把盂丙封为盂大夫。
English: "Chunqiu Zu Chuan": Zhaogong's twenty-eight-year-old wife divided the Jie's fields into seven counties, as a doctor's food town, and sealed Jie Bing as a doctor.

古文：洛阴水又西，径狼孟县故城南。王莽之狼调也。
现代文：洛阴水又往西流经狼孟县旧城南边，这就是王莽的狼调。
English: The Luo Yin water flows westward through the southern part of the old city of Wolf Meng County, which is Wang Mang's wolf tune.

古文：左右夹涧幽深，南面大壑，俗谓之狼马涧，旧断涧为城，有南、北门，门闉故壁尚在。
现代文：老城左右两边都是幽深的山涧，城南朝向一条大沟，俗称狼马涧。旧时截断山涧来筑城，有南门和北门，城门和老城墙还在。
English: On both sides of the old city are deep mountain ridges. To the south of the city, there is a large ditch, commonly known as the "wolf-horse ravine." In the old days, the mountain ridges were cut off to build the city. There are the south gate and the north gate. The city gate and the old city wall are still there.

古文：洛阴水又西南径阳曲城北。
现代文：洛阴水又往西南流经阳曲城北边。
English: Luo Yin water also flows to the southwest through the north of Yangqu City.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：阳曲，胡寄居太原界，置阳曲护军治。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：阳曲的胡人寄居在太原边界，设置了阳曲护军治所。
English: "Wei Zhi Ji" said: Yangqu's Hu people lived in the border of Taiyuan, and set up the Yangqu Protection and Military Administration Center.

古文：其水西南流，注于汾水。
现代文：水往西南流，注入汾水。
English: The water flows to the southwest, injecting brackish water.

古文：汾水又南径阳曲城西南注也。
现代文：汾水又往南流经阳曲城往西南流去。
English: Surabaya's water also flows south through Yangqu City to the southwest.

古文：东南过晋阳县东，晋水从县南东流注之。
现代文：往东南流过晋阳县东边，晋水从县南往东流注人。
English: It flows southeast through the eastern part of Jinyang County, and Jinshui flows eastward from the southern part of the county.

古文：太原郡治晋阳城。秦庄襄王三年立。《尚书》所谓既修太原者也。
现代文：太原郡设置于秦庄襄王三年前，《尚书》说：太原的河道也已得到整治，指的就是这里。
English: Taiyuan County was set up in Qinzhuang Xiangwang three years ago, "Shangshu" said: Taiyuan's river has also been rectified, referring to here.

古文：《春秋说题辞》曰：高平曰太原。
现代文：《春秋说题辞》说：又高又平的土地叫太原。
English: "Spring and Autumn Inscription" says: The high and flat land is called Taiyuan.

古文：原，端也，平而有度。
现代文：原是端正的意思，平坦而有规律。
English: Originally, it meant neat, flat and regular.

古文：《广雅》曰：大卤，太原也。
现代文：《广雅》说：大卤就是太原。
English: "Guangya" said: Taiyuan is Taiyuan.

古文：《释名》曰：地不生物曰卤。
现代文：《释名》说：土地不长草木叫卤。
English: "Explanation of the name" says: the land is not long and the plants are called halogen.

古文：卤，罏也。
现代文：卤就是炉。
English: Brine is the furnace.

古文：《谷梁传》曰：中国曰太原，夷狄曰太卤。
现代文：《殷梁传》说：中国叫太原，夷狄地区叫太卤。
English: "The Tale of Yin Liang" says: China is called Taiyuan, and the Yidi region is called Taiyuan.

古文：《尚书大传》曰：东原底平，大而高平者谓之太原，郡取称焉。
现代文：《尚书大传》说：东部的原野很平坦。广大而且又高又平的土地叫太原，郡就照此取名。
English: "Shangshu Daquan" said: The eastern plain is very flat. The vast, high and flat land is called Taiyuan, and the county was named accordingly.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：城东有汾水南流，水东有晋使持节、都督并州诸军事、镇北将军太原成王之碑。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：城东有汾水南流，汾水东边有晋使持节、都督并州诸军事、镇北将军、太原成王碑。
English: "Wei Shiji Ji" said: To the east of the city, there is the south stream of Surabaya, and to the east of Surabaya, there are the Jin envoys holding festivals, the military of the governor and the state, the general of Zhenbei, and the monument of Taiyuan Chengwang.

古文：水上旧有梁，青荓殒于梁下，豫让死于津侧，亦襄子解衣之所在也。
现代文：水上从前有一座桥，青莽死于这座桥下。豫让死于桥边，那也是赵襄子脱衣的地方。
English: Once upon a time, there was a bridge over the water. Qing Mang died under this bridge. Yu Zhan died on the edge of the bridge, which is also the place where Zhao Xiangzi undressed.

古文：汾水西径晋阳城南。
现代文：汾水往西流经晋阳城南边。
English: Surabaya water flows westward through the southern part of Jinyang City.

古文：旧有介子推词，祠前有碑，庙宇倾颓，惟单碑独存矣。今文字剥落，无可寻也。
现代文：从前有介子推祠，祠前有石碑；庙宇早已塌毁，只留那块孤零零的石碑了，现在碑上的字也已剥落，再也看不出来了。
English: Once upon a time, there was a stone monument in front of an ancestral shrine. The temple had long since collapsed, leaving only that solitary stone monument. Now the words on the monument have also peeled off, and can no longer be seen.

古文：又南，洞过水从东来注之。
现代文：又往南流，洞过水从东边流来注人。
English: It flowed south again, and water from the east flowed through the cave to pour people.

古文：汾水又南径梗阳县故城东。故榆次之梗阳乡也。魏献子以邑大夫魏戊也。
现代文：汾水继续往南流，经过梗阳县旧城东边，这里本来是榆次的梗阳乡，魏献子把梗阳赐给大夫魏戊作为食邑。
English: Surabaya continued to flow southward, passing the eastern edge of the old city of Yeroyang County. This was originally the Yeroyang Township of Xiji, and Wei Xianzi gave Yeroyang to Dr. Wei Wu as a food town.

古文：京相璠曰：梗阳，晋邑也。
现代文：京相潘说：梗阳是普国的城邑。
English: Beijing's Minister of Foreign Affairs Pan said: "Yangyang is a city of the whole country.

古文：今太原晋阳县南六十里榆次界有梗阳城。
现代文：现在太原郡晋阳县南六十里榆次的边界上有梗阳城。
English: There is now a Yangcheng Town on the border of Minamishishrilanzhi, Jinyang County, Taiyuan County.

古文：汾水又南，即洞过水会者也。
现代文：汾水又南流，就是洞过水的汇流处。
English: Surabaya's water also flows south, which is where the water passing through the cave converges.

古文：又南过大陵县东，昔赵武灵王游大陵，梦处女鼓琴而歌，想见其人，吴广进孟姚焉，即于此县也。
现代文：又往南流过大陵县东边，从前赵武灵王游大陵，梦见一位姑娘在弹琴唱歌。他很想见见那位姑娘，于是昊广就在大陵找了孟姚献给他。
English: It also flowed south to the east of Daling County. Once upon a time, King Zhao Wuling toured Daling and dreamed of a girl playing the piano and singing. He was very eager to meet the girl, so Hao Guang found Meng Yao in Daling and dedicated it to him.

古文：王莽改曰大宁矣。
现代文：王莽改名为大宁。
English: Wang Mang changed his name to Daming.

古文：汾水于县左迤为邬泽。
现代文：汾水在大陵县向左分支流出，积成邹泽。
English: Surabaya water flows out to the left branch in Daling County, and accumulates in Surabaya Lake.

古文：《广雅》曰：水自汾出为汾陂。
现代文：《广雅》说：从汾水分支流出的水，积聚成为汾破。
English: "Guangya" said: The water flowing out from the branch of the river is accumulated into the river.

古文：其陂东西四里，南北十余里，陂南接邬。
现代文：这片破塘东西宽四里，南北长十余里，南端与邹县相接。
English: This piece of broken pond is four miles wide from east to west, more than ten miles long from north to south, and the southern end is connected to Jixian County.

古文：《地理志》曰：九泽在北，并州薮也。
现代文：《地理志》说：九泽在北方，是并州的沼泽地。
English: "Geography" said: Jiuzawa is in the north, and it is the swamp land of the state.

古文：又名之曰沤洟之泽，俗渭之邬城泊。
现代文：《吕氏春秋》称为大陆，又叫沤演之泽，俗称邹城泊。
English: "Lu's Spring and Autumn" is known as the mainland, also known as Yuyuan no Ze, commonly known as Shicheng Tomari.

古文：许慎《说文》曰：漹水出西河中阳县北沙，南入河。
现代文：许慎《说文》说：嫣水发源于西河中阳县北沙，南流注入河水。
English: Xu Shen's "Narrative" said: "The water of the Yunnan River originates from the Beisha River in Zhongyang County of the West River, and the southern stream is injected into the river water.

古文：即此水也。
现代文：说的就是这条水。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the northern part of Dangse.

古文：漹水又会婴侯之水，《山海经》称谒戾之山，婴侯之水出于其阴，北流注于祀水。
现代文：嫣水又与婴侯之水汇合。《山海经》说，渴决之山，婴侯之水发源于它的北麓，北流注入祀水。
English: The "Mountain and Sea Sutra" says that the mountain of thirst, the water of the baby, originates from its northern foot, and the north stream injects the water of worship.

古文：水出祀山，其水殊源共舍，注于婴侯之水，乱流径中都县南，俗又谓之中都水，侯甲水注之。
现代文：祀水发源于祀山，异源合流，注入婴侯之水，乱流经过中都县南边，民间又叫中都水，有侯甲水注入。
English: Shishimizu originates from Shishiyama, the confluence of different sources, infused with the water of infancy, the turbulent flow passes through the south of Zhongdu County, and is also called Zhongdu Water by the people, and infused with the water of Houjia.

古文：水发源祁县胡甲山，有长坂，谓之胡甲岭，即刘歆《遂初赋》所谓越侯甲而长驱者也。
现代文：侯甲水发源于祁县胡甲山，有一道长长的山岭，叫胡甲岭。刘散《遂初赋》说：翻过侯甲岭向前走，说的就是这道山岭。
English: Hujia Water originates from Hujia Mountain in Handan County. There is a long mountain ridge, called Hujia Ridge. Liu San said in "Sui Shufu": "Walk forward over Hujia Ridge," referring to this mountain ridge.

古文：蔡邕曰：侯甲，亦邑名也，在祁县。
现代文：蔡岂说：侯甲也是城名，在祁县。
English: Cai Tao said: "Houjia is also the name of a city, in Jixian County.

古文：侯甲水又西北历宜岁郊，径太谷，谓之太谷水。
现代文：侯甲水又往西北流过宜岁郊，穿过太谷，叫太谷水。
English: The Houjia River flows northwest through the suburbs of Yili, passing through Taiyuan, and is called the Taiyuan River.

古文：出谷西北流，径祁县故城南，自县连延，西接邬泽，是为祁薮也。
现代文：出谷后往西北流经祁县老城南，从县城往西与邹泽相连，就是祁蔽。
English: After flowing out of the valley, it flows northwest through the south of the old city of Handan County, and is connected to Handan Lake from the county seat to the west, that is, it is covered.

古文：即《尔雅》所谓昭余祁矣。
现代文：祁县就是《尔雅》所说的昭杀祁。
English: Handan County is what "Lya" calls a "shooting gallery."

古文：贾辛邑也。
现代文：祁县是贾萃的食邑。
English: Handan County is the food town of Jiaqi.

古文：辛貌丑，妻不为言，与之如皋射雉，双中之则笑也。王莽之示县也。
现代文：贾辛状貌丑陋，他的妻子不同他说话；和他一起到沼泽旁边猎难，两人都射中时才嫣然一笑。祁县也就是王莽的示县。
English: Jia Xin is ugly, his wife does not speak like him; they went hunting with him next to the swamp, and only smiled when they were both shot.

古文：又西径京陵县故城北。王莽更名曰致城矣。
现代文：水又往西流经京陵县旧城北面，王莽改名为致城。
English: The water flowed westward through the north of the old city of Jingling County, and Wang Mang was renamed Zhicheng.

古文：于《春秋》为九原之地也。
现代文：春秋时这是九原的地方。
English: In spring and autumn, this is the place of the nine plains.

古文：故《国语》曰：赵文子与叔向游于九原，曰：死者若可作也，吾谁与归？
现代文：所以《国语》说：赵文子和叔向一起在九原游览，对叔向说：假如死人能够活着走出来的话，你看我该同谁一起回去呢？
English: Therefore, "National Language" said: Zhao Wenzi and his uncle went on a tour of Jiuhara together, and said to his uncle: If the dead can come out alive, who should I go back with?

古文：叔向曰：其阳子乎？
现代文：叔向说：该是阳子了吧？
English: Uncle Xiang said: It should be Yang Zi, right?

古文：文子曰：夫阳子行并植于晋国，不免其身，智不足称。
现代文：文子说：阳子在晋国行为廉直，可是却未能逃脱杀身之祸，他的智慧不值得称道。
English: Fumiko said, "Yoko acted with integrity in Jin Province, but he could not escape the scourge of killing himself. His wisdom is not worthy of praise."

古文：叔向曰：其舅犯乎？
现代文：叔向说：那末是舅犯吧？
English: The uncle said to him, "Then it was the uncle who committed the crime, right?"

古文：文子曰：夫舅犯见利不顾其君，仁不足称。
现代文：文子说：舅犯一见有利可图，就不顾自己的君主，他的仁德不值得称道。
English: Fumiko said, "My uncle disregarded his sovereign as soon as he saw a profit. His benevolence is beyond praise."

古文：吾其随会乎？
现代文：我看还是同曾一起回去的好吧。
English: I think it's better to go back together.

古文：纳谏不忘其师，言身不失其友，事君不援而进，不阿而退。
现代文：曾在接受劝告的时候不忘记自己的老师，说到自身的时候，不伤朋友的感情，侍奉君主不攀附他人而进身，也不曲意逢迎而引退。
English: He once did not forget his teacher when receiving advice, did not hurt the feelings of his friends when talking about himself, served the monarch without clinging to others, and did not retire when it suited him.

古文：其故京尚存。
现代文：旧时的墓地现在还留着。
English: The old cemetery is still there.

古文：汉兴，增陵于其下，故曰京陵焉。
现代文：汉朝兴起后，在山下增建了陵墓，所以叫京陵。
English: After the rise of the Han Dynasty, more mausoleums were built at the foot of the mountain, which is why it is called the Beijing Mausoleum.

古文：侯甲水又西北径中都县故城南，城临际水湄。
现代文：侯甲水又往西北流，从中都县老城南边流过，老城靠近水边。
English: The Houjia River flows to the northwest, passing south of the old town of Zhongdu County. The old town is close to the water's edge.

古文：《春秋》昭公二年，晋侯执陈无宇于中都者也。
现代文：春秋》：昭公二年前，晋侯在中都逮捕了陈无宇。
English: Chunqiu: Two years ago, Jin Hou arrested Chen Muyu in Zhongdu.

古文：汉文帝为代王，都此。武帝元封四年，上幸中都宫，殿上见光，赦中都死罪以下。
现代文：汉文帝封为代王时就建都在这里，武帝在元封四年前，来到中都宫，殿上有祥光出现，于是把中都的犯人还够不上死罪的都赦免了。
English: They were all built here when Han Emperor Wenfeng was the acting king. Emperor Wu came to Zhongdu Palace four years before Yuanfeng, and Xiangguang appeared in the hall, so he pardoned all the prisoners in Zhongdu who were not eligible for the death penalty.

古文：侯甲水又西，合于婴侯之水，径邬县故城南，晋大夫司马弥牟之邑也。谓之邬水，俗亦曰虑水。虑、邬声相近，故因变焉。
现代文：侯甲水又西流，与婴侯之水汇合，流经邹县老城南―这是晋大夫司马弥牟的食邑―称为邹水，民间也叫虑水，虑、乌仔读音相近，因而字也转变了。
English: Houjia water also flows westward, merging with the water of the infant Hou, and flowing through the old city south of Handan County - this is the food town of Jin doctor Simayimou - known as Handan water, and is also called Handan water by the people. The pronunciation of Handan and Wuzi is similar, so the characters have also changed.

古文：又西北入邬陂，而归于汾流矣。
现代文：又往西北注入邹破，最后流入汾水。
English: It then flows northwest into the Bohai Canal and finally flows into the Bohai Sea.

古文：又南过平陶县东，文水从西来流注之。
现代文：又往南流过平陶县东，文水从西边流来注人。
English: It also flows southward through the east of Pingtao County, and the Wen Shui flows from the west.

古文：汾水又南与石桐水合，即绵水也。
现代文：汾水又往南流，与石桐水汇合，这就是绵水。
English: Surabaya water also flows southward, merging with Shitong water, which is braided water.

古文：水出界休县之绵山，北流径石桐寺西。即介子推之祠也。
现代文：绵水发源于界休县的绵山，往北流经石桐寺西边，石桐寺实际上就是介子推祠。
English: Mianshui originates from Mianshan in Jieju County and flows north through the west side of Shitong Temple. Shitong Temple is actually the ancestral shrine of Jie Zi.

古文：昔子推逃晋文公之赏，而隐于绵上之山也。
现代文：从前介子推不受晋文公的赏赐而出逃，隐居在绵山之上。
English: Once upon a time, Empress Dowager Cixi ran away from the rewards of Emperor Wenzong and lived in seclusion on top of Mianshan Mountain.

古文：晋文公求之不得，乃封绵为介子推田。
现代文：晋文公找不到他，于是在绵划地立为介子推田。
English: Jin Wengong couldn't find him, so he set out to build a mule-pushing field.

古文：曰：以志吾过，且旌善人。
现代文：说道：留下这地方来纪念我的过失吧，同时也用以表扬好人。
English: "Let this place be a memorial to my wrongdoings, but also a tribute to the good people," he said.

古文：因名斯山为介山。
现代文：因此把这座山称为介山。
English: Therefore, this mountain is called "Kaizan."

古文：故袁山松《郡国志》曰：界休县有介山、绵上聚、子推庙。
现代文：所以袁山松《郡国志》说：界休县有介山，有绵上聚、子推庙。
English: Therefore, Yuan Shansong's "County History" said: there are mountains in Jiexu County, and there are Mianshangju and Zitui temples.

古文：王肃《丧服要记》曰：昔鲁哀公祖载其父，孔子问曰：宁设桂树乎？
现代文：王肃《丧服要记》说：从前鲁哀公的祖父用车载了他父亲的遗体。孔子问道：要立一棵桂树吗？
English: Wang Su's "Memory of Mourning" said: Once upon a time, Lu Aiguo's grandfather carried his father's body in a car. Confucius asked: Do you want to erect a laurel tree?

古文：哀公曰：不也。
现代文：哀公说：不用立。
English: Aiko said, "You don't have to stand."

古文：桂树者，起于介子推。
现代文：立桂树是从介子推开始的。
English: The development of Guizhu began with the introduction of meson.

古文：子推，晋之人也。
现代文：介子推是晋国人。
English: Kaezotoshi is a native of Jin Province.

古文：文公有内难，出国之狄，子推随其行，割肉以续军粮。
现代文：文公国内有难，出国到狄去避难，介子推跟他出走，因军粮吃完了，就割下自己的肉给文公吃。
English: Prince Wen was in trouble at home, so he went abroad to Di to take refuge, and his son-in-law ran away with him. When he had finished eating the army rations, he cut off his own flesh to give to Prince Wen to eat.

古文：后文公复国，忽忘子推，子推奉唱而歌，文公始悟，当受爵禄。
现代文：后来文公回国，却忘记了介子推。介子推唱了一首歌，文公听到了方才醒悟，想到应当给他奖赏爵位和傣禄。
English: Later, Wengong returned to China, but he forgot to give the prize to Jie Zi. Jie Zi sang a song, and it was only when Wengong heard it that he came to his senses and thought that he should be rewarded with a knighthood and a stipend.

古文：子推奔介山，抱木而烧死，国人葬之，恐其神魂霣于地，故作桂树为。
现代文：可是介子推却逃到介山去，抱着树木被火烧死。晋国人把他安葬了，怕他的魂魄仆地而灭，所以立了一棵桂树。
English: However, he fled to Mount Kaizan and was burned to death while clinging to a tree. The people of Jin buried him, fearing that his soul would perish, so they erected a laurel tree.

古文：吾父生于宫殿，死于枕席，何用桂树为？
现代文：我父亲生在宫殿里，死在床上，哪里用得着桂树呢？
English: My father was born in a palace and died in his bed. What need is there for a laurel tree?

古文：余按夫子尚非璠玙送葬，安能问桂树为礼乎？
现代文：我按孔夫子甚至反对用美玉陪葬，怎能向哀公询问立桂树行丧礼的事呢？
English: According to Confucius, I even oppose the use of gems to accompany funerals. How can I ask the mourners about the funeral of the laurel tree?

古文：王肃此证，近于诬矣。
现代文：王肃这些话有点近于污蔑了。
English: Wang Su, these words are a bit close to slander.

古文：石桐水又西流注于汾水。
现代文：石桐水又西流，注入汾水。
English: Shi Tong water also flows to the west, and is infused with reed water.

古文：汾水又西南径界休县故城西，王莽更名之曰界美矣。
现代文：汾水又往西南流，从界休县老城西边流过，王莽改名为界美。
English: The Surabaya water flowed to the southwest, passing through the west side of the old city of Jiexiu County. Wang Mang changed his name to Jiemei.

古文：城东有征士郭林宗、宋子浚二碑。
现代文：城东有郭林宗和宋子浚两人的墓碑。
English: In the east of the city, there are the tombstones of Guo Linzong and Song Zijun.

古文：宋冲以有道司徒征，林宗县人也。
现代文：宋冲两次受到朝廷的征召，授予司徒和有道的官职，都没有去。
English: Song Chong was twice called up by the imperial court, and was awarded the official posts of Sitoru and Daode. However, he did not go.

古文：辟司徒，举太尉，以疾辞。
现代文：郭林宗是本县人，被征召为司徒，授以太尉的官职，他却借口有病推辞了。
English: Guo Linzong is a native of this county. He was conscripted as an apprentice and given the official post of lieutenant, but he declined on the pretext of illness.

古文：其碑文云：将蹈洪崖之遐迹，绍巢由之逸轨，翔区外以舒翼，超天衢以高峙，禀命不融，享年四十有二，建宁二年正月丁亥卒。
现代文：碑文说：他踏着仙人洪崖的足迹，循着高士巢父、许由的道路，展翅翱翔于远绝尘寰的天宇，超越青云而傲然独峙。享寿不长，只活到四十二岁，死于建宁二年正月丁亥日。
English: The inscription says: He walked in the footsteps of the hermit Hongya, followed the path of the nobleman's father-in-law, Xu You, spread his wings and soared into the distant and dusty sky, surpassing the blue clouds and proudly standing alone. He did not live long, only lived to the age of forty-two, and died on the first day of the second year of Jianning, Ding Hai Day.

古文：凡我四方同好之人，永怀哀痛，乃树碑表墓，昭铭景行云。
现代文：我们这些来自各地，志同道合的人，长怀着哀痛的心情，在他的墓前刻石立碑，以族表他的崇高德行。
English: Those of us from all over the country, like-minded people, with a long and sorrowful heart, carved a stone monument in front of his grave to show his noble virtues.

古文：陈留蔡伯喈、范阳卢子干、扶风马日磾等，远来奔丧，持朋友服。
现代文：陈留蔡伯嘈、范阳卢子干，扶风马日禅等，远道前来参加丧礼，穿的是朋友身份的丧服。
English: Chen Liu, Cai Bo, Fan Yang, Lu Zi Gan, Fu Feng, Ma Rijen and others came from far away to attend the funeral, wearing the funeral clothes of friends.

古文：心丧期年者如韩子助、宋子浚等二十四人，其余门人著锡衰者千数。
现代文：以弟子身分守丧满一年的，有韩子肋、宋子浚等二十四人。其余门生披麻带孝的上干人。
English: Twenty-four disciples, including Han Zili and Song Zijun, have served as disciples for a full year. The rest of the disciples are superior cadres who wear the robe of filial piety.

古文：蔡伯喈谓卢子干、马日磾曰：吾为天下碑文多矣，皆有惭容，惟郭有道，无愧于色矣。
现代文：蔡伯嘈对卢子干、马日禅说：我为天下人写的碑文很多，自己却感到有点惭愧；只有为郭有道写这篇碑文，可以毫无愧色。
English: Cai Boyan said to Lu Zigang and Ma Rizhen: I have written many inscriptions for people around the world, but I feel a little ashamed; only writing this inscription for Guo Youdao can be without shame.

古文：汾水之右有左部城，侧临汾水，盖刘渊为晋都尉所筑也。
现代文：汾水右岸有左部城，靠近水边，这是刘渊在晋朝当都尉时所筑。
English: On the right bank of the Surabaya River, there is the Left City, close to the water's edge, which was built by Liu Yuan when he was a captain in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：又南过冠爵津，汾津名也，在界休县之西南，俗谓之雀鼠谷，数十里间道险隘，水左右悉结偏梁阁道，累石就路，萦带岩侧，或去水一丈，或高五六尺，上戴山阜，下临绝涧，俗谓之为鲁般桥。
现代文：又往南流过冠爵津，冠爵津是汾水上的渡口名，在界休县西南，俗称雀鼠谷。谷内数十里的小路险阻难行，河水两岸都架设了栈道，沿着岩边用石块筑成弯弯曲曲的山路，有的离水一丈，有的高约五六尺；头上有山冈遮顶，脚下临着深涧。
English: It also flows south through Guanzhouzin. Guanzhouzin is the name of a ferry crossing on the Yu River, in the southwest of Xiu County. It is commonly known as Sparrow Mouse Valley. Dozens of small roads in the valley are dangerous and difficult to travel. On both sides of the river, there are boardwalks. Along the edge of the rock, stones are used to build curvy mountain roads, some are a foot above the water, and some are about five or six feet high. There are mountain tops overhead, and deep ravines at the foot.

古文：盖通古之津隘矣，亦在今之地险也。
现代文：这条栈道俗称鲁般桥，古代是通往渡口和关隘的道路，今天仍然据有险要的地势。
English: Commonly known as Luhang Bridge, this causeway used to be the road leading to the ferry port and the pass in ancient times. Today, it is still in a precarious situation.

古文：又南入河东界，又南过永安县西，故彘县也，周厉王流于彘，即此城也。
现代文：又往南流人河东郡地界，又往南流过永安县西，永安县是从前的氦县，周厉王被流放于氦，就是这座城。
English: People also flowed south to the land boundary of Hedong County, and they also flowed south to the west of Yong'an County. Yong'an County was formerly Helium County, and King Zhou Li was exiled to Helium, which is this city.

古文：王莽更名黄城，汉顺帝阳嘉三年，改曰永安。
现代文：王莽改名为黄城，汉顺帝阳嘉三年，改称永安县。
English: Wang Mang was renamed Huangcheng, and Hanshun Diyangjia was renamed Yong'an County.

古文：县，霍伯之都也。
现代文：这里也是霍伯的都城。
English: It is also the capital of Hobo.

古文：历唐城东，薛瓒注《汉书》云：尧所都也，东去彘十里。
现代文：流过唐城东边，薛攒为《汉书》作注时说：唐城是尧定都的地方，东边离最十里。
English: Flowing through the eastern side of Tangcheng, Xue Nan said when making a note for the "Chinese Book": Tangcheng is the place of the capital city, and the eastern side is at most ten miles away.

古文：汾水又南与彘水合，水出东北太岳山，《禹贡》所谓岳阳也。即霍太山矣。
现代文：汾水又南流，与撬水汇合。氦水发源于东北的太岳山，《禹贡》称为岳阳，就是霍太山。
English: Helium water originates from Taiyue Mountain in the northeast, "Yugong" is called Yueyang, that is, Huotai Mountain.

古文：上有飞廉墓，飞廉以善走事纣，恶来多力见知。
现代文：山上有飞廉墓。飞廉以善走为封王效力，恶来以力大而知名。
English: There is Fei Lian's tomb on the mountain. Fei Lian was famous for his ability to seal kings with his good walking, and his great strength with his bad walking.

古文：周武王伐纣，兼杀恶来。
现代文：周武王征伐封王，连恶来也杀了。
English: King Zhou Wu conquered and besieged the king, and even killed the evil king.

古文：飞廉先为纣使北方，还无所报，乃坛于霍太山而致命焉。
现代文：飞廉早先为封王出使北方，回来后却不能向封王报告了，于是在霍太山设坛祭祀，打算以身殉封。
English: Fei Lian had earlier sent an envoy to the north for King Huo, but after returning, he was unable to report to King Huo, so he set up an altar in Mount Huotai and planned to die for King Huo.

古文：得石棺，铭曰：帝令处父，不与殷乱，赐汝石棺以葬。
现代文：他在山上看到一具石棺，上面刻着：天帝命令你老人家不要参与殷朝的作乱，特此赐你石棺安葬。
English: He saw a sarcophagus on the mountain, on which was inscribed: The Heavenly Emperor ordered your old man not to participate in the chaos of the Yin Dynasty, and hereby granted you a sarcophagus for burial.

古文：死，遂以葬焉。
现代文：他死了，于是就葬在霍太山。
English: He died and was buried in Mount Huotai.

古文：霍太山有岳庙，庙甚灵，鸟雀不栖其林，猛虎常守其庭，又有灵泉以供祭祀，鼓动则泉流，声绝则水竭。
现代文：山上有霍山庙，十分灵验。
English: There is Huoshan Temple on the mountain, which is very effective.

古文：湘东阴山县有侯昙山，上有灵坛，坛前有石井深数尺，居常无水，及临祈祷，则甘泉涌出，周用则已，亦其比也。
现代文：庙旁的树林里，鸟雀都不来栖息，庭院里常有猛虎在守卫。又有灵泉可供人祭祀之用，鼓声一响，就有泉水流出，鼓声一停泉水也就干了。湘东阴山县有侯昙山，山上有灵坛，坛前有一口数尺深的石井，平常都没有水，待到祈祷时，就有甘泉涌出，大家都用遍后，泉水就不流了，也是这一类。
English: In the woods near the temple, birds and finches do not come to roost, and there are often tigers guarding the courtyard. There are also spiritual springs that can be used for human sacrifice. When the drum sounds, the spring water flows out, and when the drum stops, the spring water dries up. There is Houyu Mountain in Yinshan County, Shandong Province. There is a spiritual altar on the mountain, and there is a stone well several feet deep in front of the altar. Usually there is no water. When it is time to pray, there is a sweet spring gushing out. After everyone has used it, the spring water will not flow. It is also this type.

古文：彘水又西流径观阜北，故百邑也。
现代文：氦水又往西流经观阜以北，就是日时的百邑。
English: Helium water also flows westward through the north of Guanfu, which is the hundred cities of the day and time.

古文：原过之从襄子也，受竹书于王泽，以告襄子。
现代文：原过跟从赵襄子，在王泽得到竹书，他把这件事报告了襄子。
English: Originally, he had followed Zhao Xiangzi and obtained the Bamboo Scroll from Wang Ze. He reported the matter to Xiangzi.

古文：襄子斋三日，亲自剖竹，有朱书曰：余霍太山山阳侯天使也，三月丙戌，余将使汝反灭智氏，汝亦立我于百邑。
现代文：襄子斋戒了三天，亲自剖开竹子，看到里面有朱砂写的红字：我是霍太山山阳侯，是天帝的使者，三月丙戌日，我将派遣你去杀掉智氏，你也要在百邑为我立庙。
English: Xiangzi fasted for three days, personally cut open the bamboo, and saw the red characters written with cinnabar inside: I am the prince of Mount Huotai, the sun and the moon, the messenger of the heavenly emperor. On the third day of the third month, I will send you to kill Zhi, and you will also build a temple for me in the hundred villages.

古文：襄子拜受三神之命，遂灭智氏，祠三神于百邑，使原过主之，世谓其处为观阜也。
现代文：襄子跪拜领受了三神的命令，于是就杀了智氏，在百邑为三神立祠，让原过去管理。人们就把这地方称为观阜。
English: Xiangzi knelt down and received the order of the three gods, so he killed Zhi, and built a shrine to the three gods in Baiyue, and let Yuan manage it. People called this place Guanfu.

古文：彘水又西流径永安县故城南，西南流，注于汾水。
现代文：徽水又西流，从永安县老城南面流过，然后往西南流，注入汾水。
English: Huisui also flows westward, passing south of the old town of Yong'an County, and then flows southwest, injecting fresh water.

古文：汾水又甫径霍城东，故霍国也。
现代文：汾水又往南流经霍城东边，就是旧时的霍国。
English: Surabaya also flows south through the east side of H City, which was the old H Province.

古文：昔晋献公灭霍，赵夙为御，霍公求奔齐。
现代文：从前晋献公灭了霍国，赵夙当驾车人，霍公求逃奔到齐国。
English: In the past, Jin Xian Gong annihilated Huo Guo, Zhao Wei was the driver, and Huo Gong fled to Qi Guo.

古文：晋国大旱，卜之曰，霍太山为祟。
现代文：当时晋国大旱，叫巫师占卜，说这是霍太山作祟的缘故。
English: At that time, there was a great drought in Jin Province, and the sorcerers were asked to tell fortunes, saying that this was due to the curse of Mount Huotai.

古文：使赵夙召霍君奉祀。晋复穰。
现代文：于是派赵夙去召回霍君主持祭祀，晋国重新又获得丰收。
English: Therefore, he sent Zhao Wei to call back Huo Jun to preside over the sacrificial rites, and Jin Province once again achieved a bumper harvest.

古文：盖霍公求之故居也。
现代文：霍城就是霍公求的故居。
English: Huo Cheng is the former residence of Huo Gongzhu.

古文：汾水又径赵城西南。穆王以封造父，赵氏自此始也。
现代文：汾水又流经赵城西南，穆王把赵城封给造父，他就是赵氏的始祖。
English: Surabaya also flows through the southwest of Zhaocheng. King Mu gave Zhaocheng to his father, who was the founder of the Zhao clan.

古文：汾水又南，霍水入焉，水出霍太山，发源成潭，涨七十步而不测其深。
现代文：汾水又南流，霍水注入。霍水发源于霍太山，源泉流出后积成深潭，宽七十步，深不可测。
English: The Houtai Water originates from the Houtai Mountain, and after the source flows out, it accumulates into a deep pool, seventy paces wide and unfathomable.

古文：西南径赵城南，西流注于汾水。
现代文：水往西南流经赵城南边，西流注入汾水。
English: The water flows to the southwest through the south side of Zhaocheng, and the west flow injects the water from Shao.

古文：又南过杨县东，涧水东出谷远县西山，西南径霍山南，又西径杨县故城北。晋大夫僚安之邑也。
现代文：又往南流过杨县东边，涧水发源于东方谷远县的西山，往西南流经霍山南，又往西流经杨县老城以北，这是晋大夫僚安的食邑。
English: It also flows southward through the eastern part of Yang County. The stream originates from the West Mountain of Dongfangyuan County, flows southwest through the south of Huoshan, and flows westward through the north of the old city of Yang County. This is the food village of Jin Dafu Lian'an.

古文：应劭曰：故杨侯国。
现代文：应肋说：这是从前杨侯的封国。
English: Ying Li said: This is the former Yang Hou's fiefdom.

古文：王莽更名有年亭也。
现代文：王莽改名为有年亭。
English: Wang Mang changed his name to Yu Nian Ting.

古文：其水西流入于汾水。
现代文：水往西流入汾水。
English: The water flows west into the Surabaya River.

古文：汾水径杨城西，不于东矣。
现代文：汾水是从杨城西边而不是东边流过的。
English: Surabaya's water flows from the west of Yangcheng, not the east.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：平阳郡治杨县，郡西有汾水南流者是也。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：平阳郡的治所是杨县，郡西有汾水，往南流。
English: "Wei Zhi Ji" said: the administrative center of Pingyang County is Yang County, the west of the county has turbid water, flowing southward.

古文：西南过高梁邑西，黑水出黑山，西径杨城南，又西与巢山水会。
现代文：往西南流过高梁邑西边，黑水发源于黑山，往西流过杨城南边，又往西流，与巢山水汇合。
English: It flows southwest through the west of Gaoliangyur. The black water originates from the Black Mountain, flows westward through the south of Yangcheng, and flows westward, merging with the landscape.

古文：《山海经》曰：牛首之山，劳水出焉，西流注干潏水。疑是水也。潏水，即巢山之水也。
现代文：《山海经》说：牛首之山，劳水发源在那里，往西流注入濡水，说不定就是汾水，而濡水则是巢山之水。
English: "Mountain and Sea Sutra" says: The mountain of the head of the ox, the source of the labored water is there, and the westward flow injects wet water, which may be salty water, and the wet water is the water of the nest mountain.

古文：水源东南出巢山东谷，北径浮山东，又西北流与劳水合，乱流西北径高梁城北，西流入于汾水。
现代文：巢山水的源头，在东南方巢山的东谷流出，往北流经浮山东边，又往西北流与劳水汇合，往西北乱流，经过高梁城北边，西流注入汾水。
English: The source of the Chaozhan River flows out of the East Valley of Chaozhan Mountain in the southeast, flows northward through the east side of Mount Fuxing, and flows northwest to meet the Laoshui River. The turbulent flow flows northwest, passes the north side of Gaoliang City, and the west stream is injected into the Ershui River.

古文：汾水又南径高梁故城西，故高梁之墟也。
现代文：汾水又往南流经高梁老城西边，这就是旧时的高梁之墟。
English: Surabaya also flows south through the west side of Gaoliang Old Town, which is the old Gaoliang Ruins.

古文：《春秋》僖公二十四年，秦穆公纳公子重耳于晋，害怀公于此。
现代文：《春秋》：嘻公二十四年前，秦穆公接纳了来自晋国的公子重耳，并在这里杀害了怀公。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Twenty-four years before He Gong, Qin Mu Gong received the prince Chong Er from Jin Province, and killed Huai Gong here.

古文：《竹书纪年》，晋出公十三年，智伯瑶城高梁。
现代文：《竹书纪年》：晋出公十三年前，智伯瑶在高梁筑城。
English: "The Year of the Bamboo Cutter": Thirteen years before he was promoted to public office, Zhi Bo Rong built a city in Gaoliang.

古文：汉高帝十二年以为侯国，封恭侯郦疥于斯邑也。
现代文：汉高帝十二年前，把高梁立为侯国，封恭侯哪疥于此城。
English: Twelve years ago, Emperor Han Gao set up Gaoliang as a vassal state, and the vassals of Gaoliang were stationed in this city.

古文：又南过平阳县东，汾水又南径白马城西。
现代文：又往南流过平阳县东边，汾水又往南流经白马城西边。
English: It also flows south through the east of Pingyang County, and the Surabaya River flows south through the west of Baima City.

古文：魏刑白马而筑之，故世谓之白马城。
现代文：魏杀白马致祭筑了此城，所以人们称为白马城。
English: Wei killed the white horse and built this city as a sacrifice, so people called it the White Horse City.

古文：今平阳郡治。
现代文：现在是平阳郡的治所。
English: It is now the seat of Pingyang County.

古文：汾水又南径平阳县故城东，晋大夫赵晁之故邑也。
现代文：汾水又往南流经平阳县老城东边，这里从前是晋大夫赵晃的封邑。
English: Surabaya also flows south through the eastern side of the old city of Pingyang County, which was once the fief of the Jin doctor Zhao Kiao.

古文：应劭曰：县在平河之阳，尧舜并都之也。
现代文：应肋说：县城在平河的北岸，尧、舜都在这里建都过。
English: Ying Li said: The county seat is on the north bank of the Pinghe River, and the capital cities of both Jiangsu and Fujian have been built here.

古文：《竹书纪年》：晋烈公元年，韩武子都平阳。
现代文：《竹书纪年》：晋烈公元年前，韩武子建都于平阳。
English: "The Bamboo Annals": Jin Rong Before the year 1000, Han Mu Zi built the capital in Pingyang.

古文：汉昭帝封度辽将军范明友为侯国，王莽之香平也。
现代文：汉昭帝把这地方封给度辽将军范明友，立为侯国，就是王莽的香平。
English: Emperor Han Zhao gave this place to Du Liao General Fan Mingyou and established it as a vassal state, which is the Shangping of Wang Mang.

古文：魏立平阳郡，治此矣。
现代文：魏时设置平阳郡，治所就在这里。
English: In the Wei Dynasty, Pingyang County was set up, and the government office was located here.

古文：水侧有尧庙，庙前有碑。
现代文：水边有尧庙，庙前有碑。
English: On the water's edge there is a dragonfly temple, and in front of the temple there is a monument.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：平阳城东十里，汾水东原上有小台，台上有尧神屋石碑。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：平阳城东十里，汾水以东的高地上，有一座小台，台上有尧的祠庙和石碑。
English: "Wei Shiji Ji" said: Ten miles east of Pingyang City, on the highland east of Surabaya, there is a small platform with a dragonfly temple and a stone monument.

古文：永嘉三年，刘渊徙平阳，于汾水得白玉印，方四寸，高二寸二分，龙纽。
现代文：永嘉三年，刘渊迁都平阳，在汾水上，得到一枚白玉印，四寸见方，高二寸二分，上有龙形印纽。
English: In the third year of Yongjia, Liu Yuan moved the capital to Pingyang. On the Surabaya River, he obtained a white jade seal, four inches square, two inches and two minutes high, with a dragon-shaped seal.

古文：其文曰：有新宝之印，王莽所造也。
现代文：印上刻的是：有新宝之印，原来是王莽刻的。
English: Inscribed on it was: "The seal of a new treasure, originally engraved by Wang Mang. "

古文：渊以为天授，改永凤二年为河瑞元年。
现代文：刘渊以为这是上天所赐，把永凤二年改为河瑞元年。
English: Liu Yuan thought that this was a blessing from heaven and changed Yongfeng 2nd year to He Rui 1st year.

古文：汾水南与平水合，水出平阳县西壶口山，《尚书》所谓壶口冶梁及岐也。
现代文：汾水南流与平水汇合。平水发源于平阳县西边的壶口山。《尚书》说：继壶口山之后，又凿梁山及岐山。
English: Surabaya's southern stream converges with Pingshui. Pingshui originates from Mount Hukou in the west of Pingyang County. "Shangshu" says: After Mount Hukou, Mount Liang and Mount Qishan were also carved.

古文：其水东径狐谷亭北，春秋时，狄侵晋，取狐厨者也。
现代文：此水往东流经狐谷亭北面，春秋时，狄族入侵晋国，占领了狐厨，就指这地方。
English: This water flows eastward through the north side of the Fox Valley Pavilion. In spring and autumn, the Di people invaded Jin Province and occupied the Fox Kitchen, which refers to this place.

古文：又东径平阳城南，东入汾。
现代文：又往东流经平阳城南边，东流注入汾水。
English: It also flows eastward through the south side of Pingyang City, and the eastward flow injects Surabaya.

古文：俗以为晋水，非也。
现代文：民间以为这是晋水，那是弄错了。
English: People thought it was the Jinshui River, but they were mistaken.

古文：汾水又南历襄陵县故城西，晋大夫郤犨之邑也，故其地有犨氏乡亭矣。
现代文：汾水又往南流经襄陵县旧城西，这是晋大夫邯擎的食邑，所以那里有辈氏乡亭。
English: Surabaya also flows south through the old west of the city of Yangling County, which is the food town of Dr. Jin, so there is a village pavilion there.

古文：西北有晋襄公陵，县，盖即陵以命氏也，王莽更名曰干昌矣。
现代文：西北有晋襄公的陵墓，该县就是以这座陵墓来命名的。王莽改名为干昌。
English: In the northwest, there is the mausoleum of Jin Xianggong, and the county is named after this mausoleum. Wang Mang changed his name to Ganchang.

古文：又南过临汾县东，天井水出东陉山西南，北有长岭，岭上东西有通道，即鈃隥也。
现代文：又往南流过临汾县东边，天井水发源于东隆山西南，北边有长岭，岭上东西有通道，就是钎瞪。
English: It also flows southward through the eastern part of Linyi County. The ceiling water originates from the southwestern part of East Longshan Mountain. There is a long ridge on the north side, and there are passages on the ridge from east to west, that is, the gape.

古文：《穆天子传》曰：乙酉，天子西绝鈃隥，西南至盬是也。
现代文：《穆天子传》说：乙酉日，穆天子西行翻过钎瞪，往西南流到簸。
English: "The Biography of Mu Tianzi" says: On the day of the second lunar month, Mu Tianzi, traveling westward, crossed the Yangtze River and flowed southwest to the Yangtze River.

古文：其水三泉奇发，西北流，总成一川，西径尧城南，又西流入汾。
现代文：这条水的源头有三道奇泉涌出，往西北流，合并成一条溪流，西经尧城以南，又往西流入汾水。
English: At the source of this water, three miraculous springs gush out, flow to the northwest, merge into a stream, and flow westward to the south of Lucheng, and then westward into Lushui.

古文：又屈从县南西流，汾水又径绛县故城北。《竹书纪年》：梁武王二十五年，绛中地，西绝于汾。
现代文：又转弯从县南往西流，汾水又流经绛县老城北面，《竹书纪年》：梁武王二十五年，绛县发生地裂，西到汾水为止。
English: It also turns from the south of the county to the west, and the Surabaya water flows through the north of the old city of Surabaya. "The Year of the Bamboo Scroll": In the 25th year of King Liangwu, the ground crack occurred in Surabaya, and the west to Surabaya.

古文：汾水西径虒祁宫北，横水有故梁，截汾水中，凡有三十柱，柱径五尺，裁与水平，盖晋平公之故梁也。
现代文：汾水往西流经旎祈宫北，水上有一座老桥，横跨过汾水，共有三十根桥柱，直径五尺，高度与水面相平，这是晋平公时造的桥。
English: The Surabaya River flows westward to the north of the Grand Palace. There is an old bridge on the water, spanning the Surabaya River. There are a total of thirty bridge pillars, five feet in diameter, and the height is equal to the water level. This is a bridge built by Jinping Gongshi.

古文：物在水，故能持久而不败也。
现代文：木头浸在水里，所以能经久不烂。
English: The wood is immersed in water, so it can last a long time without rotting.

古文：又西径魏正平郡南，故东雍州治。
现代文：又往西流经魏正平郡南边，这里是旧时东雍州的治所。
English: It also flows westward through the southern part of Weizhengping County, which was once the capital of Dongyang Prefecture.

古文：太和中，皇都徙洛，罢州立郡矣。
现代文：太和年间，皇都迁到洛阳，于是废州立郡。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, the imperial capital was moved to Luoyang, and the county was abolished.

古文：又西径王泽，浍水入焉。
现代文：又往西流经王泽，有侩水注入。
English: It also flows westward through Wangze, injecting brackish water.

古文：又西过长修县南，汾水又西与古水合，水出临汾县故城西黄阜下，其大若轮，西南流，故沟横出焉，东注于汾，今无水。
现代文：又往西流过长惰县南边。汾水又西流与古水汇合，古水发源于临汾县老城西边的黄阜脚下，源头的水口大如车轮，往西南流，有旧沟从旁边横通出去，往东注入汾水，现在已经枯涸无水了。
English: It also flows westward across the southern edge of Changnai County. The westward flow of Lishui also merges with the ancient water. The ancient water originates from the foot of Huangfu on the west side of the old city of Linyi County. The water outlet at the source is as big as a wheel. It flows to the southwest, with an old ditch running alongside it. It injects Lishui water to the east. Now it has dried up and there is no water.

古文：又西南径魏正平郡北，又西径荀城东。古荀国也。
现代文：又往西南流，经魏正平郡北边，又往西流经荀城东边，就是古时的荀国。
English: It also flows to the southwest, passing through Wei Zhengping County to the north, and westward to the east of Lucheng, which is the ancient Lucheng.

古文：《汲郡古文》，晋武公灭荀以赐大夫原氏也。
现代文：《汲郡古文》，晋武公灭了荀国，把那地方赏赐给大夫原氏。
English: According to the "Kumigun Ancient Texts," Emperor Jinwu destroyed Shikoku and bestowed the place to the doctor Hara clan.

古文：古水又西南入于汾。
现代文：古水又往西南注入汾水。
English: The old water was then injected into the south-west with the new water.

古文：汾水又西南径长修故城南，汉高帝十一年以为侯国，封杜恬也。
现代文：汾水又往西南流经长惰县老城南，汉高帝十一年前,把这里立为侯国，封给杜恬。
English: Surabaya also flows to the southwest through the south of the old city of Changnai County. Eleven years ago, Emperor Han Gao established this place as a vassal state and gave it to Du Wei.

古文：有修水出县甫，而西南流入汾。
现代文：有惰水发源于县南，往西南流入汾水。
English: There is stagnant water originating in the south of the county and flowing southwest into Surabaya.

古文：汾水又西径清原城北，故清阳亭也。
现代文：汾水又往西流经清原城北面，就是旧时的清阳亭。
English: Surabaya water also flows westward through the north side of Qingyuan City, which is the old Qingyang Pavilion.

古文：城北有清原，晋侯蒐清原，作三军处也。
现代文：城北有清原，晋侯在清原检阅部队，建立三军，就在这地方。
English: In the north of the city, there is Qingyuan. Jin Hou inspected the troops in Qingyuan and established the three armies in this place.

古文：汾水又径冀亭南。昔臼季使过冀野，见邵缺耨，其妻饁之，相敬如宾，言之文公，文公命之为卿，复与之冀。
现代文：汾水又流经冀亭南，从前臼季出使，经过冀野，看见部缺在田间褥草，他的妻子给他送饭，两人相敬如宾。臼季把所见报告文公，文公就任命邵缺为大臣，又把冀这地方赐给他。
English: Surabaya also flowed through the south of Jiting, and the envoy sent from the former Usu season passed through Jino. He saw Bu Xie weeding in the fields, and his wife brought him food. The two respected each other like guests. Usu season reported what he saw to Wengong, and Wengong appointed Shao Xie as minister, and gave him this place in Ji.

古文：京相璠曰：今河东皮氏县有冀亭，古之冀国所都也。
现代文：京相潘说：现在河东皮氏县有冀亭，是古代冀国建都的地方。
English: Beijing's Minister of Foreign Affairs Pan said, "Nowadays, there is Jiting in Pishi County, Hedong Province, which is the place where the capital of ancient Hebei Province was built.

古文：杜预《释地》曰：平阳皮氏县东北有冀亭，即此亭也。
现代文：杜预《释地》说：平阳皮氏县东北有冀亭，就是此亭。
English: Du Yuan of "Interpretation" said: Pingyang Pishi County Northeast Yuji Pavilion is this pavilion.

古文：汾水又西与华水合，水出北山华谷，西南流径一故城西。俗谓之梗阳城，非也。
现代文：汾水又西流，一与华水汇合。华水发源于北山的华谷，往西南流经一座老城西边，俗称梗阳城，其实是不对的。
English: Surabaya's water also flows west, where it meets Hua Shui. Hua Shui originates in the Huayuan Valley of the North Mountain, and flows southwest through the west side of an old city, commonly known as Yangyang City. This is actually not correct.

古文：梗阳在榆次不在此。
现代文：梗阳在榆次，并不在这里。
English: Yingyang is in Ganzi, not here.

古文：案《故汉上谷长史侯相碑》云：侯氏出自仓颉之后，逾殷历周，各以氏分，或著楚、魏，或显齐、秦，晋卿士斯，其胄也，食采华阳，今蒲坂北亭，即是城也。
现代文：按《故汉上谷长史侯相碑》说：侯氏是仓领的后裔，经过商、周两朝，各个支系分成不同的姓氏，有的在楚国和魏国成为著名的氏族，有的在齐国和秦国取得显要的地位；晋国大臣士劳，也是他的后代，他的食邑华阳，在现在蒲坂的北亭，就是此城。
English: According to the "Monument of the Hou Clan, the Long History of the Upper Valley of the Han Dynasty," the Hou clan is the descendant of Cangliao. After the Shang and Zhou dynasties, each branch was divided into different surnames. Some became famous clans in the Chu and Wei dynasties, while others achieved a prominent position in the Qi and Qin dynasties. The Jin minister Shilou was also his descendant, and his hometown Huayang, in what is now the North Pavilion of Busan, is this city.

古文：其水西南流注于汾。
现代文：水往西南流，注入汾水。
English: The water flows to the southwest, injecting brackish water.

古文：汾水又径稷山北，在水南四十许里，山东西二十里，南北三十里，高十三里，西去介山十五里。
现代文：汾水又流经授山以北，山在水南约四十里。山东西二十里，南北三十里，高十三里，西边离介山十五里。
English: Surabaya also flows through the north of Jushan, the mountain is about forty miles south of the water, the mountain is twenty miles east to west, thirty miles north to south, thirteen miles high, and fifteen miles west of the mountain.

古文：山上有稷祠，山下稷亭。
现代文：山上有翟祠，山下有樱亭。
English: On the mountain there is an ancestral hall, and at the foot of the mountain there is a cherry blossom pavilion.

古文：《春秋》宣公十五年，秦桓公伐晋，晋侯治兵于稷，以略狄土是也。
现代文：《春秋》：宣公十五年前，秦桓公攻打晋国，晋侯在樱练兵，准备夺取狄族的土地，指的就是这地方。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Fifteen years before the proclamation of the emperor, Qin Huan attacked Jin, and the princes of Jin trained their soldiers in Sakura, preparing to seize the land of the Di people. This is the place.

古文：又西过皮氏县南，汾水西径鄈丘北，故汉氏之方泽也。
现代文：又往西流过皮氏县南边，汾水往西流经鄂丘北边，就是从前汉代的方泽。
English: It also flows westward through the southern part of Pi County, and Ershui flows westward through the northern part of Huchu, which is the Fangze of the former Han Dynasty.

古文：贾逵云：汉法，三年祭地。
现代文：贾遴说：按汉代的传统，每三年须在汾阴的方泽举行祭地。
English: Jia Qian said: According to the tradition of the Han Dynasty, the festival must be held every three years in Fangze, Shenyang.

古文：汾阴方泽，泽中有方丘，故谓之方泽丘。即鄈丘也。
现代文：泽中有个方丘，所以泽称方泽，这方丘就是鄂丘。
English: There is a square mound in the lake, so the lake is called Fangze, and this square mound is Huchu.

古文：许慎《说文》称从邑，癸声。
现代文：许慎《说文》说：癸卜字偏旁从邑，读作癸。
English: Xu Shen's "Recitation" says: "The character 卜 comes from 邑, and is pronounced as.

古文：河东临汾地名矣，在介山北，山即汾山也。
现代文：是河东临汾的地名，在介山以北，就是汾山，雄峙于群山之上。
English: It is the name of a place in Linyi, east of the river. To the north of Mount Jie, it is Mount Lushan, which dominates the mountains.

古文：其山特立，周七十里，高三十里。
现代文：文颖说：介山在河东皮氏县东南，巍然耸立，周围七十里，高三十里。
English: Wen Ying said: Kaishan is in the southeast of Pishi County, Hedong Province. It stands tall, with a circumference of seventy miles and a height of thirty miles.

古文：文颖言在皮氏县东南，则可三十里，乃非也。
现代文：文颖说在皮氏县东南，倒也差不多，说三十里却不对了。
English: Wen Ying said that it was in the southeast of Pi County, but it was almost the same, but it was wrong to say thirty miles.

古文：今准此山可高十余里，山上有神庙，庙侧有灵泉，祈祭之日，周而不耗，世亦谓之子推祠。
现代文：现在据目测，此山高约十余里，山上有神庙，庙旁有灵泉，在祈祷祭祀的日子，泉水供应源源不绝，世人也称神庙为子推祠。
English: Now, according to visual measurements, this mountain is about ten miles high. There is a temple on the mountain, and there is a spiritual spring next to the temple. On the day of prayer and worship, the spring water supply is endless. The world also calls the temple a Zifu Shrine.

古文：扬雄《河东赋》曰：灵舆安步，周流容与，以览于介山，嗟文公而愍推兮，勤大禹于龙门。
现代文：扬雄《河东赋》说：天子的车驾，缓缓前行，到处从容不迫地漫游，在介山观赏风光。他为文公而磋叹，为介子推而悲伤，在龙门称颂大禹劳苦功高。
English: Yang Xiong's "Hedong Fu" said: "Heaven's son drives a car, slowly drives forward, roams everywhere unhurriedly, and enjoys the scenery in Jie Shan. He sighs for Wen Gong, grieves for Jie Zi, and praises Da Yu's hard work in Longmen.

古文：《晋太康记》及《地道记》与《永初记》，并言子推所逃隐于是山，即实非也。
现代文：《晋太康记》以及《地道记》、《永初记》都说介子推出逃，隐居在这座山中，但证之于史实，却不是这里。
English: "Jintai Kang Ji" as well as "Jindo Ji" and "Yonghatsu Ji" all say that the gecko fled and lived in seclusion in this mountain, but the proof is in the historical facts, but not here.

古文：余案介推所隐者，绵山也。
现代文：我按介子推所隐的地方，其实是绵山。
English: According to my meson, the hidden place is actually Mianshan Mountain.

古文：文公环而封之，为介推田，号其山为介山。
现代文：文公绕山划定范围，立为介推田，称山为介山。
English: Wengong circled the mountain to delineate the scope, set up as a mediate field, and called the mountain a mediate mountain.

古文：杜预曰：在西河界休县者是也。汾水又西径耿乡城北，故殷都也。
现代文：杜预说：介山在西河界休县。汾水又往西流，经耿乡城北边，这里是殷商的故都。
English: Du Yuan said: Kaishan is located in Xihe County in the West River area. Lushui also flows westward, passing through the north of Geng Township. This is the former capital of Yin merchants.

古文：帝祖乙自相徙此，为河所毁，故《书》叙曰：祖乙圮于耿。
现代文：帝祖乙从相迁移到这里，被河水冲毁，所以《尚书•叙》说：祖乙在耿的都城被毁了。
English: Emperor Zu Yi moved here from the phase and was washed away by the river, so "Shang Shu • Su" said: Emperor Zu Yi was destroyed in the capital city of Geng.

古文：杜预曰：平阳皮氏县东南耿乡是也。
现代文：杜预说：耿，就是平阳郡皮氏县东南的耿乡。
English: Du Yu said: Geng is Geng Township in the southeast of Pi County, Pingyang County.

古文：盘庚以耿在河北，迫近山川，乃自耿迁毫。
现代文：盘庚因耿在河水以北，近山临水，地方狭窄，于是从耿迁都于毫。
English: Pan Geng because Geng in the north of the river, near the mountain near the water, the place is narrow, so from Geng moved to the mill.

古文：晋献公灭耿，以封赵夙，后襄子与韩、魏分晋，韩康子居平阳，魏桓子都安邑，号为三晋，此其一也。
现代文：晋献公灭耿，把这地方封给赵夙，后来赵襄子与韩、魏分割了晋国，韩康子居留在平阳，魏桓子定都于安邑，号称三晋，这就是其中之一。
English: Zhao Xiangzi divided Jin Province with Han and Wei, Han Kangzi stayed in Pingyang, Wei Huanzi settled in Anyi, known as the Three Jin, and this is one of them.

古文：汉武帝行幸河东，济汾河，作《秋风辞》于斯水之上。
现代文：汉武帝巡游河东，渡过汾河，在这条水上做了一篇《秋风辞》。
English: Emperor Hanwu cruised to the east of the river, crossed the Li River, and wrote an "Autumn Wind Speech" on this water.

古文：汾水又西径皮氏县南。
现代文：汾水又往西流经皮氏县南边。
English: Surabaya water also flows westward through the southern part of Pishi County.

古文：《竹书纪年》：魏襄王十二年，秦公孙爱率师伐我，围皮氏，翟章率师救皮氏围，疾西风。
现代文：《竹书纪年》：魏襄王十二年前，秦国公孙爱领兵攻打我国，包围皮氏；翟章领兵来援救被围困的皮氏，苦于猛烈的西风。
English: "The Bamboo Annals": Twelve years before the Wei Xiang Wang, the Qin Emperor Gongsun Ai led an army to attack China and encircle the Pi clan; Yu Zhang led an army to rescue the besieged Pi clan, suffering from the fierce west wind.

古文：十三年，城皮氏者也。
现代文：十三年前，给皮氏筑城。
English: Thirteen years ago, he built a castle for Pi.

古文：汉河东太守潘系穿渠引汾水以溉皮氏县，故渠尚存，今无水也。
现代文：汉朝河东太守潘系，开渠引汾水来灌溉皮氏县，这条旧渠道还在，但现在已无水了。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Emperor Taizong of the Eastern Han Dynasty opened a canal to divert water to irrigate Pi County. The old canal is still there, but there is no water now.

古文：又西至汾阴县，北西注于河。
现代文：又往西流到汾阴县北边，往西注人河水。
English: It also flows westward to the northern part of Shuyin County, and westward to the Shunren River.

古文：水南有长阜，背汾带河，阜长四五里，广二里余，高十丈，汾水历其阴，西入河。
现代文：汾水南岸有一条长长的山冈，背倚汾水，河水从旁边流过，山冈长四五里，宽二里余，高十丈，汾水经山北西流注入河水。
English: On the south bank of the Surabaya, there is a long hill, with the back leaning on the Surabaya water and the river flowing by. The hill is four or five miles long, more than two miles wide and ten meters high, and the Surabaya water is injected into the river by the northwest current of the mountain.

古文：《汉书》谓之汾阴脽。
现代文：《汉书》把这条山冈称为汾阴雅。
English: "Hanshu" describes this mountain range as beautiful.

古文：应劭曰：脽，丘类也。
现代文：应肋说：推是丘陵一类。
English: Ying Li said: Pushing is a kind of hill.

古文：汾阴男子公孙祥望气，宝物之精上见，祥言之于武帝，武帝于水获宝鼎焉。
现代文：汾阴有个汉子叫公孙祥，能够望气，他看到宝物的精气冲天而上，就去报告武帝，于是武帝在水中获得宝鼎。
English: Once upon a time, there was a man named Gongsun Xiang, who was able to hold his breath. When he saw the essence of the treasure soar into the sky, he went to report to Emperor Wu, and Emperor Wu obtained the Baoding in the water.

古文：迁于甘泉宫，改其年曰元鼎，即此处。
现代文：武帝把宝鼎移到甘泉宫，并改年号为元鼎，就在这里。
English: Emperor Wu moved Baoding to Ganquan Palace, and changed the year name to Yuanding, right here.

古文：浍水出河东绛县东浍交东高山，浍水东出绛高山，亦曰河南山，又曰浍山。西径翼城南。
现代文：浍水发源于河东郡绛县东边的洽交东高山。浍水发源于东方的绛高山。也叫河南山，又称浍山，往西流经翼城南面。
English: The Ershui originates from the Jiaotong Donggaoshan in the east of Er County, Hedong County. The Ershui originates from the Ergaoshan in the east. Also called Henan Mountain, also known as Ershan, it flows westward through the south of Yingcheng.

古文：案《诗谱》言：晋穆侯迁都于绛，暨孙孝侯，改绛为翼，翼为晋之旧都也。
现代文：据《诗谱》说：晋穆侯迁都于绛，到了他孙子孝侯的时候，按照晋国旧都名，把绛改名为翼。
English: According to "Shisho," the capital of Jinmu was moved to Gan, and when his grandson, Takaharu, arrived, he changed the name of Gan to Tsubasa, in accordance with the old capital of Jin.

古文：后献公北广其城，方二里，又命之为绛。
现代文：后来献公把城向北扩展，面积增至二里见方，重又命名为绛。
English: Later, the city was expanded to the north, the area increased to two square miles, and it was re-named Shao.

古文：故司马迁《史记年表》称：献公九年，始城绛都。
现代文：所以司马迁《史记•年表》说：献公九年前，才开始为绛筑城。
English: Therefore, Sima Qian's "History • Chronology" said: Nine years before the dedication, he only began to build the city.

古文：《左传》庄公二十六年，晋士城绛以深其宫是也。
现代文：《左传》：庄公二十六年前，晋国士芳为绛筑城，以便把他的宫殿造得更为高大。
English: "Left Biography": Twenty-six years before Zhuang Gong, Shifang of Jin built a city for Zou, so that he could build his palace even taller.

古文：其水又西南合黑水，水导源东北黑水谷，西南流径翼城北，右引北川水，水出平川，南流注之，乱流西南入浍水。
现代文：水又往西流，与黑水汇合。黑水发源于东北方的黑水谷，往西南流经翼城北面，右边引了出自平原的北川水，南流注入黑水，然后乱流往西南注入浍水。
English: The Black Water originates from the Black Water Valley in the northeast, flows southwest through the northern side of the Wing City, draws the Beichuan Water from the plain on the right, the southern flow injects the Black Water, and then the turbulent flow injects the Surabaya Water to the southwest.

古文：浍水又西南与诸水合，谓之浍交。
现代文：浍水又往西南流，与诸水汇合，汇流处称为浍交。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southwest and merges with other waters. The place of confluence is called Surabaya intersection.

古文：《竹书纪年》曰：庄伯十二年，翼侯焚曲沃之禾而还，作为文公也。
现代文：《竹书纪年》说：庄伯十二年，翼侯焚烧了曲沃的庄稼后退了回去。
English: "The Bamboo Annals" said: In the twelfth year of Zhuangbo, Ying Hou burned the crops of Quwo and retreated back.

古文：又有贺水，东出近川，西南至浍交入浍。
现代文：还有一条贺水，出自东边近处的平原，往西南，到浍交注入浍水。
English: There is also a stream of auspicious water, which comes from the plains near the eastern edge and flows to the southwest, where it is infused with auspicious water.

古文：又有高泉水，出东南近川，西北趣浍交注浍。
现代文：又有高泉水，源出东南邻近的平原，往西北到浍交注入浍水。
English: There is also high spring water, which originates from the nearby plains in the southeast and is injected with brackish water from the northwest to the intersection of the two rivers.

古文：又南，紫谷水东出白马山白马川。
现代文：浍水又南流，紫谷水出自东方白马山的白马川。
English: Surabaya's water also flows south, while Zigu's water comes from the Hakuba River in the eastern part of Mount Hakuba.

古文：《遁甲开山图》曰：绛山东距白马山。谓是山也。
现代文：《遁甲开山图》说心绛山东到白马山，说的就是这座山。
English: According to the "Lingjia Kaishan Map," it is this mountain that is said to stretch from the east of Xinqian Mountain to Baima Mountain.

古文：西径荧庭城南，而西出紫谷，与乾河合，即教水之枝川也。
现代文：往西流经荧庭城南边，然后往西流出紫谷，与乾河汇合―乾河是教水的支流。
English: It flows westward through the southern side of Fu Ting City, then flows westward out of Zidani, and merges with the Qianhe River - the Qianhe River is a tributary of the Jiu River.

古文：《史记。白起传》称涉河取韩安邑，东至乾河是也。
现代文：《史记•白起传》说：涉水过河，占领韩国的安邑，往东直至乾河。
English: "Histories • Baiqi Biography" said: wade across the river, occupy South Korea's Anyi, and go east to the Qianhe River.

古文：其水西与田川水合，水出东溪，西北至浍交入浍。
现代文：乾河西流与田川水汇合。田川水源出东溪，往西北流，到浍交注入浍水。
English: The west stream of the Qianhe River merges with the Tianchuan River. The source of the Tianchuan River flows out of the Dongxi River, flows to the northwest, and injects brackish water at the junction.

古文：又有于家水出于家谷。
现代文：又有于家水，发源于家谷。
English: It is also found in Ieyasu and originated in Ieyasu's valley.

古文：《竹书纪年》曰：庄伯以曲沃叛，伐翼，公子万救翼，荀叔轸追之至于家谷。
现代文：《竹书纪年》说：庄伯据有曲沃，起兵反叛，向翼进攻。公子万前来援救，荀叔较追击他，直到于家谷。
English: The "Chronicle of the Bamboo Cutter" says: According to Zhu Bo, Zhu Bo had Quwo, raised an army to rebel, and attacked the wing. Prince Wan came to the rescue, and his uncle pursued him until he reached Iya Valley.

古文：有范壁水出于壁下，并西北流，至翼广城。
现代文：又有范壁水发源于壁下，也往西北流到翼广城。
English: There is also Fan Wall Water, which originates under the wall and also flows northwest to Yingguangcheng.

古文：昔晋军北入，翼广筑之，因即其姓以名之。
现代文：从前晋军北上攻入翼，扩大修建此城，因而叫翼广城。
English: Formerly, the Jin army invaded the north into the wings, expanded and built this city, so it was called the Wings of Guangcheng.

古文：二水合而西北流，至浍交入浍。
现代文：两水汇合后往西北流，到浍交注入洽水。
English: After the confluence of the two waters, it flows to the northwest, and at the confluence of the two, it is infused with rapids.

古文：浍水又西南与绛水合，俗谓之白水，非也。
现代文：浍水又往西南流，与绛水汇合，俗称白水，其实不对。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southwest, merging with Surabaya water, commonly known as white water, which is actually incorrect.

古文：水出绛山东，寒泉奋涌，扬波北注，悬流奔壑，一十许丈。
现代文：绛水发源于绛山东麓，一股冷泉强劲地直冒出来，波浪滔滔地往北流去，从高约十丈的悬崖一泻而下，倾注入深壑中。
English: The Surabaya water originates from the eastern foot of the Surabaya Mountains. A cold spring emerges vigorously, and the waves flow northward, cascading down from a cliff about ten meters high and pouring into the depths.

古文：青崖若点黛，素湍如委练，望之极为奇观矣。
现代文：青苍的崖壁像是点上了黛色，霜雪似的急流宛如下垂的白绢，望去真是壮观极了。
English: The azure cliffs seem to be dotted with daisies, the frosty rapids look like drooping egrets, and the view is truly spectacular.

古文：其水西北流注于浍。
现代文：绛水往西北流，注入浍水。
English: Surabaya water flows to the northwest, injecting Surabaya water.

古文：应劭曰：绛水出绛县西南，盖以故绛为言也。
现代文：应劫说：绛水发源于绛县西南，这是就旧绛城而说的。
English: Ying Gao said: Surabaya's water originates from the southwest of Surabaya County. This was said in reference to the old city of Surabaya.

古文：《史记》称：智伯率韩、魏引水灌晋阳，不没者三版。
现代文：《史记》说：智伯率领韩、魏两国军队引水淹晋阳，城没有被淹的只有两丈余。
English: "Histories" said: Zhi Bo led the Korean and Wei armies to divert water and flood Jinyang. The city was not flooded for more than two years.

古文：智氏曰：吾始不知水可以亡人国，今乃知之。
现代文：智伯说：起初我还不知道水可以使人亡国，现在才知道了。
English: Zhibo said, "At first, I didn't know that water could destroy a country, but now I know.

古文：汾水可以浸安邑，绛水可以浸平阳。
现代文：汾水可以淹没安邑，绛水可以淹没平阳。
English: Surabaya water can flood Anyi, Surabaya water can flood Pingyang.

古文：时韩居平阳，魏都安邑，魏桓子肘韩康子，韩康子履魏桓子，时足接于车上，而智氏以亡。
现代文：当时韩国建都平阳，魏国建都安邑。魏桓子用手肘碰碰韩康子，韩康子用脚尖踢踢魏桓子，两人的手肘和脚尖在车上相触，智氏于是灭亡。
English: At that time, South Korea's capital was built in Pingyang, and Wei's capital was built in Anyi. Wei Huan Zi touched Han Kang Zi with his elbow, Han Kang Zi kicked Wei Huan Zi with his toes, and the two men's elbows and toes touched on the car, and Zhi died.

古文：鲁定公问：一言可以丧邦，有诸？
现代文：鲁定公问道：一句话可以亡国，有这样的事吗？
English: Rudingong asked: Is there such a thing as a sentence that can ruin a country?

古文：孔子以为几乎，余睹智氏之谈矣，汾水灌安邑，或亦有之；绛水灌平阳，未识所由也。
现代文：孔子以为差不多是可能的，我从智伯的话里就看到一个例证。但以汾水来淹安邑，也许还是可行的，以绛水来淹平阳，却不知怎么流得过去。
English: Confucius thought it was almost possible, and I saw an example of it in the words of Zhibo. But it may still be possible to flood An'yur with salty water, and to flood Pingyang with salty water, but I don't know how it will flow.

古文：西过其县南，《春秋》成公六年，晋景公谋去故绛，欲居郇瑕。
现代文：往西流过绛县南，《春秋》：成公六年前，晋景公打算离开旧绛城，迁居到娜瑕去。
English: Flowing westward through the south of Handan County, "Spring and Autumn": Six years before he became a prince, Jin Jinggong planned to leave the old Handan City and move to Nagore.

古文：韩献子曰：土薄水浅，不如新田，有汾、浍以流其恶。
现代文：韩献子说：旬肠瑕这地方土壤痔薄，河水又浅，不如新田，有汾水、浍水能把脏污涤荡净尽。
English: Han Xianzi said: The soil in this place is thin and the river is shallow. It is not as good as Xintian. There is salty water, and the salty water can wash away the dirty dirt.

古文：遂居新田，又谓之绛，即绛阳也，盖在绛、浍之阳。
现代文：于是就迁居到新田，也叫绛，就是绛阳，因为在绛、浍二水北边的缘故。
English: As a result, they moved to Shinden, also known as Shiyan, or Shiyang, due to the fact that Shiyan and Shiyan are located north of the Ershui River.

古文：汉高帝六年，封越骑将军华无害为侯国。
现代文：汉高帝六年前，把这里封给越骑将军华无害，立为侯国。
English: Six years ago, Emperor Han Gao gave this place to the Yue cavalry general Hua Miao and established it as a principality.

古文：县南对绛山，面背二水。
现代文：县城南与绛山相望，前后是汾浍两水。
English: The southern part of the county and Lushan are facing each other, and there are two rivers in front and behind.

古文：《古文琐语》曰：晋平公与齐景公乘至于浍上，见乘白骖八驷以来，有大狸身而狐尾，随平公之车，公问师旷，对首阳之神，有大狸身狐尾，其名曰者，饮酒得福，则徼之，盖于是水之上也。
现代文：《古文琐语》说：晋平公与齐景公乘车到浍上，看见有人驾着八匹白马而来，有一只狗，身如狸，尾如狐，跟在文公的车后。平公问师旷，师旷说：首阳山的神抵有一只狗，身如鲤，尾如狐，名叫者来。如果饮酒得福，就会招来这条神狗。
English: "Ancient Chinese Proverbs" says: Prince Jinping and Prince Qi Jing rode to Shao Shang and saw someone driving eight white horses. A dog, with a body like a fox and a tail like a fox, was following Prince Wen's car. Prince Ping asked Shiguang, and Shiguang said: The god of Shouyang Mountain has a dog, with a body like a donkey and a tail like a fox, named Shiguang. If you drink and are blessed, you will attract this god dog.

古文：又西南过虒祁宫南，宫在新田绛县故城西四十里，晋平公之所构也。
现代文：他就是在这条水边碰到的。又往西南流过旎祁宫南，旎祁宫在新田绛县旧城西四十里，是晋平公所建。
English: He came across it on the edge of this waterway, and it flowed south-west to the south of the Summer Palace, which was built by Emperor Jinpyeong and is located forty miles west of the old city in Shinden County.

古文：时有石言于魏榆，晋侯以问师旷，旷曰：石不能言，或凭焉。
现代文：当时魏榆有一块石头竟说起话来。晋侯问师旷，师旷说：石头是不能说话的，或许有什么东西凭借着石头在说话。
English: At that time, Wei Wei had a stone that could actually speak. Jin Hou asked Shiguang, and Shiguang said: "A stone cannot speak. Perhaps something is speaking with the help of the stone."

古文：臣闻之，作事不时，怨动于民，则有非言之物言也。
现代文：我听说做事情不合时，民怨沸腾，那末原来不会说话的东西也说话了。
English: I heard that when things were not done right, people's anger boiled over, and things that could not speak began to speak.

古文：今宫室崇侈，民力雕尽，石言不亦宜乎！
现代文：现在宫庭里的房子造得这么高大豪华，把民间的财力都耗尽了，连石头也开口说话，岂不是很自然的吗？
English: Isn't it natural that the houses in the palace courtyard are now so tall and luxurious that they have exhausted the people's financial resources, and even the stones speak?

古文：叔向以为子野之言，君子矣。
现代文：叔向认为子野的话真是语重心长。
English: Uncle Xiang thought that what Zino said was really profound.

古文：其宫也，背汾面侩，西则两川之交会也。
现代文：平公的宫殿背倚汾水，前临浍水，西边是这两条河流的汇合处。
English: Hirako's palace backs on the Surabaya River and fronts on the Surabaya River, with the confluence of the two rivers to the west.

古文：《竹书纪年》曰：晋出公五年，浍绝于梁。即是水也。
现代文：《竹书纪年》说：晋出公五年前，洽水到梁就断流了，指的就是此水。
English: The "Chronicle of the Bamboo Cutter" says: Five years before Jinshi became emperor, the water flow to Liang was cut off, referring to this water.

古文：又西至王泽，注于汾水。
现代文：又往西流到王泽，注人汾水。
English: It also flows west to Wangze, where it is used for irrigation.

古文：晋智伯瑶攻赵襄子，襄子奔保晋阳，原过后至，遇三人于此泽，自带以下不见，持竹二节与原过，曰，为我遗无恤。
现代文：晋国智伯瑶进攻赵襄子，襄子逃奔到晋阳，守城自卫。原过随后来到，在这片泽地里遇见三个人，但腰带以下却看不到他们的下身。他们手里拿着一支两节的竹筒交给原过，说道：请替我们送给无恤吧。
English: Jin Guo Zhibo attacked Zhao Xiangzi. Xiangzi fled to Jinyang to defend the city. Yuan You then came and met three people in this meadow, but their lower bodies could not be seen from the waist down. They held a two-section bamboo tube in their hands and handed it to Yuan You, saying: "Please give it to Shirtless for us."

古文：涑水出河东闻喜县东山黍葭谷，涑水所出，俗谓之华谷，至周阳与洮水合，水源东出清野山，世人以为清襄山也。
现代文：原过就在这片泽地接过竹筒，这就是所谓王泽。涑水发源于河东闻喜县东山黍蔑谷，黍霞谷是涑水的发源地，俗称华谷。涑水流到周阳后，与挑水汇合。挑水源出东边的清野山，世人称为清襄山。
English: Originally, a bamboo tube was connected to this lakeland, which is called Wangze. The spring water originates from Dongshan, Wenshu Valley, Wenshi County, East China Sea. Wuxia Valley is the source of the spring water, commonly known as Hua Valley. After the spring water flows to Zhouyang, it merges with the water source. The source of the water source comes from Qingshan Mountain in the east, known to the world as Qingshan Mountain.

古文：其水东径大岭下，西流出谓之唅口。
现代文：挑水往东流经大岭山下，西流出山，那地方叫含口。
English: The upstream water flows eastward under the Daling Mountain and flows out of the mountain in the west. That place is called Hamaguchi.

古文：又西合涑水。
现代文：又西流，与涑水瓜合。
English: It also flows west, merging with the Surabaya River.

古文：郑使子产问晋平公疾，平公曰：卜云台骀为祟。史官莫知，敢问。
现代文：晋平公有病，郑国派遣子产去探病。平公说：巫师说我的病是因为台骑作祟，可是史官也不知道台胎是什么，请问您可知道？
English: Jin Ping Gong was ill, and Zheng Guo sent his sons and daughters to investigate the illness. Ping Gong said, "The sorcerer said that my illness was caused by the horse, but the historian didn't know what the horse was. Do you know?"

古文：子产曰：高辛氏有二子，长曰阏伯，季曰实沈，不能相容。帝迁阏伯于商丘，迁实沈于大夏。
现代文：子产说：高辛氏有两个儿子，大儿子叫阔伯，小儿子叫实沈，两人互不相容，于是他就把阔伯下放到商丘，把实沈下放到大夏。
English: Zi Yuan said: Mr. Gao Xin has two sons, the elder son is named Kuo Bo and the younger son is named Si Shen. The two are incompatible with each other, so he sent Kuo Bo to Shangqiu and Si Shen to Daxia.

古文：台骀，实沈之后，能业其官，帝用嘉之，国于汾川。
现代文：台胎是实沈的儿子，能继承先人的事业，因而受到帝害的嘉奖，在汾川建都。
English: Tai Tuo was the son of Shichenshen, who was able to inherit the cause of his predecessors, and thus was rewarded by the emperor, and built the capital in Luochuan.

古文：由是观之，台骀，汾、洮之神也。
现代文：这样看来，台验应当是汾水和挑水的神抵了。
English: From this point of view, the table test should be a godsend for watering and watering.

古文：贾逵曰：汾、洮，二水名。
现代文：贾速说：汾、挑是两条河名。
English: Jahangir said, "The names of the two rivers are Ho and Hoe.

古文：司马彪曰：洮水出闻喜县。故王莽以县为洮亭也。
现代文：司马彪说：挑水发源于闻喜县，所以王莽时把该县改为挑亭。
English: Sima Biao said: the water-lifting ceremony originated in Wensi County, so Wang Mangshi changed the county to the water-lifting ceremony.

古文：然则涑水殆亦洮水之兼称乎？
现代文：那末涑水大概也就是挑水的兼称了吧！
English: After all, to draw water is probably also to draw water!

古文：西过周阳邑南，其城南临涑水，北倚山原。
现代文：往西流过周阳邑南边，周阳城南濒涑水，北依山地。
English: It flows westward through the southern part of Zhouyang, south of Zhouyang City along the Yanshui River, and north of the mountains.

古文：《竹书纪年》：晋献公二十五年正月，翟人伐晋，周有白兔舞于市。即是邑也。
现代文：《竹书纪年》：晋献公二十五年正月，翟人攻打晋国，周有白兔在市场上跳舞一一周，就是周阳城。
English: "The Bamboo Annals": In the first month of the 25th year of the Jin Dynasty, the Xiongnu attacked Jin Province, and the Zhou White Rabbits danced in the market for a week. This was Zhouyang City.

古文：汉景帝以封田胜为侯国。
现代文：汉景帝把这地方封给田胜，立为侯国。
English: Emperor Han Jing gave this place to Tian Sheng and established it as a vassal state.

古文：涑水西径董泽陂南，即古池，东西四里，南北三里。
现代文：涑水往西流经董泽破南边，这就是古池，东西四里，南北三里。
English: Surabaya water flows westward through Dongze to the south, this is the ancient pond, east-west four miles, north-south three miles.

古文：《春秋》文公六年，蒐于董，即斯泽也。
现代文：《春秋》：文公六年前，在董打猎，指的就是这片泽地。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Six years ago, when Wen Gong was hunting in Dong, he was referring to this lake.

古文：涑水又与景水合，水出景山北谷。
现代文：涑水又与景水汇合。景水发源于景山北谷。
English: Surabaya Water also merges with Jingshui Water, which originates from Jingshan North Valley.

古文：《山海经》曰：景山南望盐贩之泽，北望少泽，其草多藷、秦椒，其阴多赭，其阳多玉。
现代文：《山海经》说：景山向南可以望见盐贩之泽，向北可以望见少泽。山上的草，以山药、秦椒居多，山北多红壤，山南多玉。
English: "Shanhaikyo" says: To the south of Jingshan, you can see Yanhuanzawa, and to the north, you can see Shaozawa. The grass on the mountain is mostly yam and Qin pepper, the north of the mountain is mostly red soil, and the south of the mountain is mostly jade.

古文：郭景纯曰：盐贩之泽即解县盐池也。
现代文：郭景纯说：盐贩之泽，就是解县的盐池。
English: Guo Jingshun said: "Yanhuang Lake is the salt pond of Xie County.

古文：案《经》不言有水，今有水焉。西北流，注于涑水也。
现代文：《山海经》没有提到山上有水，但却有水，往西北流，注入涑水。
English: "Shanhai Jing" did not mention that there was water on the mountain, but there was water, flowing to the northwest, injecting brackish water.

古文：故《传》曰：鬼神所凭，有时而信矣。涑水又西径王官城北，城在南原上。《春秋左传》成公十三年四月，晋侯使吕相绝秦曰：康犹不悛，入我河曲，伐我涑川，俘我王官。故有河曲之战是矣。
现代文：又往西南流过左邑县南边，涑水又往西流经仲邮郭北面；又往西流经桐乡城北面。《竹书纪年》说：翼侯攻打曲沃，打了个大胜仗，武公请求在翼议和，到了桐才回去。《汉书》说：武帝元鼎六年四月，晋侯派遣吕相与秦绝交，信中说：康公还不悔过，侵犯我国的河曲，进攻我国的涑水，又把王官的老百姓抓走，因而发生河曲之战。
English: It also flowed to the southwest through the south side of Zuoying County, and its waters flowed westward through the north side of Zhongpu County; it also flowed westward through the north side of Tongxiang City. "The Annals of the Bamboo Annals" said: "Wang Hou attacked Quvo and won a great victory, and Wukong asked for peace in the wings, and only returned to Tong." "The Book of Han" said: "In April of the sixth year of Emperor Wu's reign, the Prince of Jin dispatched Luxiang to break off diplomatic relations with Qin. The letter said: "Kangong still did not repent, invaded our country

古文：今世人犹谓其城曰王城也。
现代文：现在世人还把那座城称为王城。
English: The world still calls that city the royal city.

古文：又西南过安邑县西。
现代文：又往西南流过安邑县西边，
English: flowing southwest through the western part of Anyi County,

古文：安邑，禹都也。
现代文：安邑是禹的都城。
English: Anyi is the capital of Yu.

古文：禹娶涂山氏女，思恋本国，筑台以望之，今城南门，台基犹存。
现代文：禹娶了涂山氏的女乙，她思念祖国，于是筑台望乡，今天安邑城的南门，那座高台的基址还在。
English: Yu married the second daughter of the Tu Shan clan. She was homesick for her motherland, so she built a platform overlooking her hometown. Today, it is the south gate of the city of Anyi, and the foundation of the platform is still there.

古文：余案《礼》，天子诸侯，台门隅阿相降而已，未必一如《书》传也。故晋邑矣，春秋时，魏绛自魏徙此。
现代文：我按《礼》天子诸侯台上的门，不过边角层层下降罢了，未必都像书中所载安邑是古时晋国的城邑，春秋时，魏绛从魏迁都到这里。
English: I pressed the door on the platform of the "Ritual" of the sons of heaven, but the corners fell down. It may not be like the book says. Anyi was a city of Jin in ancient times. In spring and autumn, Wei Wei moved the capital from Wei to here.

古文：昔文侯悬师经之琴于其门，以为言戒也。
现代文：从前文侯把师经的琴挂在城门上，作为对待批评的鉴戒。
English: Once upon a time, the lord of the manor hung his master's harp on the city gate as a warning against criticism.

古文：武侯二年，又城安邑，盖增广之。
现代文：武侯二年前，又在安邑筑城，这次是扩建。
English: Two years ago, Wuhou also built a city in Anyi, but this time it was an expansion.

古文：秦始皇使左更、白起取安邑，置河东郡。
现代文：秦始皇派左更、白起去夺取安邑，设置了河东郡。
English: Qin Shihuang sent Zuogeng and Baiqi to capture An'yun and set up Hedong County.

古文：王莽更名洮队，县曰河东也。
现代文：王莽改郡名为桃队，县名叫河东。
English: Wang Mang changed the county name to Taotie and the county name to Hedong.

古文：有项宁都，学道升仙，忽复还此，河东号曰斥仙。
现代文：有个项宁都，学道升天成了仙人，忽然又回到这里，河东人都称他为斥仙。
English: There is a story about Ningdu, a scholar who ascended to heaven and became a hermit, but suddenly came back here. People in eastern Hebei call him a hermit.

古文：汉世又有闵仲叔，隐遁市邑，罕有知者，后以识瞻而去。
现代文：汉时又有个阂仲叔，隐居于市崖之间，很少有人知道他，后来因人们知道了，又来周济他，他才离去。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was also an Uncle Zizhong, who lived in seclusion between the cliffs of the city. Few people knew about him. Later, because people found out, they came to give him money, and he left.

古文：涑水西南径监盐县故城，城南有盐他，上承盐水。
现代文：辣水往西南流经监盐县老城，城南有盐池，上流承接盐水。
English: The spicy water flows to the southwest through the old city of Jianyan County. There is a salt pond in the south of the city, and the upstream receives salt water.

古文：水出东南薄山，西北流径巫咸山北。
现代文：盐水发源于东南方的薄山，往西北流经巫咸山北。
English: The brine originates from the thin mountains in the southeast and flows northwest through the northern part of Wuxian Mountain.

古文：《地理志》曰：山在安邑县南。
现代文：《地理志》说：山在安邑县南。
English: "Geography" said: the mountain is in the south of Anyi County.

古文：《海外西经》曰：巫咸国在女丑北，右手操青蛇，左手操赤蛇，在登葆山，群巫所从上下也。
现代文：《海外西经》说：巫咸国在女丑北边，他右手握着青蛇，左手握着赤蛇，群巫都跟着他在登葆山上上下下。
English: "Overseas Classics" said: Wuham country is in the north of the Ugly Woman, he holds the blue snake in his right hand and the red snake in his left hand, and the witches follow him up and down the mountain.

古文：《大荒西经》云：大荒之中有灵山，巫咸、巫即、巫朌、巫彭、巫姑、巫真、巫礼、巫抵、巫谢、巫罗十巫，从此升降，百药爱在。
现代文：《大荒西经》说：大荒之中有灵山，巫咸、巫即、巫盼、巫彭、巫姑、巫真、巫礼、巫抵、巫谢、巫罗这十位巫师都从这里上山下山，山上长着各种药草。
English: "The Great Western Desert Classic" says: In the great desert, there is a spiritual mountain. These ten wizards, Wuxian, Wuxia, Wupan, Wupeng, Wugu, Wuzhen, Wulai, Wudai, Wuxie and Wulao, all go up and down the mountain from here. Various herbs grow on the mountain.

古文：郭景纯曰：言群巫上下灵山，采药往来也。
现代文：郭景纯说：这里是说群巫在灵山上上下下往来采药。
English: Guo Jingshun said: Here it is said that a group of witches go up and down the mountain to collect medicine.

古文：盖神巫所游，故山得其名矣。
现代文：因为神巫在这里漫游，所以山也因而得名了。
English: The mountain got its name because witches and wizards used to roam here.

古文：谷口岭上，有巫咸祠。
现代文：谷口岭上，还有巫咸祠。
English: On the Taniguchi Ridge, there is also the Wuxian Shrine.

古文：其水又径安邑故城南，又西流注于盐池。
现代文：盐水又流经安邑老城南，又西流注入盐池。
English: The salt water also flows through the south of the old town of Anyi, and the west stream is injected into the salt pond.

古文：《地理志》曰：盐池在安邑西南。
现代文：《地理志》说：盐池在安邑西南。
English: "Geography" says: Yanchi is in the southwest of Anyi.

古文：许慎谓之盬。
现代文：许慎则称为篮。
English: Xu Sheng is called the basket.

古文：长五十一里，广七里，周百一十六里，从盐省古声。
现代文：池长五十一里，宽七里，周围一百十六里，嗡字偏旁从盐而笔划较简，读作古。
English: The pond is 51 miles long, 7 miles wide, and has a circumference of 116 miles. The characters "嗡" (zhu) and "盐" (salt) are relatively simple, and read as "古" (ancient).

古文：吕忱曰：夙沙初作煮海盐，河东盐池谓之盬。
现代文：吕忱说：夙沙氏开始煮海水，提取食盐，河东盐池称为盆。
English: Lü Zhen said: The Basha clan began to boil seawater to extract salt. The salt pond in Hedong is called a basin.

古文：今池水东西七十里，南北十七里，紫色澄渟，潭而不流。
现代文：现在池水东西七十里，南北十七里，澄清而带紫色，深沉而不流动。
English: Now the water of the pond is seventy miles from east to west and seventeen miles from north to south, clear and purple, deep but not flowing.

古文：水出石盐，自然印成，朝取夕复，终无减损。
现代文：水中出产石盐，全是自然形成，早上取盐，到了晚上又会再结起来，始终不会减少。
English: The rock salt produced in the water is all naturally formed, the salt is taken in the morning, and it will re-solidify in the evening, and it will never decrease.

古文：惟山水暴至，雨澍潢潦奔泆，则盐池用耗。
现代文：但在雨后山洪暴发，积水横流的时候，池里的盐就会被冲尽。
English: However, when a flash flood occurs after a rain, and the accumulated water flows sideways, the salt in the pond will be washed out.

古文：故公私共堨水径，防其淫滥，谓之盐水，亦谓之为堨水。《山海经》谓之盐贩之泽也。
现代文：所以官民协力堵截水路，防止泛滥，于是这条水就叫盐水，也叫竭水了。《山海经》则称为盐贩之泽。
English: Therefore, the public and private sectors worked together to block the waterway to prevent flooding, so this water is called salt water, also called depleted water. "Mountain and Sea Sutra" is called salt dealer's glaze.

古文：泽南面层山，天岩云秀，地谷渊深，左右壁立，间不容轨，谓之石门，路出其中，名之曰径，南通上阳，北暨盐泽。
现代文：盐泽南对层沓的山岭，凌霄的嵘岩在云间映着秀色，地底的山谷险峻幽深，两边石崖陡峻如壁，中间只留一条极狭的空隙，称为石门，道路在其间通过，名为白径，南通上阳，北到盐泽。
English: On the south side of Yanze, there is a rugged mountain range. The towering rock of Yanze reflects beautifully in the clouds. The valley at the bottom of the earth is steep and deep. The cliffs on both sides are as steep as a wall. In the middle, there is only a very narrow gap, called the stone gate. A road passes between them, called the white path. It leads south to Shangyang and north to Yanze.

古文：池西又有一池，谓之女盐泽，东西二十五里，南北二十里，在猗氏故城南。
现代文：池西又有一口池，称为女盐泽，东西二十五里，南北二十里，坐落在琦氏老城南面。
English: On the west side of the pond, there is another pond, known as Mei Yan Ze, twenty-five miles east to west and twenty miles north to south, located in the south of the old city of Jiu.

古文：《春秋》成公六年，晋谋去故绛，大夫曰：郇、瑕，地沃饶近盬。
现代文：《春秋》：成公六年前，晋国准备离开旧绛城，大夫说：旬朽、瑕二处，土地肥沃，又与盐池邻近。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Six years ago, when Jin Guo was preparing to leave the old Lucheng, the doctor said: "It is decayed, there are two defects, the land is fertile, and it is close to the salt pond."

古文：服虔曰：土平有溉曰沃，盬，盐池也。
现代文：服虔说：土地平整有水可以灌溉叫沃。盛就是盐池。
English: Zhu Qian said: The land is flat and has water that can be irrigated is called Wao. Sheng is the salt pond.

古文：土俗裂水沃麻，分灌川野，畦水耗竭，土自成盐，即所谓咸鹾也，而味苦，号曰盐田，盐盬之名，始资是矣。
现代文：当地风俗各家分引池水灌溉原野，来浇田地中的大麻；田间的水干了，泥土中就结出盐来，这就是所谓咸磋，带有苦味。这种田叫盐田。池以盐篮为名就是由此开始的。
English: Local custom is that each family draws water from the pond to irrigate the fields, and then they water the hemp in the fields; when the water in the fields dries, salt is formed in the soil, which is known as hamlet, and has a bitter taste. This type of field is called a salt field. This is how the pond with the name "salt basket" began.

古文：本司盐都尉治，领兵千余人守之。
现代文：盐池原属司盐都尉管理，他带领了一千余兵士守在这里。
English: Shiochi was originally managed by Captain Shioto, who led more than a thousand soldiers here.

古文：周穆王、汉章帝并幸安邑而观盐池。
现代文：周穆王、汉章帝都到过安邑，参观过盐池。
English: King Zhou Mu and Emperor Han Zhang have both been to Anyi and visited the salt ponds.

古文：故杜预曰：猗氏有盐池。
现代文：所以杜预说：琦氏有盐池。
English: That's why Du Yu said, "There is a salt pond in the Min clan."

古文：后罢尉司，分猗氏、安邑，置县以守之。
现代文：后来裁撤了司盐都尉，分为琦氏、安邑二县，设县来防守。
English: Later, the Siyan captaincy was abolished, and it was divided into two counties, namely, Shizhi and Anyi, and a county was set up for defense.

古文：又南过解县东，又西南注于张阳池。
现代文：又往南流过解县东，又往西南注人张阳池。
English: It also flows southward through the east of Jie County, and flows southwest into Zhangyang Pond.

古文：涑水又西径猗氏县故城北。
现代文：涑水又往西流经椅氏县老城北面。
English: Surabaya water also flows westward through the northern part of the old city of Jingshi County.

古文：《春秋》文公七年，晋败秦于令狐，至于刳首，先蔑奔秦，士会从之。
现代文：《春秋》：文公七年前，晋国在令狐打败秦国，直打到剖首，先蔑逃往秦国，士会也跟着他走。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Seven years ago, Wengong, the leader of Jin, defeated Qin with the help of the fox, and fled to Qin. The Shikai also followed him.

古文：阚駰曰：令狐即猗氏也。
现代文：阐胭说：令狐就是猜氏。
English: Elucidate said: Linghu is the leader of the Chai clan.

古文：刳首在西三十里，县南对泽，即猗顿之故居也。
现代文：夸首在琦氏以西三十里。县城朝南，面对沼泽，这里就是椅顿的故居。
English: It is located 30 miles west of Kaji. Facing south from the county seat and facing the swamp, this is the former residence of Shiodon.

古文：《孔丛》曰：猗顿，鲁之穷士也，耕则常饥，桑则常寒，闻朱公富，往而问术焉。
现代文：《孔丛》说：椅顿是鲁国的穷书生，他耕田但却常常饥饿，他种桑养蚕，但却常常挨冻。
English: "Confucius" said: "Chairton was a poor student in Lu. He cultivated fields but was often hungry. He planted mulberry trees and raised silkworms, but was often chilled.

古文：朱公告之曰：子欲速富，当畜五牸。
现代文：听说朱公很富有，就去向他请教有什么妙法可以致富。朱公告诉他说：你要想富得快，就应当养些母的家畜。
English: Hearing that Zhu Gong was very rich, he went to ask him for advice on how to get rich. Zhu Gong told him: "If you want to get rich quickly, you should raise some mother livestock.

古文：于是乃适西河，大畜牛羊于猗氏之南，十年之间，其息不可计，赀拟王公，驰名天下，以兴富于猗氏，故曰猗顿也。
现代文：于是他就去到西河，在琦氏以南大规模饲养牛羊，十年之中，获利无算，家财可与王公相比，名扬天下。因为他是在琦氏发家致富的，所以叫他琦顿。
English: So he went to the West River and raised cattle and sheep on a large scale south of the Xiong clan. In ten years, there was no profit, and the family's wealth could be compared to that of the prince. He was famous all over the world. Because he made his fortune with the Xiong clan, he was told to shut up.

古文：涑水又西径郇城，《诗》云郇伯劳之，盖其故国也。
现代文：涑水又往西流经邮城。《诗经》说：旬卜伯给他们慰劳。
English: Surabaya's water also flows westward through the postal city. "The Book of Songs" says: Shun Bu Bo gave them consolation.

古文：杜元凯《春秋释地》云：今解县西北有郇城。
现代文：这就是娜伯的故都。杜元凯《春秋释地》说：现在解县西北有娜城。
English: This is the former capital of Nabe. Du Yuankai, "Spring and Autumn Liberation," said: Now there is a Nabe city in the northwest of the county.

古文：服虔曰：郇国在解县东，郇瑕氏之墟也。
现代文：服虔说询肠国在解县东，是娜瑕氏的废址。
English: It is the waste site of the Nago clan, which is located in the east of the county.

古文：京相璠《春秋土地名》曰：桑泉、臼衰并在解东南，不言解，明不至解。可知《春秋》之文，与《竹书》不殊。
现代文：我按《竹书纪年》说：晋惠公十四年前，秦穆公领兵送公子重耳，包围了令狐，桑泉、臼衰都向秦军投降了。狐毛和先较抵抗秦军，来到庐柳，要求秦穆公派公子紫来与晋军谈判，于是晋军撤退，驻于邮，并订立盟约。京相潘《春秋土地记》说：桑泉、臼衰都在解县东南，没有提到解，可见军队没有到解。
English: According to "The Annals of the Bamboo Annals," I said: "Fourteen years ago, Jin Huigong, led by Qin Mu, sent his soldiers to surround Linghu, and both Mulberry Spring and Usui surrendered to the Qin army. Fox Hair and the first to resist the Qin army, came to Xiliu, asked Qin Mu to send his son Zi to negotiate with the Jin army, so the Jin army withdrew, stationed in the post, and signed a covenant. Beijing Sangpan "Spring and Autumn Land Record" said: Mulberry Spring and Usui are both in the southeast of the county, and there is no mention of a settlement. It can be seen that

古文：今解故城东北二十四里有故城，在猗氏故城西北，乡俗名之为郇城，考服虔之说，又与俗符，贤于杜氏单文孤证矣。
现代文：《春秋》的记载与《竹书纪年》无异，而现今解县旧城东北二十四里又有一座旧城，在琦氏旧城的西北面，乡里间俗名叫娜城。推究服虔的说法，又与民间所说相符，那末此说比杜氏文中独家之说要可靠得多了。
English: The record of "Spring and Autumn" is the same as that of "The Bamboo Annals," and now there is another old city 24 miles northeast of the old city of Jinshe County. In the northwest of the old city of the Xiong family, it is commonly known as Na city in the countryside. In terms of religious belief, it is consistent with what people say, so this is much more reliable than the exclusive saying in Du's text.

古文：涑水又西南径解县故城南。
现代文：涑水又往西南流经解县老城南面。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southwest, flowing south of the old city of Jingye County.

古文：《春秋》，晋惠公因秦返国，许秦以河外五城，内及解梁，即斯城也。
现代文：《春秋》：晋惠公仗着秦国帮助回到本国，于是答应割让河水外的五座城池，直到河水以内的解梁城。说的就是此城。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Jin Huigong took advantage of Qin's help to return to his home country, so he agreed to cede five cities outside the river, up to the city of Jie Liang within the river. This is the city.

古文：涑水又西南径瑕城，晋大夫詹嘉之故邑也。
现代文：涑水又往西南流经瑕城，这是从前晋大夫詹嘉的食邑。
English: Surabaya water also flows southwest through Kecheng, which was the former food town of Jin doctor Zhan Jia.

古文：《春秋》僖公三十年，秦、晋围郑，郑伯使烛之武谓秦穆公曰：晋许君焦瑕，朝济而夕设版者也。
现代文：《春秋》：嘻公三十年前，秦、晋包围了郑，郑伯派遣烛之武对秦穆公说：晋国答应把焦瑕二城给您，早上刚渡河回国，晚上就在这里筑城防你了。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Hip Gong Thirty years ago, Qin and Jin besieged Zheng, Zheng Bo dispatched the Candle Warrior to Qin Mu Gong and said: Jin promised to give you the two cities of Joke, just crossed the river in the morning and returned to the country, and in the evening built a city defense here.

古文：京相璠曰：今河东解县西南五里有故瑕城。
现代文：京相播说：现在河东解县西南有座旧瑕城。
English: Beijing's official broadcaster said: "There is now an old ruined city in the southwest of Lixian County, Hedong.

古文：涑水又西南径张阳城东。
现代文：涑水又往西南流经张阳城东边。
English: Surabaya water also flows southwest through the eastern side of Zhangyang City.

古文：《竹书纪年》，齐师逐郑太子齿，奔张城南郑者也。
现代文：《竹书纪年》：齐军追赶郑国太子齿，太子逃奔到张城南郑。
English: "The Bamboo Annals": The Qi army chased the Zheng prince, and the prince fled to Zhangcheng South Zheng.

古文：《汉书》之所谓东张矣。
现代文：张城就是《汉书》中所说的东张。
English: Zhangcheng is the East Zhang mentioned in the "Chinese Book."

古文：高祖二年，曹参假左丞相，别与韩信东攻，魏将孙遬军东张，大破之。
现代文：汉高祖二年前，曹参代理左垂相，分兵与韩信向东进攻，当时魏将孙邀驻军于东张，被打得大败。
English: Two years before the founding of the Han Dynasty, Cao San, acting as the left-lowering emperor, led a detachment of soldiers and Han Xin to attack eastward. At that time, Wei invited Sun to garrison troops in East Zhang and was defeated.

古文：苏林曰：属河东，即斯城也。
现代文：苏林说：东张属河东，说的就是此城。
English: Su Lin said: Dongzhang belongs to the east of the river, and it is this city that is referred to.

古文：涑水又西南属于陂，陂分为二，城南面两陂，左右泽渚。
现代文：涑水又往西南与破塘相通。破塘分成两个部分，城朝南面对两个破塘，左右两边都是沼泽。
English: Surabaya is connected to Hatang to the southwest. Hatang is divided into two parts, and the city faces two ponds to the south, with swamps on both sides.

古文：东陂世谓之晋兴泽，东西二十五里，南北八里，南对盐道山。
现代文：东边的破塘人们称为晋兴泽，东西长二十五里，南北八里，南朝盐道山。
English: The broken pond on the east is known as Jinxingze, with a length of 25 miles from east to west, 8 miles from north to south, and the Southern Dynasty Salt Road Mountain.

古文：其西则石壁千寻，东则磻溪万仞，方岭云回，奇峰霞举，孤标秀出，罩络群山之表，翠柏荫峰，清泉灌顶。
现代文：西边是极高的石壁，东边是极深的播溪，方岭挡住浮云，奇峰高接彩霞，峰峦以独特的风姿高高耸起，超越周围群山之上。峰岭上翠柏成荫，清泉从顶上飞泻而下。
English: The west side is a very high stone wall, the east side is a very deep stream, the square ridge blocks floating clouds, the strange peak is connected to the colorful haze, and the peak rises high with a unique style, surpassing the surrounding mountains. The top of the peak is shaded by cedar and cypress, and the clear spring flows down from the top.

古文：郭景纯云：世所谓鸯浆也。发于上而潜于下矣。
现代文：郭景纯说：这山泉就是世人所谓鸯浆，泉水发源于山上，从地下潜流到山下。
English: Guo Jingshun said, "This mountain spring is the world's so-called molasses. The spring water originates from the mountain and flows from the underground to the mountain.

古文：厥顶方平，有良药。《神农本草》曰：地有固活、女疏、铜芸、紫菀之族也。
现代文：山顶方而且平，长着各种优质的药草 《神农本草》说：那地方有固活、女疏、铜芸、紫苑之类。
English: The top of the mountain is square and flat, with all kinds of high-quality medicinal herbs growing on it. "Shennong Ben Cao" said: There are such places as Guo Huo, Jingsao, Tongye, and Xiyuan.

古文：是以缁服思元之士，鹿裘念一之夫，代往游焉。
现代文：所以僧人道士，苦修隐逸的人去那里游览的往来不绝。
English: Therefore, monks and nuns, as well as those who practice asceticism and seclusion, visit there incessantly.

古文：路出北，势多悬绝，来去者咸援萝腾崟，寻葛降深，于东则连木，乃陟百梯方降岩侧，縻锁之迹，仍今存焉，故亦曰百梯山也。
现代文：山路从北边高峰上通出，萦纤回绕于悬崖绝壁之间，往来行人都要攀援着藤萝和葛蔓才能登峰或下谷。东边险处，用木材连接起来架设天梯栈道，人们上下要爬过上百道的梯桥。
English: The mountain road leads from the peak on the north side, and the cable car goes around the cliff between the cliffs, and pedestrians have to climb with the help of the vine and the vine to climb to the peak or the valley. At the eastern danger point, the sky ladder is connected with wood, and people have to climb up and down over hundreds of bridges.

古文：水自山北流五里而伏，云潜通泽渚，所未详也。
现代文：今天山上岩边还留着当时为固定这些梯桥而斧凿过的痕迹，因此又称为百梯山。水从山间北流了五里后，潜入地下，据说与沼泽有暗流相通，不知是否如此。
English: Today, there are still traces of the axes that were used to fix the bridges on the rocky edge of the mountain, which is why it is also known as the Hundred Ladder Mountain. After the water flows five miles north from the mountains, it sinks into the ground. It is said that there is an undercurrent connected to the swamp, but I don't know if this is true.

古文：西陂即张泽也，西北去蒲坂十五里，东西二十里，南北四五里，冬夏积水，亦时有盈耗也。
现代文：西边的破塘就是张泽，西北与蒲坂相距十五里。破塘东西长二十里，南北宽约四五里，冬夏都有积水，不过也时常有满有浅，有涨有落。
English: The broken pond on the west is Zhangze, and the distance between the northwest and Busan is fifteen miles. The broken pond is twenty miles long from east to west, and about forty-five miles wide from north to south. There is standing water in winter and summer, but it is often full and shallow, with ups and downs.

古文：文水出大陵县西山文谷，东到其县，屈南到干陶县东北，东入于汾。
现代文：文水发源于大陵县西山文谷，往东流到县城，转向南边，流到平陶县东北，往东注人汾水。
English: The Wenshui originates from the Wenshu Valley in the West Mountain of Daling County, flows eastward to the county seat, turns southward, flows to the northeast of Pingtao County, and discharges into the east.

古文：文水径大陵县故城西而南流，有泌水注之。
现代文：文水经过大陵县老城西边往南流，有泌水注入。
English: The Wen Shui flows southward through the west side of the old city of Daling County and is infused with seepage.

古文：县西南山下，武氏穿井给养，井至幽深，后一朝水溢平地，东南注文水。
现代文：大陵县西南山下，有一家姓武的人家凿井汲水，井凿得极深，后来有一天忽然井中冒出一道泉水，在平地流溢成河，往东南注入文水。
English: At the foot of a mountain southwest of Daling County, a family surnamed Wu dug a well to draw water. The well was very deep, and then one day a spring suddenly emerged from the well. The stream overflowed into a river on the plain, and the water was injected to the southeast.

古文：文水又南径平陶县之故城东，西径其城内，南流出郭，王莽更曰多穰也。
现代文：文水又往南流经平陶县老城东面，转向西边流过城内，然后南流出城。王莽改名为多攘。
English: The Wen Shui also flowed southward through the east of the old city of Pingtao County, turned west and flowed through the city, and then flowed south out of the city. Wang Mang changed its name to Dojo.

古文：文水又南径县，右会隐泉口，水出谒泉山之上顶，俗云：旸雨愆时，是谒是祷。故山得其名，非所详也。
现代文：文水又往南流经县城右边，在隐泉口汇合了一条水，这条水发源于渴泉山顶上，民间相传，无论久晴久雨，人们都要上山朝拜祈祷，山也因而得名，不知是否如此。
English: The Wen Shui also flows south through the right side of the county seat. At the entrance of the hidden spring, a stream of water comes together. This water originates from the top of the thirsty spring mountain. According to folk legend, no matter how long it has been sunny or rainy, people have to go up the mountain to worship and pray. The mountain also got its name from this, I don't know if this is true.

古文：其山石崖绝险，壁立天固，崖半有一石室，去地可五十余丈，爱有层松饰岩，列柏绮望，惟西侧一处得历级升陟，顶上平地十许顷，沙门释僧光表建二刹。
现代文：山上石崖极其险峻，陡如墙壁，上接青天，半腰有一个石洞，离地约五十余丈，岩上层层点缀着苍松，洞外生长着成行的翠柏。只在西边一处可以沿着石级上登，顶上有一片平地，面积约十来顷，有个名叫光的僧人建造了两座寺院。
English: The rocky cliff on the mountain is extremely steep, steep as a wall, with a blue sky above. There is a stone cave halfway up, about fifty meters above the ground. The upper layers of the rock are dotted with pines, and outside the cave there are rows of cedar trees. There is only one place in the west where you can climb up the stone steps. At the top there is a flat area of about ten hectares. A monk named Light built two temples.

古文：泉发于两寺之间，东流沥石，沿注山下，又东，津渠隐没而不恒流，故有隐泉之名矣。
现代文：一道泉水在二寺间流出，在岩石上往东流泻到山下，又东流，水道隐没而不长流，所以有隐泉之称。
English: A spring water flows out between the two temples, flows eastward on the rock to the bottom of the mountain, and flows eastward, the waterway is hidden and does not flow for long, so it is known as a hidden spring.

古文：雨泽丰谢，则通入文水。
现代文：每逢雨水丰沛的季节，水流就通入文水。
English: Every rainy season, water flows into the Wen Shui.

古文：文水又南径兹氏县故城东，为文湖，东西十五里，南北三十里，世谓之西湖，在县直东十里；湖之西侧，临湖又有一城，谓之潴城。
现代文：文水又往南流经兹氏县老城东，就到文湖。文湖东西十五里，南北三十里，世人称为西湖，在县城正东十里。湖的西边临湖又有一座城池，称为储城。
English: Wen Shui also flows southwards through the old city of Zishi County to the east, reaching Wenhu. Wenhu is fifteen miles east-west, thirty miles north-south, known to the world as the West Lake, and is ten miles east of the county seat. On the west side of the lake, there is another city pond, known as the storage city.

古文：水泽所聚谓之都，亦曰潴，盖即水以名城也。
现代文：水流汇聚成泽叫都，也叫储，储城就是以水命名的。
English: The confluence of water streams in Narisawa is called the capital, also known as the storage city. The storage city is named after water.

古文：文湖又东径中阳县故城东。
现代文：文湖又东经中阳县老城以东。
English: Wenhu is also east of the old town of Zhongyang County.

古文：案《晋书地道记》、《太康地记》，西河有中阳城，旧县也。
现代文：按《晋书•地道记》、《太康地记》，西河有中阳城，是个旧县城。
English: According to "Jinshu•Jindo-roku" and "Taikangji," there is Zhongyang City in the West River, which is an old county seat.

古文：文水又东南流，与胜水合，水西出狐岐之山，东径六壁城南，魏朝旧置六壁于其下，防离石诸胡，因为大镇。
现代文：文水又往东南流，与胜水汇合。胜水发源于西边的狐岐之山，往东流经六壁城南面。从前魏朝曾在城下造了六道壁垒，以防离石的各族胡人，因而成为大镇。
English: Wen Shui also flows to the southeast and merges with Sheng Shui. Sheng Shui originates from the Fox Mountain in the west and flows eastward to the south of the Six-Walled City. In the past, the Wei Dynasty built six barriers under the city to prevent Hu people of all ethnic groups from leaving the stone, thus becoming a large town.

古文：太和中罢镇，仍置西河郡焉。
现代文：太和年间撤去镇的建制，仍设西河郡。
English: When the town was dismantled during the Taiwa era, Saikawa County was still established.

古文：胜水又东合阳泉水，水出西山阳溪，东径六壁城北，又东南流注于胜水。
现代文：胜水又东流，与阳泉水汇合。阳泉水发源于西山的阳溪，往东流经六壁城以北，又往东南流，注入胜水。
English: The Yangquan water originates from the Yangxi River in the West Mountain, flows eastward to the north of the Six-Walled City, and flows southeastward to infuse the water into the Shengshui River.

古文：胜水又东径中阳故城南，又东合文水。
现代文：胜水又往东流经中阳旧城南，又东流与文水汇合。
English: The Shengshui also flows eastward through Zhongyang and the old south of the city, and the eastward flow merges with the Wenshui.

古文：文水又东南，入于汾水也。
现代文：文水又往东南流，注入汾水。
English: The Wen Shui also flows to the southeast, injecting salty water.

古文：原公水出兹氏县西羊头山，东过其县北，县，故秦置也，汉高帝更封沂阳侯婴为侯国，王莽之兹同也。
现代文：原公水发源于兹氏县西面的羊头山，往东流过县城北边，兹氏县原是秦时设置，汉高帝把这里改封给沂阳佚夏侯婴，立为侯国；王莽时叫兹同。
English: The original public water originated from Sheep's Head Mountain in the west of Zishi County and flowed eastward to the north of the county seat. Zishi County was originally set up in the Qin Dynasty, and Emperor Han Gao changed the name of the county to Fenyang Qixia Houying and established it as a princely state. Wang Mangshi called it Zidong.

古文：魏黄初二年，分太原，复置西河郡。
现代文：魏黄初二年，从太原划地重新设置西河郡。
English: In the second year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Xihe County was re-established from Taiyuan.

古文：晋徙封陈王斌于西河，故县有西河缪王司马子政庙。
现代文：晋时把陈王司马斌迁封于西河。旧县城有西河缪王司马子政庙。
English: At the time of the Jin Dynasty, Chen Wang Simabin was moved to the West River. The old county seat has the West River Miao Wang Simazhong Temple.

古文：碑文云：西河旧处山林，汉末扰攘，百姓失所。
现代文：碑文说：西河过去地处山林之中，汉朝末年天下大乱，百姓流离失所。
English: The inscription says: "In the past, the West River was in the middle of the mountains and forests. At the end of the Han Dynasty, the country was in turmoil, and the people were displaced.

古文：魏兴，更开疆宇，分割太原四县，以为邦邑，其郡带山侧塞矣。
现代文：魏朝兴起后，重新划分疆界，把太原郡分为四县，作为封国都城，郡的领域就一边靠山一边邻接边塞了。
English: After the rise of the Wei Dynasty, the borders were redrawn and Taiyuan County was divided into four counties. As the national capital, the county's territory was adjacent to the mountains.

古文：王以咸宁三年，改命爵上，明年十二月丧国。
现代文：陈王于咸宁三年更改封爵与封地，次年十二月死于封国内。
English: Chen Wang changed his title and fief in Xianning for three years, and died in December of the following year.

古文：臣大农阎崇、离石令宗群等二百三十四人，刊石立碑，以述勋德。
现代文：他的臣属太农阎崇、离石县令宗群等二百三十四人，刻石立碑，叙述他的功勋和恩德。
English: Two hundred and thirty-four of his vassals, including Tai Nong Yan Chong and Li Shixian Ling Zong Qun, carved a stone monument to describe his merits and kindness.

古文：碑北庙基尚存也。
现代文：此碑北面的祠庙废址如今还在。
English: The temple ruins to the north of this monument are still standing today.

古文：又东入于汾。
现代文：又往东流注人汾水。
English: It also flows to the east, where it is used for irrigation.

古文：水注文湖，不至汾也。
现代文：原公水注入文湖，并不流到汾水。
English: The original public water was injected into Lake Wen, but it did not flow to Surabaya.

古文：洞过水出沾县北山，其水西流，与南溪水合，水出南山，西北流注洞过水，洞过水又西北，黑水西出山，三源合舍，同归一川，东流南屈，径受阳县故城东。
现代文：洞过水发源于沾县北山，洞过水西流，与南溪水汇合。南溪水发源于南山，往西北流，注入洞过水。洞过水又往西北流，黑水西流出山，三个源头相汇合，归并为一条溪流，先往东流，然后折向南边，流经受阳县老城东面。
English: The water flowing through the cave originates from Beishan in Jian County. The western stream of the water flowing through the cave flows west and merges with the water of Nanxi Stream. The water of Nanxi Stream originates from Nanshan, flows northwest, and is injected into the water flowing through the cave. The water flowing through the cave flows northwest, and the black water flows out of the mountain to the west. The three sources converge and merge into one stream, first flowing east, then turning south, and flowing through the east of the old city of Youyang County.

古文：案《晋太康地记》，乐平郡有受阳县，卢谌《征艰赋》所谓历受阳而总辔者也。
现代文：按《晋太康地记》，乐平郡有受阳县，卢湛《征艰赋》说：经过受阳时系马小憩。
English: According to the "Jin Tai Kang Di Ji," Leping County has the largest number of horses in Zhuoyang County. Lu Zhan said in "Seeking Hardship": "When passing through Zhuoyang, horses take a short rest.

古文：其水又西南入洞过水。
现代文：水又往西南流，注入洞过水。
English: The water then flows to the southwest, filling the hole with water.

古文：洞过水又西，蒲水南出蒲谷，北流注之。
现代文：洞过水又西流，有蒲水发源于南边的蒲谷，北流注入。
English: Water flows through the cave and flows westward. Some water originates from the south side of the valley and is injected by the north stream.

古文：洞过水又西与原过水合，近北便水源也。
现代文：洞过水又西流，与原过水汇合，这条水的源头就在北边近处。
English: The source of this water is near the north side.

古文：水西阜上有原过祠，盖怀道协灵，受书天使，忧结宿情，传芳后日，栋宇虽沦，攒木犹茂，故水取名焉。
现代文：水西山上，有原过祠，原过怀仁义之道，协助神灵，接受天使所授的竹书，他为主上而忧思，忠忱流芳于后世；祠庙屋宇虽已废毁，但树丛还长得很茂盛，所以水也以原过取名了。
English: On the mountain west of the water, there used to be an ancestral shrine, which used to cherish the path of benevolence and righteousness, help the gods, and accept the bamboo scroll given by the angel. He was worried about the Lord, and faithfully passed it on to future generations. Although the ancestral temple building has been destroyed, the bushes are still growing very luxuriantly, so the water is also named after the original.

古文：其水南流，注于洞过水也。
现代文：水往南流，注人洞过水。
English: The water flows south, and the manhole is flooded.

古文：西过榆次县南，又西到晋阳县南，榆次县，故涂水乡，晋大夫智徐吾之邑也。
现代文：往西流过榆次县南边，又往西流到晋阳县南边，榆次县就是旧时的涂水乡，原是晋大夫智徐吾的食邑。
English: It flows westward through the south of Ganzi County, and then westward to the south of Jinyang County. Ganzi County is the old Tuishu Township, which was originally the food village of Jin doctor Zhixu.

古文：《春秋》昭公八年，晋侯筑箎祁之宫，有石言晋之魏榆。
现代文：《春秋》：昭公八年前，晋侯建了旎祁之宫，在晋国魏榆地方有一块石头竟说起话来。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Eight years before King Zhaogong, the prince of Jin built the Palace of the Dragonfly. In the Wei Wei region of Jin, a stone actually began to speak.

古文：服虔曰：魏，晋邑：榆，州里名也。
现代文：服虔说：魏是晋国的城；榆是乡里名。
English: Zhu Qian said: Wei is the city of Jin; Zou is the name of the township.

古文：《汉书》曰榆次，《十三州志》以为涂阳县矣。王莽之太原亭也。
现代文：《汉书》称为榆次；《十三州志》说是涂阳县；王莽则叫太原亭。
English: "Hanshu" is called 次; "The History of the Thirteen States" is said to be Tuyang County; Wang Mang is called Taiyuan Pavilion.

古文：县南侧水有凿台，韩、魏杀智伯瑶于其下，刳腹绝肠，折颈招颐处也。
现代文：县城南面水边有凿台、韩、魏就在台下杀了智伯瑶，把他剖腹断肠砍头，还砸烂他的下巴。
English: In the south of the county seat, there was a scaffold on the water's edge, and Han and Wei killed Zhi Bo Yao under the scaffold, cut open his abdomen, severed his intestines, beheaded him, and smashed his jaw.

古文：其水又西南流，径武灌城西北。
现代文：水又往西南流经武灌城西北面。
English: The water then flows south-west through the north-west of Wukan.

古文：卢谌《征艰赋》曰：径武馆之故郛，问厥途之远近。
现代文：卢湛的《征艰赋》说：经过武馆的旧城，询问路途的远近。
English: Lu Zhan's "Seeking Hardship" said: Passing through the old city of the Martial Arts Museum, inquire about the distance.

古文：洞过水又西南为淳湖，谓之洞过泽。
现代文：洞过水又往西南流，就到淳湖，称为洞过泽。
English: The water flows through the cave and flows to the southwest, reaching Lake Chun, known as the cave lake.

古文：泽南，途水注之，水出阳邑东北大嵰山涂谷，西南径萝蘑亭南，与蒋谷水合，水出县东南蒋溪。
现代文：涂水在泽南注入。涂水发源于阳邑东北大嫌山的涂谷，往西南流经萝蘑亭南面，与蒋谷水汇合。蒋谷水发源于县城东南的蒋溪。
English: Coated water is injected into the south of Zhejiang Province. Coated water originates from the Coated Valley of Dashan Mountain in the northeast of Yangyi, flows southwest through the south of Luo Muxing, and merges with Jianggu water. Jianggu water originates from Jiangxi in the southeast of the county seat.

古文：《魏土地记》曰：晋阳城东南百一十里至山有蒋谷大道，度轩车岭，通于武乡。
现代文：《魏土地记》说：晋阳城东南一百一十里有蒋谷大道通到山里，翻过轩车岭，通向武乡。
English: "Wei Zhi Ji" said: There is a Jianggu avenue in the southeast of Jinyang City that leads to the mountains, over the Xuanche Ridge, and leads to Wuxiang.

古文：水自蒋溪西北流，西径箕城北。
现代文：水从蒋溪往西北流，往西流经箕城北面。
English: The water flows from Jiangxi to the northwest and flows westward to the north of Lucheng.

古文：《春秋》僖公三十三年，晋人败狄于箕。
现代文：《春秋》：嘻公三十三年前，晋人在箕打败了狄人。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Thirty-three years ago, Jin people defeated Di people.

古文：杜预《释地》曰：城在阳邑南，水北即阳邑县故城也。
现代文：杜预《释地》说：箕城在阳邑南，北岸就是阳邑县老城。
English: Du Yuan of "Interpretation" said: "Fengcheng is in the south of Yangyi, and the north bank is the old town of Yangyi County.

古文：《竹书纪年》曰：梁惠成王九年，与邯郸、榆次、阳邑者也。
现代文：《竹书纪年》说：梁惠成王九年前，把榆次和阳邑给予赵国。
English: The "Chronicle of the Bamboo Cutter" says: Nine years ago, King Liang Huicheng gave Zhaozhou and Yangyun to Zhao.

古文：王莽之繁穰矣。
现代文：阳邑就是王莽的繁攘。
English: Yang'eup is a bustling place.

古文：蒋溪又西合涂水，乱流西北入洞过泽也。
现代文：蒋溪又西流，与涂水汇合，往西匕乱流注入洞过泽。
English: Jiangxi also flows westward, merging with Tuishui, and the turbulent flow to the west is injected into the cave.

古文：西入于汾，出晋水下口者也。
现代文：西流注人汾水，从晋水下口流出去。
English: The West Stream pours water into the human body and flows out from the lower mouth of the Jin River.

古文：刘琨之为并州也，刘曜引兵邀击之，合战于洞过，即是水也。
现代文：刘棍当并州太守时，刘暇领兵去攻打他，会战于洞过，就是此水。
English: When Liu Jian was the governor of Jianzhou, Liu Bai led the soldiers to attack him, and the battle was fought in the cave, which is this water.

古文：晋水出晋阳县西悬瓮山，县，故唐国也。
现代文：晋水发源于晋阳县西边的悬瓮山，晋阳县就是旧时的唐国。
English: Jinshui originated from the Hanging Mountains on the west side of Jinyang County. Jinyang County was the old Tang Dynasty.

古文：《春秋左传》称唐叔未生，其母邑姜梦帝谓己曰：余名而子曰虞，将与之唐，属之参。
现代文：《春秋左传》说：唐叔还没有出生时，他母亲邑姜梦见天帝对她说：我把你的儿子取名为虞，将把唐交给他，那地方属于参星的分野。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn" says: When Uncle Tang was not yet born, his mother, Ou Jiang, dreamed that the Heavenly Emperor said to her: "I have named your son Yu, and will give him Tang. That place belongs to the realm of the stars.

古文：及生，名之曰虞。
现代文：降生以后，就把他取名为虞。
English: After he was born, he was named Yu.

古文：《吕氏春秋》曰：叔虞与成王居，王援桐叶为圭，以授之曰：吾以此封汝。
现代文：《吕氏春秋》说：叔虞和成王住在一起，成王拿桐叶作硅，交给他说：我用这东西来封你。
English: "Lu's Spring and Autumn" said: Shugu lived with Cheng Wang. Cheng Wang took tung leaf to make silicon and gave it to him, saying, "I will use this to seal you."

古文：虞以告周公，周公请曰：天子封虞乎？
现代文：虞告诉了周公，周公问道：天子封了虞吗？
English: Yu told Zhou Gong, and Zhou Gong asked: Did Heaven seal Yu?

古文：王曰：余戏耳。
现代文：成王说：我是闹着玩呢。
English: Cheng Wang said: I'm just having fun.

古文：公曰：天子无戏言。
现代文：周公说：天子说话是不能闹着玩的！
English: Zhou Gong said, "God cannot be trifled with when He speaks!"

古文：时唐灭，乃封之于唐。
现代文：当时唐已灭国，于是就把虞封在唐。
English: At that time, the Tang Dynasty had been overthrown, so he sealed the state in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：县有晋水，后改名为晋。
现代文：县里有晋水，后来就改名为晋。
English: The prefecture had Jinshui, which was later renamed Jin.

古文：故子夏叙《诗》称此晋也，而谓之唐，俭而用礼，有尧之遗风也。
现代文：所以子夏给《诗经》作序，说这是晋的地方，但却把它称为唐。谦逊守礼，有尧的遗风。
English: Therefore, Zixia prefaced the "Song of Songs" by saying that this was the place of Jin, but called it Tang. Humble and respectful, there is a lingering style.

古文：《晋书地道记》及《十三州志》并言晋水出龙山，一名结绌山，在县西北，非也。
现代文：《晋书•地道记》和《十三州志》都说晋水发源于龙山，又名结细山，在晋阳县西北，其实不是。
English: Both "Jinshu•Jidokuki" and "The History of the Thirteen Provinces" say that Jinshui originated in Longshan, also known as Jiexiao Mountain, in the northwest of Jinyang County, but in fact it is not.

古文：《山海经》曰：悬瓮之山，晋水出焉，今在县之西南。
现代文：《山海经》说：悬瓮之山，是晋水的发源地，今天在晋阳县西南。
English: "Mountains and Seas Sutra" says: "Mountains of Suspension" is the birthplace of Jinshui, today in the southwest of Jinyang County.

古文：昔智伯之遏晋水以灌晋阳，其川上溯，后人踵其遗迹，蓄以为沼，沼西际山枕水，有唐叔虞祠。
现代文：从前智伯堵截晋水来淹晋阳，后人沿着那条水上溯，就循着遗迹，开渠凿水成为沼泽，沼泽西边依山近水，有唐叔虞祠。
English: In the past, Zhi Bo blocked and cut off the water of Jin to flood Jinyang. Later generations followed the water upstream, followed the remains, and dug a canal to make the water into a swamp. The side of the swamp jersey is close to the water by the side of the mountain, and there is a Tang Shugu Shrine.

古文：水侧有凉堂，结飞梁于水上，左右杂树交荫，希见曦景，至有淫朋密友，羁游宦子，莫不寻梁契集，用相娱慰，于晋川之中，最为胜处。
现代文：水边有凉堂，在水上凌空高架起木桥，两边杂树的繁荫交接在一起，连阳光也看不到。逢有浪荡亲昵的朋友，离乡别井出来求仕的人，都要结伴同游，寻找到桥上来相偕游乐，相互慰藉。在晋水上，这要算是最佳胜之处了。
English: There is a pavilion on the water's edge, a wooden bridge soaring high above the water, and the shade of the trees on both sides is intertwined, so you can't even see the sun. If you have a roving intimate friend, or someone who has left their hometown to seek work, you should travel together and find a bridge to play together and comfort each other. On the Jin River, this is the best place to win.

古文：又东过其县南，又东入于汾水。
现代文：又往东流过县南，又往东流，注人汾水。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern part of the county, and flows eastward again, injecting fresh water.

古文：沼水分为二派，北读即智氏故渠也。
现代文：沼泽的水分成两支，北边的一支就是智氏的旧渠。
English: The water of the swamp is divided into two branches, one on the north side is the old canal of Mr. Zhi.

古文：昔在战国，襄子保晋阳，智氏防山以水之，城不没者三版，与韩、魏望叹于此，故智氏用亡。
现代文：从前在战国时，赵襄子守在晋阳，智氏堵截山水来淹晋阳城，城墙只有两三丈没有淹水。他与韩、魏两国诸侯在这里观望兴叹，智氏因而灭亡。
English: Once upon a time, during the Warring States period, Zhao Xiangzi was in Jinyang, and the Zhi clan blocked the mountains and rivers to flood Jinyang City. The city wall was only two or three stories high and did not flood. He and the princes of Korea and Wei watched and sighed here, and the Zhi clan died as a result.

古文：其渎乘高，东北注入晋阳城，以周灌溉。
现代文：这条渠道乘高而下，往东北注入晋阳城，以供灌溉之用。
English: This channel descends vertically and flows into Jinyang City in the northeast for irrigation.

古文：汉未赤眉之难，郡椽刘茂负太守孙福匿于城门西下空穴中，其夜奔盂。即是处也。
现代文：汉末赤眉之乱时，郡中属吏刘茂背了太守孙福躲藏在城门西边下面的洞穴中，当夜逃往盂县，就是这地方。
English: At the time of the Red-Eyed Peasants' Revolt at the end of the Han Dynasty, Liu Mao, an official of the county, turned his back on the governor, Sun Fu, and hid in a cave below the west side of the city gate. That night, he fled to Jixian County. This is the place.

古文：东南出城流，注于汾水也。
现代文：北渠往东南流出城外，注入汾水。
English: The northern canal flows out of the city to the southeast, injecting brackish water.

古文：其南渎于石塘之下伏流，径旧溪东南出，径晋阳城南，城在晋水之阳，故曰晋阳矣。
现代文：南边一支在石塘下面潜流，经旧溪往东南注出，从晋阳城南边流过。因为城在晋水的北面，所以称为晋阳。
English: On the south side, a subterranean stream flows under the stone pond, flows southeast through the old stream, and flows past the south side of Jinyang City. Because the city is north of Jinyang Water, it is called Jinyang.

古文：《经》书晋苟吴帅师败狄于大卤。杜预曰：大卤，晋阳县也，为晋之旧都。
现代文：《春秋经》载，晋荀吴领兵在大卤打败狄人。杜预说：大卤就是晋阳城，是晋的旧都。
English: According to the "Spring and Autumn Annals," the leader of the Jin Dynasty, Wu, led his army to defeat the Di people at Daguo. Du Yu said: Daguo is Jinyang City, the old capital of Jin.

古文：《春秋》定公十三年，赵鞅以晋阳叛，后乃为赵矣。
现代文：《春秋》：定公十三年前，赵鞍据有晋阳，举兵反叛，以后就成立赵国。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Thirteen years before Ding Gong, Zhao Kuan, who ruled Jinyang, raised an army to rebel, and later founded Zhao State.

古文：其水又东南流入于汾。
现代文：水又往东南流入汾水。
English: The water then flows south-east into Surabaya.

古文：湛水出河内轵县西北山，湛水出轵县南原湛溪，俗谓之堪水也。
现代文：湛水发源于河内郡软县西北的山间，湛水发源于积县南原的湛溪，俗称堪水。
English: The waterlogging originated in the mountains northwest of Ho County, Hanoi County, and the waterlogging originated in the Zhan Creek in Nanyuan, Jie County, commonly known as Kansui.

古文：是盖声形尽邻，故字读俱变，同于三豕之误耳。
现代文：两字读音和字形都很相近，因而写法和读法也慢慢变了，正像把 己亥 误作 三永 一样。
English: The pronunciation and glyph of the two characters are very similar, so the writing and reading have gradually changed, just like mistaking "己亥" for "三永."

古文：其水自溪出南流。
现代文：湛水从溪中流出后，就往南奔去。
English: After the floodwater flows out of the stream, it rushes south.

古文：东过其县北，又东过波县之北，湛水南径向城东而南注。
现代文：往东流过县北，又往东流过波县以北，湛水往南流经向城东面，往南流注。
English: It flows eastward through the north of the county, and then eastward through the north of Bo County. The high water flows southward through the east of the city and flows southward.

古文：又东过毋辟邑南，原《经》所注，斯乃湨川之所由，非湛水之间关也，是乃《经》之误证耳。
现代文：又往东流过毋辟邑南边，推原《水经》所注，这是溪川经过的地方，并非湛水所流的路线，《水经》搞错了。
English: It also flows eastward past the southern edge of the town, which is not the place where the stream passes, as noted by the Suikei. This is not the route of the waterlogged stream. The Suikei has made a mistake.

古文：湛水自向城东南径湛城东。时人谓之椹城，亦或谓之隰城矣。溪曰隰涧。
现代文：湛水从向城往东南流经湛城东面，当时人们称为堪城，也有人叫瞩城；溪则叫瞩涧。
English: At that time, people called it Kancheng, while others called it Zhencheng; the stream was called Zhenyu.

古文：隔城在东，言此非矣。
现代文：限城在东，说这座城是瞩城，这就错了。
English: The city limits are in the east, and it is wrong to say that this city is the city of attention.

古文：《后汉郡国志》曰河阳县有湛城是也。
现代文：《后汉书•郡国志》说：河阳县有湛城，就指此城。
English: "Hou Han Shu • Gu Gu Gu Zhi" said: If there is a Zhancheng in Heyang County, it refers to this city.

古文：又东南当平县之东北，南入于河。
现代文：又往东南流到平县的东北边，南流注人河水。
English: It also flows southeast to the northeast side of Ping County, and the south stream injects the water of the Renren River.

古文：湛水又东南径邓，南流注于河，故河济有邓津之名矣。
现代文：湛水又往东南流经邓县，南流注入河水，所以河上的渡头有邓津这个地名。
English: The floodwaters also flowed southeast through Deng County, and the southern stream injected the river water, so the wading head on the river has the place name Dengjin.

