古文：王次仲墨子刘政孙博天门子玉子茅濛沈羲陈安世
现代文：王次仲墨子刘政孙博天门子玉子茅濛沈羲陈安世
English: Wang Zizhong, Zhongmo, Liu Zheng, Sun Bo, Tianmen, Yu Zi, Mao Yu, Shen Yi, Chen Anshi

古文：王次仲
现代文：王次仲
English: Wang Jizhong

古文：王次仲者，古之神仙也。
现代文：王次仲是古时的神仙。
English: Wang Jizhong is an ancient immortal.

古文：当周末战国之时，合纵连衡之际，居大夏小夏山。
现代文：那时正是周朝末年战国时代，各国正互相纷争征伐，策士们到处游说 合纵连横 策略的时候，王次仲正住在大夏山小夏山中。
English: At that time, it was the end of the Zhou Dynasty in the Warring States period, when countries were fighting against each other, and strategists were lobbying everywhere for strategic alliances. Wang Zizhong was living in the middle of the Greater Xia Mountain and the Lesser Xia Mountain.

古文：以为世之篆文，功多而用寡，难以速就。
现代文：他认为当时通行的篆体字，写起来很费事而用处不广，而且人们很难在短时期内学会使用篆字。
English: He believed that the then-prevalent cursive script was laborious to write and not widely used, and that it was difficult for people to learn to use cursive in a short period of time.

古文：四海多事，笔扎所先。
现代文：现在天下这么纷乱，事情繁杂，文字的普及是很重要的。
English: Now that the world is so chaotic and things are so complicated, the spread of writing is very important.

古文：乃变篆籀之体为隶书。始皇既定天下，以其功利于人，征之入秦，不至。
现代文：王次仲就把篆体、籀体字变化成隶书，秦始皇统一天下之后，认为王次仲改革文字为统一大业立下了功勋，就请他到秦国来作官，但王次仲拒绝了。
English: Wang Jizhong changed the characters of the Chinese characters into the characters of the Chinese characters into the characters of the Chinese characters. After Qin Shihuang unified the country, he thought that Wang Jizhong's reform of the characters was a great achievement for the cause of unification, so he invited him to Qin to serve as an official, but Wang Jizhong refused.

古文：复命使召之，敕使者曰： 吾削平六合，一统天下，孰敢不宾者！
现代文：秦始皇很生气，又派了使者去传诏让王次仲入秦，并对使者说： 我征服了各诸侯国，统一了天下，谁敢不臣服我！
English: Qin Shihuang was very angry, and sent an envoy to preach Wang Cizhong into Qin, and said to the envoy: I have conquered all the principalities and unified the world, who dares not submit to me!

古文：次仲一书生而逆天子之命，若不起，当杀之，持其首来，以正风俗，无肆其悍慢也。 
现代文：王次仲不过是一个书生，竟敢违抗天子的圣命，何等狂妄。这次你去召他，他如果再不来，就杀掉他，提他的头来见我，以正法纪，让他这种人再不敢傲慢抗上！ 
English: Wang Jizhong is nothing more than a scholar, how dare he defy the holy order of the Son of Heaven, how arrogant. This time you go to summon him, if he does not come again, kill him, bring his head to see me, with righteous legal discipline, so that people like him will no longer dare to arrogantly resist!

古文：诏使至山致命，次仲化为大鸟，振翼而飞。
现代文：使者到了山里见到王次仲，宣示了秦始皇的诏命，王次仲立刻变成一只大鸟振翅飞去。
English: When the messenger arrived in the mountains, he saw Wang Zizhong and announced the imperial decree of the First Emperor of Qin. Wang Zizhong immediately turned into a big bird and flew away.

古文：使者惊拜曰： 无以复命，亦恐见杀，惟神人悯之。 
现代文：使者又惊又怕跪在地上不住的磕头哀求说， 您这样作，叫我怎么回去向皇上交差啊，皇上非杀了我不可。请大仙可怜可怜我吧！ 
English: The messenger, terrified and afraid, kneeled on the ground and begged, "How can I go back and appeal to the emperor if you do this? The emperor must kill me. Please have pity on me!"

古文：鸟徘徊空中，故堕三翮，使者得之以进。
现代文：那大鸟在空中盘旋了半天，故意落下三根翎毛，使者只好拿着这三支羽毛回去向秦始皇复命。
English: The big bird hovered in the sky for half a day, deliberately dropping three feathers, and the messenger had to take these three feathers back to the Qin Shi Huang.

古文：始皇素好神仙之道，闻其变化，颇有悔恨。
现代文：秦始皇向来爱好修道求仙的事，听使者说王次仲已经变成了神仙，挺悔恨的。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang had always been fond of the practice of seeking immortality. When he heard the messenger say that Wang Jizhong had become a god, he was very remorseful.

古文：今谓之落翮山，在幽州界，乡里祠之不绝。
现代文：王次仲变大鸟的地方叫 落翮山 ，在现在的河北，老百姓一直在祭祀他。
English: The place where Wang Cizhong turned into a big bird is called Lushan Mountain. In present-day Hebei, the common people have been worshipping him.

古文：墨子
现代文：墨子
English: Mozi is growing

古文：墨子者，名翟，宋人也，仕宋为大夫。
现代文：墨子名叫翟，是战国时代宋国人，任宋国的大夫。
English: Mozi, whose given name was Hao, was a native of the Song Dynasty during the Warring States period and served as a doctor in the Song Dynasty.

古文：外治经典，内修道术，著书十篇，号为墨子。
现代文：他平时编撰著述经学典籍，更勤于道家方术的修炼，曾著了十篇文章，号称《墨子》。
English: He usually compiled books on classics, and was more diligent in the cultivation of Taoist techniques. He once wrote ten articles, known as "Mozi."

古文：世多学者，与儒家分途，务尚俭约，颇毁孔子。
现代文：世上很多人学习他的理论，他的论点和孔、孟的儒家学问分歧很大，他提倡勤俭节约，对孔子的学说提出不少批评。
English: Many people in the world study his theory. His arguments are very different from the Confucianism of Confucius and Mencius. He advocated diligence, thrift and economy, and made many criticisms of Confucius's theory.

古文：有公输般者，为楚造云梯之械以攻宋。
现代文：有一个叫公输般的能工巧匠，为楚国造了攻城用的云梯，帮助楚国攻宋国。
English: There was a skilled craftsman called Gongtao, who built a ladder for Chu to use to attack the city, helping Chu to attack Song.

古文：墨子闻之，往诣楚。脚坏，裂裳裹足，七日七夜到。
现代文：墨子听说后就急忙往楚国赶，路上脚磨破了，就把衣裳撕下来包上脚，七天七夜终于到了楚国。
English: After hearing the news, Mozi hurried to Chu. His feet got worn out on the way, so he tore off his clothes and wrapped them around his feet. After seven days and seven nights, he finally arrived in Chu.

古文：见公输般而说之曰： 子为云梯以攻宋，宋何罪之有？
现代文：墨子见了公输般后劝说道： 你为楚国造了云梯攻打宋国，宋国有什么罪过呢？
English: When Mozi saw Gongpu, he tried to persuade him, saying, "You built a ladder for Chu to attack Song. What is Song guilty of?

古文：余于地而不足于民，杀所不足而争所有余，不可谓智；宋无罪而攻之，不可谓仁；知而不争，不可谓忠；争而不得，不可谓强。 
现代文：楚国土地广阔肥沃，宋国的老百姓却没有足够的土地供他们种庄稼，索取宋国的不足去增加富裕的楚国，这不是明智的做法。
English: The land of Chu is vast and fertile, but the people of Song do not have enough land to grow crops. It is not wise to take advantage of Song's shortage to increase the wealth of Chu.

古文：公输般曰： 吾不可以已，言于王矣。 
现代文：宋国没有罪你却要去攻打它，这是不仁义的作法。
English: Song is not guilty, but you want to attack it. This is an uncharitable act.

古文：墨子见王曰： 于今有人，舍其文轩，邻有一敝舆而欲窃之；舍其锦绣，邻有短褐而欲窃之；舍其梁肉，邻有糟糠而欲窃之，此为何若人也？ 
现代文：你明明知道这种作法不对而不去向楚王劝告和他争辩，这是你对楚王不忠诚。争辩了却没有收效，说明你的态度还不坚定，没有很强的说服力。 公输般说， 攻宋的事已经定了，由不得我，我已经对楚王说过同意他攻宋的话，我没法改口了。 墨子就直接去见楚王，对楚王说： 现在有这么一个人，扔掉自己华丽的马车却要去偷邻居家的一辆破车；放着自己的锦锻袍服不穿，却要去盗取邻居大的一件短衫；放着自己家的鱼肉不吃，却要去偷邻居的粗糠野菜，大王您说这是个什么人呢？ 
English: You clearly know that this approach is wrong, but you do not go to King Chu to advise and argue with him. This is your disloyalty to King Chu. If you argue but do not get results, it means that your attitude is not yet firm and you do not have a strong persuasive power. You say like a loser, the attack on Song has been decided, I can't help it, I have already told King Chu that I agree with his attack on Song, I can't change my mind. Mozi went directly to King Chu and said to King Chu: Now there is such a person, who threw away his gorgeous carriage but is going to steal a broken car from a neighbor's house

古文：王曰： 若然也，必有狂疾。 
现代文：楚王说， 要真有这么个人，我看他一定是个疯子。 
English: Chu Wang said, "If there really is such a person, I think he must be a madman."

古文：翟曰： 楚有云梦之麋鹿，江汉之鱼龟，为天下富，宋无雉兔鲋鱼，犹梁肉与糟糠也。
现代文：墨子说： 楚国有湖北湖南云梦泽盛产的麋鹿，有长江汉水盛产的鱼、龟，是天下最富足的国家。而宋国连山鸡、鲋鱼和野兔都没有，这就像把鱼肉和糠菜相比。
English: Mozi said, "Chu is the richest country in the world for elk, which is abundant in Hubei, Hunan, Yunnan, and Mengze, and for fish and turtles, which are abundant in the Yangtze River and Han River, while Song has no mountain chicken, eel, or hare, which is like comparing fish meat to stew.

古文：楚有杞梓豫章，宋无数丈之木，此犹锦绣之与短褐也。
现代文：楚国盛产杞树、桑树、梓树和豫章树，而宋国连几丈高的树都没有，这就像锦锻袍服和短衫相比一样。
English: Chu has an abundance of eucalyptus, mulberry, azusa and yuanzhang trees, while Song has no trees of any height, which is like comparing a brocade robe with a short shirt.

古文：臣闻大王更议攻宋，有与此同。 
现代文：我听说大王打算攻打宋国，这不和您说的那个疯子一样了吗？ 
English: I heard that the Great King plans to attack Song, isn't that the same as that madman you mentioned?

古文：王曰： 善哉，然公输盘已为云梯，谓必取宋。 
现代文：楚王说： 你说得很好。但是公输般已经为我造好了云梯，他说一定能攻下宋国。 
English: King Chu said, "You said it very well. However, you have already built a ladder for me. He said that he would definitely be able to conquer Song.

古文：于是见公输般。
现代文：于是墨子又要求公输般来见。
English: As a result, Mozi demanded to see him in public.

古文：墨子解带为城，以幞为械，公输般乃设攻城之机。
现代文：墨子解下自己的衣带放在桌上假设是宋国的都城，又摘下头巾假设是宋国守城的士兵和武器，公输般就摆布他攻城的武器和战术。
English: Mozi undid his belt and put it on the table, assuming that it was the capital of the Song Dynasty. He also took off his turban, assuming that it was the soldiers and weapons of the Song Dynasty guarding the city. He wielded his weapons and tactics of attacking the city as if it were a public game.

古文：九变而墨子九拒之，公输之攻城械尽，而墨子之守有余也。
现代文：公输般攻城的战术变化了九次，都被墨子挡回去了。公输般攻城的武器战法都用尽了，而墨子防守的策略还绰绰有余。
English: The tactic of attacking the city like a loser was changed nine times, but all of them were blocked by Mozi. The weapons and tactics of attacking the city like a loser were exhausted, but Mozi's defensive strategy was more than enough.

古文：公输般曰： 吾知所以攻子矣，吾不言。 
现代文：公输般说： 现在我已经知道怎么攻破你了，但是我不说。 
English: He said publicly, "Now I know how to beat you, but I won't tell you."

古文：墨子曰： 吾知子所以攻我，我亦不言。 
现代文：墨子说： 我也知道你将用什么方法攻我，我也不说。 
English: Mozi said, "I also know what method you will use to attack me, and I won't say.

古文：王问其故。墨子曰： 公输之意，不过杀臣，谓宋莫能守耳。
现代文：楚王问是什么方法，墨子说， 公输般的意思是只要杀了我，宋国就守不住了。
English: When King Chu asked what the method was, Mozi said, in a tone of defeatism, "If you just kill me, Song will not be able to defend itself."

古文：然臣之弟子禽滑厘等三百人，早已操臣守御之器，在宋城上而待楚寇矣，虽杀臣，不能绝也。 
现代文：然而他不知道，我的弟子禽滑厘等三百人，早就带着我布置的守城武器和战术在宋国都城上等待楚国的进攻呢。
English: However, he didn't know that 300 of my disciples, including the bird Slippery, were already waiting for Chu's attack on the Song capital with the weapons and tactics I had arranged to defend the city.

古文：楚乃止，不复攻宋。
现代文：就算把我杀了，宋国的防御武器和战术仍然存在，楚国是不可能取胜的！ 
English: Even if you kill me, Song's defensive weapons and tactics still exist, and it is impossible for Chu to win!

古文：墨子年八十有二，乃叹曰： 世事已可知，荣位非常保，将委流俗，以从赤松子游耳。 
现代文：楚王只好改弦易辙，不再攻打宋国。墨子活到八十二岁那一年，自己感叹地说： 世间的事我已经全经历过，也全知道了，一个人的福禄、荣誉和官位不是永远不变的，我已看透了世间的一切，将离开这纷繁杂绕的俗世，去追随能吞云吐雾呼石成羊的神仙赤松子漫游去了！ 
English: King Chu had no choice but to change his course and no longer attack Song. Mozi lived to the age of eighty-two, and he said with regret: I have experienced everything in the world, and I know everything. A person's fortune, honor, and official position are not permanent. I have seen through everything in the world, and I will leave this complicated world to follow the wandering red pine fairy, who can swallow clouds, spit fog, and call stones into sheep!

古文：乃入周狄山，精思道法，想像神仙。
现代文：后来墨子就进了周狄山，专心致志于道术的修炼，一心想得道成仙。
English: Later, Mozi went to Mount Zhoudishan, devoted himself to the cultivation of Taoism, and devoted himself to becoming a Taoist.

古文：于是数闻左右山间，有诵书声者，墨子卧后，又有人来，以衣覆足。
现代文：他经常听到有读书的声音，有一次他睡下以后，有一个人到他跟前来，脱下衣服替他盖上脚。
English: He often heard the sound of reading. Once, after he fell asleep, a man came to him and took off his clothes to cover his feet.

古文：墨子乃伺之，忽见一人，乃起问之曰： 君岂非山岳之灵气乎，将度世之神仙乎？
现代文：墨子就偷偷看，发现身边有一个人，就立刻起来问那人： 您是不是这山岳中的神灵，特意来超度我成仙的呢？
English: Mo Tzu peeked around and found a man nearby, and immediately got up and asked the man: "Are you the deity in the mountains who has come to make me immortal?"

古文：愿且少留，诲以道要。 
现代文：如果是，那就请您等一会儿，对我教诲传授一些修道的诀窍吧！ 
English: If so, then please wait a moment and teach me some of the techniques of the practice.

古文：神人曰： 知子有志好道，故来相候。
现代文：那位神仙说： 我知道你诚心修道，所以特地来见你。
English: The god said, "I know that you are a sincere practitioner, so I came specially to see you.

古文：子欲何求？ 
现代文：你有什么要求呢？ 
English: What do you want?

古文：墨子曰： 愿得长生，与天地相毕耳。 
现代文：墨子说： 我想长生不老，寿命和天地相同。 
English: Mozi said, "I want to live forever, and my life span is the same as that of heaven and earth."

古文：于是神人授以素书，朱英丸方，道灵教戒，五行变化，凡二十五篇，告墨子曰： 子有仙骨，又聪明，得此便成，不复须师。 
现代文：于是那位神仙就授给他写着修道要诀的绢书和用朱草的花药丸配制的秘方，以及道教的法则戒律和阴阳五行变化的经书，一共二十五篇，并对墨子说： 你本来就有仙风道骨，又聪慧通灵，得到我给你的这些东西后就能成仙，不需要再拜师学道了。 
English: So the godly man gave him a twenty-five-volume set of sutras, including a sutra on the essentials of religious practice, a secret recipe made with vermilion flower pills, as well as the rules and precepts of Taoism and the changes of yin and yang, and said to Mozi, "You already have the spirit of a fairy and the wisdom of a psychic. When you obtain these things that I have given you, you will become a fairy, and you will no longer need to learn the Tao from a teacher."

古文：墨子拜受合作，遂得其验，乃撰集其要，以为《五行记》。
现代文：墨子拜谢接受了神仙的授予并按经卷上的要求去作，得到了具体的验证，就根据体会把那二十五篇经卷的要点编撰成书，书名叫 五行记 。
English: Mozi Bai Xie accepted the award of the gods and did according to the requirements of the scriptures. After receiving specific verification, he compiled the main points of the twenty-five scriptures into a book based on his experience. The book is called the Five Elements.

古文：乃得地仙，隐居以避战国。
现代文：墨子修成了地上的神仙，隐居起来避开了战国时代的纷争混乱。
English: Mozi became a divine being on earth, living in seclusion to avoid the strife and chaos of the Warring States period.

古文：视其颜色，常如五十许人。
现代文：汉武帝时，皇帝刘彻派了杨违作使者，带着白玉和锦缎去聘请墨子，墨子坚拒不出山。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwu, Emperor Liu Che sent Yang Rong as an envoy, bringing white jade and brocade to hire Mozi. Mozi refused to leave the mountain.

古文：周游五岳，不止一处。
现代文：使者看墨子的容颜，仍然像五十来岁的人。
English: The messenger looked at Mozi's face and saw that he still looked like a man in his fifties.

古文：刘政
现代文：刘政
English: Liu Zheng

古文：刘政者，沛人也。
现代文：刘政是江苏沛县人，才华横溢，博古通今。
English: Liu Zheng is a talented person from Pei County, Jiangsu Province. He is a well-known figure in Bo Gu.

古文：高才博物，学无不览。以为世之荣贵，乃须臾耳，不如学道，可得长生。
现代文：他认为世上的荣华富贵都如过眼烟云，不如学道，可以得到长生不老。
English: He believes that the world's glory and wealth are like passing clouds, and it is not as good as learning the Tao, which can lead to immortality.

古文：乃绝进趋之路，求养生之术。
现代文：于是他就自己断绝了求官之路，求索研究养生修炼的方术。
English: As a result, he himself cut off the road of seeking a post and sought to study the methods of health maintenance and cultivation.

古文：勤寻异闻，不远千里。
现代文：只要听到奇异的传说，就不远千里去了解。
English: If you hear a strange legend, you won't have to go far to find out about it.

古文：苟有胜己，虽奴客必师事之。
现代文：只要遇到比自己强的人呢，哪怕他是地位低的奴仆门客，也要拜为自己的老师向他们求教。
English: As long as you meet someone who is better than you, even if he is a low-ranking servant, you should worship and seek advice from them as your teacher.

古文：复治墨子五行记，兼服朱英丸，年百八十余岁，色如童子。
现代文：他按照墨子的《五行记》去修身养性，还经常服用灵丹秘方 朱英丸 ，活到一百八十多岁时容貌还像个少年人。
English: He followed Mozi's "Five Elements" to improve his health and fitness, and often took the secret elixir Zhu Ying Maru. He lived to be more than 180 years old and still looked like a young man.

古文：能变化隐形，以一人分作百人，百人作千人，千人作万人。
现代文：他修炼得能变化和隐身，能把自己分成一百个人，再分成千人万人。
English: He has cultivated to be able to change and become invisible, to be able to divide himself into a hundred people, and then into thousands of people.

古文：又能隐三军之众，使成一丛林木，亦能使成鸟兽；试取他人器物，易置其处，人不知觉。
现代文：他还能把千军万马隐蔽起来使他们变成一丛树木，也能把三军变成鸟兽。他可以把别人的东西拿过来或转移到别的地方而毫不被人发现。
English: He can also hide thousands of horses and turn them into a bunch of trees, and can also turn three armies into birds and beasts. He can take other people's things or transfer them to other places without being discovered.

古文：又能种五果，立使华实可食。
现代文：他还能种植各种果树，种子落地后马上就长大开花并结出能吃的果实。
English: He can also plant all kinds of fruit trees, which will grow, bloom and produce edible fruits as soon as the seeds fall to the ground.

古文：坐致行厨，饭膳俱数百人。
现代文：他不动地方就可以做饭炒菜，供几百个人用餐。
English: He can cook and stir-fry food for hundreds of people at the drop of a hat.

古文：又能吹气为风，飞砂扬石。以手指屋宇山陵壶器，便欲颓坏；复指之，即还如故。
现代文：他并能吹气成风，掀起飞砂走石，只要用手一指，被他指到的房屋、器具、山陵就立刻崩塌毁坏。
English: He can also blow wind into the wind, lift up sand and stones, and with just one finger, the houses, utensils, and mountains he points to will immediately collapse and be destroyed.

古文：又能化生美女之形，及作水火。
现代文：再一指被他毁坏的东西又可以立刻复原如初。他能凭空变出来美丽的女子，还能兴起水患和火灾。
English: One more finger and everything he has destroyed can be instantly restored to its original state. He can conjure up a beautiful woman out of thin air, and can also cause floods and fires.

古文：又能一日之中，行数千里。能嘘水兴云，奋手起雾，聚土成山，刺地成渊。
现代文：一天之内他可以奔走几千里，还能用嘴喷水变云，手一挥就生起弥天大雾，把土聚成山岳，把地钻成深潭。
English: He can run several thousand miles in a day, and can also spray water into clouds with his mouth, and create a huge fog with a wave of his hand, gather the soil into mountains, and drill the ground into a deep pool.

古文：能忽老忽少，乍大乍小，入水不沾，步行水上，召江海中鱼鳖蛟龙鼋鼍，即皆登岸。
现代文：他能一会变成老人一会儿变成少年，一会儿身材高大无比一会儿又变得十分矮小。他涉水不湿鞋，能在水面上行走，能云集江河湖海中的龟鳖虾蟹和蛟龙，使它们都上岸聚集。
English: He can turn into an old man one moment, a young man the next, a very tall man the next, and a very short man the next. He can wade through water without wet shoes, can walk on the surface of the water, and can gather the turtles, shrimps, crabs and dragonflies in the rivers, lakes and seas, and make them all come ashore.

古文：又口吐五色之气，方广十里，直上连天，又能跃上。下去地数百丈。
现代文：他能够口吐五色云气覆盖十里地，云气直冲青天，和天空溶为一体，他只要一跳，就可上天和入地好几百丈。
English: He can spit out five-colored cloud gas to cover ten miles of land. The cloud gas goes straight up to the blue sky and melts into the sky. As long as he jumps, he can go up to the sky and down to the ground for several hundred meters.

古文：后去不知所在。
现代文：后来也不知道这个刘政究竟去了什么地方。
English: Later, I did not know where this Liu Zheng had gone.

古文：孙博
现代文：孙博
English: Sun Bo

古文：孙博者，河东人也。有清才，能属文，著书百余篇，诵经数十万言。
现代文：孙博是山西河东郡人，很有才华，善写文章，曾写文章一百多篇，背诵经书几十万字。
English: Sun Bo is a native of Hedong County, Shanxi Province. He is very talented and good at writing articles. He has written more than a hundred articles and recited hundreds of thousands of words of scriptures.

古文：晚乃好道，治墨子之术。
现代文：孙博晚年爱好道家学问，研究墨子关于道学的论述。
English: In his later years, Sun Bo became interested in Taoist culture and studied Mozi's discourse on Taoism.

古文：能令草木金石皆为火，光照数里；亦能使身成火，口中吐火，指大树生草则焦枯，更指还如故。
现代文：他能让草木、金属、石头着起火来，燃烧的火光照亮好几里地，他自己也能起火燃烧，从嘴里喷出火来，用手一指，大树草丛就立刻变得焦黄枯死。
English: He could set fire to wood, metal, and stone, and the light of the blazing fire would light up several miles of land. He could also start a fire and burn himself, spewing fire from his mouth, and with one finger, the large trees and bushes would immediately turn yellow and wither away.

古文：又有人亡奴，藏匿军中者，捕之不得。
现代文：再一指，大树和草丛就又恢复原状。有一次，有个人的奴仆逃跑后藏在军营里，抓不到他。
English: With another finger, the trees and bushes were restored to their original state. On one occasion, an individual's servant ran away and hid in the military camp, and he could not be caught.

古文：博语奴主曰： 吾为卿烧其营舍，奴必走出，卿但谛伺捉之。 于是博以一赤丸子，掷军门，须臾火起烛天，奴果走出，乃得之。
现代文：孙博就对奴仆的主人说： 我可以为你发火焚烧营房，那时你的奴仆一定会从营房里跑出来，你就等着抓他吧。 于是孙博就把一枚红色的丸子扔到军营门里，片刻之间燃起熊熊烈火，那奴仆果然跑出营房，被他的主人抓住。
English: Sun Bo said to the slave's master: "I can start a fire for you and burn down the barracks, then your slave will surely run out of the barracks, just wait to catch him." So Sun Bo threw a red ball into the barracks door, igniting a raging fire in an instant. The slave indeed ran out of the barracks and was caught by his master.

古文：博乃复以一青丸子掷之，火即灭，屋舍百物，如故不损。
现代文：孙博又用一枚黑色的丸子扔进营门，火立刻就灭了，军营中的房舍和所有的东西，像没着火时一样丝毫没有损坏。
English: Sun Bo also threw a black ball into the gate of the camp. The fire was immediately extinguished, and the buildings and everything in the camp were not damaged in the slightest, as if they had not caught fire.

古文：博每作火有所烧，他人以水灌之，终不可灭，须臾自止之，方止。
现代文：当孙博作法兴火烧东西的时候，别人用水浇火，火始终不灭，必须过一阵由孙博发令让火停止燃烧，火才会熄灭。
English: When Sun Bo set fire to something, others poured water on the fire, but the fire never went out. It took a while for Sun Bo to issue an order to stop the fire, and then the fire went out.

古文：行水火中不沾灼，亦能使千百人从己蹈之，俱不沾灼，又与人往水上，布席而坐，饮食作乐，使众人舞于水上。又山间石壁，地上盘石，博入其中，渐见背及两耳，良久都没。又能吞刀剑数千枚，及壁中出入，如孔穴也。能引镜为刀，屈刀为镜，可积时不改，须博指之，乃复如故。
现代文：孙博还能钻进山间的石壁和地上的磐石之中，当他钻进去之后，起初还能看见石壁里有他的后背和两只耳朵，过了半天就消失在石壁里了。孙博还能吞下几千把刀剑，能自由地出入于墙壁里，好像墙壁原来就有洞似的。他能把铜镜扯拉成刀剑，又能把刀剑团弄成镜子，变形之后就定了形，只有他用手指一下，才能恢复原形。
English: Sun Bo could also get into the stone walls in the mountains and the rocks on the ground. When he got in, at first he could see his back and two ears in the stone walls. After half a day, he disappeared into the stone walls. Sun Bo could also swallow thousands of swords and could freely go in and out of the walls, as if the walls originally had holes. He could pull the copper mirror into a sword, and he could make the swords into a mirror. After the deformation, the shape was fixed. Only by using his fingers could he restore the original shape.

古文：后入林虑山，服神丹而仙去。
现代文：后来，孙博进到林虑山中，服用了神丹灵药，成仙西去。
English: Later, Sun Bo-jin went to the mountains of Linxi, took the holy elixir, and went to Xi'an.

古文：天门子
现代文：天门子
English: Tianmenzi Street

古文：天门子者，姓王名纲，尤明补养之道。
现代文：天门子原名叫王纲，非常精通阴阳互补互养的学问。
English: Tianmenzi, whose original name was Wang Gang, was very proficient in the study of yin and yang complementarity.

古文：故其经曰： 阳生立于寅，纯木之精；阴生立于申，纯金之精。
现代文：在他所著的关于修炼的著作中说， 阳刚之气发生在天亮前的寅时，是属阴阳五行中 木 的精华。而阴柔之气生在申时，是阴阳五行中 金 的精华。 金 位在西方属秋，所以 金 有肃杀之气。
English: In his book on cultivation, he said that masculine qi occurs before dawn in the yin yang five elements and is the essence of wood, while feminine qi is born in the yin yang five elements and is the essence of gold.

古文：天以木投金，无往不伤，故阴能疲阳也。
现代文：上天把木投于金，木就会被金克伤，所以阴气能损伤阳气。
English: Heaven throws wood at gold, and the wood is hurt by the gold, so yin can hurt yang.

古文：阴人所以著脂粉者，法金之白也。
现代文：女子属阴，她们在脸上抹粉涂脂，就是本能地学 金 那种耀眼的光彩。
English: Women are yin, they put powder and grease on their faces, that is, they instinctively learn gold, that dazzling brilliance.

古文：是以真人道士，莫不留心注意，精其微妙，审其盛衰。
现代文：所以凡是修炼的道家真人，对女人的阴柔之气特别小心留神，研究阴阳相生相克的道理，注意阴阳的盛衰变化。
English: Therefore, all practitioners of Taoism should pay special attention to the feminine and submissive qualities of women, study the principle of yin and yang, and pay attention to the changes in the rise and fall of yin and yang.

古文：我行青龙，彼行白虎，取彼朱雀，煎我玄武，不死之道也。
现代文：修道者仰仗于东方的青龙星，而女人则属于西方的白虎星，用南方属阴的朱雀星来镇服北方属阳的玄武星，就能得到长生的道术。
English: Monastics rely on the blue dragon star in the east, while women belong to the white tiger star in the west. If you use the cedar star in the south, which is yin, to subdue the yang star in the north, you will be able to obtain the Taoism of longevity.

古文：又阴人之情也，每急于求阳，然而外自收抑，不肯请阳者，明金不为木屈也。
现代文：此外，女人在情感上有强烈的欲望，常常急切地追求男人，但表面上又故作控制压抑，不肯主动表现出追求男人的欲望，表现出了不肯向男子屈服的姿态。
English: In addition, women have strong emotional desires, often eagerly pursue men, but on the surface they pretend to control and suppress, refuse to actively show their desire to pursue men, and show their unwillingness to yield to men.

古文：阳性气刚躁，志节疏略。
现代文：男子性情刚烈暴躁，节操志气比较坚定。
English: Men's temperament is rigid and irascible, and their self-discipline is relatively firm.

古文：至于游宴，言和气柔，词语卑下，明木之畏于金也。 
现代文：平时在游玩宴饮时，男子对女人却又十分温柔和柔顺，言谈话语中表现出讨好和追求，这说明木怕金，阳惧阴的道理。 
English: In ordinary times, when playing banquets, men are very gentle and submissive to women, and they show favoritism and pursuit in their speech and conversation. This shows that wood is afraid of gold, and the sun is afraid of the shade.

古文：天门子既行此道，年二百八十岁，犹有童子之色。
现代文：天门子由于按这些道理去修身养性。所以活到二百八十岁面貌仍然像童子少年。
English: Because Tianmenzi followed these principles to improve his health, he lived to be 280 years old and still looked like a boy.

古文：乃服珠醴得仙，入玄洲山去也。
现代文：后来他常服用珍珠泡的酒，终于得道成仙，进了北海中玄洲山里去了。
English: Later, he often took pearl-infused wine, and finally became a Taoist, and went into the North Sea in the Xuanzhou Mountains.

古文：玉子
现代文：玉子
English: Eggs

古文：玉子者，姓韦名震，南郡人也。少好学众经，周幽王征之不出。
现代文：玉子原名叫韦震，是南郡人，他少年时就爱读各种经书，周幽王曾召他作官，他不愿出山。
English: Tamako's original name was Wei Zhen. He was from Nan County. When he was young, he loved to read all kinds of scriptures. King Zhou Yu once called him to be an official, but he didn't want to go out into the mountains.

古文：乃叹曰： 人生世间，日失一日，去生转远，去死转近。
现代文：他常常感叹说： 人生在世上，过一天少一天，离生越远，离死却越来越近。
English: He often lamented, "Life on earth is getting shorter by the day. The further you are from life, the closer you are to death."

古文：而但贪富贵，不知养性命，命尽气绝则死，位为王侯，金玉如山，何益于灰土乎？
现代文：有的人贪图荣华富贵，却不知道修身养性，大限临头就会气绝身亡。人死了，虽然位居王侯，金玉珍宝聚敛如山，其实和粪土有什么不同呢？
English: Some people are greedy for glory and wealth, but do not know how to cultivate themselves, and will die of exhaustion before the end. When a person dies, although he is a prince and has a mountain of gold and precious stones, what is the difference between him and the dung?

古文：独有神仙度世，可以无穷耳。
现代文：看来只有得道成仙，才可以使生命无穷无尽。
English: It seems that only those who attain immortality can make life endless.

古文：乃师长桑子，具受众术。
现代文：于是他拜道学家桑子为师，学习了很多道家的法术。
English: So he turned to the Taoist Sang Zi as his teacher and learned a lot of Taoist spells.

古文：乃别造一家之法，著道书百余篇。
现代文：并把各种道家理论融汇贯通，自成一家，写了论述道术的文章一百多篇。
English: He also integrated various Taoist theories and wrote more than a hundred articles on Daoism.

古文：其术以务魁为主，而精于五行之意，演其微妙，以养性治病，消灾散祸。
现代文：他主要是论述养神藏气和修道的关系，对阴阳五行的道理也研究得很透彻，并运用五行的相生相克的奥秘来养性治病，消灾免祸。
English: He mainly discussed the relationship between cultivating the spirit and spiritual practice. He also thoroughly studied the principle of yin and yang and the five elements, and used the secrets of the symbiosis of the five elements to cultivate and cure diseases, and eliminate and prevent disasters.

古文：能起飘风，发屋折木，作雷雨云雾。
现代文：他能兴风掀毁房屋折断树木，也能兴雷播雨散布云雾。
English: He can cause wind to blow down houses and break trees, and can also cause thunder and rain to spread clouds.

古文：能以木瓦石为六畜龙虎立成，能分形为百千人。
现代文：他能把木头瓦石作成活生生的龙、虎和牛、马、羊、狗、猪、鸡，还能把自己分成千百个人。
English: He can make wood and stone into living dragons, tigers, cows, horses, sheep, dogs, pigs, chickens, and can also divide himself into thousands of people.

古文：能涉江海。
现代文：他能在江海上行走。
English: He can walk on water.

古文：含水喷之，皆成珠玉，亦不变。
现代文：嘴里含着水喷出去就能变成珍珠，珍珠绝不会再变成水珠。
English: If you squirt water in your mouth, it will turn into pearls. Pearls will never turn into water again.

古文：或时闭气不息，举之不起，推之不动，屈之不曲，伸之不直，或百日数十日乃起。
现代文：有时他一运气，可以不呼不吸，这时就举不起他推不动他，不能使他身子弯屈，弯屈后又不能使他伸直，可以一次闭气几十天一百多天纹丝不动。
English: Sometimes, if he is lucky, he can breathe without inhaling. At this time, he can't lift him, he can't push him, he can't bend his body, and he can't straighten it after bending. He can hold his breath for dozens of days at a time without moving.

古文：每与子弟行，各丸泥为马与之，皆令闭目，须臾成大马，乘之日行千里。
现代文：有时他和弟子们出行，他就把泥团成马，让弟子们闭上眼睛，泥马立刻变成高头大马，而且骑上就能日行千里。
English: Sometimes, when he was traveling with his disciples, he would roll up mud into a horse and ask his disciples to close their eyes. The muddy horse would immediately turn into a tall horse, and they could travel thousands of miles in a day.

古文：又能吐气五色，起数丈，见飞鸟过，指之即堕。
现代文：他还能口吐五色云气，云气有几丈高。看见空中的飞鸟，他用手一指，鸟儿就立刻掉下来。
English: He can also spit out five-colored clouds, which are several feet high. When he sees a flying bird in the sky, he uses one finger and the bird immediately falls down.

古文：临渊投符，召鱼鳖之属，悉来上岸。
现代文：他在深潭里扔进一道神符就能把鱼鳖之类召上岸来。
English: If he threw a magic spell into a deep pool, he would be able to call fish such as eels to the shore.

古文：能令弟子举眼见千里外物，亦不能久也。
现代文：他能让弟子们抬眼看见千里之外的东西，但看的时间不太长。
English: He could make his disciples look up and see things thousands of miles away, but they couldn't see for very long.

古文：其务魁时，以器盛水着两肘之间，嘘之，水上立有赤光，辉辉起一丈。
现代文：每当他进行藏神养气的修炼时，就用器皿盛上水，放在两肘之间，一吹气，水上立刻发出红色的光，光芒能升起一丈多高。
English: Whenever he was doing the exercises to raise qi, he would fill a bowl with water and place it between his elbows. When he blew, the water would immediately emit a red light, and the light would rise as high as it could.

古文：以此水治病，病在内饮之，在外者洗之，皆立愈。
现代文：用这施过法术的水治病，内脏的病喝它，外在的病用这水洗，都能马上治好。
English: Use this enchanted water to cure diseases, drink it for internal diseases, and wash with it for external diseases, and you will be cured immediately.

古文：后入崆峒山合丹，白日升天而去。
现代文：后来进入洛阳崆峒山炼丹，白天升天成仙而去。
English: Later, he entered Luoyang Lushan Refinery and ascended to heaven during the day.

古文：茅濛
现代文：茅濛
English: thatch

古文：茅濛，字初成，咸阳南关人也，即东卿司命君盈之高祖也。
现代文：茅濛字初成，是陕西咸阳南关人，是东卿茅君盈的高祖。
English: He was a native of Nanguan in Xianyang, Shaanxi Province, and the great-great-grandfather of Dongqing Mao Junying.

古文：濛性慈悯，好行阴德，廉静博学。
现代文：茅濛性情慈悲良善，平日常积德行善，俭朴素净，博学多闻。
English: Mao Yu's disposition is benevolent and kind, he is always virtuous and does good deeds, he is frugal and simple, and he is well-read.

古文：逆覩周室将衰，不求进于诸侯。
现代文：他预见周朝将越来越衰败，所以从来不到诸侯那里求官作。
English: He foresaw that the Zhou Dynasty would decline more and more, so he never went to the lords to apply for a post.

古文：常叹人生若电流，出处宜及其时。
现代文：他常常感慨于人生转眼即逝，要抓住适当的时机自己处理好自身的事。
English: He often feels that life is fleeting and that he should seize the right opportunity to deal with his own affairs.

古文：于是师北郭鬼谷先生，受长生之术，神丹之方。
现代文：于是他拜北城鬼谷子为师，跟他学习长生之术和仙丹秘方。
English: As a result, he became a disciple of Hokuriku Kigayatsu, learning from him the art of longevity and the secret of immortelle.

古文：后入华山，静斋绝尘，修道合药，乘龙驾云，白日升天。
现代文：后来他又进入华山，远离尘世静心修炼，修道炼丹，后来乘龙驾云，白日成仙升天。
English: Later, he went to Huashan, away from the mundane world, to practice meditation and cultivate Dan. Later, he rode on a dragon and ascended to heaven.

古文：先是其邑歌谣曰： 神仙得者茅初成，驾龙上升入太清。
现代文：在他成仙之前都城里就流传着一首歌谣： 神仙得者茅初成，驾龙上升入太清。
English: Before he became a god, there was a folk song circulating in the capital: The god-winner, Mao, has just become a god, and has ascended to Taiching on a dragon.

古文：时下玄洲戏赤城，继世而往在我盈。
现代文：时下玄洲戏赤城，继世而往在我盈。
English: At present, the Xuan Zhou opera is in Akagi, and the successors are in Ying.

古文：帝若学之腊嘉平。 
现代文：帝若学之腊嘉平。 
English: Emperor Jakuchu's apprentice, La Jiaping.

古文：秦始皇闻之，因改腊为 嘉平 。
现代文：秦始皇听说后，就把腊月改名叫 嘉平 了。
English: After the First Emperor of Qin heard about it, he changed his name to Jiaping.

古文：沈羲
现代文：沈羲
English: Shen Zhen

古文：沈羲者，吴郡人，学道于蜀中。
现代文：沈羲是吴郡人，曾经在四川学道。
English: Shen Yao is a native of Wuxi County and once studied Taoism in Sichuan.

古文：但能消灾治病，救济百姓，不知服食药物。功德感天，天神识之。
现代文：他长期救济百姓，不用药就能治好病人。他的功德感动了上天，天神都非常赞赏他。
English: He has been helping the people for a long time, and can cure the sick without medicine. His merits have touched the heavens, and the gods are very appreciative of him.

古文：羲与妻贾共载，诣子妇卓孔宁家还，逢白鹿车一乘，青龙车一乘，白虎车一乘，从者皆数十骑，皆朱衣，仗矛带剑，辉赫满道。
现代文：有一次，沈羲和妻子贾氏一同乘车到儿媳卓孔宁家串门，回来的路上，遇见白鹿、青龙和白虎驾的三辆车，每辆车都有几十个骑马的随从，全都穿着红袍，持着长矛挂着刀剑，辉煌显赫，堵塞了道路。
English: On one occasion, Shen Rong and his wife Jia took a car to visit their daughter-in-law Zhuo Kongning's house. On the way back, they met three cars driven by the White Deer, the Blue Dragon and the White Tiger. Each car had dozens of horse-riding attendants, all dressed in red robes, holding spears and swords. They were brilliant and conspicuous, and blocked the road.

古文：问羲曰： 君是沈羲否？ 
现代文：这些人问沈羲： 您是沈羲先生吗！ 
English: These people asked Shen Rong: Are you Mr. Shen Rong!

古文：羲愕然，不知何等，答曰： 是也。
现代文：沈羲非常吃惊，不知道他们是什么人，忙回答说： 我是沈羲。
English: Shen Yao was very surprised and did not know who they were. He quickly replied, "I am Shen Yao."

古文：何为问之？ 
现代文：不知道你们有什么事？ 
English: I don't know what you're up to.

古文：骑人曰： 羲有功于民，心不忘道，自少小以来，履行无过。
现代文：骑马的人说： 你救济百姓有功德，品德高尚，从年少到现在没有犯过什么过错。
English: The man on the horse said, "You have made great contributions to the relief of the people, you have a noble character, and you have not made any mistakes since you were young.

古文：寿命不长，年寿将尽。
现代文：但你的寿命并不长，阳寿将尽。
English: But your lifespan is not long, and your yang longevity will be exhausted.

古文：黄老今遣仙官来下迎之。
现代文：现在黄帝、老子派了仙官到人间来迎接你。
English: Now, the Yellow Emperor and Laozi have sent a genie to the human world to welcome you.

古文：侍郎薄延之，乘白鹿车是也；度世君司马生，青龙车是也；迎使者徐福，白虎车是也。 
现代文：乘白鹿车的是侍郎薄延之，乘青龙车的是度世君司马生，乘白虎车的是迎接你的使者徐福。 
English: In the white deer cart is the attendant Bo Yanzhi, in the blue dragon cart is the great scholar Sima Sheng, and in the white tiger cart is the messenger Xu Fu to welcome you.

古文：须臾，有三仙人，羽衣持节，以白玉简、青玉介丹玉字，授羲，羲不能识。
现代文：不一会，那三位神仙穿着羽衣持着旌节来到沈羲面前，把一只白玉板、一块刻在青玉上的证书和一块刻着字的红玉授给沈羲，沈羲不知道这些东西是什么。
English: After a while, the three immortals wearing feathered coats and holding a skull and crossbones came to Shen Rong and gave him a white jade plate, a certificate engraved on a blue jade, and a red jade with inscriptions. Shen Rong did not know what these things were.

古文：遂载羲升天。
现代文：三位神仙就用车载着沈羲夫妇升天而去。
English: The three deities then ascended to heaven in a chariot carrying the Shen Yi couple.

古文：升天之时，道间锄耘人皆共见，不知何等。
现代文：他们升天时，在田地里耕作的人都看见了，不知他们是什么人。
English: When they were taken up, the men who were working in the field saw them and did not know who they were.

古文：斯须大雾，雾解，失其所在，但见羲所乘车牛，在田食苗。
现代文：当时天上突然大雾弥漫，等雾散之后，就不知他们到哪里去了，只看见沈羲曾坐过的牛车在路上停着，驾车的牛在田里吃禾苗。
English: At that time, the sky was suddenly covered with a thick fog. After the fog cleared, they did not know where they had gone. They only saw the ox cart that Shen Yao had once sat in stopped on the road, and the driving cattle were eating grass seedlings in the fields.

古文：或有识是羲车牛，以语羲家。
现代文：有的人认识那车和牛是沈羲的，就跑去报告了沈羲家。
English: Some people knew that the car and the cow were Shen Yao's, so they ran to inform Shen Yao's family.

古文：弟子恐是邪鬼，将羲藏山谷间，乃分布于百里之内，求之不得。
现代文：沈羲的弟子担心是鬼怪把沈羲抓到山谷里藏起来了，就在周围百里以内到处寻找，但没找到。
English: Shen Yao's disciples feared that a ghost had caught Shen Yao and hidden him in the valley. They searched everywhere within a hundred miles around, but did not find him.

古文：四百余年，忽还乡里，推求得数世孙，名怀喜。
现代文：过了四百多年沈羲突然回来了，找到了他好多代之后的孙子，他叫沈怀喜。
English: After more than 400 years, Shen Rong suddenly returned and found his grandson after many generations, his name was Shen Huaixi.

古文：怀喜告曰： 闻先人说，家有先人仙去，久不归也。 
现代文：怀喜对沈羲说： 我听祖上说家中有先人成了仙，很久没回来。 
English: Huai Xi said to Shen Yao: I heard from my ancestors that there were ancestors in my family who became immortals and didn't come back for a long time.

古文：留数十日，说初上天时，云不得见帝，但见老君东向而坐。左右敕羲不得谢，但默坐而已。
现代文：沈羲在家住了几十天，据他说刚升天时并没见到天帝，只看见太上老君面向东坐着，左右的人告诉沈羲不必跪拜，只默默坐着。
English: Shen Rong lived at home for dozens of days. According to him, when he ascended to heaven, he did not see the heavenly emperor, but only saw the old lady sitting facing the east. People around him told Shen Rong not to kneel, but to sit silently.

古文：宫殿郁郁如云气，五色玄黄，不可名状。
现代文：宫殿里云雾笼罩，不时涌起五色云或黄色黑色的云，说不清是怎么回事。
English: The palace is shrouded in mist, and from time to time, five-colored clouds or yellow-black clouds rise. It's unclear what's going on.

古文：侍者数百人，多女少男。
现代文：老君周围有好几百人侍从，女的多男的少。
English: The old man is surrounded by several hundred attendants, many of them women, but few men.

古文：庭中有珠玉之树，众芝丛生，龙虎成群，游戏其间，闻琅琅如铜铁之声，不知何等。
现代文：宫殿院中有结着珠玉的树，到处生长着灵芝仙草，有很多龙虎在周围游戏，还听到叮叮当当的铜铁撞击的声音，也不知是怎么回事。
English: In the palace courtyard, there are trees with precious stones, Ganoderma lucidum grows everywhere, there are many dragons and tigers playing around, and the sound of clanging copper and iron is heard. I don't know what's going on.

古文：四壁熠熠，有符书着之。
现代文：殿内四边墙上闪闪发光，上面写着神符。
English: On the four walls inside the hall, there is glittering light, and a divine symbol is written on it.

古文：老君身形略长一丈，披发文衣，身体有光耀。
现代文：太上老君有一丈来高，披着长发，穿着有花纹写着文字的衣服，身体也发出闪光。
English: The lady-in-waiting was tall, had long hair, wore clothes with patterns and words written on them, and her body also glowed.

古文：须臾，数玉女持金按玉杯，来赐羲曰： 此是神丹，饮者不死。
现代文：不一会儿，有几名玉女用金盘端着玉杯来赏赐沈羲说， 这玉杯里是神丹，喝了可以长生。
English: Soon after, several ladies came with gold plates and jade cups to reward Shen Yao, saying, "This jade cup is sacred and if you drink it, you can live forever."

古文：夫妻各一杯，寿万岁。 
现代文：你们夫妻一人一杯，可以活一万年。 
English: If you and your spouse each have one cup, you can live for ten thousand years.

古文：乃告言：饮服毕，拜而勿谢。
现代文：玉女还告诉沈羲喝完后行个礼，但不用说感谢的话。
English: The lady also told Shen Tao to salute after drinking, but not to say thank you.

古文：服药后，赐枣二枚，大如鸡子，脯五寸，遗羲曰： 暂还人间，治百姓疾病。
现代文：服了仙丹后又赐给两枚枣子，像鸡蛋大，又赏给五寸大的一只果脯并说： 你暂时回到人间，给百姓治病。
English: After taking the peony, he also gave her two jujubes the size of eggs, and a five-inch-tall fruit fly, and said, "You should temporarily return to the human world to treat the people's illnesses."

古文：如欲上来，书此符，悬之杆稍，吾当迎汝。 
现代文：如果想到天上来，可以照这符写一道符挂在你家门外高竿上，我会去接你。 
English: If you want to go to heaven, you can write a sign like this and hang it on a pole outside your house. I will come to pick you up.

古文：乃以一符及仙方一首赐羲。
现代文：说罢把一张符和一张仙方给了沈羲。
English: Saying this, he gave Shen Zhen a piece of paper and a fairy godmother.

古文：羲奄忽如寐，已在地上。
现代文：沈羲忽然昏昏睡去，醒时已在地上了。
English: Shen Yao suddenly fell into a drowsy sleep. When he woke up, he was already on the ground.

古文：多得其符验也。陈安世
现代文：后来他多次使用那仙符都非常灵验。陈安世
English: Later, he used the talisman many times, and it was very effective.

古文：陈安世，京兆人也，为权叔本家佣赁。禀性慈仁，行见禽兽，常下道避之，不欲惊之，不践生虫，未尝杀物。
现代文：陈安世是京城人，被权叔本家所雇佣，他为人慈善厚道，走路时如果遇见禽兽，他就躲到道旁，不惊动它们，从来不踩死一只小虫，也从不杀生。
English: Chen Anshi is a resident of Beijing. He is employed by the Kwon family. He is charitable and kind. When walking, if he encounters animals, he hides by the side of the road and does not startle them. He never tramples a bug to death, and he never kills a living being.

古文：年十三四，叔本好道思神，有二仙人，托为书生，从叔本游，以观试之。而叔本不觉其仙人也，久而意转怠。
现代文：陈安世十三岁时，他的主人权叔本非常爱好修道成仙的事，有两位神仙假托为书生，跟着叔本漫游各地以考察他，但叔本不知道两位书生是神仙。
English: When Chen Anshi was thirteen years old, his master, Human Rights Uncle Ben, was very fond of cultivating immortals. There were two immortals who pretended to be students and followed Uncle Ben to roam around to investigate him, but Uncle Ben did not know that the two students were immortals.

古文：叔本在内，方作美食，而二仙复来诣门，问安世曰： 叔本在否？ 答曰： 在耳。 
现代文：时间长了，叔本对二位书生就有些怠慢了。有一次，叔本在家里吃美味的食物。两个书生来到门外，问陈安世叔本在不在家，安世说在家，就进去告诉叔本。
English: As time went on, Uncle Ben neglected the two students. Once, Uncle Ben was eating delicious food at home. Two students came to the door and asked Chen Anshi if Uncle Ben was not at home. When Anshi said he was at home, he went in and told Uncle Ben.

古文：入白叔本，叔本即欲出，其妇引还而止曰： 饿书生辈，复欲来饱腹耳。 
现代文：叔本打算出门去迎接两位书生，他老婆一把拉住他说： 两个饿急了的书生，又要来咱家饱餐一顿，别理他们！ 
English: Uncle Ben planned to go out to meet the two students. His wife grabbed him and said, "Two hungry students are coming to our house for a full meal. Don't pay attention to them!

古文：于是叔本使安世出答： 言不在。 
现代文：于是叔本就让安世出门去对书生说自己不在家。
English: As a result, Shukumoto asked Ansei to go out and tell Shosei that he was not at home.

古文：二人曰： 前者云在，旋言不在，何也？ 
现代文：两位书生说： 你刚才说他在家，现在又说不在，这是怎么回事呢？ 
English: The two students said, "You just said he was at home, but now you say he's not here. What's going on?"

古文：答曰： 大家君教我云耳。 
现代文：陈安世说， 是主人让我这样说的。 
English: Chen Anshi said, "My master told me to say that."

古文：二人善其诚实，乃谓 叔本勤苦有年，今适值我二人，而乃懈怠，是其不遇，儿成而败。 
现代文：两位书生见安世这样诚实，就说， 权叔本这人修道好多年都很勤奋，但我们两人来考察他，他却懈怠了，这是他自己失去了得道的机会，快要成功时却失败了。 
English: When the two scholars saw that An Shih was so honest, they said, "This man, Uncle Quan, has been a diligent practitioner for many years, but when the two of us came to examine him, he slacked off. This was his own lost opportunity to attain the Way, and when he was about to succeed, he failed.

古文：乃问安世曰： 汝好游戏耶？ 答曰： 不好也。 
现代文：接着就问陈安世： 你贪玩吗？ 安世说： 我不爱玩。 
English: Then he asked Chen Anshi: Are you greedy for fun? Anshi said: I don't like fun.

古文：又曰： 汝好道乎？ 
现代文：又问： 你喜欢修道吗？ 
English: He also asked: Do you like monasticism?

古文：答曰： 好，而无由知之。 
现代文：安世说： 我爱好道术，但是不知道该怎么做。 
English: Yasushi said, "I like Daoism, but I don't know how to do it.

古文：二人曰： 汝审好道，明日早会道北大树下。 
现代文：两位书生说： 你如果真的爱好道术，明天早晨在路北的大树下等着我们。 
English: The two scholars said, "If you are really interested in Taoism, wait for us under the big tree on the north side of the road tomorrow morning."

古文：安世承言，早往期处，到日西，不见一人，乃起欲去，曰： 书生定欺我耳。 
现代文：安世记住了，第二天很早就到大树下等着，一直等到太阳落山，也不见一个人来，就打算回去，说： 书生一定是欺骗我呢。 
English: Ansei remembered. The next day, he went to wait under a tree very early, and waited until the sun set. When he didn't see anyone come, he planned to go back and say, "The student must have lied to me."

古文：二人已在其侧，呼曰： 安世汝来何晚也？ 答曰： 早来，但不见君耳。 
现代文：没想到两个书生突然出现在他身边，喊他说： 你怎么来得这么晚呀？ 安世说： 我早就来了，一直没看见你们呀！ 
English: Unexpectedly, two students suddenly appeared beside him and called out to him, "How come you're here so late?" Anshe said, "I've been here for a long time, I haven't seen you for ages!"

古文：二人曰： 吾端坐在汝边耳。 
现代文：两个书生说： 我们就坐在你身边嘛。 
English: Two students said, "We'll just sit next to you."

古文：频三期之，而安世辄早至。
现代文：两位书生约会了安世三次，安世三次都是早早就来等着。
English: The two students went on three dates with Anse, who came early to wait for them all three times.

古文：知可教，乃以药二丸与安世，诫之曰： 汝归，勿复饮食，别止于一处。 
现代文：二书生经过考验，知道安世可以受教了，就给了安世两枚药丸，并告诫说： 你回去以后，不要再吃饭，睡觉也单个儿睡在另一个地方。 
English: After being tested, the second-year students knew that Anse could be taught, so they gave him two pills and warned him: After you go back, don't eat again, and sleep alone in another place.

古文：安世承诫，二人常来往其处。
现代文：安世遵照二书生的话做了，二书生就常到安世住处来。
English: Ansei did as the second-year student said, and the second-year student often came to Ansei's residence.

古文：叔本怪之曰： 安世处空室，何得有人语？ 
现代文：权叔本奇怪地说： 安世一个人住在空屋子里，怎么常听见他和别人说话的声音呢？ 
English: Uncle Kwon said strangely, "Anse lives alone in an empty house. How often do you hear his voice talking to others?"

古文：往辄不见。
现代文：权叔本一进他屋里，看不见有什么人在那里。
English: As soon as Uncle Quan entered his house, he couldn't see anyone there.

古文：叔本曰： 向闻多人语声，今不见一人，何也？ 
现代文：就问安世道： 我刚才听见你屋里有好几个人说话，现在却看不见有人，是怎么回事呢？ 
English: I just heard several people talking in your room, but now I can't see anyone. What's going on?

古文：答曰： 我独语耳。 
现代文：安世回答说， 是我在自言自语。 
English: "I'm talking to myself," Anse replied.

古文：叔本见安世不复食，但饮水，止息别位，疑非常人，自知失贤，乃叹曰： 夫道尊德贵，不在年齿。
现代文：叔本发现安世不吃饭光喝水，而且独自住在别处，疑心他不是个平凡的人，自己知道自己做错了，失去了得道的机会，就感叹地说： 一个人有无道德修行不在年纪大小。
English: Uncle Ben found that An Shih did not eat, only drank water, and lived alone in another place. He suspected that he was not an ordinary person. He knew that he had made a mistake and lost the opportunity to attain the Tao. He said with regret: A person's moral practice is not determined by his age.

古文：父母生我，然非师则莫能使我长生。
现代文：父母生了我，但没有师长的指点我就不可能得道长生。
English: My parents gave birth to me, but without my teacher's guidance, it would have been impossible for me to attain eternal life.

古文：先闻道者，即为师矣。 
现代文：先得到道术的，就是我的老师。 
English: My teacher is the one who got to dojutsu first.

古文：乃执弟子之礼，朝夕拜事之，为之洒扫。
现代文：于是叔本心甘情愿地给安世当徒弟，每天向安世跪拜求教，为安世清理打扫房间。
English: Therefore, Uncle Ben willingly became a disciple of Ansei, bowed down to Ansei every day to ask for advice, and cleaned the room for Ansei.

古文：安世道成。白日升天。临去，遂以要道术授叔本，叔本后亦仙去矣。
现代文：后来安世修炼成功，白日升天成了仙，临升天之前，安世把修道的秘诀传授给叔本，叔本也得道成仙，升天而去。
English: Later, Ansei's cultivation was successful. He ascended to heaven and became an immortal. Before ascending to heaven, Ansei taught the secret of cultivation to Shubun. Shubun also became an immortal and ascended to heaven.

