古文：盘庚五迁，将治亳殷，民咨胥怨。
现代文：到盘庚时商朝面临第五次迁都，他决定把国都从亳迁到殷。
English: By the time of Pan Geng, the Shang Dynasty was facing its fifth capital relocation, and he decided to move the national capital from Sui to Yin.

古文：作《盘庚》三篇。盘庚迁于殷，民不适有居，率吁众戚出矢言。
现代文：这一决定受到贵族们的反对，影响很坏，于是盘庚写下三篇《《盘庚》。盘庚将把都城迁到殷。臣民不愿往那个处所，相率呼吁一些贵戚大臣出来，向他们陈述意见。
English: This decision was opposed by the nobles, and the influence was very bad, so Pan Geng wrote three "Pan Geng." Pan Geng would move the capital to Yin. The subjects did not want to go to that place, so they called on some noble ministers to come out and present their opinions to them.

古文：曰： 我王来，即爰宅于兹，重我民，无尽刘。
现代文：臣民说： 我们的君王迁来，既已改居在这里，是看重我们臣民，不使我们受到伤害。
English: The subjects said, "Our king has moved here, and since he has taken up residence here, he values our subjects and does not want to harm us."

古文：不能胥匡以生，卜稽，曰其如台？
现代文：现在我们不能互相救助，以求生存，用龟卜稽考一下，将怎么样呢？
English: Now that we can't help each other to survive, what will happen with the turtles?

古文：先王有服，恪谨天命，兹犹不常宁；不常厥邑，于今五邦。
现代文：先王保有这个国家，敬慎地遵从天命。这里还不能长久安宁吗？不能长久住在一个地方，到现在已经五个国都了！
English: The previous king preserved this country, cautiously following the destiny of heaven. Can't there be peace here for a long time? You can't live in one place for a long time, and now there are five countries!

古文：今不承于古，罔知天之断命，矧曰其克从先王之烈？
现代文：现在不继承先王敬慎天命的传统，就不知道老天所决定的命运，更何况说能继承先王的事业呢？
English: Now, if you do not carry on the tradition of reverence for the fate of the ancestors, you will not know the fate decided by God, let alone be able to carry on the cause of the ancestors?

古文：若颠木之有由蘖，天其永我命于兹新邑，绍复先王之大业，厎绥四方。 
现代文：好像倒伏的树又长出了新枝、被砍伐的残余又发出嫩芽一样，老天将使我们的国运在这个新都奄邑延续下去，继续复兴先王的大业，安定天下。 
English: It is as if a fallen tree has sprouted new branches, or the remains of a felled tree have sprouted new shoots. God will enable our national fortune to continue in this new capital, Ama-eup, and continue to revive the great cause of our forefathers and bring stability to the world.

古文：盘庚斅于民，由乃在位以常旧服，正法度。
现代文：盘庚开导臣民，又教导在位的大臣遵守旧制、正视法度。
English: Pan Geng enlightened and guided his subjects, and also taught the reigning ministers to abide by the old system and face up to the law.

古文：曰： 无或敢伏小人之攸箴！ 
现代文：他说： 不要有人敢于凭借小民的谏诫，反对迁都！ 
English: He said: Don't anyone dare to oppose the relocation of the capital on the basis of the admonitions of the common people!

古文：王命众，悉至于庭。
现代文：于是，王命令众人，都来到朝廷。
English: Then the king commanded all the people to come to the king's house.

古文：王若曰： 格汝众，予告汝，训汝猷，黜乃心，无傲从康。
现代文：王这样说： 来吧，你们各位，我要告诉你们，开导你们。可克制你们的私心，不要傲求安。
English: Thus saith the king, Come, ye children, I will teach you, yea, I will make you wise: but let not your heart be haughty, neither let it be proud.

古文：古我先王，亦惟图任旧人共政。
现代文：从前我们的先王，也只是谋求任用旧臣共同管理政事。
English: In the past, our former king only sought to appoint former vassals to jointly manage government affairs.

古文：王播告之，修不匿厥指。
现代文：施行先王的教令，他们不隐瞒教的旨意，先王因此敬重他们。
English: They carried out the edict of the former king, they did not hide the will of the church, and the former king respected them.

古文：王用丕钦；罔有逸言，民用丕变。
现代文：他们没有错误的言论，百姓们因此也大变了。
English: They don't have a bad word to say, and people have changed a lot as a result.

古文：今汝聒聒，起信险肤，予弗知乃所讼。
现代文：现在你们拒绝我的意，自以为是，起来申说危害虚浮的言论，我不知道你们争辩的意图。
English: Now that you have rejected my will, have become self-righteous, and have risen up to make empty threats, I do not know what you are arguing about.

古文：非予自荒兹德，惟汝含德，不惕予一人。
现代文：并不是我自己放弃了任用旧人的美德，而是你们包藏好意而不施给我。
English: It is not that I have abandoned the virtue of appointing old men, but that you have hidden your good intentions and not given them to me.

古文：予若观火，予亦拙谋作，乃逸。
现代文：我对当前形势像看火一样地清楚，我如果又不善于谋划和行动，那就错了。
English: I know the current situation like the back of my hand, and if I am not good at planning and action, then I am wrong.

古文：若网在纲，有条而不紊；若农服田，力穑乃亦有秋。
现代文：好像把网结在纲上，才能有条理而不紊乱；好像农民从事田间劳动，只有努力耕种，才会大有收成。
English: It's like tying a net in a groove, only then can it be organized and not chaotic; it's like farmers working in the fields, only when they work hard can they get a good harvest.

古文：汝克黜乃心，施实德于民，至于婚友，丕乃敢大言汝有积德。
现代文：你们能克制私心，把实际的好处施给百姓，以至于亲戚朋友，于是才敢扬言你们有积德。
English: You can restrain selfishness and give practical benefits to the people, so that relatives and friends dare to say that you have accumulated virtue.

古文：乃不畏戎毒于远迩，惰农自安，不昏作劳，不服田亩，越其罔有黍稷。
现代文：如果你们不怕远近会出现大灾害，像懒惰的农民一样自求安逸，不努力操劳，不从事田间劳动，就会没有黍稷。
English: If you are not afraid of great disasters in the near and far, if you seek comfort like lazy farmers, do not work hard, do not engage in field labor, there will be no radon.

古文：汝不和吉言于百姓，惟汝自生毒，乃败祸奸宄，以自灾于厥身。
现代文：你们不向老百姓宣布我的善言，这是你们自生祸害，即将发生灾祸邪恶，而自己害自己。
English: If you do not proclaim my good news to the people, it will be your own ruin. Disaster and evil are about to come upon you, and you will bring it on yourselves.

古文：乃既先恶于民，乃奉其恫，汝悔身何及！
现代文：假若已经引导人们做了坏事，而又承受那些痛苦，你们悔恨自己又怎么来得及？
English: If you have led people to do bad things, and then suffer those pains, how can you repent?

古文：相时憸民，犹胥顾于箴言，其发有逸口，矧予制乃短长之命！
现代文：看看这些小人吧，他们尚且顾及规劝的话，顾及发出错误言论，何况我掌握着你们或短或长的生命呢？
English: Look at these rascals, they even care about words of exhortation, about saying the wrong thing, how much more do I control your short or long life?

古文：汝曷弗告朕，而胥动以浮言，恐沈于众？
现代文：你们为什么不亲自告诉我，却用些无稽之谈互相鼓动，恐吓煽动民众呢？
English: Why didn't you tell me in person, instead of using nonsense to encourage each other, intimidate and incite the public?

古文：若火之燎于原，不可向迩，其犹可扑灭。
现代文：好像大火在原野上燃烧一样，不能面向，不能接近，还能够扑灭吗？
English: It's like a fire burning in a field. You can't face it, you can't get close to it, but can you put it out?

古文：则惟汝众自作弗靖，非予有咎。
现代文：这都是你们众人自己做了不好的事，不是我有过错。
English: All of this is your own doing, not my fault.

古文：迟任有言曰： 有惟求旧，器非求旧，惟新。 
现代文：迟任说过： 人要寻求旧的，器物不要寻求旧的，要新。 
English: Lai Ren said: People should look for old things, don't look for old things, look for new things.

古文：古我先王暨乃祖乃父胥及逸勤，予敢动用非罚？
现代文：过去我们的先王同你们的祖辈父辈共同勤劳，共享安乐，我怎么敢对你们施行不恰当的刑罚呢？
English: In the past, our forefathers and your forefathers worked hard together and enjoyed peace and happiness. How dare I impose an inappropriate punishment on you?

古文：世选尔劳，予不掩尔善。
现代文：世世代代都会说到你们的功劳，我不会掩盖你们的好处。
English: Your deeds will be spoken of for generations to come, and I will not hide your good deeds.

古文：兹予大享于先王，尔祖其从与享之。
现代文：现在我要祭祀我们的先王，你们的祖先也将跟着享受祭祀。
English: Now I will offer sacrifices to our former king, and your ancestors will also enjoy the sacrifices.

古文：作福作灾，予亦不敢动用非德。
现代文：赐福降灾，我也不敢动用不恰当的赏赐或惩罚。
English: I do not dare to use inappropriate rewards or punishments.

古文：予告汝于难，若射之有志。
现代文：我在患难的时候告诉你们，要像射箭有箭靶一样，你们不能偏离我。
English: I have told you in times of trouble to be like arrows aimed at a target. You must not turn away from me.

古文：汝无侮老成人，无弱孤有幼。
现代文：你们不要轻视成年人，也不要看不起年幼的人。
English: Don't look down on adults, and don't look down on young people.

古文：各长于厥居。勉出乃力，听予一人之作猷。
现代文：你们各人领导着自己的封地，努力使出你们的力量，听从我一人的谋划。
English: Each of you is in charge of his own fiefdom, so exert your strength and listen to my one and only plan.

古文：无有远迩，用罪伐厥死，用德彰厥善。
现代文：没有远和近的分别，我用刑罚惩处那些坏的，用赏赐表彰那些好的。
English: There is no difference between near and far. We punish the bad with punishment and reward the good with reward.

古文：邦之臧，惟汝众；邦之不臧，惟予一人有佚罚。
现代文：国家治理得好，是你们众人的功劳；国家治理得不好，是我有过有罪。
English: If the country is well governed, it is the merit of all of you; if the country is not well governed, it is my fault.

古文：凡尔众，其惟致告：自今至于后日，各恭尔事，齐乃位，度乃口。
现代文：你们众人，要思考我告诫的话：从此以后，你们要努力做各自的事情，在自己的职位上要兢兢业业，认真负责，你们的嘴要杜绝浮言。
English: All of you, think about my words of admonition: From now on, you should work hard to do your own things, be conscientious and conscientious in your positions, and keep your mouths shut.

古文：罚及尔身，弗可悔。 
现代文：不然惩罚就会落到你们身上，到时候不要后悔！ 
English: Otherwise, the punishment will fall on you, so don't regret it!

