古文：师道，异母弟也。
现代文：李师道，是李师古的异母弟。
English: Li Shidao is the half-brother of Li Shigu.

古文：师古尝曰： 是不更民间疾苦，要令知衣食所从。 
现代文：师古曾说 ：即使不能改变民间疾苦，也要使其知道衣食之从何而得。 
English: Shigu once said: Even if we cannot change the hardships of the people, we must let them know where their food and clothing come from.

古文：乃署知密州。
现代文：让他管密州之事。
English: Let him handle the Missoula situation.

古文：师古病，召亲近高沐、李公度等曰： 即我不讳，欲以谁嗣？ 
现代文：李师古病了，召来亲信高沐、李公度，问他们： 我死了以后，你们准备让谁即位？ 
English: When Li Shigu fell ill, he summoned his close confidants Gao Mu and Li Gongdu and asked them: "After I die, who are you going to put on the throne?"

古文：二人未对。师古曰： 岂以人情属师道邪？
现代文：两人迟疑未答，李师古说： 难道你们想以人情而属意师道吗？
English: The two hesitated but did not answer, and Li Shigu said: "Do you really want to follow the Way of the Master with human feelings?

古文：彼不服戎，以技自尚，虑覆吾宗，公等审计之。 
现代文：他不知军事却自诩有才。我怕他会使我李家覆灭的，请你们考虑。 
English: He doesn't know the military, but he thinks he's talented. I'm afraid he'll ruin the Lee family for me. Please think about it.

古文：及死，沐、公度与家奴卒立之，而请于朝。
现代文：李师古死，高沐、李公度与家奴等还是扶立李师道为平卢节度使，上报朝廷，请正式授官。
English: After the death of Li Shigu, Gao Mu, Li Gongdu and his family's slaves still set up Li Shidao as the envoy of the Pinglu Festival, reported to the imperial court, and requested that he be officially awarded the post.

古文：于是制书久不下，师道谋裒兵守境，沐争止，更上书奉两税，守盐法，请吏朝廷。
现代文：高沐极力制止，再次上书，奉两税，守盐法，请求委任为朝廷之官。宰相杜黄裳想设官分治，削减其权力。
English: Gao Mu tried his best to put a stop to this, and once again sent a letter requesting that he be appointed as an official of the imperial court in accordance with the two taxes and the salt-keeping law. Prime Minister Du Huangxiao wanted to establish a separation of powers between officials and reduce their power.

古文：宰相杜黄裳欲桡削其权，而宪宗方诛刘辟，未皇东讨，故命建王审领节度大使，而以师道知留后。
现代文：那时宪宗刚刚诛平刘辟之乱，来不及东顾。所以命建王审领御平卢节度大使，而任李师道掌管留后事务。
English: At that time, Emperor Gensong had just quelled the Liu Bi Rebellion, and it was too late for him to go to the East. Therefore, he ordered Jian Wang Xun to take charge of the envoy to the Pinglu Festival, and appointed Li Shidao to be in charge of the remaining affairs.

古文：岁中，加检校工部尚书，为副大使。
现代文：年中，加官检校工部尚书，为平卢节度副大使。
English: In the middle of the year, he was promoted to Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and became Vice-Ambassador of Pinglu Festival.

古文：自正己以来，虽外奉王命，而啸引亡叛，有得罪于朝者厚纳之。
现代文：从李正己以来，平卢虽表面听命天子，实质招降纳叛，有得罪了朝廷的人就一定厚礼招纳。
English: Since the time of Li Zhengyi, although Pinglu was ostensibly obedient to the emperor, he was in fact submissive and receptive to rebellion. If someone offended the imperial court, he would certainly be polite and receptive.

古文：以严法持下，凡所付遣，必质其妻子；有谋顺者，类夷其家。
现代文：且一向以严法治理军政，凡有什么事交付派遣出去，一定将他的妻儿为人质；有人想要归顺朝廷，一定夷灭他全家。
English: And he has always governed military affairs with strict laws. If anything is sent to him, he will definitely take his wife and children as hostages. If anyone wants to submit to the imperial court, he will definitely destroy his entire family.

古文：以故能胁污士众，传三世云。
现代文：所以他能胁迫士众，传位三代。
English: Therefore, he was able to coerce the community of priests and pass down the throne to three generations.

古文：帝讨蔡，诏兴诸道兵而不及郓，师道选卒二千抵寿春，阳言为王师助，实欲援蔡也。
现代文：皇帝讨伐蔡州吴元济，诏令各道出兵而未及郓州。李师道挑选精兵二千人到达寿春，表面上说是协助官军，实际上却是援救吴元济。
English: The emperor campaigned against Wu Yuanji in Caizhou, and issued an imperial edict ordering all provinces to send troops, but did not reach Zhangzhou. Li Shidao selected two thousand elite soldiers to arrive in Shuchun, ostensibly to assist the official army, but in fact to rescue Wu Yuanji.

古文：亡命少年为师道计曰： 河阴者，江、淮委输，河南，帝都，请烧河阴敖库，募洛壮士劫宫阙，即朝廷救腹心疾，此解蔡一奇也。 
现代文：有个亡命之徒为李师道献计说： 河阴，是江、淮的运输要道；河南，是帝都所在，如果烧毁河阴的转运仓库，再招募洛阳壮士去劫掠皇宫，朝廷马上会去救援腹心之患。这是解蔡州之围的一个奇策。 
English: A fugitive offered a plan for Li Shidao, saying: Heyin is a major transportation route for the Jiang and Huai; Henan is where the imperial capital is located. If you burn the transshipment warehouse in Heyin and recruit Luoyang strongmen to loot the imperial palace, the imperial court will immediately go to the rescue of the vassal. This is a wonderful strategy to solve the siege of Caizhou.

古文：师道乃遣客烧河阴漕院钱三十万缗，米数万斛，仓百馀区。
现代文：李师道于是派人烧了河阴的漕运院，毁去钱三十万缗，米几万斛，仓库一百多区。
English: Li Shidao then sent people to burn the rowing hall in Heyin, destroying 300,000 baht in money, tens of thousands of baht in rice, and more than 100 warehouses.

古文：又有说师道曰： 上虽志讨蔡，谋皆出宰相，而武元衡得君，愿为袁盎事，后宰相必惧，请罢兵，是不用师，蔡围解矣。 
现代文：又有人劝李师道说： 皇帝虽发令讨伐蔡州，其实这主意是宰相出的。现在武元衡得到皇帝信任，如能效法汉代袁盎的做法，以后宰相会心惊，而请皇帝罢兵的。这样那就不用兵将而蔡围就解了。 
English: Another person advised Li Shidao to say: Although the emperor issued an order to attack Caizhou, the idea actually came from the prime minister. Now that Wu Yuanheng has gained the emperor's trust, if he can follow the example of Yuan Weng in the Han Dynasty, the prime minister will be shocked and ask the emperor to call off the troops. In this way, the siege of Caizhou will be resolved without the use of troops.

古文：乃使人杀元衡，伤裴度。
现代文：李师道又听信了，派人杀了武元衡，同时伤了裴度。
English: Li Shidao listened again, and sent someone to kill Wu Yuanhei, and at the same time injured Pei Du.

古文：初，师道置邸东都，多买田伊阙、陆浑间，以舍山棚，遣将訾嘉珍、门察部分之，嵩山浮屠圆静为之谋。
现代文：当初，李师道在东都置官邸，在伊阙、陆浑之间广置田产，给山民建屋，派大将訾嘉珍、门察带兵分守，嵩山的僧人圆静为他出谋划策。
English: At the beginning, Li Shidao set up an official residence in Dongdu, built extensive fields between Ili and Lukhun, built houses for the mountain people, sent the general Zou Jiazhen, the gatekeeper, and the soldiers to keep watch, and the monk Yuan Jing of Songshan made suggestions for him.

古文：元和十年，大飨士邸中，椎牛酾酒，既衷甲矣，其徒白官发之。
现代文：元和十年，李师道在邸中大宴士众，然后将铠甲穿在衣内，准备焚烧掠夺东都。
English: In the 10th year of the Yuan and the 10th year of the Heian, Li Shidao held a grand banquet in his residence, and then put armor on his clothes to prepare to burn and plunder Dongdu.

古文：留守吕元膺以兵掩邸，贼突出，转略畿部，入山中数月，夺山棚所市，山棚怒，道官军袭击，尽杀之。
现代文：有一个部下到官府告发。留守吕元膺带兵包围了邸宅，李师道的人马突围而出，转而掠夺京畿周围，躲入山中几个月，抢夺山棚猎户买卖的东西。激怒了山棚，引导官军袭击，将他们全都杀尽。
English: One of his subordinates went to the government office to report the matter. The remaining Lü Yuanzhang and his soldiers surrounded the mansion. Li Shidao's men broke out of the encirclement and plundered the area around Gyeonggi. They hid in the mountains for several months and robbed the goods sold by the mountain hut hunters. They angered the mountain hut and led the government army to attack and kill them all.

古文：圆静者，年八十馀，尝为史思明将，骁悍绝伦。
现代文：僧人圆静，八十多岁，曾经在史思明手下为将，骠悍异常。
English: The monk Yuanjing, over eighty years old, was once a general under Shi Siming, and was unusually brave.

古文：既执，力士椎其胫，不能折，骂曰： 竖子，折人脚且不能，乃曰健儿！ 
现代文：既被擒获，怕他在途中逃跑，由大力者用锤打他的胫骨，竟然不能折断。圆静骂道 ：没有用的家伙，连打断人腿都不会，还妄称什么健儿。 
English: Having been caught, and fearing that he might escape on the way, a strong man hit him with a hammer on the shinbone, which could not be broken. Yuan Jing scolded: "Useless fellow, can't even break a man's leg, and arrogantly claims to be so strong."

古文：因自置其足折之。
现代文：于是自己把腿搁在石上击折。
English: So he put his leg on a rock and broke it.

古文：且死，叹曰： 败吾事，不得见洛城流血！ 
现代文：将要处死他时，他叹息说： 可惜误我大事，没能让我看见洛城流血！ 
English: As he was about to be put to death, he said with a sigh, "Too bad I missed the big event and didn't get to see L.A. bleed!"

古文：于时，留守、防御将、都亭驿史数十人，皆阴受师道署职，使为讠冋察，故无知者。
现代文：那时，留守、防御将、都亭驿史几十人，都曾暗中接受李师道所署之职，作为他的耳目。
English: At that time, dozens of left-behinds, defensive generals, and prefectural governors had secretly accepted the post of Li Shidao, serving as his eyes and ears.

古文：及穷治，嘉珍、察乃害武元衡者。
现代文：所以李师道的一些阴谋朝中无人知道。及至追根究源地询查，才知道杀害武元衡的是李师道的手下訾嘉珍和门察。
English: Therefore, no one in the DPRK knew about some of Li Shidao's conspiracies. Only after investigating the source did it become known that Li Shidao's subordinates, Gong Jiazhen and Mencha, were responsible for the murder of Wu Yuanheng.

古文：盐铁使王播又得嘉珍所藏弓材五千，并断建陵戟四十七。
现代文：盐铁使王播又搜出訾嘉珍所藏的弓材五千，还有断建陵戟四十七件。
English: Using salt and iron, Wang Bo also found five thousand pieces of bow materials and forty-seven pieces of broken mausoleums from the collection of Zou Jiazhen.

古文：始，师道欲知元济虚实，使刘晏平间道走淮西。
现代文：当初，李师道想知道吴元济的虚实，派刘晏平从小路到淮西。
English: At first, Li Shidao wanted to know the truth about Wu Yuanji and sent Liu Bingping to Huaxi via a back road.

古文：元济日与宴，厚结欢。
现代文：吴元济每日与他欢宴，与他结友。
English: Wu Yuanji feasted with him every day and made friends with him.

古文：晏平归，以为元济暴师数万，而晏然居内，与妻妾戏博，必败之道也。
现代文：刘晏平回来后说，吴元济几万人马暴师于外，自己则安然居内，每日只与妻妾赌博嬉戏，其势必败。
English: After his return, Liu Bingping said that while Wu Yuanji had tens of thousands of followers outside the country, he himself stayed safely at home and only gambled with his wife and concubine every day. He was bound to fail.

古文：师道本倚蔡为重，闻之怒，乃以它事杀晏平。
现代文：李师道原来是看重蔡州才帮助他的。听了刘晏平的话不觉大怒，借别的事杀了刘晏平。
English: Li Shidao originally valued Caizhou before helping him. After listening to Liu Yuping's words, he became enraged and killed Liu Yuping for other reasons.

古文：及闻李光颜拔凌云栅，始大惧，遣使归顺，帝重分兵支两寇，故命给事中柳公绰慰抚之，加检校司空。
现代文：到了听说李光颜攻克了凌云栅，才大为震惊，派使者入朝，愿意归顺。皇帝因当时淮西、恒冀两边用兵，无暇顾及，于是命给事中柳公绰去抚慰笼络，加官检校司空。
English: When he heard that Li Guangyan had conquered Lingyun Grate, he was very shocked and sent an envoy to the North, willing to submit. The emperor had no time to consider the matter, as both sides of Huaixi and Hengji were using soldiers at the time, so he ordered Liu Gongpiao to soothe the situation and add the official inspection of the school.

古文：蔡平，又遣比部员外郎张宿讽令割地质子。
现代文：蔡州乱平，又派比部员外郎张宿劝李师道割地赎罪，送儿子入朝为质。
English: Caizhou Rampyeong also sent a member of the match committee, Wai Lang Zhang Shuk, to persuade Li Shidao to atone for his sins and send his son to the imperial court as a pledge.

古文：宿谓曰： 公今归国为宗姓，以尊卑论之，上叔父矣，不屈一也；以十二州事三百馀州天子，北面称籓，不屈二也；以五十年传爵，臣二百年天子，不屈三也。今反状己暴，上犹许内省，宜遣子入宿卫，割地以赎罪。 
现代文：张宿说 ：公如今归顺朝廷，乃是宗姓，若以尊卑而论，皇上是叔父辈，你不能算屈膝，这是一；你以十二州之众服从三百多州的天子，以小事大，作为藩臣，这是不算屈膝之二；你家传爵五十年，向传位二百年的天子称臣，这是不算屈膝之三，如今你不轨之心已经暴露，皇上还允许你自己赎罪，你该派儿子入朝宿卫，割地自赎。 
English: Zhang Suku said, "Nowadays, to obey the imperial court, it is a family name. If it is a matter of superiority or inferiority, the emperor is an uncle. You cannot count kneeling, which is one; you obey the gods of more than three hundred states with the twelve states; with minor matters, as a vassal, this is not a kneeling of two; your family has been a feudal lord for fifty years, and you call yourself a vassal to the gods of two hundred years. This is not a kneeling of three. Now your crooked heart has been exposed. The emperor has also allowed you to atone for your sins. You should send your son to the

古文：师道乃纳三州，遣子弘方入侍。
现代文：李师道于是送上三个州，派儿子李弘方入侍。
English: Li Shidao was then sent to three states and sent his son Li Hongfang to be a samurai.

古文：宿既还，师道中悔，召诸将议，皆曰： 蔡数州，战三四年乃克，公今十二州，何所虞？ 
现代文：张宿回去后，李师道又后悔了，召集众将商讨。大家都说： 蔡州那么几个州，朝廷打了三四年才打下来，公现在有十二州，有什么可担心的？ 
English: After returning to Zhangjuku, Li Shidao regretted it again and convened the generals to discuss. Everyone said: Caizhou has so many states, the imperial court fought for three or four years to bring it down, but now there are twelve states, what is there to worry about?

古文：大将崔承度独进曰： 公初不示诸将腹心，而今委以兵，此皆嗜利者，朝廷以一浆十饼诱之去矣。 
现代文：大将崔承度进言 ：公当初不将心腹事告诉各将，而今把兵交给他们。这都是一些惟利是图者，朝廷拿一杯酒十个饼就能把他们诱走的。 
English: General Cui Chengdu said, "At the beginning, the prince did not tell the generals about his secret, but now he has handed over the soldiers to them. These are all opportunists, and the court can lure them away with a glass of wine and ten loaves of bread."

古文：师道恚，遣承度诣京师，戒候吏时其还斩之。
现代文：李师道对他的话很生气，派他去京师，嘱咐侦察待他回来时杀了他。
English: Li Shidou was very angry at his words, sent him to the Beijing Division, and ordered the reconnaissance to kill him when he returned.

古文：承度待命客省，不敢还。
现代文：崔承度就在京师待命，不敢回来。
English: Cui Chengdu is on standby in Beijing and does not dare to come back.

古文：帝以其负约，用左散骑常侍李逊喻旨。
现代文：皇帝因李师道负约，派左散骑常侍李逊来宣谕旨意。
English: As Li Shidao had failed to keep his promise, the emperor sent his left horseman, Li Xun, to proclaim his will.

古文：既至，师道严兵以见，逊让曰： 前已约，而今背之，何也？
现代文：李逊到，李师道竟然以武装迎接。李逊责备他说： 前已有约，现在又背约，是为了什么？
English: When Li Xun arrived, Li Shidao went so far as to meet him armed. Li Xun reproached him, saying: There was a previous agreement, and now you have broken the agreement. What is the reason for this?

古文：愿得要言奏天子。 
现代文：请简单说明，我将上奏天子。 
English: Please explain briefly. I will play the role of the son of heaven.

古文：师道许之，然懦暗不自决。
现代文：李师道口中答应，但仍迁延不能决断。
English: Li Shizhong gave his consent, but the postponement could not be decided.

古文：私奴婢媪争言： 先司徒土地，奈何一旦割之？
现代文：私奴婢杨自媪说 ：先司徒的土地，为什么一旦无故割献？
English: Yang Zizhi said, "The land of the predecessors, why was it once cut off for no reason?

古文：今不献三州，不过战耳，即不胜，割地未晚。 
现代文：现在不献这三州，不过是兵戎相见罢了。即使打不胜，到那时再割地也不晚。 
English: If we don't defend these three states now, it's just a battle. Even if we don't win, it won't be too late to reclaim the land.

古文：师道乃上书，以军不协为解。
现代文：李师道于是上书，说是因军士们不肯协力。
English: Li Shidao then wrote a letter saying that it was because the sergeants refused to cooperate.

古文：帝怒，下诏削其官，诏诸军进讨。
现代文：皇帝生气，下诏削去他的官职，诏令各军进讨。
English: The emperor was angry, and in the next edict he removed him from his official post and ordered all the armies to discuss the matter.

古文：武宁节度使李愿使将王智兴破其众，斩二千级，获马牛四千，略地至平阴。
现代文：武宁节度使李愿派大将王智兴打败了他们，斩杀二千人，获马牛四千。进军到平阴。
English: During the Wu Ning Festival, Li Yan sent the general Wang Zhixing to defeat them, killing two thousand people and capturing four thousand horses and cattle. They marched to Pingyin.

古文：横海节度使郑权战福城，斩五百级。
现代文：横海节度使郑权，在福城与李师道兵众交战，斩杀五百人。
English: Henghai Festival made Zheng Quan fight with Li Shidao's soldiers in Fucheng, killing five hundred people.

古文：武宁将李祐战鱼台，败之。
现代文：武宁的大将李在鱼台与之交战，也将其兵众打败。
English: Wu Ning's General Li fought with them in Yutai and defeated their troops.

古文：宣武节度使韩弘拔考城。
现代文：宣武节度使韩弘攻克考城。
English: The declaration of martial law allowed Han Hong to capture Kekao Castle.

古文：淮南节度使李夷简命李听趋海州，下沭汤、朐山，进戍东海。
现代文：淮南节度使李夷简命李听去海州，攻克沭阳、朐山，进戍东海。
English: The Huainan Festival made Li Yijian order Li He to go to Haizhou, conquer Fenyang and Lushan, and enter the East China Sea.

古文：魏博节度使田弘正身将兵自阳刘济河，拒郓四十里而营，再接战，破三万众，禽三千人。
现代文：魏博节度使田弘正亲自带兵从阳刘渡河，在离郓城四十里处扎营，两次接战，击破三万人，擒获三千人。
English: During the Wei Bo Festival, Tian Hongzhen personally led the troops from Yang Liu to cross the river, camped forty miles away from Lucheng, fought twice, defeated thirty thousand people and captured three thousand people.

古文：陈许节度使李光颜攻濮阳，收斗门、杜庄二屯。
现代文：陈许节度使李光颜攻濮阳，收取斗门、杜庄二屯。
English: Chen Huxi ordered Li Guangyan to attack Fenyang and take Doumen and Duzhuang.

古文：弘正又战东阿，残其众五万。
现代文：田弘正又在东阿一战，打败他五万人马。
English: Tian Hongzheng won another battle in East Asia, defeating him by fifty thousand horsepower.

古文：师道每闻败，辄悸成疾，及李祐取金乡，左右莫敢白。
现代文：李师道每听到一处败报，就心悸成病，到李攻取了金乡，左右都不敢再报了。
English: Every time Li Shidao heard of a report of defeat, his heart sank. When Li conquered Jinxiang, he didn't dare to report any more.

古文：初，遣大将刘悟屯阳谷，当魏博军，疑其逗留，悟惧不免，引兵反攻城。
现代文：当初，李师道派大将刘悟屯守阳谷，抵挡魏博的兵力，又怀疑他有二心。刘悟怕终究会被李师道杀害，所以引兵反转来攻郓城。
English: At first, Li Shidao sent General Liu Wotun to guard Yanggu to fend off Wei Bo's forces, and suspected that he was double-minded. Liu Wotun was afraid that he would eventually be killed by Li Shidao, so he led the troops in the opposite direction to attack Yancheng.

古文：师道晨起闻之，白其嫂裴曰： 悟兵反，将求为民，守坟墓。 
现代文：李师道早上起来听说此事，对他的嫂子裴氏说： 刘悟造反了，以后我们只能当个小民守坟墓了。 
English: Li Shidao got up in the morning when he heard about this, and said to his sister-in-law Pei: "Liu Wou has rebelled. From now on, we can only be a small guard of the tomb.

古文：即与弘方匿溷间，兵就禽之。
现代文：当即与李弘方躲进厕所，刘悟的兵把他们擒获。
English: He immediately hid in the toilet with Li Hongfang, and Liu Wuxu's soldiers captured them.

古文：师道请见悟，不许，复请送京师，悟使谓曰： 司空今为囚，何面目见天子！ 
现代文：李师道要求见刘悟，未得允许。
English: Li Shidao asked to see Liu Wuxu, but was not allowed.

古文：犹俯仰祈哀，弘方曰： 不若速死！ 
现代文：又要求把自己送往京师。刘悟让人对他说 ：司空今天已成囚犯，有什么脸面见天子？ 李师道还流涕乞怜，李弘方说： 不如快点死。 
English: He also asked to be sent to the Beijing Division. Liu Wou had someone say to him, "Siku has become a prisoner today, what face does he have to see the Son of God?" Li Shidao was still crying and begging for mercy, and Li Hongfang said, "It would be better to die quickly."

古文：乃并斩之，传首京师。
现代文：于是将父子两人一并斩杀，将首级传送京师，其尸骸暴露，没有人敢去收敛。
English: So they beheaded the father and son together, and sent their heads to the capital. Their bodies were exposed, and no one dared to restrain them.

古文：弃其尸，无敢收视者，有士英秀为殡城左。马皛至，以士礼更葬。初，师古见刘悟，曰： 后必贵，然败吾家者此人也。 
现代文：后来英秀将他们埋在城西。马总来后，以士之礼重新埋葬。先前，李师古见到刘悟，曾说 ：此人以后必贵，不过败我家的也就是这个人。 
English: Later, Yingxiu buried them in the west of the city. After General Ma came, they were reburied with the honor of a scholar. Previously, when Li Shigu saw Liu Wugu, he said, "This person will be valuable in the future, but it was this person who defeated my family."

古文：田弘正之度河也，禽其将夏侯澄等四十七人，有诏悉赦之，给缯絮，还隶魏博、义成军，父母在欲还者优遣，贼皆感慰相告，由是悟得行其谋。
现代文：田弘正渡河时，擒获李师道的大将夏侯澄等四十七人，皇帝诏令全部赦免，并给棉衣，让他们回去隶属魏博、义成军，父母还在、愿意回家的，给以厚赐遣返。贼人都感恩相互告慰。也正因此刘悟能一举成功。
English: When Tian Hongzheng crossed the river, he captured forty-seven people, including Xia Houcheng, the general of Li Shidao. The emperor issued a decree to pardon all of them, and gave them cotton clothes so that they could return to Weibo and Yicheng. If their parents were still alive and wanted to return home, they would be repatriated with a generous gift. The thieves were all grateful and consoled each other. This is also why Liu Wonen was successful.

古文：师道首传弘正营，召澄验之，澄舐目中尘，号绝良久。
现代文：李师道的头传到田弘正营中，召夏侯澄验证。夏侯澄用舌将李师道眼中的尘土舔干净，痛哭了很久。
English: Li Shidao's head was brought to Tianhongzheng Camp, and Xia Houcheng was summoned to verify it. Xia Houcheng licked the dust in Li Shidao's eyes with his tongue and cried for a long time.

古文：悟素与师道妻魏乱，妄言郑公征之裔，不死，没入掖廷，它宗属悉远徙。
现代文：刘悟早就与李师道的妻子魏氏私通，谎说魏氏是郑公徵的后裔，因此得以不死，收入掖廷为婢。其他的宗属都流放远地。
English: Liu Wugu had been having an affair with the Wei clan, the wife of Li Shiduo, for a long time. He falsely claimed that the Wei clan was a descendant of Zheng Gongzhu, so he was able to become immortal and gain the position of a servant in the imperial court. The other clans were exiled to distant lands.

古文：悟独表师古子明安为朗州司户参军。
现代文：刘悟独上表推荐李师古的儿子李明安为郎州司户参军。
English: Liu Wodu recommended Li Shigu's son, Li Ming'an, to join the army.

古文：亲将王承庆，承宗弟也，师道以兄女妻之，潜约左右，欲因肄兵执师道，会悟入，出奔徐州，归朝。
现代文：李师道的亲将王承庆，是王承宗的弟弟，李师道曾把哥哥的女儿许配给他，曾暗中约好左右，想借练兵之机逮住李师道，正好刘悟来，于是逃奔到徐州，归顺朝廷。
English: Wang Chengqing, the prince general of Li Shidao, was the younger brother of Wang Chengzong. Li Shidao had betrothed his brother's daughter to him. They had secretly made an appointment to capture Li Shidao, hoping to use the opportunity to train soldiers. When Liu Wulai arrived, they fled to Xuzhou and surrendered to the imperial court.

