古文：费宏，字子充，铅山人。
现代文：费宏，字子充，江西铅山人。
English: Fei Hong, character Zizhong, Jiangxi lead mountain people.

古文：甫冠，举成化二十三年进士第一，授修撰。
现代文：他刚刚加冠成人就考中成化二十三年进士第一名，担任修撰。
English: He has just been crowned as the first winner of the twenty-three-year-old junior high school student in the middle school entrance examination, and serves as a revisionist.

古文：弘治中，迁左赞善，直讲东宫，进左谕德。
现代文：弘治年间，升为左赞善，任东宫直讲，后升为左谕德。
English: During the Hongzhi era, he was promoted to Zuo Zanzen, appointed as a direct disciple of the Eastern Palace, and later promoted to Zuo Yu De.

古文：武宗立，擢太常少卿，兼侍讲读。
现代文：武宗即位后，提拔他为太常少卿，兼任侍讲。
English: After Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, he was promoted to Taizhong Shaoqing (太常少卿) and concurrently served as an aide-de-camp.

古文：预修《孝宗实录》。充日讲官。
现代文：参加了《孝宗实录》的编写，同时充任皇上的日讲官。
English: He participated in the compilation of "Kozong Shitsuroku" and also served as the emperor's Japanese lecturer.

古文：正德二年拜礼部右侍郎，寻转左。五年进尚书。
现代文：正德二年开始担任礼部右侍郎，不久转任左侍郎，五年升任尚书。
English: Zhengde began to serve as the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department in the second year, soon transferred to the Left Attendant, and was promoted to the Rector in the fifth year.

古文：帝耽于逸乐，早朝日讲俱废。
现代文：武宗当时沉浸在游佚、享乐中间，早朝、日讲都耽搁了。
English: At that time, Wu Zong was immersed in the middle of travel and enjoyment. In the early morning, he was delayed in speaking Japanese.

古文：宏请勤政、务学、纳谏，报闻。
现代文：费宏上书请求皇上勤于政事，努力学习，听取忠言，武宗回答说知道了。
English: Fei Hong sent a letter requesting the emperor to be diligent in politics, study hard, and listen to loyal advisers, and Emperor Wu replied that he understood.

古文：鲁府邹平王子当潩当袭父爵，为弟当凉所夺且数年矣。宏因当潩奏辨，据法正之。
现代文：鲁王府邹平王的儿子当赮本当继承父亲的爵位，却被他的弟弟当凉夺走，事已过去几年了，费宏还是根据当赮的奏书，依法加以改正。
English: It has been several years since the son of Lu Wangfu and Lu Ping Wang, Dang Xuan, actually inherited his father's title, but was taken away by his brother Dang Liang. Feihong still corrected it according to Dang Xuan's report.

古文：当凉怒，诬宏受赂，宏不为动。
现代文：当凉恼了，诬告费宏接受了贿赂，费宏却没被吓倒。
English: When irritated, he falsely accused Fei Hong of accepting bribes, but Fei Hong was not intimidated.

古文：明年冬十二月，命宏兼文渊阁大学士参预机务。
现代文：第二年十二月份，武宗让费宏兼任文渊阁大学士，参与国家机密大事。
English: In December of the following year, Wuzong Zhanfeihong also served as a scholar of Wenyuan Pavilion University and participated in the state secret event.

古文：寻加太子太保、武英殿大学士，进户部尚书。
现代文：不久加官太子太保、武英殿大学士，升任户部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of Crown Prince Taibo, and became a scholar of the Imperial Household Agency. He was also promoted to the post of household secretary.

古文：幸臣钱宁阴党宸濠，欲交欢宏，馈彩币及他珍玩。拒却之。宁惭且恚。
现代文：武宗宠用的宦官钱宁暗里和宸濠勾结。他想和费宏结交，就赠送彩币及别的珍玩给费宏，费宏拒不接受，钱宁又羞又气。
English: Wu Zong's favorite eunuch Qian Ning secretly colluded with Yu. He wanted to make friends with Fei Hong, so he gave Fei Hong coins and other precious toys. Fei Hong refused to accept them, and Channing was ashamed and angry.

古文：宸濠谋复护卫、屯田，辇白金巨万，遍赂朝贵，宁及兵部尚书陆完主之。
现代文：宸濠打算恢复护卫军和屯田，用车子装了数万两白银对朝廷中的权贵广为贿赂，由钱宁和兵部尚书陆完在京城做主送人。
English: Zhai planned to restore the escort army and the military garrison. He used cars loaded with tens of thousands of silver to bribe the magnates in the imperial court. Channing and the military commander Shang Shuluan were the main guests in the capital.

古文：宏从弟编修寀，其妻与濠妻，兄弟也，知之以告宏。
现代文：费宏的堂弟、编修费肕的妻子与宸濠的妻子是姊妹，费肕知道这事就告诉了费宏。
English: Fei Hong's cousin, editor Fei Yao's wife and Yao's wife are sisters, Fei Yao knew this and told Fei Hong.

古文：宏入朝，完迎问曰： 宁王求护卫，可复乎？ 
现代文：费宏入朝时，陆完迎着问道： 宁王请恢复他的护卫军，可以吗？ 
English: When Fei Hong entered the court, Lu Gan asked in welcome: Ning Wang, please restore his escort army, is it possible?

古文：宏曰： 不知当日革之者何故？ 
现代文：费宏问 ：不知当时因为什么取消他的护卫兵？ 
English: Fei Hong asked: I don't know why his escort was canceled at that time?

古文：完曰： 今恐不能不予。 
现代文：陆完说 ：现在恐怕不能不准许他吧。 
English: Lu Gan said, "I'm afraid we have to let him go now."

古文：宏峻却之。
现代文：费宏严厉地拒绝了。
English: Fei Hong sternly refused.

古文：及中官持奏至阁，宏极言不当予，诏卒予之。
现代文：等到中官把奏本送到内阁里来，费宏极力说不应当准许他，但是诏书最后还是准了宸濠的请求。
English: When the lieutenant-general sent the report to the cabinet, Fei Hong insisted that he should not be allowed to do so, but the edict finally approved the request.

古文：于是宸濠与宁合，而恚宏。
现代文：于是宸濠与钱宁一样都痛恨费宏。
English: As a result, Hao, like Channing, hates Fei Hong.

古文：宁数侦宏事无所得。以御史余珊尝劾寀不当留翰林，即指为宏罪。中旨责陈状，宏乞休。
现代文：钱宁几次暗中找茬都没有抓到什么把柄，后来因为御史余珊曾经弹劾费肕，认为他不应该留在翰林院，所以钱宁就把费肕留在翰林院作为费宏的罪，从宫中传下圣旨，责令费宏说明情况。
English: Channing tried several times to find fault with Fei Hong in secret, but failed to catch him. Later, because the Grand Historian Yu Shan had impeached Fei Hong, believing that he should not stay in the Hanlin Academy, Channing took Fei Hong's crime of leaving Fei Hong in the Hanlin Academy as a sin, and sent a sacred edict from the palace, ordering Fei Hong to explain the situation.

古文：命并寀致仕。
现代文：费宏请求退休，朝廷下令要费肕一起退休。
English: Fei Hong asked to retire, and the court ordered Fei Yao to retire together.

古文：宁遣骑伺宏后，抵临清，焚其舟，资装尽毁。
现代文：钱宁派人骑马悄悄跟在费宏后边，到临清时烧掉了他坐的船，连行李都全部烧没了。
English: Channing sent a man on horseback to quietly follow behind Fei Hong, and when it was time to leave, he burned the boat he was on, and even his luggage was all burned up.

古文：宏归，杜门谢客。
现代文：费宏回到家，关上房门不与宾客往来。
English: When Fei Hong got home, he closed the door and did not mingle with the guests.

古文：宸濠复求与通，宏谢绝之，益怒。
现代文：宸濠又谋求结交他，费宏谢绝了，宸濠更加恼怒。
English: Zou again sought to befriend him, Fei Hong declined, Zou was even more angry.

古文：会宏族人与邑奸人李镇等讼，宸濠阴令镇贼宏。
现代文：正好费宏的族人与本乡的一个坏人李镇等打官司，宸濠暗中纵使李镇害费宏。
English: Just as Fei Hong's people were fighting a lawsuit with a villain in his hometown, Li Zhen, and so on, even though Li Zhen harmed Fei Hong.

古文：镇等遂据险作乱，率众攻费氏。
现代文：李镇等于是就占据有利地势造起反来，率领手下攻打费氏。
English: Li Zhen immediately took advantage of the favorable situation and led his men to attack Mr. Fei.

古文：索宏不得，执所与讼者支解之，发宏先人冢，毁其家，劫掠远近，众至三千人。
现代文：寻找费宏没找到，抓住那些同他打官司的费家人，就把他们肢解了，又挖了费家祖先的坟墓，毁了他的家。后来远近抢掠，人数发展达到三千。
English: They searched for Fei Hong, but did not find him. They caught those Fei family members who sued him, and dismembered them. They also dug up the graves of Fei's ancestors and destroyed his home. Later, they looted far and near, and the number of people grew to three thousand.

古文：宏驰使诉于朝。下巡抚孙燧按状，始遣兵剿灭。
现代文：费宏派人到朝廷告状，朝廷下令巡抚孙燧调查情况以后，才派兵加以消灭。
English: Fei Hong sent people to the imperial court to complain, and the imperial court ordered the inspector Sun Ye to investigate the situation before sending soldiers to eliminate it.

古文：宸濠败，言者争请召宏。
现代文：宸濠败亡后，谏官们争着上书请求召用费宏。
English: After Zou's defeat and death, the eunuchs scrambled to submit a petition to summon Feihong.

古文：世宗即位，遣行人即家起宏，加少保，入辅政。
现代文：世宗即位以后，派遣行人到家中去召费宏出来，加官少保，入内阁中辅佐朝政。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, a messenger was sent to his home to summon Fei Hong, who was promoted to the position of Junior Vice-Minister of Public Security and became a member of the Cabinet of Vice-Ministers of State.

古文：宏持重识大体，明习国家故事。
现代文：费宏办事稳重，识大体，熟悉国家的旧事。
English: Fei Hong is steady in his work, has a general knowledge, and is familiar with the country's history.

古文：与杨廷和、蒋冕、毛纪同心协赞，数劝帝革武宗弊政。 大礼 之议，诸臣力与帝争，帝不能堪。宏颇揣知帝旨，第署名公疏，未尝特谏，以是帝心善之。
现代文：他与杨廷和、蒋冕、毛纪同心协力，辅佐世宗，曾几次劝世宗革除武宗时的弊政。对于 大礼 的争论，群臣竭力与世宗对抗，世宗受不了，费宏揣摩到了世宗的心思，只是在大家的上书里签过名，没有进行过单独的谏劝，因此世宗心里喜欢他这样的人。
English: He made concerted efforts with Yang Tinghe, Jiang Guanjun, and Mao Ji to support Shizong, and had several times persuaded Shizong to overthrow the evil government of Wu Zong. As for the debate on the grand salute, the ministers tried their best to confront Shizong, but Shizong could not stand it. Feihong guessed Shizong's thoughts, but only signed his name in everyone's letter, and did not carry out a separate persuasion. Therefore, Shizong liked people like him in his heart.

古文：及廷和等去位，宏为首辅。
现代文：等到廷和等离位后，费宏就成为首辅大臣。
English: After the abdication of Ting Wo and others, Fei Hong became the First Vice-Minister.

古文：加少师兼太子太师、吏部尚书、谨身殿大学士，委任甚至。
现代文：世宗加封他为少师兼太子太师、吏部尚书、谨身殿大学士，对他的委任很是周到。
English: King Sejong appointed him as a young teacher and prince's teacher, an official of the Ministry of Education, and a scholar of the Imperial Household. His appointment was very thoughtful.

古文：户部议督正德时逋赋，宏偕石珤、贾咏请断自十年以后。
现代文：户部讨论征收正德年间拖欠的田赋，费宏和石王缶、贾咏上书请断自正德十年以后。
English: Ten years after Zhengde, Fei Hong, Shi Wang Can, and Jia Yao petitioned the Ministry of Household Affairs to discuss the collection of land tax arrears during the Zhengde period.

古文：从之。
现代文：世宗听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：帝以四方灾异，敕群臣修省。
现代文：不久，世宗因为各地出现的灾异，指示群臣修身反省。
English: Soon after, Sejong instructed his retainers to practice self-cultivation and self-reflection because of the calamities that occurred in various regions.

古文：宏等因言： 陛下用度无节，工役不休。
现代文：费宏等于是上书说： 陛下用度不加节制，工役没完没了。
English: Fei Hong wrote a letter saying, "Your Majesty's consumption is unbridled, and the labor is endless.

古文：畿内土地半成庄田，内库收纳要求逾倍。
现代文：京畿内的田地有一半变成了皇庄，内库的收入要求超过以前的一倍。
English: Half of the fields in Gyeonggi Province were turned into imperial estates, and the income requirement of the treasury was more than doubled.

古文：太仓无三年之积而冗食日增，京营无十万之兵而赴工不已。
现代文：太仓里边没有三年所需的积蓄，可是宫廷闲杂人员一天天增多。京营的兵额不足十万，还不停地调派去做工役。
English: Taicang did not have the necessary savings for three years, but the number of idle people in the court increased day by day. The number of soldiers in the Beijing camp was less than one hundred thousand, and they were constantly assigned to work.

古文：直臣得罪未见原，言官举职乃被诘。
现代文：正直的大臣被问罪，得不到原谅，谏官做本份的工作，您竟然大加诘问。
English: An honest minister is accused and not pardoned, a eunuch does his duty, and you heap insults on him.

古文：律所当行者数经谳不诛，罪无可辨者遽传旨获免。
现代文：按律该杀的人几经审判至今不加正法，罪行已经无法狡辩的恶人却忽然传下圣旨把他赦免了。
English: Those who should have been killed according to the law have not been corrected after several trials, but the wicked, whose crimes have become indefensible, have suddenly been pardoned by the Holy Will.

古文：干和召怨，自非一端。 
现代文：您想求得天地和合却召来鬼神埋怨，原因并不是一个方面的。 
English: If you want to achieve harmony between heaven and earth, but bring ghosts and gods to complain, the reason is not one-sided.

古文：帝引咎褒答，然不能用也。
现代文：世宗称赞了他，自行引咎，但终究没能采用他的意见。
English: The Sejong praised him, self-reproached, but ultimately failed to adopt his opinion.

古文：大同兵变，张璁请讨之。
现代文：后来大同发生兵变，张璁请加以讨伐。
English: Later, there was a mutiny in Datong, and Zhang Ye asked him to fight against it.

古文：宏曰： 讨而胜，玉石俱焚；不胜，彼将据城守，损威重多矣。
现代文：费宏说： 讨伐能得胜时，玉石俱焚；如果不能取胜，叛兵就会据城自守，那时将大大损害朝廷的声威。
English: Fei Hong said: When the crusade can win, the jade will be burned; if it cannot win, the rebels will defend themselves according to the city, then it will greatly damage the prestige of the imperial court.

古文：莫若观变而徐图之。 
现代文：不如静观事态的改变，慢慢地规划此事。 
English: It's better to wait and see how the situation changes, and slowly plan for it.

古文：事果旋定。
现代文：事情不久果然平息了。
English: Things soon calmed down.

古文：宏为人和易，好推毂后进。
现代文：费宏为人和蔼、平易，喜欢帮助、引进后生。
English: Fei Hong is amiable and easy-going, and likes to help and introduce the younger generation.

古文：其于 大礼 不能强谏，亦未尝附离。
现代文：他对于 大礼 一事虽然没能大力谏阻，也不曾附会别人。
English: Although he failed to vigorously oppose the matter of the grand banquet, he did not attach others.

古文：而是时席书、张璁、桂萼用事。
现代文：这时席书、张璁、桂萼掌了权。
English: At this time, Shi Shu, Zhang Ye, and Gui Cale took power.

古文：书弟检讨春，故由他曹改用。及《武宗实录》成，宏议出为佥事，书由是憾宏。
现代文：席书的弟弟、检讨席春原本是由别的部曹改任的，等《武宗实录》编成后，费宏主张把他调出做佥事，席书因此恨起费宏来。
English: Shishu's younger brother, Shichun Shishu, was originally reassigned from another department, and after the compilation of the "Bujong Record," Feihong advocated that he be transferred to do anecdotes, so Shishu hated Feihong.

古文：璁、萼由郎署入翰林，骤至詹事，举朝恶其人。
现代文：张璁、桂萼是由郎署进入翰林，然后突然间升到詹事，所以满朝大臣厌恶他们的为人。
English: Zhang Xuan and Gui Caly entered Hanlin from Langdian, and then suddenly rose to Zhanjie, so the Manchurian minister loathed them as people.

古文：宏每示裁抑，璁、萼亦大怨。
现代文：费宏过去也常示意世宗对他们要有所抑制，张璁、桂萼对他也很怨恨。
English: In the past, Fei Hong also often suggested that Shizong should restrain them, and Zhang Xuan and Gui Caly also resented him.

古文：帝尝御平台，特赐御制七言一章，命辑倡和诗集，署其衔曰 内阁掌参机务辅导首臣 。
现代文：世宗曾经驾临平台访古，特别赠送他一首自己写的七言诗，让他编辑一本唱和诗集，把他的官衔题写为 内阁掌参机务辅导首臣 。
English: King Sejong once came to visit Gyeongbokgung, and presented him with a seven-character poem he had written, asked him to edit a song and poem collection, and wrote his official title as "Cabinet Chief Advisor."

古文：其见尊礼，前此未有也。
现代文：他得到的尊敬、礼遇是以前没有过的。
English: He's getting a level of respect and courtesy that he's never had before.

古文：璁、萼滋害宏宠。萼言： 诗文小技，不足劳圣心，且使宏得冯宠灵，凌压朝士。 
现代文：张璁、桂萼一心要破坏皇上对费宏的宠信，桂萼说 ：诗文是雕虫小技，不值得陛下为之劳心费神，况且这样做会使费宏凭借陛下的宠爱欺压别的大臣呢。 
English: Zhang Xuan and Gui Calyx were bent on destroying the emperor's favoured letter to Fei Hong. Gui Calyx said, "Poetry is a minor skill of carving insects. It is not worth your majesty's time and effort. Moreover, by doing so, Fei Hong will use your majesty's favour to bully other ministers."

古文：帝置不省。
现代文：世宗置若罔闻，未予理睬。
English: The world turned a deaf ear and paid no attention.

古文：萼遂与璁毁宏于帝，言宏纳郎中陈九川所盗天方贡玉，受尚书邓璋赇谋起用，并及其居乡事。
现代文：桂萼于是与张璁一起在世宗面前谤毁费宏，说费宏接收了郎中陈九川所偷的天方贡玉，接受了尚书邓璋的贿赂为他策划起用，并且说到他闲居乡间的一些事。
English: Gui Cai then slandered Fei Hong together with Zhang Ye in front of Shizong, saying that Fei Hong received the tribute money stolen by his brother-in-law Chen Jiuchuan, accepted the bribe of Shangshu Deng Ye for his planning and use, and said that he was idle in the countryside.

古文：宏上书乞休，略曰： 萼、璁挟私怨臣屡矣。
现代文：费宏上书请求退休，大概地说： 桂萼、张璁怀着私心怨恨我多次了。
English: Fei Hong wrote a letter requesting retirement, saying roughly: Gui Calyp and Zhang Ye have harbored selfish grudges against me many times.

古文：不与经筵讲官则怨，不与修献皇帝实录则怨，不为两京乡试考官则怨，不为教习则又怨。
现代文：不让他们担任经筵讲官就埋怨；不让他们参加编写《献皇帝实录》就埋怨；不让他们担任两京乡试考官就埋怨；没当成教习也埋怨。
English: They complained that they were not allowed to serve as lecturers of economics; they complained that they were not allowed to participate in the compilation of "The Emperor's Report"; they complained that they were not allowed to serve as examiners of the two Beijing townships; they also complained that they were not allowed to teach.

古文：萼、璁疑内阁事属臣操纵，抑知臣下采物望，上禀圣裁，非可专擅。
现代文：桂萼、张璁疑心内阁的事都是我在操纵着，岂不知我也向下参考大家的舆论，向上禀承陛下裁决而决定事情，并不是可以一个人就专断的。
English: Gui Caly, Zhang Xuan, and the suspicious cabinet are all under my control. Don't you know that I also refer to everyone's public opinion and follow His Majesty's ruling to decide things? It is not possible for one person to arbitrarily decide things.

古文：萼、璁日攘袂搤掔，觊觎臣位。
现代文：桂萼、张璁一天天擦拳捋袖，企图争到我这个位置。
English: Gui Calyp and Zhang Xuan have been working day in and day out, trying to fight for my position.

古文：臣安能与小人相齮龁？
现代文：我怎么能够和这种小人相互倾轧？
English: How can I compete with such a villain?

古文：祈赐骸骨。 
现代文：请让我告老还乡吧。 
English: Please let me go back to my hometown.

古文：不允。
现代文：世宗不同意。
English: He did not agree to the request of the Guru.

古文：及璁居兵部，宏欲用新宁伯谭纶掌奋武营，璁遂劾宏劫制府部。
现代文：等张璁任职兵部时，费宏想任用新宁伯谭纶掌管奋武营，张璁就弹劾说费宏胁迫兵部。
English: When Zhang Ye was in charge of the military department, Fei Hong wanted to appoint Xin Ningbo Tan Ye to be in charge of the military camp, Zhang Ye impeached that Fei Hong coerced the military department.

古文：无何，又因宏子懋良坐罪下吏，攻之益力，复录前后劾疏上之。
现代文：不多久，又借费宏的儿子懋良因罪入狱一事，更加起劲地攻击他，又抄录前前后后弹劾费宏的奏章一起递了上去。
English: Not long after, he took advantage of the fact that Fei Hong's son, Hao Liang, was jailed for a crime, and attacked him more vigorously. He also copied Fei Hong's impeachment report and handed it to him.

古文：不得请，则力求罢，诋宏尤切，章数上。
现代文：达不到目的，就一个劲地请罢免自己，诋毁费宏就更是激切，奏章一个接一个。
English: If you can't achieve the goal, you can't help but dismiss yourself, and denigrating Fei Hong is even more intense, one chapter after another.

古文：宏亦连疏乞休，帝辄下优诏慰留，然终不以谴璁、萼。
现代文：费宏也接连上书请求退休，世宗总是下诏书加以安慰、留用。
English: Fei Hong also successively sent a letter requesting retirement, and Shizong always sent an imperial edict to comfort and retain him.

古文：于是奸人王邦奇承璁、萼指，上书污故大学士廷和等，并诬宏。
现代文：这时奸臣王邦奇禀承张璁、桂萼的意思，上书诬告前大学士廷和等人，并且诬告费宏。
English: At this time, the treacherous vassal Wang Bangqi, following the lead of Zhang Ye and Gui Ce, falsely accused the former university judge Ding He and others, and falsely accused Fei Hong.

古文：宏竟致仕去。
现代文：费宏终于被允许退休而去。
English: Fei Hong was finally allowed to retire.

古文：时六年二月也。
现代文：当时是嘉靖六年二月。
English: It was February of the sixth year of Jiajing.

古文：十月，璁遂以尚书、大学士入直内阁。间一岁萼亦入矣。
现代文：十月里，张璁就以尚书、大学士的身份到内阁值勤了，隔一年时间桂萼也进来了。
English: In October, Zhang Qian went to the cabinet on duty as a scholar and university professor. A year later, Gui Caly also came in.

古文：十四年，萼既前死，璁亦去位，帝始追念宏。四月，再遣行人即家起官如故。
现代文：十四年，桂萼已经死去，张璁也离职而去，世宗才又追念起费宏来，四月份又和过去一样派行人到家里召费宏出来。
English: Fourteen years later, Gui Calyp has died, Zhang Xuan has also left his post and gone away. It was only after that that Shizong remembered Feihong, and in April, as in the past, sent a passerby to his home to summon Feihong.

古文：七月至京师。
现代文：七月，费宏到了北京。
English: In July, Fei Hong arrived in Beijing.

古文：使中使劳以上尊御馔，面谕曰： 与卿别久，卿康健无恙，宜悉心辅导称朕意。 
现代文：世宗派宦官用上等的御用佳肴慰劳他，当面告诉他说 ：与爱卿分别多年，爱卿健康无病，应该尽心辅导，莫让我失望啊！ 
English: The sectarian eunuch comforted him with first-class royal delicacies, and told him in person: I have been separated from Aiqing for many years, Aiqing is healthy and disease-free, I should do my best to guide him, don't let me down!

古文：宏顿首谢。
现代文：费宏顿首称谢。
English: Fei Hongdon was the first to express his thanks.

古文：自是眷遇益厚。
现代文：从此世宗对他的依恋、礼遇很是丰厚。
English: From then on, Shizong was very attached to him and treated him with great courtesy.

古文：偕李时召入无逸殿，与周览殿庐，从容笑语，移时始出。
现代文：和李时一块应诏进入无逸殿，世宗和他们一道周览殿房，从容笑语，过一段时间才出来。
English: Together with Li Shih, they entered the Muxiyi Palace in response to the imperial edict. Shizong looked around the palace together with them, and only came out after a while with a smile.

古文：赐银章曰 旧辅元臣 。
现代文：赐给他的银章上刻着 旧辅元臣 。
English: The silver medallion given to him is engraved with the words "Old Vice-Minister."

古文：数有咨问，宏亦竭诚无隐。
现代文：几次向他询问政事，费宏也至诚不欺，无所隐瞒。
English: Fei Hong asked him several times about political affairs. Fei Hong was also very sincere and did not hide anything.

古文：承璁、萼操切之后，易以宽和，朝士皆慕乐之。
现代文：当时继张璁、桂萼的苛刻政治之后，费宏改行宽和政策，满朝大臣都爱戴他。
English: At that time, after the harsh politics of Zhang Ye and Gui Caly, Fei Hong changed to a broad policy, and the ministers of the whole dynasty loved him.

古文：未几卒，年六十有八。
现代文：没多长时间他死了，终年六十八岁。
English: He died not long after, aged 68.

古文：帝嗟悼，赙恤加等，赠太保，谥文宪。
现代文：世宗惋惜地表示哀悼，给他家里的抚恤也等外有加，追赠他为太保，谥文宪。
English: Shizong regretfully expressed his condolences, gave him a family pension and other extras, posthumously awarded him the title of grand tutor, and bestowed on Wenxin.

古文：以兵部尚书马文升请，令瑄与御史邓庠往按。
现代文：费宏三次入内阁，辅佐两代皇帝近十年。中间遭到谗言诽谤，但最终还是建功立名而死。
English: Fei Hong entered the cabinet three times, and assisted two generations of emperors for nearly ten years. In the middle, he was slandered, but eventually he made a name for himself and died.

古文：白苗无反状，抚定之。劾昶、经及镇守中官张成罪。
现代文：他从少保入内阁时，弟弟费肕做着赞善，侄儿懋中进士及第后任编修，他的长子懋贤刚刚充任庶吉士，他们一家父子兄弟一起都在皇帝身边做着大官。
English: When he entered the cabinet as a minor, his younger brother Fei Yao was a Zanzan, his nephew Zou Zhong Jin Shi was the second editor, and his eldest son Zou Xian had just been appointed the second secretary. Together, they all served as high-ranking officials around the emperor.

古文：迁贵州参议以终。翟銮，字仲鸣，其先诸城人。
现代文：翟銮，字仲鸣，他的祖先原来是山东诸城人。
English: His ancestors were originally from various cities in Shandong Province.

古文：曾祖为锦衣卫校尉，因家京师。
现代文：他的曾祖父在北京当过锦衣卫校尉，就把家安在了京师。
English: His great-grandfather was a captain of the Jin Yi Wei School in Beijing, and he made his home in Beijing.

古文：举弘治十八年进士，改庶吉士。
现代文：翟銮本人考中弘治十八年进士，改选为庶吉士。
English: In 18 years, he became a member of the Junior High School Examination, and was reelected as a member of the Junior High School Examination.

古文：正德初，授编修。
现代文：正德初年，当上编修。
English: In Zhengde's first year, he became editor-in-chief.

古文：刘瑾改翰林于他曹，以銮为刑部主事。
现代文：刘瑾把翰林们改派各个部曹时，让翟銮当了刑部主事。
English: When Liu Ye reassigned Hanlin and the others to different departments, he put Ye in charge of the criminal investigation department.

古文：旋复官，进侍读。
现代文：不久又恢复原职，升为侍读。
English: He was soon reinstated to his original position and promoted to chauffeur.

古文：嘉靖中，累迁礼部右侍郎。
现代文：嘉靖年间，他几经迁升，做了礼部右侍郎。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jiajing, he was promoted several times and became the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department.

古文：六年春，廷推阁臣。帝意在张孚敬，弗与。命再推，乃及銮。
现代文：六年春天，朝廷推举阁臣，世宗的意思想用张孚敬，而张孚敬不在推举的名单中，就命令再一次推举，于是推出了翟銮。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, the imperial court nominated a cabinet minister, and Shizong wanted to use Zhang Fujing, but Zhang Fujing was not on the nomination list, so he ordered another nomination, and then issued the edict.

古文：中贵人多誉銮者，帝遂逾次用之。
现代文：因为宫廷中宦官有很多人称赞翟銮，世宗于是破格提用他。
English: Because there were many people who praised the eunuch in the court, Shizong used him in an unconventional way.

古文：杨一清以銮望轻，请用吴一鹏、罗钦顺。帝不许，命銮以吏部左侍郎兼学士入直文渊阁。
现代文：杨一清认为翟銮名望太轻，请任用吴一鹏或者罗钦顺，世宗不答应，命令让翟銮以吏部左侍郎兼学士的名义到文渊阁中值勤。
English: Yang Iqing thought that Xuan's reputation was too low, so he asked Wu Yipeng or Luo Qinshun to be appointed. However, Shizong did not agree, and ordered Xuan to go to Wenyuan Pavilion in the name of the left attendant and bachelor of the cadre department.

古文：寻赐银章曰 清谨学士。 
现代文：不久赐给他一枚银章，上刻 清谨学士 四个字。
English: Soon, he was awarded a silver medal inscribed with the four characters of "Pure and Prudent."

古文：銮初入阁，一清、谢迁辅政，既而孚敬与桂萼入，銮皆谨事之。
现代文：翟銮刚入阁时，杨一清、谢迁还在辅政，后来孚敬与桂萼也进来了，翟銮对他们都小心侍奉。
English: When Gong first entered the cabinet, Yang Iqing and Xie Qian were still in the auxiliary government. Later, Fu Jing and Gui Cale also came in, and Gong served them carefully.

古文：孚敬、萼皆以所赐银章密封言事，銮独无所言。
现代文：孚敬、桂萼都用世宗赐给他们的银章密封上书评论政事，翟銮却没有什么评论。
English: Fu Jing and Gui Calyp both used the silver seal given to them by King Sejong to seal a letter to comment on political affairs, but Zou had no comment.

古文：诘之，则顿首谢曰： 陛下明圣，臣将顺不暇，何献替之有。 
现代文：世宗质问他，他磕头认罪说 ：陛下英明，我顺承您的教导还来不及呢，能有什么好建议呢？ 
English: Sejong questioned him, and he confessed, saying, "Your Majesty is wise. It is too late for me to follow your teachings. What good advice can I give you?"

古文：帝心爱之。
现代文：世宗心里很喜欢他做的回答。
English: Sejong really liked his answer.

古文：一清、萼、孚敬先后罢，銮留独秉政者两月。
现代文：杨一清、桂萼、孚敬先后都被免除后，翟銮一个人留下来执政两个月。
English: After Yang Yixing, Gui Caly, and Fu Jing were all pardoned, Zou was left in power for two months.

古文：其后李时、方献夫入，位皆居銮上，銮亦无所怫。
现代文：后来李时、方献夫进来，地位都在翟銮上边，翟銮也没有什么不高兴。
English: Later, Li Shiji and Fang Xianfu came in, and their positions were on the upper side of the cocoon, and the cocoon was not unhappy.

古文：帝数召时、銮入见，尝问： 都察院拟籍谷大用资产，当乎？ 
现代文：世宗几次召李时和他进去问话，一次世宗问他们 ：都察院决定抄没谷大用的家产，合适吗？ 
English: Several times when Sejong called Lee to go in and talk to him, once Sejong asked them: Is it appropriate for the Duka-in to decide to confiscate the family property of Gu Datong?

古文：时、銮皆北人，与中贵合。时曰： 所拟不中律。 
现代文：李时和翟銮都是北方人，和宫廷中宦官要好，所以李时说 ：这样判决不合乎法律规定。 
English: Li Shih and Zou are both northerners, and they are better than eunuchs in the court, so Li Shih said: Such a judgment is not in accordance with the law.

古文：銮曰： 按律，籍没止三条，谋反、叛逆及奸党耳。
现代文：翟銮说 ：按照法律规定，判处抄家的罪行只有三条：谋反、叛逆和奸党。
English: Zou said: According to the law, there are only three crimes to be sentenced for house raiding: conspiracy, treason and treason.

古文：不合三尺法，何以信天下。 
现代文：判刑如果不合乎法律规定，怎么取信于天下呢？ 
English: If the sentence is not in accordance with the law, how can it be trusted by the world?

古文：帝曰： 大用乱政先朝，正奸党也。 
现代文：世宗说： 大用在武宗时坏乱国事，不正是奸党？ 
English: Sejong said, "Wasn't it the ruffian faction that caused chaos in the country when Bujong was in power?

古文：銮曰： 陛下，即天也。春生秋杀，何所不可。 
现代文：翟銮就说 ：陛下就是老天爷，春天生长万物，秋天杀死万物，有什么不行的呢？ 
English: Toad said, "Your Majesty is God. Everything grows in the spring, and everything dies in the fall. What's not to like?"

古文：帝卒从重拟。
现代文：世宗最后还是从重判处了谷大用一案。
English: In the end, Sejong gave a heavy sentence in the case of Gu Dayong.

古文：丁生母忧归。
现代文：翟銮后来因替生母守丧回家去了。
English: Later, she went home to grieve for her birth mother.

古文：服阕，久不召。
现代文：除下丧服很长时间内不被召用。
English: They will not be called up for a long time after removing their mourning clothes.

古文：夏言、顾鼎臣居政府，銮与谋召己。
现代文：夏言、顾鼎臣当时在主持政府事务，翟銮和他们商量希望召自己回朝。
English: Xia Yan and Gu Dingchen were in charge of government affairs at that time, and he discussed with them and hoped to call himself back to the North.

古文：会帝将南巡，虑塞上有警，议遣重臣巡视，言等因荐銮充行边使。
现代文：正好世宗即将南巡，担心边塞上发生战争，考虑派一名重臣前往巡视，夏言等就借此机会推荐翟銮担任行边使。
English: Just as Shizong was about to make a tour of the south, he was worried about a war breaking out on the border fortress and considered sending a senior minister to make a tour. Xia Yan and others took this opportunity to recommend Yao to serve as a border envoy.

古文：十八年二月改兵部尚书兼右都御史，诸边文武将吏咸受节制。
现代文：十八年二月，翟銮改任兵部尚书兼右都御史前往上任，各处边镇上的文武将吏都接受他的管辖。
English: In February 18th, he was appointed as the head of the military department and the governor of the capital, and all the military and civilian officials in the border towns accepted his jurisdiction.

古文：且赍帑金五十万犒边军，东西往返三万余里。
现代文：世宗又拨出五十万两国库银给他犒赏边防部队。翟銮在此期间东西往返跑了三万多里路。
English: Sejong also allocated half a million rupees from the treasury of the two countries to reward the border troops. During this period, he traveled more than thirty thousand miles from east to west.

古文：明年春入京，遂命以原官入阁。
现代文：第二年春天返回北京，世宗就让他以原先的身份进入内阁。
English: When he returned to Beijing in the spring of the following year, Sejong allowed him to enter the cabinet in his former capacity.

古文：在大同与总督毛伯温议筑五堡，过甘肃与总督刘天和议拓嘉峪关，皆受荫叙。
现代文：过去在大同，翟銮曾经与总督毛伯温商议过修复五堡，过甘肃时与总督刘天和商议过开拓嘉峪关，工程完成后翟銮都受封荫、嘉奖。
English: In the past, in Datong, Yu had discussed the restoration of the Five Castles with Governor Mao Bowen, and when he visited Gansu, he discussed the development of Jiayuguan with Governor Liu Tianhe. After the project was completed, Yu was awarded and commended.

古文：二十一年，言罢，銮为首辅。
现代文：嘉靖二十一年，夏言被免除了职务，翟銮就担任了首辅。
English: In the 21st year of Jiajing, Xia Yan was relieved of his duties, and Zou served as the first assistant.

古文：时已加少保、武英殿大学士，进少傅、谨身殿。
现代文：当时他已经升到少保、武英殿大学士，又升为少傅、谨身殿大学士。
English: At that time, he had already been promoted to the rank of Shobo (Junior Security Officer) and Master of the College of the Imperial Household, and then to the rank of Shofu (Junior Master) and Master of the College of the Imperial Household.

古文：严嵩初入，銮以资地居其上，权远出嵩下，而嵩终恶銮，不能容。
现代文：严嵩刚入阁，翟銮凭资历地位在严嵩之上，权力却远远不如严嵩大，但严嵩还是讨厌他，容不下他。
English: Yan Song has just entered the cabinet, but his status is higher than Yan Song due to his seniority, but his power is far less than Yan Song, but Yan Song still hates him and cannot tolerate him.

古文：御史赵大佑劾銮私同年，吏部尚书许赞亦发銮请属私书，帝皆不问。
现代文：御史赵大佑弹劾翟銮偏向自己的同年，吏部尚书许瓒也揭发翟銮写过请托信件，世宗都没加追问。
English: In the same year that the chief historian Zhao Dayou impeached him for being biased towards himself, the personnel department also revealed that he had written a letter of request, but Shizong did not pursue the matter.

古文：会銮子汝俭、汝孝与其师崔奇勋所亲焦清同举二十三年进士，嵩遂属给事中王交、王尧日劾其有弊。
现代文：后来碰上翟銮的两个儿子汝俭、汝孝和他们老师崔奇勋的亲戚焦清一同考中二十三年进士，严嵩就吩咐给事中王交、王尧日弹劾他们舞弊。
English: Later, when Yan's two sons, Ru Jian and Ru Xiao, and their teacher, Cui Qixun's relative, Jiao Qing, were admitted to the 23rd year of junior high school together, Yan ordered Wang Jia and Wang Xi to impeach them for fraud.

古文：帝怒，下吏部、都察院。
现代文：世宗恼了，把这事交给吏部、都察院审查。
English: Sejong was annoyed and referred the matter to the Criminal Investigation Department and the Central Investigation Agency for review.

古文：銮疏辨，引西苑入直自解。
现代文：翟銮上书辩解，说自己当时在西苑值勤，不曾舞弊。
English: He wrote a letter of apology, saying that he was on duty at the West Court at the time and that he had not committed any fraud.

古文：帝益怒，勒銮父子、奇勋、清及分考官编修彭凤、欧阳奂为民，而下主考少詹事江汝璧及乡试主考谕德秦鸣夏、赞善浦应麒诏狱，并杖六十，褫其官。
现代文：世宗更加恼火，就勒令把翟銮父子、奇勋、焦清和分考官、编修彭风、欧阳唤一并罢官为民，把主考官、少詹事江汝璧和乡试主考官、谕德秦鸣夏、赞善浦应麒三人打入皇家监狱，都打了六十大棒，削除官职。
English: Sejong was even more annoyed, so he ordered that the three of them, father and son, Ji Xun, Jiao Qing, and sub-examiners, editor Peng Feng and Ouyang Xuan, be dismissed as citizens, and that the chief examiner, Shao Zhan Jie Jiang Rubei, and the chief examiner of the township test, magistrate De Qin Ming Xia and Zhan Zhan Pu Yingjun, be sent to the royal prison, and all of them were beaten with sixty sticks and removed from their official positions.

古文：銮初辅政，有修洁声。中持服家居，至困顿不能自给。
现代文：翟銮当初在内阁时有自奉廉洁的名声，中间居家守丧时甚至贫困到不能自给的程度。
English: At the beginning, when he was in the cabinet, he had a reputation of being a self-professed incorruptible person. In the middle, when he stayed at home to mourn, he was even too poor to be self-sufficient.

古文：其用行边起也，诸边文武大吏俱櫜鞬郊迎，恒恐不得当銮意，馈遗不赀。
现代文：当他以行边使身份起复以后，各边镇的文武将官无不骑着马到郊外迎接，谁都怕不能使翟大人满意，所赠送的礼品多得无法数。
English: After he was reinstated as the governor of Xingbian, all the generals and generals from towns on all sides rode to the outskirts to greet him. They were all afraid that they would not be able to satisfy him, and the gifts they gave were too numerous to count.

古文：事竣，归装千辆，用以遗贵近，得再柄政，声誉顿衰。
现代文：事后，翟銮回京时的行装满载千百辆马车，用这些东西赠送权贵，得以再次入阁，他的声望一下子就败坏完了。
English: Afterwards, when he returned to Beijing, he loaded his carriage with thousands of horse-drawn carriages, used these things to give gifts to the powerful, and was able to re-enter the cabinet. His reputation was ruined all at once.

古文：又为其子所累，讫不复振。
现代文：后来又受儿子的牵累，终于一蹶不振。
English: Later, he was dragged down by his son, and finally lost his fortune.

古文：逾三年卒，年七十。
现代文：翟銮罢官以后过了三年死掉，终年七十岁。
English: He died three years after his dismissal, at the age of seventy.

古文：穆宗即位，复官，谥文懿。
现代文：穆宗即位以后才给他恢复官职，谥文懿。
English: It was only after Emperor Muzong ascended to the throne that he was restored to his official position.

古文：李时，字宗易，任丘人。
现代文：李时，字宗易，河北任丘人。
English: Li Shi, Zi Zong Yi, Hebei Ren Qiu Ren.

古文：父棨，进士，莱州知府。
现代文：父亲李蓕，进士出身，做过莱州知府。
English: His father, Li Yan, was born in Jin, and served as the governor of Laizhou.

古文：时举弘治十五年进士，改庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：李时本人考中弘治十五年进士，改选庶吉士，授职编修。
English: Li Shiji himself was awarded the title of "Junior Editor" in the 15th year of the Hongzhi Middle School Examination, and was re-elected as "Junior Editor" and given the title of "Editor."

古文：正德中，历侍读、右谕德。
现代文：正德年间，做过侍读、右谕德。
English: During his time in Zhengde, he worked as an attendant and right-hand man.

古文：世宗嗣位，为讲官，寻迁侍读学士。
现代文：世宗即位后，充任讲官，不久升为侍读学士。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, he served as a lecturer and was soon promoted to an attendant bachelor.

古文：嘉靖三年，擢礼部右侍郎。
现代文：嘉靖三年升为礼部右侍郎，不久因守丧回家。
English: Three years later, Jiajing was promoted to the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, but he soon returned home due to the funeral.

古文：俄以忧归。服除，为户部右侍郎。
现代文：脱下丧服后，出任户部右侍郎。
English: After taking off his mourning clothes, he became the right hand man of the household.

古文：复改礼部，寻代方献夫为尚书。
现代文：后来又改任礼部右侍郎，不久就取代方献夫当上了尚书。
English: Later, he was appointed as the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, and soon he replaced Fang Xianwu as Shangshu.

古文：帝既定尊亲礼，慨然有狭小前人之志，欲裁定旧章，成一朝制作。
现代文：世宗确定尊崇父母的 大礼 以后，意气慷慨，产生了藐视古人的意思，想要裁定古代的典籍，完成本朝制礼作乐的事业。
English: After the Sejong determined to honor the parents of the Great Rite, the spirit of generosity, contempt for the ancients, the desire to adjudicate ancient classics, and the completion of the cause of this system of rites and music.

古文：张孚敬、夏言用事，咸好更张。
现代文：张孚敬、夏言掌权时，都喜欢改这改那。
English: When Zhang Fu Jing and Xia Yan were in power, they both liked to change this and that.

古文：所建诸典礼，咸他人发端，而时傅会成之。
现代文：世宗一朝所制定的各种典礼，都是别人开的头，而由李时牵强附会地完成的。
English: The various ceremonies established by King Sejong I were all initiated by others, but completed by Li Shih in a far-fetched manner.

古文：或廷议不合，率具两端，待帝自择，终未尝显争。
现代文：有时大臣们的讨论意见不一，李时大都摆出两头的观点，等待世宗自己来加以选择，始终没有大的争议。
English: Sometimes the ministers' discussion opinions differed, and Li Shih mostly put forward two points of view, waiting for Shizong himself to make a choice, and there was never a big controversy.

古文：以故帝爱其恭顺。
现代文：所以世宗喜欢他为人的恭敬、和顺。
English: That's why the Sejong liked him, because he was respectful and gentle.

古文：四方上嘉瑞，辄拜疏请贺。
现代文：各地送上什么吉祥之物来，李时都上书请进行祝贺。
English: All over the country to send what auspicious things to come, when the letter is sent, please congratulate.

古文：帝谦让，时必再请。由是益以时为忠。赐银章曰 忠敏安慎 ，俾密封言事。
现代文：世宗如果谦让，李时一定会再一次请求，所以世宗更认为李时忠心，赐给他的银章上刻 忠敏安慎 四个字，让他密封上书谈论军国大事。
English: If Sejong gave in, Li Shih would certainly ask him again. Therefore, Sejong thought that Li Shih was loyal and gave him a silver medallion engraved with the words "Loyal, Prudent, and Discreet" so that he could talk about military affairs in a sealed letter.

古文：久而失之，请罪，帝再赐焉。
现代文：时间长了，他把银章搞丢了，赶忙上书求罪，世宗又赐给他一枚。
English: After a long time, he lost the silver medal and quickly wrote a letter to ask for forgiveness. The Sejong gave him another one.

古文：十年七月，四郊成，加太子太保。
现代文：十年七月，京城四郊的祭坛建成，李时被加官太子太保。
English: In July of the 10th year, the altars in the four suburbs of Beijing were completed, and Li Shih was promoted to crown prince.

古文：雷震午门，彗星见东井，时请敕臣工修省，令言官指陈利害兴革。
现代文：雷电震坏了午门，彗星出现在东边的井宿，李时上书请敕令大臣们修身反省，并传令谏官上书陈述政治上存在的问题和改革措施。
English: Lightning and electric shock destroyed the meridian gate, the comet appeared in the east of the well, and Li Shiji sent a letter to the eunuchs to ask the ministers to improve themselves and reflect, and sent a letter to the eunuchs to state the political problems and reform measures.

古文：帝以建言乃科道专责，寝不行。
现代文：世宗认为提这些建议应该是给事中、御史的专门职责，放下他的建议未予实施。
English: Sejong thought that it should be the special duty of the regent to make these suggestions, but his suggestions were not implemented.

古文：光禄寺厨役王福、锦衣卫千户陈昇请迁显陵于天寿山，时等力陈不可。
现代文：光禄寺的厨工王福、锦衣卫千户陈升请把显陵迁往天寿山，李时等人极力说不行。
English: Wang Fu, a cook at the Guanglu Temple, and Chen Sheng, a member of the Jin Yi Wei family, requested that the tomb be moved to Tianshou Mountain, but Li Si and others insisted that this was not possible.

古文：巡检徐震奏于安陆建京师，时等驳其非制，遂议改州为承天府。
现代文：巡检徐震奏请在安陆另建一个京师，李时等驳斥说这样做不合祖制规定，于是朝廷决定把安陆所在的州改为承天府。
English: The inspector Xu Zhenxiao asked to build another Beijing Division in Anlu. Li Shih and others refuted that this was not in accordance with the provisions of the ancestral system, so the imperial court decided to change the state where Anlu was located to Chengdianfu.

古文：其秋，桂萼卒，命时兼文渊阁大学士入参机务。
现代文：这年秋天，桂萼死了，世宗任命李时兼文渊阁大学士入内阁参预机要大事。
English: In the autumn of that year, Katsura died, and Sejong appointed Li Shikeng and Wenyu into the cabinet.

古文：时张孚敬已罢，翟銮独相。
现代文：当时张孚敬已被免除职务，翟銮一个人为辅臣。
English: At that time, Zhang Fuqing had already been relieved of his duties, and only one person was an assistant minister.

古文：时后入，以宫保官尊，反居銮上。
现代文：李时在他后面进来，因为宫保官位尊贵一些，位置反而在他上边。
English: Li Shiji came in after him, because the position of the palace guard was more prestigious, but the position was above him.

古文：两人皆谦逊，无龃龉。
现代文：好在两个人都谦虚下人，在一起倒也没矛盾。
English: Fortunately, both of them are humble and down-to-earth, and together there is no contradiction.

古文：帝御无逸殿，召时坐讲《无逸篇》，銮讲《豳风·七月》诗，武定侯郭勋及九卿翰林俱入侍。
现代文：世宗到无逸殿，召李时进来坐着讲解《无逸篇》，翟銮讲解《豳风？七月》诗，武定侯郭勋及九卿、翰林都进来奉陪。
English: Shizong went to Muyidun, and when Li was summoned, he came in and sat down to explain the "Muyidun," and Zou explained the "Fengfeng? July" poem. Wuding Hou Guoxun, Jiuqing and Hanlin all came to accompany him.

古文：讲毕，帝退御豳风亭赐宴。
现代文：讲完之后，世宗退回到豳风亭赐他们一桌酒宴。
English: After the lecture, Sejong retreated to the pavilion and gave them a table of wine.

古文：自是，数召见，谘谋政务。
现代文：从此以后，几次召他，向他询问政事。
English: Since then, I have called him several times to ask him about politics.

古文：明年春，孚敬还内阁，事取独裁，时不敢有所评议。
现代文：第二年春天，孚敬又回到内阁中来，事事都一个人做主，李时也不敢有什么评论。
English: In the spring of the following year, Fu Jing returned to the cabinet. Everything was decided by one person, and Li Si did not dare to make any comments.

古文：未几，方献夫入，与时亦相得。
现代文：没多久，方献夫也进来了，与李时也能合得来。
English: Not long after, Fang Xianfu also came in, and he was able to get along with Li Shi.

古文：彗星复出，帝召见时等，谕以引咎修省之意，从容语及乏才。
现代文：彗星又一次出现，世宗召见李时等人，教导他们要引咎、修身、反省，又随便说到人才缺少。
English: When the comet appeared again, Shizong called Li Shi and others to teach them to blame, cultivate, and reflect, and casually mentioned that there was a shortage of talent.

古文：时等退，条上务安静、惜人才、慎刑狱三事，颇及 大礼 大狱废斥诸臣。
现代文：李时回来后上书讲了实现安定局面、爱惜人才和慎重刑罚三件事，很有些话提到了因为 大礼 之争而吃官司被罢黜的大臣们。
English: After Li Shiji returned, he wrote a letter in which he talked about three things: achieving a stable situation, cherishing talents, and prudent punishment. There were many words mentioned about the ministers who were sued and ousted because of the dispute over gifts.

古文：帝优诏褒答之，然卒不能用也。
现代文：世宗以赞扬的口吻做了批复，但最终还是没有采用他的意见。
English: The Sejong responded with praise, but ultimately did not adopt his opinion.

古文：给事中魏良弼、御史冯恩先后劾吏部尚书汪鋐，触帝怒，时皆为论救。
现代文：给事中魏良弼、御史冯恩先后弹劾吏部尚书汪钅宏，触怒了世宗，李时都替他们上书解救。
English: During the incident, Wei Liangyao and Gongshi Feng'en successively impeached the head of the cadre department, Shang Shuhong, which angered Shizong, and Li Shih both wrote a letter to rescue them.

古文：十二年，孚敬复入，銮以忧去，献夫致仕。
现代文：十二年，孚敬又一次返回到内阁里来，翟銮回家守丧去了，献夫退休了。
English: In the twelfth year, Fu Jing returned to the cabinet again, went home to attend the funeral, and retired.

古文：时随孚敬后，拱手唯诺而已，以故孚敬安之。
现代文：李时跟随在孚敬后边，只能是拱手说 好好 就是了，因此孚敬还容得下他。
English: Li Shiji followed behind Fu Jian, and could only say, "Good, good, that's it," so Fu Jian still tolerated him.

古文：孚敬谢政，费宏再入，未几卒，时遂独相。
现代文：孚敬退休后，费宏又一次入阁，不久就死了，李时于是独自一个做辅臣。
English: After Fu Jing retired, Fei Hong once again entered the cabinet and died soon after. Li Si was left alone as an assistant minister.

古文：时素宽平，至是益镇以安静。
现代文：他平时对人就宽厚、和易，到现在越发以清静主持大局。
English: He is usually generous and amiable to people, and now he is increasingly presiding over the overall situation with serenity.

古文：帝亦恒召对便殿，接膝咨询。
现代文：世宗也经常传他到便殿里谈话，亲切地向他咨询政事。
English: King Sejong also often sent him to the latrine to talk, and kindly consulted him on political affairs.

古文：时虽无大匡救，而议论恒本忠厚，廷论咸以时为贤。
现代文：李时虽然没有什么大的补救，但是议论总是以忠厚为根本，朝中大臣也都认为他是个好人。
English: Although there was no great remedy for Li Shih, the discussion was always based on loyalty, and the ministers of the two Koreas also considered him to be a good man.

古文：客星见天棓旁，帝问所主事应。对曰： 事应之说起汉京房，未必皆合。
现代文：客星在天蒬旁出现，世宗问会发生什么事，他回答说： 事应的说法起自汉朝的京房，未必都与事实相符。
English: When Sejong asked what would happen if a guest star appeared next to the celestial pavilion, he replied, "The saying that the guest star will appear next to the celestial pavilion comes from the Han Dynasty's imperial palace, and it may not always be true.

古文：惟在人君修德以弭之。 
现代文：全靠皇上修养自己的品德来消除为宜。 
English: It is advisable to rely entirely on the emperor to cultivate his own character to eliminate it.

古文：帝称善。
现代文：世宗听后予以称赞。
English: Wen Di thought it was right.

古文：扈跸谒陵，道沙河，帝见居民萧索，怆然曰： 七陵在此，宜加守护。 
现代文：后来他陪同世宗去晋见皇陵，经过沙河时，世宗看到附近村庄破烂不堪，居民很少，神色暗淡地说 ：七座皇陵在这里，应该加以守护。 
English: Later, he accompanied Shizong to Jin to see the imperial mausoleums. When passing the Shahe River, Shizong saw that the nearby villages were dilapidated and had few residents, and said with a gloomy look: the seven imperial mausoleums are here and should be protected.

古文：时对曰： 昔邱濬建议，京师当设四辅，以临清为南，昌平为北，苏州、保定为东西，各屯兵一二万。
现代文：李时回答说： 过去丘曾建议，京城应该设立四处屏障，以临清为南屏，昌平为北屏，蓟州、保定为东、西屏，各驻兵一二万。
English: Li Shi replied: In the past, Yau had suggested that the capital should set up four barriers, with Linqing as the south screen, Changping as the north screen, and Luzhou and Bao as the east and west screens, with 120,000 soldiers stationed in each.

古文：今若于昌平增一总兵，可南卫京师，北护陵寝。 
现代文：现在如果在昌平增设一个总兵官，往南可以保卫京城，往北可以守护皇陵。 
English: Now, if a general officer is added in Changping, the capital can be protected to the south, and the imperial mausoleum can be guarded to the north.

古文：帝乃下廷臣勘议，于沙河筑巩华城，为置戍焉。
现代文：世宗于是下发大臣们讨论，决定在沙河修筑巩华城，置兵防守。
English: Therefore, Shizong discussed with the ministers and decided to build Gonghua City in Shahe and set up troops to defend it.

古文：屡加少傅、太子太师、吏部尚书、华盖殿大学士。
现代文：李时前后被加官为少傅、太子太师、吏部尚书、华盖殿大学士。
English: Around that time, Li Shiji was promoted to the positions of Junior Master, Prince and Grand Master, Secretary of the General Staff, and Academician of the Huagai Palace.

古文：会夏言入辅，时不与抗，每事推让言，言亦安之。
现代文：当时夏言入阁，李时不与他对抗，事事都推让给夏言做主，夏言也能容得下他。
English: At that time, Xia Yan was in the cabinet, Li Shi did not oppose him, and everything was left to Xia Yan to decide, and Xia Yan could tolerate him.

古文：且所任选郎贤，举无失人。 华亭谓徐阶，选郎则陆光祖也。家居二十年卒，年七十有四。赠少保，谥文靖。袁炜，字懋中，慈溪人。
现代文：世宗对待李时不如孚敬、夏言那么宠信，然而也很少指责、欺辱他，对他的信任始终没有减少，这是孚敬、夏言也无法相比的。嘉靖十七年十二月，李时还在位时死掉了，赠太傅，谥文康。袁炜，字懋中，浙江慈溪人。
English: Shizong treated Li Shiji less favourably than Fu Jing and Xia Yan, but he rarely criticized or bullied him, and his trust never diminished, which is incomparable to Fu Jing and Xia Yan. In December of the 17th year of Jiajing, Li Shiji died while he was still on the throne, and was succeeded by Taifu, Yu Wenkang. Yuan Shiji, Zhaozhong, Zhejiang Cixi people.

古文：嘉靖十七年会试第一，殿试第三，授编修。
现代文：嘉靖十七年考中会试第一名，殿试第三名，初任编修。
English: In the 17th year of Jiajing, he won the first place in the junior high school entrance examination, the third place in the palace entrance examination, and was appointed editor for the first time.

古文：炜性行不羁，为御史包孝所劾，帝宥不罪。
现代文：他为人不加检点，曾被御史包孝弹劾过，世宗宽恕了他，未予惩治。
English: He was a man of no scruples. He was once impeached by Mishi Bao Xiao, but Shizong forgave him and did not punish him.

古文：进侍读。久之，简直西苑。撰青词，最称旨。
现代文：进为侍读很久以后，又被选择到西苑值勤，他写的宫体诗词最能令世宗满意。
English: After serving as an attendant for a long time, he was selected to be on duty in the West Courtyard. The palace-like poetry he wrote was the most satisfying to Sejong.

古文：三十五年，阁臣推修撰全元立掌南京翰林院，帝特用炜。
现代文：三十五年，阁臣推举修撰全元立出掌南京翰林院，世宗特意用袁炜担任这个职务。
English: In the 35th year of the reign of King Sejong, Shosan Chongen was elected by the cabinet ministers to be the head of the Nanking Hanlin Academy. Sejong specifically chose Yuan Qi to hold this position.

古文：炜疏辞，愿以故官供奉。帝大喜，立擢炜侍讲学士。
现代文：袁炜上书辞谢，表示愿意以原职侍候在皇上身边，世宗十分高兴，立刻提拔他为侍讲学士。
English: Yuan Xuan wrote a letter of thanks, expressing his willingness to serve at the emperor's side in his original position. Shizong was very pleased and immediately promoted him to attendant lecturer.

古文：甫两月，手诏拜礼部右侍郎。
现代文：才过两个月，又用手诏任用他当上了礼部右侍郎。
English: Just two months later, he was appointed to the post of the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：明年，加太子宾客兼学士，赐一品服。
现代文：第二年，加封他为太子宾客兼学士，赐给他一品官服。
English: The following year, he was named a guest of the crown prince and a bachelor, and was given an official uniform.

古文：三十九年，复以供奉恩加俸二等，俄进左侍郎。
现代文：三十九年，又因为侍奉皇上给他加两级官俸，紧接着升任左侍郎。
English: In 39th year, because he served the emperor, he was given an additional two-level official salary, and was immediately promoted to the position of the left attendant.

古文：明年二月调吏部，兼官供奉如故。
现代文：第二年二月改调吏部，仍兼旧职到西苑侍奉皇上。
English: In February of the following year, he was transferred to the clerk's department, and continued to serve the Emperor in the West Garden.

古文：逾月迁礼部尚书，加太子少保，仍命入直。
现代文：过一个月升为礼部尚书，加官为太子少保，仍奉命到西苑值勤。
English: After a month, he was promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and was given the additional post of Prince's Junior Bodyguard. He was still ordered to be on duty in the West Courtyard.

古文：炜自供奉以后，六年中进宫保、尚书，前未有也。
现代文：袁炜自从侍奉皇上以后，六年时间就做到宫保、尚书，这是以前不曾有过的事。
English: Since serving the emperor, Yuan Shun has been able to serve as palace guard and secretary for six years, which has never happened before.

古文：先是二月朔，日食微阴，炜言不当救护。
现代文：在此之前，二月初一发生日食，天色略微有些阴暗，袁炜说没必要加以救护。
English: Prior to this, a solar eclipse occurred on the first day of February, and the sky was slightly gloomy. Yuan Wei said that there was no need to be rescued.

古文：礼部尚书吴山不从，得谴去。
现代文：礼部尚书吴山不答应，被世宗调离职务。
English: Shangshu Wushan, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, did not agree and was removed from his post by Shizong.

古文：帝闻炜言善之，遂以代山。
现代文：世宗听到袁炜的意见，认为很好，就让他接替了吴山。
English: When the Sejong heard Yuan Qi's opinion and thought it was good, they let him succeed Wu Shan.

古文：及七月朔，又日食。历官言食止一分五杪，例免救护。
现代文：等到七月初一又发生了日食，历官说日食只有一分零五秒，理应免加救护。
English: When another solar eclipse occurred on the first day of July, the calendar officials said that the solar eclipse was only one minute and five seconds, and it should be exempted.

古文：炜乃阿帝意上疏言： 陛下以父事天，以兄事日，群阴退伏，万象辉华。
现代文：袁炜于是迎合世宗的心意上书说 ：陛下把天当父亲，把太阳当哥哥供奉，各种阴气都躲一边去了，一切东西都在太阳之下熠熠生辉。
English: Yuan Zong then pandered to Shizong's wishes and wrote: "Your Majesty worships the heavens as his father and the sun as his brother. All kinds of gloomy things have been put aside, and everything is shining brightly under the sun."

古文：是以太阳晶明，氛祲销烁，食止一分，与不食同。
现代文：所以太阳光明，邪气灭绝，日食一回只有一分，跟没发生日食一个样。
English: Therefore, the sun is bright, the evil spirit is extinct, and the solar eclipse is only one minute, which is the same as if there was no solar eclipse.

古文：臣等不胜欣忭。 
现代文：我们真是不胜欢喜。 
English: We couldn't be happier.

古文：疏入，帝益喜。
现代文：他的奏疏递上后，世宗更高兴了。
English: Mr. Sejong was even happier when his rendition was delivered.

古文：其冬，遂命以户部尚书兼武英殿大学士入阁典机务。
现代文：这年冬天，就让他以户部尚书兼武英殿大学士的身份入内阁参与机要事务。
English: In the winter of that year, he was asked to join the cabinet to participate in important matters as a member of the Household Ministry and a scholar of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：累加少傅兼太子太傅、建极殿大学士。
现代文：后经几次加官做到了少傅兼太子太傅、建极殿大学士。
English: After being promoted several times, he achieved the positions of Shonofu, Taifu, and Kenkyodenno Daigaku Shoshi.

古文：四十四年春，疾笃，请假归，道卒，年五十八。
现代文：嘉靖四十四年春天，他病重了，请假回乡，死在路上，终年五十八岁。
English: In the spring of the 44th year of Jiajing, he fell seriously ill, asked for leave to return to his hometown, and died on the road, at the age of 58.

古文：赠少师，谥文荣。
现代文：被追赠为少师，谥文荣。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Shoshi, and his name was changed to Yu Wen Rong.

古文：炜才思敏捷。帝中夜出片纸，命撰青词，举笔立成。
现代文：袁炜才思敏捷，世宗半夜递出一张纸，让他撰写宫体诗词，他举笔马上就能写成。
English: Yuan Shao could only think quickly. In the middle of the night, Shizong handed him a piece of paper and asked him to write a palace poem. He could write it as soon as he lifted his pen.

古文：遇中外献瑞，辄极词颂美。
现代文：每次碰上中央、地方上献来吉祥物，他都极力赞美。
English: Every time he comes across a mascot presented by the central or local government, he praises it.

古文：帝畜一猫死，命儒臣撰词以醮。
现代文：世宗养的一只猫死了，让儒臣写篇祷告词为它祈福。
English: A cat owned by Sejong died, so he asked Ju Chen to write a prayer to pray for it.

古文：炜词有 化狮作龙 语，帝大喜悦。
现代文：袁炜的祷词中有句话说这个福星将会 变成雄狮，化作飞龙 ，世宗非常喜欢。
English: There is a saying in Yuan Xi's prayer that this lucky star will turn into a lion and a flying dragon, which Shizong likes very much.

古文：其诡词媚上多类此。
现代文：他花言巧语向世宗献媚，经常就是这副样子。
English: He was a flatterer of the world, and often looked like one.

古文：以故帝急枋用之，恩赐稠叠，他人莫敢望。
现代文：因此世宗赶忙不迭地任用他，对他的赏赐十分频繁，别的人不能和他相比。
English: Therefore, Shizong hastily appointed him, and his rewards were very frequent, and others could not compare with him.

古文：自嘉靖中年，帝专事焚修，词臣率供奉青词。工者立超擢，卒至入阁。
现代文：自嘉靖中期以后，世宗一心搞什么炼丹、祈祷，词臣都只是奉命撰写宫体诗词，写得好的立刻就加以提拔，直至进入内阁为止。
English: From the middle of the Jiajing period onwards, Sejong was preoccupied with all kinds of purging and prayers, and the ministers of the word were only ordered to write poems in the palace style, and if they were well written, they were immediately promoted until they entered the cabinet.

古文：时谓李春芳、严讷、郭朴及炜为 青词宰相 。
现代文：当时人们都说李春芳、严讷、郭朴和袁炜是 青词宰相 。
English: At that time, people said that Li Chunfang, Yan Na, Guo Pu and Yuan Qi were the prime ministers of the Blue Speech.

古文：而炜贵倨鲜淟，故出徐阶门，直以气凌之。
现代文：可是袁炜自高自大，寡廉鲜耻，本来出自徐阶门下，竟然盛气凌人地对待徐阶。
English: However, Yuan Xuan was arrogant, corrupt and shameless. He was originally from Xu Ji's class, but he treated Xu Ji in a domineering manner.

古文：与阶同总裁《承天大志》，诸学士呈稿，炜窜改殆尽，不以让阶。
现代文：他和徐阶一同总裁《承天大志》，学士们交上的稿件，袁炜窜改殆尽，也不推让给徐阶过目。
English: He and Xu Shifu were the co-presidents of "The Great Dream of Heaven," and the manuscripts submitted by the bachelors were all revised by Yuan Shifu, who did not allow Xu Shifu to read them.

古文：诸学士不平，阶第曰任之而已。
现代文：学士们气忿不平，徐阶只是说由他改吧。
English: The bachelors were furious, and Xu just said it was up to him to change it.

古文：其后炜死，阶亦尽窜改之。
现代文：后来袁炜死了，徐阶也把他改的稿子全窜改了一番。
English: Later, after Yuan Qi died, Xu Ji also completely rewrote the manuscript he had revised.

古文：炜自负能文，见他人所作，稍不当意，辄肆诋诮。馆阁士出其门者，斥辱尤不堪，以故人皆畏而恶之。
现代文：袁炜以会写文章自负，看到别人的作品稍不如意就大加讥笑，翰林院的学士们出自他门下的，更被他训斥得难以忍受，因此人们都怕他也讨厌他。
English: Yuan Xuan was proud of his ability to write articles. When he saw that someone else's work was not as good as his, he mocked them. The scholars of Hanlin Academy, who were his students, were scolded by him, which was unbearable. Therefore, people were afraid of him and hated him.

古文：李春芳，字子实，扬州兴化人。
现代文：李春芳，字子实，扬州兴化人。
English: Li Chunfang, real name Zizi, is from Xinghua, Yangzhou.

古文：嘉靖二十六年举进士第一，除修撰。
现代文：嘉靖二十六年考中进士第一名，被任命为翰林院修撰。
English: In Jiajing's 26th year, he won the first place in the junior high school entrance examination and was appointed as a scholar of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：简入西苑撰青词，大被帝眷，与侍读严讷超擢翰林学士。
现代文：挑选入西苑撰写宫体诗词，很得世宗宠爱，与侍读严讷一道破格提升为翰林学士。
English: He was chosen to enter the West Court to write palace-style poetry, and was greatly loved by the world. Together with Yan Na, he was promoted to Hanlin Scholar.

古文：寻迁太常少卿，拜礼部右侍郎，俱兼学士，直西苑如故。
现代文：不久升太常少卿，担任礼部右侍郎，同时都还兼任学士，像往常一样到西苑值班。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of Taijo Shokei, and served as the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department. At the same time, he also served as a bachelor. As usual, he was on duty in the West Courtyard.

古文：佐理部事，进左侍郎，转吏部，代讷为礼部尚书。
现代文：后来到礼部佐理事务，升为左侍郎，转任吏部，又代严讷为礼部尚书。
English: Later, he became an assistant director of the Ceremonial Affairs Department, was promoted to the position of the left attendant, was transferred to the Personnel Department, and was appointed as the ceremonial secretary of the Ceremonial Affairs Department.

古文：时宗室蕃衍，岁禄苦不继。
现代文：当时，宗室人口繁衍，苦于岁禄不够发放。
English: At that time, the number of people living in the same house was proliferating, and they were suffering from the fact that the annual stipend was not being distributed enough.

古文：春芳考故事，为书上之。
现代文：春芳考察以往事实，写了一本书进呈皇帝。
English: Chunfang examined the facts of the past and wrote a book to present to the emperor.

古文：诸吉凶大礼及岁时给赐，皆严为之制。
现代文：有关吉凶大礼及逢年过节的赏赐，都做了严格的规定。
English: Strict regulations have been made regarding auspicious and inauspicious occasions, as well as the giving of gifts at the end of the year.

古文：帝嘉之，赐名《宗藩条例》。
现代文：世宗很称赞，赐名为《宗藩条例》。
English: It was highly praised by King Sejong and was given the name "Shu Domain Ordinance."

古文：寻加太子太保。
现代文：不久，春芳升为太子太保。
English: Soon, Chunfang was promoted to Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：四十四年命兼武英殿大学士，与讷并参机务。
现代文：四十四年命令他兼任武英殿大学士，与严讷一同参与机密大事的处理。
English: In 1944, he was ordered to serve concurrently as a scholar of the Imperial Household Agency, and to participate in the handling of confidential matters together with Yan Na.

古文：世宗眷侍直诸臣厚，凡迁除皆出特旨。
现代文：世宗很宠爱身边值勤的大臣们，他们的升迁任命都出自皇帝的诏书。
English: Sejong was very fond of the ministers on duty around him. Their promotion and appointment all came from the emperor's edict.

古文：春芳自学士至柄政，凡六迁，未尝一由廷推。
现代文：春芳自任学士到执政，共六次进升，没一次是由大臣推举的。
English: Since taking office as a bachelor, Chunfang has been promoted a total of six times, and not once was she promoted by a minister.

古文：春芳恭慎，不以势凌人。
现代文：春芳恭敬、谨慎，从不气势凌人。
English: Chunfang is respectful, cautious, and never domineering.

古文：居政府持论平，不事操切，时人比之李时；其才力不及也，而廉洁过之。
现代文：在政府任职，论议平正，不说偏激的话，当时人们把他比作李时；他的才能固不及李时，但廉洁过于李时。
English: At that time, people compared him to Li Shih, who served in the government and had a level-headed, not to say radical, discourse; his talent was not as solid as Li Shih's, but his integrity was better than Li Shih's.

古文：时徐阶为首辅，得君甚。
现代文：当时徐阶为首辅，很得皇帝信任。
English: At that time, Xu Jia was the first assistant, and he was trusted by the emperor.

古文：春芳每事必推阶，阶亦雅重之。
现代文：春芳遇事必抬徐阶，徐阶也很看重他。
English: If something happens to Chunfang, he will always look up to Xu Jian, and Xu Jian also thinks highly of him.

古文：隆庆元年春，有诏修翔凤楼，春芳曰： 上新即位，而遽兴土木，可乎？ 
现代文：隆庆元年春，有诏书令修造翔凤楼，春芳说： 皇上刚刚即位，就大兴土木，说得过去吗？ 
English: In the spring of the first year of the Longqing era, there was an imperial edict ordering the construction of the Xiangfeng Building. Chunfang said, "The emperor has just ascended the throne, and he has begun a large-scale civil engineering project. Is that acceptable?

古文：事遂止。
现代文：修楼事就这样停止了。
English: The matter was put to rest.

古文：齐康之劾徐阶也，语侵春芳。春芳疏辨求去，帝慰留之。
现代文：齐康批评徐阶的时候，言语连及春芳，春芳上书辩护并请去职，穆宗对他加以慰留。
English: When Qikang criticized Xu Jia, his words were associated with Chunfang. Chunfang submitted a letter of defense and was asked to resign. Mu Zong consoled him.

古文：及代阶为首辅，益务以安静，称帝意。
现代文：等接替徐阶为首辅后，越发注意安静，从容行事，很合皇上的心愿。
English: After succeeding Xu Ji as chief aide, he paid more and more attention to being quiet and acting calmly, which was very much in line with the emperor's wishes.

古文：时同列者陈以勤、张居正。
现代文：当时官位平列的还有陈以勤、张居正。
English: At that time, Chen Yikun and Zhang Jizheng were also in the same rank.

古文：以勤端谨，而居正恃才凌物，视春芳蔑如也。
现代文：以勤端庄谨慎，而居正自恃才气，欺凌他人，眼睛里好像没春芳这个人。
English: Diligent, dignified and prudent, but self-righteous, bullying others, there seems to be no Chunfang in his eyes.

古文：始阶以人言罢，春芳叹曰： 徐公尚尔，我安能久？
现代文：当初徐阶因为别人的批评下台，春芳感叹说： 徐公尚且那样，我能长得了吗？
English: At first, Xu Jia stepped down because of the criticism of others, and Chunfang lamented: Xu Gong is still like that, can I grow up?

古文：容旦夕乞身耳。 
现代文：容我有机会请求退休算了。 
English: Give me a chance to ask for retirement.

古文：居正遽曰： 如此，庶保令名。 
现代文：居正马上说 ：这样倒好，也许还可以保全您的美名呢。 
English: Ju Zheng immediately said, "This is a good thing, and you may even be able to save your reputation."

古文：春芳愕然，三疏乞休，帝不允。
现代文：春芳感到震惊，所以多次上书要求退休，皇上不允许。
English: Chunfang was shocked, so she repeatedly wrote to the emperor asking to retire, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：既而赵贞吉入代以勤，刚而负气。
现代文：以后赵贞吉入阁，接替了以勤，性格刚果自负。
English: After that, Zhao Zhengyi entered the cabinet and succeeded Iqin, who was arrogant.

古文：及高拱再入直，凌春芳出其上，春芳不能与争，谨自饬而已。
现代文：等高拱再度入阁值勤，恨春芳位置在他上面，春芳又争他不过，只能是自加修饬而已。
English: So Gaoqong again entered the cabinet on duty, hating Chunfang's position above him, and Chunfang also contested him, but it could only be self-adjustment.

古文：俺答款塞求封，春芳偕拱、居正即帝前决之。
现代文：俺答攻打边塞，求取封赏，春芳和高拱、居正在皇帝面前商定此事。
English: I agreed to attack the border fortress and seek a reward, and Chunfang and Gao Gong agreed on this matter in front of the emperor.

古文：会贞吉为拱逐，拱益张，修阶故怨。
现代文：正逢赵贞吉被高拱逐出朝廷，高拱气焰嚣张之际，又与徐阶重修旧怨。
English: At the time when Zhao Zhengyi was expelled from the imperial court by Gao Gong, and Gao Gong was full of arrogance, he renewed the old grudge with Xu Jia.

古文：春芳尝从容为阶解，拱益不悦。
现代文：春芳为徐阶从容辩护，高拱更加不高兴。
English: Chunfang calmly defended Xu Jia, Gao Gong was even more unhappy.

古文：时春芳已累加少师兼太子太师，进吏部尚书，改中极殿，度拱辈终不容己，两疏请归养，不允。
现代文：当时春芳已渐渐做到少师兼太子太师，晋升吏部尚书，改为中极殿学士，但考虑到高拱等人最终容不得自己，因此两次上书请准予回家养亲，皇上不予批准。
English: At that time, Chunfang had gradually become a junior teacher and a prince's teacher, promoted to the cadre department of Shangshu and changed to the middle pole hall bachelor, but considering that Gao Gong and others could not tolerate him in the end, he twice submitted a letter asking for permission to go home and raise relatives, but the emperor did not approve.

古文：南京给事中王祯希拱意，疏诋之，春芳求去益力。
现代文：南京给事中王祯迎合高拱的意思，上书诋毁春芳，春芳这下更加坚决要求退休。
English: In the middle of the Nanjing incident, Wang Yao pandered to Gao Gang's intention and wrote a letter to slander Chun Fang. Chun Fang now more resolutely demanded retirement.

古文：赐敕乘传，遣官护行，有司给夫廪如故事。
现代文：皇上命令给予马车，派官护送他告老还乡，官府照例发他禄米。
English: The emperor ordered to give him a carriage, sent an officer to escort him back to his hometown, and the government office sent him rice as usual.

古文：阅一岁，拱复为居正所挤，几不免。
现代文：一年过后，高拱自己又受到居正排挤，差一点丢了命。
English: A year later, Gao Gong himself was once again ousted by Ju Zheng and almost lost his life.

古文：而春芳归，父母尚无恙，晨夕置酒食为乐，乡里艳之。
现代文：而春芳还乡，父母还都健在，一家人从早到晚摆酒食娱乐，乡亲们对他艳羡不止。
English: But Chunfang has returned to his hometown, his parents are still alive, and the family has been entertaining themselves with food and wine from morning till night. The villagers are envious of him.

古文：于陛别有传。赵贞吉，字孟静，内江人。
现代文：父母死后数年他才谢世，终年七十五岁，被追赠为太师，谥文定。赵贞吉，字孟静，四川内江人。
English: He died only a few years after the death of his parents, at the age of seventy-five. He was posthumously given the title of Grand Master, 文定. Zhao Zhengyi, a.k.a. Meng Jing, from Sichuan's Neijiang River.

古文：六岁日诵书一卷。及长，以博洽名。
现代文：早在六岁时他就每天读一卷书，等长大成人后，因知识广博、融通而扬名。
English: As early as the age of six, he read a book a day, and when he became an adult, he became famous for his extensive knowledge and flexibility.

古文：最善王守仁学。
现代文：他最喜欢王守仁的学说。
English: His favorite theory is that of Wang Shouren.

古文：举嘉靖十四年进士，选庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：嘉靖十四年考中进士，改选为庶吉士，初任编修。
English: In the 14th year of the Jiajing Middle School Entrance Examination, he was promoted to associate professor, and became an editor for the first time.

古文：时方士初进用，贞吉请求真儒赞大业。执政不怿，因请急归。
现代文：当时方术之士刚开始得到进用，贞吉请求朝廷延用真儒辅佐王政，执政对此很不高兴，贞吉于是立即请假回乡去了。
English: At that time, Fang Shuxi's men were just beginning to be used, and Zhengyi requested the imperial court to extend the use of Zhengyu to assist the king. The government was very unhappy about this, so Zhengyi immediately took a leave of absence and went back to his hometown.

古文：还朝迁中允，掌司业事。
现代文：后来回朝升任中允，掌管司业的事务。
English: Later, he was promoted back to the imperial court as Zhongyong, in charge of the affairs of the division.

古文：俺答薄都城，谩书求贡。
现代文：俺答的军队逼近京师，无礼地送信来要求和中国通贡。
English: Our troops approached the Beijing Division and rudely sent a message to demand tribute from China.

古文：诏百官廷议，贞吉奋袖大言曰： 城下之盟，《春秋》耻之。
现代文：世宗传令百官在朝房中商量对策，贞吉甩甩袖子说起大话来，他说： 在京师城下和敌人缔结和约，《春秋》认为这是一种耻辱。
English: Sejong ordered hundreds of officials to discuss countermeasures in the imperial court, and Sadakichi rolled up his sleeves and started talking big. He said, "Concluding a peace treaty with the enemy under the capital city of Kyoto," and "Spring and Autumn" considered this to be a disgrace.

古文：既许贡则必入城，倘要索无已，奈何？ 
现代文：如果答应了通贡，他们自然要进城来，那时假使他们没完没了地提出要求，该怎么办呢？ 
English: If the tribute was agreed to, they would naturally come into the town, and then what was to be done if they continued to make demands?

古文：徐阶曰： 君必有良策。 
现代文：徐阶说 ：这么说先生一定有好主意了？ 
English: Xu Ji said, "So you must have a good idea?"

古文：贞吉曰： 为今之计，请至尊速御正殿，下诏引咎。
现代文：贞吉说 ：根据现在的情况，最好是请皇上立刻登上正殿颁发诏书自我批评。
English: Sadakichi said: According to the current situation, it is best to ask the emperor to immediately ascend to the main hall to issue an edict of self-criticism.

古文：录周尚文功以励边帅，出沈束于狱以开言路；轻损军之令，重赏功之格；遣官宣谕诸将，监督力战，退敌易易耳。 
现代文：然后登录周尚文的战功，鼓舞边关大将，从监狱中放出沈东，开通大臣进谏的门路。损害军事的刑罚应减轻一些，奖赏战功的标准可以加重。另外再派遣一名大臣向将领们传达皇上的指示，监督他们奋勇作战，打退敌人就再容易没有了。 
English: Then record Zhou Shangwen's war exploits, encourage the border guard general, release Shen Dong from prison, and open the door for the minister to enter the castle. The penalty for damaging the military should be reduced, and the standard for rewarding war exploits can be increased. In addition, another minister should be sent to convey the emperor's instructions to the generals and supervise them to fight bravely. There is no easier way to repel the enemy.

古文：时帝遣中使瞷廷臣，日中莫发一语。闻贞吉言，心壮之，谕严嵩曰： 贞吉言是，第不当及周尚文、沈束事耳。 
现代文：当时世宗派了宦官到朝房窥视大臣们的表现，看了半天没人开口说一句话，后来听了贞吉的发言，世宗心里很赞赏他，就对严嵩说 ：贞吉说得有理，只是不该提起周尚文、沈东的事。 
English: At that time, Shizong sent eunuchs to the imperial palace to observe the performance of the ministers. After watching for half a day, no one spoke a word. Later, after listening to Zhengyi's speech, Shizong admired him very much and said to Yan Song: Zhengyi was right, but he should not have mentioned Zhou Shangwen and Shen Dong.

古文：召入左顺门，令手疏便宜。立擢左谕德兼监察御史，奉敕宣谕诸军。给白金五万两，听随宜劳赏。
现代文：接着就把贞吉召进左顺门，让他当面写下有关事宜，并立即提拔他为左谕德兼监察御史，让他奉命前往各个部队传达世宗的指示精神，发给他五万两白金，由他看情况慰劳、奖赏将士。
English: Next, he called Sadakichi into the Zuishun gate, asked him to write down the relevant matters in person, and immediately promoted him to Zuo-kukude and Supervisor of Imperial History, ordered him to go to various troops to convey the spirit of instruction of the Sejong, and gave him 50,000 taels of platinum, and let him console and reward the soldiers according to the situation.

古文：初，贞吉廷议罢，盛气谒严嵩。
现代文：开始的时候，贞吉在朝廷讨论结束，气昂昂地前往拜访严嵩。
English: At the beginning, Zhengyi ended the discussion at the imperial court and went to visit Yan Song in high spirits.

古文：嵩辞不见，贞吉怒叱门者。
现代文：严嵩谢绝会见他，贞吉恼火地喝斥了严家的看门人。
English: Yan Song Xie refused to meet with him, and Sadakichi angrily rebuked the janitor of the Yan family.

古文：适赵文华至，贞吉复叱之。
现代文：恰好这时赵文华也来拜访严嵩，贞吉把他也训斥了一通。
English: Just at this time, Zhao Wenhua also came to visit Yan Song, and Zhengyi also reprimanded him.

古文：嵩大恨。
现代文：严嵩这下十分恼他。
English: Yan Song now annoyed him very much.

古文：及撰敕，不令督战，以轻其权，且不与一卒护行。
现代文：等到起草皇上指示时，就没有让贞吉监督作战，以便削减他的权限，并且不给他一兵一卒护行。
English: When the emperor's instructions were being drafted, he did not let Zhengyi supervise the battle, so as to reduce his authority, and did not give him a soldier to escort.

古文：时敌骑充斥，贞吉驰入诸将营，散金犒士，宣谕德意，明日即复命。
现代文：当时敌寇的骑兵到处都是，贞吉飞马进入各位将领的兵营中，散发白金，犒赏官兵，传达了世宗的指示精神，第二天就回朝作汇报。
English: At that time, the cavalry of the enemy raiders were everywhere. Zhengyi Pegasus entered the barracks of the generals, distributed platinum, rewarded the officers and soldiers, and conveyed the spirit of instruction of Shizong. The next day, he returned to the North to report.

古文：帝大怒，谓贞吉漫无区画，徒为尚文、束游说。下之诏狱，杖于廷，谪荔波典史。
现代文：世宗大为恼火，批评贞吉对军事没有作任何规划、处置，只是在为周尚文、沈东游说，所以把他关进了皇家监狱，并在朝廷杖打了他一回，然后把他贬为荔波典史。
English: Sejong was very angry, criticizing Zhengyi for not making any plans or arrangements for the military, but only lobbying for Zhou Shangwen and Shen Dong, so he put him in the royal prison, and beat him once with a cane at the court, and then relegated him to the history of Lihbo.

古文：稍迁徽州通判，进南京吏部主事。
现代文：后来稍微升职当了徽州通判，又升为南京吏部主事。
English: Later, he was slightly promoted to the post of Huizhou magistrate, and was promoted to the head of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：四十年，迁至户部右侍郎。
现代文：嘉靖四十年，贞吉升任户部右侍郎。
English: In the 40th year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, Sadakichi was promoted to the post of the right hand man of the household.

古文：廷议遣大臣赴蓟州督饷练兵，嵩欲用贞吉，召饮示之意。
现代文：一次朝廷讨论派遣大臣前往蓟州督办军饷，操练军队，严嵩想任用贞吉前往，就召他喝酒告诉他这个打算。
English: One time, the imperial court discussed sending a minister to Zhangzhou to supervise the military parade and train the army. Yan Song wanted to appoint Zhengyi to go, so he invited him to drink and told him about this plan.

古文：贞吉曰： 督饷者，督京运乎，民运乎？
现代文：贞吉说 ：让我督办军饷，是督办京运呢还是督办民运？
English: Sadakichi said, "Let me supervise the military parade. Is it better to supervise the Beijing Movement or the People's Movement?"

古文：若二运已有职掌，添官徒增扰耳。
现代文：这两种运饷现在都有专人负责，再设一官只能添加烦扰罢了。
English: Both of these operations now have a special person in charge, and setting up another official can only add to the trouble.

古文：况兵之不练，其过宜不在是，即十户侍出，何益练兵？ 
现代文：况且军队没得到操练的过错原因也不该是运饷，就是派出十个户部侍郎对练兵又有什么帮助？ 
English: Moreover, the reason why the army did not receive the drill should not be a mistake, that is, what is the help of sending ten household attendants to train soldiers?

古文：嵩怫然罢。
现代文：严嵩不高兴地作罢了。
English: Unhappily, Yan Song gave up.

古文：会嵩请告，吏部用仓场侍郎林应亮。
现代文：后来当严嵩请假在家时，吏部任用了仓场侍郎林应亮。
English: Later, when Yan Song took a leave of absence at home, Lin Yingliang, a warehouse attendant, was appointed to the personnel department.

古文：比嵩出，益怒。令都给事中张益劾应亮，调之南京，而改用佥都御史霍冀。
现代文：等严嵩出来后就更不高兴了，让都给事中张益弹劾应亮，把他调到南京，改用了佥都御史霍冀。
English: After Yan Song came out, he was even more unhappy. He made Zhang Yi's impeachment public, transferred him to Nanjing, and changed the name of the capital to Gushihouji.

古文：益又言： 督饷户部专职，今贞吉与左侍郎刘大宾廷推不及，是不职也，宜罢。 
现代文：张益在他的上书中又说 ：督办粮饷是户部的专门职责，现在贞吉和左侍郎刘大宾在推选中根本未被提名，说明他们不称职，应该予以免职。 
English: Zhang Yi also said in his petition: "Supervising grain distribution is a special responsibility of the household department. Now, Sadakichi and the left-hand man Liu Dabin have not been nominated at all in the election, indicating that they are incompetent and should be removed from office.

古文：于是二人皆夺官。
现代文：于是他们两个侍郎都被免了职。
English: As a result, both of them were relieved of their duties.

古文：隆庆初，起礼部左侍郎，掌詹事府。
现代文：隆庆初年，贞吉起复，做了礼部左侍郎，掌管詹事府的事务。
English: In the first year of Longqing, Sadayoshi recovered and became the left attendant of the etiquette department, in charge of the affairs of Zhan Prefecture.

古文：穆宗幸太学，祭酒胡杰适论罢，以贞吉摄事。讲《大禹谟》称旨，命充日讲官。
现代文：穆宗视察太学时，祭酒胡杰刚刚被人评议后罢官，贞吉代理其事务，因为他讲解《大禹谟》让穆宗满意，穆宗就任命他充任自己的日讲官。
English: When Mu Zong inspected Taigaku, Hu Jie, the sacrificial wine, had just been reviewed and dismissed, and Zhengyi acted as his deputy, because his explanation of "Daiyumu" was satisfactory to Mu Zong, and Mu Zong appointed him as his day lecturer.

古文：贞吉年逾六十，而议论侃直，进止有仪，帝深注意焉。
现代文：贞吉那时已年过六十，但说起话来理直气壮，行走坐立仪表堂堂，穆宗对他很注重。
English: At that time, Zhengyi was over sixty years old, but he spoke with a straightforward manner and walked with a dignified appearance. Mu Zong paid great attention to him.

古文：寻迁南京礼部尚书。既行，帝念之，仍留直讲。
现代文：不久贞吉升任南京礼部尚书，已经动了身，穆宗因想念他，又留下他当经筵直讲。
English: Soon after, Zhengyi was promoted to the post of Nanjing's etiquette official, and he was already on the move. Mu Zong missed him, so he left him to be the etiquette official.

古文：三年秋，命兼文渊阁大学士参预机务。
现代文：三年秋天，穆宗让贞吉兼任文渊阁大学士参与机要事务。
English: In the autumn of the third year, Mu Zong asked Zhengyi to participate in important affairs as a scholar of Wenyu Pavilion University.

古文：贞吉入谢，奏： 朝纲边务一切废弛，臣欲捐躯任事，惟陛下主之。 
现代文：贞吉上朝谢恩，奏道 ：眼下朝廷的纪纲、边境的防务都不景气，我想为国捐躯，大胆做事，希望陛下能为我做主。 
English: In her thanks to the Emperor, Sadayoshi wrote, "Currently, the discipline of the Imperial Court and the defense of the borders are in a slump. I want to die for my country and do things boldly. I hope that His Majesty will make the decision for me."

古文：帝益喜。
现代文：穆宗这下更加高兴了。
English: Mu Zong was even happier now.

古文：会寇入大同，总兵官赵岢失事，总督陈其学反以捷闻，为御史燕如宦所发。
现代文：后来碰上敌寇打入大同，总兵官赵岢出了事，总督陈其学反而当成捷报递上，被御史燕如宦揭发了。
English: Later, when encountering enemy raiders entering Datong, the commander-in-chief, Zhao Qian, had an accident, but the governor, Chen Qixue, instead handed in a report as a victory, which was revealed by Emperor Shi Yan Rugao.

古文：贞吉欲置重罚，兵部尚书霍冀仅议贬秩。
现代文：贞吉欲用重刑处置其学，兵部尚书霍冀只主张把他贬官。
English: Zhengyi wanted to punish his student with a heavy sentence, but the military department only wanted to demote him.

古文：贞吉与同官争不得，因上言： 边帅失律，祖宗法具在。今当事者屈法徇人，如公论何？
现代文：贞吉和同事争不过他，于是上书说 ：边关的大将违法，祖宗定下的处罚条例都还在，现在执法者屈法徇人，对得起公众吗？
English: Sadakichi and his colleagues couldn't argue with him, so they sent a letter saying: the general of the border is illegal, the punishment regulations set by the ancestors are still in place, and now the law enforcers are lawbreakers, are they worthy of the public?

古文：臣老矣，效忠无术，乞赐罢。 
现代文：我老了，想尽忠也没有办法，请把我罢免了吧！ 
English: I'm too old to be loyal, so please remove me!

古文：不许。
现代文：穆宗不答应。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：俄加太子太保。
现代文：不久还把他加官为太子太保。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of Crown Prince and Protector.

古文：贞吉以先朝禁军列三大营，营各有帅，今以一人总三营，权重难制。
现代文：贞吉认为先朝的禁军分为三大营，每营都有统帅，现在让一个人总督三大营兵力，权力太大，难于控制。
English: Zhengyi believed that the forbidden army of the previous dynasty was divided into three battalions, each battalion had a commander, and now let a person governor three battalions of troops, the power is too great, difficult to control.

古文：因极言其弊，请分五营，各统以大将，稍复祖宗之旧。
现代文：所以极力陈述这样做的弊端，请把禁军分作五营，各设大将统率，大略恢复成祖宗时的老样子。
English: Therefore, I strongly state the drawbacks of doing so. Please divide the forbidden army into five battalions, each led by a general, and roughly restore the old appearance of the ancestors.

古文：帝善之，命兵部会廷臣议。
现代文：穆宗认为是好办法，命令兵部召集朝臣加以讨论。
English: Mu Zong thought it was a good idea and ordered the military department to convene courtiers to discuss the matter.

古文：尚书霍冀前与贞吉议不合，颇不然其言。
现代文：尚书霍冀过去和贞吉主张不一致，对他的主张很不以为然。
English: In the past, Shangshu Hoji did not agree with Zhengyi's opinion, and he did not think much of his opinion.

古文：廷臣亦多谓强兵在择将，不在变法。
现代文：朝臣中也有很多人认为强兵在于选择大将，不在于改革兵制。
English: Among the courtiers, there are also many who believe that a strong military lies in the selection of generals, not in the reform of the military system.

古文：冀等乃上议三大营宜如故。惟以一人为总督，权太重，宜三营各设一大将，而罢总督，以文臣为总理。
现代文：霍冀等人于是递上奏议说三大营应维持原样，只是让一个人当总督，权力太大，应该给三大营各配一名大将，废除总督，由一名文官担任总理。
English: Ho Jie and others then submitted a report saying that the three battalions should remain as they are, but that it would be too powerful to have a single person as governor. Each of the three battalions should be assigned a general, the governor should be abolished, and a civilian should serve as prime minister.

古文：报可。
现代文：穆宗批示说可以。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：初，给事中杨镕劾冀贪庸。
现代文：原先给事中杨弹劾霍冀贪婪、无能。
English: Originally, Yang impeached Ho Chi Minh for greed and incompetence.

古文：帝已留冀，冀以镕贞吉乡人，疑出贞吉意，疏辨乞罢，且诋贞吉。
现代文：穆宗已经继续留用他，霍冀因为杨是贞吉的同乡，就怀疑对他的弹劾是贞吉出的主意，又上书辩解，请求罢免，并且在奏章中攻击贞吉。
English: Mu Zong had continued to employ him. Because Yang was a fellow villager of Zhengyi, Ho Ji suspected that his impeachment was Zhengyi's idea. He also wrote a letter to defend himself, requested to be dismissed, and attacked Zhengyi in his letter.

古文：贞吉亦疏辨求去。
现代文：贞吉也上书请求离休。
English: Sadakichi also sent a letter requesting a leave of absence.

古文：诏留贞吉，褫冀官。
现代文：穆宗传诏挽留贞吉，把霍冀削了职。
English: Mu Zong announced that he would retain Zhengyi and demote Huo Jie.

古文：其后营制屡更，未逾年即复其旧，贞吉亦不能争也。
现代文：此后禁军的营制屡次调整，不出一年就又恢复了老样子，贞吉也争执不过。
English: After that, the battalion system of the Imperial Army was repeatedly adjusted, and it was restored to its old form in less than a year. Sadakichi could not help but argue.

古文：俺答款塞求封，贞吉力赞其议。
现代文：只是俺答叩击边塞请求封赏时，贞吉曾极力促成这件事。
English: It's just that when I asked for a reward for knocking down the border fence, Sadakichi did his best to make it happen.

古文：先是，高拱再入阁即掌吏部。
现代文：在这之前，高拱二次入阁，并且一入阁就兼管了吏部。
English: Prior to this, Gao Gongzhu entered the cabinet for the second time, and as soon as he entered the cabinet, he also took charge of the personnel department.

古文：贞吉言于李春芳，亦得掌都察院。
现代文：贞吉向李春芳请求，也兼管了都察院。
English: At the request of Li Chunfang, Zhengyi also took charge of the Duza Academy.

古文：拱以私憾欲考察科道。
现代文：高拱因为私仇想考察科道官，排斥异己。
English: Gao Gong wanted to inspect the Taoist scholar because of personal enmity, rejecting the dissident.

古文：贞吉与同事上言： 顷因御史叶梦熊言事忤旨，陛下严谕考核言官，并及升任在籍者。应考近二百人，其中岂无怀忠报主謇谔敢言之士？
现代文：贞吉和同事上书说： 不久前因为御史叶梦熊议事不恰当，触犯了陛下，陛下就严厉地指示考核言官，并且连带考核任期内升了官的大臣，应当接受考核的有将近二百人，其中难道就没有忠心报效陛下、敢于仗义直言的人？
English: Sadakichi and his colleagues wrote, "Not long ago, because of the inappropriate deliberation of the Imperial Historian Ye Mengxiong, which offended His Majesty, His Majesty sternly instructed the evaluation officer, and together with the ministers who were promoted during the evaluation term, there are nearly two hundred people who should be evaluated. Is there no one among them who is loyal to His Majesty and dares to speak out?

古文：今一以放肆奸邪罪之，窃恐所司奉行过当，忠邪不分，致塞言路，沮士气，非国家福也。 
现代文：现在全把他们看成放肆、奸邪之人治罪，我担心有关部门在执行过程中做得太过分，忠邪不分，以至于阻塞言路，打击士气，这可不是国家的福份啊。 
English: Now all of them are seen as impudent, treacherous people who commit crimes. I am worried that the relevant departments have gone too far in the implementation process, and do not distinguish between loyalty and evil, so as to block the path of speech and hit morale. This is not a blessing for the country.

古文：帝不从。
现代文：穆宗不听。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：拱以贞吉得其情，憾甚。
现代文：高拱因为贞吉说中了他的隐情，也恨透了他。
English: Gao Gong also hated him because Zhengyi had revealed his secret love to him.

古文：及考察，拱欲去贞吉所厚者，贞吉亦持拱所厚以解。
现代文：等到考察时，高拱想拿掉贞吉喜欢的人，贞吉也拿掉高拱所喜欢的人来解恨。
English: When it came to the inspection, Gao Gong wanted to get rid of the person who was liked by Zhengyi, and Zhengyi also got rid of the person Gao Gong liked to get rid of the hatred.

古文：于是斥者二十七人，而拱所恶者咸与。
现代文：就这样被罢斥的有二十七个人，高拱所厌恶的已都在其中了。
English: Twenty-seven people were expelled in this way, and Gao Gong was disgusted with all of them.

古文：拱犹以为憾也，嗾门生给事中韩楫劾贞吉庸横，考察时有私。
现代文：他还引以为恨，唆使他的门生给事中韩楫弹劾贞吉平庸而且专横，在考察过程中徇私舞弊。
English: He also instigated his protégé to instigate the mediocre and high-handed impeachment of Zhengyi by Han Zheng in the middle of the matter, and committed malpractice in the investigation process.

古文：贞吉疏辨乞休，且言： 臣自掌院务，仅以考察一事与拱相左。
现代文：贞吉上书辩解，请求退休，并且说 ：我自从掌管都察院以来，仅仅因为考察这一件事和高拱意见不一致。
English: Sadakichi wrote a letter of apology, asking to retire, and said, "Since I have been in charge of the Imperial Household Agency, I have disagreed with Takaakumi only because of the investigation of this matter.

古文：其他坏乱选法，纵肆作奸，昭然耳目者，臣噤口不能一言，有负任使，臣真庸臣也。若拱者，斯可谓横也已。
现代文：他所干的其他一些破坏选法、放肆作假、明白不过的坏事，我闭着嘴巴不敢说，辜负了陛下对我的任命，我实在是个平庸的大臣。像高拱，那才真叫专横呢。
English: As for the other things he has done, such as sabotaging the election, being arrogant and deceitful, and doing bad things that are too obvious to be said, I have kept my mouth shut and dared not say anything. I have failed to live up to His Majesty's appointment of me. I am really a mediocre minister. Like Gao Gong, that's what really means to be domineering.

古文：臣放归之后，幸仍还拱内阁，毋令久专大权，广树众党。 
现代文：我罢官以后，最好还是让高拱回内阁中去，不要让他长期掌握用人大权，广树朋党。 
English: After my dismissal, it is best to let Gao Gong return to the cabinet, and not let him hold the power of appointment for a long time, Guangshu hongtang.

古文：疏入，竟允贞吉去，而拱握吏部权如故。
现代文：奏疏递进以后，穆宗竟批准他退休了，可是高拱仍旧掌握着吏部的大权。
English: After the report was submitted, Mu Zong actually approved his retirement, but Gao Gong still held the power of the cadre department.

古文：贞吉学博才高。
现代文：贞吉学识广博，本领很大。
English: Zhengyi has a broad knowledge and great ability.

古文：然好刚使气，动与物迕。
现代文：但他很好强，爱发脾气，动不动就得罪人。
English: But he is very strong, loves to lose his temper, and offends people at every turn.

古文：九列大臣，或名呼之，人亦以是多怨。
现代文：他对有的九卿重臣也直呼其名，很有些人也因此怨恨他。
English: He also called some of the nine senior ministers by their first names, and many people resented him for this.

古文：高拱、张居正名辈出贞吉后，而进用居先。
现代文：高拱、张居正的名望、年龄都不如贞吉，但是都在他前边受到重用。
English: Gao Gong and Zhang Juzheng were not as famous or as old as Zhengyi, but they were used heavily in front of him.

古文：咸负才好胜不相下，竟龃龉而去。
现代文：他们三个人都仗着自己的才气争强好胜，互不相让，贞吉终于被排挤掉了。
English: All three of them used their talents to compete with each other and were not willing to give in to each other. Sadakichi was finally pushed out.

古文：万历十年卒，赠少保，谥文肃。
现代文：他死在万历十年，朝廷追赠他为少保，谥文肃。
English: He died in the tenth year of Wanli, and the imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of Shao Bao (lesser protector) and the title of Wenshu.

