古文：◎世祖五十年春正月乙卯朔，高丽国王王禃遣其世子愖来朝。
现代文：至元十年春，正月初一，高丽国王王礻直派遣他的世子王忄甚前来朝见。
English: In the spring of the 10th year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the first day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of

古文：戊午，敕自今并以国字书宣命。
现代文：初四，皇上敕令：从今以后都用蒙古文字宣布命令。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the emperor issued a decree: from now on, all orders would be announced in Mongolian.

古文：命忻都、郑温、洪茶丘征耽罗。
现代文：命令忻都、郑温、洪茶丘征伐耽罗。
English: He ordered Xindu, Zheng Wen, and Hong Chaqiu to conquer Tanluo.

古文：宿州万户爱先不花请筑堡牛头山，以厄两淮粮运，不允。
现代文：宿州万户爱先不花请求在牛头山修筑堡寨，以扼守两淮的粮食运输，皇上不允。
English: The emperor did not agree to the request of thousands of households in Cangzhou to build a fortification in Niu Tou Shan to protect the grain transportation of the two Huai.

古文：爱先不花因言： 前宋人城五河，统军司臣皆当得罪。
现代文：爱先不花于是上奏说 ：先前宋军在五河修筑城堡，统军司的官员都因为这件事而落下罪名。
English: Ai Xianfei then went on to say: Previously, the Song Army built a castle in Wuhe, and the officials of the United Military Department were all guilty of this matter.

古文：今不筑，恐为宋人所先。 
现代文：如果现在不在牛头山修筑堡寨，恐怕会被宋朝的人抢先修筑。 
English: If we don't build a fortress on Niutou Mountain now, I'm afraid it will be built first by the Song Dynasty.

古文：帝曰： 汝言虽是，若坐视宋人戍之，罪亦不免也。 
现代文：皇帝说： 你的话虽然是对的，但如果眼睁睁地看着宋军据守那地方，罪责也是免不了的。 
English: The emperor said: Although what you said is right, if you watch the Song army defend that place, you will be held responsible.

古文：安南使者还，言陈光昞受诏不拜。
现代文：出使安南的使臣返回，说安南国王陈光日丙接受诏书时不行跪拜礼。
English: The envoys sent by Annan returned and said that Annan's King Chen Guangri could not kneel when accepting the edict.

古文：中书移文责问，光昞称从本俗。
现代文：中书省发出公文进行责问，陈光日丙说，这是按他们本地的习惯才这样做的。
English: The Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy issued an official letter to reprimand him. Chen Guangrizhong said that this was done according to their local customs.

古文：改回回爱薛所立京师医药院名广惠司。
现代文：把回回人爱薛所建立的京师御药院改名为广惠司。
English: Renamed the Beijing Teacher's Pharmacy, which was founded by a returnee named Ai Xue, to Guang Huizi.

古文：己未，禁鹰坊扰民及阴阳图谶等书。
现代文：初五，禁止鹰坊扰害百姓，禁止阴阳图谶一类书籍。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, it was forbidden for Yingfang to disturb the people, and it was forbidden for books such as Yin and Yang to circulate.

古文：癸亥，阿里海牙等大攻樊城，拔之，守将吕文焕惧而请降，中书省驿闻，遣前所俘唐永坚持诏谕之。
现代文：初九，阿里海牙等大举进攻樊城，攻占了该城，宋军守将吕文焕害怕，请求投降，中书省通过驿传知道了这件事，派原先俘获的唐永坚拿着皇上的诏书去招降他。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Ali Haiga and others launched a large-scale attack on Shicheng and captured the city. The commander of the Song army was afraid of Lu Wenhuan and asked him to surrender. The Central Literature Department learned about this through rumor and sent the previously captured Tang Yongjian to invite him to surrender with the emperor's edict.

古文：丁卯，立秘书监。
现代文：十三日，设立秘书监。
English: On the 13th, the Secretary Supervisor was established.

古文：戊辰，给皇子北平王甲一千。
现代文：十四日，赐给皇子北平王甲胄一千副。
English: On the 14th, 1,000 pairs of Beiping armor were given to the prince.

古文：置军器、永盈二库，分典弓矢、甲胄。
现代文：设置军器库、永盈库两座仓库，分别掌管弓箭和甲胄。
English: Set up two warehouses, the Armory and the Yongying Warehouse, respectively in charge of bows and arrows and armor.

古文：庚午，签陕西探马赤军。
现代文：十六日，签征陕西的探马赤军。
English: On the 16th, the Red Army in Shaanxi was conscripted.

古文：己卯，川蜀省言： 宋昝万寿攻成都，也速带儿所部骑兵征建都未还，拟于京兆等路签新军六千为援。 
现代文：二十五日，川蜀行省上奏说 ：宋军将领昝万寿进攻成都，也速带儿部下的骑兵征伐建都尚未返回，打算在京兆等路签征六千名新兵前去救援。 
English: On the twenty-fifth day of the year, the report of the Sichuan-Shuhai expedition to the provincial government said: "The general of the Song Army led by Gong Wan Shou attacked Chengdu, and he also hastened to take his cavalry to conquer and build the capital before returning, intending to sign up six thousand recruits on the Jingzhao and other roads to go to the rescue.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：诏遣紥术呵押失寒、崔杓持金十万两，命诸王阿不合市药狮子国。
现代文：皇上下诏派扎术呵押失寒、崔杓携带十万两黄金，命令诸侯王阿不合到狮子国购买药材。
English: The emperors and empresses sent Zhaoxu to stop the cold, and Cui Rong carried 100,000 taels of gold and ordered the princes to go to the lion country to buy medicinal materials.

古文：壬午，赏东川统军合剌所部有功者。
现代文：二十八日，奖赏东川统军合剌部下有功的人员。
English: On the 28th, he rewarded the meritorious personnel of the East River United Army and their subordinates.

古文：合剌请于渠江之北云门山及嘉陵西岸虎头山立二戍，以其图来上，仍乞益兵二万。
现代文：合剌请求在渠江北面的云门山以及嘉陵江西岸的虎头山建立两个戍所，把那地方的地图送来呈上，并请求增兵二万。
English: He requested the establishment of two garrisons at Yunmen Mountain on the north side of the canal and Kudu Mountain on the west bank of the Jialing River, sent a map of the area, and requested an additional 20,000 soldiers.

古文：诏给京兆新签军五千益之。
现代文：皇上下诏，命把京兆府新签征的五千名士兵派去增援他。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict, ordering the newly conscripted five thousand soldiers from Beijing to reinforce him.

古文：二月丙戌，以皇后、皇太子受册宝，遣太常卿合丹告于太庙。
现代文：二月初三，因为皇后和皇太子接受了册封，皇帝派太常卿合丹到太庙去祭告。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, because the empress and the crown prince had accepted the investiture, the emperor sent the Grand Vizier Haidan to the Imperial Temple to announce it.

古文：丙申，云南罗羽酋长阿旭叛，诏有司安集其民，募能捕斩阿旭者赏之。
现代文：十三日，云南罗羽部的酋长阿旭叛乱，皇帝诏令当地官府安抚、收聚那里的百姓，召募能够捕获、杀死阿旭的人，给予奖赏。
English: On the 13th, the rebellion of Ashu, the chieftain of Luoyang, Yunnan, broke out, and the emperor ordered the local government to pacify and gather the people there, recruit people who could capture and kill Ashu, and give them a reward.

古文：遣断事官麦肖勾校川陕行省钱谷。
现代文：派遣断事官麦肖调查、考核川陕行省的钱粮。
English: Dispatching the adjudicator Ma Xiao to investigate and assess the money grain in Sichuan and Shaanxi provinces.

古文：诏勘马剌失里、乞带脱因、刘源使缅国，谕遣子弟近臣来朝。
现代文：诏命勘马剌失里、乞带脱因、刘源出使缅国，谕令该国派遣国王的子弟或近臣前来朝见。
English: The imperial edict ordered Liu Yuan to send envoys to Burma to investigate the cause of the loss of the horse, the begging, and the removal of the cause, and ordered the country to send the king's sons or close ministers to come to the imperial court.

古文：高丽国王王禃以王师征耽罗，乞下令禁俘掠，听自制兵仗，从之。
现代文：高丽国王王礻直以朝廷的军队征伐耽罗，请求皇上下令禁止士兵们抓捕、抢掠百姓，听任高丽自己制造武器甲仗，皇上允从。
English: The king of Goryeo, Wang Jianzhong, sent troops from the imperial court to conquer Tham Luo. He asked the emperor to issue an order prohibiting the soldiers from arresting and robbing the people, and to allow Goryeo to manufacture its own weapons and armor. The emperor complied.

古文：丁未，宋京西安抚使、知襄阳府吕文焕以城降。
现代文：二十四日，宋朝的京西安抚使，襄阳府知府吕文焕以该城投降。
English: On the 24th, the Song Dynasty's Beijing-Xi pacification envoy, the governor of Xiangyang Prefecture, Lvwenhuan, surrendered the city.

古文：三月甲寅朔，诏申谕大司农司遣使巡行劝课，务要农事有成。
现代文：三月初一，皇帝下诏令大司农司派遣使臣巡行各地鼓励农耕，务必要使农业生产取得成就。
English: On the first day of March, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the director-general of the Department of Agriculture to send envoys to all parts of the country to encourage farming and ensure that agricultural production achieved success.

古文：乙丑，敕枢密院以襄阳吕文焕率将吏赴阙；熟券军并城居之民仍居襄阳，给其田牛；生券军分隶各万户翼。
现代文：十二日，敕令枢密院，让襄阳吕文焕率领军将、官员前来朝廷。熟券军和住在城市的居民仍旧住在襄阳，分给他们田地和耕牛；生券军分别隶属于各万户营。
English: On the 12th, the Privy Council was ordered by the Emperor to let Xiangyang Lvwenhuang lead the army of generals and officials to come to the imperial court. The well-versed soldiers and the residents living in the city still lived in Xiangyang, and the fields and cattle were allocated to them; the fresh soldiers were subordinated to the ten thousand households.

古文：文焕等发襄阳，择蒙古、汉人有才力者护视以来。
现代文：吕文焕等从襄阳出发，选择有才干、勇力的蒙古人、汉人护送监视而来。
English: Lu Wenhuan and others set out from Yangyang and chose talented and courageous Mongolians and Han Chinese to escort and monitor them.

古文：丙寅，帝御广寒殿，遣摄太尉、中书右丞相安童授皇后弘吉剌氏玉册玉宝，遣摄太尉、同知枢密院事伯颜授皇太子真金玉册金宝。
现代文：十三日，皇帝驾临广寒殿，派遣代理太尉、中书右丞相安童授予皇后弘吉剌氏册封的文书和玉印，派遣代理太尉、枢密院同知伯颜授予皇太子真金册封的文书和金印。
English: On the 13th, the emperor arrived at the Guangxuan Palace and dispatched the acting captain and the Minister of the Right of the CPC Central Committee, Ando, to award the Empress the document and the golden seal of the seal of Hongjitai, and dispatched the acting captain and the Privy Council confidant Bo Yan to award the crown prince the document and the golden seal of the real gold seal.

古文：辛未，以皇后、皇太子受册宝，诏告天下。
现代文：十八日，为皇后、皇太子接受册封宝印一事，皇帝下诏通报全国。
English: On the 18th, the Emperor issued an imperial edict to inform the whole country that the Empress and the Crown Prince had received the imperial seal.

古文：刘整请教练水军五六万及于兴元金、洋州、汴梁等处造船二千艘，从之。
现代文：刘整请求训练水军五六万，并在兴元路的金州、洋州、汴梁等地建造船只二千艘，皇上允从。
English: Liu Zhengyi requested the training of 560,000 sailors and the construction of 2,000 ships in Jinzhou, Yangzhou, Qiliang and other places on Xingyuan Road, and the emperor agreed.

古文：壬申，分金齿国为两路。
现代文：十九日，把金国划分为两路。
English: On the 19th, Kim divided the country into two parts.

古文：癸酉，客星青白如粉絮，起毕，度五车北，复自文昌贯斗杓，历梗河，至左摄提，凡二十一日。
现代文：二十日，客星象青白色的粉絮起自毕宿天区，经过五车星座的北面，又从文昌星座贯通北斗星的斗杓，经过梗河星，到左摄提星座，共二十一天。
English: On the 20th, the guest star, like a bluish-white powder puff, rose from the Bi-Shuku Heavenly Region, passing through the north side of the Five-Chariot Constellation, and from the Wenchang Constellation through the Dipper of the Big Dipper, through the Stygian River Star, to the left photo-taking constellation, for a total of 21 days.

古文：以前中书左丞相耶律铸平章军国重事，中书左丞张惠为中书右丞。
现代文：任命前中书左丞相耶律铸筹划军国重大事务，由中书左丞张惠担任中书右丞。
English: Former Vice-Minister of the Left, Ye Lu, was appointed to plan major military affairs, and Vice-Minister of the Left, Zhang Hui, became Vice-Minister of the Right.

古文：车驾幸上都。
现代文：皇帝的车驾临幸上都。
English: The emperor's car drove to Shangdu.

古文：西蜀严忠范以罪罢，遣察不花等抚治军民。
现代文：西蜀的严忠范因为获罪而被免职，派遣察不花前去安抚、治理军民。
English: Yan Zhongfan of West Shuxu was removed from his post because he was found guilty, and sent Zha Fuxa forward to pacify and govern the military and the people.

古文：罢中兴等处行中书省。
现代文：撤销中兴等地的行中书省。
English: Revoke ZTE and other places of the line of China's book ministry.

古文：夏四月癸未朔，阿里海牙以吕文焕入朝，授文焕昭勇大将军、侍卫亲军都指挥使、襄汉大都督，赐其将校有差。
现代文：夏季，四月初一，阿里海牙带领吕文焕入朝，皇上授予吕文焕昭勇大将军、侍卫亲军都指挥使、襄汉大都督之职，赐给他部下的将校不同数量的奖赏。
English: In the summer, on the first day of April, Ali Haiga led Lü Wenhuan into the imperial court. The emperor awarded Lü Wenhuan the positions of General Zhaoyong, Commander of the Imperial Guards, and Grand Governor of the Han Dynasty, and gave his subordinate officers different amounts of rewards.

古文：时将相大臣皆以声罪南伐为请，驿召姚枢、许衡、徒单公履等问计。公履对曰： 乘破竹之势，席卷三吴，此其时矣。 
现代文：当时将相大臣都请求征伐南方以声讨宋朝的罪行，皇上通过驿传征召姚枢、许衡、徒单公履等人垂询对策，徒单公履回答说： 趁现在势如破竹的形势，派军队占领三吴地区，这正是好机会呀！ 
English: At that time, the ministers of state all requested the conquest of the south to condemn the crimes of the Song Dynasty, and the emperor summoned Yao Zu, Xu Heng, and Tutan Gonglu to inquire about the countermeasures. Tutan Gonglu replied: Take advantage of the current unprecedented situation and send troops to occupy the Sanwu area. This is a good opportunity!

古文：帝然之。
现代文：皇帝同意他的看法。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：诏罢河南等路行中书省，以平章军国重事史天泽、平章政事阿术、参知政事阿里海牙行荆湖等路枢密院事，镇襄阳；左丞相合丹，参知行中书省事刘整，山东都元帅塔出、董文炳行淮西等路枢密院事，守正阳。
现代文：下诏撤销河南等路的行中书省，任命平章军国重事史天泽、平章政事阿术、参知政事阿里海牙等掌管荆湖等路的行枢密院事务，镇守襄阳；左丞相合丹、行中书省参知政事刘整、山东都元帅塔出、董文炳等掌管淮西等路的行枢密院事务，戍守正阳。
English: The following edict revoked the Ministry of Education and Culture in Henan and other provinces, and appointed Pingzhang Tianze, Pingzhang Ahshu, and Ali Haiga, who were in charge of important military and political affairs of the country, to be in charge of the Ministry of the Privy Council in Jinghu and other provinces, and to be the town guards of Xiangyang; Zuo Zheng He Dan, Liu Zhengyi, Shandong Duzhengtao, and Dong Wenyi, who were in charge of the Ministry of the Privy Council in Huaixi and other provinces, were in charge of the Ministry of the Privy Council in Zhengyang.

古文：天泽等陛辞，诏谕以襄阳之南多有堡寨，可乘机进取。
现代文：史天泽在朝廷辞行时，皇上下诏晓谕他们说： 襄阳以南有许多堡寨，可以乘机攻占。 
English: When Shi Tianze resigned from the imperial court, the emperor issued an edict to them: There are many fortresses south of Xiangyang that can be taken advantage of.

古文：仍以钞五千锭赐将士及赈新附军民。
现代文：并把五千锭钱钞赐给将士们和赈济新归附的军民。
English: He also gave 5,000 baht banknotes to the soldiers and the newly enlisted soldiers and civilians.

古文：甲申，免隆兴路榷课三年。
现代文：初二，免除隆兴路榷场专卖的税利三年。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the tax and interest of Longxing Road market monopoly will be exempted for three years.

古文：丁酉，敕南儒为人掠卖者官赎为民。
现代文：十五日，敕令：南方的儒士如果被人抢掠而卖为奴隶，由官府为他们赎身为民。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, a royal edict was issued: If the Confucianists in the south were robbed and sold into slavery, the government would redeem them and make them citizens.

古文：辛丑，罢四川行省，以巩昌二十四处便宜总帅汪良臣行西川枢密院，东川阆、蓬、广安、顺庆、夔府、利州等路统军使合剌行东川枢密院，东川副统军王仲仁同签行枢密院事，仍令汪良臣就率所部军以往。
现代文：十九日，撤销四川行省，任命巩昌等二十四处便宜行事总帅汪良臣执掌西川行枢密院，东川的阆州、蓬州、广安、顺庆、夔府、利州等路统军使合剌执掌东川行枢密院，东川副统军王仲仁为行枢密院同佥，并命令汪良臣立即率领所部军队前往。
English: On the 19th, the Sichuan Provincial Government was abolished, and Generalissimo Wang Liangchen, who had acted cheaply in twenty-four places, including Gongchang, was appointed to head the West Sichuan Provincial Government, and the envoys of the East Sichuan Provincial Government, including Luzhou, Pengzhou, Guang'an, Shunqing, Shufu, and Lizhou, were appointed to head the East Sichuan Provincial Government, and Wang Zhongren, the deputy commander of the East Sichuan Provincial Government, was appointed to be a peer of the East Sichuan Provincial Government, and Wang Liangchen was ordered to immediately lead the troops of the Provincial Government.

古文：五月壬子朔，定内外官复旧制，三岁一迁。
现代文：五月初一，决定朝廷内外的职官重新恢复旧制，三年调动一次。
English: On the first day of May, it was decided that officials inside and outside the Imperial Court would return to the old system and would be transferred once every three years.

古文：甲寅，禁无籍军从大军杀掠，其愿为军者听。
现代文：初三，禁止没有注册入籍的士兵随着大军杀人抢劫，那些愿意投军的听其自便。
English: In the third year of junior high school, soldiers who have not registered for naturalization are prohibited from killing and robbing with the army, and those who are willing to join the army are at their own discretion.

古文：戊辰，诏： 天下狱囚，除杀人者待报，其余一概疏放，限以八月内自至大都，如期而至者皆赦之。 
现代文：十七日，皇上诏令： 全国的囚犯，除了杀人者听候判决以外，其余的全部释放，限定在八月之内自行前来大都，凡是按时来到的都实行赦免。 
English: On the 17th, the emperor issued a decree: All prisoners in the country, with the exception of murderers awaiting sentencing, were to be released, but only if they came to the capital of their own accord within the month of August. Anyone who arrived on time would be pardoned.

古文：乙亥，诏： 免民代输签军户丝银，及伐木夫户赋税。
现代文：二十四日，皇上下诏： 免除百姓代替签军户交纳丝税银，免除伐木民户交纳赋税。
English: On the 24th, the emperor issued an imperial edict: the people were exempted from paying the silk tax and silver tax in place of the military households, and the logging households were exempted from paying the tax.

古文：负前朝官钱不能偿者，毋征。
现代文：拖欠前朝官府钱款而没有能力偿还的，不再向他们征收。
English: Those who are in arrears with the former government and are unable to repay will no longer be levied.

古文：主守失陷官钱者，杖而释之。
现代文：主管人遗失了官中钱款的，处以杖刑后释放。
English: If the person in charge lost the official's money, he or she shall be punished with a cane and then released.

古文：阵亡军及营缮工匠无丁产者，量加廪给。 
现代文：阵亡的士兵以及营建房屋的工匠，凡是家中没有成年男子和产业的，酌量情况由府库补贴。 
English: Soldiers who died in battle and craftsmen who build houses, who do not have adult men and property at home, will be subsidized by the prefectural treasury.

古文：以雄、易州复隶大都。
现代文：把雄州、易州重新隶属于大都。
English: To re-subordinate Yungzhou and Yizhou to Dadu.

古文：庚辰，赏襄阳有功万户奥鲁赤等银钞衣服有差。
现代文：二十九日，赏赐在襄阳一役有功的万户奥鲁赤等人不同数量的银两、钱钞和衣服。
English: On the 29th, various amounts of silver, banknotes and clothes were awarded to the ten thousand households of Oruchi and others who had distinguished themselves in the battle of Xiangyang.

古文：六月乙酉，赈诸王塔察儿部民饥。
现代文：六月初四，赈济诸侯王塔察儿部属的饥民。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the year, the famine relief of the vassals of the vassal king Tachara began.

古文：丁亥，以各路弓矢甲匠并隶军器监。
现代文：初六，把各路制造弓箭甲胄的工匠全部隶属于军器监。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, all the craftsmen who made bows and arrows and armor were subordinated to the Ordnance Inspector.

古文：免大都、南京两路赋役，以纾民力。
现代文：免除大都、南京两路的赋税、劳役，以宽舒民力。
English: Most of the capital and Nanjing will be exempted from taxes and labor service, so as to relax the people's power.

古文：赈甘州等处诸驿。
现代文：赈济甘州等地各驿站。
English: stations in Gansu and other places.

古文：辛卯，汰陕西贫难军。
现代文：初十，汰除陕西贫苦的士卒。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the poverty-stricken peasants in Shaanxi Province were eliminated.

古文：以刘整、阿里海牙不相能，分军为二，各统之。
现代文：因为刘整、阿里海牙不能和睦相处，把他们的军队分为两部分，各自统率一部分。
English: Because Liu Ching and Ali Hague could not get along, they divided their army into two parts, each leading a part.

古文：癸巳，敕襄阳造战船千艘。
现代文：十二日，敕令襄阳建造战船一千艘。
English: On the 12th, the Emperor ordered Xiangyang to build a thousand warships.

古文：甲午，改资用库为利用监。
现代文：十三日，把资用库改为利用监。
English: On the 13th, the use of the fund was changed to the use of supervision.

古文：丁酉，置光州等处招讨司。
现代文：十六日，在光州等处设置招讨司。
English: On the 16th, recruitment offices were set up in Gwangju and other places.

古文：戊申，经略忻都等兵至耽罗，抚定其地。诏以失里伯为耽罗国招讨使，尹邦宝副之。
现代文：二十七日，经略使忻都等人的军队抵达耽罗，镇抚、平定该地，下诏任命失里伯为耽罗国招讨使，尹邦宝担任招讨副使。
English: On the twenty-seventh day of the month, the army led by Xindu and others arrived in Tham Luo, subdued and pacified the place, and the next edict appointed Qulib to be the recruiting envoy of Tham Luo, and Yin Bangbao to be the recruiting deputy envoy.

古文：升拱卫直为都指挥司。
现代文：把拱卫直升格为都指挥司。
English: The arch-defender was reclassified as the metropolitan command division.

古文：使日本赵良弼，至太宰府而还，具以日本君臣爵号、州郡名数、风俗土宜来上。
现代文：出使日本的赵良弼到达太宰府而返回，把日本君臣的爵位、名号，州郡的名称、数目、风俗、土产全部一一上奏。
English: Zhao Liangyao, who was sent by Japan, arrived at Dazaifu and returned to report all the titles, names, names, numbers, customs, and local products of Japanese monarchs and ministers.

古文：闰月癸丑，敕诸道造甲一万、弓五千，给淮西行枢密院。
现代文：闰六月初三，敕命各道制造甲胄一万副、弓五千张，给予淮西行枢密院。
English: On the third day of the sixth lunar month, all provinces were ordered to produce 10,000 pairs of armor and 5,000 bows, which were given to the Huaixi line of the Privy Council.

古文：己巳，罢东西两川统军司。
现代文：十九日，撤销东西两川统军司。
English: On the 19th, the East-West Unified Military Command was revoked.

古文：辛未，以翰林院纂修国史，敕采录累朝事实以备编集。
现代文：二十一日，命令翰林院编修本朝的历史，敕令采录各代先皇时代史实，以供编写成集之用。
English: On the twenty-first day, Hanlin Academy was ordered to compile the history of this dynasty, and the imperial decree was issued to record the historical facts of each generation of emperors for the purpose of compiling a collection.

古文：丙子，以平章政事赛典赤行省云南，统合剌章、鸭赤、赤科、金齿、茶罕章诸蛮，赐银二万五千两、钞五百锭。
现代文：二十六日，任命平章政事赛典赤掌管云南行省，统领合剌章、鸭赤、赤科、金齿、茶罕章各蛮部，赐给二万五千两白银、五百锭钱钞。
English: On the 26th, he appointed Ping Zang Zheng Jie Xian Red to be in charge of Yunnan Province, leading the barbarian departments of He Zang Zang, Duck Red, Red Science, Gold Tooth, and Tea Han Zang, and gave him twenty-five thousand two silver and five hundred taels of banknotes.

古文：秋七月辛巳，以金州军八百人及统军司还成都，忽朗吉军千人隶东川。
现代文：秋季，七月初二，命令金州军八百人及统军司返回成都，把忽郎吉军的一千名士卒隶属于东川。
English: In the autumn, on the second day of the month of July, he ordered eight hundred soldiers of the Jinzhou Army and the United Military Department to return to Chengdu and subordinate one thousand soldiers of the Hulangyi Army to Dongchuan.

古文：壬午，以修太庙，将迁神主别殿，遣兀鲁忽奴带、张文谦祭告。
现代文：初三，因为要修建太庙，准备把先皇先圣的神主牌位迁移到别的殿堂，派遣兀鲁忽奴带、张文谦祭告先皇先圣。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, because a grand temple was to be built, preparations were made to relocate the position of the deity of the first emperor and the first saint to another hall of worship, and to send the offerings of Jialu Khuo and Zhang Wenqian to the first emperor and the first saint.

古文：丙戌，敕枢密院： 襄阳生券军无妻子者，发至京师，仍益兵卫送，其老疾者遣还家。 
现代文：初七，敕命枢密院： 把襄阳没有妻子儿女的生券军士卒遣发到京师来，仍旧增派卫兵遣送，其中年老有病的遣送回家。 
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Privy Council issued an order: to send the soldiers from Xiangyang without wives and children to Beijing Division, and still send more guards, among which the old and sick were sent home.

古文：庚寅，河南水，发粟赈民饥，仍免今年田租。
现代文：十一日，河南发生水灾，调发粮食赈济饥民，并免除今年的田租。
English: On the 11th, a flood occurred in Henan, and grain was allocated to feed the hungry, and this year's field rent was exempted.

古文：省西凉府入永昌路。
现代文：把西凉府撤销，划入永昌路。
English: Xi Liangfu was cancelled and transferred to Yongchang Road.

古文：戊申，高丽国王王禃遣其顺安公王悰、同知枢密院事宋宗礼，贺皇后、皇太子受册礼成。
现代文：二十九日，高丽国王王礻直派遣他的弟弟顺安公王忄宗、枢密院同知宋宗礼前来恭贺皇后、皇太子接受册封的典礼完成。
English: On the 29th, the King of Goryeo, Wang Jianzhong, sent his younger brother, Shunan Prince Wang Shanzong, and his confidant in the Privy Council, Song Zongli, to congratulate the Empress and the Crown Prince on the completion of the ceremony of receiving the title.

古文：八月庚戌朔，前所释诸路罪囚，自至大都者凡二十二人，并赦之。
现代文：八月初一，先前所释放各地的罪犯，自行前来大都的一共二十二人，全部赦免了他们。
English: On the first day of August, a total of 22 criminals, most of whom had previously been released from various regions, came to the capital on their own and were all pardoned.

古文：甲寅，凤翔宝鸡县刘铁妻一产三男，复其家三年。
现代文：初五，凤翔府宝鸡县列铁的妻子一胎生下三个儿子，免除他家三年的赋税。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the wife of Leitie of Baoji County, Fengxiang Prefecture, gave birth to three sons, exempting his family from three years of tax.

古文：丁丑，圣诞节，高丽王王禃遣其上将军金诜来贺。
现代文：二十八日，皇上的寿诞佳节，高丽国王王礻直派遣他的上将军金诜前来恭贺。
English: On the 28th, the Emperor's birthday, the King of Goryeo, Wang Jianzhong, sent his commander-in-chief, Kim Byung-seok, to offer congratulations.

古文：己卯，赐襄阳生熟券军冬衣有差。
现代文：三十日，赐给襄阳生券军和熟券军冬衣，数量各不相同。
English: On the 30th, winter coats were given to Yangyang student soldiers and seasoned soldiers, with different quantities.

古文：九月辛巳，辽东饥，弛猎禁。
现代文：九月初二，辽东发生饥荒，放宽不许狩猎的禁令。
English: On the second day of September, famine occurred in Liaodong, and the ban on hunting was relaxed.

古文：以合伯为平章政事。
现代文：任命合伯为平章政事。
English: Appointed He Bo as the political leader of Pingzhang.

古文：壬午，立河南宣慰司，供给荆湖、淮西军需。
现代文：初三，设置河南宣慰司，供应荆湖、淮西的军需物资。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the Henan Propaganda and Consolation Department was set up to supply military supplies to Jinghu and Huaixi.

古文：甲申，襄阳生券军至大都，诏伯颜谕之，释其械系，免死罪，听自立部伍，俾征日本；仍敕枢密院具铠仗，人各赐钞娶妻，于蒙古、汉人内选可为率领者。
现代文：初七，襄阳的生券军抵达大都，诏令伯颜抚慰他们，解除他们身上拘囚的械具，赦免他们的死罪，听任他们自己组织队伍，令他们征伐日本；同时敕令枢密院准备铠甲器仗，每个人都赐给他们钱钞，让他们娶妻，并在蒙古人、汉人中挑选能够率领他们的人。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the soldiers from Yangyang arrived in Dadu. The emperor ordered Baoyan to comfort them, to remove the instruments of imprisonment from their bodies, to pardon their capital crimes, to let them organize their own teams, and to order them to invade Japan. At the same time, he ordered the Privy Council to prepare for armored warfare. Everyone gave them money, let them marry, and select people who could lead them among the Mongols and Chinese.

古文：丙戌，刘秉忠、姚枢、王磐、窦默、徒单公履等上言： 许衡疾归，若以太子赞善王恂主国学，庶几衡之规模不致废坠。 
现代文：初九，刘秉忠、姚枢、王磐、窦默、徒单公履等人上奏说 ：许衡因病辞归，如果由太子赞善王恂来主持国子学，恐怕许衡定下的规章制度才不至于废弛。 
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Liu Bingzhong, Yao Zu, Wang Bang, Dou Miao, Tuzan Gonglu and others made a report: Xu Heng resigned due to illness. If the prince Zanzan Wang Xi presided over the study of the country, I am afraid that the rules and regulations set by Xu Heng would not be wasted.

古文：又请增置生员，并从之。
现代文：又请求增添国子学的生员，皇上均予允从。
English: He also requested that the number of students studying at the Imperial Academy be increased, and the Emperor granted his request.

古文：秉忠等又奏置东宫宫师府詹事以次官属三十八人。
现代文：刘秉忠等又奏请设置东宫宫师府詹事以下的官员三十八人。
English: Liu Bingzhong and others also requested the establishment of thirty-eight officials below Zhan Zhi.

古文：戊子，遣官诣荆湖行省，差次有功将士。
现代文：十一日，派遣官员前去荆湖行省对有功的将士分出等级顺序。
English: On the 11th day, officials were dispatched to Jinghu Province to sort out the rank order of meritorious soldiers.

古文：禁京畿五百里内射猎。
现代文：禁止在京畿五百里范围以内狩猎。
English: Hunting is prohibited within a 500-mile radius of Gyeonggi Province.

古文：己丑，敕自今秋猎鹿豕先荐太庙。
现代文：十二日，敕令：从今年秋天开始，猎获的鹿豕首先奉献给太庙。
English: On the twelfth day of the month, the emperor issued an order: starting this autumn, the deer tusks hunted will first be dedicated to the Imperial Temple.

古文：壬辰，中书省臣奏： 高丽王王禃屡言小国地狭，比岁荒歉，其生券军乞驻东京。 
现代文：十五日，中书省大臣上奏说： 高丽国王王礻直多次说他是小国，土地狭窄，近年又逢荒年歉收，请求让生券军屯驻东京。 
English: On the 15th, the Minister of the Ministry of the People's Republic of China made a report, saying, "The King of Goryeo, Wang Jintao, has repeatedly said that he is a small country with a narrow land area, and in recent years has had poor harvests. He has requested that the Korean People's Army be stationed in Tokyo.

古文：诏令营北京界，仍敕东京路运米二万石以赈高丽。
现代文：皇上诏令他们在北京的边界上驻扎，并敕令东京路运送粮米二万石以赈济高丽。
English: The emperor ordered them to be stationed on the border of Beijing, and ordered Tokyo Road to transport 20,000 koku of grain and rice to feed Goryeo.

古文：丁酉，立正阳诸驿。
现代文：二十日，设立正阳路各驿站。
English: On the 20th, the stations on Zhengyang Road were set up.

古文：敕河南宣慰司运米三十万石给淮西合答军，仍给淮西、荆湖军需有差。
现代文：敕令河南宣慰司运送三十万石米给淮西合答的军队。并给予淮西、荆湖不同数量的军用物资。
English: He ordered the Henan Propaganda and Consolation Department to transport 300,000 koku of rice to the troops in Huaixi, and to give different amounts of military supplies to Huaixi and Jinghu.

古文：壬寅，敕会同馆专居降附之入觐者。
现代文：二十五日，敕令：把会同馆专门用作投降归顺之后入朝觐见的人居住的地方。
English: On the 25th, the imperial edict was issued: the guild hall was to be used exclusively as a place of residence for those who entered the imperial court after surrendering.

古文：以翰林学士承旨和礼霍孙兼会同馆事，以主朝廷咨访，及降臣奏请。
现代文：任命翰林学士承旨和礼霍孙兼管会同馆的事务，以主持朝廷有关咨询、访问，以及降顺之臣奏请之事。
English: Hanlin Zongzhi and Li Huosun were appointed as academicians to manage the affairs of the association and the museum, to preside over the imperial court's relevant consultations, visits, and requests from subordinate subjects.

古文：征东招讨使塔匣剌请征骨嵬部，不允。
现代文：征东招讨使塔匣剌请求征讨骨嵬部，皇上不准。
English: The Emperor did not approve of the request of the Emperor's envoys to the East to enlist the help of the Emperor's envoys.

古文：丙午，置御药院。
现代文：二十九日，设置御药院。
English: On the 29th, the Imperial Pharmacy was established.

古文：车驾至自上都。
现代文：皇上的车驾从上都抵达。
English: The emperor's car drove from the capital to the capital.

古文：给诸王塔察儿所部布万匹。
现代文：赐给诸侯王塔察儿的部属一万匹布。
English: He gave the vassals of the vassal king Tachara ten thousand camels.

古文：冬十月乙卯，享于太庙。
现代文：冬季，十月初七，向太庙敬献祭品。
English: In winter, on the 7th day of the 10th month, offerings are made to the Great Temple.

古文：丙辰，以西川编民、东川义士军屯田，饷潼川、青居戍兵。
现代文：初八，令西川的民户和东川的义士军屯田，以供应潼川、青居山守军的粮饷。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the private households of the West River and the righteous soldiers of the East River were ordered to set up farms to supply grain to the defenders of the Shukawa and Aokiyama.

古文：敕伯颜、和礼霍孙以史天泽、姚枢所定新格，参考行之。
现代文：敕命伯颜、和礼霍孙用史天泽、姚枢所制定的新规定参考实行。
English: The new regulations formulated by Tianze Shi and Yao Zu of the Sun Yat-sen School and the Sun Yat-sen School will be implemented as reference.

古文：庚申，御史台臣言，没入赃罚，为钞一千三百锭。
现代文：十二日，御史台大臣上奏说 ：没收的赃款共有一千三百锭钱钞。 
English: On the 12th, the Minister of State for History reported that a total of 1,300 banknotes had been confiscated.

古文：诏有贫乏不能存者，以此赈之。
现代文：皇上诏令：用这笔钱赈济那些贫穷而无法养活自己的人。
English: Imperial edict: Use the money to help those who are too poor to feed themselves.

古文：有司断死罪五十人，诏加审覆，其十三人因斗殴杀人，免死充军，余令再三审覆以闻。
现代文：官府判处死刑的罪犯共五十名，下诏进行复查，其中有十人因为斗殴而杀人，免去死罪改判充军。其余的令再三审核复查后报上来。
English: A total of 50 criminals sentenced to death by the government were ordered to be re-examined. Ten of them were sentenced to military service after being acquitted of the death penalty for killing someone in a fight. The rest of the orders were repeatedly reviewed and reported.

古文：禁牧地纵火。
现代文：禁止在放牧的草地放火。
English: It is prohibited to set fire to grazing meadows.

古文：以合答带为御史大夫，升襄阳府为路，罢广宁府新签军。
现代文：任命合答带为御史大夫。把襄阳由府升格为路。罢除在广宁府新签征的军队。
English: He appointed He Er Belt as the chief historian, promoted Xiangyang from a prefecture to a province, and dismissed the newly conscripted troops in Guangning Prefecture.

古文：初建正殿、寝殿、香阁、周庑两翼室。
现代文：开始在皇宫建造正殿、寝殿、香阁、正殿四周的廊庑以及两翼的房舍。
English: The construction of the main hall, the sleeping hall, the pavilion, the corridors around the main hall and the buildings in the two wings began in the Imperial Palace.

古文：西蜀都元帅也速答儿与皇子奥鲁赤合兵攻建都蛮，擒酋长下济等四人，获其民六百，建都乃降，诏赏将士有差。
现代文：西蜀都元帅也速答儿和皇子奥鲁赤合兵进攻建都蛮，擒获酋长下济等四人，掳掠了他的百姓六百人，建都蛮才投降，皇帝下诏赐给将士们不同数量的奖赏。
English: The West Shudu Marshal and the prince Olu Chiahe attacked the Jiandu barbarians, captured four people such as the chief Jianji, and captured six hundred of his people. The Jiandu barbarians surrendered only after the emperor issued an edict to give the soldiers different amounts of rewards.

古文：十一月癸未，命布只儿修《起居注》。
现代文：十一月初五，命令布只儿修撰《起居注》。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, he ordered Bu Jia Er to revise "Living Notes."

古文：丁未，大司农司言： 中书移文，以畿内秋禾始收，请禁农民覆耕，恐妨刍牧。 
现代文：二十九日，大司农司上奏说 ：中书省的公文说，因为京畿地区刚开始秋收，请求禁止农民今年重复地耕种，恐怕妨碍牧草生长。 
English: On the 29th, the Grand Secretary of the Department of Agriculture reported that the official document of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology said that because the autumn harvest had just begun in the Gyeonggi region, farmers were requested to prohibit repeated cultivation this year, which would hinder the growth of pasture grass.

古文：帝以农事有益，诏勿禁。
现代文：皇帝认为有利农业生产，下诏不要禁止农民重复地耕种。
English: The emperor believed that it was beneficial to agricultural production, and issued an edict not to prohibit farmers from farming repeatedly.

古文：十二月己酉朔，安童等言： 昔博赤伯都谓总管府权太重，宜立运司并诸军奥鲁以分之。
现代文：十二月初一，安童等人上奏说： 从前侍奉皇上饮食的伯都认为总管府的权力太大，应该设立转运司和各军的辎重老营，以分散总管府的权力。
English: On the first day of December, Ando and others made a report, saying: "Bodu, who used to serve the emperor's meals, thought that the power of the General Administration Office was too great, and that a transportation department and a heavy camp for each army should be established to disperse the power of the General Administration Office.

古文：臣以今之民官，循例迁徙，保无邪谋，别立官府，于民未便。 
现代文：臣等认为，现在的管民官按照定例升迁调动，保证不会有邪辟的打算，另外设置官府对百姓不方便。 
English: In the opinion of the ministers, the current officials in charge of the people's affairs will be promoted and transferred in accordance with the regular procedures to ensure that there will be no evil intentions, and it is inconvenient for the people to set up government offices.

古文：帝然之。
现代文：皇帝同意他们的看法。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：壬子，赐襄樊被伤军士钞千锭。
现代文：初四，赐予在襄阳一战中受伤的军卒钱钞一千锭。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, a soldier wounded in the First Battle of Xiangyang was awarded 1,000 baht in banknotes.

古文：甲寅，宋夏贵攻正阳，淮西行院击走之。
现代文：初六，宋朝的夏贵进攻正阳，淮西行枢密院将他击退。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Xia Gui of the Song Dynasty attacked Zhengyang, and the Privy Council of Huaixi Province repulsed him.

古文：壬戌，召阿术同吕文焕入觐。
现代文：十四日，皇帝征召阿术同吕文焕入朝觐见。
English: On the 14th, the emperor summoned Ah Jutong and Lu Wenhong to the imperial court.

古文：大司农司请罢西夏世官，括诸色户，从之。
现代文：大司农司请求罢免世袭的官员，统计各类匠户，皇帝允从。
English: The emperor acceded to the request of the director of the Department of Agriculture to remove hereditary officials and count all types of artisan households.

古文：安南国王陈光昞遣使来贡方物。
现代文：安南国王陈光日丙派遣使臣前来进贡地方特产。
English: Annan King Chen Guang Rong sent envoys to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：诸王薛阇秃以罪从军，累战皆捷，召赴阙。
现代文：诸侯王薛秃因犯罪而随军征战，每一次战斗都打胜仗，皇帝征召他前来朝廷。
English: As a result of committing a crime, the prince Xue Balding went to war with the army. He won every battle. The emperor summoned him to the court.

古文：己巳，省陕州虢略、朱阳二县入灵宝。
现代文：二十一日，撤销陕州的虢略、朱阳二县，划入灵宝。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the revocation of Shaanxi's Zouliu and Zhuyang counties, and their inclusion in Lingbao.

古文：赐万户解汝楫银万五千两。
现代文：赐给万户解汝楫一万五千两白银。
English: He gave 15,000 taels of silver to every household.

古文：诸王孛兀儿出率所部兵与皇子北平王合军讨叛臣聂古伯，平之，赏立功将士有差。
现代文：诸侯王孛兀儿出率领本部军队与皇子北平王合军讨伐叛臣聂古伯，平定了叛军，给予立功的将士不同数量的赏赐。
English: Prince Wang Jie'er led the headquarters army and joined forces with Prince Peiping Wang to fight against the traitor Xing Gubo. The rebels were defeated, and the soldiers who rendered meritorious service were given different amounts of rewards.

古文：赐诸王金、银、币、帛如岁例。
现代文：按照每年的惯例赐给诸侯王黄金、白银、钱钞和绢帛。
English: According to the annual practice, the princes were given gold, silver, banknotes and ingots.

古文：是岁，诸路虫蝻灾五分，霖雨害稼九分，赈米凡五十四万五千五百九十石。
现代文：这一年，各路发生虫灾、蝗灾的占五成，因暴雨而损害庄稼的占九成，共赈济粮米五十四万五千五百九十石。
English: In that year, insect and locust plagues occurred in all regions, accounting for 50%, and damage to crops due to heavy rains accounted for 90%. A total of 545,590 koku of grain and rice were consumed.

古文：天下户一百九十六万二千七百九十五。
现代文：全国共有一百九十六万二千七百九十五户。
English: There are a total of 1,962,795 households in the country.

古文：十一年春正月己卯朔，宫阙告成，帝始御正殿，受皇太子诸王百官朝贺。
现代文：至元十一年春，正月初一，皇宫宣告建成，皇帝开始驾临正殿接受皇太子、诸侯王和百官朝贺。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the first day of the first month of the year, the imperial palace was announced to be completed, and the emperor began to come to the main hall to receive congratulations from the crown prince, princes and hundreds of officials.

古文：高丽国王王禃遣其少卿李义孙等来贺，兼奉岁贡。
现代文：高丽国王王礻直派遣他的少卿李义孙等前来致贺，并敬献今年的贡品。
English: The King of Goryeo, Wang Jianzhi, sent his Shaoqing, Li Yisun, and others to offer congratulations and present this year's tribute.

古文：乙酉，以金州招讨使钦察率襄阳生熟券军千人戍鸭池。
现代文：初七，派遣金州招讨使钦察率领襄阳的生券军、熟券军士卒共一千人戍守鸭池。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, a total of one thousand soldiers and officers from the Xiangyang army, led by Jincha, the envoy of Jinzhou, were sent to guard the duck pond.

古文：庚寅，初立军官以功升散官格。
现代文：十二日，开始建立军官按照功劳晋升散官的制度。
English: On the 12th, the establishment of a system for officers to be promoted to non-commissioned officers according to merit began.

古文：免诸路军杂赋。
现代文：免除向各路的军队征收杂赋。
English: exempt from the collection of miscellaneous funds to the armed forces of all roads.

古文：以忙古带等新旧军一万一千五百人戍建都。立建都宁远都护府，兼领互市监。
现代文：派遣忙古带等新旧军一万一千五百人戍守建都，建立建都宁远都护府，都护府兼掌互市监的职责。
English: He dispatched 11,500 troops from the old and new armies to defend the newly built capital, and established the Ningyuan Capital Protectorate, which was also responsible for the duties of the city supervisor.

古文：壬辰，置西蜀四川屯田经略司。
现代文：十四日，设置西蜀四川屯田经略司。
English: On the 14th, the West Shu-Sichuan Tonden Economic Development Division was set up.

古文：丁酉，长春宫设周天金箓醮七昼夜。
现代文：十九日，长春宫设立周天金大醮，共七昼夜。
English: On the 19th, the Changchun Palace set up a weekday grand banquet, a total of seven days and nights.

古文：敕荆湖行院以军三万、水弩炮手五千隶淮西行院。
现代文：敕令荆湖行枢密院以兵卒三万人、水弩炮手五千人隶属于淮西行枢密院统辖。
English: With 30,000 soldiers and 5,000 water cannonmen, the Jinghu Line Privy Council was subordinate to the Huaixi Line Privy Council.

古文：丙午，彰德赵当道等以谋逆伏诛，余从者论罪有差。
现代文：二十八日，彰德赵当道等人因为谋叛被处死，其余的胁从者判处不同的刑罚。
English: On the 28th, Zhang De, Zhao Dang Dao and others were executed for plotting treason, while the rest of the followers were sentenced to different punishments.

古文：立于阗、鸦儿看两城水驿十三，沙州北陆驿二，免于阗采玉工差役。
现代文：在于阗、鸦儿看两城建立十三个水驿站，在沙州北面建立两个陆驿站。免除于阗采玉工匠的差役。
English: Thirteen water jade stations will be set up in the two cities of Yunnan and Shandong, and two land jade stations will be set up in the northern part of Shazhou. Jade miners in Yunnan will be exempted from labor service.

古文：阿里海牙言： 荆襄自古用武之地，汉水上流已为我有，顺流长驱，宋必可平。 
现代文：阿里海牙上奏说 ：荆州、襄阳自古以来就是兵家用武的地方，汉水的上游已经被我军占领，如果顺水长驱直入，宋朝一定可以平定。 
English: Ali Hague said: Jingzhou and Xiangyang have been places where soldiers have been fighting since ancient times. The upper reaches of the Han River have been occupied by our army. If the water is driven straight in, the Song Dynasty can certainly be pacified.

古文：阿术又言： 臣略地江淮，备见宋兵弱于往昔，今不取之，时不能再。 
现代文：阿术又上奏说： 我攻取江淮一带，完全看出宋军比过去弱，如果现在不攻占宋地，时机就不会再来了。 
English: Ah Shu also said in his report: I conquered the area around the Jianghuai River, and fully realized that the Song Army was weaker than in the past. If we do not conquer the Song territory now, the opportunity will not come again.

古文：帝趣召史天泽同议，天泽对曰： 此国大事，可命重臣一人如安童、伯颜，都督诸军，则四海混同，可计日而待矣。
现代文：皇帝立即召见史天泽一起商量这件事，史天泽回答说 ：这是国家的一件大事，可以派遣一个像安童、伯颜这样的重臣总领各路军马完成此事。
English: The emperor immediately summoned Shi Tianze to discuss the matter. Shi Tianze replied, "This is a matter of great national importance. You can send a chief minister like Ando and Bo Yan to lead the army to complete this matter."

古文：臣老矣，如副将者，犹足为之。 
现代文：那么，四海的统一就为期不远了。我老了，如果担任副手，还可以胜任。 
English: Then, the unification of the four seas is not far away. I am old, if I serve as a deputy, I can still be competent.

古文：帝曰： 伯颜可以任吾此事矣。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：伯颜可以担当我的这项使命了。 
English: The emperor said, "Bo Yan can take on this mission for me."

古文：阿术、阿里海牙因言： 我师南征，必分为三，旧军不足，非益兵十万不可。 
现代文：阿术、阿里海牙借此机会上奏说 ：我军征伐南方，必须分三路进军，原来的军队不够，非增加十万人不可。 
English: Al-Shi and Ali-Hague took this opportunity to announce: Our army will conquer the south, and must advance in three directions. The original army is not enough, we must increase it by 100,000 men.

古文：诏中书省签军十万人。
现代文：皇上便下诏，命中书省签征十万名士兵。
English: The emperor then issued an edict ordering the Ministry of Education to conscript 100,000 soldiers.

古文：二月戊申朔，赐阿术所部将士及茶罕章阿吉老耆等银钞有差。
现代文：二月初一，赐给阿术部下的将士以及茶罕章、阿吉老耆等人不同数额的银两、钱钞。
English: On the first day of February, different amounts of silver and banknotes were given to the soldiers under the A operation department, as well as Cha Han Zhang, Agi Laojun and others.

古文：甲寅，太阴犯井宿。
现代文：初七，太阴星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the sun is too dark and the stars are too dim.

古文：庚申，新德副元帅杨尧元战没，以其子袭职。
现代文：十三日，新德副元帅杨尧元战死，令他的儿子袭取父职。
English: On the 13th, the vice-marshal of the New Germany, Yang Xuanyuan, died in battle, causing his son to take over his father's position.

古文：初立仪鸾局，掌宫门管钥、供帐灯烛。
现代文：开始设立仪鸾局，掌管宫门的钥匙、陈设物品和灯烛之类。
English: He began to set up the Ceremonial Affairs Bureau, which was in charge of the keys to the palace gates, furnishings, and candles.

古文：壬申，造战船八百艘于汴梁。
现代文：二十五日，在汴梁建造战船八百艘。
English: On the 25th, 800 warships were built in Haoliang.

古文：以廉希宪为中书右丞、北京等处行中书省事。
现代文：任命廉希宪为中书右丞，掌管北京等地行中书省事务。
English: Appointed Liang Xixian as the vice-chairman of the Chinese Book Ministry, in charge of the affairs of the Chinese Book Ministry in Beijing and other places.

古文：车驾幸上都。
现代文：皇帝的车驾抵达上都。
English: The emperor's car drove to Shangdu.

古文：三月己卯，诏以劝课农桑谕高丽国王王禃，仍命安抚高丽军民总管洪茶丘提点农事。
现代文：三月初二，下诏给高丽国王王礻直，命他鼓励百姓从事农桑，并命令镇抚高丽的军民总管洪茶丘管理农事。
English: On the second day of March, he issued an edict to the King of Goryeo, Wang Xizhong, ordering him to encourage the people to engage in agriculture, and ordered the military and civilian chief of Zhenfu Goryeo, Hong Cha Kuo, to manage agricultural affairs.

古文：己丑，吕文焕随司千户陈炎谋叛，诛首恶二人，其随司军并其妻子皆令内徙。
现代文：十二日，吕文焕的随司千户陈炎阴谋叛变，将两名首恶处死，其余的随司军人和他们的妻子儿女，都令他们迁往内地。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Lu Wenhuan's retainer Chen Yan plotted a mutiny and executed the two ringleaders. The rest of the retainer's soldiers and their wives and children were ordered to move inland.

古文：庚寅，敕凤州经略使忻都、高丽军民总管洪茶丘等将屯田军及女直军，并水军，合万五千人，战船大小合九百艘，征日本。
现代文：十三日，敕令凤州经略使忻都、高丽军民总管洪茶丘等率领屯田军，以及女真军，加上水军，共一万五千人、大小战舰九百艘，征伐日本。
English: On the 13th, the Emperor ordered the Fengzhou Economic Delegate to send the Tongdu, the General Manager of the Korean People's Army Hong Cha-koo, and others to lead the Tonden Army, the Jurchen Army, and the Navy, a total of 15,000 people and 900 large and small warships, to invade Japan.

古文：移碉门兵戍合答城。
现代文：调动碉门的士卒去戍守合答城。
English: Mobilize the guards of the gate to defend the city.

古文：辛卯，改荆湖、淮西二行枢密院为二行中书省，伯颜、史天泽并为左丞相，阿术为平章政事，阿里海牙为右丞，吕文焕为参知政事，行中书省于荆湖；合答为左丞相，刘整为左丞，塔出、董文炳为参知政事，行中书省于淮西。
现代文：十四日，把荆湖、淮西两地的行枢密院改为行中书省；伯颜、史天泽均担任左丞相，阿术任平章政事，阿里海牙任右丞，吕文焕任参知政事，在荆湖执掌中书省事务；合答任左丞相，刘整任左丞，塔出、董文炳任参知政事，在淮西执掌中书省事务。
English: On the 14th, the Privy Council of Jinghu and Huaixi was changed to the Central Book Ministry; Bo Yan and Shi Tianze served as the Left Vice-Minister, Ah Shu served as the Vice-Minister of Pingzhang, Ali Haiga served as the Right Vice-Minister, Lu Wenhuan served as the Vice-Minister of the Governor, and was in charge of the Central Book Ministry affairs in Jinghu; Heping served as the Left Vice-Minister of the Governor, Liu Zhei served as the Left Vice-Minister of the Governor, Tade and Dong Wenyu served as the Vice-Minister of the Governor, and were in charge of the

古文：遣使代祀岳渎后土。
现代文：派遣使臣代表皇帝祭祀五岳、四渎和土地大神。
English: On behalf of the emperor, he dispatched envoys to offer sacrifices to the Five Mountains, the Four Deities and the Great God of the Land.

古文：河南宣慰司言： 军兴转输烦重，宜赋军匠诸户，权助财用。 
现代文：河南宣慰司上奏说： 打仗时转运军用物资很繁重，应当向军中的匠户征收赋税，暂时资助财经用费。 
English: The head of the Henan Propaganda and Consolation Department said: It is very burdensome to transport military supplies during the war, and it is necessary to collect taxes from artisans in the army to temporarily subsidize financial and economic expenses.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：癸巳，获嘉县尹常德，课最诸县，诏优赏之。
现代文：十六日，获嘉县尹常德，征收的赋税超过其他各县，皇帝颁诏对他优奖。
English: On the 16th, Yin Changde of Jiaya County was awarded the prize for collecting more taxes than any other county, and the emperor awarded him the prize.

古文：亦乞里带强取民租产、桑园、庐舍、坟墓，分为探马赤军牧地，诏还其民。
现代文：亦乞里带强行夺取百姓的租田、桑园、屋舍、坟墓，把它们分给探马赤军作为放牧之地，皇帝下诏令其还给百姓。
English: He also forcibly seized the people's rented land, mulberry orchards, houses, and graves, and gave them to the Red Army as grazing land. The emperor issued a decree to return them to the people.

古文：万户阿里必尝发李璮逆谋，为璮所杀，以其子剌剌吉袭职。
现代文：万户阿里必曾经揭发李王叛变的阴谋，被李王杀害，命他的儿子剌剌吉承袭他的官职。
English: Wanyu Ali must have uncovered the plot of King Li's mutiny, was killed by King Li, and ordered his son Yanji to take over his official position.

古文：改金州招讨司为万户府。
现代文：把金州招讨司改为万户府。
English: Change the name of Jinzhou Invitation Division to Wanyu Prefecture.

古文：遣要速木、咱兴憨失招谕八鲁国。
现代文：派遣要速木、咱兴憨失前去招降八鲁国。
English: Send to Hayaki, let's go forward to recruit and surrender the eight countries.

古文：帝师八合思八归土番国，以其弟亦邻真袭位。
现代文：帝师八合思八返回土蕃国，命他的弟弟亦邻真承袭他的职位。
English: Emperor Shihaba returned to Tujue and ordered his younger brother, Yochinomaru, to take over his position.

古文：建大护国仁王寺成。
现代文：建成大护国仁王寺。
English: Daigo Koku Nio-ji Temple was built.

古文：夏四月辛亥，分陕西陇右诸州置提刑按察司，治巩昌。
现代文：夏季，四月初五，分设陕西路和陇右路各州，设置提刑按察司，府衙设在巩昌。
English: In the summer, on the fifth day of the fourth month, Shaanxi Road and Shiyu Road were separated into various prefectures, and the Criminal Investigation Department was set up, and the prefectural government was set up in Gongchang.

古文：癸丑，初建东宫。
现代文：初七，开始修建东宫。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, construction of the East Palace began.

古文：甲寅，诛西京讹言惑众者。
现代文：初八，把在西京用谎言蛊惑百姓的人处死。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, those who had deceived the people with lies in Xijing were put to death.

古文：括诸路马五万匹。
现代文：从各路收聚五万匹马。
English: Collect fifty thousand horses from all the roads.

古文：辛未，诏安慰斡端、鸦儿看、合失合儿等城。
现代文：二十五日，下诏安抚斡端、鸦儿看、合失合儿等城。
English: On the 25th, the following edicts were issued to pacify the city, see the crows, and meet the lost children.

古文：赐襄樊战死之士二百四十九人之家，每家银百两。
现代文：赐给在襄樊战役中战死的二百四十九名士卒的家属银子，每家一百两。
English: The families of the 249 soldiers who died in the Battle of Xiangfan were given 100 taels of silver each.

古文：乙亥，命也速带儿将千人，同撒吉思所部五州丁壮戍益都。
现代文：二十九日，命令也速带儿率领一千名士卒，同撒吉思部下五州的丁壮一起戍守益都。
English: On the 29th, he also hastily ordered a thousand soldiers to accompany Ding Zhuang from the five prefectures under Sagis to defend Yiwu.

古文：五月丙戌，汪惟正以所部军逃亡，乞于民站户选补，从之。
现代文：五月十一日，汪惟正因为部下的士兵逃跑，请求从民间的驿户中选人进行补充，皇上允从。
English: On May 11th, Wang Wei, because his subordinate soldiers had fled, requested that a replacement be selected from among the civilian tenants, and the emperor complied.

古文：敕北京、东京等路新签军恐不宜暑，权驻上都。
现代文：敕令北京、东京等路：新近签征的士兵恐怕不能适应暑热天气，暂时驻扎在上都。
English: Newly enlisted soldiers may not be able to adapt to the hot weather and are temporarily stationed in Beijing and Tokyo.

古文：乙未，枢密院臣言： 旧制，蒙古军每十人月食粮者，惟拔都二人。
现代文：二十日，枢密院大臣上奏说： 按照旧制，每月吃粮的蒙古军士兵，每十个人当中只能有两名拔都勇士的名额。
English: On the 20th, the Minister of the Privy Council made a report saying: According to the old system, for every ten Mongolian soldiers who eat grain every month, there can only be two places for those who are brave enough to take the capital.

古文：今遣怯薛丹合丹核其数，多籍二千六百七十人。 
现代文：现在派了侍卫军去合丹部核实他的人数，册籍上多出了二千六百七十人。 
English: Now the bodyguards have been sent to the headquarters to verify his number, and there are 2,670 more people on the register.

古文：敕杖合丹，斥无入宿卫，谪往西川效死军中，余定罪有差。
现代文：敕令对合丹处以杖刑，斥退他，不许他进入宿卫营轮值，贬谪到西川的军旅中效死力，其余的人判定不同的罪名。
English: The imperial edict punished Hardan with a cane, banished him, forbade him to enter the rotational guard battalion, and sent him to the military expedition in the West River to use deadly force. The rest of the people were convicted of different charges.

古文：丙申，以皇女忽都鲁揭里迷失下嫁高丽世子王愖。
现代文：二十一日，皇帝把皇女忽都鲁揭里迷失下嫁给高丽国王的世子王忄甚。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the emperor married the princess, Khutuluk, to the heir of the king of Goryeo, Wang Junchi.

古文：辛丑，敕随路所签新军，其户丝银均配于民者，并除之。
现代文：二十六日，敕令：由各路所签征的新军，他们户内平均分配给各民户承担的丝税银，全部予以免除。
English: On the 26th, a royal decree was issued: all the silk tax money, which was evenly distributed among the households of the conscripted soldiers, was exempted.

古文：六月丙午朔，刘整乞益甲仗及水弩手，给之。
现代文：六月初一，刘整请求增加甲仗和水军弓箭手，拨给了他。
English: On the first day of June, Liu Zhengyi requested to increase the number of armored and naval archers, which was allocated to him.

古文：庚戌，赐建都合马里战士银钞有差。
现代文：初五，赏给建都合马里部下的战士不同数额的银两、银钞。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, soldiers under the command of the Construction Party of Mali were awarded different amounts of silver coins and banknotes.

古文：癸丑，敕合答选部下蒙古军五千人，与汉军分戍沿江堡隘，为使传往来之卫。
现代文：初八，敕令合答挑选部下的蒙古军士卒五千人，与汉军分别戍守沿江的堡寨险隘，以保卫使臣驿路上的往来。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the imperial command jointly selected five thousand Mongolian sergeants and soldiers from his subordinates, and separately guarded the fortresses along the river with the Han army, in order to protect the traffic of the envoys on the road.

古文：仍以古不来拔都、翟文彬率兵万人，掠荆南鸦山，以缀宋之西兵。
现代文：并派遣古不来拔都、翟文斌率领一万名士兵攻掠荆南的鸦山，以遏止宋朝西面的军队。
English: He also dispatched Gu Bu to capture the capital, and sent ten thousand soldiers led by Yu Wenbin to attack and plunder the Raven Mountain in southern Jing Province, in order to stop the Song Dynasty's army in the west.

古文：丙辰，免上都、隆兴两路签军。
现代文：十一日，免征上都、隆兴两路的签征军。
English: On the 11th day, the conscripts of Shangdu and Longxing were exempted from conscription.

古文：庚申，问罪于宋，诏谕行中书省及蒙古、汉军万户千户军士曰：
现代文：十五日，向宋朝兴师问罪，下诏给行中书省及蒙古军、汉军万户、千户及士兵们说：
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, he made an accusation against Song Chaoxing, and issued the following edict to the People's Commissariat of Education, the Mongolian army, ten thousand households, one thousand households of the Chinese army and the soldiers:

古文：爰自太祖皇帝以来，与宋使介交通。
现代文： 自从太祖皇帝以来，一直和宋朝保持着使臣交往。
English: Since the time of Emperor Taizu, China has maintained diplomatic relations with the Song Dynasty.

古文：宪宗之世，朕以藩职奉命南伐，彼贾似道复遣宋京诣我，请罢兵息民。
现代文：宪宗朝的时候，我以藩王的职司奉命讨伐南方，对方的贾似道多次派遣宋京到我这里来请求停止战争，与民休息。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gensong, I was ordered to fight in the south in my capacity as the king of the domain. The other side, Jiaxing, sent Songjing to me many times to ask me to stop the war and rest with the people.

古文：朕即位之后，追忆是言，命郝经等奉书往聘，盖为生灵计也。
现代文：我即皇帝位之后，追忆他这话，命令郝经等带着国书前去访问，这是为百姓们着想啊！
English: After I became emperor, I recalled his words and ordered Gong Jing and others to bring the state book to visit. This was for the sake of the people!

古文：而乃执之，以致师出连年，死伤相藉，系累相属，皆彼宋自祸其民也。
现代文：而宋朝却把郝经等人抓起来，以致连年出兵打仗，死伤的人互相枕藉，俘获囚系的人一批又一批，这都是那宋朝自己为他的百姓带来的祸害。
English: On the other hand, the Song Dynasty arrested Gong Jing and others, so that they sent troops to fight for years on end, and the dead and wounded fought with each other, and prisoners were captured in batches. All of these were the evils that the Song Dynasty itself brought to its people.

古文：襄阳既降之后，冀宋悔祸，或起令图，而乃执迷，罔有悛心，所以问罪之师，有不能已者。
现代文：襄阳的宋兵投降之后，本希望宋朝自悔生祸，说不定能产生正确想法，却仍旧执迷不悟，没有改过之心，因此才兴起问罪之师，实在是因为没有别的办法。
English: After the surrender of the Song soldiers in Yangyang, it was hoped that the Song Dynasty would repent of its misdeeds and perhaps come up with the right idea, but it still persisted and did not change its mind. Therefore, it was only because there was no other way.

古文：今遣汝等，水陆并进，布告遐迩，使咸知之。
现代文： 现在派遣你们水陆并进，并向远近宣布，使所有的人都知道。
English: Now therefore send out your ships, and let them go to and fro, and publish your fame far and wide, that all men may know it.

古文：无辜之民，初无预焉，将士毋得妄加杀掠。
现代文：无辜的百姓当初并没有参与这些事情，我军将士们不得随意杀戮抢劫他们。
English: Innocent people did not take part in these events in the first place, and our soldiers must not kill and rob them at will.

古文：有去逆效顺，别立奇功者，验等第迁赏。
现代文：有脱离逆朝效命归顺，另立奇功的，查实功劳的等级后给予升迁奖赏。
English: Those who have left the anti-dictatorship and surrendered to the order, and have made extraordinary achievements, will be given a promotion reward after verifying the level of their achievements.

古文：其或固拒不从及逆敌者，俘戮何疑。
现代文：那些顽固地抗拒，不顺从，以及附逆投敌的，将毫不留情地擒获、杀死。 
English: Those who stubbornly resist, disobey, and join the enemy will be mercilessly captured and killed.

古文：甲子，分遣忙古带、八都、百家奴率武卫军南征。
现代文：十九日，分别派遣忙古带、八都、百家奴率领武卫军征伐宋朝。
English: On the 19th, he dispatched the Hegu Belt, the Eight Capital Cities, and the Hundred Families to lead the armed guards to invade the Song Dynasty.

古文：丙寅，以合剌合孙为中书左丞，崔斌参知政事，仍行河南道宣慰司事。
现代文：二十一日，任命合剌合孙为中书左丞，崔斌为参知政事，并执掌河南道宣慰司的事务。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he appointed Rong Hao and Hao Sun as the vice-chairmen of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, and Cui Bin as the vice-chairman of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, and took charge of the affairs of the Propaganda and Consolation Department of Henan Province.

古文：敕有司阅核延安新军，贫无力者免之。
现代文：敕命官府派人视察、审核延安路的新军，贫穷而无力的免于签征。
English: The government sent people to inspect and review the new army of Yan'an Road, and the poor and powerless were exempted from signing up.

古文：戊辰，监察御史言： 江淮未附，将帅阙人。
现代文：二十三日，监察御史上奏说： 江淮地区尚未归附，将帅缺人。
English: On the 23rd, the inspector general of history said: the Jianghuai region has not yet been annexed, and there will be a shortage of people.

古文：今首用阿里海牙子忽失海牙、刘整子垓，素不知兵，且缺人望，宜依弟男例罢去。 
现代文：现在首先任用阿里海牙的儿子忽失海牙、刘整的儿子刘垓为将帅，他们一向不懂得兵法，而且又缺乏人望，应当按照处置将帅的弟弟和儿子的成例将他们撤职。 
English: Now, first of all, Ali Hague's son, Huo Kuo Hague, and Liu Jian, Liu Jian's son, have been appointed as generals. They have never understood the art of war, and they are not popular. They should be removed from their posts in accordance with the precedent of dealing with generals' younger brothers and sons.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：秋七月乙亥朔，敕山北辽东道提刑按察使兀鲁失不花同参知政事廉希宪行省北京，国王头辇哥毋署事，有大事，则希宪等就议。
现代文：秋季，七月初一，敕令山北辽东道提刑按察使兀鲁失不花同参知政事廉希宪一起掌管北京行省的事务，国王头辇哥不必理事，有了大事，则由廉希宪等就地商议。
English: In the autumn, on the first day of July, Liao, the governor of Liaoning Province in the north of Shanshan Province, was appointed by the inspector general to take charge of the affairs of Beijing and the province together with the governor and the politician Lian Xixian. The king's eldest brother did not need to be a director, and if there was a major event, Lian Xixian and others would discuss it on the spot.

古文：乙酉，徙生券军八十一人屯田和林。
现代文：十一日，迁调生券军八十一人到和林屯田。
English: On the eleventh day, eighty-one soldiers of the Student Loan Army were transferred to Warin Tonden.

古文：癸巳，高丽国王王禃薨，遣使以遗表来上，且言世子搔孝谨，可付后事。
现代文：十九日，高丽国王王礻直去世，派遣使臣以遗表前来献上，说世子王忄甚孝顺勤谨，可以托付后事。
English: On the 19th, the King of Goryeo, Wang Jianzhi, passed away, and sent an envoy to present a memorial tablet, saying that his son, Wang Jianzhi, was very filial and diligent, and could be entrusted with future affairs.

古文：敕同知上都留守司事张焕册愖为高丽国王。
现代文：皇帝敕命上都留守司同知张焕去册封王忄甚为高丽国王。
English: On his deathbed, the emperor left Zhang Huan to be crowned King of Goryeo.

古文：乙未，伯颜等陛辞，帝谕之曰： 古之善取江南者，唯曹彬一人。
现代文：二十一日，伯颜等在朝廷向皇帝告别，皇帝谕示他们说： 古代善于攻取江南的只有曹彬一个人。
English: On the 21st, Bo Yan and others bid farewell to the emperor at the court. The emperor told them: In ancient times, Cao Bin was the only one who was good at conquering the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：汝能不杀，是吾曹彬也。 
现代文：你能够不杀人，就是我的曹彬了。 
English: If you can avoid killing, you are my Cao Bin.

古文：兴元凤州民献麦一茎四穗至七穗，谷一茎三穗。
现代文：兴元路凤州的百姓献上麦子，一株长出四到七个麦穗，谷子一株长出三个谷穗。
English: The people of Fengzhou, Xingyuan Road, presented wheat. One stalk produced four to seven ears of wheat, and one stalk produced three ears of corn.

古文：八月甲辰朔，颁诸路立社稷坛壝仪式。
现代文：八月初一，颁布各路设立社稷坛的仪式。
English: On the first day of August, a ceremony was held to announce the establishment of community altars.

古文：丁未，史天泽言： 今大师方兴，荆湖、淮西各置行省，势位既不相下，号令必不能一，后当败事。 
现代文：初四，史天泽上奏说： 现在大军刚刚组成，荆湖、淮西各设置行省，权力、地位既然不相上下，号令必然不能统一，以后一定会坏事的。 
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Shi Tianze said: Now that the great army has just been formed, and the provinces of Jinghu and Huaxi have been set up, since the power and status are not equal, the call must not be unified, and there will be bad things in the future.

古文：帝是其言，复改淮西行中书省为行枢密院。
现代文：皇帝赞同他的话，重新把淮西行中书省改为行枢密院。
English: The emperor agreed with his words and changed the name of Huaixi Province from the Ministry of Literature to the Privy Council.

古文：癸丑，行中书省言： 江汉未下之州，请令吕文焕率其麾下临城谕之，令彼知我宽仁，善遇降将，亦策之善者也。 
现代文：初十，行中书省上奏说： 长江、汉水那些还没有攻下的州，请派吕文焕率领他的部众到城下去向他们劝降，令对方知道我们宽厚仁慈，优待降将，这也算是一个很好的策略。 皇帝允从。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the commander of the middle line of the provincial army said: For those provinces that have not yet been conquered by the Yangtze River and the Han River, please send Lü Wenhuan to lead his subordinates to the city to persuade them to surrender, so that the other side knows that we are generous and benevolent and treat the surrendering generals preferentially, which is also a good strategy. The emperor agreed.

古文：从之。甲寅，弛河南军器之禁。
现代文：十一日，放开对于河南路武器的禁令。
English: On the 11th, the ban on weapons in Henan Province was lifted.

古文：辛未，高丽王愖遣其枢密使朴璆来贺圣诞节。
现代文：二十八日，高丽国王王忄甚派遣他的枢密使朴趚前来恭贺皇上的寿诞佳节。
English: On the 28th, the King of Goryeo, Wang Yeonjin, sent his envoy, Pak Yeon, to congratulate the Emperor on his birthday.

古文：诏太原新签军远戍两川，诚可悯恤，谕枢密院遣使分括廪粟，给其家。
现代文：诏令：太原新签征的军队远戍西川，的确应当怜悯、体恤，谕令枢密院派遣使者分别收集各仓库的粮食，赐给他们的家属。
English: Imperial edict: The newly conscripted troops from Taiyuan, who came from as far away as the West River, should indeed be pitied and pitied, and the Privy Council was ordered to send emissaries to collect grain from each warehouse separately and give it to their families.

古文：九月丙戌，行中书省以大军发襄阳，檄谕宋州郡官吏将校士民。
现代文：九月十三日，行中书省派大军从襄阳出发，发出招降宋朝州郡的官吏、军官、百姓的檄文。
English: On September 13th, the central government and the Ministry of Education sent a large army from Xiangyang to issue a letter of invitation to the officials, officers and people of Song Chaozhou County.

古文：癸巳，师次盐山，距郢州二十里。
现代文：二十日，军队驻扎在盐山，距离郢州有二十里。
English: On the 20th, the army was stationed in Yanshan, 20 miles away from Zhangzhou.

古文：宋兵十余万当郢，夹汉水，城万胜堡，两岸战舰千艘，铁縆横江，贯大舰数十，遏我舟师不得下。
现代文：宋军十余万人守郢州，夹汉水列阵，修筑万胜堡城垣，两岸的水边排列战船一千艘，又用铁索横于长江江面，贯通几十艘大船，以阻止我军水师，使我军不得顺流而下。
English: More than a hundred thousand people of the Song Army guarded Bozhou, lined up in a water column, built a fortress wall, lined up a thousand warships on the water's edge on both sides, and used iron ropes to cross the Yangtze River and pass through dozens of large ships to stop our sailors and prevent our army from going down the river.

古文：惟黄家湾有溪，经鹞子山入唐港，可达于江，宋又为坝，筑堡其处，驻兵守之，系舟数百，与坝相依。
现代文：只有黄家湾有一条小河，经过鹞子山流入唐港，可以到达长江。宋军又修建大坝，在那里筑起堡垒，驻扎军队戍守，系着几百只船，和大坝相依靠。
English: Only Hwange Bay has a small river, which flows through Lazy Mountain into Tang Port, and can reach the Yangtze River. The Song Army also built a dam, built a fortress there, stationed troops there, tied hundreds of ships, and relied on the dam.

古文：伯颜督诸军攻拔之，凿坝挽舟入溪，出唐港，整列而进。
现代文：伯颜监督各军攻下了大坝，凿开大坝，牵引船只进入小河，出唐港，把船排成队列前进。
English: Boyan supervised the troops to capture the dam, break the dam, tow the ships into the creek, out of the port of Tang, and put the ships in a queue to advance.

古文：车驾至自上都。
现代文：皇上的车驾从上都来到京师。
English: The emperor's car drove from the capital to the capital.

古文：冬十月己酉，享于太庙。
现代文：冬季，十月初七，向太庙敬献祭品。
English: In winter, on the 7th day of the 10th month, offerings are made to the Great Temple.

古文：庚申，长河西千户必剌冲剽掠甲仗，集众为乱，火你赤移戍未还，副元帅覃澄率属吏赴之。
现代文：十八日，长河西千户必剌冲抢劫兵甲器仗，聚众作乱，火你赤移守他处尚未返回，副元帅覃澄率领属下的官员前往。
English: On the 18th, thousands of households in the west of the Yangtze River rushed to rob the soldiers and equipment, gathered the crowd to make trouble, and moved to another place and have not yet returned. Vice Marshal Zou Cheng led his subordinate officials to go.

古文：帝曰： 澄不必独往，趣益兵三千付火你赤，合力讨之。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：覃澄不必独自一个人前往，立即征兵三千人交给火你赤，合力讨伐必剌冲。 
English: The emperor said: You don't have to go alone, immediately recruit three thousand soldiers and give them to the fire, and fight together.

古文：壬戌，岁星犯垒壁阵。
现代文：二十日，木星干犯垒壁阵星。
English: On the 20th, Jupiter interfered with the star formation.

古文：乙丑，伯颜督诸将破沙洋堡，生擒守将串楼王。
现代文：二十三日，伯颜督率诸将攻下沙洋堡，生擒宋军守将串楼王。
English: On the 23rd, Governor Boyan led the generals to capture the Shayang Fort, and the surviving Song military commander led the troops to King Lou.

古文：翌日，次新城，总制黄顺缒城降。
现代文：第二天，屯驻在新城。宋军总制黄顺缒城投降。
English: The next day, he was stationed in Xincheng. The Song general Huang Shun surrendered in Shicheng.

古文：伯颜遣顺招都统边居谊，不出，总管李庭破其外堡，诸军蚁附而登，拔之，居谊自焚死。
现代文：伯颜派遣黄顺前去招降都统边居谊，边居谊不露面，我军总管攻破宋军外围的堡垒，各军的将士们像蚂蚁一般攀附城垣而上，攻下了城池，边居谊自焚而死。
English: Bo Yan sent Huang Shun forward to recruit and surrender the capital side of the residence, while the residence did not show up, the head of our army broke through the fortress outside the Song Army, the soldiers of each army climbed up the city wall like ants, captured the city, and the residence died of self-immolation.

古文：辛未，赐北平王南木合马三万、羊十万。
现代文：二十九日，赐予北平王南木合三万匹马、十万头羊。
English: On the 29th, King Nanmu of Peking was given 30,000 horses and 100,000 sheep.

古文：十一月庚辰，断死罪三十九人。
现代文：十一月初八，判处三十九名罪犯死刑。
English: On November 8th, thirty-nine criminals were sentenced to death.

古文：壬午，敕西川行枢密院也速带儿取嘉定府。
现代文：初十，敕命西川行枢密院也速带儿攻占嘉定府。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the Privy Council rushed to Nishikawa to capture Jiading.

古文：癸未，符宝郎董文忠言： 比闻益都、彰德妖人继发，其按察司、达鲁花赤及社长不能禁止，宜令连坐。 
现代文：十一日，符宝郎董文忠上奏说 ：近来听说益都、彰德的妖人一个接一个地出现，当地的按察司、镇守官和社长无法禁止，应当令他们在当地实行连坐处罚。 
English: On the 11th day of the month, the treasure hunter Dong Wenzhong made a report, saying, "Recently, we have heard that yokens in Yidu and Zhangde have appeared one after another. The local procuratorate, town guards and the president of the company cannot prohibit them, and they should be ordered to carry out joint punishment in the local area."

古文：诏行之。
现代文：皇上下诏实行。
English: The Emperor's edict was put into effect.

古文：乙酉，军次复州，宋安抚使翟贵出降。
现代文：十三日，大军驻扎在复州，宋朝复州安抚使翟贵出城投降。
English: On the 13th, a large army was stationed in Fuzhou, and the Song Dynasty's pacification of Fuzhou made He Gui leave the city and surrender.

古文：丁亥，诏宋嘉定安抚昝万寿，及凡守城将校纳款来降，与避罪及背主叛亡者，悉从原免。
现代文：十五日，下诏命宋朝嘉定安抚使昝万寿，以及所有守城的军官献出钱财前来投降，与那些逃避罪罚及背主叛逃的人一起，全部给予宽大赦免。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the imperial edict ordered the Song Dynasty to pacify Jiading, and all the officers who defended the city to come and surrender with money and money, and all those who evaded punishment and defected from the master were pardoned.

古文：癸巳，东川元帅杨文安与青居山蒙古万户怯烈乃、也只里等会兵达州，直趣云安，军至马湖江与宋兵遇，大破之，遂拔云安、罗拱、高阳城堡，赐文安等金银有差。
现代文：二十一日，东川元帅杨文安与青居山蒙古万户怯烈乃、也只里等在达州会师，径直向云安军进发，到达马湖江时与宋军相遇，将宋军打得大败，于是攻下了云安军、罗拱、高阳等城堡，朝廷赐予杨文安等数额不等的金银。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Dongchuan Marshal Yang Wen'an and the Qingju Mountain Mongolian families waited in Dazhou to join the division and went straight to the Yun'an Army. When they reached the Mahu River, they met the Song Army and defeated the Song Army. They then captured the Yunnan Army, Luoqong, Gaoyang and other castles. The court awarded Yang Wen'an with gold and silver in varying amounts.

古文：以香河荒地千顷置中卫屯。
现代文：用香河的千顷荒地建立中卫的屯田。
English: to use the thousand-hectare wasteland of the Xianghe River to build a central garrison.

古文：伯颜遣万户帖木儿、译史阿里奏沙洋、新城之捷，且以新城总制黄顺来见，赐顺黄金锦衣及细甲，授湖北道宣慰使，佩虎符。
现代文：伯颜派遣万户帖木儿、驿史阿里奏报沙洋、新城战役胜利的消息，并且让新城总制黄顺前来朝见。皇帝赐给黄顺黄金锦衣和细甲，授予他湖北道宣慰使之职，佩戴虎符。
English: Baoyan sent Wanyu Timur and Zushi Ali to report the news of the victory of the battle of Shayang and Xincheng, and asked Huang Shun, the general manager of Xincheng, to come to see the emperor. The emperor gave Huang Shun a gold brocade robe and fine armor, awarded him the Hubei Provincial Propaganda and Consolation Office, and wore a tiger emblem.

古文：敕： 京师盗诈者众，宜峻立治法。 
现代文：皇帝敕命： 京师盗窃、行骗的人很多，应当制定严加处治的法令。 
English: The emperor said, "There are many people in Beijing who steal and swindle, so we should make a law to punish them severely."

古文：召征日本忽敦、忽察、刘复亨、三没合等赴阙。
现代文：征召征伐日本的忽敦、忽察、刘复亨、三没合等人前来朝廷。
English: Hu Dong, Hu Cha, Liu Fuhong, San Menghe and others, who were conscripted to fight in Japan, came to the imperial court.

古文：壬寅，安童以阿合马擅财赋权，蠹国害民，凡官属所用非人，请别加选择；其营作宫殿，夤缘为奸，亦宜诘问。
现代文：三十日，安童上奏 ：阿合马独揽财赋大权，祸国殃民，凡所任用的属官都不称职，请另外选择职官；他营造宫殿，攀附上司为奸，也应该查究。 
English: On the 30th, Ando issued a proclamation: Ahamadra is monopolizing wealth and power, bringing disaster to the country and the people. All subordinate officials he has appointed are incompetent. Please select another official. He has built a palace and is a traitor to his superiors. He should also be investigated.

古文：帝命穷治之。
现代文：皇帝命令，对阿合马彻底追查。
English: The emperor ordered a thorough investigation of the Ahama.

古文：起阁南直大殿及东西殿，增选乐工八百人，隶教坊司。
现代文：起造阁南直大殿及东西殿。增选乐工八百人，隶属于教坊司。
English: The construction of the South Nanzhi Great Hall and the East and West Hall was started. Eight hundred additional musicians were selected, affiliated with the Education Division.

古文：十二月丙午，伯颜大军次汉口。
现代文：十二月初四，伯颜的大军屯驻在汉口。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, Bo Yan's large army was stationed in Hankou.

古文：宋淮西制置使夏贵，都统高文明、刘仪以战船万艘，分据诸隘，都统王达守阳罗堡，荆湖宣抚朱禩孙以游击军厄中流，师不得进。
现代文：宋朝的淮西制置使夏贵、都统高文明、刘仪用战船一千艘分头据守各处险隘，都统王达戍守阳逻堡，京朝宣抚使朱祀孙用游动袭击的队伍阻遏长江中流，我军无法前进。
English: The Song Dynasty's Huaixi system enabled Xia Gui, Du Tong Gao Civility, and Liu Yi to use a thousand warships to defend the dangerous areas. Du Tong Wang Dacun guarded the Yangluo Fort, and the Beijing Dynasty's proclamation made Zhu Shisun block the middle reaches of the Yangtze River with a swimming attack team. Our army could not advance.

古文：用千户马福言，自汉口开坝，引船会沦河口，径趋沙芜，遂入大江。
现代文：采用千户马福的建议，从汉口打开堤坝，带领船舰在伦河口会合，直接前往沙芜，于是进入了长江。
English: Using Chihuma Mafu's suggestion, he opened the dike from Hankou, led the ship to meet at the mouth of the Lun River, went directly to Shajing, and then entered the Yangtze River.

古文：癸丑，以诸路逃奴之无主者二千人，隶行工部。
现代文：十一日，把各路无主的两千名逃奴隶属于工部。
English: On the eleventh day, two thousand runaway slaves, all of whom had no master, were brought under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Labor.

古文：甲寅，赏忻都等征耽罗功，银钞币帛有差。
现代文：十二日，奖赏忻都等人征讨耽罗的功劳，赏给银子、钱钞、绢帛，数量各不相同。
English: On the 12th day of the month, people from all over the country solicited Tanro's services and rewarded him with silver, banknotes, and coins, in varying amounts.

古文：乙卯，阿里海牙督万户张弘范等攻武矶堡，宋夏贵以兵来援，阿术率万户晏彻儿等四翼军对青山矶泊。
现代文：十三日，阿里海牙督率万户张弘范等进攻武矶堡，宋将夏贵率军前来救援，阿术率领晏彻儿等四支军队对着青山矶停泊下来。
English: On the 13th, Ali Hague led by Wanyu Zhang Hongfan and others attacked Wuye Fort, Song general Xia Gui led an army to come to the rescue, and Ah Ju led four armies such as Zou Che'er to moor against Qingshanye.

古文：丙辰，万户史格以一军先渡，为宋荆鄂诸军都统程鹏飞所败，总管史塔剌浑等率众赴敌，鹏飞败走。
现代文：十四日，万户史格率领一军先行渡过长江，被宋朝的荆鄂诸军都统程鹏飞击败，总管史塔剌浑等率领部下前去迎敌，程鹏飞兵败逃走。
English: On the 14th, Wanyu Shige led an army to cross the Yangtze River first, and was defeated by Cheng Pengfei of the Song Dynasty's Jing E army. The head of the army, Sita Bingun, led his subordinates to meet the enemy, and Cheng Pengfei's soldiers fled in defeat.

古文：进军沙州，抵观音山，夏贵东走，遂破武矶堡，斩宋都统王达，始达南岸，追至鄂州南门而还。
现代文：我军向沙州进军，抵达观音山，夏贵向东逃走，我军便攻下了武矶堡，杀死宋军都统王达，才抵达长江南岸，追击敌军，直到鄂州南门而返回。
English: Our army marched to Shazhou, arrived at Guanyinshan, Xia Gui fled to the east, our army then captured Wuye Fort, killed the Song Army commander Wang Da, and only arrived at the south bank of the Yangtze River, pursued the enemy army until the south gate of Huzhou and returned.

古文：丁巳，伯颜登武矶山，宋朱禩孙遁归江陵。
现代文：十五日，伯颜登上武矶山。宋将朱祀孙逃回江陵。
English: On the fifteenth day, Boyan ascended Mount Wuye. Song ordered Zhu Shisun to flee back to Gangneung.

古文：己未，师次鄂州，宋直秘阁湖北提举张晏然、权知汉阳军王仪、知德安府来兴国并以城降，程鹏飞以本军降。
现代文：十七日，我军驻扎在鄂州，宋朝直秘阁湖北提举张晏然、暂署汉阳军王仪、德安府知府来兴国都献城投降。程鹏飞率领本军投降。
English: On the 17th, our army was stationed in Ezhou. The Song Dynasty's direct secretary of Hubei, Zhang Bingran, temporarily dispatched the Hanyang Army Wang Yi, and the governor of De'an Prefecture, Lai Xing Guodu, surrendered. Cheng Pengfei led the army to surrender.

古文：伯颜承制以宋鄂州民兵总制王该知鄂州事，王仪、来兴国仍旧任，撤其戍兵，分隶诸军。
现代文：伯颜按照旧制任命宋朝的鄂州民兵总制王该掌管鄂州的政务，王仪、来兴国仍然担任旧职，撤除原来的守军，把他们分别隶属于各军。
English: According to the old system, Bo Yan appointed the Song Dynasty's Ezhou militia commander Wang Qi to be in charge of the government affairs of Ezhou. Wang Yi and Lai Xing Guo still held their old positions, removed the original defenders, and subordinated them separately to each army.

古文：下令禁侵暴，凡逃民悉纵还之。
现代文：下令禁止侵扰虐害百姓，凡是逃跑的百姓全部令他们返回原地。
English: An order was issued prohibiting the intrusion and abuse of the people, and all the people who had fled were ordered to return to their original places.

古文：以阿里海牙兵四万镇鄂汉。
现代文：派阿里海牙的四万兵卒镇守鄂州、汉口。
English: Ali sent Hague's forty thousand soldiers to defend Ezhou and Hankow.

古文：伯颜、阿术将大军，水陆东下，以侍卫亲军都指挥使秃满带为诸军殿。
现代文：伯颜、阿术率领大军，从水陆两路东下。派侍卫亲军都指挥使秃满带担任各军殿后。
English: Bo Yan and Ah Xiu led a large army and marched eastward by land and sea. They sent their bodyguards to command the troops and made Bald Man take charge of the rear of each army.

古文：以襄阳路总管贾居贞为宣抚使，商议行中书省事。
现代文：任命襄阳路总管贾居贞为宣抚使，商讨行中书省的事务。
English: Jia Juzhen, the general manager of Xiangyang Road, was appointed as the envoy to discuss the affairs of the book ministry.

古文：庚申，淮西正阳火，庐舍甲仗焚荡无余，杖万户爱先不花等有差。
现代文：十八日，淮西路的正阳发生火灾，房屋、兵甲器仗全部被烧毁，对万户爱先不花等处以轻重不同的杖刑。
English: On the 18th, a fire broke out in Zhengyang of Huaxi Road, and all the houses and military equipment were burned down. The families of the victims were punished with varying degrees of punishment.

古文：癸亥，赐太一真人李居素第一区，仍赐额曰太一广福万寿宫。
现代文：二十一日，赐给太乙真人李居寿住宅一所，赐给的匾额上书 太乙广福万寿宫 。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, a residence of Li Jiushou was given to Taiyi Zhenren, and a letter of donation was given to Taiyi Guangfu Manshou Palace.

古文：行中书省以渡江捷闻。
现代文：行中书省把渡过长江的捷报奏闻皇上。
English: During the procession, the Ministry of Education and Culture presented the news of the successful crossing of the Yangtze River to Emperor Wen.

古文：敕纵吕文焕随司军悉还家。
现代文：敕令把吕文焕的随司军全部遣放回家。
English: The imperial command sent all of Lü Wenhuan's attendant troops home.

古文：割南阳卢氏县隶嵩州，置归德永城县，长武县省入泾川，良原县省入灵台。
现代文：把南阳路的卢氏县分出，隶属于嵩州；设置归德府永城县；撤销长武县，并入泾川；撤销良原县，并入灵台。
English: To separate Lu County on Nanyang Road and subordinate it to Songzhou; to place it under Yongcheng County of Defu; to revoke Changwu County and merge it into Fenchuan; to revoke Liangyuan County and merge it into Lingtai.

古文：是岁，天下户一百九十六万七千八百九十八。
现代文：这一年，全国共有一百九十六万七千八百九十八户。
English: In that year, there were a total of 1,967,898 households nationwide.

古文：诸路虸蚄等虫灾凡九所，民饥，发米七万五千四百一十五石、粟四万五百九十九石以赈之。
现代文：各路发生粘虫灾害的一共九处。百姓饥饿缺食，共发放大米七万五千四百一十五石、小米四万零五百九十九石，赈济饥民。
English: There were a total of nine places where armyworm disasters occurred on various roads. The people were hungry and short of food, and a total of 75,415 koku of rice and 40,599 koku of millet were distributed to help the hungry.

古文：十二年春正月癸酉朔，高丽国王王愖遣其判阁事李信孙来贺，及奉岁币。
现代文：至元十二年春，正月初一，高丽国王王忄甚派遣高丽判阁事李信孙前来恭贺新年，并进贡常例税钱。
English: In the spring of the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the first day of the first month of the year, the King of Goryeo, Wang Bingjin, sent the Goryeo Judge Li Xinsun to come to congratulate the New Year, and paid the regular tax.

古文：甲戌，大军次黄州，宋沿江制置副使、知黄州陈奕以城降，伯颜承制授奕沿江大都督。其子岩知涟州，奕遣人以书谕之，书至，岩即出降。
现代文：初二，大军停驻在黄州，宋朝沿江制置副使、黄州知府陈奕献城投降，伯颜按旧制授予陈奕沿江大都督之职；陈奕的儿子陈岩当时任涟州知府，陈奕派人带着书信去劝他投降，书信一到，陈岩就出城投降了。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, a large army was stationed in Huangzhou. Chen Yi, the vice-envoy of the Song Dynasty along the Yangtze River and the governor of Huangzhou, surrendered the city. According to the old system, Bo Yan awarded Chen Yi the post of governor along the Yangtze River. Chen Yi's son Chen Yan was the governor of Zhangzhou at that time. Chen Yi sent someone with a letter to persuade him to surrender. As soon as the letter arrived, Chen Yan left the city and surrendered.

古文：乙亥，徙襄阳新民七百户于河北。
现代文：初三，把襄阳新归附的七百户百姓迁移到河北。
English: On the third day of the first month, the newly annexed seven hundred households in Yangyang were relocated to Hebei.

古文：东川副都元帅张德润拔礼义城，杀宋安抚使张资，招降军民千五百余人。
现代文：东川副都元帅张德润攻占礼义城，杀死宋朝安抚使张资，招降军民共一千五百多人。
English: Dongchuan Vice-Capital Marshal Zhang Derun captured Liyi City, killed the Song Dynasty's pacification envoy Zhang Zi, and recruited a total of more than 1,500 soldiers and civilians.

古文：继遣元帅张桂孙略地，俘总管郭武及都辖唐惠等六人以归。
现代文：既而派遣元帅张桂孙攻占宋地，俘获宋军总管郭武及都辖唐惠等六人而回。
English: He dispatched Marshal Zhang Guisun to invade Song territory and captured six people, including the general manager of the Song army, Guo Wu, and the governor of the capital, Tang Hui, before returning.

古文：赐德润金五十两及西锦、金鞍、细甲、弓矢，部下将士钞三百锭。
现代文：赐给张德润黄金五十两以及西锦、金鞍、细甲、弓箭等，赐给其部下的将士钱钞三百锭。
English: He gave Zhang Derun fifty taels of gold as well as brocade, gold saddles, fine armor, bows and arrows, etc., and gave his subordinates three hundred taels of money.

古文：戊寅，刘整卒。
现代文：初六，刘整去世。
English: At the age of six, Liu Zhengyou passed away.

古文：安西王相府乞给钞万锭为军需，敕以千锭给之。
现代文：安西王的相府请求赐给一万锭钱钞作为军需费用，皇帝敕令赐给他一千锭。
English: At the request of King Anxi's chancellor's office, he was given ten thousand baht of banknotes as military expenses, and the emperor's edict gave him one thousand baht.

古文：癸未，师次蕲州，宋安抚使管景模以城降。
现代文：十一日，军队驻扎在蕲州，宋朝安抚使管景模献城投降。
English: On the 11th day, the army was stationed in Zhangzhou, and the Song Dynasty pacified and made Guan Jingmo surrender the city.

古文：乙酉，敕枢密院以纳忽带儿、也速带儿所统戍军及再签登莱丁壮八百人，付五州经略司，其郯城、十字路亦听经略司节度。
现代文：十三日，皇上敕命枢密院把纳忽带儿、也速带儿所统辖的守军，以及再次签征的壮士八百人交付给五州经略司掌管，郯城、十字路也听任五州经略司节制、调遣。
English: On the 13th, the emperor ordered the Privy Council to hand over the defenders under the jurisdiction of the Nakhon Ratchasima and Nakhon Ratchasima Commands, as well as the eight hundred strong men who had been conscripted again, to the control of the five-state economic planning departments, and the control and deployment of the five-state economic planning departments were also left to the control and deployment of the five-state economic planning departments.

古文：丙戌，大军次江州，宋江西安抚使、知江州钱真孙及淮西路六安军曹明以城降。
现代文：十四日，大军驻扎在江州，宋朝的江西安抚使、江州知府钱真孙，以及淮西路六安军的曹明献城投降。
English: On the 14th, a large army was stationed in Jiangzhou, and the Song Dynasty's Jiangxi pacification envoy, the governor of Jiangzhou, Qian Zhensun, and Cao Ming of the Lu'an Army on Huaixi Road surrendered the city.

古文：丁亥，枢密院臣言： 宋边郡如嘉定、重庆、江陵、郢州、涟海等处，皆阻兵自守，宜降玺书招谕。 
现代文：十五日，枢密院大臣上奏说： 宋朝的边郡，如嘉定、重庆、江陵、郢州、涟海等地都仗恃军队而各自戍守，应当颁布诏书去招降他们。 
English: On the 15th, the Minister of the Privy Council made a report saying: The border counties of the Song Dynasty, such as Jiading, Chongqing, Gangneung, Bozhou, Bohai and other places, all rely on troops to defend themselves, and should issue an edict to invite them to surrender.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允准。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：宋知南康军叶阊以城降。
现代文：宋朝南康军知府叶阊献城投降。
English: The Song Dynasty's Southern Kangjun Army surrendered after the surrender of the prefectural capital Yeqi.

古文：敕以侍卫亲军指挥使札的失、囊加带将蒙古军二千，百家奴、唐古、忙兀儿将汉军万人，赴蔡州；秃满带、贾忙古带复将余兵赴阙。
现代文：敕令：派侍卫亲军指挥使札的失、囊加带率领蒙古军二千人，百家奴、唐古、忙兀儿率领汉军一万人前往蔡州。秃满带、贾忙古带另率领其余的士兵前来朝廷。
English: The imperial order: send the bodyguards to command the troops and lead the Mongolian army of two thousand people, and the Chinese army of ten thousand people led by Bai Jia Niu, Tang Gu and He Xie Er to Caizhou. The other soldiers were led by Bald Man Belt and Jia Xie Gu Belt to the imperial court.

古文：己丑，遣伯术、唐永坚赍诏招谕郢州，仍敕襄阳统军司调兵三千人卫送永坚等。
现代文：十七日，派遣伯术、唐永坚带着诏书前去招降郢州的守将，并敕令襄阳统军司调三千名士兵侍卫、护送唐永坚等人。
English: On the 17th, Bo Xiu and Tang Yongjian were dispatched with an imperial edict to recruit the generals in charge of the defense of Zhangzhou, and the commander of the Xiangyang Army was ordered to dispatch 3,000 soldiers to guard and escort Tang Yongjian and others.

古文：选蒙古、畏吾、汉人十四人赴行中书省，为新附州郡民官。
现代文：挑选十四名蒙古人、畏吾儿人、汉人前往行中书省，担任新近归附州郡的管民官。
English: Fourteen Mongolians, Mongolians and Han Chinese were selected to go to Xingzhongshuo to serve as administrators of the newly annexed Zhoushu County.

古文：庚寅，遣右卫指挥副使郑温、唐古、帖木儿率卫军万人，同札的失、囊加带戍黄州。
现代文：十八日，派遣右卫指挥副使郑温、唐古、帖木儿率领卫军一万人，同札的失、囊加带一起戍守黄州。
English: On the 18th, Zheng Wen, Tang Gu, and Timur, the right guard commander and deputy envoy, were dispatched to lead the guard of ten thousand people, and together with the loss of the same card and the addition of the bag, they guarded Huangzhou.

古文：诏谕重庆府制置司并所属州郡城寨官吏军民举城归附。
现代文：下诏劝谕宋朝重庆府制置司，以及所属州、郡城寨的官吏军民，献上城池归附元朝。
English: The following edict advised the Song Dynasty to establish the Chongqing Prefecture, and the officials, soldiers and civilians of the state and county townships to submit the city to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：壬辰，以宣抚使贾居贞签书行中书省事，戍鄂州。
现代文：二十日，任命宣抚使贾居贞协办行中书省事务，戍守鄂州。
English: On the 20th, Jia Juzhen was appointed as the special envoy to coordinate the affairs of the People's Republic of China and the People's Republic of China, and he stayed in Ezhou.

古文：安南国使者还，敕以旧制籍户、设达鲁花赤、签军、立站、输租及岁贡等事谕之。
现代文：安南国使者返国，皇上敕令，把登记民户入册的旧制、设置镇守官、签征士兵、设立驿站、交纳租税，以及年年进贡的事谕令他们知晓。
English: When the envoys from Annan returned to China, the emperor issued an imperial edict to inform them of the old system of registering households, setting up town guards, conscripting soldiers, setting up stations, paying taxes, and the annual tribute.

古文：乙未，遣兵部尚书廉希贤、工部侍郎严忠范、秘书监丞柴紫芝奉国书使于宋。
现代文：二十三日，派遣兵部尚书廉希贤、工部侍郎严忠范、秘书监臣柴紫芝，带上国书出使宋朝。
English: On the 23rd, he dispatched Shang Shulian Xixian from the Ministry of Military Affairs, Yan Zhongfan from the Ministry of Industry, and Secretary and Supervisor Chai Zizhi to the Song Dynasty.

古文：丁酉，以万家奴所募愿为军者万人南征。
现代文：二十五日，派遣万家奴所招募的一万名自愿从军的士兵征伐南方。
English: On the 25th, he dispatched ten thousand soldiers who volunteered to join the army and were recruited by Wan Jia Nong to conquer the south.

古文：己亥，云南总管信苴日、石买等刺杀合剌章舍里威之为乱者，以金赏之。
现代文：二十七日，云南总管信苴日、石买等刺杀合剌章舍里威的作乱者，用金子赏赐他们。
English: On the 27th, the Governor of Yunnan Province, Xin Xunri, rewarded the rioters who assassinated and killed He Yingzhang and Sheli Wei with gold.

古文：命土鲁至云南，趣阿鲁帖木儿入觐。
现代文：命令土鲁到云南去催促阿鲁帖木儿入朝觐见。
English: He ordered Turu to go to Yunnan to urge Aru Thetmul to attend the imperial court.

古文：以蛮夷未附者尚多，命宣慰司兼行元帅府事，并听行省节度，置郡县，尹长选廉能者任之。
现代文：因为没有归附的蛮夷还很多，命令宣慰司兼管元帅府的事务，并听由行中书省节制、调遣，设置郡县，主管官员选择廉洁而有才能的人担任。
English: Because there are still many barbarians who have not been returned, he ordered the Consolation Division to also manage the affairs of the Marshal's Office, and to be controlled and dispatched by the Central Government, to set up counties, and the competent officials to select honest and talented people to serve.

古文：置云南诸路规措所，以赡思丁为使。
现代文：设置云南诸路规措所，任命赡思丁担任规措使。
English: Set up the Yunnan Road Regulation Institute, and appointed Yan Siding as the regulation envoy.

古文：益卫送唐永坚兵，永坚求拜都、忙古带偕行，许之。
现代文：增加侍卫、护送唐永坚的士兵，唐永坚要求拜都、忙古带一同前往，皇上允从。
English: The number of bodyguards and soldiers escorting Tang Yongjian was increased. Tang Yongjian requested to go to the capital with He Gu, and the emperor agreed.

古文：敕追诸王海都、八剌金银符三十四。
现代文：敕令追回诸侯王海都、八剌的金银牌符三十四枚。
English: Thirty-four pieces of gold and silver medals worth eight monme were ordered to be recovered from the princes of Wanghaidu.

古文：二月癸卯，大军次安庆府，宋殿前都指挥使、知安庆府范文虎以城降，伯颜承制授文虎两浙大都督。
现代文：二月初二，大军屯驻在安庆府，宋朝殿前都指挥使、安庆府知府范文虎献城投降，伯颜按照旧制授予范文虎两浙大都督之职。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, a large army was stationed in Anqing Prefecture. In front of the Song Dynasty Hall, Fan Wenhu, commander and governor of Anqing Prefecture, surrendered the city. According to the old system, Bo Yan awarded Fan Wenhu the post of governor of the two Zhejiang provinces.

古文：甲辰，以中书右丞博鲁欢为淮东都元帅，中书右丞阿里左副都元帅。
现代文：初三，任命中书右丞博鲁欢为淮东都元帅，中书右丞阿里为左副都元帅。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Bo Luhan was appointed as the marshal of Huai Dongdu, and Ali was appointed as the deputy marshal of Zuo Du.

古文：仍命阿里、撒吉思等各部蒙古、汉军会邳州。
现代文：同时命令阿里、撒吉思等各部的蒙古军、汉军在邳州会合。
English: At the same time, he ordered the Mongolian army and the Chinese army of Ali, Sagis and other ministries to meet in Zhangzhou.

古文：又发蕲、宿戍兵，将河南战船千艘赴之。
现代文：又派蕲州、宿州的守军带着河南的一千艘战船前去。
English: He also sent the defenders of Bozhou and Suzhou with a thousand warships from Henan.

古文：遣必阇赤孛罗检核西夏榷课，命开元宣抚司赈吉里迷新附饥民。
现代文：派遣辅相孛罗检查、核实西夏专卖物的赋税。命令开元宣抚司赈济吉里迷新归附的饥民。
English: He dispatched the Auxiliary Jiro to inspect and verify the taxation of special goods sold in Western Xia, and ordered the emperor to open the Yuan to preach to the starving people who were newly added to Jijiji.

古文：敕畏吾地春夏毋猎孕字野兽。立后土祠于平阳之临汾，伏羲、女娲、舜、汤、河渎等庙于河中、解州、洪洞、赵城。丙午，大军次池州，宋权州事赵昴发自经死，都统制张林以城降。
现代文：敕令畏吾儿地区春夏两季不得猎取怀孕的野兽，在平阳府的临汾建立后土祠，在河中、解州、洪洞、赵城分别建立伏羲、女娲、虞舜、商汤，以及河渎之神的祠庙。初五，大军驻扎在池州，宋朝暂署池州事务的赵卯发自缢而死，都统制张林献城投降。
English: During the spring and summer seasons, pregnant beasts were not allowed to be hunted in areas that feared the dragon. After the establishment of the earthen shrine in Linyi of Pingyang Prefecture, the ancestral temples of Fuxiong, Mujing, Yujing, Shangtang, and the god of river pollution were respectively established in Hechu, Lezhou, Hongdong, and Zhaocheng. In the fifth day of the first month of the year, the army was stationed in Chizhou. Zhao Ufa, who was temporarily in charge of affairs in Chizhou during the Song Dynasty, committed suicide and surrendered Zhanglin.

古文：省西夏中兴都转运司入总管府。
现代文：撤销西夏中兴路的都转运司，并入总管府。
English: The Metropolitan Transportation Division of West Xia Zhongxing Road was revoked and merged into the General Administration Office.

古文：议以中统钞易宋交会，并发蔡州盐，贸易药材。
现代文：决定用元朝中统年的钞币去交换宋朝的交会钞币，并放开蔡州的盐卖，开展药材的贸易。
English: It was decided to use the banknotes of the middle unification year of the Yuan Dynasty to exchange the trading banknotes of the Song Dynasty, and to liberalize the sale of salt in Caizhou and carry out the trade of medicinal materials.

古文：丁未，禁无籍自效军俘掠新附复业军民。
现代文：初六，禁止不在籍而自动前来效力的士兵抓捕、抢劫新近归附、正在恢复生计的军民。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, soldiers who are not registered and come to work automatically are prohibited from arresting and robbing soldiers and civilians who have recently returned and are recovering their livelihoods.

古文：戊申，诏谕江、黄、鄂、岳、汉阳、安庆等处归附官吏士民军匠僧道人等，令农者就耒，商者就途，士庶缁黄，各安己业，如或镇守官吏妄有搔扰，诣行中书省陈告。
现代文：初七，下诏，令江州、黄州、岳州、汉阳、安庆等地新归附的官吏、士民、军匠、僧道之类的人，让农民去耕种，商人去贩运，不同身份地位的人，各自安于自己的本业，如果镇守的官吏妄行骚扰，可以到行中书省衙门去申诉、控告。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued, ordering the newly-annexed officials, scholars, soldiers, artisans, monks and other people in Jiangzhou, Huangzhou, Yuezhou, Hanyang, Anqing and other places to let the farmers do the farming, the merchants do the trafficking, and the people of different statuses do their own business. If the officials of the town guard harassed them, they could go to the gate of the town of Xingzhongshu to appeal and complain.

古文：史天泽卒。
现代文：史天泽去世。
English: Shi Tianze passed away.

古文：召游显、杨庭训赴阙。
现代文：皇上征召游显、杨庭训前来朝廷。
English: The emperor summoned You Xian and Yang Tingxun to come to the imperial court.

古文：赐陈言人霍升、张和钞十锭，俾从淮东元帅府南征。
现代文：赐给陈述建议的人霍升、张和钱钞十锭，令他们跟随淮东元帅府征伐宋朝。
English: He gave the person who made the proposal, Huo Sheng, Zhang He and Qianbei ten cormorants, and ordered them to follow the Huaidong Marshal's Office to invade the Song Dynasty.

古文：庚戌，遣礼部侍郎杜世忠、兵部郎中何文著，赍书使日本国。
现代文：初九，派遣礼部侍郎杜世忠、兵部郎中何文著带着书信出使日本国。
English: On the ninth day of the ninth month of the year, he dispatched the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Du Shizhong, and the attendant of the Ministry of War, He Wen, to Japan with a letter.

古文：辛亥，遣同知济南府事张汉英持诏谕淮东制置使李庭芝。
现代文：初十，派遣济南府同知张汉英带着诏书前去劝降宋朝淮东制置使李庭芝。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, he sent Zhang Hanying, a friend from Jinan Prefecture, with an imperial edict to persuade Li Tingzhi, the Song Dynasty's envoy to Huaidong, to surrender.

古文：壬子，洺磁路总管姜毅捕获农民郝进等四人，造妖言惑众，敕诛进，余减死流远方。
现代文：十一日，氵名磁路总管姜毅捕获农民郝进等四人，他们以妖言惑众，皇上敕令将郝进处以死刑，其余几人减去死罪流放到远方。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Jiang Yi, the general manager of the Anming magnetic circuit, captured four people, including the farmer Hao Jin, who used magic to deceive the public. The emperor ordered that Hao Jin be sentenced to death, and the remaining several people were exiled to a distant place minus the death penalty.

古文：宋都督贾似道遣计议宋京、承宣使阮思聪诣行中书省，请还已降州郡，约贡岁币。
现代文：宋朝都督贾似道派遣计议使宋京、承宣使阮思聪前来行中书省，请求交还已经投降元朝的州郡，说定每年向元朝进贡钱款。
English: Jia Linduo, the prefect of the Song Dynasty, dispatched the envoy Song Jing and the envoy Nguyen Sicong to the Central Song Province to request the return of the states and counties that had surrendered to the Yuan Dynasty, and to determine the annual tribute to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：伯颜使囊加带同阮思聪还报命，留宋京以待，使谓似道曰： 未渡江时，议贡议和则可，今沿江诸郡皆已内属，欲和，则当来面议也。 
现代文：伯颜派囊加带同阮思聪一起返回宋朝复命，把宋京留下来等候，元朝的使臣对贾似道说 ：我军没有渡过长江时，宋朝向我朝进贡议和是可以的，现在长江沿岸各州郡都已经属于我朝版图之内，想要议和，就应当前来当面商议。 
English: Bo Yan sent his bag and baggage with Ruan Sicong to return to the Song Dynasty to answer the call, leaving Song Jing to wait. The Yuan Dynasty's envoy said to Jia Lidao: When our army did not cross the Yangtze River, it was OK for the Song Dynasty to pay tribute to my dynasty and discuss peace. Now, all the states and counties along the Yangtze River already belong to my dynasty's territory. If you want to discuss peace, you should come and discuss it in person.

古文：囊加带还，乃释宋京。
现代文：囊加带回来之后，才释放了宋京。
English: Song Jing was only released after he brought the bag back with him.

古文：以同签枢密院事倪德政赴鄂州省，治财赋。
现代文：派枢密院同佥倪德政前往鄂州整治财政赋税。
English: He sent the Privy Council and Ni Desheng to Ezhou to rectify the fiscal taxation.

古文：癸丑，御史台臣劾前南京路总管田大成，以其弟妇赵氏为妻，废绝人伦，敕杖八十，三年不齿。时大成已死，惟市杖赵氏八十。
现代文：十二日，御史台大臣弹劾前南京路总管田大成娶自己的弟媳赵氏为妻，弃绝了做人的道德伦常，敕命杖责田大成八十，三年不予录用，当时田大成已经死了，只好把赵氏杖责八十。
English: On the 12th, the Minister of History impeached the former Nanjing Road General Manager, Tian Dacheng, for marrying his brother-in-law, Ms. Zhao, and abandoning the moral and ethical standards of being a human being. Tian Dacheng was eighty years old, and was not hired for three years. At that time, Tian Dacheng was already dead, and Mr. Zhao had to be eighty years old.

古文：丙辰，赏东征元帅府日本战功锦绢、弓矢、鞍勒。
现代文：十五日，向征东元帅府征伐日本立下战功的人赏赐锦绢、弓箭、鞍勒。
English: On the 15th, the people who made contributions to the East Marshal's campaign against Japan were awarded brocades, bows and arrows, and saddles.

古文：庚申，遣塔不带、斡鲁召鄂汉降臣张晏然等赴阙，仍谕之曰： 朕省卿所奏云： 宋之权臣不践旧约，拘留使者，实非宋主之罪，傥蒙圣慈，止罪擅命之臣，不令赵氏乏祀者。 
现代文：十九日，派遣塔不带、斡鲁去征召鄂州、汉口的降臣张晏然等前来朝廷，并勉慰张晏然说 ：我看你的奏章上说 ：宋朝当权的大臣不履行原来的协议，拘留使臣，确实不是宋朝皇帝的罪过，如蒙圣上仁慈，则只加罪于擅发命令的大臣，不要断绝了赵氏祭祀的香火。 
English: On the 19th, Zhang Yulan, the capitulating minister of Ezhou and Hankou, was sent to the imperial court without the tower and without the good offices to summon Zhang Yulan, and to console Zhang Yulan, he said, "I see your record says that the minister in power of the Song Dynasty did not fulfill the original agreement and detained the envoy, which is indeed not the sin of the Song Dynasty emperor. If he had been blessed with divine mercy, he would only add guilt to the minister who issued the order without authorization, and not cut off the incense of the Zhao clan's sacrifice.

古文：卿言良是。
现代文：你的话非常正确。
English: You're absolutely right.

古文：卿既不忘旧主，必能辅弼我家。
现代文：你既然不忘记你的旧主，一定能够辅佐我家的事业。
English: Since you do not forget your former master, you will surely be able to assist my family's cause.

古文：比卿奏上，已遣伯颜按兵不进，仍遣兵部尚书廉希贤等持书往使，果能悔过来附，既往之愆，朕复何究？
现代文：按照你奏上来的意思，已经命令伯颜按兵不动，并派遣兵部尚书廉希贤等带着书信前去出使宋朝，如果他们果真能够悔过，前来归降，过去的罪行，我还追究什么呢？
English: According to what you said, you have ordered Bo Yan not to move, and sent the military department such as Shang Shulan and Xixian to go to the Song Dynasty with letters. If they can truly repent and come to surrender, what past crimes should I investigate?

古文：至于权臣贾似道，尚无罪之之心，况肯令赵氏乏祀乎？
现代文：至于当权之臣贾似道，我连他都没有加罪的想法，怎么会让赵氏断绝祭祀的香火呢？
English: As for Jia Li Dao, a vassal of the authorities, I have no intention of adding to his guilt. How could I let the Zhao clan cut off the sacrificial incense?

古文：若其执迷罔悛，未然之事，朕将何言，天其鉴之。 
现代文：但如果他们执意不想悔改，以后的事情我将会怎么决定，那就只有让老天爷明鉴了。 
English: But if they persist in not wanting to repent, how will I decide things in the future, then let God be the judge.

古文：辛酉，以阔阔出率其部下军千人及亲附军五百，听阿剌海牙节制。
现代文：二十日，命令阔阔出率领他部下的士兵一千人，以及新归附的士兵五百人听由阿剌海牙节制。
English: On the 20th, he ordered Kuo Kuo to lead out 1,000 of his soldiers, and the newly acquired 500 soldiers to submit to the discipline of Lady Hague.

古文：凡湖南州县及濒水之民有来附者，俾阔阔出统之，拒敌不降者，就为招集。
现代文：凡是湖南的州县，以及濒临水边的居民，有前来归附的，由阔阔出统辖他们，抗拒而不投降的，就地进行招降。
English: All the prefectures and counties in Hunan, as well as the residents along the water's edge, have come to attach themselves, to govern them from the broad, to resist and not surrender, to invite and surrender on the spot.

古文：诏令大洪山避兵民，还归汉阳，复业农亩，命阿剌海牙镇守之。
现代文：下诏，令大洪山躲避兵祸的军人和百姓返回汉阳，重新进行农业生产，命阿剌海牙镇守该地。
English: He issued an edict, ordering the soldiers and people who had escaped from the military disaster in Dahong Mountain to return to Hanyang and resume agricultural production, and ordered the town of Ao Haiga to guard the area.

古文：复命阿失罕、唐永坚、綦公直等与脱烈将甲骑千人，持诏招谕郢州。
现代文：又命令阿失罕、唐永坚、綦公直等人和脱烈一起率领带甲的骑士一千名，携带诏书招降郢州。
English: He also ordered Ah Quhan, Tang Yong Jian, Zhai Gong Zhi and other people to lead a thousand knights with a necktie to carry the edict to recruit and surrender Zhangzhou.

古文：大军次丁家洲，战船蔽江而下。
现代文：大军屯驻在丁家洲，战船遮蔽长江江面顺流而下。
English: A large army was stationed in Dingjiazhou, and warships shielded the Yangtze River downstream.

古文：宋贾似道分遣步帅孙虎臣及督府节制军马苏刘义，集兵船于江之南北岸，似道与淮西制置使夏贵将后军。
现代文：宋朝贾似道分别派遣步帅孙虎臣和督府节制军马苏刘义，在长江的南北岸边集结兵船。贾似道和淮西制置使夏贵率领后军。
English: During the Song Dynasty, Jiaxiang Dao dispatched the foot-soldier, Sun Huchen, and the governor-general's temperance army, Masu Liuyi, respectively, to assemble warships on the north and south banks of the Yangtze River. Jiaxiang Dao and Huaixi Jiechi sent Xia Gui to lead the rear army.

古文：战船二千五百余艘，横亘江中。
现代文：共有二千五百余艘战船横亘在长江当中。
English: A total of more than 2,500 warships stretch across the Yangtze River.

古文：翌日，伯颜命左右翼万户率骑兵，夹岸而进，继命举巨炮击之。
现代文：第二天，伯颜命令左翼万户和右翼万户率领骑兵夹长江两岸而进，接着又命令用巨炮轰击宋军，宋军的阵地遭到动摇，夏贵首先逃跑。
English: The next day, Boyan ordered the left-wing Wanyuan and the right-wing Wanyuan to lead the cavalry to advance on both sides of the Yangtze River, and then ordered the Song Army to be bombarded with huge cannons. The Song Army's position was shaken, and Xia Gui fled first.

古文：宋兵阵动，夏贵先遁，似道错愕失措，鸣钲斥诸军散，宋兵遂大溃。阿术与镇抚何玮、李庭等舟师及步骑，追杀百五十里，得船二千余艘，及军资器仗、督府图籍符印，似道东走扬州。
现代文：贾似道惊慌失措，敲击金钲驱使各军散开，宋军于是大溃败。阿术和镇抚何玮、李庭等将领的水军和步兵、骑兵，追杀宋军一百五十里，缴获战船二千多艘，还加上军用物资、兵器、甲仗和督府的地图、册籍、兵符、印信等。贾似道向东逃往扬州。
English: Jia Xiangdao panicked, struck the golden hammer and drove the armies to disperse, and the Song army was then defeated. The navy, infantry, and cavalry of Ah Shu and the commanders of He Xuan and Li Ting chased the Song army for one hundred and fifty miles, captured more than two thousand warships, and also added military supplies, weapons, maps of the war and the governor's office, books, emblems, letters, etc. Jia Xiangdao fled eastward to Yangzhou.

古文：阿先不花言： 夏贵纵北军岳全还，称欲内附，宜降玺书招谕。 
现代文：阿先不花上奏说 ：夏贵把北军中的岳全放了回来，说是想要归顺，应该下诏书去招降他。 
English: Without further ado, the old man said, "Xia Gui released Yue Quan from the Northern Army, saying that he wanted to surrender, and that he should issue an edict to recruit him."

古文：遂遣其甥胡应雷持诏往谕之。
现代文：于是派遣他的外甥胡应雷带着皇上的诏书前去招降夏贵。
English: So he sent his nephew Hu Yinglei with an imperial edict to invite Xia Gui to surrender.

古文：甲子，大军次芜湖县，宋江东运判、知太平州孟之缙以城降。
现代文：二十三日，大军屯驻在芜湖县，宋朝的江东通判、太平州知州孟之缙献城投降。
English: On the 23rd, a large army was stationed in Wuhu County, and the Song Dynasty's Jiangdong Tongzhan and Taiping Province's Zhizhou Mengzhuan surrendered.

古文：都元帅博鲁欢次海州，知州丁顺以城降。
现代文：都元帅博鲁欢屯驻在海州，知州丁顺献城投降。
English: The capital's marshal, Bolu Huan Tun, was stationed in Haizhou, and Chizhou's Ding Shun surrendered the city.

古文：乙丑，阿里海牙言： 江陵宋巨镇，地居大江上流，屯精兵不啻数十万，若非乘此破竹之势取之，江水泛溢，鄂汉之城亦恐难守。 
现代文：二十四日，阿里海牙上奏说： 江陵是宋朝的重镇，地处长江上游，驻扎的精兵不下数十万人，如果不趁现在这个破竹之势攻占它，等到长江水势大涨，连鄂州、汉口这些地方也难以守住。 
English: On the 24th, Ali Hague reported: "Gangneung is a major town of the Song Dynasty. It is located in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River. There are hundreds of thousands of elite soldiers stationed there. If we do not take advantage of this unprecedented situation to capture it, when the water level of the Yangtze River rises, even places such as Ezhou and Hankou will be difficult to hold.

古文：从其请，仍降玺书，遣使谕江陵府制置司及高达已下官吏军民。
现代文：皇上同意他的请求，便颁发诏书，派遣使臣去劝谕宋朝江陵府制置司，以及高达以下的官吏、军民投降。
English: The emperor agreed to his request, issued an imperial edict, and dispatched envoys to persuade the Song Dynasty to set up a government office in Jiangling, as well as the officials, soldiers and civilians up to and including him to surrender.

古文：宋福州团练使、知特摩道事农士贵，率知那寡州农天或、知阿吉州农昌成、知上林州农道贤，州县三十有七，户十万，诣云南行中书省请降。
现代文：宋朝福州团练使、特摩道知事农士贵率领那寡州知州农天或、阿吉州知州农昌成、上林州知州农道贤，以及州属的三十七个县、十万户百姓，前往云南行中书省请求归降。
English: The Song Dynasty's Fuzhou regimental training envoy and the governor of Temo Province, Nanzhi Gui, led Nanzhi Zhizhou Nongtian or, Agi Zhizhou Nongchangcheng, Shanglin Zhizhou Nongdaoxian, as well as the thirty-seven counties and one hundred thousand households belonging to the province, went to Yunnan to request the surrender of Zhongshu Province.

古文：丙寅，枢密院言： 渡江初，亳州万户史格、毗阳万户石抹绍祖，以轻进致败，乞罪之。 
现代文：二十五日，枢密院上奏说 ：渡过长江之初，亳州万户史格、毗阳万户石抹绍祖，因为轻率地进军导致失败，请追究其罪责。 
English: On the 25th, the Privy Council issued a report saying: At the beginning of crossing the Yangtze River, Bozhou Wanyu Shige and Biyang Wanyu Shishi and Shao Zu, because of the failure caused by imprudent advance, please investigate their guilt.

古文：有旨，或决罚降官，或以战功自赎，其从行省裁处。
现代文：皇上降旨，或对他们处罚降职，或让他们立功赎罪，由所在的行中书省决定。
English: If the emperor decrees a demotion, or punishes them with a demotion, or makes them perform meritorious deeds to atone for their sins, it is up to the province in which they are stationed to decide.

古文：禁民间赌博，犯者流之北地。
现代文：禁止民间赌博，违犯的流放到北方的边地。
English: Civilian gambling is prohibited, and violators are banished to the outlying areas in the north.

古文：戊辰，师次采石镇，知和州王善以城降。
现代文：二十七日，军队屯驻在采石镇，和州知州王喜献城投降。
English: On the 27th, the army was stationed in Quarry Town, and surrendered to Wang Xicheng of Zhizhou.

古文：都元帅博鲁欢次涟州，宋知州孙嗣武以城降。
现代文：都元帅博鲁欢驻扎在涟州，宋朝知州孙嗣武献城投降。
English: The capital's marshal, Bolu Huan, was stationed in Bozhou, while the Song dynasty's Sun Zhiwu surrendered the city of Zhizhou.

古文：己巳，复遣伯术、唐永坚等宣谕郢州官吏士庶。
现代文：二十八日，再次派遣伯术、唐永坚等宣令招降郢州的官吏和百姓。
English: On the 28th, he once again dispatched Bo Xiu, Tang Yongjian and other officials and common people to invite the officials and common people of Ganzhou to surrender.

古文：庚午，大军次建康府，宋沿江制置使赵溍南走，都统、权兵马司事徐王荣、翁福、茅世雄等及镇军曹旺以城降。
现代文：二十九日，大军驻扎在建康府，宋朝的沿江制置使赵氵晋向南逃跑，都统、暂署兵马司事务的徐王荣、翁福、茅世雄等，以及镇军使曹旺献城投降。
English: On the 29th, a large army was stationed in Jiankangfu. The Song Dynasty's riverside fortifications caused Zhao Binjin to flee to the south. Xu Wang Rong, Onfu, and Mao Shixiong, who were in charge of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and the town's military envoy Cao Wang, surrendered the city.

古文：宋贾似道至扬州，始遣总管段佑送国信使郝经、刘人杰等来归。
现代文：宋朝的贾似道抵达扬州，才派总管段佑送元朝国信使郝经、刘人杰等归国。
English: It was not until the Song Dynasty's Jia Li Dao arrived in Yangzhou that the general management section sent messengers from the Yuan Dynasty, such as Gong Jing and Liu Renjie, to return to China.

古文：敕枢密院迎经等，由水路赴阙。
现代文：敕令枢密院前去迎接郝经等人经由水路前来朝廷。
English: The Emperor ordered the Privy Council to go to the palace to meet the monks and others who came to the imperial court by water.

古文：诏安南国王陈光昞，仍以旧制六事谕之，趣其来朝。
现代文：下诏给安南国王陈光日丙，仍旧以原来制定的六项事务勉励他，促使他前来朝见。
English: I hereby issue the following edict to the King of Annan, Chen Guangri, and still encourage him with the six matters originally formulated, and urge him to come to the imperial court.

古文：命怯薛丹察罕不花、侍仪副使关思义、真人李德和，代祀岳渎后土。
现代文：命令禁卫官察罕不花、侍仪副使关思义、真人李德和代表皇帝前去祭祀五岳、四渎和土地大神。
English: He ordered the imperial guard officer, Chahan Fuxa, and the deputy attendants, Guan Siyi, Zhenren Li De and the representative of the emperor to go to worship the Five Mountains, the Four Forsaken Mountains and the Great God of the Land.

古文：车驾幸上都。
现代文：皇帝的车驾临幸上都。
English: The emperor's car drove to Shangdu.

古文：三月壬申朔，宋镇江府马军总管石祖忠以城降。
现代文：三月初一，宋朝镇江府马军总管石祖忠献城投降。
English: On the first day of March, Shi Zuzhong, the head of the Song Dynasty Zhenjiang Prefecture Horse Army, surrendered the city.

古文：行中书省分遣淮西行枢密院阿塔海驻京口。
现代文：行中书省分遣淮西行枢密院的阿塔海屯驻京口。
English: Atahai Tun, a member of the Privy Council, was dispatched to Huaixi by the Ministry of Education and Culture and stationed in Jingkou.

古文：宋诛殿帅韩震，其部将李大明等二百人，携震母、妻并诸子文〈火育、文炌自临安来奔。
现代文：宋朝将殿帅韩震处死，韩震的部将李大明等二百人携带着韩震的母亲、妻子以及儿子韩文火育、韩文火介，从临安前来投奔我朝。
English: Song Dynasty general Han Zhen was executed. Han Zhen's subordinate Li Daming and 200 others, along with Han Zhen's mother, wife, and sons Han Wen Hui Yu and Han Wen Huo Jie, came from Lin'an to join our dynasty.

古文：甲戌，宋江阴军佥判李世修以城降。
现代文：初三，宋朝江阴军佥判李世修献城投降。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the Song Dynasty's Jiangyin Military Command ordered Li Shixiu to surrender the city.

古文：乙亥，谕枢密院： 比遣建都都元帅火你赤征长河西，以副都元帅覃澄镇守建都，付以玺书，安集其民。 
现代文：初四，谕令枢密院 ：近来派遣建都都元帅火你赤征伐长河西，命令副都元帅贾澄镇守建都，赐给他玺书，以安定、收聚当地的百姓。 
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Privy Council issued an edict: Recently, it dispatched the Marshal of Capital Construction to lead the Red Army to conquer the west of the Yangtze River, ordered the Deputy Marshal of Capital Construction, Jia Cheng Zhen, to guard the construction of the capital, and gave him a written order to stabilize and gather the local people.

古文：仍敕安西王忙兀剌、诸王只必帖木儿、驸马长吉，分遣所部蒙古军从西平王奥鲁赤征吐蕃。
现代文：并敕令安西王忙兀剌、诸侯王只必帖木儿、驸马长吉分别派遣部下的蒙古军随从西平王奥鲁赤征伐吐蕃。
English: He also ordered the king of Anxi to be busy, and the princes Tamerlane and Nagayoshi separately dispatched their Mongolian troops to follow the king of Siping, Orukh, in the conquest of Tubo.

古文：命万执中、唐永坚同前所遣阿失罕等，将锐兵千人，同往招谕郢州：已降，则镇之；不降，则从陆路与阿里海牙、忽不来会于荆南。
现代文：命令万执中、唐永坚和先前所派遣的阿失罕等，率领精兵一千人，一起前去招降郢州：已经投降，就镇守该城；不投降，就从陆路到荆南和阿里海牙、忽不来会合。
English: He ordered Wan Xingzhong, Tang Yongjian, and the previously dispatched Al Quhan, etc., to lead a thousand elite soldiers to march together to recruit Zhangzhou: if they had surrendered, they would defend the city; if they did not surrender, they would go by land to Jingnan and Ali Hague, and suddenly they would not meet.

古文：丙子，国信使廉希贤等至建康，传旨令诸将各守营垒，毋得妄有侵掠。
现代文：初五，国信使廉希贤等抵达建康府，传下圣旨，令诸将各守自己的营垒，不得随意侵扰、劫掠百姓。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the messenger of the state, Lian Xixian, and others arrived at Jiankangfu and passed down the sacred will, ordering all generals to guard their own camps and not to disturb and plunder the people at will.

古文：宋知滁州王文虎以城降。
现代文：宋朝滁州知州王文虎献城投降。
English: During the Song Dynasty, King Wenhu of Bozhou, Chizhou, surrendered the city.

古文：戊寅，赐皇子安西王币帛八千匹、丝万斤。
现代文：初七，赐给皇子安西王绢帛八千匹，丝料一万斤。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he gave Prince Anxi eight thousand silk reeds and ten thousand catties of silk fabric.

古文：己卯，改平阴县新镇寨为肥城县，隶济宁府。
现代文：初八，把平阴县的新镇寨改为肥城县，隶属于济宁府。
English: On the eighth day of the first lunar month, Xinzhenzhai in Pingyin County was changed to Ficheng County, which belongs to Jining Prefecture.

古文：庚辰，宋知宁国府颜绍卿以城降。
现代文：初九，宋朝宁国府知府颜绍卿献城投降。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Yan Shaoqing, the prefectural governor of the Song Dynasty, surrendered the city.

古文：江东路得府二、州五、军二、县四十三，户八十三万一千八百五十二，口一百九十一万九千一百六。
现代文：江东路共有二府、五州、二军府、四十三县，八十三万一千八百五十二户，一百九十一万九千一百零六人。
English: Jiangdong Road has a total of two prefectures, five prefectures, two military prefectures and 43 counties, with 8,311,852 households and 19,119,106 people.

古文：甲申，于中兴路置怀远、灵武二县，分处新民四千八百余户。
现代文：十三日，在中兴路设置怀远、灵武两县，分别安置新归附的百姓四千八百余户。
English: On the 13th, Huayuan and Lingwu counties were set up on Zhongxing Road, and more than 4,800 newly annexed households were resettled separately.

古文：丙戌，宋常州安抚戴之泰、通判王虎臣以城降。
现代文：十五日，宋朝常州安抚使戴之泰、通判王虎臣献城投降。
English: On the 15th, the Song Dynasty's Changzhou pacification envoys Dai Zhitai and Tongzhan Wang Huchen surrendered the city.

古文：国信使廉希贤、严忠范等至宋广德军独松关，为宋人所杀。
现代文：国信使廉希贤、严忠范等抵达宋朝境内的广德军独松关，被宋人杀害。
English: The messengers of the state, such as Ren Xixian and Yan Zhongfan, arrived in the territory of the Song Dynasty and were killed by the Song people.

古文：丁亥，免诸路军杂赋。
现代文：十六日，免征各路军队的杂赋。
English: On the 16th, all troops were exempted from conscription.

古文：辛卯，宋将高世杰复据岳州，质知州孟之绍妻子；又取复州降将翟贵妻子，送之江陵。
现代文：二十日，宋朝将领高世杰重新占据岳州，把知州孟之绍的妻儿作为人质；又接取复州降将翟贵的妻儿，把他们送到江陵。
English: On the 20th, Gao Shijie, a general of the Song Dynasty, reoccupied Yuezhou and took the wife and child of Meng Nishao of Chizhou as hostages. He also took the wife and child of Gu Gui Gui, a general of Fuzhou, and sent them to Jiangling.

古文：世杰会郢、复、岳三州及上流诸军战船数千艘，兵数万人，扼荆江口。
现代文：高世杰会集郢州、复州、岳州三个州和长江上游各军的战船共几千艘、士兵几万人，扼守荆江口。
English: Gao Shijie gathered a total of several thousand warships and tens of thousands of soldiers from the armies of the three states of Ganzhou, Fuzhou and Yuezhou and the upper reaches of the Yangtze River to guard the mouth of the Jingjiang River.

古文：壬辰，阿里海牙以军屯于东岸，世杰夜半遁去，黎明至洞庭湖口，兵船成列而阵。
现代文：二十一日，阿里海牙把军队屯驻在东岸，高世杰半夜时逃走，天明的时候抵达洞庭湖口，战船排列成行，形成战阵。
English: On the twenty-first day, Ali Hague stationed his army on the east coast. Gao Shijie fled in the middle of the night and arrived at the mouth of Dongting Lake at dawn. Warships lined up to form a battle line.

古文：阿里海牙督诸翼万户及水军张荣实、解汝楫等，逐世杰于湖口之夹滩，遣郎中张鼎召世杰，世杰降。
现代文：阿里海牙督率各军的万户以及水军张荣实、解汝楫等部，把高世杰赶逐到洞庭湖口的夹滩，派遣郎中张鼎去招降高世杰，高世杰投降。
English: Ali Hague, the commander-in-chief of the armies of the ten thousand households, as well as the naval forces of Zhang Rongshi, Xie Rong and other departments, drove Gao Shijie to the stranding at the mouth of Dongting Lake, and sent Zhang Ding to recruit Gao Shijie, and Gao Shijie surrendered.

古文：阿里海牙以世杰招岳州，孟之绍亦以城降。
现代文：阿里海牙派高世杰去招降岳州，孟之绍也献城投降。
English: Ali Hague sent Gao Shijie to recruit and defeat Yuezhou, and Meng Nishao also surrendered the city.

古文：以世杰力屈而降，诛之。
现代文：因为高世杰是力量用尽而投降的，将他处死。
English: Because Gao Shijie had exhausted his strength and surrendered, he was executed.

古文：赐北平王南木合所部马二千一百八十、羊三百。
现代文：赐给北平王南木合的部众二千一百八十匹马、三百头羊。
English: He gave 2,180 horses and 300 sheep to King Peiping of Nanmuhe.

古文：癸巳，敕郯城、沂州、十字路戍兵从博鲁欢征淮南。
现代文：二十二日，敕令郯城、沂州、十字路的守军跟随博鲁欢征讨淮南。
English: On the 22nd, the defenders of Boryeong, Yeongju, and the crossroads followed Boru to invade Huainan.

古文：丙申，侧布蕃官税昔、确州蕃官庄寮男车甲等，率四十三族，户五千一百六十，诣四川行枢密院来附。
现代文：二十五日，侧布的番官税昔、确州番官庄寮的儿子车甲等率领四十三个家族，五千一百六十户前往四川行枢密院归附。
English: On the 25th day of the month, the flank-clothed guardsman Zeinu and the son of the Jizhou guardsman Zhuangliao, Che Jia, led forty-three families and 5,160 households to Sichuan to join the Privy Council.

古文：戊戌，遣山东路经略使王俨戍岳州。
现代文：二十七日，派遣山东路经略使王俨戍守岳州。
English: On the 27th, the Shandong Provincial Government sent an envoy to Wang Xi to guard Yuezhou.

古文：庚子，从王磐、窦默等请，分置翰林院，专掌蒙古文字，以翰林学士承旨撒的迷底里主之。
现代文：二十九日，按照王磐、窦默等人的请求，分置专门掌管蒙古文字的翰林院，任命翰林学士承旨撒的迷底里掌管。
English: On the 29th, in accordance with the request of Wang Bang, Dou Mo and others, the Hanlin Academy, which is specially in charge of the Mongolian script, was set up, and the Hanlin Scholar was appointed to take charge of the labyrinth.

古文：其翰林兼国史院，仍旧纂修国史、典制诰、备顾问，以翰林学士承旨兼修《起居注》和礼霍孙主之。
现代文：其中的翰林兼职于国史院，仍旧纂修国史，执掌文告诏令，备咨询顾问，任命翰林学士承旨兼编修《起居注》的和礼霍孙主管。
English: Among them, Hanlin worked part-time at the National Academy of History, still continued to compile and study national history, presided over the proclamation of the edict, prepared advisory consultants, and appointed Hanlin as a bachelor and editor of the "Resident's Note" and director of Reihosun.

古文：辛丑，敕阿术分兵取扬州。
现代文：三十日，敕令阿术分遣军队攻取扬州。
English: On the 30th, the Emperor ordered a detachment of troops to capture Yangzhou.

古文：夏四月壬寅朔，赏讨长河西必剌充有功者及阵亡者金、银、钞、币、帛各有差。
现代文：夏季，四月初一，向征讨长河西必剌充的有功者和阵亡者奖赏黄金、白银、交钞、绢、帛，数量各不相同。
English: In the summer, on the first day of April, the number of gold, silver, banknotes, ingots and pennies awarded to the meritorious and the dead in the West Yangtze River Campaign varied.

古文：乙巳，改西夏中兴道按察司为陇右河西道。
现代文：初四，把西夏中兴道按察司改为陇右河西道按察司。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the West Xia Zhongxing Road Inspection Office was changed to the West He River Road Inspection Office.

古文：丙午，立涟州、新城、清河三驿。
现代文：初五，设立涟州、新城、清河三地的驿站。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the three stations of Bozhou, Xincheng and Qinghe were established.

古文：阿里海牙驻军江陵城南沙市，攻其栅，破之，知荆门军刘懋降。
现代文：阿里海牙把军队在江陵城南面的沙市，攻打它的栅寨，将其攻占。荆门军知州刘懋投降。
English: Ali Haiga put his army in Shashi, south of Gangneung, attacked its stockade and captured it. Jingmen's army capitulated at Liuye, Zhizhou.

古文：丁未，阿里海牙遣郎中张鼎赍诏入江陵，宋荆湖制置朱禩孙，湖北制置副使高达，京西湖北提刑青阳梦炎、李湜始出降。
现代文：初六，阿里海牙派遣郎中张鼎携带诏书进入江陵，宋朝的京湖制置使朱祀孙，湖北制置使高达，京西湖北提刑使青阳梦炎、李方才投降。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Ali Haiga sent his son-in-law Zhang Ding to carry the edict into Gangneung, the Song Dynasty's Beijing Lake system made Zhu Shisun, the Hubei system made Gao Da, the Beijing West Hubei system made Qingyang Mengyan, and Li Fangcai surrendered.

古文：阿里海牙入江陵，分道遣使招谕未下州郡，知峡州赵真、知归州赵仔、权丰州安抚毛浚、常德府新城总制鲁希文、旧城权知府事周公明等，悉以城降。
现代文：阿里海牙进入江陵，分路派遣使者招降还没有攻下的州郡。峡州知州赵真、归州知州赵仔、暂署澧州安抚使毛浚、常德府新城总制鲁希文、旧城代理知府周公明等都献城投降。
English: Ali Haiga entered Gangneung, and sent envoys to the counties that had not yet been conquered. Zhao Zhen of Chizhou in the Gorges, Zhao Zai of Chizhou who returned to Chizhou, Mao Jun, the temporary pacifier of Zhangzhou, Lu Xiwen, the general of the new city of Changde Prefecture, and Zhou Gongming, the acting governor of the old city, all surrendered the city.

古文：辛亥，遣使招谕宋五郡镇抚使吕文福使降。
现代文：初十，皇上派使臣招谕宋朝五郡镇抚使吕文福，令他投降。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the emperor sent an envoy to summon the Song Dynasty's five county township governor, Lü Wenfu, and ordered him to surrender.

古文：甲寅，谕中书省议立登闻鼓，如为人杀其父母兄弟夫妇，冤无所诉，听其来击。
现代文：十三日，谕令中书省商议设置 登闻鼓 ，如果有人的父母、兄弟、丈夫、妻子被人杀害了而没有地方伸冤，可以任其击鼓鸣冤。
English: On the 13th, the decree ordered the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology to discuss the setting up of the "Tangwen Drum." If someone's parents, brothers, husband, or wife have been killed and there is no place to seek redress, they can be allowed to beat the drum to express their grievances.

古文：其或以细事唐突者，论如法。
现代文：如果有人因为小事而随便击鼓则依法判罪。
English: If someone beats a drum for trivial reasons, they will be convicted according to the law.

古文：辛酉，宋郢州安抚赵孟、复州安抚翟贵以城降。
现代文：二十日，宋朝郢州安抚使赵孟、复州安抚使翟贵献城投降。
English: On the 20th, the Song Dynasty sent Zhao Meng to pacify Bozhou and Zheng Gui to pacify Fuzhou, and they surrendered the city.

古文：宋度支尚书吴浚移书建康徐王荣等，述其丞相陈宜中语，请罢兵通好。
现代文：宋朝度支部尚书吴浚寄信给建康府徐王荣等人，谈到宋朝丞相陈宜中的话，请求停止战争，结成友好。
English: Shangshu Wu Jun, a member of the provincial branch of the Song Dynasty, sent a letter to Xu Wang Rong and others in Jiankang, mentioning the words of Chen Yizhong, the prime minister of the Song Dynasty, and requesting to stop the war and form a friendship.

古文：伯颜遣中书议事官张羽、淮西行院令史王章，同宋来使马驭，持徐王荣复书至平江府驿亭，悉为宋所杀。
现代文：伯颜派中书省议事官张羽、淮西行枢密院令史王章，同宋朝的来使马驭，拿着徐王荣的复信到平江府的驿亭，都被宋军士兵杀害。
English: Zhang Yu, the councilor of the Central Book Ministry sent by Bo Yan, Shi Wangzhang, the commander of the Privy Council of Huaixi Province, and the soldiers of the Song Dynasty who came with the horse and took Xu Wangrong's reply letter to the pavilion in Pingjiang were all killed by the soldiers of the Song Army.

古文：癸亥，阿术师驻瓜洲，距扬州四十五里，宋淮东制置司尽焚城中庐舍，迁其居民而去。
现代文：二十二日，阿术的军队驻扎在瓜洲，距离扬州四十五里。宋朝淮东制置司把城中的房屋全部烧毁，城中的居民全部迁走。
English: On the 22nd, the army of Ahshu was stationed in Guazhou, forty-five miles from Yangzhou. The Song Dynasty Huaidong Construction Division burned all the houses in the city, and all the residents of the city moved away.

古文：阿术创立楼橹战具以守之。
现代文：阿术制造楼橹战具以监视宋军。
English: Ahshu made tower and battle gear to keep an eye on the Song army.

古文：丙寅，立尚牧监。
现代文：二十五日，设立尚牧监。
English: On the 25th, the post of pastoral supervisor was established.

古文：赐降臣丁顺等衣服。
现代文：赐给降臣丁顺等人衣服。
English: He gave clothes to the surrendered soldiers such as Ding Shun and others.

古文：免京畿百姓今岁丝银。
现代文：免征京畿地区百姓今年的丝税银。
English: The people of Gyeonggi Province are exempt from this year's silk tax.

古文：丁卯，以大司农、御史中丞孛罗为御史大夫。
现代文：二十六日，任命大司农、御史中丞孛罗为御史大夫。
English: On the 26th, the Grand Secretary of Agriculture and the Vice-Minister of History, Chujo Shiro, were appointed as Vice-Ministers of History.

古文：罢随路巡行劝农官，以其事入提刑按察司。
现代文：撤销随路巡行的劝农官，把他们的职司归入提刑按察司。
English: revoke the roadside inspection of agrarian officials, and assign their duties to the Department of Criminal Investigation.

古文：括诸寺阑遗人口。
现代文：统计各个寺庙遗漏未登记入籍的人口。
English: Counting the number of unregistered naturalized people omitted by each temple.

古文：庚午，以高达为参知政事，仍诏慰谕之。
现代文：二十九日，命令高达为参知政事，并下诏慰勉、鼓励他。
English: On the 29th, Gao Gao was ordered to take part in the political affairs of the prefectural government, and the imperial rescript was issued to commiserate and encourage him.

古文：遣兵部郎中王世英、刑部郎中萧郁，持诏召嗣汉四十代天师张宗演赴阙。
现代文：派遣兵部郎中王世英、刑部郎中萧郁携带诏书去征召汉朝张道陵的传人第四十代天师张宗演前来京师。
English: He dispatched the Minister of Military Affairs, Wang Shiying, and the Minister of Justice, Xiao Yu, to carry the imperial edict to recruit the successor of the Han Dynasty Zhang Daoling, the 40th Tianshi, Zhang Zongyuan, to come to Beijing.

古文：五月辛未朔，阿里海牙以所俘童男女千人、牛万头来献。枢密院言： 峡州宜以战船扼其津要。
现代文：五月初一，阿里海牙前来敬献他所俘获的童男童女一千名和牛一万头，枢密院上奏说 ：应该用战船扼守峡州的要道。
English: On the first day of May, Ali Haiga came to pay homage to the one thousand boys and girls and ten thousand head of Wagyu cattle that he had captured, and the Privy Council reported: It is necessary to use warships to guard the key routes of the Gorges.

古文：又郢、复二州戍兵不足，今拟襄阳等处选五千七百人，隶行中书省，听阿里海牙调遣。 
现代文：另外，郢州、复州二州的守军不足，现在打算从襄阳等地挑选五千七百人隶属于行中书省，由阿里海牙调遣。 
English: In addition, the defense forces of Zhangzhou and Fuzhou are insufficient, and now it is planned to select 5,700 people from Xiangyang and other places to be subordinated to the Ministry of Education and Culture, and dispatched by Ali Hague.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：诏中书右丞廉希宪、参知政事脱博忽鲁秃花行中书省于江陵府，阿里海牙还鄂州。
现代文：诏令中书右丞廉希宪、参知政事脱博忽鲁秃花在江陵府执掌中书省的事务。阿里海牙返回鄂州。
English: Ali Haiga returned to Ezhou after the imperial edict was issued in which the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Lian Xixian, and the Vice-governor, Debo Kulu, took charge of the affairs of the Ministry of Education and Culture in Gangneung Province.

古文：立襄阳至荆南三驿。
现代文：设立从襄阳到荆南的三处驿站。
English: Set up three stations from Xiangyang to Jingnan.

古文：丁丑，阿术立木栅于杨子桥，断淮东粮道，且为瓜洲藩蔽。
现代文：初七，阿术在扬子桥树立木栅栏，以切断淮东路的粮道，并且作为瓜洲的屏蔽。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Ah Shu erected a wooden fence at Yangzi Bridge to cut off the grain route of Huaidong Road and serve as a shield for melon cucumbers.

古文：庚辰，诏谕参知政事高达曰： 昔我国家出征，所获城邑，即委而去之，未尝置兵戍守，以此连年征伐不息。
现代文：初十，下诏晓谕参知政事高达说： 从前我们的国家出征，所占领的城镇立即放弃而离去，没有安排军队戍守，因此一年又一年地不能够停止征伐。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued by the Councilor of State, saying: In the past, when our country went to war, the occupied towns were immediately abandoned and left, and there was no arrangement for the army to stay, so we could not stop the conquest year after year.

古文：夫争国家者，取其土地人民而已，虽得其地而无民，其谁与居？
现代文：所谓争夺国家，不过是取得国家的土地人民而已，即使得到了这块土地却没有人民，又能得到什么呢？
English: The so-called struggle for the country is nothing more than the people acquiring the land of the country. Even if they get this land without the people, what can they get?

古文：今欲保守新附城壁，使百姓安业力农，蒙古人未之知也。
现代文：现在想要保住新归附的城堡，就得使百姓能够安于生计，努力农耕，蒙古人还不懂得这一点。
English: Now, if you want to keep the newly annexed castle, you have to make the people able to make a living and work hard in agriculture. The Mongolians still don't understand this.

古文：尔熟知其事，宜加勉旃。
现代文：你熟悉这些事情，应当对他们加以勉励。
English: You are familiar with these things and should encourage them.

古文：湖南州郡皆汝旧部曲，未归附者何以招怀，生民何以安业，听汝为之。 
现代文：湖南的州郡都是你的旧部，那些还没有归附的用什么方法招降怀柔，百姓们怎样才能安居乐业，都听由你去办理。 
English: Hunan's prefectures and counties are all your old departments. How to invite Huairou to surrender those that have not yet been annexed, and how the people can live and work in peace, are all up to you.

古文：宋嘉定安抚昝万寿遣部将李立奉书请降，言累负罪愆，乞加赦免。
现代文：宋朝的嘉定安抚使昝万寿派遣部将李立奉上书信请求投降，说是多次身负罪责，请求给予赦免。
English: The dispatching department of the Song Dynasty's Jiading appeasement envoy Zou Wan Shou sent Li Li a letter requesting surrender, saying that he had been guilty many times and requesting amnesty.

古文：诏遣使招谕之。
现代文：皇帝下诏，派使臣前去招降他。
English: The emperor issued an edict and sent an envoy to invite him to surrender.

古文：辛巳，宋知辰州吕文兴、黄仙洞行隋州事傅安国、仙人寨行均州事徐鼎、知沅州文用圭、知靖州康玉、知房州李鉴等，皆以城降。
现代文：十一日，宋朝的辰州知州吕文兴、黄仙洞兼署隋州事傅安国、仙人寨暂署均州事徐鼎、沅州知州文用圭、靖州知州康玉、房州知州李鉴等，都献城投降。
English: On the 11th day of the Song Dynasty, Lu Wenxing of Chizhou in Chenzhou, Fu An Guo of Suizhou in Huangxendong, Xu Ding of Yongzhou in Xianrenzhai, Wenyu Gui of Chizhou in Zhangzhou, Kang Yu of Chizhou in Jingzhou, and Li Jian of Chizhou in Fangzhou all surrendered.

古文：荆南湖北路凡得府三、州十一、军四、县五十七，户八十万三千四百一十五，口一百一十四万三千八百六十。
现代文：荆南湖北路共有三府、十一州、四军州、五十七县，共有八十万零三千四百一十五户，一百九十四万三千八百六十人。
English: Jingnanhu North Road has a total of three prefectures, eleven prefectures, four military regions and fifty-seven counties, with a total of 800,341,415 households and 1,943,860 people.

古文：丙戌，以三卫新附生券军赴八达山屯田。
现代文：十六日，命三卫新归附的生券军开赴八达山屯田。
English: On the 16th, the newly-annexed Shengzheng Army was ordered to march to Badashan Tunden.

古文：丁亥，召伯颜赴阙，以蒙古万户阿剌罕权行中书省事，遣肃州达鲁花赤阿沙签河西军。
现代文：十七日，征召伯颜前来朝廷。任命蒙古万户阿剌罕暂时掌管中书省事务。派遣肃州镇守官阿沙签征河西的军队。
English: On the seventeenth day, Bo Yan was summoned to the imperial court. The Mongolian Wanhu Ao Han was appointed to temporarily take charge of the affairs of the Central Book Province. Asha, the town marshal of Suizhou, was dispatched to sign for the army in the west of the river.

古文：万户爱先不花违伯颜节制，擅撤戍兵，诏追夺符印，使从军自效。
现代文：万户爱先不花违反伯颜的指挥，擅自撤走戍守的士兵，皇帝下诏追缴他的符牌印信，命他到军前效力。
English: Wanyu Aixian did not hesitate to disobey the command of Bo Yan and withdraw the soldiers from the garrison without authorization. The emperor issued an edict to hand over his badge and seal and ordered him to serve in the army.

古文：淮东宣抚陈岩乞解官，终丧三年，不许。
现代文：淮东宣抚使陈岩请求解除官职，以完成三年守孝，皇上不准。
English: The Emperor did not allow Chen Yan's request to be relieved of his official duties in order to complete the three-year filial piety.

古文：申严屠牛马之禁。
现代文：申令严禁屠宰牛马。
English: The decree strictly forbids the slaughter of cattle and horses.

古文：庚寅，宋五郡镇抚使吕文福来降。
现代文：二十日，宋朝的五郡镇抚使吕文福前来归降。
English: On the 20th, the five counties of the Song Dynasty sent Lu Wenfu to come and surrender.

古文：壬辰，宋都统制刘师勇、殿帅张彦据常州。
现代文：二十二日，宋朝都统制刘师勇、殿帅张彦占领常州。
English: On the 22nd, Liu Shiyong and Zhang Yan, the generals of the Song Dynasty, occupied Changzhou.

古文：癸巳，谕高丽国王王愖，招珍岛余党之在耽罗者。
现代文：二十三日，晓谕高丽国王王忄甚招降那些待在耽罗的珍岛余党。
English: On the 23rd, the King of Goryeo, Wang Pi, issued an edict calling for the surrender of those remaining on Jindo Island in Thang Lo.

古文：六月庚子朔，日有食之。宋嘉定安抚使昝万寿以城降，赐名顺。
现代文：六月初一，发生日食。宋朝嘉定安抚使昝万寿献城投降，皇上赐他名 顺 。
English: On the first day of June, there was a solar eclipse. The Song Dynasty pacified Jiading and made Zou Wan Shou surrender the city, and the emperor gave him the name Shun.

古文：癸卯，遣两浙大都督范文虎持诏往谕安丰、寿州、招信、五河等处镇戍官吏军民；遣刑部侍郎伯术谕朱禩孙，以年老多病，不任朝谒，权留大都，无自疑惧。
现代文：初四，派遣两浙大都督范文虎带着皇上的诏书前去招降安丰、寿州、招信、五河等处镇守的官员、士兵和百姓。派遣刑部侍郎伯术前去劝慰朱祀孙，因为他年老多病，所以不担任朝见、参谒皇帝的官职，暂时留在大都，不要自己猜疑、惧怕。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Fan Wenhu, the governor of the two major cities of Zhejiang, was dispatched with the imperial edict to invite officials, soldiers and people from the town guards of Anfeng, Shuzhou, Zhaoxin and Wuhe to surrender. Zhu Shishisun, the minister of the Ministry of Justice, was dispatched to comfort Zhu Shishisun, because he was old and sick, so he did not hold the official position of courtier and consort of the emperor, and temporarily stayed in Dadu. Do not be suspicious and afraid.

古文：谕廉希宪等，元没青阳梦炎、李湜家赀，如籍还之，并徙其家赴都。
现代文：谕令廉希宪等人，原来没收青阳梦炎、李的家产，按照册籍上登记的归还给他们，并让他们把家搬迁到京师来。
English: The edict ordered Lian Xixian and others to confiscate the family property of Qingyang Mengyan and Li, return it to them in accordance with the registration in the register, and let them relocate their home to Beijing.

古文：甲辰，以万户阿剌罕为行中书省参知政事。
现代文：初五，任命万户阿剌罕为行中书省参知政事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Wanhu Ajuhan was appointed to be the chief advisor to the Minister of Education and Culture.

古文：获知开州张章，赦其罪。
现代文：俘获开州知府张章，赦免了他的罪过。
English: He captured Zhang Zhang, the governor of Kaizhou, and pardoned his sins.

古文：章二子柱、楫先来降，以其子故，免死。
现代文：张章的两个儿子张柱、张缉先来投降，因为他儿子的缘故，免去死罪。
English: Zhang Zhang's two sons, Zhang Zhu and Zhang Ji, were the first to surrender, because of his son, he was exempted from the death penalty.

古文：敕失里伯、史枢率襄阳熟券军二千、猎户丁壮二千，同范文虎招安丰军，各赐马十匹。
现代文：敕令失里伯、史枢率领襄阳熟券军二千人、年轻力壮的猎户二千人，同范文虎一起去招降安丰军，各赐战马十匹。
English: Zou ordered the loss of Libo, Shi Zu led the Xiangyang Rongzheng army of two thousand, and the young and strong hunters of two thousand, together with Fan Wenhu, went to recruit the Anfeng army, and each gave ten horses.

古文：其故尝从丞相史天泽者十九人，愿宣劳军中，令从枢以行。
现代文：有十九个以前曾经跟随丞相史天泽的人愿意到军中效劳，命令他们跟随史枢前往。
English: Nineteen people who had previously followed the prime minister, Shi Tianze, were willing to serve in the army and were ordered to follow Shi Zuo.

古文：戊申，签平阳、西京、延安等路达鲁花赤弟男为军。
现代文：初九，签征平阳、西京、延安等路镇守的子弟为兵。
English: In the early 9th century, the sons of the provincial governors of Pingyang, Xijing and Yan'an were enlisted as soldiers.

古文：辛亥，赏诸王兀鲁所部获功建都者三十五人银钞有差，定兀鲁卫士人各马二匹，从者一匹。
现代文：十二日，赏赐诸侯王秃鲁部下在建都立功的三十五个人不同数额的银子和钱钞。确定秃鲁的卫士每个人各两匹马，随从每个人一匹马。
English: On the twelfth day, the thirty-five people who contributed to the construction of the capital were awarded different amounts of silver and banknotes by the vassals of the vassal king Baldur. Each of Baldur's guards was assigned two horses, and one horse was assigned to each of his followers.

古文：敕淮东元帅府发兵，及鄂州戍兵与李璮旧部曲，并前河南已签军万人后免为民者，复籍为兵，并付行中书省。
现代文：敕令淮东元帅府派遣士卒，加上鄂州的守军和李王原来的旧部，以及先前河南已经签征后来又免于服役为民的一万名士卒，重新恢复军籍当兵，全部交给行中书省管辖。
English: He ordered the Huaidong Marshal's Office to dispatch soldiers, together with the defenders of Ezhou and Li Wang's former department, as well as ten thousand soldiers from Henan who had previously signed up for conscription and were later exempted from military service, to reinstate their military registration as soldiers, and all of them were placed under the jurisdiction of Xingzhongshuo.

古文：戊午，诏遣使招谕宋四川制置赵定应： 比者毕再兴、青阳梦炎赴阙，面陈蜀阃事宜，奏请缓师，令自纳款，姑从所请。
现代文：十九日，下诏招降宋朝的四川制置使赵定应说 ：近来毕再兴、青阳梦炎前来朝廷，当面陈述蜀军辕门中的情况，奏请暂缓进军，让他们自己纳款请降，姑且依从他们的请求。
English: On the 19th, Zhao Dingye, the envoy of the Song Dynasty to Sichuan Province, said: Recently, Bi Zhenxing and Qingyang Mengyan came to the imperial court to present the situation of the Shu army in front of the court, and asked them to delay the advance, let them raise money to surrender, and comply with their request.

古文：今遣再兴宣布大信，若能顺时达变，可保富贵，毋为涂炭生灵，自贻后悔。 
现代文：现在派遣毕再兴宣布朝廷的诚信，如果能够顺应时势，通达变革，就可以保住富贵，千万不要做出涂炭生灵的事，给自己留下后悔。 
English: Now dispatch Bi Zaixing to announce the integrity of the imperial court. If you can conform to the trend of the times and achieve change, you can keep your wealth. Don't do anything that will harm others and leave yourself with regrets.

古文：庚申，遣重庆府招讨使毕再兴持诏招谕宋合州节使张珏、江安潼川安抚张朝宗、涪州观察阳立、梁山军防御马野。
现代文：二十一日，派遣重庆府招讨使毕再兴，带着诏书前去招降宋朝合州节度使张珏、江安潼川安抚使张朝宗、涪州观察使阳立、梁州军防御使马懋。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Chongqing government dispatched the recruiting envoy Bi Zhenxing, and went with the imperial rescript to recruit Zhang Qian, the Song Dynasty and Hezhou festival envoy Zhang Qian, the Jiang'an and Qianchuan pacification envoy Zhang Qianzong, the Zhangzhou observation envoy Yang Li, and the Liangzhou army defense envoy Ma Qian.

古文：辛酉，宋潼川安抚使、知江安州梅应春以城降。
现代文：二十二日，宋朝潼川安抚使、江安州知州梅应春献城投降。
English: On the 22nd day of the month, the Song Dynasty's Yechuan pacification envoy, Jiang'an State Chizhou Mei Yingchun, surrendered the city.

古文：乙丑，以涟、海新附丁顺等括船千艘，送淮东都元帅府。
现代文：二十六日，命令涟州、海州新归附的丁顺等聚集船只一千艘送达淮东都元帅府。
English: On the 26th, he ordered the newly-annexed Ding Shun of Zhangzhou and Haizhou to gather a thousand ships and deliver them to the Huai Dongdu Marshal's Office.

古文：丙寅，宋扬州都统姜才、副将张林步骑二万人，乘夜攻杨子桥木栅。
现代文：二十七日，宋朝的扬州都统姜才、副将张林率领步兵骑兵共二万人，乘着黑夜进攻扬子桥的木栅栏。
English: On the 27th, the Yangzhou capital of the Song Dynasty, Jiang Cai, and Vice Admiral Zhang Lin led a total of 20,000 infantry and cavalry to attack the wooden fence of the Yangzi Bridge in the dark.

古文：守栅万户史弼来告急，阿术自瓜洲以兵赴之。
现代文：戍守栅栏的万户史弼前来告急，阿术从瓜洲前去救援。
English: Wanyu Shijun, who was guarding the fence, came to help in a hurry, and Ah Jiu went to the rescue from Guazhou.

古文：诘旦至栅下，才军夹水为阵，阿术麾骑兵渡水击之，阵坚不动。
现代文：天亮的时候来到栅栏下，姜才的军队夹水列成战阵，阿术指挥骑兵渡水攻击宋军，宋军的阵地很坚牢，毫不动摇。
English: When they came under the fence at dawn, Jiang Cai's army lined up in a line of battle against the water. Ah Shou commanded the cavalry to cross the water and attack the Song Army. The Song Army's position was very solid and unshakable.

古文：阿术军引却，才军来逼，我军与力战，才军遂走。阿术步骑并进，大败之，才仅以身免，生擒张林，斩首万八千级。
现代文：阿术率领军队退却，姜才的军队向前逼近，我军和宋军奋力战斗，姜才的军队便退走了，阿术指挥步兵和骑兵同时并进，把宋军打得大败，姜才只身脱逃，张林被我军生俘，我军斩杀敌军一万八千人。
English: Ah Jiu led the army to retreat, Jiang Cai's army approached forward, our army and the Song army fought hard, and Jiang Cai's army retreated. Ah Jiu commanded the infantry and cavalry at the same time, and defeated the Song army. Jiang Cai escaped alone. Zhang Lin was captured alive by our army, and our army killed 18,000 enemy soldiers.

古文：戊辰，敕塔出率阿塔海、也速带儿两军赴涟水。
现代文：二十九日，敕令塔出率领阿塔海、也速带儿两军前往涟水。
English: On the 29th, Gong Lingta led the Atahai and also quickly led the two armies to Surabaya.

古文：以逊摊为耽罗国达鲁花赤。
现代文：任命逊摊为耽罗国镇守官。
English: Sun Zhan was appointed as the governor of Tanluo Town.

古文：罢山东经略司。
现代文：撤销山东经略司。
English: Revocation of the Shandong Economic Strategy Division.

古文：秋七月庚午朔，阿术集行省诸翼万户兵船于瓜洲，阿塔海、董文炳集行院诸翼万户兵船于西津渡，宋沿江制置使赵溍、枢密都承旨张世杰、知泰州孙虎臣等陈舟师于焦山南北。
现代文：秋季，七月初一，阿术集合行中书省各军万户的战船到瓜洲，阿塔海、董文炳集合行枢密院各军万户的战船到西津渡，宋朝的沿江制置使赵氵晋、枢密院都承旨张世杰、泰州知州孙虎臣等在焦山南北布列水军。
English: In autumn, on the first day of July, the warships of all the armies of the People's Republic of China and the People's Republic of China gathered in Guazhou, the warships of all the armies of the People's Republic of China and the People's Republic of China gathered in Xi'an, the warships of the People's Republic of China and the People's Republic of China gathered in Xi'an, the warships of the People's Republic of China and the People's Republic of China and the warships of the People's Republic of China and the People's Republic of China and the warships of the People's Republic of China and the People'

古文：阿术分遣万户张弘范等，以拔都兵船千艘，西掠珠金沙。
现代文：阿术分别派遣万户张弘范等率领勇士营兵船一千艘掠取西面的珠金沙。
English: A Shou separately dispatched 10,000 households led by Zhang Hongfan and other warriors to capture a thousand warships to plunder the pearly sands in the west.

古文：辛未，阿术、阿塔海登南岸石公山，指授诸军水军万户刘琛循江南岸，东趣夹滩，绕出敌后；董文炳直抵焦山南麓，以掎其右；招讨使刘国杰趣其左；万户忽剌出捣其中；张弘范自上流继至，趣焦山之北。
现代文：初二，阿术、阿塔海登上长江南岸的石公山，指挥授命诸军的水军万户刘深，顺着长江南岸向东前往夹滩，绕到敌军的后方；命董文炳直接抵达焦山的南麓，以牵制宋军的右路；命招讨使刘国杰进到宋军的左侧；命万户忽剌出直捣宋军中路；张宏范接着从上流来到，进至焦山的北面。
English: On the second day of the first semester, Ah Shou and Atahai ascended Shigong Mountain on the south bank of the Yangtze River, and the commander ordered the naval forces of the army to follow the south bank of the Yangtze River to the east to the beach and go around to the rear of the enemy army; ordered Dong Wenyi to directly reach the southern foot of Jiaoshan to divert the right path of the Song Army; summoned Liu Guojie to enter the left side of the Song Army; ordered Wanyu to directly attack the middle path of the Song Army; Zhang Hongfan then came from the upstream and entered the north side of Jiaoshan.

古文：大战自辰至午，呼声震天地，乘风以火箭射其箬篷。
现代文：大战从上午九时直进行到中午，呐喊声震天动地，我军借着风势用火箭射向宋军战船的篷席。
English: The great battle went on from nine o'clock in the morning to noon, the shouting was earth-shattering, and our army used the wind to fire rockets at the canopies of the Song warships.

古文：宋师大败，世杰、虎臣等皆遁走。
现代文：宋军被打得大败，张世杰、孙虎臣等人都逃跑。
English: The Song army was soundly defeated, and Zhang Shijie, Sun Huchen and others all fled.

古文：追至圌山，获黄鹄白鹞船数百艘。
现代文：我军追击到图山，俘获黄鹤白鹞船数百艘。
English: Our army chased them to Tushan and captured hundreds of yellow cranes and egrets.

古文：宋人自是不复能军。
现代文：宋人从此以后再也不能组织成军。
English: From then on, the Song people could no longer organize themselves into an army.

古文：翌日，宋平江都统刘师勇、殿帅张彦，以两浙制司军至吕城，复为阿塔海行院兵所败。
现代文：第二天，宋朝的平江都统刘师勇、殿帅张彦，率领着两浙制置司院军队抵达吕城，再次被阿塔海的行枢密院军队打败。
English: The next day, Liu Shiyong and Zhang Yan, the generals of the Pingjiang capital of the Song Dynasty, arrived in Lucheng, leading the two armies of the State Council of Zhejiang Province, and were once again defeated by the army of the Privy Council of the Atahai Dynasty.

古文：壬申，签云南落落、蒲纳烘等处军万人，隶行中书省。
现代文：初三，签征云南的落落、蒲纳烘等处的军队一万名，隶属于行中书省管辖。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, 10,000 troops from Yunnan Province, Puna Province and other places were conscripted, under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Education.

古文：癸酉，太白犯井。
现代文：初四，太白金星干犯井宿天区。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, it's too white for Venus to commit a crime.

古文：诏取茶罕章未附种落。
现代文：诏令攻取茶罕章尚未归附的部落。
English: The imperial edict ordered the capture of the tribes that had not yet been annexed by Chakhan Zhang.

古文：丁丑，立卫州至杨村水驿五。
现代文：初八，建立从卫州到杨村的水驿站五处。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, five water sprinkler stations were built from Weizhou to Yangcun.

古文：己卯，增置燕南河北道提刑按察司。
现代文：初十，增设燕南河北道提刑按察司。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the Yan'an and Hebei Provincial Department of Criminal Investigation was added.

古文：以蔡州驿蒙古军四百隶阿里海牙，汉军六百从万户宋都带赴江西。
现代文：把蔡州驿的四百名蒙古军士兵隶属于阿里海牙，六百名汉军士兵跟随万户宋都带前往江西。
English: The four hundred Mongolian soldiers in Caizhou were subordinated to Ali Haiga, and the six hundred Chinese soldiers were brought to Jiangxi by Wanhu Songdu.

古文：壬午，遣使招宋淮安安抚使朱焕。
现代文：十三日，派遣使臣前去招降宋朝的淮安安抚使朱焕。
English: On the 13th, Zhu Huan, the Huai'an and pacification envoy of the Song Dynasty, was dispatched.

古文：癸未，诏遣使江南，搜访儒、医、僧、道、阴阳人等。
现代文：十四日，下诏派遣使臣去江南，搜求、访问儒士、医生、僧人、道士、阴阳生之类的人。
English: On the 14th, the emperor sent envoys to the south of the Yangtze River to search for and interview Confucianists, doctors, monks, Taoists, Yin and Yang students and other people.

古文：敕左丞相伯颜率诸将直趣临安；右丞阿里海牙取湖南；蒙古万户宋都带，汉军万户武秀、张荣实、李恒，兵部尚书吕师夔行都元帅府，取江西。
现代文：敕命左丞相伯颜率领诸将直接进军临安；命右丞相阿里海牙攻取湖南；命蒙古军万户宋都带，汉军万户武秀、张荣实、李恒，兵部尚书吕师夔执掌都元帅府，攻取江西。
English: He ordered the left-wing minister Bo Yan to lead the generals to march directly into Lin'an; ordered the right-wing minister Ali Haiga to capture Hunan; ordered the Mongolian army to take Song capital, the Chinese army to take Wanshu Wuxiu, Zhang Rongshi, Li Heng, and the military department Shangshu Lv Shijun to take charge of the capital Marshal's office and capture Jiangxi.

古文：罢淮西行枢密院，以右丞阿塔海、参政董文炳同署行中书省事。
现代文：撤销淮西行枢密院，任命中书右丞阿塔海、参知政事董文炳共同署理行中书省事务。
English: The Privy Council of Huaixi Province was revoked, and Atahai, the Vice-Chairman of the CPC Central Committee, and Dong Wenyi, the Vice-Chairman of the CPC Central Committee, were appointed to jointly manage the affairs of the CPC Central Committee and the Ministry of Education.

古文：辛卯，太阴犯毕。
现代文：二十二日，太阴星干犯毕宿天区。
English: On the 22nd, the great Yin star committed a crime and was banished to the heavenly region.

古文：甲午，遣使持诏招谕宋李庭芝及夏贵。
现代文：二十五日，派遣使臣带着诏书前去招降宋朝的李庭芝和夏贵。
English: On the 25th, he sent an envoy with an imperial edict to recruit Li Tingzhi and Xia Gui from the Song Dynasty.

古文：以伯颜为中书右丞相，阿术为中书左丞相。
现代文：任命伯颜为中书右丞相，阿术为中书左丞相。
English: He appointed Bo Yan as the Vice-Minister of the Right, and Ah Xiu as the Vice-Minister of the Left.

古文：八月己亥朔，免北京、西京、陕西等路今岁丝银。
现代文：八月初一，免征北京、西京、陕西等路今年的丝税银。
English: On the first day of August, Beijing, Xijing, Shaanxi and other regions will be exempt from this year's silk tax.

古文：癸卯，伯颜陛辞南行，奉诏谕宋君臣，相率来附，则赵氏族属可保无虞，宗庙悉许如故。
现代文：初五，伯颜在朝廷辞别皇上前往南方，奉圣旨告谕宋朝的君臣，只要相帅前来归附，赵氏家族和臣下就可以保证无忧，宗庙的祭祀也都可以允许和原来一样。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Bo Yan said goodbye to the emperor at the imperial court and went to the south. According to the holy edict, he told the princes and ministers of the Song Dynasty that as long as the suitors came to join, the Zhao family and their subjects could be guaranteed peace of mind, and the sacrificial rites of the ancestral temple could be allowed as before.

古文：授故奉使大理王君侯子如珪正八品官。
现代文：授予已故奉命出使大理的使臣王君侯的儿子王如王圭正八品官职。
English: The son of the late envoy Wang Junhou, who was ordered to dispatch Dali, Wang Ruo Wang Gui, was awarded the official post of the eighth grade.

古文：己未，升任城县为济州。
现代文：二十一日，把任城县升格为济州。
English: On the 21st, Rencheng County was upgraded to Jeju.

古文：辛酉，车驾至自上都。
现代文：二十三日，皇帝的车驾从上都抵达京师。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor's carriage arrived in Beijing from Shangdu.

古文：丙寅，高丽王王愖遣其枢密副使许珙、将军赵珪来贺圣诞节。
现代文：二十八日，高丽国王王忄甚派遣他的枢密副使许珙、将军赵王圭前来祝贺皇上的寿诞佳节。
English: On the 28th, the King of Goryeo, Wang Binjin, sent his confidential deputy envoy, General Zhao Wang Gui, to congratulate the Emperor on his birthday.

古文：九月己巳，太白犯少民。
现代文：九月初二，太白金星干犯少民星。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, the too-white Venus and the young people star.

古文：庚午，阿合马等以军兴国用不足，请复立都转运司九，量增课程元额，鼓铸铁器，官为局卖，禁私造铜器。
现代文：初三，阿合马等人认为，军队打仗，国家经费不足，请求重新建立九个都转运司，酌量增加赋税的基数，鼓励铸造铁器，由官府设局专卖，禁止私造铜器。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Ahma and others believed that the army was at war and the state's funds were insufficient. They requested the re-establishment of nine transit departments, the discretionary increase of the tax base, the encouragement of cast ironware, the establishment of a monopoly by the government, and the prohibition of privately made copperware.

古文：乙亥，赏清河、新城战士及死事者银千两、钞百锭。
现代文：初八，奖赏清河、新城之役的战士以及战死者一千两白银、一百锭钱钞。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the soldiers who fought and died in the battles of Qinghe and Xincheng were rewarded with one thousand taels of silver and one hundred taels of banknotes.

古文：赐西平王所部鸭城戍兵，人马三匹。
现代文：赐给西平王部下戍守鸭城的士兵每个人三匹马。
English: He gave three horses to each of the soldiers of Xiping's subordinates who were guarding Duck Town.

古文：丁丑，以襄阳官牛五千八百赐贫民。
现代文：初十，把襄阳的五千八百头官牛赐给贫苦百姓。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he gave 5,800 head of government cattle from Xiangyang to the poor people.

古文：弛河南鬻马之禁。
现代文：开放河南不准贩卖马匹的禁令。
English: Henan to lift ban on horse trading.

古文：赐东西川屯戍蒙古军粮钞有差。
现代文：赐给驻守东川西川的蒙古军队不同数额的粮食和钱钞。
English: Different amounts of grain and banknotes were given to the Mongolian troops stationed in Dongchuan and Xichuan.

古文：戊寅，谕太常卿合丹： 去冬享太宫，敕牲无用牛，今其复之。 
现代文：十一日，晓谕太常卿合丹说 ：去年冬天祭祀太庙，敕令祭品不得用牛，现在可以恢复原制。 
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Grand Councilor Hatan said, "Last winter, we held a memorial service for the Imperial Family, and according to the imperial edict, we were not allowed to use cattle as a sacrificial offering. Now, we can return to the original system."

古文：己卯，太白犯太微西垣上将。
现代文：十二日，太白金星干犯太微西垣天区的上将星官。
English: On the 12th, the general officer of Taibai Venus committed a crime in Taibai Xigatian District.

古文：壬午，阿术筑湾头堡。
现代文：十五日，阿术修筑湾头堡。
English: On the 15th, Ahshu started to build the Bay Head Fort.

古文：乙酉，罢襄阳统军司。
现代文：十八日，撤销襄阳统军司。
English: On the 18th, the Xiangyang United Military Department was abolished.

古文：甲午，宋扬州都统姜才将步骑万五千人攻湾头堡，阿术、阿塔海击败之。
现代文：二十七日，宋军扬州都统姜才率领步兵骑兵共一万五千人进攻湾头堡，阿术、阿塔海将宋军击败。
English: On the 27th, Jiang Cai, the Yangzhou governor of the Song Army, led a total of 15,000 infantry and cavalry to attack the Bay Head Fort, and the Song Army was defeated by Ahshu and Attahai.

古文：赏淮安招讨使乞里迷失及有功将士锦衣银钞有差。
现代文：奖赏淮安招讨使别乞里迷失，以及有功的将士锦衣和数额不同的银两、钱钞。
English: Huai'an Recruitment will reward the lost beggars, as well as the meritorious soldiers with brocade clothes and different amounts of silver and banknotes.

古文：丙申，以玉昔帖木儿为御史大夫。
现代文：二十九日，任命玉昔帖木儿为御史大夫。
English: On the 29th, he appointed Gyokuseki Timur as a goshi daifu.

古文：括江南诸郡书版及临安秘书省《乾坤宝典》等书。
现代文：收聚江南各郡的书版以及临安秘书省《乾坤宝典》等书。
English: Collect the book plates of counties in the south of the Yangtze River and the books such as the "Qian Kun Bao Di" of the Secretary of Lin'an Province.

古文：冬十月戊戌朔，享于太庙。
现代文：冬季，十月初一，向太庙敬献祭品。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, offerings are made to the Great Temple.

古文：辛丑，弛北京、义、锦等处猎禁。
现代文：初四，放开北京、义州、锦州等处不许狩猎的禁令。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the ban on hunting in Beijing, Yizhou, Jinzhou and other places was lifted.

古文：癸丑，太阴犯毕。
现代文：初六，太阴星干犯毕宿天区。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the first year of junior high school, Taiyin Star committed a crime and ended up in heaven.

古文：十一月丁卯，阿里海牙以军攻潭州。
现代文：十一月初一，阿里海牙率军进攻潭州。
English: On the first day of November, Ali Hague led an army to attack Tanzhou.

古文：乙亥，伯颜分军为三，趣临安；阿剌罕率步骑自建康、四安、广德以出独松岭；董文炳率舟师循海趣许浦、澉浦，以至浙江；伯颜、阿塔海由中道节度诸军，期并会于临安。
现代文：初九，伯颜兵分三路直接进军临安：阿剌罕率领步兵和骑兵从建康、四安、广德出独松岭；董文炳率领水军沿着海路前往许浦、澉浦，以抵达浙江；伯颜、阿塔海由中路节制、调遣各军，约定时间，全部在临安会师。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, the soldiers of Boyan marched directly to Lin'an in three directions: Ayhan led the infantry and cavalry from Jiankang, Sian, and Guangde out of the German pine ridge; Dong Wenjun led the navy along the sea route to Xu Pu and Weipu to arrive in Zhejiang; Boyan and Atahai controlled and dispatched the armies from the middle route, and all the divisions met in Lin'an at the agreed time.

古文：丙子，宋权融、宜、钦三州总管岑从毅，沿边巡检使、广西节制军马李维屏等，诣云南行中书省降。
现代文：初十，宋朝暂署融州、宜州、钦州三州总管岑人毅和沿边巡检使、广西节制军马使李维异等人，来到云南行中书省投降。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the Song Dynasty's provisional governor of the three states of Rongzhou, Yizhou and Qinzhou, Xunren Yi, and the patrol envoy along the border, the Guangxi temperance military envoy Li Weiyi and others, came to Yunnan to surrender in Zhoushu.

古文：丁丑，阿合马奏立诸路转运司凡十一所。
现代文：十一日，阿合马奏请设立的各路转运司共十一所。
English: On the 11th day of the month, there were a total of 11 Road Transportation Departments set up by the Ahamaso.

古文：己卯，宋都带等军次隆兴府，宋江西转运使、知府刘槃以城降。
现代文：十三日，宋都带等人的军队进军到隆兴府，宋朝江西转运使、知府刘般木献城投降。
English: On the 13th, Song Du and his army marched to Longxingfu, and Liu Bangmu, the envoy of the Song Dynasty to the west of Jiangxi Province and the governor of the province, surrendered the city.

古文：都元帅府檄谕江西诸郡相继归附，得府州六、军四、县五十六，户一百五万一千八百二十九，口二百七万六千四百。
现代文：都元帅府传令招降的江西各郡相继归附，一共取得六个府州、四个军州、五十六个县，共有一百零五万一千八百二十九户，二百零七万六千四百人。
English: The counties in Jiangxi Province that were ordered to surrender by the order of the Generalissimo were successively annexed, and a total of six prefectures, four military regions, and fifty-six counties were acquired, with a total of 1,051,829 households and 2,076,400 people.

古文：壬午，伯颜大军至常州，督诸军登城，四面并进，拔其城。
现代文：十六日，伯颜的大军抵达常州，督率各军登城，四面同时进攻，攻下了这座城市。
English: On the 16th, Bo Yan's large army arrived in Changzhou. He led all the armies to the city, attacked from all directions at the same time, and captured the city.

古文：刘师勇变服单骑南走。
现代文：刘师勇变换服装单人独骑向南逃跑。
English: Liu Shiyong changed his clothes and rode away alone to the south.

古文：改顺天府为保定府。
现代文：把顺天路改为保定路。
English: Change Shuntian Road to Baoding Road.

古文：枢密院言： 两都、平滦猎户新签军二千，皆贫无力者，宜存恤其家。
现代文：枢密院上奏说： 从两都、平滦路的猎户中新近签征的二千名士兵，都是贫困无力的人，应当对他们的家属进行慰问、优抚。
English: The report to the Privy Council said: The newly conscripted two thousand soldiers from the hunters in the two cities and Pingli Road are all poor and weak people, and their families should be comforted and pampered.

古文：又新附郡县有既降复叛，及纠众为盗犯罪至死者，既已款伏，乞听权宜处决。 
现代文：另外，新近归顺的郡县，有的已经投降后来又重新叛变，还有纠集部众为盗贼犯下死罪的，既然已经招认罪行，请听任地方官衙据情将他们处死。 
English: In addition, the newly surrendered counties and counties, some of which have surrendered and then rebelled again, as well as those who have gathered followers to commit capital crimes for thieves, since they have confessed their crimes, please allow local officials to execute them according to their circumstances.

古文：皆从之。
现代文：皇上全部允准。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：中书省臣议断死罪，诏： 今后杀人者死，问罪状已白，不必待时，宜即行刑。
现代文：中书省大臣商议判决死刑的事，皇上下诏说： 从今以后，凡是杀人的都处以死刑，罪状已经审讯清楚，不必等到每年预定的行刑时间，应当立即执行死刑。
English: When the ministers of the People's Republic of China and the People's Republic of China discussed the issue of the death penalty, the Emperor issued an imperial edict: From now on, anyone who commits murder shall be sentenced to death. The charges have been clearly tried, and there is no need to wait until the scheduled time of execution each year. The death penalty shall be carried out immediately.

古文：其奴婢杀主者，具五刑论。 
现代文：那些杀害主人的奴才，均按照五种刑罚依法论处。 
English: Those slaves who kill their masters will be punished according to the five punishments.

古文：乙酉，阿剌罕克广德，趣独松关。
现代文：十九日，阿剌罕攻占广德，进军独松关。
English: On the 19th, Ajangan conquered Quang Duc and marched into Duosongguan.

古文：丙戌，太阴犯轩辕大星。
现代文：二十日，太阴星干犯轩辕星座的大星。
English: On the 20th, the big star of the constellation of the Great Yin committed the crime of the Great Yin.

古文：己丑，遣太常卿合丹以所获涂金爵三，献于太庙。
现代文：二十三日，派太常卿合丹把所得到的三个涂金酒爵敬献给太庙。
English: On the 23rd, he sent the three gold-coated wine coats to the Imperial Temple.

古文：庚寅，伯颜遣降人游介实奉玺书副本使于宋，仍以书谕宋大臣。
现代文：二十四日，伯颜派遣宋朝的降官游介实奉上玺书的副本出使宋朝，并且以书信招降宋朝的大臣。
English: On the 24th, Bo Yan sent a copy of the letter of demotion of the Song Dynasty to You Jie and sent it to the Song Dynasty, and invited the ministers of the Song Dynasty to surrender by letter.

古文：甲午，以高丽国官制僣滥，遣使谕旨，凡省、院、台、部官名爵号，与朝廷相类者改正之。
现代文：二十八日，因为高丽的官制混乱失序，派遣使臣前去宣布谕旨：凡是中书省、枢密院、御史台、各部的官职、爵位名号，与中央朝廷的名称相类似的，一律改正过来。
English: On the 28th, because the official system of Goryeo was chaotic and out of order, envoys were sent to announce the decree: all the names of the Central Ministry of Literature, the Privy Council, the Office of the Historian, the official posts of various ministries, and the titles of nobility, which were similar to the name of the Central Court, were all corrected.

古文：十二月戊戌，填星犯亢。
现代文：十二月初二，土星干犯亢宿天区。
English: On the 2nd day of the 12th month, Saturn entered the Pleiades.

古文：己亥，签书四川行枢密院事昝顺言： 绍庆府、施州、南平及诸蛮吕告、马蒙、阿永等，有向化之心。
现代文：初三，四川行枢密院佥事昝顺上奏说： 绍兴府、施州、南平，以及吕告、马蒙、阿永等各蛮部有归化之心。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the Anecdote of the Privy Council in Sichuan was reported as follows: Shaoxing Prefecture, Shizhou, Nanping, as well as Lvgui, Mamun, Ayong and other barbarian provinces have naturalization hearts.

古文：又播州安抚杨邦宪、思州安抚田景贤，未知逆顺，乞降诏使之自新，并许世绍封爵。 
现代文：另外，播川安抚使杨邦宪、思州安抚使田景贤，不知道他们是否愿意归降，请颁发圣旨令他们改过自新，并允许他们世袭朝廷所封的官爵。 
English: In addition, Yang Bangxian, the pacifier of Benguechuan, and Tian Jingxian, the pacifier of Shizhou, do not know whether they are willing to surrender, please issue a sacred edict to reform them, and allow them to inherit the official titles awarded by the imperial court.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允准。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：辛丑，董文炳军次许浦，宋都统制祁安以本军降。
现代文：初五，董文炳的军队屯驻在许浦，宋军都统制祁安率领本军投降。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Dong Wenyi's army was stationed in Xupu, and the Song army was under the control of Yan'an, who led his army to surrender.

古文：宋主为书，介国信副使严忠范侄焕请和。
现代文：宋朝皇帝写信，传命国信副使严忠范的侄儿严焕前来求和。
English: The Emperor of the Song Dynasty wrote a letter and ordered the vice-envoy of the State Council, Yan Huan, the nephew of Yan Zhongfan, to come and sue for peace.

古文：甲辰，伯颜次平江府，宋都统王邦杰以城降。
现代文：初八，伯颜进驻到平江府，宋军都统王邦杰献城投降。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Boyan was stationed in Pingjiang Prefecture, and the king of the Song Dynasty, Bangjie, surrendered the city.

古文：乙巳，免江陵等处今岁田租。
现代文：初九，免征江陵等地今年的田租。
English: In the first nine months of the year, land rents in Gangneung and other places are exempt from taxation.

古文：丁未，改诸站提领司为通政院。
现代文：十一日，把诸站提领司改为通政院。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the name of the station was changed to Tongzheng Academy.

古文：戊申，中书左丞相忽都带儿与内外文武百寮及缁黄耆庶，请上皇帝尊号曰宪天述道仁文义武大光孝皇帝，皇后曰贞懿顺圣昭天睿文光应皇后，不许。
现代文：十二日，中书左丞相忽都带儿和朝内外文武百官，以及各种不同身份地位的平民老人，请求向皇帝敬献尊号：宪天述道仁文义武大光孝皇帝；向皇后献尊号为：贞懿顺圣昭天睿文光应皇后。皇帝不准。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the left chancellor of the Chinese Academy of Letters and Calligraphy, along with hundreds of military and civilian officials at home and abroad, as well as various senior citizens of different statuses, requested that the emperor be given the honorific title: Emperor Xian, Emperor Su, Emperor Da Guang, Emperor Yi, Emperor Wu; and that the empress be given the honorific title: Empress Zhen, Empress Shun, Empress Zhaotian, Empress Wen. The emperor did not allow it.

古文：太阴犯毕。
现代文：太阴星干犯毕宿天区。
English: If the moon is too dark, the stars will not be able to shine.

古文：庚子，宋主复遣尚书夏士林、右史陆秀夫奉书，称侄乞和。
现代文：二十四日，宋朝皇帝再次派遣尚书夏士林、右史陆秀夫奉上书信称侄求和。
English: On the 24th, the Emperor of the Song Dynasty once again sent Shangshu Xia Shilin and Yu Shi Lu Hsiu-fu to present a letter saying that his nephew had sued for peace.

古文：西川沧溪知县赵龙遣间使入宋，敕流远方，籍其家。
现代文：西川沧溪知县赵龙派遣密使进入宋境，皇帝敕令将他流放到远方，抄没他的家产。
English: Zhao Long of Cangxi County, West Sichuan Province, sent a secret envoy into the Song territory. The emperor ordered him to be exiled to a distant place and confiscated his family property.

古文：癸亥，敕枢密院： 靖州既降复叛，今已平定，其遣张通判、李信家属并同叛者赴都。 
现代文：二十七日，敕令枢密院说： 靖州已经投降又重新叛变，现在已经平定，望遣送张通判、李信的家属和一起叛变的人前来京师。 
English: On the 27th, the Privy Council issued an edict saying, "Jingzhou has surrendered and rebelled again, and has now been pacified. It is hoped that the families of Zhang Tonghan, Li Xin, and those who rebelled with them will be sent to the capital.

古文：甲子，答宋国主书，令其来降。
现代文：二十八日，答复宋朝皇帝的书信，令他前来投降。
English: On the 28th, he replied to the Emperor Song's letter and ordered him to surrender.

古文：丙寅，阿剌罕军次安吉州，宋安抚使赵与可以城降。
现代文：三十日，阿剌罕的军队进驻到安吉州，宋朝赵与可献城投降。
English: On the 30th, the army of Ajanghan was stationed in Anji Prefecture, and Song Zhao and Kecheng surrendered.

古文：升高丽东宁府为路，割江东南康路隶江西省，置马湖路总管府。
现代文：把高丽的东宁府升格为路。把江东南康路划属于江西行省。设置马湖路总管府。
English: Dongningfu in Goryeo was upgraded to a road, Jiangdong Nankang Road was classified as belonging to Jiangxi Province, and Mahu Road General Administration Office was set up.

古文：省重庆路隆化县入南川，滦州海山县入昌黎县。
现代文：撤销重庆路隆化县，划入南川路，把滦州海山县划入昌黎县。
English: Longhua County of Chongqing Road was revoked, transferred to Nanchuan Road, and Zhangzhou Haishan County was transferred to Changli County.

古文：复华州郑县。
现代文：恢复华州的郑县。
English: Restore Zheng County, Washington.

古文：是岁，卫辉、太原等路旱，河间霖雨伤稼，凡赈米三千七百四十八石、粟二万四千二百六石。
现代文：这一年，卫辉、太原等路发生旱灾，河间路连降大雨伤害庄稼，共赈济饥民三千七百八十八石大米、二万四千二百零六石小米。
English: In this year, droughts occurred in Weihui, Taiyuan and other areas, and continuous heavy rain in Hema damaged crops, and a total of 3,788 kilos of rice and 24,206 kilos of millet were provided to the hungry.

古文：天下户四百七十六万四千七十七，断死罪六十八人。
现代文：全国共四百七十六万四千零七十七户。全年判处死刑的罪犯六十八人。
English: There were a total of 4,764,077 households in the country, and 68 criminals were sentenced to death throughout the year.

