古文：七年春，郯子来朝。
现代文：七年春季，郯子前来朝见。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, Zizi came to see the morning.

古文：夏四月，三卜郊不从，乃免牲。
现代文：夏季四月，鲁国三次为郊祭而占卜，都不吉利，于是就免除使用牺牲。
English: In the summer of April, the Lu three times for the suburb festival and divination, are unlucky, so they are exempt from the use of sacrifice.

古文：小邾子来朝。
现代文：小邾穆公来鲁国朝见。
English: Xiao Yanmu Gong came to see the Emperor of Lu.

古文：城费。
现代文：在费地筑城。
English: Build a city in Philly.

古文：秋，季孙宿如卫。
现代文：秋季，季孙宿去卫国。
English: In autumn, Qisunjuku goes to defend the country.

古文：八月，螽。
现代文：八月，有螽虫。
English: In August, the locust disaster occurred.

古文：冬十月，卫侯使孙林父来聘。
现代文：冬季十月，卫侯派遣孙林父来鲁国聘问。
English: In the winter of October, Wei Hou sent Sun Lin's father to Lu to ask for advice.

古文：壬戌，及孙林父盟。
现代文：壬戌日，和孙林父签订盟约。
English: On the following day, he signed a contract with Sun Lin's father.

古文：楚公子贞帅师围陈。
现代文：楚国公子贞率领军队包围陈国。
English: Prince Zhen of Chu led an army to encircle Chen.

古文：十有二月，公会晋侯、宋公、陈侯、卫侯、曹伯、莒子、邾子于鄬。
现代文：十二月，襄公与晋侯、宋公、陈侯、卫侯、曹伯、莒子、邾子在鄬地会见。
English: In December, Prince Xiang met with Prince Jin, Prince Song, Prince Chen, Prince Wei, Prince Cao, Prince Zizi and Prince Zizi in Handan.

古文：郑伯髠顽如会，未见诸侯。
现代文：郑伯髠顽来参见会见，没有与各诸侯见面。
English: Zheng Boqin did not meet with the princes.

古文：丙戌，卒于鄵。
现代文：丙戌日，在鄵地去世。
English: He passed away in Handan on the same day.

古文：陈侯逃归。
现代文：陈侯逃了回去。
English: Chen Hou fled back.

古文：七年春，郯子来朝，始朝公也。
现代文：七年春季，郯子前来朝见，这是他第一次朝见鲁襄公。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, Zou Zi came to see the emperor. This was the first time for him to see Lu Xiang.

古文：夏四月，三卜郊不从，乃免牲。
现代文：夏季四月，鲁国三次为郊祭而占卜，都不吉利，于是就免除使用牺牲。
English: In the summer of April, the Lu three times for the suburb festival and divination, are unlucky, so they are exempt from the use of sacrifice.

古文：孟献子曰： 吾乃今而后知有卜筮。
现代文：孟献子说： 我从今以后才知道有占卜和占筮了。
English: Meng Xianzi said: From now on, I know that there is divination and fortune-telling.

古文：夫郊，祀后稷以祈农事也。
现代文：郊祭是祭祀后稷，而祈求农事顺利。
English: Suburban festivals are held after the religious services, and prayers are offered for the success of agricultural work.

古文：是故启蛰而郊，郊而后耕。
现代文：所以一到启蛰节就举行郊祭，郊祭以后开始耕种。
English: Therefore, the Suburban Festival is held as soon as the New Year's Day arrives, and farming begins after the Suburban Festival.

古文：今既耕而卜郊，宜其不从也。 
现代文：现在已经开始耕种再来为郊祭占卜，占卜不吉利是应该的。 
English: Now that farming has begun, it's time to do divination for the suburb festival again. It's right to do divination for bad luck.

古文：南遗为费宰。
现代文：南遗出任费邑县宰。
English: Nan Zi was appointed Fei Yu County Governor.

古文：叔仲昭伯为隧正，欲善季氏而求媚于南遗，谓遗： 请城费，吾多与而役。 
现代文：叔仲昭伯做了掌征发郊外庶民服役的官，想要讨好季氏，因而谄媚南遗。他对南遗说： 你去请求在费地筑城，我多给你劳力。 
English: Uncle Zhong Zhao Bo became the official in charge of recruiting and dispatching common people from the suburbs to serve. He wanted to please the Ji clan, so he flattered Nan Zi. He said to Nan Zi: "Go and ask to build a city in Feidi, I will give you more labor."

古文：故季氏城费。
现代文：所以季氏在费地筑城。
English: That's why Mr. Ji built the city in Feidi.

古文：小邾穆公来朝，亦始朝公也。
现代文：小邾穆公来鲁国朝见，也是第一次朝见襄公。
English: It was also the first time for Xiao Yanmu Gong to meet Xiang Gong in the morning.

古文：秋，季武子如卫，报子叔之聘，且辞缓报，非贰也。
现代文：秋季，季武子去到卫国，这是为了回报子叔的聘问，同时解释所以延迟回报不是出于三心二意。
English: In the autumn, Jiwuko went to the defense of the country, this was to return his uncle's offer, while explaining that the delay in return was not out of half-heartedness.

古文：冬十月，晋韩献子告老。公族穆子有废疾，将立之。
现代文：冬季，十月，晋国韩献子告老退休，公族穆子患有残疾，准备立他为卿。
English: In the winter, in October, Han Xianzi of Jin Province announced his retirement. The court noble Mu Zi suffered from a disability and was preparing to make him a lord.

古文：辞曰： 《诗》曰： 岂不夙夜，谓行多露。 
现代文：穆子辞谢说： 《诗》说： 难道不是早晚都想着前来？
English: Mu Zi said, "Poetry" said, "Don't you think about coming sooner or later?

古文：又曰： 弗躬弗亲，庶民弗信。 
现代文：无奈路上的露水太多。 又说： 不能亲自办事，百姓不会信任。 
English: Unfortunately, there was too much dew on the road. He also said: If you can't handle things personally, people won't trust you.

古文：无忌不才，让其可乎？
现代文：无忌没有才能，让给别人，也许可以吧？
English: If you don't have talent, give it to someone else, maybe?

古文：请立起也！
现代文：请立起吧。
English: Please stand up.

古文：与田苏游，而曰好仁。
现代文：起和田苏有交往，田苏称赞他 好仁 。
English: Since he has been in contact with Wada So, Wada So has praised him as a good person.

古文：《诗》曰： 靖共尔位，好是正直。
现代文：《诗》说： 忠诚谨慎地对待你的职位，喜爱这正直的人。
English: The poem says, "Be faithful and discreet in your position, and love this honest man."

古文：神之听之，介尔景福。 
现代文：神灵将会听到，赐给你以大福。 
English: If the gods are informed, they will bestow bountiful blessings.

古文：恤民为德，正直为正，正曲为直，参和为仁。
现代文：体恤百姓是德，纠正直是正，纠正曲是直，把这三者合而为一是仁。
English: Compassion for the people is a virtue, rectification is a virtue, rectification is a virtue, and rectification is a virtue. These three together are benevolence.

古文：如是，则神听之，介福降之。
现代文：像这样，那么神灵就会听到，降给他大福。
English: Like this, then the gods will hear and bestow him with great fortune.

古文：立之，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：立他为卿，不也是可以的吗？ 
English: Wouldn't it be okay to make him a lord?

古文：庚戌，使宣子朝，遂老。
现代文：初九日，让韩宣子朝见，于是他就告老退休。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, he asked Han Xuan Zi to see him in the morning, so he retired.

古文：晋侯谓韩无忌仁，使掌公族大夫。
现代文：晋悼公认为韩无忌具有仁德，让他做首席公族大夫。
English: Jin Weikong thought that Han must have benevolence and let him be the chief public doctor.

古文：卫孙文子来聘，且拜武子之言，而寻孙桓子之盟。
现代文：卫国的孙文子来鲁国聘问，同时答谢季武子的解释，重温和孙桓子结盟的友好关系。
English: The defender of the country, Sun Wenzi, came to Lu to ask questions, and at the same time, he thanked Ji Wuzi for his explanation and reaffirmed the friendly relationship with Sun Huanzi.

古文：公登亦登。
现代文：鲁襄公登上台阶，孙林父同时登上。
English: Lu Xiangg climbed the steps, and Sun Lin's father climbed up at the same time.

古文：叔孙穆子相，趋进曰： 诸侯之会，寡君未尝后卫君。
现代文：叔孙穆子相礼，快步进入，说： 诸侯会见，寡君从来没有走在卫君后面。
English: Sun Muzi, the uncle of the Grand Duke of Lu, who was the minister of praise and etiquette, hurried over to Sun Wenzi and said: At the time of the alliance of princes, our sovereign did not let Wei Jun walk behind.

古文：今吾子不后寡君，寡君未知所过。
现代文：现在您没有走在寡君后面，寡君不知道自己错在哪里。
English: Now you are not walking behind the widower, the widower does not know where he is wrong.

古文：吾子其少安！ 
现代文：大夫您稍停一下吧！ 
English: Doctor, will you stop for a moment?

古文：孙子无辞，亦无悛容。穆叔曰： 孙子必亡。
现代文：孙林父没有话说，也没有改悔的样子。穆叔说： 孙子必然逃亡。
English: Sun Lin's father did not say a word, nor did he show any sign of repentance. Mu Xiu said, "My grandson will definitely run away."

古文：为臣而君，过而不悛，亡之本也。
现代文：作为臣下而和国君并行，有了过错又不改悔，这是逃亡的根本原因。
English: As a vassal and parallel to the sovereign, if there is a mistake and does not repent, this is the root cause of the escape.

古文：《诗》曰： 退食自公，委蛇委蛇。 谓从者也。
现代文：《诗》说， 退朝回家吃饭，从容自得 ，说的是小心顺从的人。
English: "Poetry" says, "Return home to eat, take it easy," it is a careful and obedient person.

古文：衡而委蛇必折。 
现代文：专横而又自得，必然遭受挫折。 
English: Arrogant and self-satisfied, he is bound to suffer setbacks.

古文：楚子囊围陈，会于鄬以救之。郑僖公之为大子也，于成之十六年，与子罕適晋，不礼焉。
现代文：楚国的子襄包围陈国，鲁襄公和晋悼公、宋平公、陈哀公、卫献公、曹成公、莒子、邾子在鄬地会见以救援陈国。郑僖公做太子的时候，在鲁成公十六年和子罕同去晋国，对子罕不加礼遇。
English: Zi Xiang of Chu surrounded Chen. Lu Xiang and Jin Mui, Song Ping, Chen Ai, Wei Xian, Cao Cheng, Zangzi, and Zangzi met in Handan to rescue Chen. When Zheng Rong was crown prince, he went to Jin with Lu Cheng at the age of 16 and Zi Han, and treated him with little courtesy.

古文：又与子豐適楚，亦不礼焉。
现代文：又和子丰同去楚国，对子丰也不加礼遇。
English: He also went to Chu Province with Zifeng, and did not show any courtesy to Zifeng.

古文：及其元年，朝于晋。子豐欲愬诸晋而废之，子罕止之。
现代文：等到僖公即位的元年去晋国朝见，子丰想要向晋国控告而废立僖公，子罕加以劝阻。
English: After waiting until the first year of the reign of Shoko to go to the Jin court, Zifeng wanted to complain to the Jin state and abolish the establishment of Shoko, and Zihang tried to dissuade him.

古文：及将会于鄬，子驷相，又不礼焉。
现代文：等到将要在鄬地会见，子驷做相礼，僖公不以礼遇待子驷。
English: When they are about to meet, Zi Yan will make a courting salute, but Zi Gong will not treat Zi Yan with courtesy.

古文：侍者谏，不听。又谏，杀之。
现代文：侍者劝谏，不听；又劝谏，杀了说话的人。
English: The steward rebuked him, and he didn't listen; he rebuked him again, and he killed the speaker.

古文：及鄵，子驷使贼夜弑僖公，而以疟疾赴于诸侯。
现代文：到达鄵地，子驷派人夜里害死僖公，而用急病致死讣告诸侯。
English: When he arrived in Xiangdi, Zixuan sent someone to kill Xianggu in the night, and used the sudden illness to accuse the princes of causing his death.

古文：简公生五年，奉而立之。
现代文：简公当时五岁，就奉立他为国君。
English: When he was five years old, he was enthroned as the country's king.

