古文：李昉吕蒙正张齐贤贾黄中李昉，字明远，深州饶阳人。
现代文：李昉字明远，深州饶阳人。
English: Li Yanzhi is from Mingyuan and Shenzhou is from Raoyang.

古文：父超，晋工部郎中、集贤殿直学士。
现代文：其父李超，任后晋工部郎中、集贤殿直学士。
English: His father, Li Chao, was later promoted to Junior Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Industry and Technology, and received a bachelor's degree directly from Jixian Temple.

古文：从大父右资善大夫沼无子，以昉为后，荫补斋郎，选授太子校书。
现代文：叔父右资善大夫李沼没有儿子，以李昉为后人，蒙荫补斋郎，选任太子校书。
English: His uncle, Dr. Li Numa, did not have a son, but his descendant, Li Yao, was chosen to be the prince's school teacher.

古文：汉乾祐举进士，为秘书郎。
现代文：后汉乾年间考中进士，任秘书郎。
English: After the Han Dynasty, he passed the junior high school entrance examination and became a secretary.

古文：宰相冯道引之，与吕端同直弘文馆，改右拾遗、集贤殿修撰。
现代文：宰相冯道荐引他，与吕端同直弘文馆，改任右拾遗、集贤殿修撰。
English: Prime Minister Feng Dao recommended him, and he and Lü Duan were assigned to the Dongzhihong Literature Museum, and were assigned to the right to collect relics, and the right to collect scholars.

古文：周显德二年，宰相李穀征淮南，昉为记室。
现代文：后周显德二年，宰相李谷征伐淮南，李昉任记室。
English: Two years after Zhou Xiande, the prime minister Li Gu invaded Huainan, and Li Jian was appointed to the office.

古文：世宗览军中章奏，爱其辞理明白，已知为昉所作，及见《相国寺文英院集》，乃昉与扈蒙、崔颂、刘衮、窦俨、赵逢及昉弟载所题，益善昉诗而称赏之曰： 吾久知有此人矣。 师还，擢为主客员外郎、知制诰、集贤殿直学士。
现代文：周世宗观览军中奏章，喜欢其文词事理明白，已经知道是李昉所作，到看见相国寺《文英院集》，乃是李昉与扈蒙、崔颂、刘衮、窦俨、赵逢及李昉之弟李载所作，越发喜欢李昉的诗而称赏说 ：我早已知道有这个人啊。 军队返回后，擢升李昉为主客员外郎、知制诰、集贤殿直学士。
English: Zhou Shizong watched the military middle school performance, liked the lyrics and understood the reason, and already knew that it was written by Li Qian. When he saw the "Wen Ying Academy Collection" of Shogoku Temple, it was written by Li Qian and Yimeng, Cui Song, Liu Qian, Dou Qian, Zhao Feng and Li Qian's brother Li Zai. He liked Li Qian's poetry more and more and praised it, saying: I already knew this person. After the army returned, Li Qian was promoted to the main guest foreign brother, Zhisheng, and Jixian's direct bachelor.

古文：四年，加史馆修撰、判馆事。
现代文：四年，加任史馆修撰、判馆事。
English: Four years later, he was assigned to the History Museum as a reviewer and adjudicator.

古文：是年冬，世宗南征，从至高邮，会陶穀出使，内署书诏填委，乃命为屯田郎中、翰林学士。
现代文：这一年冬季，周世宗南征，李昉从征到高邮，遇到陶谷出使，李昉在军中代理书诏填委，于是任命他为屯田郎中、翰林学士。
English: In the winter of that year, Zhou Shizong went on the Southern Expedition, Li Qian went from the expedition to Gaoyou, and met the envoy from Tao Valley. Li Qian was the agent of the Imperial Rescript Commission in the army, so he was appointed as the tutor of Tonden and the scholar of Hanlin.

古文：六年春，丁内艰。
现代文：六年春季，遭母丧。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, his mother passed away.

古文：恭帝嗣位，赐金紫。
现代文：恭帝即皇位，赐给他金紫官服。
English: Emperor Kyo, that is, the throne, gave him a gold and purple official uniform.

古文：宋初，加中书舍人。
现代文：宋朝初年，加任中书舍人。
English: In the first year of the Song Dynasty, he was appointed to the post of the Chinese scholar.

古文：建隆三年，罢为给事中。
现代文：建隆三年，罢职任给事中。
English: Jianlong three years, resigned from the post to the case.

古文：四年，平湖湘，受诏祀南岳，就命知衡州，逾年代归。
现代文：四年，湖湘被平定后，李昉受命祀祠南岳，就近任为衡州知州，一年后调职回到朝廷。
English: Four years later, after Hunan had been completely subdued, Li Xi was ordered to build the Nangyue Shrine. He was then appointed as the governor of Henzhou, and a year later he was transferred back to the imperial court.

古文：陶穀诬奏昉为所亲求京畿令，上怒，召吏部尚书张昭面质其事。
现代文：陶谷诬告李昉替亲近人谋求京畿令一职，皇上大怒，召吏部尚书张昭当面质问这件事。
English: Tao Gu falsely accused Li Yu of seeking the post of Gyeonggi governor for a close relative. The emperor was furious and summoned Shangshu Zhang Zhao from the officials department to question him about the matter.

古文：昭老儒，气直，免冠上前，抗声云： 翙罔上。 上疑之不释，出昉为彰武军行军司马，居延州为生业以老。
现代文：张昭是著名儒者，性格耿直，在朝廷上摘下自己的官帽，上前厉声说： 陶谷欺骗皇上。 皇上仍疑意不去，把李昉调出朝廷任彰武军行军司马，居住在延州以谋生度日。
English: Zhang Zhao was a famous Confucianist with a straightforward personality. At the imperial court, he took off his official cap and said sharply: "Tao Gu deceived the emperor." The emperor still hesitated, transferred Li Wei out of the imperial court to be the marshal of the Zhangwu army, and lived in Yanzhou to earn a living.

古文：三岁当内徙，昉不愿。
现代文：三年内应当迁徙内地，李昉不愿意。
English: Within three years, they should move to the mainland, but Li Yao is not willing.

古文：宰相荐其可大用，开宝二年，召还，复拜中书舍人。
现代文：宰相推荐他可以担当大任，开宝二年，皇上召他还朝，再次任为中书舍人。
English: The prime minister recommended him for the important post, and two years later, the emperor called him back to the court and reappointed him as the secretary of the Central Committee.

古文：未几，直学士院。
现代文：不久，在学士院任职。
English: Soon after, he took up a post at the Academy.

古文：三年，知贡举。
现代文：三年，主持贡举。
English: Three years later, he presided over the tribute.

古文：五年，复知贡举。
现代文：五年，再次主持贡举。
English: Five years later, he presided over the tribute again.

古文：秋，预宴大明殿，上见昉坐卢多逊下，因问宰相，对曰： 多逊学士，昉直殿尔。 即令真拜学士，令居多逊上。
现代文：秋季，在大明殿参加宴会，皇上看见李昉坐次在卢多逊之下，于是问宰相，宰相回答说： 卢多逊是学士，李昉只不过是个殿直。 于是命令任李昉为学士，让他坐在卢多逊的上位。
English: In the autumn, when attending a banquet at the Daiming Hall, the emperor saw Li Qiye sitting below Ludoson, so he asked the prime minister. The prime minister replied: Ludoson is a bachelor, Li Qiye is just a courtier. So he ordered Li Qiye to be a bachelor and let him sit above Ludoson.

古文：昉之知贡举也，其乡人武济川预选，既而奏对失次，昉坐左迁太常少卿，俄判国子监。
现代文：李昉主持贡举时，他的乡人武济川预备选取，不久武济川奏对皇上失当，李昉因此贬任太常少卿，不久兼任国子监。
English: When Li Qian presided over the tribute, his countryman Wu Jichuan was selected as the leader. Soon, Wu Jichuan acted improperly towards the emperor. As a result, Li Qian was demoted to the position of too-frequent minor lord, and soon also served as the state's son inspector.

古文：明年五月，复拜中书舍人、翰林学士。
现代文：第二年五月，重新任命为中书舍人、翰林学士。
English: In May of the following year, he was reappointed as a scholar of Chinese literature and a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：冬，判吏部铨。
现代文：冬季，判吏部铨选。
English: In winter, the judges are elected.

古文：时赵普为多逊所构，数以其短闻于上，上询于昉，对曰： 臣职司书诏，普之所为，非臣所知。 普寻出镇，多逊遂参知政事。
现代文：当时赵普被卢多逊排挤，卢多逊多次向皇上告发赵普的过错，皇上询问李昉，李昉回答说： 我的职责是拟写诏书，赵普的所作所为，不是我能知道的。 赵普不久调任地方官，卢多逊于是任参知政事。
English: At that time, Zhao Pu was ousted by Ludoson. Ludoson repeatedly reported Zhao Pu's faults to the emperor. The emperor inquired about Li Yao. Li Yao replied: My duty is to draft the imperial edict. What Zhao Pu has done is beyond my knowledge. Zhao Pu was soon transferred to the post of local official, and Ludoson was appointed to the post of councillor.

古文：太宗即位，加昉户部侍郎，受诏与扈蒙、李穆、郭贽、宋白同修《太祖实录》。
现代文：太宗即位，加任李昉为户部侍郎，李昉受命与扈蒙、李穆、郭贽、宋白一起修撰《太祖实录》。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, Li Qian was appointed as a household attendant. Li Qian was ordered to compile the "True Record of the Great Patriarch" with Yao Meng, Li Mu, Guo Qi and Song Bai.

古文：从政太原，车驾次常山，常山即昉之故里，因赐羊酒，俾召公侯相与宴饮尽欢，里中父老及尝与游从者咸预焉。
现代文：随从皇帝攻伐太原，皇上驻在常山，常山是李昉的故乡，于是皇上赐给他羊和酒，召大臣们与他宴饮尽欢，乡中百姓及曾经与李昉相交的都参加宴会。
English: Accompanying the emperor to attack Taiyuan, the emperor stayed in Changshan. Changshan is the hometown of Li Lan. Therefore, the emperor gave him sheep and wine, called the ministers to feast with him, and the people in the village and those who had been in contact with Li Lan all attended the banquet.

古文：七日而罢，人以为荣。
现代文：七天才结束，人人以此为荣。
English: It's only been seven days and everyone's proud of it.

古文：师还，以劳拜工部尚书兼承旨。
现代文：部队还师，李昉因功被任为工部尚书兼承旨。
English: The troops returned to the division, and Li Jie was appointed to the Ministry of Industry and Commerce for his meritorious service.

古文：太平兴国中，改文明殿学士。
现代文：太平兴国年间，改任文明殿学士。
English: During the Taiping Xingguo period, he was reappointed as a scholar of the Palace of Civilization.

古文：时赵普、宋琪居相位久，求其能继之者，宿旧无逾于昉，遂命参知政事。
现代文：当时赵普、宋琪任宰相很久，寻找能接替宰相的人，宿旧大臣中没有人能超过李昉，于是任命李昉为参知政事。
English: At that time, Zhao Pu and Song Qi had been prime ministers for a long time, and they were looking for someone who could succeed the prime minister. Among the former ministers, no one could surpass Li Qian, so they appointed Li Qian as a political advisor.

古文：十一月，普出镇，昉与琪俱拜平章事。
现代文：十一月，赵普出任地方官，李昉与宋琪都被任命为平章事。
English: In November, Zhao Pu was appointed as a local official, and Li Qian and Song Qi were both appointed as Pingzhangji.

古文：未几，加监修国史，复时政记先进御而后付有司，自昉议始也。
现代文：不久，加任监修国史，恢复时政大事记先进呈皇上而后交付有关部门，从李昉的建议开始。
English: Soon, he was appointed to supervise the national history, and the restoration of the current political events were first presented to the emperor and then delivered to the relevant departments, starting with the suggestion of Li Jun.

古文：雍熙元年郊祀，命昉与琪并为左右仆射，昉固辞，乃加中书侍郎。
现代文：雍熙元年郊祀，任命李昉与宋琪一同为左右仆射，李昉再三辞让，于是加任中书侍郎。
English: In the first year of the reign of the Yongxi Emperor, Li Qian and Song Qi were appointed as the left and right attendants, but Li Qian repeatedly declined, so he was appointed as the secretary.

古文：王师讨幽蓟不利，遣使分诣河南、东，籍民为兵，凡八丁取一。
现代文：朝廷军队讨伐幽蓟不能取胜，派遣使者分赴河南、河东，征发百姓当兵，每八个壮丁抽取一人当兵。
English: When the imperial army couldn't win the battle of Yucheng, they sent emissaries to Henan and Hedong to recruit common people as soldiers. Every eight able-bodied men were selected to be soldiers.

古文：昉等相率奏曰： 近者分遣使籍河南、东四十余郡之民以为边备，非得已也。
现代文：李昉等人相继对皇上说： 近来分派使者征发河南、河东四十多郡的百姓作为边境守备，是不得已之举啊。
English: Li Qian and others successively said to the emperor: Recently, it was a last resort to send an envoy to conscript the people of more than forty counties in Henan and Hedong as border guards.

古文：然河南之民素习农桑，罔知战斗，一旦括集，必致动摇，若因而啸聚，更须剪除。
现代文：但是河南的百姓一贯从事农业，不知战事，一旦征集起来，一定会导致动乱，如果因此啸聚山林作乱，还必须剪除消灭。
English: However, the people of Henan have always been engaged in agriculture and do not know about the war. Once they are conscripted, it will definitely lead to turmoil. If they gather in the mountains and forests to make trouble, they must be cut down and destroyed.

古文：如此，则河北闾阎既困于戎马，河南生聚复扰于萑蒲，矧当春和，有妨农作。
现代文：如果这样，那么河北之地既被戎人所困扰，河南百姓又作乱于民间，况且到了春季，妨碍农业耕作。
English: If this is the case, then Hebei will be plagued by the soldiers, and the people of Henan will make trouble for the people. Moreover, in the spring, agricultural cultivation will be hindered.

古文：陛下若以明诏既颁，难于反汗，则当续遣使臣，严加戒饬，所至点募，人情若有不安，即须少缓，密奏取裁，庶免后患。 上嘉纳之。
现代文：陛下如果认为诏令已颁布，难以反悔，就应当再派使臣，严加戒令，所到之处少征发百姓，如果百姓情绪不安定，就应该迟缓其事，密令见机行事，才能免除后患。 皇上表示赞许并采纳了他的意见。
English: If His Majesty thought that the edict had been issued and it was difficult to retract it, he should send more envoys, strictly enforce the edict, recruit fewer people wherever he went, and if the people were emotionally unstable, he should delay the matter and secretly order them to act at the right time in order to avoid future troubles.

古文：端拱初，布衣翟马周击登闻鼓，讼昉居宰相位，当北方有事之时，不为边备，徒知赋诗宴乐。
现代文：端拱初年，百姓翟马周击鼓上告，揭发李昉官居宰相，在北方有战争的时候，不作边防准备，只知赋诗宴乐。
English: In the first year of the end of the arch, the people sued the drumming of Ma Zhou, exposing that when there was a war in the north, Li Qian, the prime minister, did not make border defense preparations, but only knew how to make poems and banquets.

古文：属籍田礼方毕，乃诏学士贾黄中草制，罢昉为右仆射，且加切责。
现代文：籍田礼完毕后，皇上立即召贾黄中草拟诏令，贬李昉为右仆射，而且严加谴责。
English: After the completion of the ceremony, the emperor immediately summoned Jia Huangzhong to draft an edict, denouncing Li Xi as a right-hand man and severely condemning him.

古文：黄中言： 仆射，百僚师长，实宰相之任，今自工部尚书而迁是职，非黜责也。
现代文：贾黄中说 ：仆射，是百官的表率和上级，实是宰相之任，现在从工部尚书而迁任此职，不是黜贬斥责。
English: Jia Huang said: "The firing of a subordinate is the model and superior of a hundred officials. In fact, it is the prime minister's duty. It is not a demeaning reprimand to be transferred to this position from the Ministry of Industry and Trade.

古文：若曰文昌务简，以均劳逸为辞，斯为得体。 上然之。
现代文：如果说文昌政务简少，以均劳逸为借口，较为得体。 
English: If the government affairs of Wenchang are simple, it is more appropriate to use the excuse of equal work and rest.

古文：会边警益急，诏文武群臣各进策备御，昉又引汉、唐故事，深以屈己修好、弭兵息民为言，时论称之。
现代文：皇上认为这个意见很好。恰遇边境危急，皇上诏令文武群臣各自进献防御之策，李昉又援引汉、唐先例，坚持认为应委屈己方与敌修好，停止战争休养百姓，当时舆论称赞这个意见。
English: The emperor thought this was a good idea. When there was a critical situation on the border, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the civil and military courtiers to devise their own defense strategies. Li Yong also cited Han and Tang precedents, insisting that the wronged party should make amends with the enemy, stop the war, and rest and recuperate the people. At that time, the public opinion praised this opinion.

古文：淳化二年，复以本官兼中书侍郎、平章事，监修国史。
现代文：淳化二年，又任命李昉以本官兼任中书侍郎、平章事、监修国史。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Junhua, he also appointed Li Xi as his own official, concurrently serving as the secretary of the Central Committee, the secretary of the Central Military Commission, and the supervisor of the national history.

古文：三年夏，旱蝗，既雨。
现代文：三年夏天，天下发旱灾和蝗灾，又遇雨灾。
English: In the summer of the third year, droughts and locust plagues occurred throughout the country, and there were also rain disasters.

古文：时昉与张齐贤、贾黄中、李沆同居宰辅，以燮理非材，上表待罪，上不之罪。
现代文：当时李昉与张齐贤、贾黄中、李沆同为宰相，以执政无能，上表请罪，皇上不怪罪他们。
English: At that time, Li Qian and Zhang Qixian, Jia Huangzhong, and Li Qianrong were all prime ministers, and they pleaded guilty to incompetence in governing, but the emperor did not blame them.

古文：四年，昉以私门连遭忧戚，求解机务，诏不允，遣齐贤等谕旨，复起视事。
现代文：四年，李昉因为家里连遭忧虑悲戚之事，请求解除职任，诏令不允，皇上派张齐贤等人宣谕圣旨，才又上朝处理政事。
English: In the fourth year, because of the worries and sorrows of his family, Li Qian requested to be relieved of his duties. The imperial edict was not accepted, and the emperor sent Zhang Qixian and others to proclaim the sacred will. Only then did he go to the court to deal with political affairs.

古文：后数月，罢为右仆射。
现代文：数月以后，罢为右仆射。
English: A few months later, he became a right-handed shooter.

古文：先是，上召张洎草制，授昉左仆射，罢相，洎言： 昉居燮理之任，而阴阳乖戾，不能决意引退，俾居百僚师长之任，何以示劝？ 上览奏，乃令罢守本官。
现代文：先前，皇上召张洎起草诏令，任命李昉为左仆射，罢免宰相，张洎说 ：李昉官居治理政务的重任，而阴阳不调，不能决意引退，让他官居百官师长之任，怎么能表示皇上劝勉之意呢？ 
English: Previously, the emperor had summoned Zhang Ye to draft the edict, appointed Li Ye as the second-in-command, and dismissed the prime minister. Zhang Ye said: Li Ye holds the important position of governing government affairs, but the yin and yang are out of balance, and he cannot decide to retire. How can he express the emperor's intention of exhortation by letting him hold the position of the chief of hundreds of officials?

古文：晋侍中崧者，与昉同宗且同里，时人谓崧为东李家，昉为西李家。
现代文：皇上观看奏章后，于是下令罢贬李昉，让他只任本官。后晋侍中李崧，与李昉同宗又同乡，当时人称李崧为东李家，李昉为西李家。
English: After the emperor read the record, he then ordered the dismissal of Li Qiye, allowing him to serve only as his own official. Li Qiye, a member of the imperial retinue, was from the same family and the same hometown as Li Qiye. At that time, Li Qiye was known as the East Li family, and Li Qiye was known as the West Li family.

古文：汉末，崧被诛。
现代文：后汉末年，李崧被诛杀。
English: In the last years of the Later Han Dynasty, Li Xi was beaten to death.

古文：至是，其子璨自苏州常熟县令赴调，昉为讼其父冤，且言： 周太祖已为昭雪赠官，还其田宅，录璨而官之。
现代文：到这个时候，李崧的儿子李璨从苏州常熟县令之职赴朝待调，李昉代为他的父亲辩冤，并且说： 周太祖已经替他昭雪赠官，追还他家田宅，录取李璨为官。
English: At this time, Li Yao's son Li Yao was transferred from the post of Suzhou Changshu County Governor to the North, and Li Yao defended his father on his behalf, and said: Zhou Taizu had awarded him the post, recovered his family's farmhouse, and accepted Li Yao as an official.

古文：然璨年几五十，尚淹州县之职，臣昔与之同难，岂宜叨遇圣明。
现代文：然而李璨年近五十岁，还任州县之职，我从前与他同难，难道只有我应该蒙圣明君主之恩。
English: However, Li Xuan was nearly fifty years old and still held the post of prefectural governor. I had been in the same predicament as him. Was I the only one who should have received the grace of Emperor Shengming?

古文：傥推一视之仁，泽及衰微之祚，则已往之冤获伸于下，而继绝之恩永光简册矣。 诏授璨著作佐郎，后官至右赞善大夫。
现代文：如果皇上能一视同仁施恩于衰微的人，则过去的冤屈得以伸张，而继绝之恩永远光耀史册啊。 皇上诏令任李璨为著作佐郎，后来官至右赞善大夫。
English: If the emperor can be equally benevolent to those who are in decline, then past grievances can be asserted, and the grace of succession will forever shine in the history books. The emperor decreed that Li Qian be appointed as a literary doctor, and later he was appointed as a doctor.

古文：明年，昉年七十，以特进、司空致事，朝会宴飨，令缀宰相班，岁时赐予，益加厚焉。
现代文：第二年，李昉年届七十，以特进、司空官位辞职归居，如遇朝会宴饮，令他居宰相班次之中，每年赏赐，愈发厚重。
English: In the second year, when Li Xi was 70 years old, he resigned and returned to his residence with the official rank of special promotion and promotion. If he was invited to a banquet of the Imperial Court, he would be in the prime minister's squadron, and he would be rewarded every year, which became more and more heavy.

古文：至道元年正月望，上观灯乾元楼，召昉赐坐于侧，酌御樽酒饮之，自取果饵以赐。
现代文：至道元年正月十五，皇上在乾元楼观灯，召来李昉命他坐在旁边，把自己杯中的酒倒给他饮，皇上亲自拿水果点心赐给他吃。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the first year of the Tao, the emperor was watching the lanterns in the Qianyuan Building. He summoned Li Yan to sit next to him, poured the wine in his cup for him to drink, and the emperor himself gave him fruit snacks to eat.

古文：上观京师繁盛，指前朝坊巷省署以谕近臣，令拓为通衢长廊，因论： 晋、汉君臣昏暗猜贰，枉陷善良，时人不聊生，虽欲营缮，其暇及乎？ 昉谓： 晋、汉之事，臣所备经，何可与圣朝同日而语。
现代文：皇上看见京师繁华，手指前面街坊小巷及官府衙门命令近臣开拓为通衢长廊，于是谈论道： 后晋、后汉君臣昏暗相互猜疑，枉屈陷害善良，当时百姓民不聊生，即使想准备宴席，哪里顾得上呢？ 李昉说： 后晋、后汉之事，臣都经历过，哪里能与圣朝同日而语呢？
English: The emperor saw the flourishing of Beijing, and ordered his vassals to open up the streets and alleys of the neighborhoods and the gate of the government office in front of his fingers to become a long corridor, so he talked about: Later Jin and later Han dynasties suspected each other dimly, and unjustly succumbed to good deeds. At that time, the people did not want to live, even if they wanted to prepare a banquet, where could they get it? Li Wei said: Later Jin and later Han dynasties have experienced things, where can they speak with the Holy Spirit?

古文：若今日四海清晏，民物阜康，皆陛下恭勤所致也。 上曰： 勤政忧民，帝王常事。
现代文：像现在这样天下清平，人民富康，都是陛下恭勤政事所致啊。 皇上说： 勤政忧民，是帝王常事。
English: The world is as peaceful as it is now, and the people are prosperous, all as a result of His Majesty's diligent governance. The Emperor said: "Diligence in government and concern for the people are the Emperor's regular duties."

古文：朕不以繁华为乐，盖以民安为乐尔。 因顾侍臣曰： 李昉事朕，两人中书，未尝有伤人害物之事，宜其今日所享如此，可谓善人君子矣。 
现代文：朕不是因为繁华而高兴，而是因为百姓安居乐业而高兴啊。 于是对侍臣们说： 李昉奉事朕，两次入中书省，从未做过伤人害物之事，今日应当如此享受，可以算作是善人君子啊。 
English: I am not happy because of the prosperity, but because the people are happy to live and work in peace. So I said to the courtiers: Li Qian served me, entered the Central Book Ministry twice, never did anything harmful to people, and today should be enjoyed like this, can be regarded as a good man and gentleman.

古文：二年，陪祀南郊，礼毕入贺，因拜舞仆地，台吏掖之以出，卧疾数日薨，年七十二。
现代文：二年，李昉陪侍皇上祭祀南郊，礼仪完毕后，进去拜贺，由于拜舞时倒在地上，台吏把他扶出来，病倒卧床数天而死，终年七十二岁。
English: In the second year, Li Qian accompanied the Emperor to the Southern Suburbs for a ritual. After the ceremony was over, he went inside to offer his congratulations. As he fell to the ground during the dance, the stage officials helped him out. He fell ill and died after lying in bed for several days. He was 72 years old.

古文：赠司徒，谥文正。
现代文：追赠为司徒，谥号为文正。
English: His posthumous name was Sitoru, and his posthumous nickname was Monjo.

古文：昉和厚多恕，不念旧恶，在位小心循谨，无赫赫称。
现代文：李昉为人宽厚温和，不计旧恶，在位时小心谨慎，没有显赫的名望。
English: Li Qiye was a generous and gentle person, he did not care about the old evils, he was careful and cautious when he was in power, and he did not have a prominent reputation.

古文：为文章慕白居易，尤浅近易晓。
现代文：作文章敬慕白居易，尤其浅近易晓。
English: It is easy to admire Bai Juyi for writing articles, especially the ones that are easy to understand.

古文：好接宾客，江南平，士大夫归朝者多从之游。
现代文：喜欢结交宾客，江南平定后，士大夫归附朝廷的人多与他交游。
English: He liked to make friends with guests. After the pacification of the Southern Yangtze River, Shidafu was attached to the imperial court, and many people traveled with him.

古文：雅厚张洎而薄张佖，及昉罢相，洎草制深攻诋之，而佖朔望必诣昉。
现代文：向来厚待张洎而薄待李亻必，李昉被罢免宰相时，张洎起草诏令刻骨地攻击诋毁他，而李亻必却每到初一、十五一定去拜访李昉。
English: He had always been kind to Zhang Ye and unkind to Li Shoubi. When Li Shoubi was dismissed as prime minister, Zhang Ye drafted an edict to attack and slander him, but Li Shoubi always visited Li Shoubi on the first and fifteenth day of the first month.

古文：或谓佖曰： 李公待君素不厚，何数诣之？ 佖曰： 我为廷尉日，李公方秉政，未尝一有请求，此吾所以重之也。 
现代文：有人对李亻必说 ：李公对你历来不厚重，为什么还数次拜访他呢？ 李说： 我当廷尉时，李公刚刚执掌权政，未曾有一事请托，这是我之所以敬重他的原因啊。 
English: Someone said to Li Shoubi: "Li Gong has never been very fond of you, why did you visit him several times?" Li said: "When I was a court lieutenant, Li Gong had just taken power, and I had never asked for anything. This is why I respect him."

古文：昉所居有园亭别墅之胜，多召故人亲友宴乐其中。
现代文：李昉的居宅有园亭别墅之美，召来很多朋友亲戚在家里宴饮欢乐。
English: Li Yao's residence has the beauty of a garden pavilion villa, and has attracted many friends and relatives to feast and have fun at home.

古文：既致政，欲寻洛中九老故事，时吏部尚书宋琪年七十九，左谏议大夫杨徽之年七十五，郢州刺史魏丕年七十六，太常少卿致仕李运年八十，水部郎中朱昂年七十一，庐州节度副使武允成年七十九，太子中允致仕张好问年八十五，吴僧赞宁年七十八，议将集，会蜀寇而罢。
现代文：辞官归居后，想仿照洛中九老旧事，当时吏部尚书宋琪年七十九岁，右谏议大夫杨徽之年七十五岁，郢州刺史魏丕年七十六岁，以太常少卿退休的李运年八十岁，水部郎中朱昂年七十一岁，庐州节度副使武允成年七十九岁，以太子中允职退休的张好问年八十五岁，吴地僧侣赞宁年七十八岁，商议准备集会，遇到蜀地作乱而中止。
English: After returning to their residences, the dictionaries wanted to follow the example of the nine ancient events of Luo Middle School. At that time, the clerk Shang Shu Song Qi was seventy-nine years old, the doctor Yang Hui was seventy-five years old, the eunuch Shi Wei Wei Wei was seventy-six years old, the eunuch Li Yun was eighty years old, the vice-minister Zhu Ang was seventy-one years old, the vice-minister Wu Yun was seventy-nine years old, the eunuch Zhang Haoqian was eighty-five years old, and the monk Zan Ning was seventy-eight years old. They discussed the preparation of the assembly, but

古文：昉素与卢多逊善，待之不疑，多逊屡谮昉于上，或以告昉，不之信。
现代文：李昉向来与卢多逊相好，对他从不怀疑，卢多逊数次向皇上诬告李昉，有人告诉李昉，李昉不相信。
English: Li Yao had always been friendly with Ludoson and never doubted him. Ludoson falsely accused Li Yao to the emperor several times. Someone told Li Yao that Li Yao did not believe him.

古文：及入相，太宗言及多逊事，昉颇为解释。
现代文：做宰相时，太宗谈及卢多逊的事，李昉为他多作解脱。
English: When he was prime minister, Taizong talked about Ludoson, and Li Lan did a lot for him.

古文：帝曰： 多逊居常毁卿一钱不直。 昉始信之。
现代文：皇上说： 卢多逊经常毁谤你是一钱不值。 李昉开始相信。
English: The emperor said, "Ludoson has often slandered you as being worthless. Li Qiye began to believe it.

古文：上由此益重昉。
现代文：皇上因此越发看重李昉。
English: As a result, the emperor became more and more attached to Li Xun.

古文：昉居中书日，有求进用者，虽知其材可取，必正色拒绝之，已而擢用；或不足用，必和颜温语待之。
现代文：李昉在中书省任职时，有人请求任用，虽然知道此人才能可取，一定正色加以拒绝，后来任用他；如果此人才能不足用，一定和颜悦色对待他。
English: When Li Xi served in the Ministry of Education and Culture, there was a request to appoint someone. Although he knew that this person's talent was desirable, he must positively reject it, and then appoint him; if this person's talent was not enough, he must treat him politely.

古文：子弟问其故，曰： 用贤，人主之事；若受其请，是市私恩也，故峻绝之，使恩归于上。
现代文：他的子弟问他这样做的原因，李昉说： 任用贤能之人，是皇上的事情；如果接受他的请求，是卖私人交情，故严峻拒绝他，让他感恩于皇上。
English: His son asked him the reason for doing so, and Li Yao said: "It is the emperor's business to appoint a person of merit; if you accept his request, it is to sell personal friendship, so you should sternly refuse him and let him be grateful to the emperor."

古文：若不用者，既失所望，又无善辞，取怨之道也。 
现代文：如果不任用他，既让他感到失望，又没有好的言辞，是结怨的做法啊。 
English: If you don't appoint him, you will make him feel disappointed and you won't have any good words to say. It's a way of creating resentment.

古文：初，超未有子，昉母谢方娠，指腹谓叔母张曰： 生男当与叔母为子。 故昉出继于超。
现代文：当初，李沼没有儿子，李昉的母亲谢氏正怀孕，指着腹部对叔母张氏说： 如果生下的是儿子就给叔母做儿子。 所以李昉出继给李沼。
English: At first, Li Numa did not have a son, and Li Yao's mother, Xie, who was pregnant, pointed to her abdomen and said to her aunt Zhang, "If you give birth to a son, give your aunt a son.

古文：昉再相，因表其事，求赠所生父母官。
现代文：李昉第二次任宰相时，上表说明这个情况，请求追赠自己亲生父母官职。
English: During his second term as prime minister, Li Hongzhi, as the above table shows, requested that his biological parents be given the official posts.

古文：诏赠其祖温太子太傅，祖母权氏莒国太夫人，超太子太师，谢氏郑国太夫人。
现代文：皇上诏令追赠其祖父李温为太子太傅，祖母权氏为莒国太夫人，其父李超为太子太师，其母谢氏为郑国太夫人。
English: The Emperor's edict posthumously awarded his grandfather Li Wen to the Crown Prince, his grandmother Quan to the Empress Dowager, his father Li Chao to the Crown Prince, and his mother Xie to the Empress Dowager of Zheng.

古文：昉素病心悸，数岁一发，发必弥年而后愈，盖典诰命三十余年，劳役思虑所致。
现代文：李昉向来有心脏病，数年发作一次，每次必过一年后才痊愈，因为主管诰命三十多年，积劳思虑过度所致。
English: Li Yao has always had a heart attack. He had an attack once every few years, and each time it took him a year to recover, because the supervisor has been struggling for more than 30 years, caused by overwork and over-thinking.

古文：及居相位，益加忧畏。
现代文：任宰相时，愈是忧愁顾虑。
English: When he was appointed prime minister, he became more and more worried.

古文：有文集五十卷。
现代文：李昉有文集五十卷。
English: He is the author of fifty volumes of anthologies.

古文：昭遘性和易，不忤物，能守家法。
现代文：儿子有四个：李宗讷、李宗诲、李宗谔、李宗谅。李宗诲，任右赞善大夫。李宗谅，任主宾客员外郎。
English: He had four sons: Li Zongna, Li Zongyun, Li Zongyao and Li Zongren. Li Zongyun was appointed as the doctor of the Right Zanzan. Li Zongyun was appointed as the chief guest and the guest of honor.

古文：吕蒙正字圣功，河南人。
现代文：吕蒙正字圣功，河南人。
English: Lv Meng Zhengyi Shengong, from Henan Province.

古文：祖梦奇，户部侍郎。
现代文：其祖父吕梦奇，是户部侍郎。
English: His grandfather, Lü Mengqi, was a steward of the household.

古文：父龟图，起居郎。
现代文：其父吕龟图，是起居郎。
English: His father, Lyu Ketu, was a farmer.

古文：蒙正，太平兴国二年擢进士第一，授将作监丞，通判升州。
现代文：吕蒙正在太平兴国二年录取为进士第一名，任命为将作监丞、升州通判。
English: In the second year of Taiping Xingguo, Lv Meng was the first to be admitted as a scholar, and was appointed to be the superintendent and the judge of the promotion.

古文：陛辞，有旨，民事有不便者，许骑置以闻，赐钱二十万。
现代文：向皇上辞行时，皇上命令，政事如果有不便处理的，允许骑驿马前来上告，赐给他钱二十万。
English: When he resigned to the emperor, the emperor ordered that if there was any inconvenience in dealing with political affairs, he would be allowed to come to appeal on horseback and give him money of two hundred thousand.

古文：代还，会征太原，召见行在，授著作郎、直史馆，加左拾遗。
现代文：待调回到京师，遇上皇帝亲征太原，召他到行宫晋见，任为著作郎、直史馆，加任左拾遗。
English: When he was transferred back to Beijing, the emperor personally summoned Taiyuan and called him to the palace to meet him. He was appointed as the scribe, the direct history museum, and the additional left to collect relics.

古文：五年，亲拜左补阙、知制诰。
现代文：五年，皇上亲自任命他为左补阙、知制诰。
English: In the fifth year, the Emperor personally appointed him as Zuo Shu and Zhizhe.

古文：初，龟图多内宠，与妻刘氏不睦，并蒙正出之，颇沦踬窘乏，刘誓不复嫁。
现代文：当初，吕龟图内眷很多，与嫡妻刘氏不和，把刘氏及蒙正一并赶出，蒙正母子非常穷困窘迫，刘氏发誓不再嫁人。
English: At the beginning, Lyu Ketu had many relatives in the inner circle. He was at odds with his legitimate wife, Liu, and drove out Liu and Meng Zheng together. Meng Zheng's mother and son were very poor and distressed, and Liu vowed not to marry again.

古文：及蒙正登仕，迎二亲，同堂异室，奉养备至。
现代文：蒙正做官后，迎接父母亲同住，父母亲住在一个屋子里但不同房间，蒙正对他们奉侍得非常周到。
English: After Meng Zheng became an official, he welcomed his parents to live together. His parents lived in the same house but in different rooms. Meng Zheng served them very thoughtfully.

古文：龟图旋卒，诏起复。
现代文：吕龟图不久死去，朝廷诏令起复蒙正。
English: Lyu Ketu died soon after, and the imperial edict was issued to restore Mengzheng.

古文：未几，迁都官郎中，入为翰林学士，擢左谏议大夫、参知政事，赐第丽景门。
现代文：不久，升为都官郎中，入朝任翰林学士，擢升为左谏议大夫、参知政事，赐给他丽景门的住宅一栋。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to be one of the officials of the capital, entered the imperial court as a scholar of Hanlin, and was promoted to the doctor of the Left Division of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and a member of the Council of State. He was given a house in Lijingmen.

古文：上谓之曰： 凡士未达，见当世之务戾于理者，则怏怏于心；及列于位，得以献可替否，当尽其所蕴，虽言未必尽中，亦当佥议而更之，俾协于道。
现代文：皇上对他说 ：凡是读书人未被任用时，见当世之政事不合理的地方，则心中不满；到被任用后，可以提出可行的建议而救助不当的政事，应当尽其所能，即使建议不一定每次都合理，也应当凡事都提上建议，使政事符合于治道。
English: The emperor said to him, "Whenever a scholar, who has not been appointed, sees something unreasonable in the current political situation, he becomes dissatisfied; when he is appointed, he can make feasible suggestions to save the inappropriate political situation, and he should do his best. Even if the suggestions are not always reasonable, he should always make suggestions to make the political situation consistent with the way of governance."

古文：朕固不以崇高自恃，使人不敢言也。 蒙正初入朝堂，有朝士指之曰： 此子亦参政耶？ 蒙正阳为不闻而过之。
现代文：朕从来不自恃崇高，使人不敢有所言。 吕蒙正刚进入朝廷，有位朝臣指着他说： 这个人也是参政吗？ 蒙正装作没有听见而走过去。
English: I have never pretended to be lofty, so that people would not dare to say anything. Lv Meng had just entered the imperial court, when a courtier pointed at him and said, "Is this person also involved in politics?" Meng pretended not to hear and walked over.

古文：同列不能平，诘其姓名，蒙正遽止之曰： 若一知其姓名，则终身不能忘，不若毋知之为愈也。 时皆服其量。
现代文：同僚们愤愤不平，询问那个人的姓名，吕蒙正急忙制止说： 如果知道他的姓名，就会终身不能忘记，不如不知道为好。 当时人都佩服他的度量。
English: His colleagues were indignant and asked for the man's name, but Lv Meng hurried to stop them, saying, "If you know his name, you will never forget it. It's better not to know." At the time, everyone admired his stamina.

古文：李昉罢相，蒙正拜中书侍郎兼户部尚书、平章事，监修国史。
现代文：李日方被罢免宰相后，吕蒙正被任命为中书侍郎兼户部尚书、同平章事、监修国史。
English: After Li Yifang was removed from the post of prime minister, Lü Mengzheng was appointed as the attendant of the Chinese book and also the head of the household, the record keeper, and the supervisor of the national history.

古文：蒙正质厚宽简，有重望，以正道自持。
现代文：吕蒙正为人厚道宽容，有很高名望，以坚守正道自律。
English: Lv Meng Zheng is a kind and tolerant person, with a high reputation for sticking to the right path and self-discipline.

古文：遇事敢言，每论时政，有未允者，必固称不可，上嘉其无隐。
现代文：遇事敢出来讲话，每次讨论时政，有不公允的，一定坚持反对意见，皇上赞许他能无所隐瞒。
English: In the event of an emergency, he dared to speak out, and every time he discussed current affairs, there was something unfair, he must insist on opposing opinions, and the emperor praised him for having nothing to hide.

古文：赵普开国元老，蒙正后进，历官一纪，遂同相位，普甚推许之。
现代文：赵普是开国元老，吕蒙正是后来提升的官员，历任各种官职十二年，于是同任宰相，赵普很赞许他。
English: Zhao Pu was the founding elder of the country, and Lv Meng was the official who was promoted later. He held various official positions for 12 years, so he was the same prime minister. Zhao Pu praised him very much.

古文：俄丁内艰，起复。
现代文：不久，遭母丧，守丧未满三年，被重新起用。
English: Soon after, he was reappointed after his mother's death, less than three years after the funeral.

古文：先是，卢多逊为相，其子雍起家即授水部员外郎，后遂以为常。
现代文：先前，卢多逊任宰相时，他的儿子刚出仕就授官水部员外郎，后来就当作常例。
English: Previously, when Ludoson was prime minister, his son was given the post of water minister when he first came to office. Later, this became a regular practice.

古文：至是，蒙正奏曰： 臣忝甲科及第，释褐止授九品京官。
现代文：到现在，吕蒙正上奏说： 臣出身进士及第，出仕时只授为九品京官。
English: Up to now, Lv Meng Zheng said: "As a vassal, I was promoted to the first and second rank, but when I entered the service, I was only awarded the ninth rank of Beijing official.

古文：况天下才能，老于岩穴，不沾寸禄者多矣。
现代文：况且天下有才能的人，终身隐居于山林，没有得到朝廷丝毫俸禄的人多得很。
English: Moreover, there are many talented people in the world who live in seclusion in the mountains and forests for life and do not receive any remuneration from the imperial court.

古文：今臣男始离襁褓，膺此宠命，恐罹阴谴，乞以臣释褐时官补之。 自是宰相子止授九品京官，遂为定制。
现代文：现在，臣儿子刚成年，获此宠任，恐怕遭到上天谴责，请求以臣刚出仕时的官职补任他。 从此宰相的儿子只授给九品京官，成为法定制度。
English: Now, if a minister's son, who has just come of age, is given this favoured position, I am afraid that he will be condemned by heaven and asked to fill the official position that the minister had when he first came to office. From now on, the son of the prime minister will only be awarded nine official ranks in Beijing, which will become a legal system.

古文：朝士有藏古镜者，自言能照二百里，欲献之蒙正以求知。
现代文：朝臣中有位收藏有古镜的人，自称此镜能照出二百里范围的景色，想献给吕蒙正以求任用。
English: Among the courtiers, there was a man who collected antique mirrors. He claimed that this mirror could illuminate the scenery of a 200-mile range. He wanted to dedicate it to Lü Mengzheng in order to be appointed.

古文：蒙正笑曰： 吾面不过楪子大，安用照二百里哉？ 闻者叹服。
现代文：吕蒙正笑说 ：我的面部不过碟子那么大，哪里用得上照二百里的镜子呢？ 
English: Lv Meng Zheng smiled and said, "My face is only as big as a saucer. Why do I need a mirror that can see two hundred miles?"

古文：淳化中，右正言宋抗上疏忤旨，抗，蒙正妻族，坐是罢为吏部尚书，复相李昉。
现代文：听说的人都叹服。淳化年间，左正言宋沆上奏疏违逆皇上旨意，宋沆是吕蒙正妻子的族人，因此而罢免吕蒙正吏部尚书一职，又任用李日方为宰相。
English: During the reign of Emperor Junka, Zuo Zhengqin, Song Xuan Shangso, violated the emperor's will. Song Xuan was a member of Lv Mengzheng's wife's family, so Lv Mengzheng was dismissed from his position as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and Li Yifang was appointed as the prime minister.

古文：四年，昉罢，蒙正复以本官入相。
现代文：四年，李日方被罢免宰相，吕蒙正又以本官任宰相。
English: Four years later, Li Yifang was dismissed as prime minister, and Lv Mengzheng was appointed prime minister in his place.

古文：因对，论及征伐，上曰： 朕比来征讨，盖为民除暴，苟好功黩武，则天下之人熸亡尽矣。 蒙正对曰： 隋、唐数十年中，四征辽碣，人不堪命。
现代文：与皇上奏对时，谈到征伐之事，皇上说 ：朕近来的征讨，是为百姓剪除凶暴，如果好功黩武，那么天下百姓都灭尽了啊。 蒙正回答说： 隋、唐数十年中，四次征讨辽碣，百姓疲乏不堪。
English: When arguing with the emperor, when it came to the matter of the conquest, the emperor said: My recent conquest is to cut off the violence for the people. If I succeed, then all the people in the world will be exterminated. Meng Zheng replied: In the Sui and Tang dynasties, there were four times of conquest, and the people were exhausted.

古文：炀帝全军陷没，太宗自运土木攻城，如此卒无所济。且治国之要，在内修政事，则远人来归，自致安静。 上韪之。
现代文：隋炀帝全军覆没，唐太宗运去土木攻城，这样最终没有成功，况且治理国家的重点，在于国内勤修政事，那么远方之人必来归服，自然会得到安宁。 
English: The whole army of the Sui and Qian Dynasties was annihilated, and Tang Taizong was sent to attack the city with earthworks, which ultimately did not succeed. Moreover, the focus of governing the country lies in domestic diligence and government affairs, so people from far away will come to submit, and they will naturally get peace.

古文：尝灯夕设宴，蒙正侍，上语之曰： 五代之际，生灵凋丧，周太祖自邺南归，士庶皆罹剽掠，下则火灾，上则彗孛，观者恐惧，当时谓无复太平之日矣。
现代文：皇上同意他的意见。皇上曾经在元宵节主办宴会，吕蒙正侍奉，皇上对他说： 五代的时候，生灵凋丧，周太祖从邺南归，官吏和百姓都遭到抢掠，下则有火灾，上则彗星出现，观者惊恐畏惧，当时认为天下再也没有太平日子了。
English: The emperor agreed with his opinion. The emperor once hosted a banquet on the Lantern Festival, and Lv Meng was serving. The emperor said to him: Five generations ago, lives were lost, Zhou Taizu returned from southern Fujian, officials and people were robbed, there was a fire below, and a comet appeared above, and observers were terrified. At that time, it was thought that there would never be a peaceful day in the world again.

古文：朕躬览庶政，万事粗理，每念上天之贶，致此繁盛，乃知理乱在人。 蒙正避席曰： 乘舆所在，士庶走集，故繁盛如此。
现代文：朕亲自总揽政事，万事大致得到治理，每当想到上天的赏赐，导致这样繁荣昌盛，就知道国家的治理与混乱在乎人为。 吕蒙正离开坐位说 ：皇帝所在之处，百姓都到此聚集，所以繁盛至此。
English: Whenever I think of heaven's reward leading to such prosperity and prosperity, I know that the governance and chaos of the country depend on human beings.Lu Meng was leaving his seat and said: Where the emperor is, the people have gathered here, so prosperity has come here.

古文：臣尝见都城外不数里，饥寒而死者甚众，不必尽然。
现代文：臣曾经看到城外不出数里之地，饥寒而死者很多很多，不是都像城里这个样子。
English: The vassal once saw a land just a few miles outside the city. There were many, many people who died of hunger and cold, and not all of them looked like this in the city.

古文：愿陛下视近以及远，苍生之幸也。 上变色不言。
现代文：希望陛下从近处看到远处，才是百姓的幸福啊。 皇上脸上变色不说话。
English: I hope your majesty can see far from near, that is the happiness of the people. The emperor's face is discolored and he does not speak.

古文：蒙正侃然复位，同列多其直谅。
现代文：蒙正凛然回到座位，同僚们赞许他的刚直。
English: Meng Zheng calmly returned to his seat, and his colleagues praised his steadfastness.

古文：上尝欲遣人使朔方，谕中书选才而可责以事者，蒙正退以名上，上不许。
现代文：皇上想派人出使朔方，命令中书省选择有才能而可以担负重任的人，蒙正退朝后，上奏人选名字，皇上不批准。
English: The emperor wanted to send an envoy to the Shuo side, and ordered the Central Book Ministry to select a talented person who could shoulder the heavy responsibility. After Meng Zheng retired, the name of the candidate was announced, but the emperor did not approve.

古文：他日，三问，三以其人对。
现代文：后来，皇上三次问到此事，蒙正三次以此人作答。
English: Later, the emperor asked three times about this matter, and Meng Zheng answered three times as this person.

古文：上曰： 卿何执耶？ 蒙正曰： 臣非执，盖陛下未谅尔。 固称： 其人可使，余人不及。
现代文：皇上说 ：卿为什么这么固执呢？ 吕蒙正说： 臣不是固执，而是陛下不能体察谅解啊。 再次说： 这个人可以任用，其他的人赶不上他。
English: The emperor said, "Sir, why are you so stubborn?" Lu Mengzheng said, "It's not that I'm stubborn, it's that your majesty can't understand me." He said again, "This man can be appointed, other people can't keep up with him."

古文：臣不欲用媚道妄随人主意，以害国事。 同列悚息不敢动。
现代文：臣不愿用阿谀献媚盲目听从皇上的意见，以致耽误国事。 同僚们屏气不敢言。
English: The vassal did not want to use flattery to blindly follow the emperor's advice, delaying state affairs, and his colleagues did not dare to speak out.

古文：上退谓左右曰： 蒙正气量，我不如。 既而卒用蒙正所荐，果称职。
现代文：皇上退朝后对身边的人说 ：吕蒙正的气量是我不如的啊。 后来还是任用蒙正推荐的人，这个人果然称职。
English: After the Emperor abdicated, he said to the people around him, "Liu Mengzheng's stamina is not as good as mine." Later, the person recommended by Mengzheng was appointed, and this person was indeed qualified.

古文：至道初，以右仆射出判河南府兼西京留守。
现代文：至道初年，诏令吕蒙正以右仆射身份出任河南府通判兼西京留守。
English: In the first year of the Dao, the daimyo, Lü Mengzheng, assumed the position of Henan prefectural magistrate and stayed in West Beijing as his right-hand man.

古文：蒙正至洛，多引亲旧欢宴，政尚宽静，委任僚属，事多总裁而已。
现代文：吕蒙正到洛阳后，常常招引亲戚故交欢宴，政事主张宽静，委任僚属，政事自己只总体裁决而已。
English: After Lv Mengzheng arrived in Luoyang, he often invited relatives to a party, advocated calmness in political affairs, appointed colleagues and subordinates, and only made a general ruling on political affairs.

古文：真宗即位，进左仆射。
现代文：真宗即位，进迁吕蒙正为左仆射。
English: Shinsong ascended to the throne, and Shinsen Lv Mengzheng became his left-hand man.

古文：会营奉熙陵，蒙正追感先朝不次之遇，奉家财三百余万以助用。
现代文：遇到朝廷营建奉熙陵，吕蒙正追忆感戴先朝所给予的优厚的恩遇，贡献家财三百多万作为营建经费的补充。
English: Encountering the construction of the Bongxi Mausoleum by the imperial court, Lv Mengzheng recalled the generous favor given by the previous dynasty and contributed more than three million yuan of family wealth as a supplement to the construction funds.

古文：葬日，伏哭尽哀，人以为得大臣体。
现代文：太宗下葬那天，吕蒙正伏地哭泣极尽悲哀，人们认为合大臣之礼。
English: On the day of Emperor Taizong's burial, Lv Meng was weeping on the floor with great sadness, and people thought it was a fitting tribute from the minister.

古文：咸平四年，以本官同平章事、昭文馆大学士。
现代文：咸平四年，朝廷诏令吕蒙正以本官同平章事、昭文馆大学士。
English: In the 4th year of Xianping, the imperial court issued a decree that Lv Mengzheng should be awarded the title of "Dongping" and become a member of the Shouwen Academy.

古文：国朝以来三入相者，惟赵普与蒙正焉。
现代文：本朝以来三次任为宰相的，只有赵普和吕蒙正两人。
English: Since this morning, only Zhao Pu and Lv Mengzheng have been appointed as prime minister for three times.

古文：郊祀礼成，加司空兼门下侍郎。
现代文：郊祀礼后，加封为司空兼门下侍郎。
English: After the suburb's religious ceremony, Gafu was appointed as Tsukasa and his attendant.

古文：六年，授太子太师，封蔡国公，改封随，又封许。
现代文：六年，授给他太子太师一职，封为莱国公，改封徐国公，又封为许国公。
English: In the sixth year, he was awarded the position of crown prince and grandmaster, and was given the title of Lai Guogong, changed to Xu Guogong, and then to Xu Guogong.

古文：景德二年春，表请归洛。
现代文：景德二年春天，吕蒙正上表请求辞官回洛阳。
English: In the spring of the second year of King Jingde's reign, Lv Meng was on his way to ask his resignation to return to Luoyang.

古文：陛辞日，肩舆至东园门，命二子掖以升殿，因言： 远人请和，弭兵省财，古今上策，惟愿陛下以百姓为念。 上嘉纳之，因迁从简太子洗马，知简奉礼郎。
现代文：到朝廷告辞那天，坐轿到东园门，命令他的儿子扶着他到宫殿，对皇上说： 对远方的人要和平共处，停止战争节省财用，是古往今来的治国上策，希望陛下经常替百姓着想。 皇上赞许并采纳他的意见，于是升任他的儿子吕从简为太子洗马，吕知简为奉礼郎。
English: On the day of his farewell to the imperial court, he took a sedan to the East Garden Gate, ordered his son to support him to the palace, and said to the emperor: "Peaceful coexistence with distant people, stopping wars, and saving money are the best policies for governing the country from ancient times to the present. I hope that His Majesty will always think about the people." The emperor approved and adopted his opinion, so he promoted his son Lv Cong Jian as the prince to wash horses, and Lv Zhijian as the bestowal.

古文：蒙正至洛，有园亭花木，日与亲旧宴会，子孙环列，迭奉寿觞，怡然自得。
现代文：吕蒙正在洛阳，有园亭花木，每天与亲戚朋友宴会，子孙环列，经常向他敬酒祝寿，怡然自得。
English: Lv Meng is in Luoyang, there are garden pavilions, flowers and trees, every day banquets with relatives and friends, his children and grandchildren are lined up, and they often toast to him and wish him a happy birthday.

古文：大中祥符而后，上朝永熙陵，封泰山，祠后土，过洛，两幸其第，锡赉有加。
现代文：大中祥符以后，皇上朝拜永熙陵，封禅泰山，祀祠后土，经过洛阳，两次到他家，赏赐给他很多财物。
English: After the Great Mid-Autumn Festival, the emperor paid homage to Yongxi Mausoleum, Fuzhen Taishan, and Houtu Shrine, passed through Luoyang, and went to his home twice, and gave him many possessions.

古文：上谓蒙正曰： 卿诸子孰可用？ 对曰： 诸子皆不足用。
现代文：皇上对吕蒙正说： 卿的几个儿子谁可以重用？ 蒙正回答说 ：我的几个儿子都不足任用。
English: The emperor said to Lü Mengzheng, "How many sons of your lordship can be re-appointed?" Mengzheng replied, "My sons are all under-appointed."

古文：有侄夷简，任颍州推官，宰相才也。 夷简由是见知于上。
现代文：臣有个侄儿叫吕夷简，现任颍州推官，具有宰相的才能。 夷简从此被皇上知道。
English: The vassal had a nephew named Lü Yijian, the current governor of Zhangzhou, who had the talent of a prime minister, and Yijian was known to the emperor.

古文：富言者，蒙正客也。
现代文：有个叫富言的人，是吕蒙正的宾客。
English: A man named Fugen was a guest of Lv Mengzheng.

古文：一日白曰： 儿子十许岁，欲令入书院，事廷评、太祝。 蒙正许之。
现代文：一天告诉蒙正说： 我的儿子十几岁，想让他入书院，事奉廷评、太祝。 吕蒙正答应了他。
English: One day, he told Meng Zheng, "My son is a teenager, and I want him to go to college, and serve as a court commentator and a grand marshal."

古文：及见，惊曰： 此儿他日名位与吾相似，而勋业远过于吾。 令与诸子同学，供给甚厚。
现代文：见面后，惊叹说： 这个儿子将来名位与我相似，而功勋事业远远超过我。 令他与自己的几个儿子同学，供给很优厚。
English: After the meeting, he said with amazement: "This son will have a similar position to me in the future, and his meritorious career will far exceed mine.

古文：言之子，即弼也。
现代文：富言的儿子就是富弼。
English: The son of Fugen is Fuchu.

古文：后弼两入相，亦以司徒致仕。
现代文：后来富弼两次任宰相，也是以司徒退休。
English: Later, Fuxi twice served as prime minister, and he also retired with Stowe.

古文：其知人类如此。
现代文：吕蒙正善于识人才就是这样。
English: Lu Mengzheng is good at recognizing talent.

古文：许国之命甫下而卒，年六十八。
现代文：许国公的封命刚下来，吕蒙正就逝世了，终年六十八岁。
English: Soon after Xu Guogong's appointment, Lü Mengzheng passed away at the age of sixty-eight.

古文：赠中书令，谥曰文穆。
现代文：追赠中书令，赐谥号为文穆。
English: He was posthumously awarded the Chinese Calligraphy Order, and his posthumous name became Wenmu.

古文：蒙正初为相时，张绅知蔡州，坐赃免。
现代文：吕蒙正初次任相时，张绅知蔡州，因为贪赃被罢免。
English: When Lv Mengzheng was first appointed minister, Zhang Shengzhi of Caizhou was dismissed for corruption.

古文：用二事，迁秩盐铁判官，拜集贤院学士、知梓州、应天府，徙荆南，进龙图阁直学士、知广州，陶甓甃城，人以为便。
现代文：有人对皇上说 ：张绅家里很富，不会这样，仅仅因为吕蒙正贫贱时请他救济不如意罢了。 皇上命令马上恢复官职，吕蒙正不予分辩。后来考课院得知张绅的真实情况，又贬张绅为绛州团练副使。吕蒙正第二次任宰相时，太宗对他说 ：张绅果然有赃。 吕蒙正既不分辩也不感谢。
English: Some people said to the emperor: Zhang Sheng's family is very rich, it won't be like this, just because it was not satisfactory to ask him for relief when Lv Meng Zheng was poor. The emperor ordered to resume his official duties immediately, and Lv Meng Zheng did not make a distinction. Later, the examination hall learned the true situation of Zhang Sheng, and relegated Zhang Sheng to the vice-envoy of the Bozhou Rehearsal Team. When Lv Meng Zheng was the prime minister for the second time, Taizong told him: Zhang Sheng certainly has a beard. Lv Meng Zheng neither makes a distinction nor thanks

古文：以兵部侍郎判西京御史台，卒，年七十二。张齐贤，曹州冤句人。
现代文：在西京时，皇上几次派遣中贵人送命令给他，吕蒙正对待使者的礼节仍像任宰相时一样，不自我贬低，当时人都很敬重他。张齐贤，曹州冤句人。
English: When he was in Xijing, the nobles sent orders to him during the emperor's several dispatches. Lv Mengzheng still treated the envoys with the same courtesy as when he was prime minister, and did not degrade himself. At that time, people respected him very much. Zhang Qixian, Caozhou Guanzhu people.

古文：生三岁，值晋乱，徙家洛阳。
现代文：出生才三岁，遭遇后晋之乱，迁家到洛阳。
English: He was only three years old when he encountered the Later Jin Rebellion and moved to Luoyang.

古文：孤贫力学，有远志，慕唐李大亮之为人，故字师亮。
现代文：孤贫用功学习，有远大志向，敬慕唐朝李大亮的为人，因此取字为师亮。
English: Alone and poor, he studied hard, had lofty aspirations, and admired Li Da Liang of the Tang Dynasty. Therefore, he chose to be Li Da Liang's teacher.

古文：太祖幸西都，齐贤以布衣献策马前，召至行宫，齐贤以手画地，条陈十事：曰下并、汾，曰富民，曰封建，曰敦孝，曰举贤，曰太学，曰籍田，曰选良吏，曰慎刑，曰惩奸。
现代文：太祖到西都，齐贤以布衣身份到太祖马前献策，被召到行宫，齐贤以手画地，逐条陈述十件事，分别是：下并汾；富民；封建；敦孝；举贤；太学；籍田；选良吏；慎刑；惩奸。
English: The great-grandfather went to the western capital, Qixian went to the great-grandfather's residence as a cloth-clad person to offer advice, and was summoned to the palace. Qixian drew a hand-drawn picture and stated ten things one by one, which were: down-and-out; rich people; feudal; filial piety; virtuous men; great learning; ancestral land; election of good officials; prudent punishment; punishment of evil-doers.

古文：内四说称旨，齐贤坚执以为皆善，上怒，令武士拽出之。
现代文：其中有四件符合太祖的意思，齐贤坚持认为十条都是好的，太祖发怒，令武士把他拖出去了。
English: Of these, four were in accordance with the wishes of the great-grandfather. Qi Xian insisted that all ten were good. The great-grandfather became angry and had the samurai drag him out.

古文：及还，语太宗曰： 我幸西都，唯得一张齐贤尔。
现代文：太祖回朝后，对太宗说： 我到西都，只得到一个张齐贤罢了。
English: After returning to the imperial court, the great-grandfather said to Emperor Taizong: "I only got one Zhang Qixian when I went to the western capital.

古文：我不欲爵之以官，异进可使帗汝为相也。 
现代文：我不打算授任他官职，今后可以让他辅佐你任宰相。 
English: I don't plan to appoint him to an official position, but in the future I can have him assist you as prime minister.

古文：太宗擢进士，欲置齐贤高第，有司偶失抡选，上不悦，一榜尽与京官，于是齐贤以大理评事通判衡州。
现代文：太宗考试进士，本想把齐贤录取为前几名，有关部门偶然选择失误，太宗不高兴。一榜进士都授任京官，于是任命齐贤以大理评事身份通判衡州。
English: Taizong wanted to admit Qi Xian as one of the first few candidates in the examination, but the relevant departments accidentally made a mistake in the selection, and Taizong was not happy. All the candidates were appointed to Beijing officials, so he appointed Qi Xian to judge Hengzhou as a great judge.

古文：时州鞫劫盗，论皆死，齐贤至，活其失入者五人。
现代文：当时衡州审讯劫贼，审判后都要处死，齐贤到任后，救活其中误判的五人。
English: At that time, Hengzhou tried robbers, and all of them were executed after the trial. After Qi Xian took office, he saved the five people who were wrongly convicted.

古文：自荆渚至桂州，水递铺夫数千户，困于邮役，衣食多不给，论奏减其半。
现代文：从荆渚到桂州，水路邮递铺夫数千户，被邮役困苦，衣食不足，齐贤上奏减去了一半。
English: From Jingzhu to Guizhou, thousands of households of waterway mail delivery merchants were impoverished by the postal service, lacking food and clothing, and half of Qixian's postage was deducted.

古文：四年，代还，会亲征晋阳，齐贤上谒，迁秘书丞。
现代文：四年，任职期满回朝，正好太宗亲自征讨晋阳，齐贤朝见，升为秘书丞。
English: Four years later, at the end of his term of office, he returned to the imperial court. It was just at that time that Emperor Taizong personally solicited Jinyang, and Qi Xian met with him in the morning and was promoted to secretary.

古文：忻州新下，命知州事。
现代文：忻州刚刚攻下，任命他为知州事。
English: Zhangzhou had just been conquered, and he was appointed governor.

古文：明年召还，改著作佐郎，直史馆，改左拾遗。
现代文：第二年召回朝廷，改任著作佐郎，直史馆，改任左拾遗。
English: The following year, he was recalled to the Imperial Court, and was reassigned to Shososaro, the Museum of Direct History, and then to Zuihoi.

古文：冬，车驾北征，议者皆言宜速取幽蓟，齐贤上疏曰：
现代文：冬天，太宗北征，议论的人都说应当速取幽蓟，齐贤上疏说：
English: In winter, when the Northern Expedition of Emperor Taizong was about to begin, people said that it was necessary to take Yucheng as soon as possible. Qi Xian Shangsu said:

古文：方今海内一家，朝野无事。关圣虑者，岂不以河东新平，屯兵尚众，幽燕未下，辇运为劳？
现代文：现在海内统一，朝野安定无事，关系到皇上忧虑的，难道不是因为河东刚刚平定，驻屯军队太多，幽蓟未被攻下，粮草运输过劳吗？
English: Now that the sea is unified and there is nothing wrong with the stability of the court and the country, what concerns the emperor's worries, is it not because the east of the river has just been pacified, there are too many stationed troops, Yucheng has not been conquered, and the transportation of grain and grass is overworked?

古文：臣愚以为此不足虑也。
现代文：我认为这些不足为虑。
English: I don't think these shortcomings are a cause for concern.

古文：自河东初下，臣知忻州，捕得契丹纳米典吏，皆云自山后转般以授河东。
现代文：自从河东平定，我任知忻州，捕捉到契丹纳米典吏，都说契丹是从山后转运粮草到河东。
English: Since the pacification of Hedong, I have been assigned to Zhishu, and I have caught the Qidan nano-officials. They all said that the Qidan was transporting grain and grass from the back of the mountain to Hedong.

古文：以臣料，契丹能自备军食，则于太原非不尽力，然终为我有者，力不足也。
现代文：据我考虑，契丹能自备军粮，则是对于太原不是不尽力，然而太原最终被我方占有，是因为契丹军力不足。
English: According to my consideration, if Khitan is able to supply its own military food, it is not because it is not doing its best for Taiyuan. However, Taiyuan was eventually occupied by our side because of Khitan's lack of military strength.

古文：河东初平，人心未固，岚、宪、忻、代未有军砦，入寇则田牧顿失，扰边则守备可虞。
现代文：河东刚刚平定，人心还未安定，岚、宪、忻、代几州没有军营，敌人进攻则田地尽失，敌人侵扰边界则守备为忧。
English: Hedong has just been pacified, but the people's hearts are not yet stable. There are no military camps in Gansu, Jiangsu, Fujian and several provinces. If the enemy attacks, the fields will be lost, and if the enemy invades the border, the defense will be worried.

古文：及国家守要害，增壁垒，左控右扼，疆事甚严，恩信已行，民心已定，乃于雁门阳武谷来争小利，此其智力可料而知也。
现代文：到了国家扼守要害地方，增加壁垒，控制扼守左右边，边防严密，恩信已经实行，民心已经安宁时，敌人还跑到雁门、阳武谷来争夺小利，其后果是他们的智力能料知的。
English: When the country has secured the key areas, increased the barriers, controlled and secured the left and right sides, and tightened the border defenses, the trust has been implemented, and the people's hearts have been tranquil, the enemy also ran to the Wild Goose Gate and Yangwu Valley to compete for small profits. The consequences are predictable to their intelligence.

古文：圣人举事，动在万全，百战百胜，不若不战而胜，若重之慎之，则契丹不足吞，燕蓟不足取。
现代文：圣人行事，一举一动都考虑周到，百战百胜，不如不战而胜，如果慎重考虑，则契丹不足吞，燕蓟不足取。
English: When a sage acts, every move is carefully considered. It is better to win a hundred battles than to win without a battle. If you carefully consider, then the Khitan is not enough to swallow, and the terns are not enough to take.

古文：自古疆埸之难，非尽由敌国，亦多边吏扰而致之。
现代文：自古边疆之事难以处理，并非完全因为敌国，也大多由于边吏侵扰导致的。
English: Since ancient times, border affairs have been difficult to deal with, not entirely because of the enemy country, but also mostly due to the intrusion of border officials.

古文：若缘边诸砦抚御得人，但使峻垒深沟，畜力养锐，以逸自处，宁我致人，此李牧所以用赵也。
现代文：如果边缘诸营寨抚御得到合适人选，只要加固壁垒挖深沟濠，蓄精养锐，以闲逸自处，我方安宁敌方劳顿，这是李牧之所以为赵所用。
English: If a suitable candidate is found in the outlying villages, as long as they strengthen the barriers, dig deep ravines, accumulate energy and keep sharp, they will be at leisure, and our side will be at peace while the enemy is at work. This is the reason why Li Mu was used by Zhao.

古文：所谓择卒不如择将，任力不如任人。
现代文：所谓择卒不如择将，任力不如任人。
English: The so-called choice of graduates is not as good as the choice of generals, and the power of choice is not as good as the power of choice.

古文：如是则边鄙宁，边鄙宁则辇运减，辇运减则河北之民获休息矣。民获休息，则田业增而蚕绩广，务农积谷，以实边用。
现代文：如果这样则边疆宁静，边疆宁静则转运之劳可减，转运减则河北的百姓得到休养生息，百姓得到休养生息，则田产丰富而蚕绩增加，百姓专心务农积聚粮食，充实边疆的用度。
English: If this is the case, the frontier will be tranquil, the tranquility of the frontier will reduce the labor of transshipment, the reduction of transshipment will allow the people of Hebei to rest and live, the people will rest and live, the farmland will be rich and the harvest will increase, and the people will concentrate on farming and accumulating grain to enrich the consumption of the frontier.

古文：且敌人之心固亦择利避害，安肯投诸死地而为寇哉？
现代文：况且敌人的心也是择利避害的，怎么肯跑到必死之地去作寇呢？
English: Moreover, the enemy's heart is also to seek profit and avoid harm, so how could he run to the land of death to commit robbery?

古文：臣闻家六合者以天下为心，岂止争尺寸之事，角强弱之势而已乎？
现代文：我听说以六合之内为家者以天下为心，哪里有以争尺寸之地为事，斗强弱之势而后已的呢？
English: I've heard that people who live within six degrees of the equator have the whole world in their hearts. But where is there a place for fighting over size, a place for fighting over strength and weakness, and a place for fighting over power?

古文：是故圣人先本而后末，安内以养外。
现代文：所以圣人先务本而后求末，使国内安定来抵御敌国。
English: Therefore, the sage sought the end before the beginning, to make the country stable to resist the enemy country.

古文：人民，本也，疆土，末也。五帝三王，未有不先根本者也。
现代文：百姓是本，土地是末。五帝先王，没有不先务根本的啊。
English: The people are the source, the land is the end. The five emperors, there is no fundamental.

古文：尧、舜之道无他，在乎安民而利之尔。
现代文：尧、舜之治没有别的方法，在于使百姓安定并且为百姓谋利罢了。
English: There is no other way to rule the country but to stabilize the people and make profits for the people.

古文：民既安利，则远人敛衽而至矣。
现代文：百姓安定且有利后，则远方之人恭敬到来。
English: After the people are stable and prosperous, people from far away will come respectfully.

古文：陛下爱民人、利天下之心，真尧、舜也。
现代文：陛下爱护百姓，谋利天下之心，真是尧、舜啊。
English: His Majesty loves and protects the people, and seeks to benefit the whole world.

古文：臣虑群臣多以纤微之利，克下之术，侵苦穷民，以为功能。
现代文：我猜想群臣大多因为纤微的利益，任用克下之术，侵扰穷苦百姓，以为有成。
English: I suspect that most of the courtiers, because of their slender interests, thought they could succeed by employing the art of patronizing and harassing the poor people.

古文：至于生民疾苦，见之如不见，闻之如不闻，敛怨速尤，无大于此。
现代文：至于百姓的疾苦，看到了像没有看到，听见了像没有听见，招来民怨导致祸害，没有比这更大的了。
English: For there is no greater calamity than to see the affliction of the people and not see it, or to hear and not hear it, or to provoke the people to anger and bring calamity upon them.

古文：伏望慎择通儒，分路采访两浙、江南、荆湖、西川、岭南、河东，凡前日赋敛苛重者，改而正之，因而利之，使赋税课利通济，可经久而行，为圣朝定法；除去旧弊，天下诸州有不便于民者，委长吏以闻。
现代文：希望慎重选择通儒，分路采访两浙、江南、荆湖、西川、岭南、河东，凡是以前赋敛苛重的地方，予以改正，因循旧例谋利于百姓，使赋税课利都有利于民，可以长久实行，为圣朝立法；除去旧弊，天下诸州有不方便百姓的，委托长吏上告。
English: It is hoped that they will carefully choose those who understand Confucianism, and visit Zhejiang, Jiangnan, Jinghu, Xichuan, Lingnan, and Hedong separately, and correct those places that were previously harsh, follow the old example to benefit the people, so that the taxation and interest are beneficial to the people and can be implemented for a long time, and legislate for the Holy Dynasty; remove the old defects, and if there are inconvenient people in various states around the world, entrust the officials to appeal.

古文：敢循故常者，重置之法。
现代文：胆敢照行旧法者，处以重罚。
English: Those who dare to follow the old law will be severely punished.

古文：使天下耳目皆知陛下之心，戴陛下之惠，以德怀远，以惠利民，则远人之归，可立而待也。
现代文：使天下百姓都知道陛下的心意，感戴陛下的恩惠，用德政来感动远方之人，用恩惠来谋利于百姓，则远方之人的归服，可指日而待。
English: So that the people all over the world know His Majesty's will, feel His Majesty's grace, use virtue to move people far away, and use grace to benefit the people, then the people far away will submit and wait for the day.

古文：六年，为江南西路转运副使，冬，改右补阙，加正使。
现代文：太平兴国六年，任江南西路转运副使，冬天，改任右补阙，加任转运正使。
English: Taiping Xingguo served for six years as deputy envoy for transportation on the west side of the Yangtze River. In the winter, he was reassigned to the post of right assistant secretary and then to the post of chief envoy for transportation.

古文：齐贤至官，询知饶、信、虔州土产铜、铁、铅、锡之所，推求前代铸法，取饶州永平监所铸以为定式，岁铸五十万贯，凡用铜八十五万斤，铅三十六万斤，锡十六万斤，诣阙面陈其事，敷奏详确，议者不能夺。
现代文：齐贤到任，询知饶、信、虔三州是出产铜、铁、铅、锡的地方，推求前代铸钱法，拿饶州永平监所铸钱为定式，每年铸钱五十万贯，一共用去十五万斤铜，三十六万斤铅，十六万斤锡，到朝廷当面陈述这件事，陈述详细准确，议者不能指责。
English: When Qi Xian took office, he inquired whether the three states of Rao, Xin and Qian were the places that produced copper, iron, lead and tin, and urged the previous generation of minting methods, taking the minting method of the Yongping Prison in Rao as the standard. The annual minting of money was five hundred thousand yuan, with a total of one hundred and fifty thousand pounds of copper, three hundred and sixty thousand pounds of lead and one hundred and sixty thousand pounds of tin. He went to the imperial court to present the matter in person. The presentation was detailed and accurate, and the speaker could not be criticized.

古文：先是，诸州罪人多锢送阙下，路死者十常五六。
现代文：从前，各州罪人多械送到京城，在路上死去的有五六成。
English: In the past, criminals from various states were sent to the capital in large numbers, and 56% of them died on the way.

古文：齐贤道逢南剑、建昌、虔州所送，索牒视之，率非首犯，悉伸其冤抑。
现代文：齐贤在路上遇到南剑、建昌、虔州押送的罪犯，要来案卷一看，凡不是首犯的，全部为他们解伸冤屈。
English: Qixian encountered criminals escorted by Nanjian, Jianchang and Qianzhou on the road. He wanted to take a look at the case files. If they were not the first offenders, he would solve their grievances.

古文：因力言于朝，后凡送囚至京，请委强明吏虑问，不实，则罪及原问官属。
现代文：于是向朝廷竭力建议，以后凡送囚犯到京城，委任明察的官吏审问，如果不实，就向原来审问的官吏问罪。
English: Therefore, he tried his best to suggest to the Imperial Court that in the future, whenever a prisoner was sent to the capital, an official should be appointed to inspect the interrogation, and if it was not true, the official who had originally interrogated the prisoner should be charged with a crime.

古文：自是江南送罪人者为减太半。
现代文：从此江南送罪犯到京城的减去一大半。
English: Since then, the number of criminals sent south of the Yangtze River to Beijing has decreased by more than half.

古文：先是，江南诸州小民，居官地者有地房钱，吉州缘江地虽沦没，犹纳勾栏地钱，编木而浮居者名水场钱，皆前代弊政，齐贤悉论免之。
现代文：从前，江南各州百姓，住在官府土地上的要交地房钱，吉州沿江土地虽然沉没，仍要交勾栏地钱，编木在水上浮居的要交水场钱，都是前代弊政，齐贤上奏建议都免掉了。
English: In the past, the people of the states south of the Yangtze River, who lived on the land of the government, had to pay land rent. Although the land along the Yangtze River in Jizhou had sunk, they still had to pay land rent, and those who lived on the water had to pay waterfront rent. All of these were bad policies of the previous generation, and all of Qixian's suggestions were exempted.

古文：初，李氏据有江南，民户税钱三千已上者户出丁一人，黥面，自备器甲输官库，出即给之，日支粮二升，名为义军。
现代文：当初，李氏占据江南，百姓中每户能交纳税钱三千以上的人家出壮丁一人，刺脸，自备兵器送到官府，出战就发给他，每天支给粮食二升，名为义军。
English: At the beginning, the Li clan occupied the southern part of the Yangtze River. Among the common people, each household that could pay taxes of more than 3,000 yuan had to send one strong man to the government with a sad face. He had to send his own weapons to the government, and when he went to war, he was given two liters of grain every day. He was called the rebel army.

古文：既内附，皆放归农。
现代文：内附朝廷后，把这些人都放回家务农。
English: After annexation by the imperial court, these people were sent back to their homes to work in agriculture.

古文：至是，言者以为此辈久在行伍，不乐耕农，乞遣使选充军伍，并其家属送阙下。
现代文：到这时，言者认为这些人长期在军中，不喜欢农事，请求派遣使者选择人员充任军士，连同他们的家属送到朝廷。
English: At this time, the speaker thought that these people had been in the army for a long time and did not like farming, and requested that an envoy be sent to select people to serve as sergeants and send them to the imperial court together with their families.

古文：齐贤上言： 江南义军，例皆良民，横遭黥配，无所逃避。
现代文：齐贤上言说 ：江南义军，本都是良民，横遭黥配，无法逃避。
English: Qi Xian said at the top of his speech, "The south of the Yangtze River rebels are basically good people, they are surrounded by enemies, and they cannot escape.

古文：克复之后，便放归农，久被皇风，并皆乐业。
现代文：江南攻克之后，就放回家务农，长期被皇家所苦，都喜欢农业。
English: After conquering the south of the Yangtze River, they were sent back home to work in agriculture. They had suffered from the royal family for a long time, and they all liked agriculture.

古文：若逐户搜索，不无惊扰。
现代文：如果挨户搜索，不会没有惊扰。
English: If you do a door-to-door search, you're not going to get away unscathed.

古文：法贵有常，政尚清净，前敕既放营农，不若且仍旧贯。 齐贤居使职，勤究民弊，务行宽大，江左人思之不忘。
现代文：法律崇尚固定，政事崇尚清静，以前的赦令既然放他们归农，不如仍然按旧敕执行。 齐贤身居使职，勤于纠正民弊，务行宽大之政，江南百姓都不忘思念他。
English: The law advocates fixedness, the government advocates tranquility, and since the previous pardon order released them to farmers, it is better to still implement it according to the old rules. Qixian was on duty, diligently corrected the people's ills, and carried out a generous policy, and the people in the south of the Yangtze River did not forget to miss him.

古文：召还，拜枢密直学士，擢右谏议大夫、签书枢密院事。
现代文：召回朝廷，授任他为枢密直学士，升为右谏议大夫、签书枢密院事。
English: He was recalled to the Imperial Court, appointed as a Privy Councilor, promoted to the post of Doctor of the Right Hand of the Privy Council, and appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：雍熙初，迁左谏议大夫。
现代文：雍熙初年，改任左谏议大夫。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongxi, he was appointed as the doctor of the Left Division of the State Council.

古文：三年，大举北伐，代州杨业战没。
现代文：雍熙三年，宋军大举北伐，代州杨业战死。
English: In the third year of the reign of Yongxi, the Song Army launched a large-scale Northern Expedition, and Yang Ye of Daizhou died in battle.

古文：上访近臣以策，齐贤请行，即授给事中、知代州，与部署潘美同领缘边兵马。
现代文：太宗访求近臣作为策应，齐贤请求前往，即授任他为给事中、知代州，与部署潘美一起统领边疆军队。
English: Emperor Taizong visited and asked close vassals to act as a countermeasure, and Emperor Qixian requested Emperor Quanzhong to visit, and then appointed him as the commander of the frontier troops for the Central and Zhidao Provinces, together with the deployment of Pan Mei.

古文：是时辽兵自湖谷入寇，薄城下，神卫都校马正以所部列南门外，众寡不敌，副部署卢汉赟畏懦，保壁自固。
现代文：当时辽兵从湖谷进攻，逼近城下，神卫都校马正率领所部在南门外列阵，寡不敌众，副部署卢汉斌贝畏惧，保营自固。
English: At that time, the Liao soldiers attacked from the valley, approaching the city, the Shenwei Capital School Ma Zheng led the headquarters to line up outside the south gate, outnumbered, the deputy deployment of Lu Hanbin Bei was afraid, and the camp was self-sufficient.

古文：齐贤选厢军二千，出正之右，誓众慷慨，一以当百，辽兵遂却。
现代文：齐贤选派厢军二千人，从马正的右面出发，慷慨誓师，以一当百，辽兵于是退却。
English: Qi Xianxuan sent an army of two thousand people, starting from the right side of Ma Zheng, and generously swore to the division to be one hundred, and the Liao soldiers then retreated.

古文：先是，约潘美以并师来会战，无何，间使为辽人所得。
现代文：在此之前，齐贤约潘美指挥并州军队来会战，不久，使者被辽兵捉去。
English: Prior to this, Qixian Yopanmei commanded the state army to fight, and soon the envoy was captured by the Liao soldiers.

古文：齐贤以师期既漏，且虞美众为辽所乘。
现代文：齐贤因为会期既然泄露，并且考虑到潘美的军队会被辽所袭。
English: Qi Xian because the date of the meeting had been leaked, and considering that Pan Mei's army would be attacked by the Liao.

古文：既而美使至，云师出并州，至北井，得密诏，东师败绩于君子馆，并之全军不许出战，已还州矣。
现代文：后来潘美派的使者到，说军队已从并州出发，到了柏井，接到密诏，东边部队在君子馆遭到失败，并州全军不许出战，已经回到并州了。
English: Later, an emissary of the Pan-American faction arrived, saying that the army had set out from Banzhou, arrived in Kashiwai, received a secret edict, the eastern troops were defeated at the Gentleman's House, and the entire state army was not allowed to go to war, and had returned to Banzhou.

古文：于时辽兵塞川，齐贤曰： 贼知美之来，而不知美之退。 乃闭其使密室，中夜发兵二百，人持一帜，负一束刍，距州城西南三十里，列帜然刍。
现代文：当时辽兵遍山，齐贤说： 敌人只知道潘美要来会师，而不知道潘美已退兵。 于是把使者关闭在密室，半夜派出军队二百人，每人拿一面旗帜，背一束草，离州城西南三十里，打出旗帜燃烧干草。
English: At that time, Liao soldiers were all over the mountains, Qi Xian said: The enemy only knew that Pan Mei was coming to join the division, but did not know that Pan Mei had withdrawn from the army. So he closed the messenger in a secret room and sent an army of two hundred people in the middle of the night, each with a flag and a bunch of grass, thirty miles southwest of the state capital, to make a flag and burn hay.

古文：辽兵遥见火光中有旗帜，意谓并师至矣，骇而北走。
现代文：辽兵远远看见火光有旗帜，以为是并州部队到了，惊骇而逃走。
English: The Liao soldiers saw the flames and flags from far away, thought it was the annexation troops, and fled in shock.

古文：齐贤先伏步兵二千于土磴砦，掩击大败之，擒其北大王之子一人，帐前舍利一人，斩数百级，获马二千、器甲甚众。
现代文：齐贤先在土磴砦埋下二千伏兵，袭击大败辽军，擒俘辽军北大王的儿子一人，帐前舍利一人，杀敌数百，俘获二千匹战马及很多兵器。
English: Qi Xianxian first buried two thousand soldiers in the Dujuan Fort, attacked the defeated Liao Army, captured one son of the Liao Army Beidaiwang, one person of the former Sheli, killed hundreds of enemies, captured two thousand horses and a lot of weapons.

古文：捷奏，且归功汉赟。
现代文：捷报上奏，齐贤把功劳归于汉斌贝。
English: After the victory was announced, Qi Xian gave the credit to Han Binbei.

古文：端拱元年冬，拜工部侍郎。
现代文：端拱元年冬天，授任工部侍郎。
English: In the winter of 1861, he was appointed as a chamberlain of the Ministry of Works.

古文：辽人又自大石路南侵，齐贤预简厢兵千人为二部，分屯繁畤、崞县。
现代文：辽兵又从大石路往南侵犯，齐贤预先选择厢兵一千人分为二支，分别驻扎在繁、崞县。
English: Liao soldiers also invaded from Dashi Road to the south, and Qi Xian pre-selected one thousand soldiers to be divided into two branches, stationed in Shanzhuang and Yu County respectively.

古文：下令曰： 代西有寇，则崞县之师应之；代东有寇，则繁畤之师应之。
现代文：下令说： 代西有敌人，则崞县的部队出战，代东有敌人，则繁的部队出战。
English: The order said: If there is an enemy to the west, then the troops from Jixian County will go to war, and if there is an enemy to the east, then the troops from Fuxian County will go to war.

古文：比接战，则郡兵集矣。 至是，果为繁畤兵所败。
现代文：战斗发生后，则郡中部队集合作战。 到此时，辽兵果然被繁部队打败。
English: After the battle took place, the troops in the county fought together, and by this time, the Liao soldiers were indeed defeated by the Chinese troops.

古文：二年，置屯田，领河东制置言方田都部署，入拜刑部侍郎、枢密副使。
现代文：端拱二年，建立屯田制。齐贤兼任河东制置方田都部署，入朝授任刑部侍郎、枢密副使。
English: In the second year of the Dragon's Arch, the military garrison system was established. Qi Xian was also assigned to the eastern part of the province in the eastern part of the province, and was appointed to the imperial court as the attendant of the criminal department and the vice-minister of the privy council.

古文：淳化二年夏，参知政事，数月，拜吏部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：淳化二年夏天，任参知政事。几个月后，授任吏部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the summer of the second year of Chunhua, he was appointed to the post of the Vice-Governor. A few months later, he was appointed to the post of the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and to the post of the Vice-Minister of Education.

古文：齐贤母孙氏年八十余，封晋国太夫人，每人谒禁中，上叹其福寿、有令子，多手诏存问，加赐与，搢绅荣之。
现代文：齐贤的母亲孙氏年纪有八十多岁，封为晋国太夫人，每次入宫朝见，太宗叹服她高寿，有好儿子，常常下手诏慰问，给与赏赐，朝官们都感到他家很荣幸。
English: Qixian's mother, Sun, was over eighty years old and was named the First Lady of Jin. Every time she came to the palace for a morning meeting, Emperor Taizong praised her for her long life, for having a good son, and often sent her condolences and gave her gifts. The court officials all felt that his family was very honored.

古文：初，王延德与朱贻业同掌京庾，欲求补外，贻业与参政李沆有姻娅，托之以请于沆，沆为请于齐贤，齐贤以闻。
现代文：当初，王延德与朱贻业一同掌管京城粮仓，想求任地方官，贻业与参政李沆是亲家，就向李沆请托，李沆替他向齐贤请托，齐贤告诉了皇上。
English: At the beginning, Wang Yande and Zhu Yingye jointly controlled the grain silos in Beijing. When Wang Yingye wanted to be appointed as a local official, he asked Li Yingye, who was a relative of Li Yan, to do it. Li Yingye asked Qi Xian to do it for him. Qi Xian told the emperor.

古文：太宗以延德尝事晋邸。怒其不自陈而干祈执政，召见诘责。
现代文：太宗因为延德曾经奉事晋王府，厌恶他不自己陈述请求而委托执政大臣，召见并斥责了他。
English: Emperor Taizong summoned and reprimanded Yande because he had once served in the Jin royal court and was disgusted that he did not present his own request but entrusted it to the ruling minister.

古文：延德、贻业皆讳不以实对，齐贤不欲累沆，独任其责。
现代文：延德、贻业都瞒着不说实情，齐贤不想连累李沆，单独承担责任。
English: Yan De and Zou Ye both concealed and did not tell the truth. Qi Xian did not want to implicate Li Yao and took the responsibility alone.

古文：四年六月，罢为尚书左丞。
现代文：淳化四年六月，罢前职任尚书左丞。
English: In June of the fourth year of the Junka era, he resigned from his previous position as Shojo-zojo.

古文：十月，命知定州，以母老不愿往，未几，丁内艰，水浆不入口者七日，自是日啖粥一器，终丧不食酒肉蔬果。
现代文：十月，命他知定州，齐贤因为母亲年老不愿去。不久，遭母丧，水浆不入口者七天，从此每天只吃一碗粥，守丧期间一直不吃酒肉蔬果。
English: In October, he was ordered to visit Dingzhou, but Qixian did not want to go because his mother was too old. Soon after, his mother passed away, and he did not drink water for seven days. Since then, he has only eaten a bowl of porridge every day. During the mourning period, he has not eaten wine, meat, vegetables or fruits.

古文：寻复转礼部尚书、知河南府。时狱有大辟将决，齐贤至，立辨而释之。
现代文：不久转任礼部尚书、知河南府，当时监狱有死犯将处决，齐贤到任后，马上辨明案情而放了他。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the ceremonial department of Shangshu, Zhicheng, Henan Province. At that time, there was a death row inmate in the prison who was about to be executed. After Qi Xian took office, he immediately clarified the case and released him.

古文：三日，徙知永兴军。
现代文：三天后，改任知永兴军。
English: Three days later, he was reassigned to Zhiyong Xingjun.

古文：时阁门祗候赵赞以言事得幸，提点关中刍粮，所为多豪横。
现代文：当时门祗候赵赞因为议论政事得到皇帝宠幸，提点关中粮食，所做多豪横不法。
English: At that time, the doorkeeper Zhao Zang was favored by the emperor because he discussed political affairs. He raised the issue of grain, which was illegal.

古文：齐贤论列其罪，卒抵于法。
现代文：齐贤论奏列举他的罪状，终于伏法。
English: Qi Xian enumerated the charges against him and finally sentenced him to death.

古文：俄徙襄州，移荆南，又徙安州。
现代文：不久改任知襄州，又改任知荆南，又改任知安州。
English: Soon he was transferred to Chizhang Prefecture, then to Chizhongnan, and then to Chian Prefecture.

古文：逾年，加刑部尚书。
现代文：一年后，加任刑部尚书。
English: A year later, he was assigned to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：真宗即位，召拜兵部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：真宗即位，召他入朝授任兵部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
English: When Shinso ascended to the throne, he was called to the imperial court and appointed to the post of Hyobu Shosho (Minister of Military Affairs) and the post of Doju Shomon (Minister of Education).

古文：尝从容为上言皇王之道，而推本其所以然，且言： 臣受陛下非常恩，故以非常为报。 上曰： 朕以为皇王之道非有迹，但庶事适治道则近之矣。 时戚里有分财不均者更相讼，又入宫自诉。
现代文：曾经向皇上从容讲说帝王之道，而推究其所以然的根本，并且说 ：我受陛下异常恩遇，所以加倍报答。 真宗说： 我认为帝王之道无迹可循，只要政事适当则近于帝王之道啊。 当时他的亲戚中有人因分财不均互相诉讼，又入宫告状。
English: Once, he told the emperor about the way of the emperor, and inquired into the root of its origin, and said: I have been extremely favored by His Majesty, so I will repay him double. Shinshu said: I think that the way of the emperor has no trace to follow, as long as the government affairs are appropriate, it is close to the way of the emperor. At that time, some of his relatives sued each other due to unequal distribution of wealth, and entered the palace to sue.

古文：齐贤曰： 是非台府所能决，臣请自治。 上俞之。
现代文：齐贤说： 这不是台府能决断的，我请求自己处治。 
English: Qi Xian said: This is not something that the Taiwanese government can decide, I ask myself to handle it.

古文：齐贤坐相府，召讼者问曰： 汝非以彼所分财多、汝所分少乎？ 曰： 然。 命具款。
现代文：真宗表示同意。齐贤坐在相府里，召诉讼的人来问道 ：你是认为他家分得多，你家分得少吗？ 回答说 ：是。 命他写下名字。
English: Qian Xian sat in the palace and asked the person who had called for the lawsuit: "Do you think that his family was more divided and your family was less divided?" He replied: "Yes. Tell him to write down his name."

古文：乃召两吏，令甲家入乙舍，乙家入甲舍，货财无得动，分书则交易之。
现代文：于是召来两个官吏，令甲家到乙家住宅，乙家到甲家住宅，财物不能移动，分书交易。
English: As a result, two officials were called in, and ordered the A family to go to the B family's residence, and the B family to go to the A family's residence. The property could not be moved, and the transaction was split.

古文：明日奏闻，上大悦曰： 朕固知非君莫能定者。 郊祀，加门下侍郎。
现代文：第二天上奏给皇上，皇上非常高兴地说 ：我本来知道非你不能决定。 郊祀礼后，加任门下侍郎。
English: The next day, the report was delivered to the Emperor, and the Emperor said with great pleasure, "I knew you couldn't decide."

古文：与李沆同事，不相得。
现代文：与李沆同事，不和。
English: With Li Yong's colleague, discord.

古文：坐冬至朝会被酒失仪，免相。
现代文：因冬至日朝会时醉酒失仪，免去相位。
English: Due to the winter solstice, drunkenness is out of order during the Japanese-Korean meeting, and the phase is omitted.

古文：四年，李继迁陷清远军，命为泾、原等州军安抚经略使，以右司谏梁颢为之副。
现代文：咸平四年，李继迁攻陷清远军，真宗任命齐贤为泾、原等州军安抚经略使，以右谏议梁颢为他的副手。
English: In the fourth year of the Xianping era, Li Jiquan invaded and defeated the Qingyuan army, and Zhenzong appointed Qi Xian as the commander, and the former and other provincial armies as the pacification and strategic envoys, with the right commander Liang Jun as his deputy.

古文：齐贤上言谓： 清远军陷没以来，青冈砦烧弃之后，灵武一郡，援隔势孤，此继迁之所觊觎而必至者也。
现代文：齐贤上言说 ：清远军陷没以来，青冈砦被烧弃之后，灵武郡援兵阻隔势力孤单，这是继迁所窥伺而一定到的地方。
English: Qi Xian said: Since the fall of the Qingyuan Army, after the burning of the Qinggang Fort, the Lingwu County reinforcements have been the only forces blocking the enemy. This is the place that the Relocation Office must go to.

古文：以事势言之，加讨则不足，防遏则有余。
现代文：以事势而论，讨伐则力不足，防御则有余。
English: Judging from the current situation, the crusade is not enough, and the defense is more than enough.

古文：其计无他，蕃部大族首领素与继迁有隙者，若能啖以官爵，诱以货利，结之以恩信，而激之以利害，则山西之蕃部族帐，靡不倾心朝廷矣。
现代文：没有别的方法，蕃部大族首领向来与李继迁有矛盾，不如给他们官职，诱以货利，用恩信交结他们，并且以利害激发他们，则山西之蕃部族帐，无不倾心为朝廷出力。
English: There was no other way. The leaders of the large Shanxi clans had always been at odds with Li Jiqian. It was better to give them official positions, entice them with goods and profits, use letters of credit to bind them, and stimulate them with interests. The Shanxi clans were all eager to contribute to the imperial court.

古文：臣所领十二州军，见二万余人，若缘边料柬本城等军，更得五万余人，招致蕃部，其数又逾十数万。
现代文：我所统率的十二个州、军，现有二万士兵，如果加上沿疆料柬本城等军，又得五万多人，招致蕃部，其数又超过十几万人。
English: The twelve prefectures and armies under our command have at present no more than 20,000 soldiers. If we add the armies of the provinces and cities along the frontiers, we shall have more than 50,000 men, and if we add the troops of the provinces and cities, we shall have more than 100,000 men.

古文：但彼出则我归，东备则西击，使之奔走不暇，何能为我患哉？
现代文：只要敌人出动，我方归守，敌人东备我方则击其西，使他们奔走不暇，怎能成为我方祸患呢？
English: As long as the enemy is on the move and we are on the defensive, and the enemy is on the east and we are on the west, so that they have no time to run, how can it be our misfortune?

古文：今灵武军民不翅六七万，陷于危亡之地，若继迁来春于我兵未举之前，发兵救援灵武，尽驱其众，并力攻围，则灵州孤城必难固守。
现代文：现在灵武军民一起不超过六七万，陷于危亡的境地，如果继迁明年春天在我方未集中兵力以前，发兵救援灵武，全部出动其军队，并力围攻，则灵州城一定难以固守。
English: Now Lingwu's military and civilians together do not exceed six or seven hundred thousand, and Lingzhou is in a critical situation. If, before we concentrate our forces next spring, we send troops to rescue Lingwu, dispatch all of its troops, and forcefully besiege it, then Lingzhou City will definitely be difficult to defend.

古文：万一失陷，贼势益增，纵多聚甲兵，广积财货，亦难保必胜矣。
现代文：万一灵州城失陷，敌人声势会大增，即使多聚军队，广积财货，也难保必胜。
English: In the unlikely event of the fall of Lingshou, the enemy's clamor will greatly increase, and even if more troops are gathered and vast amounts of wealth and goods are accumulated, it is difficult to guarantee victory.

古文：臣所以乞封潘罗支为六谷王而厚以金帛者，恐继迁旦暮用兵断彼卖马之路也。苟朝廷信使得达潘罗支，则泥埋等族、西南远蕃，不难招集。
现代文：我之所以请求封潘罗支为六谷王，是恐怕继迁早晚用兵断绝他卖马之路。如果朝廷使者能见到潘罗支，则泥埋等族，西南远蕃，不难招集。
English: I am afraid that the reason why I requested that Penrose be crowned King of Rokkasho was that Suijo would sooner or later use soldiers to cut off his way of selling horses. If an emissary of the Imperial Court could see Penrose, then it would not be difficult to summon the Mudbury and other clans from as far away as the southwest.

古文：西南既廪命，而缘边之势张，则鄜、延、环、庆之浅蕃，原、渭、震戎之熟户，自然归化。
现代文：西南既受命，而边缘之军势大张，则、延、环、庆之浅蕃，原、渭、镇戎之熟户，自然归化。
English: Since the southwest was ordered, and the military power of the edge was large, the familiar households of Yan, Huan, Qingzhi, Asan, Hara, Zeng and Zhenwu were naturalized.

古文：然后使之与对替甲兵及驻泊军马互为声援，则万山闻之，必不敢于灵州、河西顿兵矣。
现代文：然后让他们与野战部队及驻扎军队互相声援，则继迁听说后，必定不敢在灵州、河西驻扎军队。
English: Then let them support each other with the field troops and the stationed troops. After hearing about the relocation, they will certainly not dare to station troops in Lingshou and Hexi.

古文：万山既退，则贺兰蕃部亦稍稍叛继迁矣。
现代文：万山如果败退，则贺兰蕃部也慢慢叛离继迁。
English: If Wanshan is defeated, then Helan Xibe will also slowly defect.

古文：若曰名器不可以假人，爵赏不可以滥及，此乃圣人为治之常道，非随时变易之义也。 
现代文：如果说名器不可以假人，爵赏不可以滥及，这是圣人治国的常道，不是随时事变化应变的法则。 
English: If it is said that famous instruments should not be made by dummies, and peerages should not be awarded indiscriminately, this is the normal way for sages to govern the country, not a rule for coping with changes at any time.

古文：齐贤又请调江淮、荆湘丁壮八万以益防御，朝议以为动摇，兼泽国人民，远戍西鄙亦非便，计遂寝。
现代文：齐贤又请求调来江淮、荆湘丁壮八万加强防御，朝廷议论认为动摇民心，并且湖泊之乡的人远戍西鄙也不方便，这件事就停止不办了。
English: Qi Xian also requested that 80,000 soldiers from Jianghuai and Jingxiang Dingzong be sent to strengthen the defense. The imperial court argued that it would shake the people's hearts, and that it was inconvenient for the people of the lake town to be far away from the west, so the matter was stopped.

古文：齐贤又言： 灵州斗绝一隅，当城镇完全、碛路未梗之时，中外已言合弃，自继迁为患已来，危困弥甚。
现代文：齐贤又说： 灵州地处边隅，当城镇还完好、碛路还未阻塞时，朝廷内外已经说应当放弃，从继迁叛乱以来，危困越发厉害。
English: Qi Xian also said: Lingshou is located in a corner. When the town was still intact and the branch road was not blocked, both inside and outside the imperial court had said that it should be abandoned. Since the succession rebellion, the crisis has become more and more severe.

古文：南去镇戎约五百余里，东去环州仅六七日程，如此畏途，不须攻夺，则城中之民何由而出，城中之兵何由而归？
现代文：南距镇戎约五百多里，东离环州仅六七天路程，如此畏途，不必攻夺，则城中之民怎么出来，城中之兵又怎么回去？
English: The town of Rong is about more than five hundred miles to the south, and the east is only six or seven days away from Huanzhou. It is so far away that there is no need to attack, so how can the people in the city come out, and how can the soldiers in the city go back?

古文：欲全军民，理须应接。
现代文：想保护城中军民，按理应当接应。
English: If you want to protect the military and civilians in the city, you should naturally respond.

古文：为今之计，若能增益精兵，以合西边屯驻、对替之兵，从以原、渭、镇戎之师，率山西熟户从东界而入，严约师期，两路交进。设若继迁分兵以应敌，我则乘势而易攻。
现代文：为今之计，如果能增加精兵，以合西边驻屯、换防的军队，接着以原、渭、镇戎的军队，率领山西熟户从东界进入，严约会师日期，两路并进，假如继迁分兵抵抗，我方则乘机而易攻。
English: For now, if we can increase the number of elite soldiers to meet the army stationed in the west and changing the fortifications, and then lead the army of Yuan, Zou and Zhen from the east with the army of Yuan, Zou and Zhen, and lead the acquaintances from Shanxi to enter from the east, strictly date the division, and advance along the two roads. If the subsequent relocation detachment resists, we will take advantage of the opportunity and easily attack.

古文：且奔命途道，首尾难卫，千里趋利，不败则禽。
现代文：况且在路途奔波，首尾难顾，千里趋利，不失败就会被俘。
English: Moreover, on the road, rushing around, struggling to succeed, striving for profit, without failure will be captured.

古文：臣谓兵锋未交，而灵州之围自解。
现代文：我认为兵锋未交，而灵州之围自解。
English: I think that the front line has not been surrendered, and the siege of Lingzhou has been lifted.

古文：然后取灵州军民，而置砦于萧关、武延川险要处以侨寓之，如此则蕃汉士人之心有所依赖。
现代文：然后迁移灵州军民到在萧关、武延川险要地方设立的营寨居住，这样做则蕃汉人士之心有所依赖。
English: Then, Lingshou soldiers and civilians were relocated to live in the camps set up in Xiaoguan and Wuyanchuan, places that were at risk. In doing so, the hearts of the Han people depended on Zeng.

古文：裁候平宁，却归旧贯，然后纵蕃汉之兵，乘时以为进退，则成功不难矣。 时不能用。
现代文：等到叛乱平定后，仍回到旧州，然后指挥蕃汉之兵，乘机进攻，则成功不难。 朝廷不能用他的计策。
English: If he waits until after the rebellion is quelled, and still returns to the old prefecture, and then commands the soldiers of Shih and Han, and takes the opportunity to attack, it will not be difficult to succeed.

古文：未几，灵武果陷。
现代文：不久，灵武果然失陷。
English: Soon, Lingwu finally fell.

古文：闰十二月，拜右仆射、判汾州，不行，改判永兴军兼马步军部署。
现代文：闰十二月，授任右仆射、判州，不出发，改为判永兴军兼马步军部署。
English: In leap December, he was appointed as the right-hand man of Jia and Banzhou, but did not set out, and changed to the deployment of the Yongxing Army and Ma Bu Army.

古文：时薛居正子惟吉妻柴氏无子早寡，尽畜其货产及书籍论告，欲改适齐贤。
现代文：当时薛居正的儿子惟吉的妻子柴氏早年守寡，把她家的财产及书籍论告都储藏起来，打算改嫁齐贤。
English: At that time, Chai, the wife of Xue Jizheng's son Wei Jixi, had been a widow for many years. She had put away all of her family's property and books, intending to remarry Qixian.

古文：惟吉子安上诉其事，上不欲置于理，命司门员外郎张正伦就讯，柴氏所对与安上状异。
现代文：惟吉的儿子安上为此上诉。皇上不想理睬这件事，命司门员外郎张正伦前去讯问，柴氏的回答与安上的诉状不同。
English: Korekichi's son, Anjo, appealed for this. The emperor did not want to ignore the matter, and the gatekeeper of the imperial family, Zhang Zhengrong, went to inquire. Chai's answer was different from Anjo's complaint.

古文：下其事于御史，乃齐贤子太子中舍宗诲教柴氏为词。
现代文：把这件事交给御史，发觉是齐贤的儿子太子中舍宗诲教柴氏这样说。
English: Handing the matter over to the historian, he discovered that it was the son of Qi Xian, Prince Zhongshe Zongchao, who had said this.

古文：齐贤坐责太常卿、分司西京，宗诲贬海州别驾。
现代文：齐贤因此被贬为太常卿、分司西京，宗诲贬为海州别驾。
English: As a result, Qi Xian was demoted to Tai Changqing, Branch West Beijing, and Zong Ji was demoted to Haishu Beijiro.

古文：景德初，起为兵部尚书、知青州。
现代文：景德初年，重新升齐贤为兵部尚书、知青州。
English: In the first year of Jingde, Qi Xian was re-promoted to the military department of Shangshu and Zhicheng.

古文：上幸澶渊，命兼青、淄、濰州安抚使。
现代文：皇上到澶渊，任命他兼任青、淄、潍三州安抚使。
English: The emperor went to Qianyuan and appointed him to concurrently serve as the Peace Envoy to the Three Provinces of Qinghai, Fujian and Fujian.

古文：二年，改吏部尚书。
现代文：景德二年，改任吏部尚书。
English: In the second year of the reign of King Jingde, he was transferred to the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：尔后攻劫不已，直至降麟、府州界八部族蕃酋，又胁制贺兰山下帐族，言事者犹谓封奖未厚。
现代文：上疏说： 我在先朝时，常忧虑灵、夏两镇会被继迁并吞，议事者认为我的忧虑太过分了，大略列举往事以明本末。
English: Shang Shou said, "During the last dynasty, I was often worried that the two towns of Ling and Xia would be successively moved and annexed. The councilors thought that my worries were too excessive, and roughly listed the past events.

古文：洎陛下赐以银、夏土壤，宠以节旄，自此奸威愈滋，逆志尤暴。
现代文：当时大臣们都以为继迁只是怀恋祖辈旧地，别无他心，先帝任命他为银州廉察，以满足他的心愿。到陛下赐给他银、夏二州土地，宠任为节度，从此奸威愈滋，逆志尤凶。
English: At that time, the ministers all thought that the succession was just a yearning for the ancestors and the old land, with nothing else in mind. The former emperor appointed him as the Yinzhou Liancha to satisfy his wish. When His Majesty gave him silver and Xia Erzhou land, and appointed him as the governor, the treachery became more and more dangerous, and the rebellious spirit was particularly fierce.

古文：屡断灵州粮路，复挠缘边城池，数年之间，灵州终为吞噬。
现代文：多次阻断灵州粮路，又侵扰边境城池，几年之间，灵州终于被他吞没。
English: He repeatedly blocked Lingshou Grain Road and encroached on the border cities. In a few years, Lingshou was finally engulfed by him.

古文：当灵池、清远军垂欲陷没，臣方受经略之命。
现代文：当灵池、清远军即将陷没时，我正接受经略的使命。
English: When the Lingchi and Qingyuan armies were about to fall, I was on a mission of strategy.

古文：臣思继迁须是得一两处强大蕃族与之为敌，此乃以蛮夷攻蛮夷，古今之上策也。
现代文：我认为对付继迁需要一两处强大蕃族与之为敌，这乃是用蛮夷对付蛮夷，古今之上策。
English: I think that dealing with the succession needs one or two powerful Yao people as enemies, which is to use barbarians to deal with barbarians, the best strategy of ancient and modern times.

古文：遂请以六谷名目封潘罗支，俾其展效。
现代文：于是请求朝廷以六谷王名目封潘罗支，使他效力。
English: Therefore, he asked the Imperial Court to grant him the title of Rokkoku King to make him effective.

古文：其时近臣所见，全与臣谋不同，多为沮挠。
现代文：当时朝廷亲信大臣意见，全然与我的计谋不同，从中阻挠。
English: At that time, the opinion of the minister, a close confidant of the imperial court, was completely different from my strategy and obstructed it.

古文：及继迁为潘罗支射杀，边患谓可少息。
现代文：到继迁被潘罗支射杀后，边患才算稍稍平息。
English: It was only after the Successionists were shot and killed by Penrose that the border troubles calmed down a bit.

古文：今其子德明依前攻劫，析逋游龙钵等尽在部下，其志又似不小。
现代文：现在继迁的儿子德明像以往那样攻劫城池，析靅游龙钵等人又都在他的军中，他们志向也似乎不小。
English: Now, the son of the successor, Deming, is attacking and robbing the city as in the past, and others such as Jingyou Longyu and others are in his army, and their ambition seems to be not small.

古文：臣虑德明乘大驾东幸之际，去攻六谷，则瓜、沙、甘、肃、于阗诸处渐为控制矣。
现代文：我忧虑的是德明乘皇上到东方之际，去进攻六谷，则瓜、沙、甘、肃、于阗几处渐渐被他控制。
English: What worries me is that when Deming, riding on the emperor's horse, went to the East to attack Rokkoku, he gradually gained control of several places, including Gua, Sha, Gan, Su and Yu'an.

古文：向使潘罗支尚在，则德明未足为虞；今潘罗支已亡，厮铎督恐非其敌。
现代文：如果潘罗支还在，则德明不足为虑；现在潘罗支已死，厮铎督恐怕不是他的对手。
English: If Penrose were still alive, Deming would not be worried; now that Penrose is dead, the governor is probably not his rival.

古文：望委大臣经制其事。 
现代文：希望委任大臣经制其事。 
English: It is hoped that a minister will be appointed to deal with the matter.

古文：从东封还，复拜右仆射。
现代文：齐贤跟从真宗到东边封禅回朝后，被授任为右仆射。
English: After Qi Xian returned to the imperial court from the Shinshu sect to the Eastern Fuzhen, he was appointed as the Right Footman of the Emperor.

古文：时建玉清昭应宫，齐贤言绘画符瑞，有损谦德，又违奉天之意，屡请罢其役。
现代文：当时建筑玉清昭应宫，齐贤说画瑞符，有损自谦之理，又违背奉天之意，多次请求停止此项工程。
English: At that time, the construction of the Jade Qing Zhaoying Palace, Qi Xian said that the painting of auspicious symbols was detrimental to the principle of self-restraint, and also violated the will of heaven, and repeatedly requested to stop this project.

古文：三年，出判河阳，从祀汾阴还，进左仆射。
现代文：大中祥符三年，出京任判河阳，跟从真宗祭祀汾阴回朝，升为左仆射。
English: In the third year of junior high school, he went to Beijing and was assigned to Kawayo. He followed the Shinshu sect and returned to Japan, and was promoted to Zuoying.

古文：五年，代还，请老，以司空致仕。
现代文：大中祥符五年，换任回朝，请求归家养老，以司空衔退休。
English: In the fifth year of college, he was transferred back to the imperial court, requested to return home for his old age, and retired with the rank of flight attendant.

古文：入辞便坐，方拜而仆，上遽止之，许二子扶掖升殿，命益坐茵为三。
现代文：入宫辞别时便坐，刚拜见就仆倒地上，真宗急忙阻止他，允许他的两个儿子扶持着上殿，命令给他加上三个坐垫。
English: When he left the palace, he sat down. As soon as he was greeted, he fell to the ground. The Emperor hurried to stop him, allowed his two sons to hold him up, and ordered him to add three cushions.

古文：归洛，得裴度午桥庄，有池榭松竹之盛，日与亲旧觞咏其间，意甚旷适。
现代文：回到洛阳，得到裴度的午桥庄，庄中有很多池榭松竹，每天与亲朋旧友喝酒吟诗，心情很旷达闲适。
English: After returning to Luoyang, he got lucky in the afternoon bridge village. There are many ponds and ponds of pine and bamboo in the village. He drank wine and chanted poetry with his relatives, friends and old friends every day. His mood was very open and leisurely.

古文：七年夏，薨，年七十二。
现代文：大中祥符七年夏天，去世，终年七十二岁。
English: He passed away in the summer of his seventh year of junior high school, at the age of seventy-two.

古文：赠司徒，谥文定。
现代文：追赠司徒，赐谥号为 文定 。
English: He posthumously bestowed the title of "Stu" and gave his posthumous name as "Wending."

古文：齐贤姿仪丰硕，议论慷慨，有大略，以致君自负。留心刑狱，多所全活。
现代文：齐贤容貌丰硕，议论慷慨，有大略，以忠君为己任，留心刑狱，被他救活的人很多。
English: Qixian was handsome, generous in speech, had a broad mind, took loyalty to the emperor as his duty, paid attention to imprisonment, and many people were saved by him.

古文：喜提奖寒隽。
现代文：喜欢提奖寒门隽士。
English: He likes to give out awards to cold warriors.

古文：少时家贫，父死无以为葬，河南县吏为办其事，齐贤深德之，事以兄礼，虽贵不替也。
现代文：年轻时家里贫困，父亲去世无法埋葬，河南县吏替他办丧事，齐贤非常感激他，以兄礼奉事他，即使显贵也不变。
English: When he was young, his family was poor, his father died and could not be buried, Henan County officials held a funeral for him. Qi Xian was very grateful to him and served him as a brother, even if he was a dignitary.

古文：仲兄昭度尝授齐贤经，及卒，表赠光禄寺丞。又尝依太子少师李肃家，肃死，为营葬事，岁时祭之。
现代文：仲兄昭度曾经教他经书，昭度去世后，齐贤上表请求追赠他光禄寺丞，又曾经投靠太子少师李肃家，李肃死后，替他办理丧事，逢年过节祭祀他。
English: His elder brother Zhaodu once taught him the scriptures. After Zhaodu's death, Qi Xian petitioned the emperor to bestow him with the title of Guanglu Tsering. He also once relied on the young prince and teacher Li Sui. After Li Sui's death, he handled the funeral for him and offered sacrifices to him every year.

古文：赵普尝荐齐贤于太宗，未用，普即具前列事，以谓： 陛下若进齐贤，则齐贤他日感恩，更过于此。 上大悦，遂大用。
现代文：赵普曾经向太宗推荐齐贤，未被重用，赵普就在皇上面前述说上述事实，说： 陛下如果进用齐贤，那么齐贤今后感恩，更会有过于此。 太宗非常高兴，于是重用他。
English: Zhao Pu had once recommended Qi Xian to Emperor Taizong, but Qi Xian was not reused, so Zhao Pu recounted the above facts in front of the emperor, saying: If Your Majesty uses Qi Xian, then Qi Xian will be more grateful in the future. Emperor Taizong was very happy, so he reused him.

古文：种放之起，齐贤所荐也。齐贤四践两府，九居八座，以三公就第，康宁福寿，时罕其比。
现代文：种放的受重用，是齐贤推荐的，齐贤四次任职两府，九次任职八座，以三公衔退休，康宁福寿，当时很少有人可与比拟。
English: Qi Xian was recommended by Qi Xian to be reappointed. Qi Xian served four times in two prefectures, nine times in eight prefectures, and retired with three public titles. At that time, there were few people who could be compared to him.

古文：居相日，数起大狱，又与寇准相倾，人或以此少之。
现代文：任宰相时，兴起几宗大案，又与寇准互相倾轧，人们有时因这件事看不起他。
English: When he was prime minister, several major cases arose, and he was at loggerheads with Kojun. People sometimes looked down on him because of this.

古文：齐贤诸子皆能有立：宗信，内殿崇班；宗理，大理寺丞；宗谅，殿中丞；宗简，阁门祗候；宗讷，太子中舍；宗礼最贤，虽累资登朝，而畏羁束，故多居田里。
现代文：齐贤的几个儿子都有成就：宗信任内殿崇班；宗理任大理寺丞；宗谅任殿中丞；宗简任门合门祗候；宗讷任太子中舍；宗礼最贤，虽然历次登朝为官，但害怕羁束，所以常常住在乡间。
English: Several of Qixian's sons had achievements: Zongtrust Inner Hall Senior Class; Zori appointed Dali Temple Junior Secretary; Zonken appointed Hall Junior Secretary; Zongjian appointed Door-to-Door Attendant; Zonne appointed Prince's Junior Secretary; Zourei, the most virtuous, although he had been to the court for official duties several times, was afraid of the shackles, so he often lived in the countryside.

