古文：人生而静，其情难见；感物而动，然后可辨。
现代文：人来到这个世界上，本来是静态的，其所思所虑，难于发现，但一与外界事物接触，便产生喜怒哀乐等反应，然后才能清楚地加以辨析。
English: When people come to this world, they are originally static, and it is difficult to find out what they are thinking about. However, as soon as they come into contact with external things, they will have reactions such as emotions, and then they can be clearly distinguished.

古文：推之于棋，胜败可得而先验。
现代文：根据这一道理来推测下棋，胜败也是可以预先观察出的。
English: According to this principle, it is possible to predict the outcome of a game of chess, and win or lose can also be observed in advance.

古文：持重而廉者多得，轻易而贪者多丧。
现代文：其法则是：谨慎、稳重而不贪的，多得；轻随便而贪婪的，多失。
English: The rule is: those who are prudent, steady and not greedy, gain more; those who are careless and greedy, lose more.

古文：不争而自保者多胜，务杀而不顾者多败。
现代文：不贸然相争而加强防御，多胜；一味杀夺而不顾后果的，多败。
English: Those who do not rush to fight and strengthen their defenses are more likely to win; those who kill and plunder without regard for the consequences are more likely to lose.

古文：因败而思者，其势进；战胜而骄者，其势退。
现代文：因为失败而回想、检查其错误的，棋艺能够长进；因为胜利而骄傲自满、洋洋得意的，棋艺必然减退。
English: Because of the failure and recall, check their mistakes, chess can grow; because of the victory and complacency, complacency, chess will inevitably decline.

古文：求己弊不求人之弊者，益；攻其敌而不知敌之攻己者，损。
现代文：寻求自己的毛病而不寻求他人的毛病，对己有利；只顾攻击对手而不知道对手在进攻自己，对己有害。
English: It is to one's advantage to look for one's own faults without looking for the faults of others; it is to one's detriment to attack an opponent without knowing that the opponent is attacking oneself.

古文：目凝一局者，其思周；心役他事者，其虑散。
现代文：注意力高度集中在棋局上，其思虑必然周密；心灵为种种杂事所纠缠，其思虑必然散缓。
English: If one's attention is highly concentrated on the chess game, one's thoughts are bound to be thorough; if one's mind is entangled in various miscellaneous matters, one's thoughts are bound to be scattered.

古文：行远而正者吉，机浅而诈者凶。
现代文：目标远大而下正直，吉利；心机浅隘而奸诈，不吉利。
English: The goal is lofty and upright, auspicious; the mind is narrow and treacherous, unlucky.

古文：能畏敌者强，谓人莫己若者亡。
现代文：能够承认对手的实力的，是强大的人；以为他人不知自己的，灭亡。
English: It is a strong man who recognizes the strength of his opponent; he who thinks that others do not know him perishes.

古文：意旁通者高，心执一者卑。语默有常，使敌难量。
现代文：掌握了关于某一事物的知识，从而能推知同类中其他事物的，棋艺高；固执不变，迂执到愚蠢地步的棋艺低。说话和沉默保持常态，使对手难于测度。
English: He who has knowledge of one thing, so as to be able to deduce other things of the same kind, has high skill in chess; he who is inflexible and stupidly capricious, has low skill in chess. Speech and silence remain normal, making it difficult for the opponent to gauge.

古文：动静无度，招人所恶。
现代文：行动如静止没有分寸，只能招致他人的厌恶。
English: Actions such as standing still without moderation, can only lead to the disgust of others.

古文：《诗》云﹕ 他人之心，予时度之。 
现代文：《诗·小雅·巧言》说： 他人心里在想什么，我不妨加以揣测。 
English: "Poetry, Elegance, and Eloquence" says: I may as well speculate on what others are thinking.

