古文：乐羊子尝于行路拾遗金一饼，还以语妻，妻曰： 志士不饮盗泉，廉士不食嗟来，况拾遗金乎？ 
现代文：原文有一次乐羊子在路边捡到一锭金子，回家后他把这件事告诉了妻子，妻子说： 有志节的人从来不喝 盗泉 之水，廉节的人从来不吃乞讨得来的食物，更何况是捡来的金子呢？ 
English: Once upon a time, Le Yang Zi found a pile of gold on the roadside. When he got home, he told his wife about it. She said, "People with high moral standards would never drink water from a stolen spring. People with low moral standards would never eat food from a beggar, let alone gold they found."

古文：羊子大惭，即捐之野。
现代文：乐羊子听后非常惭愧，立即把金子放回了路边。
English: After hearing this, Le Yangzi was very ashamed and immediately put the gold back on the roadside.

古文：乐羊子游学，一年而归。
现代文：乐羊子离家求学，一年后突然返回家中。
English: Le Yangzi left home to study, but suddenly returned home a year later.

古文：妻问故，羊子曰： 久客怀思耳。 
现代文：妻子问他为什么，乐羊子说： 长时间客居他乡心中想家，因此就回来了。 
English: When his wife asked him why, Le Yangzi said, "I felt homesick after living away from home for a long time, so I came back."

古文：妻乃引刀趋机而言曰： 此织自一丝而累寸，寸而累丈，丈而累匹。今若断斯机，则前功尽捐矣!
现代文：他的妻子拿着剪刀走到织布机旁边，对乐羊子说： 这匹绢布是从一丝一线累积而成尺寸，再从尺寸累积而成丈，最后成为一匹，现在如果我剪掉织布机只织到一半的布，那么以前所织的布，就全都成为没有用的废物了。
English: His wife took a pair of scissors and went to the loom. She said to Le Yangzi: "This piece of fabric is made up of one thread, one size, one height, and finally one horse. If I now cut the loom to only half of the fabric, then all the fabric I used to weave will become useless waste.

古文：学废半途，何以异是？ 
现代文：现在你求学半途而废，和我将这个半成品毁掉有什么差别呢？ 
English: What's the difference between you abandoning your studies halfway through and me destroying this half-finished product?

古文：羊子感其言，还卒业，七年不返。
现代文：乐羊子被妻子所说的这番话所触动，回去接着完成了学业，七年没有回过家。
English: Moved by his wife's words, Le Yangzi went back to complete his studies and did not return home for seven years.

古文：乐羊子游学，其妻勤作以养姑。
现代文：乐羊子离家求学期间，妻子辛勤持家，侍养婆婆。
English: While Le Yangzi was studying away from home, his wife worked hard to keep the house and take care of her mother-in-law.

古文：尝有他舍鸡谬入园，姑杀而烹之，妻对鸡不餐而泣，姑怪问故，对曰： 自伤居贫，不能备物，使食有他肉耳。 姑遂弃去不食。
现代文：有一次，邻居家所养的鸡误闯入了乐羊子家中，婆婆就将鸡抓住做菜吃。到吃饭的时候，乐羊子的妻子知道了鸡的来历后，一直对着那盘鸡流泪，也不吃饭。婆婆感到非常奇怪，询问她原因，乐羊子的妻子说： 我是难过家中太穷，没有好吃的菜，您才去吃邻居家的鸡的。 婆婆听到后非常惭愧，就把鸡丢弃不食。
English: Once, a chicken raised by a neighbor mistakenly broke into Le Yangzi's home, and her mother-in-law caught the chicken to cook and eat. When it was time to eat, after Le Yangzi's wife learned the origin of the chicken, she kept crying at the plate of chicken and did not eat. Her mother-in-law felt very strange and asked her why. Le Yangzi's wife said, "I am sad because I am too poor at home and do not have good food, so you went to eat the neighbor's chicken." After hearing this, her mother-in-law was very ashamed and threw the chicken away and did not eat it.

古文：返遗金，则妻为益友；卒业，则妻为严师；谕姑于道，成夫之德，则妻又为大贤孝妇。
现代文：劝勉丈夫不拾遗金，乐羊子的妻子可以说是一个益友；断织布鼓励丈夫坚持完成学业，乐羊子的妻子可以说是一个严师；用道理晓谕婆婆，保全丈夫的名声，又可以说是一个贤德的孝妇了。
English: The wife of Le Yangzi can be said to be a good friend when she exhorts her husband not to collect the inheritance money; the wife of Le Yangzi can be said to be a strict teacher when she encourages her husband to persist in completing his studies; and she can be said to be a virtuous filial wife when she instructs her mother-in-law with reason and preserves her husband's reputation.

