古文：鲁妙典谌母盱母杜兰香白水素女蔡女仙蓬球紫云观女道士秦时妇人何二娘
现代文：鲁妙典谌母盱母杜兰香白水素女蔡女仙蓬球紫云观女道士秦时妇人何二娘
English: Brilliantly beautiful mother-in-law mother-in-law mother-in-law mother-in-law mother-in-law mother-in-law mother-in-law mother-in-law mother-in-law mother-in-law mother-in-law

古文：鲁妙典
现代文：鲁妙典
English: Lu Mya Dian

古文：鲁妙典者，九嶷山女官也。
现代文：鲁妙典是九嶷山的女仙官。
English: Lu Myu Dian is a female sage of the Nine Mountains.

古文：生即敏慧高洁，不食荤饮酒。
现代文：生来就聪明敏捷，气质高雅，喜欢洁净，不吃荤腥不喝酒。
English: They are born smart and agile, have an elegant temperament, like to be clean, and do not eat or drink.

古文：十余岁，即谓其母曰： 旦夕闻食物臭浊，往往鼻脑疼痛，愿求不食。 
现代文：十多岁时，就对她的母亲说： 从早到晚闻到食物的气味就觉得臭浊，往往闻到脑袋都疼痛，希望不要让我吃饭。 
English: When she was more than ten years old, she told her mother: From morning to night, when I smell the smell of food, I feel like a skunk. I often feel pain in my head when I smell it. I hope you don't make me eat.

古文：举家怜之。
现代文：全家人对她都很怜惜。
English: The whole family felt sorry for her.

古文：复知服气饵药之法。
现代文：后来又学会炼气吃药的法术。
English: Later, he also learned the spell of taking medicine from the purified gas.

古文：居十年，常悒悒不乐。因谓母曰： 人之上寿，不过百二十年，哀乐日以相害；况女子之身，岂可复埋没贞性，混于凡俗乎？ 
现代文：过了十年，她常常闷闷不乐，就对她母亲说： 人的最高寿命，不过一百二十岁，喜怒哀乐每天都来伤害它；又何况是女子之身，哪能再埋没贞性，混同于凡夫俗子呢？ 
English: At the end of ten years, often depressed, she said to her mother: "The longest human life is only one hundred and twenty years, and every day it is wounded by joy, anger, and sorrow; besides, a woman's body, how can it lose its chastity and be confused with that of an ordinary man?

古文：有麓床道士过之，授以大洞《黄庭经》，谓曰： 《黄庭经》，扶桑大帝君宫中金书，诵咏万遍者，得为神仙；但在劳心不倦耳。
现代文：有个竹麓道士拜访她，把大洞《黄庭外》传授给她，对她说： 《黄庭经》是扶桑大帝君宫中的金书，诵读一万遍的人，能够成为神仙；只在于劳心不倦而已。
English: A Zhu Rong Daoist visited her and taught her the sutra "Beyond the Yellow Courtyard" and said to her: "The Yellow Courtyard Sutra is the golden book in the palace of Emperor Fusang the Great. If you read it ten thousand times, you can become a god; it's just a matter of tireless work.

古文：《经》云： 咏之万遍升三天，千灾已消百病痊。不惮虎狼之凶残，亦已却老年永延。 
现代文：经书上说，把它读了上万遍，就可以升上三天，千灾已消病痊愈，不怕虎狼凶狠残暴，又已经推迟衰老，寿命永延。
English: The sutra says that after reading it tens of thousands of times, it can be raised to three days, the thousand disasters have been eliminated, the diseases have been cured, the tigers and wolves are not afraid of ferocious brutality, and the aging has been delayed, and the life expectancy has been extended forever.

古文：居山独处，咏之一遍，如与十人为侣，辄无怖畏。
现代文：住在山上独自修炼，把它读上一遍，如同与十个人为伴，就没有恐怖畏惧。
English: Living in the mountains and cultivating alone, reading it over, as if with ten people, there is no fear.

古文：何者？
现代文：什么原因呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：此经召集身中诸神，澄正神气。
现代文：这是道经把你身中的众神召集起来，澄清端正了神气。
English: This is the Tao Te Ching calling together the gods within you, clarifying and rectifying your aura.

古文：神气正则外邪不能干，诸神集则怖畏不能及。
现代文：神气端正了，外部的邪恶就不能干扰；众神集中了，恐怖就不能到达你的身边。
English: When your spirit is upright, external evil cannot disturb you; when the gods are concentrated, terror cannot reach you.

古文：若形全神集，气正心清，则彻见千里之外，纤毫无隐矣。
现代文：如果形全神集、气正心清，就可以清楚地看见千里之外的东西，连纤细的毫毛也不能隐匿了。
English: If one's form is perfect and one's spirit is pure, one can clearly see things that are thousands of miles away. Even the tiniest speck of dust cannot be hidden.

古文：所患人不能知，知之而不能修，修之而不能精，精之而不能久。
现代文：所担心的是人不能够懂得，懂得了而不能修炼，修炼了而不能精通，精通了而不能长久。
English: The worry is that people can't understand, understand but can't cultivate, cultivate but can't master, master but can't last.

古文：中道而丧，自弃前功，不惟有玄科之责，亦将洗荡生死，苦报无穷也。 
现代文：半途而废，自己抛弃前功，不仅将遭到玄法的责罚，又将使生命流荡，痛苦的报应无穷。 
English: If you give up halfway and abandon your previous achievements, you will not only be punished by the occult, but will also make your life wander, and the painful retribution will be endless.

古文：妙典奉戒受《经》，入九嶷山，岩栖静默。
现代文：妙典遵奉玄戒接受了经书，就进入九嶷山，在岩石上居住，静修默炼。
English: Myoden followed the precepts and accepted the scriptures. He entered the Nine Mountains, lived on a rock, and practiced meditation.

古文：累有魔试，而贞介不挠。
现代文：屡次有妖魔前来试探，而妙典道念坚贞，不为所挠。
English: Many times, demons have come to tempt her, but she has remained steadfast in her faith and has not been shaken.

古文：积十余年，有神人语之曰： 此山大舜所理，天地之总司、九州之宗主地。
现代文：这样生活了达十多年，有个神人告诉她说： 这座山系大舜管辖，是天地的总司九州的宗主。
English: After living like this for more than ten years, a god-man told her: This mountain system is under the jurisdiction of the Great Dragon, who is the head of heaven and earth in Kyushu.

古文：古有高道之士，作三处麓床，可以栖庇风雨，宅形念贞。
现代文：古时候有个道高之人，制作了三处竹床，可以歇宿遮避风雨，保护形体、坚定道念。
English: In ancient times, there was a man of great virtue who made three bamboo beds to shelter from the wind and rain, protect the body, and strengthen the mind.

古文：岁月即久，旋皆朽败。
现代文：岁月长久竹床也都朽烂破碎了。
English: The bamboo beds, which have stood the test of time, are also rotten and broken.

古文：今为制之，可以遂性宴息也。 
现代文：现在我给你制作它，可以遂心安闲歇息。
English: Now that I've made it for you, you can finally rest easy.

古文：又十年，真仙下降，授以灵药，白日升天。
现代文：又过了十年，真仙降临下来，交给她灵药，她就白日升天了。
English: After another ten years, a true fairy came down and gave her the elixir, and she ascended to heaven in broad daylight.

古文：初，妙典居山，峰上无水。
现代文：当初，妙典到山上去住，山峰顶上没有水，神仙就点化一个石头盆。
English: At first, Myoden went to live in the mountains. There was no water at the top of the mountain, so the gods lit a stone basin.

古文：神人化一石盆，大三尺，长四尺，盆中常自然有水，用之不竭。
现代文：这石盆大三尺，长四尺，盆中常常自然有水，用之不竭。
English: This stone basin is three feet wide and four feet long. There is often water in the basin, which is inexhaustible.

古文：又有大铁臼，亦神人所送，不知何用。
现代文：又有一个大铁臼，也是神仙送给她的，不知干什么用。
English: She also has a large iron mill, which was also given to her by the gods, and she doesn't know what to do with it.

古文：今并在上。
现代文：如今，这两件东西都在山峰上。
English: Now, both of those things are on the mountain top.

古文：仙坛石上，宛然有仙人履迹；及古镜一面，大三尺；钟一口，形如偃月。
现代文：仙坛的石头上，清清楚楚地有仙人的鞋印；还有一面古镜，大三尺；有一口钟，形状象仰卧的月牙。
English: On the stone of the hermitage, there are clearly the footprints of the hermit; there is also an ancient mirror, three feet in size; there is a bell, shaped like a supine crescent.

古文：皆神人送来，并妙典升天所留之物，今在无为观。
现代文：这些都是神仙送来的。上述神品与妙真升天所留之物，如今存在无为观。
English: These are all sent by the gods. The above-mentioned gods and the things left behind by Myojin's ascension to heaven now exist in plain sight.

古文：谌母
现代文：谌母
English: 母

古文：婴母者，姓谌氏，字曰婴，不知何许人也。
现代文：婴母姓谌，字叫婴，不知道是哪里人。
English: The baby's mother's surname is Hao, and her nickname is Baby. It is not known where she comes from.

古文：西晋之时，丹阳郡黄堂观居焉，潜修至道。时人自童幼逮衰老见之，颜状无改。
现代文：西晋的时候，在丹阳郡黄堂观居住，当时的人自从幼年、壮年一直到衰老都见到她，而她的容颜、状态却没有改变。
English: When she lived in Huangdangguan, Danyang County, during the Western Jin Dynasty, people at that time saw her from childhood and adulthood to old age, and her face and condition did not change.

古文：众号为婴母。
现代文：众人称她为婴母。
English: Everyone called her the baby's mother.

古文：因入吴市，见一童子，年可十四五。
现代文：有一次，她进吴市买东西，见到一个小孩，年龄大约十四五岁。
English: Once, when she went shopping in Wuxi, she saw a child who was about 14 or 15 years old.

古文：前拜于母云： 合为母儿。 
现代文：这个小孩走到谌母面前下拜，说： 我应当作您的儿子。 
English: The little boy went to his mother and bowed down before her and said, "I should be your son."

古文：母曰： 年少自何而来？拜吾为母，既非其类，不合大道。 
现代文：谌母说： 年少之人，从什么地方来，拜我为母亲，既然不是同类，不合乎大道。 
English: My mother said: "Young people, from wherever they come, worship me as a mother, since they are not of the same kind, they do not fit into the main road.

古文：童子乃去。
现代文：那个小孩就走了。
English: The kid just walked away.

古文：月余，又吴市逢有三岁孩子，悲啼呼叫。
现代文：一个多月以后，谌母又在吴市遇到了一个三岁孩子，这小孩儿又呼又叫，哭得很悲伤。
English: More than a month later, the foster mother met a three-year-old child in Wuxi. The child cried and cried and cried with great sadness.

古文：倏遇谌母，执母衣裾曰： 我母何来？ 
现代文：突然遇到谌母，就拉住谌母的衣襟，说： 我母亲从哪来？ 
English: When he suddenly met his mother, he grabbed her by the collar and said, "Where did my mother come from?

古文：母哀而收育之，逾于所生。
现代文：谌母可怜他，就收养抚育他，超过对自己亲生儿子。
English: His mother took pity on him and raised him as her own son.

古文：既长，明颖孝敬，异于常人。
现代文：这个小孩长大以后，既聪明又孝敬，与平常人不同。
English: When this child grows up, he will be both intelligent and respectful, and he will be different from ordinary people.

古文：冠岁以来，风神挺迈，所居常有异云气，光景仿佛，时说蓬莱阆苑之事。
现代文：成年以后，风度神情极其豪迈，他居住的地方常常有特殊的云气，只是光影不真切。他还常说些蓬莱阆苑的事情。
English: After he became an adult, his demeanor was extremely heroic, and the place where he lived often had a special cloud atmosphere, but the light and shadow were not real. He also often said things about Penglai Gongyuan.

古文：母异之，谓曰： 吾与汝暂此相因。汝以何为号也？ 
现代文：谌母觉得他很奇异，就对他说： 我和你暂时在这里互相依靠，你用什么作为称号呢？ 
English: His mother thought he was very strange and said to him, "You and I are here for the time being, relying on each other. What do you use as a title?

古文：子曰： 昔蒙天真盟授灵章，锡以名品，约为孝道明王。今宜称而呼之矣。 
现代文：那个孩子说： 从前承蒙天真让我盟誓，传授给我灵章，赐给我名号品级，称我为孝道明王，如今应当用这个名号称呼我。 
English: The child said, "Once upon a time, I was blessed with the gift of swearing, I was given a spiritual badge, I was given a name and a rank, and I was called the King of Filial Piety. Now I should be called by this name."

古文：遂告母修真之诀曰： 每须高处玄台，疏绝异党，修闲丘阜，饵顺阳和，静夷玄圃，委鉴前非。无英公子、黄老《玉书》、大洞《真经》、豁落七元、太上隐言之道可致。
现代文：于是告诉谌母修真的诀窍，他说： 总须处于高高的玄台之上，与同我们不同道的人疏远断绝关系，到山丘上去修闲，引顺阳和，在玄圃平和静修，明辨以前的错误并引以鉴，这样，无英公子、黄老《玉书》、大洞《真经》、豁落七元、大上隐玄之道就可以得到。
English: So he told his mother the secret of cultivating truth. He said, "Always stay on a high platform, keep away from and cut off relations with those who are different from us, go to the hills to relax, guide the sun, and meditate peacefully in the garden. Discern the mistakes of the past and learn from them. In this way, you can obtain Mu Ying Gong Zi, Huang Lao's "Jade Book," Da Dong's "True Scripture," Ou Luo Yuan's "Seven Elements," and Da Shang's "The Way of Hidden Mysteries."

古文：晏息以流霞之障，睠眄乎文昌之台，得此道者，九凤齐唱，天籍骇虚，竦身御节，入景浮空，龙车虎旗，游遍八方矣。
现代文：晚上睡觉用流霞作屏障，眷顾着文昌之台。获得这种道的人，能让九凤齐唱，天籍骇虚，耸身奉节，入景浮空，驾龙车擎虎旗而通游八方了。
English: To sleep at night, use the haze as a barrier and pay attention to the stage of Wenchang. The person who obtains this way can make the nine phoenixes sing in unison, the heavenly origin is terrible, the body is proud, the scenery is floating in the air, and the dragon car is flying the tiger flag and traveling in all directions.

古文：母宜宝之。 
现代文：您应该珍惜它。 
English: You should cherish it.

古文：一旦，孝道明王漠然隐去，母密修道法，积数十年，人莫知也。
现代文：有一天，孝道明王无声无息地隐身而去，谌母秘密地按道法修行，坚持了几十年，没有人知道这件事。
English: One day, the king of filial piety, Ming Wang, quietly slipped away. His mother secretly practiced according to the Taoist teachings for decades, and no one knew about it.

古文：其后吴猛、许逊自高阳南游，诣母，请传所得之道，因盟而授之，孝道之法，遂行江表。
现代文：其后吴猛、许逊从高阳向南云游，拜访了谌母，请谌母把所得之道传给他们，于是盟誓之后就传给他们，孝道之行便在江东传播开来。
English: After that, Wu Meng and Xu Xun traveled from Gaoyang to Nanyun, visited his mother, and asked his mother to pass on the way of income to them, so he passed it on to them after taking an oath, and the practice of filial piety spread in the east of the river.

古文：闲日每告二子曰： 世云昔为逊师。今玉皇谱之中，猛为御史，而逊为高明大使，总领仙籍五品已迁。
现代文：谌母闲暇的时候经常告诉两个人说： 世云从前是许逊的老师，现在玉皇的玄谱中，吴猛为御史，而许逊为高明大使，总领仙籍在五品以下的。
English: In her spare time, Yan's mother often told the two of them: Shiyun used to be Xu Xun's teacher. Now, in the genealogy of the Jade Emperor, Wu Meng is the imperial historian, while Xu Xun is the high-level ambassador, and the general leader of the immortals is under the fifth grade.

古文：又所主十二辰，配十二国之分野。
现代文：又主管十二时辰，分配十二国的分野。
English: And he is in charge of the twelve hours, and he apportions the twelve tribes.

古文：逊领玄枵之野，于辰为子；猛统星纪之邦，于辰为丑。
现代文：许逊分领玄枵之野，以辰为子；吴猛统领星纪之邦，以辰为丑。
English: Xu Xun led the Xuan Zang field, with Chen as his son; Wu Meng led the State of Xingji, with Chen as the ugly.

古文：许当居吴之上，以从仙阶之等降也。 
现代文：许逊应当位居吴猛之上，以顺应仙阶的等级差别。 
English: Xu Xun should be ranked above Wu Meng, in order to conform to the level difference of the Immortal Order.

古文：又数年，有云龙之驾，千乘万骑来迎，谌母白日升天。
现代文：又过了几年，有云龙车驾、千乘万骑来迎谌母，谌母遂白日升天。
English: A few years later, a dragon chariot and a thousand horsemen came to welcome the mother, and the mother ascended to heaven in broad daylight.

古文：今洪州高安县东四十里，有黄堂坛静，即许君立祠朝拜圣母之所。
现代文：如今洪州高安县东四十里，有座黄堂观，就是许逊立祠朝拜圣母的地方。
English: Today, forty miles east of Gao'an County, Hongzhou, there is a Huangdangguan, which is the place where Xu Xunli's shrine worships the Virgin Mary.

古文：其升天事迹，在丹阳郡中，后避唐宣宗庙讳，钟陵祠号为谌母。
现代文：她升天的事迹，在丹阳郡中流传。后来为了避唐宣宗的庙讳，钟陵祠称为谌母祠。
English: The story of her ascension to heaven has been passed down in Danyang County. Later, in order to avoid the taboos of the temples of Tang Xuan Zong, the bell-tower shrine was called the mother-of-pearl shrine.

古文：其孝道之法，与灵宝小异。豫章人世世行之。
现代文：其孝道之法，与灵宝略有差异，豫章的人世世代代修行它。
English: His way of filial piety is slightly different from that of Lingbao, and the people of Yuanzhang have practiced it for generations.

古文：盱母
现代文：盱母
English: 母

古文：盱母者，豫章人也。
现代文：盱母是豫章人。
English: His mother was from Yuanzhang.

古文：外混世俗，而内修真要。
现代文：她在外表上混同于世俗之人，而在内心里却在修习玄真要诀。
English: On the outside, she is confused with the worldly people, but on the inside, she is practicing the secret formula.

古文：常云： 我千年之前，曾居西山，世累稍息，当归真于彼。 
现代文：她常说： 我在一千年前曾住在西山，世上的牵累稍稍停止，应该在那里回归真境。 
English: She often said: I lived in Xishan a thousand years ago, the world's involvement stopped slightly, and I should return to reality there.

古文：其子名烈，字道微。
现代文：她的儿子叫盱烈，字道微。
English: Her son's name is Hao Liang, pronounced "Hao Liang."

古文：少丧父，事母以孝闻。
现代文：道微小时候失去了父亲，奉侍母亲，以孝顺出名。
English: He lost his father when he was very young, served his mother, and was known for his filial piety.

古文：家贫，而营侍甘旨，未尝有阙，乡里推之。
现代文：他家里贫穷，然而他置办的侍奉母亲的香甜食品，从不曾有过短缺。乡里之人很推重他。
English: His family was poor, but the sweetmeats he bought to serve his mother were never in short supply. The people in the village were very supportive of him.

古文：西晋武帝时，同郡吴猛、许逊，精修通感，道化宣行。
现代文：西晋武帝时，与她同郡的吴猛、许逊精诚修炼，感动上天，道化盛行。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu of the Western Jin Dynasty, Wu Meng and Xu Xun, who were in the same county as her, devoted themselves to cultivation and were moved to heaven.

古文：居洪崖山，筑坛立静。
现代文：住在洪崖山，筑造玄坛，设立静室。
English: He lived in Hongyaoshan, built a burial mound, and set up a seclusion room.

古文：猛既去世，逊即以宝符、真箓拯俗救民。远近宗之。
现代文：吴猛去世之后，许逊就用宝符、真箓拯救世俗的百姓，远近的人都很尊崇他。
English: After the death of Wu Meng, Xu Xun saved the secular people with treasure charms and genuine ingots. People near and far respected him.

古文：逊仕州为记室，后每朔望还家朝拜。
现代文：许逊做官任某州的记室。后来每当旧历初一和十五，他便回家朝拜。
English: Xu Xun worked as a clerk in a certain state. Later, whenever the first day of the first month and the fifteenth day of the first month of the old calendar, he would go home to worship.

古文：人或见其乘龙，往来径速，如咫尺耳。
现代文：有人看见他乘着龙，往来径直迅速，象近在咫尺一般。
English: He was seen riding a dragon, going and coming straight and fast, as if he were never far away.

古文：盱君淳笃忠厚，逊委用之，即与母结草于逊宅东北八十余步，旦夕侍奉，谨愿恭肃，未尝有怠。
现代文：盱君淳朴诚信忠厚，许逊雇用他，他就与母亲一起在许逊宅院东北八十余步的地方居住以报恩，从早到晚侍奉着，神情郑重，态度恭敬严肃，不曾有过倦怠。
English: Jun Jun was simple, honest, and loyal. Xu Xun hired him, and he lived with his mother in a place more than eighty paces northeast of Xu Xun's mansion to repay the favor. He served from morning to night, with a solemn look and a respectful and serious attitude. He never got tired.

古文：母常于山下采撷花果，以奉许君。
现代文：盱母还经常在山下采摘花果，用来奉送许逊。
English: The godmother also often picked flowers and fruits at the foot of the mountain, which were used to send gifts to Xu Xun.

古文：君惜其诚志，常欲拯度之。
现代文：许逊怜惜她诚恳的心志，常常想拯救度引她。
English: Xu Xun pitied her sincere aspiration and often tried to save her.

古文：元康二年壬子八月十五日，太上命玉真上公崔文子、太玄真乡瑕丘仲，册命征拜许君为九州都仙大使高明主者，白日升天。
现代文：元康二年壬子八月十五日，太上老君命玉真上公崔文子、太玄真乡瑕丘仲，凭册书下令征召许君，拜为九州都仙大使高明主者，白日升天。
English: On the 15th day of the 8th month of the 2nd year of the reign of Emperor Kangxi, Grandmaster Laojun, Grandmaster Yujin, Grandmaster Cui Wenzi, and Grandmaster Xuan Zhenxiang, Grandmaster Keqiu Zhong, issued a written order to conscript Xu Jun, and he was worshipped as the master of the Kyushu Dousen Ambassador Gao Ming, and ascended to heaven in broad daylight.

古文：许谓道微及母曰： 我承太帝之命，不得久留。
现代文：许逊对道微及盱母说： 我奉太帝的命令，不能久留。
English: Xu Xun said to Daowei and his mother, "I was ordered by the Great Emperor not to stay for long.

古文：汝可后随仙舆，期于异日。
现代文：你们可以随仙舆之后，期待将来成仙。 
English: You can follow the path of immortals and expect to become immortal in the future.

古文：母子悲不自胜，再拜告请，愿侍云辇。
现代文：母子悲伤得不能自禁，拜了又拜，哀告请求，愿随许逊而去侍奉于云辇左右。
English: The mother and son were so sad that they couldn't help themselves. They prayed and prayed, and begged and pleaded that they would follow Xu Xun and go to serve around Yunluo.

古文：君许之，即赐灵药服之，躬禀真诀，于是午时从许君升天。
现代文：许逊答应了他们母子的请求，就赐给他们灵药让他们服下，亲自传授真诀，于是在午时跟着许逊升天而去。
English: Xu Xun agreed to their mother's and son's request, gave them the elixir to take and personally taught them the truth, and then followed Xu Xun into the sky at noon.

古文：今坛井存焉。乡人不敢华缮，盖盱君母子俭约故也。
现代文：如今坛井还在，乡人不敢修缮得太华丽，原因是盱君母子俭朴的缘故。
English: Nowadays, the jars are still there, and the villagers do not dare to renovate them too lavishly, because of the frugality of the mother and son.

古文：世号为盱母井焉。
现代文：世人称坛井为盱母井。
English: The world calls the tansui the mother well.

古文：杜兰香
现代文：杜兰香
English: Dulan incense

古文：杜兰香者，有渔父于湘江洞庭之岸，闻儿啼声，四顾无人，惟三岁女子在岸侧，渔父怜而举之。
现代文：有个打鱼的人在湘江洞庭的岸边，听见小孩啼哭的声音，四下看一下没有发现别人，只有个三岁小女孩在岸边。打鱼的人很可怜这个小孩，就把她抱走了。
English: A fisherman on the shore of the Hunan River Dongting heard the sound of a child crying, looked around and found no one else, only a three-year-old girl on the shore. The fisherman felt sorry for the child and took her away.

古文：十余岁，天姿奇伟，灵颜姝莹，迨天人也。
现代文：小女孩长到十多岁时，天姿奇伟，容颜艳丽，光彩照人，赶上仙女了。
English: When the little girl grew up to more than ten years old, her heavenly figure was marvelous, her face was beautiful and radiant, and she caught up with the fairy.

古文：忽有青童灵人，自空而下，来集其家，携女而去。
现代文：有一天，突然有个青童灵人从空中下来，降临到她的家里，带着她离去。
English: One day, a young boy spirit suddenly descended from the sky, landed in her home, and took her away.

古文：临升天，谓其父曰： 我仙女杜兰香也，有过谪于人间。
现代文：就要升天的时候，小女孩对她的养父说： 我是仙女杜兰香，因为犯了错误被贬到人间。
English: Just as she was about to ascend to heaven, the little girl said to her foster father: "I am the fairy Tulan Xiang, because I made a mistake and was relegated to the human world.

古文：玄期有限，今去矣。 
现代文：天上的日期是有严格限制的，今天我就要回去了。 
English: The sky has a strict time limit, so I'm going back today.

古文：自后时亦还家。
现代文：自从升天以后，有时她也回家。
English: Since ascending to heaven, she sometimes returns home.

古文：其后于洞庭包山降张硕家，盖修道者也。
现代文：其后，她又在洞庭包山降临到张硕的家中，因为张硕也是个修道的人。
English: Later, she came to Zhang Shuo's home in Dongting Baoshan, because Zhang Shuo was also a religious man.

古文：兰香降之三年，授以举形飞化之道，硕亦得仙。
现代文：杜兰香降临张硕家三年。教给张硕举形飞化的道术，张硕也获得成仙的机会。
English: Dulanxiang came to Zhang Shuo's home three years ago. He taught Zhang Shuo the Taoism of flying, and Zhang Shuo also got the opportunity to become a immortal.

古文：初降时，留玉简、玉唾盂、红火浣布，以为登真之信焉。
现代文：杜兰香刚降临张家的时候，留下玉简、玉唾盂、红火浣布，用这些仙器仙物作为她登上真仙的证据。
English: When Dulan Xiang had just arrived at Zhang's house, she left behind Jade Jane, Jade Spit, and Red Flame Cloth, and used these celestial objects as evidence that she had ascended to the realm of true immortals.

古文：又一夕，命侍女赍黄麟羽帔、绛履玄冠、鹤氅之服、丹玉珮挥剑，以授于硕，曰： 此上仙之所服，非洞天之所有也。 
现代文：又有一天晚上，兰香命侍女拿着黄麟羽毛的帔肩、大红色的鞋、黑色的帽子、鹤羽的大氅和饰有丹玉珰珮的宝剑，把它们送给张硕，说： 这都是上仙穿戴的东西，不是人间洞天所有之物。 
English: On another night, the maid of Lan Xiang took the mantle of Huang Lin feather, the big red shoes, the black hat, the crane's feather and the sword decorated with jade, and gave them to Zhang Shuo, saying: These are all things worn by the immortals, not things that belong to the world.

古文：不知张硕仙官定何班品。
现代文：不知道张硕成仙后仙官定为什么班次、什么品级。
English: I don't know why Zhang Shuo Chengxian's class and grade were determined by the magistrate.

古文：渔父亦老，因益少，往往不食。
现代文：打鱼的人也老了，因为杜兰香的缘故，却越来越年轻了，往往不吃东西，后也学道江湖。
English: People who catch fish are also old, but because of the Tulan incense, they are getting younger and younger, often do not eat, and later also learn the way of the country.

古文：亦学道江湖，不知所之。白水素女谢端，晋安侯官人也。
现代文：后来不知到哪儿去了。白水素女谢端，是晋代福建省侯官县人。
English: Later, I don't know where she went. Bai hydrogen woman Xie Duan was from Houkan County, Fujian Province in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：少丧父母，无有亲属，为邻人所养。
现代文：他小时候就父母双亡，又没有亲属，被邻人所抚养。
English: His parents died when he was a child, he had no relatives and was brought up by neighbours.

古文：至年十七八，恭谨自守，不履非法，始出作居。
现代文：到十七八岁的时候，他恭顺谨慎自守，不涉足非法的事。开始自己出去生活。
English: By the time he was seventeen or eighteen, he was obedient, cautious, and did not get involved in illegal things. He began to go out and live on his own.

古文：未有妻，乡人共悯念之，规为娶妇，未得。
现代文：他没有妻子，乡人们都可怜他、惦念他，共同谋划给他娶媳妇，却一直没有找到。
English: He didn't have a wife, and the villagers felt sorry for him, pined for him, and made plans together for him to marry a daughter-in-law, but they never found her.

古文：端夜卧早起，躬耕力作，不舍昼夜。
现代文：谢端晚睡早起，种田十分卖力，不分昼夜去劳作。
English: Xie Duan slept late and got up early. He cultivated fields and worked hard, regardless of day and night.

古文：后于邑下得一大螺，如三升壶。以为异物，取以归，贮瓮中畜之。
现代文：后来，他在城下发现一个大螺，象三升的壶那么大，觉得是个稀奇的东西，就把它拿回家去，放到瓮中养着它。
English: Later, he found a large snail under the city, as big as a three-liter pot, and thought it was a strange thing, so he took it home and kept it in a cocoon.

古文：十数日，端每早至野，还，见其户中有饭饮汤火，如有人为者。
现代文：一连十几天，谢端每天起来到野外种田，回来的时候，就看见自己家中有吃的有喝的有汤有水，好象是有人特意给他做的。
English: For a dozen days in a row, Xie Duan got up every day to go to the field to farm. When he returned, he saw that there was food, drink, soup and water in his home, as if someone had specially made it for him.

古文：端谓是邻人为之惠也。
现代文：谢端认为这是邻人帮他做的好事。
English: Xie Duan believes that this is a good deed done by his neighbor.

古文：数日如此，端便往谢邻人。邻人皆曰： 吾初不为是，何见谢也？ 
现代文：几天都是这样，谢端就去向邻人道谢，邻人都说： 我们当初帮你做的不是为了这个，何必感谢我们呢？ 
English: This went on for several days. Xie Duang went to thank his neighbors, and they all said, "What we did for you in the beginning was not for this, why should you thank us?"

古文：端又以为邻人不喻其意，然数尔不止。
现代文：谢端又觉得邻人不明白他的意思，然而屡次这样做个不停。
English: Xie Duan also felt that his neighbor did not understand his meaning, but he kept doing this repeatedly.

古文：后更实问，邻人笑曰： 卿以自取妇，密着室中饮爨，而言吾为人饮耶！ 
现代文：后来谢端就把实话告诉他们，问他们是谁帮他做的。邻人笑着说： 你自己已经娶了媳妇，藏在屋里给你做饭，怎么反而说我们给你做的饭？ 
English: Later, Xie Duan told them the truth and asked them who had helped him. The neighbor smiled and said: You yourself have married a daughter-in-law, hidden in the house to cook for you, why did you say that we cooked for you?

古文：端默然，心疑不知其故。
现代文：谢端没话可说，心里怀疑，却不知其中缘故。
English: Xie Duan had nothing to say, he was suspicious, but he didn't know why.

古文：后方以鸡初鸣出去，平早潜归，于篱外窃窥其家，见一少女从瓮中出，至灶下燃火。
现代文：后来他在鸡刚叫的时候出去，天亮时悄悄地回来，在篱笆外偷偷地窥视自己的家，看见一个年轻女子从瓮中出来，到灶下去点火。
English: Then he went out at cock-crow, and crept back at dawn, and peeped furtively over the hedge into his house, and saw a young woman come out of her cocoon, go down to the stove, and light a fire.

古文：端便入门，取径造瓮所视螺，但见壳。
现代文：谢端就进了门，直奔放瓮的地方去看那个大田螺，却只看见田螺的壳。
English: Xie Duan walked through the door and went straight to the place where the cormorants were released to see the large snail, but only saw the shell of the snail.

古文：仍到灶下问之曰： 新妇从何所来，而相为炊？ 
现代文：他就又到灶下问那个女子说： 你从什么地方来？为什么给我做饭呢？ 
English: He went back to the stove and asked the woman: "Where did you come from? Why are you cooking for me?"

古文：女人惶惑，欲还瓮中，不能得，答曰： 我天汉中白水素女也。
现代文：那个女子很惶惑，想要回到瓮中去，却没能回去，只好回答说： 我是天河中的白水素女。
English: The woman was very confused and wanted to go back to the cocoon, but she couldn't go back, so she had to answer: I am the white hydrogen woman in the river of heaven.

古文：天帝哀卿少孤，恭慎自守，故使我权相为守舍炊烹。
现代文：天帝可怜你年少孤单，能以恭敬谨顺的态度自守，所以派我暂且给你看守房舍，做饭做菜。
English: Heavenly Father pities you for being young and lonely and being able to defend yourself with a respectful and obedient attitude, so he sent me to temporarily guard your house, cook and prepare food.

古文：十年之中，使卿居富得妇，自当还去。
现代文：十年之内，使你家中富裕，等你找到媳妇时，我自当回去。
English: Within ten years, I will make your family rich, and when you find a daughter-in-law, I will return.

古文：而卿无故窃相同掩，吾形已见，不宜复留，当相委去。
现代文：而你无故偷着看我，把我挡住。我的身形已经暴露，不宜再留下，你应当放我回去。
English: But you stole a glance at me for no reason and blocked me. My body has been exposed, it is not appropriate to stay any longer, you should let me go back.

古文：虽尔后自当少差，勤于田作，渔采治生。
现代文：虽然你今后自己做饭，情况稍差一些，但你勤于耕田劳作，打渔采药，可以维持生活。
English: Although you will have to cook your own meals in the future, the situation is slightly worse, but you can earn a living by working hard in the fields, fishing and collecting medicines.

古文：留此壳去，以贮米谷，常可不乏。 
现代文：我这个壳给你留下，用它贮存米谷，可以经常不缺粮食。 
English: I'll leave this shell for you, and you can use it to store rice grains, so you won't be short of food.

古文：端请留，终不肯。
现代文：谢端请她留下，她始终不肯。
English: Xie Duan asked her to stay, but she still refused.

古文：时天忽风雨，翕然而去。
现代文：这时，天上忽然刮起风，下起雨，白水素女忽然身形一收就离去了。
English: At this time, the sky suddenly became stormy, and the girl quickly flew away.

古文：端为立神座，时节祭祀，居常饶足，不致大富耳。
现代文：谢端为她立了神位，逢年过节祭祀她，家里常常丰足，只不过不致大富而已。
English: Xie Duan set up a shrine for her and sacrificed to her every year. The family was often well-off, but they did not become very rich.

古文：于是乡人以女妻端。
现代文：于是乡人里便有把女儿嫁给谢端。
English: As a result, some villagers married their daughters to Xie Duan.

古文：端后仕至令长云。
现代文：谢端后来做了官，官至县令、郡守。
English: Xie Duan later became a government official, from county magistrate to county governor.

古文：今道中素女是也。
现代文：现在道教中的素女就是白水素女。
English: Now in Taoism, a lay woman is a white hydrogen woman.

古文：蔡女仙
现代文：蔡女仙
English: Cai Nianxian

古文：蔡女仙者，襄阳人也。幼而巧慧，善刺绣，邻里称之。
现代文：蔡女仙是襄阳人，小时候就心灵手巧，善长刺绣，邻里之人都夸奖她。
English: Cai Nianxian is from Yangyang. When she was a child, she was good at embroidery. Neighbors praised her.

古文：忽有老父诣其门，请绣凤。
现代文：有一天，忽然有个老头到她家拜访，请她绣凤。
English: One day, an old man suddenly visited her home and asked her to embroider phoenixes.

古文：眼，毕功之日，自当指点。
现代文：约定：凤凰的眼睛，等完工的那天，老头自己来指点。
English: The agreement: the eyes of the phoenix, and on the day of completion, the old man himself will point them out.

古文：既而绣成，五彩光焕。
现代文：不久，凤凰绣成了，五彩缤纷，光芒闪耀。
English: Soon, the phoenix was embroidered, colorful, shining.

古文：老父观之，指视安眼。
现代文：老头前来观看她绣的凤凰，指点她给凤凰安上眼睛。
English: The old man came to see the phoenix she had embroidered, and told her to put the eyes on the phoenix.

古文：俄而功毕，双凤腾跃飞舞。老父与仙女各乘一凤，升天而去。
现代文：不一会儿，绣工完毕，一双凤凰腾跃飞舞，老头就与仙女各乘一只凤凰，升天而去。
English: Soon after the embroidery was finished, a pair of phoenixes pranced and danced. The old man and the fairy each took a phoenix and ascended into the sky.

古文：时降于襄阳南山林木之上，时人名为凤林山。
现代文：曾经降落到襄阳南山林子的树上，当时的人便将那座山命名为凤林山。
English: Once he landed on a tree in the forest of the Nanshan Mountains in Yangyang. People at that time named that mountain Fenglin Mountain.

古文：后于其地置凤林关，南山侧有凤台。
现代文：后来在那个地方设置了凤林关，南山旁边还有凤台。
English: Later, Fenglin Pass was set up in that place, and there was also Fengdaiguan next to Nanshan Mountain.

古文：敕于其宅置静贞观，有女仙真像存焉。
现代文：朝廷诏令在女仙之宅建立了静贞观，有女仙画像保存在那里。
English: The imperial edict established the concept of tranquility and chastity in the home of the nymphs, and images of the nymphs are preserved there.

古文：云晋时人也。蓬球
现代文：有人说蔡女仙是晋朝时候的人。蓬球
English: Some people say that Cai Nianxian was a person during the Jin Dynasty.

古文：贝丘西有玉女山。
现代文：贝丘的西边有个玉女山。
English: On the west side of Beču there is a mountain called Tamameyama.

古文：传云，晋太始中，北海蓬球，字伯坚，入山伐木，忽觉异香，遂溯风寻至北山。
现代文：人们传说，晋朝太始年间，北海有个姓蓬名球字伯坚的人，进山去砍伐木材，忽然闻到一股奇异的香味，他就迎着风寻到了北山。
English: According to legend, in the early years of the Jin Dynasty, a man named Peng Niangzhu Bo Jian, who went into the mountains to cut wood, suddenly smelled a strange scent, and he found the North Mountain against the wind.

古文：廓然宫殿盘郁，楼台博敞。
现代文：一看那里广阔无边，宫殿曲折幽深，楼台又大又敞亮。
English: At a glance, the vast expanse there is boundless, the twists and turns of the palace are deep, and the balcony is large and bright.

古文：球入门窥之，见五株玉树；复稍前，有四妇人，端妙绝世，共弹棋于堂上。
现代文：蓬球就进门偷偷地去看，首先看到的是五棵玉树；再稍稍往前走，又看见了四个女子，这四个女子端庄秀美，都是世上所没有的美貌女子，她们正一起在堂上玩弹棋。
English: Pengqiu entered the door and peeked in. The first thing he saw was five jade trees. A little further on, he saw four women. These four women were dignified and beautiful. They were the most beautiful women in the world. They were playing chess together in the hall.

古文：见球俱惊起，谓球曰： 蓬君何故得来？ 
现代文：看到蓬球，她们都惊讶地站起来，问蓬球说： 蓬君什么缘故能来到这里？ 
English: Seeing Peng Quan, they all stood up in surprise and asked Peng Quan, "Peng Quan, why did you come here?"

古文：球曰： 寻香而至。 
现代文：蓬球回答说： 我是随着香气寻找到这里来的。 
English: The puffball replied, "I came here by following the scent.

古文：遂复还戏。
现代文：四个女子就又回去玩。
English: The four girls went back to play.

古文：一小者便上楼弹琴，留戏者呼之曰： 元晖何为独升楼？ 
现代文：一会儿，一个小一点的女子就上楼去弹琴，留下继续玩的女子就呼唤她说： 元晖，你为什么独自上楼？ 
English: After a while, a smaller woman went upstairs to play the piano. The woman who had stayed behind to continue playing called out to her: "Yuan Ye, why did you go upstairs alone?

古文：球树下立，觉少饥，乃以舌舐叶上垂露。
现代文：这时，蓬球在树下站着，觉得稍微有点饿了，就用舌头舐树叶上将要滴下的露珠。
English: At this time, the puffball stood under the tree, felt a little hungry, and licked the dew that would drip from the leaves with his tongue.

古文：俄然有一女乘鹤而至，迎恚曰： 玉华，汝等何故有此俗人？
现代文：忽然有一个女子乘着鹤来到了，冲着她们气愤地说： 玉华！你们为什么留下这么个俗人？
English: Suddenly, a woman arrived on a crane and said angrily to them, "Tamahwa! Why did you leave such a layman behind?

古文：王母即令王方平行诸仙室。 
现代文：王母娘娘命令王方平到各仙室巡行了。 
English: The queen mother and daughter ordered Wang Fangping to go on a tour of all the hermitages.

古文：球慎而出门，回顾，忽然不见。
现代文：蓬球害怕了，就溜出大门。回头一看，忽然宫殿、仙女都不见了。
English: Pengqiu was afraid, so he slipped out of the gate. Looking back, he suddenly saw that the palace and the fairy had disappeared.

古文：至家乃是建平中，其旧居闾舍，皆为墟矣。
现代文：他回到家里时，竟然，已是几十年后的建平年间，他过去居住的房屋和邻里房舍，早都变为废墟了。
English: When he returned home, it turned out that the house he used to live in and the neighbouring houses had long since been reduced to rubble, decades after they were built.

古文：紫云观女道士
现代文：紫云观女道士
English: Shiyunkan, a female Taoist

古文：唐开元二十四年春二月，驾在东京，以李适之为河南尹。
现代文：唐朝开元二十四年春二月，唐玄宗在东京洛阳，用李适之作河南府尹。
English: In the spring and February of the 24th year of the founding of the Tang Dynasty, Tang Xuan Zong was in Luoyang, Tokyo, with Li Shih as the Yin of Henan Province.

古文：其日大风，有女冠乘风而至玉贞观，集于钟楼，人观者如堵。
现代文：李适之到任后，有一天刮起了大风，有个女道士乘着风来到玉贞观，落在钟楼上，引得观看的人象一堵墙似的。
English: After Li Shizhi took office, a strong wind blew one day. A female Taoist took advantage of the wind to come to the Jade Immaculate Conception and landed on the bell tower, attracting viewers like a wall.

古文：以闻于尹。
现代文：有人就把这事报告给府尹。
English: Someone reported the matter to Fu Yin.

古文：尹率略人也，怒其聚众，袒而笞之。
现代文：府尹是个直率粗略的人，因为那个女道士使观众堆集起来而发怒，就把她的衣服扒下打板子。
English: Fu Yin, a blunt and rough-hewn man, was so angry that the female Taoist had made the audience pile up that he ripped off her clothes and beat her with a board.

古文：至十，而乘风者即不哀祈，亦无伤损，颜色不变。
现代文：打到十下，乘风而来的那个女道士即不哀告，也没有伤损，面色不变。
English: After ten strokes, the female Taoist who came by the wind did not complain, was not injured, and her face did not change.

古文：于是适之大骇，方礼请奏闻。
现代文：于是李适之大吃一惊，才以礼相请，并把这事上奏给皇帝。
English: So Li Shizhi was taken aback, and only then did he make a courtesy call, and reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：教召入内殿，访其故，乃蒲州紫云观女道士也，辟谷久，轻身，因风遂飞至此。
现代文：皇帝下诏书召女道士入内殿，询问她原故。原来她是蒲州紫云观女道士，由于辟谷时间长久，身体很轻，凭借风力就飞到这里。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict summoning a female Taoist to the inner hall and inquired about her background. It turned out that she was a female Taoist from Shiyunkan, Puzhou. Since she had been away from home for a long time, her body was very light, and she flew here by the power of the wind.

古文：玄宗大加敬畏，锡金帛，送还蒲州。
现代文：玄宗对她大加敬畏，赐给她金帛，把她送回到蒲州。
English: Xuanzong was greatly in awe of her, gave her a golden scepter and sent her back to Puzhou.

古文：数年后，又因大风，遂飞去不返。
现代文：几年以后，又因为刮大风，这个女道士终于飞去没有回来。
English: A few years later, again due to high winds, the female Taoist finally flew away and did not return.

古文：秦时妇人
现代文：秦时妇人
English: Qin Shi Ren

古文：唐开元中，代州都督以五台多客僧，恐妖伪事起，非有住持者，悉逐之。
现代文：唐朝开元年间，代州都督因为五台山客僧多，恐怕妖伪之事发生，就下令把没有度牒的和尚，全部赶走。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the governor of Daizhou ordered the expulsion of all monks who did not have a degree, because there were too many monks from Wutai Mountain, and he feared that something sinister would happen.

古文：客僧惧逐，多权窜山谷。
现代文：客僧害怕被驱逐，大多暂时逃避到山谷中去。
English: Fearful of being expelled, most of the guest monks temporarily fled to the valley.

古文：有法朗者，深入雁门山。
现代文：有个叫法朗的和尚，逃进雁门山深处。
English: A monk named Farang escaped into the depths of the Wild Goose Gate Mountains.

古文：幽涧之中有石洞，容人出入。
现代文：雁门山深涧当中有个石洞，能容纳人出进。
English: There is a stone cave in the depths of the Ganmen Mountains that can accommodate people.

古文：朗多赍干粮，欲住此山，遂寻洞入。
现代文：法朗就多带干粮，想要住在这座山里，于是他就寻找洞口进去了。
English: Farran brought more dry food and wanted to live in the mountain, so he went in search of a cave.

古文：数百步渐阔，至平地，涉流水，渡一岸，日月甚明。
现代文：走了几百步之后，那里渐渐空阔了。到了平地，踏过流水，渡过到另一岸，那里太阳、月亮都很明亮。
English: After walking a few hundred steps, there is gradually more open space. To the plain, stepped over the running water, crossed to the other side, where the sun and the moon are very bright.

古文：更行二里，至草屋中，有妇人，并衣草叶，容色端丽。
现代文：又走了二里，到一个草屋中，草屋中有女人，穿着草叶，但容颜端庄秀丽。
English: They walked another two miles and came to a grass hut. In the grass hut was a woman, dressed in grass, but her face was dignified and beautiful.

古文：见僧惧愕，问云： 汝乃何人？ 僧曰： 我人也。 
现代文：她看见和尚，害怕而又惊讶，就问和尚说： 你是什么人？ 和尚说： 我是人啊！ 
English: Frightened and surprised, she asked the monk, "Who are you?" The monk replied, "I am a human being."

古文：妇人笑云： 宁有人形骸如此？ 
现代文：女人笑着说： 难道有这样形骸的人吗？ 
English: The woman smiled and said, "Is there really such a thing as a skeleton?"

古文：僧曰： 我事佛。佛须摈落形骸，故尔。 
现代文：和尚说： 我奉事佛，佛必须贬降形骸，所以这样。 
English: The monk said, "I serve the Buddha, and the Buddha must degrade the body, so this is how it is.

古文：因问： 佛是何者？ 
现代文：她又顺便问： 佛是干什么的？ 
English: She also asked in passing: What does a Buddha do?

古文：僧具言之。
现代文：法朗就详细地说给她听。
English: He told her in detail.

古文：相顾笑曰： 语甚有理。 
现代文：女人们互相看了看，笑着说： 他的话很有道理。 
English: The women looked at each other, smiled and said, "He's got a point."

古文：复问： 宗旨如何？ 
现代文：又问： 佛教的宗旨如何？ 
English: He also asked: What is the purpose of Buddhism?

古文：僧为讲《金刚经》。
现代文：法朗就给她们讲解《金刚经》。
English: Farang explains the Diamond Sutra to them.

古文：称善数四。
现代文：她们听了再三再四称赞叫好。
English: They cheered at the repeated compliments.

古文：僧因问： 此处是何世界？ 
现代文：法朗就问她们： 这个地方是个什么样的世界？ 
English: Farran asked them: What kind of world is this place?

古文：妇人云： 我自秦人，随蒙恬筑长城。
现代文：女人说： 我们本来是秦时人，随着蒙恬修筑长城。
English: The woman said, "We were originally from the Qin Dynasty and followed the Mongols to build the Great Wall.

古文：恬多使妇人，我等不胜其弊，逃窜至此。
现代文：蒙恬多使用妇女，我们忍受不了那样的折磨，就逃避到这里。
English: Mongols mostly use women, we can't bear that kind of torture, so we fled here.

古文：初食草根，得以不死。
现代文：当初吃草根，得以不死。
English: At first, it ate grass roots to stay alive.

古文：此来亦不知年岁，不复至人间。 
现代文：来到这里也不知道年岁，也没有再到人间。 
English: You don't know how old you are when you get here, and you don't come back to the world.

古文：遂留僧，以草根哺之，涩不可食。
现代文：于是她们就把法朗留下，用草根养活他。草根涩，根本不能吃。
English: So they left Farang behind and fed him with grass roots. Grass roots are astringent and cannot be eaten at all.

古文：僧住此四十余日，暂辞，出人间求食。
现代文：法朗在这里住了四十多天，就暂时告辞出去，到人间去寻找粮食。
English: After living here for more than forty days, Farang temporarily resigned and went out to the world to look for food.

古文：及至代州，备粮更去，则迷不知其所矣。
现代文：等到他到了代州，准备好粮食再去时，却迷失了道路，不知道那个地方在哪儿了。
English: When he arrived in Daizhou and was preparing the grain, he lost his way and did not know where the place was.

古文：何二娘
现代文：何二娘
English: What two daughters

古文：广州有何二娘者，以织鞋子为业，年二十，与母居。
现代文：广州有个叫做何二娘的姑娘，以做鞋子为业，年纪二十岁，与她母亲一起居住。
English: In Guangzhou, there is a 20-year-old girl named He Er Er, who makes shoes for a living. She lives with her mother.

古文：素不修仙术，忽谓母曰： 住此闷，意欲行游。 
现代文：她一向不修仙术，有一天，忽然对她母亲说： 住在这里心里闷得慌，我心想出行云游。 
English: She had never practiced divination, but one day she suddenly said to her mother, "I'm bored living here. I want to travel."

古文：后一日便飞去，上罗浮山寺。
现代文：后来有一天她就飞走了，上了罗浮山的僧寺。
English: Then one day she flew away and went to the monk's temple on Mt.

古文：山僧问其来由，答云： 愿事和尚。 
现代文：山上的和尚问她来这里的缘由，她回答说： 我愿意侍奉和尚。 
English: The monk on the mountain asked her why she was here, and she replied, "I want to serve the monk."

古文：自尔恒留居止。
现代文：从这以后，她就长期留在这里居住。
English: Since then, she has lived here full-time.

古文：初不饮食，每为寺众采山果充斋，亦不知其所取。
现代文：开始不吃不喝，经常给寺里的众僧采摘山果充作斋饭，和尚们也不知她是从哪里弄来的。
English: At first, she didn't eat or drink. She often picked berries for the monks in the temple to use in their meals. The monks didn't know where she got them from.

古文：罗浮山北是循州，去南海四百里。
现代文：罗浮山的北面是循州，离南海四百里。
English: The north face of Mt. Luofu is Chuzhou, four hundred miles from the South China Sea.

古文：循州山寺有杨梅树，大数十围。何氏每采其实，及斋而返。
现代文：循州的山寺中有杨梅树，有几十人合抱那么粗大，何氏经常采摘它的果实，到吃斋时就返回了。
English: There is a poplar tree in the mountain temple in Zhouzhou. There are dozens of people hugging the huge tree. Mr. He often picks its fruit and returns when it is time to break the fast.

古文：后循州山寺僧至罗浮山，说云： 某月日有仙女来采杨梅。 
现代文：后来，循州山寺里的和尚到了罗浮山，对这里的人说，某月某日有个仙女来寺里采摘杨梅。
English: Later, a monk from Xuzhou Mountain Temple came to Luofu Mountain and told the people here that on a certain day of a certain month, a fairy came to the temple to pick poppies.

古文：验之，果是何氏所采之日也。
现代文：罗浮山寺里的和尚验证这件事，那天果然是何氏采摘杨梅的日子。
English: The monk in Luofu Mountain Temple verified this matter, and that day was indeed the day of Mr. He's picking of Yangmei.

古文：由此远近知其得仙。
现代文：由于这个原因，远近的人都知道何氏得道成仙了。
English: For this reason, people near and far know that He has become immortal.

古文：后乃不复居寺，或旬月则一来耳。
现代文：何氏后来就不再住在寺里，有时或十天或一月来一次而已。
English: After that, Mr. He no longer lived in the temple, only coming once every ten days or once a month.

古文：唐开元中，敕令黄门使往广州，求何氏，得之，与使俱入京。
现代文：唐朝开元年间，唐玄宗诏派黄门使前往广州寻找何氏，把她找到了，她与使者一起进京。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Xuanzong sent an envoy to Guangzhou to look for Ms. He. He found her, and she went to Beijing with the envoy.

古文：中途，黄门使悦其色，意欲挑之而未言。
现代文：半路上，黄门使喜欢她的姿色，心里想要挑逗她而没有说出来。
English: Halfway through the journey, Huangmenzu liked her appearance and wanted to tease her, but did not say so.

古文：忽云： 中使有如此心，不可留矣。 
现代文：何二娘忽然说： 中使有如此邪心，我不可逗留了。 
English: What two daughters suddenly said: "The middle one has such an evil heart, I can't stay."

古文：言毕，踊身而去，不知所之。
现代文：说完，她就腾跃而去，不知到哪里去了。
English: And with that, she skipped away, I don't know where.

古文：其后绝迹不至人间矣。
现代文：其后她的踪迹再也没有来到人间了。
English: She was never seen alive again.

