古文：齐王讳芳，字兰卿。
现代文：齐王纪，齐王名芳，字兰卿。
English: Qi Wang Ji, Qi Wang Mingfang, Ziranqing.

古文：明帝无子，养王及秦王询；宫省事秘，莫有知其所由来者。
现代文：明帝无子，抚养了齐王芳和秦王询；这是宫中的密辛，没有人知道事件的完整缘由。
English: Emperor Ming had no son and raised Qi Wangfang and Qin Wangzhen; this was a secret in the palace, and no one knows the full cause of the incident.

古文：青龙三年，立为齐王。
现代文：明帝青龙二年，被封为齐王。
English: In the second year of Qinglong of the Ming Dynasty, he was named the King of Qi.

古文：景初三年正月丁亥朔，帝甚病，乃立为皇太子。
现代文：景初三年正月初一，明帝病重，齐王被册立为皇太子。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of the Jingchu era, Emperor Ming was seriously ill, and King Qi was proclaimed crown prince.

古文：是日，即皇帝位，大赦。尊皇后曰皇太后。大将军曹爽、太尉司马宣王辅政。
现代文：这天明帝就去世了，曹芳即位，下令大赦天下，尊皇后为皇太后，大将军曹爽和太尉司马懿辅佐朝政。
English: On this day, Emperor Ming died, and Cao Fang ascended to the throne. He ordered a general amnesty for the whole country, with His Majesty the Empress as empress dowager, and General Cao Shuang and Second Lieutenant Sima Qianfu as assistants to the imperial government.

古文：诏曰： 朕以眇身，继承鸿业，茕茕在疚，靡所控告。
现代文：少帝下诏说： 我年龄尚小，就继承先帝的伟业，内心觉得十分孤独，没有地方可以诉说。
English: The young emperor said: I am too young to inherit the great cause of the previous emperor, and I feel very lonely inside, and there is no place to talk about it.

古文：大将军、太尉奉受末命，夹辅朕躬，司徒、司空、冢宰、元辅总率百寮，以宁社稷，其与群卿大夫勉勖乃心，称朕意焉。
现代文：大将军和太尉受先帝临终嘱托，共同辅佐我管理朝政，司徒、司空、冢宰、元辅等带领百官，恪尽职守，维持国家的稳定，这些人和朝中文武百官都共同勉励，很符合我的心意，我很高兴。
English: The grand general and the first lieutenant were entrusted by the late emperor to jointly assist me in the management of the imperial government. Sito, Suko, Kaji, and Genko led hundreds of officials to fulfill their duties and maintain the stability of the country. These people and hundreds of military officials from the DPRK and China all worked hard together, which is very much in line with my heart. I am very happy.

古文：诸所兴作宫室之役，皆以遗诏罢之。
现代文：现在正在修建的各种宫殿楼阁，都依照先帝遗命都要停止。
English: According to the last emperor's last will and testament, the construction of all kinds of palaces is to be stopped.

古文：官奴婢六十已上，免为良人。 
现代文：宫中婢女年满六十岁的，都放归出宫成为普通百姓。 
English: The maidservants of the palace who had reached the age of sixty were released from the palace and became ordinary people.

古文：二月，西域重译献火浣布，诏大将军、太尉临试以示百寮。
现代文：二月，西域边国通过翻译进献火浣布，少帝诏令大将军、太尉亲自试验给朝中百官看。
English: In February, the bordering countries in the western region passed the translation into the fire-sacrificing cloth, and the young emperor ordered the general and the lieutenant to personally test it and show it to the hundreds of officials in the court.

古文：丁丑诏曰： 太尉体道正直，尽忠三世，南擒孟达，西破蜀虏，东灭公孙渊，功盖海内。
现代文：二月二十一日，少帝下诏说： 太尉躬行正道，行事正直，已在朝中尽忠三代，曾经南征擒获孟达，西伐大败蜀军，东行消灭了公孙渊，功劳威震天下，无人能比。
English: On February 21, the young emperor issued the following edict: "The captain has been following the right path, acting honestly, and has been loyal to the three generations of the dynasty. He once conquered Mengda in the south, defeated the Shu army in the west, and eliminated Gongsun Yuan in the east. His achievements are impressive and incomparable.

古文：昔周成建保傅之官，近汉显宗崇宠邓禹，所以优隆隽乂，必有尊也。
现代文：从前周朝设立太傅、太保等官职，稍近的汉朝的显宗尊崇宠信邓禹，所以对待才德卓越的人，特别优待信任。
English: From the previous Zhou Dynasty, Tai Fu, Tai Bao and other official positions were established, and the Han Dynasty's Xian Zong respected and revered Deng Yu, so they treated people with outstanding talents with special preferential treatment and trust.

古文：其以太尉为太傅，持节统兵都督诸军事如故。 
现代文：现在下令提升太尉为太傅，但持符节统率军马监督军事的官职依然不变。 
English: Now it has been ordered to elevate the captain to the rank of taifu, but the official position of leading the army and supervising the military remains unchanged.

古文：三月，以征东将军满宠为太尉。
现代文：三月，封征东将军满宠为太尉。
English: In March, he was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant.

古文：夏六月，以辽东东沓县吏民渡海居齐郡界，以故纵城为新沓县以居徙民。
现代文：六月，因为辽东东沓县的军民们渡海到齐郡的边界居住，就下令把原来的纵城改为新沓县来让迁居过来的百姓居住。
English: In June, because soldiers and civilians from Donglu County, Liaodong, had crossed the sea to live on the border of Qi County, he ordered that the original fortified city be changed to Xinlu County to let the people who had moved in live there.

古文：秋七月，上始亲临朝，听公卿奏事。
现代文：七月，齐王开始亲掌朝政，听取文武百官你的奏章。
English: In July, King Qi began to take a hands-on approach to the government, listening to the speeches of hundreds of officials.

古文：八月，大赦。
现代文：八月，下令大赦天下。
English: In August, an amnesty was implemented.

古文：冬十月，以镇南将军黄权为车骑将军。
现代文：十月，令镇南将军黄权为车骑将军。
English: In October, Zhenan General Huang Quan was promoted to General of Cavalry.

古文：十二月，诏曰： 烈祖明皇帝以正月弃背天下，臣子永惟忌日之哀，其复用夏正；虽违先帝通三统之义，斯亦礼制所由变改也。
现代文：十二月，少帝下诏说： 烈祖明皇帝在正月离世，身为臣子，永远不会忘记先帝离世之日的哀痛，现在下令重新使用夏历，以正月为一年第一个月；虽然违背了先帝要通三王之统的旨意，但也是根据礼制来改变的。
English: In December, the young emperor issued the following edict: Emperor Mingzhu passed away in the first month of the year. As a courtier, he would never forget the sorrow of the day of the death of the former emperor. Now he ordered the re-use of the summer calendar, with the first month of the year as the first month; although it violated the will of the former emperor to pass the three kings, it was also changed according to the etiquette.

古文：又夏正於数为得天正，其以建寅之月为正始元年正月，以建丑月为后十二月。 
现代文：又因为夏历正月从天数上是承袭天道，符合自然运转规律的，所以以夏历建寅之月即第一个月为正始元年的岁首，以建丑之月及第十二个月为岁末。 
English: Also, because the first month of the lunar calendar inherits the heavenly path from the number of days and conforms to the natural operation law, the first month of the lunar calendar, the first month, is the beginning of the first year, and the end of the year is the end of the twelfth month.

古文：正始元年春二月乙丑，加侍中中书监刘放、侍中中书令孙资为左右光禄大夫。
现代文：正始元年二月十五日，加封侍中中书监刘放、侍中中书令孙资为左右光禄大夫。
English: On February 15, the first day of the first year of the year, Liu Fang, the attendant junior high school librarian, was appointed, and Sun Zi, the attendant junior high school librarian, became the doctor of the left and right halo.

古文：丙戌，以辽东汶、北丰县民流徙渡海，规齐郡之西安、临菑、昌国县界为新汶、南丰县，以居流民。
现代文：三月八日，将辽东汶县、北丰县的百姓渡海迁徙，又规划出齐郡的西安、临菑、昌国县等部分设立新汶、南丰县，来让迁徙的百姓居住。
English: On March 8th, the people of Liaodong Wenxian County and Beifeng County will be migrated across the sea, and it is also planned to set up Xinwen and Nanfeng counties in Xi'an, Linyi, Changguo County and other parts of Qi County to allow the migrating people to live.

古文：自去冬十二月至此月不雨。
现代文：从去年十二月到这个月都没有下雨。
English: From last December to this month, there has been no rain.

古文：丙寅，诏令狱官亟平冤枉，理出轻微；群公卿士谠言嘉谋，各悉乃心。夏四月，车骑将军黄权薨。
现代文：四月十八日，下令让各地方审理案件的官员们立刻核查冤屈的案件，整理出的案件要好好处理；文武百官们如果有对国家有利的意见，希望都能毫无保留地陈述出来。四月，车骑将军黄权去世。
English: On April 18th, it was ordered that the officials in charge of hearing cases in various regions should immediately check the cases of grievances, and the sorted out cases should be handled well; if the civil and military officials have opinions that are beneficial to the country, it is hoped that they will be able to state them without reservation. In April, General Huang Quan passed away.

古文：秋七月，诏曰： 易称损上益下，节以制度，不伤财，不害民。
现代文：七月，少帝下诏说: 《易经》中说减少上层公卿的利益就能增加下层百姓的受益，以礼仪制度加以节制，不浪费钱财，也不损害百姓利益。
English: In July, the young emperor issued the following edict: "It is said in the I Ching that reducing the interests of the upper-class nobles can increase the benefits of the lower-class people, and it is restrained by the etiquette system. It does not waste money and does not harm the interests of the people.

古文：方今百姓不足而御府多作金银杂物，将奚以为？
现代文：但现在百姓贫困，官府中的杂物都用金银制造，怎么能这样下去呢？
English: But now the people are poor, and the clutter in government offices is made of gold and silver. How can this continue?

古文：今出黄金银物百五十种，千八百馀斤，销冶以供军用 八月，车驾巡省洛阳界秋稼，赐高年力田各有差。
现代文：现在要从国库中拿出金银制成的物品一百五十种，总计一千八百多斤，销毁重新冶炼来供军中物资开销。 八月，文帝巡视洛阳地区的秋季庄稼，给那些年事已高但仍然耕种的百姓不同的赏赐。
English: Now, one hundred and fifty kinds of items made of gold and silver, totaling more than 1,800 catties, are to be taken out of the state treasury, destroyed and re-smelted to provide material expenses for the military.In August, Emperor Wen inspected the autumn crops in Luoyang region and gave different rewards to those old people who were still farming.

古文：二年春二月，帝初通论语，使太常以太牢祭孔子於辟雍，以颜渊配。
现代文：正始二年二月，皇帝稍能读懂《论语》，派掌管宗祀礼仪的太常以猪、牛、羊三牲之礼作为祭品，到太学中祭祀先师孔子，让颜渊配享祭祀。
English: At the beginning of February of the second year, the emperor was able to read the "Analects" a little, and he sent Tai Chang, who was in charge of religious rites, to sacrifice pigs, cattle, and sheep as a sacrifice, to Taigaku Middle School to sacrifice the forerunner Confucius, and let Yan Yuan enjoy the sacrifice.

古文：夏五月，吴将朱然等围襄阳之樊城，太傅司马宣王率众拒之。
现代文：五月，东吴将军朱然率兵围攻襄阳郡的樊城，太傅司马懿率领军队抵抗。
English: In May, the Eastern Wu general Zhu Ran led the troops to besiege the city of Handan in Xiangyang County, and the Tai Fu Sima Yu led the troops to resist.

古文：六月辛丑，退。
现代文：六月二十九日，吴军撤退。
English: On June 29, the Wu army withdrew.

古文：己卯，以征东将军王凌为车骑将军。冬十二月，南安郡地震。
现代文：闰月七日，任命征东将军王凌为车骑将军，十二月，南安郡发生地震。
English: On the seventh day of the leap month, Wang Ling, the general of the Eastern Expedition, was appointed as the general of the cavalry. In December, an earthquake occurred in Nan'an County.

古文：三年春正月，东平王徽薨。
现代文：正始三年正月，东平王曹徽病死。
English: At the beginning of the first month of the third year, Dongping King Cao Hui died of illness.

古文：三月，太尉满宠薨。
现代文：三月，太尉满宠去世。
English: In March, Taifu Manchong passed away.

古文：秋七月甲申，南安郡地震。
现代文：七月十八日，南安郡地震。
English: On July 18, Nan'an County was hit by an earthquake.

古文：乙酉，以领军将军蒋济为太尉。
现代文：十日，任命领军将军蒋济为太尉。
English: On the 10th, the leading general, Jiang Ji, was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant.

古文：冬十二月，魏郡地震。
现代文：十二月，魏郡也发生地震。
English: In December, there was also an earthquake in Wei County.

古文：四年春正月，帝加元服，赐群臣各有差。
现代文：正始四年正月，少帝举行加冠仪式，对文武百官都有不同程度的赏赐。
English: At the beginning of the first month of the fourth year, the crowning ceremony was held for the young emperor, and the civil and military officials were rewarded to varying degrees.

古文：夏四月乙卯，立皇后甄氏，大赦。
现代文：四月二十四日，立甄氏为皇后，下令大赦天下。
English: On April 24th, Lijing became the empress and ordered a general amnesty.

古文：五月朔，日有食之，既。
现代文：五月初一，出现日全食。
English: On the first day of May, a total solar eclipse occurred.

古文：秋七月，诏祀故大司马曹真、曹休、征南大将军夏侯尚、太常桓阶、司空陈群、太傅锺繇、车骑将军张郃、左将军徐晃、前将军张辽、右将军乐进、太尉华歆、司徒王朗、骠骑将军曹洪、征西将军夏侯渊、后将军朱灵、文聘、执金吾臧霸、破虏将军李典、立义将军庞德、武猛校尉典韦於太祖庙庭。
现代文：七月，下诏在太祖曹操庙庭中祭祀已故大司马曹真、曹休、征南大将军夏侯尚、太常桓阶、司空陈群、太傅钟繇、车骑将军张合阝、左将军徐晃、前将军张辽、右将军乐进、太尉华歆、司徒王朗、骠骑将军曹洪、征西将军夏侯渊、后将军朱灵、文聘、执金吾臧霸、破虏将军李典、立义将军庞德、武猛校尉典韦等功臣名将。
English: In July, it was decreed to hold a memorial service in the courtyard of the Grandfather Cao Cao's temple for the late Major-General Ma Cao Zhen, Cao Xiu, General of the Southern Expedition Xia Hou Shang, General of the Eastern Expedition Tai Chang Huan Qu, General of the Southern Expedition Siku Chen Qun, General of the Eastern Expedition Taifu Zhong Qi, General of the Cavalry Zhang Haoqi, General of the Left Expedition Xu Qiang, General of the Eastern Expedition Zhang Liao, General of the Right Expedition Le Jin, Lieutenant Hua Qi, General of the Eastern Expedition Wang Lang, General of the Cavalry Cao Hong, General of the Western Expedition Xia

古文：冬十二月，倭国女王俾弥呼遣使奉献。
现代文：十二月，倭国女王俾弥呼派使者来进献礼物。
English: In December, the Queen of Wa, Bimihu, sent an envoy to bring gifts.

古文：五年春二月，诏大将军曹爽率众征蜀。
现代文：正始五年二月，少帝下令让大将军曹爽率兵征讨西蜀。
English: At the beginning of February of the fifth year, the young emperor ordered the general Cao Shuang to lead the army to recruit West Shu.

古文：夏四月朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：四月初一，出现日蚀。
English: On the first day of April, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：五月癸巳，讲尚书经通，使太常以太牢祀孔子於辟雍，以颜渊配；赐太傅、大将军及侍讲者各有差。
现代文：五月十八日，少帝理解的《尚书》中的内容，派掌管宗祀礼仪的太常以猪、牛、羊三牲之礼作为祭品，到太学中祭祀先师孔子，让颜渊配享祭祀；对太傅、大将军和讲论内容的人都给了不同程度的赏赐。
English: On May 18th, the young emperor understood the content of the "Shangshu," and sent the person in charge of the religious rites, Taizang, to sacrifice pigs, cattle, and sheep as a sacrifice. He went to Taigaku Middle School to sacrifice the forerunner, Confucius, and let Yan Yuan enjoy the sacrifice. He gave different levels of rewards to Taifu, the general, and the person who gave the lecture.

古文：丙午，大将军曹爽引军还。
现代文：二月十一日，大将军曹爽班师回朝。
English: On February 11, Senior General Cao Shuang and his team returned to the DPRK.

古文：秋八月，秦王询薨。
现代文：八月，秦王曹询去世。
English: In August, Qin King Cao Zhen passed away.

古文：十二月，司空崔林薨。
现代文：九月，鲜卑前来归顺，少帝将他们安置在辽东蜀国，并设立昌黎县让他们安居。
English: In September, Xianbei came to submit, and the young emperor resettled them in Shu, Liaodong, and set up Changli County for them to live in peace.

古文：六年春二月丁卯，南安郡地震。丙子，以骠骑将军赵俨为司空；夏六月，俨薨。
现代文：十一月十二日，少帝下令在太祖庙庭中祭祀已故的尚书令荀攸。十八日，司空崔林去世。正始六年二月十七日，南安郡又发生地震。二十六日，任命骠骑将军赵俨为司空。六月，赵俨死。
English: On November 12th, the young emperor ordered that the late Emperor Shang Shuling be enshrined in the courtyard of Taizu Temple. On the 18th, Empress Dowager Cui Lin passed away. On February 17th, 1862, another earthquake occurred in Nan'an County. On the 26th, the general of the imperial cavalry Zhao Wei was appointed Empress Dowager. In June, Empress Dowager Zhao Wei died.

古文：八月丁卯，以太常高柔为司空。
现代文：八月十九日，任命太常高柔为司空。
English: On August 19th, Taizhang GaoRiu was appointed as Siku.

古文：癸巳，以左光禄大夫刘放为骠骑将军，右光禄大夫孙资为卫将军。
现代文：九月十一日，以左光禄大夫刘放为骠骑将军，右光禄大夫孙资为卫将军。
English: On September 11th, Liu Fang, the doctor of the Left Guanglu, became the general of the cavalry, and Sun Zi, the doctor of the Right Guanglu, became the general of the guards.

古文：冬十一月，祫祭太祖庙，始祀前所论佐命臣二十一人。
现代文：十一月，在太祖庙合祭先祖先帝，并一起祭祀了之前辅佐朝政的大臣共二十一位。
English: In November, a total of twenty-one ministers who had previously assisted the Imperial Court held a memorial service for the late Emperor at Taizu Temple.

古文：十二月辛亥，诏故司徒王朗所作易传，令学者得以课试。
现代文：十二月五日，下令用已故的司徒王朗所著的《易传》作为学馆里授课的内容，方便天下读书人根据这个来考核。
English: On December 5th, it was ordered to use the "I Chuan" written by the late Wang Lang, a disciple of Stow, as the content of the lectures in the school, so that readers around the world could make an assessment based on it.

古文：乙亥，诏曰： 明日大会群臣，其令太傅乘舆上殿。 
现代文：二十九日，又下达诏令： 明天太子会在朝堂面见群臣，特许太傅可以乘坐辇轿上殿。 
English: On the 29th, another imperial edict was issued: Tomorrow, the crown prince will meet with his ministers in the morning hall, and the crown prince may ride in a palanquin to the hall.

古文：七年春二月，幽州刺史毌丘俭讨高句骊，夏五月，讨濊貊，皆破之。
现代文：正始七年二月，幽州刺史毌丘征讨高句骊，五月，又去讨伐濊貊，都大获全胜。
English: At the beginning of the seventh year, in February, Yuzhou Zhishi and Qiuqiu went to fight Gao Jiuqi, and in May, they went to fight Gao Jiuqi, and both won a complete victory.

古文：韩那奚等数十国各率种落降。
现代文：韩那奚等数十个外国都纷纷带领族人投降。
English: Han Na-soo and dozens of other foreign countries led their people to surrender one after another.

古文：秋八月戊申，诏曰： 属到巿观见所斥卖官奴婢，年皆七十，或癃疾残病，所谓天民之穷者也。
现代文：八月六日，少帝又下诏说： 我派人到市场上观察，发现那些被府邸辞退而出卖自己的奴婢，年龄都已经到了七十岁，有的甚至病弱残疾，这就是普通人里的贫穷者啊。
English: On August 6, the young emperor issued another edict: "I sent someone to the market to observe, and found that those slaves and maids who were dismissed from the residence and sold their own slaves and maids had reached the age of seventy, and some were even weak and disabled. These are the poor among ordinary people."

古文：且官以其力竭而复鬻之，进退无谓，其悉遣为良民。
现代文：但官府却因为她们年老力弱又将它们卖掉，让她们没有可以依靠的，应该把她们都归为良民。
English: However, the government sold them because they were old and weak, leaving them with nothing to rely on. They should all be classified as good citizens.

古文：若有不能自存者，郡县振给之。 
现代文：如果有无法养活自己的，各地郡县官府应该赈济她们。 
English: If there are those who are unable to support themselves, local governments should help them.

古文：己酉，诏曰： 吾乃当以十九日亲祠，而昨出已见治道，得雨当复更治，徒弃功夫。
现代文：七日，天子下诏说： 我本来决定在十九日这天前往宗庙祭祀，但昨天出去发现已经有人在修整道路，要是遇上下雨还有再整改，只不过是拜拜浪费了劳力时间。
English: On the seventh day, the heavenly son said: I had originally decided to go to the ancestral temple on the 19th day, but yesterday I went out and found that someone was already repairing the road. If it rains and there are further rectifications, it is just a waste of labor time.

古文：每念百姓力少役多，夙夜存心。
现代文：我每次想到百姓劳力很少但各种税役又很繁重，就早晚忧心不宁。
English: Every time I think that the people have little labor but all kinds of taxes and duties are very burdensome, I get worried sooner or later.

古文：道路但当期于通利，闻乃挝捶老小，务崇脩饰，疲困流离，以至哀叹，吾岂安乘此而行，致馨德于宗庙邪？
现代文：道路只要能按时修整通行即可，但我又听说为了修路已经逼迫百姓们劳作不息，追求奢华的装饰，使百姓疲惫不堪流离四处，以至于民怨沸腾，我又怎么能安心地坐在轿辇上通过这条路呢，一路到先祖们的面前去展示自己的德行与孝顺呢？
English: The road is passable as long as it can be repaired on time, but I also heard that in order to build the road, the people have been forced to work tirelessly, pursue luxury decoration, make the people exhausted and wander around, so that the people's resentment boils over. How can I safely sit in a sedan chair and pass through this road, all the way to the ancestors to show my virtue and filial piety?

古文：自今已后，明申敕之。 
现代文：从现在开始，明白下令要改变这样的做法。 
English: From now on, there is a clear order to change this practice.

古文：冬十二月，讲礼记通，使太常以太牢祀孔子於辟雍，以颜渊配。
现代文：十二月，皇上理解了《礼记》中的内容，派掌管宗祀礼仪的太常以猪、牛、羊三牲之礼作为祭品，到太学中祭祀先师孔子，让颜渊配享祭祀。
English: In December, the emperor understood the contents of the "Ryoki" and sent Taijo, who was in charge of religious rituals, to sacrifice pigs, cattle, and sheep as a sacrifice, to Taigaku Junior High School to sacrifice Confucius, so that Yanbyu could enjoy the sacrifice.

古文：八年春二月朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：八年二月初一，日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of February in 2008.

古文：夏五月，分河东之汾北十县为平阳郡。
现代文：五月，将汾北等十县从河东郡中划分出来设置平阳郡。
English: In May, Binbei and other ten counties were divided from Hedong County to set up Pingyang County.

古文：秋七月，尚书何晏奏曰： 善为国者必先治其身，治其身者慎其所习。
现代文：七月，尚书何晏上书说： 善于治理国家的人一定会先修养其身，修养身心的人会慎重选择所研习的内容。
English: In July, Shangshu He Rong wrote: Those who are good at governing the country must first cultivate their body. Those who cultivate their body and mind will carefully choose the content they study.

古文：所习正则其身正，其身正则不令而行；所习不正则其身不正，其身不正则虽令不从。
现代文：所研习的内容合乎正道那么身心自然也正，身心正直的人，对待事情不需要下令他自然就能完成；所研习的内容不合乎正道那么身心自然也不正，身心不正的人，对待事情就算下令了也不会执行的。
English: If the content of the study is in accordance with the righteous path, then the body and mind will naturally be correct, and a person who is physically and mentally honest will naturally be able to complete the treatment without having to order it; if the content of the study is not in accordance with the righteous path, then the body and mind will naturally be incorrect, and a person who is physically and mentally incorrect will not carry out the treatment even if it is ordered.

古文：是故为人君者，所与游必择正人，所观览必察正象，放郑声而弗听，远佞人而弗近，然后邪心不生而正道可弘也。
现代文：所以为人君主，一定要选身心都正直的人来交往，选择符合礼仪制度的内容来观察学习，不听像郑卫之音那样违背雅乐的音乐，不接近心怀奸诈的小人，这样就能保证不生出奸邪之心又能保证弘扬正道了。
English: Therefore, as a monarch, we must choose people who are honest in mind and body to interact with, choose content that conforms to the etiquette system to observe and learn, do not listen to music that violates the classical music like Zheng Weizhong, and do not approach small people with treacherous hearts. In this way, we can ensure that we do not produce treacherous hearts and can ensure the promotion of the righteous path.

古文：季末闇主，不知损益，斥远君子，引近小人，忠良疏远，便辟亵狎，乱生近昵，譬之社鼠；考其昏明，所积以然，故圣贤谆谆以为至虑。
现代文：朝代末期那些昏庸不明的君主，不了解是非黑白，远离品行良好的君子，亲近心术不正的小人，疏远忠臣良将，亲近宠信那些谄媚奉上的小人，与他们太过亲近就容易导致灾乱发生，就好像老鼠一样；考察这些昏昧贤明，都是长时间的积累造成的，所以先贤圣人们都谆谆教诲，常常忧心。
English: At the end of the dynasty, those dim-witted and ignorant monarchs did not understand the black and white, far away from the well-behaved gentleman, close to the villain who was not good at mind tricks, estranged from the loyal general, close to the villain who was flattered by the flatterer, and too close to them would easily lead to the occurrence of disasters, just like a mouse; the investigation of these dim-witted sages was the result of long-term accumulation, so the sages and saints were always instructing and often worried.

古文：舜戒禹曰 邻哉邻哉 ，言慎所近也，周公戒成王曰 其朋其朋 ，言慎所与也。
现代文：尧帝告诫大禹说 邻哉邻哉 ，意思是说君主与大臣的关系就好像相近的邻居，要谨慎选择相近的邻居，周公告诫成王说： 其朋其朋 ，意思是要谨慎选择交往的人。
English: Emperor Qian admonished Dayu that "neighbors are neighbors," meaning that the relationship between the monarch and the minister is like a close neighbor, so be careful to choose a close neighbor. Zhou issued a proclamation to admonish Cheng Wang, saying: "Chi peng qi peng," meaning be careful to choose people to associate with.

古文：书云： 一人有庆，兆民赖之。 
现代文：《诗》里说 君主一个人有良好品德，天下万民都能享受到恩泽。
English: The "poem" says that the monarch alone has good moral character, and all people in the world can enjoy the grace.

古文：可自今以后，御幸式乾殿及游豫后园，皆大臣侍从，因从容戏宴，兼省文书，询谋政事，讲论经义，为万世法。 
现代文：从今以后，应当陛下驾临式乾殿或者到花园中游玩放松的时候，都让一些大臣随侍左右，这样在从容的宴饮游乐之时，还能查看文书奏章，共同讨论决定朝政，或者探讨经书中的内容与思想，这才是使得天下长治久安流传万世的办法。 
English: From now on, when His Majesty should arrive at the Dry Palace or go to the garden to relax, let some ministers accompany him. In this way, during the leisurely banquet and recreation, you can also check the records of documents, jointly discuss the decision of the government, or explore the content and ideas in the scriptures. This is the way to make the world long-lasting and peaceful.

古文：冬十二月，散骑常侍谏议大夫孔乂奏曰： 礼，天子之宫，有斫砻之制，无朱丹之饰，宜循礼复古。
现代文：十二月，散骑常侍谏议大夫孔乂上奏说： 按礼制，天子所居的宫殿，有斩断木头然后用石头来磨平的做法，没有用朱丹红色等来装饰的，应该遵循礼制，恢复以前的做法。
English: In December, the Councilor of the Imperial Household Agency, Dr. Kong Qian, said: According to the etiquette, the palace where the heavenly son lives has the practice of chopping wood and then grinding it with stones. If it is not decorated with red jade, it should follow the etiquette and resume the previous practice.

古文：今天下已平，君臣之分明，陛下但当不懈于位，平公正之心，审赏罚以使之。
现代文：现在天下已经平定，君与臣地位分明，陛下您应当不要懈怠，怀着公平的心，以严格的赏罚制度来治理朝政。
English: Now that the country has been pacified and the status of the emperor and his subjects is clear, Your Majesty should not slack off, but govern the imperial government with a fair mind and a strict reward and punishment system.

古文：可绝后园习骑乘马，出必御辇乘车，天下之福，臣子之愿也。 
现代文：应该停止在后园练习乘马骑射，出入必须有轿辇或御车随行，做到这样，就是天下百姓的福祉，文武百官的愿望了。 
English: It is necessary to stop the practice of horse riding and shooting in the backyard, and the entrances and exits must be accompanied by carriages or cars. To do so is the well-being of the people of the world, and the wish of all civil and military officials.

古文：晏、乂咸因阙以进规谏。
现代文：何晏、孔乂都常常因为君王的过失加以劝谏。
English: He and Kong are often reprimanded for the king's misdeeds.

古文：九年春二月，卫将军中书令孙资，癸巳，骠骑将军中书监刘放，三月甲午，司徒卫臻，各逊位，以侯就第，位特进。
现代文：正始九年二月，卫将军中书令孙资，三十日，骠骑将军中书监刘放，三月二十二日，司徒卫臻，分别辞去自己的职务。
English: At the beginning of the ninth year, in February, Sun Zi, the secretary of General Wei, resigned from his post, on the 30th, Liu Fang, the inspector of General Wei, and on the 22nd of March, Sitou Weizhen, resigned from their posts.

古文：四月，以司空高柔为司徒；光禄大夫徐邈为司空，固辞不受。
现代文：少帝下令升任到最高一级官职，让他们以侯爵的身份退休。四月，升任司空高柔为司徒，光禄大夫徐邈为司空，徐邈坚决推辞不肯接受。
English: The young emperor ordered that they be promoted to the highest-ranking official position, so that they could retire as marquesses. In April, Siku Gaoru was promoted to the position of tutor, and Guanglu doctor Xu Wei was promoted to the position of Siku. Xu Wei firmly refused to accept the resignation.

古文：秋九月，以车骑将军王凌为司空。
现代文：九月，升任车骑将军王凌为司空。
English: In September, Wang Ling was promoted to the post of carriage and cavalry general.

古文：冬十月，大风发屋折树。
现代文：十月，有大风将房屋摧毁树木折断。
English: In October, high winds tore down houses and snapped trees.

古文：嘉平元年春正月甲午，车驾谒高平陵。
现代文：嘉平元年正月六日，少帝拜谒高平陵。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the first year of Jiaping, the young emperor visited Gaoping Mausoleum.

古文：太傅司马宣王奏免大将军曹爽、爽弟中领军羲、武卫将军训、散骑常侍彦官，以侯就第。
现代文：太傅司马懿上奏请求免去大将军曹爽以及他的弟弟中领军曹羲、武将军曹训、散骑常侍曹彦官等人的官职，让他们以侯爵的身份退休。
English: Grand Master Sima Yu made a request for the removal of Grand General Cao Shuang and his younger brother, Lieutenant Colonel Cao Yu, General Cao Xun, Cavalryman Cao Yan and others from their official positions, so that they could retire as marquesses.

古文：戊戌，有司奏收黄门张当付廷尉，考实其辞，爽与谋不轨。
现代文：十日，相关官员上奏请求收押宦官张当并交付廷尉审理，经过考查，证实曹爽与张当图谋叛逆。
English: On the 10th, relevant officials submitted a request to detain eunuch Zhang Dang and submit it to the court for trial. After examination, it was confirmed that Cao Shuang and Zhang Dang were plotting to rebel.

古文：又尚书丁谧、邓飏、何晏、司隶校尉毕轨、荆州刺史李胜、大司农桓范皆与爽通奸谋，夷三族。
现代文：还有尚书丁谧、邓、何晏、司隶校尉毕轨、荆州刺史李胜、大司马桓范等人也了解曹爽的阴谋并参与其中，这些人都被夷灭三族。
English: Shangshu Dingyao, Deng, Heyao, Sili Lieutenant Bi Luo, Jingzhou Shishi Li Sheng, Chief Secretary Ma Huanfan and others also understood Cao Shuang's plot and participated in it. These people were all exterminated.

古文：语在爽传。
现代文：这件事在《曹爽传》中有记载。
English: This incident is recorded in the "Cao Shuang Biography."

古文：丙午，大赦。
现代文：十八日，下诏大赦天下。
English: On the afternoon of the 3rd, the amnesty began.

古文：丁未，以太傅司马宣王为丞相，固让乃止。
现代文：十九日，任命太傅司马懿为丞相，司马懿坚决推迟，天子才停止了任命。
English: On the 19th, the appointment of Taifu Sima Yi as chancellor of the exchequer was firmly postponed by Sima Yi, and only then did the emperor stop the appointment.

古文：夏四月乙丑，改年。
现代文：四月八日，改年号正始为嘉平元年。
English: On April 8th, the new year began as the first year of Jiaping.

古文：丙子，太尉蒋济薨。
现代文：十九日，太尉蒋济去世。
English: On the 19th, Lieutenant Jiang Ji passed away.

古文：冬十二月辛卯，以司空王凌为太尉。
现代文：十二月九日，封司空王凌为太尉。
English: On December 9th, the commander of the fortress, Ku Wangling, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：庚子，以司隶校尉孙礼为司空。
现代文：十八日，封司隶校尉孙礼为司空。
English: On the 18th, Lieutenant Colonel Sun Li was appointed to the position.

古文：二年夏五月，以征西将军郭淮为车骑将军。
现代文：嘉平二年五月，封征西将军郭淮为车骑将军。
English: In May of the second year of Jiaping, Guo Huai, the general of the Western Expedition, became the general of the cavalry.

古文：冬十月，以特进孙资为骠骑将军。
现代文：十月，封特进孙资为骠骑将军。
English: In October, the special envoy Sun Zi was appointed as the general of the cavalry.

古文：十一月，司空孙礼薨。
现代文：十一月，司空孙礼去世。
English: In November, Siku Sunlei passed away.

古文：十二月甲辰，东海王霖薨。
现代文：十二月二十七日，东海王曹霖死。
English: On December 27th, the king of the East Sea, Cao Lin, died.

古文：乙未，征南将军王昶渡江，掩攻吴，破之。
现代文：十八日，征南将军王昶率领军队渡过长江，趁吴军不备攻打他们，大获全胜。
English: On the 18th, the south-conquering general Wang Xi led the army across the Yangtze River, taking advantage of the Wu army's unpreparedness to attack them, and won a complete victory.

古文：三年春正月，荆州刺史王基、新城太守州泰攻吴，破之，降者数千口。
现代文：嘉平三年正月，荆州刺史王基，新城太守州泰领兵攻打吴国，取得胜利，投降的士兵有数千人。
English: In the first month of the third year of Jiaping, Jingzhou stabbed Shi Wangji, and Xincheng Tai Shou Shu Tai led the troops to attack Wu, and achieved victory, with thousands of soldiers surrendering.

古文：二月，置南郡之夷陵县以居降附。
现代文：二月，划定南郡的夷陵县为让东吴投降的军民安居的地方。
English: In February, Yiling County in Nan County was designated as a place for the soldiers and civilians who surrendered in Eastern Wu to live in peace.

古文：三月，以尚书令司马孚为司空。
现代文：三月，提升尚书令司马孚为司空。
English: In March, Shang Shuling promoted Sima Fu to Sifu.

古文：四月甲申，以征南将军王昶为征南大将军。
现代文：四月九日，任命征南将军王昶为征南大将军。
English: On April 9, the Southern Expeditionary Army General Wang Qi was appointed as the Southern Expeditionary Army General.

古文：壬辰，大赦。
现代文：十七日，大赦天下。
English: On the 19th, there was a general amnesty.

古文：丙午，闻太尉王凌谋废帝，立楚王彪，太傅司马宣王东征凌。
现代文：五月三日，听闻太尉王凌谋划要废掉皇帝曹芳，立楚王曹彪为帝，太尉司马懿率军东征讨伐王凌。
English: On May 3, it was learned that Lieutenant Wang Ling planned to depose Emperor Cao Fang and install King Cao Biao of Chu as emperor, and Lieutenant Sima Wei led the Eastern Expedition to fight against Wang Ling.

古文：五月甲寅，凌自杀。
现代文：五月十日，王凌自杀。
English: On May 10, Wang Ling committed suicide.

古文：六月，彪赐死。
现代文：六月，曹彪被赐死。
English: In June, Cao Biao was sentenced to death.

古文：秋七月壬戌，皇后甄氏崩。
现代文：七月十九日，皇后甄氏去世。
English: On July 19, Empress Zhen passed away.

古文：辛未，以司空司马孚为太尉。
现代文：二十八日，任命司空司马孚为太尉。
English: On the 28th, he appointed Siu Kuo and Sima Fu as second lieutenants.

古文：戊寅，太傅司马宣王薨，以卫将军司马景王为抚军大将军，录尚书事。
现代文：八月五日，太傅司马懿病逝，天子封他的长子卫将军司马师为抚军大将军，总领尚书事宜。
English: On August 5th, Grand Master Sima Qian died of illness, and Emperor Tianzi appointed his eldest son, General Sima Shi, to be the general of the army and the leader of the military affairs.

古文：乙未，葬怀甄后於太清陵。
现代文：二十二日，将甄皇后安葬在太清陵。
English: On the 22nd, Empress Zhen was buried in the Taiqing Mausoleum.

古文：庚子，骠骑将军孙资薨。
现代文：二十七日，骠骑将军孙资去世。
English: On the 27th, the cavalry general Sun Zi passed away.

古文：十一月，有司奏诸功臣应飨食於太祖庙者，更以官为次，太傅司马宣王功高爵尊，最在上。
现代文：十一月，朝中掌管礼仪祭祀的官员上奏，认为应该将诸位功臣的灵位安置在太祖曹操的庭庙中，一起配享祭祀，排列次序则按照功臣们生前的官职高低来排列，已故太尉司马懿劳苦功高，地位尊崇，应该安置在最前面。
English: In November, the official in charge of ceremonial and sacrificial rites in the central government made a report, saying that the spiritual position of the heroes should be placed in the temple of the great ancestor Cao Cao, and they should enjoy the sacrificial rites together. The order of the ranking was arranged according to the rank of the heroes before their death. The late Lieutenant Sima Wei worked hard and was highly respected, and should be placed in the front.

古文：十二月，以光禄勋郑冲为司空。
现代文：十二月，提升光禄勋郑冲为司空。
English: In December, Zheng Chong was promoted to Sikyong.

古文：四年春正月癸卯，以抚军大将军司马景王为大将军。
现代文：嘉平四年正月二日，少帝封抚军大将军司马师为大将军。
English: On the second day of the first month of the fourth year of Jiaping, Sima Shi, the general of the young emperor's fief army, became the general.

古文：二月，立皇后张氏，大赦。
现代文：二月，册封张氏为皇后，大赦天下。
English: In February, the Zhang family was crowned empress and granted a general amnesty.

古文：夏五月，鱼二，见於武库屋上。
现代文：五月，在有两条鱼出现在收藏兵器的仓库屋顶上。
English: In May, two fish appeared on the roof of a warehouse housing a collection of weapons.

古文：冬十一月，诏征南大将军王昶、征东将军胡遵、镇南将军毌丘俭等征吴。
现代文：十一月，下诏令让征南大将军王昶、征东将军胡遵、镇南将军毋丘俭等率军攻打东吴。
English: In November, the imperial edict was issued to let the Southern Expeditionary Army General Wang Qian, the Eastern Expeditionary Army General Hu Zun, and the Southern Expeditionary Army General Zhennan Boqiu Jian lead the army to attack Dongwu.

古文：十二月，吴大将军诸葛恪拒战，大破众军于东关。
现代文：十二月，东吴大将军诸葛恪率军抵抗，两军交战，在东关大败魏军。
English: In December, the Great General of the Eastern Wu, Zhuge Ke, led the resistance army, and the two armies fought, defeating the Wei army in Dongguan.

古文：不利而还。
现代文：魏军失利，班师回朝。
English: The Wei army was defeated, and the division returned to China.

古文：五年夏四月，大赦。
现代文：嘉平五年四月，大赦天下。
English: In April of the fifth year of Jiaping, the general amnesty came into effect.

古文：五月，吴太傅诸葛恪围合肥新城，诏太尉司马孚拒之。秋七月，恪退还。
现代文：五月，东吴太傅诸葛恪领兵围攻合肥新城。朝廷派太尉司马孚督师率军反击，七月，诸葛恪率军撤退。
English: In May, Eastern Wu Taifu Zhuge Gua led an army to besiege Hefei New Town. The imperial court sent Lieutenant Sima Fu to lead the army to counterattack, and in July, Zhuge Gua led the army to retreat.

古文：八月，诏曰： 故中郎西平郭脩，砥节厉行，秉心不回。
现代文：八月，天子下诏说： 已故中郎西平人郭脩，一直磨炼自己的节操与德行，行为正直，忠心不改。
English: In August, Emperor Taizong said: The late Guo Jun, the middle son of Xiping, had been honing his self-discipline and virtue, behaving honestly and remaining loyal.

古文：乃者蜀将姜维寇钞脩郡，为所执略。
现代文：当初蜀将姜维侵犯西平，郭脩被他抓住。
English: At first, Shu general Jiang Wei invaded Xiping, and Guo Gan was caught by him.

古文：往岁伪大将军费祎驱率群众，阴图闚，道经汉寿，请会众宾，脩於广坐之中手刃击祎，勇过聂政，功逾介子，可谓杀身成仁，释生取义者矣。
现代文：后来伪大将军费祎率领百姓北上，暗中图谋偷袭我们，经过汉寿的时候，费祎宴请军中将士，郭脩在众人面前用剑刺杀了费祎，他的智谋勇气已经超过了聂政刺杀韩相侠累时的勇气，功劳超越了斩杀楼兰王的傅介子，可以称得上是杀身成仁，舍生取义的典范了。
English: Later, the pseudo-general Fei Yao led the people to the north, secretly plotting to attack us. When the Han Shou passed, Fei Yao invited the lieutenant generals to a banquet. Guo Yao assassinated Fei Yao with a sword in front of everyone. His wisdom and courage have surpassed the courage of Han Xiangxia assassinated by Yan Zheng, and his merit has surpassed that of Fu Kaizi who assassinated King Loulan. It can be said to be a model of killing oneself and sacrificing one's life for righteousness.

古文：夫追加褒宠，所以表扬忠义；祚及后胤，所以奖劝将来。
现代文：现在朝廷为他追加封号以示恩宠，就是为了表扬智勇双全又忠心不改的人；赐福给他的后代，是为了鼓励后人学习他的智勇忠义。
English: Now the imperial court has added a seal to him as a sign of grace, that is, to praise a man who is both wise and brave and loyal; to bless his descendants is to encourage future generations to learn from his wisdom, courage and loyalty.

古文：其追封脩为长乐乡侯，食邑千户，谥曰威侯；子袭爵，加拜奉车都尉；赐银千鉼，绢千匹，以光宠存亡，永垂来世焉。 
现代文：现在下令追封郭脩为长乐乡侯，享有有千户的封地，赐谥号为威侯；他的儿子承袭他的爵位，加封奉车都尉；赏赐银两千鉼，一千匹绢，以此展示对郭脩以及他的后代的恩宠，让郭脩的精神永远流传。 
English: Now, he ordered that Guo Jun should be made a vassal of Changle Township, enjoy the fief of a thousand households, and be given the title of vassal; his son should inherit his title, and be made a vassal of a chariot captain; and he should be awarded two thousand taels of silver and a thousand horses, so as to show his grace to Guo Jun and his descendants, and let the spirit of Guo Jun be passed down forever.

古文：自帝即位至于是岁，郡国县道多所置省，俄或还复，不可胜纪。
现代文：自少帝曹芳即位到这一年，十四年间，国内的郡、国、县、道等行政区划多有变化。有的不久又复称，这样的情况数不胜数。
English: In the 14 years since the enthronement of the young Emperor Cao Fang, there have been many changes in the administrative divisions of counties, provinces, prefectures, and provinces in China. Some were renamed again soon after, and there are countless such cases.

古文：六年春二月己丑，镇东将军毌丘俭上言： 昔诸葛恪围合肥新城，城中遣士刘整出围传消息，为贼所得，考问所传，语整曰： 诸葛公欲活汝，汝可具服。 
现代文：嘉平六年二月七日，镇东将军毋丘俭上奏： 去年诸葛恪率军包围合肥新城，城中将士派遣军士刘整偷偷突出重围传递消息，但不幸被敌军抓住，敌军拷问他所传递消息的内容，告诉刘整说： 诸葛公想给你机会活着，只要你认罪即可。 
English: On February 7th, the 6th year of the Jiaping era, General Zhendong made the following announcement: Last year, Zhuge Kun led the army to encircle Hefei New City. The general officer of the city sent Sergeant Liu Zhengyi to surreptitiously highlight the encirclement and pass on the news, but unfortunately he was caught by the enemy army. The enemy army interrogated the content of the message he passed on and told Liu Zhengyi: Zhuge Kun wants to give you a chance to live, as long as you confess.

古文：整骂曰： 死狗，此何言也！
现代文：刘整怒骂说： 死狗，这是什么话！
English: Liu Zhengyi scolded angrily: "Dead dog, what kind of language is this!

古文：我当必死为魏国鬼，不苟求活，逐汝去也。
现代文：我就算死也是魏国的魂灵，不会苟且求生，只希望将你们这些贼人都打败。
English: Even if I die, I will still be the soul of Wei. I will not seek to survive, I only hope to defeat all of you thieves.

古文：欲杀我者，便速杀之。 
现代文：要是想杀掉我，就快动手吧。 
English: If you want to kill me, go ahead.

古文：终无他辞。
现代文：除此之外，再也没有其他的话了。
English: There is no other word for it.

古文：又遣士郑像出城传消息，或以语恪，恪遣马骑寻围迹索，得像还。
现代文：城中又派兵士郑像出城传递消息，有奸细将这一情况报告给诸葛恪诸葛恪派骑兵绕着城寻找搜索，抓住了郑像。
English: The soldiers in the city also sent Zheng Zong out of the city to deliver the news. Some spies reported this situation to Zhuge Zhuge sent cavalry to search around the city and caught Zheng Zong.

古文：四五人靮头面缚，将绕城表，敕语像，使大呼，言 大军已还洛，不如早降。 
现代文：抓住之后，诸葛恪又派四五个人将郑像绑起来，用布遮住脸，带着他绕着城外走，令他向城中大喊说 朝廷的援军已经返回洛阳，我们不会胜利，不如趁早投降了吧。 
English: After seizing him, Zhuge again sent four or five men to tie up the Zheng statue, cover his face with a cloth, and lead him around the outskirts of the city, making him shout to the city that the imperial reinforcements had returned to Luoyang, that we would not win, and that it would be better to surrender as soon as possible.

古文：像不从其言，更大呼城中曰： 大军近在围外，壮士努力！ 
现代文：郑像没有按照他的话喊话，甚至还向城中大喊： 我们的大军已经到了，城中将士们要继续努力战斗！ 
English: Zheng Zong did not shout words according to his words, and even shouted to the city: Our great army has arrived, the soldiers in the city should continue to fight!

古文：贼以刀筑其口，使不得言，像遂大呼，令城中闻知。
现代文：吴军用刀刺入他的口中，让他无法说话，郑像就大呼，让城中的将士知道。
English: Wu stuck a military knife into his mouth, leaving him unable to speak, and Zheng shouted loudly to let the soldiers in the city know.

古文：整、像为兵，能守义执节，子弟宜有差异。 
现代文：刘整、郑像作为军士，能坚守正义保持气节，他们的子弟应该受到优待。 
English: As sergeants, Liu Zhengyi and Zheng Zi are able to adhere to justice and maintain discipline, and their children should receive preferential treatment.

古文：诏曰： 夫显爵所以褒元功，重赏所以宠烈士。
现代文：于是天子下令说： 封爵是为了褒奖功臣，重赏是为了表示对为国家牺牲的烈士的恩宠。
English: Therefore, the heavenly son ordered: "The knighthood is to reward the meritorious, and the reward is to express the grace to the martyrs who sacrificed for the country.

古文：整、像召募通使，越蹈重围，冒突白刃，轻身守信，不幸见获，抗节弥厉，扬六军之大势，安城守之惧心，临难不顾，毕志传命。
现代文：刘整、郑像在危急之际成为与外界相通的人，穿过包围越过阻碍，冒着生命危险突出重围只为了传递消息，看轻自己的生命就是为了坚守自己的信义，哪怕不幸被敌军抓住，却更能展示在危难之时的气节与坚守，振作我军的声势，安抚城中将士的恐惧之心，在生死关头也不顾自己，只希望能完成自己传递消息的使命。
English: Liu Zhengyi and Zheng Zong became communicators with the outside world in a time of crisis. They passed through the encirclement and overcame obstacles, risked their lives to stand out from the encirclement only to pass on the news. They despised their own lives in order to uphold their loyalty. Even if they were caught by the enemy, they were more able to show their stamina and perseverance in a time of crisis. They invigorated the voice of our army, calmed the fear of the city's generals, and did not care about themselves in a life-and-death situation. They only hoped to complete their mission of passing on the news.

古文：昔解杨执楚，有陨无贰，齐路中大夫以死成命，方之整、像，所不能加。
现代文：过去晋国大臣解杨出使宋国时被楚国抓获，就算失去性命也忠诚不二，齐国路中大夫被吴楚士兵抓住，用自己的生命来换取使命的完成，这些人跟刘整、郑像相比，也不会更杰出。
English: In the past, when the minister of Jin Province sent Yang as an envoy to Song Province, he was captured by Chu Province and remained loyal even if he lost his life. The doctor of Qi Province was captured by Wu Chu soldiers and exchanged his life for the completion of his mission. These people are no more outstanding than Liu Zhengyi and Zheng Zong.

古文：今追赐整、像爵关中侯，各除士名，使子袭爵，如部曲将死事科。 
现代文：所以现在追封刘整、郑像为关中侯，各免除他们的士兵身份，让他们的儿子承袭他们的爵位，按军中阵亡将领的品级规格来举办他们的葬礼。 
English: Therefore, Liu Zhengyi and Zheng are now posthumously appointed as Guan Zhonghou, and each of them is exempted from their soldier status, and their sons are allowed to inherit their titles, and their funerals are held according to the rank specifications of the fallen generals in the army.

古文：庚戌，中书令李丰与皇后父光禄大夫张缉等谋废易大臣，以太常夏侯玄为大将军。
现代文：二十二日，中书令李丰与皇后的父亲光禄大夫张缉等人私下谋划撤换朝臣，让太常夏侯玄当大将军。
English: On the 22nd, the Chinese imperial edict ordered Li Feng and the queen's father, Guanglu doctor Zhang Zhe, and others to secretly plan the removal and replacement of courtiers, and let Tai Changxia Hou Xuan become the general.

古文：事觉，诸所连及者皆伏诛。
现代文：事情败露，所有与此事有牵连的人都被诛杀。
English: The affair was exposed, and all those involved were killed.

古文：辛亥，大赦。
现代文：二十三日，大赦。
English: On the 18th, there was a general amnesty.

古文：三月，废皇后张氏。
现代文：三月，废掉了张皇后。
English: In March, the Zhang empress was abolished.

古文：夏四月，立皇后王氏，大赦。
现代文：四月，册封王氏为皇后，大赦天下。
English: In April, the Wang clan was crowned empress and granted a general amnesty.

古文：五月，封后父奉车都尉王夔为广明乡侯、光禄大夫，位特进，妻田氏为宣阳乡君。
现代文：五月，封皇后的父亲奉车都尉王夔为广明乡侯和光禄大夫，位居三公之下。他的妻子田氏被封为宣阳田君。
English: In May, the father of the empress was given the title of Prince of Guangming Township and the title of Doctor of Guanglu, ranking below the Three Princes. His wife, Lady Tian, was given the title of Princess Xuanyang.

古文：秋九月，大将军司马景王将谋废帝，以闻皇太后。
现代文：九月，大将军司马师密谋要废掉曹芳另立新帝，他将这件事告诉了皇太后。
English: In September, the great general Sima Shi conspired to abolish Cao Fang and set up a new emperor, and he told the Empress Dowager about this.

古文：甲戌，太后令曰： 皇帝芳春秋已长，不亲万机，耽淫内宠，沈漫女德，日延倡优，纵其丑谑；迎六宫家人留止内房，毁人伦之叙，乱男女之节；恭孝日亏，悖慠滋甚，不可以承天绪，奉宗庙。
现代文：十六日，皇太后下懿旨说： 皇帝曹芳年纪已经不小，但却不理政事，一味宠爱身边小人，又沉迷女色，每日都与倡优之辈混在一起，纵容他们的各种丑态媚上；还曾经将六宫后妃的家人都召进宫里让他们居住在内房，毁坏人伦秩序，打乱男女的节操；对长辈的恭敬孝顺渐渐荒驰，狂悖傲慢滋长得越来越严重，这样的皇帝是不能承接天命，敬奉宗庙的。
English: On the 16th, the empress dowager issued an edict saying: Emperor Cao Fang is already quite old, but he does not care about political affairs. He loves the villains around him and is obsessed with women. Every day, he mingles with those who advocate excellence and indulges their various ugly manners. He also once called the families of the six empresses into the palace to let them live in the inner room, destroying the order of human relations and disrupting the discipline of men and women. Respect and filial piety for elders are gradually running amok, and insanity and arrogance are growing more and more serious. Such an emperor cannot accept the mandate of heaven and worship the

古文：使兼太尉高柔奉策，用一元大武告于宗庙，遣芳归藩于齐，以避皇位。 
现代文：所以现在我觉得派遣司徒兼太尉带着曹芳即位的文书，用一头大牛的牲礼去祭祀曹氏宗庙和各位先帝，让曹芳到齐地去做藩王，以退位让贤。 
English: So now I feel that I should send a priest and captain to take Cao Fang's accession document and sacrifice a bull to the ancestral temple of the Cao clan and the previous emperors, let Cao Fang go to Qiji to become the king of the clan, and let him abdicate.

古文：是日迁居别宫，年二十三。
现代文：这一天，曹芳就迁到别宫居住，此时他年仅二十三岁。
English: On this day, Cao Fang moved to another palace to live, at this time he was only 23 years old.

古文：使者持节送卫，营齐王宫於河内之重门，制度皆如藩国之礼。
现代文：朝廷派出使者持符节护卫他到齐地，并在河内郡的重门为他修建了 齐王宫 ，一切制度都是按藩王的礼制。
English: The imperial court sent emissaries to escort him to Qi with the festival of symbols, and built the Qi Royal Palace for him at the main gate of Hanoi County. All systems were in accordance with the etiquette of the king of the domain.

古文：丁丑，令曰： 东海王霖，高祖文皇帝之子。
现代文：十九日，皇太后又下诏说： 东海王曹霖是高祖文皇帝的嫡子。
English: On the 19th, the empress dowager issued another edict, saying: the East Sea King Cao Lin is the legitimate son of Emperor Gao Zuwen.

古文：霖之诸子，与国至亲，高贵乡公髦有大成之量，其以为明皇帝嗣。
现代文：曹霖的几个儿子，都是皇亲国戚，听说曹霖的儿子中子中高贵乡公曹髦有成就大业的气量，现在令他作为明帝的继承人即天子位。
English: Several of Cao Lin's sons were relatives of the emperor. It was said that Cao Lin's son, Cao Xiang, a middle-ranking noble, had the ability to accomplish great things. Now he is the heir of Emperor Ming, that is, the Son of Heaven.

古文：高贵乡公讳髦，字彦士，文帝孙，东海定王霖子也。
现代文：高贵乡公名髦，字彦士，是魏文帝曹丕的孙子。正始五年封为郯县高贵乡公。
English: He was the grandson of Cao Pi, Emperor of Wei and Wen. He was the first nobleman of Gaogui Township in Jixian County for five years.

古文：正始五年，封郯县高贵乡公。
现代文：从小就勤勉好学，学业早有成就。
English: Since childhood, he has been diligent and eager to learn, and has achieved academic success.

古文：少好学，夙成。齐王废，公卿议迎立公。
现代文：齐王曹芳被废后，朝中文武百官商议立他为皇帝。
English: After King Cao Fang of Qi was dethroned, hundreds of military officials of the Chinese government discussed and appointed him as emperor.

古文：十月己丑，公至于玄武馆，群臣奏请舍前殿，公以先帝旧处，避止西厢；群臣又请以法驾迎，公不听。
现代文：十月四日，他到达京都洛阳北郊邙山的玄武馆，百官上书请求他住到前殿，曹髦认为前殿是从前先帝的住处，所以要到西厢居住；百官又希望以天子之礼迎接他，他依旧没有同意。
English: On October 4, he arrived at the Genbukan in Shaoshan, a northern suburb of Kyoto's Luoyang, and a hundred officials sent a letter requesting him to live in the front hall. Cao Shixiao believed that the front hall was the former emperor's residence, so he wanted to live in the west wing; the hundred officials also hoped to welcome him with the gift of heaven, but he still did not agree.

古文：庚寅，公入于洛阳，群臣迎拜西掖门南，公下舆将答拜，傧者请曰： 仪不拜 公曰： 吾人臣也。 
现代文：五日，曹髦进入京都洛阳，百官到西掖门南边叩拜迎接，曹髦下车想要答拜，司礼官拜请说： 按礼制，您不需要下拜。 曹髦说： 我不是天子，是臣子。 
English: On the fifth day, Cao Xiang entered Kyoto Luoyang, and hundreds of officials came to the south side of the Xidi Gate to bow and greet him. Cao Xiang got off the bus and wanted to bow in return. The ceremonial officer asked him to say: "According to the etiquette, you don't need to bow." Cao Xiang said: "I'm not the son of heaven, I'm a courtier."

古文：遂答拜。
现代文：就对群臣还礼了。
English: He bowed to the courtiers.

古文：至止车门下舆。
现代文：行进到宫门，曹髦令车子停下想要下车步行。
English: On the way to the palace gate, Cao Xiang ordered the car to stop and wanted to get off and walk.

古文：左右曰： 旧乘舆入。 
现代文：左右的侍从都说： 按前制，您可以乘车进入。 
English: The attendants on both sides said: According to the previous system, you can enter by car.

古文：公曰： 吾被皇太后徵，未知所为 遂步至太极东堂，见于太后。
现代文：曹髦说： 我受皇太后的懿旨征召而来，还不知道自己要做些什么！ 于是就跟百官一同步行到太极东堂，拜见太后。
English: Cao Xiang said, "I was summoned by the Empress Dowager's command, and I don't know what I'm going to do yet! So I walked with hundreds of officials to the East Hall of the Taiji Temple to see the Empress Dowager.

古文：其日即皇帝位於太极前殿，百僚陪位者欣欣焉。诏曰： 昔三祖神武圣德，应天受祚。
现代文：当天就在太极前殿登位称帝，在下面陪侍的百官都很高兴。新帝下诏说： 从前三位先帝英明神武，胸怀明德，承受天命，继承皇位。
English: On the same day, he ascended to the throne in front of the Taiji Hall, and the hundreds of officials who accompanied him were very happy. The new emperor made a proclamation: The previous three emperors were wise, courageous, and virtuous, and they accepted the destiny of heaven and succeeded to the throne.

古文：齐王嗣位，肆行非度，颠覆厥德。
现代文：齐王曹芳继承帝位之时，肆意妄为，行为无度，颠覆了做为君王应有的品德修养。
English: When King Cao Fang of Qi succeeded to the throne, he acted recklessly and excessively, subverting the moral cultivation that a king should have.

古文：皇太后深惟社稷之重，延纳宰辅之谋，用替厥位，集大命于余一人。
现代文：皇太后以天下社稷万民为重，听取宰相与各位辅政大臣的意见，让我来代替缺失的帝位，将天下寄托在我一人身上。
English: The Empress Dowager prioritized the interests of the world's society and people, listened to the opinions of the Prime Minister and the various assistant ministers, let me replace the missing imperial throne, and entrusted the world to me alone.

古文：以眇眇之身，讬于王公之上，夙夜祗畏，惧不能嗣守祖宗之大训，恢中兴之弘业，战战兢兢，如临于谷。
现代文：我以自己渺小的见识品行，便身居众位王公大臣身上，我日夜悬心忧虑，担心不能守卫祖宗留下的圣明教诲，恢复中兴的伟业，战战兢兢，就像站在深谷边缘。
English: I acted with my own small knowledge and character, and then I found myself in the ranks of princes and ministers. I was worried day and night, worried that I could not guard the sacred teachings left by my ancestors and restore the great cause of ZTE. I was trembling, as if standing on the edge of a deep valley.

古文：今群公卿士股肱之辅，四方征镇宣力之佐，皆积德累功，忠勤帝室；庶凭先祖先父有德之臣，左右小子，用保乂皇家，俾朕蒙闇，垂拱而治。
现代文：现在诸位王公大臣都是我所仰赖的肱股之臣，为国家平定四方，有镇守四海的辅佐之功，都修养德行积聚功勋，对皇室忠诚勤勉；我凭借众位祖先父辈留下来的有德之臣的辅佐，一定可以治理好国家并使之安定。
English: Now, all the princes and ministers are my trusted vassals. They have helped the country pacify the four directions and defend the four seas. They have cultivated virtue, accumulated merits, and are loyal and diligent to the royal family. With the help of the virtuous vassals left by my ancestors and fathers, I can surely govern the country well and make it stable.

古文：盖闻人君之道，德厚侔天地，润泽施四海，先之以慈爱，示之以好恶，然后教化行於上，兆民听於下。
现代文：虽然我幼稚不明事理，但一定也能轻松地治理好国家。我听说为人君主的道理，德行一定要厚重如天地，泽被四海，以关怀慈爱为先，像百姓展示自己的好恶，然后从天子百官为百姓做出榜样，百姓就知道该如何修身养德。
English: Although I am childish and ignorant, I am sure that I can easily govern the country well. I have heard that the principle of being a monarch is that virtue must be as thick as heaven and earth, and it must be spread all over the world. First, it is necessary to be caring and loving, to show one's likes and dislikes like the common people, and then to set an example for the common people from the hundreds of officials, so that the common people will know how to cultivate their moral character.

古文：朕虽不德，昧於大道，思与宇内共臻兹路。书不云乎： 安民则惠，黎民怀之。  
现代文：我虽然德行不足，对先圣大道愚昧不通，但也想与朝臣贤人一起朝这个方向努力。《书经》里不也说吗： 君王对百姓施以恩泽，百姓是会感怀的。  
English: Although I am deficient in virtue and ignorant of the ancient sacred road, I would also like to make efforts in this direction together with courtiers and sages. Doesn't the "Book of Books" also say: If the king gives grace to the people, the people will feel it.

古文：大赦，改元。
现代文：于是就下诏大赦天下，改齐王曹芳嘉平年号为正元。
English: An amnesty will be implemented and the year will be changed.

古文：减乘舆服御，后宫用度，及罢尚方御府百工技巧靡丽无益之物。
现代文：缩减天子的车马服饰与后宫众人的用度，并罢除宫中与各官府中那些华丽奢靡又无用的物品。
English: Reduce the use of the emperor's chariot and horse costumes and the harem of the people, and remove those gorgeous, luxurious and useless items from the palace and government offices.

古文：正元元年冬十月壬辰，遣侍中持节分適四方，观风俗，劳士民，察冤枉失职者。
现代文：正元元年十月七日，皇帝曹髦派侍中持符节各到地方巡视，观察当地的风土民情，慰劳当地的官员百姓，调查有没有冤案或者失职的情况。
English: On October 7th, the first year of the Geng era, Emperor Cao Shuang sent his attendants to tour the localities, observing the local customs and customs, consoling the local officials and people, and investigating whether there were any unjust cases or dereliction of duty.

古文：癸巳，假大将军司马景王黄钺，入朝不趋，奏事不名，剑履上殿。
现代文：八日，授予大将军司马师黄金制作的战斧，以示他军功累累，同时还特许他上朝时不必为了表示对天子的尊敬而小步快走，需要奏事时不需要直呼姓名，可以佩剑穿鞋上殿。
English: On the 8th, he awarded General Sima Shi with a gold-made tomahawk to show his military achievements. At the same time, he was specially allowed to go to the palace without having to walk fast to show respect for the emperor. When he needed to report a matter, he did not need to call his name directly. He could wear a sword and shoes to go to the palace.

古文：戊戌，黄龙见于邺井中。
现代文：十三日，有黄龙出现在邺城的某一处水井中。
English: On the 13th, a yellow dragon appeared in a well in Lucheng.

古文：甲辰，命有司论废立定策之功，封爵、增邑、进位、班赐各有差。
现代文：十九日，下诏令执掌礼仪的官员讨论废立天子之事中的功劳，并按功劳大小有封爵、增加食邑、提升品级、奖赏等各种不同的恩裳。
English: On the 19th, the officials in charge of the etiquette were ordered to discuss the merits in the matter of abolishing the emperor, and according to the size of the merit, there were knighthoods, increased cuisines, upgraded grades, rewards and various other favors.

古文：二年春正月乙丑，镇东将军毌丘俭、扬州刺史文钦反。
现代文：正元二年正月十二日，镇东将军毋丘俭、扬州刺史文钦反叛朝廷。
English: On the 12th day of the first month of the second year of the first century, Zhendong General Bo Qiuqian and Yangzhou General Shi Wenqin rebelled against the imperial court.

古文：戊寅，大将军司马景王征之。
现代文：二十五日，大将军司马师率军讨伐。
English: On the 25th, General Sima led the army in a crusade.

古文：癸未，车骑将军郭淮薨。
现代文：三十日，车骑将军郭淮去世。
English: On the 30th, the cavalry general Guo Huai passed away.

古文：闰月己亥，破钦于乐嘉。
现代文：闰月十六日，司马师大军在乐嘉大败文钦。
English: On the 16th day of the leap month, Sima Shih's army defeated Wenqin in Lejia.

古文：钦遁走，遂奔吴。
现代文：文钦得以生还逃走，于是奔向东吴。
English: Wenqin was able to escape alive, so he ran to Dongwu.

古文：甲辰，安风津都尉斩俭，传首京都。
现代文：二十一日，安风津都尉斩杀了毌丘俭，将他的首级传到京都洛阳。
English: On the twenty-first day, Captain Anfeng Tsu killed Zou Qiu Jian and sent his head to Luoyang, Kyoto.

古文：壬子，复特赦淮南士民诸为俭、钦所诖误者。
现代文：二十九日，朝廷下令赦免那些被毌丘俭、文钦挟持连累的淮南一代的官吏百姓。
English: On the 29th, the imperial court ordered to pardon those officials and commoners of the Huainan generation who were held hostage by Zhai Qujian and Wenqin.

古文：以镇南将军诸葛诞为镇东大将军。司马景王薨于许昌。
现代文：又任命镇南将军为镇东大将军。司马师在许昌病逝。
English: He also appointed General Zhennan as General Zhen Dongda. Sima died of illness in Xuchang.

古文：二月丁巳，以卫将军司马文王为大将军，录尚书事。
现代文：二月五日，提升卫将军司马文为大将军，总领尚书事宜。
English: On February 5, General of the Guards Sima Wen was promoted to the rank of major general, and the matter was officially announced.

古文：甲子，吴大将孙峻等众号十万至寿春，诸葛诞拒击破之，斩吴左将军留赞，献捷于京都。
现代文：十二日，东吴大将孙峻率军号称十万行军到寿春，诸葛诞领兵抗击并将孙峻打败，斩杀了东吴的左将军留赞，将胜利捷报送往京都洛阳。
English: On the 12th, Sun Jun, the general of the Eastern Wu, led an army of 100,000 marching to Shouchun. Zhuge Zheng led the army to resist and defeated Sun Jun, killed the left general of the Eastern Wu, and sent the victory report to Kyoto Luoyang.

古文：三月，立皇后卞氏，大赦。
现代文：三月，立卞氏为皇后，下令大赦天下。
English: In March, she proclaimed herself empress and ordered a general amnesty.

古文：夏四月甲寅，封后父卞隆为列侯。
现代文：四月三日，封皇后的父亲卞隆为列侯。
English: On April 3rd, the queen's father, Shulong, was made a vassal.

古文：甲戌，以征南大将军王昶为骠骑将军。
现代文：二十三日，任命征南大将军王昶为骠骑将军。
English: On the 23rd, the general of the Southern Expeditionary Force, Wang Qi, was appointed as the general of the cavalry.

古文：秋七月，以征东大将军胡遵为卫将军，镇东大将军诸葛诞为征东大将军。
现代文：七月，任征东大将军胡遵为卫将军，镇东大将军诸葛诞为征东大将军。
English: In July, Hu Zun, the general of the East University, was appointed as the general of Wei, and Zhu Ge, the general of the East University, was appointed as the general of the East University.

古文：八月辛亥，蜀大将军姜维寇狄道，雍州刺史王经与战洮西，经大败，还保狄道城。
现代文：八月二日，西蜀大将姜维率师侵扰狄道，雍州刺史王经与他在洮西交战，王经失利，退回固守狄道城。
English: On August 2, Jiang Wei, the general of Western Shu, led his division to invade Dido. Wang Jing, the governor of Yongzhou, fought with him in Shaanxi. Wang Jing lost and returned to the city of Dido.

古文：辛未，以长水校尉邓艾行安西将军，与征西将军陈泰并力拒维。
现代文：二十三日，任命长水校尉邓艾代理安西将军，让他和征西将军共同抗击姜维。
English: On the 23rd, he appointed Changshui Lieutenant Deng Ai as acting General Anxi, and let him and General Zheng Xi jointly fight against Jiang Wei.

古文：戊辰，复遣太尉司马孚为后继。
现代文：九月十九日，又派太尉司马孚率军支援。
English: On September 19th, he also sent Lieutenant Sima Fu to lead the army to support.

古文：九月庚子，讲尚书业终，赐执经亲授者司空郑冲、侍中郑小同等各有差。
现代文：九月二十一日，皇帝曹髦学习完《尚书》，按不同程度赏赐讲课的司空郑冲与侍中郑小同等人。
English: On September 21st, after Emperor Cao Xiang finished studying the Shangshu, he rewarded the lecturer, Siku Zhengchong, and the attendant, Zheng Xiao, according to different degrees.

古文：甲辰，姜维退还。
现代文：二十五日，姜维率军撤退。
English: On the 25th, Jiang Wei and his army withdrew.

古文：冬十月，诏曰： 朕以寡德，不能式遏寇虐，乃令蜀贼陆梁边陲。
现代文：十月，曹髦下诏说： 由于我德行有失，不能阻止敌寇的侵扰暴虐，才导致蜀贼进犯边地。
English: In October, Cao Shixi issued an edict saying, "Because of my moral failings, I could not stop the intrusion and tyranny of the enemy bandits, which led to the Shu bandits invading the borderlands.

古文：洮西之战，至取负败，将士死亡，计以千数，或没命战场，冤魂不反，或牵掣虏手，流离异域，吾深痛愍，为之悼心。
现代文：蜀军进犯时的洮西之战，甚至已经战败，有数以千计的将士在战场上牺牲，有的战死沙场，忠魂无法返回故土，有的战败被俘，流落异地，我感到深深的悲痛，心中为这些将士日夜哀悼。
English: At the time of the Shu army's attack, the battle of Shaanxi had even been defeated. Thousands of soldiers died on the battlefield. Some died in battle, and their loyal souls could not return to their homeland. Some were captured and exiled. I feel deep sorrow and mourn for these soldiers day and night in my heart.

古文：其令所在郡典农及安抚夷二护军各部大吏慰恤其门户，无差赋役一年；其力战死事者，皆如旧科，勿有所漏。 
现代文：现在下令阵亡将士家庭所在的郡县的典农以及安抚夷等长官还有各部的官员要到将士家中慰问抚恤，免除一年的赋税徭役；那些在战场上殊死奋战的将士，要按先例给予嘉奖，不要有漏掉的。 
English: He now ordered the chiefs of the counties and counties where the families of the fallen soldiers were located, such as the chiefs of the farmers and the appeasers, as well as the officials of various ministries, to go to the homes of the soldiers to offer condolences and pensions, and to exempt them from paying taxes for one year. Those soldiers who fought hard on the battlefield should be awarded according to precedent, and nothing should be missed.

古文：十一月甲午，以陇右四郡及金城，连年受敌，或亡叛投贼，其亲戚留在本土者不安，皆特赦之。
现代文：十一月二十七日，因为陇右四郡和金城等地区连年遭受侵扰，就有些人逃往到外地，甚至到了蜀地，他们的亲戚留在当地都甚感不安害怕被牵连，朝廷下令将他们都赦免了。
English: On November 27th, some people fled to other places, even to Shudi, because areas such as the four counties of Shudu and Jincheng had been harassed for years. Their relatives who remained in the area were very uneasy and afraid of being implicated. The court ordered that they all be pardoned.

古文：癸丑，诏曰： 往者洮西之战，将吏士民或临陈战亡，或沈溺洮水，骸骨不收，弃於原野，吾常痛之。
现代文：十二月十六日，皇帝曹髦下诏说： 过去的洮西之战，军士平民有的在战场上浴血奋战，有的不甘被俘而跳入洮水中，他们的遗骸都没有能收埋，暴露在荒野上，我想到这些常常深感悲痛。
English: On December 16th, Emperor Cao Shixian issued an edict saying, "During the battle of Shaanxi in the past, some sergeants and civilians fought bloody battles on the battlefield, some were unwilling to be captured and jumped into the turbid water, and their remains could not be buried and were exposed to the wilderness. I often feel deeply sad when I think about these things.

古文：其告征西、安西将军，各令部人於战处及水次钩求尸丧，收敛藏埋，以慰存亡。 
现代文：现在下令命征西、安西将军各自率领部队到原来战场或者洮水边寻找我方将士的遗骸，将他们好好地安葬，以祭奠英灵，安抚生者。 
English: He now ordered General Zeng Xi and General Anxi to lead their respective troops to the original battlefield or the edge of Surabaya to search for the remains of our soldiers and bury them properly to pay tribute to the heroes and appease the living.

古文：甘露元年春正月辛丑，青龙见轵县井中。
现代文：甘露元年正月二十四日，有青龙出现在轵县某地的水井中。
English: On the 24th day of the first month of the year of Ganlu, a blue dragon appeared in a well in a certain place in Handan County.

古文：乙巳，沛王林薨。
现代文：二十八日，沛王曹林去世。
English: On the 28th, Pe Wang Cao Lin passed away.

古文：夏四月庚戌，赐大将军司马文王衮冕之服，赤舄副焉。
现代文：四月四日，皇帝特赐大将军司马昭穿戴与天子同样的龙袍王冠，还有红色的鞋子相配。
English: On April 4, the emperor specially granted the general Sima Zhao to wear the same dragon robe crown as Tianzi, as well as matching red shoes.

古文：丙辰，帝幸太学，问诸儒曰： 圣人幽赞神明，仰观俯察，始作八卦，后圣重之为六十四，立爻以极数，凡斯大义，罔有不备，而夏有连山，殷有归藏，周曰周易，易之书，其故何也？ 
现代文：十日，皇帝到太学巡视，问诸位儒者说： 古时的圣人们受神明辅助，观察天地，才推演出了阴阳八卦。后代的圣贤又增加到六十四卦，推演出爻为演变最多的象，凡是天地间的大义，没有不包含到的。夏朝时将它称作《连山》，殷朝时称为《归藏》，周朝时就称为《周易》了。《易经》这部书，究竟是怎么回事呢？ 
English: On the 10th, the emperor made a tour of Taixu and asked the Confucians: "The ancient sages, assisted by the gods, observed the heavens and the earth, and then deduced the Yin-Yang Eight Trigrams. The descendants of the sages increased it to sixty-four trigrams, and deduced that the most evolved element was the dragonfly, which is the great justice between heaven and earth. In the Xia Dynasty, it was called "Lianshan," in the Yin Dynasty, it was called "Gathering," and in the Zhou Dynasty, it was called "Zhou Yi." What is the matter with this book, "I Ching"?

古文：易博士淳于俊对曰： 包羲因燧皇之图而制八卦，神农演之为六十四，黄帝、尧、舜通其变，三代随时，质文各繇其事。
现代文：易学博士淳于俊回答说： 从前伏羲氏依靠燧人氏的图推演了八卦，神农氏将它增加到六十四卦，黄帝、尧帝、舜帝三代都有所变动，都是根据所推崇的资质品德对它进行修改。
English: Dr. Yi Xue Jun Yujun replied: In the past, the Fuxiong clan relied on the map of the Xiongren clan to deduce eight dynasties, and the Shennong clan increased it to sixty-four dynasties. The three generations of the Yellow Emperor, the Xiongde Emperor, and the Xiongde Emperor all had changes, and they all modified it according to the qualities they respected.

古文：故易者，变易也，名曰连山，似山出内云气，连天地也；归藏者，万事莫不归藏于其中也。 
现代文：所以所谓的 易 ，就是改变。名叫《连山》，是因为像山里涌出又吸收云气，连接天地；所谓归藏，意思就是天地万物没有不隐藏于其中的。 
English: Therefore, the so-called "Yi" means change. It is called "Lian Mountain" because it is like a mountain that gushes out and absorbs cloud gas, connecting heaven and earth; the so-called "Gushu" means that there is nothing in heaven and earth that is not hidden in it.

古文：帝又曰： 若使包羲因燧皇而作易，孔子何以不云燧人氏没包羲氏作乎？ 
现代文：皇帝又问道： 孔子为《易经》作《彖》、《象》等十篇传，后世的郑玄为《易经》作注，虽然二位圣贤不同，但他们所解释的经义是一致的。
English: The emperor also asked: Confucius wrote "The Beginning" and "The Elephant" for the "I Ching" and other ten biographies, and the later Zheng Xuan annotated the "I Ching." Although the two sages are different, their interpretation of the meaning of the sutra is consistent.

古文：俊不能答。帝又问曰： 孔子作彖、象，郑玄作注，虽圣贤不同，其所释经义一也。今彖、象不与经文相连，而注连之，何也？ 
现代文：现在孔子所作的《彖》、《象》等传的内容不与原书相连，却与郑玄的注连在一起，这是为什么呢？ 淳于俊回答说： 郑玄将《彖》、《象》等传与自己的注文连在一起，是希望学习的人在推求省察的时候比较方便。 
English: Why is it that the contents of Confucius's "Analects of Confucius" and "Analects of Confucius" are not connected to the original books, but are connected to Zheng Xuan's annotation? Jun Yujun replied: Zheng Xuan connected "Analects of Confucius" and "Analects of Confucius" with his own order, which is more convenient for people who want to learn when they are pushing for reflection.

古文：俊对曰； 郑玄合彖、象于经者，欲使学者寻省易了也。 帝曰： 若郑玄合之，於学诚便，则孔子曷为不合以了学者乎？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 郑玄把孔子的传和自己的注连在一起，对学习的人确实方便，那么孔子那时候为什么不把他作的传与原书经文连在一起以方便学者呢？ 
English: The emperor said: Zheng Xuan's translation of Confucius and his commentary are really convenient for students, so why didn't Confucius link his translation with the original text at that time to make it easier for scholars?

古文：俊对曰： 孔子恐其与文王相乱，是以不合，此圣人以不合为谦。 
现代文：淳于俊回答说： 孔子担忧他的传与原书经文连在一起会混乱，所以没有连起来，这也是圣人的自谦。 
English: Junyujun replied, "Confucius was worried that it would be confusing to connect his teachings with the original scriptures, so he did not connect them. This is also the self-effacement of a sage.

古文：帝曰： 若圣人以不合为谦，则郑玄何独不谦邪？ 
现代文：皇帝又说： 如果圣人孔子将不把传与经文连起来视为自谦的话，那郑玄为什么又独独不谦虚呢？ 
English: The emperor also said, "If the sage Confucius regarded it as self-effacing not to connect the teachings with the scriptures, then why is Zheng Xuan not self-effacing?

古文：俊对曰： 古义弘深，圣问奥远，非臣所能详尽。 
现代文：淳于俊回答说： 古代经典意义深远宏大，皇上您所问的问题深奥悠远，不是以臣的见识能详尽回答的。 
English: Junyujun replied, "The ancient classics are of profound and great significance. The question you asked, Your Majesty, is profound and far-reaching, and cannot be answered in detail with the knowledge of a courtier.

古文：帝又问曰： 系辞云 黄帝、尧、舜垂衣裳而天下治 ，此包羲、神农之世为无衣裳。
现代文：皇帝又问到： 《易经》中的系卦中说 黄帝、尧帝、舜帝轻松地垂着衣裳就能使天下安定 ，在伏羲、神农的时期衣裳还没有出现。
English: The emperor also asked: According to the "I Ching," the Yellow Emperor, the Yellow Emperor, and the Yellow Emperor can make the world stable by hanging their clothes easily. In the time of Fuxi and Shennong, clothes had not yet appeared.

古文：但圣人化天下，何殊异尔邪？ 
现代文：但圣人依靠德行教化天下，怎么会有这么大的差别呢？ 
English: But how can there be such a big difference between a saint and a saint who relies on virtue to enlighten the world?

古文：俊对曰： 三皇之时，人寡而禽兽众，故取其羽皮而天下用足，及至黄帝，人众而禽兽寡，是以作为衣裳以济时变也。 
现代文：淳于俊回答说： 三皇的时代，人类少而飞禽走兽很多，所以取禽兽的皮毛就足够人们使用了。等到黄帝时期，人类多但飞禽走兽已经变少，所以要制作衣裳来适应季节的变化。 
English: Junyujun replied, "In the era of the three emperors, there were few humans and many birds and beasts, so taking the fur of animals was enough for people to use. By the time of the Yellow Emperor, there were more humans but fewer birds and beasts, so it was necessary to make clothes to adapt to the changing seasons.

古文：帝又问： 乾为天，而复为金，为玉，为老马，与细物并邪？ 
现代文：皇帝又问： 乾卦代表天，又可以代表金、玉、老马，这不是又和细微的事物一样了吗？ 
English: The emperor also asked, "Kenga represents heaven, and can also represent gold, jade, and old horses. Isn't this the same as the subtle things?

古文：俊对曰： 圣人取象，或远或近，近取诸物，远则天地。 
现代文：淳于俊回答说： 圣人推演时选取意象，有时远有时近，近的时候可取眼前各种东西，远的时候可以选取到天地那么广阔的事物。 
English: Junyujun replied, "In the interpretation of sages, images are selected. Sometimes they are far away, sometimes they are near. When they are near, various things can be selected. When they are far away, things as vast as heaven and earth can be selected.

古文：讲易毕，复命讲尚书。
现代文：讲完《易经》，皇上又命学者们讲《尚书》。
English: After the recitation of the I Ching, the emperor also ordered scholars to recite the Shang Shu.

古文：帝问曰： 郑玄曰 稽古同天，言尧同於天也 。
现代文：他问道： 郑玄说： 稽古同天，言尧同于天也。 
English: He asked: Zheng Xuan said: Practice the same day, say the same thing in the same day.

古文：王肃云 尧顺考古道而行之 。
现代文：王肃说： 尧顺考古道而行之。 
English: Wang Su said, "I followed the archaeological trail.

古文：三义不同，何者为是？ 博士庾峻对曰： 先儒所执，各有乖异，臣不足以定之。
现代文：三种意思并不相同，哪一个才算是正确的呢？ 博士庾峻回答说： 先儒的看法，都有他们侧重的地方，我们臣子没有办法做定论。
English: The three meanings are not the same, so which one is correct? Dr. Zou Jun replied: The views of the early Confucians all have their emphasis, and we courtiers have no way to make a final conclusion.

古文：然洪范称 三人占，从二人之言 。贾、马及肃皆以为 顺考古道 。
现代文：但《洪范》篇里说说： 三人占卜，听从其中两人的说法 ，既然贾、马和王肃都认为应该 考校顺应古道而行 ，按照《洪范》篇里的说法，应该是王肃的说法更好。 
English: But the "Hong Fan" article said: Three people are diviners, listen to the words of two of them, since Jia, Ma and Wang Su all believe that the examination should follow the ancient path, according to the "Hong Fan" article, Wang Su's words should be better.

古文：以洪范言之，肃义为长。 帝曰： 仲尼言 唯天为大，唯尧则之 。
现代文：皇帝说： 孔子曾说 只有天是最大的，也只有尧这样的圣人能顺应天意行事 。
English: The emperor said, "Confucius once said that only heaven is the greatest, and only a sage like Yao can act in accordance with the will of heaven.

古文：尧之大美，在乎则天，顺考古道，非其至也。
现代文：尧的至善至美，在于他能按上天意志行事，考察并顺应古代行为，并不是他所追求的。
English: The best and most beautiful quality of a monk is that he can act according to God's will, examine and conform to the ancient behavior, and is not what he pursues.

古文：今发篇开义以明圣德，而舍其大，更称其细，岂作者之意邪？ 峻对曰： 臣奉遵师说，未喻大义，至于折中，裁之圣思。 
现代文：现在我们探究里面的内容来明确尧帝的圣德，舍弃大的方面探究更精细的内容，这是作者的意思吗？ 淳于俊回答说： 我只是按照以前老师的说法，我也没有明白其中蕴含的大义，至于是不是选择折中的说法，就要靠皇上您自己的判断了。 
English: Is it the author's intention that we now explore the inner content to clarify the sanctity of Emperor Gong, and abandon the large aspects to explore the finer content? Junyujun replied: I just followed the former teacher's words, and I did not understand the great meaning behind them. As for whether to choose the middle way, it depends on the emperor's own judgment.

古文：次及四岳举鲧，帝又问曰： 夫大人者，与天地合其德，与日月合其明，思无不周，明无不照，今王肃云 尧意不能明鲧，是以试用 。
现代文：接着又谈论到四岳推举鲧治水的事，皇帝又问到： 作为君主，德行应该与天地之道相符，与日月一样照亮天下，思虑一定周祥，公正没有偏失，现在王肃所说的 尧帝不够了解鲧，所以先行试用 。
English: Next, they talked about the matter of the four mountains and the water control, and the emperor asked: As a monarch, virtue should be consistent with the way of heaven and earth, illuminate the world like the sun and the moon, be thoughtful and fair, and there is no deviation. Now, Wang Su said that "the emperor does not understand enough," so try it first.

古文：如此，圣人之明有所未尽邪？ 
现代文：这样的话，岂不是圣人观察人事也有不够详尽的地方吗？ 
English: In this case, is it not the case that the sage's observation of human affairs is not exhaustive enough?

古文：峻对曰： 虽圣人之弘，犹有所未尽，故禹曰 知人则哲，惟帝难之 ，然卒能改授圣贤，缉熙庶绩，亦所以成圣也。 
现代文：淳于俊回答说： 虽然圣人的贤明非常弘大，但也有不够详尽的地方，所以大禹说 能赏识人才是哲人，但对于帝王来说是很难的 。但尧帝最终也改正了自己的失误，将帝位传给了贤明的大禹，让社会发展得很好，所以也可以被称为圣人。 
English: Junyujun replied, "Although the sage's wisdom is very great, it is not detailed enough. Therefore, Dayu said that the person who can appreciate talent is a philosopher, but it is difficult for the emperor. However, Emperor Zhao eventually corrected his mistake and passed the imperial throne to the wise Dayu, so that social development was very good, so he could also be called a sage.

古文：帝曰： 夫有始有卒，其唯圣人。
现代文：皇帝说： 说到善始善终，只有圣人才能做到。
English: The emperor said: When it comes to starting well and ending well, only a sage can do it.

古文：若不能始，何以为圣？
现代文：如果没有一个好的开端，又怎么能被称为圣人呢？
English: How can you be called a saint if you don't have a good start?

古文：其言 惟帝难之 ，然卒能改授，盖谓知人，圣人所难，非不尽之言也。
现代文：那句话说的 对于皇帝来说很困难 ，但最后能改正失误传位大禹，大概也能称得上是能赏识人才了，所以圣人认为难的，并不是言语的不够周祥。
English: It is very difficult for the emperor to say that sentence, but finally being able to correct mistakes and pass it on to the next generation can probably be called being able to appreciate talent, so what the sage thinks is difficult is not that the words are not comprehensive enough.

古文：经云： 知人则哲，能官人。 
现代文：《经》上说 能知人的就可以称得上圣哲，能选拔人才做官。 
English: "The Book" says that if you can know people, you can be called a sage, and you can select talent to be an official.

古文：若尧疑鲧，试之九年，官人失叙，何得谓之圣哲？ 
现代文：如果尧帝质疑鲧的品德，用了九年时间来检验他，使得在选择继位者的时候失去了章法，又怎么能称得上是圣哲呢？
English: If Emperor Qian questioned the virtue of Zang, spent nine years to test him, and lost the rules when choosing a successor, how could he be called a saint?

古文：峻对曰： 臣窃观经传，圣人行事不能无失，是以尧失之四凶，周公失之二叔，仲尼失之宰予。 
现代文：淳于俊回答说： 臣私下阅读经传的时候，认为即使是圣人也不会行事没有偏差，所以尧帝任用鲧、共工、兜、三苗等四凶，周公任用管叔、菜叔等人，孔子错误对待宰予。 
English: Junyujun replied, "When my father-in-law read the sutras in private, he thought that even a sage would not act without deviation. Therefore, Emperor Zhao appointed four evil-doers, such as Gong, Tonggong, Kabu, and Sanmiao, and Zhou Gong appointed Guan Shou, Cao Shou, and others. Confucius wrongly treated Zhaiyu.

古文：帝曰： 尧之任鲧，九载无成，汨陈五行，民用昏垫。
现代文：皇帝说： 尧帝信任鲧，九年没有什么成效，天下水道都四散流淌，百姓遭受水灾，苦不堪言。
English: The emperor said, "In nine years, the emperor's trust in me has produced no results. The world's waterways are scattered all over the place, and the people are suffering from floods. The suffering is beyond words.

古文：至於仲尼失之宰予，言行之间，轻重不同也。
现代文：至于孔子对待宰予的失误，与尧帝有轻重的差别，不应放在一起。
English: As for the mistakes made by Confucius in dealing with Zhaiyang, they are very different from those made by Emperor Zhao, and should not be lumped together.

古文：至于周公、管、蔡之事，亦尚书所载，皆博士所当通也。 
现代文：至于周公任用管叔、蔡叔的事，在《尚书》中也有记载，都是你们作为博士应该熟知的。 
English: As for Zhou Gong's appointment of Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai, there are also records in the "Shang Shu," which you should be familiar with as a doctor.

古文：峻对曰： 此皆先贤所疑，非臣寡见所能究论。 次及 有鳏在下曰 虞舜 ，帝问曰： 当尧之时，洪水为害，四凶在朝，宜速登贤圣济斯民之时也。
现代文：淳于俊回答说： 这些都是前代的圣贤们所疑虑的，不是臣愚陋的见识能说清楚的。 又接着说到《尚书》中的 有在下曰虞舜 一句的含义，皇帝问到： 在尧帝的时代，洪水泛滥，又有四凶在为害朝廷百姓，但是很需要选拔贤明的君主来解救百姓于水火之中。
English: Junyujun replied, "These are all things that the sages and wise men of the previous generation doubted, and it is not possible for the foolish insight of a vassal to explain them clearly." Then, referring to the meaning of the following sentence in the Shangshu, the emperor asked, "In the era of Emperor Zhou, there were floods and four villains harming the people of the court, but it was very necessary to select a wise monarch to rescue the people from the water and fire.

古文：舜年在既立，圣德光明，而久不进用，何也？ 
现代文：舜在当时社会上已经有了影响，贤明圣德，但很久没有被举荐任用，为什么呢？ 
English: At that time, he had already had an impact on society, he was wise and saintly, but he had not been recommended for appointment for a long time. Why?

古文：峻对曰： 尧咨嗟求贤，欲逊己位，岳曰 否德忝帝位 。
现代文：淳于俊回答说： 尧帝也曾感叹着寻求贤人，想要让出自己的帝位，四岳说 如果选出德行不够的人是会辱没这个帝位的 。
English: Junyujun replied, "Emperor Gong also lamented that he was looking for a wise man and wanted to give up his imperial throne. Si Yue said that if someone with insufficient virtue was elected, he would disgrace the imperial throne."

古文：尧复使岳扬举仄陋，然后荐舜。
现代文：尧帝又让四岳举荐那些有仁德由身处低位的人，四岳就像他举荐了舜。
English: Emperor Xuan also asked the four mountains to recommend those who had benevolence from being in a low position, and the four mountains, just like him, recommended the four mountains.

古文：荐舜之本，实由於尧，此盖圣人欲尽众心也。 
现代文：所以舜得以举荐，实际上主要是尧的功劳，这大概是尧为了让天下百姓都满意。 
English: Therefore, the fact that it was able to be recommended was actually mainly due to the efforts of, which is probably  in order to make the people of the world satisfied.

古文：帝曰： 尧既闻舜而不登用，又时忠臣亦不进达，乃使狱扬仄陋而后荐举，非急於用圣恤民之谓也。 峻对曰： 非臣愚见所能逮及。 
现代文：皇帝说： 尧已经听闻了舜的贤德却不能重用，同时对一些忠臣也不重用，最终还是四岳摒除地位低下的偏见然后举荐的舜，这不是说尧并不是急于选拔有贤德的人来解救百姓的苦难吗？ 淳于俊回答说： 这就不是臣浅薄的见解所能达到的深度了。 
English: The emperor said, "You have heard of the virtues of the four mountains, but you can't reuse them. At the same time, you don't reuse them for some loyal vassals. In the end, it is the four mountains that eliminate the prejudice of low status and then recommend the four mountains. Isn't it that you are not eager to select people with virtues to relieve the suffering of the people?" Junyujun replied, "This is not the depth that a shallow opinion of a vassal can achieve.

古文：於是复命讲礼记。
现代文：继而皇帝又令学者们讲《礼记》。
English: Next, the emperor ordered scholars to recite the "Rituals."

古文：帝问曰： 太上立德，其次务施报 。
现代文：他问： 《礼记》上说 太上立德，其次务施报 。
English: He asked: "The Book of Etiquette says that the first duty is to be virtuous, and the second duty is to reward virtue.

古文：为治何由而教化各异；皆脩何政而能致于立德，施而不报乎？ 
现代文：治理天下为什么会有不同的政策手段呢；应该制定什么的方针政策才能做到树立德政，付出努力不需强求回报呢？ 
English: Why are there different policy means for governing the world? What policies should be formulated in order to establish a moral government and make efforts without demanding rewards?

古文：博士马照对曰： 太上立德，谓三皇五帝之世以德化民，其次报施，谓三王之世以礼为治也。 
现代文：博士马照回答说： 最高的境界是树立德行，说的是三皇五帝的时代都是明君们以自己的德行教化百姓，第二的是报答，是说后来的尧、舜、禹的时代依靠礼法治理天下。 
English: Dr. Ma Zhao replied: The highest realm is to establish virtue, saying that in the era of the three emperors and five emperors, it was the Ming rulers who educated the people with their own virtue. The second is reward, saying that in the later era of Yu, Yu, and Yu, they relied on etiquette to govern the world.

古文：帝曰： 二者致化薄厚不同，将主有优劣邪？时使之然乎？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 这两种做法不同，对百姓教化的影响程度也有深浅的区别，这是因为帝王本身品行有差别，还是时代造成的呢？ 
English: The emperor said: These two practices are different, and there is also a profound difference in the degree of influence on the education of the people. Is this because the emperor himself has a different character, or is it caused by the times?

古文：照对曰： 诚由时有朴文，故化有薄厚也。 
现代文：马照回答说： 自然是因为不同时代发展有不同的社会基础，所以教化的影响力也自然有深有浅了。 
English: Ma Zhao replied, "Naturally, because different eras have different social foundations, the influence of indoctrination will naturally vary.

古文：五月，邺及上洛并言甘露降。夏六月丙午，改元为甘露。
现代文：这一年的五月，邺城和上洛等地都上奏称有甘霖降落，于是六月初一，改年号为甘露。
English: In May of this year, there were reports of rain falling in Penang and Shangluo, so on the first day of June, the name of the year was changed to Nehru.

古文：乙丑，青龙见元城县界井中。
现代文：二十日，又在元城县的一口水井中发现了青龙。
English: On the 20th, a blue dragon was found in a well in Yuancheng County.

古文：秋七月己卯，卫将军胡遵薨。
现代文：七月五日，卫将军胡遵去世。
English: On July 5th, Wei general Hu Zun passed away.

古文：癸未，安西将军邓艾大破蜀大将姜维于上邽，诏曰： 兵未极武，丑虏摧破，斩首获生，动以万计，自顷战克，无如此者。
现代文：九日，安西将军邓艾在上邽与蜀将姜维交战，大获全胜。天子下诏说： 我军还没有投入全部战力，贼寇就已经被摧毁，战场上杀死和俘虏的数以万计，自从我朝平定天下以来，还没有获得过这么大的胜利。
English: On the 9th, the Anxi general Deng Ai fought with the Shu general Jiang Wei in Shangguan and won a complete victory. The emperor said: Our army has not yet invested all its combat power, the bandits have already been destroyed, and the tens of thousands killed and captured on the battlefield have not won such a great victory since I pacified the world.

古文：今遣使者犒赐将士，大会临飨，饮宴终日，称朕意焉。 
现代文：现在派遣将士犒赏三军，设宴款待三军将士，大家终日宴饮，才合我的心意。 
English: Now it is my heart's desire to send soldiers to reward the three armies, set up a banquet to entertain the three soldiers, and have everyone feast all day long.

古文：八月庚午，命大将军司马文王加号大都督，奏事不名，假黄钺。
现代文：八月二十六日，令大将军司马昭加上大都督的称号，允许他上奏时只需要报官职不报姓名，授予他可以统率全国兵马的黄钺。
English: On August 26th, General Sima Zhao was given the title of grand governor, allowing him to only report his official position and not his name when reporting. He was awarded the honor of leading the national soldiers and horses.

古文：癸酉，以太尉司马孚为太傅。
现代文：二十九日，任命太尉司马孚为太傅。
English: On the 29th, Taifu Sima Fu was appointed Taifu.

古文：九月，以司徒高柔为太尉。
现代文：九月，任命司徒高柔为太尉。
English: In September, he appointed Sito Goju as a second lieutenant.

古文：冬十月，以司空郑冲为司徒，尚书左仆射卢毓为司空。
现代文：十月，封司空郑冲为司徒、尚书左仆射卢毓为司空。
English: In October, Zheng Chong, the secretary of the Empress Dowager, became the secretary of the Empress Dowager, and Shang Shuxu's left-hand servant Lu Yao became the secretary of the Empress Dowager.

古文：二年春二月，青龙见温县井中。
现代文：甘露二年二月，有青龙出现在温县的某处水井中。
English: In February of the following year, a blue dragon appeared in a well somewhere in Wen County.

古文：三月，司空卢毓薨。
现代文：三月，司空卢毓去世。
English: In March, Sikuo Rouyi passed away.

古文：夏四月癸卯，诏曰： 玄菟郡高显县吏民反叛，长郑熙为贼所杀。
现代文：四月三日，皇帝下诏说： 玄菟郡高显县的官吏百姓反叛，县令郑熙被这些反贼杀害。
English: On April 3, the emperor issued an edict saying: The officials and people of Gaoxian County, Xuanzang County rebelled, and the county governor, Zheng Xi, was killed by these rebels.

古文：民王简负担熙丧，晨夜星行，远致本州，忠节可嘉。
现代文：百姓王简背负着郑熙的遗体昼夜赶路，走了很远才到了郡府所在，他的忠诚气节应该嘉奖。
English: Wang Jian, a commoner, carried Zheng Xi's body on his back and rushed day and night. He walked a long way before reaching the county seat. His loyalty should be commended.

古文：其特拜简为忠义都尉，以旌殊行。 
现代文：现在下令授予他忠义都尉的职位，来表彰他与常人不同的行为。
English: Now he has been ordered to be awarded the position of Lieutenant of Loyalty in recognition of his extraordinary behaviour.

古文：甲子，以征东大将军诸葛诞为司空。
现代文：二十四日，任命征东大将军诸葛诞为司空。
English: On the 24th, Zhuge Zhixing, the general of the Eastern Expeditionary Force, was appointed as the deputy commander.

古文：五月辛未，帝幸辟雍，会命群臣赋诗。
现代文：五月一日，皇帝来到国学馆，让朝臣们作诗。
English: On the first of May, the emperor came to the Kokugakukan and asked his courtiers to compose a poem.

古文：侍中和逌、尚书陈骞等作诗稽留，有司奏免官，诏曰： 吾以暗昧，爱好文雅，广延诗赋，以知得失，而乃尔纷纭，良用反仄。
现代文：侍中和逌、尚书陈骞等人作诗时故意拖延时间，有官员上奏请求免去他们的官职，天子下诏说： 我不够机智灵敏，但喜好风雅之事，现在让大家即席作诗，只是想借此了解朝政的得失，但大家却议论纷纷，又不能理解我的意图。
English: Some officials requested to be exempted from their official duties. The emperor said, "I am not clever and sensitive enough, but I like elegant things. Now I want everyone to write poems at the same time. I just want to use this to understand the gains and losses of the imperial government, but everyone is talking about it and cannot understand my intention.

古文：其原逌等。
现代文：现在就原谅他们了。
English: Forgive them now.

古文：主者宜敕自今以后，群臣皆当玩习古义，脩明经典，称朕意焉。 
现代文：所以应该从现在以后，朝臣们都应该认真钻研古文内涵，修习研明经典，才符合我的心意。 
English: Therefore, from now on, the courtiers should seriously study the connotation of ancient texts and study the classics, which is in line with my heart.

古文：乙亥，诸葛诞不就徵，发兵反，杀扬州刺史乐綝。
现代文：五日，诸葛诞不接受朝廷的征召担任司空，发兵反叛，杀死扬州刺史乐綝。
English: On the fifth day, Zhuge Zi did not accept the imperial court's call to serve as a crane operator, sent troops to rebel, and killed Yangzhou crane operator Le Yao.

古文：丙子，赦淮南将吏士民为诞所诖误者。丁丑，诏曰： 诸葛诞造为凶乱，荡覆扬州。
现代文：六月，朝廷下令赦免那些被诸葛诞欺骗连累的官吏百姓。七月，天子下诏说： 诸葛诞反叛，是制造祸乱的元凶，还颠覆扬州的平静。
English: In June, the imperial court ordered to pardon those officials and people who were deceived and entangled by Zhuge Zetian. In July, the emperor said: Zhuge Zetian's rebellion was the cause of the calamity, and it also subverted the peace of Yangzhou.

古文：昔黥布逆叛，汉祖亲戎，隗嚣违戾，光武西伐，及烈祖明皇帝躬征吴、蜀，皆所以奋扬赫斯，震耀威武也。
现代文：从前黥布反叛，汉高祖亲自出征平叛；隗嚣乖张违命，光武帝西征讨伐。等到我朝先祖明皇帝亲自率军征讨吴、蜀，这些事都是能彰显朝廷威势的。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Xizong rebelled, and Emperor Gaozu personally went to fight against the rebellion; once upon a time, Emperor Guangwu led an army to fight against the Western Expedition; once upon a time, Emperor Ming personally led an army to fight against the Western Expedition; these are all things that can demonstrate the might of the imperial court.

古文：今宜皇太后与朕暂共临戎，速定丑虏，时宁东夏。 
现代文：现在也应当由我和皇太后一起参与到军事事务中，方便更快地平定反贼，安定东边的局势。 
English: Now is also the time for me and the Empress Dowager to participate in military affairs, so that we can more quickly settle the anti-Japanese war and stabilize the situation in the east.

古文：己卯，诏曰： 诸葛诞造构逆乱，迫胁忠义，平寇将军临渭亭侯庞会、骑督偏将军路蕃，各将左右，斩门突出，忠壮勇烈，所宜嘉异。
现代文：九日，天子又下诏说： 诸葛诞编造谎言反叛，胁迫忠义之士参与到他的行动中，但他部下的平寇将军临渭亭侯庞会和骑督偏将军路蕃都各自带领手下随从突围而出投奔朝廷，他们的忠勇壮烈的行为应该受到褒扬嘉奖。
English: On the 9th, Tianzi also issued an edict saying: Zhuge Liang fabricated lies to rebel and coerced loyal people to participate in his actions. However, his subordinates, Pingko General Linyi Ting Hou Pang Hui and Cavalry General Lu Wei, each led their men to break out of the encirclement and rush to the imperial court. Their brave and heroic behavior should be commended and rewarded.

古文：其进会爵乡侯，蕃封亭侯。 
现代文：现在特下令加封庞会为乡侯，路蕃为亭侯。 
English: Now, it has been specifically ordered that Jafeng Panghui will be the townspeople, and Lulu will be the pavilion.

古文：六月乙巳，诏： 吴使持节都督夏口诸军事镇军将军沙羡侯孙壹，贼之枝属，位为上将，畏天知命，深鉴祸福，翻然举众，远归大国，虽微子去殷，乐毅遁燕，无以加之。
现代文：六月六日，天子下诏说： 东吴那边持着符节监督夏口各类军事事务的镇军将军沙羡侯孙壹，是吴王的同族近亲，处在上将军的高位上，但能敬畏天命，鉴别局势福祸，毅然率部众向我军投降。就算是从前微子启离开殷国，乐毅出逃至燕国，也无法与孙将军相比较。
English: On the 6th of June, the emperor said: Sha En Hou Sun Yi, the general of the town army who oversaw all kinds of military affairs in Xia Kou on the East Wu side, is a close relative of the same ethnic group as the king of Wu. He is in a high position of the general, but he can fear the fate of heaven, identify the situation of good and evil, and resolutely lead his subordinates to surrender to our army. Even if he left Yin Province and fled to Yan Province before the microcosm, he can not be compared with General Sun.

古文：其以壹为侍中车骑将军、假节、交州牧、吴侯，开府辟召仪同三司，依古侯伯八命之礼，衮冕赤舄，事从丰厚。 
现代文：现在特下令封孙壹为侍中车骑将军，授予符节，兼任交州牧，封为吴侯，建立公府或受到征召时的礼节待遇与三司同等。依照古代伯侯的八命之礼，赐给他三公所穿戴的礼服和冠冕，所有待遇都要很好。 
English: Now, it is specifically ordered to appoint Sun I as the general of the cavalry and cavalry, to award the symbols, to concurrently serve as the pastor of Jiaozhou, to be named Wu Hou, to establish a public office or to receive the same courtesy treatment as the three departments when conscripted. In accordance with the ancient count's gift of eight lives, he was given the gowns and crowns worn by the three princes, and all treatment should be good.

古文：甲子，诏曰： 今车驾驻项，大将军恭行天罚，前临淮浦。
现代文：二十五日，天子又下诏： 现在我亲自到项县来督军，大将军依循天意讨伐叛贼，要到淮浦前线。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the heavenly son issued another edict: Now I will personally go to Xiang County to supervise the army, and the general will follow the will of heaven to fight the traitors and go to the front line of Huaipu.

古文：昔相国大司马征讨，皆与尚书俱行，今宜如旧。 
现代文：从前相国或大司马出征讨伐时，都有尚书随行，现在也应该如此。 
English: In the past, when a foreign country or a great warrior went out to fight, Shangshu accompanied him, and it should be the same now.

古文：乃令散骑常侍裴秀、给事黄门侍郎锺会咸与大将军俱行。
现代文：就下令让散骑常侍裴秀、给事黄门侍郎锺会咸与大将军一起行动。
English: He ordered that the straggler, the regular attendant, Pei Xiu, and the attendant of the Yellow Gate, Gui Xuan, should act together with the general.

古文：秋八月，诏曰： 昔燕刺王谋反，韩谊等谏而死，汉朝显登其子。
现代文：八月，天子又下诏说： 从前燕刺王密谋造反，韩谊等官员极力劝阻却因此被杀，汉朝朝廷给予韩谊的子孙优厚的待遇。
English: In August, Tianzi issued another edict: "Once upon a time, Yan Zhiguo plotted to rebel, and Han Rui and other officials tried their best to dissuade him, but were killed as a result. The Han Dynasty court gave Han Rui's descendants generous treatment.

古文：诸葛诞创造凶乱，主簿宣隆、部曲督秦絜秉节守义，临事固争，为诞所杀，所谓无比干之亲而受其戮者。
现代文：现在诸葛诞制造祸乱，他的主簿宣隆、部曲督秦睱等人也坚守节操正义，在他反叛之前也坚决抗争，但却被诸葛诞杀害。
English: Now Zhuge Zetian is creating havoc. His main disciple, Xuan Long, and the music director, Qin Hui, and others also adhere to the principles of discipline and justice. Before he rebelled, he also resolutely resisted, but he was killed by Zhuge Zetian.

古文：其以隆、絜子为骑都尉，加以赠赐，光示远近，以殊忠义。 
现代文：这就是世人所说的没有与比干亲近但却遭受和他一样的结局。现在特下令提升宣隆、秦睱的儿子为骑都尉，加以赏赐，并广为宣传，以示嘉奖对朝廷忠诚的忠义之人。 
English: This is what people say about those who were not close to Bi Gan, but suffered the same fate as him. Now, a special order has been issued to promote Xuan Long, the son of Qin Yu, to the rank of cavalry captain, to reward him, and to widely publicize it, in order to show appreciation for those who are loyal to the imperial court.

古文：九月，大赦。
现代文：九月，下令大赦天下。
English: In September, he ordered a general amnesty.

古文：冬十二月，吴大将全端、全怿等率众降。
现代文：十二月，东吴大将全端、全怿等率部下投降。
English: In December, General Dongwu and his subordinates, including Quanquan and Quanzhang, surrendered.

古文：三年春二月，大将军司马文王陷寿春城，斩诸葛诞。
现代文：甘露三年二月，大将军司马昭攻陷了寿春，斩杀了诸葛诞。
English: In February of the 3rd year of the Kamloops, the general Sima Zhao captured Shuchun and killed Zhuge Zi.

古文：三月，诏曰： 古者克敌，收其尸以为京观，所以惩昏逆而章武功也。
现代文：三月，天子下诏说： 从前军队打了胜仗，都收取敌人的尸首堆土形成高冢以示敌军，来炫耀胜利，目的是为了惩罚叛逆之人同时彰显武力。
English: In March, the emperor said: In the past, when the army won a battle, they would collect the enemy's corpses to form a mound of soil to show the enemy army, to show off the victory, in order to punish the traitors and at the same time show force.

古文：汉孝武元鼎中，改桐乡为闻喜，新乡为获嘉，以著南越之亡。
现代文：西汉武帝元鼎年间，改桐乡为闻喜县，新乡为获嘉县，是为了彰显攻克南越的胜利。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu of the Western Han Dynasty, Tongxiang was renamed Wensi County and Xinxiang was renamed Huojia County in order to highlight the victory over South Vietnam.

古文：大将军亲总六戎，营据丘头，内夷群凶，外殄寇虏，功济兆民，声振四海。
现代文：现在我朝大将军亲自率领军队，驻扎在丘头，对内平定反贼，对外抵御外族侵扰，功劳福泽万民，声威震荡四海。
English: Now I, the supreme commander of the Korean army, am personally leading the army, stationed at the hilltop, suppressing the rebels at home and resisting foreign intrusion abroad, bringing benefits to the people and making my voice heard far and wide.

古文：克敌之地，宜有令名，其改丘头为武丘，明以武平乱，后世不忘，亦京观二邑之义也。 
现代文：攻克敌军的地方，也应该有一个值得纪念的名称，特下令将丘头改称武丘，表明用武力平定叛乱的事，让后代的人永远也不要忘记，这跟京观或给两地改名的用意是一样的。 
English: The place where the enemy was defeated should also have a memorable name. It was specifically ordered to change the name of the hilltop to Wuqiu, indicating the use of force to quell the rebellion, so that future generations would never forget. This is the same intention as the renaming of Beijing or the two places.

古文：夏五月，命大将军司马文王为相国，封晋公，食邑八郡，加之九锡，文王前后九让乃止。
现代文：五月，任命大将军司马昭为相国，加封晋公，享受八个郡的食邑，再特赐九种用物，司马昭先后推辞了九次才停止了这些赏赐。
English: In May, he appointed the general Sima Zhao as a peer of the state, promoted him to crown prince, and allowed him to enjoy the food of eight counties and nine kinds of special gifts. Sima Zhao refused nine times before stopping these gifts.

古文：六月丙子，诏曰： 昔南阳郡山贼扰攘，欲劫质故太守东里衮，功曹应余独身捍衮，遂免於难。
现代文：六月十三日，天子下诏说： 从前南阳郡有山贼作乱，侵扰百姓，想要劫持以前的太守东里衮为人质，当地功曹应余只身力争保护太守，才使得东里衮幸免于难。
English: On June 13th, the emperor said, "Once upon a time, there were bandits in Nanyang County who made trouble, harassed the people, and wanted to take the former governor, Dong Lijun, hostage. It was only thanks to the efforts of local heroes to protect the governor that Dong Lijun survived.

古文：余颠沛殒毙，杀身济君。其下司徒，署余孙伦吏，使蒙伏节之报。 
现代文：应余在掩护东里衮的过程中历经千辛万苦，最终为使长官突出重围力战而死。现在司徒应该了解一下，安排应余的孙子应伦担任相应的职位，让他和后代都能得到忠诚相应的回报。 
English: Yingyu went through a lot of hardships in the process of protecting the East Lihong, and eventually died in order to make the commander stand out. Now, Sito should understand, arrange Yingyu's grandson Yinglun to hold the corresponding position, so that he and future generations can get the corresponding return of loyalty.

古文：辛卯，大论淮南之功，封爵行赏各有差。
现代文：二十八日，朝廷大举评议众位官员在平定诸葛诞叛乱中的功劳，最后依据功劳大小给予不同程度的封爵赏赐。
English: On the 28th, the Imperial Court made a sweeping evaluation of the merits of many officials in the suppression of Zhuge Zhou's rebellion, and finally rewarded them with different degrees of knighthoods according to their merits.

古文：秋八月甲戌，以骠骑将军王昶为司空。
现代文：八月十二日，任命骠骑将军王昶为司空。
English: On August 12th, he appointed the cavalry general Wang Qi as the deputy commander of the air force.

古文：丙寅，诏曰： 夫养老兴教，三代所以树风化垂不朽也，必有三老、五更以崇至敬，乞言纳诲，著在惇史，然后六合承流，下观而化。
现代文：九月四日，天子下诏说： 奉养老人，推行德教，这是尧、舜、禹三代得以树立良好风范并流传不衰的原因。所以朝廷应选举德高望重的老人加以推崇致敬，向他们请教国家大事与朝政的利弊得失，并记录他们的言语德行，这样之后全国都仿效他们，自然就有教化的效果了。
English: On September 4, the imperial edict said: "Cultivating the elderly and promoting moral education are the reasons why the three generations of Yu, Xuan and Yu have been able to establish a good demeanor and pass it on. Therefore, the imperial court should select highly respected elderly people and pay tribute to them, ask them about national affairs and the pros and cons of imperial politics, and record their words and deeds. After that, the whole country will follow their example, which will naturally have an educational effect.

古文：宜妙简德行，以充其选。
现代文：所以朝廷应该精选那些品行良好的老人，作为三老、五更的任选。
English: Therefore, the imperial court should select those old people with good conduct as the three old people and five younger people.

古文：关内侯王祥，履仁秉义，雅志淳固。
现代文：关内侯王祥，素来履行仁道秉持忠义，性格温文尔雅又坚定本心。
English: Wang Xiang, Prince of Guanai, has always followed the path of benevolence, upholding loyalty. He is mild-mannered, elegant and has a strong mind.

古文：关内侯郑小同，温恭孝友，帅礼不忒。
现代文：关内侯郑小同，品性温良恭俭，孝亲忠友，遵循礼法不会违背。
English: Guan Nei Hou Zheng Xiaodong is mild-mannered, frugal, filial and loyal, and will not violate the rules of etiquette.

古文：其以祥为三老，小同为五更。 
现代文：可以推选王祥为三老，郑小同为五更。 
English: Wang Xiang can be elected as the third elder, and Zheng Xiaodong as the fifth elder.

古文：车驾亲率群司，躬行古礼焉。
现代文：诏令下达后，天子亲自率领相关官员，按古代礼节举行聘任礼仪。
English: After the edict was issued, Tianzi personally led the relevant officials to hold the appointment ceremony according to the ancient etiquette.

古文：是岁，青龙、黄龙仍见顿丘、冠军、阳夏县界井中。
现代文：这一年，仍然有青龙、黄龙出现在顿丘、冠军、阳夏县的水井中。
English: This year, there are still blue dragons and yellow dragons appearing in the wells of Dongqiu, Champion and Yangxia counties.

古文：四年春正月，黄龙二，见宁陵县界井中。夏六月，司空王昶薨。
现代文：甘露四年正月，宁陵县的一水井中有两条黄龙出现。六月，司空王昶死去。
English: In the first month of the 4th year of the lunar calendar, two yellow dragons appeared in a well in Ningling County. In June, Sikuo Wang Yao died.

古文：秋七月，陈留王峻薨。
现代文：七月，陈留王曹峻亡故。
English: In July, Chen Liu Wang Cao Jun passed away.

古文：冬十月丙寅，分新城郡，复置上庸郡。
现代文：十月十日，朝廷将新城郡一分为二，复设上庸郡。
English: On October 10th, the imperial court divided Xincheng County into two and reinstated Shangyong County.

古文：十一月癸卯，车骑将军孙壹为婢所杀。
现代文：十一月十八日，车骑将军孙壹被他的奴婢所杀。
English: On November 18th, the cavalry general Sun I was killed by his slaves.

古文：五年春正月朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：甘露五年正月初一，出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the fifth year of the Kamloops.

古文：夏四月，诏有司率遵前命，复进大将军司马文王位为相国，封晋公，加九锡。
现代文：四月，天子下诏令相关官员按照之前的决定，再次任命大将军司马昭为相国，封为晋公，再嘉赏九锡之礼。
English: In April, the emperor issued an imperial edict to the relevant officials, according to the previous decision, re-appointed the general Sima Zhao as a consort of the emperor, appointed him as a crown prince, and then awarded him the Jiuxi gift.

古文：五月己丑，高贵乡公卒，年二十。
现代文：五月十三日，高贵乡公曹髦去世，年仅二十岁。
English: On May 13th, Gao Guixiang Gong Cao Xiang passed away, only 20 years old.

古文：皇太后令曰： 吾以不德，遭家不造，昔援立东海王子髦，以为明帝嗣，见其好书疏文章，冀可成济，而情性暴戾，日月滋甚。
现代文：皇太后下令说： 我德行不足，所以家中接连出现不幸的事，之前我推荐东海王曹霖的儿子曹髦来作为明帝的继承人，我见他喜欢读书，又乐于批阅朝臣们的奏章，期望他可以成为一个明君，但他却性情暴劣，并且越发严重。
English: The empress dowager ordered: "I am not virtuous enough, so misfortunes have occurred in my family one after another. Previously, I recommended the son of the East Sea King Cao Lin, Cao Xiang, to be the successor of Emperor Ming. I saw that he liked to read books, and was happy to approve the records of courtiers, hoping that he could become an emperor, but he had a bad temper, and it was getting worse.

古文：吾数呵责，遂更忿恚，造作丑逆不道之言以诬谤吾，遂隔绝两宫。
现代文：我多次叱责他，他却更加愤恨，编造散播大逆不道的言论来诽谤我，并且与我断绝往来。
English: I reprimanded him many times, but he became even angrier, fabricated and spread outrageous remarks to slander me, and broke off contact with me.

古文：其所言道，不可忍听，非天地所覆载。
现代文：那些他捏造的话，简直不堪入耳，甚至是天地都无法容忍的。
English: The words he fabricated were simply unbearable to listen to, even intolerable to heaven and earth.

古文：吾即密有令语大将军，不可以奉宗庙，恐颠覆社稷，死无面目以见先帝。
现代文：所以我私下向大将军传话，说他不能敬奉宗庙承继帝位，否则可能会使国家陷入颠覆的混乱之中，那么我死之后是没有脸面去面对先帝的。
English: Therefore, I privately sent a message to the general, saying that he could not honor the ancestral temple and succeed to the imperial throne, otherwise it might plunge the country into subversive chaos, then I would have no face to face with the former emperor after my death.

古文：大将军以其尚幼，谓当改心为善，殷勤执据。
现代文：大将军认为他年纪尚小，说我们应该多加引导劝责，让他能改过向善。
English: The general thought that he was still young and said that we should give him more guidance and persuasion so that he could change for the better.

古文：而此儿忿戾，所行益甚，举弩遥射吾宫，祝当令中吾项，箭亲堕吾前。
现代文：但这小子蛮横无理，行为越来越过分，甚至远远地举着弩箭射向我的寝宫，诅咒说要射中我的脑袋，箭矢都落在了我的面前。
English: But this boy was insolent and unreasonable, and his behavior became more and more excessive. He even shot a crossbow at my bedroom from a distance, cursing that he would shoot me in the head. The arrows landed in front of me.

古文：吾语大将军，不可不废之，前后数十。
现代文：我告诉大将军，他是不能不被废掉的，前后说了数十次。
English: I told the general that he couldn't be scrapped, and I said it dozens of times.

古文：此儿具闻，自知罪重，便图为弑逆，赂遗吾左右人，令因吾服药，密因鸩毒，重相设计。
现代文：这小子听说之后，自知罪行深重，竟然密谋要杀掉我，收买了我左右的近身侍从，告诉他们，因为我正在服药，所以将鸩毒下在我的药中，还设计了很多种方案。
English: After hearing this, the boy, knowing that his crime was serious, conspired to kill me, bribed my close attendants, told them that because I was taking medicine, he would poison my medicine, and devised many schemes.

古文：事已觉露，直欲因际会举兵入西宫杀吾，出取大将军，呼侍中王沈、散骑常侍王业、尚书王经，出怀中黄素诏示之，言今日便当施行。
现代文：当他的计谋败露后，就想在与他会面的时候趁机领兵到西宫杀死我，然后再杀死大将军。他召见了侍中王沈、散骑常侍王业、尚书王经等人，将手中的诏书给他们看，说今天立刻就要执行计划。
English: When his plot was exposed, he wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to lead soldiers to the West Palace to kill me and then kill the general when he met with him. He summoned the attendant Wang Shen, the horseback riding attendant Wang Ye, Shang Shu Wang Jing and others, showed them the edict in his hand, and said that the plan would be implemented immediately today.

古文：吾之危殆，过于累卵。
现代文：我的处境已经危如累卵。
English: I'm in a precarious situation.

古文：吾老寡，岂复多惜馀命邪？
现代文：我年事已高，难道还吝惜自己的性命吗？
English: Am I too old to save my own life?

古文：但伤先帝遗意不遂，社稷颠覆为痛耳。
现代文：只是感伤这样子会辜负先帝遗愿，为天下要陷入混乱中而悲痛罢了。
English: It's just that sentimentality like this would betray the last wishes of the former emperor, and it's sad that the world is about to fall into chaos.

古文：赖宗庙之灵，沈、业即驰语大将军，得先严警，而此儿便将左右出云龙门，雷战鼓，躬自拔刃，与左右杂卫共入兵陈间，为前锋所害。
现代文：仰赖先祖先辈的英灵，王沈、王业立刻将他的计划告知了大将军，才使得大将军有所戒备。但这小子仍然带领左右侍从冲出云龙门，敲响战鼓，亲自拔刀，和左右侍从一起冲进交战的队伍中，结果被前锋杀害身亡。
English: Relying on the spirit of the ancestors, Wang Shen and Wang Ye immediately informed the general of his plan, which made the general wary. However, the boy still led the left and right attendants to rush out of the Yunlong Gate, beat the war drums, personally pulled out his sword, and rushed into the warring team together with the left and right attendants. As a result, he was killed by the forward.

古文：此儿既行悖逆不道，而又自陷大祸，重令吾悼心不可言。
现代文：这小子实行大逆不道之事，又让自己陷入祸乱中，实在是让我悲痛得无法言说。
English: For this boy to commit such a heinous act and get himself into such a mess, it really saddens me beyond words.

古文：昔汉昌邑王以罪废为庶人，此儿亦宜以民礼葬之，当令内外咸知此儿所行。
现代文：从前汉朝的昌邑王因罪被废为普通百姓，这小子也应当只按普通百姓的礼节下葬，让天下万民都知道他的所作所为。
English: Changyi Wang of the former Han Dynasty was dethroned as an ordinary citizen for his crime. This boy should also be buried only according to the etiquette of ordinary people, so that all the people in the world know what he did.

古文：又尚书王经，凶逆无状，其收经及家属皆诣廷尉。 
现代文：还有尚书王经，也一样参与到谋乱之中，现在下令将王经和他的家属一起收押交付廷尉审理查办。 
English: There is also Wang Jing Shangshu, who was also involved in plotting the rebellion. Now, Wang Jing and his family have been ordered to be detained and handed over to the Court Lieutenant's Investigation and Investigation Office.

古文：庚寅，太傅孚、大将军文王、太尉柔、司徒冲稽首言： 伏见中令，故高贵乡公悖逆不道，自陷大祸，依汉昌邑王罪废故事，以民礼葬。
现代文：十四日，太傅司马孚、大将军司马昭、太尉高柔、司徒郑冲前向皇太后跪奏说： 我们敬读了太后的旨意，已故的高贵乡公违反正道，犯法作乱，让自己陷入祸乱中以致身亡，按照汉朝昌邑王因罪被废为普通百姓的先例，将他以普通百姓的礼节安葬。
English: On the 14th, Grand Master Sima Fu, General Sima Zhao, First Lieutenant Gao Rou, and Second Lieutenant Zheng Chong kneeled before the Empress Dowager and said, "We have read the Empress Dowager's will with respect. The late noble townsman violated the right way, broke the law and caused turmoil, and got himself into trouble, leading to his death. In accordance with the precedent of the Han Dynasty, when the King of Changyi was abolished as an ordinary citizen for his crime, he was buried with the etiquette of an ordinary citizen.

古文：臣等备位，不能匡救祸乱，式遏奸逆，奉令震悚，肝心悼栗。
现代文：但我们这些朝臣处于高位，却不能匡正补救他的过失，不能阻止他奸邪悖逆的行为，所以我们接到您的命令也很震惊，心中悲痛万分。
English: But those of us who are high-ranking courtiers cannot rectify or remedy his mistakes, cannot stop his treacherous and rebellious behavior, so we were shocked to receive your order, and our hearts are filled with sorrow.

古文：春秋之义，王者无外，而书 襄王出居于郑 ，不能事母，故绝之于位也。
现代文：按《春秋》中的涵义，君主也不能例外，而书中所说的 襄王出居于郑 ，就是说他不能遵从母亲的教诲，所以不让他继承王位。
English: According to the meaning of "Spring and Autumn," the monarch is no exception, and the book says that King Xiang was born in Zheng, which means that he could not follow his mother's teachings, so he was not allowed to inherit the throne.

古文：今高贵乡公肆行不轨，几危社稷，自取倾覆，人神所绝，葬以民礼，诚当旧典。
现代文：现在高贵乡公大肆行不轨之事，几乎危害到社稷，这样的结果都是他自作自受，是天下和神明都不能容忍的，按照平民的规格下葬，确实是合乎先例的。
English: Now, the nobles of the township are indulging in immoral activities, almost endangering the community. Such a result is self-inflicted, which is intolerable to the world and the gods. It is indeed a precedent to be buried according to the specifications of the common people.

古文：然臣等伏惟殿下仁慈过隆，虽存大义，犹垂哀矜，臣等之心实有不忍，以为可加恩以王礼葬之。 
现代文：但我们认为皇太后新心存仁慈，虽然从大义出发宣布高贵乡公的不义行为，但心中还是心存怜悯的，我们身为臣子也有不忍之心，所以我们请求皇太后是否能加恩，允许高贵乡公按王侯的礼节下葬。 
English: However, we believe that the Empress Dowager's new heart is merciful. Although she announced the noble townsman's unjust act from the perspective of justice, she still has compassion in her heart. As courtiers, we also have a heart of forbearance, so we ask the Empress Dowager if she can be gracious and allow the noble townsman to be buried according to the prince's etiquette.

古文：太后从之。
现代文：皇太后同意了他们的请求。
English: The Queen Mother complied.

古文：使使持节行中护军中垒将军司马炎北迎常道乡公璜嗣明帝后。
现代文：皇太后派代理中护军中垒将军司马炎持旌节迎常道乡公曹璜入京承袭明帝的帝位。
English: The empress dowager sent the acting middle-ranking general of the middle-ranking general of the middle-ranking general of the middle-ranking general of the middle-ranking general of the middle-ranking general of the middle-ranking general of the middle-ranking general of the middle-ranking general of the middle-ranking general of the middle-ranking general of the middle-ranking general of the middle-ranking general of the middle-ranking general of the middle-ranking general.

古文：辛卯，群公奏太后曰： 殿下圣德光隆，宁济六合，而犹称令，与藩国同。
现代文：十五日，群臣向太后奏请说： 殿下贤德光耀四海，保佑国家安定和平，但至今殿下的旨意还是只称为 令 ，与藩王的用法是一样的。
English: On the fifteenth day, the courtiers appealed to the empress dowager, saying, "Your highness, your wisdom shines throughout the four seas, and you bless the country with stability and peace. However, to this day, the will of your highness is still only called an order, and the usage is the same as that of the lord of the domain."

古文：请自今殿下令书，皆称诏制，如先代故事。 
现代文：我们请求从今以后，殿下您的旨意都称为 诏 ，就像前代太后们亲政的先例一样。 
English: We request that, from now on, Your Imperial Highness's will be referred to as the Imperial Edict, just like the precedent of the previous generations of empresses.

古文：癸卯，大将车固让相国、晋公、九锡之宠。
现代文：二十一日，大将军司马昭还是坚决推辞被提升为相国，加封晋王，加九锡之礼的恩宠。
English: On the twenty-first day, the general Sima Zhao still resolutely refused to be elevated to the peerage, to be given the title of Jin Wang, and to receive the grace of Jiuxi.

古文：太后诏曰： 夫有功不隐，周易大义，成人之美，古贤所尚，今听所执，出表示外，以章公之谦光焉。 
现代文：太后下诏说： 有功劳不应该隐藏，这是《周易》所提倡的。实现他人的美好愿望，也是古代圣贤们所推崇的。现在我愿意听从大将军的请求，但要明文昭告天下，以彰显您的谦恭的美德。 
English: The empress dowager issued an edict saying, "Merit should not be hidden, which is advocated by Zhou Yi, and fulfilling the good wishes of others is also advocated by ancient sages. Now I am willing to listen to the general's request, but I must announce it to the world in order to highlight your virtue of humility."

古文：戊申，大将军文王上言： 高贵乡公率将从驾人兵，拔刃鸣金鼓向臣所止；惧兵刃相接，即敕将士不得有所伤害，违令以军法从事。
现代文：二十六日，大将军司马昭上奏说： 高贵乡公当时率领部下以及一些跟随的人，擂鼓举刀向臣的住处而去；臣担心会发生混战，就下令我的部下不能对高贵乡公有所伤害，违反的人一律以军法处置。
English: On the 26th, General Sima Zhao made a report, saying: At that time, Gao Guoxiang led his subordinates and some followers to go to the residence of the minister with drums and swords. The minister was worried that a scuffle would occur, and ordered his subordinates not to harm Gao Guoxiang. Anyone who violated this order would be dealt with according to military law.

古文：骑督成倅弟太子舍人济，横入兵陈伤公，遂至陨命；辄收济行军法。
现代文：骑兵都尉成倅的弟弟太子舍人成济冲入混战的阵中刺伤了高贵乡公，使他丧命；我就立刻将他收押起来以军法处置。
English: The younger brother of cavalry captain Cheng Yao, Prince Shenren Cheng Ji, rushed into the melee and stabbed the noble townsman, killing him; I immediately detained him and dealt with him according to military law.

古文：臣闻人臣之节，有死无二，事上之义，不敢逃难。
现代文：臣听闻为人臣子的应有的节操，除了为君而死没有别的选择，侍奉君主的大义，应当是不敢回避君王的责难。
English: It is said that a vassal's duty as a vassal is to have no choice but to die for the sovereign. To serve the sovereign's great justice, one should not dare to evade the sovereign's rebuke.

古文：前者变故卒至，祸同发机，诚欲委身守死，唯命所裁。
现代文：但先前突然发生变故，灾祸突然降临，臣想要将生死置之度外不做抵抗，一起听随天意。
English: However, there had been a sudden turn of events, a sudden disaster, and the vassal wanted to put life and death aside, not to resist, but to follow the will of heaven.

古文：然惟本谋乃欲上危皇太后，倾覆宗庙。
现代文：但又想到高贵乡公的计划是为了要杀掉太后，扰乱国家安定。
English: However, it also occurred to me that the noble townsman's plan was to kill the empress dowager and disrupt national stability.

古文：臣忝当大任，义在安国，惧虽身死，罪责弥重。
现代文：臣虽然忝居高位，但臣的职责就在于守卫国家朝廷安定，担忧臣就这样死去，但罪责却会更加深重。
English: Although the vassal holds a high position, the vassal's duty is to guard the stability of the country's imperial court. It is worrying that the vassal died like this, but the guilt will be more serious.

古文：欲遵伊、周之权，以安社稷之难，即骆驿申敕，不得迫近辇舆，而济遽入陈间，以致大变。
现代文：所以想要像伊尹、周公等先贤一样，挺身而出以平定国家的危难。但同时也反复告诫部下，不能接近皇上的车驾伤害皇上，没想到成济突然冲入兵阵中，导致严重后果。
English: Therefore, he wanted to stand up to quell the national crisis like sages such as Yi Yin and Zhou Gong. But at the same time, he repeatedly warned his subordinates that they should not approach the emperor's car to hurt the emperor. He did not expect that Cheng Jie would suddenly rush into the line of battle, leading to serious consequences.

古文：哀怛痛恨，五内摧裂，不知何地可以陨坠？
现代文：臣深感悲痛，肝肠寸断，不知道哪里可以以死赎罪。
English: The vassal was deeply saddened, heartbroken, and did not know where he could atone for his sins by dying.

古文：科律大逆无道，父母妻子同产皆斩。
现代文：按律法，大逆不道的人，他的父母妻子孩子都应该处死。
English: According to the law, his parents, wife and children should all be put to death.

古文：济凶戾悖逆，干国乱纪，罪不容诛。
现代文：现在成济悖逆残暴，扰乱国家法纪，罪大恶极。
English: Now, Cheng Jie has committed the heinous crime of disobeying the law, disturbing the national law and order.

古文：辄敕侍御史收济家属，付廷尉，结正其罪。 
现代文：请太后立刻下诏令侍御史收押成济的家属，交付廷尉审理，查明并依法严惩。 
English: I request the empress dowager to immediately issue an imperial edict ordering the Imperial Household Agency to detain the family members of Seongji, hand them over to the court officers for trial, investigate and severely punish them in accordance with the law.

古文：太后诏曰： 夫五刑之罪，莫大於不孝。
现代文：太后下诏说： 要判处五刑的罪责，没有比不孝更严重的了。
English: The empress dowager issued an edict saying, "There is no more serious crime deserving of a five-year sentence than being unfilial.

古文：夫人有子不孝，尚告治之，此儿岂复成人主邪？
现代文：平常百姓家有不孝子孙，尚且还有上告官府以求惩治，难道高贵乡公这人还能担任一个国家的君主吗？
English: Ordinary people have children and grandchildren who are not filial, and they still have to appeal to the government for punishment. Can this noble countryman still serve as the monarch of a country?

古文：吾妇人不达大义，以谓济不得便为大逆也。
现代文：我是个普通妇人，不了解天下大义，但我认为成济的做法并不能称为大逆不道。
English: I am an ordinary woman, I do not understand the world, but I think that the practice of making money cannot be called a great treason.

古文：然大将军志意恳切，发言恻怆，故听如所奏。
现代文：但大将军你意志坚定，言辞恳切，言语哀伤，所以我同意你的请求。
English: But General, you are strong-willed, your words are sincere, and your words are sad, so I agree to your request.

古文：当班下远近，使知本末也。 
现代文：并且应该将这件事公告天下，让百姓都知道事情的来龙去脉。 
English: And this matter should be announced to the world, so that the people know the ins and outs of the matter.

古文：六月癸丑，诏曰： 古者人君之为名字，难犯而易讳。
现代文：六月初一，太后下诏说： 古代的君主所取的名字，大多是不容易犯讳又容易避讳。
English: On the first day of June, the Empress Dowager issued the following edict: Most of the names taken by ancient monarchs are not easy to commit and easy to avoid.

古文：今常道乡公讳字甚难避，其朝臣博议改易，列奏。 
现代文：现在常道乡公名璜，他的名字比较难避开，所以朝臣们可以充分讨论一下应该改个什么样的名字，讨论好了就呈奏上来。 
English: Now, his name is more difficult to avoid, so the courtiers can fully discuss what kind of name should be changed, and once the discussion is over, it will come up.

古文：陈留王讳奂，字景明，武帝孙，燕王宇子也。
现代文：陈留王名奂，字景明，是武帝的孙子，燕王曹宇的儿子。
English: Chen Liu Wang Mingtang, also known as Jingming, was the grandson of Emperor Wu and the son of Yan Wang Cao Yu.

古文：甘露三年，封安次县常道乡公。
现代文：甘露三年被封为安次县常道乡公。
English: Three years later, Kanro was made the mayor of Jondo Township, Anji County.

古文：高贵乡公卒，公卿议迎立公。
现代文：高贵乡公死后，朝中文武百官商议迎接他来承继皇位。
English: After the death of Prince Gao Guixiang, hundreds of military officials in the DPRK deliberated to welcome him to succeed to the throne.

古文：六月甲寅，入于洛阳，见皇太后，是日即皇帝位于太极前殿，大赦，改年，赐民爵及谷帛各有差。
现代文：六月二日，他来到洛阳，见皇太后，同日在太极前殿正式登基称帝。接着大赦天下，改年号甘露为景元，对众人按爵位不同分别予以赏赐。
English: On June 2, he came to Luoyang to see the empress dowager, and on the same day, he officially ascended to the throne in front of the Taiji Hall. Then, he pardoned the whole world, changed the year name to "Kamro," and rewarded everyone according to their rank.

古文：景元元年夏六月丙辰，进大将军司马文王位为相国，封晋公，增封二郡，并前满十，加九锡之礼，一如前诏；诸群从子弟，其未有侯者皆封亭侯，赐钱千万，帛万匹，文王固让乃止。
现代文：景元元年六月四日，新即位的皇帝曹奂任命大将军司马昭为相国，封晋公，食邑增加两个郡，总共达十个郡，并加九锡之礼，就像之前的赏赐一样。对司马家族的子弟，那些还没有爵位的都封为亭侯，赏赐银钱十万，丝帛万匹，司马昭坚决推辞，才停止了这些决定。
English: On June 4, 1861, the newly enthroned emperor Cao Pi appointed the general Sima Zhao as a peer of the state, the title of prince of Jin, the food counties increased by two counties, a total of ten counties, and the gift of Jiuxi, just like the previous reward. For the children of the Sima family, those who did not have a peerage were named as princes, rewarded with 100,000 silver and 100,000 silk horses, Sima Zhao firmly refused, and stopped these decisions.

古文：己未，故汉献帝夫人节薨，帝临于华林园，使使持节追谥夫人为献穆皇后。
现代文：七日，已故汉献帝的妇人去世，天子亲自到华林园，派遣使者持符节追谥夫人为献穆皇后。
English: On the seventh day, the late Han Xian Di's wife passed away, and Tian Zi himself went to Hualin Garden to send an envoy with a festival to pursue his wife as the queen of Xian Mu.

古文：及葬，车服制度皆如汉氏故事。
现代文：等到举行葬礼时候，一切车马服饰，礼节制度都按照汉代旧制来。
English: By the time of the funeral, all the horse-drawn carriages, costumes, and etiquette were in accordance with the old Han Dynasty system.

古文：癸亥，以尚书右仆射王观为司空，冬十月，观薨。
现代文：十一日，任命尚书右仆射王观为司空。十月，王观病逝。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he appointed his right-hand man, Sha Wangguan, as his second-in-command. In October, Wangguan died of illness.

古文：十一月，燕王上表贺冬至，称臣。
现代文：十一月，燕王上奏祝贺冬至，向曹奂称臣。
English: In November, Yan Wang played a song to congratulate the winter solstice and praised Cao Pi.

古文：诏曰： 古之王者，或有所不臣，王将宜依此义，表不称臣乎！
现代文：天子下诏说： 古时候的诸侯王们，也会有不对皇帝行君臣之礼的，现在父王您也应该按照这一礼节，上奏时不需要向我称臣。
English: The divine son said: In ancient times, princes and kings would not bow to the emperor. Now, father, you should also follow this etiquette. You do not need to bow to me when you play.

古文：又当为报。
现代文：就当做我对您养育之恩的报答吧。
English: Just think of it as my way of repaying you for raising me.

古文：夫后大宗者，降其私亲，况所继者重邪！
现代文：被选中来继承大统的人，会使自己的亲属向自己称臣，难道这样才算是对继位大统的人的重视吗？
English: The person who is chosen to succeed the supreme leader will make his relatives bow to him. Is this the kind of attention that should be paid to the person who succeeds the supreme leader?

古文：若便同之臣妾，亦情所未安。
现代文：如果燕王的自称都像后妃一样称为 臣  妾 ，于情于理都会让我有所不安。
English: If the self-proclaimed king of swallows were all called vassals and concubines like the empress dowager, it would make me uneasy.

古文：其皆依礼典处，当务尽其宜。 
现代文：现在下令应该一切都按照规章制度来做，应当一切都做得符合情理。 
English: Now the order is that everything should be done according to the rules and regulations, and everything should be done reasonably.

古文：有司奏，以为 礼莫崇于尊祖，制莫大于正典。
现代文：掌管礼仪的官员因此上奏说： 所谓礼仪，最大的莫过于尊崇祖先，礼节最严格的莫过于已经制定的礼节制度。
English: The official in charge of etiquette therefore made a report saying: The so-called etiquette, the biggest is to respect the ancestors, and the strictest etiquette is the etiquette system that has been established.

古文：陛下稽德期运，抚临万国，绍大宗之重，隆三祖之基。
现代文：陛下您以自己贤明的品德承继帝位，治理天下，担负着宗族的厚望，振兴先帝开辟的基业。
English: Your Majesty, you have succeeded to the imperial throne with your wise and virtuous character, governed the world, shouldered the high hopes of your family, and revitalized the foundation that your predecessor opened up.

古文：伏惟燕王体尊戚属，正位藩服，躬秉虔肃，率蹈恭德以先万国；其于正典，阐济大顺，所不得制。
现代文：而燕王是陛下的至亲，受先帝分封担任地方诸侯，但他对朝廷和皇上恭敬有加，以自己的忠诚品德向天下做出表率；如果按照先前礼制，那么开国便创立并流传至今的制度可能会得不到延续。
English: However, King Yan was a close relative of His Majesty and was assigned by the former emperor to serve as a local vassal, but he was respectful to the court and the emperor, and set an example to the world with his loyal character; if the previous etiquette was followed, then the system that was created at the founding of the country and has been passed down to this day may not be continued.

古文：圣朝诚宜崇以非常之制，奉以不臣之礼。
现代文：臣等认为陛下您可以将这件事看做非常情况，允许燕王可以不执行臣下的礼节。
English: The courtiers think that Your Majesty can treat this matter as an extraordinary situation and allow King Yan not to carry out the etiquette of his subjects.

古文：臣等平议以为燕王章表，可听如旧式。
现代文：臣等还建议燕王的奏章可以依照之前的形式。
English: The courtiers also suggested that Yan Wang's movement could be performed according to the previous form.

古文：中诏所施，或存好问，准之义类，则 燕觌之敬 也可少顺圣敬，加崇仪称，示不敢斥，宜曰 皇帝敬问大王侍御 。
现代文：皇上您写给燕王的书信，则可以在其中表示对燕王的尊敬，用标准的写法如 燕王见信，知敬 等，也可以稍稍顺着陛下的心意，表示心中的尊敬，如果用合乎礼仪的称呼表示礼节，则可以用 皇帝敬问大王侍御 。
English: Emperor, in your letter to King Yan, you can express your respect for King Yan in it. You can use standard writing such as "King Yan sees the letter," "Respect," etc., or you can slightly follow the wishes of His Majesty and show the respect in your heart. If you use a ceremonial salutation to show etiquette, you can use "Emperor respectfully asks the Great King to attend you."

古文：至于制书，国之正典，朝廷所以辨章公制，宣昭轨仪于天下者也，宜循法，故曰 制诏燕王 。
现代文：至于正式的文书，是国家严正的制度，是朝廷明确朝廷推崇的礼节并向天下展示的，应该遵循礼节制度，所以应该称为 制诏燕王 。
English: As for formal documents, it is the country's strict system, it is the etiquette that the imperial court clearly promotes and shows to the world, and it should follow the etiquette system, so it should be called the "king of etiquette."

古文：凡诏命、制书、奏事、上书诸称燕王者，可皆上平。
现代文：凡是各种天子诏令、朝臣奏章、启奏、上表等情况，都可以用上述称谓。
English: The above-mentioned titles can be used in all kinds of situations such as the Emperor's edict, the Emperor's message, the opening ceremony, and the table of precedence.

古文：其非宗庙助祭之事，皆不得称王名，奏事、上书、文书及吏民皆不得触王讳，以彰殊礼，加于群后。
现代文：如果不是到宗庙陪同祭祀的大事，都不可以直呼燕王的名讳，朝臣上奏、上书、写文书等还有普通官员百姓，都不准触犯燕王名讳，以彰显对燕王的尊敬，这些理解一样适用于诸位往后。
English: If it is not an important event to go to the ancestral temple to accompany the ritual, it is not allowed to call Yan Wang's name directly. Courtiers playing music, writing letters, writing documents, as well as ordinary officials and common people, are not allowed to violate Yan Wang's name, in order to show respect for Yan Wang. These understandings apply to you in the future.

古文：上遵王典尊祖之制，俯顺圣敬烝烝之心，二者不愆，礼实宜之，可普告施行。 
现代文：陛下尊崇王典所规定的祖先的定例，又对自己的父王又强烈恭顺的孝心，这二者都没有过失，各种礼节也应该适宜恰当，希望陛下能诏告天下并实行。 
English: His Majesty's reverence for the traditions of his ancestors, as set forth in the royal edict, and his strong sense of filial obedience to his father, the king, are without fault, and all forms of etiquette should be appropriate. I hope that His Majesty will announce this to the world and implement it.

古文：十二月甲申，黄龙见华阴县井中。
现代文：十二月六日，有黄龙出现在华阴县的某处水井中。
English: On December 6, a yellow dragon appeared in a well somewhere in Huayin County.

古文：甲午，以司隶校尉王祥为司空。
现代文：七日，任命司隶校尉王祥为司空。
English: On the 7th, Wang Xiang, a sergeant-lieutenant, was appointed as the deputy commander.

古文：二年夏五月朔，日有食之。
现代文：景元二年五月初一，发生了日偏食。
English: A partial solar eclipse occurred on the first day of May in the second year of Jingyuan.

古文：秋七月，乐浪外夷韩、濊貊各率其属来朝贡。
现代文：七月，乐浪的外族韩、濊貊等部落各自率领部众前来朝拜进贡。
English: In July, foreign tribes such as the Han and Yao of Le Lang each led their people to come to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：八月戊寅，赵王幹薨。
现代文：八月三日，赵王曹干去世。
English: On August 3, Zhao Wang Cao Gan passed away.

古文：甲寅，复命大将军进爵晋公，加位相国，备礼崇锡，一如前诏；又固辞乃止。
现代文：九日，天子再次下令加封大将军司马昭晋王爵位，加封相国，赐九锡之礼，就像之前的诏令一样；司马昭又一次坚决推辞，皇帝才收回诏令。
English: On the 9th, the heavenly son once again ordered that the general Sima Zhaojin be given the title of king, the country be given the title of sister country, and the gift of Jiuxi be given, just like the previous edict; Sima Zhao once again firmly refused, and the emperor withdrew the edict.

古文：三年春二月，青龙见于轵县井中。
现代文：景元三年二月，有青龙出现在轵县某处水井中。
English: In February of the third year of Jingyuan, a blue dragon appeared in a water well somewhere in Jixian County.

古文：夏四月，辽东郡言肃慎国遣使重译入贡，献其国弓三十张，长三尺五寸，楛矢长一尺八寸，石弩三百枚，皮骨铁杂铠二十领，貂皮四百枚。
现代文：四月，辽东郡上奏说肃慎国派使者历经艰辛来朝进贡，进献他们国家制造的弓三十张，每张长三尺五寸；木苦木制的箭矢长一尺八寸，还有石弩三百枚，牛皮加铁制成的盔甲二十套，貂皮四百张。
English: In April, the report of Liaodong County said that Shushan State sent an envoy to pay tribute to the North through hardships, and presented 30 bows made by their country, each of which was three feet and five inches long; arrows made of wood and wood were one foot and eight inches long, as well as 300 stone anchors, 20 sets of armor made of cowhide and iron, and 400 mink skins.

古文：冬十月，蜀大将姜维寇洮阳，镇西将军邓艾拒之，破维于侯和，维遁走。
现代文：十月，蜀国大将姜维率军侵扰洮阳郡，朝廷派镇西将军邓艾率军前去抗击，在侯河打败姜维部队，姜维战败逃走。
English: In October, Jiang Wei, the general of Shu, led an army to invade Fenyang County. The imperial court sent Zhenxi General Deng Ai to lead an army to fight back, defeat Jiang Wei's troops in Houhe, and Jiang Wei was defeated and fled.

古文：是岁，诏祀故军祭酒郭嘉於太祖庙庭。
现代文：这一点，天子下令在太祖庭庙祭祀已故的军祭酒郭嘉。
English: At this point, the Son of Heaven ordered that the late military hero, Guo Jia, be enshrined in the ancestral temple.

古文：四年春二月，复命大将军进位爵赐一如前诏，又固辞乃止。
现代文：但姜维不考虑百姓需求，一味想要侵犯我朝疆土。去年被我军打败后，仍然带兵驻扎在沓中，开荒种田。
English: However, Jiang Wei did not consider the needs of the people and only wanted to encroach on the territory of the DPRK. After being defeated by our army last year, he still stationed troops in Yuzhong and opened up wasteland for farming.

古文：夏五月，诏曰： 蜀，蕞尔小国，土狭民寡，而姜维虐用其众，曾无废志；往岁破败之后，犹复耕种沓中，刻剥众羌，劳役无已，民不堪命。
现代文：他刻薄地剥削当地的羌族百姓，迫使他们不间断地劳役，百姓无法忍受。联合弱小攻打残暴之人，是战争的原则，主动进攻制约别人而不是受别人制约，是兵法中的上策。
English: He cruelly exploited the local Yi people and forced them to work without interruption, which was unbearable for the people. The principle of war is to unite the weak to attack the brutal, and the active attack to control others rather than being controlled by others is the best strategy in the art of war.

古文：夫兼弱攻昧，武之善经，致人而不致於人，兵家之上略。蜀所恃赖，唯维而已，因其远离巢窟，用力为易。
现代文：蜀地所仰赖的，只有姜维以及他带领的部队而已，而现在姜维远离蜀地，正是我军趁机用兵的好时机。
English: Shu only relies on Jiang Wei and the troops he leads, and now that Jiang Wei is far away from Shu, it is a good time for our army to use soldiers.

古文：今使征西将军邓艾督帅诸军，趣甘松、沓中以罗取维，雍州刺史诸葛绪督诸军趣武都、高楼，首尾蹴讨。
现代文：现在派遣征西将军邓艾监督率领各部队，赶赴甘松、沓中等地以形成包围之势打败姜维，雍州刺史诸葛绪率军开赴武都、高楼，与邓艾军队形成首尾合击之势。
English: Now send the general of the Western Conquest, Deng Ai, to supervise and lead the troops, and rush to Gan Song and Jiuyuan to defeat Jiang Wei by forming an encirclement, and the general of the Western Conquest of Yongzhou, Zhushi Zhugexu, led the army to Wudu and Gaoluo, and formed a head-to-head battle with Deng Ai's army.

古文：若擒维，便当东西并进，扫灭巴蜀也。 
现代文：如果能将姜维军队打败，就可趁机两军进击，平定巴蜀。 
English: If Jiang Wei's army can be defeated, the two armies can take advantage of the opportunity to attack and pacify Bashu.

古文：又命镇西将军锺会由骆谷伐蜀。
现代文：又下令让镇西将军钟会率军从骆谷向西蜀进攻。
English: He also ordered Zhenxi General Zhong Hui to lead the army from Luogu to attack West Shu.

古文：秋九月，太尉高柔薨。
现代文：九月，太尉高柔去世。
English: In September, Taifu Gaoru passed away.

古文：冬十月甲寅，复命大将军进位爵赐一如前诏。癸卯，立皇后卞氏，十一月，大赦。
现代文：十月，天子又下诏像从前一样给大将军司马昭加官进爵赏赐。十一日，册立卞氏为皇后，十一月，下令大赦天下。
English: In October, the emperor issued another imperial edict to reward the general Sima Zhao with a knighthood, as he had done in the past. On the 11th day, she was enthroned as empress, and in November, he ordered a general amnesty.

古文：自邓艾、锺会率众伐蜀，所至辄克。
现代文：自从邓艾、钟会率师伐蜀，魏军所到的地方战无不胜。
English: Ever since Deng Ai and Zhong Hui led their division to attack Shu, the Wei army has been invincible wherever it goes.

古文：是月，蜀主刘禅诣艾降，巴蜀皆平。
现代文：这个月，蜀主刘禅到邓艾军中请降，至此，巴蜀之地都被魏军平定。
English: This month, the Shu lord Liu Zhen went to Deng Ai's army to ask for a surrender. At this point, the lands of Bashu had all been pacified by the Wei army.

古文：十二月庚戌，以司徒郑冲为太保。
现代文：十二月十九日，天子任命司徒邓冲为太保。
English: On December 19th, Emperor Taishi appointed Sitoru Dengchong as Taiho.

古文：壬子，分益州为梁州。
现代文：二十一日，将益州的一部分划出设置梁州。
English: On the 21st, a part of Yizhou was set aside as Liangzhou.

古文：癸丑，特赦益州士民，复除租赋之半五年。
现代文：二十二日，天子下诏赦免益州的兵士百姓，还免除他们五年内的一半赋税。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Taizong pardoned the soldiers and people of Yizhou, and also exempted them from half of the tax within five years.

古文：乙卯，以征西将军邓艾为太尉，镇西将军锺会为司徒。
现代文：二十四日，天子加封征西将军邓艾为太尉，镇西将军钟会为司徒。
English: On the 24th day of the month, Emperor Tianzi promoted the Western General Deng Ai to the rank of lieutenant, and the Western General Zhong Hui to the rank of constable.

古文：皇太后崩。
现代文：皇太后驾崩。
English: The Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：咸熙元年春正月壬戌，槛车徵邓艾。
现代文：咸熙元年正月初一，皇帝下诏用囚车押送邓艾回京都洛阳。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Xi Jinping, the emperor issued an edict to escort Deng Ai back to Kyoto Luoyang in a prisoner car.

古文：甲子，行幸长安。
现代文：三日，皇帝巡视到长安。
English: On the third day, the emperor visited Chang'an.

古文：壬申，使使者以璧币祀华山。
现代文：十一日，派使者带着玉璧做成的钱币前往华山祭祀山神。
English: On the 11th day, an envoy was sent to Mount Huashan to offer sacrifices to the mountain god, carrying a coin made of jade.

古文：是月，锺会反于蜀，为众所讨；邓艾亦见杀。
现代文：这一个月，钟会在蜀地发兵反叛，被当地的众多将领讨伐；邓艾也被斩杀。
English: In this month, the Bell Association rebelled in Shu and was fought by many local generals; Deng Ai was also killed.

古文：二月辛卯，特赦诸在益土者。
现代文：二月初一，朝廷特赦那些在益州的当地人。
English: On the first day of February, the imperial court granted amnesty to those local people in Yizhou.

古文：庚申，葬明元郭后。
现代文：三十日，安葬明元郭皇后。
English: On the 30th, Empress Mingyuan Guo was buried.

古文：三月丁丑，以司空王祥为太尉，征北将军何曾为司徒，尚书左仆射荀顗为司空。
现代文：三月十七日，任命司空王祥为太尉，征北将军何曾为司徒，尚书左仆射荀岂页为司空。
English: On March 17th, Wang Xiang, the secretary of the Northern Expeditionary Force, was appointed as the first lieutenant, He, the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, was appointed as the secretary of the Northern Expeditionary Force, and Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Shao Qiao, was appointed as the secretary of the Northern Expeditionary Force.

古文：己卯，进晋公爵为王，封十郡，并前二十。
现代文：十九日，加封晋公司马昭为晋王，增加十个郡的采邑，连同之前的二十个。
English: On the 19th, Ma Zhao of the Jin Company was added as the king of Jin, and ten county townships were added, together with the previous twenty.

古文：丁亥，封刘禅为安乐公。
现代文：二十七日，封前蜀王刘禅为安乐公。
English: On the 27th, Liu Zhen, the former King of Shu, was named the Prince of Peace and Happiness.

古文：夏五月庚申，相国晋王奏复五等爵。
现代文：五月初一，相国、晋王司马昭上奏请求恢复五等爵位制度。
English: On the first day of May, Sima Zhao, the brother-in-law of the King of Jin, petitioned for the reinstatement of the fifth-class title system.

古文：甲戌，改年。
现代文：十五日，改年号景元为咸熙。
English: On the fifteenth day of the new year, the scene was changed to Ham Hee.

古文：癸未，追命舞阳宣文侯为晋宣王，舞阳忠武侯为晋景王。
现代文：二十四日，天子追封舞阳宣文侯司马懿为晋宣王，舞阳忠武侯司马师为晋景王。
English: On the 24th day of the month, the heavenly son chased and enthroned Muyang Xuanwen Hou Simaju as the King of Jinxuan, and Muyang Zhongwu Hou Simaju as the King of Jinjing.

古文：六月，镇西将军卫瓘上雍州兵于成都县获璧玉印各一，印文似 成信 字。
现代文：六月，镇西将军卫瓘上奏说他部下的雍州兵在成都县获得了玉璧和玉印各一块，玉印上的文字好像 成信 二字。
English: In June, Zhenxi General Wei Yao reported that his subordinate Yongzhou soldiers in Chengdu County had obtained a piece of jade and a piece of jade, and the words on the jade seemed to be two words.

古文：依周成王归禾之义，宣示百官，藏于相国府。
现代文：朝廷按照周文王得到晋国唐叔赠送嘉禾的先例，将两块玉向文武百官展示，最后收藏在相国府里。
English: In accordance with the precedent of Zhou Wen Wang receiving the gift of Jiahe from the Tang uncle of Jin, the imperial court showed the two pieces of jade to hundreds of civil and military officials, and finally collected them in the provincial government.

古文：初，自平蜀之后，吴寇屯逼永安，遣荆、豫诸军掎角赴救。
现代文：自从魏军平定蜀国之后，东吴军队步步逼近到永安，朝廷派遣荆州、豫州驻扎的部队以犄角之势援救永安。
English: After the Wei army had subdued Shu, the Eastern Wu army gradually approached Yong'an, and the imperial court dispatched troops stationed in Jingzhou and Yuzhou to rescue Yong'an.

古文：七月，贼皆遁退。
现代文：七月，吴军都战败逃走。
English: In July, the Wu army was defeated and fled.

古文：八月庚寅，命中抚军司马炎副贰相国事，以同鲁公拜后之义。
现代文：八月三日，天子任命中抚军司马炎为副相国，让他与自己的父亲司马昭一同处理国事，就像鲁公让自己的儿子做助手一样。
English: On August 3, Heaven's Son appointed the Vice-Regent of the Central Military Commission, Sima Yan, as the Vice-Councilor of State, and let him and his father, Sima Zhao, deal with state affairs, just as Lu Gong let his son be an assistant.

古文：癸巳，诏曰： 前逆臣锺会构造反乱，聚集征行将士，劫以兵威，始吐奸谋，发言桀逆，逼胁众人，皆使下议，仓卒之际，莫不惊慑。
现代文：六日，皇帝下诏说： 之前逆贼钟会造反谋乱，聚集了他部下的将官士兵，借军法的威势胁迫他们，并将自己的奸计告知众人，言语中狂悖大逆，他逼迫威胁众人与他一同作乱。事情发生得太突然，众人都惊慌失措。
English: On the sixth day, the emperor issued an edict saying: "Previously, the rebel bell would rebel and plot, gathered his subordinate generals and soldiers, used the power of military law to coerce them, and informed everyone of his treachery. In his words, he was wild and rebellious, and he forced and threatened everyone to join him in the rebellion. Things happened too suddenly, and everyone was panicked.

古文：相国左司马夏侯和、骑士曹属朱抚时使在成都，中领军司马贾辅、郎中羊琇各参会军事；和、琇、抚皆抗节不挠，拒会凶言，临危不顾，词指正烈。
现代文：当时相国左司马夏侯和、骑士曹属朱抚正在成都巡视，与中领军司马贾辅、郎中羊都参与钟会的军事行动；夏侯和、羊、朱抚等都坚守气节，没有屈服，叱责了钟会的大逆之言，面对危难也没有退缩，言语刚强有力。
English: At that time, the left secretary of the neighboring country, Ma Xiaohua, and the knight Cao Zhizhen, Zhu Fu, were on a tour of Chengdu. They, together with the central leader of the army, Ma Jiawei, and the son-in-law, Yang, all participated in the military operations of the bell association. Xiaohua, Yang, Zhu Fu, etc. all adhered to the spirit, did not give in, rebuked the bell association's treacherous words, and did not flinch in the face of danger. The words were strong and powerful.

古文：辅语散将王起，说 会奸逆凶暴，欲尽杀将士 ，又云 相国已率三十万众西行讨会 ，欲以称张形势，感激众心。
现代文：贾辅对钟会手下的散将王起说： 钟会奸诈残暴，想要杀掉所有不服从他的将士 ，又说 相国司马昭已经率领三十万大军前来讨伐钟会 ，想要凭借这些让将士们认清形势，激励大家一同起来反抗钟会。
English: Jia Wei said to Wang Qi, the rebel general under Zhonghui's command: "Zhonghui is treacherous and cruel, and wants to kill all soldiers who do not obey him. He also said that the country's Sima Zhao has led a 300,000-strong army to fight against Zhonghui. He wanted to use these to make the soldiers understand the situation and encourage everyone to rise up against Zhonghui.

古文：起出，以辅言宣语诸军，遂使将士益怀奋励。
现代文：王起听了之后走到外面，将贾辅的话告诉了众位将官士兵，使得将士们都振奋起来。
English: After listening, Wang Qi went outside and told Jia Yu's words to the generals and soldiers, which made the soldiers all excited.

古文：宜加显宠，以彰忠义。
现代文：朝廷应该嘉奖这些将士们，以彰显他们的忠诚大义。
English: The imperial court should reward these soldiers to show their loyalty and righteousness.

古文：其进和、辅爵为乡侯，琇、抚爵关内侯。
现代文：现在下令封夏侯和、贾辅为乡侯；羊、朱抚为关内侯。
English: He now ordered Xia Houhe and Jia Fu to be appointed as township governors, and Yang and Zhu Fu to be appointed as Guanai governors.

古文：起宣传辅言，告令将士，所宜赏异。其以起为部曲将。 
现代文：王起将贾辅的话传给众人，也应该有所奖赏，任命他为部曲将。 
English: Wang Qi passed on Jia Yu's words to everyone, and he should also be rewarded by appointing him as the music director.

古文：癸卯，以卫将军司马望为骠骑将军。
现代文：十六日，任命卫将军司马望为骠骑将军。
English: On the 16th, the general of the Guards, Sima Wang, was appointed as the general of the cavalry.

古文：九月戊午，以中抚军司马炎为抚军大将军。
现代文：九月初一，任命中抚军司马炎为抚军大将军。
English: On the first day of September, Sima Yan, the commander of the Middle Fuzhou Army, was appointed as the general of the Fuzhou Army.

古文：辛未，诏曰： 吴贼政刑暴虐，赋敛无极。
现代文：十四日，皇帝下诏说： 东吴贼人为政残酷暴虐，横征暴敛没有限度。
English: On the 14th, the emperor issued an edict saying: "The East Wu bandits are cruel and tyrannical, and there is no limit to their extortion and violence.

古文：孙休遣使邓句，敕交阯太守锁送其民，发以为兵。
现代文：孙休让邓句为使者，让交趾太守将自己辖区内的民众都送去补充兵力。
English: Sun Xiu asked Deng Gu to be the envoy, and asked Koji Taishou to send the people in his jurisdiction to supplement the troops.

古文：吴将吕兴因民心愤怒，又承王师平定巴蜀，即纠合豪杰，诛除句等，驱逐太守长吏，抚和吏民，以待国命。
现代文：东吴的将领吕兴因为民怨沸腾，又遇上我朝军队平定巴蜀之地，立即联络当地豪杰，诛杀了邓句等人，又驱逐了太守和官吏，安抚剩下的官吏及当地百姓，等待朝廷的命令。
English: The general of Eastern Wu, Lv Xing, because of the boiling resentment of the people, also encountered the troops of our dynasty to pacify the land of Bashu, immediately contacted the local heroes, killed Deng Qu and others, and expelled the governor and officials, pacified the remaining officials and local people, and waited for the order of the imperial court.

古文：九真、日南郡闻兴去逆即顺，亦齐心响应，与兴协同。
现代文：九真、日南听说吕兴杀死了吴国使臣，即将归顺我朝，也率部响应，与吕兴协同作战。
English: Jiuzhen and Nichinan heard that Lv Xing had killed an envoy of the State of Wu and was about to surrender to our country, and they also responded by leading their troops to fight together with Lv Xing.

古文：兴移书日南州郡，开示大计，兵临合浦，告以祸福。
现代文：吕兴给日南郡送去书信，商讨相关大事，军队开进到合浦，决定下一步的行动。
English: Lv Xing sent a letter to Jinan County to discuss the relevant events, and the army entered Hapu to decide on the next step.

古文：遣都尉唐谱等诣进乘县，因南中都督护军霍弋上表自陈。
现代文：又派遣都尉唐谱等人到进乘县，通过南中都督护军霍弋给我朝上书表示愿意归降。
English: He also dispatched Lieutenant Tang Fan and others to Jinzhen County, and sent a letter to the Emperor through the Southern and Central Governor's escort army, Huo Wei, expressing his willingness to surrender.

古文：又交阯将吏各上表，言 兴创造事业，大小承命。
现代文：还有交阯郡众位将官都各自上书， 表示吕兴正在交阯谋划大事，这里从官吏到普通百姓都服从他。
English: Also, all the generals in Jiaozuo County each wrote a letter, saying that Lv Xing was planning a big event in Jiaozuo, and everyone from officials to ordinary people obeyed him.

古文：郡有山寇，入连诸郡，惧其计异，各有携贰。
现代文：但交阯还有一些山贼与其他州郡暗中勾结，他们担心吕兴还有其他计划，所以都怀有二心。
English: However, there are still some bandits who are in collusion with other states and counties. They are worried that Luxing has other plans, so they are of two minds.

古文：权时之宜，以兴为督交阯诸军事、上大将军、定安县侯，乞赐褒奖，以慰边荒 。
现代文：现在的权宜之计，应该是任命吕兴督军的官职，让他督察交趾各类军事事务，并拜他为大将军、安定县侯，并希望朝廷能下诏加以赏赐褒扬，以慰劳我们荒远之地的将士们。 
English: The expedient measure now should be to appoint Lv Xing as the commander of the army, let him supervise all kinds of military affairs, and worship him as a general and a stable county magistrate, and hope that the imperial court can issue a decree to reward and praise him to comfort our soldiers in the wilderness.

古文：乃心款诚，形于辞旨。
现代文：从他们上奏的内容可以看出来他们心怀诚意。
English: From the content of their performance, it can be seen that they are sincere.

古文：昔仪父朝鲁，春秋所美；窦融归汉，待以殊礼。
现代文：从前仪父到鲁国朝拜，在《春秋》中受到赞美；窦融归附汉朝，汉朝给予他特殊的礼遇。
English: In the past, Dou Rong made a pilgrimage to the State of Lu and was praised in Spring and Autumn; Dou Rong was annexed by the Han Dynasty, and the Han Dynasty gave him special courtesy.

古文：今国威远震，抚怀六合。
现代文：现在我朝国力威震天下，四海归心。
English: Now, my country's strength has shaken the world, and the four seas have come to their senses.

古文：方包举殊裔，混一四表。
现代文：并且现在我朝接受不同民族的融合，天下即将统一。
English: And now my government accepts the integration of different ethnic groups, and the world is about to be unified.

古文：兴首向王化，举众稽服，万里驰义，请吏帅职，宜加宠遇，崇其爵位。
现代文：吕兴是率先归顺朝廷的，交趾地区的民众都跟随他的意愿，又远赴万里送上奏章，请求担任官职以为国家管理交趾地区，朝廷应该对他有所优待，给他相应的爵位。
English: Lv Xing was the first to submit to the imperial court, and the people of the Jiaozuo region followed his wishes. He also traveled thousands of miles to send a petition, requesting to serve as an official to manage the Jiaozuo region for the state. The imperial court should give him preferential treatment and give him a corresponding title.

古文：既使兴等怀忠感悦，远人闻之，必皆竞劝。
现代文：这样既能让吕兴等心怀忠义的人感到高兴，也能让天下人知道朝廷对待忠义之人的嘉奖，天下人一定都会受到鼓舞。
English: This can not only make Lv Xing and other loyal people feel happy, but also let the world know that the court treats the loyal people with praise, and the world will certainly be encouraged.

古文：其以兴为使持节、都督交州诸军事、南中大将军，封定安县侯，得以便宜从事，先行后上。 
现代文：因此下令任命吕兴为使持节、都督交州诸军事、南中大将军，定安县侯。遇到事情可以根据实际情况解决，先执行后面再上奏陈述。 
English: Therefore, he ordered the appointment of Lv Xing as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of Jiaozhou, the general of the Southern Middle School, and the governor of Ding'an County. If there is a problem, it can be solved according to the actual situation, and the implementation should be carried out first, and then the statement should be submitted.

古文：策命未至，兴为下人所杀。
现代文：但朝廷的任命文书还没有送到，吕兴就被部下杀死了。
English: However, the imperial court's appointment document had not yet been sent, and Lv Xing was killed by his subordinates.

古文：冬十月丁亥，诏曰： 昔圣帝明王，静乱济世，保大定功。
现代文：十月初一，皇帝下诏说： 古代圣德贤明的君主能够平定天下，济助世人，开创宏大的事业使天下安定。
English: On the first day of October, the emperor issued an edict saying: The ancient saintly and wise monarchs can pacify the world, help the world, and create a grand cause to stabilize the world.

古文：文武殊涂，勋烈同归。
现代文：虽然文治武功不同，但他们的功业是一样的。
English: Although the civil and martial arts are different, their merits are the same.

古文：是故或舞干戚以训不庭，或陈师旅以威暴慢。
现代文：所以他们有的能手持兵器讨伐叛逆之徒，有的能亲自率领大军震慑想要侵扰江山的残暴之人。
English: Therefore, some of them are able to fight the rebels with weapons in hand, and some can personally lead a large army to deter the cruel people who want to invade the country.

古文：至于爱民全国，康惠庶类，必先脩文教，示之轨仪，不得已然后用兵，此盛德之所同也。
现代文：至于爱护百姓保全江山方面，他们都一定先让百姓修习文化礼节，让百姓明白法则典仪，只有在不得已的情况下才动用武力，这些都是有圣明品德的君主相同的地方。
English: As for the protection of the people and the preservation of the country, they must first let the people practice cultural etiquette, let the people understand the rules and regulations, and only use force when they are forced to do so. These are the same places as the monarchs with sacred and virtuous morals.

古文：往者季汉分崩，九土颠覆，刘备、孙权乘间作祸。
现代文：汉朝末年，天下分崩离析，刘备、孙权趁机作乱。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, the world was falling apart, and Liu Bei and Sun Quan took the opportunity to create chaos.

古文：三祖绥宁中夏，日不暇给，遂使遗寇僣逆历世。
现代文：我朝武、文、明三位先帝为了平定中原，披星戴月，无暇顾及所有事务，才使得逆贼历经很长时间不能剿灭。
English: In order to pacify the Central Plains, the three emperors, the Emperor Wu, the Emperor Wen and the Emperor Ming, did not have time to take care of all the affairs, which made the traitors unable to be annihilated for a long time.

古文：幸赖宗庙威灵，宰辅忠武，爰发四方，拓定庸、蜀，役不浃时，一征而克。
现代文：所幸仰赖祖宗神灵庇护，相国大将军勇武忠诚，率领军队平定四方，征伐平定巴蜀之地，也没有花费很长时间，都是迅速攻克。
English: Fortunately, relying on the protection of the ancestral deities, the great generals of the allied countries were brave and loyal, led the army to pacify the four directions, and conquered and pacified the land of Bashu. It did not take long, and they were quickly conquered.

古文：自顷江表衰弊，政刑荒闇，巴、汉平定，孤危无援。
现代文：近来江东孙权政权日益衰败，政治军事都渐渐凋敝，由于西蜀已经被我朝平定，所以他们处于孤立无援的状态。
English: Recently, the Sun Quan regime in the eastern part of the Yangtze River has been in a state of decline, and its political and military power has gradually faded away. Since the Western Shu has been pacified by our dynasty, they are in a state of isolation and helplessness.

古文：交、荆、扬、越，靡然向风。
现代文：交趾、荆州、扬州、越州等地纷纷归顺我朝。
English: Kozuke, Jingzhou, Yangzhou, Yuezhou and other places have successively surrendered to our dynasty.

古文：今交阯伪将吕兴已帅三郡，万里归命；武陵邑侯相严等纠合五县，请为臣妾；豫章庐陵山民举众叛吴，以助北将军为号。
现代文：现在交趾的吴国将领吕兴已经带领三个郡不远万里前来归顺；武陵邑侯相严等联络了五个县的官吏百姓，请求称臣；豫章庐陵的山民率领民众叛离东吴，以助北将军作为他们首领的称号。
English: The general Lv Xing of the State of Wu, who is now a close friend, has led three counties not far away to submit; Wuling, Hou Xiangyan and others have contacted officials and people in five counties, requesting to be called a minister; the mountain people of Yuzhang and Fuling led the people to rebel from East Wu, with the title of helping the Northern General as their leader.

古文：又孙休病死，主帅改易，国内乖违，人各有心。
现代文：加上东吴的孙休病逝，吴军主帅改换他人，国内军民都不服从命令，大家都各怀异心。
English: In addition, Sun Xiu of East Wu died of illness, the commander of the Wu Army was replaced by someone else, the domestic military and civilians did not obey orders, and everyone harbored dissent.

古文：伪将施绩，贼之名臣，怀疑自猜，深见忌恶。
现代文：原东吴将领施绩，本来是东吴的名臣，但东吴却对他心怀猜忌，被众人所厌恶痛恨。
English: The former Dongwu general Shih Bing was originally a famous minister of Dongwu, but Dongwu was suspicious of him and was hated by everyone.

古文：众叛亲离，莫有固志，自古及今，未有亡徵若此之甚。
现代文：如今的东吴政权，不得人心，陷入孤立，官员民众都没有坚定的信心，自古以来，还没有一个国家有这么强烈的亡国征兆。
English: Today's Dongwu regime is unpopular and isolated. Officials and the public have no firm confidence in it. Since ancient times, no country has shown such strong signs of collapse.

古文：若六军震曜，南临江、汉，吴会之域必扶老携幼以迎王师，必然之理也。
现代文：如果我朝大军出军讨伐，抵达南面的江汉之地，东吴都城地区的百姓一定携家带口来迎接我军，这是毋庸置疑的。
English: There is no doubt that if I send a large army to fight against the North and arrive at the land of Jianghan in the south, the people in the Dongwu Capital area will certainly come with their families to welcome our army.

古文：然兴动大众，犹有劳费，宜告喻威德，开示仁信，使知顺附和同之利。
现代文：但大动干戈，还是会耗费很多民力钱财，所以我们应该向东吴宣示我们的威势，向他们显示我们的仁慈忠信，让他们知道归顺我朝的好处。
English: But it will still take a lot of manpower and money to wage a large-scale war, so we should proclaim our might to the East and the West, show them our benevolence and loyalty, and let them know the benefits of surrendering to our country.

古文：相国参军事徐绍、水曹掾孙彧，昔在寿春，并见虏获。
现代文：朝中相国参军事徐绍、水曹掾孙彧，都是之前在寿春战役中被我军俘虏的。
English: Xu Shao, a military attaché to the DPRK and China, and Sun Ye, a water sprite, were both captured by our army in the Shuchun Campaign.

古文：绍本伪南陵督，才质开壮；彧，孙权支属，忠良见事。
现代文：徐绍原来是东吴的南陵督，才学能力都是很优秀的；孙彧，是孙权的同宗，为人处事以忠厚善良著称。
English: Xu Shao was originally the governor of the southern mausoleum of Eastern Wu, and his ability to learn was very excellent; Sun Xuan, a member of the same family as Sun Quan, was known for his loyalty and kindness.

古文：其遣绍南还，以彧为副，宣扬国命，告喻吴人，诸所示语，皆以事实，若其觉悟，不损征伐之计。
现代文：现在我决定派徐绍为特使、孙为副使返回吴地，让他们宣扬我朝国威，告知吴地百姓，朝廷所颁布的奖赏都是实际可靠的，倘若他们醒悟，我们就可以不必大动干戈。
English: Now I have decided to send Xu Shao as a special envoy and Sun as a deputy envoy back to Wuxi, and let them promote the prestige of my dynasty and tell the people of Wuxi that the rewards issued by the imperial court are all practical and reliable. If they wake up, we will not have to go to war.

古文：盖庙胜长算，自古之道也。
现代文：对重大决策深思熟虑，自古以来就是这样的用兵之道。
English: This has been the way of war since time immemorial, with great deliberation over major decisions.

古文：其以绍兼散骑常侍，加奉车都尉，封都亭侯；彧兼给事黄门侍郎，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：现在任命徐绍兼任散骑常侍，加奉车都尉，封为都亭侯。孙彧给事黄门侍郎，赐爵关内侯。
English: Now, he appointed Xu Shao to be the equerry of horseback riding, as well as the lieutenant of carriage, and he was given the title of the governor of the capital. Sun Yat-sen gave him the title of the governor of Huangmen, and he was given the title of the governor of Guanai.

古文：绍等所赐妾及男女家人在此者，悉听自随，以明国恩。
现代文：二人身边的妻子或朝廷所赐的妾室以及家人，他们想离开或留下都可以，以彰显我朝恩典。
English: The wives around them or the concubines given by the court and their families, they can leave or stay if they want to, to show my grace.

古文：不必使还，以开广大信。 
现代文：二人完成使命后也不必回朝，以表示朝廷对他们的信任。 
English: The two also do not have to return to the North after completing their mission, which is a sign of the court's trust in them.

古文：丙午，命抚军大将军新昌乡侯炎为晋世子。
现代文：二十日，皇帝下令抚军大将军新昌乡侯司马炎为晋王世子。
English: On the 20th, the emperor ordered the general of the army of Xinchang Township, Hossima Yan, to be the successor of Jin Wang.

古文：是岁，罢屯田官以均政役，诸典农皆为太守，都尉皆为令长；劝募蜀人能内移者，给廪二年，复除二十岁。
现代文：这一年，朝廷罢免了各地屯田官以均平国家赋税。原来担任典农的都改任太守，都尉都改任县令；能劝说蜀地百姓迁往内地的，由官府供给两年的生活用粮，并在二十年内不征赋税。
English: In that year, the imperial court dismissed the officials in charge of the garrisons in various regions in order to equalize the national tax. Those who had originally served as farmers were all appointed as governors, and the captains were all appointed as county magistrates. If they could persuade the people of Shu to move to the mainland, the government would provide them with food for two years, and they would not be taxed for twenty years.

古文：安弥、福禄县各言嘉禾生。
现代文：安弥、福禄等县都上奏说田中有嘉禾生长。
English: Ami, Fukuro, and other prefectures all reported that there was good growth in their fields.

古文：二年春二月甲辰，朐县获灵龟以献，归之于相国府。
现代文：咸熙二年二月十九日，朐县得到灵龟，进献给朝廷，后来将灵龟收藏在相国府。
English: On February 19 of the second year of the reign of Emperor Hanxi, Jixian County obtained a spirit turtle and presented it to the imperial court. Later, the spirit turtle was collected at the Shogoku government.

古文：庚戌，以虎贲张脩昔於成都驰马至诸营言锺会反逆，以至没身，赐脩弟倚爵关内侯。
现代文：二十五日，因为虎贲张修之前在成都的时候骑马疾驰到各军营中报告钟会反叛的消息最后却因此而死，天子就下令封张修的弟弟张倚为关内侯。
English: On the 25th day of the month, since Zhang Xiu, the brother of Zhang Xiu, was ordered by Heaven to be made the governor of Guanzhong because he rode a horse to all the military camps in Chengdu to report the news of the rebellion of the bell association, but eventually died as a result.

古文：夏四月，南深泽县言甘露降。
现代文：四月，南深泽县上报说有天降甘霖。
English: In April, it was reported in Minami-Fukasawa County that it was raining.

古文：吴遣使纪陟、弘璆请和。
现代文：东吴派遣纪陟、弘璆为使臣向朝廷请求议和。
English: Dongwu dispatched Ji Ji and Hongyi as envoys to request the imperial court to negotiate peace.

古文：五月，诏曰： 相国晋王诞敷神虑，光被四海；震耀武功，则威盖殊荒；流风迈化，则旁洽无外。
现代文：五月，天子下诏说： 相国、晋王司马昭展示自己的深远谋虑，品德影响天下；率军征战的时候，威势震撼边疆各族；推行朝廷教化，影响的范围一直到国土内外。
English: In May, Emperor Taishi said: When the Jin king, Sima Zhao, led his troops into battle, he showed his far-reaching thoughts and moral influence to the whole world; when he led his troops into battle, his might shook all the ethnic groups along the border; when he promoted the indoctrination of the imperial court, his influence extended to both inside and outside the country.

古文：愍恤江表，务存济育，戢武崇仁，示以威德。
现代文：对东吴政权心怀怜悯，不忍让众多的士兵百姓死于战火，所以不忍动武，改用仁德的和平解决办法，向东吴百姓显示我朝的仁德。
English: With compassion for the East and West regimes, I could not bear to let so many soldiers and people die in the war, so I could not bear to use force, but instead used a humane and peaceful solution to show the East and West peoples the benevolence of my dynasty.

古文：文告所加，承风向慕，遣使纳献，以明委顺。
现代文：在他的武力威慑和仁德感召之下，东吴政权开始有归顺的意图，所以派遣使者前来进献礼物，以表示他们归附的心意。
English: Under the influence of his military deterrence and benevolence, the Eastern Wu regime began to have the intention of surrendering, so they sent emissaries to bring gifts to show their willingness to surrender.

古文：方宝纤珍，欢以效意。
现代文：各种奇珍异宝，都是希望能合我们的心意。
English: All kinds of rarities and treasures are made in the hope that they will suit our hearts.

古文：而王谦让之至，一皆簿送。
现代文：但晋王谦让至极，将礼品全部都登记并交送给我。
English: However, Jin Wang Qian gave in completely and registered all the gifts and handed them over to me.

古文：非所以慰副初附，从其款愿也。
现代文：这不是对孙皓前来归附的安慰，是遵从孙皓原本的美好愿望。
English: This is not a consolation for Sun Yat-sen's coming to annexation, but is in accordance with Sun Yat-sen's original good wishes.

古文：孙皓诸所献致，其皆还送，归之于王，以协古义。 
现代文：所以我决定，孙皓所进献的所有宝物，我都赐还给晋王，以符合古人的尊贤之礼。 
English: Therefore, I decided to return all the treasures that Sun Yat-sen had donated to the King of Jin, in accordance with the ancient custom of honoring the wise.

古文：王固辞乃止。
现代文：晋王坚决推辞，才搁置了。
English: Jin Wang adamantly refused, only to put it on hold.

古文：又命晋王冕十有二旒，建天子旌旗，出警入跸，乘金根车、六马，备五时副车，置旄头云罕，乐舞八佾，设钟虡宫县。
现代文：天子又下令特许晋王戴只有皇帝戴的前后有十二根玉串的冠冕，使用天子的旗帜，出入有御林军沿途警卫并禁止路人通行，乘坐皇帝专用的六匹马拉的金根车，后面跟随配以青、白、红、黑、黄五种颜色的五辆从车。又特许晋王宫殿中可以设置悬挂钟磬的木架，可以演奏皇宫中的八佾乐舞，设置钟虡宫县。
English: Tianzi also ordered that the king of Jin should be allowed to wear a crown with twelve strings of beads on the front and back, which is only worn by the emperor; to use the flag of Tianzi; to enter and leave the palace with guards along the way and prohibit the passage of passers-by; to ride in the golden chariot with six horses, which is exclusively used by the emperor; and to be followed by five carriages with five colors of blue, white, red, black and yellow. In addition, it was allowed to set up a wooden frame for hanging a bell in the palace of the king of Jin; to play the octopus dance in the palace; and to set up a bell tower

古文：进王妃为王后，世子为太子，王子、王女、王孙，爵命之号如旧仪。
现代文：进王妃为王后，世子为太子，王子、王女、王孙的爵位称号一如从前。
English: The crown princess is the queen, the heir apparent is the crown prince, and the titles of prince, princess, and grandson are the same as before.

古文：癸未，大赦。
现代文：三十日，下令大赦天下。
English: On the 30th, he ordered a general amnesty.

古文：秋八月辛卯，相国晋王薨。
现代文：八月九日，相国、晋王司马昭去世。
English: On August 9th, Sima Zhao, the crown prince of Jin, passed away.

古文：壬辰，晋太子炎绍封袭位，总摄百揆，备物典册，一皆如前。
现代文：十日，晋太子司马炎继承司马昭的王位，统领百官，所有的用度礼节，都像司马昭生前一样。
English: On the 10th, the crown prince Sima Yan succeeded Sima Zhao to the throne, leading hundreds of officials, and all the etiquette was the same as before Sima Zhao's death.

古文：是月，襄武县言有大人见，长三丈馀，迹长三尺二寸，白发，著黄单衣，黄巾，柱杖。
现代文：就在这个月，襄武县上告说有巨人出现，高三丈多，脚印长三尺二寸，白头发，穿戴这黄衣黄巾，拄着拐杖。
English: Just this month, Xiangwu County reported that a giant appeared, more than three feet tall, with footprints three feet two inches long, white hair, wearing this yellow coat and scarf, and carrying a cane.

古文：呼民王始语云： 今当太平。 
现代文：他将百姓都叫过来后说： 现在天下太平了。 
English: He called the people together and said: "Now the world is at peace.

古文：九月乙未，大赦。
现代文：九月十四日，大赦天下。
English: On September 14th, the amnesty came into effect.

古文：戊午，司徒何曾为晋丞相。
现代文：十月六日，任命司徒何曾为晋丞相。
English: On October 6, he appointed Sito He Zeng as the prime minister.

古文：癸亥，以骠骑将军司马望为司徒，征东大将军石苞为骠骑将军，征南大将军陈骞为车骑将军。
现代文：十一日，任命骠骑将军司马望为司徒，征东大将军石苞为骠骑将军，征南大将军陈骞为车骑将军。
English: On the 11th, he appointed the cavalry general Sima Wang as the cavalry general, the general of the Eastern Expeditionary Force Shi Wei as the cavalry general, and the general of the Southern Expeditionary Force Chen Wei as the cavalry general.

古文：乙亥，葬晋文王。
现代文：二十三日，为晋文王举行葬礼。
English: On the 23rd, a funeral was held for King Jinwen.

古文：闰月庚辰，康居、大宛献名马，归于相国府，以显怀万国致远之勋。
现代文：闰月，西域康居、大宛来朝进献名马，都收归在相国府，以彰显司马相国心怀万国的不朽功勋。
English: The leap month, the western region's Kangju, and the famous horse presented by Dawan to the emperor were all returned to the Shogunate, to highlight the immortal feats of Sima Shogunate.

古文：十二月壬戌，天禄永终，历数在晋。
现代文：十二月十三日，曹魏王朝的运数终结，转而到了司马氏手中。
English: On December 13th, the reign of the Cao Wei Dynasty came to an end and passed into the hands of the Sima clan.

古文：诏群公卿士具仪设坛于南郊，使使者奉皇帝玺绶册，禅位于晋嗣王，如汉魏故事。
现代文：天子下令召集群臣详细讨论在京城南郊举行祭天仪式，派特使捧着皇帝的玉玺、绶带和诏书，将皇位禅让给晋嗣王，就像当初汉献帝将皇位禅让给魏氏一样。
English: The heavenly son ordered to convene a group of ministers to discuss in detail the holding of the rite of sacrificing to the heavens in the southern suburbs of Beijing, and sent a special envoy holding the emperor's jade bracelet, sash and edict to cede the imperial throne of Zen to King Jinzhi, just as the Han Emperor originally ceded the imperial throne of Zen to the Wei clan.

古文：甲子，使使者奉策。遂改次于金墉城，而终馆于邺。
现代文：十五日，晋武帝派遣特使给曹奂送去文书，把他迁置到金墉城居住，后来，又改到邺城，他最终病死在那里。
English: On the fifteenth day, Emperor Jinwu sent a special envoy to Cao Wei to deliver a document to him. He was relocated to live in the city of Jinwu, and later moved to the city of Shandong, where he eventually died of illness.

古文：时年二十。
现代文：曹奂将皇位禅让给晋武帝的时候年仅二十岁。
English: Cao Pi was only 20 years old when he ceded the imperial throne to Emperor Jinwu.

古文：评曰：古者以天下为公，唯贤是与。
现代文：评曰：古人认为天下为公，只有贤德的人才能被推举担任君主。
English: Comment: The ancients believed that all power belongs to the people, and that only a virtuous person could be elected as the monarch.

古文：后代世位，立子以適；若適嗣不继，则宜取旁亲明德，若汉之文、宣者，斯不易之常准也。
现代文：后代的帝王将皇位世代相传，让自己的儿子来继承；如果没有子嗣可以继承，就在同宗近亲中选取贤明仁德的人来继承皇位，就像汉代的文帝、宣帝一样，但这样也没有改变皇位的世代相传的原则。
English: Subsequent emperors handed down the imperial throne from generation to generation, allowing their sons to succeed; if there were no heirs to inherit, they would choose a wise and benevolent person from among their close relatives to inherit the throne, just like Emperor Wen and Emperor Xuan in the Han Dynasty, but this did not change the principle of the imperial throne being passed down from generation to generation.

古文：明帝既不能然，情系私爱，抚养婴孩，传以大器。
现代文：明帝既然没有子嗣可以承袭皇位，又一心惦念自己所偏爱的人，才在宗族近亲中选择一名婴儿抚养，将江山社稷都传给他。
English: Since Emperor Ming had no son to succeed to the throne, and was thinking about the person he preferred, he chose a baby from among the close relatives of the clan to raise, and passed on the capital of the country to him.

古文：讬付不专，必参枝族，终于曹爽诛夷，齐王替位。
现代文：但他所托付的辅政大臣用心不专，异姓宗族占了上风，最终导致曹爽被诛、齐王被废。
English: However, the Assistant Minister of State entrusted by him was not diligent, and the clan with a different surname gained the upper hand, which eventually led to Cao Shuang being banished and King Qi being abolished.

古文：高贵公才慧夙成，好问尚辞，盖亦文帝之风流也；然轻躁忿肆，自蹈大祸。
现代文：高贵乡公天资聪颖，学业早成，喜欢探讨经文大义，有从前文帝的风采；但他行事肆意轻狂，最终自己酿成了大祸。
English: Gao Guixiang was gifted and intelligent, he was an early achiever in school, he liked to discuss the meaning of scriptures, and he had the style of the former Emperor Wen; however, he acted recklessly and frivolously, and eventually he brought about a great disaster.

古文：陈留王恭己南面，宰辅统政，仰遵前式，揖让而禅。
现代文：陈留王在位期间，恭顺本分，朝政都交给司马昭来掌管，最后又效仿汉献帝禅位曹丕的先例，把江山社稷拱手禅让给司马氏。
English: During the reign of Chen Liu Wang, he dutifully fulfilled his duty and handed over the imperial government to Sima Zhao to take charge of. Finally, he followed the precedent of the Han Dynasty's offering the throne of Zen to Cao Pi, and gave the throne of Jiangshan to Sima.

古文：遂飨封大国，作宾于晋，比之山阳，班宠有加焉。
现代文：他因此被封为藩王，以宾客的身份生活在晋朝，不过比起汉献帝禅位后仅被封为山阳公，他所受的待遇还算是更好了吧。
English: As a result, he was named the king of the domain and lived as a guest in the Jin Dynasty, but compared to the Han Dynasty, where he was only named Sanyanggu after he offered the throne to the emperor, the treatment he received was actually better.

