古文：徒单镒贾铉孙铎孙即康李革徒单镒本名按出，上京路速速保子猛安人。
现代文：徒单镒本名叫按出，是上京路速速保子猛安人。
English: His real name was Hakuho, and he was a member of the Hakuho-Hoshi-Mokuho family from Kamigyo-ro.

古文：父乌辇，北京副留守。
现代文：父名乌辇，任北京副留守。
English: His father's name was Wu Xi, and he stayed in Beijing as a deputy.

古文：镒颖悟绝伦，甫七岁，习女直字。
现代文：镒异常聪明，刚刚七岁，就能熟习女真文字。
English: Zou is unusually clever. At just seven years old, she is able to become familiar with the characters for girls.

古文：大定四年，诏以女直字译书籍。
现代文：大定四年，皇帝命他用女真文翻译书籍。
English: In the fourth year of Dading, the emperor ordered him to translate books into Jurchen.

古文：五年，翰林侍讲学士徒单子温进所译《贞观政要》、《白氏策林》等书。
现代文：五年，翰林侍讲学士徒单子温献来镒翻译的《贞观政要》、《白氏策林》等书。
English: In the fifth year, Hanlin served as a lecturer of the bachelor student list, and presented the translated books of "Zhenguan Zhengyao" and "Bai Shi Zhering."

古文：六年，复进《史记》、《西汉书》，诏颁行之。
现代文：六年，又送上《史记》、《西汉书》，皇帝下令将这些译本公布发表。
English: In the sixth year, the "History" and the "Western Han Dynasty" were also submitted, and the emperor ordered these translations to be published.

古文：选诸路学生三十余人，令编修官温迪罕缔达教以古书，习作诗、策。
现代文：皇帝令挑选各路学生三十多人，叫编修官温迪罕缔达教他们读古书，学做诗、对策。
English: The emperor ordered the selection of more than 30 students from all walks of life, and ordered the editor-in-chief, Wendy Hanwei Da, to teach them to read ancient books, learn to make poems, and countermeasures.

古文：镒在选中，最精诣，遂通契丹大小字及汉字，该习经史。
现代文：被选中的人中最精通学业的是镒，于是他从此通晓了契丹大小字及汉字，完全熟悉了经史。
English: The most academically proficient of those selected was Zou, and from then on he became fluent in Khitan and Chinese characters, and was fully familiar with the history of scripture.

古文：久之，枢密使完颜思敬请教女直人举进士，下尚书省议。
现代文：过了较长一段时间，枢密使完颜思敬请示让女真人参加科举考试，从中拔取进士，此议送交尚书省商定。
English: After a long period of time, the privy councillor, Guan Yan Sijian, requested that Jianzhen participate in the imperial examinations and select scholars from them. This proposal was sent to the Ministry of Education and Culture for agreement.

古文：奏曰： 初立女直进士科，且免乡、府两试，其礼部试、廷试，止对策一道，限字五百以上成。
现代文：回禀皇帝 ：刚建立的女真进士科，暂且免去乡、府两试，其礼部试、廷试，只考一道对策，限定满五百字就行了。
English: Emperor Huizong: In the newly established Women's Genuine Scholarship, for the time being, there is no need to go to the township and the government for two tests, the etiquette test and the court test, only one countermeasure will be tested, and it is enough to limit it to 500 words.

古文：在都设国子学，诸路设府学，并以新进士充教授，士民子弟愿学者听。
现代文：同时在国都设国子学，各路设府学，并用新科进士充当教授，士民子弟愿意学习的人都可以上。
English: At the same time, a national school was set up in the national capital, and a prefectural school was set up in each province, and new science scholars were used as professors. Anyone who is willing to learn can go to the school.

古文：岁久，学者当自众，即同汉人进士三年一试。 
现代文：几年过后，学者自然多了，就同汉人考进士一样三年一试。 
English: After a few years, it became much more natural for scholars to take the entrance examination every three years, just like the Chinese.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十三年八月，诏策女直进士，问以求贤为治之道。
现代文：十三年八月，皇帝策问女真进士求贤以治的方法。
English: In August of the thirteenth year, the emperor asked Jianzhen for advice on how to rule wisely.

古文：侍御史完颜蒲涅、太常博士李晏、应奉翰林文字阿不罕德甫、移刺杰、中都路都转运副使奚釭考试镒等二十七人及第。
现代文：侍御史完颜蒲涅、太常博士李晏、应奉翰林文字阿不罕德甫、移剌杰、中都路都转运副使奚礱主持考试，镒等二十七人进士及弟。
English: The attendant of the imperial history, Yanpunye, the doctor of the imperial history, Li Qian, the scholar of the Chinese classics, Abuhan Defu, the scholar of the Chinese classics, Ying Bonghanlin, the scholar of the Chinese classics, Zhi Qianjie, the vice-minister of transportation of the Chinese capital, Zou, presided over the examination, and twenty-seven people including Zou were promoted to the rank of scholar and his brother.

古文：镒授两官，余授一官，上三人为中都路教授，四名以下除各路教授。
现代文：镒被授予两职，其余授一官，前三名担任中都路教授，第四名以下任各路教授。
English: Zou was awarded two posts, the rest were awarded one post, the first three were professors of Zhongdu Road, and the fourth and below were professors of various roads.

古文：十五年，诏译诸经，著作佐郎温迪罕缔达、编修官宗璧、尚书省译史阿鲁、吏部令史杨克忠译解，翰林修撰移刺杰、应奉翰林文字移刺履讲究其义。
现代文：大定十五年，皇帝下诏翻译各部经书，著作佐郎温迪罕缔达、编修官宗璧、尚书省译史阿鲁、史部令史杨克忠译文注解，翰林修撰移剌杰、应奉翰林文字移剌履讲析其义。
English: In the fifteenth year of Dading, the emperor issued an edict to translate all the scriptures, and the works of Saro Wendi Han Deida, editor-in-chief Zong Bi, Shangshu translation Shi Aru, and history department order Shi Yang Ke Zhong were translated and annotated. Hanlin's writing was excellent, and it was necessary to study Hanlin's writing and interpret its meaning.

古文：镒自中都路教授选为国子助教。
现代文：镒以中都路教授选拔为国子助教。
English: He was selected by Prof. Zhongdu Lu to be Kuniko's assistant professor.

古文：左丞相纥石烈良弼尝到学中与镒谈论，深加礼敬。
现代文：左丞相纥石烈良弼曾到国子学中与镒论谈，对他十分敬佩。
English: Zuojo (Minister of the Left) 石烈良 once went to discuss with  at Kuniko Gakuin Middle School, and admired him very much.

古文：丁母忧，起复国史院编修官。
现代文：镒遭逢母亲丧事后，再用为国史院编修官。
English: After the death of his mother, he was re-employed as an editor of the National Academy of History.

古文：世宗尝问太尉完颜守道曰： 徒单镒何如人也？ 
现代文：世宗曾问太尉完颜守道说 ：徒单镒人怎么样？ 
English: Sejong once asked Taifu Kanen Shodo, "What about a lone eunuch?"

古文：守道对曰： 有材力，可任政事。 
现代文：守道回答说： 有才力，可担当政事。 
English: Shodo replied, "If you have talent, you can be in charge of government affairs."

古文：上曰： 然，当以剧任处之。 
现代文：皇上说： 对，让他多处理繁杂事务。 
English: The emperor said: Yes, let him deal with more complicated matters.

古文：又曰： 镒容止温雅，其心平易。 
现代文：又说： 镒举止温文尔雅，性情和蔼可亲。 
English: He also said: His demeanor is mild and gentle, and his disposition is amiable.

古文：久之，兼修起居注，累迁翰林待制，兼右司员外郎。
现代文：过了较长的一段日子，镒兼修起居注，累官到翰林待制，兼任右司员外郎。
English: After a long period of time, Zou Jianshu began to live in the capital, and he was appointed to the position of Hanlin, and he also served as the right-hand man of the secretary.

古文：献《汉光武中兴赋》，世宗大悦曰： 不设此科，安得此人。 
现代文：他献上《汉光武中兴赋》，世宗阅后大喜说 ：不设立女真进士科，怎么能得到这人！ 
English: He presented "Hanko Wuzhong Xingfu," and after reading it, Shizong was overjoyed and said, "Without setting up a women's true advancement course, how can I get this person!"

古文：章宗即位，迁左谏议大夫，兼吏部侍郎。
现代文：章宗即位，镒升为左谏议大夫，兼任吏部侍郎。
English: Emperor Zhang Zong ascended to the throne. He was promoted to Zuo Jianli Doctor and concurrently served as the Chamberlain of the General Staff.

古文：明昌元年，为御史中丞。
现代文：明昌元年，升为御史中丞。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he was promoted to goshi chujo.

古文：无何，拜参知政事，兼修国史。
现代文：不久，被任为参知政事，兼撰写国史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a member of the Council of State, and also wrote a history of the country.

古文：镒言： 人生有欲，不限以制，则侈心无极。
现代文：镒说： 人生有很多欲望，不用制度加以限制，则奢侈之心没有尽头。
English: Zou said: There are many desires in life, and if there is no limit to the system, there is no end to the heart of luxury.

古文：今承平日久，当慎行此道，以为经久之治。 
现代文：如今天下安定已久，应当谨慎行事，以便长久太平。 
English: If the current situation has been stable for a long time, we should act cautiously in order to maintain long-term peace.

古文：章宗锐意于治平，镒上书，其略曰： 臣窃观唐、虞之书，其臣之进言于君曰 戒哉 ， 懋哉 ，曰 吁 ，曰 都 。
现代文：章宗坚定致力于政治安定。镒送上奏章，奏文大致说： 我私下看唐虞的书，他们的臣子对皇帝说 谨慎啊 、 勤勉啊 ，并用 吁 表示惊疑，用 都 表示赞美。
English: Zhangzong is firmly committed to political stability. Zhe sent a report to Zhang, and the report said roughly: I read Tang Yu's book in private, and their courtiers said to the emperor, "Be careful, be diligent," and expressed surprise with "Hao" and praise with "Duo."

古文：既陈其戒，复导其美。
现代文：既陈述了皇帝应警惕的地方，又用美好的东西来劝导他。
English: He not only stated where the emperor should be vigilant, but also used beautiful things to persuade him.

古文：君之为治也，必曰： 稽于众，舍己从人 。
现代文：皇帝治理时，一定说 向大家核查，大家的说法对就放弃自己的主张，听从大家的意见 。
English: When the emperor governed, he always said that he would check with everyone, and if what everyone said was right, he would give up his own ideas and listen to everyone's opinions.

古文：既能听之，又能行之，又从而兴起之。君臣上下之间相与如此。
现代文：又能听从，又能做到，因而兴旺。君臣上下之间就是这样相处的。
English: They can both obey and achieve, and thus prosper. This is how princes and ministers get along with each other.

古文：陛下继兴隆之运，抚太平之基，诚宜稽古崇德，留意于此，无因物以好恶喜怒，无以好恶喜怒轻忽小善，不恤人言。
现代文：今天陛下继承兴隆的气数，保护太平基业，的确应当考古重德，在这点上留心，不因身外的人或事决定好恶喜怒，不因自己的好恶喜怒忽略友善，不体恤别人的话。
English: Today, as His Majesty inherits a flourishing economy and protects the Taiping Heritage, it is indeed necessary to attach great importance to archaeology. In this regard, we should be careful not to determine our likes and dislikes, our likes and dislikes, our likes and dislikes, our likes and dislikes, our likes and dislikes, our likes and dislikes, our likes and dislikes, and our likes and dislikes.

古文：夫上下之情有通塞，天地之运有否泰。
现代文：是啊，上下情况有通达有阻塞。天地的运气有好有坏。
English: Yes, there are ups and downs, there is access and there is obstruction. The luck of heaven and earth is good and bad.

古文：唐陆贽尝陈隔塞之九弊，上有其六，下有其三。
现代文：唐代的陆贽曾陈述上下情况不通有九种弊病，其中上有六种，下有三种。
English: Lu Yao of the Tang Dynasty once stated that there are nine kinds of ills, of which there are six kinds above and three kinds below.

古文：陛下能慎其六，为臣子者敢不慎其三哉！
现代文：皇上能注意这六种弊病，做臣子的怎敢不小心待另三病。
English: The emperor can pay attention to these six kinds of ills, how dare a courtier be careless about the other three diseases.

古文：上下之情既通，则大纲举而群目张矣。 
现代文：上下情况既然能通畅，那就抓住了主要环节带动了一切。 
English: Since the up-and-down situation can be smooth, it has seized the main link and driven everything.

古文：进尚书右丞，修史如故。
现代文：镒升为尚书右丞，依旧撰写史书。
English: He was promoted to Shang Shuxu Yu Rong, and continued to write history books.

古文：三年，罢为横海军节度使，改定武军节度使，知平阳府事。
现代文：明昌三年，镒被免去其他职务担任横海军节度使，后改任定武军节度使，知平阳府事。
English: In the third year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, Zou was relieved of other duties to serve as the envoy of the Navy Festival, and later he was appointed as the envoy of the Armed Forces Festival, leading the affairs of Pingyang.

古文：先是，郑王永蹈判定武军，镐王永中判平阳府，相继得罪，连引者众，上疑其有党，或命节度定武，继又知平阳焉。
现代文：先前，郑王永蹈任职定武军，镐王永中任职平阳府，相继获罪，受牵连的人很多，皇帝怀疑他们有同党，也许因为这个缘故，命镒节度定武，随即又请他管理平阳。
English: In the past, Zheng Wang Yongchu was in charge of the Dingwu army, and Gong Wang Yongzhong was in charge of the Pingyang government. They were successively convicted, and many people were implicated. The emperor suspected that they had the same party. Perhaps for this reason, he ordered Dingwu to be killed, and then asked him to manage Pingyang.

古文：改西京留守。
现代文：之后改任西京留守。
English: After that, he was transferred to Saikyo, where he stayed.

古文：承安三年，改上京留守。
现代文：承安三年，改为上京留守。
English: After three years in Cheng'an, he left for Tokyo.

古文：五年，上问宰臣： 徒单镒与宗浩孰优？ 
现代文：五年，章宗问宰臣： 徒单镒与宗浩谁行？ 
English: In the fifth year, Zhang Zong asked his aide-de-camp: "Who is better, Duan Zang or Zong Hao?"

古文：平章政事张万公对曰： 皆才能之士，镒似优者。镒有执守，宗浩多数耳。 
现代文：平章政事张万公答道 ：都是有才能的人，镒似乎更强些，镒有操守，宗浩多数而已。 
English: Zhang Wankong, a member of the Pingzhang Political Bureau, replied, "They are all talented people, but Zou seems to be stronger, Zou has ethics, and Zonghao is just more numerous."

古文：上曰： 何谓多数？ 
现代文：皇帝问 ：什么叫多数？ 
English: The emperor asked: What is a majority?

古文：万公曰： 宗浩微似趋合。 
现代文：万公说 ：宗浩略有些迎合。 
English: Mangong said: "There is a bit of pandering to Zong Hao.

古文：上曰： 卿言是也。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：你说得对啊。 
English: The emperor said: Your words are right.

古文：顷之，镒拜平章政事，封济国公。
现代文：不久，镒被提为平章政事，封济国公。
English: Soon after, Zou was elevated to the title of Pingzhang Zhengji (平章政事) and Fuzhi Guogong (封济国公).

古文：淑妃李氏擅宠，兄弟恣横，朝臣往往出入其门。
现代文：淑妃李氏专宠，她的兄弟横行霸道，朝臣常常奔走他们门下。
English: Shuxi was the favorite of the Li family. Her brothers were domineering, and courtiers often followed them.

古文：是时烈风昏噎连日，诏问变异之由。
现代文：那时一连几天狂风蔽日，皇帝下诏问天象变异的缘故。
English: At that time, for several days in a row, strong winds blotted out the sun, and the emperor issued an edict to inquire about the cause of the celestial phenomenon.

古文：镒上疏略曰： 仁、义、礼、智、信谓之五常，父义、母慈、兄友、弟敬、子孝谓之五德。
现代文：镒上疏大致说： 仁、义、礼、智、信叫五常，父义、母慈、兄友、弟敬、子孝称作五德。
English: The Analects of Confucius roughly says: benevolence, righteousness, propriety, wisdom, and faith are called the five constants, and fatherly righteousness, motherly kindness, brotherly friendship, brotherly respect, and filial piety are called the five virtues.

古文：今五常不立，五德不兴，缙绅学古之士弃礼义，忘廉耻，细民违道畔义，迷不知返，背毁天常，骨内相残，动伤和气，此非一朝一夕之故也。
现代文：如今五常不建立，五德不提倡，官宦士人抛弃礼义，忘掉廉耻，小民背道德叛信义，迷惑而不知悔改，背弃损毁天常，骨肉相残，动伤和气，这不是一朝一夕的原因。
English: Nowadays, the Five Precepts are not established, the Five Moral Precepts are not advocated, officials and scholars abandon propriety, forget shame, the common people abandon morality and treachery, confuse and do not know how to repent, abandon and destroy nature, the flesh and blood are hostile to each other, and move and hurt. This is not a cause overnight.

古文：今宜正薄俗，顺人心，父父子子夫夫妇妇，各得其道，然后和气普洽，福禄荐臻矣。 
现代文：现在应端正不淳厚的民俗，顺应人心，对待父亲、子女，对待丈夫、妻子，各遵循应有的准则，这样才能和气融洽，使得福禄频频来到。 
English: Now it is time to rectify the unfair folk customs, conform to the people's hearts, treat fathers and children, treat husbands and wives, and follow the proper standards, so that they can be in harmony with the spirit, so that the blessings come frequently.

古文：因论： 为政之术，其急有二。一曰正臣下之心。
现代文：为此评论道 ：治理政事的方法，紧要的有两点：其一，纠正臣子的心态。
English: Commenting on this, he said: There are two important points in the method of governing political affairs: First, correct the mentality of courtiers.

古文：窃见群下不明礼义，趋利者众，何以责小民之从化哉。
现代文：私下见众臣不明礼义，贪图功利的人很多，怎么能责怪老百姓跟着他们变化呢？
English: Privately, there are many courtiers who do not know the etiquette and are greedy for profit. How can we blame the people for following their changes?

古文：其用人也，德器为上，才美为下，兼之者待以不次，才下行美者次之，虽有才能，行义无取者，抑而下之，则臣下之趋向正矣。
现代文：用人时，德行端正的为上，才高为下。两者兼有待以不同等级，才不高德行好的次一等，虽有才能，行为道义没有可取之处的人，要压一压放在低位上，那么当臣子的风气就正了。
English: When employing people, if the moral conduct is correct, it will be higher. If both are not correct, it will be lower. If the moral conduct is not correct, it will be lower. If the moral conduct is not good, it will be lower. If the moral conduct is not good, it will be lower. If the moral conduct is not good, it will be lower. If the moral conduct is good, it will be higher.

古文：其二曰导学者之志。
现代文：其二，引导学者的志向。
English: The second is to guide the aspirations of scholars.

古文：教化之行，兴于学校。
现代文：教育感化工作的推行，发动在学校。
English: The implementation of the educational influence work will be launched in schools.

古文：今学者失其本真，经史雅奥，委而不习，藻饰虚词，钓取禄利，乞令取士兼问经史故实，使学者皆守经学，不惑于近习之靡，则善矣。 
现代文：如今学者失去本来应有的求真的美德，经史高深，抛弃它不去学习，学点词藻华丽不真实的东西，钓取地位名利，我请求取士时同时考考经史典故，使学者坚持学习经学，不为当前浮靡文风所惑，就好了。 
English: Nowadays, scholars have lost the virtue of truth-seeking that they should have had. They have become too familiar with the history of scripture. They have abandoned it and do not study. They learn a few words, gorgeous and unreal things, and fish for fame and fortune. I would like to request that when they are selected as scholars, they also examine the history of scripture, so that scholars can persist in studying scripture and not be confused by the current literary fad.

古文：又曰： 凡天下之事，丛来者非一端，形似者非一体，法制不能尽，隐于近似，乃生异论。
现代文：又说： 凡天下的事情，多头来的不是一头，相似的不是同一体，法律制度不能完全套用，因为相似而掩盖了真相，就会产生不同的议论。
English: He also said: In all matters of the world, many things do not come from a single source, similar things are not the same, the legal system cannot be fully applied, because similarity hides the truth, different discussions will arise.

古文：孔子曰： 义者天下之制也。 
现代文：孔子说 ：道义是天下必须遵循的制度。 
English: Confucius said: Morality is a system that must be followed by the whole world.

古文：《记》曰： 义为断之节。 
现代文：《礼记》说 ：道义是判断的凭证。 
English: "Li Ji" says: Morality is the evidence of judgment.

古文：伏望陛下临制万机，事有异议，少凝圣虑，寻绎其端，则裁断有定，而疑可辨矣。 
现代文：请陛下处理日常政务时，遇到对事情的处理有不同主张时，稍微多考虑一下，找到事情发生的原因理出头绪，那样就能确定如何裁决，并且能分辨疑问。 
English: I would like to ask His Majesty, when dealing with the day-to-day affairs of government, to think a little more when encountering different opinions on the handling of things, to find out the reasons for the occurrence of things, and to find out the clues, so that we can determine how to adjudicate, and can distinguish doubts.

古文：镒言皆切时弊，上虽纳其说，而不能行。
现代文：镒的话句句切中时弊，皇帝虽然接受他的主张，却不能施行。
English: Although the emperor accepted his proposal, he could not carry it out.

古文：上问汉高帝、光武优劣。
现代文：皇上问汉高祖、光武帝的好坏。
English: The emperor asked Han Gao Zu whether Emperor Guangwu was good or bad.

古文：平章政事张万公对曰： 高祖优甚。 
现代文：平章政事张万公答道： 高祖好得多！ 
English: Zhang Wankong, a politician from Pingzhang, replied: Gaozu is much better!

古文：镒曰： 光武再造汉业，在位三十年，无沈湎冒色之事。
现代文：镒说 ：光武再建汉的基业，在位三十年，没有沉溺于酒色的事情。
English: Zou said: Guangwu rebuilt the foundation of the Han Dynasty, and during his thirty-year reign, he did not indulge in alcohol.

古文：高祖惑戚姬，卒至于乱。
现代文：高祖被戚姬所迷惑，终于导致变乱。
English: Gaozhu was confused by his cousin, which eventually led to a riot.

古文：由是言之，光武优。 
现代文：从这点说，光武帝好。 
English: From this point of view, Emperor Guangwu is good.

古文：上默然。
现代文：皇帝不说话。
English: The Emperor was speechless.

古文：镒盖以元妃李氏隆宠过盛，故微谏云。
现代文：镒大概因为元妃李氏宠爱过度，所以暗暗规劝。
English: Probably because the former empress was overly favored by Mr. Li, she secretly advised him against it.

古文：泰和四年，罢知咸平府。
现代文：泰和四年，免为知咸平府事。
English: In the fourth year of the Thai-Japanese War, he was exempted from serving in the Chihampyeong prefectural government.

古文：五年，改南京留守。
现代文：五年，改任南京留守。
English: Five years later, he was transferred to Nanjing.

古文：六年，徙知河中府，兼陕西安抚使。
现代文：六年，调为知河中府，兼任陕西安抚使。
English: Six years later, he was transferred to Zhihe Zhongfu and concurrently served as the Peacemaker of Shaanxi.

古文：仆散揆行省河南、陕西，元帅府虽受揆节制，实颛方面，上思用谋臣制之，由是升宣抚使一品，镒改知京兆府事，充宣抚使，陕西元帅府并受节制。
现代文：仆散揆行省河南、陕西，元帅府虽受揆控制，实权上，皇帝考虑用谋臣掌管，为此升宣抚使为一品官，镒改任知京兆府事，担当宣抚使，陕西元帅府一并受他节制。
English: Although the Marshal's Office was under the control of the Shogunate, the Emperor considered using advisors to control the real power. For this reason, the envoy was promoted to a first-class official, and the envoy was assigned to Jingzhao prefectural affairs and was in charge of the envoy. The Marshal's Office in Shaanxi was also controlled by him.

古文：诏曰： 将帅虽武悍，久历行阵，而宋人狡狯，亦资算胜。
现代文：诏书说 ：将帅虽勇猛，久经沙场，但宋人狡猾，也要凭借计谋取胜。
English: The edict said: Although the general was brave and had been in the battlefield for a long time, the Song people were cunning and had to rely on cunning to win.

古文：卿之智略，朕所深悉，且股肱旧臣，故有此寄。
现代文：你的才智韬略，我很熟悉，况且是辅助得力的老臣，因而对你有此重托。
English: I am very familiar with your talents and abilities, and I am also a senior minister who can help you, so I entrust you with this important task.

古文：宜以长刺御敌，厉兵抚民，称朕意焉。 
现代文：应当有长远的策略抵御敌人，训练兵士安抚百姓，不辜负我对你的希望。 
English: There should be a long-term strategy to resist the enemy, train soldiers to pacify the people, and live up to my hope for you.

古文：镒言： 初置急递铺，本为转送文牒，今一切乘驿，非便。 
现代文：镒提出 ：当初设置急递铺本来为了方便转送文件，如今都靠乘驿，不便利。 
English: proposed: Originally, express delivery shops were set up to facilitate the transfer of documents, but now they all rely on, which is not convenient.

古文：上深然之。始置提控急递铺官。
现代文：皇帝十分赞同，这就开始设置提控急递铺官。
English: The emperor was very much in favour of this, and this led to the establishment of the post office.

古文：自中都至真定、平阳置者，达于京兆。
现代文：从中都到真定、平阳设置的，到达京兆。
English: From Zhongdu to Zhending and Pingyang, it will reach Beijing.

古文：京兆至凤翔置者，达于临洮。
现代文：京兆到凤翔设置的，到达临洮。
English: From Jingzhao to Fengxiang, it will reach Linyi.

古文：自真定至彰德置者，达于南京。
现代文：从真定到彰德设置的，直达南京。
English: From Zhending to Zhangde set up, all the way to Nanjing.

古文：自南京分至归德置者，达于泗州、寿州，分至许州置者，达于邓州。
现代文：从南京分开到归德设置的，到达泗州、寿州，分开到许州设置的，到达邓州。
English: If it is set up separately from Nanjing to Guizhou, it will reach Zhangzhou and Shuzhou, and if it is set up separately to Huzhou, it will reach Dengzhou.

古文：自中都至沧州置者，达于益都府。
现代文：从中都到沧州设置的，到达益都府。
English: From Zhongdu to Cangzhou, it reaches Yidu Prefecture.

古文：自此邮达无复滞焉。
现代文：从此传递文书不再不顺畅了。
English: From now on, the transmission of documents will no longer be difficult.

古文：七年，吴曦死，宋安丙分兵出秦、陇间。
现代文：七年，吴曦死，宋人安丙分别从秦、陇间出兵。
English: In the seventh year, after the death of Wu Xi, the Song people An Hun sent troops from Qin and Yao respectively.

古文：十月，诏镒出兵金、房以分掣宋人梁、益、汉、沔兵势。
现代文：十月，下令镒出兵金、房用来分别牵制宋人梁、益、汉、沔的兵势。
English: In October, he ordered the dispatch of troops of Jin and Fang to contain the forces of Liang, Yi, Han, and Xing of the Song Dynasty.

古文：镒遣行军都统斡勒叶禄瓦、副统把回海、完颜掴刺以步骑五千出商州。
现代文：镒派遣行军都统斡勒叶禄瓦、副统把回海、完颜掴剌领步骑兵五千出商州。
English: He dispatched the marching troops to Yeluwa, the vice-commander returned to the sea, and led 5,000 infantry and cavalry to Shangzhou.

古文：十一月，叶禄瓦拔鹘岭关，掴刺别将攻破燕子关新道口，回海取小湖关敖仓，至营口镇，破宋兵千余人，追至上津县，斩首八百余级，遂取上津县。
现代文：十一月，叶禄瓦攻取鹘岭关，掴剌偏将攻破燕子关新道口，回海攻占小湖关敖仓，到营口镇，击溃宋军千余人，追到上津县，斩首八百多，接着攻取上津县。
English: In November, Ye Luo Wa captured Fuling Pass, and then broke through the new pass of Yan Zi Pass, and went back to the sea to capture the small lake pass of Fuling, to Yingkou Town, defeated more than a thousand people of the Song Army, chased to Shangjin County, beheaded more than eight hundred people, and then captured Shangjin County.

古文：叶禄瓦破宋兵二千于平溪，将趋金州。
现代文：叶禄瓦在平溪击溃宋兵二千人，将到金州。
English: Ye Luwa defeated two thousand Song soldiers in Pingxi and will go to Jinzhou.

古文：宋王柟以书乞和，诏镒召叶禄瓦军退守鹘岭关。
现代文：宋王籹写书求和，诏令镒调回叶禄瓦军退守鹘岭关。
English: King Song of Song wrote a book to sue for peace, and ordered his troops to return to Yelowai and retreat to Shilingguan.

古文：八年正月，宋安丙遣景统领由梅子溪、新道口、朱砂谷袭鹘岭关，回海，掴刺击走之，斩景统领于阵。
现代文：八年正月，宋人安丙调遣景统领从梅子溪、新道口、朱砂谷出兵偷袭鹘岭关，回海、掴剌打跑了他们，斩杀景统领在阵上。
English: In the first month of the eighth year, the Song people Anpi dispatched the leader of the Jing Dynasty from Meizi Creek, Xindokou, and Zhusagou to attack the Shiling Pass, returned to the sea, fought them, and killed the leader of the Jing Dynasty at the front.

古文：是岁，罢兵。
现代文：这年，休战。
English: This year, there was a truce.

古文：镒迁特进，赐赉有差。改知真定府事。
现代文：镒升特进，按级别赐赏，改任知真定府事。
English: He was promoted to special promotion, rewarded according to his rank, and transferred to the post of Chizhending prefectural official.

古文：大安初，加仪同三司，封濮国公。
现代文：大安初年，加封仪同三司，封濮国公。
English: In the first year of the Taian era, Jiafeng Yi and the three departments were added, and Jiafeng Guogong was created.

古文：改东京留守，过阙入见。卫绍王谓镒曰： 卿两朝旧德，欲用卿为相。
现代文：改任东京留守，经过京城入见，卫绍王对镒说： 你有两朝功德，想任命你担任丞相。
English: He was transferred to Tokyo and stayed there. After entering the capital, the King of Wei Shao said to Zou, "You have the merits of two dynasties. I would like to appoint you as chancellor."

古文：太尉匡，卿之门人，朕不可屈卿下之。 
现代文：太尉匡，是你的门下，我不能委屈你地位在他下面。 
English: Captain Kuang is under your command, I can't begrudge you your position under him.

古文：迁开府仪同三司，佩金符，充辽东安抚副使。
现代文：升任开府仪同三司，佩带金符，担任辽东安抚副使。
English: He was promoted to the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong, wore a gold badge, and served as the deputy envoy of Liaodong pacification.

古文：三年，改上京留守。
现代文：三年，改任上京留守。
English: Three years later, he was reassigned to stay in Tokyo.

古文：平章政事独吉思忠败绩于会河堡，中都戒严，镒曰： 事急矣。 
现代文：平章政事独吉思忠在会河堡战败，中都戒严，镒说： 情况危急！ 
English: After the defeat of the Hebei Fortress, the central government declared martial law, and Zou said, "The situation is critical!

古文：乃选兵二万，遣同知乌古孙兀屯将之，入卫中都。
现代文：及时选兵两万，派同知乌古孙兀屯统领，进入中都防卫。
English: He promptly selected twenty thousand soldiers and dispatched Wu Gu Sun, the leader of Xingtun, to enter the defense of Zhongdu.

古文：朝廷嘉之，征拜尚书右丞相，监修国史。
现代文：朝廷嘉奖他，征召任命他为尚书右丞相，监督撰写国史。
English: The imperial court commended him, conscripted him, and appointed him as the minister of the right for official documents, supervising the writing of the national history.

古文：镒言： 自用兵以来，彼聚而行，我散而守，以聚攻散，其败必然。
现代文：镒说： 从用兵以来，对方集中兵力行动，我方分散防守，用集中攻击分散，失败是必然的。
English: Zhai said: Since the use of troops, the other side has concentrated its military operations, and we have dispersed our defense, dispersed with concentrated attacks, and failure is inevitable.

古文：不若入保大城，并力备御。
现代文：不如退而保卫大城，合力防备抵御。
English: It is better to retreat and defend the big city, and work together to prevent and resist.

古文：昌、桓、抚三州素号富实，人皆勇健，可以内徙，益我兵势，人畜货财，不至亡失。 
现代文：昌、桓、抚三州向来号称富实，人人都很勇敢强健，可以内迁，增加我的兵力，人畜财物，不至于丢失。 
English: Chang, Huan, and Fuzhou have always been known as rich, and everyone is very brave and strong. I can move in and increase my troops, people, animals, and property without losing them.

古文：平章政事移刺、参知政事梁絪曰： 如此是自蹙境土也。 
现代文：平章政事移剌、参知政事梁王堂说： 这样是自损国土。 
English: Ping Zhang, a member of the Council of State, and Liang Wangtang, a member of the Council of State, said: This is self-defeating for the country.

古文：卫绍王以责镒。
现代文：卫绍王因而责备镒。
English: As a result, King Weishao rebuked him.

古文：镒复奏曰： 辽东国家根本，距中都数千里，万一受兵，州府顾望，必须报可，误事多矣。
现代文：镒再次奏道 ：辽东这地方是国家的根本，相距中都数千里远，万一遭到袭击，州府观望，必须上报得到许可方能出击，实在误事。
English: Zou said again, "Liaodong is the foundation of the country. It is thousands of miles away from the central cities. In case of an attack, the provincial government will wait and see. It is necessary to report to the government and get permission before launching an attack. This is really a mistake."

古文：可遣大臣行省以镇之。 
现代文：要派大臣以行省的地位镇守。 
English: It is necessary to send a minister to guard the town with the status of a province.

古文：卫绍王不悦曰： 无故置行省，徒摇人心耳。 
现代文：卫绍王不高兴地说： 无故置行省，只会动摇人心罢了。 
English: The king of Weishao said unhappily, "To abolish the province without reason will only shake people's hearts."

古文：其后失昌、桓、抚三州，卫绍王乃大悔曰： 从丞相之言，当不至此！ 
现代文：后来失去昌、桓、抚三州，卫绍王这才大为后悔，说： 听丞相的话，当不至于此！ 
English: Later, after losing Chang, Huan, and Fuzhou, King Weishao regretted it greatly, saying, "I should not have listened to the words of the prime minister!

古文：顷之，东京不守，卫绍王自讼曰： 我见丞相耻哉！ 
现代文：不久，东京失守，卫绍王公开说： 我见到丞相十分羞愧。 
English: Soon after, Tokyo was lost, and the Prince of Wei Shao publicly said: I am very ashamed to see the Prime Minister.

古文：术虎高琪驻兵缙山，甚得人心，士乐为用。
现代文：术虎高琪驻兵缙山，十分得人心，士人乐意为他所用。
English: The skillful tiger Gao Qi was stationed in Lushan. He was very popular, and scholars were happy to use him.

古文：至宁元年，尚书左丞完颜纲将行省于缙山，镒谓纲曰： 行省不必自往，不若益兵为便。 
现代文：至宁元年，尚书左丞相完颜纲要到缙山行省。镒对纲说 ：行省不必自己去，不如增兵有利。 
English: In the first year of the Ning Dynasty, Shang Shuzhong, the Minister of the Left and the Minister of the Right, went to Lushan to govern the province. Zou said to him, "You don't have to go to the province yourself, it's better to increase the number of soldiers."

古文：纲不听，且行，镒遣人止之曰： 高琪之功，即行省之功也。 
现代文：纲不听，将走，镒又派人制止说 ：高琪的功劳就是行省的功劳。 
English: Gao Qi did not listen, and sent someone to stop him, saying, "Gao Qi's achievement is the achievement of the province."

古文：亦不听。
现代文：也听不进去。
English: I can't listen to it either.

古文：纲至缙山，遂败绩焉。
现代文：纲到缙山，就战败了。
English: Once they reached Shaoshan, they were defeated.

古文：顷之，镒坠马伤足在告，闻胡沙虎难作，命驾将入省。
现代文：不久，镒落马伤足休假，听说胡沙虎发难，动身前往官署。
English: Soon after, Zhao Luo Ma took a leave of absence due to a foot injury. When he heard that Hu Shaohu was in trouble, he left for the government office.

古文：或告之曰： 省府相幕皆以军士守之，不可入矣。 
现代文：有人告诉他说： 省府相幕都有军士把守，不能进入。 
English: Someone told him: "The provincial government's photo curtain is guarded by military officers, so you can't enter.

古文：少顷，兵士索人于闾巷，镒乃还第。
现代文：一会儿，又见兵士在街道巷里抓人，镒于是返回家中。
English: After a while, he saw soldiers arresting people in the streets, so he returned home.

古文：胡沙虎意不可测，方犹豫，不能自定，乃诣镒问疾，从人望也。
现代文：胡沙虎还是不能预料形势的发展，正在犹豫，不能决定下一步怎么办，于是到镒家去问候他的病，想听听声望高的人的意见。
English: Hu Shahu still could not predict the development of the situation, hesitating, unable to decide what to do next, so he went to Zou's home to greet his illness and wanted to listen to the opinions of prestigious people.

古文：镒从容谓之曰： 翼王，章宗之兄，显宗长子，众望所属，元帅决策立之，万世之功也。 
现代文：镒从容对他说： 翼王，章宗的兄弟、显宗长子，众望所归，元帅决策立他为帝，这是万世的功劳。 
English: Zou Zong said to him calmly: "Wing Wang, Zhang Zong's brother, the eldest son of Xian Zong, is highly regarded. The marshal's decision to make him emperor is a great achievement.

古文：胡沙虎默然而去，乃迎宣宗于彰德。
现代文：胡沙虎没说什么就走了，于是到彰德迎立宣宗。
English: Hu Shahu left without saying anything, so he went to Zhangde to welcome Xuan Zong.

古文：胡沙虎既杀徒单南平，欲执其弟知真定府事铭，镒说之曰： 车驾道出真定，镐王家在威州，河北人心易摇，徒单铭有变，朝廷危矣。不如与之金牌，奉迎车驾，铭必感元帅之恩。 
现代文：胡沙虎已杀徒单南平，想抓他的弟弟知真定府事徒单铭，镒劝他说： 皇帝车驾从真定过，镐王家在威州，河北人心易乱，徒单铭叛变，朝廷就危急了，不如给他金牌，迎接车驾，铭一定感激您的恩德。 
English: Hu Shaohu had killed the traitor Shan Nanping, and wanted to catch his younger brother Zhizhen Dingfu and the traitor Shan Ming. Zou advised him, "The emperor's chariot has passed from Zhen Ding, the Shao royal family is in Weizhou, Hebei is in turmoil, the traitor Shan Ming has mutinied, and the imperial court is in danger. It would be better to give him a gold medal and welcome the chariot. Ming will surely be grateful for your kindness."

古文：胡沙虎从之。
现代文：胡沙虎听从了他的意见。
English: The hooded tiger followed his advice.

古文：至宁、贞祐之际，转败为功，惟镒是赖焉。
现代文：至宁、贞时期，转败为胜，全都依赖镒呀！
English: In the era of moderation and chastity, to turn defeat into victory, it all depends on gongs!

古文：宣宗即位，进拜左丞相，封广平郡王，授中都路迭鲁都世袭猛安蒲鲁吉必剌谋克。
现代文：宣宗即位，升任镒为左丞相，封广平郡王，授予中都路迭鲁都世袭猛安蒲鲁吉必剌谋克。
English: Xuan Zong ascended the throne, was promoted to minister of the left, was named the king of Guangping County, and was awarded the central capital, Diyelu, and the hereditary capital, Meng'an and Buluqi.

古文：镒尚有足疾，诏侍朝无拜。
现代文：镒足疾未好，令他上朝不需跪拜。
English: His crippling foot ailment meant that he did not have to kneel for the last time.

古文：明年，镒建议和亲。
现代文：第二年，镒建议和亲。
English: The following year, Zou proposed a reconciliation.

古文：言事者请罢按察司。镒曰： 今郡县多残毁，正须按察司抚集，不可罢。 
现代文：有人请求废去按察司，镒说： 如今郡县多有残破毁坏，正要按察司抚慰安定，不可撤去。 
English: Some people requested to abolish the procuratorate, and Zou said: Nowadays, many counties and counties have been destroyed, and it is necessary to appease and stabilize them according to the procuratorate, and they cannot be removed.

古文：遂止。
现代文：终于阻止了这项建议。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：宣宗将幸南京，镒曰： 銮辂一动，北路皆不守矣。
现代文：宣宗想去南京，镒说： 圣驾一起动，北路都不守了。
English: When Xuan Zong wanted to go to Nanjing, Zou said, "Let's move together. The north road is no longer guarded.

古文：今已讲和，聚兵积粟，固守京师，策之上也。
现代文：如今已经讲和，招兵积粮，坚守京师，才是上策。
English: Now that peace has been declared, the best policy is to recruit soldiers, stockpile grain, and hold fast to the Beijing division.

古文：南京四面受兵。
现代文：南京四面受敌。
English: Nanjing was besieged on all sides.

古文：辽东根本之地，依山负海，其险足恃，备御一面，以为后图，策之次也。 
现代文：辽东是根基，靠山背海，其险完全可以依靠，防御好一面，作为日后图谋，这是次一等的计策。 
English: Liaodong is the foundation, backed by the mountains and the sea, its risk can be fully relied on, the defense is good, as a future plan, this is a second-class strategy.

古文：宣宗即位，召赴阙，以兵道阻。
现代文：皇帝不听。这年，镒死，皇帝赐很多财物以优厚的待遇办丧事。
English: The emperor didn't listen. This year, Xing died, and the emperor gave him a lot of wealth and generous treatment to handle the funeral.

古文：宣宗迁汴，铎上谒于宜村，除太子太师。
现代文：镒明智刚正，学问完备。当时名士都出于他的门下，不少位列卿相。
English: He was wise and upright, and his learning was complete. At that time, celebrities were from his school, and many of them were ranked as high-ranking officials.

古文：在疾，累遣使候问。贞祐三年，致仕。是岁薨。
现代文：他曾叹惜文士精神不振，虽聪敏、笨拙有所不同，都要以仁义道德为根本，于是写《学之急》、《道之要》二篇。
English: He once lamented that the spirit of the scribes was not strong, although they were clever and clumsy, they had to take benevolence, righteousness and morality as the foundation, so he wrote two articles, "The Urgency of Learning" and "The Essentials of the Way."

古文：孙即康，字安伯，其先沧州人。
现代文：太学里的学生们把它刻在石头上。他还著有《弘道集》六卷。孙即康，字安伯，他的祖先是沧州人。
English: The students at the school engraved it on the stone. He also wrote the six-volume "Hongdao Collection." Sun Jiekang, also known as Amber, was a native of Cangzhou.

古文：石晋之末，辽徙河北实燕、蓟，八代祖延应在徙中，占籍析津，实大兴，仕至涿州刺史。
现代文：后晋末年，辽国迁移河北居民充实燕、蓟，八代祖延应在被迁人中，口说籍贯析津，其实在大兴。官做到涿州刺史。
English: At the end of the Later Jin Dynasty, the resettlement of Hebei residents to Liaoning Province enriched Yan and Zou, and the eighth-generation ancestor Yan should have been among the relocated people, but he was actually in Daxing. The official did the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：延应玄孙克构，辽检校太傅、启圣军节度使。
现代文：延应玄孙克构，是辽检校太傅、启圣军节度使。
English: Yan Ying's great-great-grandson, Kechi, was the Taifu of the Liao inspection school and the festival envoy of the Qisheng Army.

古文：即康，克构曾孙，中大定十年进士第。
现代文：即康，是克构曾孙，大定十年中进士第。
English: That is, Kang is the great-grandson of Ke Jie, and he was promoted to the first rank in the middle school in the last ten years.

古文：章宗为右丞相，是时，即康为尚书省令史，由是识其人。
现代文：章宗任右丞相时，即康为尚书省令史，由此识其人。
English: When Zhang Zong was appointed as the Minister of the Right, Kang was the Minister of the Ministry of Education and Culture, which is how he was identified.

古文：章宗即位，累迁户部员外郎，讲究盐法利害，语在《食货志》。
现代文：章宗即位，接连升为户部员外郎，研究盐法利弊，这些在《食货志》中谈到。
English: When Zhang Zong ascended the throne, he was successively promoted to a member of the household department, and studied the pros and cons of salt, which was discussed in the "Food Diary."

古文：除耀州刺史，入为吏部左司郎中。
现代文：升耀州刺史，入朝任吏部左司郎中。
English: He rose through the ranks of provincial officials and entered the imperial court as a middle-ranking official in the Left Division of the General Staff.

古文：上谓宰臣曰： 孙即康向为省掾，言语拙讷，今才力大进，非向时比也。 
现代文：皇上对宰臣说 ：孙即康过去是省属官，不善口头表达，现在才能大有长进，不是以前可以比了。 
English: The Emperor said to the Vice-Minister, "In the past, Sun Jikang was a provincial official, and he was not good at expressing himself verbally. It is only now that he has made great progress, and it cannot be compared to the past.

古文：宰臣因曰： 即康年已高，幸及早用之。 
现代文：宰臣因此说 ：即康年龄已不小，希望尽早使用他。 
English: As a result, the vice-minister said, "Joko is already quite old, and I hope to use him as soon as possible."

古文：上问： 年几何矣？ 
现代文：皇上问： 年龄多少了？ 
English: The emperor asked: How old are you?

古文：对曰： 五十六岁。 
现代文：回答说： 五十六岁。 
English: And he said, Fifty and six years old.

古文：上复问： 其才何如张万公？ 
现代文：皇上又问 ：他的才能和张万公比怎样？ 
English: The emperor also asked: How does his talent compare to Zhang Wankong?

古文：平章政事守贞对曰： 即康才过之。 
现代文：平章政事守贞回答说： 即康的才能超过他。 
English: Pingzhang Zhengzhi Shuzhen replied: That is, Kang's talent surpasses him.

古文：上曰： 视万公为通耳。 
现代文：皇上说 ：我看万公和他一样罢了。 
English: The emperor said, "I think that Vangong is just like him."

古文：由是迁御史中丞。
现代文：由这升御史中丞。
English: From this, he was promoted to Mishi chujo.

古文：初，张汝弼妻高陀斡不道，伏诛。汝弼，镐王永中舅也，上由是颇疑永中。
现代文：当初，张汝弼的妻子高陀斡行事不道，被杀，汝弼是镐王永中的舅舅，皇帝因此十分怀疑永中。
English: At the beginning, Zhang Ruzhen's wife, Gaotao, was killed for misbehaving. Ruzhen was the uncle of Yongzhong, the king of Qi, so the emperor was very suspicious of Yongzhong.

古文：永中府傅尉奏永中第四子阿离合懑语涉不轨，诏同签大睦亲府事袴与即康鞫之。
现代文：永中府傅尉上告永中第四子阿离合懑说话犯不轨罪，下诏同签大睦亲府事礮与即康审讯他。
English: Yongzhongfu Fu Li sued Yongzhong's fourth son, Ah Ying Hao, accusing him of committing the crime of indecent speech, and ordered him to sign the document of reconciliation between the family and the government, and then interrogated him.

古文：第二子神土门尝撰词曲，颇轻肆，遂以语涉不逊就逮。
现代文：第二子神土门曾写词曲，十分轻浮放肆，于是因言语不谦逊被逮捕。
English: The second son, the god Tu-men, once wrote a song that was very frivolous and impudent, so he was arrested for his immodest speech.

古文：家奴德哥首永中尝与侍妾瑞云言： 我得天下，以尔为妃，子为大王。 
现代文：家奴德哥告发永中曾与侍妾瑞云说： 我得天下，以你为妃，儿子做大王。 
English: The family slave, De Go, reported that Yongzhong had said to his concubine, Rui Yun, "I will conquer the world, with you as my wife, and my son as the great king."

古文：袴、即康还奏，诏礼部尚书张暐复讯。
现代文：礮、即康回报，诏令礼部尚书张日韦再审，永中父子都死。
English: , that is, Kang returned, ordered the ceremonial department to re-examine Zhang Rongwei, and Yongzhong and his son both died.

古文：永中父子皆死，时论冤之。
现代文：当时人们议论认为他们冤枉。
English: At the time, people argued that they had been wronged.

古文：顷之，迁泰宁军节度使，改知延安府事。
现代文：不久，即康被调为泰宁军节度使，改任知延安府事。
English: Soon after, Jiao Kang was transferred to be the Taining Army's envoy to the Qing Dynasty and was assigned to the Chiyan'an prefectural government.

古文：承安五年，上问宰相： 今汉官谁可用者？ 
现代文：承安五年，皇上问丞相： 今汉官谁可用者？ 
English: In the 5th year of Cheng'an, the emperor asked the prime minister: Who can be a Han official now?

古文：司空襄举即康。
现代文：司空襄推荐即康。
English: Sikyong's recommendation is a good one.

古文：上曰： 不轻薄否？ 
现代文：上说 ：不轻佻浮薄吗？ 
English: He said: "Isn't it frivolous and superficial?

古文：襄曰： 可再用为中丞观之。 
现代文：襄说 ：可再用作中丞观察他。 
English: Xiang said, "You can use him as a junior high school student to observe him."

古文：上乃复召即康为御史中丞。
现代文：上于是又召即康任御史中丞。
English: As a result, Jikang was called to the post of Vice-Minister of History.

古文：泰和三年，除参知政事。
现代文：泰和三年，授予参知政事。
English: In the third year of the Taihe era, he was awarded the post of councillor.

古文：明年，进尚书右丞。
现代文：四年，升做尚书右丞。
English: Four years later, he was promoted to Shoshu Ujo.

古文：六年，宋渝盟有端，大臣犹以为小盗窃发不足恤。
现代文：六年，宋朝背盟已有迹象，大臣还以为小规模抢窃活动发生不值得忧虑。
English: Six years later, there were already signs that the Song Dynasty had turned its back on the alliance, and the minister still thought that the occurrence of small-scale robbery activities was not worth worrying about.

古文：即康与左丞仆散端、参政独吉思忠以为必当用兵，上以为然。
现代文：即康与左丞仆散端、参政独吉思忠认为一定要用兵，皇帝以为是对的。
English: The emperor thought it was right that Jokang and his left-hand man Sandato, as well as Doji Sizhong, who was involved in politics, should employ soldiers.

古文：上问即康、参知政事贾铉曰： 太宗庙讳同音字，有读作 成 字者，既非同音，便不当缺点画。
现代文：皇上询问即康、参知政事贾铉说： 太宗庙讳同音字，有读作 成 字者，既非同音，书写便不当缺点画。
English: The emperor asked Jokang and Jia Yu, the political secretary of the prefectural government, and said: Taizong Temple does not have homophones, and if there is a word that is pronounced as a word, it is not homophonic, and it is improper to write it.

古文：睿宗庙讳改作 崇 字，其下却有本字全体，不若将 示 字依《兰亭贴》写作 未 字。
现代文：睿宗庙讳改作 崇 字，其下却有本字全体，不如将 示 字照兰亭帖写作 未 字。
English: Ruizong Temple's name was changed to "Chong" (崇), but the whole word is written below it. It would be better to write "Shi" (示) like "Lanting" (蘭亭帖) but without the word.

古文：显宗庙讳 允 ， 充 字合缺点画，如 统 傍之 充 ，似不合缺。 
现代文：显宗庙讳 允 ， 充 字应当缺笔画，像 统 旁的 充 似乎不应该缺笔画。 
English: According to the rules of the temple of Emperor Xuanzong, the inscriptions should not be missing brushstrokes, just as the inscriptions next to the throne should not be missing brushstrokes.

古文：即康奏曰： 唐太宗讳世民，偏傍犯如  字作 筼 字， 泯 字作 泜 字。 
现代文：即康上奏说： 唐太宗讳世民，偏旁触犯的如 叶 字写作 礲 字， 泯 字写作 氵氐 字。 
English: That is to say, Kang Shangso said: Tang Taizong conceals the world's people, and those who commit offenses on the sidelines, such as 叶 字, write  字,  字, write  字.

古文：乃拟 熙宗庙讳从 面 从 且 。
现代文：于是拟定 熙宗庙讳从 面 从 且 。
English: As a result, it was decided to build the temple of Emperor Xi from scratch.

古文：睿宗庙讳上字从 未 ，下字从 筜 。
现代文：睿宗庙讳上字从 未 ，下字从 篧 。
English: In the Ruizong Temple, the upper character is from 未, and the lower character is from.

古文：世宗庙讳从 系 。
现代文：世宗庙讳从 系 。
English: It is a descendant of the Sejongji Temple.

古文：显宗庙讳如正犯字形，止书斜画， 沇 字 鈗 字各从 口 ， 兑  悦 之类各从本传。 
现代文：显宗庙讳如正触犯字形，仅写斜画， 氵允 字和 钅允 字各自从 口 ， 兑  悦 之类字各从本体 。
English: In the case of the temple of Emperor Xianzong, only the oblique pictures were written, the characters 允 字 and 允 字 were written separately from the mouth, and the words such as 兑 悦  were written separately from the body.

古文：从之，自此不胜曲避矣。
现代文：听从他的意见，从这以后避讳字多了。
English: I listened to his advice, and since then I've been avoiding the word a lot more.

古文：进左丞。宋人请和，进官一阶。
现代文：进升左丞，宋人请和，加官一级。
English: Jin was promoted to Zojo, Song was promoted to He, and Xian was promoted to first grade.

古文：旧制，尚书省令史考满优调，次任回降。崔建昌已优调兴平军节度副使，未回降即除大理司直。
现代文：以往制度，尚书省令史考察期满优待调用，再升前要回降，崔建昌已优待调用兴平军节度副使，没有回降就升为大理司直。
English: According to the previous system, Shang Shuxuan ordered the historical investigation period to expire, and Cui Jianchang was to be promoted to vice-envoy of the Xingping Army, and if he was not promoted, he would be promoted to Dali Sizhi.

古文：诏知除郭邦杰、李蹊杖七十勒停，左司员外郎高庭玉决四十解职，即康待罪，有诏勿问。
现代文：诏令知除郭邦杰、李蹊杖责七十强制停职，左司员外郎高庭玉杖责四十解除职务，即康等待定罪，有诏书说不追究。
English: According to the edict, Guo Bangjie and Li Nianjie should be suspended for 70 years, and Gaotian Yu Jie, the left secretary, should be relieved of his duties for 40 years, that is, Kang is awaiting conviction, and there is an edict saying that he will not be investigated.

古文：章宗崩，卫绍王即位，即康进拜平章政事，封崇国公。
现代文：章宗去世，卫绍王即位，即康进封平章政事，封崇国公。
English: When Zhangzong died and King Weishao ascended to the throne, Kangjin was given the title of Pingzhang Zhengji (平章政事) and the title of Chongguo (崇国公).

古文：大安三年，致仕。
现代文：大安三年，辞职。
English: Daan three years, resigned.

古文：是岁，薨。
现代文：这年，逝世。
English: He died that year.

古文：遣使致祭。
现代文：皇帝派使者去祭奠。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to pay his respects.

古文：李革，字君美，河津人。
现代文：李革，字君美，河津人。
English: Li Ge, Zha Junme, Kawazu people.

古文：父余庆，三至廷试，不遂，因弃去。
现代文：父名余庆，三次到朝廷廷试，没有通过，因此放弃。
English: His father's name was Yu Qing, and he went to the imperial court three times to take the imperial examination, but he did not pass, so he gave up.

古文：革颖悟，读书一再诵，辄记不忘。
现代文：革聪明，读书一二遍，就记住不忘。
English: If you're smart, you'll read it once or twice and remember it.

古文：大定二十五年进士。
现代文：大定二十五年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in 25th year of his ordination.

古文：调真定主簿。
现代文：调任真定主簿。
English: Transferred to the main office in Shinjuku.

古文：察廉，迁韩城令。
现代文：考查他廉洁，迁升为韩城令。
English: He was found to be incorruptible and was promoted to the position of Hancheng Commander.

古文：同知州事纳富商赂，以岁课军须配属县，革独不听，提刑司以为能。
现代文：同知州事接受富商贿赂，用每年征收的赋税军需分配给隶属各县，只有革不听从，提刑司认为他能干。
English: The same magistrate accepted bribes from wealthy businessmen and used the annual tax revenue to allocate military supplies to the counties under his jurisdiction. Only Ge did not obey, and the Criminal Investigation Department thought he could do it.

古文：迁河北东路转运都勾判官、太原推官。
现代文：迁升河北东路转运都勾判官、太原推官。
English: He was promoted to be the judge of the Hebei East Road transshipment center and the judge of Taiyuan.

古文：丁母忧，起复，迁大兴县令、中都左警巡使、南京提刑判官、监察御史、同知昭义军节度事。丁父忧，起复，签南京按察事。
现代文：遭母丧暂停职务，起用恢复原职。升大兴县令、中都左警巡使、南京提刑判官、监察御史、同知昭义军节度事，遭逢父亲之丧，服丧后复职，任签南京按察事。
English: Suspended from his duties due to the death of his mother, he was reinstated to his original position. He was promoted to Daxing County Governor, Central Left Police Inspector, Nanjing Criminal Court Judge, Supervisor of History, and a friend of the Shao Yijun Festival. He suffered the death of his father, was reinstated after the funeral, and was appointed as Nanjing Inspector.

古文：泰和六年，伐宋，尚书省奏： 军兴，随路官，差占者别注，阙者选补，老不任职者替罢，及司、县各存留强干正官一员。 
现代文：泰和六年，伐宋，尚书省奏： 军队发动，沿路官员，在职的区别登记，缺的选补上，年老不胜任职务选人替代后撤职，司、县各存留强干正职官一员。 
English: The six years of the Taihe era, the Song and Song Dynasty, and the Song and Song dynasties: the army was launched, the officials along the road, the difference between the incumbents were registered, the vacancies were filled, the old incompetent officials were replaced and removed, and one strong official was retained in each division and county.

古文：革与签陕西高霖、签山东孟子元俱被诏，体访三路官员能否，籍存留正官，行省、行部、元帅府差占员数及事故阙员，老不任职，赴阙奏事。
现代文：革与签陕西高霖、签山东孟子元都被接受命令，实地调查三路官员有否能力，登记留下正职官，和行省、行部、元帅府在职人数及因意外变故空缺的人员，及年老不能任职的，到朝廷报告这事。
English: At the same time, Gaolin of Shaanxi Province and Meng Ziyuan of Shandong Province were ordered to investigate on the spot whether the three-way officials had the ability to register the number of full-time officials, the number of people working in the province, the department and the marshal's office, the number of people who were vacant due to accidents, and those who were unable to work due to old age, and report the matter to the imperial court.

古文：改刑部员外郎，调观州刺史兼提举漕运，陕西西路按察副使，大兴府治中。
现代文：改任刑部员外郎，调任观州刺史兼提举漕运、陕西西路按察副使、大兴府治中。
English: He was reappointed as Wei Rong, a member of the Penal Department, and transferred to Guanzhou Jishi and Zhuo Zhouzhong, Shaanxi West Road Deputy Inspector, and Daxingfujing.

古文：知府徒单南平贵幸用事，势倾中外，遣所亲以进取诱革，革拒之。
现代文：知府徒单南平高贵受宠而当权，势倾中外，派亲信用进取功名来引诱革，革拒绝了他。
English: The prefectural governor, Nanping Gao, was favored by the nobility and came to power. He was influential both at home and abroad. He sent his relatives to persuade Ge to accept the position, but Ge refused.

古文：贞祐二年，迁户部侍郎。
现代文：贞二年，迁任户部侍郎。
English: In the second year of Sadamori's reign, he was transferred to the position of household attendant.

古文：宣宗迁汴，行河北西路六部事，迁知开封府事，河南劝农使，户部、吏部尚书，陕西行省参议官。
现代文：宣宗迁汴，任行河北西路六部事，任知开封府事，河南劝农使，户部、吏部尚书，陕西行省参议官。
English: Xuan Zong moved the capital, and was appointed to six ministries in the west of Hebei Province, including the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs in Henan Province, the Ministry of Household Affairs, the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and the Ministry of Personnel, and the Shaanxi Province.

古文：四年，拜参知政事。
现代文：贞四年，授职参知政事。
English: Four years later, she was appointed to the post of governor.

古文：革奏： 有司各以情见引用断例，牵合附会，实启幸门。
现代文：革上奏 ：有司各根据自己的情况引用过去决断的事例，牵强附会，实际上打开了侥幸办事的大会。
English: Prelude to the speech: Each division cited cases of decisions made in the past according to their own circumstances, creating a far-fetched meeting, and in fact opened a meeting that was a fluke.

古文：乞凡断例敕条特旨奏断不为永格者，不许引用，皆以律为正。 
现代文：请求凡是断例、敕条、特旨、奏断不能作为久永准则的，不许引用，都按法律为正确判断的依据。 
English: Any request that is based on a ruling, ruling, special order, or ruling that cannot be used as a long-term guideline may not be quoted. According to the law, it is the basis for correct judgment.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：下诏同意。
English: He complied.

古文：是岁，大元兵破潼关，革自以执政失备御之策，上表请罪。
现代文：这年，大元兵破潼关，革自己以执政而在防备抵御上失策，上表请罪。
English: In this year, the Taiyuan soldiers broke the deadlock and blamed themselves for making mistakes in prevention and resistance by governing, and pleaded guilty to the above.

古文：不许，罢为绛阳军节度使。
现代文：不许，免去原职任绛阳军节度使。
English: No, he will be relieved of his former position as the Shenyang Army's envoy to the festival.

古文：兴定元年，胥鼎自平阳移镇陕西，革以知平阳府事，权参知政事，代鼎为河东行省。
现代文：兴定元年，胥鼎自平阳转移镇守陕西，革因任知平阳府事，暂代参知政事，代鼎为河东行省。
English: In the first year of Xingding, Yu Ding was transferred from Pingyang to guard Shaanxi Province. He was appointed to the post of the governor of Pingyang Province, and temporarily participated in the political affairs of the governor. He was appointed to the post of the governor of Hedong Province.

古文：是时兴兵伐宋，革上书曰： 今之计当休兵息民，养锐待敌。
现代文：这时兴兵伐宋，革上书说： 现在策略应休兵息民，保养精锐部队防备敌人。
English: At this time, the Song Dynasty launched a military campaign, and the document said: the strategy should now be to rest the troops and save the people, maintain the elite troops and guard against the enemy.

古文：宋虽造衅，止可自备。
现代文：宋朝虽然制造兵祸，只是自我防备就可以了。
English: Although the Song Dynasty created military disasters, it was enough to be self-prepared.

古文：若不忍小忿以勤远略，恐或乘之，不能支也。 
现代文：不忍受小的愤恨来尽力考虑得远些，恐怕有人利用这个机会，就不能支持了。 
English: I am afraid that if someone takes advantage of this opportunity, I will not be able to support it.

古文：不纳。
现代文：不采纳。
English: Chuseok did not accept his request.

古文：太原兵后阙食，革移粟七万石以济之。
现代文：太原战后缺粮，革调七万石粟来接济他们。
English: Taiyuan was short of grain after the war, and 70,000 koku of millet was sent to help them.

古文：二年，宣差粘割梭失至河东，于是晚禾未熟，牒行省耕毁清野。
现代文：兴定二年，宣差粘割梭失至河东，这时晚稻没有成熟，下文书到行省将农作物耕毁清理收藏，使敌人抢不到粮食。
English: In the second year of Xingding, Xuanzha lost the viscous cutting shuttle to the east of the river. At this time, the late rice was not mature, and the next document went to the province to destroy the crops and clean up the collection, so that the enemy could not grab the grain.

古文：革奏： 今岁雨泽及时，秋成可待。
现代文：革上奏 ：今年雨水及时，秋收可待。
English: After the rain: This year's rain came just in time, and the autumn harvest is ready.

古文：如令耕毁，民将不堪。 
现代文：如令耕毁，百姓将无法承受。 
English: If the farmland is destroyed, the people will not be able to bear it.

古文：诏从革奏。
现代文：诏令接受革的意见。
English: The edict accepted the opinion of the leather.

古文：十月，平阳被围，城中兵不满六千，屡出战，旬日间伤者过半。
现代文：十月，平阳被围，城中兵不满六千，屡次出战，十天内伤者过半。
English: In October, Pingyang was besieged, with less than six thousand soldiers in the city. They repeatedly went out to fight, and more than half of them were injured within ten days.

古文：征兵吉、隰、霍三州，不时至。
现代文：征调吉、隰、霍三州兵，没按时到。
English: Conscripted soldiers from the three states of Ji, Handan and Huo did not arrive on time.

古文：裨将李怀德缒城出降，兵自城东南入。
现代文：副将李怀德缒城出降，敌军从城东南攻入。
English: The vice-commander, Li Huai De, surrendered and the enemy invaded from the southeast of the city.

古文：左右请革上马突围出，革叹曰： 吾不能保此城，何面目见天子！
现代文：左右请革上马突围出去。革叹道 ：我不能保此城，有何面目见天子？
English: Left and right, please get on your horses and break out.The Ge sighed, "I can't protect this city, what kind of face does the Son of Heaven have?"

古文：汝辈可去矣。 
现代文：你们这些人可以离开了。 
English: You people can leave.

古文：乃自杀。
现代文：于是自杀。
English: He killed himself.

古文：赠尚书右丞。
现代文：追封尚书右丞。
English: He was posthumously awarded the posthumous title of Shoshuu-jo.

