古文：○哲宗一哲宗宪元继道显德定功钦文睿武齐圣昭孝皇帝，讳煦，神宗第六子也，母曰钦圣皇后朱氏。
现代文：哲宗宪元继道显德定功钦文睿武齐圣昭孝皇帝，名煦，宋神宗第六个儿子，母亲是钦圣皇后朱氏。
English: Zhezong Xianyuan was the sixth son of Emperor Song Shenzong, who was the successor of Emperor Dao Xiande Dinggong, Emperor Qin Wenrui, Emperor Wuqi and Emperor Shenzhaoxiao. His mother was the Qinsheng Empress Zhu.

古文：熙宁九年十二月七日己丑生于宫中，赤光照室。
现代文：熙宁九年十二月七日，生于皇宫，当时红光照室。
English: Xi Ning was born on December 7th, 9th year, in the imperial palace, at that time the red light illuminated the room.

古文：初名佣，授检校太尉、天平军节度使，封均国公。
现代文：初名墉，授给检校太尉、天平军节度使，封为均国公。
English: His first name was Shun, and he was awarded the title of kengyo taifu (school inspector captain) and tenpyo military governor, as well as the title of hongokukong (provincial governor).

古文：元丰五年，迁开府仪同三司、彰武军节度使，进封延安郡王。
现代文：元丰五年，升为开府仪同三司、彰武军节度使，进封为延安郡王。
English: In the fifth year of Yuanfeng, he was promoted to the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong and the festival envoy of Zhangwu Army, and was crowned the king of Yan'an County.

古文：七年三月，神宗宴群臣于集英殿，王侍立，天表粹温，进止中度，宰相而下再拜贺。
现代文：元丰七年三月，神宗在集英殿宴请大臣们，哲宗当时侍立在旁，外表纯粹温和，举止合乎礼仪制度，宰相以下官员拜贺两次。
English: In March of the 7th year of the Genpo era, Shinso held a banquet for ministers at Shueiden. Tetsuzo was standing next to him at the time. His appearance was pure and gentle, and his behavior conformed to the etiquette system. Officials from the prime minister down bowed twice.

古文：八年二月，神宗寝疾，宰相王珪乞早建储，为宗庙社稷计，又奏请皇太后权同听政，神宗首肯。
现代文：元丰八年二月，神宗卧病不起，宰相履睛求早立太子，为国家大计考虑，又奏请皇太后权同听政，神宗点头批准同意。
English: In February of the eighth year of the Yuan Feng, when Shenzong was bedridden with illness, the prime minister asked for the crown prince to be crowned as soon as possible, considering the overall plan for the country. He also asked the empress dowager to listen to politics, and Shenzong nodded his approval.

古文：三月甲午朔，皇太后垂帘于福宁殿，谕珪等曰： 皇子性庄重，从学颖悟。自皇帝服药，手写佛书，为帝祈福。 
现代文：三月一日，皇太后在福宁殿垂帘听政，诏谕巨圭等人说： 皇子赵煦生性庄重，学习聪颖敏悟，自神宗皇帝生病服药，他手写佛书，为神宗皇帝祈求天福降临。 
English: On March 1st, the empress dowager came to listen to the government at the Fu Ning Palace, and the edict of the great Gui and others said: The prince Zhao Xing Sheng was dignified, learned cleverly, and took medicine when the Emperor Shenzong was ill. He hand-wrote a Buddhist book and prayed for the Emperor Shenzong to be blessed.

古文：因出以示珪等，所书字极端谨，珪等称贺，遂奉制立为皇太子。
现代文：于是拿出来给巨盖等人看，所书写的字迹极为端正严谨，巨盖等人道贺，于是奉制立赵煦为皇太子。
English: So he took it out to show it to Juguai and the others. The handwriting was extremely neat and precise, and Juguai and the others congratulated him. So the emperor made Zhao Jun the crown prince.

古文：初，太子宫中常有赤光，至是光益炽如火。
现代文：当初，太子东宫中常有红光环绕，到这时红光更加炽烈如火。
English: At the beginning, there was often a red glow around the East Palace of the Prince, and by this time the red glow was more intense and fiery.

古文：戊戌，神宗崩，太子即皇帝位。
现代文：三月初五，神宗逝世，太子即皇帝位。
English: On the fifth day of the third month, Shinso died, and the crown prince became emperor.

古文：己亥，大赦天下常赦所不原者。
现代文：初六，大赦全国包括一般性赦免时得不到原谅者。
English: Sixth, the national amnesty includes those who are not pardoned in the general amnesty.

古文：群臣进秩，赐赉诸军。
现代文：大臣们升官进爵，赏赐各军。
English: The ministers were promoted to knighthoods, and the armies were rewarded.

古文：遣使告哀于辽。
现代文：派遣使臣到辽朝发丧。
English: Sending envoys to Liao Dynasty to mourn.

古文：白虹贯日。
现代文：白色虹贯穿天空。
English: A white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：庚子，尊皇太后曰太皇太后，皇后曰皇太后，德妃朱氏曰皇太妃。
现代文：初七，尊皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为皇太后，德妃朱氏为皇太妃。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the revered empress dowager became the grand empress dowager, the empress dowager became the empress dowager, and the German princess Zhu became the imperial princess.

古文：命宰臣王珪为山陵使。
现代文：命令宰臣巨圭为神宗山陵使。
English: He ordered the vice-minister, Kogui, to be the envoy to the Shinzō Mausoleum.

古文：甲寅，以群臣固请，始同太皇太后听政。
现代文：二十一日，因大臣们再三请求，始同太皇太后听政。
English: On the twenty-first day, due to the repeated requests of the ministers, the Empress Dowager and the Grand Empress Dowager began to listen to the government.

古文：己未，赐叔雍王颢、曹王頵赞拜不名。
现代文：三月二十六日，赐给叔父雍王赵颖、曹王茜页朝拜时赞礼不称姓名的特权。
English: On March 26th, the uncle of Yong Wang Zhao Ying and Cao Wang Xizhe was given the privilege of praising without naming.

古文：令中外避太皇太后父遵甫名。
现代文：命令朝廷内外回避太皇太后父亲遵甫的名字。
English: He ordered that the name of the Grand Empress Dowager's father, Junpo, be avoided inside and outside the Imperial Court.

古文：诏边事稍重者，枢密院与三省同议以进。
现代文：下诏比较重要的边事，枢密院与三省共同商议进献朝廷。
English: He decreed that the Privy Council and the three provinces should jointly discuss and submit to the imperial court more important side issues.

古文：庚申，尚书左仆射、郇国公王珪进封岐国公。
现代文：二十七日，尚书左仆射、旬卜国公下辛进封为岐国公。
English: On the 27th, Shoshu's second-in-command, Shunbu, was enthroned as the ruler of Gifu.

古文：颢进封扬王，頵为荆王，并加太保。
现代文：赵颖进封为扬王，茜页进封为荆王，都加给太保职衔。
English: Zhao Ying's investiture as Yang Wang and Xi Zhe's investiture as Jing Wang were both given the title of Tai Bao.

古文：弟宁国公佶为遂宁郡王，仪国公佖为太宁郡王，成国公俣为咸宁郡王，和国公似为普宁郡王。
现代文：弟弟宁国公赵估为遂宁郡王，仪国公赵泌为大宁郡王，成国公赵误为咸宁郡王，和国公赵似为普宁郡王。
English: His younger brother, Ning Guo Gong Zhao, is estimated to be the king of Suining County, Yi Guo Gong Zhao Zhao is the king of Danying County, Cheng Guo Gong Zhao is mistakenly the king of Xianning County, and Guo Guo Zhao seems to be the king of Puning County.

古文：高密郡王宗晟、汉东郡王宗瑗、华原郡王宗愈、安康郡王宗隐、建安郡王宗绰并为开府仪同三司。
现代文：高密郡王赵宗晨、汉东郡王赵宗缓、华原郡王赵宗愈、安康郡王赵宗隐、建安郡王赵宗绰都为开府仪同三司。
English: King Zhao Zongchen of Gaomi County, King Zhao Zongxiao of Hantong County, King Zhao Zongyu of Hua Yuan County, King Zhao Zongyin of Ankang County, and King Zhao Zongqiu of Jian'an County are the three departments of Kaifu Yi Tong.

古文：太师、潞国公文彦博为司徒，济阳郡王曹佾为太保，特进王安石为司空，余进秩，赐致仕服带、银帛有差。
现代文：太师、潞国公文彦博为司徒，济阳郡王曹情为太保，特进王安石为司空，其余官员升官进爵，赐退休、服带、银帛不等。
English: The Grand Master and the governor of Shandong Province, Fumihiko Bo, was appointed as a tutor, the governor of Jiyang County, Wang Cao Rong, was appointed as a tutor, the special envoy, Wang Anshi, was appointed as a tutor, and the rest of the officials were promoted to the rank of knight, and were given retirement, uniforms, and silver badges.

古文：辛酉，诏颜子、孟子配享孔子庙庭。
现代文：二十八日，下诏以颜子、孟子配享孔子庙庭。
English: On the 28th, it was decreed that Yan Zi and Men Zi would share the Confucius Temple garden.

古文：夏四月丙寅，初御紫宸殿。
现代文：夏四月初三，初到紫哀垣。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of summer, I came to Shiorigaki for the first time.

古文：辛未，蠲元丰六年以前逋赋。
现代文：初八，免除元丰六年以前拖欠的赋税。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Yuanfeng was exempted from tax arrears up to six years ago.

古文：甲戌，加李乾德同中书门下平章事，董毡检校太尉。
现代文：十一日，加给李乾德同中书门下平章事职衔，董毡为检校太尉。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Qiande was given the title of the second-highest-ranking official in the Chinese Academy of Letters, and Dong Hao was promoted to the rank of inspector.

古文：诏曰： 先皇帝临御十有九年，建立政事以泽天下，而有司奉行失当，几于烦扰，或苟且文具，不能布宣实惠。
现代文：下诏说： 先皇帝神宗统治十九年，建立政事，惠泽天下，而有关部门奉行失当，几乎陷人烦扰人民的境地，或者苟且偷安，徒具空文，没能传布实行皇上的实惠。
English: The following edict said: The former emperor Shenzong ruled for nineteen years, established government affairs, and benefited the whole world, while the relevant departments pursued improperly, almost got into the situation of annoying the people, or stole the peace, used empty words, and failed to spread the implementation of the emperor's benefits.

古文：其申谕中外，协心奉令，以称先帝惠安元元之意。 
现代文：在此重申，朝廷内外同心同德，奉行命令，从而使行为举措符合先帝神宗惠安人民的意愿。 
English: Here, I would like to reiterate that both inside and outside the Imperial Court are of the same mind and follow the order, so that the behavior measures are in line with the wishes of the people of Huian, the former Emperor Shenshu.

古文：乙亥，诏以太皇太后生日为坤成节。
现代文：十二日，下诏以太皇太后生日为坤成节。
English: On the 12th, it was announced that the Empress Dowager's birthday would be celebrated as Kuncheng Festival.

古文：丁丑，召吕公著侍读。
现代文：十四日，召吕公著为侍读。
English: On the 14th, he summoned Lyu Gongzhu to read for him.

古文：谕枢密、中书通议事都堂。
现代文：诏谕枢密院、中书省交好，议事都堂。
English: The Privy Council and the Chinese Ministry of Education and Culture were given diplomatic relations, and a meeting hall was built.

古文：诏遵先帝制，遣官察举诸路监司之法。
现代文：下诏遵循先帝神宗制度，派遣官员察举各路监司之法。
English: The following edict follows the previous emperor's Shinshu system and dispatches officials to investigate the methods of supervisors of each road.

古文：庚辰，吕惠卿遣兵入西界，破六砦，斩首六百余级。
现代文：十七日，吕惠卿派兵进人西界，攻破六寨，斩首级六百多。
English: On the 17th, Lü Huixing sent troops into the Western Regions, breaking through the Six Villages and beheading more than six hundred people.

古文：辛己，遣使以先帝遗留物遗辽国及告即位，甲申，水部员外郎王谔非职言事，坐罚金。
现代文：十八日，派遣使臣把先帝神宗的遗留物送给辽朝，以及报告哲宗即位的消息。二十一日，水部员外郎王愕超越职权范围议事，被处以罚金。
English: On the 18th, envoys were dispatched to bring the remains of the former Emperor Shinso to the Liao Dynasty, and to report the news of Tetsuzo's accession to the throne. On the 21st, the member of the Ministry of Water Affairs, Wai Lang Wang Appa, exceeded the scope of his duties and was fined.

古文：丙戌，以蕃官高福战死，录其子孙。
现代文：二十三日，因蕃官高福战死，录用他的子孙。
English: On the 23rd, due to the death of eunuch Gao Fu, his children and grandchildren were hired.

古文：丁亥，复蠲旧年逋赋。
现代文：二十四日，又免除原来拖欠的赋税。
English: On the 24th, the original tax arrears were waived.

古文：五月丙申，诏百官言朝政阙失。
现代文：五月初四，下诏百官议论朝政缺失。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, hundreds of officials gathered to discuss the inadequacy of the imperial government.

古文：资政殿学士司马光过阙，入见。
现代文：资政殿学士司马光经过朝廷朝见皇上。
English: Sima Guang, the Scholar of the Palace of Councillors, went through the Imperial Court to see the Emperor.

古文：丁酉，群臣请以十二月八日为兴龙节。
现代文：初五，太臣们请求以十二月八日为兴龙节。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the ministers requested that December 8 be designated as the Dragon Festival.

古文：壬寅，城熙、兰、通远军，赐李宪、赵济银帛有差。
现代文：初十，在熙、兰、通远军筑城，赐给李宪、赵济银帛不等。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the troops of Xi, Lan and Tongyuan built cities, and gave Li Xian and Zhao Ji silver ingots.

古文：甲辰，作受命宝。
现代文：十二日，制作 受命宝 。
English: On the 12th, production of "Treasure of the Mandate" began.

古文：丙午，京师地震。
现代文：十四日，京城发生地震。
English: On the 21st, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：复置辽州。
现代文：重新设置辽州。
English: Re-establish Liaozhou.

古文：庚戌，王珪薨。
现代文：十八日，巨盖逝世。
English: On the eighteenth day, the giant died.

古文：改命蔡确为山陵使。
现代文：改命蔡确为神宗山陵使。
English: Cai Zhengyi was appointed as the envoy to the Shensong Mausoleum.

古文：丙辰，赐礼部奏名进士、诸科及第出身四百六十一人。
现代文：二十四日，赐礼部奏名进士、诸科及第出身四百六十一人。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, four hundred and sixty-one people from all disciplines and all walks of life were awarded the title of "Ceremonial Musicians of the Ministry of Ceremonies."

古文：戊午，以蔡确为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，韩缜为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎，章惇知枢密院，司马光为门下侍郎。
现代文：二十六日，任命蔡确为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，韩填为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎，章为知枢密院，司马光为门下侍郎。
English: On the 26th, Cai Ji was appointed as Sho Sho's left-hand servant and junior footman, Han Du as Sho Sho's right-hand servant and junior footman, Zhang as Privy Councilor, and Sima Guang as junior footman.

古文：六月庚午，赐楚州孝子徐积绢米。
现代文：六月初八，赐楚州孝子徐积绢米。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, he gave the Chuzhou filial son Xu Jizhong rice.

古文：丁亥，诏中外臣庶许直言朝政阙失、民间疾苦。
现代文：二十五日，下诏：朝廷内外臣民允许直言朝政缺失和民间疾苦。
English: On the 25th, the following edict was issued: subjects inside and outside the imperial court were allowed to speak frankly about the lack of imperial government and the suffering of the people.

古文：秋七月戊戌，以资政殿大学士吕公著为尚书左丞。
现代文：秋七月初六，任命资政殿大学士吕公著为尚书左承。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the autumn, he appointed Lu Gongzhu, a scholar of the University of the House of Councillors, as his successor.

古文：诏府界、三路保甲罢团教。
现代文：下诏开封府界、三路保甲废除团结教阅。
English: The following edict opened the prefectural boundary and abolished the three-way guarantee.

古文：丙午，辽人来吊祭。
现代文：十四日，辽朝派使臣来吊丧祭奠。
English: On the 14th, the Liao Dynasty sent envoys to pay their respects.

古文：丙辰，白虹贯日。
现代文：二十四日，一道白色虹贯穿天空。
English: On the 30th, a white rainbow covers the sun.

古文：吏部侍郎熊本奏归化侬智会异同，坐罚金。
现代文：吏部侍郎熊本奏归化侬智会异同，被处以罚金。
English: Kumamoto So, a waiter in the clerk's office, was punished with a fine.

古文：罢沅州增修堡砦。
现代文：罢除沉州增修堡寨。
English: Removing Shenzhou and building a new fortress.

古文：八月乙丑，诏按察官所至，有才能显著者以名闻。
现代文：八月初四，下诏：按察官所到之处，有才能显著者，把名字报到朝廷。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month, the following edict was issued: According to where the procurator went, those with outstanding talents should report their names to the imperial court.

古文：己巳，镇江军节度使韩绛进开府仪同三司。
现代文：初八，镇江军节度使韩绛升为开府仪同三司。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the Zhenjiang Military Festival promoted Han Qi to the third division of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：癸酉，遣使贺辽主生辰、正旦。
现代文：十二日，派遣使臣祝贺辽主生日、正旦。
English: On the 12th, envoys were dispatched to congratulate Liao on his birthday, Zhengdan.

古文：乙亥，以供奉王英战死葭芦，录其子。
现代文：十四日，因供奉官王英在霞芦战死，录用他的儿子。
English: On the 14th, Wang Ying, a tributary official, died in battle in Xiahu, and his son was hired.

古文：九月戊戌，以神宗英文烈武圣孝皇帝之谥告于天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：九月初七，把神宗的溢号英文烈武圣孝皇帝告知天地、宗庙、社翟。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month of the year, he announced to heaven and earth, the patriarchal temple, and the community the name of the Shinshu Sect in English, "Rebellious Emperor Shengxiao."

古文：己亥，上宝册于福宁殿。己酉，遣使报谢于辽。
现代文：初八，在福宁殿奉上宝册。十八日，派遣使臣回访辽朝。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, a treasure book was presented to him at the Funing Palace. On the 18th day, he sent an envoy to pay a return visit to the Liao Dynasty.

古文：冬十月甲子，夏国遣使进助山陵马。
现代文：冬十月初三，夏国派遣使臣进助山陵马。
English: On the 3rd day of the 10th month of winter, Xia sent envoys to assist Shanlingma.

古文：癸酉，诏仿《唐六典》置谏官。
现代文：十二日，下诏仿照塘六典设置谏官。
English: On the twelfth day, the following edict set up eunuchs in imitation of Tang Six Classic.

古文：丁丑，令侍从各举谏官二人。
现代文：十六日，命令侍从官分别推举谏官二名。
English: On the 16th, he ordered his attendants to separately nominate two eunuchs.

古文：诏监察御史兼言事，殿中侍御史兼察事。
现代文：下诏监察御史兼言事，殿中侍御史兼察事。
English: Under the imperial edict, the inspector of history is also a speaker, and the attendant of history in the palace is also an inspector.

古文：罢义仓。
现代文：废罢义仓。
English: Abandoned warehouse.

古文：己卯，诏均宽民力，有司或致废格者，监司、御史纠劾之。
现代文：十八日，下诏：均宽民力，有关部门或废除了规定的标准，监司、御史纠察弹勃。
English: On the 18th, the following edict was issued: the relevant departments may have abolished the prescribed standards, and the supervisors and historians picketed.

古文：河决大名。
现代文：黄河在大名决口。
English: The Yellow River flows through the mouth of Daming.

古文：乙酉，葬神宗皇帝于永裕陵。
现代文：二十四日，葬神宗皇帝于永裕陵。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Shenzong was buried in Yongyu Mausoleum.

古文：丙戌，罢方田。
现代文：二十五日，废罢方田法。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the ban on farmland law was abolished.

古文：以夏国主母卒，遣使吊祭。
现代文：因夏国主母亲逝世，派遣使臣吊丧祭奠。
English: Due to the death of Lord Xia's mother, envoys were dispatched to pay their respects.

古文：十一月癸巳，诏按问强盗，欲举自首者毋减。
现代文：十一月初三，下诏审查讯问强盗，想举报自首者不要减罪。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the examination and interrogation of robbers will begin. Those who want to report and surrender should not reduce their crimes.

古文：丁酉，祧翼祖，祔神宗于太庙，庙乐曰《大明之舞》。
现代文：初七，祭祀翼祖，在太庙附祭神宗神主，庙乐称为伏明之舞。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Winged Ancestors are worshipped. In the main temple, there is also a shrine dedicated to the Shinto deity, and the temple music is called the Fuming Dance.

古文：辛丑，减两京、河阳囚罪一等，杖已下释之，民缘山陵役者蠲其赋。
现代文：十一日，两京、河阳囚犯减罪一等，杖刑以下释放，百姓因山陵服役者免除赋税。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the first-class prisoners in Beijing and Heyang were pardoned and released with less than cane punishment, and the people who served in the military were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：己酉，辽遣使贺即位。
现代文：十九日，辽朝派遣使臣来祝贺哲宗即皇帝位。
English: On the 19th, the Liao Dynasty sent envoys to congratulate Zhezong on his accession to the throne.

古文：十二月壬戌，于阗进狮子，诏却之。
现代文：十二月初二，于闻进贡狮子，下诏拒却。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, Yu Wen paid tribute to the lion and refused to do so.

古文：开经筵，讲《鲁论》，读《三朝宝训》。罢《太学保任同罪法》。
现代文：开经筵，讲噜沦，读三朝宝训》，废罢汰学保任同罪念。
English: Reading the sutras, talking about the fall of the Han Dynasty, reading the Three Dynasties and Three Kingdoms, and abandoning the practice of learning and preserving one's position are all sins.

古文：丙寅，夏人以其母遗留物、马、白驼来献。
现代文：初六，夏国以其母遗留物、马、白驼来进献朝廷。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, Xia Guo brought his mother's leftovers, a horse and a white camel, to present to the imperial court.

古文：辛未，左仆射蔡确、右仆射韩缜并迁秩、加食邑，扬王颢、荆王頵并为太傅。
现代文：十一日，左仆射蔡确、右仆射韩填都进官加爵，扬王赵颖、荆王茜弼卜为太傅。
English: On the 11th day, the left-hand servant, Cai Jizhen, and the right-hand servant, Han Ziling, were both promoted to the rank of peer, and Yang Wang Zhao Ying and Jing Wang Qian Bo were promoted to taifu.

古文：壬申，章惇、司马光等进秩有差。
现代文：十二日，章、司马光等进官不等。
English: On the 12th, Zhang, Sima Guang and others were promoted.

古文：申戌，罢后苑西作院。
现代文：十四日，废罢后苑西作院。
English: On the 14th, the West Garden Hospital was built after the abolition.

古文：乙亥，诏执政、侍臣讲读。
现代文：十五日，下诏执政、侍臣讲读。
English: On the fifteenth day, the imperial edict was issued, and the attendants began to read it.

古文：戊寅，罢增置铸钱监十有四。
现代文：十八日，废罢增置铸钱监十四。
English: On the 18th, the strike was abolished and 14 new money supervisors were appointed.

古文：乙酉，辽遣萧睦等来贺正旦。
现代文：二十五日，辽朝派遣萧睦等来祝贺新春。
English: On the 25th, the Liao Dynasty sent Xiao Mutu and others to congratulate the New Year.

古文：是岁，日有五色云者六。
现代文：这一年，太阳表面六次出现五种颜色的云彩。
English: This year, five-colored clouds appeared on the surface of the sun six times.

古文：高丽、大食入贡。
现代文：高丽、大食来进贡。
English: Goryeo pays tribute with lavish meals.

古文：元祐元年春正月庚寅朔，改元。
现代文：元元年春正月初一，改元。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 11th month of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13

古文：丙午，录在京囚，减死罪以下一等，杖罪者释之。
现代文：十七日，讯察记录京城囚犯，死罪以下囚犯减罪一等，杖刑罪犯释放。
English: On the 17th, the information inspection recorded the prisoners in Beijing, the prisoners with the death penalty or less were reduced to the first class, and the criminals with the cane were released.

古文：丁未，诏回赐高丽王鞍马、服带、器币有加。
现代文：十八日，下诏回赐高丽王鞍马、服带、器币。
English: On the 18th day of the month, the king of Goryeo gave him a pommel horse, a sash, and money.

古文：罢陕西、河东元丰四年后凡缘军兴添置官局。
现代文：废罢陕西、河东元丰四年以后所有因兴兵添置的官局。
English: Abolish all the bureaucracies in Shaanxi and Hedong Yuanfeng that have been added due to the rise of the military after four years.

古文：丙辰，久旱，幸相国寺祈雨。
现代文：二十七日，长久干早，到相国寺祈祷降雨。
English: On the 27th, after a long dry morning, I went to Shokoku-ji Temple to pray for rain.

古文：立神宗原庙。
现代文：在神宗正庙外别立一庙。
English: Don't build a temple outside the main temple of the Shinshu sect.

古文：戊午，甘露降。
现代文：二十九日，降甘露。
English: On the 29th, the dew began to fall.

古文：二月辛酉，以河决大名，坏民田，民艰食者众，诏安抚使韩绛振之。
现代文：二月初二，因黄河在大名决口，毁坏民田，百姓缺食者众多，下诏安抚使韩绛贩济灾民。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, because the Yellow River broke through the Daimyo and destroyed the people's fields, there were many people who were short of food.

古文：乙丑，修《神宗实录》。
现代文：初六，修撰件申宗实录。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, the actual record of the petition was written.

古文：丁卯，诏左右侍从各举堪任监司者二人，举非其人有罚。
现代文：初八，下诏左右侍从官分别推举可以担任监司者二名，被推举的人不符合要求，推举者论罪。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the attendants on both sides of the imperial edict separately nominated two people who could serve as supervisors. The person nominated did not meet the requirements, and the nominator was convicted.

古文：庚午，禁边民与夏人为市。
现代文：十一日，严禁边民与夏国贸易。
English: On the 11th, it was strictly forbidden for border residents to trade with Xia Guo.

古文：辛未，董毡卒，以其子阿里骨袭河西军节度使、邈川首领。
现代文：十二日，董毡去世，任命他的儿子阿里骨承继河西军节度使的职衔，担任邀川首领。
English: On the 12th, Dong Xuan passed away and appointed his son, Ali, to succeed to the title of the Hexi Military Festival Envoy and serve as the leader of Yingchuan.

古文：庚辰，夏人入贡。
现代文：二十一日，夏国来进贡。
English: On the 21st, Xia Guo came to pay tribute.

古文：辛巳，刑部侍郎蹇周辅坐变盐法落职。
现代文：二十二日，刑部侍郎赛周辅因变换盐法获罪，被解除官职。
English: On the 22nd, Sai Zhou Fu, a constable of the Criminal Investigation Department, was found guilty of changing the salt method and was dismissed from his post.

古文：闰月庚寅，蔡确罢。
现代文：闰二月初二，蔡确被罢免。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, Cai Ji was dismissed.

古文：以司马光为尚书左仆射、门下侍郎。
现代文：任命司马光为尚书左仆射、门下侍郎。
English: He appointed Sima Guang as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man and subordinate attendant.

古文：诏韩维、吕大防、孙永、范纯仁详定役法。
现代文：下诏韩维、吕大防、孙永、范纯仁详细商定役法。
English: In the following, Han Wei, Lv Dago, Sun Yong and Fan Chunren agreed in detail on the method of playing.

古文：壬辰，以吕公著为门下侍郎。
现代文：初四，任命吕公著为门下侍郎。
English: In his fourth year, he appointed Lü Gongzhu as his junior attendant.

古文：丙午，守尚书右丞李清臣为尚书左丞，试吏部尚书吕大防为尚书右丞。
现代文：十八日，守尚书右承李清臣为尚书左承，试吏部尚书吕大防为尚书右承。
English: On the 18th, Li Qingchen, the right-hand successor of Shangshu, became the left-hand successor of Shangshu, and Ludao, the right-hand successor of Shangshu, became the right-hand successor of Shangshu.

古文：白虹贯日。
现代文：一道白色虹贯穿天空。
English: A white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：丁未，群臣上太皇太后宫名曰崇庆，殿曰崇庆寿康；皇太后宫曰隆祐，殿曰隆祐慈徽。
现代文：十九日，大臣们敬上太皇太后宫名称为崇庆，殿名为崇庆寿康；皇太后宫为隆，殿名为隆慈徽。
English: On the 19th, the ministers paid their respects to the Grand Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager.

古文：庚戌，赐于阗国王服带、器币。
现代文：二十二日，赐给于闻国王服带、器币。
English: On the 22nd, he gave King Huan a belt and money.

古文：辛亥，章惇罢。
现代文：二十三日，章被罢免。
English: On the 23rd, Zhang was dismissed.

古文：甲寅，诏侍从、御史、国子司业各举经明行修、可为学官者二人。
现代文：二十六日，下诏侍从、御史、国子司业分别举荐通晓经典、行为端正可以担任学官者二人。
English: On the 26th day of the following month, the courtier, the historian, and the secretary of state recommended two people who were familiar with the classics and behaved well, respectively, to serve as scholars.

古文：乙卯，以吏部尚书范纯仁同知枢密院事。
现代文：二十七日，任命吏部尚书范纯仁为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 27th, Shangshu Fan Chunren, the head of the personnel department, was appointed to the Tongzhi Privy Council.

古文：丙辰，掩京城暴骸。
现代文：二十八日，掩埋京城暴露在外的尸体。
English: On the 28th, the bodies of those who were exposed in the capital were buried.

古文：罢诸州常平管勾官。
现代文：废罢各州常平管勾官。
English: Repeal the ban on the appointment of Changping officials in each state.

古文：三月辛未，诏毋以堂差冲在选已注官。
现代文：三月十四日，下诏不要用政事堂直接奏注差遣官吏挤压在选已注官吏。
English: On March 14th, the following edict was issued: "Don't use the direct election of officials by the State Council to squeeze officials who have already been elected."

古文：置诉理所，许熙宁以来得罪者自言。
现代文：设置诉理所，允许熙宁以来获罪者自己陈诉。
English: Set up a prosecution office to allow those who have been convicted since Xining to make their own complaints.

古文：命太学公试，司业、博士主之，如春秋补试法。
现代文：命令太学公试，由司业、博士主考，如同春秋补试法。
English: Taigaku public examinations were ordered to be conducted by the department of education and doctoral examinations, just like the spring and autumn supplementary examinations.

古文：癸酉，置开封府界提点刑狱一员。
现代文：十六日，设置开封府界提点刑狱一员。
English: On the 16th, it was decided to set up a penal colony in Kaifeng Prefecture.

古文：乙亥，罢熙河兰会路经制财用司。
现代文：十八日，废罢熙河兰会路经制财用司。
English: On the 18th, the Department of Finance and Economic Affairs was abolished.

古文：己卯，复广济河辇运。
现代文：二十二日，恢复广济河举运物资。
English: On the 22nd, the movement of goods on the Guangji River was resumed.

古文：辛巳，诏民间疾苦当议宽恤者，监司具闻。
现代文：二十四日，下诏应当商议讨论宽缓抚恤的民间疾苦，由监司逐条上报。
English: On the 24th, the following edict was issued that the discussion on easing the hardships of the people should be discussed, and it was reported by the Supervision Department one by one.

古文：以程颐为崇政殿说书。
现代文：任命程颐为崇政殿说书。
English: The story of the appointment of Cheng Yu to the Palace of Supreme State Power.

古文：乙酉，许职事官带职。
现代文：二十八日，允许职事官带职。
English: On the 28th, officials were allowed to take their posts with them.

古文：夏四月己丑，韩缜罢。
现代文：夏四月初二，韩填被罢免。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, Han Ji was dismissed.

古文：辛卯，诏诸路旱伤蠲其租。
现代文：初四，下诏各路早灾免除田租。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the year, the emperor decreed that all areas would be exempted from land rent.

古文：壬辰，以旱虑囚。
现代文：初五，因早灾讯视记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, due to the early disaster, the status of the recorded prisoner is regarded as the highest.

古文：癸巳，王安石薨。
现代文：初六，王安石逝世。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, Wang Anshi passed away.

古文：辛丑，诏执政大臣各举可充馆阁者三人。
现代文：十四日，下诏执政大臣分别推举可以担任馆阁者三人。
English: On the 14th, the minister-in-charge separately nominated three people who could serve as cabinet ministers.

古文：壬寅，以吕公著为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎，文彦博平章军国重事。
现代文：十五日，任命吕公著为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎，文彦博为平章军国重事。
English: On the 15th, Lü Gongzhu was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man and Shao and Zhong Shuxu's equerry, and Fumihiko Bo was appointed as the military governor of Pingzhang.

古文：乙巳，诏户部裁冗费，著为令。
现代文：十八日，下诏户部裁减冗费，著为令。
English: On the 18th, the Ministry of the Interior issued an order to reduce redundancy costs.

古文：李宪等以用兵失利，为刘挚所劾，贬秩奉祠。
现代文：李宪等因用兵失利被刘挚弹勃，贬降官职，主管宫祠。
English: Li Xian and others were beaten up by Liu Zhiqin for failing to use soldiers, demoted from their official posts, and put in charge of the palace shrine.

古文：辛亥，扬王颢、荆王頵并特授太尉。
现代文：二十四日，扬王赵颖、荆王茜页都特授太尉。
English: On the 24th, Yang Wang Zhao Ying and Jing Wang Xizhe were both promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：诏遇科举，令升朝官各举经明行修之士一人，俟登第日与升甲。
现代文：下诏：遇科举考试时，命令升朝官分别推荐精通经典、行为端正之士一人，等到登第日升甲。
English: The following edict: In the case of the imperial examinations, order the promotion officer to recommend one person who is proficient in classics and behaves properly, and wait until the first day of promotion.

古文：罢谒禁之制。
现代文：罢除渴禁之制。
English: Abolition of the prohibition of alcohol.

古文：知诚州周士隆抚纳溪洞民一千三百余户，赐士隆银帛。
现代文：诚州知州周士隆抚纳溪洞民户一千三百多户，朝廷赐给周士隆银帛。
English: The imperial court gave Zhou Shilong silver ingots to more than 1,300 households in Naxi-dong, Chizhou, Chizhou.

古文：癸丑，定六曹郎官员数。
现代文：二十六日，确定六曹郎官人数。
English: On the 26th, the number of six sergeants was determined.

古文：五月丁巳朔，以资政殿大学士韩维为门下侍郎。
现代文：五月初一，任命资政殿大学士韩维为门下侍郎。
English: On the first day of May, Han Wei, a member of the House of Councillors, was appointed as an attendant.

古文：罢诸路重禄，复熙宁前旧制。
现代文：罢除各路重禄法，恢复熙宁以前旧制。
English: Repeal the method of re-awarding bonuses, and restore the old system before Xining.

古文：庚申，夏人来贺即位。
现代文：初四，夏国派人来祝贺哲宗即位。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Xia Guo sent someone to congratulate Zhezong on his accession to the throne.

古文：壬戌，诏侍从、台官、监司各举县令一人。
现代文：初六，下诏侍从、台官、监司分别举荐县令一人。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the attendant, the Taiwan official, and the superintendent separately recommended one county magistrate.

古文：戊辰，命程颐同修立国子监条制。
现代文：十二日，命令程颐同修立国子监条制。
English: On the 12th, he ordered Cheng Rong to establish a system of provincial son supervision.

古文：己巳，幸扬王、荆王第，官其子九人。癸酉，复左、右天厩坊。
现代文：十三日，恢复左右天厩坊。
English: On the 13th, Tianmaifang on the left and right was restored.

古文：壬午，诏文彦博班宰相之上。
现代文：二十六日，下诏文彦博班位在宰相之上。
English: On the 26th, Fumihiko Hiroshige was promoted to the position of prime minister.

古文：六月甲辰，置《春秋》博士。
现代文：六月十八日，设置春秋》经博士。
English: On June 18th, the Spring and Autumn Festival was set up.

古文：吕惠卿落职，分司南京、苏州居住。
现代文：吕惠卿被解职，受到处罚，分司南京，居住苏州。
English: Lü Huiqing was dismissed from his post, punished, transferred to Nanjing, and resided in Suzhou.

古文：戊申，以富弼配享神宗庙庭。
现代文：二十二日，以富弼配享神宗庙庭。
English: On the 22nd, they enjoyed the Shinshu temple garden with rich strawberries.

古文：庚戌，太白昼见。
现代文：二十四日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 27th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：甲寅，诏正风俗，修纪纲，勿理隐疵细故。
现代文：二十八日，下诏端正风俗，整修纲纪，不要在小小弊端上纠缠不清。
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued to rectify customs and discipline, and not to get entangled in minor defects.

古文：复置通利军。
现代文：重新设置通利军。
English: Re-establish the Tongli army.

古文：程颐上疏论辅养君德。
现代文：程颐上疏议论辅养君德。
English: On the subject of helping to cultivate virtue, there is a lot of talk in Chengdu.

古文：秋七月丁巳，置检法官。
现代文：秋七月初二，设置检法官。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, the procuratorate was established.

古文：辛酉，设十科举士法。
现代文：初六，设十科举士法。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, a ten-subject examination system was established.

古文：刘恕同修《资治通鉴》，未沾恩而卒，诏官其子。
现代文：刘恕同修馈治通鉴，没有得到恩赏就逝世了，下诏授给他儿子官职。
English: Liu Shou, who passed away without receiving any reward, gave his son an official post.

古文：乙丑，夏国主秉常卒。
现代文：初十，夏国主秉常逝世。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Emperor Xia died.

古文：庚午，夏国遣使贺坤成节。
现代文：十五日，夏国派遣使臣来祝贺坤成节。
English: On the 15th, Xia sent envoys to congratulate Kuncheng.

古文：八月辛卯，诏常平依旧法，罢青苗钱。
现代文：八月初六，下诏实行原来的常平法，罢除青苗法。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, the lower edict implemented the original Changping Law and abolished the Young Seedlings Law.

古文：壬辰，封弟偲为祁国公。
现代文：初七，封弟弟赵为祁国公。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, Feng's younger brother, Zhao, became the Duke of Shandong.

古文：甲午，占城国遣使入贡。
现代文：初九，占城国派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the state of Zhancheng sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：壬子，日傍有五色云。
现代文：二十七日，太阳旁出现五种颜色的云彩。
English: On the 27th, a five-colored cloud appeared next to the sun.

古文：磁州谷异垄同穗。
现代文：磁州稻谷异垄同穗。
English: The magnetic state of rice paddies has different ridges and the same ears.

古文：九月丙辰朔，司马光薨。
现代文：九月初一，司马光逝世。
English: On September 1, Sima Guang passed away.

古文：己未，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：初四，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 11th day, the ceremony was held at the Jingling Palace.

古文：辛酉，大享明堂，以神宗配，赦天下。
现代文：初六，大享明堂，以神宗配享，赦免全国。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the junior high school year, Myeongdong was granted a nationwide amnesty.

古文：丁卯，试中书舍人苏轼为翰林学士、知制诰。
现代文：十二日，试中书舍人苏轼为翰林学士、知制浩。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Su Yao, a junior high school student, was awarded the title of Hanlin Baccalaureate and Zhizhe Hao.

古文：己卯，张璪罢。
现代文：二十四日，张被罢免。
English: On the 24th, Zhang was removed from office.

古文：冬十月丙戌，改衍圣公为奉圣公。
现代文：冬十月初二，改衍圣公为奉圣公。
English: In winter, on the second day of October, Shingon was changed to Bong Shingon.

古文：庚寅，太白昼见。
现代文：初六，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 25th, a very white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：壬辰，夏人来告哀。
现代文：初八，夏国派人来报丧。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Xia Guo sent someone to report the death.

古文：庚子，遣使吊祭。
现代文：十六日，朝廷派遣使臣到夏国吊丧祭奠。
English: On the 16th, the Imperial Court dispatched envoys to Natsu to pay their respects.

古文：十一月戊午，以尚书左丞吕大防为中书侍郎，御史中丞刘挚为尚书右丞。
现代文：十一月初四，任命尚书左承吕大防为中书侍郎，御史中承刘挚为尚书右承。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month, the left successor of Shangshu, Lyu Dabao, was appointed as the attendant of the middle secretary, and the right successor of Shangshu, Liu Jing, was appointed as the successor of the middle secretary.

古文：乙亥，于阗国遣使入贡。
现代文：二十一日，于闻国派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, envoys were sent from Wen to pay tribute.

古文：庚辰，蠲盐井官溪钱。
现代文：二十六日，免除盐井官溪钱。
English: On the 26th, it exempted the Yantai Guanxi money.

古文：十二月庚寅，诏将来服除，依元丰三年故事，群臣勿上尊号。
现代文：十二月初六，下诏：将来服丧期满，依照元丰三年确定的典制，大臣们不要奉上尊号。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, the following edict was issued: In the future, when the period of mourning is over, in accordance with the formal system determined in the third year of the Yuanfeng era, ministers should not be given honorary titles.

古文：戊戌，华州郑县小敷谷山崩。
现代文：十四日，华州郑县小敷谷山崩。
English: On the 14th, there was a landslide in Koshiki Valley, Zheng County, Huazhou.

古文：戊申，诏以冬温无雪，决系囚。
现代文：二十四日，下诏因冬季温暖没有降雪，处理关押的囚犯。
English: On the 24th, due to the warm winter and lack of snow, the Lower Court of the People's Procuratorate had to deal with the detained prisoners.

古文：是岁，河北、楚、海诸州水。
现代文：这一年，河北及楚州、海州等地发生水灾。
English: This year, floods occurred in Hebei, Chuzhou, and Haizhou.

古文：二年春正月乙丑，封秉常子乾顺为夏国主。
现代文：元二年春正月十二日，封秉常儿子乾顺为夏国主。
English: On the twelfth day of the first month of the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Feng Bingsong's son, Qian Shun, became the ruler of Xia.

古文：戊辰，诏举人程试，主司毋得于《老》、《庄》、《列子》书命题。
现代文：十五日，下诏：科举考试的试卷，主考官不得在老开、《庄予、烦叮开书中命题。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the following edict was issued: for the examination papers of the imperial examinations, the chief examiner must not open the propositions in the old, "Zhuoyu" and "Zhuyu" books.

古文：辛巳，诏苏辙、刘分攵编次神宗御制。
现代文：二十八日，下诏苏辙、文做编撰神宗御制。
English: On the 28th, the imperial edict of the Sui Dynasty and the imperial edict of the Shinshu Dynasty were issued.

古文：白虹贯日。
现代文：一道白色虹贯穿天空。
English: A white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：二月丁亥，遣左司谏朱光庭使河北，振民被灾者。
现代文：二月初四，派遣左司谏朱光庭出使河北，贩济遭受灾害的民户。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, Zhu Guangting, Left Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, was dispatched to Hebei Province to help the disaster-stricken households.

古文：诏施、黔、戎、泸等州保甲监司免岁阅。
现代文：下诏施、黔、戎、沪等州保甲监司免除每年教阅。
English: According to the following edict, the supervisors of the State Armor Maintenance Departments of Shih, Handan, Rong and Shanghai are exempted from teaching and reading every year.

古文：丁酉，加赐于阗国金带、锦袍、器币。
现代文：十四日，加赐于闻国金带、锦袍、器币。
English: On the 14th, a gold belt, a gold robe, and coins were given to Wenguo.

古文：己亥，命吏部选人改官，岁以百人为额。
现代文：十六日，命令吏部选人改官每年限定一百人。
English: On the 16th, it was ordered to limit the number of officials selected by the Ministry of Personnel to change positions to one hundred people each year.

古文：辛丑，诏陕西、河东行策应牵制法。
现代文：十八日，下诏陕西、河东实行策应牵制法。
English: On the 18th, Shaanxi and Hedong promulgated the implementation policy of the containment law.

古文：是月，代州地震。
现代文：这个月，代州发生地震。
English: This month, there was an earthquake in Daizhou.

古文：三月壬戌，太皇太后手诏，止就崇政殿受册。
现代文：三月初十，太皇太后亲书诏书，只在崇政殿接受封册。
English: On the 10th day of the 3rd month, the empress dowager herself issued an imperial edict, which could only be sealed at the Sui Seongjeon Palace.

古文：戊辰，诏中外侍从岁举郡守各一人。
现代文：十六日，诏令中外侍从官每年举荐郡守各一人。
English: On the 16th, the imperial edict ordered the Chinese and foreign attendants to recommend one county governor each year.

古文：令御史台察民俗奢僭者。
现代文：命令御史台核察民俗奢侈无度者。
English: ordered the History Channel to investigate the extravagant folklorist.

古文：夏人遣使入谢。
现代文：夏国派遣使臣答谢宋朝。
English: Xia sent an envoy to thank the Song Dynasty.

古文：癸酉，奉安神御于景灵宫宣光殿。
现代文：二十一日，恭敬安置神宗神主在景灵宫宣光殿。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Shinshu shinju was respectfully placed in the Senko-den Hall of the Keihin-gu Shrine.

古文：庚辰，诏内侍省供奉官以下百人为额。
现代文：二十八日，下诏内侍省供奉官以下限定一百人。
English: On the 28th, a decree was issued limiting the number of officials from the Ministry of the Interior to 100 people.

古文：夏四月丙戌，交阯入贡。
现代文：夏四月初五，交趾来进贡。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of summer, cross your fingers to get tribute.

古文：丁亥，鬼章子结龌龊寇洮东。
现代文：初六，鬼章的儿子结丽凝攻打姚东。
English: In the sixth grade of junior high school, Jingzhang's son, Jie Li, attacked and beat Yao Dong.

古文：戊子，虑囚。
现代文：初七，讯视记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 23rd, the criminal status of the prisoner was investigated.

古文：己丑，诏太师文彦博十日一议事都堂。
现代文：初八，下诏太师文彦博每十天到政事堂一次商议国事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the next Daishi, Fumihiko, came to the Seiji-do Hall once every ten days to discuss national affairs.

古文：辛卯，诏： 冬夏旱，海内被灾者广，避殿减膳，责躬思过，以图消复。 
现代文：初十，下诏：冬夏干早，全国受灾范围广，决定不上殿，减少饮食，自责思过，以图消灭灾异，恢复正常。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued: In view of the early onset of winter and summer and the wide range of disaster-affected areas across the country, it was decided not to go to the temple, reduce diet, and self-condemn, in order to eliminate disasters and restore normalcy.

古文：丁酉，以四方牒诉上尚书者，或冤抑不得直，令御史分察之。
现代文：十六日，因全国各地讼诉到尚书省，有的冤屈得不到昭雪，命令御史分别核察。
English: On the 16th, due to lawsuits from all over the country to Shangshu Province, some grievances could not be resolved, and ordered the governor to inspect them separately.

古文：己亥，太皇太后以旱权罢受册礼。
现代文：十八日，太皇太后因早灾暂罢受册礼。
English: On the 18th, the great empress dowager postponed her enrollment ceremony due to an early disaster.

古文：癸卯，雨。
现代文：二十二日，降雨。
English: On the 22nd, it rained.

古文：乙丑，以徐州布衣陈师道为亳州司户参军。
现代文：乙丑日，任命徐州布衣陈师道为毫州司户参军。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd lunar month, Xuzhou Buyi Chen Shidao was appointed as the leader of the milling state to join the army.

古文：丁未，复制科。
现代文：二十六日，恢复制科。
English: On the 26th, the exam system was restored.

古文：戊申，御殿复膳。
现代文：二十七日，上殿听政，恢复饮食。
English: On the 27th, he returned to the palace to listen to the government and resume his diet.

古文：李清臣罢。
现代文：李清臣被罢免。
English: Li Qingcheng was removed from office.

古文：五月癸丑，夏人围南川砦。
现代文：五月初二，夏军围攻南川寨。
English: On the second day of May, Xia's army besieged Nanchuanzhai.

古文：丁卯，以刘挚为尚书左丞，兵部尚书王存为尚书右丞。
现代文：十六日，任命刘挚为尚书左承，兵部尚书王存为尚书右承。
English: On the 16th, Liu Zhen was appointed as the left successor of Shangshu, and Wang Cun of the Military Department was appointed as the right successor of Shangshu.

古文：壬申，于阗入贡。
现代文：二十一日，于闻来进贡。
English: On the twenty-first day, Yu Wen came to pay tribute.

古文：丁丑，诏御史官阙，御史中丞、翰林学士、两省谏议大夫以上杂举。
现代文：二十六日，下诏：御史官缺，御史中承、翰林学士、两省谏议大夫以上官员混合举荐。
English: On the 26th, the following edict was issued: There was a shortage of officials in charge of history, and officials above the rank of middle-ranking official in charge of history, scholar of Hanlin, and doctors of the two provinces were recommended.

古文：六月辛丑，以安焘知枢密院事。
现代文：六月初二，任命安煮为知枢密院事。
English: On the 2nd day of the 6th month of the year, he was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：壬寅，有星如瓜出文昌。
现代文：二十二日，有星像瓜一样出现在文昌宫内。
English: On the 22nd, a star appeared in Wenchang Palace like a melon.

古文：丙午，邈川首领结药来降，授三班奉职。
现代文：二十六日，邀川首领结药来降附，授给他三班奉职。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, he invited the leader of the Sichuan Province to come down and give him a three-shift duty.

古文：秋七月辛亥，诏户部修《会计录》。
现代文：秋七月初二，下诏户部修撰会计录。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, the household department revised the accounting record.

古文：韩绛以司空致仕。
现代文：韩绛以司空衔退休。
English: Han Min retired with the rank of flight attendant.

古文：夏人寇镇戎军。
现代文：夏军攻打镇戎军。
English: The summer army attacked the town army.

古文：诏府界、三路教阅保甲。
现代文：下诏开封府界、三路教阅保甲。
English: The next edict is to open the prefectural boundary, and the three-way teaching and reading is guaranteed.

古文：复课利场务亏额科罚。
现代文：恢复课利场务亏损科罚制度。
English: The system of levying interest and imposing a fine for business losses will be reinstated.

古文：丙辰，罢诸州数外岁贡。
现代文：初七，罢除各州额外岁贡。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of the year, the extra tax of each state was abolished.

古文：戊午，以辽萧德崇等贺坤成节，曲宴垂拱殿，始用乐。
现代文：初九，因辽朝萧德崇等人祝贺坤成节，哲宗在垂拱殿设宴款待，开始用乐。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, because Xiao De Chong and others from the Liao Dynasty congratulated Kuncheng Festival, Zhe Zong held a banquet at the Hanging Arch and began to play.

古文：庚申，进封李乾德为南平王。
现代文：十一日，进封李乾德为南平王。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Qiande became the king of Nanping.

古文：辛酉，改诚州为渠阳军。
现代文：十二日，改诚州为渠阳军。
English: On the 12th, Kaisheng Prefecture was taken over by the Quyang Army.

古文：辛未，韩维罢。
现代文：二十二日，韩维被罢免。
English: On the 22nd, Han Wei was removed from office.

古文：八月辛巳，程颐罢经筵，权同管勾西京国子监。
现代文：八月初二，程颐被罢免经筵职，暂为同管勾西京国子监。
English: On the second day of August, Cheng Yu was removed from his post and temporarily became the co-governor of the West Beijing State Children's Supervision.

古文：癸未，以西蕃寇洮、河，民被害者给钱粟，死者赐帛其家。
现代文：初四，因西蕃攻打姚、河一带，民受害者给钱粟，死者赐给他家庭帛。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, because of the attack of Xidi on Yao and He, the victims of the people gave money to the victims, and the dead gave him family money.

古文：诏复进纳人改官旧法。
现代文：恢复买官人四任十考改官旧法。
English: The old law of the four-term and ten-examination system for the promotion of officials will be restored.

古文：乙酉，命吕大防为西京安奉神宗御容礼仪使。
现代文：初六，命令吕大防为西京安奉神宗画像礼仪使。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he ordered Lü Dabao to serve as the ceremonial envoy for the worship of Shinto images in Xijing'an.

古文：庚寅，西南蕃遣人入贡。
现代文：十一日，西南蕃派人来进贡。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Nanxi Province sent people to collect tribute.

古文：癸巳，以夏国政乱主幼，强臣乙逋等擅权逆命，诏诸路帅臣严兵备之。
现代文：十四日，因夏国政治混乱，国主幼弱，强臣乙通等人擅权违命，下诏各路帅臣严格管理军队，防备不测。
English: On the 14th, due to the political turmoil in Xia, the ruler of the country was young and weak, and the strong minister Yitong and others disobeyed orders without authority.

古文：庚子，授西蕃首领心牟钦毡银州团练使，温溪心瓜州团练使。
现代文：二十一日，任命西蕃首领心牟钦毡为银州团练使，温溪心为瓜州团练使。
English: On the 21st, Xi'an leader Xin Mouqin was appointed as the training envoy for the Yinzhou group, and Wenxi Xin was appointed as the training envoy for the Guazhou group.

古文：辛丑，泾原言夏人寇三川诸砦，官军败之。
现代文：二十二日，径原报告说夏军攻打三川诸寨，官军打败他们。
English: On the 22nd, Jianyuan reported that the Xia army attacked the Mikawa villages, and the government army defeated them.

古文：丁未，岷州行营将种谊复洮州，执蕃酋鬼章青宜结。
现代文：二十八日，山民州行营将领种谊收复姚州，俘获蕃酋鬼章青宜结。
English: On the 28th, the general of the camp of Shanminzhou led the fraternity to recover Yaozhou, and captured the ghost of the chief of Yaozhou, Zhang Qingyi.

古文：冬十月壬午，奉安神宗御容于会圣宫及应天院。癸未，日有五色云。
现代文：九月初六，在大庆殿发布太皇太后册宝。初七，在文德殿发布皇太后、皇太妃册宝。初十，夏军攻打镇戎军。十八日，严禁私造金箔。冬十月初四，在会圣宫和应天院恭敬安置神宗画像。初五，太阳表面出现五种颜色的云彩。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, the treasures of the great empress dowager were released in Daqing Hall. On the 7th day of the 9th month, the treasures of the great empress dowager and the great empress dowager were released in Wende Hall. On the 10th day of the 9th month, the summer army attacked the town army. On the 18th day, it was strictly forbidden to illegally make gold foil. On the 4th day of the 10th month, the images of the Shinto religion were respectfully placed in the Holy Palace and Ying Tian Yuan. On the 5th day of the 10th month, the clouds of five colors appeared

古文：戊子，恭谢景灵宫。
现代文：初十，到景灵宫恭恭敬敬行礼。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, go to the Jingling Palace to pay respects.

古文：辛卯，减西京囚罪一等，杖已下释之。
现代文：十三日，西京囚犯减罪一等，杖刑以下释放。
English: On the 13th, the Saikyo prisoner received a first-class reduction of his sentence and was released with a cane sentence or less.

古文：己亥，西南龙、张蕃遣人入贡。
现代文：二十一日，西南龙蕃、张蕃派人来进贡。
English: On the twenty-first day, Southwest Longyan and Zhangye sent people to pay tribute.

古文：庚子，论复洮州功，种谊等迁秩、赐银绢有差。
现代文：二十二日，论收复姚州之功，种谊等人晋官加爵，赐给银帛不等。
English: On the 22nd, on the merits of recovering Yaozhou, the breeding friendship and other people were promoted to higher ranks and given silver medals.

古文：十一月丙辰，复置涟水军。
现代文：十一月初八，重新设置涟水军。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of November, the Surabaya Navy was re-established.

古文：庚申，献鬼章于崇政殿，以罪当死，听招其子及部属归以自赎。
现代文：十二日，把鬼章带到崇政殿，论罪当死，允许招其子及部属赎回。
English: On the twelfth day, he brought the ghost emblem to the Su Zheng Palace, pleaded guilty to death, and allowed his son and subordinates to redeem it.

古文：乙亥，大雪甚，民冻多死，诏加振恤，死无亲属者官瘗之。
现代文：二十七日，降大雪，百姓冻死者很多，下诏加以贩济抚恤，没有亲属的死者，官府替他埋葬。
English: On the 27th, heavy snow fell, and many people froze to death. The government decreed that they should be given a subsistence allowance, and those who had no relatives were buried by the government.

古文：罢内殿承制试换文资格。
现代文：罢除内殿承制试换文资格。
English: Withdrawal of the qualification for trial exchange of documents under the Naidensho system.

古文：丙子，决囚。
现代文：二十八日，处理囚犯。
English: On the 28th, the prisoners were disposed of.

古文：十二月乙酉，赐诸军及贫民钱。
现代文：十二月初七，赐给各军及贫民钱。
English: On the seventh day of the twelfth month, he gave money to the army and to the poor.

古文：丙戌，兴龙节，初上寿于紫宸殿。
现代文：初八，兴龙节，初次在紫哀殿祝寿。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month, the Dragon Festival, the first birthday celebration was held at the Purple Shrine.

古文：己丑，大寒，罢集英殿宴。
现代文：十一日，大寒，罢除在集英殿举行的宴会。
English: On the 11th day, due to the cold weather, the banquet held at Shueiden was cancelled.

古文：壬辰，兀征声延部族老幼万人渡河南，遣使廪食之，仍谕声延勿失河北地。
现代文：十四日，兀征声延部族老幼一万人渡过黄河南来，派遣使臣供给他们粮食吃，并且告谕声延不要放弃黄河北边的土地。
English: On the 14th, he conscripted 10,000 men, women and children of the Shenyang tribe to cross the Yellow River to the south, sent envoys to provide them with food, and told Shenyang not to give up the land north of the Yellow River.

古文：乙未，白虹贯日。
现代文：十七日，一道白色虹贯穿天空。
English: On the 18th, a white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：壬寅，颁《元祐敕令式》。
现代文：二十四日，颁布元救令式。
English: On the 24th, the form of the rescue order was issued.

古文：是冬，始闭汴口。
现代文：这年冬天，始闭汁口。
English: This winter, it began to close.

古文：三年春正月己酉朔，不受朝。
现代文：元三年春正月初一，不接受朝拜。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, morning worship was not accepted.

古文：庚戌，复广惠仓。
现代文：初二，恢复广惠仓。
English: On the second day of the new year, Guang Hui Cang was restored.

古文：己未，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：十一日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 11th day, the ceremony was held at the Jingling Palace.

古文：庚申，雪寒，发京西谷五十余万石，损其直以纾民。
现代文：十二日，降雪，寒冷，调出西京谷五十多万石，降价卖给百姓，以缓解急需。
English: On the 12th, with snowfall and cold weather, more than half a million koku of rice was brought from the West Jinggu Valley and sold to the people at a reduced price to alleviate the urgent need.

古文：辛酉，诏广南西路朱崖军开示恩信，许生黎悔过自新。
现代文：十三日，诏令广南西路朱崖军开示恩信，允许生黎悔过自新。
English: On the 13th, Zhu Yajun of West Guangnan Road was ordered to open a letter of gratitude, allowing Li Sheng to repent and reform.

古文：壬戌，罢上元游幸。
现代文：十四日，废罢上元节游赏享乐。
English: On the 14th, it is time to stop traveling and enjoy the Lantern Festival.

古文：壬申，阿里骨奉表诣阙谢罪，令边将无出兵，仍罢招纳。
现代文：二十四日，阿里骨奉表到朝廷谢罪，命令边将不出兵，并且停罢招纳叛降和百姓。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Ali Bon was sent to the imperial court to apologize for his crime, and ordered the governor not to fight, and to stop recruiting rebels and commoners.

古文：甲戌，决囚。
现代文：二十六日，处理囚犯。
English: On the 26th, the prisoners were disposed of.

古文：二月甲申，罢修金明池桥殿。
现代文：二月初七，罢修金明池桥殿。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month of the year, the reconstruction of the Kinmei Pond Bridge began.

古文：乙酉，德音：减囚罪一等，徒以下释之，工役权放一年，流民饥贫量与应副。
现代文：初八，颁布德音文告： 囚犯减罪一等，徒刑以下释放，工役暂放一年，流民饥贫者适当给予照顾。 
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the German pronunciation announcement was issued: prisoners were given first-class crime reduction, released under imprisonment, labor service was temporarily suspended for one year, and the displaced and poor were properly taken care of.

古文：丙戌，诏河东苦寒，量度存恤戍兵。
现代文：初九，下诏河东特别寒冷，根据情况适当慰问抚恤戍守士兵。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, it was particularly cold in the eastern part of Hebei Province. According to the situation, appropriate condolences and pensions were given to the soldiers stationed there.

古文：癸巳，罢春宴。
现代文：十六日，废罢春宴。
English: On the 16th, the spring banquet was cancelled.

古文：乙未，白虹贯日。
现代文：十八日，一道白色虹横贯天空。
English: On the 18th, a white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：辛丑，太白昼见。
现代文：二十四日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 28th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：乙巳，广东兵马监童政坐擅杀无辜，伏诛。
现代文：二十八日广乐兵马监童政因滥杀无辜被处以死刑。
English: On the 28th, Guangle Terracotta Warriors and Horses Supervisor Tong Zheng was sentenced to death for indiscriminate killing of innocent people.

古文：三月丙辰，韩绛薨。
现代文：三月初九，韩绛逝世。
English: On March 9th, Han Min passed away.

古文：丁巳，御集英殿策进士。
现代文：初十，到集英殿策试进士。
English: At the age of ten, he went to Shueiden to prepare for the entrance exam.

古文：戊午，策武举。
现代文：十一日，策试武举。
English: On the 11th day, the strategic military exercise began.

古文：己巳，赐礼部奏名进士、诸科及第出身一千一百二十二人。
现代文：二十二日，赐礼部奏名进士、诸科及第出身一千一百二十二人。
English: On the 22nd, the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies conferred honorary doctorates on 1,122 people from various disciplines and backgrounds.

古文：乙亥，夏人寇德静砦，将官张诚等败之。
现代文：二十八日，夏军攻打德靖寨，将官张诚等率军打败夏军。
English: On the 28th, the Xia army attacked Dejingzhai, and the army led by the general Zhang Cheng defeated the Xia army.

古文：夏四月戊寅，令诸路郡邑具役法利害以闻。
现代文：夏四月初二，命令各路郡县陈述役法利害报告朝廷。
English: On the 2nd day of the 4th month of the summer, he ordered all counties to report their interests to the imperial court.

古文：辛巳，以吕公著为司空、同平章军国事，吕大防为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，范纯仁为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
现代文：初五，任命吕公著为司空、同平章军国事，吕大防为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，范纯仁为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he appointed Lü Gongzhu as Siku, Tongping Zhangjun as the head of state affairs, Lü Dabao as Shangshu's left attendant and junior attendant, and Fan Chunren as Shangshu's right attendant and junior attendant.

古文：壬午，以观文殿学士孙固为门下侍郎，刘挚为中书侍郎，王存为尚书左丞，御史中丞胡宗愈为尚书右丞，户部侍郎赵瞻签书枢密院事。
现代文：初六，任命观文殿学士孙固为门下侍郎，刘挚为中书侍郎，王存为尚书左承，御史中承胡宗愈为尚书右承，户部侍郎赵瞻为签书枢密院事。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Sun Gu, a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, was appointed as a junior attendant, Liu Zhi as a junior attendant, Wang Cun as a junior attendant, Hu Zongya as a junior attendant, and Zhao Zhan as a junior attendant.

古文：癸巳，诏定职事官岁举升陟人数。
现代文：十七日，下诏确立职事官岁举升陆人数。
English: On the 17th, the next edict established the number of officials to be promoted each year.

古文：丁酉，阿里骨来贡。
现代文：二十一日，阿里骨来进贡。
English: On the 21st, Ali's bones came to pay tribute.

古文：庚子，诏天下郡城以地里置壮城兵额，禁勿他役。
现代文：二十四日，下诏全国郡城按地理范围来设置守城兵额，禁止另外服役。
English: On the 24th, it was decreed that the number of garrison soldiers should be set according to the geographical scope of county towns across the country, and it was forbidden to serve separately.

古文：五月癸亥，汉东郡王宗瑗薨。
现代文：五月十八日，汉东郡王赵宗缓逝世。
English: On May 18th, King Zhao Zong of Hantong County passed away.

古文：六月癸未，诏司谏、正言、殿中、监察御史，仿故事，以升朝官通判资序历一年者为之。
现代文：六月初八，下诏：司谏、正言、殿中、监察御史等官，依照惯例任命升朝官通判资序历一年者担任。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, the following edict was issued: The officials such as the chief priest, the chief adviser, the chief chamberlain, and the inspector general of history were to be appointed in accordance with the usual practice of appointing those who had been promoted to court officials according to the seniority order of the previous year.

古文：辛丑，夏人寇塞门砦。
现代文：二十六日，夏军攻打塞门寨。
English: On the 26th, Xia's army attacked Saimen Village.

古文：甲辰，五色云见。
现代文：二十九日，出现五种颜色的云彩。
English: On the 29th, clouds of five colors appeared.

古文：秋七月戊申，荆王頵薨。
现代文：秋七月初四，荆王茜页逝世。
English: Autumn On the fourth day of the seventh month, Jing Wang Xizhe passed away.

古文：戊辰夜，东北方明如昼，俄成赤气，中有白气经天。
现代文：二十四日夜，东北方向明亮如昼，不久变成红气，其中有白气经天。
English: On the night of the 24th, the northeast direction was bright as day, and soon turned red, with white gas passing through the sky.

古文：辛未，太白昼见。
现代文：二十七日，太白星白天显现。
English: On the 27th, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：癸酉，忠州言临江涂井镇雨黑黍。
现代文：二十九日，忠州报告说临江涂井镇降黑黍。
English: On the 29th, Chungju reported that Linjiang Tuiji Town fell into darkness.

古文：八月戊寅，阿里骨入贡。
现代文：八月初五，阿里骨来进贡。
English: On the fifth day of the eighth lunar month, Ali's bones came to pay tribute.

古文：己卯，进封扬王颢为徐王。
现代文：初六，进封扬王赵颖为徐王。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Yang Wang Zhao Ying was promoted to Xu Wang.

古文：辛巳，复置荆门军。
现代文：初八，重新设置荆门军。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the Jingmen Army was re-established.

古文：丙戌，罢吏试断刑法。
现代文：十三日，废罢吏试断刑法。
English: On the thirteenth day, the criminal law was tried and condemned.

古文：丁酉，渠阳蛮入寇。
现代文：二十四日，渠阳蛮攻打边境。
English: On the 24th, Quyang attacked the border.

古文：辛丑，降系囚罪一等，杖以下释之。
现代文：二十八日，关押囚犯减罪一等，杖刑以下释放。
English: On the 28th, the prisoner's crime was reduced to the first degree, and he was released with a cane sentence or less.

古文：九月庚申，禁宗室联姻内臣家。
现代文：九月十七日，禁止宗室与内臣家联姻。
English: On September 17th, it was forbidden for the head family to marry into the Naishin family.

古文：乙丑，阿里骨复迁职，加封邑。
现代文：二十二日，阿里骨又迁职，加封邑。
English: On the 22nd, Alibone was transferred to a new post and given an additional fiefdom.

古文：诏观察使以上给永业田。
现代文：下诏观察使以上官给永业田。
English: The lower edict of observation caused the higher officials to leave for Yeongyeon.

古文：丁卯，御集英殿策贤良方正能直言极谏科。
现代文：二十四日，到集英殿策试贤良方正能直言极谏科。
English: On the 24th, he went to the Shueiden Hall to test the virtuous side of Zheng Neng.

古文：十月丙戌，诏罢新创诸堡砦，废渠阳军。
现代文：十月十四日，下诏罢除新创建各寨堡，废除渠阳军。
English: On October 14th, the edict was issued abolishing the newly-established fortresses, and the Quyang Army was abolished.

古文：戊戌，复南、北宣徽院。
现代文：二十六日，恢复南、北宣徽院。
English: On the 26th, the South and North Xuanhuis were restored.

古文：十一月甲辰，遣吏部侍郎范百禄等行河。
现代文：十一月初二，派遣吏部侍郎范百禄等视察黄河。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, he dispatched Fan Bailu, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, to inspect the Yellow River.

古文：丁卯，大食麻啰拔国入贡。
现代文：二十五日，大食麻锣拔国来进贡。
English: On the 25th, Daishoku Mochi invited the country to pay tribute.

古文：诏岁以十月给巡城兵衣裘。
现代文：诏令每年十月供给巡守城市士兵衣裘。
English: The imperial edict provided the soldiers of the patrol city with clothing every October.

古文：十二月丁酉，渝州獠人寇小溪。
现代文：十二月二十五日，渝州撩人攻打小溪。
English: On December 25th, people in Yuzhou attacked the creek.

古文：壬寅，白虹贯日。
现代文：三十日，一道白色虹贯穿天空。
English: On the 30th, a white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：闰月癸卯朔，颁《元祐式》。
现代文：闰十二月初一，颁布元式。
English: On the first day of leap December, the Yuan Dynasty was promulgated.

古文：甲辰，范镇定铸律、度量、钟磬等以进，令礼部、太常参定。
现代文：初二，范镇确定铸律、度量、钟馨等献上。命令礼部、太常寺参酌制定。
English: On the second day of the freshman year, Fan Zhen decided to present the casting rules, measurements, bell charms, etc. He ordered the ritual department and Taizhoji Temple to participate in the formulation.

古文：戊申，减宰执赐予。
现代文：初六，减少给宰执官的赏赐。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, the reward given to the vice-chancellor will be reduced.

古文：庚申，置六曹尚书权官。
现代文：十八日，设置六曹尚书权官。
English: On the 18th, six Caoshangs were set up.

古文：丙寅，诏吏部详定六曹重复利害以闻。
现代文：二十四日，下诏吏部详细确定六曹重复利害报告朝廷。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the lower magistrate's department determined in detail that six Cao repeated the interest report to the imperial court.

古文：是岁，三佛齐、于阗、西南蕃入贡。
现代文：这年，三佛齐、于闻、西南蕃来进贡。
English: This year, Sanfo Qi, Yuwen, and Southwest Min came to pay tribute.

古文：天下上户部：主户二百一十三万四千七百三十三，丁二千八百五十三万三千九百三十四。客户六百一十五万四千六百五十二，丁三百六十二万九千八十三。
现代文：全国上报户部：主户二百一十三万四千七百三十三户，丁二千八百五十三万三千九百三十四口；客户六百一十五万四千六百五十二户，丁三百六十二万九千零八十三口。
English: Nationwide, the number of reported households was as follows: head households, 2,134,733, and households, 2,853,339,334; and customers, 6,154,652, and households, 3,629,083.

古文：断大辟二千九百一十五人。
现代文：判定死罪二千九百一十五人。
English: 2,915 people were sentenced to death.

古文：四年春正月壬申朔，不受朝，群臣及辽使诣东上阁门、内东门拜表贺。
现代文：元四年春正月初一，不受朝拜，大臣们及辽朝使臣到东上阎门、内东门上奏祝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the ministers and the Liao Dynasty envoys went to the East Shangyan Gate and the Inner East Gate to offer congratulations.

古文：丙子，宴辽使于紫宸殿。甲申，以夏人通好，诏边将毋生事。
现代文：初五，在紫哀殿宴请辽朝使臣。十三日，因夏国与朝廷通和讲好，诏令边将不要挑起事端。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, the envoys of the Liao Dynasty were invited to a banquet at the Purple Shrine. On the 13th day, because Xia and the imperial court were on good terms, the emperor ordered the generals not to stir up trouble.

古文：二月甲辰，吕公著薨。
现代文：二月初三，吕公著逝世。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, Lü Gongzhu passed away.

古文：庚戌，白虹贯日。
现代文：初九，一道白色虹贯穿天空。
English: On the ninth day of the first lunar month, a white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：乙卯，夏人来谢封册。
现代文：十四日，夏国派人来感谢朝廷授给的封册。
English: On the 14th, Xia Guo sent someone to thank the Imperial Court for the booklet.

古文：三月己卯，作浑天仪。
现代文：三月初八，制作浑天仪。
English: On the 8th day of the 3rd month, the Hunten instrument was made.

古文：胡宗愈罢。
现代文：胡宗愈被罢免。
English: Hu Zongyao was dismissed.

古文：丁亥，以不雨，罢春宴。
现代文：十六日，因不降雨废罢春宴。
English: On the 16th, the spring banquet was cancelled due to lack of rain.

古文：己丑，诏自今大礼毋上尊号。
现代文：十八日，诏令从今以后凡遇大礼不上尊号。
English: On the 18th, the imperial edict decreed that henceforth, the honorific would not be used in the event of a grand salute.

古文：辛卯，昼有流星出东方。
现代文：二十日，白天流星出现在东方。
English: On the 20th, a meteor appeared in the east during the day.

古文：癸巳，录囚。
现代文：二十二日，讯视记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 22nd, CCTV recorded the prisoner's criminal status.

古文：乙未，罢幸琼林苑、金明池。
现代文：二十四日，罢除到琼林苑、金明池观赏、游玩的计划。
English: On the 24th, the plan to visit Qionglin Garden and Jinming Pond was canceled.

古文：夏四月乙巳，吕大防等以久旱求罢，不允。
现代文：夏四月初五，吕大防等因长久干早请求罢职，没得到允准。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, Lv Dabao and others did not get permission to resign due to long working hours.

古文：丁未，曹佾薨。
现代文：初七，曹情逝世。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Cao Jie passed away.

古文：戊申，罢大礼使及奏告执政加赐。
现代文：初八，废罢明堂五使及大礼前奏告郊庙等执政官加赐。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the five envoys of the Abolition of the Ming Hall and the pre-ceremony report to the suburb temples and other consuls were given.

古文：戊午，立试进士四场法。
现代文：十八日，制定考试进士四场法。
English: On the 18th, a four-stage method for entering the examination was formulated.

古文：壬戌，弛在京牧地与民。
现代文：二十二日，在京城的牧马草地，弛禁给民。
English: On the 22nd, the horse pasture in Beijing was opened to the public.

古文：五月癸酉，诏自今侍读以三人为额。
现代文：五月初四，下诏从今以后侍读以三人为定额。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, the emperor decreed that from now on, there would be a quota of three attendants.

古文：中丞李常、侍御史盛陶坐不论蔡确，改官。
现代文：御史中承、侍御史盛陶因不论蔡确获罪，改官。
English: Due to the fact that Tsai was indeed found guilty, both Mishi Chuzo and Samurai Mishi Shengtao changed their posts.

古文：辛巳，贬观文殿学士蔡确为光禄卿。
现代文：十二日，贬观文殿学士蔡确为光禄卿。
English: On the 12th, Cai Zhengyi, a scholar of Confucianism, was awarded the title of Guangluqing.

古文：丁亥，复贬确为英州别驾、安置新州。
现代文：十八日，又贬蔡确为英州别驾，安置新州。
English: On the 18th, Cai Zhengyi was relegated to the second rank of Yingzhou and placed in Xinzhou.

古文：丁酉，于阗国来贡。
现代文：二十八日，于闻国来进贡。
English: On the 28th, they came to pay tribute in Wen.

古文：六月甲辰，范纯仁、王存罢。
现代文：六月初五，范纯仁、王存被罢免。
English: On June 5, Fan Chunren and Wang Cun were dismissed.

古文：丙午，以赵瞻同知枢密院事，户部尚书韩忠彦为尚书左丞，翰林学士许将为尚书右丞。
现代文：初七，任命赵瞻为同知枢密院事，户部尚书韩忠彦为尚书左承，翰林学士许将为尚书右承。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Zhao Zhan was appointed as the secretary of Tongzhi Privy Council, Han Tadahiko, the head of the household, was appointed as the left successor of Shangshu, and Hanlin Biao Xu was appointed as the right successor of Shangshu.

古文：丁未，夏国来贡。
现代文：初八，夏国来进贡。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Xia Guo came to pay tribute.

古文：癸丑，邈黎国般次泠移、四林栗迷等赍于阗国黑汗王及其国蕃王表章来贡。
现代文：十四日，邀黎国般次冷移、四林栗迷等带着于闻国黑汗王及本国蕃王上表进贡。
English: On the 14th, Li Guo was invited to pay tribute to the King of Black Sweat of Wen Guo and the King of Gong of his own country.

古文：秋七月丙子，诏复外都水使者。
现代文：秋七月初八，诏令恢复外都水使者。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the imperial edict restored the post of water envoy to the capital.

古文：丁丑，辽国使萧寅等来贺坤成节，曲宴垂拱殿。
现代文：初九，辽国使臣萧寅等来祝贺坤成节，在垂拱殿设宴款待。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, Liao envoy Xiao Yin and others came to congratulate Kuncheng on the festival, and a banquet was held in the Hanging Arch.

古文：庚辰，安焘以母忧去位。
现代文：十二日，安煮因遭母丧离职。
English: On the 12th, Ankhi resigned due to the death of his mother.

古文：八月壬寅，敕郡守贰以 四善三最 课县令，吏部岁上监司考察知州状。
现代文：八月初五，救令州郡正副长官以 四善三最 考课县令，吏部每年上报监司考察知州的情况。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month of the lunar month, the county executive and vice-governor of Zhuling County issued the county order of the four virtues and three virtues of the examination, and the personnel department reported to the supervision department every year to inspect the situation of Zhizhou.

古文：辛酉，太皇太后诏：今后明堂大礼，毋令百官拜表称贺。
现代文：二十四日，太皇太后下诏：今后明堂大礼，不要命令文武百官上奏祝贺。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the empress dowager issued an edict: In the future, do not order the civil and military officials to offer congratulations.

古文：九月戊寅，致斋垂拱殿。
现代文：九月十一日，在垂拱殿举行致斋礼。
English: On September 11th, a memorial service was held at the Hanging Arch.

古文：己卯，朝献景灵宫，辛巳，大飨明堂，赦天下，百官加恩，赐赍士庶高年九十以上者。
现代文：十二日，祭祀景灵宫。十四日，大祀明堂，赦免全国，文武百官加给恩赏，赏赐士庶年龄达到九十岁以上者。
English: On the twelfth day, a ceremony was held at the Jingling Palace. On the fourteenth day, a grand ceremony was held at the Ming Hall. The whole country was pardoned, and rewards were given to hundreds of civil and military officials, and those who reached the age of ninety and above were rewarded.

古文：乙酉，加赐韩缜、范纯仁器币有差。
现代文：十八日，加赐韩填、范纯仁器币不等。
English: On the 18th, Han Zhi and Fan Chunren ware coins were added.

古文：乙未，检举先朝文武七条，戒谕百官遵守。
现代文：二十八日，检举颁布前朝文武臣僚七条，告诫文武百官遵守。
English: On the 28th, the procuration issued seven articles to the imperial and military courtiers before the proclamation, and warned hundreds of civil and military officials to comply.

古文：冬十月辛丑，西南程蕃入贡。
现代文：冬十月初五，西南程蕃来进贡。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of winter, the tributes from the southwestern provinces arrived.

古文：丁未，龙蕃入贡。
现代文：十一日，龙蕃来进贡。
English: On the 11th day, Longyu came to pay tribute.

古文：戊申，翰林学士苏辙上《神宗御集》，藏宝文阁。
现代文：十二日，翰林学士苏辙呈上件申宗御集，藏在宝文阁。
English: On the 12th, Hanlin Scholar Su Ruts presented the above-mentioned Shenzong Imperial Collection, which was hidden in the treasure pavilion.

古文：癸丑，御迩英殿，讲官进讲《三朝宝训》。
现代文：十七日，到迩英殿，讲读官进讲任朝宝切卜。
English: On the seventeenth day, he went to the Yu Ying Hall and was lectured by Choho Cheb.

古文：十一月庚午，敕朝请大夫以下进士为左，余为右。
现代文：十一月初四，救令朝请大夫以下进士为左，余为右。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the 11th month, the relief order in the morning invited the doctors to the left, and the rest to the right.

古文：溪洞彭儒武等进溪洞布。
现代文：溪洞彭儒武等进贡溪洞布。
English: Xidong Peng Rongwu and others paid tribute to Xidong Bu.

古文：癸未，以孙固知枢密院事，刘挚为门下待郎，吏部尚书傅尧俞为中书侍郎。
现代文：十七日，任命孙固知枢密院事，刘挚为门下侍郎，吏部尚书傅尧俞为中书侍郎。
English: On the 17th, Sun Guzhi was appointed Privy Councillor, Liu Zhi as Under Secretary, and Shang Shufu of the Personnel Department as Senior Secretary.

古文：乙酉，有星色赤黄，尾迹烛地。
现代文：十九日，有赤黄颜色的星，尾迹照地。
English: On the 19th, a reddish-yellow star appeared, and its trail lit up the sky.

古文：己丑，太皇太后却元日贺礼，令百官拜表。
现代文：二十三日，太皇太后拒绝元日贺礼，命令百官呈上奏章。
English: On the 23rd, the empress dowager refused the New Year's greetings and ordered all officials to present their certificates.

古文：庚寅，章惇买田不法，降官。
现代文：二十四日，章买田犯法，降官。
English: On the 24th, Zhang Meitian violated the law and was demoted.

古文：辛卯，改发运、转运、提刑预妓乐宴会徒二年法。
现代文：二十五日，改发运使、转运使、提刑参加妓乐宴会徒二年法。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the two-year law of sending and transferring envoys, and punishing those who participate in prostitute banquets was revised.

古文：十二月庚子，辽使耶律常等贺兴龙节，曲宴垂拱殿。
现代文：十二月初四，辽朝使臣耶律常等人祝贺兴龙节，在垂拱殿设宴款待。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, the envoy of the Liao Dynasty, Ye Rujang, and others congratulated the Dragon Festival and held a banquet at the Hanging Arch.

古文：癸丑，更定朝仪二舞曰《威加四海》、《化成天下》。
现代文：十七日，改定朝仪二舞为威加四海、化成天朴。
English: On the 17th, the morning ceremony and two dances were changed to Weiga four seas and transformed into Tianpu.

古文：甲寅，减鄜延等路戍兵归营。
现代文：十八日，精减延等路戍兵，陆续回营。
English: On the 18th, the soldiers were reduced in number and sent back to camp one after another.

古文：戊午，以御史阙，令中丞、两省各举二人。
现代文：二十二日，因御史官缺，命令御史中承、两省官员分别荐举二人。
English: On the 22nd, due to a vacancy in the position of Imperial Historian, the Imperial Historian's junior successor and the officials of the two provinces were ordered to nominate two people respectively.

古文：是岁，夏国、邈黎、大食、麻啰拔国入贡。
现代文：这一年，夏国、邀黎、大食麻锣拔国来进贡。
English: In this year, Xia Guo, Zhaoli, and Daishu Mazuo were the first to pay tribute.

古文：五年春正月丁卯朔，御大庆殿视朝。
现代文：元五年春正月初一，哲宗到大庆殿临朝听政。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, Zhezong went to Daqing Palace to listen to politics.

古文：丁丑，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：十一日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 11th day, the ceremony was held at the Jingling Palace.

古文：二月丁酉，罢诸州、军通判奏举改官。
现代文：二月初二，罢除各州军通判奏举改官。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the military commissars of each state were removed from their posts.

古文：己亥，夏人归永乐所掠吏士百四十九人。
现代文：初四，夏国归还永乐陷没吏士一百四十九人。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, one hundred and forty-nine officials were returned to Yongle.

古文：庚子，加溪洞人田忠进等九十二人检校官有差。
现代文：初五，加给溪洞人田忠进等九十二人检校官不等。
English: On the fifth day of the new year, ninety-two inspectors, including Tian Zhongjin from Xidong, were added.

古文：辛丑，以旱罢，修黄河。
现代文：初六，因早灾罢修黄河。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, construction of the Yellow River was suspended due to an early disaster.

古文：癸卯，祷雨岳渎，罢浚京城壕。
现代文：初八，在岳读祈祷降雨，罢废修浚京城壕沟。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, pray for rain in Yueyue, abandon the waste and dredge the Beijing city trench.

古文：丁未，减天下囚罪，杖以下释之。
现代文：十二日，全国囚犯减罪，杖刑以下释放。
English: On the 12th, prisoners across the country had their sentences reduced and were released with a cane or less.

古文：庚戌，文彦博以太师充护国军、山南西道节度等使致仕，令所司备礼册命。
现代文：十五日，文彦博以太师衔担任护国军、山南西道节度使退休，命令有关部门备礼册命。
English: On the 15th, Wen Yanbo retired from the National Defense Force and the Shannan West Road Festival with the rank of division, and ordered the relevant departments to prepare a manual of etiquette.

古文：壬子，彦博乞免册礼，从之。
现代文：十七日，文彦博请求免行册礼，答应了他的请求。
English: On the 17th, Fumihiko requested to be excused from the ceremony, and his request was granted.

古文：甲子，宴饯文彦博于玉津园。
现代文：二十九日，在玉津园宴别文彦博。三月初一，赵瞻逝世。
English: On the 29th, he bid farewell to Wen Yanbo at a banquet in the Yutsun Garden. On the first day of March, Zhao Jun passed away.

古文：三月丙寅朔，赵瞻薨。丁卯，诏赐故孙觉家缗钱，令给丧事。
现代文：初二，诏令赐给已故孙觉家络钱，令给丧事。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict gave money to the deceased Sun Jue family and ordered a funeral.

古文：壬申，以韩忠彦同知枢密院事，翰林学士承旨苏颂为尚书左丞。
现代文：初七，任命韩忠彦为同知枢密院事，翰林学士承旨苏颂为尚书左承。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Han Tadahiko was appointed as the secretary of Tongzhi Privy Council, and Hanlin Scholar Shongzhi Susong was appointed as the successor of Shoshu Zuo.

古文：癸未，罢春宴。
现代文：十八日，废罢春宴。
English: On the 18th, the spring banquet was cancelled.

古文：壬辰，罢幸金明池、琼林苑。
现代文：二十七日，废罢到金明池、琼林苑观赏、游玩。
English: On the 27th, they went to Jinming Pond and Qionglin Garden to watch and play.

古文：夏四月癸卯，诏郑穆、王岩叟等同举监察御史二员。
现代文：夏四月初八，诏令郑穆、王岩雯等共同举荐监察御史二名。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month of the summer, Zheng Mu, Wang Yanwen and others jointly recommended two supervisors.

古文：甲辰，吕大防等以旱求退，不允。
现代文：初九，吕大防等因早灾请求退位，没有允准。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Lü Dafo and others requested to abdicate due to early disasters, but were not allowed to do so.

古文：丙午，孙固薨。
现代文：十一日，孙固逝世。
English: On the 11th day, Sun Gu passed away.

古文：癸丑，诏讲读官御经筵退，留二员奏对迩英阁。
现代文：十八日，诏令讲读官到经筵退，留二人奏对迩英阁。
English: On the 18th, the reader of the imperial edict came to the imperial retreat, and the two stayed to play against Zou Yingge.

古文：丁巳，诏以旱、避殿减膳，罢五月朔日文德殿视朝。
现代文：二十二日，下诏因早灾不上殿，减少饮食，罢除五月一日到文德殿临朝听政。
English: On the 22nd, due to the early disaster, the emperor did not go to the hall, reduced the diet, and cancelled the May 1st visit to the Winter Palace to listen to politics.

古文：辛酉，以保宁军节度使冯京为检校司空。
现代文：二十六日，任命保宁军节度使冯京为检校司空。
English: On the 26th day of the month, Feng Jing was appointed as the inspector of the school.

古文：五月壬申，诏差役法有未备者，令王岩叟等具利害以闻。
现代文：五月初八，诏令差役法有未完备的地方，命令王岩雯等条陈利害上报朝廷。
English: On the eighth day of the fifth month of the year, the Emperor issued an order to Wang Yanwen and other officials to report to the imperial court on the shortcomings of the law.

古文：乙亥，雨。
现代文：十一日，降雨。
English: On the 11th, it rained.

古文：己卯，御殿复膳。
现代文：十五日，上殿听政，恢复饮食。
English: On the fifteenth day, he went up to the palace to listen to the government and resumed his diet.

古文：六月辛丑，录囚。
现代文：六月初八，讯视记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, the status of prisoners was recorded by CCTV.

古文：癸亥，昼有五色云。
现代文：三十日，白天出现五种颜色的云彩。
English: On the 30th, clouds of five colors appeared in the daytime.

古文：七月壬申，泾原路经略司言：诸人违制典买蕃部田土，许以免罪，自二顷五十亩以下，责其出刺弓箭手及买马备边用各有差。
现代文：七月初九，径原路经略使报告说：违背制度规定典买蕃部田土的人，允许免罪，从二顷五十亩以下，责罚出刺弓箭手和买马不等，以备边防使用。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the lunar calendar, the pathfinder of the original road reported that those who violated the system regulations and bought land in the lower part of the country were allowed to be exempted from punishment, from two hectares to less than fifty mu, and the punishment ranged from stabbing archers to buying horses for use in border defense.

古文：乙酉，夏人来议分画疆界。
现代文：二十二日，夏国派人来商议划分疆界。
English: On the 22nd, Xia Guo sent people to discuss the division of the border.

古文：九月丁丑，诏复置集贤院学士。
现代文：九月十六日，诏令重新设置集贤院学士。
English: On September 16th, the Imperial Edict re-established the Jixian Academy.

古文：冬十月癸巳，罢提举修河司。
现代文：冬十月初二，废罢提举修河司。
English: On the second day of the first month of October in winter, the abolition of the nomination and the construction of the river section.

古文：丁酉，诏定州韩琦祠载祀典。
现代文：初六，诏令把定州的韩琦祠庙载于祀典。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict listed the Hanluo Ancestral Temple in Dingzhou in the ritual book.

古文：十二月辛卯朔，许将罢。
现代文：十二月初一，许将被罢免。
English: On the first day of December, Xu will be removed from office.

古文：安康郡王宗隐薨。
现代文：安康郡王赵宗隐逝世。
English: The king of Ankang County, Zhao Zongyin, passed away.

古文：丙辰，禁军大阅，赐以银楪、匹帛，罢转资。
现代文：二十六日，禁军举行大检阅，赐给银、匹帛，废罢转资。
English: On the 26th, the Forbidden Army held a grand review, awarded silver and gold medals, and abolished the ban on capital transfers.

古文：是岁，东北旱，浙西水灾。
现代文：这一年，东北发生早灾，浙西发生水灾。
English: This year, early disasters occurred in Northeastern China, and floods occurred in Western Zhejiang.

古文：赐宗室子授官者四十四人。
现代文：赐给宗室子授官者四十四人。
English: There are forty-four people who have been given the title of Sonomuro.

古文：断大辟四千二百六十有一。
现代文：判处死刑四千二百六十一人。
English: 4,261 people were sentenced to death.

古文：高丽、于阗、龙蕃、三佛齐、阿里骨入贡。
现代文：高丽、于闻、龙蕃、三佛齐、阿里骨来进贡。
English: Goryeo, Yuwen, Yongzheng, the Three Buddhas, and Alibone came to pay tribute.

古文：六年春正月辛酉朔，不受朝，群臣及辽使诣东上阁门、内东门拜表贺。
现代文：元六年春正月初一，不受朝拜，大臣们及辽朝使臣到东上阎门、内东门上奏祝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the ministers and envoys of the Liao Dynasty went to the East Shangyan Gate and the Inner East Gate to offer congratulations.

古文：癸酉，诏祠祭、游幸毋用羔。
现代文：十三日，诏令祠祭、游幸不用小羊。
English: On the 13th, it was decreed that no lambs would be used for the ancestral hall festival or the parade.

古文：二月辛卯，以刘挚为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎，龙图阁待制王岩叟签书枢密院事。
现代文：二月初二，任命刘挚为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎，龙图阁待制王岩雯为签书枢密院事。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, Liu Zhen was appointed as the right-hand man of Shang Shu and the attendant of Zhong Shu, and Wang Yanwen, the attendant of Longtu, was appointed as the secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：癸巳，以苏辙为尚书右丞，宗室士伣追封魏国公。
现代文：初四，任命苏轼为尚书右承，宗室赵士不见追封为魏国公。
English: In the fourth year of his junior high school, Su Shi was appointed as the rightful heir of Shang Shuxu, and his father's wife Zhao Shixing was posthumously appointed as Wei Guogong.

古文：庚子，拂箖国来贡。
现代文：十一日，拂韶国来进贡。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the tributes from Ashi Province began to arrive.

古文：丁丑，授阿里骨男溪邦彪篯为化外庭州团练使。
现代文：丁丑日，授给阿里骨儿子溪邦彪为宋朝教化达不到的庭州团练使。
English: On the day of Ding Jiu, Xi Bang Biao, the son of Ali Jian, was awarded the post of training envoy of the Tianzhou Reunions, which was beyond the reach of the Song Dynasty.

古文：三月癸亥，吕大防上《神宗实录》。
现代文：三月初四，吕大防呈上件申宗实录。
English: On the fourth day of March, Luda Defense submitted the above-mentioned application.

古文：己巳，御集英殿策进士。
现代文：初十，到集英殿策试进士。
English: On the 12th, he went to Shueiden to make a plan to enter the priesthood.

古文：庚午，策武举。
现代文：十一日，策试武举。
English: On the 11th day, the strategic military exercise began.

古文：癸酉，诏御史中丞举殿中侍御史二人，翰林学士至谏议大夫同举监察御史二人。
现代文：十四日，下诏：御史中承荐举殿中侍御史二人，翰林学士至谏议大夫一起举荐监察御史二人。
English: On the 14th, the following edict was issued: Two court attendants and two supervisors were recommended by the court historian, and two supervisors and two supervisors were recommended by the court historian, ranging from a scholar of Hanlin to a doctor of constitutional law.

古文：丙子，吕大防特授右正议大夫。
现代文：十七日，吕大防特授为右正议大夫。
English: On the 17th, Lv Dafo was promoted to the post of doctor of the right side.

古文：壬午，赐礼部奏名进士、诸科及第出身九百五十七人。
现代文：二十三日，赐礼部奏名进士、诸科及第出身九百五十七人。
English: On the 23rd, nine hundred and fifty-seven people from various disciplines and backgrounds were conferred the title of "Celebrant of the Song" of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：丁亥，罢幸金明池、琼林苑。
现代文：二十八日，废罢游赏金明池、琼林苑。
English: On the 28th, the Mingchi and Qionglin Yuan bounty tours were cancelled.

古文：夏四月乙未，复置通礼科。
现代文：夏四月初六，重新设置通礼科。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, the etiquette department was re-established.

古文：丙申，诏恤刑。
现代文：初七，诏令慎用刑法。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the imperial edict cautioned against the use of criminal law.

古文：辛丑，诏大臣堂除差遣，非行能卓异者不可轻授。仍搜访遗材，以备擢任。
现代文：十二日，下诏： 大臣由政事堂直接奏注差遣，若不是品行卓异、才能超众者不可轻易授给；继续搜罗寻访遗材，以备提拔。 
English: On the 12th, the following edict was issued: Ministers should be sent directly by the State Council, and if they are not outstanding in character and talent, they should not be easily awarded; continue to collect and search for relics to prepare for promotion.

古文：夏人寇熙河兰岷、鄜延路。
现代文：夏军攻打熙河兰崛路、延路。
English: Xia's army attacked Xihe Lanhui Road and Yan Road.

古文：壬寅，太白昼见。
现代文：十三日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 22nd, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：壬子，赐南平王李乾德袍带、金帛、鞍马。
现代文：二十三日，赐给南平王李乾德袍带、金帛、鞍马。
English: On the 23rd, he gave the Nanping King Li Qiande a robe belt, a golden scepter, and a pommel horse.

古文：五月己未朔，日有食之，罢文德殿视朝。
现代文：五月初一，日食，废罢到文德殿临朝听政。
English: On the first day of May, the day of the solar eclipse, I went to the Imperial Palace to listen to politics.

古文：庚辰，诏娶宗室女得官者，毋过朝请大夫、皇城使。
现代文：二十二日，下诏： 因娶宗室女得官者，不超过朝请大夫、皇城使。 
English: On the twenty-second day, the following edict was issued: Those who became officials due to marrying a female relative should not exceed the limit of inviting doctors and imperial envoys from the imperial court.

古文：丁亥，后省上《元祐敕令格》。
现代文：二十九日，中书后省呈上元救令格。
English: On the 29th, after the report, the province submitted a rescue plan.

古文：六月壬辰，录囚。
现代文：六月初四，讯视记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 4th of June, CCTV recorded the prisoner's criminal status.

古文：甲辰，置国史院修撰官。
现代文：十六日，设置国史院修撰官。
English: On the 16th, an editor of the National Academy of History was set up.

古文：乙卯，诏以田思利为银青光禄大夫，充溪洞都巡检。
现代文：二十七日，下诏任命田思利为银青光禄大夫，担任溪洞都巡检。
English: On the 27th, the next imperial edict appointed Tian Sili as the silver Qingguanglu doctor, and he served as the inspector of Xidongdu.

古文：秋七月癸亥，复张方平宣徽南院使致仕。
现代文：秋七月初六，恢复张方平宣徽南院使退休。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Zhang Fangping retired from the Southern Xuanhui Hospital.

古文：乙丑，复制置解盐使。
现代文：初八，恢复制置解盐使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the production and installation of desalination plants was resumed.

古文：己卯，振两浙水灾。
现代文：二十二日，贩济两浙水灾饥民。
English: On the 22nd, he sold food to the flood-stricken and starving people in Zhejiang.

古文：八月己丑，三省进纳后六礼仪制。
现代文：八月初二，三省进呈纳后六礼仪制。
English: On the second day of August, three provinces introduced the six-ceremony system.

古文：辛卯，诏御史台：臣僚亲亡十年不葬，许依条弹奏及令吏部检察。
现代文：初四，诏令御史台：臣僚亲人去世十年不葬，允许依照有关规定予以弹勃，并令吏部检举核察。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Emperor issued an imperial edict to the Imperial Historian: the relatives of ministers would not be buried for ten years after their death, and it was permitted to exhume them in accordance with the relevant regulations, and the Ministry of Personnel was ordered to investigate and inspect.

古文：己亥，改宗正属籍曰《宗藩庆系录》。
现代文：十二日，改宗正属籍为宗藩庆系录。
English: On the 12th, he changed his official religion and became a member of the Zonghanqing lineage.

古文：令文武臣出入京城门书职位、差遣、姓名及所往。
现代文：命令文武臣僚出人京城门书写职位、差遣、姓名及住所。
English: He ordered his courtiers to go to the Capital Gate to write their positions, assignments, names and addresses.

古文：己酉，修《神宗宝训》。
现代文：二十二日，修撰件申宗宝训》。
English: On the 22nd, the manuscript of the "Shenzong Treasure Sermon" was completed.

古文：癸丑，诏鄜延路都监李仪等以违旨夜出兵入界，与夏人战死，不赠官，余官降等。
现代文：二十六日，下诏：延路都监李仪等因违背命令，夜晚出兵进人西夏境内，与夏军作战，战死，不赠官，其余官吏降级。 
English: On the 26th, the following edict was issued: Because of disobeying orders, Yanlu Metropolitan Li Yi and others sent troops into the territory of Western Xia at night, fought with the Xia army, died in battle, officials were not awarded, and the remaining officials were demoted.

古文：乙卯，夏人寇怀远砦。
现代文：二十八日，夏军攻打怀远寨。
English: On the 28th, Xia's army attacked Huaiyuan Village.

古文：闰月壬戌，严饬陕西、河东诸路边备。
现代文：闰八月初六，命令陕西、河东各路严密准备边防。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, he ordered all roads in Shaanxi and Hedong to prepare for border defense.

古文：甲子，太白昼见。
现代文：初八，太白星白天显现。
English: On the 14th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：庚午，诏御史中丞举殿中侍御史二人，翰林学士、中书舍人、给事中举监察御史四人。
现代文：十四日，诏令御史中承举荐殿中侍御史二人，翰林学士、中书舍人、给事中举荐监察御史四人。
English: On the 14th, the imperial edict was issued to recommend two palace attendants, a scholar from Hanlin, a Chinese scholar, and four supervisors.

古文：壬申，太子太保致事张方平辞免宣徽使，不允。
现代文：十六日，太子太保致事张方平辞免宣徽使，没有允准。
English: On the 16th, the Crown Prince Taibo sent a message to Zhang Fang, saying that he was not allowed to proclaim the emblem.

古文：甲申，刑部侍郎彭汝砺与执政争狱事，自乞贬逐，诏改礼部侍郎。
现代文：二十八日，刑部侍郎彭汝砺与执政官争论诉讼案件，自请贬滴，诏令改为礼部侍郎。
English: On the 28th, Peng Ruxuan, the attendant of the criminal department, argued with the consul about the litigation case, and asked to be demoted, and the decree was changed to the attendant of the ceremonial department.

古文：九月丁亥，夏人寇麟、府二州。
现代文：九月初二，夏军攻打麟州、府州。
English: On the second day of September, Xia's army attacked Linzhou and Fuzhou.

古文：壬辰，诏州民为寇所掠，庐舍焚荡者给钱帛，践稼者振之，失牛者官贷市之。
现代文：初七，下诏：州民被夏军劫掠，庐舍被焚毁者，赐给钱帛，践踏庄稼者予以贩济，失掉耕牛者官府为之贷买。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued: the people of the prefecture were robbed by the Xia army, those whose homes were burned were given money, those who trampled on crops were sold, and those who lost cattle were bought by the government.

古文：癸巳，御集英殿策贤良方正能直言极谏科。
现代文：初八，到集英殿策试贤良方正能直言极谏科。
English: In the eighth year of his junior high school, he went to Shuei-den to test the virtuous side of his character.

古文：丁酉，御试方正王普等，迁官有差。
现代文：十二日，御试方正王普等迁官不等。
English: On the twelfth day, the test party Zheng Wang Pu and other officials were transferred.

古文：岁出内库缗钱五十万以备边费。
现代文：每年调出内库络钱五十万用作边费。
English: Every year, half a million rupees are transferred from the treasury to be used as border fees.

古文：甲辰，幸上清储祥宫。
现代文：十九日，到上清储样宫。
English: On the 19th, he went to the Shangqing Storage and Sample Palace.

古文：壬子，宫成，减天下囚罪一等，杖以下释之。
现代文：二十七日，上清储样宫修成，全国囚犯减罪一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 27th, the Upper Qing Reservoir Model Palace was completed, and the prisoners in the whole country were commuted to the first class and released from imprisonment.

古文：癸丑，以执政官行谒禁法非便，诏有利害陈述勿禁。
现代文：二十八日，因执政官实行渴禁法不便，诏令陈述利害者不禁止。
English: On the 28th, because it was inconvenient for the consul to implement the prohibition of thirst, the imperial edict did not prohibit the statement of interests.

古文：冬十月丁卯，有流星昼出东北。
现代文：冬十月十二日，有流星白天出现在东北方向。
English: On October 12th in winter, a meteor appeared in the northeast direction during the day.

古文：庚午，朝献景灵宫，还，幸国子监，赐祭酒丰稷三品服，监学官赐帛有差。
现代文：十五日，祭祀景灵宫，回时到国子监，赐给祭酒丰翟三品官服，监学官赐帛不等。
English: On the fifteenth day, the sacrificial rites were held at Jingling Palace, and when the time came to go back to the provincial overseer, he gave the sacrificial wine Fengqi three official uniforms, and the supervisor of the school gave the official uniform.

古文：庚辰，令诸宫院建小学。
现代文：二十五日，命令各宫院建立小学。
English: On the 25th, he ordered all Imperial Palaces to establish elementary schools.

古文：贵妃苗氏薨。
现代文：贵妃苗氏逝世。
English: Guifei Miao passed away.

古文：癸未，编修神宗御制官转秩加赏。
现代文：二十八日，编修神宗御制官转秩加赏。
English: On the 28th, the editor-in-chief of the Shinto religion received a promotion.

古文：诏京西提刑司岁给钱物二十万缗，以奉陵寝。
现代文：诏令京西提刑司每年供给二十万络钱用作奉侍陵寝。
English: He ordered the Beijing Xitian Criminal Division to provide 200 thousand rupees per year to be used to serve the mausoleum.

古文：十一月乙酉朔，刘挚罢。
现代文：十一月初一，刘挚被罢免。
English: On the first day of November, Liu Zhengyi was dismissed.

古文：壬辰，作《元祐观天历》。
现代文：初八，作玩观天历。
English: The eighth day of the first month of the year, a playful view of the calendar.

古文：尚书右丞苏辙罢知绛州。
现代文：尚书右承苏辙罢为绛州知州。
English: Shangshu U.S.S.R. became Zhangzhou Chizhou.

古文：辛丑，傅尧俞薨。
现代文：十七日，傅尧俞逝世。
English: On the 17th, Fu Xi passed away.

古文：十二月戊辰，开封府火。
现代文：十二月十四日，开封府发生火灾。
English: On December 14, a fire broke out in Kaifeng Prefecture.

古文：壬申，范纯仁以前御敌失策降官。
现代文：十八日，范纯仁因此前御敌失策降官。
English: On the 18th, Fan Chunren was demoted as a result of his former enemy's blunder.

古文：是岁，两浙水，定州野蚕成茧。
现代文：这一年，两浙发生水灾，定州野蚕成茧。
English: In this year, floods occurred in Zhejiang and Dingzhou, and the wild silkworms in Dingzhou grew into cocoons.

古文：高丽、交阯、三佛齐入贡。
现代文：高丽、交趾、三佛齐来进贡。
English: Goryeo, Khotan, and the Three Buddhas all paid tribute.

古文：七年春正月甲辰，以辽使耶律迪卒，辍朝一日。
现代文：元七年春正月二十一日，因辽朝使臣耶律迪去世，辍朝一天。
English: On the twenty-first day of the first month of the spring of the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, because of the death of the Liao Dynasty envoy Yeludi, he left the country for one day.

古文：乙巳，张诚一以穿父墓取犀带，责授左武卫将军，提举亳州明道宫。
现代文：二十二日，张诚一因挖掘父亲坟墓拿取犀带，降授为左武卫将军，提举毫州明道宫。
English: On the 22nd, Zhang Chengyi was demoted to General Zuo Wuwei for digging up his father's grave and taking a rhinoceros hair band, but he was promoted to the highest rank of the Milzhou Mingdao Palace.

古文：二月丁卯，诏陕西、河东边要进筑守御城砦。
现代文：二月十四日，诏令陕西、河东边境要地修筑守御城寨。
English: On February 14, an imperial edict ordered the construction of fortresses in important border areas in Shaanxi and Hedong.

古文：三月己亥，录囚。
现代文：三月十四日，讯视记录囚犯罪状。
English: On March 14th, CCTV recorded the prisoner's criminal status.

古文：夏四月己未，立皇后孟氏。
现代文：夏四月初七，立皇后孟氏。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, Empress Meng was crowned.

古文：甲子，命吕大防为皇后六礼使。
现代文：十二日，命令吕大防为皇后大礼使。
English: On the 12th, Lv Dabao was ordered to become the empress's envoy.

古文：甲戌，立考察县令课绩法。
现代文：二十二日，立考察县令课绩法。
English: On the 22nd, the county-ordered performance appraisal law was set up.

古文：五月戊戌，御文德殿册皇后。
现代文：五月十六日，到文德殿册封皇后。
English: On May 16th, she was enthroned as empress at the Winter Palace.

古文：庚子，罢侍从官转对。
现代文：十八日，废罢侍从官转对。
English: On the 18th day of the month, the abolition of the ban on serving and the transfer of officials took place.

古文：丙午，王岩叟罢知郑州。
现代文：二十四日，王岩雯罢为郑州知州。
English: On the 24th, Wang Yanwen became Zhengzhou Chizhou.

古文：大食进火浣布。
现代文：大食进贡火洗布。
English: Gluttony goes into the fire to wash the cloth.

古文：六月辛酉，以吕大防为右光禄大夫，苏颂为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎，韩忠彦知枢密院事，苏辙为门下侍郎，翰林学士范百禄为中书侍郎，翰林学士梁焘为尚书左丞，御史中丞郑雍为尚书右丞，户部尚书刘奉世签书枢密院事。
现代文：六月初九，任命吕大防为右光禄大夫，苏颂为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎，韩忠彦为知枢密院事，苏辙为门下侍郎，翰林学士范百禄为中书侍郎，翰林学士梁煮为尚书左承，御史中承郑雍为尚书右承，户部侍郎刘奉世为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month of the year, Lü Dabao was appointed as the doctor of Uguanglu, Su Song was appointed as the right-hand servant of Shang Shu and the attendant of the middle book, Han Tadahiko was appointed as the clerk of the Privy Council, Su Rug was appointed as the attendant of the disciple, Hanlin Baccalaureate Fan Bai Lu was appointed as the attendant of the middle book, Hanlin Baccalaureate Liang Ni was appointed as the left-hand successor of Shang Shu, Mishi Baccalaureate Zheng Yong was appointed as the right-hand successor of Shang Shu, and Liu B

古文：甲子，置广文馆解额。
现代文：十二日，置广文馆解送举人名额。
English: On the 12th, the Guangwen Museum was set up to send the number of people.

古文：戊辰，浑天仪像成。
现代文：十六日，浑天仪象制成。
English: On the 16th, the Hun Tian Yi Zong was made.

古文：甲戌，日旁五色云见。
现代文：二十二日，太阳旁出现五种颜色的云彩。
English: On the 22nd, a five-colored cloud appeared next to the sun.

古文：七月癸巳，诏修《神宗史》。
现代文：七月十二日，诏令修撰件申宗史。
English: On July 12th, the imperial edict to revise the written record of the history of the Jurchen Sect was issued.

古文：复翰林侍讲学士。
现代文：队复翰林侍讲学士。
English: Hanlin attends the graduation ceremony as a member of the team.

古文：己酉，诏诸路安抚钤辖司及西京、南京各赐《资治通鉴》一部。
现代文：二十八日，诏令各路安抚铃辖司和西京、南京分别赐给资治通鉴一部。
English: On the 28th, it was decreed that each province and city, as well as West Beijing and Nanjing, would be given a copy of the Zizhi Tongjian.

古文：庚戌，宗室缌麻以上者禁析居。
现代文：二十九日，宗室绍麻以上的亲人间禁止分户析居。
English: On the 29th, it was forbidden for relatives above Shoma's family to live in separate households.

古文：八月丙辰，罢监酒税务增剩给赏法。
现代文：八月初五，废罢监酒税务增剩给赏法。
English: On August 5th, the liquor tax surplus reward method was abolished.

古文：己未，诏西边诸将严备，毋轻出兵。
现代文：初八，诏令西部边境各将领严密防备，不要轻易出兵。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the emperor ordered the generals on the western border to be on high alert and not to send troops out lightly.

古文：乙亥，戒边将毋掊克军士。
现代文：二十四日，告诫边将不要克扣军士粮晌。
English: On the 24th, he admonished the generals not to cut back on food rations for sergeants.

古文：前陷交阯将吏苏佐等十七人自拔来归。
现代文：此前陷没交趾将吏苏佐等十七人自拔而归。
English: Seventeen people, including the commander Suzu, who had previously been caught in the crossfire, managed to escape.

古文：九月戊戌，诏： 冬至日南郊，宜依故事设皇地祇位。礼毕，别议方泽之仪以闻。 
现代文：九月十八日，下诏： 冬至日南郊祭祀应该依照制度规定设皇地雇位，行礼完毕，另外商议方泽祭地礼仪上报朝廷。 
English: On September 18th, the following edict was issued: From the winter solstice to the day of the Southern Suburbs Festival, according to the provisions of the system, the imperial place should be set up, the salute should be completed, and the Fangze Festival etiquette should be discussed and reported to the Imperial Court.

古文：己酉，永兴军、兰州、镇戎军地震。
现代文：二十九日，永兴军、兰州、镇戎军发生地震。
English: On the 29th, an earthquake occurred in Yongxing Army, Lanzhou and Zhenrong Army.

古文：冬十月庚戌朔，环州地震。
现代文：冬十月初一，环州发生地震。
English: On the first day of October in winter, an earthquake occurred in Huanzhou.

古文：丁巳，陕西有前代帝王陵庙处，给民五家充守陵户。
现代文：初八，陕西有前代帝王陵庙处，供给百姓五家，使他们充当守陵户。
English: In the early eighties, Shaanxi had the former imperial mausoleum and temple department, which provided five families of commoners to act as guardians of the mausoleum.

古文：丁卯，夏人寇环州。
现代文：十八日，夏军攻打环州。
English: On the 18th, Xia's army attacked Huanzhou.

古文：十一月辛巳，太白昼见。
现代文：十一月初二，太白星白天出现。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：甲申，诏太中大夫以上许占永业田。
现代文：初五，诏令太中大夫以上官允许占永业田。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, officials at the level of vice-premiers and higher were allowed to occupy Yongye Tian.

古文：丙戌，于阗入贡。
现代文：初七，于闻来进贡。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Yu Wenlai paid tribute.

古文：庚寅，帝斋大庆殿。
现代文：十一日，哲宗在大庆殿行斋戒。
English: On the 11th day, Tetsuzo fasted at Daqing Hall.

古文：辛卯，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：十二日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 12th, the ceremony was held at Jingling Palace.

古文：壬辰，飨太庙。
现代文：十三日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the thirteenth day, the ritual was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：癸巳，祀天地于圜丘，赦天下，群臣中外加恩。
现代文：十四日，在圆丘祭祀天地，赦免全国，内外臣僚加给恩赏。
English: On the 14th, heaven and earth were sacrificed at the round mound, the whole country was pardoned, and ministers at home and abroad were rewarded.

古文：罢南京榷酒。
现代文：废罢南京榷酒。
English: Quit drinking Nanjing ginger wine.

古文：民罹亲丧者，户以差等与免徭。
现代文：百姓遭亲人丧者按户等免除摇役。
English: People who have lost loved ones are exempted from shaking duty according to their households.

古文：辛丑，赐徐王剑履上殿。
现代文：二十二日，赐徐王可以佩戴剑履上殿。
English: On the 22nd, King Xu was granted permission to wear a pair of sword slippers into the palace.

古文：十二月辛亥，阿里骨、李乾德加食邑实封。
现代文：十二月初三，阿里骨、李乾德加给食邑实封。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, Ali Jian and Li Qiande added a seal to the food village.

古文：甲子，罢饮福宴。
现代文：十六日，废罢饮福宴。
English: On the 16th, the banquet was cancelled.

古文：庚午，祈雪。
现代文：二十二日，祈祷降雪。
English: On the 22nd, I prayed for snow.

古文：是岁，兖州仙源县生瑞谷。
现代文：这一年，充州仙源县生出瑞谷。
English: In the same year, Zuigu was born in Xianyuan County, Chenzhou.

古文：高丽、占城、西南蕃龙氏、罗氏入贡。
现代文：高丽、占城、西南蕃龙氏和罗氏来进贡。
English: The Goryeo, Zhancheng, Southwest Hailong and Luo clans came to pay tribute.

古文：八年春正月己卯朔，不受朝。
现代文：元八年春正月初一，不受朝拜。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty, it was not subject to morning worship.

古文：甲申，蔡确卒。
现代文：初六，蔡确去世。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the new year, Cai Ji passed away.

古文：丁亥，御迩英阁，召宰臣读《宝训》。
现代文：初九，到迩英阁，召宰臣进读宝训》。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, he went to Su Yingge and summoned his aide-de-camp to read the Treasure Sermon.

古文：庚寅，诏复范纯仁太中大夫。
现代文：十二日，诏令恢复范纯仁为太中大夫。
English: On the 12th, Fan Chunren was reinstated as First Vice-Minister of Health by imperial decree.

古文：壬辰，幸太乙宫。
现代文：十四日，到太一宫。
English: On the 14th, I went to Taichung.

古文：庚子，诏颁高丽所献《黄帝针经》于天下。
现代文：二十二日，下诏向全国颁布高丽献上的演帝针经。
English: On the 22nd, the next edict promulgated to the whole country the Emperor's Needle Sutra presented by Goryeo.

古文：二月己酉，诏西南蕃龙氏迁秩补官。
现代文：二月初二，诏令西南蕃龙氏迁秩补官。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：辛亥，礼部尚书苏轼言： 高丽使乞买历代史及《策府元龟》等书，宜却其请不许。 
现代文：初四，礼部尚书苏轼说： 高丽使臣请求购买历代史和策府元龟等书，应予以拒绝他的请求。 
English: On the fourth day of the new year, Su Ye, a member of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, said: If the Goryeo envoy requests to purchase books such as the history of the past and the founding of the Goryeo dynasty, his request should be rejected.

古文：省臣许之，轼又疏陈五害，极论其不可。
现代文：省臣答应他的请求，苏轼又上疏陈述五项害处，坚决认为不可应允。
English: The provincial minister agreed to his request, and Su Wei went on to state five harms, and firmly believed that it was impossible to agree.

古文：有旨： 书籍曾经买者听。 
现代文：皇上发旨： 书籍曾经有人买过的允许高丽使臣购买。 
English: Emperor's order: Goryeo envoys are allowed to purchase books that have already been purchased.

古文：壬子，诏刑部不得分禁系人数，瘐死数多者申尚书省。
现代文：初五，诏令刑部不得分散关押囚犯人数，在狱中死亡多的，要申报尚书省。
English: On the fifth day of the month, the imperial edict ordered the criminal department not to disperse the number of prisoners in custody. If there are more deaths in prison, it should be reported to the Ministry of Public Security.

古文：癸丑，诏大宁郡王以下出就外学。
现代文：初六，诏令大宁郡王以下到外学就读。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Da Ning Gu Wang and his younger siblings were ordered to go to a foreign school.

古文：三月甲申，苏颂罢。
现代文：三月初七，苏颂被罢免。
English: On March 7th, Susong was removed from office.

古文：辛卯，范百禄罢。
现代文：十四日，范百禄被罢免。
English: On the 14th, Fan Bailu was removed from office.

古文：庚子，诏御试举人复试赋、诗、论三题。
现代文：二十三日，诏令御试举人复试赋、诗、论三题。
English: On the 23rd, the imperial edict was issued to hold a multiple-choice examination for three subjects: fu, poetry, and discourse.

古文：夏四月丁未朔，夏人来谢罪，愿以兰州易塞门砦，不许。
现代文：夏四月初一，夏国派人来道歉认罪，愿意用兰州换塞门寨，朝廷没允许。
English: On the first day of April, Xia Guo sent someone to apologize and plead guilty, willing to exchange Lanzhou for Saimen Village, but the court did not allow it.

古文：癸丑，诏恤刑。
现代文：初七，诏令慎用刑法。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the imperial edict cautioned against the use of criminal law.

古文：甲寅，令范祖禹依先朝故事止兼侍讲。
现代文：初八，命令范祖禹按照先朝惯例只兼侍讲。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Fan Zuyu was ordered to be only an assistant speaker in accordance with the practice of the previous dynasty.

古文：丁巳，诏南郊合祭天地，罢礼部集官详议。
现代文：十一日，诏令南郊合祭天地，罢废礼部召集官员详细商讨。
English: On the 11th day, the Emperor ordered the southern suburbs to join the festival world, and summoned officials to discuss in detail the abolition of the ceremonial department.

古文：五月癸未，置蕲州罗田县。
现代文：五月初七，设置薪州罗田县。
English: On the 7th day of the 5th month, it was set up in Luotian County, Taizhou.

古文：丁亥，罢二广铸折二钱。
现代文：十一日，罢废二广铸造折二钱。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the 2 guang minting was abolished and the 2 yuan coin was introduced.

古文：己丑，录囚。
现代文：十三日，讯视记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 25th, the inmate's confession was examined.

古文：辛卯，监察御史董敦逸、黄庆基以论苏轼、苏辙，罢为湖北、福建转运判官。
现代文：十五日，监察御史董敦逸、黄庆基因议论苏轼、苏辙，罢为湖北、福建转运判官。
English: On the 15th, supervising magistrates Dong Dunyi and Huang Qing Jian discussed Su Shi and Su Gutu, and became judges of Hubei and Fujian transshipment.

古文：己亥，祁国公亻思为开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十三日，祁国公赵为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao, the governor of Shandong Province, was appointed as the head of the three departments of the prefectural government.

古文：六月戊午，梁焘罢。
现代文：六月十二日，梁煮被罢免。
English: On June 12, Liang was removed from his post.

古文：壬戌，中书后省上《元祐在京通用条贯》。
现代文：十六日，中书后省呈上玩在京通用条债珍。
English: On the 16th, after the publication of the book, the provincial government presented the play to the general public in Beijing.

古文：秋七月丙子朔，以观文殿大学士范纯仁为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
现代文：秋七月初一，任命观文殿大学士范纯仁为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of the autumn, Fan Junren, a scholar at the University of the Palace of Literature, was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man and junior secretary.

古文：戊寅，令陕西沿边铁钱、铜钱悉还近地。
现代文：初三，命令陕西沿边铁钱铜钱全部移回靠近内地处。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, he ordered that all the iron money and copper money along the border of Shaanxi be moved back to the inland.

古文：八月丁未，久雨。祷山川。
现代文：八月初二，长久降雨，祈祷山川。
English: On the second day of August, long-term rainfall, pray for mountains and rivers.

古文：辛酉，以太皇太后疾，帝不视事。
现代文：十六日，因太皇太后患病，哲宗不上朝听政。
English: On the 16th, due to the illness of the Grand Empress Dowager, Tetsuzo did not go to the court to listen to politics.

古文：壬戌，遣使按视京东西、河南北、淮南水灾。
现代文：十七日，派遣使臣视察京东西、河南北、淮南水灾地区。
English: On the 17th, envoys were dispatched to inspect the flood-stricken areas in the east and west of Beijing, the north and south of Henan, and Huainan.

古文：癸亥，减京师囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：十八日，京城囚犯减罪一等，徒刑以下释放。
English: On the 18th, the Beijing prisoner received a first-class reduction of his sentence and was released with a prison sentence or less.

古文：丁卯，祷于岳渎、宫观、祠庙。
现代文：二十二日，在岳读、宫观、祠庙祈祷。
English: On the 22nd, they read the sutras, visited the palace, and prayed at the ancestral temple.

古文：戊辰，赦天下。
现代文：二十三日，赦免全国。
English: Wuchen, amnesty to the world.

古文：庚午，诏陕西复铸小铜钱。
现代文：二十五日，诏令陕西重铸小铜钱。
English: On the 25th, Shaanxi was ordered to recast the small copper coins.

古文：辛未，祷于天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：二十六日，向天地、宗庙、社翟祈祷。
English: On the 26th, they prayed to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community.

古文：乙亥，祷于诸陵。
现代文：三十日，向皇上各陵祈祷。
English: On the 30th, he prayed at each of the emperor's tombs.

古文：九月戊寅，太皇太后崩。
现代文：九月初三，太皇太后逝世。
English: On the third day of the ninth month, the great empress dowager passed away.

古文：己卯，诏以太皇太后园陵为山陵。
现代文：初四，诏令以太皇太后园陵为山陵。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month, the Empress Dowager's garden was decreed to be a mountain mausoleum.

古文：庚辰，遣使告哀于辽。
现代文：初五，派遣使臣到辽国报丧。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, he sent an envoy to Liao to report the death.

古文：甲申，命吕大防为山陵使。
现代文：初九，命吕大防为太皇太后山陵使。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 9th month of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11

古文：壬辰，诏山陵修奉从约，诸道毋妄有进助。
现代文：十七日，诏令修奉山陵从简，各道不要乱有进奉。
English: On the 17th, the emperor issued an edict that the practice of mountain and mausoleum should be simplified, and that there should be no indiscriminate practice in different areas.

古文：冬十月戊申，群臣七上表请听政。
现代文：冬十月初四，大臣们七次上奏请哲宗听政。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of winter, the ministers petitioned Tetsuzo seven times to listen to the government.

古文：戊辰，徐王颢乞解官给丧，诏不允。
现代文：二十四日，徐王赵颖请求解官服丧，诏令不允。
English: On the 24th, Xu Wang Zhao Ying requested to be relieved of his official duties, but the imperial edict did not allow it.

古文：庚午，复内侍刘瑗等六人。
现代文：二十六日，恢复内侍刘缓等六人官职。
English: On the 26th, six officials, including Liu Xuan, the chambermaid, were reinstated.

古文：十一月丙子，始御垂拱殿。
现代文：十一月初二，开始到垂拱殿。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, the procession to the Hanging Arch began.

古文：乙未，以雪寒，振京城民饥。
现代文：二十一日，因降雪寒冷，贩济京城饥民。
English: On the 21st, due to the cold snowfall, vendors came to the aid of the starving people of Beijing.

古文：壬寅，赐劳修奉山陵兵士。
现代文：二十八日，赏赐修奉山陵的士兵。
English: On the 28th, a reward was given to the soldiers who worshipped the mountain.

古文：十二月乙巳，范纯仁乞罢，不允。
现代文：十二月初二，范纯仁请求罢职，没有允准。
English: On the second day of December, Fan Chunren requested to resign, but was not allowed to do so.

古文：甲寅，仿《唐六典》修官制。
现代文：十一日，仿照塘六典修改官制。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the official system was revised according to the Tang Six Classics.

古文：丁巳，辽人遣使来吊祭。
现代文：十四日，辽国派遣使臣来吊丧祭奠。
English: On the 14th, Liao sent envoys to pay their respects.

古文：出钱粟十万振流民。
现代文：拿出十万络钱粟贩济流民。
English: He gave 100,000 rupees to the poppy sellers to help the displaced people.

古文：己巳，上太皇太后谥曰宣仁圣烈皇后。
现代文：二十六日，敬献太皇太后溢号为宣仁圣烈皇后。
English: On the 26th, the honorary title of the Great Empress Dowager was changed to the Empress Shenren.

古文：是岁，河入德清军，决内黄口。
现代文：这一年，黄河进人德清军，在内黄决口。
English: In this year, the Yellow River was invaded by the German and Qing armies, and the Inner Yellow River was breached.

