古文：王若曰： 明大命于妹邦。
现代文：王这样说： 要在殷朝旧都宣布一项重大教命。
English: The king said, "An important religious edict should be announced in the Yin and Yang dynasties.

古文：乃穆考文王肇国在西土。
现代文：当初，穆考文王在西方创立了这个国家。
English: Originally, King Muqawun founded the country in the West.

古文：厥诰毖庶邦庶士越少正御事，朝夕曰： 祀兹酒。
现代文：他早晚告戒各国诸侯、各位卿士和各级官员说： 只有在祭祀时，才饮酒。 
English: In the morning and evening, he warned the princes of various countries, the nobles and officials at all levels, saying: Only drink alcohol during religious services.

古文：惟天降命，肇我民，惟元祀。
现代文：上天降下教令，劝勉我们臣民，只有在祭祀的时候才能饮酒。
English: Heaven sent down the edict, exhorting our subjects to drink alcohol only at the time of sacrifice.

古文：天降威，我民用大乱丧德，亦罔非酒惟行；越小大邦用丧，亦罔非酒惟辜。 
现代文：上天降下惩罚，我们臣民大乱失德，也无非是酒造成的罪行；有些诸侯国灭亡了，那也是众民饮酒过度带来的灾祸。
English: It is nothing but a crime caused by alcohol that our subjects have fallen into disorder and immorality, and it is also a calamity brought about by the excessive drinking of the people that some principalities have perished.

古文：文王诰教小子有正有事：无彝酒。
现代文：文王还告诫官员和子孙，不要经常喝酒。
English: King Moon also warned officials and their offspring not to drink too often.

古文：越庶国：饮惟祀，德将无醉。
现代文：告诫各诸侯国君，只有在祭祀时才可以饮酒，并要用德扶持，不要喝醉了。
English: He admonished the princes and sovereigns that they could only drink alcohol during religious services, and that they should be supported by virtue and not get drunk.

古文：惟曰我民迪小子惟土物爱，厥心臧。
现代文：文王还告诫臣民要教导子孙珍惜粮食，使我们的思想善良。
English: King Wen also admonished his subjects to teach their children and grandchildren to cherish food, so that our thoughts would be kind.

古文：聪听祖考之遗训，越小大德。
现代文：我们一定要牢记前辈的常训，发扬他们的美德！
English: We must keep in mind the constant training of our predecessors and carry forward their virtues!

古文：小子惟一妹土，嗣尔股肱，纯其艺黍稷，奔走事厥考厥长。
现代文：殷朝旧都的殷民们，你们一定要用你们的手足力量，专心种植黍稷，勤勉地奉事你们的父兄。
English: Yan people of the old capital of the Yan Dynasty, you must use your strength of hands and feet, concentrate on planting oaks, and diligently serve your parents and brothers.

古文：肇牵车牛，远服贾用，孝养厥父母，厥父母庆，自洗腆，致用酒。
现代文：农事完毕以后，可以牵牛赶车，到外地去从事贸易，孝顺赡养父母；父母一定会高高兴兴地为你们置办美好丰盛的膳食，这时就可以饮酒。
English: After the agricultural work is completed, you can drive cattle, go to other places to engage in trade, and dutifully support your parents; your parents will be happy to arrange a beautiful and rich meal for you, and then you can drink alcohol.

古文：庶士有正越庶伯君子，其尔典听朕教！
现代文：各级官员们，希望你们能经常听从我的教导！
English: Officials at all levels, I hope you can always follow my teachings!

古文：尔大克羞耇惟君，尔乃饮食醉饱。
现代文：只要你们能好好的侍奉长辈和君主，你们就能喝醉吃饱。
English: As long as you can serve your elders and the monarch well, you will be able to get drunk and eat well.

古文：丕惟曰尔克永观省，作稽中德，尔尚克羞馈祀。
现代文：我想说的是：你们要长久地观察自己，使自己的言行符合中正的美德。你们能够参加国君举行的祭祀。
English: What I want to say is: you should observe yourselves for a long time, and make your words and deeds conform to the virtue of the Chinese people. You can participate in the sacrificial rites held by the king.

古文：尔乃自介用逸，兹乃允惟王正事之臣。
现代文：你们如果自己限制行乐饮酒，这样就能长期成为王家的治事官员。
English: If you restrict yourselves from indulging in alcohol, you will be able to become a long-term administrative official of the royal family.

古文：兹亦惟天若元德，永不忘在王家。 
现代文：你们是上天嘉奖的有德之人，将永远不会被王家忘记。 
English: You are a credit to this country and will never be forgotten by the Royal Family.

古文：王曰： 封，我西土棐徂，邦君御事小子尚克用文王教，不腆于酒，故我至于今，克受殷之命。 
现代文：王说： 封啊，我们西土辅导帮助诸侯和官员，常常能够遵从文王的教导，不多饮酒，所以我们到今天，能够接受重大的使命。 
English: The king said, "Feng, we Western tutors help princes and officials, and we can often follow the teachings of King Wen and not drink too much alcohol, so we can accept an important mission to this day.

古文：王曰： 封，我闻惟曰： 在昔殷先哲王迪畏天显小民，经德秉哲。
现代文：王说： 封啊，我听到有人说： 过去，殷的先人明王畏惧天命和百姓，施行德政，保持恭敬。
English: The king said, "Feng, I heard someone say, 'In the past, Yin's ancestors, King Ming, feared the fate of heaven and the people, practiced virtue, and remained respectful.

古文：自成汤咸至于帝乙，成王畏相惟御事，厥棐有恭，不敢自暇自逸，矧曰其敢崇饮？
现代文：从成汤延续到帝乙，明君贤相都考虑着治理国事，他们颁布政令很认真，不敢自己安闲逸乐，何况敢聚众饮酒呢？
English: From Cheng Tang to Emperor Wu, the Ming and Qin dynasties all considered the governance of state affairs. They issued decrees very seriously, and did not dare to relax and enjoy themselves. How dare they gather together to drink alcohol?

古文：越在外服，侯甸男卫邦伯，越在内服，百僚庶尹惟亚惟服宗工越百姓里居，罔敢湎于酒。
现代文：在外地的侯、甸、男、卫的诸侯，在朝中的各级官员、宗室贵族以及退住在家的官员，没有人敢酣乐在酒中。
English: In the provinces, the lords of Hou, Tien, Man and Wei, the officials at all levels in the imperial court, the aristocrats of the family and the officials who live away from home, no one dares to have fun in wine.

古文：不惟不敢，亦不暇，惟助成王德显越，尹人祗辟。 
现代文：不但不敢，他们也没有闲暇，他们只想助成王德使它显扬，助成长官重视法令。 
English: Not only do they not dare, they have no leisure, they only want to help Wang De to make it shine, and help the officials to pay attention to the laws.

古文：我闻亦惟曰： 在今后嗣王，酣，身厥命，罔显于民祗，保越怨不易。
现代文：我听到也有人说： 在近世的商纣王，好酒，以为有命在天，不明白臣民的痛苦，安于怨恨而不改。
English: I have also heard some people say: In the modern world, the merchant king, good wine, thought that his life was in heaven, did not understand the suffering of his subjects, and was satisfied with resentment and did not change.

古文：诞惟厥纵，淫泆于非彝，用燕丧威仪，民罔不衋伤心。
现代文：他大作淫乱，游乐在违反常法的活动之中，因宴乐而丧失了威仪，臣民没有不悲痛伤心的。
English: He indulged in debauchery, took pleasure in activities that violated the common law, and lost his dignity due to feasting. His subjects were heartbroken.

古文：惟荒腆于酒，不惟自息乃逸，厥心疾很，不克畏死。
现代文：商纣王只想放纵于酒，不想自己制止其淫乐。他心地狠恶，不能以死来畏惧他。
English: The merchant king only wants to indulge in wine, and does not want to stop his lewdness. His heart is wicked, and he cannot be afraid of death.

古文：辜在商邑，越殷国灭，无罹。
现代文：他作恶在商都，对于殷国的灭亡，没有忧虑过。
English: He did evil in the mercantile city and did not worry about the destruction of the country.

古文：弗惟德馨香祀，登闻于天；诞惟民怨，庶群自酒，腥闻在上。
现代文：没有明德芳香的祭祀升闻于上天；只有老百姓的怨气、只有群臣私自饮酒的腥气升闻于上。
English: No sacrificial rites with the fragrance of wisdom and virtue ascend to the heavens; only the grudge of the common people, and the stench of the private drinking of the courtiers, ascend to the heavens.

古文：故天降丧于殷，罔爱于殷，惟逸。
现代文：所以，上天对殷邦降下了灾祸，不喜欢殷国，就是淫乐的缘故。
English: Therefore, heaven has brought down a disaster on the Yin Kingdom. The reason why people do not like the Yin Kingdom is because of sexual pleasure.

古文：天非虐，惟民自速辜。  
现代文：上天并不暴虐，是殷民自己招来了罪罚。 
English: Heaven is not tyrannical, it is the Yin people themselves who have incurred the punishment.

古文：王： 封，予不惟若兹多诰。
现代文：王说： 封啊，我不想如此多告了。
English: Wang said, "Feng, I don't want to complain so much.

古文：古人有言曰： 人无于水监，当于民监。 
现代文：古人有话说： 人不要只从水中察看，应当从民情上察看。 
English: The ancients had a saying: One should not only observe from the water, but should also observe from the people's conditions.

古文：今惟殷坠厥命，我其可不大监抚于时！
现代文：现在殷商已丧失了他的福命，我们难道可以不大大地省察这个事实！
English: Now that Yin Shang has lost his good fortune, can we not greatly reflect on this fact!

古文：予惟曰： 汝劼毖殷献臣、侯、甸、男、卫，矧太史友、内史友、越献臣百宗工，矧惟尔事服休，服采，矧惟若畴，圻父薄违，农夫若保，宏父定辟，矧汝，刚制于酒。 
现代文：我想告诉你： 你要慎重告诫殷国的贤臣，侯、甸、男、卫的诸侯，又朝中记事记言的史官，贤良的大臣和许多尊贵的官员，还有你的治事官员，管理游宴休息和祭祀的近臣，还有你的三卿，讨伐叛乱的圻父，顺保百姓的农父，制定法度的宏父： 你们要强行断绝饮酒！ 
English: I want to tell you: You should carefully admonish the wise men of Yin, the princes of Hou, Tien, Meng and Wei, the historians who keep records of the court and the government, the wise ministers and many honorable officials, as well as your government officials, the close ministers who manage the banquet and the sacrifice, and your three nobles, the father of the crusade against the rebellion, the father of the farmers who obey the people, and the father of the laws: You should forcibly stop drinking alcohol!

古文：厥或诰曰： 群饮。 
现代文：假若有人报告说： 有人群聚饮酒。 
English: If someone reports: People are drinking in groups.

古文：汝勿佚。尽执拘以归于周，予其杀。
现代文：你不要放纵他们，要全部逮捕起来送到周京，我将杀掉他们。
English: Don't indulge them. Arrest them all and send them to Zhoujing. I will kill them.

古文：又惟殷之迪诸臣惟工，乃湎于酒，勿庸杀之，姑惟教之。
现代文：又殷商的辅臣百官酣乐在酒中，不用杀他们，暂且先教育他们。
English: Moreover, the aides-de-camp of wealthy merchants, including hundreds of officials, enjoy drinking wine. There is no need to kill them, just educate them first.

古文：有斯明享，乃不用我教辞，惟我一人弗恤弗蠲，乃事时同于杀。 
现代文：有这样明显的劝戒，若还有人不遵从我的教令，我不会怜惜，不会赦免，处治这类人，同群聚饮酒者一样，要杀。 
English: There is such a clear exhortation, if there are still people who do not follow my edict, I will not pity, will not forgive, treat such people, like a group of drinkers, to kill.

古文：王曰： 封，汝典听朕毖，勿辩乃司民湎于酒。 
现代文：王说： 封啊，你要经常听从我的告诫，不要使你的官员酣乐在酒中。 
English: And the king said, O Haman, hearken unto my voice in all that I say unto thee, and make not thy princes drunken.

