古文：季桓子穿井，获如土缶，其中有羊焉。使使问于孔子曰： 吾穿井于费，而于井中得一狗，何也？ 
现代文：季桓子打井，得到一个土缶，里面有个像羊的东西，季桓子派人去问孔子说： 我在费地打井，在井中得到一只狗，这是怎么回事呢？ 
English: Ji Huan Zi dug a well and got an earthenware pot with something that looked like a sheep in it. Ji Huan Zi sent a man to ask Confucius, "I dug a well in a field and got a dog in the well. What's going on?"

古文：孔子曰： 丘之所闻者，羊也。
现代文：孔子说： 就我知道的而言，应该是一只羊。
English: Confucius said: As far as I know, it should be a sheep.

古文：丘闻之，木石之怪夔蝄蜽，水之怪龙罔象，土之怪羵羊也。 
现代文：我听说，山林中的精怪有夔和魍魉，水中的精怪有龙和罔象，土中的精怪有羊。 
English: I have heard that the creatures in the mountain forest are toads and centipedes, the creatures in the water are dragons and elephants, and the creatures in the soil are sheep.

古文：吴伐越，隳会稽，获巨骨一节，专车焉。
现代文：吴国攻打越国，毁坏了会稽，获得了一节巨大的骨头，要用一辆车来转运。
English: Wu attacked Yue, destroyed the guild hall, and obtained a huge section of bone, which had to be transported by car.

古文：吴子使来聘于鲁，且问之孔子，命使者曰： 无以吾命也。 
现代文：吴国国君派使者问候鲁君，并且向孔子请教骨头的事，吴君对使者说： 不要说是我的命令。 
English: The Emperor of Wu sent an envoy to greet Lu Jun and to ask Confucius about the bones. Wu Jun said to the envoy: "Don't say it's my order.

古文：宾既将事，乃发币于大夫，及孔子，孔子爵之。
现代文：使者问候完鲁君，就分发礼物给鲁国大夫，发到孔子时，孔子给他倒了一杯酒。
English: After the messenger finished greeting Lu Jun, he distributed gifts to Lu Guotong, and when he sent them to Confucius, Confucius poured him a glass of wine.

古文：既彻俎而燕，客执骨而问曰： 敢问骨何如为大？ 
现代文：问候鲁君的事情完毕，撤去祭器举行宴饮，使者拿着祭品中的骨头问道： 请问什么样的骨头算是大的？ 
English: After the greetings to Lu Jun were over, the sacrificial vessels were removed and a banquet was held. The messenger took the bones in the offering and asked: What kind of bones are large?

古文：孔子曰： 丘闻之，昔禹致群臣于会稽之山，防风后至，禹杀而戮之，其骨专车焉。此为大矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 我听说，从前大禹召集群臣到会稽山，防风后到，大禹杀了他，他的骨头装了一车，防风的骨头算是大的了。 
English: Confucius said: I have heard that in the past, Dayu summoned a group of ministers to Hefei Mountain, arrived after the wind, Dayu killed him, his bones were loaded into a cart, and the bones of the wind were considered to be large.

古文：客曰： 敢问谁守为神？ 
现代文：使者问： 请问谁是守护山川的神？ 
English: The messenger asked: Who is the god who protects the mountains and rivers?

古文：孔子曰： 山川之灵，足以纪纲天下者，其守为神；社稷之守为公侯，山川之祀者为诸侯，皆属于王。 
现代文：孔子说： 山川的神灵足以能有利天下的，是守护之神。守护社稷的为会侯，祭祀山川的为诸侯，他们都隶属于君王。 
English: Confucius said: The deities of the mountains and rivers are powerful enough to benefit the world. They are the guardian deities. The guardians of the shrine are the chiefs, and those who worship the mountains and rivers are the princes. They are all subordinate to the king.

古文：客曰： 防风何守？ 
现代文：使者说： 防风氏守在何处呢？ 
English: Wu Zhi also asked: What is the Feng clan responsible for sacrificing?

古文：孔子曰： 汪芒氏之君，守封嵎山者，为漆姓。
现代文：孔子说： 他是汪芒国的国君，守护封嵎山。
English: Confucius said, "He is the sovereign of Wang Mang country and the guardian of Mount Lushan.

古文：在虞、夏、商为汪芒氏，于周为长翟氏，今曰大人。 
现代文：姓添，在虞、夏、商时代为汪芒氏，到周朝为长瞿氏，现今称作大人。 
English: The surname "Tian" was called "Wang Mang" in the Yu, Xia, and Shang dynasties, and "Chang Kun" in the Zhou Dynasty. Nowadays, it is called "Rengo."

古文：有客曰： 人长之极几何？ 
现代文：有客人问： 人的身体最长的，能有多长？ 
English: A guest asked: The human body is the longest muscle, how long can it be?

古文：孔子曰： 焦侥氏长三尺，短之至也；长者不过十，数之极也。 
现代文：孔子说： 焦侥氏身长三尺，是最短的了。最长的不超过十尺，这个数已达到极限了。 
English: Confucius said, "Jiao Huo is three feet long, which is the shortest. The longest is no more than ten feet, and this number has reached its limit.

古文：孔子在陈，陈惠公宾之于上馆。
现代文：孔子在陈国，陈惠公请他住在上等馆舍里。
English: Confucius was in Chen Province, and Chen Huigong invited him to live in a high-class mansion.

古文：时有隼集陈侯之庭而死，楛矢贯之，石砮，其长尺有咫。
现代文：当时有一只死的隼鸟陈列在陈惠公的厅堂上，射穿它的箭的箭杆是楛木制成，箭头是石头的，长度有一尺八寸。
English: At that time, there was a dead ostrich on display in the hall of Chen Huigong. The shaft of the arrow that pierced it was made of birch, and the arrowhead was made of stone. It was a foot and eight inches long.

古文：惠公使人持隼，如孔子馆而问焉。
现代文：陈惠公让人拿着死鸟到孔子的馆舍询问这件事。
English: Chen Huigong had someone take the dead bird to Confucius' mansion to inquire about it.

古文：孔子曰： 隼之来远矣，此肃慎氏之矢。
现代文：孔子说： 隼鸟是从很远的地方来的啊！这是肃慎氏的箭。
English: Confucius said, "Ostriches come from far away. This is Sushen's arrow."

古文：昔武王克商，通道于九夷、百蛮，使各以其方贿来贡，而无忘职业。
现代文：从前周武王攻克商朝，打通了通向各少数民族的道路，让他们以各自的特产来进贡，并要求按职业进贡物品。
English: Since King Zhou Wu conquered the Shang Dynasty, he opened the way to all ethnic minorities, let them pay tribute with their own special products, and required tribute items according to their occupation.

古文：于是肃慎氏贡楛矢、石砮，其长尺有咫。
现代文：于是慎肃氏进贡了用楛木作杆石头作箭头的箭，长有一尺八寸。
English: As a result, Shinsui paid tribute with an arrow made of birch as a shaft and stone as an arrowhead, which was one foot eight inches long.

古文：先王欲昭其令德之致远物也，以示后人使永鉴焉，故铭其括曰： 肃慎氏贡楛矢。 
现代文：武王欲显示他的美德能使远方来进贡，以此来昭示后人，永远作为借鉴，所以在箭杆的末端刻着 肃慎氏贡楛矢 几个字，把它赏给他的女儿大姬。
English: King Wu wanted to show that his virtue could bring tribute from far away, so as to show future generations and serve as a reference forever, so he engraved the words "Sushin's tribute arrow" at the end of the arrow shaft and gave it to his daughter, Daxi.

古文：以分大姬，配胡公，而封诸陈。
现代文：女儿嫁给胡公，封在陈地。
English: His daughter married Hu Gong and was sealed in Chen Di.

古文：古者分同姓以珍玉，所以展亲亲也；分异姓以远方之职贡，所以无忘服也。
现代文：古代把珍玉分给同姓，为了表示亲属的亲密关系；把远方的贡物分给异姓，是为了让他们不忘记臣服。
English: In ancient times, precious stones were given to people with the same surname to show the closeness of relatives; distant tributes were given to people with different surnames so that they would not forget to submit.

古文：故分陈以肃慎氏贡焉。
现代文：所以把肃慎氏的贡物分给陈国。
English: Therefore, the tributes of Sushen clan were distributed to Chen Guo.

古文：君若使有司求诸故府，其可得也。 
现代文：您如果派官员到从前的府库中去找，就可以得到。 
English: If you send an official to look for it in the former treasury, you can get it.

古文：公使人求，得之金牍，如之。
现代文：陈惠公派人去找，得到写有金字的简牍，果然和孔子说得一样。
English: Chen Huigong sent someone to look for it, and they found a briefcase with gold writing, and sure enough, it said the same thing as Confucius.

古文：郯子朝鲁，鲁人问曰： 少皓氏以鸟名官，何也？ 
现代文：郯国国君朝拜鲁国，鲁国人叔孙昭子问： 少昊氏用鸟名来命名官职，为什么呢？ 
English: The prince of Shandong pays homage to Lu. Lu's great-great-grandson, Akiko, asks: Mr. Xiao Hao used a bird's name to name an official post. Why?

古文：对曰： 吾祖也，我知之。昔黄帝以云纪官，故为云师而云名，炎帝以火，共工以水，大昊以龙，其义一也。我高祖少皓摰之立也，凤鸟适至，是以纪之于鸟，故为鸟师而鸟名。
现代文：郯子回答说： 少昊氏是我的祖先，我知道这件事；从前黄帝用云来命名官职，所以百官之长都以云为名。炎帝用火命名官职，共工用水命名官职，太昊氏用龙命名官职，意思都是一样的，我的高祖少昊继位时，凤鸟正好飞来，因此用鸟来命名，所以称鸟师而以鸟命名。
English: Zou Zi replied, "The Xiao Hao clan is my ancestor, I know about it. Once upon a time, the Yellow Emperor used clouds to name official positions, so the heads of hundreds of officials were named after clouds. The Emperor named the official positions with fire, the co-workers named the official positions with water, and the Tai Hao clan named the official positions with dragons, all with the same meaning. When my great-great-grandfather Xiao Hao succeeded to the throne, the phoenix bird happened to fly, so it was named after the bird, so it was called the bird teacher and named after the bird.

古文：自颛顼氏以来，不能纪远，乃纪于近，为民师而命以民事，则不能故也。 
现代文：自古以来，不能用远来的事物命名，就用身边的事物来命名，设立长官就用民众所做的事来命名，那就不能像原来那样做了。 
English: Since ancient times, instead of naming things that are far away, we should name things that are close by, and when appointing officials, we should name them according to what the people have done. This cannot be done as it was before.

古文：孔子闻之，遂见郯子而学焉。
现代文：孔子听说了这件事，就去拜见郯子向他学习。
English: When Confucius heard about this, he went to see Xunzi to learn from him.

古文：既而告人曰： 吾闻之，天子失官，学在四夷，犹信。 
现代文：后来告诉别人说： 我听说，天子的官学失传，可以向四周的小国学习，这话是真实可信的。 
English: Later, he told others, "I have heard that the official learning of the Son of Heaven has been lost, and that we can learn from the small countries around us. This is a true and trustworthy saying.

古文：邾隐公朝于鲁，子贡观焉。
现代文：邾隐公朝拜鲁君，子贡观看了当时的情况。
English: Yan Ying Gong went to Bai Rukun, and Zigong watched the situation at that time.

古文：邾子执玉高，其容仰；定公受玉卑，其容俯。
现代文：邾隐公高高地拿着玉，脸是仰着的；鲁定公低身接受玉，脸是低着的。
English: Zou Ying Gong held the jade high and his face was upturned; Lu Ding Gong bent down to receive the jade and his face was downturned.

古文：子贡曰： 以礼观之，二君者、将有死亡焉？
现代文：子贡说： 从礼节来看，两位君主中将会有死亡的。
English: Zigong said: Judging from the etiquette, one of the two monarchs will die.

古文：夫礼、生死存亡之体。将左右周旋，进退俯仰，于是乎取之；朝祀丧戎，于是乎观之。
现代文：礼，是生死存亡的主体，一举一动，或左或右，进退俯仰，是从这里来选取它，朝会祭祀、死丧征战，也是从这里观察它。
English: Rites are the main body of life and death, every move, whether left or right, advancing and retreating, is from here to select it, and the imperial ceremony, death and war, is also from here to observe it.

古文：今正月相朝，而皆不度，心以亡矣。
现代文：现今在正月里互相朝见，而都不合法度，两位国君的心中没有礼了。
English: Now they meet each other in the first month of the year, but they are not legitimate, and there is no courtesy in the hearts of the two sovereigns.

古文：嘉事不体，何以能久？
现代文：朝会这样的好事不合于礼，怎么能够活得长久？
English: Such a good thing as the morning assembly is not proper, how can it survive for a long time?

古文：高仰、骄也；卑俯、替也。骄近乱，替近疾；君为主，其先亡乎？ 
现代文：高和仰，这是骄纵；卑和俯，这是衰废，骄纵接近动乱，衰废接近疾病，君王是主人，恐怕会先亡吧。 
English: High and high, this is pride; low and low, this is decay, pride is close to turmoil, decay is close to disease, the king is the master, I'm afraid he will die first.

古文：夏五月，公薨。又邾子出犇。
现代文：夏天五月，鲁定公死了，后来邾子也出逃了。
English: In the summer of May, Lu Dingong died, and later Zangzi also fled.

古文：孔子曰： 赐不幸而言中，是赐多言。 
现代文：孔子说： 子贡不幸而言中，这是子贡多言了。 
English: Confucius said, "Unfortunately, the word "zigong" (tribute) is often used to describe the middle class.

古文：孔子在陈，陈侯就之，燕焉。
现代文：孔子在陈国，陈国国君陪他一起宴饮游览。
English: Confucius is in Chen Guo, and Chen Guo Guo Jun is accompanying him on a banqueting tour.

古文：子游行路之人云： 鲁司铎灾，及宗庙。 
现代文：路上的行人说： 鲁国的火灾殃及宗庙了。 
English: A passerby on the street said: "The fire in Lu has affected the ancestral temple.

古文：以告孔子。
现代文：有人把这话告诉了孔子。
English: Someone told this to Confucius.

古文：子曰： 所及者其桓、僖之庙。 
现代文：孔子说： 殃及的大概是鲁桓公、鲁僖公的宗庙吧。 
English: Confucius said: It is probably the ancestral temple of Lu Huan Gong and Lu Ye Gong Gong that will be affected.

古文：陈侯曰： 何以知之？ 
现代文：陈国国君问： 您是怎么知道的呢？ 
English: Chen Guo Guojun asked: How did you know?

古文：子曰： 礼，祖有功而宗有德，故不毁其庙焉。
现代文：孔子说： 按照礼，祖先有功而且后代有德，就不会毁坏他们的宗庙。
English: Confucius said: According to the etiquette, if the ancestors have merits and the descendants have virtues, they will not destroy their ancestral temples.

古文：今桓、僖之亲尽矣，又功德不足以存其庙，而鲁不毁，是以天灾加之。 
现代文：如今桓公和僖公的亲属已经没有了，而他们的功劳和德行又不足以保存他们的宗庙，鲁国没有毁掉它们，所以天灾要加在它们上面。 
English: Now, the relatives of Huan Gong and Xing Gong are no longer alive, and their merits and virtues are not enough to preserve their ancestral temple. Lu did not destroy them, so the natural disaster will be imposed on them.

古文：三日，鲁使至。问焉，则桓、僖也。
现代文：三天后，鲁国使者来，一问，果然是桓公和僖公的宗庙遭了灾。
English: Three days later, an envoy from the State of Lu came to inquire, and it turned out to be the ancestral temple of Lord Huan and Lord Xing that had suffered a disaster.

古文：陈侯谓子贡曰： 吾乃今知圣人之可贵。 
现代文：陈国国君对子贡说： 我如今才知道圣人的可贵。 
English: Chen Guo Guojun said to Zigong, "Only now do I know the value of a sage.

古文：对曰： 君之知之，可矣，未若专其道而行其化之善也。 
现代文：子贡回答说： 您知道这点，还不错，但还不如一心推行他的道来实行圣人的教化为好。 
English: Zigong replied, "It is good that you know this, but it would be better for you to practice the enlightenment of a sage by wholeheartedly following his teachings."

古文：阳虎既犇齐，自齐犇晋，适赵氏。
现代文：季孙氏的家臣阳虎逃到齐国后，又从齐国跑到晋国，投奔了赵简子。
English: After Yang Hu, a retainer of the Ji Sun clan, fled to Qi Province, he also ran from Qi Province to Jin Province and joined Zhao Jianzi.

古文：孔子闻之，谓子路曰： 赵氏其世有乱乎！ 
现代文：孔子听说了这件事，对子路说： 赵氏的后代恐怕有动乱吧？ 
English: When Confucius heard about this, he said to Zi Lu: I'm afraid that the descendants of the Zhao clan will be in turmoil, right?

古文：子路曰： 权不在焉，岂能为乱？ 
现代文：子路说： 权不在阳虎手里，怎能为乱呢？ 
English: Zilu said, "If the power is not in the hands of the tigers, how can there be chaos?

古文：孔子曰： 非汝所知。
现代文：孔子说： 这不是你能知道的。
English: Confucius said: This is not something you can know.

古文：夫阳虎亲富而不亲仁，有宠于季孙，又将杀之，不克而犇，求容于齐；齐人囚之，乃亡归晋。
现代文：阳虎亲近富人而不亲近仁人，得罪于季恒子，而又要杀害他，未得逞又逃走，请求齐国接纳他。齐人囚禁了他，又逃到晋国。
English: Yanghu was close to the rich, but not to the benevolent. He was offended by Ji Heng Zi, and wanted to kill him. He did not succeed, and fled, asking Qi to accept him. Qi imprisoned him, and he fled to Jin.

古文：是齐、鲁二国已去其疾。
现代文：这样，齐、鲁两国都去掉了祸根。
English: In this way, the two countries of Qi and Lu have eliminated the root cause.

古文：赵简子好利而多信，必溺其说而从其谋，祸败所终，非一世可知也。 
现代文：赵简子贪图利益而又轻信，必定会轻信他的话而听从他的谋划，祸患引起的最终后果，不是这一代能够知道的。 
English: Zhao Jianzi is greedy for profit and gullible, and will certainly be gullible to his words and follow his plan. The final consequences of the disaster are not known to this generation.

古文：季康子问于孔子曰： 今周十二月，夏之十月，而犹有螽，何也？ 
现代文：季康子问孔子说： 现在是周历十二月，即夏历的十月，却还有蝗虫，为什么呢？ 
English: Ji Kangzi asked Confucius, "It is now December of the lunar calendar, that is, October of the summer calendar, but there are still locusts. Why?

古文：孔子对曰： 丘闻之，火伏而后蛰者毕，今火犹西流，司历过也。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 我听说，火星下去以后昆虫潜伏结束。现今火星还经过西方，这是司历官造成的错误。 
English: Confucius replied, "I have heard that when Mars descends, the lurking of insects comes to an end. Today, Mars is still passing to the west, which is a mistake made by the calendar officials.

古文：季康子曰： 所失者几月也？ 
现代文：季康子说： 错误在哪个月呢？ 
English: Ji Yasuko said: What month is the mistake?

古文：孔子曰： 于夏十月，火既没矣，今火见，再失闰也。 
现代文：孔子说： 夏历十月，火星没了；现今火星还可见，错在闰月。 
English: Confucius said: In October of the lunar calendar, Mars disappeared; today Mars can still be seen, but it is the intercalary month.

古文：吴王夫差将与哀公见晋侯。
现代文：吴王夫差将要和鲁哀公去进见晋国诸侯。
English: Wu Wangfusha and Lu Aigong are going to visit the princes of Jin.

古文：子服景伯对使者曰： 王合诸侯，则伯率侯牧以见于王；伯合诸侯，则侯率子男以见于伯，今诸侯会，而君与寡君见晋君，则晋成为伯矣。
现代文：子服景伯对吴国使者说： 君王会合诸侯，那么伯爵就应该率侯牧等官去进见君王；伯爵会合诸侯，那么侯爵就应该率领子爵、男爵进见伯爵。现今诸侯会和，而你们吴国国君与我们鲁国国君去见晋君，那么晋国就成伯爵了。
English: Zifu Jingbo said to the emissary of the State of Wu: If the king meets with the princes, then the count should lead the princes and officials to meet with the king; if the count meets with the princes, then the marquis should lead the viscounts and barons to meet with the count. Now the princes will meet, and if you, the prince of the State of Wu, and we, the prince of the State of Lu, meet with Jin, then Jin will become a count.

古文：且执事以伯召诸侯，而以侯终之，何利之有焉？ 
现代文：况且你们以伯爵的身份召集诸侯，而以侯爵的身份结束，又有什么好处呢？ 
English: Besides, what good is it if you gather the dukes as counts and end up as marquesses?

古文：吴人乃止。
现代文：吴人听了子服景伯的话，停止了此事。
English: Wu people listened to Zifu Jingbo and stopped the matter.

古文：既而悔之，遂囚景伯。
现代文：既而又后悔了，于是囚禁了景伯。
English: He regretted it and imprisoned King Bo.

古文：伯谓太宰嚭曰： 鲁将以十月上辛，有事于上帝先王，季辛而毕，何也世有职焉，自襄已来，未之改也。
现代文：景伯对太宰说： 鲁国将在十月上辛这天祭祀上帝、先王，季辛这天结束。我家世代都在祭祀中担任职务，自鲁襄会以来，从未改变。
English: Jingbo said to Dazai, "Luzhou will hold a sacrifice for God and the former king on the day of Shangxing in October, and it will end on the day of Jixing. My family has held positions in the sacrifice for generations, and it has never changed since the time of the Lü Xianghui.

古文：若其不会，祝宗将曰： 吴实然。  
现代文：如果我不参加祭祀，在祭祀时，主持人将会说， 这是吴国造成的。 
English: If I don't participate in the ritual, during the ritual, the host will say, "This is caused by the State of Wu."

古文：嚭言于夫差。
现代文：太宰把此话告诉了夫差，夫差把景伯放回了鲁国。
English: Dazai told this to Fucha, and Fucha released Jingbo back to Lu.

古文：归之，子贡闻之，见于孔子曰： 子服氏之子拙于说矣，以实获囚，以诈得免。 
现代文：子贡听说此事，见到孔子说： 子服氏之子太不会说话了，因为说实话受到囚禁，又因为说假话而被释放。 
English: When Zigong heard about this, he saw Confucius and said, "The son of Zifu is too dumb to speak. He was imprisoned for telling the truth and released for telling a lie.

古文：孔子曰： 吴子为夷德，可欺而不可以实。
现代文：孔子说： 吴王信奉边境少数部族的道德，可以欺骗而不可以讲实话。
English: Confucius said: King Wu believes in the morality of the border minority tribes, and can deceive but cannot tell the truth.

古文：是听者之蔽，非说者之拙。 
现代文：这是听话人的毛病，不是说话人拙劣。 
English: It is the fault of the listener, not the speaker.

古文：叔孙氏之车士，曰子锄商，采薪于大野，获麟焉；折其前左足，载以归。
现代文：叔孙氏的车夫子钅且商在大野打柴，抓到一只麒麟。他折断了麒麟的左前足，用车子载了回来。
English: Mr. Sun's uncle, a cart driver and trader, was collecting firewood in Ono when he caught a unicorn. He broke the unicorn's left front leg and brought it back in his cart.

古文：叔孙以为不祥，弃之于郭外，使人告孔子曰： 有麇而角者何也？ 
现代文：叔孙氏认为不吉利，把麒麟抛弃在城外。派人告诉孔子说： 有一只嶂子而有角，这是什么呢？ 
English: Uncle Sun thought it was unlucky and left the unicorn outside the city. He sent someone to tell Confucius, "What is a mule with horns?

古文：孔子往观之，曰： 麟也。胡为来哉？
现代文：孔子前往观看说： 这是麒麟啊，是从哪里来的呢？
English: Confucius went to have a look and said, "This is a giraffe, where did it come from?"

古文：胡为来哉？ 
现代文：是从哪里来的呢？ 
English: Where did it come from?

古文：反袂拭面，涕泣沾衿。
现代文：他把袖子翻过来擦着脸，眼泪把衣服都弄湿了。
English: He rolled up his sleeve and wiped his face, tears wetting his clothes.

古文：叔孙闻之，然后取之。
现代文：叔孙氏听了孔子的话，就把麒麟取了来。
English: After listening to the words of Confucius, Uncle Sun took the unicorn.

古文：子贡问曰： 夫子何泣尔？ 
现代文：子贡问道： 老师为什么哭泣呢？ 
English: Zigong asked: Why is the teacher crying?

古文：孔子曰： 麟之至，为明王也。
现代文：孔子曰： 麒麟出现，是圣明君王出现的征兆。
English: Confucius said: "The appearance of the unicorn is a sign of the emergence of the King of Wisdom."

古文：出非其时而见害，吾是以伤焉。 
现代文：但出现的不是时候而被害，因此伤心啊！ 
English: However, it was not the right time for it to appear, and it was damaged, so it was sad!

