古文：李俊李赤韦浦郑驯魏朋道政坊宅郑琼罗
现代文：李俊李赤韦浦郑驯魏朋道政坊宅郑琼罗
English: Li Jun, Li Chia, Wei Pu, Zheng Jian, Wei Peng, Tao Zheng, Zheng Qiong Luo

古文：李俊
现代文：李俊
English: Li Jun

古文：岳州刺史李俊举进士，连不中第。
现代文：岳州刺史李俊当年考进士，连续多次没有考中。
English: Yuezhou painter Li Jun failed the entrance examination several times in a row.

古文：贞元二年，有故人国子祭酒包佶者，通于主司，援成之。
现代文：贞元二年，有个旧友是国子监祭酒包佶，通报给主事，帮助成就功名。
English: In the second year of the Zhengyuan era, an old friend, Guo Zi, who was the overseer of the festival of wine and bread, reported to the main thing and helped to achieve fame.

古文：榜前一日，当以名闻执政。
现代文：发榜前一天，应当把名字通报给执政。
English: The day before the list is published, the names should be notified to the government.

古文：初五更，俊将候佶，里门未开，立马门侧。
现代文：刚五更，李俊就等候包佶。里门没开，停马在门旁。
English: Just after five o'clock, Li Jun was waiting for Baojun. The inner door was not open, and the horse stopped next to the door.

古文：旁有卖糕者，其气烛烛。
现代文：旁边有个卖糕的，那糕热气腾腾。
English: There's a cake seller next to me, and the cake is steaming.

古文：有一吏若外郡之邮檄者，小囊毡帽，坐于其侧，颇有欲糕之色。
现代文：有一个小吏好象外地来投递文书的，拿着小袋，头戴毡帽，坐在他的旁边，很有要吃糕的神色。
English: A clerk, who seemed to have come from out of town to deliver documents, holding a small bag and wearing a skullcap, sat next to him, looking very eager to eat cake.

古文：俊为买而食之，客甚喜，啗数片。
现代文：李俊买糕让他吃，客人很高兴，吃了几片。
English: Li Jun bought a cake and let him eat it. The guest was very happy and ate a few pieces.

古文：俄而里门开，众竞出，客独附俊马曰：愿请间。
现代文：一会儿里门打开，众人都走出来。客人独自靠着李俊的马说：请让我悄悄地告诉你。
English: After a while, the inner door opened and everyone came out. The guest leaned against Li Jun's horse and said, "Please let me tell you quietly."

古文：曰：送堂之榜在此，可自寻之。
现代文：俊低下听他说：我是冥府送进士榜的小吏，你不是那伙人。俊说：是的。说：送堂上的榜在这里，你可自己寻找。
English: Jun bowed down and listened to him. "I am a minor official who was sent to the hall of fame by the underworld. You are not from that group." Jun said, "Yes." He said, "The list on the hall of fame is here. You can look for it yourself."

古文：因出视。
现代文：于是拿出来让他看。
English: So I took it out and showed it to him.

古文：俊无名，垂泣曰：苦心笔砚，二十余年，偕计者亦十年。
现代文：没有李俊的名，低头哭泣道：苦心读书作文章，二十多年，一同计谋的也十年了。
English: Without the name of Li Jun, he bowed his head and wept, "I have been painstakingly reading and writing articles for more than 20 years, and we have been plotting together for 10 years.

古文：今复无名，岂终无成乎？
现代文：今又没名，难道终身也不能成名吗？
English: Now that I'm no longer famous, can't I be famous forever?

古文：曰：君之成名，在十年之外，禄位甚盛。今欲求之，亦非难。但于本录耗半，且多屯剥，才获一郡，如何？
现代文：客说：你成名，在十年之后，官位很高，现在要得到它，也并不难，只是在本册没有多大希望，而且多遭遇不幸，才能获得一郡，怎么样？
English: The guest said: You are famous, after ten years, the official rank is very high, now it is not difficult to get it, but there is not much hope in this book, and it is more unfortunate to get a county, how about it?

古文：俊曰：所求者名，名得足矣。
现代文：俊说：所要追求的是功名，功名得到就满足了。
English: Jun said, "What I want to pursue is fame, and when I get fame, I will be satisfied."

古文：客曰：能行少赂于冥吏，即于此，取其同姓者易其名，可乎？
现代文：客说：可以向冥吏稍微贿赂一下，就在这上面，找同姓换掉他的名字，可以吗？
English: The customer said, "Can you bribe the steward a little, and change his name to match your last name, just like that?

古文：俊问：几何可？
现代文：俊问多少钱可以。
English: Jun can ask how much it costs.

古文：曰：阴钱三万贯。某感恩而以诚告，其钱非某敢取，将遗牍吏。来日午时送可也。
现代文：说：阴间的钱三万贯，我感谢你的恩惠而诚心告诉你，那钱不是我敢要的，将给牍吏，明天午时送钱就可以。
English: I thank you for your kindness and sincerely tell you that the money is not what I dared to ask for. It will be given to the bailiff. You can send the money tomorrow at noon.

古文：复授笔，使俊自注。
现代文：又给他笔，让俊自己看。
English: He also gave him a pen, and let Jun read it for himself.

古文：从上有故太子少师李夷简名，俊欲揩之，客遽曰：不可，此人禄重，未易动也。
现代文：上边有故太子少师李夷简的名字，俊要擦去。客急忙说：不可以，这个人奉禄重，不能轻易改动。
English: On the top, there was the name of the late prince's apprentice, Li Yijian, and Jun wanted to erase it. The customer hurriedly said, "No, this person has a high rank and cannot be changed easily."

古文：又其下有李温名，客曰：可矣。
现代文：又在他的下面有李温的名字。客说：可以。
English: He also has Li Wen's name below him. The customer said, "Okay."

古文：乃揩去温字，注俊字。
现代文：便擦去温字，写上俊字。
English: He then erased the word "warm" and wrote "happy."

古文：客遽卷而行曰：无违约。
现代文：客就急忙卷起而走说：不要失约。
English: The guest hurriedly rolled up and left, saying, "Don't miss your appointment.

古文：即而俊诣佶，佶未冠，闻俊来怒，出曰：吾与主司分深，一言状头可致。公何躁甚？频见问：吾其轻言者耶？
现代文：不久之后李俊到包佶处。佶没戴帽子，听说俊来而恼怒，出来说：我和主词交情深，一句话状元就可得到，你为什么特别急躁，频频来问，我是轻易说话的人吗？
English: Soon after, Li Jun went to Bao Bao's place. Bao didn't wear a hat, and when he heard that Jun was coming, he got angry and came out to say: I am very familiar with the subject, and I can get the gist of a sentence. Why are you particularly impatient and frequently come to ask, am I a person who speaks easily?

古文：俊再拜对曰：俊恳于名者，若恩决此一朝。今当呈榜之晨，冒责奉谒。
现代文：俊再拜回答说：俊对功名恳切，你的恩德决定在此一朝，现在是呈送榜文的早晨，冒着责怪来拜见。
English: Jun Zai Bai replied: "Jun is earnest about the merits. Your benefactor decided to visit you on this morning, the morning of the presentation of the letter of recommendation, braving reproach.

古文：佶唯唯，色犹不平。俊愈忧之。
现代文：佶答应了，怒声还没平息，俊更加担心，就灵活服侍等佶出跟随着。
English: Zhai agreed, but before the anger had subsided, Jun was even more worried, so he flexibly served and waited for Zhai to follow.

古文：乃变服伺佶出随之，经皇城东此隅，逢春官怀其榜，将赴中书。佶揖问曰：前言遂否。
现代文：经过皇城东北角，遇着一个礼部官吏怀揣那榜文，将要到中出，佶打揖问道：以前和你说的办没办？
English: After passing through the northeast corner of the imperial city, he met a ceremonial official who was carrying the document and was about to leave, and he asked, "Didn't you do what you said before?"

古文：春官曰：诚知获罪，负荆不足以谢。
现代文：礼部官说：本来知道得罪，负荆也不足谢罪。
English: The etiquette official said, "If you know that you have committed a sin, it is not enough to bear the brunt of it.

古文：今君移妄于某，盖以某官闲也。平生交契，今日绝矣！
现代文：听了愤怒说道：季布所以在天下闻名，是因为能够说话算数，现在你说话不算数按到我身上，大概是认为我没用了，平生的交情，今天断绝！不打揖而走。
English: After listening to the anger, he said: Qibou is famous all over the world for being able to speak, and now you are pressing me to speak, probably thinking that I am useless. Life-long friendships, break up today! Leave without a hiccup.

古文：不揖而行，春官遂追之曰：迫于豪权，留之不得。窃恃深顾，处于形骸，见责如此。宁得罪于权右耳。请同寻榜，揩名填之。
现代文：礼部官忙追他说：迫于豪门权贵，留不得，我凭着长远的考虑，在形体之外，被责怪如此，宁可得罪于权右了，请共同寻找榜，擦名填上他。
English: The etiquette officer hurriedly chased after him and said, "Forced by the rich and powerful, I can't stay. Based on long-term considerations, outside the body, I was blamed for this. I'd rather be offended by the powerful. Please look for the list together and fill in his name.

古文：祭酒开榜，见李公夷简，欲揩，春官急曰：此人宰相处分，不可去。
现代文：祭酒打开榜，看见李夷简，要擦。礼部官急忙说：此人是宰相安排的，不能擦去。
English: Opening the list of sacrificial wine, he saw Li Yizhen and wanted to wipe it. The ceremonial officer hurriedly said: This person was arranged by the prime minister and cannot be wiped away.

古文：指其下李温曰：可矣。
现代文：指那下边的李温说：可以。
English: Li Wen pointed to the lower side and said, "Yes."

古文：遂揩去温字，注俊字。
现代文：遂擦温字，写上俊字。
English: He then erased the word "warm" and wrote "happy."

古文：及榜出，俊名果在已前所指处。
现代文：等到榜发出，俊名果然在以前所指的地方。
English: When the list was issued, Junna was indeed in the place previously indicated.

古文：其日午时，随众参谢，不及赴糕客之约。
现代文：那天午时，随着大家参拜谢恩，没能按照糕客的要求去办。
English: That afternoon, with everyone paying tribute to Shane, I couldn't do it as the cake baker asked.

古文：追暮将归，道逢糕客，泣示之背曰：为君所误，得杖矣。
现代文：天将晚才回去，在路上遇见糕客，哭泣着让看他的背并说道：被你耽误，挨杖打了。
English: When he got home late, he met a cake baker on the road, who wept and asked him to watch his back, saying: "You delayed me, and I got a cane."

古文：牍吏将举勘，某更他祈。其止之，某背实有重杖者。
现代文：牍吏将要进行调查，我再没有其它的要求，让我们共同制止他。糕客的背确实在重重杖打的痕迹。
English: The gendarmes are going to investigate, I have no other demands, let's stop him together.

古文：俊惊谢之，且曰：当如何？
现代文：俊惊恐谢罪，并且说：该怎么办呢？
English: Horrified, Jun pleaded guilty and said, "What should I do?

古文：客曰：来日午时，送五万缗，亦可无追勘之厄。
现代文：客说：明天午时，送五万缗钱，亦可无追查的灾难。
English: The customer said: Tomorrow at noon, I will send 50,000 baht, and there will be no traceable disaster.

古文：俊曰：诺。
现代文：俊说：是。
English: Jun said, "Yes."

古文：及到时焚之，遂不复见。
现代文：等到时焚化了，就再没看见。
English: By the time it was incinerated, it was no longer visible.

古文：然后筮仕之后，追勘贬降，不绝于道。才得岳州刺史，未几而终。
现代文：可是李俊初次做官以后，追查贬谪降职，不断发生，才得到岳州刺史，不久就死了。
English: However, after Li Junmo became an official for the first time, the investigation of demotion and demotion continued to occur, and only then did he get the Yuezhou stabbing history. He died soon after.

古文：李赤
现代文：李赤
English: Li Chia

古文：贞元中，吴郡进士李赤者，与赵敏之相同游闽。
现代文：贞元年间，吴郡进士李赤，与赵敏之到闽游览。
English: In the first year of the Zhengyuan era, Li Chieh, a member of the Wu County Jin Shi, and Zhao Minzhi went on an excursion to Handan.

古文：行及衢之信安，去县三十里，宿于馆厅。
现代文：走到衢州的信安，距离县城三十里，住在馆驿里。
English: I walked to Xin'an in Zhangzhou, thirty miles from the county seat, and lived in a guesthouse.

古文：宵分，忽有一妇人入庭中。赤于睡中蹶起下阶，与之揖让。
现代文：夜半，忽然有一个妇人进到院中，赤在睡梦中急忙起来走下台阶，与她行揖让礼节。
English: In the middle of the night, a woman suddenly entered the courtyard. In his sleep, Red hurriedly got up and walked down the steps to be polite with her.

古文：良久既上厅，开箧取纸笔，作一书与其亲，云：某为郭氏所选为婿。
现代文：过了很久才进屋，打开书箱，拿出纸笔，写了一封信给他父母，说：我被郭氏选作女婿。
English: It was a long time before he entered the house, opened the bookcase, took out a pen and paper, and wrote a letter to his parents, saying, "I have been chosen by Mr. Guo as his son-in-law."

古文：词旨重叠，讫，乃封于箧中。
现代文：词意重迭，写完，就把信封在书箧中，又下到庭院。
English: After finishing writing, he put the envelope in his satchel and went down to the courtyard.

古文：复下庭，妇人抽其巾缢之，敏之走出大叫，妇人乃收巾而走。
现代文：妇人抽出巾带勒他。敏之跑出大叫，妇人就收起巾带跑了。
English: The woman pulled out her handkerchief and tugged at him. Minzhi ran out screaming, so the woman put away her handkerchief and ran away.

古文：乃视其书，赤如梦中所为。
现代文：等到看那书信，赤象梦中所做的。
English: Wait until you read the letter that the red elephant did in the dream.

古文：明日，又偕行，南次建中驿，白昼又失赤。敏之即遽往厕，见赤坐于床，大怒敏之曰：方当礼谢，为尔所惊。
现代文：第二天，又一起出游，向南住在建中驿。白天赤又失踪，敏之就急忙到茅房，看见赤坐在床上，非常生气地说道：正要以礼相谢，被你惊醒了。
English: The next day, they went on another trip together and went south to live in Jianzhonglu. During the day, Red disappeared again, and Minzhi hurried to the cottage. Seeing Red sitting on the bed, he said angrily, "I was just about to thank you for your courtesy, but you woke me up."

古文：浃日至闽，属寮有与赤游旧者，设燕饮次，又失赤。
现代文：十天后到达闽，属下有和赤交游的旧友，设宴饮酒的地方，又失去了赤。
English: Ten days later, he arrived in Handan, where his subordinates had an old friend who had crossed paths with the Reds, where they had a banquet and drank alcohol. He lost the Reds again.

古文：敏之疾于厕，见赤僵仆于地，气已绝矣。
现代文：敏之又急忙到茅房去找，看见赤僵硬地倒在地上，气已经断了。
English: Toshizhi hurried to the cottage again to look for him, and saw him fall to the ground, stiff as a board, his breath gone.

古文：韦浦
现代文：韦浦
English: Weipo

古文：韦浦者，自寿州士曹赴选，至阌乡逆旅，方就食，忽有一人前拜曰：客归元昶，常力鞭辔之任，愿备门下厮养卒。
现代文：韦浦，从寿州士曹去候选。到达阌乡旅馆里，正要吃饭，忽有一人上前拜见说：我是归元昶，平常做马夫工作，希望在你门下做个马夫。
English: Weipu, a candidate from Shoushu Shizhao, arrived at the Huanxiang Hotel and was about to eat when a man came forward to say: "I'm Gui Yuan, I usually work as a groom, I hope to be a groom under your door."

古文：浦视之，衣甚垢而神彩爽迈，因谓曰：尔何从而至？
现代文：浦看他衣服很脏，可是精神豪爽超逸。于是对他说：你从哪里来？
English: She saw that his clothes were dirty, but his spirit was high. So she said to him, "Where are you from?"

古文：对曰：某早蒙冯六郎职在河中，岁月颇多，给事亦勤，甚见亲任。
现代文：回答说：我以前在冯六郎处任职在河中，时间很长了，办事也勤快，很被信任。
English: He replied, "I used to work for Feng Rokuro at Hezhen. It was a long time, I worked diligently, and I was trusted.

古文：昨六郎绛州轩辕四郎同至此，求卞判官买腰带。某于其下丐茶酒直，遂有言语相及。
现代文：昨天六郎和绛辕四郎一同到这里，求卞判官买腰带，我在他下边要茶酒钱，就有言语相撞。
English: Yesterday, Rokuro and Kasushiro came here together and begged the judge to buy a belt. When I asked him for money for tea and wine, there was a clash of words.

古文：六郎谓某有所欺，斥留于此。
现代文：六郎认为我有所欺骗他，驱逐我留在这里。
English: Rokuro thought I had cheated him and banished me to stay here.

古文：某佣贱，复鲜资用，非有符牒，不能越关禁。
现代文：我平庸低贱，又少钱物，没有符牒，不能过关禁。
English: I am mediocre and lowly, and have little money and things. I don't have a certificate, and I can't pass through the customs.

古文：伏知二十二郎将西去，偿因而获归，为愿足矣。或不弃顽下，终赐鞭驱，小人之分，又何幸焉？
现代文：我知二十二郎将向西去，能够得到归，做为愿望就满足了，如不嫌弃我，让我为你扬鞭策马，对我这样的人来说，就是十分荣幸了！
English: I know that Twenty-two-year-old will go west, and if he can return, his wish will be fulfilled. If you don't hate me, let me whip your horse for you. For someone like me, it's a great honor!

古文：浦许之。
现代文：浦答应了他。
English: Ura agreed.

古文：食毕，乃行十数里，承顺指顾，无不先意，浦极谓得人。
现代文：吃完饭，才走了十几里，按照指点，没有不如意的，浦认为真正得到了人才。
English: After eating, he walked more than ten miles. According to the instructions, there was nothing unsatisfactory, and Pu thought that he really got talent.

古文：俄而憩于茶肆，有扁乘数十适至，方解辕纵牛，龁草路边。
现代文：不久在茶馆里休息。有扁乘几十辆来到这里，才解开车辕放牛，在路边吃草。
English: Soon we were resting in a teahouse. Dozens of flatbed trucks had come here, only to drive away to graze cattle and graze on the roadside.

古文：归趋过牛群，以手批一牛足，牛即鸣痛不能前。
现代文：归快步走过牛群，用手打一牛足。牛就鸣叫疼痛不能前行。
English: Gui walked briskly through the herd of cattle, striking a cow's foot with his hand. The cow cried out in pain, unable to move forward.

古文：主初不之见，遽将求医，归谓曰：吾常为兽医，为尔疗此牛。
现代文：主人开始没看见他，就要找兽医。归对他说：我曾经当过兽医，给你治疗这头牛。
English: When his master didn't see him at first, he went to find a veterinarian, and Gui said to him, "I used to be a veterinarian, and I treated this cow for you.

古文：即於墙下捻碎少许土，傅牛脚上，因疾驱数十步，牛遂如故。众皆兴叹。
现代文：就在墙下捻碎少量土，敷在牛脚上。又让快跑几十步，牛便如从前一样，大家都赞叹不已。
English: He just crushed a small amount of soil under the wall and laid it on the cow's feet. And let it run fast for dozens of steps, the cow will be the same as before, everyone is amazed.

古文：其主乃赏茶二斤，即进於浦曰：庸奴幸蒙见诺，思以薄伎所获，傚献芹者。
现代文：那主人就赏了二斤茶叶。归走到浦前说：平凡的奴才幸蒙你允许同行，想用小小的伎俩所获得的，敬献给你。
English: The master rewarded him with two kilos of tea leaves. Gui went to Pu Yuan and said: "Your humble servant is fortunate to have been allowed to accompany you. I would like to dedicate to you what I have gained with my little trick.

古文：浦益怜之。
现代文：浦更加喜欢他。
English: Ura likes him even more.

古文：次於潼关，主人有稚儿戏於门下，乃见归以手挃其背，稚儿即惊闷绝，食顷不寤。
现代文：住在潼关，主人有个小儿子在门前玩，就见归用手撞他心背，小儿就惊吓没气，一顿饭的时间没醒。
English: Living in Shaoguan, the owner had a small son playing in front of the door, and when he saw Guye using his hand to hit him in the back of the heart, the child was so scared that he lost his breath and didn't wake up for a meal.

古文：主人曰：是状为中恶。疾呼二娘，久方至。
现代文：主人说，这状态是中邪，赶紧叫二娘，很久才到。
English: The master said that this state was a middle evil, and called the second daughter immediately. It took a long time to arrive.

古文：二娘巫者也，至则以琵琶迎神，欠嚏良久，曰：三郎至矣。传语主人，此客鬼为崇，吾且录之矣。
现代文：二娘是巫婆，到了就用琵琶迎神，呵欠喷嚏了好久，曰：三郎到了，传告主人，这是外鬼作崇。我记录他了。
English: The second daughter was a witch, and when she arrived, she greeted the god with a lute, yawned and sneezed for a long time, and said, "Saburo has arrived, tell your master, this is the work of a foreign spirit. I have recorded him."

古文：言其状与服色，真归也。
现代文：说他的形状和衣服颜色，真是归。
English: The shape of him, the colour of his clothes, it's just amazing.

古文：又曰：若以兰汤浴之，此患除矣。
现代文：又说：如果用兰汤给他洗澡，这病患就消除了。
English: And he said, If they wash him with the broth of the lilies of the field, he shall be clean.

古文：如言而稚儿立愈。
现代文：按照说的去做，小儿立刻就好了。
English: Do as you're told and you'll be fine in no time.

古文：浦见归所为，已恶之。
现代文：浦看归所做的事情，已经厌恶了。
English: Urakane has come to loathe what he has done.

古文：及巫者有说，呼则不至矣。
现代文：想告诉巫婆，呼叫她却已经晚了。
English: It was too late to call the witch to tell her.

古文：明日又行，次赤水西。
现代文：第二天又走，停留在赤水西。
English: The next day, they left again, staying in the west of Akamizu.

古文：路旁忽见元昶，破弊紫衫，有若负而顾步甚重，曰：某不敢以为羞耻，便不见二十二郎。
现代文：路旁忽然看见归之昶，破料的紫衫，好象背负东西脚步沉重，说：我不敢因为羞耻，便不见二十二郎，我是鬼。
English: On the side of the road, I suddenly saw Kechizome, wearing a torn purple shirt, as if he was carrying something and his steps were heavy. He said, "I don't dare not to see Nijuro because I'm ashamed. I'm a ghost."

古文：某客鬼也，昨日之事，不敢复言，已见责於华岳神君。巫者所云三郎，即金天也。某为此界，不果闲行，受笞至重。
现代文：昨天的事，不敢再说，已被华岳神君责罚了。巫者所说的三郎，就是金天，我是此地界的，不敢果决闲走，受笞打到这么重，才见二十二郎。
English: Yesterday's incident, I dare not say, has been punished by Huayue Shinkun. The sorcerer said that Saburo is the golden sky. I am from this area, and I dare not walk around idly. I was beaten so badly that I could only see the 22nd lord.

古文：方见二十二郎，到京当得本处县令，无足忧也。他日亦此伫还车耳。
现代文：你到京能得到担任本处县令，没有什么可以担忧的，他日还在这伫立等你回还的车骑。
English: If you go to Beijing, you can get a job as a county magistrate of this office. There is nothing to worry about. The next day, you will still be standing here waiting for your ride back.

古文：浦云：尔前所说冯六郎等，岂皆人也？
现代文：浦说：你以前所说的冯六郎等，难道都是人吗？
English: Pu said, "Are all the people you mentioned before, such as Feng Liulong, really human beings?

古文：归曰：冯六郎名夷，即河伯，轩辕天子之爱子也。卞判官名和，即昔刖足者也。
现代文：归说：冯六郎名叫夷，就是阿神，是轩辕天子的受子；卞判官名叫和，就是从前刖足的，善于区分宝贝，地府让他做荆山玉使判官。
English: Gui said, "Feng Rokuro's name is Yi, which means Ah Shen, and he is the adopted son of Xuan Zang Tianzi. The judge's name is He, who used to be lame, and is good at distinguishing treasures. Di Fu let him be the judge of Jing Shan Yuping.

古文：善别宝，地府以为荆山玉使判官，轩辕家奴客，小事不相容忍。遽令某失冯六郎意。
现代文：轩辕家奴客，小事不能互相容忍，就命令我让冯六郎失意。
English: Xuanzang's lackeys, who could not tolerate each other's trifles, ordered me to let Feng Rokuro down.

古文：今日迍踬，实此之由。
现代文：今天艰难不利，实在是这缘由。
English: Today's difficult and unfavourable conditions are really the reason for this.

古文：浦曰：冯何得第六？
现代文：浦说：冯为什么得第六？
English: Pu said: Why did Feng get the sixth?

古文：曰：冯水官也，水成数六耳。
现代文：说：冯是水官，水成数是六。
English: He said: Feng is a naval officer, and the number of water is six.

古文：故黄帝四子，轩辕四郎，即其最小者也。
现代文：故黄帝有四个儿子，轩辕是四子，就他是最小的。
English: The Yellow Emperor had four sons, and Xuan Zang was the youngest.

古文：浦其年选授霍丘令，如其言。
现代文：浦那年被选作霍丘县令，与他所言相合。
English: Pune was elected as the Hoxha County Commissioner that year, in line with his words.

古文：及赴官至此，虽无所覩，肸飨如有物焉。
现代文：上任途中来到这里，虽然什么也没看，大的宴会好象有鬼在那里。
English: I came here on my way to work, and although I didn't see anything, the big banquet was like a ghost.

古文：郑驯
现代文：郑驯
English: Zheng Taming

古文：郑驯，贞元中进士擢第，调补门下典仪，第三十五。
现代文：郑驯，贞元年间考中进士，调补门下典仪，排行第三十五。
English: Zheng Tame, Zhen Yuan's junior high school entrance examination, adjusted the ceremony, ranked thirty-fifth.

古文：庄居在华阴县南五六里，为一县之胜。
现代文：庄园在华阴县南五六里处，是一县的胜地。
English: The manor is located five or six miles south of Huayin County, and is a scenic spot in the county.

古文：驯兄弟四人，曰駉，曰骥，曰騊。
现代文：驯有兄弟四人，叫駉、叫骥、叫騊。
English: There are four brothers who are tamed. They call meow, meow, meow.

古文：騊与驯，有科名时誉，县大夫泊邑客无不倾向之。
现代文：騊和驯，有科名和名望。县大夫到邑客没有不佩服他的。
English: The county doctor did not fail to admire him when he came to the town.

古文：驯与渭桥给纳判官高叔让中外相厚，时往求丐。
现代文：驯与渭桥给纳判官高叔让中外交情深厚，时常去求助。
English: Judge Gao Jian, who gave Taming and Fenqiao to Nana, had a deep affinity for China and often went to Nana for help.

古文：高为设鲙食，其夜，暴病霍乱而卒。
现代文：高给他做鲙鱼吃。那夜，突然得霍乱病而死。
English: Gao made him eel to eat. That night, Gao suddenly died of cholera.

古文：时方暑，不及候其家人，即为具棺椁衾禭敛之，冥器奴马，无不精备。
现代文：当时正是暑天，来不及等他家人，就给他备齐了棺槨衣被后入殓，冥器奴马无不精心准备。
English: It was a hot day at the time, and his family couldn't wait any longer, so they prepared a coffin for him, put a blanket over him, and put him in the coffin. Everything was meticulously prepared.

古文：题冥器童背，一曰鹰儿，一曰鹘子。马有青色者，题云撒豆搃。
现代文：在冥器童子心背上题字，一个叫鹰儿，一个叫鹘子，马是青色的，题名撒豆骢。
English: On the back of the heart of the necromancer, there is an inscription, one is called Eagle, one is called Dove, the horse is blue, and the title is Scatter the Beans.

古文：十数日，柩归华阴别墅。
现代文：十多天，灵柩运回华阴别墅。
English: For more than ten days, the coffin was transported back to Huayin Villa.

古文：时邑客李道古游虢川半月矣，未知训之死也。
现代文：当时邑客李道古游览虢川半月了，不知道驯死。
English: At that time, Li Daogu, a guest of the town, had been on a tour of Luchuan for half a month and did not know how to tame it.

古文：回至潼关西永丰仓路，忽逢驯自北来。
现代文：回到潼关西永丰仓。路上，忽然遇到郑驯从北边过来，车马仆从很盛大。
English: On the way back to Yongfengcang, Shanxi Province, I suddenly met Zheng Jian coming from the north. The carriage and horse procession was grand.

古文：车仆甚盛，李曰：别来旬日，行李何盛耶？
现代文：李说：分别十来天，行李为什么这么盛大呢？
English: Li said: It's been ten days, why is the luggage so big?

古文：色气忻然谓李曰：多荷渭桥老高所致。
现代文：声色很高兴的样子对李说：多蒙渭桥老高给操办的。
English: He said to Li with a happy tone of voice, "More than Mengqiao, Lao Gao is in charge of the operation.

古文：即呼二童鹰儿、鹘子参李大郎。
现代文：就叫二童子鹰儿、鹘子参拜李大郎。
English: They called the two boys, Eagle and Dove, to come and pay homage to Li Dairo.

古文：戏谓曰：明时文士，乃蓄鹰鹘耶？
现代文：开玩笑说：盛明之时的文人学士，也养鹰和鹘呀？
English: Jokingly, he said: "Writers and scholars at the time of Shengming also raised eagles and cormorants?

古文：驯又指所乘马曰：兼请看仆撒豆搃。
现代文：驯又指所乘的马说：请看看我的撒豆搃马。
English: The trainer also pointed to the horse he was riding and said, "Please look at my bean sprinkling horse.

古文：李曰：仆颇有羡色如何？
现代文：李曰：我很羡慕你怎么办？
English: Li said, "I envy you very much. How about you?"

古文：驯曰：但勤修令德，致之何难。
现代文：训曰：只要努力修炼美德，得到还有什么困难？
English: The sermon said: "As long as you work hard to cultivate virtue, what are the difficulties in getting it?

古文：乃相与并辔，至野狐泉，李欲留食，驯以马策过曰：去家咫尺，何必食为。
现代文：就共同并排骑马，到了野狐泉。李想留驯吃饭，驯把马鞭打过去，说：距离家只有咫尺，何必吃饭呢。
English: They rode side by side and arrived at Wild Fox Spring. Li wanted to stay and eat with the trainer. The trainer whipped the horse and said, "We are only a few feet away from home, why do we have to eat?"

古文：有顷，到华阴岳庙东。驯揖李曰：自此迳路归矣。
现代文：一会儿，到了华阴岳庙东边，驯向李作揖说：从这小路回去了。
English: After a while, when he arrived at the east side of Huayin Yue Temple, he said to Li Zuojun: "I went back from this path."

古文：李曰：且相随至县，幸不回路。
现代文：李说：暂且跟随到县里，正好不绕道。
English: Li said, "For the time being, I will follow you to the county, just don't take a detour."

古文：驯曰：仆离家半月，还要早归。
现代文：驯说：我离家已半月，还要早点回去。
English: Tamer said: I have been away from home for half a month, and I want to go back early.

古文：固不肯过岳庙。
现代文：坚持不肯过岳庙。
English: He was adamant that he would not go past the Yue Temple.

古文：须臾，李至县，问吏曰：令与诸官何在？
现代文：一会儿，李到了县里，问官吏说：县令和各位官吏在哪里？
English: After a while, Li arrived at the county and asked the officials: "Where is the county magistrate and the officials?"

古文：曰：适往县南慰郑三十四郎矣。
现代文：说：到县南慰问郑三十四郎去了。
English: He said: I went to the southern part of the county to offer my condolences to Zheng Sanjie.

古文：李曰：慰何事？
现代文：李说：因何事慰问？
English: Li said: "What is the reason for the condolences?

古文：吏曰：郑三十五郎，今月初向渭桥亡，神柩昨夜归庄耳。
现代文：吏说：郑三十五郎，今月初去渭桥死了，灵柩昨夜回庄。
English: The official said, "Zheng Sanjugolang, who died at the beginning of this month, went to Fenqiao, and his coffin came back to the village last night.

古文：李冁然曰：我适与郑偕自潼关来。
现代文：李笑着说：我刚才和郑驯一同从潼关来。
English: Li said with a smile, "I just came from Shouguan with Zheng Jian.

古文：一县人吏皆曰不虚，李愕然，犹未之信，即策马疾驰，往郑庄。
现代文：一县人都说这可不能虚言。李很惊愕，还不信他们。就策马疾驰，前往郑庄。
English: Everyone in the county said it couldn't be a lie. Li was stunned and didn't believe them. So he galloped to Zhengzhuang.

古文：中路逢县吏崔频、县丞裴悬、主簿卢士琼、县尉庄儒，及其弟庄古、邑客韦纳、郭存中，并自郑庄回。立马叙言，李乃大惊，良久方能言，且忧身之及祸。
现代文：中途遇见县吏崔频、县丞裴悬、主簿卢土琼、县尉庄儒、及其弟庄古、邑客韦纳、郭存中，一起从郑庄回来，停马叙说，李才大惊，很久才能说出话，担忧自己将遭灾祸。
English: In the middle of the way, he met the county official Cui Fen, the county magistrate Pei Xing, the chief bookkeeper Lu Tu Qiong, the county lieutenant Zhuang Ru, and his younger brothers Zhuang Gu, the town guest Weina, and Guo Cunzhong. They came back from Zhengzhuang together, and stopped the horse and said that Li Cai was shocked and could not speak for a long time, worried that he would suffer a disaster.

古文：后往来者。往往於京城中闹处相逢，行李仆马，不异李之所见，而不复有言。
现代文：以后来往的人，常常在京城里热闹地方就遇见他，行李仆从马匹，与李所看见的没有差异，只是不再说话。
English: Those who came after him often met him in busy places in the capital. The luggage, servants and horses were no different from what Li had seen, except that he no longer spoke.

古文：魏朋
现代文：魏朋
English: Wei Peng

古文：建州刺史魏朋，辞满后，客居南昌。
现代文：建州刺史魏朋，辞官期满后，客居在南昌。
English: Jianzhou assassin Shi Wei Peng, after the expiration of his resignation, stayed in Nanchang.

古文：素无诗思，后遇病，迷惑失心，如有人相引接，勿索笔抄诗言：孤愤临清江，每睹向日晚。
现代文：平素没有写诗的心意，后来得病，精神失常，好象有人牵引他，忽然要笔抄写诗句：孤坟临清江，每睹向日晚。
English: He had never intended to write a poem. Later, he fell ill and suffered a mental breakdown. It was as if someone was pulling him, and he suddenly wanted to copy a poem: "A lonely grave is next to the Qingjiang River. Every day I see the sunset."

古文：松影摇长风，蟾光落岩甸。
现代文：松影摇长风，蟾光落岩甸。
English: Pine shadows swaying in the wind, twinkling in the rocks.

古文：故乡千里余，亲戚罕相见。
现代文：故乡千里余，亲戚罕相见。
English: My hometown is more than a thousand miles away, and I rarely see my relatives.

古文：望望空云山，哀哀泪如霰。
现代文：望望空云山，哀哀泪如霰。
English: Looking at the mountain of clouds in the sky, sorrowful tears flowed like ripples.

古文：恨为泉台客，复此异乡县。
现代文：恨为泉台路，复此异乡县。
English: Hate for the Quan Tai Road, this is a different county.

古文：愿言敦畴昔，忽以弃疵贱。
现代文：愿言敦畴昔，勿以弃疵贱。
English: I would like to say that the past is the past, and we should not abandon the imperfections.

古文：诗意如其亡妻以赠朋也。
现代文：诗的意思好象是他的亡妻用来赠送给郑朋的。
English: The meaning of the poem seems to have been used by his late wife as a gift to Zheng Peng.

古文：后十余日，朋卒。
现代文：后来十多天，郑朋死了。
English: More than ten days later, Zheng Peng passed away.

古文：道政坊宅
现代文：道政坊宅
English: Doushengfang House

古文：道政里十字街东，贞元中，有小宅，怪异日见，人居者必大遭凶祸。
现代文：道政里十字街东边，贞元年间，有一小宅院，奇异现象每天都可看见：人住在那里必然遭到大的灾祸。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan, there was a small mansion on the east side of the cross street in Doushengli. A strange phenomenon could be seen every day: people living there would inevitably suffer a great disaster.

古文：时进士房次卿假西院住，累月无患，乃众夸之云：仆前程事，可以自得矣。
现代文：当时进士房次卿租借西院住，一个多月也没遭祸患。于是大家夸奖说：他的前程，可以顺利得到。
English: At that time, Vice-Minister Jin Shifang rented the West Courtyard and lived there for more than a month without any misfortune. Therefore, everyone praised him and said that his future could be smooth.

古文：咸谓此宅凶，於次卿无何有。
现代文：都说这个宅院凶恶，对于次卿却没有什么。
English: They all say that this house is evil, but they have nothing against the Vice-Admiral.

古文：李直方闻而答曰：是先辈凶於宅。
现代文：李直方听说而答道：这是他比宅院还凶。
English: When Li Naofang heard about this, he replied, "That's because he's even more evil than Takuan."

古文：人皆大笑。
现代文：众人大笑。
English: The crowd roars with laughter.

古文：后为东平节度李师古买为进奏院。
现代文：后来被东平节度李师古买做进奏院。
English: Later, it was bought by Dongping Festival Master Li Shigu to be made into a concert hall.

古文：是时东平军每贺冬正常五六十人，鹰犬随之，武将军吏，烹炰屠宰，悉以为常。
现代文：这时东平军每当庆贺冬正常常有五六十人，鹰犬跟随着，武将军吏，烹煮屠宰，悉以为常。
English: At this time, whenever the Dongping Army celebrated the winter, there were usually fifty or sixty people, eagle dogs followed, military officers cooked and slaughtered, and it was considered normal.

古文：进士李章武初及第，亦负壮气，诘朝，访太史丞徐泽。
现代文：进士李章武刚刚及第，凭着年轻力壮，早晨，拜访太史丞徐泽，正巧他清早外出。
English: Younger brother Li Zhangwu, who was just in his second year, visited Grand Historian Xu Ze in the morning, and it happened that he went out early in the morning.

古文：遇早出，遂憩马於其院。
现代文：于是在那宅院停马休息。
English: So they stopped at the house to rest.

古文：此日东平军士悉归，忽见堂上有伛背衣黮绯老人，目且赤而有泪，临街曝阳。西轩有一衣暗黄裙白褡裆老母，荷担二笼，皆盛亡人碎骸及驴马等骨，又插六七枚人胁骨於其髻为钗，似欲移徙。
现代文：这天东平军士都回家了，忽然看见堂上有一个曲背穿着褐红色衣的老人，眼睛发红而且有泪，靠着台阶晒太阳；西轩有一个穿着暗黄色裙白褡裆的老太婆，肩上担着两个笼子，都盛着死人的碎骨和驴马等骨，又在她的发髻上插着六七个人胁骨当做发钗，好象挪动要走。
English: On this day, Sergeant Dongping went home and suddenly saw an old man with a hunched back wearing a brown-red robe, his eyes red and tearful, basking in the sun on the steps; Xixuan had an old woman in a dark yellow dress, carrying two cages on her shoulders, both containing dead people's broken bones and bones of donkeys and horses, and six or seven people's bones were stuck in her hair bun as a hair bun, as if she wanted to move.

古文：老人呼曰：四娘子何为至此？
现代文：老人叫道：四娘子为啥到这？
English: The old man exclaimed, "Why did the four daughters come here?"

古文：老母应曰：高八丈万福。
现代文：老太婆应道：给高八丈行礼致意。
English: The old woman replied, "I would like to pay my respects to Gao Hachijo."

古文：遽云：且辟八丈移去，近来此宅大蹀聒，求住不得也。
现代文：急忙说：暂且辞别八丈离去，近来这个宅院杂乱吵闹，不能住下去了。
English: He hurriedly said, "Let's call it quits for the time being. Lately, this house has been so noisy and cluttered that I can't live here anymore."

古文：章武知音亲说，此宅本凶。
现代文：章武的知心朋友亲戚说，这个宅院本来凶恶。
English: Zhang Wu's close friend and relative said that the house was originally evil.

古文：或云，章武因此玥粉黛耳。
现代文：有的说：章武因此得到神珠美女。
English: Some said: Zhang Wu got the divine pearl beauty as a result.

古文：郑琼罗
现代文：郑琼罗
English: Zheng Qiongluo

古文：段文昌从弟某者，贞元末，自信安还洛，暮达瓜洲，宿於舟中。
现代文：段文昌堂弟某某，在贞元末年，从信安回洛阳，晚上到达瓜洲，住在船里。
English: Duan Wenchang's cousin So-and-so, in the late Zhenyuan, returned to Luoyang from Xin'an, arrived in Guazhou in the evening, and lived in a boat.

古文：夜久弹琴，忽外有嗟叹声，止息即无。
现代文：夜深弹琴，忽然听到外面有叹息声。他停止弹琴，叹息声便没有了。
English: He was playing the lute late at night when he heard a sigh outside. He stopped playing and the sighing stopped.

古文：如此数四，乃缓轸还寝。
现代文：象这样好几次。
English: Like this several times.

古文：梦一女年二十余，形悴衣败，前拜曰：妾姓郑名琼罗，本居丹徒。父母早亡，依於孀嫂。
现代文：他便放松了琴弦回去睡觉，梦见一个二十多岁的女子，形容憔悴，衣裳破旧，女子走上前拜见他说：我姓郑叫琼罗，原本住在丹徒，父母早亡，依靠孀嫂。
English: He loosened the strings and went back to sleep. He dreamed of a woman in her twenties, described as gaunt, with shabby clothes. The woman came forward to see him and said, "My name is Zheng Qiong Rong. I used to live in Dantu. My parents died young, and I rely on my sister-in-law."

古文：嫂不幸又没，遂来杨子寻姨。
现代文：嫂子不幸又死去了，便到杨子寻找姨母。
English: Unfortunately, her sister-in-law died again, so she went to Yangzi to look for her aunt.

古文：夜至逆旅，市吏子王惟举乘醉逼辱，妾知不免，因以领巾绞颈自杀。
现代文：晚上到了客舍，市吏子王惟举乘着酒醉要强行侮辱我。我知道不能逃脱，便用领巾缠住脖子自杀。
English: When I arrived at the guest house in the evening, the city official, Wang Zi, was drunk and wanted to forcefully insult me. I knew I couldn't escape, so I wrapped a scarf around my neck and committed suicide.

古文：市吏子乃潜埋於鱼行西渠中。
现代文：市吏子便偷偷地将我埋在鱼行的西渠中。
English: The city official then secretly buried me in the west canal of the fish market.

古文：其夕，再见梦於杨子令石义，竟不为理。
现代文：那天晚上，我托梦给杨子令石义，他竟然不加理睬。
English: That night, I told Yang Ziling Shi Yi about my dream, but he turned a deaf ear.

古文：复见冤气於江，石尚谓非烟之祥，图而表奏。
现代文：我又让冤气出现在江上，石义还说那不是烟的吉凶预兆，画下来上奏。
English: I also let the anger appear on the river, Shiyi also said that it was not a smoke omen, draw it down and play it.

古文：抱恨四十年，无人为雪。
现代文：怨恨存在心里四十多年了，无人替我昭雪。
English: The grudge has existed in my heart for more than forty years, and no one has cleared it up for me.

古文：妾父母俱善琴，适听君琴声，奇弄翕响，不觉来此。
现代文：我父母都擅长弹琴，刚才听到您的琴声，非常和谐，不知不觉便来到这儿。
English: My parents are both good at playing the piano, and just now I heard your voice on the piano, it was very harmonious, and I came here without noticing.

古文：寻至洛北河清县温谷，访内弟樊元则，少有异术。
现代文：段某的堂弟找到洛北河清县温谷，拜访他的内弟樊元则。元则会一些特异的法术。
English: A cousin of Duan found Wen Gu, Heqing County, Luo Bei, to visit his brother-in-law, Yu Yuan Ze. Yuan Ze could perform some special spells.

古文：居数日，忽曰：兄安得一女鬼相随？请言遣之。
现代文：住了几天，元则忽然说：你怎么有一个女鬼尾随，请让我遣走她。
English: After staying for a few days, Yuan suddenly said, "How come you have a female ghost following you? Please let me send her away."

古文：乃张灯焚香作法，顷之，灯后窣窣有声，元则曰：是请纸笔也，好投纸笔于灯影中。
现代文：于是张灯烧香作法。一会儿，灯后发出窣窣的声响。元则说：这是请求纸金。立即将纸笔投在灯影中。
English: So they lit a lamp to burn incense. After a while, a beeping sound came from behind the lamp. Yuan Zi said, "This is a request for paper money." He immediately threw the paper and pen into the light and shadow.

古文：少顷，满纸疾落，灯前视之，书盈於幅。
现代文：一会儿，整张纸急速落下，在灯前观看，字迹写满在纸上。
English: In a moment, the whole sheet of paper fell rapidly, and I looked at it in front of the lamp, writing all over the paper.

古文：书若杂言七字，辞甚凄恨。
现代文：写的象七言杂诗，措辞非常凄楚怨恨。
English: It's like a seven-character rambling poem, and it's written in a very bitter, resentful tone.

古文：元则遽令录之，言鬼书不久辄漫灭。
现代文：元则便令人赶紧记下来，说鬼写的字不久就会没有。
English: The original will be quickly written down, and the ghost-written characters will soon disappear.

古文：及晓，纸上若煤污，无复字也。
现代文：到了破晓，纸上象被煤弄污了似的，不再有字迹。
English: By dawn, the paper looked as if it had been soiled with coal, and there was no more writing.

古文：元刚复令具酒脯纸钱，乘昏焚於道。有风旋灰，直上数尺，及闻悲泣声。
现代文：元则又令人准备了酒菜纸钱，黄昏时在道上焚烧，有风旋转刮灭，一直被吹到几尺高，还听到悲切的哭泣声。
English: At the same time, people prepared wine and vegetable paper money, and burned it on the road at dusk. The wind whirled and blew it away, and it was blown up to several feet high. Mournful crying was also heard.

古文：诗凡二百六十二字，率叙幽冤之意，语不甚晓，词故不载。
现代文：诗一共二百六十二个字，说的都是冤屈的意思话语不太明白，所以此处不载录了。
English: The poem has a total of two hundred and sixty-two words, all of which are grievances. The meaning of the words is not very clear, so it is not recorded here.

古文：其中二十八字曰：痛填心兮不能语，寸断肠兮诉何处？
现代文：其中二十八个字说的是：痛填心兮不能语，寸断肠兮诉何处。
English: Twenty-eight of them said: "It is painful to be unable to speak, and it is hard to tell where to appeal."

古文：春生万物妾不生，更恨香魂不相遇。
现代文：春生万物妾不生，更恨香魂不相遇。
English: Spring-born things do not have a concubine, and even more hate not to meet the soul.

