古文：陉山之事，赵且与秦伐齐。
现代文：陉出战役，赵国将联合秦国攻打齐国。
English: After the Battle of Jiuyuan, Zhao would unite with Qin to attack Qi.

古文：齐惧，令田章以阳武合于赵，而以顺子为质。
现代文：齐圆因此感到恐惧，便指派田章用蹦武与赵国和好。又用齐国公予顺予做人质。
English: As a result, Qi Yuan felt fear, so he assigned Tian Zhang to make peace with Zhao Guo by jumping and fighting. He also used Qi Guo Gongyu Shunyu as a hostage.

古文：赵王喜，乃案兵告于秦曰： 齐以阳武赐弊邑而纳顺子，欲以解伐。
现代文：赵惠文纛非常高兴，于是按兵不发并告诉秦国说： 齐国把阳武赠给我国又送来顺子当人质，我们准备解除对它的讨伐。
English: Zhao Huiwenqian was very happy, so he did not send soldiers and told Qin State: Qi State gave Yangwu to our country and sent Junzi as a hostage, we are ready to lift the crusade against it.

古文：敢告下吏。 
现代文：为此冒昧地通知贵国的官员们。 
English: You had the temerity to inform your officials of this.

古文：秦王使公子他之赵，谓赵王曰： 齐与大国救魏而倍约，不可信恃，大国不义，以告弊邑，而赐之二社之地，以奉祭祀。
现代文：秦昭王派公子他前往赵国，对赵王说： 齐国相约贵国一同救援魏国，但事后却背弃信约，齐国是不值得信任的，贵国认为齐国不守信义，把要讨伐齐国的事通报我国，而且赠送方圆十二里的土地，用来供祭祀之用。
English: Qin Zhao Wang sent his son to Zhao Guo and said to Zhao Wang, "Qi Guo made an agreement with your country to jointly rescue Wei Guo, but later reneged on the agreement. Qi Guo is not trustworthy. Your country believes that Qi Guo is not trustworthy. It notified our country that it would fight against Qi Guo, and gave us a 12-mile-square piece of land for sacrificial purposes.

古文：今又案兵，且欲合齐而受其地，非使臣之所知也。
现代文：贵国又按兵不动，而且想要接受齐国的阳武与它和解，这是我所不了解的。
English: What I don't understand is that your country is standing still and wants to accept the Yangwu of Qi and reconcile with it.

古文：请益甲四万，大国裁之 。
现代文：请让我国增派士兵四万，出贵国去决断。 
English: Please let our country send an additional 40,000 soldiers to your country to make a decision.

古文：苏代为齐献书穰侯曰： 臣闻往来之者言曰： 秦且益赵甲四万人以伐齐。 
现代文：苏代替齐国送给穰侯一封信说： 我听到道往的行人说： 秦国将要增援赵国四万兵力来进攻齐国。 
English: On behalf of the State of Qi, Su sent a letter to Gong Hou saying: I heard a passerby say: The State of Qin is going to reinforce the State of Zhao with 40,000 troops to attack the State of Qi.

古文：臣窃必之弊邑之王曰： 秦王明而熟于计，穰侯智而习于事，必不益赵甲四万人以伐齐。 
现代文：我私下认为要肯定地告诉我国的国王说： 秦王精明而善于谋划，穰侯明智而善于办事，一定不会增援赵国四万兵力来进攻齐国。 
English: Privately, I thought that I should tell the king of our country with certainty: King Qin is shrewd and good at planning, and his vassals are wise and good at doing things. They will definitely not reinforce 40,000 troops from Zhao to attack Qi.

古文：是何也？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：夫三晋相结，秦之深雠也。
现代文：赵、魏、韩三国联合，这是秦国的深仇。
English: Zhao, Wei, and Han united the three countries, which was a deep hatred of Qin.

古文：三晋百背秦，百欺秦，不为不信，不为无行。
现代文：它们上百次的背弃秦国，上百次的欺骗秦国，秦国都不算是不守信用，不算是不讲道义。
English: They have betrayed the Qin state hundreds of times, deceived the Qin state hundreds of times, and the Qin state is not a breach of trust, not a lack of morality.

古文：今破齐以肥赵，赵，秦之深讎，不利于秦。
现代文：现在打败齐国去壮大赵国，赵国是秦国的深仇大敌，这样不利于秦国。
English: Now, to defeat Qi is to strengthen Zhao. Zhao is a bitter enemy of Qin, and this is not good for Qin.

古文：一也。
现代文：这是一。
English: So he gave it a thumbs down.

古文：秦之谋者必曰： 破齐弊晋，而后制晋、楚之胜。 
现代文：秦国的谋士一定说： 打败齐国让三晋疲困，然后制服三晋和楚国。 
English: The strategist of Qin must have said: Defeat Qi and let the Three Kingdoms be exhausted, and then subdue the Three Kingdoms and Chu.

古文：夫齐，罢国也，以天下击之，譬犹以千钧之弩溃痈也。
现代文：齐国是一个疲惫的国家，用天下各国的兵力进攻齐国，就好比用于钩重的强弩去击破一个溃烂了的毒疮，它必然灭亡。
English: Qi is a tired country. Attacking Qi with the military forces of all countries in the world is like using a heavy hammer to break a festering sore. It will inevitably perish.

古文：秦王安能制晋、楚哉！
现代文：秦王怎么能制服三晋和楚国呢？
English: How could King Qin subdue the Three Kingdoms of Jin and Chu?

古文：二也。
现代文：这是二。
English: That's two.

古文：秦少出兵，则晋、楚不信；多出兵，则晋、楚制于秦。
现代文：秦国出动军队少，那么三晋和楚国就不会相信秦国；出动军队多，那么三晋和楚国就会认为受秦国控制。
English: If Qin dispatches a small number of troops, then Sanjin and Chu will not believe Qin; if Qin dispatches a large number of troops, then Sanjin and Chu will believe that they are under the control of Qin.

古文：齐恐，则必不走于秦且走晋、楚。
现代文：齐国恐惧，一定不会投靠秦国而去投靠三晋和楚国。
English: Because of the fear of Qi, they would not support Qin, but would support Sanjin and Chu.

古文：三也。
现代文：这是三。
English: That's three.

古文：齐割地以实晋、楚，则晋、楚安。
现代文：齐国割让土地以充实三晋和楚国，那么三晋和楚国就安定了。
English: If Qi ceded land to enrich Sanjin and Chu, then Sanjin and Chu would be stable.

古文：齐举兵而为之顿剑，则秦反受兵。
现代文：齐国出动兵力，秦国反而会受到军事压力。这是四。
English: If Qi dispatches troops, Qin will come under military pressure. This is four.

古文：四也。是晋、楚以秦破齐，以齐破秦，何晋、楚之智而齐、秦之愚！
现代文：这实际上是三晋和楚国利用秦国来攻破齐国，又利用齐国来攻破秦国，为什么三晋和楚国会这样聪明而齐国和秦国这样愚蠢呢？
English: This is actually the three Jin and Chu states using the Qin state to break through the Qin state, and using the Qin state to break through the Qin state. Why are the three Jin and Chu states so clever and the Qin and Qi states so stupid?

古文：五也。
现代文：这是五。
English: That's five.

古文：秦得安邑，善齐以安之，亦必无患矣。
现代文：秦国取得了安邑，好好地安抚齐国，也就必然没有祸患了。
English: When Qin gained An'yun and successfully pacified Qi, there would be no more disasters.

古文：秦有安邑，则韩、魏必无上党哉。
现代文：秦国有了安邑，韩、魏两国一定会失去上党的。
English: If Qin gained An'yun, Han and Wei would certainly lose the upper hand.

古文：夫取三晋之肠胃与出兵而惧其不反也，孰利？
现代文：取得三晋的枢纽地带，跟出动军队却害怕全军覆没，哪一个有利呢？
English: Which is more advantageous, to obtain the pivotal area of Sanjin, or to send out an army, but fear that the whole army will be wiped out?

古文：故臣窃必之弊邑之王曰： 秦王明而熟于计，穰侯智而习于事，必不益赵甲四万人以伐齐矣。  
现代文：所以我私下对我们国王说： 秦王精明而善于谋划，穰侯明智而善于办事，一定不会增援赵国四万兵力来进攻齐国的。  
English: Therefore, I said to our king in private: King Qin is shrewd and good at planning, and his vassals are wise and good at doing things. They will definitely not reinforce Zhao with 40,000 troops to attack Qi.

