古文：江、河为南北二经流主要河流，以其特达于海也。
现代文：长江、黄河是南北的两条主干河流，是因为它们单独通到大海。
English: The Yangtze River and the Yellow River are the two main north-south rivers because they flow separately to the sea.

古文：而余邑正当大江入海之冲，邑以江名，亦以江之势至此而大且尽也。
现代文：我们县正当大江入海的要冲之地，县因长江而得名，也因为到了这里长江的水势浩大而且将要到头了。
English: Our county is the place where the Yangtze River enters the sea. The county got its name from the Yangtze River, and also because the water level of the Yangtze River here is huge and is about to end.

古文：生长其地者，望洋击楫，知其大，不知其远；溯流穷源，知其远者，亦以为发源岷山而已。
现代文：生长在这个地方的人，望着浩渺的水流击浆，知道它大不知道它远；溯流穷源，知道它远的人，也只以为发源于眠山而已。
English: People who grow up in this place, looking at the vast water flow, know that it is big, but do not know that it is far away; people who trace the source of the stream and know that it is far away, only think that it originated from the sleeping mountain.

古文：余初考纪籍，见大河即黄河自积石入中国。
现代文：我最初考证典籍的记载，见黄河自积石山流入中原。
English: My first record of the reference books, see the Yellow River flows from Jishishan into the Central Plains.

古文：溯其源者，前有博望之乘槎，后有都实之佩金虎符。
现代文：追溯它的源头的人，前有博望侯乘木筏，后有都实佩带金虎符。
English: The people who traced back to its source, before there was Bohang Hou by raft, after there was Du Si wearing a golden tiger charm.

古文：其言不一，皆云在昆仑之北，计其地，去岷山西北万余里，何江源短而河源长也？
现代文：他们的说法不一致，都说是在昆仑山的北面，估计那地方，距眠山西北一万多里，为什么长江的源头短而黄河的源头长呢？
English: Their statements are inconsistent. They all say that it is in the north of Kunlun Mountain. It is estimated that the place is more than ten thousand miles northwest of the sleeping mountain. Why is the source of the Yangtze River short and the source of the Yellow River long?

古文：岂河之大更倍于江乎？
现代文：莫非黄河的大处更比长江大一倍吗？
English: Isn't the Yellow River twice as big as the Yangtze?

古文：入江之水为省十一。西北自陕西、四川、河南、湖广、南直，西南自云南、贵州、广西、广东、福建、浙江。
现代文：等到越过淮河涉过汴河，然后才看到黄河的水流如同衣带，水面宽的地方不到长江的三分之一，难道长江这样大，它所流入的水流，还赶不上黄河吗？往北经过了三秦地区，南边穷尽了五岭，向西到了石门关、金沙江，然后了解到中国流入黄河的水流是五个省，流入长江的水流是十一个省。
English: Wait until you have crossed the Huai River and waded through the Min River, and then you will see that the Yellow River's water flow is like a girdle. The width of the water surface is less than one-third of the Yangtze River. Is the Yangtze River so big that the water flow into it cannot catch up with the Yellow River? It passed through the Sanqin region to the north, exhausted the Wuling in the south, and reached Shimen Pass and the Jinsha River in the west. Then it was learned that China's water flow into the Yellow River is five provinces, and the water flow into the Yangtze River is eleven provinces.

古文：计其吐纳，江既倍于河，其大固宜也。
现代文：计算它们水流的吞吐量，长江既然比黄河多一倍，那它的水流大就是应该的。
English: Calculate the throughput of their water flow. Since the Yangtze River is twice more than the Yellow River, its large water flow is appropriate.

古文：按其发源，河自昆仑之北，江亦自昆仑之南，其远亦同也。
现代文：考察它们的发源地，黄河在昆仑山的北面，长江也是在昆仑山的南面，它们的长处也相同。
English: Examine their places of origin. The Yellow River flows north of Mount Kunlun, and the Yangtze River flows south of Mount Kunlun. Their strengths are the same.

古文：发于北者曰星宿海，佛经谓之徙多河。北流经积石，始东折入宁夏，为河套，又南曲为龙门大河，而与渭渭河合。
现代文：发源于北面的叫星宿海，往北流经积石山，这才向东折进宁夏卫，形成河套，又向南弯曲成为龙门峡的大河，而后与渭水合流。
English: Originating in the north, it is called the Starry Sea. It flows northward through the Jishi Mountain, and then turns eastward into the Ningxia Wei, forming a river, and bends southward to become the Longmen Gorge River, and then merges with the Surabaya River.

古文：发于南者曰犁牛石，佛经谓之殑伽河。南流经石门关，始东折而入丽江，为金沙江，又北曲为叙州大江，与岷山之江合。
现代文：发源于南面的叫犁牛石，往南流经石门关，这才向东折入丽江，成为金沙江，又向北弯曲成为叙州府的大江，与源于氓山的江水合流。
English: Originating from the south, it is called the Snail Rock. It flows southward through Shimen Pass, and then turns east into the Lijiang River, becoming the Jinsha River, and bends north to become the big river of Suzhou, and merges with the river water originating from the Humen Mountain.

古文：余按岷江经成都至叙今之宜宾，不及千里，金沙江经丽江、云南、乌蒙至叙，共二千余里，舍远而宗近，岂其源独与河异乎？
现代文：我考察，岷江经成都到叙州府，不到一千里，金沙江流经丽江、云南、乌蒙府到叙州府，共有二千多里，舍弃远的却把近的看作是本源，难道是它的源头唯独与黄河不同吗？
English: According to my investigation, the Minjiang River flows through Chengdu to Suzhou, less than a thousand miles, and the Jinsha River flows through Lijiang, Yunnan, and Umong to Suzhou, a total of more than two thousand miles. They abandon the distant but regard the near as the source. Is it only its source that is different from the Yellow River?

古文：云南诸志，俱不载其出入之异，互相疑溷同 混 ，尚不悉其是一是二，分北分南，又何由辨其为源与否也。既不悉其孰远孰近，第见《禹贡》 岷山导江 之文，遂以江源归之，而不知禹之导，乃其为害于中国之始，非其滥觞发脉之始也。
现代文：不对！黄河的源头屡次经过寻找探求，所以才找到它远处的源头；长江的源头从来无人向津，所以仅把那近处的支流作为源头。其实岷江流入长江，与渭水流入黄河一样，都是中国的支流，而岷江是舟船所通之处，金沙江盘绕曲折在蛮僚各族聚居的溪谷之间，水陆两路都无人能追溯。既然不知道它们谁远谁近，只见到《禹贡》中 眠山导江 的字句，便把长江的源头归属于岷江，却不知大禹疏导岷江，是因为它是为害于中国的起点，不是长江发源的起点。
English: Wrong! The source of the Yellow River has been searched and explored many times, so it was only possible to find its distant source; the source of the Yangtze River has never been explored, so only the nearby tributary was used as the source. In fact, the Li River flowing into the Yangtze River is a tributary of China, just like the Lishui River flowing into the Yellow River, and the Li River is a place where boats can pass. The Jinsha River twists and turns between the valleys where barbarians and other ethnic groups live. No one can trace the land and water routes. Since they do not know who is far and who is near, they only see the words

古文：导河自积石，而河源不始于积石；导江自岷山，而江源亦不出于岷山。
现代文：疏导黄河起自积石山，可是黄河的源头不起始于积石山；疏导长江起自眠山，而长江的源头也不是起始于眠山。
English: The dredging of the Yellow River starts from Jishishan, but the source of the Yellow River does not start from Jishan; the dredging of the Yangtze River starts from Mingshan, but the source of the Yangtze River does not start from Mingshan.

古文：岷流入江，而未始为江源，正如渭流入河，而未始为河源也。
现代文：崛江只是流入长江，并不是长江的源头。正如渭水流入黄河，不是黄河的源头一样。
English: The Horie River only flows into the Yangtze River, but is not the source of the Yangtze River, just as the Surabaya River flows into the Yellow River, but is not the source of the Yellow River.

古文：不第此也，岷流之南，又有大渡河，西自吐蕾，经黎、雅与岷江合，在金沙江西北，其源亦长于岷而不及金沙，故推江源者，必当以金沙为首。
现代文：不但如此，岷江流域的南边，又有条大渡河，西面源自吐蕃，流经黎州、雅州与岷江合流，在金沙江的西北方，它的源头也比岷江远但赶不上金沙江，所以推寻长江源头的，必定应当把金沙江作为第一。
English: Not only that, in the south of the Li River basin, there is also a Dadu River, which originates from Tubo in the west and flows through Lizhou and Yazhou to merge with the Li River. In the northwest of the Jinsha River, its source is also farther than the Li River but not as far as the Jinsha River. Therefore, when searching for the source of the Yangtze River, the Jinsha River should be the first.

古文：不第此也：宋儒谓中国三大龙，而南龙之脉，亦自岷山，濒大江南岸而下，东渡城陵、湖口而抵金陵，此亦不审大渡、金沙之界断其中也。
现代文：不仅如此，宋代儒生认为中国有三大龙脉，而南方的龙脉，也是起自眠山，濒大江南岸下延，往东延过城陵矶、湖口县后抵达金陵，这也是不清楚大渡河、金沙江在其中隔断了。
English: Moreover, the Song Dynasty Confucianists believed that China had three major dragon veins, and the southern dragon vein also started from Mianshan, extended along the south bank of the Yangtze River, extended eastward through Chenglingye and Hukou County, and reached Jinling. It is also unclear whether the Dadu River and the Jinsha River were cut off in the middle.

古文：不第此也：并不审城陵矶、湖口县为洞庭、鄱阳二巨浸入江之口。
现代文：不仅如此，并且是不清楚城陵矶、湖口县是洞庭湖、都阳湖这两个巨大的湖泽入江的湖口。
English: Not only that, but it is not clear that Chenglingji and Hukou County are the estuaries of the two huge lakes, Dongting Lake and Duyang Lake.

古文：洞庭之西源自沅，发于贵州之谷芒关；南源自湘，发于粤西之釜山、龙庙。
现代文：洞庭湖西边的水源来自玩江，发源于贵州的谷芒关；南边的水源来自湘江，发源于广西的釜山、龙庙。
English: The water source on the west side of Dongting Lake comes from the Jianjiang River, originating from Gu Mangguan in Guizhou; the water source on the south side comes from the Hunan River, originating from Busan and Longmiao in Guangxi.

古文：鄱阳之南源自赣，发于粤东之浰头、平远；东源自信丰，发于闽之渔梁山、浙之仙霞南岭。
现代文：都阳湖南边的水源来自赣江，发源于广东的俐头、平远；东边的水源来自信江、永丰溪，发源于福建的渔梁山、浙江的仙霞南岭。
English: The water source on the south side of Duyang Lake comes from the Minjiang River, originating in Shantou and Pingyuan in Guangdong; the water source on the east side comes from the Xinjiang River and Yongfeng Creek, originating in Yu Liangshan in Fujian and Xianxia Nanling in Zhejiang.

古文：是南龙盘曲去江之南且三千里，而谓南龙濒江乎？
现代文：这样南方的龙脉盘绕屈曲离长江的南岸将近三千里，却认为南方的龙脉是濒临长江吗？
English: So, the southern dragon's coiled bend is nearly three thousand miles away from the southern bank of the Yangtze River, but do you think that the southern dragon's coiled bend is on the verge of the Yangtze River?

古文：不第此也：不审龙脉，所以不辨江源。
现代文：不仅如此，不清楚龙脉，所以不能分辨长江的源头。
English: Moreover, the dragon's vein is not clear, so it is impossible to distinguish the source of the Yangtze River.

古文：今详三龙大势，北龙夹河之北，南龙抱江之南，而中龙中界之，特短。
现代文：今天已详尽知道三条龙脉的大体趋势，北方的龙脉夹在黄河的北面，南方的龙脉环抱在长江的南面，而中部的龙脉隔在它们中间，特别短。
English: Today, the general trend of the three dragon veins is known in detail. The northern dragon vein is sandwiched between the north side of the Yellow River, the southern dragon vein is surrounded by the south side of the Yangtze River, and the central dragon vein is separated from them and is particularly short.

古文：北龙亦只南向半支入中国。
现代文：北方的龙脉也只有向南延伸的半条支脉进入中原。
English: In the northern part of the dragon vein, only the southern half of the branch vein enters the Central Plains.

古文：俱另有说。惟南龙磅礴半宇内，而其脉亦发于昆仑，与金沙江相持南下，经石门丽江，东金沙，西澜沧，二水夹之。环滇池之南，由普定度贵竺、都黎南界，以趋五岭。
现代文：唯有南方的龙脉磅礴在半个国家内，而且它的山脉也是起始于昆仑山，与金沙江互相并列往南下延，经过石门关、丽江，环绕过滇池的南面，由普定延伸到贵竹、都黎的南境，以后奔向五岭。
English: Only the magnificent Southern Dragon Vein is in half of the country, and its mountains also start from Kunlun Mountain, and run parallel to the Jinsha River to the south, passing through Shimen Pass, Lijiang, around the south of Dianchi Lake, extending from Puding to the southern border of Guizhu and Duoli, and then running to Wuling.

古文：龙远江亦远，脉长源亦长，此江之所以大于河也。
现代文：龙脉远长江也远，山脉长水源也长，这就是长江之所以大过黄河的原因了。
English: The Yangtze River is far away from the dragon vein, and the mountains have long water sources. This is the reason why the Yangtze River is larger than the Yellow River.

古文：不第此也：南龙自五岭东趋闽之渔梁，南散为闽省之鼓山，东分为浙之台、宕。
现代文：不仅如此，南方的龙脉从五岭往东延向福建的渔梁山，向南散开成为福建省的鼓山，向东分开成为浙江的天台山、雁宕山。
English: Not only that, the southern dragon vein extends from the Wuling Mountains in the east to Yu Liang Mountain in Fujian, spreads to the south to become Gushan in Fujian Province, and spreads to the east to become Tiantai Mountain and Yantang Mountain in Zhejiang.

古文：峙为浙岭、徽浙界。黄山，徽宁界。而东抵丛山关，绩溪、建平界。东分为天目、武林。
现代文：正脉向北转成为小草岭，延伸到草坪释，耸峙为浙岭、黄山，往东抵达丛山关，向东分散成为天目山、武林山。
English: The main vein turns northward into Xiao Cao Ling, extends to Lawn Xie, rises as Zhejiang Ling and Huangshan Mountain, reaches Congshan Pass to the east, and disperses to the east as Tianmu Mountain and Wulin Mountain.

古文：正脉北度东坝，而峙为句曲，于是回龙西结金陵，余脉东趋余邑。
现代文：正脉往北延伸过东坝，而后耸峙为句曲山，于是龙脉向西回绕盘结为金陵，余脉往东奔向我县。
English: The main vein extends northward through Dongba, and then rises to the top of the mountain, so the dragon vein circles back to the west to form Jinling, and the remaining vein rushes eastward to our county.

古文：是余邑不特为大江尽处，亦南龙尽处也。
现代文：这样我县不仅是大江的尽头处，也是南方龙脉的尽头处。
English: In this way, our county is not only the end of the big river, but also the end of the southern dragon vein.

古文：龙与江同发于昆仑，同尽于余邑，屹为江海锁钥，以奠金陵，拥护留都千载不拔之基以此。
现代文：龙脉与长江一同发源于昆仑山，一同在我县到了尽头，屹然成为长江入海处的军事要地，得以奠定金陵，拥围护卫留都千载不败的基础就是凭借这一点。
English: Together with the Yangtze River, the dragon vein originated in Kunlun Mountain, and together they reached the end of our county. It has become a military important place at the entrance of the Yangtze River to the sea, and it is by virtue of this that we were able to lay the foundation of Jinling and surround and defend the capital for a thousand years.

古文：岂若大河下流，昔曲而北趋碣石，今徙而南夺淮、泗，漫无锁钥耶？
现代文：难道是像黄河的下游，从前曲向北流向褐石，如今迁移到南边夺取了淮河、洒水的河道，漫无边际没有入海处的军事要地吗？
English: Is it like the lower reaches of the Yellow River, which flowed northward from the former curve to the brownstone, and now migrated to the south to seize the Huai River, the water-sprinkling river channel, and the endless military important place without the sea?

古文：然则江之大于河者，不第其源之共远，亦以其龙之交会矣。
现代文：这样长江之所以大于黄河的原因，不仅是它们的源头一样远，也是因为它与龙脉交会了。
English: The reason why the Yangtze River is larger than the Yellow River is not only because their sources are the same distance apart, but also because it intersects with the dragon vein.

古文：故不探江源，不知其大于河；不与河相提而论，不知其源之远。
现代文：所以不探索长江的源头，不知它比黄河大；不与黄河相提并论，不知它的源头远。
English: Therefore, do not explore the source of the Yangtze River, do not know that it is larger than the Yellow River; do not compare with the Yellow River, do not know that its source is far away.

古文：谈经流者，先南而次北可也。
现代文：谈论主干河流的人，可以先及南方次及北方了。
English: Those who talk about the main rivers can start with the south, then the north.

