古文：石守信，开封浚仪人。事周祖，得隶帐下。
现代文：石守信，开封浚仪人。奉事周祖，得以隶属周祖帐下。
English: Ishimori Shinshin, the person who opened the seal. He served Zhou Zu and was able to belong to Zhou Zu's account.

古文：广顺初，累迁亲卫都虞候。
现代文：广顺年间初期，历次升迁，做到亲卫都虞候之职。
English: At the beginning of the Guangshun era, he was promoted several times to become a pro-defender of the capital.

古文：从世宗征晋，遇敌高平，力战，迁亲卫左第一军都校。
现代文：跟随周世宗征战晋阳，在高平遇到敌人，奋力拼战，升为亲卫左第一军都校。
English: He followed Zhou Shizong's expedition to Jinyang, encountered the enemy in Gaoping, fought hard, and was promoted to the First Army Capital School.

古文：师还，迁铁骑左右都校。
现代文：部队回师，升为铁骑左右都校。
English: The troops returned to the division and were promoted to the Iron Cavalry Left and Right Capital School.

古文：从征淮南，为先锋，下六合，入涡口，克扬州，遂领嘉州防御使，充铁骑、控鹤四厢都指挥使。
现代文：又随从皇帝征战淮南，任先锋官，攻拔六合，进入涡口，攻克扬州，于是任嘉州防御使，充任铁骑、控鹤四厢都指挥使。
English: He also followed the emperor to fight in Huainan, served as a vanguard officer, attacked and captured Liuhe, entered the vortex, and conquered Yangzhou. He was then appointed as the defense envoy of Jiazhou, and served as the commander of the iron cavalry and the four cranes.

古文：从征关南，为陆路副都部署，以功迁殿前都虞候，转都指挥使、领洪州防御使。
现代文：跟随皇帝征战关南，任陆路副都部署，因战功升任殿前都虞候，转任都指挥使、领任洪州防御使。
English: He followed the emperor to Guannan for the war, served as deputy commander of the land route, was promoted to prefectural governor due to his war service, transferred to commander of the capital, and led the Hongzhou defense envoy.

古文：恭帝即位，加领义成军节度。
现代文：恭帝即位，加任义成军节度使。
English: Emperor Kyo ascended to the throne, and was appointed as the envoy of the Yoshinari Shogunate.

古文：太祖即位，迁侍卫马步军副都指挥使，改领归德军节度。
现代文：宋太祖即位，升石守信为侍卫马步军副都指挥使，改任归德军节度使。
English: When Song Taizu ascended to the throne, Shoseki Shoshin became the deputy commander of the Horse Guards and Foot Guards, and was reassigned to be the German army's festival envoy.

古文：李筠叛，守信与高怀德率前军进讨，破筠众于长平，斩首三千级。
现代文：李筠叛乱，石守信与高怀德率领前军进击讨伐，在长平大破李筠的军队，斩首三千级。
English: Li Qiye rebelled, Shi Shouxin and Gao Huaide led the vanguard to attack and fight, and defeated Li Qiye's army in Changping, beheading three thousand.

古文：又败其众三万于泽州，获伪河阳节度范守图，降太原援军数千，皆杀之。
现代文：又在泽州打败李筠军三万人，俘获伪河阳节度使范守图，太原援军数千人投降，都被杀掉了。
English: In addition, in Zezhou, he defeated 30,000 soldiers of Li Qiye's army, captured the pseudo-Hayang commander Fan Shoutu, and thousands of Taiyuan reinforcements surrendered, all of whom were killed.

古文：泽、潞平，以功加同平章事。
现代文：泽、潞二地的平定，石守信因战功加任为同平章事。
English: After the pacification of the two provinces of Ze and Ye, Shi Shouxin was promoted to the same rank for his war service.

古文：李重进反扬州，以守信为行营都部署兼知扬州行府事。
现代文：李重进在扬州反叛，朝廷任石守信为行营都部署兼任知扬州行府事。
English: Li Chongjin rebelled in Yangzhou, and the imperial court appointed Shi Shouxin as the camp commander and also deployed him to serve as the governor of Yangzhou.

古文：帝亲征至大仪顿，守信驰奏： 城破在朝夕，大驾亲临，一鼓可平。 帝亟赴之，果克其城。
现代文：皇帝亲征到了大仪顿，石守信派人骑马来上奏： 扬州城即将攻破，如果皇帝大驾亲临，可以一鼓攻平。 皇帝急忙到了扬州，果然攻克此城。
English: The emperor himself arrived at the grand ceremony, and Shi Shouxin sent a man on horseback to play: Yangzhou City is about to be conquered, if the emperor arrives in person, he can conquer it with a drum. The emperor hurried to Yangzhou and successfully conquered the city.

古文：建隆二年，移镇郓州，兼侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使，诏赐本州宅一区。
现代文：建隆二年，石守信移镇郓州，兼任侍卫亲军马步军都指挥使，皇帝诏令赐给他本州住宅一栋。
English: In the second year of Jianlong, Shi Shouxin moved to the town of Bozhou, concurrently serving as a bodyguard and commander of the pro-army Ma Bu army. The emperor gave him a house in Honshu by imperial decree.

古文：乾德初，帝因晚朝与守信等饮酒，酒酣，帝曰： 我非尔曹不及此，然吾为天子，殊不若为节度使之乐，吾终夕未尝安枕而卧。 守信等顿首曰： 今天命已定，谁复敢有异心，陛下何为出此言耶？ 帝曰： 人孰不欲富贵，一旦有以黄袍加汝之身，虽欲不为，其可得乎。 守信等谢曰： 臣愚不及此，惟陛下哀矜之。 帝曰： 人生驹过隙尔，不如多积金、市田宅以遗子孙，歌儿舞女以终天年。
现代文：乾德初年，皇帝因晚朝与石守信等一起饮酒，酒酣时，皇帝说 ：我要是没有你们就不能登上皇位，但我身为天子，还不如做节度使快乐，我终日不能安然入睡。 石守信等叩头说： 现在天命已定，谁还敢有异心，陛下为什么说出这样的话来呢？ 皇帝说： 谁人不想要富贵，一旦有人把黄袍加在你们身上，虽然想不这样，哪里还可能呢？ 石守信等拜谢说： 臣愚笨不至于此，希望陛下哀悯我们。 皇帝说 ：人生在世好像快马奔驰，不如多积累些金钱，买田地住宅传给子孙，伴随歌儿舞女以享天年。
English: In the first year of the Qiande era, the emperor drank alcohol with Shi Shouxin and others because of the late morning. When the wine was drunk, the emperor said, "If I don't have you, I can't ascend to the throne, but as a heavenly son, I might as well make a festival to make happy, I can't sleep peacefully all day long." Shi Shouxin and others bowed and said, "Now the fate of heaven has been decided, who would dare to have a different heart, why did Your Majesty say such a thing?" The emperor said, "Who doesn't want to be rich and noble? Once someone puts the yellow robe on you,

古文：君臣之间无所猜嫌，不亦善乎。 守信谢曰： 陛下念及此，所谓生死而肉骨也。 明日，皆称病，乞解兵权，帝从之，皆以散官就第，赏赍甚厚。
现代文：君臣之间没有猜疑间隙，不是很好吗？ 石守信谢道： 陛下替臣子们想得周到，真是给死人以生路，使骨骼长肌肉啊！ 第二天，都称患病，请求解除兵权，皇帝依从他们的要求，都被授以散官就第闲居，皇帝给他们的赏赐很多。
English: Isn't it great that there is no suspicion gap between the princes and ministers? Shi Shouxin said gratefully, "His Majesty thought about his ministers thoughtfully, and truly gave the dead a way to live, and made their bones grow muscles! The next day, they all claimed to be ill and requested to be relieved of their military powers, and the emperor complied with their request. They were all granted the status of non-commissioned officers and allowed to stay idle. The emperor gave them many rewards.

古文：已而，太祖欲使符彦卿管军，赵普屡谏，以为彦卿名位已盛，不可复委以兵权，太祖不从。
现代文：后来，宋太祖让符彦卿管理军事，赵普几次进谏，认为符彦卿名望官位已经很盛，不可再授给他兵权，太祖不听。
English: Later, Emperor Taizu of the Song Dynasty asked Fuyanqing to manage the military, and Zhao Pu was promoted several times. He thought that Fuyanqing's prestige and official position were already very prosperous, and he should not be granted military power again. Emperor Taizu did not listen.

古文：宣已出，普复怀之，太祖迎谓之曰： 岂非符彦卿事耶？ 对曰： 非也。 因奏他事。
现代文：太祖默默不语，这件事就中止下来。
English: The great-grandfather was silent, and the matter was dropped.

古文：既罢，乃出彦卿宣进之，太祖曰： 果然，宣何以复在卿所？ 普曰： 臣托以处分之语有侏亻离者，复留之。惟陛下深思利害，勿复悔。 太祖曰： 卿苦疑彦卿，何也？朕待彦卿厚，彦卿岂负朕耶。 普对曰： 陛下何以能负周世宗？ 太祖默然，事遂中止。开宝六年秋，加守信兼侍中。
现代文：开宝六年冬天，加封石守信兼任侍中。
English: In the winter of the sixth year of the Kaibō era, Gafon Ishinomori also served as a chamberlain.

古文：太平兴国初，加兼中书令。
现代文：太平兴国年间初期，加官兼任中书令。
English: In the early years of the Taiping Xingguo era, he was also appointed as a middle-ranking official.

古文：二年，拜中书令，行河南尹，充西京留守。
现代文：二年，正式拜为中书令，代理河南尹，充任西京留守。
English: In the second year, he was officially appointed as the deputy of Henan Yin, and stayed in West Beijing.

古文：三年，加检校太师。
现代文：三年，加官检校太师。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to superintendent of schools.

古文：从徙许州，还京师卒。王审琦字仲宝，其先辽西人，后徙家洛阳。
现代文：四年，跟随皇帝征战范阳，在前军督战不力，受到指责被任命为崇信军节度使、兼中书令，不久进封为卫国公。七年，移驻陈州，又任中书令。九年，去世，终年五十七岁，赠尚书令，追封为威武郡王，谥号为武烈。
English: In the fourth year, he followed the emperor to fight in Fanyang, but he was not able to fight in the former military governor. He was accused of being appointed as the festival envoy of the Chongxin Army and the middle secretary, and soon he was appointed as the defender of the country. In the seventh year, he moved to Chenzhou and was also appointed as the middle secretary. In the ninth year, he died, and he was 57 years old. He was awarded the honorable letter, posthumously named the king of Weiwu County, and his posthumous name was Wu Rong.

古文：汉乾祐初，隶周祖帐下，性纯谨，甚亲任之。
现代文：王审琦字仲宝，其祖先是辽西人，后来迁家到洛阳。后汉乾初年，隶属周太祖帐下，禀性纯谨，周太祖很信任他。
English: Wang Xunzhi Zi Zhongbao, whose ancestor was from western Liaoning, later moved to Luoyang. In the first year of the Later Han Dynasty, he was under the charge of Zhou Taizu. He was honest and trustworthy, and Zhou Taizu trusted him very much.

古文：从平李守贞，以功署厅直左番副将。
现代文：跟从太祖平定李守贞，因功署任厅直左番副将。
English: He followed Li Shouzhen, who was promoted from the great ancestor, and was appointed vice-general of the General Office for Meritorious Service.

古文：广顺中，历东西班行首、内殿直都知、铁骑指挥使，从世宗征刘崇，力战有功，迁东西班都虞候，改铁骑都虞候，转本军右第二军都校。
现代文：广顺年间，历任东西班行首、内殿直都知、铁骑指挥使，跟从周世宗征伐刘崇，拼力死战立下功劳，升任东西班都虞候，改任铁骑都虞候，转任本军右第二军都校。
English: During the Guangshun era, the successive heads of the East and West Squadrons, the Inner Court of the Inner Court, and the Iron Cavalry Commander, followed the Zhou Shizong to conquer Liu Chong, and made great efforts to win the battle, and were promoted to the East and West Squadrons, the Iron Cavalry Squadrons, and the Second Army Capital School.

古文：世宗召禁军诸校宴射苑中，审琦连中的，世宗嘉之，赏赍有加。
现代文：世宗召禁军诸校在苑中宴射，王审琦连连中的，世宗很欣赏他，大加赏赐。
English: Shizong called in the imperial troops from all schools to have a banquet in the courtyard. Wang Xian, who was in the middle of the banquet, was greatly appreciated by Shizong, who gave him a large reward.

古文：俄领勤州刺史。
现代文：不久兼任勤州刺史。
English: Soon, he also served as the chief historian of Qinzhou.

古文：亲征淮南，舒州坚壁未下，诏以郭令图领刺史，命审琦中超以精骑攻其城，一夕拔之，擒其史，获铠仗军储数十万计。
现代文：世宗亲自征伐淮南，舒州坚壁未曾攻下，诏令由郭令图兼任刺史，命王审琦及司超以精骑攻城，一晚上攻了下来，擒获舒州刺史，获得铠仗等军中装备数十万。
English: Shizong personally conquered Huainan, but never conquered Shuzhou's fortified walls. Guo Lingtu also served as the scribe of the imperial edict, and ordered Wang Siyuan and Si Chao to attack the city on horseback. They conquered the city in one night, captured Shuzhou's scribe, and obtained hundreds of thousands of equipment from the army.

古文：令图既入城，审琦等遂救黄州，数日，令图为舒人所逐。
现代文：郭令图入城后，王审琦等人就去救黄州，几天后，郭令图被舒人赶走。
English: After Guo Lingtu entered the city, Wang Xianqi and others went to save Huangzhou. A few days later, Guo Lingtu was driven away by Shu Ren.

古文：审琦选轻骑衔枚夜发，信宿至城下，大败舒人，令图得复还治所。
现代文：王审琦选择轻骑连夜暗中出发，天明时到舒州城下，大败舒人，郭令图得以回到治所。
English: Wang Qianqian chose to ride lightly and set off in the dark at night, and arrived at the foot of Shuzhou Castle at dawn. He defeated Shuren, and Guo Lingtu was able to return to the detention center.

古文：世宗嘉之，授散员都指挥使。
现代文：世宗嘉奖他，授任为散员都指挥使。
English: He was commended by King Sejong and given the post of Sanzhan Duxiang.

古文：又能上能下南唐军于紫金山，先登，中流矢，转控鹤右厢都校、领虔州团练使。
现代文：又在紫金山大破唐军，审琦率先登城，中流矢，转任控鹤右厢都校，兼任虔州团练使。
English: In addition, he defeated the Tang army in Zijin Mountain, took the lead in going to the city, and was transferred to the school of the right wing of the control crane, and also served as the training envoy of the Gyeongju group.

古文：世宗围濠州，审琦率敢死士数千人拔其水砦，夺月城，濠州遂降。
现代文：世宗围攻濠州，审琦率领敢死队数千人攻拔敌人的水营，夺取月城，濠城于是投降。
English: Shizong besieged Bozhou, and led thousands of death squads to attack the enemy's water camp and capture Yuecheng, after which Bozhong surrendered.

古文：及攻楚州，为南面巡检，城将陷，审琦意淮人必遁，设伏待之。
现代文：攻楚州时，任南面巡检，城将被攻陷，审琦料定淮人一定逃遁，设下埋伏等待敌人。
English: When attacking Chuzhou, let the south patrol, the city will be captured, the investigation determined that the Huai people must flee, and set up an ambush to wait for the enemy.

古文：少顷，城中兵果凿南门而溃，伏兵击之，斩数千级，系五千余人，献于行在，赐名马、玉带、锦彩数百匹。
现代文：不久，城中敌兵果然凿开城南门溃逃，斩敌数千人，俘获五千余人，献给皇帝行营，世宗赐给他玉带、名马、绵彩数百匹。
English: Not long after, the enemy soldiers in the city really opened the south gate of the city and fled, killing thousands of enemies and capturing more than five thousand people. They dedicated the camp to the emperor, and Shizong gave him jade belts, famous horses, and hundreds of horses.

古文：淮南平，改铁骑右厢都校。
现代文：淮南平定后，改任铁骑右厢都校。
English: After Huainan was pacified, he was assigned to the Iron Cavalry Right Wing Capital School.

古文：又从平瓦桥关。恭帝即位，迁殿前都虞候、领睦州防御使。
现代文：又跟从皇帝平定瓦桥关，恭帝即位后，升任殿前都虞候、兼任睦州防御使。
English: He also followed the emperor to pacify the tile bridge pass, and after the enthronement of Emperor Gong, he was promoted to the prefectural governor and concurrently served as the defense envoy of Mutsu Province.

古文：襟初，擢为殿前都指挥使、领泰宁军节度。
现代文：宋初，擢升为殿前都指挥使、兼任泰宁军节度使。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, he was promoted to the commander of the palace front and also served as the commander of the Taining Army.

古文：从征李筠，为御营前洞屋都部署，为飞石所伤，车驾临视。
现代文：跟从皇帝征讨李筠，任御营前洞屋都部署，被飞石击伤，皇帝亲自问伤。
English: He followed the emperor to enlist Li Qian, and was deployed in front of the imperial camp. He was injured by a flying stone, and the emperor personally asked him about the injury.

古文：泽、潞平，改领武成军节度。
现代文：泽、潞平定后，改任武成军节度使。
English: After the subjugation of Ze and Zou, he was reassigned as the military governor of Wu Chengjun.

古文：李重进叛，副石守信为前军部署讨之。
现代文：李重进叛乱，辅助石守信为前军部署讨伐他。
English: Li re-entered the rebellion and assisted Shi Shouxin in deploying the former army to fight against him.

古文：建隆二年，出为忠正军节度。
现代文：建隆二年，出京任忠正军节度使。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jianlong, he went to Beijing to serve as an envoy of the Taizheng Army.

古文：在镇八年，为政宽简。
现代文：在地方做官八年，为政宽简。
English: He has been a local official for eight years, and is known as a political moderate.

古文：所部邑令以罪停其录事吏，幕僚白令不先咨府，请按之。
现代文：辖区内邑令因罪停任他的录事吏，幕僚认为邑令不先征求节度府意见，请求治他的罪。
English: A magistrate in the area under his jurisdiction suspended him from his post as a recorder for the crime, and the staff thought that the magistrate did not first seek the opinion of the State Administration of Press, Publication and Radio, and requested that he be punished for the crime.

古文：审琦曰： 五代以来，诸侯强横，令宰不得专县事。
现代文：审琦说 ：五代以来，诸侯强横，令宰不得专断县里政事。
English: The inquisitor said, "Since the fifth generation, the lords have been strong and domineering, and the regents must not arbitrarily decide the affairs of the county."

古文：今天下治平，我忝守藩维，而部内宰能斥去黠吏，诚可嘉尔，何按之有？ 闻者叹服。
现代文：现在天下平定，我有幸忝任藩镇，而辖区内邑宰能斥去奸狡官吏，实在令人高兴，哪里需要治他的罪呢？ 听者叹服。
English: Now that the country is at peace, I have the honor of serving as a hanzhen, and it is truly gratifying that the mayor of the area under my jurisdiction is able to expel the treacherous officials. Where is the need to punish his crime? The listener sighed in admiration.

古文：开宝二年，从征太原，为御营四面都巡检。
现代文：开宝二年，跟从宋太祖征讨太原，任御营四面都巡检。
English: In the second year of Kaibao, he followed Song Taizu in conquering Taiyuan, and was assigned to patrol all four sides of the camp.

古文：三年，改镇许州，赐甲第，留京师。
现代文：开宝三年，改为镇守许州，赐给住宅，留在京师。
English: After three years in Kaibao, he was changed to the town guard of Xuzhou, given a house, and remained in Beijing.

古文：太祖尝召审琦宴射苑中，连中的，赐御马、黄金鞍勒。
现代文：太祖曾经召审琦宴射于禁苑，连连中的，皇上赐给他御马、黄金鞍勒。
English: The great-grandfather once held a trial banquet in the Forbidden Garden, and the emperor gave him a royal horse and a golden saddle.

古文：六年，与高怀德并加同平章事。
现代文：开宝六年，与高怀德一同加任同平章事。
English: Six years after the founding of Kaibao, he and Gao Huide were promoted to the same rank.

古文：七年，卒，年五十。
现代文：开宝七年，去世，终年五十岁。
English: He died at the age of fifty, seven years after founding Kaibao.

古文：初，审琦暴疾，不能语，帝亲临视，及卒，又幸其第，哭之恸。
现代文：当初，审琦暴病，不能说话，太祖亲自探望，去世后，又到他的宅第，痛哭哀悼他。
English: At first, when he was gravely ill and unable to speak, the great-grandfather visited him in person. After his death, he went to his house to mourn him with tears.

古文：赐中书令，追封琅琊郡王，赙赠加等。
现代文：赐中书令，追封为琅笽郡王，加倍赐钱办丧事。
English: He was given the order of the book, posthumously crowned as the king of Shixian County, and given double the amount of money to pay for the funeral.

古文：葬日，又为废朝。
现代文：下葬那天，又为他停朝致哀。
English: On the day of his burial, the country came to a standstill to mourn him.

古文：审琦重厚有方略，尤善骑射。
现代文：审琦为人厚重有谋略，尤其擅长骑射。
English: He is a clever and resourceful person. He is especially good at riding and shooting.

古文：镇寿春，岁得租课，量入为出，未尝有所诛求。
现代文：镇守寿春时，每年收得的租税，量入为出，从未过分诛求。
English: In the town of Shuchun, the taxes collected each year are within the amount of income, and have never been excessively demanded.

古文：素不能饮，尝侍宴，太祖酒酣仰祝曰： 酒，天之美禄；审琦，朕布衣交也。
现代文：一向不能饮酒，曾经陪侍皇帝用宴，太祖酒酣后仰天祝道： 酒是天赐美禄；审琦是我的布衣之交。
English: He has never been able to drink alcohol. He once accompanied the emperor to a banquet. After drinking, the great-grandfather congratulated the heavens and said: "Wine is a gift from heaven; the emperor is my clothed friend."

古文：方兴朕共享富贵，何靳之不令饮邪？ 祝毕，顾谓审琦曰： 天必赐卿酒量，试饮之，勿惮也。 审琦受诏，饮十杯无苦。
现代文：正要与我共享富贵，为什么让他不能饮酒呢？ 祝毕，看着审琦说： 上天一定赐给你酒量，试着喝，不要怕。 审琦受令，喝下十杯酒没有事。
English: Just as he was about to share his wealth with me, why couldn't he drink alcohol? Wishing him good luck, he looked at the judge and said, "Heaven must have given you the right amount of alcohol, try to drink it, don't be afraid." The judge was ordered to drink ten glasses of wine.

古文：自此侍宴常引满，及归私家即不能饮，或强饮辄病。
现代文：从此陪宴常常斟满，回到家里就不能喝了，如果勉强喝就会生病。
English: From then on, the banquet is often filled to the brim, and you can't drink it when you get home. If you drink it reluctantly, you'll get sick.

古文：子承衍、承干、承德、承祐、承俊、承偓、承僎、承仅、承休。
现代文：儿子有承衍、承絗、承德、承祐、承俊、承偓、承承僎、承僅、承休。
English: His sons were Zhengyan, Zhengyuan, Zhengde, Zhenyu, Zhenjun, Zhengyuan, Zhengyuan, Zhengyuan and Zhengyuan.

古文：承西上阁门使、会州刺史，承至如京使，承俊、承僎至内殿崇班，承偓至阁门祗候，承仅至左神武将军致仕，承休至内殿承制。
现代文：承德任西上门合门使、会州刺史，承祐官至如京使，承俊、承官至内殿崇班，承经官至门合门祗候，承僅官至左神武将军退休，承休官至内殿承制。
English: Chengde was appointed as the west-upper gate gate gatekeeper, the state gatekeeper, Chengyu was appointed as the west-upper gate gate gate keeper, Chengjun was appointed as the west-upper gate keeper, Chengyu was appointed as the west-upper gate keeper, Chengjun was appointed as the west-upper gate keeper, Chengdu was appointed as the west-upper gate keeper, Chengde was appointed as the west-upper gate keeper, Chengdu was appointed as the west-upper gate keeper, Chengde was appointed as the west-upper gate keeper, Chengdu was appointed as the west-upper gate keeper,

