古文：苏秦始将连横，说秦惠王曰： 大王之国，西有巴、蜀、汉中之利，北有胡貉、代马之用，南有巫山、黔中之限，东有肴、函之固。
现代文：苏秦最初主张连横，他游说秦惠文王说： 大王的国家，西面有巴、蜀和汉中等地丰富物产的便利，北面有胡貉、代马两地提供的物资费用，南面有巫山、黔中作为天然的屏障，东面有崤山、函谷关这两个牢固的关塞。
English: Su Qin initially advocated Lianyuan, and he lobbied Qin Huiwen Wang to say: The country of the great king has the convenience of rich products in Ba, Shu and Han in the west, the cost of materials provided by Hu and Ma in the north, Wushan and Yuzhong in the south as a natural barrier, and Lushan and Hakodate in the east as two solid barriers.

古文：田肥美，民殷富，战车万乘，奋击百万，沃野千里，蓄积饶多，地势形便，此所谓天府，天下之雄国也。
现代文：国家田地肥沃，百姓殷实富裕，战车万辆，兵甲百万，沃野千里，各种资源富饶，积蓄充足，地势险要，易守难攻，这真是天府之国，因此秦国可以称得上是能够称霸天下的强国。
English: The country's fields are fertile, the people are rich and affluent, there are 10,000 chariots, a million soldiers, thousands of fertile fields, various resources are abundant, sufficient savings, the terrain is precarious, easy to defend and difficult to attack, this is truly the country of heaven, so Qin can be said to be a powerful country that can dominate the world.

古文：以大王之贤，士民之众，车骑之用，兵法之教，可以并诸侯，吞天下，称帝而治。
现代文：凭借着大王的贤能，国家众多的士卒和百姓，战车、骑兵的强大力量，兵法和谋略的运用，贵国完全可以吞并其他诸侯，统一天下，号称皇帝来统治全国。
English: With the virtue of the great king, the country's numerous soldiers and people, the powerful strength of chariots and cavalry, the use of military methods and strategies, your country can completely absorb other princes, unify the country, and claim to be the emperor to rule the country.

古文：愿大王少留意，臣请奏其效。 
现代文：希望大王能考虑这样做的好处，请大王采纳臣所设计的方略。 
English: I hope that the king can consider the benefits of doing so, and ask the king to adopt the strategy designed by the minister.

古文：秦王曰： 寡人闻之，毛羽不丰满者不可以高飞，文章不成者不可以诛罚，道德不厚者不可以使民，政教不顺者不可以烦大臣。
现代文：秦惠文王说： 寡人听说，羽毛不够丰满的鸟儿不可以高飞，法令不完备不可以奖惩刑罚，道德不崇高的君主不可统治万民，政策教化不顺天意的君主不可以号令大臣。
English: Qin Huiwen Wang said: Many people have heard that birds whose feathers are not plump enough cannot fly high, incomplete laws cannot reward and punish punishments, a monarch without high morals cannot rule the people, and a monarch whose policies are not conducive to the will of heaven cannot order ministers.

古文：今先生俨然不远千里而庭教之，愿以异日。 
现代文：如今先生不远千里来当面登庭指教，军国大计还是希望等将来再说吧。 
English: Now that you have come thousands of miles to appear in court in person to instruct us, let's hope that the military state plan will be discussed in the future.

古文：苏秦曰： 臣固疑大王之不能用也。昔者神农伐补遂，黄帝伐涿鹿而禽蚩尤，尧伐驩兜，舜伐三苗，禹伐共工，汤伐有夏，文王伐崇，武王伐纣，齐桓任战而伯天下。
现代文：苏秦说： 我本来就怀疑大王不会听取我的意见，过去神农氏讨伐补遂，黄帝讨伐涿鹿而擒获蚩尤，尧帝征讨兜，舜帝征伐三苗，禹帝征伐共工，商汤征伐有夏，文王征伐崇侯，武王征伐殷纣，齐桓公凭战争而称霸天下。
English: Su Qin said: I originally suspected that the great king would not listen to my opinion. In the past, Shennong's crusade was successful, the Yellow Emperor's crusade against the elk was successful, Emperor Zhao's campaign was successful, Emperor Zhao's campaign was successful, Emperor Zhao's campaign was successful, Emperor Zhao's campaign was successful, Emperor Yu's campaign was successful, Emperor Wen's campaign was successful, Emperor Wen's campaign was successful, Emperor Wen's campaign was successful, Emperor Wen's campaign was successful, Emperor Wen's campaign was successful, Emperor Wen's campaign was successful, Emperor Wen's campaign was successful, Emperor

古文：由此观之，恶有不战者乎？
现代文：由此看来，哪有不运用战争的道理呢？
English: From this point of view, is there any reason not to resort to war?

古文：古者使车毂击驰，言语相结，天下为一；约从连横，兵革不藏；文士并饬，诸侯乱惑；万端俱起，不可胜理；科条既备，民多伪态；书策稠浊，百姓不足；上下相愁，民无所聊；明言章理，兵甲愈起；辩言伟服，战攻不息；繁称文辞，天下不治；舌弊耳聋，不见成功；行义约信，天下不亲。
现代文：古时候，出使的车辆络绎不绝，外交使节互结同盟，这是天下都一致的。即使这样，或言合纵，或言连横，但也从未停止过使用武力；当外交、军事同时并用，则诸侯混乱；各种问题同时发生，则来不及处理；法令条款齐备，百姓反而奸诈；政令繁多杂乱，百姓就衣食不足；上下互相埋怨，百姓就无所依赖；空洞的道理虽在不厌其烦地讲述，而使用武力之事却在愈来愈频繁地发生；巧言善辩，奇装异服，战争却没有一日停息；书策繁乱，言辞驳杂，天下却不能治理。说的人说得舌烂，听的人听得耳聋，却不见什么成效；推行仁义，订立盟约，然而天下并不因此而亲善。
English: In ancient times, there was a never-ending stream of dispatched vehicles, and diplomatic envoys made alliances with each other, which was the same all over the world. Even so, the use of force was never stopped, whether it was a combination of words or a series of words; when diplomacy and military were used at the same time, the lords were in chaos; when various problems occurred at the same time, it was too late to deal with them; the legal provisions were complete, but the people were treacherous; the government decrees were numerous and chaotic, and the people were short of food and clothing; the people complained to each other, and the people had nothing to rely on; although the

古文：于是，乃废文任武，厚养死士，缀甲厉兵，效胜于战场。
现代文：于是，才废弃文治，使用武力，多养敢死之士，修缮铠甲，磨砺兵器，以取胜于战场。
English: As a result, they abandoned the rule of law, used force, raised more daredevils, repaired armor, and sharpened weapons in order to win the battlefield.

古文：夫徒处而致利，安坐而广地，虽古五帝、三王、五伯，明主贤君，常欲坐而致之，其势不能，故以战续之。
现代文：如果无所事事，无所作为，不进行战争，就想获利，扩充土地，即使五帝、三王、春秋五霸、明主贤君，总想坐待成功，却势难奏效，因此还得用战争继续解决问题。
English: If there is nothing to do, nothing to do, no war, they want to make a profit and expand the land. Even if the Five Emperors, the Three Kings, the Five Rulers of Spring and Autumn, and the Wise and the Wise, always want to wait for success, it is difficult to work, so they have to continue to solve the problem with war.

古文：宽则两军相攻，迫则杖戟相撞，然后可建大功。
现代文：如果两军相距遥远，就互相进攻；相距迫近，就白刃交锋，然后才可以建立大功。
English: If the two armies are far apart, they will attack each other; if they are close to each other, they will fight each other, and then they can build a great achievement.

古文：是故兵胜于外，义强于内；威立于上，民服于下。
现代文：所以，军队得胜于外，正义治强于内；威权建立于上，百姓服从于下。
English: Therefore, the army is superior to the outside, justice is stronger than the inside; authority is established on the top, and the people are subordinate to the bottom.

古文：今欲并天下，凌万乘，诎敌国，制海内，子元元，臣诸侯，非兵不可。
现代文：如今，想要吞并天下，控制大国，击败敌人，统治海内，爱护百姓，臣服诸侯，非战争不可。
English: Today, if you want to annex the world, control the great powers, defeat the enemy, rule the sea, love the people, and submit to the lords, you must have war.

古文：今之嗣主，忽於至道，皆悯于教，乱于治，迷于言，惑于语，沈于辩，溺于辞。
现代文：但是，现在的国君，偏偏忽视了这个极其重要的道理，他们都被那些众说纷纭的所谓治国的说教弄昏了头脑，迷惑于他们那些巧舌善辩的言辞，沉醉于他们那些夸夸其谈的空论之中。
English: However, the present rulers of the country have ignored this extremely important principle. They have all been befuddled by the so-called statecraft teachings of those with divergent opinions, confused by their eloquent words, and intoxicated by their boastful empty talk.

古文：以此论之，王固不能行也。 
现代文：由此来看，大王必然不会采用我的主张。 
English: From this point of view, the great king will certainly not adopt my proposal.

古文：说秦王书十上而说不行。
现代文：苏秦游说秦王，一连十多次上表奏章，但他的建议始终都没能得到采纳。
English: Su Qin lobbied Qin Wang to play the movement more than ten times in a row, but his suggestion was never adopted.

古文：黑貂之裘弊，黄金百斤尽，资用乏绝，去秦而归。
现代文：他穿的黑色貂皮衣服破了，带的一百斤黄金也花光了，花的用的都没有了，不得不离开了秦国回到洛阳老家。
English: The black mink coat he was wearing was torn, and the hundred pounds of gold he had brought with him had been spent. There was no more use for flowers, and he had to leave Qin and return to his hometown in Luoyang.

古文：羸滕履蹻，负书担櫜，形容枯槁，面目犁黑，状有归色。
现代文：他腿上缠着绑腿布，脚上穿着草鞋，背着书籍，担着行囊，神情枯槁，面容憔悴，脸色黄黑，显得非常失意。
English: He had leg-warmers on his legs, straw sandals on his feet, books on his back and a rucksack on his shoulder. He looked withered, gaunt, yellow-black and very disappointed.

古文：归至家，妻不下紝，嫂不为炊，父母不与言。
现代文：回到了家里，他的妻子正在织布不理会他，嫂子不给他做饭，父母不和他说话。
English: When he got home, his wife was weaving and ignored him, his sister-in-law wouldn't cook for him, and his parents wouldn't talk to him.

古文：苏秦喟叹曰： 妻不以我为夫，嫂不以我为叔，父母不以我为子，是皆秦之罪也。 
现代文：苏秦慨叹说： 妻子不认我是丈夫，嫂子不认我是小叔，父母不认我是儿子，这都是我苏秦的罪过啊！ 
English: Su Qin sighed and said, "My wife doesn't recognize me as her husband, my sister-in-law doesn't recognize me as her uncle, and my parents don't recognize me as their son. It's all my Su Qin's fault!"

古文：乃夜发书，陈箧数十，得太公阴符之谋，伏而诵之，简练以为揣摩。
现代文：于是，他晚上翻出他的藏书，打开了数十个书箱，找到了一本《太公阴符》的讲谋略的书，埋头攻读，找那些简练精要的地方反复揣摩。
English: As a result, he dug out his collection of books in the evening, opened dozens of bookcases, found a book on the strategy of "Tai Gongyin Fu," immersed himself in studying, and repeatedly tried to find those concise and essential places.

古文：读书欲睡，引锥自刺其股，血流至足。
现代文：读书到了困倦的时候想要睡觉，他就拿来锥子自己刺自己的大腿，致使鲜血顺着腿流到脚底。
English: When he was tired from reading and wanted to sleep, he stabbed himself in the thigh with a skewer, causing blood to flow down his leg to the sole of his foot.

古文：曰： 安有说人主不能出其金玉锦绣，取卿相之尊者乎? 
现代文：他自言自语地说： 怎么可能游说各国的国君却不能使他们拿出金玉锦绣、得到卿相这样的尊位的呢？ 
English: He said to himself, "How is it possible to lobby the sovereigns of various countries, but not be able to get them to come up with the gold and jewels to obtain such an honorable position as a noble?"

古文：期年揣摩成，曰： 此真可以说当世之君矣。 
现代文：过了一年终于揣摩成功，又自言自语地说： 这样一来就可以游说当世在位的各国国君了！ 
English: After a year, he finally calculated his success and said to himself: This way, I can lobby the reigning monarchs of all countries!

古文：于是乃摩燕乌集阙，见说赵王于华屋之下，抵掌而谈。
现代文：于是苏秦取道燕乌集阙，被赵王召见，在华丽的宫殿里游说赵王，两人甚至握着手，谈得非常投机。
English: So Su Qin took the road of Yan Wuji, was summoned by Zhao Wang, and lobbied Zhao Wang in the gorgeous palace. The two even held hands and talked very opportunistically.

古文：赵王大悦，封为武安君。受相印，革车白乘，锦绣千纯，白壁百双，黄金万溢，以随其后，约从散横，以抑强秦。
现代文：赵王大为高兴，于是封苏秦为武安君，并授予他相印，一百辆革车，一千匹锦绣，一百双白璧，一万镒黄金，长长的车队尾随在他的身后，到各国去约定合纵，拆散连横，以此来压制强秦。
English: Zhao Wang was very pleased, so he named Su Qin as Wu Anjun, and awarded him a seal, one hundred leather cars, one thousand brocades, one hundred pairs of white brocades, and ten thousand gold. A long convoy followed behind him, going to various countries to make agreements and break up conflicts, in order to suppress the strong Qin.

古文：故苏秦相于赵而关不通。
现代文：因此，当苏秦在赵国做宰相时，秦国不敢出兵函谷关。
English: Therefore, when Su Qin was the prime minister of Zhao, Qin did not dare to send troops to Hantuguan.

古文：当此之时，天下之大，万民之众，王侯之威，谋臣之权，皆欲决苏秦之策。
现代文：就在这个时候，广大的天下、所有的老百姓、威武的王侯、掌握大权的谋臣，都想让苏秦出谋划策。
English: Just at this time, the vast world, all the common people, the mighty princes, the strategists who hold great power, all want Su Qin to come up with a plan.

古文：不费斗粮，未烦一兵，未战一士，未绝一弦，未折一矢，诸侯相亲，贤于兄弟。
现代文：因此，不用花费一斗粮食，没有征用一个兵卒，没有派遣一个大将，没有坏掉一把弓，没有折断一支箭，就使得各国诸侯和睦相处，甚至比亲兄弟之间还要亲近。
English: Therefore, without spending a bucket of grain, without conscripting a soldier, without sending a general, without breaking a bow, without breaking an arrow, the princes of all countries live in harmony, even closer than brothers and sisters.

古文：夫贤人在而天下服，一人用而天下从，故曰：式于政不式于勇；式于廊庙之内，不式于四境之外。
现代文：所以说，只要有贤能的人掌握政权，天下就能够服从安定，只要有一个这样的人得到任用，老百姓就会顺从。因此说，只要能够运用政治手段解决的问题，就不必用武力来征服；只要在朝廷上能够通过外交手段来解决的问题，就不必到对方的国家境内作战。
English: Therefore, as long as there is a competent person in power, the world can be subject to stability, and as long as such a person is appointed, the people will obey. Therefore, as long as the problem can be solved by political means, there is no need to conquer by force; as long as the problem can be solved by diplomatic means in the court, there is no need to fight in the other country's territory.

古文：当秦之隆，黄金万溢为用，转毂连骑，炫熿于道，山东之国从风而服，使赵大重。
现代文：当苏秦权势逐渐上升的时候，金帛万镒供他使用，而他所指挥的战车和骑兵接连不断，在道路上走路都显得权势显赫，崤山以东的各个诸侯国，都听从他的号令，这使赵国的地位得到提高。
English: When the power of Su Qin was gradually rising, the gold and silver were plentiful for him to use, and the chariots and cavalry he commanded kept coming one after another. When walking on the road, they all appeared to be powerful. All the principalities east of Mount Lushan obeyed his orders, which improved the status of Zhao.

古文：且夫苏秦，特穷巷掘门桑户棬枢之士耳，伏轼撙衔，横历天下，廷说诸侯之王，杜左右之口，天下莫之能伉。
现代文：但苏秦当初只不过是一个极端贫穷、挖墙当门、用桑做窗、用弯曲的木头做门框的人罢了，而此时他却常常坐上华丽的车子，纵横游历天下，在各诸侯国的朝廷上游说君王，使各诸侯君王的亲信不敢开口，天下没有谁敢与他相抗衡了。
English: But at the beginning, Su Qin was nothing more than an extremely poor man, digging walls as doors, using mulberry as windows, and using bent wood as door frames. At that time, however, he often rode around the world in a luxurious car, lobbying kings in the imperial courts of various states, so that the close friends of the kings of various states did not dare to speak out. No one in the world dared to compete with him.

古文：将说楚王，路过洛阳，父母闻之，清宫除道，张乐设饮，郊迎三十里。
现代文：苏秦要去游说楚国国君，路过洛阳。父母知道了这个消息，就急忙清理居所、扫除道路，找来乐队吹打起音乐，准备好丰盛的酒席，迎接到郊外三十里远的地方。
English: Su Qin was passing through Luoyang on his way to lobby the king of Chu. When his parents learned the news, they hurried to clean up their home, sweep the roads, find a band to play music, and prepare a sumptuous banquet to welcome him to a place thirty miles away in the suburbs.

古文：妻侧目而视，倾耳而听；嫂蛇行匍伏，四拜自跪而谢。
现代文：妻子敬畏他，斜着眼睛来观看他的威仪，而不敢正眼看他，并且侧着耳朵听他说话。嫂子跪在地上，像蛇一样在地上爬行，对苏秦一再地叩头请罪。
English: His wife was in awe of him, squinting at his majesty, not daring to look directly at him, and listening to him with her ears averted. Her sister-in-law knelt on the ground, crawling on the ground like a snake, and repeatedly kowtowed to Su Qin to plead guilty.

古文：苏秦曰： 嫂何前倨而后卑也? 
现代文：苏秦问： 嫂子，你对待我为什么以前傲慢，现在却这样的卑贱呢？ 
English: Su Qin asked: Sister-in-law, why did you treat me with arrogance before, but now with such meanness?

古文：嫂曰： 以季子之位尊而多金。 苏秦曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：他的嫂子回答说： 因为现在你有尊贵的地位和很多的钱财。 苏秦说： 唉！
English: His sister-in-law replied, "Because now you have a prestigious position and a lot of money." Su Qin said, "Alas!

古文：贫穷则父母不子，富贵则亲戚畏惧。
现代文：一个人如果贫穷失意，连父母都不把他当儿子，然而一旦富贵显赫之后，亲戚朋友就都敬畏有加。
English: If a person is poor and frustrated, even his parents do not consider him a son, but once he is rich and famous, relatives and friends are awestruck.

古文：人生世上，势位富贵，盖可忽乎哉！
现代文：一个人在世上活着，权势和富贵怎么能忽视不顾呢！ 
English: How can one live in the world and ignore power and wealth?

