古文：起昭阳作噩，尽阏逢阉茂，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。梁元帝承圣二年
English: two years. In the second year of the enthronement of Emperor Liang Yuan,

古文：世祖孝元皇帝下承圣二年春，正月，王僧辩发建康，承制使陈霸先代镇扬州。
现代文：春季正月，王僧辩从建康出发，按照诏旨让陈霸先从京口回来替代他镇守扬州。
English: In the first month of spring, Wang Sangyan set out from Jiankang and, in accordance with the imperial edict, let Chen Ba first return from Beijing to replace him as the town guard of Yangzhou.

古文：丙子，山胡围齐离石。
现代文：丙子，山胡包围了北齐的离石城。
English: Well, the mountain goats have encircled Jiaosi Town in North Qi.

古文：戊寅，齐主讨之，未至，胡已走，因巡三堆，大猎而归。
现代文：戊寅，北齐国主高洋出兵讨伐，还没到离石，山胡已经跑了，于是乘便巡视了三堆一带，痛快地打了一场猎后回来。
English: Wu Yin, the lord of Northern Qi, sent troops to fight Gaoyang, but before he reached the rock, the beech had already run away, so he took the bus to inspect the three piles of the area, and happily returned after a hunt.

古文：以吏部尚书王褒为左仆射。
现代文：梁元帝任命吏部尚书王褒为左仆射。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan appointed the official Shang Shuxu Wang Bo to be his left-hand man.

古文：己丑，齐改铸钱，文曰 常平五铢 。
现代文：己丑，北齐修改铸钱的图样，上面铸的字为 常平五铢 。
English: As a result, Beiqi modified the pattern of casting money, and the word cast on it was "常平五."

古文：二月，庚子，李洪雅力屈，以空云城降陆纳。
现代文：二月，庚子，李洪雅兵力不济，献出空云城投降陆纳。
English: In February, Geng Zi and Li Hongya were short of troops, so they surrendered the Sky Cloud City to Lu Na.

古文：纳囚洪雅，杀丁道贵。
现代文：陆纳把李洪雅关起来，杀了丁道贵。
English: Lu Na locked up Li Hongya and killed Ding Daogui.

古文：纳以沙门宝志诗识有 十八子 ，以为李氏当王，甲辰，推洪雅为主，号大将军，使乘平肩舆，列鼓吹，纳帅众数千，左右翼从。
现代文：陆纳因为僧人宝志写的诗谶中有 十八子 字样，以为姓李的会当皇帝，便于甲辰，推举李洪雅为主子，封号为大将军，让他坐在平肩舆上，左右排列鼓吹乐队，自己则率领几千士兵在左右护卫。
English: Lu Na thought that Li Hongya would become emperor because of the word "18 sons" in the poem written by the monk Baozhi, so he promoted Li Hongya as the main son and gave him the title of general. He had Li Hongya sit on his shoulders, had the band of preachers line up on his right and left, and himself led several thousand soldiers to escort him on his right and left.

古文：魏太师泰去丞相、大行台，为都督中外诸军事。
现代文：西魏太师宇文泰辞去丞相、大行台等职，出任都督中外诸军事。
English: Western Wei Grandmaster Wu Wentai resigned as chancellor and commander-in-chief, and served as the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces.

古文：王雄至东梁州，黄众宝帅众降。
现代文：王雄进军东梁州，黄众宝率众投降。
English: Wang Xiong marched into Dongliangzhou, and Huang Zhongbao led the crowd to surrender.

古文：太师泰赦之，迁其豪帅于雍州。
现代文：太师宇文泰赦免了黄众宝，把他手下骁勇的将领迁到了雍州。
English: Grand Master Wu Wentai pardoned Huang Zhongbao and transferred his brave generals to Yongzhou.

古文：齐主送柔然可汗铁伐之父登注及兄库提还其国。
现代文：北齐国主高洋送柔然可汗铁伐的父亲登注和哥哥库提回到了他们的国家。
English: Northern Qi sovereign Gao Yang sent Zhu Ranzhong, Khan Tie Va's father Deng Zhu and brother Kuti back to their country.

古文：铁伐寻为契丹所杀，国人立登注为可汗。登注复为其大人阿富提所杀，国人立库提。
现代文：铁伐不久被契丹人杀害，其国人又立登注为可汗，登注又被头人阿富提杀死，国人又立库提为可汗。
English: Tieba was soon killed by the Khitans, and his compatriots installed Dengzhu as khan, Dengzhu was killed by the headman Afuti, and the compatriots installed Kuti as khan.

古文：突厥伊利可汗卒，子科罗立，号乙息记可汗；三月，遣使献马五万于魏。
现代文：突厥伊利可汗去世，其子科罗立为可汗，号为乙息记可汗。三月，科罗派使者献马匹五万给西魏。
English: The Turk Ili Khan died, and his son Koro became Khan, with the title Bixi Khan. In March, Koro sent an envoy to present 50,000 horses to the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：柔然别部又立阿那瓖叔父邓叔子为可汗。
现代文：柔然另一个部落又立阿那的叔父邓叔子为可汗。
English: Then another tribe made Anah's uncle, Deng Shuzi, the khan.

古文：乙息记击破邓叔子于沃野北木赖山。
现代文：乙息记可汗在沃野北边木赖山一带把邓叔子打得大败。
English: Yi Xi Ke Khan defeated Deng Shuzi in the area of Muraishan on the northern edge of Weno.

古文：乙息记卒，舍其子摄图而立其弟俟斤，号木杆可汗。
现代文：乙息记去世，没有立他的儿子摄图而立他的弟弟俟斤为可汗，号为木杆可汗。
English: After the death of Aixi, he did not name his son Zhengtu, but named his younger brother Yaojin as khan, and his posthumous name Muxu as khan.

古文：木杆状貌奇异，性刚勇，多智略，善用兵，邻国畏之。
现代文：木杆可汗相貌形状颇为奇特怪异，性格刚强勇猛，足智多谋，善于用兵打仗，邻国都怕他。
English: The wooden pole khan's appearance and shape are quite peculiar and strange, his character is strong and brave, resourceful, good at using soldiers to fight, and his neighbors are afraid of him.

古文：上闻武陵王纪东下，使方士画版为纪像，亲钉支体以厌之，又执侯景之俘以报纪。
现代文：元帝听到武陵王萧纪出兵东下的消息，就派会妖术的方士在木版上画上萧纪的图像，亲自往图像的躯体四肢上钉钉子，以为可以把他诅死。
English: When Emperor Yuan heard the news that King Xiao Ji of Wuling had sent troops to the east, he sent magicians to draw an image of Xiao Ji on a wooden board and personally nail nails to the body and limbs of the image, thinking that he could be cursed to death.

古文：初，纪之举兵，皆太子圆照之谋也。
现代文：又把侯景的俘虏押送到萧纪那儿，告诉他侯景已平。当初，萧纪举兵东进，全是太子萧圆照的主意。
English: He also escorted Hou Jing's captives to Xiao Ji and told him that Hou Jing had been defeated. At the beginning, it was all the idea of Prince Xiao Yuanzhao for Xiao Ji to march to the east.

古文：圆照时镇巴东，执留使者。启纪云： 侯景未平，宜急进讨；已闻荆镇为景所破。 
现代文：萧圆照这时镇守巴东，截获了使者，派人报告萧纪说： 侯景还没平定，应该赶快进军声讨。我已听到荆州被侯景攻破的消息。 
English: At this time, Xiao Yuan Zhao was guarding Badong and intercepted the messenger. He sent someone to report to Xiao Ji, saying: "Houjing has not been pacified, we should quickly march into the army to protest. I have heard the news that Jingzhou has been invaded by Houjing.

古文：纪信之，趣兵东下。
现代文：萧纪信以为真，就火速率兵东下。
English: Xiao Jixin believed this to be true, so he ordered his soldiers to advance eastward at a rapid rate of fire.

古文：上甚惧，与魏书曰： 子纠，亲也，请君讨之。 
现代文：元帝很害怕，就写信给西魏求援，信中引用了《左传》中鲍叔所说的 子纠，是我的亲族，请你不必顾虑，出兵讨伐他 ，让宇文泰出兵打萧纪。
English: Emperor Yuan was very scared, so he wrote to West Wei for help. The letter quoted Uncle Bao from "Zhuan" as saying, "Zigang is my relative, please don't worry, send troops to fight him, let Yu Wentai send troops to fight Xiao Ji."

古文：太师泰曰： 取蜀制梁，在兹一举。 
现代文：太师宇文泰说： 夺取蜀地，制伏梁朝，就在这一次了。 
English: Grand Master Wu Wentai said, "This is the time to seize Shu and subdue the Liang Dynasty.

古文：诸将咸难之。
现代文：但是，将领们都感到困难。
English: But the generals are struggling.

古文：大将军代人尉迟迥，泰之甥也，独以为可克。
现代文：大将军代京人尉迟迥是宇文泰的外甥，只有他以为能打下来。
English: The great general and representative of the people of Kyoto, Lieutenant Chihiro, was the nephew of Uwentai, and only he thought he could defeat the dragon.

古文：泰问以方略，迥曰： 蜀与中国隔绝百有馀年，恃其险远，不虞我至。若以铁骑兼行袭之，无不克矣。 
现代文：宇文泰问他有什么方法谋略，尉迟迥说： 蜀地和中原别的地区隔绝有一百多年了，仗恃其地险要，从来不曾担心我军会去攻打，如果我们用铁甲骑兵，昼夜兼行去偷袭，没有打不下来的。 
English: Uven Tai asked him what kind of strategy he had, and the lieutenant said: "Shu Di and other areas of Central Plains have been isolated for more than a hundred years, so we never feared that our army would attack. If we used iron-clad cavalry to sneak attack day and night, we could not beat them down.

古文：泰乃遣迥督开府仪同三司原珍等六军，甲士万二千，骑万匹，自散关伐蜀。
现代文：宇文泰深以为然，就派尉迟迥率领开府仪同三司原珍等六支部队，甲士一万二千人，骑兵一万，从散关进发讨伐蜀地。
English: Deeply convinced of this, Uwen Tai sent six troops, including twelve thousand warriors and ten thousand cavalrymen, led by Lieutenant Chi Qian, Kaifu Yi and San Shi Yuan Zhen, to march from Sanguan to fight against Shu.

古文：陆纳遣其将吴藏、潘乌黑、李贤明等下据车轮。
现代文：陆纳派他的部将关藏、潘乌黑、李贤明等人占据了车轮。
English: Lu Na sent his subordinates Guanzang, Pan Wu Hei, Li Xianming and others to occupy the wheel.

古文：王僧辩至巴陵，宜丰侯循让都督于僧辩，僧辩弗受。
现代文：王僧辩到了巴陵，宜丰侯萧循把都督让给王僧辩，王僧辩不接受。
English: When Wang Sangye arrived in Baling, Xiao Xun, the lord of Fenghou, offered the governorship to Wang Sangye, but Wang Sangye did not accept it.

古文：上乃以僧辩、循为东、西都督。
现代文：元帝就任命王僧辩、萧循为东西都督。
English: Emperor Yuan appointed Wang Sangyan and Xiao Xun as the governors of the eastern and western capitals.

古文：夏，四月，丙申，僧辩军于车轮。
现代文：夏季，四月，丙申，王僧辩把军队驻扎在车轮。
English: In the summer, in April, Hun Sen and Wang Sangyan stationed troops at the wheel.

古文：吐谷浑可汗夸吕，虽通使于魏而寇抄不息，宇文泰将骑三万逾陇，至姑臧，讨之。
现代文：吐谷浑可汗夸吕，虽然和西魏互派使者修好，但仍然在西魏边境抢劫进犯不止，宇文泰带骑兵三万人越过陇地，抵达姑臧去讨伐夸吕。
English: Although he sent envoys to the Western Wei Dynasty to make peace with them, Uwentai Khan of Tugu, Khan of Kwarju, continued to rob and invade the Western Wei Dynasty's border. Uwentai led 30,000 cavalry across the Badlands and arrived in Gulu to fight Kwarju.

古文：夸吕惧，请服；既而复通使于齐。
现代文：夸吕害怕了，请求降服，但不久又派使者去联通北齐。
English: Kauru was afraid and asked for surrender, but soon sent an envoy to connect with Beichiu.

古文：凉州刺史史宁觇知其还，袭之于赤泉，获其仆射乞伏触状。
现代文：凉州刺史史宁侦察到夸吕回来了，就在赤泉设伏兵袭击了他，抓获了他的仆射乞伏触壮。
English: When Liangzhou assassin Shi Ning detected that Qualu had returned, he set up an ambush in Akizumi and attacked him, capturing his henchman.

古文：陆纳夹岸为城，以拒王僧辩。
现代文：陆纳夹江岸修筑城垒，以抵抗王僧辩。
English: Lu Na clamped the river bank to build a fortress to resist Wang Sang Yu.

古文：纳士卒皆百战之馀，僧辩惮之，不敢轻进，稍作连城以逼之。
现代文：陆纳的士兵都是身经百战的精锐，王僧辩有点害怕，因此不敢大意轻进，慢慢修筑相连的城垒来逼近陆纳的部队。
English: Lu Na's soldiers were all elite warriors who had been through hundreds of battles. Wang Sangye was a little scared, so he did not dare to advance lightly, slowly building connected ramparts to approach Lu Na's troops.

古文：纳以僧辩为怯，不设备；五月，甲子，僧辩命诸军水陆齐进，急攻之，僧辩亲执旗鼓，宜丰侯循身受矢石，拔其二城；纳众大败，步走，保长沙。
现代文：陆纳以为王僧辩胆怯，所以一点也不防备。五月，甲子，王僧辩命令水陆各路兵马齐头并进，猛烈发动进攻。王僧辩亲自举旗擂鼓，宜丰侯萧循亲自迎着飞箭乱石，从而攻下了陆纳的两座城垒。陆纳的队伍大败，步行逃跑退保长沙。
English: Lu Na thought that Wang Sofen was timid, so he did not prepare at all. In May, Jia Zi, Wang Sofen ordered the water and land soldiers to march side by side and launch a fierce attack. Wang Sofen personally raised the flag and drums, and Yi Feng Hou Xiao Cun personally faced the flying arrows and rocks, thus capturing Lu Na's two fortresses. Lu Na's team was defeated and fled on foot to retreat to Changsha.

古文：乙丑，僧辩进围之。
现代文：乙丑，王僧辩挥师进逼并把陆纳包围起来。
English: In the second game, Wang Soen forced Lu Na into a corner and encircled him.

古文：僧辩坐垄上视筑围垒，吴藏、李贤明帅锐卒千人开门突出，蒙楯直进，趋僧辩。
现代文：王僧辩坐在土岸上督察兵士修筑围垒，吴藏、李贤明突然率领精锐将士一千人开门冲出来，拿着盾牌挥矛直进，朝王僧辩冲去。
English: Wang Sangye was sitting on the bank of the river surveying the soldiers building the enclosure. Wu Zang and Li Xianming suddenly led a thousand elite soldiers to open the gate and rushed out. They took their shields and swung their spears straight ahead, and rushed towards Wang Sangye.

古文：时杜崱、杜龛并侍左右，甲士卫者止百馀人，力战拒之。
现代文：这时杜、杜龛两人都侍立在王僧辩身边，甲士、警卫人员只有一百多人，拼死抵抗。
English: At this time, Du and Du Xuan were both standing by Wang Sangye's side, and there were only more than a hundred warriors and guards, desperately resisting.

古文：僧辩据胡床不动，裴之横从旁击藏等，藏等败退，贤明死，藏脱走入城。
现代文：战斗异常激烈，但王僧辩坐在胡床上不动。裴之横从旁边率军袭击吴藏等人，吴藏才败退下去。李贤明战死，吴藏逃脱跑入城里。
English: The battle was extremely fierce, but Wang Sangye did not move as he sat on Hu's bed. Pei Zhiyang led an army to attack Wu Zang and others from the side, only for Wu Zang to retreat in defeat. Li Xianming was killed in the battle, and Wu Zang escaped and ran into the city.

古文：武陵王纪至巴郡，闻有魏兵，遣前梁州刺史巴西谯淹还军救蜀。
现代文：武陵王萧纪的军队抵达巴郡，听说有西魏的士兵出现，就派前梁州刺史巴西人谯淹掉头回师救蜀。
English: When the army of Wuling King Xiao Ji arrived in Ba County, he heard that soldiers from the Western Wei Dynasty had appeared, and sent the former Liangzhou Jishi Brazilians to drown the head coach and save Shu.

古文：初，杨乾运求为梁州刺史，纪以为潼州；杨法琛求为黎州刺史，以为沙州：二人皆不悦。
现代文：当初，杨乾运要求当梁州刺史，萧纪任命他为潼州刺史；杨法琛要求当黎州刺史，萧纪任命他为沙州刺史，两人都不高兴。
English: At first, Yang Qianyun asked to be the governor of Liangzhou, and Xiao Ji appointed him as the governor of Zhangzhou; Yang Fahui asked to be the governor of Lizhou, and Xiao Ji appointed him as the governor of Shazhou. Both of them were not happy.

古文：乾运兄子略说乾运曰： 今侯景初平，宜同心戮力，保国宁民，而兄弟寻戈，此自亡之道也。
现代文：杨崐乾运的侄子杨略向杨乾运进言说： 现在侯景之乱刚刚平定，应该同心协力，保卫国家，安抚黎民，而萧纪却起兵与萧绎争帝，兄弟打仗，争斗不已，这是自我灭亡的行为。
English: Yang Liang, Yang Jianyun's nephew, said to Yang Jianyun: Now that the Houjing Rebellion has just been quelled, we should work together to defend the country and appease the people of Lai, but Xiao Ji has raised an army to fight against Xiao Yu for the emperor. Brothers fight and fight endlessly. This is a self-destructive behavior.

古文：夫木朽不雕，世衰难佐。
现代文：人们说木头朽烂了就不能雕刻，世道衰颓了就难以扶救。
English: People say that wood cannot be carved if it is rotten, and it is difficult to help if the world is decadent.

古文：不如送款关中，可以功名两全。 
现代文：我看不如和西魏联络一下，派人到关中去表示归附的心迹，这样可以功名两全。 
English: I don't see how contacting the Western Wei Dynasty and sending someone to Guanzhong to express allegiance can accomplish both goals.

古文：乾运然之，令略将二千人镇剑阁，又遣其婿乐广镇安州，与法琛皆潜通于魏。
现代文：杨乾运深以为然，命令杨略带兵二千去镇守剑阁，又派他女婿乐广去镇守安州，连同杨法琛一起，暗暗和西魏打通了关系。
English: Yang Qianyun was deeply impressed and ordered Yang Liang to take 2,000 soldiers to guard Jiange, and sent his son-in-law Le Guang to guard Anzhou. Together with Yang Fahui, they secretly established relations with the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏太师泰密赐乾运铁券，授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、梁州刺史。
现代文：西魏太师宇文泰秘密地把铁券踢给杨乾运，并授予他骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、梁州刺史的职位。
English: Western Wei Grand Master Yu Wentai secretly gave Yang Qianyun the iron certificate and awarded him the positions of General of Cavalry, Kaifu Yi Tong Third Division, and Liangzhou Jishi.

古文：尉迟迥以开府仪同三司侯吕陵始为前军，至剑阁，略退就乐广，翻城应始，始入据安州。
现代文：西魏尉迟迥以开府仪同三司侯吕陵始为前军，抵达剑阁，杨略有意弃城退却，去投靠乐广，他从城墙翻出来接应侯吕陵始，这样，侯吕陵始就轻而易举地占据了安州。
English: The Western Wei lieutenant belatedly arrived at Jiange with the Kaifu Yi and the three divisions of the Hou Luling Shi as the front army. Yang Liang deliberately abandoned the city and retreated to rely on Leguang. He turned out from the city wall to meet the Hou Luling Shi. In this way, the Hou Luling Shi easily occupied Anzhou.

古文：甲戌，迥至涪水，乾运以州降。
现代文：甲戌，尉迟迥进军到涪水，杨乾运献出潼州投降。
English: Armor and cavalry marched to Surabaya, Yang Qianyun surrendered Zhangzhou.

古文：迥分军守之，进袭成都。
现代文：尉迟迥分出一部分军队守潼州，大军继续挺进，袭击成都。
English: A part of the army was detached to defend Zhangzhou, and the large army continued to advance and attacked Chengdu.

古文：时成都见兵不满万人，仓库空竭，永丰侯捴婴城自守，迥围之。
现代文：这时成都的守军剩下不满一万人，仓库空虚，粮草兵器都用完了，永丰侯萧环城防守，尉迟迥把成都包围起来。
English: At this time, there were less than ten thousand defenders left in Chengdu, the warehouse was empty, the grain and grass weapons were all used up, Yongfeng Hou Xiaohuan City was defended, and the soldiers encircled Chengdu.

古文：谯淹遣江州刺史景欣、幽州刺史赵拔扈援成都，迥使原珍等击走之。
现代文：谯淹派江州刺史景欣、幽州刺史赵拔扈带兵去救援成都。尉迟迥派原珍等人击跑了他们。
English: Qianlong sent Jiangzhou's assassin Jingxin and Yuzhou's assassin Zhao Bajian to rescue Chengdu with soldiers. The latter sent Yuan Zhen and others to drive them away.

古文：武陵王纪至巴东，知侯景已平，乃自悔，召太子圆照责之，对曰： 侯景虽平，江陵未服。 
现代文：武陵王萧纪进军到巴东时，才听说侯景之乱已经平定，于是感到后悔，就把太子萧元照找来，责备他。但萧元照回答说： 侯景之乱虽平，但江陵方面湘东王并没有臣服呀！ 
English: When Wuling King Xiao Ji marched to Badong, he only heard that the Houjing Rebellion had been quelled, so he felt regret, so he sought out Prince Xiao Yuanzhao and reproached him. But Xiao Yuanzhao replied: Although the Houjing Rebellion was peaceful, the King of East Hunan did not submit to Jiangling!

古文：纪亦以既称尊号，不可复为人下，欲遂东进。
现代文：萧纪也认为自己既然已经称帝，就不能再臣服别人，于是就想继续东进。
English: Xiao Ji also thought that since he had become emperor, he could no longer submit to others, so he wanted to continue eastward.

古文：将卒日夜思归，其江州刺史王开业以为宜还救根本，更思后图；诸将皆以为然。
现代文：但是，他军中的将士们日夜思念故土，想回老家，他手下的江州刺史王开业认为应该回去，救援成都，巩固根本，慢慢再考虑今后的发展。
English: However, the soldiers in his army began to miss their homeland day and night and wanted to return to their hometown. His subordinate, Jiangzhou Sisi Wang Kaye, thought that they should go back, rescue Chengdu, consolidate the foundation, and slowly reconsider future development.

古文：圆照及刘孝胜固言不可，纪从之，宣言于众曰： 敢谏者死！ 
现代文：将领们也都觉得这种想法是对的。只有萧元照和刘孝胜固执地说不行，必须继续东进。萧纪听从了这两人的意见，当众宣布说： 敢再多说的就处死！ 
English: The generals also felt that this way of thinking was right. Only Xiao Yuanzhao and Liu Xiaosheng stubbornly said that it was impossible and that they had to continue eastward. Xiao Ji listened to the opinions of these two men and publicly announced: "If you dare to say more, you will be executed!"

古文：己丑，纪至西陵，军势甚盛，舳舻翳川。
现代文：乙丑，萧纪的军队到达西陵，军势看起来很强盛，战船把江面都遮蔽了。
English: Second ugly, Xiao Ji's army arrived in Xiling, the army looks strong, the warships have covered the river surface.

古文：护军陆法和筑二城于峡口两岸，运石填江，铁锁断之。
现代文：江陵方面派护军陆法和在峡口修筑了两座城堡，运来很多大石头填江，同时拉上铁索把江面航道切断。
English: The Jiangling side sent troops to escort the troops and built two castles at the mouth of the gorge. They brought a lot of large stones to fill the river, and at the same time pulled up the iron cable to cut off the river channel.

古文：帝拔任约于狱，以为晋安王司马，使助法和拒纪，谓之曰： 汝罪不容诛，我不杀汝，本为今日！ 
现代文：元帝把任约从监狱里放出来，任命地为晋安王司马，让他协助陆法和抵抗萧纪，并对他说： 你本来是该得死罪的，我不杀你，就是为了今天让你戴罪立功。 
English: Emperor Yuan let Ren You out of prison and appointed him as the King of Jin'an, Sima, to assist Lu Fa and resist Xiao Ji, and said to him: You should have been sentenced to death. If I don't kill you, it's because I want you to pay for your crime today.

古文：因撤禁兵以配之，仍许妻以庐陵王续之女，使宣猛将军刘棻与之俱。
现代文：于是，把宫庭警卫部队也撤销了，把他们发配给任约指挥。元帝仍然答应任约把庐陵王萧续的女儿嫁给他，还派宣猛将军刘和他一块儿出发。
English: As a result, the palace guard troops were also abolished, and they were assigned to the command of Ren You. Emperor Yuan still promised Ren You to marry the daughter of Fuling King Xiao Zhuang to him, and also sent the fierce General Liu to set out with him.

古文：庚辰，巴州刺史余孝顷将兵万人会王僧辩于长沙。
现代文：庚辰，巴州刺史余孝顷带兵一万去长沙和王僧辩会合。
English: Geng Chen, Bazhou assassin Yu Xiaohua and ten thousand soldiers went to Changsha to meet with Wang Sangye.

古文：豫章太守观宁侯永，昏而少断。左右武蛮奴用事，军主文重疾之。
现代文：豫章太守观宁侯萧永，糊涂而缺少决断事情的魄力，把事情一概托给身边的亲信武蛮奴来掌管，军主文重对此很痛恨。
English: Yuanzhang Taishu Guan Ning Hou Xiao Yong, confused and lacking the courage to decide things, entrusted everything to his close confidants, the barbarians, to take control of the situation, which was hated by the military leader, Wen Chong.

古文：永将兵讨陆纳，至宫亭湖，重杀蛮奴。永军溃，奔江陵。
现代文：萧永带兵去讨伐陆纳，抵达宫亭湖时，文重杀了武蛮奴，萧永的军队溃败下来，逃跑回江陵。
English: Xiao Yong led an army to fight Lu Na, and when he arrived at the Palace Lake, Wen Chong killed the barbarian, and Xiao Yong's army was defeated and fled back to Gangneung.

古文：重将其众奔开建侯蕃，蕃杀之而有其众。
现代文：文重带着他的部众投奔开建侯萧蕃，萧蕃杀了文重，而吞并了他的军队。
English: Wenzhong took his subordinates and rushed to start the construction of Xiaohui. Xiaohui killed Wenzhong and absorbed his army.

古文：六月，壬辰，武陵王纪筑连城，攻绝铁锁，陆法和告急相继。
现代文：六月，壬辰，武陵王萧纪修筑互相连接的城垒，攻断了拦江的铁锁，陆法和连连向江陵告急。
English: In June, the king of Wuling, Xiao Ji, began to build a series of interconnected fortresses, and broke the iron lock of the river barrier. Lu Fa and Lian Lian were in a hurry to Jiangling.

古文：上复拔谢答仁于狱，以为步兵校尉，配兵使助法和；又遣使送王琳，令说谕陆纳。
现代文：元帝又把谢答仁从监狱里放出来，任命他为步兵校尉，配以士兵，让他去协助陆法和。又派使者送王琳去陆纳那里，让他去劝说陆纳归顺。
English: The Yuan Emperor also released Xie Dairen from prison, appointed him an infantry captain and equipped him with soldiers to assist Lu Fa, and sent an envoy to take Wang Lin to Lu Na to persuade Lu Na to surrender.

古文：乙未，琳至长沙，僧辩使送示之，纳众悉拜且泣，使谓僧辩曰： 朝廷若赦王郎，乞听入城。 
现代文：乙未，王琳到了长沙，王僧辩派人送他去前线，崐把他指给陆纳看，陆纳等部众都拜倒在地哭泣不止。陆纳派人对王僧辩说： 朝廷如果赦免了王琳，请你放他到城里来。 
English: After Wang Lin arrived in Changsha, Wang Sangye sent someone to take him to the front line and pointed him out to Lu Na. Lu Na and other officials bowed to the ground and wept. Lu Na sent someone to argue with Wang Sangye: If the court has pardoned Wang Lin, please let him come to the city.

古文：僧辩不许，复送江陵。
现代文：王僧辩不允许，又把王琳送回江陵。
English: Wang Sangyan did not allow it, and sent Wang Lin back to Gangneung.

古文：陆法和求救不已，上欲召长沙兵，恐失陆纳，乃复遣琳许其入城。
现代文：陆法和不断求救，元帝想把在长沙的王僧辩的军队调动来使用，又怕失去陆纳，于是又派王琳去，允许他到陆纳占据的城里去劝降。
English: The Yuan Emperor wanted to use Wang Sangye's army in Changsha, but he was afraid of losing Lu Na. Therefore, he sent Wang Lin to persuade Lu Na to surrender.

古文：琳既入，纳遂降，湘州平。
现代文：王琳进了城，陆纳就投降了，湘州从此被平定了。
English: Wang Lin entered the city, Lu Na surrendered, and Hunan was pacified from then on.

古文：上复琳官爵，使将兵西援峡口。
现代文：元帝恢复了王琳的官职爵位，让他带兵向西去支援峡口。
English: Emperor Yuan restored Wang Lin's official position and title, and let him lead troops to the west to support the gorge.

古文：甲辰，齐章武景王库狄干卒。
现代文：甲辰，北齐章武景王库狄干去世。
English: Jia Chen, the North Qi chapter, the martial arts king Kudigan passed away.

古文：武陵王纪遣将军侯睿将众七千，筑垒与陆法和相拒。
现代文：武陵王萧纪派将军侯睿带领七千人修筑城堡和陆法和对抗。
English: Wuling King Xiao Ji sent General Hou Rui to lead seven thousand people to build a castle and land law and confrontation.

古文：上遣使与纪书，许其还蜀，专制一方；纪不从，报书如家人礼。
现代文：元帝派使者送信给萧纪，准许他带头回蜀，可以专制一方。萧纪不听从，回信用兄弟之礼相称，不用君臣之礼。
English: The Yuan Emperor sent an envoy to Xiao Ji, allowing him to take the lead in returning to Shu, and he could be the autocratic one. Xiao Ji did not obey, and the return was commensurate with the courtesy of brothers, without the courtesy of princes and ministers.

古文：陆纳既平，湘州诸军相继西上，上复与纪书曰： 吾年为一日之长，属有平乱之功，膺此乐推，事归当璧。
现代文：陆纳被平定后，湘州各路人马相继向西开来，元帝再次写信给萧纪，说： 我年纪比你大，又有平定侯景的功劳，荣幸被众人心悦诚服地推举，登基称帝的事实乃天意。
English: After Lu Na was pacified, people from all walks of life in Hunan successively moved to the west. Emperor Yuan once again wrote to Xiao Ji, saying: I am older than you, and I have the merit of pacifying Houjing. It is an honor to be elected by everyone sincerely. The fact that I was enthroned as emperor is the will of heaven.

古文：倘遣使乎，良所迟也。
现代文：倘若你这时看清形势，派使者来朝见称臣，这正是我等待的。
English: If you see the situation clearly at this time and send an emissary to the Imperial Court to praise your minister, this is exactly what I've been waiting for.

古文：如曰不然，于此投笔。
现代文：如果不这样做，那么就此扔下笔动刀兵吧！
English: If it is true that there has been a delay in the arrival of the envoys, and if it is true that this is not good, then I will put down my pen.

古文：友于兄弟，分形共气，兄肥弟瘦，无复相见之期，让枣推梨，永罢欢愉之日。
现代文：兄弟之间，本该友好，因为大家形体虽分，血脉气质却是相通的。汉代赵孝自愿代替瘦弱的弟弟去死，情深谊厚，但我们之间却不再有相见的时候，孔融对兄长让枣推梨，欢乐愉悦，已经一去不返。
English: Brothers are supposed to be friendly, because although they are physically different, they share the same blood and temperament. In the Han Dynasty, Zhao Xiao volunteered to die in place of his weak brother. They had a deep friendship, but when we no longer saw each other, Kong Rong let his elder brother push the jujube, joy and pleasure, have gone forever.

古文：心乎爱矣，书不尽言。 
现代文：兄弟之爱存于我心，文字是不能完全表达的。 
English: My heart is so full of love for you that I cannot write you a letter.

古文：纪顿兵日久，频战不利，又闻魏寇深入，成都孤危，忧懑不知所为。
现代文：萧纪看到军队屯驻日久，频繁地打仗，都不顺利，又听说西魏的军队深入后方，成都处于孤立而危险的态势之中，于是忧愁愤懑，不知该怎么办好。
English: When Xiao Ji saw that the army had been stationed for a long time and frequently fought wars, which did not go well, and heard that the West Wei army was deep in the rear and Chengdu was in an isolated and dangerous situation, he was sad and angry and did not know what to do.

古文：乃遣其度支尚书乐奉业诣江陵求和，请依前旨还蜀。
现代文：于是，他派手下的度支尚书乐奉业去江陵向萧绎求和，请求按照以前萧绎信中说的回师蜀地。
English: As a result, he sent his subordinate Du Zhi Shang Shule Bongye to Gangneung to sue Xiao Yu for peace and request that he return to his master Shu Di in accordance with Xiao Yu's previous letter.

古文：奉业知纪必败，启上曰： 蜀军乏粮，士卒多死，危亡可待。 
现代文：乐奉业看到萧纪必败无疑，就报告元帝说： 蜀军缺乏粮食，士兵死亡很多，全军灭亡，指日可待。 
English: When Le Fongye saw that Xiao Ji's defeat was inevitable, he reported to Emperor Yuan that: The Shu army lacks food, many soldiers have died, and the whole army has perished.

古文：上遂不许其和。
现代文：元帝听到这个情况，就不允许萧纪求和了。
English: When Emperor Yuan heard this, he did not allow Xiao Ji to sue for peace.

古文：纪以黄金一斤为饼，饼百为箧，至有百箧，银五倍于金，锦罽、缯彩称是，每战，悬示将士，不以为赏。
现代文：萧纪用一斤黄金做成一个饼，一百个黄金饼装为一箱，积下的黄金共有一百箱，银子五百箱，其他锦缎、缯一类的东西也很多。每次作战，他都把这些东西挂起来让将士们看，但不用它作奖赏之物。
English: Xiao Ji used one kilogram of gold to make a cake, and one hundred gold cakes were packed into one box. The accumulated gold totaled one hundred boxes, silver five hundred boxes, and there were also many other things such as brocade and broom. Every time he fought, he hung these things up for the soldiers to see, but he did not use it as a reward.

古文：宁州刺史陈智祖请散之以募勇士，弗听，智祖哭而死。
现代文：宁州刺史陈智祖要求把这些财物分发给军队，以招募勇士，但萧纪不听，陈智祖情知这样下去，必败无疑，终于痛哭而死。
English: Chen Zhizu, the famous historian of Ningzhou, demanded that these goods be distributed to the army in order to recruit warriors, but Xiao Ji did not listen. Chen Zhizu knew that if he continued in this way, there was no doubt that he would be defeated, and finally he died crying bitterly.

古文：有请事者，纪辞疾不见，由是将卒解体。
现代文：有事情要求见的，萧纪推说自己病了，不予接见，因此军队将士离心离德，逐渐解体。
English: When there was a request to see him, Xiao Ji said that he was ill and refused to see him. As a result, the army gradually disintegrated.

古文：秋，七月，辛未，巴东民符升等斩峡口城主公孙晃，降于王琳。
现代文：秋季七月，辛未，巴东平民符升等人杀了峡口城守将公孙晃，投降了王琳。
English: In the autumn of July, Xin Wei, Fusheng, a commoner in Badong, and others killed Gongsun Ao, the keeper of the Gorges, and surrendered to Wang Lin.

古文：谢答仁、任约进攻侯睿，破之，拔其三垒。于是两岸十四城俱降。
现代文：谢答仁、任约进攻侯睿，大获全胜，攻下了他的三座堡垒，于是长江两岸十四座城市全部投降了。
English: Xie Dairen and Ren You attacked Hou Rui and won a complete victory, capturing three of his fortresses. As a result, all fourteen cities on both sides of the Yangtze River surrendered.

古文：纪不获退，顺流东下，游击将军南阳樊猛追击之，纪众大溃，赴水死者八千馀人，猛围而守之。
现代文：萧纪后路被切断，没有退路了，只好顺流东下。游击将军南阳人樊猛派兵去追击，萧纪的部众分崩离析，四处溃逃，跳崐到水里淹死的有八千多人。樊猛把萧纪密密包围起来，严守着不让他逃脱。
English: The road behind Xiao Ji was cut off, and there was no way to retreat, so he had to follow the river to the east. The guerrilla general Nanyang people fiercely sent troops to pursue. Xiao Ji's followers fell apart and fled in all directions, and more than eight thousand people drowned in the water. The ferocity surrounded Xiao Ji closely and did not let him escape.

古文：上密敕猛曰： 生还，不成功也。 
现代文：元帝秘密地派人送旨令给樊猛，说： 如果让萧纪生还，那就是不成功。 
English: Emperor Yuan secretly sent someone to send an order to Fei Meng, saying: If Xiao Ji is allowed to live, it will not be a success.

古文：猛引兵至纪所，纪在舟中绕床而走，以金囊掷猛曰： 以此雇卿，送我一见七官。 
现代文：樊猛带兵到达了萧纪的住处，萧纪在船上绕床而跑，用装金子的口袋扔向樊猛，说： 我用这袋金子雇你，送我去和七官见一面。 
English: The ferocious soldiers arrived at Xiao Ji's residence. Xiao Ji ran around the bed in the boat, threw a bag of gold at the ferocious soldiers and said, "I will hire you with this bag of gold to take me to see the seven officials."

古文：猛曰： 天子何由可见！杀足下，金将安之！ 
现代文：樊猛拒绝说： 天子怎么能随便见面，杀了你，金子能跑到哪儿去呢？ 
English: He fiercely refused, saying, "How can the Son of Heaven casually meet and kill you, and where can the gold go?

古文：遂斩纪及其幼子圆满。
现代文：于是就杀了萧纪和他的小儿子萧圆满。
English: So he killed Xiao Ji and his little son, Xiao Fulong.

古文：陆法和收太子圆照兄弟三人送江陵。
现代文：陆法和押送太子萧圆照兄弟三人去江陵。
English: Lu Fa and Prince Xiao Yuanzhao escorted the three brothers to Gangneung.

古文：上绝纪属籍，赐姓饕餮氏。
现代文：元帝取消了萧纪的族籍，另赐他姓饕餮氏。
English: The Yuan Emperor cancelled Xiao Ji's nationality and gave him the surname Zeng.

古文：下刘孝胜狱，已而释之。
现代文：元帝把刘孝胜投入监狱，后来又释放了他。
English: Emperor Yuan put Liu Xiaosheng in prison and later released him.

古文：上使谓江安侯圆正曰： 西军已败，汝父不知存亡。 
现代文：元帝派人对江安侯萧圆正说： 西边的军队已经失败，你父亲不知死活。 
English: Emperor Yuan sent a message to Jiang's vassal Xiao Yuanzheng: "The western army has failed, and your father does not know whether he will live or die.

古文：意欲使其自裁。
现代文：意思是想让他自杀。
English: In his heart, Yuan Di wanted Yuan Zheng to commit suicide.

古文：圆正闻之号哭，称世子不绝声。
现代文：圆正听了后大声号哭，口里连连抱怨太子萧圆照，说他误了萧纪，替萧纪引错了路。
English: After listening to this, Yuan Zheng cried loudly and complained about Prince Xiao Yuanzhao, saying that he had misled Xiao Ji and led him down the wrong path.

古文：上频使觇之，知不能死，移送廷尉狱，见圆照，曰： 兄何乃乱人骨肉，使痛酷如此！ 
现代文：元帝不断派人去观察他，知道他没有自杀的意思，就把他移送到廷尉管的大狱里。在监狱，萧圆正见了萧圆照，说： 哥哥何必鼓动父亲，使他们兄弟骨肉相残，弄出这样痛苦残酷的结局呢？ 
English: Emperor Yuan continuously sent people to observe him, and knowing that he had no intention of committing suicide, he transferred him to a large prison run by a courtier. In prison, Xiao Yuan saw Xiao Yuan's face and said, "Why would my brother incite my father to make their brothers hate each other and bring about such a painful and cruel end?

古文：圆照唯云 计误 。
现代文：萧圆照只是说： 计策有误。 
English: Xiao Yuanzhao just said: The strategy is wrong.

古文：上并命绝食于狱，至啮臂啖之，十三日而死，远近闻而悲之。
现代文：元帝断绝了他们在监狱里的食物，让他们饿得咬自己的臂膀，过了十三天终于死了。远近听到消息，都为他们感到悲伤。
English: Yuan Di cut off their food in prison, making them so hungry that they bit their own arms, and finally died thirteen days later. Hearing the news from far and wide, everyone felt sad for them.

古文：乙未，王僧辩还江陵。
现代文：乙未，王僧辩回到江陵。
English: Soon after, Wang Sangyan returned to Gangneung.

古文：诏诸军各还所镇。
现代文：元帝下诏让各路兵马都回到各自的镇所去。
English: Emperor Yuan decreed that all soldiers and horses should return to their respective towns.

古文：魏尉迟迥围成都五旬，永丰侯捴屡出战，皆败，乃请降。
现代文：西魏尉迟迥把成都包围了五十天，永丰侯萧多次出城迎战，都失败了，于是请求投降。
English: The Western Wei army besieged Chengdu for fifty days. Yongfeng Hou Xiao repeatedly went to the city to fight, but failed, so he asked for surrender.

古文：诸将欲不许，迥曰： 降之则将士全，远人悦；攻之则将士伤，远人惧。 
现代文：但是尉迟迥手下的将领们不允许，尉迟迥说： 接受他投降，则我军将士完好无死伤，远方百姓也高兴。继续进攻则将士必有伤亡，远方百姓会害怕。 
English: However, the generals under the command of 尉迟 did not allow it. 尉迟 said, "If we accept his surrender, our soldiers will be safe and sound, and the people in far away places will be happy. If we continue to attack, our soldiers will be killed and wounded, and the people in far away places will be afraid."

古文：遂受之。
现代文：于是就接受了萧的投降。
English: He accepted the appointment.

古文：八月，戊戌，捴与宜都王圆肃帅文武诣军门降；迥以礼接之，与盟于益州城北。
现代文：八月，戊戌，萧和宜都王萧圆肃带着文武官员到尉迟迥军营前投降，尉迟迥按礼仪迎接了他，和他在益州城北订立了受降盟约。
English: In August, Emperor Wu, Emperor Xiao, and Emperor Yidu's son, Emperor Xiao Yuan Sui, brought military and civilian officials to surrender in front of the camp of General Yi Shixuan. General Yi Shixuan greeted him according to the etiquette, and signed a surrender agreement with him in the north of Yizhou.

古文：吏民皆复其业，唯收奴婢及储积以赏将士，军无私焉。
现代文：凡官吏百姓都各安其业，只没收奴婢和仓库积粮赏赐给将士们，军队中没有人敢私下抢掠的。
English: All officials and commoners were allowed to keep their property. Only slaves and maidservants were confiscated, and the stored grain was given to the soldiers as a reward. No one in the army dared to loot privately.

古文：魏以捴及圆肃并为开府仪同三司，以迥为大都督益、潼等十二州诸军事、益州刺史。
现代文：西魏任命萧和萧圆肃一并为开府仪同三司，任命尉迟迥为大都督益、潼等十二诸州军事，益州刺史。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty appointed Xiao He and Xiao Yuan Su as the three departments of the Kaifu Rites and Decrees, and appointed Ye Zhixuan as the military commander of the twelve states, including Datu Yixi and Zou, and the historian of Yixu.

古文：庚子，下诏将还建康，领军将军胡僧祐、太府卿黄罗汉、吏部尚书宗懔、御史中丞刘彀谏曰： 建业王气已尽，与虏正隔一江，若有不虞，悔无及也！
现代文：庚子，元帝下诏令，准备回建康。领军将军胡僧、太府卿黄罗汉、吏部尚书宗懔、御史中丞刘等人进谏劝止，说： 建康那地方王气已尽，而且和敌虏只隔一条长江，如果有什么不测之灾，后悔就来不及了！
English: Geng Zi, the Yuan emperor, issued a decree to prepare to return to Jiankang. The leading general Hu Zeng, the grand minister Huang Luohan, the head of the personnel department Shang Shuzong, the chief historian Liu Zhongzheng and others advised against the advance, saying: Jiankang's royal power has been exhausted, and there is only one Yangtze River separating it from the enemy. If there is any unforeseen disaster, it is too late to regret it!

古文：且古老相承云： 荆州洲数满百，当出天子。 
现代文：况且从古至今，就相传说： 荆州的沙洲满一百时，定会出天子 。
English: Moreover, from ancient times to the present day, there is a legend: when the sandbank in Jingzhou reaches one hundred, a heavenly son will surely appear.

古文：今枝江生洲，百数已满，陛下龙飞，是其应也。 
现代文：现在枝江生出了一个新的沙洲，荆洲的沙洲已经满一百了，所以陛下云腾龙飞，乘势而起，正是其应验呀。 
English: Now, the Yangtze River has given birth to a new sandbar, and the sandbar of Jingzhou has reached one hundred. Therefore, His Majesty's ascension to the throne, taking advantage of the situation, is exactly its fulfillment.

古文：上令朝臣议之。
现代文：元帝让朝廷大臣讨论这件事。
English: The Yuan emperor asked the imperial court minister to discuss the matter.

古文：黄门侍郎周弘正、尚书右仆射王褒曰： 今百姓未见舆驾入建康，谓是列国诸王；愿陛下从四海之望。 
现代文：黄门侍郎周弘正、尚书右仆射王褒说： 现在老百姓还没看见皇上车辆仪仗进入建康，因此以为皇上还是列国诸王之一。希望陛下依从四海黎民的瞩望，回建康定都。 
English: Huangmen waiter Zhou Hongzheng and Shangshu's right-hand man Shaowang praised the construction: "Nowadays, the people have not seen the emperor's vehicle enter Jiankang, so they think that the emperor is still one of the kings of the nations. I hope that His Majesty will follow the expectations of the people of the four seas and return to build Kangding.

古文：时群臣多荆州人，皆曰： 弘正等东人也，志愿东下，恐非良计。 
现代文：当时群臣大多是荆州人，都说： 周弘正等是东边的人，当然一心要回东边去，他们的主张恐怕不是什么好主意。 
English: At that time, most of the ministers were from Jingzhou, and they all said: Zhou Hongzheng and others are people from the east, of course, they want to go back to the east, and their idea is probably not a good idea.

古文：弘正面折之曰： 东人劝东，谓非良计；君等西人欲西，岂成长策？ 
现代文：周弘正当面争辩说： 东边的人劝皇上去东边，就说不是好主意；西边的人想去西边，难道倒成了妙策？ 
English: Zhou Hong justly argued: People in the east advised the emperor to go to the east, saying that it was not a good idea; people in the west wanted to go to the west, but did it turn out to be a good idea?

古文：上笑。
现代文：元帝听着他们争论，不禁笑了。
English: Taizong smiled.

古文：又议于后堂，会者五百人，上问之曰： 吾欲还建康，诸卿以为如何？ 
现代文：定都建康的问题又在后堂进行讨论，与会者共五百人。元帝问大家：崐 我想回建康定都，各位大臣，你们对这件事有什么看法？ 
English: The issue of rebuilding Kangdingdu was discussed in the back hall, with a total of 500 participants. Yuan Di asked everyone: "I want to rebuild Kangdingdu, ministers, what is your opinion on this matter?"

古文：众莫敢先对。
现代文：众人谁也不敢先回答。
English: No one dared to answer first.

古文：上曰： 劝吾去者左袒。 
现代文：元帝看大家都不吱声，就说： 劝我去建康的把左肩膀袒露出来。 
English: Seeing that everyone was silent, Yuan Di said, "I advise you to go to Jiankang and expose your left shoulder."

古文：左袒者过半。
现代文：结果袒露左肩的人过了一半。
English: As a result, more than half of those who had their left shoulder exposed died.

古文：武昌太守硃买臣言于上曰： 建康旧都，山陵所在；荆镇边缰，非王者之宅。
现代文：武昌太守朱买臣向元帝进言，说： 建康是我们梁朝的旧都，是帝室祖宗陵墓的所在地。而荆州是边疆军事重镇，不是帝王居住的地方。
English: Wuchang's eunuch Zhu Mai Shen advised Emperor Yuan, saying: Jiankang is the old capital of our Liang Dynasty and the location of the imperial ancestor's mausoleum, while Jingzhou is a frontier military town, not a place where emperors live.

古文：愿陛下勿疑，以致后悔。
现代文：希望陛下下决心回建康，不要怀疑犹豫，以至将来后悔。
English: I hope that His Majesty will make up his mind to return to Jiankang, and will not hesitate to doubt or regret in the future.

古文：臣家在荆州，岂不愿陛下居此，但恐是臣富贵，非陛下富贵耳！ 
现代文：我家就住在荆州，难道不愿陛下住在这儿？但这样做恐怕是臣下富贵之计，不是陛下富贵之计了！ 
English: My family lives in Jingzhou, wouldn't Your Majesty like to live here? But I'm afraid that doing so is a rich man's scheme, not Your Majesty's!

古文：上使术士杜景豪卜之，不吉，对上曰： 未去。 
现代文：元帝又让术士杜景豪占卜吉凶，结果不吉利，因此杜景豪对元帝说： 别去建康。 
English: Emperor Yuan also asked the sorcerer Du Jinghao to tell fortunes, but the results were not auspicious, so Du Jinghao said to Emperor Yuan: Don't go to Jiankang.

古文：退而言曰： 此兆为鬼贼所留也。 
现代文：退朝后他又说： 这个征兆是鬼贼所留下的。 
English: After retiring, he said, "This omen was left by a ghost thief.

古文：上以建康凋残，江陵全盛，意亦安之，卒从僧祐等议。
现代文：元帝认为建康凋蔽残破，而江陵正处于全盛之时，心里的意思也是安于此地，于是听从了胡僧等人的意见，留在江陵。
English: Emperor Yuan believed that Jiankang had fallen into ruin, while Gangneung was in its prime, and his heart's desire was to settle down here, so he listened to the opinions of the monks and others and stayed in Gangneung.

古文：以湘州刺史王琳为衡州刺史。
现代文：元帝任命湘州刺史王琳为衡州刺史。
English: Emperor Yuan appointed Wang Lin, the shishi of Xiangzhou, as the shishi of Hengzhou.

古文：九月，庚午，诏王僧辩还镇建康，陈霸先复还京口。
现代文：九月，庚午，元帝下诏命令王僧辩回建康镇守，陈霸先再回京口。
English: In the late afternoon of September, Emperor Yuan issued an edict ordering Wang Sangye to return to Jiankang as the town guard, and Chen Baizhen to return to Beijing first.

古文：丙子，以护军将军陆法和为郢州刺史。
现代文：丙子任命护军将军陆法和为郢州刺史。
English: He Zi, the founder of the Chinese nation, appointed the general of the army to protect the country and write the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：法和为政，不用刑狱，专以沙门法及西域幻术教化，部曲数千人，通谓之弟子。
现代文：陆法和处理政事，不用刑法，不用断狱，专门用佛法和西域传来的幻术搞教化，他的部曲几千人，都称为弟子。
English: Land law and dealing with political affairs, not using criminal law, not breaking out of prison, special use of Buddhism and Western magic to educate, thousands of people are called his disciples.

古文：契丹寇齐边。
现代文：契丹族在北齐边境虏掠。
English: The Khitan pillaged and plundered along the Northern Qi border.

古文：壬午，齐主北巡冀、定、幽、安，遂伐契丹。
现代文：壬午，北齐国主高洋到北方巡视冀州、定州、幽州、安州，于是决定讨伐契丹。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, the ruler of Northern Qi, Gaoyang, went to the north to inspect Jizhou, Dingzhou, Yuzhou and Anzhou, and then decided to fight against the Khitan.

古文：齐主使郭元建治水军二万馀人于合肥，将袭建康，纳湘潭侯退，又遣将军邢景远、步大汗萨帅众继之。
现代文：北齐国主派郭元建在合肥训练水军二万余人，准备袭击建康。北齐接受了湘潭侯萧退的投降，又派将军邢景远、步大汗萨率领部众跟进。
English: The ruler of Northern Qi sent Guo Yuanjian to Hefei to train a naval force of more than 20,000 men in preparation for an attack on Jiankang. Northern Qi accepted the surrender of Xiangtan Hou Xiaoqi, and also sent the generals Zou Jingyuan and Boudai Khansa to lead the troops to follow.

古文：陈霸先在建康闻之，白上；上诏王僧辩镇姑孰以御之。
现代文：陈霸先在建康听到消息，就向元帝报告。元帝下诏调王僧辩镇守姑孰进行抵抗。
English: Chen Hao first heard the news in Jiankang and reported it to Emperor Yuan. Emperor Yuan sent an imperial edict to the king, the monks, and the guanxi to resist.

古文：冬，十月，丁酉，齐主至平州，从西道趣长堑，使司徒潘相乐帅精骑五千自东道趣青山。
现代文：冬季十月，丁酉，北齐国主高洋抵达平州，又从西边的道路去到长堑，派司徒潘相乐率领精锐骑兵五千人从东边的道路逼近青山。
English: In the winter of October, Ding Xi, the ruler of Northern Qi, Gao Yang, arrived in Pingzhou, and went from the west road to Nagatoro. He sent the disciple Pan Sang Le to lead five thousand elite cavalrymen to approach Aoyama from the east road.

古文：辛丑，至白狼城。壬寅，至昌黎城，使安德王韩轨帅精骑四千东断契丹走路。
现代文：辛丑，北齐军队抵达白狼城；壬寅，抵达昌黎城，并派安德王韩轨率领精锐骑兵四千人切断了契丹东边的逃跑道路。
English: Xin Ug, the Northern Qi army arrived at White Wolf City; Ren Yin, arrived at Changli City, and sent King Ando Hanluo to lead 4,000 elite cavalry to cut off the escape route on the east side of Qidan.

古文：癸卯，至阳师水，倍道兼行，掩袭契丹。
现代文：癸卯，抵达阳师水，一路上以加倍的速度前进，昼夜兼行，奔袭契丹。
English: At dusk, they arrived at Yangshisui. Along the way, they doubled their speed, traveling both day and night to attack Khitan.

古文：齐主露髻肉袒，昼夜不息，行千馀里，逾越山岭，为士卒先，唯食肉饮水，壮气弥厉。
现代文：北齐国主高洋露着发髻，光着膀子，昼夜不息，一气行军一千多里，爬山越岭，走在前面给士卒作榜样，一路上只是大块吃肉，痛饮泉水，因此军中杀敌定边的壮志越来越高昂。
English: The ruler of Northern Qi, with his hair braided and his arms bare, marched day and night for more than a thousand miles at a stretch, climbing mountains and crossing ridges, walking in front to set an example for his soldiers. Along the way, he only ate large pieces of meat and drank spring water, so the army's ambition to kill the enemy became more and more lofty.

古文：甲辰，与契丹遇，奋击，大破之，虏获十万馀口，杂畜数百万头。
现代文：甲辰，北齐军队与契丹相遇，契丹人大败，俘虏十余万人，缴获各种牧畜几百万头。
English: At the time of Jia Chen, the Northern Qi army encountered the Khitan, the Khitan were defeated, more than one hundred thousand people were captured, and several million heads of various livestock were captured.

古文：潘相乐又于青山破契丹别部。
现代文：潘相乐又在青山打败另一支契丹军队。
English: Pan Sang Lok defeated another Khitan army in Aoyama.

古文：丁未，齐主还至营州。
现代文：丁未，北齐国主高洋回到营州。
English: Ding Wei, the ruler of Northern Qi, Gaoyang, returned to Yingzhou.

古文：己酉，王僧辩至姑孰，遣婺州刺史侯瑱、吴郡太守张彪、吴兴太守裴之横筑垒东关，以待齐师。
现代文：己酉王僧辩到姑孰，派遣婺州刺史侯、吴郡太守张彪、吴兴太守裴之横在东关筑营垒，以等待北齐的军队。
English: The King of Jizang, the Monk Zhen, went to Gushan and sent Zhang Shihou, the Governor of Bozhou, Zhang Biao, the Governor of Wu County, and Pei Zhiyuan, the Governor of Wu Xing, to build a camp in Dongguan to wait for the army of Beiqi.

古文：丁巳，齐主登碣石山，临沧海，遂如晋阳。
现代文：丁巳，北齐国主高洋登上碣石山，东望沧海，然后就返回晋阳去。
English: At that time, the ruler of Northern Qi, Gao Yang, ascended the Shishishan Mountain, looked eastward to the Canghai Sea, and then returned to Jinyang.

古文：以肆州刺史斛律金为太师，乃还晋阳，拜其子丰乐为武卫大将军，命其孙武都尚义宁公主，宠待之厚，群臣莫及。
现代文：高洋任命肆州刺史斛律金为太师，回到晋阳后，又任命斛律金的儿子斛律丰乐为武卫大将军。他还让斛律金的孙子斛律武都娶了义宁公主，对他的宠爱优待之厚，其他群臣均无法相比。
English: Gao Yang appointed Zhaozhou's Grand Master Zhaolujin as Grand Master, and after returning to Jinyang, he appointed Zhaolujin's son Zhaolujin Fengle as General Wuwei. He also let Zhaolujin's grandson Zhaolujin marry Princess Yining, and his favor and preferential treatment are incomparable to other ministers.

古文：闰月，丁丑，南豫州刺史侯瑱与郭元建战于东关，齐师大败，溺死者万计。
现代文：闰月，丁丑，南豫州刺史侯与郭元建交战于东关，北齐军队大败，淹死的士兵数以万计。
English: In the leap month, Ding Yuxiu, the Southern Yu Prefecture's Zhang Shihou and Guo Yuanjian fought in Dongguan, the Northern Qi army was defeated, and tens of thousands of soldiers drowned.

古文：湘潭侯退复归于鄴，王僧辩还建康。
现代文：湘潭侯萧退又退回到邺城，王僧辩回建康。
English: Xiangtan Hou Xiaowei retreated and returned to Shicheng, Wang Sangye returned to Jiankang.

古文：吴州刺史开建侯蕃，恃其兵强，贡献不入，上密令其将徐佛受图之。
现代文：吴州刺史开建侯萧蕃，仗恃自己兵力强大，不向朝廷进贡。元帝秘密命令他的将领徐佛受算计他。
English: Emperor Yuan secretly ordered his general, Xu Bu, to take revenge on him.

古文：佛受使其徒诈为讼者，诣蕃，遂执之。
现代文：徐佛受派他的党徒假装成打官司的人，去求见萧蕃，趁机把萧蕃抓起来。
English: Xu Fo was sent by his party members to pretend to be a litigant, to ask for Xiao Yao and seize the opportunity to arrest Xiao Yao.

古文：上以佛受为建安太守，以侍中王质为吴州刺史。
现代文：元帝任命徐佛受为建安太守，任命侍中王质为吴州刺史。
English: Emperor Yuan appointed Xu Fuzhu as the governor of Jian'an, and appointed the vice-regent as the governor of Wuzhou.

古文：质至鄱阳，佛受置之金城，自据罗城，掌门管，缮治舟舰甲兵，质不敢与争。
现代文：王质到了鄱阳，徐佛受把他安置在金城，自己占据罗城，掌握城门钥匙，致力于修缮船只，训练士兵。王质不敢和他争权。
English: When the hostage arrived in Shenyang, Xu Fuzhong placed him in Jincheng, occupied Luocheng himself, mastered the key to the city gate, dedicated himself to repairing ships and training soldiers. The hostage did not dare to compete with him.

古文：故开建侯部曲数千人攻佛受，佛受奔南豫州，侯瑱杀之，质始得行州事。
现代文：原来属于开建侯萧蕃的部曲几千人哗变，进攻徐佛受，徐佛受逃往南豫州，侯把他杀了，这样，王质才开始得以行使州政大权。
English: Originally, it belonged to Xiao Jiong, the prince who started the construction of the county. Several thousand people mutinied and attacked Xu Fuzhou. Xu Fuzhou fled to South Henan Province, and the prince killed him. In this way, the prince began to exercise state power.

古文：十一月，戊戌，以尚书右仆射王褒为左仆射，湘东太守张绾为右仆射。
现代文：十一月，戊戌，元帝任命尚书右仆射王褒为左仆射，湘东太守张绾为右仆射。
English: In November, Emperor Yuan appointed Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Sha Wang Bo, as his left-hand man, and the East Hunan governor, Zhang Ye, as his right-hand man.

古文：己未，突厥复攻柔然，柔然举国奔齐。
现代文：己未突厥人又进攻柔然，柔然全国都投奔了北齐。
English: Even before the Turks attacked, the whole country rushed to join the Northern Qi.

古文：癸亥，齐主自晋阳北击突厥，迎纳柔然，废其可汗库提，立阿那瑰子庵罗辰为可汗，置之马邑川，给其廪饩缯帛；亲追突厥于朔州，突厥请降，许之而还。
现代文：癸亥，北齐国主高洋从晋阳向北进攻突厥人，迎接并接受柔然的投靠。他把柔然可汗库提废了，另立阿那的儿子庵罗辰为可汗，把他们安置在马邑川，供给他们俸禄、粮食、缯帛。北齐国主高洋亲自在朔州追击突厥人，突厥人请求投降，高洋答应了，于是回师。
English: In the Heian period, the Northern Qi sovereign, Gaoyang, attacked the Turks from Jinyang to the north, and received and accepted the help of Juran. He abolished Juran's khan, Kut, and appointed Anan's son, An Luo Chen, as khan, and settled them in Mayugawa, providing them with a stipend, grain, and ploughs. The Northern Qi sovereign, Gaoyang, personally pursued the Turks in Shuozhou. The Turks asked for surrender, and Gaoyang agreed, and then returned to his master.

古文：自是贡献相继。
现代文：从此之后，突厥人就年年进贡了。
English: From then on, the Turks paid tribute year after year.

古文：魏尚书元烈谋杀宇文泰，事泄，泰杀之。
现代文：西魏尚书元烈阴谋杀害宇文泰，事情泄漏，宇文泰杀了他。
English: In the Western Wei Dynasty, Shang Shuyuan killed Wu Wentai in a conspiracy. The affair leaked out, and Wu Wentai killed him.

古文：丙寅，上使侍中王琛使于魏。
现代文：丙寅，元帝派侍中王琛出使西魏。
English: Cui Yin, the Yuan Emperor sent an envoy to the Western Wei Dynasty from the attendant Wang Xuan.

古文：太师泰阴有图江陵之志，梁王詧闻之，益重其贡献。
现代文：太师宇文泰暗地里有夺取江陵的野心，梁王萧听到这消息，给西魏的贡品越发多了。
English: Grandmaster Uwentai secretly had the ambition to seize Gangneung. When Liang Wang Xiao heard this news, he sent more and more tributes to the West Wei Dynasty.

古文：十二月，齐宿预民东方白额以城降，江西州郡皆起兵应之。
现代文：十二月，北齐宿预的平民东方白额献出宿预城投降梁朝，江西各州郡都起兵响应东方白额。
English: In December, the civilians of Beqi and Shukuhaku in Eastern Qi offered Shukuhaku and surrendered to the Liang Dynasty, and all the counties and prefectures in Jiangxi Province raised an army in response to Eastern Qi's surrender.

古文：世祖孝元皇帝下承圣三年
现代文：承圣三年
English: Three years after consecration

古文：春，正月，癸巳，齐主自离石道讨山胡，遣斛律金从显州道，常山王演从晋州道夹攻，大破之，男子十三以上皆斩，女子及幼弱以赏军，遂平石楼。
现代文：春季正月，癸巳，北齐国主高洋从离石道出发讨伐山胡，派斛律金从显州道，常山王高演从晋州道夹攻，把山胡打得大败，男子十三岁以上的都被杀头，女子和孩子赏给士兵，于是平定了石楼。
English: In the first month of spring, Gao Yang, the ruler of Northern Qi, set out from the stone road to fight the beech, sent Bao Li Jin from the Hsien Chou road, and Changshan Wang Gao Yuan from the Jin Chou road, and defeated the beech. The men over the age of thirteen were killed, and the women and children were rewarded to the soldiers, thus leveling the stone tower.

古文：石楼绝险，自魏世所不能至，于是远近山胡莫不慑服。
现代文：石楼这地方极其险要，自从北魏开国以来就没有被征服过。于是远近山胡各部落没有不慑于北齐国声威而臣服的。
English: This place, Shilou, is extremely precarious and has not been conquered since the founding of the Northern Wei Dynasty. Therefore, the tribes of Shanhu far and near did not submit to the prestige of North Qi.

古文：有都督战伤，其什长路晖礼不能救，帝命刳其五藏，令九人食之，肉及秽恶皆尽。
现代文：有一位都督在战斗中受伤，他手下的什长路晖礼没有救他，文宣帝高洋便令人把这个什长的五脏六肺全掏出来，命令队中的其他九个人都来吃，结果把肉和内脏等腥秽的东西全吃了。
English: There was a governor who was wounded in battle, and his men's long-distance salute did not save him. Emperor Gaoyang ordered that the long-distance salute's five guts and six lungs be pulled out, and ordered the other nine people in the group to eat them. As a result, they ate all the meat, guts, and other filthy things.

古文：自是始为威虐。
现代文：从这以后高洋就开始酷虐逞威。
English: From then on, Gao Yang began to be cruel and arrogant.

古文：陈霸先自丹徒济江，围齐广陵，秦州刺史严超达自秦郡进围泾州，南豫州刺史侯瑱、吴郡太守张彪皆出石梁，为之声援。
现代文：陈霸先从丹徒渡江，包围了北齐的广陵，秦州刺史严超达从秦郡出发崐去包围泾州，南豫州刺史侯、吴郡太守张彪都从石梁出发，援助陈霸先。
English: Chen Baxian first crossed the Yangtze River from Dantu and encircled Guangling in North Qi, Qin State Governor Yan Chaoda set out from Qin County to encircle Quzhou, and the governor of South Yuzhou and the governor of Wu County Zhang Biao both set out from Shiliang to assist Chen Baxian.

古文：辛丑，使晋陵太守杜僧明帅三千人助东方白额。
现代文：辛丑，梁朝派晋陵太守杜僧明率领三千人去帮助东方白额。
English: Sincerely, the Liang Dynasty sent Du Mengming, the governor of the Jin Mausoleum, to lead three thousand people to help Dongfang Baigu.

古文：魏太师泰始作九命之典，以叙内外官爵，改流外品为九秩。
现代文：西魏太师宇文泰开始让人效法周朝官制，制定九品典章，用来区分朝廷内外不同的官爵，改订朝廷外的命官为九级。
English: Wu Wentai, the Grand Master of the Western Wei Dynasty, began to have people follow the official system of the Zhou Dynasty, and formulated the Nine Grades Ordinance, which was used to distinguish different official ranks inside and outside the imperial court, and revised the appointment of officials outside the imperial court to nine levels.

古文：魏主自元烈之死，有怨言，密谋诛太师泰；临淮王育、广平王赞垂涕切谏，不听。
现代文：西魏国主元钦自从元烈被宇文泰杀死之后，颇有怨言，就密谋要处死太师宇文泰，临淮王元育、广平王元赞哭着再三劝止，但元钦不听。
English: Ever since Yuan Rong was killed by Wu Wentai, the ruler of the Western Wei Dynasty, Yuan Qin, complained a lot and plotted to execute Grand Master Wu Wentai. Lin Huai, Wang Genyu, and Guangping, Wang Yuan, repeatedly urged him to stop, but Yuan Qin would not listen.

古文：泰诸子皆幼，兄子章武公导、中山公护皆出镇，唯以诸婿为心膂，大都督清河公李基、义城公李晖、常山公于翼俱为武卫将军，分掌禁兵。
现代文：宇文泰的儿子们都年幼，侄子章武公宇文导，中山公宇文护都出任外镇将领，都城中只有他的几个女婿充当得力心腹，大都督清河公李基、义城公李晖、常山公于翼都被任命为武卫将军，分头掌管宫廷宿卫部队。
English: The sons of Uwentai were all young, and his nephews, including Zhang Wu Gong, U Wendao, and Zhongshan Gong, U Wenguo, all served as foreign generals. In the capital, only a few of his sons-in-law acted as able confidants. Grand Dictators Qinghe Gong, Li Ji, Yicheng Gong, and Changshan Gong, Yu Ying, were all appointed as Wuwei generals, and they were in charge of the palace guards.

古文：基，远之子；晖，弼之子；翼，谨之子也。
现代文：李基是李远的儿子。
English: Li Kee is the son of Li Yuan.

古文：由是魏主谋泄，泰废魏主，置之雍州，立其弟齐王廓。去年号，称元年，复姓拓跋氏。
现代文：李晖是李弼的儿子。
English: Li Yao is the son of Li Yao.

古文：九十九姓改为单者，皆复其旧。
现代文：李翼是李谨的儿子。因此，西魏国主元钦的密谋很快就被宇文泰诸婿察觉了。
English: Li Ying was the son of Li Zhen. Therefore, the conspiracy of the West Wei ruler Yuan Qin was soon discovered by the sons-in-law of Yu Wentai.

古文：魏初统国三十六，大姓九十九，后多灭绝。泰乃以诸将功高者为三十六国，次者为九十九姓，所将士卒亦改从其姓。
现代文：宇文泰废了西魏国主元钦，把他发落到雍州去，另立他的弟弟齐王元廓为帝，取消了原来的年号，另立年号，称元年，帝室重新恢复姓拓跋，原先改为单姓的九十九种姓氏，现在也都恢复了他们原来的旧姓。北魏当初建国时，统一了三十六个小国，共有九十九个大姓，后来大多灭绝了。宇文泰就把他手下各位将领中功劳大的人封为三十六姓，功劳低一点的封为九十九姓，他们部下的兵卒也改姓了主将的姓。
English: U Wentai abolished the Western Wei ruler, Yuan Qin, and sent him to Yongzhou. He also appointed his brother, Qi Wangyuanku, as emperor. The original era name was abolished, and a new era name was established, which was called the first year. The imperial family restored the surname Tuoba. The ninety-nine caste names, which were originally changed to single surnames, have now also restored their original old surnames. When the Northern Wei Dynasty was originally founded, it unified thirty-six small countries, with a total of ninety-nine great surnames. Later, most of them became extinct. U Wentai made the most meritorious generals among his subordinates

古文：三月，丁亥，长沙王韶取巴郡。
现代文：三月丁亥，长沙王萧韶攻取了巴郡。
English: In March of Dinghai, the Changsha king Xiao Wei captured Ba County.

古文：甲辰，以王僧辩为太尉、车骑大将军。
现代文：甲辰，元帝任命王僧辩为太尉、车骑大将军。
English: At that time, Emperor Yuan appointed Wang Sangyan as the first lieutenant and the general of cavalry.

古文：丁未，齐将王球攻宿预，杜僧明出击，大破之，球归彭城。
现代文：丁未，北齐将领王球攻打宿预城，杜僧明带兵出击，大获全胜，王球只好退回彭城。
English: Ding Wei, the leader of the Northern Qi, led the king's ball to attack Suwaecheng, Du Sangming led the troops to attack, and won a complete victory. The king's ball had to return to Pengcheng.

古文：郢州刺史陆法和上启自称司徒，上怪之。
现代文：郢州刺史陆法和上书时自称司徒，元帝觉得奇怪。
English: Emperor Yuan thought it was strange that the prefect of Luzhou Province, Lu Fa, and the emperor himself called himself "Stu" when he wrote the letter.

古文：王褒曰： 法和既有道术，容或先知。 
现代文：王褒替他解释说： 陆法和既然有道术，也许这是他预先知道自己会当司徒吧。 
English: Wang Bao explained on his behalf: "Since there are land techniques and Taoism, perhaps he knew in advance that he would be a disciple.

古文：戊申，上就拜法和为司徒。
现代文：戊申，元帝就此封陆法和为司徒。
English: Wushin, Emperor Yuan thus sealed the law of the land and became a disciple.

古文：己酉，魏侍中宇文仁恕来聘。
现代文：己酉，西魏派侍中宇文仁恕出使梁朝。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty sent an envoy to the Liang Dynasty led by Wu Wenren.

古文：会齐使者亦至江陵，帝接仁恕不及齐使，仁恕归，以告太师泰。
现代文：刚好北齐的使者也到了江陵，元帝对宇文仁恕的接待不如对北齐使者那样隆重，宇文仁恕回国后，把这事告诉了太师宇文泰。
English: It just so happened that the emissary of the Northern Qi also arrived in Gangneung. The Yuan Emperor's reception of Uwen Rinsho was not as grand as that of the Northern Qi emissary. After returning to China, Uwen Rinsho told this to Grand Master Uwen Tai.

古文：帝又请据旧图定疆境，辞颇不逊，泰曰： 古人有言， 天之所弃，谁能兴之 ，其萧绎之谓乎！ 
现代文：元帝又要求按过去的版图来划定边境线，使用的言辞颇为傲慢，宇文泰说： 古人说得好： 天意要是想抛弃他，谁能使他兴起呢！ 这话说的就是萧绎吧！ 
English: Emperor Yuan also demanded that the border line be delineated according to the territory map of the past. The rhetoric used was rather arrogant. Uwentai said, "The ancients said it well: If the providence wants to abandon him, who can make him rise up! This is just an exaggeration!

古文：荆州刺史长孙俭屡陈攻取之策，泰征俭入朝，问以经略，复命还镇，密为之备。
现代文：荆州刺史长孙俭过去曾多次陈述进攻梁朝的方略，宇文泰就把长孙俭征召入朝，向他询问向南进攻的计策，然后又命令他回到所镇守的地方，秘密地进行南下攻梁的准备。
English: In the past, Sun Jian, the chief historian of Jingzhou, had repeatedly stated the strategy of attacking the Liang Dynasty. Therefore, U Wantai recruited Sun Jian into the dynasty, asked him about the strategy of attacking the south, and then ordered him to return to the place where he was guarding the town and secretly prepare to attack the south.

古文：马伯符密使告帝，帝弗之信。
现代文：降魏的梁朝旧臣马伯符秘密派使者把这危险情况报告给元帝，但元帝不相信。
English: The Liang Dynasty's former vassal Ma Bofu secretly sent an envoy to report the dangerous situation to the Yuan Emperor, but the Yuan Emperor did not believe him.

古文：柔然可汗庵罗辰叛齐，齐主自将出击，大破之，庵罗辰父子北走。
现代文：柔然可汗庵罗辰起兵反叛北齐，北齐文宣帝亲自带兵出击，把他打得大败，庵罗辰父子向北逃跑。
English: Reluctantly, Khan An Luo Chen raised an army to rebel against Northern Qi. Northern Qi Emperor Wen Xuan personally led an army to attack and defeated him. An Luo Chen and his son fled to the north.

古文：太保安定王贺拔仁献马不甚骏，齐主怒，拔其发，免为庶人，输晋阳负炭。
现代文：太保安定王贺拔仁贡献的马匹不太强壮，北齐国主就把他的头发拔掉，免去官职，废为平民，发配到晋阳去背炭。
English: The horses contributed by Taibo Wang He Bajin were not very strong, so the ruler of Northern Qi plucked out his hair, removed him from his official position, made him a commoner, and sent him to Jinyang to work as a charcoal burner.

古文：齐中书令魏收撰《魏书》，颇用爱憎为褒贬，每谓人曰： 何物小子，敢与魏收作色！
现代文：北齐中书令魏收修撰《魏书》，很爱以自己的爱憎任意褒贬人物，常常对人说： 你是什么东西，敢和我魏收搭架子，摆脸色！
English: Bei Qi Zhongshu ordered Wei to collect and compile "Weishu," and he loved to praise and disparage people arbitrarily with his own love and hate. He often said to people: "What are you, dare to close ranks with me Wei, show your face!

古文：举之则使升天，按之则使入地！ 
现代文：我在写史，抬举你能让你升天，贬低你能叫你入地。 
English: I am writing history, exalting what you can make you ascend to heaven, and disparaging what you can make you descend to earth.

古文：既成，中书舍人卢潜奏： 收诬罔一代，罪当诛！ 
现代文：《魏书》写成以后，中书舍人卢潜启奏高洋，说： 魏收的史书诬蔑了一代人，他的罪应该处死。 
English: After "Wei Shu" was written, Lu Xuanqi, a scholar of Chinese history, said: "Wei Shu's history book slandered a generation of people, and his crime should be put to death.

古文：尚书左丞卢斐、顿丘李庶皆言《魏史》不直。
现代文：尚书左丞卢斐、顿丘人李庶都说《魏史》写得不公正。
English: Shangshu Zuoren Lu Fei and Dongqiu man Li Shiao both said that "Wei Shi" was written unfairly.

古文：收启齐主云： 臣既结怨强宗，将为刺客所杀。 
现代文：魏收启奏文宣帝高洋，说： 我既然因修史和强大的宗族结下仇怨，那么将会被刺客杀死。 
English: Wei received a message from Emperor Xuan Gaoyang, saying, "Since I have a grudge against history and a powerful clan, I will be killed by the Assassins."

古文：帝怒，于是斐、庶及尚书郎中王松年皆坐谤史，鞭二百，配甲坊。
现代文：文宣帝听了勃然大怒，于是卢斐、李庶和尚书郎中王松年都因诽谤史书而获罪，每人被鞭打二百下，被发配在甲坊里制造兵甲。
English: Emperor Wenzhong was furious when he heard this, and Lu Fei, Li Zhaozhong, and Wang Songnian, the second son of Li Zhaozhong, were all found guilty of slandering history books. They were each given 200 lashes and ordered to make armor in the Armory.

古文：斐、庶死于狱中，潜亦坐系狱。
现代文：结果卢斐、李庶死在监狱中，卢潜也犯罪关入监狱。
English: As a result, Lu Fei and Li Shiao died in prison, and Lu Qian was also imprisoned for a crime.

古文：然时人终不服，谓之 秽史 。
现代文：但当时人终究不服气，把《魏书》说成 秽史 。
English: But at that time, people were not convinced and called the "Weishu" a "dirty history."

古文：潜，度世之曾孙；斐，同之子；松年，遵业之子也。
现代文：卢潜是卢度世的曾孙。卢斐是卢同的儿子。王松年是王遵业的儿子。
English: Lu Qian is the great-grandson of Lu Du. Lu Fei is the son of Lu Tong. Wang Songnian is the son of Wang Zunye.

古文：夏，四月，柔然寇齐肆州，齐主自晋阳讨之，至恒州，柔然散走。
现代文：夏季四月，柔然人进犯北齐的肆州，北齐国主高洋从晋阳出发去讨伐。进军到恒州时，柔然人四散而逃。
English: In the summer of April, the Jurchens attacked Zhouzhou in North Qi, and the ruler of North Qi, Gaoyang, set out from Jinyang to fight. When they marched into Hengzhou, the Jurchens scattered and fled.

古文：帝以二千馀骑为殿，宿黄瓜堆。
现代文：高洋派二千余名骑兵殿后，宿营在黄瓜堆。
English: More than two thousand cavalrymen of the Gaoyang faction camped in the cucumber heap behind the palace.

古文：柔然别部数万骑奄至，帝安卧，平明乃起，神色自若，指画形势，纵兵奋击。柔然披靡，因溃围而出。
现代文：柔然的另一支部队几万骑兵突然到来，文宣帝安然高卧，到天亮才起床，神色自若，指划山川地形，然后指挥战士奋勇猛击敌阵，柔然人溃散，北齐军突围而出。
English: Another force of tens of thousands of cavalry suddenly arrived, Emperor Wenzhong was sleeping peacefully, and woke up at dawn, looking confident, pointing out the mountain and river terrain, and then commanding the soldiers to bravely slam the enemy line, the people of Zhu Rong broke up, and the North Qi Army broke out.

古文：柔然走，追击之，伏尸二十馀里，获庵罗辰妻子，虏三万馀口，令都督善无高阿那肱帅骑数千塞其走路。
现代文：柔然人逃跑了，北齐军队追击，尸体扔满二十余里的道路，捉获了庵罗辰的妻子儿女，俘虏了三万多人。文宣帝命令都督善无人高阿那肱率领几千骑兵去挡住柔然人逃跑的道路。
English: Juran fled, and the Northern Qi army chased him, throwing his body across more than twenty miles of road, capturing An Luo Chen's wife and children, and taking more than thirty thousand prisoners. Emperor Wenzhong ordered the governor-general Gao Ananyuan to lead several thousand cavalry to block Juran's escape route.

古文：时柔然军犹盛，阿那肱以兵少，请益，帝更减其半。
现代文：当时柔然军势还很盛大，阿那肱因为兵力太少，要求多派一些人马，但是高洋不但不给，反而减少了一半。
English: At that time, Zhu Ran's army was still very large. Anaximenes asked Gao Yang to send more soldiers because the army was too small, but Gao Yang not only refused, but reduced it by half.

古文：阿那肱奋击，大破之。
现代文：阿那肱奋勇进攻，大破敌军。
English: Anas fought bravely and defeated the enemy.

古文：庵罗辰超越岩谷，仅以身免。
现代文：庵罗辰越过了岩谷，幸免于一死。
English: An Luo-Chen crossed the rocky valley and was spared from death.

古文：丙寅，上使散骑常侍庾信等聘于魏。
现代文：丙寅，元帝派散骑常侍庚信等到西魏聘问。
English: Cui Yin, the Yuan Emperor dispatched his equestrian equerry, Geng Xin, to the Western Wei Dynasty to ask questions.

古文：癸酉，以陈霸先为司空。
现代文：癸酉，梁朝任命陈霸先为司空。
English: At that time, Liang Dynasty appointed Chen Baxian as Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：丁未，齐主复自击柔然，大破之。
现代文：丁未，北齐国主高洋又一次亲自进攻柔然，大获全胜。
English: Ding Wei, the ruler of Northern Qi, Gao Yang, once again personally attacked Suoren and won a complete victory.

古文：庚戌，魏太师泰鸩杀废帝。
现代文：庚戌，西魏太师宇文泰用毒药毒死了废帝元钦。
English: Geng Zheng, the West Wei Grand Master Yu Wentai used poison to poison the former emperor Yuan Qin.

古文：五月，魏直州人乐炽、洋州人黄国等作乱，开府仪同三司高平田弘、河南贺若敦讨之，不克。
现代文：五月，西魏直州人乐炽、洋州人黄国等叛乱，开府仪同三司高平人田弘、河南人贺若敦去讨伐，不能破敌。
English: In May, the rebels of the Western Wei Dynasty, such as the Zhouzhou people of Lezhuang and the Yangzhou people of Huangguo, led by Kaifu Yi and the three Gaoping people, such as Tianhong and the Henan people, such as He Ruodong, went to fight, but they could not defeat the enemy.

古文：太师泰命车骑大将军李迁哲与敦共讨炽等，平之。
现代文：太师宇文泰命令车骑大将军李迁哲与贺若敦一起讨伐乐炽等人，平定了这次叛乱。
English: Grand Master Yu Wentai ordered the cavalry general Li Qianzhe and Heraodong to fight against Le Blaze and others, and quelled the rebellion.

古文：仍与敦南出，徇地至巴州，巴州刺史牟安民降之，巴、濮之民皆附于魏。
现代文：平乱之后，李迁哲仍然与贺若敦一起向南方进发，一路攻城掠地，直达巴州。巴州刺史牟安民投降了他们，巴州、濮州的民众都依附了西魏。
English: After the suppression of the rebellion, Li Qianzhe still marched south with He Ruodong, attacking the city and grabbing land all the way to Bazhou. The people of Bazhou and Shimu'an surrendered to them, and the people of Bazhou and Zhangzhou all adhered to the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：蛮酋向五子王等陷白帝，迁哲击之，五子王等遁去，迁哲追击，破之。
现代文：蛮族酋长向五子王攻陷了白帝城，李迁哲发兵攻打他，向五子王逃跑了，李迁哲追击，打败了他。
English: The barbarian chieftain attacked the Five Sons King and captured the White Emperor City, Li Qianzhe sent troops to attack him and fled to the Five Sons King, Li Qianzhe pursued and defeated him.

古文：泰以迁哲为信州刺史，镇白帝。
现代文：宇文泰任命李迁哲为信州刺史，镇守白帝城。
English: Yu Wentai appointed Li Qianzhe as the governor of Shinshu and the town guard of Baidicheng.

古文：信州先无储蓄，迁哲与军士共采葛根为粮，时有异味，辄分尝之，军士感悦。
现代文：信州这个地方早先没有粮草储备，李迁哲和士兵一起采葛根之类的野菜野果作粮食，不时能采得到新奇味道的，就分给士兵品尝，士兵都很感动、高兴。
English: There was no grain and grass reserve in this part of Shinshu earlier. Li Qianzhe and the soldiers picked vegetables and wild fruits such as kudzu root together to make grain. From time to time, if they could get a new taste, they were given to the soldiers to taste. The soldiers were very moved and happy.

古文：屡击叛蛮，破之，群蛮慑服，皆送粮饩，遣子弟入质。
现代文：李迁哲多次进攻叛变的蛮族，打败了他们，各部蛮族被他的军威慑服，都送粮食来进贡，并派子弟来当人质。
English: Li Qianzhe attacked the mutinous barbarians many times and defeated them. All the barbarians were deterred by his army, sent grain as tribute, and sent their children as hostages.

古文：由是州境安息，军储亦赡。
现代文：从此以后信州边境安定，人民得以休养生息，军队粮草储备也丰富了。
English: Since then, the Shinshu border has been stable, the people have been able to rest and recuperate, and the army's grain and grass reserves have also been enriched.

古文：柔然乙旃达官寇魏广武，柱国李弼追击，破之。
现代文：柔然乙旃达官进犯西魏广武，柱国李弼派兵出击，把他打得大败。
English: Zhu Ranzhong, a high-ranking official, invaded Guangwu in the Western Wei Dynasty, and his vassal, Li Xi, sent troops to attack him. He was soundly defeated.

古文：广州刺史曲江侯勃，自以非上所授，内不自安，上亦疑之。
现代文：广州刺史曲江侯萧勃，觉得自己的官职不是元帝所授予的，内心很不安稳，元帝也怀疑他。
English: Xiao Bo, the Prince of Qujiang in Guangzhou, felt that his official position was not conferred by the Yuan Emperor, and his heart was very unstable. The Yuan Emperor was also suspicious of him.

古文：勃启求入朝；五月，乙巳，上以王琳为广州刺史，勃为晋州刺史。
现代文：萧勃向上请求朝见元帝。五月，乙巳，元帝任命王琳为广州刺史，萧勃为晋州刺史。
English: In May, Emperor Yuan appointed Wang Lin as the governor of Guangzhou and Xiao Bo as the governor of Jinzhou.

古文：上以琳部众强盛，又得众心，故欲远之。
现代文：元帝因为王琳手下兵势强盛，又得到民众拥护，所以想把他外放到远处。
English: Because Wang Lin's troops were strong and he was supported by the people, Yuan Di wanted to send him far away.

古文：琳与主书广汉李膺厚善，私谓膺曰： 琳，小人也，蒙官拔擢至此。
现代文：王琳与主书广汉人李膺关系很深，一向亲善，私下对李膺说： 我王琳出身平民小百姓，承蒙皇上提拔到这个份上。
English: Wang Lin had a very deep relationship with the principal scribe, the Han Chinese Li Qianlu, and they had always been friendly. She said to Li Qianlu in private: I, Wang Lin, was born as a commoner and was promoted to this position by the emperor.

古文：今天下未定，迁琳岭南，如有不虞，安得琳力！
现代文：现在天下还没安定，就把我远远迁徙到岭南去，如果形势有变，发生不测的灾祸，我王琳想出力也够不着了！
English: Now that the world is not yet stable, I will move far away to Lingnan. If the situation changes and unexpected disasters occur, I won't be able to reach Wang Lin even if I want to!

古文：窃揆官意不过疑琳，琳分望有限，岂与官争为帝乎！
现代文：我私下揣度皇上的意思不就是对我不放心吗？其实我的志向和期待也很有限，难道还能想和皇上争帝位吗？
English: Is it because I secretly guess the emperor's meaning that I am not at ease? In fact, my aspirations and expectations are also limited, can I still want to compete with the emperor for the throne?

古文：何不以琳为雍州刺史，镇武宁，琳自放兵作田，为国御捍。 
现代文：何不任命我为雍州刺史，镇守武宁。我自会带兵屯垦，为国御敌，捍卫梁朝。 
English: Why don't you appoint me as the historian of Yongzhou and the town guard of Wu Ning? I will lead the troops to camp, be the enemy of the country and defend the Liang Dynasty.

古文：膺然其言而弗敢启。
现代文：李膺觉得他的话很对，但不敢启奏元帝。
English: Li Yao felt that his words were right, but he did not dare to criticize the Yuan Emperor.

古文：散骑郎新野庾季才言于上曰： 去年八月丙申，月犯心中星，今月丙戌，赤气干北斗。
现代文：散骑郎新野人庚季才进言给元帝，说： 去年八月丙申，月亮侵犯了心宿中间的一颗星，这月丙戌，赤气干犯了北斗星。
English: The wandering horseman and new wild man, Geng Ji, gave advice to the Yuan Emperor, saying: Last August, the moon invaded a star in the middle of the heart, and this month, the red dragon invaded the Big Dipper.

古文：心为天王，丙主楚分，臣恐建子之月有大兵入江陵。陛下宜留重臣镇江陵，整旆还都以避其患。
现代文：心宿就是天王，丙的天干主管楚地的分野，我担心建子之月有大兵来犯江陵，陛下应该留下重臣镇守江陵，自己整顿旌旗仪仗回建康以避开兵患。
English: My heart's destination is the heavenly king, C's heavenly stem is in charge of the Chu region, I am worried that soldiers will come to attack Jiangling in the month of Jianzi, His Majesty should leave his senior vassals to guard Jiangling, and rectify the flag-raising ceremony and return to Jiankang to avoid military suffering.

古文：假令魏虏侵蹙，止失荆、湘，在于社稷，犹得无虑。 
现代文：假如魏虏入侵，我方失地，也止限于荆州、湘州，整个国家，还能处于安全之境。 
English: If Wei and Ruiz invaded and we lost our territory, we would be limited to Jingzhou and Hunan, and the whole country would still be in a safe situation.

古文：上亦晓天文，知楚有灾，叹曰： 祸福在天，避之何益！ 
现代文：元帝也懂得天文，心知楚地会有兵灾，长叹一声，说： 祸福都在天意，避灾躲祸也徒劳无益！ 
English: Yuan Di also knew astronomy and knew that there would be military disasters. He sighed and said, "Both misfortune and good fortune are in the will of Heaven. Avoiding disasters and hiding from disasters is useless!

古文：六月，壬午，齐步大汗萨将兵四万趣泾州，王僧辩使侯瑱、张彪自石梁引兵助严超达拒之，瑱、彪迟留不进。
现代文：六月，壬午，北齐步大汗萨带兵四万人逼近泾州，王僧辩派侯、张彪从石梁带兵帮助严超达抵抗，侯、张彪接到命令，却迟迟滞留，不肯前进。
English: In June, at noon, the Northern Qi marched to the Great Khansa with 40,000 soldiers and approached Zhangzhou. Wang Sangye sent Hou and Zhang Biao from Shiliang with soldiers to help Yan Chao resist. Hou and Zhang Biao received the order, but delayed and refused to advance.

古文：将军尹令思将万馀人谋袭盱眙。
现代文：梁朝将军尹令思带一万多人准备袭击盱眙。
English: Liang Dynasty General Yin Lingsi led more than ten thousand people to prepare to attack Handan.

古文：齐冀州刺史段韶将兵讨东方白额于宿预，广陵、泾州皆来告急，诸将患之。
现代文：当时北齐冀州刺史段韶带兵在宿预讨伐东方白额，正好广陵，泾州两地都来告急，将领们都很担心。
English: At that time, the Northern Qi Jizhou Zhisheng led the soldiers to attack the Eastern Baiyun in Suqian, just like Guangling. Both places in Zhizhou were in a hurry, and the generals were very worried.

古文：韶曰： 梁氏丧乱，国无定主，人怀去就，强者从之。
现代文：段韶说： 梁朝连遭丧乱，国家没有确定的主人，臣子们心里怀着或去或留的两种心思，看谁势强就归附谁。
English: Duan Qi said: The Liang Dynasty had suffered repeated disasters, the country had no definite master, and the courtiers had two thoughts in their minds: either to go or to stay, and to see who was powerful was to attach to whom.

古文：霸先等外托同德，内有离心，诸君不足忧，吾揣之熟矣！ 
现代文：陈霸先等人外表上表示与梁朝同心同德，其实内心早有了分离自雄的念头。你们不必担心，我对这中间情形都揣摩透了！ 
English: On the outside, Chen Baxian and others said that they were of the same mind and spirit as Liang Chao, but in fact, they already had the idea of separating themselves from him. You don't have to worry, I have figured out this middle situation!

古文：乃留仪同三司敬显携等围宿预，自引兵倍道趣泾州，涂出盱眙。
现代文：于是留下仪同三司敬显携等人围攻宿预，自己带兵以加倍的速度直取泾州，路上还经过了盱眙。
English: So he left Yi with the three divisions of Jing Xian and others to besiege Shuku, and he took the soldiers to double the speed to take Bozhou, and passed Bozhou on the way.

古文：令思不意齐兵猝至，望风退走。
现代文：尹令思没想到北齐军队会突然降临，赶快望风逃跑。
English: Yin Lingsi did not expect that the North Qi army would suddenly arrive, and quickly hoped for the wind to escape.

古文：韶进击超达，破之，回趣广陵，陈霸先解围走。杜僧明还丹徒，侯瑱、张彪还秦郡。
现代文：段韶进攻严超达，打败了他，又回过头来逼近广陵，陈霸先解围退走，杜僧明回丹徒，侯、张彪回秦郡。
English: Duan Yu attacked Yan Chaoda, defeated him, and then turned around to approach Guangling. Chen Ba first broke the siege and retreated, Du Sangming returned to Dantu, and Hou and Zhang Biao returned to Qin County.

古文：吴明彻围海西，镇将中山郎基固守，削木为箭，剪纸为羽。
现代文：吴明彻围困海西，守将中山人郎基固守城池，削木头作箭头，剪纸片作箭尾羽饰，顽强抵抗。
English: Wu Mingche besieged the west coast of the sea, and the guard commander Zhongshan Ren Rongji firmly guarded the castle, carved wood as arrows, cut paper pieces as arrow tail feathers, and tenaciously resisted.

古文：围之十旬，卒不能克而还。
现代文：吴明彻围困了十旬一百天，到底没能打下来，就退回去了。
English: Wu Mingche besieged for one hundred and ten days, and when he failed to defeat the enemy, he retreated.

古文：柔然帅馀众东徙，且欲南寇，齐主帅轻骑邀之于金川。
现代文：柔然率领被击溃后剩余的士兵向东迁徙，而且想要向南进犯。北齐国主高洋率轻骑兵在金川拦击，柔然听到消息，远远逃跑了。
English: Zhu Ran led the remaining soldiers to migrate to the east after being defeated, and wanted to attack to the south. The light cavalry led by Gao Yang, the ruler of North Qi, stopped them in Jinchuan. Zhu Ran heard the news and fled far away.

古文：柔然闻之，远遁，营州刺史灵丘王峻设伏击之，获其名王数十人。
现代文：营州刺史灵丘人王峻设下埋伏袭击他们，捉获了几十个有名的首领。
English: Wang Jun, a member of the Yingzhou Zishi Lingqiu people, set up an ambush to attack them and captured dozens of famous leaders.

古文：邓至羌檐桁失国，奔魏，太师泰使秦州刺史宇文导将兵纳之。
现代文：邓至羌人檐失去政权，投奔西魏，太师宇文泰派秦州刺史宇文导带兵接纳了他。
English: When Deng lost power, he fled to the Western Wei Dynasty. The Grand Master Uwen Tai sent Qin Zhou Zhi Yuwen Guo with soldiers to receive him.

古文：齐段韶还至宿预，使辩士说东方白额，白额开门请盟，因执而斩之。
现代文：北齐段韶回到宿预，派一个善于言辞的人去游说东方白额。东方白额被说动了，打开城门要求和段韶结盟，段韶趁机把他抓起来杀了。
English: Beiqi Duanqi returned to Suiyuan and sent a person who was good at rhetoric to lobby Dongfang Baiyao. Dongfang Baiyao was moved by the speech and opened the gate to request an alliance with Duanqi. Duanqi took the opportunity to arrest and kill him.

古文：秋，七月，庚戌，齐主还鄴。
现代文：秋季七月，庚戌，北齐国主高洋回到邺城。
English: In the autumn of July, Geng Zang, the ruler of Northern Qi, Gao Yang, returned to Lucheng.

古文：魏太师泰西巡，至原州。
现代文：西魏太师宇文泰到西边巡视，到达原州。
English: Western Wei Grand Master Yu Wentai went on a tour to the west and arrived in Wonju.

古文：八月，千辰，齐以司州牧清河王岳为太保，司空尉粲为司徒，太子太师侯莫陈相为司空，尚书令平阳王淹录尚书事，常山王演为尚书令，中书令上党王涣为左仆射。
现代文：八月，壬辰，北齐任命司州牧清河王高岳为太保，司空尉粲为司徒，太子太师侯莫陈相为司空，尚书令平阳王高淹为录尚书事，常山王高演为尚书令，中书令上党王高涣为左仆射。
English: In August, in Imjin, Northern Qi appointed Shizhou Mu Qinghe Wang Gao Yue as Tai Bao, Shih Kuang Liang as Shih Tuo, Prince Daishi Hou Mo Chen Xiang as Shih Kuo, Shang Shuling Pingyang Wang Gao Ruan as Luo Shang Shuling, Changshan Wang Gao Yuan as Shang Shuling, Shang Shuling Shang Dang Wang Gao Yu as Zuo Shu Ya.

古文：乙亥，齐仪同三司元旭坐事赐死。
现代文：乙亥，北齐国仪同三司元旭因犯罪被赐死。
English: Yi Hai, Bei Qi Guoliang and San Si Yuan Xu were sentenced to death for their crimes.

古文：丁丑，齐主如晋阳。
现代文：丁丑，北齐国主高洋去晋阳。
English: Ding Yuxi, the ruler of North Qi, Gaoyang, went to Jinyang.

古文：齐主之未为魏相也，太保、录尚书事平原王高隆之常侮之，及将受禅，隆之复以为不可，齐主由是衔之。
现代文：当初，高洋还没有当上东魏丞相的时候，太保、录尚书事平原王高隆之常常轻侮他。待到高洋将接受禅让的时候，高隆之又认为不能这样做，高洋因此记恨在心。
English: At first, when Gao Yang had not yet become the prime minister of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, the eunuch and recorder of records, the Plain King Gao Longzhi, often scorned him. When Gao Yang was about to accept Zen's concession, Gao Longzhi thought that he could not do so, and Gao Yang therefore held a grudge in his heart.

古文：崔季舒谮 隆之每见诉讼者辄加哀矜之意，以示非己能裁。 
现代文：崔季舒乘机进谗言说： 高隆之每次见到吃官司的人就都表示同情哀怜，以表示这不是他自己就能裁断的，企图把怨恨引向陛下。 
English: Cui Jishu took advantage of the opportunity to say: "Every time Gao Longzhi saw a litigant, he expressed sympathy and pity, to show that it was not something he could decide on his own, in an attempt to lead resentment to His Majesty.

古文：帝禁之尚书省。
现代文：文宣帝高洋听了，就把高隆之软禁在尚书省。
English: Emperor Wenxuan listened to Gao Yang and placed Gao Long under house arrest in Shangshu Province.

古文：隆之尝与元旭饮，谓旭曰： 与王交，当生死不相负。 
现代文：高隆之曾经和元旭一块儿饮酒，对元旭说： 我和您的交情，是生死之交，永不相负！ 
English: Gao Longzhi used to drink alcohol with Yuan Xu, and said to Yuan Xu: My friendship with you is a life-and-death friendship, never to be outdone!

古文：人有密言之者，帝由是发怒，令壮士筑百馀拳而舍之。辛巳，卒于路。
现代文：有人把这话密告给文宣帝，文宣帝因此勃然大怒，命令壮士把他打了一百余拳，然后扔开，辛巳，高隆之就这样死在路边。
English: Someone tipped off Emperor Wenxuan about this, and he flew into a rage, ordering a strong man to beat him with more than a hundred punches and then throw him away. Soon, Gao Longzhi died on the side of the road.

古文：久之，帝追忿隆之，执其子慧登等二十人于前，帝以鞭叩鞍，一时头绝，并投尸漳水；又发隆之冢，出其尸，斩截骸骨焚之，弃于漳水。
现代文：过后很久，文宣帝对高隆之越想越恼怒，又把他的儿子高慧登等二十人捉到自己面前，文宣帝以马鞭击打马鞍为号，令人一下子砍下这二十人的头，然后把尸体一起扔到漳水里去。又把高隆之的坟墓挖开，把尸体刨出来，砍为好几段烧掉，然后扔入漳水。
English: After a long time, Emperor Wenxuan became more and more angry with Gao Longzhi. He also caught twenty people, including his son Gao Huiden, in front of him. Emperor Wenxuan ordered the heads of these twenty people to be cut off with a horsewhip, and then threw the bodies together into the Surabaya. He also dug up Gao Longzhi's grave, dug out the bodies, cut them into several pieces, burned them, and then threw them into the Surabaya.

古文：齐主使常山王演、上党王涣、清河王岳、平原王段韶帅众于洛阳西南筑伐恶城、新城、严城、河南城。
现代文：北齐国主高洋派常山王高演、上党王高涣、清河王高岳、平原王段韶率领士兵民工在洛阳西南修筑伐恶城、新城、严城、河南城。
English: King Gao Yuan of Changshan, King Gao Tuo of Shangdang, King Gao Yue of Qinghe, and King Duan of the Plain, who were the masters of the Northern Qi Kingdom, led the soldiers and migrant workers to build Jiaocheng, Xincheng, Yancheng, and Henancheng in the southwest of Luoyang.

古文：九月，齐主巡四城，欲以致魏师，魏师不出，乃如晋阳。
现代文：九月，北齐国主高洋巡视这四座城堡，想以这一举动把西魏的军队吸引出来，但西魏军队不敢出来。于是高洋就到晋阳去了。
English: In September, the ruler of Northern Qi, Gao Yang, toured the four castles, hoping to lure the West Wei army out with this move, but the West Wei army did not dare to come out. So Gao Yang went to Jinyang.

古文：魏宇文泰命侍中崔猷开回车路以通汉中。
现代文：西魏宇文泰命令侍中崔猷开山填谷，修通通往汉中的车路。
English: Western Wei Yu Wentai ordered the chamberlain Cui Jun to open the mountain to fill the valley and repair the road leading to Hanzhong.

古文：帝好玄谈，辛卯，于龙光殿讲《老子》。
现代文：梁元帝萧绎喜好玄谈，辛卯，在龙光殿开设讲座，讲论《老子》。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan's Xiao Yuanyuan was fond of gossip, and gave lectures on "Laozi" at Longguangden.

古文：曲江侯勃迁居始兴，王琳使副将孙瑒先行据番禺。
现代文：曲江侯萧勃迁居始兴。王琳派副将孙先去占据了番禺。
English: Xiao Bu, the lord of Qujiang, began to move and prosper. Wang Lin sent Vice Admiral Sun to occupy Panyu first.

古文：乙巳，魏遣柱国常山公于谨、中山公宇文护、大将军杨忠将兵五万入寇。冬，十月，壬戌，发长安。
现代文：乙巳，西魏派柱国常山公于谨、中山公宇文护、大将军杨忠带兵五万人进犯梁朝，冬季，十月，壬戌，从长安出发。
English: Once upon a time, the Western Wei Dynasty sent the pillar countries Changshan Gong Yugong, Zhongshan Gong Yu Wengu, and General Yang Zhong with 50,000 soldiers to invade the Liang Dynasty. In the winter, in October, they set out from Chang'an.

古文：长孙俭问谨曰： 为萧绎之计，将如何？ 
现代文：长孙俭问于谨，说： 假如咱们替萧绎谋划一下，他该怎样抵抗我军才好呢？ 
English: The eldest grandson Jian asked Yu Zhen, saying, "If we make a plan for Xiao Yu, how should he resist our army?"

古文：谨曰： 耀兵汉、沔，席卷度江，直据丹杨，上策也；移郭内居民退保子城，峻其陴堞，以待援军，中策也；若难于移动，据守罗郭，下策也。 
现代文：于谨回答说： 如果他能陈兵于汉江、沔水一带，从江陵收拾家当率领臣下全部渡江而下，先径直占据丹杨，这是上策。如果他能把江陵外城内的居民全部移往内城，退保固守，把城墙加高，等待援军，这是中策。如果他感到搬动起来很困难，就原地不动防守外城，这可是下策。 
English: Yu Qian replied: "If he can gather his troops in the area of the Han River and Surabaya, gather his family members from Gangneung, and lead all his vassals to cross the river, and occupy Danyang directly first, this is the best strategy. If he can move all the residents in the outer city of Gangneung to the inner city, defend it, raise the city wall, and wait for reinforcements, this is the middle strategy. If he feels it is difficult to move, he will not move to defend the outer city, but this is the next strategy.

古文：俭曰： 揣绎定出何策？ 
现代文：长孙俭问道： 您估计萧绎会采用那一种计策？ 
English: The eldest grandson asked: What kind of strategy do you think Xiao Yuanzhong will use?

古文：谨曰： 下策。 
现代文：于谨说： 他只会采用下策。 
English: Yu said: He will only take the next step.

古文：俭曰： 何故？ 
现代文：长孙俭问： 那是为什么呢？ 
English: The eldest grandson asked: Why is that?

古文：谨曰： 萧氏保据江南，绵历数纪，属中原多故，未遑外略；又以我有齐氏之患，必谓力不能分。
现代文：于谨回答说： 萧氏据守江南以自保，已经绵延经历了三、四十年。正好这段时间里中原地区也处多事之秋，不能够向外扩张。萧氏又因为我国东边有齐国为患，认为我国必不可能分散兵力去进攻他们。
English: Yu Qian replied: The Xiao clan has been defending the south of the Yangtze River for self-preservation for 30 to 40 years. During this period, the Central Plains region was also in turmoil, unable to expand outward. The Xiao clan also believed that it would be impossible for China to disperse its forces to attack them because of the problem of Qi in the east of China.

古文：且绎懦而无谋，多疑少断。愚民难与虑始，皆恋邑居，所以知其用下策也。 
现代文：而且萧绎这个人懦弱而没有谋略，多疑而少决断，而那些普通平民们又很难忧深虑远地想问题，都留恋自己的家园，所以我知道萧绎一定采用下策。 
English: Moreover, Xiao Yu is a coward without a strategy, more suspicious and less decisive, while those ordinary civilians are difficult to worry about, think about problems from afar, and are homesick for their homes, so I know that Xiao Yu will definitely adopt the next strategy.

古文：癸亥，武宁太守宗均告魏兵且至，帝召公卿议之。
现代文：癸亥，武宁太守宗均向上报告西魏大军将要入侵，元帝召集公卿大臣商议对策。
English: Yan Hai and Wu Ning Taishou Zong both reported to the emperor that the West Wei army was about to invade, and the Yuan Emperor summoned the nobles and ministers to discuss countermeasures.

古文：领军胡僧祐、太府卿黄罗汉曰： 二国通好，未有嫌隙，必应不尔。 
现代文：领军胡僧、太府卿黄罗汉说： 西魏和我们梁朝一向友好来往，也没发生过什么不愉快的事情，我想不会向我们进攻吧。 
English: The leader of the Hu army, Huang Luohan, said: "The Western Wei Dynasty and our Liang Dynasty have always been friendly, and nothing unpleasant has happened. I don't think they will attack us."

古文：侍中王琛曰： 臣揣宇文容色，必无此理。 
现代文：侍中王琛也附和说： 我曾于去年出使魏，揣摩宇文泰的神色，很是友好，决不可能发兵来打我们。 
English: Wang Xuanru, a chamberlain, also chimed in, saying, "I was sent to Wei last year, and I guessed what Yu Wentai was like. He is very friendly, and he would never send troops to fight us."

古文：乃复使琛使魏。
现代文：于是又派王琛到西魏去访问。
English: Therefore, he sent Wang Qi to the West Wei Dynasty to visit.

古文：丙寅，于谨至樊、邓，梁王詧帅众会之。
现代文：丙寅，于谨的队伍抵达樊、邓，梁王萧率部属去和他会合。
English: Cui Yin, Yu Jian's team arrived in Zou, Deng, Liang Wang Xiao led the subordinates to meet with him.

古文：丁卯，帝停讲，内外戒严。
现代文：辛卯，元帝停止讲论《老子》，朝廷内外宣布戒严。
English: Soon after, Emperor Yuan stopped lecturing on "Lao Zi," and martial law was declared inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：王琛至石梵，未见魏军，驰书报黄罗汉曰： 吾至石梵，境上帖然，前言皆儿戏耳。 
现代文：王琛抵达石，没有见到西魏的军队，派人送急信报告黄罗汉，说： 我已来到石，边境上很安宁，以前说魏要对我们发动进攻，简直是儿戏之言。 
English: Wang Hui arrived in Shih and did not see the Western Wei army. He sent someone to send an express letter to report to Huang Luo Han, saying: I have arrived in Shih, the border is very peaceful. Previously, it was a child's play to say that Wei would launch an attack on us.

古文：帝闻而疑之。
现代文：元帝听后感到疑惑。
English: Yuan Di felt doubtful after hearing this.

古文：庚午，复讲，百官戎服以听。
现代文：庚午，元帝又恢复讲《老子》，百官都穿着军装听讲。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Emperor Yuan resumed his lecture on "Lao Zi," and all the officials wore military uniforms to listen to the lecture.

古文：辛未，帝使主书李膺至建康，征王僧辩为大都督、荆州刺史，命陈霸先徙镇扬州。
现代文：辛未，元帝派主书李膺去建康，征召王僧辩为大都督、荆州刺史，命令陈霸先移兵驻守扬州。
English: In Xinwei, the Yuan Emperor sent his main secretary Li Xi to Jiankang, conscripted Wang Sangyan as the grand governor and Jingzhou as the chief historian, and ordered Chen Baxian to move his troops to Yangzhou.

古文：僧辩遣豫州刺史侯瑱帅程灵洗等为前军，兗州刺史杜僧明帅吴明彻等为后军。
现代文：王僧辩派遣豫州刺史侯率领程灵洗等为先头部队，兖州刺史杜僧明率领吴明彻等人为后卫部队。
English: Wang Sangye dispatched Cheng Lingchi and others led by Yu Zhou Zhishi Hou as the vanguard troops, and Wu Mingche and others led by Du Sangming and others led by Zhang Zhou Zhishi Du as the rearguard troops.

古文：甲戌，帝夜登凤皇阁，徙倚叹息曰： 客星入翼、轸、今必败矣！ 
现代文：甲戌，元帝夜里登上凤皇阁，来回踱步，凭栏叹息说： 客星冲犯翼宿、轸宿，看来这回一定失败了！ 
English: Armor-plated, the Yuan Emperor boarded the Fenghuang Pavilion in the night, paced back and forth, sighed and said: "Guest star crashes into the winged inn, the cocoon inn, it seems that this time it must have failed!"

古文：嫔御皆泣。
现代文：嫔妃和侍从听了都哭泣起来。
English: The Empress Dowager and her attendants burst into tears.

古文：陆法和闻魏师至，自郢州入汉口，将赴江陵。
现代文：陆法和听说西魏大兵压境，从郢州出发到汉口，将赶赴江陵抗敌。
English: Lu Fa and heard that the Western Wei Dynasty soldiers were oppressing the border, set out from Ganzhou to Hankou, and would rush to Gangneung to resist the enemy.

古文：帝使逆之曰： 此自能破贼，但镇郢州，不须动也！ 
现代文：元帝派人去拦住他，说： 我这儿自能打败敌兵，你只管镇守郢州，不用动。 
English: The former emperor sent someone to stop him, saying, "I can defeat the enemy soldiers here by myself. You only need to guard Zhangzhou, don't move."

古文：法和还州，垩其城门，著衰绖，坐苇席，终日，乃脱之。
现代文：陆法和回到郢州，让人用白土涂城门，自己身穿丧服，坐在苇席上，静坐了一天，才把丧服脱下来。
English: When he returned to Luzhou, he had the gate of the city painted with white clay, put on his mourning clothes, and sat at the banquet for a whole day before taking off his mourning clothes.

古文：十一月，帝大阅于津阳门外，遇北风暴雨，轻辇还宫。
现代文：十一月，元帝在津阳门外举行大阅兵，遇到北风挟暴雨袭击，赶快乘轻车崐便辇回宫。
English: In November, Emperor Yuan held a grand military parade outside the Tsuyang Gate. Encountering the north wind and heavy rain, he hurriedly returned to the palace by car.

古文：癸未，魏军济汉，于谨令宇文护、杨忠帅精骑先据江津，断东路。
现代文：癸未，西魏军队渡过汉水，于谨命令宇文护、杨忠率精锐骑兵先占领了江津，切断元帝东逃的道路。
English: Not long after, the Western Wei army crossed the Han River, and Yu ordered Uwen Guo and Yang Zhong to lead the elite cavalry to occupy Jiangjin first, cutting off the former emperor's escape route to the east.

古文：甲申，护克武宁，执宗均。
现代文：甲申，宇文护攻克武宁，抓住了宗均。
English: Ka-shin, U-wen, and other guards attacked Kewuning and captured Zongjun.

古文：是日，帝乘马出城行栅，插木为之，周围六十馀里。
现代文：这一天，元帝骑马出城巡察修筑栏栅。栏栅用木头插在地上组成，周围共六十多里长。
English: On this day, the Yuan Emperor rode out of the city to inspect the construction of the fence. The fence is made of wood inserted into the ground and is more than sixty miles long.

古文：以领军将军胡僧祐都督城东诸军事，尚书右仆射张绾为之副，左仆射王褒都督城西诸军事，四厢领直元景亮为之副；王公已下各有所守。
现代文：又派领军将军胡僧都督城东诸军事，尚书右仆射张绾当他的副将，左仆射王褒都督城西诸军事，四厢领直元景亮当他的副将。王公以下各大臣各有守责。
English: He also sent the leading general, Hu Zeng, as the military governor of the eastern part of the city, Shangshu's right-hand man, Sha Zhangye, as his vice-commander, his left-hand man, Sha Wang, as the military governor of the western part of the city, and the leader of the four quarters, Jiuyuan Jingliang, as his vice-commander. The ministers below Wang Gu all had their own responsibilities.

古文：丙戌，命太子巡行城楼，令居人助运木石。
现代文：丙戌，派太子在城楼上巡视督责，命令居民帮助军队搬运城防用的木头石头。
English: In response, the crown prince sent inspectors to patrol the towers of the city and ordered residents to help the army carry wood and stone for the defense of the city.

古文：夜，魏军至黄华，去江陵四十里，丁亥，至栅下。
现代文：夜里，西魏军队抵达黄华，这里离江陵才四十里路。丁亥，魏兵到了梁军的栅栏下。
English: In the evening, the West Wei army arrived in Huanghua, which is only forty miles from Jiangling. Dinghai, Wei soldiers came under the fence of Liang's army.

古文：戊子，巂州刺史裴畿、畿弟新兴太守机、武昌太守硃买臣、衡阳太守谢答仁开枇杷门出战，裴机杀魏仪同三司胡文伐。
现代文：戊子，州刺史裴畿、裴畿的弟弟新兴太守裴机、武昌太守朱买臣、衡阳太守谢答仁打开枇杷门出战，裴机杀了西魏仪同三司胡文伐。
English: Wu Zi, the statesman Baigui, Baigui's younger brother, the newly-emerged Empress Dowager Pei Ji, the Empress Dowager of Wuchang Zhu Mai Sheng, and the Empress Dowager of Hengyang Xie Dairen opened the gate to battle, and Pei Ji killed Xi Wei Yi and the three Hu Wenfaras.

古文：畿，之高之子也。
现代文：裴畿是裴之高的儿子。
English: Baegi is the son of Baegi Gao.

古文：帝征广州刺史王琳为湘州刺史，使引兵入援。
现代文：元帝征召广州刺史王琳为湘东刺史，让他带兵入江陵救援。
English: The Yuan Emperor conscripted Wang Lin, the governor of Guangzhou, as the governor of eastern Hunan, and asked him to lead troops to rescue Jiangling.

古文：丁酉，栅内火，焚数千家及城楼二十五，帝临所焚楼，望魏军济江，四顾叹息。
现代文：丁酉，军营的栅栏内失火，烧毁了几千家民房和二十五座城楼。元帝亲临烧毁的城楼察看，远望魏军渡江涌来，四顾孤危，不禁长叹。
English: In Dingyao, a fire broke out in the fence of the military camp, burning down several thousand houses and twenty-five towers. Emperor Yuan personally inspected the burned towers and watched the Wei army crossing the river. Looking around at the danger, he could not help but sigh.

古文：是夜，遂止宫外，宿民家。
现代文：当天晚上，就住在宫外，宿在老百姓家里。
English: In the evening of the same day, they lived outside the palace, staying in the homes of ordinary people.

古文：己亥，称居礻氐洹寺。
现代文：己亥，移居到祗洹寺内。
English: Ji Hai, moved to the temple.

古文：于谨令筑长围，中外信命始绝。
现代文：于谨下令修筑长久围城用的军营，从此，梁朝信使，诏命无法外传，内外联络被切断了。
English: Yu ordered the construction of a military camp for a long siege of the city. From then on, Liang's courier, the imperial command, could not be transmitted, and internal and external communication was cut off.

古文：庚子，信州刺史徐世谱、晋安王司马任约等筑垒于马头，遥为声援。
现代文：庚子，信州刺史徐世谱、晋安王司马任约等在江陵南岸的马头修筑城堡，远远地作为声援。
English: Geng Zi, Shinshu Shishi Xu Shifu, Jinan Wang Sima Ren Yu and others built a castle in Ma Tou on the south bank of the Yangtze River, far away as solidarity.

古文：是夜，帝巡城，犹口占为诗，群臣亦有和者。
现代文：当天晚上，元帝巡视城防，还随口吟出诗来，群臣还有和他诗的。
English: In the evening of the same day, Emperor Yuan inspected the city's defenses. He also recited a poem at random, and the courtiers also recited poems with him.

古文：帝裂帛为书，趣王僧辩曰： 吾忍死待公，可以至矣！ 
现代文：元帝撕裂绢帛写了一封信，催促王僧辩速发援兵。信中说： 我忍受着死去的熬煎等你来，现在援兵该可以来了吧！ 
English: The former emperor wrote a letter urging Wang Sangye to send reinforcements as soon as possible, saying, "I have endured the agony of death waiting for you to come, so it is time for reinforcements to come!"

古文：壬寅，还宫；癸卯，出长沙寺。
现代文：壬寅，回到宫中。癸丑，又出来住入长沙寺。
English: Ren Yin, returned to the palace. Zou Ug, came out again to live in Changsha Temple.

古文：戊申，王褒、胡僧祐、硃买臣、谢答仁等开门出战，皆败还。
现代文：戍申，王褒、胡僧、朱买臣、谢答仁等人开门出城迎战，都败了回来。
English: Yu Sheng, Wang Bao, Hu Zeng, Zhu Mei Sheng, Xie Dairen and others went out of the city to fight, but all were defeated and came back.

古文：己酉，帝移居天居寺；癸丑，移居长沙寺。
现代文：己酉，元帝移居天居寺。癸丑，移居长沙寺。
English: Emperor Yuan moved to Tenju-ji Temple, and Emperor Zengushi moved to Changsha Temple.

古文：硃买臣按剑进曰： 唯斩宗懔、黄罗汉，可以谢天下！ 
现代文：朱买臣按着宝剑向元帝进言，说： 只有杀了宗懔、黄罗汉，才可以平息天下的怨恨！ 
English: Zhu Maichen pressed his sword to the Yuan Emperor and said: Only by killing Zonglu and Huang Luohan can the hatred of the world be calmed down!

古文：帝曰： 曩实吾意，宗、黄何罪！ 
现代文：元帝说： 过去不回建康，其实是我的意思，宗懔、黄罗汉有什么罪？ 
English: Yuan Di said, "In the past, I didn't go back to Jiankang, which is actually what I meant. What are the sins of Zong Yu and Huang Luo Han?"

古文：二人退入众中。
现代文：这两个人唯唯退入众人之中。
English: The two men retreated into the crowd.

古文：王琳军至长沙，镇南府长史裴政请间道先报江陵，至百里洲，为魏人所获。
现代文：王琳的军队赶到长沙，镇南府长史裴政要求走小路先把援兵来到的消息报告江陵。裴政走到百里洲时，让西魏人抓获了。
English: When Wang Lin's army arrived in Changsha, the governor of the south of the town, Shi Peizheng, asked them to take a side road to report the news of the arrival of reinforcements to Jiangling. When Peizheng went to Baizhou, he was captured by the West Wei people.

古文：梁王詧谓政曰： 我，武皇帝之孙也，不可为尔君乎？
现代文：梁王萧对裴政说： 我，是武皇帝的孙子，难道不能当你的君主吗？
English: Liang Wang Xiao said to Pei Zheng: I am the grandson of Emperor Wu, can I not be your ruler?

古文：若从我计，贵及子孙；如或不然，腰领分矣。 
现代文：如果臣服于我，那么富贵可以传给子孙。如果不听，那么你的腰和脖子就要断成两截。 
English: If you submit to me, then your wealth can be passed on to your children and grandchildren. If you don't listen, then your waist and neck will be cut in two.

古文：政诡对曰： 唯命。 
现代文：裴政假意回答说： 我愿唯命是从。 
English: Pei Zheng pretended to answer: I am willing to obey orders.

古文：詧锁之至城下，使言曰： 王僧辩闻台城被围，已自为帝。
现代文：萧把他用锁链系住，推到江陵城下，让他向城里喊话，说： 王僧辩听说台城被围，已经自立为皇帝。
English: Xiao put him in chains and pushed him to the foot of Jiangling Castle. He asked him to call out to the city, saying, "Wang Sangye heard that Taicheng was besieged, and has declared himself emperor.

古文：王琳孤弱，不复能来。 
现代文：王琳孤军力弱，不能再来救援了。 
English: Wang Lin alone has a weak military force and cannot come to the rescue.

古文：政告城中曰： 援兵大至，各思自勉。
现代文：但裴政却大声告诉城里，说： 救援大军大批赶来了，你们要自奋自励。
English: But Baizheng loudly told the city, saying: The rescue army has arrived in large numbers, you must work hard.

古文：吾以间使被擒，当碎身报国。 
现代文：我因充当报信的秘使，被敌军抓获，理当粉身碎骨，报效国家。 
English: I was captured by the enemy for acting as a courier, and I deserved to be crushed to death for serving my country.

古文：监者击其口，詧怒，命速杀之。
现代文：监视他的人使劲打他的嘴，萧勃然大怒，喝令手下快把他杀了。
English: His guards hit him hard in the mouth, and Xiao flew into a rage, shouting for his men to kill him.

古文：西中郎参军蔡大业谏曰： 此民望也，杀之，则荆州不可下矣。 
现代文：西中郎参军蔡大业进谏说： 这样坚贞不屈的人，使民众仰望而归心。杀了他，那么荆州就攻不下来了。 
English: Cai Daye Jinjun, a member of the Western Zhonglang Army, said: Such a steadfast and unyielding person makes the people look up and come to their senses. If you kill him, then you will not be able to conquer Jingzhou.

古文：乃释之。
现代文：萧这才放了他。
English: As a result, the brother was released.

古文：政，之礼之子；大业，大宝之弟也。
现代文：裴政是裴之礼的儿子。蔡大业是蔡大宝的弟弟。
English: Baizheng is the son of Pei Zili, and Cai Daye is the younger brother of Cai Dabao.

古文：时征兵四方，皆未至。
现代文：当时元帝向四方征兵求援，都没前来。
English: At that time, Yuan Di appealed to the four sides for help, but none of them came.

古文：甲寅，魏人百道攻城，城中负户蒙楯，胡僧祐亲当矢石，尽夜督战，奖励将士，明行赏罚，众咸致死，所向摧殄，魏不得前。
现代文：甲寅，西魏军队从四面八方一齐攻城。城里的守军扛着门板作为盾牌，胡僧亲自冒着飞箭流石，昼夜督战，对勇敢的将士进行鼓励，严明地厉行赏罚，这样大家都拼死抵抗，所向披靡，敌军纷纷溃败死伤，无法前进。
English: The Western Wei army attacked the city from all directions. The defenders of the city carried the door plate as a shield, and the monk himself braved the flying arrows, fought day and night, encouraged the brave soldiers, and strictly enforced rewards and punishments. In this way, everyone resisted to the death, and the enemy army was defeated and killed one after another, unable to advance.

古文：俄而僧祐中流矢死，内外大骇。
现代文：不久，胡僧被飞箭射死，内外城军民惊慌失措。
English: Soon after, the monk was killed by an arrow, and the soldiers and civilians inside and outside the city panicked.

古文：魏悉众攻栅，反者开西门纳魏师，帝与太子、王褒、谢答仁、硃买臣退保金城，令汝南王大封、晋熙王大圆质於于谨以请和。
现代文：西魏军队倾巢而出猛攻栅栏，有反叛的人打开西门迎接魏军进城，元帝和太子、王褒、谢答仁、朱买臣等退却到金城自保，派汝南王萧大封，晋熙王萧大圆为人质，到于谨军中去求和。
English: The Western Wei army poured out of the nest and stormed the fence. Some rebels opened the West Gate to welcome the Wei army into the city. The former emperor and the prince, Wang Bao, Xie Dairen, Zhu Mai Sheng, etc. retreated to Jincheng to protect themselves. They sent King Xiao Daifeng of Runan and King Xiao Dayuan of Jinxi as hostages to the Yuzheng army to sue for peace.

古文：魏军之初至也，众以王僧辩子侍中顗可为都督，帝不用，更夺其兵，使与左右十人入守殿中；及胡僧祐死，乃用为都督城诸军事。
现代文：当魏军刚到的时候，众人认为王僧辩的儿子侍中王可以当都督。但元帝不用他，还夺了他率领的士兵，让他和身边卫士十个人到宫殿中守卫。等到胡僧死了，才任命他为都督城中诸军事。
English: When the Wei army had just arrived, everyone thought that Wang Sangye's son, Wang Zhizhong, could be the governor. But the Yuan emperor did not use him, he also took the soldiers he led, and let him and the ten guards around him guard the palace. It was not until the monk died that he was appointed as the military governor of the city.

古文：裴畿、裴机、历阳侯峻皆出降。
现代文：裴畿、裴机、历阳侯萧峻都出城投降了。
English: Pei Gui, Pei Ji, and Liyang marquis Xiao Jun all left the city and surrendered.

古文：于谨以机手杀胡文伐，并畿杀之。
现代文：于谨用裴机的手杀了胡文伐，然后又把他和裴畿一块儿杀了。
English: Yu Zhen killed Hu Wenfa with the hand of Baikie, and then killed him and Baikie together.

古文：峻，渊猷之子也。
现代文：萧峻是萧渊猷的儿子。
English: Xiao Jun is the son of Xiao Yuanzhang.

古文：时城南虽破，而城北诸将犹苦战。日暝，闻城陷，乃散。
现代文：当时城南已被攻破，但城北诸将还在苦战，一直到天黑，听说全城都陷落了，才纷纷逃散。
English: At that time, the southern part of the city had already been breached, but those in the northern part of the city were still fighting hard until nightfall, when they heard that the entire city had fallen, and then they fled in droves.

古文：帝入东阁竹殿，命舍人高善宝焚古今图书十四万卷，将自赴火，宫人左右共止之。
现代文：元帝躲进东竹殿，命令舍人高善宝把自己收藏的古今图书十四万卷全部烧毁。他正准备跳到火里去自杀，宫中左右侍从一起阻止了他。
English: Emperor Yuan hid himself in the East Bamboo Hall and ordered his bodyguard Gao Zhenbao to burn all the 140,000 volumes of ancient and modern books in his collection. He was about to jump into the fire to commit suicide, but attendants from both sides of the palace stopped him.

古文：又以宝剑斫柱令折，叹曰： 文武之道，今夜尽矣！ 
现代文：元帝又用宝剑砍柱子，宝剑折断，他长叹说： 书烧了，剑折了，文武之道，今天晚上全完了。 
English: Emperor Yuan also used his sword to cut the pillar, and the sword was broken. He sighed and said, "The book is burned, the sword is broken, and the way of literature and martial arts is all over tonight."

古文：乃使御史中丞王孝祀作降文。
现代文：于是让御史中丞王孝祀写投降文告。
English: Therefore, he asked the Imperial Historian, Chujo Wang Xiaosi, to write a surrender proclamation.

古文：谢答仁、硃买臣谏曰： 城中兵众犹强，乘暗突围而出，贼必惊，因而薄之，可渡江就任约。 
现代文：谢答仁、朱买臣进谏说： 城里兵力还算强大，如果乘着黑夜突围而出，贼兵必然惊慌，乘乱大胆靠近敌陈，可以渡过长江去依靠任约的军队。 
English: Xie Dairen and Zhu Mai Sheng said: The city's military strength is still relatively strong. If you take advantage of the darkness to break out of the encirclement, the robber soldiers will inevitably panic, take advantage of the chaos to boldly approach the enemy Chen, and you can cross the Yangtze River to rely on any army.

古文：帝素不便走马，曰： 事必无成，只增辱耳！ 
现代文：元帝平时不善于骑马，有点畏难地说： 事情肯定不会成功的，只不过徒增羞辱罢了。 
English: The former emperor, who is not good at riding horses, said somewhat fearfully, "This will definitely not succeed, it will only increase the humiliation."

古文：答仁求自扶，帝以问王褒，褒曰： 答仁，侯景之党，岂足可信！
现代文：谢答仁要求亲自为元帝牵马护持。元帝问王褒行不行，王褒回答说： 谢答仁，是侯景的党羽，哪里可以相信！
English: Xie Dairen asked to personally hold the horse for the former emperor. The former emperor asked Wang Bo whether he could do it, and Wang Bo replied: Xie Dairen is a partisan of Houjing, how can you believe him!

古文：成彼之勋，不如降也。 
现代文：靠他逃跑，即使成功了也是成就了他的功勋，还不如投降西魏呢！ 
English: He might as well surrender for all the good he's done.

古文：答仁又请守子城，收兵可得五千人，帝然之，即授城中大都督，配以公主。
现代文：谢答仁又要求去防守子城，说收拾残兵还能有五千人，元帝同意他的建议，马上授给他城中大都督的官职，把公主也许配给他。
English: Xie Dairen also asked to go to defend the city, saying that there were still five thousand people to pick up the remnants. The Yuan Emperor agreed to his suggestion and immediately awarded him the official position of the city's grand governor, and the princess may be assigned to him.

古文：既而召王褒谋之，以为不可。
现代文：后来又召王褒来谋划这件事，王褒认为不能授权给谢答仁。
English: Later, Wang Bo was called to plan the event. Wang Bo thought that he could not authorize Xie Dairen.

古文：答仁请入不得，欧血而去。
现代文：谢答仁请求入子城防守，但不获批准，气得吐血，只好走了。
English: Xie Dairen requested to enter the city to defend it, but was not approved. He was so angry that he vomited blood and had to leave.

古文：于谨征太子为质，帝使王褒送之。
现代文：于谨接到投降书，提出让太子来当人质，元帝派王褒去送太子。
English: Upon receiving the surrender letter, he proposed to let the prince come as a hostage, and the former emperor sent Wang Bo to see the prince off.

古文：谨子以褒善书，给之纸笔，褒乃书曰： 柱国常山公家奴王褒。 
现代文：于谨的儿子知道王褒书法很好，就给他纸和笔，请他写字。王褒写字后自署： 柱国常山公家奴王褒。 
English: Yu Jian's son knew that Wang Bao's calligraphy was very good, so he gave him a piece of paper and a pen and asked him to write. After Wang Bao wrote, he signed his name: "Zhu Guo Changshan Gongjia Nao Wang Bao."

古文：有顷，黄门郎裴政犯门而出。
现代文：过一阵子，黄门郎裴政冲开门出去了。
English: Soon after, Huangmen Lang Baizheng broke through the gate and left the city.

古文：帝遂去羽仪文物，白马素衣出东门，抽剑击阖曰： 萧世诚一至此乎！ 
现代文：元帝于是丢掉羽仪饰物、骑着白马，穿着素衣逃出东门，抽出宝剑砍着门扇说： 我萧世诚到了这个地步了吗！ 
English: The Yuan emperor then threw away his feather ornaments, rode a white horse, and escaped from the east gate wearing plain clothes. He drew his sword and slashed the door and said, "Have I reached this level, Xiao Shicheng?"

古文：魏军士度堑牵其辔，至白马寺北，夺其所乘骏马，以驽马代之，遣长壮胡人手扼其背以行，逢于谨，胡人牵帝使拜。
现代文：西魏将士跳过沟堑一下子拉住了他乘的白马的辔头，拉到白马寺北边，把他所骑的骏马夺了下来，换了一匹老弱的马给他，派一个高个子的壮健胡人用手扼着他的背押着走，遇到于谨，胡人牵着元帝，让他跪拜。
English: The Western Wei general jumped across the gully and suddenly pulled the hoof of the white horse he was riding. He pulled it to the north side of the White Horse Temple, took down the horse he was riding, replaced it with an old and weak horse, and sent a tall, strong Hu man to hold his back with his hand and push him away. When he met Yu Zhen, the Hu man took the Yuan emperor and made him kneel.

古文：梁王詧使铁骑拥帝入营，囚于乌幔之下，甚为詧所诘辱。
现代文：梁王萧派铁甲骑兵前后拥着元帝入了军营，关在黑帐幕里头，萧狠狠地质问羞辱了他一通。
English: Liang Wang Xiao sent iron-clad cavalrymen to surround and embrace the Yuan Emperor, and they entered the military camp and locked him up in a black tent. Xiao severely questioned and humiliated him.

古文：乙卯，于谨令开府仪同三司长孙俭入据金城。
现代文：乙卯，于谨命令开府仪同三司长孙俭进据金城。
English: Second, I hereby order Kaifu Yi and Third Division Chief Sun Jian to enter Jincheng.

古文：帝绐俭云： 城中埋金千斤，欲以相赠。 
现代文：元帝骗长孙俭，说： 城里埋着一千斤黄金，我想送给你。 
English: Emperor Yuan deceived Sun Jian, saying: There is a thousand pounds of gold buried in the city, I want to give it to you.

古文：俭乃将帝入城。
现代文：长孙俭就把元帝带进金城。
English: The eldest grandson Jian brought the Yuan Emperor to Jincheng.

古文：帝因述詧见辱之状，谓俭曰： 向聊相绐，欲言此耳，岂有天子自埋金乎！ 
现代文：元帝乘便向长孙俭述说他被萧侮辱的情状，他对长孙俭说： 刚崐才骗了你了，目的是找个机会向你诉苦，哪里有天子自己埋藏金子的事！ 
English: Emperor Yuan took the opportunity to tell his eldest grandson Jian that he had been insulted by Xiao. He said to his eldest grandson Jian: "Gondor has just lied to you, in order to find an opportunity to complain to you, where is the god himself burying gold!

古文：俭乃留帝于主衣库。
现代文：于是长孙俭就把元帝留在主衣库里头。
English: The eldest grandson Jian then left the emperor in the princess's wardrobe.

古文：帝性残忍，且惩高祖宽纵之弊，故为政尚严。
现代文：元帝生性残忍，而且鉴于梁武帝为政过于宽厚放纵的弊病，所以自己为政崇尚严酷。
English: Emperor Yuan was cruel by nature, and in view of Emperor Liangwu's malady of being too lenient and indulgent in politics, he himself was harsh in politics.

古文：及魏师围城，狱中死囚且数千人，有司请释之以充战士；帝不许，悉令棓杀之，事未成而城陷。
现代文：到西魏军队围城时，监狱里关的死罪囚犯还有几千人。有关部门建议都释放出来让他们当战士，元帝不允许，命令都用木棍打死，还没有来得及执行城已被攻破。
English: By the time the West Wei army besieged the city, there were still several thousand prisoners of capital crimes in the prison. The relevant departments suggested that they should be released and let them be soldiers, but the Yuan Emperor did not allow it. The orders were all beaten to death with wooden sticks. The city had already been breached before the execution could be carried out.

古文：中书郎殷不害先于别所督战，城陷，失其母。
现代文：中书郎殷不害早先在别的地方督战，城破之后，失去了母亲。
English: Zhongshulang Yin had earlier overseen a battle in another place. After the city was destroyed, he lost his mother.

古文：时冰雪交积，冻死者填满沟堑。不害行哭于道，求其母尸，无所不至。见沟中死人，辄投下捧视，举体冻湿，水浆不入口，号哭不辍声。
现代文：当时冰雪堆积，冻死的人填满了沟壕，殷不害一路上边走边哭，到处寻找母亲的尸体，他找遍了所有的地方，每见到沟里有死人，就跳下去抱起来看看，全身衣服都湿了，冻上了冰，一连找了七天，没喝一口水，哭声不断，才找到了母亲的遗体。
English: At that time, the snow and ice piled up, and the trenches were filled with people who had frozen to death. Yin Yin cried as he walked along the road, looking for his mother's body everywhere. He searched everywhere. Whenever he saw a dead person in the ditch, he jumped down and held it up to see. His whole body and clothes were wet and frozen with ice. He searched for seven days in a row, without drinking a sip of water, and cried constantly, before he found his mother's remains.

古文：如是七日，乃得之。十二月，丙辰，徐世谱、任约退戍巴陵。
现代文：十二月丙辰，徐世谱、任约退守巴陵。
English: In December, Xu Shifu retreated to Baling.

古文：于谨逼帝使为书召王僧辩，帝不可。
现代文：于谨逼迫元帝写信召降王僧辩，元帝拒绝了。
English: He forced Emperor Yuan to write a letter calling for the abdication, but Emperor Yuan refused.

古文：使者曰： 王今岂得自由？ 
现代文：使者说： 你现在还能由得自己吗？ 
English: The messenger said, "Can you help yourself now?

古文：帝曰： 我既不自由，僧辩亦不由我。 
现代文：元帝回答说： 我既然由不得自己，王僧辩也不会听我的了。 
English: Emperor Yuan replied, "Since I can't help myself, Wang Sangye won't listen to me.

古文：又从长孙俭求宫人王氏、苟氏及幼子犀首，俭并还之。
现代文：元帝又向长孙俭要宫人王氏、荀氏和幼子萧犀首，长孙俭都还给了他。
English: Emperor Yuan also demanded the heads of the palace attendants Wang, Zou and the infant Xiao from the eldest grandson Zhen, and the eldest grandson Zhen gave them back to him.

古文：或问： 何意焚书？ 
现代文：有人问元帝： 为什么把书都烧毁？ 
English: Someone asked Emperor Yuan: Why did you burn all the books?

古文：帝曰： 读书万卷，犹有今日，故焚之！ 
现代文：元帝回答： 我读书万卷，还落得今天亡国的结局，所以干脆烧了它！ 
English: Emperor Yuan replied: I have read tens of thousands of books, and I still ended up with today's doom, so I simply burned it!

古文：庚申，齐主北巡，至达速岭，行视山川险要，将起长城。
现代文：庚申，北齐国主高洋到北方边境巡视，到了达速岭一带，边走边察看山川险要情形，准备修筑长城。
English: Goshun, the ruler of Northern Qi, went to Gaoyang to inspect the northern border, and when he arrived at the area around Dazaoling, he walked around and observed the dangerous situation of the mountains and rivers, and prepared to build the Great Wall.

古文：辛未，帝为魏人所杀。
现代文：辛未，元帝被西魏人处死。
English: Xinwei, the former emperor was executed by the West Wei people.

古文：梁王詧遣尚书傅准监刑，以土囊陨之。
现代文：梁王萧派尚书傅准去监刑，用装土的袋子把他压死。
English: Liang Wang Xiao sent Shang Shufu to prison and crushed him to death with a bag of soil.

古文：詧使以布帕缠尸，敛以蒲席，束以白茅，葬于津阳门外。
现代文：萧让人用粗布把尸体缠裹起来，以蒲草织的席子进行收殓，用白茅草牢牢捆住，埋葬在津阳门外。
English: Xiao had the corpse wrapped in a coarse cloth, covered with a bed of rushes, bound tightly with white thatch, and buried outside the Tsuyang Gate.

古文：并杀愍怀太子元良、始安王方略、桂阳王大成等。
现代文：同时把愍怀太子萧元良、始安王萧方略、桂阳王萧大成等都杀了。
English: At the same time, Xiao Yuanliang, the prince of Zhaihaihai, Xiao Fangliang, the king of Shi'an, and Xiao Dacheng, the king of Guiyang, were all killed.

古文：世祖性好书，常令左右读书，昼夜不绝，虽熟睡，卷犹不释，或差误及欺之，帝辄惊寤。
现代文：元帝萧绎天性喜好书，常常让身边人为他读书，昼夜不停地读，虽然睡着了，手里还拿着书卷。如果读错了或有意漏读欺骗他，他就惊醒过来。
English: Emperor Yuan had a natural affinity for books, and often had people around him read to him. He read non-stop day and night, and even when he fell asleep, he still held a book in his hand. If he read it wrong or intentionally omitted it to deceive him, he would wake up.

古文：作文章，援笔立就。常言： 我韬于文士，愧于武夫。 
现代文：他写起文章来，提笔马上就能成篇，平时常说： 我比起文士来更善为文，比起武夫来却有些惭愧。 
English: When he starts to write, he can write an article immediately after picking up the pen. He often says: I am better at writing than a scribe, but I am a little ashamed to be compared to a warrior.

古文：论者以为得言。
现代文：评论他的人认为他这话说得很恰当。
English: His critics thought he was on to something.

古文：魏立梁王詧为梁主，资以荆州之地，延袤三百里，仍取其雍州之地。
现代文：西魏立梁王萧为梁朝的天子，给了他荆州管界内缘江一块狭长的土地，宽不超过三百里，他原来拥有的雍州的土地被夺走了。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty established Liang Wang Xiao as the heavenly son of the Liang Dynasty, and gave him a long and narrow piece of land, not more than three hundred miles wide, on the inner edge of the river in the jurisdiction of Jingzhou. The land he originally owned in Yongzhou was taken away.

古文：詧居江陵东城，魏置防主，将兵居西城，名曰助防，外示助詧备御，内实防之。
现代文：萧住在江陵的东城，西魏在江陵设置城防主将，带兵住在西城，名义上叫做助防，对外表示这是帮助萧备战御敌，其实完全是为了防备萧势力的发展。
English: Xiao lived in the eastern city of Jiangling. The Western Wei Dynasty set up the commander of the city defense in Jiangling and led the soldiers to live in the western city. It was nominally called the auxiliary defense, and it was said to the outside world that this was to help Xiao prepare for war against the enemy. In fact, it was entirely to prevent the development of Xiao's power.

古文：詧曰： 卿此策非不善也，然魏人待我厚，未可背德。若遽为卿计，人将不食吾馀。 
现代文：西魏任命前仪同三司王悦留下镇守江陵。于谨没收了宫廷府库中的珍宝以及刘宋朝铸的浑天仪，梁朝造的铜晷表，直径四尺的大玉和各种法物，把王公以下的百官和挑选出来的百姓男女共几万人全部俘虏去当奴婢，分赏给三军将士，驱赶回长安。
English: Western Wei appointed Qian Yi and Wang Yue, the third secretary, to guard Jiangling. Yu Zhen confiscated the treasures in the palace treasury, as well as the Hun Tian Yi cast by the Liu Song Dynasty, the copper and enamel table made by the Liang Dynasty, the four-foot-diameter large jade and various legal objects, and captured all the hundreds of officials below the prince and the tens of thousands of men and women selected from the people to be slaves and servants, distributed to the three soldiers, and drove them back to Chang'an.

古文：既击阖城长幼被虏，又失襄阳，詧乃叹曰： 恨不用尹德毅之言！ 
现代文：那些幼小体弱的都被杀掉了。有三百余家幸免于死，但被人马踩死、冻死的也有十分之二三。
English: Those small and weak were all killed. More than three hundred families escaped death, but two-thirds of them were trampled to death or froze to death.

古文：王僧辩、陈霸先等共奉江州刺史晋安王方智为太宰，承制。
现代文：王僧辩、陈霸先等人共同侍奉江州刺史晋安王萧方智为太宰，继承梁朝的朝制。
English: Wang Sofen, Chen Baxian and others jointly served Jiangzhou Prince Jinan King Xiao Fangzhi as Dazai, inheriting the imperial system of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：王褒、王克、刘、宗懔、殷不害及尚书右丞吴兴沈烱至长安，太师泰厚礼之。
现代文：王褒、王克、刘、宗懔、殷不害和尚事右丞吴兴人沈炯到了长安，太师宇文泰都给予优厚的礼遇。
English: Wang Bao, Wang Ke, Liu, Zong Yao, Yin harmless monk Wu Xingren and Shen Yao came to Chang'an, and Grand Master Yu Wentai gave them generous courtesy.

古文：泰亲至于谨第，宴劳极欢，赏谨奴婢千口及梁之宝物并雅乐一部，别封新野公；谨固辞，不许。
现代文：宇文泰亲自到于谨府第，设宴尉劳他远征归来，宴会极为盛大，充满欢乐气氛。又赏给于谨一千个奴碑和梁朝的很多宝物，还有一个奏雅乐的班子。另外又封他为新野公。于谨一再推辞，宇文泰不允许。
English: Uwentai himself came to Jigen's residence and held a banquet to welcome him back from his expedition. The banquet was extremely grand and full of joy. In addition, Jigen was given a thousand slave monuments and many treasures of the Liang Dynasty, as well as a group of musicians to play classical music. In addition, he was appointed as the new lord of Nino. When Jigen repeatedly declined, Uwentai did not allow it.

古文：谨自以久居重任，功名既立，欲保优闲，乃上先所乘骏马及所著铠甲等。
现代文：于谨自己认为在朝廷重要职位上呆很久了，功名也建立了，想给自己留点优游闲逸的时间，就献上早先所骑的骏马和所穿的衣甲等。
English: Yu Zhen himself thought that he had been in an important position in the imperial court for a long time, and his reputation had been established. If he wanted to give himself some leisure time, he offered the horse he rode earlier and the coat he wore.

古文：泰识其意，曰： 今巨猾未平，公岂得遽尔独善！ 
现代文：宇文泰识破他想退休的用意，对他说： 现在大敌还未平定，你怎么能突然就独善其身呢？ 
English: Uwentai saw through his intention to retire and said to him: Now that the great enemy has not yet been defeated, how can you suddenly become self-sufficient?

古文：遂不受。是岁，魏秦州刺史章武孝公宇文导卒。
现代文：这一年，西魏秦州刺史章武孝公宇文导去世。
English: In the same year, Wu Xiaogong and Wu Wendu of the Western Wei Qin State died.

古文：魏加益州刺史尉迟迥督六州，通前十八州，自剑阁以南，得承制封拜及黜陟。
现代文：西魏让尉迟迥督管六个州，加上他以前管的十八个州，这样，从剑阁以南的地区内，他可以承受皇帝的旨意自行封官拜将，有任免之权。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty allowed the lieutenant to control six states, in addition to the eighteen states he had previously controlled, so that from the area south of Jiange, he could accept the emperor's will to appoint and dismiss generals.

古文：迥明赏罚，布威恩，绥辑新民，经略未附，华、夷怀之。
现代文：尉迟迥赏罚分明，恩威并用，善于宠抚管理新归附的民众，也善于开疆拓土，使还没归附的地区来归附。因此华人、夷人都感怀他。
English: He was good at pampering and managing the newly annexed people, and was also good at opening up new territories and annexing areas that had not yet been annexed. Therefore, the Chinese and the barbarians were impressed by him.

