古文：民弱国强，民强国弱。故有道之国，务在弱民。
现代文：人民不敢抗拒法律，国家就强，人民敢于触犯法律，国家力量就弱，所以治理得法的国家一定要使人民不敢抗拒法令。
English: The people do not dare to resist the law, the country is strong, the people dare to violate the law, the national strength is weak, so the country governed by law must make the people dare not to resist the law.

古文：朴则强，淫则弱。
现代文：人民朴质，就不敢触犯法律；民众放纵就敢于恣意妄为。
English: If the people are simple, they will not dare to violate the law; if the people are indulgent, they will dare to act arbitrarily.

古文：弱则轨，淫则越志。
现代文：不敢触犯法律就会守法。
English: If you don't dare to break the law, you will abide by the law.

古文：弱则有用，越志则强。
现代文：人民守法，就听众役使；任意而行就不受控制。
English: If the people abide by the law, they will obey the public servants; if they act arbitrarily, they will not be controlled.

古文：故曰：以强去强者，弱；以弱去强者，强。
现代文：所以说采取强民政策以去除不守法的民众国家力量就弱；采用弱民政策以去除不守法的民众，国家力量就强。
English: Therefore, adopting a strong-people policy to remove people who do not abide by the law weakens the power of the state; adopting a weak-people policy to remove people who do not abide by the law strengthens the power of the state.

古文：民，善之则亲，利之用则和。
现代文：民众，国家优待他们，他们就与国家亲近；国家合理地役使他们，他们就与国家同心。
English: People, if the state treats them well, they will be close to the state; if the state serves them reasonably, they will be one with the state.

古文：用则有任，和则匮，有任乃富于政。
现代文：国家起用他们，他们就全力以赴。他们与国家同心，国家就不贫乏；他们全力工作，国家的政令就会取得好的效果。
English: If the state engages them, they will do their best; if they are of one mind with the state, the state will not be impoverished; if they work hard, the state's decrees will achieve good results.

古文：上舍法，任民之所善，故奸多。
现代文：如果国君抛弃法度，放任人民为所欲为，那奸邪就多了。
English: If the sovereign abandons the law and lets the people do as they please, there will be more treachery.

古文：民贫则力富，力富则淫，淫则有虱。
现代文：人民贫穷就会努力致富，致富就会放纵，放纵就会产生如虱虮一样的弊端。
English: If the people are poor, they will strive to become rich, and if they become rich, they will indulge, and indulgence will produce the same drawbacks as a cocoon.

古文：故民富而不用，则使民以食出，各必有力，则农不偷。
现代文：因而人民富裕了就不易役使，那就让他们以粮谷顶替外出服役，使他们每人都出力，那样农民就不怠惰。
English: Therefore, if the people are rich, they are not easy to serve, so let them go out to serve with grain instead of grain, so that everyone can contribute, so that farmers are not lazy.

古文：农不偷，六虱无萌。
现代文：农民不怠惰，六种弊端就不会产生。
English: If farmers are not lazy, the six evils will not occur.

古文：故国富而贫治，重强。
现代文：所以国家富强，人民守法就是强而又强。
English: Therefore, the country is rich and strong, and the people's adherence to the law is strong and strong.

古文：兵易弱难强。
现代文：国家军力往往容易衰弱，难以强大。
English: National military strength is often easily weakened and difficult to strengthen.

古文：民乐生安佚，死难难正，易之则强。
现代文：人们都爱惜生命，贪图安逸，拼死赴国难是以难做到的。
English: People cherish life, yearn for comfort, and work hard to go abroad, which is difficult to achieve.

古文：事有羞，多奸；寡赏，无失。
现代文：若拼死赴国难是不难之事，兵力就是强大的。人民若有羞耻之心，那奸邪就会减少。
English: If you fight to the death to go to the country, it is not difficult, the army is strong. If the people have a sense of shame, then the treachery will decrease.

古文：多奸疑，敌失必，利。
现代文：国家赏罚没有差错，奸邪就会止息。
English: If there is no mistake in the reward and punishment of the state, the evil of treason will cease.

古文：兵至强，威；事无羞，利。
现代文：敌方在这方面有差错，就会对我们有利。
English: If the enemy makes a mistake in this respect, it will be to our advantage.

古文：用兵久处利势，必王。
现代文：兵力强大，就会产生声威，作战不以任何手段为羞耻就利于用兵。
English: A strong military force will generate prestige, and it is advantageous to use soldiers if the war is not shameful by any means.

古文：故兵行敌之所不敢行，强；事兴敌之所羞为，利。
现代文：长时间处于有利形势，一定能称王。所以用兵做到敌人所不敢做的，兵力就强大；做敌人认为可耻的事，国家就有利。
English: If you are in a favorable situation for a long time, you will certainly be able to win. Therefore, if you use soldiers to do what the enemy does not dare to do, the military strength will be strong; if you do something that the enemy considers shameful, the country will be advantageous.

古文：法有，民安其次；主变，事能得齐。
现代文：法度有常，人民才能各守其位；君主随机应变，才能万事成功。
English: When the law is stable, the people can hold their own; when the monarch adapts to the situation, everything can be successful.

古文：国守安，主操权，利。
现代文：国这家有常法国君操纵大权，就有利。
English: It is advantageous for a country to have a French monarch to wield great power.

古文：故主贵多变，国贵少变。
现代文：所以国君以机变之能为贵，国家以稳定为贵。
English: Therefore, it is valuable for the sovereign to take advantage of opportunities for change, and it is valuable for the country to maintain stability.

古文：利出一孔，则国多物；出十孔，则国少物。
现代文：朝廷的利禄出于一个渠道国家的物资就多，出于十个渠道国家的物资就少。
English: The Imperial Court's Li Luo has more materials from one channel country, and fewer materials from ten channel countries.

古文：守一者治，守十者乱。
现代文：坚守用一个渠道，国家就治理严整；坚守十个渠道的，国家就混乱。
English: If you stick to one channel, the country will be well governed; if you stick to ten channels, the country will be chaotic.

古文：治则强，乱则弱。
现代文：国家治理严整就强大，乱就弱。
English: National governance is strong when it is orderly, and weak when it is chaotic.

古文：强则物来，弱则物去。
现代文：强就会出现物资聚集；弱物资就会流散。
English: Strong materials will be gathered; weak materials will be dispersed.

古文：故国致物者强，去物者弱。
现代文：所以国家使物资聚集就强，使物资流散就弱。
English: Therefore, the state is strong when it gathers materials, and weak when it disperses materials.

古文：民，辱则贵爵，弱则尊官，贫则重赏。
现代文：人民地位卑弱就会崇尚爵位，怯弱就会尊敬官吏；贫穷就重视赏赐。
English: If the people's status is low, they will worship the title of nobility; if they are timid, they will respect officials; if they are poor, they will value rewards.

古文：以刑治民，则乐用；以赏战民，则轻死。
现代文：朝廷用刑法统治人民，人民就乐为的用；用赏赐来奖励战争，人民就会轻视死亡。
English: If the imperial court uses criminal law to rule the people, the people will use it for pleasure; if rewards are used to reward war, the people will despise death.

古文：故战事兵用曰强。
现代文：因此临战严整、士兵全力以赴，就叫强。
English: Therefore, when preparing for battle, soldiers should be well-prepared and go all-out, which is called strong.

古文：民有私荣，则贱列卑官；富则轻赏。
现代文：民众有自以为荣的尺度就轻视官爵，鄙视官吏；人民富裕就看不起赏赐。
English: When the people are proud, they despise nobles and officials; when the people are rich, they despise rewards.

古文：治民羞辱以刑，战则战。
现代文：治理民众，以刑法使他们知道何为真正的羞耻，战争时他们才会出战。
English: To govern the people, to teach them by penal laws what shame really is, so that in time of war they will not go to war.

古文：民畏死、事乱而战，故兵农怠而国弱。
现代文：民众贪生怕死，政治纷乱，而去与别国交战，兵众与农民都会怠惰，国家力量就弱。
English: The people are greedy for life and afraid of death, the politics are chaotic, and they go to war with other countries. The soldiers and farmers will be lazy, and the national strength will be weak.

古文：农、商、官三者，国之常食官也。
现代文：农民、商人、官吏，这三种人是国家有经常职业的人。
English: Farmers, merchants, and government officials are the three types of people who have regular employment with the state.

古文：农辟地，商致物，官法民。
现代文：农民耕恳土地，商人贩卖货物，官吏治理人民。
English: Farmers worked the land, merchants sold goods, and officials governed the people.

古文：三官生虱六：曰 岁 ，曰 食 ；曰 美 ，曰 好 ；曰 志 ，曰 行 。
现代文：这三种职业会产生六种虱子：第一是 岁 虱；第二是 食 虱；第三是 美 虱；第四是 好 虱；第五是 志 虱；第六是 行 虱。
English: These three occupations give rise to six kinds of difficulties: the first is old age; the second is food; the third is beauty; the fourth is health; the fifth is ambition; and the sixth is conduct.

古文：六者有朴，必削。
现代文：这六种虱子生了根，国家必定削弱。
English: If these six evils take root, the country will weaken.

古文：农有余食，则薄燕于岁；商有淫利有美好，伤器；官设而不用，志、行为卒。
现代文：农民有了剩余的粮食，于是成年安逸享乐。商人获致了大的利润，贩卖华丽、玩好的物品，于是对于日用必需物品发生了不良的影响。官吏虽然设置了，而不肯为国家出力，思想行为成为国家和人民的病害。
English: Farmers have surplus grain, so they can enjoy life to the full. Merchants have made large profits by selling ornate and playful items, which has had a negative impact on daily necessities. Officials, although established, are unwilling to contribute to the country, and ideological behavior has become a disease of the country and the people.

古文：六虱成俗，兵必大败。
现代文：六种虱子形成风俗，军队出征，必定是大败的。
English: Six kinds of dice form a custom. When the army goes to war, it is bound to be a crushing defeat.

古文：法枉，治乱；任善，言多。
现代文：法度邪曲，统治就要错乱。任用贤良，谈论就要盛行。
English: If the law is perverse, the government will be disorderly. If the appointment is good, the discussion will prevail.

古文：治众，国乱；言多，兵弱。
现代文：治道纷繁，国家就乱。谈论盛行，兵力就弱。
English: The country is in turmoil, the military is weak, and talk is rife.

古文：法明，治省；任力，言息。
现代文：法度明确，治道就会省简。
English: If the laws are clear, the administration of justice will be simplified.

古文：治省，国治；言息，兵强。
现代文：任用力量，谈论就会停止。治道省简，国家就治。谈论停止，兵力就强。
English: If you use force, the talk will stop. If you make the government simple, the country will be governed. If you stop talking, the military will be strong.

古文：故治大，国小；治小，国大。
现代文：所以治道扩大，国土就缩小了；治道缩小，国土就扩大了。
English: Therefore, as the way of governance expands, the country shrinks; as the way of governance shrinks, the country expands.

古文：政作民之所恶，民弱；政作民之所乐，民强。
现代文：政策建立人民所憎恶的东西，人民就弱；政策建立人民所喜欢的东西，人民就强。
English: If a policy establishes what the people hate, the people will be weak; if a policy establishes what the people like, the people will be strong.

古文：民弱，国强；民强，国弱。
现代文：人民弱，国家就强；人民强，国家就弱。
English: When the people are weak, the country is strong; when the people are strong, the country is weak.

古文：故民之所乐民强，民强而强之，兵重弱。
现代文：人民所喜欢的是人民强；如果人民强了，而政策又使他们更强，结果，兵力就弱而又弱了。
English: What the people like is that the people are strong; if the people are strong, and the policy makes them stronger, as a result, the military strength is weak and weak.

古文：民之所乐民强，民强而弱之，兵重强。
现代文：人民所喜欢的是人民强；如果人民强了，而政策又使他们转弱，结果，兵力就强而又强了。
English: What the people like is that the people are strong; if the people are strong and the policy makes them weak, the result is that the military is strong and getting stronger.

古文：故以强，重弱；弱，重强。王。以强政强，弱，弱存；以弱政弱，强，强去。
现代文：所以实行强民的政策，以致兵力弱而又弱，国家就削；实行弱民的政策，以致兵力强而又强，就能成就王业。
English: Therefore, the implementation of the strong people's policy, so that the military force is weak and weak, the country will be reduced; the implementation of the weak people's policy, so that the military force is strong and strong, can achieve the king's cause.

古文：强存则弱，强去则王。故以强政弱，削；以弱政强，王也。
现代文：用强民的政策攻治强民和弱民，强民是仍然存在；用弱民的政策攻治弱民和强民，强民就会消灭。
English: Use the policy of strong people to attack and control strong people and weak people, and strong people will still exist; use the policy of weak people to attack and control weak people and strong people, and strong people will be eliminated.

古文：明主之使其臣也，用必加于功，赏必尽其劳。
现代文：强民存在，国家就弱；强民消灭，就能成就王业。
English: If the strong people exist, the country will be weak; if the strong people are eliminated, the king's business can be accomplished.

古文：人主使其民信此如日月，则无敌矣。
现代文：可见，用强民政策统治强民，国家就会削弱；用弱民政策统治强民，就能成就王业。
English: It can be seen that if the strong people's policy is used to rule the strong people, the country will be weakened; if the weak people's policy is used to rule the strong people, the king's cause will be achieved.

古文：今离娄见秋豪之末，不能以明目易人；乌获举千钧之重，不能以多力易人；圣贤在体性也，不能以相易也。
现代文：明君任用他们的臣下，任命一定要充分体现他的功绩，奖赏一定要及于他的所有功劳。国君使臣民相信这一点就像相信日月运行有规律一样，那样就无敌于天下了。离娄能看到秋毫之末而不能将他的明目给旁人；乌获能举起千钧的重量却不能把他的神力给予旁人。圣贤在才能方面也不能给予旁人。
English: The Ming emperors appointed their vassals, the appointment must fully reflect his merits, and the reward must be equal to all his merits. The sovereign made his subjects believe this, just as he believed that the sun and the moon had regular movements, so that they would be invincible to the world. He could see the end of the autumn and could not give his eyesight to others; he could lift the weight of a thousand cormorants but could not give his divine power to others. The sages could not give others in terms of talent.

古文：今当世之用事者，皆欲为上圣，举法之谓也。
现代文：当今掌握政权的人都想成为圣人，那就要实行法治了。
English: The people in power today want to be saints, so the rule of law must be implemented.

古文：背法而治，此任重道远而无马、牛，济大川而无舡、楫也。
现代文：舍弃法度治理国家好比负得远行而没有牛马，又如想渡过大河而没有船。
English: To govern a country without laws is like trying to cross a river without a boat.

古文：今夫人众兵强，此帝王之大资也，苟非明法以守之也，与危亡为邻。
现代文：一个国家人口多，兵力强是成就帝王之业的大资本，但如不严明法令巩固它，就接近危亡了。
English: A country with a large population and a strong military is a great capital for achieving the emperor's cause, but if it is not consolidated by strict laws and regulations, it is close to peril.

古文：故明主察法，境内之民无辟淫之心，游处之士迫于战阵，万民疾于耕战。
现代文：明君修明法度，使民众没有淫邪的念头，游客处士都自动参加战争，万民都努力于农作和战争。
English: The Ming and Qing dynasties amended laws and regulations so that the people did not have the idea of fornication, the tourist officials all voluntarily participated in the war, and all the people worked hard in farming and war.

古文：有以知其然也。
现代文：国君明白其中的道理。
English: The sovereign understands the reason for this.

古文：楚国之民，齐疾而均，速若飘风；宛钜铁虿，利若蜂虿；胁蛟犀兕，坚若金石；江、汉以为池，汝、颍以为限；隐以邓林，缘以方城。
现代文：楚国的民众行动迅速而统一，行军快如旋风。手持宛如钢铁制成的矛，如蜂蝎的刺一样锋利，身披鲛鱼、犀牛皮制的铠甲像金石一样坚固。又有长江、汉水作护城河，有汝河，颖水作凭借，有邓林作屏障，有方城作要塞。
English: The people of Chu acted quickly and unitedly, marching as fast as a whirlwind. They held spears made of steel, as sharp as the sting of a wasp, and wore armor made of eel and rhinoceros skin, as strong as gold. The Yangtze River and the Han River acted as moats, the Ye River and the Ying River as levees, the Dunlin River as a barrier, and Fangcheng as a fortress.

古文：秦师至，鄢、郢举，若振槁；唐蔑死于垂涉，庄发于内，楚分为五。
现代文：可是秦兵到来，攻下鄢郢如同摧枯拉朽。唐蔑在垂涉战死，庄蹻在国内起义，楚国就一分为五。
English: However, when the Qin soldiers arrived, the capture of Zhai was like wiping out the dead. Tang Zhao was dying in battle, Zhuang Zhao was revolting in the country, and Chu was divided into five.

古文：地非不大也，民非不众也，甲兵财用非不多也；战不胜，守不固，此无法之所生也，释权衡而操轻重者。
现代文：楚国土地不是不广阔，人民不是人众多，兵甲财物不是不充足，而作战却不能取胜，防守不能坚固，这就是不修明法度的结果，如同舍弃权衡的工具而去量轻重一样。
English: The land of Chu is not too vast, the people are not too numerous, the military equipment and property are not insufficient, but the battle cannot be won, and the defense cannot be solid. This is the result of not fixing the laws, just like abandoning the tool of weighing and removing the weight.

