古文：韩傀相韩，严遂重于君，二人相害也。
现代文：韩傀作韩国的相国的时候，严遂也受到韩哀侯的器重，因此两人相互忌恨。
English: When Han Guo served as South Korea's partner country, Yan Sui also received the weight of South Korea's grief, so the two hated each other.

古文：严遂政议直指，举韩傀之过。
现代文：严遂敢于公正地发表议论，曾直言不讳地指责韩傀的过失。
English: Yan Su dared to make a fair comment and bluntly accused Han Kuo of negligence.

古文：韩傀以之叱之于朝。严遂拔剑趋之，以救解。
现代文：韩傀因此在韩廷上怒斥严遂，严遂气得拔剑直刺韩傀，幸而有人阻止才得以排解。
English: As a result, Han Guo angrily rebuked Yan Sui in the courtroom. Yan Sui was so angry that he drew his sword and stabbed Han Guo. Fortunately, someone stopped him before he could resolve the issue.

古文：于是严遂惧诛，亡去游，求人可以报韩傀者。
现代文：从此以后，严遂担心韩傀报复，就逃出韩国，游历国外，四处寻找可以向韩傀报仇的人。
English: After that, fearing revenge from Han Guo, Yan Sui fled South Korea and traveled abroad, looking for someone who could take revenge on Han Guo.

古文：至齐，齐人或言： 軹深井里聂政，勇敢士也，避仇隐于屠者之间。 
现代文：严遂来到齐国，有人对他说： 轵地深井里的聂政，是一个勇敢的侠士，因为躲避仇人才混迹在屠户中间。 
English: When Yan finally arrived in Qi Province, someone said to him: "Yi Zheng, who lives in a deep well in a barren land, is a brave knight, because he can only hide from enemies by mingling with butchers.

古文：严遂阴交于聂政，以意厚之。
现代文：严遂就和聂政暗中交往，以深情厚谊相待。
English: Yan Su secretly interacted with Yan Zheng and treated each other with deep affection and friendship.

古文：聂政问曰： 子欲安用我乎？ 
现代文：聂政问严遂： 您想让我做什么呢？ 
English: Yan Zheng asked Yan Sui: What do you want me to do?

古文：严遂曰： 吾得为役之日浅，事今薄，奚敢有请？ 
现代文：严遂说： 我为您效劳的时间还不长，我们的交情还这样薄，怎么敢对您有所求呢？ 
English: Yan Sui said: I haven't been serving you for long, our friendship is still so thin, how dare I ask you for anything?

古文：于是严遂乃具酒，觞聂政母前。仲子奉黄金百镒，前为聂政母寿。
现代文：于是，严遂就备办了酒席向聂政母亲敬酒，又拿出百镒黄金，为聂政母亲祝寿。
English: As a result, Yan Sui prepared a banquet to toast the mother of Yan Zheng, and took out a hundred ounces of gold to celebrate the birthday of the mother of Yan Zheng.

古文：聂政惊，愈怪其厚，固谢严仲子。
现代文：聂政很吃惊，越发奇怪他何以厚礼相待，就坚决辞谢严遂的赠金，但严遂坚持要赠送。
English: Hao Zheng was very surprised and even more surprised at how graciously he treated him. He firmly thanked Yan Sui for the gift money, but Yan Sui insisted on giving it to him.

古文：仲子固进，而聂政谢曰： 臣有老母，家贫，客游以为狗屠，可旦夕得甘脆以养亲。亲供养备，义不敢当仲子之赐。 
现代文：聂政就推辞说： 我家有老母，生活贫寒，只得离乡背井，做个杀狗的屠夫，现在我能够早晚买些甜美香软的食物来奉养母亲，母亲的供养已经齐备了，就不敢再接受您的赏赐。 
English: Hao Zheng declined, saying: My family has an old mother, living in poverty, and I had to leave my hometown and become a butcher who kills dogs. Now I can buy some sweet and fragrant food sooner or later to support my mother. My mother's support is already complete, so I dare not accept your reward.

古文：严仲子辟人，因为聂政语曰： 臣有仇，而行游诸侯众矣。
现代文：严遂避开周围的人，告诉聂政： 我有仇要报，曾游访过很多诸侯国。
English: He strictly avoided the people around him and told Xizheng: I have a vendetta to report. I have visited many provinces.

古文：然至齐，闻足下义甚高，故直进百金者，特以为夫人粗粝之费，以交足下之欢，岂敢以有求邪？ 
现代文：我来到齐国，听说您很讲义气，所以特地送上百金，只是想作为老夫人粗茶淡饭的费用罢了，同时也让您感到高兴，哪里敢有什么请求呢？ 
English: When I came to Qi Province, I heard that you are very loyal, so I specially sent a hundred gold coins. I just wanted to use it as the cost of the old lady's coarse tea and light meal, and at the same time make you feel happy. Who would dare to ask for anything?

古文：聂政曰： 臣所以降志辱身，居市井者，徒幸而养老母。
现代文：聂政说： 我所以降低志向，辱没身份，隐居于市井之中，只是为了奉养老母。
English: Hao Zheng said: I have lowered my aspirations, humiliated my status, and lived in seclusion in the middle of the city, just to serve as an elderly mother.

古文：老母在，政身未敢以许人也。 
现代文：只要老母还活着，我的生命就不敢轻易托付给别人。 
English: As long as my mother is still alive, I will not easily entrust my life to others.

古文：严仲子固让，聂政竟不肯受。
现代文：严遂坚持让聂政收下赠金，聂政始终不肯接受。
English: Yan Su insisted that Yan Zheng receive the gift money, but Yan Zheng always refused to accept it.

古文：然仲子卒备宾主之礼而去。
现代文：然而严遂还是尽了宾主之礼才离开。
English: However, Yan finally did the courtesy of the guest before leaving.

古文：久之，聂政母死，既葬，除服。
现代文：过了很长时间，聂政的母亲去世了，聂政守孝期满，脱去丧服，感叹地说： 唉！
English: After a long time, Yan Zheng's mother passed away, and when Yan Zheng's term of filial piety expired, he took off his mourning clothes and said with regret: Alas!

古文：聂政曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：我不过是市井平民，动刀杀狗的屠夫，而严遂却是诸侯的卿相。
English: I'm just an ordinary citizen, a butcher who kills dogs with a sword, but Yan Su is a high-ranking courtier.

古文：政乃市井之人，鼓刀以屠，而严仲子乃诸侯卿相也，不远千里，枉车骑而交臣，臣之所以待之至浅鲜矣，未有大功可以称者，而严仲子举百金为亲寿，我虽不受，然是深知政也。夫贤者以感忿睚眦之意，而亲信穷僻之人，而政独安可嘿然而止乎？
现代文：他不远千里，屈驾前来与我结交，我对他太薄情了，没有做出什么可以和他待我相称的事情来，而他却拿百金为我母亲祝寿，我虽然最后没有接受，但这表明他很赏识我聂政啊。贤德的人因为心中的激愤而来亲近穷乡僻壤的人，我怎么能够默然不动呢?
English: He is not thousands of miles away, he stooped down to befriend me. I was too lenient with him and did not do anything to deserve his treatment of me. Instead, he wished my mother a happy birthday with a hundred gold coins. Although I did not accept it in the end, this shows that he appreciates me very much. How can I remain silent when a virtuous person, because of the anger in his heart, comes close to people in the remote countryside?

古文：且前日要政，政徒以老母。
现代文：再说以前他邀请我，我因为母亲还健在，就拒绝了他。
English: Besides, he invited me before, but I turned him down because my mother was still alive.

古文：老母今以天年终，政将为知已者用。 
现代文：如今母亲已享尽天年，我要去为赏识我的人效力了！ 
English: Now that my mother has reached the end of her natural life, I want to work for someone who appreciates me!

古文：遂西至濮阳，见严仲子曰： 前所以不许仲子者，徒以亲在。
现代文：于是聂政往西到了濮阳，见到严遂时说： 以前之所以没有答应您，只是因为母亲还在，如今老母不幸谢世。
English: Therefore, Hao Zheng went west to Fenyang, and when he saw Yan Sui, he said: "The reason why I did not promise you before was only because my mother was still alive, but now my mother has unfortunately passed away.

古文：今亲不幸，仲子所欲报仇者为谁？ 严仲子具告曰： 臣之仇韩相傀。
现代文：请问您想报仇的人是谁？ 严遂将情况一一地告诉聂政： 我的仇人是韩国国相韩傀，他又是韩哀侯的叔父。
English: Who is the person you want to take revenge on, please? Yan Su told Yu Zheng the situation one by one: My enemy is the South Korean State Minister Han Guo, who is also Han Yehu's uncle.

古文：傀又韩君之季父也，宗族盛，兵卫设，臣使人刺之，终莫能就。
现代文：家族很大，守卫设置严密，我曾派人刺杀他，始终没能成功。
English: My family is large, the guards are tight. I sent someone to assassinate him, but he never succeeded.

古文：今足下幸而不弃，请益具车骑壮士，以为羽翼。 
现代文：如今兄弟幸而没有丢下我，让我为你多准备些车马和壮士作为你的助手。 
English: Now that my brother has fortunately not abandoned me, let me prepare more horses and chariots for you, and strong men to help you.

古文：政曰： 韩与卫，中间不远，今杀人之相，相又国君之亲，此其势不可以多人。
现代文：聂政说： 韩国和卫国相隔不远，如今去刺杀韩国的相国，他又是韩侯至亲，这种情况下不能带太多的人去。
English: Hao Zheng said: South Korea and the motherland are not far apart. Now, to assassinate South Korea's partner country, he is also a close relative of Han Hou. In this case, you can't bring too many people.

古文：多人不能无生得失，生得失则语泄，语泄则韩举国而与仲子为雠也，岂不殆哉！ 
现代文：人多了难免会出差错，出了差错就难免会泄露机密，泄露了机密就会使韩国上下与你为敌，那岂不是太危险了吗？ 
English: With so many people, it's inevitable that mistakes will be made. If mistakes are made, it's inevitable that secrets will be leaked. If secrets are leaked, South Korea will turn against you. Isn't that too dangerous?

古文：遂谢车骑人徒，辞，独行仗剑至韩。
现代文：于是聂政谢绝了车马和随从，只身一人去了韩国。
English: As a result, He Zheng refused the carriage, horses, and attendants, and went to Korea alone.

古文：韩适有东孟之会，韩王及相皆在焉，持兵戟而卫者甚众。
现代文：正好韩国在东孟举行盛会，韩侯和相国都在那里，他们身边有许多的侍卫。
English: Just as South Korea held a grand event in Dongmen, Han Hou and his countrymen were there, with many attendants around them.

古文：聂政直入，上阶刺韩傀。
现代文：聂政直冲上台阶刺杀韩傀，韩傀边逃边抱住韩哀侯。
English: Han Zheng rushed up the steps to assassinate Han Guo, while Han Guo ran away and hugged Han Mo Hou.

古文：韩傀走而抱哀侯，聂政刺之，兼中哀侯，左右大乱。
现代文：聂政再刺韩傀，同时也刺中韩哀侯，左右的人一片混乱。
English: Han Zheng then stabbed Han Guo, and at the same time stabbed Han Weihou, and the people on both sides were in chaos.

古文：聂政大呼，所杀者数十人。因自皮面抉眼，自屠出肠，遂以死。
现代文：聂政大吼一声冲上去，杀死了几十人，随后自己用剑划破脸皮，挖出眼珠，又割腹挑肠，就此死去。
English: Hao Zheng roared and rushed to the scene, killing dozens of people. He then slashed his own face with a sword, gouged out his eyeballs, slit his stomach, and died.

古文：韩取聂政尸于市，县购之千金。
现代文：韩国把聂政的尸体摆在街市上，以千金悬购他的姓名。
English: South Korea put his body on the market and offered thousands of dollars for his name.

古文：久之莫知谁子。
现代文：过了很久也没人知道他究竟是谁。
English: For a long time, no one knew who he was.

古文：政姊闻之，曰： 弟至贤，不可爱妾之躯，灭吾弟之名，非弟意也。 
现代文：聂政的姐姐听说这事后，说道： 我弟弟非常贤能，我不能因为吝惜自己的性命，而埋没弟弟的名声，埋没声名，这不是弟弟所想要的。 
English: After hearing about this, Yan Zheng's sister said: My brother is very capable. I can't bury my brother's reputation and fame because I don't want to take my own life. This is not what my brother wanted.

古文：乃之韩。视之曰： 勇哉！
现代文：于是她去了韩国，看着尸体说： 勇士啊！
English: So she went to South Korea, looked at the bodies and said, "What a warrior!"

古文：气矜之隆。
现代文：壮怀激烈！
English: Strong and fierce!

古文：是其轶贲、育而高成荆矣。
现代文：你的行为胜过孟贲、夏育，高过了成荆！
English: Your behavior surpasses that of Mencius and Xia Yu, and is higher than that of Cheng Jing!

古文：今死而无名，父母既殁矣，兄弟无有，此为我故也。
现代文：如今死了却没有留下姓名，父母已不在人世，又没有其他兄弟，你这样做都是为了不牵连我啊。
English: Now you've died without leaving a name, your parents are no longer alive, and you have no other brothers. You're doing all this so as not to implicate me.

古文：夫爱身不扬弟之名，吾不忍也。 
现代文：因为吝惜我的生命而不显扬你的名声，我不忍心这样做！ 
English: I can't bear to do this, since you have spared my life to make your name known!

古文：乃抱尸而哭之曰： 此吾弟轵深井里聂政也。 
现代文：于是就抱住尸体痛哭道： 这是我弟弟轵邑深井里的聂政啊! 
English: So he hugged the corpse and cried bitterly, "This is my brother, Yeongseong, in the deep well of Yeon-eup!"

古文：亦自杀于尸下。
现代文：说完便在聂政的尸体旁自杀而死。
English: After saying this, he committed suicide and died next to Yuanzheng's corpse.

古文：晋、楚、齐、卫闻之曰： 非独政之能，乃其姊者，亦列女也。 
现代文：三晋、楚、齐、卫等国的人听说这件事，都赞叹道： 不单聂政勇敢，就连他的姐姐也是一个刚烈女子！ 
English: When people from the three Jin states, Chu, Qi, Wei and other countries heard about this, they all said with admiration: Not only is Ying Zheng brave, but even his sister is a strong-willed woman!

古文：聂政之所以名施于后世者，其姊不避菹醢之诛，以扬其名也。
现代文：聂政之所以名垂后世，就是因为她姐姐不怕剁成肉酱以显扬他的名声!
English: The reason why Hezheng became famous in later generations is because her sister was not afraid to make mincemeat out of him to show off his fame!

