古文：陶成，字孔思，郁林人。
现代文：陶成，字孔思，郁林人。
English: Tao Cheng, Zi Kong Si, Yu Lin Ren.

古文：永乐中，举于乡，除交阯凤山典史。
现代文：永乐年问，乡试中举，授任交趾凤山典史。
English: Yongle Nianqian, township exam middle school, awarded the title of Koji Fengshan Classic History.

古文：尚书黄福知其贤，命署谅江府教授，交人化之。
现代文：尚书黄福知道他有贤能，任命他代理谅江府教授，交陆人受到教化。
English: Shangshu Huangfu knew that he was capable, and appointed him to be the acting professor of Jiangfu, so that the compatriots could be enlightened.

古文：秩满，迁山东按察司检校，用荐擢大理评事。
现代文：考核期满，迁任山东按察司检校，因人推荐升任大理评辜。
English: At the end of the assessment period, he was transferred to Shandong to be the inspector of the inspection of the school, and was recommended to be promoted to the evaluation of the university.

古文：正统中，以刘中敷荐，超擢浙江佥事。
现代文：正统年问，因刘中敷推荐，破格升任浙江愈事。
English: Due to Liu Zhongshiki's recommendation, he was promoted to the post of Zhejiang Provincial Minister of Health.

古文：成有智略，遇事敢任。
现代文：陶成有智慧谋略，遇事敢承担责任。
English: Tao Cheng has wisdom and strategy, and dares to take responsibility in case of emergency.

古文：倭犯桃渚，成密布钉板海沙中。倭至，舣舟跃上，钉洞足背。
现代文：倭寇侵犯桃渚，陶成在海沙中密集地布满钉板，倭寇到来，船靠岸跳上海滩，钉子穿透脚背。
English: The wokou encroached on Taozhu, and Tao Cheng was densely covered with nail plates in the sea sand. When the wokou arrived, the ship docked and jumped onto the beach, and the nails penetrated the soles of the feet.

古文：倭畏之，远去。
现代文：倭寇害怕，远远离去。
English: The wako got scared and moved far away.

古文：秩满，进副使。
现代文：任期屈满，进任副使。
English: After his term of office expired, he was appointed deputy envoy.

古文：处州贼叶宗留、陈鉴胡、陶得二等寇兰溪，成击斩数百人。
现代文：处州寇贼叶宗留、陈鉴胡、陶得二等侵犯兰溪，陶成袭击斩杀数百人。
English: Ye Zongrui, Chen Jianhu and Tao De, second-class bandits from Wenzhou, invaded Lanxi and attacked and killed hundreds of people.

古文：进屯武义，立木城以守。
现代文：进军屯兵武义，设立木制城防守备。
English: The troops marched into Wuyi and set up a wooden city for defense.

古文：诱贼党为内应，前后斩首数百，生擒百余人。
现代文：引诱寇贼同伙作为内应，前后斩杀数百人，活捉一百多人。
English: He lured the bandit's accomplices as an inside job, killed hundreds of them, and captured more than a hundred alive.

古文：又自抵贼巢，谕降者三千余人。
现代文：又亲自到寇贼据点，告谕劝降三千多人。
English: He also personally went to the strongholds of the bandits and advised more than three thousand people to surrender.

古文：贼势渐衰，惟得二尚在。
现代文：寇贼势力逐渐衰弱，只有陶得二还在。
English: The influence of the bandits gradually weakened, and only Tao Deru still remained.

古文：久之，势复炽，拥众来犯。
现代文：很久以后，势力又强盛了，聚集众人前来侵犯。
English: After a long time, the forces became strong again and gathered many people to invade.

古文：先遣其党十余辈伪为乡民避贼者，以敝缊裹薪，阑入城。
现代文：先派他的同党十几个人伪装成躲避寇贼的乡民，用破旧的衣服裹住木柴，混入城中。
English: He first sent a dozen of his fellow party members to disguise themselves as villagers hiding from the robbers, wrapped firewood in old clothes, and sneaked into the city.

古文：及成出战，贼持薪纵火，焚木城。
现代文：等陶成出城作战，寇贼拿木柴放火，烧毁木制城防。
English: When Tao Cheng left the city to fight, the bandits took firewood and set fire to the wooden city wall.

古文：官军惊溃，成与都指挥佥事崔源战死。
现代文：官军震惊溃败，陶成和都指挥愈事崔源战死。
English: The government army suffered a shocking defeat, and Cui Yuan, the commander of Taocheng and Dadu, died in battle.

古文：时景泰元年五月也。
现代文：当时是景泰元年五月。
English: It was May of the first year of King Taejo's reign.

古文：事闻，赠成左参政，录其子鲁为八品官。
现代文：事情被皇帝知道，追赠陶成左参政，录用他的儿子陶鲁为八品官。
English: The emperor found out about the matter, posthumously made Tao Cheng Zuo a member of the government, and appointed his son Tao Lu as the eighth grade official.

古文：鲁，字自强，荫授新会丞。
现代文：陶鲁，字自强，承袭先人功绩被授予新会丞。
English: Tao Lu, the word self-improvement, inherits the achievements of his predecessors and is awarded the title of New Society President.

古文：当是时，广西瑶流劫高、廉、惠、肇诸府，破城杀吏无虚月。
现代文：当时，广西瑶民流窜抢劫高、廉、惠、肇各府，攻破城池杀害官吏每月不停。
English: At that time, in Guangxi, there was a continuous stream of people robbing high-ranking, low-ranking, favored, and high-ranking prefectures, breaking through the city and killing officials every month.

古文：香山、顺德间，土寇蜂起，新会无赖子群聚应之。
现代文：香山、顺德之间，寇贼蜂起，新会无赖之徒群集响应。
English: Between Xiangshan and Shunde, the bandits revolted, and the ruffians of the New Society responded in droves.

古文：鲁召父老语曰： 贼气吞吾城，不早备且陷，若辈能率子弟捍御乎？ 
现代文：陶鲁召集百姓告诉他们说： 寇贼气势嚣张像要吞掉我们这座城，不早作准备将被攻陷，你们能率领子弟抵御吗？ 都说： 可以。 
English: Tauru called the people together and said to them: "The bandits are growing more and more powerful and are threatening to swallow up our city. If we don't make preparations soon, we will be overrun. Will you be able to lead your children to resist? They all said: Yes."

古文：皆曰 诺 。乃筑堡寨，缮甲兵，练技勇，以孤城捍贼冲。建郭掘濠，布铁蒺藜刺竹于外，城守大固。
现代文：就建筑堡垒寨子，修理兵器，训练技能，培养勇气，以孤城抵挡寇贼的要冲，修建城郭挖掘濠沟，布置铁蒺藜刺竹于城外，城防守卫十分坚固。
English: The construction of the fortress, the repair of weapons, the training of skills, the cultivation of courage, the use of a lonely city to resist the onslaught of robbers, the construction of the city wall, the excavation of the ditch, the arrangement of the iron fence outside the city, and the city defense guard are very strong.

古文：贼来犯，辄击破之。
现代文：寇贼来侵犯，就打垮他们。
English: When bandits come to invade, crush them.

古文：天顺七年，秩满，巡抚叶盛上其绩，就迁知县。
现代文：天顺七年，任职期满，巡抚叶盛上奏他的功绩，升任知县。
English: Tianshun seven years, the expiration of his term of office, the governor Ye Sheng played up his achievements and was promoted to Zhixian.

古文：寻以破贼功，进广州同知，仍知县事。
现代文：不久因打败寇贼的功劳，进升广州同知，仍兼任知县。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of Guangzhou Tongzhi due to his achievements in defeating the bandits, and he still serves as the county magistrate.

古文：成化二年从总督韩雍征大藤峡。
现代文：成化二年，跟从总督韩雍征讨大藤峡。
English: In the second year of Chenghua, he followed Governor Han Yong to conquer Dafuji Gorge.

古文：雍在军严重，独于鲁未尝不虚己。
现代文：韩雍在军中威严郑重，惟独对于陶鲁没有不虚心的。
English: Han Yong was dignified and solemn in the army, but he was not insincere to Tao Lu.

古文：用其策，辄有功。
现代文：采纳他的计策，就会有战功。
English: If you adopt his strategy, you will succeed in the war.

古文：雍请擢鲁为佥事，专治新会、阳江、阳春、泷水、新兴诸县兵。
现代文：韩雍请求升陶鲁为余事，专门管理新会、阳江、阳春、洒水、新兴各县的军队。
English: Han Yong asked Sheng Tao Lu to manage the troops of Xinhui, Yangjiang, Yangchun, Sprinkling and Emerging counties.

古文：其冬会参将王瑛破剧贼廖婆保等于钦、化二州，大获，玺书嘉劳。
现代文：这年冬天，正逢参将王瑛在钦、化二州攻破大盗廖婆保等，大有俘获，皇上命令嘉奖慰劳。
English: In the winter of that year, Wang Ying in Qin and Guanzhou defeated the great thief Liao Baoba, and captured a large number of people. The emperor ordered to reward and console them.

古文：明年，贼首黄公汉等猖獗，偕参将夏鉴等连破之思恩、浔州。
现代文：第二年，寇贼首领黄公汉等猖獗，和参将夏鉴等连续在思恩、浔州打败他们。
English: In the second year, the bandit leader Huang Gonghan and others were rampant, and the general Xia Jian and others continuously defeated them in Sion and Zhangzhou.

古文：未几，贼陷石康，执知县罗绅。
现代文：不久，寇贼攻陷石康，抓走知县罗绅。
English: Soon, the bandits attacked Shikang and captured Zhixian Luo Sheng.

古文：复偕鉴追击至六菊山，败之。
现代文：又和夏鉴追击到六菊山，打败他们。
English: He and Xia Jian also chased them to Liukushan Mountain and defeated them.

古文：两广自韩雍去，罢总督不设，帅臣观望相推诿，寇盗滋蔓。
现代文：两广自韩雍离去后，宠置总督未再设置，大将观望相互推诿，寇贼滋生蔓延。
English: After the departure of the two Guangzhi and Han Yong, the favorite governor was no longer set up, the general watched and pushed each other, and the bandits bred and spread.

古文：鲁奏请重臣仍开府梧州，遂为永制。
现代文：陶鲁上奏请求仍派重臣在梧州设府，于是成为定制。
English: At the request of Tao Lu, he still sent his chief minister to set up a government in Wuzhou, so it became a custom.

古文：秩满，课最，进副使。
现代文：任期屈满，考核最优，进升副使。
English: The term of office is over, the assessment is the best, and the promotion is the deputy envoy.

古文：兵部尚书余子俊奏其抚辑劳，赉银币。
现代文：兵部尚书余子俊上奏他安抚辑和的功劳，奖赏银币。
English: The Minister of Military Affairs, Shangshu Yuzihun, was awarded a silver coin for his contribution to the pacification of Korea.

古文：鲁治兵久。
现代文：陶鲁治理军务很久。
English: Tauru has been in charge of military affairs for a long time.

古文：贼剽两粤，大者会剿，小者专征，所向奏捷。
现代文：寇贼掠夺两粤，大的集中围剿，小的专门征讨，大军所向捷报频传。
English: The bandits plundered the two provinces of Guangdong, large-scale centralized encirclement and suppression, small-scale special requisitioning, and frequent reports of large-scale military operations were sent to Jie.

古文：贼雠之次骨，劫其郁林故居，焚诰命，发先茔，戕其族党。
现代文：寇贼恨之入骨，抢劫他在郁林的故居，烧毁诰令，挖掘祖坟，戕害他的同乡和族人。
English: The robbers hated him to the bone, robbed his former home in Yulin, burned down the imperial edict, dug up the ancestral grave, and killed his fellow townsmen and tribesmen.

古文：鲁闻大恸。
现代文：陶鲁听了十分悲恸。
English: Tauru was very sad to hear this.

古文：诏徙籍广东，补给封诰，慰劳有加，益奋志讨贼。
现代文：下诏将户籍迁到广东，补发诰书，加倍慰问，陶鲁更加立志讨伐寇贼。
English: The next edict moved the household registration to Guangdong, issued a supplementary letter of condolence, doubled the condolences, and Tao Lu was even more determined to fight the bandits.

古文：二十年，以征荔浦瑶功，增俸一级。
现代文：二十年，因征伐荔浦瑶立功，增加俸禄一级。
English: In the past 20 years, he has increased his salary by one grade because of his distinguished service in the conquest of Lippur.

古文：又九载，课最，进湖广按察使，治兵两广如故。
现代文：又过了九年，考核最优，进升为塑堕按察使，管理两广军务还像以前一样。
English: After another nine years, the assessment was the best, and he was promoted to the post of inspector, and the management of the two military affairs was still the same as before.

古文：郁林、陆川贼黄公定、胡公明等为乱，与参将欧磐分五路进讨，大破之，毁贼巢一百三十。
现代文：郁林、陆川寇贼黄公定、胡公明等作乱，和参将欧盘分五路进攻征讨，大败寇贼，捣毁贼窝一百三十处。
English: Yulin, Lu Chuan bandits Huang Gongding, Hu Gongming and others made a disturbance, and divided the attack and conquest into five ways with General Eu Pan, defeated the bandits, and destroyed one hundred and thirty thieves' dens.

古文：弘治四年，总督秦纮遣平德庆瑶，进湖广右布政使。
现代文：弘治四年，总督秦弦派陶鲁平定德庆瑶，进升为湖广右布政使。
English: In the fourth year of the Hongzhi era, Governor Qin Zhen sent Tao Lu Ping Ding De Qing Qi to be promoted to the post of the political envoy to Hubei.

古文：鲁言身居两广，而官以湖广为名，于事体非便，乃改湖广左布政使兼广东按察副使，领岭西道事。
现代文：陶鲁说身居两广，雨官职以湖广为名，对事务不便利，就改任湖广左布政使兼任广东按察副使，管理岭西道事务。
English: Tauru said that he lived in the two provinces, and the post of rain officer was named after Hukang, which was not convenient for affairs. He was reassigned as the political envoy of Hukangzabo and concurrently served as the deputy envoy of Guangdong Azecha to manage the affairs of Lingxi Road.

古文：人称之为 三广公 。
现代文：人们称他为 三广公 。
English: People call him the Three Generals.

古文：十一年，总督邓廷瓒请官其子，俾统鲁所募健卒备征讨。
现代文：十一年，总督邓廷瓒请求授官给陶鲁的儿子，让他统领陶鲁所招募的精兵准备征讨。
English: In the eleventh year, Governor Deng Tingyao requested that Tauru's son be given an official post, so that he could lead the elite soldiers recruited by Tauru to prepare for the campaign.

古文：乃授其子荆民锦衣百户。
现代文：于是授予他儿子陶剂民锦农百户。
English: As a result, his son was awarded the 100 households of pottery, porcelain and damask farmers.

古文：是年，鲁卒。
现代文：这年，陶鲁去世。
English: This year, Tauru passed away.

古文：荆民复陈父功，遂进副千户，世袭。
现代文：陶剂民又陈述父亲功绩，就进升副千户，世代承袭。
English: The potters also reported their father's achievements, and they were promoted to the second thousand households, which was inherited by generations.

古文：鲁善抚士，多智计，谋定后战。
现代文：陶鲁善于安抚士卒，足智多谋，计谋确定后再战。
English: Tao Lu is good at pacifying his soldiers, resourceful and resourceful, and will fight again after the plan is determined.

古文：凿池公署后，为亭其中，不置桥。
现代文：在官署后开凿水池，在水池中建造亭子，不设桥梁。
English: A pool will be dug behind the government office, and a pavilion will be built in the pool, but no bridge will be built.

古文：夜则召部下计事。
现代文：夜里就召集部下议事。
English: He would call his subordinates together in the middle of the night.

古文：以版度一人，语毕，令退。
现代文：用木板渡过一人，说完，命令退回。
English: He used a wooden board to pass one person, and then ordered them to go back.

古文：如是凡数人，乃择其长而参伍用之，故常得胜算而机不泄。
现代文：像这样总共数人，选择他们的长处而综合使用，所以常常得胜而机密不泄露。
English: A total of a few people like this, choose their strengths and use them in combination, so they often win and secrets are not revealed.

古文：羽书狎至，戎装宿戒，声色不动。
现代文：密报交替传来，身着军装，整夜戒备，不动声色。
English: Confidential reports came in and out. Dressed in military uniform, he was on the alert all night and did not move.

古文：审贼可乘，潜师出城，中夜合围，晓辄奏凯。
现代文：审视寇贼有机可乘，秘密派兵出城，半夜包围，早上就报捷。
English: Examine whether the bandits can take advantage of the situation, secretly send troops out of the city, surround them in the middle of the night, and report success in the morning.

古文：贼善侦，终不能得要领。
现代文：寇贼善于侦察，始终不能得知他的要领。
English: The robbers are good at reconnaissance, but they are never able to get to the bottom of him.

古文：历官四十五年，始终不离兵事。
现代文：任官四十五年，始终没有脱离军务。
English: After forty-five years of service, he has never left the military.

古文：大小数十战，凡斩馘二万一千四百有奇，夺还被掠及抚安复业者十三万七千有奇，两广人倚之如长城。
现代文：大小数十战，共斩杀二万一千四百多人，夺回被劫掠的人和安抚恢复产业的人十三万七千多，两广人倚仗他如像依靠长城。
English: He fought dozens of wars, large and small, and killed more than 21,400 people in total. He recovered the plundered people and pacified and restored the property of more than 137,000 people. The two peoples relied on him as if they were relying on the Great Wall.

古文：然鲁将兵不专尚武，尝言： 治寇贼，化之为先，不得已始杀之耳。 
现代文：然而陶鲁率兵不专一崇尚武力，曾经说： 治理寇贼，教化他们第一，不得已纔杀他们。 
English: However, Tauru and his soldiers did not exclusively advocate the use of force. He once said: "Govern the bandits, educate them first, and if necessary, kill them."

古文：每平贼，率置县建学以兴教化。
现代文：每次平定寇贼，率先设县建学校来开启教化。
English: Each time the bandits were subdued, the county took the lead in setting up a school to start the indoctrination.

古文：鲁初为丞，年才弱冠，知县王重勉之学。
现代文：陶鲁刚任丞时，年龄纔二十岁，知县王重勉励他学习。
English: When Tao Lugang was appointed as chancellor, he was 20 years old. Wang Chong from Zhixian County encouraged him to study.

古文：重故老儒，鲁遂请执弟子礼。
现代文：王重是过去资深年长的儒者，陶鲁就请行弟子礼节。
English: Wang Chung was a senior Confucian in the past, and Tao Lu asked him to behave like a disciple.

古文：每晨，授经史讲解而后视事。
现代文：每天早晨，教授经史讲解后纔办理公事。
English: Every morning, after the professor's lecture on history, I go about my business.

古文：后重卒官，鲁执丧如父礼，且资其二子。
现代文：后来王重死在任上，陶鲁服丧如同对父亲的礼节，并且资助他的两个儿子。
English: Later, when Wang Chong died in office, Tao Lu attended the funeral as a courtesy to his father, and supported his two sons.

古文：又敬事名儒陈献章，献章亦重之。
现代文：又恭敬地事奉名儒陈献章，陈献章也器重他。
English: He also respectfully served the name of Confucius and Chen Xizhang, and Chen Xizhang also respected him.

古文：宋陆秀夫、张世杰尽节崖山，未有庙祀，特为建祠，请祠额，赐名大忠。
现代文：宋陆秀夫、张世杰在崖山为节操献身，没有宗庙祭祀，陶鲁特地为他们建立祠堂，请求皇上赐题祠堂匾頟，赐名大忠。
English: Song Lu Hsiu-fu and Zhang Shijie dedicated their lives for the festival on the cliff, and there was no ancestral temple for them. They built a shrine for them in Taolu, and asked the emperor to bestow the title of the shrine and the name of Dazhong.

古文：嘉靖初，鲁殁三十载矣，新会人思其德，颂于朝，赐祠祀之。
现代文：嘉靖初年，陶鲁去世三十年了，新会人怀念他的德行，向朝廷称颂，赐建祠堂祭祀他。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, it had been 30 years since the death of Tao Lu. The members of the New Association remembered his virtues, praised him to the imperial court, and were granted permission to build an ancestral hall to worship him.

古文：陈敏，陕西华亭人。
现代文：陈敏，陕西华亭人。
English: Chen Min, from Huating, Shaanxi Province.

古文：宣德时，为四川茂州知州。
现代文：宣德年间，任四川茂州知州。
English: During the Xuande era, he served as the governor of Chizhou in Shoushou, Sichuan.

古文：遭丧去官，所部诸长官司及番民百八十人诣阙奏言： 州僻处边徼万山中，与松藩、叠溪诸番邻，岁被其患。
现代文：遭遇丧事离职，所管各长官司和番民一百八十多人上朝上奏说： 茂州偏处于边境万山之中，和松潘、晷溪各番族相邻，每年遭受他们的侵害。
English: After being relieved of their duties due to a death, more than 180 people, including the heads of various government agencies and their subordinates, made a report to the emperor, saying: "Maushou is located in the middle of the border mountains, adjacent to the Songpan and Qixi tribes, and suffers from their encroachments every year.

古文：自敏莅州，抚驭有方，民得安业。
现代文：自从陈敏来到茂州，安抚治理有方，百姓得以安居乐业。
English: Since Chen Min came to Maozhou, the pacification and governance have been effective, and the people have been able to live and work in peace.

古文：今以忧去职，军民失所依。
现代文：如今因服丧离职，军民失去依靠。
English: Now that they have left the service due to death, the military and civilians have lost their support.

古文：乞矜念远方，还此良牧。 
现代文：请求怜悯顾念远方，归还这样的好官。 
English: Plead for mercy, think of the distant lands, and return such a good official.

古文：帝立报可。
现代文：皇帝立即回复可以。
English: The emperor can reply immediately.

古文：正统中，九载满，军民复请留。
现代文：正统年间，九年屈满，军民又请求留任。
English: During the years of orthodoxy, after nine years of submission, the military and the people again requested to remain in office.

古文：进成都府同知，视茂州事。
现代文：进升为成都府同知，管理茂州事务。
English: He was promoted to Chengdu prefectural comrade-in-arms and managed the affairs of Maozhou.

古文：都司徐甫言，敏及指挥孙敬在职公勤，群番信服。
现代文：都司徐甫上言说，陈敏和指挥孙敬任职公正勤奋，各番族信任服从。
English: Mayor Xu Fu said that Chen Min and commander Sun Jing were fair and diligent in their duties, and all ethnic groups trusted and obeyed them.

古文：章下都御史王翱等核实，进敏右参议，仍视州事。
现代文：奏章下给都御史王翱等核实，进升陈敏为右参议，仍管理茂州事务。
English: Under the report, it was verified by the Metropolitan Wang Xi and others, and Chen Min, who was promoted to the Right Counselor, still managed the affairs of Mengzhou.

古文：以监司秩莅州，前此未有也。
现代文：以监司品位任知州，前所未有。
English: Appointed to Chizhou with the rank of superintendent, unprecedented.

古文：黑虎寨番掠近境，为官军所获。
现代文：黑虎寨番入侵掠边境，被官军抓获。
English: Black Tiger Zhaiban invaded and plundered the border, and was captured by the government army.

古文：敏从其俗，与誓而遣之。
现代文：陈敏依从他们的风俗，和他盟誓后放了他。
English: Chen Min followed their custom and swore an oath to him before releasing him.

古文：既复出掠，为巡按御史陈员韬所劾。
现代文：不久又出来抢掠，被巡按御史陈员韬弹劾。
English: He soon went out to loot again, and was impeached by the inspector-general of history, Chen Junjun.

古文：诏贳之。
现代文：下诏宽恕他。
English: I hereby pardon him.

古文：提督都御史寇深器其才，言敏往来抚恤番人，赞理军政，乞别除知州，俾敏专戎务。
现代文：提督都御史寇深器重他的才能，上言说陈敏往来抚恤番人，代理军政，请求另外除授知州，使陈敏专一治理军务。
English: Admiral Duke Shikoh deeply valued his talent. He said that Chen Min was the patron of military affairs and the agent of military affairs. He requested that Zhouzhi Province be excluded and that Chen Min be appointed to manage military affairs.

古文：吏部以敏莅茂久，别除恐未悉番情，猝难驯服，宜增设同知一人佐之。
现代文：吏部认为陈敏在茂州时间久，另外任命恐怕不熟悉番族情况，仓猝难以驯服，应增设一位同知辅佐他。
English: The cadre department thought that Chen Min had been in Maozhou for a long time, and he was probably not familiar with the situation of the tributaries, and it was difficult to tame his haste. An assistant should be added to him.

古文：报可。
现代文：皇帝回复可以。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：敏既以参议治州，其体俪监司。遂劾按察使陈泰无故杖死番人。
现代文：陈敏以参议管理州事之后，他的身份就和监司相比配，于是弹劾按察使陈泰无故用棒打死番人。
English: After Chen Min managed state affairs as a councillor, his status was compared to that of a supervisor, so the impeachment inspector Chen Tai beat the guard to death with a stick for no reason.

古文：泰亦讦敏，帝不问。而泰下狱论罪。
现代文：陈泰也揭发陈敏，皇帝不过问，而陈泰入狱定罪。
English: Chen Tai also exposed Chen Min, but the emperor did not ask questions, and Chen Tai was sentenced to prison.

古文：景泰改元，参议满九载，进右参政，视州事如前。
现代文：景泰元年，参议任满九年，进升为右参政，管理州事同以前一样。
English: In the first year of Jingtai, after nine years as a councilor, he was promoted to the right to participate in politics, and managed state affairs as before.

古文：莅州二十余年，威信大行，番民胥悦。
现代文：到州二十多年，威信很高，番民都很高兴。
English: After more than 20 years in the state, the prestige is very high, and the followers are very happy.

古文：秩渐高，诸监司郡守反位其下，同事多忌之者。
现代文：职位逐渐升高，众监司郡守反而位居他的下面，同事多有忌妒他的。
English: As his position gradually rose, the supervisors and county supervisors ranked below him, and many of his colleagues envied him.

古文：为按察使张淑所劾，罢去。
现代文：被技察使张淑弹劾，罢免离职。
English: Zhang Shu was impeached by the technical inspector and removed from office.

古文：丁瑄，不知何许人。
现代文：工管，不知道是哪里的人。
English: Administration, I don't know who it is.

古文：正统间为御史。
现代文：正统年间任御史。
English: He held the post of Imperial Historian during the period of orthodoxy.

古文：初，福建多矿盗，命御史柳华捕之。
现代文：当初，福建多有盗矿的人，命令御史柳华逮捕他们。
English: At first, many people in Fujian stole minerals, and the governor ordered Liu Hua to arrest them.

古文：华令村聚皆置望楼，编民为甲，择其豪为长，得自置兵仗，督民巡徼。
现代文：柳华命令村落都设置望楼，把百姓编为甲兵，选择其中豪勇的为头领，准许自己置办兵器，督令百姓巡查。
English: Liu Hua ordered the villages to set up watchtowers, organized the people into armored soldiers, selected the most courageous of them as the leader, allowed himself to purchase weapons, and ordered the people to patrol.

古文：沙县佃人邓茂七素无赖，既为甲长，益以气役属乡民。
现代文：沙县佃户邓茂七一向无赖，成为甲长之后，更加依恃气势役使乡民。
English: Deng Maoqi of Seto, Sha County, was always a scoundrel. After he became the A-level chief, he became more attached to the villagers.

古文：其俗佃人输租外，例馈田主。
现代文：当地风俗，佃户纳租以外，照例要偿赠田主。
English: According to local custom, in addition to the rent paid by the tenant, the landowner should be compensated as usual.

古文：茂七倡其党令毋馈，而田主自往受粟。
现代文：邓茂七号召他的同伙叫他们不要馋赠，而要田主自己去接受粟米。
English: Deng Shouqi called on his colleagues to tell them not to accept gifts, but to ask the farmers themselves to accept the corn.

古文：田主诉于县，县逮茂七，不赴。
现代文：田主诉讼到县里，县里逮捕邓茂七。
English: The farmer's lawsuit went to the county, and the county arrested Deng Shouqi.

古文：下巡检追摄，茂七杀弓兵数人。
现代文：邓茂七不去投案。下令巡检追捕，邓茂七杀死弓兵多人。
English: Deng Shouqi did not give in. He ordered a patrol to hunt them down, and Deng Shouqi killed many archers.

古文：上官闻，遣军三百捕之。
现代文：上司听说，派军队三百人追捕他。
English: His boss heard about it and sent 300 soldiers to hunt him down.

古文：被杀伤几尽，巡检及知县并遇害。
现代文：几乎全被杀死杀伤，巡检和知县都遇害。
English: Almost all of them were killed or injured, including the patrol inspector and the magistrate.

古文：茂七遂大剽略，伪称 铲平王 ，设官属，党数万人，陷二十余县。
现代文：邓茂于是大肆劫掠，伪称为铲平王，设置官吏。同党敷万人，攻陷二十多个县。
English: Deng Mao then went on a rampage of looting and pillaging, falsely claiming to be the king of shoveling and setting up officials. He and his party employed tens of thousands of people and conquered more than twenty counties.

古文：都指挥范真、指挥彭玺等先后被杀。
现代文：都指挥范真、指挥彭玺等先后被杀害。
English: The city's commanding officer, Fan Zhen, and commanding officer, Peng Yao, were killed successively.

古文：时福建参政交阯人宋新，贿王振得迁左布政使，侵渔贪恶，民不能堪，益相率从乱。东南骚动。
现代文：当时福建参政交趾人宋新，贿赂王振得以升任左布政使，侵夺贪婪，人民不能忍受，也相继跟随作乱，东南骚动。
English: At that time, Song Xin, a Fujian political crony, bribed Wang Zhenru to be promoted to the post of Zuo Bu political envoy. The people could not bear the greed of usurpation. They also followed the unrest and the Southeast riot.

古文：十三年四月，茂七围延平。
现代文：十三年四月，邓茂七围攻延平。
English: In April of the thirteenth year, Deng Mao attacked Yanping in seven sieges.

古文：刷卷御史张海登城抚谕。
现代文：刷卷御史张海登上城楼安抚晓谕。
English: Zhang Hai, the brush scroll historian, ascended the castle to appease the oracle.

古文：贼诉乞贳死，免三年徭役，即解散为良民。
现代文：寇贼申诉请求免死，免除三年徭役，就解散成为良民。
English: The robbers appealed and requested to be exempted from death, exempted from three years of forced labor, and then disbanded to become good people.

古文：海以闻。
现代文：张海以此上报。
English: Zhang Hai reported this.

古文：命瑄往招讨，以都督刘聚、佥都御史张楷大军继其后。
现代文：命令丁坛前去招降征讨，让都督刘聚、愈都御史张楷的大部队紧随其后。
English: He ordered Ding Tan to go forward to recruit and recruit, and let the governor Liu Ju and the governor Zhang Kai's large army follow closely behind.

古文：瑄既至，先令人赍敕往抚。
现代文：丁坛到了以后，先令人拿着诏书去招抚。
English: After the altar arrived, people were first invited to hold the imperial edict and caress it.

古文：茂七不肯降，瑄驰赴沙县图之。
现代文：邓茂七不肯投降，丁坛急奔至沙县对付。
English: Deng Shouqi refused to surrender, and Ding Tan rushed to Shaxian County to deal with him.

古文：贼首林宗政等万余人攻后坪，欲立寨。
现代文：寇贼首领林宗政等一万多人攻打篷丝，想建立营寨。
English: More than ten thousand people, including the leader of the bandits, Lin Zongzheng, attacked the tents and tried to build a camp.

古文：瑄令通判倪冕等率众先据要害，而身与都指挥雍埜等邀其归路，斩贼二百余级，获其渠陈阿岩。
现代文：丁瑝命令通判倪冕等率领众人先占据要地，而亲自和都指挥雍堃等截断他们的退路，斩杀寇贼二百多人，捕获他们的首领陈阿岩。
English: Ding Xi ordered Tong Zhan, Ni Guanyin and others to lead the people to occupy the important places first, and personally and with the command of Yong Xi and others to cut off their escape route, kill more than two hundred bandits, and capture their leader Chen Ayan.

古文：明年二月，瑄诱贼复攻延平，督众军分道冲击。
现代文：第二年二月，丁坛引诱寇贼再次攻打延平，督令各军分路冲击。
English: In February of the following year, Ding Tan lured the bandits to attack Yanping again, and ordered the armies to attack separately.

古文：贼大败，遁走，指挥刘福追之，遂斩茂七，招胁从复业。
现代文：寇贼大败，逃跑。指挥刘福追击他们，于是斩杀邓茂七，招降胁从的人恢复生产。
English: The bandits were defeated and fled. Commander Liu Fu chased after them, then killed Deng Shouqi, and recruited subordinates to resume production.

古文：未几，复擒其党林子得等。
现代文：不久，又捕获他的同党林子得等。
English: Soon after, his fellow party member, Lin Ziguo, was also captured.

古文：尤溪贼首郑永祖率四千人攻延平。
现代文：尤溪寇贼首领郑永祖率领四千人进攻延平。
English: The leader of the Youxi bandits, Zheng Yongzu, led four thousand people to attack Yanping.

古文：瑄偕埜等邀击，擒之，斩首五百有奇，余党溃散。
现代文：丁管和雍婪等拦击，擒获了他，斩首五百多人，余下的同党溃败逃散。
English: He was intercepted by Ding Guan and Yang Kui, who captured him, beheaded more than 500 people, and the remaining members of the same party fled in defeat.

古文：楷之监大军讨贼也，至建宁顿不进，日置酒赋诗为乐。
现代文：张楷督促大部队讨伐寇贼，到建宁就屯兵不前，每天置办酒席赋诗作乐。
English: Zhang Kai urged the large army to fight against the bandits, and when he arrived in Jianning, the soldiers did not advance. Every day, he set up a banquet to make poetry and music.

古文：闻瑄破贼，则驰至延平攘其功。
现代文：听说丁埴擎破寇贼，就急奔到延平窃取功劳。
English: Hearing that Ding Bingjing had defeated the bandits, he rushed to Yanping to steal the credit.

古文：瑄被胁依违具奏。
现代文：丁管被胁迫顺着他写了奏章。
English: Ting Guan was coerced into following him and wrote the score.

古文：福不能平，诉之。
现代文：刘福不平，告癸了他。
English: Liu Fu complained and denounced him.

古文：诏责瑄具状。
现代文：下诏责令丁坛报告情况。
English: issued an edict ordering Ding Tan to report the situation.

古文：楷等皆获罪。瑄有功不问，功亦竟不录。
现代文：张楷等都获罪，丁琼有功不问罪，功劳也不记录。
English: Zhang Kai and others were all found guilty, but Ding Qiong was not charged with any crime, and his merits were not recorded.

古文：茂七虽死，其从子伯孙等复炽。
现代文：邓茂七虽然死了，他的侄子邓伯孙等又兴起。
English: Although Deng Shoushi died, his nephew Deng Buxun and others rose again.

古文：朝廷更遣陈懋等以大军讨，瑄乃还朝。
现代文：朝廷另派陈懋等带大部队征讨，丁埴于是返回朝廷。
English: In addition, the imperial court sent Chen Xi and other officials with a large force to collect taxes. Ding Xi then returned to the imperial court.

古文：景泰初，出为广东副使，卒。
现代文：景泰初年，出任广东副使，去世。
English: Jing Tai died in his first year as deputy envoy to Guangdong.

古文：当是时，浙、闽盗所在剽掠为民患。
现代文：当时，浙、闽寇盗到处劫掠成为人民的祸患。
English: At that time, the bandits from Zhejiang and Shandong became the scourge of the people as they plundered everywhere.

古文：将帅率玩寇，而文吏励民兵拒贼，往往多斩获。
现代文：将帅都消极抗敌，而文官激励民兵抗拒寇贼，往往多有斩杀捕获。
English: Generals were passive in resisting the enemy, while civilian officials encouraged the militias to resist the bandits, often resulting in death or capture.

古文：闽则有张瑛、王得仁之属。
现代文：闽则有张瑛、王得仁等人。
English: On the other hand, there are Zhang Ying, Wang Deren and others.

古文：浙江则金华知府石瑁擒遂昌贼苏才于兰溪。处州知府张佑击败贼众，擒斩千余人。
现代文：浙江则有金华知府石瑁擒获遂昌寇贼苏才于兰溪，处州知府张佑击败贼人众多，擒获斩杀一千多人。
English: In Zhejiang, the governor of Jinhua prefecture, Shijie, captured Suichang bandit Su Cai in Lanxi, and the governor of Zhouzhou prefecture, Zhang You, defeated many bandits and captured and killed more than a thousand people.

古文：于是帝降敕，数诘让诸将帅。
现代文：于是皇帝下诏书，多次斥责众将帅。
English: As a result, the emperor issued an imperial edict and repeatedly reprimanded the generals.

古文：都指挥邓安等因归咎于前御史柳华。
现代文：都指挥邓安等于是把遇错推给前任御史柳华。
English: Deng An, the commander of the capital, is equivalent to pushing the mistake to his predecessor, Mishi Liuhua.

古文：时王振方欲杀朝士威众，命逮华。
现代文：当时王振正想杀朝臣威吓众人，命令逮捕柳华。
English: At that time, Wang Zhen was trying to kill the courtier to intimidate everyone and ordered the arrest of Liu Hua.

古文：华已出为山东副使，闻命，仰药死。
现代文：柳华已出任山东副使，听到命令，服毒药自尽。
English: Liu Hua, who had been appointed deputy envoy to Shandong Province, heard the order and took poison to commit suicide.

古文：诏籍其家，男戍边，妇女没入浣衣局。
现代文：下诏取消他家官籍，男的戍边，妇女收入浣衣局。
English: The next edict was to cancel his family's official registration, the man's frill, the woman's income, and the clothing bureau.

古文：而御史汪澄、柴文显亦以是得罪。
现代文：而御史汪澄、柴文显也因此获罪。
English: As a result, Wangchen and Chai Wenxian were also found guilty.

古文：初，澄按福建，以茂七乱，檄浙江、江西会讨。
现代文：当初，汪澄巡按福建，因邓茂七作乱，征召浙江、江西集中讨伐。
English: At first, Wang Cheng made a tour of Fujian, but because of Deng Shouqi's rebellion, he was conscripted to fight in Zhejiang and Jiangxi.

古文：寻以贼方议降，止兵毋进。
现代文：不久因寇贼正商议投降，停止部队不前进。
English: Soon, as the bandits were negotiating their surrender, the troops stopped advancing.

古文：既知贼无降意，复趣进兵，而贼已不可制。
现代文：等知道寇贼没有投降的意思，再催促进兵，而寇贼已经不能控制。
English: After knowing that the bandits had no intention of surrendering, they called for reinforcements, but the bandits were already out of control.

古文：浙江巡按御史黄英恐得罪，具白澄止兵状，兵部因劾澄失机。
现代文：浙江巡按御史黄英恐怕获罪，全部上奏汪澄停止部队不进的情况，兵部于是弹劾汪澄失去战机。
English: Huang Ying, the inspector-general of Zhejiang Province, is likely to be found guilty, all reported to Wang Cheng to stop the situation of troops not advancing, and the military department then impeached Wang Cheng for losing a fighter plane.

古文：福建三司亦言，贼初起，按臣柴文显匿不奏，酿成今患。
现代文：福建三司也上言，寇贼刚开始兴起，按臣柴文显隐藏不上奏，酿成今天的祸患。
English: The Fujian Three Departments also said that the bandits had just begun to rise, and the minister Chai Wenxian could not hide and play, leading to today's disaster.

古文：遂俱下吏。
现代文：于是都下狱。
English: So they all went to prison.

古文：狱成，诏磔文显，籍其家。澄弃市。
现代文：审讯结束，下韶柴文显分尸，没收他的家产，汪澄死刑。
English: At the end of the trial, the lower court dismembered the body of Chai Wenxian, confiscated his family property, and sentenced Wangcheng to death.

古文：而宋新及按察使方册等十人俱坐斩。
现代文：而宋新和按察使方册等十人都定罪斩首。
English: However, ten people including Song Xin and Fang Zhao, the inspector, were convicted and beheaded.

古文：遇赦，谪驿丞。
现代文：遇到赦免，谪降为驿丞。
English: When he was pardoned, he was demoted to the rank of lieutenant colonel.

古文：天顺初，复官。
现代文：天顺初年，恢复官位。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, he resumed his official position.

古文：论者谓华所建置未为过，澄、文显罪不至死。
现代文：评论的人说柳华的处置没有过错，汪澄、柴文显罪不当死。
English: Commentators said that there was no fault in Liu Hua's treatment, and that Wang Cheng and Chai Wenxian were guilty of wrongful death.

古文：武将不能灭贼，反罪文吏。华、文显至与叛逆同科，失刑实由王振云。
现代文：武将不能够消灭寇贼，反而归罪于文官，柳华、柴文显和叛贼同罪，量刑不当实际是由于王振的缘故。
English: The military commanders were unable to eliminate the bandits, but instead blamed the civilian officials, Liu Hua, Chai Wenxian and the traitors for the same crime. The improper sentencing was actually due to Wang Zhen.

古文：华，吴县人。
现代文：柳华，昊县人。
English: Liu Hua, from Hao County.

古文：文显，浙江建德人。
现代文：柴文显，浙江建德人。
English: Chai Wenxian, Zhejiang Jian De Ren.

古文：澄仁和人。
现代文：汪澄，仁和人。
English: Wang Cheng, Ren He Ren.

古文：王得仁，名仁，以字行，新建人。
现代文：壬得仁，名仁，以字行世，新建人。
English: Ren Deren, Ren Ren, go through life as a character, and become a new person.

古文：本谢姓，父避仇外家，因冒王氏。
现代文：本姓谢，父亲躲避仇人到母亲娘家，因而改姓王。
English: Originally surnamed Xie, his father hid from the enemy at his mother's house and changed his surname to Wang.

古文：得仁五岁丧母，哀号如成人。
现代文：王得仁五岁丧母，悲哀号哭如同成人。
English: Wang Deren was five years old when his mother died. He cried out in grief like an adult.

古文：初为卫吏，以才荐授汀州府经历。
现代文：刚开始任卫吏，因有才被推荐授任汀州府经历。
English: At the beginning of his tenure as a guard, he was recommended to be awarded the post of Ting Prefecture because of his experience.

古文：廉能勤敏，上下爱之。
现代文：廉洁能干勤奋聪敏，上上下下都喜欢他。
English: He is honest, capable, diligent and intelligent. Everyone likes him.

古文：秩满当迁，军民数千人乞留，诏增秩再任。
现代文：任职期满应当升遥，军民数干人请求留任，下诏增加任期再任。
English: At the end of their term of office, they should be promoted, and several military and civilian cadres should request to remain in office, and the next decree should be to increase the term of office and reappointment.

古文：居三年，推官缺，英宗从军民请，就令迁擢。
现代文：过了三年，推官缺乏，英宗听从军民的请求，命令升迁。
English: After three years, there was a shortage of officers, and Ying Zong obeyed the request of the military and the people and ordered the promotion.

古文：数辩冤狱，却馈遗，抑镇守内臣苛索，政绩益著。
现代文：多次辩明冤案，推辞馋赠，抑制镇守内臣的苛刻勒索，政绩更加显著。
English: He repeatedly clarified unjust cases, refused gifts, and restrained the harsh extortion of town guards and vassals, and his political achievements were even more remarkable.

古文：沙县贼陈政景，故邓茂七党也。纠清流贼蓝得隆等攻城。
现代文：沙县寇贼陈政景，是过去邓茂七的同党，纠集清流寇贼蓝得隆等进攻府城。
English: Chen Zhengjing, the Sand County bandit, was a member of the same party as Deng Shouqi in the past, and led the attack on the capital with the help of the Clear Stream Bandit Lan Delong and others.

古文：得仁与守将及知府刘能击败之，擒政景等八十四人，余贼惊溃。
现代文：王得仁和守将及知府刘能击败他们，擒获陈政景等八十四人，剩余的寇贼惊慌溃散。
English: Wang Deren, together with the commander and governor Liu Neng, defeated them and captured eighty-four people, including Chen Zhengjing. The remaining bandits panicked and dispersed.

古文：诸将议穷搜，得仁恐滥及百姓，下令招抚，辨释难民三百人。
现代文：众将领商议穷尽搜查，王得仁恐怕超过限度殃及百姓，下令招降安抚辨别释放难民三百人。
English: The generals discussed the exhaustive search, and Wang Deren, fearing that it would exceed the limit and affect the people, ordered to recruit, pacify, identify and release 300 refugees.

古文：都指挥马雄得通贼者姓名，将按籍行戮，得仁力请焚其籍。
现代文：都指挥马雄得到串通寇贼的人的姓名，将要按名单实行杀戮，王得仁竭力请求烧掉名单。
English: They all ordered Ma Xiong to get the names of those who had colluded with the bandits, and they were going to execute the killings according to the list. Wang Deren tried his best to request that the list be burned.

古文：贼复寇宁化，率兵往援，斩首甚众。
现代文：寇贼又入侵宁化，率兵去援助，斩杀很多。
English: The bandits invaded Ninghua again, led soldiers to help, and killed many people.

古文：民多自拔归，贼势益衰。
现代文：百姓多脱身归来，寇贼势力更加衰弱。
English: Most of the people have escaped and returned, and the bandit forces have become even weaker.

古文：贼退屯将乐，得仁将追灭之，俄遘疾。
现代文：寇贼退兵驻扎在将乐，王得仁将要追击歼灭他们，不久生病了。
English: The retreating soldiers of the bandits were stationed in Zhaole, Wang Deren was going to chase and destroy them, and soon fell ill.

古文：众欲舆归就医，得仁不可，曰： 吾一动，贼必长驱。 
现代文：众人想载他回去看病，王得仁不允许，说： 我一动，寇贼一定长驱直入。 
English: Many people wanted to take him back to see a doctor, but Wang Deren would not allow it, saying, "If I move, the robbers will surely drive straight in."

古文：乃起坐帐中，谕将吏戮力平贼，遂卒。
现代文：就起来坐在帐中，告谕将领官吏齐心协力平息寇贼，于是去世。
English: He got up, sat in his account, told the generals and officials to work together to quell the bandits, and then died.

古文：时正统十四年夏也。
现代文：当时是正统十四年夏天。
English: It was the summer of Orthodoxy 14.

古文：军民哀恸。
现代文：军民哀恸。
English: Soldiers and civilians wailed in grief.

古文：丧还，哭奠者道路相属，多绘像祀之。
现代文：灵柩运回，在路上痛哭祭奠的人连续不断，多绘制肖像祭祀他。
English: The coffin was transported back, and people wept and offered prayers on the road continuously, and more portraits were painted to pay tribute to him.

古文：天顺末，吏民乞建祠。
现代文：天顺末年，官吏百姓请求建立祠堂。
English: At the end of Tian Shun, officials and commoners requested the establishment of an ancestral hall.

古文：有司为请，诏如广东杨信民故事，春秋致祭。
现代文：有关官员为他请求，下诏按庆塞杨信民的旧制，春秋雨季祭祀。
English: At his request, the relevant officials issued an edict according to the old system of Yang Xinmin's Qingjie, and the spring, autumn and rainy season were sacrificed.

古文：子一夔，天顺四年举进士第一。
现代文：儿子王一夔，天顺四年考中进士第一。
English: His son, Wang Yixuan, won the first place in the Tianshun four-year middle school entrance examination.

古文：授修撰，进左谕德。
现代文：授任修撰，进升为左谕德。
English: He was awarded the post of Shuxian and promoted to Zuozhuide.

古文：成化七年，彗星见。应诏陈五事：请正宫闱，亲大臣，开言路，慎刑狱，戒妄费。
现代文：成化七年，彗星出现，接受韶命陈疏五件事，请求端正后宫，亲近大臣，广开言路，慎重办案，防止浪费。
English: After seven years of development, the comet appeared. He accepted the five things of Chen Shao, asked to straighten out the harem, get close to the minister, open up the way to speak, handle the case carefully, and prevent waste.

古文：语极剀挚，被旨切责。
现代文：语气极焉恳切真挚，受到皇帝严厉斥责。
English: His tone was extremely earnest and sincere, and he was severely reprimanded by the emperor.

古文：累迁工部尚书。
现代文：多次迁升至工部尚书。
English: He was promoted to the Ministry of Industry and Trade several times.

古文：卒，赠太子少保。
现代文：去世，追赠太子少保。
English: He died and was posthumously given the title of Crown Prince Junior Protector.

古文：正德中，谥文庄。
现代文：正德年间，赠谧号文庄。
English: During the Zhengde era, he was given the posthumous name of Wenzhuang.

古文：叶祯，字梦吉，高要人。
现代文：祯，字梦吉，高要人。
English: ,字梦吉,高要人.

古文：举于乡，授浔州府同知。
现代文：乡试中举，除授浔州府同知。
English: In addition to the award of the township junior high school entrance examination, it is also known as the prefectural examination.

古文：补凤翔，调庆远。
现代文：补任于凤翔，调任庆远。
English: He was replaced by Yu Fengxiang and transferred to Qingyuan.

古文：两广瑶贼蜂起，列郡咸被害，将吏率缩朒观望。
现代文：两广瑶贼蜂起，各郡都遭祸害，将领官吏都退缩观望。
English: Two broad bands of bandits rose up, all counties were plagued, and generals and officials stood back and watched.

古文：祯誓不与贼俱生，募健儿日训练。
现代文：叶祯发誓不与寇贼共存，招募壮士每日训练。
English: Ye Kun vowed not to coexist with the bandits and recruited strong men for daily training.

古文：峒酋韦父强数败官军，祯生絷之，其党忿，悉众攻城。旗山守将拥兵不救。
现代文：峒人首领韦父强多次打败官军，墓整活捉了他。他的同党忿恨，以全部人力攻打县城，旗山守将统领着军队不去救援。
English: Wei Chih-qiang, the leader of the Xiongnu, defeated the government army many times and was captured alive by tomb raiders. His fellow party members were so angry that they attacked the county seat with all their manpower. The governor of Qishan led the army and did not come to the rescue.

古文：祯率健儿出战，贼却去。
现代文：叶塑率壮士出城应战，寇贼退走。
English: The leaf-moulding heroes went out of the city to fight, and the robbers retreated.

古文：旋蹑祯，战相当，祯子公荣歼焉。
现代文：不久跟踪叶祯，战斗相持不下，叶祯的儿子叶公荣战死在那里。
English: Soon after, he followed Ye Kun, and they could not stand each other in battle. Ye Kun's son Ye Gong Rong died in battle there.

古文：顷之，贼围鸡刺诸村，祯率三百人趋赴。
现代文：不久，寇贼包围鸡刺等村庄，菜祯率领三百人快速前去。
English: Soon, the bandits surrounded the village of Chishan and other villages, and Cuisine led three hundred people to go quickly.

古文：道遇贼人头山下，鏖战，祯被数枪，手刃贼一人，与从子官庆及三百人皆死。
现代文：路上在人头山下遭遇寇贼，一番激战，墓祯身受敷枪，亲手杀死寇贼一人，和侄儿叶官度及三百人都战死。
English: On the way, they encountered a bandit at the foot of the Hill of Human Heads, and a fierce battle ensued. Tombe personally killed one of the bandits, as well as his nephew Ye Guandu and three hundred others.

古文：时天顺三年正月晦也。
现代文：当时是天顺三年正月三十。
English: At that time, it was the 30th day of the first month of Tianshun Year 3.

古文：岭南素无雪，是夜大雷电，雪深尺许。
现代文：岭南一向无雪，那天晚上雷电猛烈，雪深一尺多。
English: There had never been snow in Lingnan, but that night there was a violent thunder and lightning, and the snow was more than a foot deep.

古文：贼释围去，诸村获全。
现代文：寇贼解除包围离去，各村得以保全。
English: The bandits left after the siege was lifted, and the villages were preserved.

古文：事闻，赠朝列大夫、广西参议，守臣为立庙祀之。
现代文：事情被皇帝知道，追赠朝列大夫、广西参议，地方长官为他立宗庙祭祀。
English: The matter was known to the emperor, and he posthumously bestowed the title of Imperial Physician, the title of Councillor of Guangxi, and the local governors established a family temple for him.

古文：伍骥，字德良，安福人。
现代文：伍骥，字德良，安福人。
English: Wu Xuan, De Liang, An Fu Ren.

古文：景泰五年进士。
现代文：景泰五年进士。
English: Jing Tai was promoted to sergeant five years later.

古文：授御史。
现代文：授任御史。
English: He was given the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：庄重寡言笑，见义敢为。
现代文：庄重而少言笑，见义勇为。
English: Dignified, but few words and few laughs, he did his duty bravely.

古文：天顺七年巡按福建。
现代文：天顺七年巡按福建。
English: Tianshun seven-year inspection tour in Fujian.

古文：先是，上杭贼起，都指挥佥事丁泉，汶上人，善捍御。
现代文：在此之前，上杭寇贼兴起，都指挥愈事丁泉，汶上人，善于捍卫防御。
English: Prior to this, Shanghang bandits had risen, and they were all commanded by Dingquan, who was good at defending defenses.

古文：贼屡攻城，皆为所却。
现代文：寇贼多次攻城，都被打退。
English: The robbers attacked the city several times, but were repulsed.

古文：已而贼转炽。
现代文：不久寇贼又兴起。
English: The bandits soon reappeared.

古文：骥闻，立驰入汀州，调援兵四集。
现代文：伍骥听说，立刻奔入汀州，征调援兵会集各处。
English: Upon hearing of this, Wu Gan immediately rushed to Tingzhou, where recruiting and dispatching reinforcements gathered everywhere.

古文：骥单骑诣贼垒。
现代文：伍骥一人骑马进入寇贼营垒。
English: One by one, Wu Gan rode into the bandits' camp.

古文：贼不意御史猝至，皆擐甲露刃。
现代文：寇贼没料到御史忽然到来，都穿上甲胄露出锋刃。
English: The robbers did not expect the king's sudden arrival and put on their armor to reveal their blades.

古文：骥从容立马，谕以祸福。
现代文：伍骥从容地停住马，以祸福开导他们。
English: Wu Yao calmly stopped the horses and enlightened them with good and bad fortune.

古文：贼见其至诚，感悟泣下，归附者千七百余户。
现代文：寇贼见他十分诚挚，感动醒悟而流泪，归顺依附的有一千七百多户。
English: When the robbers saw that he was very sincere, they were moved to tears, and more than 1,700 households surrendered to him.

古文：给以牛种，俾复故业。
现代文：给予牛和种子，让他们恢复本业。
English: Give them cattle and seeds and let them get back to business.

古文：惟贼首李宗政负固不服，遂与泉深入破之。
现代文：只有寇贼首领李宗政依恃险阻不归服，于是和丁泉深入敌境打击他。
English: Only the leader of the bandits, Li Zongzheng, refused to surrender to the danger, so he and Ding Quan went deep into the enemy territory to fight him.

古文：泉力战，为贼所害。
现代文：丁泉奋力作战，被寇贼杀害。
English: Ding Quan fought hard and was killed by the bandits.

古文：骥吊死恤伤，激以忠义，复与贼战。
现代文：伍骥悼念死者抚恤伤员，以忠义激发众人，又和寇贼开战。
English: Wu Gan mourned the dead, cared for the wounded, inspired the people with loyalty, and went to war with the bandits.

古文：连破十八寨，俘斩八百余人，四境悉平。
现代文：连续攻破十八个营寨，俘获斩首八百多人，周边都被平定。
English: Eighteen camps were broken into in succession, more than 800 people were captured and beheaded, and the surrounding areas were pacified.

古文：而骥冒瘴疠成疾，班师至上杭卒。
现代文：而伍骥受瘴气得病，军队回到上杭后去世。
English: However, after the army returned to Shanghang, Wu Gan became ill and died.

古文：军民哀之如父母，旦夕临者数千人，争出财立祠。
现代文：军民哀悼他如同父母，早晚之间去吊唁的有几千入，都争着出钱建立祠堂。
English: Soldiers and civilians mourned him as if he were their own parents. Thousands of people came to pay their condolences in the morning and evening, all of them vying for money to build an ancestral hall.

古文：成化中以知县萧宏请，诏与泉并祀，赐祠名 褒忠 。
现代文：成化年间因知县萧宏请求，下诏和丁泉一起祭祀，赐祠堂名褒忠。
English: During the Chenghua years, at the request of Xiao Hong of Zhixian County, the following edict and Ding Quan were sacrificed together, bestowing the ancestral hall with fame and loyalty.

古文：毛吉，字宗吉，余姚人。
现代文：毛吉，字宗吉，余姚人。
English: Mao Ji, Zi Zong Ji, Yu Yao Ren.

古文：景泰五年进士。
现代文：景泰五年进士。
English: Jing Tai was promoted to sergeant five years later.

古文：除刑部广东司主事。
现代文：除授刑部广东司主事。
English: In addition, he is in charge of the Guangdong Division of the Sentencing Department.

古文：司辖锦衣卫。
现代文：管辖锦衣卫。
English: It is under the jurisdiction of JinRiWei.

古文：卫卒伺百官阴事，以片纸入奏即获罪，公卿大夫莫不惴恐。
现代文：卫卒窥伺百官的隐秘之事，有片纸只字上奏立即获罪，公卿大夫没有人不惊恐不安。
English: Guardsmen spied on the secrets of hundreds of officials, and were immediately convicted for writing a single word on a piece of paper. No noble doctor was not alarmed and uneasy.

古文：公行请属，狎侮官司，即以罪下刑部者，亦莫敢捶挞。
现代文：公开进行请托，轻慢侮弄官员，就是因罪下到刑部的，也役人敢鞭打。
English: Even if they go to the criminal investigation department for a crime, officials dare to whip them.

古文：吉独执法不挠，有犯必重惩之。
现代文：惟独毛吉执法不屈，有违犯的必定重重惩罚。
English: But Mokichi is the only one who is unyielding in enforcing the law, and those who violate the law will be severely punished.

古文：其长门达怙宠肆虐，百官道遇率避马，吉独举鞭拱手过，达怒甚。
现代文：锦衣卫长官门达依仗恩宠放纵肆虐。百官路上遇见都下马回避，惟独毛吉举起鞭子拱手而过，门达很愤怒。
English: Menda, the chief of the imperial palace guards, indulged in violence with the help of grace. When he met hundreds of officials on the road, he dismounted and avoided them, but Mogi raised his whip and passed by. Menda was very angry.

古文：吉以疾失朝，下锦衣狱。
现代文：毛吉因病没有上朝，关入锦衣狱。
English: Due to illness, Mogi did not ascend to the throne and was imprisoned in the brocade prison.

古文：达大喜，简健卒，用巨梃搒之。
现代文：门逵非常高兴，选拔强健的士卒，用巨大的棒子拷打。
English: The doorknob was very pleased, selected a strong soldier and beat him with a huge stick.

古文：肉溃见骨，不死。
现代文：皮肉溃烂现出骨头，没有死。
English: Flesh festers into bone, not death.

古文：天顺五年擢广东佥事，分巡惠、潮二府。
现代文：天顺五年，升任广东愈事，分管巡视惠、潮二府。
English: Tianshun five years, promoted to Guangdong Yueji, in charge of inspecting Hui, Chao two prefectures.

古文：痛仰豪右，民大悦。
现代文：狠狠抑制富豪，百姓很高兴。
English: The people are happy that the plutocrats have been severely curbed.

古文：及期当代，相率吁留之。
现代文：到任朔满应当替换，相继吁请挽留他。
English: When he took office, he should have replaced Shuo Man, and successively called for him to be retained.

古文：程乡贼杨辉者，故剧贼罗刘宁党也。
现代文：程乡寇贼杨辉，是过去大盗罗刘空的同党。
English: Yang Hui, the Chengxiang bandit, was once a member of the same party as the great thief Luo Liu Kuang.

古文：已抚复叛，与其党曾玉、谢莹分据宝龙、石坑诸洞，攻陷江西安远，剽闽、广间。
现代文：已经归顺又叛变，和他的同党曾玉、谢莹分别占据宝龙、石坑各洞，攻陷江西塞莲，劫掠于因、广之间。
English: He had already surrendered and mutinied, and together with his fellow party members Zeng Yu and Xie Ying, he occupied Baolong and Shikeng separately, captured Jiangxi Selen, and plundered between Ying and Guang.

古文：已，欲攻程乡。
现代文：后来，想进攻程乡。
English: Later, he wanted to attack Chengxiang.

古文：吉先其未至，募壮士合官军得七百人。抵贼巢。
现代文：毛吉在他没有到来之前，招募壮士结合官军共七百人，直抵寇贼巢穴。
English: Before he arrived, Mokichi had recruited seven hundred strong men to join the government army and march straight to the burglar's lair.

古文：先破石坑，斩玉；次击莹，馘之。复生擒辉。
现代文：先攻破石坑，斩杀曾玉，再擎破谢莹，取其首级，又活捉杨辉。
English: First, break through the stone pit, kill Zeng Yu, then break through Xie Ying, take his head, and capture Yang Hui alive.

古文：诸洞悉破，凡俘斩千四百人。
现代文：各洞都被攻破，共俘获斩首一千四百人。
English: Every hole was breached, and a total of 1,400 people were captured and beheaded.

古文：捷闻，宪宗进吉副使，玺书嘉劳。
现代文：捷报上达皇帝，宪宗进升毛吉为副使，下诏书嘉奖慰劳。
English: The victory report was delivered to the emperor, and Kenzong promoted Mokichi to vice-envoy, and issued an imperial edict commending and consoling him.

古文：移巡高、雷、廉三府。
现代文：转移巡枧高、雷、廉三府。
English: Transfer patrol Gao, Lei and Lian to the three provinces.

古文：时民遭贼躏，数百里无人烟，诸将悉闭城自守，或以贼告，反被挞。
现代文：当时百姓遭寇贼蹂躏，数百里没有人烟，众将都闭城自守，有的人报告贼情，反而被鞭打。
English: At that time, the people were ravaged by robbers, there was no smoke for hundreds of miles, the generals closed the city to defend themselves, some people reported the theft, but they were whipped.

古文：有自贼中逸归者，辄诬以通贼，扑杀之。
现代文：有从寇贼中逃逸回来的，就诬陷勾通贼人，将他杀害。
English: When a man who had escaped from the bandits came back, they framed him as an accomplice of the bandits and killed him.

古文：吉不胜愤，以平贼为己任。
现代文：毛吉不胜愤怒，以平定寇贼作为自己的责任。
English: Mokichi is furious and takes it as his responsibility to quell the bandits.

古文：按部雷州。
现代文：巡视部属到雷州。
English: The inspection department belongs to Leizhou.

古文：海康知县王骐，云南太和人也，日以义激其民，贼至辄奋击。
现代文：海康知县王麒，云南太和人，经常用大义激励百姓，寇贼到来就奋力打击。
English: Wang Qi of Hai Kangzhi County, Taihe people of Yunnan, often inspire the people with great righteousness, and fight against the arrival of the bandits.

古文：吉壮其勇节，奖励之。
现代文：毛吉觉得他们的勇气节操雄壮，奖励他们。
English: Mogi thinks their courage is heroic and rewards them.

古文：适报贼掠乡聚，吉与骐各率所部击败之。
现代文：正逢有人报告寇贼掠夺村落，毛吉和王骐各自率领军队击败他们。
English: At a time when there were reports of bandits plundering villages, Mokichi and Wang Yao each led an army to defeat them.

古文：荐骐，迁雷州通判。
现代文：推荐王骥，升任雷州通判。
English: Wang Qi was recommended and promoted to Leizhou magistrate.

古文：未闻命，战死。
现代文：没有接到任命就战死了。
English: He was killed in action without an appointment.

古文：赠同知，荫其子为国子生。
现代文：追赠同知，他的儿子承袭父功为国子生。
English: His son inherited his father's merits and became a son of the country.

古文：成化元年二月，新会告急。
现代文：成化元年二月，新会告急。
English: In February of the first year of Chenghua, the new association was in a hurry.

古文：吉率指挥阎华、掌县事同知陶鲁，合军万人，至大磴破贼，乘胜追至云岫山，去贼营十余里。
现代文：毛吉率领指挥间华、掌县事同知陶鲁，集合军队一万人，到大磴击败寇贼，乘胜追到云岫山，离贼营十多里。
English: Mokichi led the command of Mika, the head of the county, Tongzhi Toru, and gathered an army of ten thousand people to defeat the bandits in Dalat, and took advantage of the victory to chase them to Yunnan Mountain, more than ten miles away from the bandits' camp.

古文：时已乙夜，召诸将分三哨，黎明进兵。
现代文：当时已是二更时分，召集聚将分三部，黎明时进攻。
English: At that time, it was already two o'clock in the morning. The convocation would be divided into three parts and attacked at dawn.

古文：会阴晦，众失期。及进战，贼弃营走上山。
现代文：正碰上阴天，众人误了时间，等到进攻作战，寇贼丢弃营寨逃跑上山。
English: It was a cloudy day, the people lost time and waited for the attack to fight, the bandits abandoned the camp and fled up the mountain.

古文：吉命潘百户者据其营，众竞取财物。
现代文：毛吉命令潘百户占领他们的营寨，众人竞相夺取财物。
English: Mokichi ordered Pan Hyakuni to occupy their camp, and everyone competed to seize the property.

古文：贼驰下，杀百户。华亦马踬，为贼所杀。诸军遂溃。
现代文：寇贼奔驰而下，杀死百户，间华的马也被绊倒，被寇贼杀害，众军于是溃败。
English: The bandits galloped down and killed a hundred households, and Mika's horse also tripped and was killed by the bandits, and the army was routed.

古文：吉勒马大呼止军。
现代文：毛吉勒马大呼制止军队。
English: Mao called for a halt to the military buildup.

古文：吏劝吉避，吉曰： 众多杀伤，我独生可乎？ 言未已，贼持枪趋吉。
现代文：属吏劝毛吉躲避，毛吉说： 众人多遭杀伤，我独自生还可以吗？ 话役说完，寇贼持枪追向毛吉。
English: The officials advised Mogi to hide. Mogi said, "Many people have been killed and injured. Is it okay for me to live alone?" After the announcer finished speaking, the robbers chased Mogi with guns.

古文：古且骂且战，手剑一人，断其臂。
现代文：毛吉边骂边战，挥剑杀伤一人，砍断了他的手臂。
English: While cursing and fighting, he swung his sword and killed one person, cutting off his arm.

古文：力绌，遂被害。
现代文：力量耗竭，于是被害。
English: Exhausted, he fell to his death.

古文：是日，雷雨大作，山谷皆震动。
现代文：这天，雷雨大作，山谷都震动了。
English: On this day, there was a thunderstorm and the valley was shaken.

古文：又八日，始得尸，貌如生。
现代文：过了八日，纔找到尸体，相貌如同活着一样。
English: Eight days later, the baboons found the corpse, which looked as if it was still alive.

古文：事闻，赠按察使，录其子科入国子监。
现代文：事情上报皇帝，追赠按察使，录用他的儿子毛科进入国子监。
English: He reported the matter to the emperor, was posthumously awarded the post of inspector, and his son, Mao Ke, was hired to enter the State Children's Prison.

古文：寻登进士，终云南副使。
现代文：不久中进士，官至云南副使。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the rank of junior envoy and became the deputy envoy to Yunnan.

古文：方吉出军时，赍千金犒，委驿丞余文司出入，已用十之三。
现代文：当毛吉出兵时，拿出千金作为犒赏，委托驿丞余文管理开支，已经用去十分之三。
English: When Mao Zedong dispatched troops, he took out thousands of yuan as a reward and entrusted Yuwen Yu to manage the expenses. Three-tenths of the money has already been spent.

古文：吉既死，文悯其家贫，以所余金授吉仆，使持归治丧。
现代文：毛吉死后，余文怜悯他家贫困，把所剩余的钱交给毛吉的仆人，让他拿着回去办理丧事。
English: After Mokichi's death, Yuwen took pity on his family's poverty and gave the remaining money to Mokichi's servant, letting him take it back to deal with the funeral.

古文：是夜，仆妇忽坐中堂作吉语，顾左右曰： 请夏宪长来。 
现代文：当夜，仆人的妻子忽然坐在中堂像毛吉一样说话，环颅左右说： 请夏宪长来。 
English: That night, the servant's wife suddenly sat in the middle of the hall and spoke like Mogi, saying around her head: "Ask Xia Xian to come."

古文：举家大惊，走告按察使夏埙。埙至。起揖曰： 吉受国恩，不幸死于贼。
现代文：全家大惊，跑去告诉按察使夏埙，夏埙到，仆人的妻子站起作揖说： 毛吉享受国家恩典，不幸死于贼手。
English: The whole family was shocked and ran to inform the inspector, Xia Yao. When Xia Yao arrived, the servant's wife stood up and said: "Mauji enjoyed the grace of the state, but unfortunately died at the hands of a thief.

古文：今余文以所遗官银付吉家，虽无文簿可考，吉负垢地下矣。
现代文：如今余文把所剩的公家的钱财给毛吉家，虽然没有簿册可查，毛吉在地下也背负耻辱。
English: Today, Yuwen takes the remaining public money and gives it to the Maoji family. Although there is no ledger to check, Maoji also carries shame underground.

古文：愿亟还官，毋污我。 
现代文：但愿立即归还官府，不要玷污我。 
English: I hope you will return the government office immediately and not defile me.

古文：言毕，仆地，顷之始苏。
现代文：说完，倒地，不久纔苏醒。
English: After saying this, he fell to the ground and soon woke up.

古文：于是归金于官。
现代文：于是把钱归还给官府。
English: So he returned the money to the government.

古文：吉死时年四十，后赐谥忠襄。
现代文：毛吉死时四十岁，后来赐谧号忠襄。
English: He was forty years old at the time of his death, and was later given the posthumous name Zhongxiang.

古文：林锦，字彦章，连江人。
现代文：林锦，字彦章，连江人。
English: Lin Jin, Zi Yan Zhang, Lian Jiang Ren.

古文：景泰初，由乡贡授合浦训导。
现代文：景泰初年，由乡贡除授合浦训导。
English: In the first year of Jing Tai, he was awarded the title of Hepu Xun Dao by the township.

古文：瑶寇充斥，内外无备。
现代文：瑶贼众多，内外没有防备。
English: There are so many thieves that there is no protection inside or outside.

古文：锦条具方略，悉中机宜。
现代文：林锦分条上陈方略，都符合情理。
English: It is reasonable that there should be some deviation in the layout of the Linjin section.

古文：巡抚叶盛异之，檄署灵山县事。
现代文：巡抚叶盛对此很惊异，发文征召他代理灵山县事务。
English: Ye Sheng, the procurator, was very surprised by this and issued a document to recruit him to be the representative of Lingshan County affairs.

古文：城毁于贼，锦因形便，为栅以守，广设战具，贼不敢逼。
现代文：城池毁于寇贼，林锦因地制宜，作栅栏防守，广泛设置作战工具，寇贼不敢逼近。
English: The castle was destroyed by robbers, the forest was protected by fences according to local conditions, and combat tools were widely set up. The robbers did not dare to approach.

古文：满秩去官，民曰： 公去，贼复至，谁御者？ 
现代文：任期满离官去职，百姓说： 你离去，寇贼又来，谁来抵御？ 
English: When the term of office expires and the official leaves the post, the people say: You leave, the robbers will come again, who will resist?

古文：悉逃入山。
现代文：都逃入山中。
English: They all fled into the mountains.

古文：盛以状闻，诏即以锦为知县。
现代文：叶盛把情况告诉皇帝，下诏立即任林锦为知县。
English: Ye Sheng reported the situation to the emperor, who immediately made Linjin a county seat.

古文：驰驿之官，民复来归。
现代文：乘驿马急速赴任，百姓又来归服。
English: He rushed to office on a horse and carriage, and the people came to obey him.

古文：适岁饥，诸瑶益剽掠无虚日。
现代文：恰逢饥荒，瑶民各部更加劫掠不间断。
English: Coinciding with the famine, the robberies of the various departments of the People's Liberation Army became more and more incessant.

古文：锦单骑诣垒，晓以祸福。
现代文：林锦一人驰入瑶民营垒，以祸福开导他们。
English: Lin Jin rushed into the camp of the Xing people and enlightened them with misfortune and fortune.

古文：瑶感悟，附县二十五部咸听命。
现代文：瑶民感动醒悟，归顺的二十五部都听从命令。
English: The people were moved and awakened, and the twenty-five submissive provinces all obeyed the order.

古文：其不服者则讨之。
现代文：那些不归服的就讨伐他们。
English: Those who do not submit, fight them.

古文：天顺六年破贼罗禾水，再破之黄姜岭，又大破之新庄。
现代文：天顺六年在罗禾水击破寇贼，再次在黄姜岭擎破，在新庄又击破。
English: Tianshun defeated the bandits in Luohe six years ago, again in Huangjiangling, and again in Xinzhuang.

古文：先后斩获千余级，还所掠人口，贼悉平，乃去栅，筑土城。
现代文：先后斩杀俘获一千多人，归还所劫掠的人口，寇贼全被平定，就撤去栅栏，修筑土城。
English: More than a thousand people were killed and captured successively, the looted population was returned, and the robbers were all subdued, so they removed the fence and built the earthen city.

古文：盛及监司屡荐其才。
现代文：叶盛和监司多次推荐他的才能。
English: Ye Sheng and the supervisor repeatedly recommended his talent.

古文：成化改元，会廉州为贼所陷，乃以锦为试知府。
现代文：成化元年，正逢廉州被寇贼攻陷，就任命林锦焉试用知府。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, just as Lianzhou was invaded by bandits, Lin Jinyan was appointed governor on a trial basis.

古文：岁复大饥，贼四出劫掠。
现代文：年内又遭大饥荒，寇贼四处劫掠。
English: During the year, there was a great famine, and robbers plundered everywhere.

古文：锦谕散千余人，诛梗化者，而绥辑其流移。
现代文：林锦晓谕遣散一千多人，诛杀顽固不化的人。而安抚聚集流亡的百姓。
English: Lin Jinxiao ordered to dismiss more than a thousand people, fight and kill the stubborn people, and pacify the people gathered in exile.

古文：境内悉平。
现代文：境内全部平定。
English: The entire territory has been pacified.

古文：四年，上官交荐，请改授宪职，令专备钦、廉群盗。
现代文：四年，上官相继推荐，请求改授督察职务，让他专门防备钦、廉群盗。
English: In four years, the superior officers successively recommended and requested that he be re-assigned to the position of inspector, so that he could specifically guard against thieves.

古文：乃以为按察使佥事，益勤于政。
现代文：就任为按察使愈事，更加勤于政事。
English: Since taking office, he has been more diligent in political affairs.

古文：十年赐敕旌异。
现代文：十年，赐诏书表彰嘉奖。
English: Ten years later, the imperial rescript was issued to commend the award.

古文：久之，进副使。
现代文：很久以后，进升为副使。
English: After a long time, he was promoted to vice-envoy.

古文：锦以所部屡有盗警，思为经久计，乃设团河营于西，设新寮营于南，而别设洪崖营以杜诸寇出没路。
现代文：林锦因所管辖地多次有寇贼警报，考虑长久之计，就在西面设置团河营，在南面设置新寮营，而另设洪崖营以堵塞众寇贼出没的道路。
English: As there were many warnings of bandits in the area under the jurisdiction of Linjin, they considered a long-term solution and set up the Tuanhe Camp in the west, the Xinliao Camp in the south, and the Hongya Camp to block the road where the bandits were.

古文：易灵山土城，更筑高墉，亘五百丈，卒为岩邑。
现代文：改换灵山的土城，另筑高大的城墙，方圆五百丈，最终成为险要的城邑。
English: He changed the earthen city of Lingshan and built a high city wall with a circumference of five hundred meters, eventually becoming an important city.

古文：十四年，兵部上其抚辑功，被赉。
现代文：十四年，兵部上奏他的安抚辑和的功劳，受到奖励。
English: Fourteen years later, he received an award from the Ministry of Military Affairs for his contribution to the pacification of Korea.

古文：锦在兵间，以教化为务。
现代文：林锦在军队期间，以教化为紧要事务。
English: During his time in the army, Lin Jin made education a top priority.

古文：灵山尚鬼，则禁淫祠，修学校，劝农桑。
现代文：灵山崇尚鬼，就禁止过多的祠庙，修建学校，鼓励农桑。
English: Lingshan advocates ghosts, prohibiting too many ancestral temples, building schools, and encouraging farmers.

古文：其治廉、钦，皆饬学宫，振起文教。
现代文：他治理廉、钦，都整顿学校，振兴文教。
English: He governed the provinces of Qian and Qin, rectified the schools, and revitalized the culture and education.

古文：为人诚实，洞见肺腑，瑶蛮莫不爱信。
现代文：为人诚实，洞见肺腑，瑶人没有不敬爱信服的。
English: There is no one who is honest, insightful and persuasive.

古文：其行军，与士卒同甘苦，有功辄推以与人，以故士多效死，所在祠祀。
现代文：他行军，和士卒同甘共苦，有功劳就推给别人，因此士卒多舍命效力，到处建祠堂祭祀他。
English: He marched in the army, shared the joys and sorrows with the soldiers, and if he had any merit, he gave it to others. Therefore, the soldiers were more willing to sacrifice their lives, and built ancestral halls everywhere to worship him.

古文：郭绪，字继业，太康人。
现代文：郭绪，字继业，太康人。
English: Guo Xu, surnamed Jiye, is a well-off person.

古文：成化十七年进士。
现代文：成化十七年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the seventeenth year of Chenghua.

古文：使楚府，却其馈。
现代文：出使楚府，推辞他们的娘赠。
English: The Chu government sent an envoy to reject their daughter's gift.

古文：授户部主事，督饷二十万于陕西给军。
现代文：除授户部主事，监督军饷二十万到陕西供给军队。
English: In addition to being in charge of the Household Division, he oversaw the supply of 200,000 war booty to the army in Shaanxi.

古文：主者以羡告，悉还之。
现代文：主管的人报告有多余的，都退还了。
English: The person in charge reported that there were extra cranes, and they were all returned.

古文：历迁云南参议。
现代文：多次迁任至云南参议。
English: He was transferred to Yunnan to serve as a councilor several times.

古文：初，孟密宣抚司之设也，实割木邦宣慰司地。
现代文：当初，设立孟密宣抚司，实际是从木邦宣慰司所分割出来的地方。
English: At first, the establishment of the Mengmi Relief Division was actually a place that was separated from the Mubangsa Relief Division.

古文：既而孟密思揲复于界外侵木邦地二十七所。
现代文：不久，孟密思揲又在边界之外侵占木邦土地二十七处。
English: Not long after, Meng Mishan occupied 27 pieces of land outside the border.

古文：属谕之还。不听。
现代文：多次说服他们归还，不听从。
English: Persuaded them to return it several times, but they did not listen.

古文：乃调孟养宣抚思禄兵胁之。
现代文：就调集孟养宣抚思禄的兵力逼迫他。
English: They mobilized the troops of Mengyang Xuanlu to persecute him.

古文：思揲始还所侵地，然多杀孟养兵。
现代文：思揲纔归还所侵占的土地，然而杀了很多孟养的士卒。
English: Siyu returned the occupied land, but killed many Mengyang soldiers.

古文：思禄仇之，发兵越金沙江夺木邦故割孟密地十有三所。
现代文：思禄仇恨他，发兵越过金沙江夺取木邦以前割给孟密的地方十三处。
English: Sulu hated him and sent troops across the Jinsha River to seize thirteen places that had previously been assigned to Mengmi.

古文：两酋构怨不已。
现代文：两位首领结怨不止。
English: The two chiefs were constantly at loggerheads.

古文：巡抚陈金承诏，遣绪与副使曹玉往谕之。
现代文：巡抚陈金秉承诏令，派郭绪和副使曹玉前去说明朝廷用意。
English: In accordance with the imperial edict, the governor Chen Jin sent Guo Xiu and the deputy envoy Cao Yu to explain the preparations to the imperial court.

古文：旬余抵金齿。
现代文：十多天到达金齿。
English: It took more than ten days to reach Jinzu.

古文：参将卢和先统军距所据地二程而舍，遣官驰驿往谕，皆留不报。
现代文：参将卢和先行率军到达距所占之地雨站的地方驻扎下来，派官员乘驿马疾行去说明来意，都扣留不回复。
English: General Lu and the leading troops arrived at the place where they were stationed far from the occupied rain station, and sent officials to ride horses to explain their intentions, but they were detained and did not reply.

古文：和惧，还军至干崖遇绪，语故，戒勿进。
现代文：卢和害怕，撤军至干崖。遇到郭绪，告诉他原因，告诫他不要前进。
English: Lu He was afraid and withdrew to the cliff. When he met Guo Xiu, he told him the reason and warned him not to advance.

古文：绪不可。
现代文：郭绪不同意。
English: Guo Xuxu disagreed.

古文：玉以疾辞。
现代文：曹玉以病为由辞去。
English: Cao Yu resigned on the grounds of illness.

古文：绪遂单骑从数人行，旬日至南甸，峻险不可骑，乃斩棘徒步引绳以登。
现代文：郭绪就一人一马带着几个人去，十天到南甸，险峻不能骑马，就砍开荆棘步行牵绳攀登。
English: Guo Xu took several people one by one on horseback and went to Nandian in ten days. Since it was too steep to ride a horse, he cut thorns and climbed on foot with a rope.

古文：又旬日至一大泽。
现代文：又十天到达一个大湖。
English: It took another ten days to reach a large lake.

古文：土官以象舆来，绪乘之往。
现代文：土人官史带着象舆来迎，郭绪乘象舆前去。
English: The local people and government officials came to welcome Guo Xu with the elephant, and Guo Xu went ahead with the elephant.

古文：行毒雾中，泥沙踸踔。
现代文：行进在毒雾中，奔走在泥沙里。
English: Marching in the haze, running in the mud.

古文：又旬日至孟赖，去金沙江仅二舍。
现代文：又十天到达孟赖，离金沙江只有两站路。
English: Another ten days to reach Menglai, only two stops away from the Jinsha River.

古文：手自为檄，使持过江，谕以朝廷招徕意。
现代文：亲手写了公文，派人拿着过江，告诉他们朝廷招抚的意旨。
English: He wrote the official document by hand and sent someone to cross the river with it, telling them the intention of appealing to the court.

古文：蛮人相顾惊曰： 中国使竟至此乎？ 
现代文：蛮人你看我我看你十分惊讶地说： 中原使者竟然到了这里吗？ 
English: Barbarian, look at me, I see you are very surprised and say: Did the messenger from the Central Plains actually come here?

古文：发兵率象马数万夜渡江，持长槊劲弩，环之数重。
现代文：发兵率领象、马敷万夜间渡江，拿着长矛劲弩，把他们包围了几层。
English: The soldiers, led by elephants and horses, crossed the river at night, holding spears, and surrounded them several times.

古文：从行者惧，请勿进。
现代文：随从的人害怕了，请求不要前进。
English: The followers were afraid and begged him not to go.

古文：绪拔刀叱曰： 明日必渡江，敢阻者斩！ 
现代文：郭绪拔出喝叱说： 明天一定渡江，敢阻拦的斩首。 
English: Guo Xu pulled out a scolding and said, "Tomorrow we will definitely cross the river. If you dare to stop us, you will be beheaded."

古文：思禄既得檄，见譬晓祸福甚备，又闻至者才数人，乃遣酋长来听令，且致馈。
现代文：星禄得到公文以后，见譬喻说明祸福很充分，又听说来的只有几个人，就派酋长来听受命令，并且赠送礼物。
English: After Xinglu got the official document, he saw a parable to illustrate that the blessings and the curses were plentiful. He also heard that only a few people came, so he sent chiefs to take orders and give gifts.

古文：绪却之，出敕谕宣示。
现代文：郭绪推辞了碛赠，拿出诏书宣示。
English: Guo Xu declined the gift and issued an imperial edict.

古文：思禄亦继至。
现代文：思禄也随后到来。
English: Siroku also came later.

古文：绪先叙其劳，次白其冤状，然后责其叛。
现代文：郭绪先叙述了他们的功劳，再辩白了他们的冤情，然后责备他们的叛乱。
English: Guo Xu first described their merits, then justified their grievances, and then blamed them for the rebellion.

古文：诸酋闻，咸俯伏呼万岁，请归侵地。
现代文：众酋长听了，都俯身伏地高呼万岁，请求归还侵占的地方。
English: When the chiefs heard this, they all bowed down and cried out, "Long live!" and asked for the return of the occupied land.

古文：绪诘前所留使人，乃尽出而归之。
现代文：郭绪追问先前所扣留的使者，就把他们全部放出归还。
English: Guo Xu questioned the previously detained emissaries and released them all.

古文：和及玉闻报驰至，则已归地纳款矣。
现代文：卢和和曹玉听到消息赶来，则已经归还土地交纳钱财了。
English: When Lu He and Cao Yu arrived after hearing the news, they had already returned the land and paid the money.

古文：时弘治十四年五月也。
现代文：当时是弘治十四年五月。
English: At that time, it was May in the 14th year of the Heian period.

古文：越三年，擢绪四川督储参政。
现代文：过了三年，提升郭绪为四川督储参政。
English: Three years later, Guo Xiu was promoted to the post of Sichuan governor and participated in politics.

古文：武宗即位，始以云南功，加俸一级。
现代文：武宗即位，纔因云南的功绩，增加俸禄一级。
English: When Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, because of his achievements in Yunnan, his salary was increased by one level.

古文：明年致仕归。
现代文：第二年退休回家。
English: He retired the following year and returned home.

古文：姜昂，字恒頫，太仓人。成化八年进士。
现代文：姜昂，字恒俯，太仓人，成化八年进士。
English: Jiang Ang, also known as Heng Pu, was born in Taicang and became a scholar eight years later.

古文：除枣强知县。授御史。
现代文：除授枣强知县；授任御史。
English: In addition, he was awarded the jujube of Qiangchi County; he was also awarded the title of Imperial Historian.

古文：偕同官劾方士李孜省，杖午门外。
现代文：和同官弹劾方士李孜省，被杖责于午门外。
English: He and his colleagues impeached the magistrate Li Ze, and were punished with the cane outside the afternoon gate.

古文：以母老乞改南，寻出为河南知府。
现代文：因母亲年老，请求改任南方，不久出任河南知府。
English: Due to his mother's old age, he asked to be transferred to the south, and soon became the governor of Henan Province.

古文：吏白事毕，退阖门读书，鞭箠悬不用。
现代文：小吏报告事情结束，就退堂闭门读书，鞭子悬而不用。
English: When the petty official reported that the matter was over, he left the classroom to study behind closed doors, without using the whip.

古文：藩府人有犯，立决遣之。
现代文：藩王府的人有犯法的，立即处置遣送。
English: If anyone from the Prince's residence commits a crime, they will be immediately dealt with and deported.

古文：改知宁波，擢福建参政。
现代文：改任宁波知县，升任福建参政。
English: He was transferred to Ningbo Zhixian County and promoted to Fujian Province to participate in politics.

古文：请终养归，服阕而卒。
现代文：请求尽孝回家，服丧完毕后去世。
English: He asked for filial piety to return home, and passed away after the funeral.

古文：昂在官，日市少肉供母，而自食菜茹。
现代文：姜昂作官时，每天买少量的肉给母亲，而自己吃素菜。
English: When Jiang Ang was an official, he bought a small amount of meat for his mother every day, while he ate vegetarian food.

古文：子弟学书，不听用官纸笔，家居室不蔽风雨。
现代文：子弟学习，不让用官家的纸笔，家居房屋不能遮蔽风雨。
English: Children should not be allowed to use government-issued paper and pens to study, and homes should not be able to shelter them from the wind and rain.

古文：子龙，字梦宾，正德三年进士。
现代文：儿子姜龙，字梦宾，正德三年进士。
English: His son, Jiang Long, was nicknamed Meng Bin, and Zheng De was promoted to a scholar three years later.

古文：历礼部郎中。
现代文：任礼部郎中。
English: He was appointed to the position of Reibu no roju.

古文：武宗南巡，率同官谏。
现代文：武宗巡枧南方，率领同官进谏。
English: Emperor Wuzong marched to the south and led his officials to the capital.

古文：罚跪五日，杖几死。
现代文：罚跪五天，受杖责打得几乎死去。
English: He was forced to kneel for five days and was beaten with a cane until he almost died.

古文：出为建宁同知，寻迁云南副使，备兵澜沧、姚安。
现代文：出任建宁同知，不久迁任云南副使，驻守军队于澜沧、姚安。
English: He served as Jianning Tongzhi, and soon moved to Yunnan Deputy Envoy, stationed troops in Lancang and Yao'an.

古文：滇故盗薮，龙让土酋曰： 尔世官，纵盗宁非贿乎？ 
现代文：滇地从来就是盗贼聚集的地方，姜龙责备土人酋长说： 你们世代为官，放纵盗贼难道不是有贿赂吗？ 
English: Shantou has always been a place where thieves gather. Jiang Long reproached the native chiefs and said: You have been officials for generations. Isn't there bribery in indulging thieves?

古文：酋惧，抚谕群盗，悉听命。
现代文：酋长害怕了，安抚说服众盗贼，都听从命令。
English: The chief got scared, calmed down and convinced all the thieves to do as they were told.

古文：巨盗方定者，既降而贫，为妻妾所诟，卒不忍负龙，竟仰药死。
现代文：大盗方定，归降后很贫困，被妻妾辱骂，终不忍辜负姜龙，竟服毒而死。
English: Fang Ding, the great thief, was very poor after his surrender, and was abused by his wife and concubine. Finally, he could not bear to live up to Jiang Long, and actually took poison and died.

古文：南安大盗千人，御史欲征兵，龙檄三日散尽。
现代文：南安大盗一干人，御史想出兵征讨，姜龙发去文书三天就全部解散了。
English: Nan'an's great robber was a gangster. Gu Shi wanted to conscript soldiers, but Jiang Long sent a document and they were all disbanded in three days.

古文：四川盐井剌马仁、云南晒江和歌仲雠杀数十年，龙抚谕，遂解。
现代文：四川盐井刺马仁、云南晒江和歌仲仇杀数十年，姜龙安抚说服，就和解了。
English: Sichuan Yantai Zhima Ren, Yunnan Xiangjiang and Waka have been feuding for decades. Jiang Long appeased and persuaded them, and they reconciled.

古文：大候州土官猛国恃险肆暴，龙擒之。
现代文：大候州土官猛国依仗险阻肆虐粗暴，姜龙擒获他。
English: The local official of Dahuozhou, Mengguo, wreaked havoc and brutality by relying on danger and obstacles, and Jiang Longyu caught him.

古文：在滇四年，番、汉大治。
现代文：在滇四年，番、漠都治理得很好。
English: In the past four years, the ban and the desert have been well managed.

古文：邓川州立三正人祠，祀袁州郭绅、莆田林俊及龙。
现代文：邓川州建立三位正直人的祠堂，祭祀袁州郭绅、莆田林俊和姜龙。
English: An ancestral hall of three honest people was built in Dengchuanzhou to worship Yuanzhou Guosheng, Putian Linjun and Jianglong.

古文：赞曰：陶成、陈敏诸人，以监司守令著征剿功，而成及毛吉、叶祯身死王事，劳烈显著，亦可以愧戎帅之畏懦戚蹜者矣。
现代文：赞曰：陶成、陈敏等人，以监司守令身份有显著的征剿功绩，而陶成和毛吉、叶祯死于国事，功绩壮烈显著，也可以令将帅中畏惧懦弱退缩不前的人羞愧了。
English: Zang said: Tao Cheng, Chen Min and others, with the status of supervising officers and keeping orders, have significant achievements in the recruitment of soldiers, while Tao Cheng, Mokichi and Ye Ye have died in national affairs, and their achievements are remarkable, and they can also make those who are afraid of cowardly retreats among the generals ashamed.

古文：林锦威能临制，材足绥怀，边疆皆得斯人，何忧不治？
现代文：林锦的威严可以监临控制，才能足以安抚怀柔，边疆都得到这样的人，何愁不能治理。
English: The majesty of Lin Jin can supervise and control, and it can be enough to appease Huairou. The frontier has such people, and it can't be governed.

古文：郭绪单骑入险，谕服两酋，令当洪、永间亦何至尚淹常调哉。
现代文：郭绪一人一马驰入险地，晓谕说服两个酋长，假如在洪武、永乐年间又何至于还掩汝在平常的调动中。
English: Guo Xu galloped into the danger zone one by one, and told the two chiefs to convince the two chiefs that if they were in the years of Hongwu and Yongle, they would still hide in the usual mobilization.

古文：平世秉国者，多抑边功，谓恐生事。
现代文：太平时期主持国政的人，多抑制治理边疆的功劳，说是恐怕滋生事端。
English: Those who presided over national affairs in the Taiping period were said to have done more to curb the management of the frontier, and they were said to be afraid of breeding trouble.

古文：然大帅倚内援，叙禄又多逾等，适足以长武夫玩寇之心，而无以奖劳臣致死之节。
现代文：然而大帅倚靠内援，迁升又多超越等级，正足以助长武官消极抗敌的情绪，而无法奖赏勤劳臣子舍命效国的节操。
English: However, the grand marshal relied on internal support and was promoted beyond his rank, which was enough to encourage the military attaché's passive resistance to the enemy, but could not reward the hard work of the minister's son who sacrificed his life to serve the country.

古文：国家以赏罚驭世，曷可不公乎！
现代文：国家用赏罚来治理国事，怎么可以不公平呢！
English: How can it be unfair for the state to use rewards and punishments to govern state affairs?

