古文：◎选举三
现代文：选举三
English: Election Three

古文：太祖下金陵，辟儒士范祖干、叶仪。
现代文：太祖攻下金陵，征召儒学之士范祖干、叶仪。
English: Taizu conquered Jinling and conscripted the Confucian scholars Fan Zukan and Ye Yi.

古文：克婺州，召儒士许元、胡翰等，日讲经史治道。
现代文：攻克鍪也，征召儒学之士许元、胡翰等人每日讲论经史和治国之道。
English: Confucian scholars Xu Yuan, Hu Han and others were enlisted to give daily lectures on the history of Confucianism and the way of governing the country.

古文：克处州，征耆儒宋濂、刘基、章溢、叶琛至建康，创礼贤馆处之。
现代文：攻克处州，征召老儒士宋濂、刘基、章溢、叶琛到建康，建立褛贤馆安置他们。
English: He conquered Zhouzhou, and conscripted the old Confucianists Song Kun, Liu Ji, Zhang Yiyi, and Ye Kun to Jiankang, and established the Jianxian Museum to accommodate them.

古文：以濂为江南等处儒学提举，溢、琛为营田佥事，基留帷幄预谋议。
现代文：以宋濂作江南等处儒学提举，章溢、叶琛作营田愈事，刘基留自己身边参与出谋划策。
English: With Song Li as the head of Confucianism in the south of the Yangtze River, Zhang Yue as the head of Confucianism in the south of the Yangtze River, Zhang Yue as the head of Confucianism in the south of the Yangtze River, and Liu Jiliu as the head of Confucianism in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：甲辰三月，敕中书省曰： 今土宇日广，文武并用。
现代文：甲辰年三月，敕命中书省说： 现在疆土一天天扩大，文臣武将并用。
English: In March of the year of the dragon, the Ministry of Education said: Now the territory is expanding day by day, and the military generals are also used.

古文：卓荦奇伟之才，世岂无之。
现代文：卓越奇伟的人才，世上怎么会没有呢？
English: How can there be no outstanding and wondrous talent in the world?

古文：或隐于山林，或藏于士伍，非在上者开导引拔之，无以自见。
现代文：有的隐居在山林，有的潜藏在军队士卒中，如果不是在上位的引导举拔他们，没有机会显示自己的才能。
English: Some live in seclusion in the mountains, and some are hidden among the soldiers. If they are not guided and promoted by superiors, they will not have the opportunity to show their talents.

古文：自今有能上书陈言、敷宣治道、武略出众者，参军及都督府具以名闻。
现代文：从今以后有能够上书陈言、阐发宣扬治国之道、军事谋略出众的，参军以及都督府都把名字上报。
English: From now on, those who are able to submit written statements, explain and promote the way of governing the country, and have outstanding military strategies, join the army and the governor's office will report their names.

古文：或不能文章而识见可取，许诣阙面陈其事。
现代文：有的不能作文章而见解可以取法，允许到京城当面陈说其事。
English: Some can't write an article, but their opinions can be used, and they are allowed to go to Beijing to present their case in person.

古文：郡县官年五十以上者，虽练达政事，而精力既衰，宜令有司选民间俊秀年二十五以上、资性明敏、有学识才干者辟赴中书，与年老者参用之。
现代文：郡县官年龄在五十岁以上的，虽然熟悉明达行政事务，而精力已衰，应该命令主管部门在民间选拔英俊突出年龄在二十五岁以上、资质禀性聪明敏悟、有学识才干的人征召到中书省，与年纪大的参互使用。
English: County and prefectural officials over the age of fifty, although they are familiar with the administrative affairs of Mingda, and their energy has waned, should order the competent departments to recruit handsome, outstanding people over the age of twenty-five, qualified, persistent, intelligent, and perceptive, and those with knowledge and talent to the Ministry of Education and Culture, and use them with older people.

古文：十年以后，老者休致，而少者已熟于事。
现代文：十年以后，老的退休，而年少的对政事已熟悉。
English: Ten years later, the older ones have retired, while the younger ones have become familiar with politics.

古文：如此则人才不乏，而官使得人。
现代文：如这样人才便不会缺乏，而官吏使用能获得贤人。
English: In this way, there will be no shortage of talent, and the use of officials can obtain sages.

古文：其下有司，宣布此意。 
现代文：希望下发主管部门，宣布这个旨意。 
English: It is hoped that the competent authorities will announce this intention.

古文：于是州县岁举贤才及武勇谋略、通晓天文之士，间及兼通书律者。
现代文：于是州县每年选拔贤才以及英武勇敢胸怀谋略、通晓天文的才士，问或涉及兼通书律的人。
English: As a result, prefectures and counties annually select sages, as well as those who are brave and courageous, have a mind for strategy, and are knowledgeable about astronomy, or those who are involved in the study of calligraphy.

古文：既而严选举之禁，有滥举者逮治之。
现代文：随后逐步严格选拔贤才的禁令，有虚妄举荐的便逮捕治罪。
English: Subsequently, the ban on the selection of talents was gradually and strictly enforced, and those who made false recommendations were arrested and punished.

古文：吴元年，遣起居注吴林、魏观等以币帛求遗贤于四方。
现代文：昊元年，派遣起居注昊林、魏观等人带上财礼到四方访求散遗的贤才。
English: In the first year of the year of Hao, Zhuo Hao Lin, Wei Guan and others who lived in the area were sent to visit the four directions with Zai Li to seek the wisdom of the scattered relics.

古文：洪武元年，征天下贤才至京，授以守令。
现代文：洪武元年，征召天下的贤才到京城，授给守令之官。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the world's sages were conscripted to the capital and given the title of shurei.

古文：其年冬，又遣文原吉、詹同、魏观、吴辅、赵寿等分行天下，访求贤才，各赐白金而遣之。
现代文：这年冬天，又派遣文原吉、詹同、魏观、昊辅、趟寿等分别巡行天下，访求贤才，各赐白银而遣送他们。
English: In the winter of the same year, Wen Yuanji, Zhan Tong, Wei Guan, Hao Yu, Wanzhou and others were sent to travel around the world separately to visit the wise men, and each of them was given silver to send them.

古文：三年，谕廷臣曰： 六部总领天下之务，非学问博洽、才德兼美之士，不足以居之。
现代文：洪武三年，皇帝训谕廷臣说： 六部总管天下的事务，不是学问广博该洽、才能与德行都好的贤士，不能够居此任。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, the emperor instructed the courtiers: "The head of the six departments in charge of the affairs of the world is not a sage with extensive knowledge, talent and virtue, and cannot hold this post.

古文：虑有隐居山林，或屈在下僚者，其令有司悉心推访。 
现代文：考虑到有隐居山林，或受屈处在下级官吏的，应该命令主管部门尽心推寻访求。 
English: In view of the fact that there are officials who live in seclusion in the mountains and forests, or are subordinate to lower-level officials, the competent departments should be ordered to diligently push forward the investigation.

古文：六年，复下诏曰： 贤才国之宝也。
现代文：洪武六年，又下诏说： 贤才是国家的宝贝。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu's reign, he issued another edict, saying: "Wisdom is the treasure of the country.

古文：古圣王劳于求贤，若高宗之于傅说，文王之于吕尚。
现代文：古代圣王为访求贤才而忧劳。如高宗访求傅说，文王访求吕尚。
English: As Gaozong visited Fu, King Wen visited Lushan.

古文：彼二君者，岂其智不足哉？顾皇皇于版筑鼓刀之徒者。盖贤才不备，不足以为治。
现代文：那二君哪里是他们的智慧不够呢，反而一心向往版筑鼓之徒的原因，乃是因为贤才不具备，不能够治理好国家。
English: The reason why the two princes are not wise enough, but instead yearn to be drummers, is because they do not have the ability to govern the country well.

古文：鸿鹄之能远举者，为其有羽翼也；蛟龙之能腾跃者，为其有鳞鬛也；人君之能致治者，为其有贤人而为之辅也。
现代文：鸿鹄能够遥远飞翔，是因为它有羽翼。蛟龙能够升腾飞跃，是因为它有鳞鬣。人君能够使国家得到治理，是因为有贤人作他的辅佐。
English: A great eagle can fly far away because it has wings. A dragon can soar and leap because it has scales. A wise man can govern a country because he has wise men to help him.

古文：山林之士德行文艺可称者，有司采举，备礼遣送至京，朕将任用之，以图至治。 
现代文：山林中的隐士，德行文章技艺值得称道的，主管部门采纳推举，礼仪周全送到京城，我将任用他们，以图谋国家最好的治理。 
English: Hermits in the mountains and forests, with praiseworthy virtues and skills, recommended by the competent departments and sent to Beijing with elaborate etiquette, I will appoint them to seek the best governance of the country.

古文：是年，遂罢科举，别令有司察举贤才，以德行为本，而文艺次之。
现代文：这一年，于是罢除科举，另外命令主管部门考察举拔贤才，以穗行作为根本，而文章技艺其次。
English: In the same year, the Science Education Examination was abolished, and the competent departments were ordered to investigate the promotion of talents, with learning as the fundamental, and writing skills as the second.

古文：其目，曰聪明正直，曰贤良方正，曰孝弟力田，曰儒士，曰孝廉，曰秀才，曰人才，曰耆民。
现代文：其项目，一是聪明正直，一是贤良方正，一是孝悌力田，一是儒士，一是孝廉，一是秀才，一是人才，一是耆民。
English: Its projects, one is clever and honest, one is virtuous and upright, one is filial and virtuous, one is Confucianist, one is filial and virtuous, one is gifted, one is talented, one is popular.

古文：皆礼送京师，不次擢用。
现代文：都以礼送往京城，破格提拔使用。
English: All of them were sent to the capital as gifts, and they were used in an unprecedented promotion.

古文：而各省贡生亦由太学以进。
现代文：而各省贡生也由太学引进。
English: Tribute students from various provinces have also been introduced by Taigaku.

古文：于是罢科举者十年，至十七年始复行科举，而荐举之法并行不废。
现代文：于是停开科举十年，到洪武十七年纔又实行科举，而推荐选拔的办法并行不废。
English: As a result, the imperial examination was suspended for ten years, and the imperial examination was implemented in the seventeenth year of Hongwu, while the recommended selection method was implemented in parallel.

古文：时中外大小臣工皆得推举，下至仓、库、司、局诸杂流，亦令举文学才干之士。
现代文：当时中外大小官吏都可以推举，下至仓、库、司、局等杂流，也要他们推举文学才干之士。
English: At that time, Chinese and foreign officials of all sizes could be elected, and they were also required to nominate people with literary talent, down to the clutter of warehouses, libraries, departments, and bureaus.

古文：其被荐而至者，又令转荐。
现代文：那些被举荐而来的人，又命令他们转相推荐。
English: Those who had been recommended to come, ordered them to change their recommendation.

古文：以故山林岩穴、草茅穷居，无不获自达于上，由布衣而登大僚者不可胜数。
现代文：因此山林岩穴之士、茅屋穷居之人，个个都获得向朝廷展示自己才能的机会，从平民升为大官的数也敷不尽。
English: As a result, people from the mountains, forests, and caves, as well as those who lived in poor huts, were all given the opportunity to show their talents to the imperial court, and the number of people who were promoted from commoners to high officials was inexhaustible.

古文：耆儒鲍恂、余诠、全思诚、张长年辈，年九十馀，征至京，即命为文华殿大学士。
现代文：年高饱学的儒士鲍恂、余诠、全思诚、张长年等年龄九十多岁，征召至京城，便任命为文华殿大学士。
English: The Confucian scholars Baojun, Yu Yan, Quan Shicheng, Zhang Changnian and others, all in their nineties, were conscripted to the capital and appointed as scholars of the Palace of Literature.

古文：儒士王本、杜斅、赵民望、吴源，特置为四辅官兼太子宾客。
现代文：儒士王本、杜斅、趟民望、昊源特意安置为四辅官兼太子宾客。
English: The Confucianists Wang Ben, Du Xi, Watan Minwang and Hao Yuan were specially placed as the four assistant officials and guests of the prince.

古文：贤良郭有道，秀才范敏、曾泰，税户人才郑沂，儒士赵翥，起家为尚书。
现代文：贤良郭有道，秀才范敏、曾泰，税户人才郑沂，儒士赵翥从家中征召出来作尚书。
English: The virtuous Guo Youdao, the talented Fan Min and Zeng Tai, the tax-payer talent Zheng Yao, and the Confucian scholar Zhao Yao were all recruited from their families to write Shangshu.

古文：儒士张子源、张宗德为侍郎。
现代文：儒士张子源、张宗德任侍郎。
English: Confucianists Zhang Ziyuan and Zhang Zongde served as attendants.

古文：耆儒刘堉、关贤为副都御史。
现代文：年高饱学的儒士刘堉、关贤任副都御史。
English: The Confucian scholars Liu Ye and Guan Xian, who had studied hard in high school, were appointed vice-governors of the capital.

古文：明经张文通、阮仲志为佥都御史。
现代文：明经张文通、阮仲志任愈都御史。
English: Mingjing Zhang Wentong and Ruan Zhongzhi were appointed as imperial historians.

古文：人才赫从道为大理少卿。
现代文：人才赫从道任大理少卿。
English: His talent led him to be appointed to the position of Daori Shokei.

古文：孝廉李德为府尹。
现代文：孝廉李德任府尹。
English: Xiaolian Li, De Ren and Fu Yin.

古文：儒士吴颙为祭酒。
现代文：儒士昊颐任祭酒。
English: Confucian scholar Hao Yimin brewed the sacrificial liquor.

古文：贤良栾世英、徐景升、李延中，儒士张璲、王廉为布政使。
现代文：贤良乐世英、徐景升、李延中，儒士张隧、王廉任布政使。
English: The virtuous Le Shiying, Xu Jingsheng, and Li Yanzhong, and the Confucianists Zhang Tun and Wang Lian served as Bu's political envoys.

古文：孝弟李好诚、聂士举，贤良蒋安素、薛正言、张端，文学宋亮为参政。
现代文：孝悌李好诚、聂士举，贤良蒋安素、薛正言、张端，文学宋亮任参政。
English: Li Haocheng, a filial son, and Fuxi Ji, a scholar, and Jiang Ansu, Xue Zhengyan, Zhang Duan, a virtuous man, and Song Liang, a literary man, all participated in politics.

古文：儒士郑孔麟、王德常、黄桐生，贤良余应举、马卫、许安、范孟宗、何德忠、孙仲贤、王福、王清，聪明张大亨、金思存为参议，凡其显擢者如此。
现代文：儒士郑孔麟、王德常、黄桐生，贤良余应举、马卫、许安、范孟宗、何德忠、孙仲贤、王福、王清，聪明张大亨、金思存任参议，大凡显耀提拔的都像这样。
English: Confucianists Zheng Konglin, Wang Dezhong, Huang Tongsheng, Xian Liangyu, Ma Wei, Xu An, Fan Mengzong, He Dezhong, Sun Zhongxian, Wang Fu, Wang Qing, clever Zhang Daigong, Jin Sicun served as councillors, and those who were promoted were all like this.

古文：其以渐而跻贵仕者，又无算也。
现代文：那些按官次登上显贵官位的，又不计其数。
English: Those who have risen through the ranks to positions of prominence are legion.

古文：尝谕礼部： 经明行修练达时务之士，征至京师。
现代文：皇帝曾经训谕礼部： 经书明达，德行善美，熟练通达时务的人，征召到京城。
English: The emperor once instructed the ritual department: Those who are well-versed in scripture, virtuous, virtuous, and skilled in current affairs are called to the capital.

古文：年六十以上七十以下者，置翰林以备顾问。
现代文：年龄六十岁以上，七十岁以下的，安置为翰林以备咨询。
English: Those who are over the age of sixty and under the age of seventy will be placed in a sanatorium for consultation.

古文：四十以上六十以下者，于六部及布、按两司用之。 
现代文：四十岁以上，六十岁以下的，在六部以及布政、按察两司使用。 
English: For those over the age of forty and under the age of sixty, it is used in six departments as well as the two departments of administration and inspection.

古文：盖是时，仕进无他途，故往往多骤贵者。
现代文：因为这时期，作官没有别的途径，所以往往有很多突然颢贵的。
English: Because during this period, there was no other way to become an official, there were often many suddenly precious things.

古文：而吏部奏荐举当除官者，多至三千七百馀人，其少者亦至一千九百馀人。
现代文：而吏部上奏举荐应当授予官职者，多达三千七百多人，少的时候也达到一千九百多人。
English: However, as many as more than 3,700 people, and sometimes as few as more than 1,900 people, were recommended by the cadres to be awarded official posts.

古文：又俾富户耆民皆得进见，奏对称旨，辄予美官。
现代文：又使富裕之家、年高有德之民都能够进京朝见，奏对适合皇帝心意，往往给予好职位高俸禄厚的官职。
English: It also made it possible for wealthy families and people of high age and virtue to visit the imperial court in Beijing, which suited the emperor's intentions, and often gave them good positions with high salaries and lucrative official positions.

古文：而会稽僧郭传，由宋濂荐擢为翰林应奉，此皆可得而考者也。
现代文：而宣擅和尚郭传，由宋濂推荐，提拔为翰林应奉，这些都是能够考查的。
English: However, it is possible to verify the fact that Xuanzang was recommended by Song Xi and promoted to Hanlin Yingbong.

古文：洎科举复设，两途并用，亦未尝畸重轻。
现代文：及科举重设，两条途径一并使用，也不曾偏轻偏重。
English: and the resumption of the imperial examination, the two methods were used together, and they were not biased.

古文：建文、永乐间，荐举起家犹有内授翰林、外授藩司者。
现代文：建文、永乐年间，举荐住官还有京官授任翰林、地方官授任藩司的。
English: During the Jianwen and Yongle dynasties, there were also residents recommended by Beijing officials to be awarded the title of Hanlin and local officials to be awarded the title of Hanshi.

古文：而杨士奇以处士，陈济以布衣，遽命为《太祖实录》总裁官，其不拘资格又如此。
现代文：而杨士奇以处士身份，陈济以平民身份，突然任命为《太祖实录》总裁官，其不拘泥于资格又像这样。
English: But Yang Shiqui, as a clerk, and Chen Ji, as a commoner, were suddenly appointed as the president of the "Grand Ancestor Record," and this is what happened regardless of their qualifications.

古文：自后科举日重，荐举日益轻，能文之士率由场屋进以为荣；有司虽数奉求贤之诏，而人才既衰，第应故事而已。
现代文：从此之后，科举一天天被推重，举荐一天天被轻视，能写文章的士子大都以由科举进用为荣耀。主管部门虽然多次接到访求贤人的诏书，而人才已经衰微，祇是按照旧例办事而已。
English: Since then, the imperial examination has been promoted day by day, and the recommendation has been despised day by day, and most of the scholars who can write articles are honored to be promoted by the imperial examination. Although the competent department has been visited many times to request the edict of the wise man, and the talent has declined, it is only in accordance with the old practice.

古文：宣宗尝出御制《猗兰操》及《招隐诗》赐诸大臣，以示风励。
现代文：宣宗曾经拿出自己作的《猗兰操》以及《招隐诗》赐给诸大臣，以表示劝讽勉励。
English: Xuan Zong once gave his own "Lan Fu" and "Invitation Poem" to the ministers to express his encouragement.

古文：实应者寡，人情亦共厌薄。
现代文：实际响应的少，人心也都厌恶鄙薄。
English: Actual responses are few, and people's hearts are disgusted and contemptuous.

古文：正统元年，行在吏部言： 宣德间，尝诏天下布、按二司及府、州、县官举贤良方正各一人，迄今尚举未已，宜止之。 
现代文：正统元年，北京行在吏部上奏说： 宣德年间，曾经诏令天下布政、按察二司以及府、州、县官举荐贤良方正各一人，至今还举荐不止，应该停止。 
English: In the first year of the orthodox era, Beijing Xing made a report to the cadre department, saying: During the rise of Xuan De, it was decreed that the whole country should be governed, and the two departments of inspection and the prefectural, state, and county officials should recommend one virtuous person each. So far, there have been more than one recommendation, and it should be stopped.

古文：帝以朝廷求贤不可止，自今来者，六部、都察院、翰林院堂上官考试，中者录用，不中者黜之。
现代文：皇帝因朝廷访求贤才不能停止，从此以后，六部、都察院、翰林院堂上官考试，考试合格的便录用，不合格的便罢黜。
English: The emperor couldn't stop because of the imperial court's visit to solicit talents. From then on, officials from the Six Departments, the Duka-in, and the Hanlin-in were required to pass the examination. Those who passed the examination were hired, while those who failed were dismissed.

古文：荐举者益稀矣。
现代文：举荐的人更加稀少了。
English: Referrals are even scarcer.

古文：天顺元年诏： 处士中，有学贯天人、才堪经济、高蹈不求闻达者，所司具实奏闻。 
现代文：天顺元年，下诏： 处士之中，有学问贯通天人之道，才能胜任经时济世，却隐居山林，不追求名声显达的，主管部门按照实际情况奏报。 
English: In the first year of Tianshun, the following edict was issued: Among the officials, those who have the learning to penetrate the way of heaven and man, and are able to be competent in the economic world, but live in seclusion in the mountains and forests, and do not pursue fame, shall be reported by the competent department according to the actual situation.

古文：御史陈迹奏崇仁儒士吴与弼学行，命江西巡抚韩雍礼聘赴京。
现代文：御史陈迹上奏崇仁儒士昊与弼的学问德行，命令江西巡抚韩雍以礼聘请到京城。
English: He ordered Han Yong, the governor of Jiangxi Province, to be invited to Beijing as a courtesy.

古文：至则召见，命为左谕德。
现代文：一到便召见，任命为左谕德。
English: As soon as he arrived, he was summoned and appointed as Zuo Zhuode.

古文：与弼辞疾不受。
现代文：昊与弼推托有病不接受。
English: Hao and Zou do not accept the suggestion that they are ill.

古文：帝又命李贤引见文华殿，从容顾问曰： 重卿学行，特授宫僚，烦辅太子。 
现代文：皇帝又命令李贤引见于文华殿，委婉询问说： 推重您的学问德行，特意授予宫廷之官，烦托您辅佐太子。 
English: The emperor also ordered Li Xian to be brought to the Palace of Literature, and asked him in a tactful manner, "I value your scholarly virtues, and have specially appointed you as an official of the court. I entrust you to assist the crown prince."

古文：与弼固辞。
现代文：昊与弼坚决推辞。
English: Hao and Zou firmly refused.

古文：赐宴文华殿，命贤侍宴，降敕褒赉，遣行人送归，盖殊典也。
现代文：皇帝在文华殿赐宴，命令李贤陪侍，降敕命褒奖赏赐，派遣行人官送归，算是特殊的恩典。
English: The emperor gave a banquet at the Wenhua Palace, ordered Li Xian to accompany him, rewarded him with the award of life, and sent officials to escort him home, which was considered a special grace.

古文：至成化十九年，广东举人陈献章被荐，授翰林院检讨，而听其归，典礼大减矣。
现代文：到了成化十九年，广东举人陈献章被举荐，授任翰林院检讨，而准许他返还家乡，礼数和恩典都大大减轻了。
English: In the 19th year of Chenghua, Chen Xizhang from Guangdong Province was recommended and appointed to review the Hanlin Academy, and he was allowed to return to his hometown. The number of honors and grace were greatly reduced.

古文：其后弘治中浙江儒士潘辰，嘉靖中南直隶生员文征明、永嘉儒士叶幼学，皆以荐授翰林院待诏。
现代文：其后，弘治年间，浙江儒士潘辰，嘉靖年间，南直隶生员文征明、永嘉儒士叶幼学，都因被举荐授任翰林院待诏。
English: Later, during the Hongzhi era, the Zhejiang Confucian scholar Pan Chen, and during the Jiajing era, the Nan Zhi Li scholar Wen Xieming, and the Yongjia Confucian scholar Ye Yu Xue, were recommended for appointment to the Hanlin Academy.

古文：万历中，湖广举人瞿九思亦授待诏，江西举人刘元卿授国子监博士，江西处士章潢仅遥授顺天府训导。
现代文：万历年间，湖广举人瞿九思也授任待诏，江西举人刘元卿授任国子监博士，江西处士章潢人未到京城，祇是在京城迁授顺天府训导。
English: During the Wanli years, the person who was raised in Hubei Province, Zhang Jiusi, was also awarded the title of "Dai Zhao," the person who was raised in Jiangxi Province, Liu Yuanqing, was awarded the title of "Doctor of the State Children's Supervision," and the person who was raised in Jiangxi Province, Zhang Xuan, did not come to Beijing, but was transferred to Beijing to teach the Shuntianfu teachings.

古文：而直隶处士陈继儒、四川举人杨思心等虽皆被荐，下之礼部而已。
现代文：而直隶处士陈继儒、四川举人杨思心等虽然都被举荐，而祇是把姓名下发到礼部而已。
English: And although the direct subordinate clerk Chen Jiru and the Sichuan delegate Yang Sishin were all recommended, they were only sent to the ceremonial department with their names.

古文：崇祯九年，吏部复议举孝廉，言： 祖宗朝皆偶一行之，未有定制。
现代文：崇祯九年，吏部重新提议举荐孝廉，说： 祖宗朝都偶尔实行一次，没有固定的制度。
English: In the ninth year of the Chongzhen era, the cadre department once again proposed to recommend Xiaolian, saying: The ancestral dynasties are implemented once in a while, and there is no fixed system.

古文：今宜通行直省，加意物色，果有孝廉、怀才抱德、经明行修之士，由司道以达巡按，覆核疏闻，验试录用。 
现代文：现在应该通行于直属行省，持别注意发现人才，果真有孝廉、怀才抱德、经书明畅、德行善美的人才，由司道官员报送巡按，复核后，上疏报告，检验考试之后录用。 
English: Now it should be circulated to the provinces directly under the Central Government. Pay attention to the discovery of talents, and if there are truly talents with filial piety, talent, morality, clear scriptures, and virtuous deeds, they should be reported by the officials of the State Council for inspection and approval. After review, they should be reported to the Supreme People's Procuratorate for approval. After the inspection and examination, they should be hired.

古文：于时荐举纷纷遍天下，然皆授以残破郡县，卒无大效。
现代文：当时纷纷举荐，遍及全国，但是都授任残破了的郡县之职，最终没有大的效果。
English: At that time, recommendations were made one after another, all over the country, but they were all assigned to the broken county post, and ultimately did not have much effect.

古文：至十七年，令豫、楚被陷州县员缺悉听抚、按官辟选更置，不拘科目、杂流、生员人等。
现代文：到崇祯十七年，命令豫、楚被攻陷了的州县所缺的官员全部听凭巡抚、按察使官征召选派重新设置，不拘泥于是否科举出身，还是杂流、生员人等。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Chongzhen Emperor's reign, he ordered that all the officials who were lacking in the prefectures and counties where Yu and Chu had been captured should be re-appointed by the inspectors, according to the inspectors' recruitment and selection group, regardless of whether they were from the imperial examination, or miscellaneous, freshmen, etc.

古文：此则皇遽求贤，非承平时举士之典。
现代文：这便是仓皇之中求贤，不是国家太平之时举荐士人的制度。
English: This is the system of searching for a wise man in a time of panic, not the system of recommending a wise man when the country is at peace.

古文：至若正德四年，浙江大吏荐馀姚周礼、徐子元、许龙，上虞徐文彪。
现代文：至于正德四年，浙江的大官举荐余姚人周礼、徐子元、许龙，以及上虞人徐文彪。
English: As for the four years of Zhengde, the great officials of Zhejiang recommended Yu Yao to Zhou Li, Xu Ziyuan, Xu Long, and Shangyu to Xu Wenbiao.

古文：刘瑾以四人皆谢迁同乡，而草诏出于刘健，矫旨下礼等镇抚司，谪戍边卫，勒布政使林符、邵宝、李赞及参政、参议、府县官十九人罚米二百石，并削健、迁官，且著令，馀姚人不得选京官。
现代文：刘瑾因四人都是谢迁的同乡，而草拟诏书出自刘健，便假传圣旨把周礼等交给镇抚司，贬谪戍守边防，命令布政使林符、邵宝、李赞以及参政、参议、府县官吏十九人处罚米二百石，并且削除刘健、谢迁的官职，而且用文字形式定下条令，余姚人不能选任京官。
English: Since all four of them were Xie Qian's fellow villagers, and the imperial edict was drafted by Liu Jian, Liu Hui falsely transmitted the imperial edict to give Zhou Li and others to the Zhen Fusi, demeaned the border defense, ordered the cloth political envoys Lin Fu, Shao Bao, Li Zan, and nineteen political, advisory, and prefectural and county officials to be punished with 200 kilos of rice, and removed Liu Jian and Xie Qian's official posts, and stipulated in writing that Yuyao people could not be elected as Beijing officials.

古文：此则因荐举而得祸者，又其变也。
现代文：这便是因为举荐而得到祸害，又是其中一种变化。
English: This is one of the changes that has come as a result of the scourge of referrals.

古文：任官之事，文归吏部，武归兵部，而吏部职掌尤重。
现代文：任命官员的事，文官归吏部，武官归兵部，而吏部职掌权力尤其重。
English: When it comes to appointing officials, civil servants belong to the personnel department, military officers to the military department, and the personnel department is particularly powerful.

古文：吏部凡四司，而文选掌铨选，考功掌考察，其职尤重。
现代文：吏部共有四个司，而文选司执掌铨选，考功司执掌考察，其职位尤其显要。
English: There are a total of four departments in the Personnel Department, while the Literature Selection Department is in charge of the selection, and the Examination and Merit Selection Department is in charge of the examination, and their positions are particularly prominent.

古文：选人自进士、举人、贡生外，有官生、恩生、功生、监生、儒士，又有吏员、承差、知印、书算、篆书、译字、通事诸杂流。
现代文：选人除进士、举人、贡生之外，有官生、恩生、功生、监生、儒士，又有吏员、承差、知印、书算、篆书、译字、通事等杂流。
English: In addition to the candidates for promotion, promotion, and tribute, there are government officials, favored students, meritorious students, supervisors, and Confucian scholars, as well as clerks, dispatchers, scholars, accountants, transcribers, translators, and couriers.

古文：进士为一途，举贡等为一途，吏员等为一途，所谓三途并用也。
现代文：进士是一条途径，举贡等是一条途径，吏员等是一条途径，这就是所说的三条途径并用。
English: Recruiting cadres is one way, raising tribute and so on is one way, officials and so on is one way, which is the so-called three ways.

古文：京官六部主事、中书、行人、评事、博士，外官知州、推官、知县，由进士选。
现代文：京官六部主事、中书、行人、评事、博士，地方官知州、推官、知县，由进士选任。
English: The officers of the six departments of the Beijing government, including the director, the secretary, the commuter, the critic, and the doctor, as well as the local officials of Zhizhou, the magistrate, and Zhixian, were elected by the cadres.

古文：外官推官、知县及学官，由举人、贡生选。
现代文：地方官推官、知县以及学官，由举人、贡生选任。
English: Local officials, prefectural officials, and academic officials are elected by the people and the students.

古文：京官五府、六部首领官，通政司、太常、光禄寺、詹事府属官，由官荫生选。
现代文：京官五府、六部负责总务的首领官，通政司、太常、光禄寺、詹事府属官，由官荫生选任。
English: The heads of the five prefectures and six departments of the Beijing government responsible for general affairs, including the Secretary of State, the Grand Duchess, the Koroku-ji Temple, and the Zhanzhi Prefecture, are elected by the students.

古文：州、县佐贰，都、布、按三司首领官，由监生选。
现代文：州、县的副职官，都察、布政、按察三司首领官，同监生选任。
English: The deputy officials of prefectures and counties, the heads of the three departments of inspection, administration, and supervision, are elected by the students.

古文：外府、外卫、盐运司首领官，中外杂职、入流未入流官，由吏员、承差等选。
现代文：外府、外卫、盐运司首领官，京官、地方官的杂职官、入流或未入流官，由吏员、承差等选任。
English: The heads of the prefectural government, foreign affairs, and salt transportation departments, as well as the miscellaneous officials of the capital and local officials, and the officials who have entered or have not entered the stream, are selected by the officials and dispatchers.

古文：此其大凡也。
现代文：这是它的大致情况。
English: Here's what it looks like.

古文：其参差互异者，可推而知也。
现代文：那些参差互异的，可以推而知之。
English: Those that are uneven can be inferred.

古文：初授者曰听选，升任者曰升迁。
现代文：第一次授官的称听选，升任的称升迁。
English: The first appointment is called "listening to the election," and the promotion is called "promotion."

古文：选人之法，每年吏部六考、六选。
现代文：选拔官员的办法，每年吏部六次考核、六次选拔。
English: As for the method of selecting officials, the personnel department conducts six examinations and six selections every year.

古文：凡引选六，类选六，远方选二。
现代文：共引选六次，类选穴次，远方选二次。
English: A total of six citations were selected, the category was selected first, and the distance was selected second.

古文：听选及考定升降者，双月大选，其序定于单月。
现代文：初次选任以及考核决定升降的，双月大选，其次序定在单月。
English: In the case of the initial appointment and the assessment decision of promotion or demotion, the general election will be held in two months, and then the order will be set in one month.

古文：改授、改降、丁忧、候补者，单月急选。
现代文：改授官、改降官、服丧制、候补缺的，在单月紧急选取。
English: In the event that there is a vacancy for an official to be promoted, an official to be demoted, an official to be retired, or a vacancy on the waiting list, an emergency selection will be made in a single month.

古文：其拣选，三岁举行。
现代文：在职官吏中选拔任用官员，三年举行一次。
English: Appointed officials are selected from among active officials, and the election is held once every three years.

古文：举人乞恩，岁贡就教，无定期。
现代文：举人请求恩准，岁贡生就任教官，没有固定的日期。
English: There is no fixed date for the appointment of a new instructor.

古文：凡升迁，必满考。
现代文：凡是升迁，必定要考绩期满。
English: For any promotion, the performance appraisal period must be over.

古文：若员缺应补不待满者，曰推升。
现代文：如果官员空缺应该补充不能等待期满的，叫做推升。
English: If the vacancy should be filled by an official who cannot wait for the expiration of the term, it is called a promotion.

古文：内阁大学士、吏部尚书，由廷推或奉特旨。
现代文：内阁大学士、吏部尚书，由朝廷推举，或奉特别圣旨。
English: Members of the Cabinet of Ministers and other high-ranking officials are chosen by the Imperial Court or by special decree.

古文：侍郎以下及祭酒，吏部会同三品以上廷推。
现代文：侍郎以下以及祭酒，吏部会同三品以上官员在朝廷推举。
English: Servants and below, as well as the sacrificial wine, were selected at the imperial court by the cadre committee and officials with three or more honours.

古文：太常卿以下，部推。
现代文：太常卿以下，由部推举。
English: Those below the rank of Tai Chang Ching are selected by the ministry.

古文：通、参以下吏部于弘政门会选。
现代文：通政、参政以下官吏，吏部在弘政门会选。
English: Government officials below the level of political advisor and political participant, as well as government officials, will be elected at the Hongzheng Gate.

古文：詹事由内阁，各衙门由各掌印。
现代文：詹事由内阁决定，各衙门由各掌印官决定。
English: All other matters shall be decided by the Cabinet, and all decisions shall be decided by the respective Seal Officers.

古文：在外官，惟督、抚廷推，九卿共之，吏部主之。
现代文：在地方之官，只有督、抚官由朝廷推举，九卿共同参与议决，吏部主持。
English: Of the local officials, only the governor and the assistant governor were elected by the imperial court, while the nine nobles participated in the deliberation and the cadre department presided.

古文：布、按员缺，三品以上官会举。
现代文：布政、按察官员空缺，由三品以上的官员会同推举。
English: For vacant posts of Bu Zheng and Bao Zhan officials, officials with more than three promotions will be jointly elected.

古文：监、司则序迁。
现代文：监、司之官，便按官级次第升迁。
English: Supervisors and officials of departments will be promoted according to their ranks.

古文：其防边兵备等，率由选择保举，付以敕书，边府及佐贰亦付敕。
现代文：那些防边兵备等官，大致都由选择保举之人担任，付给敕命文书，边府之官以及其副职也付给敕命。
English: Those officers in charge of border defense, such as soldiers and equipment, are generally held by those who choose to be promoted, and are paid a life-saving document. The officers of the border government and their deputies are also paid a life-saving document.

古文：蓟辽之昌平、蓟州等，山西之大同、河曲、代州等，陕西之固原、静宁等六十有一处，俱为边缺，尤慎选除。
现代文：蓟、辽的昌平、蓟州等，山西的大同、河曲、代州等，陕西的固原、静宁等六十一处，都是边地缺员，尤其审慎选拔授任。
English: There are vacancies in 61 places, including Changping and Bozhou in Fujian and Liao, Datong, Hequ and Daizhou in Shanxi, and Guyuan and Jingning in Shaanxi. They are all marginal vacancies, and the selection and appointment are particularly prudent.

古文：有功者越次擢，误封疆者罪无赦。
现代文：有功的超越位次提拔，贻误封疆大事的惩罪不赦免。
English: The meritorious ones will be promoted beyond their ranks, and the punishments will not be pardoned.

古文：内地监司率序迁，其后亦多超迁不拘次，有一岁中四五迁、由佥事至参政者。
现代文：内地的监司之官大都按位次升迁，以后也多有越级升迁不拘泥于位次的，有的在一年中升迁四五次，从愈事升迁至参政。
English: Most of the supervisors of the mainland were promoted according to their ranks. Later, there were also many promotions beyond their ranks without being bound by their ranks. Some were promoted four or five times in one year, from seniority promotion to political participation.

古文：监、司多额外添设，守巡之外往往别立数衔，不能画一也。
现代文：监、司之官多额外添设，守、巡之外，往往另立数个官衔，不能统一。
English: The posts of inspector and secretary are often added as extras, and in addition to guard and patrol, there are often several other ranks, which cannot be unified.

古文：在外府、州、县正佐，在内大小九卿之属员，皆常选官，选授迁除，一切由吏部。
现代文：在地方府、州、县的正职官和佐副官，在京的大小九卿的属官，都常常选官，选拔、授任、升迁、除任，全部由吏部执行。
English: In local prefectures, prefectures, and counties, officials and assistant officials, as well as subordinate officials of the nine nobles in Beijing, are often elected, selected, appointed, promoted, and removed from office, all of which are carried out by the Personnel Department.

古文：其初用拈阄法，至万历间变为掣签。
现代文：开初用拈閜之法，到万历年间变为抽签。
English: At first, the method of drawing lots was used, but in the Wanli era, it was changed to a lottery.

古文：二十九年，文选员外郎倪斯蕙条上铨政十八事，其一曰议掣签。
现代文：万历二十九年，文选员外郎倪斯蕙条陈上奏铨政十八件事，其中之一就是议抽签。
English: In the 29th year of the Wanli calendar, the author's son-in-law Ni Si-jie put forward 18 cases of political subversion, one of which was the drawing of lots.

古文：尚书李戴拟行报可，孙丕扬踵而行之。后虽有讥其失者，终明世不复更也。
现代文：尚书李戴拟行回复同意，孙丕扬跟着便执行，后来虽然有讥讽其失误的，但整个明代不再更改。
English: Shangshu Li Dai proposed to make a reply and agreed, and Sun Yat-sen followed suit and implemented it. Later, although some ridiculed his mistakes, the entire Ming Dynasty would no longer be changed.

古文：洪武间，定南北更调之制，南人官北，北人官南。
现代文：洪武年间，确定南北更换调动的制度，南方人在北方作官，北方人在南方作官。
English: During the Hongwu era, the system of North-South replacement and transfer was established, with Southerners serving in the North and Northerners serving in the South.

古文：其后官制渐定，自学官外，不得官本省，亦不限南北也。
现代文：其后官制渐渐固定，除学官以外，不能在本省作官，也不限定南方或北方。
English: After that, the official system was gradually fixed. Except for academic officials, they could not serve as officials in the province, and they were not limited to the south or the north.

古文：初，太祖尝御奉天门选官，且谕毋拘资格。
现代文：当初，太祖曾经到奉天门选拔官吏，并且训谕不要拘泥于资格。
English: In the beginning, the great-grandfather once went to the Gate of Heaven to select officials, and he instructed them not to be obsessed with qualifications.

古文：选人有即授侍郎者，而监、司最多，进士、监生及荐举者，参错互用。
现代文：选择人有选中就授官侍郎的，而任盛、司的最多，进士、监生以及被举荐的人，交错着使用。
English: Selectors had the power to award the position of chamberlain to those who were selected, while the highest number of positions were given to those who were appointed to the positions of minister and secretary, and those who were promoted to the positions of scholar, probationer, and those who were recommended were used in a staggered manner.

古文：给事、御史，亦初授升迁各半。
现代文：给事、御史，官员中也初次授官者与升迁者各占一半。
English: Among officials, first-time appointees and those promoted accounted for half each.

古文：永、宣以后，渐循资格，而台省尚多初授。
现代文：永乐、宣德以后，渐渐按照资格授官，而台省还是多初授官。
English: After Yongle and Xuande, officials were gradually awarded according to their qualifications, but Taiwan Province was still the first to award officials.

古文：至弘、正后，资格始拘，举、贡虽与进士并称正途，而轩轾低昂，不啻霄壤。
现代文：至弘治、正德以后，纔拘守资格，举拔、贡举虽然与进士并称正途，但是轻重高低，不异于天上地下。
English: After Hongzhi and Zhengde, Zhai adhered to the qualification, and although the promotion and tribute were called the right path together with the promotion, they were not different from the sky and the earth.

古文：隆庆中，大学士高拱言： 国初，举人跻八座为名臣者甚众。
现代文：隆庆年间，大学士高拱说： 开国之初，举人登上八座成为名臣的很多。
English: During the Longqing era, the university scholar Gao Gong said: At the beginning of the founding of the country, there were many people who climbed the eight seats to become famous ministers.

古文：后乃进士偏重，而举人甚轻，至于今极矣。
现代文：以后进士纔渐被看重，而举人地位很轻，到了现在已达极点。
English: Since then, Jin Shizhen has gradually been valued, while Huo Ren Ren's status is very light, and has now reached its peak.

古文：请自授官以后，惟考政绩，不问其出身。 
现代文：请求从授官以后，只考核政绩，不过问其身份资历。 
English: After the request is granted, only the performance of the government will be examined, but the status and qualifications will be asked.

古文：然势已积重，不能复返。
现代文：然而形势已经积累深重，不能复返。
English: However, the situation has accumulated to such an extent that there can be no going back.

古文：崇祯间，言者数申 三途并用 之说。间推一二举人如陈新甲、孙元化者，置之要地，卒以倾覆。
现代文：崇祯年间，上言的人多次申论 三途并用 的道理，问或推荐一二举人如陈新甲、孙元化这样的人，放在显要官位，但最终在高官位上倾覆。
English: During the reign of Chongzhen, the above-mentioned people repeatedly appealed to the principle of "three ways and one use," asked or recommended one or two people such as Chen Xinjia and Sun Yuanhua to be placed in prominent official positions, but eventually overturned in high official positions.

古文：用武举陈启新为给事，亦声名溃裂。
现代文：任用武举人陈启新为给事，也声败名裂。
English: Chen Qixin, who was appointed as the person in charge of martial arts promotion, was also discredited.

古文：于是朝端又以为不若循资格。
现代文：于是朝廷又认为不如按照资格任用。
English: As a result, the imperial court decided that it would be better to appoint according to qualifications.

古文：而甲榜之误国者亦正不少也。
现代文：而进士误国的人也真正不少。
English: And there are really quite a few people who have entered the country by mistake.

古文：给事中、御史谓之科道。
现代文：给事中、御史全称科道。
English: In the letter, Goshi's full name is Kudo.

古文：科五十员，道百二十员。
现代文：每科五十人，每道一百二十人。
English: There are fifty students in each subject and one hundred and twenty students in each course.

古文：明初至天顺、成化间，进士、举贡、监生皆重选补。其迁擢者，推官、知县而外，或由学官。
现代文：明朝初年至天顺、成化年间，进士、举贡、监生都能选拔补官，那些升迁为给事中、御史的人，推官、知县之外，有的由学官充任。
English: From the beginning of the Ming Dynasty to the years of Tianshun and Chenghua, the Jin Shi, the tribute, and the probationers were able to select the supplementary officials. Those who were promoted to the middle and senior officials, in addition to the officials and prefectures, some were appointed by the academic officials.

古文：其后监生及新科进士皆不得与。
现代文：其后，监生和新考中的进士都不能参与。
English: After that, the supervising student and the candidate in the new examination cannot participate.

古文：或庶吉士改授，或取内外科目出身三年考满者考选，内则两京五部主事、中、行、评、博，国子监博士、助教等，外则推官、知县。
现代文：或者由庶吉土改授，或者取由内外科目作官三年考核期满的考核选用。京官则两京五部主事、中书、行人、大理评事、太常博士，国子监博士、助教等，地方官则推官、知县。
English: They were either conferred by Shoko Kichido, or were selected by the end of the three-year assessment period of the medical officer of internal surgery. The officials in Kyoto were the heads of the five departments in Kyoto, Chusho, Gyojin, Dali Hanritoshi, Taijo hakase, Kokushi choko hakase, assistant professors, etc., and the local officials were shukan and chigata.

古文：自推、知入者，谓之行取。
现代文：从推官、知县选入的，叫做行取。
English: Those selected from the magistrate and prefectures are called Gyotori.

古文：其有特荐，则俸虽未满，亦得与焉。
现代文：其中有特荐的，则任官期限虽然没有满，也能够参与考选。
English: If there is a special recommendation among them, they will be able to participate in the examination and selection even though their term of office has not expired.

古文：考选视科道缺若干，多寡无定额。
现代文：考选要枧科道缺额而定，多少无确定额数。
English: The examination and selection will be determined by the shortage of places in the Department of Mathematics and Physics, but there is no definite quota.

古文：其授职，吏部、都察院协同注拟，给事皆实补，御史必试职一年始实授，惟庶吉士否。
现代文：其授予官职，吏部、都察院协同拟定，给事之官都是实补，御史必须试用一年纔实际授官，祇有庶吉士不这样。
English: To be awarded an official post, it must be jointly drafted by the Ministry of Civil Service and the National Audit Office. The official to whom the post is awarded must be a substantive officer. The position must be held for one year before it can be actually awarded. This is not the case with the position of deputy inspector.

古文：嘉靖、万历间，常令部曹不许改科道，后亦间行之。
现代文：嘉靖、万历年间，曾经下令部曹官不许改科道，后来也间或施行。
English: During the Jiajing and Wanli dynasties, officials were once ordered not to change the scientific way, and later it was occasionally enforced.

古文：举贡、推、知，例得与进士同考选，大抵仅四之一。
现代文：举贡、推官、知县，按规程能够与进士一同考选，大抵仅仅占四分之一。
English: According to the regulations, the tributes, officials and counties can be selected together with the new recruits, which usually accounts for only a quarter.

古文：嘉靖间，尝令监生与选。已罢不行。
现代文：嘉靖年间，曾经命令监生参与选拔，不久又罢除不施行。
English: During the Jiajing era, he once ordered the prison students to participate in the selection, but soon removed the order and did not implement it.

古文：万历中，百度废驰。
现代文：万历年间，各种制度都废弛了。
English: Over the years, various systems have fallen into disuse.

古文：二十五年，台省新旧人数不足当额设之半。
现代文：万历二十五年，台省新旧人数不足应当额定设置人数的一半。
English: In the past 25 years, the number of new and old people in Taiwan Province is less than half of the number of people who should be rated.

古文：三十六年，科止数人，道止二人。
现代文：万历三十六年，一科只有几个人，每道祇有二人。
English: In the 36th year of Wanli, there are only a few people in one subject, and only two people in each subject.

古文：南科以一人摄九篆者二岁，南道亦止一人。
现代文：南科用一个人代理九个人的职务长达二年，南道也只有一个人。
English: Nanko has been using one person to represent nine people for up to two years, and Nando has only one person.

古文：内台既空，外差亦缺，淮、扬、苏、松、江西、陕西、广东西、宣大、甘肃、辽东巡按及陕西之茶马，河东之盐课，缺差至数年。
现代文：内台已空虚，京城之外的官员也缺额，淮、扬、苏、松、江西、陕西、广东、广西、宣、大、甘肃、辽东巡按以及陕西的茶马官，河东的盐课官，缺空达数年。
English: Inner Taiwan is already empty, and there are vacancies for officials outside Beijing. Huai, Yang, Su, Song, Jiangxi, Shaanxi, Guangdong, Guangxi, Xuan, Dai, Gansu, and Liaodong inspection posts, as well as tea and horse officials in Shaanxi and salt officials in Hedong, have been vacant for several years.

古文：给事中陈治则请急考选，不报。
现代文：给事中陈治则请求紧急考核选录，没有回复。
English: In response, Chen Zhi requested an urgent assessment of the selection, but there was no reply.

古文：三十九年，考选疏上，复留中不下。
现代文：万历三十九年，考核选用的奏疏呈上，又留宫中不下发。
English: In the thirty-ninth year of Wanli, the examination of the selection of the Song Suo was submitted, and it was not issued while staying in the palace.

古文：推、知拟擢台省，候命阙下，去留不得自如。
现代文：推官、知县拟提拔为台省官员，候命于京城，离去与留下不能自如。
English: The governor and the county magistrate are to be promoted to officials of Taiwan Province, and they are to wait for their orders in Beijing. They are not at ease to leave or stay.

古文：四十六年，掌河南道御史王象恒复言： 十三道御史在班行者止八人，六科给事中止五人，而册封典试诸差，及内外巡方报满告病求代者踵至，当亟议变通之法。 
现代文：万历四十六年，掌河南道的御史王象恒又上奏说： 十三道御史在官位的只有八人，六科给事中只有五人，而册封典试等差职，以及内外巡察四方上报期满告病请求替代的奏疏接踵而至，应当赶快商议变通的办法。 
English: In the 46th year of Wanli, Wang Xiangheng, the governor of Henan Province, made another report, saying: There are only eight governors of the 13th province in official positions, and only five in the six subjects. However, there are a succession of posts such as the record and seal examination, as well as the report of the internal and external inspection four parties requesting replacement after the deadline for reporting illness. It is necessary to quickly discuss a workaround.

古文：大学士方从哲亦言： 考选诸臣，守候六载，艰苦备尝。
现代文：大学士方从哲也上奏说： 考核选拔众臣，等候六年，艰难困苦都全部尝到了。
English: The university scholar said from Tetsuya: The examination and selection of all ministers, waiting for six years, all the hardships and difficulties have been tasted.

古文：吏部议咨礼部、都察院按次题差，盖权宜之术。不若特允部推，令诸臣受命供职，足存政体。 
现代文：吏部商议咨询礼部、都察院按官次列出差额，都是权宜的办法，不如特别允准各部自己推选，让众臣受命供职，足以保存施政的要领。 
English: It is expedient for the Ministry of Personnel to discuss and consult with the Ministry of Ceremonies, and for the General Inspectorate to list the differences according to official ranks. It would be better to allow each ministry to select their own ministers, so that all ministers can be appointed to serve, which is enough to preserve the essentials of governance.

古文：卒皆不报。
现代文：而皇帝始终都不回复。
English: But the emperor never replied.

古文：至光宗初，前后考选之疏俱下，而台省一旦森列矣。
现代文：到光宗初年，前后考核选官的奏疏全都下发，而台省的官员一朝纷然罗列。
English: By the first year of Guangzong, all the records of the examination and selection of officials were issued, and the officials of Taiwan Province were listed in droves.

古文：考选之例，优者授给事中，次者御史，又次者以部曹用。
现代文：考核选拔的规程，优秀的授予给事中，其次的授予御史，又其次的由部曹任用。
English: The assessment of the selection procedure, the award of excellence in the matter, followed by the award of history, and followed by the appointment of the department.

古文：虽临时考试，而先期有访单，出于九卿、台省诸臣之手，往往据以为高下。
现代文：虽然临时考试，而事先有调查的底单，出于九卿、台省等臣之手，往往据以作为高低的依据。
English: Although it is a provisional examination, the document of investigation in advance, from the hands of ministers such as Jiujing and Taiwan Province, is often used as the basis for the high and low.

古文：崇祯三年，吏部考选毕，奏应擢给事、御史若干人，而以中书二人访单可否互异，具疏题请。
现代文：崇祯三年，吏部考核选拔结束，上奏应提拔给事、御史若干人，而以中书二人，调查填写的底单，内容褒贬互有不同，便详细地疏列上奏，请求皇帝决定。
English: In the third year of Chongzhen, after the assessment and selection of the cadre department was completed, several people should be promoted to the post and the imperial historian should be promoted to the post, and two people should be promoted to the post, and the documents filled in the survey, the contents of the praise and criticism were different, so they listed the promotion in detail and asked the emperor to decide.

古文：帝责其推诿，令更确议，而不责访单之非体也。
现代文：皇帝责备他们推诿，命令重新商议确定，而不责怪填单调查的体制不对。
English: The emperor scolded them for procrastinating and ordered them to re-discuss and determine, but did not blame them for the incorrect system of filling out the investigation form.

古文：京官非进士不得考选，推、知则举贡皆行取。
现代文：京官如果不是进士便不能考核选拔，推官、知县则举贡都可以调任京职。
English: If a Beijing official is not a conscript, he cannot be evaluated and selected, while a deputy and a magistrate can be transferred to the Beijing post by paying a tribute.

古文：然天下守令，进士十三，举贡十七；推、知行取，则进士十九，举贡才十一。
现代文：然而天下的守令之官，进士占十分之三，举贡占十分之七；推官、知县调任京职，则进士占十分之九，举贡纔占十分之一。
English: However, of the officials of the shorings around the world, three-tenths were enlisted men and seven-tenths were paid tribute; while nine-tenths were enlisted men and one-tenth were paid tribute.

古文：举贡所得，又大率有台无省，多南少北。
现代文：举贡所得官，又大多有台职无省职，南方之官多，北方之官少。
English: In addition, most of the officials receiving tribute have Taiwanese posts and no provincial posts. There are more officials in the south and fewer in the north.

古文：御史王道纯以为言。
现代文：御史王道纯以此进言。
English: This is how Michihito Michizane started his speech.

古文：帝谓用人当论才，本不合拘资格，下所司酌行之。
现代文：皇帝认为用人应当评定才能，本来就不应该拘泥于资格，下发主管部门酌情施行。
English: The emperor believed that the employer should evaluate the talent, and should not be bound by the qualification, and the competent department should implement it as appropriate.

古文：初制，急缺风宪，不时行取。
现代文：开初的制度，御史十分紧缺，可以随时从地方选拔官吏充此任。
English: At the beginning of the system, there was a severe shortage of magistrates, and officials could be selected from local areas to fill this position at any time.

古文：神宗时，定为三年，至是每年一举。
现代文：神宗时期，制定期限是三年，到这时每年选拔一次。
English: During the period of the Shinshu sect, the deadline was three years, by which time the selection was made once a year.

古文：帝从吏部尚书闵洪学请，仍以三年为期。
现代文：皇帝听从吏部尚书闵洪学请求，仍然以三年为期限。
English: The emperor obeyed the request of Shang Shuxu and Hong Xue of the cadre department, and still set three years as the time limit.

古文：此选择言路之大凡也。
现代文：这便是选择谏官的大概情况。
English: This is the general situation for the selection of eunuchs.

古文：保举者，所以佐铨法之不及，而分吏部之权。
现代文：保举是用来辅助铨选之法的不足，而分散吏部权力的做法。
English: The promotion is used to supplement the inadequacy of the method of selection, and the practice of decentralizing the power of the cadre department.

古文：自洪武十七年命天下朝觐官举廉能属吏始。
现代文：徒洪武十七年命令全国朝觐之官举拔廉洁能干的属吏开始。
English: In the seventeenth year of Emperor Hongwu, he ordered the officials of the national imperial court to begin the process of selecting honest and competent subordinate officials.

古文：永乐元年，命京官文职七品以上，外官至县令，各举所知一人，量才擢用。
现代文：永乐元年，命令京官文职七品以上，地方官至县令，各自举荐所了解的一个人，衡量才干提拔使用。
English: In the first year of the Yongle Emperor, he ordered the Beijing officials with seven or more civil posts, and the local officials up to the county magistrates, to each recommend a person they knew, to measure their talents and promote and use them.

古文：后以贪污闻者，举主连坐，盖亦尝间行其法。
现代文：以后如果因贪污闻名的，举荐人连同获罪，而也曾间或施行其法。
English: In the future, if a person is known for corruption, the person who recommended him or her will be convicted along with him or her, and his or her law will occasionally be enforced.

古文：然洪、永时，选官并由部请。
现代文：但洪武、永乐时期，选拔官吏都由吏部请示。
English: However, during the Hongwu and Yongle Dynasties, the selection of officials was left to the Personnel Department.

古文：至仁宗初，一新庶政，洪熙元年，特申保举之令。
现代文：到了仁宗初年，全面刷新各种政务。洪熙元年，特意申明保举的命令。
English: In the first year of the Reverend Sun Yat-sen's reign, various government affairs were comprehensively revamped. In the first year of Hong Xilong's reign, he specifically affirmed the order to hold the election.

古文：京官五品以上及给事、御史，外官布、按两司正佐及府、州、县正官，各举所知。
现代文：京官五品以上以及给事、御史，地方官布政、按察雨司正职、副职以及府、州、县正职，各自保举所了解的人。
English: People who are above the rank of the five-ranked official in Beijing, as well as those who are in charge of affairs, history, local government administration, and those who are in charge of the prefectural, prefectural, and county government.

古文：惟见任府、州、县正佐官及曾犯赃罪者，不许荐举，其他官及屈在下僚，或军民中有廉洁公正才堪抚字者，悉以名闻。
现代文：只是现任府、州、县正、副官以及曾犯贪赃罪的，不准推荐保举，其它官吏以及受屈处在下位，或军民中有廉洁公正、才能胜任安抚体恤百姓的，全部把名字上报。
English: However, the current prefectural, prefectural, and county officials and their aides, as well as those who have committed the crime of corruption, are not allowed to be recommended for promotion. Other officials, as well as those in subordinate positions, or those in the military and the people who are honest and fair and are able to pacify and sympathize with the people, should all report their names.

古文：是时，京官势未重，台省考满，由吏部奏升方面郡守。
现代文：此时，京官的权势不重，台省考绩期满，由吏部上奏升任一个地方的郡守。
English: At this time, the power of Beijing officials was not heavy, and the performance appraisal period of Taiwan Province was over, and he was promoted to the position of a local county governor from the cadre department.

古文：既而定制，凡布按二司、知府有缺，令三品以上京官保举。
现代文：随后规定制度，凡布政、按察二司、知府有缺空，命令三品以上的京官保举。
English: Subsequently, the system was stipulated that if there was a vacancy in the post of prime minister, the post of inspector of the second division, or the post of prefectural governor, an order was issued to guarantee the promotion of three or more officials in Beijing.

古文：宣德三年，况钟、赵豫等以荐擢守苏、松诸府，赐敕行事。
现代文：宣德三年，况锺、赵豫等人因举荐提升镇守苏州、松江等府知府，赐予敕命办事。
English: In the third year of Xuande, Zhou Xuan, Zhao Yu and others were promoted to town guards of Suzhou, Songjiang and other prefectures due to recommendation, and were given the order to work.

古文：十年用郭济、姚文等为知府，亦如之。
现代文：宣德十年，任用郭济、姚文等人作知府，也如同况锺等人那样。
English: In the 10th year of Xuande's reign, Guo Ji, Yao Wen and others were appointed as prefectural governors, just like Cang Jun and others.

古文：其所奏保者，郎中、员外、御史及司务、行人、寺副皆与，不依常调也。后多有政绩。
现代文：那些上奏保举的，郎中、员外、御史以及司务、行人、寺副等职都在其中，不依照常规调遣，后来多有政绩。
English: Those who were raised to the rank of Shoshoho included retainers, non-commissioned officers, and priests, as well as stewards, attendants, and temple assistants. They were not transferred according to the usual procedure, and many of them later had political achievements.

古文：部曹及御史，由堂上官荐引，类能其官。
现代文：各部曹官以及御史，由堂上官推荐，大抵都能胜任其官。
English: The sergeants of each department, as well as the superintendent of history, are recommended by the superintendent, and most of them are able to perform their duties competently.

古文：而长吏部者，蹇义、郭琎亦屡奉敕谕。
现代文：而吏部长官，蹇义、郭璀也屡次承奉敕命训谕。
English: And the officials and ministers, Zou Yi and Guo Xi, also repeatedly obeyed his orders.

古文：帝又虑诸臣畏连坐而不举，则语大学士杨溥以全才之难，谓： 一言之荐，岂能保其终身，欲得贤才，尤当厚教养之法。 
现代文：皇帝又担心众臣畏惧连坐而不保举，便以全才的艰难告诉大学士杨溥，说： 一句话的保举，哪能保证他的终身呢？要想得到贤才，尤其应当加重教养之法。 
English: The emperor was also worried that all the courtiers were afraid to sit in succession without being promoted, so he told the university scholar Yang Qi about the difficulties of being a generalist, saying: "A one-sentence promotion, how can it guarantee his life? If you want to get a genius, you should especially strengthen the method of education.

古文：故其时吏治蒸蒸，称极盛焉。
现代文：所以那时吏治纯一且宽厚，堪称是极盛。
English: Therefore, at that time, the officials were pure and generous, which can be said to be the peak.

古文：沿及英宗，一遵厥旧。
现代文：随后直到英宗，全部遵循其旧制。
English: Subsequently, until the Yingzong, all followed its old system.

古文：然行之既久，不能无弊，所举或乡里亲旧、僚属门下，素相私比者。
现代文：但是施行已久，不能没有弊端。所保举的人或是乡里亲属故旧，或是僚属门生，一向偏私亲近的人。
English: However, it has been implemented for a long time and cannot be without drawbacks. The people who are guaranteed to be promoted are either old-fashioned relatives in the countryside, or colleagues, disciples, and people who have always been close to each other.

古文：方面大吏方正、谢庄等由保举而得罪。
现代文：负责一方事务的大官方正、谢庄等就因保举而获罪。
English: Daojangzheng and Xie Zhuang, who were in charge of one side of the affairs, were found guilty because they were promoted.

古文：而无官保举者，在内御史，在外知府，往往九年不迁。
现代文：而无官员保举的人，在京城的御史，在地方的知府，往往九年不能升迁。
English: However, those who do not have an official guarantee of promotion often cannot be promoted for nine years in the imperial history of the capital and in local prefectures.

古文：正统七年，罢荐举县令之制。
现代文：廷统七年，罢除荐举县令的制度。
English: After seven years of imperial rule, the system of recommending the appointment of prefectural governors was abolished.

古文：十一年，御史黄裳言： 给事、御史，国初奏迁方面郡守。
现代文：正统十一年，御史黄寰上奏说： 给事、御史，开国之初上奏可以升迁地方郡守。
English: In the 11th year of the Zhengde Emperor's reign, the Grand Historian Huang Qi said in his report: "For your information, Grand Historian, the first report of the founding of the country can promote local county governors.

古文：近年方面郡守率由廷臣保升，给事、御史以纠参为职，岂能无忤于一人。
现代文：近年来郡守大都由朝臣保举升迁，给事、御史以纠弹参劾为职分，哪能不触犯一人呢？
English: In recent years, most of the county governors have been promoted and promoted by the courtier, and the governor and the governor have been impeached. How can you not offend someone?

古文：乞敕吏部仍按例奏请除授。 
现代文：请求敕命吏部仍然按规程奏请授官。 
English: The request for the death of the cadre department is still in accordance with the regulations.

古文：帝是其言，命部议行。
现代文：皇帝认为他的话有理，命令吏部商议施行。
English: The emperor thought his words were reasonable and ordered the officials to discuss and implement them.

古文：明年，给事中余忭复指正、庄等事败，谓宜坐举主。
现代文：第二年，给事中余忭又指出方正、谢庄等办事不成功，认为应该加罪于举荐的人。
English: In the second year, during the case, Yu Yu also pointed out that Fang Zheng, Xie Zhuang and others were not successful, and believed that the crime should be added to the person who recommended.

古文：且言方面郡守有缺，吏部当奏请上裁。
现代文：并且说，地方郡守有缺员，吏部应当奏请皇帝来裁决。
English: Moreover, it was said that there was a shortage of local county governors, and the cadre department should petition the emperor to adjudicate.

古文：尚书王直、英国公张辅等言，方面郡守，保举升用，称职者多，未可擅更易。
现代文：尚书王直、英国公张辅等上奏说，一方的郡守，由保举升迁使用，称职的多，不能擅自改变。
English: Shangshu Wang Zhi, the British public Zhang Fu and others made a report, saying that the county governor of one side, promoted by the guarantee, is more competent and cannot be changed without authorization.

古文：英宗仍从辅、直言，而采忭疏，许言官指劾。
现代文：英宗仍然听从张辅、王直之言，采用余忭的疏奏，允许言官指斥弹劾。
English: Yingzong still listens to the words of Zhang Yu and Wang Zhi, uses the sparse sound of the remaining cymbals, and allows the speaker to denounce the impeachment.

古文：十三年，御史涂谦复陈，举荐得方面郡守，辄改前操之弊。请仍遵洪武旧制，于内外九年考满官内拣择升授，或亲择朝臣才望者任之。
现代文：正统十三年，御史涂谦又陈说举荐得到一方郡守之职便改变先前操行的弊端，请求仍遵循洪武时期旧有的制度，在京官和地方官九年考绩期满的官吏之中选择升官授职，或者亲自选择朝臣中有才能声望的人担任。
English: In the 13th year of the Zhengzhu era, the Grand Historian Tu Qian also said that he would change the drawbacks of the previous practice if he was recommended to be appointed as a county governor. He requested that the old system of the Hongwu period should still be followed, and that he should choose the promotion and appointment among the officials who had completed the nine-year performance evaluation period of the Beijing officials and local officials, or personally select the talented and prestigious people among the courtiers to serve.

古文：诏可。
现代文：下诏同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：大臣举官之例遂罢。
现代文：大臣保举官吏的规程便罢除。
English: The procedure for the promotion of officials by the Minister of Defense was abolished.

古文：景泰中，复行保举。
现代文：景泰年间，又施行保举。
English: During the reign of King Gyeongtae, the promotion system was implemented again.

古文：给事中林聪陈推举骤迁之弊，言： 今缺参政等官三十馀员，请暂令三品以上官保举。
现代文：给事中林聪陈述推举突然升迁的弊端，说： 现参政等官缺少三十多人，请求暂时命令三品以上官员保举。
English: During the meeting, Lin Cong pointed out the drawbacks of the sudden promotion, saying: There are currently more than 30 political appointees and other officials missing, and asked for a temporary order to guarantee the promotion of officials with more than three promotions.

古文：自后惟布、按两司三品以上官连名共举，其馀悉付吏部。 
现代文：从此之后只有布政、按察两司官员由三品以上的官员联名共同保举，其余的全部交付吏部。 
English: From then on, only the officials of the two departments of Bu Zheng and Bao Zha were jointly sponsored by more than three officials, and all the rest were handed over to the cadre department.

古文：诏并从之。
现代文：下诏一并依从办理。
English: The lower jaws obeyed his every command.

古文：成化五年，科道官复请保举方面，吏部因并及郡守。
现代文：成化五年，科道之官又请求保举一方大臣，吏部于是一并连及郡守。
English: In the fifth year of Chenghua, the official of science and technology also requested the promotion of a minister, and the personnel department was merged with the county governor.

古文：帝从言官请，而命知府员缺仍听吏部推举。
现代文：皇帝听从谏官的请求，而命令知府官缺空仍听从吏部推举。
English: The emperor obeyed the eunuch's request, but ordered the prefect's vacancy to still obey the nomination of the cadre.

古文：逾年，以会举多未当，并方面官第令吏部推两员以闻，罢保举之令。
现代文：遇了一年，因联名推举多不恰当，连同地方官只命令吏部推举两人上报，罢除保举的命令。
English: A year later, due to the fact that the joint nomination was mostly inappropriate, together with the local officials, they only ordered the cadre department to nominate two people to report, and the order to guarantee the nomination was cancelled.

古文：既而都御史李宾请令在京五品以上管事官及给事、御史，各举所知以任州县。
现代文：随后，都御史奎宣请求命令在京五品以上管事官以及给事、御史，各自保举所了解的人任州县之官。
English: Subsequently, the governor of the capital, Shi Kuixuan, requested an order to appoint five or more administrators in Beijing, as well as the governor of the capital, and the governor of the capital, respectively, to ensure that the people they knew were appointed as officials of the state and county.

古文：从之。
现代文：朝廷听从其请。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：弘治十二年，复诏部院大臣各举方面郡守。
现代文：弘治十二年，又下诏令部院大臣各自保举一方的郡守。
English: In the 12th year of the Heian period, the Imperial edict was issued again, ordering the cabinet ministers to each appoint a county governor.

古文：吏部因请依往年御史马文升迁按察使、屠滽迁佥都御史之例，超擢一二，以示激劝，而未经大臣荐举者亦兼采之。
现代文：吏部于是请求依照往年御史马文升升迁按察使、屠澝升迁愈都御史的规程，越级提拔一二人，以表示激励，而未经大臣举蔫的也兼采纳录用。
English: The cadre department then requested that one or two people be promoted beyond their grade in accordance with the previous years of promotion and promotion according to the rules of inspectors and inspectors, and that one or two people be promoted beyond their grade to show encouragement, and those who were not promoted by the minister were also accepted.

古文：并从其议。
现代文：皇帝都听从其建议。
English: Emperors followed his advice.

古文：当是时，孝宗锐意求治，命吏、兵二部，每季开两京府部堂上及文武方面官履历，具揭帖奏览。
现代文：当这个时候，孝宗锐意谋求国家治理，命令吏、兵二部，每个季度开列两京府部堂上的官员以及文武方面官员的履历，准备揭帖上奏，以便阅览。
English: At this time, with the intention of seeking national governance, Xiao Zongrui ordered the officials and soldiers of the two departments to list the biographies of the officials in the halls of the two Beijing prefectures and the officials in the field of literature and military affairs every quarter, and prepare to post them for reading.

古文：第兼保举法行之，不专恃以为治也。
现代文：只是兼采保举之法施行，不专门依赖作为治道。
English: It is only the implementation of the law of protection and guarantee, and does not specifically rely on it as a way of governance.

古文：正德以后，具帖之制渐废。
现代文：正德以后，准备揭帖的制度渐渐废弃。
English: After Zhengde, the system of preparing and unveiling posts was gradually abandoned.

古文：嘉靖八年，给事中夏言复请循弘治故事，且及举劾贤否略节，每季孟月，部臣送科以达御前，命著为令。
现代文：嘉靖八年，给事中夏吉又请求遵循弘治旧有制度，并且兼及举荐贤能弹劾不贤的简要报告，每个季度第一月，部臣送科，再送达御前，命令定着为常令。
English: In the eighth year of the Jiajing era, in the middle of the matter, Xia Jie also requested that the old system of Hongzhi be followed, and that a brief report of recommending the virtuous and impeaching the unvirtuous be made. In the first month of each quarter, the minister would send it to the department and then to the emperor, and the order was set as a standing order.

古文：而保举方面郡守之法，终明世不复行矣。
现代文：而保举地方郡守的方法，到明朝终结也不再施行了。
English: However, the method of appointing local county governors will no longer be implemented after tomorrow morning.

古文：至若坐事斥免、因急才而荐擢者，谓之起废。
现代文：至于因事获罪罢免，因人才急用而又被举荐提拔的，叫做起废。
English: As for being removed from office for a crime, those who have been recommended for promotion because their talents are urgently needed are said to have been dismissed.

古文：家居被召、因需缺而预补者，谓之添注。
现代文：居住在家被征召，因需缺而预补的，叫做添注。
English: Those who live at home and are conscripted, and those who are pre-supplied due to shortages, are called supplementary notes.

古文：此又铨法之所未详，而中叶以后间尝一行者也。
现代文：这又是选举官吏之法未能详尽的，而明朝中期以后曾经问或施行一次。
English: This, again, is not exhaustive of the law on the election of officials, but it was asked or implemented once after the middle of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：考满、考察，二者相辅而行。
现代文：考满、考察，二者相辅而施行。
English: The examination and the inspection are carried out in a complementary manner.

古文：考满，论一身所历之俸，其目有三：曰称职，曰平常，曰不称职，为上、中、下三等。
现代文：考满是评价一个人所担任的官职，官俸，其项目有三个：称职、平常、不称职，分成上中下三等。
English: The examination is to evaluate a person's official position and official salary. There are three items: competent, ordinary and incompetent, divided into upper, middle and lower third.

古文：考察，通天下内外官计之，其目有八：曰贪，曰酷，曰浮躁，曰不及，曰老，曰病，曰罢，曰不谨。
现代文：考察，凡是天下京官和地方官都计入考察之列，其项目有八个：贪、酷、浮躁、不及、老、病、罢、不谨。
English: According to the survey, Beijing officials and local officials from all over the world are included in the survey, and there are eight items: greed, cruelty, impetuousness, incompetence, old age, illness, strike, and impudence.

古文：考满之法，三年给由，曰初考，六年曰再考，九年曰通考。
现代文：考满的方法，任职三年其主管长官将其履历提供给吏部，称做给由，叫做初考，六年叫做再考，九年叫做通考。
English: The method of passing the examination is that the supervisor who has been in office for three years provides his resume to the personnel department, calling it a reason, called a preliminary examination, six years is called a re-examination, and nine years is called a general examination.

古文：依《职掌》事例考核升降。
现代文：依照《职掌》成例，考核升迁降黜。
English: In accordance with the "job" example, the assessment of promotion and demotion.

古文：诸部寺所属，初止署职，必考满始实授。外官率递考以待核。
现代文：各部寺所隶属，开初只是署理官职，必定考绩期满纔实授官职，地方官大都递相考察以等待核准。
English: Affiliated to various ministries and temples, at the beginning it was only an acting official position, but it must be awarded official position after the performance evaluation period, and local government officials must submit to the minister for examination to await approval.

古文：杂考或一二年，或三年、九年。
现代文：杂考或一二年，或三年、九年。
English: Miscellaneous examination may take one or two years, or three years, or nine years.

古文：郡县之繁简或不相当，则互换其官，谓之调繁、调简。
现代文：郡县施政的繁与简有的不合适，便互相交换其官职，叫做调繁、调简。
English: When it is found that a county's administration is too complex or too simple, officials will exchange their posts. This is called "adjustment of complexity" or "adjustment of simplicity."

古文：洪武十一年，命吏部课朝觐官殿最。
现代文：洪武十一年，命令吏部考察朝觐官吏的优劣。
English: In the eleventh year of Hongwu, he ordered the cadre department to investigate the merits and demerits of court officials.

古文：称职而无过者为上，赐坐而宴。
现代文：称职而没有过失的为上等，赐坐并参加宴会。
English: Those who are competent and without fault are the best, and are allowed to sit and participate in the banquet.

古文：有过而称职者为中，宴而不坐。
现代文：有过失而又称职的为中等，参加御宴但不赐坐。
English: Those who have faults but are competent are middle-ranking. They attend the banquet but are not allowed to sit down.

古文：有过而不称职者为下，不预宴，序立于门，宴者出，然后退。
现代文：有过失而又不称职的为下等，不参加御宴，按官阶品次站立在门口，等参加御宴的人出来，然后纔退下。
English: Those who are negligent and incompetent are inferior, do not participate in the banquet, stand at the door according to the rank and grade, wait for those who participate in the banquet to come out, and then retreat.

古文：此朝觐考核之始也。
现代文：这是朝觐考核的开始。
English: This is the beginning of the Hajj examination.

古文：十四年，其法稍定。
现代文：洪武十四年，考核官吏之法渐渐确定。
English: In the 14th year of Hongwu, the law on the assessment of officials was gradually determined.

古文：在京六部五品以下，听本衙门正官察其行能，验其勤怠。
现代文：在京的六部官五品以下，听从本衙门正官考察其德行才能，检验其勤政还是怠惰。
English: The six ministers and five subordinate officials in Beijing should listen to this official to examine their virtue and ability, and check whether they are diligent or lazy.

古文：其四品以上，及一切近侍官与御史为耳目风纪之司，及太医院、钦天监、王府官不在常选者，任满黜陟，取自上裁。
现代文：那些四品以上，以及一切近侍之官和御史作为负责视听、严肃风纪的官员，以及太医院、钦天监、王府官不按常例选用的官员，任期满后废黜或提拔，由皇上裁决。
English: Those above the fourth grade, as well as all the officials of the close attendants and the imperial historian as the officials responsible for audio-visual and serious etiquette, as well as the officials of the Tai Hospital, the Qin Tian Guan and the officials of the royal palace who are not selected according to the usual practice, will be dismissed or promoted after the expiration of the term of office, and will be adjudicated by the emperor.

古文：直隶有司首领官及属官，从本司正官考核，任满从监察御史覆考。
现代文：直隶主管部门首领官以及属官，由本部门正职官考核，任期满后由监察御史复考。
English: The head of the department directly under the competent authority and the subordinate officials shall be examined by the official of this department, and after the expiration of the term of office, they shall be reviewed by the inspector.

古文：各布政使司首领官，俱从按察司考核。
现代文：各布政使司的首领官，都由按察司考核。
English: The heads of all political envoys are examined by the inspector general.

古文：其茶马、盐马、盐运、盐课提举司、军职首领官，俱从布政司考核，仍送按察司覆考。
现代文：那些茶马、盐马、盐运、盐课提举司、军职首领官，都由布政司考核，仍然送按察司复考。
English: Those tea horses, salt horses, salt transport, salt class promotion officers, and military leaders were all examined by the Secretary for Political Affairs, and still sent to the inspector for review.

古文：其布政司四品以上，按察司、盐运司五品以上，任满黜陟，取自上裁。
现代文：那些布政司四品以上，按察司、盐运司五品以上，住期满后，贬黜升迁，由皇上裁决。
English: Those who are awarded four or more prizes by the Political Secretary, and five or more prizes by the Inspector General and the Salt Transport Secretary, will be demoted or promoted after the expiration of the residence period, and will be adjudicated by the emperor.

古文：内外入流并杂职官，九年任满，给由赴吏部考核，依例黜陟。
现代文：京官、地方官由九品之外登入九品之内的入流官员和九品之外担任各项杂职的官员，九年任期满，给由到吏部考核，依照常例贬黜或升迁。
English: Beijing officials and local officials who are promoted from outside the nine grades to within the nine grades, and officials who are promoted from outside the nine grades to various miscellaneous posts, will be examined by the Personnel Department after the nine-year term is over, and will be demoted or promoted in accordance with the usual practice.

古文：果有殊勋异能、超迈等伦者，取自上裁。
现代文：如果确实有特殊功勋、特异才能、卓越不凡的人，由皇上裁决。
English: If there are indeed people with special merits, special talents, and extraordinary excellence, the emperor will make a ruling.

古文：又以事之繁简，与历官之殿最，相参互核，为等第之升降。
现代文：又按职事的繁简，与任职的优劣，相互参证考核，作为等第的升迁或贬降。
English: In addition, according to the complexity and simplicity of the job, and the advantages and disadvantages of the post, mutual reference assessment, as the promotion or demotion of the grade.

古文：其繁简之例，在外府以田粮十五万石以上，州以七万石以上，县以三万石以上，或亲临王府都、布政、按察三司，并有军马守御，路当驿道，边方冲要供给处，俱为事繁。
现代文：那些职事繁筒的规制，在地方，府以田粮十五万石以上，州以田粮七万石以上，县以田粮三万石以上，或亲临王府都、布政、按察三司，并且有军马守御，道路正当驿道，边疆要冲，需要供给的地方，都属于职事繁复。
English: As for the regulation of the duties and responsibilities, in the localities, where the prefecture has more than 150,000 koku of field grain, the prefecture has more than 70,000 koku of field grain, and the county has more than 30,000 koku of field grain, or the three departments of the royal capital, cloth administration, and inspection, and there are military horses to guard, the road is a legitimate road, the border is to be washed, and it needs to be supplied, all belong to the duties and responsibilities.

古文：府粮不及十五万石，州不及七万石，县不及三万石，及僻静处，俱为事简。
现代文：府粮不到十五万石，州粮不到七万石，县粮不到三万石，以及偏僻的地方，都属于职事简单。
English: The prefectural grain is less than 150,000 koku, the state grain is less than 70,000 koku, the county grain is less than 30,000 koku, and the remote places are all simple jobs.

古文：在京诸司，俱从繁例。
现代文：在京各司都按职事繁复的规定看待。
English: In Beijing, all departments are treated according to the regulations of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：十六年，京官考核之制稍有裁酌，俱由其长开具送部核考。
现代文：洪武十六年，京官考核的制度稍微有变动，都由各职司的长官开列送吏部考核。
English: In the 16th year of Hongwu, there was a slight change in the examination system of Beijing officials. The heads of each function were listed and sent to the cadre department for examination.

古文：十八年，吏部言天下布、按、府、州、县朝觐官，凡四千一百一十七人，称职者十之一，平常者十之七，不称职者十之一，而贪污阘茸者亦共得十之一。
现代文：洪武十八年，吏部上言说，天下布、按、府、州、县朝觐之官，一共四千一百一十七人，称职的只有十分之一，平常的占十分之七，不称职的占十分之一，而贪污低劣的也一共考核得十分之一。
English: In the 18th year of Hongwu, the head of the cadre department said that there were a total of 4,117 officials of cloth, press, prefectural, state and county courts in the world, and only one-tenth were competent, seven-tenths were ordinary, one-tenth were incompetent, and one-tenth were corrupt and inferior.

古文：帝令称职者升，平常者复职，不称职者降，贪污者付法司罪之，阘茸者免为民。
现代文：皇帝命令称职的人升迁，平常的人复职，不称职的降职，贪污的人交付执法机关治罪，低劣平庸的免官为民。
English: The emperor ordered competent people to be promoted, ordinary people to be reinstated, incompetent people to be demoted, corrupt people to be handed over to law enforcement agencies to be punished, and inferior and mediocre people to be dismissed.

古文：永、宣间，中外官旧未有例者，稍增入之。
现代文：永乐、宣德年间，京官和地方官旧时没有考核规定的，逐渐增入。
English: During the Yongle and Xuande eras, the number of Beijing officials and local officials, who were not required to pass the examination in the old days, gradually increased.

古文：又从部议，初考称职、次考未经考核、今考称职者，若初考平常、次考未经考核、今考称职者，俱依称职例升用。
现代文：又听从吏部的提议，初考称职，次考没有经过考核，现在考核称职的，或者初考平常，次考没有经过考核，现在考核称职的，都依照称职之例升用。
English: and listen to the proposal of the Personnel Department, the initial examination is competent, the second examination has not been assessed, and now the assessment is competent, or the initial examination is normal, the second examination has not been assessed, and now the assessment is competent, all in accordance with the example of competence.

古文：自时厥后，大率遵旧制行之。中间利弊不可枚举，而其法无大变更也。
现代文：从此之后，大都遵照旧有的制度施行，中间的利与弊不能一条一条地全部举出，而其方法没有大的变动。
English: Since then, most of them have been implemented in accordance with the old system. The intermediate advantages and disadvantages cannot be listed one by one, and there has been no major change in their methods.

古文：考察之法，京官六年，以巳、亥之岁，四品以上自陈以取上裁，五品以下分别致仕、降调、闲住为民者有差，具册奏请，谓之京察。
现代文：考察的办法。京官六年，在逢巳、亥之年，四品以上的官自我陈述而取决于皇上裁定，五品以下分别为致仕、降调、闲住为民等各种不同的处理，造成名册上奏请求决定，叫做京察。
English: Six years of Beijing officials, in the year of the snake and the boar, the self-declaration of officials with four or more awards depended on the emperor's ruling, and the five or fewer awards were handled in different ways, such as promotion, demotion, and idle living as citizens, resulting in the decision to submit a request for the roster, called Beijing inspection.

古文：自弘治时，定外官三年一朝觐，以辰、戌、丑、未岁，察典随之，谓之外察。
现代文：从弘治时，决定地方官二年入京朝觐一次，在辰、戌、丑、未年，考核随之进行，叫做外察。
English: From the time of Hongzhi, it was decided that local officials would enter Beijing once every two years for the imperial court, in the year of the dragon, the rooster, the ox and the rooster, and the assessment would be carried out accordingly, which is called foreign inspection.

古文：州县以月计，上之府，府上下其考，以岁计，上之布政司。
现代文：州县以月计上交给府，府考核决定上下，以岁计上呈布政司。
English: States and counties submit to the prefectural government on a monthly basis, the prefectural assessment decision is up and down, and it is submitted to the Department of Political Affairs on a yearly basis.

古文：至三岁，抚、按通核其属事状，造册具报，丽以八法。
现代文：到三年，巡抚、巡按通核其属员各种情况，造成名册上报，附加八法。
English: By the third year, the supervisors and inspectors had verified the various conditions of their subordinates, resulting in the report of the roster and the addition of eight laws.

古文：而处分察例有四，与京官同。
现代文：而处理考察规程有四项，与京官相同。
English: However, there are four procedures for handling the inspection, which are the same as the Beijing officials.

古文：明初行之，相沿不废，谓之大计。
现代文：明初施行考察法，相沿使用而不废弃，叫做大计。
English: At the beginning of the Ming Dynasty, the inspection method was implemented, and it was used in parallel without being discarded, which is called the general plan.

古文：计处者，不复叙用，定为永制。
现代文：大计考核，予以处分的，不再录用，定为长远的制度。
English: Comprehensive assessment, to be punished, no longer recruited, as a long-term system.

古文：洪武四年命工部尚书朱守仁廉察山东莱州诸郡官吏。
现代文：洪武四年，命令工部尚书朱守仁察访山东莱州各郡的官吏。
English: In the fourth year of Hongwu, he ordered the Ministry of Industry and Commerce's Shangshu Zhu Shou Renchu to visit officials in counties in Laizhou, Shandong.

古文：六年，令御史台御史及各道按察司察举有司官有无过犯，奏报黜陟，此考察之始也。
现代文：六年，命令御史台的御史和各道按察司察核检举主管官吏有没有犯罪行为，上奏报告升和降，这是考察官吏的开始。
English: In six years, he ordered the inspectors of the History Channel and the inspectors of each province to investigate whether the officials in charge of prosecution had any criminal acts, and to report the promotion and demotion. This was the beginning of the inspection of officials.

古文：洪熙时，命御史考察在外官，以奉命者不能无私，谕吏部尚书蹇义严加戒饬，务矢至公。
现代文：洪熙时期，命令御史考察在京外的官吏，因奉命的人不能没有偏私，训谕吏部尚书蹇义严格地加以告诫，务必绝对公正。
English: During the Hongxi period, the imperial historian was ordered to inspect officials outside Beijing. Since those who received the order could not be unbiased, the officials were strictly warned in writing that they must be absolutely fair.

古文：景泰二年，吏部、都察院考察当黜退者七百三十馀人。
现代文：景泰二年，吏部、都察院考察应当罢黜的官员七百三十多人。
English: In the second year of Jingtai, more than 730 officials who should be dismissed were investigated by the Ministry of Personnel and the Central Investigation Agency.

古文：帝虑其未当，仍集诸大臣更考，存留者三之一。
现代文：皇帝担心他们的考核不恰当，于是会集众大臣重新考核，保留下来的有三分之一。
English: The emperor was worried that their evaluation was not appropriate, so he gathered the ministers to re-evaluate, retaining one-third.

古文：成化五年，南京吏部右侍郎章纶、都察院右佥都御史高明考察庶官。
现代文：成化五年，南京吏部右侍郎章纶、都察院右余都御史高明考察众官。
English: In the fifth year of the Jianhua era, the Right Attendant of the Nanjing Cadastre, Zhang Jun, and the Right Assistant of the Duka Academy, Gao Ming, inspected the officials.

古文：帝以各衙门掌印官不同佥名，疑有未当，令侍郎叶盛、都给事中毛弘从公体勘，亦有所更定。弘治六年考察，当罢者共一千四百员，又杂职一千一百三十五员。
现代文：皇帝因为各衙门的掌印官不共同签名，怀疑有不恰当的地方，命令侍郎叶盛、都给事中毛弘从公勘察，弘治六年，经考察应当罢官的共有一千四百人，还有杂职人员一千一百三十五人。
English: The emperor, suspecting that there was something improper about the fact that the officials in charge of the seals of all the imperial residences did not sign jointly, ordered Ye Sheng, the steward, and Mao Hong, the steward, to conduct a public investigation into the matter. After six years of investigation, there were a total of fourteen hundred people who should be dismissed from their posts, as well as eleven hundred and thirty-five miscellaneous employees.

古文：帝谕： 方面知府必指实迹，毋虚文泛言，以致枉人。
现代文：皇帝训谕： 一方知府必须指明实迹，不要空文泛论，以至于冤屈人。
English: Emperor's edict: On the other hand, the prefectural government must point out the actual facts, not make empty generalizations, so that the wrongdoer is wronged.

古文：府州以下任未三年者，亦通核具奏。 
现代文：府州以下任官不到三年的，也全部考核详细上奏。 
English: For prefectural and lower-level officials who have been in office for less than three years, all of their performance evaluations are also recorded in detail.

古文：尚书王恕等具陈以请，而以府、州、县官贪鄙殃民者，虽年浅不可不黜。
现代文：尚书王恕等人都详细陈说请求，而以府、州、县官中贪婪鄙陋殃害人民的，即使任职年限短也不能不废黜。
English: Shangshu Wangshu and others have made detailed requests, and the greed and meanness of prefectural, state, and county officials that have harmed the people, even if the term of office is short, cannot but be dethroned.

古文：帝终谓人才难得，降谕谆谆，多所原宥。
现代文：皇帝终究认为人才难得，降谕旨谆谆劝勉，很多都得到宽恕。
English: After all, the emperor believed that talent was rare, and many people were pardoned.

古文：当黜而留者九十馀员。
现代文：应当贬黜而留下的九十多人。
English: There are more than ninety people left behind who should be deported.

古文：给事、御史又交章请黜遗漏及宜退而留者，复命吏部指实迹，恕疏各官考语及本部访察者以闻。
现代文：给事、御史又纷纷上书请求罢黜遗漏的以及应黜退而却留任的，又命令吏部指出实迹。王恕条疏各官考核评语以及本部访察的报告上奏。
English: Wang Shujia also ordered the personnel department to point out the actual records. Wang Shujia omitted the evaluation comments of various officials and the report of the headquarters visit.

古文：帝终以考语为未实，谕令复核。
现代文：皇帝最终以考查评语不实，训谕命令重新核实。
English: In the end, the emperor ruled that the review was untrue and ordered that it be re-verified.

古文：恕以言不用，且疑有中伤者，遂力求去。
现代文：王恕因上奏不被采用，并且怀疑有人中伤，于是竭力请求离职。
English: Wang Shou was not hired because of his performance, and suspected that someone had slandered him, so he tried his best to ask for his resignation.

古文：至十四年，南京吏部尚书林瀚言，在外司府以下官，俱三年一次考察，两京及在外武职官，亦五年一考选，惟两京五品以下官，十年始一考察，法大阔略。
现代文：至弘治十四年，南京吏部尚书林瀚上奏，在地方司府以下官吏，都是三年一次考察，两京以及在外武职官吏，也是五年一次考核选拔，只有两京五品以下官吏，十年纔一次考察，法令太宽容。
English: By the 14th year of the Hongzhi era, Nanjing's cadre department, Shang Shulin, was in full swing, and officials below the local government were inspected once every three years, and officials in the two capitals and foreign military officials were inspected and selected once every five years. Only officials in the two capitals and below the fifth grade were inspected once every ten years, and the laws and regulations were too lenient.

古文：旨下，吏部覆请如瀚言，而京官六年一察之例定矣。
现代文：圣旨下达，吏部又请求按照林瀚的上言办，而京官六年考察一次的规程确定下来。
English: The imperial edict was issued, and the cadre department requested that the matter be handled in accordance with Lin Han's suggestion, and the procedure for the six-yearly inspection by the Beijing officials was determined.

古文：京察之岁，大臣自陈。
现代文：京官考察那一年，大臣自己陈述。
English: In the year of the Beijing official's inspection, the minister himself made a statement.

古文：去留既定，而居官有遗行者，给事、御史纠劾，谓之拾遗。
现代文：罢除、留用已定，而留用之官有失于检束行焉者，给事、御史系举弹劾，叫做拾遗。
English: The removal or retention of an official has already been decided, and if the appointed official fails to comply with the prosecution, he or she will be impeached, which is called "picking up the remains."

古文：拾遗所攻击，无获免者。
现代文：拾遣所攻击的人，没有获得赦免的。
English: There is no pardon for those who attack the House of Representatives.

古文：弘、正、嘉、隆间，士大夫廉耻自重，以挂察典为终身之玷。
现代文：弘治、正德、嘉靖、隆庆年间，士大夫以廉耻自我尊重，以触犯考核大典为终身的污点。
English: During the Hongzhi, Zhengde, Jiajing, and Longqing dynasties, the scholar-bureaucrats were shameless in their self-respect, and regarded the violation of the examination code as a lifelong blemish.

古文：至万历时，阁臣有所徇庇，间留一二以挠察典，而群臣水火之争，莫甚于辛亥、丁巳，事具各传中。
现代文：到万历时期，阁臣有所徇私庇护，间或留下一二以扰乱考察大典，而群臣之间水火不容的争执，没有什么时候比辛亥、丁巳更厉害的了，事情都记在各传中。
English: In the Wanli period, the courtiers protected their own interests, occasionally leaving one or two to disturb the inspection of the great ceremony, and the fierce disputes between the courtiers were never more severe than in Xinhai and Dingxi, and the events are recorded in each legend.

古文：党局既成，互相报复，至国亡乃已。
现代文：朋党的格局已经形成，互相报复，直到国家灭亡纔停止。
English: A pattern of cronyism has formed, with each side taking revenge on the other until the country's demise comes to a halt.

古文：兵部凡四司，而武选掌除授，职方掌军政，其职尤要。
现代文：兵部一共有四个司，而武选司执掌授官，职方司执掌军队政务，其职位尤其显要。
English: There are a total of four divisions in the Ministry of Military Affairs, and the Military Selection Division is in charge of awarding officers, and the Staff Division is in charge of military government affairs, and their positions are particularly important.

古文：凡武职，内则五府、留守司，外则各都司、各卫所及三宣、六慰。
现代文：凡是武职，京官则是五府、留守司，地方则是各个都司、各卫所以及三宣、六慰。
English: In terms of military duties, the Beijing officials are the five prefectures and the detaining officers, and the local officials are the various prefectural governors, the various defense offices, and the three missions and six consuls.

古文：流官八等，都督及同知、佥事，都指挥使、同知、佥事，正副留守。
现代文：朝廷派遣的流官分八等：都督及同知、愈事，都指挥使、同知、愈事，正副留守。
English: The officials dispatched by the imperial court are divided into eight grades: the governor of the capital, his or her relatives and acquaintances, and those who are away on business, are in charge of the envoy, his or her relatives and acquaintances, and those who are away on business.

古文：世官九等：指挥使及同知、佥事，卫、所镇抚，正、副千户，百户，试百户。
现代文：家族世袭的世官九等：指挥使及同知、愈事，卫、所镇抚，正、副千户，百户，试百户。
English: There are nine ranks of hereditary officials in a family: the commander and the comrade-in-arms, the elder, the guard, the commander-in-chief, the senior and the junior, the thousand, the hundred, and the hundred.

古文：直省都指挥使二十一，留守司二，卫九十一，守御、屯田、群牧千户所二百十有一。
现代文：直省都指挥使二十一人，留守司二人，卫九十一人，守御、屯田、群牧千户所二百一十一人。
English: There are twenty-one direct provincial commanders, two left-behind officers, ninety-one guards, and two hundred and eleven guards, garrisons, and herdsmen.

古文：此外则苗蛮土司，皆听部选。
现代文：此外，苗蛮土司，都听从部选。
English: In addition, both Miao and Tusi obeyed the ministry.

古文：自永乐初增立三大营，各设管操官，各哨有分管、坐营官、坐司官。
现代文：从永乐初年，增加设立三大营，各自设置管操官，各哨有分管、坐营官、坐司官。
English: Since the first year of Yongle, the establishment of three major battalions has been increased, each with a management officer, and each post has a branch manager, camp officer, and officer.

古文：景泰中，设团营十，已复增二，各有坐营官，俱特命亲信大臣提督之，非兵部所铨择也。
现代文：景泰年间，设立团营十个，随后又增加二个，各自有坐营官，都特命亲近信任的大臣提督，不是由兵部选择官员。
English: During the reign of King Taejo, ten regimental battalions were established, and two more were added later. Each battalion had its own camp officer, and all of them were especially close to the trusted minister admiral, rather than officers selected by the military.

古文：凡大选，曰色目，曰状貌，曰才行，曰封赠，曰袭荫。
现代文：凡是大选，称色目、状貌、才行、封赠、袭荫。
English: Whenever there is a general election, it's all about color, appearance, talent, gifts, and influence.

古文：其途有四，曰世职，曰武举，曰行伍，曰纳级。
现代文：其途径有四条：一是世职，二是武举，三是行伍，四是纳级。
English: There are four ways to achieve this: the first is to be promoted, the second is to be promoted, the third is to be promoted, and the fourth is to be promoted.

古文：初，武职率以勋旧。
现代文：当初，武官大都以勋旧充任。
English: At first, military attachés were mostly appointed on merit.

古文：太祖虑其不率，以《武士训戒录》、《大诰武臣录》颁之。
现代文：太祖担心其不守规矩，用《武士训戒录》、《大诰武臣录》颁发给他们。
English: The great-grandfather was worried that they would not follow the rules, and issued them with the "Samurai Discipline Record" and the "Great Imperial Retainers Record."

古文：后乃参用将材，三岁武举，六岁会举，每岁荐举，皆隶部除授。
现代文：以后纔参用将才，三年武举，六年会举，每年荐举，都隶属于兵部授官。
English: In the future, the three-year military training, the six-year meeting, and the annual recommendation are all subordinated to the military department.

古文：久之，法纪隳坏，选用纷杂。
现代文：以后，法纪败坏，选用人才纷乱混杂。
English: Since then, the legal discipline has deteriorated, and the selection of talents has been chaotic.

古文：正德间，冒功升授者三千有奇。
现代文：正德年间，冒功升官的人三千有余。
English: During the Zhengde era, more than three thousand people were promoted for their merits.

古文：嘉靖中，詹事霍韬言： 成化中，增太祖时军职四倍，今又增几倍矣。
现代文：嘉靖年间，詹事霍韬上疏说：成化年间，比太祖时军职增加四倍，现在又增加几倍了。
English: During the Jiajing period, Zhan Shizhi Huo Quan Shang Zuo said: During the Chenghua period, the military post increased four times compared to the time of the great-grandfather, and now it has increased several times.

古文：锦衣初额官二百五员，今至千七百员，殆增八倍。
现代文：锦衣卫初期额定官员二百零五人，现在达到了一千七百人，大致增加了八倍。
English: In the early days of Jinriwei, there were two hundred and five officials, and now there are one thousand seven hundred, which is roughly an eightfold increase.

古文：洪武初，军功袭职子弟年二十者比试，初试不中，袭职署事，食半俸。
现代文：洪武初年，以军功世袭职务的子弟年龄在二十岁的要比试。初试不合格，袭职代理办事，享受一半的俸禄。
English: In the first year of Hongwu's reign, the twenty-year-old son of a man who inherited his position through military merit sat for a competitive examination. He failed the initial examination, but was appointed as an acting officer and received half of his salary.

古文：二年再试，中者食全俸，仍不中者充军。
现代文：第二年再试，合格者享受全俸，仍然不合格者入伍当兵。
English: Retry the second year, those who pass enjoy full salary, those who still fail to pass are enlisted as soldiers.

古文：其法至严，故职不冗而俸易给。
现代文：其法制很严格，所以官职不烦冗而俸禄易于供给。
English: Its legal system is very strict, so the official position is not cumbersome and the salary is easy to provide.

古文：自永乐后，新官免试，旧官即比试，贿赂无不中，此军职所以日滥也。
现代文：自从永乐以后，新任官免于考试，旧官纔比试，贿赂考官没有不合格的，造就是军官职位一天天泛滥的原因。
English: Ever since Yongle, new officials have been exempted from the examination, old officials have passed the competitive examination, and bribed examiners have not failed to pass the examination, which is the reason for the proliferation of officer positions day by day.

古文：永乐平交阯，赏而不升。
现代文：永乐时平定交趾，赏赐而不升官。
English: When Yongle subdued a comrade, he rewarded the comrade without promotion.

古文：迩者不但获馘者升，而奏带及缉妖言捕盗者亦无不升，此军职所以益冗也。
现代文：近来不但获俘馘的人升官，而奏带以及搜捕妖言、捕捉盗贼的人也没有不升官的，这便是军职越来越烦冗的原因。
English: Recently, not only those who have been captured and killed have been promoted, but also those who have played musical instruments, hunted down evil spirits, and caught thieves have also been promoted. This is the reason why military posts are becoming more and more cumbersome.

古文：宜命大臣循清黄例，内外武职一切差次功劳，考其祖宗相承，叔侄兄弟继及。
现代文：应该命令大臣遵照清黄规程，京内、地方的武职一律排列功劳等次，考察其祖宗相承，叔侄兄弟相继。
English: The minister should be ordered to follow the Qing and Huang regulations, ranking the military posts in Beijing and localities in order of merit, examining their ancestral lineage, uncles and nephews in succession.

古文：或洪、永年间功，或宣德以后功，或内监弟侄恩荫，或勋戚驸马子孙，或武举取中，各分数等，默寓汰省之法。
现代文：有的是洪武、永乐年间的功劳，有的是宣德以后的功劳，有的是内监兄弟侄儿以恩荫封，有的是勋戚驸马子孙，有的是武举考试取中，各自分出敷个等次，暗中寄寓汰除减省的方法。
English: Some are the merits of the years of Hongwu and Yongle, some are the merits after Xuan De, some are the brothers and nephews of the supervisor, some are the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants

古文：或许世袭，或许终身，或许继，或不许继，各具册籍，昭示明白，以为激劝。 
现代文：有的允许世袭，有的允许结束于自身，有的允许继承，有的不允许继承，各自列入册籍，明白昭示，以此作为激励武官的手段。
English: Some allow heredity, some allow it to end in themselves, some allow inheritance, some do not allow inheritance, each is included in the register, clearly indicated, as a means of motivating military officers.

古文：于是命给事中夏言等查核冒滥。
现代文：于是命令给事中夏言等人查核不合格而滥任之官。
English: As a result, the order was given to Natsugen and others in the case to check the unqualified and abusive officials.

古文：言等指陈其弊，言： 镇守官奏带旧止五名，今至三四百名，盖一人而奏带数处者有之，一时而数处获功者有之。
现代文：夏言等指出并陈述其弊端，上奏说： 镇守官奏带旧时只有五名，现在达到了三四百名，原因是有一人而奏带几处的，有一时而数处获得功劳的。
English: Xia Yan and others pointed out and stated its drawbacks, and the report said: In the old days, there were only five town guards who played the role, but now there are three or four hundred. The reason is that there is one person who plays the role in several places, and there is one person who plays the role in several places.

古文：他复巧立名色，纪验不加审核，铨选又无驳勘，其改正重升、并功加授之类，弊端百出，宜尽革以昭神断。 
现代文：其它又巧立名目，纪验不加以审察考核，铨选又没有批驳勘验，那些改正重新升迁，并功加官授任之类，弊端百出，应该全部革除以昭示圣君的明断。 
English: Others have cleverly set up names, disciplinary examinations are not subject to examination and assessment, and selection is not subject to examination and disapproval. Those who have been corrected and promoted, and those who have been awarded official positions, are full of defects, and should all be eliminated to show the saint's clear decision.

古文：部核如议。
现代文：兵部核实按他们的议论办。
English: The verification by the Ministry of Military Affairs will be carried out according to their discussion.

古文：恩幸冗滥者，裁汰以数千计，宿蠹为清。
现代文：恩荫侥幸烦冗遇滥的，裁除数干人，长期积累的弊端为之清明。
English: For those who have been overworked and overindulged, several cadres have been dismissed, and the long-term accumulated drawbacks have become clear.

古文：万历十五年，复诏严加察核。
现代文：万历十五年，又下诏严加审察核实。
English: After 15 years of hard work, it was again subjected to strict inspection and verification.

古文：且尝命提、镇、科道会同兵部，品年资，课技艺，序荐剡，分为三等，名曰公选。
现代文：并且还曾命令提、镇、科道会同兵部，品评年岁资历，考核技术武艺，排列推荐文书，分成三等，名叫公选。
English: Moreover, he also ordered that the military, township, science and technology associations and the military department should be divided into three classes, namely, public election, to evaluate seniority, assessment of technical martial arts, and arrangement of recommendation documents.

古文：然徒饰虚名，终鲜实效也。
现代文：然而只是徒有虚名，终究少有实际功效。
English: However, it is only a false name, and after all, it has little practical effect.

古文：武官爵止六品，其职死者袭，老疾者替，世久而绝，以旁支继。
现代文：武官的爵位只有六个品级，因职而死的人由子孙袭封，老病的人由子孙代替，世代久传而断绝的人，以旁支继承。
English: There are only six ranks for the title of military attaché. Those who die in the line of duty are succeeded by their descendants, those who are chronically ill are replaced by their descendants, and those who have been passed down for generations but have been discontinued are succeeded by collateral branches.

古文：年六十者子替。
现代文：年龄六十岁的，儿子代替。
English: The 60-year-old was replaced by his son.

古文：明初定例，嫡子袭替，长幼次及之。
现代文：明代初期制定的规程，嫡子袭封和代职，长幼依次继承。
English: According to the regulations established at the beginning of the Ming Dynasty, the eldest son would succeed to the throne and the deputy post, and the eldest son and the youngest son would succeed in turn.

古文：绝者，嫡子庶子孙次及之；又绝者，以弟继。
现代文：绝嗣的，由嫡子的庶子孙，依次继承；又绝嗣的，以弟襁承。
English: If there is no heir, the illegitimate children of the legitimate son succeed in turn; if there is no heir, the younger brother succeeds.

古文：永乐后，取官舍旗军馀丁曾历战功者，令原带俸及管事袭替，悉因之。
现代文：永乐以后，选取官吏中四卫营的官军编外人员曾经经历过战争而立功的，命其原带俸以及管事袭封或代替，后世全部沿袭下来。
English: After Yongle, the selection of officials in the middle of the four guards battalion of the government army, who had experienced the war and made meritorious contributions, was ordered to be sealed or replaced by their original salaries and managers, and all of them were inherited by future generations.

古文：其降级子孙仍替见降职事。
现代文：那些降级官员的子孙仍然替代被降的职事。
English: The children and grandchildren of those demoted officials still fill the positions they were demoted from.

古文：弘治时，令旁支减级承袭。
现代文：弘治年间，命令旁支降级承袭爵位。
English: During the Koji era, he ordered subordinates to be demoted in order to inherit the peerage.

古文：正德中，令旁支入总旗。
现代文：正德年间，命令旁支加入总旗。
English: During the Zhengde era, it ordered the subordinate branches to join the general banner.

古文：嘉靖间，旁支无功者，不得保送。
现代文：嘉靖年间，旁支无功的人不能保送。
English: During the Jiajing period, those who did not make any contribution could not be pardoned.

古文：凡升职官舍，如父职。
现代文：凡是升职的官吏，如同父亲的职位。
English: Every official who is promoted to a higher position is like a father.

古文：其阵亡保袭者，流官一等。
现代文：那些因父亲阵亡而抚养袭封的，改变官阶一个等次。
English: Those whose fathers were killed in the war and who were brought up to succeed to the throne will have their official ranks changed by one rank.

古文：凡袭替官舍，以骑射试之。
现代文：凡是袭封代替的官吏，以骑马射箭的方式考核。
English: All officials who are replacing the seal are evaluated by riding a horse and shooting arrows.

古文：大抵世职难核，故例特详，而长弊丛奸，亦复不少。
现代文：大致说来，世袭之职难以考核，旧的规程特别详细，而滋长弊端丛生奸乱也不少。
English: Generally speaking, the hereditary post is difficult to assess, the old regulations are particularly detailed, and there are also many malpractices and conflicts.

古文：官之大者，必会推。
现代文：大的官吏，必定会聚公推。
English: High-ranking officials are sure to flock to the public meeting.

古文：五军都督府掌印缺，于见任公、侯、伯取一人。
现代文：五军都督府掌印官缺员，在现任公、侯、伯中选取一人担当。
English: There is a vacancy for the official in charge of the seals of the five military governor-generals' offices, and one person will be selected from among the current prince, lord, and count.

古文：佥书缺，于带俸公、侯、伯及在京都指挥，在外正副总兵官，推二人。
现代文：余事缺员，在带俸公、侯、伯以及在京都指挥中选拔，地方正副总兵官，推举二人。
English: In the event of a vacancy, there will be two candidates for the position of the local commander-in-chief and deputy commander-in-chief, who will be selected from the district commander-in-chief, the district commander-in-chief, the district commander-in-chief and the district commander-in-chief.

古文：锦衣卫堂上官及前卫掌印缺，视五府例推二人。
现代文：锦衣卫堂上官以及前卫掌印官缺员，按照五府规定推举二人。
English: In accordance with the regulations of the five prefectures, the superintendent of the Palace of the Grand Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager.

古文：都指挥、留守以下，上一人。
现代文：都指挥、留守以下，上推一人。
English: Those who are in charge and those who are absent should be promoted to the next level.

古文：正德十六年，令五府及锦衣卫必由都指挥屡著勋猷者升授。
现代文：正德十六年，命令五府以及锦衣卫必定由都指挥屡次建立显著功勋的人升任。
English: In the 16th year of Zhengde, he ordered that the five prefectures and the brocade guards must be commanded by people who have repeatedly established significant merits.

古文：诸卫官不世，独锦衣以世。
现代文：诸卫官不世袭，祇有锦衣卫世袭。
English: The guards are not hereditary, only the brocade guards are hereditary.

古文：武之军政，犹文之考察也。
现代文：武官的治军政绩，犹如文官的考察。
English: The military and political achievements of military officers are just as important as those of civilian officials.

古文：成化二年，令五年一行，以见任掌印、带俸、差操及初袭官一体考核。
现代文：成化二年，命令五年实行一次考绩，以现任掌印、带俸、差操以及初袭官一同考核。
English: Two years later, he ordered that a performance appraisal be carried out once every five years, with the incumbent's palm print, salary, drill and first-time officer being evaluated together.

古文：十三年令两京通考以为常。
现代文：成化十三年，命令两京通通考核以为常规。
English: In the thirteenth year of Chenghua, the two cities were ordered to pass the examination as a general rule.

古文：五府大臣及锦衣卫堂上官自陈候旨，直省总兵官如之。
现代文：五府的大臣以及锦衣卫堂上官自己述职等侯圣旨裁定，直属行省的总兵官也像这样。
English: The ministers of the five prefectures and the shogun of the Palace of the Grand Master of the Sacred Sacred Heart of the Sacred Heart of the Emperor, as well as the commanders-in-chief of the armed forces of the provinces directly under the shogunate, also ruled in this way.

古文：在内五府所属并直省卫所官，悉由巡视官及部官注送；在外都司、卫所官，由抚、按造册缴部。
现代文：在京五府所属和直属行省的卫所官，仝部由巡视官以及部官注明考核情况报送朝廷；在地方的都司、卫所官，由抚、按造册上缴兵部。
English: In the five prefectures of Beijing that belong to and are directly subordinated to the provinces of the Ministry of Defense, the inspection officers and officials of the Ministry of Defense shall report the assessment status to the Imperial Court; in the local capital city, the officials of the Ministry of Defense shall submit to the Ministry of Defense according to the record.

古文：副参以下，千户以上，由都、布、按三司察注送抚，咨部考举题奏。
现代文：副参以下，干户以上，由都、布、按三司考察注明情况报送抚署，咨询兵部考核举荐题奏。
English: Subordinate staff below, cadres above, from the capital, cloth, according to the three departments to investigate the situation, report to the social security department, consult the military department assessment and make a recommendation.

古文：锦衣卫管戎务者倍加严考，南、北镇抚次之。
现代文：锦衣卫管戎务的人加倍严格考核，南、北镇抚其次。
English: Those who are in charge of military affairs in brocade and clothing are subject to more rigorous assessment, followed by those in southern and northern townships.

古文：各卫所及地方守御并各都司隶巡抚者，例同。
现代文：各卫所以及地方守御官吏并各都司隶属巡抚者，规程相同。
English: The regulations are the same for all sanctuaries, local governors and officials, as well as for those who are subordinate to the governor of each capital city.

古文：惟管漕运者不与考。
现代文：只有管漕运的官吏不参与考核。
English: Only officials of the China Railway Administration did not participate in the assessment.

