古文：高行周，字尚质，幽州人也。
现代文：高行周，字尚质，幽州人。
English: Gao Xing Zhou, the character is still quality, Yuzhou people.

古文：生于妫州怀戎军之雕窠里。
现代文：出生于妫州怀戎军的雕窠里。
English: He was born in the village of Zhaoju of Wai Rong Army in Zhangzhou.

古文：曾祖顺厉，世戍怀戎。
现代文：曾祖父高顺厉，一生在怀戎军任职。
English: Great-grandfather Gao Shunli served in the Wai Rong Army all his life.

古文：父思继，昆仲三人，俱雄豪有武干，声驰朔塞。
现代文：父亲高思继，有兄弟三人，都英勇豪健有武略，名声传遍朔方。
English: His father, Gao Siji, had three brothers, all of whom were brave and courageous, and their fame spread far and wide.

古文：唐武皇之平幽州也，表刘仁恭为帅，仍留兵以戍之。
现代文：后唐武皇平定幽州时，上表推荐刘仁恭做统帅，又留下军队来戍守幽州。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, when Emperor Wu conquered Yuzhou, the above table recommended Liu Rengong as commander-in-chief, and left an army to defend Yuzhou.

古文：以思继兄为先锋都将、妫州刺史，思继为中军都将、顺州刺史，思继弟为后军都将，昆仲分掌燕兵。
现代文：以高思继的哥哥担任先锋都将、妫州刺史，高思继提任中军总将、顺州刺史，高思继的弟弟担任后军都将，兄弟分别掌领燕地军队。
English: With Gao Si Jie's elder brother as the vanguard, both of them will lead the Yanzhou army, Gao Si Jie as the general of the Chinese army and Shunzhou army, and Gao Si Jie's younger brother as the rear army, and the brothers will respectively lead the Yan army.

古文：部下士伍，皆山北之豪也，仁恭深惮之。
现代文：部下士卒，都是山北的豪杰，刘仁恭非常畏惧他们。
English: Liu Renkong was very afraid of his subordinates, who were all heroes from Shandong Province.

古文：武皇将归，私谓仁恭曰： 高先锋兄弟，势倾州府，为燕患者，必此族也，宜善筹之。 
现代文：后唐武皇准备南归以前，私下对刘仁恭说： 高先锋兄弟三人，势力覆盖州府，将成为燕地后患的，一定是这一家人，你要善于谋划。 
English: Before Emperor Wu of the Later Tang Dynasty prepared to return to the south, he said to Liu Rengong in private: The three Gao Vanguard brothers, whose power covers the state capital, will be the posterity of Yan Di. It must be this family. You must be good at planning.

古文：久之，太原戍军恣横，思继兄弟制之以法，所杀者多。
现代文：过了一段时间，来自太原的戍守部队放肆横行，高思继兄弟们以军法制裁他们，杀死很多人。
English: After a period of time, the garrison troops from Taiyuan went on a rampage, and the Gao Si stepbrothers punished them with martial law, killing many people.

古文：太祖怒，诟让仁恭，乃诉以高氏兄弟，遂并遇害。
现代文：武皇大怒，责备刘仁恭，刘仁恭就状告高氏兄弟，于是高氏三兄弟全被杀害。
English: Emperor Wu was furious and blamed Liu Rengong. Liu Rengong sued Gao's brothers, and Gao's three brothers were all killed.

古文：仁恭因以先锋子行珪为牙将，诸子并列帐下，厚抚之以慰其心。
现代文：刘仁恭又以高思继哥哥的儿子高行圭做牙将，高氏兄弟的儿子都收在帐营中做事，优厚地对待他们以安定他们的心。
English: Liu Renkong also used Gao Si's son Gao Xinggui, who succeeded his elder brother, as a dentist. The sons of Gao's brothers were all put to work in the camp, and treated them well to stabilize their hearts.

古文：时行周十余岁，亦补职，在仁恭左右。
现代文：这时高行周才十多岁，也担任一职，在刘仁恭身边做事。
English: At this time, Gao Xing Zhou was just over ten years old. He also held a post and worked alongside Liu Rengong.

古文：行珪别有传，在《唐书》。及庄宗收燕，以行周隶明宗帐下，常与唐末帝分率牙兵。
现代文：到后唐庄宗收复燕地，将高行周隶归于明宗帐下，经常与后唐末帝分别率领牙兵。
English: After his arrival, Tang Zhuangzong recovered Yan's land and put Gao Xing Zhou under the account of Mingzong, and often led the tooth soldiers separately from the late Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty.

古文：明宗征燕，率其下拥从。
现代文：明宗征伐燕地时，高行周领兵随行。
English: When the Ming Dynasty conquered Yan's land, Gao Xing Zhou accompanied the soldiers.

古文：乡人赵德钧谓明宗曰： 行周心甚谨厚，必享贵位。 
现代文：同乡人赵德钧对明宗说 ：高行周内心很是谨慎忠厚，必将享有高贵的地位。 
English: Fellow villager Zhao Deyu said to Mingzong: Gao Xingzhou is very cautious and loyal at heart, and will certainly enjoy a noble status.

古文：梁将刘鄩之据莘也，与太原军对垒，旦夕转斗。
现代文：后梁大将刘寻阝占据莘地时，与太原部队对阵，一天到晚接战。
English: When Rear Admiral Liang Liu Xun occupied the land, he faced off against the Taiyuan troops and engaged in battle all day long.

古文：尝一日，两军成列，元行钦为敌军追蹑，剑中其面，血战未解。行周以麾下精骑突阵解之，行钦获免。
现代文：曾有一天，两军列成战阵，元行钦被敌军追击，一剑砍中了他的脸，而血战仍未停止，高行周带着手下精锐骑兵突进敌人阵营而解了围，元行钦得以逃脱。
English: Once upon a time, the two armies lined up for battle. Yuan Xingqin was chased by the enemy army and was slashed in the face with a sword. While the bloody battle still continued, Gao Xingzhou and his elite cavalry broke into the enemy camp and broke the siege. Yuan Xingqin was able to escape.

古文：庄宗方宠行钦，召行周抚谕赏劳，而欲置之帐下，又念于明宗帐下已夺行钦，更取行周，恐伤其意，密令人以利禄诱之。
现代文：庄宗这才信任高行周，召来行周抚爱慰问，奖赏功劳，想招收行周到自己帐下，又考虑自己已经从明宗帐下夺过了元行钦，再要夺过高行周，恐怕将伤了明宗的感情，就暗地里叫人以利禄诱招他。
English: Zhuang Zong trusted Gao Xing Zhou, summoned Xing Zhou for affection and condolences, rewarded his services, and wanted to recruit Xing Zhou to his account. He also considered that he had already taken Yuan Xing Qin from Mingzong's account, and if he wanted to take Gao Xing Zhou again, he would probably hurt Mingzong's feelings, so he secretly asked someone to entice him with Liluo.

古文：行周辞曰： 总管用人，亦为国家，事总管犹事王也。
现代文：高行周推辞说 ：总管用人，也是为了国家，服事总管就像服事王一样。
English: Gao Xingzhou said in his resignation speech: the general manager employs people for the sake of the country, and serving the general manager is like serving the king.

古文：余家昆仲，脱难再生，承总管之厚恩，忍背之乎！ 
现代文：我家兄弟们，脱离灾难再获生命，是蒙受了总管的厚恩，能忍心背离他吗？ 
English: My brothers and sisters, it is through the kindness of the chief steward that we have been able to escape disaster and regain our lives. Can we bear to turn our backs on him?

古文：及两军屯于河上，觇知梁军自汴入杨村寨，明宗晨至斗门，设伏将邀之，众寡不敌，反为所乘。
现代文：到两军驻扎在黄河岸边时，侦知后梁军队从汴州进了杨村寨，明宗清晨到斗门，布置埋伏下的兵将截击梁军，而寡不敌众，反被梁军占了上风。
English: By the time the two armies were stationed on the banks of the Yellow River, it was discovered that Hou Liang's army had entered Yang Cunzhai from Zhangzhou, and Mingzong had arrived at Doumen in the early morning. The soldiers who had laid an ambush would intercept Liang's army, but they were outnumbered, and Liang's army gained the upper hand.

古文：时矛槊丛萃，势甚危蹙。
现代文：这时刀光剑影，形势非常危急。
English: At this time, the situation is very critical.

古文：行周闻之，出骑横击梁军，遂得解去。
现代文：高行周听到后，出动骑兵横冲攻击梁军，才使明宗伏兵解了围。
English: After Gao Xing Zhou heard this, he sent out cavalry to attack Liang's army, and only then was the Mingzong ambush relieved.

古文：明宗之袭郓州也，行周为前锋。
现代文：明宗袭击郓州时，高行周当先锋。
English: When the Ming Dynasty attacked Zhangzhou, Gao Xing Zhou was the vanguard.

古文：会夜分澍雨，人无进志，行周曰： 此天赞也，彼必无备。 
现代文：恰逢夜晚下暴雨，士兵都不愿前进，高行周说： 这是上天帮助，他们一定没有准备。 
English: When it rained heavily at night, the soldiers did not want to advance. Gao Xingzhou said, "It was God's help. They must not have been prepared."

古文：是夜，涉河入东城，比曙平之。
现代文：当夜，渡过黄河攻进郓州东城，到天亮时就平定了郓州城。
English: That night, they crossed the Yellow River and entered the eastern city of Ganzhou. By dawn, they had leveled the city.

古文：庄宗平河南，累加检校太保，领端州刺史。
现代文：庄宗平定黄河以南，高行周接连迁升到检校太保，兼任端州刺史。
English: Zhuangzong settled south of the Yellow River, and Gao Xing was successively promoted to the school inspector, and also served as the governor of Danzhou.

古文：同光末，出守绛州。
现代文：后唐同光末年，出任镇守绛州。
English: In the last years of the Tang Dynasty, Tongguang served as the town guard of Bozhou.

古文：明宗即位，特深委遇。
现代文：后唐明宗即皇帝位，特别对高行周委以重任和厚待他。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Mingzong, especially for Gao Xing, the Zhou Committee treated him with great responsibility and kindness.

古文：天成中，从王晏球围定州，败王都，擒托诺，皆有功。
现代文：天成年间，跟从王晏球包围定州，击败王都，擒获秃馁，都立下战功。
English: Between the ages of ten and eighteen, he surrounded Dingzhou with Wang Yingqiu, defeated Wang Du, captured the vulture, and made great achievements in the war.

古文：贼平，迁颍州团练使。
现代文：贼寇平定后，调任颍州团练使。
English: After the defeat of the bandits, he was transferred to the post of Zhangzhou regimental training envoy.

古文：长兴初，以北边陷契丹，用为振武节度使。
现代文：长兴初年，因为北部与契丹相邻接，高行周被委用做振武军节度使。
English: In the first year of Changxing, because the north was adjacent to Qidan, Gao Xing Zhou was appointed as the commander of the Zhenwu Army.

古文：明年，以河西用军，移镇延安。
现代文：第二年，因为黄河西部发生战争，被调任镇守延安。
English: The next year, because of the war in the west of the Yellow River, he was transferred to the post of Yan'an town guard.

古文：清泰初，改潞州节度使。晋祖建义于太原，唐末帝命张敬达征之，行周与符彦卿为左右排阵使。
现代文：清泰初年，改任潞州节度使，晋高祖石敬瑭在太原称帝，唐末帝命令张敬达征讨他，高行周和符彦卿担任左右排阵使。
English: In the first year of the Qing and Tai Dynasties, he was appointed as the envoy of the Bozhou Festival. His great-great-grandfather, Jinshi Jingyu, became emperor in Taiyuan. The late Tang Emperor ordered Zhang Jinda to recruit him, and Gao Xing Zhou and Fu Yanqing served as the envoys of the left and right platoons.

古文：契丹主入援太原也，行周、彦卿引骑拒之，寻为契丹所败，遂与敬达保晋安寨，累月救军不至。
现代文：契丹国主进入中原援助太原晋军时，高行周和符彦卿领骑兵阻击他，不久被契丹人打败，于是高行周和张敬达据守晋安寨，几个月都不见救兵到来。
English: When the Khitan sovereign entered the Central Plains to aid the Taiyuan Jin army, Gao Xing Zhou and Fu Yanqing led the cavalry to block him and were soon defeated by the Khitans. Therefore, Gao Xing Zhou and Zhang Jingda held on to Jin Anzai and did not see any rescuers coming for several months.

古文：杨光远欲图敬达，行周知之，引壮士护之。
现代文：杨光远想谋害张敬达，高行周知悉这一阴谋，领着勇壮武士保护敬达。
English: Yang Guangyuan wanted to assassinate Zhang Jingda, Gao Xing Zhou learned of this plot and led brave warriors to protect Jingda.

古文：敬达性戆，不知其营护，谓人曰： 行周每踵余后，其意何也？ 
现代文：敬达性情憨厚，不知高行周是在暗中保护自己，对别人说 ：行周总是跟在我后面，是什么意思呀？ 
English: Jingda has a generous nature, and he does not know that Gao Xingzhou is secretly protecting himself, saying to others: Xingzhou is always behind me, what does it mean?

古文：繇是不复敢然，敬达遂为光远所害。
现代文：因此行周不敢再那样，张敬达就被杨光远杀害了。
English: Therefore, Xing Zhou did not dare to do that again, and Zhang Jingda was killed by Yang Guangyuan.

古文：晋祖入洛，令行周还籓，加同平章事。晋祖都汴，以行周为西京留守，未几，移鄴都。
现代文：晋高祖进入西京洛阳，命令高行周回到藩镇，加封同平章事，晋高祖建都汴京，以行周担任西京留守，不久，调到邺都。
English: Jingu Gaozu entered Luoyang, West Beijing, and ordered Gaozhong Zhou to return to the town of the domain, and to add a fief and a peerage. Jingu Gaozu built the capital, Beijing, and left for West Beijing with Jingu Zhou. Soon, he was transferred to Beijing.

古文：晋祖幸鄴，会安从进叛，命行周为襄州行营都部署。
现代文：晋高祖驾临邺都时，碰上安从进叛乱，就任命高行周为襄州行营都部署。
English: When Emperor Gaozong was on his way to Linyi, he encountered the Anzongjin rebellion and appointed Gao Xing Zhou as the commander of the Xingzhou encampment.

古文：明年秋，平定汉南。
现代文：第二年秋天，平定汉南。
English: In the autumn of the following year, Hannan was pacified.

古文：晋少帝嗣位，加兼侍中，移镇睢阳。
现代文：晋少帝即位，兼任侍中，调任镇守睢阳。
English: When Emperor Jin Shao ascended the throne, he also served as an aide-de-camp and was transferred to the post of the town guard of Shenyang.

古文：开运初，从幸澶渊，拒敌于河上。
现代文：开运初年，跟从少帝到澶渊，在黄河岸边阻击敌人。
English: In the first year of the campaign, he followed the young emperor to Qianyuan and blocked the enemy on the banks of the Yellow River.

古文：车驾还京，代景延广为侍卫亲军都指挥使，移郓州节度使。
现代文：车驾回京后，代替景延广担任侍卫亲军都指挥使，调任郓州节度使。
English: After returning to Beijing by car, he replaced Jing Yanguang as the commander of the palace guards, and was transferred to the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：时李彦韬为侍卫都虞候，可否在己。
现代文：当时李彦韬任侍卫都虞候，事情都由他决定。
English: At that time, Li Yanxuan was in charge of the palace guards, and everything was decided by him.

古文：及契丹主死于栾城，契丹将萧翰立许王李从益知南朝军国事，遣死士召行周，辞之以疾，退谓人曰： 衰世难辅，况兒戏乎！ 
现代文：行周虽然典掌禁兵，常常无所事事，朝拜之后回到家中，门庭冷落，客人朋友来往，也只斟满酒杯畅饮而已。接着改任归德军节度使，以李守贞代掌兵权，让高行周回到藩镇。到契丹国主死在栾城，契丹将领萧翰立许王李从益掌管契丹在南方的军国事务，李从益冒死派人召请高行周，行周托病推辞，过后对别人说 ：衰落的世代难以辅佐，更何况契丹这种儿戏呢！ 
English: Although Gao Zhou was banned from military service, he was often idle. When he returned home after paying homage, he was left out in the cold. When guests and friends came and went, they only filled their wine glasses to drink. He was then reassigned to be the German army's ceremonial envoy, with Li Shuzhen taking over military power on his behalf, and Gao Xing Zhou returned to the town. When the Khitan ruler died in Lushan, the Khitan general Xiaohan appointed King Li Congyi to be in charge of Khitan's military affairs in the south. Li Congyi risked his life to send someone to summon Gao Xing Z

古文：汉高祖入汴，加守太傅、兼中书令，代李守贞为天平节度使。
现代文：汉高祖刘知远进入汴京后，加封高行周为守太傅，兼中书令，代替李守贞做天平节度使。
English: After Liu Zhiyuan, the ancestor of Han Gao, entered Beijing, Gao Xingzhou was appointed as Shou Taifu, and also as Zhong Shuling, replacing Li Shouzhen as Tianping Jiedu Envoy.

古文：杜重威据鄴叛，汉祖以行周为招讨使，总兵讨之。
现代文：杜重威占据邺都反叛时，汉高祖以高行周任招讨使，统兵讨伐他。
English: When Du Chongwei occupied Shidu and rebelled, Han Gaozu summoned Gao Xing Zhou as his envoy and led an army to fight him.

古文：鄴平，授鄴都留守，加守太尉，进爵临清王。
现代文：邺都平定后，被授与邺都留守，加封守太尉，进临清王爵位。
English: After 都 was pacified, he was awarded 都留守, 加封守太尉, and promoted to 临清王爵位.

古文：乾祐中，入觐，加守太师，进封鄴王，复授天平节钺，改封齐王。
现代文：乾佑年间，入朝拜见皇帝，加封守太师，进封为邺王，又授与天平军节度使，改封为齐王。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qianyu, he went to the imperial court to pay homage to the emperor, was given the title of Jifeng Shou Daishi, was given the title of Shao Wang, and was also awarded the title of Tianping Army Festival Envoy, and was given the title of Qi Wang.

古文：太祖践阼，加守尚书令，增食邑至一万七千户。
现代文：周太祖登上帝位时，加封为尚书令，增加食邑到一万七千户。
English: When Zhou Taizu ascended the throne, he added the title of Shang Shuling and increased the number of counties to 17,000.

古文：太祖以行周耆年宿将，赐诏不名，但呼王位而已。
现代文：太祖因为行周是年高老将，诏令恩赐不称行周名字，只称呼他的王位。
English: As the great-grandfather was a veteran, the imperial edict did not call him by his name, but only referred to his throne.

古文：慕容彦超据兗叛，太祖亲征，奉迎舆驾，倾家载贽，奉觞进俎，率以身先，太祖待之逾厚。
现代文：慕容彦超占据兖州反叛时，太祖御驾亲征，行周奉侍圣驾，进酒上菜，总是亲自殷勤服侍，太祖待他更加优厚。
English: When Murong Yanchao occupied Zhangzhou rebellion, the great-grandfather personally led the troops, and served the great-grandfather for a week. He always served the dishes with wine. The great-grandfather treated him more generously.

古文：广顺二年秋，以疾薨于位，享年六十八。
现代文：广顺二年秋天，因病在任上去世，享年六十八岁。
English: In the autumn of Guangshun's second year, he died of illness while in office, at the age of sixty-eight.

古文：赗赙加等，册赠尚书令，追封秦王，谥曰武懿。
现代文：朝廷加倍赠送丧资，册封为尚书令，追封为秦王，谥号叫武懿。
English: The imperial court doubled the amount of the offering, and he was given the title of Shang Shuling (尚書令) and the posthumous title of Qin Wang (秦王). His posthumous name was Wu Xi (武).

