古文：樊哙，沛人也，以屠狗为事。
现代文：樊哙，沛县人，以宰狗为职业。
English: Zou, a resident of Peixian, is a dog slaughterer by profession.

古文：后与高祖俱隐于芒砀山泽间。
现代文：后来曾因避官和汉高祖一起躲藏到芒山和赐山一带。
English: Later, he was forced to go into hiding with the founder of the Han Dynasty to the vicinity of Mangshan and Jieshan.

古文：陈胜初起，萧何、曹参使哙求迎高祖，立为沛公。
现代文：陈胜起义时，萧何、曹参让樊哙寻找迎回汉高祖，做了沛公。
English: During the Chen Sheng Uprising, Xiao He and Cao San asked Zhuo to search for and welcome back the Han Gao ancestor, and he did so.

古文：哙以舍人从攻胡陵、方与，还守丰，击泗水临丰下，破之。
现代文：樊哙作为舍人从攻胡陵、方与，回军驻守丰邑，在丰邑一带进攻泅水郡监的军队，并击败他们。
English: , as a deserter, attacked Huling and Fangye, and the returning troops stationed in Fengyi, attacked the troops of the Surabaya County Supervisor in the area of Fengyi, and defeated them.

古文：复东定沛，破泗水守薛西。
现代文：又向东平定沛县，在薛县西面打败泗水郡守的军队。
English: He also leveled Pei County to the east and defeated the army of the governor of Surabaya County on the west side of Xue County.

古文：与司马尸二战砀东，却敌，斩首十五级，赐爵国大夫。
现代文：在赐县束面跟司马虐作战，打退敌人，斩掉敌人首级十五个，沛公赐给他国大夫的爵位。
English: He fought against Sima Zongmen in Jixian County, repulsed the enemy, chopped off fifteen heads of the enemy, and Pei Gong gave him the title of state doctor.

古文：常从，沛公击章邯军濮阳，攻城先登，斩首二十三级，赐爵列大夫。
现代文：樊哙经常跟随沛公，沛公在濮阳攻打章邯的军队，攻城时樊哙最先登上去，斩敌首二十三个，沛公赐给他列大夫的爵位。
English: Pei Gong attacked Zhang Ye's army in Fenyang. When attacking the city, Zhe took the lead in climbing the city, beheading 23 Qin soldiers. Pei Gong also gave him the title of grand doctor.

古文：从攻城阳，先登。下户牖，破李由军，斩首十六级，赐上闻爵。
现代文：又跟着进攻城阳，最先登城，占领户牖，打垮李由的军队，斩敌首十六个，沛公赐给他上闻爵位。
English: He also followed the attack on Chengyang, was the first to enter the city, occupied Houyu, defeated Li Yu's army, beheaded sixteen enemies, and Pei Gong gave him the title of Shangwen.

古文：后攻圉都尉、东郡守尉于成武，却敌，斩首十四级，捕虏十六人，赐爵五大夫。
现代文：后来又跟随沛公在成武攻打束郡郡守和圉县都尉，将敌人打退，斩敌首十四个，俘虏十六人，沛公赐给他五大夫的爵位。
English: Later, he also followed Pei Gong in Chengwu to attack and beat the county governor of Shu County and the captain of Handan County. He beat back the enemy, beheaded fourteen enemies, captured sixteen people, and Pei Gong gave him the title of the five great men.

古文：从攻秦军，出亳南。
现代文：跟随沛公攻打秦军，出军亳邑以南。
English: He followed Pei Gong to attack the Qin army and went to the south of Shu.

古文：河间守军于杠里，破之。
现代文：河间郡守的军队驻扎在杠里，樊哙打败了他们。
English: The army of the governor of Kawama County was stationed in Bari, and Tsukuda defeated them.

古文：击破赵贲军开封北，以却敌先登，斩候一人，首六十八级，捕虏二十六人，赐爵卿。
现代文：在开封北面打败趟贲的军队，樊哙因为打退敌军，最先登城，斩杀军候一人，斩敌首六十八级，俘虏二十六人，沛公赐给他卿的爵位。
English: In the north of Kaifeng, he defeated the army of Wanzhong. Because Wanzhong beat back the enemy army, Wanzhong was the first to enter the city. He killed one soldier, beheaded sixty-eight enemy leaders, and captured twenty-six people. Pei Gong gave him the title of lord.

古文：从攻破扬熊于曲遇。
现代文：又跟随沛公在曲遇打败了扬熊的军队。
English: He also followed Pei Gong in defeating Yang Xiong's army.

古文：攻宛陵，先登，斩首八级，捕虏四十四人，赐爵封号贤成君。
现代文：攻打宛陵，樊呛首先登城，斩敌首八个，俘虏四十四人，沛公赐给他贤成君的封号。
English: When attacking Wanling, Zhai took the lead in entering the city, beheaded eight people, captured forty-four people, and Pei Gong gave him the title of Xianchengjun.

古文：从攻长社、轘辕，绝河津，东攻秦军尸乡，南攻秦军于犨。
现代文：跟随沛公进攻长社、辗辕，封锁黄河渡口，向东到尸乡进攻秦军，又向南到辇邑进攻秦军。
English: He followed Pei Gong to attack Changsha and Handan, blockaded the Yellow River ferry, attacked the Qin army to the east to Zhixiang, and attacked the Qin army to the south to Handan.

古文：破南阳守齮于阳城。东攻宛城，先登。
现代文：在阳城打败了南阳郡守龄。向东攻打宛城，樊呛首先登城。
English: In Yangcheng, he defeated Nanyang County's Shuling. He attacked Wancheng from the east, and first entered the city.

古文：西至郦，以却敌，斩首十四级，捕虏四十人，赐重封。
现代文：向西到郦县，樊哙因为打退了敌军，斩敌首十四个，俘虏四十人，沛公给他增加封赏。
English: He went west to Min County, and because Min beat back the enemy army, he beheaded fourteen enemies and captured forty people. Pei Gong gave him an increased reward.

古文：攻武关，至霸上，斩都尉一人，首十级，捕虏百四十六人，降卒二千九百人。
现代文：进攻武关，来到霸上，斩杀都尉一人，斩敌首十个，俘虏一百四十六人，收降士兵二千九百人。
English: He attacked Wuguan, and when he reached Heping, he killed one captain, beheaded ten people, captured 146 people, and defeated 2,900 enemy soldiers.

古文：项羽在戏下，欲攻沛公。
现代文：项羽驻军在戏下，准备攻打沛公。
English: Under the play, the troops of the Xiang Yu Garrison are preparing to attack Pei Gong.

古文：沛公从百余骑因项伯面见项羽，谢无有闭关事。
现代文：沛公带领一百多骑兵，通过项伯来面见项羽，向项羽谢罪，说明没有封锁关口的事。
English: Pei Gong led more than a hundred cavalrymen to meet Xiang Yu through Xiang Bo, and thanked Xiang Yu for the sin, explaining that there was no blockade of the pass.

古文：项羽既飨军士，中酒，亚父谋欲杀沛公，令项庄拔剑舞坐中，欲击沛公，项伯常屏蔽之。
现代文：项羽用酒肉款待沛公将士，酒喝得正畅快时，亚父想杀沛公，让项庄在席前舞剑，趁机击杀沛公，项伯常掩护沛公。
English: Xiang Yu used wine and meat to entertain the Pei generals. When the wine was being drunk, Yabu wanted to kill Pei, so Xiang Zhuang danced with a sword in front of the table and took the opportunity to kill Pei. Xiang Bo often covered up for Pei.

古文：时，独沛公与张良得入坐，樊哙居营外，闻事急，乃持盾入。
现代文：这时只有沛公和张良得以进入营帐坐下，樊哙在营门外听说事情紧急，就带剑盾来到军门。
English: At this time, only Pei Gong and Zhang Liang were able to enter the camp and sit down. Hearing that things were urgent outside the camp gate, they came to the gate with swords and shields.

古文：初入营，营卫止哙，哙直撞入，立帐下。
现代文：刚要进入营门，守门的卫士挡住樊哙，樊哙径直闯入，站在帐幕下。
English: As he was about to enter the gate of the camp, the gatekeeper stopped the donkey, and the donkey ran straight in and stood under the tent.

古文：项羽目之，问为谁。
现代文：项羽看着他，询问他是什么人。
English: She looked at him with her eyes and asked him who he was.

古文：张良曰： 沛公参乘樊哙也。 
现代文：张良说： 是沛公的陪乘樊哙。 
English: Zhang Liang said: It was Pei Gong's escort.

古文：项羽曰： 壮士！ 
现代文：项羽说： 壮士！ 
English: The feather said: "Strong man!

古文：赐之卮酒彘肩。
现代文：并赐给他一杯酒和一条猪腿。
English: He was given a jar of wine and a leg of pork.

古文：哙既饮酒，拔剑切肉食之。
现代文：樊哙喝完酒，拔出剑切肉吃。
English: After drinking wine, he pulled out his sword and cut meat to eat.

古文：项羽曰： 能复饮乎？ 
现代文：项羽说： 能再喝酒吗? 
English: Cao Yu asked: Can I drink alcohol again?

古文：哙曰： 臣死且不辞，岂特卮酒乎！
现代文：樊哙说： 我死尚且不推辞，难道还怕喝一杯酒吗?
English: Toad said, "I'm dead and I won't deny it, let alone drink a whole bottle of wine!"

古文：且沛公先人定咸阳，暴师霸上，以待大王。
现代文：再说沛公首先进入平定咸阳，露营霸上，以等待大王。
English: Moreover, Pei Gong first entered Pingding Xianyang and camped on the top to wait for the great king.

古文：大王今日至，听小人之言，与沛公有隙，臣恐天下解心疑大王也！ 
现代文：大王今天一到，就听信坏人的渔言，跟沛公有了隔阂。我担心天下分裂，人们心裹会怀疑大王呢。 
English: As soon as the great king arrived today, he listened to the evil man's words and became estranged from Pei Gong. I am worried that the world will be divided and people will doubt the great king.

古文：项羽默然。
现代文：项羽沉默不语。
English: The feathers fall silent.

古文：沛公如厕，麾哙去。
现代文：沛公去厕所，召樊哙出去。
English: Pei Gong went to the toilet and called her out.

古文：既出，沛公留车骑，独骑马，哙等四人步从，从山下走归霸上军，而使张良谢项羽。
现代文：出来后，沛公留下车马，衹骑了一匹马，樊哙等四人步行跟随，从山下跑回霸上军营，而让张良致谢项羽。
English: After coming out, Pei Gong left his chariot and horse, Zou rode a horse, Zou and four others followed on foot, ran back to the military camp from the bottom of the mountain, and let Zhang Liang thank Xiang Yu.

古文：羽亦因遂已，无诛沛公之心。
现代文：项羽也就此罢了，已没有诛杀沛公的念头。
English: That's all there is to it, and there is no longer any thought of killing Pei Gong.

古文：是日微樊哙奔入营谯让项羽，沛公几殆。
现代文：这天如果没有樊哙闯入营帐谴责项羽，沛公的事业几乎失败。
English: On this day, if there is no one to break into the camp to condemn Xiang Yu, Pei Gong's cause will almost fail.

古文：后数日，项羽入屠咸阳，立沛公为汉王。
现代文：几天以后，项羽进入咸阳，大肆焚烧杀戮，封沛公为汉王。
English: A few days later, Xiang Yu entered Xianyang, burned and killed a large number of people, and made Pei Gong the king of Han.

古文：汉王赐哙爵为列侯，号临武侯。
现代文：汉王封樊哙为列侯，称为临武侯。
English: Han emperors made him a vassal lord, known as Linwu.

古文：迁为郎中，从入汉中。
现代文：后樊哙被提升为郎中，跟随汉王进入汉中。
English: Later, he was promoted to roju, and followed the Han king into the Han dynasty.

古文：还定三秦，别击西丞白水北，雍轻车骑雍南，破之。
现代文：汉王回军平定三秦，樊哙另率领一支部队在白水北面攻打西县县丞的军队，在雍县南面攻打雍王的轻快车骑部队，击败敌人。
English: Han Wang Hui's army subdued Sanqin, and Zou Yu led an army to attack the army of Xixian Xian Rong in the north of Baishui, and attacked the light express bicycle army of Yong Wang in the south of Yong County, defeating the enemy.

古文：从攻雍、斄城，先登。
现代文：跟随汉王进攻雍县和藤城，首先登城。
English: He followed Han Wang to attack Yong County and Fujicheng, and entered the city first.

古文：击章平军好畤，攻城，先登陷阵，斩县令丞各一人，首十一级，虏二十人，迁为郎中骑将。
现代文：在好峙攻打章平的军队，攻城时，樊哙首先登城，斩杀县令、县丞各一人，斩敌首十一个，俘虏二十人，被提升为郎中骑将。
English: When Zhangping's army was attacked in a good standoff and the city was besieged, Zou went to the city first, killed one county magistrate and one county magistrate each, beheaded eleven enemies, captured twenty people, and was promoted to vice-commander.

古文：从击秦车骑壤东，却敌，迁为将军。
现代文：跟随汉王在壤乡束面攻打秦军的车骑部队，打退敌军，被提升为将军。
English: He followed Han Wang to attack the chariot and cavalry troops of the Qin Army in Zhouzhuang Township, drove back the enemy army, and was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：攻赵贲，下郿、槐里、柳中、咸阳；灌废丘，最。
现代文：进攻赵贲，占领郡、槐里、柳中、咸阳；引水灌废丘，樊哙的功劳最大。
English: He made the greatest contribution in attacking Zhao Wei and occupying the areas of Wei County, Wei Li, Liuzhong and Xianyang, and in diverting water to the waste mounds.

古文：至栎阳，赐食邑杜之樊乡。
现代文：到达滦阳，汉王把杜县的樊乡赐作食邑。
English: When he arrived in Fenyang, the Han king granted him the fief of Fenyang Township in Dulin to make it a food town.

古文：从攻项籍，屠煮枣，击破王武、程处军于外黄。
现代文：跟随汉王攻打项羽，屠煮枣邑，在外黄县打败王武、程处的军队。
English: He followed the Han Emperor to attack Xiang Yu, slaughter and boil Zaozhuang, and defeat the armies of Wang Wu and Cheng Shu in Waigaoqian.

古文：攻邹、鲁、瑕丘、薛。
现代文：接着进攻邹县、鲁县、瑕丘和薛县。
English: The capture of Lushan County, Lu County, Keqiu County, Xue County.

古文：项羽败汉王于彭城，尽复取鲁、梁地。
现代文：项羽在彭城打败汉王，再次全部取得鲁、梁地区。
English: Xiang Yu defeated Han Wang in Pengcheng and once again gained all of Lu and Liang regions.

古文：哙还至荥阳，益食平阴二千户，以将军守广武一岁。项羽引东，从高祖击项籍，下阳夏，虏楚周将军卒四千人。
现代文：樊哙回到荣阳，汉王又给他增加平阴二千户作为食邑，让他以将军的身份驻守广武山一年，项羽领兵束去，他又跟随汉王攻击项羽，占领阳夏县，俘虏楚的周将军士兵四千人。
English: When Xiang Yu returned to Rongyang, the Han king gave him an additional two thousand Pingyin households as food villages, let him stay on Guangwu Mountain as a general for one year, and let Xiang Yu lead the troops. He also followed the Han king to attack Xiang Yu, occupied Yangxia County, and captured four thousand soldiers of General Zhou of Chu.

古文：围项籍陈，大破之。屠胡陵。
现代文：在陈县包围项羽，打败他并血洗胡陵。
English: They encircled Xiang Yu in Chen County, defeated him and ransacked the Huling Tomb.

古文：项籍死，汉王即皇帝位，以哙有功，益食邑八百户。
现代文：项羽死后，汉王做皇帝，因为樊哙作战有功，加封食邑八百户。
English: After the death of Xiang Yu, the Han king made him emperor, and because of Xiang Yu's distinguished service in the war, he sealed eight hundred households in the county.

古文：其秋，燕王臧荼反，哙从攻虏荼，定燕地。
现代文：这年秋天，燕王臧荼反叛，樊哙跟随汉高祖攻打他，并俘虏臧荼，平定燕地。
English: In the autumn of that year, Yan Wangqi rebelled, followed Henkel, attacked him, captured him, and pacified Yan's territory.

古文：楚王韩信反，哙从至陈，取信，定楚。
现代文：楚王韩信谋反，樊哙跟随漠高祖到陈县，逮捕韩信，平定楚地。
English: Han Xin, the king of Chu, launched a rebellion. He followed Gaozu to Chen County, arrested Han Xin, and pacified Chu.

古文：更赐爵列侯，与剖符，世世勿绝，食舞阳，号为舞阳侯，除前所食。
现代文：汉高祖改赐樊哙列侯爵位，并剖符定封，时代相传，赐给舞阳作食邑，称为舞阳侯，免除以前所封的食邑。
English: Emperor Gaozong conferred the title of Marquis of the Han Dynasty, and the seal was cut, which was handed down from generation to generation. It was given to the food-producing town of Maiyang, known as Maiyang Hou, exempting the previously sealed food-producing town.

古文：以将军从攻反者韩王信于代。
现代文：以后，樊哙以将军身份跟随高祖去代地攻打反叛食物。
English: Later, as a general, Zou followed Gao Zu to fight against rebel food instead.

古文：自霍人以往至云中，与绛侯等共定之，益食千五百户。
现代文：从霍人邑一直打到云中县，和绛侯等人共同平定了代地，增加食邑一千五百户。
English: From the Hu people all the way to the clouds, they were all pacified by Zhai and Zhou Bo, and so another 1,500 households were added.

古文：因击陈豨与曼丘臣军，战襄国，破柏人，先登，降定清河、常山凡二十七县，残东垣，迁为左丞相。
现代文：因为攻打陈稀和曼丘臣的军队，战于襄国，攻破柏人县，樊哙首先登城，降服平定清河、常山两郡共二十七个县，摧毁束垣县，被提升为左丞相。
English: Later, he led the troops to attack the troops of the traitor Chen Xi and Manchu Chen, and fought in Xiang Province. When capturing Baoren County, he took the lead in climbing the city. He also surrendered and leveled the twenty-seven counties of Qinghe and Changshan counties, and destroyed the city of Dongyuan County. He was promoted to the post of the Minister of the Left.

古文：破得綦母卯、尹潘军于无终、广昌。破豨别将胡人王黄军代南，因击韩信军参合。
现代文：在无终县、广昌县一带打垮綦母印和尹潘的军队。在代地南部打败陈稀偏将匈奴人王黄的军队，趁势到参合县攻打韩信的军队。
English: He defeated the armies of Yan Muyin and Yin Pan in the areas of Mufeng County and Guangchang County, defeated the army of Chen Xizhong and the Hunnic general Wang Huang in the southern part of Daiji, and took advantage of the situation to attack the army of Han Xin in Sanhe County.

古文：军所将卒斩韩信，击豨胡骑横谷，斩将军赵既，虏代丞相冯梁、守孙奋、大将王黄、将军一人、太仆解福等十人。
现代文：樊哙的部下斩杀韩信，在横谷县打垮陈稀的匈奴骑兵，斩杀将军赵既，俘虏代国丞相冯梁、郡守孙奋、大将王黄、将军一人、太仆解福等十人。
English: Xing's subordinates killed Han Xin, defeated the rare Xiongnu cavalry in Yokoya County, killed General Zhao Ye, and captured ten people, including Acting Minister Feng Liang, County Governor Sun Fen, General Wang Huang, one general, and Taibo Jiefu.

古文：与诸将共定代乡邑七十三。
现代文：樊哙和将领们共同平定代地七十二县邑。
English: He and the generals together subdued seventy-three townships.

古文：后燕王卢绾反，哙以相国击绾，破其丞相抵蓟南，定燕县十八、乡邑五十一。
现代文：以后燕王卢绾反叛，樊哙以相国身份攻打卢绾，打败他的丞相，到达蓟县以南，平定燕地十八县、五十一乡邑。
English: Later, Yan's king, Lu Xun, rebelled, and Yan attacked Lu Xun as a fellow countryman, defeated his prime minister, reached the south of Yan County, and conquered eighteen counties and fifty-one townships in Yan's territory.

古文：益食千三百户，定食舞阳五千四百户。
现代文：高祖给樊哙增加食邑一千三百户，把舞阳的五千四百户确定为樊哙的食邑。
English: Gao Zu increased the number of food villages to 1,300, and identified 5,400 households in Wuyang as food villages.

古文：从，斩首百七十六级，虏二百八十七人。别，破军七，下城五，定郡六、县五十二，得丞相一人，将军十三人，二千石以下至三百石十二人。
现代文：樊哙跟随汉高祖作战，斩敌首一百七十六个，俘虏二百八十七人，他另外领兵作战，打垮七支敌军，占领五座城池，平定六郡、五十二县，俘获丞相一人，将军十三人，二千石以下至三百石的官十二人。
English: He fought alongside Emperor Gaozu, beheaded 176 enemies, and captured 287 people. He also led troops in battle, defeated seven enemy armies, occupied five cities, pacified six counties and 52 counties, and captured one chancellor, 13 generals, and 12 officials of less than 2,000 koku and up to 300 koku.

古文：哙以吕后弟吕须为妇，生子伉，故其比诸将最亲。
现代文：樊哙娶吕后的妹妹吕须为妻，生子名樊伉，因此他跟其他将领相比与皇上最亲近。
English: He married Queen Lyu's younger sister, Liusu, and had a son named Miao, so he was the closest to the emperor compared to other generals.

古文：先黥布反时，高帝尝病，恶见人，卧禁中，诏户者无得入群臣。
现代文：先前黥布反叛时，汉高祖曾病得很厉害，不愿见人，住在内宫，命令门卫不得让大臣们进去。
English: At the time of the Zibo Rebellion, Emperor Gaozong was very ill and did not want to see anyone. He stayed in the Inner Palace and ordered the doorkeepers not to let the ministers in.

古文：群臣绛、灌等莫敢人。
现代文：大臣绛侯、灌婴等没人敢进去。
English: No one dares to enter, not even ministers, princes, or infants.

古文：十余日，哙乃排闼直入，大臣随之。
现代文：过了十几天，樊哙竟推开宫门径直闯进去，大臣们跟随着他。
English: After a dozen days, he actually pushed open the palace door and ran straight in. The ministers followed him.

古文：上独枕一宦者卧。
现代文：皇上独自枕着一个宦官躺着。
English: Seeing Gaozu lying alone with a eunuch on his pillow.

古文：哙等见上，流涕曰： 始，陛下与臣等起丰沛，定天下，何其壮也！
现代文：樊哙等看见皇上流着泪说： 当初陛下带领我们在沛县丰邑起兵，平定天下，何等雄壮啊!
English: When they saw the emperor with tears streaming down his face, they said, "At first, His Majesty led us to raise an army in Fengyi, Pei County, to pacify the world. How majestic he was!

古文：今天下已定，又何惫也！
现代文：如今天下已经安定，又是何等疲惫啊!
English: But now that the situation has stabilized, how exhausted you are!

古文：且陛下病甚，大臣震恐，不见臣等计事，顾独与一宦者绝乎？
现代文：再说陛下病势严重，大臣震惊恐惧，陛下不召见我们商议国事，衹是独自跟一个宦官诀别吗?
English: Besides, you are seriously ill, your ministers are in a panic, and you refuse to receive us to discuss matters of state. Do you only want to decide with a eunuch?

古文：且陛下独不见赵高之事乎？ 
现代文：况且陛下难道没看到赵高的事情吗? 
English: Besides, didn't you see what happened to Zhao Gao?

古文：高帝笑而起。
现代文：高祖笑着起身。
English: Hearing this, Gaozu laughed and got up from the bed.

古文：其后卢绾反，高帝使哙以相国击燕。
现代文：以后卢绾反叛，漠高祖派樊哙以相国身份攻打燕国。
English: After the Lushan Rebellion, the Mongolian Emperor Gaozhu sent the Lushan to invade Yan as an ally.

古文：是时，高帝病甚，人有恶哙党于吕氏，即上一日宫车晏驾，则哙欲以兵尽诛戚氏、赵王如意之属。
现代文：这时高祖病得很厉害，有人诽谤樊哙勾结吕氏，说皇上一旦逝世，樊哙就会用兵力把戚夫人和赵王如意等人全部杀光。
English: At this time, Gao Zu was very ill. Some people slandered Gao Yu for colluding with the Lv clan, saying that once the emperor died, Gao Yu would use troops to kill all the relatives and Zhao Wang Ruyi.

古文：高帝大怒，乃使陈平载绛侯代将。而即军中斩哙。
现代文：汉高祖听到这些话大为生气，就派陈平乘车送周勃代替樊哙统率军队，并将樊哙就地斩首。
English: When Han Gaozu heard these words, he was very angry, so he sent Chen Ping to take Zhou Bo away in a car instead of Zhai leading the army, and beheaded Zhai on the spot.

古文：陈平畏吕后，执哙诣长安。
现代文：陈平畏惧吕后，逮捕樊哙来到长安。
English: Chen Ping did not carry out Gao Zu's order because he was afraid of Lü Guo. Instead, he sent his son to Chang'an.

古文：至则高帝已崩，吕后释哙，得复爵邑。
现代文：到达长安时汉高祖已经驾崩，吕后释放樊哙，给他恢复爵位和食邑。
English: When he arrived in Chang'an, Han Gaozu had already passed away. Lv Hou released him and restored his peerage and food township.

古文：孝惠六年，哙薨，谥曰武侯，子伉嗣。
现代文：孝惠六年，樊哙去世，谧号为武侯，儿子樊伉继承为侯。
English: Six years after Xiao Hui's death, Zou died. His posthumous name was Wuhou, and his son Zou succeeded him as Hou.

古文：而伉母吕须亦为临光侯，高后时用事颛权，大臣尽畏之。
现代文：樊伉的母亲吕须也被封为临光侯，吕后时期，独揽大权，大臣们都畏惧她。
English: Yao's mother, Liusu, was also given the title of Lin Guang Hou. During the reign of Queen Lyu, she held all the power, and the ministers were afraid of her.

古文：高后崩，大臣诛吕须等，因诛伉，舞阳侯中绝数月。
现代文：吕后逝世后，大臣们杀死了吕须等人，也就诛杀樊伉，舞阳侯的爵位中断了几个月。
English: After the death of Empress Lyu, the ministers killed Liusu and others, and the title of Prince Muyang was suspended for several months.

古文：孝文帝立，乃复封哙庶子市人为侯，复故邑。
现代文：孝文帝登位后，才又封樊哙的庶子樊市人为舞阳侯，恢复原来的爵位和食邑。
English: After Emperor Xiaowen ascended to the throne, it was only after Emperor Gaozong's illegitimate son, Zou Shi, was made the Prince of Wuyang that the original peerage and food towns were restored.

古文：薨，谥曰荒侯。
现代文：樊市人死后，谧号为荒侯。
English: After the death of the man from Handan, his posthumous name was Aro.

古文：子佗广嗣。
现代文：儿子樊佗广继承爵位。
English: His son Gong Guang succeeded to the peerage.

古文：六岁，其舍人上书言： 荒侯市人病不能为人，令其夫人与其弟乱而生佗广，佗广实非荒侯子。 
现代文：六年后，舞阳侯家中的舍人上书说： 荒侯樊市人有病不能生育，让他的妻子和他的弟弟淫乱，生下了樊佗广，樊佗广实际上不是荒侯的儿子。 
English: Six years later, the steward of the Maiyang Hou family wrote a letter saying: "Ara Hou, the mayor of Handan, is sick and cannot give birth. He let his wife and his brother commit adultery, and gave birth to Gong Guang. Gong Guang is actually not the son of Ara Hou.

古文：下吏，免。
现代文：皇上下令交给官吏处置，罢免爵位。
English: The imperial edict was handed over to officials for disposal, and the peerage was revoked.

古文：平帝元始二年，继绝世，封哙玄孙之子章为舞阳侯，邑千户。
现代文：平帝元始二年，继承被断绝的爵位，封樊哙的玄孙的儿子樊章为舞阳侯，食邑一千户。
English: In the first two years of the Ping Dynasty, inheriting the severed peerage, the son of the great-great-grandson of the empress Dowager, Minzhang, was the Maiyang marquis, with a thousand households.

古文：郦商，高阳人也。
现代文：郦商，高阳县人。
English: He was a merchant in Shandong Province and a native of Goyang County.

古文：陈胜起，商聚少年得数千人。
现代文：陈胜起义时他聚集了数千名少年。
English: When Chen Sheng rebelled, he gathered thousands of boys.

古文：沛公略地六月余，商以所将四千人属沛公于岐。从攻长社，先登，赐爵封信成君。
现代文：沛公攻占一些区域的六个多月后，郦商在岐地率领他的兵将四千人归属沛公，并跟随沛公攻打长社，他率先登城，沛公赐给他爵位并封为信成君。
English: More than six months after Pei Gong conquered some regions, the merchant from Shandong led his soldiers in Qidi to assign four thousand people to Pei Gong, and followed Pei Gong to attack Chosha. He was the first to enter the city, and Pei Gong gave him a peerage and named him as Xin Chengjun.

古文：从攻缑氏，绝河津，破秦军雒阳东。
现代文：又跟随沛公攻打缑氏县，封绝了黄河渡船，在雒阳以束击灭秦军。
English: He also followed Pei Gong to attack and defeat Shishi County, sealed the Yellow River ferry, and defeated the Qin Army with a bundle in Fenyang.

古文：从下宛、穰，定十七县。
现代文：又跟随攻下宛、穣，平定十七个县。
English: It also followed the capture of Wan and Handan, and the pacification of seventeen counties.

古文：别将攻旬关，西定汉中。
现代文：又与主力军配合作战攻下旬关，向西平定了汉中。
English: It also cooperated with the main army to attack late Guan, and leveled Hanzhong to the west.

古文：沛公为汉王，赐商爵信成侯，以将军为陇西都尉。
现代文：沛公作了汉王，封郦商信成君，赐给爵位，任命他为陇西都尉。
English: Pei Gong became the king of Han, and gave the title to the merchant, Xin Chengjun, and appointed him as the captain of Shaanxi.

古文：别定北地郡，破章邯别将于乌氏、栒邑、泥阳，赐食邑武城六千户。
现代文：他又平定北地郡，还打败章邯的副将于乌氏、拘邑、泥阳，汉王赐给他武城六千户作为食邑。
English: He also subdued Beidai County, and defeated Zhang Ye's vassals Wu, Zho, and Diyang. The Han king gave him six thousand households in Wucheng as food villages.

古文：从击项籍军，与钟离眛战，受梁相国印，益食四千户。
现代文：他跟从汉王攻打项籍的军队，与钟离昧激战，获胜而被授给梁国的相国印，增加了四千户食邑。
English: He followed the army of Han Wang to attack Xiang Quan, and fought a fierce battle with Zhong Liang. He won and was awarded the national seal of Liang Guo, adding four thousand households.

古文：从击项羽二岁，攻胡陵。
现代文：跟从汉王攻打项羽二年，又去攻打胡陵。
English: He followed Han Wang to attack Xiang Yu for two years, and then went to attack Huling.

古文：汉王即帝位，燕王臧荼反，商以将军从击荼，战龙脱，先登陷阵，破荼军易下，却敌，迁为右丞相，赐爵列侯，与剖符，世世勿绝，食邑涿郡五千户。
现代文：汉王称帝后，燕王臧荼谋反，郦商作为汉的将军跟随皇帝攻击臧荼，在龙脱作战，冲锋陷阵，在易下击败臧荼军，打退敌人，升迁为右丞相，赐给列侯的爵位，皇帝给他剖符作为世代不绝的凭证，获得涿郡五千户的食邑。
English: The king of Han proclaimed himself the empress, the king of Yan plotted a rebellion, the merchants of Yan followed the emperor to attack Yan as the general of Han, fought in Longtu, stormed the battlefield, defeated the Yan army under Yi, repulsed the enemy, was promoted to the minister of the right, and was given the title of the prince of the princes. The emperor gave him a notation as a proof of uninterrupted generations, and obtained the food villages of five thousand households in Yan County.

古文：别定上谷，因攻代，受赵相国印。
现代文：又率兵攻取上谷，乘胜夺取代地，皇帝授给赵相国印。
English: He also led the troops to conquer Shanggu, and took advantage of the victory to take the place, and the emperor awarded Zhao Xiang the state seal.

古文：与绛侯等定代郡、雁门，得代丞相程纵、守相郭同、将军以下至六百石十九人。
现代文：和绛侯等将军平定代郡、雁门，俘获代国丞相程纵、代理丞相郭同、将军以下至六百石共十九人。
English: He and his vassals and other generals conquered Dingde County and Yanmen, and captured the acting governor Cheng Zheng, the acting governor Guo Tong, and a total of nineteen people of up to six hundred koku.

古文：还，以将军将太上皇卫一岁。
现代文：凯旋而归，作为将军统率太上皇卫军一年。
English: He made a triumphant return and, as a general, led the Emperor's Guard for a year.

古文：十月，以右丞相击陈豨，残东垣。
现代文：十月，作为右丞相攻打陈稀的叛军，摧毁束垣壁垒。
English: In October, as the Minister of the Right, he attacked Chen Xi's rebels and destroyed the Sokaku barrier.

古文：又从击黥布，攻其前垣，陷两阵，得以破布军，更封为曲周侯，食邑五千一百户，除前所食。
现代文：又随从攻打黥布叛军，击破叛军前方壁垒，攻陷两阵，得以歼灭黥布军队。于是改封为曲周侯，食邑为五千一百户，废除以前的食邑。
English: He also followed the attack on the rebels in Zibo, broke through the barriers in front of the rebels, attacked and captured two lines, and was able to annihilate the Zibo army. So he changed his title to Qu Zhouhou, and the food villages were 5,100 households, and the former food villages were abolished.

古文：凡别破军三，降定郡六，县七十三，得丞相、守相、大将各一人，小将二人，二千石以下至六百石十九人。
现代文：总其军功，郦商率军攻破三个叛军，平定六个郡，七十三个县，俘获丞相、代理丞相、大将军各一人，小将军二人，俸禄在二千石以下至六百石共十九人。
English: As a result of all his military exploits, Zou Shang led the army to defeat three rebel armies, pacify six counties and 73 counties, capture the prime minister, acting prime minister, one general and two minor generals, and pay a total of 19 people from 2,000 koku to 600 koku.

古文：商事孝惠帝、吕后。
现代文：郦商辅佐孝惠帝、吕后。
English: Zou Shangfu assisted Emperor Xiao Hui and Empress Lu.

古文：吕后崩，商疾不治事。
现代文：吕后死后，郦商病重而不能理事。
English: After the death of Empress Lv, Zou Shang fell seriously ill and was unable to serve as a director.

古文：其子寄，字况，与吕禄善。
现代文：他的儿子郦寄，字况，和吕禄交往很好。
English: His son, Diao Ying, has a good handwriting and is very close to Lu Lu.

古文：及高后崩，大臣欲诛诸吕，吕禄为将军，军于北军，太尉勃不得入北军，于是乃使人劫商，令其子寄绐吕禄。
现代文：等到吕后死后，大臣们要诛杀吕氏家族，吕禄当时为将军，统率北军。太尉周勃因此而不能指挥北军，于是便派人胁持郦商，命令他的儿子郦寄诱骗吕禄。
English: After the death of Empress Lv, the ministers wanted to kill the Lv family. At that time, Lv Lu was a general and led the Northern Army. As a result, Lieutenant Zhou Bo could not command the Northern Army, so he sent someone to intimidate the merchants and ordered his son to trick Lv Lu.

古文：吕禄信之，与出游，而太尉勃乃得入据北军，遂以诛诸吕。
现代文：吕禄信任郦寄，和他出游，太尉周勃趁机进入北军降服了他们，于是便诛杀了吕氏家族。
English: Lulu trusted the messenger and traveled with him. Second Lieutenant Zhou Bo took advantage of the opportunity to enter the Northern Army and subjugate them. He then killed the Lue family.

古文：商是岁薨，谥曰景侯。
现代文：郦商于这年去世，谧号为景侯。
English: The merchant died that year, and his posthumous name was Jinghou.

古文：子寄嗣。天下称郦况卖友。
现代文：其子郦寄继承爵位，天下人皆称郦况出卖朋友。
English: His son, Mu Ying, inherited the title, and people all over the world said that he betrayed his friends.

古文：孝景时，吴、楚、齐、赵反，上以寄为将军，围赵城，七月不能下，栾布自平齐来，乃灭赵。
现代文：孝景帝时，吴、楚、齐、趟谋反，皇上命郦寄为将军，围攻趟城，七个月仍不能攻下。乐布从平齐来才攻下趟城，于是消灭了赵国。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaojing, Wu, Chu, Qi, and Watan plotted to rebel. The emperor sent a general to besiege Watan, but he was unable to capture it for seven months. It took Lo Bu from Pingqi to capture Watan, thus eliminating the State of Zhao.

古文：孝景中二年，寄欲取平原君为夫人，景帝怒，下寄吏，免。
现代文：孝景帝中元二年，郦寄想娶平原君为夫人，景帝大怒，将郦寄逮捕，免去爵位。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing in the middle of the first century, Mei Ying wanted to marry Pingyuan Jun as his wife. Emperor Jing was furious and arrested Mei Ying and removed her from her title.

古文：上乃封商它子坚为缪侯，奉商后。
现代文：皇上封郦商的另一个儿子郦坚为缪侯，为郦商的后代。
English: Another son of the emperor's seal merchant, Jian Jian, was his son-in-law and a descendant of Jian Jian.

古文：传至玄孙终根，武帝时为太常，坐巫蛊诛，国除。
现代文：爵位直传到玄孙塑，选武查时任命为太常，因巫蛊之事牵连获罪被杀，废除其封国。
English: The title of nobility was passed directly to the great-great-grandson of Su Shi, who was appointed as Taizhong during the election of Wu Zha, and was implicated and killed for the matter of witchcraft, and his title of state was abolished.

古文：元始中，赐高祖时功臣自郦商以下子孙爵皆关内侯，食邑凡百余人。
现代文：二始年间，赐连直担时的功臣，白丽适以下的子孙爵位都为关内侯，食邑共百余人。
English: During the first two years of the dynasty, the descendants of Bai Lishi, who was a meritorious person when he was awarded the title of direct vassal, were all dukes of Guanai, with a total of more than a hundred people in Shifu.

古文：夏侯婴，沛人也。
现代文：夏侯婴是沛县人。
English: Xia Houyi is from Peixian County.

古文：为沛厩司御，每送使客，还过泗上亭，与高祖语，未尝不移日也。
现代文：他在沛县掌管养马驾车，每次送客回来经过泗上亭，都和高祖交谈，经常谈论很久。
English: He is in charge of horse-breeding in Peixian County. Every time he sends a guest back, he talks to Gao Zu through the pavilion. They often talk for a long time.

古文：婴已而试补县吏，与高祖相爱。
现代文：夏侯婴后来试用充任为县吏，和高祖相友好。
English: Later, Xia Houying served as a probationary county official, and became even closer to Gao Zu.

古文：高祖戏而伤婴，人有告高祖。
现代文：高祖戏谚而伤了夏侯婴，于是有人高祖犯法。
English: On one occasion, Gaozu accidentally injured Xia Hou's baby as a joke, and was reported to the government by others.

古文：高祖时为亭长，重坐伤人，告故不伤婴，婴证之。
现代文：高祖当时作为亭长，要加重判处伤人罪，但高祖告诉说根本没有伤害夏侯婴，夏侯婴为高祖作证无此事。
English: At that time, Gao Zu was the head of the pavilion, and if someone was injured, they would be severely punished. Therefore, Gao Zu's complaint did not hurt Xia Hou's baby, and Xia Hou's baby also proved that he was not injured.

古文：移狱复，婴坐高祖系岁余，掠笞数百，终脱高祖。
现代文：后翻案覆审，夏侯婴犯了伪证罪而被关押一年多，鞭打数百下，最后还是开脱了高祖。
English: After the overturned case was retried, Xia Houying committed perjury and was detained for more than a year, whipped hundreds of times, and finally acquitted Gao Zu.

古文：高祖之初与徒属欲攻沛也，婴时以县令史为高祖使。
现代文：高祖起兵之初和属下想攻沛县，夏侯婴当时作为县衙掌文书的小官为高祖所指使。
English: At the beginning, when Gaozu was leading his followers to prepare to attack Peixian, Xia Houyi contacted Gaozu in his capacity as a subordinate official of the county magistrate.

古文：上降沛一日，高祖为沛公，赐爵七大夫，以婴为太仆，常奉车。
现代文：高祖攻下沛县的第一天，高祖作了沛公，赐夏侯婴第七级爵公大夫，成为掌管车马的太仆。
English: On the first day of Gaozu's conquest of Pei County, Gaozu became Pei Gong, bestowed upon Xia Houyin the title of the seventh grade noble doctor, and became the eunuch in charge of chariots and horses.

古文：从攻胡陵，婴与萧何降泗水监平，平以胡陵降，赐婴爵五大夫。
现代文：跟从高祖攻打胡陵，夏侯婴和萧何降服泅水郡监平，平献出胡陵归降，于是赐夏侯婴第九级爵五大夫。
English: When he followed Gao Zu to attack Huling, Xia Houyi and Xia He together recruited and demoted the Surabaya County Supervisor Ping, Ping surrendered Huling, and Gao Zu gave Xia Houyi the title of five husbands.

古文：从击秦军砀东，攻济阳，下户牖，破李由军雍丘，以兵车趣攻战疾，破之，赐爵执帛。
现代文：又在旸东攻打秦军，攻下济阳，夺取户牖，在雍丘大破李由军队，用兵车急攻，战斗激烈，打败敌人，赐给爵位执帛。
English: He also attacked the Qin army in the east of Shandong, conquered Jiyang, captured Humen, defeated Li Yu's army in Yongqiu, stormed with chariots, fought fiercely, defeated the enemy, and was given a knighthood.

古文：从击章邯军东阿、濮阳下，以兵车趣攻战疾，破之，赐爵执圭。
现代文：跟从高祖在束阿、濮阳下攻打章邯军队，用兵车急攻猛打，攻破秦军，赐爵位执圭。
English: He followed Gao Zu to attack the Zhangye army in Sokha and Shenyang, and attacked the Qin army with his chariot. He was awarded a knighthood.

古文：从击赵贲军开封，杨熊军曲遇。
现代文：跟从高祖在开封攻打趟贲的军队，在曲遇攻打杨熊的军队。
English: He followed Gao Zu in Kaifeng to attack the army of Wanzhong, and in Quchu to attack the army of Yangxiong.

古文：婴从捕虏六十八人，降卒八百五十人，得印一匮。
现代文：夏侯婴捕虏六十八人，投降的士兵八百五十人，得官印一柜。
English: During the battle, Xia Houying captured sixty-eight prisoners, captured eight hundred and fifty soldiers, and seized a box of gold seals.

古文：又击秦军雒阳东，以兵车趣攻战疾，赐爵封，转为膝令。
现代文：又在雒阳东追击秦军，仍用兵车急攻，赐封爵并任命为滕县县令。
English: He also pursued the Qin army in the east of Fenyang, still using troop cars to make a sudden attack, and was given a knighthood and appointed as the county magistrate of Tengxian County.

古文：因奉车从攻定南阳，战于蓝田、芷阳，至霸上。
现代文：因此常奉车跟从高祖出战，乎定南阳，战于蓝田、芷阳，直至霸上。
English: Therefore, he often followed Gaozu to go to war, and fought in Lantian, Shenyang, and even Hegemony.

古文：沛公为汉王，赐婴爵列侯，号昭平侯，复为太仆，从入蜀汉。
现代文：沛公做汉王，赐夏侯婴爵列侯，号昭平侯，又为太仆，跟从汉王到蜀汉。
English: Pei Gong was the king of Han, he gave Xia Marquis the title of Infante Marquis, the title of Zhao Ping Marquis, and he was also a great servant, he followed from the king of Han to Shu Han.

古文：还定三秦，从击项籍。
现代文：汉王还定三秦，夏侯婴跟从皇上攻打项籍。
English: Later, Han Wang Hui's army conquered Sanqin, and Xia Houying followed Han Wang to attack Xiang Yu's army.

古文：至鼓城，项羽大破汉军。
现代文：到彭城。项羽大败汉军。
English: To Pengcheng. Xiang Yu defeated the Han army.

古文：汉王不利，驰去。见孝惠、鲁元，载之。
现代文：汉王见战势不利，迅速撤退，遇见孝惠帝和鲁元公主，夏侯婴均让他们上车一起走。
English: Han Wang saw that the war situation was unfavorable and quickly retreated. He met Xia Hui Di and Lu Yuan Princess, and Xia Hou Ying let them both get on the car and walk together.

古文：汉王急，马罢，虏在后，常跋两儿弃之，婴常收载行，面雍树驰。
现代文：汉王心急，马疲，敌人追赶在后，于是几次将两个孩子蹬下车来抛弃他们，夏侯婴总是载着他们，紧抱奔驰。
English: Han Wang was anxious, his horse was tired, and the enemy was chasing after him. Therefore, he several times pushed his two children out of the car to abandon them. Xia Houying always carried them, hugging the Mercedes.

古文：汉王怒，欲斩婴者十余，卒得脱，而致孝惠、鲁元于丰。
现代文：汉王大怒，十多次想斩杀了夏侯婴，最后终于逃脱，将孝惠帝和鲁元公主送到丰地。
English: The king of Han was furious and tried to kill Xia Houyou more than ten times. Finally, he escaped and sent Emperor Xia Hui and Princess Lu Yuan to Fengdi.

古文：汉王既至荥阳，收散兵，复振，赐婴食邑沂阳。
现代文：汉王到了荣阳后，收集散乱的士兵，重振军队，赐给夏侯婴沂阳作食邑。
English: After the Han king arrived in Rongyang, he collected the scattered soldiers, reinvigorated the army, and gave Xia Houyin the food-growing town of Rongyang.

古文：击项籍下邑，追至陈，卒定楚。
现代文：在下邑攻打项籍，一直追击到陈，最终平定了楚。
English: He attacked Xiangqi in the lower county and pursued it all the way to Chen, eventually pacifying Chu.

古文：至鲁，益食兹氏。
现代文：到鲁城，给他增加了兹氏县作为食邑。
English: When he arrived in Lucheng, Zishi County was added to him as a food county.

古文：汉王即帝位，燕王臧荼反，婴从击荼。
现代文：汉王称帝后，燕王臧荼谋反，夏侯婴跟从高帝击臧荼。
English: Han Wang called the empress dowager, Yan Wang plotted rebellion, and Xia Houyou followed Gao Di to fight.

古文：明年，从至陈，取楚王信。
现代文：第二年，又跟从到陈县，获楚王韩信。
English: The following year, he followed Emperor Gao to Chen County and arrested King Han Xin of Chu.

古文：更食汝阴，剖符，世世勿绝。
现代文：改封汝阴侯，剖符为证，世代相传。
English: The change of name to "Ru Yin Hou" is attested by the cut-up characters and has been passed down from generation to generation.

古文：从击代，至武泉、云中，益食千户。
现代文：跟随高帝攻打代国，到武泉、云中，增加食邑一千户。
English: Following Gao Di's attack on the country, he went to Wuquan and Yunchu and increased the number of restaurants by a thousand.

古文：因从击韩信军胡骑晋阳旁，大破之。
现代文：就跟从高祖在晋阳附近攻打韩信军队胡骑，大败敌军。
English: He then followed Han Wang to the vicinity of Jinyang and defeated the Hun cavalry under Han Xin.

古文：追北至平城，为胡所围，七日不得通。
现代文：向北追击至平城，被匈奴军包围，七天不能通音信。
English: When they chased the defeated army to Pingcheng, they were surrounded by Hun cavalry regiments and trapped for seven whole days.

古文：高帝使使厚遗阏氏，冒顿乃开其围一角。
现代文：高帝派使者送给匈奴丰厚的物品，冒顿才打开包围圈的一角放行。
English: Emperor Gao sent an envoy to present the Huns with rich goods, only to suddenly open a corner of the encirclement and let them go.

古文：高帝出欲驰，婴固徐行，弩皆持满外乡，卒以得脱。
现代文：高帝想驱驰，而夏侯婴则坚持让部队严整地从匈奴所开的缺口慢慢退出，士卒都将兵器弓箭向外，终于得以脱险。
English: Gao Di wanted to drive away, while Xia Houyi insisted that the troops should withdraw slowly from the gap opened by the Xiongnu. The soldiers pointed their weapons and bows outward and were finally able to escape.

古文：益食婴细阳千户。
现代文：高帝又给夏侯婴增加细阳一千户作为食邑。
English: With this achievement, Emperor Gao sealed a thousand households in Xieyang as food villages to Xia Houying.

古文：从击胡骑句注北，大破之。
现代文：跟随高帝在句注北面攻打匈奴骑兵，大破敌军。
English: He followed Emperor Gao to attack the Hun cavalry on the north side of the junction and defeated the enemy army.

古文：击胡骑平城南，三陷陈，功为多，赐所夺邑五百户。
现代文：在平城以南攻打匈奴骑兵，三次冲锋陷阵，军功很多，于是高帝赐其所夺取的五百户作为食邑。
English: In the south of Pingcheng, he attacked the Hun cavalry, stormed the battlefield three times, and won a lot of military merit. Therefore, Emperor Gao gave him the 500 households he captured as food villages.

古文：从击陈豨、黥布军，陷陈却敌，益千户，定食汝阴六千九百户，降前所食。
现代文：跟从高帝攻打陈猪、黥布军队，冲锋陷阵，勇退敌军，增加一千户食邑，额定夏侯婴在汝阴食邑六千九百户，撤销以前所封食邑。
English: He followed Gao Di to attack the troops of Chen Gu and Zibo, stormed the front, and bravely retreated from the enemy. He increased the number of food villages by one thousand, and rated Xia Houyi's food villages in Ruyin as six thousand nine hundred, and revoked the previously sealed food villages.

古文：婴自上初起沛，常为太仆从，竟高祖崩。
现代文：夏侯婴自从高帝起兵沛县，常作为太仆跟随高帝左右，直到高帝去世。
English: Since Emperor Gao took up residence in Heibei County, Xia Houyou often followed Emperor Gao around as his eunuch until Emperor Gao passed away.

古文：以太仆事惠帝。
现代文：以后又作为太仆服侍惠帝。
English: Later, he served Emperor Hui as a courtier.

古文：惠帝及高后德婴之脱孝惠、鲁元于下邑间也，乃赐婴北第第一，曰 近我 ，以尊异之。
现代文：惠帝和吕后感谢夏侯婴在下邑救出孝惠和鲁元公王，于是赐给他一座最靠近皇宫北阙的第一等住宅，吕后题名 近我 ，表示一种特殊的优于群臣的尊礼。
English: Emperor Hui and Empress Lu thanked Xia Houyi for rescuing Prince Xia Hui and Prince Lu Yuan in the lower town, so he was given a first-class residence closest to the north gate of the imperial palace. Empress Lu named it "Close to Me," indicating a special honor that was superior to that of other courtiers.

古文：惠帝崩，以太仆事高后。
现代文：惠帝死后，又作为太仆听命于吕后。
English: After Emperor Hui's death, he again obeyed Empress Lyu as her servant.

古文：高后崩，代王之来，婴以太仆与东牟侯入清宫，废少帝，以天子法驾迎代王代邸，与大臣共立文帝，复为太仆。
现代文：吕后死后，代王刘恒到来，夏侯婴作为太仆与柬牟侯刘兴居一起入宫逐吕后所立少帝，按照天子车驾仪式到代王府邸迎接代王刘恒，和大臣们共同拥立为皇帝，他仍作太仆。
English: After the death of Empress Lv, Liu Heng, the acting king, arrived. Xia Houyou, as the eunuch, entered the palace with Liu Xingju, the prince of Khmer, to follow the young emperor appointed by Empress Lv. According to the celestial chariot driving ceremony, he went to the residence of the acting king to meet Liu Heng, and was supported by the ministers as the emperor. He was still the eunuch.

古文：八岁薨，谥曰文侯。
现代文：八年后死，谧号文侯。
English: He died eight years later, with the posthumous title of "Wen Hou."

古文：传至曾孙颇，尚平阳公主，坐与父御婢奸。自杀，国除。
现代文：爵位传到曾孙夏侯颇，娶了汉武帝的姐姐平阳公主，后因和父亲的婢女通奸犯罪而自杀，封国被废除。
English: The title of nobility was passed down to his great-grandson, Xia Hupo, who married Emperor Hanwu's sister, Princess Pingyang, and later committed suicide for committing adultery with his father's maid, and the state was abolished.

古文：初，婴为藤令奉车，故号滕公。及曾孙颇尚主，主随外家姓，号孙公主，故滕公子孙更为孙氏。
现代文：起初，夏侯婴因作滕县县令而号滕公，到他的曾孙夏侯颇时，因娶了平阳公主，平阳公主随外公家的孙姓，号孙公主，所以滕公的子孙也都改姓为孙氏。
English: At first, Xia Houyou was called Tenggong because he was the county magistrate of Teng County. When his great-grandson Xia Houpo was born, he married Princess Pingyang. Princess Pingyang took the surname of her maternal grandfather's grandson, Sun Princess. Therefore, all of Tenggong's grandchildren changed their surnames to Sun.

古文：灌婴，睢阳贩缯者也。
现代文：灌婴，睢阳县贩卖丝织品的商人出身。
English: He was born in Fenyang County, a merchant who sold silk fabrics.

古文：高祖为沛公，略地至雍丘，章邯杀项梁，而沛公还军于砀，婴以中涓从，击破东郡尉于成武及秦军于杠里，疾斗，赐爵七大夫。
现代文：高祖作了沛公，带士卒到达雍丘。章邯杀死项梁后，沛公还军驻旸，灌婴作为中涓随从。在成武击破秦的束郡郡尉，在杠里打败秦军。因在战斗中很勇敢，被赐给七大夫的爵位。
English: Gao Zu became Pei Gong and led the soldiers to reach Yongqiu. After Zhang Quan killed Xiang Liang, Pei Gong returned to the army stationed in Shao, and Guan Yu followed as the middle eunuch. In Chengwu, he defeated Qin's Saku County lieutenant and defeated Qin's army in Liuli. Because he was very brave in the battle, he was given the title of the seventh doctor.

古文：又从攻秦军亳南、开封、曲遇，战疾力，赐爵执帛，号宣陵君。
现代文：又跟从沛公在亳的南面及开封、曲遇攻打秦军，攻战迅猛，沛公赐给他爵位执帛，号宣陵君。
English: He also followed Pei Gong to attack the Qin army in the south of Lu and in Kaifeng and Qu, and the battle was fierce. Pei Gong gave him the title of Duke and the title of Xuanlingjun.

古文：从攻阳武以西至雒阳，破秦军尸北。
现代文：跟从沛公攻打阳武以西至雒阳，在尸的北面大败秦军。
English: He followed Peigong to attack Yangwu to the west and Fenyang to the north, defeating the Qin army.

古文：北绝河津，南破南阳守齮阳城东，遂定南阳郡。
现代文：向北跨过黄河渡口，向南击败南阳郡守骑于阳城东，于是平定了南阳郡。
English: He crossed the Yellow River ferry to the north and defeated the Nanyang County garrison in the east of Yangcheng to the south, thus leveling Nanyang County.

古文：西入武关，战于蓝田，疾力，至霸上，赐爵执圭，号昌文君。
现代文：又向西进入武关，在蓝田作战，战斗中迅猛顽强，到霸上，沛公赐他执圭的爵位，号昌文君。
English: He also entered Wuguan to the west, fought in Lantian, was swift and tenacious in battle, and was given the title of "Changwenjun" by Pei Gong.

古文：沛公为汉王，拜婴为郎中，从入汉中，十月，拜为中谒者。
现代文：沛公作了汉王，拜灌婴为郎中，跟随进入漠中，十月，又拜他为中谒者。
English: Pei Gong became the king of Han, worshiped Guan Yu as his son-in-law, followed him into the desert, and in October, worshiped him as the midwife.

古文：从还定三秦，下栎阳，降塞王。
现代文：跟从汉王平定三秦，攻下烁阳，降服塞王。
English: He followed the Han king and leveled Sanqin, captured Fenyang, and subdued the Sai king Sima Xin.

古文：还围章邯废丘，未拔。
现代文：在废丘围攻章邯军队，未能彻底歼灭敌人。
English: They besieged the Zhangye army in the wasteland, but failed to completely annihilate the enemy.

古文：从东出临晋关，击降殷王，定其地。
现代文：跟从汉王向东出临晋关，击败招降殷王，平定了他的领地。
English: Later, he followed Han Wang Dong out of Jin Pass, subdued Yin Wang Dong Yao, and pacified the area under his jurisdiction.

古文：击项羽将龙且、魏相项佗军定陶南，疾战，破之。
现代文：攻打项羽的将领龙且、魏的丞相项佗的军队在定陶南，战斗勇猛，大败敌军。
English: The army of Long Jie, the general who attacked Xiang Yu, and Wei's chancellor Xiang Yu, fought bravely in the south of Dingtao and defeated the enemy army.

古文：赐婴爵列侯，号昌文侯。
现代文：汉王赐灌婴为列侯，号昌文侯，食邑在杜县平乡。
English: Han Wang gave Guan Yu to be a vassal lord, his name was Changwen, and his hometown was Pingxiang, Du County.

古文：复以中谒者从降下砀，以北至彭城。
现代文：他仍以中谒者身份跟从汉王攻下赐，又向北攻至彭城。
English: He still followed the emperor's order to attack from the north and attacked Pengcheng.

古文：项羽击破汉王，汉王遁而西，婴从还，军于雍丘。
现代文：项羽在彭城打败汉王，汉王向西逃跑，灌婴跟从汉王归来，驻军在雍丘。
English: Xiang Yu defeated Han Wang in Pengcheng, Han Wang fled to the west, Guan Yu followed Han Wang back, and the garrison was in Yongqiu.

古文：王武、魏公申徒反，从击破之。
现代文：王武、魏公申徒反汉，跟随汉王打败他们。
English: Wang Wu and Wei Gong incited the rebels to rebel, and Guan Yu followed the Han king to attack, and defeated them.

古文：攻下外黄，西收军于荥阳。
现代文：又攻下外，向西到荣阳收整军队。
English: He also attacked the outlying areas and went west to Rongyang to consolidate the army.

古文：楚骑来众，汉王乃择军中可为骑将者；皆推故秦骑士重泉人李必、骆甲习骑兵，今为校尉，可为骑将。
现代文：由于楚军的骑兵人数多，汉王于是挑选军中可以作骑兵将领的人，大家一致推举原秦军的骑士重泉人李必、骆甲熟习骑兵，当时是校尉，可作骑军将领。
English: Due to the large number of cavalrymen in the Chu army, the Han king then selected the best people in the army who could be cavalry generals. Everyone unanimously nominated Li Bi, a knight of the former Qin army, and Luo Jia, an experienced cavalryman, who was a lieutenant at the time, to be cavalry generals.

古文：汉王欲拜之，必、甲曰： 臣故秦民，恐军不信臣，臣愿得大王左右善骑者傅之。 
现代文：汉王想拜任他们，李必、骆甲说： 我们是秦朝的臣民，恐怕汉军不信任我们，我们愿得到汉王左右的善于骑兵作战的人辅助我们。 
English: When the Han king wanted to pay homage to them, Li Bi and Luo Jia said: "We are subjects of the Qin Dynasty. I am afraid that the Han army does not trust us. We would like to have people around the Han king who are good at cavalry warfare to assist us."

古文：婴虽少，然数力战，乃拜婴为中大夫，令李必、骆甲为左右校尉，将郎中骑兵击楚骑于荥阳东，大破之。
现代文：灌婴虽年轻，然而已身经数战，于是拜灌婴为中大夫，命令李必、骆甲为左右校尉，率领郎中骑兵在荣阳以柬攻打楚骑兵，大破敌军。
English: Although Guanzhong was young, he had already been through several battles. Therefore, Bai Guanzhong became the middle doctor, ordered Li Bi and Luo Jia to be the left and right lieutenants, and led the middle cavalrymen to attack the Chu cavalrymen in Rongyang with camels, and defeated the enemy army.

古文：受诏别击楚军后，绝其饷道，起阳武至襄邑。
现代文：又受命另率大军攻打楚军后方，断绝他们的粮道，封锁阳武至襄邑。
English: He was also ordered to lead another large army to attack the rear of the Chu army, cut off their food supply, and blockade Yangwu to Xiangyun.

古文：击项羽之将项冠于鲁下，破之，所将卒斩右司马、骑将各一人。
现代文：在鲁地攻打项羽的将领项冠，打败敌军，率领士兵斩杀了右司马、骑军将领各一人。
English: In Ludi, he attacked the general Xiang Yu's general Xiang Guan, defeated the enemy army, and led the soldiers to kill the right steed and the cavalry general, one each.

古文：击破柘公王武军燕西，所将卒斩楼烦将五人，连尹一人。
现代文：在燕地以西击败柘公王武军队，率兵斩杀楼烦将五人，连尹一人。
English: In the west of Yan Di, he defeated the army of the Duke of Zou Wu, and led the soldiers to kill five of the leaders, and one person, Lian Yin.

古文：击王武别将桓婴白马下，破之，所将卒斩都尉一人。
现代文：在皇屋打败玺的偏将担婴，大败敌军，手下兵士斩杀都尉一人。
English: In the vicinity of the White Horse, the great defeat of Wang Wu's warlord Huan Yu, the commander of the soldiers beheaded a captain.

古文：以骑度河南，送汉王到雒阳，从北迎相国韩信军于邯郸。
现代文：率骑兵向南渡过黄河，护送汉王到昼困，向北在翅塑迎接相国整值的军队。
English: He crossed the Yellow River with his cavalry to the south, escorted the Han king to the daytime sleep, and went north to meet the enemy's whole army at Yingpu.

古文：还至敖仓，婴迁为御史大夫。
现代文：还兵至敖仓，灌婴升迁为御史大夫。
English: When he returned to Kamakura, he was promoted to chief historian.

古文：三年，以列侯食邑杜平乡。
现代文：第三年，作为列侯封给他杜县平乡作食邑。
English: When Han Wang was three years old, he was given the title of Marquis of Du County's food town of Pingxiang.

古文：受诏将郎中骑兵东属相国韩信，击破齐军于历下，所将卒虏车骑将华毋伤及将吏四十六人。
现代文：他作为御史大夫受命率郎中骑兵向东归属相国韩值军队，在历下击败变军，率领士兵俘虏车骑将华毋伤和他的吏属四十六人。
English: As the chief of the imperial history department, he was ordered to lead the cavalry to the east to belong to the Korean army of the same country. He defeated the mutinous army and led the soldiers to capture the chariot and cavalry commander Hua Nei and his 46 officers and men.

古文：降下临淄，得相田光。
现代文：攻下临淄，抓获齐相田光。
English: Linyi was captured and Qi Ao Tian Guang was captured.

古文：追齐相田横至嬴、博，击破其骑，所将卒斩骑将一人，生得骑将四人。
现代文：追击齐相田横到赢、博，击败他的骑军，率兵斩杀骑将一人，活捉骑将四人。
English: Chased Qi Aida sideways to win, Bo, defeated his cavalry, led the soldiers to kill one rider, and captured four riders alive.

古文：攻下嬴、博，破齐将军田吸于千乘，斩之。
现代文：攻下蛊、博，在千乘攻破齐将军田吸，杀了他。
English: He captured Zou and Bo, and defeated and killed the general Tian Su in Qizheng.

古文：东从韩信攻龙且、留公于假密，卒斩龙且，生得右司马、连尹各一人，楼烦将十人，身生得亚将周兰。
现代文：向东跟从韩信在堡适攻打垄旦、贸金，部下斩杀垄旦，活捉右司马、连尹各一人，楼烦的将领十人，亲自活捉敌副将周兰。
English: Xiangdong followed Han Xin to attack and fight against Rongdan and Tongjin in the castle, and his subordinates killed Rongdan, captured one person each of the Right Sima and Lian Yin, ten troublesome generals, and personally captured the enemy vice-general Zhou Lan.

古文：齐地已定，韩信自立为齐王，使婴别将击楚将公杲于鲁北，破之。
现代文：齐地已经平定，韩信自立为齐王，派灌婴率领军队在鲁地北面攻打楚将公呆，大败敌军。
English: Qi has been pacified, Han Xin has established himself as the king of Qi, and he has dispatched Guanzhong to lead the army to attack Chu in the north of Ludi, defeating the enemy army.

古文：转南，破薛郡长，身虏骑将一人。
现代文：转向南方，打败薛郡郡守，亲自俘获骑将一人。
English: Guanzhong waved his division southward, defeated the army led by Xue County, and personally captured a cavalry general.

古文：攻傅阳，前至下相以东南僮、取虑、徐。
现代文：攻打傅阳，进军到下相东南的僮、取虑、徐。
English: Attacking Fuyang, marching to the southeast of the next phase of Zhengzhou, Yixian, Xu.

古文：度淮，尽降其城邑，至广陵。
现代文：渡过鲢，全部占领了这一带的城邑，到达广陵。
English: After crossing the Huai River, they conquered all the towns in the south of Huai, and then arrived at Guangling.

古文：项羽使项声、薛公、郯公复定淮北，婴度淮击破顶声、郯公下邳，斩薛公，下下邳、寿春。
现代文：项型派玺登、萨公、塑公又重定进回以北，违婴渡进回在工邳击败了玺登、垄升，斩杀整公，攻占工邳、画画。
English: The sub-types sent Xingdeng, Sakong and Shougong to the north and back again, and the illegal immigrants defeated Xingdeng and Rengsheng in the work camp, killed Zhengong, and captured the work camp and painting.

古文：击破楚骑平阳，遂降彭城。虏柱国项佗，降留、薛、沛、酂、萧、相。
现代文：在王荡击破楚军的骑兵，于是平定彭城，俘虏了柱国项佗，占领了留、薛、沛、邓、芦、捣。
English: After defeating the cavalry of the Chu army at Wanglang, they subdued Pengcheng, captured the pillar country Xiangyi, and occupied Ru, Xue, Pei, Deng, Lu, and Mash.

古文：攻苦、谯，复得亚将。
现代文：攻打萱瑟、遮瑟，又抓获了一名副将。
English: They attacked Fuso and Chasa, and captured a vice admiral.

古文：与汉王会颐乡。从击项籍军陈下，破之。
现代文：与汉王在颐乡会合，跟从汉王在陈地击败项篮。
English: He met with Han Wang in Handan Township and followed Han Wang to defeat Cao Bang in Chen Di.

古文：所将卒斩楼烦将二人，虏将八人。
现代文：所率士兵斩杀了撞烦将二人，抓获将领八人。
English: The soldiers led by him killed two general officers and captured eight generals.

古文：赐益食邑二千五百户。
现代文：汉王增加他的食邑二千五百户。
English: Han Wang has increased the number of households receiving infant formula by 2,500.

古文：项籍败垓下去也，婴以御史大夫将车骑别追项籍至东城，破之。
现代文：项籍在垓下失败逃跑，婴作为御史大夫率骑兵追击项籍至束城，大败敌军。
English: Xiang Zeki failed to escape under the yoke, the infant, as the chief historian, led the cavalry to chase Xiang Zeki to Sokcheng, and defeated the enemy army.

古文：所将卒五人共斩项籍，皆赐爵列侯。
现代文：手下的五名士兵一起斩杀了项籍，于是都赐给他们列侯爵位。
English: The five soldiers led by him jointly killed Xiang Yu, and they were all made vassals.

古文：降左右司马各一人，卒万二千人，尽得其军将吏。
现代文：俘虏左右司马各一人，敌兵一万二千人，敌军将领和士兵全部被俘获。
English: They also subdued one Sima from each side, twelve thousand soldiers, and captured all the generals and officials in Xiang Yu's army.

古文：下东城、历阳。
现代文：攻下束城、历阳县。
English: They captured Sokcho and Liyang County.

古文：度江破吴郡长吴下，得吴守，遂定吴、豫章、会稽郡。
现代文：渡过旦丝，在昱打败呈塑郡长，抓住呈郡守，并平定了呈、跶、会擅登。
English: After crossing the Danshi River, he defeated the county magistrate of Chengshu County in Handan, captured the county governor of Chengshu County, and defeated the gangs of Cheng, Handan and He.

古文：还定淮北，凡五十二县。
现代文：回军平定进回以北共五十二个县。
English: Then the army returned, and the Huaibei region, a total of fifty-two counties, was leveled.

古文：汉王即帝位，赐益婴邑三千户。
现代文：汉王登基后，增加灌婴的食邑至三千户。
English: After Emperor Han ascended to the throne, the number of households feeding infants was increased to 3,000.

古文：以车骑将军从击燕王荼。
现代文：作为车骑将军跟随皇上攻打燕王臧荼。
English: As a chariot and cavalry general, he followed the emperor to attack Yan Wangzhu.

古文：明年，从至陈，取楚王信。
现代文：第二年，跟从皇上到陈县，捉得楚王韩信。
English: The following year, he followed Emperor Gao to Chen County and arrested King Han Xin of Chu.

古文：还，剖符世世勿绝，食颍阴二千五百户。
现代文：凯旋归来，皇上与他剖符为证，将颖阴二千五百户作食邑，世代相传。
English: After his triumphant return, the emperor cut the imperial seal with him as a proof, and 2,500 households in Yingying were made into food villages, which were passed down from generation to generation.

古文：从击韩王信于代，至马邑，别降楼烦以北六县，斩代左将，破胡骑将于武泉北。
现代文：跟从皇上在代地攻打韩王信，至马邑，又率将攻占楼烦以北六个县，斩杀代地左将，在武泉以北大败匈奴骑兵。
English: Following the emperor's attack on Han Wangxin on behalf of the emperor, he led his troops to capture six counties north of Rouyi, killed the left general on behalf of the emperor, and defeated the Hun cavalry north of Wuquan.

古文：复从击信胡骑晋阳下，所将卒斩胡白题将一人。
现代文：又跟从皇上在晋阳攻打韩值、包抠的骑兵，手下兵士斩杀了鲤抠人直墨的将军一人。
English: He also followed the cavalry from the emperor to attack Han Zheng and Bao Zheng in Jinyang, and his soldiers killed one of the generals who had directly attacked Han Zheng.

古文：又受诏将燕、赵、齐、梁、楚车骑，击破胡骑于硰石。
现代文：又受皇上军令率领燕、赵、齐、梁、楚的兵力在碧石击破匈奴骑兵。
English: In addition, the troops of Yan, Zhao, Qi, Liang and Chu, led by the emperor's military order, defeated the Hun cavalry in Bijie.

古文：至平城，为胡所困。
现代文：到平城时，被匈奴军队围困。
English: When they reached Pingcheng, they were besieged by the Hun army.

古文：从击陈豨，别攻豨丞相侯敞军曲逆下，破之，卒斩敞及特将五人。
现代文：跟从皇上攻打陈豨，在曲逆率领军队打败陈稀的丞相侯敞的军队，斩侯敞和将军五人。
English: He followed the emperor to attack Chen Xi, and led the army to defeat the army of Chen Xi's prime minister and general, and killed five generals and generals.

古文：降曲逆、卢奴、上曲阳、安国、安平。
现代文：攻降曲逆、卢奴、上曲阳、安国、安平等县。
English: The counties that were attacked and defeated were Qujing, Lunu, Shangquyang, Anguo, and Anping.

古文：攻下东垣。
现代文：攻下东旦瑟。
English: Capture East Dansi.

古文：黥布反，以车骑将军先出，攻布别将于相，破之，斩亚将楼烦将三人。
现代文：黥布反汉，灌婴以车骑将军首先出征，在相地攻击黥布的偏将，大破敌军，斩杀副将楼烦将领三人。
English: Zibo, an anti-Han general, was the first to go to war, attacking Zibo's general on the same day, defeating the enemy army, killing the vice-general and three generals.

古文：又进击破布上柱国及大司马军。
现代文：又进军消灭了黥布的上柱国和大司马的军队。
English: They also marched to wipe out the troops of the Upper Column Kingdom and the Great Horse Army.

古文：又进破布别将肥铢。
现代文：还打败了黥布的手下将领肥铢。
English: He also defeated Obu's subordinate, General Fatty.

古文：婴身生得左司马一人，所将卒斩其小将十人，追北至淮上。
现代文：灌婴自抓获左司马一人，他的士兵斩杀了小将十人，向前追击到淮河上游。
English: Guanzhong captured one person, Zuo Sima, and his soldiers killed ten minor generals and pursued them to the upper reaches of the Huai River.

古文：益食邑二千五百户。
现代文：皇上增加他的食邑二千五百户。
English: The emperor increased his food stores by 2,500 households.

古文：布已破，高帝归，定令婴食颍阴五千户，除前所食邑。
现代文：黥布被消灭后，皇上归朝，决定让灌婴将颖阴五千户作为食邑，收回以前所封食邑。
English: After the destruction of Xibe, the emperor returned to the imperial court and decided to let Guanzhong take Yingying five thousand households as food villages and recover the previously sealed food villages.

古文：凡从所得二千石二人，别破军十六，降城四十六，定国一、郡二、县五十二，得将军二人，柱国、相各一人，二千石十人。
现代文：总其军功共抓获二千石俸禄的将领二人，率军灭敌十六次，占领城池四十六座，平定一个叛国、二个郡、五十二个县，抓获将军二人，柱国、相各一人，二千石俸禄的十人。
English: In total, his military exploits captured a total of two generals with a salary of 2,000 koku, led the army to defeat the enemy 16 times, occupied 46 cities and villages, defeated one treason, two counties, 52 counties, captured two generals, one pillar country, one relative, and ten people with a salary of 2,000 koku.

古文：婴自破布归，高帝崩，以列侯事惠帝及吕后。
现代文：濯婴打败黥布回军，高帝死，作为列侯辅佐惠帝和吕后。
English: Laundry baby defeated the Qin cloth back to the army, Gao Di died, as the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal of the vassal.

古文：吕后崩，吕禄等欲为乱。
现代文：吕后死，吕禄等人想叛乱。
English: After Lü Guo's death, Lü Lu and others wanted to rebel.

古文：齐哀王闻之，举兵西，吕禄等以婴为大将军往击之。
现代文：齐哀王听到消息，率兵西进，吕禄等以灌婴为大将军迎击查军。
English: Upon hearing the news, King Qie Lai marched westward with his soldiers, and Lulu and the other generals fought against the Chao army.

古文：婴至荥阳，乃与绛侯等谋，因屯兵荥阳，风齐王以诛吕氏事，齐兵止不前。
现代文：整婴到茔肠，便与继凰动等策，屯兵荣阳，劝说齐王要以诛减吕氏为重，齐兵停止进军。
English: When the baby was born, he and Suihuang took the following measures to persuade Qi Wang to give priority to the reduction of the Lv clan and stop the advance of Qi soldiers.

古文：绛侯等既诛诸吕，齐王罢兵归。
现代文：绛侯等诛减诸吕之后，齐王撤兵回国。
English: After the subjugation of Zhu Lv by the warlords, King Qi withdrew his troops and returned to China.

古文：婴自荥阳还，与绛侯、陈平共立文帝。
现代文：灌婴从荣阳返回，与绛侯、陈平等大臣共同拥立文帝。
English: Guanzhong returned from Rongyang, and together with Gonghou and Minister Chen Rongfei, supported Emperor Wen.

古文：于是益封婴三千户，赐金千斤，为太尉。
现代文：于是增加了灌婴三千户食邑，赏赐黄金千斤，拜为太尉。
English: As a result, he increased the amount of rice given to three thousand households, awarded a gold coin, and was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant.

古文：三岁，绛侯勃免相，婴为丞相，罢太尉官。
现代文：汉文帝三年，绛侯周勃免去丞相，濯婴成为丞相，不再作太尉官。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Hanwen, Zhou Bo was removed from the post of chancellor and became chancellor. He was no longer a second lieutenant.

古文：是岁，匈奴大入北地，上令丞相婴将骑八万五千击匈奴。
现代文：这一年匈奴大举入侵北地，皇上命令灌婴率骑军八万五千人迎战匈奴军。
English: In that year, the Huns invaded the north in a big way, and the emperor ordered the 85,000 cavalry led by Guan Yu to fight against the Huns.

古文：匈奴去，济北王反，诏罢婴兵。
现代文：匈奴撤退，济北王谋反，皇上下韶书命令灌婴全军撤回。
English: The Xiongnu retreated, the northern king of Jibei plotted a rebellion, and the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the entire army to withdraw.

古文：后岁余，以丞相薨，谥曰懿侯。
现代文：一年多后，灌婴在丞相任上去世。谧号整屋。
English: More than a year later, Kaneko died while serving as chancellor.

古文：传至孙强，有罪，绝。
现代文：爵位传到孙子：鳖彊，因犯罪，封国爵位断绝。
English: The title of nobility passed to his grandson:, due to crime, the title of nobility was cut off.

古文：武帝复封婴孙贤为临汝侯，奉婴后，后有罪，国除。
现代文：汉武帝时又封逻婴孙濩资为临汝侯，奉为逻婴后代，后来又因犯罪而被收回食邑。
English: At the time of Emperor Hanwu, Luo Yingzhu's grandson, Xizhi, was also made a prince of Lin Ryu, and was honored as Luo Yingzhu's descendant. Later, he was taken back to Shuxi County for committing a crime.

古文：傅宽，以魏五大夫骑将从，为舍人，起横阳。
现代文：傅宽作为魏国五大夫骑将跟随沛公征战，任舍人，起兵于横阳。
English: Fu Kuan, as one of the five great horsemen of Wei, will follow Pei Gong to the war, and he will start his army in Hengyang.

古文：从攻安阳、杠里，赵贲军于开封，及击杨熊曲遇、阳武、斩首十二级，赐爵卿。
现代文：跟从沛公攻取安阳、杠里，在开封击败赵贲军队，并在曲遇、阳武攻打杨熊军队，斩敌人十二个，沛公赐给公卿的爵位。
English: He followed Pei Gong in conquering Anyang and Liuli, defeated Zhao Xi's army in Kaifeng, and attacked Yang Xiong's army in Quyu and Yangwu, killing twelve enemies, and Pei Gong gave him the title of noble.

古文：从至霸上。
现代文：跟从沛公到霸上。
English: After that, he followed from Peigong to Baxing.

古文：沛公为汉王，赐宽封号共德君。
现代文：沛公作了汉王，赐傅宽共德君的封号。
English: Pei Gong became the king of Han and gave Fu Kuan the title of Comrade De Jun.

古文：从入汉中，为右骑将。
现代文：跟从汉王进入关中，作右骑将。
English: He followed Han Wang into Guanzhong and served as his right-hand man.

古文：定三秦，赐食邑雕阴。
现代文：平定三秦，赐给他雕阴作为食邑。
English: He subdued Sanqin and gave him Jieyin as a food town.

古文：从击项籍，待怀，赐爵通德侯。
现代文：跟从攻打项籍，在怀县跟从汉王，汉王赐给他通德侯的爵号。
English: When Chu and Han were fighting, he marched with the Han King to attack the Western Chuba King Xiang Yu, and was ordered to meet the Han King in Huai County. The Han King gave him the title of Tongde Marquis.

古文：从击项冠、周兰、龙且，所将卒斩骑将一人敖下，益食邑。
现代文：跟从攻打项冠、周兰、龙且，所率的士兵在敖下斩杀敌骑军将领一人，汉王增加他的食邑。
English: When he followed Han Wang to attack Xiang Yu's generals Xiang Guan, Zhou Lan, and Long Jie, the soldiers he led captured an enemy cavalry commander at the foot of Mount Huchang, thus increasing the food supply.

古文：属淮阴，击破齐历下军，击田解。
现代文：在淮阴侯韩信的指挥下，打败齐在历的军队，进攻田解。
English: Fu Kuan was once under the command of Huaiyin Hou Han Xin. He defeated the garrison of Qi under his command and defeated the commander of Qi, Tian Ge.

古文：属相国参，残博，益食邑。
现代文：在相国曹参的指挥下，摧毁博县，因功而增加食邑。
English: Later, it was under the command of Guo Cao, who conquered Bo County in Qi Province and added Shuxi County.

古文：因定齐地，剖符世世勿绝，封阳陵侯，二千六百户，除前所食。
现代文：因平定齐地有功，汉王与他剖符为证，爵位世代相传，封为阳陵侯，食邑二千六百户，免除以前所封食邑。
English: Because of his great contribution to the pacification of Qi, the Han King cut his initials with him as a proof, and the title of nobility was passed down from generation to generation. He was awarded the title of Yangling Hou, with 2,600 households in food villages, and was exempted from previously awarded food villages.

古文：为齐右丞相，备齐。
现代文：作齐右丞相，在齐地驻守。
English: Later, he served as the chancellor of Qi, and the garrison garrisoned the garrison field and caused chaos.

古文：五岁，为齐相国。
现代文：五年后，为齐的相国。
English: Five years later, the two countries are on an equal footing.

古文：四月，击陈豨，属太尉勃，以相国代丞相哙击豨。
现代文：四月，攻打陈稀，归太尉周勃率领，以相国身份代替丞相樊呛去攻击陈稀。
English: In April of the eleventh year of Emperor Gaozu's reign, he attacked Chen Xi, who had rebelled against the Han Dynasty and established himself as the acting king. He was under the command of Lieutenant Zhou Bo, and defeated Chen Xi in his capacity as a compatriot in place of Han Zhe.

古文：一月，徙为代相国，将屯。
现代文：一月，迁为代的相国，率领守兵。
English: In January of the following year, he was transferred to the post of acting governor and stationed in Shouwen County.

古文：二岁，为丞相，将屯。
现代文：二年后，任代国丞相，统率守兵。
English: Two years later, he was appointed acting Minister of War and led the guards.

古文：孝惠五年，薨，谥曰景侯。
现代文：孝惠帝五年时，傅宽死，谧号景侯。
English: When Emperor Xiao Hui was five years old, Fu Kuan died and was succeeded by Jing Hou.

古文：传至曾孙偃，谋反，诛，国除。
现代文：爵位传至曾孙傅偃，因谋反被杀，封国被废除。
English: The title of nobility was passed down to his great-grandson Fu Xi, who was killed for plotting rebellion, and the feudal state was abolished.

古文：靳歙，以中涓从，起宛朐。
现代文：周緤，沛人，作为中涓追随高祖，起兵于宛朐。
English: Zhou Qi, Pei Ren, as the middle son, followed Gao Zu and raised an army at Wan Qi.

古文：攻济阳。
现代文：攻打济阳。
English: He once attacked Jiyang.

古文：破李由军。
现代文：打败李由的军队。
English: defeated the Qin general Li Yu's army.

古文：击秦军开封东，斩骑千人将一人，首五十七级，捕虏七十三人，赐爵封临平君。
现代文：在开封束面攻打秦军，斩骑千人将一人，杀敌五十七人，捕获俘虏七十三人，赐给临平君的封号和爵位。
English: He attacked the Qin army on the eve of the opening of the seal, decapitated a commander of a thousand horsemen, killed fifty-seven enemies, captured seventy-three prisoners, and gave Lin Pingjun's seal number and peerage.

古文：又战蓝田北，斩车司马二人，骑长一人，首二十八级，捕虏五十七人。
现代文：又在蓝田以北作战，杀死车司马二人，骑长一人，杀敌二十八人，捕获俘虏五十七人。
English: Later, they fought on the north side of Lantian, beheading two horse drivers and a cavalry commander of the Qin army, beheading twenty-eight officers and taking fifty-seven prisoners.

古文：至霸上，沛公为汉王，赐歙爵建武侯，迁骑都尉。
现代文：到霸上。沛公作了汉王，赐给他爵位，封为建武侯，升迁为骑都尉。
English: Baekong became the king of Han, and he was given a title of nobility, given the title of Jianwu, and promoted to the rank of cavalry captain.

古文：从定三秦。
现代文：跟从汉王平定三秦，又向西去进攻章平的军队于陇西，获胜。
English: Zou, a follower of Han Wang, established the Three Kingdoms.

古文：别西击章平军于陇西，破之，定陇西六县，所将卒斩车司马、候各四人，骑长十二人。
现代文：占领陇西六个县，部下斩杀车司马、候各四人，骑长十二人。
English: He occupied six counties in western Shaanxi Province, and his subordinates killed four drivers, four horses, and twelve horsemen.

古文：从东击楚，至彭城。
现代文：跟从汉王向东攻击楚军，战到彭城。
English: Subsequently, they followed Han Wangdong in attacking the Chu army and reached Pengcheng.

古文：汉军败还，保雍丘，击反者王武等。
现代文：汉军败而撤回，坚守雍丘，打败反叛的王武等人。
English: The defeated Chinese army withdrew, defended Yongqiu, and defeated the rebel Wang Wu and others.

古文：略梁地，别西击邢说军菑南，破之，身得说都尉二人，司马、候十二人，降吏卒四千六百八十人。
现代文：略取梁地，向西在菌县南率军攻打邢说军队，获胜，亲自抓获邢说都尉二人，司马、候十二人，降服敌军四千六百八十人。
English: Taking advantage of the situation, he led an army to the west in the south of Yungye County to attack and defeat the enemy's army, and won. He personally captured two of the enemy's captains, Sima, and twelve others, and defeated 4,680 enemy troops.

古文：破楚军荥阳东。食邑四千二百户。
现代文：在荣阳以束大败楚军。受封食邑四千二百户。
English: In Rongyang, the Chu army was decisively defeated with a bundle. 4,200 households in the county were subject to the ban.

古文：别之河内，击赵贲军朝歌，破之，所将卒得骑将二人，车马二百五十匹。
现代文：独自率军开赴河内，在朝歌打败了趟贲的军队，部下抓获敌骑将二人，车马二百五十匹。
English: He led the army to Hanoi on his own, and defeated the rag-tag army in the morning song. His subordinates captured two enemy cavalry generals and 250 horses and chariots.

古文：从攻安阳以东，至棘蒲，下十县。
现代文：跟从汉王攻打安阳以束，战至棘蒲，占领十个县。
English: He followed Han Wang in attacking Anyang with a bunch of troops, and the battle went as far as Xizhou, occupying ten counties.

古文：别攻破赵军，得其将司马二人，候四人，降吏卒二千四百人。
现代文：又另率军打败趟军，抓获敌军将司马二人，候四人，投降的吏卒有二千四百人。
English: He also led another army to defeat Zhao's army, captured two of Zhao's generals alive, four soldiers, and recruited and demoted 2,400 Zhao officers and soldiers.

古文：从降下邯郸。别下平阳，身斩守相，所将卒斩兵守、郡守各一人，降邺。
现代文：跟从汉王占领邯郸，又独自率军攻占了平阳，亲自斩杀了守相，部下又斩杀了敌军郡守一人，平定邺县。
English: He followed Han Wang to occupy Handan, and then led his own army to capture Pingyang, personally killed the defense minister, and his subordinates killed one of the enemy's county guards to pacify Handan County.

古文：从攻朝歌、邯郸，又别击破赵军，降邯郸郡六县。
现代文：跟从汉王攻打朝歌、邯郸，又独率军队击破趟军，攻取邯郸郡的六个县。
English: He followed the Han king in attacking the Northern Song and Southern Song dynasties, and led the army to defeat the Southern Song army and capture six counties of the Southern Song.

古文：还军敖仓，破项籍军成皋南，击绝楚饷道，起荥阳至襄邑。
现代文：还军敖仓，在成皋南大破项籍，截断了楚军的粮饷之路，封锁了自荣阳至襄邑地区。
English: Returning troops to Kamakura, they broke the record in the south of Chengdu, cut off the food supply route of the Chu army, and blocked the area from Rongyang to Xiangyi.

古文：破项冠鲁下。
现代文：在鲁地打败项冠军。
English: Defeating the champion in Ludi.

古文：略地东至鄫、郯、下邳，南至蕲、竹邑。
现代文：占领土地束到郜、郯、下邳，南到蕲县和竹邑。
English: The occupation of land stretched from Sokcho to Handan, Handan and Lower Handan, and south to Handan County and Zhuyi.

古文：击项悍济阳下。
现代文：在济阳攻打项悍。
English: They also defeated Xiang Han's army at the foot of Jiyang Castle.

古文：还击项籍军陈下，破之。
现代文：还军到陈地攻打项籍军队，获胜，又率军平定江陵。
English: He returned to Chen to fight against the Xiang army, won, and led the army to pacify Jiangling.

