古文：高季兴，字贻孙，陕州硖石人也。
现代文：高季兴字贻孙，是陕州殃石人。
English: Gao Jixing, also known as Gao Sun, was born in Shaanxi Province.

古文：本名季昌，避后唐献祖庙讳，更名季兴。
现代文：原名高季昌，避后唐献祖的庙讳，改名高季兴。
English: His original name was Gao Jichang, but he changed his name to Gao Jixing to avoid the stigma of a temple dedicated to ancestors after the Tang Dynasty.

古文：季兴少为汴州富人李让家僮。
现代文：高季兴小时候做汴州富人李让的家僮。
English: When Gao Jixing was a child, he worked as a housemaid for a rich man in Zhangzhou, Li Zhan.

古文：梁太祖初镇宣武，让以入赀得幸，养为子，易其姓名曰硃友让。
现代文：梁太祖最初为宣武节镇时，李让靠进献资财得到宠幸，梁太祖收养他作儿子，更改他的姓名为朱友嘻。
English: When Liang Taizu was originally the town of Xuanwu Festival, Li Zhan was favored to donate money. Liang Taizu adopted him as his son and changed his name to Zhu Youhui.

古文：季兴以友让故得进见，太祖奇其材，命友让以子畜之，因冒姓硃氏，补制胜军使，迁毅勇指挥使。
现代文：高季兴因为朱友让的缘故得以进见梁太祖，梁太祖对他的才能感到惊奇，命朱友让把他当作儿子收养，于是冒姓朱，补为制胜军使，升任毅勇指挥使。
English: Gao Jixing was able to see Liang Taizu because of Zhu Youjan. Liang Taizu was surprised by his talent and ordered Zhu Youjan to adopt him as his son. He then changed his surname to Zhu, became the victorious envoy, and was promoted to the commanding envoy of Yi Yong.

古文：天复二年，梁兵攻凤翔，李茂贞坚壁不出，太祖议欲收军还河中，季兴独进曰： 天下豪杰窥此举者一岁矣，今岐人已惫，破在旦夕，而大王之所虑者，闭壁以老我师，此可以诱致之也。 
现代文：天复二年，梁兵攻打凤翔，李茂贞坚守营垒不出来迎战，梁太祖商议想收兵回到河中，惟独高季兴上前说： 天下豪杰注视此举一年了，如今岐州人已经疲惫，攻破他们是早晚之间的事，而大王你所忧虑的，是他们躲在营垒中拖疲了我们的军队，这可以引诱使他们出来。 
English: In the second year of the Heian period, Liang's soldiers attacked Fengxiang. Li Maozhen held fast to the camp and did not come out to fight. Liang Taizu discussed the idea of withdrawing his troops back to the river, but Gao Jixing stepped forward and said: The world's heroes have been watching this move for a year, and now the people of Qizhou are tired. Breaking through them is a matter of morning and evening. What worries you, great king, is that they are hiding in the camp and exhausting our troops. This can lure them out.

古文：太祖壮其言，命季兴募勇敢士，得骑士马景，季兴授以计，引见太祖。
现代文：梁太祖觉得他的话很豪壮，命令高季兴招募勇士，得到骑士置量，高季兴向他交代计策，带着他拜见梁太祖。
English: Liang Taizu thought his words were very brave, and ordered Gao Jixing to recruit warriors and get knights. Gao Jixing told him the strategy and took him to see Liang Taizu.

古文：景曰： 此行无还理，愿录其后嗣。 
现代文：马景说： 这次行动没有回来的道理，希望录用我们的后代。 
English: Ma Jing said: This operation has no reason to come back, we hope to recruit our descendants.

古文：太祖恻然止之，景固请，乃行。
现代文：梁太祖凄恻地劝阻他，马景坚持请求，纔出发。
English: Liang Taizu desperately dissuaded him, Ma Jing insisted on the request, and they set off.

古文：景以数骑驰叩城门告曰： 梁兵将东，前锋去矣。 
现代文：马景率领几个骑兵驰马敲击城门报告说： 梁军准备东去，前锋已经离开了。 
English: Ma Jing led several horsemen to knock on the city gate and reported: Liang's army is preparing to go east, the vanguard has already left.

古文：岐人以为然，开门出追梁军，梁兵随景后以进，杀其九千余人，景死之。
现代文：岐州人信以为真，打开城门出来追击梁军，梁兵跟在马景后面前进，杀敌九千多人，马景战死。
English: The people of Qizhou believed this to be true and opened the city gate to pursue Liang's army. Liang's soldiers followed Ma Jing and advanced in front of him, killing more than 9,000 of the enemy. Ma Jing was killed in the battle.

古文：茂贞后与梁和，昭宗出，赠景官，谥曰忠壮。
现代文：李茂贞后来和梁言和，唐昭宗出城，赠马景官位，赐谧号叫忠壮。
English: Li Maozhen later went out of the city with Liang Yanhe and Tang Zhaozong, presented Ma Jing with an official rank, and gave him the nickname Zhong Zhuang.

古文：季兴由是知名。
现代文：高季兴因此出名。
English: This is how Gao Jixing became famous.

古文：明年，拜宋州刺史。
现代文：第二年，任命为宋州刺史。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as Songzhou chief historian.

古文：从破青州，徙颍州防御使，复姓高氏。
现代文：跟随攻破青州，改任颖州防御使，恢复原姓高氏。
English: Following the conquest of Qingzhou, he was appointed as the defense minister of Yingzhou, and his original surname, Gao, was restored.

古文：当唐之末，襄州赵匡凝袭破雷彦恭于荆南，以其弟匡明为留后。
现代文：在唐代末年，襄州趟匡凝在剂南袭击攻破雷彦恭，任命他的弟弟趟匡明为留后。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, Yangzhou Wai Kuangge attacked and defeated Lei Yanqong in Jiaonan, and appointed his brother Wai Kuangming to stay behind.

古文：梁兵攻破襄州，匡凝奔于吴，匡明奔于蜀，乃以季兴为荆南节度观察留后。
现代文：梁兵攻破襄州，赵匡凝逃奔到昊，赵匡明逃奔到蜀，于是任命高季兴为剂南节度观察留后。
English: Liang soldiers broke through Xiangzhou, Zhao Kuangning fled to Hao, Zhao Kuangming fled to Shu, so Gao Ji Xing was appointed as the agent to observe the Southern Festival.

古文：开平元年，拜季兴节度使。
现代文：开平元年，封高季兴为节度使。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Gao Jixing was appointed as the chief of the festival.

古文：二年，加同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二年，加同中书门下平章事。
English: Two years later, it was followed by the addition of Zhongshumen Shimohei chapter.

古文：荆南节度十州，当唐之末，为诸道所侵，季兴始至，江陵一城而已，兵火之后，井邑凋零。
现代文：剂南管辖十个州，在唐代末年，被各道侵占，高季兴初到时，只有江陵一个城罢了，经历战火之后，城邑凋零。
English: Jiangnan governed ten provinces. At the end of the Tang Dynasty, it was invaded and occupied by various provinces. At the beginning of the Qing Dynasty, there was only one city in Jiangling. After the war, the city withered away.

古文：季兴招缉绥抚，人士归之，乃以倪可福、鲍唐为将帅，梁震、司空熏、王保义等为宾客。
现代文：高季兴招徕安抚，人们都回来了，于是任命倪可福、鲍唐为将帅，梁震、司空熏、王保义等人为宾客。
English: Gao Ji Xing invited and appeased, and the people all came back, so Ni Kefu and Bao Tang were appointed as generals, and Liang Zhen, Siku Xuan, Wang Baoyi and others were guests.

古文：太祖崩，季兴见梁日以衰弱，乃谋阻兵自固，治城隍，设楼橹。
现代文：梁太祖驾崩，高季兴见梁日益衰弱，于是计划依靠军队巩固自己，修治城壕，设置望楼。
English: After the death of Liang Taizu, Gao Ji Xing saw that Liang was getting weaker, so he planned to rely on the army to consolidate himself, repair the trenches, and set up a watchtower.

古文：以兵攻归、峡，为蜀将王宗寿所败。
现代文：率兵攻打归、峡二州，被蜀将王宗寿打败。
English: He led his troops to attack and return to the gorge of Nishu, and was defeated by Shu general Wang Zongshou.

古文：又发兵声言助梁击晋，以侵襄州，为孔勍所败，乃绝贡赋累年。
现代文：又出兵声称协助梁攻晋，以侵占襄州，被孔勃打败，于是断绝进贡多年。
English: He also dispatched troops claiming to assist Liang in attacking Jin to invade and occupy Xiangzhou, but was defeated by Kong Bo, so he cut off tribute for many years.

古文：梁末帝优容之，封季兴渤海王，赐以衮冕剑佩。
现代文：梁末帝宽容他，封高季兴为渤海王，赐给龙袍王冠和佩剑。
English: Emperor Liang Moku tolerated him, crowned Gao Jixing as the king of Bohai, and gave him a dragon robe crown and a sword.

古文：贞明三年，始复修贡。
现代文：贞明三年，纔恢复进贡。
English: In the third year of Zhenming, the tribute was restored.

古文：梁亡，唐庄宗入洛，下诏慰谕季兴，司空薰等皆劝季兴入朝京师，梁震以为不可，曰： 梁、唐世为仇敌，夹河血战垂二十年，今主上新灭梁，而大王梁室故臣，握强兵，居重镇，以身入朝，行为虏尔。 
现代文：梁灭亡，唐庄宗进入洛阳，下诏安慰开导高季兴，司空熏等人都劝高季兴到京师朝拜，梁震认为不行，说： 梁、唐是世代仇敌，在黄河两岸血战近二十年，如今皇上刚消灭粱，而大王你是梁朝旧臣，手握强兵，身居重镇，亲自入朝，就将要作俘虏了。 
English: Liang died, Tang Zhuangzong entered Luoyang, and issued an edict to comfort and enlighten Gao Jixing. Siku Xun and others all advised Gao Jixing to go to Beijing to worship. Liang Zhen did not think it was possible, saying: Liang and Tang are generational enemies, and there has been a bloody war on both sides of the Yellow River for nearly 20 years. Now the emperor has just eliminated the barbarians, but if you are an old minister of the Liang Dynasty, holding a strong army, living in a major town, and entering the imperial court in person, you will be taken prisoner.

古文：季兴不听，留其二子，以骑士三百为卫，朝于洛阳。
现代文：高季兴不采纳，留下他的两个儿子，率骑士三百人作护卫，到洛阳朝见。
English: Gao Jixing did not accept, leaving his two sons and leading 300 knights to escort him to Luoyang to meet the emperor.

古文：庄宗果欲留之，郭崇韬谏曰： 唐新灭梁得天下，方以大信示人，今四方诸侯相继入贡，不过遣子弟将吏，而季兴以身述职，为诸侯率，宜加恩礼，以讽动来者。
现代文：唐庄宗果然想扣留他，郭崇韬谏阻说： 唐刚消灭梁得到天下，正以大的信义昭示于人，如今四方诸侯相继进贡，不过派遣子弟将吏前来，而高季兴亲自前来述职，做诸侯的表率，应当给予恩礼优待，以鼓励后来的人。
English: Tang Zhuangzong really wanted to detain him, but Guo Chongyong said: "Tang Gang destroyed Liang and gained the world, and is showing great faith and righteousness to people. Now the four princes have paid tribute one after another. However, they sent their sons and officers to come, and Gao Jixing personally came to report for duty. As an example of princes, they should give grace and preferential treatment to encourage later people.

古文：而反縻之，示天下以不广，且绝四方内向之意，不可。 
现代文：如果反而拘囚他，就会让天下人觉得我们心胸狭窄，而且会断绝四面八方归附我们的意愿，不行。 
English: If, on the other hand, we imprison him, it will make the world think that we are narrow-minded, and it will break the will to adhere to us in all directions.

古文：庄宗乃止，厚礼而遣之。
现代文：唐庄宗纔作罢，用重礼送他回去。
English: Tang Zhuangzong did not want to do it, so he sent him back with a heavy gift.

古文：庄宗尝问季兴曰： 吾已灭梁，欲征吴、蜀，何者为先？ 
现代文：唐庄宗曾问高季兴说： 我已消灭梁，想征伐昊、蜀，应首先征伐哪个？ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong once asked Gao Jixing: I have eliminated Liang, I want to conquer Hao and Shu, which should I conquer first?

古文：季兴曰： 宜先蜀，臣请以本道兵先进。 
现代文：高季兴说： 应当先征伐蜀，我请求率本道军队焉先锋。 
English: Gao Jixing said: It is necessary to conquer Shu first. I request you to lead the local troops to be the vanguard.

古文：庄宗大悦，以手拊其背，季兴因命工绣其手迹于衣，归以为荣耀。
现代文：唐庄宗很高兴，用手拍着他的背，高季兴于是命令绣工把唐庄宗的手迹绣在他的衣服上，回去后当成荣耀。
English: Tang Zhuangzong was very happy and patted him on the back with his hand. Gao Jixing then ordered the embroiderer to embroider Tang Zhuangzong's handwriting on his clothes and take it as an honor when he returned.

古文：季兴已去，庄宗心悔遣之，密诏襄州刘训图之。
现代文：高季兴离去后，唐庄宗心中后悔让他回去了，下密诏要襄州刘训算计他。
English: After Gao Jixing left, Tang Zhuozong regretted in his heart that he had let him go back, and secretly ordered Yangzhou Liu Xun to calculate him.

古文：季兴行至襄州，心动，夜斩关而出。
现代文：高季兴到达襄州，心跳，晚上夺关而出。
English: Gao Jixing arrived in Xiangzhou with a heartbeat and went out in the evening.

古文：已去，而诏书夜至。
现代文：已经离去，而密诏晚上纔送到。
English: He had already left, and the secret edict was delivered in the evening.

古文：季兴归而谓梁震曰： 不听子言，几不免。 
现代文：高季兴回去后对梁震说： 不听你的话，几乎不能幸免。 
English: After Gao Jixing returned, he said to Liang Zhen: If I don't listen to you, I will almost certainly be punished.

古文：因曰： 吾行有二失；来朝一失，放还一失。
现代文：于是说： 我这次去有两个过失：前去朝拜是一失，放回我们是一失。
English: Then he said: I made two mistakes this time: it was a mistake to go to the temple, and it was a mistake to send us back.

古文：且主上百战以取河南，对功臣夸手抄《春秋》；又曰： 我于手指上得天下。 
现代文：而且皇上历经百战攻取河南，对功臣夸耀亲手抄录《春秋》；又说： 我在手指上得到天下。 
English: Moreover, the emperor conquered Henan after hundreds of battles, and boasted to the heroes that he had copied "Spring and Autumn" with his own hands; he also said: I got the world on my finger.

古文：其自矜伐如此。
现代文：他就是如此自我夸耀。
English: That's how full of himself he is.

古文：而荒于游畋，政事多废，吾可无虑矣。 
现代文：而又迷恋于游乐打猎，常常废弃政事，我可以不必担忧了。 
English: But I'm obsessed with pleasure hunting and often abandon politics, so I don't have to worry.

古文：同光三年，封南平王。
现代文：同光三年，封为南平王。
English: Three years later, he was given the title of Nanping King.

古文：魏王继岌已破蜀，得蜀金帛四十余万，自峡而下，而庄宗之难作。
现代文：魏王李继岌攻破蜀后，得到蜀地金银绸缎四十多万，从峡州而下，而唐庄宗遭受了祸难。
English: After the Wei King Li defeated Shu, he obtained more than 400,000 gold, silver and silk ingots from Shu, and descended from the gorge, while Tangzhuangzong suffered a disaster.

古文：季兴闻京师有变，乃悉邀留蜀物，而杀其使者韩珙等十余人。
现代文：高季兴听说京师变乱，于是全部拦截蜀中财物，杀掉使臣韩珙等十多人。
English: Gao Jixing heard that the capital was in turmoil, so he intercepted all of Shu Zhong's property and killed more than a dozen people, including the envoy Han Qi.

古文：初，唐兵伐蜀，季兴请以本道兵自取夔、忠、万、归、峡等州，乃以季兴为峡路东南面招讨使，而季兴未尝出兵。
现代文：当初，唐军讨伐蜀，高季兴请求率本道军队自行攻取夔、忠、万、归、峡等州，于是以高季兴为峡路东南面招讨使，而高季兴不曾出兵。
English: At first, the Tang army fought against Shu, and Gao Jixing requested the local army to take the provinces of Shun, Zhong, Wan, Gui, and Xia by themselves. Therefore, Gao Jixing was invited to be the envoy for the southeast side of the Xia Road, but Gao Jixing did not send troops.

古文：魏王已破蜀，而明宗入立，季兴因请夔、忠等州为属郡，唐大臣以为季兴请自取之，而兵出无功，不与。
现代文：魏王攻破蜀后，唐明宗登位，高季兴于是请求把夔、忠等州当作属郡，唐大臣认为高季兴自己请求攻取，而兵出又无功劳，不给他。
English: After the Wei king conquered Shu, Tang Mingzong ascended to the throne. Gao Jixing then requested that the states of Zhai and Zhong be treated as counties. The Tang minister thought that Gao Jixing himself requested to conquer, and the soldiers were not meritorious, and did not give it to him.

古文：季兴屡请，虽不得已而与之，而唐犹自除刺史，季兴拒而不纳。
现代文：高季兴多次请求，唐虽然迫不得已给了他，但仍自行任命刺史，高季兴拒不接受。
English: Gao Jixing made repeated requests, and although Tang had to give it to him, he still appointed his own secretary. Gao Jixing refused to accept it.

古文：明宗乃以襄州刘训为招讨使，攻之，不克，而唐别将西方鄴克其夔、忠、万三州，季兴遂以荆、归、峡三州臣于吴，吴册季兴秦王。
现代文：唐明宗于是以襄州刘训为韶讨使，进攻他，没有攻克，而唐的另一个将领西方邺攻克夔、忠、万三州，高季兴于是率领剂、归、峡三州向昊称臣，昊册封高季兴为秦壬。
English: Tang Mingzong then took Liu Xun of Xiangzhou as his envoy and attacked him without defeating him, while another general of the Tang Dynasty, Xichang Xun, attacked Kegu, Zhong, and Wanzhou, and Gao Jixing led the three states of Qi, Gui, and Xiao as his vassal, and Gao Jixing of Hao Fang was Qinren.

古文：天成三年冬卒，年七十一，谥曰武信。
现代文：天成三年冬逝世，享年七十一岁，赐谧号为武信。
English: Tiancheng died in the winter of the third year, at the age of seventy-one, and his posthumous name was Wu Xin.

古文：季兴子九人，长子从诲立。
现代文：高季兴儿子九人，长子高从诲继位。
English: Gao Jixing had nine sons, and his eldest son Gao Congyu succeeded to the throne.

古文：从诲字遵圣。
现代文：高从诲字遵圣。
English: Gao Congzhuzhi Zun Sheng.

古文：季兴时，入梁为供奉官，累迁鞍辔库使，赐告归宁，季兴遂留为马步军都指挥使、行军司马。
现代文：高季兴时，入梁朝任供奉官，屡经升迁马鞍辔库使，赐假回去探亲，高季兴于是留下他任马步军都指挥使、行军司马。
English: When Gao Jixing entered the Liang Dynasty, he was appointed as a tributary official. After being promoted several times, he was given leave to go back and visit his relatives. Gao Jixing then left him to be the commander of the horse-marching army and the marshal of the army.

古文：季兴卒，吴以从诲为荆南节度使。
现代文：高季兴死后，昊以高从诲为荆南节度使。
English: After Gao Ji Xing's death, Hao appointed Gao Cong Yao as the chief envoy of the Jingnan Festival.

古文：从诲以父自绝于唐，惧复见讨，乃遣使者聘于楚，楚王马殷为之请命于唐，而从诲亦遣押衙刘知谦奉表自归，进赎罪银三千两，明宗纳之。
现代文：高从诲因为父亲自行和唐绝交，怕又受到讨伐，于是派使臣出使楚，楚王马殷为他向唐请命，而高从诲也派押衙刘知谦奉表白行归附，进献赎罪银三千雨，唐明宗收下了。
English: Gao Congchu, because his father had broken off diplomatic relations with Tang on his own, was afraid of being attacked again, so he sent an envoy to Chu. King Ma Yin of Chu asked Tang for his life, and Gao Congchu also sent Liu Zhikian to declare his allegiance and offer three thousand rain of silver for atonement, which Tang Mingzong accepted.

古文：长兴元年正月，拜从诲节度使，追封季兴楚王，谥曰武信。
现代文：长兴元年正月，封高从诲焉节度使，追封高季兴为楚王，赐谧号武信。
English: In the first month of the first year of the reign of Changxing, Gao Jixing was given the posthumous title of King of Chu.

古文：三年，封从诲渤海王。
现代文：三年，封高从诲为渤海王。
English: Three years later, Fong Gao became the king of the Bohai Sea.

古文：应顺元年，封南平王。
现代文：应顺元年，封为南平壬。
English: In the first year of the Shun era, it was named Nanping Ren.

古文：从诲为人明敏，多权诈。
现代文：高从诲为人聪明机敏，善于权术欺诈。
English: Gao Zongyao is clever and astute, and is good at power tricks and deception.

古文：晋高祖遣翰林学士陶穀为从诲生辰国信使，从诲宴穀望沙楼，大陈战舰于楼下，谓穀曰： 吴、蜀不宾久矣，愿修武备，习水战，以待师期。 
现代文：晋高祖派翰林学士陶谷为高从诲生辰国信使，高从诲在望沙楼宴请陶谷，在楼下陈列很多战船，对陶谷说： 昊、蜀不归顺很久了，希望整修武备，练习水战，等待出兵的时候。 
English: Shang Gao's ancestor sent Gao Zongya, a scholar of Hanlin, to be Gao Zongya's messenger to the country when he was born. Gao Zongya invited Gao Zongya to a banquet at the Wangsha Building, displayed many warships downstairs, and said to Gao Zongya, "Hao, Shu has not surrendered for a long time, I hope to refurbish our military equipment, practice naval warfare, and wait for the time to send troops.

古文：穀还，具道其语，晋高祖大喜，复遣使赐以甲马百匹。
现代文：陶谷返回，详细报告了他的话，晋高祖十分高兴，又派使臣赐给他一百匹带甲战马。
English: When Tao Gu returned and reported his words in detail, Emperor Jingu was very pleased and sent an envoy to give him a hundred horses with armor.

古文：襄州安从进反，结从诲为援，从诲外为拒绝，阴与之通。
现代文：襄州安从进反叛，交结高从诲求为援助，高从诲表面拒绝，暗中和他勾通。
English: Xiangzhou Anzong rebelled, met Gao Zongyao for assistance, Gao Zongyao refused on the surface, and secretly colluded with him.

古文：晋师致讨，从诲遣将李端以舟师为应，从进诛，从诲求郢州为属郡，高祖不许。
现代文：晋军讨伐，高从诲派将领李端率水军接应，安从进被杀，高从诲请求把郢州作为属郡，晋高祖不答应。
English: When the Jin army attacked, Li Duan, the general of the Gaozongyu faction, led the navy to respond, and An Congjin was killed. Gaozongyu requested that Zhangzhou be made a county, but the ancestors of the Jin faction did not agree.

古文：契丹灭晋，汉高祖起太原，从诲遣人间道奉表劝进，且言汉得天下，愿乞郢州为属，汉高祖阳诺之。
现代文：契丹灭晋，漠高祖在太原起兵，高从诲派人从小路奉表劝他称帝，而且说漠得到天下后，希望求得郢州作属郡，漠高祖假意答应他。
English: When Khitan defeated Jin, Mu Gaozhu raised an army in Taiyuan. Gaozhu sent people to persuade him to declare himself emperor. He also said that when Mu came to the world, he hoped to obtain Zhangzhou as a county, and Mu Gaozhu supposedly agreed to this.

古文：高祖入汴，从诲遣使朝贡，因求郢州，高祖不与。
现代文：漠高祖进入汴州，高从诲派使臣进贡，趁机请求把郢州给他，汉高祖不给。
English: When the Mongolian Emperor Gaozhu entered Zhangzhou, Gaozong sent envoys to pay tribute and took the opportunity to request that Zhangzhou be given to him, but the Han Emperor Gaozhu refused to give it.

古文：从诲怒，发兵攻郢州，为刺史尹实所败。
现代文：高从诲发怒，出兵攻打郢州，被刺史尹实打败。
English: Gao Congchu was enraged and sent troops to attack Zhangzhou. He was defeated by Zhang Shi and Yin Si.

古文：汉遣国子祭酒田敏使于楚，假道荆南，从诲问敏中国虚实，以为契丹之后，兵食皆殚，意欲以诮敏，敏为言： 杜重威悉以晋戈甲降虏，虏置之镇州，未尝以北，而晋兵皆汉有也。 
现代文：漠派遣园子祭酒田敏出使楚，向荆南借道，高从诲向田敏打听中原的虚实，认为经过契丹侵扰之后，军器粮草都耗尽了，想以此讥诮田敏，田敏对他说： 杜重威将晋的武器全部献上向契丹人投降，契丹人把它们置放在镇州，不曾带到北方，而晋的武器都为漠所有。 
English: The desert dispatched the envoy of the gardener-sacrificer, Sakata Toshimitsu, to Jingnan, and the high priest asked Toshimitsu about the truth of the Central Plains. He thought that after the Khitan invasion, the military equipment, grain and grass were all exhausted, and wanted to mock Toshimitsu with this. Toshimitsu said to him: Du Chong Wei surrendered all of Jin's weapons to the Khitan. The Khitan placed them in Zhenzhou, but never brought them to the north, while Jin's weapons were all owned by the desert.

古文：从诲不悦。
现代文：高徒诲不高兴。
English: Gao is not happy.

古文：敏以印本《五经》遗从诲，从诲谢曰： 予之所识，不过《孝经》十八章尔。 
现代文：田敏把印本《五经》送给高从诲，高从诲推辞说： 我懂得的不过是《孝经》十八章罢了。 
English: Tian Min gave the printed copy of the "Five Classics" to Gao Congyou, and Gao Congyou said, "I only know the 18 chapters of the "Book of Filial Piety."

古文：敏曰： 至德要道，于此足矣。 
现代文：田敏说： 至德要道，有这本书就够了。 
English: Tian Min said, "If you want to be a virtuous person, this book is enough.

古文：敏因诵《诸侯章》曰： 在上不骄，高而不危，制节谨度，满而不溢。 
现代文：田敏于是读《诸侯章》说： 在百姓之上而不骄纵，位置高却不倾危，费用节俭，谨行礼法，财货充满而不盈溢。 
English: Tian Min then read the "Chapter of Princes" and said: Above the people but not arrogant, high position but not in danger, cost-saving, respectful etiquette, full of goods but not overflowing.

古文：从诲以为讥己，即以大卮罚敏。
现代文：高从诲认为他讥讽自己，就用大杯罚田敏喝酒。
English: Gao Congyao thought he was mocking himself, so he punished Tian Min with a large cup of wine.

古文：荆南地狭兵弱，介于吴、楚，为小国。
现代文：荆南地小兵弱，是夹在昊、楚之间的小国。
English: Jingnan is a small and weak country, sandwiched between Hao and Chu.

古文：自吴称帝，而南汉、闽、楚皆奉梁正朔，岁时贡奉，皆假道荆南。
现代文：自从昊称帝以来，而南汉、闽、楚都遵奉梁的纪年，每逢年节时进贡，都借路于剂南。
English: Since Emperor Hao was crowned, the Southern Han, Yan, and Chu all followed Liang's calendar, and paid tribute at every festival, all of which took the path of Jiannan.

古文：季兴、从诲常邀留其使者，掠取其物，而诸道以书责诮，或发兵加讨，即复还之而无愧。
现代文：高季兴、高从诲常常拦截他们的使臣，抢夺财物，而各道致信斥责，或出兵讨伐，就归还财物而面无愧色。
English: Gao Jixing and Gao Congchi often intercepted their envoys and robbed them of their property, but each side sent a letter of reprimand, or sent troops to fight, and then returned the property with a straight face.

古文：其后南汉与闽、蜀皆称帝，从诲所向称臣，盖利其赐予。
现代文：后来南漠和闽、蜀都称帝了，高从诲都对他们称臣，大概是为了贪图他们的赐予。
English: Later, Nanmo, Sui, and Shu all became emperors, and Gaozongchi all became their vassals, presumably in order to covet their gifts.

古文：俚俗语谓夺攘苟得无愧耻者为赖子，犹言无赖也，故诸国皆目为 高赖子 。
现代文：俗话称偷抢财物却不感到羞耻的人是赖子，就好像说是无赖，因此各国都把他看成 高赖子 。
English: As the saying goes, a person who steals property and is not ashamed of it is a rascal, just like a scoundrel, so all countries regard him as a scoundrel.

古文：从诲自求郢州不得，遂自绝于汉。
现代文：高从诲自己索求郢州没有得到，于是和漠断绝关系。
English: Gao Congzhu did not get what he asked for, so he severed ties with the desert.

古文：逾年，复通朝贡。
现代文：遇了一年，又阔始进贡。
English: A year passed, and once again, Koizumi paid tribute.

古文：乾祐元年十月卒，年五十八，赠尚书令，谥曰文献。
现代文：干佑元年十月死去，终年五十八岁，赠尚书令，赐谧号文献。
English: Ganyu died in October of the first year of the year, at the age of fifty-eight. He was given the title of Shang Shuling (尚書令) and the title of Jiao Zhe (號文献).

古文：子保融立。
现代文：儿子高保融继位。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Gao Baorong.

古文：从诲十五子，长曰保勋，次保正，保融第三子也，不知其得立之因。
现代文：高从诲有十五个儿子，长子叫高保勋，次子叫高保正，高保融是第三个儿子，不知他得以嗣位的原因。
English: Gao Congchu had fifteen sons. The eldest son was named Gao Baoxun, the second son was named Gao Baozheng, and Gao Baorong was the third son. It is not known why he was able to succeed to the throne.

古文：保融字德长。
现代文：高保融字德长。
English: Gao Baorong is also known as De Chang.

古文：从诲时，为节度副使，兼峡州刺史。
现代文：高从诲时，任节度副使，兼峡州刺史。
English: At the time of Gao Congyu, he was appointed as the vice-envoy of the Qing Dynasty, and also served as the governor of Xizhou.

古文：从诲卒，拜节度使。
现代文：高从诲死后，封为节度使。
English: After Gao Zongchu's death, he was appointed as the ceremonial envoy.

古文：广顺元年，封渤海郡王。
现代文：广顺元年，封为渤海郡王。
English: In the first year of Guangshun, he was named the king of Bohai County.

古文：显德元年，进封南平王。
现代文：显德元年，晋封为南平王。
English: In the first year of Xiande, he was promoted to Nanping King.

古文：世宗征淮，保融遣指挥使魏璘率兵三千，出夏口以为应。
现代文：周世宗征伐淮，高保融派指挥使魏璘率兵三千人，出夏口作接应。
English: Zhou Shizong led an expedition to conquer Huai, and the commander of the Gaobao Rong faction ordered Wei Wei to lead three thousand soldiers and go to Xiakou to meet him.

古文：又遣客将刘扶奉笺南唐，劝其内附。
现代文：又派客将刘扶致书信于南唐，劝他们归附中原。
English: He also sent Liu Fu to write to the Southern Tang Dynasty to persuade them to join the Central Plains.

古文：李景称臣，世宗得保融所与笺，大喜，赐以绢百匹。
现代文：李景称臣，周世宗见到高保融给李景的信，非常高兴，赐给他一百匹绢。
English: When Zhou Shizong saw Gao Baorong's letter to Li Jing, he was very pleased and gave him a hundred yakitori.

古文：荆南自后唐以来，常数岁一贡京师，而中间两绝。
现代文：荆南自从后唐以来，常常几年纔向京师进贡一次，而中间两次断绝。
English: Since the late Tang Dynasty, Jingnan had often paid tribute to the imperial capital once every few years, and then stopped paying tribute twice in between.

古文：及世宗时，无岁不贡矣。
现代文：到周世宗时，没有哪一年不进贡。
English: By the time of Zhou Shizong, there was no year without tribute.

古文：保融以谓器械金帛，皆土地常产，不足以效诚节，乃遣其弟保绅来朝，世宗益嘉之。
现代文：高保融认为器物金银绸缎，都是当地的常产，不足以表达他的诚意，于是派他的弟弟高保绅前来朝见，周世宗更加赞赏他。
English: Gao Baorong thought that the gold, silver, silk, and enamel wares, all of which were locally produced, were not enough to express his sincerity, so he sent his brother Gao Baosheng to meet the emperor. Zhou Shizong appreciated him even more.

古文：初，季兴之镇，梁以兵五千为牙兵，衣食皆给于梁。
现代文：当初，高季兴到镇时，梁用五千人做牙兵，衣物粮食都由梁供给。
English: At first, when Gao Jixing came to the town, Liang used five thousand people as dental soldiers, and the clothing and food were all supplied by Liang.

古文：至明宗时，岁给以盐万三千石，后不复给。
现代文：到唐明宗时，每年供给盐一万三千石，后来就不再供给。
English: By the time of the Tang and Ming dynasties, 13,000 koku of salt was supplied each year, but later it was no longer supplied.

古文：及世宗平淮，故命泰州给之。
现代文：到周世宗平定淮南后，命令泰州供给。
English: After Zhou Shizong subdued Huainan, he ordered Taizhou to supply.

古文：保融性迂缓，无材能，而事无大小，皆委其弟保勖。
现代文：高保融性格迂腐迟缓，没有才能，而事情无论大小，都交给他的弟弟高保勖。
English: Gao Baorong's character is pedantic and slow, he has no talent, and things, no matter how big or small, are handed over to his younger brother Gao Baorong.

古文：其从叔从义谋为乱，为其徒高知训所告，徙之松滋而杀之。
现代文：他的堂叔高从义谋划作乱，被他的同党高知训告发，把他迁徙到松滋杀掉。
English: His cousin Gao, who plotted to create turmoil out of a sense of righteousness, was denounced by his fellow party member Kochi Xun, who had him moved to Songzi and killed.

古文：宋兴，保融惧，一岁之间三入贡。
现代文：宋朝兴起，高保融害怕，一年中三次进贡。
English: With the rise of the Song Dynasty, Gao Baorong was afraid and paid tribute three times a year.

古文：建隆元年，以疾卒，年四十一，赠太尉，谥曰贞懿。
现代文：建陛元年，因病去世，时年四十一岁，赠为太尉，赐谧号贞懿。
English: In the first year of his reign, he died of illness at the age of forty-one. He was promoted to the rank of captain and given the posthumous name Zhengrong.

古文：弟保勖立。
现代文：弟弟高保勖继位。
English: His younger brother Gao Baojun succeeded him.

古文：保勖字省躬，从诲第十子也。
现代文：高保勖字省躬，是高从诲的第十个儿子。
English: Gao Bao is the tenth son of Gao Congchu.

古文：保融卒，拜节度使。
现代文：高保融死后，授高保勖为节度使。
English: After Gao Baorong's death, Gao Baorong was awarded the title of the Minister of the Interior.

古文：三年，保勖疾，谓其将梁延嗣曰： 我疾遂不起，兄弟孰可付之后事者？ 
现代文：三年，高保勖患病，对他的将领梁延嗣说： 我患病卧床不起，兄弟中可把后事交给谁？ 
English: Three years ago, Gao Baojun fell ill and said to his general, Liang Yanji: "I am bedridden due to illness. Which of my brothers can I hand over the succession to?

古文：延嗣曰： 公不念贞懿王乎？
现代文：梁延嗣说： 你没想到贞懿王吗？
English: Liang Yanji said, "Didn't you think of King Zhenyao?"

古文：先王寝疾，以军府付公，今先王子继冲长矣。 
现代文：先王病危时，把军府事务交给你，如今先王的儿子高继冲长大了。 
English: When the late king was critically ill, he entrusted the affairs of the military government to you. Today, the late king's son, Gao Jichong, has grown up.

古文：保勖曰： 子言是也。 
现代文：高保勖说： 你说得对。 
English: Gao Baojun said: You are right.

古文：即以继冲判内外兵马。
现代文：就任命高继冲判内外兵马。
English: On the appointment of Gao Jicheng, the internal and external soldiers and horses were judged.

古文：十一月，保勖卒，年三十九，赠侍中。
现代文：十一月，高保勖死，时年三十九岁，赠侍中。
English: In November, Gao Baozhang died at the age of thirty-nine.

古文：保融之子继冲立。
现代文：高保融的儿子高继冲继位。
English: Gao Baorong's son Gao Jichong succeeded to the throne.

古文：继冲字成和。
现代文：高继冲字成和。
English: The high consecutive stroke word is summed up.

古文：保勖卒，拜节度使。
现代文：高保勖死后，授高继冲焉节度使。
English: After Gao Baozhen's death, Gao was awarded the title of "Grand Marshal."

古文：湖南周行逢卒，子保权立，其将张文表作乱，建隆四年，太祖命慕容延钊等讨之。
现代文：湖南周行逢死后，儿子周保权继位，他的将领张文表作乱，建隆四年，宋太祖命令慕容延钊等人讨伐他。
English: After the death of Hunan Zhou Xinghu, his son Zhou Baoquan succeeded to the throne. His general Zhang Wenbai made a disturbance. In the fourth year of Jianlong, Song Taizu ordered Murong Yanqi and others to fight against him.

古文：延钊假道荆南，约以兵过城外。
现代文：慕容延钊借路于剂南，约定率兵通过城外。
English: Murong Yanqi took the road to Jiannan, and the agreed rate of soldiers passed outside the city.

古文：继冲大将李景威曰： 兵尚权谲，城外之约，不可信也。
现代文：高继冲的大将李景威说： 用兵崇尚权诈，经过城外的约定，不可相信。
English: Gao Jichong's general, Li Jingwei, said: "It is unbelievable that the use of soldiers advocates power fraud and is arranged outside the city.

古文：宜严兵以待之。 
现代文：应当严整军备来防备他们！ 
English: We must arm ourselves to defend ourselves against them!

古文：判官孙光宪叱之曰： 汝峡江一民尔，安识成败！
现代文：判官孙光宪呵叱他说： 你不过是峡江的一个百姓罢了，哪里懂得成败的道理！
English: The judge, Sun Guangxian, scolded him: "You are just a commoner in the canyon. How can you know the reason for success or failure?

古文：且中国自周世宗时，已有混一天下之志，况圣宋受命，真主出邪！
现代文：而且中原自从周世宗时超，已有统一天下的志向，何况圣宋接受天命，真主出现了呢！
English: Moreover, since Zhou Shizong, the Central Plains have had the ambition to unify the country, not to mention that the Holy Song Dynasty accepted the Mandate of Heaven, and God appeared!

古文：王师岂易当也！ 
现代文：王者之师难道容易对付吗！ 
English: Isn't it easy to deal with the king's teacher!

古文：因劝继冲去斥候，封府库以待，继冲以为然。
现代文：于是劝高继冲撤掉侦察敌情的士兵，封闭府库等待，高继冲认为对。
English: Therefore, Gao Jichong was advised to withdraw the soldiers who had been scouting for enemy positions and to close the government treasury while waiting. Gao Jichong thought this was right.

古文：景威出而叹曰： 吾言不用，大事去矣，何用生为！ 
现代文：李景威退出后叹息说： 不采纳我的话，大事完了，活着有什么用？ 
English: After withdrawing, Li Jingwei sighed and said: If you do not accept my words, the big event is over, what is the use of being alive?

古文：因扼吭而死。
现代文：于是卡住喉咙自杀而死。
English: He then choked himself to death.

古文：延钊军至，继冲出逆于郊，而前锋遽入其城。
现代文：慕容延钊军队到达，高继冲到郊外迎接，而前锋军迅速进入城中。
English: When Murong Yanqi's army arrived, Gao Jie rushed to the outskirts to meet it, while the vanguard army quickly entered the city.

古文：继冲亟归，见旌旗甲马，布列衢巷，大惧，即诣延钊纳牌印，太祖优诏复命继冲为节度使。
现代文：高继冲急忙赶回，看见旌旗甲马，布满大街小巷，十分恐惧，就到慕容延钊那里交纳牌印，宋太祖降诏宽慰，又任命高继冲焉节度使。
English: Gao Jichong hurried back, saw the banners and horses covering the streets and alleys, and was very afraid. He went to Murong Yanqi to pay the stamp, Song Taizu was relieved by the emperor's abdication, and Gao Jichong was appointed as the envoy of the emperor.

古文：乾德元年，有事于南郊，继冲上书愿陪祠。
现代文：干德元年，宋在南郊祭天，高继冲上害希望陪祭。
English: In the first year of the Kangde era, the Song Dynasty held a festival in the southern suburbs, and Gao Jicheng accompanied the festival.

古文：九月，具文告三庙，率其将吏宗族五百余人朝于京师，拜武宁军节度使以卒。
现代文：九月，撰写祭文禀告祖庙，率领他的将领官吏、宗族五百多人到京师朝拜，封为武宁军节度使而死。
English: In September, he wrote an obituary for his ancestral temple and led his generals, officials and more than 500 members of his family to pay homage to the emperor in Beijing. He died as a messenger of the Wu Ning Army's festival.

古文：光宪拜黄州刺史，其后事具国史。
现代文：孙光宪封为黄州刺史，以后的事都记载在本朝国史上。
English: Sun Quang Xianfeng is recorded in the history of Huangzhou, and all subsequent events are recorded in the history of this dynasty.

