古文：楚王元佐，太宗长子也，因申救廷美不获，遂感心疾，习为残忍；左右微过，辄弯弓射之。
现代文：原文楚王赵元佐是宋太宗的长子，因为援救赵廷美失败，于是的精神病，性情变得很残忍，身边人稍微有过失，就用箭射杀。
English: The original text: Chu Wang Zhao Yuan Zuo is the eldest son of Song Taizong, because the rescue of Zhao Tingmei failed, he was mentally ill, his temperament became very cruel, and the people around him were slightly negligent and shot with arrows.

古文：帝屡诲不悛。
现代文：太宗屡次教训他都不改过。
English: Taizong repeatedly taught him and he never changed.

古文：重阳，帝宴诸王，元佐以病新起，不得预，中夜发愤，遂闭媵妾，纵火焚宫。
现代文：重阳节的时候，太宗宴请诸王，赵元佐借口生病初愈不参加，半夜发怒，把侍妾关闭于宫中，并纵火焚宫。
English: During the Chung Yeung Festival, Emperor Taizong invited all the kings to a banquet, but Zhao Yuan Zuo did not attend on the pretext that he was ill. In the middle of the night, he became angry, locked his concubine in the palace, and set fire to the palace.

古文：帝怒，欲废之。
现代文：太宗很生气，打算废除他太子的身份。
English: Emperor Taizong was very angry and planned to abolish his position as crown prince.

古文：会寇准通判郓州，得召见，太宗谓曰： 卿试与朕决一事，东宫所为不法，他日必为桀、纣之行，欲废之，则宫中亦有甲兵，恐因而招乱。 
现代文：寇准那时正在郓州任通判，太宗特别召见他，对他说： 找你来和朕一起商议一件大事。太子所作所为都属不法，将来若登上帝位一定会做出桀、纣般的行为。朕想废掉他，但东宫有自己的军队，恐怕因此引起乱事。 
English: At that time, Kojun was in the process of appointing a general court judge in Bozhou. Emperor Taizong specially summoned him and said to him, "I want you to come and discuss a major matter with me. Everything the crown prince has done is illegal. If he ascends to the throne in the future, he will certainly behave like a rogue. I want to abolish him, but the East Palace has its own army, and I am afraid that this will cause chaos.

古文：准曰： 请某月日，令东宫于某处摄行礼，其左右侍从皆令从之，陛下搜其宫中，果有不法之事，俟还而示之；废太子，一黄门力耳。 
现代文：寇准说： 请皇上于某月某日，命令太子到某地代理皇上祭祀，太子的左右侍从也都命令跟着去，陛下再趁此机会派人去搜查东宫，若果真有不法的证物，等太子回来再当他面公布出来，如此罪证确凿，要废太子，只须派个黄门侍郎宣布就行了。 
English: Kojun said, "Please, on a certain day of a certain month, ask the emperor to order the prince to go to a certain place to represent the emperor's sacrificial rites. The prince's right and left attendants are also ordered to follow. Your majesty should take this opportunity to send someone to search the East Palace. If there really is illegal evidence, wait for the prince to return and then announce it to him. The evidence is so conclusive. To abolish the prince, all you have to do is send a Yellow Gate attendant to announce it.

古文：太宗从其策，及东宫出，得淫刑之器，有剜目、挑筋、摘舌等物，还而示之，东宫服罪，遂废之。
现代文：太宗采用他的计策，等太子离去后，果然搜得一些残酷的刑具，包括有挖眼、挑筋、割舌等刑具。太子回来后，当场展示出来，太子服罪，于是被废。评译
English: Taizong used his strategy, and after the prince left, he found some cruel torture tools, including torture tools such as eye gouging, pulling sinews, and cutting tongues. After the prince returned, they were displayed on the spot, and the prince pleaded guilty, so he was scrapped.

