古文：炀帝下八年春正月辛巳，大军集于涿郡。
现代文：大业八年正月初一，大军集结在涿郡。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year of the Taiei era, a large army gathered in Yuxian.

古文：以兵部尚书段文振为左候卫大将军。
现代文：任命兵部尚书段文振为左侯卫大将军。
English: He appointed the head of the military department, Shangshu Danman Zhen, as the general of the Left Guards.

古文：壬午，下诏曰：天地大德，降繁霜于秋令；圣哲至仁，著甲兵于刑典。
现代文：初二，下诏书说：天地对人类有大恩大德，也要在秋季降落浓霜；圣贤对人民极为仁爱，也要把武备战争的事写在法典上。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the next imperial edict said: Heaven and earth have great benevolence to mankind, and heavy frosts will also fall in the autumn; sages are extremely benevolent to the people, and they should also write the matter of armed war on the code.

古文：故知造化之有肃杀，义在无私；帝王之用干戈，盖非获已。
现代文：因此知道自然界所以有天气寒冷草木枯落，意思是表明天地无私；帝王之所以动用干戈，大概都是出于不得已。
English: Therefore, knowing the reason why the natural world has cold weather and withering of plants, it means that heaven and earth are selfless; the reason why the emperor used dry go is probably out of necessity.

古文：版泉、丹浦，莫匪龚行，取乱覆昏，咸由顺动。
现代文：版泉、丹浦之战，无不是恭敬地执行上天的惩罚，征服暴乱颠覆昏君，全是顺应人民的行动。
English: The battles of Huanquan and Danpu were nothing more than the respectful execution of heaven's punishment, the conquest of the rebellion and the overthrow of the tyrant, all of which were the actions of the people.

古文：况乎甘野誓师，夏开承大禹之业；商郊问罪，周发成文王之志。
现代文：何况在甘地原野誓师讨伐有扈，夏启承继了大禹的事业；在商地郊野责问殷纣罪过，周发完成了文王的志愿。
English: What's more, in the field of Gandhi's struggle against the teachers' oath, Xia Qiming succeeded the cause of Dayu; in the field of commerce, Yin Qi was punished, and Zhou Fa fulfilled the will of King Wen.

古文：永监前载，属当朕躬。
现代文：借鉴前代记载，征服昏王的使命恰好落在朕的肩上。
English: Referring to the records of the previous generation, the mission of conquering the King of Darkness falls squarely on my shoulders.

古文：粤我有隋，诞膺灵命，兼三才而建极，一六合而为家。
现代文：我堂堂隋朝膺受了神灵的旨意，尊有天地人三才而立德治国，统一天地四方而成为一家天下。
English: The Sui Dynasty was the first to accept the will of the gods. It honored the three great powers and ruled the country with virtue. It unified the four directions and became a unified country.

古文：提封所渐，细柳、盘桃之外，声教爰暨，紫舌、黄枝之域，远至迩安，罔不和会。功成治定，于是乎在。
现代文：我管辖的封疆到的地方，已在细柳、盘桃之外；声威教化所及，包括了紫舌、黄枝等地。远方归顺，近处安定，无不协和，功业告成，政治稳定，在此已成为现实。
English: The areas under my jurisdiction that have been reached by the sealing of the frontiers have been beyond the thin willow and the peach tree; and the areas that have been reached by the sounding of the bell have included the purple tongue, the yellow branch and other places. It has become a reality here that the distant areas have surrendered, the nearby areas are stable, there is no disharmony, the work has been completed, and the politics have been stable.

古文：而高丽小丑，迷昏不恭，崇聚勃碣之间，荐食辽 之境。
现代文：然而高丽这小小丑类，却糊涂昏愦不肯恭顺，聚集在勃海，碣石之间，多次吞食辽水、犭岁地之境。
English: However, Goryeo, this clown, was confused and unwilling to obey, gathered in the Bohai Sea, between the rocks, and repeatedly swallowed Liao Shui, the land of the yearling.

古文：虽复汉魏诛戳，巢窟暂倾，乱离多阻，种落还集。
现代文：虽然汉、魏两代一再诛讨杀戮，他的巢穴暂时倾覆，但由于世事多难，关山阻隔，高丽部族得以再次集聚。
English: Although the Han and Wei dynasties repeatedly fought and killed each other, his nest was temporarily overturned, but due to the difficulties of the world and the barrier of Guanshan, the Goryeo tribe was able to gather again.

古文：萃川薮于往代，播实繁以迄今，眷彼华壤，剪为夷类。
现代文：从前他们聚集于河川湖泽，流传繁衍直到如今。眼看那华夏的土地，将沦灭为夷狄的邦国。
English: In the past, they gathered in rivers and lakes, spreading and multiplying until now. Looking at that land of China, it will be reduced to a state of barbarians.

古文：历年永久，恶稔既盈，天道祸淫，亡征已兆。
现代文：经历了长久岁月，他的罪恶已满盈，上天的原则是降祸给恶人，看来高丽灭亡的征兆已显现。
English: After a long time, his sins have accumulated, the principle of heaven is to bring evil to the wicked, and it seems that the signs of Goryeo's demise have appeared.

古文：乱常败德，非可胜图，掩慝怀奸，唯日不足。
现代文：他们搅乱纲常败坏道德，无法完全弄清；掩盖过错怀藏邪恶，只觉日日不够。
English: They have perverted justice, they have corrupted equity; they have covered up iniquity, they have hidden wickedness; they have not done justice from day to day.

古文：移告之严，未尝面受，朝觐之礼，莫肯躬亲。
现代文：朝廷的文书告示，从未当面接受，朝拜皇帝的礼仪，不肯亲自参与。
English: He never accepted the court's written notice in person, and refused to participate in the emperor's ritual of bowing to him.

古文：诱纳亡叛，不知纪极，充斥边垂，亟劳烽候，关柝以之不静，生人为之废业。
现代文：招诱接纳逃亡叛变之徒，没有办法弄清其数。这类人充斥边地，使边防哨所劳碌不堪，边关巡夜的木梆子时常报警，不得安宁，人民因此而荒废生业。
English: There is no way of ascertaining the number of those who have been lured to accept fugitive rebels. Such people have flooded the border areas, making the border guard posts laborious, and the rafts patrolling the border at night often call the police, and there is no peace. As a result, people's livelihoods have been devastated.

古文：在昔薄伐，已漏天网，既缓前擒之戮，未即后服之诛。
现代文：从前加以讨伐，天网疏漏，既宽免了他先前被擒后应遭的诛戮，又未让他接受最晚所应得的刑罚，竟然不感念皇恩，反而经常作恶。
English: In the past, Heaven's Gate cracked down on him, but neglected to pardon him for the beating he suffered after being captured, and did not allow him to receive the punishment he deserved at the latest, so that he did not feel the grace of the king, but often did evil.

古文：曾不怀恩，翻为长恶，乃兼契丹之党，虔刘海戍，习靺鞨之服，侵轶辽西。
现代文：于是纠合契丹的同伙，掠杀我海防人员，穿上族的衣服，侵袭辽西。又青丘国以外地区，都全来贡，碧海之滨，一起实行我隋朝的历法。
English: So they got together with Qidan's allies, killed our coast guard personnel, put on tribal clothes, and invaded western Liaoning Province. In addition, all regions outside Qingqiu Province came to pay tribute, along the coast of the Bihai Sea, and together implemented my Sui Dynasty calendar.

古文：又青丘之表，咸修职贡，碧海之滨，同禀正朔，遂复夺攘琛 ，遏绝往来，虐及弗辜，诚而遇祸。
现代文：高丽竟又抢夺他人献给天子的财宝，阻拦隔绝人们的往来，肆虐危及无辜，使那些诚心归顺的人遭祸害。
English: Goryeo, on the other hand, robbed the treasure that others dedicated to the Son of Heaven, obstructed and cut off people's communications, wreaked havoc and endangered the innocent, and brought calamity to those who sincerely submitted.

古文：輶轩奉使，爰暨海东，旌节所次，途经籓境，而拥塞道路，拒绝王人，无事君之心，岂为臣之礼！
现代文：天子的使臣奉命出使，来到海东，沿途停留的地方，多经过属国的境土。而高丽竟然堵塞道路，拒绝帝王派出的使臣，简直没有侍奉君上的心思，这难道是做臣下应有的礼节！
English: The envoys of the Son of Heaven, sent by order, came to the East Sea, and the places where they stopped along the way, mostly passed through the territory of the country. And Goryeo even blocked the road, refused the envoys sent by the emperor, and simply did not have the heart to serve the prince. Is this the proper etiquette for being a vassal?

古文：此而可忍，孰不可容！
现代文：这种现象如果可以忍受，那还有什么不可以容忍的呢！
English: If this is tolerable, what is intolerable?

古文：且法令苛酷，赋敛烦重，强臣豪族，咸执国钧，朋党比周，以之成俗，贿货如市，冤枉莫申。
现代文：而且高丽国法令苛刻严酷，赋税繁重，强臣豪族，都把持着国家的权力。他们结党营私，这已形成风俗。
English: Moreover, the laws of Goryeo are harsh and severe, taxes are onerous, and powerful powerful clans hold the power of the country. It has become a custom for them to form parties.

古文：重以仍岁灾凶，比屋饥馑，兵戈不息，徭役无期，力竭转输，身填沟壑。
现代文：公开行贿，犹如市场上做买卖，人民的冤枉得不到昭雪，又加上连年凶灾，家家饿肚子，征战不停，无尽无休地服徭役，为运输物资耗尽了精力，身死野外抛尸于沟壑。
English: Openly paying bribes is like doing business in the market, and the people are unjustly deprived of their rights, coupled with years of calamities, families are hungry, wars are incessant, they serve as soldiers endlessly, they have exhausted their energy to transport materials, and they die and throw their bodies into ravines.

古文：百姓愁苦，爰谁适从？
现代文：百姓忧怨痛苦，不知道依从谁才好？
English: The people are worried and bitter, and don't know who to follow?

古文：境内哀惶，不胜其弊。
现代文：国境之内，人民哀怨惶恐，实在承受不住这些沉重的灾难。
English: Within the borders, the people are saddened and frightened, and they really can't bear these heavy disasters.

古文：回首面内，各怀性命之图，黄发稚齿，咸兴酷毒之叹。
现代文：他们回顾往事，而对国内当前的景象，都各怀保全性命的打算，老人幼儿，都发出了惨痛的叹息。
English: They look back on the past, and the current situation in the country, each with the intention of preserving their lives, the old and the young, have issued a bitter sigh.

古文：省俗观风，爰屈幽朔，吊人问罪，无俟再驾。
现代文：如今朕视察风俗，来到幽州北部，慰问人民，责问罪臣，不必等待第二次驾临了。
English: Now that I have inspected the customs, come to the northern part of Yuzhou, consoled the people, and rebuked the sinners, there is no need to wait for the second coming.

古文：于是亲总六师，用申九伐，拯厥阽危，协从天意，殄兹逋秽，克嗣先谟。
现代文：于是亲自统领军队，以制裁违逆王命的诸侯，拯救面临危险的人民，顺从天意，消灭这些不守法的丑类，继承先贤的谋略。
English: So he personally led the army to sanction the princes who disobeyed the king's order, to save the people facing danger, to obey the will of heaven, to eliminate these lawless scum, and to inherit the sages' strategy.

古文：今宜援律启行，分麾屈路，掩勃澥而雷震，历夫余以电扫。
现代文：现在应当命将出征，分发旌旗上路，大军要如迅雷震击一般突袭勃氵解，像闪电掠过一样飞过夫余。
English: Now it is time for the commander-in-chief to march out, distribute banners and go on the road. The great army should make a surprise attack on Burgundy like a thunderbolt, and fly over the countryside like lightning.

古文：比戈按甲，誓旅而后行，三令五申，必胜而后战。
现代文：摆好队伍，誓师然后出发，三令五申，要有必胜把握才开战。
English: Set up the team, swear in the coach and then set off. It is necessary to have a sure grasp of victory before going to war.

古文：左第一军可镂方道。第二军可长岑道，第三军可海冥道，第四军可盖马道，第五军可建安道，第六军可南苏道，第七军可辽东道，第八军可玄菟道，第九军可扶余道，第十军可朝鲜道，第十一军可沃沮道，第十二军可乐浪道，右第一军可黏蝉道，第二军可含资道，第三军可浑弥道，第四军可临屯道，第五军可候城道，第六军可提奚道，第七军可踏顿道，第八军可肃慎道，第九军可碣石道，第十军可东暆道，第十一军可带方道，第十二军可襄平道。
现代文：左路第一军往镂方道，第二军往长岑道，第三军往海冥道，第四军往盖马道，第五军往建安道，第六军往南苏道，第七军往辽东道，第八军往玄菟道，第九军往扶余道，第十军往朝鲜道，第十一军往沃沮道，第十二军往乐浪道。右路第一军往黏蝉道，第二军往含资道，第三军往浑弥道，第四军往临屯道，第五军往候城道，第六军往提奚道，第七军往踏顿道，第八军往肃慎道，第九军往碣石道，第十军往东日施道，第十一军往带方道，第十二军往襄平道。
English: On the left, the First Army went to Shifang Road, the Second Army went to Changchun Road, the Third Army went to Haiyu Road, the Fourth Army went to Gaima Road, the Fifth Army went to Jian'an Road, the Sixth Army went to Nansu Road, the Seventh Army went to Liaodong, the Eighth Army went to Xuancheng Road, the Ninth Army went to Fuyu Road, the Tenth Army went to Chosun Road, the Eleventh Army went to Wo Deshi Road, and the Twelfth Army went to Le Lang Road. On the right, the First Army went to Qixian Road, the Second Army went to H

古文：凡此众军，先奉庙略，骆驿引途，总集平壤。
现代文：凡是此次出征的各军，首先要遵循朝廷的作战方略，然后络绎出发，在平壤会师。
English: All the armies of this expedition must first follow the strategy of the imperial court, and then set out in succession to join the division in Pyongyang.

古文：莫非如豺如貔之勇，百战百胜之雄，顾眄则山岳倾颓，叱吒则风云腾郁，心德攸同，爪牙斯在。
现代文：我军将士无不像豺豹那样勇猛，具有百战百胜的雄心，眼睛一瞪就会使山岳崩塌，大声怒吼就会让风云升腾，同心同德，猛士俱在。
English: The soldiers of our army are not as brave as the cheetah, with the ambition of winning a hundred battles, the eyes will collapse the mountains, the loud roar will make the clouds rise, the same heart and the same virtue, the brave men are all there.

古文：朕躬驭元戎，为其节度，涉辽而东，循海之右，解倒悬于遐裔，问疾苦于遗黎。
现代文：朕亲自担任元帅，为军队指挥调度，渡过辽水向东进发，沿着大海西边进军。解救边远地区处境极端困苦危急的人民，慰问亡国之民的疾苦。
English: I personally served as a marshal, commanded and dispatched the army, crossed the Liao River to the east, and marched along the west side of the sea. I rescued the people in remote areas who were in extreme and critical conditions, and consoled the suffering of the people of the lost country.

古文：其外轻赍游阙，随机赴响，卷甲衔枚，出其不意。
现代文：此外，那些轻装前进游动于敌军的空隙中的部队，应当见机行事，赶赴战场，藏好铠甲，衔枚噤声，出其不意进行突然袭击。
English: In addition, those lightly armed troops moving forward and swimming in the enemy's gap should act opportunistically, rush to the battlefield, hide their armor, and make a sudden attack.

古文：又沧海道军舟舻千里，高帆电逝，巨舰云飞，横断浿江，迳造平壤，岛屿之望斯绝，坎井之路已穷。
现代文：还有海上一路军队，船只首尾相接，长达千里，风帆高扬，迅如闪电，巨舰奔驰，疾若云飞，大小船只截断氵贝江，迳直开赴平壤，敌人躲进岛屿的希望已绝，像青蛙那样藏入废井的路子已断。
English: There are also armies all the way along the sea, ships abreast, thousands of miles long, sails soaring, fast as lightning, huge ships galloping, clouds flying swiftly, large and small ships cutting off the mussel river, heading straight for Pyongyang, the enemy's hope of hiding in the islands has been exhausted, and the way to hide like a frog in a waste well has been broken.

古文：其余被发左衽之人，控弦待发，微卢彭濮之旅，不谋同辞。
现代文：其他随朕出征的异族部队，无不拉弓待发，微、卢、彭、濮等地的军队，不用商量就众人一辞。
English: The other foreign troops who will accompany me on the campaign are all ready to go, and the troops from We, Lu, Peng, and Handan do not need to be consulted.

古文：杖顺临逆，人百其勇，以此众战，势等摧枯。
现代文：依仗天意，讨伐叛逆，人人都百倍勇敢，凭借这样壮大的队伍来同敌人作战，那势头就等于摧枯拉朽。
English: Relying on God's providence, fighting and rebelling, everyone is a hundred times braver. With such a large team to fight the enemy, the momentum is equal to withering and decay.

古文：然则王者之师，义存止杀，圣人之教，必也胜残。
现代文：然而，实行王道的军队，它的宗旨在于制止杀戮，圣人教诲我们，如果一定要动用武力，也只是打败凶残的人，使其不能作恶。
English: However, the royal army, its purpose is to stop the killing, the sage teaches us that if we must use force, it is only to defeat the murderous people, so that they can not do evil.

古文：天罚有罪，本在元恶，人之多僻，胁从罔治。
现代文：上天惩罚有罪的人，本在处治元凶，至于多数人的毛病，作为胁从就不必惩处了。
English: Heaven punishes the guilty by dealing with the culprits. As for most people's faults, there is no need to punish them as a threat.

古文：若高元泥首辕门，自归司寇，即宜解缚焚榇，弘之以恩。
现代文：假如高丽首领高元以泥涂首，到军营门口请罪，到司寇那里去自首的话，就应解开他的绑绳，烧掉棺材，扩大给他的恩惠。
English: If the head of Goryeo, Gao Yuan, covered his head with mud, went to the gate of the military camp to plead guilty, and went to Siko to turn himself in, he should untie his ropes, burn the coffin, and expand the favors given to him.

古文：其余臣人归朝奉顺，咸加慰抚，各安生业，随才任用，无隔夷夏。
现代文：其余臣民归附朝廷恭敬顺从的，都要加以安慰抚恤，让他们各安其业，根据才能予以任用，不要有夷夏的分别。
English: The rest of the subjects attached to the imperial court, who are respectful and obedient, should be comforted and palliated, let them each secure their careers, and be appointed according to their talents, and there should be no difference between them.

古文：营垒所次，务在整肃，刍尧有禁，秋毫勿犯，布以恩宥，喻以祸福。
现代文：军营驻扎的地方，务必整齐严肃，禁止搅扰百姓，做到秋毫无犯，宣告朝廷为何施恩恕罪，向他们说明怎样才能远祸求福。
English: Where the military camp is stationed, it must be neat and serious, it is forbidden to disturb the people, so that there is no offense, proclaim why the court forgives sins, and explain to them how to seek blessings far away from evil.

古文：若其同恶相济，抗拒官军，国有常刑，俾无遗类。
现代文：如果他相助为恶，抗拒官军，那么依照国家的刑法，将使他们中不再有存活的人。
English: On the left, the First Army can come from Shifang Road, the Second Army can come from Changchun Road, the Third Army can come from Haitou Road, the Fourth Army can come from Gaima Road, the Fifth Army can come from Jian'an Road, the Sixth Army can come from Nansu Road, the Seventh Army can come from Liaodong, the Eighth Army can come from Xuancheng Road, the Ninth Army can come from Fuyu Road, the Tenth Army can come from Chosun Road, the Eleventh Army can come from Wode Road, and the Twelfth Army can come from Lelang Road; on the right, the First Army can come

古文：明加晓示，称朕意焉。
现代文：以上种种，要明明白白地告诉他们，这才符合朕的心意。
English: All of the above should be clearly told to them, which is in line with my heart.

古文：总一百一十三万三千八百，号二百万，其餽运者倍之。
现代文：这次出兵总共有一百一十三万三千八百人，号称二百万人，那些运送物资的人还要加倍。
English: The total number of soldiers dispatched this time is 1,133,800, which is claimed to be 2 million people, and those who are transporting materials will be doubled.

古文：癸未，第一军发，终四十日，引师乃尽，旌旗亘千里。
现代文：癸未，第一军出发，四十天后，所率部队才全部上路，旌旗绵亘千里。
English: Not long after, the First Army set out, and forty days later, the troops led by the First Army were all on the road, waving flags for thousands of miles.

古文：近古出师之盛，未之有也。
现代文：近古以来，出兵打仗从来没有这么盛大的规模。
English: In recent times, there has never been such a great turnout.

古文：乙未，以右候卫大将军卫玄为刑部尚书。
现代文：十五日，任命右侯卫大将军卫玄为刑部尚书。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, he appointed the General of the Right Guard, Wei Xuan, as the head of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：甲辰，内史令元寿卒。
现代文：二十四日，内史令元寿去世。
English: On the 24th, Shigenobu passed away.

古文：二月甲寅，诏曰： 朕观风燕裔，问罪辽滨。
现代文：二月初四，下诏书说： 朕在燕地观察民风得失，在辽河之滨兴师问罪。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the second lunar month, the imperial edict said: "I will observe the gains and losses of the people's will in Yan Di, and investigate the crimes of Bin Xing Shi in Liaohe."

古文：文武协力，爪牙思奋，莫不执锐勤王，舍家从役，罕蓄仓廪之资，兼损播殖之务。
现代文：文臣武将，同心协力，助手亲信，均思奋勉，无不手持兵器为王室尽力，舍家服役，家中粮仓里没存多少粮食，又耽搁了播种栽植的家活。
English: The scholars and generals, working together, and their assistants and confidants, were all working hard, all armed with weapons to do their best for the royal family, leaving their homes to serve. There was not much grain stored in the granary at home, and the housework of sowing and planting was delayed.

古文：朕所以夕惕愀然，虑其匮乏。
现代文：朕因此戎慎恐惧，老惦念着那些匮乏的人家。
English: Therefore my heart is troubled, and I am afraid of what it will lack.

古文：虽复素饱之众，情在忘私，悦使之人，宜从其厚。
现代文：虽然以素食果腹的民众，忘却私利，但对那些愉快受命、离家远征的人应当给予优厚的待遇。
English: Although people with vegetarian diets and full stomachs, forget about self-interest, but those who are happily ordered to leave home for an expedition should be given preferential treatment.

古文：诸行从一品以下，佽飞募人以上家口，郡县宜数存问。
现代文：众位出征的人，凡副一品以下应募的勇士以上人员的家属，郡县应当经常慰问。
English: Countless people who go to war, and the families of the warriors and above who are recruited below the rank of vice-premier, should be constantly consoled by the county.

古文：若有粮食少，皆宜赈给；或虽有田畴，贫弱不能自耕种，可于多丁富室劝课相助。
现代文：若有人粮食缺少，都应救济。有的家庭虽然有田地，但由于贫困体弱而不能自力耕种，可鼓励督促成年男子多的富裕人家相助。
English: If someone is short of food, they should be given relief. Although some families have fields, they are too poor and weak to farm on their own. They can be encouraged to urge more adult men to help rich families.

古文：使夫居者有敛积之丰，行役无顾后之虑。 
现代文：要使留守的人有丰厚的贮积，服役在外的人无后顾之忧。 
English: In this way, the people at home have some savings, and those who go to war have no worries.

古文：壬戌，司空、京兆尹、光禄大夫观王雄薨。
现代文：十二日，司空、京兆尹、光禄大夫观王杨雄去世。
English: On the 12th, Siku, Jing Zhaoyun and Guanglu doctor Guan Wang Yangxiong passed away.

古文：三月辛卯，兵部尚书、左候卫大将军段文振卒。
现代文：三月十二日，兵部尚书、左候卫大将军段文振去世。
English: On March 12th, General Duan Wen Zhen, the commander-in-chief of the Western Front, passed away. On the 14th, the emperor personally commanded the army.

古文：癸巳，上御师。
现代文：十四日，皇上到军中。
English: On the 15th, they faced off against the enemy at Liao Shui Qiao.

古文：甲午，临戎于辽水桥。
现代文：十五日，两军在辽水桥对阵。
English: On the 19th, the large army encountered strong resistance from the enemy and was unable to cross the river.

古文：戊戌，大军为贼所拒，不果济。
现代文：十九日，大军遭敌军抵抗，未能渡过辽水。
English: On the 19th, the large army encountered resistance from the enemy and was unable to cross the Liao Shui.

古文：右屯卫大将军、左光禄大夫麦铁杖，武贲郎将钱士雄、孟金叉等，皆死之。
现代文：右屯卫大将军、左光禄大夫麦铁杖，虎贲郎将钱士雄、孟金叉等，皆战死。
English: General of the Right Tunwei, Doctor of the Left Guanglu, Mai Tiezhu, Tiger Herder, General Qian Shixiong, Meng Jinsha, etc. all died in the battle.

古文：甲午，车驾渡辽。
现代文：十五日，皇上车驾渡过辽水。
English: On the fifteenth day, the imperial car drove across Liao Shui.

古文：大战于东岸，击贼破之，进围辽东。
现代文：两军大战于东岸，击破贼军，进兵围困辽东城。
English: The two armies fought a great battle on the east coast, defeated the thief army, and entered the siege of Liaodong City.

古文：乙未，大顿，见二大鸟，高丈余，皜身硃足，游泳自若。
现代文：乙未日，皇上大休息，看到两只鸟，有一丈多高，白身红足，无拘无束地在水中游泳。
English: On the eve of the second day, when the emperor was taking a long rest, he saw two tall birds, white with red feet, swimming freely in the water.

古文：上异之，命工图写，并立铭颂。
现代文：皇上感到惊奇，命画工描绘它，并立铭碑颂赞。
English: The emperor was so surprised that he ordered an artist to paint it down and erected a monument in his honour.

古文：五月壬午，纳言杨达卒。
现代文：五月初四，纳言杨达去世。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, Nagan Yanda passed away.

古文：于时诸将各奉旨，不敢越机。
现代文：当时众将领各奉皇上的凡事都必须奏闻的旨意，不敢自寻机会出击。
English: At that time, the generals, each following the emperor's will that everything must be reported, did not dare to find an opportunity to attack.

古文：既而高丽各城守，攻之不下。
现代文：不久高丽各城都固守，攻打不下来。
English: Soon, all the cities in Korea were firmly defended and could not be attacked.

古文：六月己未，幸辽东，责怒诸将。
现代文：六月十一日，皇上到辽东城，怒责诸将领。
English: On June 11, the emperor went to Liaodong City and angrily rebuked the generals.

古文：止城西数里，御六合城。
现代文：车驾停留在城西边数里地，又到六合战。
English: The car stayed a few miles to the west of the city, and then went to the battle of Liuhe.

古文：七月壬寅，宇文述等败绩于萨水，右屯卫将军辛世雄死之。
现代文：七月二十二日，宇文述等在萨水打了败仗，右屯卫将军辛世雄战死。
English: On July 22nd, Wu Wenshu and others lost the battle in Sashui, and the Right Tunwei General Xin Shixiong died in the battle.

古文：九军并陷，将帅奔还亡者二千余骑。癸卯，班师。
现代文：各路军队全部被打败，将帅奔亡逃回的仅两千人。癸卯，全军撤回。
English: All the armies were defeated, and only two thousand of the generals fled back. Suddenly, the whole army retreated.

古文：九月庚辰，上至东都。
现代文：九月初三，皇上到东都。
English: On the third day of the ninth month, the emperor arrived in the eastern capital.

古文：己丑，诏曰： 军国异容，文武殊用，匡危拯难，则霸德攸兴，化人成俗，则王道斯贵。
现代文：十二日，下诏书说： 军务与政事有不同的法度，文臣武将有不同的作用。匡扶危险，拯救急难，则霸道兴盛；教化人民，养成良好习俗，就以王道为贵。
English: On the 12th, the next imperial edict said: Military affairs and political affairs have different legal systems, and civil and military affairs will have different roles. If you support danger and save the distressed, then the domineering way will flourish; if you educate the people and develop good customs, then the royal way will be valuable.

古文：时方拨乱，屠贩可以登朝，世属隆平，经术然后升仕。
现代文：当治理乱世之时，屠夫商贩可以上朝秉政，而在升平的时世，只有掌握经学才能入仕。
English: When governing a chaotic world, butchers and traders can enter the government, while in a peaceful world, only those who have mastered the study of economics can enter the service.

古文：丰都爰肇，儒服无预于周行，建武之朝，功臣不参于吏职。
现代文：周文王在灭纣缔建丰都时，儒生不能加入朝官的行列，汉光武帝建武时的朝廷，有武功的大臣不参预治国的职事。
English: When King Zhou Wen founded Fengdu, Confucian scholars were not allowed to join the ranks of imperial officials. When Emperor Han Guangwu founded the imperial court, ministers with military merit were not allowed to participate in the pre-governance work.

古文：自三方未一，四海交争，不遑文教，唯尚武功。
现代文：我隋朝立国之初，三方未曾统一，四海还在交战，无暇顾及文治教化，惟有崇尚武功。
English: At the beginning of the Sui Dynasty, the three parties had not been unified, the four seas were still at war, and there was no time to pay attention to literature and education, but to advocate martial arts.

古文：设官分职，罕以才授，班朝治人，乃由勋叙，莫非拔足行阵，出自勇夫，斅学之道，既所不习，政事之方，故亦无取。
现代文：当时设立官位，分别职守，很少根据才能授给，在朝廷治理人民的人，乃是根据功勋大小依次授用，这些官员无非选拔于军队，来自武夫，学习的道理，既未曾学习，处理政务的方法，因此也无处可取。
English: At that time, official positions were set up, duties were separated, and they were rarely awarded on the basis of ability. The people who governed the people in the imperial court were awarded in order of merit. These officials were selected from the army, from warriors, from the principle of learning, and they had not learned how to handle government affairs, so they were nowhere to be found.

古文：是非暗于在己，威福专于下吏，贪冒货贿，不知纪极，蠢政害民，实由于此。
现代文：是非不明在于自身胡涂，刑赏大权被下属专擅。贪污受贿，不知纲纪，败坏政治，危害人民，实由于这个原因。
English: It is not clear whether it is because they are stupid, the power of punishment and reward is exclusively exercised by their subordinates, corruption and bribery, ignorance of discipline, corruption of politics, and harm to the people are really due to this reason.

古文：自今已后，诸授勋官者，并不得回授文武职事，庶遵彼更张，取类于调瑟，求诸名制，不伤于美锦。
现代文：从今以后，各个被授给勋官的人，都不得再给文武职务。希望遵循改弦更张的原则，采取类似调瑟的办法，寻找裁剪能手，才不会损伤美锦。
English: From now on, all those who have been awarded the medal will no longer be allowed to give military and civilian duties. I hope that they will follow the principle of changing the strings and changing the tension, adopt a method similar to tuning, and look for skilled tailors so as not to damage the brocade.

古文：若吏部辄拟用者，御史即宜纠弹。 
现代文：如果吏部总给上述人员拟定文武职务，御史即应检举弹劾。 
English: If the cadre department intends to appoint, the governor should immediately correct the impeachment.

古文：冬十月甲寅，工部尚书宇文恺卒。
现代文：十月初八，工部尚书宇文恺去世。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of October, Shangshuu Wenzhong of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce passed away.

古文：十一月己卯，以宗女华容公主嫁于高昌王。
现代文：十一月初三，以宗室之女华容公主嫁给高昌王。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Princess Hua Rong, the daughter of the royal family, married King Gaochang.

古文：辛巳，光禄大夫韩寿卒。
现代文：初五，光禄大夫韩寿去世。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Guanglu doctor Han Shou passed away.

古文：甲申，败将宇文述、于仲文等并除名为民，斩尚书右丞刘士龙以谢天下。
现代文：初八，败将宇文述、于仲文等一并除去名籍，成为百姓。斩杀尚书右丞刘士龙来向天下谢罪。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the defeated general Yu Wenshu, Yu Zhongwen, and others were all removed from their family names and became commoners. They killed the scholar Liu Shilong to express their gratitude to the world.

古文：是岁，大旱，疫，人多死，山东尤甚。
现代文：这一年，天下大旱，瘟疫流行，许多人病死，崤山以东地区尤为严重。
English: In that year, the country was hit by a severe drought, a plague epidemic, and many people died of disease. The situation was particularly serious in the areas east of Lushan.

古文：密诏江、淮南诸郡阅视民间童女，姿质端丽者，每岁贡之。
现代文：密令江、淮以南各郡官员察看民间少女，相貌品质端庄秀丽的，每年进献朝廷。
English: Officials from counties south of the Mi-Ling River and Huai-Nan inspected the folk girls, who had a dignified and beautiful appearance and were presented to the imperial court every year.

古文：九年春正月丁丑，征天下兵，募民为骁果，集于涿郡。
现代文：大业九年正月初一，征调天下兵士，招募百姓为敢死队成员，在涿郡集结。
English: On the second day of the first month of the ninth year of spring, soldiers from all over the country were conscripted, and the people were recruited as the Yunnan Fruit Army and gathered in Yunnan County.

古文：壬午，贼帅杜彦冰、王润等陷平原郡，大掠而去。
现代文：初七，贼帅杜彦冰、王润等攻陷平原郡，大肆掳掠后离去。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the thieves Du Yanbing, Wang Run and others invaded Pingyuan County, plundered it and left.

古文：辛卯，置折冲、果毅、武勇、雄武等郎将官，以领骁果。
现代文：十六日，在禁卫军中设置折冲、果毅、武勇、雄武等郎将官，以统领敢死队。
English: On the 16th, officials such as Fuchong, Guoyi, Wuyong and Xiongwu were set up to lead the Xingguo Army.

古文：乙未，平原李德逸聚众数万，称 阿舅贼 ，劫掠山东。
现代文：二十日，平原李德逸聚集几万人，人称 阿舅贼 ，在崤山以东地区进行抢掠。
English: On the 20th, tens of thousands of people gathered in the plain of Li Deyi, known as the thieves, to loot the area east of Lushan.

古文：灵武白榆妄称 奴贼 ，劫掠牧马，北连突厥，陇右多被其患。
现代文：灵武人白榆妄，人称 奴贼 ，专门劫掠牧马，北连突厥，陇西地区多受其害。
English: Lingwu people with delirium tremens, known as "slave thieves," specialized in robbing herdsmen. Northern Lianyungang and western Shaanxi regions suffered the most.

古文：遣将军范贵讨之，连年不能克。
现代文：皇上派将军范贵去讨伐他，连年未能战胜。
English: He sent General Fan Gui to fight them, but he was unable to defeat them for several years.

古文：戊戌，大赦。
现代文：戊戍日，实行大赦。
English: On the 23rd, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：己亥，遣代王侑、刑部尚书卫玄镇京师。
现代文：己亥，派代王杨侑，刑部尚书卫玄镇守京城。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, he appointed Wang Xi and the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shang Shouwei, to be the governors of Kyoto.

古文：辛丑，以右骁骑将军李浑为右骁卫大将军。
现代文：辛丑日，任命右骁骑将军李浑为骁卫大将军。
English: On that fateful day, he appointed the right-hand cavalry general Li Hun as the commander of the National Guard.

古文：二月己未，济北人韩进洛聚众数万为群盗。
现代文：二月十五日，济北人韩进洛聚集数万人为强盗。
English: On February 15th, tens of thousands of people from North Jeju gathered in Hanjinluo to become bandits.

古文：壬午，复宇文述等官爵。
现代文：十八日，恢复宇文述等人的官职爵位。
English: On the 18th, the official titles and ranks of Wu Wenshu and others were restored.

古文：又征兵讨高丽。
现代文：又调兵征讨高丽。
English: He also mobilized troops to conquer Korea.

古文：三月丙子，济阴人孟海公起兵为盗，众至数万。
现代文：三月初二，济阴人孟海公起兵为盗，人数多达数万。
English: On the second day of March, Meng Haigong, a resident of Jilin, raised an army of up to tens of thousands.

古文：丁丑，发丁男十万城大兴。
现代文：初三，派十万成年男子修筑大兴城。
English: On the third day of the new year, 100,000 men were conscripted to build Daxing City.

古文：戊寅，幸辽东。
现代文：初四，驾莅辽东。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the emperor went to Liaodong.

古文：以越王侗、民部尚书樊子盖留守东都。
现代文：命越王杨侗、民部尚书樊子盖留守东都。
English: Wang Yangjun, the Minister of the People's Department, Shang Shuzi and Ziguai stayed in Dongdu.

古文：庚子，北海人郭方预聚徒为盗，自号卢公，众至三万，攻陷郡城，大掠而去。
现代文：二十六日，北海人郭方预聚集徒众为盗，自称卢公，人数多达三万，攻破郡城，大肆掳掠后离去。
English: On the 26th, Guo Fangyuan, a man from the North Sea, gathered a crowd of thieves, calling themselves Lu Gong, numbering as many as thirty thousand, broke through the county seat, plundered and left.

古文：夏四月庚午，车驾渡辽。
现代文：四月二十七日，皇上渡过辽水。
English: On April 27th, the emperor crossed the Liao River.

古文：壬申，遣宇文述、杨义臣趣平壤。
现代文：二十九日，派宇文述、杨义臣率部奔赴平壤。
English: On the 29th, he sent Yu Wenshu, Yang Yichen and his entourage to Pyongyang.

古文：五月丁丑，荧惑入南斗。
现代文：五月初四，荧惑星切入南斗。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, Mars enters the Southern Cross.

古文：己卯，济北人甄宝车聚众万余，寇掠城邑。
现代文：初六，济北人甄宝车聚集万余人，骚扰掠夺城镇。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, more than ten thousand people from North Jeju gathered to attack and loot towns.

古文：六月乙巳，礼部尚书杨玄感反于黎阳。
现代文：六月初三，礼部尚书杨玄感在黎阳反叛。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, Yang Xuanxuan rebelled in Liyang.

古文：丙辰，玄感逼东都。河南赞务裴弘策拒之，反为贼所败。
现代文：丙辰，玄感率部逼近东都，河南赞务裴弘策进行抵抗，反被贼兵打败。
English: At the time of Xing Chen, the Xuan sensibility department approached Dongdu, Henan Zanwu Peihong strategy to resist, but was defeated by the thief soldiers.

古文：戊辰，兵部侍郎斛斯政奔于高丽。
现代文：二十六日，兵部侍郎斛斯政逃亡到高丽。
English: On the 26th, Hyobushojiro Gohsu defected to the Goryeo Dynasty.

古文：庚午，上班师。
现代文：二十八日，皇上率军撤退。
English: On the 28th, the emperor returned to his master.

古文：高丽犯后军，敕右武卫大将军李景为后拒。
现代文：高丽侵扰后军，命令右武卫大将军李景殿后抵御。
English: Goryeo invaded the rearguard and ordered the Right Division of the Imperial Guard, General Ri Kyong-dong, to defend the rear.

古文：遣左翊卫大将军宇文述、左候卫将军屈突通等驰传发兵，以讨玄感。
现代文：派左翊卫大将军宇文述、左候卫将军屈突通等驾驿站车马回国，调兵遣将讨伐杨玄感。
English: He sent General Yu Wenshu of the Left Division and General Qu Jutong of the Left Division back to China, and dispatched troops to fight against Yang Xuanquan.

古文：秋七月己卯，令所在发人城县府驿。
现代文：七月初七，命令各地派人修筑城防，保护县府驿站。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn, he ordered all regions to solicit people to build county and prefectural stations.

古文：癸未，余杭人刘元进举兵反，众至数万。
现代文：十一日，余杭人刘元进举兵造反，人数多达数万。
English: On the 11th day, Liu Yuanjin, a resident of Yuhang, started a mutiny, gathering tens of thousands of people.

古文：八月壬寅，左翊卫大将军宇文述等破杨玄感于阌乡，斩之，余党悉平。
现代文：八月初一，左翊卫大将军宇文述等在阌乡打败杨玄感，杀了他。余部全部平息。
English: On the first day of August, General Yu Wenshu of the Left Division of the National Guard defeated Yang Xuanxuan and killed him in Handan Township. The rest of the troops were all subdued.

古文：癸卯，吴人硃燮、晋陵人管崇拥众十万余，自称将军，寇江左。
现代文：初二，吴人朱、晋陵人管崇，聚众十万余人，自称将军，侵犯江东。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, more than 100,000 people from Zhu Xi in Wuxi and Guan Chong in Jinling gathered together, calling themselves generals and plotting in the east of the Yangtze River.

古文：甲辰，制骁果之家蠲免赋役。
现代文：初三，决定敢死队员的家庭免除租税徭役。
English: On the third day of junior high school, it was decided that the families of death-defying players would be exempt from paying taxes.

古文：丁未，诏郡县城去道过五里已上者，徙就之。
现代文：初六，诏令郡县城距离驰道超过五里以上的，要迁移到驰道附近。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the county seat was ordered to move to the side of the road if it was more than five miles away from the road.

古文：戊申，制盗贼籍没其家。
现代文：初七，规定反贼家产全部没收，反贼家人没官为奴。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, he ordered all thieves to forfeit all their family property.

古文：乙卯，贼帅陈瑱等众三万攻陷信安郡。
现代文：贼帅陈慎等三万人，攻陷信安郡。
English: Thief-commander Chen Shen and 30,000 others invaded Xin'an County.

古文：辛酉，司农卿、光禄大夫、葛国公赵元淑以罪伏诛。
现代文：二十日，司农卿、光禄大夫、葛国公赵元淑因犯罪被诛杀。
English: On the 20th, Secretary of Agriculture, Guanglu Doctor, and Ge Guogong Zhao Yuanshu were executed for their crimes.

古文：九月己卯，济阴人吴海流、东海人彭孝才并举兵为盗，众数万。
现代文：九月初八，济阴人吴海流，东海人彭孝才一同起兵当强盗，多达数万人。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month, Wu Hailiu from Jilin Province and Peng Xiaocai from the East China Sea both raised an army to steal, leading tens of thousands of soldiers.

古文：庚辰，贼帅梁慧尚率众四万陷苍梧郡。
现代文：庚辰，贼帅梁慧尚率领四万人，攻陷苍梧郡。
English: Geng Chen, the thief-commander Liang Huishang, led forty thousand people to invade Gowu County.

古文：甲午，车驾次上谷，以供费不给，上大怒，免太守虞荷等官。
现代文：二十二日，皇上驻扎在上谷，因供给费用不足，皇上大怒，免去太守虞荷等人的官职。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor was stationed in Shanggu. Due to insufficient supply costs, the emperor was furious and removed the official position of the eunuch Yu Ho and others.

古文：丁酉，东阳人李三兒、向但子举兵作乱，众至万余。
现代文：二十六日，东阳人李三儿、向但子起兵作乱，多达万余人。
English: On the 26th, Dongyang residents Li San'er and Xiang Danzi led the troops in a riot, gathering more than 10,000 people.

古文：闰月己巳，幸博陵。
现代文：闰九月二十八日，驾莅博陵。
English: On the 28th day of the leap month, the emperor went to Boling.

古文：庚午，上谓侍臣曰： 朕昔从先朝周旋于此，年甫八岁，日月不居，倏经三纪，追惟平昔，不可复希！ 
现代文：二十九日，皇上对侍奉左右的人说： 朕过去跟随先帝在此处与人应酬时，才刚刚八岁，光阴易逝，很快过了三十六年，追思往日生活，已不可再得了！ 
English: On the 29th, the Emperor said to the attendants: "I was just eight years old when I used to accompany the former emperor to entertain people here. Time passes quickly. Thirty-six years have passed quickly. It is no longer possible to live in the past.

古文：言未卒，流涕呜咽，侍卫者皆泣下沾襟。
现代文：话未说完，就泪流满面，低声哭泣，侍臣卫士们都感慨流泪，浸湿了衣襟。
English: Before he had finished speaking, he burst into tears and wept in a low voice. The bodyguards were moved to tears and their collars were wet.

古文：冬十月丁丑，贼帅吕明星率众数千围东郡，武贲郎将费青奴击斩之。
现代文：十月初七，贼帅吕明星率领几千人包围东都，虎贲郎将费青奴出击并斩杀了明星。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month, Lv Xingxing led thousands of people to encircle Dongdu, and Tigress attacked Fei Xiongnu and killed him.

古文：乙酉，诏曰： 博陵昔为定州，地居冲要，先皇历试所基，王化斯远，故以道冠《豳风》，义高姚邑。
现代文：十五日，下诏书说： 博陵从前叫定州，地处要冲，先帝曾普遍考察建立基业的地方，这地方先王的德化深远，所以认为它超过幽地的风尚，义高于舜住过的姚邑。
English: On the 15th, the next imperial edict said: Boling used to be called Dingzhou and was located in Chong. The previous emperor had generally inspected the place where the foundation was established. The virtue of the former king was far-reaching in this place, so it was considered to be more than the style of a secluded place and higher than Yaoyu, where he had lived.

古文：朕巡抚氓庶，爰屈兹邦，瞻望郊廛，缅怀敬止，思所以宣播德泽，覃被下人，崇纪显号，式光令绪。
现代文：我巡视抚慰百姓，来到这一邦国，瞻望郊野民宅，追思前代它泽及百姓，所以想尊崇这建立基业的地方，使它的名称高贵显赫，以光大先帝留下的美好事业。
English: I toured the country to comfort the people, came to this country, looked at the houses in the countryside, and thought about the previous generations and the people, so I wanted to respect this place where the foundation was established, make its name noble and prominent, and highlight the great cause left by the former emperor.

古文：可改博陵为高阳郡。赦境内死罪已下。
现代文：可把博陵改名为高阳郡，赦免境内死罪以下犯人。
English: He may rename Boling to Goyang County, and pardon prisoners convicted of capital crimes or less within the territory.

古文：给复一年。 
现代文：免除一年徭役。 
English: He will be exempted from the post of chief steward for one year.

古文：于是召高祖时故吏，皆量材授职。
现代文：于是征召高祖时代的老官吏，都衡量其才能授予职务。
English: As a result, the old officials of Gaozu's era were conscripted, and their talents were measured and given positions.

古文：壬辰，以纳言苏威为开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十二日，任命纳言苏威为开府仪同三司。
English: On the 22nd, Nagon Su Wei was appointed as the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong.

古文：硃燮、管崇推刘元进为天子。
现代文：朱、管崇推举刘元进为天子。
English: Zhu and Guanzong recommended Liu Yuanjin as the divine son.

古文：遣将军吐万绪、鱼俱罗讨之，连年不能克。
现代文：皇上派将军吐万绪、鱼俱罗去讨伐他们，连年不能战胜。
English: The emperor sent generals to fight them, and for years they were unable to defeat them.

古文：齐人孟让、王薄等众十余万，据长白山，攻剽诸郡，清河贼张金称众数万，渤海贼帅格谦自号燕王，孙宣雅自号齐王，众各十万，山东苦之。
现代文：齐人孟让、王薄等聚众十余万人，占据长白山，攻击抢掠各郡，清河贼张金称聚众数万，渤海贼帅格谦自称燕王，孙宣雅自称齐王，聚众各十万人，崤山以东深以为苦。
English: Meng Zhan, Wang Bo and other Qi people gathered more than one hundred thousand people and occupied Changbai Mountain, attacked and plundered counties, Qinghe thief Zhang Jin claimed to have gathered tens of thousands of people, Bohai thief handsome Ge Qian claimed to be Yan Wang, Sun Xuanya claimed to be Qi King, and gathered one hundred thousand people each.

古文：丁亥，以右候卫将军郭荣为右候卫大将军。
现代文：丁亥，任命右侯卫将军郭荣为右侯卫大将军。
English: On the 17th, Guo Rong, the right guard general, was appointed as the right guard general.

古文：十一月己酉，右候卫将军冯孝慈讨张金称于清河，反为所败，孝慈死之。
现代文：十一月初九，右侯卫将军冯孝慈在清河讨伐张金称，反被张金称打败，孝慈战死。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of November, Feng Xiao Ci, the right guard general, challenged Zhang Jin in Qinghe, but was defeated by Zhang, and Feng Xiao Ci died.

古文：十二月甲申，车裂玄感弟朝请大夫积善及党与十余人，仍焚而扬之。
现代文：十二月十五日，对杨玄感之弟朝请大夫杨积善及党羽十余人，执行车裂酷刑，再焚尸扬灰。
English: On December 15, Dr. Yang Jizhen and more than ten party members were invited to torture Yang Xuanquan's brother, Yang Xuanquan, and then burn his body.

古文：丁亥，扶风人向海明举兵作乱，称皇帝，建元白乌。
现代文：示八日，扶风人向海明起兵作乱，自称皇帝，立年号白马。
English: On the 18th, Fufeng people rioted against Haiming, claiming to be the emperor, and Jianyuan was Baiwu.

古文：遣太仆卿杨义臣击破之。
现代文：派遣太仆卿杨义臣率兵打败了他。
English: Emperor Qian sent his servant Yang Yichen to defeat him.

古文：十年春正月甲寅，以宗女为信义公主，嫁于突厥曷娑那可汗。
现代文：大业十年正月十五日，以宗室之女信义闺主，嫁给突厥曷娑那可汗。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the tenth year of the Spring, the daughter of the imperial family, Princess Xinyi, married the Turk Jinnakhan.

古文：二月辛未，诏百僚议伐高丽，数日无敢言者。
现代文：二月初三，命令百官商议进攻高丽的事，几天当中没有敢说话的。
English: On the third day of February, he ordered hundreds of officials to discuss the attack on Korea. For several days, no one dared to speak out.

古文：戊子，诏曰： 竭力王役，致身戎事，咸由徇义，莫匪勤诚。委命草泽，弃骸原野，兴言念之，每怀愍恻。
现代文：二十日，下诏书说： 尽力以事君王的事务，投身于战争，都是出于舍身取义，无不勤勉忠诚，牺牲在草泽之中，弃尸于原野之上，感慨追念这些，我心中常充满了悲痛之情。
English: On the 20th, the next imperial edict said: "I have devoted myself to the king's business and to the war, all out of self-sacrifice and loyalty, sacrificing in the grass and abandoning corpses in the fields. I am often filled with sorrow when I think of these things.

古文：往年出车问罪，将届辽滨，庙算胜略，具有进止。
现代文：往年出兵，兴师问罪，将至辽水之滨，由朝廷制定的克敌制胜的谋略，都有进退去留的部署。
English: In previous years, the dispatch of troops, the arraignment of officers, the march to the coast of Liao Shui, and the strategy for defeating the enemy formulated by the imperial court, all had the deployment of advancing and retreating.

古文：而谅惛凶，罔识成败，高颎愎很，本无智谋，临三军犹兒戏，视人命如草芥，不遵成规，坐贻挠退，遂令死亡者众，不及埋藏。
现代文：然而杨谅胡涂凶恶，不懂得成败的关键，高赹刚愎凶暴，根本没有智谋，他们统领三军如同儿戏，把士兵的生命看成同小草一样轻微，不遵守作战的常规，以至留下了屈服败退的结局，让士兵们死亡惨重，来不及掩埋尸骨。
English: However, Yang Peng was foolish and vicious, he did not know the key to success or failure, Gao Yao was stubborn and ferocious, and had no wisdom at all. They led the three armies like a child's play, regarded the lives of soldiers as light as grass, did not abide by the rules of war, and even left the outcome of surrender and defeat, so that the soldiers died horribly, and it was too late to bury the bones.

古文：今宜遣使人分道收葬，设祭于辽西郡，立道场一所。
现代文：现在应当派使者分道收葬阵亡士兵，在辽西郡设祭坛，建一所道场。
English: Now it is time to send emissaries to separate ways to bury the fallen soldiers, set up an altar in West Liao County, and build a dojo.

古文：恩加泉壤，庶弭穷魂之冤，泽及枯骨，用弘仁者之惠。 
现代文：把恩惠施加于九泉之下，期望能安抚坟墓中的冤魂，使恩泽降及枯骨，以此来弘大仁者的恩惠。 
English: To spread the bounty of the benevolent by showering bounty on the fountains of mercy, hoping to appease the souls in the grave, and bring down bounty on the bones of the dead.

古文：辛卯，诏曰：黄帝五十二战，成汤二十七征，方乃德施诸侯，令行天下。
现代文：二十三日，下诏书说：黄帝进行了五十二次战争，成汤发动了二十七次征讨，这才使王德施加于诸候，号令颁行于天下。
English: On the 23rd, the next imperial edict said: "The Yellow Emperor waged fifty-two wars, Cheng Tang launched twenty-seven campaigns, which made Wang De impose on the states, and the order was issued to the world.

古文：卢芳小盗，汉祖尚且亲戎，隗嚣余烬，光武犹自登陇，岂不欲除暴止戈，劳而后逸者哉！
现代文：卢芳乃小股盗贼，汉高祖尚且亲自征讨，隗嚣虽然已是残余势力，汉光武帝还亲自登陇地西征。难道不正是为了铲除暴虐，停止干戈，先辛劳然后安适吗？
English: Lu Fang was a petty thief, the Han Emperor Gao Zu still personally led the expedition, and although the rebellion was already a residual force, the Han Emperor Guangwu personally led the Western Expedition. Isn't it precisely in order to eradicate tyranny, stop the war, first work hard and then feel comfortable?

古文：朕纂成宝业，君临天下，日月所照，风雨所沾，孰非我臣，独隔声教。
现代文：我继承了帝王的事业，统治着全国各地，凡是日月所能照临，风雨所能浸润的地方，谁不是我的臣民？怎能隔断声威教化？
English: I have inherited the emperor's cause, ruling over all parts of the country. Wherever the sun and moon can shine, and the wind and rain can infiltrate, who is not my subject? How can I cut off the influence of propaganda?

古文：蕞尔高丽，僻居荒表，鸱张狼噬，侮慢不恭，抄窃我边陲，侵轶我城镇。
现代文：小小的高丽，偏居在边远地区，嚣张贪婪，轻慢不恭，掠取我边疆财富，侵袭我城镇居民。
English: Small Goryeo, living in remote areas, is arrogant, greedy and contemptuous, plundering the wealth of our borderlands and invading our townspeople.

古文：是以去岁出军，问罪辽碣，殪长蛇于玄菟，戮封豕于襄平。
现代文：因此我去年出兵，问罪于辽水、碣石，在玄菟射死凶残的首恶，在襄平诛杀贪暴的元凶。
English: Therefore, last year I sent troops to Liaoshui and Shanshi to find the culprits, to Xuanwu to shoot the main villain, and to Xiangping to kill the instigator of the violence.

古文：扶余众军，风驰电逝，追奔逐北，径逾浿水，沧海舟楫，冲贼腹心，焚其城郭，污其宫室。
现代文：扶余各部，风驰电掣，追逐逃敌，一直越过氵贝水，再者海上乘船，直冲敌腹心之地，焚毁他的城郭，污损他的宫室。
English: Supporting the remaining departments, the wind rushes the electric eel, chasing the fleeing enemy, all the way across the mussel water, and then the sea by boat, straight to the enemy's heartland, burning his castle, defiling his palace.

古文：高元伏钅质泥首，送款军门，寻请入朝，归罪司寇。
现代文：高元囚首服罪，押送至营门，随即请求入朝，到司寇处听从治罪处罚。
English: Gao Yuan, the first prisoner, pleaded guilty and was escorted to the gate of the camp. He then requested to be taken to the imperial court, and was taken to the police department to be punished for his crime.

古文：朕以许其改过，乃诏班师。
现代文：我已允许他改正过错，于是下令撤退军队。
English: I have allowed him to correct his mistake and ordered the withdrawal of the troops.

古文：而长恶靡悛，宴安鸩毒，此而可忍，孰不可容！
现代文：然而高元却经常作恶，不思悔改，贪图逸乐，就像服毒药自杀。这等恶行如可容忍，那还有什么不可容忍！
English: However, Gao Yuan often commits evil, does not repent, and craves pleasure, just like taking poison to commit suicide. If these evil deeds are tolerable, what else is intolerable!

古文：便可分命六师，百道俱进。
现代文：即可分别命令六军，从各道同时进兵。
English: That is, the six armies can be ordered separately, and the soldiers from each province can march in at the same time.

古文：朕当亲执武节，临御诸军，秣马丸都，观兵辽水，顺天诛于海外，救穷民于倒悬。
现代文：我应当亲自掌握武道，指挥众军，在丸都喂马备战，在辽水阅兵示威，顺应天意在海外诛杀顽劣，解救处境极困苦的人民。
English: I should personally master martial arts, command the troops, feed horses in Marudu to prepare for battle, parade in Liaoshui to demonstrate, and obey the will of heaven to fight the wicked overseas and rescue the people in dire straits.

古文：征伐以正之，明德以诛之，止除元恶，余无所问。
现代文：进行征战是为了纠正邪恶，阐明德威来诛灭他，只铲除元凶，其余人等不予追究。
English: The war was waged to rectify the evil, clarifying that Dulwe came to annihilate him, only eradicated the culprit, and the rest would not be investigated.

古文：若有识存亡之分，悟安危之机，翻然北首，自求多福；必其同恶相济，挤拒王师，若火燎原，刑兹无赦。
现代文：如有人能认识到存亡的道理，领悟安危的预兆，翻然悔悟，北面称臣，可以得到福佑。如果与敌人狼狈为奸，抗拒朕的军队，我军将如燎原大火，所到之处，坚决惩处，决不宽恕。
English: If someone can recognize the truth of survival and death, understand the omens of safety and danger, suddenly repent, and praise the north, he can be blessed. If he is in cahoots with the enemy and resists our army, our army will be like the fire of the plains, wherever it goes, it will be resolutely punished and will never be forgiven.

古文：有司便宜宣布，咸使知闻。
现代文：主管官员适时宣布我的诏令，使他们全都知道这一精神。
English: Benevolence is added to the earth to erase the wrongs of the lonely soul; grace to the dry bones to benefit the benevolent.

古文：丁酉，扶风人唐弼举兵反，众十万，推李弘为天子，自称唐王。
现代文：二十九日，扶风人唐弼起兵反朝廷，人数多达十万，推举李弘为天子，自称唐王。
English: On the 23rd, he issued the following edict: "I can assign six divisions and advance in a hundred directions. I should personally hold the Martial Arts Festival, lead the troops, hold a horse in Marutsu, watch the soldiers in Liao Shui, march across the sky overseas, and save the people by hanging upside down. On the 29th, Tang Xuan, the windmaker, raised an army to rebel, with 100,000 soldiers, supported Li Hongdan as emperor, and called himself Tang Wang.

古文：三月壬子，行幸涿郡。
现代文：三月十四日，皇上到涿郡。
English: On March 14th, the emperor arrived in Shixian.

古文：癸亥，次临渝宫，亲御戎服，祃祭黄帝，斩叛军者以衅鼓。
现代文：二十五日，驻扎在临渝宫，皇上亲穿军装，祭祀黄帝，斩杀叛军，用其血来涂战鼓。
English: On the 25th, stationed at the Linyu Palace, the emperor himself put on a military uniform, sacrificed to the Yellow Emperor, killed the rebels, and used their blood to paint the war drums.

古文：夏四月辛未，彭城贼张大彪聚众数万，保悬薄山为盗。
现代文：四月初四，彭城贼张大彪聚集数万人，驻守于悬薄山当强盗。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of April, Zhang Dabiao, the thief of Pengcheng, gathered tens of thousands of people and stationed himself as a robber in Xuanwu Mountain.

古文：遣榆林太守董纯击破，斩之。
现代文：皇上派榆林太守董纯打败他们，杀了张大彪。
English: The emperor sent Dong Chun, the governor of Yulin, to defeat them and kill Zhang Dabiao.

古文：甲午，车驾次北平。
现代文：二十七日，皇上车驾驻扎在北平。
English: On the 27th, the emperor arrived in Beiping.

古文：五月庚子，诏举郡孝悌廉洁各十人。
现代文：五月初三，下令各郡举拔孝敬父母、顺从兄长、操守廉洁的各十人。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, the following edict was issued to recommend ten filial piety and incorruptible persons from each county.

古文：壬寅，贼帅宋世谟陷琅邪郡。
现代文：初五，贼帅宋世谟攻陷琅笽郡。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Song Shimo, the thief-commander-in-chief, invaded Min County.

古文：庚申，延安人刘迦论举兵反，自称皇王，建元大世。
现代文：二十三日，延安人刘迦论起兵反叛，自称皇王，建年号为 大世 。
English: On the 23rd, Liu Jia, a native of Yan'an, declared that he would rise up in revolt and call himself the emperor.

古文：六月辛未，贼帅郑文雅、林宝护等众三万，陷建安郡，太守杨景祥死之。
现代文：六月初五，贼帅郑文雅、林宝护等三万人，攻陷建安郡，太守杨景祥战死。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the year, Zheng Wenya, Lin Baogu, and other leaders of the 30,000-strong army captured Jian'an County, and Yang Jingxiang, the governor, died.

古文：秋七月癸丑，车驾次怀远镇。
现代文：七月十八日，皇上车驾驻扎在怀远镇。
English: Autumn On July 17th, the emperor arrived at Huaiyuan Town.

古文：乙卯，曹国遣使贡方物。
现代文：二十日，曹国派使臣贡奉土产。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Cao sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：甲子，高丽遣使请降，囚送斛斯政。
现代文：二十九日，高丽派使臣乞降，押送斛斯政请罪。
English: On the 28th, the Koryo sent an envoy to ask for surrender and sent him back to Gyeongsangbuk-do in a prison van.

古文：上大悦。
现代文：皇上十分高兴。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was very happy.

古文：八月己巳，班师。
现代文：八月初四，大军凯旋。
English: On the 4th of August, the class teacher returned to China.

古文：庚午，右卫大将军、左光禄大夫郑荣卒。
现代文：初五，右卫大将军、左光禄大夫郑荣去世。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Zheng Rong, General of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards and Doctor of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards, passed away.

古文：冬十月丁卯，上至东都。
现代文：冬十月初三，皇上回到东都。
English: On the third day of winter in early October, the emperor arrived in Dongdu.

古文：己丑，还京师。
现代文：二十五日，返回京城。
English: On the 24th, he returned to Beijing.

古文：十一月丙申，支解斛斯政于金光门外。
现代文：十一月初三，在金光门外肢解斛斯政。十一日，在南郊祭祀。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, the government of Gansu was dismembered outside the Golden Gate.

古文：乙巳，有事于南郊。己酉，贼帅司马长安破长平郡。
现代文：十五日，贼帅司马长安攻破长平郡。
English: On the 15th, the thief Sima Chang'an broke through Changping County.

古文：乙卯，离石胡刘苗王举兵反，自称天子，以其弟六兒为永安王，众至数万。
现代文：二十一日，离石胡刘苗王起兵反叛，自称天子，命其弟六儿为永安王，人数多达数万。
English: On the twenty-first day, Liu Miao Wang from Shihwu rebelled, calling himself the Son of Heaven and naming his sixth son the King of Yongan, leading tens of thousands of soldiers.

古文：将军潘长文讨之，不能克。
现代文：派将军潘长文去讨伐，未能战胜。
English: General Pan Changwen went to advance and failed to capture it.

古文：是月，贼帅王德仁拥众数万，保林虑山为盗。
现代文：这一月，贼帅王德仁拥有数万之众，驻守林虑山当强盗。
English: That month, the thief Wang Deren gathered tens of thousands of people to occupy Linxi Mountain.

古文：十二月壬申，上如东都。
现代文：十二月初九，皇上到东都去。
English: On the ninth day of the twelfth month, the emperor went to Dongdu.

古文：其日，大赦天下。
现代文：那一天，对天下实行大赦。
English: On that day, a general amnesty was declared for the whole world.

古文：戊子，入东都。
现代文：二十五日，皇上进入东都。
English: On the 25th, he entered Dongdu.

古文：庚寅，贼帅孟让众十余万，据都梁宫。遣江都郡丞王世充击破之，尽虏其众。
现代文：二十七日，贼帅孟让率众十余万，占据都梁宫，皇上派江都郡丞王世充打败了他，全部俘虏了他众多的部属。
English: On the 27th, the bandit general Meng Jang led more than one hundred thousand people to occupy the Du Liang Palace. The emperor sent Jiangdu County Warlord Wang Shichong to defeat him and captured all of his numerous subordinates.

古文：十一年春正月甲午朔，大宴百僚。
现代文：大业十一年正月初一，大宴百官。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eleventh year of the Taiei era, a grand banquet was held for hundreds of officials.

古文：突厥、新罗、靺鞨、毕大辞、诃咄、传越、乌那曷、波腊、吐火罗、俱虑建、忽论、靺鞨、诃多、沛汗、龟兹、疏勒、于阗、安国、曹国、何国、穆国、毕、衣密、失范延、伽折、契丹等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：突厥、新罗？毕大辞、诃咄、传越、乌那曷、波腊、吐火罗、俱虑建、忽论、诃多、氵市汗、龟兹、疏勒、于阆、安国、曹国、何国、穆国、毕、衣密、失范延、伽折、契丹等国都派使臣朝贡。
English: Turkestan, Silla, Bidaoji, Xingyi, Chuanyue, Unaqi, Bala, Tuhuaro, Qiuqianjian, Huonan, Qudao, Shichikang, Kuez, Shule, Yuqi, An Guo, Cao Guo, He Guo, Mu Guo, Bi, Shimi, Shufanyan, Qili, Qidan and other countries all sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：戊戌，武贲郎将高建毗破贼帅颜宣政于齐郡，虏男女数千口。
现代文：初五，虎贲郎将高建毗在齐郡打败贼帅颜宣政，俘虏男女数千人。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Tigress led Gao Jianbei to defeat the thief Yan Xuanzheng in Qi County, capturing thousands of men and women.

古文：乙卯，大会蛮夷，设鱼龙曼延之乐，颁赐各有差。
现代文：二十二日，大会蛮夷，表演鱼龙蔓延百戏之乐，颁赏各不相同。
English: On the 22nd, the conference was wild, performing the music of the hundred plays spread by the fish and dragon, and the awards were different.

古文：二月戊辰，贼帅杨仲绪率众万余，攻北平，滑公李景破斩之。
现代文：二月初五，贼帅杨仲绪率万余人攻北平。滑公李景击败并杀了他。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, the thief Yang Zhongxu led more than ten thousand people to attack Beiping. The slippery Li Jing defeated and killed him.

古文：庚午，诏曰： 设险守国，著自前经，重门御暴，事彰往策，所以宅土宁邦，禁邪固本。
现代文：初七，下诏书说： 设险守国，前代经典早已写明这一道理，设置层层门户抵御强暴，往昔的简策上已有明确记载。凭借它可使国土安定，郡国安宁，禁绝邪恶，坚固根本。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the next imperial edict said: "Prepare for danger and defend the country, the previous generation of classics has already written this principle, and the establishment of layers of portals to resist violence has been clearly recorded in the past simple strategy. With it, the country can be stable, the county can be peaceful, evil can be prohibited, and the foundation can be solid.

古文：而近代战争，居人散逸，田畴无伍，郛郭不修，遂使游惰实繁，寇襄未息。
现代文：然而近代由于战争频繁，居民逃散，田地上没有成群耕种的人，城郭没有整治，遂使游手好闲之人大量增加，偷盗抢劫行为屡发不止。
English: However, due to frequent wars in modern times, residents fled and dispersed, there were no hordes of farmers in the fields, and the city walls were not repaired. As a result, there was a large increase in idlers, and thefts and robberies occurred repeatedly.

古文：今天下平一，海内晏如，宜令人悉城居，田随近给，使强弱相容，力役兼济，穿窬无所厝其奸宄，萑蒲不得聚其逋逃。
现代文：现在天下统一，海内安然，应当让百姓全部筑城而居，就近供给田地，使强弱互相容纳，劳役合力互助。这样一来，穿壁翻墙的盗窃者将无处藏匿那些为非作歹的行为，芦苇丛密之地也不得再聚集逃亡的罪人。
English: Now that the country is unified and the sea is safe, all the people should be allowed to build cities and live in them, and the fields should be provided nearby, so that the strong and the weak can accommodate each other, and the laborers can help each other. In this way, the thieves who break through the wall will have nowhere to hide those who commit evil deeds, and the reed-clustered land will no longer be able to gather fleeing sinners.

古文：有司具为事条，务令得所。 
现代文：主管官员要准备好办事条例，务令百姓各得其所。 
English: The officials in charge should prepare the rules of procedure and order the people to go their own way.

古文：丙子，上谷人王须拔反，自称漫天王，国号燕，贼帅魏刁兒自称历山飞，众各十余万，北连突厥，南寇赵。
现代文：丙子，上谷人王须拔造反，自称 漫天王 ，国号燕，贼帅魏刁儿自称 历山飞 。各率十余万之众，在边塞联合突厥，向南侵扰赵地。
English: Bongzi, the king of the Shang Valley people, had to rebel, claiming to be the King of Heaven, the country name Yan, and the thief Wei Wei Er claimed to be Leshanfei. More than a hundred thousand people each joined the Turks at the border fortress and invaded Zhao Di to the south.

古文：五月丁酉，杀右骁卫大将军、光禄大夫、郕公李浑，将作监、光禄大夫李敏，并族灭其家。
现代文：五月初六，杀右骁卫大将军、光禄大夫、成阝公李浑，将作监、光禄大夫李敏，并消灭他们的家族。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month of the year, they killed General Yu Xianwei, Doctor Guanglu, and Li Hun, the governor of Chengdu, and Li Min, the doctor of Guanglu, and wiped out their families.

古文：癸卯，贼帅司马长安破西河郡。
现代文：十二日，贼帅司马长安攻破西河郡。
English: On the 12th, Sima Chang'an, the thief-in-chief, broke through Xihe County.

古文：己酉，幸太原，避暑汾阳宫。
现代文：十八日，皇上驾临太原，在汾阳宫避暑。
English: On the 17th, the emperor went to the Poyang Palace to spend the summer.

古文：秋七月己亥，淮南人张起绪举兵为盗，众至三万。
现代文：七月初九，淮南人张起绪起兵为盗，聚众三万。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn and the 7th day of the 7th month of the year, Zhang Qi of Huainan raised an army of bandits, gathering up to 30,000 people.

古文：辛丑，光禄大夫、右御卫大将军张寿卒。
现代文：二十一日，光禄大夫、右御卫大将军张寿死。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Dr. Guanglu and General Zhang Shou passed away.

古文：八月乙丑，巡北塞。
现代文：八月初五，巡视北部边塞。
English: On the fifth day of August, they inspected the northern border fortress.

古文：戊辰，突厥始毕可汗率骑数十万，谋袭乘舆，义成公主遣使告变。
现代文：初八，突厥始毕可汗率领数十万骑兵，谋划袭击皇上，义成公主派使臣来报告事变。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the Turkic calendar, Bikhan led hundreds of thousands of cavalry and planned to attack the emperor. Princess Yicheng sent an envoy to report the incident.

古文：壬申，车驾驰幸雁门。
现代文：十二日，皇上疾行雁门。
English: On the 12th, the car drove quickly to the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：癸酉，突厥围城，官军频战不利。
现代文：十三日，突厥围困城池，官军屡战不胜。
English: On the 13th, the Turks besieged the city, and the officers and soldiers failed in many battles.

古文：上大惧，欲率精骑溃围而出，民部尚书樊子盖固谏乃止。
现代文：皇上十分恐惧，想率领精锐骑兵突围出去，因民部尚书樊子盖坚持劝阻才放弃突围的打算。
English: The emperor was very afraid and wanted to lead the elite cavalry to break out of the encirclement, but only gave up the plan to break out because the Ministry of Civil Affairs persisted in dissuading him.

古文：齐王暕以后军保于崞县。
现代文：齐王杨率西军在崞县筑堡保护皇上。
English: After the invasion of Japan and Cambodia by King Qi, the army held fast to Min County.

古文：甲申，诏天下诸郡募兵，于是守令各来赴难。
现代文：二十四日，诏令天下各郡招募士兵，于是，郡守县令各自率部赶来拯救危险。
English: On the 24th, the Emperor ordered all the counties in the country to recruit soldiers, so the county governors led their respective departments to come and save the danger.

古文：九月甲辰，突厥解围而去。
现代文：九月十五日，突厥解除对雁门的包围，撤走了部队。
English: On September 15, the Turks left.

古文：丁未，曲赦太原、雁门郡死罪已下。
现代文：十八日，因特殊情况而赦免太原、雁门郡死罪以下犯人。
English: On the 18th, due to special circumstances, Taiyuan and Ganmen County were pardoned from the death penalty.

古文：冬十月壬戌，上至于东都。
现代文：十月初三，皇上到达东都。
English: On the third day of winter in early October, the emperor arrived in Dongdu.

古文：丁卯，彭城人魏骐麟聚众万余为盗，寇鲁郡。
现代文：初十，彭城人魏骐駘聚众万余人当强盗，骚扰鲁郡。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Pengcheng resident Wei Wei gathered more than ten thousand people to be robbers and harass Lu County.

古文：壬申，贼帅卢明月聚众十余万，寇陈、汝间。
现代文：十五日贼帅卢明月聚众十余万，侵扰陈、汝地区。
English: On the 13th, the bandit Lu Mingyue gathered more than one hundred thousand people to invade Chen and Ru.

古文：东海贼帅李子通拥众度淮，自号楚王，建元明政，寇江都。
现代文：东海贼帅李子通拥众兵渡过淮河，自号 楚王 ，建年号为 明政 ，侵扰江都。
English: The East Sea thief Li Zi Tong crossed the Huai River with many soldiers, calling himself King Chu, founded in the Ming Dynasty, and invaded Jiangdu.

古文：十一月乙卯，贼帅王须拔破高阳郡。
现代文：十一月二十七日，贼帅王须拔攻破高阳郡。
English: On November 27th, the thief and general Wang Subao captured Goyang County.

古文：十二月戊寅，有大流星如斛，坠明月营，破其冲车。
现代文：十二月二十日，有像斛那样大的流星，坠入军营，砸坏了攻城用的战车。
English: On December 20th, a large meteor fell into Lu Mingyue's military camp, destroying his vehicle.

古文：庚辰，诏民部尚书樊子盖发关中兵，讨绛郡贼敬盘陀、柴保昌等，经年不能克。
现代文：二十二日，诏令民部尚书樊子盖调关中兵士，讨伐绛郡贼敬盘陀、柴保昌等，过了一年也不能战胜。
English: On the 22nd, he ordered the Ministry of People's Affairs to dispatch soldiers from Guanzhong to fight against the bandits of Qixian County, such as Jingpan Da and Chai Baochang. After a year, they could not defeat them.

古文：谯郡人硃粲拥众数十万，寇荆襄，僭称楚帝，建元昌达，汉南诸郡多为所陷焉。
现代文：谯郡人朱粲拥有数十万人，侵扰荆襄，自称 楚帝 ，建年号为 昌达 。汉南诸郡多被他攻陷。
English: Zhu Xi, a native of Zeng County, owned hundreds of thousands of people and invaded Jingxiang, calling himself Emperor Chu, with the year of foundation as Changda. Most of the counties in Hannan were conquered by him.

古文：十二年春正月甲午，雁门人翟松柏起兵于灵丘，众至数万，转攻傍县。
现代文：大业十二年正月初七，雁门人翟松柏在灵丘起兵，众达数万人，进攻附近各县。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of the 12th year of the Spring, the people of Ganmen, led by Zou Songbo, raised an army in Lingqiu, gathered tens of thousands of people, and attacked the surrounding counties.

古文：二月己未，真腊国遣使贡方物。
现代文：二月初二，真腊国派使臣进贡土产。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：甲子夜，有二大鸟似雕，飞入大业殿，止于御幄，至明而去。
现代文：初八夜，有两只像雕的大鸟，飞入大业殿，停在御前的帐幕上，天明后飞走。
English: On the evening of the seventh day of the first month, two large birds resembling eagles flew into the Great Hall of the Work and rested among the emperor's curtains. They did not leave until dawn.

古文：癸亥，东海贼卢公暹率众万余，保于苍山。
现代文：初五，东海贼卢公暹率万余人，据守在苍山。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, more than ten thousand people led by the East Sea thief Lu Gong Sie occupied Cangshan.

古文：夏四月丁巳，显阳门灾。
现代文：四月初一，显阳门发生火灾。
English: On the first day of April in summer, a fire broke out at the Xianyang Gate.

古文：癸亥，魏刁兒所部将甄翟兒复号历山飞，众十万，转寇太原。
现代文：初七，魏刁儿部下的将领甄翟儿又自称 历山飞 ，率领十万之众，转而进攻太原。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Zhen Yuer, the general of Wei Yuer's subordinates, also called himself Leshan Fei, led a hundred thousand people, and attacked Taiyuan.

古文：将军潘长文讨之，反为所败，长文死之。
现代文：将军潘长文率兵讨伐，反被打败，长文战死。
English: General Pan Changwen went to collect, but was defeated, and Pan Changwen died.

古文：五月丙戌朔，日有蚀之，既。
现代文：五月初一，有日蚀，是全蚀。
English: On the first day of May, there was a total solar eclipse. On the eighth day of the first month, a large meteorite landed in Wuxi County. It was made of stone.

古文：癸巳，大流星陨于吴郡，为石。
现代文：初八，大流星陨落在吴郡，变成石头。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, a large meteorite landed in Wuxi County and turned into stone.

古文：壬午，上于景华宫征求萤火，得数斛，夜出游山，放之，光遍岩谷。
现代文：壬午日，皇上在景华宫求取萤火虫，得到数斛，晚间皇上出宫游山时，把萤火虫放了，萤光照遍山谷。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, the emperor asked for fireflies in the Jinghua Palace and got several dragonflies. In the evening, when the emperor went out of the palace to visit the mountains, he released the fireflies, and the fluorescence shined all over the valley.

古文：秋七月壬戌，民部尚书、光禄大夫济北公樊子盖卒。
现代文：七月初八，民部尚书、光禄大夫、济北公樊子盖死。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of the year, the Minister of People's Affairs, Shangshu, the doctor of Guanglu, and the governor of Jibei died.

古文：甲子，幸江都宫，以越王侗、光禄大夫段达、太府卿元文都、检校民部尚书韦津、右武卫将军皇甫无逸、右司郎卢楚等总留后事。
现代文：初十，皇上驾临江都宫，命越王杨侗、光禄大夫段达、太府卿元文都、检梭民部尚书韦津、右武卫将军皇甫无逸、右司郎卢楚等人总管留守后方的事宜。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the emperor arrived at the Jiangdu Palace, and ordered Wang Yangqi, Guanglu Dr. Danda, Dafu Sir Yuan Wentu, Kiso Minbu Shangshu Weitin, Ubuwei General Wang Fu Muyu, and Ujiro Ruchu to be in charge of the affairs in the rear.

古文：奉信郎崔民象以盗贼充斥，于建国门上表，谏不宜巡幸。
现代文：奉信郎崔民象以盗贼比比皆是为由，于建国门上表，劝皇上不宜巡游。
English: On the grounds that thieves were everywhere, Bongsin Lang Choi Minzang appeared at the gate of the founding of the country and advised the emperor not to go on a tour.

古文：上大怒，先解其颐，乃斩之。
现代文：皇上大怒，叫人先割去崔的下巴，再砍头。
English: Enraged, the emperor first gouged out his jaw and then beheaded him.

古文：戊辰，冯翊人孙华自号总管，举兵为盗。
现代文：十四日，冯翊人孙华自称 总管 ，起兵当强盗。
English: On the 14th, Sun Hua, a member of the Fenghuang Clan, claimed to be the chief steward and raised an army to steal.

古文：高凉通守洗珤彻举兵作乱，岭南溪洞多应之。
现代文：高凉通守洗彻起兵作乱，岭南溪洞人大多响应他。
English: Gao Liang Tong Shou Zecheng started a riot, and most of the people in Lingnan Creek Cave responded to him.

古文：己巳，荧惑守羽林，月余乃退。
现代文：十五日，荧惑星停在羽林星座，一个多月才退去。
English: On the fifteenth day, Mars occupied the feather forest, and left more than a month later.

古文：车驾次汜水，奉信郎王爱仁以盗贼日盛，谏上请还西京。
现代文：皇上车驾驻扎在汜水，奉信郎王爱仁因盗贼日益猖獗，劝请皇上返回西京。
English: The emperor's carriage was stationed in Surabaya, and it was believed that his son, King Aijin, was urging the emperor to return to Saikyo because thieves were becoming increasingly rampant.

古文：上怒，斩之而行。
现代文：皇上愤怒，杀了王爱仁，后继续巡行。
English: The emperor was enraged and killed Wang Airen, after which the parade continued.

古文：八月乙巳，贼帅赵万海众数十万，自恆山寇高阳。
现代文：八月二十一日，贼帅赵万海率众数十万，从恒山出发，侵犯高阳。
English: On August 21st, the thief Zhao Wanhai led hundreds of thousands of people to invade Gaoyang from Hengshan.

古文：壬子，有大流星如斗，出王良阁道，声如隤墙。
现代文：二十八日，有斗大的流星，出现在王良、阁道星座，声音洪大好像城垣倒塌。
English: On the 28th, a large meteor appeared in the constellation of Wang Liang and Gaodou. The sound was so loud that it sounded like a city wall collapsing.

古文：癸丑，大流星如彳育攵，出羽林。
现代文：二十九日，像瓮一样的大流星，出现在羽林星座处。
English: On the 29th, a large meteor like a dragonfly appeared in the constellation of Hauraki.

古文：九月丁酉，东海人杜扬州、沈觅敌等作乱，众至数万。
现代文：九月初四，东海人杜扬州、沈觅敌等作乱，人数达数万。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of September, tens of thousands of people from the East China Sea, including Du Yangzhou and Shen Guofeng, rioted.

古文：右御卫将军陈棱击破之。
现代文：右御卫将军陈棱击败了他们。
English: The Right Guard General Chen Ren defeated them.

古文：戊午，有二枉矢出北斗魁，委曲蛇形，注于南斗。
现代文：初五，有两颗枉矢星出现在北斗星座的魁星处，运行轨迹曲折辗转像蛇的形状，然后，汇集向南斗星座。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, two false stars appeared in the constellation of the Big Dipper at the location of the star of the same name. Their trajectory twists and turns like the shape of a snake, and then converges towards the constellation of the Big Dipper.

古文：壬戌，安定人荔非世雄杀临泾令，举兵作乱，自号将军。
现代文：初九，安定人荔非世雄杀临泾县令，起兵作乱，自号 将军 。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the stable man Lih Fei Shixiong killed the Linyi County magistrate, started a riot, and appointed himself as a general.

古文：冬十月己丑，开府仪同三司、左翊卫大将军、光禄大夫、许公宇文述薨。
现代文：十月二十六，开府仪同三司、左翊卫大将军、光禄大夫、许公宇文述死。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of winter, Kaifu Yi passed away, along with the 3rd Division, General Zuo Jianwei, Doctor Guanglu, and Xu Gongyu Wenshu.

古文：十二月癸未，鄱阳贼操天成举兵反，自号元兴王，建元始兴，攻陷豫章郡。
现代文：十二月初一，鄱阳贼操天成起兵反叛，自称 元兴王 ，建年号 始兴 ，攻陷豫章郡。
English: On the first day of December, the Poyang bandits led by Tiancheng rebelled, claiming to be the King of Yuanxing, the year of the founding of Yuanxing, and captured Yuzhang County.

古文：乙酉，以右翊卫大将军来护兒为开府仪同三司、行左翊卫大将军。
现代文：初三，任命右翊卫大将军来护儿为开府仪同三司、行左翊卫大将军。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, he appointed the right guard major general to take care of the children as the Kaifu ceremony with the three departments and the left guard major general.

古文：壬辰，鄱阳人林士弘自称皇帝，国号楚，建元太平，攻陷九江、庐陵郡。
现代文：壬辰，鄱阳人林士弘自称皇帝，国号楚，建年号为 太平 ，攻陷九江、庐陵郡。
English: Lin Shihong, a native of Rencheng and Shenyang, proclaimed himself emperor of the Chu Kingdom, which was founded under the name of Taiping, and conquered Jiujiang and Fuling County.

古文：唐公破甄翟兒于西河，掳男女数千口。
现代文：唐公李渊在西河打败甄翟儿，俘虏男女数千人。
English: Tang Prince Li Yuan defeated Zhen Yuer in the West River and captured thousands of men and women.

古文：十三年春正月壬子，齐郡贼杜伏威率众渡淮，攻陷历阳郡。
现代文：大业十三年正月初一，齐郡贼杜伏威率部渡过淮河，攻陷历阳郡。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 13th year of Daye, Du Fuwei, a thief from Qi County, crossed the Huai River and invaded Liyang County.

古文：丙辰，勃海贼窦建德设坛于河间之乐寿，自称长乐王，建元丁丑。
现代文：初五，勃海贼窦建德在河间的乐寿设立坛场，自称 长乐王 ，建年号为 丁丑 。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Erhai thief Dou Jiande set up an altar in the Le Shou of the river, calling himself the Changle King, and the year of establishment was Dingwu.

古文：辛巳，贼帅徐圆朗率众数千，破东平郡。
现代文：初十，贼帅徐圆朗率领数千人，攻破东平郡。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the thief-commander Xu Yuanlang led thousands of people to break through Dongping County.

古文：弘化人刘企成聚众万余人为盗，傍郡苦之。
现代文：弘化人刘企成聚众万余人当强盗，邻郡感到苦恼。
English: Liu Qicheng, a resident of Honghua, gathered more than ten thousand people to be robbers, and the neighboring counties were distressed.

古文：二月壬午，朔方人梁师都杀郡丞唐世宗，据郡反，自称大丞相。
现代文：二月初一，朔方人梁师都杀郡丞唐世宗，占据郡城造反，自称 大丞相 。
English: On the first day of February, all the members of the Shuo faction and Liang Shizong killed the county magistrate Tang Shizong, occupied the county seat and rebelled, calling themselves the grand marshals.

古文：遣银青光禄大夫张世隆击之，反为所败。
现代文：皇上派银青光禄大夫张世隆公攻打他，反被打败。
English: He sent Zhang Shilong, a silver-haired doctor of Qing Guanglu, to attack, but was defeated.

古文：戊子，贼帅王子英破上谷郡。
现代文：初七，贼帅王子英攻破上谷郡。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the thief Prince Ying defeated Shanggu County.

古文：己丑，马邑校尉刘武周杀太守王仁恭，举兵作乱，北连突厥，自称定杨可汗。
现代文：初八，马邑校尉刘武周杀太守王仁恭，起兵作乱，向北联合突厥，自称 定杨可汗 。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Liu Wuzhou, a lieutenant of Ma'iyu, killed the imperial governor Wang Rinkong, started a riot, allied with the Turks in the north, and called himself Ding Yang Khan.

古文：庚寅，贼帅李密、翟让等陷兴洛仓。
现代文：初九贼帅李密、翟让等攻占兴洛仓。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, the thieves Li Mi and Xuan Zhan conquered Xingluo Cang.

古文：越王侗遣武贲郎将刘长恭、光禄少卿房崱击之，反为所败，死者十五六。
现代文：越王杨侗派虎贲郎将刘长恭、光禄少卿房萴进攻他，反被打败，十分之五六的官兵战死。
English: Yue Wangjun sent Wu Yulang to attack Liu Changqing and Guanglu Shaoqing Fangshan, but they were defeated, and 56 out of 10 died.

古文：庚子，李密自号魏公，称元年，开仓以振群盗，众至数十万，河南诸郡相继皆陷焉。
现代文：十八日，李密自称 魏公 ，称元年，打开粮仓，赈救群盗，部属多达数十万人，黄河以南各郡相继被他攻占。
English: On the 18th, Li Mi, calling himself Wei Gong, said that in the first year of the year, he opened the granary, rescued the bandits, and had as many as hundreds of thousands of subordinates. Counties south of the Yellow River were successively occupied by him.

古文：壬寅，刘武周破武贲郎将王智辩于桑乾镇，智辩死之。
现代文：二十一日，刘武周在桑乾镇打败虎贲郎将王智辩，王智辩战死。
English: On the twenty-first day, Liu Wuzhou defeated the military commander Wang Zhifen in Sangqian Town, and Wang Zhifen died.

古文：三月戊午，庐江人张子路举兵反。遣右御卫将军陈棱讨平之。
现代文：三月初八，庐江人张子路起兵造反，皇上派右御卫将军陈棱征讨平定了他。
English: On the eighth day of the third month of the year, Zhang Zilu, a native of the Minjiang River, started a mutiny. The emperor dispatched Chen Ren, the right guard general, to quell the rebellion.

古文：丁丑，贼帅李通德众十万寇庐江，左屯卫将军张镇州击破之。
现代文：二十七日，贼帅李通德率众十万，侵扰庐江，左屯卫将军张镇州击败了他。
English: On the 27th, the bandit general Li Tongde's army of 100,000 people invaded the Minjiang River, and the Left Tunwei general Zhang Zhenzhou defeated them.

古文：夏四月癸未，金城校尉薛举率众反，自称西秦霸王，建元秦兴，攻陷陇右诸郡。
现代文：四月初三，金城校尉薛举率众造反，自称 西秦霸王 ，建年号 秦兴 ，攻陷陇右诸郡。
English: On the third day of the fourth month, Jincheng Lieutenant Xue led the rebellion, claiming to be the Western Qin overlord, founding year name Qin Xing, and invaded the counties on the right bank of the Yunnan River.

古文：己丑，贼帅孟让夜入东都外郭，烧丰都市而去。
现代文：初九，贼帅孟让，夜入东都外城，焚烧丰都市后离去。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the thief Meng Zhan entered the Dongdu Outer City at night, burned the city of Fengdu and then left.

古文：癸巳，李密陷回洛东仓。
现代文：十三日，李密攻陷回洛东仓。
English: On the 13th, Li Mi recaptured Luodongcang.

古文：丁酉，贼帅房宪伯陷汝阴郡。
现代文：十七日，贼帅房宪伯攻陷汝阴郡。
English: On the 17th, the thief Shuai Fang Xianbo captured Ruyin County.

古文：是月，光禄大夫裴仁基、淮阳太守赵佗等并以众叛归李密。
现代文：这一个月，光禄大夫裴仁基、淮阳太守赵佗等都率众叛归李密。
English: In this month, Guanglu doctor Pei Renji, Huaiyang governor Zhao Wei and others all led the crowd to rebel against Li Mi.

古文：五月辛酉，夜有流星如彳育攵坠于江都。
现代文：五月十二日，夜间有大如瓮的流星，坠入江都。
English: On the night of May 12th, a meteor as big as a dragonfly crashed into Jiangdu.

古文：甲子，唐公起义师于太原。
现代文：十五日，唐公李渊在太原兴起义军。
English: On the 15th, Tang Prince Li Yuan raised a rebel army in Taiyuan.

古文：丙寅，突厥数千寇太原，唐公击破之。
现代文：十七日，突厥数千人侵犯太原，唐公打败了他们。
English: On the 17th, several thousand Turks invaded Taiyuan and were defeated by Tang.

古文：秋七月壬子，荧惑守积尸。
现代文：七月初四，荧惑星停在积尸星的位置。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of autumn, Mars occupies the position of the corpse.

古文：丙辰，武威人李轨举兵反，攻陷河西诸郡，自称凉王，建元安乐。
现代文：初八，武威人李轨起兵造反，攻陷黄河以北诸郡，自称 凉王 ，建年号为 安乐 。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Li Li, a Wuwei man, rebelled and invaded the counties north of the Yellow River. He called himself Liangwang, and his founding year was Anle.

古文：八月辛巳，唐公破武牙郎将宋老生于霍邑，斩之。
现代文：八月初三，唐公在霍邑打败武牙郎将宋老生，将他斩首。
English: On the third day of the first month of August, Tang Gong defeated Wu Ya Lang's general Song Laosheng in Huoyu and beheaded him.

古文：九月己丑，帝括江都人女寡妇以配从兵。
现代文：九月初一，皇上搜求江都百姓的女儿及寡妇，强行与他的随从士兵婚配。
English: On the first day of September, the emperor searched for the daughters and widows of the people in Jiangdu and forced them to marry his soldiers.

古文：是月，武阳郡丞元宝藏以郡叛归李密，与贼帅李文相攻陷黎阳仓。
现代文：这一月，武阳郡丞元宝藏叛变，带全郡归降李密，并与贼帅李文相并力攻陷黎阳仓。
English: In the same month, the county treasurer of Wuyang County, Zheng Yuan Baozang, rebelled with his county and attached himself to Li Mi, and together with the thief commander Li Wenxiang, he attacked Li Yangcang.

古文：彗星见于营室。
现代文：彗星显现于营室星座。
English: The comet appeared in the camp room.

古文：冬十月丁亥，太原杨世洛聚众万余人，寇掠城邑。
现代文：冬十月初十，太原人杨世洛聚集万余人，侵犯掠夺城邑。
English: On the tenth day of the tenth month of the winter, more than ten thousand people gathered in Yang Shiloh, Taiyuan, to invade and plunder the city.

古文：丙申，罗令萧铣以县反，鄱阳人董景珍以反，迎铣于罗县，号为梁王，攻陷傍郡。
现代文：十九日，罗县县令萧铣据县反叛，鄱阳人董景珍据郡反叛，到罗县迎接萧铣，称为 梁王 ，攻陷附近的郡县。
English: On the 19th, Luo County Governor Xiao Yu rebelled against Luo County, and Dong Jing Zhen rebelled against Luo County. He went to Luo County to welcome Xiao Yu, known as Liang Wang, to attack the nearby counties.

古文：戊戌，武贲郎将高毗败济北郡贼甄宝车于监山。
现代文：戊戍，虎贲郎将高毗在山监山打败济北郡贼甄宝车。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wu Yulang defeated Gao Bi in the mountain supervision mountain and defeated the thief screening treasure car in Jibei County.

古文：十一月丙辰，唐公入京师。
现代文：十一月初九，唐公进入京城。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month, Tang Gong entered Beijing.

古文：辛酉，遥尊帝为太上皇，立代王侑为帝，改元义宁。
现代文：十四日，唐公遥尊皇上为太上皇，立代王杨侑为皇帝，改年号为 义宁 。
English: On the 14th day of the month, Emperor Zonglu became the Emperor Emeritus, Emperor Wang Rong was established, and the era name was changed to Yining.

古文：上起宫丹阳，将逊于江左。
现代文：皇上在丹阳兴建宫室，准备在江左退位。
English: The emperor built a palace in Danyang and prepared to abdicate in Jiangzuo.

古文：有乌鹊来巢幄帐，驱不能止。
现代文：有乌鸦来在帐幕上筑巢，驱赶也不能止住。
English: A crow came to build a nest on the curtain rod, and I couldn't drive it away.

古文：荧惑犯太微。
现代文：荧惑星进入太微星座。
English: Mars is too faint.

古文：有石自江浮入于扬子。
现代文：有石头从长江浮入扬子。
English: There are stones floating from the Yangtze River into the Yangtze.

古文：日光四散如流血。
现代文：阳光四射光芒如血。
English: The sunlight shines like blood.

古文：上甚恶之。
现代文：皇上对此十分厌恶。
English: The Emperor was very disgusted by this.

古文：二年三月，右屯卫将军宇文化及，武贲郎将司马德戡、元礼，监门直阁裴虔通，将作少监宇文智及，武勇郎将赵行枢，鹰扬郎将孟景，内史舍人元敏，符玺郎李覆、牛方裕，千牛左右李孝本、弟孝质，直长许弘仁、薛世良，城门郎唐奉义，医正张恺等，以骁果作乱，入犯宫闱。
现代文：义宁二年三月，右屯卫将军宇文化及，虎贲郎将司马德戡，元礼，监门直阁裴虔通，将作少监宇文智及，武勇郎将赵行枢，鹰扬郎将孟景，内史舍人元敏，符玺郎李覆、牛方裕，千牛左右李孝本，孝本弟弟孝质，直长许弘仁、薛世良，城门郎唐奉义，医正张恺等，率勇猛敢死的人作乱，进犯皇宫。
English: In March of the second year of Yining, U Bunka, the general of the Right Tunwei, Sima Deya, the general of the Tiger Fist, Genrei, the gatekeeper Jiage Pei Qian Tong, U Wenshi, the junior warden, Zhao Xinghu, the general of the Eagle Fist, Meng Jing, the general of the Inner History, Yuan Min, the general of the Feather Fist, Li Zhe, the general of the Cow Fist, Li Xiaobang, the general of the Thousand Cattle Fist, Li Xiaobang, the brother of Xiaobang, the general of the Straight Fist, Xu Hongren,

古文：上崩于温室，时年五十。
现代文：皇上驾崩于温室，时年五十。
English: The emperor died in a greenhouse at the age of fifty.

古文：萧后令宫人撤床箦为棺以埋之。
现代文：萧皇后命宫人拆掉床板做棺材埋葬皇上。
English: Empress Xiao ordered the palace staff to remove the bed board to make a coffin to bury the emperor.

古文：化及发后，右御卫将军陈棱奉梓宫于成象殿，葬吴公台下。发敛之始，容貌若生，众咸异之。
现代文：宇文化及最后离开，右御卫将军陈棱在成象殿奉侍皇上的灵柩，埋葬在吴公台下，入殓之时，皇上容貌好像活着似的，大家都觉得奇怪。
English: Yu Wenhua and finally left, the right guard general Chen Ren served as the emperor's coffin in Chengxiang Hall, buried under Wu Gongdai. When he entered the coffin, the emperor's appearance seemed to be alive, which everyone found strange.

古文：大唐平江南之后，改葬雷塘。
现代文：大唐平定江南之后，将隋炀帝改葬于雷塘。
English: After Datang subdued the south of the Yangtze River, he was reburied in Letang.

古文：初，上自以籓王，次不当立，每矫情饰行，以钓虚名，阴有夺宗之计。
现代文：当初，皇上自认为凭藩王身份，按等次不应立为太子，于是常常掩饰真情，粉饰行为，用手段猎取虚名，暗中有夺取太子之位的计划。
English: At first, the emperor thought that he should not be elevated to the position of crown prince by virtue of his status as the king of the domain, so he often concealed his true feelings, whitewashed his actions, used means to gain a false reputation, and secretly had a plan to seize the position of crown prince.

古文：时高祖雅信文献皇后，而性忌妾媵。
现代文：当时高祖非常宠信文献皇后，而皇后忌恨侍妾。
English: At that time, Gao Zu was very fond of the empress, and the empress abhorred concubines.

古文：皇太子勇内多嬖幸，以此失爱。
现代文：皇太子杨勇在宫内有许多宠爱的侍妾，因此失去皇后的喜爱。
English: Crown Prince Yang Yong has many favorite concubines in the palace, so he has lost the queen's favor.

古文：帝后庭有子，皆不育之，示无私宠，取媚于后。
现代文：炀帝有儿子在后宫，他都不亲自抚养，以表示自己别无儿女私情，以此来讨好皇后。
English: Emperor Qian had a son in his harem, but he did not raise him himself, to show that he had no other children or personal feelings, in order to please the queen.

古文：大臣用事者，倾心与交。
现代文：对当权的大臣，他倾心同他们结交。
English: The ministers who held important positions in the imperial court were all eager to make friends with the emperor.

古文：中使至第，无贵贱，皆曲承颜色，申以厚礼。
现代文：凡王宫中派使者来，无论贵贱，炀帝都委曲己意摆出一副奉承的脸色，再三赠以厚礼。
English: When the eunuchs came to the palace, no matter how high or low they were, he would lower his status to please them and give them gifts.

古文：婢仆往来者，无不称其仁孝。
现代文：来来往往的婢女仆人，没有不称赞他仁厚孝敬的。
English: Therefore, all the maidservants and servants who came and went praised the benevolence and filial piety of Emperor Xuan.

古文：又常私入宫掖，密谋于献后，杨素等因机构扇，遂成废立。
现代文：他又常常私下进入宫中，与文献皇后密谋，杨素等人乘机勾结煽动，于是就弄成功了废太子杨勇立杨广的计谋。
English: He also often secretly entered the palace, conspired with the empress of literature, and Yang Su and others took the opportunity to collude and incite, so he succeeded in the scheme of the waste prince Yang Yongli Yang Guang.

古文：自高祖大渐，暨谅闇之中，烝淫无度，山陵始就，即事巡游。
现代文：自从高祖病危，以至父死居丧之际，他竟与母后淫乱无休。
English: From the time Gao Zu was critically ill until the time of his father's death, he was unceasingly adulterous with his mother.

古文：以天下承平日久，士马全盛，慨然慕秦皇、汉武之事，乃盛治宫室，穷极侈靡，召募行人，分使绝域。
现代文：高祖的陵墓刚修好，他就去各地巡游，认为天下太平日子很久了，士卒兵马正当全盛时期，心情激昂地仰慕秦皇、汉武的事业。于是大造宫室，任意挥霍，极其奢侈，招募使者，分别派往极远的地方。
English: As soon as Gao Zu's mausoleum was repaired, he went on a tour around the country, thinking that the world had been at peace for a long time, and that the soldiers and horses were in their heyday, enthusiastically admiring the Qin Emperor and Han Wu's cause. Therefore, the great palace builder, arbitrarily wasteful, extremely extravagant, recruited emissaries and sent them separately to very far away places.

古文：诸蕃至者，厚加礼赐，有不恭命，以兵击之。
现代文：各蕃国来京朝拜的，给予隆重的礼遇，赐给极丰厚的物品，如有不肯恭顺从命的，就派兵攻打他们。
English: Those from various countries who come to Beijing to pay homage are accorded grand courtesies, and are given extremely rich goods. If there are those who refuse to obey orders, troops are sent to attack them.

古文：盛兴屯田于玉门、柳城之外。
现代文：在玉门、柳城以外地区大兴屯田活动。
English: He also amassed a large amount of land in Gyumon and outside of Liucheng.

古文：课天下富室，益市武马，匹直十余万，富强坐是冻馁者十家而九。
现代文：向天下富裕人家抽税，资助国家买军马，每匹马价值十余万钱，富强之家十之八九因此而受冻挨饿。
English: Taxes were levied on the world's wealthy, and the state was funded to buy war horses, each horse worth more than a hundred thousand dollars. As a result, nine out of ten wealthy families suffered from cold and hunger.

古文：帝性多诡谲，所幸之处，不欲人知。
现代文：炀帝的性格十分奸猾诡诈，所到之处，不愿别人知道。
English: Emperor Xuan's character is very treacherous and cunning, and he does not want others to know where he goes.

古文：每之一所，辄数道置顿，四海珍羞殊味，水陆必备焉，求市者无远不至。
现代文：每到一个地方，总是几路设置停留食宿之所，四海珍贵的食物，特殊的美味，水陆产品必须齐备，为采购这些食品，无论多远也没有不去的。
English: Whenever you go to a place, there are always several ways to set up a place to stay and eat. Precious food from all over the world, special delicacies, aquatic and terrestrial products must be prepared. To purchase these foods, no matter how far it is, there is no need to go.

古文：郡县官人，竞为献食，丰厚者进擢，疏俭者获罪。
现代文：郡县官员，争先来进献食物，贡物丰厚的晋爵升官，粗疏俭朴的受到惩处。
English: County and prefectural officials scrambled to donate food, rich tributes were offered for promotion to higher ranks, and those who were rude and frugal were punished.

古文：奸吏侵渔，内外虚竭，头会箕敛，人不聊生。
现代文：邪恶的官吏趁机大肆侵吞掠夺，致使朝廷内外财力枯竭，赋税繁苛，民不聊生。
English: Evil officials took advantage of the opportunity to plunder and pillage, resulting in the depletion of financial resources both inside and outside the imperial court, heavy taxation, and people not being able to make a living.

古文：于时军国多务，日不暇给，帝方骄怠，恶闻政事，冤屈不治，奏请罕决。
现代文：那时候的军务与国政有很多事情要办理，时间根本不够用。皇上正处在骄奢怠惰心态中，很厌恶听到政务方面的事，冤屈的案件不得申诉处治，奏章请示很少决断。
English: At that time, there were a lot of things to be dealt with in military affairs and national politics, and there was simply not enough time. The emperor was in a proud and lazy state of mind, and he was very averse to hearing about political affairs. Cases of grievance were not allowed to be handled, and petitions were rarely decided.

古文：又猜忌臣下，无所专任，朝臣有不合意者，必构其罪而族灭之。
现代文：他又猜忌臣下，对谁也不信任，朝廷大臣有不合他心意的，必罗织罪名而消灭他整个家族。
English: He also suspected his subordinates and did not trust anyone. If a minister of the Imperial Court did something that was not to his liking, he would fabricate a crime and destroy his entire family.

古文：故高颎、贺若弼先皇心膂，参谋帷幄，张衡、李金才籓邸惟旧，绩著经纶，或恶其直道，或忿其正议，求其无形之罪，加以刎颈之诛。
现代文：所以像高赹、贺若弼等先皇的亲信骨干，曾参与谋划指挥，张衡、李金才等王府旧交，而筹划治理国家大事政绩卓著。对这些良臣，皇上或者厌恶他们耿直的性情，或者气忿他们刚正的议论，给他们搜罗些无根据的罪名，施以斩首的惩罚。
English: Therefore, the backbone of the first emperor's close confidants, such as Gao Qi and He Ruoqi, had participated in the planning and command, and Zhang Heng and Li Jincai, old friends of the royal court, had outstanding achievements in the planning and governance of national events. For these good ministers, the emperor either disliked their upright disposition, or was angry with their upright discussion, collected some unfounded charges for them, and imposed the punishment of beheading.

古文：其余事君尽礼，謇謇匪躬，无辜无罪，横受夷戮者，不可胜纪。
现代文：其余的人或奉事君王尽礼，或正言直谏，尽忠而不顾自身，无辜无罪，出乎意料地被杀害的人，无法全部记述。
English: The rest, whether they were courteous in the service of the king, or outspoken, loyal in spite of themselves, innocent or guilty, and killed unexpectedly, cannot all be described.

古文：政刑弛紊，贿货公行，莫敢正言。
现代文：政事刑罚松弛紊乱，贿赂公开进行，没有人敢直言上谏，国人慑于暴政，敢怒而不敢言。
English: Political punishment is lax and disorderly, bribery is openly carried out, no one dares to speak out, and the Chinese people are intimidated by tyranny, dare to be angry but dare not speak.

古文：道路以目。六军不息，百役繁兴，行者不归，居者失业。
现代文：六军征战不息，各种徭役繁多，服役远行的不能回家，在家留居的失去生业。
English: The Six Armies were constantly at war, and there were many kinds of forced laborers. Those who served far away could not return home, and those who stayed at home lost their livelihoods.

古文：人饥相食，邑落为墟，上不之恤也。
现代文：人们饿极了就互相残食，城镇村落沦为废墟，这都是因为皇上不抚恤百姓的缘故。
English: People were so hungry that they ate each other's leftovers, and towns and villages were reduced to rubble, all because the emperor did not show mercy to the people.

古文：东西游幸，靡有定居，每以供费不给，逆收数年之赋。
现代文：皇上东西游玩，没有固定的居室，常常因供应费用不足而预收几年的赋税。
English: Emperors moved from place to place, had no fixed residence, and often had to collect several years of taxes in advance due to insufficient supply costs.

古文：所至唯与后宫流连耽湎，惟日不足，招迎姥媪，朝夕共肆丑言，又引少年，令与宫人秽乱，不轨不逊，以为娱乐。
现代文：他所到之处，只是与后宫的嫔妃享乐，唯恐时日不够，竟招迎一些年老的妇女，朝夕在一起放肆地讲那些丑恶污秽的下流话。又引来一些年轻人，让他们与宫中妇女大肆淫乱，所有这些既不合法度，也不恭敬，皇上却以此为欢娱行乐。
English: Everywhere he went, he only enjoyed himself with the concubines of his harem, and as if there were not enough time in the day, he invited some old women to spend the morning and evening with him, and together they spoke all manner of vile and filthy things, and he also brought in some young men and let them fornicate with the women of the palace, all of which was neither legal nor respectful, but the emperor took pleasure in doing so.

古文：区宇之内，盗贼蜂起，劫掠从官，屠陷城邑，近臣互相掩蔽，隐贼数不以实对。
现代文：疆土境域之内，盗贼蜂起，抢劫掠夺部下僚属官吏，攻陷城镇大肆屠杀，皇上身边侍臣互相掩盖真相，隐瞒盗贼数目不把实情告诉皇上。
English: Within the territory, the thieves rose up, robbed and plundered the ministers and subordinate officials, attacked and massacred the towns. The courtiers around the emperor covered up the truth, concealed the number of thieves and did not tell the emperor the truth.

古文：或有言贼多者，辄大被诘责。各求苟免，上下相蒙，每出师徒，败亡相继。
现代文：间或有人说盗贼很多，立即遭到严厉追问责罚，各自为求苟且免祸，上下互相蒙骗，所以常常出兵打仗，失败丧亡的事相继发生。
English: Occasionally, someone said that there were many thieves, and they were immediately severely held accountable and punished. Each of them was anxious to avoid disaster and deceived each other, so they often sent soldiers to fight, and the failure and death happened one after another.

古文：战士尽力，必不加赏，百姓无辜，咸受屠戮。
现代文：战士们尽力作战，从不给奖赏，百姓们无罪，却都遭屠杀。
English: The soldiers fought to the best of their ability and were never rewarded, while the innocent civilians were slaughtered.

古文：黎庶愤怨，天下土崩，至于就擒，而犹未之寤也。
现代文：民众愤怒怨恨，天下土崩瓦解，炀帝直到被拿捉时他还没有醒悟呢！
English: The people are angry and resentful, the world is falling apart, and Emperor Gong did not wake up until he was captured!

古文：史臣曰：炀帝爰在弱龄，早有令闻，南平吴会，北却匈奴，昆弟之中，独著声绩。
现代文：史臣说：炀帝在少年时代，早有好名声。向南平定吴郡、会稽郡，向北打退匈奴，在诸兄弟中，名声业绩特别显著。
English: Shi Zhen said: "In his boyhood, Emperor Zhou already had a good reputation. To the south, he pacified Wu County and Hui County, and to the north, he drove back the Huns. Among the brothers, his reputation and achievements are particularly remarkable.

古文：于是矫情饰貌，肆厥奸回，故得献后钟心，文皇革虑，天方肇乱，遂登储两，践峻极之崇基，承丕显之休命。
现代文：从这时起，他就掩饰真情，伪装面貌，肆行其邪恶，所以得到文献皇后的钟爱，文帝也改变想法，上天开始降下祸乱，于是他当上了太子，继而登上了皇帝宝座，承继了大明的美善的命令。
English: From then on, he disguised his true feelings, disguised his appearance, and carried out his evil, so he was loved by the queen of literature. Emperor Wen also changed his mind, and heaven began to bring down disaster. So he became the prince, and then ascended to the throne of the emperor, inheriting the order of Da Ming's beauty.

古文：地广三代，威振八纮，单于顿颡，越裳重译。
现代文：领土比三代宽广，声威振及八方极远之地，单于入朝跪拜，越裳经过辗转翻译来通好。
English: The territory is wider than three generations, the prestige is vibrant, and the land is far away from the eight directions. It is better to kneel in the morning, and the more clothes, the better the translation.

古文：赤仄之泉，流溢于都内，红腐之粟，委积于塞下。
现代文：赤仄之类钱币，在京都内流溢，腐烂变质的粟米，堆积在塞下。
English: In Kyoto, coins such as akasagi are overflowing, and rotten and spoiled corn is piled up under the plugs.

古文：负其富强之资，思逞无厌之欲，狭殷周之制度，尚秦汉之规摹。
现代文：倚仗国家富强的资财，想放纵那无尽的欲望，认为殷、周的制度狭小，崇尚秦、汉的规模。
English: Relying on the country's wealth and resources, they want to indulge their endless desires, think the Yin and Zhou systems are narrow, and advocate the scale of the Qin and Han dynasties.

古文：恃才矜己，傲狠明德，内怀险躁，外示凝简，盛冠服以饰其奸，除谏官以掩其过。
现代文：仗恃才能自我夸耀，用倨傲凶狠来显示德性。内心充满邪恶骄躁情绪，外表上却摆出凝重简朴的姿态。以冠服严整来掩饰他的邪恶，铲除谏官来遮掩他的过错。
English: A warrior can only boast of himself and display his virtue with arrogance and ferocity. His heart is full of evil and arrogance, but on the outside he has a dignified and simple attitude. He disguises his evil with a strict uniform and removes eunuchs to cover up his mistakes.

古文：淫荒无度，法令滋章，教绝四维，刑参五虐，锄诛骨肉，屠剿忠良，受赏者莫见其功，为戮者不知其罪。
现代文：贪恋酒色毫无节制，法规程制定得愈加详明，教化中断，绝礼、义、廉、耻四维之权，刑罚里参用了断耳、截鼻、宫、黥、大辟五种酷刑。铲锄诛杀亲骨肉，屠戮剿灭忠良之人。受赏赐的看不到他有什么功劳，被杀戮的不知犯了什么罪。
English: The craving for alcohol is unbridled, the legal procedures are more and more detailed, the indoctrination is interrupted, and the four-dimensional rights of absolute propriety, righteousness, cleanliness, and shame are suspended. Five kinds of torture are used in the punishment: ear-breaking, nose-cutting, palace, beheading, and beheading. Shoveling kills the flesh and blood of relatives, slaughtering annihilates the faithful. The recipient of the reward does not see what merit he has, and the killed does not know what crime he has committed.

古文：骄怒之兵屡动，土木之功不息。
现代文：骄狂气盛的军队多次出动，大兴土木，工程不息。
English: The proud and vigorous army has been dispatched many times to carry out large-scale civil works, and the projects continue.

古文：频出朔方，三驾辽左，旌旗万里，征税百端，猾吏侵渔，人不堪命。
现代文：频繁出击北方，三次驾临辽东，旌旗绵延万里，苛捐杂税多种多样，奸猾官吏侵夺掠取，人民不能活命。
English: Frequent sorties to the north, three visits to Liaodong, thousands of miles of banners, a wide variety of taxes and duties, treacherous officials plundering and pillaging, the people can not live.

古文：乃急令暴条以扰之，严刑峻法以临之，甲兵威武以董之，自是海内骚然，无聊生矣。
现代文：于是用紧急的命令、猝发的条文去骚扰百姓，用严厉的刑法来对付百姓，用军队的威武来督察百姓，从此就海内骚动不安，民不聊生了。
English: So they used emergency orders and sudden-onset regulations to harass the people, used harsh criminal laws to deal with the people, and used the might of the army to inspect the people. From then on, there was unrest at sea, and the people did not want to live.

古文：俄而玄感肇黎阳之乱，匈奴有雁门之围，天子方弃中土，远之扬越。
现代文：不久，杨玄感发动黎阳之乱，匈奴又有雁门之围，天子正舍弃中原，远赴扬、越。
English: Soon, Yang Xuanxuan launched the Liyang Rebellion, the Xiongnu besieged the Wild Goose Gate, and Tianzi abandoned the Central Plains and went as far away as Yang and Yue.

古文：奸宄乘衅，强弱相陵，关梁闭而不通，皇舆往而不反。
现代文：奸贼趁空作乱，强弱互相侵犯，关卡桥梁关闭不通，皇上的车驾去而不回。
English: Traitors took advantage of the situation to create chaos, the strong and the weak encroached on each other, checkpoints and bridges were closed, and the emperor's car left without returning.

古文：加之以师旅，因之以饥馑，流离道路，转死沟壑，十八九焉。
现代文：加上征战频繁，饥馑连年，人民流转离散于道路，辗转死亡在大沟深谷中的，已达十分之八九。
English: Coupled with frequent military campaigns, famine for years on end, people scattered on the roads and dying in the deep valleys, it has reached eighty-nine out of ten.

古文：于是相聚萑蒲，胃毛而起，大则跨州连郡，称帝称王，小则千百为群，攻城剽邑，流血成川泽，死人如乱麻，炊者不及析骸，食者不遑易子。
现代文：于是，这些饥寒交迫的百姓相聚在芦苇丛生的地方，聚众起事的多如猬毛，大的造反队伍则跨州连郡，称帝称王，小的造反队伍就千百人会合为群，攻城掠邑，血流成河成泽，死人如乱麻堆积，做饭的来不及把骨头劈开就做柴禾烧，饥饿的人没空闲交换儿子就把他们当饭吃了。
English: As a result, these hungry and cold-pressed people gathered together in the reed-grown area, and the number of rallies was as numerous as the number of bristles. The large rebel group went across the state and county, claiming to be the emperor and the king. The small rebel group was a group of hundreds of people, attacking the city and robbing the town, and the blood flowed into rivers. The dead were piled up like jumble, and when it was too late to cook, the bones were split and made into firewood. The hungry people had no time to exchange their sons and ate them as meals.

古文：茫茫九土，并为麋鹿之场，忄弃忄弃黔黎，俱充蛇豕之饵。
现代文：茫茫九州的土地，都成了麋鹿的场苑，满怀恐惧的平民百姓，都充当了长蛇大猪的饭食。
English: The land of boundless Kyushu has become a playground for elk, and the terrified common people have served as food for the pythons.

古文：四方万里，简书相续，犹谓鼠窃狗盗，不足为虞，上下相蒙，莫肯念乱，振蜉蝣之羽，穷长夜之乐。
现代文：四面八方，万里之外，告急文书，相连不断，仍然认为那是小窃小盗，不值得担忧，上下相互蒙骗，设有谁愿意考虑这动乱局面。炀帝仍然像蜉蝣一样，享尽彻夜的欢乐。
English: In all directions, thousands of miles away, urgent documents, connected constantly, still think that it is petty theft, not worth worrying about, up and down mutual deception, who is willing to consider this turbulent situation.

古文：土崩鱼烂，贯盈恶稔，普天之下，莫匪仇雠，左右之人，皆为敌国。
现代文：国家土崩瓦解，犹鱼腐烂，炀帝恶贯满盈，罪孽深重，普天之下，没有人不是他的仇敌，左右侍奉他的人，似乎都变成了敌国。
English: The country is falling apart, the Jews are rotting, the wickedness of the emperor is rampant, the sins are heavy, under the whole world, there is no one who is not his enemy, and those who serve him around seem to have become an enemy country.

古文：终然不悟，同彼望夷，遂以万乘之尊，死于一夫之手。
现代文：他最终也未醒悟，同那望夷宫前被杀的秦二世一样，于是以天子这样尊贵的地位，而死在一个人手中。
English: In the end, he did not wake up to the fact that, just like Qin II, who was killed in front of the Palace of Wangyi, he died in the hands of a man in such an honorable position as the Son of Heaven.

古文：亿兆靡感恩之士，九牧无勤王之师。
现代文：亿兆人中没有对炀帝感恩的人，九州没有救援王朝的军队。
English: Among the billions and trillions of people, there is no one who is grateful to Emperor Gong, and Kyushu has no army to rescue the dynasty.

古文：子弟同就诛夷，骸骨弃而莫掩，社稷颠陨，本枝殄绝，自肇有书契以迄于兹，宇宙崩离，生灵涂炭，丧身灭国，未有若斯之甚也。
现代文：国家衰落，嫡庶子孙，全部灭绝。自从有文字记载迄今，宇宙分崩离析，生灵涂炭，帝王身死国灭的，还没有比这更严重的。
English: The decline of the state, the extinction of all legitimate children and grandchildren. Since the beginning of written records, the universe has fallen apart, living beings have been charred, and emperors have been killed, there has been nothing more serious than this.

古文：《书》曰： 天作孽，犹可违，自作孽，不可逭。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 天作孽，还可以逃避；自作孽，就不可能逃避了。 
English: "Shangshu" said: If the heavens do evil, you can still escape; if you do evil, you cannot escape.

古文：《传》曰： 吉凶由人，祆不妄作。 
现代文：《左传》说： 吉凶祸福，缘由在人，怪异现象，不会无缘无故兴起。 
English: "Zo Zhuan" said: good luck, bad luck, misfortune, the cause is in people, strange phenomena will not arise for no reason.

古文：又曰： 兵犹火也，不戢将自焚。 
现代文：又说： 战争好比是烈火，如不止息必将自焚。 
English: He also said: "War is like a raging fire, if it does not stop, it will burn itself out."

古文：观隋室之存亡，斯言信而有征矣！
现代文：看看隋朝的兴亡，这些话确实可靠而且得到验证了。
English: Looking at the rise and fall of the Sui Dynasty, these words are indeed reliable and have been verified.

