古文：人禀元气於天，各受寿夭之命，以立长短之形，犹陶者用土为簋廉，冶者用铜为柈杅矣。
现代文：人从天那儿承受了元气，各自接受了自己的寿命，形成了高矮不同的形体，就像制陶工人用粘土做成簋和甒，冶炼工人用铜铸成盘和盂。
English: People have received vitality from heaven, and each has accepted his own life span, forming different shapes, just as potters use clay to make pots and ladles, and smelters use copper to cast plates and ladles.

古文：器形已成，不可小大；人体已定，不可减增。
现代文：器皿的形体已经形成，不能再缩小与扩大；人的身体已经定型，也不能再变矮与增高。
English: The shape of the vessel has been formed, and can no longer shrink and expand; the human body has been set, and can no longer become shorter and taller.

古文：用气为性，性成命定。
现代文：人因承受气形成生命，生命一旦形成，寿命就不会改变。
English: Once life is formed, life expectancy will not change.

古文：体气与形骸相抱，生死与期节相须。
现代文：人体具备的气与形体是相互依存的，生死与寿限是相互一致的。
English: The qi and form possessed by the human body are interdependent, and life and death are consistent with each other.

古文：形不可变化，命不可减加。
现代文：形体不能改变，寿命不能缩短与延长。
English: The shape cannot be changed, and the lifespan cannot be shortened or extended.

古文：以陶冶言之，人命短长，可得论也。
现代文：根据制陶和冶金的道理来推论，人的寿命有长有短，就能够得到说明了。
English: Based on the principles of ceramics and metallurgy, it can be deduced that people have a long and short life span.

古文：或难曰： 陶者用埴为簋廉，簋廉壹成，遂至毁败，不可复变。若夫冶者用铜为柈，杅虽已成器，犹可复烁。柈可得为尊，尊不可为簋。
现代文：有人反驳说： 制陶工人用粘土做成簋和甒，簋和甒一旦制成，直到毁坏，形体不会再改变，至于冶炼工人用铜铸成盘和盂，盘和盂即使已经铸成器皿，还能再熔化，盘可以成为尊，尊也可以成为簋。
English: Some people objected: potters use clay to make mortars and pestles. Once the mortars and pestles are made, they will not change their shape until they are destroyed. As for smelters, they use copper to cast plates and pestles. Even if the plates and pestles have been cast into vessels, they can be melted again. The plate can become a deity, and the deity can also become a pestle.

古文：人禀气於天，虽各受寿夭之命，立以形体，如得善道神药，形可变化，命可加增。
现代文：人从天那儿承受气，即使各自接受了自己的寿命，形成了形体，要是得到了神奇的道术和仙丹，形体仍然能改变，寿命也可能延长。
English: People receive qi from heaven. Even if they each accept their own lifespan and form a body, if they obtain magical Taoism and immortals, the body can still change and the lifespan may be extended.

古文：曰：冶者变更成器，须先以火燔烁，乃可大小短长。
现代文：我认为：冶炼工人要改变原来样子再铸成器皿，一定得先用炉火烧化，才能使其扩大、缩小，压短、拉长。
English: I think that if smelters want to change the original appearance and then cast a vessel, they must first burn it with a fire in order to enlarge, shrink, shorten and elongate it.

古文：人冀延年，欲比於铜器，宜有若炉炭之化乃易形形易寿亦可增。
现代文：人希望延长寿命，想拿铜器来作比方，那就应当有像炉里的炭一样变化，才能改变形体；形体改变了，寿命也就能延长。
English: If one wishes to prolong one's life, if one wishes to use the metaphor of a bronze vessel, then one must change, like coal in a furnace, in order to change one's form; if one's form is changed, one's life will also be prolonged.

古文：人何由变易其形，便如火烁铜器乎？
现代文：人通过什么方式来改变自己的形体，就像炉火熔化铜器一样呢？
English: By what means does man change his form, as fire melts brass?

古文：《礼》曰： 水潦降，不献鱼鳖。 
现代文：《礼记·曲礼》上说： 下大雨，就不向君主献鱼鳖。 
English: "Li Ji Qu Li" said: If there is heavy rain, do not offer fish bait to the monarch.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：雨水暴下，虫蛇变化，化为鱼鳖。
现代文：因为雨水猛下，虫蛇改变了形体，变成了鱼鳖。
English: Because of the torrential rain, the snake changed its shape and turned into a fish hook.

古文：离本真暂变之虫，臣子谨慎，故不敢献。
现代文：它们脱离本来样子突然变成鱼鳖，作臣子的小心谨慎，所以不敢献给君主。
English: They are detached from their original appearance and suddenly turn into fish hooks. As courtiers are cautious, they do not dare to offer them to the monarch.

古文：人愿身之变，冀若虫蛇之化乎？
现代文：人希望身体能变化，是希望像虫蛇那样变化吗？
English: Do you want your body to change? Do you want it to change like a snake?

古文：夫虫蛇未化者，不若不化者。
现代文：其实变化了的虫蛇，还不如不变化的。
English: In fact, a changed tapeworm is better than no change.

古文：虫蛇未化，人不食也；化为鱼鳖，人则食之。
现代文：虫蛇没有变成鱼鳖，人不吃它；变成鱼鳖，人就要吃它。
English: If a snake does not turn into a fish bait, people will not eat it; if it turns into a fish bait, people will eat it.

古文：食则寿命乃短，非所冀也。
现代文：被人吃了其寿命就短，这不是人们所希望的。
English: If they are eaten, their lifespan is short, which is not what people want.

古文：岁月推移，气变物类，虾蟆为鹑，雀为蜃蛤。
现代文：随着时间的推移，节气的变化，物类也会跟着变化，蛤蟆成了鹌鹑，麻雀成了大蚌、蛤蜊。
English: With the passage of time and the change of the solar terms, the species will also change. The dragonfly has become the dragonfly, and the sparrow has become the great dragonfly and the cormorant.

古文：人愿身之变，冀若鹑与蜃蛤鱼鳖之类也？
现代文：人希望身体能变化，是希望像鹌鹑、大蚌、蛤蜊、鱼、鳖之类一样吗？
English: Do people want their bodies to change, do they want to be like a clam, a giant clam, a cormorant, a fish, a cormorant, and so on?

古文：人设捕蜃蛤，得者食之。虽身之不化，寿命不得长，非所冀也。
现代文：人如果捕捉大蚌、蛤蜊，得到者把它吃了，即使本身没有变化，其寿命也不会长，这也不是人们所希望的。
English: If a person catches a giant clam or earthworm, and the recipient eats it, even if there is no change in itself, its lifespan will not be long, which is not what people hope for.

古文：鲁公牛哀寝疾，七日变而成虎。
现代文：鲁国的公牛哀得了卧床的疾病七天，就变成了老虎。
English: Lu's bull fell ill and was bedridden for seven days before turning into a tiger.

古文：鲧殛羽山，化为黄能。
现代文：鲧在羽山被杀，变成了黄能。
English: Zhai was killed in Hasan and became Huang Neng.

古文：愿身变者，冀牛哀之为虎，鲧之为能乎？
现代文：希望身体能变化的人，是希望像公牛哀变为老虎，鲧变为黄能那样吗？
English: Do people who hope that their bodies can change want to be like the bull that turns into a tiger and the donkey that turns into a jackal?

古文：则夫虎、能之寿，不能过人。
现代文：然而那老虎，黄能的寿命，是不可能超过人的。
English: However, the tiger, Huang Neng's lifespan, is unlikely to exceed that of a human.

古文：天地之性，人最为贵。
现代文：天地间的生命，人最为宝贵。
English: Human life is the most precious thing on earth.

古文：变人之形，更为禽兽，非所冀也。
现代文：改变人的形体，再变成禽兽，这不是人们所希望的。
English: It's not what people want, to change the shape of a human being and then turn into an animal.

古文：凡可冀者，以老翁变为婴兒，其次白发复黑，齿落复生，身气丁强，超乘不衰，乃可贵也。
现代文：凡是希望身体能变化的人，若能由老翁变为婴儿，其次，由白发能恢复成黑发，落掉的牙齿能再长出，身体和体气能保持坚强，跃车迅猛的劲头不减，才是可贵的。
English: All those who hope that their bodies can change, if they can change from an old man to a baby, and secondly, if they can recover from white hair to black hair, if they can regrow lost teeth, if they can keep their bodies and stamina strong, and if they can keep the vigor of jumping cars.

古文：徒变其形，寿命不延，其何益哉？
现代文：光改变自己形体，寿命没有延长，那有什么好处呢？
English: What good is it to change your body without extending your life?

古文：且物之变，随气，若应政治，有所象为，非天所欲寿长之故，变易其形也，又非得神草珍药食之而变化也。
现代文：况且物类的变化是随着节气，有时就应与国家政治好坏相应，有所预兆出现，并不是上天想它延年益寿的缘故，才改变它的形体，也不是得神草仙丹吃了而变化的。
English: Moreover, the change of species is in accordance with the solar terms, and sometimes it should be in accordance with the national political good or bad, and there are omens. It is not because God wants it to prolong its life that it changes its shape, and it is not changed by eating the sacred herb.

古文：人恆服药固寿，能增加本性，益其身年也。
现代文：人长期服药能保持长寿，能增加原来的生命，延长其寿命。
English: People who take drugs for a long time can maintain longevity, can increase their original life, and prolong their life.

古文：遭时变化，非天之正气、人所受之真性也。
现代文：这只是碰巧发生的变化，不是天正常施放的气，也不是人所承受的原有生命。
English: This is just a change that happened by chance, not the normal breath of heaven, nor the original life that people bear.

古文：天地不变，日月不易，星辰不没，正也。
现代文：天地不发生变化，日月不改变形态，星辰不发生坠落，这是正常现象。
English: The heavens and the earth do not change, the sun and the moon do not change shape, and the stars do not fall. This is a normal phenomenon.

古文：人受正气，故体不变。
现代文：人承受的是天的正气，所以身体不会改变。
English: What one endures is God's righteous disposition, so one's body will not change.

古文：时或男化为女，女化为男，由高岸为谷，深谷为陵也。
现代文：有时男人变成女人，女人变成男人，同样高地成了谷地，深谷成了丘陵，应和政治发生变化。
English: Sometimes a man becomes a woman, a woman becomes a man, the same highlands become valleys, deep valleys become hills, and politics changes.

古文：应政为变，为政变，非常性也。
现代文：有应和政治的变化，不是正常的生命现象。
English: Political and social changes are not a normal part of life.

古文：汉兴，老父授张良书，已化为石。是以石之精，为汉兴之瑞也。犹河精为人持璧与秦使者，秦亡之征也。
现代文：汉朝要兴起，老翁授兵书给张良，然后变成石头，这石头精灵的出现是作为汉朝兴起的吉兆；像河的精灵变成人手捧玉璧递给秦的使者，是秦朝将亡的凶兆。
English: The Han Dynasty was about to rise. Lao Weng gave Zhang Liang a military award, and then turned into stone. The appearance of this stone genie was a good omen for the rise of the Han Dynasty. The river genie turned into a man holding a jade gemstone and handing it to the Qin emissary was a bad omen for the Qin Dynasty.

古文：蚕食桑老，绩而为茧，茧又化而为蛾；蛾有两翼，变去蚕形。
现代文：蚕吃桑叶而衰，然后吐丝作成茧，茧又变成蛾，蛾有两只翅膀，改变掉了蚕的形体。
English: The silkworm eats the mulberry leaf and dies, then spits out the silk to form a cocoon, and the cocoon turns into a moth. The moth has two wings and changes the shape of the silkworm.

古文：蛴螬化为复育，复育转而为蝉；蝉生两翼，不类蛴螬。
现代文：蛴螬变成复育，复育转变成了蝉，蝉长出两只翅膀，完全不像蛴螬。
English: The grasshopper became a cicada, and the cicada grew two wings, completely unlike the grasshopper.

古文：凡诸命蠕蜚之类，多变其形，易其体。
现代文：凡是各种有生命能蠕动和飞行的虫类，大多能改变它们的形体。
English: All kinds of insects with life that can creep and fly can mostly change their shape.

古文：至人独不变者，禀得正也。
现代文：至于人唯独不改变形体，是因为承受到的是正气。
English: As for the reason why only humans do not change their form, it is because they are inheriting a righteous spirit.

古文：生为婴兒，长为丈夫，老为父翁。从生至死，未尝变更者，天性然也。
现代文：人出生是婴儿，长大作丈夫，年老成老翁，从生到死，不曾改变，这是天生本性如此的缘故。
English: Man is born a baby, grows up to be a husband, grows old to be an old man, and never changes from birth to death. This is due to his innate nature.

古文：天性不变者，不可令复变；变者，不可不变。
现代文：天生本性不变的，不可能使其再变化；变化的，又不可能叫它不变化。
English: What is by nature unchangeable cannot be made changeable; what is changeable cannot be made unchangeable.

古文：若夫变者之寿，不若不变者。
现代文：至于变化者的寿命，不如不变的。
English: As for the life span of the changer, it is better than that of the changeless.

古文：人欲变其形，辄增益其年，可也；如徒变其形而年不增，则蝉之类也，何谓人愿之？
现代文：人希望改变自己的形体，就能延长其寿命，那值得。如果光改变自己形体而寿命不能延长，那就与蝉同类，怎么能说人是希望这样呢？
English: If one wishes to change one's body so that one can prolong one's life, that is worthwhile. If the light changes one's body so that one's life cannot be prolonged, then one is the same as a cicada. How can one say that one wishes this?

古文：龙之为虫，一存一亡，一短一长。龙之为性也，变化斯须，辄复非常。
现代文：龙作为一种虫，时而出现，时而隐没，身体有时短，有时长，龙为了生命，变化很快，总是反复无常。
English: As a kind of insect, dragons sometimes appear and sometimes disappear. Their bodies are sometimes short and sometimes long. For the sake of life, dragons change quickly and are always capricious.

古文：由此言之，人，物也，受不变之形，形不可变更，年不可增减。
现代文：这样说来，人是物类，禀受不能变化的形体，形体就不能改变，寿命也不会延长与缩短。
English: In this way, man is a kind of thing, a form that cannot be changed, a form that cannot be changed, and a life that cannot be extended or shortened.

古文：传称高宗有桑谷之异。悔过反政，享福百年，是虚也。
现代文：传说殷高宗时宫里有突然长出桑树和穀树的奇异现象，他就追悔自己的过错，反省政冶，于是享受了活到百岁的福分，这是假的。
English: According to legend, there was a strange phenomenon of mulberry trees and grain trees suddenly growing in the palace of Emperor Yin Gaozong. He repented of his mistakes, reflected on his policies, and enjoyed the blessing of living to be 100 years old. This is false.

古文：传言宋景公出三善言，荧惑却三舍，延年二十一载，是又虚也。
现代文：传说宋景公说了三句怜惜臣民的好话，火星就移动了三次位置，他得以延长寿命二十一年，这又是假的。
English: According to legend, when Song Jing Gong said three good words of sympathy for his subjects, Mars moved three times, and he was able to extend his life by twenty-one years. This is also false.

古文：又言秦缪公有明德，上帝赐之十九年，是又虚也。
现代文：还说秦缪公有清白的品德，上天赐给他十九年寿命，这也是假的。
English: He also said that Qin Muigong had a pure character, and that Heaven had given him a life span of nineteen years, which was also false.

古文：称赤松、王乔好道为仙，度世不死，是又虚也。
现代文：传说赤松子，王子乔喜欢道术成了神仙，离开尘世而不死，这还是假的。
English: The legend of the Red Pine Nut, Prince Joe, who became a god thanks to his love of martial arts, and left this world without dying, is still a lie.

古文：假令人生立形谓之甲，终老至死，常守甲形。
现代文：假使说把一个人生下来形成的形体称为甲，直到老死，他都会经常保持着甲的形体。
English: If we say that the form formed by a person is called A, he will always maintain the form of A until he dies of old age.

古文：如好道为仙，未有使甲变为乙者也。
现代文：如果真是喜欢道术成了神仙，也没有使甲形变为乙形的。
English: If you really like Daoism, you won't become a god, and you won't turn an A-shape into an A-shape.

古文：夫形不可变更，年不可减增。
现代文：可见，形体不能改变，寿命不能缩短与延长。
English: It can be seen that the shape cannot be changed, and the lifespan cannot be shortened or extended.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：形、气、性，天也。
现代文：因为人的形体、气和生命，都是由天施气决定的。
English: Because the human form, qi and life are all determined by heaven.

古文：形为春，气为夏。
现代文：使植物萌芽而具备外形的是春天，气动使植物发育成长的是夏天。
English: It is spring that causes plants to germinate and take shape, and summer that causes plants to develop and grow.

古文：人以气为寿，形随气而动。
现代文：人是以承受气的厚薄形成寿命的，形体也是随着承受气的不同而发育成长的。
English: A person's lifespan is formed by the thickness of the gas they are exposed to, and their body shape also develops and grows in accordance with the difference in the amount of gas they are exposed to.

古文：气性不均，则於体不同。
现代文：由于承受的气和生命不均衡，则在形体上也不相同。
English: Due to the unbalanced qi and life, they are also different in form.

古文：牛寿半马，马寿半人，然则牛马之形与人异矣。
现代文：牛的寿命只是马的一半，马的寿命只是人的一半，既然如此，牛和马的形体与人的就会有差别。
English: The life span of a cow is only half that of a horse, and the life span of a horse is only half that of a human. Therefore, the shape of a cow and a horse will be different from that of a human.

古文：禀牛马之形，当自得牛马之寿；牛马之不变为人，则年寿亦短於人。
现代文：禀受牛马的形体，应当自然得到牛马的寿命，牛马不能变成人，那寿命也就比人短。
English: In the form of a bull and a horse, one should naturally obtain the lifespan of a bull and a horse. A bull and a horse cannot turn into a human, and their lifespan is shorter than that of a human.

古文：世称高宗之徒，不言其身形变异。而徒言其增延年寿，故有信矣。
现代文：社会上称道殷高宗、宗景公、秦穆公他们如何如何长寿，却不说说他们的身体形态改变了没有，而光说他们延年益寿，所以不可信。
English: The society praises Yin Gaozong, Zongjing Gong, and Qin Mu Gong for how long they live, but they do not say whether their body shape has changed, and it is not credible to say that they have extended their lives.

古文：形之血气也，犹囊之贮粟米也。
现代文：形体中的血气，就像口袋中装有粟米一样。
English: The blood and gas in the body is like carrying corn in the pocket.

古文：一石囊之高大，亦适一石。
现代文：粟米一石，口袋的长短大小也应恰巧够装一石。
English: The length of the bag should be just enough to hold one stone of corn.

古文：如损益粟米，囊亦增减。
现代文：如果减少或增加了粟米，口袋也应随着增大或缩小。
English: If corn is reduced or increased, the pocket should also increase or decrease accordingly.

古文：人以气为寿，气犹粟米，形犹囊也。
现代文：人以承受气形成寿命，气就像粟米，形体就像口袋。
English: A person's life span is formed by bearing qi, qi is like corn, and the body is like a bag.

古文：增减其寿，亦当增减其身，形安得如故？
现代文：增加或减少人的寿命，也应当改变其身体的大小，那么形体怎么能像原来一样呢？
English: Increasing or decreasing a person's lifespan should also change the size of his body, so how can the body be the same as before?

古文：如以人形与囊异，气与粟米殊，更以苞瓜喻之。
现代文：如果因为人的形体跟口袋有差异，气与粟米有不同，就改用苞瓜来比喻。
English: If the qi is different from the corn because of the difference between the shape of the human body and the bag, use the analogy of the melon instead.

古文：苞瓜之汁，犹人之血也；其肌，犹肉也。
现代文：苞瓜的汁液，就像人的血，瓜的肌，就像人的肉。
English: The juice of the melon is like human blood, and the skin of the melon is like human flesh.

古文：试令人损益苞瓜之汁，令其形如故，耐为之乎？
现代文：试让人减少或增加苞瓜的汁液，还要使它的形体像原来一样，能办得到吗？
English: Is it possible for someone to reduce or increase the juice of a melon, but still make it look like the original?

古文：人不耐损益苞瓜之汁，天安耐增减人之年？
现代文：人不能够减少或增加苞瓜的汁液，天又怎么能增加或减少人的寿命呢？
English: Man cannot reduce or increase the juice of a gourd, so how can the heavens increase or decrease man's lifespan?

古文：人年不可增减，高宗之徒，谁益之者？而云增加。
现代文：人的寿命既是不能够增加或减少，殷高宗他们谁长寿了，而硬要说增添了寿命？
English: People's lifespan cannot be increased or decreased, so who has lived longer, and who has increased their lifespan?

古文：如言高宗之徒，形体变易，其年亦增，乃可信也。
现代文：如果说殷高宗他们，形体改变了，其寿命也随着增添了，才可以相信。
English: If it is said that Yin Gao is their ancestor, the shape has changed, and their life expectancy has also increased, then we can believe it.

古文：今言年增，不言其体变，未可信也。
现代文：现在说他们寿命增加了，却不说他们形体是否改变，这不能相信。为什么呢？
English: To now say that their lifespan has increased, but not say whether their shape has changed, is not believable. Why?

古文：何则？人禀气於天，气成而形立，则命相须以至终死。
现代文：人从天承受气，得气就形成形体，形体和寿命相互依存至到寿终死去。
English: People receive qi from the heavens, and the resulting qi forms a body, and the body and life span are interdependent until the end of life.

古文：形不可变化，年亦不可增加。
现代文：形体没有变化，寿命也就不能增添。
English: There is no change in shape, so life expectancy cannot be increased.

古文：以何验之？
现代文：拿什么来验证呢？
English: What do you use for verification?

古文：人生能行，死则僵仆，死则气减形消而坏。
现代文：人活着就能行走，死去则僵硬地倒下，死了则气断绝，形体腐烂消灭。
English: When a person is alive, he can walk; when he dies, he falls down stiffly; when he is dead, his breath is cut off and his body rots away.

古文：禀生人形，不可得变，其年安可增？
现代文：承受气生下人，形体不可能改变，其寿命又怎么能增添？
English: It is impossible to change the shape of a person born with qi, so how can its lifespan be increased?

古文：人生至老，身变者，发与肤也。
现代文：人从生下来到老，身体上有改变的，只是毛发和皮肤。
English: From birth to old age, only the hair and skin of a person's body change.

古文：人少则发黑，老则发白，白久则黄。
现代文：人年少则毛发黑，年老则毛发白，白久了则变黄。
English: Young people have black hair, old people have white hair, and those who have been white for a long time turn yellow.

古文：发之变，形非变也。
现代文：毛发颜色改变了，但形体没有改变。
English: The hair color changed, but the shape didn't.

古文：人少则肤白，老则肤黑，黑久则黯，若有垢矣。
现代文：人年少则皮肤白，年老则皮肤黑。黑久了则颜色会加深，像是粘有污垢。
English: When you are young, your skin is white, when you are old, your skin is dark. If you are dark for a long time, the color will deepen, as if there is dirt stuck to it.

古文：发黄而肤为垢，故《礼》曰： 黄耇无疆。 
现代文：年老毛发变黄，皮肤变得暗黑，所以《礼仪·士冠礼》上说： 黄耉无疆。 
English: In old age, the hair turns yellow and the skin darkens, which is why the "Etiquette and Discipline" says: "There is no limit to jaundice."

古文：发肤变异，故人老寿迟死，骨肉不可变更，寿极则死矣。
现代文：由于只是毛发和皮肤的颜色变得不同，所以人长寿到晚年，骨肉的形态也不会改变，直到寿终死去。
English: Since only the hair and skin color become different, people live longer into old age, and the shape of the bones and flesh will not change until they die.

古文：五行之物，可变改者，唯土也。
现代文：木、火、土、金、水等东西，能够改变形体的，只有土。
English: Wood, fire, earth, gold, water and other things can change their shape, but only earth.

古文：埏以为马，变以为人，是谓未入陶灶更火者也。
现代文：揉和粘土用它捏成马，还可以改变马的形状捏成人，这说的是还没有送进窑里经过烧炼的东西。
English: Kneading and clay can be used to make a horse, and it is also possible to change the shape of the horse and make it into an adult, which means something that has not been sent to the kiln and burned.

古文：如使成器，入灶更火，牢坚不可复变。
现代文：如果把它做成陶器，送进窑里经过烧炼，形体就会坚固得不能再改变。
English: If it is made into pottery and sent into a kiln to be fired, the shape will be so strong that it cannot be changed.

古文：今人以为天地所陶冶矣，形已成定，何可复更也？
现代文：现在人体已经被天地陶冶过，形状已经固定，怎么能再改变呢？
English: Now the human body has been cultivated by heaven and earth, the shape has been fixed, how can it be changed again?

古文：图仙人之形，体生毛，臂变为翼，行於云则年增矣，千岁不死。
现代文：画仙人的形象，身体长毛，两臂变成翅膀，在云中行走，于是寿命增添，千岁不死。
English: He painted the image of a fairy, his body was hairy, his arms turned into wings, and he walked in the clouds. As a result, his lifespan increased, and he did not die for a thousand years.

古文：此虚图也。世有虚语，亦有虚图。
现代文：这样的画不真实。社会上有假话，也有假图。
English: Such a picture is not true. There are false words and false images in society.

古文：假使之然，蝉蛾之类，非真正人也。
现代文：假定是这样，只能是蝉蛾一类的虫子，不是真正的人。
English: Assuming so, it can only be a worm such as a cicada moth, not a real person.

古文：海外三十五国，有毛民羽民，羽则翼矣。
现代文：海外有三十五国，有长毛的人，有生羽的人，羽就是翅膀。
English: There are thirty-five countries overseas. People with long hair, people with raw feathers, feathers are wings.

古文：毛羽之民土形所出，非言为道身生毛羽也。
现代文：生毛长羽的人，是地理条件造成的，不能说是修道才使得他们身上长出毛羽的。
English: People with long hair and feathers are the result of geographical conditions, and it cannot be said that it is because of religious belief that they have long hair and feathers.

古文：禹、益见西王母，不言有毛羽。
现代文：大禹，伯益见过西王母，并没有说她身上长有毛羽。
English: Dayu, Bo Yi saw Xi Wang Mu, and did not say that she had feathers on her body.

古文：不死之民，亦在外国，不言有毛羽。
现代文：有不会死的人，但在外国，也没有说他们身上长有毛羽。
English: There are people who can't die, but in foreign countries, they don't say they have feathers on their bodies.

古文：毛羽之民，不言之死；不死之民，不言毛羽。
现代文：身上长有毛羽的人，没有说他们长生不死；不会死的人，又没有说他们长有毛羽。
English: People with feathers on their bodies do not say that they are immortal; people who cannot die do not say that they have feathers.

古文：毛羽未可以效不死，仙人之有翼，安足以验长寿乎？
现代文：可见，身上长毛生翅膀不能用它来证明长生不死，仙人有翅膀，又怎么能用它来证明可以长寿呢？
English: It can be seen that a winged horse with long hair on its body cannot use it to prove immortality, and a fairy with wings, how can it be used to prove longevity?

