古文：老子木公广成子黄安孟岐
现代文：老子木公广成子黄安孟岐
English: Lao Zi Mu Gong Guang Cheng Zi Huang An Meng Qi

古文：老子
现代文：老子
English: Lao Tzu

古文：老子者，名重耳，字伯阳，楚国苦县曲仁里人也。
现代文：老子姓李，名重耳，字伯阳，是春秋时期楚国苦县曲仁里的人。
English: Laozi, surnamed Li, with the honorific "Ju" and the Chinese character "Bo" Yang, was a man from Qurenli, Qiu County, Chu Province during the Spring and Autumn Period.

古文：其母感大流星而有娠。
现代文：传说他的母亲有一次看见空中大流星飞过后，就有了身孕。
English: Legend has it that his mother became pregnant after she once saw a large meteor in the sky.

古文：虽受气天然，见于李家，犹以李为姓。
现代文：老子虽然是承受上界的神灵之气才降生，但因为是生在李家，所以姓了凡人的李氏。
English: Although Lao Zi was born with the breath of the gods of the upper world, he was born in the Li family, so he was given the name of the mortal Li clan.

古文：或云，老子先天地生。
现代文：有人说，老子生于开天辟地之前。
English: Some people say that Lao Zi was born before the heavens and the earth were created.

古文：或云，天之精魄，盖神灵之属。
现代文：有人说他是天的精灵神魄，自然就是神灵了。
English: Some people say that he is the spirit of the sky, so naturally he is a deity.

古文：或云，母怀之七十二年乃生，生时，剖母左腋而出。
现代文：有人说，老子的母亲怀了他七十二年才将他生下来，生的时候，剖开左腋生下了他。
English: Some people say that Laozi's mother was pregnant with him for 72 years before giving birth to him. When he was born, she opened his left jaw and gave birth to him.

古文：生而白首，故谓之老子。
现代文：他一出生就是白发苍苍的样子，所以才叫老子。
English: He was born with white hair, which is why he is called Lao Zi.

古文：或云，其母无夫，老子是母家之姓。
现代文：有人说老子的母亲没有丈夫，他是随母亲娘家而姓李的。
English: Some people say that Lao Zi's mother did not have a husband, and he was named Li after his mother's family.

古文：或云，老子之母，适至李树下而生老子，生而能言，指李树曰：以此为我姓。
现代文：也有人说老子的母亲碰巧是在李树下生了老子，老子一出生就能说话，指着李树说： 就用它来作我的姓吧。 
English: It is also said that Lao Zi's mother happened to give birth to Lao Zi under a plum tree. Lao Zi was able to speak as soon as he was born. Pointing to the plum tree, he said, "Use it as my surname."

古文：或云，上三皇时为玄中法师，下三皇时为金阙帝君，伏羲时为郁华子，神农时为九灵老子，祝融时为广寿子，黄帝时为广成子，颛顼时为赤精子，帝喾时为禄图子，尧时为务成子，舜时为尹寿子，夏禹时为真行子，殷汤时为锡则子，文王时为文邑先生。
现代文：还有人说，老子在上三皇时是玄中法师，下三皇时是金阙帝君，伏羲氏时是郁华子，神农氏时是九灵老子，祝融时是广寿子，黄帝时是广成子，颛顼时是赤精子，帝喾时是禄图子，尧时是务成子，舜时为尹寿子，夏禹时是真行子，殷商时是锡则子，周文王时是文邑先生。
English: It is also said that Lao Tzu in the time of the last three emperors was Xuanzhong Mage, in the time of the next three emperors was Jin Xi, in the time of the Fuxi clan was Yu Hua Zi, in the time of the Shennong clan was Jiu Ling Lao Zi, in the time of Zhu Rong was Guang Shou Zi, in the time of the Yellow Emperor was Guang Cheng Zi, in the time of the Zhou Dynasty was Red Sperm, in the time of the Emperor Zhou was Lu Tu Zi, in the time of the Zhou Dynasty was Mu Cheng Zi, in the time of the Zhou Dynasty was

古文：一云，守藏史。
现代文：还有一种说法，说老子是文王的守藏史。
English: There is also a saying that Laozi is the history of King Wen's protection of Tibet.

古文：或云，在越为范蠡，在齐为鸱夷子，在吴为陶朱公。
现代文：有人说，老子在越国就是范蠡，在齐国就是鸱夷子，在吴国就是陶朱公。
English: Some people say that Lao Zi in Yue Province is Fan Zheng, in Qi Province is Yaizi, and in Wu Province is Tao Zhu Gong.

古文：皆见于群书，不出神仙正经。
现代文：这些传说在各种书籍中都有记载，但都不是出自神仙经书的正式传记中，所以不能把它们当成依据。
English: These legends are recorded in various books, but they are not from the official biography of the immortal book, so they cannot be used as a basis.

古文：未可据也。葛稚川云：洪以为老子若是天之精神，当无世不出。俯尊就卑，委逸就劳。背清澄而入臭浊，弃天官而受人爵也。
现代文：晋代的道学大师葛洪曾说： 老子如果真是上天的精灵神人，那他应当世世代代都会出现在尘世间，放弃他尊贵的身份混迹于凡夫俗子之中，反而从事辛苦的劳作，背离神界的清明高洁，而进入凡俗肮脏的尘世，抛弃天界的官位而接受人间的封爵。
English: Ge Hong, a Taoist master of the Jin Dynasty, once said: "If Lao Tzu is really a heavenly spirit godman, then he should appear in the earthly world for generations to come, give up his noble identity and mingle with ordinary people, but instead engage in hard work, depart from the purity and purity of the divine world and enter the mundane and dirty earthly world, abandon the official position of the heavenly world and accept the knighthood of the human world.

古文：夫有天地则有道术，道术之士，何时暂乏。
现代文：自有天地以来，就有道术存在，修炼道术的人更是从来没有间断过。
English: Daoism has existed since the beginning of the world, and people who practice Daoism have never stopped.

古文：是以伏羲以来，至于三代，显名道术，世世有之，何必常是一老子也。
现代文：从伏羲以来，到夏、商、周三代，著名的道家世代都有，怎么会仅仅只有一位老子呢？
English: There have been famous generations of Taoists from Fuxi to Xia, Shang and San dynasties. How could there be only one Laozi?

古文：皆由晚学之徒，好奇尚异，苛欲推崇老子，故有此说。
现代文：这都是因为后来的一些学道的人们为了推崇老子而夸大其词，才编造了那些奇闻异说以耸人听闻罢了。
English: This is all because some later scholars exaggerated in order to praise Lao Zi and fabricated those bizarre stories to sensationalize.

古文：其实论之，老子盖得道之尤精者，非异类也。
现代文：实事求是地说，老子就是一个得道精深的人而已，绝不是什么神仙异类。 
English: Truth be told, Lao Tzu is a man of profound wisdom, not some kind of supernatural being.

古文：按史记云：老子之子名宗，事魏为将军，有功，封于段。
现代文：根据《史记》上记载，老子的儿子叫李宗，在魏国作过将军，由于有功被封邑在叫段干的地方。
English: According to the "Historical Records," the son of Lao Zi was called Li Zong. He was a general in Wei, and because of his meritorious service, he was given a fiefdom in the place called Duan Gan.

古文：至宗之子汪、汪之子言、言之玄孙瑕，仕于汉。
现代文：李宗的儿子是李汪，李汪的儿子是李言，李言的玄孙李瑕。李瑕在汉朝作过官。
English: Li Zong's son was Li Wang, Li Wang's son was Li Yan, and Li Yan's great-great-grandson was Li Ke. Li Ke had been an official in the Han Dynasty.

古文：瑕子解，为胶西王太傅，家于齐。
现代文：李瑕的儿子李解，当过胶西王的太傅，家在齐国。
English: Li Ke's son, Li Jie, once served as the King of Jiaoxi's Taifu, and his home is in Qi Province.

古文：则老子本神灵耳，浅见道士，欲以老子为神异，使后代学者从之，而不知此更使不信长生之可学也。
现代文：老子本人十分聪慧机灵，所以有些浅薄的道士想把他说成神仙，好让后代人更崇拜他学习他。殊不知这样一来使得普通的人们更认为老子是长生不老的神仙，不是后天学习能得到的。
English: Lao Tzu himself was very clever and witty, so some shallow Taoists wanted to make him a god, so that future generations would worship and study him more. However, this made ordinary people think that Lao Tzu was an immortal god, not something that could be learned later.

古文：何者，若谓老子是得道者。
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why do you say that?

古文：则人必勉力竞慕；若谓是神灵异类，则非可学也。
现代文：因为如果说老子只是个得了道的凡人，那人们一定会在倾慕他的同时向他学习，如果说老子本来就是神仙，人们会望而生畏不知从何学起了。
English: Because if Lao Tzu is just an ordinary man who has been enlightened, then people will certainly admire him and learn from him at the same time. If Lao Tzu is originally a god, people will be daunted and do not know where to learn from.

古文：或云：老子欲西度关，关令尹喜知其非常人也，从之问道。
现代文：据说老子要向西出关去，守关的令尹名叫喜，知道老子不是一般人，就向他问道。
English: It is said that Lao Zi wanted to go out of the pass to the west. The gatekeeper's name was Yin Xie. Knowing that Lao Zi was not an ordinary person, he asked him.

古文：老子惊怪，故吐舌聃然，遂有老聃之号。
现代文：老子听了他的请求又惊又怪，竟吐出舌头来半天没收回去，从此才有了 老聃 这个称号。
English: Hearing his request, Lao Zi was surprised and surprised. He actually spat out his tongue and confiscated it for half a day. From then on, he had the title of Lao Zi.

古文：亦不然也。
现代文：其实这个说法不对。
English: Actually, that's not true.

古文：今按《九变》及《元生十二化经》，老子未入关时，固已名聃矣。
现代文：根据《九变》及《元生十二化经》的记载，老子没进关时已经有了 老聃 这个别号了。
English: According to the records of "The Nine Changes" and "The Twelve Transmutation of Yuan Sheng," when Laozi did not enter the pass, he already had the nickname of Laozi.

古文：老子数易名字，非但一聃而已。
现代文：老子改过好几次名字，不仅是一个 聃 字而已。
English: Laozi changed his name several times, and it wasn't just a misspelling.

古文：所以尔者，按《九宫》及《三五经》及《元辰经》云：人生各有厄会，到其时，若易名字，以随元气之变，则可以延年度厄。
现代文：他之所以改免职，是根据《九宫》《三五经》《元辰经》上说的，人这一生会有几次命运中的坎坷，每到一个 坎儿 的时候，如果能改一下名字来顺应运气的改变，就可以消除灾厄延年益寿。
English: The reason why he was relieved of his duties was that according to the Nine Palace, the Thirty-five Classics, and the Book of Changes, it is said that a person will have several ups and downs in his fate in this life. Whenever he comes to a crossroads, if he can change his name to conform to the change of luck, he can eliminate misfortune and prolong life.

古文：今世有道者，亦多如此。
现代文：现在一些有道术的人，也常常这样做。
English: Nowadays, some people with Daoism often do the same.

古文：老子在周，乃三百余年，二百年之中，必有厄会非一，是以名稍多耳。
现代文：老子在周朝活了三百多年，这么长的时间里，必然会有多次的厄运坎坷，所以老子改名的次数也就必然多了些。
English: Laozi lived more than three hundred years in the Zhou Dynasty. In such a long time, there will inevitably be multiple bad luck, so the number of times Laozi changed his name will inevitably increase.

古文：欲正定老子本末，故当以史书实录为主，并老仙经秘文，以相参审。其它若俗说，多虚妄。
现代文：如果想准确地考证确定老子的生平，还是应该以史书上的正式的记载为主，并参考一些神仙的经传秘文。其他一些世俗传说大多荒诞，不可凭信。
English: If you want to accurately verify the life of Lao Tzu, you should still focus on the official records in the history books, and refer to some secret scriptures of the immortals. Other secular legends are mostly absurd and cannot be trusted.

古文：洪按《西升中胎》及《复命苞》及《珠韬玉机》《金篇内经》，皆云：老子黄白色，美眉，广颡长耳，大目疏齿，方口厚唇；额有三五达理，日角月悬；鼻纯骨双柱，耳有三漏门；足蹈二五，手把十文。
现代文：葛洪按《西升中胎》及《复命苞》和《珠韬玉机》《金篇内经》等典籍上的记载说，老子皮色黄白，眉毛很美，额头宽阔耳朵很长，眼睛大，牙齿稀疏，四方大口嘴唇很厚。他的额头有十五道皱纹，额角两端似有日月的形状。他鼻子很端正，有两根鼻骨，耳朵上有三个耳孔。
English: Ge Hong said that according to the records in the classics such as "The West-Rising Middle Child" and "The Return to Life" and "The Pearl and the Jade Machine" and "The Golden Inner Canon," Laozi's skin color is yellow and white, his eyebrows are beautiful, his forehead is broad, his ears are long, his eyes are large, his teeth are sparse, and his lips are thick. His forehead has fifteen wrinkles, and the corners of his forehead are shaped like the sun and the moon. His nose is very neat, with two nasal bones and three ear holes.

古文：以周文王时为守藏史，至武王时为柱下史。时俗见其久寿，故号之为老子。
现代文：他一步可跨一丈，双手上有十道贵人的纹路。周文王时期，老子做守藏史，到武王时，他还担任柱下史，人们看他如此长寿，就称他为 老子 。
English: He can leap a height with a single step, and his hands bear the marks of ten noblemen. During the reign of King Zhou Wen, Lao Zi was the keeper of Tibetan history, and when he became King Wu, he also served as a pillar of history. People called him Lao Zi because of his long life.

古文：夫人受命，自有通神远见者，禀气与常人不同，应为道主，故能为天神所济，众仙所从。
现代文：凡是受命于天的人，必然是通达灵异的人，他的禀赋气质也与平常人不同，这样的人理所当然成为道家之主，也自然会得到天神的佑助和神仙们的呵护。
English: Anyone who is commanded by heaven is bound to be a person with insight into the supernatural, and his endowment temperament is also different from that of ordinary people. Such a person will naturally become the head of the Taoist family, and will naturally receive the blessing of the gods and the care of the immortals.

古文：是以所出度世之法，九丹八石，金醴金液；次存玄素守一，思神历藏，行气炼形，消灾辟恶，治鬼养性，绝谷变化，厌胜教戒，役使鬼魅之法。
现代文：老子济助世人的法术有九种丹八种石，有金酒、金液等仙药；此外，以 玄而又玄，众妙之门 的玄学修养心性，运气炼身，消灾辟邪，清除鬼魅，并有不食五谷、超脱变化之法，有符咒教戒、驱使鬼魅之法。
English: The magic of Laozi to help the world has nine kinds of diamonds and eight kinds of stones, and there are magical medicines such as gold wine and gold liquid. In addition, with the metaphysics of the mysterious and the mysterious, the door of the miraculous, the mind is cultivated, the luck is refined, the disaster is eliminated, the evil is eliminated, and the ghost is eliminated. In addition, there is the method of not eating grain, the method of transcending change, the method of spells and commandments, and the method of driving ghosts.

古文：凡九百三十卷，符书七十卷，皆老子本起中篇所记者也，自有目录。
现代文：老子的道术共有九百三十卷，符术七十卷卷，这些都记载在他的著作中，有目录可查。
English: There are a total of nine hundred and thirty volumes of Laozi's Taoism and seventy volumes of Confucianism, all of which are recorded in his works, and can be found in the catalogue.

古文：其不在此数者，皆后之道士，私所增益，非真文也。
现代文：凡不在他著作中的，都是后来的道士们私自增添的，并不是老子本人的著作。
English: Everything that was not in his writings was added by later Taoists themselves, and was not written by Lao Tzu himself.

古文：老子恬淡无欲，专以长生为务者，故在周虽久，而名位不迁者，盖欲和光同尘。
现代文：老子为人清心寡欲，专心致志于修炼长生之道，所以他在周朝虽然活的时间很久，但在官位上没有什么升迁，他始终与世无争。
English: Laozi was a man of pure heart and few desires, dedicated to cultivating the way of longevity, so although he lived for a long time in the Zhou Dynasty, there was no promotion in his official position, and he was always at peace with the world.

古文：内实自然，道成乃去，盖仙人也。
现代文：他效法自然、道术修炼成功后就羽化而去，进入天界成了仙人，这是必然的事。
English: He imitated nature, and after successfully cultivating Daoism, he fled into the sky and became a hermit, which was an inevitable thing.

古文：孔子尝往问礼，先使子贡观焉。
现代文：孔子曾经去向老子请教《礼》方面的学问，先派了他的学生子贡去拜见。
English: Confucius once went to ask Lao Tzu for advice on the study of "Rite" and first sent his student Zigong to visit him.

古文：子贡至，老子告之曰： 子之师名丘，相从三年，而后可教焉。 
现代文：子贡见到老子后，老子对子贡说： 你的老师叫孔丘，他如果能跟随我三年，我才能教他。 
English: After Zigong saw Lao Zi, Lao Zi said to Zigong: Your teacher is called Kongqiu. If he can follow me for three years, I can teach him.

古文：孔子既见老子，老子告曰： 良贾深藏若虚，君子盛德若愚。
现代文：孔子见了老子，老子对孔子说： 善于经商的人，总是把财货隐藏得很深，看上去好像一无所有；道德高尚的人，总是随时向人求教，看上去好像愚蠢笨拙。
English: Confucius saw Lao Zi, and Lao Zi said to Confucius, "A man who is good at business always hides his wealth so deeply that it looks as if he has nothing; a man of high morality always seeks advice from others at any time, and looks as if he is stupid and clumsy.

古文：去子之骄气与多欲淫志，是皆无益于子也。 孔子读书，老子见而问之曰： 何书？ 
现代文：你应该尽快丢掉你的骄气、过多的欲望和志向，因为这些东西对你一点好吃都没有。 孔子读书的时候，老子看见了，问他： 这是什么书？ 
English: You should get rid of your pride, excessive desires and ambitions as soon as possible, because these things are not good for you at all.When Confucius was reading, Laozi saw it and asked him: What is this book?

古文：曰： 易也。圣人亦读之。 
现代文：孔子答： 这是《易经》，圣人都读这本书。 
English: Confucius replied, "This is the I Ching. All the sages read this book.

古文：老子曰： 圣人读之可也，汝曷为读之？
现代文：老子说： 圣人读它可以，你为什么要读它呢？
English: Lao Tzu said: A sage can read it, so why should you read it?

古文：其要何说？ 
现代文：你说一说，这本书的精要是什么？ 
English: Tell me, what is the essence of this book?

古文：孔子曰： 要在仁义。 
现代文：孔子说： 精要是宣扬仁义的。 
English: Confucius said: It is best to preach benevolence and righteousness.

古文：老子曰： 蚊虻噆肤，通夕不得眠。
现代文：老子说： 蚊子牛虻乱咬人，咬得人整晚不得安睡。
English: Lao Tzu said: Mosquitoes and gnats bite indiscriminately, biting people all night long.

古文：今仁义惨然而汩人心，乱莫大焉。
现代文：如今仁义惨毒人心，再没有比它给人造成的乱子大了。
English: Nowadays, benevolence and righteousness have poisoned people's hearts, and there is no greater disorder than that caused by it.

古文：夫鹄不日浴而白，乌不日染而黑，天之自高矣，地之自厚矣，日月自照矣，星辰固自列矣，草木固有区矣。
现代文：你看鹄鸟，它不用每天洗浴，它的毛自然就是雪白的。乌鸦不用天天把自己染黑，它的羽毛自然就黑漆漆。天自来的就那么高，地自来的就那么厚，日月自来的就能放射光芒，星辰自来的就能够按照顺序排列，草木生来就有区别。
English: Look at the ostrich, it does not need to bathe every day, its hair is naturally snow-white. The crow does not need to dye itself black every day, its feathers are naturally black and lacquered. Those that come from the sky are so high, those that come from the earth are so thick, those that come from the sun and the moon can radiate light, those that come from the stars can be arranged in order, and plants and trees are born different.

古文：夫子修道而趋，则以至矣，又何用仁义！
现代文：你冲着自然的规律去修道，自然能够修得最高的道法，又何需讲什么仁义！
English: If you cultivate according to the laws of nature, you will naturally be able to cultivate the highest Dharma, and there is no need to talk about benevolence and righteousness!

古文：若击鼓以求亡羊乎？夫子乃乱人之性也。 
现代文：就像敲着鼓去寻找丢失的羊，你这是在拂乱人的天性啊！ 
English: It's like beating a drum to find a lost sheep, you're messing with human nature!

古文：老子问孔子曰： 亦得道乎？ 
现代文：老子又问孔子， 你得道了吗？ 
English: Lao Tzu asked Confucius again, "Have you had enough?"

古文：孔子曰： 求二十七年而不得也。 
现代文：孔子说： 我求了二十七年，仍然没有得到啊。 
English: Confucius said, "I've been asking for twenty-seven years, and I still haven't gotten it."

古文：老子曰： 使道可献人，则人莫不献之其君；使道而可进人，则人莫不进之其亲矣；使道可告人，则人莫不告之兄弟矣；使道可传人，则人莫不传之其子矣；然而不可者，无他也，中无主而道不可居也。 
现代文：老子说： 如果道是一种有形的东西可以拿来献人，那人们会争着拿它献给君王。如果道可以送人，人们就会争着拿它送给亲人。如果道能够明明白白地阐述清楚，人们都会把它告诉自己的兄弟。
English: Lao Tzu said: "If the Tao were a tangible thing that could be offered as a gift, people would compete to offer it to the king. If the Tao could be given away, people would compete to give it to their relatives. If the Tao could be clearly explained, people would tell it to their brothers."

古文：孔子曰： 丘治诗、书、礼、乐、易、春秋，诵先王之道，明周、召之迹，以干七十余君而不见用，甚矣人之难说也。 
现代文：原因很简单，那就是一个人心里没有正确的对道的认识，道就绝不会进入他的心里。 孔子说， 我研究《诗经》《书经》《周礼》《周乐》《易经》《春秋》，讲说先王治国之道，深明周公、召公成功之路，我用这些学问谒晋了七十多个国君，但他们都不采用我的主张。想要劝服人，实在是太难了！ 
English: The reason is simple, that is, if a person does not have a correct understanding of the Tao in his heart, the Tao will never enter his heart. Confucius said, I studied the "Book of Songs," "Book of Books," "Zhou Rituals," "Zhou Music," "I Ching," "Spring and Autumn," and talked about the way of the previous king's governance, the profound understanding of Zhou Gong, and the successful way of summoning Gong. I used these studies to promote more than seventy kings, but they did not adopt my idea. It is really difficult to persuade people!

古文：老子曰： 夫六艺，先王之陈迹也，岂其所陈哉。
现代文：老子说， 你那 六艺 全都是先王时代的陈旧事迹，你说那些又有什么用呢？
English: "Lao Tzu said, "Your six arts are all old stories from the time of the previous king. What use are they?

古文：今子所修者，皆因陈迹也。迹者履之出，而迹岂异哉？ 
现代文：你现在所修的，也都是些陈陈相因的旧迹。 迹 就是人的鞋子留下的印迹，脚印和脚印，有什么区别呢？ 
English: What you are building now are also old relics from ancient times, relics are the marks left by people's shoes, footprints and footprints, what's the difference?

古文：孔子归，三日不谈。
现代文：孔子从老子那儿回来，三天没有说话。
English: When Confucius returned from Laozi, he did not speak for three days.

古文：子贡怪而问之。孔子曰： 吾见人之用意如飞鸟者，吾饰意以为弓弩射之，未尝不及而加之也；人之用意如糜鹿者，吾饰意以为走狗而逐之，未尝不衔而顿之也；人之用意如渊鱼者，吾饰意以为钩缗而投之，未尝不钓而制之也。
现代文：子贡很奇怪地问是怎么了，孔子说： 我如果遇见有人的思路像飞鸟一样放达时，我可以用我似弓箭般准确锐利的论点射住他制服他。如果对方的思想似麋鹿一样奔驰无羁，我可以用猎犬来追逐它，一定能使他被我的论点所制服。如果对方的思想像鱼一样遨游在理论的深渊中，我可以用钓钩来捕捉他。
English: Zigong asked in surprise, "What's the matter?" Confucius said: "If I meet someone whose thoughts are flying like a bird, I can use my sharp and accurate arguments like a bow and arrow to shoot him down and subdue him. If the other person's thoughts are running wild like a moose, I can chase him with a hound and surely subdue him with my arguments. If the other person's thoughts are swimming like a fish in the abyss of theory, I can catch him with a fishing hook."

古文：至于龙，乘云气，游太清，吾不能逐也。
现代文：可是如果对方的思想像龙一样，乘云驾雾，遨游于太虚幻境，无影无形捉摸不定，我就没法追逐和捕捉他了。
English: But if the other person's thoughts are like a dragon, riding on the clouds, wandering in a too unreal fantasy, shadowless and elusive, I can't chase and catch him.

古文：今见老子，其犹龙乎，使吾口张而不能翕，舌出而不能缩，神错而不知其所居也。 
现代文：我见到老子，觉得他的思想境界就像遨游在太虚中的龙，使我张着嘴说不出话，舌头伸出来也缩不回去，弄得我心神不定，不知自己身在何处。 
English: When I saw Lao Zi, I felt that his state of mind was like that of a dragon wandering in the void. I couldn't speak with my mouth open, and I couldn't retract my tongue when it was sticking out. This made my mind unstable, and I didn't know where I was.

古文：阳子见于老子，老子告之曰： 虎豹之文，猿猱之捷，所以致射也。 
现代文：阳子见到老子，老子对他说， 虎豹由于身上有花纹，猿猴由于身手敏捷，所以才招人射杀。 
English: When Yang Zi saw Lao Zi, Lao Zi said to him, "The tiger and the leopard have patterns on their bodies, and the monkeys are agile, so they only need to be shot."

古文：阳子曰： 敢问明王之治。 
现代文：阳子问老子，说： 请问英明的君主，应该怎样治理国家？ 
English: Yang Zi asked Lao Zi, saying, "Excuse me, wise monarch, how should the country be governed?

古文：老子曰： 明王之治，功盖天下而以不自己；化被万物而使民不恃；其有德而不称其名；位乎不测而游乎无有者也。 
现代文：老子说： 一位真正英明的君王，应该是他虽有盖世的功劳但老百姓却不知道。他的德行包容和泽被万物，而老百姓认为本来就应该是那样。他德行很高，但老百姓却并不歌颂他的名字。他在位或不在位，对于天下百姓来说都不要紧。 
English: Lao Tzu said: A truly wise king should be one who, although he has made great contributions to the world, is unknown to the common people. His virtue is tolerant and kind to all things, and the common people think that is how it should be. His virtue is very high, but the common people do not praise his name. It does not matter to the people of the world whether he is in power or not.

古文：老子将去而西出关，以升昆仑。
现代文：老子将要出关西去，打算登昆仑山。
English: Lao Zi is going to leave Kansai to climb Mount Kunlun.

古文：关令尹喜占风气，逆知当有神人来过，乃扫道四十里。见老子而知是也。
现代文：守关的令尹喜通过占卜预知会有神人从这里经过，就命人清扫了四十里道路迎接，果然是老子来了。
English: The gatekeeper, Yin Xi, foresaw through divination that there would be a god-man passing through here, so he ordered someone to sweep the forty-mile road to meet him, and sure enough, Lao Zi arrived.

古文：老子在中国，都未有所授，知喜命应得道，乃停关中。
现代文：老子出行以来，在中原一带都没有传授过什么，他知道令尹喜命中注定该得道，就在那里停留下来。
English: Since Laozi's trip, he had not taught anything in the Central Plains area. He knew that Yin Xi was destined to be a Taoist, so he stayed there.

古文：老子有客徐甲，少赁于老子，约日雇百钱，计欠甲七百二十万钱。
现代文：有一个叫徐甲的人，从小就给老子做仆人，老子每天大约应付给他一百钱，一共欠了他七百二十万钱的工钱。
English: There was a man named Xu Jia, who had been a servant to Lao Zi since he was a child. Lao Zi paid him about one hundred yuan a day, and he owed him a total of 7.2 million yuan in wages.

古文：甲见老子出关游行，速索偿不可得，乃倩人作辞，诣关令，以言老子。
现代文：徐甲见老子出关远行，想尽快讨回自己的工钱又怕要不回来，就求人写了状子告到令尹喜那里。
English: When Xu Jia saw that Lao Zi had left for a long trip, he wanted to get his salary back as soon as possible and was afraid that he would not be able to return, so he asked someone to write a notice and report it to Ling Yinxi.

古文：而为作辞者，亦不知甲已随老子二百余年矣，唯计甲所应得直之多，许以女嫁甲。
现代文：替徐甲写状子的人并不知道徐甲已跟随老子二百多年了，只知道他如果索回老子所欠的工钱，就会有很多的钱，就答应把女儿嫁给徐甲。
English: The person who wrote the letter for Xu Jia did not know that Xu Jia had been following Lao Zi for more than two hundred years. He only knew that if he recovered the wages that Lao Zi owed, he would have a lot of money, so he agreed to marry his daughter to Xu Jia.

古文：甲见女美，尤喜，遂通辞于尹喜。
现代文：徐甲见那女子很美，更加高兴，就把告老子的状子递交给令尹喜。
English: Xu Jia saw that the woman was very beautiful and was even happier, so he handed the petition to Ling Yinxi.

古文：得辞大惊，乃见老子。
现代文：令尹喜看了状子，大惊，就去见老子。
English: When Yin Xi read the letter, he was shocked and went to see Lao Zi.

古文：老子问甲曰： 汝久应死，吾昔赁汝，为官卑家贫，无有使役，故以《太玄清生符》与汝，所以至今日。
现代文：老子对徐甲说： 你的寿命早就该到尽头了。我当初因为官小家穷，连个替我打杂的人都没有，就雇了你，所以就把 太玄清生符 给了你，所以你才能一直活到今天。
English: Laozi said to Xu Jia, "Your lifespan should have ended a long time ago. I originally hired you because I was poor and didn't even have a helper, so I gave you the Tai Xuan Qing Sheng Fu, so you could live until today.

古文：汝何以言吾？
现代文：你为什么要告我呢？
English: Why are you suing me?

古文：吾语汝到安息国，固当以黄金计直还汝，汝何以不能忍？ 
现代文：我当初曾答应你，如果你将来进入了 安息国 ，那时我会用黄金计算你的工钱全数还给你。
English: I promised you that if you ever came to the land of peace, I would pay you all your wages in gold.

古文：乃使甲张口向地，其太玄真符立出于地，丹书文字如新，甲成一聚枯骨矣。
现代文：你怎么竟这样急得等不了呢？ 说罢就让徐甲低头张开嘴，那 太玄真符 立刻被吐了出来，符上的朱砂字迹还像刚写时一样，而徐甲则顿时变成了一具枯骨了。
English: How could you be in such a hurry that you couldn't wait? As soon as he said it, Xu Jia lowered his head and opened his mouth. The mysterious character was immediately spit out. The cinnabar writing on the character was still the same as when it was first written, but Xu Jia suddenly turned into a dead body.

古文：喜知老子神人，能复使甲生，乃为甲叩头请命，乞为老子出钱还之。
现代文：令尹喜知道老子是神人，就跪下磕头为徐甲求情，并自愿替老子还欠债。
English: When Yin Xi knew that Lao Zi was a man of God, he knelt down and begged for Xu Jia's forgiveness, and volunteered to pay off Lao Zi's debts.

古文：老子复以太玄符投之，甲立更生。
现代文：老子就把那太玄真符又扔给徐甲，徐甲立刻复活了。
English: Lao Zi then threw the mysterious symbol to Xu Jia, and Xu Jia immediately came back to life.

古文：喜即以钱二百万与甲，遗之而去。
现代文：令尹喜就给了徐甲二百万钱打发他去了。
English: Ling Yinxi gave Xu Jia 2 million yuan to send him away.

古文：并执弟子之礼，具以长生之事授喜。
现代文：令尹喜向老子恭敬地执弟子之礼，老子就把长生之道的秘方授给了令尹喜。
English: Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche respectfully presented the disciple's gift to Lao Tzu, and Lao Tzu gave Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche the secret of the way of eternal life.

古文：喜又请教诫，老子语之五千言，喜退而书之，名曰《道德经》焉。
现代文：令尹喜又向老子请求更进一步的教导训诫，老子就口述五千字，令尹喜回去将他们全部记载了下来，这就是著名的《道德经》。
English: Yin Xi also asked Lao Zi for further instruction and admonition. Lao Zi dictated five thousand words, and ordered Yin Xi to go back and write them all down. This is the famous "Moral Classic."

古文：尹喜行其道，亦得仙。
现代文：令尹喜按照老子的教导去修行，果然也成了仙。
English: Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche told Yin Xi to practice in accordance with Lao Zi's teachings, and he became an immortal.

古文：汉窦太后信老子之言，孝文帝及外戚诸窦，皆不得不读，读之皆大得其益。
现代文：汉代的窦太后崇尚老子的著作，孝文帝及窦氏家族人人都必须读老子的书，读后都获益匪浅。
English: Empress Dowager Dou of the Han Dynasty revered Lao Zi's works, and Emperor Xiaowen and the Dou family all had to read Lao Zi's books. They all benefited a lot after reading them.

古文：故文景之世，天下谧然，而窦氏三世保其荣宠。
现代文：所以汉文帝、汉景帝在位时，天下太平国运兴盛，而窦氏三代也保住了他们的富贵和皇帝的恩宠。
English: Therefore, when Emperor Hanwen and Emperor Hanjing were on the throne, the Taiping Rebellion flourished, and the three generations of the Dou family kept their wealth and the emperor's favor.

古文：太子太傅疏广父子，深达其意，知功成身退之意，同日弃官而归，散金布惠，保其清贵。
现代文：太子的老师疏广父子也对老子的道义理解深刻，知道功成身退的道理，父子二人同一天辞官回家，把他们的财富散给了穷人，以保持高贵的节操。
English: The prince's teacher, Zou Guang and his son, also had a deep understanding of Lao Zi's morality, and knew the principle of retiring with merit. Both father and son resigned from the government and went home on the same day, and distributed their wealth to the poor in order to maintain noble principles.

古文：及诸隐士，其遵老子之术者，皆外损荣华，内养生寿，无有颠沛于险世。
现代文：后来的那些隐士们，凡是遵从老子道法的，都是抛弃了世俗的荣华富贵，着力于修身养性，而没有在险恶的乱世遭遇颠沛坎坷。
English: The later hermits who followed the teachings of Laozi abandoned worldly glory and wealth and focused on self-cultivation, but they did not encounter ups and downs in the sinister chaotic world.

古文：其洪源长流所润，洋洋如此，岂非乾坤所定，万世之师表哉。
现代文：老子的学说和道法源远流长，渊博广大，这难道不是乾坤所定，值得后代万世向他师法学习的吗？
English: Laozi's teachings and Taoism have a long history and are very profound. Isn't this predetermined by fate, and is it worth future generations to learn from his teachings?

古文：故庄周之徒，莫不以老子为宗也。
现代文：所以庄周一派的门徒，也都把老子奉为他们的宗师了。
English: That is why the disciples of the Zhuangzhuang sect also regard Lao Zi as their guru.

古文：木公
现代文：木公
English: Mokgong

古文：木公，亦云东王父，亦云东王公。盖青阳之元气，百物之先也。
现代文：木公，有些地方称他为 东王父 ，或者称他为 东王公 ，说他产生于春天阳光的元气中，是万物的始祖。
English: Mokong, some places call him Dongwang father, or call him Dongwang, said that he was born in the spring sunshine of vitality, is the ancestor of all things.

古文：冠三维之冠，服九色云霞之服，亦号玉皇君。
现代文：木公头上戴着象征着天、地、人三界的帽子，穿着九色云霞制成的袍服，人们也称他为 玉皇君 。
English: Wearing a hat symbolizing the three realms of heaven, earth and man on his wooden head and a robe made of nine colors of clouds and haze, people also call him the Jade Emperor.

古文：居于云房之间，以紫云为盖，青云为城。
现代文：木公住在九霄云中，以紫云作他的车伞盖，以青云筑成他的城池。
English: Mogi lives in the clouds, with purple clouds as his umbrella cover, and with blue clouds to build his castle.

古文：仙童侍立，玉女散香。
现代文：他的身边侍立着仙童和身上散发着异香的玉女。
English: He is flanked by a fairy godmother and a fragrant maiden.

古文：真僚仙官，巨亿万计。各有所职，皆禀其命，而朝奉翼卫。
现代文：他所管辖的仙官有亿万名，都各司各的职务，恭谨地遵奉着他的圣命，朝拜护卫着他。
English: There are hundreds of millions of immortals under his jurisdiction, all of whom perform their respective duties, respectfully follow his holy will, worship and protect him.

古文：故男女得道者，名籍所隶焉。
现代文：这些仙官，都是人间男女中得道的人，人们得道之后就隶属于仙籍了。
English: These celestial magistrates are all human men and women who have attained the Tao. After attaining the Tao, people belong to the celestial family.

古文：昔汉初，小儿于道歌曰： 着青裙，入天门，揖金母，拜木公。 
现代文：过去汉朝初年时，有一个小孩在道旁唱道： 着青裙，入天门。揖金母，拜木公。 
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty in the past, there was a child singing on the side of the road: "Wear a blue dress, enter the gates of heaven.

古文：时人皆不识，唯张子房知之。乃再拜之曰： 此乃东王公之玉童也。
现代文：当时人们都不懂这首儿歌说的是什么意思，只有张良知道，就向小孩恭敬地下拜，并说： 这孩子就是东王公身边的玉童。
English: At that time, people did not understand the meaning of this children's song. Only Zhang Liang knew, so he bowed down respectfully to the child and said, "This child is the Jade Child around the Eastern Prince."

古文：盖言世人登仙，皆揖金母而拜木公焉。 
现代文：他说的就是人间能够成仙的人都要向金母、木公叩拜啊。 
English: What he said was that all people who can become immortals must worship the golden mother and the wood god.

古文：或云，居东极大荒中，有山焉，以青玉为室，深广数里。
现代文：还有一种传说，说极东的大荒之中有一座高山，木公就住在这山中用青玉盖的房子里，这房子的长和宽都有好几里地。
English: There is also a legend that there is a high mountain in the desolation of the Far East, and Mokong lives in a house covered with jade in this mountain. The length and width of this house are several miles.

古文：僚荐真仙时往谒，九灵金母一岁再游其宫，共校定男女真仙阶品功行，以升降之，总其行籍，而上奏元始，中开玉晨，以禀命于老君也。
现代文：神界的仙人们时常到这里来朝拜木公。九灵金母也每年到这个宫中来考查男女神仙们的品行功德，以决定他们的升降，并把他们的功绩上奏给元始天尊，同时报到玉晨宫中的太上老君那里听候裁定。
English: The immortals of the divine world often come here to worship the Wood God. The Nine Spirits of Gold Mother also come to this palace every year to examine the moral merits of the male and female immortals to determine their promotion and demotion, and report their merits to the Original God. At the same time, they report to the Grand Lady in the Jade Palace to hear the ruling.

古文：天地劫历，阴阳代谢，由运兴废，阳九百六，举善黜恶，靡不由之。
现代文：天地的劫数，阴阳的替代、运行和兴衰，每九千九百年轮回一次的 阳九 和 百六 ，以及惩恶扬善等具体事情，都是这样决定的。
English: The number of the heavens and the earth, the replacement, movement and rise and fall of yin and yang, the nine hundred and ninety-six suns and the nine hundred and ninety-six suns, as well as the punishment of evil and the promotion of good, are all determined in this way.

古文：或与一玉女，更投壶焉。每投，一投十二百枭。
现代文：有时也由一名玉女用投壶的方式来决定，用箭向特制的猫头鹰口中投掷，每一局投一千二百次。
English: Sometimes it is decided by a lady using a jug, throwing arrows into the mouth of a specially made owl, twelve hundred times in each set.

古文：设有入不出者，天为嘘。
现代文：如果箭落入猫头鹰口中不出来，天神就会开口大笑。
English: If the arrow falls into the owl's mouth and does not come out, the sky god will open his mouth and laugh.

古文：枭而脱悟不接者，天为为嗤。
现代文：如果箭落在猫头鹰嘴外边，天神就会撇着嘴冷笑。
English: If the arrow lands outside the owl's mouth, the sky god will sneer.

古文：儒者记而详焉。
现代文：有些学士的著作中对这些情况记述得很详细。
English: Some of these cases are described in detail in the works of scholars.

古文：所谓王者，乃尊为贵上之称，非其氏族也。
现代文：人们常说的 王 ，是对贵人的一种尊称，并不代表神人的姓氏和宗族。
English: Wang, which people often say, is an honorific title for a noble person, and does not represent the surname and clan of a godman.

古文：世人以王父王母为姓，斯亦误矣。
现代文：比如，人世间以王父、王母为姓，是完全错误的。
English: For example, it is completely wrong to take the surnames of the king's father and queen's mother in the world.

古文：广成子
现代文：广成子
English: Hiro Shigeko

古文：广成子者，古之仙人也。
现代文：广成子是古代的一位神仙，住在崆峒山的一个石洞之中。
English: Guangcheng Zi was an ancient immortal who lived in a stone cave in Lushan Mountain.

古文：居崆峒之山，石室之中，黄帝闻而造焉。
现代文：黄帝听说后曾专程去拜访他，向他请教如何才能修炼得道。
English: After hearing this, the Yellow Emperor made a special trip to visit him and asked him how to cultivate the Tao.

古文：曰： 敢问至道之要。 广成子曰： 尔治天下，禽不待候而飞，草木不待黄而落，何足以语至道？ 
现代文：广成子对黄帝说： 你所治理的天下，候鸟不到迁徙的季节就飞走，草木还没等变黄就凋零，你凭什么来和我谈道呢? 
English: Guangcheng Zi said to Huangdi: In the world you govern, migratory birds fly away before the migration season, and plants wither before they turn yellow. Why do you need to talk to me?

古文：黄帝退而闲居三月，后往见之，膝行而前。再拜请问治身之道。
现代文：黄帝回去后闲居三个月，什么事都不干，然后又去见广成子，跪着匍匐到广成子面前，十分恭敬，再三叩拜求教修身的方法。
English: After returning, the Yellow Emperor idled for three months, doing nothing, and then went to see Guangcheng Zi, kneeled and prostrated in front of Guangcheng Zi, very respectful, and repeatedly bowed down to learn the method of cultivation.

古文：广成子答曰： 至道之精，杳杳冥冥，无视无听。
现代文：广成子回答说： 修身求道所达到的最高境界就是虚空渺茫，既不看也不听。
English: Guangcheng Zi replied, "The highest realm attained by the path of self-cultivation is nothingness, neither seeing nor hearing.

古文：抱神以静，形将自正。必净必清，无劳尔形，无摇尔精，乃可长生。
现代文：凝神修行自然会心静身正，你的肉体和心灵都会变得十分清洁干净，如此，身体不再劳顿，精神不再操劳，你就可以长生。
English: Concentration practice will naturally make your mind calm and upright, and your body and mind will become very clean and pure. In this way, your body will no longer be overworked, your spirit will no longer be overworked, and you can live forever.

古文：慎内闭外，多知为败。
现代文：注重内心的修养，排除外界的干扰，知道过多的俗事会败坏你的真性。
English: Pay attention to inner cultivation, eliminate external interference, and know that too much mundane things will corrupt your true nature.

古文：我守其一，以处其和，故千二百岁，而形未尝衰。
现代文：我能够将自己的精神集中于养性这一点，心态平和与世无争，所以活了一千二百岁，形体上却没有一点衰老的迹象。
English: I have been able to concentrate my mind on nurturing this, and my mind is at peace with the world, so I have lived for twelve hundred years, and there is no sign of aging on my body.

古文：得我道者上为皇，失吾道者下为土。
现代文：修得我道术的可以成为君王，修不得的只能成为凡俗之辈。
English: Those who can cultivate my Taoism can become kings, while those who can't can only become ordinary people.

古文：将去汝入无穷之门，游无极之野，与日月参光，与天地为常。
现代文：我的道将把你引向无穷之门，游于无极的原野，与日月同辉，与天地共存。
English: My path will lead you to the gate of infinity, swim in the boundless field, shine with the sun and moon, and coexist with heaven and earth.

古文：人其尽死。而我独存矣。 
现代文：凡人都将死去，而得我道的人却会长存于天地之间。 
English: All mankind will die, but those who hold to my teaching will live forever.

古文：黄安
现代文：黄安
English: Huang An

古文：黄安，代郡人也。
现代文：黄安是代郡人，在郡衙里当差。
English: Huang An is a representative of the county and works as a clerk in the county magistrate.

古文：为代郡卒，云卑猥不获，处人间执鞭。
现代文：上司见他形象丑陋，就让他当车夫，拿着荆条鞭子赶马。
English: When his boss saw his ugly appearance, he made him a coachman, driving horses with a whip made of thorns.

古文：推荆读书，画地以计数，一夕地成池。
现代文：然而他常常把荆条鞭子别在腰间去刻苦读书，用手指在地上画着记数。一天晚上，他画字的那块地变成了水池子。
English: However, he would often tie a whip around his waist to study hard and count on the ground with his fingers. One night, the area where he was writing turned into a pool.

古文：时人谓安舌耕。
现代文：当时人们都说黄安是一个勤奋读书的 舌耕人 。
English: At that time, people said that Huang An was a diligent reader.

古文：年可八十余，强视若童子。
现代文：黄安八十岁时，眼力还像少年一样锐利。
English: At the age of eighty, Huang An's eyesight is still as sharp as a boy's.

古文：常服朱砂，举体皆赤，冬不著衣。
现代文：他经常吃朱砂，全身都光着，冬天也不穿衣服，坐在一个三尺宽三尺长的大乌龟上。
English: He often eats cinnabar, his whole body is naked, he does not wear clothes in winter, and he sits on a large turtle three feet wide and three feet long.

古文：坐一龟，广长三尺，时人间此龟有几年矣，曰：昔伏羲始造网罟，得此龟以授吾，其龟背已平矣。
现代文：有人问他那龟有多少年了，黄安说： 远古时伏羲氏造了网，捕到了这个龟送给了我。现在这龟背让我骑得都磨平了。
English: Someone asked him how old the turtle was, and Huang An said: In ancient times, the Fuxiong Clan made a net, caught this turtle and gave it to me. Now this turtle's back makes me ride very smoothly.

古文：此虫畏日月之光，二千年则一出头，我生此虫已五出头矣。 
现代文：这个家伙怕日月的光亮，两千年才伸一次头出来看看。我生下来时，这只龟已经伸了五次头了。 
English: This fellow is afraid of the light of the sun and the moon, and has only once poked his head out in two thousand years. When I was born, this turtle had already poked his head out five times.

古文：行则负龟而趋，世人谓安万岁矣。
现代文：黄安要出门就背着乌龟走路，人们都说，黄安已经活了一万年了。
English: When Huang An wants to go out, he walks with a turtle on his back. People say that Huang An has lived for ten thousand years.

古文：孟岐
现代文：孟岐
English: Mengqi

古文：孟岐，清河之逸人，年可七百岁。
现代文：孟岐是清河的一位隐士，已经有七百岁了。
English: Mengqi is a seven-hundred-year-old hermit from Qinghe.

古文：语及周初事，了然如目前。
现代文：谈论起周朝的事情，他十分熟悉，就好像发生在眼前一样。
English: When he talks about the events of the Zhou Dynasty, he is very familiar with them, as if they were happening right in front of him.

古文：岐时侍周公升坛上，岐以手摩成王足。
现代文：他曾服侍着周公姬旦登上拜相的神坛，还用手摸过西周成王姬诵的脚。
English: He served Zhou Gong Hetan as he ascended the altar to pay homage to the emperor, and he also touched the feet of Xi Zhou Cheng Wang Hie with his hands.

古文：周公以玉笏与之，岐常宝执，每以衣裾拂拭。
现代文：周公曾送给他一个玉制的笏板，他十分珍爱，经常用衣服的前襟擦拭它。
English: Zhou Gong once gave him a jade-made cutting board, which he treasured so much that he often wiped it with the lapels of his clothes.

古文：笏厚七分，今锐欲折。
现代文：这只玉笏本来是七分厚，现在竟被他擦得薄得都快折断了。
English: This jade anchor was originally seven points thick, but now he has rubbed it so thin that it is about to break.

古文：恒饵桂叶，闻汉武帝好仙，披草莱而来，武帝厚待之。后不知所之。
现代文：孟岐长期以桂叶当饭吃，他听说汉武帝爱好神仙学问，就披着藜草去见他。汉武帝非常优厚地接待了他，后来孟岐就不知所踪了。
English: Meng Qi had long eaten cinnamon leaves as a meal. He heard that Emperor Hanwu was fond of the study of the immortals, so he went to see him dressed in an egret. Emperor Hanwu received him very graciously, and later Meng Qi lost track of him.

