古文：道士王纂真白先生桓闿兰公阮基
现代文：道士王纂真白先生桓闿兰公阮基
English: The Taoist Wang Zuo, Mr. Zhen Bai, and Huan Lan Gong, Ruan Ji

古文：道士王纂
现代文：道士王纂
English: Taoist Wang Zuo

古文：道士王纂者，金坛人也，居马迹山。
现代文：道士王纂乃金坛人，住在马迹山中。
English: Taoist Wang Zuo is a gold standard person who lives in the Ma Rui Mountain.

古文：常以阴功救物，仁逮蠢类。
现代文：平时好积阴功救助生灵，对待任何动物都很仁义。
English: He is usually good at saving sentient beings, and treats all animals with kindness.

古文：值西晋之末，中原乱离，饥馑既臻，疫疠乃作，时有毒瘴，殒毙者多，闾里凋荒，死亡枕藉。
现代文：当时是西晋末年，中原大乱，饥荒遍地，瘟疫横行，而且还到处发生了有毒的瘴气，死了很多人，田野荒十室九空，到处都是病饿而死的尸体。
English: At that time, it was the end of the Western Jin Dynasty, the Central Plains were in turmoil, famine was everywhere, plague was rampant, and poisonous miasma occurred everywhere, many people died, the fields were barren, the ten rooms were empty, and the bodies of those who died of starvation were everywhere.

古文：纂于静室，飞章告玄，三夕之中，继之以泣。
现代文：王纂在自己修身的净室写了奏章向天神告急求上天救助人世的灾民，整整哭了三天三夜。
English: In the purification room of his self-cultivation, Wang Zuo wrote a musical composition to the heavenly gods to urgently ask the heavens to save the victims of the disaster, and cried for three days and three nights.

古文：至第三夜，有光如昼，照其家庭，即有瑞风景云，纷郁空际，俄而异香天乐，下集庭中，介金执锐之士三千余人，罗列若有所候。
现代文：到了第三天夜里，突然有一道耀眼的光辉把家中全都照亮了，接着吹来了阵阵祥瑞的风，空中彩云翻卷，不一会儿，伴着阵阵仙乐传来浓郁的香气，有三千多穿着银铠甲手持兵器的武士来到院中排列着好像在迎候什么贵人。
English: On the night of the third day, suddenly a dazzling light illuminated everything in the house, followed by gusts of warm wind, colorful clouds rolled in the sky, and soon, accompanied by bursts of fairy music, a rich aroma came. More than three thousand warriors wearing silver armor and holding weapons came to the courtyard and lined up as if they were waiting for some nobles.

古文：顷之，珠幢宝幡，霓旆羽节，红旗锦旆各二，相对前引，幢居其前，节最居后。
现代文：接着一队仪仗来了，镶着珠穗的旗帜；缀着宝石的旗幡；还有绣着彩虹图案的旌旗和符节，以及两面大红旗两面锦绣旗在前面引导开路，镶羽毛的大旗在最前，符节在最后。
English: Then came a procession of honour, with flags set with pearl; flags set with precious stones; and flags and banners embroidered with rainbow motifs, and two great red flags and two embroidered banners leading the way in front, the great feathered flag in front, and the banners at the end.

古文：又四青童执花捧香，二侍女捧案，地舒锦席，前立巨屏，左右龙虎将军，侍从官将，各二十许人，立屏两面，若有备卫焉。
现代文：还有四位仙童举着花捧着香，两个侍女捧着小桌，地上铺着彩色的地毯，堂前立着巨大的屏风，龙虎将军和二十多个侍卫的军官立在屏风两边，好像等着护卫谁。
English: There are also four fairy children holding flowers and incense, two maids holding small tables, colorful carpets on the floor, a huge screen in front of the hall, and General Longhu and more than twenty officers standing on both sides of the screen, as if waiting to escort someone.

古文：复有金甲大将军二十六人，神五十人，次龙虎二君之外，班列肃如也。
现代文：接着又有穿金色铠甲的大将军二十六个，神仙五十人，站在龙虎二将军的外侧，站班排列完毕，院里十分肃穆。
English: Next, there were twenty-six generals in golden armor and fifty immortals, standing on the outside of the dragon and tiger two generals. The standing order was completed, and the courtyard was very solemn.

古文：须臾，笙簧骇空。自北而至，五色奇光，灼烁艳逸。
现代文：不一会，从北传来震天的鼓乐声，云中散发出五彩奇光，光彩炫目。
English: Soon, from the north came the sound of drums and music that shook the sky, and multicolored strange lights were emitted from the clouds, dazzling.

古文：一人佩剑持版而前，告纂曰： 太上道君至矣。 
现代文：这时一个腰佩宝剑手持笏版的神来到王纂面前说： 太上道君到了！ 
English: At this time, a god wearing a sword on his waist and holding a tablet came to Wang Zuo and said: "Master Tao, you have arrived!"

古文：于是，百宝大座，自空而下，太上大道君，侍二真人，二天帝。
现代文：于是镶着百种宝石的大座从空中降下来，太上道君由两位真人两位天帝陪着。
English: As a result, a large throne set with a hundred kinds of precious stones descended from the sky, accompanied by two real people and two heavenly emperors.

古文：在座之上，道君五色莲花，二真二帝立侍焉。
现代文：太上道君盘腿坐在五色莲花上，两位真人两位天帝侍立在他两旁。
English: The Lady Superior sits cross-legged on a five-colored lotus, with two real people and two heavenly emperors standing beside him.

古文：纂拜手迎谒，跪伏于地。
现代文：王纂赶快迎上去参见，跪伏在地上。
English: Wang Zang hurried up to see, kneeling on the ground.

古文：道君曰： 子愍念生民，形于章真，刳心投血，感动幽冥。
现代文：太上道君说： 你体恤百姓疾苦，写了奏章上达天界，奏章中字字血泪，感动了上苍。
English: Mother Superior Daojun said: You sympathized with the sufferings of the people and wrote a musical composition that reached the heavenly realm. The words and blood and tears in the musical composition moved the heavens.

古文：地司列言，吾得以鉴躬于子矣。 
现代文：由于土地神的建议，我才亲自来见一见你。 
English: It was at the suggestion of the land god that I came to see you in person.

古文：纂匍匐礼谢竟，道君告曰： 夫一阴一阳，化育万物，而五行为之用。
现代文：王纂又赶快伏在地上拜谢太上道君的降临。道君说： 一阴一阳相生相克才化育出世间万物，这里面全靠着木、金、土、水、火这五行在起作用。
English: Wang Zuo also quickly prostrated himself on the ground in thanksgiving for the advent of Lady Superior Tao Jun. Tao Jun said: It is only through the interplay of yin and yang that all things in the world have been brought into being and brought forth. All of this depends on the five elements of wood, gold, earth, water, and fire.

古文：五行互有相胜，各有盛衰，代谢推迁，间不容息，是以生生不停，气气相续。
现代文：五行之间各有长处也各有兴盛和衰落，新陈代谢，推移变迁一颗也不休止，所以万物才能生生不息，不断延续下去。
English: Each of the five elements has its own strengths and weaknesses, and each has its own rise and fall. Metabolism, transitions, and changes do not stop, so all things can continue to grow and continue to continue.

古文：亿劫已来，未始暂辍也。
现代文：经过了亿万个劫数，万物的生长始终没有停止过。
English: After billions of years, the growth of all things has never stopped.

古文：得其生者，合于纯阳，升于天而仙；得其死者，沦于至阴，在地而为鬼。
现代文：凡是长生的，都是由于合乎纯阳之气数，才会升天成仙。凡是死了的都沉沦到阴界，在地下作鬼。
English: All those who live forever ascend to heaven and become immortals by virtue of the number of qi corresponding to the number of pure suns. All those who die sink into the underworld and become ghosts underground.

古文：鬼物之中，自有优劣强弱，刚柔善恶，与人世无异。
现代文：就是在鬼物中也有好坏强弱、刚柔善恶的不同，和人世完全一样。
English: Even in ghosts, there are differences between good and bad, strong and weak, tough and soft, good and evil, exactly the same as in the human world.

古文：玉皇天尊，虑鬼神之肆横害于人也，常命五帝三官，检制部御之，律令刑章，罔不明备。
现代文：至高无上的玉皇大帝，由于担心鬼神往往肆意伤害人类，常常派五帝三宫巡视检查鬼神的行为，制定了很完备的刑律规章来约束鬼神。
English: The supreme Jade Emperor, fearing that ghosts and gods often wantonly harmed humans, often sent the Five Emperors and Three Kings to inspect the behavior of ghosts and gods, and formulated very complete criminal law regulations to restrict ghosts and gods.

古文：然而季世之民，浇伪者众，淳源既散，妖诈萌生。不忠于君，不孝于亲，违三纲五常之教，自投死地。
现代文：然而在人世上生逢末世的人中，心术不正的人很多，忠厚善良的古风被败坏，萌生了奸诈和妖邪。这些人对君王不忠，对双亲不孝，违背了三纲五常的古训，自己作孽找死。
English: However, among the people born in the world in the last days, there are many people who are not good at heart, and the old style of loyalty and kindness has been corrupted, and treachery and evil spirits have sprung up. These people are disloyal to the king, unfilial to their parents, violate the ancient teachings of the three principles and five constants, and seek death by doing evil.

古文：由于六天故气，魔鬼之徒，与历代已来，将败军死，聚结为党，亦戕害生民。驾雨乘风，因衰伺隙，为种种病。
现代文：自从黄帝、白帝、赤帝、苍帝、黑帝、天皇大帝这六天帝主宰宇宙以来，魔妖鬼怪就同时产生了。他们纠集了历代战败战死的将军士兵的鬼魂，驾雨乘风，在人世上横行。尤其是赶上世风衰落时，他们就制造瘟疫疾病，伤害黎民。
English: Since the Yellow Emperor, the White Emperor, the Red Emperor, the Heavenly Emperor, the Black Emperor, and the Great Emperor ruled the universe for six days, demons and monsters have emerged simultaneously. They have gathered the ghosts of the generals and soldiers who have been defeated and killed in wars throughout the ages, driving the rain and riding the wind, and running rampant in the human world. Especially when they catch up with the decline of the world, they create plague diseases and harm the people.

古文：中伤极多，亦有不终天年，罹其天枉者。昔于杜阳宫出神咒经，授真人唐平，使其流布，以救于物，民间有之。
现代文：也有很多人不能终其天年中途夭亡的。从前我在杜阳宫曾把《神咒经》传授给得道的真人唐平，让他救助苍生，这部经也曾流传到民间。
English: There are also many people who can't die young in the middle of the day. Once upon a time, I taught the Divine Spell Sutra to Tang Ping, a real person who had attained enlightenment, at Duyang Palace, so that he could save sentient beings. This sutra was also passed down to the common people.

古文：世人见王翦、白起之名，谓为虚诞。
现代文：世间人听说秦将白起、王翦死后还显灵救人，认为是瞎说。
English: People around the world have heard that Qin Zhaobai rose from the dead, and that after Wang Xi's death, his spirit still appeared to save people. They think this is nonsense.

古文：此盖从来将领者，生为兵统，死为鬼帅，有功者迁为阴官。
现代文：其实向来那些活着当统帅的人死后在阴间也是鬼帅，他们中间有功的，在阴间也能升官。
English: In fact, those who have been living as generals have always been ghost generals in the netherworld after death. Those who have meritorious deeds among them can also be promoted in the netherworld.

古文：残害者犹居魔属，乘五行败气，为瘵为瘥。
现代文：那些残害百姓的败将鬼魂就属于妖魔一类了，他们乘着阴阳五行中的败气制造各种大小疾病。
English: Those defeated ghosts that mutilate the people belong to the category of demons. They take advantage of the defeat of yin and yang in the five elements to create various diseases.

古文：然以阳为惮，以神咒服之，自当弭戢矣。
现代文：然而他们毕竟害怕阳气，只要用神咒制服了他们，他们就不能再兴妖作怪了。
English: However, after all, they are afraid of yang qi. As long as they are subdued by the divine curse, they can no longer play the role of demons.

古文：今以《神化》、《神咒》二经，复授于子，按而行之，以拯护万民也。 
现代文：现在我把《神化》《神咒》两卷经传授给你，你按照经文去做，就可以拯救万民了。 
English: Now I am passing on to you the two volumes of "Theosis" and "Divine Curse." If you follow the scriptures, you will be able to save all people.

古文：即命待童，披九光之韫，以《神化经》及《三五大斋》之诀，授之于纂，曰： 勉而勤之，阴功克成，真阶可冀也！ 
现代文：太上道君当即命令侍童把闪耀着九彩光芒的《神化经》和《三王大斋》的秘诀授给了王纂，并对他说： 继续勤奋地修炼，不断积累阴功，你大有成仙的希望！ 
English: The Lady Superior immediately ordered the attendant to teach Wang Zuo the secret of the "Divination Sutra" and the "Three Kings' Great Banquet," which shone with nine colors of light, and said to him: "Continue to cultivate diligently, constantly accumulate yin gong, you have great hope of becoming a immortal!"

古文：言讫，千乘万骑，西北而举，升还上清矣。
现代文：说完后，只见千乘万骑又腾空而起升入西北云天回天界去了。
English: After he finished speaking, he was seen riding on a thousand-horse chariot and taking off into the air, rising into the northwest sky and returning to the heavenly realm.

古文：篡按经品斋科，行于江表，疫毒镇弭，生灵又康。
现代文：王纂按照经文上的要求斋戒净身，然后按照经符在荆州、扬州等江南一带给百姓救治，瘟疫很快被镇服消失，百姓恢复了健康。
English: In accordance with the requirements of the scriptures, Wang Zuo fasted, fasted and purified himself. Then, in accordance with the scriptures, he went to Jingzhou, Yangzhou and other areas south of the Yangtze River to treat the people. The plague was quickly suppressed and disappeared, and the people recovered.

古文：自晋及兹，蒙其福者，不可胜纪焉。
现代文：从晋朝以来，受到那两卷仙经保佑的人不计其数，这些就不一一记述了。
English: Since the Jin Dynasty, countless people have been blessed by the two volumes of the Book of Immortals, and these are described one by one.

古文：真白先生
现代文：真白先生
English: Mr. Mashiro

古文：真白先生陶君，讳弘景，字通明，吴荆州牧浚七世孙，丹阳人也。
现代文：陶弘景，字通明，道号真白先生，是吴地荆州牧陶浚的七世孙，丹阳人。
English: Tao Hongjing, known by his pen name, Mr. Zhenbai, is a seventh-generation descendant of Wu Di Jingzhou herdsman Tao Jun, a native of Danyang.

古文：母初娠，梦青龙出怀，并二天人降，手执香炉。
现代文：他的母亲刚怀上他，就梦见一条青龙在她的怀中，同时有两个神仙从天而降，手里拿着香炉。
English: As soon as his mother was pregnant with him, she dreamed of a blue dragon in her arms, and at the same time, two fairies fell from the sky, holding incense burners in their hands.

古文：觉语左右，言当孕男子，非凡人，多恐无后。
现代文：他母亲睡醒后对旁边的人说怀的一定是个男孩，但不会是凡人，恐怕还是等于没有后代。
English: After his mother woke up, she said to the people around her that it must be a boy, but it would not be a mortal. I'm afraid there would be no offspring.

古文：及生，标异，幼而聪识，长而博达，因读《神仙传》，有乘云驭龙之志。
现代文：孩子生下以后，果然和平常人不同，自小就特别聪明，长大后博学多闻，因为读了《神仙传》而萌生了乘龙驾云的志向。
English: After the child was born, he was indeed different from ordinary people. Since childhood, he was particularly clever. When he grew up, he was well-read and learned a lot. Because he read "The Legend of the Immortals," he had the ambition to ride a dragon.

古文：年十七，与江斅、褚炫、刘俊，为宋朝 升明四友 。
现代文：先生十七岁时，和江斅、褚炫、刘俊，并称为南朝宋国的 升明四友 。
English: When he was 17 years old, he and Jiang Qi, Zou Xuan, and Liu Jun were known as the Four Friends of the Southern Song Dynasty.

古文：仕齐，历诸王侍读。
现代文：真白先生一开始在齐地做官，给几位王侯当过侍读。
English: Mr. Mashiro first worked as an official in Qi, and served as an attendant to several princes.

古文：年二十余，稍服食，后就兴世观主孙先生咨禀经法，精行道要。殆通幽洞微，转奉朝请，乃拜表解职。
现代文：二十多岁时，开始服食仙药，后来在兴世观的观主孙先生门下学习道经和法术，研究道学的奥秘，达到了洞察人间一切大小事物的程度，后来先生就上表请求辞去官职。
English: When he was in his twenties, he began to take celestial medicine. Later, he studied Taoism and magic under the guidance of Mr. Sun, a world-renowned Taoist, studied the mysteries of Taoism, and reached the level of insight into all things large and small in the human world. Later, he requested to resign from the post.

古文：答诏优叹，赐与甚厚。
现代文：皇帝很惋惜，给了他很多的赏赐准许了他的请求。
English: The emperor was very sorry, gave him a lot of rewards and granted his request.

古文：公卿祖之于征虏亭，供帐甚盛，咸云：宋齐已来，未有斯事。
现代文：真白先生辞官返乡，临上路时，三公大臣们在征虏亭为他送行，宴会很丰盛，都说南朝宋、齐以来，从没见君主给臣下这样的赏赐礼遇。
English: When Mr. Zhenbai returned home after his resignation and was about to leave, the three princes and ministers saw him off at the recruiting pavilion. The banquet was very sumptuous. They all said that since the Southern Dynasties of Song and Qi, they had never seen a monarch give such a reward and courtesy to his subjects.

古文：遂入茅山，又得杨许真书。
现代文：真白先生进入茅山修道，又得到了杨主、许迈的真经。
English: Mr. Zhenbai entered the Mayan Order, and obtained the true teachings of Yangshuo and Xu Mai.

古文：遂登岩告静，自称 华阳稳居 ，书疏亦以此代姓名。
现代文：于是他登上山峰与人世隔绝，自称 华阳稳居 ，写信著书也用 华阳隐居 为代名。
English: So he climbed the mountain and isolated himself from the world. He called himself "Huayang Steadily Residing," and also used "Huayang Seclusion" as a pseudonym in his letter-writing.

古文：至明帝时，议欲迎往蒋山，恳辞得止。
现代文：到南朝宋明帝时，朝里的人们共同商量打算迎他到蒋山，真白先生再三辞谢才算作罢。
English: When Emperor Song Ming of the Southern Dynasty arrived, the people in the court discussed the plan to welcome him to Mount Jiang. Mr. Zhenbai repeatedly thanked him.

古文：然敕命饷赉，恒为繁极。
现代文：但是皇室给他的俸禄和赏赐比以前更丰厚了。
English: But the royals have given him a more generous salary and perks than before.

古文：乃造三层楼栖止，身居其上，弟子居中，接宾于下，令一小竖传度而已。
现代文：于是给他在茅山中建了一座三层楼，真白先生住在上层，中层住弟子，下层会宾客，派了一名小僮给他当传达事情的仆人。
English: So he had a three-storey building built for him in the middle of Mao Shan. Mr. Zhenbai lived on the upper floor, his disciples lived on the middle floor, and guests were invited to the lower floor. He sent a servant to convey the news to him.

古文：潜光隐耀，内修秘密，深诚所诣。
现代文：从此真白先生更加深居简出，收敛了自己一切外在的神采，专门修炼心性。
English: From then on, Mr. Mashiro became more introverted, restrained all of his external brilliance, and devoted himself to cultivating his character.

古文：远属灵人，可谓感而遂通矣。身长七尺八寸，为性圆通谦谨，心如明镜，遇物便了。
现代文：他修道的一份诚心始终寄托给天上的神灵，上天的神人果然也很赞赏他的坚定志向，真可谓人神相互通达感应了。真白先生身高七尺八寸，性格谦逊豁达，心为明镜般清净，任何事情一眼都能看透。
English: He always entrusted a part of the sincerity of his spiritual practice to the gods in heaven, and the gods and humans in heaven really appreciated his steadfast aspiration. It can truly be said that the gods and humans have been able to reach each other. Mr. Mashiro is seven feet and eight inches tall, has a humble and open-minded personality, and his heart is as pure as a mirror. He can see through anything at a glance.

古文：深慕张良之为人，率性轻虚，飘飘然颇有云间兴。
现代文：他羡慕敬佩张良的为人，认为张良也是放达飘逸，看破凡尘，颇有云中神仙的气度。
English: He admires and admires Zhang Liang as a person, and believes that Zhang Liang is also a person who can let go, see through the mundane, and has the air of a fairy godmother.

古文：其所通者，皆得于心，非傍识所能及。
现代文：真白先生对道木的精通全靠心领神会，不是靠薄人的学识所能达到的。
English: Mr. Mashiro's mastery of dōki relies entirely on his intuitive understanding, and is not something that can be achieved by someone with little knowledge.

古文：长于诠正谬伪。
现代文：他尤其擅长注解经典，纠正书中的谬误。
English: He is particularly good at annotating the classics and correcting errors in books.

古文：地理历算，文不空发，成即为体。造浑天仪，转之，与天相会。
现代文：对于地理、历法、算学等门类的学问也不只停留在论述上，而是联系实际使之能够应用。他制造出表示宇宙星球运行轨迹的 浑天仪 ，运转起来和天体的运传完全符合。
English: His knowledge of geography, the calendar, arithmetic, and other subjects did not stop at discussion, but was connected to reality to make it applicable. He created the armillary sphere, which represented the trajectory of the stars, and its operation was completely consistent with the movement of celestial bodies.

古文：其撰真诰隐诀，注老子等书，二百余卷。
现代文：他撰写的有关道学研究和修道秘诀的著作，以及注解《老子》的书共有二百多卷。
English: He wrote more than two hundred volumes on the study of Taoism and the secrets of Buddhism, as well as a commentary on "Lao Zi."

古文：至永元三年，深藏向晦。
现代文：到了永元三年时，更加潜心修炼。
English: When he reached the third year of Yongyuan, he devoted himself even more to cultivation.

古文：及梁武帝革命，议国号未定，先生乃引诸谶记，定梁应运之符。
现代文：后来梁武帝谋取皇位后，和大臣们商讨定国号的事，一直没有统一的意见。真白先生就按照各种卦书推算，建议国号定为 梁 ，说这个国号上应天运，一定能使国家昌盛。
English: Later, after Emperor Liangwu sought the throne, he and his ministers discussed the issue of determining the country's name, but there was no unified opinion. Mr. Zhenbai suggested that the country's name should be Liang, according to the calculations of various gua books, saying that this country's name should be in accordance with heaven's fortune and will surely make the country prosperous.

古文：又择交禅日，灵验昭著。
现代文：先生又为梁武帝卜算出登基的日子，也十分吉利灵验。
English: The teacher also calculated the day of enthronement for Emperor Liangwu, which was also very auspicious.

古文：敕使入山，宣旨酬谢。
现代文：梁武帝即位后，派使臣进山，向先生宣读了感谢他辅佐的圣旨。
English: After Emperor Liangwu ascended to the throne, he sent envoys into the mountains and read out the sacred edict thanking him for his assistance.

古文：帝既早与之交游，自此后动静必报。
现代文：梁武帝早就和真白先生交往，从即位以后，更是有事必然报知先生，一同商议国家大事。
English: Emperor Liangwu has been in contact with Mr. Zhenbai for a long time, and since his enthronement, he has inevitably reported to Mr. Zhenbai and discussed national affairs with him.

古文：先生既得秘旨妙诀，以为神丹可成，恒苦无药，帝给之。
现代文：先生早就得到了炼制仙丹的秘方，认为仙丹一定可以炼成，但苦于一时找不到炼丹的金、石等药料。
English: He had long ago obtained the secret recipe for refining cactus and believed that cactus could definitely be refined, but he struggled to find the gold, stone and other ingredients for cactus for a while.

古文：又手敕咨迓，先生因画二牛：一散放于水间；一著金笼，一人执绳，以杖驱之。
现代文：梁武帝就供给他需要的药料，梁武帝有一次写了一封亲笔信请真白先生入朝作官，先生就画了两条牛，一条散放在水间自由自在，另一条戴着黄金笼头被人用绳子牵着，用棍子赶着走。
English: Emperor Liangwu provided him with the medicines he needed. On one occasion, Emperor Liangwu wrote a personal letter to Mr. Zhenbai to invite him to become an official in the imperial court. Mr. Zhenbai drew two cows, one lying freely in the water, the other wearing a golden cage and being led by a rope and driven away with a stick.

古文：帝笑曰： 此人无所不作，欲效曳尾龟，岂可致邪。 
现代文：梁武帝看后笑道： 这个人真是什么都能干的好人才，但他硬要学乌龟缩头缩脑，谁也没法子让他出山做官。 
English: Liang Wu Di smiled after watching: This man is really a good talent who can do anything, but he insists on learning from the turtle to shrink his head and shrink his brain. No one can make him go to the mountains to be an official.

古文：其时每有大事，无不已前陈奏，时人谓之 山中宰相。 
现代文：尽管真白先生不入朝做官，但朝中的每件大事，他都事先向梁武帝陈奏，帮着出主意，所以当时人们都称他为 山中宰相 。
English: Although Mr. Zhenbai did not join the imperial court to become an official, he reported every major event in the imperial court to Emperor Liangwu in advance and helped to make suggestions, so at that time people called him the prime minister of the mountains.

古文：以大同初，献二刀，一名 善胜 ，一名 成胜 ，为佳宝。
现代文：梁武帝大同初年，先生献了两口宝刀，一口叫 善胜 ，一口叫 成胜 ，都很珍贵。
English: In the first year of Emperor Liangwu's reign, he donated two precious swords, one called Zensheng and the other called Chengsheng, both of which are very precious.

古文：梁武初未知道教，先生渐悟之，后诣张天师道裕，建立玄坛三百所，皆先生之资也。
现代文：梁武帝并不懂道教，先生逐渐启发感悟他，后来梁武帝访问张道裕张天师，建立了道观三百所，这都是先生的意见起了作用。
English: Emperor Liangwu did not understand Taoism, and his teacher gradually inspired him. Later, Emperor Liangwu visited Zhang Daoyu and established three hundred Taoist schools, all of which were influenced by his teacher's opinion.

古文：梁帝《金楼子》云： 予于隐士重陶真白，士大夫重周弘正。
现代文：梁武帝曾说过： 隐士中我最看重真白先生，士大夫中我最看重周弘正。
English: Emperor Liangwu once said: Among the hermits, I value Mr. Zhenbai the most, and among the scholars, I value Zhou Hongzheng the most.

古文：其于义理，精博无穷，亦一时名士也。 
现代文：周弘正对于治国处世的各种理论也十分精通，也是当代的名士啊！ 
English: Zhou Hongzheng is also very familiar with the various theories of governing the country and dealing with the world, and is also a contemporary celebrity!

古文：先生尝作诗云： 夷甫任散诞，平叔坐谭空。
现代文：真白先生曾作过一首诗说： 夷甫任散诞，平叔坐谈空。
English: Mr. Zhenbai once wrote a poem saying: It is not good to celebrate the birthday of the Empress Dowager, but it is not good to sit and talk about it.

古文：不信昭阳殿，化作单于宫。 
现代文：不信昭阳殿，化作单于宫。 
English: If you don't believe in Shoyo-dono, you'll end up in the palace.

古文：其时人皆谈空理，不习武事，侯景之难，亦如所言。
现代文：这是先生在告诚当时的官宦大夫们都爱空谈，不注重富国强兵，后来河南王侯景叛变，攻破建康把梁武帝围困在台城最后饿死，这场 侯景之乱 ，就验证了真白先生那首诗中的预言。
English: At the time of Mr. Zhenbai's confession, the officials and doctors were all fond of empty talk and did not pay attention to enriching the country and strengthening the army. Later, the Henan King Houjing rebelled, defeated Jiankang, besieged Emperor Liangwu in Taicheng, and finally starved to death. This "Houjing Rebellion" proved the prophecy in Mr. Zhenbai's poem.

古文：先生以大同二年丙辰岁三月壬寅朔十二日癸丑告化，时年八十一，颜色不变，屈伸如常，室中香气，积日不散。
现代文：真白先生在梁武帝大同二年三月十二日癸丑去世，当时八十一岁，死时脸上颜色像活着一样，四肢柔软没有僵硬能屈能伸，室内的香气奸几天不散。
English: Mr. Zhenbai died at the age of eighty-one on the twelfth day of the third month of the second year of Emperor Liangwu's reign. At the time of his death, the color of his face was the same as when he was alive, his limbs were soft and could be flexed and stretched without stiffness, and the fragrance in the room lingered for several days.

古文：以其月十四日，窆于雷平山，同轩辕之葬衣冠，如子乔之藏剑舄，比于兹日，可得符焉。
现代文：三月十四日，在雷平山给他建了衣冠冢就像轩辕黄帝埋葬衣冠，子乔埋葬剑和鞋一样，希望在埋葬他的时候，可以看到天上仙人带着符节来接他成仙而去。
English: On March 14th, in Lei Ping Mountain, they built a crown for him. Just as Emperor Xuanzang buried his crown, and Zi Qiao buried his sword and shoes, they hoped that when they buried him, they could see the celestial immortals come to pick him up and make him immortal.

古文：诏追赠中散大夫，谥 贞白先生 ，仍敕舍人监护。
现代文：皇帝下诏，追赐他中散大夫的官职，还追赐他 贞白先生 的庙号，并派人监办他的丧礼。
English: The emperor issued an edict, bestowing upon him the official post of Zhongshan Doctor, and also bestowing upon him the temple name of Mr. Zhenbai, and sent someone to supervise his funeral.

古文：马枢《得道传》云： 受蓬莱都水监，弟子数百人。
现代文：马枢在《得道传》里说，真白先生成仙后被天界任命为蓬莱仙洲的都水监，有好几百弟子。
English: Ma Zu said in "Te Tao Chuan" that after Mr. Zhenbai became a immortal, he was appointed by heaven as the water inspector of Penglai and Shanzhou, and he had hundreds of disciples.

古文：有先得道者，唯王远知、陆逸冲、桓清远，嗣先生之德焉。 
现代文：弟子中有些是得道的如王远之、陆逸冲、桓清远等人，都继承了真白先生的高尚的道德节操。
English: Some of his disciples, such as Wang Yuanzhi, Lu Yichong, and Huan Qingyuan, all inherited the noble moral integrity of Mr. Zhenbai.

古文：唐天宝元年，追赠金紫光禄大夫太保，梁郡陵王萧纶为碑铭焉。
现代文：唐代天宝元年，唐玄宗追赐他为金紫光禄大夫和太子太保，梁郡陵王肖纶为他的墓碑撰写了墓志铭。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Xuanzong posthumously bestowed upon him the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Daifu and Prince Taibao. Liang County Mausoleum King Xiao Wei wrote an epitaph for his tombstone.

古文：桓闿
现代文：桓闿
English: Kanazawa

古文：桓闿者，不知何许人也，事华阳陶先生，为执役之士，辛勤十余年。
现代文：桓闿，不知道是什么地方人，拜华阳陶先生为师，担当一些杂物活，默默无闻地干了十几年。
English: Huan Yu, I don't know what kind of local people, studied under Mr. Bai Huayang Tao, was in charge of some miscellaneous work, and worked in obscurity for more than ten years.

古文：性常谨默沉静，奉役之外，无所营为。
现代文：他性格十分沉静谨慎，干完了活儿，就什么也不干了。
English: He is a very quiet and cautious person, and when he has finished his work, he does not do anything.

古文：一旦，有二青童白鹤，自空而下，集隐居庭中。
现代文：有一天，有两个青童骑着白鹤从天而降，落到了陶先生的院子里。
English: One day, two young boys riding a white crane fell from the sky and landed in Mr. Tao's yard.

古文：隐居欣然临轩接之，青童曰： 太上命求桓先生耳。 
现代文：陶先生非常高兴地到门口迎接，但是骑鹤青童却说： 太上老君命我们来见桓先生。 
English: Mr. Tao was very happy to meet him at the door, but the young boy riding the crane said, "Grandfather, let's go see Mr. Huan."

古文：隐居默然，心计门人无姓恒者，命求之，乃执役桓君耳。
现代文：陶先生一时说不出话来，心里暗想自己的门人中也没有一个姓桓的呀，就让左右找一找，结果还真的找到了，原来是在他家干杂活的桓闿。
English: Mr. Tao was speechless for a moment, thinking to himself that there was no one by the name of Huan in his family, so he asked both sides to look for him. As a result, he actually found Huan, who was doing odd jobs at his home.

古文：问其所修何道而致此，桓君曰： 修默朝之道积年，亲朝太帝九年矣，乃有今日之召。 
现代文：于是就问他是修的什么道达到了这个程度，桓君说： 我修的默默养性的道，已经好几年，而且我亲自到天界朝见太帝也有九年了，所以神仙今天才会来召我升天。 
English: So he asked him what path he had cultivated to reach this level. Huan Jun said, "I have been cultivating the path of silently cultivating my character for several years, and I have personally been in the heavenly world for nine years, so it is only today that the gods have called me to ascend to heaven.

古文：将升天，陶君欲师之，桓固执谦卑，不获请。
现代文：陶先生一听，就马上向桓君拜师，桓君赶快拒绝，说怎么能担当得起。
English: As soon as Mr. Tao heard it, he immediately asked Huanjun to be his teacher. Huanjun quickly refused, saying that he couldn't handle it.

古文：陶君曰： 某行教修道，勤亦至矣，得非有过，而淹延在世乎？
现代文：陶先生说： 我信道，并认真修道，说得上是很勤奋的。是不是因为我有什么罪过才不让我得道成仙，而让我留在人间呢？
English: Mr. Tao said, "I believe in Taoism and practice it seriously, and I can say that I am very diligent. Was it because of my sins that I was not allowed to attain immortality, but was allowed to remain on earth?

古文：愿为访之，他日相告。 
现代文：请你替我在天界查访一下，回头告诉我。 
English: I would like you to visit me in heaven and report back to me.

古文：于是桓君服天衣，驾白鹤，升天而去。
现代文：于是桓君穿上天仙的衣服，骑着一只白鹤升了天。
English: So, he put on the clothes of a celestial being and rode a white crane to the heavens.

古文：三日，密降陶君之室言曰： 君子阴功著矣，所修本草，以虻虫水蛭辈为药，功虽及人，而害于物命。
现代文：三天后，他秘密地降临到陶先生的屋里对他说： 你积累的阴功已经很卓著了，但是你所著的本草药方中，把虻虫、水蛭等昆虫当成药物，这样的药虽然对人类有益，但你犯了杀生害命的罪。
English: Three days later, he secretly descended to Mr. Tao's house and said to him: Your accumulated yin gong is already very outstanding, but in this herbal formula you have written, you use aphids, leeches and other insects as drugs. Although such drugs are beneficial to humans, you have committed the crime of killing and harming life.

古文：以此一纪之后，当解形去世，署蓬莱都水监耳。 
现代文：从现在起，十二年之后，你将脱离你的肉体去世，到蓬莱仙岛去任水监。 
English: Twelve years from now, you will die out of your body and go to the island of Penglai to be a water inspector.

古文：言讫乃去。
现代文：说罢就走了。
English: Just say the word and walk away.

古文：陶君复以草木之药可代物命者，著别行本草三卷，以赎其过焉。 后果解形得道。
现代文：后来陶君以草药代替了昆虫，又写了别行本草三卷来赎罪。以后他果然脱离肉体得道成仙。
English: Later, Tao Jun substituted herbs for insects, and wrote three volumes of Beixing herbal to atone for his sins. After that, he was able to leave his body and become a immortal.

古文：兰公
现代文：兰公
English: Lankong

古文：兖州曲阜县高平乡九原里，有至人兰公。
现代文：山东兖州曲阜县高平乡九原里，有一位贤人兰公。
English: In Jiuyuan, Gaoping Township, Qufu County, Luzhou, Shandong Province, there is a wise man named Lan Gong.

古文：家族百余口，精专孝行，感动乾坤，忽有斗中真人，下降兰公之舍，自称孝悌王。
现代文：他的家族有一百多口，但兰公以他特别孝顺的品行感动了天界，天界派了一位斗中真人降临到兰公家，自称 孝悌王 。
English: His family has more than a hundred members, but Lan Gong has moved the heavenly realm with his particularly filial behavior. The heavenly realm sent a real person to the Lan Gong family, calling himself the filial piety king.

古文：云居日中为仙王，月中为明王，斗中为孝悌王。
现代文：他说： 住在太阳中的叫仙王，住在月亮中的叫明王，住在斗中的叫孝悌王。
English: He said, "The one who lives in the sun is called the Fairy King, the one who lives in the moon is called the Bright King, and the one who lives in the fight is called the Filial King.

古文：夫孝至于天，日月为之明；孝至于地，万物为之生；孝至于民，王道为之成。
现代文：因为孝行可以感动上天，日月都为孝顺的人大放光明，孝行在地上传扬，可以使万物滋生。孝行在民间发扬光大，天下就可以大治，王道就可以得到施行。
English: Because filial piety can move the heavens, the sun and the moon shine brightly for those who are filial, and if filial piety is spread on the earth, it can make all things grow. If filial piety is spread widely among the people, the world can be governed, and the royal way can be implemented.

古文：且其三才肇分，始于三气，三气者，玉清三天也。
现代文：而且天、地、人这 三才 的划分是根据玄气、元气、始气这 三气 ，而三气就是清微天、禹宇天、大赤天这 玉清三天 。
English: Moreover, the division of the three elements of heaven, earth, and man is based on the three elements of the primordial spirit, the original spirit, and the initial spirit, and the three elements are the three days of the clear sky, the sky of the universe, and the great red sky.

古文：玉清境是元始太圣真王治化也；太清者，玄道流行，虚无自然，玉皇所治也。
现代文：玉清境，是元始太圣真王所治理管辖的仙境，而 太清三天 ，则是虚无自然，玄道流行，由玉皇大帝治理的境界。
English: The Jade Emperor's Kingdom was originally a fairyland governed by King Taishenjin, while the Three Days of the Jade Emperor's Kingdom was ruled by the Jade Emperor.

古文：吾于上清已下，托化人间，示陈孝悌之教。
现代文：我从上清仙界降临到人间，就是为了宣传和张扬孝悌之道。
English: I descended from the celestial world of the Upper Qing Dynasty to the human world in order to promote and publicize the way of filial piety.

古文：后晋代尝有真仙许逊，传吾孝道之宗，是为众仙之长。 
现代文：后来，晋代曾有一位得道的真仙许逊，由于传扬了我的孝悌之道，成为众仙的首座。 
English: Later, in the Jin Dynasty, there was a True Immortal Xu Xun, who became the first of all immortals because he propagated my way of filial piety.

古文：因付兰公至道秘旨。
现代文：于是，斗中真人向兰公传授了道术的秘诀宗旨。
English: As a result, Dou Zhongzheng taught Lan Gong the secret purpose of Taoism.

古文：于是兰公获斯妙诀，颖悟真机，默辨往由，顾知前事。
现代文：兰公得了修道的秘诀，悟到了天机，能够重见过去往事，预知未来吉凶。
English: Lan Gong obtained the secret of cultivation, realized the heavenly opportunity, was able to revisit the past and foresee the future.

古文：因与里人共出郊野，忽睹古冢三所，乃云： 此是吾三仙解化之坟，请民报官，令移冢旁之路，勿令人物践蹋。 
现代文：有一次兰公和乡中的朋友们一起到野外，忽然看见三座古坟，兰公就说： 这就是三仙解脱肉体达到成仙的坟，请各位报告官府，把这三座坟旁的道路挪走，以免被人们践踏。 
English: Once upon a time, Lan Gong and his friends in the countryside went out into the open and suddenly saw three ancient tombs. Lan Gong said, "This is the tomb where the three immortals were liberated from the body and became immortals. Please report to the government and remove the roads next to these three tombs so that they will not be trampled by people."

古文：吏乃讯于兰公，此言以何验实。
现代文：官府的人来问兰公，用什么来验证。
English: People from the government came to ask Lan Gong what to use for verification.

古文：公曰： 第一冢者，昔有真人骸骨，今乃已得复形，是为地仙，长生久视。
现代文：兰公说： 第一座坟里，过去曾埋着一位真人的尸骨，现在真人已成为地仙，得以长生永不衰老。
English: Lankong said: In the first tomb, the bones of a real person were buried in the past. Now, the real person has become an earth fairy, able to live forever and never grow old.

古文：第二冢见有仙衣一对，道经一函，复有一人，方如醉卧，发之良久，乃能话谈，此以太阴炼形，绵养真气耳。
现代文：第二座坟里埋着两件仙衣，一部道经，还有一个人好像喝醉后还在沉睡，如果把这人挖出来，过一段他就能说话，这是他在进行太阴炼形，绵养真气。
English: In the second tomb, there are two fairy dresses, a Taoist sutra, and a man who seems to be drunk and is still asleep. If this man is dug out, he will be able to speak after a while. This is because he is cultivating his true nature.

古文：第三冢有玉液丹，服之，白日便当冲翥。 
现代文：第三座坟中有玉液丹，如果凡人喝下，当时就可以升天成仙。 
English: In the third tomb, there is jade elixir. If an ordinary person drinks it, he can become a celestial being.

古文：公曰： 我自此，每十日一至于斯，更逾数年，百日一降，施行孝道，宜准玄科，接济樊笼，符臻至道。 自尔，吴都十五童子，丹阳三岁灵孩，泊于兰公，并是仙之化现也。
现代文：于是官府的人就当兰公的面打开了三座坟，结果坟内的情形和兰公说的完全符合。兰公就来到坟前，亲手解开仙衣穿在身上，又取了坟中的玉液丹吞服下去，招呼躺在坟里的两位真人，一起耸身升入云天了。官府派来的人十分懊丧，跪在地上虔诚地陪礼，并问兰公什么时候回来。兰公说： 以后我每十天来一次，几年后百日来一次，来施行孝道，指导修道者，接济困苦的人，来发扬道学。 从那时起，吴都十五岁的男孩和丹阳三岁的聪明儿童都常常成为兰公的化身。
English: As a result, the people from the government opened three tombs in front of Lan Gong's face. As a result, the situation inside the tombs was completely consistent with what Lan Gong said. Lan Gong went to the tomb, unwrapped the fairy dress with his own hands, put it on his body, took the jade liquid from the tomb, swallowed it down, called out to the two real people lying in the grave, and together they rose into the sky. The people sent by the government were very distressed, kneeled on the ground piously, and asked Lan Gong when he would return. Lan Gong said: In the future, I will come once every ten days, and once every hundred days

古文：所传孝道之秘法，别有宝经一帙，金丹一合，铜符铁券，得之者唯高明大使许真君焉。
现代文：他所传授的孝道秘法以及一卷宝经、一盒金丹，还有铜符、铁券，只有高明大使许真君得到了。
English: He taught the secret of filial piety, as well as a scroll of the Treasure Sutra, a box of jade, as well as bronze charms and iron coupons, which only Gaoming Ambassador Xu Zhenjun received.

古文：阮基
现代文：阮基
English: Nguyn Kim

古文：阮基者，河内人也。
现代文：阮基是河内人。
English: Nguyen Quy is a native of Hanoi.

古文：以周武帝建德七年，因射熊入王屋山东北，见一道士坐松树下，神状奇异。
现代文：南北朝周武帝建德七年时，阮基因为射熊进了王屋山的东北，看见一个道士坐在松树下，外貌神态很不凡。
English: When Emperor Jiande of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, Zhou Wu, was seven years old, Ruan Ji entered the northeast of Wangya Mountain because he shot a bear. He saw a Taoist monk sitting under a pine tree. His appearance was very unusual.

古文：基遂舍弓矢，稽首起居已。
现代文：阮基就扔掉弓箭，向道士跪拜问候。
English: Nguyen Gi threw away his bow and arrow and bowed to the Taoist monk.

古文：师命基曰： 可暂往观中眺望。 
现代文：道士让阮基先到他的道观中眺望远处。
English: The Taoist asked Nguyn Ki to first look into the distance in his Taoism.

古文：岩间忽有一童子，引基到观门。
现代文：这时山岩中忽然来了一个童子，领着阮基来到道观的门前。
English: At this time, a boy suddenly appeared from the rocks and led Ruan Ji to the door of the Taoist monastery.

古文：台殿严丽，皆饰以金玉；土地清净，皆绀碧琉璃；行树端直，绿叶朱实，清风时起，锵然有声。
现代文：见道观里的楼阁殿堂庄严华丽，都镶着金玉，地面上也铺着碧蓝的琉璃，清净光洁，道旁是成行的树木，树上结着鲜红的果实。阵阵清风吹得树木摇动发出金属的声音。
English: Seeing the lofty and gorgeous pavilions in the Taoist temple, all of which are inlaid with gold beads, the ground is also covered with blue glaze, pure and clean, and the roadside is lined with trees bearing bright red fruits. The gusts of wind make the trees shake and emit metallic sounds.

古文：基于门下观览，心神惶怖。
现代文：阮基在门前站着，心里很惶然。
English: Standing in front of the door, Nguyn Khi was very confused.

古文：载拜请退。
现代文：向童子施了礼就回到了道士那里。
English: After bowing to the boy, he returned to the Taoist monk.

古文：即至师所、师笑曰： 汝不敢进邪？ 
现代文：道士笑着说： 你是不是没敢进那道观里去呀？ 
English: The Taoist laughed and said, "Didn't you dare to go into that Taoist temple?"

古文：基曰： 凡夫肉人，不识大道，忽于今日，得睹天堂，情诚喜悦，不能自胜。
现代文：阮基说： 我是个凡夫俗人，不懂得道家的玄奥，今天忽然看见了天堂，万分欣喜，不知所措了。
English: Nguyn Ki said: "I am an ordinary person who does not know the intricacies of Taoism. Today, I suddenly saw heaven. I was overjoyed and overwhelmed.

古文：愿师弘慈，济基沉溺。 
现代文：恳望仙师指点迷津，使我这个凡俗之辈能够超度。 
English: I implore the Immortal Teacher to guide me, so that I, an ordinary person, can transcend.

古文：师曰： 汝积罪人也，先身微缘，今得遇我。
现代文：道士说： 你是个罪孽深重的人，由于你的前身和我有缘分，才得遇见我。
English: The moralist said, "You are a deeply sinful person. You only met me because your predecessor had a predestined relationship with me.

古文：汝命将尽，其奈之何？ 
现代文：你的阳寿快要到头了，你打算怎么办呢？ 
English: Your Yang Shou is coming to an end. What are you going to do?

古文：基闻，不胜惶悚，叩头千百，求乞生津。
现代文：阮基听了这话，更加惶恐，不断向道士磕头乞求延长寿命。
English: Hearing this, Nguyn Gin became even more terrified and kept begging the Taoist priest, Hu Tho, to prolong his life.

古文：师遂令基，舍恶从善，誓弃弓矢，乃授基《智惠上品十戒》，兼为设蔬食。
现代文：道士就告诉他只有改恶从善才是出路，让他发誓扔掉弓箭从今以后不再杀生害命，然后授给他《智惠上品十戒》，并给他安排了素食让他吃。
English: The moralist told him that the only way out was to change evil into good, made him swear to throw away his bow and arrow and never kill again, and then gave him the "Ten Commandments of Wisdom" and arranged vegetarian food for him to eat.

古文：食讫令去。
现代文：吃完后，道士让他回去。
English: After eating, the Taoist asked him to leave.

古文：基载拜奉辞，师曰： 汝命绝之时，吾将度汝。 
现代文：阮基再三拜谢，向道士告别，道士说： 你死了以后，我会使你超度的。 
English: Nguyn Gi repeatedly thanked and bid farewell to the Taoist. The Taoist said, "After you die, I will make you transcendent."

古文：其年冬，基得暴病而卒，唯左手一指尚暖。
现代文：这年冬天，阮基得急病突然死亡，但左手有一个指头还是暖的。
English: That winter, Nguyn Kin died suddenly after a sudden illness, but one finger on his left hand was still warm.

古文：家人不即葬之，三日而活，久能言。
现代文：家里人没有马上葬他，三天后阮基又复活了，过了很久才能说话。
English: His family didn't bury him right away, and three days later, Nguyn Gin was brought back to life. It took a long time for him to speak.

古文：言云：初见黄衣使者二人，执文书，引基去，忽至一处，状如台府，至屏门，使者引入。
现代文：据他说，刚死时，看见两个穿黄衣的使者手里握着公文领着他走，来到了一个像官府的地方，使者领他进了门。
English: According to him, at the time of his death, he saw two messengers dressed in yellow holding documents in their hands and leading him to a place resembling a government office. The messengers led him to the door.

古文：见大厅上有官人隐隐，阶前小吏数十人，皆执簿书，或青或黑。
现代文：看见大厅上影影绰绰有位官人，台阶前有好几十个官员，每人手里都拿着个本子，本子有青色的有黑色的。
English: I saw the shadow of more than one official in the hall, and there were dozens of officials in front of the steps, each holding a book in their hands. The books were blue and black.

古文：有一吏执黑簿，谓基曰： 汝积罪深厚，应入地狱。 
现代文：这时有个官员手里拿着黑本子对他说： 你罪孽深重，该入地狱！ 
English: At this time, an official holding a black book in his hand said to him: "You are sinful and deserve to go to hell!"

古文：基闻，仓卒惶怖，莫知何言。
现代文：他十分恐惧不知该怎么回答，好半天才忽然想起那位仙师。
English: He was so scared that he didn't know how to answer, and it was a long time before he suddenly remembered the sorcerer.

古文：良久思之，忽忆圣师，心中作念： 初别之时， 言临命绝时，必来度汝 ，今日危困，幸垂救济。 
现代文：就心里默默祈求说： 我和仙师辞别时，仙师曾说我死后会来超度我，现在我眼看要入地狱了，仙师快来救我啊！ 
English: He silently prayed in his heart, saying, "When I said goodbye to Master Immortal, Master Immortal said that after my death, he would come to save me. Now, I am about to go to hell. Master Immortal, come save me!"

古文：须臾，天西北瑞云忽起，云车冉冉，自空而下，直至阶前，去地丈余而止。
现代文：果然不一会儿西北天边涌起祥云，一辆云车从空中慢慢降下来，在大厅阶前离地一丈多悬在那里不动了。
English: Sure enough, in a short while, auspicious clouds appeared in the northwest sky, and a cloud chariot slowly descended from the sky and hung motionless in front of the hall steps.

古文：乃见圣师在车中坐，冥官见之。皆稽首作礼。
现代文：只见他遇到的那位仙师在车里坐着，阴曹里的官员们忙向他跪拜行礼。
English: He only saw that the sorcerer he met was sitting in a car, and the officials in the underworld were busy kneeling and bowing to him.

古文：圣师曰： 我有弟子在此，故来度之。 
现代文：仙师对冥府的官员们说： 我有位弟子在这里，我是来超度他的。 
English: The Immortal Master said to the officials of Hades: I have a disciple here, and I have come to surpass him.

古文：乃取经一卷付基，基载拜跪受，题云《太上救苦经》。
现代文：说罢拿了一卷经授给阮基，阮基忙跪下接了过来，见经上题知是《太上救苦经》。
English: After saying this, he took a volume of scripture given to Nguyn Gin. Nguyn Gin quickly knelt down and accepted it. The above scripture is known as "The Book of the Relief of Suffering."

古文：令基读之一遍，冥官皆稽首受命听讫。
现代文：仙师让阮基把这卷经念一遍，阮基就念了，那些冥官都恭敬地低着头听。
English: The sorcerer asked Nguyn Ki to recite the sutra. Nguyn Ki did so, and the officials listened respectfully with their heads bowed.

古文：谓基曰： 可去，勿住此，深勤精进，后更与汝相见。 
现代文：阮基念完经后，仙师说： 你可以走了，不要在这儿停留。以后要刻苦修道，我还会和你相见的。 
English: After Ruan Ji finished reciting the sutras, the sage said: "You can go, don't stay here. In the future, you must practice hard, and I will see you again."

古文：言讫，失师所在，唯觉香气氛氲久之。
现代文：说完，仙师就突然不见了，只留下很浓重的香气很久不散。
English: After saying this, the sorcerer suddenly disappeared, leaving only a very strong aroma that lingered for a long time.

古文：乃见一黄衣使者，引基至家，唯闻家号泣之声，基乃还活。
现代文：这时有一个黄衣使者把阮基领到他家门口，只听见家里一片哭声，阮基就复活了。
English: At this time, a yellow-clad messenger led Ruan Ji to the door of his house. He only heard a cry in the house, and Ruan Ji was revived.

古文：凝坐良久，追忆梦中经，不遗一字。
现代文：复活后，坐在那里长时间地回忆梦中得到的那卷经文，竟一字不漏地默写下来了。
English: After his resurrection, he sat there for a long time recalling the book of scripture that he had received in a dream, and he wrote it down word for word.

古文：乃慎持念，遂抄录传于世。
现代文：以后阮基就天天持斋念经，经文也被抄录流传开来。
English: From then on, Nguyn Gin would fast and recite the sutras every day, and the scriptures were also copied and circulated.

古文：复辞亲友，入王屋山，莫知所在。
现代文：后来阮基辞家出走，进了王屋山修道，不知究竟在什么地方。
English: Later, Ruan Ji left home and went into the monastery of Wangya Mountain, I don't know where exactly.

