古文：末帝，讳从珂，本姓王氏，镇州人也。
现代文：末帝，讳名从珂，原来姓王，是镇州人。
English: Late Emperor, alias Zongke, originally surnamed Wang, was a native of Zhenzhou.

古文：母宣宪皇后魏氏，以光启元年岁在乙巳正月二十三日，生帝于平山。景福中，明宗为武皇骑将，略地至平山，遇魏氏，掳之，帝时年十余岁，明宗养为己子。
现代文：母亲宣宪皇后魏氏，光启元年一月二十三日，在平山生下末帝。景福年中，明宗作为武皇的骑将，攻城略地来到平山，遇见魏氏，将她抓走，末帝这时十几岁，明宗收养为自己的儿子。
English: Emperor Mingzong's mother, Empress Wei, gave birth to Emperor Mingzong on the 23rd day of January in the first year of the Guangqi Dynasty. In the middle of the reign of King Fufu, Emperor Mingzong, as the cavalry commander of Emperor Wu, came to the city of Hirayama, met Empress Wei and took her away. Emperor Mingzong adopted Emperor Mingzong as his son when Emperor Mingzong was in his teens.

古文：小字二十三。
现代文：小名叫二十三。
English: His nickname is Twenty-three.

古文：帝幼谨重寡言，及壮，长七尺余，方颐大体，材貌雄伟，以骁果称，明宗甚爱之。
现代文：末帝幼年时谨慎厚重而少言语，长大后，身长七尺多，方脸粗壮，体貌雄伟，以骁勇果敢著称，明宗十分喜欢他。
English: When he was a child, the late emperor was cautious, thick-skinned, and had few words. When he grew up, he was more than seven feet tall, with a thick square face and a majestic physique. He was known for his bravery and courage. Emperor Mingzong liked him very much.

古文：在太原，尝与石敬瑭因击球同入于赵襄子之庙，见其塑像，屹然起立，帝秘之，私心自负。
现代文：在太原，曾与石敬瑭因击球一同进入赵襄子庙，见其塑像屹然起立，末帝口中不言，但心里颇为自负。
English: In Taiyuan, he once entered the Zhao Xiangzi Temple together with Shi Jingyao for batting, and saw his statue standing tall. The late emperor did not say anything, but he was quite conceited.

古文：及从明宗征讨，以力战知名，庄宗尝曰： 阿三不惟与我同齿，敢战亦相类。 
现代文：以后跟随明宗征战，以作战勇猛闻名，庄宗曾说 ：阿三不仅和我岁数相同，敢于出战也很相似。 
English: After that, he went to war with Mingzong and was known for his bravery in battle. Zhuangzong once said, "A San is not only the same age as me, but he also has the courage to go to war.

古文：庄宗与梁军战于胡柳陂，两军俱挠，帝卫庄宗夺土山，摧骁阵，其军复振。
现代文：庄宗与梁军在胡柳陂交战时，双方都有损失，末帝保卫庄宗夺取土山，摧毁敌阵，唐军军势又振奋起来。
English: When Zhuangzong and Liang's army clashed at Hu Liuzhang, both sides suffered losses. The last emperor, defending Zhuangzong, seized the hill and destroyed the enemy line. The Tang army's military strength was again invigorated.

古文：时明宗先渡河，庄宗不悦，谓明宗曰： 公当为吾死，渡河安往？ 
现代文：当时明宗率先渡过黄河，庄宗不高兴，对明宗说： 你应当为我死战，渡过黄河想去哪里呢？ 
English: At that time, Mingzong was the first to cross the Yellow River. Zhuangzong was not happy and said to Mingzong, "You should fight to the death for me. Where do you want to go after crossing the Yellow River?"

古文：明宗待罪，庄宗以帝从战有功，由是解愠。
现代文：明宗待罪接受处置，庄宗因末帝随从作战有功，因此消除了心中不愉快。
English: Ming Zong pleaded guilty and accepted the punishment, while Zhuang Zong, because he had served the last emperor well in the war, eliminated his unhappiness.

古文：天祐十八年，庄宗营于河上，议讨镇州。
现代文：天祐十八年，庄宗在黄河岸边扎营，商议讨伐镇州。
English: In the 18th year of Tianyu, Zhuangzong camped on the banks of the Yellow River to discuss the suppression of Zhenzhou.

古文：留守符存审在德胜寨未行，梁人谓庄宗已北，乃悉众攻德胜，庄宗命明宗、存审为两翼以抗之，自以中军前进。
现代文：留守符存审在德胜寨没有动，梁人认为庄宗已经往北去了，便全部出动进攻德胜，庄宗命令明宗、符存审作为两翼部队抵抗，自己率中军前进。
English: The remaining Fu Cunxi did not move in Deshengzhai. The Liang people thought that Zhuangzong had gone to the north, so they all set out to attack Desheng. Zhuangzong ordered Mingzong and Fu Cunxi to resist as two-wing troops, and he led the Chinese army forward.

古文：梁军退却，帝以十数骑杂梁军而退，至垒门大呼，斩首数级，斧其望橹而还。
现代文：梁军退却，末帝以十几名骑兵夹杂在梁军队伍中退走，到垒门时大声呐喊，斩首数级，砍断军营上的望橹而回。
English: Liang's army retreated, and the Last Emperor retreated with more than a dozen cavalrymen mixed in Liang's army. When he reached the gate, he shouted loudly, beheaded several ranks, cut off the watchtower on the camp and returned.

古文：庄宗大噱曰： 壮哉，阿三！ 
现代文：庄宗大笑道： 勇敢啊，阿三！ 
English: Zhuozong laughed loudly, "Brave, Ah San!

古文：赐酒一器。
现代文：赐给他一坛酒。
English: Give him a pitcher of wine.

古文：同光元年四月，从明宗袭破郓州。
现代文：同光元年四月，随从明宗袭击攻破郓州。
English: In April of the same year, he accompanied the Ming Dynasty to attack and conquer Zhangzhou.

古文：九月，庄宗败梁将王彦章于中都，急趋汴州。
现代文：九月，庄宗在中都击败梁将王彦章，紧急奔赴汴州。
English: In September, Zhuo Zong defeated Liang general Wang Yanzhang in Zhongdu and rushed to Zhangzhou.

古文：明宗将前军，帝率劲骑以从，昼夜兼行，率先下汴城。
现代文：明宗率领前军，末帝率领精锐骑兵跟从，昼夜兼行，率先拿下汴城。
English: Ming Zong led the vanguard, while Late Emperor led the elite cavalry to follow, marching both day and night, and taking the lead in taking down Lucheng.

古文：庄宗劳明宗曰： 复唐社稷，卿父子之功也。 
现代文：庄宗慰劳明宗说 ：复兴唐朝社稷，是你们父子的功劳。 
English: Zhuangzong consoled Mingzong and said, "The revival of the Tang Dynasty is the merit of your father and son.

古文：二年，以帝为卫州刺史。
现代文：二年，任末帝为卫州刺史。
English: Two years later, he was appointed as the last emperor to write the history of Weizhou.

古文：时有王安节者，昭宗朝相杜让能之宅吏也。
现代文：此时有一个叫王安节的人，是唐昭宗朝宰相杜让能的宅吏。
English: At this time, there was a man named Wang Anjie, who was the housekeeper of the Tang Zhaozong Dynasty Prime Minister Du Jiangneng.

古文：安节少善贾，得相术于奇士，因事见帝于私邸，退谓人曰： 真北方天王相也，位当为天子，终则我莫知也。 
现代文：王安节年轻时擅长做生意，从奇士那里学到相术，因有事在私邸见过末帝，退出后对人说： 真是北方天王之相，位当为天子，最终什么结果我就不知道了。 
English: When he was young, Wang Anqing was good at doing business. He learned the art of physiognomy from a wizard. For some reason, he met the last emperor in a private residence. After they left, he said to the man, "This is truly the physiognomy of the king of the north. He should be the son of heaven. In the end, I don't know what the outcome will be."

古文：三年，明宗奉诏北御契丹，以家在太原，表帝为北京内衙指挥使；庄宗不悦，以帝为突骑都指挥使，遣戍石门。
现代文：三年，明宗奉诏令抗击北部契丹，因住家在太原，上表章推荐末帝为北京内衙指挥使，庄宗不高兴，任末帝为突骑都指挥使，遣往戍卫石门。
English: Three years later, Mingzong was ordered by the emperor to fight against the Khitan in the north. Since he lived in Taiyuan, the last emperor was recommended by the above title to be the commanding officer of the Beijing Inner Circuit. Zhuangzong was not happy, and appointed the last emperor as the commanding officer of the Turbulent Cavalry and sent him to Xianwei Shimen.

古文：四年，魏州军乱，明宗赴洛，时帝在横水，率部下军士由曲阳、孟县趋常山，与王建立会，倍道兼行，渡河而南，由是明宗军声大振。
现代文：四年，魏州军叛乱，明宗奔赴洛阳，此时末帝在横水，率部下军士由曲阳、盂县前往常山，与王建立会合，加速行军，渡过黄河往南，因此明宗军声势大振。
English: In the fourth year, the Weizhou Army rebelled, and the Ming Dynasty rushed to Luoyang. At this time, the late emperor was in Hengshui. He led his subordinate sergeants from Quyang and Jixian to Changshan, established a meeting with the king, accelerated the march, and crossed the Yellow River to the south. As a result, the Ming Dynasty army gained momentum.

古文：天成初，以帝为河中节度使。
现代文：天成初年，任末帝为河中节度使。
English: In the first year of Tiancheng, the last emperor was appointed as the envoy of the Mid-Heaven Festival.

古文：明年二月，加检校太保、同平章事。
现代文：第二年二月，加检校太保、同平章事。
English: In February of the following year, the school was inspected for safety and security, and was awarded a certificate of equality.

古文：十一月，加检校太傅。
现代文：十一月，加检校太傅。
English: In November, the school's superintendent was put on probation.

古文：长兴元年，加检校太尉。
现代文：长兴元年，加检校太尉。
English: In the first year of Changxing, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：先是，帝兴枢密使安重诲在常山，因杯盘失意，帝以拳击重诲脑，中其栉，走而获免。
现代文：在这之前，末帝和枢密使安重诲在常山，因喝酒时相争，末帝用拳头揍安重诲的脑袋，打中头上发髻，安重诲跑开才免于出大事。
English: Prior to this, the late emperor and the privy councillor had quarreled over drinking in Changshan. The late emperor hit the head of the late emperor with his fist, and the councillor was hit on the head with a hairpin. It was only when the late emperor ran away that the late emperor was able to avoid a major incident.

古文：帝虽悔谢，然重诲终衔之。
现代文：末帝虽然后悔向安重诲道歉，但安重诲始终记恨在心。
English: Although the last emperor regretted apologizing to An Chongyun, An Chongyun always kept the grudge in mind.

古文：及帝镇河中，重诲知其出入不时，因矫宣中旨，令牙将杨彦温遇出郭则闭门勿纳。
现代文：到末帝镇守河中时，安重诲知道他经常出入州城，便假托君命告诉牙将杨彦温，令他遇上末帝出城后就关闭城门不让他进来。
English: When he arrived at the town of Madui in the middle of the river, An Chongzhen knew that he often went in and out of the state capital, so he told Yang Yanwen, the commander-in-chief, on the pretext of entrusting him with his life, so that when he met Madui leaving the city, he would close the gate and not let him in.

古文：是岁四月五日，帝阅马于黄龙庄，彦温闭城拒帝，帝闻难遽还，遣问其故，彦温曰： 但请相公入朝，此城不可入也。 
现代文：这一年四月五日，末帝在黄龙庄阅马，杨彦温关闭城门拒绝末帝进城，末帝听说出事立即赶回，派人追问原因，杨彦温说 ：只好请您回朝廷，此城不能让您进来了。 
English: On April 5th of that year, the last emperor read the horse in Huanglongzhuang, Yang Yanwen closed the gate and refused to let the last emperor enter the city. When the last emperor heard about the accident, he immediately rushed back and sent someone to inquire about the reason. Yang Yanwen said, "I have to ask you to return to the imperial court, this city cannot let you enter."

古文：帝止虞乡以闻，明宗诏帝归阙。
现代文：末帝停在虞乡把事情往上报告，明宗下令末帝回朝廷。
English: Meitai stopped at Yuxiang to report the matter to higher-ups, and Mingsong ordered Meitai to return to the imperial court.

古文：遣药彦稠将兵讨彦温，令生致之，面要鞫问。
现代文：派药彦稠带兵讨伐杨彦温，下令要抓活的，要当面审问。
English: Yan Yanwen sent troops to fight Yang Yanwen, and ordered that those who wanted to be caught alive should be interrogated face to face.

古文：十一月收城，彦温已死，明宗以彦稠不能生致彦温，甚怒之。
现代文：十一月收复州城，杨彦温已死，明宗因为药彦稠不能活捉杨彦温，很愤怒。
English: In November, they recaptured the city of Fuzhou. Yang Yanwen was already dead. Mingzong was very angry because Yang Yanwen could not be captured alive because of the thick medicine.

古文：后数日，安重诲以帝失守，讽宰相论奏行法，明宗不悦。
现代文：几天之后，安重诲以末帝失守州城为由，暗示宰相上奏要依法处分他，明宗不高兴。
English: A few days later, Emperor Anzong was displeased when Emperor Anzong suggested that the prime minister should be punished according to the law, on the grounds that Emperor Anzong had lost control of the state capital.

古文：重诲又自论奏，明宗曰： 朕为小将校时，家徒衣食不足，赖此兒荷石灰、收马粪存养，以至今贵为天子，而不能庇一兒！
现代文：安重诲又亲自上奏，明宗说： 我还是小将校时，家穷，衣食都不充足，依靠这个孩子挑石灰、捡马粪养家，以致现在我能贵为天子，却不能庇护一个儿子！
English: When I was still a junior officer, my family was poor, and we did not have enough food and clothing. I relied on this child to pick lime and horse manure to feed my family, so that now I can be a son of heaven, but I cannot protect a son!

古文：卿欲行朝典，朕未晓其意，卿等可速退，从他私第闲坐。 
现代文：你想行使朝廷法典，我不明白这里的道理，你们可以快点退下，随他在家中闲坐。 
English: If you want to invoke the Imperial Code, I don't understand the logic here. You can quickly retreat and sit idly at home with him.

古文：遂诏归清化里第，不预朝请。
现代文：遂下诏令末帝回清化里私第，不参加上朝。
English: Finally, the emperor issued an imperial edict that the late emperor should return to Qinghua and not participate in the Shang Dynasty.

古文：帝尚惧重诲多方危陷，但日讽佛书阴祷而已。
现代文：末帝又害怕安重诲多方陷害威胁，只是每天诵读佛经暗地祈祷而已。
English: The last emperor was also afraid of the threat of multiple traps, but he only read Buddhist scriptures and secretly prayed every day.

古文：二年，安重诲得罪，帝即授左卫大将军。
现代文：二年，安重诲获罪受处置，末帝立即被授予左卫大将军。
English: Two years later, An Chongyun was found guilty and punished, and the last emperor was immediately awarded the title of General of the Left Division.

古文：未几，复检校太傅、同平章事、行京兆尹，充西京留守。
现代文：没过多久，又恢复检校太傅、同平章事、代理京兆尹，兼任西京留守。
English: It did not take long before he was reinstated as the school inspector, Tongping Zhangji, acting for Jing Zhaoyun, and also stayed in West Beijing.

古文：三年，进位太尉，移凤翔节度使。
现代文：三年，进位太尉，调任凤翔节度使。
English: In the third year, he was promoted to the rank of captain and transferred to the post of Fengxiang Festival envoy.

古文：四年五月，封潞王。
现代文：四年五月，封潞王。
English: In May of the fourth year, he was crowned king.

古文：闵帝即位，加兼侍中。
现代文：闵帝即位后，加兼侍中。
English: After Emperor Xuan ascended the throne, he was also made an aide-de-camp.

古文：既而帝子重吉出刺亳州，女尼入宫，帝方忧不测。
现代文：不久末帝之子李重吉出任亳州团练使，有女尼进入宫廷，末帝正忧虑事有不测。
English: Soon after, the late emperor's son, Li Chongji, was appointed as the training envoy of the Zhangzhou Regiment, and a nun entered the court. The late emperor was worried that something might happen.

古文：应顺元年二月，移帝镇太原，是时不降制书，唯以宣授而已。
现代文：应顺元年二月，调末帝镇守太原，此时不下发诏书，只是口头宣布而已。
English: It should be noted that in February of the first year, at the end of the Emperor's reign, Taiyuan was placed under imperial guard. At this time, no imperial edict was issued, but only a verbal announcement.

古文：帝闻之，召宾佐将吏以谋之，皆曰： 主上年幼，未亲庶事，军国大政悉委硃宏昭等，王必无保全之理。 
现代文：末帝听说后，召集宾佐将吏谋划起事，都说 ：皇上年幼，不能亲自处理各类事情，军国大政全都委托给朱弘昭等人，君王一定没有保证自己的安全的办法了。 
English: Upon hearing of this, the late emperor summoned his aides-de-camp to plot a coup. They all said, "The emperor is young and cannot personally handle all kinds of affairs. The military and state affairs are all entrusted to Zhu Hongzhao and others. The monarch must have no way to ensure his own safety."

古文：判官马裔孙曰： 君命召，不俟驾行焉。
现代文：判官马裔孙说 ：君主下令召见，不等车子备好就应起身。
English: Magistrate Ma Zi Sun said: The monarch ordered to be summoned, and you should get up as soon as the car is ready.

古文：《九国志·李彦琦传》：潞王守岐下，诸道将急攻其垒，彦琦时在围中，罄家财以给军用。
现代文：各位说的都是凶险的事，不是好方法。 这一夜，末帝令李专美草拟檄文向各路诸侯求援，想消灭君王身边的罪人。朝廷命王思同率军队前来讨伐。
English: All of you are talking about dangerous things, which is not a good way. That night, the last emperor ordered Li Zhenmei to draft an imperial edict to ask for help from all the princes, wanting to eliminate the sinners around the king. The court ordered Wang Si and his army to come to fight.

古文：十六日，大将督众攻城，帝登城垂泣，谕于外曰： 我年未二十从先帝征伐，出生入死，金疮满身，树立得社稷，军士从我登阵者多矣。
现代文：三月十五日，外边来的军队集合在一起。十六日，大将督促众军攻城，末帝登上城墙流泪对城外军队说 ：我不到二十岁跟随先帝征伐，出生入死，刀伤满身都是，才帮助建立起王朝，军士随从我上阵的很多。
English: On the 16th, the general urged the troops to attack the city, and the last emperor climbed the city wall to shed tears and said to the troops outside the city: I am less than twenty years old, I followed the first emperor to conquer, I was born and died, I have knife wounds all over my body, I helped to establish a dynasty, and there are many sergeants who went to war with me.

古文：今朝廷信任贼臣，残害骨肉，且我有何罪！ 
现代文：现在朝廷信任奸臣，残害骨肉亲人，我有什么罪呢？ 
English: Now the imperial court trusts a treacherous vassal and destroys flesh-and-blood relatives. What is my crime?

古文：因恸哭，闻者哀之。
现代文：因而痛哭，听到的人都哀怜他。
English: Therefore he weeps bitterly, and all who hear him mourn for him.

古文：时羽林都指挥使杨思权谓众曰： 大相公，吾主也。 
现代文：此时羽林军都指挥使杨思权对大家说 ：大相公才是我们的国主！ 
English: At this time, the commander of the Uebayashi army made Yang Siquan say to everyone: Daso Gong is our lord!

古文：遂引军自西门入，严卫都指挥使尹晖亦引军自东门而入，外军悉溃。
现代文：遂引军从西门入城，严卫都指挥使尹晖也引军从东门入城，外军全部溃散。
English: As a result, the army was led into the city from the west gate. Yan Weidu, the commander of the capital, ordered Yin Qi to also lead the army into the city from the east gate. All foreign troops were dispersed.

古文：十七日，率居民家财以赏军士。
现代文：十七日，末帝用居民家财犒赏军士。
English: On the seventeenth day, the late emperor rewarded the soldiers with the money of the residents.

古文：是日，帝整众而东。
现代文：这一天，末帝整顿军队率领向东进发。
English: On this day, the rectification army led by the last emperor marched eastward.

古文：二十日，次长安，副留守刘遂雍以城降，率京兆居民家财犒军。
现代文：二十日，到长安，副留守刘遂雍献城投降，用京兆居民家财犒赏军队。
English: On the 20th, when he arrived in Chang'an, Liu Suiyong, the deputy left-behind, offered the city to surrender and rewarded the troops with the wealth of the residents of Jingzhao.

古文：二十三日，次灵口，诛王思同。
现代文：二十三日，到灵口，诛杀王思同。
English: On the 23rd, he went to Lingkou and killed Wang Sitong.

古文：二十四日，次华州，收药彦稠系狱。
现代文：二十四日，到华州，收捕药彦稠关进监狱。
English: On the 24th, he went to Huazhou to arrest and imprison Yan Yan.

古文：二十五日，次阌乡，王仲皋父子迎谒，命诛之。
现代文：二十五日，到阌乡，王仲皋父子迎接进见，末帝下令杀掉他们。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Wang Zhongya and his son went to Shanzhong to meet Jin Rong, and the late emperor ordered them to be killed.

古文：二十六日，次灵宝，河中节度使安彦威来降，待罪，宥之，遣归镇。
现代文：二十六日，到灵宝，河中节度使安彦威来投降，等待治罪，末帝饶恕了他，派他回镇。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, when he arrived at Lingbao, the Mid-river Festival ordered An Yanwei to surrender and await punishment. The last emperor forgave him and sent him back to the town.

古文：陕州节度使康思立奉迎。
现代文：陕州节度使康思立迎接。
English: The festival in Shaanxi Province was welcomed by Kang Sili.

古文：二十七日，次陕州，下令告谕京城。
现代文：二十七日，到陕州，下令通告京城。
English: On the 27th, he went to Shaanxi and ordered that Beijing be notified.

古文：二十八日，康义诚军前兵士相继来降，义诚诣军门请罪，帝宥之。
现代文：二十八日，康义诚军前士兵相继前来投降，康义诚到军门前请罪，末帝宽恕了他。
English: On the 28th, the former soldiers of Kang Yicheng's army came to surrender one after another. Kang Yicheng went to the army gate to plead guilty, and the late emperor pardoned him.

古文：驾下诸军毕至，诛宣徽南院使孟汉琼于路左。
现代文：朝廷各军全部到了，在路边杀死宣徽南院使孟汉琼。
English: All the troops of the imperial court arrived and killed Meng Hanqiong, the envoy of the Southern Court of Xuanhui, on the roadside.

古文：是夜，闵帝与帐下亲骑百余出元武门而去。
现代文：这一夜，闵帝和帐下亲兵一百多人从玄武门逃走。
English: That night, Emperor Xuan and more than a hundred soldiers under his command fled from the Xuanwu Gate.

古文：夏四月壬申，帝至蒋桥，文武百官立班奉迎，教旨以未拜梓宫，未可相见，俟会于至德宫，时六军勋臣及节将内职已累表劝进。
现代文：四月三日，末帝到蒋桥，文武百官排列迎候，传旨令说还没拜见明宗棺柩，不能与百官相见，等以后到至德宫相会，此进六军勋臣及节将内职已多次上表章劝进。
English: On April 3, the last emperor arrived at Jiangqiao, and hundreds of civil and military officials lined up to greet him. An order was sent to say that they had not yet seen the Ming Dynasty coffin, and could not meet with the officials, so they would meet at the German Palace. This time, the six army officers and men and the commander-in-chief have been persuaded to enter the table several times.

古文：是日，帝入谒太后、太妃，至西宫，伏梓宫恸哭，宰相与百僚班见致拜，帝答拜。
现代文：这一天，末帝入宫进见太后、太妃，到西宫，趴在棺材上痛哭，宰相与百官排队拜见，末帝答拜。
English: On this day, the last emperor entered the palace to see the empress dowager and the empress dowager, went to the West Palace, lay down on the coffin and cried bitterly, the prime minister and the hundred officials lined up to meet, and the last emperor responded.

古文：冯道等上笺劝进，帝立谓群臣曰： 予之此行，事非获已，当俟主上归阙，园陵礼终，退守籓服。
现代文：冯道等人上笺表劝进，末帝站着对群臣说： 我这次出行，目的不是想得到什么，应该等闵帝回朝，明宗葬礼结束，仍要退回自己的藩属。
English: Feng Dao and others went to the imperial table to persuade them to go forward, and the last emperor stood up and said to the group of courtiers: My purpose of this trip is not to get anything, I should wait for the emperor to return to the morning, the Ming Dynasty funeral is over, I still have to return to my own clan.

古文：诸公言遽及此，信无谓也。 
现代文：各位这么快就说到即位之事，实在太没意思了。 
English: It's really boring for you to talk about the succession so soon.

古文：卫州刺史王宏贽奏，闵帝以前月二十九日至州。
现代文：卫州刺史王弘贽上奏，闵帝在上个月二十九日到卫州。
English: Wang Hongtao, the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince of the prince.

古文：癸酉，皇太后下令降闵帝为鄂王。
现代文：四日，皇太后下令废闵帝为鄂王。
English: On the fourth day, the empress dowager ordered the dethronement of the emperor as the king of E.

古文：又，太后令曰： 先皇帝诞膺天眷，光绍帝图，明诚动于三灵，德泽被于四海，方期偃革，遽叹遗弓。
现代文：太后又下令说 ：先皇帝受上天佑护，继承帝业，明诚感动三灵，德泽施及四海，正准备停息兵戈，却突然去世。
English: The empress dowager also ordered, "The former emperor was blessed and protected by God, he succeeded to the imperial inheritance, he sincerely moved the Three Spirits, he spread virtue to the four seas, he was preparing to end the war, but he suddenly passed away.

古文：自少主之承祧，为奸臣之擅命，离间骨肉，猜忌磐维，既辄易于籓垣，复骤兴于兵甲。
现代文：自从少主继承皇位，被奸臣把持专权，离间骨肉，猜忌大将，既轻易更换藩守，又骤然发起战事。
English: Since the young lord succeeded to the imperial throne, he has been held in absolute power by treacherous vassals, which has divided his bones and flesh and made him distrustful of generals. It is not only easy to change the governor of the domain, but also to suddenly start a war.

古文：遂致轻离社稷，大挠军民，万世鸿基，将坠于地。
现代文：遂致国家离乱，军民受扰，万世大业将坠落下来。
English: As a result, the country will be disrupted, the military and the people will be disturbed, and the great cause of the world will fall.

古文：皇长子潞王从珂，位居冢嗣，德茂冲年，乃武乃文，惟忠惟孝。
现代文：皇长子潞王李从珂，位居嫡传，德高望重，正当壮年，能文能武，又忠又孝。
English: The emperor's eldest son, King Li Zongke, was the heir to the throne. He was highly respected for his virtue, was of the right age, was able to be a scholar and a warrior, and was both loyal and filial.

古文：前朝廓清多难，有战伐之大功；缵绍丕图，有夹辅之盛业。
现代文：在前朝清除多难，有战伐之大功；在闵帝接续大位后，有夹助辅佐之勋业。
English: In the previous dynasty, he cleared many difficulties, and made great achievements in battle; after Emperor Gong succeeded to the throne, he was awarded the title of "Pinch, Assist, and Assist."

古文：今以宗祧乏祀，园寝有期，须委亲贤，俾居监抚，免万机之壅滞，慰兆庶之推崇。
现代文：现在因宗族缺少继任者，陵墓又要按期修治，应该委任亲贤，以使监督安抚，免得国家大事无人办理，也可告慰天下百姓的推崇之意。
English: Now, due to the lack of successors in the clan, the mausoleum must be repaired on schedule. It is necessary to appoint relatives and sages to supervise and pacify, so that no one can handle national affairs, and also to appease the admiration of the people around the world.

古文：可起今月四日知军国事，权以书诏印施行。 
现代文：可从本月四日起主持军国事务，暂且以书诏印施行。 
English: He can preside over military affairs from the 4th of this month, and for the time being, this will be implemented with the imperial seal.

古文：是日，监国在至德宫，宰臣冯道等率百官班于宫门待罪。帝出于庭，曰： 相公诸人何罪，请复位。 
现代文：这一天，监国在至德宫，宰臣冯道等人率百官排列在宫门等待治罪，末帝从廷中出来说： 相公诸位有什么罪，请复原位。 
English: On this day, the supervisor of the state was in the Zhi De Palace, and the vice-minister Feng Dao and others lined up at the palace gate with hundreds of officials waiting to be punished. The last emperor came out of the court and said: What is the sin of you, please restore the original position.

古文：乃退。
现代文：于是退下。
English: So back off.

古文：甲戌，太后令曰： 先皇帝栉风沐雨，平定华夷，嗣洪业于艰难，致苍生于富庶。
现代文：五日，太后下令说： 先皇帝栉风沐雨，平定华夷，在艰难中继承伟大事业，带给天下百姓富庶安宁。
English: On the fifth day, the empress dowager issued an order saying, "The late emperor calmed the wind and the rain, pacified China and the barbarians, inherited a great cause in the midst of difficulties, and brought prosperity and peace to the people of the world."

古文：鄂王嗣位，奸臣弄权，作福作威，不诚不信，离间骨肉，猜忌磐维。
现代文：鄂王即位后，奸臣弄权，作威作福，不诚不信，离间骨肉，猜忌大将。
English: After King He ascended to the throne, his treacherous vassals tried to usurp power, arrogance, dishonesty, distrust, discord, and suspicion became rampant.

古文：鄂王轻舍宗祧，不克负荷，洪基大宝，危若缀旒，须立长君，以绍丕构。
现代文：鄂王轻易放弃宗祧，不能担当大任，社稷江山，像断线珠子般危险，应立长君，以接续大业。
English: The king of H did not easily give up the patriarchate, he could not take on the great responsibility, and the mountains and rivers of Shifang were as dangerous as broken beads. He should set up the patriarch to continue the great cause.

古文：皇长子潞王从珂，日跻孝敬，天纵聪明，有神武之英姿，有宽仁之伟略。
现代文：皇长子潞王李从珂，十分孝敬，聪明，有神武英姿，宽仁伟略。
English: The eldest son of the emperor, King Gong, Li Congke, was very filial and respectful, intelligent, and had a godly, brave and brilliant appearance.

古文：一日万机，不可以暂旷；九州四海，不可以无归。
现代文：先朝时从创业初期就出力献策，平定天下，有辛勤百战之劳，忠心助成天下统一，作为臣子的诚实有道，堪称古今第一。
English: At the time of the previous dynasty, from the early days of entrepreneurship, he put forth his efforts and made suggestions to pacify the world. He worked hard in a hundred battles, loyally supported the unification of the world, and was honest and virtuous as a courtier. He can be called the first in the past and the present.

古文：况因山有期，同轨斯至，永言嗣守，属任元良，宜即皇帝位。 
现代文：而又克己教化人民，推心招抚士人，国内有很多人歌颂他，上天也显灵庇护他。国家每天都有众多大事，不能一刻没人治理；九州四海，也不可没有归属。遇此良机应即皇帝位。 
English: However, he restrained himself from educating the people, and encouraged the scholars. Many people in the country sang his praises, and the heavens also appeared to protect him. The country has many important events every day, and it cannot be governed by no one for a moment; Kyushu and the four seas cannot be without belonging. If there is a good opportunity, it should be the emperor's throne.

古文：乙亥，监国赴西宫，柩前告奠即位。摄中书令李愚宣册书曰：
现代文：六日，监国到西宫，在灵柩前告奠即皇帝位，摄中书令李愚宣读册书说：
English: On the sixth day, the Supervisor of the State went to the West Palace to pay tribute to the emperor in front of the coffin. In the photo, Li Yu was ordered to read the book and said:

古文：维应顺元年岁次甲午，四月庚午朔，六日乙亥，文武百僚，特进、守司空兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、充太微宫使、弘文馆大学士、上柱国、始平郡公、食邑二千五百户臣冯道等九千五百九十三人上言：帝王兴运，天地同符，河出图而洛出书，云从龙而风从虎。
现代文： 应顺元年岁星在甲午，四月六日，文武百官，特进、守司空兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、充太微宫使、弘文馆大学士、上柱国、始平郡公、食邑二千五百户臣冯道等九千五百九十三人上言：帝王兴运，天地同时符验，黄河出现图而洛河出现书，云随蛟龙而风从猛虎。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the year, April 6th, nine thousand five hundred and ninety-three people, including civil and military officials, the special envoy, the governor-general Ku Ku and his attendants, the scholar of the same school, the scholar of the same school, the scholar of the same school, the envoy of the same school, the scholar of the same school, the scholar of the same school, the scholar of the same school, the scholar of the same school, the scholar of the same school, the scholar of the same school, the scholar of the same school, the scholar of the same school, the scholar of the same school, the scholar of the same school, the

古文：莫不恢张八表，覆育兆民，立大定之基，保无疆之祚。
现代文：无不恢宏四方大地，抚育亿万人民，建立永久基业，保持无限福祚。
English: It is a vast and magnificent land in all directions, nurturing hundreds of millions of people, establishing a permanent foundation, and maintaining infinite blessings.

古文：人谣再洽，天命显归，须登宸极之尊，以奉祖宗之祀。
现代文：人民传言谐合，天命明显有归，必须登皇帝尊位，以奉祖宗之祀。
English: The people's rumors are in harmony, the fate of heaven is obviously right, and it is necessary to ascend to the emperor's dignity and worship the ancestors.

古文：伏惟皇帝陛下，天资仁智，神助机权，奉庄宗于多难之时，从先帝于四征之际，凡当决胜，无不成功。
现代文：我们认为当今皇帝陛下，天资仁厚智慧，神助机巧权变，在多难之时侍奉庄宗，又追随先帝四处征讨，凡是决战，无不成功。
English: We believe that His Majesty, the current emperor, has the talent, benevolence, wisdom, God-assisted opportunism, served Zhuangzong in difficult times, and followed the former emperor to solicit everywhere. In all decisive battles, he has been successful.

古文：洎正皇纲，每严师律，为国家之志大，守臣子之道全。
现代文：端正皇纲，严格军法，有统御国家的大志，有谨守臣道的德义。
English: It has a correct imperial program, strict military law, a great ambition to rule the country, and the virtue of observing the way of a subject.

古文：自泣遗弓，常悲易月，欲期同轨，亲赴因山。
现代文：自从先帝去世，常哭泣悲伤，想约定诸侯，亲赴山陵归葬。
English: Since the death of the former emperor, he often wept with grief and wanted to make an agreement with the princes to personally go to the mountain to be buried.

古文：而自鄂王承祧，奸臣擅命，致神祇之乏飨，激朝野以归心。
现代文：然而自鄂王即位之后，奸臣专权，弄得神癨缺乏供食，激起朝野归心今上。
English: However, after the enthronement of King E, the treacherous vassal's exclusive power caused the shrine to lack food supply, provoking the emperor and the country to return to the present.

古文：使屈者伸，令否者泰，人情大顺，天象至明。
现代文：使屈者得以伸直，令倒霉的人时来运转，人情大顺，天象极其明朗。
English: It can straighten up those who are bent over, make the unlucky people move from time to time, people are very happy, and the sky is extremely clear.

古文：聚东井以呈祥，拱北辰而应运。
现代文：聚东方井宿呈现祥瑞，拱北极星辰而应验天运。
English: The cluster of oriental wells and lodgings present auspiciousness, arch the North Star and fulfill the heavenly fortune.

古文：由是文武百辟，岳牧群贤，至于比屋之伦，尽祝当阳之位。今则承太后慈旨，守先朝远图，抚四海九州，享千龄万祀。
现代文：因此文武百官、州牧群贤，家家都在祝贺天子施政。现在秉承太后慈旨，守先朝的远大规划，安抚四海九州，享受千岁万祀。
English: For this reason, all the military and civilian officials, state pastors and wise men, and all families are congratulating the heavenly son on his administration. Now, adhering to the Empress Dowager's benevolent will, we will keep the previous dynasty's ambitious plan, pacify the four seas of Kyushu, and enjoy eternal life.

古文：臣等不胜大愿，谨上宝册，禀太后令，奉皇帝践祚。
现代文：我们不胜大愿荣幸之至，谨献上宝册，禀报太后之令，奉请皇帝登位。
English: It is our great honor to present the treasure book and report the order of the empress dowager to the emperor for his enthronement.

古文：臣等诚庆诚忭，谨言。
现代文：我们诚心庆贺诚心喜悦，谨言。 
English: We sincerely congratulate you on your sincere joy.

古文：帝就殿之东楹受群臣称贺。
现代文：末帝在大殿的东柱接受群臣称贺。
English: The late emperor receives congratulations from his courtiers at the east pillar of the Great Hall.

古文：先是，帝在凤翔日，有瞽者张濛自言知术数，事太白山神，其神祠即元魏时崔浩庙也。
现代文：在这以前，末帝在凤翔的时候，有盲人张氵蒙自称知道术数，事奉太白山神，其神祠就是元魏时崔浩的庙。
English: Prior to this, when the last emperor was in Fengxiang, there was a blind man, Zhang Yimeng, who claimed to know the number of operations and served the god of Taibai Mountain. His shrine was the temple of Cuihao in the Yuan and Wei dynasties.

古文：时之否泰，人之休咎，濛告于神，即传吉凶之言，帝亲校房暠酷信之。
现代文：时运的否泰，人的走运倒霉，张氵蒙向神询问，立即就会传告吉凶之言，末帝的亲近校官房詗特别信服他。
English: Whether it's bad luck or good luck, whether it's bad luck or good luck, if Zhang Yimeng inquires with the gods, they will immediately tell him the words of good or bad luck.

古文：一日，濛至府，闻帝语声，骇然曰： 非人臣也。 
现代文：一天，张氵蒙到府第，听到末帝说话声音，惊骇地说： 不是人臣的声音。 
English: One day, Zhang Yimeng went to the palace, heard the Emperor's voice speaking, and said in shock: "It's not the voice of a courtier."

古文：暠询其事，即传神语曰： 三珠并一珠，驴马没人驱，岁月甲庚午，中兴戊己土。 
现代文：房詗问事情来由，即传告神语说： 三珠并一珠，驴马没人驱，岁月甲庚午，中兴戊己土。 
English: Fong Yao asked the reason for the matter, that is, he told the divine words: Three beads and one bead, donkey and horse are not driven, the years are in the middle of the year, the land is in the middle of the year.

古文：暠请解释，曰： 神言予不知也。 
现代文：房詗请他解释，说： 神的话我不知道。 
English: And he gave him an answer, and said, I know not the word of God.

古文：长兴四年五月，府廨诸门无故自动，人颇骇异。
现代文：长兴四年五月，府第官署的门都无故自己动起来，人们感到有点惊异害怕。
English: In May of the fourth year of Changxing, the doors of the prefectural government offices all moved on their own for no reason. People felt a little surprised and scared.

古文：遣暠问濛，濛曰： 衙署小异勿怪，不出三日，当有恩命。 
现代文：派房詗问张氵蒙，张氵蒙说： 衙署小小的异象不用奇怪，不出三天，会有恩命。 
English: He asked Zhang Yimeng about it, and Zhang Yimeng said: "Don't be surprised if you see a small vision. In three days, you will have a blessing.

古文：是夜报至，封潞王。
现代文：这晚报信的来到，末帝被封为潞王。
English: When the news came this evening, the last emperor was crowned as the Dragon King.

古文：及帝移镇河东，甚惧，问濛，濛曰： 王保无患。 
现代文：当末帝调任镇守河东时，感到很害怕，问张氵蒙，张氵蒙说 ：王可保证没有祸患。 
English: When the last emperor transferred him to guard the eastern part of the river, he felt very scared and asked Zhang Yimeng. Zhang Yimeng said, "The king can guarantee that there will be no disaster."

古文：王思同兵至，又诘之，濛曰： 王有天下，不能独力，朝廷兵来迎王也。
现代文：王思同带兵来到时，又问张氵蒙，张氵蒙说： 王有天下，不能靠独自的力量，朝廷来兵是迎接您的。
English: When Wang Sitong arrived with his soldiers, he asked Zhang Yimeng again. Zhang Yimeng said: "The king has the whole world at his disposal, he cannot rely on his own strength. The soldiers from the court are here to welcome you."

古文：王若疑臣，臣唯一子，请王致之麾下，以质臣心。 
现代文：王若怀疑我的话，我只有一个儿子，请王带到麾下作为人质，验证我的心意。 
English: If the king doubts my word that I have an only son, let him bring me as a hostage to his palace and test my resolve.

古文：帝乃以濛摄馆驿巡官。
现代文：末帝便任张氵蒙统摄馆驿巡官。
English: The late emperor then appointed Zhang Yimeng as the inspector of the photography studio.

古文：至是，帝受册，册曰： 维应顺元年岁次甲午，四月庚午朔。 
现代文：现在，末帝受宝册，册上说： 维应顺元年岁次甲午，四月庚午朔。 
English: Now, the last emperor received the treasure book, and the book said: Wei Ying Shun, the first year of the year, the second year of the year, the first day of the month of April, the first day of the month of April.

古文：帝回视房暠曰： 张濛神言甲庚午，不亦异乎！ 
现代文：末帝回头看着房詗说： 张氵蒙神说甲庚午，不是很奇异吗？ 
English: The Last Emperor looked back at Fang Ye and said, "Isn't it strange that Zhang Ye and Meng Shen said the time was in the afternoon of the first lunar month?

古文：帝令暠共术士解三珠一珠事，言： 三珠，三帝也；驴马没人驱，失位也。 
现代文：末帝令房詗和术士一起解释三珠一珠这些话，说： 三珠，就是三帝；驴马没人驱，是失去位置的意思。 
English: The last emperor ordered Fusang and the sorcerer to explain the words "three beads, one bead" together, saying: "Three beads means three emperors; no one drives the donkey and horse, which means losing one's position.

古文：帝即位之后，以濛为将作少监同正，仍赐金紫以酬之。
现代文：末帝即位以后，任张氵蒙为将作少监同正，还赐给金紫衣酬谢他。
English: After the last emperor ascended to the throne, he appointed Zhang Yimeng as a junior inspector and co-director, and also gave him a gold and purple clothing reward to thank him.

古文：帝初封潞王，言事者云： 潞字一足已入洛矣。 
现代文：末帝刚封潞王时，有议论说 ：潞字意思是一足已经进入洛阳了。 
English: When the last emperor had just enthroned Shao Wang, there was a debate that: Shao Zi means that Shao Wang has already entered Luoyang.

古文：又，帝在凤翔日，有何叟者，年逾七十，暴卒，见阴官凭几告叟曰： 为我言于潞王，来年三月当为天子，二十三年。 
现代文：还有，末帝在凤翔时，有一个叫何叟的人，年过七十，突然死去，见阴间官吏靠着桌子告诉何叟： 给我对潞王说，来年三月会成为天子，二十三年。 
English: Also, when the last emperor was in Fengxiang, there was a man named He Xuan, who was over seventy years old and died suddenly. Seeing the officials of the underworld leaning over the table, he told He Xuan: "Tell me to tell King Zou that he will become the Son of Heaven in March next year, in 23 years."

古文：叟既苏，惧不敢言。
现代文：何叟苏醒过来，害怕不敢说。
English: When she woke up, she was too scared to speak.

古文：逾月复卒，阴官见而叱之曰： 安得违吾旨，不达其事，再放汝还。 
现代文：过一个月又死去，阴官见了斥责他说： 怎么敢违抗我的话，不传达那句话，再放你还世。 
English: A month later, he died again, and the gynaecologist saw him and scolded him: "How dare you disobey my word, not to pass on that sentence, and then let you live again.

古文：退见廊庑下簿书，以问主者，曰： 朝代将易，此即升降人爵之籍也。 
现代文：退下来看见廊下有记事簿，问管事的人，说： 朝代将要改换，这个就是升降人的爵位的册子。 
English: He stepped back and saw a record book in the hallway. He asked the person in charge and said, "The dynasty is about to change. This is the book of titles for those who are promoted and demoted."

古文：及苏，诣帝亲校刘延朗告之。
现代文：苏醒过来后，见末帝亲校刘延朗告诉这事。
English: After regaining consciousness, Liu Yanlang, a former student of the late emperor, told him about the incident.

古文：帝召而问之，叟曰： 请质之，此言无征，戮之可也。 
现代文：末帝召见他问起此事，何叟说 ：请以后对质，这话如不能应验，杀掉也可以。 
English: The Emperor summoned him to ask him about the matter, and Ho Ye said, "Please confront me later. If you can't fulfill this promise, you can kill me."

古文：后人云： 二十三，盖帝之小字也。 
现代文：后人说： 二十三，就是末帝的小名。 
English: Later generations said: "Twenty-three is the nickname of the last emperor."

古文：又，石壕人胡杲通善天文，帝召问之，曰： 王贵不可言，若举动，宜以乙未年。 
现代文：还有，石壕人胡杲通喜欢天文，末帝召问他，他说： 王贵不可言，如果要有举动，应在乙未年。 
English: Moreover, the stone dweller Hu Ying Tong liked astronomy. The late emperor summoned him and said, "Wang Gui cannot be said. If there is to be any action, it should be in the Year of the Rat.

古文：及举兵，又问之，杲通曰： 今岁篰首，王者不宜建功立事，若俟来岁入朝，则福祚永远矣。 
现代文：等到起兵时，又问他，胡杲通说： 今年是冬至在年初，王者不宜建功立事，如等到来年入朝廷，则福祚永远不绝。 
English: When he waited for the troops to be raised, he asked him again, and Hu Yutong said: This year is the winter solstice at the beginning of the year, the king should not make meritorious deeds. If he enters the imperial court next year, then the blessings will never end.

古文：其后皆验。
现代文：后来都一一应验。
English: Later, all of them were fulfilled.

古文：夫如是，则大宝之位，必有冥数，可轻道哉！
现代文：像上面说的，则大宝之位，必有命数，岂可轻易谈论。
English: As mentioned above, the position of the great treasure must have a certain number of lives, it is not easy to talk about.

古文：丙子，诏河南府率京城居民之财以助赏军。
现代文：七日，下诏令河南府收集京城居民的财物以赞助赏军。
English: On the seventh day, Henan Prefecture was ordered to collect the property of residents of Beijing to sponsor the army.

古文：丁丑，又诏预借居民五个月房课，不问士庶，一概施行。
现代文：八日，又下诏预借居民五个月房税，不论士族庶民，一概施行。
English: On the eighth day, the five-month room tax for residents was also issued, regardless of the common people of the warrior class.

古文：帝素轻财好施，自岐下为诸军推戴，告军士曰： 候入洛，人赏百千。 
现代文：末帝一贯看轻财物喜好施舍，在岐下被诸军推戴时，曾向军士许诺： 等到进了洛阳，每人赏钱百千。 
English: The last emperor had always despised wealth and preferred to give alms. When he was being pushed by the troops in Qizhi, he had promised the sergeants: Wait until you enter Luoyang, and each of you will be rewarded with one hundred thousand yuan.

古文：至是，以府藏空匮，于是有配率之令，京城庶士自绝者相继。
现代文：到这时，因为府库收藏空乏，于是有按比率分配的命令，京城中的庶民士族自杀的时有发生。
English: At this time, because the prefectural treasury collection was empty, there was an order to distribute according to the ratio, and the common people in the capital committed suicide from time to time.

古文：己卯，卫州奏，此月九日鄂王薨。
现代文：十日，卫州上奏，说这月九日鄂王死去。
English: On the tenth day of the month, there was a report from the state of Weizhou, saying that King Huan died on the ninth day of the month.

古文：庚辰，以宰臣刘煦判三司。
现代文：十一日，任宰臣刘日句判三司。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Liu, who was appointed as the vice-minister, was sentenced to the third division.

古文：辛巳，邢州奏，磁州刺史宋令询自经而卒。
现代文：十二日，邢州上奏，说磁州刺史宋令询自缢而死。
English: On the 12th, Zhangzhou Shangso said that the magnetic state assassinated Song Lingxun and died of self-immolation.

古文：令询，鄂王在籓时都押牙也，故至于是。
现代文：宋令询是鄂王在藩地时的都押牙，所以会这样去做。
English: Song Lingquan was the king of H's right-hand man when he was in the domain, so he would do this.

古文：甲申，帝以鄂王薨，行服于内园，群臣奉慰。
现代文：十三日，末帝因为鄂王去世，在内园穿丧服，群臣感觉得到安慰。
English: On the 13th day, the last emperor because of the death of King H, wore mourning clothes in the courtyard, and the ministers felt comforted.

古文：癸未，太后、太妃出宫中衣服器用，以助赏军。
现代文：十四日，太后、太妃拿出宫中衣服器具用来赞助犒赏军士。
English: On the 14th, the empress dowager and the empress dowager took out the palace's clothes and utensils to sponsor the award ceremony.

古文：乙酉，帝服衮冕御明堂殿，文武百僚朝服就位，宣制改应顺元年为清泰元年，大赦天下，常赦不原者咸赦除之。
现代文：十六日，末帝穿戴兖冕礼服到明堂殿，文武百官穿上朝礼服各就各位，宣布改应顺元年为清泰元年，大赦天下，一般赦免时不可宽恕的也全都赦免了。
English: On the 16th, the last emperor wore a crowned ceremonial dress to the Myeongdong Palace, and hundreds of civil and military officials put on morning ceremonial dress and took their places. They announced that the year should be changed to the first year of the Qing Dynasty and the first year of the Thai Dynasty, and that the whole world would be pardoned. Those who could not be pardoned in general pardons were also pardoned.

古文：丁亥，以宣徽北院使郝琼为宣徽南院使，权判枢密院；以前三司使王玫为宣徽北院使。以随驾牙将宋审虔为皇城使，刘延朗为庄宅使。凤翔节度判官韩昭允为左谏议大夫，充端明殿学士；观察判官马裔孙为翰林学士；掌书记李专美为枢密院直学士。
现代文：十八日，任宣徽北院使郝琼为宣徽南院使，临时主管枢密院；任前三司使王玫为宣徽北院使；任随驾牙将宋审虔为皇城使，刘延朗为庄宅使；任凤翔节度判官韩昭裔为左谏议大夫，兼端明殿学士；任观察判官马裔孙为翰林学士；任掌书记李专美为枢密院直学士。
English: On the 18th, Zou Qiong, the envoy of the Northern Yuan of the Northern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Northern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Northern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the Southern Yuan of the

古文：戊子，侍卫亲军都指挥使康义诚伏诛。
现代文：十九日，侍卫亲军都指挥使康义诚被诛杀。
English: On the 19th day of the month, the bodyguards of the pro-government troops all led the troops to beat and kill Kang Yicheng.

古文：是日，诏曰：枢密使硃宏昭、冯赟、宣徽南院使孟汉琼、西京留守王思同、前邠州节度使药彦稠，共相朋煽，妄举干戈，互兴离间之谋，几构倾亡之祸，宜行显戮，以快群情，仍削夺官爵云。
现代文：这一天，下诏书说：枢密使朱弘昭、冯斌贝，宣徽南院使孟汉琼、西京留守王思同、前州节度使药彦稠，共同煽动交结，妄举干戈，相互之间兴用离间之谋，几乎构成倾亡之祸，应该处以死刑，以顺应民情，并且削夺其官爵等等。
English: On this day, the next imperial edict said: the secret envoys Zhu Hongzhao and Feng Binbei, the envoy of the Southern Court of the State Council of Hunan, Meng Hanqiong, the West Beijing left-behind Wang Sidong, and the former provincial governor of the State Council of the State Council of Hunan, jointly instigated conflicts, arbitrarily waged wars, and used divisive tactics between each other, almost constituting the scourge of downfall. They should be sentenced to death, in order to comply with the people's conditions, and deprive them of their official titles and so on.

古文：庚寅，凤翔奏，西川孟知祥僭称大蜀，年号明德。
现代文：二十一日，凤翔上奏，说西川孟知祥僭称大蜀，年号称为明德。
English: On the twenty-first day, Feng Xiang played, saying that the West River Meng Zhi Xiang called Daxu, and the year was called Mingde.

古文：有司上言： 皇帝以五月朔日御明堂殿受朝，三日夏至，祀皇地祇，前二日奏告献祖室，不坐。
现代文：有关部门官员进言说 ：皇帝以五月一日到明堂殿接受朝贺，三日夏至，祭祀皇地礻氏，前两天奏告献祖宫室，不坐。
English: The officials of the relevant departments said: the emperor went to the Myeongdong Palace on May 1st to receive morning greetings, and on the summer solstice on the 3rd, he offered a sacrifice to the Imperial Family, and two days before that, he announced the dedication of the ancestral palace, and did not sit.

古文：比正旦冬至，是日有祀事，则次日受朝。
现代文：恰好正旦冬至，这一天有祀事，那就第二天受朝贺。
English: Just as the winter solstice falls on the same day, if there is a religious service on this day, it will be followed by morning greetings the next day.

古文：今祀在五鼓前，质明行礼华，御殿在旦后，请比例行之。 
现代文：现在是五鼓前祭祀，天亮时行礼完毕，御殿在旦后，请按惯例行事。 
English: This is the ritual before the five drums. The ritual will be over at dawn, and the palace will be closed. Please follow the usual procedure.

古文：诏曰： 日出御殿，举祀事无妨，宜依常年例。 
现代文：下诏书说： 日出御殿，举行祭祀之事没什么妨碍，可以依照常年旧例。 
English: The next imperial edict said: "Hinode Palace, there is nothing to prevent you from holding a religious service, and you may do so in accordance with the long-standing custom.

古文：史馆奏： 凡书诏及处分公事，臣下奏议，望令近臣录付当馆。 
现代文：史馆上奏 ：凡书奏和处理公事，臣下奏议，希望命令近臣记录后交付史馆。 
English: Report to the history museum: Usually report and deal with public affairs, report to the vassal, hope to order the vassal to record and deliver to the history museum.

古文：诏端明殿学士韩昭允、枢密直学士李专美录送。
现代文：下诏令端明殿学士韩昭裔、枢密直学士李专美记录送去。
English: He issued a decree to send the records of Han Zhaoxiong, the academician of the Ming Dynasty, and Li Zhenmei, the academician of the Privy Council.

古文：辛卯，以左谏议大夫卢损为右散骑常侍。
现代文：二十二日，任左谏议大夫卢损为右散骑常侍。
English: On the 22nd, Dr. Lu Jia, who had been appointed as the left-hand councilor, became the right-hand rider.

古文：壬辰，诏赐禁军及凤翔城下归命将校钱帛各有差。
现代文：二十三日，下诏赐给禁军及凤翔城下归顺将校数量不同的钱帛。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor decreed that different amounts of money should be given to the imperial army and the officers who surrendered to Fengxiang.

古文：《通鉴》云：禁军在凤翔归命者，自杨思权、尹晖等各赐二马一驼、钱七十缗，下至军人钱二十缗，其在京者各十缗。
现代文：起初，末帝离开岐下时，各军都盼望有厚赏，等跟随到京师后，愿望不能满足，相互传谣言说 ：去却生菩萨，扶起一条铁。 
English: At first, when the last emperor left Qizhi, all the armies were hoping for a rich reward, and when they followed him to Beijing, their wishes could not be satisfied, and they spread rumors among each other saying: "Go and give birth to a bodhisattva, hold up a piece of iron."

古文：戊戌，山陵使、司空兼门下侍郎、平章事冯道上表纳政，不允。
现代文：他们是这样的贪得无厌。二十七日，把明宗皇帝安葬到徽陵。二十八日，在太庙供奉神主。二十九日，山陵使、司空兼门下侍郎、平章事冯道上表章辞官，没有应允。
English: They were insatiably greedy. On the 27th, Emperor Mingzong was buried in the Imperial mausoleum. On the 28th, the emperor's remains were enshrined in the Imperial mausoleum. On the 29th, the envoy to the imperial mausoleum, the attendant of the emperor, the attendant of the emperor, the attendant of the emperor, the attendant of the emperor, the attendant of the emperor, the attendant of the emperor, the attendant of the emperor, the attendant of the emperor, the attendant of the emperor, and the attendant of the emperor.

古文：五月庚子朔，御文明殿受朝贺。
现代文：五月一日，到文明殿接受朝贺。
English: On May 1st, they came to the Bunmei-den to receive morning greetings.

古文：乙巳，以左龙武指挥使安审琦为左右捧圣都指挥使，以右千牛上将军符彦饶为左右严卫都指挥使。
现代文：六日，任左龙武指挥使安审琦为左右捧圣都指挥使，任右千牛上将军符彦饶为左右严卫都指挥使。
English: On the sixth day, the commander of the left Longwu assigned the commander of the security trial to the commander of the right and left sacred cities, and the commander of the right Thousand Cows, General Fuhiko Rao, to the commander of the left and right sacred cities.

古文：丙午，以端明殿学士韩昭允为枢密使；以庄宅使刘延朗为枢密副使；以权知枢密事房暠为宣徽北院使；以成德军节度使、大同彰国振武威塞等军蕃汉马步都部署、检校太尉、兼中书令、驸马都尉石敬瑭为北京留守、河东节度使，加检校太师、兼中书令，都部署如故。
现代文：七日，任端明殿学士韩昭裔为枢密使；任庄宅使刘延朗为枢密副使；任权知枢密使房詗为宣徽北院使；任成德军节度使、大同彰国振武威塞等军蕃汉马军步军都部署、检校太尉、兼中书令；驸马都尉石敬瑭为北京留守、河东节度使、加检校太师、兼中书令，都部署如往常一样。
English: On the 7th, Han Zhaoxiang, a scholar of Duanming Palace, was appointed as a privy envoy; Liu Yanlang, a scholar of Zhuangzhai Mansion, was appointed as a deputy privy envoy; Fang Jian, a scholar of power and wisdom, was appointed as an envoy of Xuanhui North Academy; the military officers of the German Army and the Han and Ma armies, such as Zhenwu Weixi of Datong and Zhangguo, were appointed as the festival envoys, and they were deployed as the chief inspector and the secretary of the Central Party Committee; the military officer of the Central Party Committee, Shi Jingyi, was

古文：今祔庙事大，忌日属私，请比大朝会宣召例。 
现代文：有关官员上奏说 ：李愚私忌在致斋期内，但各种私忌日遇上大朝会入阁宣召，都要奔赴朝廷参与，现在明宗附祭祖庙事大，忌日是私事，请按照大朝会宣召的惯例去做。 
English: The officials concerned reported: Li Yuxi's death anniversary falls within the mourning period, but all kinds of death anniversaries have to go to the imperial court to participate in the proclamation of the Grand Council of Elders. Now, the Ming Dynasty attached to the ancestral temple is a big event, and the death anniversary is a private matter. Please follow the practice of the Grand Council of Elders.

古文：从之。
现代文：末帝同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：以陕府节度使康思立为邢州节度使，以同州节度使安重霸为西京留守，以羽林右第一军都指挥使、春州刺史杨思权为邠州节度使。
现代文：任陕府节度使康思立为邢州节度使，任同州节度使安重霸为西京留守，任羽林右第一军都指挥使、春州刺史杨思权为州节度使。
English: Kang Sili was appointed as the envoy of the festival of Shaanxi Province, An Chongba was appointed as the envoy of the festival of the same province, Ulin Yu was appointed as the envoy of the commander of the First Army, and Chunzhou Zhishi Yang Siquan was appointed as the envoy of the festival of the same province.

古文：己酉，左监门卫将军孔知鄴、右骁卫将军华光裔并勒停见任。
现代文：十日，左监门卫将军孔知邺、右骁卫将军华光裔一并勒令停止现任职务。
English: On the 10th, the left guard gatekeeper general Kong Zhisheng and the right guard general Hua Guangyuan were both ordered to stop their current duties.

古文：时差知鄴应州告庙，称疾辞命，改差光裔，复称马坠伤足，故俱罢之。
现代文：当时差遣孔知邺在应州告祭太庙，他称病辞去差使，改派华光裔，又称从马上摔下伤了脚，所以全都罢免其职务。
English: At that time, he sent Kong Zhisheng to complain to the Grand Temple in Yingzhou. He said that he was ill and resigned from the post, reassigned the Huaguang descendants, and also said that he fell off the horse and hurt his foot, so they were all dismissed from their duties.

古文：庚戌，以司空兼门下侍郎、平章事冯道为检校太尉、同平章事，充同州节度使；以天雄军节度使范延光为枢密使，封齐国公；郓州节度使李从严为凤翔节度使。
现代文：十一日，任司空兼门下侍郎、平章事冯道为检校太尉、同平章事，兼同州节度使；任天雄军节度使范延光为枢密使，封齐国公；任郓州节度使李从日严为凤翔节度使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Siku was appointed as a subordinate attendant, Ping Zhangji Feng Dao as a school inspector, Tong Ping Zhangji and Tongzhou Festival envoy; Tianxiong Army Festival envoy Fan Yanguang was appointed as a privy envoy and the Duke of Qi; and Li Congnian was appointed as a Fengxiang Festival envoy.

古文：辛亥，以严卫都指挥使尹晖为齐州防御使。
现代文：十二日，任严卫都指挥使尹晖为齐州防御使。
English: On the 12th, Ren Yanwei ordered Yin Qi to be the defense envoy of Qi Province.

古文：甲寅，以侍卫马军都指挥、顺化军节度使安从进为河阳节度使，典军如故。
现代文：十五日，任侍卫马军都指挥、顺化军节度使安从进为河阳节度使，如以往一样掌握军队。
English: On the fifteenth day, he took command of the Horse Guards and the Horse Army, followed by An, the commander of the Hue Army, and Heyang, the commander of the Heyang Army, and took control of the army as before.

古文：太常卿卢文纪奏： 明宗一室，酌献舞曲，请名《雍熙之舞》。 
现代文：太常卿卢文纪上奏说 ：明宗一室，酌献舞曲，请称之为雍熙之舞。 
English: Lu Wenji, the first secretary of the Tai Changqing Emperor, said: "Mingzong I Room, drinking and dancing music, please call it the dance of the Yongxi Dynasty."

古文：从之。
现代文：末帝同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：丁巳，以皇子银青光禄大夫、检校工部尚书重美为检校司徒、守左卫上将军。
现代文：十八日，任皇子银青光禄大夫、检校工部尚书李重美为检校司徒、守左卫上将军。
English: On the 18th, the prince's son, Yin Qing Guanglu, was appointed as a doctor, the inspection department's Shangshu Li Chongmei was appointed as a school inspector, and the guard guard was appointed as a general.

古文：自是，诸道节度使、刺史、文武臣僚，相继加检校官，或阶爵封邑，以帝登位覃庆也。
现代文：从这时起，各道节度使、刺史、文武臣僚，相继加检校官，或进爵封邑，都是为了给末帝登位扩大喜庆气氛。
English: From that time onward, officials of various provinces were appointed to the post of the festival envoy, the post of the chief historian, and the post of the minister of literature and military affairs, and they were successively promoted to the post of inspector of schools, or knighted, in order to expand the festive atmosphere for the enthronement of the last emperor.

古文：戊午，以陇州防御使相里金为陕州节度使。
现代文：十九日，任陕州防御使相里金为陕州节度使。
English: On the 19th, the defense envoy of Shaanxi Province, Sori Jin, was appointed as the festival envoy of Shaanxi Province.

古文：初，帝以檄书告籓邻，惟金遣判官薛文遇往来计事，故以节镇奖之。
现代文：起初，末帝以檄书传告各邻藩，只有相里金派判官薛文遇来计划起事，所以奖赏他为节镇官职。
English: At first, the last emperor sent a message to all the neighboring clans, and only Xue Wen, the judge of the Sori gold faction, was found to be planning to rise up, so he was rewarded with the official post of the town.

古文：宣徽北院使、检校工部尚书房暠加检校司空，行左威卫大将军，使如故；以枢密使、左谏议大夫韩昭允为刑部尚书，使如故。
现代文：宣徽北院使、检校工部尚书房詗加检校司空，暂任左威卫大将军，仍为北院使。任枢密使、左谏议大夫韩昭裔为刑部尚书，仍为枢密使。
English: The envoy of the Northern Yuan of Xuanhui Province, the inspector of the School Inspection Department, Shang Shobo, and the inspector of the School Inspection Department, Kuang, temporarily the General of the Left Wei Wei, are still the envoys of the Northern Yuan. The envoy of the Privy Council, Han Zhaoxi, the doctor of the Left Wei Wei, is the inspector of the Criminal Law Department, and is still the envoy of the Privy Council.

古文：至德二载十二月，改吴山为岳，祠享官属一同五岳。
现代文：六月一日，改侍卫捧圣军为彰圣，改严卫军为宁卫。三日，封吴岳成德公为灵应王，礼仪待遇如同五岳。
English: On the first day of June, the guards were changed to hold the sacred army as the sacred army, and the strict guards were changed to Ningwei. On the third day, Wu Yue Chengde Gong was named the spiritual king, and the etiquette treatment was the same as the five mountains.

古文：今国家欲祈祷灵应，宜示殊礼，臣等商量，请加封为灵应王。
现代文：末帝刚起事时，派使者祭祀吴岳以求保佑，等到登帝位后，所以有这样的报答。
English: When the last emperor first rose to power, he sent an envoy to worship Wu Yue to ask for blessings, and after he ascended to the throne, he received such a reward.

古文：从之。幽州节度使赵德钧进封北平王，青州节度使房知温进封东平王。
现代文：幽州节度使赵德钧进封为北平王，青州节度使房知温进封为东平王。
English: The Yuzhou Festival made Zhao Deyu Jinfeng the king of Beiping, and the Qingzhou Festival made Fang Zhiwen Jinfeng the king of Dongping.

古文：癸酉，以前鄜州节度使索自通为右龙武统军。
现代文：四日，任前州节度使索自通为右龙武统军。
English: On the fourth day, the former state festival made So Zhitong the right dragon unified army.

古文：甲戌，皇子左卫上将军重美加检校太保、同平章事，充镇州节度使兼河南尹，判六军诸卫事。
现代文：五日，皇子左卫上将军李重美加检校太保、同平章事，充镇州节度使兼河南尹，主管六军诸卫事。
English: On the fifth day, the prince's son, General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards Li Shoumei, was appointed as the inspector of the school, the warden of the school, the secretary of the same level, the secretary of the Zhenzhou Festival and the Henan Yin, and was in charge of the guards of the six armies.

古文：丁丑，诏天下见禁罪人，委所在长吏躬亲虑问，疾速疏决。
现代文：八日，下诏说凡天下被关押的罪人，委托所在长吏亲自过问，尽快从宽处理。
English: On the eighth day, the next edict said that all criminals who are detained in the world should be personally interrogated by the director of the entrustment office and dealt with leniently as soon as possible.

古文：庚辰，幸至德宫，因幸房知温、安元信、范延光、索自通、李从敏第。
现代文：十一日，到至德宫，顺便到房知温、安元信、范延光、索自通、李从敏等人家中。
English: On the 11th day, he went to Degu, and dropped in at the homes of Fang Zhiwen, An Yuanxin, Fan Yanguang, Suo Zhitong, Li Congmin and others.

古文：壬午，以检校太子太傅致仕王建立为检校太尉、兼侍中、郓州节度使；以前宋州节度使安元信为检校太尉、兼侍中、潞州节度使。
现代文：十三日，任以检校太子太傅退休的王建立为检校太尉、兼侍中、郓州节度使，任前宋州节度使安元信为检校太尉、兼侍中、潞州节度使。
English: On the 13th, Wang Jianfu, who retired as the crown prince of the imperial examination, was appointed as the lieutenant of the imperial examination, concurrently the chamberlain, and the delegate of the Bozhou Festival, and An Yuanxin, the former delegate of the Songzhou Festival, was appointed as the lieutenant of the imperial examination, concurrently the chamberlain, and the delegate of the Bozhou Festival.

古文：癸未，三司使刘煦奏： 天下户民，自天成二年括定秋夏田税，迨今八年。
现代文：十四日，三司使刘日句上奏： 天下编了户籍的百姓，从天成二年制定秋夏田税后，到现在已有八年。
English: On the 14th, the Third Division asked Liu to play the first verse of the day: The world has compiled the household registration of the people, and it has been eight years since the establishment of the autumn and summer field tax in Tiancheng Year Two.

古文：近者相次有百姓诣阙诉田不均，累行蠲放，渐失税额，望差朝臣一概检视。 
现代文：最近不断有百姓来朝廷诉说田地不均，多次实行减免税收，渐渐又失去税额，希望派官员一概检查一番。 
English: Recently, more and more people have been coming to the imperial court to complain about the inequality of the fields, repeatedly implementing tax reductions and exemptions, and gradually losing the amount of taxes, hoping to send officials to check everything.

古文：不报。
现代文：没有报上去。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：甲申，帝为故皇子亳州刺史重吉、皇长女尼惠明大师幼澄举哀行服，群臣诣阁门奉慰。
现代文：十五日，末帝为已故皇子亳州刺史李重吉、皇长女尼姑惠明大师幼澄举哀穿丧服，各位大臣到宫门安慰。
English: On the fifteenth day, the late emperor put on mourning clothes for the deceased prince of Bozhou, Zishi Li Chongji, and the eldest daughter of the emperor, nun Huiming Master Yu Cheng, and the ministers came to the palace gate to comfort.

古文：癸卯，凤翔进伪蜀孟知祥来书，称 大蜀皇帝献书于大唐皇帝 ，且言 见迫群情，以今年四月十二日即皇帝位 云，帝不答。
现代文：末帝刚起兵时，李重吉、李幼澄都被闵帝害死。十六日，任户部侍郎韩彦恽为绛州刺史，任左武卫上将军李肃为单州刺史。这个月，京师大旱，十分炎热，中暑死亡一百多人。七月二日，退休的太子少保崔沂死。五日，凤翔转来伪蜀孟知祥书信，称 大蜀皇帝献书于大唐皇帝 ，而且说 ：受大家情绪所迫，于今年四月十二日登皇帝位 等等，末帝没有回信。
English: When the last emperor had just raised an army, both Li Chongji and Li Youcheng were killed by Emperor Xizong. On the 16th, Han Yanjun, a household servant, was appointed as the scribe of Zhangzhou, and Li Su, a general of the Left Division of Wei, was appointed as the scribe of Shanzhou. This month, Beijing was very hot, and more than a hundred people died of heatstroke. On July 2, the retired prince Shao Bao Cui Xuan died. On the 5th, Feng Xiang turned to the fake Shu Meng Zhixiang letter, saying that the Great Shu Emperor donated a book to the Emperor of the Great Tang, and

古文：以前武州刺史郑琮为右卫上将军。
现代文：任前武州刺史郑琮为右卫上将军。
English: Zheng Yao, the former governor of Wuzhou, was promoted to General of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards.

古文：甲辰，幸龙门佛寺祷雨。乙巳，皇子故亳州团练使重吉赠太尉，仍于宋州置庙。
现代文：六日，到龙门佛寺祈祷降雨，七日，已故皇子亳州团练使李重吉被追赠为太尉，仍在宋州设庙。
English: On the sixth day, he went to Longmen Buddhist Temple to pray for rain. On the seventh day, the late prince of Bozhou, Li Chongji, was posthumously promoted to the rank of lieutenant and set up a temple in Songzhou.

古文：丁未，凤翔节度使李从严封西平王。
现代文：九日，凤翔节度使李从日严封为西平王。
English: On the 9th, the Fengxiang Festival made Li Congnian the king of Xiping.

古文：是日，宰臣李愚、刘煦因论公事，于政事堂相诟，辞甚鄙恶，帝令枢密副使刘延朗宣谕曰： 卿等辅弼之臣，不宜如是，今后不得更然。 
现代文：这一天，宰相李愚、刘日句因议论公事，在政事堂互相谩骂，语言很粗鄙，末帝令枢密副使刘延朗宣称自己的意见说 ：你们是辅佐朝廷的大臣，不应该如此，今后不得再这样了。 
English: On this day, the Prime Minister Li Gu and the Vice-Premier Liu Riku, because of a quarrel over official business, abused each other in the government hall. The language was very coarse. The last emperor ordered the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council Liu Yanlang to declare his opinion, saying: You are ministers who assist the imperial court. This should not be the case. This must not happen again in the future.

古文：辛亥，以太常卿卢文纪为中书侍郎、平章事。
现代文：十三日，任太常卿卢文纪为中书侍郎、平章事。
English: On the 13th, Lu Wenji, who was appointed the First Secretary of the Central Committee, became the secretary of the Central Committee and the secretary of the Central Committee.

古文：是日，中书门下三上章请立中宫，从之。
现代文：这一天，中书门下三次上表章请立皇后，末帝答应了。
English: On this day, the emperor asked the empress to place the seal on the gate three times, and the late emperor agreed.

古文：丁巳，制立沛国夫人刘氏为皇后。
现代文：十九日，下令立沛国夫人刘氏为皇后。
English: On the 19th, he ordered that Mrs. Liu, the wife of Pei Guo, be installed as empress.

古文：庚申，太子少傅陈皋卒。
现代文：二十二日，太子少傅陈皋去世。
English: On the 22nd, the young prince Fu Chen passed away.

古文：乙丑，史官张昭远以所撰庄宗朝列传三十卷上之。
现代文：二十七日，史官张昭远把他撰写的庄宗朝列传三十卷献上。
English: On the 27th, historian Zhang Zhaoyuan presented 30 volumes of Zhuangzong Dynasty Chronicles, which he had written.

古文：八月庚午，诏蠲放长兴四年十二月已前天下所欠残税。
现代文：八月二日，下诏减免长兴四年十二月以前天下所欠残留税款。
English: On August 2nd, the lower edict reduced and exempted the residual taxes owed by Changxing before December 4th.

古文：辛未，以前尚书左丞姚顗为中书侍郎、平章事。
现代文：三日，任前尚书左丞姚岂页为中书侍郎、平章事。
English: On the third day, Yao Guofang, who was the left-hand man of Shangshu before he took office, became the secretary of the middle secretary, and Ping Zhangji.

古文：甲午，以太子少傅卢质为太子少师。
现代文：下诏令所有曾经受御署官逐次摄任同一任正官，依照期限赴选。荆南报告，伪蜀孟知祥去世，他的儿子孟昶接位。
English: Under the edict, all officials who had been successively appointed to the same post by the imperial commissioner were to go to the election according to the time limit. Jing Nan reported that the pseudo-Shu Meng Zhixiang died and his son Meng Jun took over.

古文：乙未，以前邢州节度使赵凤为太子太保。
现代文：二十七日，任前邢州节度使赵凤为太子太保。
English: On the 27th, the former Bozhou Festival made Zhao Feng the crown prince.

古文：诏： 文武百官差使，宜令依伦次，中书置簿，不得重叠。
现代文：下诏说 ：文武百官的任命安排，应该下诏依照次序，中书省设置簿册，不能重叠。
English: The next edict said: The appointment arrangements of civil and military officials should be in accordance with the order of the next edict, and the book of the Ministry of Education should be set up, and there should be no overlap.

古文：若当使者自缘有事，或不欲行者，注簿便当一使。
现代文：如果应当差使的人自己有什么缘故，或不想出行的，注簿时便应该当作已差使。
English: If the person who should be sent has his own reasons, or does not want to travel, he should be considered to have been sent at the time of registration.

古文：自长兴三年正月后已曾奉使者，便为簿首；已后差者，次第注之。 
现代文：从长兴三年正月以后曾经奉命出使的，便算作簿首；以后差使的人，按次序注册。 
English: Those who have been dispatched after the first month of the third year of the third year of Changxing will be counted as the head of the book; those who are sent later will be registered in order.

古文：有司上言： 皇后受册，内外命妇上笺无答教。 
现代文：有关官员上奏说： 皇后受册封，朝廷内外贵妇人上书不用答复。 
English: The officials concerned reported: The empress has been canonized, and there is no need to reply to the letters from noblewomen inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：从之。
现代文：末帝同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：丙申，御文明殿册皇后，命使摄太尉、宰臣卢文纪，使副摄司徒、右谏议大夫卢损指皇后宫，行礼毕，恩赐有差。
现代文：二十八日，到文明殿册封皇后，命令使摄太尉、宰臣卢文纪，使副摄司徒、右谏议大夫卢损到皇后宫，行礼完毕，按差别各有赏赐。
English: On the 28th, the Empress was enthroned at the Hall of Civilizations, and it was ordered that the Camera Officer, Vice-Minister Lu Wenji, the Deputy Camera Officer, and the Right Reviewer Lu Qi should go to the Empress's palace. After the ceremony, they were rewarded according to the difference.

古文：九月己亥，以久雨，分命朝臣营都城门，告宗庙社稷。
现代文：九月二日，由于下雨太久，分别命令朝臣到都城门祈祷消灾，到宗庙社稷祷告。
English: On September 2, since it had been raining for a long time, he ordered his courtiers to go to the gate of the capital to pray for disaster relief, and to go to the family temple to pray.

古文：辛丑，夜有星如五斗器，西南流，尾迹长数丈，屈曲如龙形。
现代文：四日，夜晚有星星很像五斗器，往西南方向流动，尾巴几丈长，弯曲像龙的形状。
English: On the 4th, at night, there were stars very much like the five-dipper, flowing in a southwesterly direction, with tails several feet long and curved like the shape of a dragon.

古文：又众星乱流，不可胜数。
现代文：又有很多星星乱流动，数不清有多少。
English: There are also many stars floating around, too many to count.

古文：京师大雨，雹如弹丸。
现代文：首都下大雨，冰雹像弹丸。
English: It rained heavily in the capital and the hailstones were like bullets.

古文：曹州刺史药纵之卒。
现代文：曹州刺史药纵之去世。
English: Caozhou's famous herbalist Zhongsheng Zhou passed away.

古文：甲辰，以霖霪甚，诏都下诸狱委御史台宪录问，诸州县差判官令录亲自录问，画时疏理。
现代文：七日，因大雨下得过多过久，下诏要京城各狱委派御史台宪询问案情，各州县派判官令录亲自记录审问，限时处理案件。
English: On the seventh day, due to the heavy rain for too long, it was decreed that each prison committee in Beijing should send a magistrate to inquire about the case, and each state and county should send a magistrate to record the interrogation in person and deal with the case within a time limit.

古文：壬子，中书门下举行长兴三年敕，常年荐送举人，州郡行乡饮酒之时，帖太常草定仪注奏闻。
现代文：十五日，中书门下履行长兴三年敕令，常年推荐选送举人，各州郡举行宴会时，帖太常拟定仪注上奏报告。
English: On the 15th, under the leadership of Zhongshu, the Changxing three-year imperial edict was carried out, and people were recommended to be selected and sent every year. When banquets were held in various states and counties, Tetai often drafted a ceremonial note and delivered a report.

古文：甲寅，以前潞州节度使、检校太尉、同平章事卢文进为安州节度使。
现代文：二十五日，任前潞州节度使、检校太尉、同平章事卢文进为安州节度使。
English: On the 25th, Lu Wenzhin, the former secretary of the Anzhou Festival, the captain of the inspection of the school, and the secretary of the Tongping Chapter, became the new secretary of the Anzhou Festival.

古文：己未，云州奏，契丹寇境。
现代文：二十六日，云州报告，契丹侵犯边境。
English: On the 26th, Yunnan reported that the Khitan invaded the border.

古文：冬十月辛未，有雉金色，止于中书政事堂。
现代文：十月四日，有一只金色野鸡，停在中书政事堂。
English: On October 4th, a golden pheasant stopped at the China Book Administration Building.

古文：中书门下奏： 请以正月二十三日皇帝诞庆日为千春节。 
现代文：中书门下上奏 ：请以一月二十三日皇帝诞生日为千春节。 
English: Prelude from the middle of the book: Please take January 23rd, the birthday of the emperor, as the Chiharu Festival.

古文：从之。
现代文：末帝同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：戊寅，宰臣李愚、刘煦罢相，以愚守左仆射，煦守右仆射。
现代文：十一日，宰臣李愚、刘日句罢去宰相，任李愚为守左仆射职，刘日句为守右仆射职。
English: On the 11th day, Vice-Minister Li Gu and Vice-Minister Liu Rongquan dismissed the Vice-Minister, Li Gu was appointed as the left-hand man to guard the position, and Liu Rongquan was appointed as the right-hand man to guard the position.

古文：契丹寇云、应州，诏河东节度使石敬瑭率兵屯代州。
现代文：契丹侵犯云州、应州，下诏令河东节度使石敬瑭率兵在代州驻扎。
English: The Khitan invaded Yunnan and Yingzhou, and ordered the Hedong Festival to make Shi Jingyao and his soldiers stationed in Daizhou.

古文：戊子，宰臣姚顗奏： 吏部三铨，近年并为一司，望令依旧分铨。 
现代文：二十一日，宰臣姚岂页上奏 ：吏部三铨，近年合并成了一司，望下令按旧例分开。 
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Vice-Minister Yao Hongzhi made the following announcement: "The three departments of the Ministry of Personnel, which have recently been merged into one department, are hereby ordered to be separated according to the old practice.

古文：从之。
现代文：末帝同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：辛卯，以左卫上将军李宏元卒废朝，赠司徒。
现代文：二十四日，由于左卫上将军李宏元去世而停止上朝，赠司徒职。
English: On the 24th, due to the death of Admiral of the Left Division, Li Hongyuan, he stopped serving in the Shang Dynasty and was given the post of steward.

古文：癸巳，以礼部郎中、知制诰吕琦守本官，充枢密院直学士。
现代文：二十六日，任礼部郎中、知制诰吕琦保留本官，充枢密院直学士。
English: On the 26th, he was appointed as a junior member of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and retained his position as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：十一月辛丑，以刑部侍郎郑韬光为尚书右丞，以光禄少卿乌昭远为少府监。
现代文：十一月五日，任刑部侍郎郑韬光为尚书右丞，任光禄少卿乌昭远为少府监。
English: On November 5th, Zheng Bingguang, who was appointed as the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Justice, and Wu Zhaoyuan, who was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Justice, was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Justice.

古文：秦州节度使张延郎奏，率师伐蜀。
现代文：秦州节度使张延朗上奏，率兵讨伐蜀国。
English: The Qin State Festival made Zhang Yanlang march up and lead an army to fight against Shu.

古文：中书门下奏： 二十六日明宗忌，陛下初遇忌辰，不同常岁，请于忌辰前后各一日不坐朝。 
现代文：中书门下奏道： 二十六日是明宗忌日，陛下第一次遇上这种忌日，与平时不同，请在忌日前后各一天不坐朝办公。 
English: Zhongshumen made the following report: The 26th is the day of the death of Emperor Mingzong. This is the first time that His Majesty has encountered such a day of death. Unlike usual, please do not sit in the morning office for one day before and after the day of death.

古文：从之。
现代文：末帝同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：御史台奏： 前任节度使、刺史、行军副使，虽每日于便殿起居，每遇五日起居，亦合缀班。 
现代文：御史台上奏： 前任的节度使、刺史、行军副使，虽然每天在便殿居住，每遇五日起居，也应该停止上朝。 
English: On the history stage: Although the predecessor of the festival envoy, the stabbing history, and the marching deputy envoy lived in the hall every day and moved out every five days, they should also stop going to the palace.

古文：从之。
现代文：末帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：丙午，以前兴州刺史冯晖配同州衙前安置。
现代文：十日，任前兴州刺史冯晖分配同州衙前安置。
English: On the 10th, the former Xingzhou magistrate Feng Yao was assigned to the same state as the former magistrate.

古文：晖为兴州刺史，屯乾渠，蜀人来侵，晖自屯所奔归凤翔，故有是责。
现代文：冯晖为兴州刺史时，驻扎在乾渠，蜀人来侵犯，冯晖从驻地奔回凤翔，所以有这次处分。
English: When Feng Xuan was writing the history of Xingzhou, he was stationed in the dry canal, Shu people came to encroach, Feng Xuan ran back to Fengxiang from the station, so there was this punishment.

古文：丁未，诏振武、新州、河东西北边经契丹蹂践处，放免三年两税差配，时契丹初退故也。
现代文：十一日，下诏振武、新州、河东西北边地经过契丹侵掠的地方，减免三年两税差配，因这时契丹刚刚退出。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhenwu, Xinzhou, and the areas north of the east and west of the river that had been invaded and plundered by the Khitan were exempted from the three-year two-tax difference, because the Khitan had just withdrawn at that time.

古文：癸丑，以前华州节度使王万荣为左骁卫上将军致仕。
现代文：十七日，命前华州节度使王万荣为左骁卫上将军退休。
English: On the 17th, before his death, the Huazhou Festival made Wang Wan Rong retire as General Zuo Wei.

古文：甲寅，以振武节度使杨光远充大同、彰国、振武、威塞等军兵马都虞候，以前右金吾大将军穆延晖为右武卫上将军。
现代文：十八日，任振武节度使杨光远充大同、彰国、振武、威塞等军兵马都虞候，任前右金吾大将军穆延晖为右武卫上将军。
English: On the 18th, the appointment of Zhenwu Jiedu made Yang Guangyuan the commander-in-chief of Datong, Zhangguo, Zhenwu, Wessai and other troops and horses, and Mu Yanqi, the former Right Kingu General, became the Right Wuwei Senior General.

古文：壬戌，以礼部侍郎杨凝式为户部侍郎。
现代文：二十六日，任礼部侍郎杨凝式为户部侍郎。
English: On the 26th, Yang Jingshi, who had been appointed as the Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, became the Attendant of the Household Department.

古文：甲子，以中书舍人卢导为礼部侍郎。
现代文：十二月一日，下诏修建本朝各位皇帝陵墓。
English: On December 1, an edict was issued to build the mausoleums of the emperors of this dynasty.

古文：乙亥，以秦州节度使张延朗为中书侍郎、同平章事、判三司；《五代会要》：二年三月，宰臣张延朗奏： 臣判三司公事，每日内殿祗候，其合缀前班押班，伏乞特免。 从之。以中书侍郎、平章事卢文纪为门下侍郎、平章事、监修国史；以中书侍郎、平章事姚顗兼集贤院大学士；以前邠州节度使康福为秦州节度使。
现代文：三日，任北面马军都指挥使、易州刺史安叔千为安北都护、振武节度使，任齐州防御使尹晖为彰国军节度使。四日，下诏安葬庶人李从荣。有关官员上奏 ：依照贞观年间庶李承乾的例子，以公礼安葬。 末帝答应了。九日，任秦州节度使张延朗为中书侍郎、同平章事、判三司；任中书侍郎、平章事卢文纪为门下侍郎、平章事、监修国史；任中书侍郎、平章事姚岂页兼集贤殿大学士；任前州节度使康福为秦州节度使。
English: On the third day, the commander of the Northern Horse Army was appointed, the governor of the Northern Capital was appointed as the governor of the Northern Capital, the vice-governor of the Northern Capital was appointed as the vice-governor of the Northern Capital, the vice-governor of the Northern Capital was appointed as the vice-governor of the Northern Capital, the vice-governor of the Northern Capital was appointed as the vice-governor of the Northern Capital, the vice-governor of the Northern Capital was appointed as the vice-governor of the Northern Capital, the vice-governor of the Northern Capital was appointed as the vice-governor of the

古文：丙戌，夜有白气，东西亘天。
现代文：二十日，夜间有白气贯穿东西天际。
English: On the 20th, a white aura permeated the eastern and western sky at night.

古文：庚寅，幸龙门祈雪，自九月至是无雨雪故也。
现代文：二十四日，到龙门祈求下雪，因为从九月到这时一直没下过雨雪。
English: On the 24th, I went to Longmen to pray for snow, because there had been no rain or snow since September.

