古文：斡鲁斡鲁古勃堇婆卢火吾紥忽阇母宗叙斡鲁，韩国公劾者第三子。康宗初，苏滨水含国部斡豁勃堇及斡准、听备二部有异志，斡带治之，斡赛、斡鲁为之佐，遂伐斡豁，拔其城以归。
现代文：斡鲁，是韩国公劾者的第三个儿子。康宗初年，苏滨水含国部斡豁勃堇以及斡准、职德两部落对康宗有异心，斡带负责治理这件事，斡赛、斡鲁辅佐他，一起征伐斡豁，攻克了斡豁的城池而归。
English: In the first year of Kangzong's reign, Su Bin Shui, including the Ministry of State, the Ministry of Justice and the two tribes of the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Justice, had a different intention for Kangzong. The Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Justice were responsible for managing this matter. The Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Justice assisted him, and together they fought against the Ministry of Justice and defeated the Ministry of Justice and returned home.

古文：高丽筑九城于曷懒甸。斡赛母疾病，斡鲁代将其兵者数月。
现代文：高丽国在曷懒甸修筑了九座城威胁，斡赛因母亲生病不能带兵，斡鲁代替斡赛统领他的军队几个月。
English: Goryeo built nine cities in the lazy days of the Warring States Period. When Gyosei was unable to lead his army due to his mother's illness, Gyoru took his place and led his army for several months.

古文：斡鲁亦对筑九城与高丽抗，出则战，入则守，斡赛用之，卒城高丽。
现代文：斡鲁也在高丽九城对面筑了九座城与之抗衡，兵马出城则作战，入城则防守，斡赛用这种办法与高丽对抗到底。
English: Goryeo also built nine cities opposite the nine cities of Goryeo to compete with it. Troops and horses went out of the city to fight, and entered the city to defend. Goryeo used this method to fight against Goryeo.

古文：收国二年四月，诏斡鲁统诸军，与阇母、蒲察、迪古乃合咸州路都统斡鲁古等，伐高永昌。
现代文：收国二年四月，太祖下诏令斡鲁统领诸军，与母、蒲察、迪古乃一起并联合咸州路都统斡鲁古等，征伐高永昌。
English: In April of the second year of the National Reunification, the great-grandfather issued an imperial edict ordering Yulong to lead the army, and together with his mother, Pu Zha, and Digong Nai, and in conjunction with Yulong, the commander of the Xianzhou Road, to conquer Gaoyongchang.

古文：诏曰： 永昌诱胁戍卒，窃据一方，直投其隙而取之耳。
现代文：太宗诏书上说 ：高永昌诱惑胁迫戍边士兵，窃据一方，要直接抓住他的弱点而攻取他。
English: Emperor Taizong's edict said: Gao Yongchang seduced and coerced the soldiers on the other side of the border, stole one side, and wanted to directly seize his weakness and capture him.

古文：此非有远大计，其亡可立而待也。
现代文：这次除非他有远大计谋，不然他的灭亡可以立而待之了。
English: This time, unless he has a master plan, his demise is imminent.

古文：东京渤海人德我旧矣，易为招怀。
现代文：东京渤海人平素对我们讲道德，容易怀柔招安。
English: Tokyo Bohai people always talk about morality to us, and it is easy to have a soft heart.

古文：如其不从，即议进讨，无事多杀。 
现代文：如果他们不服从，就可以商量进攻讨伐他们，没有变故则多多杀敌。 
English: If they do not obey, they can discuss attacking and fighting them, and if nothing changes, they will kill more enemies.

古文：高永昌渤海人，在辽为裨将，以兵三千，屯东京八甔口。
现代文：高永昌是渤海人，在辽国做副将，用三千兵马屯守东京八詹瓦口。
English: Gao Yongchang is a native of Bohai Sea. He was a vice-general in Liao Province and guarded Tokyo's Hachijangwakou with three thousand soldiers.

古文：永昌见辽政日败，太祖起兵，辽人不能支，遂觊觎非常。
现代文：永昌见辽国政事日渐衰败，太祖已经起兵收国，辽人已经不能支撑下去了，于是怀着非分的希望和企图。
English: Yongchang saw that the political situation in Liaoning Province was deteriorating day by day, that the Great Ancestor had raised an army to take back the country, and that the Liao people could no longer support it, so he harbored unreasonable hopes and intentions.

古文：是时，东京汉人与渤海人有怨，而多杀渤海人。
现代文：在当时，东京的汉人与渤海人有怨恨，渤海人多有被杀。
English: At that time, there was a grudge between Han Chinese in Tokyo and Bohai people, and many Bohai people were killed.

古文：永昌乃诱诸渤海，并其戍卒人据东京，旬月之间，远近响应，有兵八千人，遂僣称帝，改元隆基。
现代文：永昌就利诱渤海人，并利诱渤海守边部队进入并占据东京，不出一个月时间，远近不少人响应，竟聚集了八千士兵，于是妄自称帝，改年号为隆基。
English: Yongchang took advantage of the bait sea people, and took advantage of the bait sea border troops to enter and occupy Tokyo. Less than a month later, many people from far and near responded, and actually gathered eight thousand soldiers, so he pretended to be an emperor, and changed his name to Longji.

古文：辽人讨之，久不能克。
现代文：辽国派人攻讨他，很长时间未能攻克。
English: Liao Province sent people to attack him, but they could not defeat him for a long time.

古文：永昌使挞不野、杓合，以币求救于太祖，且曰： 愿并力以取辽。 
现代文：永昌派挞不野、杓合，拿着钱币去向太祖阿骨打请求援救，同时说： 愿同心合力去攻取辽国。 
English: Yongchang sent his soldiers to take the money and go to the great-grandfather, Akechi, to ask for help. At the same time, he said, "Let's work together to conquer Liaoning Province."

古文：太祖使胡沙补往谕之曰： 同力取辽固可。东京近地，汝辄据之，以僣大号可乎。
现代文：太祖派胡沙补前往东京告诉永昌说： 同力攻打辽国固然可以，但是东京是近地，你占据了它，并冒用帝王尊号，能容许你这样做吗？
English: The great-grandfather sent Hu Shaci to Tokyo to tell Yongchang, "It is certainly possible to attack Liao Province together, but Tokyo is nearby, you occupy it, and use the title of emperor, can you do this?

古文：若能归款，当处以王爵。
现代文：如果你能诚恳地归附我朝，当封你王爵。
English: If you can sincerely attach yourself to my dynasty, I will make you a prince.

古文：仍遣系辽籍女直胡突古来。 
现代文：如果你愿意，你可以仍然派遣辽籍女真人胡突古来。 
English: If you want, you can still send the Liao nationality female real person Hu Tu Gu to come.

古文：高永昌使挞不野与胡沙补、胡突古偕来，而永昌表辞不逊，且请还所俘渤海人。
现代文：高永昌派挞不野与胡沙补、胡突古相偕来朝。然而永昌的表辞出言不逊，并且要求退还以前金所俘获的渤海人。
English: Gao Yongchang sent Zou Buyeo and Hu Shazhu and Hu Tu Gu to the DPRK. However, Yongchang's words were insolent, and he demanded the return of the Bohai people captured by Kim earlier.

古文：太祖留胡突古不遣，遣大药师奴与挞不野往招谕之。
现代文：太祖留下胡突古不让他回去，派遣大药师奴和挞不野前往东京招谕永昌。
English: The great-grandfather left Hu Tu Gu not to let him go back, and sent the great apothecary and Zou Buyeo to Tokyo to invite Yongchang.

古文：斡鲁方趋东京，辽兵六万来攻照散城，阿徒罕勃堇、乌论石准与战于益褪之地，大破之。
现代文：斡鲁正要奔赴东京，辽兵六万人马来进攻照散城，阿徒罕勃堇、乌论石准在益褪那个地方与辽兵作战，杀得辽兵大败。
English: Yulong Lu was about to rush to Tokyo, and 60,000 Liao soldiers came to attack Terasan City. Atukhanbogu and Wu Onshi Jun fought against the Liao soldiers in the place of Yifet, and defeated the Liao soldiers.

古文：五月，斡鲁与辽军遇于渖州，败之，进攻渖州，取之。
现代文：五月，斡鲁与辽军在沈州相遇，打败了辽军，又进攻沈州，一举攻克。
English: In May, Yulong Lu and the Liao Army met in Shenzhou, defeated the Liao Army, and attacked Shenzhou, conquering it in one fell swoop.

古文：永昌闻取渖州，大惧，使家奴铎刺以金印一、银牌五十来，愿去名号，称藩。
现代文：永昌听说斡鲁攻占了沈州，大为恐惧，便派他的家奴铎剌拿一枚金印、五十块银牌见斡鲁，说是愿意取消名号，向金拱手称藩。
English: When Yongchang heard that Yanglu had captured Shenzhou, he was terrified. He sent his family servant to fetch a gold seal and fifty pieces of silver to see Yanglu, saying that he was willing to cancel the name and hand over the domain to Jin.

古文：斡鲁使胡沙补、撒八往报之。
现代文：斡鲁派遣胡沙补、撒八前往东京回话。
English: Yorimichi sent Ho Shaju and Saba to Tokyo to talk back.

古文：会渤海高桢降，言永昌非真降者，特以缓师耳。
现代文：适逢渤海高桢来投降，说永昌不是真投降的，不过是用了缓兵之计罢了。
English: At the right time, Bohai Gaoqi came to surrender, saying that Yongchang did not really surrender, but only used a delaying tactic.

古文：斡鲁进兵，永昌遂杀胡沙补等，率众来拒。
现代文：于是斡鲁又向永昌进军，永昌于是杀了胡沙补等人，率领众人来抗拒斡鲁。
English: As a result, Yanglu marched against Yongchang, and Yongchang killed Hu Shaci and others and led the people to resist Yanglu.

古文：遇于沃里活水，我军既济，永昌之军不战而却，逐北至东京城下。
现代文：两军相遇于沃里活水，我军已经占了优势，永昌的军队不战而退，我军追逐败兵到东京城下。
English: The two armies met at Woli Zhishui. Our army had already gained the upper hand. Yongchang's army retreated without a fight, and our army chased the defeated soldiers to the outskirts of Tokyo.

古文：明日，永昌尽率其众来战，复大败之，遂以五千骑奔长松岛。
现代文：第二天，永昌带领他所有的人来迎战，又被打得大败。斡鲁于是又用五千名骑兵直奔长松岛。
English: The next day, Yongchang led all his men to meet the enemy, and was again defeated. Therefore, Yang Lu sent another five thousand cavalry straight to Nagamatsu Island.

古文：初，太祖下宁江州，获东京渤海人皆释之，往往中道亡去，诸将请杀之，太祖曰： 既以克敌下城，何为多杀。
现代文：当初，太祖下宁江州，将所抓获的东京渤海人全部释放了，但他们却往往在中途逃跑了。诸位将领请求杀死他们，太祖说 ：既然已经战胜了敌人攻占了城池，又何必多杀人。
English: At first, Emperor Taizu's Ningjiang Province released all the captured Tokyo clansmen, but they often escaped halfway. The generals asked to kill them, and Emperor Taizu said, "Since we have defeated the enemy and captured the castle, why do we need to kill more people?"

古文：昔先太师尝破敌，获百余人，释之，皆亡去。
现代文：从前先朝太师尝攻破敌城，擒获一百多人，又全部释放，他们都逃亡了。
English: Once upon a time, the first emperor Taishi tried to break through the enemy city, captured more than a hundred people, released them all, and they all fled.

古文：既而，往往招其部人来降。
现代文：没过多久，又往往招他们的部人一起来投降。
English: Before long, they often recruit their subordinates to surrender with them.

古文：今此辈亡，后日当有效用者。 
现代文：现在这些人逃跑了，日后会有起效用的人。 
English: Now these people have fled, there will be people who will be useful in the future.

古文：至是，东京人恩胜奴、仙哥等，执永昌妻子以城降，即宁江州所释东京渤海人也。
现代文：就在这个时候，东京人恩胜奴、仙哥等人，捉住高永昌的妻子拿城投降，这些人就是太祖在宁江州所释放的东京渤海人。
English: It was at this time that Enshonnu, Sengo, and others from Tokyo captured Gao Yongchang's wife, Natcheng, and surrendered. These people were the Tokyo Bohai people released by Taizu in Ningjiang.

古文：先太师，盖谓世祖云。
现代文：先前太师全对世祖说了。
English: Earlier, Grand Master Chuan said to Shizuo.

古文：未几，挞不野执永昌及铎刺以献，皆杀之。
现代文：没过几天，挞不野押着高永昌及铎剌来进献，高永昌、铎剌等人被杀掉了。
English: A few days later, Gao Yongchang and Gao Yongchang and Gao Yongchang and Gao Yongchang and Gao Yongchang were killed.

古文：于是，辽之南路系籍女直及东京州县尽降。
现代文：于是，辽国南路系女真籍的及东京所属州县全部降服。
English: As a result, all the counties and prefectures belonging to Liaoguo South Road and Tokyo surrendered.

古文：以斡鲁为南路都统、迭勃极烈，留乌蠢知东京事。
现代文：金太祖用斡鲁做南路都统以及迭勃极烈，留下乌蠢做东京知事。
English: Kim Tae-Ju used his good offices to make Namrodo the capital of a unified Korea and Ipyeong the capital of a powerful country, leaving Wu Bu as the governor of Tokyo.

古文：诏除辽法，省赋税，置猛安谋克一如本朝之制。
现代文：皇上并下诏废除辽国法令，减少赋税，设置部落联盟组织猛安谋克一如金朝历来的制度。
English: The emperor also issued an edict to abolish the laws of Liaoning Province, reduce taxes, and set up a tribal alliance organization to fight against the system that had always existed in the Kim dynasty.

古文：九月，斡鲁上谒于婆鲁买水，上慰劳之。
现代文：九月，斡鲁在婆鲁买水拜谒皇上，皇上慰劳了他。
English: In September, Gyalwang went to buy water in Borneo to pay homage to the emperor, who consoled him.

古文：辛亥，幸斡鲁第，张宴，官属皆预，赐赉有差。
现代文：辛亥，皇上驾临斡鲁府第，斡鲁设宴接待，所属官吏都参预了，皇上给了不同层次的赏赐。
English: In Xinhai, the emperor came to Yulu Prefecture, and Yulu held a banquet for the reception. The officials who belonged to Yulu attended the banquet, and the emperor gave rewards at different levels.

古文：烛偎水部实里古达，杀酬斡、仆忽得，斡鲁分胡刺古、乌蠢之兵讨之。
现代文：烛偎水部的实里古达，杀死了酬斡、仆忽得。斡鲁调集古刂剌古、乌蠢的部分军队讨伐实里古达。
English: Shi Liguo Da of the Candlestick and Water Ministry killed Fuoyao and Guhu De. Shi Liguo mobilized part of the ancient and stupid army to fight Shi Liguo Da.

古文：酬斡宗室子，魁伟善战，年十五，隶军中，多见任用。
现代文：酬斡有一个宗室子，魁伟善战，年纪只有十五岁，收留在军中，多次被任用。
English: He was only 15 years old, had a family room, was good at fighting, stayed in the army, and was appointed many times.

古文：以兵五百，败室韦，获其民众。
现代文：他曾带兵五百人，打败室韦，获得了室韦的民众。
English: He once led an army of five hundred men to defeat Shuwae and won over the people of Shuwae.

古文：及招降烛偎水部，以功为谋克。
现代文：等到招降烛偎水部后，因他有功而任命为谋克。
English: After he was recruited by the Ministry of Water Resources, he was appointed as a strategist because of his merits.

古文：仆忽得初事撒改，从讨萧海里，降烛偎水部，领行军千户。
现代文：仆忽得最初跟随撒改做事的时候，跟从撒改去讨伐萧海里，投降烛偎水部，领受行军千户之职。
English: When he first worked with Sakai, he followed Sakai to fight against the Xiao Hai, surrendered to the Ministry of Candle and Water, and received the post of marching thousands of households.

古文：从破黄龙府，战达鲁古城，皆有功。
现代文：参加攻克黄龙府，攻打达鲁古城，都立了功。
English: Participating in the conquest of Huanglongfu and the attack on the ancient city of Daru have all made contributions.

古文：其破宁江州，渤海乙塞补叛去，仆忽得追复之。
现代文：他们去破宁江州，渤海乙塞补叛逃，仆忽得追回了他。
English: They went to break through the Ningjiang Province, and the Bohai Yessai to make up for the defection, and they were able to catch up with him.

古文：至是，与酬斡同被害。
现代文：到这个时候，仆忽得却与酬斡一同被杀害。
English: By this time, the henchman had been killed along with the bribe-taker.

古文：斡鲁至石里罕河，实里古达遁去，追及于合挞刺山，诛其首恶四人，抚定余众。
现代文：斡鲁到石里罕河，实里古达已经逃跑了，斡鲁在合挞剌山追上他，杀了实里古达等首恶分子四人，安抚了其余众人。
English: When Yang Lu arrived at the Shilihan River, Shili Guoda had already fled. Yang Lu caught up with him at Hailu Mountain, killed Shili Guoda and four other villains, and pacified the rest of the people.

古文：诏曰： 汝讨平叛乱，不劳师众，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：太祖下诏书说： 你讨伐平定叛乱，不辞劳苦率领众人，朕要很好地表彰你的功绩。
English: The imperial edict issued by the great-grandfather said: You fought and quelled the rebellion, and led the people with great efforts. I would like to commend your achievements.

古文：酬斡等死于国事，闻其尸弃于河，俟冰释，必求以葬。
现代文：酬斡等人是为国事而死的，听说他们的尸体被抛弃在河里，等到冰封解冻，一定要找到安葬。
English: Fuyou and the others died for the state. I heard that their bodies were dumped in the river, and when the ice thawed, they had to be buried.

古文：其民可三百户为一谋克，以众所推服者领之，仍以其子弟等为质。 
现代文：他们的人民可以每三百户编为一谋克，让众人推举信服的人统领他们，仍然拿他们的子弟等作为人质。 
English: Their people can be organized into a guild every three hundred households, let everyone elect a convinced person to lead them, and still take their children and so on as hostages.

古文：斡鲁乃还。
现代文：斡鲁于是领命而还。
English: As a result, Su Lu accepted the order and returned it.

古文：天眷中，酬斡赠奉国上将军，仆忽得赠昭义大将军。
现代文：天眷中，皇上赠谥酬斡奉国上将军的称号，赠谥仆忽得昭义大将军的称号。
English: Among the celestial relatives, the emperor bestowed the title of the general who served the country, and the title of the general who served the country was bestowed on the servant of the emperor.

古文：斡鲁从都统袭辽主，辽主西走，西京已降复叛，敌据城西浮图，下射攻城者。
现代文：斡鲁随从都统袭击辽国君主，辽主向西逃跑，西京已经投降却又叛乱，敌人占据城西浮图，居高临下用箭射攻城的人。
English: Yulong Lu and his followers attacked the Liao monarch in Tudong. The Liao lord fled to the west. Xijing had already surrendered, but rebelled again. The enemy occupied the west side of the city, and those who attacked the city with arrows were at a high level.

古文：斡鲁与鹘巴鲁攻浮图，夺之，复以精锐乘浮图下射城中，遂破西京。
现代文：斡鲁和鹘巴鲁攻击浮图，并夺取了浮图，又以精锐部队乘浮图的居高优势，向下往城中射箭，于是破了西京。
English: Yulong Lu and Zibo Lu attacked the floating map, and captured the floating map, and the elite troops took advantage of the high advantage of the floating map to shoot arrows down into the city, thus breaking the West Beijing.

古文：夏国王使李良辅将兵三万来救辽，次于天德之境。
现代文：当时，夏国国王派遣李良辅率领三万大军前来救援辽国，到达天德之境。
English: At that time, the king of Xia dispatched Li Liangfu, who led a 30,000-strong army to come to the rescue of Liao, reaching the realm of heaven and earth.

古文：娄室与斡鲁合军击败之，追至野谷，杀数千人。
现代文：娄室与斡鲁的军队合在一起共同击败了李良辅军，又乘胜追击到野谷，杀敌数千人。
English: He defeated Li Liangsuo's army together with the troops of Yulong Lu, and took advantage of the victory to pursue them to the valley, killing thousands of enemies.

古文：夏人渡涧水，水暴至，漂溺者不可胜计。
现代文：夏人泅渡涧水，正遇河水暴涨，漂浮溺水的人不可胜数。
English: Summer people are crossing the river, the river is surging, and there are countless people floating and drowning.

古文：辽主在阴山、青冢之间，斡鲁为西南路都统，往袭之。
现代文：辽主逃在阴山、青冢之间，斡鲁作为西南路都统，率领军队前往袭击辽主。
English: Liao Zhen fled between Yin Mountain and Qinglu Mountain, and sent Lu as the southwestern governor to lead the army to attack Liao Zhen.

古文：使勃刺淑、撒曷懑以兵二百，袭辽权六院司喝离质于白水泺，获之。
现代文：他派勃剌淑、撒曷懑带兵二百，到白水泺袭剿辽国权六院司喝离质，捕获了喝离质。
English: He sent 200 soldiers led by Bo Xunshu and Saju to Baishui County to attack the Sixth Division of the State Council of Yunnan and Liaoning Province, and captured the prisoners.

古文：辽主留辎重于青冢，领兵一万，往应州。
现代文：辽主把辎重留在青冢，带领一万兵马，赶往应州。
English: The Lord of Liao left the weight of his yoke in Qingtao, and led ten thousand soldiers and horses, rushing to Yingzhou.

古文：遣照里、背答各率兵邀之，宗望奄至辽主营，尽俘其妻、子、宗族，得其传国玺。
现代文：斡鲁派遣照里、背答各自率兵阻截辽主。宗望突然进入辽主的大营，俘获了辽主的妻子、儿子以及他的全部族人，并获得了辽主的传国玉玺。
English: Zongfang suddenly entered Liao's large camp, captured Liao's wife, son and all his people, and obtained Liao's inheritance, the Jade Scepter.

古文：斡鲁使使奏捷曰： 赖陛下威灵，屡败敌兵，辽主无归，势必来降。
现代文：斡鲁派使者进朝报捷说 ：仰仗陛下威灵，屡次打败敌兵，辽主逃亡未归，势必来投降。
English: Yanglu sent an envoy to the court to report to Jie that: Relying on His Majesty's Willing, repeatedly defeated the enemy soldiers, Liao Lord fled and did not return, and was bound to surrender.

古文：已严戒邻境，毋纳宋人，合馈军粮，令银术可往代州受之。 
现代文：我们已经严密警戒邻国边境，万勿接纳宋人，合馈送的军粮，命令银术可前往代州去接收了。 
English: We have closely guarded the borders of neighboring countries, do not accept the Song people, and ordered the silver art to go to Daizhou to receive the military grain.

古文：诏： 遍谕有功将士，俟朕至彼，当次第推赏。
现代文：皇上下诏说 ：广泛晓谕有功的将士，等朕到了你们那里，当论功行赏。
English: The Emperor's edict said, "When I come to you, I will make a wide proclamation to commend the meritorious soldiers and reward their meritorious deeds."

古文：辽主戚属勿去其舆帐，善抚存之。
现代文：对辽主的亲戚和家属，不要销毁他们的车轿和帐篷，要妥善保存着。
English: For Liao's relatives and family members, do not destroy their cars and tents, but keep them in good condition.

古文：辽主伶俜去国，怀悲负耻，恐陨其命。
现代文：辽主孤零地离开了祖国，满怀悲哀，背负羞耻，恐怕他性命难保。
English: Liao Lord left the motherland alone, full of sorrow, burdened with shame, I'm afraid his life is in danger.

古文：孽虽自作，而尝居大位，深所不忍。
现代文：辽主虽然自己作孽，然而曾经身居大位，朕深感有所不忍。
English: Although the Liao Lord did his own evil deeds, he once held a high position, and I deeply feel that I cannot bear it.

古文：如招之肯来，以其宗族付之。
现代文：如果对他招安他肯来，把他的宗族仍然交给他。
English: If he be called, let him come; and let his father's house be given unto him.

古文：已遣杨璞征粮于宋，银术可不须往矣。
现代文：朕已经派遣杨璞到宋国征粮，不必再派银术可前去了。
English: I have already sent Yang Xuan to Song to collect grain. I don't need to send any more silver to go ahead.

古文：辽赵王习泥烈及诸官吏，并释其罪，且抚慰之。 
现代文：对辽国的赵王习泥烈以及诸位官吏，要一并释放他们，并且抚慰他们。 
English: For Zhao Wangxi, the muddy martyr of Liao, and all the officials, we should release them together and comfort them.

古文：太祖还京师，宗翰为西北、西南两路都统，斡鲁及蒲家奴副之。
现代文：太祖阿骨打回到京都，宗翰出任西北、西南两路都统，斡鲁和蒲家奴是他的副将。
English: The great-grandfather, Akechi, returned to Kyoto, and Zonghan took charge of the northwestern and southwestern capitals, with Gyoru and Puchano as his vice-commanders.

古文：宗翰朝京师，诏： 以夏人言，宋侵略新割地，以便宜决之。 
现代文：宗翰到京都朝见皇上，皇上下诏说 ：按夏人说的，宋国侵略新割地，按适当的办法决定这件事。 
English: Zonghan went to Kyoto to see the emperor, and the emperor issued an imperial edict saying, "According to the Xia people, the Song state invaded the newly-divided land, and this matter should be decided by appropriate means."

古文：斡鲁奏曰： 夏人不尽归户口资帑，又以宋人侵赐地求援兵。
现代文：斡鲁上奏说 ：夏人不完全归还户口资产和金帛，又拿宋人侵略新地为理由求救兵。
English: Yanglu Shangsoo said: Xia did not fully return the household assets and gold ingots, and took the Song people's invasion of Xinjiang as a reason to ask for help.

古文：宋之边臣将取所赐夏人疆土，盖有异图。 
现代文：宋朝的戍边大臣将要夺取所赐夏人的疆土，完全是有其他企图。 
English: The Song Dynasty's minister of the borderlands was going to seize the territory given to the Xia people, but he had other plans.

古文：诏曰： 夏人屡求援兵者，或不欲归我户口，沮吾追袭辽主事也。
现代文：皇上下诏说 ：夏人屡次要求出动援兵的原因，或许是不想归还我们户口，阻止我们追袭辽主。
English: The imperial edict said: The reason why the Xia people repeatedly requested the dispatch of reinforcements may be that they did not want to return our hukou and prevent us from pursuing the Liao ruler.

古文：宋人敢言自取疆土于夏，诚有异图。
现代文：宋人敢说要擅自去夏取回疆土，实在是另有企图。
English: If the Song people dare to say that they want to go to Xia to take back the territory without authorization, it is really another attempt.

古文：宜谨守备，尽索在夏户口，通闻两国，事审处之。 
现代文：应该严紧防守戒备，全部索取在夏国的户口，要向夏、宋两国通告，这件事要审慎处理。 
English: It is necessary to be on the alert, to request all the hukou in Xia, to notify Xia and Song, and to handle the matter carefully.

古文：斡鲁复请弗割山西与宋，则辽主不能与宋郭药师交通。
现代文：斡鲁又请求不要割山西的土地给宋国，这样辽主就不能与宋国的郭药师交结勾通。
English: Yulong Lu also requested that the land in Shanxi should not be given to Song, so that Liao Lord could not collude with Guo Yakushi of Song.

古文：复诏曰： 宗翰请毋与宋山西地，卿复及此，疆场之事当慎毋忽。 
现代文：太祖又下诏说 ：宗翰请示不要把山西土地给宋国，卿又重复提到这件事，疆场之事确实要慎重不能疏忽。 
English: The great-grandfather also issued an edict saying: Zonghan, please do not give the land of Shanxi to Song, and the lord repeatedly mentioned this matter. The matter of the battlefield must indeed be careful and cannot be neglected.

古文：及宗翰等伐宋，斡鲁行西南、西北两路都统事。
现代文：等到宗翰等去攻伐宋国，斡鲁行使西南、西北两路都统的职责。
English: Waiting for Zonghan and others to attack Song, Yulong exercised the responsibility of unifying the southwest and northwest.

古文：天会五年，薨。
现代文：天会五年，斡鲁逝世。
English: Five years after the heavenly meeting, Yang Lu passed away.

古文：皇统五年，追封郑国王。
现代文：皇统五年，斡鲁被追封为郑国王。
English: In the fifth year of imperial unification, Yang Lu was posthumously crowned King Zheng.

古文：天德二年，酏享太祖庙廷。
现代文：天德二年，皇封配享太祖庙廷。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Dezong, he was awarded the imperial title of the Grand Ancestor of the Imperial Court.

古文：子撒八，银青光禄大夫。
现代文：斡鲁的儿子叫撒八，授银青光禄大夫之职。
English: Su Lu's son was called Saba, and he was given the post of doctor of Qingguanglu.

古文：子赛里。
现代文：他的另一个儿子叫赛里。
English: His other son is called Sairee.

