古文：起昭阳大荒落，尽屠维大渊献，凡七年。
现代文：起，止，一共七年。
English: A total of seven years.

古文：世祖武皇帝上之下泰始九年
现代文：晋武帝泰始九年
English: The ninth year of Emperor Jinwu's reign

古文：春，正月，辛酉，密陵元侯郑袤卒。
现代文：春季，正月，辛酉，密陵元侯郑袤去世。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the former Prince Zheng He passed away.

古文：二月，癸巳，乐陵武公石苞卒。
现代文：二月，癸巳，乐陵武公石苞去世。
English: In February, Lingshi, Le Ling Wu Gong Shijie passed away.

古文：三月，立皇子祗为东海王。
现代文：三月，晋朝立皇子司马祗为东海王。
English: In March, the prince Sima Qian became the king of the East Sea.

古文：吴以陆抗为大司马、荆州牧。
现代文：吴国任命陆抗为大司马、荆州牧。
English: The State of Wu appointed Lu An as the grand steward and Jing Zhou as the herdsman.

古文：夏，四月，戊辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，四月，戊辰朔，出现日食。
English: In the summer, in April, the New Year's Day, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：初，邓艾之死，人皆冤之，而朝廷无为之辨者。
现代文：当初，对于邓艾的死，人们都觉得他冤屈，但是朝廷之中却没有为他辩解的人。
English: At first, people felt that Deng Ai's death was unjustified, but there was no one in the court to defend him.

古文：及帝即位，议郎敦煌段灼上疏曰： 邓艾心怀至忠，而荷反逆之名，平定巴、蜀而受三族之诛。
现代文：等晋武帝即位，议郎敦煌人段灼上疏说： 艾心中怀着极大的忠诚却背着反叛的罪名；平定了巴、蜀之地却受到夷灭三族的惩罚。
English: When Emperor Jinwu ascended to the throne, the leader of the Dunhuang faction, Yan Shangsuo, said: Ai had great loyalty in his heart, but he was guilty of rebellion; he pacified the lands of Ba and Shu, but was punished by the extermination of the three ethnic groups.

古文：艾性刚急，矜功伐善，不能协同朋类，故莫肯理之。
现代文：邓艾性格刚强急躁，夸耀自己的功劳和长处，不能和朋友、同事和谐相处，所以没有人肯为他申辩。
English: Deng Ai's character is strong and impetuous, he boasts of his own merits and strengths, and he cannot get along harmoniously with his friends and colleagues, so no one is willing to defend him.

古文：臣窃以为艾本屯田掌犊人，宠位已极，功名已成，七十老公，复何所求！
现代文：我私下认为邓艾本来是屯田养牛人，对他来说，光宠荣耀的地位已经达到了极点，功名已经成就，一个七十岁的老人，还有什么可乞求的！
English: Privately, I think that Deng Ai was originally a cattle breeder in Tongtian. For him, the status of glory has reached its peak, fame has been achieved, a seventy-year-old man, what else to ask for!

古文：正以刘禅初降，远郡未附，矫令承制，权安社稷。
现代文：当时正因为刘禅刚投降，远处的郡县还没有归附，邓艾假托秉承皇帝旨意，是为了暂且先使国家安定下来。
English: At that time, precisely because Liu Zeng had just surrendered, the distant counties had not yet been annexed, and Deng Aitken adhered to the emperor's will in order to temporarily stabilize the country.

古文：钟会有悖逆之心。畏艾威名，因其疑似，构成其事。
现代文：钟会有悖乱忤逆之心，他害怕邓艾的威名，乘着是非难辩之际，构成了这件事。
English: He was afraid of Deng Ai's prestige and took advantage of the difficult situation to frame the case.

古文：艾被诏书，即遣强兵，束身就缚，不敢顾望，诚自知奉见先帝，必无当死之理也。
现代文：邓艾接受诏书时，立即遣散了手下强兵，投案受拘囚，不敢再有别的想法，因为他心里明白，如果见到先帝必然不会把他处死。
English: When Deng Ai accepted the imperial edict, he immediately dismissed the strong soldiers under his command and surrendered to be taken prisoner. He did not dare to have any other thoughts, because he knew in his heart that if he saw the former emperor, he would not be executed.

古文：会受诛之后，艾官属将吏，愚戆相聚，自共追艾，破坏槛车，解其囚执。
现代文：钟会被杀之后，邓艾属下的将吏，愚昧不明事理，聚在一起，自发地去追赶邓艾，毁坏了囚车，为邓艾松了绑。
English: After the killing of the bell, the officers under Deng Ai, ignorant and unreasonable, gathered together and spontaneously chased Deng Ai, destroyed the prison car, and tied up Deng Ai Song.

古文：艾在困地，狼狈失据，未尝与腹心之人有平素之谋，独受腹背之诛，岂不哀哉！
现代文：当时邓艾处境困难，狼狈而又孤立无援，他与手下的心腹之人平时就没有预谋，因此独自绝无幸免地被杀戮，难道不可悲哀吗？
English: At that time, Deng Ai was in a difficult situation, bewildered and helpless. He and his henchmen did not have any premeditation, so he was killed alone. Isn't it sad?

古文：陛下龙兴，阐弘大度，谓可听艾归葬旧墓，还其田宅，以平蜀之功继封其后，使艾阖棺定谥，死无所恨，则天下徇名之士，思立功之臣，必投汤火，乐为陛下死矣！ 
现代文：陛下即天子之位，应显扬您的宽弘大度，如果您下令允许邓艾的尸骨归葬于旧墓，归还他的田地房宅，并以邓艾平定蜀国的功绩加封他的后代，使邓艾能够在盖棺之后确定封谥，死而无憾，那么天下那些舍身为名之士以及想要建立功勋的大臣，必然会赴汤蹈火，乐意为陛下献身效命了。 
English: Your Majesty, the Son of Heaven, should show your magnanimity. If you order that Deng Ai's bones be allowed to be buried in the old tomb, return his farmhouse, and seal his descendants with Deng Ai Ping's achievements in ruling Shu, so that Deng Ai can seal the coffin after the coffin is covered and die without regret, then those who sacrifice themselves for fame and ministers who want to establish merit will inevitably go through the fire and be willing to sacrifice their lives for Your Majesty.

古文：帝善其言而未能从。
现代文：晋武帝很赞许他的话，但却没有照办。
English: Emperor Jinwu appreciated his words, but did not act on them.

古文：会帝问给事中樊建以诸葛亮之治蜀，曰： 吾独不得如亮者而臣之乎？ 
现代文：后来晋武帝向给事中樊建询问诸葛亮治理蜀国的事情，说： 难道我偏偏不能得到一个像诸葛亮那样的人作我的臣下吗？ 
English: Later, Emperor Jinwu inquired about Zhuge Liang's governance of the State of Shu and said, "Couldn't I just get someone like Zhuge Liang to be my vassal?"

古文：建稽首曰： 陛下知邓艾之冤而不能直，虽得亮，得无如冯唐之言乎！ 
现代文：樊建跪拜于地，说： 陛下了解邓艾的冤情，却不能为他平反，即使得到诸葛亮，会不会像汉文帝时冯所说的那样，得到了也不能任用呢？ 
English: Hao Jian bowed to the ground and said, "Your Majesty understands Deng Ai Cang's grievances, but you can't rehabilitate him. Even if you get Zhuge Liang, will it be like Han Emperor Shi Feng said, if you get him, you can't appoint him?"

古文：帝笑曰： 卿言起我意。 
现代文：晋武帝笑了，说： 你的话提醒了我。 
English: Emperor Jinwu smiled and said: Your words have reminded me.

古文：乃以艾孙朗为郎中。
现代文：于是任命邓艾的孙子邓朗为郎中。
English: So he appointed Deng Ai's grandson, Deng Lang, as his son-in-law.

古文：吴人多言祥瑞者，吴主以问侍中韦昭，昭曰： 此家人筐箧中物耳！ 
现代文：吴国有许多谈论吉祥符瑞的人，吴主向侍中韦昭询问这件事，韦昭说： 这不过是人家箱笼里的寻常物罢了！ 
English: There are many people in the State of Wu who talk about the auspicious fury. The Lord of Wu asked the chamberlain Wei Zhao about it. Wei Zhao said: This is just an ordinary thing in someone's box!

古文：昭领左国史，吴主欲为其父作纪，昭曰： 文皇不登帝位，当为传，不当为纪。 
现代文：韦昭担任左国史之职，吴主想给自己的父亲作纪，韦昭说： 文皇帝没有登天子之位，应当作传，不应当作纪。 
English: Wei Zhao was in charge of the history of Zuo Province, and the Lord Wu wanted to discipline his father. Wei Zhao said: Emperor Wen did not ascend to the position of the Son of Heaven, he should be a preacher, not a disciplinarian.

古文：吴主不悦，渐见责怒。
现代文：吴主心中不快，逐渐显露出对韦昭的谴责与怒气。
English: Unhappy in his heart, Wu Zhong gradually revealed his condemnation and anger towards Wei Zhao.

古文：昭忧惧，自陈衰老，求去侍、史二官，不听。
现代文：韦昭忧郁恐惧，于是上书陈述自己年事已高，请求免去他侍中及左国史二项官职，但是吴主不允许。
English: Wei Zhao was gloomy and afraid, so he submitted a letter stating that he was too old, and requested to be relieved of his two official positions of attendant and left country historian, but Lord Wu did not allow it.

古文：时有疾病，医药监护，持之益急。
现代文：有时韦昭得了病吴主派医生、送医药监视护理，催促他快些上朝。
English: Sometimes, when Wei Zhao fell ill, Master Wu would send doctors and medicine to monitor and care for him, urging him to get up early.

古文：吴主饮群臣酒，不问能否，率以七升为限。
现代文：吴主召集群臣饮酒，不管能不能喝，一律限定必须喝七升。
English: The Lord of Wu summoned his ministers to drink alcohol. Regardless of whether they could drink or not, they all had to drink seven liters.

古文：至昭，独以茶代之，后更见逼强。
现代文：至于韦昭，唯独用茶代替酒，但以后就越来越强逼他。
English: As for Wei Zhao, he only used tea instead of liquor, but they forced him more and more.

古文：又酒后常使侍臣嘲弄公卿，发摘私短以为欢；时有愆失，辄见收缚，至于诛戮。
现代文：另外，饮酒之后，吴主经常支使近臣嘲弄公卿大臣，揭露他们的隐私和短处拿来取乐；大臣们这时若有过失，就被拘进起来，甚至于杀头。
English: In addition, after drinking, the Lord of Wu often sent his courtiers to taunt the nobles and ministers, exposing their privacy and shortcomings for fun; if the ministers were at fault at this time, they were detained and even beheaded.

古文：昭以为外相毁伤，内长尤恨，使群臣不睦，不为佳事，故但难问经义而已。
现代文：韦昭认为，不顾脸面地诽谤、中伤，会使人的内心增长怨恨情绪，使群臣之间不和睦，这并不是好事，所以他只是在经义方面发难质问而已。
English: Wei Zhao believed that it was not a good thing to slander and defame people regardless of their faces, which would increase resentment in people's hearts and cause disharmony among ministers. Therefore, he was only raising difficult questions in terms of scripture.

古文：吴主以为不奉诏命，意不忠尽，积前后嫌忿，遂收昭付狱。
现代文：吴主认为韦昭没有奉行他的命令，不忠心尽职，把前前后后对韦昭的愤恨、仇怨都积累起来。
English: Lord Wu thought that Wei Zhao did not carry out his orders and was not faithful to his duties. He accumulated resentment and grudges against Wei Zhao.

古文：昭因狱吏上辞，献所著书，冀以此求免。
现代文：于是拘捕了韦昭，把他投进了监狱。韦昭通过狱吏上书陈词，献上了他写的书，希望以此求得赦免。
English: As a result, Wei Zhao was arrested and thrown into prison. Wei Zhao submitted a written statement through prison officials and presented a book he had written, hoping to obtain a pardon.

古文：而吴主怪其书垢故，更被诘责，遂诛昭，徙其家于零陵。
现代文：但吴主却责备他的书脏又破旧，愈加责怪他，于是杀死韦昭，把他的家族放逐到零陵。
English: However, the Lord of Wu reproached him for his dirty and worn-out books, and blamed him even more, so he killed Wei Zhao and banished his family to Luling.

古文：五月，以何曾领司徒。
现代文：五月，晋任命何曾兼任司徒。
English: In May, Jin appointed He Zeng to concurrently serve as a magistrate.

古文：六月，乙未，东海王祗卒。
现代文：六月，乙未，东海王司马祗去世。
English: In June, the East Sea King Sima Xuan passed away.

古文：秋，七月，丁酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，七月，丁酉朔，出现日食。
English: In autumn, in July, on the first day of spring, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：诏选公卿以下女备六宫，有蔽匿者以不敬论。采择未毕，权禁天下嫁娶。
现代文：晋武帝下诏，挑选公卿以下人家的女子补充六宫，有隐蔽藏匿的以不敬论处；挑选未结束时，暂时禁止天下嫁娶。
English: Emperor Jinwu issued an edict to select women from the families of court nobles and below to supplement the six palaces, and to treat those who had hidden them with disrespect; before the selection was completed, the world was temporarily banned from marrying.

古文：帝使杨后择之，后惟取洁白长大而舍其美者。
现代文：晋武帝让杨皇后去挑选美女，杨皇后只挑选肤洁白、身材修长的而舍弃了容貌美丽的女子。
English: Emperor Jinwu asked Empress Yang to choose a beautiful woman. Empress Yang only chose a woman with fair skin and a slender figure, but discarded a beautiful woman.

古文：帝爱卞氏女，欲留之。
现代文：晋武帝喜爱卞氏之女，想把她留下。
English: Emperor Jinmu liked the daughter of the Yi clan and wanted to keep her.

古文：后曰： 卞氏三世后族，不可屈以卑位。 
现代文：杨皇后说： 卞氏是三代为皇后的家族，不能屈尊以就后宫的卑微地位。 
English: Empress Yang said, "The Min family has been the empress's family for three generations. We cannot condescend to the lowly position of the harem.

古文：帝怒，乃自择之，中选者以绛纱系臂，公卿之女为三夫人、九嫔、二千石、将、校女补良人以下。
现代文：晋武帝动了怒，就自己挑选，凡是中选的女子，就用深红色的纱巾系在臂上。公卿之家的女子封为三夫人、九嫔；俸禄二千石的官员以及将校之女，补充良人以下的位置。
English: When Emperor Jinmu became angry, he chose his own, and any woman who was chosen was tied to his arm with a crimson scarf. Women from noble families were given the titles of the third wife and the ninth concubine; officials with a salary of 2,000 koku and the daughters of officers were given positions below that of concubine.

古文：九月，吴主悉封其子弟为十一王，王给三千兵。
现代文：九月，吴主把他的十一个子侄都封了王，每个王都配备三千士兵。
English: In September, Lord Wu made his eleven sons and nephews kings, and each king was equipped with three thousand soldiers.

古文：大赦。
现代文：大赦罪人。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：是岁，郑冲以寿光公罢。
现代文：这一年，晋朝郑冲以奉光公的身分、地位免职。
English: In the same year, Zheng Chong of the Jin Dynasty was dismissed from his position as a Fengguanggong.

古文：吴主爱姬遣人至市夺民物，司市中郎将陈声素有宠于吴主，绳之以法。
现代文：吴主的宠妾派人到集市上抢夺百姓的财物，司市中郎将陈声一向受到吴主的宠幸，他依法处理了这件事。
English: Lord Wu's favorite concubine sent people to the market to rob the people's property. The chief steward, Chen Sheng, had always been favored by Lord Wu, and he handled the matter in accordance with the law.

古文：姬诉于吴主，吴主怒，假他事烧锯断声头，投其身于四望之下。
现代文：吴主的宠妾向吴主诉说，吴主勃然大怒，借其他事情为由，烧红刀锯截断陈声的头颅，把他的身躯扔到四望山下。
English: Lord Wu's favorite concubine told Lord Wu that Lord Wu flew into a rage and, on the pretext of other matters, cut off Chen Xing's head with a red-hot saw and threw his body under Mount Siwang.

古文：世祖武皇帝上之下泰始十年
现代文：泰始十年春季，正月，乙未，出现日食。
English: In the spring of the 10th year of the Taizhi era, a solar eclipse occurred in the first month of the year and the second month of the year.

古文：春，正月，乙未，日有食之。闰月，癸酉，寿光成公郑冲卒。
现代文：闰月，癸酉，晋朝寿光成公郑冲去世。
English: In the intercalary month,, the Jin Dynasty Shuguang Chenggong Zhengchong passed away.

古文：丁亥，诏曰： 近世以来，多由内宠以登后妃，乱尊卑之序；自今不得以妾媵为正嫡。 
现代文：丁亥，晋武帝下诏说： 近代以来，时常由姬妾登上后妃的位子，乱了尊卑的次序，从现在起，不得以侍妾的身份，任正宗的后妃。
English: Dinghai, Emperor Jinwu issued an edict saying: Since modern times, concubines have often ascended to the position of empress, upsetting the order of superiority and inferiority. From now on, they are not allowed to serve as concubines, but as empresses.

古文：分幽州置平州。
现代文：晋朝分出幽州的一部分，设置了平州。
English: The Jin Dynasty separated a part of Yuzhou and set up Pingzhou.

古文：三月，癸亥，日有食之。
现代文：三月，癸亥，出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurs in March, in the middle of the year of the boar.

古文：诏又取良家及小将吏女五千馀人入宫选之，母子号哭于宫中，声闻于外。
现代文：晋武帝又下诏，召取清白人家以及小将吏家的女子共五千人，入宫进行挑选。母女的号哭声响彻宫中，声音传到了宫外。
English: Emperor Jinwu also issued an edict, summoning a total of five thousand women from the Qing white people's families and minor generals' families to enter the palace for selection. The cries of the mother and daughter rang through the palace, and the sound reached outside the palace.

古文：夏，四月，己未，临淮康公荀顗卒。
现代文：夏季，四月，已未，晋朝临淮康公荀去世。
English: In the summer, in April, not long ago, Jin Dynasty's Vice-Premier Huai Kang Gongjun passed away.

古文：吴左夫人王氏卒。
现代文：吴国左夫人王氏去世。
English: Wu Guoza's wife Wang died.

古文：吴主哀念，数月不出，葬送甚盛。
现代文：吴主悲哀思念，几个月不出门，葬礼非常隆重。
English: Wu Shuzhong mourned and missed him, and did not leave home for several months. The funeral was very grand.

古文：时何氏以太后故，宗族骄横。
现代文：当时，由于何太后的缘故，何氏宗族骄傲专横。
English: At that time, because of the Empress Dowager Ho, the Ho clan was arrogant and domineering.

古文：吴主舅子何都貌类吴主，民间讹言： 吴主已死，立者何都也。 
现代文：吴主舅舅的儿子何都，相貌与吴主相似，民间流传的谣言说： 吴主已经死了，现在在位的是何都。 
English: Uncle Wu's son Ho Du, his appearance is similar to that of Uncle Wu. A rumor spread among the people said: "Uncle Wu has died, and Ho Du is now in power."

古文：会稽又讹言： 章安侯奋当为天子。 
现代文：会稽又流传谣言说： 章安侯孙奋，将要成为天子。 
English: The auditor also spread a rumor saying, "Zhang An Hou, Sun Fen, will become the Son of Heaven."

古文：奋母仲姬墓在豫章，豫章太守张俊为之扫除。
现代文：孙奋的母亲仲姬的坟墓在豫章，豫章太守张俊就为孙奋的母亲打扫坟墓。
English: The tomb of Sun Tan's mother, Zhong Ji, is in Yuzhang. Zhang Jun, the governor of Yuzhang, cleaned the tomb for Sun Tan's mother.

古文：临海太守奚熙与会稽太守郭诞书，非议国政；诞但白熙书，不白妖言。
现代文：临海太守奚熙写信给会稽太守郭诞，非议国政，郭诞只是禀告了奚熙的书信，却没的提民间流传的谣言。
English: Linhai Governor Gong Xi wrote a letter to the auditor, Governor Guo Xizhi, denouncing state affairs. Guo Xizhi only denounced Gong Xi's letter, but did not mention the rumors spread by the people.

古文：吴主怒，收诞系狱，诞惧。功曹邵畴曰： 畴在，明府何忧？ 
现代文：吴主大怒，把郭诞抓进监狱，郭诞非常害怕，功曹邵畴说： 有我邵畴在，太守您不用发愁。 
English: The lord of Wu was furious and put Guo Xizhou in prison. Guo Xizhou was very scared. Gong Cao Shao Zhen said: "With me Shao Zhen is here, you don't have to worry about him.

古文：遂诣吏自列曰： 畴厕身本郡，位极朝右，以噂沓之语，本非事实，疾其丑声，不忍闻见，欲含垢藏疾，不彰之翰墨，镇躁归静，使之自息。
现代文：于是他到官吏那里陈述说： 我置身于本郡，地位达到了州郡长官的辅佐。我认为人们聚在一起议论纷纭，所说的本来并不是事实，我憎恨这种毁谤诬蔑的声音，不能够容忍这样的议论让天子看到，所以我想藏污纳垢，不写成文字使这种议论显露，以使议论平静下来，事情自然平息。
English: So he went to the officials and said, "I am in this county, and I have reached the position of assistant to the governor of the state and county. I think that people come together to discuss differences, and what is said is not the truth. I hate this slanderous voice, and I cannot tolerate this kind of talk for the Son of God to see. So I want to hide the dirt, and not write a text to reveal this kind of talk, so that the discussion calms down, and things naturally calm down.

古文：故诞屈其所是，默以见从。
现代文：所以郭诞放弃了他自己正确的主张，而默默地听从了我的意见。
English: Therefore, Guo Xue gave up his own correct proposition and silently followed my opinion.

古文：此之为愆，实由于畴。不敢逃死，归罪有司。 
现代文：这次罪过，实在是因我而起，我不敢逃脱死罪，向主管部门认罪自首。 
English: This crime really started because of me. I didn't dare to escape the death penalty and turned myself in to the authorities.

古文：因自杀。
现代文：于是邵畴自杀了。
English: He then took his own life.

古文：吴主乃免诞死，送付建安作船。
现代文：吴主便赦免了郭诞的死罪，把他送那建安去造船。
English: Lord Wu then pardoned Guo Zhao's capital crime and sent him to Jian'an to build a ship.

古文：遣其舅三郡督何植收奚熙。
现代文：吴主派他的舅舅三郡督何植去拘捕奚熙。
English: Lord Wu sent his uncle, the governor of the three counties, He Zhe, to arrest Gong Xi.

古文：熙发兵自守，其部曲杀熙，送首建业。
现代文：奚熙发兵防守，部下将他杀了，把首级送到建业。
English: Yan Xi sent troops to defend, his subordinates killed him and sent his head to Jianye.

古文：又车裂张俊，皆夷三族。并诛章安侯奋及其五子。
现代文：吴主又车裂了张俊，奚熙与张俊都被灭了三族；同时被杀的还有章安侯孙奋和他的五个儿子。
English: The Lord of Wu also crushed Zhang Jun, and both Gong Xi and Zhang Jun were destroyed by the three tribes. At the same time, Zhang An Hou, Sun Fen, and his five sons were also killed.

古文：秋，七月，丙寅，皇后杨氏殂。
现代文：秋季，七月，丙寅，晋皇后杨氏去世。
English: In the autumn, in July, Cui Yin, the queen of the Jin Dynasty, died.

古文：初，帝以太子不慧，恐不堪为嗣，常密以访后。
现代文：当初，晋武帝觉得太子不聪明，担心他不能挑起继承王位的重任，曾经秘密地和皇后商议。
English: At first, Emperor Jinmu felt that the crown prince was not smart, worried that he would not be able to take on the heavy responsibility of inheriting the throne, and had secretly discussed the matter with the empress.

古文：后曰： 立子以长不以贤，岂可动也！ 
现代文：她头枕着晋武帝的膝，流着眼泪说： 叔父杨骏的女儿杨芷，既有德，又有容貌，希望陛下选她入宫。 
English: With her head resting on Emperor Jinwu's knee, she shed tears and said, "Uncle Yang Hui's daughter, Yang Hui, has both virtue and good looks. I hope that His Majesty will choose her to enter the palace."

古文：镇军大将军胡奋女为贵嫔，有宠于帝，后疾笃，恐帝立贵嫔为后，致太子不安，枕帝膝泣曰： 叔父骏女芷有德色，愿陛下以备六宫。 
现代文：晋武帝流着眼泪答应了。
English: Emperor Jinwu agreed with tears.

古文：帝流涕许之。以前太常山涛为吏部尚书。
现代文：晋朝任命前太常山涛为吏部尚书。
English: Before he was appointed by the Jin Dynasty, Taizhong Shantao was an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：涛典选十馀年，每一官缺，辄择才资可为者启拟数人，得诏旨有所向，然后显奏之。
现代文：山涛掌管选拔官吏的职务十几年每当有一个官职空缺，他总是选择几名才能与资历都合适的人，告诉晋武帝，得到武帝诏令，对任用某人有倾向性的意见时，他才明确地为这名人选上奏。
English: Shantao was in charge of the selection of officials for more than ten years. Whenever there was an official vacancy, he always chose several people with the right talents and qualifications, and told Emperor Jinwu that when he received Emperor Wu's edict and had a biased opinion about the appointment of someone, he would clearly choose this person.

古文：帝之所用，或非举首，众情不察，以涛轻重任意，言之于帝，帝益亲爱之。
现代文：因此，晋武帝所任用的人，有的并不是选拔人中最好的。大家对这些情况并不了解，有人就说山涛凭自己举官吏，并禀告晋武帝，晋武帝对山涛却更加亲近宠爱。
English: Therefore, some of the people appointed by Emperor Jinwu were not the best among the selectors. People did not understand these circumstances. Some people said that Shantao appointed officials on his own and denounced Emperor Jinwu, but Emperor Jinwu was closer to Shantao.

古文：涛甄拔人物，各为题目而奏之，时称 山公启事 。
现代文：山涛甄别选拔人材，对每一个人都进行评量品题然后上奏，当时的人把这称为《山公启事》。
English: At that time, people referred to this as the "Mountain Publicity."

古文：涛荐嵇绍于帝，请以为秘书郎，帝发诏征之。
现代文：山涛向晋武帝荐举嵇绍，请求晋武帝任用嵇绍为秘书郎。晋武帝下诏征召嵇绍。
English: Shantao recommended to Emperor Jinwu to promote Sheng Shao and asked Emperor Jinwu to appoint Sheng Shao as his secretary. Emperor Jinwu issued an edict to conscript Sheng Shao.

古文：绍以父康得罪，屏居私门，欲辞不就。
现代文：嵇绍由于父亲嵇康获罪，所以隐居在家，他想拒绝征召，不去赴任。
English: Because his father, Jikang, was convicted of a crime, Jinshao lived in seclusion at home. He wanted to refuse conscription and not go to work.

古文：涛谓之曰： 为君思之久矣，天地四时，犹有消息，况于人乎！ 
现代文：山涛对他说： 我为你想了很久了，天地、四季尚且有消有长，互为更替，更何况对于人呢！ 
English: Shantao said to him, "I have been thinking about you for a long time. The heavens and the earth and the four seasons still have their ups and downs, and they alternate with each other.

古文：绍乃应命，帝以为秘书丞。
现代文：于是，嵇绍答应了任命，晋武帝让他作了秘书丞。
English: As a result, Jinshao agreed to the appointment, and Emperor Jinwu made him the secretary.

古文：初，东关之败，文帝问僚属曰： 近日之事，谁任其咎？ 
现代文：当初，晋在东关一战失败，晋文帝问他的僚属说： 最近这件事，应由谁来承担罪责？ 
English: At first, Jin was defeated in the First Battle of Dongguan, and Emperor Jinwen asked his subordinates: "In this recent incident, who should bear the blame?

古文：安东司马王仪，修之子也，对曰： 责在元帅。 
现代文：安东司马王仪是王的儿子，他回答说： 责任在元帅。 
English: Anton Sima Wangyi, the king's son, replied: "The responsibility lies with the marshal.

古文：文帝怒曰： 司马欲委罪孤邪！ 
现代文：晋文帝勃然大怒，说： 司马是想把罪过推给我吗？ 
English: Emperor Jinwen flew into a rage and said, "Is Sima trying to put the blame on me?

古文：引出斩之。
现代文：拉出去把他杀了。
English: So they dragged him out and killed him.

古文：仪子裒痛父非命，隐居教授，三征七辟，皆不就。
现代文：王仪的儿子王褒，为他的父亲死于非命而悲痛，他隐居起来传授学业，任凭朝廷三次征召，以及公府、州郡七次授职，他一概不去。
English: Wang Bo, the son of Wang Yi, grieved for his father's untimely death. He went into seclusion to teach his studies. He was summoned three times by the imperial court, and seven times by the government and prefectures, but he never went.

古文：未尝西向而坐，庐于墓侧，旦夕攀柏悲号，涕泪著树，树为之枯。
现代文：晋都城洛阳，位于王褒居住地的西方，王褒从来不面向西就座。他在父亲坟墓的旁边修建茅庐居住，早晚攀着柏树悲哀号哭，眼泪落于树上，天长日久，树因此而干枯。
English: Luoyang, the capital of Jin Dynasty, is located in the west of Wang Bo's residence. Wang Bo never sat facing west. He built a thatched hut next to his father's grave and lived there. In the morning and in the evening, he climbed a cypress tree and cried in sorrow. Tears fell on the tree. The sky was long, and the tree withered.

古文：读《诗》至 哀哀父母，生我劬劳 ，未尝不三复流涕，门人为之废《蓼莪》。
现代文：他读《诗经》，每当读到 可怜父母心，生我多辛劳 时，总要再三流泪，他的弟子们因此就不敢讲习《诗经·蓼莪》篇了。
English: When he read the "Song of Songs," whenever he read "Poor parents, how hard I worked," he would shed tears again and again. As a result, his disciples did not dare to study the "Song of Songs ·" passage.

古文：家贫，计口而田，度身而蚕；人或馈之，不受；助之，不听。
现代文：王褒家境贫苦，他计算着人口食用耕种，度量着身材养蚕制衣。有人馈赠物品，他不接受；予以帮助，他不允许。
English: Wang Bao's family is poor. He calculates the population for food and farming, and measures his stature to raise silkworms for clothing. He does not accept gifts; he does not allow help.

古文：诸生密为刈麦，裒辄弃之。
现代文：学生们偷偷地帮他割麦，他就把麦子扔了。
English: The students secretly helped him cut the wheat, and he threw it away.

古文：遂不仕而终。
现代文：他一直到死都没有去作官。
English: He never held public office until his death.

古文：臣光曰：昔舜诛鲧而禹事舜，不敢废至公也。
现代文：臣司马光曰：从前舜诛杀了禹的父亲鲧，而禹却为舜而效力，这是因为禹不敢废弃国家大事。
English: Minister Sima Guang said: "Once upon a time, I killed Yu's father Yu, but Yu worked for me, because Yu did not dare to abandon national affairs.

古文：嵇康、王仪，死皆不以其罪，二子不仕晋室可也。
现代文：嵇康、王仪的死，都不是因为他们犯了罪，所以他们二人的儿子不作晋朝的官是可以的。
English: The deaths of Shinkang and Wang Yi were not because they had committed a crime, so it was okay for their two sons not to become officials of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：嵇绍苟无荡阴之忠，殆不免于君子之讥乎！
现代文：嵇绍假如没有以后在荡阴所表现的忠城，大概就不免遭到君子的讥笑和非议了吧？
English: If Lushao didn't have the loyalty shown by its citizens in the past, wouldn't it be ridiculed and criticized by the gentry?

古文：吴大司马陆抗疾病，上疏曰： 西陵、建平，国之蕃表，即处上流，受敌二境。
现代文：吴国大司马陆抗病情加重。他上疏说： 西陵、建平，是国家的屏障，地势既处于上流，二郡边境的西面、北面又与敌人的边境接壤。
English: He said: Xiling and Jianping are national barriers. The terrain is upstream, and the western and northern borders of the two counties are adjacent to the enemy's border.

古文：若敌泛舟顺流，星奔电迈，非可恃援他部以救倒县也。
现代文：如果敌人泛舟顺流而下，那么就如同星奔电驰一样迅速，到那时，就不能依赖别的地区援助来解救危难了。
English: If the enemy can raft down the river as fast as a Mercedes Benz, then we can't rely on help from other regions to save us.

古文：此乃社稷安危之机，非徒封疆侵陵小害也。
现代文：这可是关系到国家安危的关键，不只是国家疆界受到犯的小祸患。
English: This is a key point of national security, not just a minor scourge of border intrusion.

古文：臣父逊，昔在西垂上言： 西陵，国之西门，虽云易守，亦复易失。
现代文：我的父亲陆逊，从前在西部边境时曾上书说： 西陵是国家的西门，虽然说容易防守，但同时容易丧失。
English: My father, Lu Xun, once wrote in a letter when he was on the western border: Xiling is the west gate of the country. Although it is easy to defend, it is also easy to lose.

古文：若有不守，非但失一郡，荆州非吴有也。
现代文：假如守不住的话，那就不只是失掉一个郡，就连荆州都会不属于吴所有了。
English: If it cannot be defended, it will not only lose a county, but even Jingzhou will no longer belong to Wu.

古文：如其有虞，当倾国争之。 
现代文：如果西陵有忧患，就要竭尽国家的力量去争夺它。 
English: If there is an accident at the Western Mausoleum, the whole country should be mobilized to fight for it.

古文：臣前乞屯精兵三万，而主者循常，未肯差赴。
现代文：我过去曾经请求在西陵驻守三万精兵，但是主管的官员遵循常规，不肯派兵赴西陵。
English: In the past, I had asked for 30,000 elite soldiers to be stationed in Xiling, but the officials in charge followed the usual practice and refused to send troops to Xiling.

古文：自步阐以后，益更损耗。
现代文：自从步阐事件以后，我方兵力愈加损耗。
English: After the Spontaneous Interpretation Incident, the loss of troops was even more serious.

古文：今臣所统千里，外御强对，内怀百蛮，而上下见兵，财有数万，羸敝日久，难以待变。
现代文：现在我统率着千里方圆的地方，对外抵御着强大的敌人，对内里又安抚各蛮族，上上下下的现有军队，才有几万，久已疲惫，衰败，是很难应付突发的事变的。
English: Now I am in command of a thousand-mile-square area, fending off a powerful enemy from the outside, and pacifying the barbarians from the inside. The existing armies, from top to bottom, are only tens of thousands, and have been exhausted and decayed for a long time. It is difficult to cope with sudden events.

古文：臣愚，以为诸王幼冲，无用兵马以妨要务；又，黄门宦官开立占募，兵民避役，逋逃入占。
现代文：我认为，诸王年幼，不要给他们配备兵马，使要紧的事务受到损害。另外，对黄门宦官进行招募，使士兵百姓得以躲避兵役，而逃亡的罪人也都进入黄门。
English: In my opinion, the kings are young, so don't equip them with soldiers and horses to the detriment of important affairs. In addition, the recruitment of Yellow Gate eunuchs allows soldiers and commoners to evade military service, and fugitive criminals also enter the Yellow Gate.

古文：乞特诏简阅，一切料出，以补疆场受敌常处，使臣所部足满八万，省息众务，并力备御，庶几无虞。
现代文：我请求特别下诏书对黄门宦官进行检查，凡是清理出来的，都把他们补充到边境地区经常与敌人冲突的地方，以使我所统领的军队，兵员满额为八万，节省、停止众多的事务，集中力量准备防御，也许可以避免忧患。
English: I especially request that the edict be issued to inspect the eunuchs of the Yellow Gate, and that those who have been purged be added to the border areas where there are frequent conflicts with the enemy, so that the army under my command, with a full complement of 80,000 soldiers, can save and stop many affairs, concentrate on preparing for defense, and perhaps avoid trouble.

古文：若其不然，深可忧也！
现代文：如果不这样作，那就非常令人担忧了。
English: If they don't, it's very worrying.

古文：臣死之后，乞以西方为属。 
现代文：我死了以后，请特别注意西方边境。 
English: After my death, please pay special attention to the western border.

古文：及卒，吴主使其子晏、景、玄、机、云分将其兵。
现代文：陆抗死后，吴主让陆抗的儿子陆晏、陆景、陆玄、陆机、陆云分别统领陆抗的士兵。
English: After the death of Lu Huan, the Lord of Wu let Lu Huan's sons, Lu Wei, Lu Jing, Lu Xuan, Lu Ji, and Lu Yun respectively lead the soldiers of Lu Huan.

古文：机、云皆善属文，名重于世。
现代文：陆机、陆云都善于写文章，名声为当世所推重。
English: Both Lu Jie and Lu Yun were good at writing articles, and their fame was highly valued by the contemporary world.

古文：初，周鲂之子处，膂力绝人，不修细行，乡里患之。
现代文：当初，周鲂的儿子周处，体力超过常人，他不拘小节，乡里的百姓都认为他是祸患。
English: At the beginning, Zhou Ye's son was physically stronger than ordinary people everywhere, and he was careless. The people in the village all thought he was a scourge.

古文：处尝问父老曰： 今时和岁丰而人不乐，何邪？ 
现代文：周处曾经询问乡里的老人说： 如今四时谐调，又是丰收之年，而人们却不欢喜，这是为什么？ 
English: An old man in the village was once asked: "Nowadays, the four seasons are in harmony, and it is the year of the harvest, but people are not happy. Why is that?"

古文：父老叹曰： 三害不除，何乐之有！ 
现代文：老人叹气说： 三害没有除掉，哪里会有快乐！ 
English: The old man sighed and said, "If the three evils are not eliminated, where will there be happiness?"

古文：处曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：周处说： 三害是什么？ 
English: Everyone around said: What are the three evils?

古文：父老曰： 南山白额虎，长桥蛟，并子为三矣。 
现代文：老人说： 南山的白额虎，长桥的蛟龙，再加上你就是三害了。 
English: The old man said: Nanshan's white-fronted tiger, Long Bridge's dragon, plus you are the three evils.

古文：处曰： 若所患止此，吾能除之。 
现代文：周处说： 如果所忧的只限于这三害，那我就能把它除了。 
English: People all around said, "If my worries are limited to these three evils, then I can eliminate them."

古文：乃入山求虎，射杀之，因投水，搏杀蛟。遂从机、云受学，笃志读书，砥节砺行，比及期年，州府交辟。
现代文：于是，周处进山搜寻老虎，将老虎射死；他跳到河里，与蚁龙搏斗，杀死咬龙；然后他跟随陆机、陆云，向他们求学，专心致志地读书，磨陈操守与德行。过了一年，州郡的官府争相征召他去作官。
English: As a result, he went into the mountains all around to search for tigers and shot the tiger to death; he jumped into the river, fought with the ant-dragon and killed the biting dragon; then he followed the land machine and the land cloud, studied with them, devoted himself to reading, and honed his ethics and virtues. A year later, the state and county government offices competed to recruit him as an official.

古文：八月，戊申，葬元皇后于峻阳陵。
现代文：八月，戊申，晋朝在峻阳埋葬了元皇后。
English: In August, Boushen, the Jin Dynasty buried the former empress in Shunyang.

古文：帝及群臣除丧即吉，博士陈逵议，以为： 今时所行，汉帝权制；太子无有国事，自宜终服。 
现代文：晋武帝以及群臣除去丧服，博士陈逵提议，认为 现在所实行的，是汉代帝王暂时制定的丧礼规定，太子没有担负国家大事，自然应当穿丧服一直到守丧期满。 
English: Emperor Jinwu and his courtiers should remove their mourning clothes, suggested Dr. Chen Zhuang, who believed that what is being implemented now is the funeral regulations temporarily established by the Han Dynasty emperor. The prince did not bear the burden of national affairs, so he should naturally wear the mourning clothes until the mourning period is over.

古文：尚书杜预以为： 古者天子、诸侯三年之丧，始同齐、斩，既葬除服，谅闇以居，心丧终制。
现代文：尚书杜预认为： 古时候天子、诸侯守丧三年，开始同样穿丧服齐衰和斩衰，等到葬礼结束，就除下丧服，守丧而居，在心中悼念，度过三年。
English: Shangshu Du Yu believes that: In ancient times, the sons of heaven and the princes mourned for three years, and they began to wear the same mourning clothes, and when the funeral was over, they removed the mourning clothes, lived in mourning, mourned in their hearts, and spent three years.

古文：故周公不言高宗服丧三年而云谅闇，此服心丧之文也；叔向不讥景王除丧而讥其宴乐已早，明既葬应除，而违谅闇之节也。
现代文：所以周公不说高宗服丧三年而只说天子居丧，这就是在心里哀悼、服心丧的制度。叔向不讥讽景王除去丧服却讥讽他饮宴娱乐过早，很明显是说葬礼结束就应当除去丧服，但是景王过早地宴乐，就是违背了还应服心丧的仪节。
English: Therefore, Zhou Gong did not say that Gaozong had been in mourning for three years, but only that the heavenly son was in mourning. This is the system of mourning in the heart and obeying the mourning. Uncle Xiang did not ridicule King Jing for removing the mourning clothes, but ridiculed him for having a banquet and entertainment too early. It is obvious that the funeral should be removed when the funeral is over, but King Jing's premature banquet is a violation of the ritual that should also obey the mourning.

古文：君子之于礼，存诸内而已。礼非玉帛之谓，丧岂衰麻之谓乎！
现代文：君对于礼，保存在自己的心里而已，礼并非就是瑞玉缣帛，丧礼难道就是衰麻之类的丧服吗？
English: As for the ritual, you keep it in your own heart. The ritual is not exactly a wedding, but a funeral. Isn't a funeral a kind of swoon?

古文：太子出则抚军，守则监国，不为无事，宜卒哭除衰麻，而以谅闇终三年。 
现代文：太子外出则从君出征，守在国都之内是在君王外出时代行处理国政，不能说没有事情可作，所以太子应当哭别之后，除去丧服，居丧三年。 
English: When the prince goes out, it is his duty to go to the front. When he stays in the capital, it is his duty to deal with state affairs when the king is out. It cannot be said that there is nothing to do. Therefore, the prince should remove his mourning clothes and stay in mourning for three years after bidding farewell.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：晋武帝同意了。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：臣光曰：规矩主于方圆，然庸工无规矩，则方圆不可得而制也；衰麻主于哀戚，然庸人无衰麻，则哀戚不可得而勉也。《素冠》之诗，正为是矣。
现代文：臣司马光曰：圆规和曲尺的作用是画出圆形和方形，然而平庸的工匠没有圆规和曲尺就不知如何作出方形和圆形来；丧服的作用是为了表达悲哀、伤悼的心情，然而平庸的人没有丧郛，就不能尽力表达悲哀伤悼的心情。《诗经·素冠》，正是为此而作。
English: Minister Sima Guang said: The function of the compass and the ruler is to draw circles and squares, but mediocre craftsmen do not know how to make squares and circles without a compass and a ruler; the function of mourning clothes is to express sadness and mourning, but mediocre people do not have a funeral, they can not try to express sadness and mourning.

古文：杜预巧饰《经》、《传》以附人情，辩则辩矣，臣谓不若陈逵之言质略而敦实也。
现代文：杜预巧妙地假托《经》、《传》以附会人情，倒是很有说服力，但是我却认为，不如陈逵的话质朴简要且厚重诚实。
English: Du Yueh's ingenious way of pretending that the "Ching" and "Zhuan" were written for the benefit of the association is very persuasive, but I think that it is not as good as Chen Yao's words, which are simple, concise and full of honesty.

古文：九月，癸亥，以大将军陈骞为太尉。
现代文：九月，癸亥，晋任命大将军陈骞为太尉。
English: In September, Emperor Qianhai and Emperor Jin appointed General Chen Qi as the first lieutenant.

古文：杜预以孟津渡险，请建河桥于富平津。
现代文：杜预认为孟津渡口险要，请求在富平津渡口建造一座黄河桥。
English: Du Yuan thought that the Mengjin Ferry was too dangerous and requested that a Yellow River bridge be built at the Fupingjin Ferry.

古文：议者以为： 殷、周所都，历圣贤而不作者，必不可立故也。 
现代文：有人议论说： 殷、周时期的都城，都建在黄河边上，但是经历了圣人贤人的时代而没有造桥，必定是不宜于建桥的缘故。 
English: Some people argue that: the capital cities of the Yin and Zhou dynasties were all built on the edge of the Yellow River, but they experienced the era of sages and wise men and did not build bridges, which must be due to the fact that it is not suitable for building bridges.

古文：预固请为之。
现代文：但是杜预仍然坚持要造桥。
English: But Du Yueh still insisted on building a bridge.

古文：及桥成，帝从百寮临会，举觞属预曰： 非君，此桥不立。 
现代文：等到桥建起来了，晋武帝和百官一起集会，他举韦酒杯敬杜预说： 如果不是你，这桥就建不起来。 
English: When the bridge was built, Emperor Jinwu gathered with hundreds of officials. He held up a Wei wine glass to Du Yu and said, "If it wasn't for you, this bridge wouldn't have been built."

古文：对曰： 非陛下之明，臣亦无所施其巧。 
现代文：杜预回答说： 如果不是陛下圣明，我也没有机会施展我的技巧。 
English: Du Yu replied, "If it wasn't for Your Majesty's patronage, I wouldn't have had the opportunity to demonstrate my skills."

古文：是岁，邵陵厉公曹芳卒。
现代文：这一年，邵陵厉公曹芳去世。
English: This year, Shao Lingli Cao Fang passed away.

古文：初，芳之废迁金墉也，太宰中郎陈留范粲素服拜送，哀动左右。
现代文：当初，曹芳被废，迁到了金墉城，太宰中郎、陈留人范粲，穿白色的衣服为他送行，哀伤之情使身边的人都被感动了。
English: At first, Cao Fang was abolished and moved to Jinshan City. Dazai Zhong Lang and Chen Lujin Fan Qi dressed in white to see him off. People around them were moved by the sadness.

古文：遂称疾不出，阳狂不言，寝所乘车，足不履地。
现代文：这以后，范粲就称病不出门，装疯不说话。他睡在自己的乘车上，脚不踩地。
English: After this, Fan Qi said that he would not go out when he was sick, and would not talk while pretending to be mad. He slept in his car and did not step on the ground.

古文：子孙有婚宦大事，辄密谘焉，合者则色无变，不合则眠寝不安，妻子以此知其旨。
现代文：子孙当中如果有婚姻、作官的大事，家人总是悄悄与他商议，他如果表示同意，脸色就没有变化，如果不同意，睡卧就不安稳，他的妻子和儿子因此知道他的想法。
English: If there is a marriage or an important official matter among the descendants, the family always quietly consults with him. If he agrees, his face will not change. If he does not agree, he will not sleep well. His wife and son know his thoughts.

古文：子乔等三人，并弃学业，绝人事，侍疾家庭，足不出邑里。
现代文：他的儿子范乔等三人，一起抛弃了学业，断绝人世间一切事情，在家里侍奉他的疾病，从来不走出他们居住的地区。
English: His son, Fan Qiao, and the other three abandoned their studies together, cut off everything in the world, served his illness at home, and never left the area where they lived.

古文：及帝即位，诏以二千石禄养病，加赐帛百匹，乔以父疾笃，辞不敢受。
现代文：到晋武帝即位，下诏给范粲二千石俸禄让他养病，又赐给他一百匹缣帛。范乔以父亲病重的缘故，推辞不敢接受。
English: When Emperor Jinmu ascended the throne, he issued an edict to give Fan Qiao a stipend of two thousand koku so that he could recover from his illness, and also gave him one hundred yakitori. Fan Qiao did not dare to accept the resignation because of his father's serious illness.

古文：粲不言凡三十六年，年八十四，终于所寝之车。
现代文：范粲总共三十六年没说话，在他八十四岁的时候，死在他睡卧的车子上。
English: Fan Yu did not speak for a total of thirty-six years. At the age of eighty-four, he died in his sleeping car.

古文：吴比三年大疫。
现代文：吴国接连三年闹起大瘟疫。
English: For three years in a row, the Great Plague has been raging in the State of Wu.

古文：世祖武皇帝上之下咸宁元年春，正月，戊午朔，大赦，改元。
现代文：咸宁元年春季，正月，戊午朔，晋大赦天下，改年号为咸宁。
English: In the spring of the first year of Xianning, the first month of the year, the first day of the month, the first day of the month, the first day of the month, the first day of the month, the first day of the month, the first day of the month, the first day of the month, and the first day of the month.

古文：吴掘地得银尺，上有刻文。吴主大赦，改元天册。
现代文：吴国挖地时得到了银尺，上面刻着文字，吴主便下令大赦，改年号为天册。
English: When the State of Wu was digging in the ground, it obtained a silver ruler with inscriptions on it. The Lord of Wu then ordered an amnesty, and the year was changed to the heavenly calendar.

古文：吴中书令贺邵，中风不能言，去职数月，吴主疑其诈，收付酒藏，掠考千数，卒无一言，乃烧锯断其头，徙其家属于临海。
现代文：吴国中书令贺邵得了中风病不能说话，便离职几个月。吴主怀疑他装病，把他拘捕起来，押送到储藏酒的仓里拷打，打了他上千次，他最后也没有说一句话，吴主叫人烧红刀锯割断了他的头颅，把他的家属放逐到临海。
English: The Lord of Wu suspected him of feigning illness, arrested him, sent him to a warehouse where wine was stored, tortured him, and beat him thousands of times. In the end, he didn't say a word. The Lord of Wu had his head cut off with a red-hot knife and saw, and banished his family to the coast.

古文：又诛楼玄子孙。
现代文：吴主又诛杀了楼玄的儿子和孙子。
English: Lord Wu also killed Lou Xuan's son and grandson.

古文：夏，六月，鲜卑拓跋力微复遣其子沙漠汗入贡，将还，幽州刺史卫瓘表请留之，又密以金赂其诸部大人离间之。
现代文：夏季，六月，鲜卑人拓跋力微又派他的儿子拓跋沙漠汗到晋朝进献贡品。沙漠汗将要返回的时候，幽州刺史卫上表请求把他留下来，卫又暗地里用金子贿赂鲜卑各部落的着领，挑拔他们与沙漠汗之间的关系。
English: In the summer, in June, the Xianbei Tuoba sent his son Tuoba Desert Khan to the Jin Dynasty to pay tribute. When Desert Khan was about to return, the Yuzhou chief Wei Shangbo asked him to stay, and Wei secretly bribed the leaders of the Xianbei tribes with gold to provoke relations between them and Desert Khan.

古文：秋，七月，甲申晦，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，七月，甲申晦，出现日食。
English: In autumn, in July, at the turn of the year, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：冬，十二月，丁亥，追尊宣帝庙曰高祖，景帝曰世宗，文帝曰太祖。
现代文：冬季，十二月，丁亥，晋朝追尊晋宣帝司马懿庙号为高祖，晋景帝司马师庙号为世宗，晋文帝司马昭庙号为太祖。
English: In the winter, December, Dinghai, the Jin Dynasty named the Emperor Jinsun's temple of Emperor Sima Jiao as the high ancestor, the Emperor Jinshun's temple of Emperor Sima Shi as the sejong, and the Emperor Jinshun's temple of Emperor Sima Zhao as the great ancestor.

古文：大疫，洛阳死者以万数。
现代文：晋国流行大瘟疫，洛阳因瘟疫而死的人，数以万计。
English: There was a great plague in Jin Province, and tens of thousands of people died in Luoyang due to the plague.

古文：世祖武皇帝上之下咸宁二年春，令狐丰卒，弟宏继立，杨欣讨斩之。
现代文：咸宁二年春季，令狐丰去世，他的弟弟令狐宏继他之后任敦煌太守。杨欣前去征讨令狐宏，把他杀死。
English: In the spring of the second year of Xianning, Lingfufeng died, and his younger brother Lingfuhong succeeded him as the governor of Dunhuang. Yang Xin went to recruit Lingfuhong and killed him.

古文：帝得疾，甚剧，及愈，群臣上寿。
现代文：晋武帝得病十份严重，等他痊愈了，大臣们都去为他祝寿。
English: Emperor Jinwu was seriously ill. When he recovered, his ministers all went to congratulate him on his birthday.

古文：诏曰： 每念疫气死亡者，为之怆然。
现代文：晋武帝下诏说： 每当我想到因瘟疫死去的人，就为他们而悲伤。
English: Emperor Jinwu issued an edict saying, "Whenever I think of those who died from the plague, I grieve for them.

古文：岂以一身之休息，忘百姓之艰难邪！ 
现代文：我怎能因为我一个人平安了，就忘记百姓的艰难呢？ 
English: Shall I forget the affliction of the people, because there is peace for me alone?

古文：诸上礼者，皆绝之。
现代文：于是拒绝了祝贺送礼的人。
English: So he refused to congratulate the giver.

古文：初，齐王攸有宠于文帝，每见攸，辄抚床呼其小字曰： 此桃符座也！ 
现代文：当初，齐王司马攸受到晋文帝的宠爱，晋文帝每当见到司马攸，总是抚摸着床，叫着司马攸的小名说： 这是桃符座位！ 
English: At first, King Sima Youyou of Qi was favored by Emperor Jinwen. Whenever Emperor Jinwen saw Sima Youyou, he always stroked the bed, called Sima Youyou's nickname and said, "This is the seat of the peach charm!"

古文：几为太子者数矣。
现代文：司马攸几次都差一点被立为太子。
English: Sima You nearly became crown prince several times.

古文：临终，为帝叙汉淮南王、魏陈思王事而泣，执攸手以授帝。
现代文：晋文帝临死的时候，给晋武帝讲述了汉代淮南王魏陈思王的遭遇。他流着眼泪，拉着司马攸的手，然后把司马攸的手放在晋武帝的手上。
English: When Emperor Jinwen was about to die, he told Emperor Jinwu the story of the Han Dynasty Huainan King Wei Chen Si. He shed tears, took Sima You's hand, and then put Sima You's hand on Emperor Jinwu's hand.

古文：太后临终，亦流涕谓帝曰： 桃符性急，而汝为兄不慈，我若不起，必恐汝不能相容，以是属汝，勿忘我言！ 
现代文：太后临死时，也流着眼泪对晋武帝说： 桃符情子急躁，而你这作哥哥的又不慈爱。我的病如果好不了，我很担心你容不下他，我因此嘱咐你，你不要忘记我的话。 
English: When the empress dowager was about to die, she also said to Emperor Jinwu with tears streaming down her face, "Momo Fu's affections are impetuous, and you, as a brother, are not kind. If my illness does not get better, I am very worried that you will not be able to tolerate him. Therefore, I ordered you not to forget my words.

古文：及帝疾甚，朝野皆属意于攸。
现代文：后来晋武帝病得很重时，朝野上下都归心于司马攸。
English: Later, when Emperor Jinwu was gravely ill, the emperor and the court all confided in Sima You.

古文：攸妃，贾充之长女也，河南尹夏侯和谓充曰： 卿二婿，亲疏等耳。
现代文：司马攸的妻子是贾充的长女。河南尹夏侯和对贾充说： 你的二位女婿，与皇帝的亲疏是相等的。
English: Sima You's wife is Jia Chong's eldest daughter. Henan Yin Xia Hou said to Jia Chong: Your two sons-in-law are as close as the emperor.

古文：立人当立德。 
现代文：树人应当树立有德之人。 
English: Tree people should establish a virtuous person.

古文：充不答。攸素恶荀勖及左卫将军冯紞倾谄，勖乃使紞说帝曰： 陛下前日疾苦不愈，齐王为公卿百姓所归，太子虽欲高让，其得免乎！
现代文：贾充不回答，司马攸平素就憎恨荀勖以及左卫将军冯专事谄媚、逢迎，荀勖于是让冯对晋武帝说： 陛下前些天的病如果不能痊愈，公卿大臣及百姓们，都对齐王司马攸归心，太子虽然打算谦让，最后也免不了灾祸。
English: Jia Chong did not answer, Sima Youping simply hated Zou and the left guard general Feng, who specialized in flattering and welcoming, so Zou let Feng say to Emperor Jinwu: If His Majesty's illness of the previous days cannot be cured, the nobles and ministers and the people are all aligned with King Sima Youping's heart, and although the prince intends to be humble, in the end disaster cannot be avoided.

古文：宜遣还籓，以安社稷。 
现代文：应当打发齐王返回他的封国，以使国家安宁。 
English: He should be sent back to the motherland to stabilize the country.

古文：帝阴纳之，乃徙和为光禄勋，夺充兵权，而位遇无替。
现代文：晋武帝不动声色地采纳了冯的意见，于是把河南尹夏侯和的官职迁为光禄勋，削夺贾充的权，但是地位和待遇不变。
English: Emperor Jinwu accepted Feng's opinion without a murmur, so he transferred the official position of Henan Yin Xia Houhe to Guanglu Hun and stripped Jia Chong of his power, but his status and treatment remained unchanged.

古文：吴施但之乱，或谮京下督孙楷于吴主曰： 楷不时赴讨，怀两端。 
现代文：吴国发生了施但造反作乱的事，有人在吴主面前诬陷京下督孙楷说： 孙楷不准时去征讨施但，他是两头观望，脚踏两只船。 
English: In the State of Wu, the rebellion of the Shidans broke out. Some people slandered the governor of Beijing, Sun Kai, in front of the Lord of Wu, saying: Sun Kai did not go to conquer Shidans on time. He was watching from both sides, stepping on two boats.

古文：吴主数诘让之，征为宫下镇、骠骑将军。
现代文：吴主多次指责孙楷，召他任宫下镇、骠骑将军。
English: The Lord of Wu repeatedly criticized Sun Kai and called him to serve as a courtier and cavalry general.

古文：楷自疑惧，夏，六月，将妻子来奔；拜车骑将军，封丹杨侯。
现代文：孙楷从此心中又疑忌又害怕，夏季的六月，他带着妻子儿女投奔了晋朝，晋朝任命他为车骑将军，封为丹阳侯。
English: From then on, Sun Kai was full of suspicion and fear. In the summer of June, he and his wife and children defected to the Jin Dynasty. The Jin Dynasty appointed him as the general of chariots and cavalry and made him the lord of Danyang.

古文：秋，七月，吴人或言于吴主曰： 临平湖自汉末薉塞，长老言： 此湖塞，天下乱；此湖开，开下平。 
现代文：秋季，七月，吴国有人对吴主说： 监平湖自从汉末就荒阻塞了，老人们说： 此湖塞，天下乱；此湖开，天下平。 
English: In the autumn, in July, someone in Wu said to the Lord of Wu, "Jianping Lake has been blocked since the end of the Han Dynasty. The old people said, "This lake is blocked, the world is in chaos; this lake is open, the world is flat."

古文：近无故忽更开通，此天下当太平，青盖入洛之祥也。 
现代文：近来元缘无故，临平湖忽然又开通了，这是天下将要太平，青色车盖进入洛阳的吉祥征兆。 
English: Recently, for no reason, Linping Lake suddenly reopened, which is an auspicious sign that the world will be peaceful and the blue cover will enter Luoyang.

古文：吴主以问奉禁都尉历阳陈训，对曰： 臣止能望气，不能达湖之开塞。 
现代文：吴主以此事去询问奉禁都尉、历阳人陈训，陈训对他说： 我只会望云气，不能通达湖水开通阻塞的奥秘。 
English: The Lord of Wu inquired about this matter with Chen Xun, the forbidden captain and Liyang man. Chen Xun said to him: I can only hope for clouds, I can't access the mystery of the blockage of the lake.

古文：退而告其友曰： 青盖入洛者，将有衔璧之事，非吉祥也。 
现代文：陈训退下来就对他的朋友说： 青车盖入洛阳，这是说将要有战败面君主投降之事，这并不是吉祥的兆头。 
English: When Chen Xun retreated, he said to his friend: "The blue car has entered Luoyang, which means that there will be a defeat and the monarch will surrender. This is not an auspicious sign.

古文：或献小石刻 皇帝 字，云得于湖边。
现代文：有人献上小石头，上面刻着 皇帝 的字样，献者说，他是在湖边上得到的。
English: Someone offered a small stone with the word "emperor" carved on it, and the donor said he got it on the edge of the lake.

古文：吴主大赦，改元天玺。
现代文：吴主因此大赦罪人，改年号为天玺。
English: As a result, the Lord of Wu granted amnesty to the guilty and changed the name of the year to Tianzhu.

古文：湘东太守张咏不出算缗，吴主就在所斩之，徇首诸郡。
现代文：湘东太守张咏不上交赋税，吴主就地杀了他，把他的首级在各郡示众。
English: When Zhang Xuan, the governor of eastern Hunan, refused to pay his taxes, the Lord of Wu killed him on the spot and displayed his severed head in every county.

古文：会稽太守车浚公清有政绩，值郡旱饥，表求振贷。吴主以为收私恩，遣使枭首。
现代文：会稽太守浚公正清廉有政绩。当时，会稽郡大旱，老百姓没有粮食吃，车浚上表，请求借贷救济，吴主认为他是想以私人的恩惠收买民心，就派人杀了他，把头悬挂在柱子上示众。
English: At that time, there was a severe drought in the county of Hefei, and the common people had no food to eat. He went to the table and asked for loan relief. Lord Wu thought that he was trying to buy the people's hearts with private favors, so he sent someone to kill him and hung his head on a post for the public to see.

古文：尚书熊睦微有所谏，吴主以刀镮撞杀之，身无完肌。
现代文：尚书熊睦稍微说了几句劝谏的话，吴主就用刀头上的环把他砸死，身上的皮肉没有一处是完好的。
English: When Shang Shuxiong said a few words of advice to him, the Lord of Wu killed him with the ring on the tip of his sword. Not a single piece of flesh on his body was left intact.

古文：八月，已亥，以何曾为太傅，陈骞为大司马，贾充为太尉，齐王攸为司空。
现代文：八月，已亥，晋朝任命何曾为太傅，陈骞为大司马，贾充为太尉，齐王司马攸为司空。
English: In August, the Jin Dynasty appointed He Zeng as Taifu, Chen Yu as Daishima, Jia Chong as Taifu, and Qi Wang as Sima You.

古文：吴历阳山有七穿骈罗，穿中黄赤，俗谓之石印，云： 石印封发，天下当太平。 
现代文：吴因历阳山上有七个洞孔并排罗列，洞孔里面呈黄赤色，当时的习俗把这称之为石印，也就是指石头上的有色彩的纹理。民间流传说： 石印显露，天下太平。 
English: On Wuying Liyang Mountain, there are seven holes lined up side by side. The inside of the holes is yellow and red. At that time, the custom was to call this a stone seal, which refers to the colored texture on the stone. Folk legend: The stone seal is revealed, and the world is at peace.

古文：历阳长上言石印发，吴主遣使者以太牢祠之。
现代文：历阳官上报石印显现，吴主派遣使者用羊猪牛祭祀。
English: Liyang officials reported the appearance of the stone seal, and the Lord of Wu sent an emissary to make a sacrifice of sheep, pigs and cattle.

古文：使者作高梯登其上，以硃书石曰： 楚九州渚，吴九州都。
现代文：使者造了很高的梯子登上历阳山，用大红色在石头上书写道： 楚地是九州中的岛，吴国是九州之都。
English: The envoy built a tall ladder to climb up Liyang Mountain, and wrote on the stone with a big red crane: Chu is an island in Kyushu, and Wu is the capital of Kyushu.

古文：扬州士，作天子，四世治，太平始。 
现代文：扬州之士作天子，四世得治，太平开始。 
English: The people of Yangzhou are the sons of heaven, the fourth generation will rule, and peace will begin.

古文：还以闻。吴主大喜，封其山神为王，大赦，改明年元曰天纪。
现代文：使者返回，禀告吴主，吴主大喜，封历阳山神为王。大赦罪人，把明年的年号改为天纪。
English: When the messenger returned, he reported to the Lord of Wu that the Lord of Wu was overjoyed and had made Liyang Mountain God the king. He pardoned the sinners and changed the name of the coming year to Tianji.

古文：冬，十月，以汝阴王骏为征西大将军，羊祜为征南大将军，皆开府辟召，仪同三司。
现代文：冬季，十月，晋任命汝阴王司骏为征西大将军，羊祜为征南大将军，二人都设立府署，征召属员，仪节与三司相同。
English: In the winter, in October, Jin appointed Ruyin Wang Shizhu as the general of the Western Expedition and Yang Shizhu as the general of the Southern Expedition. Both of them set up offices, recruited subordinates, and the ceremony was the same as that of the three divisions.

古文：祜上疏请伐吴，曰： 先帝西平巴、蜀，南和吴、会，庶几海内得以休息。
现代文：羊祜上疏请求讨伐吴国，说： 先帝在西面平定了巴、蜀地区，在南面与东吴、会稽地区和平相处，海内几乎可以休息子。
English: Yang Xuan Shang Su requested a crusade against the State of Wu, saying, "The former emperor has pacified the Ba and Shu regions in the west, and coexisted peacefully with the Eastern Wu and Huiqi regions in the south. He can almost rest in peace at sea.

古文：而吴复背信，使边事更兴。
现代文：但是吴国却再次背信弃义，使边境又生事端。
English: However, the State of Wu again violated the principle of good faith and caused the border war to break out again.

古文：夫期运虽天所授，而功业必因人而成，不一大举扫灭，则兵役无时得息也。
现代文：运数中说是由上天所授予，而功勋业绩却必须由人来成就。如果不用一次大规模折行动把敌人彻底消灭，那么兵役就没有停息的时候。
English: The number of operations is said to be awarded by the heavens, but the meritorious performance must be achieved by people. If the enemy is completely eliminated without a large-scale operation, then there is no time to stop military service.

古文：蜀平之时，天下皆谓吴当并亡，自是以来，十有三年矣。
现代文：平定蜀国的时候，天下人都认为吴国也应当一同灭亡，从那时到现在，已经十三年了。
English: When Shu was conquered, people around the world thought that Wu should be destroyed as well. It has been 13 years since then.

古文：夫谋之虽多，决之欲独。
现代文：谋略虽然很多，却需要独自断。
English: Although there are many strategies, they need to be made independently.

古文：凡以险阻得全者，谓其势均力敌耳。
现代文：凡是凭借险阻得到保全的，是因为其势力不同，即使有险阻，也保不住。
English: Everything that is preserved by virtue of obstacles is because of its different forces. Even if there are obstacles, it cannot be preserved.

古文：若轻重不齐，强弱异势，虽有险阻，不可保也。
现代文：蜀作为一个国家，其地势并非不险，人们都说，一夫当关，万夫莫开。
English: As a country, the situation of Shu is not without danger. People say that one man is responsible for everything.

古文：蜀之为国，非不险也，皆云一夫荷戟，千人莫当。
现代文：但是，到了我军进兵之日，却不曾有藩篱的阻碍，我军乘胜席卷而下，直接到子成都，汉中各城，都如栖息之鸟，不敢出动。
English: However, on the day of our army's advance, there were no barriers to prevent it. Our army swept down to Zicheng, the capital of Hanzhong, and all the cities in Hanzhong, like a roosting bird, and dared not move.

古文：及进兵之日，曾无籓篱之限，乘胜席卷，径至成都，汉中诸城，皆鸟栖而不敢出，非无战心，诚力不足以相抗也。
现代文：并不是因为他们没有抵抗之心，实在是其力量不足以与我相抗衡。
English: It's not that they don't have the heart to resist, it's just that their strength is not enough to compete with me.

古文：及刘禅请降，诸营堡索然俱散。
现代文：等到刘禅请求投降，各个营堡索然离散。
English: By the time Liu Zen requested surrender, the various camps had dispersed.

古文：今江、淮之险不如剑阁，孙皓之暴过于刘禅，吴人之困甚于巴、蜀，而大晋兵力盛于往时。不于此际平壹四海，而更阻兵相守，使天下困于征戍，经历盛衰，不可长久也。
现代文：现在长江，淮水的险峻不如蜀之剑阁，孙的残暴超过了刘禅，吴人的困苦胜于巴、蜀，而大晋的兵力比以往任何时候都强盛，不在此时平定统一四海，却还坚守要塞防守，使天下为远行守边而窘迫，将士们长年出征，经历盛年而至于衰老，这样下去是不会长久的。
English: At present, the Yangtze River and the Huai River are not as precipitous as the Sword Pavilion of Shu. The brutality of Sun Quan surpasses that of Liu Zhen. The hardships of the Wu people are better than that of Ba and Shu. And the military strength of Dajin is stronger than ever before. At this time, the unification of the four seas is not settled, but the fortress defense is still adhered to. The world is embarrassed by the long-distance defense. The soldiers have been sent to war for many years, have experienced the golden age, and as for aging, this will not last long.

古文：今若引梁、益之兵水陆俱下，荆、楚之众进临江陵，平南、豫州直指夏口，徐、扬、青、兗并会秣陵，以一隅之吴当天下之众，势分形散，所备皆急。
现代文：现在如果率领梁州和益州之兵沿水路、陆路齐下，荆、楚之兵进逼江陵，平南、豫州的军队直趋夏口，徐、扬、青、兖各路兵马在秣陵会合，这样的话，吴国依凭其一隅之地，抵挡天下之众，必然会分兵把守，所守之处，处处危急。
English: Now, if the soldiers of Liangzhou and Yizhou were to march together along the waterways and land routes, the soldiers of Jing and Chu would enter and force Jiangling, the armies of Pingnan and Yuzhou would march straight to Xiakou, and the soldiers of Xu, Yang, Qing and Qin would meet in Fuling, in such a case, Wu would rely on its corner of the country to resist the masses of the world, and it would inevitably divide its troops to defend, and the places it defended would be in danger everywhere.

古文：巴、汉奇兵出其空虚，一处倾坏则上下震荡，虽有智者不能为吴谋矣。
现代文：然后，乘其空虚，从巴、汉出奇兵袭击，只要有一处被摧毁，就会引起上下震动，即使再有谋略之士也不能为吴国谋划了。
English: Then, taking advantage of its emptiness, soldiers from Ba and Han attacked, and as long as one place was destroyed, it would cause up and down vibrations. Even if there were strategists, they could not plan for the State of Wu.

古文：吴缘江为国，东西数千里，所敌者大，无有宁息。
现代文：吴国沿着长江建立了国家，其地从东到西有几千里，敌对的战线过于广大，所以没有安宁。
English: Wu built a country along the Yangtze River, stretching thousands of miles from east to west. The enemy's front line was too vast, so there was no peace.

古文：孙皓恣情任意，与下多忌，将疑于朝，士困于野，无有保世之计，一定之心；平常之日，犹怀去就，兵临之际，必有应者，终不能齐力致死已可知也。
现代文：孙放纵任性，为所欲为，常常猜忌臣下，结果使将官在朝中感到疑虑不安，兵士于原野困顿疲惫，没有保卫国家的计谋和长久的打算；平常的日子里，尚且考虑是否离去，到了战事临头之际，必然全有反应，终不能齐心协力以效死命，这一点，现在就已经很清楚了。
English: Sun indulged his caprice, did whatever he wanted, and often suspected his subordinates. As a result, the generals in the DPRK and China felt doubts and uneasiness. The soldiers were exhausted in the field, and had no plan or long-term plan to defend the country. In ordinary days, even if they considered whether to leave, when the war was imminent, they would inevitably have a reaction, and they would not be able to work together to save their lives. This is now very clear.

古文：其俗急速不能持久，弓弩戟楯不如中国，唯有水战是其所便，一入其境，则长江非复所保，还趣城池，去长入短，非吾敌也。
现代文：吴人的习性是急而快但不能持久，他们运用弓弩戟盾等兵器不如中原地区的士兵熟练，只有水战是他们所适宜的，但是我军一入吴境，那么长江就不再是他们所要保住的，待他们回过头为奔救城池，正是丢弃了长处而拾起短处，就不是我们的对手了。
English: The habit of the Wu people is quick and fast but not lasting. They are not as proficient in using weapons such as bows and shields as soldiers in the Central Plains. Only water warfare is suitable for them. But once our army enters the Wu territory, then the Yangtze River is no longer what they want to keep. When they turn back to save the city, it is precisely by discarding strengths and picking up weaknesses that they are not our opponents.

古文：官军县进，人有致死之志，吴人内顾，各有离散之心，如此，军不逾时，克可必矣。 
现代文：我军深入敌境，人人有献身效命的决心；吴人牵挂后方，各自怀有离散之心，这样，我军过不了多久，克敌制胜就是必然的了。 
English: Our army has penetrated deep into the enemy's territory, and everyone has the determination to devote themselves to serving the enemy; the Wu people are concerned about the rear, and each has a discrete heart. In this way, our army will not last long, and defeating the enemy is inevitable.

古文：帝深纳之。
现代文：晋武帝深为赞同，采纳了羊祜的意见。
English: The emperor accepted it completely.

古文：而朝议方以秦、凉为忧，祜复表曰： 吴平则胡自定，但当速济大功耳。 
现代文：当时朝廷议事，正为秦州、凉州的胡人而忧虑，羊祜又上表说： 平定子吴国，胡人自然就安定了，现在只应当迅速去成就伟大的功业。 
English: At that time, the imperial court was in deliberation and was worried about the Hu people in Qin and Liang Provinces. Yang Xuan also said on the table: The Hu people have naturally stabilized in the peaceful state of Wu, and now they should only quickly accomplish great feats.

古文：议者多有不同，贾充、荀勖、冯紞尤以伐吴为不可。
现代文：朝中不少人不同意羊祜的意见，贾充、荀勖、冯尤其认为不能伐吴。
English: Many people in the DPRK disagreed with the opinions of Yang Mi, and Jia Chong, Yao, and Feng especially believed that Wu should not be cut down.

古文：祜叹曰： 天下不如意事十常居七、八。
现代文：羊祜汉道： 天下不如意的事情，常占十之七八。
English: Yang Qian Han said: The things that are not satisfactory in the world often account for seven or eight out of ten.

古文：天与不取，岂非更事者恨于后时哉！ 
现代文：上天赐与时机人却不去获取，这岂不是使经历其事的人以后扼腕长叹吗！ 
English: Heaven gives and does not take away, is it not a pity for those who go through this?

古文：唯度支尚书杜预、中书令张华与帝意合，赞成其计。
现代文：当时只有度支尚书杜预、中书令张华与晋武帝意见相合，赞成羊祜的计划。
English: At that time, only Du Zhi Shang Shu Du Yuan and the Chinese calligrapher Zhang Hua agreed with Emperor Jinwu and supported the plan of mutton roasting.

古文：丁卯，立皇后杨氏，大赦。
现代文：丁卯，晋朝立杨氏为皇后，大赦天下。
English: Dingwu, the Jin Dynasty established the Yang clan as empress, and granted amnesty to the whole world.

古文：后，元皇后之从妹也，美而有妇德。
现代文：皇后是元皇后的堂妹，容貌美丽且具有妇女德行。
English: The empress is a cousin of the former empress. She is beautiful and virtuous.

古文：帝初聘后，后叔父珧上表曰： 自古一门二后，未有能全其宗者，乞藏此表于宗庙，异日如臣之言，得以免祸。 
现代文：晋武帝当初和皇后订婚的时候，皇后的叔父杨珧上表说： 自古以来，一个门里有两位皇后，还没有能够保全其宗族的。我请求把我所上之表收藏在宗庙里，哪一天如果我的话应验了，我也可因此而免于灾祸。 
English: When Emperor Jinwu was engaged to marry the Empress, the Empress's uncle Yang Xuan wrote on a watch: "Since ancient times, there have been two Empresses in one family, and no one has been able to preserve their family line. I request that the watch I mentioned above be kept in the ancestral temple. One day, if my words come true, I will be able to avoid the disaster."

古文：帝许之。
现代文：晋武帝答应了他。
English: Emperor Daowu agreed.

古文：十二月，以后父镇军将军骏为车骑将军，封临晋侯。
现代文：十二月，晋朝任命皇后的父亲，镇军将军杨骏为车骑将军，封为临晋侯。
English: In December, the Jin dynasty appointed the queen's father, the town army general Yang Jie, as the chariot and cavalry general, and he was named the prince of Jin.

古文：尚书褚略、郭弈皆表骏小器，不可任社稷之重，帝不从。
现代文：尚书褚、郭奕都上表，说杨骏度量狭隘，不可委以国家重任，晋武帝不听。
English: Shang Shuxuan and Guo Yi were both on the table, saying that Yang Jie's measurement was narrow and that he could not be entrusted with important national tasks. Emperor Jinwu did not listen.

古文：骏骄傲自得，胡奋谓骏曰： 卿恃女更益豪邪！
现代文：杨骏骄傲，自以为得意，胡奋对杨骏说： 你仗着女儿越来越强横了。
English: Yang Hui was proud and self-satisfied. Hu Fen said to Yang Hui, "You have become more and more powerful thanks to your daughter."

古文：历观前世，与天家婚，未有不灭门者，但早晚事耳。 
现代文：历观前代历史，凡是和天子结亲的，没有不遭灭门之祸的，只不过早晚而已。 
English: Looking back on the history of previous generations, there is no one who is related to the Son of Heaven without suffering the scourge of being eliminated, but sooner or later.

古文：骏曰： 卿女不在天家乎？ 
现代文：杨骏说： 您的女作不是也在天子家里吗？ 
English: Yang Mi said, "Isn't your female work also in the Heavenly Child's home?"

古文：奋曰： 我女与卿女作婢耳，何能为损益乎！ 
现代文：胡奋说： 我的女儿只是给你的女儿当女仆而已，不可能造成伟么好处或害处！ 
English: Hu Fen said, "My daughter is just a maid to your daughter, she can't do any great good or harm!"

古文：世祖武皇帝上之下咸宁三年春，正月，丙子朔，日有食之。
现代文：咸宁三年春季，正月，丙子朔，出现日食。
English: In the spring of the third year of Xianning, the New Year, the Year of the Rooster, and a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：立皇子裕为始平王；庚寅，裕卒。
现代文：晋朝立皇子司马裕为始平王；庚寅，司马裕去世。
English: Sima Yu, the prince of the Jin Dynasty, was installed as the first king of the Heian period; in the Heian period, Sima Yu died.

古文：三月，平虏护军文鸯督凉、秦、雍州诸军讨树机能，破之，诸胡二十万口来降。
现代文：三月，平虏护军文鸯，统领凉州、秦州、雍州各军征讨发树机能，将其打败，胡人各部落共二十万人归降晋。
English: In March, Wen Xuan, commander of the Pingru Garrison, led the armies of Liangzhou, Qinzhou, and Yongzhou to investigate the function of the hair tree, and defeated it. A total of 200,000 people from all Hu tribes returned to Jin.

古文：夏，五月，吴将邵顗、夏祥帅众七千馀人来降。
现代文：夏季，五月，吴将邵、夏祥郭领部众七千余人投降了晋。
English: In the summer, in May, more than seven thousand people from Wu Zhaoshao and Xia Xiangguo surrendered to Jin.

古文：秋，七月，中山王睦坐招诱逋亡，贬为丹水县侯。
现代文：秋季，七月，中山王司马睦因为招募逃亡的罪犯而获罪，被贬为丹水县侯。
English: In the autumn, in July, the King of Zhongshan, Sima Mutu, was found guilty of recruiting fugitive criminals, and was demoted to the position of Marquis of Danshui County.

古文：有星孛于紫宫。
现代文：异星出现于紫宫星座。
English: Order the special advance to wear fish charms.

古文：卫将军杨珧等建议，以为： 古者封建诸候，所以籓卫王室；今诸王公皆在京师，非扞城之义。
现代文：卫将军杨珧等人建议，认为： 古时候分封诸侯，是为了藩屏护卫王室；现在诸位王公都在京都，这就失去了保卫的意义。
English: Yang Xuan, the general of the imperial guard, and others suggested that: In ancient times, the division of the feudal lords was for the protection of the royal family; now all the princes are in Kyoto, which has lost the meaning of protection.

古文：又，异姓诸将居边，宜参以亲戚。 
现代文：另外，异姓诸将领居住在国家边境地区时，应当让皇室的亲戚参与其中。 
English: In addition, when generals with different surnames live in the national border areas, the relatives of the royal family should be involved.

古文：帝乃诏诸王各以户邑多少为三等，大国置三军五千人，次国二军三千人，小国一军一千一百人；诸王为都督者，各徙其国使相近。
现代文：晋武帝于是下诏书，诸会根据所食户邑的多少被分为三等，大国设置三军共五千人，次国设二军共三千人，小国设一军一千一百人。诸王中任都督的，各自迁往封国使他们靠近任所。
English: Emperor Jinwu then issued an edict, according to which the communities were divided into three classes according to the number of households in which they were located. The big country set up three armies with a total of five thousand people, the second country set up two armies with a total of three thousand people, and the small country set up one army with eleven hundred people. The governors of the kings moved to the fiefs to be closer to their offices.

古文：八月，癸亥，徙扶风王亮为汝南王，出为镇南大将军，都督豫州诸军事；琅邪王伦为赵王，督鄴城守事；勃海王辅为太原王，监并州诸军事；以东莞王亻由在徐州，徙封琅邪王；汝阴王骏在关中，徙封扶风王；又徙太原王颙为河间王，汝南王柬为南阳王。
现代文：八月，癸亥，扶风王司马亮为汝南王，出任镇南大将军，总领豫州军事。迁琅邪王司马伦为赵王，督率邺城的防守事务，迁勃海王司马在徐州，被迁封为琅邪王；汝阴王司马骏在关中，被迁封为扶风王；又迁徒太原王司马为河间王；汝南王司马柬为南阳王。
English: In August, King Sima Liang of Fu Feng was appointed as the King of the South of the Yunnan Province, and served as the General of the South of the Zhen and the Commander-in-Chief of the Military of the Yuzhou Province. King Sima Lun of the Yunnan Province was appointed as the King of the Zhao Province and led the defense affairs of the Yunnan Province. King Sima of the Bohai Province was appointed as the King of the South of the Yunnan Province; King Sima Yi of the Guanzhong Province was appointed as the King of Fu Feng; King Sima of the Taiyuan Province was appointed as the King of the Hebe

古文：辅，孚之子；颙，孚之孙也。
现代文：司马辅是司马孚的儿子，司马是司马孚的孙子。
English: Sima Fu is the son of Sima Fu, Sima is the grandson of Sima Fu.

古文：其无官者，皆遣就国。
现代文：诸王中不担任官职的，都把他们遣返回各自的封国。
English: All the kings who did not hold public office sent them back to their respective fiefdoms.

古文：诸王公恋京师，皆涕泣而去。
现代文：各位王公留恋京都，一个一个都流着眼泪走子。
English: All the princes fell in love with Kyoto, and one by one they left in tears.

古文：又封皇子玮为始平王，允为濮阳王，该为新都王，遐为清河王。
现代文：晋朝又封皇子司马玮为始平王，封司马允为濮阳王，司马该为新都王，司马遐为清河王
English: The Jin Dynasty also made the prince Sima Qian the king of Shihping, Sima Yun the king of Shiyang, Sima Gao the king of Xindu, and Sima Qian the king of Qinghe

古文：其异姓之臣有大功者，皆封郡公、郡侯。
现代文：异姓大臣中有立过大功的，都被封为郡公或郡侯。
English: Among the ministers with different surnames, those who have made great contributions have all been made county dukes or county lords.

古文：封贾充为鲁郡公，追封王沈为博陵郡公。
现代文：贾充被封为重郡公。王沈被追封为博陵郡公。
English: Jia Chong was named the governor of Chong County. Wang Shen was posthumously named the governor of Boling County.

古文：徙封巨平侯羊祜为南城郡侯，祜固辞不受。
现代文：钜平侯羊祜被徙封为南城郡侯。羊祜坚持推辞不接受。
English: Quping marquis Yang Qi was transferred to be the marquis of Nancheng County. Yang Qi insisted that he would not accept the resignation.

古文：祜每拜官爵，常多避让，至心素著，故特见申于分列之外。
现代文：羊祜每当被授予官职和爵位时，经常避让，他的至诚之心一贯有名，所以他被特别许可不接受分封他的官爵。
English: Whenever he was given an official post and a peerage, he often avoided it, and his sincerity was always famous, so he was given special permission not to accept his peerage.

古文：祜历事二世，职典枢要，凡谋议损益，皆焚其草，世莫得闻，所进达之人皆不知所由。
现代文：羊祜经历了两代帝王，他一直掌管关键重要的部门。凡是他参与谋划商议的事情，不管是设置或简省，他都把草稿烧掉，使世人不能知道。由羊祜荐举而作了官的人，自己都不知道是谁推荐的。
English: Wang Qian has experienced two generations of emperors, and he has always been in charge of the most important departments. Whenever he was involved in planning and discussion, whether it was setting up or simplifying, he burned the draft so that the world could not know. People who were recommended by Wang Qian and became officials did not know who recommended them.

古文：常曰： 拜官公朝，谢恩私门，吾所不敢也。 
现代文：羊祜常常说： 在公众的朝廷里授予官职，但是却让别人向你个人谢恩，这样的事情是我所不敢作的。 
English: "I would not dare to do such a thing as to confer an official position in the public court, but to have others thank you personally," the shepherd often said.

古文：兗、豫、徐、青、荆、益、梁七州大水。
现代文：兖、豫、徐、青、荆、益、梁七州洪水泛滥。
English: Flooding occurred in seven prefectures: Min, Yu, Xu, Qing, Jing, Yi and Liang.

古文：冬，十二月，吴夏口督孙慎入江夏、汝南，略千馀家而去。
现代文：冬季，十二月，吴国夏口督孙慎进犯江夏、汝南，抢动了一千多家然后离去。
English: In the winter, in December, Sun Shenjin, the governor of Xiakou, Wu, invaded Jiangxia and Runan, robbed more than a thousand people and then left.

古文：诏遣侍臣诘羊祜不追讨之意，并欲移荆州。
现代文：晋武帝下诏，派身边的大臣责问羊祜，不追击讨伐孙慎是什么意思；晋武帝还打算迁徙荆州。
English: Emperor Jinwu issued an edict and sent his ministers around to ask Yang Jie what he meant by not pursuing Sun Shen; Emperor Jinwu also planned to move to Jingzhou.

古文：祜曰： 江夏去襄阳八百里，比知贼问，贼已去经日，步军安能追之！
现代文：羊祜说： 江夏距离襄阳有八百里，等知道了贼人的消息，贼人已经离开几天了，步兵如何能追上他们？
English: The shepherd said, "Jiangxia is 800 miles away from Xiangyang. Once the news of the bandits is known, the bandits have already left for a few days. How can the infantry catch up with them?"

古文：劳师以免责，非臣志也。
现代文：为了使自己免遭责备，就让部队受苦受累，这不是我的愿望。
English: It is not my wish to make the troops suffer in order to save myself from blame.

古文：昔魏武帝置都督，类皆与州相近，以兵势好合恶离故也。
现代文：从前，魏武帝设置都督，大抵都州相接近，就是因为喜欢力集中而厌恶兵力分散的缘故。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Wu of Wei set up the capital, usually close to the capital city, because he liked the concentration of forces and disliked the dispersion of forces.

古文：疆场之间，一彼一此，慎守而已。
现代文：战场上的事情，一彼一此，只是要谨慎防守而已。
English: Things on the battlefield, one after another, just have to be carefully defended.

古文：若辄徙州，贼出无常，亦未知州之所宜据也。 
现代文：如果总是迁州，贼人出没无常，也不知把州设在哪里才便于据守。 
English: If the prefectural government is moved frequently, the presence of enemy soldiers is uncertain, and it is not known where the prefectural government should be located.

古文：是岁，大司马陈骞自扬州入朝，以高平公罢。
现代文：这一年，大司马陈骞从杨州入朝廷，以高平公的身份免职。
English: In the same year, Grand Master Ma Chenjun entered the imperial court from Yangzhou and was dismissed from his post as Prince Gao Pingguo.

古文：吴主以会稽张俶多所谮白，甚见宠任，累迁司直中郎将，封侯。
现代文：会稽人张俶经常在吴主面前搬弄口舌，诬陷别人，因而深受吴主宠爱信任，被多次升迁，任司直中郎将，还被封为侯。
English: Zhang Ye, the auditor of the association, often played tricks in front of the Lord of Wu and framed others. As a result, he was deeply loved and trusted by the Lord of Wu, and was promoted many times. He was appointed to the position of Vice Admiral, and was also given the title of marquis.

古文：其父为山阴县卒，知俶不良，上表曰： 若用俶为司直，有罪，乞不从坐。 
现代文：张的父亲在山阴县当差，知道张不是善良之辈，就上表说： 如果任用张为司直，我请求，他犯了罪不要牵连到我。 
English: Zhang's father was on duty in Shanyin County. Knowing that Zhang was not a kind person, he wrote on the form: "If Zhang is appointed as a magistrate, I request that he not implicate me in his crime.

古文：吴主许之。
现代文：吴主答应了他。
English: Lord Wu agreed to his request.

古文：俶表置弹曲二十人，专纠司不法，于是吏民各以爱憎互相告讦，狱犴盈溢，上下嚣然。
现代文：张上表，设置弹曲二十人，专门负责举报检查种种不法行为。于是官吏百姓各自凭自己的好恶互相告发检举，一时间监狱里人满为患，上上下下，人人惶恐不安。
English: A watch was put up, and twenty people were assigned to play music, and they were specifically responsible for reporting and checking all kinds of illegal acts. As a result, officials and citizens each reported to each other according to their own likes and dislikes. For a while, the prison was overcrowded, up and down, and everyone was frightened and uneasy.

古文：俶大为奸利，骄奢暴横，事发，父子皆车裂。
现代文：而张却借机为自己在谋私利，骄奢专横。后来张的罪恶暴露出来，父亲儿子都曹车袭的酷刑。
English: However, Zhang took the opportunity to seek personal gain and was arrogant and domineering. Later, Zhang's crimes were exposed, and both father and son were tortured by Cao Che.

古文：卫瓘遣拓跋沙漠汗归国。
现代文：卫送拓跋沙漠汗回国。
English: Wei sent Tuoba desert sweat back to China.

古文：自沙漠汗入质，力微可汗诸子在侧者多有宠。
现代文：自从沙漠汗入中原作人质，拓跋力微可汗身边的儿子们大多受到力微可汗的宠爱。
English: Ever since he became a hostage in the middle of the desert, most of the sons around Tuoba Liwei Khan have been favored by Liwei Khan.

古文：及沙漠汗归，诸部大人共谮而杀之。
现代文：沙漠汗回国以后，各部落的首领一起诬陷并且杀了他。
English: After Desert Khan returned to his country, the leaders of all the tribes conspired to frame and kill him.

古文：既而力微疾笃，乌桓王库贤亲近用事，受卫瓘赂，欲扰动诸部，乃砺斧于庭，谓诸大人曰： 可汗恨汝曹谗杀太子，欲尽收汝曹长子杀之。 诸大人惧，皆散走。
现代文：不久，拓跋力微可汗病倒了，病势沉重。乌桓王库贤由于与力微可汗亲近而当权，他受了卫的随赂，想把各部落搅乱。于是他在朝堂上磨斧子，对各部落首领说： 可汗恨你们进谗言杀了太子，要把你们的长子都抓起来杀了。 部落首领们害怕，都四散逃跑。
English: Soon, Tuoba Liwei Khan fell ill and was in a serious condition. Wuhuan King Ku Xian, who came to power due to his closeness to Liwei Khan, was bribed by the guards and wanted to stir up the tribes. So he sharpened an axe in the imperial hall and said to the tribal leaders: "Khan hates you for saying that you killed the crown prince and wants to capture and kill your firstborn sons. The tribal leaders were afraid and fled in all directions.

古文：力微以忧卒，时年一百四。
现代文：力微可汗由于忧虑而去世，死时年龄一百零四岁。
English: Fearing for his life, the weak khan died at the age of 104.

古文：子悉禄立，其国遂衰。
现代文：他的儿子拓跋悉禄继位。鲜卑国从此就衰落了。
English: His son, Tuoba Siroku, succeeded him, and the Xianbei state fell into decline.

古文：初，幽、并二州皆与鲜卑接，东有务桓，西有力微，多为边患。
现代文：当初，幽州并州都和鲜卑接壤，东边有务桓，西边有力微，经常成为边境地区的祸患。
English: At the beginning, Yuzhou and Xianbei were adjacent to each other. The east side was busy and the west side was weak, which often became a scourge in the border areas.

古文：卫瓘密以计间之，务桓降而力微死。
现代文：后来，卫秘密地用计谋离间鲜卑各部，结果务桓投降晋国而力微死去。
English: Later, Wei secretly used stratagems to separate the new and inferior parts, and as a result, he surrendered to Jin and died.

古文：朝廷嘉瓘功，封其弟为亭侯。
现代文：朝廷表彰卫的功勋，封卫的弟弟为亭侯。
English: The imperial court commended Wei's merits, and Fong Wei's younger brother became the prince.

古文：世祖武皇帝上之下咸宁四年春，正月，庚午朔，日有食之。
现代文：咸宁四年春季，正月，庚午，出现日食。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of Xianning, the solar eclipse occurred in the first month of the year and in the second half of the year.

古文：司马督东平马隆上言： 凉州刺史杨欣失羌戎之和，必败。 
现代文：司马督东平人马隆上书说： 凉州刺史杨欣丧失了与羌戎之间的和睦关系，他必然要失败。 
English: Sima Du Dongping's Malong said in a letter: Yang Xin, the governor of Liangzhou, has lost the harmonious relationship with Qiong Rong, and he is bound to fail.

古文：夏，六月，欣与树机能之党若罗拔能等战于武威，败死。
现代文：夏季，六月，杨欣与秃发树机能的党羽若罗拔能等人在武威作战，兵败身死。
English: In the summer, in June, Yang Xin and his followers, including the bald-headed tree-functioning party member Ruo Ba Neng, fought in Wuwei, and the soldiers were defeated and killed.

古文：弘训皇后羊氏殂。
现代文：弘训皇后羊氏去世。
English: The Empress Yang of Hongxun passed away.

古文：羊祜以病求入朝，既至，帝命乘辇入殿，不拜而坐。
现代文：羊祜因病请求入朝见晋武帝。到了朝廷，晋武帝让他乘着车子上殿，不行拜礼坐下。
English: Due to his illness, Yang Hui requested to see Emperor Jinwu. When he arrived at the court, Emperor Jinwu let him go to the palace in a carriage, but he could not sit down for the prayer.

古文：祜面陈伐吴之计，帝善之。
现代文：羊祜向晋武帝当面陈述伐吴的计划，晋武帝非常赞赏。
English: Yangsheng told Emperor Jinwu about the plan to attack Wu in person, and Emperor Jinwu highly appreciated it.

古文：以祜病，不宜数入，更遣张华就问筹策。
现代文：因为羊祜有病，不便一次一次地面见晋武帝，晋武帝便派张华去羊祜那里询问伐吴的谋划。
English: Because the shepherd was ill, it was inconvenient to see Emperor Jinwu on the ground time after time, so Emperor Jinwu sent Zhang Hua to the shepherd to inquire about the plan of felling Wu.

古文：祜曰： 孙皓暴虐已甚，于今可不战而克。
现代文：羊祜说： 孙凶暴残酷已经到了极点，如果现在行动，可以不战而取胜。
English: The sheep said, "Sun's ferocity and cruelty have reached their peak. If we act now, we can win without a fight."

古文：若皓不幸而没，吴人更立令主，虽有百万之众，长江未可窥也，将为后患矣！ 
现代文：假如孙不幸而死去，吴人再立一个贤明的君主，那么我们虽然有百万之众，长江也不是我们可以窥伺的了，这样就将成为后患！ 
English: If Sun were to die tragically and the Wu people were to reinstate a wise monarch, then even though there are millions of us, we would not be able to spy on the Yangtze River, and that would be a hindrance!

古文：华深然之。
现代文：张华非常赞同他的话。
English: Zhang Hua very much agrees with his words.

古文：祜曰： 成吾志者，子也。 
现代文：羊祜说： 成就我的志向的人，就是你。 
English: The shepherd said, "You are the one who will fulfill my desire."

古文：帝欲使祜卧护诸将，祜曰： 取吴不必臣行，但既平之后，当劳圣虑耳。
现代文：晋武帝想让羊祜卧病在车上总领各位将领，羊祜说： 夺取吴国我不一定要去，但是等平吴之后，就要劳累您圣明的思虑了。
English: Emperor Jinwu wanted Guo Gan to lie sick in the car. General leaders, Guo Gan said, "I don't have to go to conquer Wu, but after defeating Wu, I will have to wear out your sacred thoughts."

古文：功名之际，臣不敢居。若事了，当有所付授，愿审择其人也。 
现代文：我不敢居于功绩与名声之间，但是如果事情结束，应当委派官员去东南地区镇抚时，希望您慎重地选择合适的人选。 
English: I dare not stand between merit and fame, but if the matter is over, I hope you will carefully choose the right person when appointing officials to pacify the southeast region.

古文：秋，七月，己丑，葬景献皇后于峻平陵。
现代文：秋季，七月，已丑，晋朝在峻平陵埋葬了景献皇后。
English: Autumn, July, already ugly, the Jin Dynasty buried the Empress Jingxian in the Jianping Mausoleum.

古文：司、冀、兗、豫、荆、扬州大水，螟伤稼。
现代文：晋武帝下诏书询问主管人说： 用什么来帮助老百姓呢？ 
English: Emperor Jinwu issued an edict and asked the person in charge: "What should we use to help the people?"

古文：诏问主者： 何以佐百姓？ 
现代文：度支尚书杜预上疏认为： 当前的水灾，以东南地区尤其严重。
English: Doushi Shangshu Du Yuanzhong thought: The current flood disaster is particularly serious in the southeastern region.

古文：度支尚书杜预上疏，以为： 今者水灾，东南尤剧，宜敕兗、豫等诸州留汉氏旧陂，缮以蓄水外，馀皆决沥，令饥者尽得鱼菜螺蜯之饶，此目下日给之益也。水去之后，填淤之田，亩收数钟，此又明年之益也。
现代文：应当告诫兖、豫等各州，修理汉代遗留下来的池塘，用来蓄水，把多余的水引走。这样，饥饿的百姓就可以得到丰足的螺蚌鱼菜充饥，这是眼前就能得益的每日的供给。等到大水退了以后，淤泥的田地，每亩能收获几种粮食，这又是明年就能得到的好处。
English: It is necessary to admonish the provinces such as Handan and Henan to repair the stagnant ponds left over from the Han Dynasty and use them to store water and divert excess water. In this way, the hungry people can get plenty of snail fish and vegetables to satisfy their hunger, which is a daily supply that can be immediately benefited. When the flood waters recede, the muddy fields can harvest several kinds of grain per mu, which is another benefit that can be obtained next year.

古文：典牧种牛有四万五千馀头，不供耕驾，至有老不穿鼻者，可分以给民，使及春耕；谷登之后，责其租税，此又数年以后之益也。 
现代文：另外，朝廷的典牧官有四万五千多头种牛，这些牛不耕田，不驾车，甚至有的牛到老鼻也不穿绳。可以把这些牛分给百姓使用，让这些牛赶上春天的耕种，等到粮食丰收以后，再向老百姓索取租税，这又是几年以后可以得到的好处。 
English: In addition, the imperial court's herdsmen have more than 45,000 head of breeding cattle. These cattle do not farm, do not drive, and even some cattle do not wear ropes up to their nostrils. These cattle can be used by the people, so that these cattle can catch up with spring farming, and wait until after the grain harvest to collect taxes from the people, which is another benefit that can be obtained after a few years.

古文：帝从之，民赖其利。
现代文：晋武帝采纳了杜预的意见，老百姓以此得到了利益。
English: Emperor Jinwu adopted Du Yu's suggestion, and the common people benefited from it.

古文：预在尚书七年，损益庶政，不可胜数，时人谓之 杜武库 ，言其无所不有也。
现代文：杜预任尚书七年，经他斟酌修正的种政务数不胜数，当时的人称他为 杜武库 ，意思是说他富有才干，像一个储藏武器的仓库，无所不有。
English: In the seven years since the appointment of Du Yuanshu, there have been countless government affairs that have been revised at his discretion. At that time, people called him Du Wu Ku, meaning that he was rich in talent, like a warehouse for storing weapons, everything.

古文：九月，以何曾为太宰；辛巳，以侍中、尚书令李胤为司徒。
现代文：九月，晋朝任命何曾为太审。辛巳，任命侍中、尚书令李胤为司徒。
English: In September, the Jin Dynasty appointed He Zeng as the grand judge, and Xin Si, a chamberlain, and Shang Shuling Li Yin as the magistrate.

古文：吴主忌胜己者，侍中、中书令张尚，纮之孙也，为人辩捷，谈论每出其表，吴主积以致恨。
现代文：吴主嫉妒比他强的人。侍中、中书令张尚，是张绂的孙子。张尚能言善辩有口才，谈论起来往往出人意外，吴主天长日久积下了圣他的憎恨。
English: The Lord of Wu was jealous of those who were stronger than him. Zhang Shang, a chamberlain and the second-in-command, was the grandson of Zhang Ye. Zhang Shang was an eloquent and eloquent man, and his conversations were often surprising. The Lord of Wu had accumulated his holy hatred for a long time.

古文：后问： 孤饮酒可以方谁？ 
现代文：后来有一次吴主问张尚： 我喝酒可以和谁相比？ 
English: Later, Wu Shuzhong once asked Zhang Shang: Who can I drink with?

古文：尚曰： 陛下有百觚之量。 
现代文：张尚回答说： 陛下有能饮百觚的酒量。 
English: Zhang Shang replied, "Your Majesty has enough wine to drink a hundred gourds.

古文：吴主曰： 尚知孔丘不王，而以孤方之。 
现代文：吴主说： 张尚明明知道孔丘没有作君主，他还要拿我和孔丘相比。 
English: Lord Wu said: Zhang Shang clearly knew that Confucius was not a monarch, and he wanted to compare me to Confucius.

古文：因发怒，收尚。
现代文：因为古谚有： 尧饮千钟，孔子百觚 之说，于是勃然大怒，把张尚抓了起来。
English: Because there is an ancient proverb: "Drink a thousand bells, Confucius a hundred cymbals," he flew into a rage and arrested Zhang Shang.

古文：公卿已下百馀人，诣宫叩头，请尚罪，得减死，送建安作船，寻就杀之。
现代文：公卿取下的官吏一百多人，到宫里去叩头，替张尚请罪，张尚这才得以减罪免死，被送到建安去造船。但不久吴主就把他杀了。
English: More than a hundred officials, who had been removed by the court noble, went to the palace to prostrate themselves and plead guilty on behalf of Zhang Shang. Only then was Zhang Shang's sentence commuted and he was spared death and sent to Jian'an to build a ship. However, the lord of Wu soon killed him.

古文：冬，十月，征征北大将军卫瓘为尚书令。
现代文：冬季十月，晋朝征召北大将军卫任尚书令。
English: In the winter of October, the Jin dynasty issued a written order to conscript General Wei Ren Shang.

古文：是时，朝野咸知太子昏愚，不堪为嗣，瓘每欲陈启而未敢发。
现代文：当时，朝廷上下都知道太子糊涂愚蠢，不能负起王位继承人的重任。
English: At that time, everyone in the imperial court knew that the crown prince was confused and stupid and could not shoulder the heavy responsibility of being the heir to the throne.

古文：会侍宴陵云台，瓘阳醉，跪帝床前曰： 臣欲有所启。 帝曰： 公所言何邪？ 
现代文：卫每次想向晋武帝陈说这件事都没敢开口。后来，有一次陪晋武帝在陵云台宴饮，卫假装醉了酒，跪在晋武帝的床前说： 我有事情要向您启奏。 晋武帝说： 你要说什么？ 
English: Every time Wei wanted to tell Emperor Jinwu about this matter, he did not dare to speak. Later, once when he was dining with Emperor Jinwu at Lingyuntai, Wei pretended to be drunk and knelt in front of Emperor Jinwu's bed and said, "I have something to tell you." Emperor Jinwu said, "What do you want to say?"

古文：瓘欲言而止者三，因以手抚床曰： 此座可惜！ 
现代文：卫欲言又止一共三次，趁势用手抚摸着床说： 这个座位可惜了。 
English: Wei Can tried to speak three times and stopped, so he stroked the bed with his hand and said, "This seat is a pity!

古文：帝意悟，因谬曰： 公真大醉邪？ 
现代文：晋武帝明白了他的意思，也顺着他说道： 你真是大醉了。 
English: Emperor Jinwu understood what he meant and said, "You are really drunk."

古文：瓘于此不复有言。
现代文：从这以后，卫对这件事不再提起。
English: The right to defend oneself is no longer mentioned.

古文：帝悉召东宫官属，为设宴会，而密封尚书疑事，令太子决之。
现代文：晋武帝把东宫的官吏都召集到一起，为他们设宴，他把尚书决定不下来的事情密封起来，让太子决断应如何处理。
English: Emperor Jinwu called all the officials of the East Palace together and held a banquet for them. He sealed the matter that Shang Shu could not decide, and let the prince decide how to deal with it.

古文：贾妃大惧，倩外人代对，多引古义。
现代文：贾妃听到这个消息非常恐惧，就借助外人代替太子回答问题，引用了很多古义。
English: Jiafei was very frightened when she heard this news, so she used an outsider to answer questions on the prince's behalf, quoting many ancient sayings.

古文：给使张泓曰： 太子不学，陛下所知，而答诏多引古义，必责作草主，更益谴负，不如直以意对。 
现代文：给使张泓说： 太子不学，这是陛下所了解的，但是答题引用许多古义，这必然会引起陛下对起草人的责问，反而更增加了太子的过错与不足，倒不如直以意思来回答问题。 
English: Zhang Ye, the messenger, said, "The prince does not study, which is something His Majesty understands, but the answer cites many ancient teachings, which will inevitably cause His Majesty to criticize the drafter. On the contrary, it has increased the prince's faults and shortcomings. It would be better to answer the question directly.

古文：妃大喜，谓泓曰： 便为我好答，富贵与汝共之。 
现代文：贾妃听了非常高兴，对张泓说： 你这就给我好好地答题，我和你共享富贵。 
English: Jiafei was very happy to hear this and said to Zhang Ye: You just gave me a good answer to the question, I share my wealth with you.

古文：泓即具草令太子自写。
现代文：张泓立即动手准备草稿，让太子亲笔抄录下来，晋武帝了之后非常高兴。
English: Zhang Ye immediately began to prepare a draft and asked the prince to transcribe it in his own handwriting. He was very happy after he became emperor.

古文：帝省之，甚悦，先以示瓘，瓘大踧踖，众人乃知瓘尝有言也。贾充密遣人语妃云： 卫瓘老奴，几破汝家！ 
现代文：先拿给卫看，卫局促不安，众人于是知道了卫曾经说过太子的话。贾充秘密派人对贾妃说： 卫这个老奴才，差点破了你的家。
English: He showed it to Wei first, which made the guards uneasy, and then everyone knew that Wei had said the prince's words. Jia Chong secretly sent someone to Jia Fei to say: Wei, this old slave, almost broke your home.

古文：吴人大佃皖城，欲谋入寇。
现代文：吴人在皖城大规模地屯田，想图谋进犯。
English: The Wu people built large-scale military camps in Lucheng in an attempt to invade.

古文：都督扬州诸军事王浑遣扬州刺史应绰攻破之，斩首五千级，焚其积谷百八十馀万斛，践稻田四千馀顷，毁船六百馀艘。
现代文：都督扬州诸军事王浑，派遣扬刺史应绰去攻打皖城，打败了吴军。斩首五千级，焚烧储备的粮食一百八十余万斛，践踏了稻田四千多顷，毁坏船只六百余艘。
English: Wang Hun, the military governor of Yangzhou, dispatched Yang Zhi Shi Ying Piao to attack Shicheng, defeating the Wu army. He beheaded five thousand, burned more than one hundred and eighty million mu of grain reserves, trampled more than four thousand hectares of rice fields, and destroyed more than six hundred ships.

古文：十一月，辛巳，太医司马程据献雉头裘，帝焚之于殿前。
现代文：十一月，辛巳，太医司马程据，献上用雉适合鸡头上的羽毛制成的裘衣，晋武帝在殿前把这件羽毛衣焚烧了。
English: In November, Emperor Jinwu burned a feather coat made of feathers from a chicken's head, which was presented to him by the imperial physician, Sima Cheng.

古文：甲申。敕内外敢有献奇技异服者，罪之。
现代文：甲申，晋武帝告诫朝廷内外，如果有敢于献上奇特的技艺或者怪异的服装的，就判他的罪。
English: In Jiaxing, Emperor Jinwu admonished both inside and outside the court that if anyone dared to present strange skills or strange clothing, he would be found guilty.

古文：羊祜疾笃，举杜预自代。
现代文：羊祜病重，荐举杜预代替他。
English: Yang Jie is seriously ill, recommending Du Yu to replace him.

古文：辛卯，以预为镇南大将军、都督荆州诸军事。
现代文：辛卯，任命杜预为镇南大将军、都督荆州诸军事。
English: Xinwu appointed Du Yu as the general of Zhenan and the military governor of Jingzhou.

古文：祜卒，帝哭之甚哀。
现代文：羊祜去世，晋武帝哭得特别哀伤。
English: Emperor Jinwu was particularly saddened by the death of Yang Hui.

古文：是日，大寒，涕泪沾须鬓皆为冰。
现代文：那天天气很冷，晋武帝流下的眼泪沾在胡须和鬓发上，立刻成了冰。
English: The weather was very cold that day. The tears shed by Emperor Jinwu stained his beard and hair and immediately turned into ice.

古文：祜遗令不得以南城侯印入柩。
现代文：羊祜留下遗言，不让把南城侯印放入棺木。
English: He left his last words, not allowing Nancheng Houyin to be put into the coffin.

古文：帝曰： 祜固让历年，身没让存，今听复本封，以彰高美。 
现代文：晋武帝说： 羊祜坚持谦让已经有很多年了，现在人死了而谦让的美德还在。如今就按他的意思办，恢复他原来的封号，以彰明他高尚的美德。 
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "It has been many years since Yang Hui insisted on modesty, and now that he is dead, the virtue of modesty is still alive. Now, I will do as he wants and restore his original seal to highlight his noble virtue."

古文：南州民闻祜卒，为之罢市，巷哭声相接。
现代文：荆州的百姓们听到羊祜去世的消息，为他罢市，在里巷里聚在一起哭泣，哭声接连不绝。
English: When the people of Jingzhou heard the news of Yang Qi's death, they went on strike for him and gathered together in the alleys to cry. The cries were incessant.

古文：吴守边将士亦为之泣。
现代文：就连吴国守卫边境的将士们也为羊祜的死而流泪。
English: The soldiers guarding the border of Wu also cried for him.

古文：祜好游岘山，襄阳人建碑立庙于其地，岁时祭祀，望其碑者无不流涕，因谓之堕泪碑。
现代文：羊祜喜欢游岘山，襄阳的百姓们谅在岘山上建庙立碑，一年四季祭祀。望着这座碑的人没有不落泪的，所以人们称这座碑为堕泪碑。
English: Sheep and donkeys like to travel on Lushan Mountain. The people of Yangyang have allowed a temple and monument to be built on Lushan Mountain, and there are sacrifices all year round. There is no one who does not shed tears when looking at this monument, so people call this monument the Fallen Tears Monument.

古文：杜预至镇，简精锐，袭吴西陵督张政，大破之。
现代文：杜预到任后，他挑选精兵，袭击吴国西陵督张政，使吴兵大败。
English: After Du Yu arrived at his post, he selected elite soldiers and attacked Zhang Zheng, the governor of the Western Necropolis of Wu, resulting in a crushing defeat for the Wu soldiers.

古文：政，吴之名将也，耻以无备取败，不以实告吴主。
现代文：张政是吴的名将，他因为没有防备而打了败仗，感到羞耻，所以没有把实情告诉吴主。
English: Zhang Zheng was a famous general in Wu. He was ashamed of losing the battle because he was unprepared, so he did not tell the truth to the Lord of Wu.

古文：预欲间之，乃表还其所获。
现代文：杜预想使离间计，于是公开地把战斗中的缴获都学给了吴国。
English: Du premeditated to sow discord, so he openly taught Wu about his conquests in battle.

古文：吴主果召政还，遣武昌监留宪代之。
现代文：吴主果然召回了张政，派武昌监留宪代替张政。
English: The Lord of Wu indeed recalled Zhang Zheng and sent Wuchang to stay in custody to replace Zhang Zheng.

古文：十二月，丁未，朗陵公何曾卒。
现代文：十二月丁未，晋朗陵公何曾去世。
English: In December Ding Wei, Jin Lang Ling Gong He Zeng passed away.

古文：曾厚自奉养，过于人主。
现代文：何曾自己生活豪华奢侈，超过了君主。
English: He had lived a life of luxury beyond that of a monarch.

古文：司隶校尉东莱刘毅数劾奏曾侈汰无度，帝以其重臣，不问。
现代文：司隶校尉、东莱人刘毅，多次揭发检举何曾奢侈无度，晋武帝因为何曾是身居要职的大臣，所以不去过问。
English: Liu Yi, a Donglai native and the school's captain, repeatedly exposed and reported the extravagance of the Emperor Jinwu, who did not want to be questioned because he had been a minister in an important position.

古文：及卒，博士新兴秦秀议曰： 曾骄奢过度，名被九域。
现代文：何曾死后，博士、新兴人秦季议论说： 何曾骄奢过度，名声传遍了九州。
English: After He Zeng's death, Qin Qi, a doctor and up-and-comer, commented: He Zeng was arrogant and extravagant, and his reputation spread all over Kyushu.

古文：宰相大臣，人之表仪，若生极其情，死又无贬，王公贵人复何畏哉！
现代文：宰相大臣是作人的表率，如果活着的时候随心所欲，死了以后又不受贬抑，那么王公贵人还怕什么呢？
English: The Prime Minister is a role model. If he can do as he pleases when he is alive and is not demeaned after his death, then what is the prince afraid of?

古文：谨按《谥法》， 名与实爽曰缪，怙乱肆行曰丑 ，宜谥缪丑公。 
现代文：我恭敬地根据《谥法》所说 名与实在差失叫作缪；乘乱取利、肆意妄为叫作丑 ，觉得应当为何曾定谥号为缪公。 
English: I respectfully based on the "Law of the Dragonfly" said that the name and the reality are different, and it is called "Miyu"; taking advantage of the chaos and taking advantage of the chaos and taking advantage of the chaos are called "ugly"; I feel that why should I have set the name of the dragonfly as "Miyu."

古文：帝策谥曰孝。
现代文：晋武帝没有采纳秦秀的建议，下令赐何曾谥号为孝。
English: Emperor Jinmu did not accept Qin Xiu's suggestion and ordered that He Zengyu be given the title of Xiao.

古文：前司隶校尉傅玄卒。
现代文：前任司隶校尉傅玄去世。
English: The former captain Fu Xuan passed away.

古文：玄性峻急，每有奏劾，或值日暮，捧白简，整簪带，竦踊不寐，坐而待旦。
现代文：傅玄性格严厉急躁，常常向皇帝上奏揭发罪行的文状，有时完正当黄错时分，傅玄也手捧状子，整理好上朝用的簪笔和身上的衣带。由于心绪不宁而无法入睡，他就坐在那里等待天亮。
English: Fu Xuan was a stern and quick-tempered man. He often wrote to the emperor to denounce his crimes. Sometimes, just at the right time, Fu Xuan would also take the letter and tidy up the imperial quill pen and the clothes belt on his body. Unable to sleep because of his restless mood, he sat there waiting for the dawn.

古文：由是贵游震慑，台阁生风。
现代文：因此王公贵族震动恐惧，而政府官署却增添了气势。
English: So princes and nobles tremble in fear, while government agencies gain momentum.

古文：玄与尚书左丞博陵崔洪善，洪亦清厉骨鲠，好面折人过，而退无后言，人以是重之。
现代文：傅玄与尚书左丞、博陵人崔洪友好。崔洪也是清廉严历正直的人，喜好当面斥责别人的过失，但在背后却不议论别人，人们因此而尊重他。
English: Fu Xuan is friendly with Shang Shuzojo and Bo Ling man Cui Hong. Cui Hong is also a clean, strict and honest person. He likes to rebuke others' faults in person, but does not talk about others behind their backs. People respect him for this.

古文：鲜卑树机能久为边患，仆射李憙请发兵讨之，朝议皆以为出兵重事，虏不足忧。
现代文：鲜卑人秃发树机能，长久以来一直是边境地区的祸患。仆射李请求发兵征讨树机能，朝廷议事时，大臣们都认为出兵是重大的事情，而树机能还不值得朝廷忧虑。
English: Baldness has long been a scourge of border regions. When the court was in session, the ministers all thought that sending troops was a serious matter, and that baldness was not worth the court's concern.

古文：世祖武皇帝上之下咸宁五年春，正月，树机能攻陷凉州。帝甚悔之，临朝而叹曰： 谁能为我讨此虏者？ 
现代文：咸宁五年春季，正月，秃发树机能攻陷了凉州。晋武帝异常悔恨，在朝廷上叹道： 有谁能为我征讨此虏？ 
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Xianning, in the first month, the bald-headed tree-creeper captured Liangzhou. Emperor Jinmu was extremely remorseful and lamented at the court: Who can collect this booty for me?

古文：司马督马隆进曰： 陛下能任臣，臣能平之。 
现代文：司马督马隆上前说道： 陛下如能任用我，我能平定树机能。 
English: Chief Magistrate Malong came forward and said: If Your Majesty can appoint me, I can pacify the tree function.

古文：帝曰： 必能平贼，何为不任，顾方略何如耳！ 
现代文：晋武帝说： 你如果一定能平定贼人，我为什么不用你，只是你的计谋策略怎么样？ 
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "If you can surely subdue the bandits, why don't I use you, but what is your strategy?

古文：隆曰： 臣愿募勇士三千人，无问所从来，帅之以西，虏不足平也。 
现代文：马隆说： 我打算招募三千名勇士，不管他们是从哪儿来、从前是干什么的，率领他们向西去，一个树机能都不够我打的。 
English: Malone said: I'm going to recruit three thousand warriors, no matter where they come from or what they used to do, and lead them west.

古文：帝许之。
现代文：晋武帝同意了。
English: Emperor Daowu agreed.

古文：乙丑，以隆为讨虏护军、武威太守。
现代文：乙丑，任命马隆为讨虏护军、武威太守。
English: Second, he appointed Malong as the leader of the anti-hijacking protection force and the military commander.

古文：公卿皆曰： 见兵已多，不宜横设赏募，隆小将妄言，不足信也。 
现代文：官员们都说： 我们目前的兵员就已经很多了，不应当再任意地设立赏格与招募，马隆这个小将不过是胡说，不值得相信他。 
English: The officials all said: We already have a lot of soldiers at present, we should no longer arbitrarily set rewards and recruitment, Malone is just a nonsense, it's not worth believing him.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：晋武帝不听。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：隆募能引弓四钧、挽弩九石者取之，立标简试。自旦至日中，得三千五百人。隆曰： 足矣。 
现代文：马隆招募的标准是，只要能拉开一百二十斤力的弓，能拉开相当于九石力的弩，就录取。他立下标准考试挑选，从早晨到中午，招了三千五百人，马隆说： 足够了。 
English: Malone's criteria for admission was to be able to draw a bow with a force of one hundred and twenty kilos, and to be able to draw a crossbow with a force of nine kilos. He set up a standard exam selection, and from morning to noon, recruited three and a half thousand people. Malone said: Enough is enough.

古文：又请自至武库选仗，武库令与隆忿争，御史中丞劾奏隆。
现代文：又请求亲自到武器库里去挑选兵器，武库令愤怒地和他吵了起来。
English: He also asked to go to the armoury in person to select weapons, and the armourer quarrelled with him angrily.

古文：隆曰： 臣当毕命战场，武库令乃给以魏时朽仗，非陛下所以使臣之意也。 帝命惟隆所取，仍给三年军资而遣之。
现代文：御史中丞向皇帝告发马隆，马隆说： 我将要地战场上尽力效命，武库令却给我魏时的朽烂兵器，这可不是陛下委派我的用心。 晋武帝下令，武器库中的兵器任马隆挑选，仍然供给他三年的军用物资，然后就派他出发。
English: The chief historian reported Malong to the emperor, and Malong said: I will do my best to serve on the battlefield, but the order of the arsenal gave me the rotten weapons of the Wei Dynasty, which is not the intention of His Majesty to appoint me. Emperor Jinwu ordered that the weapons in the arsenal be selected by Malong, still providing him with three years of military supplies, and then sent him on his way.

古文：初，南单于呼厨泉以兄于扶罗子豹为左贤王，及魏武帝分匈奴为五部，以豹为左部帅。
现代文：当初，南单于呼厨泉任命他哥哥於扶罗的儿子刘豹为左贤王。后来魏武帝把匈奴分为五部，任命刘豹为左部帅。
English: At first, Nan Shan Yu Hukouquan appointed Liu Pan, the son of his brother Yu Guro, as the left-hand king. Later, Emperor Weiwu divided the Xiongnu into five parts and appointed Liu Pan as the left-hand commander.

古文：豹子渊，幼而俊异，师事上党崔游，博习经史。
现代文：刘豹的儿子刘渊，年幼却俊秀出众。他拜上党人崔游为师，广博地学习经与史。
English: Liu Pan's son, Liu Yuan, is young but brilliant. He worships the party member Cui You as his teacher and studies the scriptures and history extensively.

古文：尝谓同门生上党硃纪、雁门范隆曰： 吾常耻随、陆无武，绛、灌无文。
现代文：他曾经对与他同门的学生、上党人朱纪和雁门人范隆说： 我常常为随何、陆贾没有武功，绛侯、灌婴没有文才而感到羞愧。
English: He once said to his fellow students, Zhu Ji, a member of the Shang Party, and Fan Long, a member of the Yanmen Party: I often feel ashamed that Zhu He, Lu Jia did not have martial arts skills, and Zhou Hou and Hanying did not have literary talent.

古文：随、陆遇高帝而不能建封侯之业，降、灌遇文帝而不能兴庠序之教，岂不惜哉！ 
现代文：随何、陆贾遇到了汉高帝却不能建立封侯的业绩；绛侯、灌婴遇到了汉文帝动不能振兴文化教育，这难道不可惜吗？ 
English: After all, Lu Jia met with Emperor Han Gao but could not establish the performance of the fief; Zhou Hou and Guan Yu met with Emperor Hanwen and could not revitalize cultural education. Isn't it a pity?

古文：于是兼学武事。
现代文：于是他在习文的同时也兼学武功。
English: As a result, while studying literature, he also studied martial arts.

古文：及长，猿臂善射，膂力过人，姿貌魁伟。
现代文：等他长大了，长臂善于射箭，体力超过常人，身材高大魁梧。
English: When he grows up, his long arms will be good at archery, his physical strength will exceed that of an ordinary person, and he will be tall and burly.

古文：为任子在洛阳，王浑及子济皆重之，屡荐于帝，帝召与语，悦之。
现代文：他因为是人质，所以留在洛阳。王浑与儿子王济都很器重刘渊，多次向晋武帝荐举。
English: Because he was a hostage, he stayed in Luoyang. Wang Hun and his son Wang Ji were very fond of Liu Yuan and recommended him to Emperor Jinwu many times.

古文：济曰： 渊有文武长才，陛下任以东南之事，吴不足平也。 
现代文：晋弄帝就召来刘渊与他交谈，结果非常喜欢他。王济说： 刘渊有文武英才，陛下把东南的事情委任于他，平定吴国都不够他施展的。 
English: Emperor Jinliao summoned Liu Yuan to talk with him, and liked him very much as a result. Wang Ji said: Liu Yuan has great talent in literature and martial arts. His Majesty entrusted him with the affairs of Southeast China, and he was not able to do enough to pacify Wuxi.

古文：孔恂、杨珧曰： 非我族类，其心必异。
现代文：孔恂、杨珧说： 刘渊非我族类，必然与我们不是一条心。
English: Confucius and Yang Xuan said: Liu Yuanlu is not from our tribe, so he is not of the same mind as us.

古文：渊才器诚少比，然不可重任也。 
现代文：刘渊的才能器量确实很少有人能和他相比，但是却不能重用他。 
English: It is true that very few people can match Liu Yuan's talent, but he cannot be reused.

古文：及凉州覆没，帝问将于李憙，对曰： 陛下诚能发匈奴五部之众，假刘渊一将军之号，使将之而西，树机能之首可指日而枭也。 
现代文：后来凉州陷落，晋武帝问李，可以用谁为将去救凉州。李回答说： 陛下如果真能把匈奴五部的人都发动起来，给刘渊一个将军的名号，让他率领匈奴人向西进发，那么树机能的头颅示众就指日可待了。 
English: Later, after the fall of Liangzhou, Emperor Jinwu asked Li who he could use to save Liangzhou. Li replied: "If Your Majesty can really mobilize the five Huns and give Liu Yuan a general's name and let him lead the Huns to the west, then the head of the tree's ability to show the public can wait.

古文：孔恂曰： 渊果枭树机能，则凉州之患方更深耳。 
现代文：孔恂说： 刘渊要是真杀了树机能的头示众，那么凉州的祸患就会更深子。 
English: Confucius said: If Liu Yuan really killed the head of the tree function to show the public, then the calamity of Liangzhou would be more profound.

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：晋武帝于是没有任用刘渊。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：东莱王弥家世二千石，弥有学术勇略，善骑射，青州人谓之 飞豹 。
现代文：东莱人王弥的家世袭二千石俸禄。王弥有学问，勇猛而有谋略。他善于骑射，青州人称他为 飞豹 。
English: The family of Wang Ya, a Donglai man, inherited a stipend of 2,000 koku. Wang Ya is learned, brave and resourceful. He is good at riding and shooting, and the people of Qingzhou call him "Flying Leopard."

古文：然喜任侠，处士陈留董养见而谓之曰： 君好乱乐祸，若天下有事，不作士大夫矣。 
现代文：他喜欢打抱不平。隐士陈留人董养看到他就对他说： 你是一个喜好动乱和灾祸的人，如果天下有乱事，你就连士大夫都不想作了。 
English: When the hermit Chen Liu Ren and Dong Yao saw him, they said to him, "You are a person who likes turmoil and disaster. If there is turmoil in the world, you would not even want to be a shidafu."

古文：渊与弥友善，谓称曰： 王、李以乡曲见知，每相称荐，适足为吾患耳。 
现代文：刘渊和王弥很友好，刘渊对王弥说： 王浑和李因为与我是同乡所以了解我，他们时常向晋武帝荐举我，这却正是我的忧虑。 
English: Liu Yuan and Wang Ya are very friendly. Liu Yuan said to Wang Ya: Wang Hun and Li know me because I am a fellow villager. They often recommend me to Emperor Jinwu, but this is exactly my concern.

古文：因歔欷流涕。
现代文：说着就抽泣流泪了。
English: As she spoke, she began to sob and shed tears.

古文：齐王攸闻之，言于帝曰： 陛下不除刘渊，臣恐并州不得久安。 
现代文：齐王司马攸知道了这件事，他对晋武帝说： 陛下如不除掉刘渊，我恐怕并州不能够长久安宁了。 
English: When King Sima You of Qi learned of this, he said to Emperor Jinwu: "If your majesty does not get rid of Liu Yuan, I am afraid that Bianzhou will not be able to enjoy peace for long."

古文：王浑曰： 大晋方以信怀殊俗，奈何以无形之疑杀人侍子乎？
现代文：王浑说： 大晋正要以信义来安抚异族，为什么要为了无形的怀疑，就要杀了人家入侍皇帝的儿子呢？
English: Wang Hun said, "Dajin was just about to appease the foreigners with his faith and righteousness. Why would he kill someone's son who had entered the emperor's service because of an invisible doubt?

古文：何德度之不弘也！ 帝曰： 浑言是也。 
现代文：为什么恩惠的气度就不能宽宠大量呢？ 晋武帝说： 王浑说得对。 
English: Why can't there be a lot of grace and favor? Emperor Jinwu said: Wang Hun was right.

古文：会豹卒，以渊代为左部帅。
现代文：这时刘豹去世了，刘渊继位作了左部帅。
English: At this time, Liu Pan passed away, and Liu Yuan succeeded him as the left wing commander.

古文：夏，四月，大赦。
现代文：夏季，四月，晋朝大赦天下。
English: In the summer, in April, there is a general amnesty.

古文：除部曲督以下质任。
现代文：晋朝废除部曲督以下官员纳人质的规定。
English: The Jin Dynasty abolished the provision of taking hostages for officials below the rank of Bu Qu Gu.

古文：吴桂林太守修允卒，其部曲应分给诸将。
现代文：吴国桂林太守允去世。允的部曲应当分别归属于各个将领。
English: Guilin Taishou Yun of the State of Wu passed away. Yun's music should be separately attributed to each general.

古文：督将郭马、何典、王族等累世旧军，不乐离别，会吴主料实广州户口，马等因民心不安，聚众攻杀广州督虞授，马自号都督交、广二州诸军事，使典攻苍梧，族攻始兴。
现代文：督将郭马、何典、王族等人几代都在这支军队中，不愿意分离。这时，吴主正在调查、核实广州的户口，郭马等人就乘民心不安的时机，聚众起事，杀子广州督虞授，郭马自己封为都督交、广二州诸军事，派何典去攻打苍梧，派王族去进攻始兴。
English: At this time, the Lord of Wu was investigating and verifying the household registration of Guangzhou. Guo Ma and others took advantage of the opportunity of people's uneasiness and rallied the masses to rise up. They killed the son of Guangzhou Governor Yu Zhu, and Guo Ma himself was appointed as the military governor of Guangzhou and Guanzhou. They sent He Dian to attack Gorgou and sent the royal family to attack Shixing.

古文：秋，八月，吴以军师张悌为丞相，牛渚都督何植为司徒，执金吾滕修为司空。
现代文：秋季，八月，吴国任命军师张悌为丞相，牛渚都督何植为司徒，执金吾滕为司空。
English: In the autumn, in August, the State of Wu appointed the military strategist Zhang Ye as chancellor, the military governor of Niuhu, He Zi, as secretary, and the military governor of Jin, Wu Teng, as secretary.

古文：未拜，更以修为广州牧，帅万人从东道讨郭马。
现代文：还没来得及授官，又任命滕为广州牧，率领一万人从东路去讨伐郭马。
English: Before he could be appointed, he also appointed Teng as the Guangzhou herdsman, leading ten thousand people to fight Guoma from the east.

古文：马杀南海太守刘略，逐广州刺史徐旗。
现代文：郭马杀了南海太守刘略，赶走了广州刺史徐旗。
English: Guo Ma killed Liu Liao, the governor of the South China Sea, and expelled Xu Qiang, the governor of Guangzhou.

古文：吴主又遣徐陵督陶浚将七千人，从西道与交州牧陶璜共击马。
现代文：吴主又派遣徐陵督陶率领七千人，从西路与交州牧陶璜一起攻打郭马。
English: The Lord of Wu also sent Xu Lingdu Tao, leading seven thousand people, to attack Guo Ma from the west road together with Jiaozhou Mu Tao Jun.

古文：吴有鬼目菜，生工人黄耇家；有买菜，生工人吴平家。
现代文：吴国发现了鬼目菜，生长在工人黄家里；又发现了买菜，生长在工人吴平家。
English: Wu Guo discovered ghost vegetables, which grew in the worker Huang's home; he also discovered bought vegetables, which grew in the worker Wu Ping's home.

古文：东观案图书，名鬼目曰芝草，买菜曰平虑草。
现代文：负责管理国家图书的官吏，查考书籍，给鬼目菜起名叫芝草；买菜起名叫平虑草。
English: The official in charge of managing the national library, checking books, named the ghost vegetable "chiba grass" and the vegetable vegetable "pancake grass."

古文：吴主以耇为侍芝郎，平为平虑郎，皆银印青缓。
现代文：吴主任命黄为侍芝郎，吴平为平虑郎，授予他们银印和青色的绶带。
English: The Lord of Wu appointed Huang as the attendant, and Wu Ping as the attendant, and awarded them the silver seal and the blue ribbon.

古文：吴主每宴群臣，咸令沉醉。
现代文：吴主每次宴会群臣都要把大臣们灌醉。
English: Every time Lord Wu held a banquet, his ministers would get drunk.

古文：又置黄门郎十人为司过，宴罢之后，各奏其阙失，迕视谬言，罔有不举。
现代文：他设置了黄门郎十人，专门负责搜集大臣们的过失。
English: He set up ten huangmenlang, specifically responsible for collecting the faults of ministers.

古文：大者即加刑戮，小者记录为罪，或剥人面，或凿人眼。由是上下离心，莫为尽力。
现代文：每次宴会结束以后，这十个人就向吴主汇报大臣们的过失，凡是大臣中有抵触的、说了错话的，都向吴主举报，严重的被判刑、处死，轻的也要当作罪状记录下来；有的被剥下脸上的皮，有的被挖去眼睛，因此朝廷上下人心相离，没有人肯为吴主尽力。
English: After the end of each banquet, these ten people reported the mistakes of the ministers to Lord Wu. Any ministers who had conflicts or said the wrong thing were reported to Lord Wu. The serious ones were sentenced to death, and the minor ones were also recorded as criminal charges. Some were flayed off their faces, and some had their eyes gouged out. As a result, the upper and lower levels of the imperial court were separated from each other, and no one was willing to do their best for Lord Wu.

古文：益州刺史王濬上疏曰： 孙皓荒淫凶逆，宜速征伐，若一旦皓死，更立贤主，则强敌也；臣作船七年，日有朽败；臣年七十，死亡无日。
现代文：晋朝益州刺史王浚上疏说： 孙荒淫，凶暴反常，应当迅速地征讨他。如果一旦孙死了，吴国又立了一个贤明的君王，那么就成为我们的强敌了。我造船已经七年，每天都有船因腐烂而毁坏；我年已七十，离死亡没有几天了。
English: Wang Jun Shang Zuo, a member of the Jin Dynasty in Yizhou, said: "Sun was a lecherous, violent and abnormal person, and he should be quickly subdued. If once Sun died, and Wu established another wise king, then he would become our strong enemy. I have been building ships for seven years, and every day there is a ship destroyed by decay; I am seventy years old, and I am only a few days away from death.

古文：三者一乖，则难图也。
现代文：这三点只要一有失误，那么伐吴的大事就难以实现。
English: As long as there is a mistake in these three points, it will be difficult to achieve the important task of felling Wu.

古文：诚愿陛下无失事机。 
现代文：我真诚地希望陛下不要失去机会。 
English: I sincerely hope that Your Majesty will not lose this opportunity.

古文：帝于是决意伐吴。
现代文：晋武帝于是下定决心伐吴。
English: Emperor Jinwu then made up his mind to invade Wu.

古文：会安东将军王浑表孙皓欲北上，边戍皆戒严，朝廷乃更议明年出师。
现代文：这时，安东针军王浑上表说，孙要北上，吴国边境地区已经戒备森严。朝廷于是又商议明年再出后。
English: At this time, the king of the Anton needle army said that Sun wanted to go north, and the border area of Wu was already heavily guarded. The imperial court then discussed whether to go out again next year.

古文：王濬参军何攀奉使在洛，上疏称： 皓必不敢出，宜因戒严，掩取其易。
现代文：王浚的参军何攀奉命出使正在洛阳，他上疏说： 孙必然不敢出兵，应当乘着吴国防备严密而突然袭击，这样更容易取胜。 
English: Wang Jun's envoy to join the army, He Pang, was in Luoyang on orders, and he said: Sun must not dare to send troops. He should take advantage of Wu's well-prepared defense and make a surprise attack. This would make it easier to win.

古文：杜预上表曰： 自闰月以来，贼但敕严，下无兵上。
现代文：杜预上表说： 自从闰月以来，贼人只是防备得严，下游地区并不见吴兵沿江而上。
English: Du Yuan said in the table above: Since the leap month, the thieves have only been on high alert, and the downstream areas have not seen Wu soldiers going up the river.

古文：以理势推之，贼之穷计，力不两完，必保夏口以东以延视息，无缘多兵西上，空其国都。
现代文：依道理及形势推测，贼人已无计可施，其兵力不足以保全两边，必然要保住夏口以东地区以便苟延残喘，没有理由派很多兵士向西，而使国都空虚。
English: According to reason and situation speculation, the bandits have nothing to do, their strength is not enough to protect both sides, it is necessary to keep the area east of Xiakou in order to survive, there is no reason to send a lot of soldiers to the west, leaving the country empty.

古文：而陛下过听，便用委弃大计，纵敌患生，诚可惜也。
现代文：但是陛下却由于误听，而丢开大计，放纵敌人而留下了后患，实在是可惜。
English: However, due to a mishearing, His Majesty abandoned the grand plan and indulged the enemy, leaving a legacy behind. It is really a pity.

古文：向使举而有败，勿举可也。
现代文：过去假如举兵有可能失败，那么也可以不举兵。
English: In the past, if it was possible for a military mobilization to fail, it was also possible not to mobilize.

古文：今事为之制，务从完牢，若或有成，则开太平之基，不成不过费损日月之间，何惜而不一试之！
现代文：现在事情已经作了决定，务必要作得完美牢靠，假如能成功，那么就开创了太平的基础；如果不能成功，损失耗费也不过在数日几月之间，何必吝惜而不去试一试呢！
English: Now that the matter has been decided, it is imperative to make it perfect and reliable. If it can succeed, then it will create a foundation for peace; if it cannot succeed, the loss will only be in the range of days and months. Why begrudge it and not try it!

古文：若当须后年，天时人事，不得如常，臣恐其更难也。
现代文：如果还要等到以后，那么天时人事就不能和往常一样了，我担心到时会更难。
English: If we have to wait until later, then things will not be the same as usual, and I'm afraid it will be more difficult then.

古文：今有万安之举，无倾败之虑，臣心实了，不敢以暖昧之见自取后累，惟陛下察之。 
现代文：当前的举动万分妥贴，绝没有覆灭失败的忧虑，我已下定了决心，决不敢以暧昧不明的态度以自取日后的麻烦，请陛下明察。 
English: The current move is very appropriate, and it has by no means eliminated the fear of failure. I have made up my mind that I will never dare to take the trouble of the future with an ambiguous attitude. Please observe your majesty.

古文：旬月未报，预复上表曰： 羊祜不先博谋于朝臣，而密与陛下共施此计，故益令朝臣多异同之议。
现代文：一个月过去了，杜预还没有得到晋武帝的答复，杜预于是又上表说： 羊祜事先没有广泛地和大臣们商议、谋划，却秘密地与陛下一起推行这个计划，所以就更使得朝廷大臣有很多不同的议论。
English: A month passed, and Du Yu still had not received a reply from Emperor Jinwu. Du Yu then went back to the table and said, "Yang Zheng did not consult and plan extensively with the ministers in advance, but secretly carried out this plan together with His Majesty. Therefore, it made the ministers of the imperial court have many different discussions.

古文：凡事当以利害相校，今此举之利十有八、九，而其害一、二，止于无功耳。
现代文：任何事情都应当把利益与损害相互比较，现在这一行动的利益占十之八九，而弊害只占十之一二，最多只是没有工劳而已。
English: In all things, we should weigh the benefits against the harms. Currently, the benefits of this action account for eighty-nine out of ten, while the harms only account for twelve out of ten. At most, there is no work.

古文：必使朝臣言破败之形，亦不可得，直是计不出己，功不在身，各耻其前言之失而固守之也。
现代文：如果一定要让大臣们说出计划的弊端，也是不可能的，他们之所以对计划有不同的看法，只是因为计划不是他们制定的，自己没有功劳，即使对自己以前说的话有过失感到羞愧，但还要坚持自己的意见，以保住面子而已。
English: If it is necessary to ask the ministers to say what is wrong with the plan, it is also impossible. They have different opinions on the plan only because the plan was not made by them, they have no merit, and even if they are ashamed of what they said before, they still have to stick to their opinions to save face.

古文：自顷朝廷事无大小，异意锋起，虽人心不同，亦由恃恩不虑后患，故轻相同异也。
现代文：近来，朝廷中的事情无论大小，总是各种意见蜂起，虽说人心各有不同，但是也是由于倚仗着恩宠而不考虑后患，所以很轻易地表示自己相同或者不同的意见。
English: In recent times, no matter how big or small the events in the imperial court are, various opinions always arise. Although people's hearts are different, it is also because they rely on grace and do not consider the consequences, so they easily express their same or different opinions.

古文：自秋已来，讨贼之形颇露，今若中止，孙皓或怖而生计，徙都武昌，更完修江南诸城，远其居民，城不可攻，野无所掠，则明年之计或无所及矣。 
现代文：自从入秋以来，讨贼的举动越来越显露出来，现在假如中止行动，孙或许会因恐怖而产生出新的计划，迁都武昌，更完备地修整长江以南各城，把居民迁到很远的地方去，使城不可以攻，原野之中找不到东西，那么明年的计划或许就用不上了。 
English: Since the beginning of autumn, more and more attempts have been made to find the thieves. If the operation were to be suspended now, Sun would probably, out of fear, come up with a new plan. He would move the capital to Wuchang, more completely renovate the cities south of the Yangtze River, and move the residents far away, so that the city could not be attacked and nothing could be found in the fields. Then next year's plan might not be necessary.

古文：帝方与张华围棋，预表适至，华推枰敛手曰： 陛下圣武，国富兵强，吴主淫虐，诛杀贤能。
现代文：当时，晋武帝正在和张华下围棋，杜预所上表正好送到了，张华推开棋盘抵手说： 陛下圣明英武，国富兵强；吴主邪恶凶残，诛杀贤良有才能的人。
English: At that time, Emperor Jinwu was playing Go with Zhang Hua, and the above table from the Duyuan Institute just arrived. Zhang Hua pushed the chessboard away and said, "Your Majesty is wise and brave, the country is rich and strong; the Lord of Wu is evil and cruel, and he kills good and talented people."

古文：当今讨之，可不劳而定，愿勿以为疑！ 
现代文：现在就去讨伐他，可以不受劳累而平定，希望您不要再犹豫了！ 
English: Go to fight him now, you can be pacified without fatigue, I hope you will not hesitate!

古文：帝乃许之。
现代文：晋武帝接受了他的意见。
English: The emperor then consented.

古文：以华为度支尚书，量计运漕。
现代文：任命张华为度支尚书，按计划从水路运粮。
English: Zhang Huadu was appointed as the chief of the general staff, and the grain was transported from the waterway as planned.

古文：贾充、荀勖、冯紞争之，帝大怒，充免冠谢罪。
现代文：贾充、荀勖、冯等人不同意伐吴，坚持他们的意见，晋武帝大怒，贾充立即脱帽认罪。
English: Jia Chong, Yao, Feng and others did not agree to attack Wu, and insisted on their opinions. Emperor Jinwu was furious, and Jia Chong immediately took off his hat and confessed.

古文：仆射山涛退而告人曰： 自非圣人，外宁必有内忧，今释吴为外惧，岂非算乎！ 
现代文：仆射山涛退朝回来和别人说： 古人云， 只有圣人能做到内外无患，假如不是圣人，外部安宁了就必然有内部的忧患。 以晋目前的情况来看，放着吴作外部威胁，难道产是良计吗？ 
English: He came back from the retreat and said to others: "Ancient people believed that only a sage can achieve internal and external peace. If it is not a sage, if there is external peace, there will inevitably be internal sorrow. In the current situation, is it a good plan to let Wu be an external threat?

古文：冬，十一月，大举伐吴，遣镇军将军琅邪王亻由出涂中，安东将军王浑出江西，建威将军王戎出武昌，平南将军胡奋出夏口，镇南大将军杜预出江陵，龙骧将军王濬、巴东监军鲁国唐彬下巴、蜀，东西凡二十馀万。
现代文：冬季，十一月，晋朝大举出兵讨伐吴，派遣镇军将军、琅邪王司马从涂中出兵，安将军王浑从江西出兵，建威将军王戎出武昌，平南将军胡奋出夏口，镇南大将军杜预出江陵，龙骧将军王浚和巴东监军鲁国人唐彬从巴、蜀进军，东西合计共有二十余万人。
English: In the winter, in November, the Jin Dynasty sent large-scale troops to fight against Wu, dispatched the general of the town army, the evil king Sima, to send troops from Tuizhong, the general of An, Wang Hun, sent troops from Jiangxi, the general of Jianwei, Wang Rong, sent troops from Wuchang, the general of Pingnan, Hu Fen, sent troops from Xiakou, the general of Zhenan, Du Yue, sent troops from Jiangling, the general of Longyan, Wang Jun, and the inspector of the East Batang army, Tang Bin, a citizen of Lu, sent troops from Ba and Shu, a total of more

古文：命贾充为使持节、假黄钺、大都督，以冠军将军杨济副之。
现代文：任命贾充为使持节、假黄、大都督，任命冠军将军杨济协助贾充，作贾充的副手。
English: He appointed Jia Chong as the governor of Jizhixi, Fuguang and Dadu, and appointed the champion general Yang Jie to assist Jia Chong and serve as Jia Chong's deputy.

古文：充固陈伐吴不利，且自言衰老，不堪元帅之任。
现代文：贾充坚持陈述伐吴不利，而且自称已经衰老，不能担当元师的重任。
English: Jia Chong insisted on stating that it was not good to go to Wuzhou, and claimed that he was old and could not take on the important task of the former division.

古文：诏曰： 君若不行，吾便自出。 
现代文：晋武帝下诏说： 你如果不去，那么我不亲自出征。 
English: Emperor Jinwu issued an edict saying, "If you don't go, then I won't personally go to the front."

古文：充不得已，乃受节钺，将中军南屯襄阳，为诸军节度。
现代文：贾充不得已，于是接受了符节与斧，率领中军向南驻扎在襄阳，负责各部队的部署、调度与节制。
English: As a last resort, Jia Chong accepted the rune and axe, and led the Chinese army to the south to be stationed in Yangyang, responsible for the deployment, scheduling and control of each unit.

古文：马隆西渡温水，树机能等以众数万据险拒之。
现代文：马隆向西渡过温水，发树机能等人带领几万名部众凭借险阻抵抗。
English: Malone crossed the warm water to the west, leading tens of thousands of followers with the help of dangerous resistance.

古文：隆以山路狭隘，乃作扁箱车，为木屋，施于车上，转战而前，行千馀里，杀伤甚众。
现代文：因为山路狭隘，马隆就造了扁箱车，还造了木屋，置于车上，边作战边前进，走了一千多里，打得敌人死的死，伤的伤，损失惨重。
English: Because the mountain road is narrow, Malong built a flat-box car, and also built a wooden house, placed it on the car, advanced while fighting, walked more than a thousand miles, killed the enemy, wounded the enemy, and suffered heavy losses.

古文：自隆之西，音问断绝，朝廷忧之，或谓已没。
现代文：自从马隆西去，音讯断绝，朝廷为他担忧，有的人说他们已经都死了。
English: Since Malonsi left, there has been no news, the court is worried about him, and some people say they are all dead.

古文：后隆使夜到，帝抚掌欢笑，诘朝，召群臣谓曰： 若从诸卿言，无凉州矣。 
现代文：后来马隆的使者夜里到了，晋武帝拍着手高兴地笑了。清晨，召集群臣对他们说： 假如听从了渚位的意见，就没有凉州了。 
English: Later, when Malong's emissary arrived in the night, Emperor Jinwu clapped his hands and smiled happily. In the morning, he called together his ministers and said to them: "If you follow Nagisa's advice, there will be no Liangzhou."

古文：乃诏假隆节，拜宣威将军。
现代文：于是下命令，赐给马隆符节，授官宣威将军。
English: So he issued an order to give Malone the insignia of a general.

古文：隆至武威，鲜卑大人猝跋韩且万能等帅万馀落来降。
现代文：马隆到了武威，鲜卑部落首领猝跋韩且万能率领一万多部落来归降。
English: When Malon arrived in Wuwei, the leader of the Xianbei tribe, Han, led more than ten thousand tribes to surrender.

古文：十二月，隆与树机能大战，斩之，凉州遂平。
现代文：十二月，马隆与树机能大战，杀了树机能，凉州于是平定。
English: In December, Malong fought a big war with Shuhefun, killed Shuhefun, and Liangzhou was pacified.

古文：旧都督有四，今并监军乃盈于十；禹分九州，今之刺史几向一倍；户口比汉十分之一，而置郡县更多；虚立军府，动有百数，而无益宿卫；五等诸侯，坐置官属；诸所廪给，皆出百姓。
现代文：禹分华夏为九州，现在的刺史几乎是从前的一倍。现在的户口相当于汉代的十分之一，而所设置的郡县却比汉代多。虚设的将帅幕府，动不动就有上百个，但是却无益于值宿、警卫。五个等级的诸侯，坐在那里也要设置官属。
English: Huaxia was divided into Kyushu, and the current record is almost double that of the past. The current hukou is equivalent to one-tenth of the Han Dynasty, but there are more counties than the Han Dynasty. There are hundreds of shogunate generals, but they are of no use as guards or guards. There are five levels of lords, and officials should be set up wherever they sit.

古文：此其所以困乏者也。当今之急，在于并官息役，上下务农而已。 
现代文：所有这些官吏的粮食供应，全都从都老百姓身上出，这就是之所以穷困匮乏的原因。当前最紧迫的事情，在于合并官署，停止劳役，从上至下都致力于农事。 
English: The food supply of all these officials all comes from the common people of the capital, which is the reason for the poverty and scarcity. The most urgent thing at present is to merge government offices, stop labor service, and devote ourselves to agriculture from top to bottom.

古文：咸，玄之子也。
现代文：傅咸的是傅玄的儿子。
English: Fu Xian is the son of Fu Xuan.

古文：时又议省州、郡、县半吏以赴农功，中书监荀勖以为： 省吏不如省官，省官不如省事，省事不如清心。昔萧、曹相汉，载其清静，民以宁壹，所谓清心也。
现代文：当时，朝廷中又商议，减省州、郡、县一半的官吏，让他们去从事农业。中书监荀勖认为： 减吏不如减官，减官不如减事，减事不如清心，从前萧何、曹参辅佐汉王，承受其清静无为，百姓因此而安宁统一，这就是所说的清心。
English: At that time, the imperial court also discussed reducing half of the officials from provinces, prefectures, and counties, so that they could engage in agriculture. Censors believed that: reducing officials is not as good as reducing officials, reducing officials is not as good as reducing things, and reducing things is not as good as having a pure heart. In the past, Xiao He and Cao Sanfu, the kings of the Han Dynasty, suffered from their quietness and inaction, and the people were united peacefully as a result. This is the so-called pure heart.

古文：抑浮说，简文案，略细苛，宥小失，有好变常以徼利者，必行其诛，所谓省事也。
现代文：抑制虚无根据的空言，精简公文案卷，省略细碎繁琐的事务，原谅小的过失，如果有喜好改变常规而求利的人，一定要进行惩治，这就是所谓省事。
English: Suppressing baseless and groundless empty talk, streamlining official documents and files, omitting detailed and cumbersome matters, forgiving minor faults, and punishing those who seek profits by changing the rules, is what is called "saving trouble."

古文：以九寺并尚书，兰台付三府，所谓省官也。
现代文：把九卿寺并入尚书，把御史台交付予三公府，这就是所谓的省官。
English: The merging of Jiuqing Temple into Shangshu, and the handing over of Goshidai to the three public offices, these are the so-called provincial officials.

古文：若直作大例，凡天下之吏皆减其半，恐文武众官，郡国职业，剧易不同，不可以一概施之。
现代文：如果只做大的规定，那么普天下的官吏，都要裁减一半，恐怕众多的文武官员，郡国的各种职责，难易程度不同，不可以一概推行。
English: If only large-scale regulations are made, then all government officials in the world will have to be reduced by half. I am afraid that the numerous civil and military officials, the various duties of the county, the degree of difficulty is different, and it cannot be implemented in general.

古文：若有旷阙，皆须更复，或激而滋繁，亦不可不重也。 
现代文：假如出现公务废弛，全都需要再恢复，或者就会因激发而更加繁多，这也不能不加以重视。 
English: If there is an official waste, everything needs to be restored again, or it will be more abundant due to stimulation, which cannot be ignored.

