古文：维正月王在成周，昧爽，召三公、左史戎夫，曰： 今夕朕寤，遂事惊予。 
现代文：正月，穆王在成周。一天早晨，穆王告诉三公及左史戎夫： 今晚上我醒来，是已往的史事惊吓了我。 
English: In the first month of the year, King Mu was in Cheng Zhou. One morning, King Mu told the three princes and Zuo Shi Rongfu: "Tonight I woke up, it was the past historical events that frightened me.

古文：乃取遂事之要戒，俾戎夫主之，朔望以闻。
现代文：于是就要求辑录历史上重要又可鉴戒的事，使左史戎夫主办，每月朔日望日讲给自己听。
English: Therefore, he asked for a compilation of important and instructive things in history, so that Zuo Shi Rongfu hosted it and told it to himself every month.

古文：信不行、义不立，则哲士凌君政，禁而生乱，皮氏以亡。
现代文：信用不行，仁义不立，那么智谋之人就会侵凌国君政务。不让他侵凌就会发生叛乱，皮氏国因此灭亡。
English: If trust is not possible, and benevolence and righteousness are not established, then the man of wisdom and strategy will encroach on the affairs of the monarch. If he is not allowed to encroach, there will be a rebellion, and Pi's country will perish.

古文：谄谀日近，方正日远，则邪人专国政。
现代文：阿谀奉承者日益亲近，正直之臣日益疏远，那么奸邪之人就会把持国政。
English: When flatterers draw near and honest men are far away, treacherous men hold the state.

古文：禁而生乱，华氏以亡。
现代文：不让他把持就会发生叛乱，华氏国因此灭亡。
English: If he is not allowed to take control, there will be a rebellion, and the country will be destroyed.

古文：好货财珍怪，则邪人进，邪人进，则贤良日蔽而远。
现代文：喜欢财物与奇珍异宝，那么奸邪之士就进入朝庭。奸邪进入朝廷，贤良之人日益不显而遭疏远。
English: Treachery enters the imperial court, and the virtuous become increasingly invisible and alienated.

古文：赏罚无位，随财而行，夏后失以亡。
现代文：赏罚没有标准，随财物多而行赏罚，夏朝因此灭亡。
English: There was no standard for rewards and punishments, and rewards and punishments were given according to the amount of wealth. As a result, the Xia Dynasty was destroyed.

古文：严兵而不□者，其臣慑；其臣慑，则不敢忠；不敢忠，则民不亲其吏。
现代文：国君用严刑而不仁慈的，大臣就有所畏惧。大臣畏惧则不敢尽忠，不敢尽忠则百姓不亲近官吏。
English: If the sovereign is harsh and unmerciful, the ministers will be afraid. If the ministers are afraid, they will not be loyal. If they are not loyal, the people will not be close to the officials.

古文：刑始于亲，远者寒心，殷商以亡。
现代文：严刑从亲人开始，外入就会心寒。殷商因此灭亡。
English: Severe punishment begins with the relatives, and those who go outside will feel cold. As a result, Yin Shang perished.

古文：乐专于君者，权专于臣，权专于臣则刑专于民。
现代文：享乐由国君独有，权力就被大臣独占。权力由大臣独占，刑罚就被百姓专受。
English: Pleasure is the prerogative of the sovereign, power is the prerogative of the minister, and punishment is the prerogative of the people.

古文：君娱于乐，臣争于权，民尽于刑，有虞氏以亡。
现代文：国君沉溺于享乐，大臣必争夺权势，百姓尽都受刑。有虞氏因此灭亡。
English: The sovereign indulged in pleasure, the ministers competed for power, and the people were all punished. As a result, the Yogo clan perished.

古文：奉孤以专命者，谋主比畏其威，而疑其前事。
现代文：侍奉幼主而独断专行的，幼主长大一定会畏惧他的威严，并怀疑他过去的作为。
English: If he serves the young master and acts arbitrarily, the young master will certainly be afraid of his majesty and doubt his past deeds.

古文：挟德而责是，日疏位均而争，平林以亡。
现代文：侍奉者依仗自己的功德而对人君不满，彼此日益疏远，君臣双方权势相当而争斗，平林国因此灭亡。
English: The attendants, relying on their own merits, were dissatisfied with the prince, and they became increasingly estranged from each other. The prince and the vassal were of equal power and fought each other. As a result, the Hirabayashi Kingdom perished.

古文：大臣有锢职哗诛者，危。
现代文：大臣专权，动不动就扬言杀人的，危险。
English: Dictatorial power of ministers, threats of murder at every turn, danger.

古文：昔者，质沙三卿，朝而无礼，君怒而久据之，哗而弗加。哗卿谋变，质沙以亡。
现代文：从前质沙国三卿朝君而不顾礼节，国君生怒而长久拘禁他们，声言诛杀而不诛杀，三卿合谋政变，质沙国因此灭亡。
English: Once upon a time, the three lords of Sasakuni made an oath to the Emperor, disregarding the rules of etiquette. The Emperor was furious and detained them for a long time, claiming to fight but not killing. The three lords conspired to stage a coup, and Sasakuni was destroyed.

古文：外内相间，下挠其民，民无所附，三苗以亡。
现代文：外臣与内臣不和，都扰乱下面的百姓，百姓无处依附，三苗国因此灭亡。
English: The discord between the Foreign Minister and the Inner Minister disturbed the people below, and the people had nowhere to cling to. As a result, Sanmiao State perished.

古文：弱小在强大之间，存亡将由之，则无天命矣。
现代文：弱小之国在强国之间，存亡将由强国决定，自己不能作主。
English: The weak and small countries are in the middle of the powerful countries, and their survival will be decided by the powerful countries. They cannot be the masters.

古文：不知命者死。
现代文：不知道这种命运的，只有死。
English: The only one who does not know this fate is death.

古文：有夏之方兴也，扈失弱而不恭，身死国亡。
现代文：夏朝刚兴起的时候，扈氏弱小而对夏不恭敬，结果身死国灭。
English: When the Xia Dynasty was just emerging, the Min clan was weak and did not respect Xia, and as a result, the country was destroyed.

古文：嬖子两重者亡。
现代文：受宠的儿子两个都位重的，一定亡国。
English: The two favoured sons, both of whom are of high rank, are sure to ruin the country.

古文：昔者，义渠氏有两子异母，皆重。
现代文：从前义渠氏有两个儿子，不是一母所生，皆处高位。
English: Once upon a time, the Yoshiku clan had two sons, who were not born from the same mother, and they were all in high positions.

古文：君疾大臣，分党而争，义渠以亡。
现代文：国君后来得了病，大臣们分为两党而相争斗，义渠国因此灭亡。
English: Later, the sovereign fell ill, and the ministers were divided into two parties and fought each other. As a result, Yichuan State perished.

古文：功大不赏者危。
现代文：功劳大而不加奖赏的，危险。
English: Great merit without reward is dangerous.

古文：昔平州之臣，功大而不赏，谗臣日贵，功臣日怒而生变，平州之君以走出。
现代文：从前平州国的大臣有大功而不赏，谄媚之臣反而日益显贵，功臣们一天天愤怒起来而发动政变，平州的国君因此逃往他国。
English: Once upon a time, the ministers of the State of Pingzhou were not rewarded for their great achievements. On the contrary, the flatterers became more and more prominent. The heroes became angry day by day and launched a coup. As a result, the ruler of the State of Pingzhou fled to another country.

古文：召远不亲者，危。
现代文：召来远人不加亲近的，危险。
English: Calling the distant and the unapproachable, danger.

古文：昔有林失召离戎之君而朝之，至而不礼，留而弗亲，离戎逃而去之，林失诛之，天下叛林氏。
现代文：从前有林氏召来离戎国的君王朝见他，到了之后不给礼遇，留下来又不加亲近，离戎国君逃离林氏国，林氏国诛杀了他，结果天下人都背叛了林氏。
English: Once upon a time, there was a prince from the Lin Dynasty who was summoned by the Lin Dynasty to meet with him. When he arrived, the prince did not give him any courtesy. He stayed and did not get close to him. The prince from the Lin Dynasty fled from the Lin Dynasty. The Lin Dynasty killed him. As a result, the whole world betrayed the Lin Dynasty.

古文：昔者曲集之君，伐智而专事强力，而不信其臣，忠良皆伏。
现代文：从前曲集国的国君自恃聪明而独断事务，强悍有力而不信任大臣，忠良之臣都隐而不出。
English: Once upon a time, the sovereigns of the countries of the Song Dynasty prided themselves on being clever and decisive in affairs, strong and powerful, but they did not trust their ministers, and their loyal vassals kept to themselves.

古文：愉州氏伐之，君孤而无使，曲集以亡。
现代文：后来愉州氏攻打他，国君孤立而无人可使，曲集国因此灭亡。
English: Later, the Yushu clan attacked him, and the sovereign was left alone with no one to help him. As a result, Quji State perished.

古文：昔者有巢氏，有乱臣而贵任之，以国假之，以权擅国而主断，君已而夺之，臣怒而生变，有巢以亡。
现代文：从前有巢氏有个乱臣却地位显贵，把国事交给他，把大权托付给他，让他专擅国政而独断专行。国君后来夺回他的权力，乱臣生怒而发动政变，有巢氏因此灭亡。
English: Once upon a time, there was a rogue vassal of the Yao clan, but he was of high rank. He was entrusted with the affairs of state, and the supreme power was entrusted to him, so that he would be exclusively in charge of state affairs and act arbitrarily. The sovereign later reclaimed his power, and the rogue vassal launched a coup out of anger, and the Yao clan perished as a result.

古文：斧小不胜柯者，亡。
现代文：斧头小，承受不了大斧柄的，必灭亡。
English: He that hath a small axe, and cannot bear with the handle of a great axe, shall perish.

古文：昔有会阝君啬俭，减爵损禄，群臣卑让，上下不临，后□小弱禁罚不行，重氏伐之，会阝君以亡。
现代文：从前郐国之君吝啬节俭，降爵位减俸禄，群臣地位低下，上下不协调。后来郐国变成弱国，禁令与处罚都行不通。重氏国攻打他，郐君因此而死。
English: Once upon a time, the prince of Shikoku was miserly and frugal, his knighthood was reduced and his salary was reduced, the status of his vassals was low, and there was no coordination between the upper and lower ranks. Later, Shikoku became a weak country, and bans and punishments did not work. Shigejikoku attacked him, and Shikun died as a result.

古文：久空重位者危。
现代文：长久使重要位置空缺的，危险。
English: The danger of leaving an important position vacant for too long.

古文：昔有共工，自贤，自以无臣，久空大官，下官交乱，民无所附，唐氏伐之，共工以亡。
现代文：从前共工氏认为自己贤能，认为没有可用之臣，长期空缺大官，结果下面官员交相作乱，百姓无处依附，唐氏攻打他，共工氏因此灭亡。 
English: In the past, the Kwangjongs regarded themselves as virtuous, believed that there were no useful vassals, and there was a long-term vacancy of high-ranking officials. As a result, the lower-ranking officials quarreled with each other, the people had nowhere to cling to, the Tang Dynasty attacked him, and the Kwangjongs perished as a result.

古文：犯难争权，疑者死。
现代文：冒着危难争夺权力，犹疑不决者必死。
English: Those who hesitate to fight for power in the face of danger are doomed to die.

古文：昔有林氏，上衡氏争权，林氏再战而胜，上衡氏伪义，弗克，俱身死国亡。
现代文：从前有林氏与上衡氏争夺权力，林氏两战不胜，上衡氏行仁义不攻下它，结果双方都身死国灭。
English: Once upon a time, the Lin clan and the Shangheng clan competed for power. The Lin clan was not victorious in the two wars, and the Shangheng clan did not attack it out of benevolence. As a result, both sides died and the country was destroyed.

古文：知能均而不亲，并重事君者危。
现代文：聪明能干相等而不和，又同时受到重用共事君王的，危险。
English: There is a danger that those who are equally clever and capable will not get along, and at the same time will be reused to work with the king.

古文：昔有南氏，有二臣，贵宠，力钧势底，竞进争权，下争朋党，君弗能禁，南氏以分。
现代文：从前有南氏有两个大臣，显贵而受宠，势力钧等，竞相争权，在下面争取党羽，国君不能禁止，南氏国因此分裂。
English: Once upon a time, there were two ministers of the Southern Clan, both of whom were distinguished and favored, and both of whom were powerful and influential. They competed for power and fought for followers below. The sovereign could not forbid this, and the Southern Clan was divided as a result.

古文：昔有果氏，好以新易故，故者疾怨，新故不和，内争朋党，阴事外权，有果氏以亡。
现代文：从前有果氏喜欢以新易旧，旧大臣嫉妒怨恨，新旧大臣不和，国内结党相争，暗中与外国勾结，有果氏因此灭亡。
English: In the past, the Yogo clan liked to use the new to change the old, the old minister was jealous and resentful, the new and old ministers were at odds, the domestic parties were in conflict, and they secretly colluded with foreign countries. As a result, the Yogo clan perished.

古文：爵重禄轻，比□不成者亡。
现代文：大臣爵位高而俸禄少，勾结起来坑害百姓又不诚实的，灭亡。
English: Ministers with high titles and low salaries, who collude to harm the people and are dishonest, will perish.

古文：昔有毕程氏，损顺增爵，群臣貌匮，比而戾民，毕程氏以亡。
现代文：从前毕程式减少俸禄，增加爵位，群臣貌似匮乏，而勾结坑害百姓，毕程式因此灭亡。
English: In the past, the Bi Program reduced salaries, increased titles, and the ministers seemed to be lacking, but colluded to harm the people. As a result, the Bi Program came to an end.

古文：好变故易常者，亡。
现代文：喜欢改变故旧，变更常规的，灭亡。
English: Like to change the old, change the routine, perish.

古文：昔阳氏之君，自伐而好变，事无故业，官无定位，民运于下，阳氏以亡。
现代文：从前阳氏国君王，夸耀自己而喜欢变改，结果做事没有固定职业，做官没有固定职位，百姓在下面搬来迁去，阳氏国因此灭亡。
English: In the past, the kings of the Yang Dynasty boasted of themselves and liked to make changes. As a result, there was no fixed occupation for doing things, no fixed position for being an official, and the people moved from place to place. As a result, the Yang Dynasty was destroyed.

古文：业形而愎者，危。
现代文：专用刑法而任性的，危险。
English: The special criminal law is capricious and dangerous.

古文：武不止者，亡。昔阪泉氏用兵无已，诛战不休，并兼无亲，文无所立，智士寒心，徙居至于独鹿，诸侯畔之，阪泉以亡。
现代文：从前谷平国的君王任性暴戾，没有亲近之臣，打败他国又不灭掉，专用刑法治国，结果内外势力相结合，谷平国因此灭亡。用武不停的，灭亡。从前阪泉氏用兵不止，征战不休，兼并他国，没有友好邻邦。文人无立足之地，智士个个心寒。后来迁到独鹿，诸侯背叛了它，阪泉氏因此灭亡。
English: Once upon a time, the kings of the former Tanihei Kingdom were capricious and violent, had no close vassals, defeated other countries without eliminating them, and ruled the country exclusively by punishment. As a result, internal and external forces were combined, and the Tanihei Kingdom was destroyed as a result. The use of military force was incessant, and it was destroyed. Once upon a time, the Hansen clan used more and more soldiers, fought wars incessantly, annexed other countries, and had no friendly neighbors. The literati had no foothold, and the wise men were all heartbroken. Later, they moved to Dokka, and the lords betrayed it,

古文：狠而无亲者，亡。
现代文：因执而没有亲近的，灭亡。
English: Those who are not close because of their attachment will perish.

古文：昔者县宗之君，狠而无听，执事不从，宗职者疑，发大事，群臣解体，国无立功，县宗以亡。
现代文：从前悬宗国的君王固执而不听劝导，结果办事不顺，任职者生疑而发动政变。最终群臣四散，无人为国立功，悬宗因此灭亡。
English: In the past, the kings of the Hangzong kingdom were stubborn and did not listen to persuasion. As a result, things did not go well, and the officials became suspicious and launched a coup. Eventually, the ministers were scattered, and no one was a national hero. As a result, the Hangzong dynasty died out.

古文：文武不行者，亡。昔者西夏性仁非兵，城郭不修，武士无位，惠而好赏，屈而无以赏，唐氏伐之，城郭不守，武士不用，西夏以亡。
现代文：从前玄都重视鬼神，不重人才而敬奉上天。谋臣不用，相信占卜，重用神巫治国，智士们逃出国外，玄都因此灭亡。无文德无武备的，灭亡。从前西夏国性仁爱而反对用兵。城廓不加修缮，武士也无事干。性仁惠而好赏赐，结果财竭而无物可赏。唐尧攻打它，城廓不能守护，武士不愿出力，西夏因此灭亡。
English: Once upon a time, Xuandu valued ghosts and gods, but not talents, and worshipped the heavens. It did not need advisers, it believed in divination, and used witches and spirits to govern the country. The wise men fled abroad, and Xuandu was destroyed as a result. Without documents, without weapons, Xuandu was destroyed. Once upon a time, Xixia was benevolent and opposed to the use of soldiers. The castle was not repaired, and the samurai had nothing to do. Sexual benevolence was rewarded, but the result was that there was nothing to reward. Tang Jun attacked it, the castle could not be guarded, the samurai did not want to contribute,

古文：美女破国。
现代文：美女破败国家。
English: The beauty of a ruined country.

古文：昔者绩阳强力四征，重丘遗之美女，绩阳之君悦之，荧惑不治，大臣争权，远近不相听，国分为二。
现代文：从前绩阳国凭强力四处征伐，重丘国送来一批美女。绩阳国君喜欢她们，结果被迷惑而不治理国家，导致大臣们争夺权势，远近都不再顺从，绩阳国分裂成两个。
English: In the past, Jieyang Province sent a group of beautiful women to conquer everywhere by force, and Chongqiu Province sent a group of beautiful women. Jieyang Governor liked them, and as a result, he was confused and did not govern the country, which led to the ministers competing for power, and they no longer obeyed from near and far, and Jieyang Province was divided into two.

古文：宫室破国。
现代文：宫室破败国家。
English: A dilapidated country in the imperial palace.

古文：昔者有洛氏宫室无常，池囿大，工功日进，以后更前，民不得休，农失其时，饥馑无食，成商伐之，有洛以亡。 
现代文：从前有洛式不断建造新宫室，池塘与园林都很宽大，土木工程日益增多，还在用新的取代旧的。百姓不得休息，农民违背农时，致使发生饥荒没有吃的。成汤攻打它，有洛氏因此灭亡。
English: In the past, the Luo Dynasty constantly built new palace rooms, the ponds and gardens were very large, the number of civil engineering projects was increasing, and the old ones were being replaced with new ones. The people were not allowed to rest, and the peasants disobeyed the farmers, resulting in famine and no food. Cheng Tang attacked it, and the Luo Dynasty died as a result.

