古文：古之欲正世调天下者，必先观国政，料事务，察民俗，本治乱之所生，知得失之所在，然后从事。
现代文：古时想要匡正当世调治天下的人，一定要先考察国家的政情，调查国家的事务，了解百姓的习俗，查明治乱根源与得失所在，然后着手进行。
English: In ancient times, those who wanted to rule the world in a righteous way must first examine the political situation of the country, investigate the affairs of the country, understand the customs of the people, investigate the root causes of the Meiji Rebellion and the gains and losses, and then proceed.

古文：故法可立而治可行。
现代文：这样，法制才能成立，政治措施才能贯彻。
English: In this way, the legal system can be established and political measures can be implemented.

古文：夫万民不和，国家不安，失非在上，则过在下。
现代文：大概百姓不团结，国家不安定，过失不在君主，就在下边。
English: Perhaps the people are not united, the country is unstable, and the fault is not with the monarch, but with the lower ranks.

古文：今使人君行逆不修道，诛杀不以理，重赋敛，竭民财，急使令，罢民力，财竭则不能毋侵夺，力罢则不能毋堕倪。
现代文：假如君主不讲求治国原则而倒行逆施，刑杀不坚持依理行事，重收赋税，枯竭民财，急征徭役，疲困民力，那么民财枯竭就不免发生侵夺；民力疲困就不免怠情轻慢。
English: If the monarch does not insist on the principle of governing the country, but acts contrary to it, does not insist on acting according to reason, collects taxes again, depletes people's wealth, urgently recruits officials, and exhausts people's strength, then the depletion of people's wealth will inevitably lead to theft; the exhaustion of people's strength will inevitably lead to laziness.

古文：民已侵夺、堕倪，因以法随而诛之，则是诛罚重而乱愈起。
现代文：百姓已经到了侵夺、惰慢的地步，再用刑法来惩罚，那就是刑罚越重，祸乱越起。
English: The people have already reached the level of robbery and sloth, and then use criminal law to punish them, that is, the heavier the punishment, the greater the calamity.

古文：夫民劳苦困不足，则简禁而轻罪，如此则失在上，失在上而上不变，则万民无所托其命。
现代文：百姓陷入劳苦和穷困，就无视禁令和刑罪了，这就叫作过失在于君主。过在君主而君主不改，万民就无法依靠他安身立命了。
English: When the people are reduced to toil and poverty, and the prohibitions and punishments are disregarded, it is said to be the fault of the prince, and if the prince does not change, the people cannot depend on him.

古文：今人主轻刑政，宽百姓，薄赋敛，缓使令，然民淫躁行私而不从制，饰智任诈，负力而争，则是过在下。
现代文：如果君主对百姓轻刑，宽政，薄税而缓征徭役，百姓却放纵行私而不听从节制，取巧行诈，以力相争，那么过失就在下边了。
English: If the sovereign treats the people leniently in terms of punishment, lenient government, and light taxation, and delays the levying of forced labor, but the people indulge in selfishness and disobey restraint, resort to trickery, and compete by force, then the fault is on the lower side.

古文：过在下，人君不廉而变，则暴人不胜，邪乱不止。
现代文：过在下边，君主若不能明察而加以纠正，那么暴乱分子就不能制止，邪乱之事就不会停息。
English: On the other hand, if the sovereign cannot see what is going on and correct it, then the rioters cannot be stopped, and the evil things will not stop.

古文：暴人不胜，邪乱不止，则君人者势伤而威日衰矣。
现代文：暴人不制服，邪乱不停息，则统治百姓的君主，其势力将受到损害，而权威日见下降。
English: If the ruffians are not subdued and the wickedness is not stopped, the monarch who rules the people will suffer damage to his power, and his authority will gradually decline.

古文：故为人君者，莫贵于胜。
现代文：所以，作为君主、最重要的是一个 胜 字。
English: So, as monarch, the most important thing is a winning word.

古文：所谓胜者，法立令行之谓胜。
现代文：所谓胜，法度能成立，政令能贯彻，就叫做 胜 。
English: The so-called victory, the law can be established, the decree can be implemented, it is called victory.

古文：法立令行，故群臣奉法守职，百官有常。法不繁匿。万民敦悫，反本而俭力。
现代文：由于法度能成立而政令能贯彻，群臣就守法尽职，百官也有法可依。 法度总是不利于恶人滋长的 ，万民会由此敦厚诚朴，安心农业而节俭勤劳。
English: Since laws can be established and decrees can be implemented, ministers will abide by the law and fulfill their duties, and officials can also abide by the law. Laws are always unfavorable to the growth of evildoers, and the people will be honest and simple, safe in agriculture, and frugal and hardworking.

古文：故赏必足以使，威必足以胜，然后下从。
现代文：这样，赏与罚就一定能够起到推动与克制的作用，然后下面就能服从统治了。
English: In this way, reward and punishment will certainly be able to play the role of promotion and restraint, and then the following will be able to obey the rule.

古文：故古之所谓明君者，非一君也。
现代文：古时之所谓英明君主，并非仅只一人。
English: The so-called wise monarchs of ancient times were not the only ones.

古文：其设赏有薄有厚，其立禁有轻有重，迹行不必同，非故相反也，皆随时而变，因俗而动。
现代文：他们立赏有薄有厚，行禁有轻重，做法不一定相同，但并非故意使之不同，而是随着时势的发展而变化，依据人们风气而行动的。
English: They set the rewards as thin as thick, the prohibitions as heavy, and the practices are not necessarily the same, but they do not intentionally make them different, but change with the development of the times and act according to people's customs.

古文：夫民躁而行僻，则赏不可以不厚，禁不可以不重。
现代文：百姓急躁而行为邪僻，立赏就不可不厚，行禁就不可不重。
English: If the people are impetuous and act in an unholy manner, the reward must be heavy and the punishment must be severe.

古文：故圣人设厚赏，非侈也；立重禁，非戾也。
现代文：故圣人设厚赏不能算作过分，行重禁不能算作暴皮。
English: Therefore, the saint's generous reward cannot be considered excessive, and the re-imposition of the ban cannot be regarded as bullying.

古文：赏薄则民不利，禁轻则邪人不畏。
现代文：赏薄则人们不以为利，禁轻则恶人无所恐惧。
English: People do not think it is advantageous to reward the poor, and the wicked have nothing to fear from prohibiting the poor.

古文：设人之所不利，欲以使，则民不尽力；立人之所不畏，欲以禁，则邪人不止。
现代文：设立人们不以为利的轻赏，想要役使人们做事情，则不肯尽力；规定人们不以为惧的轻禁，想要禁止人们作恶，则恶人不会平息。
English: If you set up a light reward that people don't think is beneficial, if you want to make people do things, they won't do their best; if you set up a light punishment that people don't think is scary, if you want to prohibit people from doing evil, then the wicked will not be appeased.

古文：是故陈法出令而民不从。
现代文：于是，颁布法令，百姓也不会听从了。
English: As a result, the decree was issued, but the people would not obey.

古文：故赏不足劝，则士民不为用；刑罚不足畏，则暴人轻犯禁。
现代文：所以，赏不足以令人激励，士民就不会为君主出力；刑不足以使人畏惧，坏人就轻于违法犯禁。
English: Therefore, if the reward is not enough to inspire, the people will not work hard for the monarch; if the punishment is not enough to make people afraid, the bad person will be lighter than the illegal.

古文：民者，服于威杀然后从，见利然后用，被治然后正，得所安然后静者也。
现代文：百姓，畏于刑杀然后才能服从，得到好处然后才能听用，被治理然后才走正路，安居乐业然后才平静无事。
English: The people must be afraid of torture and killing before they can obey, benefit before they can listen, be governed before they can take the right path, and live and work peacefully before there is no trouble.

古文：夫盗贼不胜，邪乱不止，强劫弱，众暴寡，此天下之所忧，万民之所患也。
现代文：如果盗贼不能镇压，邪乱不能禁止，强者劫持弱者，多数欺侮少数，这是天下所最忧虑、百姓所最害怕的。
English: If thieves cannot be suppressed, if evil cannot be banned, if the strong take advantage of the weak, and if the majority bullies the minority, this is the greatest concern in the world and the greatest fear of the people.

古文：忧患不除，则民不安其居；民不安其居，则民望绝于上矣。
现代文：忧患不能除，百姓就不得安居；百姓不得安居，他们对君主就绝望了。
English: Sorrow cannot be removed, and the people cannot live in peace; the people cannot live in peace, and they despair of the monarch.

古文：夫利莫大于治，害莫大于乱。
现代文：国家最大的利益莫过于安定，最大的危险莫过于动乱。
English: There is no greater national interest than stability, and no greater danger than turmoil.

古文：夫五帝三王所以成功立名，显于后世者，以为天下致利除害也。
现代文：五帝三王之所以成功立名显于后世，正因为他们能为天下兴利除害。
English: The reason why the Five Emperors and Three Kings were able to establish a reputation in later generations is precisely because they were able to benefit the world and eliminate harm.

古文：事行不必同，所务一也。
现代文：他们的所作所为不一定相同，但努力的目标是一致的。
English: What they do is not necessarily the same, but the goal of their efforts is the same.

古文：夫民贪行躁，而诛罚轻，罪过不发，则是长淫乱而便邪僻也，有爱人之心、而实合于伤民，此二者不可不察也。
现代文：百姓是贪利而性行急躁的，如果刑罚太轻，罪过不得举发，这就是助长淫乱而有利于邪僻的行为。看起来有爱民之心，实际上正好是伤害百姓。这两者是不可不认真考虑的。
English: The common people are greedy and impatient. If the punishment is too light and the crime cannot be punished, it is conducive to immorality and conducive to heresy. If there is an appearance of love for the people, it is actually harming the people. Both of these must be seriously considered.

古文：夫盗贼不胜则良民危，法禁不立则奸邪繁。
现代文：盗贼不能镇压，良民就生活不安；法禁不能建立，恶人就大量出现。
English: If thieves cannot be suppressed, good people will live in insecurity; if legal prohibition cannot be established, evil people will appear in large numbers.

古文：故事莫急于当务，治莫贵于得齐。
现代文：所以行事最要紧的是解决当前急务，治国最可贵的是掌握缓急适中。
English: Therefore, the most important thing to do is to solve the current urgent matters, and the most valuable thing to govern the country is to grasp the appropriate priorities.

古文：制民急则民迫，民迫则窘，窘则民失其所葆；缓则纵，纵则淫，淫则行私，行私则离公，离公则难用。
现代文：管理过急则百姓困迫，困迫则无所适从，无所适从则百姓失去生活的保障；管理过缓则百姓放纵，放纵则淫邪，淫邪则行私，行私则背公，背公就难以使用了。
English: If the management is too hasty, the people will be distressed, and if the people are distressed, they will be at a loss, and if they are at a loss, they will lose the security of life; if the management is too slow, the people will be indulgent, and if they are indulgent, they will be immoral, and if they are immoral, they will be selfish, and if they are selfish, they will be disloyal, and if they are disloyal, they will be difficult to use.

古文：故治之所以不立者，齐不得也。
现代文：所以，一个国家政治措施之所以立不住，就是因为没有得到这个 适中 。
English: Therefore, the reason why a national political measure cannot stand is because it has not obtained this "moderation."

古文：齐不得则治难行。
现代文：不得适中，措施就很难推行。
English: Without moderation, measures will be difficult to implement.

古文：故治民之齐，不可不察也。
现代文：所以治民的 适中 政策，是不可不认真体察的。
English: Therefore, it is imperative to seriously consider the "moderate" policy of governing the people.

古文：圣人者，明于治乱之道，习于人事之终始者也。
现代文：所谓圣人，就是懂得治乱规律，深悉人事终始的人。
English: The so-called sage is a person who understands the laws of governing chaos and knows the ins and outs of human affairs.

古文：其治人民也，期于利民而止。
现代文：他治理百姓，只求有利于百姓就完了。
English: If he governs the people and only seeks to benefit the people, he is finished.

古文：故其位齐也，不慕古，不留今，与时变，与俗化。夫君人之道，莫贵于胜。
现代文：所以他确立这个 适中 政策的时候，不迷信古代，也不拘泥于今天，而是随着时势和国人风气的发展而变化的。统治百姓的方法，莫贵于 胜 。
English: Therefore, when he established this "moderate" policy, he did not believe in the superstitions of ancient times, nor did he stick to today, but changed with the development of the current situation and the national ethos.

古文：胜，故君道立；君道立，然后下从；下从，故教可立而化可成也。
现代文：只有保持这种 胜 ，君主的一套制度才能确立；君主制度确定了，然后下面才可以服从；下面服从，教化才能够开展而有成效。
English: Only by maintaining this "victory" can a monarchical system be established; once the monarchical system is established, only then can subordinates obey; only then can subordinates obey, and only then can education be carried out effectively.

古文：夫民不心服体从，则不可以礼义之文教也，君人者不可以不察也。
现代文：如果百姓不是思想和行动都服从，就不可能用礼义的各种规则来教化他们。这一点是统治百姓的君主不可不认真体察的。
English: If the people are not obedient in thought and action, it is impossible to educate them with various rules of etiquette. This is something that the monarch who rules the people must seriously consider.

