古文：江淹任昉江淹，字文通，济阳考城人也。
现代文：江淹字文通，是济阳考城人。
English: Jiang Dun, a literary man, is a native of Jiyang Kaocheng.

古文：少孤贫好学，沉静少交游。
现代文：他年少时孤苦贫困，但是勤奋好学，性格沉静，很少舆人交游。
English: When he was young, he was lonely and poor, but he was diligent and eager to learn. He had a quiet personality and rarely socialized with others.

古文：起家南徐州从事，转奉朝请。
现代文：初任南徐州从事之职，转任奉朝请。
English: He was first appointed to the post of South Xuzhou, and then transferred to the post of Minister of the North.

古文：宋建平王景素好士，淹随景素在南兗州。
现代文：宋建平王景素喜欢士人，江淹就跟随景素住在南兖州。
English: King Jianping of the Song Dynasty, King Jingsu, was fond of scholars. Jiang Dun followed King Jingsu to live in Nanluozhou.

古文：广陵令郭彦文得罪，辞连淹，系州狱。
现代文：广陵令郭彦文因故获罪，供辞连及江淹，江淹被拘囚在州中监狱襄。
English: Guo Yanwen, the Guangling commander, was found guilty for some reason, and he confessed to Jiang and Jiang, who was detained in the state middle prison.

古文：淹狱中上书曰：昔者贱臣叩心，飞霜击于燕地；庶女告天，振风袭于齐台。
现代文：江淹在狱中上书说：从前，低贱的臣子击胸表白心志，就会突然有霜袭击燕地；普通的女子向天呼告，就会突然起风袭击齐台。
English: Jiang Dun wrote in prison: "Once upon a time, when a lowly courtier beat his chest to show his sincerity, a sudden frost would hit Yan's land; when an ordinary woman called out to the sky, a sudden wind would hit Qi Tai.

古文：下官每读其书，未尝不废卷流涕。
现代文：我每次读到这些文字，没有不掩卷流泪的。
English: Every time I read these words, I can't help but shed tears.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：士有一定之论，女有不易之行。
现代文：因为士子们有一直坚定的信念，女人也有不能改易的德行。
English: Because the scholars have always had a firm belief, and women also have virtues that cannot be changed.

古文：信而见疑，贞而为戮，是以壮夫义士伏死而不顾者此也。
现代文：诚实却被怀疑，忠贞反遭杀戮，所以壮烈之人侠义之士宁愿赴死，决不反顾，原因就在逭襄。
English: Honesty is doubted, but loyalty is killed, so the brave men and chivalrous men would rather go to death and never look back, the reason is in Xiangxiang.

古文：下官闻仁不可恃，善不可依，始谓徒语，乃今知之。
现代文：我听说仁和善都不可依靠，一开始我认为这是虚话，到今天才明白其中的道理。
English: I heard that kindness and goodness cannot be relied on. At first, I thought this was a lie, but today I understand the reason.

古文：伏愿大王暂停左右，少加怜鉴。
现代文：我诚恳地希望大王暂且停止身边的事务，稍稍施予我些许怜悯和鉴察。
English: I sincerely hope that the great king will temporarily stop the affairs around him and give me a little bit of mercy and inspection.

古文：下官本蓬户桑枢之民，布衣韦带之士，退不饰《诗书》以惊愚，进不买名声于天下。
现代文：我本是住在用蓬草编门桑树做户枢的简陋房屋裹，身穿麻布衣服，腰系韦皮带的无官之人。退居时不用《诗》《书》装饰自己来惊骇愚人，进用时也不向天下人收买名声。
English: I used to live in a humble house with a door made of mulberry and a door made of pengcao, wearing a linen dress and a loincloth belt. When I retired, I didn't have to decorate myself with "poems" and "books" to shock the stupid, and when I went to work, I didn't buy fame from the world.

古文：日者谬得升降承明之阙，出入金华之殿，何尝不局影凝严，侧身扃禁者乎？
现代文：先前，我侥幸能在承明宫阙裹上下，在金华宫殿中出入，我何曾不拘束我的形影，凝聚我的庄严，侧身行走于宫门禁中呢?
English: Previously, I had the good fortune to be able to enter and exit the Jinhua Palace, wrapped in the Chengming Palace robe. Why had I not restrained my figure, condensed my solemnity, and walked sideways in the palace gate?

古文：窃慕大王之义，为门下之宾，备鸣盗浅术之余，豫三五贱伎之末。
现代文：我敬慕大王的道义，才成为您门下的宾客，我准备了些许鸡呜狗盗之类的浅薄之术，还预备了三五种贱技的细枝末节。
English: I admired the morality of the great king, so I became a guest under your door. I prepared some shallow techniques such as chicken, dog, and thief, and also prepared the details of three or five low-level techniques.

古文：大王惠以恩光，眄以颜色。
现代文：大王把恩泽光辉施惠于我，和颜悦色地眄枧我。
English: The Great King has bestowed his grace and glory upon me, and he has blessed me with a pleasant countenance.

古文：实佩荆卿黄金之赐，窃感豫让国士之分矣。
现代文：遣实际上是使我如同佩有荆卿那样的黄金赏赐，私下襄感到如享有豫让那样的国士的名分了。
English: In fact, it was a golden reward that made me feel like I was wearing Jingqing, and I felt like I was enjoying the status of a statesman.

古文：常欲结缨伏剑，少谢万一，剖心摩踵，以报所天。
现代文：我常想结好帽带身伏利剑，从容就死，来稍稍感谢大王的恩德于万一，披肝沥胆摩顶放踵，来报答大王。
English: I have often thought of tying my bonnets and strapping on my sword, so that I can die with ease, to thank the great king for his kindness in case of need, and to repay the great king with my heart on my sleeve.

古文：不图小人固陋，坐贻谤缺，迹坠昭宪，身限幽圄。
现代文：不料小人固塞鄙陋，遂给我留下诽谤毁损之辞，使我的业迹坠毁于昭明的法令，身体受限制于幽冷的囹圄。
English: Unexpectedly, the villain consolidated his meanness, leaving me with slanderous and damaging words, causing my career to crash into a clear decree, and my body to be restricted to a cold cocoon.

古文：履影吊心，酸鼻痛骨。
现代文：我踩踏自己的身影，怜悯自己的心情，每每鼻子发酸，痛入骨髓。
English: I trample on my own shadow, pity my own mood, every nose is sour, it hurts into the bone marrow.

古文：下官闻亏名为辱，亏形次之，是以每一念来，忽若有遗。
现代文：我听说使声名受损是最大的耻辱，使形体受损伤还在其次，所以每一次这些念头上来，心中恍惚，如同有所遣失。
English: I have heard it said that it is the greatest disgrace to have one's reputation tarnished, and the second greatest disgrace to have one's body tarnished, so every time these thoughts come to my mind, I feel as if I have lost something.

古文：加以涉旬月，迫季秋，天光沉阴，左右无色。
现代文：再加上时间已遇了一个月，迫近秋末。天色阴沉，周围没有好景色。
English: In addition, the time has been a month, approaching the end of autumn. The sky is gloomy, and there is no good scenery around.

古文：身非木石，与狱吏为伍。
现代文：我的身体不是木头也不是石头，却和狱中吏卒为伍。
English: My body is neither wood nor stone, but I am in the company of prison officers.

古文：此少卿所以仰天搥心，泣尽而继之以血者也。
现代文：这也正是尘型仰天长叹捶心自责，眼泪流尽接着流血的原因。
English: This is also the reason for the long sighing and self-reproach of the dust type, the tears flowed out and then the blood flowed.

古文：下官虽乏乡曲之誉，然尝闻君子之行矣。
现代文：我虽然缺乏乡里部曲的赞誉，但是也曾听说遇君子的德行。
English: Although I lack the praise of the rural folk songs, I have also heard of the virtues of the gentleman.

古文：其上则隐于帘肆之间，卧于岩石之下；次则结绶金马之庭，高议云台之上；次则虏南越之君，系单于之颈：俱启丹册，并图青史。
现代文：首先就是隐身于市肆之间，退居安卧在山林岩石之下；其次就是在金马之庭上佩结印绶，在云台之上高谈阔论；再其次就是俘虏南越国君，系住单于的颈子：遣都能启用丹书铁券，留名青史。
English: First of all, it is to hide among the markets and retreat to lie down under the rocks of the mountains and forests; secondly, it is to wear a seal on the Golden Horse Garden and talk about it on the top of the Yuntai; and secondly, it is to capture the South Vietnamese sovereign and tie it to the neck of the individual: all of them can use the Dan Shu Iron Coupon and remain in history.

古文：宁当争分寸之末，竞刀锥之利哉！
现代文：人难道应当争夺一分一寸这样的微小益处，竞争刀刃锥尖这样的细小利益吗!
English: Ought a man to strive for so small a gain as a penny, or for so small a gain as the point of a hatchet?

古文：然下官闻积毁销金，积谗糜骨。
现代文：可是我听说毁谤的话积累多了可销熔金子，谗言积累多了可以使骨头糜烂。
English: But I have heard that the more slander one accumulates, the more gold one can sell. The more slander one accumulates, the more one's bones can rot.

古文：古则直生取疑于盗金，近则伯鱼被名于不义。
现代文：古代的直生被怀疑有盗窃金子的行为，近世的伯鱼被加上不义的名声。
English: In ancient times, Naosho was suspected of stealing gold, and in modern times, the egret was given an unfair reputation.

古文：彼之二才，犹或如此；况在下官，焉能自免。
现代文：他们这样两个贤才尚且如此，何况事情发生在我的身上，我哪裹能使自己免祸。
English: They are two such geniuses, and what's more, it happened to me, and I can't save myself.

古文：昔上将之耻，绛侯幽狱；名臣之羞，史迁下室，如下官尚何言哉！
现代文：从前上将军遭受的耻辱，可以举出绛侯系囚在牢狱中的例子；名臣所受的羞辱，可以举出史迁被下蚕室遭受宫刑的例子，像我这样的遭遇还有什么话说呢。
English: The humiliation suffered by a former general can be exemplified by the example of a member of the imperial family imprisoned in a dungeon; the humiliation suffered by a distinguished minister can be exemplified by the example of being banished from the palace and subjected to torture in a silkworm cell. What else is there to say about such an experience as mine?

古文：夫鲁连之智，辞禄而不反；接舆之贤，行歌而忘归。
现代文：鲁连有智慧，辞去俸禄而无反顾；接舆贤明，边行边唱忘记归去。
English: Lulian had the wisdom to resign his salary without hesitation; he was wise enough to listen to public opinion, and he sang while walking, forgetting to return home.

古文：子陵闭关于东越，仲蔚杜门于西秦，亦良可知也。
现代文：王陵在东越闭关自守，仲蔚在西秦杜门谢客，他们也很可以理解。
English: Wang Ling kept a low profile in East Vietnam, and Zhong Wei thanked guests at the Western Qin Dumen, which is understandable.

古文：若使下官事非其虚，罪得其实，亦当钳口吞舌，伏匕首以殒身，何以见齐鲁奇节之人，燕赵悲歌之士乎？方今圣历钦明，天下乐业，青云浮雒，荣光塞河。
现代文：假如我的事不是这样虚假不实，而是罪名与实际相符，那么我就应当闭不言，身伏匕首来殒灭自身，我还有什么面目见齐鲁那些有奇节的人，燕趟那些慷慨悲歌之士呢如今圣上理政英明，天下人安居乐业，青云飘浮在雒水的上空，荣光充塞黄河。
English: If my case is not so false and untrue, but the crime is consistent with the reality, then I should shut up and kill myself with a dagger. What kind of face do I have to see those who have strange festivals, those who are generous with sad songs? Nowadays, the Supreme Ruler is wise, the people of the world live in peace and happiness, the clouds float in the sky of Surabaya, and the glory fills the Yellow River.

古文：西洎临洮、狄道，北距飞狐、阳原，莫不浸仁沐义，照景饮醴。
现代文：西到临洮、狄道，北到飞狐、阳原，没有不沉浸沐浴在仁义的恩泽裹的，人们揽镜照影，饮用甘甜的美酒。
English: From the west to Linyi and Didao, and from the north to Feihu and Yangyuan, there is no one who is not immersed in the grace of benevolence and righteousness. People take pictures and drink sweet wine.

古文：而下官抱痛圜门，含愤狱户，一物之微，有足悲者。
现代文：然而我却在牢狱裹抱深痛含悲愤，逭一件事情虽然微小，却有值得悲伤的地方。
English: However, I was in prison with a deep sorrow and indignation, and although it was a small thing, it had something to be sad about.

古文：仰惟大王少垂明白，则梧丘之魂，不愧于沉首；鹄亭之鬼，无恨于灰骨。
现代文：我恳求大王稍稍垂察，把我的事弄个明白，果真如此，那么梧丘的冤魂，就不会因为头颅变成水中污泥而羞愧；鹄亭的游鬼，也不会因为骨朽为灰而遣憾。
English: I begged the king to take a closer look and understand my situation. If this is the case, then the evil spirits of Wuqiu will not be ashamed because their heads have turned into watery sludge, and the wandering ghosts of Fengting will not be sorry because their bones have turned to ashes.

古文：不任肝胆之切，敬因执事以闻。
现代文：我不能忍受肺腑之情的急切，衹得恭敬地通过大王左右的人来使您闻悉我的事情。
English: I can't bear the desperate eagerness with which I'm respectfully trying to make you aware of my situation through the people around the king.

古文：此心既照，死且不朽。
现代文：我的遣片心意已经宣明，那就死也将不朽了。
English: My sentimental thoughts have been declared, then death will also be immortal.

古文：景素览书，即日出之。
现代文：景素看过逭封上书后，当天就放出了江淹。
English: After Jing Su read the seal of the seal, he released the river flood on the same day.

古文：寻举南徐州秀才，对策上第，转巴陵王国左常侍。
现代文：不久又举拔江淹为南徐州秀才，江淹对答皇帝的策问，结果列入最上等，转任巴陵王国左常侍。
English: Not long after that, Bajiangtang was promoted to the Southern Xuzhou Distinguished Talents. Jiangtang answered the emperor's inquiry, and as a result, he was included in the highest grade and transferred to the post of the Left Attendant of the Kingdom of Baling.

古文：景素为荆州，淹从之镇。
现代文：景素担任荆州刺史，江淹随从他到镇所。
English: Jing Su served as the chief historian of Jingzhou, and Jiang Dun followed him to the town.

古文：少帝即位，多失德。
现代文：少童即位，言行多失帝德。
English: When a child succeeds to the throne, his words and actions often lack the virtue of a father.

古文：景素专据上流，咸劝因此举事。
现代文：景素专擅倨傲，控制着上流之地，人们都劝景素趁此时发动事变。
English: As Jing Su was very proud and controlled the upper stream, people advised him to take advantage of this time to start a revolution.

古文：淹每从容谏曰： 流言纳祸，二叔所以同亡；抵局衔怨，七国于焉俱毙。
现代文：江淹每每耐心地劝谏景素说： 谣言会招致灾祸，这是二叔同亡的原因；抵触怨恨、器度狭小，七国就都为此而遭到灭亡。
English: Jiang Dunbei patiently advised Yao Jingsu, saying: "Rumors will bring disaster, which is the reason why the two uncles died together; resentment, narrow-mindedness, the seven countries were all destroyed for this reason.

古文：殿下不求宗庙之安，而信左右之计，则复见麋鹿霜露栖于姑苏之台矣。 景素不纳。
现代文：殿下您不求宗庙的安定，却偏信左右的计谋，那么麋鹿霜露栖息布满姑苏台的惨景又要重现了。 
English: Your highness, you do not seek the stability of the ancestral temple, but are partial to the right and left stratagems, then the tragic scene of the elk's frost-dew roosting all over the Gu Sudai will reappear.

古文：及镇京口，淹又为镇军参军事，领南东海郡丞。
现代文：景素却不采纳他的忠言。等到景素镇守京，江淹又随任镇军参军事，领南东海郡丞。
English: However, Jing Su did not accept his loyal advice. It was not until Jing Su was in charge of the capital and the river flooded that he joined the military as a member of the town's army and became the county magistrate of the South East Sea.

古文：景素与腹心日夜谋议，淹知祸机将发，乃赠诗十五首以讽焉。
现代文：景素此时与，腹们日夜密谋计议，江淹知道祸乱机变将要发生，就写了十五首诗赠送给景素来讽谏他。
English: At this time, Jingsu was plotting and scheming day and night with his vassals. Knowing that disaster and turmoil were about to happen, he wrote fifteen poems and presented them to Jingsu to tease him.

古文：会南东海太守陆澄丁艰，淹自谓郡丞应行郡事，景素用司马柳世隆。
现代文：造时碰上南东海太守陆澄守丧离任，江淹认为自己作为郡丞应该处理郡务，景素却任用司马柳世隆主管郡事。
English: At the time of construction, Lu Chengshu, the governor of the South East China Sea, passed away and left his post. Jiang Wan thought that he should deal with county affairs as the county magistrate, but Jing Su appointed Sima Liu Shilong to be in charge of county affairs.

古文：淹固求之，景素大怒，言于选部，黜为建安吴兴令。
现代文：江淹坚持要求管理郡事，景素大怒，把此事告诉选部，结果江淹被贬官为建安吴兴令。
English: Jiang Dun insisted on managing county affairs. Jing Su was furious and reported the matter to the election department. As a result, Jiang Dun was demoted to Jian An Wu Xingling.

古文：淹在县三年。
现代文：江淹在吴兴县任职三年。
English: Jiang has served in Wuxing County for three years.

古文：升明初，齐帝辅政，闻其才，召为尚书驾部郎、骠骑参军事。
现代文：升明年初，齐壹辅助朝政，听说了江淹的才能，就征召他为尚书驾部郎、骠骑参军事。
English: At the beginning of the next year, Zhi Yi assisted the imperial government, and when he heard of Jiang Dun's talent, he conscripted him to be his driver and cavalryman in the military.

古文：俄而荆州刺史沈攸之作乱，高帝谓淹曰： 天下纷纷若是，君谓何如？ 
现代文：不久荆州刺史沈攸之发动叛乱，高帝对江淹说： 天下如此纷乱，您说该怎么办? 
English: Soon after the rebellion was launched by Jingzhou assassin Shen You, Emperor Gao said to Jiang Dun: The world is in such a mess, what do you think should be done?

古文：淹对曰： 昔项强而刘弱，袁众而曹寡，羽号令诸侯，卒受一剑之辱，绍跨蹑四州，终为奔北之虏。
现代文：江淹回答说： 往昔项羽强大而刘邦弱小，袁绍兵多而曹操兵少。项羽虽然号令诸侯，却终于遭受用一剑刎颈而死的耻辱；袁趋曾经据有四州，却最终成为奔亡败北之人。
English: Jiang Dun replied: In the past, Xiang Yu was powerful and Liu Bang was weak, Yuan Shao had more soldiers and Cao Cao had fewer soldiers. Although Xiang Yu commanded the lords, he finally suffered the shame of dying with a sword on his neck; Yuan Xian once controlled four states, but eventually became a man who was defeated.

古文：此谓 在德不在鼎 。
现代文：造就叫 重在德行而不在显赫 。
English: The emphasis is on excellence, not prominence.

古文：公何疑哉？ 
现代文：您疑虑什么呢。 
English: What are your doubts about?

古文：帝曰： 闻此言者多矣，试为虑之。 
现代文：高帝说： 这样的话我已听过很多了，还是请您试着替我分析一下。 
English: Gao Di said: I have heard a lot of things like this, but please try to analyze it for me.

古文：淹曰： 公雄武有奇略，一胜也；宽容而仁恕，二胜也；贤能毕力，三胜也；民望所归，四胜也；奉天子而伐叛逆，五胜也。
现代文：江淹说： 您雄壮英武有奇谋异略，这是取胜的第一个条件；您宽厚容忍又仁爱忠恕，这是取胜的第二个条件；天下贤才能人都愿为您尽力，这是取胜的第三个条件；您是民心所向的人，这是取胜的第四个条件；您帮助天子去讨伐叛逆，这是取胜的第五个条件。
English: Jiang Dun said: You are strong, brave, and resourceful, which is the first condition for victory; you are generous, tolerant, kind, and loyal, which is the second condition for victory; all the wise and talented people in the world are willing to do their best for you, which is the third condition for victory; you are a people-oriented person, which is the fourth condition for victory; you help the Son of Heaven to fight against rebellion, which is the fifth condition for victory.

古文：彼志锐而器小，一败也；有威而无恩，二败也；士卒解体，三败也；搢绅不怀，四败也；悬兵数千里，而无同恶相济，五败也。
现代文：他们虽然志气锐利但是器量狭小，这是他们会失败的第一个原因；他们有威势却刻薄无恩惠，这是他们会失败的第二个原因；他们的士兵人心涣散，四分五裂，这是他们失败的第三个原因；官宦不支持他们，这是他们失败的第四个原因；他们孤军深入几千里，却没有同伙相助，这是他们失败的第五个原因。
English: The first reason why they will fail is that they are ambitious but narrow-minded; the second reason why they will fail is that they are powerful but mean and ungracious; the third reason why they will fail is that their soldiers are scattered and disunited; the fourth reason why they will fail is that the officials do not support them; the fifth reason why they will fail is that they have advanced thousands of miles alone and have no allies to help them.

古文：故虽豺狼十万，而终为我获焉。 
现代文：所以他们虽有十万豺狼之兵，但是终将被我们俘获。 
English: So even though they have a hundred thousand jackal soldiers, they will eventually be captured by us.

古文：帝笑曰： 君谈过矣。 
现代文：高帝笑着说： 您说得过分了。 
English: Gao Di said with a smile: You have gone too far.

古文：是时军书表记，皆使淹具草。
现代文：遣时军事上的书、表、记，都让江淹起草备办。
English: The military books, schedules, and records of the time of the expedition were all drafted and prepared by Jiangun.

古文：相国建，补记室参军事。
现代文：相国府建立，补授江淹记室参军事。
English: A sister-state government was established, and Jiangnanzhi was given the additional title of Chamberlain of the Military.

古文：建元初，又为骠骑豫章王记室，带东武令，参掌诏册，并典国史。
现代文：建元初年，他又担任骠骑豫章王记室，带东武令，参与掌管诏书典册，并且执掌编修国史。
English: In the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, he also served as the secretary of the Office of the Prince of Yuzhang, took charge of the Eastern Military Command, participated in the management of the Imperial Rescript, and was in charge of compiling the national history.

古文：寻迁中书侍郎。
现代文：不久迁任中书侍郎。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of junior secretary.

古文：永明初，迁骁骑将军，掌国史。
现代文：永明年初，又迁任骁骑将军，执掌国史修撰。
English: At the beginning of the Ming Dynasty, he was transferred to the post of General of Cavalry, in charge of compiling the national history.

古文：出为建武将军、庐陵内史。
现代文：后出京担任建武将军、庐陵内史。
English: After that, he went to Kyoto to serve as a general of the Kenmu army and a historian of the Imperial mausoleum.

古文：视事三年，还为骁骑将军，兼尚书左丞，寻复以本官领国子博士。
现代文：在任主事三年，又回京任骁骑将军，兼任尚书左丞，不久又以本官职领国子博士。
English: He served as the chief for three years, and then returned to Beijing as the general of the cavalry, concurrently serving as the secretary of the left, and soon he was promoted to the position of the leader of Dr. Kuniko.

古文：少帝初，以本官兼御史中丞。
现代文：少帝即位之初，江淹又以本官职兼任御史中丞。
English: At the beginning of the young emperor's accession to the throne, Jiang Rong also took on the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：时明帝作相，因谓淹曰： 君昔在尚书中，非公事不妄行，在官宽猛能折衷；今为南司，足以震肃百僚。 
现代文：此时明帝担任相职，就对江淹说： 您先前在尚书省时，不是公家的事决不轻妄行动，为官既宽容又严厉，还能折衷调和；现在您任南司之职，足以震慑整肃百官。 
English: At this time, Emperor Ming, who held the post of chancellor, said to Jiang Yu: When you were in Shangshu Province, you never acted rashly in matters that were not public affairs. As an official, you were both tolerant and strict, but you could also compromise; now that you hold the post of Nanshi, it is enough to shock and purify hundreds of officials.

古文：淹答曰： 今日之事，可谓当官而行，更恐才劣志薄，不足以仰称明旨耳。 
现代文：江淹回答说： 今天的事，衹能说是按照官员的本分去行事，我更害怕自己才能低劣，意志薄弱，不能够与圣上英明的旨意相称。 
English: Jiang replied, "In today's matter, I can only say that it is best to act according to the duty of officials. I am more afraid of my inferior talent, weak will, and not being able to be commensurate with the holy and wise will.

古文：于是弹中书令谢朏，司徒左长史王缋、护军长史庾弘远，并以久疾不预山陵公事；又奏前益州刺史刘悛、梁州刺史阴智伯，并赃货巨万，辄收付廷尉治罪。
现代文：于是江淹弹劾中书令谢础、司徒左长史王绩、护军长史庾弘远，都是因为长时间生病而不参与帝陵公事；又劾奏前益州刺史刘悛、凿业刺史壁垒啦，都是贪污受贿得钱物多以万计，这些人就被收交廷尉治罪。
English: As a result, in the impeachment of Jiang Dun, the impeachment of Xie Bin, the impeachment of Szeto Zuo, the impeachment of Wang Bi, the impeachment of Shih Hongyuan, were all because of long-term illness and did not participate in the imperial mausoleum affairs; and the impeachment of the former Yizhou stabbing Liu Bei, the impeachment of the former Yizhou stabbing Liu Bei, and the impeachment of the former Yizhou stabbing Barriers, were all corruption and bribery.

古文：临海太守沈昭略、永嘉太守庾昙隆，及诸郡二千石并大县官长，多被劾治，内外肃然。
现代文：临海太守沈昭略、永嘉太守庾昙隆以及各郡的二千石和大县的官长，多被弹劾治罪，朝廷内外因此而庄严安定。
English: Linhai Dazhong Shen Zhaoli, Yongjia Dazhong Yaolong, as well as the governors of counties of 2,000 koku and large counties, were mostly impeached and punished, and the imperial court and beyond were thus solemnly stable.

古文：明帝谓淹曰： 宋世以来，不复有严明中丞，君今日可谓近世独步。 
现代文：明帝对江淹说： 宋代以来，不再有严明的御史中丞了，您现在可以称得上是近世独一无二的了。 
English: Emperor Ming said to Jiang Dun: Since the Song Dynasty, there is no longer a strict imperial historian, and you can now be said to be unique in the modern world.

古文：明帝即位，为车骑临海王长史。
现代文：明帝即位后，任命江淹为车骑临海王长史。
English: After the Ming Emperor ascended the throne, he appointed Jiang Dun as the chariot-riding Linhai King Changshi.

古文：俄除廷尉卿，加给事中，迁冠军长史，加辅国将军。
现代文：不久又官拜廷尉卿，加给事中，又迁任冠军长史，加辅国将军。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of Lieutenant General Beiting, and in the middle of the matter, he was transferred to the position of Champion Changshi, General of Qayuo Province.

古文：出为宣城太守，将军如故。
现代文：后出京任宣城太守，仍旧担任辅国将军之职。
English: After that, he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Xuancheng, and still served as the adjutant general.

古文：在郡四年，还为黄门侍郎、领步兵校尉，寻为秘书监。
现代文：在宣城郡任职四年，江淹又回到京城任黄门侍郎、领步兵校尉，不久又担任秘书监之职。
English: After serving in Xuancheng County for four years, Jiang returned to Beijing to serve as Huangmen waiter, infantry captain, and soon held the position of secretary.

古文：永元中，崔慧景举兵围京城，衣冠悉投名刺，淹称疾不往。
现代文：永元年间，崔慧景兴兵包围京城，士绅官宦都去投名帖，拜谒结交，江淹却假称有病不去。
English: During the Yongyuan era, Cui Hui Jing Xing's soldiers besieged Beijing. The gentry, officials and commoners all went to cast their ballots and make friends, but Jiang Wan did not go, pretending to be ill.

古文：及事平，世服其先见。
现代文：等到叛乱被平息，世人都佩服江淹有先见之明。
English: By the time the rebellion was quelled, the world was in awe of Jiang's foresight.

古文：东昏末，淹以秘书监兼卫尉，固辞不获免，遂亲职。
现代文：东昏侯末年，江淹以秘书监之职兼任卫尉，他坚持辞谢，但是没有获得同意，于是只好上任。
English: At the end of the Eastern Zhou Dynasty, Jiang Rong took the post of secretary supervisor and concurrently served as a guard lieutenant. He insisted on resigning, but did not get approval, so he had to take up the post.

古文：谓人曰： 此非吾任，路人所知，正取吾空名耳。
现代文：江淹曾对人说： 卫尉之职不是我能胜任的，这连路人都知道，让我兼任卫尉，祇不过看取了我的虚名罢了。
English: Jiang Dun once said to someone: "I am not competent enough to be a guard lieutenant. Even passers-by know this. If I were to serve as a guard lieutenant, it would only be to gain a false reputation.

古文：且天时人事，寻当翻覆。
现代文：况且天时人事，不久就要发生变化。
English: Moreover, there are changes in personnel all the time, and there will be changes soon.

古文：孔子曰： 有文事者必有武备。 
现代文：孔子说过： 有文的事务的人必有武的准备。 
English: Confucius said: "He who has literary affairs must be prepared for war."

古文：临事图之，何忧之有？ 
现代文：事情临头时再去图谋它，又有什么好忧虑的呢? 
English: What is there to worry about if you try to do it again when the time comes?

古文：顷之，又副领军王莹。
现代文：不久，又做领军王莹的副职。
English: Soon, she became the deputy of the leader Wang Ying.

古文：及义师至新林，淹微服来奔，高祖板为冠军将军，秘书监如故，寻兼司徒左长史。
现代文：等到义师到达塞丘叠，辽渣身穿便服前来投奔，产担下韶书任命江淹为冠军将军，仍做秘书监，不久又兼任司徒左长史。
English: When the righteous teacher arrived in Setouchi, Liao Jia, dressed in casual clothes, came to join him. He appointed Jiang Wan as the champion general under the auspices of Ying Shu, and still worked as a secretary supervisor. Soon, he also served as the chief historian of Stuzhou.

古文：中兴元年，迁吏部尚书。二年，转相国右长史，冠军将军如故。
现代文：中兴元年，迁任吏部尚书，二年，转任相国右长史，仍旧担任冠军将军。
English: In the first year of the reformation, he was transferred to the post of cadre Shangshu, and in the second year, he was transferred to the post of Minister of State for the Right Long History, and still served as the champion general.

古文：天监元年，为散骑常侍、左卫将军，封临沮县开国伯，食邑四百户。
现代文：丢监元年，避任散骑常侍、左卫将军，被封为临沮县开国伯，封地有四百户。
English: In the first year after losing supervision, he avoided the position of straggler, general of the left, and was named the founding count of Lingshui County, with a fief of four hundred households.

古文：淹乃谓子弟曰： 吾本素宦，不求富贵，今之忝窃，遂至于此。
现代文：江淹就对子弟们说： 我本来是普通官员，不追求功名富贵，现在窃居高位，于是就到了富贵的地步。
English: Jiang Dun said to his sons: I was originally an ordinary official, not pursuing fame and fortune, but now I am in a high position, so I have become rich.

古文：平生言止足之事，亦以备矣。
现代文：我平生好谈知止知足的事，现在也已经很完备了。
English: I've always been good at talking about contentment, and now I'm all set.

古文：人生行乐耳，须富贵何时。
现代文：人生不过是行乐罢了，贪求富贵要到何时。
English: Life is but a sport. How long must we pursue riches?

古文：吾功名既立，正欲归身草莱耳。 
现代文：我的功名既然已经建立，正想退身到草野中去。 
English: Now that my reputation has been established, I'm thinking of retiring to the meadows.

古文：其年，以疾迁金紫光禄大夫，改封醴陵侯。
现代文：那一年，他因病迁任金紫光禄大夫，改封醴陵伯。
English: That year, due to illness, he was transferred to the position of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, and changed his title to Gong Ling Bo.

古文：四年卒，时年六十二。
现代文：天监四年，江渣去世，此时他六十二岁。
English: In the fourth year of Tianjun, Jiang Jie passed away, at this time he was 62 years old.

古文：高祖为素服举哀。赙钱三万，布五十匹。
现代文：直祖为江淹穿素服尽哀，赐钱三万、布五十匹作为办理丧事之用。
English: The direct ancestor dressed in plain clothes to mourn for Jiang, and gave him thirty thousand yuan and fifty pieces of cloth for the funeral.

古文：谥曰宪伯。
现代文：江淹的谧号叫宪伯。
English: The nickname of Jiangtang is Xianbo.

古文：淹少以文章显，晚节才思微退，时人皆谓之才尽。
现代文：红痉年少时，因为文章做得好而显名，晚年才思衰微退化，当时的人都说他是才思枯竭。
English: When Hongyao was young, he was famous for his well-done articles. It was only in his later years that his mind began to deteriorate. At that time, people said that his mind was exhausted.

古文：凡所著述百余篇，自撰为前后集，并《齐史》十志，并行于世。
现代文：他总共著述有百余篇作品，自己编撰为前后两集，他还着有《齐史》十志，一起在世上流传。
English: In total, he wrote more than a hundred works, which he compiled into two parts. He also wrote the "Qi Shi" (Qi History) ten books, which have been circulated around the world.

古文：子筼袭封嗣，自丹阳尹丞为长城令，有罪削爵。
现代文：江淹的儿子江荐承袭封地爵位，从丹阳尹丞做到长城令，因为有罪而被削去封爵。
English: Jiang Yu's son, Jiang Xian, inherited the fief and knighthood, from Danyang Yinzheng to the Great Wall Order, and was stripped of his knighthood because of his guilt.

古文：普通四年，高祖追念淹功，复封筼吴昌伯，邑如先。
现代文：普通四年，追思怀念道的功绩，又封丝姜为呈旦伯，封地仍像先前一样。
English: After four years, he thought about the merits of the Way of Recollection, and sealed the silk and ginger as a gift, and the fief was still the same as before.

古文：任昉，字彦升，乐安博昌人，汉御史大夫敖之后也。
现代文：任防字彦升，是乐安博昌人，漠代御史大夫邀的后代。
English: Renbo Zi Yan Sheng is a descendant of Le An Bo Changren, who was invited by Dr. Mushiro Mishi.

古文：父遥，齐中散大夫。
现代文：父亲名遥，是齐的中散大夫。
English: His father was a famous doctor in Zhongshan, Qi.

古文：遥妻裴氏，尝昼寝，梦有彩旗盖四角悬铃，自天而坠，其一铃落入裴怀中，心悸动，既而有娠，生昉。
现代文：任遥的妻子是苤旦，曾经白天睡觉，梦见有彩旗华盖四角悬挂小铃，从天而降，其中一个小铃落入裴氏怀中，裴氏心有触动，不久就有了身孕，生下任堕。
English: Ren Yao's wife, Xidan, used to sleep during the day, and dreamed of a small bell hanging from the four corners of the bunting, falling from the sky. One of the small bells fell into Pei's arms. Pei's heart was touched, and she soon became pregnant and gave birth to Ren Pu.

古文：身长七尺五寸。
现代文：任堕身高七尺五寸。
English: Ren is 7'5" tall.

古文：幼而好学，早知名。
现代文：他年幼时就好学，很早就出了名。
English: He was a quick learner at a young age and became famous early on.

古文：宋丹阳尹刘秉辟为主簿。
现代文：宋丹阳尹刘秉征召他为主簿。
English: Song Danyang Yin Liu Bing recruited him as the main book.

古文：时昉年十六，以气忤秉子。
现代文：当时任堕才十六岁，因为年少气盛而忤逆刘秉的儿子。
English: At that time, Ren Pu was only 16 years old, the son of Liu Bing, who was rebellious because of his youthful exuberance.

古文：久之，为奉朝请，举兗州秀才，拜太常博士，迁征北行参军。
现代文：很久以后，担任奉朝请之职，被举荐为兖州秀才，官拜太常博士，迁任征北行参军。
English: After a long time, he held the position of being invited by the North Korean government, was recommended as a talented person in Zhangzhou, and was promoted to the position of doctor. He was transferred to the north to join the army.

古文：永明初，卫将军王俭领丹阳尹，复引为主簿。
现代文：永明初年，卫将军王俭领丹阳尹，又延引任堕为主簿。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the Wei general Wang Jian led Danyang Yin, and he was appointed as the main book.

古文：俭雅钦重昉，以为当时无辈。
现代文：王侩很钦佩看重任堕，认为当时没有人能和他相比。
English: Wang Yao admired Ren Zhuang very much and thought that no one could compare with him at that time.

古文：迁司徒刑狱参军事，入为尚书殿中郎，转司徒竟陵王记室参军，以父忧去职。
现代文：任防又迁任司徒刑狱参军事，入内阁担任尚书殿中郎，转任司徒竟陵王记室参军，后因父亲去世守丧离职。
English: He was appointed to the defense, transferred to the post of the chief of the prison guards, joined the military, entered the cabinet as the vice-chairman of the Imperial Household Agency, transferred to the post of the chief of the Imperial Household Agency, joined the army, and then left the post due to the death of his father.

古文：性至孝，居丧尽礼。
现代文：任防性情极孝顺，居丧时克尽礼节。
English: They are extremely filial in nature, and they are very polite at the time of death.

古文：服阕，续遭母忧，常庐于墓侧，哭泣之地，草为不生。
现代文：他刚除去丧服，又接着遭遇丧母之痛，因为长期在父母墓侧住庐守坟，哭泣过的地方，草木因此不再生长。
English: He had just removed his mourning clothes, and then he suffered the pain of losing his mother, because for a long time he stood at the side of his parents' grave and wept. Where he had wept, the plants and trees no longer grew.

古文：服除，拜太子步兵校尉、管东宫书记。
现代文：丧服除去后，任防官拜太子步兵校尉、管东宫书记。
English: After removing the mourning clothes, he was appointed the defense officer, the prince's infantry lieutenant, and the secretary of the East Palace.

古文：初，齐明帝既废郁林王，始为侍中、中书监、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史、录尚书事，封宣城郡公，加兵五千，使昉具表草。
现代文：当初，齐明帝已经废去郁林王，开始做诗中、中书监、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史、录尚书事，被封为宣城郡公，加兵五千。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Qiming had already abolished the King of Yulin, and began to be a poet, a Chinese librarian, a cavalry general, a member of the three departments of the Kaifu Rites, a historian of Yangzhou, and a recorder of records. He was appointed the governor of Xuancheng County, with an additional five thousand soldiers.

古文：其辞曰： 臣本庸才，智力浅短。
现代文：让型左准备奏表的草稿。任堕起草的奏表的辞语是： 我本是庸才，智慧能力都很浅薄短小。
English: Let type left prepare a draft of the report card. The wording of the report card drafted by Ren Rui is: I am a mediocre talent, and my intellectual ability is shallow and short.

古文：太祖高皇帝笃犹子之爱，降家人之慈；世祖武皇帝情等布衣，寄深同气。
现代文：太担直皇童对我加深像对待子女一样的恩爱，降下对待家人的仁慈；世祖武皇帝对我这个布衣之人感情平等，寄托深厚，精神相同。
English: Emperor Taizhanzhong deepened his love for me as if I were his child, and lowered his benevolence towards my family; Emperor Shizhuwu treated me as a man of cloth with equal feelings, deep trust, and the same spirit.

古文：武皇大渐，实奉诏言。
现代文：武皇病危，我确实遵奉诏言。
English: Emperor Wu is critically ill. I have indeed obeyed the edict.

古文：虽自见之明，庸近所蔽，愚夫一至，偶识量己，实不忍自固于缀衣之辰，拒违于玉几之侧，遂荷顾托，导扬末命。
现代文：人们虽然有自见之明，但仍然会因为亲近而受蒙蔽；愚陋的人偶尔还记得衡量自己，我实在不忍心自己固执于缀衣之辰，抗拒违命于玉几之侧，于是承受高皇、武皇的垂顾嘱托，引导弘扬微末的命运。
English: Although people have self-awareness, they will still be blinded by closeness; stupid people occasionally remember to measure themselves. I really can't bear myself to be stubborn in decorating clothes and resisting disobeying orders to be on the side of the Jade Emperor, so I can bear the patronage of the High Emperor and the Emperor Wu and guide the promotion of the fate of the tiny.

古文：虽嗣君弃常，获罪宣德，王室不造，职臣之由。
现代文：虽然嗣位之君废弃纲常，那是获罪于宣德；王室没有成就，那是臣的原因。
English: Although the heir to the throne abandoned the routine, it was a crime of proclamation; the royal family did not succeed, that was the reason for the vassal.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：亲则东牟，任惟博陆，徒怀子孟社稷之对，何救昌邑争臣之讥。
现代文：亲近的就是东牟，任用的祇有博陆，人们空怀子孟治国之道，如何能救昌邑谏静之臣所受的讥讽。
English: It is Dongmou that is close, only Bolu is appointed, and people ridicule the way of governing the country, how can they save the quiet vassals of Changyi.

古文：四海之议，于何逃责？
现代文：四海之内的议论，我有何理由逃避责任。
English: All over the world, people are talking about how I have no reason to avoid responsibility.

古文：陵土未乾，训誓在耳，家国之事，一至于斯，非臣之尤，谁任其咎！
现代文：先王陵墓泥土未干，先王训誓言犹在耳，可是家国之事，竟到了这种地步，不是我的过错，又有谁能承担这个过错!
English: The soil of the former king's mausoleum is not dry, and the former king's oath is still in my ears, but it is not my fault that the matter of my homeland has come to this point, and who can bear this fault!

古文：将何以肃拜高寝，虔奉武园？
现代文：我将如何严肃地拜谒高皇陵寝，虔诚地侍奉武皇的陵园?
English: How will I solemnly pay homage to the tomb of Emperor Gao and piously serve the tomb of Emperor Wu?

古文：悼心失图，泣血待旦。
现代文：内心伤悼，失魂落魄，彻夜难眠，眼泪流尽，接着流血。
English: Heartbroken, distraught, sleepless nights, tears, and then bloodshed.

古文：宁容复徼荣于家耻，宴安于国危。
现代文：哪裹容忍我再在家庭蒙耻之时求取荣位，在国家危亡之际追求安闲逸乐。
English: How can I tolerate seeking glory when my family is disgraced, and pursuing leisure and pleasure when the country is in peril.

古文：骠骑上将之元勋，神州仪刑之列岳，尚书是称司会，中书实管王言。
现代文：骠骑上将为国家元勋，神州仪礼刑法之官重如排列的山岳，尚书之职就是人们所说的司会之官，中书之职实际上掌管王之言论。
English: The commander-in-chief will be the founder of the country, the officials of the Divine Liturgy and Criminal Law will be as important as the mountains in a row, the post of the secretary is what people call the secretary, and the post of the secretary is actually in charge of the king's speech.

古文：且虚饰宠章，委成御侮，臣知不惬，物谁谓宜。
现代文：而且虚饰宠章，责成御侮，我知道这样做不能使自己心安理得，这样的事又有谁说它是应当的。
English: Moreover, I know that this is not the way to make my heart feel at ease, and who is to say that such a thing is appropriate.

古文：但命轻鸿毛，责重山岳，存没同归，毁誉一贯。
现代文：但是我的生命虽然轻如鸿毛，可是我的责任却重于山岳，无论生存还是毁灭，归旨都是相同的；无论是受到毁谤还是得到赞誉，思想都是一贯的。
English: However, although my life is light as a feather, my responsibility is heavier than a mountain. Whether I live or die, the result is the same; whether I am slandered or praised, my thoughts are consistent.

古文：辞一官不减身累，增一职已黩朝经。
现代文：辞去一个官职仍然不能减轻我自身的负累，增加一个官职却已亵渎了朝廷的圣经。
English: Resigning from an official post still cannot lighten my own burden, but adding an official post has desecrated the imperial Bible.

古文：便当自同体国，不为饰让。
现代文：我自当体念国家，不做虚饰辞让。
English: I think of the country first and foremost, and make no false concessions.

古文：至于功均一匡，赏同千室，光宅近甸，奄有全邦，殒越为期，不敢闻命，亦愿曲留降鉴，即垂听许。
现代文：至于功业均为匡助天子，奖赏同为千室，光大所居在京城近郊，全部占有邦国，至死之日，我不敢听命，也衹希望圣上垂降明鉴，允许我不就宣城郡公。
English: As for the merits, they are all to help the Son of Heaven, and the reward is the same for a thousand rooms. Guangda lived in the suburbs of Beijing and occupied the whole country. To the day of my death, I did not dare to obey orders, and I also did not hope that the Holy One would send down a clear example and allow me not to proclaim the city and county.

古文：钜平之恳诚必固，永昌之丹慊获申，乃知君臣之道，绰有余裕，苟曰易昭，敢守难夺。 
现代文：氲垩的恳心诚意必当永固，永昌的遗恨得以舒展，才知晓君臣之道，是舒缓有宽余的，假如说圣上容易宣明，那谁还敢抱着他难改成命的想法呢。 
English: The earnestness and sincerity of Zhai must be eternal, and the hatred of Yongchang must be extended to know the way of the prince and minister. It is soothing and generous. If it is easy to proclaim the sacred, then who would dare to hold the idea that he is difficult to change into life?

古文：帝恶其辞斥，甚愠昉，由是终建武中，位不过列校。
现代文：齐旦嘘厌恶奏表的言辞有斥责自己的意思，很生气，任堕因此在整个越雪年间，官位也不超过列校。
English: Zidan lied that he disliked the speech of the report card, which had the intention of reprimanding himself, was very angry, and allowed himself to fall. Therefore, during the entire snow-crossing year, the official rank did not exceed the rank of the school.

古文：昉雅善属文，尤长载笔，才思无穷，当世王公表奏，莫不请焉。
现代文：任堕很善于作文章，尤其擅长疏、传、表、奏之类写作，才思敏捷，没有穷尽。当时王公大臣的上表和奏章，没有不请任防写的。
English: Ren Po is very good at writing articles, especially good at writing such as shu, chuan, table, and play. He is quick-witted and inexhaustible. At that time, there was no table and play chapter of the Wanggu minister that was not written by Ren Po.

古文：昉起草即成，不加点窜。
现代文：任防写文章起的草稿就成了正式的作品，不用加以删改。
English: A draft of an article that is allowed to be written becomes an official work, and does not need to be edited.

古文：沈约一代词宗，深所推挹。
现代文：选垫为一代词宗，对任堕却非常推崇。
English: Zengmat is a generation of words, but it is very respected for any fall.

古文：明帝崩，迁中书侍郎。
现代文：塱查崩，任堕官迁中书侍郎。
English: After the investigation, he was appointed as the secretary of the fallen official.

古文：永元末，为司徒右长史。
现代文：丞元末年，任防任司徒右长史。
English: At the end of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh year.

古文：高祖克京邑，霸府初开，以昉为骠骑记室参军。
现代文：直担攻克京城，霸府刚刚建立，就任命任防为骠骑记室参军。
English: Directly in charge of conquering the capital city, just after the establishment of the hegemonic government, he was appointed to join the army as a cavalry recorder.

古文：始高祖与昉遇竟陵王西邸，从容谓昉曰： 我登三府，当以卿为记室。 
现代文：当初高祖和任防在竟陵王西邸相遇，高祖从容地对任防说： 我如果登上三府，当用您做记室官。 
English: At the beginning, Gaozu and Renba met at the western residence of the king of Jingling. Gaozu calmly said to Renba, "If I ascend to the three provinces, I should use you as a recorder."

古文：昉亦戏高祖曰： 我若登三事，当以卿为骑兵。 
现代文：任防也对高祖开玩笑说： 我如果登上三事，当用您为骑兵。 
English: Ren also jokingly said to Gaozu: "If I ascend three things, I should use you as a cavalryman."

古文：谓高祖善骑也。
现代文：是说高祖善于骑马。
English: It is said that Gaozu was good at riding.

古文：至是故引昉，符昔言焉。
现代文：到了高祖攻克京城时，就延引任防为骠骑记室参军，以此和过去的话相符。
English: When Gaozhu conquered the capital, he joined the army as a cavalry officer, which is consistent with what he said in the past.

古文：昉奉笺曰： 伏承以今月令辰，肃膺典策，德显功高，光副四海，含生之伦，庇身有地；况昉受教君子，将二十年，咳唾为恩，眄睐成饰，小人怀惠，顾知死所。
现代文：任防敬奉给高祖的信笺说： 在本月的良辰吉日，我承蒙您的恩惠，受到典命册封，使我品德尊颢，功业抬高，荣光满四海，有生之年，有地方庇护自身了；何况我任防受君子教诲，将近二十年，知道您的咳嗽吐唾都是给我的恩惠，您斜眼看我也会成为值得我夸饰的事，小人感恩，不过也知道要为谁而死。
English: The letter written by Ren Fang Jing to Gao Zu said: On this auspicious day of the month, I have received your favor, and I have been sealed by the decree, so that my character is honored, my work is exalted, and my glory is full of the four seas. In my lifetime, I have a place to shelter myself; moreover, I have been taught by a gentleman for nearly twenty years, knowing that your coughing and spitting are all my favors. Your squinting at me will also become a thing worthy of my praise. The villain is grateful, but he also knows who to die for.

古文：昔承清宴，属有绪言，提挈之旨，形乎善谑，岂谓多幸，斯言不渝。
现代文：从前我承蒙竟陵王宴请，您嘱托我前面的话，提挈我的心意，却用善意的戏诘话表达出来，是否可以说我是多幸的，您说过的话没有改变。
English: Once upon a time, I was honored to be invited to a banquet by Emperor Qianling. You entrusted me with the previous words, mentioned my heart's desire, but expressed it with good-natured jokes. Can I say that I am lucky? What you said has not changed.

古文：虽情谬先觉，而迹沦骄饵，汤沐具而非吊，大厦构而相欢。
现代文：虽然我的性情舆您先前的感觉不合，而且我的行迹因骄傲的引诱而沉沦，但是您使我汤沐具备而无忧虑，国家的大厦构成而相互欢欣。
English: Although my disposition is not congenial to your former feelings, and my conduct is marred by the lure of pride, you have made me feel secure and at ease, and the edifice of the state is a mutual delight.

古文：明公道冠二仪，勋超邃古，将使伊周奉辔，桓文扶毂，神功无纪，化物何称。
现代文：您的道德居二仪之首，功勋超远古之人，您将使伊尹周公为您执缰绳，齐桓公晋文公为您扶车，您神奇的功绩无法记载，化育万物又有什么能与之相称。
English: Your morality is at the top of the two rites, and you are a person with super-ancient merits. You will let Yi Yin Zhou hold the reins for you, and Qi Huan Jinwen hold the wheel for you. Your miraculous achievements cannot be recorded, and there is nothing that can be commensurate with transforming and nurturing all things.

古文：府朝初建，俊贤骧首，惟此鱼目，唐突玙璠。
现代文：府朝刚刚建立，俊杰贤才正昂首前进，惟有我遣像鱼目一样的人，唐突了那些像宝玉一样的贤才。
English: The prefectural government had just been established, and the young, outstanding and talented people were marching forward with their heads held high. However, I sent people who looked like fish eyes to abruptly capture the talented people who looked like precious stones.

古文：顾己循涯，实知尘忝，千载一逢，再造难答。
现代文：考虑到自己衹能算挨着贤才的边，实在觉得惭愧，您对我的恩遇千载难逢，您的再造之恩我难以报答。
English: Considering that I'm not even close to being a genius, I really feel ashamed. Your kindness to me is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, and I can't repay your kindness of reinvention.

古文：虽则殒越，且知非报。 
现代文：即使我死了，也不能报答您的深思。 
English: Even if I die, I cannot repay your thoughtfulness.

古文：梁台建，禅让文诰，多昉所具。
现代文：梁台建立，禅让的文书诏诰，大多是任防所写。
English: Most of the edicts establishing the Liang and Tai, and giving way to Zen, were written by Ren Fang.

古文：高祖践阼，拜黄门侍郎，迁吏部郎中，寻以本官掌著作。
现代文：高祖登位，任防官拜黄门侍郎，迁吏部郎中，不久又以本官职兼管著作。
English: Gao Zu ascended to the throne, and was appointed as the defense official, the attendant of Bai Huangmen, and the assistant of the transfer officer, and soon he was also in charge of writing with his official position.

古文：天监二年，出为义兴太守。
现代文：梁武帝天监二年，任防出京担任义兴太守。
English: In the second year of Emperor Liangwu's celestial supervision, he was appointed as the governor of Yixing.

古文：在任清洁，儿妾食麦而已。
现代文：型堕在任时清廉高洁，儿女仆妾衹吃麦食。
English: When he was in office, he was clean and chaste, and his children, servants, and concubines all ate wheat food.

古文：友人彭城到溉，溉弟洽，从昉共为山泽游。
现代文：任防有友人是室缠的至妪，型避的弟弟是型捡，型捡跟从任防共游山川林泽。
English: Ren Fang's friends are the closest to him, and his younger brother who avoids the type is the type pick up, and the type pick up follows Ren Fang to travel the mountains, rivers and forests.

古文：及被代登舟，止有米五斛。
现代文：等到义兴太守之职被人代替，任防登船远行，此时他衹有五斛米。
English: When the position of Yixing's daimyo was replaced by someone else, he was allowed to board the ship and travel far away. At this time, he only had five bushels of rice.

古文：既至无衣，镇军将军沈约遣裙衫迎之。
现代文：已经到了京城却没有衣服可穿，镇军将军沈约派人送裙衫欢迎他。
English: He has arrived in the capital but has no clothes to wear. The town's general, Shen Yotong, sends someone to welcome him with a skirt.

古文：重除吏部郎中，参掌大选，居职不称。
现代文：后任防重新官拜吏部郎中，参与掌管大选事宜，但他居此官却不称职。
English: Later, he was a subordinate of the Defense Ministry's revered chief of staff and participated in the management of the general election, but he was incompetent in this position.

古文：寻转御史中丞，秘书监，领前军将军。
现代文：不久转任御史中丞，秘书监，领前军将军。
English: Soon he was transferred to the post of secretary superintendent, secretary superintendent, and leading general of the former army.

古文：自齐永元以来，秘阁四部，篇卷纷杂，昉手自雠校，由是篇目定焉。
现代文：从齐永元以来，秘阁四部之书，篇目卷帙纷繁复杂，任防亲自校对，因此篇目确定了。
English: Since the time of Qi Yongyuan, the contents of the four books of the secret cabinet have been complex and complicated, and it is up to the guards to proofread them in person, so the contents have been determined.

古文：六年春，出为宁朔将军、新安太守。
现代文：六年的春天，任防出京任宁朔将军、新安太守。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, Ren Bo left Beijing and was appointed as the general of Ningshuo and the governor of Xin'an.

古文：在郡不事边幅，率然曳杖，徒行邑郭，民通辞讼者，就路决焉。
现代文：任防在郡时不修边幅，随意地拖着拐杖，徒步行走在郡城内外，老百姓有打官司的，任防就在路上决断了。
English: When he was in the county, he was unkempt, dragged crutches at will, and walked on foot in and out of the county seat. When the common people had lawsuits, he decided on the road.

古文：为政清省，吏民便之。
现代文：任防为政清廉省事，官吏百姓都感到很方便。
English: It is convenient for both officials and the public to have a clean and honest government.

古文：视事期岁，卒于官舍，时年四十九。
现代文：为官满一年，死在官署，当时年龄是四十九岁。
English: After one year in office, he died in office at the age of forty-nine.

古文：阖境痛惜，百姓共立祠堂于城南。
现代文：新安郡全境的人都深感痛惜，老百姓一起在城南建立了祠堂。
English: People from all over Xin'an County are deeply saddened, and the common people have jointly established an ancestral hall in the south of the city.

古文：高祖闻问，即日举哀，哭之甚恸。
现代文：高祖听说后，当天就为任防尽哀，哭得很伤心。
English: After Gaozu heard about it, he mourned for Ren Bao on the same day and cried very sad.

古文：追赠太常卿，谥曰敬子。
现代文：任防被迫赠为太常卿，谧号为敬子。
English: Ren Fang was forced to be given the title of Tai Changqing, and his nickname was Keishi.

古文：昉好交结，奖进士友，得其延誉者，率多升擢，故衣冠贵游，莫不争与交好，坐上宾客，恒有数十。
现代文：任防喜好舆人结交，奖掖举荐士人和朋友。
English: No matter what your preferences are, you can make friends with anyone, and you will be rewarded for recommending people and friends.

古文：时人慕之，号曰任君，言如汉之三君也。
现代文：凡是得到任防延引赞誉的人，大多被升迁提拔。所以达官贵人，没有谁不争着舆任防结交相好。任防家坐着的宾客，总有几十个。
English: Most of the people who have been praised by Renbo have been promoted. Therefore, there is no dignitary who does not compete with Renbo for friendship. There are always dozens of guests sitting at Renbo's house.

古文：陈郡殷芸与建安太守到溉书曰： 哲人云亡，仪表长谢。
现代文：当时的人羡慕他，称他为任君，意思是指他像漠代的三君。陈郡的殷芸给建安太守到溉的书信中说： 哲人亡故，他的仪表永远消失了。
English: The people at that time envied him and called him Renjun, meaning that he was like the three kings of the desert. Chen County's Yin Ying said in a letter to Jian'an's governor, Zuo Lian: "The philosopher is dead, his appearance is gone forever."

古文：元龟何寄？
现代文：从今以后，史占著作之事寄托给谁?
English: From now on, who will be entrusted with the task of writing history?

古文：指南谁托？ 
现代文：为士人朋友指路延引之举又由谁来承担呢? 
English: Who will be responsible for the delay in giving directions to the scholar's friend?

古文：其为士友所推如此。
现代文：任防被士人朋友所推崇就是如此。
English: This is how Renbo was highly respected by his scholar friends.

古文：昉不治生产，至乃居无室宅。
现代文：任防不治家产，竟然到了没有房子居住的地步。
English: The family property was left unattended, to the point that there was no house to live in.

古文：世或讥其多乞贷，亦随复散之亲故。
现代文：当时有人讥讽任防经常乞求借贷，但他借贷来的钱物随后又散发给亲朋故友。
English: At that time, some people ridiculed Ren Fang for constantly begging for loans, but the money and goods he borrowed were then distributed to relatives, friends and old friends.

古文：昉常叹曰： 知我亦以叔则，不知我亦以叔则。 
现代文：任防常常感叹说： 了解我的是叔则，不了解我的也是叔则。 
English: Ren Fang often lamented, "Those who know me are my uncles, and those who don't know me are also my uncles."

古文：昉坟籍无所不见，家虽贫，聚书至万余卷，率多异本。
现代文：任防博览群书，三坟五典各类书籍没有他没看过的，他家虽然贫困，他却聚积圃书达万余卷，大多是舆常见本不同的本子。
English: He is an avid reader of all kinds of books, and there is no book he has not read. Although his family is poor, he has accumulated more than 10,000 volumes of books, most of which are different from the popular books.

古文：昉卒后，高祖使学士贺纵共沈约勘其书目，官所无者，就昉家取之。
现代文：任防死后，高祖派学士贺纵与沈约一起勘查他家的书籍篇目，凡是官府所没有的，就从任防家取出补足。
English: After Ren Fang's death, Gao Zu faction academician He Zheng and Shen You jointly surveyed his family's book titles. Anything that the government did not have, they took from Ren Fang's family to supplement.

古文：昉所著文章数十万言，盛行于世。
现代文：任防所写的文章有几十万字，在世上广为流行。
English: The articles written by Ren Fang have hundreds of thousands of words and are widely popular in the world.

古文：初，昉立于士大夫间，多所汲引，有善己者则厚其声名。
现代文：当初，任防位列于士大夫之间，对士大夫多有奖掖延引，凡是和自己相好的就抬高他的声名。
English: At the beginning, the position of Ren Fang was ranked first among the scholar-bureaucrats. The scholar-bureaucrats were often rewarded and promoted, and anyone who was friendly with him would elevate his reputation.

古文：及卒，诸子皆幼，人罕赡恤之。
现代文：等到任防死去，他的几个子女都还年幼，人们却很少去赡养体恤他们。
English: By the time Ren Fang died, several of his children were still young, but people rarely went to support and sympathize with them.

古文：平原刘孝标为著论曰：客问主人曰： 硃公叔《绝交论》，为是乎？
现代文：平原刘孝标为此事着文议论说：客人问主人说： 朱公叔的《绝交论》，是对呢?
English: The guest asked the host and said: Uncle Zhu's "Theory of the Lasting Relationship," is that right?

古文：为非乎？ 
现代文：还是不对呢? 
English: Is it still wrong?

古文：主人曰： 客奚此之问？ 
现代文：主人说： 客人您为什么问这个呢? 
English: The host said: "Guest, why do you ask this?

古文：客曰： 夫草虫鸣则阜螽跃，雕虎啸而清风起。
现代文：客人回答说： 草虫呜叫土山上的螽斯虫就会跳跃，雕虎啸叫清风就会吹起。
English: The guest replied, "When the grasshopper whistles, the earthworm on the mound will jump, and when the tiger roars, the wind will blow."

古文：故絪缊相感，雾涌云蒸；嘤鸣相召，星流电激。
现代文：所以捆组相互感召，就会云雾升腾汹涌；动物的呜叫互相感召，以致星儿流走电光激发。
English: Therefore, when the bundles invoke each other, the clouds rise violently; the cries of the animals invoke each other, so that the stars are excited by electricity and light.

古文：是以王阳登则贡公喜，罕生逝而国子悲。
现代文：所以王阳登位贡公就喜欢，罕生逝世国子就悲伤。
English: Therefore, Wang Yang liked the enthronement tribute, and Kuniko, who died in infancy, was sad.

古文：且心同琴瑟，言郁郁于兰筜，道叶胶漆，志婉娈于埙篪。
现代文：况且人心如果同琴瑟般和谐，那么语言就会像兰花香草一样香气浓烈；人们的道德理想如果融洽统一，如胶似漆，那么心意就会像乐器发出的声音一样婉转多变。
English: Moreover, if the people's hearts are as harmonious as a harp, then the language will be as fragrant as orchids and herbs; if people's moral ideals are harmonious and unified, like glue and paint, then the mind will be as subtle and changeable as the sound emitted by the musical instrument.

古文：圣贤以此镂金版而镌盘盂，书玉牒而刻钟鼎。
现代文：圣贤之人因此在金版、磐石和器皿上雕镂镌刻文字，还在玉牒钟鼎上书写雕刻文句，以引起人们的共鸣，指导人们行动。
English: Therefore, sages and sages carved and engraved words on gold plates, rocks and utensils, and also wrote carved phrases on jade pendants to arouse people's resonance and guide people's actions.

古文：若匠人辍成风之妙巧，伯牙息流波之雅引。
现代文：如同匠人能巧妙地停止已经形成的风，伯牙能通过正确的引导停息正在流动的水。
English: Just as a craftsman can skillfully stop the wind that has already formed, Boga can stop the water that is flowing through proper guidance.

古文：范、张款款于下泉，尹、班陶陶于永夕。
现代文：范、张在下泉舒缓闲适，尹、班竟夜欢喜快乐。
English: Fan and Zhang are relaxing and leisurely in the lower spring, while Yin and Ban are actually joyful and happy at night.

古文：骆驿纵横，烟霏雨散，皆巧历所不知，心计莫能测。
现代文：事物的往来不绝纵横交错，烟云的浓盛雨雪的消散，都是有智慧有经验的人所不能知道，有心计的人所不能猜测的。
English: The incessant comings and goings of things, the thick clouds of smoke, the rain and snow dissipating, are all things that a wise and experienced person cannot know, and a person with a plan cannot guess.

古文：而硃益州汨叙，越谟训，捶直切，绝交游，视黔首以鹰鹯，媲人伦于豺虎。蒙有猜焉，请辨其惑。 
现代文：因而朱益州扰乱常道和秩序，超越先人的谋略和教诲，用棍打正直恳切之人，断绝与人的交游，把老百姓看作鹰鹌一样的猛禽，把人的伦理舆豺狼虎豹相比照，我蒙昧无知，对此事无法猜想，请您为我辨别其中的疑惑。 
English: Therefore, Zhu Yizhou disturbs the normal way and order, surpasses the strategies and teachings of his predecessors, beats honest and sincere people with a stick, breaks off intercourse with people, regards the common people as a bird of prey like an eagle, and compares human ethics to a wolf, tiger and leopard. I am blinded by ignorance and cannot guess this matter. Please distinguish the doubts for me.

古文：主人欣然曰： 客所谓抚弦徽音，未达燥湿变响；张罗沮泽，不睹鹄雁高飞。
现代文：主人欣然说： 客人所说的正像弹拨琴弦发出美好的声音，却不会出现因琴弦燥湿引起的变声；在低湿的沼泽地带张开罗网，却没有看见鸿鹄大雁已高飞。
English: The host said cheerfully: What the guest said was just like playing the strings to make a beautiful sound, but there would be no change in the sound caused by the dryness and humidity of the strings; in the low-moisture swamp area, the Cairo net was opened, but it did not see the wild geese flying high.

古文：盖圣人握金镜，阐风烈，龙骧蠖屈，从道污隆。
现代文：大概圣人手握金镜，开辟猛烈之风气，龙首高抬尺蠖屈伸，所从之路有积水不流有突起高显。
English: Probably a sage holding a golden mirror in his hand, opening up a fierce culture, the dragon's head raised high and the bow stretched, the road from which there is stagnant water and protrusion.

古文：日月联璧，叹亹亹之弘致；云飞电薄，显棣华之微旨。
现代文：月如珠联璧合，感叹于勤勉不倦的宏大情致；彩云飞扬闪电迫近，显示出棣树之华的微妙旨趣。
English: The moon is like a pearl, and the diligent and tireless work of the grand sentiment is admired; the colorful clouds are flying and the lightning is approaching, showing the subtle flavor of the eucalyptus.

古文：若五音之变化，济九成之妙曲。
现代文：如同五音的变化，可以助成九成妙曲。
English: Like the variation of the five tones, it can contribute to the creation of ninety-percent wonderful music.

古文：此硃生得玄珠于赤水，谟神睿而为言。
现代文：这就是朱生在赤水边得到玄珠，因此计谋神奇睿智而成为人们的言谈。
English: This is how Zhu Sheng obtained the Black Pearl on the edge of the Red Water, and thus became the talk of the town.

古文：至夫组织仁义，琢磨道德，欢其愉乐，恤其陵夷。
现代文：至于组织仁义之事，琢磨道德之心，为别人的愉乐而欢心，为他人的衰落而担忧。
English: As for the organization of benevolence and righteousness, ponder the moral heart, rejoice for the enjoyment of others, and worry about the decline of others.

古文：寄通灵台之下，遗迹江湖之上，风雨急而不辍其音，霜雪零而不渝其色，斯贤达之素交，历万古而一遇。
现代文：寄情通达于灵台之下，遗迹于江湖之上，风猛雨急却能不停其声音，霜降雪落也不改变其容色，这是贤达之人的真情交往，经历万古才能一遇。
English: The sentiments reach under the funeral table, the relics are above the rivers and lakes, the wind and rain can not stop their voices, the frost and snow do not change their appearance, this is the true feelings of the sages, and it takes thousands of years to meet.

古文：逮叔世民讹，狙诈飙起，谿谷不能逾其险，鬼神无以究其变，竞毛羽之轻，趋锥刀之末。
现代文：等到后世之人风气变坏，窥伺动静虚假欺骗之事如暴风骤起，溪谷不能超过他们的危险，鬼神也无法探求他们的变化，他们争逐毛羽一样的轻利，为锥尖刀刃一样的细小利益而奔走。
English: Wait until the morals of the people of future generations become bad, and the things of spying, moving, lying, and deceiving are like a sudden storm, the valley cannot exceed their danger, and the ghosts and gods cannot explore their changes. They compete for light profits like fluff, and run for small profits like the tip of a cone.

古文：于是素交尽，利交兴，天下蚩蚩，鸟惊雷骇。
现代文：于是朴素真情的交往没有了，势利虚假的交往却兴起了，天下纷扰，鸟儿吃惊雷电骇怕。
English: As a result, there was no more plain and sincere interaction, but there was an upsurge in snobbish and false interaction. The world was in turmoil, and the birds were startled by the thunder and lightning.

古文：然利交同源，派流则异，较言其略，有五术焉：
现代文：不过势利之交虽然同源，其流派却不同，比较一下，说说它们的大略情况，有五种势利之交如下：
English: However, although the origins of snobbish friends are the same, their schools are different. Let's compare and talk about their general situation. There are five types of snobbish friends as follows:

古文： 若其宠钧董、石，权压梁、窦。雕刻百工，炉锤万物，吐漱兴云雨，呼吸下霜露，九域耸其风尘，四海叠其熏灼。靡不望影星奔，藉响川鹜，鸡人始唱，鹤盖成阴，高门旦开，流水接轸。
现代文： 如果他的荣宠与董、石相当，权势压倒梁、窦，雕刻的有百种工艺，炉火锤炼出万般事物，他吐唾咳嗽能兴起云雨，呼吸之间能降下霜露，九洲的地域内高耸其风烟尘雾，四海之中重叠着他的火烟舆灼热，人们就无不望见他的身影就星夜奔走干谒，践踏惊扰使得河中鸭子发出叫声。
English: If his glory is equal to that of the dong and the stone, if his power is greater than that of the joist and the mortar, if there are a hundred kinds of carving techniques, if the fire and the hammer can produce all kinds of things, if his spitting and coughing can cause clouds and rain, if frost and dew can fall between his breaths, if his wind and smoke and dust are towering in the region of Jiuzhou, and if his fire and smoke and scorching heat are overlapping in the four seas, then people will inevitably see his figure running in the starry night, trampling and disturbing the ducks in the river.

古文：皆愿摩顶至踵，隳胆抽肠，约同要离焚妻子，誓徇荆卿湛七族。是曰势交，其流一也。
现代文：司晨之人刚开始高声报晓，车盖就会集连成一片遮出阴影；高大的门早晨一打开，车子奔来前后衔接如同流水一般。人们都愿意从头顶到脚跟都摩伤，毁坏自己的胆抽出自己的肠，订约说颐同要离一样焚烧妻子儿女，发誓要像荆卿一样从而使七族荣光。造就是势利之交，是其中的第一种流派。
English: As soon as the morning herald begins to announce the dawn in a loud voice, the roofs of the carriages will come together to cover the shadows; as soon as the tall doors are opened in the morning, the cars rushing forward and backward are connected like flowing water. People are willing to be worn from the top of the head to the heel, destroy their own guts, pull out their intestines, burn their wives and children as if they were going to separate, and swear to make the seven tribes glorious like Jingqing. Zou is the friendship of snobbery, which is the first kind of school.

古文： 富埒陶、白，赀巨程、罗，山擅铜陵，家藏金穴，出平原而联骑，居里闬而鸣钟。
现代文： 富贵与陶、白相等，资财比程、罗雄厚，独揽出铜的山陵，家藏产金的洞穴，出现在平原上就是骑手相连，居住在里巷就击钟鸣乐。
English: The rich and the rich are equal to the pottery and the white, the wealth is greater than the distance, Luo Xiong thick, the mountains are rich in copper, the caves are rich in gold, the riders are connected when they appear on the plain, and the bell tolls when they live in the alley.

古文：则有穷巷之宾，绳枢之士，冀宵烛之末光，邀润屋之微泽，鱼贯凫踊，飒沓鳞萃，分雁鹜之稻粱，沾玉斝之余沥。
现代文：那么就会有身处穷巷的宾客，瓮牖绳枢之人，希望能得到他夜晚蜡烛的余光照耀，求取他滋润房屋的些微雨露，他们像游鱼一样连贯而行，像野鸭子一样争先恐后，豪迈地会合像鱼鳞一样聚集排列，希求分得雁鸭吃剩的稻米高粱，被施舆玉酒杯中余下的点滴残酒。
English: Then there will be guests in the poor alley, people of the bridle pivot, hoping to get the afterglow of his candle to shine at night, to get the slight rain dew that moistens his house, they are like swimming fish, scrambling like wild ducks, proudly gathering like fish scales, hoping to score the leftover rice sorghum of the geese and ducks, and the remaining drops of leftover wine in the jade wine cup.

古文：衔恩遇，进款诚，援青松以示心，指白水而旌信。
现代文：他们心怀富人所给的恩遇，就向富人表白自己的诚恳，援引青松来表示自己的心志，指着白水来夸耀自己的诚实。
English: Mindful of the favors bestowed by the rich, they declare their sincerity to the rich, invoke the young pine to express their aspirations, and point to the white water to boast of their honesty.

古文：是曰贿交，其流二也。
现代文：这就叫金钱之交，是其中的第二种流派。
English: This is called the friendship of money, and it is the second type of friendship.

古文： 陆大夫燕喜西都，郭有道人伦东国，公卿贵其籍甚，搢绅羡其登仙。
现代文： 陆大夫在西都设宴欢会，郭有道在东京敦厚人伦，公卿们认为他们的名籍很显贵，措绅大人羡慕他们如同登仙。
English: Dr. Lu held a banquet in the western capital, Guo Youdao was popular in Tokyo, the nobles thought that their titles were very distinguished, and the gentry envied them as if they were immortal.

古文：加以颐蹙頞，涕唾流沫，骋黄马之剧谈，纵碧鸡之雄辩，叙温燠则寒谷成暄，论严枯则春丛零叶，飞沉出其顾指，荣辱定其一言。
现代文：于是公卿揞绅们脸颊或蹙或伸，鼻涕唾沫流溅，像放任黄马奔驰一样来畅谈，又像放纵碧鶸呜叫一样来雄辩，叙谈温热时寒冷的峡谷也成了暖和的地方，议论严冷枯败时春天的树丛也会落叶，飞升还是沉降似乎祇出现在他们的顾盼指点之间，荣誉舆耻辱衹要他们一句话就可确定。
English: So the nobles and gentry, their cheeks either wrinkled or stretched, their noses dripping with spittle, talked as freely as if they were letting a yellow horse gallop, and spoke as eloquently as if they were indulging in the howling of a hyacinth. The cold canyons became warm places when they talked about warm and hot, and the spring bushes also shed leaves when they talked about cold and withered. Whether they were soaring or sinking only seemed to appear between their gazes. If they wanted a word about honor and disgrace, they could be sure of it.

古文：于是弱冠王孙，绮纨公子，道不絓于通人，声未遒于云阁，攀其鳞翼，丐其余论，附骐骥之髦端，轶归鸿于碣石。
现代文：于是未成年的王孙，穿着华丽的公子，他们的学说还不能难住通达之人，声音弱小不能传达到云阁之上，却要攀附在善谈之人的鳞甲翼翅上，求他们剩余的议论能给自己一些好处，依附在骐骥的尾巴尖上，以图在碣石超越回归的大雁。
English: So the underage Wang Sun, dressed in gorgeous courtly attire, whose teachings cannot yet be difficult for those who are knowledgeable, whose voice is weak and cannot be transmitted above the clouds, but wants to cling to the scaly wings of those who are good at talking, and ask their remaining discussions to give themselves some benefits, cling to the tip of the tail of the dragonfly, in order to surpass the returning geese in the dragonfly stone.

古文：是曰谈交，其流三也。
现代文：造就叫剧谈之交，是其中的第三种流派。
English: The third genre is the creation of friendships, known as dramaturgy.

古文： 阳舒阴惨，生民大情，忧合欢离，品物恒性。
现代文： 阳光温暖明亮让人舒畅，阴天寒冷昏暗让人觉得凄惨，这是人们的常情；悲欢离合，这是众多人和物的永恒本性。
English: Sunshine warm and bright makes people feel comfortable, cloudy cold and gloomy makes people feel miserable, this is people's normal feelings; sadness and joy, this is the eternal nature of many people and things.

古文：故鱼以泉涸而呴沫，鸟因将死而悲鸣。
现代文：所以鱼儿因为泉水干涸而吐出泡沫，鸟儿因为将要死去而悲伤地呜叫。
English: So the fish spit out foam because the spring has dried up, and the birds wail sadly because they are going to die.

古文：同病相怜，缀河上之悲曲；恐惧置怀，昭《谷风》之盛典。
现代文：因为同病相怜所以谱写成河上的悲伤曲子；怀着恐惧的心情，才能显示出《谷风》的盛大与典雅。
English: It was out of compassion for a fellow sufferer that he composed the sorrowful melody on the river; it was with fear in his heart that he was able to show the grandeur and elegance of "The Valley Wind."

古文：斯则断金由于湫隘，刎颈起于苫盖。
现代文：造就是说由于同处低下狭窄的住宅而成为同心之友，因为同住在茅草房裹而结为刎颈之交。
English: That is to say, because they live in the same low and narrow house, they become like-minded friends, and because they live in the same thatched house, they become like neck and neck.

古文：是以伍员濯溉于宰嚭，张王抚翼于陈相。
现代文：所以伍员因为宰豁而灵光，张王被陈相抚慰辅佐。
English: As a result, the soldiers were inspired by Zhaozhuang, and Zhang Wang was comforted and assisted by Chen.

古文：是曰穷交，其流四也。
现代文：造就叫不得志之交，是其中的第四种流派。
English: Making friends is the fourth type.

古文： 驰鹜之俗，浇薄之伦，无不操权衡，秉纤纩。
现代文： 奔竞的风俗，浇薄的人伦，没有不控制权衡，秉持纤缤的。
English: Racing customs, thinly cast human relations, no uncontrolled trade-offs, upholding the delicate.

古文：衡所以揣其轻重，纩所以属其鼻息。
现代文：衡是用来测量轻重的，续可以用来跟随鼻子出的气息飞动。
English: The balance is used to measure weight, and the pendulum can be used to follow the movement of the breath out of the nose.

古文：若衡不能举，纩不能飞，虽颜、冉龙翰，凤雏曾、史，兰熏雪白，舒、向金玉，渊海卿、云，黼黻河汉，视若游尘。遇同土梗，莫肯费其半菽，罕有落其一毛。
现代文：如果秤杆不能举起，绵絮不能飞舞，那么即使颜、冉秀颖杰出，曾、史德行纯美，舒、向美好宏大，卿、云文采飞扬，也要把他们看作游动的尘埃，对待他们如同对待泥土和草芥，不肯为他们费去半颗豆子，很少有人为他们拔出一根毫毛。
English: If the scales cannot be lifted and the lintel cannot fly, then even if Yan and Ran are outstanding, Zeng and Shide are pure and beautiful, Shu and Xiang are beautiful and magnificent, and Qing and Yunwen are flying, they should be regarded as floating dusts, treated as if they were mud and mustard, not willing to spend half a bean for them, and few people pull out a single hair for them.

古文：若衡重锱铢，纩微彯撇，虽共工之蒐慝，驩兜之掩义，南荆之跋扈，东陵之巨猾，皆为匍匐委蛇，折枝舐痔，金膏翠羽将其意，脂韦便辟导其诚。
现代文：如果秤杆能测量出锱铢一样的微小的重量，绵絮能随微风飘飞，那么即使像共工一样隐蔽邪恶，像谨兜一样掩饰仁义，像南荆一样跋扈，像柬陵一样巨猾，也都要为他们匍匐身体委蛇而行，轻易地为他们舔痔疮，用金膏翠羽来迎合他们的意旨，擦脂粉佩韦带的宠信小臣也要表达他们的诚恳。
English: If the scale can measure the weight of a tiny dragonfly, and the lint can fly with the breeze, then even if the evil is hidden like a co-worker, the benevolence and righteousness are covered up like a chastity belt, the south is like a rhinestone, and the Cambodia is like a giant, it is necessary to walk for them, lick their hemorrhoids easily, cater to their intentions with gold paste and green feathers, and the pet minister with the eraser powder Pei Wei should also express their sincerity.

古文：故轮盖所游，必非夷、惠之室；苞苴所入，实行张、霍之家。
现代文：所以车子所游走的地方，必定不是夷、惠的家；馈赠所入的实际上是张、霍之类的家。
English: Therefore, the place where the car travels is definitely not the home of Yi and Hui; the gift is actually the home of Zhang and Huo.

古文：谋而后动，芒毫寡忒。
现代文：思谋而后行动，会很少出现差错。
English: If you think before you act, you'll rarely go wrong.

古文：是曰量交，其流五也。
现代文：这就叫衡量之交，是其中的第五种流派。
English: This is called the measuring of friendship, which is the fifth genre.

古文： 凡斯五交，义同贾鬻，故桓谭譬之于阛阓，林回喻之于甘醴。
现代文： 凡是这五种交往，意义舆做买卖相同，所以谭拾子用市喻交，林回用甜酒打比方。
English: All of these five types of interactions have the same meaning as doing business, so Tan Zhi Zi uses the metaphor of market exchange, and Lin Hui uses the metaphor of sweet wine.

古文：夫寒暑递进，盛衰相袭，或前荣而后瘁，或始富而终贫，或初存而末亡，或古约而今泰，循环翻覆，迅若波澜。
现代文：寒暑递相更进，盛衰互相重叠，有的人前半生荣光而后半生却劳苦困病，有的人开始很富裕而最终却很贫穷，有的当初兴旺而最后衰亡，有的先代节俭而今天却侈泰，循环反复，如同波澜起伏一样迅速。
English: The cold and hot phases are progressing, the rise and fall are overlapping each other, some people are glorious in the first half of their lives but suffer from hardship and disease in the second half of their lives, some people start out very rich but end up very poor, some were prosperous at the beginning and finally decline, some were frugal in the past but are extravagant today, the cycle repeats, just as fast as the ups and downs.

古文：此则徇利之情未尝异，变化之道不得一。
现代文：因此人们顺从势利的感情不曾不同，祇不过变化的方式不一样罢了。
English: So people's deference to snobbery hasn't changed, just the way it's changed.

古文：由是观之，张、陈所以凶终，萧、硃所以隙末，断焉可知矣。
现代文：由此看来，张、陈之所以不欢而散，萧、朱之所以未了出现感情上的裂痕，稍作判断就可以知道了。
English: From this point of view, the reason why Zhang and Chen were unhappy and broke up, and the reason why Xiao and Zhu did not have an emotional rift, can be known with a little judgment.

古文：而翟公方规规然勒门以箴客，何所见之晚乎？
现代文：然而翟公正在规规矩矩地严守大门来规劝客人，他的认识是多么晚啊!
English: However, Mr. Zou is dutifully guarding the gate to persuade the guests, how late he is!

古文： 然因此五交，是生三衅：败德殄义，禽兽相若，一衅也；难固易携，仇讼所聚，二衅也；名陷饕餮，贞介所羞，三衅也。
现代文： 然而因为这五种势利之交，就产生了三种罪过：败坏道德殄减仁义，和禽兽相像，这是第一种罪过；要稳固很难而分离却很容易，仇恨舆争讼聚积，这是第二种罪遇；名声被贪婪的饕餮所陷害，让忠贞耿介之士感到羞耻，这是第三种罪过。
English: However, because of these five kinds of snobbish friendships, three kinds of sins have arisen: corrupting morality, diminishing benevolence, and resembling beasts, which is the first kind of sin; it is difficult to be stable but easy to separate, hatred and litigation accumulate, which is the second kind of crime; reputation is framed by greedy shenanigans, making loyal Geng Jie people feel ashamed, which is the third kind of sin.

古文：古人知三衅之为梗，惧五交之速尤。
现代文：古人知道这三种罪过是梗塞，害怕五种势利之交会加速罪遇的产生。
English: The ancients knew that these three kinds of sins were obstructions, and they were afraid that the intersection of the five kinds of snobbery would accelerate the occurrence of crimes.

古文：故王丹威子以槚楚，硃穆昌言而示绝，有旨哉！
现代文：所以王丹用椟树枝荆条来教训子女，朱穆发出善言以示绝势利之交，有意旨啊!
English: Therefore, Wang Dan used eucalyptus twigs and thorns to teach his children, Zhu Mu sent out kind words to show that he would not make snobbish friends. It was intentional!

古文： 近世有乐安任昉，海内髦杰，早绾银黄，夙招民誉。
现代文： 近世有个乐安的任防，为海内豪杰，很早就佩带官印，平素很能招致老百姓的赞誉。
English: In the early modern times, there was a Le An, a hero of the sea, who wore the official seal very early, and was able to attract the praise of the people.

古文：遒文丽藻，方驾曹、王；英特俊迈，联衡许、郭。
现代文：他文风刚劲词藻华丽，正能超越曹、王；英才盖世，智慧出众，可以和许、郭并列。
English: His literary style is vigorous, his words are gorgeous, and he is able to surpass Cao and Wang; his talent is world-renowned, his wisdom is outstanding, and he can be on a par with Xu and Guo.

古文：类田文之爱客，同郑庄之好贤。
现代文：他就像田文一样爱惜宾客，同郑庄一样喜欢贤才。
English: Just like Tian Wen, he cherishes guests, and like Zheng Zhuang, he likes talents.

古文：见一善则盱衡扼腕，遇一才则扬眉抵掌。
现代文：看见一个善人他会扶住车衡张目直视扼腕而叹，遇到一位贤才就会扬眉吐气抵掌而谈。
English: If he sees a good person, he will hold the scale, look straight into his eyes, wring his hands and sigh, and if he meets a wise man, he will raise his eyebrows, exhale and talk.

古文：雌黄出其脣吻，硃紫由其月旦。
现代文：任防口中随时能出驳正之言，是非由他考评。
English: It is up to him to evaluate whether or not he can refute the truth at any time.

古文：于是冠盖辐凑，衣裳云合，辎軿击轊，坐客恒满。
现代文：于是冠盖如云车辆齐集，人们像云一样会合在任防门前，有帷盖的车子互相拥挤碰击，任防家座上宾客总是满满的。
English: As a result, the vehicles gather like a cloud, people gather like a cloud in front of the gate, the covered cars crowd and collide with each other, and the gate is always full of guests.

古文：蹈其阃阈，若升阙里之堂；入其奥隅，谓登龙门之坂。
现代文：踩上任防家的门槛，就如同升上了阙里的正屋；进入他家的屋角，就会被人们说成是登上了垄门的山坡。
English: Stepping on the threshold of Ren Fang's house is like climbing up to the main house in Zouli; entering the corner of his house will be said to be climbing up the hillside of Renmen.

古文：至于顾盼增其倍价，剪拂使其长鸣，彯组云台者摩肩，趋走丹墀者叠迹。
现代文：至于任防看他一下就会使他身价倍增，推崇赞誉他就会使他施展才能，在云台任职作官的人摩肩接踵，在丹墀役使奔走的人足迹相叠。
English: As for him, a glance at him will double his worth, praise him, and he will make him display his talents. In Yuntai, those who serve as officials are rubbing shoulders with each other, and in Danzhong, the footsteps of those who run are overlapping.

古文：莫不缔恩狎，结绸缪，想惠、庄之清尘，庶羊、左之徽烈。
现代文：没有谁不想与任防缔结恩情舆亲近，多相往来，心中盼望惠、庄一样的任防光顾，期待着像羊、左那样声名美好功业显赫。
English: There is no one who does not want to be close to Renba, and have many exchanges with him. They hope to patronize Renba like Hui and Zhuang, and look forward to fame, beauty and outstanding achievements like Sheep and Zuo.

古文：及瞑目东越，归骸雒浦，繐帐犹悬，门罕渍酒之彦；坟未宿草，野绝动轮之宾。
现代文：等到任防在束越死去，骸骨归葬雒浦，当总帐还高高悬挂，他家的门前已经罕有吊丧的才学之士了；他的坟墓上还未长出隔夜的草，郊野已断绝了乘车吊唁的宾客。
English: By the time Ren Bao died in Sokue and his skeleton was buried in Goupo, when the general ledger was still hanging high, there was already a rare scholar hanging in front of his house; the overnight grass had not yet grown on his grave, and the countryside had been cut off from condolence guests by car.

古文：藐尔诸孤，朝不谋夕，流离大海之南，寄命瘴疠之地。
现代文：任防的诸位孤儿都还幼稚，生活上朝不保夕，流离在大海的南边，在充满瘴疠的地方寄托命运。
English: The defenseless orphans are still naïve, their lives are precarious, and they are wandering on the south side of the ocean, entrusting their fate to a place full of sharks.

古文：自昔把臂之英，金兰之友，曾无羊舌下泣之仁，宁慕郈成分宅之德。
现代文：从前那些和任防互相握住手臂亲密交往的英杰，缔结金兰的朋友，竟然没有了羊舌下泣的仁慈，又哪裹能羡慕邱成分宅的恩德。
English: In the past, those heroes who held each other's arms and had close contacts with each other, and friends who made golden lanterns, actually did not have the kindness to cry under the sheep's tongue, nor could they envy the kindness of Qiu Shengzhu.

古文：呜呼！
现代文：哎呀!
English: Alas!

古文：世路险巇，一至于此！
现代文：世路的艰险，已经到了这种地步!
English: The hardships of life have come to this!

古文：太行孟门，宁云崭绝。
现代文：太行孟门，宁愿说它险峻高绝。
English: It's too steep, I'd rather say it's dangerously steep.

古文：是以耿介之士，疾其若斯，裂裳裹足，弃之长祇。
现代文：所以耿介之人，憎恨他们像这样，就撕裂衣裳裹住双足，纵马疾驰远远地抛弃他们。
English: So Gonsuke's men, hating them as they did, tore their clothes, bound their feet, and rode away, abandoning them.

古文：独立高山之顶，欢与麋鹿同群，皦皦然绝其雰浊，诚耻之也，诚畏之也。 
现代文：独立在高山顶上，高兴地和麋鹿们同群，清白高洁，断绝了世间的昏乱与污浊，他们确实为忘恩负义的人感到羞耻，确实害怕那些背信弃义的人。 
English: Independent on the top of the mountain, happy to be with the elks, innocent and pure, cut off from the chaos and filth of the world, they are really ashamed of the ungrateful, and really afraid of those who have betrayed the faith.

古文：昉撰《杂传》二百四十七卷，《地记》二百五十二卷，文章三十三卷。
现代文：任防撰写的《杂传》有二百四十七卷，《地记》有二百五十二卷，文章有三十三卷。
English: The "Miscellaneous Biography" written by Ren Fang has 247 volumes, the "Geography" has 252 volumes, and the articles have 33 volumes.

古文：昉第四子东里，颇有父风，官至尚书外兵郎。
现代文：第四个儿子是塞里，他很有父亲的风度，官做到尚书外兵郎。
English: The fourth son is Seri, who has a father's demeanor and is a career soldier.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：观夫二汉求贤，率先经术；近世取人，多由文史。
现代文：陈吏部尚书姚察说：观察二汉求取贤才，大致是以儒经方术为优先；近代的取人标准，多是由文学历史的好坏来判断。
English: Chen Li Bu Shangshu Yao said: Observing the two Han dynasties to seek talents, the priority is generally given to Confucianism and Confucianism; modern recruitment standards are mostly judged by the quality of literature and history.

古文：二子之作，辞藻壮丽，允值其时。
现代文：江淹与任防两个人的作品，辞藻雄壮华丽，的确正逢其时。
English: The works of two people, Jiang and Ren, are magnificent and gorgeous, and it is indeed the right time.

古文：淹能沉静，昉持内行，并以名位终始，宜哉。
现代文：江淹有能力性格沉静，任防矜持注重内在修行，一起在名声地位上善始善终，这是适宜的呀。
English: Jiang Dun has the ability to have a calm personality, and it is appropriate for him to pay attention to his inner practice, and make a good start and a good end in his reputation status.

古文：江非先觉，任无旧恩，则上秩显赠，亦末由也已。
现代文：江淹如不是靠事先知觉，任防也没有旧的恩宠，那么上等的官品显赫的馈赠，也是无从得来的啊。
English: If the flooding of the river did not depend on foreknowledge, and if there was no old grace, then there was no way to get the prestigious gift of the highest official title.

