古文：八年春，王正月，师次于郎，以俟陈人、蔡人。
现代文：八年春天，周历正月，军队到达郎地，等待陈国人和蔡国人。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, the first month of the lunar calendar, the army arrived in Langdi, waiting for Chen and Cai.

古文：甲午，治兵。
现代文：甲午日，练兵。
English: At noon on the second day of the month, the soldiers began their training.

古文：夏，师及齐师围郕，郕降于齐师。
现代文：夏季，鲁军和齐军包围郕国。郕国向齐军投降。
English: In the summer, the Lu army and the Qi army encircled Shan State. Shan State surrendered to the Qi army.

古文：秋，师还。
现代文：秋季，班师回国。
English: In the autumn, the troops returned home.

古文：冬十有一月癸未，齐无知弑其君诸儿。
现代文：冬季十一月癸未，齐国公孙无知杀害齐襄公。
English: In the winter of November, the grandson of Qigong Guo killed Qixiang Guo in ignorance.

古文：八年春，治兵于庙，礼也。
现代文：八年春季，鲁庄公在太庙把武器发给军队，这是合于礼的。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, Prince Lu Zhuang gave weapons to the army in the Great Temple, which was proper.

古文：夏，师及齐师围郕。
现代文：夏季，鲁军和齐军包围郕国。
English: In the summer, the Lu army and the Qi army encircled Yunnan.

古文：郕降于齐师。
现代文：郕国向齐军投降。
English: Shan State surrenders to the Qi army.

古文：仲庆父请伐齐师。
现代文：仲庆父请求进攻齐军。
English: Naka's father pleaded for the Qi army to attack.

古文：公曰： 不可。我实不德，齐师何罪？
现代文：庄公说： 不行，我实在缺乏德行，齐军有什么罪？
English: Zhuang Gong said, "No, I really lack virtue. What is Qi Jun guilty of?"

古文：罪我之由。
现代文：罪是由我引起的。
English: The sin was caused by me.

古文：《夏书》曰： 皋陶迈种德，德乃降。 
现代文：《夏书》说： 皋陶勉力培育德行，德行具备，别人就会降服。 
English: "The Summer Book" says: "If a Taoist cultivates virtue, others will submit to him."

古文：姑务修德以待时乎。 
现代文：我们姑且致力于修养德行，以等待时机吧！ 
English: Let us devote ourselves to cultivating virtue and waiting for the right time!

古文：秋，师还。
现代文：秋季，军队回国。
English: In the autumn, the troops returned home.

古文：君子是以善鲁庄公。
现代文：君子因此而赞美鲁庄公。
English: As a result, the gentleman praised Lu Zhuang.

古文：齐侯使连称、管至父戍葵丘。瓜时而往，曰： 及瓜而代。 
现代文：齐襄公派连称、管至父驻守葵丘，瓜熟的时节前去，说： 到明年瓜熟的时候派人替代你们。 
English: Qixianggong sent a group of soldiers to say, "Let your father stay in Kwai Chung and go to the time when the melons are ripe," and said, "Next year, when the melons are ripe, send someone to replace you."

古文：期戍，公问不至。
现代文：驻守了一周年，齐襄公的命令并没有下来。
English: On the first anniversary of the garrison, the order of Prince Qixiang did not come down.

古文：请代，弗许。故谋作乱。
现代文：连称、管至父请求派人替代，齐襄公不同意，因此就策划叛乱。
English: Lian Zhao and Guan Zhizhi asked their father to send someone to replace him, but Qi Xianggong did not agree, so he plotted a rebellion.

古文：僖公之母弟曰夷仲年，生公孙无知，有宠于僖公，衣服礼秩如適，襄公绌之。
现代文：齐僖公的同母兄弟叫夷仲年，生了公孙无知，受到僖公的宠信，衣服礼仪等种种待遇都和嫡子一样。
English: Prince Qi's half-brother, named Yizhongnian, gave birth to his grandson, Ignorance. He was favored by Prince Zou, and received the same treatment as his legitimate son in terms of clothing etiquette and other matters.

古文：二人因之以作乱。
现代文：齐襄公降低了公孙无知的待遇。
English: Prince Qixiang reduced the ignorant treatment of his grandson.

古文：连称有从妹在公宫，无宠，使间公，曰： 捷，吾以女为夫人。 
现代文：连称、管至父两个人就利用公孙无知而发动叛变。连称有个堂妹在齐襄公的后宫，不得宠，就让她去侦察襄公的情况。公孙无知说： 事情成功，我把你立为君夫人。 
English: Even though he claimed to be in charge of his father, the two men took advantage of his ignorance to start a rebellion. Even though he claimed to have a cousin in Prince Qixiang's harem, he did not like her, so he asked her to investigate Prince Qixiang's situation. Prince Qixiang said: "The matter is successful, I have made you my wife."

古文：冬十二月，齐侯游于姑棼，遂田于贝丘，见大豕，从者曰： 公子彭生也。 
现代文：冬季，十二月，齐襄公在姑棼游玩，就在贝丘打猎。看到一头大野猪，随从说： 这是公子彭生啊！ 
English: In winter, in December, Prince Qixiang was playing in Gulu and hunting in Bechu. When he saw a big wild boar, his attendant said, "This is Prince Peng Sheng!"

古文：公怒曰： 彭生敢见！ 
现代文：齐襄公发怒说： 彭生敢来见我！ 
English: Qi Xiangong said angrily, "How dare Peng Sheng come to see me!

古文：射之，豕人立而啼。
现代文：就用箭射它。野猪像人一样站起身啼叫。
English: Shoot it with an arrow, and the boar stands up like a man and squawks.

古文：公惧，坠于车，伤足丧屦。
现代文：齐襄公害怕，从车上摔下来，伤了脚，丢了鞋。
English: Mr. Qi Xiang was scared and fell from the car, injuring his foot and losing his shoe.

古文：反，诛屦于徒人费。弗得，鞭之，见血。
现代文：回去以后，责令徒人费去找鞋，费找不着，齐襄公就鞭打他，打得皮开血出。
English: After he returned, he ordered his apprentice to spend money to find the shoes, but he couldn't find the money, so Lord Qi Xiang whipped him until his skin bled.

古文：走出，遇贼于门，劫而束之。
现代文：费走出去，在宫门口遇到叛贼。
English: Fei went out and met the traitor at the palace gate.

古文：费曰： 我奚御哉！ 袒而示之背，信之。费请先入，伏公而出斗，死于门中。石之纷如死于阶下。
现代文：进去以后把齐襄公隐藏起来，然后出宫同其他宦官和叛贼格斗，死在宫门里，石之纷如死在台阶下。
English: After entering, he hid Prince Qixiang, and then went out of the palace to fight with other eunuchs and traitors. He died in the palace gate, and under the steps.

古文：遂入，杀孟阳于床。曰： 非君也，不类。 
现代文：叛贼就进入宫中，在床上杀了孟阳，说： 不是国君，样子不像。 
English: The traitor entered the palace and killed Meng Yang on the bed, saying, "He is not the sovereign, he does not look like one."

古文：见公之足于户下，遂弑之，而立无知。
现代文：一眼看到齐襄公的脚露出在门下边，就把他杀死了，而拥立无知为国君。
English: As soon as he saw Qi Xianggong's foot peeking out from under the door, he killed him and made ignorance the ruler of the country.

古文：初襄公立，无常。
现代文：当初，襄公在位，言行多变，政令不信。
English: At the beginning, Prince Xiang was on the throne, his words and deeds were changeable, and he did not believe in government decrees.

古文：鲍叔牙曰： 君使民慢，乱将作矣。 
现代文：鲍叔牙说： 国君役使臣民的态度轻慢，叛乱将要发生了。 
English: Bao Shuzha said: The service of the sovereign makes the attitude of the subjects light-hearted, and a rebellion will occur.

古文：奉公子小白出奔莒。
现代文：与公子小白出宫投奔莒。
English: She ran away from the palace with Prince Kobaku.

古文：乱作，管夷吾、召忽奉公子纠来奔。
现代文：叛乱发生，管夷吾、召忽与公子纠投奔鲁国。
English: When the rebellion broke out, Guan Yiguo, Zhaogu and his son were forced to go to Panlu.

古文：初，公孙无知虐于雍廪。
现代文：当初，公孙无知对待雍廪很暴虐。
English: At first, Gongsun ignorantly treated Yongzheng cruelly.

