古文：屈到嗜芰。
现代文：屈到喜欢吃菱角。
English: I've sunk so low that I like to eat horse mackerel.

古文：有疾，召其宗老而属之，曰： 祭我必以芰。 
现代文：他生病时，叫来负责祭祀的家臣嘱咐说： 祭祀我的时候，一定要用菱角。 
English: When he fell ill, he summoned the vassal in charge of the ritual and instructed him: "When you sacrifice me, be sure to use the rhomboid horn.

古文：及祥，宗老将荐芰，屈建命去之。
现代文：到了一周年祭祀的时候，家臣准备供奉菱角，屈建命令将它拿掉。家臣说： 这是您父亲嘱咐的。 屈建说： 不能这样做。
English: At the time of the first anniversary ceremony, when the vassal was preparing to offer the rhomboid, Qu Jian ordered him to remove it. The vassal said, "This is what your father ordered." Qu Jian said, "You can't do that."

古文：宗老曰： 夫子属之。 子木曰： 不然。夫子承楚国之政，其法刑在民心而藏在王府，上之可以比先王，下之可以训后世，虽微楚国，诸侯莫不誉。
现代文：我父亲执掌楚国的政事，他制定的法令记在百姓的心中，收藏在王府中，对上可以比同于先王，对下可以训导后人，即使没有楚国，各国诸侯也没有谁不称赞的。
English: My father was in charge of the political affairs of the State of Chu. The decrees he made were recorded in the hearts of the people and stored in the royal palace. They could be compared to the previous king, and they could be taught to future generations. Even without the State of Chu, there was no one who did not praise the princes of various countries.

古文：其祭典有之曰：国君有牛享，大夫有羊馈，士有豚犬之奠，庶人有鱼炙之荐，笾豆、脯醢则上下共之，不羞珍异，不陈庶侈。
现代文：祭祀的发点上说：祭奠国君要用牛，祭奠大夫要用羊，祭奠士用小猪和狗，祭奠普通人就用烤鱼，竹笾木器里装的果干和肉酱，国君到百姓都可以用。不进献珍贵稀有的东西，不陈列品类繁多的食物。
English: At the beginning of the ritual, it was said that: to pay tribute to the king, people should use oxen, to pay tribute to the doctor, people should use sheep, to pay tribute to the priest, people should use pigs and dogs, to pay tribute to the common man, people should use grilled fish, and the dried fruit and meat sauce in the bamboo basket can be used by the king and the common people. Precious and rare things should not be offered, and a wide variety of foods should not be displayed.

古文：夫子不以其私欲干国之典。 
现代文：我父亲也不能因为自己的嗜好而违犯国家的法典。 
English: Nor can my father violate the country's code because of his hobby.

古文：遂不用。
现代文：于是祭祀时便不用菱角。
English: As a result, Mingtai did not adopt the proposal to complete the track.

