古文：梁颢，字太素，郓州须城人。
现代文：梁颢，字太素，郓州须城人。
English: Liang Qi, Zha Tai Su, Zhangzhou Sucheng people.

古文：曾祖涓，成武主簿。
现代文：他的曾祖梁涓，做过成武县主簿。
English: His great-grandfather, Liang Qi, was the chief accountant of Chengwu County.

古文：祖惟忠，以明经历佐使府，至天平军节度判官。
现代文：祖父梁惟忠，以明经出身历任使官、知府的辅佐官员，最后官做到天平军节度判官。
English: His grandfather, Liang Weizhong, was a Ming Dynasty envoy, governor's assistant official, and the last official to become the judge of the festival of the Tianping Army.

古文：父文度早世，颢养于叔父。
现代文：父亲梁文度早逝，梁颢由叔父抚养成人。
English: His father, Liang Wenda, died young, and Liang Yao was raised by his uncle.

古文：王禹偁始与乡贡，颢依以为学，尝以疑义质于禹偁，禹偁拒之不答。
现代文：王禹翶开始参加乡贡考试时，梁颢依随着他以便求学，曾以疑难问题向王禹翶请教，王禹翶拒绝回答。
English: When Wang Ufan began to take the township tribute examination, Liang Huiyi followed him in order to study, and once asked Wang Ufan for advice on a difficult question. Wang Ufan refused to answer.

古文：颢发愤读书，不期月，复有所质，禹偁大加器赏。
现代文：梁颢便发愤读书，不到一个月后，再向王禹翶请教，王禹翶大加器重赞赏。
English: Liang Yao began to read furiously. Less than a month later, he asked Wang Yuyao for advice. Wang Yuyao greatly appreciated it.

古文：初举进士，不中第，留阙下。
现代文：初次参加进士考试，没考中，留在京城。
English: Attended the entrance examination for the first time, failed the mid-term exam, and stayed in Beijing.

古文：献疏曰：
现代文：上疏说：
English: Shang Zuo said:

古文：臣历观史籍，唐氏之御天下也，列圣间出，人文阐燿，尚且渴于共治，旁求多彦，设科之选，逾四十等。
现代文：臣遍观史籍，唐朝统治天下时，各位圣人更迭出现，人文璀璨，尚且还渴求能人共同治国，四处寻求有才德的人，选举所设科目，超过四十种。
English: When the Tang Dynasty ruled the world, saints appeared one after another, and the humanities flourished. In addition, there was a desire for capable people to jointly govern the country, and people with talent were sought everywhere. There were more than forty subjects set up for the election.

古文：当时秉笔之士，彬彬翔集，表著所以。
现代文：当时拿笔的读书人，纷纷飞集君王身边，表现他们的本领。
English: At that time, readers with pens flocked to the monarch's side to show off their skills.

古文：左右前后，有忠有良，导化原、树治本者，享三百年，得人之由也。
现代文：君王左右前后，有忠臣良将，引导、教化本原，树立、治理根基，享有三百年天下，是由于得了人才。
English: Around and around the king, there are loyal subjects and good generals to guide and enlighten the original, establish and govern the foundation, and enjoy the world for three hundred years. This is due to the talent.

古文：五代不竞，兹制日沦。
现代文：五代不昌盛，这一制度日渐沦丧。
English: If five generations do not prosper, this system will gradually decline.

古文：国家兴儒，追风三代。
现代文：我朝大兴儒学，追寻三代遗风。
English: My dynasty promoted Confucianism and pursued the legacy of three generations.

古文：方今科名之设，俊造毕臻，秉笔者如林，趋选者如云。
现代文：当今科举名目的设置，臻于完美，拿笔的人多如林，参加选试者多如云。
English: The setting of the purpose of today's exam is perfect. The number of people holding pens is like a forest, and the number of participants in the selection test is like a cloud.

古文：贡于诸侯，考于春官，陛下躬临慎择，必尽至公。
现代文：由诸侯推举，由春官考试，陛下还亲来精心挑选，务必要做到彻底公正。
English: Elected by the lords, selected by the Spring Official Examination, and carefully selected by His Majesty himself, it is imperative to be completely fair.

古文：奈何所取不出于诗赋、策论，简于心者援而陟之，咈于心者推而黜之，宁无滥陟枉黜之失耶？
现代文：奈何考试内容不出于诗赋、策论，心中喜欢的就任用提拔，心中不喜欢的就去压抑降黜，难道没有滥升枉黜的过失吗？
English: But what if the content of the examination is not based on poetry, strategy, the heart likes to be promoted, and the heart does not like to suppress the downgrade, is there no fault of excessive promotion?

古文：其间阘茸妄进，滥厕科场者，间亦有之。
现代文：其中妄进的卑鄙小人、滥厕身于科场中的人，也经常有出现。
English: Among them, there are often scumbags who are reckless and people who abuse themselves in the field of science.

古文：若曰陛下嘉惠孤寒沉滞之士，罔计贤否，悉拔而登之，一视同仁。
现代文：如果说这是陛下嘉勉、恩惠那些孤苦贫寒不能进升的读书人，于是不论贤否，全都录取，一视同仁。
English: If this is His Majesty's encouragement and grace to those lonely, poor and poor readers who cannot advance, then regardless of merit, they are all accepted without discrimination.

古文：臣窃谓此非确论。
现代文：那臣私下认为这并非正确的说法。
English: Privately, the minister does not think this is true.

古文：盖圣人在上，则内君子而外小人。
现代文：大概圣人在上，就会采用君子排斥小人。
English: Probably, if a saint is on the top, he will use a gentleman to repel a villain.

古文：若薰莸同器，甚非所以正人伦、淳风俗也。
现代文：如果香薰臭莸同装一器，那绝非端正人伦、敦厚风俗的方法。
English: If the aroma of skunk is packed in the same container, it is by no means a method of establishing a sound interpersonal relationship and strong customs.

古文：况丘园之下，岂无宏才茂德之士。
现代文：何况山丘园林之下，怎会没有大才美德之士呢？
English: Besides, how could there not be great talents and men of virtue beneath the hills and gardens?

古文：陛下诚能设科以擢异等之士，俾陈古今之治乱、君臣之得失、生民之休戚、贤愚之用舍，庶几有益于治，不特诗赋、论策之小技，以应有司之求而已。
现代文：陛下果真能设立科目来擢升异等人才，使他们陈述古今的治乱、君臣的得失、人民的喜忧、贤愚的用与不用，大概对于治国有益，不像诗赋、论策那些雕虫小技，只是用来应付官员的提问而已。
English: If His Majesty really can set up subjects to promote talented people, such as those who are different, so that they can explain the ancient and modern governance of chaos, the gains and losses of monarchs and ministers, the joys and sorrows of the people, and the use and disuse of the wise and the foolish, it will probably be beneficial to the governance of the country, unlike the minor skills of poetry and strategy, which are only used to deal with the questions of officials.

古文：疏上，不报。
现代文：疏文奏上，没有回音。
English: There is no echo in the sparse text.

古文：雍熙二年，复举进士，廷试，方禹中献赋。
现代文：雍熙二年，再次考进士，廷试时，正在禹中献赋。
English: In the second year of the reign of Yongxi, when he took the entrance examination again, he was in the middle of giving gifts to Yu during the court examination.

古文：太宗召升殿，询其门第，赐甲科，解褐大名府观察推官。
现代文：宋太宗召他升殿，询问他的门第，赐进士甲科，脱下平民服，任大名府观察推官。
English: Song Taizong called him to the palace, inquired about his lineage, gave him the title of Knight of the Armor, took off his civilian clothes, and appointed him as an observer of the daimyofu.

古文：四年，与梁湛并召为右拾遗、直史馆，赐绯。
现代文：雍熙四年，与梁湛一并被召来朝中做右拾遗、直史馆，赏赐红帛。
English: In the four years of Yongxi, he and Liang Zhan were called to the court to do the right to collect relics and direct history museum, and were awarded the Red Ribbon.

古文：判鼓司、登闻院。
现代文：后任判鼓司、登闻院。
English: Later, he was appointed as a drum master and choirmaster of Dengwen Academy.

古文：颢在大名佐赵昌言。昌言人掌枢密，会翟马周事，颢坐贬虢州司户参军。
现代文：梁颢在大名时辅佐赵昌言，后赵昌言入朝掌枢密院，遇上翟马周的事，梁颢受连坐被贬职任虢州司户参军。
English: When he was a daimyo, Liang Jun assisted Zhao Changyan. Later, Zhao Changyan became a member of the Privy Council, which was in charge of the imperial court. Liang Jun was demoted to the post of the governor of Zhangzhou and joined the army.

古文：起知鱼台县，就加大理评事。
现代文：后又被起用任鱼台知县，就地加升大理评事的头衔。
English: After that, he was appointed to the post of Yuudai Zhixian, and was promoted to the title of Dali critic on the spot.

古文：召还，迁殿中丞。
现代文：后被召回朝中，升任殿中丞。
English: Later, he was recalled to the Imperial Court and promoted to the position of Don Chujo.

古文：顷之，复直史馆，压开封府推官、三司关西道判官，转太常博士，丁内艰，起令赴职，改右司谏。
现代文：不久，再次任直史馆，历任开封府推官、三司关西道判官，转升太常博士。遇上母亲去世停职，服丧完毕，复职赴任，改做右司谏。
English: Soon, he was reappointed as the director of the History Museum, successively served as the governor of Kaifeng, the judge of the Third Division of the Kansai District Court, and was promoted to the position of Doctor of Civil Law. When his mother passed away, he was suspended from his duties, and after the funeral, he was reinstated to his duties and became the right priest.

古文：真宗初，诏群臣言事，颢时使陕西，途中作《听政箴》以献。
现代文：宋真宗初期，下诏大臣们议论国事，梁颢当时出使陕西，途中做了一篇《听政箴》进献给皇帝。
English: In the early days of Song Zhenzong, the ministers discussed state affairs. At that time, Liang Zheng sent an envoy to Shaanxi. On the way, he wrote a "Listening to Politics" and presented it to the emperor.

古文：还为度支判官。
现代文：回朝后任度支判官。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he was appointed as a judge.

古文：咸平元年，与杨励、李若拙、朱台符同知贡举。
现代文：咸平元年，与杨励、李若拙、朱台符一同任知贡举。
English: In the first year of the Xianping era, he was appointed to the tribute together with Yang Li, Li Ruoshu and Zhu Daifu.

古文：时诏钱若水重修《太祖实录》，表颢参其事，又同修起居注。
现代文：当时皇帝诏令钱若水重修《太祖实录》，钱若水又请梁颢参加这件事，后又任同修起居注。
English: At that time, the emperor ordered Qian Ruoshui to reconstruct the "Ancestor's Record." Qian Ruoshui also invited Liang Jun to participate in this matter, and later appointed him as a fellow practitioner.

古文：扈跸大名，诏访群臣边事，颢上疏曰：
现代文：护从皇帝车驾到大名，皇帝下诏询问大臣们边疆的事，梁颢上疏说：
English: After escorting the emperor's carriage to Daimyo, the emperor issued an edict to inquire of the ministers about the frontier. Liang Xuan Shangsuo said:

古文：臣闻自古用兵之道，在乎明赏罚而已。
现代文： 臣听说自古用兵的方法，关键就在于明确赏罚。
English: The minister heard that the key to the method of using soldiers since ancient times is to clearly reward and punish.

古文：然而赏不可以独任，罚不可以少失。
现代文：然而奖赏不可以由少数人独占，惩罚不可以缺少。
English: However, rewards must not be monopolized by a few, and punishments must not be lacking.

古文：故《兵法》曰： 罚之不行，譬如骄子之不可用。 又曰： 善为将者，威振敌国，令行三军。
现代文：所以《兵法》说： 罚之不行，譬如骄子之不可用。 又说： 善为将者，威震敌国，令行三军。
English: That is why the "Law of War" says, "Punishment is useless, just as arrogance is useless," and also says, "He who is a good general will make the enemy tremble and order his three armies to march."

古文：尽忠益时者，虽仇必赏；犯法败事者，虽亲必罚。 故孙武斩队长而兵皆整，穰苴斩监军而敌遂退。
现代文：尽忠益时者，虽仇必赏；犯法败事者，虽亲必罚。 所以孙武斩了队长而后队伍整齐，穰苴斩了监军而后敌人便撤退。
English: Those who are loyal and beneficial will be rewarded, even though they are enemies; those who break the law and cause trouble will be punished, even though they are relatives. Therefore, Sun Wu cut off the captain and then the team was neat, cut off the supervisor and then the enemy retreated.

古文：以此言之，兵法不可不正也。
现代文：从这一点来说，兵法不正确不行。
English: From this point of view, incorrect methods of warfare are unacceptable.

古文：昨者命将出师，乘秋备塞，而傅潜奉明诏，握重兵，逗挠无谋，守陴玩寇，老精兵於不用。
现代文：不久前命令出师，乘秋季防守边塞，但傅潜奉明确的诏令、手握重兵，却逗留不前，乱而无谋，死守城堡，观望敌人，将精兵久拖得疲累不能再用。
English: Not long ago, he ordered his division to take advantage of the autumn to defend the border fortress, but Fu Qian, with a clear imperial edict and a heavy army in his hands, lingered, confused and helpless, desperately defending the castle, watching the enemy, and dragging the elite soldiers for a long time until they were too tired to be used again.

古文：以至蕃马南牧，边尘画惊，河朔之民，流移失所，魏博以北，蹂践一空。
现代文：导致外蕃牧马南下，边境尘土都被惊起，河朔人民，流离失所，魏博以北，被蹂践一空。
English: As a result, Gaotang Muma went south, the border dust was stirred up, the people of Heshuo were displaced, and the north of Weibo was devastated.

古文：遂至残妖未殄，銮辂亲征，此所谓以贼遗君父者也。
现代文：以致使残余的妖魔未灭，皇上御驾亲征，这就叫作把敌贼送给君王。
English: As a result, the remaining demons were not exterminated, and the emperor personally drove them away. This is called sending the enemy to the king.

古文：乃或赦而不问，则何以谢横死之民；或黜而不戮，则何以恢用兵之略。
现代文：如果赦免不加问罪，那怎么向枉死的人民谢罪；或者只罢黜却不杀头，那怎么能恢复用兵的目的。
English: If one pardons without inquiring into the crime, then how can one thank the people who died in vain for their sins; or if one only dismisses without killing, then how can one restore the purpose of using soldiers.

古文：以军法论之，固合斩潜以徇军中，降诏以示天下。
现代文：以军法论处，固然应当斩傅潜来在军队中示众，降下诏书来宣告天下。
English: When it comes to military law, of course, it is necessary to show the public in the army, and to announce it to the world by issuing an edict.

古文：如此，则协前古之典章，戒后来之将帅，然后择边臣之可用者，就委用之。
现代文：如此，才能符合古代的典章，警戒后来的将帅，然后再从边疆官吏中选择可用的人，就地委任使用。
English: Only in this way can they comply with the ancient regulations, warn the later generals, and then select the available people from the frontier officials and appoint them on the spot.

古文：臣尝读汉史，李广之屯兵行师也，无部伍行阵，就善水草，人人自便，不击刁斗以自卫，远於斥候，未尝遇害，而广终为名将，士卒乐用。
现代文：臣曾读汉朝历史，李广领兵行军扎营，部队没有队形方阵，而是寻找水草好的地方，人人自便，不蛮打刁斗而求自卫，远离侦察，未曾遇到危害，于是李广终于成为一代名将，士兵都乐于受他指挥。
English: The minister had read the history of the Han Dynasty. Li Guang led the troops to march and set up camp. The troops did not have a square formation, but searched for a place with good water and grass. Everyone was at their own convenience. They did not fight brawls but sought self-defense. They were far away from reconnaissance and never encountered any harm. So Li Guang finally became a great general. The soldiers were happy to be commanded by him.

古文：又唐高祖之备北边也，选颈兵为游骑，不赍军粮，随逐水草，遇敌则杀，当时以为得策。
现代文：又唐高祖防守北疆，选派精兵做游骑，不带军粮，由他们就地自寻水草，遇到敌人就击杀，当时认为找到了好方法。
English: In addition, Tang Gaozu defended Northern Xinjiang, and selected elite soldiers to be rangers. They did not bring military rations, and let them search for water and grass on the ground. When they encountered enemies, they killed them. At that time, they thought they had found a good way.

古文：愿於边将中，不以名位高卑，但择其武勇谋略素为众所推服者，取十人焉。
现代文：希望在边疆将领中，不限名位高低，只选择威武勇猛有谋略而又素来被士兵推尊敬服的，从中取十个人。
English: It is hoped that among the frontier generals, no matter how high or low the rank, only those who are powerful, brave and resourceful and have always been respected by soldiers will be selected, and ten people will be selected from them.

古文：人付骑士五十，器甲完备，轻赍粮糗，逐水草以为利，往复扞御。
现代文：每人给骑兵五千，武器装备完整，少带干粮，让他们自己寻找水草肥美之处，再前往抵御外敌。
English: Give the cavalry five thousand rupees apiece, complete weapons and equipment, and a small amount of dry food, let them find their own water and grass, and then go to resist the foreign enemy.

古文：不令入郡邑，不许聚处，遇有寇兵，随时掩捕。
现代文：严禁进入城市，不准聚集在一起，遇到敌寇，随时击杀捉拿。
English: It is strictly forbidden to enter the city, it is not allowed to gather together, and when encountering enemy robbers, it is necessary to kill and capture them at any time.

古文：仍令烽候相望，交相救应。
现代文：仍旧命令烽火信号互相守望，交相救援响应。
English: Fire signals are still ordered to keep an eye on each other and exchange rescue responses.

古文：缘边州郡守城兵帅，即坚壁以待之。
现代文：边境各州郡守城的将士，则坚壁严阵以待。
English: The soldiers of the county garrisons of the border states are waiting.

古文：遇游骑近城，掩杀边寇，内量出兵甲援救。
现代文：遇到游骑来到近城地区击杀边境敌寇时，就从城内放出相当的军队援救。
English: When rangers came to the area near the city to kill border raiders, they sent a considerable army from the city to rescue them.

古文：如此，则乘城者不坚闭垒门，免坐观於胜负；捍边者不苟依郡郭，可行备於寇攘。
现代文：这样，就会使守城者不会紧关城门，以免犯坐山观望不战的错误；抵御边境者就不会苟且依靠郡城，而可在抗击敌寇中实行防备。
English: In this way, the defenders of the city will not close the gate tightly, so as not to make the mistake of sitting on the hill and not fighting; the defenders of the border will not rely on the county town, but can be prepared in the fight against the enemy.

古文：虽匪良筹，且殊胶柱。
现代文：虽不是最好的筹谋，但绝非胶柱鼓瑟。 
English: It's not the best planning, but it's not a rubber band.

古文：时论颇称之。
现代文：当时舆论很赞许他的建议。
English: At the time, public opinion was in favour of his proposal.

古文：三年，与李宗谔、赵安仁并命知制诰，赐金紫，是年冬，王均平，命为峡路安抚使。
现代文：咸平三年，与李宗谔、赵安仁一同受命任知制诰，并被赏赐金印紫绶。这年冬季，王均叛乱被平息，梁颢被任命为峡路安抚使。
English: In the third year of Xianping, together with Li Zongyao and Zhao Anren, he was appointed to the position of Ren Zhi Zuo, and was awarded the Golden Seal and Purple Ribbon. In the winter of this year, Wang Jun's rebellion was quelled, and Liang Yao was appointed as the Peacekeeper of the Gorges.

古文：归掌三班。
现代文：回朝后官任掌三班。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he held three government posts.

古文：韩国华判大理，以断刑失中，乃选颢以代之。
现代文：韩国华任大理判官，因决断刑狱有失公正，于是选派梁颢代替他。
English: South Korea's Huarong Dali judge, because the decision to sentence him to prison was unfair, so he chose to send Liang Qi to replace him.

古文：四年，张齐贤使关右安抚，以颢为之副。
现代文：咸平四年，张齐贤任关右安抚使，用梁颢做副使。
English: In the fourth year of Xianping, Zhang Qixian was appointed as Guan Yu's pacifying envoy, with Liang Jun as deputy envoy.

古文：颢有吏才，每进对，词辩明敏，真宗嘉赏之。
现代文：梁颢有做官的才能，每次进宫应对皇帝，言辞清晰明确敏锐，宋真宗很赞赏他。
English: Liang Jun had the ability to be an official. Every time he entered the palace, he had to deal with the emperor. His words were clear, precise and keen. Song Zhenzong appreciated him very much.

古文：凡群臣上封者，悉付颢洎薛映详阅可否。
现代文：凡是群臣中有人上奏应对，都总要先把奏文给梁颢和薛映详细阅看以决定是否可以。
English: If any of the courtiers wanted to make a report, they must first read the report to Liang Jun and Xue Ying in detail to decide whether it is possible.

古文：冬，以河北饥盗，命与映分为东、西路巡检使。
现代文：这年冬季，因河北闹饥荒和强盗，梁颢受命与薛映分别担任东、西路巡检使。
English: In the winter of that year, due to the famine and banditry in Hebei, Liang Qian and Xue Ying were ordered to serve as East and West Road Patrol Envoys respectively.

古文：还，拜右谏议大夫，充户部使。
现代文：回朝后，授任右谏议大夫，充户部使。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he was appointed to the post of doctor of the Right Division of the Privy Council, and to the post of Minister of the Household.

古文：会罢三部使，以颢为翰林学士同知审官院、三班。
现代文：当时朝廷撤销三部使，梁颢改任翰林学士同知审官院、三班。
English: At that time, the imperial court revoked the three-part envoy, and Liang Wei was reassigned to the Hanlin Academy and the Third Class.

古文：景德元年，权知开封。
现代文：景德元年，任权知开封府。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Jingde, he was given the power to open the feudal government.

古文：颢美风姿，强力少疾，闺门雍睦。
现代文：梁颢风姿俊美，身强力壮，很少疾病，家中和睦。
English: Liang Qi is handsome, physically strong, rarely ill, and his family is harmonious.

古文：与人交久而无改，士大夫多之。
现代文：与人相交，长期没有改变，士大夫多与他相交。
English: Interacting with people has not changed for a long time, and scholars and doctors often interact with him.

古文：六月，暴病卒，年九十二。
现代文：这年六月，突然发病去世，终年四十二岁。
English: In June of that year, he died of a sudden illness, at the age of 42.

古文：上甚轸恻，赐赠加等。
现代文：皇上非常悲恻，赏赐追赠高官荣衔。
English: The emperor was so saddened that he rewarded and posthumously bestowed the title of high-ranking official.

古文：所著文集十五卷。
现代文：他所著文集十五卷。
English: His collected works comprise fifteen volumes.

古文：子固、述、适。
现代文：他的儿子有梁固、梁述、梁适。
English: His sons were Liang Gu, Liang Su and Liang Shih.

古文：适相仁宗，别有传。
现代文：梁适是仁宗时的宰相，另外有传。
English: Liang Shih was the prime minister at the time of Emperor Renzong, and there is another story.

