古文：子曰： 里仁为美，择不处仁，焉得知？ 
现代文：孔子说： 居处在仁爱的邻居乡里中才是最美好的，如果你选择的住处不是一个有仁德的地方，怎么能说你是明智的呢？ 
English: Confucius said, "It is best to live in a benevolent neighborhood. If you do not live in a benevolent neighborhood, how can you be wise?"

古文：子曰： 不仁者不可以久处约，不可以长处乐。
现代文：孔子说： 没有仁德的人不能长久地处在贫困的境地，也不能长久地处在安乐中的境地。
English: Confucius said: "A person without benevolence cannot remain in poverty for long, nor can he remain at ease for long.

古文：仁者安仁，知者利仁。 
现代文：有仁德的人是安于仁道的，有智慧的人则是认识到仁对自己有长远的利益而实行仁。 
English: People with benevolence are comfortable with benevolence, and people with wisdom are aware that benevolence has long-term benefits for themselves and practice benevolence.

古文：子曰： 唯仁者能好人，能恶人。 
现代文：孔子说： 只有那些有仁德的人，才能够正确地喜爱应当喜爱的人，厌恶应当厌恶的人。 
English: Confucius said: Only those with benevolence can correctly love those who should be loved and loathe those who should be loathed.

古文：子曰： 苟志于仁矣，无恶也。 
现代文：孔子说： 如果一个人立志于仁，就不会作恶了。 
English: Confucius said, "If one is determined to be benevolent, one will not commit evil."

古文：子曰： 富与贵，是人之所欲也；不以其道得之，不处也。
现代文：孔子说： 财富和地位，是每个人都向往的；但是，用不正当的手段得到它，就不能真正的拥有它。
English: Confucius said, "Wealth and status are what everyone longs for, but if one obtains them by improper means, one cannot truly possess them.

古文：贫与贱，是人之所恶也；不以其道得之，不去也。
现代文：贫穷与低贱，是人们所厌恶的，但是用不正当的手段来摆脱它，宁可不摆脱。
English: Poverty and degradation are detestable, but to get rid of them by improper means is preferable to not getting rid of them.

古文：君子去仁，恶乎成名？
现代文：君子如果违背了仁德的准则，又怎么能是君子呢？
English: If a gentleman violates the principle of benevolence, how can he be a gentleman?

古文：君子无终食之间违仁，造次必于是，颠沛必于是。 
现代文：君子不会有吃一顿饭的时间离开仁德，即使在匆忙紧迫的情况下也一定要遵守仁的准则，在颠沛流离的时候也和仁同在。 
English: A gentleman will not have time to eat a meal without benevolence. Even if he is in a hurry, he must abide by the principle of benevolence, and be with benevolence when he is in a hurry.

古文：子曰： 我未见好仁者，恶不仁者。
现代文：孔子说： 我没有见过喜欢仁德的人和讨厌不仁德的人。
English: Confucius said: I have never seen a person who likes benevolence and a person who hates unkindness.

古文：好仁者，无以尚之；恶不仁者，其为仁矣，不使不仁者加乎其身，有能一日用其力于仁矣乎？
现代文：喜欢仁德的人，是再好不过了；讨厌不仁德的人，他实行仁德，只是为了不使不仁德的事物加在自己身上。有谁能一天都把自己的力量用在实行仁德上吗？
English: The man who loves kindness is the best of men; the man who hates unkindness practices kindness in order not to bring unkindness upon himself. Who can apply his strength to kindness all day long?

古文：我未见力不足者。
现代文：我还没有看见力量不够的。
English: I haven't seen a lack of strength.

古文：盖有之矣，我未之见也。 
现代文：这种人是有的，只是我还没见过。 
English: There are people like that, but I haven't met them yet.

古文：子曰： 人之过也，各于其党。
现代文：孔子说： 人们犯的错误，有着不同类型。
English: Confucius said: There are different types of mistakes people make.

古文：观过，斯知仁矣。 
现代文：所以，观察一个人所犯的错误，就可以知道他是什么样的人了。 
English: Therefore, by observing the mistakes a person makes, you can know what kind of person he is.

古文：子曰： 朝闻道，夕死可矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 早晨得知了真理，就算是当晚死去，也没有遗憾了。 
English: Confucius said, "If you learn the truth in the morning, even if you die in the evening, you will have no regrets."

古文：子曰： 士志于道，而耻恶衣恶食者，未足与议也。 
现代文：孔子说： 有德行道义而将出仕的人立志于追求真理，但又以自己穿着破烂衣服、吃着粗糙的饭食为耻辱，这种人是不值得与他谈论真理的。 
English: Confucius said, "A virtuous and moral person who is determined to pursue the truth, but is ashamed to wear tattered clothes and eat coarse food, is not worth talking to about the truth."

古文：子曰： 君子之于天下也，无适也，无莫也，义之与比。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子对于天下的事情，没有规定一定要怎样做，只考虑怎样去做就行。 
English: Confucius said: A gentleman does not prescribe how to do things in the world, but only considers how to do them.

古文：子曰： 君子怀德，小人怀土；君子怀刑，小人怀惠。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子心中想的是仁德，小人所思的是财产；君子想的是规则，小人想的是惠利。 
English: Confucius said: A gentleman thinks of benevolence, a villain thinks of property; a gentleman thinks of rules, and a villain thinks of benefit.

古文：子曰： 放于利而行，多怨。 
现代文：孔子说： 做事只为追求私利，必定会招来很多怨恨。 
English: Confucius said: Doing things only for the pursuit of self-interest is bound to cause a lot of resentment.

古文：子曰： 能以礼让为国乎？
现代文：孔子说： 能用礼让的原则来治理国家吗？
English: Confucius said: Can the principle of courtesy be used to govern a country?

古文：何有？
现代文：难道这有什么困难吗？
English: Is there a problem with that?

古文：不能以礼让为国，如礼何？ 
现代文：如果不能用礼让的原则来治理国家，又怎么能实行礼制呢？ 
English: If the principle of comity cannot be used to govern the country, how can a system of comity be implemented?

古文：子曰： 不患无位，患所以立；不患莫己知，求为可知也。 
现代文：孔子说： 不要老是想着官位，要担心自己有没有能力胜任这个职务。
English: Confucius said: Don't always think about the official position, but worry about whether you are capable of fulfilling this position.

古文：子曰： 参乎！吾道一以贯之。 曾子曰： 唯。 
现代文：不担心没有人知道自己，而要努力使别人知道自己的本领。 孔子说： 曾参呀！
English: Don't worry that no one knows you, but strive to let others know what you are capable of.Confucius said: Zengzang!

古文：子出，门人问曰： 何谓也？ 曾子曰： 夫子之道，忠恕而已矣。 
现代文：我的学说可以用一个根本的原则贯通起来。 曾参答道： 是的。 孔子走出去以后，其他学生问道： 这是什么意思？ 曾子说： 老师的道，就是忠恕罢了。 
English: Zeng Zang replied, "Yes." After Confucius left, the other students asked, "What does this mean?" Zeng Zi said, "The way of a teacher is to be loyal."

古文：子曰： 君子喻于义，小人喻于利。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子通晓大义，小人只知道小利。 
English: Confucius said: A gentleman knows what is right and just, but a scoundrel knows only what is expedient.

古文：子曰： 见贤思齐焉，见不贤而内自省也。 
现代文：孔子说： 看见德才兼备的人就向他学习，希望能向他看齐；看见不贤的人，就反省自己有没有和他一样的缺点，有要改正。 
English: Confucius said: If you see someone who is both virtuous and talented, you should learn from him and hope to be equal to him; if you see someone who is not virtuous, you should reflect on whether you have the same shortcomings as him and correct them.

古文：子曰： 事父母几谏，见志不从，又敬不违，劳而不怨。 
现代文：孔子说： 事奉父母，对于他们一些不对的地方要委婉地劝说。
English: Confucius said, "When serving your parents, you should gently persuade them when they do something wrong.

古文：子曰： 父母在，不远游，游必有方。 
现代文：自己的意见没有被采纳，仍然要对他们恭恭敬敬不触犯他们，替他们操劳而不怨恨。 
English: Even if your opinion is not accepted, you should still treat them with respect, not offend them, and work for them without resentment.

古文：子曰： 三年无改于父之道，可谓孝矣。 子曰： 父母之年，不可不知也。一则以喜，一则以惧。 
现代文：孔子说： 父母还健在时，就不要远离他们；如果一定要出远门，也必须告知自己所去的地方。 
English: Confucius said: When your parents are still alive, you should not stay away from them; if you must go far away, you must also tell them where you are going.

古文：子曰： 古者言之不出，耻躬之不逮也。 
现代文：孔子说： 古代的君子从不轻易发表言论，他们以说了而做不到为耻。 
English: Confucius said: The ancient gentlemen never made statements easily. They were ashamed of saying something but not being able to do it.

古文：子曰： 以约失之者鲜矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 用礼来约束自己，犯错误的人就少了。 
English: Confucius said, "If you use etiquette to discipline yourself, there will be fewer people who make mistakes."

古文：子曰： 君子欲讷于言而敏于行。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子总是说话谨慎，做事情行动敏捷。 
English: Confucius said: A gentleman always speaks cautiously and acts promptly.

古文：子曰： 德不孤，必有邻。 
现代文：孔子说： 品德高尚的人是不会孤立的，一定会有志同道合的人与他相处。 
English: Confucius said: A person of high moral character will not be isolated, there will definitely be like-minded people to get along with him.

古文：子游曰： 事君数，斯辱矣；朋友数，斯疏矣。 
现代文：子游说： 太频繁的出现在国君的身边，就会为自己招致羞辱；劝告朋友过于频繁，反而会被疏远。 
English: To appear too frequently at the sovereign's side is to invite humiliation; to advise a friend too frequently is to alienate him.

