古文：宇文融
现代文：宇文融
English: Uwen Rong

古文：玄宗命宇文融为括田使，融方恣睢，稍不附己者，必加诬谮。
现代文：唐玄宗任命宇文融为括田使，宇文融当时正放纵横行，稍有点不依附自己的人，一定要加以诬谄和进谗言。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Uwen Rong as his envoy. At that time, Uwen Rong was indulgent and rampant, and anyone who did not adhere to him must be falsely accused and slandered.

古文：密奏以为卢从愿广置田园，有地数百顷。
现代文：他密秘地向皇上报告认为卢从愿买了很多田地和庄园，有土地几百顷。
English: He secretly reported to the emperor that Lu had willingly bought a lot of fields and manors, with hundreds of hectares of land.

古文：帝素器重，亦倚为相者数矣；而又族望宦婚，鼎盛于一时，故帝亦重言其罪，但目从愿为多田翁。
现代文：皇上平时很器重卢从愿，也多次倚靠他做丞相，而且又是名门望族，与官宦人家广泛通婚，一时之间，家族极为兴盛，所以皇上也不便轻易说他有罪，只是把卢从愿看成是一个有很多田产的老翁。
English: In ordinary times, the emperor was very attached to Lu Zengwei, and relied on him many times to be the prime minister. Moreover, he was a famous and respected family member, and had extensive marriages with officials. For a while, the family was extremely prosperous, so the emperor did not easily say that he was guilty, but regarded Lu Zengwei as an old man with a lot of farmland.

古文：从愿少家相州，应明经。常从五举，制策三等，授夏县尉。自前明经至吏部侍郎，才十年。
现代文：卢从愿小时家住在相州，曾参加过五次明经科的考试，对策考试列为三等，任命他担任夏县县尉的职务，从参加明经考试到作吏部侍郎，只有十年。
English: Lu used to live in Xiangzhou when he was a child. He took five examinations of the Ming Dynasty, and was ranked third in the countermeasures examination. He was appointed to the post of Xia County Lieutenant. It was only ten years from taking the Ming Dynasty examination to being a waiter of the cadre department.

古文：自吏部员外至侍郎，只七个月。
现代文：从吏部员外到吏部侍郎，只有七个月的时间。
English: It only took seven months to go from a member of the administrative department to an administrative assistant.

古文：歌舒翰天宝中，歌舒翰为安西节度，控地数千里，甚著威令，故西鄙人歌之曰： 北斗七星高，歌舒翰夜带刀。
现代文：歌舒翰天宝中，歌舒翰为安西节度，控地数千里，甚著威令，故西鄙人歌之曰： 北斗七星高，歌舒翰夜带刀。
English: In Goshukhan Tianbao, Goshukhan is the festival of Anxi, controlling thousands of miles, very commanding, so the West's humble song says: The Big Dipper is high, Goshukhan at night with a knife.

古文：吐蕃总杀尽，更筑两重濠。 
现代文：吐蕃总杀尽，更筑两重濠。 
English: He killed all the cormorants and built two more cormorants.

古文：时差都知兵马使张擢上都奏事，值杨国忠专权黩货，擢逗留不返，因纳贿交结。
现代文：时差都知兵马使张擢上都奏事，值杨国忠专权黩货，擢逗留不返，因纳贿交结。
English: With the time difference, the soldiers and horses knew that Zhang's promotion was a matter of record. It was worth Yang Guozhong's exclusive right to buy goods, stay in the promotion without returning, and pay bribes.

古文：翰续入朝奏，擢知翰至，惧，求国忠拔用。
现代文：翰续入朝奏，擢知翰至，惧，求国忠拔用。
English: Han continued to enter the morning recital, and was promoted to the position of knowing, fearing, and being loyal to the country.

古文：国忠乃除擢兼御史大夫，充剑南西川节度使。
现代文：国忠乃除擢兼御史大夫，充剑南西川节度使。
English: Kunitada was promoted to goshi taifu (chief historian) and given the title of nanshikawa setsudoshi (envoy to the southwestern part of Japan).

古文：敕下，就第辞翰。
现代文：敕下，就第辞翰。
English: Ladies and gentlemen, let's begin the speech.

古文：翰命部下捽于庭，数其事，杖而杀之，然后奏闻。
现代文：翰命部下捽于庭，数其事，杖而杀之，然后奏闻。
English: Han ordered his subordinates to sneak into the court, count the things, kill them with a cane, and then report it.

古文：帝却赐擢尸，更令翰决尸一百。
现代文：皇上却把张擢的尸体赐给了歌舒翰，又让歌舒翰打一百鞭子尸体。
English: The emperor, however, gave the body of Zhang Yuanzhang to Goshukhan, and let Goshukhan beat the corpse with a hundred lashes.

古文：崔隐甫
现代文：崔隐甫
English: Cui Yinfu

古文：梨园弟子有胡雏善吹笛，尤承恩。尝犯洛阳令崔隐甫，已而走入禁中。
现代文：梨园弟子中有个少年胡人善长吹笛子，特别受到皇上的宠爱，曾经触犯洛阳令崔隐甫，接着就跑进禁宫之中。
English: One of Li Yuan's disciples was a young boy named Hu Ren Zhen Chang, who played the flute. He was especially favored by the emperor. He once violated the order of Luoyang Cui Ying Fu, and then ran into the Forbidden City.

古文：玄宗非时，托以他事，召隐甫对，胡雏在侧。指曰： 就卿乞此，得否？ 
现代文：唐玄宗随时托他办些别的事情。有一次召来崔隐甫问事，那个少年胡人也在旁边，唐玄宗指着少年胡人说： 从你那里要来这个人，可以吗？ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong asked him to do other things at any time. On one occasion, Cui Yingfu was summoned to ask questions, and the young Hu person was also nearby. Tang Xuan Zong pointed to the young Hu person and said, "Can I get this person from you?"

古文：隐甫对曰： 陛下此言，是轻臣而重乐人也，臣请休官。 
现代文：崔隐甫回答说： 陛下这个话，是轻视臣而看重乐师，我请你免了我的官职。 
English: Cui Yingfu replied, "Your Majesty, this remark is to despise the minister and value the musician. I ask you to relieve me of my official position.

古文：再拜而去。
现代文：拜了又拜，走了。
English: Bye-bye, bye-bye, gone.

古文：玄宗遽曰： 朕与卿戏也。 
现代文：唐玄宗急忙说： 我是和你说笑话。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong hurriedly said: I'm just joking with you.

古文：遂令曳出，至门外，立杖杀之。
现代文：就命令人把少年胡人拖出去，拖到门外，立刻用刑杖打死了他。
English: He ordered someone to drag the young man out of the house, drag him outside the door, and immediately beat him to death with a cane.

古文：俄而复敕释，已死矣。
现代文：一会儿皇上又下令释放他，已经死了。
English: A moment later, the emperor ordered his release, and he was dead.

古文：乃赐隐甫绢百匹。
现代文：于是赐给崔隐甫一百匹绢。
English: So he gave Choe In-Ho a hundred yakitori.

古文：萧嵩
现代文：萧嵩
English: Xiao Song

古文：玄宗尝器重苏颋，欲倚以为相，礼遇顾问，与群臣特异。
现代文：唐玄宗曾经很器重苏颋，准备依靠他作宰相，对他的礼节待遇和询问问题，与所有的大臣都很不一样。
English: Tang Xuan Zong had a great respect for Su Shi, and was prepared to rely on him as prime minister. His treatment of etiquette and questions was very different from that of all ministers.

古文：欲命相前一日，上秘密，不欲令左右知。
现代文：想下令让他做宰相的前一天，皇上秘密行动，不想让左右的人知道，等到黑夜过去，才找人写诏书。
English: The day before he wanted to order him to become prime minister, the emperor acted secretly. He did not want the people around him to know, and waited until nightfall to find someone to write an edict.

古文：迨夜艾，乃令草诏，访于侍臣曰： 外庭直宿谁？ 遂命秉烛召来。
现代文：皇上向侍臣打听说： 外庭是谁值宿？ 就派人拿着蜡烛去叫来，到了一看是中书舍人萧嵩。
English: When the emperor asked his attendant, "Who is on duty in the outer courtyard?," he sent someone to fetch him with a candle, and it turned out to be Xiao Song, a man from the Central Library.

古文：至则中书舍人萧嵩，上即以颋姓名授嵩，令草制书。既成，其词曰： 国之瑰宝。 上寻绎三四，谓嵩曰： 颋，瑰之子。朕不欲斥其父名，卿为刊削之。 
现代文：皇上就把苏颋的姓名交给萧嵩，让他起草制书。写完之后，那上面有句词说： 国之瑰宝 ，皇上斟酌了三四次，对萧嵩说 苏颋是苏瑰的儿子，我不想使用他父亲的名讳，你替我改正过来。 
English: The emperor gave Su Shi's name to Xiao Song and asked him to draft a book. After writing it, there was a sentence on it that said: "Treasure of the country," the emperor weighed it three or four times and said to Xiao Song that Su Shi is Su Shi's son, I don't want to use his father's name, you correct it for me.

古文：上仍命撤帐中屏风与嵩，嵩惭惧流汗，笔不能下者久之。
现代文：皇上因而让人撤出帐幕中的屏风给萧嵩使用。萧嵩惭愧恐惧流出了汗，很久时间不能下笔。
English: As a result, the emperor had the screen in the tent pulled out for Xiao Song to use. Ashamed and afraid, Xiao Song sweated profusely and was unable to write for a long time.

古文：上以嵩杼思移时，必当精密，不觉前席以观。唯改曰： 国之珍宝。 他无更易。
现代文：皇上以为萧嵩思考了一段时间，一定应当是很精密了，不知不觉走到萧嵩的坐席去看，只改成： 国之珍宝 ，别的都没有更改。
English: The emperor thought that Xiao Song had been thinking about it for some time and that it must be very precise. Unconsciously, he went to Xiao Song's seat to see it, only to change it to: National treasure, nothing else has changed.

古文：嵩既退，上掷其草于地曰： 虚有其表耳。 
现代文：萧嵩退出去之后，皇上把他草写的纸扔到地上说： 真是白白地有个好外表。 
English: After Xiao Song left, the emperor threw the paper he had scribbled on to the ground and said, "What a waste of a good appearance.

古文：左右失笑。
现代文：左右的人失声笑了出来。
English: People on both sides burst out laughing.

古文：上闻，遽起掩其口，曰： 嵩虽才艺非长，人臣之贵，亦无与比，前言戏耳。 
现代文：皇上听见了，急忙站起来掩住口说： 萧嵩虽然不善长才艺，人臣的尊贵，也没有人比得上，刚才说的是笑话。 
English: When the emperor heard this, he quickly stood up and covered his mouth, saying, "Although Xiao Song is not good at talent, no one can match the dignity of a courtier. What you just said is a joke.

古文：其默识神览，皆此类也。
现代文：皇上的默默观察识别和用心神去看人，都象这样。
English: The emperor's silent observation and discernment and seeing people with his heart are like this.

古文：陈怀卿
现代文：陈怀卿
English: Chen Huaiqing

古文：陈怀卿，岭南人也，养鸭百余头。
现代文：陈怀卿是岭南人，养了一百多只鸭子。
English: Chen Huaiqing, a native of Lingnan, raised more than a hundred ducks.

古文：后于鸭栏中除粪，粪中有光烂然，试以盆水沙汰之，得金十两。
现代文：后来在鸭栏中清除鸭粪，粪中有灿烂的光，试着用盆子象淘沙一样地淘鸭粪，得到十两金子。
English: Later, he cleaned the duck feces in the duck pen, and there was a brilliant light in the feces. He tried to clean the duck feces with a basin like cleaning sand, and got ten gold coins.

古文：乃觇所食处，于舍后山足下，土中有麸金，消得数千斤。
现代文：就去察看鸭子吃食的地方，在屋后的山脚下，土里有沙金，淘出来熔化后得到几千斤黄金。
English: He went to inspect the place where the ducks were eating. At the foot of the hill behind the house, there was sand gold in the soil. After it was mined and melted, several thousand pounds of gold were obtained.

古文：时人莫知，卿遂巨富，仕至梧州刺史。
现代文：当时的人没有人知道。陈怀卿就成了大富翁，做官做到梧州刺史。
English: At that time, no one knew about it. Chen Huaiqing became a millionaire, and as an official, he made history in Wuzhou.

古文：邹凤炽
现代文：邹凤炽
English: 凤炽

古文：西京怀德坊南门之东，有富商邹凤炽，肩高背曲，有似骆驼，时人号为邹骆驼。
现代文：西京怀德坊南门之东，有个富商叫邹凤炽，两肩高后背弯曲，象骆驼似的，当时的人叫他邹骆驼。
English: To the east of the south gate of West Beijing's Huai De Fang, there was a wealthy merchant named Zou Feng Glowing, with his shoulders high and his back bent like a camel. People at the time called him Zou Camel.

古文：其家巨富，金宝不可胜计，常与朝贵游，邸店园宅，遍满海内。四方物尽为所收，虽古之猗白，不是过也。
现代文：他家里非常有钱，金银珠宝多得数不过来，经常和朝廷中的权贵们来往，邸店和有园林的住宅，天下到处都有，四面八方的货物全被他收买下来，即使是古时的猗顿，也超不过他。
English: His family was very rich, with more gold, silver, and jewels than anyone could count, and he was in frequent contact with the nobility in the imperial court. There were mansion stores and residences with gardens everywhere in the world, and he bought goods from all over the world. Even the ancient Qutong could not surpass him.

古文：其家男女婢仆，锦衣玉食，服用器物，皆一时惊异。
现代文：他家的男女人等和男仆女仆，都是穿锦衣吃美食，穿和用的器物，都是当时令人惊异的东西。
English: The men and women of his family, as well as the male and female servants, all wore brocade to eat gourmet food, and the utensils they wore and used were amazing things at the time.

古文：尝因嫁女，邀诸朝士往临礼席，宾客数千。夜拟供帐，备极华丽。
现代文：曾经因为女儿出嫁，邀请朝廷中的官员去参加婚礼酒席，来庆祝的宾客有几千人，到了夜间，还供应帐幕休息，里面华丽到极点。
English: Once, because his daughter was getting married, he invited officials from the court to attend the wedding banquet. There were several thousand guests who came to celebrate. At night, he also provided a tent for rest. It was extremely gorgeous inside.

古文：及女郎将出，侍婢围绕，绮罗珠翠，垂钗曳履，尤艳丽者，至数百人。
现代文：等到姑娘快出来的时候，一群女仆围绕着她，都穿着绮罗戴着珠翠，低着头，小步走路。特别艳丽的，有几百人。
English: When the girl was about to come out, a group of maids surrounded her, all dressed in scarlet and pearls, with their heads bowed, walking at a slow pace. They were particularly beautiful, there were hundreds of them.

古文：众皆愕然，不知孰是新妇矣。
现代文：大家都楞了，不知道哪个是新娘子了。
English: Everyone was confused and didn't know which one was the bride.

古文：又尝谒见高宗，请市终南山中树，估绢一匹。自云： 山树虽尽，臣绢未竭。 
现代文：他曾经拜见高宗皇帝，请求买终南山中的树，一棵树的价格是一匹绢，他自己说： 山上的树卖光了，我的绢不会光。 
English: He once met Emperor Gaozong and asked him to buy a tree in the mountains in the south. The price of a tree was a donkey. He said, "The trees on the mountain have been sold out. My donkey will not run away."

古文：事虽不行，终为天下所诵。
现代文：事情虽然没有实行，终于被天下人传诵。
English: Although the matter was not implemented, it was finally recited by people around the world.

古文：后犯事流瓜州，会赦还。及卒，子孙穷匮。
现代文：后来因犯罪被流放到瓜州，遇上大赦回来了，等他死后，子孙却很穷困。
English: Later, he was exiled to Guazhou for a crime, but returned after an amnesty. When he died, his children and grandchildren were very poor.

古文：又有王元宝者，年老好戏谑，出入里市，为人所知。人以钱文有元宝字，因呼钱为王老，盛流于时矣。
现代文：又有个叫王元宝的人，年老了喜欢说笑话，进出在市集上，被人们知道了，人们因为钱上有元宝字样，因而把钱叫做 王老 。这话在当时流传很广。
English: There was also a man called Wang Yuanbao, who liked to tell jokes when he was old. He was known to go in and out of the market, and people called his money Wang Lao because it had the word "Yuanbao" on it. This saying was widely spread at the time.

古文：又一说，玄宗尝召王元宝，问其家私多少。
现代文：又有一种说法，玄宗皇帝曾经召见王元宝，问他有多少家产。
English: There is also a saying that Emperor Xuanzong once summoned Wang Yuanbao and asked him how much the family had.

古文：对曰： 臣请以绢一匹，系陛下南山树，南山树尽，臣绢未穷。 
现代文：他回答说： 臣请用一匹绢捆一棵树，捆陛下南山上的树，南山上的树捆光了，我的绢不光。 
English: He replied, "Minister, please use a mule to tie up a tree, tie up the tree on the south mountain of your majesty. The tree on the south mountain has been tied up, and my mule is not enough."

古文：又玄宗御含元殿，望南山，见一白龙横亘山间。
现代文：又一次，玄宗到含元殿，望着南山，看见一条白龙横架在两座山之间。
English: Once again, Xuanzong went to the Hall of Han Yuan, looked at the South Mountain, and saw a white dragon suspended between the two mountains.

古文：问左右，皆言不见。
现代文：问左右的人，都说没看见。
English: Everyone I asked about it said they hadn't seen it.

古文：令急召王元宝问之，元宝曰： 见一白物，横在山顶，不辨其状。 
现代文：让人赶快去叫王元宝来问他，王元宝说： 看见一个白色的东西，横架在山顶上，看不清它的样子。 
English: Wang Yuanbao said: "I saw a white thing, suspended on the top of the mountain, and I couldn't see it clearly.

古文：左右贵臣启曰： 何故臣等不见？ 
现代文：皇上身边的地位尊贵的大臣问皇上说： 我们为什么看不见呢？ 
English: A high-ranking minister close to the emperor asked him, "Why can't we see it?"

古文：玄宗曰： 我闻至富可敌贵。朕天下之贵，元宝天下之富，故见耳。 
现代文：玄宗说： 我听说最富的人能够比得上尊贵的人，我是天下最尊贵的人，王元宝是天下最富的人，所以能看见。 
English: Xuanzong said: I have heard that the richest man can be compared to a noble man. I am the most noble man in the world, and Wang Yuanbao is the richest man in the world, so I can see.

古文：高力士
现代文：高力士
English: Colliers

古文：高力士既谴于巫州，山谷多荠，而人不食。
现代文：高力士被贬到巫州之后，那里的山谷里长了很多的荠菜，可是人们都不吃它。
English: After Goliath was banished to Wuzhou, a lot of amaranth grew in the valley there, but people didn't eat it.

古文：力士感之，因为诗寄意。 两京作斤卖，五溪无人采。夷夏虽有殊，气味终不改。 
现代文：高力士很感慨这件事，因而写诗寄托心意： 在西安和洛阳按斤出卖，五溪这里却没有人采摘，人虽然有夷和夏的区别，荠菜的滋味到哪里都不会改变。 
English: Gao Lixi was very moved by this, so he wrote a poem to express his feelings: In Xi'an and Luoyang, it is sold by the kilo, but here in Wuxi, no one is picking it. Although people are different from summer, the taste of chives will not change anywhere.

古文：其后会赦，归至武溪，道遇开元中羽林军士，坐事谪岭南。
现代文：那之后遇到大赦，他回武溪去，在路上遇见了开元时代的羽林军的军士，这军士因犯罪被贬谪到岭南来。
English: After that, when there was an amnesty, he went back to Wuxi. On the way, he met a sergeant from the Yulin Army in the 19th century, who was demoted to Lingnan for a crime.

古文：停车访旧，方知上皇已厌世，力士北望号泣，呕血而死。
现代文：停下车子询问一下老相识，才知道唐明皇已经去世了。高力士望着北方大声哭泣，吐血死去。
English: After stopping the car to ask an old acquaintance, he learned that Emperor Tang Ming had passed away. Looking to the north, Colossus cried loudly and vomited blood.

古文：王维
现代文：王维
English: Wang Wei

古文：天宝末，群贼陷两京，大掠文武朝臣，及黄门宫嫔，乐工骑士。
现代文：天宝末年，反叛的部队攻下了西安和洛阳，到处捉拿朝廷的文臣武将，以及宦官、宫女、乐师和骑兵。
English: At the end of the Tenpo era, the rebel troops captured Xi'an and Luoyang, and captured the court's courtiers and generals, as well as eunuchs, court ladies, musicians and cavalry.

古文：每获数百人，以兵仗严卫，送于洛阳。
现代文：每捉拿几百人，就用兵器严密看守，送到洛阳。
English: Every time a few hundred people were captured, they were closely guarded with weapons and sent to Luoyang.

古文：至有逃于山谷者，而卒能罗捕追胁，授以冠带。
现代文：甚至有逃到山谷里去的，却最后被追拿逼迫，给他们戴官帽官服。
English: Some even fled to the valley, but were eventually chased down and forced to wear official caps and uniforms.

古文：有乐工雷海清者，投乐器于地，西向恸哭。逆党乃缚海清于戏马殿，支解以示众，闻之者莫不伤痛。
现代文：有个乐师叫雪海清把乐器扔在地上，向着西方痛哭，叛贼就把雪海清捆到戏马殿上，大卸八块用来示众。听到的人没有不伤心痛哭的。
English: A musician told Xue Haiqing to throw his musical instrument on the ground and cry bitterly to the West. The traitor then bundled Xue Haiqing onto the stage of the Opera House and used eight large bundles to show the audience. There was no one who did not weep bitterly.

古文：王维时为贼拘于菩提佛寺中，闻之，赋诗曰： 万户伤心生野烟，百官何日更朝天。
现代文：王维当时被叛贼拘捕在菩提佛庙里。他听说了这件事，写了一首诗说： 万户伤心生野烟，百官何日更朝天。
English: At that time, Wang Wei was arrested by traitors in the Bodhi Buddha Temple. When he heard about the incident, he wrote a poem saying, "Millions of families are heartbroken, and wildfire smoke is rising, and hundreds of officials are becoming more powerful day by day."

古文：秋槐叶落空宫里，凝碧池头奏管弦。 
现代文：秋槐叶落空宫里，凝碧池头奏管弦。 
English: The leaves of the autumn leaves fall in the empty palace, and the orchestra plays at the top of the pond.

古文：史思明
现代文：史思明
English: Shi Siming

古文：安禄山败，史思明继逆。
现代文：安禄山失败了，史思明继续叛逆，到了东都洛阳。
English: Anlu Mountain failed, and Shi Siming continued to rebel and went to Luoyang, the eastern capital.

古文：至东都，遇樱桃熟，其子在河北，欲寄遗之，因作诗同去。
现代文：正赶上樱桃熟了，史思明的儿子在河北，他想给儿子寄赠樱桃，于是写了一首诗一同送去。
English: Just as the cherries were getting ripe, Shi Siming's son was in Hebei. He wanted to send a gift of cherries to his son, so he wrote a poem to send along.

古文：诗云： 樱桃一笼子，半已赤，半已黄。一半与怀王。一半与周至。 
现代文：诗中说： 樱桃一笼子，半已赤，半已黄，一半与怀王，一半与周至。 
English: The poem says: "Cherries are in a cage, half red, half yellow, half with Huaiwang, half with Zhouzi."

古文：诗成，左右赞美之，皆曰： 明公此诗大佳，若能言 一半周至，一半怀王 ，即与 黄 字声势稍稳。 
现代文：诗写完了，左右的人称赞他，都说： 明公的这首诗非常好，如果说一半送给周至，一半送给怀王，就与上文的 黄 字的音韵和谐了。 
English: After he finished writing the poem, people around him praised him and said, "This poem of Ming Gong is very good. If we say that half of it is given to Zhou Zi and half to Huai Wang, it will be in harmony with the above-mentioned sound of the yellow character.

古文：思明大怒曰： 我儿岂可居周至之下？ 
现代文：史思明生气地说： 我的儿子怎么能在周至的后面呢？ 
English: Shi Siming said angrily: How can my son be behind Zhou Zhi?

古文：思明长驱至永宁县，为其子朝义所杀。
现代文：史思明长驱直至永宁县，被他的儿子史朝义杀了。
English: Shi Siming drove all the way to Yongning County, where he was killed by his son Shi Chaoyi.

古文：思明曰： 尔杀我太早，禄山尚得至东都，而尔何亟也。
现代文：史思明说： 你杀我杀得太早了，安禄山还能到东都来，可是你为什么这么着急呢？ 
English: Shi Siming said: You killed me too early, Anlu Mountain can still come to Dongdu, but why are you in such a hurry?

古文：思明子伪封怀王，周至即其傅也。豆谷
现代文：史思明的儿子被伪政权封为怀王，周至是他儿子的师傅。豆谷
English: Shi Siming's son was crowned King of Huai by the pseudo-regime, and Zhou Zhi was his son's teacher.

古文：至德初，安史之乱，河东大饥。
现代文：至德初年，安史之乱，黄河以东闹大饥荒。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, the Anshi Rebellion and the Great Famine occurred east of the Yellow River.

古文：荒地十五里生豆谷，一夕扫而复生，约得五六千石。
现代文：有块荒地十五里长，地里生出豆谷，晚上扫起来收回去后，地里又生出来。大约得了五六千石豆谷。
English: There is a piece of wasteland fifteen miles long, from which beans are grown. After being swept up in the evening and taken back, the beans are grown again. About five or six thousand koku of beans have been obtained.

古文：其实甚圆细美，人皆赖此活焉。
现代文：那豆粒长得很圆，质地细腻味道很美，人们全靠着它而活了下来。
English: The bean grows very round, the texture is delicate and the taste is beautiful. People have survived thanks to it.

古文：润州楼
现代文：润州楼
English: Runzhou Building

古文：润州城南隅，有楼名万岁楼。
现代文：润州城的南角，有座楼叫万岁楼。
English: In the southern corner of Renzhou City, there is a building called the Wan Lai Building.

古文：俗传楼上烟出，刺史即死，不死即贬。
现代文：世俗传说，楼上出现烟，刺史就会死去，不死也要被贬。
English: According to popular legend, if there is smoke on the upper floor, Jishi will die, and if he does not die, he will be demoted.

古文：开元已前，以润州为凶阙。
现代文：开元年间之前，认为润州是个凶城。
English: Before the turn of the century, Runzhou was considered a dangerous city.

古文：董琬为江东采访使，尝居此州。
现代文：董琬担任江东采访使，曾经住在润州。
English: Dong Hao served as an envoy to the East River and once lived in Runzhou.

古文：其时昼日烟出，刺史皆忧惧狼狈，愁情至死。
现代文：当时大白天出现了烟，刺史又担心又害怕，十分狼狈，心情愁闷一直到死去。
English: At that time, smoke appeared in broad daylight, and he was worried and afraid, very confused and depressed until he died.

古文：乾元中，忽然又昼日烟出，圆可一尺余，直上数丈。
现代文：乾元年间，忽然又大白天出现了烟，粗有一尺多，一直向上有几丈高。
English: During the year of the Qianyuan, smoke suddenly appeared in broad daylight, more than a foot thick and several feet high all the way up.

古文：有吏密伺之，就视其烟，乃出于楼角隙中，更近而视之，乃蚊子也。
现代文：有个官吏在近处看那烟，是从楼角的缝隙中出来的。再靠近看那烟，竟然是蚊子。
English: An official was looking at the smoke nearby, which was coming from a gap in the corner of the building. When he looked at the smoke closer, it turned out to be mosquitoes.

古文：楼下有井，井中无水，黑而且深，小虫后分胛之类，色黑而小。每晚晴，出自于隙中作团而上。
现代文：楼下有个井，井中没有水，黑糊糊的而且很深，有蠛蠓小虫和蜘蛛蛧蜽一类东西，颜色黑而且小，每当晚上晴天的时候，蚊子从缝隙中出来，形成一群向上飞，远看象烟一样。
English: Downstairs there is a well, there is no water in the well, it is dark and deep, there are things like mites and spider mites, the color is black and small, whenever it is a sunny evening, mosquitoes come out of the gap and form a group flying up, looking like smoke from a distance.

古文：遥看类烟，以手揽之，即蚊蚋耳。
现代文：用手揽一下，就知道是蚊子和蚋虫。
English: If you pick them up with your hands, you will know that they are mosquitoes and ticks.

古文：从此知非，刺史亦无虑矣。
现代文：从此就知道弄错了，刺史也没有什么担心的了。
English: From then on, I knew that I had made a mistake, and I had nothing to worry about.

古文：丘为
现代文：丘为
English: The hill is

古文：丘为致仕还乡，特给禄俸之半。
现代文：丘为辞官还乡，特准发给一半俸禄。
English: As a retired officer returning to his hometown, he was given special permission to receive half of his salary.

古文：既丁母丧，州郡疑所给，请于观察使韩滉。
现代文：赶上他母亲死了之后，州郡长官不知是否应该继续给他俸禄，就向观察使韩滉请示。
English: After catching up with his mother's death, the prefect of the county did not know whether he should continue to give him a salary, so he asked the observation to Han Han.

古文：滉以为授官致仕，本不理务，特令给禄，以恩养老臣。不可以在丧为异，命仍旧给之。
现代文：韩滉认为当官的辞官回乡，本不理事了，特别令州郡给他俸禄，以便施恩供养老臣，不可以在丧期有所改变，命令照旧供给俸禄。
English: Han Zheng thought that the official's official had returned to his hometown and was no longer in charge. In particular, he ordered the state and county to give him a salary in order to provide grace for the pensioner. There should be no change during the period of mourning, and the order was to provide the salary as usual.

古文：唯春秋二时，羊酒之直则不给。
现代文：只是春秋两季的羊和酒的钱就不给了。
English: Only the money for sheep and wine in spring and autumn is not given.

古文：虽程式无文，见称折衷。
现代文：这事尽管没有成文，却被称为折衷的好办法。
English: Although it is not written down, it has been described as a good compromise.

古文：裴佶
现代文：裴佶
English: Baekhyun

古文：朱泚既乱，裴佶与衣冠数人，佯为奴，求出城。
现代文：朱泚作乱以后，裴佶和几个士绅，打扮成奴仆的样子，要求出城。
English: After Zhu Rong's rebellion, Pei Rong and several gentry, dressed as slaves, demanded to leave the city.

古文：佶貌寝，自出称甘草。门兵曰： 此数子，必非人奴。如甘草，不疑之。 
现代文：裴佶貌丑，出来自称叫甘草，守门的士兵说： 这几个人，一定不是人家的奴仆，象甘草那样，就不会被人怀疑。 
English: Pei Yao, who was ugly, came out and called himself Licorice. The soldier guarding the gate said, "These people must not be slaves. Like Licorice, they will not be suspected."

古文：李抱贞
现代文：李抱贞
English: Li Baozhen

古文：李抱贞镇潞州，军资匮缺，计无所为。
现代文：李抱贞镇守潞州，军队缺少经费，没有什么好办法。
English: Li Baozhen was determined to defend Zhangzhou, and the army was short of funds, so there was no good way out.

古文：有老僧，大为郡人信服。
现代文：有个老和尚，郡中的人很信服他。
English: There was an old monk who was convinced by the people in the county.

古文：抱贞因请之曰： 假和尚之道，以济军中，可乎？ 
现代文：李抱贞于是请求他说： 借用和尚的道行，来供应军队的花销，可以吗？ 
English: Li Baozhen then asked him: "Is it okay to borrow the monk's practice to supply the army's expenses?

古文：僧曰： 无不可。 
现代文：和尚说： 没什么不可以。 
English: The monk said, "Nothing is off-limits."

古文：抱贞曰： 但言择日鞠场焚身，谋当于使宅凿一地道通连。俟火作，即潜以相出。 
现代文：李抱贞说： 你只要说选择哪天在球场上焚身，我事先在刺使住宅里挖一条地道和球场连通起来，等火烧起来，你就偷偷地从地道里出来。 
English: Li Baozhen said: You just have to choose which day you want to burn yourself on the court. I dug a tunnel in the house of the assassin and connected it to the court in advance. When the fire burns, you will secretly come out of the tunnel.

古文：僧喜从之，遂陈状声言。
现代文：和尚高兴地答应了他。于是照着商量好的办法传出消息。
English: The monk happily agreed, and the news was conveyed according to the agreed upon method.

古文：抱贞命于鞠场积薪贮油。因为七日道场，昼夜香灯，焚呗杂作，抱贞亦引僧入地道，使之不疑。
现代文：李抱贞命令人在球场上堆积木柴准备好油脂，于是为他准备了七天的道场，白天黑夜地点着灯烧着香，佛教赞歌唱得一阵高一阵低。李抱贞也领着和尚进入地道观看，使他不疑心。
English: Li Baozhen ordered that firewood be piled up on the court to prepare grease, so the dojo was prepared for him for seven days. During the day and night, lights were lit to burn incense, and Buddhist praise songs were sung. Li Baozhen also led the monk into the tunnel to watch and reassure him.

古文：僧乃升坛执炉，对众说法。
现代文：和尚就登上佛坛，拿着香炉，对听众讲佛法。
English: The monk climbed onto the altar, took the incense burner and began to teach the audience the Dharma.

古文：抱贞率监军僚属及将吏，膜拜其下。以俸入擅施，堆于其旁。
现代文：李抱贞率领着监军、同僚和军官，在坛下顶礼膜拜，把钱随便地施舍，堆在坛的傍边。
English: Li Baozhen led the supervisors, colleagues and officers to worship under the altar, giving money casually and piling it on the side of the altar.

古文：由是士女骈填。
现代文：从此，士女们也连续施舍。
English: Since then, both men and women have been giving alms continuously.

古文：舍财亿计。
现代文：施舍的钱财能有一亿以上。
English: The amount of money given in charity can reach more than 100 million.

古文：满七日，遂送柴积，灌油发焰，击钟念佛。
现代文：道场做满七天，就送上木柴，泼上油脂点火，敲钟念佛。
English: After the dojo has been in operation for seven days, firewood is brought in, grease is poured on to light the fire, and a bell is rung to chant the Buddha's name.

古文：抱贞密已遣人填塞地道，俄顷之际，僧薪并灰。
现代文：李袍贞已经秘密地派人填塞了地道。不一会儿，和尚和木柴全成了灰。
English: Li Baozhen had secretly sent someone to fill in the tunnel. Soon, both the monk and the firewood had been reduced to ashes.

古文：数日，籍所得货财，辇入军资库。
现代文：几天后，登记得到的钱财，用车子送进军资库。
English: A few days later, the registered money was sent by car to the military treasury.

古文：别求所谓舍利者数十粒，造塔贮焉。
现代文：另外寻求了几十粒舍利子，造了一座塔贮藏起来。
English: In addition, dozens of sherry seeds were sought and a tower was built to store them.

古文：杨志坚
现代文：杨志坚
English: Yang Zhijian

