古文：起重光作噩六月，尽玄黓阉茂，凡一年有奇。
现代文：起重光作噩六月，尽玄黓阉茂，凡一年有奇。
English: The moon is full in June, and the grass is green. Every year is special.

古文：德宗神武圣文皇帝二
现代文：德宗神武圣文皇帝二
English: Emperor Dezong Shenwu Shenwen II

古文：建中二年辛酉，公元七八一年
现代文：唐德宗建中二年
English: Tang Dezong graduated from middle school two years ago

古文：六月，庚寅，以浙江东、西观察使、苏州刺史韩滉为润州刺史、浙江东、西节度使，名其军曰镇海。
现代文：六月，庚寅，德宗任命浙江东西观察使、苏州刺史韩为润州刺史、浙江东西节度使，将他统辖的军队定名为镇海军。
English: In June, Gyeong-in and Dezong appointed the Zhejiang East-West Observation Envoy, the Suzhou Chief Historian Han as the Runzhou Chief Historian, and the Zhejiang East-West Festival Envoy, and designated the army under his jurisdiction as the town navy.

古文：张著至襄阳，梁崇义益惧，陈兵而见之。
现代文：张著来到襄阳，梁崇义愈加恐惧，让士兵结成阵列来接见张著。
English: Zhang came to Yangyang, and Liang Chongyi became more and more afraid, so he had soldiers form an array to meet Zhang.

古文：蔺杲得诏不敢发，驰见崇义，请命。
现代文：蔺杲得到出任邓州刺史的诏书，不敢启程就任，驰马去见梁崇义请示命令。
English: When he received the imperial rescript to be appointed as the chief historian of Dengzhou, he did not dare to travel to take up the post and rode to see Liang Chongyi to ask for instructions.

古文：崇义对著号泣，竟不受诏。
现代文：梁崇义面对张著号啕大哭，但到底不肯接受诏命。
English: Liang Chongyi cried loudly in front of Zhang, but refused to accept the edict.

古文：著复命。
现代文：张著只好回朝复命。
English: Zhang had to return to the morning to resume his life.

古文：癸巳，进李希烈爵南平郡王，加汉南、汉北兵马招讨使，督诸道兵讨之。
现代文：癸巳，德宗晋升李希烈爵位为南平郡王，加封汉南、汉北兵马招讨使，督率各道兵马讨伐梁崇义。
English: At that time, Dezong promoted Li Xili to the title of Nanping County King, and appointed him as the envoy to recruit soldiers and horses of Hannan and Hanbei, and led the soldiers and horses of each province to fight against Liang Chongyi.

古文：杨炎谏曰： 希烈为董秦养子，亲任无比，卒逐秦而夺其位。
现代文：杨炎规劝说； 李希烈是董秦的养子，董秦亲近并信任他的程度无可比拟，但李希烈最终还是驱逐了董秦，并夺取了他的职位。
English: Yang Yan Jie tried to persuade him; Li Xilai was the adopted son of Dong Qin, and Dong Qin was close to and trusted him to an unparalleled degree, but Li Xilai eventually expelled Dong Qin and seized his position.

古文：为人狼戾无亲，无功犹屈强不法，使平崇义，何以制之！ 
现代文：李希烈为人凶狠暴戾，六亲不认，他无功于朝廷，尚且态度强硬而不守国法，假如让他平定了梁崇义，将如何控制他呢！ 
English: Li Xili was a ferocious and violent man, his six relatives did not recognize him, he did not contribute to the imperial court, yet he had a tough attitude and did not abide by the laws of the country. If he had been allowed to pacify Liang Chongyi, how would he have been controlled?

古文：上不听。炎固争之，上益不平。
现代文：德宗不听杨炎的建议，杨炎坚持己见，争议再三，德宗对杨炎愈加不满。
English: Dezong did not listen to Yang Yan's suggestion, Yang Yan insisted on his own opinion, the dispute was repeated, and Dezong was increasingly dissatisfied with Yang Yan.

古文：荆南牙门将吴少诚以取梁崇义之策干李希烈，希烈以少诚为前锋。
现代文：荆南牙门将吴少诚带着攻取梁崇义的策谋谒见李希烈，李希烈任命吴少诚为前锋。
English: Wu Shao Cheng, the goalkeeper of Jingnan Fang, met Li Xilai with a plan to capture Liang Chongyi. Li Xilai appointed Wu Shao Cheng as a striker.

古文：少诚，幽州潞人也。
现代文：吴少诚是幽州潞县人。
English: Wu Shaocheng is from Yuzhou County.

古文：时内自关中，西暨蜀、汉，南尽江、淮、闽、越，北至太原，所在出兵，而李正己遣兵扼徐州甬桥、涡口，梁崇义阻兵襄阳，运路皆绝，人心震恐。
现代文：当时，内自关中，西至蜀、汉，南达江、淮、闽、越，北到太原，到处发兵，而李正己派兵扼守徐州的甬桥和涡口，梁崇义拥兵襄阳，运输通道全被切断，人心为之震惊恐慌。
English: At that time, troops were dispatched everywhere from Guanzhong in Inner Mongolia to Shu, Han, Nanda River, Huai, Min and Yue in the west, and to Taiyuan in the north, while Li Zhengyi sent troops to guard the Qianqiao and Vortex in Xuzhou, and Liang Chongyi supported the troops in Xiangyang. The transportation channels were all cut off, and the people were shocked and panicked.

古文：江、淮进奉船千馀艘，泊涡口不敢进。
现代文：江、淮的进奉船一千余艘，停泊在涡口而不敢前进。
English: More than a thousand vessels of Jiangsu and Huai'an were moored at the vortex and did not dare to move forward.

古文：上以和州刺史张万福为濠州刺史。
现代文：德宗任命和州刺史张万福为濠州刺史。
English: Dezong appointed Zhang Manfu, the provincial chief historian, as the provincial chief historian.

古文：万福驰至涡口，立马岸上，发进奉船，淄青将士停岸睥睨不敢动。
现代文：张万福疾驰到涡口，骑着马立在岸上，命令进奉船进发，淄青的将士停在岸边，斜目观望，但不敢妄动。
English: Zhang Wanfu galloped to the vortex mouth, rode his horse and stood on the shore, ordered the ship to proceed, and the indigo soldiers stopped on the shore, watched with slanting eyes, but did not dare to move.

古文：辛丑，汾阳忠武王郭子仪薨。
现代文：辛丑，汾阳忠武王郭子仪去世。
English: Sincerely, Guo Ziyi, the loyal warrior king of Shenyang, passed away.

古文：子仪为上将，拥强兵，程元振、鱼朝恩谗谤百端；诏书一纸征之，无不即日就道，由是谗谤不行。
现代文：郭子仪是位杰出的将领，拥有强兵，程元振、鱼朝恩曾对他用谗言百般诋毁，但只要有一纸诏书征召，他没有一次不是当日启程的，由于这些，诽谤才失去了作用。
English: Guo Ziyi was an outstanding general with a strong army. Cheng Yuan Zhen and Yu Chaon had slandered him in many ways, but as long as there was an imperial edict calling for conscription, he never left on the same day. Because of this, the slander lost its effect.

古文：尝遣使至田承嗣所，承嗣西望拜之曰： 此膝不屈于人若干年矣！ 
现代文：郭子仪曾经派遣使者到田承嗣处，田承嗣向西下拜说： 我这膝盖不向人弯屈已经有若干年头了！ 
English: Guo Zi Yi once sent an envoy to Tian Chengzhi's place. Tian Chengzhi bowed to the west and said: I have not bent my knee to anyone for several years!

古文：李灵曜据汴州作乱，公私物过汴者皆留之，惟子仪物不敢近，遣兵卫送出境。
现代文：李灵曜依凭汴州发起叛乱，公私物品经过汴州的，全都被他扣留，惟有郭子仪的物品，他不敢靠近，还派兵护卫，送出州境。
English: Li Lingyang initiated the rebellion with the help of Zhangzhou. He detained all the public and private goods that passed through Zhangzhou. However, he did not dare to approach Guo Ziyi's goods and sent soldiers to escort them out of the state border.

古文：校中书令考凡二十四，月入俸钱二万缗，私产不在焉；府库珍货山积。
现代文：据统计，郭子仪担任中书令共计二十四年，每月收入薪俸钱二万缗，私产尚不在计算之列，家中的仓库里珍异宝货堆积如山。
English: According to statistics, Guo Ziyi has served as a member of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference for a total of twenty-four years, with a monthly salary of twenty thousand baht. Private property is not yet included in the calculation, and rare and precious goods are piled up in the warehouse at home.

古文：家人三千人，八子、七婿皆为朝廷显官；诸孙数十人，每问安，不能尽辩，颔之而已。
现代文：郭子仪举家三千人，有八个儿子、七个女婿，都是朝廷中显要的官员。他的孙子有数十人，每当向他问安时，他不能一一辨认，只是向他们点头而已。
English: Guo Ziyi has a family of 3,000 people, including eight sons and seven sons-in-law, all of whom are prominent officials in the imperial court. He has dozens of grandchildren, and whenever he greets them, he can't identify each one, but just nods at them.

古文：仆固怀恩、李怀光、浑瑊辈皆出麾下，虽贵为王公，常颐指役使，趋走于前，家人亦以仆隶视之。
现代文：仆固怀恩、李怀光、浑都是他的部下，虽然贵为王公，但郭子仪经常对他们颐指气使，任意驱使，而他们在郭子仪面前用小步快走，以示身分卑微，郭子仪家人也将他们视为仆从。
English: His servants Gu Huai'en, Li Huai'guang, and Hun were all his subordinates. Although they were princes, Guo Ziyi often dictated to them and drove them arbitrarily. In front of Guo Ziyi, they walked quickly with small steps to show their lowly status. Guo Ziyi's family also regarded them as servants.

古文：天下以其身为安危者殆三十年，功盖天下而主不疑，位极人臣而众不疾，穷奢极欲而人不非之，年八十五而终。
现代文：郭子仪以一身维系全国安危将近三十年，他的功劳天下无双，但皇上不猜疑他；他的地位达到了人臣的顶峰，但众人不妒忌他；他穷极奢华，尽情享受；但人们不非难他。他八十五岁时寿终。
English: Guo Ziyi maintained the safety and security of the whole country for nearly 30 years. His achievements are unparalleled in the world, but the emperor does not suspect him; his status has reached the peak of the vassal, but people do not envy him; he is extremely luxurious and enjoys it to the full; but people do not blame him. He died at the age of 85.

古文：其将佐至大官、为名臣者甚众。
现代文：他的将佐当上大官、成为名臣的人物很多。
English: Many of his generals rose to high office and became famous ministers.

古文：壬子，以怀、郑、河阳节度副使李艽为河阳、怀州节度使，割东畿五县隶焉。
现代文：壬子，德宗任命怀、郑、河阳节度副使李艽为河阳、怀州节度使，分割东都五个畿县归其管辖。
English: Jinsi, Dezong appointed Huai, Zheng, and Heyang deputy festival envoys Li Wei as Heyang and Huaizhou festival envoys, and divided Dongdu into five counties under his jurisdiction.

古文：北庭、安西自吐蕃陷河、陇，隔绝不通，伊西、北庭节度使李元忠、四镇留后郭昕帅将士闭境拒守，数遣使奉表，皆不达，声问绝者十馀年。
现代文：北庭、安西自从吐蕃陷落河、陇以来，便与朝廷隔绝不通了。伊西、北庭节度使李元忠、四镇留后郭昕率领将士严守四境，抗拒吐蕃，屡次派遣使者上表，都未到达，音信断绝长达十余年。
English: Beiting and Anxi had been cut off from the imperial court ever since the fall of Tubo. The Isi and Beiting festivals made Li Yuanzhong and Guo Gan, who stayed behind after the four towns, lead the soldiers to strictly guard the four borders, resist Tubo, repeatedly send envoys to the table, but they did not arrive, and the message was cut off for more than ten years.

古文：至是，遣使间道历诸胡自回纥中来，上嘉之。
现代文：至此，李元忠、郭昕派使者抄偏僻小道，经诸胡人居处，从回纥来到朝廷，德宗对此很是嘉许。
English: At this point, Li Yuanzhong and Guo Gan sent an envoy along a remote path, passing through Zhuhu settlements, from Hui to the imperial court, which was highly appreciated by Dezong.

古文：秋，七月，戊午朔，加元忠北庭大都护，赐爵宁塞郡王；以昕为安西大都护、四镇节度使，赐爵武威郡王；将士皆迁七资。
现代文：秋季，七月，戊午朔，德宗加封李元忠为北庭大都护，赐爵宁塞郡王；任命郭昕为安西大都护、四镇节度使，赐爵武威郡王，所辖将士全部超迁战功七等。
English: In the autumn, in July, in the early morning, Dezong appointed Li Yuanzhong as the Great Protector of the Northern Court and conferred the title of the King of Ningxia County; appointed Guo Wei as the Great Protector of the Western Court, the Four Towns Festival Envoy, and conferred the title of the King of Wuwei County. All the soldiers under his jurisdiction were awarded the seventh grade for their outstanding war service.

古文：元忠姓名，朝廷所赐也，本姓曹，名令忠；昕，子仪弟之子也。
现代文：李元忠这一姓名，是朝廷赐给的，李元忠原本姓曹，名令忠。郭昕是郭子仪弟弟的儿子。
English: The name Li Yuanzhong was bestowed by the imperial court. Li Yuanzhong's original surname was Cao and his real name was Zhong. Guo Gan was the son of Guo Ziyi's younger brother.

古文：李希烈以久雨未进军，上怪之，卢杞密言于上曰： 希烈迁延，以杨炎故也。
现代文：因多日来连续降雨，李希烈未能进军，受到德宗的责怪。卢杞暗中对德宗说： 李希烈拖延不进，是因为杨炎的原故。
English: Due to continuous rainfall for many days, Li Xili failed to march and was blamed by Dezong. Lu Yao secretly said to Dezong: Li Xili's delay in advancing was due to Yang Yan.

古文：陛下何爱炎一日之名而堕大功？不若暂免炎相以悦之。事平复用，无伤也。 
现代文：陛下何必顾惜杨炎暂时的声誉，而毁坏了大功业，不如暂时免除杨炎的相职，使李希烈高兴，事情平息以后再起用杨炎，这并没有什么妨害。 
English: Why should His Majesty care about Yang Yan's temporary reputation and ruin his great work? It would be better to temporarily relieve Yang Yan of his official duties to make Li Xili happy, and then use Yang Yan again after the situation calms down. This is not a hindrance.

古文：上以为然。
现代文：德宗认为卢杞说得对。
English: Tenshi thinks it makes sense.

古文：庚申，以炎为左仆射，罢政事。以前永平节度使张镒为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：庚申，德宗任命杨炎为左仆射，罢去知政事，任命前永平节度使张镒为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Goshun, Dezong appointed Yang Yan as the left-hand man, removed him from the political affairs, and appointed the former Yongping Jiedu to make Zhang Jun the secretary of the Central Committee and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：镒，齐丘之子也。
现代文：张镒是张齐丘的儿子。
English: Zhang Ye is the son of Zhang Qiqiu.

古文：以朔方节度使崔宁为右仆射。
现代文：任命朔方节度使崔宁为右仆射。
English: The appointment of Shuo Fang Xidu made Cui Ning a right-hand man.

古文：丙子，赠故伊州刺史袁光庭工部尚书。
现代文：丙子，朝廷追赠已故伊州刺史袁光庭为工部尚书。
English: In addition, the Imperial Court posthumously presented the late Izhou scholar Yuan Guangting with a book for the Ministry of Industry.

古文：光庭天宝末为伊州刺史，吐蕃陷河、陇，光庭坚守累年，吐蕃百方诱之，不下。
现代文：袁光庭在天宝末年出任伊州刺史。吐蕃攻陷河、陇后，袁光庭坚守多年，吐蕃千方百计地引诱他，都不能将伊州攻下。
English: Yuan Guangting was appointed as the governor of Izhou at the end of the Tianbao era. After the fall of the river and the capture of Tuyun, Yuan Guangting held out for many years. Tuyun tried his best to lure him, but was unable to capture Izhou.

古文：粮竭兵尽，城且陷，光庭先杀妻子，然后自焚。
现代文：后来粮食吃光，士卒战死，伊州城将要陷落，袁光庭事先杀死妻子儿女，然后自焚而死。
English: Later, the grain ran out, the soldiers died in battle, Izhou City was about to fall, Yuan Guangting killed his wife and children in advance, and then set himself on fire and died.

古文：郭昕使至，朝廷始知之，故赠官。
现代文：郭昕的使者到来，朝廷才知道了袁光庭的事迹，所以给他追赠官爵。
English: When Guo Gan's envoy arrived, the imperial court only learned of Yuan Guangting's deeds, so he was posthumously given a peerage.

古文：辛巳，以邠宁节度使李怀光兼朔方节度使。
现代文：辛巳，德宗让宁节度使李怀光兼任朔方节度使。
English: It is very fortunate that Li Huaguang of the Dezong Janning Sect also serves as the Sect's Sect's Sect's Sect's Sect.

古文：癸未，河东节度使马燧，昭义节度使李抱真，神策先锋都知兵马使李晟，大破田悦于临洺。
现代文：癸未，河东节度使马燧、昭义节度使李抱真、神策先锋都知兵马使李晟在临大破田悦。
English: In recent years, the Hedong Festival has made Ma Jun, the Shouyi Festival has made Li Baozhen, and the Divine Strategy Pioneer has made Li Jun in Lintai break Tian Yue.

古文：时悦攻临洺，累月不拔，城中食且尽，府库竭，士卒多死伤。
现代文：当时，田悦进攻临，历时几个月，不能攻克，城中的食品将要吃光，仓库的储备已经用完，士卒伤亡，为数很多。
English: At that time, Tian Yue's attack was imminent, lasted several months, could not be defeated, the food in the city would run out, the warehouse's reserves had been used up, and there were many casualties.

古文：张伾饰其爱女，使出拜将士曰： 诸群守战甚苦，伾家无它物，请鬻此女为将士一日之费。 
现代文：张将心爱的女儿打扮起来，让女儿出来拜见将士，他说： 诸位坚守城池，甚是辛苦，我家没有别的东西，请让我把这个儿女卖掉，权当将士们一天的费用。 
English: Zhang dressed up his beloved daughter and let her come out to meet the soldiers. He said, "You have worked very hard to hold on to the castle. My family has nothing else. Please let me sell my daughter to pay the soldiers' daily expenses.

古文：众皆哭，曰： 愿尽死力，不敢言赏！ 
现代文：大家都哭着说： 我们甘愿用尽全力，而决不敢谈论奖赏。 
English: Everyone cried and said, "We are willing to do our best, but we dare not talk about the reward."

古文：李抱真告急于朝，诏马燧将步骑二万与抱真讨悦，又遣李晟将神策兵与之俱；又诏幽州留后硃滔讨惟岳。
现代文：李抱真向朝廷告急，德宗下诏命令马燧带领步兵、骑兵共二万人与李抱真讨伐田悦，又派遣李晟带领神策兵与二人同讨田悦，又下诏命令幽州留后朱滔讨伐李惟岳。
English: Li Bozhen appealed to the imperial court urgently, and Emperor Dezong issued an edict ordering Ma Jun to lead a total of 20,000 infantry and cavalry to fight against Li Bozhen in the battle of Tianyue. He also sent Li Jun to lead the divine strategists to fight against Tianyue together with the two men. He also issued an edict ordering Yuzhou to stay behind Zhu Tao to fight against Li Wei Yue.

古文：燧等军未出险，先遣使持书谕悦，为好语。
现代文：马燧等人的军队还没有脱出险境时，先派遣使者带着书信去开导田悦，向他说了一些好话，田悦认为马燧畏惧他，不再设置防备。
English: When the army of Ma Xuan and others had not yet escaped the dangerous situation, they first sent an envoy with a letter to enlighten Tian Yue and said some good words to him. Tian Yue thought that Ma Xuan was afraid of him and no longer set up defenses.

古文：悦谓燧畏之，不设备，又与抱真合兵八万，东下壶关，军于邯郸，击悦支军，破之。
现代文：马燧与李抱真两军汇合共八万人，东下壶关，在邯鄣驻扎，进击田悦的支属部队，并且打败了他们。
English: The two armies of Ma Jun and Li Baozhen, with a total of eighty thousand people, marched eastward to Kuguan, stationed in Zou, attacked Tian Yue's subordinate troops, and defeated them.

古文：悦方急攻临洺，分李惟岳兵五千助杨朝光。
现代文：田悦正在急切地攻打临，分出李惟岳五千人去援助杨朝光。
English: Tian Yue was eager to attack Lin, and sent 5,000 men from Li Wei Yue to aid Yang Chaoguang.

古文：明日，燧等进攻朝光栅，悦将万馀人救之，燧命大将李自良等御之于双冈，令之曰： 悦得过，必斩尔！ 
现代文：第二天，马燧等人进攻杨朝光的营栅，田悦带领一万余人去援救。马燧让大将李自良等人在双冈抵御田悦，命令他说： 只要田悦通过了双冈，就一定将你斩首！ 
English: The next day, Ma Jun and others attacked Yang Chaoguang's camp, and Tian Yue led more than ten thousand people to rescue him. Ma Jun ordered General Li Ziliang and others to resist Tian Yue in Shuanggang, and ordered him to say: As long as Tian Yue has passed Shuanggang, he will definitely behead you!

古文：自良等力战，悦军却。
现代文：李自良等人备力激战，田悦的军队退却了。
English: Li Ziliang and others prepared for a fierce battle, but Tian Yue's army retreated.

古文：燧推火车焚朝光栅，斩朝光，获首虏五千馀级。
现代文：马燧推出烧着火的车辆焚烧杨朝光的栅栏，杀了杨朝光，斩得敌首五千余级。
English: Ma Ying rolled out a burning vehicle to burn Yang Zhaoguang's fence, killed Yang Zhaoguang, and won more than five thousand ranks.

古文：居五日，燧等进军至临洺，悦悉众力战，凡百馀合，悦兵大败，斩首万馀级。
现代文：过了五天，马燧等人进军到临，田悦全军出动，奋力而战，经过约一百多个回合，田悦军大败，被斩首一万余级。
English: After five days, Ma Jun and others marched in and arrived. Tian Yue's entire army went out and fought hard. After about one hundred rounds, Tian Yue's army was defeated and more than ten thousand were beheaded.

古文：悦引兵夜遁，邢州围亦解。
现代文：田悦领兵连夜逃走，邢州也解围了。
English: Tian Yue, the leader of the troops, fled overnight, and the siege of Zhangzhou was lifted.

古文：时平卢节度使李正己已薨，子纳秘之，擅领军务。
现代文：当时，平卢节度使李正己已经去世，李正己的儿子李纳隐瞒了这一消息，擅自接管了平卢军务。
English: At that time, the Pinglu Festival had declared that Li Zhengyi had passed away. Li Zhengyi's son, Li Na, concealed the news and took over the military affairs of Pinglu without authorization.

古文：悦求救于纳及李惟岳，纳遣大将卫俊将兵万人，惟岳遣兵三千人救之。
现代文：田悦向李纳和李惟岳求救，李纳派遣大将卫俊带兵一万人，李惟岳派兵三千人，去援救田悦。
English: Tian Yue appealed to Li Na and Li Wei Yue for help. Li Na sent General Wei Jun with 10,000 soldiers and Li Wei Yue sent 3,000 soldiers to rescue Tian Yue.

古文：悦收合散卒，得二万馀人，军于洹水；淄青军其东，成德军其西，首尾相应。
现代文：田悦收聚溃散的士兵，得到二万余人，驻扎在洹水。淄青军在田悦东边驻扎，成德军在田悦西边驻扎，首尾相互接应。
English: Tian Yue gathered the scattered soldiers, got more than twenty thousand people, and stationed them in Surabaya. The Indigo Army was stationed on the east side of Tian Yue, and the Chengde Army was stationed on the west side of Tian Yue, and they corresponded with each other.

古文：马燧帅诸军进屯鄴，奏求河阳兵自助；诏河阳节度使李艽将兵会之。
现代文：马燧率领各军进军至邺城屯驻，上奏请求让河阳兵前来援助，德宗颁诏命令河阳节度使李艽带兵与马燧会师。
English: Ma Xun led the army to march to Shicheng and stationed there. He requested that the soldiers from Heyang come to help, and Dezong issued an edict ordering the soldiers from Heyang to bring Li Xun and Ma Xun to meet the division.

古文：八月，李纳始发丧，奏请袭父位，上不许。
现代文：八月，李纳开始发丧，上奏请求承袭父亲的职位，德宗不肯答应。
English: In August, Li Na began to mourn. He made a request to inherit his father's position, but Dezong refused to agree.

古文：梁崇义发兵至江陵，至四望，大败而归，乃收兵襄、邓。
现代文：梁崇义派兵攻打江陵，来到四望山，大败而回，于是收兵进入襄州和邓州。
English: Liang Chongyi sent troops to attack Jiangling, came to Sifang Mountain, was defeated and returned, and then gathered troops to enter Xiangzhou and Dengzhou.

古文：李希烈引军循汉而上，与诸道兵会；崇义遣其将翟晖、杜少诚逆战于蛮水，希烈大破之；追至疏口，又破之。
现代文：李希烈带领军队沿汉水溯流而上，与各道兵马会合。梁崇义派遣将领翟晖、杜少诚在蛮水迎战，李希烈大破敌军，追击至疏口，再破敌军。
English: Li Xilai led the army upstream along the Han River and met with soldiers and horses from various provinces. Liang Chongyi dispatched generals to lead the raft, Du Shosheng fought in the rough water, Li Xilai defeated the enemy army, pursued it to the mouth of the canal, and then defeated the enemy army.

古文：二将请降，希烈使将其众先入襄阳慰谕军民。
现代文：翟晖、杜少诚二将请求投降，李希烈派遣两位将领带领部下首先进入襄阳，慰问城内军民。
English: Gong and Du Shao Xingjie will request surrender, and Li Xilai will send two generals to lead his subordinates into Xiangyang first to offer condolences to the soldiers and civilians in the city.

古文：崇义闭城拒守，守者开门争出，不可禁。
现代文：梁崇义关闭城门抵抗，守城的人们打开城门，争先出城，不可禁止。
English: Liang Chongyi closed the city gate to resist, the defenders opened the city gate and rushed out of the city, which cannot be prohibited.

古文：崇义与妻赴井死，传首京师。
现代文：梁崇义与妻子投井而死，二人的头颅被传送到京城。
English: Liang Chongyi and his wife fell into a well and died, and their heads were sent to the capital.

古文：范阳节度使硃滔将讨李惟岳，军于莫州。
现代文：范阳节度使朱滔准备前去讨伐李惟岳，在莫州驻扎。
English: Fan Yang Jiedu made Zhu Tao prepare to go to fight against Li Wei Yue and stationed in Mozhou.

古文：张孝忠将精兵八千守易州，滔遣判官蔡雄说孝忠曰： 惟岳乳臭儿，敢拒朝命；今昭义、河东军已破田悦，淮宁李仆射克襄阳，计河南诸军，朝夕北向，恒、魏之亡，可伫立而须也。
现代文：张孝忠带领精兵八千防守易州，朱滔派遣判官蔡雄劝告张孝忠说： 李惟岳不过是个乳臭小儿，竟敢抗拒朝命！现在昭义、河东二军已经打败田悦，淮宁李仆射攻克襄阳，算来河南各军早晚要向北挺进，恒州、魏州的覆亡，那是可以立待而至的了。
English: Zhang Xiaozhong led eight thousand elite soldiers to defend Yizhou, and Zhu Tao sent the judge Cai Xiong to advise Zhang Xiaozhong, saying: Li Weiyue is just a stinky baby, how dare he resist the imperial order! Now that the Second Army of Shouyi and Hedong has defeated Tian Yue, and the Second Army of Huaining has defeated Xiangyang, it is expected that the armies of Henan will advance northward sooner or later, and the fall of Hengzhou and Weizhou can be expected immediately.

古文：使君诚能首举易州以归朝廷，则破惟岳之功自使君始，此转祸为福之策也。 
现代文：你如果能够带头将易州归属朝廷，那么，打败李惟岳的功劳便是由你开头的，这正是你转祸为福的良策啊。 
English: If you can take the lead in transferring Yizhou to the imperial court, then the credit for defeating Li Wei Yue will start with you. This is exactly the best way to turn your misfortune into a blessing.

古文：孝忠然之，遣牙官程华诣滔，遣录事参军董稹奉表诣阙，滔又上表荐之。
现代文：张孝忠认为言之有理，便派遣牙官程华至朱滔处，派遣录事参军董稹到朝廷去进献表章，朱滔又上表举荐张孝忠，德宗很是高兴。
English: Zhang Xiaozhong thought that his words were reasonable, so he sent the dentist Cheng Hua to Zhu Tao's place, and sent the record-keeping soldier Dong Hao to the imperial court to present the watch badge. Zhu Tao also recommended Zhang Xiaozhong on the watch, and Dezong was very happy.

古文：上悦。九月，辛酉，以孝忠为成德节度使。
现代文：九月辛酉，德宗任命张孝忠为成德节度使。
English: In September, Emperor Dezong appointed Zhang Xiaozhong as the envoy of Chengde Festival.

古文：命惟岳护丧归朝，惟岳不从。
现代文：命令李惟岳护送死者回朝，李惟岳不肯听从。
English: He ordered Li Wei Yue to escort the deceased back to China, but Li Wei Yue refused to obey.

古文：孝忠德滔，为子茂和娶滔女，深相结。
现代文：张孝忠感激朱滔的恩德，为儿子张茂和娶朱滔女儿，两人深相结纳。
English: Zhang Xiaozhong was grateful for Zhu Tao's kindness, and the two of them were deeply in love with each other as his son Zhang Mao and his daughter married Zhu Tao.

古文：壬戌，加李希烈同平章事。
现代文：壬戌，德宗加封李希烈同平章事。
English: Ren Zong, Dezong and Li Xilei were awarded the same rank.

古文：初，李希烈请讨梁崇义，上对朝士亟称其忠。
现代文：不以为然当初，李希烈请求讨伐梁崇义，德宗对朝中人士屡次称道李希烈有忠心。
English: At first, Li Xilai requested to fight against Liang Chongyi, but Dezong repeatedly praised Li Xilai's loyalty to the people in the DPRK.

古文：黜陟使李承自淮西还，言于上曰： 希烈必立微功；但恐有功之后，偃蹇不臣，更烦朝廷用兵耳。 
现代文：黜陟使李承从淮西回朝，对德宗说： 李希烈肯定能立点微小的功劳，只怕有了功劳以后，骄横傲慢，不尽为臣之道，还要烦劳朝廷再用刀兵罢了！ 
English: He ordered Li Cheng from Huaxi to return to the imperial court, and said to Dezong: Li Xili can certainly do a little work, but after he has done some work, he will become arrogant, not fulfill his duties as a vassal, but will still bother the imperial court and use swords and soldiers!

古文：上不以为然。
现代文：德宗。
English: The Emperor was not impressed.

古文：希烈既得襄阳，遂据之为己有，上乃思承言。
现代文：李希烈得到襄阳以后，便将襄阳据为己有，德宗这才想起李承的预言。
English: After Li Xili got Xiangyang, he claimed it as his own. It was only then that Dezong remembered Li Cheng's prophecy.

古文：时承为河中尹，甲子，以承为山南东道节度使。
现代文：当时，李承担任河中尹，甲子，德宗任命李承为山南东道节度使。
English: At that time, Li Cheng served as the envoy of Yin, Jia and Zi of Hechuang, and Dezong appointed Li Cheng as the envoy of Shannan to host the festival.

古文：上欲以禁兵送上，承请单骑赴镇。
现代文：德宗打算派禁兵护送他上任，李承请求单人匹马前往山南东道。
English: Dezong planned to send forbidden soldiers to escort him to his new post, while Li Cheng requested a one-man escort to Shandong Province.

古文：至襄阳，希烈置之外馆，迫胁万方，承誓死不屈，希烈乃大掠阖境所有而去。
现代文：李承来到襄阳时，李希烈将李承安置在客舍中，千方百计地逼迫威胁他，李承誓死不屈，于是李希烈大肆掳掠了全州所有而离去。
English: When Li Cheng came to Xiangyang, Li Xili placed Li Cheng in a guest house, persecuted and threatened him in every possible way, Li Cheng swore to die, so Li Xili plundered everything in the state and left.

古文：承治之期年，军府稍完。
现代文：李承治理山南东道整整一年，军府才逐渐完备。
English: Li Chenggong governed Shannan Province for a whole year, and the military government was gradually completed.

古文：希烈留牙将于襄州，守其所掠财，由是数有使者往来。
现代文：李希烈将牙将留在襄州，看守掳掠的财物，由此双方常有使者往来。
English: Li Xilai left the treasure in Xiangzhou to guard the plundered property, which led to frequent exchanges between the two sides.

古文：承亦遣其腹心臧叔雅往来许、蔡，厚结希烈腹心周曾等，与之阴图希烈。
现代文：李承也派遣亲信臧叔雅往来于许州和蔡州，深深结纳李希烈的亲信周曾等人，与他们暗中谋算李希烈。
English: Li Cheng also sent his close confidant Zou Shuya to and from Huzhou and Caizhou, and deeply embraced Li Xilai's close confidant Zhou Zeng and others, secretly plotting with them to assassinate Li Xilai.

古文：初，萧嵩家庙临曲江，玄宗以娱游之地，非神灵所宅，命徙之。
现代文：当初，萧嵩的家庙濒临曲江，玄宗认为曲江是娱乐游观的地方，不是建造神灵庙宇的处所，便命萧嵩迁移家庙。
English: At first, Xiao Song's family temple was on the edge of the Qujiang River. Xuanzong thought that the Qujiang River was a place for entertainment and sightseeing, not a place to build a sacred temple, so he ordered Xiao Song to move the family temple.

古文：杨炎为相，恶京兆尹严郢，左迁大理卿。
现代文：杨炎担任宰相，憎恶京兆尹严郢，把他降职为大理卿。
English: Yang Yan served as prime minister, detested Jing Zhaoyun Yanqi, and demoted him to the post of Daliqing.

古文：卢杞欲陷炎，引郢为御史大夫。
现代文：卢杞打算陷害杨炎，便荐引严郢为御史大夫。
English: Lu Wei planned to frame Yang Yan, and recommended that Yan Wei be promoted to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：先是，炎将营家庙，有宅在东都，凭河南尹赵惠伯卖之，惠伯买以为官廨，郢按之，以为有羡利。
现代文：在此之前，杨炎准备营造家庙，因有住宅在东都洛阳，便请河南尹赵惠伯为他卖掉，赵惠伯却将此宅买来充当官署。严郢按察此事，认为其中有不应得的余利。
English: Prior to this, Yang Yan was planning to build a family temple. Since he had a house in the eastern capital of Luoyang, he asked Henan Yin Zhao Huibo to sell it for him. Zhao Huibo, however, bought the house to serve as a government office. Yan Yan investigated the matter and believed that there was an undeserved surplus profit.

古文：杞召大理正田晋议法，晋以为： 律，监临官市买有羡利，以乞取论，当夺官。 
现代文：卢杞召来大理正田晋，商议处罚二人的刑律依据，田晋认为： 根据刑律，本人管理官府设立的市场，购买物品获取余利的，以索取论处，应当剥夺官位。 
English: Lu Wei called Dali Masada Jin to discuss the criminal law basis for the punishment of the two. Tian Jin believed that: According to the criminal law, if I manage the market established by the government and purchase goods to obtain surplus profits, I should be deprived of my official position.

古文：杞怒，贬晋衡州司马。
现代文：卢杞大怒，将田晋贬为衡州司马。
English: Lu Yao was furious and demoted Tian Jin to Hengzhou Sima.

古文：更召它吏议法，以为： 监主自盗，罪当绞。 
现代文：卢杞又召另外的官吏来商议罚治二人的刑律，该人认为： 在本人主管的公务中自行盗窃的，罪当处以绞刑。 
English: Lu Wei also summoned another official to discuss the punishment of the two people. The person thought: If you steal by yourself in the course of your official duties, the crime should be punished by hanging.

古文：炎庙正直萧嵩庙地，杞因谮炎，云 兹地有王气，故玄宗令嵩徙之。
现代文：杨炎的家庙正当萧嵩的家庙所在之地，卢杞借此诬陷杨炎说： 这个地方有帝王之气，所以玄宗才命令萧嵩迁移家庙。
English: Yang Yan's family temple is the place where Xiao Song's family temple is located. Lu Yao used this to frame Yang Yan and said: This place has the spirit of an emperor, so Xuanzong ordered Xiao Song to move his family temple.

古文：炎有异志，故于其地建庙。 
现代文：杨炎有心背叛朝廷，所以才在此地建造家庙。 
English: Yang Yan had the heart to betray the imperial court, so he built a family temple here.

古文：冬，十月，乙未，炎自左仆射贬崖州司马。
现代文：冬季，十月，乙未，杨炎由左仆射被贬为崖州司马。
English: In the winter, in October, in the second month of the year, Yang Yan was demoted from Zuo Shuai to Jiaozhou Sima.

古文：遣中使护送，未至崖州百里，缢杀之。
现代文：杨炎行至距崖州一百里处，遭到了缢杀。
English: Yang Yan went to a place a hundred miles away from Yazhou and was killed.

古文：惠伯自河中尹贬费州多田尉。寻亦杀之。
现代文：越惠伯由河中尹被贬为费州多田尉，不久也被杀死。
English: Yue Huibo was demoted from Kechu Yin to Feizhou Tada Leutnant, and was also killed soon after.

古文：辛丑，册太子妃萧氏。
现代文：辛巳，册立萧氏为太子妃。
English: Soon after, Xiao became the crown princess.

古文：癸卯，祫太庙。
现代文：癸卯，德宗在太庙合祭远近祖先的牌位。
English: At the end of the day, the plaques of the distant and near ancestors of the Tokugawa Shogunate were displayed at the grand temple's closing ceremony.

古文：先是，太祖既正东向之位，献、懿二祖皆藏西夹室，不飨。
现代文：在此之前，太祖的牌位已在太庙中，当东向位，献祖、懿祖的牌位则都存放在西夹室内，不予祭献。
English: Prior to this, the plaques of the Great Ancestor were already in the Great Temple, but when the Great Ancestor was enthroned, the plaques dedicated to the Great Ancestor and the Great-great Ancestor were stored in the West Room, and were not offered.

古文：至是，复奉献祖东向而飨之。
现代文：至此，再次将献祖奉为东向位，予以祭献。
English: At this point, the dedicated ancestor was once again enshrined as Dongxiang and offered as a sacrifice.

古文：徐州刺史李洧，正己之从父兄也。
现代文：徐州刺史李洧是李正己的堂兄。
English: Xuzhou assassin Li Yan is Li Zhengyi's cousin.

古文：李纳寇宋州，彭城令太原白季庚说洧举州归国。洧从之，遣摄巡官崔程奉表诣阙，且使口奏，并白宰相，以 徐州不能独抗纳，乞领徐、海、沂三州观察使，况海、沂二州，今皆为纳有。
现代文：李纳侵犯宋州，彭城令太原人白季庚劝说李洧率领全州归顺朝廷，李洧听从了他的劝告，派遣摄巡官崔程带着表章到朝廷去，让他口头上奏皇上，并且禀告宰相，大意是： 徐州无力独自抵抗李纳，李洧乞求担任徐、海、沂三州观察使，况且海、沂二州，现在都已被李纳占有。
English: Li Na invaded Songzhou, Pengcheng ordered the Taiyuan man Bai Ji Geng to persuade Li Yu to lead the whole state to surrender to the imperial court. Li Yu heeded his advice and sent the cameraman Cui Cheng to the imperial court with a watch badge. He asked him to appeal to the emperor verbally and denounce the prime minister, to the effect that: Xuzhou was powerless to resist Li Na on its own, Li Yu begged to serve as an observer of the three states of Xu, Hai and Handan. Moreover, Hai and Handan two states have now been occupied by Li Na.

古文：洧与刺史王涉、马万通素有约，苟得朝廷诏书，必能成功。 
现代文：李洧与刺史王涉、马万通素有约定，如果能够得到朝廷的诏书，必定能够成功。 
English: Li Qian had an agreement with Wang Zhou and Ma Wan Tong that if they could get the imperial decree, they would definitely succeed.

古文：程自外来，以为宰相一也，先白张镒，镒以告卢杞。
现代文：崔程来自外地，以为宰相都一样，于是先向张镒禀告，张镒又转告了卢杞。
English: Cui Cheng came from out of town, thinking that all prime ministers are the same, so he first reported to Zhang Ye, and Zhang Ye relayed the news to Lu Ye.

古文：杞怒其不先白己，不从其请。
现代文：卢杞恼火崔程不先向自己禀告，便不答应他的请求。
English: Lu Yao was angry that Cui Cheng would not agree to his request without informing him first.

古文：戊申，加洧御史大夫，充招谕使。
现代文：戊申，加封李洧为御史大夫，充任招谕使。
English: Wushin and Jiafeng Lijun were promoted to goshi taifu and appointed as envoys.

古文：十一月，戊午，以永乐公主适检校比部郎中田华，上不欲违先志故也。
现代文：十一月，戊午，将永乐公主嫁给检校比部郎中田华，以示皇上不想违背原先的意图。
English: In the afternoon of November, Emperor Go-Shirakawa married Princess Yongle to Nakata Hiburo, a school inspector, to show that he did not want to go against his original intention.

古文：蜀王傀，更名遂。
现代文：蜀王李傀改名李遂。
English: Shu King Li Guo changed his name to Li Sui.

古文：辛酉，宣武节度使刘洽，神策都知兵马使曲环，滑州刺史襄平李澄，朔方大将唐朝臣，大破淄青、魏博之兵于徐州。
现代文：辛酉，宣武节度使刘洽、神策都知兵马使曲环、滑州刺史襄平人李澄、朔方大将唐朝臣，在徐州大破淄青、魏博军。
English: Xin Xuan, Xuanwu Jiedu, Liu Cai, Shen Zhe, Du Zhi, Terracotta Warriors and Horses, Qu Huan, Li Cheng, Yang Ping, Shuo Fang, General Tang Ason, defeated the Jiaqing and Wei Bo armies in Xuzhou.

古文：先是，李纳遣其将王温会魏博将信都崇庆共攻徐州，李洧遣牙官温人王智兴诣阙告急。
现代文：在此之前，李纳派遣将领王温会合魏博领信都崇庆，一齐攻打徐州，李洧派遣牙官温县人王智兴前往朝廷告急。
English: Prior to this, Li Na dispatched the general Wang Wen to join the Wei Bo to attack Xuzhou, and Li Xi dispatched the dentist Wang Zhixing from Wen County to the imperial court for urgent matters.

古文：智兴善走，不五日而至。
现代文：王智兴擅长跑路，不出五天，便到了朝廷。
English: Wang Zhixing was good at running. He arrived at the imperial court in less than five days.

古文：上为之发朔方兵五千人，以朝臣将之，与洽、环、澄共救之。
现代文：德宗为李洧派出朔方兵五千人，让唐朝臣带领着他们，与刘洽、曲环、李澄共同援救徐州。
English: Dezong sent five thousand soldiers from the Shuo side for Li Qian, and let Tang Ason lead them to rescue Xuzhou together with Liu Cai, Qu Huan, and Li Cheng.

古文：时朔方军资装不至，旗服弊恶。宣武人嗤之曰： 乞子能破贼乎！ 
现代文：当时，朔方军的物资装备没有运到，旗帜服装破败粗劣，宣武人嗤笑朔方军说： 叫花子能够打败敌人吗！ 
English: At that time, the materials and equipment of the Shuo Fang Army did not arrive, the flag and clothing were worn out and shoddy, and the propagandists laughed at the Shuo Fang Army and said: Can Hanako defeat the enemy!

古文：朝臣以其言激怒士卒，且曰： 都统有令，先破贼营者，营中物悉与之。 
现代文：唐朝臣用宣武人的话来激怒士兵，而且说： 都统有令，先打破敌人营垒的，便将营垒中的物品悉数给他。 
English: The Tang courtier used the words of the propagandist to provoke the soldiers, and said: "All have orders. If you break the enemy's camp first, you will give him all the items in the camp."

古文：士皆愤怒争奋。
现代文：士卒们都愤怒而起，奋力争先。
English: The soldiers all rose angrily, struggling to get ahead.

古文：崇庆、温攻彭城，二旬不能下，请益兵于纳。
现代文：信都崇庆和王温攻打彭城，历时二十天，未能攻克，向李纳请求增加兵力。
English: The religious leaders, Chongqing and Wang Wen, attacked Pengcheng, which lasted for twenty days. They were unable to conquer it and asked Li Na to increase the number of troops.

古文：纳遣其将石隐金将万人助之，与刘洽等相拒于七里沟。
现代文：李纳派遣将领石隐金带领一万人援助他们，与刘洽等人在七里沟相峙。
English: Li Na dispatched General Guan Shi Yin Jin to lead ten thousand people to help them, and confronted Liu Cha and others at Shili ditch.

古文：日向暮，洽引军稍却。朔方马军使杨朝晟言于唐朝臣曰： 公以步兵负山而陈，以待两军。我以骑兵伏于山曲，贼见悬军势孤，必搏之。
现代文：天色渐晚，刘洽带领军队稍稍退却，朔方马军使杨朝晟对唐朝臣说： 你率领步兵背山列阵，等待信都崇庆、王温二军的到来，我率领骑兵在山中的曲折之处埋伏。
English: It was getting late in the day, Liu Cai led the army to retreat a little, and Yang Zhaohui, the commander of the Shuo-Fangma army, told the Tang courtier: You lead the infantry to line up behind the mountain, waiting for the arrival of Xindu Chongqing and Wang Wen's second army. I led the cavalry to ambush in the twists and turns of the mountain.

古文：我以伏兵绝其腰，必败之。 
现代文：敌军看到你孤军深入，势单力薄，定会前来与你拼搏，我率领伏兵拦腰截断敌军，定能打败他们。 
English: When the enemy sees that you are alone and weak, they will come to fight you. I will lead the ambush to cut off the enemy and defeat them.

古文：朝臣从之。
现代文：唐朝臣听从了他的意见。
English: Tang Ason listened to his advice.

古文：崇庆等果将骑二千逾桥而西，追击官军，伏兵发，横击之。
现代文：信都崇庆等人果然带领骑兵二千人，越过桥来，向西挺进，追击官军。杨朝晟的伏兵发动，从侧面进击敌军。
English: As expected, Shindu, Chongqing and others led 2,000 cavalry across the bridge and advanced westward in pursuit of the government army. Yang Zhaohui's ambush launched and attacked the enemy army from the side.

古文：崇庆等兵中断，狼狈而返，阻桥以拒官军。
现代文：信都崇庆等人的军队被从中切断，狼狈而回，退至桥前，抗拒官军。
English: The army of Shindu, Chongqing and others was cut off from it, and they returned in disarray, retreated to the bridge, and resisted the government army.

古文：其兵有争桥不得，涉水而度者。朝晟指之曰： 彼可涉，吾何为不涉！ 
现代文：部下有些士兵争着过桥受阻，便淌水过河，杨朝晟指着这些人说： 他们可以淌水过河，我们为什么不能淌水过河！ 
English: Yang Zhaohui pointed at his subordinates, some of whom were fighting to cross the bridge and were blocked, and said, "They can cross the river, why can't we?"

古文：遂涉水击，据桥者皆走，崇庆等兵大溃。洽等乘之，斩首八千级，溺死过半。
现代文：于是杨朝晟淌着河水进击，占据桥头的敌军都逃跑了，信都崇庆等人的军队全面溃退，刘洽等人率兵追赶，斩首八千级，淹死的人超过一半。
English: As a result, the Yang Dynasty attacked with the river flowing, the enemy troops occupying the bridgehead all fled, the army of Xindu Chongqing and others retreated in an all-round way, Liu Cai and others led the troops to chase, beheaded eight thousand, and more than half of the people drowned.

古文：朔方军士尽得其辎重，旗服鲜华，乃谓宣武人曰： 乞子之功，孰与宋多？ 
现代文：朔方军悉数得到了敌军的辎重，旗帜鲜明，服装华丽，于是对宣武人说： 叫花子立下的功劳，与你们宋州兵相比，到底是谁的多呀？ 
English: Shuo's entire army had received the full weight of the enemy's army, the flag was distinct, and the clothing was gorgeous. So he said to Xuanwu, "Compared to you Song soldiers, who has done more to establish Hanako?"

古文：宣武人皆惭。
现代文：宣武人都觉得惭愧了。
English: The propagandists felt ashamed.

古文：官军乘胜逐北，至徐州城下，魏博、淄青军解围走，江、淮漕运始通。
现代文：官军乘胜向北追击，来到徐州城下，魏博和淄青的军队解除了对徐州的包围，撤退逃走，江、淮漕运又开始通畅了。
English: The government army took advantage of the victory to pursue northward and came to the city of Xuzhou. The troops of Wei Bo and Jiaqing lifted the siege on Xuzhou, retreated and fled, and the river and river transport began to flow smoothly again.

古文：己巳，诏削李惟岳官爵；募所部降者，赦而赏之。
现代文：己巳，德宗下诏削去李惟岳的官爵，对能够招集部下归降的将领，予以赦免并奖赏。
English: After all, Emperor Dezong made Li Weiyue a noble by edict, and pardoned and rewarded generals who could rally their subordinates to surrender.

古文：甲申，淮南节度使陈少游遣兵击海州，其刺史王涉以州降。
现代文：甲申，淮南节度使陈少游派兵进击海州，海州刺史王涉率领全州归降。
English: Jiashen, Huainan Festival made Chen Shaoyou send troops to attack Haizhou, and Haizhou Sisi Wang Zhuo led the whole state to surrender.

古文：十二月，李纳密州刺史马万通乞降；丁酉，以为密州刺史。
现代文：十二月，李纳的部下密州刺史马万通请求归降，丁酉，德宗任命他为密州刺史。
English: In December, Li Na's subordinate, Mizhou magistrate Ma Vantong, requested to surrender. Ding Xi and Dezong appointed him as Mizhou magistrate.

古文：崔汉衡至吐蕃，赞普以敕书称贡献及赐，全以臣礼见处。又，云州之西，当以贺兰山为境，邀汉衡更请之。
现代文：崔汉衡来到吐蕃。吐蕃赞普认为敕书中使用贡献、赐给等语，完全是对臣属之礼对待吐蕃；此外，还提出在云州西面，双方应当以贺兰山为边界，请崔汉衡回去再为请求。
English: Cui Hanheng came to Tubo. Tubo Zampu thought that the use of the words "contribute" and "give" in the imperial edict was entirely a courtesy to Tubo; in addition, he also proposed that in the west of Yunnan, the two sides should use Mount Helan as the border, and asked Cui Hanheng to go back and make a request.

古文：丁未，汉衡遣判官与吐蕃使者入奏。上为之改敕书、境土，皆如其请。
现代文：丁未，崔汉衡派遣判官与吐蕃使者入朝上奏，德宗为吐蕃修改了敕书，改订了边境，一切都如吐蕃请求的那样。
English: Ding Wei and Cui Hanheng sent judges and envoys from Tubo to report to the emperor. Emperor Dezong revised the imperial edict for Tubo and revised the border. Everything was as requested by Tubo.

古文：加马燧魏博招讨使。
现代文：德宗加封马燧为魏博招讨使。
English: Dezong Jiafeng and Ma Jun are recruiting envoys for Weibo.

古文：建中三年壬戌，公元七八二年春，正月，河阳节度使李艽引兵逼卫州，田悦守将任履虚诈降，既而复叛。
现代文：建中三年春季，正月，河阳节度使李领兵逼近卫州，田悦部下的守城将领任履虚诈降，不久再次反叛。
English: In the spring of the third year of Jianming, in the first month, the Heyang Festival caused Li to lead the army to approach Weizhou, and the city's garrison commander led by Tian Yue took the lead in deceitful capitulation, and soon rebelled again.

古文：马燧等诸军屯于漳滨。
现代文：马燧等人所率各军在漳水之滨屯驻。
English: All the armies led by Ma Jun and others were stationed in the waterfront of Surabaya.

古文：田悦遣其将王光进筑月城以守长桥，诸军不得渡。
现代文：田悦派遣部将王光进沿河筑成半月形的城墙，以便防守长桥。
English: Tian Yue dispatched Wang Guangjin to build a half-moon-shaped city wall along the river to defend the Long Bridge.

古文：燧以铁锁连车数百乘，实以土囊，塞其下流，水浅，诸军涉渡。
现代文：马燧等人所率各军无法渡河，便用铁锁链将数百辆车连结在一起，装入盛满土的口袋，在长桥下游将漳水堵塞，下游水浅，各军得以淌水而渡。
English: The armies led by Ma Jun and others could not cross the river, so they used iron chains to link hundreds of vehicles together, loaded them into bags full of soil, and blocked the floodwater in the lower reaches of the Long Bridge. The water in the lower reaches was shallow, and the armies were able to cross the river.

古文：时军中乏粮，悦等深壁不战。
现代文：当时马燧等人军中缺少粮食，而田悦等人固守营垒，不肯出战。
English: At that time, there was a shortage of grain in the army of Ma Jun and others, while Tian Yue and others held fast to the camp and refused to go to war.

古文：燧命诸军持十日粮，进屯仓口，与悦夹洹水而军。
现代文：马燧命令各军只带十天的口粮，进军到仓口，与田悦隔着洹水驻扎下来。
English: Ma Jun ordered each army to bring only ten days of rations, march to Kuraguchi, and camp down across Surabaya from Tian Yue.

古文：李抱真、李艽问曰： 粮少而深入，何也？ 
现代文：李抱真、李问马燧说： 我军粮食短少，又深入敌境，是何道理？ 
English: Li Bozhen and Li Qianmao said, "Our army is short of food and has penetrated deep into the enemy territory. What is the reason for this?"

古文：燧曰： 粮少则利速战，今三镇连兵不战，欲以老我师。
现代文：马燧说： 粮食短少，利于速战。现在魏博、淄青、成德三镇兵马接连，不肯出战，目的是挫伤我军的锐气。
English: Ma Yu said, "The shortage of grain is conducive to a quick war. Now, soldiers and horses from the three towns of Wei Bo, Jiaqing and Chengde are refusing to go to war one after another, with the aim of dampening the morale of our army.

古文：我若分军击其左右，悦必救之，则我腹背受敌，战必不利。
现代文：倘若我军分兵进击敌军左右两翼，田悦必定援助，我军便会腹背受敌，打起来一定不利于我军。
English: If our army's detachments attack the enemy's left and right wings, Tian Yue will certainly help, and our army will suffer from the enemy, which will certainly be unfavorable to our army.

古文：故进军逼悦，所谓攻其所必救也。
现代文：所以进军逼迫田悦，这就是人们所说的进攻敌人必定要去救援的地方。
English: Therefore, marching in to persecute Tian Yue, this is what people call the place where the attacking enemy must go for rescue.

古文：彼苟出战，必为诸君破之。 
现代文：假如敌军出战，定然会被诸位打败。 
English: If the enemy comes out to fight, you will surely be defeated.

古文：乃为三桥逾洹水，日往挑战，悦不出。
现代文：于是马燧搭起三座浮桥，越过洹水，每天都去挑战，但田悦不肯出来。
English: So Ma Yu built three pontoons to cross the Surabaya River and challenged her every day, but Tian Yue refused to come out.

古文：燧令诸军夜半起食，潜师循洹水直趋魏州，令曰： 贼至，则止为陈。 
现代文：马燧让各军半夜起来进餐，暗中发兵，沿着洹水直奔魏州，他下令说： 若是敌军到了，就停下来，列阵相待。 
English: Ma Jun ordered all the armies to get up at midnight for dinner, secretly sent troops, and went straight to Weizhou along the Surabaya River. He ordered: If the enemy army arrives, stop and wait for each other.

古文：留百骑击鼓鸣角于营中，仍抱薪持火，俟诸军毕，则止鼓角匿其旁。伺悦军毕渡，焚其桥。
现代文：马燧留下一百骑兵在营中击鼓吹角，并且抱来柴草，握好火种，命他们等到各军全都出发以后，便停止打鼓吹角，躲在一旁；等到田悦军完全渡过洹水时，便将浮桥烧掉。
English: The stallion left a hundred horsemen in the camp to beat drums and blow horns, and brought firewood and held the kindling, and ordered them to wait until all the armies had set out, then stop beating drums and blowing horns, and hide aside; and when Tian Yue's army had completely crossed the flood, they would burn the pontoon bridge.

古文：军行十里所，悦闻之，帅淄青、成德步骑四万逾桥掩其后，乘风纵火，鼓噪而进。
现代文：各军行进了十里，田悦听见了，便率领淄青、成德步兵、骑兵共四万人，越过桥来，掩袭其后，乘风放火，擂鼓呐喊，向前行进。
English: Each army marched ten miles. Tian Yue heard this and led a total of forty thousand soldiers, including indigo, Chengde infantry, and cavalry, across the bridge, covered up behind them, set fire to the wind, beat drums and shouted, and marched forward.

古文：燧按兵不动，先除其前草莽百步为战场，结陈以待之，募勇士五千馀人为前列。
现代文：马燧按兵不动，先铲除了军前百步之内的野草丛莽做为战场，结成阵列，等待敌军，并召集勇敢的士卒五千余人，作为前锋。
English: The horse and mule did not move, first eradicated the bushes of wild grass within a hundred paces of the front of the army as a battlefield, formed an array, waited for the enemy, and gathered more than five thousand brave soldiers as forwards.

古文：悦军至，火止，气衰，燧纵岳击之，悦军大败。
现代文：田悦军赶到时，火已止熄，士气衰竭，马燧便发兵进击，田悦军大败。
English: When Tian Yue's army arrived, the fire had been extinguished and morale was exhausted. Ma Jun then sent troops to attack, and Tian Yue's army was defeated.

古文：神策、昭义、河阳军小却，见河东军捷，还斗，又破之。
现代文：神策、昭义、河阳军稍稍退却，看见河东军获胜，回过头来再与敌军战斗，又将敌军打败。
English: Shinsaku, Shouyi, and the Kawayan army retreated a little, saw the victory of the Hedong army, turned back to fight with the enemy army, and defeated the enemy army.

古文：追奔至，三桥已焚，悦军乱，赴水溺死不可胜纪，斩首二万馀级，捕虏三千馀人，尸相枕藉三十馀里。
现代文：马燧军追赶上敌军时，三座浮桥已被烧毁，田悦军混乱不堪，被赶到水中淹死的人无法计算，共斩首二万余级，俘虏三千余人，尸首横躺竖卧，连绵三十余里。
English: When the Ma Rong Army caught up with the enemy army, three floating bridges had been burned, the Tian Yue Army was in chaos, and the people who were driven into the water and drowned could not be counted. In total, more than 20,000 were beheaded, more than 3,000 were captured, and the corpses lay side by side, stretching for more than 30 miles.

古文：悦收馀兵千馀人走魏州。
现代文：田悦收拾残兵一千余人逃往魏州。
English: Tian Yue collected the remnants of more than a thousand soldiers and fled to Weizhou.

古文：马燧与李抱真不协，顿兵平邑浮图，迁延不进。
现代文：马燧与李抱真不合，将军队屯驻在平邑的佛寺中。
English: Ma Xuan disagreed with Li Bangzhen and stationed his army in a Buddhist temple in Pingyi.

古文：悦夜至南郭，大将李长春闭关不内，以俟官军，久之，天且明，长春乃开门纳之。
现代文：田悦连夜来到魏州南郊，大将李长春关闭城门，不让田悦开进，以等待官军的到来。过了许久，天快亮时，李长春才打开城门，放田悦进城。
English: Tian Yue came to the southern suburbs of Weizhou overnight. General Li Changchun closed the city gate and did not allow Tian Yue to enter, in order to wait for the arrival of the official army. After a long time, when it was almost dawn, Li Changchun opened the city gate and let Tian Yue enter the city.

古文：悦杀长春，婴城拒守。
现代文：田悦杀了李长春，据城固守。
English: Tian Yue killed Li Changchun and held on to the city.

古文：城中士卒不满数千，死者亲戚，号哭满街。
现代文：城中士卒不满数千人，死者的亲戚在街上到处哭号。
English: There are thousands of people who are dissatisfied with the city sergeant, and the relatives of the deceased are crying all over the streets.

古文：悦忧惧，乃持佩刀，乘马立府门外，悉集军民，流涕言曰： 悦不肖，蒙淄青、成德二丈人大恩，不量其力，辄拒朝命，丧败至此，使士大夫肝脑涂地，皆悦之罪也。
现代文：田悦忧愁恐惧，便手握佩刀，骑马立于府衙门外，将士卒百姓全部召集起来，流着眼泪说： 我本非贤能之人，承蒙淄青、成德二位老丈担保举荐，才得以继续守住伯父的基业。现在两位老丈已经去世，他们的后人不能承袭基业，我不敢忘记二位老丈的大恩，不自量力，抗拒朝命，以致丧乱败亡到这步田地，使部下将官肝脑涂地，这都是我的罪过啊。
English: With sorrow and fear, Tian Yue, holding a sword in his hand, rode a horse and stood outside the palace gate, gathered all the soldiers and people, and said with tears: I am not a man of virtue, I was recommended by the two old men, Ao Qing and Cheng De, and I was able to continue to hold on to my uncle's inheritance. Now the two old men have passed away, their descendants cannot inherit the inheritance, I dare not forget the great kindness of the two old men, I did not measure up, I resisted the imperial order, so that I was defeated and died at this step, and my subordinates were brainwashed. This is all my fault.

古文：悦有老母，不能自杀，愿诸公以此刀断悦首，提出城降马仆射，自取富贵，无为与悦俱死也！ 
现代文：我家有老母，不能自杀，希望诸位用这把刀砍下我的脑袋来，拿着出城，投降马仆射，各自获取富贵，用不着与我一齐赴死！ 
English: I have an old mother in my family, I can't commit suicide, I hope you can use this knife to cut off my head, take it out of the city, surrender and shoot, each of you can get rich, you don't have to go to death with me!

古文：因从马上自投地。
现代文：说着便从马上投到地下。
English: Saying this, he immediately went underground.

古文：将士争前抱持悦曰： 尚书举兵徇义，非私己也。
现代文：将士们争着上前，扶着田悦说： 尚书举兵，是赴义之举，并不是为了一己之私啊。
English: The soldiers scrambled forward, supported Tian Yue and said: Shangshu's raising an army is a move for righteousness, not for one's own sake.

古文：一胜一负，兵家之常。
现代文：胜败是兵家常事。
English: Victory and defeat are common occurrences in the military.

古文：某辈累世受恩，何忍闻此！
现代文：我辈世代蒙受深恩，怎么忍心听这种话！
English: How can I bear to hear such words when my generation has been so blessed!

古文：愿奉尚书一战，不胜则以死继之。 
现代文：我们愿意跟随尚书去决一死战。如果不能取胜，便继之以死！ 
English: We are willing to follow Shangshu to fight to the death. If we can't win, we will die!

古文：悦曰： 诸公不以悦丧败而弃之，悦虽死，敢忘厚意于地下！ 
现代文：田悦说： 诸位不因我丧乱败亡便抛弃我，即使我死了，在九泉之下也不敢忘记诸位的厚意！ 
English: Tian Yue said, "You do not abandon me because I am ruined and defeated. Even if I die, I would not dare to forget your kindness under any circumstances!

古文：乃与诸将各断发，约为兄弟，誓同生死。
现代文：于是，田悦与诸将领各自剪断头发，结为兄弟，发誓同生共死。
English: As a result, Tian Yue and the generals each cut their hair and became brothers, vowing to live and die together.

古文：悉出府库所有及敛富民之财，得百馀万，以赏士卒，众心始定。
现代文：田悦悉数拿出仓库储存的物资和收敛富人的钱财，计一百余万，用来犒赏士兵，众心开始安定下来。
English: Tian Yue took out all the materials stored in the warehouse and collected the money of the rich, totaling more than one million, to reward the soldiers, and everyone's hearts began to settle down.

古文：复召贝州刺史刑曹俊，使之整部伍，缮守备，军势复振。
现代文：田悦又召回贝州刺史邢曹俊，让他整顿队伍，修缮防守器械，军队的士气再次振作起来。
English: Tian Yue also recalled Baizhou commander Cao Jun, asking him to reorganize the team, repair the defensive equipment, and the morale of the army was once again invigorated.

古文：李纳军于濮阳，为河南军所逼，奔还濮州，征援兵于魏州。
现代文：李纳在濮阳驻扎，被河南军所逼迫，逃回濮州，向魏州征求援兵。
English: Li Na was stationed in Fenyang. He was persecuted by the Henan army, fled back to Fuzhou, and called for reinforcements from Weizhou.

古文：田悦遣军使符璘将三百骑送之，璘父令奇谓璘曰： 吾老矣，历观安、史辈叛乱者，今皆安在！
现代文：田悦派遣军使符带领骑兵三百人救援。符父亲符令奇对符说： 历观安禄山、史思明等反叛作乱之徒，现在还都存在吗？
English: Tian Yue dispatched the envoy Fu to lead the cavalry to rescue three hundred people.Fu's father Fu Lingqi said to Fu: Do the rebels such as Liguang Anlu Mountain and Shi Siming still exist?

古文：田氏能久乎！
现代文：田氏能长久吗？
English: Can the Tian family last?

古文：汝因此弃逆从顺，是汝扬父名于后世也。 
现代文：我老啦，你若能趁此机会摆脱田悦，归顺朝廷，这便是你给你老爹扬名后世了。 
English: I'm getting old. If you can take this opportunity to get rid of Tian Yue and submit to the imperial court, you will be able to give your father a good name for the rest of your life.

古文：啮臂而别。
现代文：父子咬臂立誓分别。
English: The father and son bit their arms and swore to separate.

古文：璘遂与其副李瑶帅众降于马燧。
现代文：于是符与部下副将李瑶率领众人向马燧投降。
English: As a result, Fu and his subordinate, Vice Admiral Li Yan, led everyone to surrender to Ma Yan.

古文：悦收族其家，令奇慢骂而死。
现代文：田悦逮捕并杀戮的符全家，符令奇骂不绝口而死。
English: Tian Yue arrested and killed Fu's whole family, and Fu Lingqi cursed and cursed and died.

古文：瑶父再春以博州降，悦从兄昂以洺州降，王光进以长桥降。
现代文：李瑶的父亲李再春率博州投降，田悦的堂兄田昂率州投降，王光进率长桥投降。
English: Li Yao's father, Li Zhaichun, led the surrender of Bozhou, Tian Yue's cousin, Tian Ang, led the surrender of Bozhou, and Wang Guangjin, led the surrender of Changqiao.

古文：悦入城旬馀日，马燧等诸军始至城下，攻之，不克。
现代文：田悦入城十多天，马燧等人各军才来到魏州城下，发兵攻城，但未能取胜。
English: It took more than ten days for Tian Yue to enter the city, and it was only after that that Ma Jun and other soldiers came to the outskirts of the city of Weizhou and sent troops to attack the city, but they failed to win.

古文：丙寅，李惟岳遣兵与孟祐守束鹿，硃滔、张孝忠攻拔之，进围深州。
现代文：丙寅，李惟岳派兵与孟防守束鹿，朱滔和张孝忠将束鹿攻打下来，进兵围困深州。
English: Hsin Yin and Li Wei Yue sent troops with Meng to defend Sokcho. Zhu Tao and Zhang Xiaotong attacked Sokcho and besieged Shenzhou.

古文：惟岳忧惧，掌书记邵真复说惟岳，密为表，先遣弟惟简入朝；然后诛诸将之不从命者，身自入朝，使妻父冀州刺史郑诜权知节度事，以待朝命。
现代文：李惟岳担忧而恐惧，掌书记邵真又劝说李惟岳，让他暗中上表，先派遣弟弟李惟简入朝，然后杀掉诸将领中不服从命令的人，亲身入朝，让岳丈冀州刺史郑诜暂且代理节度使事务，等待朝廷的任命。
English: Li Wei Yue was worried and afraid. The secretary Shao Zhen also persuaded Li Wei Yue to secretly send his younger brother Li Wei Jian to the imperial court, and then kill those generals who disobeyed orders. Li Wei Yue personally went to the imperial court and asked Yue Jiao, Jizhou, and Zheng Yi to temporarily act as the secretary of the festival and wait for the appointment of the imperial court.

古文：惟简既行，孟祐知其谋，密遣告田悦。
现代文：李惟简已经出发，孟知道了这一计谋，秘密派人告诉了田悦。
English: Li WeiJan had already set off. Meng knew about this scheme and secretly sent someone to tell TianYue.

古文：悦大怒，使衙官扈岌往见惟岳，让之曰： 尚书举兵，正为大夫求旌节耳，非为己也。
现代文：田悦非常生气，让衙官扈岌前往求见李惟岳，责备李惟岳说： 尚书起兵，正是要为大夫您请求节度使的旌节，不是为自己。
English: Tian Yue was very angry, so he sent the eunuch Yao to find Li Wei Yue, and scolded Li Wei Yue, saying, "You have requested the military parade for your doctor, not for yourself.

古文：今大夫乃信邵真之言，遣弟奉表，悉以反逆之罪归尚书，自求雪身，尚书何负于大夫而至此邪！
现代文：现在大夫却听信了邵真的话，派遣令弟上表，将叛逆的罪名全部归于尚书，以求开脱自身，尚书是怎么对不起大夫，以至到了如此地步呢！
English: Now, however, the doctor has listened to Shao Zhen's words and sent his younger brother to the table, attributing all the charges of rebellion to Shang Shuxu in order to exonerate himself. How could Shang Shuxu have been so ungrateful to the doctor that it has come to this!

古文：若相为斩邵真，则相待如初；不然，当与大夫绝矣。 
现代文：倘若能够为尚书杀掉邵真，那么尚书就像当初一样对待大夫，否则，当与大夫绝交。 
English: If it is possible to kill Shao Zhen for Shang Shu, then Shang Shu should treat the doctor as he did in the beginning, otherwise, he should sever ties with the doctor.

古文：判官毕华言于惟岳曰： 田尚书以大夫之故陷身重围，大夫一旦负之，不义甚矣。
现代文：判官毕华对李惟岳说： 田尚书是由于大夫的原故而身陷重围的，大夫一旦背弃了他，就太不仁义了。
English: Judge Bi Hua said to Li Weiyue: Tian Shangshu was surrounded by the doctors, and once the doctors turned their backs on him, it was too cruel.

古文：且魏博、淄青兵强食富，足抗天下，事未可知，奈何遽为二三之计乎！ 
现代文：而且，魏博和淄青兵马强盛，粮食丰足，足以与天下相抗争，事情还未见分晓，怎能突然就三心二意之计呢！ 
English: Moreover, Wei Bo and Jiaqing's soldiers and horses are strong, and the grain is plentiful enough to compete with the world. Things are not clear yet, how can they suddenly be half-hearted?

古文：惟岳素怯，不能守前计，乃引邵真，对扈岌斩之。发成德兵万人，与孟祐俱围束鹿。
现代文：李惟岳素来怯懦，不能维持原先的打算，便召来邵真，当着扈岌的面将他杀了，派出成德兵一万人，与孟一起包围束鹿。
English: Li Wei Yue had always been cowardly and unable to maintain his original plan, so he summoned Shao Zhen, killed him in front of the public, and sent ten thousand German soldiers to surround Shu Degu together with Meng.

古文：丙寅，硃滔、张孝忠与战于束鹿城下，惟岳大败，烧营而遁。
现代文：丙寅，朱滔和张孝忠与魏博和成德军在束鹿城下交战，李惟岳大败，烧了营房逃跑。
English: Hsin Yin, Zhu Tao and Zhang Xiaozhong fought against Wei Bo and Cheng German army at the foot of Shuka Castle. Li Wei Yue was defeated and burned the barracks to escape.

古文：兵马使王武俊为左右所构，惟岳疑之，惜其才，未忍除也。
现代文：兵马使王武俊被李惟岳的亲信陷害，李惟岳既怀疑他，又赏识他的才能，不忍心将他除掉。
English: The soldiers and horses caused Wang Wujun to be framed by Li Wei Yue's close confidants. Li Wei Yue both suspected him and appreciated his talent, and could not bear to get rid of him.

古文：束鹿之战，使武俊为前锋，私自谋曰： 我破硃滔，则惟岳军势大振，归，杀我必矣。 
现代文：在束鹿之战中，李惟岳让王武俊担任前锋，王武俊私下里为自己打算说： 我若打败朱滔，李惟岳军便会声势大振了，回去以后，将我杀掉便是必然的了。 
English: In the Battle of Sokcho, Li Wei Yue sent Wang Wujun as a forward. Wang Wujun secretly planned to say to himself: "If I defeat Zhu Tao, Li Wei Yue's army will become more powerful. After I return, killing me is inevitable."

古文：故战不甚力而败。
现代文：所以王武俊在交战中不太出力，于是败了下来。
English: Therefore, Wang Wujun did not make much effort in the battle and was defeated.

古文：硃滔欲乘胜攻恒州，张孝忠引兵西北，军于义丰。
现代文：朱滔准备乘胜进攻恒州，而张孝忠则率领军队开向西北，在义丰驻扎。
English: Zhu Tao prepared to take advantage of the victory to attack Hengzhou, while Zhang Xiaozhong led the army to the northwest and stationed in Yifeng.

古文：滔大惊，孝忠将佐皆怪之，孝忠曰： 恒州宿将尚多，未易可轻。
现代文：朱滔大为震惊，张孝忠的将佐也都感到奇怪。张孝忠说： 恒州宿将还很多，未可轻视。
English: Zhu Tao was shocked, and Zhang Xiaozhong's generals were also surprised. Zhang Xiaozhong said: There are still many hotels in Hengzhou, which should not be taken lightly.

古文：迫之则并力死斗，缓之则自相图。
现代文：逼迫紧了，他们就会合力奋死博斗；缓和下来，他们就会自相图谋。
English: When the pressure is on, they will fight to the death together; when it eases off, they will plot against each other.

古文：诸君第观之，吾军义丰，坐待惟岳之殄灭耳。
现代文：请诸位尽管看下去，我将军队驻扎在义丰，是要坐等李惟岳的覆灭。
English: Please read on. I am stationing my troops in Yifeng to wait for the fall of Li Wei Yue.

古文：且硃司徒言大而识浅，可与共始，难与共终也！ 
现代文：而且，朱司徒能说大话而见识短浅，只可与他同始，难以与他同终啊！ 
English: Moreover, Zhu Xi can talk big, but he is short-sighted. You can only start with him, but it is difficult to end with him!

古文：于是滔亦屯束鹿，不敢进。
现代文：于是，朱滔也在束鹿屯扎下来，不敢前进。
English: As a result, Zhu Tao also got bogged down in Sokroton and did not dare to move forward.

古文：惟岳将康日知以赵州归国，惟岳益疑王武俊，武俊甚惧。
现代文：李惟岳的将领康日知率赵州归顺国家，李惟岳益发猜疑王武俊，王武俊很是恐惧。
English: Li Wei Yue's general Kang Rong Zhi led Zhaozhou to surrender to the state. Li Wei Yue was suspicious of Wang Wujun, and Wang Wujun was very afraid.

古文：或谓惟岳曰： 先相公委腹心于武俊，使之辅佐大夫，又有骨肉之亲。
现代文：有人对李惟岳说： 先相公把王武俊当作亲信，让他辅佐大夫，而你们又有亲戚关系。
English: Someone said to Li Wei Yue: The Prime Minister treated Wang Wujun as a close confidant and let him assist the doctor, and you are also related.

古文：武俊勇冠三军，今危难之际，复加猜阻。若无武俊，欲使谁为大夫却敌乎！ 
现代文：王武俊的勇敢可谓全军之冠，现在我军处在危难之中，又对他加以猜疑，若是失去王武俊，想让谁来为大夫去退却敌兵呢！ 
English: Wang Wujun's bravery can be said to be the crown of the whole army. Now that our army is in danger, we are suspicious of him. If we lose Wang Wujun, who will retreat the enemy soldiers for the doctor?

古文：惟岳以为然，乃使步军使卫常宁与武俊共击赵州，又使王士真将兵宿府中以自卫。
现代文：李惟岳认为很对，便让步军使卫常宁与王武俊一起进击赵州，同时让王士真带兵住在军府中，以保卫自己。
English: Li Weiyue thought it was right, so he allowed Wei Changning and Wang Wujun to attack Zhaozhou together. At the same time, he allowed Wang Shizhen to live in the military headquarters with soldiers to protect himself.

古文：癸未，蜀王遂更名溯。
现代文：癸未，蜀王李遂改名叫李溯。
English: Soon after, King Li of Shu changed his name to Li Qiao.

古文：淮南节度使陈少游拔海、密二州，李纳复攻陷之。
现代文：淮南节度使陈少游攻克海、密二州，李纳又将二州攻陷。
English: The Huainan Festival made Chen Shaoyou invade Kechai and Mizhou, and Li Na invaded and conquered Mizhou.

古文：王武俊既出恒州，谓卫常宁曰： 武俊今幸出虎口，不复归矣！
现代文：王武俊出了恒州，对卫常宁说： 我今天侥幸脱出虎口，不会再回去了。
English: Wang Wujun left Hengzhou and said to Wei Changning: I got out of Hougou today by chance, and I won't go back.

古文：当北归张尚书。 
现代文：我应该北去，归依张尚书。 
English: I should go north and follow Zhang Shangshu.

古文：常宁曰： 大夫暗弱，信任左右，观其势终为硃滔所灭。
现代文：卫常宁说： 李大夫愚昧软弱，信任亲信，观其趋势，终究被朱滔吞灭。
English: Wei Changning said: Dr. Li is stupid and weak, trusts his cronies, observes their tendencies, and is eventually swallowed up by Zhu Tao.

古文：今天子有诏，得大夫首者，以其官爵与之。中丞素为众所服，与其出亡，曷若倒戈以取大夫，转祸为福，特反掌耳。
现代文：现在皇上颁有诏书，取得李大夫人头的，便将李大夫的官爵任命给他，中丞素为众人心服，与其出走逃亡，哪如倒戈俘获李大夫，转祸为福，仅费反掌之劳呢。
English: Now that the emperor has issued an imperial edict and obtained the head of Dr. Li's wife, he will appoint Dr. Li's peerage to him. Zhongzheng has been convinced by everyone, and instead of running away, what if he defected and captured Dr. Li, turning misfortune into good fortune, only with a lot of effort.

古文：事苟不捷，归张尚书，未晚也。 
现代文：如果此事不能成功，再去归依张尚书，也为时不晚。 
English: If this does not succeed, it is not too late to return to Zhang Shangshu.

古文：武俊深以为然。
现代文：王武俊认为此话很对。
English: Wang Wujun thinks this is quite right.

古文：会惟岳使要藉谢遵至赵州城下，武俊引遵同谋取惟岳。
现代文：适逢李惟岳让要藉官谢遵来到赵州城下，王武俊便延引谢遵一齐策划俘获李惟岳。
English: When Li Wei Yue asked the official Xie Zun to come to the city of Zhao Zhou, Wang Wujun invited Xie Zun and planned to capture Li Wei Yue.

古文：遵还，密告王士真。
现代文：谢遵回去后，暗中告诉了王士真。
English: After Xie Zun returned, he secretly told Wang Shizhen.

古文：闰月，甲辰，武俊、常宁自赵州引兵还袭惟岳。遵与士真矫惟岳命，启城门纳之。
现代文：闰正月，甲辰，王武俊和卫常宁从赵州率兵回来袭击李惟岳，谢遵和王士真假托李惟岳的命令，打开城门，放进王武俊、卫常宁的军队。
English: In the first month of the leap year, Jia Chen, Wang Wujun and Wei Changning returned from Zhaozhou with an army to attack Li Weiyue. Xie Zonghe and Wang Shizhen asked Li Weiyue's order to open the city gate and let in Wang Wujun and Wei Changning's army.

古文：黎明，武俊帅数百骑突入府门。士真应之于内，杀十馀人。
现代文：天刚亮，王武俊带领骑兵数百人冲入军府，王士真在里边响应，杀了十余人。
English: At first light, Wang Wujun led hundreds of cavalrymen to storm the military headquarters. Wang Shizhen responded inside and killed more than ten people.

古文：武俊令曰： 大夫叛逆，将士归顺，敢违拒者族！ 
现代文：王武俊命令说： 李大夫背叛朝廷，将士归顺朝廷，敢于违抗者，满门抄斩。 
English: Wang Wujun ordered: "Dr. Li has betrayed the imperial court, his subordinates have surrendered to the imperial court, and anyone who dares to disobey will be summarily executed."

古文：众莫敢动。
现代文：大家都不敢轻举妄动。
English: No one dared to make a move.

古文：遂执惟岳，收郑诜、毕华、王它奴等，皆杀之。
现代文：王武俊于是擒住了李惟岳，收捕了郑诜、毕华、王它奴等人，将他们都杀掉了。
English: Wang Wujun then captured Li Weiyue, arrested Zheng Yao, Bi Hua, Wang Itnong and others, and killed them all.

古文：武俊以惟岳旧使之子，欲生送之长安。常宁曰： 彼见天子，将复以叛逆之罪归咎于中丞。 
现代文：王武俊念及李惟岳是原节度使的儿子，准备将他活着送往长安，卫常宁说： 他见到皇上，将会把叛逆的罪名重新转嫁给中丞的。 
English: Wang Wujun remembered that Li Weiyue was the son of the former Jiedu envoy, and prepared to send him alive to Chang'an. Wei Changning said: If he sees the emperor, he will transfer the charge of rebellion back to Zhongzheng.

古文：乃缢杀之，传首京师。
现代文：于是，王武俊将李惟岳缢杀，把他的头颅传送给京城。
English: As a result, Wang Wujun killed Li Weiyue and sent his head to Beijing.

古文：深州刺史杨荣国，惟岳姊夫也，降于硃滔，滔使复其位。
现代文：深州刺史杨荣国是李惟岳的姐夫，他归降了朱滔，朱滔让他官复原职。
English: Yang Rongguo, the governor of Shenzhou, was Li Weiyue's brother-in-law. He surrendered to Zhu Tao, who reinstated him as an official.

古文：复榷天下酒，惟西京不榷。
现代文：重新实行全国酒酤专卖，只有西京不实行专卖。
English: The nationwide sale of sake lees will be reintroduced, with only the city of Saikyo opting out.

古文：二月，戊午，李惟岳所署定州刺史杨政义降。
现代文：二月，戊午，李惟岳所任命的定州刺史杨政义投诚。
English: In the afternoon of February, Yang Zhengyi, who had been appointed by Li Weiyue as the governor of Dingzhou, defected.

古文：时河北略定，惟魏州未下。
现代文：当时，河北基本平定，只有魏州尚未攻克。
English: At that time, Hebei was basically pacified, with only Weizhou yet to be conquered.

古文：河南诸军攻李纳于濮州，纳势日蹙。
现代文：河南各军在濮州进攻李纳，李纳所处的形势日见窘迫。
English: The armies of Henan attacked Li Na in Zhangzhou, and Li Na found himself in an increasingly difficult situation.

古文：朝廷谓天下不日可平。
现代文：朝廷认为，过不了多久，天下便可以平定下来。
English: The imperial court believed that it would not be long before the country could be pacified.

古文：甲子，以张孝忠为易、定、沧三州节度使，王武俊为恒冀都团练观察使，康日知为深赵都团练观察使，以德、林二州隶硃滔，令还镇。
现代文：甲子，德宗任命张孝忠为易、定、沧三州节度使，任命王武俊为恒、冀都团练观察使，任命康日知为深、赵都团练观察使，将德、棣二州隶属于朱滔，让让他回归本镇。
English: At the same time, Dezong appointed Zhang Xiaozhong as the festival envoy of the three states of Yi, Ding and Cangzhou, appointed Wang Wujun as the observation envoy of the group training in Heng and Hebei, appointed Kang Rongzhi as the observation envoy of the group training in Shandong and Zhao as the observation envoy of the group training in Shandong, and subordinated the two states of Dezong and Shandong to Zhu Tao, allowing him to return to the town.

古文：滔固请深州，不许，由是怨望，留屯深州。
现代文：朱滔再三请求将深州归属于己，朝廷不许，由此怨恨不满，留兵屯驻深州。
English: Zhu Tao repeatedly requested to have Shenzhou belong to him, but the imperial court did not allow it. As a result, he was resentful and dissatisfied, and remained stationed in Shenzhou.

古文：王武俊素轻张孝忠，自以手诛李惟岳，功在康日知上，而孝忠为节度使，己与康日知俱为都团练使，又失赵、定二州，亦不悦。
现代文：王武俊素来轻视张孝忠，自认为亲手诛杀李惟岳，功劳在康日知之上，但是张孝忠当了节度使，自己却与康日知都是都团练使，还失去了赵、定二州，也心中不快。
English: Wang Wujun had always despised Zhang Xiaozhong. He believed that he had personally killed Li Weiyue and that his merit was superior to Kang Rongzhi. However, Zhang Xiaozhong became the festival envoy, but he and Kang Rongzhi were both regimental drill envoys. He also lost Zhao and Ding two states, and he was also unhappy.

古文：又诏以粮三千石给硃滔，马五百匹给马燧。
现代文：德宗又下诏命令王武俊给朱滔拨粮三千石，给马燧拨马五百匹。
English: Emperor Dezong also issued a decree ordering Wang Wujun to allocate 3,000 koku of grain to Zhu Tao and 500 horses to Ma Jun.

古文：武俊以为朝廷不欲使故人为节度使，魏博既下，必取恒冀，故先分其粮马以弱之，疑，未肯奉诏。
现代文：王武俊认为朝廷不愿意让成德旧将担任节度使，魏博攻克以后，必然要攻取恒、冀二州，所以才分割他的粮食、马匹来削弱他。他心怀疑虑，不肯接受诏命。
English: Wang Wujun believed that the imperial court was not willing to allow Chengde to serve as the festival envoy. After conquering Weibo, it was inevitable to conquer Heng and Hebei two states, so he divided his grain and horses to weaken him. He was suspicious and refused to accept the imperial order.

古文：田悦闻之，遣判官王侑、许士则间道至深州，说硃滔曰： 司徒奉诏讨李惟岳，旬朔之间，拔束鹿，下深州，惟岳势蹙，故王大夫因司徒胜势，得以枭惟岳之首，此皆司徒之功也。
现代文：田悦听说了这种情况，派遣判官王侑和许士则抄小路来到深州，劝说朱滔说： 司徒奉诏讨伐李惟岳，只用了一个月的时间，便攻克束鹿，打下深州，使李惟岳形势紧迫，因此王大夫乘司徒取胜的声势，得以将李惟岳斩首，这都是司徒的功劳啊。
English: When Tian Yue heard of this situation, he dispatched judges Wang Qian and Xu Shi to take a back road to Shenshu and persuade Zhu Tao to say: "Stu was ordered to fight Li Wei Yue. It only took one month for him to defeat Shucu Deer and defeat Shenshu, which made Li Wei Yue's situation urgent. Therefore, Dr. Wang took advantage of Stu's victory and was able to behead Li Wei Yue. This was all the merit of Stu."

古文：又天子明下诏书，令司徒得惟岳城邑，皆隶本镇。今乃割深州以与日知，是自弃其信也。
现代文：加之皇上明明颁下诏书，让司徒所得的李惟岳城镇，全都隶属于本镇，而现在却分割深州给康日知，这是朝廷在自弃信义啊。
English: In addition, the emperor clearly issued an imperial decree, so that all the towns of Li Wei Yue, which were obtained by Szeto, were all subordinate to this town, but now they are dividing Shenzhou to Kang Rong Zhi. This is the imperial court abandoning its faith.

古文：且今上志欲扫清河朔，不使蕃镇承袭，将悉以文臣代武臣。
现代文：而且，皇上的意图是准备扫荡河朔，不让藩镇世袭，打算全部以文臣代替武将，如果魏亡，接下来便是燕、赵了。
English: Moreover, the emperor's intention was to prepare to sweep the river Shuo, not to allow the hereditary succession of the towns, and to replace the generals with the courtiers. If Wei died, the next would be Yan and Zhao.

古文：魏亡，则燕、赵为之次矣；若魏存，则燕、赵无患。然则司徒果有意矜魏博之危而救之，非徒得存亡继绝之义，亦子孙万世之利也。 
现代文：倘若魏存在，那么燕、赵也就不必忧虑。这么说来，司徒果真有心怜悯魏博的危难，而去援助他们，这不仅深得救亡图存、继绝扶危的大义，而且对子孙万代也是有利的。 
English: If Wei existed, then Yan and Zhao would not have to worry. In this way, if Stu really had compassion for Wei Bo's peril and went to help them, this would not only be a great act of salvation, but would also be beneficial to future generations.

古文：又许以贝州赂滔。
现代文：魏博还许诺将贝州赠给朱滔。
English: Wei Bo also promised to give Bozhou to Zhu Tao.

古文：滔素有异志，闻之，大喜，即遣王侑归报魏州，使将士知有外援，各自坚。
现代文：朱滔平素便有心背叛朝廷，听了这一席话，非常高兴，立即打发王侑回魏州报告，使魏州将士知道有外援，各自坚定信念。
English: Zhu Taopingsu had the heart to betray the imperial court. After listening to this speech, he was very happy and immediately sent Wang Qian back to Weizhou to report, so that the soldiers in Weizhou knew that there was foreign aid and that they were firm in their beliefs.

古文：又遣判官王郅与许士则俱诣恒州，说王武俊曰： 大夫出万死之计，诛逆首，拔乱根，康日知不出赵州，岂得与大夫同日论功！
现代文：朱滔又派遣判官王郅与许士则一同至恒州，劝说王武俊道： 大夫出于九死一生的考虑，诛杀叛逆的首脑，铲除祸乱的根源，而康日知不曾离开赵州，哪里能够与大夫的功劳同日而语呢！
English: Zhu Tao also sent the judge Wang Qian and Xu Shizhe to Hengzhou together to persuade Wang Wujun: The doctor, out of consideration for his own life, killed the head of the rebellion and eradicated the root of the calamity, but Kang Rong did not leave Zhaozhou, where can he be compared with the doctor's achievements?

古文：而朝廷褒赏略同，谁不为大夫愤邑者！
现代文：然而朝廷对你们的奖赏大致相同，谁不为大夫感到愤郁不平呢！
English: However, the court awards you roughly the same, and who wouldn't feel resentful towards the doctor!

古文：今又闻有诏支粮马与邻道，朝廷之意，盖以大夫善战无敌，恐为后患，先欲贫弱军府，俟平魏之日，使马仆射北首，硃司徒南向，共相灭耳。
现代文：现在又听说下诏让你支付粮食和马匹给邻道，进廷的意思，大概是由于大夫善于打仗，恐为后患，打算先使军府贫弱，待到魏博削平时，让马仆射北进，朱司徒南下，共同消灭你。
English: Now I also heard that the next edict ordered you to pay grain and horses to the neighboring dynasties, the meaning of entering the court, probably because the doctor was good at fighting, fearing to be a hindrance, intending to first make the military establishment poor and weak, stay until Wei Bo cut peacetime, let the horse servant shoot northward, and Zhu Sittu southward, and jointly eliminate you.

古文：硃司徒亦不敢自保，使郅等效愚计，欲与大夫共救田尚书而存之。
现代文：朱司徒也不敢说自保，让我二人献上此条愚计，打算与大夫一起援救田尚书，使他存活。
English: Zhu Xi Tu did not dare to say self-protection, so I asked the two of us to present this stupid trick, intending to rescue Tian Shangshu together with the doctor, so that he could survive.

古文：大夫自留粮马以供军；硃司徒不欲以深州与康日知，愿以与大夫，请早定刺史以守之。
现代文：大夫可以自己留着粮食和马匹来供给军需，朱司徒不打算将深州交给康日知，而愿意交给大夫，请及早派定刺史去守城吧。
English: The doctor can keep his own grain and horses to supply the army. Zhu Xi Tuo does not intend to hand over Shenzhou to Kang Rong Zhi, but is willing to hand it over to the doctor. Please send Ding Shishi to defend the city as soon as possible.

古文：三镇连后，若耳目手足之相救，则它日永无患矣！ 
现代文：范阳、恒冀、魏博三镇兵马连结，有如耳目手足相互救助，以后便永远没有祸患了。 
English: The three towns of Fanyang, Hengji and Weibo are connected by soldiers and horses, which is like ears, eyes, hands and feet helping each other, and there will never be any disasters in the future.

古文：武俊亦喜，许诺，即遣判官王巨源使于滔，且令知深州事，相与刻日举兵南向。
现代文：王武俊也觉欢喜，便应承下来，随即派遣判官王巨源到朱滔处，并让他代理深州事务，限定日期，一道起兵南进。
English: Wang Wujun also felt happy, so he should take over, and immediately sent the judge Wang Jiuyuan to Zhu Tao's place, and asked him to represent the affairs of Shenzhou, set a date, and march south together.

古文：滔又遣人说张孝忠，孝忠不从。
现代文：朱滔又派人劝说张孝忠，张孝忠不肯听从。
English: Zhu Tao also sent someone to persuade Zhang Xiaozhong, but Zhang Xiaozhong refused to listen.

古文：宣武节度使刘洽攻李纳于濮州，克其外城。
现代文：宣武节度使刘洽在濮州进攻李纳，攻下了濮州外城。
English: Xuanwu Jiedu led Liu Cai to attack Li Na in Ganzhou and captured the outer city of Ganzhou.

古文：纳于城上涕泣求自新，李勉又遣人说之。
现代文：李纳在城上哭泣着请求悔过自新，李勉又派人劝说他。
English: Li Na was crying on the castle and begged for repentance and reform, and Li Yan sent someone to persuade him.

古文：癸卯，纳遣其判官房说以其母弟经及子成务入见。
现代文：癸卯，李纳派遣他的判官房说带着他的同母弟李经和儿子李成务入朝觐见。
English: Unexpectedly, Li Na sent his magistrate's office to say that he would take his half-brother Li Jing and his son Li Chengmu to the imperial court.

古文：会中使宋凤朝称纳势穷蹙，不可舍，上乃因说等于禁中，纳遂归郓州，复与田悦等合。
现代文：适逢中使宋凤朝声称李纳形势困窘，不应当停止进攻，德宗便在宫中囚禁了房说等人。于是李纳回到郓州，再度与田悦等人联合。
English: At the right time, the Song and Feng dynasties claimed that Li Na was in a difficult situation and should not stop the attack, and the Emperor Dezong imprisoned Fong said and others in the palace. So Li Na returned to Zhangzhou and once again united with Tian Yue and others.

古文：朝廷以纳势未衰，三月，乙未，始以徐州刺史李洧兼徐、海、沂都团练观察使，海、沂已为纳所据，洧竞无所得。
现代文：因李纳军势尚未衰竭，三月，乙未，朝廷才让徐州刺史李洧兼任徐、海、沂都团练观察使，而海州沂州已经被李纳占据，李洧终究一无所得。
English: Because Li Na's military strength had not yet been exhausted, in March, the imperial court only allowed Xuzhou's chief of staff, Li Wei, to serve as an observer for the group training of Xu, Hai, and Shidu in March, while Haizhou's Shizhou had already been occupied by Li Na, and Li Wei ultimately gained nothing.

古文：李纳之初反也，其所署德州刺史李西华备守甚严，都虞候李士真密毁西华于纳，纳召西华还府，以士真代之。
现代文：李纳最初谋反时，他所署任的德州刺史李西华防守很严。都虞侯李士真在李纳面前暗中诋毁李西华，李纳便将李西华召回军府，让李士真代替他的职务。
English: At the time of Li Na's initial rebellion, Li Xihua, the governor of Texas, whom he had appointed, was very defensive. The governor of the capital, Li Shizhen, secretly slandered Li Xihua in front of Li Na. Li Na then recalled Li Xihua to the military headquarters and asked Li Shizhen to take his place.

古文：士真又以诈召棣州刺史李长卿，长卿过德州，士真劫之，与同归国。
现代文：李士真又用诈谋召棣州刺史李长卿，李长卿经过德州时，李士真将他劫持，与他一起归顺了朝廷。
English: Li Shizhen also used deception to summon Zhangzhou assassin Li Changxing. When Li Changxing was passing through Texas, Li Shizhen kidnapped him and surrendered to the imperial court with him.

古文：夏，四月，戊午，以士真、长卿为二州刺史。
现代文：夏季，四月，戊午，德宗任命李士真、李长卿为德、棣二州刺史。
English: In the summer of April, on the afternoon of the 4th day of the 4th month, Emperor Dezong appointed Li Shizhen and Li Changqing as the heads of the two states of Dezhou and Handan.

古文：士真求援于硃滔，滔已有异志，遣大将李济时将三千人声言助士真守德州，且召士真诣深州议军事，至则留之，使济时领州事。
现代文：李士真向朱滔请求援助，朱滔已经怀有背叛朝廷的企图，便派遣大将李济时带领三千人声称帮助李士真防守德州，同时传召李士真至深州商讨军事，李士真一到便扣留了他，而让李济时兼管德州事宜。
English: Li Shizhen asked Zhu Dao for assistance. Zhu Dao already harbored the intention of betraying the imperial court, so he sent General Li Jishi to lead three thousand people and claimed to help Li Shizhen defend Texas. At the same time, he summoned Li Shizhen to Shenzhou to discuss military affairs. As soon as Li Shizhen arrived, he detained him, and let Li Jishi take charge of Texas affairs.

古文：庚申，吐蕃归曏日所俘掠兵民八百人。
现代文：庚申，吐蕃送回以往所俘虏、劫掠的士兵和百姓八百人。
English: Eight hundred soldiers and civilians who had been captured and plundered in the past were sent back to Goshen and Tubo.

古文：上遣中使发卢龙、恒冀、易定兵万人诣魏州讨田悦。
现代文：德宗派遣中使征调卢龙、恒冀、易定兵一万人，到魏州讨伐田悦。
English: Ten thousand soldiers from Lulong, Hengji and Yiding were sent to Wei Province to fight against Tianyue.

古文：王武俊不受诏，执使者送硃滔。
现代文：王武俊不接受诏命，把朝廷的使者抓起来送给了朱滔。
English: Wang Wujun did not accept the imperial order and arrested the imperial envoy and sent him to Zhu Tao.

古文：滔言于众曰： 将士有功者，吾奏求官勋，皆不遂。
现代文：朱滔对部将说： 对于将士中立下功劳的人，我为他们上奏请求官职勋位，但都未能如愿。
English: Zhu Tao said to the captain: For those who have made contributions as soldiers, I have petitioned for them to be promoted to the rank of officers, but I have not been able to fulfill my wish.

古文：今欲与诸君敕装共趋魏州，击破马燧以取温饱，何如？ 
现代文：现在我打算与诸位整饰军装，一起开往魏州，打败马燧，好过温饱的日子，好吗？ 
English: Now I'm going to dress up my military uniform with all of you, drive to Weizhou together, defeat the horse mules, better than the days of food and clothing, okay?

古文：皆不应。
现代文：大家都没有应声。
English: Neither did the Ming Dynasty agree to this.

古文：三问，乃曰： 幽州之人，自安、史之反，从而南者无一人得还，今其遗人痛入骨髓。
现代文：朱滔问了三次，才说： 幽州的将士，自从安禄山、史思明反叛以来，随从他们南进的人没有一个得以生还，他们抛下的亲人至今还在深切的悲痛之中。
English: Zhu Tao asked three times before he said: "Yuzhou soldiers, since Anlu Mountain and Shi Siming rebelled, no one who followed them to the south has survived. The relatives they left behind are still in deep grief.

古文：况太尉、司徒皆受国宠荣，将士亦各蒙官勋，诚且愿保目前，不敢复有侥冀。 
现代文：何况太尉、司徒都深受国家的荣宠，而将士也各自蒙受官职勋位，我们愿意姑且保住目前的状况，不敢再有侥幸的希图。 
English: Not to mention the fact that both the captain and the officer have been deeply honored by the state, and the officers have each received official ranks and decorations. We are willing to maintain the current situation, and dare not hope for any more luck.

古文：滔默然而罢。
现代文：朱滔沉默无语，只好作罢。
English: Zhu Tao was speechless and had no choice but to give up.

古文：乃诛大将数十人，厚抚循其士卒。
现代文：于是朱滔杀掉大将数十人，而对士兵却厚加抚慰。
English: As a result, Zhu Tao killed dozens of generals, but comforted the soldiers.

古文：康日知闻其谋，以告马燧，燧以闻。
现代文：康日知听到朱滔的策谋，便告诉了马燧，马燧又上奏朝廷。
English: When Kang Ritsu heard of Zhu Tao's plot, he told Ma Jun, who in turn reported it to the imperial court.

古文：上以魏州未下，王武俊复叛，力未能制滔。壬戌，赐滔爵通义郡王，冀以安之。
现代文：德宗认为魏州尚未攻下，王武俊再次反叛，朝廷的力量还不足以制服朱滔，壬戌，赐爵滔为通义郡王，指望以此稳住朱滔。
English: Dezong believed that Weizhou had not yet been conquered, Wang Wujun rebelled again, and the power of the imperial court was not enough to subdue Zhu Tao. He hoped to stabilize Zhu Tao by giving him the title of Count of Tongyi.

古文：滔反谋益甚，分兵营于赵州以逼康日知，以深州授王巨源。
现代文：但是，朱滔的反叛图谋愈发加剧。他分兵在赵州设立军营，以便进逼康日知，又将深州交给王巨源。
English: However, Zhu Tao's rebellious plot intensified. He set up a military camp in Zhaozhou in order to force Kangrizhi, and handed over Shenzhou to Wang Jiuyuan.

古文：武俊以其子士真为恒、冀、深三州留后，将兵围赵州。
现代文：王武俊也任命他的儿子王士真为恒、冀、深三州留后，带领兵马包围赵州。
English: Wang Wujun also appointed his son Wang Shizhen to stay in the three states of Henan, Hebei, and Shenyang, and lead the troops and horses to encircle Zhaozhou.

古文：涿州刺史刘怦与滔同县人，其母，滔之姑也，滔使知幽州留后，闻滔欲救田悦，以书谏之曰： 今昌平故里，朝廷改为太尉乡、司徒里，此亦大夫不朽之名也。但以忠顺自持，则事无不济。
现代文：涿州刺史刘怦听说朱滔欲救田悦，便用书信劝谏朱滔说： 如今你在昌平县的故乡，朝廷为你而改称太尉乡、司徒里，这也算是大丈夫不朽的名声了，只要自己保持对朝廷的忠心和顺从，办事便无不成功。
English: After hearing that Zhu Tao wanted to save Tian Yue, Liu Ye, the governor of Zhangzhou, sent a letter to Zhu Tao, saying, "Nowadays, you are in your hometown in Changping County, and the imperial court has changed its name to Taifeng Township and Szeto Township for you. This is a good and immortal reputation. As long as you remain loyal and obedient to the imperial court, your work will be successful.

古文：窃思近日务大乐战，不顾成败而家灭身屠者，安、史是也。
现代文：我私下里想过，近年以来，贪大而乐于争战，不顾成功与失败，落得举家灭亡而身遭屠戮的，便是安禄山和史思明了。
English: I secretly thought that in recent years, it was Anlu Shan and Shi Siming who were greedy and eager to fight, regardless of success or failure, and were slaughtered with their entire family.

古文：怦忝密亲，默而无告，是负重知。
现代文：我愧为你的近亲，若是沉默不对你讲，是我辜负了你的器重和知遇。
English: I am ashamed to be your close relative. If I keep silent and don't tell you, then I have failed you and your wisdom.

古文：惟司徒图之，无贻后悔。 
现代文：但请司徒考虑我的话，不要留下后悔。 
English: But please consider my words and don't leave any regrets.

古文：滔虽不用其言，亦嘉其尽忠，卒无疑贰。
现代文：朱滔虽然不肯采纳刘怦的建言，却也嘉许他能尽忠心，一直不曾对他产生猜疑。
English: Although Zhu Tao did not want to accept Liu Yao's suggestion, he also praised him for his loyalty and never doubted him.

古文：滔将起兵，恐张孝忠为后患，复遣牙官蔡雄往说之。
现代文：朱滔将要起兵，唯恐张孝忠成为后患，再次派遣牙官蔡雄前去劝说张孝忠。
English: Zhu Tao was about to raise an army, and fearing that Zhang Xiaozhong would be the next to suffer, he again sent the dentist Cai Xiong to persuade Zhang Xiaozhong.

古文：孝忠曰： 昔者司徒发幽州，遣人语孝忠曰： 李惟岳负恩为逆 ，谓孝忠归国即为忠臣。
现代文：张孝忠说： 昔日朱司徒发兵幽州，曾派人对我讲： 李惟岳辜负朝廷恩典即为叛逆， 并告诉我归顺朝廷便是忠臣。
English: Zhang Xiaozhong said: Once upon a time, Zhu Xi sent soldiers to Yuzhou and sent someone to tell me: Li Wei Yue is a traitor if he betrays the grace of the imperial court, and told me that it is a loyal subject if he surrenders to the imperial court.

古文：孝忠性直，用司徒之教。
现代文：我生性耿直，接受了司徒的指教。
English: I'm a straightforward person by nature, and I accepted Stout's advice.

古文：今既为忠臣矣，不复助逆也。
现代文：而今我已经做了忠臣。不想再去帮助叛逆了。
English: But now that I've become a loyal subject, I don't want to help the rebels anymore.

古文：且孝忠与武俊皆出夷落，深知其心最喜翻覆。
现代文：此外，我和王武俊都出自夷人部落，深知王武俊的为人，最好翻来覆去。
English: In addition, Wang Wujun and I are both from the barbarian tribe, and we are well aware that Wang Wujun is a person, so it is best to go back and forth.

古文：司徒勿忘鄙言，它日必相念矣！ 
现代文：请司徒别忘了我的话，将来必定会想起来的。 
English: Please don't forget my words, I'm sure you will remember them in the future.

古文：雄复欲以巧辞说之，孝忠怒，欲执送京师。
现代文：蔡雄还想用花言巧语劝说张孝忠，张孝忠大怒，打算把他抓送京城。
English: Cai Xiong also wanted to persuade Zhang Xiaozhong with flowery language. Zhang Xiaozhong was furious and planned to arrest him and send him to Beijing.

古文：雄惧，逃归。
现代文：蔡雄害怕，便逃回去了。
English: Cai Xiong was scared and ran back.

古文：滔乃使刘怦将兵屯要害以备之。
现代文：于是朱滔让刘怦领兵在要害地区驻扎，以便防备张孝忠。
English: As a result, Zhu Tao asked Liu Bei to station his leading troops in the critical area in order to protect Zhang Xiaotong.

古文：孝忠完城砺兵，独居强寇之间，莫之能屈。
现代文：张孝忠修葺城防，磨砺兵器，虽然独自处在强大的敌寇之间，但是无人能够使他屈服。
English: Zhang Xiaotong repaired the city defenses and sharpened the weapons. Although he was alone among the powerful enemy, no one could make him give in.

古文：滔将步骑二万五千发深州，至束鹿。
现代文：朱滔率领步兵，骑兵二万五千人从深州出发，来到束鹿。
English: Zhu Tao led the infantry and twenty-five thousand cavalry from Shenzhou to Sokcho.

古文：诘旦将行，吹角未毕，士卒忽大乱，喧噪曰： 天子令司徒归幽州，奈何违敕南救田悦！ 
现代文：早晨将要出发，号角尚未吹完，士兵忽然大乱，大声喊叫： 皇上命令司徒回幽州去，为何违背敕令南下援救田悦！ 
English: They were about to set out in the morning, the bugle had not yet finished blowing, when the soldiers suddenly started a riot, shouting loudly: "The Emperor ordered Stutz to go back to Yuzhou, why did he disobey the order and go south to rescue Tian Yue!

古文：滔大惧，走入驿后堂避匿。
现代文：朱滔很害怕，便逃到驿舍的后堂中躲藏起来。
English: Zhu Tao was very scared, so he ran away and hid in the back hall of the mansion.

古文：蔡雄与兵马使宗顼等矫谓士卒曰： 汝辈勿喧，听司徒传令。 
现代文：蔡雄与兵马使宗顼等人对士兵诈称： 你们不要喧哗，快听司徒传达命令。 
English: Cai Xiong and the soldiers and horses envoy Zong Yao and others falsely said to the soldiers: Don't make a noise, listen to the commander's orders.

古文：众稍止。雄又曰： 司徒将发范阳，恩旨令得李惟岳州县即有之，司徒以幽州少丝纩，故与汝曹竭力血战以取深州，冀得其丝纩以宽汝曹赋率，不意国家无信，复以深州与康日知。
现代文：大家稍微安静了一些，蔡难又说： 在司徒将从范阳发兵时，皇上传下圣旨，诸将凡是能够攻得李惟岳的州县的，便可拥有这些州县。司徒念及幽州缺少丝绵，所以才与你们一起竭力血站，攻取深州，希望获得那里的丝绵，来宽解你们完纳赋敛的负担。不料朝廷言而无信，又将深州给了康日知。
English: Everyone calmed down a little, and Cai Nan continued: "When the Emperor issued the imperial edict that the Emperor would send troops from Fanyang to Zhuang, the generals who were able to conquer Li Wei Yue's prefectures would be able to own these prefectures. The emperors thought that Yuzhou and Shenzhou lacked silk, so they worked hard with you to conquer Shenzhou, hoping to obtain the silk there to relieve you of the burden of paying tribute. However, the court did not believe them and gave Shenzhou to Kang Rong Zhi.

古文：又，朝廷以汝曹有功，赐绢人十匹，至魏州西境，尽为马仆射所夺。
现代文：再者，朝廷认为你们立了功劳，赐给每人绢十匹，但绢才运到魏州西部边境，便全部被马仆射夺走。
English: Furthermore, the imperial court thought that you had done a great service and gave each of you ten yakitori, but only after the yakitori had been transported to the western border of Weizhou, were they all taken away by horse-drawn carriages.

古文：司徒但处范阳，富贵足矣，今兹南行，乃为汝曹，非自为也。
现代文：司徒只须呆在范阳，便富贵十足了，如今此次向南进军，只是为你们，而不是为自己打算啊。
English: Szeto only had to stay in Fanyang to become very rich, and now this march to the south is only for you, not for himself.

古文：汝曹不欲南行，任自归北，何用喧悖，乖失军礼！ 
现代文：你们不想南进，任凭你们回北方去，何必无理取闹，背离军礼呢！ 
English: You don't want to go south, let you go back to the north, why do you have to make trouble for no reason and depart from military etiquette!

古文：众闻言，不知所为，乃曰： 敕使何得不为军士守护赏物！ 
现代文：大有听了蔡雄这一席话，不知怎么办才好，便说： 皇上的敕使怎么可以不为士兵守护好奖赏物品呢！ 
English: Greatly moved by Cai Xiong's words, he didn't know what to do, so he said, "How can the emperor's envoy not protect the reward items for the soldiers?"

古文：遂入敕使院，擘裂杀之。
现代文：于是进入敕使院，将敕使撕裂而死。
English: So he went into the envoy's house, tore the envoy apart and died.

古文：又呼曰： 虽知司徒此行为士卒，终不如且奉诏归镇。 
现代文：大家又喊叫说： 我们虽然已经知道司徒此次南行是为士兵着想，到底不如暂且遵照诏命回到本镇去。 
English: Everyone also shouted: Although we already know that Szeto's trip to the south is for the sake of the soldiers, in the end it would be better to temporarily follow the imperial order and return to our town.

古文：雄曰： 然则汝曹各还部伍，诘朝复往深州，休息数日，相与归镇耳。 
现代文：蔡雄说： 既然如此，你们都先回各自的部伍，明晨再前往深州，休息几天，然后就回本镇吧。 
English: Cai Xiong said: In that case, you should all go back to your respective teams first, and then go to Shenzhou in the morning, rest for a few days, and then go back to this town.

古文：众然后定。
现代文：大家便平静下来。
English: Everyone calmed down.

古文：滔即引军还深州，密令诸将访察唱率为乱者，得二百馀人，悉斩之，馀众股栗。
现代文：朱滔随即带领军队回到深州，暗中命令诸将领查找带头闹事的人，查到二百余人，悉数杀掉，剩下的人们吓得两腿发抖。
English: Zhu Tao immediately led the army back to Shenzhou and secretly ordered the generals to find the people who led the riots, find more than two hundred people, and kill them all. The remaining people were so scared that their legs were shaking.

古文：乃复举兵而南，众莫敢前却。
现代文：于是朱滔又一次带领军队南下，众人再也不敢上前阻拦。
English: As a result, Zhu Tao once again led the army south, and the people no longer dared to go forward to stop them.

古文：进，取宁晋，留屯以待王武俊。
现代文：朱滔进军占领了宁晋，留驻在那里等待王武俊。
English: Zhu Tao marched into and occupied Ningjin and stayed there to wait for Wang Wujun.

古文：武俊将步骑万五千取元氏，东趣宁晋。
现代文：王武俊带领步兵，骑兵一万五千人攻取元氏，向着宁晋东奔而来。
English: Wang Wujun led the infantry and 15,000 cavalry to conquer the Yuan Dynasty and rushed eastward toward Ningjin.

古文：武俊之始诛李惟岳也，遣判官孟华入见。
现代文：王武俊刚刚杀了李惟岳时，曾派遣判官孟华入朝觐见皇上。
English: When Wang Wujun had just killed Li Wei Yue, he sent the judge Meng Hua to the imperial court to see the emperor.

古文：上问以河朔利害，华性忠直，有才略，应对慷慨。上悦，以为恒冀团练副使。
现代文：孟华秉性忠厚耿直，才华出众，谋略过人，回答皇上的问话时意气激昂。德宗大悦，任命他为恒冀团练副使。
English: Meng Hua was a loyal and upright person with outstanding talent. He was an excellent strategist, and he was full of enthusiasm when he answered the emperor's questions. Emperor Dezong was very pleased and appointed him as the deputy envoy of the Hengji Regiment.

古文：会武俊与硃滔有异谋，上遽遣华归谕旨。
现代文：适逢王武俊与朱滔图谋叛离朝廷，德宗急忙派遣孟华回去传达圣旨。
English: At the time when Wang Wujun and Zhu Dao were plotting to defect from the imperial court, Emperor Dezong hurriedly sent Meng Hua back to convey the emperor's will.

古文：华至，武俊已出师，华谏曰： 圣意于大夫甚厚，苟尽忠义，何患官爵之不崇，土地之不广，不日天子必移康中丞于它镇，深、赵终为大夫之有，何苦遽自同于逆乱乎！异日无成，悔之何及！ 
现代文：孟华来到恒州时，王武俊的军队已经开拔。孟华规劝王武俊说： 圣上对大夫很是寄以厚望，如果能够竭尽忠义，何愁官职爵位不高、土地不广呢！不久皇上肯定会将康中丞改迁到其它军镇去，深州、赵州终究属于大夫，何苦骤然间将自己置身于叛逆之列呢！将来不能成功，后悔也来不及了。 
English: When Meng Hua came to Hengzhou, Wang Wujun's army had already been dispatched. Meng Hua advised Wang Wujun, saying: The emperor has high hopes for the doctor. If you can be loyal, why worry about the low rank and low land? Soon, the emperor will definitely relocate Kang Zhongzheng to other military towns. Shenzhou and Zhaozhou ultimately belong to the doctor. Why suddenly put yourself in the ranks of rebellion? You will not succeed in the future, and it is too late to regret it.

古文：华曏在李宝臣幕府，以直道已为同列所忌，至是为副使，同列尤疾之，言于武俊曰： 华以军中阴事奏天子，请为内应，故得超迁。是将覆大夫之军，大夫宜备之。 
现代文：孟华以往曾在李宝臣的幕府，由于为人正直，已经被同僚所妒忌。至此，孟华当了恒冀团练副使，同僚对他尤为憎恨，便对王武俊说： 孟华把军中的隐私上奏给皇帝，请求作为内应，所以才得以越格升官，这将使大夫的军队遭到倾覆，大夫应对他多加防备。 
English: Meng Hua had previously been in the shogunate of Li Baochen, and had been envied by his colleagues because of his honesty. At this point, Meng Hua became the vice-envoy of the Hengji Regiment. His colleagues especially hated him, and said to Wang Wujun: Meng Hua reported the privacy of the army to the emperor, and the request was made as an internal request, so he was able to cross the promotion, which would overturn the doctor's army, and the doctor should be more prepared for him.

古文：武俊以其旧人，不忍杀，夺职，使归私第。
现代文：王武俊认为孟华是自己的老部下，不忍心杀害他，便削除了他的职位，让他回到自己的家中。
English: Wang Wujun considered Meng Hua to be one of his old subordinates. He did not have the heart to kill him, so he removed him from his post and let him return to his home.

古文：田悦恃援兵将至，遣其将康愔万馀人出城西，与马燧等战于御河上，大败而还。
现代文：田悦仗恃援兵就要来到，派遣部下将领康带领一万余人开到城西，与马燧等人在御河上开战，大败而回。
English: Tian Yuesheng thought that reinforcements were about to arrive, so he dispatched his subordinates to drive to the west of the city, led by the general Kang, with more than ten thousand people, and fought with Ma Jun and others on the Ohe River, but was heavily defeated and returned.

古文：时两河用兵，月费百馀万缗，府库不支数月。
现代文：当时，两河地区正在用兵打仗，每月消耗钱财一百余万缗，国库不能支撑几个月。
English: At that time, the two rivers region was fighting with soldiers, consuming more than one million baht of money every month, and the national treasury could not support it for several months.

古文：太常博士韦都宾、陈京建议，以为： 货利所聚，皆在富商，请括富商钱，出万缗者，借其馀以供军。
现代文：太常博士韦都宾、陈京提出建议，认为： 财利都聚集在富商手中，请征用富商的钱财，对于收入超过一万缗的富商，征借他万缗以外的钱财，以便供应军需。
English: Dr. Wei Dubin and Dr. Chen Jing of the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences made a suggestion, saying, "Wealth and profit are concentrated in the hands of wealthy merchants. Please requisition the money and property of wealthy merchants. For wealthy merchants with an income of more than 10,000 baht, requisition their money and property other than 10,000 baht in order to supply military supplies."

古文：计天下不过借一二千商，则数年之用足矣。 
现代文：算来只不过要向全国一两千个商人征借此钱，便可以满足数年之内的费用了。 
English: If it were only necessary to borrow this money from one or two thousand merchants throughout the country, it would be enough to meet expenses for several years.

古文：上从之。
现代文：德宗听从了他们的建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：甲子，诏借商人钱，令度支条上。
现代文：甲子，德宗颁诏向商人征借用钱，命令度支条陈奏上。
English: At the same time, Emperor Dezong issued an edict to borrow money from merchants, and ordered to raise the standard.

古文：判度支杜佑大索长安中商贾所有货，意其不实，辄加搒捶。
现代文：判度支杜佑大力搜索长安城中商人所有的财货，只要估计某商人申报不得其实，便加以鞭笞棒打，人们禁受不住痛楚，有的自缢而死。
English: Judge Du You vigorously searched all the goods and property of merchants in Chang'an City. As long as it was estimated that a certain merchant's declaration was not true, he would be whipped and beaten. People could not bear the pain, and some died of self-strangulation.

古文：帛粟麦者，皆借四分之一，封其柜窖。
现代文：长安城中一片愁苦，就象遭受盗寇的洗劫。
English: The city of Chang'an was in turmoil, as if it had been ransacked by robbers.

古文：百姓为之罢市，相帅遮宰相马自诉，以千万数。
现代文：朝廷所得的钱算来也有八十余万缗。朝廷又决定征用当铺的利钱，凡是存有钱帛粟麦的人，都被征借四分之一，封存该物拥有者的钱柜和粮窖。
English: The imperial court also decided to requisition the profits of the pawnshop, and anyone who had money to store poppies was required to borrow a quarter of it to seal the owner's money box and granary.

古文：卢杞始慰谕之，势不可遏，乃疾驱自他道归。
现代文：百姓为此而举行罢市，一起拦着宰相的坐骑自诉苦情的人们数以千万计。一开始，卢杞还劝慰这些罢市的人们，但势不可遏，卢杞便急忙从另外的道路驰马而回了。
English: For this reason, the people held a market strike, together with tens of millions of people who stopped the prime minister's horse to complain. At the beginning, Lu Wei also consoled these people on strike, but the momentum was irresistible, and Lu Wei hurriedly rode back from another road.

古文：计并借商所得，才二百万缗，人已竭矣。
现代文：加上向商人征借所得，算起来也才只得到二百万缗，而百姓已被敲榨得财力枯竭了。
English: In addition to the income from borrowing from merchants, they only got two million baht, and the people have been squeezed dry of financial resources.

古文：京，叔明之五世孙也。
现代文：陈京是陈叔明的五世孙。
English: Chen Jing is the fifth-generation grandson of Chen Shuming.

古文：甲戌，以昭义节度副使、磁州刺史卢玄卿为洺州刺史兼魏博招讨副使。
现代文：甲戌，德宗任命昭义节度副使、磁州刺史卢玄卿为州刺史，兼任魏博招讨副使。
English: Jia Jia, Dezong appointed Zhaoying Jiedu as deputy envoy, and Zhaozhou Jishu Lu Xuanqing as deputy envoy. He also served as deputy envoy of Wei Bo Zhaotong.

古文：初，李抱真为泽潞节度使，马燧领河阳三城。
现代文：当初，李抱真担任泽潞节度使，马燧统辖着河阳三城。
English: At the beginning, Li Bozhen served as the delegate of the Zeyu Festival, while Ma Yu was in charge of the three cities of Heyang.

古文：抱真欲杀怀州刺史杨鉥，鉥奔燧。燧纳之，且奏其无罪，抱真怒。
现代文：李抱真打算杀掉怀州刺史杨，杨逃到马燧那里，马燧收留了他，而且奏称他是无罪的，李抱真很恼怒。
English: Li Baozhen planned to kill Yang, the Waizhou thorn, Yang fled to Ma Jun, Ma Jun took him in and said he was innocent, Li Baozhen was very angry.

古文：及同讨田悦，数以事相恨望，二人怨隙遂深，不复相见。
现代文：及至李抱真与马燧共同讨伐田悦时，两人有好几次因事相互埋怨、指责。两人之间的怨恨与裂痕加深，不再见面。
English: By the time Li Bozhen and Ma Jun jointly fought against Tian Yue, the two had complained and accused each other several times. The resentment and rift between the two deepened, and they no longer met.

古文：由是诸军逗桡，久无成功，上数遣中使和解之。
现代文：由此，各军停顿不前，相互阻挠，久历时日，无所成功，德宗多次派遣中使为二人和解。
English: As a result, the armies paused and obstructed each other, which lasted for a long time without any success. Emperor Dezong sent envoys to reconcile the two sides many times.

古文：及王武俊逼赵州，抱真分麾下二千人戍邢州，燧大怒曰： 馀贼未除，宜相与戮力，乃分兵自守其地，我宁得独战邪！ 
现代文：及至王武俊进逼赵州，李抱真分拨部下二千人戍守邢州，马燧大为气愤地说： 残敌尚未铲除，应当共同努力，而李抱真竟然分兵去防守自己的地盘！ 
English: When Wang Wujun entered Zhaozhou and Li Bangzhen assigned two thousand of his subordinates to defend Ganzhou, Ma Jun said with great indignation: The remaining enemy has not yet been eradicated, we should work together, but Li Bangzhen actually sent troops to defend his own territory!

古文：欲引兵归。李晟说燧曰： 李尚书以邢、赵连壤，分兵守之，诚未有害。
现代文：马燧准备带兵撤回河阳，李晟劝说马燧道： 李尚书因邢州与赵州接壤，分兵防守邢州，诚然没有害处。
English: Ma Jun is preparing to withdraw his troops to Heyang, Li Jun persuades Ma Jun: Li Shangshu, because Ganzhou is on the border with Zhao, has divided his troops to defend Ganzhou, which is certainly not harmful.

古文：今公遽自引去，众谓公何！ 
现代文：现在你骤然领兵离开，大家会说些什么呢！ 
English: Now that you are suddenly leading your soldiers away, what will everyone say?

古文：燧悦，乃单骑造抱真垒，相与释憾结欢。
现代文：马燧悦服，便一人骑马到李抱真的营垒，相互消除了怨恨，重新交好。
English: He rode a horse to Li Bangshen's camp, and the two of them eliminated their grudges and became friends again.

古文：会洺州刺史田昂请入朝，燧奏以洺州隶抱真，请玄卿为刺史，兼充招讨之副。
现代文：适逢州刺史田昂请求回朝，马燧便奏请将州归属李抱真，请任命卢玄卿为刺史，兼任魏博招讨使的副职。
English: At the time of the request of Tian Ang, the state secretary of Wei Bo, to return to the imperial court, Ma Jun requested that the state be assigned to Li Bangzhen, and that Lu Xuanqing be appointed as the secretary of Wei Bo, and also served as the deputy of Wei Bo's recruiting envoy.

古文：李晟军先隶抱真，又请兼隶燧，以示协和。
现代文：李晟军起初隶属李抱真，李抱真又请求同时隶属马燧，以显示二人的亲睦协调。
English: Li Bangjun was initially subordinated to Li Bangzhen, and Li Bangzhen also requested to be subordinated to Ma Jun at the same time to show the harmony between the two.

古文：上皆从之。
现代文：德宗一一照办。
English: The emperor obeyed him.

古文：卢龙节度行军司马蔡廷玉恶判官郑云逵，言于硃泚，奏贬莫州参军。
现代文：卢龙节度行军司马蔡廷玉厌恶判官郑云逵，便上奏朝廷，使他被贬为莫州参军。
English: Lulong Festival parade marshal Ma Cai Tingyu disliked the judge Zheng Yunqi, so he appealed to the court, so that he was relegated to join the army in Mozhou.

古文：云逵妻，硃滔之女也，滔复奏为掌书记。
现代文：郑云逵的妻子是朱滔的女儿，朱滔也上奏朝廷，使郑云逵担任掌书记。
English: Zheng Yunyao's wife was the daughter of Zhu Tao, and Zhu Tao also appealed to the imperial court to make Zheng Yunyao the secretary.

古文：云逵深构廷玉于滔，廷玉又与检校大理少卿硃体微言于泚曰： 滔在幽镇，事多专擅，其性非长者，不可以兵权付之。 
现代文：郑云逵在朱滔面前极力罗织罪名，陷害蔡廷玉。蔡廷玉又与检校大理少卿朱体微对朱说： 朱滔在幽州，办事大多独断专行。朱滔生性不是长者，不应该把兵权交给他。 
English: In front of Zhu Tao, Zheng Yunyao tried his best to fabricate charges and frame Cai Tingyu. Cai Tingyu also said to Zhu with the inspector of the school, Zhu Tiewei: Zhu Tao is in Yuzhou, and he mostly does things arbitrarily. Zhu Tao is not an elder by nature, and he should not be given military power.

古文：滔知之，大怒，数与泚书，请杀二人者，泚不从。
现代文：朱滔得知此事，极为恼怒，几次写信给朱，要求将二人杀掉，朱不肯。
English: When Zhu Tao learned of this, he was extremely angry and wrote to Zhu several times, demanding that the two be killed. Zhu refused.

古文：由是兄弟颇有隙。
现代文：此后，朱氏兄弟便颇有嫌隙了。
English: Since then, the Zhu brothers have been at loggerheads.

古文：及滔拒命，上欲归罪于廷玉等以悦滔，甲子，贬廷玉柳州司户，体微万州南浦尉。
现代文：及至朱滔抗拒朝命，德宗打算把罪名推给蔡廷玉等人，以便取悦朱滔，甲子，贬蔡廷玉为柳州司户，朱体微为万州南浦尉。
English: When Zhu Tao resisted the imperial order, Dezong planned to put the blame on Cai Tingyu and others in order to please Zhu Tao and his son, demoting Cai Tingyu to Liuzhou Sido and Zhu Tiewei to Wanzhou Nampo Leutnant.

古文：宣武节度使刘洽攻李纳之濮阳，降其守将高彦昭。
现代文：宣武节度使刘洽攻打李纳的濮阳城，使他的守城将领高彦昭归降。
English: The proclamation of martial law made Liu Cai attack Li Na's Fenyang City and forced his garrison commander Gao Yan Zhao to surrender.

古文：硃滔遣人以蜡书置髻中遗硃泚，欲与同反。
现代文：朱滔派人在发髻中藏着蜡封的书信送给朱，打算与朱一起谋反。
English: Zhu Tao sent someone to hide a wax-sealed letter in his hair, intending to conspire with Zhu.

古文：马燧获之，并使者送长安，泚不之知。
现代文：马燧缴获了书信，将书信连同送信的使者送往长安，朱并不知道此事。
English: Ma Yu seized the letter and sent it to Chang'an together with the messenger who sent it. Zhu did not know about this.

古文：上驿召泚于凤翔，至，以蜡书并使者示之，泚惶恐顿首请罪。
现代文：德宗传驿征召朱由凤翔回朝，朱一到，便将蜡封的书信和送信的使者给朱看，朱恐惧不安，伏地叩头请罪。
English: Zhu Yu Fengxiang was summoned by Emperor Dezong to return to China. As soon as Zhu arrived, he showed the wax-sealed letter and the messenger who sent it to Zhu. Zhu was afraid and uneasy, and he bowed his head in supplication.

古文：上曰： 相去千里，初不同谋，非卿之罪也。 
现代文：德宗说： 你们二人相距千里，当初并非共同策谋，这不是你的罪过。 
English: Dezong said, "The two of you are thousands of miles away from each other, and you didn't conspire together in the beginning. This isn't your fault.

古文：因留之长安私第，赐名园、腴田、锦彩、金银甚厚，以安其意；其幽州、卢龙节度、太尉、中书令并如故。
现代文：因而将朱留在长安的私人宅第，颁赐给他名园、肥田、彩锦、金银等甚为丰厚，以稳住他的心意，他所担任的幽州、卢龙节度使和太尉、中书令等职衔也都依然保留。
English: Therefore, Zhu was kept in a private residence in Chang'an, and he was given famous gardens, fertile fields, brocade, gold and silver, which were very rich, in order to stabilize his mind. The official titles he held, such as Yuzhou, Lulong, and Taifeng, were also retained.

古文：上以幽州兵在凤翔，思得重臣代之。
现代文：德宗因朱的幽州兵还在凤翔屯扎，想得朝廷重臣代替朱。
English: De Zong, because Zhu's Yuzhou soldiers were still in Fengxiang, wanted to get the court dignitaries to replace Zhu.

古文：卢杞忌张镒忠直，为上所重，欲出之于外，己得专总朝政，乃对曰： 硃泚名位素崇，凤翔将校班秩已高，非宰相信臣，无以镇抚，臣请自行。 
现代文：卢杞妒忌张镒忠厚耿直，为皇上所器重，打算将他排挤到朝廷之外，使自己得以独自总揽朝政，便回答德宗说： 朱名声地位一向尊崇，凤翔将校的职位品级不高，不是宰相或者朝廷信任的大臣，是无法镇服并安抚幽州军的。
English: Lu Wei was jealous of Zhang Ye's loyalty and straightforwardness, which was valued by the emperor, and intended to push him out of the imperial court so that he could take over the imperial government alone. He replied to Dezong: Zhu's reputation and status have always been respected. The rank of Feng Xiang's officer is not high, he is not the prime minister or the minister trusted by the imperial court, and he cannot subdue and pacify the Yuzhou army.

古文：上俯首未言，巳又曰： 陛下必以臣貌寝，不为三军所伏，固惟陛下神算。 
现代文：请让我去凤翔吧。 德宗低着头，还没有开口，卢杞又说： 陛下若是认为我相貌丑陋不扬，不能被三军将士所敬服，那只能由陛下的神算来决定了。 
English: Please let me go to Fengxiang. Dezong bowed his head, and before he could speak, Lu Yao said, "If Your Majesty thinks that I am ugly and can't be respected by the soldiers of the three armies, that can only be decided by Your Majesty's divine calculation."

古文：上乃顾镒曰： 才兼文武，望重内外，无以易卿。 
现代文：德宗于是望着张镒说： 文武全才，声望见重于朝野内外的，没有人可以代替你。 
English: Dezong then looked at Zhang Ye and said, "You are an all-round talent in literature and martial arts. Your reputation is more important than that of anyone in or out of the imperial court. No one can replace you."

古文：镒知为杞所排而无辞以免，因再拜受命。
现代文：张镒明知自己已经被卢杞排挤了，但是找不到推脱的借口，于是拜了两拜，接受了委任。
English: Zhang Yu knew that he had been ousted by Lu Wei, but he could not find an excuse to escape, so he prayed for two days and accepted the appointment.

古文：戊寅，以镒兼凤翔尹、陇右节度等使。
现代文：戊寅，德宗任命张镒兼任凤翔尹、陇右节度等使。
English: Wu Yin, Dezong appointed Zhang Xi to concurrently serve as Feng Xiangyin, Zou Yu and other envoys.

古文：初，卢杞与御史大夫严郢共构杨炎、赵惠伯之狱，炎死，杞复忌郢。
现代文：当初，卢杞与御史大夫严郢共同罗织罪名陷害杨炎与赵惠伯，杨炎死后，卢杞又忌恨严郢。
English: At first, Lu Wei and the imperial historian Yan Qi jointly conspired to frame Yang Yan and Zhao Huibo. After Yang Yan's death, Lu Wei hated Yan Qi.

古文：会蔡廷玉等贬官，殿中侍御史郑詹误递文符至昭应送之，廷玉等行已至蓝田，召还而东，廷玉等以为执己送硃滔，至灵宝西，赴河死。
现代文：适逢蔡廷玉等贬官，殿中侍御史郑詹错把押送廷玉等人的文书符信递送到了昭应，当时蔡廷玉等人已经来到蓝田，又叫他们回头向东而行。蔡廷玉等人以为要将他们押送给朱滔，走到灵宝西面，便投黄河而死。
English: At the time of the demotion of Cai Tingyu and others, the palace attendant, Shi Zhengzhan, mistakenly sent the letter to escort Tingyu and others to Zhaoying. At that time, Cai Tingyu and others had already arrived in Lantian, and told them to turn back to the east. Cai Tingyu and others thought that they were going to escort them to Zhu Tao, went to the west of Lingbao, and died in the Yellow River.

古文：上闻之，骇异，卢杞因奏： 硃泚必疑以为诏旨，请遣三司使案詹。 
现代文：德宗听到此事，感到惊讶诧异，于是卢杞奏称： 朱肯定猜疑这是诏命的意图，请派遣三司使审查郑詹。 
English: When Dezong heard about this, he was surprised and surprised, so Lu Ye said: Zhu must have suspected that this was the intention of the edict, please send three envoys to examine Zheng Zhan.

古文：又言： 御史所为，必禀大夫，请并郢案之。 
现代文：卢杞又说： 御史所办的事情，一定要向大夫禀告，请将严郢与郑詹一并审查。 
English: Lu Yao also said: You must report to the doctor about the things you have done. Please review Yan Xuan and Zheng Zhan together.

古文：狱未具，壬午，杞奏杖杀詹于京兆府；贬郢费州刺史，卒于贬所。
现代文：案情尚未判定，壬午，卢杞又奏在京兆府将郑詹杖打而死，贬严郢为费州刺史，严郢死于贬地。
English: The case has not yet been adjudicated, but in the morning, Lu Yao also played in Jingzhao Prefecture, beating Zheng Zhanjie to death, demoting Yan Yao to Feizhou stabbing history, and Yan Yao died in demotion.

古文：上初即位，崔祐甫为相，务崇宽大，故当时政声蔼然，以为有贞观之风。
现代文：德宗初即位时，崔甫担任宰相，办事务必推崇宽大，所以当时政声和善，人们认为具有贞观时期的风范。
English: At the time of Emperor Dezong's accession to the throne, Cui Fu served as prime minister. He was known for his generosity in handling affairs, so the political atmosphere at that time was amiable, and people believed that he had the demeanor of the Zhenguan period.

古文：及卢杞为相，知上性多忌，因以疑似离间群臣，始劝上以严刻御下，中外失望。
现代文：及至卢杞担任宰相，他知道德宗生性多猜忌，因而用似是而非的事在群臣中挑拨离间，开始劝说德宗以严厉苛刻驾驭臣下，朝廷内外都感到失望。
English: When Lu Zong became the prime minister, he knew that Dezong had a suspicious nature, so he used plausible things to sow discord among his vassals and began to persuade Dezong to drive his vassals with severity and harshness. Both inside and outside the court were disappointed.

古文：淮南节度使陈少游奏，本道税钱每千请增二百。
现代文：淮南节度使陈少游上奏，请将本道税钱每一千钱增收二百钱。
English: The Huainan Festival has brought Chen Shaoyou to the fore. Please increase the local tax by 200 yuan for every 1,000 yuan.

古文：五月，丙戌，诏增它道税钱皆如淮南；又盐每斗价皆增百钱。
现代文：五月，丙戌，下诏增收其他各道税钱，一概以淮南为准，将每斗盐的价钱一律增加一百钱。
English: In May, he issued an edict to increase the tax of all other provinces, with Huainan as the standard, and increase the price of each bucket of salt by one hundred yuan.

古文：硃滔、王武俊自宁晋南救魏州，辛卯，诏朔方节度使李怀光将朔方及神策步骑万五千人东讨田悦，且拒滔等。
现代文：朱滔和王武俊从宁晋南下援救魏州，辛卯，德宗诏令朔方节度使李怀光带领朔方军和神策军步兵骑兵一万五千人向东讨伐田悦，同时抵御朱滔等人。
English: Zhu Tao and Wang Wujun came from the south of Ningjin to rescue Weizhou, Xinwu, the German Emperor ordered Shuo Fang to order Li Huiguang to lead the Shuo Fang Army and the Shenzhao Army's infantry and cavalry of fifteen thousand people to the east to fight Wa Tian Yue, while resisting Zhu Tao and others.

古文：滔行至宗城，掌书记郑云逵、参谋田景仙弃滔来降。
现代文：朱滔行军到达宗城时，掌书记郑云逵、参谋田景仙抛弃朱滔前来归降。
English: When Zhu Tao's marching army arrived at Mansion City, the chief secretary Zheng Yunyao and staff officer Tian Jingsian abandoned Zhu Tao and came to surrender.

古文：丁酉，加河东节度使马燧同平章事。
现代文：丁酉，德宗加任河东节度使马燧同平章事。
English: Ding Xuan, Dezong plus the appointment of the Hedong Festival to make Ma Xuan equal.

古文：辛亥，置义武军节度于定州，以易、定、沧三州隶之。
现代文：辛亥，朝廷在定州设置义武军节度，将易、定、沧三州隶属于该军。
English: In Xinhai, the imperial court set up a volunteer army in Dingzhou, and the three states of Yi, Ding and Cang were subordinated to the army.

古文：张光晟之杀突董也，上欲遂绝回纥，召册可汗使源休还太原。
现代文：张光晟诛杀突董时，德宗打算就此与回纥断绝关系，便传召册命可汗使源休返回太原。
English: When Zhang Guangxuan killed Xu Dong, Dezong planned to break off relations with Hui Xuan, and summoned the Khan to order Yuanxuan to return to Taiyuan.

古文：久之，乃复遣休送突董及翳密施、大、小梅录等四丧还其国，可汗遣其宰相颉子思迦等迎之。
现代文：过了很久，德宗又派遣源休护送突董以及翳密施与大小梅录等四人的遗体归还回纥，回纥可汗派遣他的宰相颉子斯迦等人迎接源休。
English: After a long time, Emperor Dezong sent Yuan Hui to escort the bodies of four people, including Tu Dong, Zhi Mishi, and Mei Luo, back to Hui, and the Hui Khan sent his prime minister, Zangzi Sjia, and others to welcome Yuan Hui.

古文：颉子思迦坐大帐，立休等于帐前雪中，诘以杀突董之状，欲杀者数四，供待甚薄。留五十馀日，乃得归。
现代文：颉子斯迦坐在宽大的帐子里，让源休等人站立在帐子前面的雪地中，诘问诛杀突董的情状，屡次打算杀掉源休等，提供的待遇甚为菲薄；滞留了五十余日，才让他们归国。
English: Zeng Zisca sat in a large tent and let Yuan Hui and others stand in the snow in front of the tent, questioning the circumstances of Zeng's killing of Xu Dong, repeatedly planning to kill Yuan Hui, etc. The treatment provided was very poor; they stayed for more than fifty days before they were allowed to return to China.

古文：可汗使人谓之曰： 国人皆欲杀汝以偿怨，我意则不然。
现代文：可汗让人对源休说： 我国百姓都想要杀死你们，借以抵偿旧日的怨仇，我的意思却不是这样。
English: The khan had someone say to Yuan Hui: "Our people all want to kill you to settle old grudges, but that's not what I mean.

古文：汝国已杀突董等，我又杀汝，如以血洗血，污益甚耳！
现代文：你国已经杀了突董等人，我再杀了你们，这样以血洗血，污浊便愈发严重了！
English: Your country has already killed Xu Dong and others, I will kill you again, so wash the blood with blood, and the filth will become more and more serious!

古文：今吾以水洗血，不亦善乎！
现代文：现在我以水洗血，不也是很好吗！
English: Now I wash my blood with water, isn't that great!

古文：唐负我马直绢百八十万匹，当速归之。 
现代文：唐朝还欠着我一百八十万匹绢帛的马价，应当快快归还给我。 
English: The Tang Dynasty still owes me the horse price of 1.8 million baht, which should be returned to me as soon as possible.

古文：遣其散支将军康赤心随休入见，休竟不得见可汗而还。
现代文：回纥可汗派遣他的散支将军康赤心随同源休入朝觐见，源休始终未能见到可汗便返还了。
English: In return, the Khan sent his general Kang Chik-shin to accompany Yuan Hui to the imperial court, but Yuan Hui never saw the Khan and returned.

古文：六月，己卯，至长安，诏以帛十万匹、金银十万两偿其马直。
现代文：己卯，康赤心随源休到达长安，朝廷下诏命令以帛十万匹、金银十万两偿还回纥的马价。
English: Meanwhile, Kang Chih-sin arrived in Chang'an with Yuan-hui, and the imperial court issued an imperial decree ordering him to pay back the horse price with 100,000 horses and 100,000 taels of gold and silver.

古文：休有口辩，卢杞恐其见上得幸，乘其未至，先除光禄卿。
现代文：源休有口才，能言善辩，卢杞唯恐他见了皇上而得到宠幸，趁着他未到长安，抢先任命他为光禄卿。
English: Yuan Hui was eloquent and able to speak eloquently. Lu Xun, fearing that he would meet the emperor and be favored, took advantage of him before he arrived in Chang'an to preemptively appoint him as Guangluqing.

古文：硃滔、王武俊军至魏州，田悦具牛酒出迎，魏人欢呼动地。
现代文：朱滔和王武俊的军队来到魏州时，田悦备办了牛肉和酒食出来迎接，魏州人欢呼动地。
English: When Zhu Tao and Wang Wujun's army came to Weizhou, Tian Yue prepared beef and wine to welcome them, and the people of Weizhou cheered.

古文：滔营于惬山，是日，李怀光军亦至，马燧等盛军容迎之。
现代文：朱滔在惬山扎营，这一天，李怀光的军队也到达此地，马燧等人以盛大的军容迎接李怀光。
English: Zhu Tao camped in Lushan. On this day, Li Huaiguang's army also arrived here. Ma Jun and others greeted Li Huaiguang with a grand military parade.

古文：滔以为袭己，遽出陈。
现代文：朱滔以为要袭击自己，急忙出营列阵。
English: Thinking that he was about to be attacked, Zhu Tao hurried out of the camp.

古文：怀光勇而无谋，欲乘其营垒未就击之。
现代文：李怀光有勇无谋，想要趁着朱滔营垒未曾安顿好便去进击他。
English: Li Huaiguang was reckless and wanted to take advantage of the fact that Zhu Tao's camp had not yet settled down to attack him.

古文：燧请且休将士，观衅而动，怀光曰： 彼营垒既立，将为后患，此时不可失也。 
现代文：马燧请他暂且将士休息一下，看出破绽，再动不迟。李怀光说： 他们若是已经将营垒安顿下来，终将成为后患，这个时机可是不能失去的。 
English: Ma Jun asked him to give his soldiers a break for the time being, see the flaws, and then move again. Li Huaiguang said: If they have already settled the camp, they will eventually become a hindrance, but this opportunity cannot be lost.

古文：遂击滔于惬山之西，杀步卒千馀人，滔军崩沮。
现代文：于是李怀光便在连惬山西面向朱滔发起攻击，杀步兵一千余人，朱滔的军队崩溃沮丧。
English: As a result, Li Huaiguang launched an attack against Zhu Tao in the west of Lianye Mountain, killing more than a thousand infantrymen, and Zhu Tao's army collapsed in frustration.

古文：怀光按辔观之，有喜色。
现代文：李怀光勒住马缰，观看形势，面有喜色。
English: Li Huaguang held his horse's bridle and watched the situation with a happy face.

古文：士卒争入滔营取宝货，王武俊引二千骑横冲怀光军，军分为二。滔引后继之，官军大败，蹙入永济渠溺死者不可胜数，人相蹈藉，其积如山，水为之不流，马燧等各收军保垒。
现代文：士兵争着进入朱滔的营垒夺取珍宝财货时，王武俊带领二千骑兵拦腰冲击李怀光军，军队被截成两段，朱滔又带领士兵接踵而来，官军大败，被逼迫落入永济渠淹死的士兵多得数不过来，兵士互相践踏，尸体堆积如山，河水也因此而不能流动，马燧等人只好各自收兵，各保营垒。
English: When soldiers were fighting to enter Zhu Tao's camp to seize precious treasures and goods, Wang Wujun led two thousand cavalrymen to attack Li Huai Guang's army. The army was cut into two sections. Zhu Tao led the soldiers to come one after another. The official army was defeated. The soldiers who were forced to fall into the Yongji Canal and drowned were too numerous to count. The soldiers trampled each other, the bodies were piled up like a mountain, and the river water could not flow because of this. Ma Jun and others had no choice but to gather their own troops and protect their camps.

古文：是夕，滔等堰永济渠入王莽故河，绝官军粮道及归路。明日，水深三尺馀。
现代文：这一天傍晚，朱滔等人在永济渠上筑起堤坝，将永济渠水导入王莽故河，断绝了官军的粮道与归路，第二天，水深已有三尺多了。
English: In the evening of this day, Zhu Tao and others built a dike on the Yongji Canal and diverted the water of the Yongji Canal into the Wang Mang Old River, cutting off the supply route and return route of the government army. The next day, the water depth was more than three feet.

古文：马燧惧，遣使卑辞谢滔，求与诸节度归本道，奏天子，请以河北事委五郎处之。
现代文：马燧害怕，派遣使者用谦卑的辞句向朱滔道歉，求他允许让自己与诸节度使回归本道，向德宗上奏，请求将河北事务委托给五郎朱滔处理。
English: Afraid, Ma Zong sent an envoy to apologize to Zhu Tao with humble words, begging him to allow himself and all the sects to return to the original path, appeal to Dezong, and request that the affairs of Hebei be entrusted to Goro Zhu Tao.

古文：滔欲许之，王武俊以为不可。滔不从。
现代文：朱滔打算应允来使，王武俊认为不能答应，朱滔不肯听从。
English: Zhu Tao intended to accept the offer, but Wang Wujun thought that he could not accept it, and Zhu Tao refused to obey.

古文：秋七月，燧与诸军涉水而西，退保魏县以拒滔，滔乃谢武俊，武俊由是恨滔。
现代文：秋季，七月，马燧与诸军淌过水向西而行，退保魏县，以抵抗朱滔。于是朱滔向王武俊认错，王武俊却自此恨朱滔。
English: In the autumn, in July, Ma Jun and his army crossed the water to the west and retreated to Wei County to resist Zhu Tao. Therefore, Zhu Tao admitted his mistake to Wang Wujun, but Wang Wujun hated Zhu Tao from then on.

古文：后数日，滔等亦引兵营魏县东南，与官军隔水相拒。
现代文：过了几天，朱滔等人也领兵在魏县东南扎营，与官军隔着一条河相互对抗。
English: A few days later, Zhu Tao and others also led soldiers to camp in the southeast of Wei County and confronted the government army across a river.

古文：李纳求援于滔等，滔遣魏博兵马使信都承庆将兵助之。
现代文：李纳向朱滔等人请求援救，朱滔派遣魏博兵马使信都承庆带兵援助他。
English: Li Na asked Zhu Tao and others for help, and Zhu Tao sent Wei Bo soldiers and horses as envoys to Chengqing to bring soldiers to help him.

古文：纳攻宋州，不克，遣兵马使李克信、李钦遥戍濮阳、南华以拒刘洽。
现代文：李纳攻打宋州，不能攻克，便派遣兵马使李克信和李钦遥戍守濮阳和南华，以便抵抗刘洽。
English: Li Na attacked Songzhou, but was unable to conquer it, so he sent soldiers and horses to send Li Kexin and Li Qin Yao to defend Fenyang and Nanhua in order to resist Liu Cai.

古文：甲辰，以淮宁节度使李希烈兼平卢、淄青、兗郓、登莱、齐州节度使，讨李纳。
现代文：甲辰，德宗让淮宁节度使李希烈兼任平卢、淄青、郓、登莱、齐州节度使，前去讨伐李纳。
English: Jia Chen and Dezong sent Li Xilai as the envoy to the Huai-Ning Festival, and he also served as the envoy to the Pinglu, Jiaqing, Handan, Denglai and Qizhou festivals, and went to fight against Li Na.

古文：又以河东节度使马燧兼魏博、澶相节度使。加朔方、邠宁节度使李怀光同平章事。
现代文：又让河东节度使马燧兼任魏博、澶相节度使，加任朔方、宁节度使李怀光同平章事。
English: He also allowed the Hedong Festival to make Ma Zhen concurrently serve as the Wei Bo and Yuxiang Festival, and appointed Shuo Fang and Ning Festival to make Li Huaiguang equal.

古文：神策行营招讨使李晟请以所将兵北解赵州之围，与张孝忠合势图范阳，上许之，晟自魏州引兵北趋赵州，王士真解围去。
现代文：神策行营招讨使李晟请求以本部兵马向北解除赵州的围困，与张孝忠共同分兵出击，谋取范阳，德宗照准。李晟从魏州率兵北进赵州，王士真解除了对赵州的围困而去。
English: Li Shizhen led his army north from Wei Province into Zhao Province, and Wang Shizhen lifted the siege of Zhao Province and left.

古文：晟留赵州三日，与孝忠合兵北略恒州。
现代文：李晟在赵州停留了三天，便与张孝忠合兵北向经略恒州。
English: Li Gan stayed in Zhaozhou for three days, and then he and Zhang Xiaozhong marched north together to capture Hengzhou.

古文：演州司马李孟秋举兵反，自称安南节度使。安南都护辅良交讨斩之。
现代文：演州司马李孟秋起兵反叛，自称安南节度使，安南都护辅良交讨伐并斩杀了他。
English: The acting state secretary, Ma Li Mengqiu, rebelled and claimed to be Annan's envoy to the festival. Annan protected and assisted his good friend and killed him.

古文：八月，丁未，置汴东、西水陆运、两税、盐铁使二人，度支总其大要而已。
现代文：八月，丁未，朝廷设置河东与河西水陆运、两税、盐铁使二人，度支仅仅总管大体情况罢了。
English: In August, Ting Wei, the imperial court set up the Hedong and Hexi water land transport, two taxes, two salt and iron envoys, and the general situation was only the general manager.

古文：辛酉，以泾原留后姚令言为节度使。
现代文：辛酉，德宗任命泾原留后姚令言为该处节度使。
English: According to Xinhua, Emperor Dezong appointed Yao Lingyan, who had stayed in Yuyuan, as the festival envoy.

古文：卢杞恶太子太师颜真卿，欲出之于外。真卿谓杞曰： 先中丞传首至平原，真卿以舌舐面血。
现代文：卢杞憎恶太子太师颜真卿，打算将他从朝中排挤出去，颜真卿对卢杞说： 先中丞的头颅被传送到平原时，我用舌头舔去了他脸上的血渍。
English: Lu Xun detested the crown prince and grand master Yan Zhenqing and planned to oust him from the imperial court. Yan Zhenqing said to Lu Xun: When the head of Zhongzheng was transported to the plain, I licked the blood off his face with my tongue.

古文：今相公忍不相容乎！ 
现代文：现在相公竟忍心不相容吗？ 
English: Are they now incompatible?

古文：杞矍然起拜，然恨之益甚。
现代文：卢杞惶恐四顾，起身下拜，但他对颜真卿的恨意却愈发加剧了。
English: Lu Yao panicked and looked around, got up and bowed down, but his hatred for Yan Zhenqing became more and more intense.

古文：九月，癸卯，殿中少监崔汉衡自吐蕃归，赞普遣其臣区颊赞随汉衡入见。
现代文：九月，癸卯，殿中少监崔汉衡从吐蕃回来，吐蕃赞普派遣他的臣区颊赞跟随崔汉衡入朝觐见。
English: In September, Choe Han Hyon, the Junior Warden of the Imperial Household, returned from Tubo, and Tubo Zampu sent his vassal Kyozan to accompany Choe Han Hyon to the Imperial Court.

古文：冬，十月，辛亥，以湖南观察使曹王皋为江南西道节度使。
现代文：冬季，十月，辛亥，德宗任命湖南观察使曹王李皋为江南西道节度使。
English: In the winter, October, Xinhai, Dezong appointed the Hunan observation envoy Cao Wang Lijun as the festival envoy of the West Jiangnan Province.

古文：皋至洪州，悉集将佐，简阅其才，得牙将伊慎、王锷等，擢为大将，引荆襄判官许孟容置幕府。
现代文：李皋到了洪州，把将佐全部召集起来，考察他们的才干，选得牙将伊慎、王锷等人，提拔为大将，还延引荆襄判官许孟容，将他安置在幕府。
English: When Li Qian arrived in Hongzhou, he gathered all the generals to examine their abilities, selected the tooth generals Isen and Wang Qian, and promoted them to general. He also brought in the judge Xu Meng Rong and placed him in the shogunate.

古文：慎，兗州人；孟容，长安人也。
现代文：伊慎是州人，许孟容是长安人。
English: Ishin is from Suzhou, and Xu Mengrong is from Chang'an.

古文：慎常从李希烈讨梁崇义，希烈爱其才，欲留之，慎逃归。
现代文：伊慎曾常跟随李希烈讨伐梁崇义，李希烈赏识他的才华，想把他留下，伊慎却逃回。
English: Ishin had often followed Li Xilai to fight against Liang Chongyi. Li Xilai appreciated his talent and wanted to keep him, but Ishin fled back.

古文：希烈闻皋用慎，恐为己患，遗慎七属甲，诈为复书，坠之境上。
现代文：李希烈听说李皋起用伊慎，唯恐他成为自己的后患，便赠他犀甲七属，并假造伊慎回复李希烈的书信，丢在边境上。
English: When Li Xili heard that Li Xuan had begun to use Ishen, lest he become his successor, he gave him seven genera of rhinoceroses, and forged Ishen's reply to Li Xili's letter and left it on the border.

古文：上闻之，遣中使即军中斩慎，皋为之论雪；未报。
现代文：德宗听说后，派遣中使到军队中就地将伊慎斩首，李皋上书替伊慎论争洗雪，不见回音。
English: After hearing this, Dezong sent an envoy to the army to decapitate Ishen on the spot. Li Gan wrote a letter to Ishen to discuss the issue of washing the snow, but there was no response.

古文：会江贼三千馀众入寇，皋遣慎击贼自赎；慎击破之，斩首数百级而还，由是得免。
现代文：恰巧长江中的群盗三千余人来江南西道侵扰，李皋便派遣伊慎进击群盗，立功自赎。伊慎打败了群盗，斩首数百级，率军而回。因此，伊慎得以幸免。
English: It so happened that a band of bandits in the Yangtze River, numbering more than three thousand, came to encroach on the west side of the south side of the river. Li Qian then sent Ishin to attack the bandits and redeem himself. Ishin defeated the bandits, beheaded several hundred of them, and led the army back. As a result, Ishin was spared.

古文：卢杞秉政，知上必更立相，恐其分己权，乘间荐吏部侍郎关播儒厚，可以镇风俗。
现代文：卢杞执掌朝政，知道德宗必定还要选立宰相，惟恐新相会分去自己的权力，便乘机举荐吏部侍郎关播儒雅忠厚，可以整肃风俗。
English: Lu Wei, who was in charge of the imperial government, knew that Dezong must also choose a prime minister, but fearing that the new meeting would divide his power, he took the opportunity to recommend Guan Bo, a courteous and loyal servant of the cadre department, who could rectify customs.

古文：丙辰，以播为中书侍郎、同平章事。政事皆决于杞，播等敛衽无所可否。
现代文：丙辰，德宗任命关播为中书侍郎、同平章事，朝中政事一概由卢杞决断，关播遇事只是整一整衣袖，不置可否。
English: At that time, Emperor Dezong appointed Guan Bao as the secretary of the Central Committee of the CPC and the Chairman of the Central Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) and the Vice-Chairman of the Central Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC). All the political affairs of the CPC and the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference were decided by the Central Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC).

古文：上尝从容与宰相论事，播意有所不可，起立欲言，杞目之而止。
现代文：德宗曾经从容地和宰相议论政事，关播有些反对意见，起身想说，卢杞以目示意，他才没说。
English: Dezong had calmly discussed political affairs with the prime minister. Guan Bao had some objections and got up to speak, but Lu Yao made a sign with his eyes, but he did not speak.

古文：还至中书，杞谓播曰： 以足下端悫少言，故相引至此，曏者奈何发口欲言邪！ 
现代文：回到中书以后，卢杞对关播说： 由于端庄忠厚，讲话不多，所以我才引荐你做了宰相，刚才你怎么要开口讲话呢！ 
English: After returning to Zhongshu, Lu Wei said to Guan Yu: As you are dignified and loyal, you don't speak much, so I just recommended you to be the prime minister. Why did you want to speak just now?

古文：播自是不复敢言。
现代文：关播自此不敢再讲话。
English: The broadcaster has not dared to speak since.

古文：戊辰，遣都官员外郎河中樊泽使于吐蕃，告以结盟之期。
现代文：戊辰，德宗派遣都官员外郎樊泽出使吐蕃，告诉吐蕃会盟的日期。
English: At that time, the Tokugawa shogunate dispatched a metropolitan official, Wairo Shizawa, as an envoy to Tubo to inform it of the date of the confederation.

古文：丙子，肃王详薨。
现代文：丙子，肃王李详去世。
English: On the 27th, Su Wang Li Zhe passed away.

古文：十一月，己卯朔，加淮南节度使陈少游同平章事。
现代文：十一月，己卯朔，德宗加封淮南节度使陈少游同平章事。
English: In November, Dezong Jiefang Huainan Festival made Chen Shaoyou a peerage.

古文：田悦德硃滔之救，与王武俊议奉滔为主，称臣事之，滔不可，曰： 惬山之捷，皆大夫二兄之力，滔何敢独居尊位！ 
现代文：田悦感激朱滔援救自己的恩德，便与王武俊商议尊奉朱滔为谋主，以臣属之礼事奉他。朱滔认为不妥，就说： 惬山获胜，都是大夫二哥出的力气，我怎么敢独自居此尊显的位子呢！ 
English: Tian Yue was grateful to Zhu Tao for rescuing her, so she discussed with Wang Wujun about honoring Zhu Tao as a mentor and serving him with the courtesy of a subordinate. Zhu Tao thought it was inappropriate and said, "Lushan's victory is all the strength of the second brother of the doctor, how dare I occupy this prestigious position alone!

古文：于是幽州判官李子千、恒冀判官郑濡等共议： 请与郓州李大夫为四国，俱称王而不改年号，如昔诸侯奉周家正朔。
现代文：于是幽州判官李子千、恒冀判官郑濡等人共同计议说： 请与郓州李大夫一起共立四国，一律称王，但不改变年号，就象昔年的诸侯尊奉周王室的正朔一样。
English: Therefore, Yuzhou Judge Li Zichian, Hengji Judge Zheng Nouring and others jointly proposed: Please work with Zhangzhou Doctor Li to jointly establish four countries, all of which will be called kings, but will not change the year, just like the princes of yesteryear honored the Zhou royal family.

古文：筑坛同盟，有不如约者，众共伐之。
现代文：筑起坛场，共同结盟，若有不履行盟约的人，大家就一起讨伐他。
English: Let's build an altar, make an alliance together, and if there is someone who does not fulfill the covenant, let's fight him together.

古文：不然，岂得常为叛臣，茫然无主，用兵既无名，有功无官爵为赏，使将吏何所依归乎！ 
现代文：如果不这样做，难道能够永远去做一个叛臣，使大家茫然无主，对朝廷用兵既没有名义，将士有功也没有官职爵位作为奖赏吗？将士和官吏还有什么指望呢！ 
English: If you do not do this, will you be able to be a traitor forever, leaving everyone without a master, having no reputation for using soldiers for the imperial court, and having no merit or official title as a reward? What hope is there for soldiers and officials!

古文：滔等皆以为然。
现代文：朱滔等人都认为讲得很对。
English: Zhu Tao and others all thought that it was very correct.

古文：滔乃自称冀王，田悦称魏王，王武俊称赵王，仍请李纳称齐王。
现代文：于是，朱滔自称冀王，田悦自称魏王，王武俊自称赵王，三人还请李纳自称齐王。
English: As a result, Zhu Tao claimed to be the King of Ji, Tian Yue claimed to be the King of Wei, Wang Wujun claimed to be the King of Zhao, and the three also asked Li Na to claim to be the King of Qi.

古文：是日，滔等筑坛于军中，告天而受之。
现代文：这一天，朱滔等人在军营中筑起坛场，祭告上天，领受王位。
English: On this day, Zhu Tao and others built an altar in the military camp, and offered sacrifices to heaven to receive the throne.

古文：滔为盟主，称孤；武俊、悦、纳称寡人。
现代文：朱滔担任盟主，自称 孤 。王武俊、田悦、李纳自称 寡人 。
English: Zhu Tao served as the leader, claiming to be alone. Wang Wujun, Tian Yue, and Li Na claimed to be few.

古文：所居堂曰殿，处分曰令，群下上书曰笺，妻曰妃，长子曰世子。
现代文：四人居住的堂舍称作殿，对事情的处置称作令，众部下上书称作笺。四人的妻子称作妃，长子称作世子。
English: The residence of the four people is called the hall, the disposition of the matter is called the order, and the subordinates are called the eunuchs. The wife of the four people is called the princess, and the eldest son is called the heir.

古文：各以其所治州为府，置留守兼元帅，以军政委之；又置东西曹，视门下、中书省；左右内史，视侍中、中书令；馀官皆仿天朝而易其名。
现代文：四人各自将所管理的州改为府，设置留守兼元帅，将军政委托给他们。又设置东西两曹，来比附中书省和门下省；设置左右内史，来比附侍中和中书令。其余官职一律模仿朝廷的建制，只是改换了名称。
English: The four of them each changed the state under their administration to a prefecture, set up a stay-behind and a marshal, and entrusted the general administration to them. They also set up two posts in the east and the west, to compare with the middle and lower provinces; set up the left and right internal history, to compare with the attendant and the middle. The remaining official positions all imitated the structure of the imperial court, but the names were changed.

古文：武俊以孟华为司礼尚书，华竟不受，呕血死。
现代文：王武俊任命孟华为司礼尚书，孟华始终不肯接受，吐血而死。
English: Wang Wujun appointed Meng Hua as the secretary of the ceremony, but Meng Hua still refused to accept it and died vomiting blood.

古文：以兵马使卫常宁为内史监，委以军事。
现代文：王武俊任命兵马使卫常宁为内史监，将军中事务委托给他。
English: Wang Wujun appointed the military commander Wei Changning as the internal history supervisor, and entrusted him with the affairs of the general staff.

古文：常宁谋杀武俊，武俊腰斩之。
现代文：卫常宁策划诛杀王武俊，王武俊将他腰斩。
English: Wei Changning plotted to kill Wang Wujun, and Wang Wujun beheaded him.

古文：武俊遣其将张终葵寇赵州，康日知击斩之。
现代文：王武俊派遣部下将领张终葵侵犯赵州，康日知出击，斩杀了他。
English: Wang Wujun dispatched his subordinate general Zhang Shengkui to invade Zhaozhou, and Kang Rongzhi attacked and killed him.

古文：李希烈帅所部兵三万徙镇许州，遣所亲诣李纳，与谋共袭汴州。
现代文：李希烈带领本部三万人移镇许州，派遣亲信到李纳处，同他谋划共同袭击汴州。
English: Li Xilai led the headquarters of 30,000 people to move to the town of Xuzhou, sent cronies to Li Na's office, and planned with him to jointly attack Xuzhou.

古文：遣使告李勉，云已兼领淄青，欲假道之官。
现代文：李希烈又派遣使者告诉李勉，说是自己已经兼领淄青，准备借道上任。
English: Li Xilai also sent an emissary to tell Li Tian that he had already received the imperial insignia and was preparing to take office.

古文：勉为之治桥、具馔以待之，而严为之备。
现代文：李勉为李希烈整治桥梁，备办食品，等待着他的到来，同时做了严密的防备，而李希烈始终没有到来。
English: Li Mian repaired bridges for Li Xili, prepared food, waited for his arrival, and at the same time made strict preparations, but Li Xili never arrived.

古文：希烈竟不至，又密与硃滔等交通，纳亦数遣游兵渡汴以迎希烈。
现代文：李希烈又暗中与朱滔等人交结往来，互通声气，李纳也好几次派出游兵，渡过汴水，迎接李希烈。
English: Li Xilai also secretly made contact with Zhu Tao and other people, and they communicated with each other. Li Na also sent out guerrillas several times to cross the Surabaya River to meet Li Xilai.

古文：由是东南转输者皆不敢由汴渠，自蔡水而上。
现代文：自此，在东南转运物资的人们都不敢从汴渠通过，而是经蔡水北上。
English: Since then, people transporting goods in the southeast do not dare to pass through the canal, but go north via Cai Shui.

古文：十二月，丁丑，李希烈自称天下都元帅、太尉、建兴王。
现代文：十二月，丁丑，李希烈自称天下都元帅、太尉、建兴王。
English: In December, Ding Yuxi, Li Xilei claimed to be the world's marshal, lieutenant, and Jian Xing Wang.

古文：时硃滔等与官军相拒累月，官军有度支馈粮，诸道益兵，而滔与王武俊孤军深入，专仰给于田悦，客主日益困弊。
现代文：当时，朱滔等人与官军相对抗已有好几个月，官军有度支运送粮食，有各道增补兵员，而朱滔与王武俊孤军深入，专门依赖田悦供给，因此朱、王的军队与田悦都一天天地艰难疲困起来。
English: At that time, Zhu Tao and others had been opposing the government army for several months. The government army had dispatched and transported grain, and there were additional soldiers from various provinces. However, Zhu Tao and Wang Wujun's lone army was deeply entrenched and relied exclusively on Tian Yue for supplies. As a result, Zhu and Wang's army and Tian Yue were exhausted day in and day out.

古文：闻李希烈军势甚盛，颇怨望，乃相与谋遣使诣许州，劝希烈称帝，希烈由是自称天下都元帅。
现代文：他们听说李希烈军队声势甚为盛大，李希烈又颇为怨恨不满，便一起谋划派遣使者到许州，劝说李希烈称帝，李希烈自此以后才自称天下都元帅。
English: They heard that Li Xilai's army was very powerful, and Li Xilai was quite resentful and dissatisfied, so they planned to send an envoy to Huzhou to persuade Li Xilai to declare himself emperor. Only after this did Li Xilai call himself the marshal of the whole world.

古文：司天少监徐承嗣请更造《建中正元历》；从之。
现代文：司天少监徐承嗣请求重新编制《建中正元历》，德宗照准。
English: Siten Juvenile Supervisor Xu Chengzhi requested the re-compilation of the "Jianzhongzheng Yuan Calendar," and De Zong complied.

