古文：云南，滇国也。
现代文：云南，就是滇国。
English: Yunnan, that is, Min Guo.

古文：汉武帝时始置益州郡。
现代文：汉武帝时开始设置益州郡。
English: Emperor Hanwu began to set up Yizhou County.

古文：蜀汉置云南郡。
现代文：三国的蜀汉设置云南郡。
English: Shu Han of the Three Kingdoms set up Yunnan County.

古文：隋置昆州，唐仍之。
现代文：隋唐两朝设置昆州。
English: The Sui and Tang dynasties set up Quanzhou.

古文：后为南诏蒙氏所据，改鄯阐府。
现代文：后来被南诏的蒙氏所占领，改为鄯阐府。
English: Later, it was occupied by the Meng clan of Nanzhao, and was changed to Shanyingfu.

古文：历郑、赵、杨三氏，至大理段氏，以高智升领鄯阐牧，遂世其地。
现代文：该地经历了郑氏、赵氏、杨氏三大家族的统治，到大理的段氏时，高智升出任鄯阐牧，便世袭该地。
English: The area experienced the rule of the three major families of the Zheng, Zhao and Yang dynasties. When the Duan clan came to Dali, Gao Zhisheng took up the position of chief herdsman and inherited the area.

古文：元初，置鄯阐万户府。既改置中庆路，封子忽哥为云南王镇之，仍录段氏子孙守其土。
现代文：元朝初年，该地设置了鄯阐万户府，不久又改为中庆路，封忽哥为云南王镇守该地。忽哥仍录用段氏子孙守卫该地。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the place was set up as the Yunnan Wangzhen Prefecture, and soon it was changed to Zhongqing Road, and Hu Ge was assigned to guard the place as the King of Yunnan. Hu Ge still hired the descendants of the Duan clan to guard the place.

古文：忽哥死，其子嗣封为梁王。
现代文：忽哥死后，其儿子继嗣，被封为梁王。
English: After Hu Ge's death, his son and successor was named Liang Wang.

古文：洪武六年，遣翰林待制王祎等赍诏谕梁王，久留不遣，卒遇害。
现代文：洪武六年，朝廷派翰林待制王礻韦等持诏书去见梁王，王礻韦被梁王久留而不予遣返，最终遇害。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu's reign, the imperial court sent Hanlin Wang Zhenwei and other officials to meet with King Liang. Wang Zhenwei was detained by King Liang for a long time without being repatriated, and was eventually killed.

古文：八年复遣湖广行省参政吴云往，中途为梁使所害。
现代文：八年又派遣湖广行省的参政吴云去见梁王，行至中途被梁王的使者杀害。
English: Eight years later, he sent Wu Yun, a politician from Guangxing Province in Hubei Province, to see Liang Wang. He was killed by Liang Wang's envoy halfway through the trip.

古文：十四年，征南将军傅友德、蓝玉、沐英率师至云南城，梁王赴滇池死，定其地。
现代文：十四年，征南将军傅友德、蓝玉、沐英率领军队到达云南城，梁王自投滇池而死，于是该地平定。
English: In the 14th year, the southward conquering generals Fu Youde, Lan Yu, and Mu Ying led the army to Yunnan City, and Liang Wang died after throwing himself into the pond, so the matter was settled.

古文：改中庆路为云南府，置都指挥使司，命都督佥事冯诚署司事。
现代文：朝廷便将中庆路改为云南府，设置都指挥使司，任命都督佥事冯诚掌管都指挥使司的事务。
English: The imperial court then changed Zhongqing Road to Yunnan Prefecture, set up the capital command envoy department, and appointed the governor Anji Fengcheng to be in charge of the affairs of the capital command envoy department.

古文：二月诏谕云南诸郡蛮。
现代文：该年二月，皇帝给云南各郡的蛮族发了诏谕。
English: In February of that year, the emperor issued an edict to the barbarians in all counties of Yunnan.

古文：十五年，友德等分兵攻诸蛮寨之未服者，土官杨苴乘隙作乱，集蛮众二十余万攻云南城。
现代文：十五年，傅友德等人分兵攻打各蛮族中还未归服明朝廷者，土官杨苴乘机作乱，纠集蛮族人二十多万进攻云南城。
English: In the fifteenth year, Fu Youde and others divided their forces to attack the barbarians who had not yet submitted to the Ming court. The local official Yang Hui took advantage of the opportunity to create turmoil, gathering more than 200,000 barbarians to attack Yunnan City.

古文：时城中食少，士卒多病，寇至，都督谢熊、冯诚等撄城固守，贼不能攻，遂远营为久困计。
现代文：此时城内粮食很少，士兵又多病，蛮族人进犯到城下，都督谢熊、冯诚等靠城固守，叛贼攻不下来，便在云南城外较远处扎下军营做长期围困的打算。
English: At this time, there was little food in the city, the soldiers were often ill, the barbarians attacked the city, the governor Xie Xiong, Feng Cheng, etc. relied on the city to hold fast, the traitors could not attack, so they set up a military camp far outside the Yunnan city to plan a long siege.

古文：时沐英方驻师乌撒，闻之，将骁骑还救。
现代文：此时沐英正将军队驻扎在乌撒，听到消息后，带领精锐骑兵回救云南。
English: At this time, Mu Ying was stationing troops in Usa. After hearing the news, he led the elite cavalry back to rescue Yunnan.

古文：至曲靖，遣卒潜入报城中，为贼所得，绐之曰： 总兵官领三十万众至矣。 
现代文：到曲靖时，沐英派士卒偷偷地潜入城内报信，被叛贼抓获，便骗他们说 ：总兵官带领三十万人到了。 
English: When they reached Qujing, Mu Ying secretly sent soldiers to sneak into the city to report the news. They were caught by the traitors and lied to them, saying: "The general officer has arrived with 300,000 men."

古文：贼众惊愕，拔营宵遁，走安宁、罗次、邵甸、富民、普宁、大理、江川等处，复据险树栅，谋再寇。
现代文：叛贼惊愕不已，连夜拔营而逃，逃到安宁、罗次、邵甸、富民、普宁、大理、江川等地后，又占领险要之地树起栏栅，图谋再次进犯云南城。
English: The traitors were so shocked that they broke camp and fled in the middle of the night. After fleeing to Anning, Luoqi, Shaodian, Fumin, Puning, Dali, Jiangchuan and other places, they occupied critical areas, erected fences and attempted to attack Yunnan City again.

古文：英分调将士剿降之，斩首六万余级，生擒四千余人，诸部悉定。
现代文：沐英分别调遣将士进剿降服他们，共斩获首级六万多个，生捉俘虏四千多人，各部都被平定。
English: Mu Ying separately dispatched soldiers to Jincheng to subdue them, a total of more than sixty thousand first-class were captured, more than four thousand prisoners were captured alive, and all departments were pacified.

古文：二十五年，英卒，命其子春袭封西平侯，仍镇云南。
现代文：二十五年，沐英逝世，朝廷命令他的儿子沐春继嗣，封他为西平侯，仍派他镇守云南。
English: Twenty-five years after Mu Ying's death, the imperial court ordered his son, Mu Chun Heir, to be named Xiping Hou, and still sent him to guard Yunnan.

古文：自英平云南，在镇十年，恩威著于蛮徼；每下片楮，诸番部具威仪出郭叩迎，盥而后启，曰： 此令旨也。 
现代文：自从沐英平定云南、镇守云南的十年间，在蛮族人中巡视时恩威并用。每次一下小令，各番人部落都要举行隆重的仪式到城郭外叩头迎接，浇水洗手之后才启开来看，说： 这是令旨啊。 
English: During the ten years since Mu Ying conquered Yunnan and guarded the city, he was both benevolent and benevolent when he inspected the barbarians. Every time he made a small order, each watchman tribe had to hold a grand ceremony to kowtow outside the castle, and only open it after pouring water and washing their hands, saying: This is the order.

古文：沐氏亦皆能以功名世其家。
现代文：沐氏家庭也都能继承沐英的功名。
English: The Mu family can also inherit the fame of Mu Ying.

古文：每大征伐，辄以征南将军印授之，沐氏未尝不在行间。
现代文：每次有大的征伐行动，朝廷总是把征南将军的印信授予他们，而出征的队伍中也未尝没有沐氏家族的人。
English: Every time there was a large-scale campaign, the imperial court always granted them the seal of the Southern Expeditionary General, and there was never a member of the Mu family in the expeditionary force.

古文：数传而西平裔孙当袭侯，守臣争之，谓滇人知有黔国公，不知西平侯也。
现代文：传了几代后，西平侯的后代子孙要继承侯爵，当地守卫大臣说云南人只知道有黔国公，不知道有西平侯。
English: After several generations, the descendants of Xiping's descendants will inherit the marquis. The local guard minister said that Yunnan people only know the Duke of Yunnan, but do not know Xiping.

古文：孝宗以为然，许之。自是，遂以公爵佩印，为故事。
现代文：孝宗皇帝认为此话有理，便答应封沐英的后代为黔国公。
English: Emperor Xiaozong thought this was reasonable, so he agreed to crown the descendants of Muying as the Duke of Shandong.

古文：诸土司之进止予夺，皆咨禀。
现代文：从此以后，沐氏家族佩公爵印符，各土司的进退予夺，都要向他们咨询。
English: From then on, the Mu family had to consult with them whenever they wanted to wear the duke's seal, as well as when the local governors wanted to advance or retreat.

古文：及承平久，文网周密，凡事必与太监抚、按、三司会议后行，动多掣肘，土官子孙承袭有积至二三十年不得职者。
现代文：天下长久太平后，朝廷的文纲更加周密，皇帝有什么事都必须与太监的抚、按和三司官员一起讨论后才执行，行动多受掣肘，土官子孙有承袭了其父祖事务达二三十年还没得到官职的。
English: After the world had been at peace for a long time, the text of the imperial court was more elaborate. Anything the emperor did had to be discussed with the eunuch's tutor, advisor, and officials of the three departments before it was implemented. Actions were often constrained. The sons and grandsons of local officials inherited the affairs of their fathers and grandfathers, who had not received official positions for twenty or thirty years.

古文：土官复慢令玩法，无所忌惮；待其罪大恶极，然后兴兵征剿，致军民日困，地方日坏。
现代文：这样一来，土官便又怠慢、玩弄法令，无所忌惮。等到他们罪大恶极时，朝廷便起兵征剿，致使军民日益困乏，地方秩序日益破坏。
English: As a result, local officials became careless, played with laws and regulations, and did not have any scruples. When they committed the most heinous crimes, the imperial court started to conscript soldiers, which led to the increasing poverty of the military and the people, and the increasing destruction of local order.

古文：大学士杨一清等因武定安铨之乱，痛切陈之。
现代文：大学士杨一清等人因为武定安铨的叛乱，痛切地向朝廷陈述弊端。
English: Because of the rebellion of Wuding Anqian, Yang Yixing, a university scholar, and others painstakingly reported the drawbacks to the imperial court.

古文：黔国公沐绍勋亦以为言。
现代文：黔国公沐绍勋也为此向皇帝进言。
English: King Mu Shao Xun also advised the emperor to this end.

古文：虽得旨允行，亦不能更革。
现代文：虽然他们都得到圣旨允许按他们所说的那样行动，但也不能更改制度。
English: Although they are all allowed by divine decree to do as they say, they cannot change the system.

古文：驯至神宗之世，朝廷惰媮，封疆败坏日甚一日。
现代文：到神宗皇帝时，朝廷沉溺于享乐之中，封疆大吏的作风败坏也一天比一天更甚。
English: By the time of Emperor Shenzong, the imperial court was addicted to pleasure, and the work style of the officials in the besieged areas was deteriorating day by day.

古文：缅、莽之叛，皆土官之失职者导之。
现代文：缅、莽的叛乱，都是因为土官的失职而引起的。
English: Burma, the reckless rebellion, was caused by the local officials' dereliction of duty.

古文：虽稍奏肤功，而滇南丧败，卒由土官沙定洲之祸。
现代文：虽然下面上报了一点小功，但在滇南丧师失地，最终导致了沙定洲这个大祸患。
English: Although a small achievement was reported below, the loss of territory in southern Shandong ultimately led to the great disaster of Shadingzhou.

古文：沙定洲者，王弄山长官司沙源之子也。
现代文：沙定洲，是王弄山长官司沙源的儿子。
English: Sha Dingzhou is the son of Wang Loushan's chief magistrate, Sha Yuan.

古文：源骁勇有将材，万历中，数从征调有功，巡抚委以王弄副长官事。
现代文：沙源骁勇善战有将才，万历中年，数次跟随官军征讨有功，巡抚便委任他为王弄山长官司的副长官。
English: Shayuan Xingyuan was a brave and skillful general in the war. He was middle-aged and had served with the government army several times. The governor appointed him as the deputy chief of Wang Loushan's chief of staff.

古文：继以征建水功，以安南长官司废地畀之。
现代文：继而又因征讨建水有功，便将安南长官司的废地付与他。
English: Then, because he had done a good job of collecting and building water, he was given the waste land of Annan Chief Magistrate.

古文：后征东川、水西、马龙山等处，全云南会城，称首功，累加至宣抚使，时号沙兵。
现代文：后来他又参加了对东川、水西、马龙山等地的征讨，在保全云南会城上立有首功，被累加提升为宣抚使。他率领的军队时常号称沙兵。
English: Later, he also took part in the conquest of Dongchuan, Shuixi, Malong Mountain and other places, and played a leading role in the preservation of Yunnan's capital, and was promoted to the position of envoy. The army he led was often known as the sand soldiers.

古文：定洲，其仲子也。
现代文：沙定洲，是沙源的二儿子。
English: Shadingzhou is the second son of Shayuan.

古文：崇祯中，元谋土知州吾必奎叛。
现代文：崇祯中年，元谋土知州吾必奎叛乱。
English: In the middle of his life, the original leader of the Tochizhou Rebellion, Wu Bikui, led a rebellion.

古文：总兵官沐天波剿之，调定洲从征。
现代文：总兵官沐天波前去进剿，征调沙定洲从征。
English: The commander-in-chief, Mu Tianbo, went to Jincheng, and transferred Sha Dingzhou to follow him.

古文：定洲不欲行，出怨言。
现代文：沙定洲不愿去，口出怨言。
English: Sha Dingzhou did not want to go and complained.

古文：会奸徒饶希之、余锡朋者逋天波金，无以偿。
现代文：正好碰上奸猾之徒饶希之、余锡朋拖欠沐天波的钱，无法偿还。
English: It just so happens that the treacherous traitor Rao Xizhi and Yu Xibeng have defaulted on the money owed to Mu Tianbo and cannot pay it back.

古文：锡朋常出入土司家，夸黔府富盛。
现代文：余锡朋经常出入土司家，夸奖黔府的富盛。
English: Yuxi Peng often visits Toji's home and praises the prosperity of Shifu.

古文：定洲心动，阴结都司阮韵嘉诸人为内应。
现代文：沙定洲听了心动，暗地里勾结都司阮韵嘉等人作为内应。
English: Sha Dingzhou listened to the heartbeat and secretly colluded with the capital secretary Ruan Yunjia and others as an internal correspondence.

古文：既定洲入城辞行，天波以家讳日不视事，定洲噪而入，焚劫其府。
现代文：不久沙定洲进入城内去向沐天波辞行，沐天波以当天是家讳日不视事为由谢绝会客。沙定洲吵嚷着冲了进去，将其府第焚烧抢劫一空。
English: Soon after, Shadingzhou went into the city to say goodbye to Mu Tianbo, who declined the invitation on the grounds that it was a family day. Shadingzhou rushed into the city noisily, setting fire to and looting his residence.

古文：天波闻变，由小窦遁。
现代文：沐天波听说发生变故，从小地道逃走。
English: When Mu Tianbo heard that there had been a change of fortune, he fled through a small tunnel.

古文：时宁州土司禄永命在城，方巷战拒贼，从官周鼎止天波，留讨贼。
现代文：此时宁州土司禄永命在城内，正与贼人巷战，他的副官周鼎将沐天波强留下来一起讨伐贼人。
English: At this time, Ningzhou Tusi Lu Yongmin was in the city, fighting with thieves in the streets. His aide-de-camp Zhou Ding would stay with Mu Tianbo Qiang to fight the thieves.

古文：天波疑鼎为定洲诱己，杀之，其母妻皆走城北自焚死。
现代文：沐天波怀疑周鼎在为沙定洲而诱骗自己，便杀了周鼎，周鼎的母亲和妻子都逃向城北自焚而死。
English: Mu Tianbo suspected that Zhou Ding was deceiving himself for the sake of Sha Dingzhou, so he killed Zhou Ding. Zhou Ding's mother and wife both fled to the north of the city and died of self-immolation.

古文：定洲据黔府，盘踞会城。劫巡抚吴兆元，使题请代天波镇滇，传檄州县，全滇震动。
现代文：沙定洲占领了黔府，盘踞在会城，劫持了巡抚吴兆元，让他题词请沙定洲代替沐天波镇守云南，并将该文告传递给各州县，结果全云南为之震动。
English: Shading Zhou occupied Ye Prefecture, entrenched himself in Huicheng, kidnapped the governor Wu Zhaoyuan, asked him to inscribe a message asking Shading Zhou to guard Yunnan in place of Mu Tianbo, and passed the message to all prefectures and counties. As a result, all of Yunnan was shaken.

古文：禄永命与石屏州龙在田俱引所部去。
现代文：禄永命与石屏州的龙在田都带领自己的部下离去了。
English: Luku Yongmei and Long Zaidu of Shiping Prefecture led their subordinates to leave.

古文：天波走楚雄，金沧副使杨畏知奉调驻城中，谓天波曰： 公何不走永昌，使楚得为备，而公在彼掎角，首尾牵制之，上策也。 
现代文：沐天波逃往楚雄，金沧副使杨畏知奉调驻守城中，他对沐天波说： 你何不逃往永昌，这样可使楚雄有所准备，而你在永昌可与楚雄倚为犄角，这样首尾互相牵制沙定洲，是上策啊。 
English: Mu Tianbo fled to Chu Xiong, and Jin Cang's deputy Yang Jiechi was dispatched to guard the city. He said to Mu Tianbo: Why don't you flee to Yongchang, so that Chu Xiong can be prepared, and you can be at loggerheads with Chu Xiong in Yongchang. It is the best strategy to hold back Shadingzhou in this way.

古文：天波从之。
现代文：沐天波同意了。
English: Mu Tianbo agreed.

古文：定洲至楚雄，城闭不得入，乃去。
现代文：沙定洲到楚雄，城门闭着无法进入，便离去了。
English: After arriving in Chuxiong from Shading Zhou, the gate was closed and he was unable to enter, so he left.

古文：遣其党王翔、李日芳等，攻陷大理、蒙化。
现代文：他派其同党王翔、李日芳等人，攻陷大理和蒙化。
English: He sent his fellow Party members Wang Xiang and Li Rifang to invade Dali and Menghua.

古文：畏知乘间檄城外居民尽入城，筑陴浚隍，调土、汉兵守之。
现代文：杨畏知乘机将城外的居民全迁入城中，然后修筑城墙挖掘护城壕，调遣土兵汉兵一起守卫。
English: Yang Jianchi took the opportunity to move all the residents from outside the city into the city, and then built the city wall, dug a moat, and dispatched local soldiers and Chinese soldiers to guard it together.

古文：定洲闻禄永命等各固守，不敢至永昌，恐畏知截其归路，急还兵攻楚雄。
现代文：沙定洲听说禄永命等人各自固守，不敢到永昌，怕杨畏知截断他的退路，便急忙回兵攻打楚雄。
English: When Shadingzhou heard that Lu Yongmei and the others were holding fast to their positions, not daring to go to Yongchang for fear that Yang Jiechi would cut off his escape route, they hurried back to attack Chu Xiong.

古文：畏知坐城楼，贼发巨炮击之，烟焰笼城橹，众谓畏知已死，而畏知端坐自如，贼相惊谓神。
现代文：杨畏知坐在城楼上，贼人发巨炮打他，硝烟火焰笼罩了城中的望楼，众人都说杨畏知已被打死，而杨畏知却在那里端坐自如，叛贼互相感到惊讶，说他是神。
English: Yang Wai Chi was sitting on the tower of the city. The bandits fired a huge cannon at him. Smoke and flames engulfed the watchtower in the city. Everyone said that Yang Wai Chi had been killed, but Yang Wai Chi was sitting there at ease. The traitors were surprised at each other, saying that he was a god.

古文：畏知伺贼间，辄出奇兵杀贼甚众。
现代文：杨畏知乘贼人攻城的间歇，出奇兵袭击贼人，杀死贼人甚多。
English: Yang Jiechi took advantage of the lull in the bandits' attack on the city, and his surprise soldiers attacked the bandits, killing many of them.

古文：贼引去，攻石屏不下，还攻宁州，禄永命战死。
现代文：贼人引退而去，进攻石屏，攻不下来，便回去进攻宁州，禄永命战死。
English: The thieves retreated and attacked Shifing. Unable to take it, they returned to attack Ningzhou. Lu Yongsheng was killed in the battle.

古文：贼计迤东稍稍定，乃复攻楚雄。
现代文：贼人考虑待往东的地方稍稍安定后，再进攻楚雄。
English: The thieves considered waiting until the area to the east was a little more stable before attacking Chu Xiong.

古文：分兵为七十二营，环城掘濠，为久困计。
现代文：于是他们将军队分为七十二个营，环着楚雄城挖掘战壕，做长期围困楚雄的准备。
English: So they divided the army into seventy-two battalions, dug trenches around the city of Chuxiong, and prepared for a long siege of Chuxiong.

古文：会张献忠死，其部将孙可望率余众由遵义入黔，称黔国焦夫人弟来复仇。
现代文：此时碰上张献忠死亡，他的部将孙可望率领余众从遵义进入贵州，声称自己是黔国焦夫人的弟弟前来报仇。
English: At this time, when Zhang Xianzhong died, his subordinate Sun Kewang led the rest of the people from Zunyi into Guizhou, claiming to be the younger brother of Lady Jiao of Shandong to take revenge.

古文：民久困沙兵，喜其来，迎之。
现代文：百姓长期被沙兵困扰，对孙可望的到来很高兴，都跑去迎接他。
English: The people, who had been plagued by sand soldiers for a long time, were very happy to see Sun Ke's arrival and ran to greet him.

古文：定洲解楚雄围，迎战于草泥关，大败，遁阿迷。
现代文：沙定洲解除了对楚雄的包围，在草泥关迎战孙可望，被打败后，逃往阿迷。
English: Shading Zhou lifted the siege on Chu Xiong, and met Sun Kibo at Caodi Pass. After being defeated, he fled to Aman.

古文：可望破曲靖及交水，俱屠之。遂由陆凉、宜良入云南城，分遣李定国徇迤东诸府。
现代文：孙可望攻破曲靖和交水，屠杀了那里的人民，于是从陆凉、宜良进入云南城，又派遣李定国去攻略往东方向的诸府。
English: Sun Ke hoped to break through Qujing and Jiaozuo and slaughtered the people there, so he entered Yunnan City from Lulang and Yiliang, and sent Li Dingguo to attack the provinces to the east.

古文：而可望自率兵西出，畏知御于启明桥，兵败，被执。
现代文：孙可望都自己率兵向西出发，杨畏知在启明桥抵御孙可望，打败后被抓。
English: Sun Kuan himself led his troops to the west. Yang Jiechi resisted Sun Kuan at the Qiming Bridge and was captured after being defeated.

古文：可望闻其名，不杀，语之曰： 吾与尔共讨贼，何如？ 
现代文：孙可望听说过杨畏知的名声，不杀他，对他说： 我和你共同讨伐贼人，怎么样？ 
English: Sun Kuan had heard of Yang Jiechi's reputation. Instead of killing him, he said to him, "How about I fight the thieves with you?"

古文：畏知要以三事： 不用献忠伪号，不杀百姓，不掳妇女，吾从尔。 
现代文：杨畏知提出三个条件 ：不使用张献忠自封的国号，不杀百姓，不掳掠妇女。
English: Yang Jianchi proposed three conditions: not to use Zhang Xianzhong's self-proclaimed country name, not to kill people, and not to abduct women.

古文：可望皆许之。
现代文：能做到这三点，我听从你的安排。 
English: If I can achieve these three points, I will follow your arrangements.

古文：即折箭相誓，乃以书谕天波如畏知言，天波亦来归。
现代文：孙可望都答应了他，于是两人马上折箭发誓。孙可望还写了一封文书给沐天波，说对待他也和对待杨畏知一样的条件，于是沐天波也来归降孙可望。
English: Both Sun Kehan and Yang Hui agreed to this, and the two immediately swore an oath. Sun Kehan also wrote a letter to Mu Tianbo, saying that he would treat him under the same conditions as Yang Hui, so Mu Tianbo also came to surrender to Sun Kehan.

古文：而李定国之徇临安者，定洲部目李阿楚拒战甚力。
现代文：李定国去攻打临安时，沙定洲的部目李阿楚抵抗甚为卖力。
English: When Li Dingguo went to attack Lin'an, Li Achu, a member of Shadingzhou, resisted very hard.

古文：定国穴地置炮，炮发城陷，遂入。
现代文：李定国便挖地置炮，炮一发城墙便塌陷，于是攻进城内。
English: Li Dingguo then dug the ground to place the cannon, and the city wall collapsed as soon as the cannon was fired, so he entered the city.

古文：驱城中官民于城外白场杀之，凡七万八千余人，斩获不与焉。
现代文：他们把临安城中的官员和百姓都驱赶到城外的白场杀死，共七万八千多人，而在战斗中斩杀的人还不算在内。
English: They drove the officials and people in Lin'an to the White Square outside the city and killed more than 78,000 people, not including those killed in battle.

古文：当时皆意定国破临安，必袭阿迷，取定洲，乃仅掠临安子女而回，所过无不屠灭。
现代文：当时都以为李定国攻破临安后，一定会去袭击阿迷，捉拿沙定洲，结果他仅仅是掳掠了临安的男子和妇女便回去了，而他所经过的地方无不遭他屠杀灭绝。
English: At that time, everyone thought that after Li Dingguo broke through Lin'an, he would definitely attack Aman and capture Shadingzhou. As a result, he merely abducted the men and women of Lin'an and went back, and the places he passed through were all slaughtered and exterminated by him.

古文：迤西以畏知在军，得保全。
现代文：往西是因为有杨畏知在军中，所以百姓得以保全。
English: To the west, because Yang Jiechi was in the army, the people were protected.

古文：始定洲归，屯兵洱革龙，且借安南援自固。
现代文：开始时沙定洲回来，屯兵在洱革龙，并借重安南的支援巩固自己。
English: At the beginning, Shadingzhou came back, stationed troops in Fenglong, and strengthened itself with the support of heavy Annan.

古文：会可望与定国不协，声其罪，杖之百，责以取定洲自赎。
现代文：碰上孙可望与李定国有矛盾，孙可望声讨了李定国的罪行，打了他一百杖，责成他捉拿沙定洲替自己赎罪。
English: When conflicts arose between Sun Kewang and Li Dingguo, Sun Kewang denounced Li Dingguo's crime, beat him with a hundred canes, and ordered him to capture Shadingzhou to atone for his sins.

古文：定国既至，定洲土目杨嘉方迎定洲就其营宴。
现代文：李定国到了后，沙定洲的土目杨嘉正迎接沙定洲到他的军营中吃宴席。
English: After the arrival of Li Dingguo, Yang Jia, a native of Shadingzhou, was welcoming Shadingzhou to his military camp for a banquet.

古文：定国侦知之，率兵围营，相拒数日，乃出降。
现代文：李定国侦察到这情况后，马上率兵包围了该军营。双方相持了几天以后，沙定洲出来向李定国投降。
English: After Li Dingguo detected this situation, he immediately led his troops to surround the military camp. After the two sides held each other for a few days, Shadingzhou came out and surrendered to Li Dingguo.

古文：遂械定洲及妻万氏数百人回云南，剥其皮市中。
现代文：李定国便将沙定洲和他的妻子万氏等数百人戴上桎梏押回云南，在闹市中剥了沙定洲的皮。
English: Li Dingguo then put hundreds of people, including Shadingzhou and his wife Wan, in shackles and sent them back to Yunnan, where he skinned Shadingzhou in the middle of the city.

古文：可望遂据滇，而天波卒走死于缅甸。
现代文：孙可望于是占领了云南，而沐天波最终逃到缅甸，死于当地。
English: It is expected that Sun Ke then occupied Yunnan, while Mu Tianbo eventually fled to Burma, where he died.

古文：大理，唐叶榆县境也。
现代文：大理，唐朝时在叶榆县境内。
English: Dali, during the Tang Dynasty, was in the territory of Yehui County.

古文：麟德初，置姚州都督府。
现代文：唐朝麟德初年，此地设置姚州都督府。
English: In the first year of Lingde in the Tang Dynasty, the Yaozhou Governor's Office was set up here.

古文：开元末，蒙诏皮罗阁建都于此，为南诏，治太和城。
现代文：唐朝开元末年，蒙诏的皮罗阁在此建都，称为南诏，治所在太和城。
English: At the end of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Piroge, who received the imperial edict, built a capital here, called Nanzhao, and governed the city of Taihe.

古文：至阁罗凤，号大蒙国，异牟寻改大礼国。
现代文：到阁罗凤时，号称大蒙国，异牟寻又改为大礼国。
English: When it came to Gora Feng, it was known as the Great Mongolian Kingdom, and Isumu was renamed the Great Reverend Kingdom.

古文：其后，郑买赐、赵善政、杨干贞互篡夺，至五代晋时，段思平得之，更号大理国。
现代文：其后，郑买赐、赵善政、杨干贞互相篡权夺位，到五代的后晋时期，段思平取得该地，改国号为大理国。
English: Later, Zheng Bai Zi, Zhao Shan Zheng and Yang Gan Zhen usurped power from each other, and in the five generations after the Jin Dynasty, Duan Siping acquired the land and changed the country name to Dali Province.

古文：元宪宗取云南，至大理，段智兴降附，乃设都元帅，封智兴为摩诃罗嵯，管领八方。
现代文：元朝宪宗皇帝攻取云南，到达大理，段智兴降附元朝廷，元朝便在此设置都元帅，封段智兴为摩诃罗嵯，管理统领八方。
English: The Yuan Dynasty Emperor Jianzong conquered Yunnan and arrived in Dali. Duan Zhixing was demoted to the Yuan Dynasty. The Yuan Dynasty appointed Duan Zhixing as the capital's marshal, and made Duan Zhixing the magistrate to administer the eight provinces.

古文：又以刘时中为宣抚使，同智兴安辑其民。
现代文：又任命刘时中为宣抚使，让他与段智兴一起安抚当地百姓。
English: He also appointed Liu Shizhong as the envoy, and let him and Duan Zhixing work together to pacify the local people.

古文：段氏有大理，传十世至宝。
现代文：段氏占据大理，传了十代后到了段宝手上。
English: The Duan clan dominated Dali, and after ten generations, it was passed down to Duan Bao.

古文：闻太祖开基江南，遣其叔段真由会川奉表归款。
现代文：段宝听说明太祖是从江南开奠基业的，便派他的叔叔段真从会川奉表向明朝廷投诚。
English: When Duan Bao heard that the great ancestor had laid the foundation from the south of the Yangtze River, he sent his uncle Duan Zhen from Huichuan to the Ming court.

古文：洪武十四年，征南将军傅友德克云南，授段明为宣慰使。
现代文：洪武十四年，征南将军傅友德攻克云南，授予段明宣慰使的职务。
English: In the 14th year of Hongwu, Fu Youde, a general of the Southern Expeditionary Force, conquered Yunnan and awarded Duan Ming with the post of comfort envoy.

古文：明遣都使张元亨贻征南将军书曰： 大理乃唐交绥之外国，鄯阐实宋斧画之余邦，难列营屯，徒劳兵甲。
现代文：段明派都使张元亨给征南将军送一封书信，说： 大理是与唐朝相互交好的外国，鄯阐实际上也是宋朝的玉斧画下来不要的国家。
English: The Duanming faction all asked Zhang Yuanheng to send a letter to the General of the Southern Expedition, saying: Dali is a foreign country that has friendly relations with the Tang Dynasty, and Yan Yan is actually a country that does not need the Song Dynasty's jade axe.

古文：请依唐、宋故事，宽我蒙、段，奉正朔，佩华篆，比年一小贡，三年一大贡。 
现代文：这两个地方很难驻扎军队，动用武力也没什么用。请求你依照唐朝、宋朝的事例，允许我们蒙氏、段氏独立成国，则我们会在每年的正月初一佩戴印章向你们通好，每两年向明朝廷献小贡一次，每三年献大贡一次。 
English: It is difficult to station troops in these two places, and the use of force is of little use. I request you to follow the example of the Tang and Song dynasties and allow us, the Meng and Duan clans, to become an independent country. Then we will wear the seal on the first day of the first month of each year to show our goodwill to you, and pay a small tribute to the Ming court once every two years, and a large tribute once every three years.

古文：友德怒，辱其使。
现代文：傅友德看后很愤怒，羞辱了段明的使者。
English: Fu Youde was very angry after watching it and humiliated the envoy of Duanming.

古文：明再贻书曰： 汉武习战，仅置益州。元祖亲征，祗缘鄯阐。
现代文：段明又送书信来说 ：汉武帝大动干戈，仅仅设置了一个益州郡，元太祖亲自出征，也只是为了一个小小的鄯阐。
English: Duan Ming also sent a letter saying: Emperor Hanwu made a big move to go to war, only setting up a county in Yizhou. Yuan Taizu personally went to war, but only for a small demonstration.

古文：乞赐班师。 
现代文：请求你们还是班师回朝吧。 
English: I implore you to return to the classroom in the morning.

古文：友德答书曰： 大明龙飞淮甸，混一区宇。
现代文：傅友德回书给段明说 ：大明王朝是龙从淮河郊区起飞，统一海内。
English: Fu Youde wrote back to Duan Ming, saying: The Daming Dynasty was a dragon that took off from the outskirts of the Huai River to unify the inland.

古文：陋汉、唐之小智，卑宋、元之浅图。
现代文：我们看不上汉朝、唐朝那些小小的智计，也看不起宋朝、元朝那些浅薄的图谋。
English: We don't look up to those small clever tricks of the Han Dynasty and the Tang Dynasty, nor do we look down on those shallow schemes of the Song Dynasty and the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：大兵所至，神龙助阵，天地应符。
现代文：我们明朝大军一到，神龙会来且助阵，天地也会与我们呼应。
English: When our great army arrives in the morning, the divine dragon will come and help us, and heaven and earth will also respond to us.

古文：汝段氏接武蒙氏，运已绝于元代，宽延至今。
现代文：你们段氏承接了蒙氏的领地，运数在元代已经断绝了，只不过是宽待你们而延续至今。
English: You Duan clans first took over the territory of the Meng clan, and the number of operations has been cut off in the Yuan Dynasty. However, they have been lenient with you and have continued to this day.

古文：我师已歼梁王，报汝世仇，不降何待？ 
现代文：我们的军队已经歼灭了梁王，替你们报了世代的怨仇，你们此时不向朝廷投降还等什么？ 
English: Our army has already annihilated King Liang and avenged you for generations. If you do not surrender to the imperial court at this time, what are you waiting for?

古文：十五年，征南左将军蓝玉、右将军沐英率师攻大理。
现代文：十五年，征南左将军蓝玉、右将军沐英率军队进攻大理。
English: In the fifteenth year, the Southern Expedition left General Lan Yu and the right General Mu Ying led the army to attack Dali.

古文：大理城倚点苍山，西临洱河为固。
现代文：大理城靠着点苍山，西临洱河，地势坚固。
English: Dali City is located at the foot of the Cangshan Mountain and west of the Fenhe River, with a rugged terrain.

古文：闻王师至，聚众扼下关。
现代文：听说朝廷的军队到了，他们便聚集众人扼守下关。
English: When they heard that the imperial army had arrived, they gathered everyone to guard Shimonoseki.

古文：下关者，南诏皮罗阁所筑龙尾关也，号极险。
现代文：下关，是南诏的皮罗阁所修筑的龙尾关，号称极险之地。
English: Shimonoseki is the Dragon's Tail Pass built by Nanzhao's Piro Pavilion, and is known as a place of extreme danger.

古文：玉等至品甸，遣定远侯王弼以兵由洱水东趋上关，为掎角势，自率众抵下关，造攻具。
现代文：蓝玉到达品甸后，派定远侯王弼带兵从洱水往东直趋上关，做犄角之势；自己则率领军队抵达下关，制造攻关的工具。
English: After the Blue Jade arrived at Pingtian, he sent the distant Hou Wangye to lead the soldiers from Surabaya to the east to Shangguan, to make the situation better; he himself led the army to arrive at Shimonoseki, to make the tools to tackle the problem.

古文：遣都督胡海洋由石门间道夜渡河，绕出点苍山后，攀木援崖而上，立旗帜。
现代文：蓝玉又派都督胡海洋从石门小道冒着夜色渡过河去，绕到点苍山背后，攀援树木从悬崖上去，插立了许多旗帜。
English: Blue Jade also sent the governor, Hu Haiyang, to cross the river from the Stone Gate Trail in the dark, go around the back of the Point Cangshan, climb trees from the cliff, and set up many flags.

古文：昧爽，军抵下关者望见，皆踊跃讙噪，蛮众惊乱。
现代文：黎明时分，抵达下关的大军望见旗帜，都踊跃欢呼，蛮人看了后很惊乱。
English: At dawn, the large army that arrived at Shimonoseki saw the flag and cheered. The barbarians were very surprised.

古文：英身先士卒，策马渡河，水没马腹，将士随之，遂斩关入。
现代文：沐英身先士卒，策马渡河，水深没到马腹，后面的将士都跟着沐英，于是便斩开关索杀了进去。
English: Mu Ying was the first to cross the river with his horse. The water was not deep enough to reach the horse's belly. The soldiers behind followed Mu Ying, so they cut the rope to enter the river.

古文：蛮兵溃，拔其城，酋长段世就擒。
现代文：蛮族军队溃散而逃，于是明军攻拔了大理城，活捉了他们的酋长段世。
English: The barbarian army scattered and fled, so the Ming army attacked Dali City and captured their chieftain Duanzhe alive.

古文：世与明皆段宝子也。
现代文：段世和段明都是段宝的儿子。
English: Both Duan Shih and Duan Ming are the sons of Duan Bao.

古文：至京师，帝传谕曰： 尔父宝曾有降表，朕不忍废。 
现代文：将段世解送到京城后，皇帝抚慰他说 ：你的父亲段宝曾有降表给我们，我不忍心撕毁这个降表。 
English: After releasing Duan Shih to Beijing, the emperor comforted him and said, "Your father Duan Bao once gave us a surrender form. I can't bear to tear it up."

古文：赐长子名归仁，授永昌卫镇抚；次子名归义，授雁门镇抚。
现代文：于是皇帝便给段世的长子赐名叫归仁，授予他永昌卫镇抚的官职；给段世的次子赐名叫归义，授予他雁门镇抚的官职。
English: As a result, the emperor named Duan's eldest son Guiren and gave him the official post of Yongchang Weizhen governor; he named Duan's second son Guiyi and gave him the official post of Ganmen governor.

古文：大理悉定，因改大理路为大理府，置卫，设指挥使司。
现代文：大理都平定以后，朝廷就将大理路改为大理府，建立了卫所，设立指挥使司。
English: After Dali was pacified, the imperial court changed Dali Road to Dali Prefecture, established a nursing station, and set up a command and envoy department.

古文：十六年，品甸土酋杜惠来朝，命为千夫长。
现代文：十六年，品甸土酋长杜惠前来朝觐，皇帝任命他为千夫长。
English: Sixteen years ago, Du Hui, the chief of the Pingtian soil, came to the imperial court, and the emperor appointed him as the chief of the thousand.

古文：命六安侯王志、安庆侯仇成、凤翔侯张龙督兵往云南品甸，缮城池，立屯堡，置邮传，安辑人民。
现代文：又命令六安侯王志、安庆侯仇成、凤翔侯张龙带兵前往云南的品甸，修缮城池，建立屯堡，设置邮传，安抚百姓。
English: He also ordered the six An princes Wang Zhi, Anqing prince Qucheng, and Fengxiang prince Zhang Long to take soldiers to Pingtian in Yunnan to repair the city, build a camp, set up a postal service, and pacify the people.

古文：十七年以土官阿这为邓川知州，阿散为太和府正千夫长，李朱为副千夫长，杨奴为云南县丞。
现代文：十七年任命土官阿这为邓川知州，阿散为太和府正千夫长，李朱为副千夫长，杨奴为云南县的县丞。
English: In the seventeenth year, the local officials appointed Ah Can as the chief magistrate of Dengchuan County, Ah San as the chief magistrate of Taihe Prefecture, Li Zhu as the deputy chief magistrate, and Yang Nu as the county magistrate of Yunnan County.

古文：十九年置云南洱海卫指挥使司，以赖镇为指挥佥事。
现代文：十九年设置云南洱海卫指挥使司，以赖镇为指挥佥事。
English: In 1919, the Yunnan Bohai Coast Guard Command and Control Division was set up, with Lai Town as the command center.

古文：洱海，本品甸也。
现代文：洱海，本来属品甸。
English: Bohai Sea, originally belonged to Pingtian.

古文：兵燹后，人民流亡，室庐无复存者。
现代文：遭受兵灾以后，百姓流亡，房屋都被破坏了。
English: After the military disaster, the people were exiled and their houses were destroyed.

古文：镇至，复城池，建谯楼，治庐舍市里，修屯堡、堤防、斥堠，又开白盐井，民始安辑。
现代文：赖镇到了以后，修复城池，建立谯楼，建设了房屋、市场和里巷，修筑了屯堡、堤防、斥土侯，又开凿了白盐井，这样百姓才开始安居下来。
English: After the arrival of Lai Town, the people began to settle down after repairing the castle, building a watchtower, constructing houses, markets and lanes, building a fort, embankment, bulldozer, and digging a white salt well.

古文：二十年诏景川侯曹震及四川都司选精兵二万五千人，给军器农具，即云南品甸屯种，以俟征讨。
现代文：二十年，皇帝下诏给景川侯曹震和四川都司，让他们挑选精兵二万五千人，发给他们军器和农具，让他们到云南品甸前去屯荒耕种，等待征讨的诏令。
English: Twenty years ago, the emperor issued an edict to the Jingchuan lord Cao Zhen and the Sichuan governor, asking them to select twenty-five thousand elite soldiers, give them military equipment and agricultural tools, and let them go to Pingtian in Yunnan to settle and cultivate, waiting for the edict to be collected.

古文：永乐以后，云南诸土官州县，率按期入贡，进马及方物，朝廷赐予如制。
现代文：永乐年间以后，云南各土司地区州县的土官，都按期向朝廷进贡，献马匹和土产，朝廷按制度都给予他们赏赐。
English: After the Yongle Era, the local officials of each county in Yunnan paid tribute to the imperial court on a regular basis, offering horses and local products. The imperial court rewarded them according to the system.

古文：嘉靖元年改十二关长官司于一泡江之西，从巡抚何孟春奏也。
现代文：嘉靖元年，朝廷听从巡抚何孟春的上奏，将十二关长官司改到一泡江的西面。临安，就是古代的句田丁国。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the imperial court followed the lead of the procurator He Mengchun and changed the twelve chief officials to the west side of a river. Lin'an is the ancient Gu Tianting country.

古文：临安，古句町国。
现代文：汉朝时在此地设县。
English: It was made a county during the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉置县。唐为羁縻牁州地。
现代文：唐朝时在此设立羁縻性的州。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, a prefectural capital was established here.

古文：天宝末，南诏蒙氏于此置通海郡。
现代文：唐朝天宝末年，南诏的蒙氏在此设置通海郡。
English: In the last years of the Tang Dynasty, the Meng clan of Nanzhao set up Tonghai County here.

古文：元时内附，置阿僰部万户府。
现代文：元朝内附朝廷，朝廷在此设置阿覺部万户府。
English: The Imperial Court was attached to the Yuan Dynasty, and the Imperial Court set up the Akakubu Mandokufu here.

古文：至元中改临安路，属临安、广西、元江等处宣慰司。
现代文：元朝至元中年，将此地改为临安路，隶属于临安、广西、元江等处宣慰司。
English: From the Yuan Dynasty to the middle of the Yuan Dynasty, this place was changed to Lin'an Road, and was affiliated with the Department of Consolation in Lin'an, Guangxi, and Yuanjiang.

古文：洪武十四年，征南将军下云南，遣宣德侯金朝兴分道取临安。
现代文：洪武十四年，征南将军攻下云南，便派宣德侯金朝兴分道攻取临安。
English: In the 14th year of Hongwu, when the Southern Expeditionary Force invaded Yunnan, he sent Xuan Dehuo Kim Chaoxing to conquer Lin'an.

古文：元右丞兀卜台、元帅完者都及土官杨政降，改路为府，废宣慰司，置临安卫指挥使司。
现代文：元朝的右丞相兀卜台、元帅完者都以及土官杨政投降朝廷，朝廷将临安路改为临安府，废除了宣慰司，设置临安卫指挥使司。
English: The Yuan Dynasty's Minister of the Right, Eubutai, and Marshal Ganja, as well as the local official Yang Zheng, surrendered to the imperial court. The imperial court changed Lin'an Road to Lin'an Prefecture, abolished the Consolation Division, and set up the Lin'an Guard Command and Envoy Division.

古文：十七年以土官和宁为阿迷知州，弄甥为宁州知州，陆羡为蒙自知县，普少为纳娄茶甸副长官；俱来朝贡，因给诰敕冠带以命之。
现代文：十七年，任命土官和宁为阿迷州的知州，弄甥为宁州的知州，陆羡为蒙自县的知县，普少为纳娄茶甸的副长官。他们都来京城朝觐献贡，皇帝就下诏给他们封这些职务，并给他们赏赐冠带。
English: In the seventeenth year, he appointed the local officials He Ning as the chizhou of Amanzhou, Tongnephew as the chizhou of Ningzhou, Lu Qian as the chizhou of Mengji County, and Pu Shao as the vice-governor of Labuan. They all came to the capital to make a pilgrimage and pay tribute, and the emperor issued a decree to give them these positions and reward them with crowns.

古文：十八年，临安府千户纳速丁等来朝，人赐米十石。
现代文：十八年，临安府的千户纳速丁等人前来朝贡，朝廷给他们每人赏赐米十石。
English: In the 18th year, Naso-Din and others from 1,000 households in Lin'an Prefecture came to pay tribute, and the imperial court rewarded each of them with 10 koku of rice.

古文：永乐九年，溪处甸长官司副长官自恩来朝，贡马及金银器，赐赉如例。
现代文：永乐九年，溪处甸长官司副长官自恩前来京城朝觐，向皇上进献贡马和金银器，皇帝按惯例对他给予赏赐。
English: In the ninth year of the Yongle Emperor's reign, Xizhudian, the chief of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office

古文：自恩因言： 本司岁纳海〈贝巴〉七万九千八百索，非土所产，乞准钞银为便。 
现代文：自恩就对皇帝说 ：本司每年向朝廷缴纳海贝巴七万九千八百索，我们那里不出产海贝巴，请求皇上准许我们将海贝巴折算成银钱上缴朝廷，这样方便。 
English: With self-satisfaction, he said to the emperor, "Our department annually pays the Imperial Court a total of 79,800 rupees for hibepa. We do not produce hibepa there, so it is convenient for us to ask the Emperor's permission to convert hibepa into silver and hand it over to the Imperial Court.

古文：户部以洪武中定额，难准折输。
现代文：户部认为这是洪武年间所定的数额，恐怕难以准许他们将此折算成银钱输送上来。
English: The Household Department believes that this is the amount determined during the Hongwu era, and it is difficult to allow them to convert this into money and send it up.

古文：帝曰： 取有于无，适以厉民，况彼远夷，尤当宽恤，其除之。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：当地没有这种物产，却偏要从这个地方求取，这正会疏远百姓的，何况他们又是远方的夷族人，尤其应当宽待体恤他们，将他们的海贝巴税免了吧。 
English: The emperor said, "There is no such property locally, but they want to get it from this place, which will alienate the people. Moreover, they are distant barbarians. In particular, they should be treated with tolerance and compassion, and their Hebei tax should be exempted."

古文：宣德五年，中官云仙还自云南，奏设东山口巡检司，以故土官后普觉为巡检。
现代文：宣德五年，宫中的官员云仙从云南回来，上奏给皇帝，请求设置东山口巡检司，任命已故土官的后代普觉为巡检。
English: In the fifth year of Xuande, the palace official Yun Xian returned from Yunnan and reported to the emperor, requesting the establishment of the East Yamaguchi Inspection Division and the appointment of the descendants of the deceased local official Pu Jue as inspectors.

古文：八年，亏容甸长官司奏： 河底自洪武中官置渡船，路通车里、八百。
现代文：八年，亏容甸长官司上奏说： 洪武年间宫中官员在河底设置渡船，这样道路就通向车里、八百等地。
English: In the eighth year, the chief magistrate of Hongwu said: During the Hongwu era, palace officials set up ferries at the bottom of the river, so that the road leads to the car, eight hundred and so on.

古文：近年军民有逃逸出境诈称使者，迫令乘载，往往被害，又沿河时有劫盗出没。
现代文：近年来有军民逃出境外，谎称自己是使者，强迫渡船乘载他们，结果又往往被害。同时沿河地区又时常有强盗出没。
English: In recent years, soldiers and civilians have fled abroad, falsely claiming to be emissaries, forcing ferries to carry them, often resulting in injury. At the same time, robbers often haunt the areas along the river.

古文：乞置巡检司，以故把事袁凯之子瑀为巡检。 
现代文：请求朝廷在此设置巡检司，任命已故的把事袁凯的儿子袁王禹为巡检。 
English: He requested the imperial court to set up an inspection division here and to appoint Yuan Kai's son, Yuan Wang Yu, who had been in charge of the case, as an inspector.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：嘉靖元年复设宁州流官知州，掌州事，土知州禄氏专职巡捕。
现代文：嘉靖元年，又在宁州设流官做知州，掌管州里事务，土知州禄氏则专门负责巡捕事务。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, a Cossack officer was set up in Ningzhou to be the Cossack of Chizhou, in charge of the affairs of Chizhou, while the Cossack of Tochizhou was specifically responsible for patrolling affairs.

古文：宁州旧设流官，正德初，土官禄俸阴贿刘瑾罢之。
现代文：宁州原先也设流官，正德初年，土官禄俸暗地里贿赂刘瑾，将流官罢免了。
English: Originally, Ningzhou also had a local government official. In the first year of Zhengde, the local government official Lu Han secretly bribed Liu Wei to remove the local government official.

古文：遂交通弥勒州十八寨强贼为乱，为官军捕诛，其子禄世爵复以罪谕死。
现代文：于是禄俸勾结弥勒州十八寨的强贼作乱，被官军抓获后诛杀，他的儿子禄世爵又因犯罪被处死。
English: As a result, Lukpan colluded with robbers from 18 villages in Maile Prefecture to cause a riot, and was captured and killed by the government army. His son, Lu Shijie, was also executed for his crime.

古文：抚按请仍设流官，从之。
现代文：现抚按官请求朝廷在该地仍然设置流官，皇帝同意了。
English: At the request of the current governor, the court still set up a liaison officer in the place, and the emperor agreed.

古文：初，临安阿迷州土官普柱，洪武中为土知州。
现代文：当初，临安阿迷州土官普柱，在洪武中年当土知州。
English: At the beginning, Lin'an and Amizhou local official Fuzhu, in Hongwu's middle age, was Tochi Prefecture.

古文：后设流，录其后觉为东山巡检，既而以他事废。
现代文：后来朝廷在当地设置流官，便录用普柱的后代普觉为东山的巡检，不久又因其他事将东山巡检废了。
English: Later, the imperial court set up a stream official in the local area, and then hired the descendants of Pu Zhu as the patrol inspection of Dongshan, and soon abolished the patrol inspection of Dongshan due to other matters.

古文：正德二年以广西维摩、王弄山与阿迷接壤，盗出没，仍令普觉后纳继前职。
现代文：正德二年，朝廷因为广西的维摩、王弄山与阿迷接壤，有强盗出没，便仍然让普觉的后代普纳继任东山巡检职务。
English: In the second year of Zhengde, the imperial court still allowed Pu Jue's descendant, Puna, to succeed to the Dongshan inspection post, because there were robbers in the vicinity of the border between Wima and Wang Loushan in Guangxi and Aman.

古文：普维藩者，与宁州禄氏构兵，师歼焉。
现代文：有一个叫普维藩的人，与宁州的禄氏构兵动武，结果他的军队全被歼灭。
English: A man by the name of Pu Wei, together with the soldiers of the Lu family from Ningzhou, took up arms, and as a result, his entire army was annihilated.

古文：维藩子名声，幼育于官，既长，有司俾继父职。
现代文：普维藩有个儿子叫普名声，从小在官府中抚养，长大成人后，有关官府让他继承其父亲的职务。
English: The Puwei clan had a son named Pu Mingsheng, who was raised in the government from a young age. When he became an adult, the government allowed him to inherit his father's position.

古文：名声收拾旧部，勇于攻战，从讨奢安有功，仍授土知州，渐骄恣。
现代文：普名声收拾起他父亲的老部下，攻伐战斗中很勇敢，跟从官军讨伐奢安时立有功劳，朝廷便仍授予他土知州的职务，他便渐渐骄横恣意起来。
English: His father's old subordinates, who were very brave in the offensive and battle, gained fame, and the imperial court still awarded him the post of Tochi Prefecture when he followed the government army to fight luxury and safety. He gradually became arrogant and arbitrary.

古文：崇祯五年，御史赵洪范按部，名声不出迎。
现代文：崇祯五年，御史赵洪范出来巡察，普名声不出来迎接。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Grand Historian Zhao Hongfan came out to inspect, but the general reputation did not come out to meet him.

古文：已，出戈甲旗帜列数里。
现代文：后来又将戈甲和旗帜排列出来长达数里。
English: Later, the goggles and flags were lined up for several miles.

古文：洪范大怒，谋之巡抚王伉，请讨，得旨。
现代文：赵洪范大怒，与巡抚王伉策划之后，向朝廷请求讨伐普名声，得到圣旨同意，官军便围困了州城。
English: Zhao Hongfan was furious, and after scheming with the governor Wang Qi, he asked the imperial court to fight against Pu fame. With the approval of the imperial edict, the government army besieged the state capital.

古文：官军进围州城，名声恐，使人约降，而阴以重贿求援于元谋土官吾必奎。
现代文：普名声感到恐惧，便一面派人约定日期向官军投降，一面又以重礼贿赂元谋土官吾必奎，向他求援。
English: Fearing that his reputation would be tarnished, he sent someone to set a date for surrendering to the government army, and at the same time bribed the former military governor, Wu Bikui, to ask him for help.

古文：时官军已调必奎随征，必奎与名声战，兵始合，佯败走。
现代文：此时官军已经调拨吾必奎随军征讨普名声，于是吾必奎与普名声接战，双方军队刚一接触，吾必奎便佯装失败而逃。
English: At this time, the government army had already assigned Wu Bikui to follow the army to fight for universal fame, so Wu Bikui fought with universal fame. As soon as the two armies came into contact, Wu Bikui pretended to be defeated and fled.

古文：官军望见，遂大溃，布政使周士昌战死。
现代文：官军望见这个阵势，便全部溃散，布政使周士昌为此战死。
English: When the government army saw this formation, they all broke up, and Buzheng sent Zhou Shichang to his death.

古文：朝廷以起衅罪伉，逮治，而名声就抚。
现代文：朝廷以挑起事端罪逮捕了王伉，招抚了普名声。
English: The imperial court arrested Wang Yao for the crime of provoking an incident, and his reputation was tarnished.

古文：然骄恣益甚，当事者颇以为患。
现代文：此后普名声骄横恣意比以前更甚，当事者都觉得这是一个祸患。
English: Since then, the reputation of arrogance and arbitrariness has increased more than before, and all parties feel that this is a scourge.

古文：已而广西知府张继孟道出阿迷，以计毒杀之。
现代文：不久，广西知府张继孟将普名声引出阿迷州，设计毒死了他。
English: Soon, the governor of Guangxi Province, Zhang Jimeng, brought fame to Amanzhou, and the design poisoned him.

古文：必奎闻名声死，遂反，连陷武定、禄丰、楚雄诸城。
现代文：吾必奎听说普名声死了，便起来造反，连续攻陷了武定、禄丰、楚雄等城。
English: When Wu Bikui heard that Pu Mingsheng was dead, he rebelled and successively captured Wuding, Lufeng, Chuxiong and other cities.

古文：宁州土官禄永命、石屏州土目龙在田，俱与必奎、名声从征著名，至是，黔国公沐天波檄之统兵，合剿擒必奎。
现代文：宁州土官禄永命、石屏州土目龙在田都是与吾必奎、普名声一样跟随官军出征而著名的，至此，黔国公沐天波斌传书给他们，要他们带兵共同围剿捉拿吾必奎。
English: Lu Yongmin, a local official in Ningzhou, and Domenglong, a local official in Shiping, were both famous for following the government army to the battlefield, just like Wu Bikui and Pu Ren. At this time, the governor of Shandong Province, Mu Tianbobin, sent a letter to them, asking them to take soldiers to jointly encircle the enemy and capture Wu Bikui.

古文：名声妻万氏，本江西寄籍女，淫而狡。
现代文：普名声的妻子万氏，是祖籍江西而寄籍于云南人家的女儿，性情淫荡狡猾。
English: The wife of universal fame, Wan, is the daughter of a family originally from Jiangxi but now residing in Yunnan. She has a lascivious and cunning temperament.

古文：名声死后，改嫁王弄山副长官沙源之子定洲。
现代文：普名声死后，她改嫁给王弄山副长官沙源的儿子沙定洲。
English: After Pu Ren's death, she was remarried to Sha Dingzhou, the son of Wang Loushan's vice-governor Sha Yuan.

古文：名声有子曰服远，与万氏分寨居，定洲诱杀服远，并其地。
现代文：普名声有个儿子叫普服远，与万氏分寨而居，沙定洲诱杀了普服远，吞并了他的领地。
English: Pu was reputed to have a son named Pu Fu Yuan, who lived separately from Wan. Shading Zhou killed Pu Fu Yuan and annexed his territory.

古文：天波檄定洲取必奎，定洲不欲行，遂反，详前传。
现代文：沐天波传檄文给沙定洲，要他带兵去捉拿吾必奎，沙定洲不想去，于是造反。
English: Mu Tianbo sent a message to Shading Zhou, asking him to take soldiers to capture Wu Bikui. Shading Zhou did not want to go, so he rebelled.

古文：临安领州四，县四。
现代文：此事前面已有详细描述。
English: This has been described in detail before.

古文：其长官司有九，曰纳楼茶甸，曰教化三部，曰溪处甸，曰左能寨，曰王弄山，曰亏容甸，曰思陀甸，曰落恐甸，曰安南，其地皆在郡东南。
现代文：临安统领有四个州、四个县，其下有九个长官司，分别称为：纳楼茶甸、教化三部、溪处甸、左能寨、王弄山、亏容甸、思陀甸、落恐甸、安南，这些长官司全都位于郡的东南方。
English: Lin'an has four prefectures and four counties, under which there are nine chief magistrates, respectively known as: Na Lou Cha Dian, Guihua Sanbu, Xi Cheng Dian, Zuo Nengzhai, Wang Lingshan, Kuo Rong Dian, Sida Dian, Luo Xi Dian, and Annan. These chief magistrates are all located in the southeast of the county.

古文：西平侯征安南，取道于此。
现代文：西平侯征讨安南时，即取道于此。
English: When Xiping marched against Annan, he took the road here.

古文：莲花滩之外即交荒外，而临安无南面之虞者，以诸甸为之备也。
现代文：莲花滩之外就是荒滩。临安南面之所以没有危险，就是因为有上述备甸守卫的缘故。
English: Beyond Lotus Beach is a deserted beach. The reason why there is no danger on the south side of Lin'an is because of the above-mentioned Baidian guards.

古文：但地多瘴，流官不欲入，诸长官亦不请代袭，自相冠带，日寻干戈。
现代文：但是该地多瘴气，流官不愿进入该地区，各长官司长官也不请求朝廷批准谁代替或继承长官职务，而是自己相互戴冠佩带，每天都动干戈争杀。
English: However, there is a lot of ill-feeling in the region, the ex-officials do not want to enter the region, and the heads of departments do not ask the court to approve who will replace or succeed to the post of director. Instead, they wear each other's crowns and fight each other every day.

古文：纳楼部内有矿场三，曰中场、鹅黄、摩诃。
现代文：在纳楼部落内有三个矿场，分别称为：中场、鹅黄、摩诃。
English: There are three mines in the Na Lou tribe, respectively known as: Zhongfang, Geowang and Mafang.

古文：封闭已久，亡命多窃取之。
现代文：这些矿场封闭已久，亡命之徒多窃为己有。
English: These mines have been closed for a long time, and the outlaws have stolen most of them for themselves.

古文：其安南长官司，本阿僰蛮所居，旧名褒古，后名舍资。
现代文：那里的安南长官司，本来是阿覺蛮人所居住，旧名叫褒古，后来叫舍资。
English: The Annan Chief Magistrate's Office there was originally inhabited by Akoku barbarians. It was formerly known as Bogo, and later called Shezai.

古文：元为舍资千户所。
现代文：元朝时设置了舍资千户所。
English: At the time of the Yuan Dynasty, a fund of 1,000 households was set up.

古文：以地近交址，改安南，属临安路。
现代文：因该地靠近交趾，改名为安南，隶属于临安路。
English: Because the place is close to Jiaozuo, it was renamed Annan and is part of Lin'an Road.

古文：景东每调兵二千，必自效千余，饷士之费，未尝仰给公家，土司中最称恭顺。其府治东有邦泰山，颇险峻，土官陶姓所世居也。广南，宋时名特磨道。
现代文：正德八年，蒙自的土舍禄祥为争夺其父职务的继承权，杀死了嫡兄禄仁。安南长官司土舍那代以军队帮助禄祥，于是便作乱，守卫当地的大臣讨伐平定了他们。此事上报朝廷后，朝廷命令革去蒙自土官职位，将原长官司改为新安守御千户所，调遣临安卫中所的官军前去戍守。广南，宋朝时名叫特磨道。
English: In the 8th year of the Zhengde era, Lu Xiang, a self-appointed local magistrate, killed his elder brother Lu Ren to fight for the right to inherit his father's position. The Annan chief magistrate, Lu Xiang, used the army to help Lu Xiang, so they caused a riot, and the local guarding minister fought and defeated them. After the matter was reported to the imperial court, the imperial court ordered that Lu Xiang be dismissed from the post of local magistrate, the former chief magistrate was changed to the new An Guo of thousands of households, and the official army of Lin An Wei was dispatched to guard. Guangnan

古文：土酋侬姓，智高之裔也。
现代文：当地土著酋长姓侬，是侬智高的后裔。
English: The local indigenous chief's surname was Nong, and he was a descendant of Nong Zhigao.

古文：元至元间，立广南西路宣抚司。
现代文：元朝至元年间，设立了广南西路宣抚司。
English: From the Yuan Dynasty to the first year of the year, the Guangnan West Road Publicity Department was established.

古文：初领路城等五州，后惟领安宁、富二州。
现代文：该司开初统领有路城等五个州，后来只统领安宁、富州两个州。
English: At the beginning, the department was in charge of five states, including Lucheng. Later, it was only in charge of two states, Anning and Fuzhou.

古文：洪武十五年归附，改广南府，以土官侬郎金为同知。
现代文：洪武十五年，广南西路宣抚司归附朝廷，朝廷便将其改为广南府，任命土官侬郎金为同知。
English: In the 15th year of Hongwu, the Guangnan West Road Publicity Department was attached to the imperial court, and the imperial court changed it to Guangnan Prefecture, appointing the local official Nong Lang Jin as a confidant.

古文：十八年，郎金来朝，赐锦绮钞锭。
现代文：十八年，侬郎金前来朝觐皇帝，皇帝赐给他锦绮和钱钞。
English: In the 18th year, Nonglang Jin came to the court of the emperor, and the emperor gave him brocade and money.

古文：二十八年，都指挥同知王俊奉命率云南后卫官军至广南，筑城建卫。
现代文：二十八年，都指挥同知王俊奉命率领云南后卫的官军到达广南，筑城墙建卫所。
English: In the 28th year, Wang Jun, who commanded Tongzhi, was ordered to lead the official army of the Yunnan guard to Guangnan, build the city wall and build the guard station.

古文：郎金父贞佑不自安，结众据山寨拒守。
现代文：侬郎金的父亲侬贞佑自己不安分，聚众占据山寨抗拒官军的戍守。
English: Nong Lang Jin's father, Nong Zhen You, was restless and gathered a crowd to occupy the cottage to resist the government army's presence.

古文：俊遣人招之，不服，时伏草莽中劫掠，觇官军进退。
现代文：王俊派人招抚他，他不服从，时常埋伏在草莽中抢劫别人，并窥探官军的进退行止。
English: Wang Jun sent someone to cajole him, but he disobeyed, often lying in wait in the grass to rob others, and spying on the advance and retreat of the official army.

古文：俊乃遣指挥欧庆等分兵攻各寨，自将取贞佑；又以兵扼间道，绝其救援。
现代文：王俊便派遣指挥欧庆等人分兵攻打各村寨，自己准备去捉拿侬贞佑；同时他又派兵守住小道，以切断有人对侬贞佑的救援。
English: Wang Jun then sent a detachment of soldiers under the command of Ou Qing and others to attack each village, preparing himself to capture Nanon Zhenyou; at the same time, he also sent soldiers to guard the trail to cut off anyone's rescue of Nanon Zhenyou.

古文：诸寨悉破，众溃，贞佑穷促就擒，械送京师。
现代文：各寨子都被攻破后，众人溃散，侬贞佑形势穷促被擒。王俊将其戴上桎梏押送到京城。
English: After each stockade was breached, the crowd dispersed, and Nong Zhenyou was arrested. Wang Jun put him in shackles and sent him to the capital.

古文：降郎金为府通判。
现代文：朝廷将侬郎金从同知降为通判。
English: The court downgraded Nonglangjin from a confidant to a co-judge.

古文：永乐六年，富州土知州沈弦经入贡，值仁孝皇后丧，弦经奉香币致祭。
现代文：永乐六年，富州的土知州沈纟玄经向朝廷入贡，正碰上仁孝皇后丧亡，沈纟玄经奉香币向仁孝皇后致祭。
English: In the sixth year of Yongle, Fuzhou's Tochi Prefecture, Shen Zhengyuan, paid tribute to the imperial court. At the time of the death of Empress Ninko, Shen Zhengyuan offered incense to the Empress Ninko.

古文：宣德元年，土官侬郎举来朝，贡马。
现代文：宣德元年，土官侬郎举来京城朝觐皇帝，进献贡马。
English: In the first year of Xuande, local official Nong Lang came to the capital to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：正统六年，广南贼阿罗、阿思等劫掠，命总兵官沐昂等招抚之。
现代文：正统六年，广南贼人阿罗、阿思等行抢劫，朝廷命令总兵官沐昂等招抚他们。
English: During the first six years of the Qing Dynasty, the Guangnan thieves Aro and Asi carried out robberies, and the imperial court ordered the commander-in-chief Muang to appease them.

古文：时富州土官沈政与郎举互讦纠众侵地，帝命昂等勘处。
现代文：此时富州土官沈政与侬郎举互相攻讦，各纠集众人侵犯对方领地，皇帝命令沐昂等前去审核处理。
English: At this time, Fuzhou local officials Shen Zheng and Nong Langjie attacked each other, each gathered people to encroach on each other's territory, and the emperor ordered Muang to go forward to review and deal with it.

古文：七年，昂奏二人叛逆无实迹，因有隙相妄奏。
现代文：七年，沐昂上奏说，二人叛逆朝廷没有事实根据，但二人有矛盾，相互妄向朝廷上奏攻讦对方才是实情。
English: In the seventh year, Muang Shangso said that there was no factual basis for the two people to rebel against the court, but the two people had contradictions, and it was the truth that they were attacking each other and attacking the court.

古文：兵部请治政等罪，帝以蛮人宥之。
现代文：兵部请求追究沈政等人的罪行，皇帝认为他们是蛮族人而宽恕了他们。
English: The military department requested that the crimes of Shen Zheng and others be investigated. The emperor considered them to be barbarians and pardoned them.

古文：政、举相仇杀已十余年，时方征麓川，惮兵威不敢动。
现代文：沈政与侬郎举之间互相仇杀已有十多年了，此时官军正在征讨麓川，慑于兵威而不敢轻举妄动。
English: It had been more than ten years since the feud between Shen Zheng and Nong Lang Ji. At this time, the government army was in the process of conquering the Luchuan River, but they were too intimidated by military might to act rashly.

古文：未几，郎举以从征功升同知，死无嗣，四门舍目共推侬文举署事，屡立战功。
现代文：不久，侬郎举因跟官军从征有功，升为同知。他死后没有子嗣，四门的舍目便共同推举侬文举掌管同知事务。侬文举也屡次立有战功。
English: Soon, Nong Rong Ji was promoted to Tong Ji due to his meritorious service with the government army. After his death, he had no children, so the four families jointly elected Nong Wen Ji to be in charge of Tong Ji affairs. Nong Wen Ji also repeatedly distinguished himself in war.

古文：万历七年，实授同知。
现代文：万历七年，授予侬文举同知职位。
English: After seven years of hard work, he was awarded the position of Nongwenqiu Tongzhi.

古文：子应祖从征三乡，亲获贼首，诏赏银百两。
现代文：侬文举的儿子侬应祖在跟随官军征讨三乡的过程中，亲自抓获贼人首领，皇帝下诏赏赐给他白银一百两。
English: Nongwenqiu's son, Nongyingzu, in the process of following the government army to conquer the three townships, personally captured the leader of the thieves, and the emperor rewarded him with one hundred taels of silver.

古文：播州之役，征其兵三千讨寻甸叛目，皆有功，赐四品服。
现代文：播州之役，朝廷从侬文举处征调军队三千人去征讨寻甸的叛目，父子俩都立有功劳，朝廷赐与他们四品官服。
English: During the Battle of Banshu, the imperial court conscripted three thousand soldiers from the Nongwen Military Training Center to fight against the traitors of Sogdian. Both father and son were meritorious, and the imperial court gave them four official uniforms.

古文：侬氏自文举藉四门舍目推拥之力得授职，后侬氏袭替必因之。
现代文：侬氏自从侬文举依靠四门舍目的推举和拥戴得以授受官职以来，后来侬氏的后人承袭或替代官职都必须依靠四门舍目。
English: Since Mr. Nong was able to be elected and appointed to office by relying on the four-door house purpose, his descendants must rely on the four-door house purpose to inherit or replace the official position.

古文：土官之政出于四门，租税仅取十之一。
现代文：土官的政策出自四门舍目，而租税仅取十分之一。
English: The policy of the local magistrate is based on the principle of "four doors, one door," and the tax is only one-tenth of the price.

古文：道险多瘴，知府不至其地，印以临安指挥一人署之。
现代文：此地道路险峻多瘴气，知府又不到该地来，官印全由临安指挥一个人掌管。
English: The road here is very steep and dangerous, the prefectural government does not come to this place, and the official seal is all controlled by one person under the command of Linan.

古文：指挥出，印封一室，入取，必有瘟疠死亡。
现代文：指挥一出去，官印就封存在一个室内，一进去取印，则必有瘟疫死亡的事情发生。
English: As soon as the commander goes out, the official seal is sealed in a room, and as soon as he goes in to get the seal, there is bound to be a plague death.

古文：万历末，知府廖铉者，避瘴临安，以印付同知侬仕英子添寿。
现代文：万历末年，知府廖铉到临安躲避瘴气，将官印交付给同知侬仕英的儿子侬添寿。
English: In the last year of the Wanli era, the prefectural governor, Liao Wei, went to Lin'an to avoid ill-will and delivered the official seal to his acquaintance, Nong Tian Shou, the son of Nong Shih Ying.

古文：添寿死，家奴窃印并经历司印以逃，既而归印于其族叔侬仕祥。
现代文：侬添寿死后，他的家奴将知府印和经历司印窃取后逃走，不久这些印信全归还到侬添寿的族叔侬仁祥的手上。
English: After the death of Nong Tianshou, his family slave stole the seal of the prefectural governor and the seal of the experienced secretary and fled. Soon, these seals were all returned to the hands of Nong Tianshou's family member, Nong Renxiang.

古文：时仕英亲弟仕獬例得袭，索仕祥印，仕祥不与，遂献地与泗城土官岑接，与连婚构兵，灭仕獬家。
现代文：这时侬仕英的亲弟弟侬仕獬按惯例可以承袭其兄长的官职，于是侬仕獬去侬仕祥处索讨官印。侬仕祥不给，将侬氏家族的领地献给泗城土官岑接，并与岑接联姻构兵消灭了侬仕獬一家。
English: At this time, Nong Shih-ying's own brother, Nong Shih-yong, could inherit his brother's official position according to the usual practice, so Nong Shih-yong went to Nong Shih-hsiang's office to ask for the official seal. Nong Shih-hsiang did not give it to him, he dedicated the territory of Nong's family to the local magistrate of Shicheng, and wiped out Nong Shih-yong's family with the allied soldiers.

古文：及仕祥死，子琳以府印送接，而经历司印又为琳弟琼所有。
现代文：等到侬仕祥死后，他的儿子侬琳将知府印送给岑接，而经历司印则被侬琳的弟弟侬琼所占有。
English: After the death of Nong Shixiang, his son Nong Lin sent the prefectural seal to Xuan Jie, while the experienced seal was occupied by Nong Lin's younger brother Nong Qiong.

古文：巡抚王懋中调兵往问，琼惧，还印于通判周宪，接亦出府印献于官。
现代文：巡抚王懋中调遣军队前去问罪，侬琼害怕，将经历司印交还给通判周宪，而岑接也将知府印拿出来献给官府。
English: The governor, Wang Yuzhong, dispatched troops to investigate the crime, but Nong Qiong was afraid and returned the official seal to the judge, Zhou Xian, while Nian Jie also took out the prefectural seal and presented it to the government.

古文：后与木邦罕正构难不绝云。
现代文：此时军队刚到达广南境界，听到官印已经回归的消息后王懋中便急忙将军队调遣回去。
English: At this time, the army had just arrived at the Guangnan border, and after hearing the news that the official seal had returned, Wang Yizhong hurriedly sent the army back.

古文：曲靖，隋恭、协二州地。唐置南宁州，改恭州为曲州，分协州置靖州，至元初，置磨弥部万户，后改为曲靖路宣慰司。
现代文：朝廷大臣讨论后认为应治廖铉擅离职守和守巡失抚之罪，而侬琼、岑接已经表示服罪，就不再追究了。皇帝下诏认为这意见可行。不久，侬绍汤兄弟俩为争夺官位的继承权，各纠集交趾的军队和战象将该地焚烧抢劫一空。曲靖，是隋朝时恭州和协州之地。唐朝设置南宁州，将恭州改为曲州，将协州分开设置靖州。元朝至元初年，设置磨弥部万户，后来改为曲靖路宣慰司。
English: After discussion, the ministers of the Imperial Court thought that Yingzhi Liaoyang was guilty of leaving his post without permission and failing to keep a patrol in Cangzhou, while Nongqiong and Xuanjie had already confessed to the crime and would no longer be investigated. The emperor's edict considered this opinion feasible. Soon, the Nongshao Tang brothers competed for the right to inherit the official post, and the troops and war elephants gathered together to burn and rob the place. Qujing was the place of Qiongzhou and Xiezhou during the Sui Dynasty. The Tang Dynasty set up Nanning Province, changed Qiongzhou to Qiongzhou,

古文：洪武十四年，征南将军下云南，元曲靖宣慰司征行元帅张麟、行省平章刘辉等来降。
现代文：洪武十四年，征南将军攻下云南，元朝曲靖宣慰司征行元帅张麟、行省平章刘辉等人前来投降。
English: In the 14th year of Hongwu, the Southern Expeditionary Army invaded Yunnan, and the Yuan Dynasty Qujing Xuan comfort Division, the expeditionary marshal Zhang Lin, the provincial governor Pingzhang Liu Hui and others came to surrender.

古文：十五年改曲靖千户所为曲靖军民指挥使司，置曲靖军民府。
现代文：十五年朝廷将曲靖千户所改为曲靖军民指挥使司，设置曲靖军民府。
English: In the 15th year, the imperial court changed the Qujing Thousand Households Office to the Qujing Military and Civilian Command and Envoy Office, and set up the Qujing Military and Civilian Government.

古文：十六年，沾益州土官安索叔、安磁等贡马及罗罗刀甲、毡衫、虎皮。诏赐磁、冠带、绮罗衣各一袭并文绮、钞锭。
现代文：十六年，沾益州的土官安索叔、安磁等人向朝廷献贡马和罗罗族的刀甲、毡毛衫及虎皮，皇帝下诏给他们赏赐磁器、冠带、绮衣罗衣各一袭以及有花纹的丝绸和钱钞。
English: In the 16th year, Uncle Anso and An Magnet, the local officials of Zhanyi Prefecture, presented to the imperial court the gongs and swords, embroidered sweaters and tiger skins of the Luo and Luo ethnic groups. The emperor issued a decree to reward them with porcelain, crown belts, embroidered robes, as well as patterned silk and money.

古文：罗雄州土酋纳居来朝，赐钞币。
现代文：罗雄州的土著酋长纳居前来朝觐皇帝，皇帝赏赐钱钞给他。
English: The aboriginal chief of Luoxiang County, Na Ju, came to pay a visit to the emperor, who rewarded him with money and banknotes.

古文：十七年，亦佐县土酋安伯作乱，西平侯沐英发兵讨降之。
现代文：十七年，亦佐县的土著酋长安伯作乱，西平侯沐英发兵讨伐并降服了他们。
English: In the seventeenth year, the indigenous chief of Isa County, Amber, led a rebellion, and Siping Hou Mu Ying sent troops to fight and subdue them.

古文：二十年，越州土酋阿资与罗雄州营长发束等叛。
现代文：二十年，越州土著酋长阿资与罗雄州营长发束等人叛乱。
English: Twenty years ago, the indigenous chief of Yuezhou, Azhi, rebelled against the battalion commander of Luoxiong and others.

古文：阿资者，土官龙海子也。
现代文：阿资，是土官龙诲的儿子。
English: Azhi is the son of the local official Long Yu.

古文：越州，蛮呼为苦麻部。
现代文：越州，蛮族人称呼为苦麻部。
English: Yuezhou, barbarians call it Bitter Hemp Department.

古文：元末，龙海居之，所属俱罗罗斯种。
现代文：元朝末年，龙诲占据了该地，其属下全是罗罗斯族人。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, Long Ya occupied the place, and his subordinates were all Luo Luos.

古文：王师征南时，英驻兵其地之汤池山。
现代文：朝廷官军征讨南方时，沐英将军队驻扎在越州的汤池山。
English: When the imperial court troops invaded the south, Mu Ying stationed the troops in Tangchishan, Yuezhou.

古文：龙海降，遂遣子入朝，诏以龙海为知州。
现代文：龙诲向沐英投降后，便派遣儿子入京城朝觐皇帝，皇帝下诏任命龙诲为越州的知州。
English: After Longyuan surrendered to Mu Ying, he sent his son to Beijing to pay homage to the emperor. The emperor issued an edict appointing Longyuan as Chizhou of Yuezhou.

古文：寻为乱，英擒之，徙辽东，至盖州病死。
现代文：不久龙诲作乱，沐英擒拿了龙诲，将他迁徙到辽东，到盖州时龙诲病死了。
English: Before long, Long Yao caused a disturbance, Mu Yingqin took Long Yao as a hostage and moved him to Liaodong. When he arrived in Geizhou, Long Yao died of illness.

古文：阿资继其职，益桀骜，至是叛。
现代文：阿资继承了龙诲的官职，更加桀骜不驯，至此便反叛朝廷。
English: Azhi inherited the official post from Long Yu, and became even more rebellious, thus rebelling against the imperial court.

古文：帝命英会征南将军傅友德进讨。
现代文：皇帝命令沐英与征南将军傅友德一起会合后进剿讨伐阿资。
English: The emperor ordered Mu Ying to meet with Fu Youde, a general of the Southern Expeditionary Force, and then go to the Yangtze River to fight against Azhi.

古文：道过平夷，以其山险恶，宜驻兵屯守，遂迁其山民往居卑午村，留神策卫千户刘成等将千人置堡其地，后以为平夷千户所。
现代文：他们经过平夷时，发现该地山势险恶，应驻兵屯守，于是便将平夷的山民迁往卑午村居住，留神策卫千户刘成带一千人在卑午村建城堡，后来这里成了平夷千户所。
English: When they passed through Pingyi, they found that the mountainous terrain of the area was dangerous and should be garrisoned. Therefore, they moved the mountain people of Pingyi to live in the village of Bago. Liu Cheng, who was the guardian of a thousand households, led a thousand people to build a castle in the village of Bago. Later, it became the thousand households of Pingyi.

古文：阿资等率众寇普安，烧府治，大肆剽掠。
现代文：阿资等人率领手下部众进犯普安，焚烧了普安府治，大肆抢劫。
English: Azhi and others led their subordinates to attack Pu'an, burned the Pu'an prefecture, and looted extensively.

古文：友德率兵击之，斩其营长。
现代文：傅友德率兵拦击他们，斩杀了他们的营长。
English: Fu Youde led the troops to intercept them and killed their battalion commander.

古文：二十二年，友德等进攻，土官普旦来降。
现代文：二十二年，傅友德等人进攻阿资，土官普旦前来投降。
English: In the 22nd year, Fu Youde and others attacked Azi, and the local official Putan came to surrender.

古文：阿资退屯普安，倚崖壁为寨。
现代文：阿资退守普安，倚着崖壁构筑寨子。
English: Azhi retreated to defend Pu'an, leaning against the cliff to build a stockade.

古文：友德以精兵蹙之，蛮众皆缘壁攀崖，坠死者不可胜数，生擒一千三百余人，获马畜甚众。
现代文：傅友德派精兵逼迫他们，蛮族人都缘壁攀崖而下，结果摔死的人不可胜数。官军生擒了他们一千三百多人，缴获马和牲畜很多。
English: Fu Youde sent elite soldiers to persecute them, and the barbarians all climbed down the edge of the cliff. As a result, countless people fell to their deaths. The government army captured more than 1,300 of them alive, and captured many horses and livestock.

古文：阿资遁还越州，复追击败之，斩其党五十余人。
现代文：阿资逃跑回到越州，官军又追击到越州将其击败，斩杀了他的同党五十多人。
English: Azhi fled back to Yuezhou, and the government army chased him to Yuezhou and defeated him, killing more than fifty of his fellow party members.

古文：阿资穷蹙请降。
现代文：阿资形势日益穷蹙，走投无路，请求投降。
English: With the situation in Afghanistan becoming increasingly desperate, they were cornered and asked to surrender.

古文：初，阿资之遁也，扬言曰： 国家有万军之勇，我地有万山之险，岂能尽灭我辈。 
现代文：当初，阿资逃跑时曾扬言： 国家有万军之勇，我那个地方有万山之险，岂能将我辈全部消灭！ 
English: At first, when Aziz fled, he threatened: "The country has the courage of a thousand soldiers, my place has the danger of a thousand mountains, how can they wipe out all of us!"

古文：英乃请置越州、马龙二卫，扼其险要，复分兵追捕，至是遂降。
现代文：阿资投降后，沐英便请求朝廷设置越州、马龙两个卫所，守住其险要之地，又分兵追捕其他叛贼，至此其他叛贼也全部投降。
English: After Azhi's surrender, Mu Ying requested the imperial court to set up two garrisons, one in Yuezhou and one in Malong, to guard the critical areas, and to dispatch troops to hunt down other traitors, at which point all the other traitors also surrendered.

古文：英等以陆凉西南要地，请设卫屯守。
现代文：沐英等人认为陆凉是西南地区的要地，请求朝廷在此设置卫所屯守该地。
English: Mu Ying and others believed that Lulang was an important place in the southwestern region and requested the imperial court to set up a garrison here.

古文：命洱海卫指挥佥事滕聚于古鲁昌筑城，置陆凉卫指挥使司。
现代文：朝廷命令洱海卫指挥佥事滕聚在古鲁昌筑城墙，设置了陆凉卫指挥使司。
English: The imperial court ordered the commanding officers of the Bohai Coast Guard to gather in Guluchang to build the city wall, and set up the Luliangwei Commanding Officer Division.

古文：英又言： 曲靖指挥千户哈刺不花，乃故元守御陆凉千户。
现代文：沐英又上奏说： 曲靖的指挥千户哈喇不花，是以前元朝时守卫陆凉的千户。
English: Mu Ying also said in his speech: Qujing's command of a thousand households is not a waste, it is a thousand households that used to guard Lu Liang during the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：今陆凉置卫，宜调于本卫镇守，庶绝后患。 
现代文：现今陆凉设置卫所，应将他调到本卫所来负责镇守事务，以免除以后的祸患。 
English: Now that Lu Liang has set up an infirmary, he should be transferred to the main infirmary to take charge of the town's defense affairs, so as to avoid future disasters.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：皇帝下诏同意了。
English: He complied.

古文：帝以平夷尤当要冲，四面皆诸蛮部落，乃遣开国公常升往辰阳集民间丁壮五千人，统以右军都督佥事王成，即平夷千户所改置卫。
现代文：皇帝认为平夷那个地方地位尤其重要，因为四面都是蛮族人部落，于是派遣开国公常升到辰阳集结民间的壮丁五千人迁到平夷，让右军都督佥事王成去统领他们，把平夷千户所改为平夷卫。
English: The emperor thought that the local status of Pingyi was particularly important, because there were barbarian tribes on all sides, so he sent the founding official to Chenyang to gather five thousand young men of the people to move to Pingyi, and let the right-wing military governor, Wang Cheng, lead them, and change the thousands of households in Pingyi to Pingyi.

古文：二十三年置越州卫。
现代文：二十三年朝廷在此设置越州卫。
English: In 1923, the imperial court set up the Yue Prefecture Guard here.

古文：二十四年徙越州卫于陆凉州；以英言云南诸蛮皆降，惟阿资恃险屡叛，宜徙卫军守御。已，阿资复叛。
现代文：二十四年，沐英上奏说现今各蛮族部落都已投降，只有阿资倚仗地势险要屡次叛乱，应将卫所的军队迁到阿资所在地附近去守卫。
English: In the 24th year, Mu Ying reported that all the barbarian tribes had now surrendered, and only the Azis, relying on the terrain, were at risk of repeated rebellions. The troops of the Academy should be moved to the vicinity of the location of the Azis to guard them.

古文：命都督佥事何福为平羌将军，率师进讨，屡败贼众。
现代文：朝廷便把越州卫迁到陆凉州。不久，阿资又叛乱。朝廷命令都督佥事何福担任平羌将军，率领军队前去进剿讨伐，屡次打败贼人。
English: The imperial court then moved the Yue Prefecture to Liangzhou on the mainland. Not long after, Azhi rebelled again. The imperial court ordered the governor, An Zhi He Fu, to serve as the general of Pingyao, leading the army to march to the capital and repeatedly defeat the bandits.

古文：会连月淫雨水溢，阿资援绝，与其众降。
现代文：正好遇上两个月天连降暴雨，河水涨溢，阿资粮尽援绝，便率众人投降。
English: Just when two months of torrential rain fell in a row, the river water rose and overflowed, and the Arab grain was exhausted, he led everyone to surrender.

古文：福择旷地列栅，以置其众。
现代文：何福选择一块空旷的地方树起栅栏，安置这些投降的蛮人。
English: He Fu chose an open area, erected a fence, and settled these surrendering savages.

古文：西南有木蓉菁，贼常出没处，复调普安卫官军置宁越堡镇之，然阿资终不悛。
现代文：在其西南有一个叫木蓉箐的地方，是贼人时常出没之处。朝廷又将普安卫的官军安排到宁越堡去镇慑他们，但阿资最终仍不悔改。
English: In the southwest, there was a place called Muroshio, which was a frequent haunt of thieves. The imperial court also arranged the official army of Pu Anwei to Ning Yue Fort to deter them, but Azhi ultimately remained unrepentant.

古文：二十七年，阿资复反。
现代文：二十七年，阿资又造反。
English: In the 27th year, Azhi rebelled again.

古文：西平侯沐春及福率兵营于越州城北，遣壮士伏于岐路，而以兵挑战。
现代文：西平侯沐春和何福率军驻扎在越州城的北面，派遣强壮士兵埋伏在小路上，再派一些士兵去向阿资挑战。
English: Xi Ping Hou Mu Chun and He Fu led the army stationed in the north of Yuezhou City, sent strong soldiers to ambush on the path, and then sent some soldiers to challenge Azhi.

古文：蛮兵悉众出，伏起，大败之，阿资脱身遁。
现代文：蛮族军队全部出击，官军埋伏四起，大败蛮军，阿资脱身逃走。
English: The barbarian army all attacked, the government army set up four ambushes, defeated the barbarian army, and Azai escaped and fled.

古文：初，曲靖土军千户阿保、张琳所守地，与越州接壤，部众多相与贸易。
现代文：原先，曲靖的土军千户阿保、张琳所守卫的地方，与越州接壤，其手下的人与越州人大多都进行过买卖贸易。
English: Originally, the place guarded by Qujing's Turkish soldiers, Senju Abo and Zhang Lin, was on the border with Yuezhou. Most of his men had engaged in trade and commerce with the people of Yuezhou.

古文：春使人结阿保等，觇阿资所在及其经行地，星列守堡，绝其粮道，贼益困。
现代文：沐春派人与阿保等人接上头，让他窥探阿资的藏身之地以及经过的道路，沿途筑修堡垒，断绝阿资的运粮之道。贼人就更加困难。
English: Mu Chun sent people to connect with Ah Bao and others, let him spy on Ah Zi's hiding place and the road he passed, build a fortress along the way, and cut off Ah Zi's way of transporting grain. Thieves are even more difficult.

古文：二十八年，福潜引兵屯赤窝铺，遣百户张忠等捣贼巢，擒阿资，斩之，俘其党，越州乃平。
现代文：二十八年，何福悄悄地带兵驻扎在赤窝铺，派百户张忠等人直捣贼人的巢穴，生擒并斩杀了阿资，俘获他的同党，越州才平定下来。
English: In the 28th year, He Fook quietly stationed soldiers in Chakwopu, sent hundreds of Zhang Zhong and others to directly attack the thief's lair, and captured and killed Ah Zi, and captured his fellow party members. Only then was Yuezhou pacified.

古文：自是以后，诸土官按期朝贡，西南晏然。
现代文：从此以后，各土官都按期向朝廷献贡，西南地区平安无事。
English: Since then, all local officials have paid tribute to the imperial court on schedule, and the southwestern region has been safe.

古文：正统二年，曲靖军民知府晏毅言四事：一，土官承袭，或子孙，或兄弟，或妻继夫，或妾继嫡，皆无豫定次序，致临袭争夺，仇杀连年。
现代文：正统二年，曲靖军民府的知府晏毅上奏朝廷谈了四件事：其一，土官官位的承袭，可由子孙继承，也可由兄弟继承，也可由妻子继承，还可由妾继承，没有一种预定的次序。所以一到官位的继承时，就相互争夺，造成连年仇杀。
English: In the second year of orthodoxy, the prefect of the Qujing Army and People's Government, Zou Yi, reported four things to the imperial court: First, the succession of the local official position can be inherited by children and grandchildren, brothers, wives, and concubines, and there is no predetermined order. Therefore, when it comes to the succession of the official position, they will compete with each other, resulting in years of vendetta.

古文：乞敕该部移文所司，豫为定序造册，土官有故，如序袭职。
现代文：请求朝廷下诏文给有关官府机构，让他们预先制定一个继承官位者的名册，一旦有土官亡故，便按先后秩序继承。
English: Request the Imperial Court to issue a gazette notice to the relevant government agencies, asking them to draw up a roster of successors in advance. In the event of the death of a local official, he or she will be succeeded in order of precedence.

古文：一，请恤阵亡子孙。
现代文：其二，请求朝廷对阵亡将士的子孙进行抚恤。
English: Secondly, he asked the Imperial Court to pay a pension to the descendants of the fallen soldiers.

古文：一，请云南官俸，悉如四川之例。
现代文：其三，请求朝廷对云南官员的俸禄按四川官员的标准发给。
English: Thirdly, they requested the imperial court to pay the salaries of Yunnan officials according to the standards of Sichuan officials.

古文：一，均户口田地。
现代文：其四，将户口、田地进行均衡。
English: Fourth, balance the hukou and fields.

古文：事下所司议行。
现代文：皇帝将这个奏章交有关机构讨论执行。
English: The emperor submitted the document to the relevant agencies for discussion and implementation.

古文：毅复请设沾益州松韶巡检，从之。
现代文：晏毅又请求设置沾益州的松韶巡检，皇帝同意了。
English: Zhai Yi also requested to set up Songtao inspection in Zhangyizhou, and the emperor agreed.

古文：嘉靖中，罗雄知州者浚杀营长，夺其妻，生子继荣，稍长即持刀逐浚。
现代文：嘉靖中年，罗雄州的知州者鞼杀死手下的营长，夺取了他的妻子，生了一个儿子叫继荣。继荣年纪稍长便持刀驱逐者鞼。
English: In the middle of the Jiajing period, Zhizhou of Luoxiong Province killed his battalion commander, took his wife, and had a son named Jirong. When Jirong was a little older, he drove out Jirong with a knife.

古文：浚欲置之死，以其母故不忍。
现代文：者鞼想把继荣置死，又因为继荣的母亲而不忍心这么做。
English: They wanted to put Jirong to death, but couldn't do it because of Jirong's mother.

古文：及浚请老，以继荣代袭，继荣遂逐浚。
现代文：等到者鞼年纪老了，让继荣代理他的职务时，继荣便驱赶者鞼。
English: When Ji Rong was old enough to let Ji Rong take over his duties, Ji Rong drove Ji Rong away.

古文：浚诉之镇巡官，命迎浚归。
现代文：者鞼向镇巡官投诉此事，镇巡官便命令继荣将者鞼接回来。
English: He complained to the town inspector about this, and the town inspector ordered Sui Rong to bring him back.

古文：继荣阳事之，实加禁锢。
现代文：继荣将者鞼接回来后，表面上是服侍他，实际上是将他禁锢起来。
English: After the return of General Rong, on the surface it was to serve him, but in fact it was to imprison him.

古文：万历九年调罗雄兵征缅。继荣将行，恐留浚为难，遂弑浚。
现代文：万历九年朝廷征调罗雄的军队出征缅甸，继荣将出发时，怕留下者鞼作难，便杀死了者鞼。
English: In the ninth year of Wanli, the imperial court conscripted and dispatched Luo Xiong's army to go to Myanmar. When Ji Rong was about to leave, he killed those who stayed behind, fearing that they would be in trouble.

古文：时沾益土知州安世鼎死，妻安素仪署州事，亦提兵赴调。
现代文：此时逖益州的土知州安世鼎死了，他的妻子安素仪在掌管州中的事务，也奉调带兵出征。
English: At this time, An Seding, the governor of Tochi Prefecture, died. His wife, An Su Yi, who was in charge of the affairs of the prefecture, was also dispatched to lead the troops.

古文：继荣与之合营，通焉，且倚沾益兵力为助。
现代文：继荣与安素仪的军队合在一起，两人也相互私通，继荣便倚仗逖益州的兵力做援助。
English: Ji Rong joined forces with An Su Yi's army, and the two also had sexual intercourse with each other. Ji Rong then relied on the military forces of An Yi Prefecture for assistance.

古文：师过越州，留土官资氏家，淫乐不进。
现代文：他们带兵经过越州，留宿在土官资氏家中，整天淫乐不再进兵。
English: They led the soldiers through Yuezhou, stayed at the homes of local officials, and no longer marched into the army.

古文：知州越应奎白于兵备，将擒之，继荣走，遂聚众反。
现代文：知州越应奎将此事告诉兵备，兵备将捉拿他们时，继荣逃走便聚众造反。
English: Chizhou Yue Yingkui told the soldiers about this, and when the soldiers caught them, Jirong fled and rallied the people to rebel.

古文：攻破陆凉鸭子塘、陡陂诸寨，筑石城于赤龙山，据龙潭为险，广六十里。
现代文：他率兵攻破了陆凉州的鸭子塘、陡陂等寨子，在赤龙山修筑石头城，占据了龙潭天险，地域广达六十里。
English: He led his troops to break through the duck ponds, steep ridges and other stockades in Liangzhou, built a stone city in Chiaolongshan, occupied Longtan Tianhuan, and covered an area of sixty miles.

古文：名己所居曰 龙楼凤阁 ，环以群寨，实诸军士妻女其中。
现代文：他还给自己的居所命名为 龙楼凤阁 ，在四周环建村寨，把各军士兵的妻子儿女都迁到这里来。
English: He also named his residence Longlou Fengge, built a village around it, and moved the wives and children of soldiers from all armies here.

古文：十三年，巡抚刘世曾乃檄诸道进兵。
现代文：十三年，巡抚刘世曾传檄文给各道，让他们进兵围剿。
English: In the thirteenth year, the governor Liu Shizeng sent a message to all the provinces, asking them to march into the siege.

古文：适刘綎破缅解官回，世曾以兵属綎。
现代文：此时正好刘纟廷攻破缅甸后解官回来，刘世曾便把军队交给刘纟廷指挥。
English: At this time, Liu Shizeng returned after he was relieved of his post after defeating Burma. Liu Shizeng then placed the army under the command of Liu Shiting.

古文：綎遂驰赴普鲊营，直捣赤龙寨，斩贼渠帅，继荣遁去。
现代文：刘纟廷便急忙赶赴普鱼乍营，直捣赤龙寨，斩杀了贼人的渠帅、酋长，继荣逃脱而去。
English: Liu Qingting then hurried to the Puyuzha camp, directly attacked the Red Dragon Village, killed the thief's canal commander and chief, and Ji Rong escaped.

古文：綎复连破三寨，降其众一万七千人，追奔至阿拜江，斩继荣，贼平。
现代文：刘纟廷又接连攻破三个寨子，降服了一万七千人，追奔到阿拜江，斩杀了继荣，贼人终于被平定。
English: Liu Bingding successively broke through three stockades, subdued 17,000 people, ran to the Abai River, killed Jirong, and the thieves were finally subdued.

古文：世曾请筑城，改设流官，乃以何倓为知州，者继仁为巡检。
现代文：刘世曾请求朝廷在此修筑城墙，改设流官统治。朝廷便任命何亻炎为知州，者继仁为巡检。
English: Liu Shih had asked the imperial court to build a city wall here and replace it with the rule of ex-officials. The imperial court then appointed He Jinyan as chizhou and He Jiren as inspector.

古文：未几，蛮寇必大反，杀继仁，执倓。
现代文：不久，蛮族人必大造反，杀死了者继仁，捆绑了何亻炎。
English: Soon, the barbarians rebelled violently, killed Ji Ren, and tied up He Xuanyan.

古文：参将蔡兆吉等讨定之，乃改罗雄州曰罗平，设千户所曰定雄。
现代文：参将蔡兆吉等将他们讨伐平定。朝廷便将罗雄州改为罗平，设置一个千户所叫定雄。
English: The imperial court changed Luoxiong Prefecture to Luoping and set up a thousand households called Dingxiong.

古文：时沾益安素仪无子，以乌撒土官子安绍庆为嗣。
现代文：此时逖益州的安素仪没有儿子，就让乌撒土官的儿子安绍庆继承了她的官职。
English: At this time, An Su Yi of Ganymede did not have a son, so she let An Shao Qing, the son of the Usa governor, inherit her official post.

古文：庆死，孙安远袭。
现代文：安绍庆死后，他的孙子安远承袭了官职。
English: After the death of An Shaoqing, his grandson An Yuan inherited the official post.

古文：土妇设科作乱，逐安远，纠众焚掠沾益诸堡站，陷平夷卫。
现代文：当地有个名叫设科的妇女作乱，驱逐了安远，纠集众人焚烧抢劫了逖益州的各堡垒和驿站，攻陷平夷卫。
English: A local woman named Shikei caused a riot, drove out Anyuan, rallied everyone to burn and loot the fortresses and stations in Niigata Prefecture, and captured Pingyibei.

古文：天启三年，官兵擒设科，诛之。
现代文：天启三年，官军生擒了设科，将她杀了。
English: In the third year of the Apocalypse, government soldiers captured Shikei and killed her.

古文：五年，安边据沾益，从水西叛。
现代文：五年，安边占领逖益州，跟随水西的蛮人反叛。
English: In the fifth year, Anbian occupied Yan'izhou and followed the barbarians in the west of Shu to rebel.

古文：事详《乌撒传》中。
现代文：此事在《乌撒传》中有详细记载。
English: This event is recorded in detail in the "Biography of Wusa."

古文：初，越州阿资罪诛，永乐间以其子禄宁为土县丞，与亦佐沙氏分土而居。
现代文：初时，越州的阿资因罪被杀，永乐年间让他的儿子禄宁担任土县丞，与亦佐的沙氏分地而居。
English: At the beginning, Azhi of Yuezhou was killed for a crime, and during the Yongle era, he had his son Lu Ning serve as the governor of Tuxian County, living separately from the Sa clan of Yiza.

古文：其地南北一百二十里，士马精强，征调银至三千八百两。
现代文：他所管辖的地方南北有一百二十里宽，兵马强壮，每年从他那里征调银子达三千八百两。
English: The area under his jurisdiction was one hundred and twenty miles wide from north to south, and the soldiers and horses were strong. The annual transfer of silver from him amounted to thirty-eight hundred taels.

