古文：崔器，深州安平人也。
现代文：崔器，深州安平人。
English: Cui Qi, Shenzhou Anping people.

古文：曾祖恭礼，状貌丰硕，饮酒过斗。
现代文：曾祖父恭礼，体态庞大，饮酒过斗。
English: My great-grandfather was a huge man who drank too much.

古文：贞观中，拜驸马都尉，尚神尧馆陶公主。
现代文：贞观年间，任驸马都尉，娶神尧馆陶公主为妻。
English: During the years of Zhenguan, he was appointed captain of the horse and married the Shenshukan Tao Princess.

古文：父肃然，平阴丞。
现代文：父亲肃然，为平阴丞。
English: His father was a solemn, grave man.

古文：器有吏才，性介而少通，举明经，历官清谨。
现代文：崔器具有吏才，性格独特与人少交往，行为分明，任官时清廉谨慎。
English: Cui Jie has the talent of an official, a unique personality and few contacts with people, clear behavior, and prudence when appointed.

古文：天宝六载，为万年尉，逾月拜监察御史。
现代文：天宝六年，任万年尉，过了几个月后任监察御史。
English: He served as a ten thousand year lieutenant for six years, and a few months later he was appointed inspector general of history.

古文：中丞宋浑为东畿采访使，引器为判官；浑坐赃流贬岭南，器亦随贬。
现代文：中丞宋浑为京畿采访使，推荐器为判官；浑因赃物获罪流放贬到岭南，器也随之被贬。
English: Song Hun, a middle-ranking general, was the envoy to Gyeonggi Province, and the recommending vessel was the judge; Hun was convicted of stealing goods and banished to Lingnan Province, and the vessel was also banished.

古文：十三年，量移京兆府司录，转都官员外郎，出为奉先令。
现代文：十三年，衡量其才转任京兆府司录，又为都官员外郎，出朝任奉先令。
English: Thirteen years later, he was transferred to the post of Keicho prefectural registrar, and he was also the son-in-law of a prefectural official, and received a shilling when he entered the imperial court.

古文：逆胡陷西京器没于贼，仍守奉先。
现代文：逆胡攻陷西京，器被贼军所围，仍坚守奉先。
English: He was besieged by a band of bandits, but he still held fast to his position.

古文：居无何，属贼党同罗叛贼，长安守将安守忠、张通儒并亡匿。
现代文：据守不行，归属贼党同罗的叛贼长安守将安守忠、张通儒一并身亡。
English: According to the guard, it was not possible. The traitor Chang'an guard, who belonged to the thief party Tongluo, killed Anshu Zhong and Zhang Tongru together.

古文：又渭上义兵起，一朝聚徒数万，器惧，所受贼文牒符敕，一时焚之，榜召义师，欲应渭上军。
现代文：此时渭水上游义兵兴起，一时聚集数万人。器害怕，将贼军所授予的文牒符敕令全部烧毁，出告示征招义师，响应渭水上游义军。
English: At this time, the rebels in the upper reaches of Surabaya rose up and gathered tens of thousands of people at one time. I was afraid, burned all the documents and orders given by the bandits, issued a notice to recruit volunteers, and responded to the rebels in the upper reaches of Surabaya.

古文：及渭上军破，贼将崔乾祐先镇蒲、同，使麾下骑三十人捉器，器遂北走灵武。
现代文：等到渭水上游义军战败，贼将崔乾率先镇守蒲、同。派手下骑兵三十人捉拿器，于是器逃向北面灵武。
English: When the rebels in the upper reaches of the Surabaya River were defeated, the thief took Cui Qian as the first to defend the town of Pu, and sent thirty cavalrymen to capture the vessel, so the vessel fled to the north of Lingwu.

古文：器素与吕諲善，諲引为御史中丞、兼户部侍郎。
现代文：器平素与吕諲友善，推荐器为御史中丞，兼户部侍郎。
English: He was very friendly with Lü Zhen, and recommended him to Goshi Chujo, who was also the chamberlain of the household.

古文：从肃宗至凤翔，加礼仪使。
现代文：随肃宗到凤翔，加授礼仪使。
English: He followed Su Zong to Fengxiang and was awarded the title of etiquette envoy.

古文：克复二京，为三司使。
现代文：收复二京后，任三司使。
English: After the recapture of the Second Capital, he was appointed as the Third Divisional Envoy.

古文：器草仪注，驾入城，令陷贼官立于含元殿前，露头跣足，抚膺顿首请罪，以刀杖环卫，令扈从群官宰臣已下视之。
现代文：器草拟仪注，驾车进城，命令曾落于贼军手中的官员站在含元殿前面，露头赤足，抚胸顿首请罪，四周以刀杖环围起来，又令护从众官宰臣以下人员来看此情形。
English: He drafted a document, drove into the city, and ordered the officials who had fallen into the hands of the bandits to stand in front of the Han Yuan Hall, barefoot, stroking their chests and pleading guilty, surrounded by a circle of swords and staves, and ordered the guards to look at the situation from the officers, vice-ministers and below.

古文：及收东京，令陈希烈已下数百人如西京之仪。
现代文：等到收复东京，令陈希烈以下数百人如同西京请罪的仪式。
English: When Tokyo was recaptured, hundreds of people, including Chen Xilei, gathered for a ceremony similar to the one held in the Western capital to plead guilty.

古文：器性阴刻乐祸，残忍寡恩，希旨奏陷贼官准律并合处死。
现代文：器性格阴险残忍，上奏请求将陷城官员按法制全部处死。
English: The organ is insidious and cruel, and requests that all officials in the besieged city be put to death in accordance with the law.

古文：肃宗将从其议。三司使、梁国公李岘执奏，固言不可，乃六等定罪，多所原宥，唯陈希烈、达奚珣斩于独柳树下。
现代文：肃宗准备同意他的建议，三司使、梁国公李岘上奏，坚持说不行，于是分六个等级定罪，大多数人被宽恕。只有陈希烈、达奚王旬在独柳树下被杀。
English: Su Zong was ready to agree to his suggestion, but Li Gan, the third envoy and Liang Guogong, insisted that he could not, so he was convicted in six grades, and most people were pardoned. Only Chen Xilei and Daju Wangjun were killed under the willow tree.

古文：后萧华自相州贼中仕贼官归阙，奏云： 贼中仕官等重为安庆绪所驱，胁至相州，初闻广平王奉宣恩命，释放陈希烈已下，皆相顾曰： 我等国家见待如此，悔恨何及。 
现代文：后来萧华从相州贼军中任贼官回朝，上奏说： 在贼军中任职主要是被安庆绪所驱使，胁迫到相州，当初听到广平王奉皇上之命宣布恩令，释放陈希烈以下之人，都相互说： 我们被国家如此见待，为何要悔恨。 
English: Later, Xiao Hua returned to the imperial court from the Songzhou Kleptocratic Army as a Kleptocratic Officer. He said in his report: I was mainly driven to serve in the Kleptocratic Army by An Qingxu and coerced to go to Songzhou. When I first heard that King Guangping had issued an order to release Chen Xili and his subordinates, I said to myself: We were treated like this by the state, why should we regret it?

古文：及闻崔器议刑太重，众心复摇。 
现代文：等听到崔器论刑极重，众人之心又有所动摇。 
English: After hearing Cui Jie's extremely heavy sentence, everyone's hearts were shaken again.

古文：肃宗曰： 朕几为崔器所误。 
现代文：肃宗说： 我几乎被崔器所害。 
English: Su Zong said: I was almost harmed by Cui Jie.

古文：吕諲骤荐器为吏部侍郎、御史大夫。
现代文：吕諲马上推荐器为吏部侍郎、御史大夫。
English: Lv Yiming immediately recommended the roles of the clerk's chamberlain and the chief historian.

古文：上元元年七月，器病脚肿，月余疾亟，瞑目则见达奚珣，叩头曰： 大尹不自由。 
现代文：上元元年七月，器患病脚肿，一个多月后病情加重，睁眼就看见达奚王旬，叩头说： 大尹不自由。 
English: In July of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he fell ill with swollen feet. More than a month later, his condition worsened. When he opened his eyes, he saw King Dadu Jun. He bowed his head and said, "Dai Yin is not free."

古文：左右问之，器答曰： 达奚大尹尝诉冤于我，我不之许。 
现代文：左右人问他，器回答说： 达奚王旬大尹曾向我诉冤，我没有答应他。 
English: When people around him asked him about it, the vessel replied: "King Dagon, Shundayun, once complained to me about injustice, and I did not agree with him.

古文：如是三日而器卒。
现代文：三天都这样，最后死去。
English: He did this for three days and finally died.

古文：赵国珍，牂柯之苗裔也。
现代文：赵国珍，牛羊牛可的后代。
English: Zhao Guozhen, descendant of cattle, sheep and oxen.

古文：天宝中，以军功累迁黔府都督，兼本管经略等使。
现代文：天宝年间，以军功多次升为黔府都督，兼任本管经略等使。
English: During the Tenpo era, he was promoted to the governor of Ye Prefecture several times for his military exploits, and also served as a special envoy.

古文：时南蛮阁罗凤叛，宰臣杨国忠兼剑南节度，遥制其务，屡丧师徒。
现代文：此时南蛮人腁罗凤反叛，宰臣杨国忠兼任剑南节度使，在朝廷控制国家边远事务，多次征伐失败。
English: At this time, the southern barbarian, Yao Luo, rebelled, and the vice-minister, Yang Guozhong, concurrently served as the envoy to the Jiannan Festival, controlling the country's remote affairs in the imperial court, and repeatedly failed to conquer.

古文：中书舍人张渐荐国珍有武略，习知南方地形，国忠遂奏用之。
现代文：中书舍人张渐推荐国珍怀有武略，熟知南方地理，国忠于是上奏任用他。
English: Zhang Yan, the person in charge of Chinese calligraphy, recommended Guo Zhenhai, who had military strategy and was familiar with southern geography. Guozhong then appointed him.

古文：在五溪凡十余年，中原兴师，唯黔中封境无虞。
现代文：在五溪地区大约十多年期间，中原战火不断，只有黔中安定无事。
English: In the Wuxi region, for more than ten years, the Central Plains was constantly at war, and only Yunnan was stable.

古文：代宗践祚，特嘉之，召拜工部尚书。
现代文：代宗即位，专门嘉奖他，升为工部尚书。
English: Daizong was enthroned, and he was specially commended and promoted to Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：大历三年九月，以疾终，赠太子太傅。
现代文：大历三年九月，患病死，赠予太子太傅。
English: In September of the third year of the lunar calendar, he died of illness and was given the title of Crown Prince Taifu.

古文：崔瓘，博陵人也。
现代文：崔瓘，博陵人。
English: Cui Wei, from Boling.

古文：以士行闻，莅职清谨。
现代文：以品行闻名，在职清廉谨慎。
English: He is known for his integrity, and is scrupulously honest in his work.

古文：累迁至澧州刺史，下车削去烦苛，以安人为务。
现代文：多次升为澧州刺史，任职期间除去繁苛杂律，以安抚为重。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian. During his term of office, he removed the complicated laws and regulations and focused on appeasement.

古文：居二年，风化大行，流亡襁负而至，增户数万。
现代文：居职二年，风俗大变，流亡他乡的人竞相背负婴儿回来，增加户口几万人。
English: After two years in office, customs have changed dramatically, and people who have fled their hometowns are competing to return with babies on their backs, increasing the number of household registrations by tens of thousands.

古文：有司以闻，优诏特加五阶，至银青光禄大夫，以甄能政。
现代文：朝廷听说后，优待诏令特加授五阶，升银青光禄大夫，以示奖励善政。
English: After the imperial court heard about it, the imperial edict specially added the award of the fifth rank and the promotion of the silver medal to the doctor of the Qing Guanglu, in order to reward the good governance.

古文：迁潭州刺史、兼御史中丞，充湖南都团练观察处置使。
现代文：升为潭州刺史、兼御史中丞，充任湖南都团练观察处置使。
English: He was promoted to Tanzhou Shishi, concurrently Shishi Chujo, and served as the Hunan Capital Rehearsal Observation and Disposition Envoy.

古文：瓘到官，政在简肃，恭守礼法。
现代文：瓘到职后，处事严谨公正，恭守礼法。
English: After taking up the post, he will be scrupulous and fair in his dealings and respect etiquette.

古文：将吏自经时艰，久不奉法，多不便之。
现代文：将吏由于经受时艰，长时期不奉守法令，很多人不熟知法律。
English: Due to the hardships of the times, the generals have not complied with the laws for a long time, and many people are not familiar with the law.

古文：大历五年四月，会月给粮储，兵马使臧玠与判官达奚觏忿争，觏曰： 今幸无事。 
现代文：大历五年四月，正当每月供应粮食的时候，兵马使臧与判官达奚觏争吵动怒，觏说： 今天幸亏无事。 
English: In April of the fifth lunar month, at the time of the monthly supply of grain, the soldiers and horses made the mule quarrel with the judge Daju and became angry. The mule said, "Fortunately, nothing happened today."

古文：玠曰： 有事何逃？ 
现代文：说： 有事为什么要逃跑？ 
English: He said: "Why run away in the first place?

古文：厉色而去。
现代文：脸色严厉离去。
English: He left stern-faced.

古文：是夜，玠遂构乱，犯州城，以杀达奚觏为名。
现代文：这天夜晚，于是发动兵变，进犯州城，以杀达奚觏为名义。
English: That night, they launched a mutiny and invaded the state capital in the name of killing Daju.

古文：瓘惶遽走，逢玠兵至，遂遇害。
现代文：瓘害怕逃走，遇上的兵马来到，于是被杀。
English: He was afraid to run away, so the soldiers and horses came and killed him.

古文：代宗闻其事，悼惜久之。敬括，河东人也。
现代文：代宗听说后，很长时间悼念他。敬括，河东人。
English: After hearing this, Daizong mourned him for a long time. Sincerely yours, people of Hedong.

古文：少以文词称。
现代文：年少时以文词受人称赞。
English: He was praised for his writing when he was young.

古文：乡举进士，又应制登科，再迁右拾遗、内供奉、殿中侍御史。
现代文：考取进士，又参加应制考试录用，升为右拾遗、内供奉、殿中侍御史。
English: He passed the entrance examination for cadets, and also took part in the entrance examination, and was promoted to the right to collect relics, the inner offering, and the palace attendant.

古文：天宝末，宰臣杨国忠出不附己者，括以例为果州刺史。
现代文：天宝末年，宰臣杨国忠排斥不依附自己的人，括在其中，任果州刺史。
English: At the end of the Tenpo era, Vice-Minister Yang Guozhong excluded those who did not cling to him, including Ren Guozhou.

古文：累迁给事中、兵部侍郎、大理卿。
现代文：多次升为给事中、兵部侍郎、大理卿。
English: He was promoted several times to the rank of genshizhong, hyobu-zirō, and darichirō.

古文：性深厚。志尚简淡，在职不务求名，因循而已。
现代文：性格非常厚道，崇尚简朴淡泊，在职期间不追求名利，按规定行事而已。
English: His character is very kind, he advocates simplicity and indifference, he does not pursue fame and fortune while in office, he only acts according to the rules.

古文：大历初，叛臣周智光伏诛，诏选循良为近辅，以括为同州刺史。
现代文：大历初年，叛臣周智光被杀，诏令选择办事认真的人为亲近的辅臣，由此括任同州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Great Calendar, the traitor Zhou Zhiguang was killed, and the person who chose to do things carefully was a close vassal, and thus he was appointed as the governor of Tongzhou.

古文：岁余，入为御史大夫。
现代文：一年多后，入朝任御史大夫。
English: More than a year later, he was appointed Imperial Historian.

古文：迟重推诚于下，未尝以私害公，士颇称焉；而从容养望，不举纲纪，士亦以此少之。
现代文：对部下尊重以诚相待，没有以私利损害国家，士大夫们对他非常称道；但却又从容颐养观望，不提出处事纲纪，士大夫们又以此轻视他。
English: He treated his subordinates with respect and sincerity, and did not harm the country for personal gain. The judges and magistrates highly commended him. However, they also despised him for calmly watching and waiting, and not proposing a code of conduct.

古文：大历六年三月卒。
现代文：大历六年三月死。
English: He died in March of the sixth year of the lunar calendar.

古文：韦元甫，少修谨，敏于学行。
现代文：韦元甫，年少时学习严格，才思敏捷。
English: Wei Yuanfu, when he was young, studied strictly and was quick-witted.

古文：初任滑州白马尉，以吏术知名。本道采访使韦涉深器之，奏充支使，与同幕判官员锡齐名。
现代文：原来任滑州白马尉，以吏术出名，主管此地域的采访使韦涉非常器重他，奏请担任支使，与同幕判官锡一同出名。
English: Originally, he was a lieutenant of the White Horse of the State of Talas. He was famous for his administrative skills. Wei Zhan, who was in charge of the interview of this region, attached great importance to him and asked him to serve as an envoy. He became famous together with his fellow judge Xie.

古文：元甫精于简牍，锡详于讯覆，涉推诚待之，时谓 员推韦状。 
现代文：元甫擅长文书，锡擅长咨询，韦涉对他们以诚相待，在当时有 员推韦状 的说法。
English: Yuanfu was good at paperwork, Xi was good at consulting, and Wei and Wanzhou treated each other with sincerity. At that time, there was a saying that "members push and pull each other."

古文：元甫有器局，所莅有声，累迁苏州刺史、浙江西道都团练观察等使。
现代文：元甫有才能，具有声望，多次升为苏州刺史、浙江西道都团练观察等使。
English: Yuan Fu was talented and had a reputation. He was promoted many times to the post of Suzhou chief historian, and to the post of the observer of group training in the West Zhejiang Province.

古文：大历初，宰臣杜鸿渐首荐之，征为尚书右丞。
现代文：大历初年，宰臣杜鸿渐第一个推荐他，征诏任尚书右丞。
English: In the first year of the Great Calendar, the prime minister Du Hongyan was the first to recommend him, and he was appointed as the right-hand man of the imperial edict.

古文：会淮南节度使缺，鸿渐又荐堪当重寄，遂授扬州长史、兼御史大夫、淮南节度观察等使。
现代文：当时淮南节度使缺人，鸿渐又推荐他能堪当重任，于是授予扬州长史、兼御史大夫、淮南节度观察等使。
English: At that time, the Huainan Festival was short of people, and Hong Qian recommended that he could be worthy of the important task, so Yang was awarded the title of governor of history, concurrently the doctor of history, and the observer of the Huainan Festival.

古文：在扬州三年，政尚不扰，事亦粗理。
现代文：在扬州任职三年，政事还没有混乱，事务也大致被料理。
English: During the three years he served in Yangzhou, there was no political turmoil, and affairs were generally handled well.

古文：大历六年八月，以疾卒于位。
现代文：大历六年八月，病死于职位上。
English: In August of the sixth year of the lunar calendar, he died of illness at his post.

古文：魏少游，钜鹿人也。
现代文：魏少游，巨鹿人。
English: Wei Shao You, the Great Deer Man.

古文：早以吏干知名，历职至朔方水陆转运副使。
现代文：早年以吏才出名，担任过朔方水陆转运副使。
English: In his early years, he was famous for his ability as a bureaucrat, and served as deputy envoy for land and water transportation of the Shuo side.

古文：肃宗幸灵武，杜鸿渐等奉迎，留少游知留后，备宫室扫除之事。
现代文：肃宗幸驾到灵武，杜鸿渐等候奉迎，留下少游主管留后，准备宫室的清理事务。
English: Su Zongxing drove to Lingwu, Du Hongxian waited for the welcome, leaving the head of the youth tour behind to prepare for the cleaning of the palace.

古文：少游以肃宗远离宫阙，初至边籓，故丰供具以悦之。
现代文：少游认为肃宗远离皇宫，刚到边藩，所以用丰盛的供品以博肃宗的欢心。
English: Shao You thought that Su Zong was far away from the imperial palace and had just arrived at the border region, so he used the rich offerings to win the favor of Bozhuzong.

古文：将至灵武，少游整骑卒千余，干戈耀日，于灵武南界鸣沙县奉迎，备威仪振旅而入。
现代文：肃宗快到灵武，少游率领整齐有序的骑兵一千多人，干戈在阳光下夺目耀眼，在灵武南面边界鸣沙县奉迎，伴以威严仪仗和雄伟的军队进城。
English: Su Zong soon arrived in Lingwu, and Shao You led more than a thousand well-ordered horsemen. The battle was dazzling in the sun. Mingsha County, on the southern border of Lingwu, welcomed them, accompanied by a dignified ceremonial battle and a majestic army entering the city.

古文：肃宗至灵武，殿宇御幄，皆象宫闱，诸王、公主各设本院，饮食进御，穷其水陆。
现代文：肃宗到达灵武，各种殿宇房屋，如同皇宫一样，各王侯公主各住其院，进献的各种物品，将其水陆交通堵塞。
English: Su Zong arrived in Lingwu, all kinds of palace buildings, like the royal palace, all princes and princesses live in their own courtyards, various items donated, and their land and water traffic jammed.

古文：肃宗曰： 我至此本欲成大事，安用此为！ 
现代文：肃宗说： 我到此地来是想完成伟大事业，怎么需要如此做法！ 
English: Su Zong said, "I came here to accomplish a great deed, how could I do such a thing!

古文：命有司稍去之。
现代文：命令有司稍略去除一些。
English: The order was given to slightly remove some of the wax.

古文：累迁卫尉卿。
现代文：多次升为卫尉卿。
English: He was promoted to Lieutenant of the Guards several times.

古文：乾元二年十月，议率朝臣马以助军，少游与汉中郡王瑀沮其议，上知之，贬渠州长史。
现代文：乾元二年十月，朝廷商议朝臣一律以马资助军队，少游和汉中郡王王禹阻止其议，皇上知道后，将其贬为渠州长史。
English: In October of the second year of Qianyuan, the imperial court discussed and the courtiers all supported the army with horses. Shao You and Wang Wangyu of Hanzhong County stopped the discussion. After the emperor knew about it, he relegated it to history.

古文：后为京兆尹，请中书门下及两省五品已上、尚书省四品已上、诸司正员三品已上、诸王、驸马中期周已上亲及女婿外甥，不得任京兆府判官、畿令、赤县丞簿尉，敕从之。
现代文：后来任京兆尹，奏请中书门下以及两省五品以上、尚书省四品以上、各司正员三品以上、各王、驸马中期周以上亲属以及其女婿外甥，不能担任京兆府判、畿令、赤县丞簿尉，皇上下敕令同意了。
English: Later, when he was appointed as Jing Zhaoyun, he requested that the subordinates of Zhongshu and the two provinces with more than five products, Shangshu Province with more than four products, each department with more than three products, each king, the middle-aged relatives of the middle-aged relatives, and his son-in-law's nephew, could not serve as the governor of Jing Zhaofu, the governor of Qi, and the governor of Aka County, and the imperial edict agreed.

古文：迁刑部侍郎。
现代文：升为刑部侍郎。
English: He was promoted to Samurai of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：大历二年四月，出为洪州刺史、兼御史大夫，充江南西道都团练观察等使。
现代文：大历二年四月，出朝任洪州刺史，兼任御史大夫，充任江南西道都团练观察等使。
English: In April of the second year of the lunar calendar, he entered the imperial court to serve as the chief historian of Hongzhou, concurrently serving as the chief historian and acting as the envoy to observe the regimental drill of the West Jiangnan Provincial Capital.

古文：四年六月，封赵国公。
现代文：四年六月，封为赵国公。
English: In June of the same year, he was given the title of Zhao Guogong.

古文：贾明观者，本万年县捕贼小胥，事刘希暹，恃鱼朝恩之势，恣行凶忍，毒甚豺虺。
现代文：贾明观，是万年县的捕贼小官，侍奉刘希暹，依仗鱼朝恩的权势，恣意凶残，毒于豺狼。
English: Jia Mingguan was a petty official in Wannen County who caught thieves, served Liu Xixia, relied on the power of Yu Chaon, was arbitrarily cruel, and was poisoned by jackals.

古文：朝恩、希暹既诛，元载当权，纳明观奸谋，容之，特令江西效力。
现代文：朝恩、希暹被杀后，元载当权，采纳明观的奸计，并且纵容他，特令派他去江西做事。
English: After the assassinations of Chao En and Hsi Hsi, Yuan Zhao, who was in power at the time, adopted an obvious ruse and indulged him, ordering him to go to Jiangxi to work.

古文：明观未出城，百姓万众聚于城外，皆怀砖石候之，期投击以快意。
现代文：明观还没有出城，数以万计的老百姓聚集在城外，都拿着砖石等候他，以期投掷击打他为快。
English: Mingguan has not yet left the city, tens of thousands of ordinary people have gathered outside the city, waiting for him with bricks and stones, hoping to throw them at him.

古文：载闻之，特令所由吏拥百姓入城内，由是获免。
现代文：载听说后，特令当地官吏将百姓赶入城内，明观才免于被打。
English: After hearing the news, the local officials were ordered to drive the people into the city, so that Mengguan would not be beaten.

古文：在洪州二年，少游为观察使，承元载意苟容之。
现代文：在洪州二年，少游任观察使，秉承元载的旨意容忍他。
English: In Hongzhou for two years, Shao You served as an observer, adhering to the will of Yuan Zhao and tolerating him.

古文：及路嗣恭代少游，到州，即日杖杀，识者以是减魏之名，多路之政。
现代文：等到路嗣恭替代少游，一到洪州，当天便将明观处死，有见识的人因此贬损魏少游的名声，称赞路嗣恭的政绩。
English: When Lu Cigong replaced Xiaoyu, once he arrived in Hongzhou, Mingguan was executed on the same day. Therefore, people with insight belittled Wei Shaoyou's reputation and praised Lu Cigong's political achievements.

古文：大历六年三月己未卒于官，赠太师。
现代文：大历六年三月己未在其官位死去，赠予太师。
English: In March of the sixth year of the lunar calendar, he did not die in his official position, and was given the title of Daishi.

古文：少游居职，缘饰成务，有规检，善任人，果于集事。
现代文：少游身居其职，凭借机遇完成其事务，具有规检，善于用人，在众多事务中处理果断。
English: Xiaoyu performs his duties, takes advantage of opportunities to complete his affairs, has regulations and inspections, is good at employing people, and resolutely deals with many affairs.

古文：前后四领京尹，虽无鹤赫之名，而龊龊廉谨，有足称者。
现代文：前后四次担任京兆尹，虽然没有显赫功名，却也小心拘谨，很多人都称道他。
English: He served as the Jing Zhaoyun four times, and although he did not have any outstanding achievements, he was also cautious and prudent, and many people praised him.

古文：卫伯玉，有膂力，幼习艺。天宝中杖剑之安西，以边功累迁至员外诸卫将军。
现代文：卫伯玉，具有体力，幼时习武，天宝年间驻守安西，凭多次战功升为员外诸卫将军。
English: Wei Bo Yu, with physical strength, learned martial arts when he was a child, stationed in Anxi during the Tenpo era, and was promoted to the rank of General of Outer Wei with many military achievements.

古文：肃宗即位，兴师靖难，伯玉激愤，思立功名，自安西归长安。
现代文：肃宗即位，举兵平定国难，伯玉满怀激愤，一心想立功求名，从安西回到长安。
English: Su Zong ascended the throne, raised an army to quell the national calamity, and Bo Yu, full of indignation and eager to make a name for herself, returned to Chang'an from Anxi.

古文：初为神策军兵马使出镇。
现代文：开始任神策军兵马使出征。
English: The envoys of the Divine Providence Army began to leave for the campaign.

古文：乾元二年十月，逆贼史思明遣伪将李归仁铁骑三千来犯，伯玉以数百骑于疆子坂击破之，积尸满野，虏马六百匹，归仁与其党东走。
现代文：乾元二年十月，叛贼史思明派将领李归仁率三千名铁骑进犯，伯玉以数百名骑兵在疆子坂将其打败，尸横遍野，获得战马六百匹，归仁和其残部向东逃走。
English: In October of the second year of the Qian Dynasty, the traitor Shi Siming sent the general Li Guiren to lead three thousand iron cavalry to attack, and Bo Yu defeated him with hundreds of cavalry in Yangtze Slope. Bodies were scattered everywhere, and six hundred horses were obtained. Guiren and his remnants fled to the east.

古文：以功迁右羽林军大将军，知军事。
现代文：以战功升为右羽林军大将军，熟知军事。
English: He was promoted to major general of the Right Uebayashi Army for his war service, and is familiar with military affairs.

古文：转四镇、北庭行营节度使。
现代文：转为四镇、北庭行营节度使。
English: It was changed to Shizhen, and the North Courtyard was used as the venue for the festival.

古文：献俘百余人至阙下，诏解缚而赦之，迁伯玉神策军节度。
现代文：向京城贡献俘虏一百多人，皇上诏令解缚赦免他们，伯玉升任神策军节度。
English: He contributed more than a hundred captives to the capital, and the emperor's edict released and pardoned them, and he was promoted to the position of military governor.

古文：上元二年二月，史思明领众西下图长安，史朝义率其党夜袭陕州。
现代文：上元二年二月，史思明率领众兵西下图谋长安，史朝义率领其军夜袭陕州。
English: In February of the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Shi Siming led the soldiers westward to plan Chang'an, and Shi Chaoyi led his army to attack Shaanxi at night.

古文：伯玉以兵逆击，大破贼于永宁。
现代文：伯玉领兵抗击，在永宁大破敌军。
English: Bo Yu led the troops to fight back and defeated the enemy army in Yongning.

古文：贼退，进位特进，封河东郡公。
现代文：贼军退走，晋位特进，封为东郡公。
English: The invaders retreated, and he was promoted to the rank of special envoy, and was named the East County Governor.

古文：广德元年冬，吐蕃寇京师，乘舆幸陕。
现代文：广德元年冬天，吐蕃进犯京师，皇上幸驾陕州。
English: In the winter of the first year of the Guangde era, Tujia invaded Beijing, and the emperor was fortunate enough to drive to Shaanxi.

古文：以伯玉有干略，可当重寄，乃拜江陵尹、兼御史大夫，充荆南节度观察等使。
现代文：认为伯玉有才略，可当重任，于是升为江陵尹，兼任御史大夫，充当荆南节度观察等使。
English: He thought that Bo Yu had talent and could be given important responsibilities, so he was promoted to Jiangling Yin, concurrently serving as an imperial historian and acting as an envoy to observe the Jingnan Festival.

古文：寻加检校工部尚书，封城阳郡王。
现代文：不久加授检校工部尚书，封为城阳郡王。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of King of Joyang County.

古文：大历初，丁母忧，朝廷以王昂代其任，伯玉潜讽将吏不受诏，遂起复以本官为荆南节度等使，时议丑之。大历十一年二月入觐，以疾卒于京师。
现代文：大历初年，遇上母亲丧事，朝廷以王昂替代其职，伯玉暗中劝将吏不接受诏令，不久又起用本官任荆南节度等使，受到当时人们的憎恶，大历十一年二月觐见皇上，病死于京师。
English: In the first year of the lunar calendar, after her mother's death, the imperial court replaced her position with Wang Ang, and Bo Yu secretly persuaded the generals not to accept the edict. Soon after, she appointed her own official as Jing Nan's festival envoy, which was hated by the people at the time. In February of the eleventh year of the lunar calendar, she met the emperor and died of illness in Beijing.

古文：李承，赵郡高邑人，吏部侍郎至远之孙，国子司业畬之第二子也。
现代文：李承，赵郡高邑人，吏部侍郎至远的孙子，国子司业籴田的第二个儿子。
English: Li Cheng, a native of Gaoyu, Zhao County, was the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the second son of the

古文：承幼孤，晔鞠养之。既长，事兄以孝闻。
现代文：承幼小时父亲死去，哥哥晔抚养他，长大以后，以侍奉其兄闻名。
English: His father died when he was very young, and he was brought up by his elder brother. When he grew up, he was famous for serving his elder brother.

古文：举明经高第，累至大理评事，充河南采访使郭纳判官。
现代文：在朝廷荐选当中属高层次人才，多次升任大理评事，充当河南采访使郭纳的判官。
English: He was one of the high-level talents recommended by the imperial court, and was promoted to the position of Dali critic several times, acting as the judge of the Henan interview with Guo Na.

古文：尹子奇围汴州，陷贼，拘承送洛阳。承在贼庭，密疏奸谋，多获闻达。
现代文：尹子奇围困汴州，落入贼手，将他拘押到洛阳，承在贼廷中，侍从奸计，多次受到称道。
English: Yin Ziqi besieged Zhangzhou, fell into the hands of thieves, detained him in Luoyang, and was held in the court of thieves. He was praised many times for his treachery.

古文：两京克复，例贬抚州临川尉。
现代文：两京收复后，照惯例被贬为抚州临川尉。
English: After the recapture of the two capitals, he was demoted to Fuzhou Linchuan Lieutenant as usual.

古文：数月除德清令，旬日拜监察御史。
现代文：数月后任德清令，十天后升为监察御史。
English: A few months later, he was appointed to the post of Deqing, and ten days later, he was promoted to the post of Supervisor of Imperial History.

古文：淮南节度使崔圆请留充判官，累迁检校刑部员外郎、兼侍御史。
现代文：淮南节度使崔圆请他留下充任判官，多次升为检校刑部员外郎、兼侍御史。
English: The Huainan Festival made Cui Yuan ask him to stay on as a judge, and he was promoted several times to the position of inspector of the school's criminal investigation department, and also to the position of attendant to the historian.

古文：圆卒，历抚州、江州二刺史，课绩连最。
现代文：圆死后，任抚州、江州两地刺史，功绩显著。
English: After Yuan's death, he was appointed to write history in Fuzhou and Jiangzhou, and his achievements were remarkable.

古文：迁检校考功郎中兼江州刺史，征拜吏部郎中。
现代文：升为检校考功郎中兼任江州刺史，征诏任吏部郎中。
English: He was promoted to the middle of the school inspection examination meritorious scholars and concurrently served as the governor of Jiangsu Province, and was appointed to the middle of the cadres.

古文：寻为淮南西道黜陟使，奏于楚州置常丰堰以御海潮，屯田瘠卤，岁收十倍，至今受其利。
现代文：不久任淮南西道黜陟使，上奏在楚州修置常丰堰以抵御海潮冲击，在贫瘠的土地上屯田，每年收获的粮食为以前的十倍，至今仍然在受益。
English: He was soon appointed as the commissioner of the West Huainan Highway, and was instrumental in the construction of the Changfeng Weir in Chuzhou to resist the impact of the sea tide. He built fields on barren land, and the annual grain harvest was ten times that of the previous year, and he is still benefiting from it.

古文：时梁崇义纵恣倨慢，朝廷将加讨伐。
现代文：当时梁崇义纵恣傲慢，朝廷准备讨伐他。
English: At that time, Liang Chongyi was arrogant, and the imperial court was preparing to crack down on him.

古文：李希烈揣知之，上表数崇义过恶，请率先诛讨。
现代文：李希烈知道此事后，上奏列数崇义的罪过，请求率先讨伐。
English: After Li Xilai learned of this, he listed the sins of the cult and asked to take the lead in the crusade.

古文：上悦之，每对朝臣多称希烈忠诚。
现代文：皇上很高兴，常常在朝臣面前称赞希烈忠诚。
English: The Emperor was delighted and often praised her loyalty in front of his courtiers.

古文：承自黜陟回，因奏之曰： 希烈将兵讨伐，必有微勋，但恐立功之后，纵恣跋扈，不禀朝宪，必劳王师问罪。 
现代文：承完成黜陟回朝，对此事上奏说： 希烈率兵讨伐，肯定会立小功，可是担心他在立功之后骄横跋扈，不遵守法令，肯定要派军队向他问罪。 
English: On this matter, he said, "Hiryo, who led the crusade, will surely make a small contribution, but I am worried that he will be arrogant after making a contribution and will not comply with the law, so I will definitely send an army to question him.

古文：上初未之信。无几，希烈既平崇义，果有不顺之迹，上思承言，故骤加擢用。
现代文：皇上开始还不相信他的话，没过多久，希烈平定崇义，果然表现出对上不顺的迹象，皇上想起承所说的话，因而马上加授官职。
English: The emperor did not believe his words at first, but it did not take long for him to pacify Chongyi, and he did indeed show signs of dissatisfaction with the emperor. The emperor remembered what he had said, and immediately gave him an official post.

古文：建中二年七月，拜同州刺史、河中尹、晋绛都防御观察使。
现代文：建中二年七月，升为同州刺史、河中尹、晋绛都防御观察使。
English: In July of the second year of Jianzhong, he was promoted to the defense observation envoy of the same state.

古文：九月，转襄州刺史、山南东道节度观察盐铁等使。
现代文：九月，转为襄州刺史、山南东道节度观察监铁等使。
English: In September, he was transferred to the post of inspector of railways in Yangzhou and Shandong Province.

古文：希烈既破崇义，拥兵襄州，遂有其地。
现代文：希烈已经击败崇义，在襄州拥兵，占据其地域。
English: Hilei has already defeated Chongyi, and has gathered troops in Xiangzhou to occupy its territory.

古文：朝廷虑不受命，欲以禁兵送承，承请单骑径行。
现代文：朝廷担心他不接受命令，想让禁兵护送承，承请求一个人径直前往。
English: The imperial court was worried that he would not accept the order, and wanted to have him escorted by soldiers, so he agreed to go alone.

古文：既至，希烈处承于外馆，迫胁万态，承恬然自安，誓死王事。
现代文：到了以后，希烈将承安置在外馆，千方百计地胁迫他，承从容自若，誓死为皇上效忠。
English: After he arrived, Heraclius placed him in an outer pavilion and tried every means to coerce him, but he remained calm and pledged his loyalty to the emperor.

古文：希烈不能屈，遂剽虏阖境所有而去，襄、汉为之空。
现代文：希烈不能使他屈服，于是将全境的东西抢掠一空离去，襄、汉由此一无所有。
English: Hillel could not bring him to his knees, so he plundered everything in the entire region and left, leaving Xiang and Han with nothing.

古文：承治之一年，颇得完复。
现代文：承治理一年，又使其基本得到完复。
English: After one year of administration, it has been basically restored.

古文：初，希烈虽归蔡州，留将校等于襄州守当时所掠得财帛什物等，后使襄、汉，往来不绝。
现代文：当初，希烈虽然归到蔡州，但留下将校等官兵在襄州看守所抢得的财帛什物，后来出使襄、汉两地，来往不断。
English: At first, although Hyeres returned to Caizhou, he left behind the officers and other officers and soldiers in the custody of the detention center in Xiangzhou. Later, he sent envoys to Xiangzhou and Han, and they kept coming and going.

古文：承亦使腹心臧叔雅往来许、蔡，厚结希烈腹心周曾、王玢、姚憺等。
现代文：承也派心腹臧叔雅在许、蔡之间来往，与希烈的心腹周会、王玢、姚忄詹等人结为厚交。
English: Cheng also sent his confidant Zhu Shujia to visit Xu and Cai, and formed a close friendship with Xilai's confidant Zhou Hui, Wang Hui, Yao Xizhan and others.

古文：及曾等谋杀希烈，以众归朝，多承首建谋也。
现代文：后来会等人谋杀希烈，率众归朝廷，这都是承首先谋略的。
English: Later, they would wait for someone to murder her and lead the crowd back to the imperial court. This was all part of the original plan.

古文：累赐密诏褒美之。
现代文：多次赐予密诏表彰他。
English: He has been awarded the Order of the Privy Seal several times.

古文：承寻改检校工部尚书，兼潭州刺史、湖南都团练观察使。
现代文：承不久升为检校工部尚书，兼任潭州刺史、湖南都团练观察使。
English: He was soon promoted to inspector of the inspection department of the inspection department, and also served as the inspector of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department.

古文：建中四年七月，卒于位，年六十二，赠吏部尚书。
现代文：建中四年七月，在职位死去，终年六十二岁，赠予吏部尚书。
English: In July of the 4th year of Jianzhong, he died in his post, aged 62, and was presented with the book of records of the cadre department.

古文：承少有雅望，至其从官，颇以贞廉才术见称于时。
现代文：承年少时便有很高的志向，等到他任命为官，以其忠贞廉洁的才能受到当时人们的高度称赞。
English: He had high aspirations when he was young, and when he was appointed as an official, he was highly praised by people at the time for his loyalty and integrity.

