古文：董晋，字混成，河中卢乡人。
现代文：董晋，字混成，河中虞乡人。
English: Dong Jin, the characters are mixed up, a villager in the middle of the river.

古文：明经及第。
现代文：明经科殿试及第。
English: He passed the entrance examination of the Ming Dynasty School of Economics.

古文：至德初，肃宗自灵武幸彭原，晋上书谒见，授校书郎、翰林待制，再转卫尉丞，出为汾州司马。
现代文：至德初年，肃宗从灵武抵达彭原，董晋上书谒见，授校书郎、翰林待制，再调任卫尉丞，出任汾州司马。
English: In the first year of Su Zong's reign, Su Zong arrived in Pengyuan from Lingwu, and Dong Jin went to see him, and he was assigned to be a school scribe, and Han Lin was put on standby, and then he was transferred to the position of Lieutenant Commander, and he was appointed as the Sima of Zhangzhou.

古文：未几，刺史崔圆改淮南节度，奏晋以本官摄殿中侍御史，充判官，寻归台，授本官，迁侍御史、主客员外郎、祠部郎中。
现代文：不久，刺史崔圆改任淮南节度使，奏请董晋以本职代理殿中侍御史，充任判官。不久又归任御史台，授原职，升为侍御史、主客员外郎、祠部郎中。
English: Soon after, the chief priest Cui Yuan was transferred to the post of Huainan Festival Delegate, and requested Dong Jin to act as the court historian in the palace and serve as a judge. Soon after, he was transferred back to the court historian's office, given his original post, and promoted to the position of court historian, chief guest attendant, and chief priest.

古文：大历中，兵部侍郎李涵送崇徽公主使回纥，奏晋为判官。使还，拜司勋郎中。
现代文：大历年间，兵部侍郎李涵护送崇徽公主出使回纥，奏请董晋为判官，出使归来，官拜司勋郎中。
English: In the year of the great calendar, Li Han, the attendant of the military department, escorted the princess of Chonghui to return from the mission, and asked Dong Jin to be the judge. When he returned from the mission, he was in the middle of the official visit to Sishenro.

古文：历秘书太府太常少卿监、左金吾将军。
现代文：历任秘书太府太常少卿监、左金吾将军。
English: The successive secretaries were Taifu Taicho Shokei no kami, and General Sakingo.

古文：旬日，德宗嗣位，改太常卿，迁右散骑常侍，兼御史中丞知台事。
现代文：十日后，德宗即位，董晋改任太常寺卿，升为右散骑常侍、兼御史中丞知台事。
English: Ten days later, when Emperor Dezong ascended to the throne, Dong Jin was appointed as the Lord of Taiji Temple, and promoted to the position of the Right Hand Cavalryman, and also to the position of the Vice-Minister of History.

古文：以清勤谨慎，故骤迁右职。
现代文：因清廉、勤恳、谨慎，所以擢升很快。
English: Because of his integrity, diligence and prudence, he was promoted quickly.

古文：寻为华州刺史、兼御史中丞、潼关防御使。
现代文：不久又任华州刺史、兼御史中丞、潼关防御使。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of Huazhou Sashishi, concurrently to the post of Goshi Chujo, and to the post of Shaoguan Defense Envoy.

古文：久之，加兼御史大夫。
现代文：许久以后，又加授兼御史大夫。
English: After a long time, he was also awarded the title of Imperial Historian.

古文：硃泚僭逆于京师，使凶党仇敬、何望之侵逼华州，晋奔遁赴行在，授国子祭酒，寻令往恆州宣慰。
现代文：朱氵此在京师建伪号谋反，派遣凶党仇敬、何望之侵逼华州，董晋奔逃到皇上所在地，被授为国子祭酒，随即被派往恒州宣旨慰劳将士。
English: Zhu Xi thus plotted a rebellion in Beijing under the false pretense of building a school, and dispatched the murderous party Vengeful and Hopeless to invade and force Huazhou. Dong Jinben fled to the emperor's location, was awarded the national son's sacrificial liquor, and was immediately sent to Hengzhou to proclaim the consolation of laborers.

古文：从车驾还京师，迁左金吾卫大将军，改尚书左丞。
现代文：随圣驾返回京师后，升为左金吾卫大将军，改任尚书左丞。
English: After returning to Beijing with the holy driver, he was promoted to General of the Left King Wu Wei, and was reappointed as Vice-Commander of the Left of Shangshu.

古文：时右丞元琇领度支使，为韩滉所挤贬黜，晋嫉之，见宰相极言非罪，举朝称之。
现代文：当时尚书右丞元担任度支使，被韩氵晃排挤而遭贬黜，董晋很愤恨，面见宰相极力辩说元无罪，满朝都称赞他。
English: At that time, Shang Shuyuan Yuan served as the imperial envoy, and was ousted by Han Shaoqiao and disparaged. Dong Jin was very angry. When he met the prime minister, he strenuously argued that Yuan was not guilty, and the whole dynasty praised him.

古文：复拜太常卿。
现代文：再度被拜为太常寺卿。
English: He was once again worshipped as Lord of Taijo-ji Temple.

古文：五年，迁门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：贞元五年沈房升任门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: In the fifth year of Sadamoto, Chikafusa was promoted to the position of junior attendant, with the same rank as Shoji.

古文：时政事决在窦参，晋但奉诏书，领然诺而已。
现代文：当时政事决定权在窦参手中，董晋只是受诏书、等候决定而已。
English: At that time, the power to make political decisions was in Dou Sang's hands, while Dong Jin merely received the imperial edict and awaited a decision.

古文：金吾卫将军沈房有弟丧，公除，衣惨服入阁。上问宰相，对曰： 准式，朝官有周年已下丧者，诸騑缦，不合衣浅色。 
现代文：金吾卫将军沈房有弟亡故，董晋脱去公服，穿着丧服入阁，皇上问宰相这事是否合制，宰相回答说： 依照规定，朝官有丧朝一年之内的丧事，允许穿无纹彩的粗绸，不应着浅色衣。 
English: The Emperor asked the Prime Minister whether it was proper for the Emperor to wear mourning clothes after the death of his brother, General Jinwuwei Shenfang. The Prime Minister replied, "According to regulations, imperial officials must hold a funeral within one year of the emperor's death. They are allowed to wear colorless coarse silk, but should not wear light-colored clothing.

古文：帝曰： 南班安得有之？ 
现代文：皇上问： 南衙班列怎么也有这个规矩呢？ 
English: The emperor asked: How is it that the Nanlu train also has this rule?

古文：对曰： 因循而然。 
现代文：回答说： 承袭旧制而如此。 
English: He replied: "We inherited the old system and that's how it is.

古文：又问晋冠冕之制，对曰： 古人服冠冕者，动有佩玉之响，所以节步也。
现代文：皇上又向董晋询问古代冠冕制度，董晋回答道： 古人穿衣着冠，一动便有佩玉碰撞的响声，是用以节制步履。
English: The emperor also asked Dong Jin about the ancient crown system. Dong Jin replied: The ancients wore crowns, and when they moved, there was the sound of beads colliding, which was used to control their steps.

古文：《礼》云 堂上接武，堂下布武 ，至恭也；步武有常，君前之礼，进趋而已。
现代文：《礼》云 堂上行走脚步要相连，堂下行走脚步要放开 ，就是说要极其恭敬。行走有常规，在国君面前的礼节，走路时小步快行而已。
English: "Ri" means "propriety." When walking up the hall, the steps should be connected, and when walking down the hall, the steps should be released, that is, they should be extremely respectful. There is a routine for walking, and the etiquette in front of the sovereign is to take small steps and walk quickly when walking.

古文：今或奔走以致颠仆，非恭慎也。
现代文：如今有人行走如奔跑以致跌倒，这是极不恭敬谨慎的。
English: It is very disrespectful and imprudent for someone to walk as if they are running and fall down.

古文：在式，朝官皆是绫袍袱，五品已上金玉带，取其文彩画饬，以奉上也。
现代文：在服饰规格上，朝官都是绫罗袍巾，五品以上佩金玉带，取其用文彩装饰以敬奉皇上之意。
English: In terms of clothing specifications, the imperial officials were all made of embroidered robes, five or more gold and jade bands, which were decorated with colors to honor the emperor's wishes.

古文：是以禹恶衣食而致美乎黻冕，君亲一致。
现代文：因此，夏禹平时粗衣粗食，而祭服却要求华美，无论君王和亲人都一样对待。
English: As a result, Hsia Yu used to wear coarse clothes and eat coarse food, while the sacrificial clothing required beauty, regardless of whether the king and his relatives were treated the same.

古文：昔尚书郎含香，老莱彩服，皆此义也。
现代文：从前尚书郎口含香物，老莱子彩服娱亲，都是这个意思。
English: Once upon a time, Shang Shurang's mouth contained perfumes, and Laozi's colorful clothes entertained relatives.

古文：服絁缦，非制也。 
现代文：穿粗绸衣，是不合古制的。 
English: Dressed in coarse silk, it is not antiquated.

古文：上深然之，遂诏曰： 常参官入阁，不得趋走；周期已下丧者，禁惨服朝会。 
现代文：皇上深表赞同，便下诏说： 常参官入内阁，不得快步行走；一周年以下的服丧，禁止着丧服参加朝会。 
English: The emperor expressed his deep approval, and issued an edict saying, "When a regular staff officer joins the cabinet, he is not allowed to walk fast; when a member of the cabinet is less than one year old, he is not allowed to wear mourning clothes to attend the imperial meeting."

古文：又令服本品绫袍金玉带。
现代文：又命朝官各自穿戴本品级的绫罗袍巾和金玉腰带。
English: He also ordered the imperial officials to wear this grade of silk robe and gold and diamond belt respectively.

古文：晋明于礼学如此。
现代文：董晋对于礼学如此精通。
English: Dong Jin is so proficient in etiquette.

古文：窦参骄满既甚，帝渐恶之。
现代文：窦参骄傲自大十分严重，皇上渐渐厌恶他。
English: Dou Zhen's pride and arrogance were very serious, and the emperor gradually became disgusted with him.

古文：八年，参讽晋奏其侄给事中窦申为吏部侍郎，帝正色曰： 岂不是窦参遣卿奏也？ 
现代文：贞元八年，窦参暗示董晋保奏他的侄儿给事中窦申为吏部侍郎，皇上严肃地说： 难道不是窦参要你上奏的吗？ 
English: In the eighth year of the Zhengyuan era, Dou Shen suggested that Dong Jinbao play the role of his nephew. In the process, Dou Shen became the attendant of the administrative department. The emperor said seriously: Isn't it Dou Shen who wants you to play the role?

古文：晋不敢隐。
现代文：董晋不敢隐瞒。
English: Dong Jin did not dare to hide it.

古文：因问参过失，晋具奏之。
现代文：皇上便询问窦参的过失，董晋详细禀奏。
English: The emperor then inquired about Dou San's fault, and Dong Jin gave a detailed explanation.

古文：旬日，参贬官，晋忧惧，累上表辞位。
现代文：十天以后，窦参被贬官，董晋忧惧，屡次上表辞职。
English: Ten days later, Dou Sang was demoted, and Dong Jin was worried and repeatedly submitted his resignation.

古文：九年夏，改礼部尚书、兵部尚书、东都留守、东都畿汝州都防御使。
现代文：贞元九年夏，改任礼部尚书、兵部尚书、东都留守、东都畿汝州都防御使。
English: In the summer of the ninth year of the Zhengyuan era, he was reassigned as the ceremonial secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, the military secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, the guard of the eastern capital, and the defense minister of the eastern capital of Guizhou.

古文：会汴州节度李万荣疾甚，其子乃为乱，以晋为检校左仆射、同平章事，兼汴州刺史、宣武军节度营田、汴宋观察使。
现代文：适遇汴州节度使李万荣病重，其子李作乱，朝廷便任命董晋为检校左仆射、同平章事，兼汴州刺史、宣武军节度营田使、汴宋观察使。
English: When the Bozhou Festival made Li Wanrong seriously ill and his son Li Zuoran, the imperial court appointed Dong Jin as the left-hand man of the school inspection, the same rank, and the history of Bozhou, the Xuanwu Army Festival Yingtian Envoy, and the Bozong Observation Envoy.

古文：晋既受命，唯将幕官傔从等十数人，都不召集兵马。
现代文：董晋受命之后，只率领幕僚、侍从等十余人，完全不召集兵马。
English: After receiving the order, Dong Jin only led more than ten people such as staff officers and attendants, and did not call up soldiers and horses at all.

古文：既至郑州，宣武军迎候将吏无至者。
现代文：到郑州后，宣武军应前来迎接的将吏无一人来到。
English: After arriving in Zhengzhou, none of the generals who should have come to meet the Xuanwu army came.

古文：晋左右及郑州官吏皆惧，共劝晋云： 邓惟恭承万荣疾病之甚，遂总领军州事。
现代文：董晋的随行人员及郑州官吏都感到害怕，一起劝董晋道： 邓惟恭趁李万荣疾病严重，便总揽了军州的事务。
English: Dong Jin's entourage and Zhengzhou officials were scared, and together they advised Dong Jin: Deng Weigong took advantage of Li Wanrong's serious illness and took over the affairs of the military region.

古文：今相公到此，尚不使人迎候，其情状岂可料；即恐须且迟回，以候事势。 
现代文：现在相公来到这里，他还不派人迎候，幕后的情况怎能预料呢。恐怕必须暂且延缓一下，以等待事态的发展变化。 
English: Now that the father-in-law has come here, he has not sent someone to meet him, so how can we predict the situation behind the scenes? I'm afraid we have to hold off for a while to wait for the development of the situation.

古文：晋曰： 奉诏为汴州节度使，即合准敕赴官，何可妄为逗留！ 
现代文：董晋道： 既然奉诏为汴州节度使，就应依旨赴任，怎能随便停留呢！ 
English: Dong Jin said: Since it was decreed to be the festival envoy of Zhangzhou, he should go to the post according to the order, how can he stay there casually!

古文：人皆忧其不测，晋独恬然。
现代文：大家都担心会遭不测，惟独董晋安详镇静。
English: Everyone was worried that he was in danger, but Dong Jin kept to himself.

古文：未至汴州十数里，邓惟恭方来迎候，晋俾其不下马；既入，乃委惟恭以军政，众服晋明于事体机变，而未测其深浅。
现代文：离汴州还有十多里，邓惟恭才来迎接，董晋令他不要下马。进入汴州城后，董晋把军政要务交付邓惟恭掌管，大家都佩服董晋通晓事情的机宜变化，却估量不出他谋略的深浅。
English: More than ten miles away from Zhangzhou, Deng Weigong came to meet him, and Dong Jin ordered him not to dismount. After entering Zhangzhou City, Dong Jin put Deng Weigong in charge of military and political affairs. Everyone admired that Dong Jin was aware of the changes in the situation, but they could not measure the depth of his strategy.

古文：初，万荣逐刘士宁，代为节度使，委兵于惟恭，以其同乡里。
现代文：当初，李万荣驱逐了刘士宁，取代他为节度使，将兵权交付邓惟恭，因为他们是同乡。
English: At first, Li Wan Rong expelled Liu Shining, replaced him as the ceremonial envoy, and handed over the military power to Deng Weigong, because they were fellow villagers.

古文：及疾甚，李乃将为乱，惟恭乃与监军同谋缚乃，送归朝廷。
现代文：及至李万荣病重，李企图作乱，邓惟恭便与监军合谋逮捕了李，将他押送朝廷。
English: When Li Wanrong became seriously ill and Li attempted to create a disturbance, Deng Weigong conspired with the supervising troops to arrest Li and escort him to the imperial court.

古文：惟恭自以当便代居其位，故不遣候吏，以疑惧晋心，冀其不敢进。不意晋之速至。晋已近，方遽出迎之。
现代文：邓惟恭自以为必会取代李万荣居节度使之位，故意不派将吏迎候，以使董晋心生疑惧，希望他不敢前来；没想到董晋来得这么快，所以直到董晋离汴州很近了，才仓猝出城迎接。
English: Deng Weigong thought that he would certainly replace Li Wanrong as the head of the festival, and deliberately did not send officials to welcome him, so as to make Dong Jin suspicious and hope that he would not dare to come; I did not expect Dong Jin to come so quickly, so until Dong Jin was very close to Zhangzhou, he suddenly left the city to welcome him.

古文：然心常怏怏，竟以骄盈慢法，潜图不轨，配流岭南。
现代文：然而心中时常闷闷不乐，终究因骄狂不守法，暗中图谋不轨，而被流放发配到岭南。
English: However, he often felt gloomy and unhappy in his heart. In the end, he was exiled to Lingnan for being arrogant and not abiding by the law, and secretly plotting evil schemes.

古文：朝廷恐晋柔懦，寻以汝州刺史陆长源为晋行军司马。
现代文：朝廷担心董晋软弱怯懦，不久便派汝州刺史陆长源担任董晋的行军司马。
English: The imperial court was worried about Dong Jin's weakness and cowardice, and soon sent Lu Changyuan, the governor of Ruzhou Province, to act as Dong Jin's escort.

古文：晋谦恭简俭，每事因循多可，故乱兵粗安。
现代文：董晋为人谦恭宽厚，凡事随和听便，因此心怀异志的兵卒大体安定。
English: Dong Jin is a humble, courteous and generous person. He is easy-going and easy to listen to. Therefore, the soldiers with different ideas are generally stable.

古文：长源好更张云为，数请改易旧事，务从削刻。
现代文：陆长源喜好改弦更张，屡次请求改变旧例，务求苛刻从事。
English: Lu Changyuan likes to change the chord and change the position, repeatedly requesting to change the old practice, so as to pursue it rigorously.

古文：朝廷因授以检校工部尚书、汴州刺史，兼宣武军节度观察等使，仍赐名全谅。
现代文：董晋最初都同意他，及至文书命令已拟好，董晋便命令暂时作罢。又将钱粮支出之事委任判官孟叔度，叔度为人轻佻，好怠慢军人，人们都憎恶他。
English: Dong Jin initially agreed with him, and when the written order was ready, Dong Jin ordered him to temporarily stop. He also appointed the judge Meng Shudu as the judge of the expenditure of money and grain. Shudu was a frivolous person, so that he could neglect the soldiers, and people hated him.

古文：贞元十五年二月卒，年四十九，废朝一日，赠右仆射。
现代文：董晋于贞元十五年二月去世，享年七十六，停止上朝三日，追赠太傅，赐给数量不等的布匹绢帛。
English: Dong Jin died in February of the fifteenth year of the Zhenyuan, at the age of seventy-six. He stopped ascending the throne on the third day, posthumously bestowed the title of Taifu, and was given a number of cloth bags.

古文：李忠臣，本姓董，名秦，平卢人也，世家于幽州蓟县。
现代文：死后不到十天，汴州大乱，杀死陆长源、孟叔度等人。李忠臣，本姓董，名秦，平卢人。世代居住在幽州蓟县。
English: Less than ten days after his death, the Bozhou Rebellion broke out, killing Lu Changyuan, Meng Shudu and others. Li Zhongchen, whose real name was Dong, was from Pinglu. He had lived in Yuzhou County for generations.

古文：自云曾祖文昱，棣州刺史；祖玄奖，安东都护府录事参军；父神峤，河内府折冲。
现代文：他自己说曾祖父董文昱，曾任棣州刺史；祖父董玄奖，任安东都护府录事参军；父董神峤，任河内府折冲郎将。
English: He himself said that his great-grandfather, Dong Wenju, had served as the chief historian of Bozhou; his grandfather, Dong Xuanbo, had served as the governor of Andong Province; and his father, Dong Shenju, had served as the vice-governor of Hanoi Province.

古文：忠臣少从军，在卒伍之中，材力冠异。
现代文：李忠臣年轻时从军，在军伍之中，才力出众。
English: Li Zhongchen joined the army when he was young, and his talent was outstanding in the army.

古文：事幽州节度薛楚玉、张守珪、安禄山等，频委征讨，积劳至折冲郎将、将军同正、平卢军先锋使。
现代文：事奉幽州节度使薛楚玉、张守王圭、安禄山等，多次受命出征，积累军功升至折冲郎将、将军同正、平卢军先锋使。
English: Serving the Yuzhou Festival, Xue Chuyu, Zhang Shou Wang Gui, An Lushan and others were repeatedly ordered to go to war, accumulating military merits and rising to the rank of General, General and Pioneer of the Pinglu Army.

古文：及禄山反，与其伦辈密议，杀伪节度吕知诲，立刘正臣为节度，以忠臣为兵马使。
现代文：及至安禄山叛乱，李忠臣与同僚们密谋，杀死伪节度使吕知诲，拥立刘正臣为节度使，任李忠臣为兵马使。
English: As far as the Anlu Mountain Rebellion, Li Zhongchen and his colleagues conspired to kill the pseudo-commander Lu Zhizhi, appoint Liu Zhengchen as the commander, and appoint Li Zhongchen as the commander.

古文：攻长杨，战独山，袭榆关、北平，杀贼将申子贡、荣先钦，擒周钊送京师，忠臣功多。
现代文：攻长杨、战独山，袭榆关、北平，杀死贼将申子贡、荣先钦，擒获周钊押送到京师，其间李忠臣功劳最大。
English: He attacked Yang and Zhendushan, stormed Shouguan and Beiping, killed the thieves Shen Zigong and Rong Xianqin, and captured Zhou Qi and sent him to the Beijing Division, during which Li Zhongchen made the greatest contribution.

古文：又从正臣破渔阳，逆将李归仁、李咸、白秀芝等来拒战，约数十合，并摧破之；无何，潼关失守，郭子仪、李光弼退师，忠臣乃引军北归。
现代文：又跟随刘正臣攻破渔阳，叛将李归仁、李咸、白秀芝等前来抵抗，约经数十合战斗，将他们全都击败。不久，潼关失守，郭子仪、李光弼退兵，李忠臣便领兵北归。
English: He also followed Liu Zhengchen to break through Yuyang, and the rebel generals Li Guiren, Li Haman, Bai Xiuzhi and others came to resist. After about dozens of battles, they all defeated them. Soon, Shaoguan was lost, Guo Ziyi and Li Guangya retired, and Li Zhongchen led the soldiers back to the north.

古文：奚王阿笃孤初以众与正臣合，后诈言请以万余骑同收范阳，至后城南，中夜反攻，忠臣与战，遂至温泉山，破之；擒大首领阿布离，斩以祭纛衅鼓。
现代文：奚王阿笃孤起初将部队与刘正臣合并，后来诈称请求率领万余骑兵共同收复范阳，到后城南面，半夜反攻官军，李忠臣同他交战，于是到了温泉山，击败贼军，生擒其大首领阿布离，将他斩首祭旗衅鼓。
English: At first, the Dragon King, Adukku, merged his troops with Liu Zhengshen. Later, he falsely claimed that he had requested Liu Zhengshen to lead more than 10,000 cavalry to jointly recover Fanyang. He went to the south of Hecheng and fought against the government army in the middle of the night. Li Zhongshen fought with him. He then went to the Hot Spring Mountain, defeated the thief army, captured its great leader, Abu Li, alive, and beheaded him as a sacrificial flag.

古文：正臣卒，又与众议以安东都护王玄志为节度使。
现代文：刘正臣去世，李忠臣又与大家商议，拥立安东都护王玄志为节度使。
English: Liu Zhengchen passed away, and Li Zhongchen discussed with everyone and supported the appointment of the Prince of Antonov as the festival envoy.

古文：至德二载正月，玄志令忠臣以步卒三千自雍奴为苇筏过海。贼将石帝庭、乌承洽来拒；忠臣与董竭忠退之，转战累日，遂收鲁城、河间、景城等，大获资粮，以赴本军。
现代文：至德二年正月，王玄志命李忠臣率领三千步卒从雍奴乘苇筏渡海，贼将石帝庭、乌承洽来抵拒，李忠臣和董竭忠击退了贼军，转战数日，收复鲁城、河间、景城等地，获得大批物资粮食，运送到本军。
English: In the first month of the second year of the German era, Wang Xuanzhi ordered Li Zhongcheng to lead 3,000 foot soldiers to cross the sea from Yongnu by raft. The thieves resisted Shiditing and Wucheng. Li Zhongcheng and Dong Zhaozhong repulsed the thief army, fought for several days, recovered Lucheng, Hema, Jingcheng and other places, obtained a large amount of materials and grain, and transported them to their own army.

古文：复与大将田神功率兵讨平原、乐安郡，下之；擒伪刺史臧瑜等。防河招讨使李铣承制以忠臣为德州刺史。
现代文：又与大将田神功一起率兵讨伐平原、乐安郡贼军，攻下两地，生擒伪刺史臧瑜等人，防河招讨使李铣遵照旧制任命李忠臣为德州刺史。
English: In addition, together with General Tian Shengong, he led the troops to fight against the plains and the bandits in Le'an County, and captured the two places. He created the fake assassin Shi Jinyu and others, and invited them to defend the river, so that Li Xi appointed Li Zhongchen as the Texas assassin in accordance with the old system.

古文：属史思明归顺，河南节度张镐令忠臣以兵赴郓州，与诸军使收河南州县。
现代文：时值史思明归顺朝廷，河南节度使张镐命李忠臣率兵赴郓州，与诸军使共同收复河南州县。
English: At the time of Shi Siming's surrender to the Shun Dynasty, the Henan Festival made Zhang Xuan order Li Zhongchen to lead the troops to Ganzhou and jointly recover the Henan Prefecture with the military envoys.

古文：又与裨将阳惠元大破贼将王福德于舒舍口，肃宗累下诏慰谕，仍令镇濮州，寻移韦城。
现代文：李忠臣又与副将阳惠元一同在舒舍口大败贼将王福德，肃宗屡次下诏慰问，并命令李忠臣镇守濮州，不久移镇韦城。
English: Li Zhongchen and Vice Admiral Yang Huiyuan together with the defeated general Wang Fude in Shushekou, Su Zong repeatedly sent condolences, and ordered Li Zhongchen to stay in Bozhou, and soon moved to Weicheng.

古文：乾元元年九月，改光禄卿同正。
现代文：乾元元年九月，改任光禄卿同正。
English: In September of the first year of Qianyuan, he was appointed as Guangluqing Tongzheng.

古文：其年，与郭子仪等九节度围安庆绪于相州。
现代文：当年，与郭子仪等九节度使在相州围攻安庆绪。
English: That year, together with Guo Ziyi and others, he led a nine-day siege of Anqingxu in Xiangzhou.

古文：明年二月，诸军溃归，忠臣亦退。
现代文：次年二月，各军溃败而回，李忠臣也退了兵。
English: In February of the following year, all the armies returned in defeat, and Li Zhongchen also withdrew.

古文：至荥阳，贼将敬釭来袭官船，忠臣大破之，获米二百余艘，以资汴州军士。
现代文：行至荥阳，贼将敬钅工前来偷袭官船，李忠臣将他打得大败，缴获米粮二百多船，用以资助汴州军士。
English: When he went to Shenyang, the thieves attacked the official ship, and Li Zhongchen defeated him and seized more than two hundred ships of rice, which was used to subsidize the Zhangzhou sergeant.

古文：寻拜濮州刺史、缘河守捉使，移镇杏园渡。
现代文：不久官拜濮州刺史、缘河守捉使，镇署迁移至杏园渡。
English: Before long, officials paid homage to the history of Bozhou and the governor of the Yangtze River, and the township was relocated to Xingyuandu.

古文：及史思明陷汴州，节度使许叔冀与忠臣并力屈降贼。思明抚忠臣背曰： 吾比只有左手，今得公，兼有右手矣！ 
现代文：及至史思明攻陷汴州，节度使许叔冀和李忠臣皆因兵力耗尽而投降贼军，史思明抚摸着李忠臣的背说： 我原先好比只有左手，如今得到你，兼有右手了。 
English: When Shi Siming conquered Zhangzhou, Xu Shuji and Li Zhongchen were both exhausted and surrendered to the invaders. Shi Siming stroked Li Zhongchen's back and said, "I used to have only my left hand, but now that I have you, I have my right hand as well."

古文：与俱寇河阳。
现代文：与李忠臣一起进犯河阳。
English: Together with Li Zhongcheng, he invaded Heyang.

古文：数日，忠臣夜以五百人斫其营，突围归。李光弼以闻，诏加开府仪同三司、殿中监同正，赐实封二百户。
现代文：数日后，李忠臣夜间率领五百人袭击史思明营垒，突围而归，李光弼将此事禀奏皇上，诏令加授李忠臣开府仪同三司、殿中监同正，赐实封食邑二百户。
English: A few days later, Li Zhongchen led 500 men to attack Shi Siming's camp at night and broke through the encirclement. Li Guangya reported the incident to the emperor, and the imperial edict awarded Li Zhongchen the title of Kaifu Yi with three divisions, the palace supervisor with one rank, and granted him 200 households in the county.

古文：召至京师，赐姓李氏，名忠臣，封陇西郡公，赐良马、庄宅、银器、彩物等。
现代文：皇上召李忠臣至京师，易姓李，名忠臣，封为陇西郡公，赏赐良马、庄宅、银器、彩帛等。
English: The emperor summoned Li Zhongcheng to Beijing. Yi, surnamed Li and surnamed Zhongcheng, was made the governor of Shaanxi County, and was rewarded with fine horses, a manor house, silverware, and colored enamelware.

古文：时陕西、神策两节度郭英乂、卫伯玉镇陕州，以忠臣为两军节度兵马使。
现代文：当时陕西、神策两军节度使郭英、卫伯玉镇守陕州，朝廷命李忠臣为两军节度兵马使。
English: At that time, Guo Ying and Wei Bo Yu were appointed as the military envoys of the two armies of Shaanxi and Shensi to guard Shaanxi, and Li Zhongchen was appointed by the imperial court as the military envoy of the two armies.

古文：鱼朝恩亦在陕，俾忠臣与贼将李归仁、李感义等战于永宁、莎栅；前后数十阵，皆摧破之。
现代文：鱼朝恩也在陕州，命李忠臣与贼将李归仁、李感义等在永宁、莎栅交战，前后数十仗，李忠臣都击败了敌人。
English: Yu Chaon was also in Shaanxi. He ordered Li Zhongchen to fight the bandits Li Guiren and Li Xiangyi in Yongning and Shazhao. After dozens of battles, Li Zhongchen defeated the enemy.

古文：会淮西节度王仲升为贼所擒，宝应元年七月，拜忠臣太常卿同正、兼御史中丞、淮西十一州节度。寻加安州刺史，仍镇蔡州。
现代文：适逢淮西节度使王仲升被贼军擒获，宝应元年七月，授李忠臣太常卿同正、兼御史中丞、淮西十一州节度使；随后又加授安州刺史，仍镇守蔡州。
English: The Huaixi Festival coincided with the capture of Wang Zhongsheng by the army of thieves, and in July of the first year of Baoying, Li Zhongchen was awarded the title of Tai Changqing Tongzheng, concurrently with the title of Mi Shizhongzheng, and the title of Huaixi Eleven State Festival Envoy; subsequently, he was also awarded the title of Anzhou Sashih, and still guarded Caizhou.

古文：其年，令忠臣会元帅诸军收复东都。
现代文：那年，命李忠臣会同各军元帅收复东都。
English: That year, Li Zhongcheng was ordered to recover Dongdu with the marshals of various armies.

古文：二年六月，就加御史大夫。
现代文：宝应二年六月，就地加授御史大夫。
English: In June of the second year of Baoying, he was awarded the title of imperial historian on the spot.

古文：时回纥可汗既归其国，留判官安恪、石帝庭于河阳守御财物，因此招聚亡命为寇，道路壅隔，诏忠臣讨平之。
现代文：当时回纥可汗回归本国，留下判官安恪、石帝庭在河阳守护他的财物，安恪、石帝庭趁机招聚亡命之徒为盗寇，道路阻隔，诏令李忠臣征讨平定他们。
English: At that time, the Uighur Khan returned to his country, leaving the judges Ankaku and Shiditei to guard his property in Kheyang. Ankaku and Shiditei took the opportunity to recruit the outlaws as robbers, block the road, and ordered Li Zhongchen to subdue them.

古文：永泰元年，吐蕃犯西陲，京师戒严。代宗命中使追兵，诸道多不时赴难。使至淮西，忠臣方会鞠，即令整师饰驾。
现代文：永泰元年，吐蕃进犯西部边境，京师戒严，代宗命宦官催兵勤王，各道大多不能及时奔赴国难，使臣到淮西时，李忠臣正在玩蹴鞠的游戏，立即下令调集军队前去救驾。
English: In the first year of the Yongtai era, Tubo invaded the western border, Beijing imposed martial law, and the eunuch on behalf of the emperor ordered the eunuchs to urge the soldiers to be loyal to the king. Most of the provinces could not rush to the national emergency in time. When the envoys arrived in Huaixi, Li Zhongchen was playing a game of kemari, and immediately ordered the army to be mobilized to rescue him.

古文：监军大将固请曰： 军行须择吉日。 
现代文：监军大将执意请求道： 军队出征必要选择吉日。 
English: The inspector general persistently requested: The army must choose a good day to go to war.

古文：忠臣奋臂于众曰： 焉有父母遇寇难，待拣好日，方救患乎！ 
现代文：李忠臣扬起手臂对兵士们说： 哪有父母遇到强盗打劫，还要等待挑选好日子才去救祸呢？ 
English: Li Zhongchen raised his arm and said to the soldiers: Which parents have encountered robbers and have to wait for a good day to save the day?

古文：即日进发。
现代文：当天就进发。
English: We started on the same day.

古文：自此方隅有警，忠臣必先期而至。
现代文：从此，什么地方有了警报，李忠臣必定先期到达。
English: From then on, wherever there was an alert, Li Zhongchen would arrive ahead of time.

古文：由是代宗嘉其忠节，加本道观察使，宠赐颇厚。
现代文：因此代宗极嘉许他的忠贞，加授本道观察使，赏赐颇丰厚。
English: Therefore, the Daizong highly commended his loyalty and awarded him the title of "Observant of the True Way," which was a very rich reward.

古文：及同华节度周智光举兵反，诏忠臣与神策将李太清等讨平之。
现代文：及至同华节度使周智光起兵造反，诏令李忠臣与神策军将领李太清等人进讨平息了他。
English: When the Tonghua Festival caused Zhou Zhiguang to rebel, he ordered Li Zhongchen and Li Taiqing, the general of the Shenzhao Army, to negotiate and quell him.

古文：大历三年，加检校工部尚书，实封通前三百户。
现代文：大历三年，加授李忠臣检校工部尚书，实封食邑连先前一共三百户。
English: In the third year of the lunar calendar, Li Zhongchen was additionally awarded the title of inspector of the school inspection department, and a total of three hundred households were previously awarded the title of actual seal.

古文：五年，加蔡州刺史。
现代文：大历五年，又加授蔡州刺史。
English: In the fifth year of the lunar calendar, he was also awarded the Caizhou History Prize.

古文：七年，检校右仆射、知省事。
现代文：大历七年，授检校右仆射、知中书省事。
English: In the seventh year of the lunar calendar, the inspection school was awarded the right to shoot, and the knowledge of the book was saved.

古文：李灵曜之叛，田承嗣使侄悦援之，忠臣与诸军大破悦等，汴州平。
现代文：李灵曜叛乱时，田承嗣派侄儿田悦去援助他，李忠臣与诸军大败田悦等人，汴州平定。
English: When Li Lingyou rebelled, Tian Chengzhi sent his nephew Tian Yue to help him. Li Zhongchen and the army defeated Tian Yue and others, and Quzhou was pacified.

古文：十一年十二月，加检校司空平章事、汴州刺史。
现代文：大历十一年十二月，加授检校司空、平章事、汴州刺史。
English: In December of the eleventh year of the lunar calendar, additional awards were given to the inspector of the school, Kuang, Ping Zhangji, and Zhangzhou Zhishi.

古文：忠臣性贪残好色，将吏妻女多被诱胁以通之。
现代文：李忠臣性情贪婪残忍好色，部下将吏的妻女大多被他诱骗胁迫而私通。
English: Li Zhongchen had a greedy, cruel and lecherous nature. Most of the wives and daughters of his subordinate generals were deceived and coerced by him into adultery.

古文：又军无纪纲，所至纵暴，人不堪命。
现代文：加上军队无纲纪，所到之处纵容施暴，人们不堪忍受。
English: Add to this the fact that the army is undisciplined and indulges in violence wherever it goes, and it becomes unbearable.

古文：而以妹婿张惠光为衙将，恃势凶虐，军中苦之；数有言于忠臣，不之信也。
现代文：又任妹夫张惠光为衙将，仗势行凶肆虐，军中人恨他，屡次对李忠臣诉说，李忠臣不相信他们。
English: In addition, his brother-in-law Zhang Huiguang was the commander of the army, and the war situation was violent. The soldiers hated him and repeatedly told Li Zhongcheng that Li Zhongcheng did not believe them.

古文：俄以惠光为节度副使，令惠光子为衙将，陵横甚于其父。
现代文：不久让张惠光担任节度副使，命张惠光之子为衙将，其凌虐残暴超过他的父亲。
English: Soon, he made Zhang Huiguang the vice-envoy of the festival, and appointed Zhang Huiguang's son as the commander, whose brutality exceeded that of his father.

古文：忠臣所信任大将李希烈，素善骑射，群情所伏，因众心之怒，以十四年三月，与少将丁皓、贾子华、监军判官蒋知璋等举兵斩惠光父子，以胁逐忠臣。
现代文：李忠臣所信任的大将李希烈，素来善于骑马射箭，为人们所拜服，借着部众的怒气，于大历十四年三月，与年轻将领丁曰高、贾子华，监军判官蒋知璋等人举兵斩杀张惠光父子，并胁迫李忠臣出走。
English: In March of the 14th year of the Tai Lian calendar, General Li Xili, who was trusted by Li Zhongchen and had always been good at horseback archery and was worshipped by the people, took advantage of the anger of his subordinates to raise an army with the young generals Ding Shigao, Jia Zihua, and the supervising military judge Jiang Zhisheng to kill Zhang Huiguang and his son, and forced Li Zhongchen to flee.

古文：单骑赴京师，朝廷方宠武臣，不之责也，依前检校司空、平章事，留京师奉朝请。
现代文：李忠臣单骑赴京师，当时朝廷正优宠武臣，没有责备他，依旧任他为检校司空、平章事，留在京师参加朝见。
English: Li Zhongchen rode alone to Beijing Division. At that time, the imperial court was favoring Wu Chen and did not reproach him. He was still appointed as the inspector of the school, and stayed in Beijing Division to attend the imperial court.

古文：建中初，尝因奏对，德宗谓之曰： 卿耳甚大，真贵人也。 
现代文：建中初年，曾因事奏对，德宗对他说： 卿之耳甚大，真是贵人相啊。 
English: In the first year of junior high school, when he was reprimanded for something, Emperor Dezong said to him, "Your ear is very large. You really have the appearance of a noble person."

古文：忠臣对曰： 臣闻驴耳甚大，龙耳甚小；臣耳虽大，乃驴耳也。 
现代文：李忠臣答道： 臣听说驴耳甚大，龙耳甚小，臣耳虽大，也是驴耳呀。 
English: Li Zhongchen replied, "I have heard that the donkey's ear is very large, while the dragon's ear is very small. Although the donkey's ear is large, it is also a donkey's ear.

古文：上说之。
现代文：皇上听了很高兴。
English: The Emperor was delighted to hear this.

古文：时常侍张涉承恩用事，坐受财贿事露，帝将以法绳之一一涉，即帝在春宫时侍讲也。忠臣奏曰： 陛下贵为天子，而先生以乏财抵法，以愚臣观之，非先生之过也。 
现代文：此时常侍张涉蒙恩执政，因受贿之事败露，皇上将绳之以法。张涉本为皇上做太子时的侍讲学士，李忠臣上奏道： 陛下贵为天子，而老师因缺钱触犯法律，以愚臣之见，这不是老师的过错。 
English: At this time, Zhang Shiban, the emperor's regular attendant, came to power by grace, and the emperor was brought to justice after it was revealed that he had accepted bribes. Zhang Shiban was an attendant and lecturer of the emperor when he was a prince, and Li Zhongchen made a report: Your Majesty is a son of heaven, and the teacher violated the law due to lack of money. In the opinion of a foolish subject, this is not the fault of the teacher.

古文：帝意解，但令归田里。
现代文：皇上怒气消解，只命他回归乡里。
English: When the emperor's anger subsided, he ordered him to return to the countryside.

古文：前湖南观察辛京杲尝以忿怒杖杀部曲，有司劾奏京杲杀人当死，从之。
现代文：前湖南观察使辛京杲曾因动怒杖杀部下，有关官署弹劾奏报辛京杲杀人应当处死，皇上允从。
English: The former Hunan Observer had ordered Xin Jingyao to kill his subordinates with a cane out of anger. The relevant government office impeached and reported that Xin Jingyao should be put to death for murder, and the emperor complied.

古文：忠臣奏曰： 京杲合死久矣！
现代文：李忠臣上奏道： 辛京杲早就该死了。 
English: Li Zhongchen made a speech: Xin Jingyao should have died a long time ago.

古文：儒生；上问之，对曰： 渠柏叔某于某处战死，兄弟某于某处战死，渠尝从行，独不死，是以知渠合死久矣。 
现代文：皇上询问原由，李忠臣回答道： 他的伯父叔父某某在某处战死，兄弟某某在某处战死，他曾随从出征，惟独不死，因此知道他早就该死了。 
English: The emperor asked the reason, and Li Zhongchen replied: His uncle uncle died in a battle somewhere, his brother died in a battle somewhere, he had followed the expedition, but he did not die, so he knew that he should have died long ago.

古文：上亦悯然，不令加罪，改授王傅而已。
现代文：皇上也露出怜悯之意，不下令加以罪罚，只将辛京杲改授王傅了事。
English: The emperor also showed mercy and did not order any punishment, but only changed Xin Jingyao to Wang Fu.

古文：忠臣木强率直，不识书，不喜儒生；及罢兵权，官位崇重，常郁郁不得志。
现代文：李忠臣倔强率直，不识字，不喜欢读书人。革除兵权之后，官位虽然很高，却时常郁郁不得志。
English: Li Zhongcheng was stubborn and outspoken, illiterate, and disliked readers. After he was dismissed from the military, although his official rank was high, he was often depressed and discouraged.

古文：及硃泚反，以为伪司空、兼侍中。
现代文：及至朱氵此谋反，任命他为伪司空、兼侍中。
English: As a result, Zhu Xi plotted a rebellion and appointed him as a pseudo-secretary and chamberlain.

古文：汝南多广野大泽，得豢马畜，时夺掠寿州茶山之利，内则数匿亡命，以富实其军。又屡以牧马来献，诏因善之。元和九年九月卒，赠右仆射。
现代文：朱氵此率兵逼近奉天，命令李忠臣留守京城。朱氵此失败，李忠臣逃到樊川的别墅中，李晟部下将士把李忠臣抓了回来，交付官府囚禁。兴元元年，同他的儿子一起被处死，时年六十九岁，朝廷抄没了他的家产。
English: Zhu Xi led his troops to approach Fengtian and ordered Li Zhongchen to remain in Beijing. Zhu Xi failed, Li Zhongchen fled to a villa in Luochuan. Li Xi's subordinates captured Li Zhongchen and delivered him to the government for imprisonment. He was executed together with his son in the first year of the Xing Dynasty, at the age of sixty-nine, and the imperial court confiscated his family property.

古文：吴元济，少阳长子也。
现代文：吴元济是吴少阳的长子。
English: Wu Yuanji was the eldest son of Wu Shaoyang.

古文：初为试协律郎、兼监察御史、摄蔡州刺史。
现代文：起初试用为协律郎、兼监察御史、代理蔡州刺史。
English: At first, he was probationary as a legal assistant, as well as a supervising magistrate and acting magistrate of Caizhou.

古文：及父死，不发丧，以病闻，因假为少阳表，请元济主兵务。
现代文：其父去世时，不发布丧事，只以患病奏报朝廷，并托吴少阳之名上表，请求由吴元济主持军务。
English: When his father died, he did not issue a funeral notice, but only reported to the imperial court that he was ill, and sent a petition in the name of Wu Shaoyang, requesting that Wu Yuanji preside over military affairs.

古文：帝遣医工候之，即称少阳疾愈，不见而还。
现代文：皇上派遣医生前去问病，便称说吴少阳已病愈，医生未见到吴少阳就回去了。
English: The emperor sent a doctor to inquire about his health. He said that Wu Shaoyang had recovered from his illness. The doctor left without seeing Wu Shaoyang.

古文：先是，少阳判官苏兆、杨元卿及其将侯惟清尝同为少阳画朝觐计；及元济自领军，凶狠无义，唯暱军中凶悍之徒。
现代文：这之前，吴少阳的判官苏兆、杨元卿及其部将侯惟清曾共同为吴少阳谋划入朝觐见的办法；及至吴元济擅自统领军队之后，凶狠无仁义，只亲近军中那些凶悍之徒。
English: Prior to this, Wu Shao Yang's judge Su Zhao, Yang Yuanqing and his subordinate Hou Weiqing had jointly plotted a way for Wu Shao Yang to enter the imperial court; and after Wu Yuanji took command of the army without authorization, he was cruel and without mercy, only close to those fierce people in the army.

古文：素不便兆，缢杀之，归其尸于家，械侯惟清而囚之。
现代文：他一向认为苏兆对他不利，便将苏兆缢杀，将尸体还给他家人，又将侯惟清抓了囚禁起来。
English: He always thought that Su Zhao was against him, so he killed Su Zhao, returned the body to his family, and arrested and imprisoned Hou Weiqing.

古文：时朝廷误闻惟清已死，赠兵部尚书，赠苏兆以右仆射。
现代文：当时朝廷听信误传以为侯惟清已死，追赠他为兵部尚书，追赠苏兆为右仆射。
English: At that time, the imperial court mistakenly believed that Hou Weiqing was dead. He was posthumously awarded the title of Heibu Shoshu, and Su Zhao was posthumously awarded the title of Uchu Ya.

古文：杨元卿先奏事在京师，得尽言经略淮西事于宰相李吉甫。
现代文：杨元卿因奏事先到京师，得以将吴元济如何处置淮西事务详细禀告宰相李吉甫。
English: As a result of his report, Yang Yuanqing went to Beijing in advance and was able to inform the Prime Minister Li Jifu in detail about how Wu Yuanji handled Huaixi affairs.

古文：始，少阳以病闻，元卿请凡淮西使在道路者，所在留止之。
现代文：开始，蔡州以吴少阳患病奏报，杨元卿奏请凡淮西来使尚在途中的，当地官府须将他们留下。
English: At the beginning, Caizhou reported that Wu Shaoyang was ill, and Yang Yuanqing asked Fan Huaxi to come to help those who were still on their way. The local government had to leave them behind.

古文：及少阳卒，凡四十日，不为辍朝，但易将加兵于外以待。
现代文：及至吴少阳去世，四十天内，李吉甫不停止上朝，只是在京城外调换将领、增加兵力以等待动静。
English: Within forty days of Wu Shaoyang's death, Li Jifu did not stop his advance on the capital, but only changed generals and increased troops outside the capital to wait for movement.

古文：其邸吏无何妄传董重质已杀元济，并屠其家；李吉甫遽请对拜贺，乃辍朝。
现代文：其府内小吏不久便妄传董重质已杀死吴元济，并诛杀他的全家，李吉甫立即请求奏对拜贺，这才停止上朝。
English: A minor official in his office soon falsely reported that Dong Chongqing had killed Wu Yuanji and killed his entire family. Li Jifu immediately asked for a congratulatory message, and only then did he stop going to the imperial court.

古文：数日，知元济尚在。
现代文：数日后，得知吴元济还活着。
English: A few days later, it was learned that Wu Yuanji was still alive.

古文：时贼阴计已成，群众四出，狂悍而不可遏，屠舞阳，焚叶县，攻掠鲁山、襄城。
现代文：这时逆贼的阴谋已经成功，其部众四面出击，狂暴凶悍而不可阻挡，屠戮舞阳，焚烧叶县，攻掠鲁山、襄城。
English: At this time, the plot of the traitors had been successful, and their followers attacked on all sides, ferocious and unstoppable, slaughtering Waiyang, burning Ye County, and raiding Lushan and Xiangcheng.

古文：汝州、许州及阳翟人多逃伏山谷荆棘间，为其杀伤驱剽者千里，关东大恐。
现代文：汝州、许州及翟阳百姓大多逃亡躲藏在山谷荆棘丛中，被贼兵杀戮伤害驱赶劫掠者遍及千里，关东极其震恐。
English: Most of the people in Ruzhou, Huzhou and Shenyang fled and hid in the thorny bushes of the valley. They were killed and injured by the robbers and drove the robbers across thousands of miles. Guandong was extremely terrified.

古文：十月，以陈州刺史李光颜为忠武军节度使，又以山南东道节度使严绶充申光蔡等州招抚使，仍令内常侍崔潭峻监绶军。
现代文：元和九年十月，朝廷任命陈州刺史李光颜为忠武军节度使，又命山南东道节度使严绶充任申、光、蔡等州招抚使，仍令内常侍崔潭峻监严绶之军。
English: In October of the ninth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court appointed Li Guangyan, Chen Zhou's secretary, as the loyal military festival envoy, and also ordered Yan Xun, the host of the Shannan Festival, to serve as the envoy of Shen, Guang, Cai and other states, and still ordered the inner attendant Cui Tan to supervise Yan Xun's army.

古文：十年正月，绶军临贼西境。
现代文：十年正月，严绶军临贼境西面。
English: In the first month of the tenth year, Yan Xuan's army approached the western part of the territory.

古文：诏曰：吴元济逆绝人理，反易天常；不居父丧，擅领军政。
现代文：朝廷下诏称： 吴元济弃绝人性，叛离天理；不居父丧，擅领军政。
English: The imperial court issued a decree saying: Wu Yuanji abandoned his absolute humanity and rebelled against the principles of heaven; he did not attend his father's funeral, but took an active part in military affairs.

古文：谕以诏旨，曾无谦恭，荧惑一方之人，迫胁三军之众。
现代文：朝廷宣旨晓谕，却无半点谦恭，诱惑一方之人，胁迫三军之众。
English: The imperial court issued an edict, but there was no modesty at all, tempting people on one side and coercing the three armies.

古文：以少阳尝经任使，为之轸悼，命申吊祭，临遣使臣。
现代文：因其父吴少阳曾经任使，朝廷哀其逝世，命人前往吊祭，使臣抵达即被遣返。
English: Because his father, Wu Shaoyang, had once appointed an envoy, the imperial court mourned his death, ordered the envoy to go to the hanging ceremony, and the envoy was repatriated upon arrival.

古文：陵虐封疆，遂致稽阻，绝朝廷之理，忘父子之恩。
现代文：据境肆虐，不听朝命，断绝君臣应有之礼义，忘却父子所受之恩德。
English: He rages against the situation, disobeys the orders of the emperor, breaks the courtesy that should be given to princes and ministers, and forgets the kindness he received from his father and son.

古文：旋又掩寇舞阳，伤残吏卒，焚烧叶县，骚扰闾阎，恣行夺攘，无所畏忌。
现代文：旋即屠戮舞阳，伤残吏卒，焚烧叶县，骚扰百姓，恣行抢掠，无所畏忌。
English: They immediately slaughtered Maiyang, injured and disabled officials, burned Ye County, harassed the people, looted arbitrarily, and were fearless.

古文：朕念赏延之义，重伤籓帅之门，尚欲纳于忠顺之途，处在显荣之地。
现代文：朕念及从前有赏赐的恩义，不轻易伤害藩帅之后人，仍然期望他回归忠顺之路，处在尊宠之位。
English: I remember the gratitude that was once rewarded, and I do not easily hurt people after the commander, I still expect him to return to the road of loyalty, and I am in the position of respect.

古文：未能饬怒，犹为包荒，再降诏书，俾申招抚。
现代文：因此并未动怒，依旧宽容，再降诏书，以示招抚。
English: Therefore, he did not get angry, remained tolerant, and then issued an imperial edict to show appeasement.

古文：而毒螫滋甚，奸心靡悛，寿春西南，又陷镇栅，穷凶稔恶，纵暴延灾。
现代文：而他毒性愈甚，奸心不收，寿春西南，又陷州郡，穷凶极恶，纵暴延灾。
English: But the more toxic he is, the more treacherous he is, southwest of Shuchun, and in Zhouzhou County, he is extremely vicious, violent and prolonged.

古文：覆载之所不容，人神之所共弃，良非获已，致此兴戎。
现代文：百姓不能容忍，人神共同唾弃，导致此次动兵，确实出于不得已。
English: The people could not tolerate it, and people and gods alike spurned it, leading to this mobilization, which was really out of necessity.

古文：吴元济在身官爵，并宜令削夺。
现代文：吴元济现有官爵，概当下令削夺。
English: Wu Yuanji's existing titles should be abolished.

古文：令宣武、大宁、淮南、宣歙等道兵马合势，山南东道及魏博、荆南、江西、剑南东川兵马与鄂岳许会，东都防御使与怀郑汝节度及义成兵马掎角相应，同期进讨。
现代文：令宣武、大宁、淮南、宣歙等道兵马结为一体，山南东道及魏博、荆南、江西、剑南东川兵马与鄂岳统一指挥，东都防御使与怀郑汝节度使及义成兵马成犄角之势相互策应，同期进讨。 
English: The troops and horses of Xuanwu, Danying, Huainan, Xuanwu and other provinces should be unified, the troops and horses of Shannan, Weibo, Jingnan, Jiangxi and Jianan should be under the unified command of Dongchuan and Hougou, and the defense of Dongdu should be coordinated with the troops and horses of Huai Zhengru and Yicheng.

古文：二月，绶兵为贼所袭，败于磁丘，退保唐州。
现代文：二月，严绶兵遭到贼军袭击，在磁丘被打败，退守唐州。
English: In February, Yan Xuan soldiers were attacked by bandits, defeated at the magnetic hill, and retreated to Tangzhou.

古文：四月，光颜破贼党，元济遣人求援于镇州王承宗、淄郓李师道；二帅上表于朝廷，请赦元济之罪，朝旨不从。
现代文：四月，李光颜击溃贼党，吴元济派人向镇州王承宗、淄郓李师道求援，二帅上表于朝廷，请求赦免吴元济之罪，朝旨不允准。
English: In April, Li Guangyan defeated the Kuomintang, and Wu Yuanji sent people to Zhenzhou Wang Chengzong and Zhai Li Shidao to ask for help. The two generals petitioned the imperial court to pardon Wu Yuanji's crime, but the imperial order was not approved.

古文：自是两河贼帅所在窃发，冀以沮挠王师。
现代文：从此两河贼帅就地暗中发难，企图以此阻挠王师。
English: From then on, the two river bandits secretly attacked on the spot, in an attempt to obstruct Wang Shi.

古文：五月，承宗、师道遣盗烧河阴仓，诏御史中丞裴度于军前宣喻，观用兵形势。
现代文：五月，王承宗、李师道派遣盗贼焚烧河阴仓，诏令御史中丞裴度前往军中宣谕，观察用兵形势。
English: In May, Wang Chengzong and Li Shidao sent thieves to burn down the Hechin warehouse, and ordered the Grand Historian Zhongzheng Pei Du to go to the military headquarters to observe the situation of soldiers.

古文：度还奏曰： 臣观诸将，唯光颜勇义尽心，必有成功。 
现代文：裴度还朝奏道： 臣观诸将，惟独李光颜勇义兼备尽心报国，必获成功。 
English: Pei Du also made a speech in the morning, saying: Li Guangyan is the only one who has the courage and dedication to serve the country and will surely succeed.

古文：上意甚悦。
现代文：皇上很是高兴。
English: The Emperor was very pleased.

古文：翌日，光颜奏大破贼于时曲，上曰： 度知光颜，可谓至矣！ 
现代文：次日，李光颜奏报在时曲大破贼兵，皇上道： 裴度了解李光颜，可说是最为透彻啊。 
English: The next day, Li Guangyan was reported to have defeated the bandits in the Song Dynasty. The emperor said, "I have known Li Guangyan for a long time, and I can say that I know her very well.

古文：乃以度兼刑部侍郎。
现代文：于是命裴度兼刑部侍郎。
English: As a result, Pei Du, who was also the head of the criminal investigation department, was killed.

古文：自是中外相贺，决不赦贼，征天下兵环申、蔡之郊，大小十余镇。
现代文：此时朝内朝外相互庆贺，决意不宽赦叛贼，征召天下官军环列申州、蔡州郊外成包围之势，共有大小十余镇的军队前来。
English: At this time, the government inside and outside the country congratulated each other, decided not to pardon the traitors, and called in the national government army to encircle the suburbs of Leshan and Caizhou, creating a siege situation. A total of more than ten towns came.

古文：六月，承宗、师道遣盗伏于京城，杀宰相武元衡、中丞裴度；衡先死，度重伤而免。
现代文：六月，王承宗、李师道派盗贼在京城埋伏，刺杀宰相武元衡及中丞裴度，武元衡先被杀死，裴度重伤而未死。
English: In June, thieves led by Wang Chengzong and Li Shidao ambushed and assassinated the prime minister, Bu Yuanheng, and the vice-president, Pei Du, in Beijing. Bu Yuanheng was killed first, and Pei Du was seriously wounded but did not die.

古文：宪宗特怒，即命度为宰相，淮右用兵之事，一以委之。
现代文：宪宗怒不可遏，立即任命裴度为宰相，淮右用兵之事，一概交付他处理。
English: Kenzong was furious and immediately appointed Pei Du as prime minister. He was put in charge of all matters concerning Huai Yu's use of troops.

古文：七月，李师道遣嵩山僧圆净结山贼与留邸兵，欲焚烧东都，先事败而祸弭。
现代文：七月，李师道派遣嵩山僧圆净勾结山贼同留守宅邸的卫兵一起，企图焚烧东都，动手之前事情败露而自遭其祸。
English: In July, Li Shidao sent Songshan monk Yuanqing to collude with the bandits and the guards of the mansion to attempt to burn Dongdu. However, before he could do so, the affair was exposed and he himself suffered the misfortune.

古文：严绶退罢，乃以汴州节度使韩弘为淮右行营兵马都统；以高霞寓有名，用为唐邓节度。
现代文：此时严绶已退休罢职，便任命汴州节度使韩弘为淮右行营兵马都统，因高霞寓有威名，任用为唐邓节度使。
English: At this time, Yan Xuan had already retired from his post, so he appointed Han Hong as the Jingzhou Festival envoy to the Huaihuang Camp of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses. Because Gao Xia had a prestigious name, he was appointed as the Tang and Deng Festival envoy.

古文：十一年春，诸军云合，惟李光颜、怀汝节度乌重胤心无顾望，旦夕血战，继献戎捷。
现代文：元和十一年春，诸军集结如云，惟有李光颜、怀汝节度使乌重胤无顾虑观望之心，旦夕同贼军血战，不断献上捷报。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, all the armies gathered like clouds, but Li Guangyan and Huairu's festival made Wu Chongyin have no qualms about watching, and he fought a bloody battle with the thief army on the eve of the day, and constantly presented a successful report.

古文：六月，高霞寓为贼所击，败于铁城，退保新兴栅。
现代文：六月，高霞寓遭贼军攻击，在铁城战败，退守新兴栅。
English: In June, Gaoxia Apartment was attacked by bandits, defeated in Tiecheng and retreated to Xinxingzha.

古文：时诸军胜负皆不实闻，多虚称克捷；及霞寓败，中外恟々。
现代文：当时各军作战之胜负皆不如实奏报，大多虚称取胜，及至高霞寓战败，朝内外人心惶惶。
English: At that time, the military victories and defeats of each army were not as good as the real report, most of them falsely claiming victory, and even defeat, and the people inside and outside the country were panicked.

古文：宰相谏官屡以罢兵为请，唯裴度坚于破贼。
现代文：宰相与谏官屡屡奏请罢兵，惟有裴度坚决主张击溃贼人。
English: The prime minister and eunuchs repeatedly requested a strike, but Pei Du resolutely insisted on defeating the bandits.

古文：寻以袁滋代霞寓为唐邓帅，滋柔懦不能军。
现代文：随即以袁滋取代高霞寓为唐邓军帅，袁滋生性懦弱不能带兵。
English: Yuan Zhi immediately replaced Gao Xiaye as the commander of the Tang and Deng armies. Yuan Zhi was too cowardly to lead the troops.

古文：十二年正月，袁滋复贬，闲厩使李醖表请军前自效，乃用醖为唐邓帅以代滋。
现代文：十二年正月，袁滋又遭贬，闲厩使李朔心上表奏请到军中效力，于是任命李朔心为唐邓军帅以替代袁滋。
English: In the first month of the 12th year, Yuan Zi was demoted again, and Li Shuo Xin was invited to serve in the army by Li Shuo, who appointed Li Shuo Xin as the commander of Tang and Deng's army to replace Yuan Zi.

古文：醖军压境，拔贼文城栅，擒栅将吴秀琳，又获贼将李祐。李光颜亦拔贼郾城。
现代文：李朔心大军压境，夺取贼军文城栅，生擒栅将吴秀琳，又活捉贼将李佑；李光颜也攻陷贼方郾城。
English: Li Shaoxin's army pressed the frontier, captured the thief army Wencheng Grate, captured the thief grate Wu Xiulin alive, and captured the thief Li You alive; Li Guangyan also captured the thief Fangcheng City.

古文：元济始惧，尽发左右及守城卒，属董重质以抗光颜、重胤。
现代文：吴元济这才感到畏惧，尽数派出左右侍卫及守城士卒，让董重质率领以抗拒李光颜、乌重胤。
English: Wu Yuanji was afraid of this, so he sent out as many bodyguards and city guards as possible to resist Li Guangyan and Wu Chungyin, led by Dong Chongqing.

古文：六月，元济乞降，为群贼所制，不能自拔。
现代文：六月，吴元济请求归降，被群贼所牵制，不能自拔。
English: In June, Wu Yuanji requested to surrender, but was held back by the bandits and could not extricate himself.

古文：上以元凶已蹙，兵未临于贼城，輓馈日殚，因延英问计于宰相。
现代文：皇上认为元凶已陷于困境，但官军未临贼城，军需日益耗尽，便在延英殿向宰相询问如何处置。
English: The emperor thought that the culprit had fallen into a difficult situation, but the government army had not yet reached the Thief City, and the military supplies were increasingly exhausted, so he asked the prime minister at Yan Ying Dian how to deal with it.

古文：裴度曰： 贼力已困，但群帅不一，故未能决降。 
现代文：裴度道： 叛贼力已穷尽，但诸贼帅主张不一，因此未能决意归降。 
English: Pei Du said: The power of the traitors had been exhausted, but the leaders of the traitors had different opinions, so they could not make up their minds to surrender.

古文：上曰： 卿决能行乎？ 
现代文：皇上道： 卿之决策能实行吗？ 
English: Empress Dowager: Can your decision be carried out?

古文：曰： 臣誓不与贼偕全。 
现代文：裴度回答道： 臣誓不与贼共存。 
English: Pei Du replied, "Ministers swear not to coexist with thieves."

古文：七月，诏以度为彰义军节度使，兼申光蔡四面行营招抚使，以郾城为行在，蔡州为节度所。
现代文：七月，诏令裴度为彰义军节度使，兼申光蔡四面行营招抚使，以郾城为行使蔡州节度使职的治所。
English: In July, it was decreed that Pei Du would be the delegate of the Zhangye Uyghur Uyghur Uyghur Uyghur Uyghur Uyghur Uyghur Uyghur Uyghur Uyghur Uyghur Uyghur Uyghur Uyghur Uyghur Uyghur Uyghur Uyghur Uyghur Uyghur Uyghur Uyghur.

古文：八月，度至郾城，激励士众，军士喜度至，以赏罚必行，皆愿输罄；每出劳，军士有流涕者。
现代文：八月，裴度至郾城，激励部众，军士们因裴度到来而喜悦，因他赏罚必行，皆愿竭力效忠，裴度每出面劳军，军士中都有感激涕零的人。
English: In August, Pei Du arrived in Handan to inspire his subordinates. The sergeants were delighted with Pei Du's arrival. They were all willing to do their best to be loyal to him. Every time Pei Du appeared in front of the laborers, there were grateful people among the sergeants.

古文：时李醖营文城栅，既得吴秀琳、李祐，知其可用，委信无疑，日夜与计事于帐中。
现代文：此时李朔心驻军文城栅，既已俘获吴秀琳、李佑，了解到这二人可利用，便委用不疑，日夜与他们在军帐中谋划。
English: At this time, Li Shuo's heart was stationed at the Wenshong Gate, and since he had already captured Wu Xiulin and Li You, he knew that these two people could be used, and he would undoubtedly use them day and night to plan with them in military accounts.

古文：祐曰： 元济劲军，多在洄曲西境防捍，而守蔡者皆市人疲耄之卒，可以乘虚掩袭，直抵悬匏，比贼将闻之，元济成擒矣！ 
现代文：李佑道： 吴元济的强兵，多在洄曲西岸防卫，而守卫蔡州的兵士都是市井老弱之人，可以乘虚偷袭，直抵悬瓠，等到贼将发觉，吴元济已成俘虏了。 
English: Li You said: Wu Yuanji's strong soldiers were mostly defending the west coast of Zhenqu, while the soldiers guarding Caizhou were all weak and old men. They could take advantage of the false attack and reach the hanging anchor, until the thief would discover that Wu Yuanji had become a prisoner.

古文：醖然之，咨于裴度。度曰： 兵非出奇不胜，常侍良图也。 
现代文：李朔心等认为很对，征求裴度的意见，裴度道： 不出奇兵不能取胜，您的主意太好了。 
English: Li Shuo Xin and others thought it was right to solicit Pei Du's opinion. Pei Du said, "No surprise soldiers can't win, your idea is too good."

古文：十一月，醖夜出军，令李祐率劲骑三千为前锋，田进诚三千为后军，醖自率三千为中军。
现代文：十一月，李朔心黑夜出兵，令李佑率精锐骑兵三千为前锋，田进诚率三千骑兵为后军，李朔心亲自率三千骑兵为中军。
English: In November, Li Shuo Xin dispatched troops in the dark of night, and ordered Li You to lead 3,000 elite cavalry as the vanguard, Tian Jincheng to lead 3,000 cavalry as the rear army, and Li Shuo Xin himself to lead 3,000 cavalry as the middle army.

古文：其月十日夜，至蔡州城下，坎墙而毕登，贼不之觉。
现代文：当月十日夜，到了蔡州城下，踏着墙上的坑洼全部登上城头，贼人没有发觉。
English: On the evening of the 10th day of the month, when they reached the bottom of the city of Caizhou, they climbed all the potholes on the wall to the top of the city, and the thieves did not find them.

古文：十一日，攻衙城，擒元济并其家属以闻。
现代文：十一日，攻击衙城，生擒吴元济及其家属，立即奏报朝廷。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wu Yuanji and his family were attacked and captured alive, which was immediately reported to the imperial court.

古文：初，元济之叛，恃其凶狠，然治军无纪纲。
现代文：当初，吴元济叛乱时，恃仗其凶残狠毒，但治军没有纲纪。
English: At first, when Wu Yuanji rebelled, the war was fierce and vicious, but there was no discipline in governing the army.

古文：其将赵昌洪、凌朝江、董重质等各权兵外寇。
现代文：其部将赵昌洪、凌朝江、董重质等各率兵向外侵犯。
English: His troops led by Zhao Changhong, Ling Chaojiang, and Dong Shouguang invaded the outside.

古文：李师道郓州之盐，城往来宁陵、雍丘之间，韩弘知而不禁。
现代文：李师道贩运郓州之盐，有时在宁陵、雍丘之间运送，韩弘知道却不能禁止。
English: Li Shidao trafficked salt from Ganzhou, sometimes transporting it between Ningling and Yongqiu. Han Hong knew about it, but he couldn't ban it.

古文：淮右自少诚阻兵已来，三十余年，王师加讨，未尝及其城下，尝走韩全义，败于頔，故骄悍无所顾忌。
现代文：淮右自吴少诚叛乱以来，三十余年，王师征讨，未能到达蔡州城下，叛贼曾击退韩全义，打败于由页，所以骄横凶悍无所顾忌。
English: Huai Yu, since Wu Shao Cheng's rebellion, for more than 30 years, Wang Shih's expedition failed to reach the castle town of Caizhou. The rebels had repulsed Han Quan Yi and defeated Yu You, so he was arrogant and fierce without any scruples.

古文：且恃城池重固，有陂浸阻回，故以天下兵环攻三年，所克者一县而已。
现代文：并且仗着城池坚固，有山隔水绕，所以朝廷征发天下之兵围攻三年，所攻克者不过一县罢了。
English: Moreover, the fortress was strong and surrounded by mountains and water, so the imperial court conscripted soldiers from all over the world to besiege it for three years, conquering only one county.

古文：及黜高霞寓、李逊、袁滋，诸军始进。
现代文：及至罢黜高霞寓、李逊、袁滋，诸军始能推进。
English: When Gao Xiaye, Li Xun and Yuan Zi were ousted, the armies were able to advance.

古文：又得阴山府沙阤骁骑、邯郸勇卒，光颜、重胤之奋命，及丞相临统，破诸将首尾之计，力擒元恶。
现代文：又靠了阴山府沙陀人骁骑、邯郸军勇士，以及李光颜、乌重胤舍命奋战，及至宰相亲临指挥，打破诸贼将首尾相顾之计，这才擒了元凶。
English: It also depended on the horseback riding of the Shatou people of Yinshan Prefecture, the brave soldiers of the Shao army, as well as Li Guangyan and Wu Chongyin, who fought hard, and the prime minister personally commanded to break the plan of the thieves to take care of each other, which only killed the culprit.

古文：申、蔡之始，人劫于希烈、少诚之虐法，而忘其所归。
现代文：申、蔡叛乱之初，人们被李希烈、吴少诚的酷虐行为所劫持，而忘记了心之所归。
English: At the beginning of the Shen and Cai rebellion, people were hijacked by the brutal behavior of Li Xilei and Wu Shaocheng, and forgot where they belonged.

古文：数十年之后，长者衰丧，而壮者安于毒暴而恬于搏噬。
现代文：数十年之后，老年人力衰或丧命，壮年人狠毒暴虐而心安、搏斗侵吞而愉悦。
English: After a few decades, the old people's strength will decline or die, and the adults will be cruel and tyrannical, but at peace, and happy to fight and devour.

古文：地既少马，而广畜骡，乘之教战，谓之骡子军。尤称勇悍，而甲仗皆画为雷公星文，以为厌胜；而少诚能以奸谋固众心。
现代文：当地马匹少，而到处畜养骡子，乘着骡子训练作战，称为骡子军，尤以勇猛凶悍著称，甲衣旗仗皆绘画雷公星象作为制胜之符咒，而吴少诚善于以奸谋稳固众人之心。
English: There are few local horses, but mules are bred everywhere, and they are trained to fight on mules, known as the mule army. They are particularly famous for their bravery and ferocity. In the battle of the coats of arms, the thunder god and the star are painted as a symbol of victory, and Wu Shosheng is good at using treachery to stabilize the hearts of the people.

古文：初，韩全义败于溵水，蔡兵于全义帐中得公卿间问讯书，少诚束而谕众曰： 朝廷公卿以此书托全义，收蔡州日，乞一将士妻女以为婢妄。 
现代文：当初，韩全义在氵殷水战败，蔡州兵在韩全义军帐中缴获朝廷公卿间相互问候的书信，吴少诚将书信包扎起来对部下说： 朝廷公卿寄来这些信件托付韩全义，收复蔡州之日，请求每人得一将士的妻女作为婢妾。 
English: At first, Han Chuan-Yi was defeated in the Battle of Suiyang, and the soldiers of Cai Zhou captured the letters of greetings between the court nobles in the military account of Han Chuan-Yi. Wu Shao-Cheng wrapped up the letters and said to his subordinates: The court nobles sent these letters to entrust Han Chuan-Yi, and on the day of recovering Cai Zhou, they asked each of them to get a wife and daughter of a soldier as a concubine.

古文：以此激怒其众，绝其归向之心。
现代文：用这种谎话来激怒手下军士，断绝他们归向朝廷的念头。
English: He used this lie to infuriate his subordinate sergeants and break their will to return to the imperial court.

古文：是以蔡人有老死不闻天子恩宥者，故坚为贼用。
现代文：因此蔡州人有宁愿老死而不愿听天子恩赦的说法，坚决为叛贼效力。
English: Therefore, the people of Caizhou would rather die of old age than be pardoned by the Son of Heaven, and resolutely worked for the traitors.

古文：地虽中州，人心过于夷貊，乃至搜阅天下豪锐，三年而后屈者，彼非将才而力备，盖势驱性习，不知教义之所致也。
现代文：蔡州虽然地处中原，人心之愚劣却超过外夷，乃至于搜罗天下豪杰，三年之后才被收服，他们并非将才却具备勇力，皆因情势驱逼、习性养成、不知教义所导致的结果。
English: Although Caizhou is located in the Central Plains, the stupidity of the people exceeds that of the barbarians. As for the collection of the world's heroes, they were only conquered three years later. They are not heroes, but they have courage. They are all the result of the situation, the development of habits, and the ignorance of doctrine.

古文：元济至京，宪宗御兴安门受浮，百僚楼前称贺，乃献庙社，徇于两京，斩之于独柳，时年三十五。
现代文：吴元济押解至京师，宪宗驾临兴安门接受献俘，百官到楼前称贺，于是献俘庙社，押往东西两市示众，在独柳将吴元济斩首，时年三十五。
English: Wu Yuanji was escorted to Beijing, and the Emperor drove to the Xing'an Gate to accept the tribute. Hundreds of officials came to the front of the building to congratulate him, so he presented the tribute to the temple, drove to the two cities in the east and west to demonstrate, and beheaded Wu Yuanji at the age of thirty-five.

古文：其夜失其首。
现代文：当夜首级不知去向。
English: The whereabouts of the head was unknown that night.

古文：妻沈氏，没入掖庭；弟二人、子三人，流于江陵诛之；判官刘协庶七人皆斩。
现代文：其妻沈氏，没身入后宫为婢；弟二人、子三人，流放江陵后杀死；判官刘协庶等七人皆斩首。
English: His wife, Shen, was taken into the harem as a maid; his two brothers and three sons were killed after being exiled to Gangneung; judge Liu Xiezhuang and seven others were beheaded.

古文：光、蔡等州平，始复为王土矣。
现代文：光、蔡等州平定，这才重新成为君王的疆土。
English: Guangxi, Cai and other provinces were pacified, and only then did they once again become the territory of the king.

