古文：起上章涒滩，尽玄黓阉茂，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。汉宣帝神爵元年
English: It lasted for a total of three years. In the first year of the reign of Emperor Han Xuan

古文：中宗孝宣皇帝中神爵元年春，正月，上始行幸甘泉，郊泰畤，三月，行幸河东，祠后土。
现代文：春季，正月，汉宣帝第一次前往甘泉宫，在泰祭祀天神。三月，前往河东郡，祭祀后土神。
English: In the spring, in the first month, Emperor Han Xuan went to Ganquan Palace for the first time to offer sacrifices to Tenjin in Tai. In March, he went to Hedong County to offer sacrifices to Hou Tu Shen.

古文：上颇修武帝故事，谨斋祀之礼，以方士言增置神祠；闻益州有金马、碧鸡之神，可醮祭而致，于是遣谏大夫蜀郡王褒使持节而求之。
现代文：汉宣帝颇仿照武帝旧例，小心谨慎地遵守斋戒祭祀之礼，又采纳方士的意见增修神祠。汉宣帝听说益州有金马神和碧鸡神，可以通过祭礼请到，于是派谏大夫蜀郡人王褒携带皇帝符节前去寻找。
English: Emperor Han Xuan rather followed the example of Emperor Wu, carefully observing the ritual of fasting and offering sacrifices, and also adopted the opinions of the magicians to add shrines. Emperor Han Xuan heard that there were golden horse gods and chicken gods in Yizhou, which could be invited through the festival, so he sent the doctor of Shu County, Wang Bo, to carry the emperor's symbols to the festival.

古文：初，上闻褒有俊才，召见，使为《圣主得贤臣颂》。
现代文：当初，汉宣帝听说王褒很有才干，召见他，命他作了一篇《圣主得贤臣颂》。
English: At first, Emperor Han Xuan heard that Wang Bo was very talented, summoned him, and ordered him to write an "Ode to the Sage."

古文：其辞日； 夫贤者，国家之器用也。
现代文：文中说到： 贤才，是国家的工具。
English: The article said: "Talent is the tool of the state.

古文：所任贤，则趋舍省而功施普；器用利，则用力少而就效众。
现代文：假使派眼神好的离娄负责测量，鲁班砍削木材，测量百丈面积，修建五层高台也不会失误，这是因为用人得当。
English: If the person appointed is capable, he will be good at choosing and the effect will be universal; if the equipment is convenient, the effort will be less and the effect will be more.

古文：故工人之用钝器也，劳筋苦骨，终日矻矻；及至巧冶铸干将，使离娄督绳，公输削墨，虽崇台五层、延袤百丈而不溷者，工用相得也，庸人之御弩马，亦伤吻、敝策而不进于行；及至驾啮膝、骖乘旦，王良执靶，韩哀附舆，周流八极，万里一息，何其辽哉？
现代文：蠢人骑劣马，即使勒破马嘴，抽坏马鞭，也不能前进；而由精于骑术的王良骑乘名种良驹，由善于改进车辆的韩哀侯驾驶快疾的宝马拉着马车周游天下，即使是万里之遥，也不过喘口气的工夫就能到达，为什么这么快呢？因为人马相得益彰之故。
English: Foolish people ride inferior horses, even if they break the horse's mouth and pull out the broken whip, they can't move forward; while Wang Liang, who is good at riding, rides the famous varieties of fine horses, and Han Yehou, who is good at improving vehicles, drives a fast BMW to travel around the world. Even if it is thousands of miles away, it can only be reached by taking a breath. Why is it so fast? Because people and horses complement each other.

古文：人马相得也，故且絺绤之凉者，不苦盛暑之郁燠；袭貂狐之暖者，不忧至寒之忄妻怆。
现代文：所以，身穿凉爽的麻布衣的人，不苦于盛夏的暑热；身穿温暖柔软的貂、狐皮衣的人，不担忧严冬的寒冷。原因何在？
English: Therefore, people who wear cool linen clothes do not suffer from the heat of midsummer; people who wear warm and soft cocoons and fox skins do not worry about the cold of winter. What is the reason?

古文：何则？有其具者易其备。
现代文：因为他们拥有相应的工具而易于防备。
English: Because they have clothes to cope with the heat and cold, it is easy to prepare for the summer and winter.

古文：贤人、君子，亦圣王之所以易海内也。
现代文：贤人、君子，也正是圣明的君王易于治理天下的工具。
English: Wise men and gentlemen are also the tools with which the king of wisdom can easily govern the world.

古文：昔周公躬吐捉之劳，故有圉空之隆；齐桓设庭燎之礼，故有匡合之功。
现代文：从前，周公为了接待宾客，吃一顿饭要停顿三次，沐浴一次要束起三次头发，所以才会出现监狱空闲的盛世；齐桓公在庭中燃起火炬，为的是不分昼夜地接待贤士，所以才能九合诸侯，称霸天下。
English: From the previous Zhou Gong, there was one meal, three spit-ups, one bath, three arrests, and a corporal's salute. Therefore, there was no need for punitive measures, and the prison was empty. Qi Huan used the courtesy of the court to receive the people who presented the 99 algorithms. Soon, the wise men competed with each other. Finally, Huan Gong won the world and the nine provinces, and achieved hegemony.

古文：由此观之，君人者勤于求贤而逸于得人。
现代文：由此看来，作为君王，只有首先不辞辛苦地访求贤才，然后才能享受所得贤才给他带来的安逸。
English: From this point of view, people who are diligent in seeking talents are at ease because they are assisted by others.

古文：人臣亦然。
现代文：作为人臣也是如此。
English: It's the same with ministers.

古文：昔贤者之未遭遇也，图事揆策，则君不用其谋；陈见悃诚，则上不然其信；进仕不得施效，斥逐又非其愆。
现代文：过去，贤能的人在没有受到君王的赏识之前，贡献策略，君王不用；陈述建议，君王不听；作官不能施展他的能力，遭斥逐也并非有什么过失。
English: In the past, a man of ability, before he was appreciated by the king, contributed strategies, but the king did not use them; made suggestions, but the king did not listen to them; an official could not exert his ability, and it was not a mistake to be expelled.

古文：是故伊尹勤于鼎俎，太公困于鼓刀，百里自鬻，宁子饭牛，离此患也。及其遇明君、遭圣主也，运筹合上意，谏诤即见听，进退得关其忠，任职得行其术，剖符锡壤而光祖考。
现代文：所以，伊尹曾经背着饭锅菜板去做厨师，姜太公曾经操刀杀牛，百里奚曾经自卖，宁戚曾经喂牛，都经历过忧患及至遇到圣主明君，出谋划策都符合主上的心意，规劝进谏立即被主上接受，无论进退都能显示其忠心，担任官职也能施展其本领，接受君王赐给的封爵、土地，光宗耀祖。
English: Therefore, Yi Yin once carried a cooking pot on his back to become a chef, Jiang Taigong once used a knife to kill a cow, Bai Lijun once sold himself, and Ning Qi once fed a cow. They all experienced sorrow and met the Lord Mingjun. Their plans and suggestions were all in line with the Lord's will. They advised Jin Kun to be immediately accepted by the Lord. No matter whether they advance or retreat, they can show their loyalty. They can also use their skills to serve as an official, and accept the knighthood, land, and glory given by the king.

古文：故世必有圣知之君，而后有贤明之臣。
现代文：所以，世间必须先有圣明智慧的君王，然后才有贤能的臣子。
English: Therefore, there must first be a prince of holy wisdom in the world, and then there will be a wise minister.

古文：故虎啸而风冽，龙兴而致云，蟋蟀俟秋吟，蜉蝤出以阴。
现代文：虎啸而兴风，龙飞而生云，蟋蟀到秋天才鸣叫，甲虫在阴湿处才会出现。
English: Therefore, the tiger roars and the wind is born, the dragon soars and the clouds rise, the dragonfly is silent until late autumn, and the dragonfly is born in the morning and dies in the evening.

古文：《易》曰： 飞龙在天，利见大人。 
现代文：《易经》上说： 飞龙在天，有利于选拔贤才。 
English: "Zhou Yi" said: "The dragon is flying in the sky.

古文：《诗》曰： 思皇多士，生此王国。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 济济贤才，生于周国。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says, "Many excellent sages were born in the country of King Zhou."

古文：故世平主圣，俊艾将自至。
现代文：所以，世道太平，君主圣明，才俊之士自会来临。
English: Therefore, the world is peaceful, the monarch is holy, and talented people will come.

古文：明明在朝，穆穆列布，聚精会神，相得益章，虽伯牙操递钟，逢门子弯乌号，犹未足以喻其意也。
现代文：君王勉力于上，人臣恭谨于下，聚精会神，相得益彰，即使用伯牙演奏他的 递钟 名琴，逢蒙使用他的 乌号 神弓也不足以比喻君臣之间的融洽。
English: Monarchs work hard at the top, people and ministers are respectful at the bottom, concentrate on each other, and complement each other. Even if you use Baoga to play his bell-shaped famous piano, and use his Wu-Fang divine bow, it is not enough to compare the harmony between monarchs and ministers.

古文：故圣主必待贤臣而弘功业，俊士亦俟明主以显其德。
现代文：所以圣主必须等待贤臣来辅佐，才能光大功业；贤臣只有等待圣主的赏识，才能显示才干。
English: Therefore, the holy Lord must wait for the wise men and women to carry out great feats, and the talented and noble men and women should also come to Mingjun to show their abilities.

古文：上下俱欲，欢然交欣，千载壹合，论说无疑，翼乎如鸿毛遇顺风，沛乎如巨鱼纵大壑。其得意若此，则胡禁不止，曷令不行！
现代文：上下互相需要，彼此欣悦，这是千年一次的际遇，言论见解无所猜疑，犹如羽毛遇到顺风，巨鲸纵横大海，如此得意，那么何禁不止，何令不行？
English: The upper and lower classes need each other and enjoy each other. This is a once-in-a-thousand-year opportunity. There is no doubt about the opinions expressed. It is like a feather encountering a tailwind, or a giant whale crossing the ocean, so proud, so why not do more, why not?

古文：行溢四表，横被无穷。
现代文：圣贤的教化，必将传播四方，永无穷尽。
English: The enlightenment of the sages will surely spread to the four directions and will never be exhausted.

古文：是以圣王不遍窥望而视已明，不殚倾耳而听已聪，太平之责塞，优游之望得，休征自至，寿考无疆，何必偃仰屈伸若彭祖，呴嘘呼吸如侨、松，眇眇绝俗离世哉！ 
现代文：所以，圣主不必处处窥望就已看得明白，不必时时侧耳就已听得清楚，使天下太平的责任已经尽到，安乐悠闲的愿望已经实现，祥瑞自然降临，寿命自然无疆，何必像彭祖那样俯仰屈伸，像王侨、赤松子那样呼吸吐纳，去寻觅与世隔绝的仙境呢！ 
English: Therefore, the Holy Lord does not need to look everywhere to see clearly, does not need to lend an ear all the time to hear clearly, the responsibility to make the world peaceful has been fulfilled, the desire for peace and leisure has been realized, auspiciousness comes naturally, and life is naturally boundless. Why do you have to bend over like Peng Zu, breathe like a king and queen, and breathe like a red pine to find a fairyland isolated from the world!

古文：是时上颇好神仙，故褒对及之。
现代文：此时，汉宣帝颇喜好神仙之术，所以王褒在文中特别提及。
English: At this time, Emperor Han Xuan was quite fond of the magic of the gods, so Wang Bao was specially mentioned in the article.

古文：京兆尹张敞亦上疏谏曰： 愿明主时忘车马之好，斥远方士之虚语，游心帝王之术，太平庶几可兴也。 
现代文：京兆尹张敞也上书规劝汉宣帝说： 希望明主经常忘掉乘车骑马的嗜好，疏远方士的虚言妄语，留心于帝王之术，太平盛世可望出现。 
English: Jing Zhao Yin Zhang Zhang also wrote a letter to advise Han Xuan Di, saying: I hope that the Lord will often forget the hobby of riding a horse, alienate the lies and nonsense of the magicians, and pay attention to the emperor's skills. Peace and prosperity are expected to appear.

古文：上由是悉罢尚方待诏，初，赵广汉死后，为京兆尹者皆不称职，唯敞能继其迹；其方略、耳目不及广汉，然颇以经术儒雅文之。
现代文：于是汉宣帝将担任待诏的方士全部罢斥。最初，自赵广汉死后，担任京兆尹一职的人都不称职，只有张敞能继续赵广汉的政绩，他的谋略、聪明虽不如赵广汉，但能以儒家经术加以辅助。
English: As a result, Emperor Han Xuan dismissed all the Fang scholars who were to be appointed. At first, since the death of Zhao Guanghan, no one who held the post of Jing Zhaoyin was qualified. Only Zhang Zhan could continue Zhao Guanghan's political achievements. Although his strategy and cleverness were not as good as Zhao Guanghan's, he could supplement them with Confucian classics.

古文：上颇修饰，宫室、车服盛于昭帝时；外戚许、史、王氏贵宠。
现代文：汉宣帝颇注重修饰，其宫室、车马、服饰都超过汉昭帝之时。外戚许、史、王氏家族尊贵受宠。
English: Emperor Han Xuan paid a great deal of attention to decoration, and his palace, chariots, horses, and clothing all surpassed those of Emperor Han Zhao. His maternal relatives, the Xu, Shi, and Wang families, were highly favored.

古文：谏大夫王吉上疏曰： 陛下躬圣质，总万方，惟思世务，将兴太平，诏书每下，民欣然若更生。
现代文：谏大夫王吉上书汉宣帝说： 陛下以圣明的资质总揽万方事务，专心思虑天下大事，将实现太平盛世。
English: Emperor Xuan of Han said in a letter to Dr. Wang Ji: His majesty, with the qualifications of a saint, will take charge of all affairs, concentrate on the major events of the world, and realize a peaceful and prosperous world.

古文：臣伏而思之，可谓至恩，未可谓本务也。
现代文：每次颁下诏书，百姓们就如同生命重新开始一样欢欣鼓舞。我想，这种情况可以说是陛下对百姓的最大恩德，却不能说是为政的根本。
English: In the opinion of his subjects, although these measures were the greatest boon to the people, they could not be said to have fulfilled the fundamentals of government affairs.

古文：欲治之主不世出，公卿幸得遭遇其时，言听谏从，然未有建万世之长策，举明主于三代之隆也。
现代文：想使国家大治的圣主并不经常出现，而如今的公卿大臣有幸遇到圣主出现，言听计从，但未能制定出建立万世基业的长远规划，未能辅助圣明君主创立可与夏、商、周三代媲美的太平盛世。
English: It is not often that a saint who wants to make the country prosper appears, but today's noble ministers are fortunate to encounter a saint who appears and listens to them, but they have not been able to formulate a long-term plan to establish an eternal foundation, and have not been able to assist the saintly monarch in creating a peaceful prosperous world comparable to the Xia, Shang and San dynasties.

古文：其务在于期会、簿书、断狱、听讼而已，此非太平之基也。
现代文：当今的政务主要着眼于朝会、财政报告、审判、处理讼案而已，这并非建立太平盛世的基础。
English: Today's government affairs mainly focus on the Imperial Diet, financial reports, trials, and the handling of lawsuits. This is not the basis for establishing a peaceful and prosperous world.

古文：臣闻民者，弱而不可胜，愚而不可欺也。
现代文：我听说，老百姓虽然软弱，却无法战胜他们；虽然愚昧，却不可欺骗他们。
English: I have heard that the people are weak, but they cannot be overcome; they are stupid, but they cannot be deceived.

古文：圣主独行于深宫，得则天下称诵之，失则天下咸言之，故宜谨选左右，审择所使。
现代文：圣主独处深宫，所作的决定，恰当则受到天下人的称颂，失当则被天下人纷纷议论，所以应小心地挑选身边的助手，审慎地择用执行命令的官员。
English: The Lord is alone in the depths of the palace, and the decisions he makes are praised by the world when they are appropriate, and discussed by the world when they are inappropriate. Therefore, you should carefully select the assistants around you, and carefully select the officials who carry out the orders.

古文：左右所以正身，所使所以宣德，此其本也。
现代文：使身边的助手能够帮助君王端正自身，执行命令的官员能够宣示圣德，这才是君王的根本要务。
English: It is a king's first duty to make his attendants capable of helping him to rectify himself, and the officers who execute his orders capable of proclaiming his holiness.

古文：孔子曰： 安上治民，莫善于礼， 非空言也。
现代文：孔子说： 使君王平安、百姓得到治理，没有比推行礼更好的了。 
English: Confucius said, "There is no better way to keep the king safe and the people under control than to promote etiquette."

古文：王者未制礼之时，引先王礼宜于今者而用之。
现代文：这不是一句空话。作为君王，在尚未制定出新的礼仪之前，应引用古代圣明君王制定的、与当今情况相适应的礼付诸实施。
English: As the ruler of a country, when a new etiquette system has not yet been established, he should choose the part of the etiquette system established by the previous monarch that is suitable for the current situation and apply it.

古文：臣愿陛下承天心，发大业，与公卿大臣延及儒生，述旧礼，明王制，驱一世之民跻之仁寿之域，则俗何以不若成、康，寿何以不若高宗！
现代文：我希望陛下能上承天心，发展大业，与公卿大臣以及儒生一起研究古代的礼仪制度，推行圣王的制度，使全体百姓都能达到仁义、福寿的境地。果真如此，风俗怎会不如周成王、周康王之时，寿命怎能不像殷高宗武丁！
English: I hope that Your Majesty can inherit the heavenly heart, develop a great cause, study the ancient etiquette system with the noblemen and ministers and Confucian scholars, and promote the system of the holy king, so that all the people can achieve the state of benevolence, righteousness and good life expectancy. If this is true, how can the customs be inferior to the time of King Zhou Cheng and King Zhou Kang, and how can the life expectancy not be like that of Yin Gao Zong Wuding!

古文：窃见当世趋务不合于道者，谨条奏，唯陛下财择焉。 
现代文：谨将我看到的当前人们所追求的不合于正道的现象分别列出，奏明陛下，请陛下裁决。 
English: My subject, I personally believe that there are some areas in today's society that do not conform to the path of propriety and righteousness. I respectfully present the list and ask His Majesty to make a clear choice.

古文：吉意以为： 世俗聘妻、送女无节，则贫人不及，故不举子。
现代文：王吉认为： 当今世俗，娶妻、嫁女的费用没有节制，使贫苦的人无力承担，以至于不敢生孩子。
English: Wang Ji believes: In today's world, the cost of marrying a wife or daughter is out of control, making poor people unable to afford it, so much so that they dare not have children.

古文：又，汉家列侯尚公主，诸侯则国人承翁主，使男事女，夫屈于妇，逆阴阳之位，故多女乱。
现代文：再有，列侯娶天子的女儿，称为 尚公主 ，国人娶诸侯王之女，称为 承翁主 ，让男子事奉妇女，丈夫屈从妻子，颠倒了阴阳之位，所以才多次发生女人为乱的情况。
English: Furthermore, the princes married the daughters of the sons of heaven, known as the Shang princesses, and the people married the daughters of the princes, known as the Chengwenshu, so that men would serve women, and husbands would submit to their wives, reversing the position of yin and yang, which is why there were many cases of women being disorderly.

古文：古者衣服、车马，贵贱有章；今上下僭差，人人自制，是以贪财诛利，不畏死亡。
现代文：古人在衣服、车马方面，严格规定了尊卑贵贱的区别；如今却上下不分，混乱一团，人人各随自己的喜好制作，所以贪图财物，追求利禄，甚至连死都不怕。
English: The ancients strictly defined the difference between the high and the low in terms of clothes, chariots and horses; nowadays, there is no distinction between the top and the bottom, and everything is a mess. Everyone makes things according to their own preferences, so they are greedy for possessions, pursue lucre, and are not even afraid of death.

古文：周之所以能致治刑措而不用者，以其禁邪于冥冥，绝恶于未萌也。 
现代文：周朝之所以能不用刑罚而使天下大治，是因为他们都将邪恶禁绝在发生之前。 
English: The reason why the Zhou Dynasty was able to rule the world without punishment was because they banned evil before it happened.

古文：又言： 舜、汤不用三公、九卿之世而举皋陶、伊尹，不仁者远。
现代文：又说： 舜、汤不用三公、九卿的后代而遴选皋陶、伊尹，不仁之人自然远去。
English: He also said, "Dao and Tang do not need the descendants of the three princes and nine nobles to select Zhaotao and YiYin, and those who are not kind will naturally go away.

古文：今使俗吏得任子弟，率多骄骜，不通古今，无益于民，宜明选求贤，除任子之令；外家及故人，可厚以财，不宜居位。
现代文：如今却使庸俗官吏的子弟因其父兄的关系得以担任官职，这些人大多骄横傲慢，不通古今，无益百姓。应公开征选贤能人才，废除保荐子弟为官的 任子令 ；陛下的外家和故旧，可以赏赐丰厚的财物，却不宜让他们身居重要官位。
English: Nowadays, the children of vulgar officials are allowed to hold official positions because of their father-brother relationship. Most of these people are arrogant and arrogant, ignorant of the past and present, and unhelpful to the people. Virtuous talents should be publicly selected, and the appointment order of sponsoring children for official positions should be abolished. Your Majesty's foreign families and old families can be rewarded with rich wealth, but it is not appropriate for them to hold important official positions.

古文：去角抵，减乐府，省尚方，明示天下以俭。
现代文：除去 角抵 游戏，减少乐府艺人，节省尚方用度，在天下人面前明确表示提倡节俭。
English: Eliminate the "square" game, reduce the number of artists, save the cost of Shangfang, and clearly advocate frugality in front of the world.

古文：古者工不造雕彖，商不通侈靡，非工、商之独贤，政教使之然也。 
现代文：古代的工匠不雕刻细致的装饰，商贾不贩卖奢侈物品，并非古代的工匠和商贾唯独贤明，而是政令教化使他们如此的。 
English: Ancient craftsmen did not carve elaborate decorations, merchants did not sell luxury goods, and it was not that ancient craftsmen and merchants were the only ones who were wise, but that they were made so by government edicts.

古文：上以其言为迂阔，不甚宠异也。吉遂谢病归。
现代文：汉宣帝认为王吉的话迂腐可笑，并不重视，于是王吉以有病为借口，辞职回乡。
English: Emperor Han Xuan thought Wang Ji's words were pedantic and ridiculous, and did not attach importance to them, so Wang Ji resigned and returned to his hometown on the pretext that he was ill.

古文：义渠安国至羌中，召先零诸豪三十馀人，以尤桀黠者皆斩之；纵兵击其种人，斩首千馀级。
现代文：义渠安国到达羌中，召集先零部落众首领三十余人前来，将其中最为桀骜狡猾者全部杀死，又纵兵袭击先零人，斩首一千余级。
English: When Yi Quan An Guo arrived in Shizhong, he summoned more than thirty leaders of the first zero tribes to come and killed all the most cunning among them. He also attacked the first zero people and beheaded more than a thousand people.

古文：于是诸降羌及归义羌侯杨玉等怨怒，无所信乡，遂劫略小种，背畔犯塞，攻城邑，杀长吏。
现代文：于是引起归附汉朝的各羌人部落和归义羌侯杨玉的愤怒怨恨，不再信任、顺服汉朝，于是劫掠弱小种族，侵犯汉朝边塞，攻打城池，杀伤官吏。
English: As a result, it caused the anger and resentment of the various Hun tribes and Yang Yuping, the head of the Hun princes who surrendered to the Han Dynasty. They no longer trusted and obeyed the Han Dynasty, so they plundered the weak races, invaded the Han Dynasty border fortress, attacked the city, and killed and injured officials.

古文：安国以骑都尉将骑三千屯备羌；至浩亹，为虏所击，失亡车重、兵器甚众。
现代文：义渠安国以骑都尉身分率领二千骑兵防备羌人，进至浩，遭到羌人袭击，损失了很多车马辎重和武器。
English: Yi Quan An Guo, as a cavalry captain, led two thousand cavalrymen to guard against the barbarians, and went to Hao. He was attacked by the barbarians and lost many chariots, horses, baggage and weapons.

古文：安国引还，至令居，以闻。
现代文：义渠安国率兵撤退，到达令居，奏闻朝廷。
English: An Guo and his soldiers returned and reported the situation after arriving at the imperial residence.

古文：时赵充国年七十馀，上老之，使丙吉问谁可将者。
现代文：此时，赵充国年纪已七十有余，汉宣帝认为他已老，派丙吉前去问他谁能担任大将。
English: At this time, Zhao Chongguo was more than seventy years old. Emperor Xuan of Han believed that he was old and sent Bingji to ask him who could be the general.

古文：充国对曰： 无逾于老臣者矣！ 
现代文：赵充国回答说： 谁也不如我合适。 
English: Zhao Chongguo replied, "No one is as suitable as me.

古文：上遣问焉，曰： 将军度羌虏何如？
现代文：汉宣帝又派人问他说： 你估计羌人会怎样？
English: Emperor Han Xuan also sent someone to ask him, "What do you think will happen to Xuanren?"

古文：当用几人？ 
现代文：应当派多少人？ 
English: How many people should be sent?

古文：充国曰： 百闻不如一见。兵难遥度，臣愿驰至金城，图上方略。
现代文：赵充国说： 百闻不如一见，行兵打仗之事难以遥测，我愿赶到金城，画出地图，制定方略，再上奏陛下。
English: Zhao Chongguo said, "A hundred pieces of information are not as good as a glance. It is difficult to remotely measure the march of soldiers to fight a war. I am willing to rush to Jincheng, draw a map, formulate a strategy, and then report to Your Majesty.

古文：羌戎小夷，逆天背畔，灭亡不久，愿陛下以属老臣，勿以为忧！ 
现代文：羌人不过是戎夷小种，逆天背叛，不久就会灭亡，希望陛下将此事交给老臣来办，不必担忧。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will leave this matter to the old minister to deal with, and there is no need to worry.

古文：上笑曰： 诺。 
现代文：汉宣帝笑着说： 可以。 
English: The Empress laughed and said, "Yes."

古文：乃大发兵诣金城。
现代文：于是调发大兵前往金城。
English: As a result, the soldiers were sent to Jincheng.

古文：夏，四月，遣充国将之，以击西羌。
现代文：夏季，四月，派赵充国率领金城军队进攻西羌。
English: In the summer, in April, Zhao Chongguo led the Jincheng army to attack Xidi.

古文：六月，有星孛于东方。
现代文：六月，东方天空出现异星。
English: In June, a comet appeared in the east.

古文：赵充国至金城，须兵满万骑，欲渡河，恐为虏所遮，即夜遣三校衔枚先渡，渡，辄营陈；会明毕，遂以次尽渡。
现代文：赵充国来到金城，等骑兵集结到一万名时，打算渡过黄河，怕遭羌军拦击，便于夜晚派出三名军校悄无声息地先行偷渡，渡河后立即设立营阵，正巧天色已明，于是大军依次全部渡过黄河。
English: Zhao Chongguo came to Jincheng, and when the cavalry gathered to 10,000, he planned to cross the Yellow River. Afraid of being intercepted by the Xiongnu army, he sent three military schools to quietly sneak across the river in the evening. After crossing the river, he immediately set up a battalion. As it happened, the sky was already clear, so the army all crossed the Yellow River in turn.

古文：虏数十百骑来，出入军傍，充国曰： 吾士马新倦，不可驰逐，此皆骁骑难制，又恐其为诱兵也。
现代文：羌军约百名骑兵出现在汉军附近，赵充国说： 我军现在兵马劳乏，不能奔驰追击，这都是敌人的精锐骑兵，不易制服，又怕是敌人的诱兵。
English: Zhao Chongguo said: "Our army is now exhausted and cannot pursue the enemy. These are the enemy's elite cavalry. It is not easy to subdue them, and I am afraid that they are the enemy's decoys.

古文：击虏以殄灭为期，小利不足贪！ 令军勿击。
现代文：我们此战的目标是要将敌军全部消灭，不能贪图小利！ 下令全军不准出击。
English: Our goal in this battle is to wipe out the entire enemy army. We must not be greedy for small gains! Order the entire army not to attack.

古文：遣骑候四望峡中无虏，夜，引兵上至落都，召诸校司马谓曰： 吾知羌虏不能为兵矣！
现代文：赵充国派人到四望峡侦察，发现峡中并无敌兵。夜晚，赵充国率军穿过四望峡，抵达落都山，召集各位军校、司马说道： 我知道羌人不懂用兵之法了。
English: In the evening, Zhao Chongguo led his army across the Siwang Gorge and arrived at Lokdu Mountain. He called together all the military schools, and Sima said, "I know that the Xiongnu people don't know how to use weapons."

古文：使虏发数千人守杜四望峡中，兵岂得入哉！ 
现代文：假如羌人派兵数千，堵住四望峡，我军怎么进得去呢！ 
English: If the Xiongnu sent thousands of soldiers to block the Siwang Gorge, how would our army get in?

古文：充国常以远斥候为务，行必为战备，止必坚营壁，尤能持重，爱士卒，先计而后战。
现代文：赵充国经常注意向远处派出侦察兵，行军时一定做好战斗准备，扎营时一定使营垒坚固，他特别老成持重，爱护士卒，必先制定好作战计划，然后再进行战斗。
English: Zhao Chongguo always paid attention to sending reconnaissance soldiers to the distance. When marching, he must be prepared for battle, and when camping, he must make the camp strong. He is particularly old-fashioned, loves nurses, and must first formulate a good battle plan, and then fight.

古文：遂西至西部都尉府，日飨军士，士皆欲为用。
现代文：他率军向西来到西部都尉府，每天都用丰富的饮食让将士们饱餐，将士们都愿意为他所用。
English: As a result, he pushed westward to the western governor's office, where he was feted day after day by the sergeants and officers, who were all willing to serve him.

古文：虏数挑战，充国坚守。
现代文：羌军多次挑战，赵充国坚守不出。
English: The Xiongnu came several times to provoke, but Zhao Chongguo ordered them to stand firm.

古文：捕得生口，言羌豪相数责曰： 语汝无反，今天子遣赵将军来，年八九十矣，善为兵；今请欲壹斗而死，可得邪！ 
现代文：汉军从抓到的羌军俘虏口中得知，羌人各部首领多次相互责备说： 告诉你不要造反，如今天子派赵将军率军前来，赵将军已然八九十岁了，善于用兵，现在我们就是想一战而死，办不到吗！ 
English: The Han army learned from the captured prisoners of the Qiang army that the leaders of the various departments of the Qiang people repeatedly reproached each other, saying: "I tell you not to rebel, if today you send General Zhao to lead the army, General Zhao is already eighty or ninety years old and is good at using soldiers, now we just want to die in a war, can't we do it!"

古文：初，罕、幵豪靡当儿使弟雕库来告都尉曰： 先零欲反。 
现代文：最初，两部首领靡当派其弟雕库来报告西部都尉说： 先零部企图造反。 
English: At first, the leader of the two departments sent his younger brother, Zhi Kuo, to report to the western captain, saying: The first zero department attempted to rebel.

古文：后数日，果反。
现代文：几天后，先零部果然造反。
English: A few days later, a few people did indeed defect.

古文：雕库种人颇在先零中，都尉即留雕库为质。
现代文：雕库同族的人有不少在先零部中，于是都尉将雕库留为人质。
English: There are many people in the first zero of the carving tribe, and the captain detained the carving as a hostage.

古文：充国以为无罪，乃遣归告种豪： 大兵诛有罪者，明白自别，毋取并灭。
现代文：赵充国认为雕库无罪，便将其放回，让他转告羌人各部首领说： 大兵前来，只杀有罪之人，请你们自相区别，不要与有罪者一同去死。
English: Zhao Chongguo thought that the carving depot was not guilty, so he put it back and asked him to tell the leaders of the various departments of the Xiongnu: Soldiers, come and kill only the guilty, please distinguish yourselves, do not die with the guilty.

古文：天子告诸羌人：犯法者能相捕斩，除罪，仍以功大小赐钱有差；又以其所捕妻子、财物尽与之。 
现代文：天子要我告诉各部羌人，犯法者只要能主动捕杀同党，就可免罪，仍按功劳大小赐给数量不同的钱财，并将捕杀之人的妻子儿女和财物全部赐给他。 
English: God's Son asked me to tell the officials of various ministries that if a law-breaker can actively hunt down and kill a member of the same party, he will be absolved of his crime. He will still be given a different amount of money and property according to the size of his merit, and the wife, children, and property of the hunted person will all be given to him.

古文：充国计欲以威信招降罕、幵及劫略者，解散虏谋，徼其疲剧，乃击之。
现代文：赵充国打算先以威信招降、及其他被先零部胁迫的羌人部落，瓦解羌人联合叛汉的人计划，等到他们疲惫不堪时，再发动攻击。
English: Zhao Chongguo planned to first use his prestige to invite surrender, and then to attack the other Xiongnu tribes that had been coerced by the First Division to disrupt the plan of the Xiongnu to unite with the Han rebels, and wait until they were exhausted.

古文：时上已发内郡兵屯边者合六万人矣。
现代文：此时，汉宣帝已征发内地郡国的军队达六万人。
English: At this time, Emperor Han Xuan had conscripted and dispatched 60,000 troops from the inland counties.

古文：酒泉太守辛武贤奏言： 郡兵皆屯备南山，北边空虚，势不可久。
现代文：酒泉太守辛武贤上奏说： 各郡军队都屯扎在南山，使北部边疆空虚，其势难以长久。
English: Jiuquan Governor Xin Wuxian said: The county armies are all stationed in Nanshan, leaving the northern border empty, and it is unlikely to last long.

古文：若至秋冬乃进兵，此虏在境外之册。今虏朝夕为寇，土地寒苦，汉马不耐冬，不如以七月上旬赍三十日粮，分兵出张掖、酒泉，合击罕、幵在鲜水上者。
现代文：如等到秋冬季节再出兵，那是敌人远在边境之外的策略，如今羌人日夜不停地进行侵扰，当地气候寒冷，汉军马匹不能过冬，不如在七月上旬，携带三十日粮，自张掖、酒泉分路出兵，合击鲜水之畔的、两部羌人。
English: If they wait until the autumn and winter season to send troops, it is a strategy of the enemy far away from the border. Now the Yanshan people are constantly harassing day and night. The local climate is cold, and the Chinese horses cannot spend the winter. It is better to carry thirty-day rations in early July, send troops from Zhangye and Jiuquan, and fight the two Yanshan people on the banks of fresh water.

古文：虽不能尽诛，但夺其畜产，虏其妻子，复引兵还。
现代文：虽不能全部剿灭，但可夺其畜产，掳其妻子儿女，然后率兵退还，到冬天再次进攻。
English: Though he could not destroy them all, he could seize their livestock, take their wives and children captive, then return with his army and attack them again in the winter.

古文：冬复击之，大兵仍出，虏必震坏。 天子下其书充国，令议之。
现代文：大军频繁出击，羌人必定震恐。 汉宣帝将辛武贤的奏章交给赵充国，命他发表意见。
English: Emperor Han Xuan gave Zhao Chongguo the musical score of Xinwuxian and ordered him to express his opinion.

古文：充国以为： 一马自负三十日食，为米二斛四斗，麦八斛，又有衣装、兵器，难以追逐。
现代文：赵充国认为： 每匹马要载负一名战士三十日的粮食，即米二斛四斗，麦八斛，再加上行装、武器，难以奔驰追击。
English: Zhao Chongguo believed that: Each horse should carry a soldier's grain for 30 days, that is, rice, two quarts, four buckets, wheat and barley, plus baggage, weapons, it is difficult to pursue.

古文：虏必商军进退，稍引去，逐水草，入山林。
现代文：敌人必然会估计出我军进退的时间，稍稍撤退，追逐水草，深入山林。
English: The enemy will inevitably estimate the time of our army's advance and retreat, retreat slightly, chase water plants, and go deep into the mountains.

古文：随而深入，虏即据前险，守后厄，以绝粮道，必有伤危之忧，为夷狄笑，千载不可复。
现代文：我军随之深入，敌人就占据前方险要，扼守后方通路，断绝我军粮道，必使我军有伤亡危险的忧虑，受到夷狄之人的嘲笑，这种耻辱千年也无法报复。
English: If we follow the enemy and go deeper, the enemy will occupy the dangerous obstacles in front and guard the fortresses behind to cut off our food supply. In this way, there will certainly be casualties and perilous sorrow, which will be ridiculed by the barbarians and will never be reversible.

古文：而武贤以为可夺其畜产，虏其妻子，此殆空言，非至计也。
现代文：而辛武贤认为可以掳夺羌人的畜产、妻子儿女等，这怕是一派空话，不是最好的计策。
English: However, Xin Wu Xian thought that he could seize the enemy's livestock and capture their wives and children, which was just an empty phrase and not the best strategy.

古文：先零首为畔逆，它种劫略，故臣愚册，欲捐罕、幵闇昧之过，隐而勿章，先行先零之诛以震动之，宜悔过反善，因赦其罪，选择良吏知其俗者，拊循和辑。
现代文：先零为叛逆祸首，其他部族只是被其胁迫，所以，我的计划是：舍弃、两部昏昧不明的过失，暂时隐忍不宣，先诛讨先零，以震动羌人，他们将会悔过，反过来向善，再赦免其罪，挑选了解他们风俗的优秀官吏，前往安抚和解。
English: The first zero is the evil of rebellion, and the other tribes are only coerced by it, so my plan is: abandon, two vague and unclear faults, temporarily conceal and tolerate, first punish the first zero, to shake the bad people, they will repent, turn to good, and then pardon their sins, select excellent officials who understand their customs, and go to appease and reconcile.

古文：此全师保胜安边之册。 
现代文：这才是既能保全部队，又能获取胜利、保证边疆安定的策略。 
English: This is the strategy that can not only protect the whole team, but also gain victory and ensure the stability of the frontier.

古文：天子下其书，公卿议者咸以为 先零兵盛而负罕、幵之助。
现代文：汉宣帝将赵充国的奏章交给公卿大臣们讨论，大家都认为： 先零兵力强盛，又依仗、的帮助，如不先破？
English: Emperor Han Xuan gave Zhao Zongguo's report to the nobles and ministers for discussion. Everyone thought: If Zhao Zongguo's army is strong and depends on war and help, why not break it first?

古文：不先破罕、幵，先零未可图也。 
现代文：就不能进攻先零。 
English: You can't attack from zero.

古文：上乃拜侍中许寿为强弩将军，即拜酒泉太守武贤为破羌将军，赐玺书嘉纳其册。以书敕让充国曰： 今转输并起，百姓烦扰，将军将万馀之众，不早及秋共水草之利，争其畜食，欲至冬，虏皆当畜食，多臧匿山中，依险阻，将军士寒，手足皲瘃，宁有利哉！
现代文：于是汉宣帝任命侍中许延寿为强弩将军，就地任命酒泉太守辛武贤为破羌将军，颁赐诏书嘉勉辛武贤的建议，并写信责备赵弃国说： 如今到处都在向前方输送军粮，使百姓受到烦扰，将军率领大军一万余人，不及早利用秋季水草茂盛的时机，争夺羌人的牲畜、粮食，却要等到冬季再行出击，但那时羌人都会积蓄粮食，多数藏匿于深山之中，据守险要，而将军士卒寒苦，手足皲裂，难道会有利吗！
English: Therefore, Emperor Han Xuan appointed the chamberlain Xu Yanshou as the strong general of the eunuchs, appointed the Jiuquan governor Xin Wuxian as the general of the broken eunuchs, issued an edict praising Xin Wuxian's suggestion, and wrote a letter to reproach Zhao for abandoning the country, saying: Nowadays, military grain is being transported to the front everywhere, which disturbs the people. The general led a large army of more than ten thousand people. It was too early to take advantage of the autumn's lush vegetation to compete for the eunuchs' livestock and grain, but they had to wait until winter to attack again. But then

古文：将军不念中国之费，欲以岁数而胜敌，将军谁不乐此者！
现代文：将军不念国家耗费巨大，只想拖延数年而取胜，哪位将军，不愿这样！
English: The general doesn't care about the huge cost to the country, he just wants to delay victory for a few years. What general wouldn't want that?

古文：今诏破羌将军武贤等将兵，以七月击罕羌。
现代文：现在诏令破羌将军辛武贤等率兵于七月进击？
English: Now the Emperor has ordered General Xin Wuxian and other generals to attack in July?

古文：将军其引兵并进，勿复有疑！ 
现代文：将军率兵同时出击，不得再有迟疑！ 
English: The general and his soldiers must attack at the same time. There must be no more hesitation!

古文：充国上书曰： 陛下前幸赐书，欲使人谕罕，以大军当至，汉不诛罕，以解其谋。
现代文：赵充国上书汉宣帝说： 陛下上次赐我书信，打算派人劝谕部羌人，大军将会前来，但汉朝并不是要征讨他们，以此来瓦解羌人联合叛汉的计划。
English: Zhao Chongguo wrote to Emperor Xuan of Han, saying: Your Majesty gave me a letter last time, intending to send someone to advise the Xiongnu people that a large army will come, but the Han Dynasty does not want to solicit them, in order to disrupt the Xiongnu people's plan to jointly rebel against Han.

古文：臣故遣幵豪雕库宣天子至德；罕、幵之属皆闻知明诏。
现代文：所以我派部首领雕库去宣示天子盛德，两部羌人都已听到了天子的明诏。
English: That is why I sent the head of the carving workshop to proclaim the coming of the Son of Heaven, and both of them have heard the decree of the Son of Heaven.

古文：今先零羌杨玉阻石山木，候便为寇，罕羌未有所犯，乃置先零，先击罕，释有罪，诛无辜，起壹难，就两害，诚非陛下本计也。
现代文：如今先零羌首领杨玉凭借山中树木岩石自保，并寻机出山骚扰，而羌并无冒犯行为，却放过有罪的先零，先打无辜的羌，一个部族起来叛乱，却给两个部族留下伤害，实在违背陛下原来的计划！
English: Now Yang Yu, the leader of the First Zero, has taken advantage of the trees and rocks in the mountains to protect himself, and is looking for an opportunity to harass the mountain. While the Badgers have not committed any offensive acts, they have let go of the guilty First Zero, and have beaten the innocent Badgers first. One tribe has rebelled, but has left damage to two tribes, which is really contrary to His Majesty's original plan!

古文：臣闻兵法： 攻不足者守有馀。 
现代文：我听说兵法上讲： 不足以进攻的力量，用于防守却能有余。 
English: I've heard it said in the art of war: There's not enough strength to attack, but there's enough for defense.

古文：又曰： 善战者致人，不致于人。 
现代文：又说： 善于打仗的人，能主动引诱敌人，而不被敌人所引诱。 
English: He also said: A person who is good at fighting can actively lure the enemy, but not be lured by the enemy.

古文：今罕羌欲为敦煌、酒泉寇，宜饬兵马，练战士，以须其至。坐得致敌之术，以逸击劳，取胜之道也。
现代文：如今羌企图进犯敦煌、酒泉，本应整顿兵马，训练士卒，等待敌人前来，坐在那里，用引诱敌人的战术，以逸击劳，这才是取胜之道。
English: Now, they are trying to invade Dunhuang and Jiuquan. They should have reorganized their soldiers and horses, trained their officers and men, waited for the enemy to come, sat there, used tactics to lure the enemy, and used diversion to defeat the enemy. This is the way to win.

古文：今恐二郡兵少，不足以守，而发之行攻，释致虏之术而从为虏所致之道，臣愚以为不便。
现代文：现在唯恐二郡兵力单薄，不足防守，却出兵进攻，放弃引诱敌人的战术，而被敌人所引诱，我认为不利。
English: Now, fearing that the strength of the two counties is thin and insufficient for defense, they have sent troops to attack, abandoning the tactic of luring the enemy, and being lured by the enemy, I think it is unfavorable.

古文：先零羌欲为背畔，故与罕、幵解仇结约，然其私心不能无恐汉兵而罕、幵背之也。
现代文：先零羌打算背叛我朝，所以才与、化解怨仇，缔结盟约，但其内心深处不能不害怕汉军一到而、背叛他们。
English: The first one planned to betray my country, so he resolved his grudge and made an alliance with the second one, but deep in his heart, he couldn't betray them without fearing the arrival of the Chinese army.

古文：臣愚以为其计常欲先赴罕、幵之急以坚其约。
现代文：我认为先零时常希望能先为、解救危急，以巩固他们的联盟。
English: I think the first zero often hopes to be the first to save the day, to save the day, to strengthen their alliance.

古文：先击罕羌，先零必助之。
现代文：先攻羌，先零肯定会援助他们。
English: The first to attack is rare, and the first to help is certain.

古文：今虏马肥、粮食方饶，击之恐不能伤害，适使先零得施德于罕羌，坚其约，合其党。
现代文：现在，羌人的马匹正肥，粮食正多，攻击他们，恐怕不能造成伤害，而正好使先零有机会施德于羌，巩固其联盟，团结其党羽。
English: Now, when the ploughmen's horses are fat and the grain is plentiful, it may not do any harm to attack them, but it will give the first few the opportunity to do good to the ploughmen, consolidate their alliance and unite their party.

古文：虏交坚党，合精兵二万馀人，迫胁诸小种，附著者稍众，莫须之属不轻得离也。
现代文：先零巩固其联盟之后，会合精兵二万余人，胁迫其他弱小部族，归附者逐渐增多，像莫须部羌人之类的弱小部族，要想脱离其控制就不容易了。
English: After consolidating its alliance from scratch, it gathered more than 20,000 elite soldiers to coerce other weak tribes, and the number of adherents gradually increased. It is not easy for weak tribes such as the Musube people to break away from its control.

古文：如是，虏兵浸多，诛之用力数倍。臣恐国家忧累，由十年数，不二三岁而已。
现代文：果真如此，则羌人兵力逐渐增多，要征讨他们，就需增加几倍的力量，我恐怕国家的忧烦困扰，当以十年计，而不只二三年了。
English: If this is the case, then the number of invaders will gradually increase, and it will take several times more strength to fight them. I am afraid that the troubles of the country should be measured in ten years, not just two or three years.

古文：于臣之计，先诛先零已，则罕、幵之属不烦兵而服矣。
现代文：按我的计划，先诛杀了先零，则、之流不必再劳烦军队，就可顺服。
English: According to my plan, the first to fight and kill the first zero, then the flow does not need to bother the army, it can obey.

古文：先零已诛而罕、幵不服，涉正月击之，得计之理，又其时也。
现代文：如先零已经诛杀，而、等仍不肯屈服，等到明年正月再攻击他们，则不但合理，而且适时。
English: If the first zero has already fought and killed, but the second zero still refuses to give in, it is not only reasonable but also timely to wait until the first month of next year to attack them.

古文：以今进兵，诚不见其利。 
现代文：现在进兵，实在看不到有什么利益！ 
English: I really don't see any benefit in joining the army now!

古文：戊申，充国上奏。
现代文：戊申，赵充国奏闻朝廷。
English: Wushin, Zhao Chongguo reported to the imperial court.

古文：秋，七月，甲寅，玺书报，从充国计焉。
现代文：秋季，七月甲寅，汉宣帝颁赐诏书，采纳赵充国的计划。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict to adopt Zhao Chongguo's plan.

古文：充国乃引兵至先零在所。
现代文：于是赵充国率兵进抵先零地区。
English: As a result, Zhao Chongguo led the troops into the first zero area.

古文：虏久屯聚，懈驰，望见大军，弃车重，欲渡湟水，道厄罕；充国徐行驱之。
现代文：羌人屯兵已久，戒备松懈，忽见汉军大兵来到，慌忙抛弃车马辎重，企图渡过湟水，道路狭窄，赵充国率军缓缓前行，驱赶羌军。
English: The Xiongnu had been garrisoned for a long time, and their alertness was lax. Suddenly, they saw the Chinese soldiers coming, and they hurriedly abandoned their heavy vehicles and horses, trying to cross the Yanshui River. The road was narrow, and Zhao Chonguo led the army slowly forward to drive away the Xiongnu army.

古文：或曰： 逐利行迟。 
现代文：有人对赵充国说： 要取得战果，推进速度不宜迟缓。 
English: Someone commented on this: "Chasing the enemy should be as fast as possible, now it's too slow.

古文：充国曰： 此穷寇，不可迫也。
现代文：赵充国说： 这是走投无路的敌兵，不可逼迫太急。
English: Zhao Chongguo replied: This is an enemy that is trapped in a predicament, it is too urgent to chase.

古文：缓之则走不顾，急之则还致死。 
现代文：缓慢追击，他们只逃跑不回头；逼迫太急，则回头死战。 
English: If pursued slowly, they will only flee and not turn back; if pursued too quickly, they will turn back and fight to the death.

古文：诸校皆曰： 善。 
现代文：各位军校都说： 有理。 
English: The generals all think he has a point.

古文：虏赴水溺死者数百。降及斩首五百馀人。虏马、牛、羊十万馀头，车四千馀两。
现代文：羌人掉入水中淹死数百人，投降及被汉军所杀达五百余人，汉军缴获马、牛、羊十万余头，车四千余辆。
English: Hundreds of people drowned after falling into the water, and more than 500 people surrendered and were killed by the Chinese army. The Chinese army captured more than 100,000 horses, cattle and sheep, and more than 4,000 vehicles.

古文：兵至罕地，令军毋燔聚落、刍牧田中。
现代文：汉军行至地，赵充国下令不得焚烧羌人村落，不得在羌人耕地中牧马。
English: When the Chinese army reached the area, Zhao Chongguo ordered that the villages of the Xiongnu should not be burned and that horses should not be allowed to graze in the cultivated land of the Xiongnu.

古文：罕羌闻之，喜曰： 汉果不击我矣！ 
现代文：羌听说后，高兴地说： 汉军果然不打我们！ 
English: After hearing this, very few people were happy to say: The Chinese army did not attack us after all!

古文：豪靡忘使人来言： 愿得还复故地。 
现代文：其首领靡忘派人前来对赵充国说： 希望能让我们回到原来的地方。 
English: "I hope to be able to return to my original place," said the leader of the Mifune faction.

古文：充国以闻，未报。
现代文：赵充国上奏朝廷，未得到回音。
English: Zhao Chongguo reported this to the emperor, but received no reply.

古文：靡忘来自归，充国赐饮食，遣还谕种人。
现代文：靡忘亲自前来归降，赵充国赐其饮食，派他回去告谕本部羌人。
English: Miebong himself came to submit, and Zhao Chongguo gave him food and drink and let him go back to preach to his people.

古文：护军以下皆争之曰： 此反虏，不可擅遣！ 
现代文：护军及以下将领都说： 靡忘是国家叛逆，不能擅自放走！ 
English: The guards and the following generals all said: "Forgetting is a national rebellion, you can't let go without permission!"

古文：充国曰： 诸君但欲便文自营，非为公家忠计也！ 
现代文：赵充国说： 你们都只是为了文墨之便，自我营护，并不忠心为国家着想！ 
English: Zhao Chongguo said: You are all just for the convenience of writing and printing, self-protection, and are not loyal to the country!

古文：语未卒，玺书报，令靡忘以赎论。
现代文：话未讲完，诏书来到，命靡忘将功赎罪。
English: Before the words were out, the edict came down, ordering that Mishimoto be punished according to the atonement theory.

古文：后罕竟不烦兵而下。
现代文：后羌终于未用兵而平定。
English: Later, Hankow was finally conquered without the use of troops.

古文：上诏破羌、强弩将军诣屯所，以十二月与充国合，进击先零。
现代文：汉宣帝下诏书命破羌将军辛武贤、强弩将军许延寿率兵前往赵充国屯兵之处，于十二月与赵充国会合，进攻先零。
English: Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict ordering Gen. Xin Wu Xian and Gen. Xu Yan Shou to lead their armies to the location of Zhao Chong's garrison, and in December they joined forces with Zhao Chong and attacked first.

古文：时羌降者万馀人矣，充国度其必坏，欲罢骑兵，屯田以待其敝。
现代文：当时，羌人投降汉军已一万有余了，赵充国估计羌人肯定要失败，打算撤除骑兵，以步兵在当地屯垦戍卫，等待羌人因自身疲惫而败亡。
English: At that time, there were more than ten thousand Han soldiers who had surrendered. Zhao Chongguo estimated that the Han soldiers would certainly fail, and planned to remove the cavalry and set up an infantry guard in the area to wait for the Han soldiers to die of exhaustion.

古文：作奏未上，会得进兵玺书，充国子中郎将卬惧，使客谏充国曰： 诚令兵出，破军杀将，以倾国家，将军守之可也。
现代文：奏章写好，还未上奏，恰于此时接到汉宣帝命其进兵的诏书。赵充国的儿子中郎将赵感到害怕，便让幕僚去劝赵充国说： 假如出兵会损兵折将，倾覆国家，将军坚持己见，防守不出也还可以。
English: Zhao Zhaozhong's son, Zhonglang, was afraid of Zhao Zhaozhong, so he sent his staff to persuade Zhao Zhaozhong, saying, "If sending troops would cause the loss of soldiers and the overthrow of the country, the general should stick to his own opinion and not go on the defensive.

古文：即利与病，又何足争？
现代文：而如果只是利与弊的区别，又有什么可争执的呢？
English: If we only proceed from the relationship between advantages and disadvantages, then on what basis can we fight?

古文：一旦不合上意，遣绣衣来责将军，将军之身不能自保，何国家之安！ 
现代文：一旦违背了皇上之意，派御史前来责问，将军本身不能自保，又怎能保证国家的安全！ 
English: Once he violated the emperor's will and sent the imperial historian to come and scold him, the general himself could not protect himself, and how could he guarantee the security of the country!

古文：充国汉曰： 是何言之不忠也！
现代文：赵充国叹息说： 这话是多么不忠！
English: Zhao Chongguo sighed and said, "How disloyal these words are!

古文：本用吾言，羌虏得至是邪！
现代文：若是原来就采纳我的意见，羌人能发展到这一步吗！
English: If my opinion had been adopted in the first place, would I have been able to make it this far?

古文：往者举可先行羌者，吾举辛武贤；丞相御史复白遣义渠安国，竟沮败羌。
现代文：当初，推荐先去西羌巡行的人选，我推荐了辛武贤；而丞相、御史又奏请皇上，派义渠安国前去，结果败坏了大事。
English: At first, I recommended the candidate who would go to the Xidi parade first, and I recommended Xin Wuxian; but the prime minister and the minister of history also asked the emperor to send Yi Quan and An Guo to go, and as a result, the event was spoiled.

古文：金城、湟中谷斛八钱，吾谓耿中丞： 籴三百万斛谷，羌人不敢动矣！ 
现代文：金城、湟中地区谷价一斛八钱，我曾对司农中丞耿寿昌说： 只要我们购买三百万斛谷物储备，羌人就不敢轻举妄动了。 
English: Grain prices in the Jincheng and Shuzhong areas were as high as 8 yuan per bushel. I once said to Geng Shuchang, the Vice-Minister of Agriculture: As long as we buy 3 million bushels of grain reserves, the people of Shandong will not dare to act rashly.

古文：耿中丞请籴百万斛，乃得四十万斛耳；义渠再使且费其半。
现代文：而耿寿昌请求购买一百万斛，实际只得四十万斛而已，义渠安国再次出行，又用去一半。
English: But Geng Shuchang requested to buy one million baht, but actually only got four hundred thousand baht. Yichuan Anguo traveled again, and spent half of the money.

古文：失此二册，羌人致敢为逆。
现代文：这两项计划都未实现，才使羌人敢于叛逆。
English: It was the failure of both plans to come to fruition that emboldened the Xiongnu to rebel.

古文：失之毫厘，差以千里，是既然矣。
现代文：正所谓失之毫厘，差以千里！
English: It has become a fact that a millimeter lost is a millimeter gained.

古文：今兵久不决，四夷卒有动摇，相因而起，虽有知者不能善其后，羌独足忧邪？
现代文：如今战事长期不能结束，如果四方蛮夷突然动摇，借机相继起兵造反，即使高明的人也无法收拾，岂只是羌人值得忧虑！
English: Today, the war cannot be ended for a long time. If the barbarians of the four sides suddenly falter and take the opportunity to rebel one after another, even a clever person will not be able to put it down. Is it just a person worthy of concern?

古文：吾固以死守之，明主可为忠言。 
现代文：我誓死也要坚持我的意见，皇上圣明，可以向他陈述我的忠言。 
English: I am firm in my adherence unto death, and a wise prince is able to offer advice.

古文：遂上屯田奏曰： 臣所将吏士、马牛食所用粮谷、茭稾，调度甚广，难久不解，役不息，恐生它变，为明主忧，诚非素定庙胜之册。
现代文：于是，赵充国上书请求屯田说： 我率领的将士、马牛食用的粮食、草料须大范围地从各处征调，羌乱长久不能解除，则徭役不会止息，又恐发生其他变故，为陛下增加忧虑，确实不是朝廷克敌制胜的上策。
English: As a result, Zhao Chongguo sent a letter to request tonden, saying: The soldiers I lead, the grain and grass used by horses and cattle must be conscripted from a wide range of places. If the turmoil cannot be resolved for a long time, the conscript will not stop, and there may be other changes that will increase anxiety for His Majesty. It is really not the best strategy for the imperial court to defeat the enemy.

古文：且羌易以计破，难用兵碎也，故臣愚心以为击之不便！
现代文：况且，对羌人之叛，用智谋瓦解较易，用武力镇压则较难，所以我认为进攻不是上策！
English: Moreover, it is easier to use cunning to break up the rebellion against the Xiongnu, but it is more difficult to suppress it by force, so I don't think attacking is the best strategy!

古文：计度临羌东至浩亹，羌虏故田及公田，民所未垦，可二千顷以上，其间邮亭多坏败者。
现代文：据估计，从临羌向东至浩，羌人旧有的私田和公田，民众没有开垦的荒地，约有二千顷以上，其间驿站多数颓坏。
English: It is estimated that from Linyi to the east to Houzhu, the old fields and public fields of the enemy have risen, and the land that has not been reclaimed by the people can reach more than two hectares, and the middle stations are mostly destroyed and dilapidated.

古文：臣前部士入山，伐林木六万馀枚，在水次。
现代文：我以前曾派士卒入山，砍伐林木六万余株，存于湟水之滨。
English: In the past, I had sent soldiers into the mountains to cut down more than 60,000 trees and store them on the coast of Surabaya.

古文：臣愿罢骑兵，留步兵万二百八十一人，分屯要害处，冰解漕下，缮乡亭，浚沟渠，治湟峡以西道桥七十所，令可至鲜水左右。
现代文：我建议：撤除骑兵，留步兵一万二百八十一人，分别屯驻在要害地区，待到河水解冻，木材顺流而下，正好用来修缮乡亭，疏浚沟渠，在湟以西建造桥梁七十座，使至鲜水一带的道路畅通。
English: I propose to remove the cavalry and retain 12,081 infantrymen, who will be stationed separately in the critical areas until the river thaws and the timber flows down the river, which will be used to repair the village pavilion, dredge the ditch, build 70 bridges west of the dike, and smooth the road to the fresh water area.

古文：田事出，赋人二十畮；至四月草生，发郡骑及属国胡骑各千，就草为田者游兵，以充入金城郡，益积畜，省大费。
现代文：明年春耕时，每名屯田兵卒分给三十亩土地；到四月草木长出后，征调郡属骑兵和属国胡人骑兵各一千，到草地为屯田者充当警卫。屯田收获的粮食，运入金城郡，增加积蓄，节省大量费用。
English: During the spring ploughing next year, each soldier of the garrison was allotted thirty mu of land; in April, after the grass grew up, one thousand cavalrymen belonging to the county and one thousand cavalrymen belonging to the Hu people of the country were transferred to the meadow to act as guards for the soldiers. The grain harvested in the garrison was transported to Jincheng County, increasing savings and saving a lot of costs.

古文：今大司农所转谷至者，足支万人一岁食，谨上田处及器用簿。 
现代文：现在大司农运来的粮食，足够一万人一年所食，谨呈上屯田区划及需用器具清册。 
English: At present, the grain transported by the director-general of agriculture is enough to feed 10,000 people for a year. I would like to present the zoning of the occupied farmland and an inventory of the equipment needed.

古文：上报曰： 即如将军之计，虏当何时伏诛？
现代文：汉宣帝下诏询问赵充国说： 如按照将军的计划，羌人叛乱当何时可以剿灭？
English: Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict asking Zhao Chingguo, "If according to the general's plan, when can the Xiongnu rebellion be extinguished?

古文：兵当何时得决？
现代文：战事当何时能够结束？
English: When will the war come to an end?

古文：孰计其便，复奏。 
现代文：仔细研究出最佳方案，再次上奏！ 
English: Please carefully consider the convenience of it, and then give it back to me.

古文：充国上状曰： 臣闻帝王之兵，以全取胜，是以贵谋而贱战。 百战而百胜，非善之善者也，故先为不可胜以待敌之可胜。 
现代文：赵充国上奏说： 我听说，帝王的军队，应当不受什么损失就能取得胜利，所以重视谋略，轻视拚杀。《孙子兵法》说： 百战百胜，并非高手中的高手，所以应先使自己立于不败之地，再等待可以战胜敌人的机会。 
English: Zhao Chongguo said: I have heard that the emperor's army should be able to achieve victory without any losses, so I attach importance to strategy and despise fighting. "Sun Tzu's Art of War" says: A hundred victories in a hundred battles is not the best of the best, so you should first make yourself invincible, and then wait for the opportunity to defeat the enemy.

古文：蛮夷习俗虽殊于礼义之国，然其欲避害就利，爱亲戚，畏死亡，一也。
现代文：蛮夷外族的习俗虽与我们礼义之邦有所不同，但希望能躲避危害，争取有利，爱护亲属，惧怕死亡，则与我们一样。
English: Although the customs of barbarians are different from those of civilized countries, they are all the same in terms of seeking profit and avoiding harm, loving relatives, and fearing death.

古文：今虏亡其美地荐草，愁于寄托，远遁，骨肉心离，人有畔志。
现代文：现在，羌人丧失了他们肥美的土地和茂盛的牧草，逃到遥远的荒山野地，为自己的寄身之地而发愁，骨肉离心，人人都产生了背叛之念。
English: Now, the Yi people have lost their fertile land and lush pastures, fled to the distant barren mountains and wildlands, worried about their place of sojourn, their bones and flesh have been separated, and everyone has developed the idea of betrayal.

古文：而明主班师罢兵，万人留田，顺天时，因地利，以待可胜之虏，虽未即伏辜，兵决可期月而望，羌虏瓦解，前后降者万七百馀人，及受言去者凡七十辈，此坐支解羌虏之具也。
现代文：而此时陛下班师罢兵，留下万人屯田，顺应天时，利用地利，等待战胜羌人的机会。
English: At this time, however, His Majesty's division went on strike, leaving tens of thousands of men in the field, adapting to the weather, taking advantage of the location, and waiting for the opportunity to defeat the Xiongnu.

古文：臣谨条不出兵留田便宜十二事：步兵九校、吏士万人留屯，以为武备，因田致谷，威德并行，一也。
现代文：羌人虽未立即剿灭，然可望于一年之内结束战事。羌人已在迅速瓦解之中，前后共有一万七百余人投降，接受我方劝告，回去说服自己的同伴不再与朝廷为敌的共有七十批，这些人恰是瓦解羌人的工具。我谨归纳了不出兵而留兵屯田的十二项有益之处：九位步兵指挥官和万名官兵留此屯田，进行战备，耕田积粮，威德并行，此其一。
English: Although the Xiongnu were not immediately annihilated, it was hoped that the war would end within a year. The Xiongnu were already rapidly disintegrating, with a total of more than seventeen hundred people surrendering before and after. A total of seventy groups accepted our advice and went back to persuade their companions to no longer be enemies of the imperial court. These people are precisely the tools for disintegrating the Xiongnu. I would like to summarize the twelve benefits of staying in the garrison without leaving the army: nine infantry commanders and ten thousand officers and soldiers stayed in this garrison to prepare for battle, to cultivate the land to accumulate grain, and to be at the same time

古文：又因排折羌虏，令不得归肥饶之地，贫破其众，以成羌虏相畔之渐，二也。
现代文：因屯田而排斥羌人，不让他们回到肥沃的土地上去，使其部众贫困破败，以促成羌人相互背叛的趋势，此其二。
English: The second point is to take advantage of the opportunity to push out the enemies and frustrate them, so that they cannot return to the fertile land. Because of poverty, they are unable to unite and gradually form a situation in which the enemies are separated from each other.

古文：居民得并田作，不失农业，三也。
现代文：居民得以一同耕作，不破坏农业，此其三。
English: The third point is that local residents are able to farm together with the soldiers from Tonden, without delaying the farmers' main business.

古文：军马一月之食，度支田士一岁，罢骑兵以省大费，四也。
现代文：骑兵，包括战马一个月的食用，能够屯田士兵维持一年，撤除骑兵可节省大量费用，此其四。
English: The fourth point is that the withdrawal of troops and horses, which takes a month's supply of grain and grass, is estimated to last a year for the soldiers in the garrisons, and the withdrawal of cavalry is used to save a large sum of money.

古文：至春，省甲士卒，循河、湟漕谷至临羌，以示羌虏，扬威武，传世折冲之具，五也。
现代文：春天来临，调集士卒，顺黄河和湟水将粮食运到临羌，向羌人显示威力，这是后世御敌的资本，此其五。
English: When spring comes, soldiers are mobilized to transport grain to Linyi along the Yellow River and Surabaya to show the power to the people of Linyi. This is the capital of future generations against the enemy.

古文：以闲暇时，下先所伐材，缮治邮亭，充入金城，六也。
现代文：农闲时，将以前砍伐的木材运来，修缮驿站，将物资输入金城，此其六。
English: During the idle time of farmers, the previously felled timber is brought in, the post station is repaired, and the materials are imported into Jincheng, which is the sixth.

古文：兵出，乘危徼幸，不出，令反畔之虏窜于风寒之地，离霜露、疾疫、瘃堕之患，坐得必胜之道，七也。
现代文：如果现在出兵，冒险而无必胜把握；暂不出兵，则使叛逆羌人流窜于风寒之地，遭受霜露、瘟疫、冻伤的灾患，我们则坐着得到必胜的机会，此其七。
English: If we send out troops now, we run the risk of not being sure of victory; if we do not send out troops for a while, we will make the traitors wander in the wind and cold, suffer from frost and dew, plague, and frostbite, and we will sit and get the chance to win.

古文：无经阻、远追、死伤之害，八也。
现代文：可以避免遭遇险阻、深入追击和将士死伤的损害，此其八。
English: It is possible to avoid encountering dangerous obstacles, in-depth pursuit and the damage of death and injury of soldiers, which is the eighth.

古文：内不损威武之重，外不令虏得乘间之势，九也。
现代文：对内不使朝廷的威严受到损害，对外不给羌人以可乘之机，此其九。
English: The ninth point is that the image of the country's might and power is not undermined at home, and the enemy is not given an opportunity to take advantage of abroad.

古文：又亡惊动河南大幵使生它变之忧，十也。
现代文：又不会惊动黄河南岸大部落而产生新的事变，增加陛下之忧，此其十。
English: And it will not alarm the large tribes on the south bank of the Yellow River and cause new incidents, increasing His Majesty's worries. This is the tenth.

古文：治隍峡中道桥，令可至鲜水以制西域，伸威千里，从枕席上过师，十一也。
现代文：修建隍中的桥梁，使至鲜水的道路畅通，以控制西域，扬威千里之外，使军队从此经过如同经过自家的床头一般容易，此其十一。
English: The eleventh was to build a bridge across the Yangtze, to clear the way to the fresh water, to control the western region, thousands of miles away, so that the army could pass through it as easily as through their own beds.

古文：大费既省，繇役豫息，以戒不虞，十二也。
现代文：大费用既已节省，便可不征发徭役，以防止出现预想不到的变故，此其十二。
English: A great deal of expense has been spared in order to free the people from the yoke of servitude and to guard against the unexpected, which is the twelfth point.

古文：留屯田得十二便，出兵失十二利，唯明诏采择！ 
现代文：留兵屯田可得此十二项便利，出兵攻击则失此十二项便利，请陛下英明抉择！ 
English: If you stay in the garrison, you can get these twelve conveniences, but if you attack, you will lose these twelve conveniences. Please make a wise choice!

古文：上复赐报曰： 兵决可期月而望者，谓今冬邪，谓何时也？
现代文：汉宣帝再次回复说： 你说可望于一年之中结束战事，是说今年冬季吗？还是何时？
English: Emperor Han Xuan replied again: "You said that it is hoped to end the war within a year, do you mean this winter? Or when?

古文：将军独不计虏闻兵颇罢，且丁壮相聚，攻扰田者及道上屯兵，复杀略人民，将何以止之？
现代文：难道你不考虑羌人听说我们撤除骑兵，会集结精锐，攻袭骚扰屯田兵卒和道路上的守军，再次杀掠百姓，我们将用什么来制止？
English: Does the general not consider what the enemy will use to stop the enemy, knowing that after a large-scale withdrawal of troops, the young men will gather, attack the people who harass the farmers and the soldiers stationed on the road, re-burn, kill, rob and plunder the people?

古文：将军孰计复奏！ 
现代文：将军深入思考后再次上奏。 
English: After deep thought, the general played the tune again.

古文：充国复奏曰： 臣闻兵以计为本，故多算胜少算。
现代文：赵充国再次上奏说： 我听说，军事行动以谋略为根本，所以多算胜于少算。
English: Zhao Chongguo said again: I have heard that military operations are based on strategy, so it is better to calculate more than to calculate less.

古文：先零羌精兵，今馀不过七八千人，失地远客分散，饥冻畔还者不绝。
现代文：先零羌之精兵，如今剩下不过七八千人，丧失了原有的土地，分散于远离家乡的地区，挨饿受冻，不断有人叛逃回家。
English: There are now only seven or eight thousand elite soldiers left, who have lost their original land, scattered in areas far from home, starving and freezing, and constantly defecting home.

古文：臣愚以为虏破坏可日月冀，远在来春，故曰兵决可期月而望。
现代文：我认为他们崩溃败亡的时间可望以日月计算，最远在明年春天，所以说可望于一年中结束战事。
English: The minister believes that defeating the enemy can wait for months, at the latest in the spring of next year, so it is expected that the war will be resolved within a year.

古文：窃见北边自敦煌至辽东万一千五百馀里，乘塞列地有吏卒数千人，虏数以大众攻之而不能害。
现代文：我看到，北部边疆自敦煌直到辽东，共一万一千五百多里，守卫边塞的官吏和戍卒有数千人，敌人多次以大兵攻击，都不能取胜。
English: I saw that the northern frontier, from Dunhuang to Liaodong, was a total of more than 11,500 miles. There were thousands of officials and soldiers guarding the frontier fortress. The enemy repeatedly attacked with soldiers, but could not win.

古文：今骑兵虽罢，虏见屯田之士精兵万人，从今尽三月，虏马羸瘦，必不敢捐其妻子于它种中，远涉山河而来为寇；亦不敢将其累重，还归故地。
现代文：现在即使撤除骑兵，而羌人见有屯田戍卫的精兵万人，且从现在开始，到三月底，羌人马匹瘦弱，必不敢将妻子儿女丢在其他部族，远涉山河前来侵扰；也不敢将其家属送还家乡。
English: Now, even if the cavalry were withdrawn, and the Yao people saw tens of thousands of elite soldiers guarding the garrisons, and from now on, until the end of March, the Yao people's horses are weak, they will not dare to leave their wives and children in other tribes, travel far and wide to invade; they will not dare to send their families back to their hometowns.

古文：是臣之愚计所以度虏且必瓦解其处，不战而自破之册也。
现代文：这正是我预计他们必将就地瓦解，不战自破而制定的策略。
English: This is exactly the kind of strategy that I predict will cause them to implode on the spot, without a fight.

古文：至于虏小寇盗，时杀人民，其原未可卒禁。
现代文：至于羌人小规模的侵扰掳掠，偶尔杀伤百姓，原本就无法立刻禁绝。
English: As for the enemy's small-scale encroachments, killing people from time to time, this cannot be completely prohibited.

古文：臣闻战不必胜，不苟接刃；攻不必取，不苟劳众。
现代文：我听说，打仗如无必胜的把握，就不能轻易与敌人交手；进攻如无必取的把握，就不能轻易劳师动众。
English: If a vassal hears that a war cannot be won, he should not engage in battle; if an attack cannot be won, he should not stir up the troops.

古文：诚令兵出，虽不能灭先零，但能令虏绝不为小寇，则出兵可也。
现代文：如果发兵出击，即使不能灭亡先零，但能禁绝羌人小规模的侵扰活动，则可以出兵。
English: If the troops are sent out, even if they cannot annihilate the first zero, but they can stop the small-scale intrusion activities of the invaders, they can be sent out.

古文：即今同是，而释坐胜之道，从乘危之势，往终不见利，空内自罢敝，贬重以自损，非所以示蛮夷也。
现代文：如果今天同样不能禁绝，却放弃坐而取胜的机会，采取危险的行动，到底得不到好处，还白白使自己内部疲惫、破败，贬低国家威严而损害自己，不能这样对付蛮夷外族。
English: If we cannot refrain from doing the same today, but give up the opportunity to win by sitting, take dangerous actions, and get no benefit in the end, but also exhaust and ruin ourselves internally in vain, degrade the national dignity and damage ourselves, we cannot deal with barbarians and foreigners in this way.

古文：又大兵一出，还不可复留，湟中亦未可空，如是，徭役复更发也。
现代文：再者大兵一出，返回时便不可再留，而湟中又不能无人戍守，如果这样，则徭役又将兴起，我认为实无益处。
English: Furthermore, once the soldiers leave, when they return, they can no longer stay, and no one can stay in the camp. If this is the case, the camp guard will rise again, and I think it is really useless.

古文：臣愚以为不便。臣窃自惟念：奉诏出塞，引军远击，穷天子之精兵，散车甲于山野，虽亡尺寸之功。
现代文：我自己思量，如果尊奉陛下的诏令出塞，率兵远袭羌人，用尽天子的精兵，将车马、甲胄散落在山野之中，即使立不下尺寸之功，也能苟且避免嫌疑，过后还能不负责任，不受指责。
English: I thought to myself that if I obeyed His Majesty's edict and went out, led an army to attack the enemy, exhausted the best soldiers, and scattered the chariots, horses, and armor in the mountains and fields, I could avoid suspicion even if I couldn't do anything, and then I could still be irresponsible and not be blamed.

古文：偷得避嫌之便，而亡后咎馀责，此人臣不忠之利，非明主社稷之福也！ 充国奏每上，辄下公卿议臣。
现代文：然而，这些个人的好处却是对陛下的不忠，不是明主和国家之福！ 赵充国每次上奏，汉宣帝都给公卿大臣讨论研究。
English: However, the benefit of these individuals is disloyalty to His Majesty, not the blessing of the Emperor and the country! Every time Zhao Chongguo played, Emperor Han Xuan gave the noble minister to discuss and study.

古文：初是充国计者什三；中什五；最后什八。
现代文：开始，认为赵充国意见正确的人为十分之三，后增加到十分之五，最后更增至十分之八。
English: At first, three out of ten people thought that Zhao Chongguo's opinion was correct, then it increased to five out of ten, and finally to eight out of ten.

古文：有诏诘前言不便者，皆顿首服。
现代文：汉宣帝诘问开始不同意赵充国意见的人为什么改变观点，这些人都叩首承认自己原来的意见不对。
English: The emperor questioned those who had previously said that Zhao Chongguo's strategy was not good, and they all admitted their mistake.

古文：魏相曰： 臣愚不习兵事利害。后将军数画军册，其言常是，臣任其计必可用也。 
现代文：丞相魏相说： 我对军事上的利害关系不了解，后将军赵充国曾多次筹划军事方略，他的意见通常都很正确，我担保他的计划一定行得通。 
English: "I don't understand the military stakes," said Vice-Premier Wei Xiang. Later, General Zhao Chongguo had planned military strategies many times. His opinions were usually correct, and I guarantee that his plans would work.

古文：上于是报充国，嘉纳之；亦以破羌、强弩将军数言当击，以是两从其计，诏两将军与中郎将卬出击。
现代文：于是汉宣帝回复赵充国，嘉勉并采纳了赵充国的计划，又因破羌将军辛武贤、强弩将军许延寿多次建议进兵攻击，所以也同时批准，下诏命两将军与中郎将赵率部出击。
English: As a result, Emperor Han Xuan replied to Zhao Chongguo, Jia Min and adopted Zhao Chongguo's plan, and also approved it at the same time because the general Xin Wu Xian and the general Xu Yan Shou repeatedly suggested the attack, and ordered the two generals and the middle brother to attack Zhao.

古文：强弩出，降四千馀人；破羌斩首二千级；中郎将卬斩首降者亦二千馀级；而充国所降复得五千馀人。
现代文：许延寿出击羌人，招降四千余人；辛武贤斩首二千级；赵斩首及招降也有二千余人；而赵充国又招降了五千余人。
English: Xu Yanshou went out to attack and subdue more than four thousand people; Xin Wuxian beheaded two thousand; Zhao also beheaded and subdued more than two thousand people; and Zhao Chongguo subdued more than five thousand people.

古文：诏罢兵，独充国留屯田。
现代文：汉宣帝下诏罢兵，只留下赵充国在当地负责屯田事务。
English: The imperial edict ordered the withdrawal of troops, leaving only Zhao Chongguo Tunden.

古文：大司农硃邑卒。
现代文：大司农朱邑去世。
English: Chief Secretary Nong Zhuyun passed away.

古文：上以其循吏，闵惜之，诏赐其子黄金百斤，以奉其祭祀。
现代文：汉宣帝因他是个奉职守法的官吏，感到怜惜，下诏赐其子黄金一百斤，作为祭祀之用。
English: Han Xuan Di felt pity for him because he was a dutiful and law-abiding official, and gave his son a hundred catties of gold as a sacrifice.

古文：是岁，前将军、龙頟侯韩增为大司马、车骑将军。
现代文：这一年，汉宣帝任命前将军、龙侯韩增为大司马、车骑将军。
English: In this year, Emperor Han Xuan appointed the former general and Dragon Lord Han Zeng as the grand steed and cavalry general.

古文：丁令比三岁钞盗匈奴，杀略数千人。
现代文：丁令国连续三年出兵劫掠匈奴，杀死及掳掠数千人。
English: For three consecutive years, Ding Lingguo sent troops to plunder the Huns, killing and kidnapping thousands of people.

古文：匈奴遣万馀骑往击之，无所得。
现代文：匈奴派遣骑兵一万余人前去攻击丁令国，但没有收获。
English: The Xiongnu dispatched more than ten thousand cavalrymen to attack Dingling, but to no avail.

古文：中宗孝宣皇帝中神爵二年春，二月，以凤皇、甘露降集京师，赦天下。
现代文：神爵二年春季，正月，因有凤凰飞集长安，并有甘露降落，所以大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the second year of Jianzhe, the first month, because of the phoenix flying to Chang'an and the nectar falling, there was a general amnesty.

古文：夏，五月，赵充国奏言： 羌本可五万人军，凡斩首七千六百级，降者三万一千二百人，溺河湟、饥饿者五六千人，定计遗脱与煎巩、黄羝俱亡者不过四千人。
现代文：夏季，五月，赵充国上奏说： 羌人部众和军队本约五万人，前后被斩首共七千六百人，投降三万一千二百人，在黄河、湟水中淹死以及饿死的有五六千人，计算起来，剩下跟随其首领煎巩、黄羝一起逃亡的不过四千人。
English: In the summer, in May, Zhao Chongguo said in his report to the emperor: "There were about fifty thousand people in the general staff and the army. A total of seven thousand six hundred people were beheaded before and after, thirty-one thousand two hundred people surrendered, and five thousand six thousand people drowned in the Yellow River and the Yangtze River and starved to death. Calculated, there were only four thousand people who fled with their leaders, Shen Gong and Huang Qi.

古文：羌靡忘等自诡必得，请罢屯兵！ 
现代文：现已归降的羌人首领靡忘等自己保证可以擒获这些人，所以我请求罢除屯田部队。 
English: The now-surrendered leaders of the Jurchens forgot their promise to capture these people, so I asked for the removal of the Tonden troops.

古文：奏可。
现代文：汉宣帝批准所奏。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：充国振旅而还。
现代文：赵充国整顿部队返回。
English: Zhao Chongguo's national rectification troops have returned.

古文：所善浩星赐迎说充国曰： 众人皆以破羌、强弩出击，多斩首、生降，虏以破坏。
现代文：赵充国的好友浩星赐前往迎接赵充国，对他说： 大家都认为破羌、强弩二将军率兵出击，多有斩获、招降，所以才使羌人败亡。
English: Zhao Chunguo's friend Hao Xingzhi went to meet Zhao Chunguo and said to him, "Everyone thinks that the two generals who broke the yoke and strengthened the yoke led the troops to attack, and most of them won victories and invited surrender, which is why the Yanshan people were defeated.

古文：然有识者以为虏势穷困，兵虽不出，必自服矣。
现代文：然而，有见识的人则认为羌人已到穷途末路，即使不发兵出击，也会很快自行投降。
English: However, people with insight believe that the enemy is already weak, and even if the army does not attack, the enemy will certainly surrender.

古文：将军即见，宜归功于二将军出击，非愚臣所及。
现代文：将军见到皇上时，应归功于破羌、强弩二位将军率兵出击，你自己并不能与之相比。
English: If the general sees the emperor, he should give credit to the two generals for the attack, saying that the two generals are not comparable to the vassals.

古文：如此，将军计未失也。 
现代文：这样做对你并无什么损失。 
English: If so, the general's stratagem is not at fault.

古文：充国曰： 吾年老矣，爵位已极，岂嫌伐一时事以欺明主哉！
现代文：赵充国说： 我年岁大了，爵位也到头了，岂能为避免夸耀一时功劳的嫌疑而欺骗皇上！
English: Zhao Chongguo said, "I am already old, and my title has reached its peak. Is it possible that I have deceived the sacred monarch by avoiding the momentary merit?

古文：兵势，国之大事，当为后法。
现代文：军事措施是国家大事，应当为后人立下榜样。
English: The military situation is a major matter for the country and should be emulated by future generations.

古文：老臣不以馀命壹为陛下明言兵之利害，卒死，谁当复言之者！ 
现代文：我如不利用自己的余生专为皇上明白分析军事上的利害，一旦去世，谁能再对皇上说这些呢！ 
English: If I don't use the rest of my life to analyze the military interests for the emperor, once I die, who can say these things to the emperor?

古文：卒以其意对。
现代文：终于将自己的想法奏明汉宣帝。
English: Finally, he decided to respond to the emperor according to his own opinion.

古文：上然其计，罢遣辛武贤归酒泉太守官，充国复为后将军。
现代文：汉宣帝接受了他的意见，免除辛武贤破羌将军职务，派其仍回酒泉太守原任。赵充国恢复了后将军职务。
English: Emperor Han Xuan accepted his opinion, relieved Xin Wuxian of his post as general and sent him back to Jiuquan as governor. Zhao Chongguo resumed his post as general.

古文：秋，羌若零、离留、且种、儿库共斩先零大豪犹非、杨玉首，及诸豪弟泽、阳雕、良儿、靡忘皆帅煎巩、黄羝之属四千馀人降。
现代文：秋季，羌人若零、离留、且种、库共同将先零首领犹非、杨玉斩杀。羌人各部首领弟泽、阳雕、良、靡忘都分别率领煎巩、黄羝所属四千余人归降汉朝。
English: In the autumn of the year, the leaders of the Xiang people who were absent or left the country, as well as the leaders of the Xiang people and the Ku, jointly killed the leaders of the Xiang people, Yufai and Yang Yu. The leaders of the various departments of the Xiang people, Brother Ze, Yang Zhao, Liang and Meibeng, respectively, led more than 4,000 people belonging to Shen Gong and Huang Qi to surrender to the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉封若零、弟泽二人为帅众王，馀皆为侯、为君。
现代文：汉宣帝封若零、弟泽二人为帅众王，其他人都被封侯、封君。
English: Emperor Han Xuan had no younger brothers, and his two younger brothers were the most handsome kings. The others were all given the title of lord or prince.

古文：初置金城属国以处降羌。
现代文：开始设置金城属国，安置归降的羌人。
English: At the beginning of the story, Jincheng vassal states were set up to arrange the surrender of the Han people.

古文：诏举可护羌校尉者。
现代文：汉宣帝下诏命保举能够担任护羌校尉一职的官员。
English: Emperor Han Xuan issued an imperial edict to ensure the promotion of officials who could serve as guards.

古文：时充国病，四府举辛武贤小弟汤。
现代文：此时赵充国正在生病，丞相、御史、车骑将军、前将军共同保举辛武贤的小弟弟辛汤。
English: At this time, Zhao Chongguo was ill, and the prime minister, minister of history, general of cavalry and cavalry, and former general jointly sponsored Xin Wuxian's little brother, Xin Tang.

古文：充国遽起，奏： 汤使酒，不可典蛮夷。不如汤兄临众。 
现代文：赵充国听说后，急忙从病床上起来，上奏说： 辛汤酗酒任性，不能派他负责蛮夷事务，不如派辛汤的哥哥辛临众担任此职。 
English: After hearing this, Zhao Chongguo hurriedly got up from his sickbed and said, "Xin Tong is a drunkard and headstrong. You can't put him in charge of barbarian affairs. It's better to put Xin Tang's brother Xin Linzhong in charge of this position."

古文：时汤已拜受节，有诏更用临众。
现代文：此时辛汤已拜受了护羌校尉的印信和皇帝符节，汉宣帝下诏，命改任辛临众。
English: At this time, Xin Tang had already received the seal letter and the emperor's rune festival from Colonel Fong Yao. Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict, and ordered him to be reassigned to Xin Linzhong.

古文：后临众病免，五府复举汤。
现代文：后辛临众因病免职，丞相、御史、车骑将军、前将军、后将军再次保举辛汤。
English: Later, Sin Rinzong was relieved of his duties due to illness, and the prime minister, minister of history, chariot and cavalry general, former general, and former general were once again promoted to Sin Tang.

古文：汤数醉句羌人，羌人反畔，卒如充国之言。
现代文：辛汤多次在酒醉之后虐待羌人，使羌人再度反叛，到底同赵充国预料的一样。
English: Xin Tang repeatedly abused Zhaoren after getting drunk, causing Zhaoren to rebel again, exactly as Zhao Chongguo expected.

古文：辛武贤深恨充国，上书告中郎将卬泄省中语，下吏，自杀。
现代文：辛武贤深恨赵充国，上书朝廷，告发赵充国之子中郎将赵泄露中枢机密，赵被交付狱吏审讯，自杀而死。
English: Xin Wu Xian deeply hated Zhao Chongguo and sent a letter to the imperial court, accusing Zhao Chongguo's son Zhong Lang of leaking Zhao's central secrets. Zhao was handed over to prison officials for interrogation and committed suicide.

古文：司隶校尉魏郡盖宽饶，刚直公清，数干犯上意。
现代文：司隶校尉魏郡人盖宽饶刚直清正，数次昌犯汉宣帝。
English: Wei County, Wei County, Wei County, Wei County, Wei County, Wei County, Wei County, Wei County.

古文：时上方用刑法，任中书官，宽饶奏封事曰： 方今圣道浸微，儒术不行，以刑馀为周、召，以法律为《诗》、《书》。 
现代文：此时，汉宣帝正注重刑法事务，信任由宦官担任的中书官。盖宽饶上了一道秘密奏章说： 如今圣贤之道逐渐衰微，儒家经术难以推行，把宦官当作周公、召公，把法律当作《诗经》、《尚书》。 
English: At this time, Emperor Xuan of Han was paying attention to criminal law affairs and trusted the eunuchs who served as the eunuchs. Gai Guangrao wrote a secret song saying: Nowadays, the way of sages is gradually declining, Confucianism is difficult to implement, the eunuchs are regarded as Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong, and the law is regarded as "Shijing" and "Shangshu."

古文：又引《易传》言： 五帝官天下，三王家天下。
现代文：又引用《易传》说： 五帝将天下视为公有，三王将天下视为私有。
English: He also quoted the "I Ching" as saying: The Five Emperors regarded the whole world as public property, while the Three Kings regarded the whole world as private property.

古文：家以传子孙，官以传贤圣。 
现代文：视为私有则传给子孙，视为公有则传给圣贤。 
English: If it is regarded as private property, it will be passed down to one's descendants; if it is regarded as public property, it will be passed down to the sages.

古文：书奏，上以为宽饶怨谤，下其书中二千石。
现代文：奏章呈上，汉宣帝认为盖宽饶恶意诽谤，将其奏章交中二千石官员处理。
English: Han Xuandi thought that Gao Xuanrao was maliciously slandering, and handed over his report to the officials of the 2,000-koku district for handling.

古文：时执金吾议，以为 宽饶旨意欲求禅，大逆不道！ 
现代文：当时，执金吾认为： 盖宽饶是想让皇上将皇位禅让给他，大逆不道！ 
English: At that time, Ejingwu thought: Gai Kuanrao is trying to make the emperor cede the imperial throne to him, which is an act of treason!

古文：谏大夫郑昌愍伤宽饶忠直忧国，以言事不当意而为文吏所诋挫，上书讼宽饶曰： 臣闻山有猛兽，藜藿为之不采；国有忠臣，奸邪为之不起。
现代文：谏大夫郑昌怜悯感伤盖宽饶忠直忧国，因议论国事辞不达意而遭文墨之吏诋毁陷害，于是上书为盖宽饶鸣冤说： 我听说，山中有猛兽，人们因此而不敢去摘采野菜；国家有忠臣，奸邪之辈因此而不敢抬头。
English: Dr. Zheng Chang, a compassionate and sentimental Gaikangrao who was loyal to the country and worried about the country, was slandered and framed by the literary and ink officials for his unsatisfactory discussion of the state affairs, so he wrote a letter to express his grievances for Gaikangrao, saying: I heard that there are wild beasts in the mountains, so people are afraid to pick vegetables; the country has loyalists, so the traitors are afraid to raise their heads.

古文：司隶校尉宽饶，居不求安，食不求饱；进有忧国之心，退有死节之义；上无许、史之属，下无金、张之托；职在司察，直道而行，多仇少与。
现代文：司隶校尉盖宽饶，居不求安，食不求饱，进有忧国之心，退有死节之义；上无陛下亲属许、史两家的庇护，下无作为皇家近侍的金、张两家的支持；而身负监察职责，秉公行事，所以仇人多而朋友少。
English: Colonel Gao Guangrao did not live for peace and security, nor did he eat for satisfaction. He was anxious about the future of the country, and he had a death wish. He did not have the protection of His Majesty's relatives Xu and Shi, and did not have the support of Jin and Zhang, who were close attendants of the royal family. However, he was in charge of supervision and acted fairly, so he had many enemies but few friends.

古文：上书陈国事，有司劾以大辟。
现代文：他上书陈述对国事的意见，却被有关官员弹劾，处以死刑。
English: He submitted a letter to state his views on state affairs, but was impeached by relevant officials and sentenced to death.

古文：臣幸得从大夫之后，官以谏为名，不敢不言！ 
现代文：我有幸能跟随在各位大夫之后，身为谏官，不敢不说出自己的看法！ 
English: I have the privilege of following the doctors, as a eunuch, I dare not not express my opinion!

古文：上不听。
现代文：汉宣帝不听。
English: The Emperor did not listen to him.

古文：九月，下宽饶吏。
现代文：九月，盖宽饶被交付狱吏审判。
English: In September, Gaikang Rao was handed over to prison officials for trial.

古文：宽饶引佩刀自刭北阙下，众莫不怜之。
现代文：盖宽饶用佩刀自刎于未央宫北门之下。人们无不怜惜。
English: Guangrao pulled out his saber and hanged himself under the North Tower. People felt sorry for him.

古文：匈奴虚闾权渠单于将十馀万骑旁塞猎，欲入边为寇。
现代文：匈奴虚闾权渠单于率领十几万骑兵沿汉朝边塞进行围猎，企图侵入汉境掳掠。
English: The Huns led more than one hundred thousand cavalrymen along the Han-Dynasty border fortress in an attempt to invade and plunder Han territory.

古文：未至，会其民题除渠堂亡降汉言状，汉以为言兵鹿奚鹿卢侯，而遣后将军赵充国将兵四万馀骑，屯缘边九郡备虏。
现代文：大军到达之前，正好有一个名叫题除渠堂的匈奴人逃到汉朝来归降，将此事报告汉朝，汉宣帝封他为 言兵鹿奚鹿卢侯 ，并派后将军赵充国率骑兵四万余人屯驻于沿边九郡以防备匈奴。
English: Prior to the arrival of the large army, there happened to be a Hun named Jianqutang who fled to the Han Dynasty to surrender and reported the matter to the Han Dynasty. Emperor Han Xuan made him the warlord Lu Lu, and sent the general Zhao Chongguo and more than 40,000 cavalrymen to stay in nine counties along the border to guard against the Huns.

古文：月馀，单于病欧血，因不敢入，还去，即罢兵。
现代文：一个多月之后，单于身患吐血之病，因而不敢入侵汉境，于是返回，随即罢兵。
English: More than a month later, because he was suffering from the disease of vomiting blood, he did not dare to invade Han territory, so he returned and immediately left the army.

古文：乃使题王都犁胡次等入汉请和亲，未报。会单于死。
现代文：匈奴又派题王都犁胡次等来到汉朝，请求和亲，尚未得到答复，单于去世。
English: The Xiongnu also sent King Tuduanhu the Second to the Han Dynasty to request a reconciliation, but he did not receive a reply and died alone.

古文：颛渠阏氏即与右贤王屠耆堂私通，右贤王会龙城而去。颛渠阏氏语以单于病甚，且勿远。
现代文：虚闾权渠单于初即位时，贬黜了颛渠阏氏，颛渠阏氏便与右贤王屠耆堂私通。右贤王参加龙城大会后离去，颛渠阏氏告诉他单于病重，暂时不要远离。
English: At the time of his accession to the throne at the beginning of the year, the illusory Wang Quanzhang demeaned the Wang Quanzhang clan, and the Wang Quanzhang clan then had a private affair with the Right Sage King Tu Youdang. When the Right Sage King left after attending the Longcheng Conference, the Wang Quanzhang clan told him that Wang Quanzhang was seriously ill and that he should not stay away for the time being.

古文：后数日，单于死，用事贵人郝宿王刑未央使人号诸王，未至，颛渠阏氏与其弟左大将且渠都隆奇谋，立右贤王为握衍朐鞮单于。
现代文：几天后，单于去世，掌权的贵族郝宿王刑未央派人召诸王前来，尚未到达，颛渠阏氏与其弟左大将且渠都隆奇商议，立右贤王为握衍朐单于。
English: A few days later, Shantou died, and the aristocrat who held power, Shanshu Wang Chihweiyang, sent a man to summon the kings to come, but they had not yet arrived. Shantou Shishi and his brother Zuo Daizheng and Shantou Longqi discussed, and set up the right-wise king as the successor of Shantou Shantou.

古文：握衍朐鞮单于者，乌维单于耳孙也。
现代文：握衍朐单于是乌维单于的曾孙。
English: He was the great-grandson of Uwajin Yu.

古文：握衍朐鞮单于立，凶恶，杀刑未央等而任用都隆奇，又尽免虚闾权渠子弟近亲而自以其子弟代之。
现代文：握衍朐单于即位后，凶恶残暴，杀死刑未央等人，任用且渠都隆奇，又将虚闾权渠单于的子弟近亲全部罢免，用自己的子弟代替。
English: After he ascended to the throne, he appointed vicious and cruel people such as Miao Yang, who was sentenced to death for murder, and removed all the close relatives of the children of the false ruler, replacing them with his own children.

古文：虚闾权渠单于子稽侯犭册既不得立，亡归妻父乌禅幕。
现代文：虚闾权渠单于的儿子稽侯未能当上单于，逃到岳父乌禅幕那里。
English: The son of the pseudo-emperor, Gui Hou Zi, failed to be made emperor and fled to his father-in-law, Wu Zen Maku.

古文：乌禅幕者，本康居、乌孙间小国，数见侵暴，率其众数千人降匈奴，狐鹿姑单于以其弟子日逐王姊妻之，使长其众，居右地。
现代文：乌禅幕本为康居、乌孙之间一个小国的国王，因多次受到侵略，便率其众数千人归降匈奴，狐鹿姑单于将自己弟弟之子日逐王的姐姐嫁给乌禅幕为妻，命其统领原来的部众，居住在西部地区。
English: Uzenmaku was originally the king of a small country between Kangju and Usun. Due to repeated invasions, he led thousands of his people to surrender to the Xiongnu. Aunt Foxtrot married the sister of her brother's son, Nichijo, to Uzenmaku, and ordered him to rule the original followers and live in the western region.

古文：日逐王先贤掸，其父左贤王当为单于，让狐鹿姑单于，狐鹿姑单于许立之。国人以故颇言日逐王当为单于。
现代文：日逐王先贤掸的父亲左贤王本当为单于，而让位给狐鹿姑单于，狐鹿姑单于曾许诺将来再传位给左贤王，因而匈奴人大都说日逐王先贤掸应当做单于。
English: King Zuo Xian, the father of Sun King Xianxuan, was originally a Duan Yu, but gave way to Fox Deer Aunt Duan Yu. Fox Deer Aunt Duan Yu had promised to pass the throne to King Zuo Xianxuan in the future, so most Huns said that King Zuo Xianxuan should be a Duan Yu.

古文：日逐王素与握衍朐鞮单于有隙，即率其众欲降汉，使人至渠犁，与骑都尉郑吉相闻。
现代文：日逐王平时就与握衍朐单于有矛盾，便打算率其众归降汉朝。他派人前往渠犁，与骑都尉郑吉取得联系。
English: Day by day, Wang Bi had conflicts with his subordinates, so he planned to lead his people back to the Han Dynasty. He sent someone to Quzhou to get in touch with the cavalry captain Zheng Ji.

古文：吉发渠犁、龟兹诸国五万人迎日逐王口万二千人、小王将十二人，随吉至河曲，颇有亡者，吉追斩之，遂将诣京师。
现代文：郑吉征发渠犁、龟兹等国五万人前往迎接日逐王率领的一万二千人、小王将十二人，跟随郑吉来到河曲。途中有很多人逃亡，郑吉派人追杀了他们，于是带领日逐王等来到京师长安。
English: Zheng Jie sent fifty thousand people from Dechuan, Kuez and other countries to meet the twelve thousand people led by Nichijie Wang, and the twelve people led by Xiaowang, and followed Zheng Jie to Hequ. On the way, many people fled, Zheng Jie sent people to chase them, so he led Nichijie Wang and others to Beijing Shichang'an.

古文：汉封日逐王为归德侯。
现代文：汉宣帝封日逐王为归德侯。
English: Lian Shuping said that the king is a fortified castle.

古文：吉既破车师，降日逐，威震西域，遂并护车师以西北道，故号都护。
现代文：郑吉攻破了车师国，招降了日逐王，威震西域，于是兼管车师以西的西域北路，所以号称 都护 。
English: After Zhengji defeated the Chariot Division, he retreated again, saying that he was chasing the king. His prestige shook the western region, so he also led the Chariot Division to the west of the North Road, so he was known as the protector of the capital.

古文：都护之置，自吉始焉。
现代文：汉朝设置都护一职，即从郑吉开始。
English: The Han Dynasty set up the post of tutelary of the capital, starting from Zhengji.

古文：上封吉为安远侯。
现代文：汉宣帝封郑吉为安远侯。
English: Emperor Han Xuan designated Zhengji as the Prince of Anyuan.

古文：吉于是中西域而立莫府，治乌垒城，去阳关二千七百馀里。
现代文：郑吉于是在西域中部设立幕府，修筑乌垒城，离阳关二千七百余里。
English: Zheng Ji then set up a shogunate in the central part of the western region and built Wuye City, which is more than 2,700 miles away from Yangguan.

古文：匈奴益弱，不敢争西域，僮仆都尉由此罢。
现代文：匈奴愈发衰弱，不敢与汉朝争夺西域，从此便取消统治西域的僮仆都尉。
English: The Xiongnu became increasingly weak and did not dare to compete with the Han Dynasty for the Western Regions. From then on, the governorship of the Western Regions was abolished.

古文：都护督察乌孙、康居等三十六国动静，有变以闻，可安辑，安辑之，不可者诛伐之，汉之号令班西域矣。
现代文：汉西域都护负责督察乌孙、康居等三十六国动静，如发生事变，则奏闻朝廷，能安抚则安抚，不能安抚便进行讨伐，从而使汉朝的号令得以颁布于整个西域。
English: The tutelary of the Western Han Dynasty was responsible for supervising the movements of the thirty-six states, such as Wusun and Kangju. If an incident occurred, it would be reported to the imperial court. If it could be pacified, it would be pacified. If it could not be pacified, it would be fought against. Thus, the proclamation of the Han Dynasty could be promulgated throughout the Western Regions.

古文：握衍朐鞮单于更立其从兄薄胥堂为日逐王。
现代文：握衍朐单于改立其堂兄薄胥堂为日逐王。
English: After his cousin, Bo Xitang, was re-established, Ji Yan Xidan became the ruler of the country.

古文：乌孙昆弥翁归靡因长罗侯常惠上书： 愿以汉外孙元贵靡为嗣，得令复尚汉公主，结婚重亲，畔绝匈奴。 
现代文：乌孙昆弥王翁归靡通过长罗侯常惠上书汉朝廷说： 愿以汉朝外孙元贵靡为继承人，希望能让他再娶汉公主为妻，结成两代婚姻，与匈奴断绝关系。 
English: Wu's grandson, King Weng Quimai, sent a letter to the Han court through his eldest son, Luo Hou Chang Hui, saying: I would like the Han dynasty's grandson, Yuan Guimai, to be my heir. I hope that he will remarry a Han princess, form a two-generation marriage, and break off relations with the Xiongnu.

古文：诏下公卿议，大鸿胪萧望之以为： 乌孙绝域，变故难保，不可许。 
现代文：汉宣帝下诏命公卿大臣商议此事。大鸿胪萧望之认为： 乌孙在极为遥远的地方，难保不发生变故，不能答应。 
English: The ministers of imperial proclamation discussed the matter, and Dahongjiao Xiwangzhi thought: "The Ussun is very far away, it is difficult to guarantee that it will not change, do not agree to their request.

古文：上美乌孙新立大功，又重绝故业，乃以乌孙主解忧弟相夫为公主，盛为资送而遣之，使常惠送之至敦煌。
现代文：汉宣帝赞赏乌孙新立大功，又毅然断绝了与匈奴的老关系，便封乌孙公主刘解忧的妹妹刘相夫为公主，赐给她丰厚的嫁妆，命她嫁往乌孙，派常惠护送她到敦煌。
English: Emperor Han Xuan appreciated U Sun's new achievement and resolutely broke off the old relationship with the Xiongnu. He made U Sun's sister, Liu Xiezheng, a princess, gave her a rich dowry, ordered her to marry U Sun, and sent Chang Hui to escort her to Dunhuang.

古文：未出塞，闻翁归靡死，乌孙贵人共从本约立岑娶子泥靡为昆弥，号狂王。
现代文：尚未出塞，听说翁归靡去世，乌孙贵族共同依从原来的约定，立岑娶之子泥靡为昆弥王，号称 狂王 。
English: Not yet out of the fortress, it was heard that Weng Quimai had passed away, and the Wusun aristocrats had jointly complied with the original agreement, and the son of the marriage of Lijun and Mu Mian became King Kunmei, known as the Mad King.

古文：常惠上书： 愿留少主敦煌。 
现代文：于是常惠上书说： 希望将少公主暂时留在敦煌。 
English: So Chang Hui wrote: I hope the young princess will stay in Dunhuang for the time being.

古文：惠驰至乌孙，责让不立元贵靡为昆弥，还迎少主。
现代文：常惠赶到乌孙，责问为何不立元贵靡为昆弥王，并宣称，如不立元贵靡，则将少公主接回长安。
English: Chang Hui rushed to Wusun and asked why he did not make Yuan Guimai the king of Kunmai, and declared that if he did not make Yuan Guimai the king, he would take the young princess back to Chang'an.

古文：事下公卿，望之复以为 乌孙持两端，难约结。
现代文：汉宣帝命公卿大臣商议此事，萧望之再次提出： 乌孙骑墙动摇，难以约束结交。
English: Han Xuan, the emperor's representative, and the court noble and minister discussed the matter, and once again, Xiao Wanzhi proposed: "The great horned owl riding on the wall wavers, and it is difficult to make friends without restraint."

古文：今少主以元贵靡不立而还，信无负于夷狄，中国之福也。
现代文：如今少公主因元贵靡未被立为单于而回，并没有对不起夷狄，而是我国之福。
English: Today, the young princess has not been left alone due to her noble ancestry, which is not a bad thing, but a blessing for our country.

古文：少主不止，繇役将兴。 
现代文：少公主如不回来，又将兴起徭役。 
English: If the young princess does not return, there will be a resurgence of the yakitori.

古文：天子从之，征还少主。
现代文：汉宣帝接受了萧望之的意见，召还少公主。
English: Emperor Xuan accepted this suggestion and took the young princess back to Chang'an.

古文：中宗孝宣皇帝中神爵三年春，三月，丙辰，高平宪侯魏相薨。
现代文：神爵三年春季，三月丙辰，高平侯魏相去世。
English: In the spring of the third year of Jianzhe, Gaoping Hou Weixiang passed away in March.

古文：夏，四月，戊辰，丙吉为丞相。
现代文：夏季，四月戊辰，丙吉被任命为丞相。
English: In the summer, in April, Heung-Gil was appointed chancellor.

古文：吉上宽大，好礼让，不亲小事，时人以为知大体。
现代文：丙吉崇尚宽大，讲究礼让，一般小事并不过问，当时人认为他识大体。
English: At that time, it was believed that he was a man of broad-mindedness, who valued politeness and did not mind trifles.

古文：秋，七月，甲子，大鸿胪萧望之为御史大夫。
现代文：秋季，七月甲子，大鸿胪萧望之被任命为御史大夫。
English: In the autumn, in July, Da Hongzhao Xiaowangzhi was appointed as an imperial historian.

古文：八月，诏曰： 吏不廉平，则治道衰。
现代文：八月，汉宣帝下诏书说： 官吏如不清廉公正，国家就不能得到治理。
English: In August, Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict saying: If officials are not honest and just, the country cannot be governed.

古文：今小吏皆勤事而俸禄薄，欲无侵渔百姓，难矣！
现代文：现在低级官吏的事务繁忙，而薪俸却很微薄，若想不让他们侵夺、敲诈百姓，实在很难！
English: Now, low-level officials are busy with affairs, but their salaries are very meager. If you want to prevent them from robbing and extorting the people, it is really difficult!

古文：其益吏百石已下俸十五。 
现代文：从今以后，百石以下官吏增加俸禄十分之五。
English: From now on, officials with less than 100 koku will receive an increase of five-tenths of their salary.

古文：是岁，东郡太守韩延寿为左冯翊。
现代文：这一年，东郡太守韩延寿被任命为左冯翊。
English: In the same year, Han Yanju, the governor of Dong County, was appointed as Zuo Fengjun.

古文：始，延寿为颍川太守，颍川承赵广汉构会吏民之后，俗多怨雠。
现代文：当初，韩延寿担任颍川太守时，颍川郡在前任太守赵广汉鼓励人民相互告发之后，民间多结怨仇。
English: At first, when Han Yanshou served as the governor of Beichuan, after the former governor of Beichuan County, Zhao Guanghan, encouraged the people to inform on each other, the people were more resentful.

古文：延行改更，教以礼让；召故老，与议定嫁娶、丧祭仪品，略依古礼，不得过法。
现代文：韩延寿改变作法，教导百姓们讲究礼让，又征召年纪大、阅历丰的长者，与他们共同研究、决定嫁娶、丧葬、祭祀的礼仪，基本上依照古礼，不许超过规定。
English: Han Yanshou changed the practice, taught the people to pay attention to courtesy, and recruited older and experienced elders to work with them to study and decide on the etiquette of marriage, funeral, and sacrifice, basically in accordance with ancient etiquette, not exceeding the regulations.

古文：百姓遵用其教。卖偶车马、下里伪物者，弃之市道。
现代文：韩延寿为官，崇尚礼义，爱好古人古事，推行教化，每到一地，必定聘请当地贤士，以礼相待，以广泛地听取建议，采纳他们的批评意见。
English: Han Yanshou, as an official, advocates courtesy and righteousness, loves ancient people and ancient things, and promotes enlightenment. Whenever he goes to a place, he will certainly hire local sages, treat each other with courtesy, listen to suggestions widely, and adopt their criticisms.

古文：黄霸代延寿居颍川，霸因其迹而大治。
现代文：韩延寿还注意表彰孝顺父母、友爱兄弟的品行高尚之人，修建地方公立学校。
English: Han Yanju also paid attention to commending people with high moral conduct who are filial to their parents and brothers, and building local public schools.

古文：延寿为吏，上礼义，好古教化，所至必聘其贤士，以礼待用，广谋议，纳谏争；表孝弟有行，修治学官，春秋乡射，陈钟鼓、管弦，盛升降、揖让；及都试讲武，设斧钺、旌旗，习射、御之事；治城郭，收赋租，先明布告其日；以期会为大事。
现代文：每年春秋两季，都要进行古代的 乡射 之礼，用比赛射箭的办法选拔人才。届时，赛场上陈列钟鼓、管弦，举行隆重的仪式，人们上下赛场时，都相互作揖礼让。到每年检阅地方武装的 都试 举行时，在考场上设置斧、旌旗，命将士们演练骑马射箭之事。修理城池，收取赋税，都于事前明白布告日期，把按期集合作为一件大事。
English: Every spring and autumn, the ancient "village archery ceremony" is held to select talents through archery competitions. At that time, bells, drums and orchestras are displayed on the competition field, and a grand ceremony is held. When people go up and down the competition field, they all make a bow to each other. When the annual review of local armed forces is held, axes and flags are set up on the test field, and the commanders practice riding archery. The repair of the city pool and the collection of taxes are all announced in advance, and the regular collection cooperation is a major event.

古文：吏民敬畏，趋乡之。
现代文：官吏和百姓非常敬服畏惧，都奔走前往。
English: The officials and the people were very respectful and fearful, and they all rushed to the scene.

古文：又置正、五长，相率以孝弟；不得舍奸人，闾里阡陌有非常，吏辄闻知，奸人莫敢入界。
现代文：又在民间设置 正 、 伍长 等管理人员，督率百姓孝顺父母，友爱兄弟，禁止收留奸邪之人，街巷、村落之中如有不寻常之事发生，官吏立即就会闻知，所以奸邪之人不敢进入韩延寿管辖地界。
English: In addition, the people's government set up administrative personnel such as chiefs and corporals to supervise the people's filial piety and brotherly love, and prohibited the reception of evil-doers. If something unusual happens in the streets and villages, officials will immediately know, so evil-doers will not dare to enter the territory under the jurisdiction of Han Yanju.

古文：其始若烦，后吏无追捕之苦，民无箠楚之忧，皆便安之。
现代文：开始时，各项事务似乎有些繁琐，但后来官吏却因此而不受追捕盗寇之苦，百姓也因此而不必担忧遭受杖责，所以都感到安全便利。
English: At first, this method seemed to be very cumbersome. Later, the officials did not have the trouble of chasing criminals, and the people did not have the anxiety of being punished. They were very satisfied with this method of governance.

古文：接待下吏，恩施甚厚而约誓明。
现代文：对待下级官吏，既施以十分深厚恩德，又加以严格约束。
English: Yan Shou treats the officials under his command with a great deal of gratitude and a clear understanding of the law.

古文：或欺负之者，延寿痛自刻责： 岂其负之，何以至此！ 
现代文：如有人欺瞒、辜负韩延寿，韩延寿就痛切自责： 难道我有什么事对不起他，否则他怎会如此！ 
English: If someone deceives or betrays Han Yanju, Han Yanju will bitterly blame himself: Did I do something to offend him, otherwise how could he be like that!

古文：吏闻者自伤悔，其县尉至自刺死。
现代文：属下听说后，都深自愧悔，其所属某县尉甚至因此而自杀。
English: Hearing this, the official secretly felt remorse, and his county lieutenant died of a stroke as a result.

古文：及门下掾自刭，人救不殊，延寿涕泣，遣吏医治视，厚复其家。
现代文：有一位门下官吏也因此而自刎，被人救活，韩延寿感动得流下眼泪，派官吏和医生探视医治，并大大地减免他家的赋税徭役。
English: Han Yan Shou was moved to tears and sent officials and doctors to visit and treat him, and greatly reduced and exempted his family's tax payment.

古文：在东郡三岁，令行禁止，断狱大减，由是入为冯翊。
现代文：韩延寿在东郡三年，有令必行，有禁必止，刑狱大为减少，因此而调入京师任左冯翊。
English: During his three years in Dong County, Han Yanshou was ordered to do certain things and forbidden to do others, and his prison sentence was greatly reduced. As a result, he was transferred to Beijing to serve as Zuo Fengyao's teacher.

古文：延寿出行县至高陵，民有昆弟相与讼田，自言。
现代文：韩延寿出外巡视各县，来到高陵县，百姓中有两兄弟，因争夺田产而相互控告，分别向韩延寿申诉。
English: Han Yan Shou went out to inspect the counties, and came to Gaoling County. Among the people, there were two brothers who sued each other for competing for farmland, and separately appealed to Han Yan Shou.

古文：延寿大伤之，曰： 幸得备位，为郡表率，不能宣明教化，至令民有骨肉争讼，既伤风化，重使贤长吏、啬夫、三老、孝弟受其耻，咎在冯翊，当先退。 
现代文：韩延寿为此深感悲伤，说道： 我有幸被摆在左冯翊这一职位上，是全郡的表率，而今却不能宣明教化，致使民间出现亲骨肉因争夺产业而相互控告的事，既伤风化，又使贤德的地方长官及啬夫、三老、孝弟等民间乡官蒙受耻辱，过错在我，我应首先退下。 
English: Han Yanshou was deeply saddened by this, saying: I was fortunate to be placed in the position of Zuo Fengyao, a model for the whole county, but now I can't preach and educate, causing people to sue each other because of competition for property. It's not only immoral, but it also brings disgrace to virtuous local governors and misers, elders, filial brothers and other folk township officials. The fault is mine, I should step down first.

古文：是日，移病不听事，因入卧传舍，闭阁思过。
现代文：当天就自称有病，不再处理公事，躺在客舍中闭门思过。
English: On this day, he said that he was too ill to attend to his duties, so he went inside and lay down in his study, and thought about it behind closed doors.

古文：一县莫知所为，令、丞、啬夫、三老亦皆自系待罪。
现代文：全县官员见韩延寿如此，都不知如何是好，县令、县丞、啬夫、三老也都自己把自己关了起来，等待处罚。
English: The officials of the whole county did not know what to do when they saw Han Yanshou like this. The county magistrate, the county magistrate, the miser, and the three elders also locked themselves up and waited for punishment.

古文：于是讼者宗族传相责让；此两昆弟深自悔，皆自髡，肉袒谢，愿以田相移，终死不敢复争。
现代文：于是诉讼的两兄弟同宗族的人相互责备，两兄弟也深自悔恨，都自己剃去头发，袒露身体，前来谢罪，表示愿将土地让给对方，终生不敢再争。
English: As a result, the two brothers in the lawsuit and the people of the same clan blamed each other, and the two brothers also felt deep remorse. They shaved their hair and exposed their bodies, came to apologize, and expressed their willingness to cede the land to the other side. They dared not fight again for the rest of their lives.

古文：郡中歙然，莫不传相敕厉，不敢犯。
现代文：全郡上下一片和睦，都传播此事，互相告诫劝勉，不敢犯同样的错误。
English: Since then, the county has been at peace, encouraging each other and not daring to break the law.

古文：延寿恩信周遍二十四县，莫敢以辞讼自言者。
现代文：韩延寿的恩德威信遍及所属二十四县，无人敢自己挑起诉讼争端。
English: Han Yanshou's Endeavour letter has spread throughout the twenty-four counties to which it belongs, and no one dares to provoke litigation disputes on their own.

古文：推其至诚，吏民不忍欺绐。
现代文：韩延寿以至诚待人，官吏和百姓都不忍心欺骗他。
English: Examining his sincerity, officials and people could not bear to deceive him.

古文：匈奴单于又杀先贤掸两弟；乌禅幕请之，不听，心恚。
现代文：匈奴单于又杀死先贤掸的两个弟弟。乌禅幕为其求情，遭到单于拒绝，因此心怀怨恨。
English: The Xiongnu then killed the two younger brothers of the sages. Wu Zhenmiao pleaded for his mercy, but was rejected by the Xiongnu, so he harbored a grudge.

古文：其后左奥鞬，王死，单于自立其小子为奥鞬王，留庭。
现代文：后匈奴左奥王去世，单于立自己的小儿子为奥王，留居王庭。
English: After the death of King Zuo of the Xiongnu, he set up his youngest son as King Zuo of the Xiongnu and stayed in the royal court.

古文：奥鞬王贵人共立故奥鞬子为王，与俱东徙。
现代文：奥部落贵族共同拥立已故奥王之子为王，同他一起率部众向东迁徙。
English: The nobles of the Oku tribe jointly supported the son of the late king of Oku as king, and together with him led the people to migrate to the east.

古文：单于右丞相将万骑往击之，失亡数千人，不胜。
现代文：单于派右丞相率骑兵万人前往追击，损失数千人，未能取胜。
English: Alone, he sent 10,000 cavalrymen led by the Minister of the Right to pursue, lost thousands of people, and failed to win.

