古文：燕太子丹质于秦，亡归。
现代文：在秦国做人质的燕太子丹逃回了燕国。
English: Yan Taizi Dan, who was a hostage in Qin, escaped back to Yan.

古文：见秦且灭六国，兵以临易水，恐其祸至。太子丹患之，谓其太傅鞫武曰： 燕、秦不两立，愿太傅幸而图之。 
现代文：他看到秦国将要吞并六国，如今秦军已逼近易水，惟恐灾祸来临，心里十分忧虑，于是对他的太傅鞫武说： 燕秦势不两立，希望太傅帮忙想想办法才好。 
English: He saw that Qin was about to annex the Six Kingdoms, and now the Qin army was approaching Yishui. Fearing disaster, he was very worried. So he said to his Taifu Xingwu, "Yan and Qin cannot stand on the same footing. I hope Taifu can help us find a solution."

古文：武对曰： 秦地遍天下，威胁韩、魏、赵氏，则易水以北，未有所定也。
现代文：鞫武回答说： 秦国的势力遍布天下，地盘广大，如果它们再用武力胁迫韩赵魏，那么易水以北的燕国局势还不一定啊。
English: Haowu replied, "Qin's forces are all over the world, covering a vast territory. If they use force to coerce Han Zhao Wei again, then the situation in Yan's country north of the Yishui River may not be stable.

古文：奈何以见陵之怨，欲排其逆鳞哉? 太子曰： 然则何由? 
现代文：何必因在秦遭受凌辱的怨恨，就去触犯秦国呢？ 太子说： 那可怎么办好呢？ 
English: Why do you want to offend the Qin State because of the resentment of being humiliated in Qin? The prince said: Then what should I do?

古文：太傅曰： 请入，图之。 
现代文：太傅说： 请让我好好考虑考虑。 
English: He said, "Please let me think about it.

古文：居之有间，樊将军亡秦之燕，太子容之。
现代文：过了一段时间，樊将军从秦国逃到燕国，太子收留了他。
English: After some time, General Zou fled from Qin to Yan, and the prince took him in.

古文：太傅鞫武谏曰： 不可。
现代文：太傅进谏劝告太子说： 不能这样做。
English: "You can't do that," the chief priest, Jin Xuan, advised the prince.

古文：夫秦王之暴，而积怨于燕，足为寒心，又况闻樊将军之在乎!
现代文：秦王残暴，又一直对燕国怀恨在心，如此足以让人胆战心惊了，更何况他知道樊将军在这里！
English: King Qin is cruel and has always harbored a grudge against Yan Guo, so much so that it is enough to make people afraid, not to mention that he knows that General Zou is here!

古文：是以委肉当饿虎之蹊，祸必不振矣!
现代文：这就好比把肉丢在饿虎经过的路上，灾祸就难以避免了。
English: This is like throwing meat in the path of a hungry tiger, and disaster is inevitable.

古文：虽有管、晏，不能为谋。
现代文：我想，即使管仲和晏婴再世，也无力回天。
English: I think that even if Guanzhong and Xingying reincarnate, they will not be able to return to heaven.

古文：愿太子急遣樊将军入匈奴以灭口。
现代文：太子您还是赶紧打发樊将军到匈奴去，以防泄露风声。
English: Prince, you'd better send General Zou to the Xiongnu to prevent the news from leaking out.

古文：请西约三晋，南连齐、楚，北讲于单于，然后乃可图也。 
现代文：请让我到西边去联合三晋，到南边去联合齐楚，到北边去和匈奴讲和，然后就可以对付秦国了。 
English: Please let me go to the west to unite the Three Kingdoms, to the south to unite Qi and Chu, to the north to make peace with the Xiongnu, and then I can deal with Qin.

古文：太子丹曰： 太傅之计，旷日弥久，心惛然，恐不能须臾。
现代文：太子丹说： 太傅的计划旷日持久，我心里昏乱忧虑得要死，恐怕一刻也不能等了。
English: Prince Dan said, "Grandpa's plan is taking a long time. I'm worried sick to death. I'm afraid I can't wait any longer.

古文：且非独于此也。夫樊将军困穷于天下，归身于丹，丹终不迫于强秦，而弃所哀怜之交置之匈奴，是丹命固卒之时也。愿太傅更虑之。 
现代文：况且问题还不仅仅在这里，樊将军穷途末路，才来投奔我，我怎么能因为秦国的威胁，就抛弃可怜的朋友，把他打发到匈奴去呢，这该是我拼命的时候了，太傅您得另想办法才好。 
English: Moreover, the problem is not only here. General Zhai only came to me when he was at the end of his rope. How can I abandon my poor friend and send him to the Xiongnu because of the threat from the Qin State? It is time for me to do my best. You have to find another way.

古文：鞫武曰： 燕有田光先生者，其智深，其勇沉，可与之谋也。 
现代文：鞫武说： 燕国有一位田光先生，此人深谋远虑勇敢沉着，您不妨跟他商量商量。 
English: Hao Wu said: There is a Mr. Tian Guang in Yan country. This man is far-sighted, brave and calm. You may wish to discuss with him.

古文：太子曰： 愿因太傅交于田先生，可乎? 
现代文：太子丹说： 希望太傅您代为介绍，好吗？ 
English: Prince Dan said, "I hope Taifu will introduce you on my behalf, okay?"

古文：鞫武曰： 敬诺。 
现代文：鞫武说： 好吧。 
English: Hayatake said, "That's fine.

古文：出见田光，道太子曰： 愿图国事于先生。 
现代文：于是鞫武去见田光，说： 太子希望和先生一起商议国家大事。 田光说： 遵命。 
English: So Haowu went to see Tian Guang and said, "The prince wishes to discuss matters of state with you." Tian Guang said, "Follow my orders."

古文：田光曰： 敬奉教 。乃造焉。太子跪而逢迎，却行为道，跪地拂席。
现代文：于是就去拜见太子。太子跪着迎接田光，倒退着走为他引路，又跪下来替田光拂拭坐席。
English: So he went to see the Crown Prince. The Crown Prince knelt down to greet Tian Guang, walked backwards to show him the way, and knelt down to wipe the seat for Tian Guang.

古文：田先生坐定，左右无人，太子避席而请曰： 燕、秦不两立，愿先生留意也。 
现代文：等田光坐稳，左右人都退下后，太子就离席，向田光请教道： 燕秦势不两立，希望先生能尽量想个办法来解决这件事。 
English: After waiting for Tian Guang to sit down and the people on his right and left to withdraw, the prince left the table and asked Tian Guang for advice: Yan Qin is not two-faced, I hope you can try to find a way to solve this matter.

古文：田光曰： 臣闻骐骥盛壮之时，一日而驰千里。
现代文：田光说： 我听说好马在年轻力壮的时候，一天可以飞奔千里。
English: Tian Guang said: I heard that when a good horse is young and strong, it can gallop thousands of miles a day.

古文：至其衰也，驽马先之。
现代文：可到它衰老力竭的时候，连劣马也能跑在它的前面。
English: But when it is old and exhausted, even a bad horse can run ahead of it.

古文：今太子闻光壮盛之时，不知吾精已消亡矣。
现代文：太子现在听说的是我壮年的情况，却不知道如今我的精力已经衰竭了。
English: The crown prince is now hearing about me in my prime, but he doesn't know that my energy is now exhausted.

古文：虽然，光不敢以乏国事也。
现代文：虽然这么说，我不敢因此耽误国事。
English: Having said that, I do not dare to delay the affairs of state.

古文：所善荆轲，可使也。 
现代文：我的好朋友荆轲可以担当这个使命。 
English: My good friend Jing Tao can take on this mission.

古文：太子曰： 愿因先生得愿交于荆轲，可乎? 
现代文：太子说： 希望能通过先生与荆轲结识，可以吗？ 
English: The prince said, "I hope I can get to know Jing Tao through you, is that okay?"

古文：田光曰： 敬诺。 
现代文：田光说： 好的。 
English: Tian Guang said: OK.

古文：即起，趋出。
现代文：说完起身就走了出去。
English: So he got up at once and hurried out.

古文：太子送之至门，曰： 丹所报，先生所言者，国大事也，愿先生勿泄也。 
现代文：太子把他送到门口，告诫他说： 我告诉您的和先生刚才说的，都是国家大事，希望先生不要泄露出去。 
English: The crown prince sent him to the door and admonished him: "What I have told you and what you have just said are matters of national importance. I hope you will not reveal them."

古文：田光俯而笑曰： 诺。 
现代文：田光低头一笑，说： 好。 
English: Tian Guang bowed his head, smiled and said: Good.

古文：偻行见荆轲，曰： 光与子相善，燕国莫不知。
现代文：田光弯腰曲背地去见荆轲，对他说： 我和您交情很深，燕国没有人不知道。
English: Tian Guang bent over backwards to see Jing Yao and said to him: I have a deep friendship with you, and no one in Yan's country does not know about it.

古文：今太子闻光壮盛之时，不知吾形已不逮也，幸而教之曰： 燕、秦不两立，愿先生留意也。 
现代文：现在太子只听说我壮年时的情况，却不知道我的身体已大不如当年了。有幸得到他的教导说： 燕秦势不两立，希望先生尽力想想办法。 
English: Now the crown prince has only heard about my condition when I was in my prime, but he doesn't know that my body is not as good as it was then. I was fortunate enough to receive his advice and said, "There is no middle ground between Yan and Qin. I hope you will do your best to find a solution."

古文：光窃不自外，言足下于太子，愿足下过太子于宫。 荆轲曰： 谨奉教。 
现代文：我从来就没把您当外人，于是把你举荐给太子，希望您能到太子的住处走一趟。 荆轲说： 遵命。 
English: I never thought of you as a stranger, so I recommended you to the crown prince, hoping that you could make a trip to the prince's residence.

古文：田光曰： 光闻长者之行，不使人疑之，今太子约光曰： 所言者，国之大事也，愿先生勿泄也。 
现代文：田光又说： 我听说，忠厚老实之人的所作所为，不使人产生怀疑，如今太子却告诫我说： 我们所讲的，都是国家大事，希望先生不要泄露出去。 
English: Tian Guang also said, "I have heard that the actions of a loyal and honest person do not arouse suspicion, but now the prince has warned me: What we have been talking about is a matter of national importance, and I hope you will not reveal it."

古文：是太子疑光也。
现代文：这是太子他怀疑我啊。
English: It's the crown prince, he suspects me.

古文：夫为行使人疑之，非节侠士也。 
现代文：为人做事让人怀疑，就不是有气节的侠客。 
English: If you do things for people and make people suspicious, then you are not a chivalrous knight.

古文：欲自杀以激荆轲，曰： 愿足下急过太子，言光已死，明不言也。 
现代文：田光这番话的意思是想用自杀来激励荆轲，接着又说道： 希望您马上去拜见太子，说我已经死了，以此表明我没有把国家大事泄漏出去。 
English: Tian Guang's words meant that he wanted to use suicide to inspire Jing Ye, and then he said: I hope you will immediately go to see the prince and say that I am dead, so as to show that I did not leak the national event.

古文：遂自刭而死。
现代文：说完就自刎而死。
English: After saying this, he hanged himself.

古文：轲见太子，言田光已死，明不言也。
现代文：荆轲见到太子，告诉他田光已经死了，转达了田光的临终之言。
English: When Jing Jun saw the prince, he told him that Tian Guang had died and conveyed Tian Guang's last words.

古文：太子再拜而跪，膝下行流涕，有顷而后言曰： 丹所请田先生无言者，欲以成大事之谋，今田先生以死明不泄言，岂丹之心哉? 
现代文：太子拜了两拜，双腿跪行，泪流满面，过了好一会儿才说道： 我之所以告诫田光先生不要泄密，是想实现重大的计划罢了。现在田先生用死来表明他没有泄密，这哪里是我的本意呢？ 
English: The crown prince bowed twice, got down on his knees, and wept. After a while, he said, "The reason why I warned Mr. Tian Guang not to leak secrets was to realize an important plan. Now Mr. Tian is using his death to show that he did not leak secrets. What was my original intention?"

古文：荆轲坐定，太子避席顿首曰： 田先生不知丹不肖，使得至前，愿有所道，此天所以哀燕不弃其孤也。
现代文：荆轲坐定后，太子离席，给荆轲叩头，说： 田先生不知我是个无能的人，让您来到我面前，愿您有所指教。这真是上天可怜燕国，不抛弃他的后代。
English: After Jing Yao sat down, the prince left the table, bowed to Jing Yao and said: Mr. Tian does not know that I am an incompetent person, let you come to me, may you have some advice. This is really a pity for Yan Guo, do not abandon his descendants.

古文：今秦有贪饕之心，而欲不可足也，非尽天下之地，臣海内之王者，其意不餍。
现代文：如今秦国贪得无厌，野心十足，如果不把天下的土地全部占为己有，不使各诸侯全部成为自己的臣下，它是不会满足的。
English: Today, the Qin state is insatiably greedy and full of ambition. It will not be satisfied if it does not own all the land in the world and if it does not make all the princes its vassals.

古文：今秦已虏韩王，尽纳其地，又举兵南伐楚，北临赵。
现代文：现在秦国已经俘虏韩王，占领了韩地，又发兵向南攻打楚国，向北进逼赵国。
English: Now Qin has captured King Han, occupied Korea, and sent troops to the south to attack Chu, and to the north to force Zhao.

古文：王翦将数十万之众临漳、邺，而李信出太原、云中。
现代文：王翦的大军已逼近漳水、邺城，而李信又出兵太原、云中。
English: Wang Hui's large army has approached Surabaya and Lucheng, while Li Xin has sent troops to Taiyuan and Yunzhong.

古文：赵不能支秦，必入臣。
现代文：赵国哪里能抵抗秦国的攻势，一定会投降。
English: If Zhao could resist the offensive of Qin, he would definitely surrender.

古文：入臣，则祸至燕。燕小弱，数困于兵，今计举国不足以当秦。
现代文：赵国向秦称臣，大祸就落到燕国头上了，燕国国小力弱，多次遭受兵祸，现在就算征发全国力量也不可能抵挡住秦军。
English: Zhao Province claimed to be a vassal of Qin, and the calamity fell on the head of Yan Province. Yan Province is weak and weak, and has suffered military disasters many times. Now, even if the national forces are conscripted, it is impossible to resist the Qin Army.

古文：诸侯服秦，莫敢合从。
现代文：诸侯都屈服于秦国，没有谁敢和燕国联合。
English: All the lords surrendered to Qin, and no one dared to unite with Yan.

古文：丹之私计，愚以为诚得天下之勇士，使于秦，窥以重利，秦王贪其贽，必得所愿矣。
现代文：我私下考虑能得到天下最勇敢的人出使秦国，用重利引诱秦王，秦王贪图这些厚礼，我们就一定能如愿以偿了。
English: Privately, I thought that if I could get the world's bravest person to go to Qin and tempt the Qin king with heavy interest, and if the Qin king was greedy for these gifts, we would definitely be able to fulfill our wish.

古文：诚得劫秦王，使悉反诸侯之侵地，若曹沫之与齐桓公，则大善矣；则不可，因而刺杀之。
现代文：如果能劫持秦王，让他归还侵占的全部诸侯土地，就像当年曹沫劫持齐桓公那样，那就更好了；如果秦王不答应，那就杀死他。
English: It would be better if they could kidnap King Qin and force him to return all the occupied lands of the princes, just as Cao Miao did when he kidnapped King Qi Huan; if King Qin does not agree, then kill him.

古文：彼大将擅兵于外，而内有大乱，则君臣相疑。
现代文：秦国的大将在国外征战，而国内又大乱起来，那么君臣必定会相互猜疑。
English: If the great generals of Qin were to fight abroad, and the country was in turmoil, then the princes and ministers would certainly be suspicious of each other.

古文：以其间诸侯，诸侯得合从，其偿破秦必矣。
现代文：趁这个机会诸侯就可以联合起来，势必击破秦国。
English: Taking advantage of this opportunity, the lords can unite and inevitably defeat Qin.

古文：此丹之上愿，而不知所以委命，惟荆卿留意焉。 
现代文：这是我最高的愿望。但不知道把这个使命托付给谁，希望先生您给想个办法。 
English: This is my highest aspiration. But I do not know to whom to entrust this mission. I hope, sir, that you will find a way.

古文：久之，荆轲曰： 此国之大事，臣驽下，恐不足任使。 
现代文：过了一会儿，荆轲才说： 这是国家大事，我才能低下，恐怕不能胜任。 
English: After a while, Jing Xuan finally said: This is a national event, I can only lower myself, I'm afraid I can't do it.

古文：太子前顿首，固请无让。
现代文：太子上前叩头，坚决请求荆轲不要推辞。
English: The prince prostrated himself before him and firmly asked Jing Ye not to refuse.

古文：然后许诺。
现代文：荆轲这才答应下来。
English: It was only then that Jing Yao agreed.

古文：于是尊荆轲为上卿，舍上舍，太子日日造问，供太牢异物，间进车骑美女，恣荆轲所欲，以顺适其意。
现代文：于是，太子尊荆轲为上卿，让他住在上等的宾馆，太子每天前去问候。供给他丰盛的宴席，备办奇珍异宝，不断地进献车马和美女，尽量满足荆轲的欲望，以便让他称心如意。
English: As a result, the prince respected Jing Yao as a noble lord and let him live in a high-class hotel. The prince went to greet him every day, provided him with sumptuous banquets, prepared rare and wonderful treasures, and constantly presented chariots and horses and beautiful women to satisfy Jing Yao's desires as much as possible in order to make him satisfied.

古文：久之，荆轲未有行意。
现代文：过了很久，荆轲还没有动身的意思。
English: After a long period of time, Jing Tao still did not show any sign of action.

古文：秦将王翦破赵，虏赵王，尽收其地，进兵北略地，至燕南界。
现代文：这时，秦将王翦攻破赵国，俘虏赵王，占领了赵地。又挥军北进，掠夺土地，一直打到燕国南部边境。
English: At this time, Qin conquered Zhao, captured Zhao, and occupied Zhao. He also marched north to plunder the land and fought all the way to the southern border of Yan.

古文：太子丹恐惧，乃请荆卿曰： 秦兵旦暮渡易水，则虽欲长侍足下，岂可得哉? 
现代文：太子丹非常恐惧，就向荆轲请求说： 秦国军队早晚要渡过易水，我虽然愿意长久地侍奉您，又哪里可能呢？ 
English: Prince Dan was very afraid, so he pleaded with Jing Yong and said: The Qin army will have to cross the Yishui River sooner or later. Although I am willing to serve you for a long time, what is possible?

古文：荆卿曰： 微太子言，臣愿得谒之。
现代文：荆轲说： 即使太子不说，我也想向您请求行动了。
English: Jing Yao said, "Even if the crown prince doesn't say anything, I want to ask you to take action."

古文：今行而无信，则秦未可亲也。
现代文：现在去了如果没有信物，那就无法接近秦王。
English: If there is no token, it is impossible to get close to the Qin King.

古文：夫今樊将军，秦王购之金千斤，邑万家。
现代文：现在秦王正用千两黄金和万户封邑来悬赏缉拿樊将军。
English: Now the Qin king is offering a reward of 1,000 taels of gold and 10,000 fiefs to capture the general.

古文：诚能得樊将军首，与燕督亢之地图献秦王，秦王必说见臣，臣乃得有以报太子。 
现代文：如果能得到樊将军的首级和燕国督亢的地图献给秦王，秦王一定乐于接见我，这样我才能有报效太子的机会。 
English: If I can get General Zou's head and the map of Yan Guodu's capital dedicated to King Qin, King Qin will certainly be happy to meet me, so that I can have the opportunity to serve as crown prince.

古文：太子曰： 樊将军以穷困来归丹，丹不忍以己之私，而伤长者之意，愿足下更虑之。 
现代文：太子丹说： 樊将军因为走投无路来投奔我，我又怎么忍心为了自己的私事而伤害忠厚老实的人的心，还望您另想个办法。 
English: Prince Dan said, "Since General Nie ran to me when he was cornered, how can I bear to hurt the hearts of loyal and honest people for the sake of my private affairs? I hope you can find another way."

古文：荆轲知太子不忍，乃遂私见樊於期曰： 秦之遇将军，可谓深矣。父母宗族，皆为戮没。
现代文：荆轲知道太子不忍心，于是就私下里去见樊于期说： 秦王对您可以说太狠毒了，父母和同家族的人都被杀害了。
English: Jing Yao knew that the crown prince could not bear it, so he secretly went to see Yao Yu and said: King Qin is too cruel to you, his parents and family members have all been killed.

古文：今闻购将军之首，金千斤，邑万家，将奈何? 
现代文：现在又听说秦王悬赏千两黄金和万户封邑来求您的头颅，您打算怎么办呢？ 
English: Now I hear that the Qin King has offered a reward of a thousand taels of gold and ten thousand fiefs to demand your head. What are you going to do?

古文：樊将军仰天太息流涕曰： 吾每念，常痛于骨髓，顾计不知所出耳。 
现代文：樊将军仰天长叹，泪流满面地说： 我每次想到这些，就恨入骨髓，考虑再三，只是不知道如何才能报仇罢了。 
English: General Zou sighed and said with tears streaming down his face, "Every time I think about this, I hate it to my bones, I think about it again and again, but I just don't know how to get revenge."

古文：轲曰： 今有一言，可以解燕国之患，而报将军之仇者，何如? 
现代文：荆轲说： 我现在有一个建议，不但可以解除燕国的祸患，而且可以为您报仇，您看怎么样？ 
English: Jing Yao said, "I now have a suggestion that can not only remove the scourge of Yan Guo, but also take revenge for you. What do you think?

古文：樊於期乃前曰： 为之奈何? 
现代文：樊于期走上前说： 您究竟想怎么办？
English: "What exactly do you want to do?

古文：荆轲曰： 愿得将军之首以献秦，秦王必喜而善见臣，臣左手把其袖，而右手揕抗其胸，然则将军之仇报，而燕国见陵之耻除矣。
现代文：但说无妨。 荆轲说： 希望能得到将军的首级，进献秦王，秦王必定很高兴，就会接见我。到那时，我左手抓住他的衣袖，右手用匕首刺进他的胸膛。这样，您的大仇可报，燕国遭受的耻辱也可以洗刷了。
English: But it's all right. Jing Yao said, "I hope I can get the general's head and present it to King Qin. King Qin will surely be happy to receive me. At that time, I will grab his sleeve with my left hand and stab him in the chest with a dagger with my right hand. In this way, your great revenge can be reported, and the shame suffered by Yan Guo can also be washed away."

古文：将军岂有意乎? 
现代文：将军可有这番心意呢？ 
English: Could the general have had such an intention?

古文：樊於期偏袒扼腕而进曰： 此臣日夜切齿拊心也，乃今得闻教。 
现代文：樊于期袒露出一条臂膀，握住手腕，走近一步说： 这是我日夜咬牙切齿、痛彻心胸的事情，居然在今天能听到您的指引。 
English: Zhai Yuxuan exposed an arm, grasped his wrist, stepped closer and said: This is what I have been gritting my teeth and heart about day and night, and I can actually hear your guidance today.

古文：遂自刎。
现代文：说完就自杀了。
English: After saying this, he committed suicide.

古文：太子闻之，驰往，伏尸而哭，极哀。
现代文：太子听说后，赶紧驾车奔去，趴在樊于期的尸体上痛哭起来，极其悲伤。
English: When the prince heard the news, he drove to the spot and wept bitterly over the corpse of General Zou. He was extremely sad.

古文：既已，无可奈何，乃遂收盛樊於期之首，函封之。
现代文：事情既然无可挽回，于是就只好收敛樊于期的头颅，用匣子封存起来。
English: Since the matter was irreparable, they had no choice but to remove the head, which had been found on time, and seal it in a box.

古文：于是，太子预求天下之利匕首，得赵人徐夫人之匕首，取之百金，使工以药淬之，以试人，血濡缕，人无不立死者。
现代文：这时候，太子已经预先寻到天下最锋利的匕首，那是从徐夫人手里用一百金才买到的匕首。太子让工匠用毒药水淬染匕首，拿它在人身上试验，只要流出一点儿血，那人就会立刻死去。
English: At this time, the prince had already found the world's sharpest dagger in advance, which was bought from Mrs. Xu with a hundred gold. The prince asked the craftsman to dye the dagger with poison water and test it on a person. As long as a little blood flows out, the person will die immediately.

古文：乃为装遣荆坷。
现代文：于是准备行装，送荆轲动身。
English: So they prepared to pack up and sent Jing Ye on his way.

古文：燕国有勇士秦武阳，年十二，杀人，人不敢与忤视。
现代文：燕国有个勇土叫秦武阳，十二岁时就杀过人，别人都不敢正眼看他。
English: There is a hero in Yan Province named Qin Wuyang. When he was twelve years old, he killed someone. No one dared to look at him.

古文：乃令秦武阳为副。
现代文：于是太子就派秦武阳做荆轲的助手。
English: So he sent Qin Muyang as his assistant.

古文：荆轲有所待，欲与俱，其人居远未来，而为留待。
现代文：荆轲正等着另一个人，想跟他一起去，那人住得远，还没有赶到，荆轲为此滞留等他。
English: Jing Yao was waiting for another person and wanted to go with him. The other person lived far away and had not arrived yet, so Jing Yao had to wait for him.

古文：顷之未发。
现代文：过了好几天还没有出发。
English: It's been days and they still haven't left.

古文：太子迟之，疑其有改悔，乃复请之曰： 日以尽矣，荆卿岂无意哉?
现代文：太子嫌他行动缓慢，怀疑他要反悔，于是又去请求他说： 时间已经不多了，你难道不打算去了吗？
English: The prince did not like his slowness and suspected that he was going to recant, so he asked him again: "Time is running out, aren't you going to go?"

古文：丹请先遣秦武阳。 
现代文：请让我先派秦武阳去吧。 
English: Please let me send Qin Wuyang first.

古文：荆轲怒，叱太子白： 今日往而不反者，竖子也!
现代文：荆轲生气了，喝叱太子说： 我今天去了如果不能回来，就可能因为秦武阳这小子!
English: Jing Yao got angry and scolded the crown prince, saying, "I went out today, and if I can't come back, it's probably because of this kid Qin Wuyang!"

古文：今提一匕首入不测之强秦，仆所以留者，待吾客与俱。
现代文：如今我拿着一把匕首到吉凶难测的秦国去，之所以还不动身，是要等我的朋友一起走。
English: Now I'm carrying a dagger to Qin, a country with unpredictable fortunes. The reason why I haven't moved is because I'm waiting for my friend to go with me.

古文：今太子迟之，请辞决矣。 
现代文：现在您既然嫌我行动迟缓，那就诀别吧! 
English: Now that you don't like my tardiness, say goodbye!

古文：遂发。
现代文：于是就出发了。
English: So they set off.

古文：太子及宾客知其事者，皆白衣冠以送之。
现代文：太子以及知道这件事的宾客，都身穿白衣，头戴白帽来为荆轲送行。
English: The prince and the guests who knew about this all dressed in ordinary people's clothes to send Jing Tao.

古文：至易水上，既祖，取道。
现代文：到了易水岸边，祭祀完路神，就要上路。
English: When you get to the bank of the Yishui River, you must go on the road after worshiping the god of the road.

古文：高渐离击筑，荆轲和而歌，为变徵之声，士皆垂泪涕泣。
现代文：这时，高渐离击起了筑乐，荆轲和着曲调唱起歌来，歌声凄厉悲怆，人们听了都流下眼泪，暗暗地抽泣。
English: At this time, Gao Yanyuan struck up the music, and the jing qi and the tune sang a song. The song was so sad that people shed tears and sobbed secretly.

古文：又前而为歌曰： 风萧萧兮易水寒，壮士一去兮不复还。 
现代文：荆轲又踱上前唱道： 风萧萧啊易水寒，壮士一去啊不复还! 
English: Jing Yao again bowed forward and sang: The wind is blowing, the water is cold, and the strong man is gone, and will not return!

古文：复为忼慨羽声，士皆瞠目，发尽上指冠。
现代文：接着乐音又变作慷慨激昂的羽声，人们听得虎目圆瞪，怒发冲冠。
English: Then the music changed into a passionate chorus, and people listened with wide-eyed fury.

古文：于是荆轲遂就车而去，终已不顾。
现代文：于是荆轲登上马车飞驰而去，始终没有回头看一眼。
English: So Jing Yao boarded the carriage and sped away, never looking back.

古文：既至秦，持千金之资币物，厚遗秦王宠臣中庶子蒙嘉。
现代文：一行人到秦国以后，荆轲带上价值千金的玉帛等礼物，去见秦王的宠臣中庶子蒙嘉。
English: After the group arrived in Qin, they took gifts such as jade bracelets worth thousands of gold to see Meng Jia, the favorite of the Qin king.

古文：嘉为先言于秦王曰： 燕王诚振畏慕大王之威，不敢兴兵以拒大王，愿举国为内臣，比诸侯之列，给贡职如郡县，而得奉守先王之宗庙。
现代文：蒙嘉替他事先在秦王面前美言道： 燕王确实畏惧大王的威势，不敢发兵和大王对抗，情愿让国人做秦国的臣民，和各方诸侯同列，像秦国郡县一样进奉贡品，只求能够奉守先王的宗庙。
English: Meng Jia made a beautiful speech for him in front of King Qin beforehand: King Yan is indeed afraid of the power of the great king, and does not dare to send troops to confront the great king. He would rather have his countrymen be the subjects of Qin, and be on the same level as the princes of all countries, and pay tribute like the counties of Qin, and only ask to be able to keep the ancestral temple of the former king.

古文：恐惧不敢自陈，谨斩樊於期头，及献燕之督亢之地图，函封，燕王拜送于庭，使使以闻大王。
现代文：燕王非常害怕，不敢亲自来向大王陈述，特地斩了樊于期，并献上燕国督亢的地图，都封装在匣子里，燕王又亲自在朝廷送行，派来使者向大王禀告。
English: King Yan was very afraid and did not dare to come to personally report to the great king. He made a special appointment and presented a map of the capital of Yan, all sealed in a box. King Yan also personally saw him off at the imperial court and sent an envoy to inform the great king.

古文：唯大王命之。 
现代文：请大王指示。 
English: Ask the Great King for instructions.

古文：秦王闻之，大喜。
现代文：秦王听了这番话后十分高兴。
English: Qin Wang was very happy after hearing this.

古文：乃朝服，设九宾，见燕使者咸阳宫。
现代文：于是穿上朝服，设置九宾之礼，在咸阳宫接见燕国使者。
English: So he put on the imperial robes, set up the nine-guest ceremony, and received the envoy of the Yan Kingdom at the Xianyang Palace.

古文：荆轲奉樊於期头函，而秦武阳奉地图匣，以次进。
现代文：荆轲捧着封藏樊于期头颅的匣子，秦武阳捧着装地图的匣子，按顺序走上前去。
English: Jing Zheng held the box of the head of Zhou Yuqi, Qin Wuyang held the box of the map, and they walked forward in order.

古文：至陛下。秦武阳色变振恐，群臣怪之，荆轲顾笑武阳，前为谢曰： 北蛮夷之鄙人，未尝见天子，故振惧，愿大王少假借之，使毕使于前。 
现代文：走到宫殿前的台阶下，秦武阳脸色陡变，浑身发抖，秦国大臣们感到奇怪，荆轲回过头朝秦武阳笑了笑，走上前去向秦王谢罪说： 他是北方荒野之地的粗人，没有见过世面，今日得见天子，所以害怕，希望大王稍加宽容，让他能在大王面前完成使命。 
English: When he reached the bottom of the steps in front of the palace, Qin Wuyang's face changed abruptly, and he was trembling all over. The Qin ministers were surprised. Jing Ye turned his head to look at Qin Wuyang, smiled, and walked forward to thank the Qin King, saying, "He is a rough man from the northern wilderness, he has never seen the world, and today he has to see the Son of Heaven. So he is afraid, and hopes that the great king will be a little tolerant and allow him to complete his mission in front of the great king."

古文：秦王谓轲曰： 起，取武阳所持图。 
现代文：秦王对荆轲说： 起来，把拿的地图取过来。 
English: Qin Wang said to Jing Yao, "Get up and get the map."

古文：轲既取图奉之，发图，图穷而匕首见。因左手把秦王之袖，而右手持匕首揕抗之。
现代文：荆轲就取过地图奉献上去，打开卷轴地图，地图完全展开时露出了匕首，说时迟那时快，荆轲左手拉住秦王的衣袖，右手抓过匕首就刺向秦王，可惜没能刺中。
English: Jing Yao took the map and offered it to the king. He opened the scroll map. When the map was completely unfolded, the dagger was revealed. He said that it was just a matter of time. Jing Yao held Qin Wang's sleeve with his left hand and stabbed Qin Wang with his right hand after grabbing the dagger. Unfortunately, he did not succeed in stabbing him.

古文：未至身，秦王惊，自引而起，绝袖。
现代文：秦王大吃一惊，抽身而起，挣断衣袖。
English: Surprised, Qin Wang stood up and tore off his sleeve.

古文：拔剑，剑长，掺其室。
现代文：秦王赶忙伸手拔剑，剑身太长，卡在剑鞘里了。
English: Qin Wang quickly reached out and drew his sword. The blade was too long and got stuck in the scabbard.

古文：时怨急，剑坚，故不可立拔。
现代文：当时情况紧急，剑又竖着卡得太紧，所以不能立刻拔出来。
English: At that time, the situation was urgent, and the sword was upright and stuck too tightly, so it could not be pulled out immediately.

古文：荆轲逐秦王，秦王还柱而走。
现代文：荆轲追赶秦王，秦王只好绕着柱子逃跑。
English: Jing Yao chased Qin Wang, and Qin Wang had to run around the pillar.

古文：群臣惊愕，卒起不意，尽失其度。
现代文：群臣都惊慌失措，由于突然发生了出人意料的事，一个个都失去了常态。
English: The courtiers were in a panic, because something unexpected had suddenly happened, and they all lost their normal state.

古文：而秦法，群臣侍殿上者，不得持尺兵。诸郎中执兵，皆陈殿下，非有诏，不得上。
现代文：而且按照秦国的法律，大臣在殿上侍奉君王时不得携带任何兵器，守卫宫禁的侍卫虽然带着武器，但都站在殿外，没有秦王的命令不能上殿。
English: Moreover, according to the laws of Qin, ministers were not allowed to carry any weapons when they served the king in the palace. Although the guards who guarded the palace were prohibited from carrying weapons, they all stood outside the palace. They could not enter the palace without the order of the Qin king.

古文：方急时，不及召下兵，以故荆轲逐秦王，而卒惶急无以击轲，而乃以手共搏之。
现代文：正在危急的时候，秦王来不及召殿下卫兵，因此荆轲追赶秦王的时候，大臣们在仓猝之间惊慌失措，没有什么东西拿来还击荆轲，只好一起用手抓他。
English: In the time of crisis, King Qin was too late to call his guards. Therefore, when Jing Ye chased after King Qin, the ministers panicked in their haste. There was nothing to fight back against Jing Ye, so they had to catch him with their hands.

古文：是时侍医夏无且，以其所奉药囊提轲。
现代文：这时御医夏无且用他身上带着的药袋向荆轲投去。
English: At this time, the doctor Xia Muxia used the medicine bag he was carrying to throw it at Jing Jun.

古文：秦王之方还柱走，卒惶急不知所为，左右乃曰： 王负剑!
现代文：秦王正绕着柱子跑，不知怎么办好，趁这个机会大臣们才对他大喊： 大王把剑背过去!快推到背后! 
English: King Qin was running around the pillar, not knowing what to do, so the ministers took this opportunity to shout at him: "Great King, put your sword behind your back!

古文：王负剑! 遂拔以击荆轲，断其左股。
现代文：秦王这才拔出剑来砍荆轲，一下子砍断了他的左腿。
English: It was only then that King Qin pulled out his sword to cut off Jing Yao, instantly severing his left leg.

古文：荆轲废，乃引其匕首提秦王，不中，中柱。
现代文：荆轲重伤跌倒在地，于是举起匕首向秦王投去，没有击中，扎在柱子上。
English: Jing Yao was seriously injured and fell to the ground. He then raised his dagger and threw it at Qin Wang. It missed and stuck in the pillar.

古文：秦王复击轲，被八创。
现代文：秦王又砍荆轲，荆轲八处受伤。
English: The king of Qin cut down the cormorant again, and the cormorant was injured in eight places.

古文：轲自知事不就，倚柱而笑，箕踞以骂曰： 事所以不成者，乃欲以生劫之，必得约契以报太子也。 
现代文：荆轲自知事情失败，就靠着柱子大笑起来，叉开两腿大骂道： 事情之所以没有成功，无非是想活捉你，得到归还侵占土地的凭证去回报太子。 
English: Knowing that the matter had failed, Jing Yao leaned on the pillar and laughed loudly. He opened his legs and cursed loudly, "The reason why the matter did not succeed is that I only wanted to capture you alive and get the certificate of returning the occupied land to repay the crown prince."

古文：左右既前斩荆轲，秦王目眩良久。
现代文：两旁的人赶过来把荆轲杀了，秦王头昏目眩了好久，才回过神来。
English: The people on both sides rushed to kill Jing Yao. Qin Wang was dazed for a long time before he regained his senses.

古文：而论功赏群臣及当坐者，各有差。
现代文：后来秦王对群臣论功行赏，处罚也根据情况，分别对待。
English: Later, the Qin king rewarded the group of courtiers for their meritorious deeds, and the punishment was also treated separately according to the situation.

古文：而赐夏无且黄金二百镒，曰： 无且爱我，乃以药囊提轲也。 
现代文：秦王赏赐夏无且黄金二百镒，说： 无且爱护我，才用药袋投击荆轲啊。 
English: The King of Qin rewarded Xia Mujia with 200 ounces of gold, saying, "You loved me so much that you used a medicine bag to hit Jing Mujia."

古文：于是，秦大怒燕，益发兵诣赵，调王翦军以伐燕。十月而拔燕蓟城。
现代文：于是秦对燕十分愤恨，增派军队赶往赵国旧地，命令王翦的部队去攻打燕国，十月攻陷燕都蓟城。
English: As a result, Qin was very angry with Yan and sent additional troops to rush to the old land of Zhao, and ordered Wang Xi's troops to attack Yan's country and capture Yan's capital Yancheng in October.

古文：燕王喜、太子丹等，皆率其精兵东保于辽东。
现代文：燕王喜、太子丹等率领精锐部队退守辽东。
English: Yan Wangxi, Prince Dan and others led the elite troops to retreat to Liaodong.

古文：秦将李信追击燕王，王急，用代王嘉计，杀太子丹，欲献之秦。
现代文：秦将李信追击燕王，燕王急了，只好采用代王赵嘉的主意，杀了太子丹，打算献给秦王。
English: Qin sent Li Xin to pursue Yan Wang. Yan Wang was in a hurry, so he had no choice but to adopt the idea of Zhao Jia, the acting king, and killed Prince Dan, intending to dedicate it to Qin Wang.

古文：秦复进兵攻之。五岁而卒灭燕国，而虏燕王喜，秦兼天下。
现代文：但秦军仍旧继续进攻，五年之后终于灭掉了燕国，俘虏了燕王喜，秦国统一天下。
English: However, the Qin army still continued to attack. Five years later, they finally eliminated the Yan Kingdom, captured Yan Wangxi, and unified the Qin Kingdom.

古文：其后荆轲客高渐离以击筑见秦皇帝，而以筑击秦皇帝，为燕报仇，不中而死。
现代文：后来，荆轲的好友高渐离利用击筑的机会见到秦始皇，他用筑投击秦始皇，想为燕国报仇，结果也没有击中，反被杀死。
English: Later, Gao Yanyuan, a good friend of Jing Yi, took advantage of the opportunity to hit the building to see Qin Shi Huang. He used the building to attack Qin Shi Huang, hoping to avenge Yan Guo. As a result, he did not hit the building and was killed instead.

