古文：萧景，字子昭，高祖从父弟也。
现代文：萧景，字子昭，是高祖的堂弟。
English: Xiao Jing, also known as Zizi Zhao, was Gao Zu's cousin.

古文：父崇之字茂敬，即左光禄大夫道赐之子。
现代文：父亲萧崇，字崇，就是左光禄大夫萧道的儿子。
English: Xiao Chong's father, Zhaotong, was the son of Dr. Xiao Dao, the doctor of the Left Guanglu Hospital.

古文：道赐三子：长子尚之，字茂先；次太祖文皇帝；次崇之。
现代文：萧道墨有三个儿子：长子萧堂之，字茂先；次子是太祖文皇帝；第三于是萧崇之。
English: Xiao Dao Mo had three sons: the eldest son, Xiao Tongzhi, was called Maoxian; the second son was Emperor Taizu Wen; and the third was Xiao Chongzhi.

古文：初，左光禄居于乡里，专行礼让，为众所推。仕历宋太尉江夏王参军，终于治书侍御史。齐末，追赠散骑常侍、左光禄大夫。
现代文：当年，左光禄道盐居住在乡里时，非常注重实行礼让，为众人所推崇，他当过宋朝太尉江夏王的参军，官至治书侍御史时去世，齐朝末年，被迫赠为散骑常侍、左光禄大夫。
English: In that year, when Zuo Guanglu Dao Yan was living in the countryside, he paid great attention to the practice of courtesy and was respected by many people. He was once the Song Dynasty's Taiyi Jiang Xia Wang and joined the army. He died when he was an official of the Office of the Secretary of State. At the end of the Qi Dynasty, he was forced to be presented as a strolling attendant and Zuo Guanglu doctor.

古文：尚之敦厚有德器，为司徒建安王中兵参军，一府称为长者；琅邪王僧虔尤善之，每事多与议决。
现代文：萧尚之性格敦厚，有德行器度，他当司徒建宝玉的中兵参军时，整个府襄的人都称他为长者；特别器重他，遇到事情经常舆他商议后再作决定。
English: Xiao Shang had a strong character and was a virtuous person. When he joined the army as a middle-ranking soldier of the Siu Jian Baogu, people from all over the province called him an elder. They held him in high esteem and often consulted him before making a decision.

古文：迁步兵校尉，卒官。
现代文：后来萧尚之迁任步兵校尉，在官任上去世。
English: Later, Xiao Shangzhi was transferred to the post of infantry captain and died in office.

古文：天监初，追谥文宣侯。
现代文：天监初年，被追赠谧号叫文宣侯。
English: In the first year of Tianjun, he was posthumously given the posthumous name Wen Xuan Hou.

古文：尚之子灵钧，仕齐广德令。
现代文：萧尚之的儿子萧灵钧，官任齐广德县令。
English: Xiao Lingyao, the son of Xiao Shangzhi, was appointed the county magistrate of Qi Guangde.

古文：高祖义师至，行会稽郡事，顷之卒。
现代文：高祖的义师到达时，正执行会稽郡的事务，不久就去世了。
English: When Gao Zu's mentor arrived, he was carrying out the affairs of the county auditor, and died soon after.

古文：高祖即位，追封东昌县侯，邑一千户。
现代文：高祖即位后，追封他为东昌县侯，食邑一千户。
English: After Gaozu ascended to the throne, he was made the lord of Dongchang County, with a thousand households in the county.

古文：子謇嗣。
现代文：他的儿子萧謇继嗣。
English: His son, Xiao Jun, became his successor.

古文：崇之以干能显，为政尚严厉，官至冠军将军、东阳太守。
现代文：萧崇之因才干和能力著称，他为政崇尚严厉，作宫作到冠军将军、东阳太守。
English: Xiao Chongzhi was famous for his talent and ability. He was a stern politician, a champion general and the governor of Dongyang.

古文：永明中，钱唐唐珝之反，别众破东阳，崇之遇害。
现代文：永明年间，钱唐唐珝二人造反，率领队伍攻下东阳，萧崇之遇害身亡。
English: In the middle of the Yongle year, Qiantang and Tangye rebelled and led a team to capture Dongyang. Xiao Chongzhi was killed and died.

古文：天监初，追谥忠简侯。
现代文：天监初年，被追赠谧号为忠简侯。
English: In the first year of the Heaven's Inspector, he was posthumously given the posthumous name Zhong Jian Hou.

古文：景八岁随父在郡，居丧以毁闻。
现代文：萧景八岁时，跟随父亲住在东阳郡，父亲去世后，萧景在服丧期间因悲哀遇度而消瘦，因此而闻名远近。
English: When Xiao Jing was eight years old, he lived with his father in Dongyang County. After his father's death, Xiao Jing lost weight during the mourning period due to grief, and became famous far and wide.

古文：既长好学，才辩能断。
现代文：长大以后，爱好学习，才辩过人，做事果断。
English: After growing up, he likes to study, and only then can he argue with others and do things decisively.

古文：齐建武中，除晋安王国左常侍，迁永宁令，政为百城最。
现代文：直变建武年间，被授予置圭王的国左常侍，迁任丞空县令，他的政绩是地方宫中最好的。
English: During the Jianwu era, he was awarded the title of Kuniza no zenshi (a courtier of the left) of King Guigui, and was transferred to the position of the county magistrate of Joseon. His political achievements were the best in the local court.

古文：永嘉太守范述曾居郡，号称廉平，雅服景为政，乃榜郡门曰： 诸县有疑滞者，可就永宁令决。 
现代文：永嘉郡太守范述曾住在郡裹，号称廉洁公平，他一直很佩服萧景的为政，就在郡门上贴了一张告示说： 各个县裹凡是有疑难积压的问题，可以到永宁县令逭裹来解决。 
English: The governor of Yongjia County, Fan Shu, used to live in Yongning County and was known for his honesty and fairness. He had always admired Xiao Jing's politics, so he posted a notice on the county gate saying: Any problems that are difficult to solve in various counties can be solved in Yongning County.

古文：顷之，以疾去官。
现代文：不久，萧景因病离职。
English: Soon after, Xiao Jing left the company due to illness.

古文：永嘉人胡仲宣等千人诣阙，表请景为郡，不许。
现代文：永嘉人胡仲宣等一千多人来到宫殿前，上表请求萧景继续任郡守，皇帝没有同意。
English: More than a thousand people, including Hu Zhongxuan from Yongjia, came to the palace to ask Xiao Jing to continue to serve as county governor. The emperor did not agree.

古文：还为骠骑行参军。
现代文：萧景回朝当了骠骑行参军。
English: Xiao Jing rode to join the army in the morning.

古文：永元二年，以长沙宣武王懿勋，除步兵校尉。
现代文：永元二年，因长沙宣武王萧懿的功劳，萧景被授予步兵校尉。
English: In the second year of the Yongyuan era, Xiao Jing was awarded the rank of infantry lieutenant for his services to Xiao Yao, the King of Xuanwu in Changsha.

古文：是冬，宣武王遇害，景亦逃难。
现代文：逭年冬天，宣武王遇害身亡，萧景也逃难走了。
English: In the winter of the year of the rooster, King Xuanwu was killed and died, and Xiao Jing also fled.

古文：高祖义师至，以景为宁朔将军、行南兗州军事。
现代文：高祖的起义队伍到达后，任命萧景为宁朔将军、执行南兖州军事。
English: After Gaozu's insurgent team arrived, Xiao Jing was appointed as the general of Ningshuo and carried out the military coup in South Luzhou.

古文：时天下未定，江北伧楚各据坞壁。景示以威信，渠帅相率面缚请罪，旬日境内皆平。
现代文：当时天下还没安定，长江北岸的那些楚人们各自占据防御用的土堡，萧景向他们示以威信，那些首领们相继捆绑了前来请罪，十天之后，境内全都平静下来。
English: At that time, the world was not yet stable. Those Chu people on the north bank of the Yangtze River each occupied a defensive earthen fort. Xiao Jing showed them his authority. Those leaders were successively tied up and came to plead guilty. Ten days later, all the territory calmed down.

古文：中兴二年，迁督南兗州诸军事、辅国将军、监南兗州。
现代文：中兴二年，萧景迁任督南兖州诸军事、辅国将军、监督南兖州。
English: In the second year of rejuvenation, Xiao Jing was transferred to serve as the governor of South Luzhou, the military, the auxiliary general, and the supervisor of South Luzhou.

古文：高祖践阼，封吴平县侯，食邑一千户，仍为使持节、都督南、北兗、青、冀四州诸军事、冠军将军、南兗州刺史。
现代文：高祖即位后，封萧景为吴平县侯，食邑一千户，并担任使持节、都督南兖州、北兖州、青州、冀州四州诸军事、冠军将军、南兖州刺史。
English: After Gao Zu's enthronement, Feng Xiaojing was the marquis of Wuping County, with a thousand households in the county, and served as the envoy, the military governor of the four states of South Luzhou, North Luzhou, Qingzhou, and Jizhou, the champion general, and the history of South Luzhou.

古文：诏景母毛氏为国太夫人，礼如王国太妃，假金章紫绶。
现代文：皇帝韶令萧景的母亲毛氏为国太夫人，在礼仪上的待遇如同王国太妃，假金章紫绶。
English: The emperor made Mao's mother, Xiao Jing, the Grand Mistress of the State, and treated her ceremonially as if she were the Queen of the Kingdom, with a fake gold seal and purple ribbon.

古文：景居州，清恪有威裁，明解吏职，文案无壅，下不敢欺，吏人畏敬如神。
现代文：萧景居住在州裹时，清廉谨慎有威裁，他明确了解吏员的职责，文件案卷从不积压，下面的办事人员不敢欺瞒他，吏员们对他非常尊敬和畏惧，就像对神一样。
English: When Xiao Jing lived in Zhouzhuang, he was clean, prudent and authoritative. He clearly understood the duties of the clerk, the documents were never backlogged, and the clerks below did not dare to deceive him. The clerks respected and feared him very much, as if he were a god.

古文：会年荒，计口赈恤，为穀粥于路以赋之，死者给棺具，人甚赖焉。
现代文：正遇上逭年闹饥荒，萧景统计人进行赈济抚恤，做好了饭粥放在路边供给路过的人，死了人的就送给棺材。百姓们都非常依赖他。
English: Facing a famine in the year of the rooster, the statistician of Xiaojing carried out almsgiving, prepared rice porridge and put it on the roadside to supply passers-by, and gave it to the coffin of the dead. The people were very dependent on him.

古文：天监四年，王师北伐，景帅众出淮阳，进屠宿预。
现代文：天监四年，梁朝军队北伐，萧景统率大军从淮阳出发，进攻宿预城。
English: In the fourth year of Tianjun, the Northern Expedition of the Liang Dynasty army, Xiao Jingtong led a large army from Huaiyang to attack the prefectural capital.

古文：丁母忧，诏起摄职。
现代文：因母亲去世离职，皇帝下韶起用为代理官职。
English: Due to his mother's death, he resigned from his post, and the emperor promoted him to the position of acting official.

古文：五年，班师，除太子右卫率，迁辅国将军、卫尉卿。
现代文：五年，班师回朝。任太子右卫率，迁任辅国将军、卫尉卿。
English: In the fifth year, the team returned to the imperial court. They were appointed as the Prince's Right Guards, transferred to the post of Vice-Provincial General, and assigned to the post of Captain of the Guards.

古文：七年，迁左骁骑将军，兼领军将军。
现代文：七年，迁任左骁骑将军，兼任领军将军。
English: Seven years later, he was transferred to the position of General of the Left Division, and concurrently served as General of the Leading Forces.

古文：领军管天下兵要，监局官僚，旧多骄侈，景在职峻切，官曹肃然。
现代文：领军之职主管国家的军事机密，而监局的官僚们，过去大多骄横奢侈，芦量在任职期间非常严厉，官员们都很收敛。
English: The leading position is in charge of the country's military secrets, while the bureaucrats of the Supervisory Bureau, most of whom were arrogant and extravagant in the past, were very strict during their tenure, and the officials were very restrained.

古文：制局监皆近幸，颇不堪命，以是不得久留中。
现代文：而武官制局监都是一些受宠幸的人，他们不堪忍受萧景，因此萧景不能久留朝廷。
English: However, the inspectors of the Military Attaché System Bureau were favored and fortunate people who could not bear Xiao Jing, so Xiao Jing could not stay in the imperial court for a long time.

古文：寻出为使持节、督雍、梁、南、北秦、郢州之竟陵司州之随郡诸军事、信武将军、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
现代文：不久，出任为使持节、督雍州、梁州、南秦州、北秦州、坚坦的童堡噩、丑泌的驴迎诸军事、信武将军、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
English: Soon, he served as the commander of Yongzhou, Liangzhou, South Qinzhou, and North Qinzhou, as well as the commander of the Yongzhou Military Region, the commander of the Yongzhou Military Region, the commander of the Yongzhou Military Region, the commander of the Yongzhou Military Region, and the commander of the Yongzhou Military Region.

古文：八年三月，魏荆州刺史元志率众七万寇潺沟，驱迫群蛮，群蛮悉渡汉水来降。
现代文：八年三月，魏国的荆州刺史五尽率领七万大军侵犯迁遘，他们驱赶逼迫蛮人，蛮人们纷纷渡过漠水来投靠梁朝。
English: In March of the eighth year, Wei's Jing Zhou Zhi Wujin led a 70,000-strong army to invade Qianlong. They drove out and persecuted the barbarians, and the barbarians crossed the desert water one after another to support the Liang Dynasty.

古文：议者以蛮累为边患，可因此除之。
现代文：有人议论，认为蛮人屡次成为边境的祸患，可以藉此机会把他们除掉。
English: It was said that the barbarians had often been a nuisance on the frontier, and that this was an opportunity to get rid of them.

古文：景曰： 穷来归我，诛之不祥。
现代文：萧景说： 他们走投无路了前来归附我们，把他们杀掉是不好的。
English: Xiao Jing said, "They came to join us when they were cornered. It is not good to kill them."

古文：且魏人来侵，每为矛盾，若悉诛蛮，则魏军无碍，非长策也。 
现代文：况且魏国人来侵犯我国时，蛮人经常舆他们产生矛盾，如果把蛮人全都杀掉，那么魏军就没有障碍了，遣不是长久之计。 
English: Moreover, when the Wei people came to invade our country, the barbarians often had conflicts with them. If the barbarians were all killed, then the Wei army would have no obstacle. Deportation was not a long-term solution.

古文：乃开樊城受降。
现代文：于是就打开樊城的城门，接受投降的蛮人。
English: So he opened the gates of Lushan to accept the surrendering barbarians.

古文：因命司马硃思远、宁蛮长史曹义宗、中兵参军孟惠俊击志于潺沟，大破之，生擒志长史杜景。
现代文：萧景因而命令司马朱思远、宁蛮长史曹义宗、中兵参军孟惠俊在潺沟袭击元志，大获全胜，活捉了元志的长史杜景。
English: As a result, Xiao Jing ordered Sima Zhu Siyuan, Ningban Chang Shi Cao Yizong, and Meng Huijun, a middle-ranking soldier who joined the army, to attack Yuan Zhi in Shuguo, and won a complete victory, capturing Yuan Zhi's Chang Shi Dujing alive.

古文：斩首万余级，流尸盖汉水，景遣中兵参军崔缋率军士收而瘗焉。
现代文：杀死敌人一万余人，汉水中盖满了漂浮的尸体，萧景派遣中兵参军崔绩率领军队士兵把尸体打捞上来掩埋了。
English: After killing more than ten thousand of the enemy, the Han River was covered with floating corpses. Xiao Jing sent soldiers to join the army, and Cui Rong led the soldiers to salvage the corpses and bury them.

古文：景初到州，省除参迎羽仪器服，不得烦扰吏人。
现代文：萧景初到雍州时，减省免除了参见拜迎的羽仪和器服，不让烦劳打扰州裹的吏员和百姓。
English: When Xiao Jing first arrived in Yongzhou, the reduction of the province exempted him from the feathers and clothing of the visit, and did not let the troubles bother the officials and people in the state.

古文：修营城垒，申警边备，理辞讼，劝农桑。
现代文：他到任后，修建营房筑城池堡垒，三令五申告诫加强边境的防备，审理案件诉讼，劝勉百姓务农种桑。
English: After he took office, he built barracks and fortresses, issued orders to strengthen border defenses, heard cases and lawsuits, and encouraged the people to farm and grow mulberry trees.

古文：郡县皆改节自励，州内清肃，缘汉水陆千余里，抄盗绝迹。
现代文：一时间，州内的各个郡县都改变政策，自我勉励，雍州境内变得清静整肃，漠水沿岸水陆共一千多里地，偷盗之事不再发生。
English: In a short time, all counties in the state have changed their policies and encouraged themselves. The territory of Yongzhou has become quiet and clean. There are more than a thousand miles of water and land along the coast of the desert. Theft will no longer occur.

古文：十一年，征右卫将军、领石头戍军事。
现代文：十一年，萧景被召入任右卫将军、兼任石头戍军事。
English: In the eleventh year, Xiao Jing was called to serve as the right guard general, and also served as the military leader of the Stone Army.

古文：十二年，复为使持节、督南、北兗、北徐、青、冀五州诸军事、信威将军、南兗州刺史。
现代文：十二年，再次任使持节、督南兖州、北兖州、北徐州、青州、冀州五州诸军事、信威将军、南兖州刺史。
English: In 2012, he was reappointed as the envoy of Jishie, the governor of the five states of South Luzhou, North Luzhou, North Xuzhou, Qingzhou and Jizhou, the military, the general of Xinwei and the historian of South Luzhou.

古文：十三年，征为领军将军，直殿省，知十州损益事，月加禄五万。
现代文：十三年，萧景被召入任领军将军，在殿省内值班，主持十个州的损益事务，每月增加俸禄五万。
English: In the thirteenth year, Xiao Jing was called in as the leading general, on duty in the palace province, presided over the profit and loss affairs of ten states, and increased his monthly salary by fifty thousand.

古文：景为人雅有风力，长于辞令。
现代文：萧景为人一直很有风度，擅长辞令。
English: Xiao Jing has always been very personable and good at rhetoric.

古文：其在朝廷，为众所瞻仰。
现代文：他在朝廷时，被大家所注视仰慕。
English: When he was at court, he was watched and admired by everyone.

古文：于高祖属虽为从弟，而礼寄甚隆，军国大事，皆与议决。
现代文：他和高祖论亲戚关系虽然是堂兄弟，而高祖对他的礼遇是很隆重的，遇到军务和国家大事，都要与他商议决定。
English: Although he and Gao Zu are cousins in terms of kinship, Gao Zu treats him with great courtesy. When it comes to military affairs and national affairs, he must discuss and decide with Gao Zu.

古文：十五年，加侍中。
现代文：十五年，萧景加任侍中。
English: Fifteen years later, Xiao Jing was promoted to the position of chamberlain.

古文：十七年，太尉、扬州刺史临川王宏坐法免。
现代文：十七年，太尉、扬州刺史临川王萧宏因犯了法而被罢免。
English: In the seventeenth year, Xiaohong Wang of Linchuan, a captain and Yangzhou magistrate, was dismissed for violating the law.

古文：诏曰： 扬州应须缉理，宜得其人。
现代文：皇帝的韶书说： 扬州应须得到管理，要选择合适的人。
English: The emperor's imperial edict said: Yangzhou should be governed, and the right person should be selected.

古文：侍中、领军将军吴平侯景才任此举，可以安右将军监扬州，并置佐史，侍中如故，即宅为府。 
现代文：侍中、领军将军吴乎侯萧景的才能，能够胜任此职，可用安右将军监督扬州，并置佐史，侍中之职依旧，就以他的住宅为官府。 
English: The talent of the chamberlain and leading general Wu Huhou Xiao Jing, who was able to fulfill this position, could be used by General An Yu to supervise Yangzhou and appoint Sashi. The position of the chamberlain remained the same, and his residence was used as the government office.

古文：景越亲居扬州，辞让甚恳恻，至于涕泣，高祖不许。
现代文：萧景的远房亲戚居住在扬州，他非常诚恳地推辞这个任命，以至于哭了起来，而高祖就是不允准他的辞让。
English: Xiao Jing's distant relative, who lives in Yangzhou, refused the appointment so earnestly that he burst into tears, but Gaozu did not allow him to resign.

古文：在州尤称明断，符教严整。
现代文：萧景在雍州任上，特别以明断而著称，所批示的政令非常严整。
English: When Xiao Jing was in charge of Yongzhou, he was particularly known for being decisive. The decrees he issued were very strict.

古文：有田舍老姥尝诉得符，还至县，县吏未即发，姥语曰： 萧监州符，火爄汝手，何敢留之！ 
现代文：有一个农村老妇人，一次她投诉后得到了萧景给她的批示，回到县裹，县吏没有立即发出去，老妇人说： 萧监州的符命，会像火一样烫你的手，怎么敢留下它呢! 
English: There was an old woman in a rural area who, after she complained once, received instructions from Xiao Jing. When she returned to the county, the county officials did not immediately send it out. The old woman said: "The fate of Xiao Jingzhou will burn your hand like fire. How dare you leave it!

古文：其为人所畏敬如此。
现代文：萧景为人们所敬畏到如此地步。
English: Xiao Jing has been revered by people to such an extent.

古文：十八年，累表陈解，高祖未之许。
现代文：十八年，萧景多次向皇帝上表，请求解除自己的职务，高祖没有同意。
English: In the 18th year, Xiao Jing repeatedly petitioned the emperor to be relieved of his duties, but Gaozu did not agree.

古文：明年，出为使持节、散骑常侍、都督郢、司、霍三州诸军事、安西将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：第二年，萧景出任使持节、散骑常侍、都督郢州、司州、霍州三州诸军事、安西将军、郢州刺史。
English: In the second year, Xiao Jing served as the envoy of the festival, the horseback riding attendant, the military of the three states of Bozhou, Shizhou, and Huozhou, the general of Anxi, and the history of Bozhou.

古文：将发，高祖幸建兴苑饯别，为之流涕。
现代文：临出发前，高祖御驾临幸建兴苑，为萧景饯行送别，并为此泪流满面。
English: Before the departure, Gao Zu drove to Jincheng Jianxingyuan to bid farewell to Xiao Jianxing, and was in tears.

古文：既还宫，诏给鼓吹一部。
现代文：高祖回到宫中，命令给萧景鼓吹一部。
English: Gaozhu returned to the palace and ordered Xiao Jing to preach a sermon.

古文：在州复有能名。
现代文：萧景在任上又以能干而闻名远近。
English: While in office, Xiao Jing was known far and wide for his ability.

古文：齐安、竟陵郡接魏界，多盗贼，景移书告示，魏即焚坞戍保境，不复侵略。
现代文：查宝邓、童堕郡舆魏国国界接壤，有很多盗贼，萧景向魏国传递告示后，魏国立即焚烧那盗贼防御的土堡，保卫国境，不再有侵略二郡的事情。
English: After Xiao Jing passed the notice to Wei, Wei immediately burned the earthen fort defended by the thieves to protect the border, and there was no longer any invasion of the two counties.

古文：普通四年，卒于州，时年四十七。
现代文：普通四年，萧量在坚蛆去世，终年四十七岁。
English: Four years later, Xiao Jia passed away in Jianye, at the age of forty-seven.

古文：诏赠侍中、中抚军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：皇帝诏令追赠他为侍中、中抚军、开府仪同三司。
English: The emperor posthumously awarded him with the titles of Samurai, Vice-Commander, Keifu, and Third Secretary.

古文：谥曰忠。
现代文：谧号忠。
English: His nickname is Zhong.

古文：子劢嗣。
现代文：他的儿子萧勤继嗣。
English: His son Xiao Qin became his successor.

古文：昌字子建，景第二弟也。
现代文：萧昌字子建，是萧景的第二个弟弟。
English: Xiao Chang Zi Jian is the second younger brother of Xiao Jing.

古文：齐豫章末，为晋安王左常侍。
现代文：齐豫章末年，任晋安王的左常侍。
English: At the end of Qi Yuanzhang's life, he served as the left attendant of King Jinan.

古文：天监初，除中书侍郎，出为豫章内史。
现代文：梁天监初年，任中书侍郎，出任豫章郡内史。
English: In the first year of Liang Tianjun, he was appointed as the secretary, and served as the county historian of Yuzhang County.

古文：五年，加宁朔将军。
现代文：五年，萧昌加任宁朔将军。
English: Five years later, Xiao Chang was promoted to the post of Ningshuo General.

古文：六年，迁持节、督广、交、越、桂四州诸军事、辅国将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
现代文：六年，迁任持节、督广州、交州、越塑、广州四州诸军事、辅国将军、平越中郎将、庐业刺史。
English: In the sixth year, he was transferred to Jisai, the governor of Guangzhou, Jiaozhou, Yuexiu, Guangzhou Shizhou Military, Vice-Governor General, Pingyue Vice-Governor General, and Zou Ye stabbing history.

古文：七年，进号征远将军。
现代文：七年，进号为征远将军。
English: In the seventh year, he was promoted to General of the Expeditionary Force.

古文：九年，分湘州置衡州，以昌为持节、督广州之绥建湘州之始安诸军事、信武将军、衡州刺史，坐免。
现代文：九年，从湘州分出衡州，任命萧昌为持节、督广州的缓建和湘州的始安诸军事、信武将军、衡州刺史，因罪免官。
English: In the ninth year, Hengzhou was separated from Hunan Province, and Xiao Chang was appointed as the governor of Hengzhou, the governor of Guangzhou and the governor of Hunan Province, the military, the general of the letter and the history of Hengzhou, and was dismissed for the crime.

古文：十三年，起为散骑侍郎，寻以本官兼宗正卿。
现代文：十三年，萧昌被起用为散骑侍郎，不久以原来的官职兼宗正卿。
English: In the thirteenth year, Xiao Chang was appointed as a horseback riding attendant, and soon he was promoted to the original official post of Zong Zhengqing.

古文：其年，出为安右长史。
现代文：同年，萧昌出任安右长史。
English: In the same year, Xiao Chang took up the post of An Yu Changshi.

古文：累迁太子中庶子、通直散骑常侍，又兼宗正卿。
现代文：屡次迁任太子中庶子、通直散骑常侍，又兼任宗正卿。
English: He was repeatedly transferred to the position of the prince's middle child, Tsuchizane Sanzhi, and also concurrently held the position of Muneyoshi.

古文：昌为人亦明悟，然性好酒，酒后多过。
现代文：萧昌的为人也很明白有悟性，然而他生性喜好喝酒，喝了酒以后，又经常犯错误。
English: Xiao Chang is also a very clear-sighted person, but he likes to drink by nature. After drinking, he often makes mistakes.

古文：在州郡，每醉辄径出入人家，或独诣草野。
现代文：在州部任上时，他每次喝醉了酒就经常径直出入别人家，有时独自一人到荒草野地襄去。
English: When he was in the state department, whenever he got drunk, he would often go straight to someone else's house, sometimes wandering off into the weeds on his own.

古文：其于刑戮，颇无期度。
现代文：他在用刑杀戮方面，也很没有限度。
English: He also has no limits when it comes to killing with torture.

古文：醉时所杀，醒或求焉，亦无悔也。
现代文：他喝醉时杀了人，酒醒后又要找那个人，就这样，他也不悔过。
English: He killed someone when he was drunk, and when he sobered up he wanted to find that person again, and that's how he never regretted it.

古文：属为有司所劾，入留京师，忽忽不乐，遂纵酒虚悸。
现代文：终于被有关官员弹劾，芦昌被召入留在京城，他非常不快乐，于是整天酗酒，身体变得很虚弱，得了心脏病。
English: Finally impeached by the relevant officials, Lu Chang was summoned to stay in Beijing. He was very unhappy, so he drank all day, his body became very weak, and he had a heart attack.

古文：在石头东斋，引刀自刺，左右救之，不殊。
现代文：在亘题柬斋，芦垦拿刀刺向自己，左右随从人员赶紧抢救下来，没有死成。
English: At the Wuzhizhan Festival, Reedy stabbed himself with a knife, and his attendants on both sides rushed to rescue him, but he did not die.

古文：十七年，卒，时年三十九。
现代文：十七年，萧昌去世，终年三十九岁。
English: Seventeen years later, Xiao Chang died at the age of 39.

古文：子伯言。
现代文：他的儿子叫萧伯言。
English: His son's name is Xiao Boyan.

古文：昂字子明，景第三弟也。
现代文：萧昂字子明，是萧景的第三个弟弟。
English: Xiao Ang Zi Ming is Xiao Jing's third younger brother.

古文：天监初，累迁司徒右长史，出为轻车将军、监南兗州。
现代文：天监初年，他多次迁任司徒右长史，出任轻车将军、监督南兖州。
English: In the first year of the overseer of heaven, he was transferred several times to the position of the chief historian of the Southern Song Dynasty, and served as the general of light vehicles and the supervisor of the Southern Song Dynasty.

古文：初，兄景再为南兗，德惠在人，及昂来代，时人方之冯氏。
现代文：当初，他的哥哥芦量第二次任茵查业长官时，功德恩惠还留在人们心中，到萧昂来代替，当时人把他比作冯氏。
English: At first, when his elder brother Lu Rong was appointed the second time as the inspector general of the Ministry of Education, the merits and benefits still remained in people's hearts, and Xiao Ao replaced him. At that time, people compared him to Mr. Feng.

古文：征为琅邪、彭城二郡太守，军号如先。
现代文：萧昂被征召任琅邪、彭城二郡太守，军号仍如从前。
English: Xiao Ang was conscripted to serve as the governor of the two counties in Pengcheng, and his military title remained the same as before.

古文：复以轻车将军出为广州刺史。
现代文：又以轻车将军的官职出任广州刺史。
English: He also served as the official post of light vehicle general in Guangzhou.

古文：普通二年，为散骑常侍、信威将军。
现代文：普通二年，任散骑常侍、信威将军。
English: In the ordinary two years, he was appointed as a knight-errant, a general of Xinwei.

古文：四年，转散骑侍郎、中领军、太子中庶子，出为吴兴太守。
现代文：四年，转任散骑侍郎、中领军、太子中庶子，出任吴兴郡太守。
English: In the fourth year, he was transferred to the position of Sanzhiyi Jiro, middle leader of the army, and the prince's middle child, and became the governor of Wuxing County.

古文：大通二年，征为仁威将军、卫尉卿，寻为侍中，兼领军将军。
现代文：大通二年，被召入任仁威将军、卫尉卿，不久任侍中，兼任领军将军。
English: In the second year of Datong, he was called up to serve as General Ren Wei and Captain of the Guards, and soon became an attendant and also served as the leading general.

古文：中大通元年，为领军将军。
现代文：中大通元年，任领军将军。
English: In the first year of Nakadamichi, he was appointed as the leading general.

古文：二年，封湘阴县侯，邑一千户。
现代文：二年，被封为湘阴县侯爵，食邑一千户。
English: Two years later, he was named the Marquis of Xiangyin County, with a thousand households in his hometown.

古文：出为江州刺史。
现代文：出任江州刺史。
English: Appointed as the chief historian of Jiangsu Province.

古文：大同元年，卒，时年五十三。
现代文：大同元年，萧昂去世，终年五十三岁。
English: In the first year of Datong, Xiao Ang died at the age of 53.

古文：谥曰恭。
现代文：谧号叫恭。
English: 号恭.

古文：昱字子真，景第四弟也。
现代文：萧昱字子真，是萧景的第四个弟弟。
English: Xiao Yaozhizhizhen is Xiao Jing's fourth younger brother.

古文：天监初，除秘书郎，累迁太子舍人，洗马，中书舍人，中书侍郎。
现代文：天监初年，被授予秘书郎，多次迁任太子舍人，洗马，中书舍人，中书侍郎。
English: In the first year of the celestial overseer, he was awarded the title of secretary, and was transferred several times to the positions of prince's attendant, horse washer, junior secretary, and junior secretary.

古文：每求自试，高祖以为淮南、永嘉、襄阳郡，并不就。
现代文：常常请求自试，高祖任命他为进直郡、永嘉郡、襄阳郡长官，他都不赴任。
English: Gao Zu appointed him as the governor of Jinzhi County, Yongjia County and Xiangyang County, but he did not take up the post.

古文：志愿边州，高祖以其轻脱无威望，抑而不许。
现代文：他志愿到地处边境的州郡去，高祖认为他轻佻不稳重，没有威望，就压抑住他，不许他去。
English: He volunteered to go to the border counties, but Gaozhu thought he was frivolous, unstable, and had no prestige, so he suppressed him and did not allow him to go.

古文：迁给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：后迁任给事黄门侍郎。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Huangmen waiter.

古文：上表曰： 夏初陈启，未垂采照，追怀惭惧，实战胸心。
现代文：萧昱上表给皇帝说： 夏初我递上的陈述，没有获得采纳允准，追怀过去，羞惭恐惧，实在让我心中战栗。
English: Xiao Yao wrote to the emperor: The statement I submitted at the beginning of the summer has not been approved, I am haunted by the past, ashamed and afraid, and it really makes my heart tremble.

古文：臣闻暑雨祁寒，小人犹怨；荣枯宠辱，谁能忘怀！
现代文：臣听说暑天下大雨，冬天大寒，小人都还有怨言；对于政治上的得意还是失意，受宠幸还是受羞辱，谁能够忘怀呢!
English: The minister heard that it rains a lot in the summer and is very cold in the winter, and the little people still have complaints; who can forget about political pride or disappointment, being favored or humiliated!

古文：臣藉以往因，得预枝戚之重；缘报既杂，时逢坎禀之运。
现代文：臣藉助过去的关系，能够得以加入皇室亲戚的队列中得到重视；依循报恩的机缘已然错杂，又正遇到穷困不得志的命运。
English: With the help of past relationships, vassals can join the queue of royal relatives and receive attention; the opportunity to follow the reward has been mixed, and they are facing the fate of poverty.

古文：昔在齐季，义师之始，臣乃幼弱，粗有识虑，东西阻绝，归赴无由，虽未能负戈擐甲，实衔泪愤懑。
现代文：过去在齐朝末年，义师初起之时，我还年幼，刚刚有点懂事，因为东西交通阻隔断绝，没有办法投奔义师，虽然没能手持戈矛，身穿钟甲，其实我也热泪盈眶，满怀愤懑。
English: In the past, at the end of the Qi Dynasty and the beginning of Yishi, I was still young and just a little sensible. Because the east-west traffic was cut off, there was no way to rush to Yishi. Although I couldn't hold a spear and was wearing a bell, I was actually in tears and full of anger.

古文：潜伏东境，备履艰危，首尾三年，亟移数处，虽复饥寒切身，亦不以冻馁为苦。
现代文：我潜伏在东境，尝遍了艰辛和危险，前后一共三年，转移了好几处地方，即使是饥饿寒冷交迫于身，我也不以冻馁为苦。
English: I lurked in the East, experienced hardships and dangers, a total of three years, moved several places, even if I was hungry and cold, I did not suffer from frostbite.

古文：每涉惊疑，惶怖失魄，既乖致命之节，空有项领之忧，希望开泰，冀蒙共乐；岂期二十余年，功名无纪，毕此身骸，方填沟壑，丹诚素愿，溘至长罢，俯自哀怜，能不伤叹！
现代文：每当遇到惊疑之时，我恐惧得失魂落魄，既已违背致命的气节，又白白惧怕遭受刑戮，身首分离，期待着亨通安泰的那一天，可以共同享受欢乐；谁知期待了二十多年，没有功名可以记载，我的整个躯体，也将填于沟壑，我的赤诚的心和纯洁的愿望，突然永远地结束了，我俯首独自哀怜，能不伤心叹息!
English: Whenever I encounter a surprise, I am scared out of my wits. I have already violated the deadly temperament, and I am afraid of being tortured and separated from my body. I am looking forward to the day when I can be successful and safe, and we can enjoy joy together. Who knows, after more than 20 years of expectation, there is no achievement to record, my whole body will also be filled with a ravine. My sincere heart and pure desire have suddenly ended forever. I bow my head and mourn alone. I can sigh without sadness!

古文：夫自媒自衒，诚哉可鄙；自誉自伐，实在可羞。
现代文：自己给自己作介绍，自己炫耀自己，确实是可鄙的行为；自己赞美自己，自己夸奖自己，实在是可羞。
English: To introduce oneself to oneself, to show oneself off, is indeed despicable behavior; to praise oneself, to praise oneself, is really shameful.

古文：然量己揆分，自知者审，陈力就列，宁敢空言？是以常愿一试，屡成干请。
现代文：然而衡量自己清楚地了解自己的情况，能够施展自己的才力才去就任官职，哪裹敢说空话，因此常希望能试一试，多次请托于人。
English: However, it is necessary to have a clear understanding of one's own situation and be able to exert one's own talents before taking office. How dare you say empty words? Therefore, I often hope to try it, and I have entrusted it to others many times.

古文：夫上应玄象，实不易叨；锦不轻裁，诚难其制。
现代文：要说能上应天象，实在不敢那么贪心，但如果锦缎不加裁剪，实在难以做成衣服。
English: If you want to say that you can dress up as a celestial elephant, you really shouldn't be so greedy, but if you don't cut the brocade, it's really hard to make clothes.

古文：过去业鄣，所以致乖算测。
现代文：因为我前世所作的种种恶果，成为今世的障碍，所以导致现在违背了算测。
English: Because the bad things I did in my previous life have become obstacles in this life, it has caused the present to go against my calculations.

古文：圣监既谓臣愚短，不可试用，岂容久居显禁，徒秽黄枢。
现代文：圣上既然认为臣愚笨有缺陷，不可以试用，难道能容忍我长久地居住在皇室禁地，白白地玷污黄门官之职。
English: Since His Holiness thinks that Emperor Wukong is flawed and cannot be put to the test, can he tolerate me living in the Imperial Forbidden City for a long time and tarnishing the post of Yellow Gate Officer in vain?

古文：忝窃稍积，恐招物议，请解今职，乞屏退私门。
现代文：愧居官位，时间渐久，恐怕要遭受人们的议论，请解除我今天的职位，乞求屏退回家门。
English: As I am ashamed of having held the post for so long, I am afraid that I will be subjected to people's discussions. Please relieve me of my position today, and beg me to return home.

古文：伏愿天照，特垂允许。
现代文：我俯伏请求皇上特别降旨允许。
English: I prostrated myself and asked the emperor for special permission.

古文：臣虽叨荣两宫，报效无地，方违省闼，伏深恋悚。 
现代文：臣虽然承受两宫的恩荣，却无法报答效命，又违背了宫中意愿，我深感留恋和恐惧。 
English: Although the minister received the honor of the two palaces, he was unable to repay his service and violated the wishes of the palace. I deeply regret and fear this.

古文：高祖手诏答曰： 昱表如此。
现代文：高祖亲手写韶书答道： 萧昱的上表如此。
English: Gao Zu replied by handwriting a copy of the imperial edict: Xiao Yao's imperial edict is as follows.

古文：古者用人，必前明试，皆须绩用既立，乃可自退之高。
现代文：古时候用人，一定先要当面试用，都必须立有功业，效用很好，才可以显扬自己谦让的高风格。
English: In ancient times, to employ people, they must first be used as interviewers, they must have a career, and the effect is very good, so that they can show their humble and high style.

古文：昔汉光武兄子章、兴二人，并有名宗室，就欲习吏事，不过章为平阴令，兴为缑氏宰，政事有能，方迁郡守，非直政绩见称，即是光武犹子。
现代文：当年漠光武帝兄长的儿子刘章、刘兴二人，都是在宗室中有名气的人，但他们想要做官，也不过是刘章当了平阴县令，刘兴当了缑氏宰，待他们在政事方面有了能力后，才迁任郡守之职，不衹是政绩受到人们称赞，他们还是光武帝的侄子。
English: At that time, the two sons of the elder brother of Emperor Guangwu, Liu Zhang and Liu Xing, were both famous people in the family, but they wanted to be officials. It was just that Liu Zhang became the governor of Pingyin County, and Liu Xing became the head of the Yi clan. After they had the ability in politics, they were transferred to the position of county magistrate. It was because their political achievements were praised by people. They were also the nephews of Emperor Guangwu.

古文：昱之才地，岂得比类焉！
现代文：萧昱你的才能和见地，怎么能与他们相比呢!
English: How can your talent and insight compare with theirs!

古文：往岁处以淮南郡，既不肯行；续用为招远将军、镇北长史、襄阳太守，又以边外致辞；改除招远将军、永嘉太守，复云内地非愿；复问晋安、临川，随意所择，亦复不行。
现代文：过去几年裹，让你到淮南郡任职，已经不肯去了；接着用你任招远将军、镇北长史、襄阳郡太守，你又以那是边远地区为藉推掉了；后改授为招远将军、永嘉郡太守，却又说去内地不是你的愿望；再问你晋安、临川这两个地方，随你自己选择，也是不肯去。
English: Over the past few years, when I asked you to serve in Huainan County, you refused to go; when I asked you to serve as Zhaoyuan General, Zhenbei Changshi, and Xiangyang County Governor, you rejected it on the grounds that it was a remote area; when I asked you to serve as Zhaoyuan General and Yongjia County Governor, you said that it was not your wish to go to the mainland; when I asked you about Jin'an and Linchuan, you also refused to go to these two places as you chose.

古文：解巾临郡，事不为薄，数有致辞，意欲何在？
现代文：除去头巾，出任官职，就没有微小的事情，而你几次三番都有说词，你的意愿到底在哪裹?
English: Removing the headscarf and taking up an official position are no small things, and you have spoken out several times. Where is your will?

古文：且昱诸兄递居连率，相继推毂，未尝缺岁。
现代文：况且你萧昱的几个兄长相继当了郡守、统帅等职，互相推荐，一年都不曾缺。
English: Moreover, several of Xiao Yao's brothers successively became county guards, commanders and other positions, recommending each other, and there was never a shortage of young men for a year.

古文：其同产兄景，今正居籓镇。
现代文：你的同胞兄长萧景，现在正官居藩镇。
English: Your compatriot and elder brother, Xiao Jing, is now officially residing in Hanzhen.

古文：朕岂厚于景而薄于昱，正是朝序物议，次第若斯，于其一门，差自无愧。
现代文：朕难道是待萧景厚而待你萧昱薄吗，正是朝廷众人的议论，像这样的次序，在你们是一门所出，稍稍可以无愧了。
English: Is it possible that I am waiting for Xiao Jinghuo and you are waiting for Xiao Xinghuo? This is exactly what everyone in the court is talking about. Such an order, coming from both of you, can be a little bit worthy of praise.

古文：无论今日不得如此；昱兄弟昔在布衣，以处成长，于何取立，岂得任情反道，背天违地。
现代文：不用说今日不得如此；萧昱兄弟当年是乎民百姓，因处于成长时期，凭什么取身立命，又怎么能够放纵自己违反正道，背天违地。
English: Needless to say, this must not be the case today. Back then, the Xiao Yao brothers were almost ordinary people. Since they were in their growth period, how could they rely on themselves to stand up for their lives, and how could they indulge themselves in violating the righteous path and going against heaven and earth.

古文：孰谓朝廷无有宪章，特是未欲致之于理。
现代文：谁说朝廷没有宪章，衹不过是没有要把你放到理前。
English: Whoever says that the Imperial Court does not have a charter is simply not putting you in your rightful place.

古文：既表解职，可听如启。 
现代文：既然你上表请求解职，就依照你所请求的办吧。 
English: Since you asked to be relieved of your duties, please do as you asked.

古文：坐免官。
现代文：萧昱因此而被免除官职。
English: He was relieved of his duties.

古文：因此杜门绝朝觐，国家庆吊不复通。
现代文：从此他杜门谢客，再也不去朝廷觐见皇帝，国家有什么庆典或吊丧之事也不再通知他参加了。
English: From then on, he was excommunicated, and never again went to the imperial court to see the emperor, nor was he invited to participate in any national celebration or funeral.

古文：普通五年，坐于宅内铸钱，为有司所奏，下廷尉，得免死，徙临海郡。
现代文：普通五年，萧昱因在自己家裹铸造钱币而犯法，被有关官员奏本，下交廷尉，得免一死，迁移到临海郡。
English: In the past five years, Xiao Yao broke the law by minting coins in his house, and was punished by the relevant officials. He was transferred to Linhai County to avoid death.

古文：行至上虞，有敕追还，且令受菩萨戒。
现代文：刚走到上虞这个地方，就有皇帝的命令追来，让他回去接受菩萨的告诫。
English: As soon as he reached Shangyu, the emperor ordered him to go back and accept the bodhisattva's admonition.

古文：昱既至，恂恂尽礼，改意蹈道，持戒又精洁，高祖甚嘉之，以为招远将军、晋陵太守。
现代文：萧昱到了京城以后，非常恭敬谨慎地按照礼的要求去做，改变意志，循规蹈矩，对斋戒又非常精心清洁，高祖非常赞赏他，任命他为招远将军、晋陵郡太守。
English: After Xiao Yao arrived in Beijing, he very respectfully and cautiously followed the requirements of etiquette, changed his will, followed the rules, and was very meticulous and clean about fasting. Gao Zu greatly appreciated him and appointed him as Zhaoyuan General and Jinling County Governor.

古文：下车励名迹，除烦苛，明法宪，严于奸吏，优养百姓，旬日之间，郡中大化。
现代文：萧昱到任后，以名望和功业勉励自己，除去烦多的苛捐杂税，申明法律宪章，对奸猾的官吏严厉管制，对百姓则实行优养政策，结果在十几天内，晋陵郡境内发生了很大的变化。
English: After Xiao Wei took office, he used his fame and achievements to encourage himself, removed the burdensome taxes and fees, affirmed the legal charter, strictly controlled the treacherous officials, and implemented the preferential policy for the people. As a result, great changes occurred in the territory of Jinling County within a dozen days.

古文：俄而暴疾卒，百姓行坐号哭，市里为之喧沸，设祭奠于郡庭者四百余人。
现代文：不久，萧昱得了暴病去世，郡内老百姓不论是正在行走的还是坐着的，听到消息后，都号啕大哭，街市巷里因此而一片喧哗沸腾，有四百多人在郡府庭院裹设祭奠。
English: Soon after, Xiao Yao became violently ill and passed away. Upon hearing the news, the common people in the county, whether they were walking or sitting, all wailed loudly. As a result, there was an uproar in the streets and alleys, and more than four hundred people held a memorial service in the courtyard of the county government.

古文：田舍有女人夏氏，年百余岁，扶曾孙出郡，悲泣不自胜。
现代文：田边农舍有一个女人夏氏，年纪已有一百多岁了，她听到萧昱去世的消息，扶着曾孙来到郡府，悲伤地哭泣，不能自己。
English: There is a woman named Xia, who is more than a hundred years old, in a farmhouse on the edge of the field. When she heard the news of Xiao Yao's death, she came to the county seat with her great-grandson, weeping with sadness, unable to control herself.

古文：其惠化所感如此。
现代文：可见萧昱的惠政的感化力量是如此之大。
English: It can be seen that the influence of Xiao Wei's benevolent policy is so great.

古文：百姓相率为立庙建碑，以纪其德。
现代文：百姓们相继为萧昱建庙宇、立碑石，用来纪念他的功德。
English: The people successively built temples and monuments for Xiao Yu to commemorate his merits.

古文：又诣京师求赠谥。
现代文：他们又到京城去为萧昱请求赠谧。
English: They also went to Beijing to ask for a gift for Xiao Yao.

古文：诏赠湘州刺史。
现代文：皇帝下韶，追赠萧昱为湘州刺史。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict, posthumously awarding Xiao Yu the title of "Historian of Xiangzhou."

古文：谥曰恭。
现代文：谧号恭。
English: 号恭.

古文：史臣曰：高祖光有天下，庆命傍流，枝戚属连，咸被任遇。
现代文：史臣曰：直担拥有天下，奖赏的任命普遍施予，那些亲属和有关系的人，全都被任用礼遇。
English: Shichen said: the direct responsibility owns the world, the reward appointment is generally given, and those relatives and related people are all appointed courtesy.

古文：萧景之才辩识断，益政佐时，盖梁宗室令望者矣。
现代文：芦量的才能见识和判断能力，可以有利于朝政，辅助时政，大概也是幽宗室有善美的威仪的人了。
English: The ability to see and judge with the ability of reed quantity can be beneficial to court politics, assist current politics, and probably also be a person with good and beautiful dignity.

