古文：王冲王通弟劢袁敬兄子枢
现代文：王冲字长深，琅邪临沂人。
English: Wang Chong's characters are long and deep.

古文：王冲，字长深，琅邪临沂人也。祖僧衍，齐侍中。
现代文：祖父王僧衍，在齐朝任侍中。父亲王茂璋，在梁朝任给事黄门侍郎。
English: His grandfather, Wang Soyan, was an attendant in the Qi Dynasty, and his father, Wang Maoju, was an attendant in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：父茂璋，梁给事黄门侍郎。冲母，梁武帝妹新安穆公主，卒于齐世，武帝以冲偏孤，深所钟爱。
现代文：王冲的母亲，是梁武帝的妹妹新安穆公主，在齐朝的时候就去世了，梁武帝因为王冲早年丧母而孤单，十分钟爱他。
English: Wang Chong's mother, Princess Xin'anmu, the younger sister of Emperor Wu of Liang, died during the reign of the Qi Dynasty. Emperor Wu of Liang was lonely because Wang Chong lost his mother at an early age, and loved him dearly.

古文：年十八，起家梁秘书郎。
现代文：王冲十八岁时，以任梁朝秘书郎起家。
English: At the age of eighteen, Wang Chong started his family as a secretary of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：寻为永嘉太守。
现代文：接着任永嘉太守。
English: He was then appointed Yongjia Taishu.

古文：入为太子舍人，以父忧去职。
现代文：进入朝廷任太子舍人，因父亲去世而离职服丧。
English: He entered the imperial court as crown prince, but resigned due to the death of his father and went into mourning.

古文：服阕，除太尉临川王府外兵参军、东宫领直。
现代文：服丧期满，任命为太尉临川王府外兵参军、束宫领直。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed as a captain of the Linchuan Wangfu foreign soldiers to join the army, led by Sokong.

古文：累迁太子洗马、中舍人。
现代文：连续升任太子洗马、中舍人。
English: He was successively promoted to Crown Prince Saima and Chuseonjin.

古文：出为招远将军、衡阳内史。
现代文：调出朝廷任招远将军、衡阳内史。
English: General Zhaoyuan, who was appointed by the imperial court, and Hengyang Naishi.

古文：迁武威将军、安成嗣王长史、长沙内史，将军如故。
现代文：升任武威将军、安成嗣王长史、长沙内史，将军一职依然担任。
English: He was promoted to General Wu Wei, An Chengzhi Wang Changshi, Changsha Neishi, and still held the post of general.

古文：王薨于湘州，仍以冲监湘州事。
现代文：安成嗣王薨于湘州，仍然用王冲监理湘州政事。
English: Ancheng's heir, Wang Xi, was in Hunan and still used Wang Chong to supervise the political affairs of Hunan.

古文：入为太子庶子。
现代文：进入朝廷任太子庶子。
English: He entered the imperial court as the prince's illegitimate son.

古文：迁给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：升任给事黄门侍郎。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Huangmen waiter.

古文：大同三年，以帝甥赐爵安东亭侯，邑一百五十户。
现代文：大同三年，以皇帝外甥的资格赐给安束亭侯的爵位，食邑一百五十户。
English: In the third year of Datong, the title of nobility was bestowed on the Marquis of Anzukting with the qualification of the emperor's nephew. There were a hundred and fifty households in the food village.

古文：历明威将军、南郡太守、太子中庶子、侍中。
现代文：历任明威将军、南郡太守、太子中庶子、侍中。
English: Successive Mingwei generals, the governor of Minami-gun, the prince's illegitimate son, and a chamberlain.

古文：出监吴郡，满岁即真。
现代文：调出朝廷监理吴郡政事，满一年后授以实职。
English: Wu County Government, the supervisor of the Imperial Court, was transferred out and given a full-time position after one year.

古文：征为通直散骑常侍，兼左民尚书。
现代文：征调为通直散骑常侍，兼任左民尚书。
English: He was enlisted as a Tsuchida Sanzhijishi (regular attendant) and concurrently held the post of Shoshu, a member of the Left.

古文：出为明威将军、轻车当阳公府长史、江夏太守，行郢州事。
现代文：调出朝廷任明威将军、轻车当阳公府长史、江夏太守，管理郢州政事。
English: The Mingwei general appointed by the imperial court, the long history of the light car Dangyang public office, and the governor of Jiangxia were transferred to manage the politics of Zhangzhou.

古文：迁平西邵陵王长史。
现代文：升任平西邵陵王长史。
English: Wang Changshi of Shaoling was promoted to Pingxi.

古文：转骠骑庐陵王长史、南郡太守。
现代文：转任骠骑庐陵王长史、南郡太守。
English: He was transferred to the posts of Shanying and Guiling Wang Changshi and Nan County Governor.

古文：王薨，行州府事。
现代文：庐陵王薨，管理州府政事。
English: Gongling Wang Qi, in charge of the administration of the prefectural government.

古文：梁元帝镇荆州，为镇西长史，将军、太守如故。
现代文：梁元帝镇守荆州，王冲任镇西长史，将军、太守的职务依然担任。
English: Liang Yuandi was the town guard of Jingzhou, Wang Chong served as the town's western governor, and still held the positions of general and governor.

古文：冲性和顺，事上谨肃，习于法令，政在平理，佐籓莅人，鲜有失德，虽无赫赫之誉，久而见思，由是推重，累居二千石。
现代文：王冲性情温和驯顺，侍奉君主谨慎严肃，熟悉法令，政事秉公处理，辅佐藩王对待部属，很少有不合道德的地方，虽然没有显赫的声誉，时间长了而能被人思念，因此得到推崇尊重，连续位居二千石的官职。
English: Wang Chong was gentle and docile. He served the monarch with caution and seriousness, was familiar with laws and regulations, handled political affairs fairly, and assisted the king of the domain in dealing with subordinates. There were few immoralities. Although he did not have a prominent reputation, he could be thought of for a long time, so he was respected and respected. He continuously held the official position of two thousand stones.

古文：又晓音乐，习歌舞，善与人交，贵游之中，声名藉甚。
现代文：又通晓音乐，熟悉歌舞，善于和人交往，在上层人士的交游之中，声名很大。
English: He is also familiar with music, familiar with song and dance, and good at interacting with people. He is very famous among the upper-class people.

古文：侯景之乱，梁元帝于荆州承制，冲求解南郡，以让王僧辩，并献女妓十人，以助军赏。
现代文：侯景叛乱的时候，梁元帝在荆州秉承武帝旨意，王冲请求解除自己担任的南郡太守职务，以让位给王僧辩，并且献女妓十人，以助军中观赏。
English: At the time of the Houjing Rebellion, Emperor Liang Yuan was in Jingzhou, upholding the will of Emperor Wu. Wang Chong requested that he be relieved of his duties as the governor of Nan County to give way to Wang Sangye, and offered ten prostitutes to help the troops watch.

古文：元帝授持节、督衡、桂、成、合四州诸军事、云麾将军、衡州刺史。
现代文：五童任命王迚为持节、督擅挂盛金四州诸军事、云麾将军、衡州刺史。
English: The five boys appointed Wang Qian as the military commander of Shijiazhuang, the military commander of Shengjin, the military commander of the four states, the general of Yunnan, and the historian of Hengzhou.

古文：元帝第四子元良为湘州刺史，仍以冲行州事，领长沙内史。
现代文：元帝第四个儿子元皇为迪业刺史，仍用王迚管理迪业的政事，领昼逆内史。
English: The fourth son of the Yuan Emperor, the Yuan Emperor, was Diye's secretary, and still used Wang Qian to manage Diye's political affairs, leading the day against internal history.

古文：侯景平，授翊左将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：谜叛乱被子定后，任命王过为翊左将军、型匿尹。
English: After the riddle of the rebellion was settled, Wang Guo was appointed as the general of Shizao and the model of Yin.

古文：武陵王举兵至峡口，王琳偏将陆纳等据湘州应之，冲为纳所拘。
现代文：武陵王率领军队到峡旦，王壁的偏将坠曲等占据周业接应他，王迚为堕面所拘禁。
English: Wuling Wang led the army to the canyon, Wang Qibing's deviation will fall into the curve, etc. occupied Zhouye to receive him, Wang Yao was detained by the fallen face.

古文：纳降，重授侍中、中权将军，量置佐史，尹如故。
现代文：堕铂投降后，重新任命王迚为侍中、中权将军，允许他酌情设置属吏，丹阳尹一职依然担任。
English: After the surrender of the fallen platinum, Wang Xi was reappointed as an attendant and middle power general, allowing him to set up subordinate officials at his discretion, and Danyang Yin still held the post.

古文：江陵陷，敬帝为太宰，承制以冲为左长史。
现代文：红堕失陷时，董瞳为太宰，秉承皇帝的旨意用王迚为左长史。
English: At the time of the fall of the Qing Dynasty, Dong Hitomi was the grand vizier, and in accordance with the emperor's will, Wang Xi was appointed as the left long history.

古文：绍泰中，累迁左光禄大夫、尚书右仆射。
现代文：钮台年间，连续升任左光禄大夫、尚书右仆射。
English: During his time in Nuptai, he was successively promoted to the positions of Sakoroku-dokufu and Shoshu-udokusho.

古文：迁左仆射、开府仪同三司，侍中、将军如故。
现代文：升任左仆射、开府仪同三司，侍中、将军二职依旧担任。
English: He was promoted to the position of Zuopuzha, Kaifu Yi and Sanji, and still held the two positions of chamberlain and general.

古文：寻复领丹阳尹、南徐州大中正，给扶。
现代文：接着又领丹阳尹、南徐州大中正，给予扶侍之人。
English: Next, he also led Danyang Yin and Nan Xuzhou Da Zhongzheng, who gave the attendants.

古文：高祖受禅，解尹，以本官领左光禄大夫。
现代文：直担接受惮让后，解除了王迚且盐尹的职务，以原来的官职领左光禄大夫。
English: After the person directly in charge accepted the resignation, he dismissed Wang Qi and Yan Yin from their positions, and appointed Dr. Zaganglu to his former position.

古文：未拜，改领太子少傅。
现代文：未就任，改为领太子少傅。
English: However, he did not take up the post, but was appointed Crown Prince Junior Master instead.

古文：文帝嗣位，解少傅，加特进、左光禄大夫。
现代文：塞童继位，解除少傅职务，加官特进、左光禄大夫。
English: Saido succeeded to the throne, and was relieved of the position of junior chef, and promoted to the rank of special inspector and doctor of the left light.

古文：寻又以本官领丹阳尹，参撰律令。
现代文：接着又以原来的官职领丹阳尹，参与制订法律政令。
English: Next, Danyang Yin, the former official leader, participated in the formulation of laws and decrees.

古文：废帝即位，给亲信十人。
现代文：废帝登上帝位后，赐给王迚亲信十人。
English: After the deposed emperor ascended to the throne, he gave ten of Wang Yao's close confidants.

古文：初，高祖以冲前代旧臣，特申长幼之敬。
现代文：起初，直担因为王迚是前代的老臣，特别表示长幼之间的尊敬。
English: At first, Zhitang especially showed the respect between the elders and the children because Wang Xuan was a veteran minister of the previous generation.

古文：文帝即位，益加尊重，尝从文帝幸司空徐度宅，宴筵之上，赐以几。
现代文：文帝登位后，更加尊重，王迚曾跟从塞壹亲临司空途仅家。在宴会的坐席上，赐给王迚小桌子。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, he had more respect for Wang Xizhi. Wang Xizhi had accompanied Xi Jinping to visit the emperor by air. At the banquet, he gave Wang Xizhi a small table.

古文：其见重如此。
现代文：他被看重就像这样。
English: That's how much he values Kouhiko-chō.

古文：光大元年薨，时年七十六。
现代文：光大元年王迚薨，当时年纪七十六岁。
English: Wang Xi was 76 years old at the time.

古文：赠侍中、司空，谥曰元简。
现代文：赠给侍中、司空的官职，谧号叫元简。
English: He was given the official positions of chamberlain and steward, and his posthumous name was Yuan Jian.

古文：冲有子三十人，并致通官。第十二子瑒，别有传。
现代文：王迚有儿子三十人，一起都做到达官，他的第十二个儿子王场，另外立有傅记。
English: Wang Yao had thirty sons, all of whom became high-ranking officials. His twelfth son was Wang Bao, and another was Fu Ji.

古文：王通，字公达，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：王通字公达，王国堕迈人。
English: Wang Tong Zi Gongda, the man whose kingdom has fallen.

古文：祖份，梁左光禄大夫。
现代文：祖父型涂，在凿朝任左光禄大夫。
English: Grandfather-type Tu, in the Jiu Dynasty, he was appointed as the doctor of the Left Guanglu.

古文：父琳，司徒左长史。
现代文：父亲王琳，任司徒左长史。
English: Wang Lin's father, Ren Szeto, left a long history.

古文：琳齐代娶梁武帝妹义兴长公主，有子九人，并知名。
现代文：王壁在壹曲的时候娶了梁武帝的妹妹义兴长公主，有儿子九人，在当时都有名声。
English: Wang Qibai married Emperor Liangwu's younger sister, Princess Yixing, at the time of the Song Dynasty, and had nine sons, all of whom were famous at the time.

古文：通，梁世起家国子生，举明经，为秘书郎、太子舍人。
现代文：王通在凿塑的时候以国子学的学生起家。因通晓经术被推荐，成为秘书郎、太子舍人。
English: Wang Tong started his career as a student of Confucianism when he was a sculptor. He was recommended because of his knowledge of scripture and became a secretary and a prince's concubine.

古文：以帝甥封武阳亭侯。
现代文：以皇帝外甥的资格封为武阳亭侯。
English: With the qualification of the emperor's nephew, he was given the title of Wuyang Prince.

古文：累迁王府主簿、限外记室参军、司徒主簿、太子中庶子、骠骑庐陵王府给事中郎、中权何敬容府长史、给事黄门侍郎，坐事免。
现代文：连续升任王府主簿、限外记室参军、司徒主簿、太子中庶子、骠骑庐陵王府给事中郎、中权何敬容府长史、给事黄门侍郎，因事获罪而被免职。
English: He was successively promoted to the position of the chief clerk of the royal palace, to the position of the chief clerk of the court registrar's office, to the position of the chief clerk of the palace registrar's office, to the position of the chief clerk of the palace registrar's office, to the position of the chief clerk of the palace registrar's office, to the position of the chief clerk of the palace registrar's office, to the position of the chief clerk of the palace registrar's office, to the position of the chief clerk of the palace registrar's office, to the position of the chief clerk of the palace

古文：侯景之乱，奔于江陵，元帝以为散骑常侍，迁守太常卿。
现代文：侯景叛乱时，逃亡到江陵，元帝任用他为散骑常侍，升任署理太常卿。
English: During the rebellion of Hou Jing, he fled to Gangneung. The Yuan Emperor appointed him as a strolling equerry, and he was promoted to the post of Acting Grand Steward.

古文：自侯景乱后，台内宫室，并皆焚烬，以通兼起部尚书，归于京师，专掌缮造。
现代文：自从侯景叛乱后，台城内的宫殿房屋，都被焚烧成为一片废墟，以王通兼任起部尚书，回到京城，专门掌管修整建造。
English: Since the rebellion of Houjing, the palace buildings in Taicheng have all been burned to a pile of rubble. Wang Tong, who also served as the first secretary, returned to Beijing to take charge of the renovation and construction.

古文：江陵陷，敬帝承制以通为吏部尚书。
现代文：江陵失陷，敬帝秉承皇帝旨意任用王通为吏部尚书。
English: After the fall of Gangneung, Emperor Jing appointed Wang Tong as the head of the personnel department in accordance with the emperor's will.

古文：绍泰元年，加侍中，尚书如故。
现代文：绍泰元年，担任侍中，尚书一职依然保留。
English: In the first year of Shaotai, he served as a chamberlain, and the post of Shangshu was still retained.

古文：寻为尚书右仆射，吏部如故。
现代文：不久任尚书右仆射，吏部尚书职务仍保留。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as Shangshu's right-hand man. Shangshu's position in the cadre department was still retained.

古文：高祖受禅，迁左仆射，侍中如故。
现代文：高祖接受禅让，王通升任左仆射，侍中一职保留。
English: Gaozu accepted Zen's resignation, and Wang Tong was promoted to the position of Left Footman and retained the position of Chamberlain.

古文：文帝嗣位，领太子少傅。
现代文：文帝继位，领太子少傅。
English: Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne, leading the young prince.

古文：天康元年，为翊右将军、右光禄大夫，量置佐史。
现代文：天康元年，任翊右将军、右光禄大夫，允许他酌情设置属吏。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Kangxi, he was appointed as the right general and the right doctor of Guanglu, and he was allowed to set up subordinate officials at his discretion.

古文：废帝即位，号安右将军，又领南徐州大中正。
现代文：废帝登位，封为安右将军，又领南徐州大中正。
English: The deposed emperor ascended to the throne, was named General An Yu, and also led the Southern Xuzhou University.

古文：太建元年，迁左光禄大夫。
现代文：太建元年，升任左光禄大夫。
English: In the first year of the Taijian era, he was promoted to the post of Sakoroku doctor.

古文：六年，加特进，侍中、将军、光禄、佐史并如故。
现代文：六年，加官特进，侍中、将军、光禄等职务及量置佐史的待遇依旧保留。
English: In the sixth year, the special promotion of officials, the positions of chamberlains, generals, and honorifics, as well as the treatment of the assistant to the history were still retained.

古文：未拜卒，时年七十二。
现代文：尚未就任便去世了，当时年纪七十二岁。
English: He died before taking office, at the age of 72.

古文：诏赠本官，谥曰成，葬日给鼓吹一部，弟质、弟固各有传。
现代文：皇帝下诏赠给他本来的官衔，谧号是成，下葬那天派给了一队鼓吹乐。他的弟弟王质、王固各人另有传。
English: The emperor gave him his original official title by imperial edict. His posthumous name was Cheng, and on the day of his burial, he was given a team of trumpeters. His younger brothers, Wang Gu and Wang Gu, each had a different story.

古文：劢字公济，通之弟也。
现代文：王勤字公济，王通的弟弟。
English: Wang Qin is the younger brother of Wang Tong.

古文：美风仪，博涉书史，恬然清简，未尝以利欲干怀。
现代文：王勘有美好的风度仪表，博览群书史籍，为人处世安静闲适清高简约，不曾以利欲萦绕胸怀。
English: Wang Kan has a beautiful demeanor and appearance, is well-versed in books and historical records, and lives a quiet and simple life. He has never been obsessed with material gain.

古文：梁世为国子《周易》生，射策举高第，除秘书郎、太子舍人、宣惠武陵王主簿、轻车河东王功曹史。
现代文：梁朝的时候成为国子学中学习《周易》的学生，参加考试取得优秀的成绩，任命为秘书郎、太子舍人、宣惠武陵王主簿、轻车河东王功曹史。
English: During the Liang Dynasty, he became a student of "Zhou Yi" in the middle school of Guozih School, and obtained excellent results in the examination. He was appointed as a secretary, a prince's concubine, the main book of Xuan Hui Wuling King, and the light car of Hedong King Gong Cao Shi.

古文：王出镇京口，劢将随之籓，范阳张缵时典选举，劢造缵言别，缵嘉其风采，乃曰： 王生才地，岂可游外府乎？ 
现代文：河东王离开朝廷镇守塞口，王勘将随同他前往藩镇，范阳人张缵当时掌管选择推举贤能之士的工作，王勘拜访张缆告别，张缵赞赏他的风采，于是说： 以王生的才能和门第，难道能去京都以外的州郡官署任职吗? 
English: King Hedong left the imperial town to guard Jiekou, and Wang Kan will accompany him to the town of the domain. Zhang Ye, a Fanyang man, was in charge of the work of selecting and electing a person of merit at that time. Wang Qian visited Zhang Cai to say goodbye. Zhang Ye appreciated his style, and said: With Wang Sheng's talent and disciple, can he go to the state and county government office outside of Kyoto?

古文：奏为太子洗马。
现代文：退堂向皇上进言将玉垒任命为太子洗马。
English: After retiring from the court, he suggested to the emperor that Tambarao be appointed as the prince's groom.

古文：迁中舍人，司徒左西属。
现代文：升任中舍人、司徒左西属。
English: He was promoted to the position of Chuseonjin (middle-ranked official) and Sito (left-ranked official).

古文：出为南徐州别驾从事史。
现代文：调出朝廷任命为南徐州别驾从事史。
English: The appointment of the imperial court to the south of Xuzhou was a turning point in history.

古文：大同末，梁武帝谒园陵，道出硃方，劢随例迎候，敕劢令从辇侧，所经山川，莫不顾问，劢随事应对，咸有故实。
现代文：大同末年，銮亘造去晋见帝王的墓地，经过塞室，王垒依照惯例迎候，武帝命令王勘跟从在自己车驾的旁边，所经各处山川，没有不向他询间的，王勘随各种事情进行对答，所答都有典故出处。
English: At the end of the year of Datong, Zou Wan made a trip to the emperor's cemetery, passing through the blocking room, and Wang Rong greeted him according to the usual practice. Emperor Wu ordered Wang Kan to follow him next to his chauffeur. Everywhere he went, there were mountains and rivers. There was nothing that he did not ask about. Wang Kan responded to various things, and his answers had allusions and sources.

古文：又从登北顾楼，赋诗，辞义清典，帝甚嘉之。
现代文：又跟从武帝登上北顾楼，王勤在那裹所作的诗篇，辞义清正典雅，武帝十分赏识他。
English: He also followed Emperor Wu to board the Beigu Tower, where Wang Qin delivered his poem. His words were clear, correct and elegant, and Emperor Wu appreciated him very much.

古文：时河东王为广州刺史，乃以劢为冠军河东王长史、南海太守。
现代文：那时河东王被任命为广州刺史，于是以王励为冠军河东王长史、南海太守。
English: At that time, the king of Hedong was appointed as the governor of Guangzhou, so Wang Li became the champion of the king of Hedong and the governor of Nanhai.

古文：王至岭南，多所侵掠，因惧罪称疾，委州还朝，劢行广州府事。
现代文：河东王到岭南，做了许多侵掠地方的事情，因而畏惧自己的罪行受到惩罚便声称有病，丢开所管辖的州事回朝廷去了，王勘就管理广州府的政事。
English: King Hedong went to Lingnan and did a lot of things to invade and plunder local areas. Fearing that his crimes would be punished, he claimed to be ill and left the state affairs under his jurisdiction to return to the imperial court. Wang Kan managed the political affairs of Guangzhou.

古文：越中饶沃，前后守宰例多贪纵，劢独以清白著闻。
现代文：越中是富饶肥沃的地方，前后在这裹任职的地方官照例大多贪污放纵，王勤惟独以清白的名声著称于世。
English: Yuezhong is a rich and fertile place. The local officials who have served here before and after are usually corrupt and indulgent. Wang Qin is famous for his clean reputation.

古文：入为给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：调入朝廷任命为给事黄门侍郎。
English: He was transferred to the imperial court and appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：侯景之乱，西奔江陵，元帝承制以为太子中庶子，掌相府管记。
现代文：侯景叛乱的时候，王勘向西逃奔到江陵，元帝秉承皇帝的旨意任命他为太子中庶子，在丞相府担任管理文牍之职。
English: When Houjing rebelled, Wang Kan fled westward to Gangneung. The Yuan Emperor, upholding the emperor's will, appointed him as the prince's illegitimate son, and he served as the administrator of Bungei in the Prime Minister's Office.

古文：出为宁远将军、晋陵太守。
现代文：调出任宁远将军、晋陵太守。
English: He was transferred to the post of Ningyuan general and Jinling governor.

古文：时兵饥之后，郡中凋弊，劢为政清简，吏民便安之。
现代文：当时是战乱饥荒之后，一郡之中民生凋敝。王绩处理政事清正简约，官吏百姓于是安定下来。
English: At that time, after the war and famine, the livelihood of the people in a county was withering. Wang Yi dealt with political affairs in a clean and simple manner, and the officials and people settled down.

古文：征为侍中，迁五兵尚书。
现代文：征调入朝廷任侍中，升任五兵尚书。
English: He was conscripted into the imperial court to serve as a chamberlain, and was promoted to the rank of five soldiers.

古文：及西魏寇江陵，元帝征湘州刺史宜豊侯萧循入援，以劢监湘州。
现代文：到西魏侵犯江陵，元帝征调湘州刺史宜丰侯萧循前来援救，任命王勘监理湘州政事。
English: When the Western Wei Dynasty invaded Jiangling, the Yuan Emperor sent Fenghou Xiao Cun to come to the rescue and appointed Wang Canrong as the supervisor of the political affairs of Hunan.

古文：江陵陷，敬帝承制以为中书令。
现代文：江陵失陷后，敬帝秉承皇帝旨意任用王勘为中书令。
English: After the fall of Gangneung, Emperor Jing appointed Wang Kan to be the chancellor in accordance with the emperor's will.

古文：绍泰元年加侍中。
现代文：绍泰元年加官侍中。
English: In the first year of the Shao Tai Dynasty, he was promoted to vice-minister.

古文：高祖为司空，以劢兼司空长史。
现代文：高祖担任司空时，任用王勘兼任司空长史。
English: When Gao Zu served as the Secretary of the Air Force, he appointed Wang Kan to serve as the Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：高祖为丞相，劢兼丞相长史，侍中、中书令并如故。
现代文：高祖担任丞相时，王勘兼任丞相长史，侍中、中书令的职务都保留如旧。
English: When Gaozu served as chancellor, Wang Kan also served as chancellor and chief historian, and the posts of chamberlain and chancellery secretary were retained as before.

古文：时吴中遭乱，民多乏绝，乃以劢监吴兴郡。
现代文：那时吴中一带遭遇战乱，老百姓贫困到了极点，于是任用王勘监理吴兴郡的政事。
English: At that time, the Wuzhong area suffered from war, and the people were extremely poor. Therefore, Wang Kan was appointed to supervise the political affairs of Wuxing County.

古文：及萧勃平后，又以劢旧在岭表，早有政绩，乃授使持节、都督广州等二十州诸军事、平南将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
现代文：到萧勃叛乱平定后，又因为王勤从前在岭表任职，早有政绩，于是任命他为使持节、都督广州等二十州诸军事、平南将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史。
English: After the suppression of the Xiaobo Rebellion, and because Wang Qin had previously served in the Ling table and had early political achievements, he was appointed as the envoy, the governor of Guangzhou and other twenty states of the military, the general of Pingnan, the general of Pingyue, and the historian of Guangzhou.

古文：未行，改为衡州刺史，持节、都督并如故。
现代文：还没有起行，改任衡州刺史，持节、都督的职务都依旧保留。
English: He has not yet started, but he has been appointed as the chief historian of Hengzhou, and he still retains his posts as the head of the festival and the governor.

古文：王琳据有上流，衡、广携贰，劢不得之镇，留于大庾岭。
现代文：王琳占据着长江的上游，衡、广两州离心不肯归附，王劝不能够去自己的镇守之地，留在大庾岭。
English: Wang Lin occupied the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, Heng and Guang did not want to be annexed by the centrifugal force of the two states, and Wang Xuan could not go to his own town and stay in Dalatling.

古文：天嘉元年，征为侍中、都官尚书，未拜，复为中书令。
现代文：天嘉元年，征调进朝廷任命为侍中、都官尚书，尚未就任，又任命为中书令。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, he was transferred to the imperial court and appointed as an attendant and official of the capital, but had not yet taken office, and was also appointed as a middle secretary.

古文：迁太子詹事，行东宫事，侍中并如故。
现代文：升任太子詹事。管理束宫事务，侍中的职务一起依旧保留。
English: He was promoted to the position of Prince Zhanji. He managed the affairs of the Sok Palace, while the position of chamberlain remained the same.

古文：加金紫光禄大夫，领度支尚书。
现代文：加官金紫光禄大夫，领度支尚书。
English: Additional officer, Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu, received a letter of commendation.

古文：废帝即位，加散骑常侍。
现代文：废帝登位，加官散骑常侍。
English: The deposed emperor ascended to the throne, and the officials rode horseback.

古文：太建元年，迁尚书右仆射。
现代文：基建元年，升任尚书右仆射。
English: In the first year of construction, he was promoted to the post of Shangshu Yuhudu.

古文：时东境大水，百姓饥馑，以劢为仁武将军、晋陵太守。
现代文：那时东边的国境内发大水，老百姓闸饥荒，任用王勘为仁武将军、置陆太守。
English: At that time, the eastern part of the country was flooded and the people were starving. Wang Kan was appointed as General of the People's Liberation Army and Okiku Taishu.

古文：在郡甚有威惠，郡人表请立碑，颂劢政绩，诏许之。
现代文：他在郡中很有威信和恩惠，郡中的人上书朝廷请求给王勘立碑，颂扬他的政绩，皇帝发布命令同意这样做。
English: He enjoyed great prestige and favor in the county. The people of the county wrote to the imperial court to request that a monument be erected to Wang Kan to celebrate his achievements. The emperor issued an order to agree to this.

古文：征为中书监，重授尚书右仆射，领右军将军。
现代文：征调入朝任命为中书监，重新授给尚书右仆射的职务，领右军将军。
English: He was conscripted into the imperial court and appointed as the Central Supervisor of Books. He was re-assigned to the position of Shang Shu's right-hand man, leading the right-hand army.

古文：四年五月卒，时年六十七。
现代文：立建四年五月去世，当时年纪六十七岁。
English: Li Jian passed away in May 2004, at the age of 67.

古文：赠侍中、中书监，谥曰温。
现代文：皇帝赠给他侍中、中书监的官衔，谧号叫做湿。
English: The emperor gave him the official title of chamberlain and librarian, and his nickname was "Wet."

古文：袁敬，字子恭，陈郡阳夏人也。
现代文：袁敬字子恭，陈郡阳夏人。
English: Yuan Jing character Zi Gong, Chen County Yang Xia people.

古文：祖顗，宋侍中、吏部尚书、雍州刺史。
现代文：祖父袁频，在宋朝任侍中、吏部尚书、雍州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Yuan Fang, was an aide-de-camp to the Song Dynasty, an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and a historian of Yongzhou.

古文：父昂，梁侍中、司空，谥穆公。
现代文：父亲袁昂在梁朝任侍中、司空，谧号是穆公。
English: His father, Yuan Ang, served as an attendant and secretary to Emperor Liang, and his posthumous name was Mu Gong.

古文：敬纯孝有风格，幼便笃学，老而无倦。
现代文：袁敬非常孝顺有品格，幼年就有志于学习，年纪老了仍是不知疲倦。
English: Yuan Jing is very filial and has character. He was eager to learn when he was young, and he is still tireless when he is old.

古文：释褐秘书郎，累迁太子舍人、洗马、中舍人。
现代文：他初仕任秘书郎，连续升任太子舍人、洗马、中舍人。
English: He first served as a secretary, and was successively promoted to the positions of prince's attendant, washing horse, and middle attendant.

古文：江陵沦覆，流寓岭表。
现代文：江陵失陷，袁敬流落寄居在岭表。
English: After the fall of Gangneung, Yuan Jing was exiled to Lingbo.

古文：高祖受禅，敬在广州，依欧阳頠。
现代文：高祖接受禅让，袁敬在广州，依附欧阳颛。
English: Gao Zu accepted Zen Zhen, Yuan Jing in Guangzhou, adhered to Ouyang Xuan.

古文：及頠卒，其子纥据州，将有异志，敬累谏纥，为陈逆顺之理，言甚切至，纥终不从。
现代文：到欧阳顾去世，他的儿子欧阳纥占据广州，将要有背叛朝廷的异志时，袁敬多次劝谏欧阳纥，给他陈述叛逆和归顺的道理，言词十分恳切透彻，欧阳纥最后还是不肯听从。
English: When Ouyang Gu passed away and his son Ouyang Jie occupied Guangzhou and was about to betray the imperial court, Yuan Jing repeatedly advised Ouyang Jie and explained to him the principles of rebellion and submission. His words were very sincere and thorough, but Ouyang Jie finally refused to listen.

古文：高宗即位，遣章昭达率众讨纥，纥将败之时，恨不纳敬言。
现代文：高宗登位，派遣章昭达率部众讨伐欧阳纥，欧阳纥将要失败的时候，悔恨没有采纳袁敬说的话。
English: Gao Zong ascended to the throne and sent Zhang Zhaoda and his followers to fight Ouyang Zang. When Ouyang Zang was about to fail, he regretted not taking Yuan Jing's advice.

古文：朝廷义之，其年徵为太子中庶子、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：朝廷善待袁敬，这年征调他入朝廷任命为太子中庶子、通直散骑常侍。
English: Yuan Jing was treated kindly by the imperial court, and that year he was transferred to the imperial court and appointed as the prince's middle child and his attendant.

古文：俄转司徒左长史。
现代文：不久转任司徒左长史。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Shituzo Nagashi.

古文：寻迁左民尚书，转都官尚书，领豫州大中正。
现代文：接着升任左民尚书，转任都官尚书，领豫州大中正。
English: Then he was promoted to the post of Zuomin Shangshu, transferred to the post of Metropolitan Shangshu, and led the Yuanzhou University Junior High School.

古文：累迁太常卿、散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫，加特进。
现代文：连续升任太常卿、散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫，加官特进。
English: He was successively promoted to the posts of Tai Changqing, Sanzhiyi Changzhi, Jin Zi Guanglu Dafu, and was promoted to the rank of Gaan Tejin.

古文：至德三年卒，时年七十九，赠左光禄大夫，谥曰靖德。
现代文：至德三年去世，当时年纪七十九岁，赠给左光禄大夫的官衔，谧号叫做靖德。
English: Zhi De died three years later, at the age of seventy-nine, and was given the official title of Dr. Zuo Guanglu. His posthumous name was Jing De.

古文：子元友嗣。
现代文：他的儿子袁元叁继嗣。
English: His son, Yuan Yuanxuan, became his successor.

古文：弟泌自有传。
现代文：塞遨的弟弟塞塑另有传记。
English: There is also a biography of Saeko's younger brother, Saesaku.

古文：兄子枢。
现代文：塞遨哥哥的儿子叫袁枢。
English: Sayu's brother's son is called Yuan Zu.

古文：枢字践言，梁吴郡太守君正之子也。
现代文：袁枢字践言，是梁朝吴郡太守袁君正的儿子。
English: Yuan Zu Zi Jianyan is the son of Yuan Jun Zheng, the governor of Wu County in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：美容仪，性沈静，好读书，手不释卷。
现代文：有美好的容貌仪表，性情沉稳安静，爱好读书，手中始终不离开书卷。
English: She has a beautiful appearance, a calm and quiet disposition, loves to read, and never leaves a book in her hands.

古文：家世显贵，赀产充积，而枢独居处率素，傍无交往，端坐一室，非公事未尝出游，荣利之怀淡如也。
现代文：他家世代显达富贵，资财产业非常多，然而袁枢独自居住的地方简单朴素，不与旁人交往，端坐在一室之中，不是公事不曾出门和人交往，荣誉利欲之心淡薄。
English: His family has been wealthy for generations, with a large number of capital and financial industries. However, Yuan Zu lives alone in a simple and plain place, does not interact with others, sits in the middle of a room, does not go out for business and does not interact with people, and has a weak sense of honor and greed.

古文：起家梁秘书郎，历太子舍人，轻车河东王主簿，安前邵陵王、中军宣城王二府功曹史。
现代文：以出任梁朝秘书郎起家，做过太子舍人，轻车河东王主簿，以及安前邵陵王、中军宣城王两个府第的功曹史。
English: He started his career as a secretary of the Liang Dynasty, and served as a prince's concubine, the main book of the King of Hedong, as well as the king of Shao Ling in An Qian and the king of Xuancheng in the Central Army.

古文：侯景之乱，枢往吴郡省父，因丁父忧。
现代文：侯景叛乱的时候，袁枢前往吴郡看望父亲，因而遭遇父亲之丧。
English: During the rebellion of Houjing, Yuan Zu went to Wu County to visit his father, which led to his father's death.

古文：时四方扰乱，人求苟免，枢居丧以至孝闻。
现代文：当时四方骚扰战乱，人们但求苟生免死，袁枢在服丧期间以非常尽孝而闻名于世。
English: At that time, the four sides were harassing the war, but people were anxious to live and avoid death. Yuan Zu was famous for his filial piety during the mourning period.

古文：王僧辩平侯景，镇京城，衣冠争往造请，枢独杜门静居，不求闻达。
现代文：王僧辩平定侯景叛乱后，镇守京城，士大夫们争着前往求见，袁枢独自闭门静居，不求显达。
English: After Wang Sangyan quelled the rebellion of Houjing, he guarded the capital. The scholars and magistrates fought to go to see him, while Yuan Zu stayed alone behind closed doors, not seeking to be seen.

古文：绍泰元年，征为给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：绍泰元年，征调进朝廷任命为给事黄门侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Shao Tai Dynasty, he was transferred to the imperial court and appointed as the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：未拜，除员外散骑常侍，兼侍中。
现代文：未就任，任命为员外散骑常侍，兼任侍中。
English: He did not take up the post, but was appointed as a non-commissioned officer riding horseback, and also served as a chamberlain.

古文：二年，兼吏部尚书。
现代文：绍泰二年，兼任吏部尚书。
English: In the second year of Shao Tai, he also served as the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：其年出为吴兴太守。
现代文：这年调出朝廷任吴兴太守。
English: This year, Wu Xing was transferred from the imperial court to the position of governor-general.

古文：永定二年，征为左民尚书。
现代文：永定二年，征召为左民尚书。
English: In the second year of Yongding, he was conscripted as a left-handed person.

古文：未至，改侍中，掌大选事。
现代文：尚未到达。改任侍中，掌管全国选拔人才的事务。
English: has not yet arrived. He was reassigned to the position of chamberlain, in charge of the national selection of talent.

古文：三年，迁都官尚书，掌选如故。
现代文：永定三年，升任都官尚书，掌管选拔人才之事依然如故。
English: Three years after Yongding, Shang Shu, who was promoted to the post of capital official, is still in charge of the selection of talents.

古文：枢博闻强识，明悉旧章。
现代文：直担见闻广博强于记忆，明了熟悉从前的典章制度。
English: Direct experience is better than memory, and I am familiar with the previous award system.

古文：初，高祖长女永世公主先适陈留太守钱蕆，生子岊，主及岊并卒于梁世。
现代文：起初，高祖的长女永世公主先是嫁给陈玺太守缝芦，生下儿子钱量，公主和铲量在鳄时都去世了。
English: At first, Gao Zu's eldest daughter, Princess Yongshih, first married Chen Yingtao, the governor of Sichuan Province, and gave birth to her son Qian Qiao. Both the princess and Shao Qiao died at the time of the crocodile.

古文：高祖受命，唯公主追封。
现代文：高祖登上帝位后，仅对公主追加封号。
English: After Emperor Gaozong ascended to the throne, only the princess received an additional title.

古文：至是将葬，尚书主客请详议，欲加蕆驸马都尉，并赠岊官。
现代文：到逭时将要下葬，担任尚书主客的官员请求详细计议，认为应加封钱蒇驸马都尉，并且赠给钱量官衔。
English: At the time of the funeral, the officials who served as the host and guest of Shang Shu requested a detailed discussion, believing that they should add the seal of the captain of the horse to the money, and give the money the official title.

古文：枢议曰： 昔王姬下嫁，必适诸侯，同姓为主，闻于《公羊》之说，车服不系，显于诗人之篇。
现代文：塞担发表意见说： 从前帝王之女下嫁，必须嫁给诸侯，同姓的诸侯才能主婚帝王之女，于《公羊》中可知，对主婚者不必赐给车和章服，而是显扬于诗人的篇章之中。
English: Setan commented, "For a daughter of a former emperor to marry, she must marry a vassal, and a vassal with the same surname can marry the daughter of an emperor. In "Ram," it can be seen that the bridegroom does not have to be given a carriage and a ceremonial robe, but is shown in the poet's chapter.

古文：汉氏初兴，列侯尚主，自斯以后，降嫔素族。
现代文：汉朝刘氏政权刚建立，列侯娶帝王之女，自那时以后，帝王之女下嫁普通氏族。
English: In the Han Dynasty, when the Liu regime had just been established, princes married the daughters of emperors. Since then, the daughters of emperors have married members of ordinary clans.

古文：驸马都尉置由汉武，或以假诸功臣，或以加于戚属，是以魏曹植表驸马、奉车趣为一号。
现代文：驸马都尉由汉武帝设置，或者封给功臣，或者加封给亲属，所以魏国的曹擅上书说明驸马、奉车两种封号旨趣上是相同的。
English: The title of "Captain of the Horse" was established by Emperor Hanwu, and was given either to meritorious soldiers or to their relatives. Therefore, the Cao of Wei wrote a letter to explain that the two titles of "Captain of the Horse" and "Captain of the Cart" were essentially the same.

古文：《齐职仪》曰，凡尚公主必拜驸马都尉，魏、晋以来，因为瞻准。
现代文：《齐职仪》中说，凡是娶公主的人必须授给驸马都尉，魏、晋以来，因此成为人们认识的标准。
English: "Qi Rong Yi" says that anyone who marries a princess must be given the title of "Horse Captain." Since the Wei and Jin Dynasties, this has become the standard for people to recognize.

古文：盖以王姬之重，庶姓之轻，若不加其等级，宁可合卺而酳，所以假驸马之位，乃崇于皇女也。
现代文：因为帝王之女身份的尊贵，平民姓氏身份的轻微，如果不给娶帝王之女的人加封等级，岂可在婚礼上喝交杯酒，所以给予驸马的地位，乃是为了尊崇帝王之女。
English: Because the status of the emperor's daughter is noble, and the status of the commoner's surname is light, if the person who marries the emperor's daughter is not given a rank, he will not be able to drink a glass of wine at the wedding, so the status of the horse is given to honor the emperor's daughter.

古文：今公主早薨，伉俪已绝，既无礼数致疑，何须驸马之授？
现代文：现在公主早薨，配偶关系已不存在，既然没有礼仪的等级问题导致疑难，何须授予驸马之位?
English: Now that the princess has died early and the relationship between husband and wife no longer exists, since there is no question of the hierarchy of etiquette, why should the position of the horse be awarded?

古文：案杜预尚晋宣帝第二女高陵宣公主，晋武践祚，而主已亡，泰始中追赠公主，元凯无复驸马之号。
现代文：查考杜预娶晋宣帝第二个女儿高陵宣公主，置亘游登位，而公主已经去世，泰蛆年中追赠公主封号，元凯却没有再给予驸马的封号。
English: Chakao Du Pre married Princess Gao Ling Xuan, the second daughter of Emperor Jinxuan, and put Wanyu on the throne, but the princess had already died, and the princess's title was posthumously awarded in the middle of the year of the Rooster, but Yuan Kai did not give the horse's title.

古文：梁文帝女新安穆公主早薨，天监初王氏无追拜之事。
现代文：銮塞童的女儿新安穆公主早薨，越初年公主的丈夫王茂璋没有追授驸马的事。
English: Wang Maoxuan, the husband of the princess, did not receive a posthumous knighthood.

古文：远近二例，足以据明。
现代文：远近两个事例，足以做依据说明不必授予钱蒇驸马都尉。
English: Two examples, near and far, are enough to show that it is not necessary to award the rank of lieutenant to Qian Yuma.

古文：公主所生，既未及成人之礼，无劳此授，今宜追赠亭侯。 
现代文：公主生的儿子钱显，既然没有长大到二十岁行成人之礼，就不必烦劳授给他官衔了，现在可赠给他亭侯的爵位。 
English: Since Qian Xian, the son of the princess, did not reach the age of 20 to celebrate his coming of age, there was no need to give him an official title. He could now be given the title of prince.

古文：时以枢议为长。
现代文：当时以袁枢的议论为最有道理。
English: At that time, Yuan Zu's argument made the most sense.

古文：天嘉元年，守吏部尚书。
现代文：天嘉元年，袁枢署理吏部尚书。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, Yuan Zuo was appointed as the director of the Personnel Department.

古文：三年，即真。
现代文：天嘉三年，授以吏部尚书的实职。
English: In the third year of Tian Jia, he was awarded the official post of librarian.

古文：寻领右军将军，又领丹阳尹，本官如故。
现代文：不久领右军将军，又领丹阳尹，本来的官职依然担任。
English: Soon, he led the Right Army General, and also led Danyang Yin, still holding the original official position.

古文：五年，以葬父，拜表自解，诏赐绢布五十匹，钱十万，令葬讫停宅视郡事，服阕，还复本职。
现代文：天嘉五年，因为要给父亲下葬，上书朝廷自己请求解除职务，皇上发布命令赐给他绢布五十匹，钱十万，令他在下葬之事完成后留在自己宅第中治理郡中政事，服丧期满，恢复本来的职务。
English: In the fifth year of Tian Jia's reign, because he wanted to bury his father, he wrote to the court to request that he be relieved of his duties. The emperor issued an order to give him fifty pieces of silk cloth and 100,000 yuan, ordering him to stay in his house to manage the county's political affairs after the burial was completed, and to resume his original duties after the period of mourning was over.

古文：其年秩满，解尹，加散骑常侍，将军、尚书并如故。
现代文：遣年因为任职期限到了，解除丹阳尹职务，加官散骑常侍，将军、尚书的职务都依旧担任。
English: Due to the expiration of his term of office, Danyang Yin was relieved of his duties at the time of the New Year's address. He was promoted to the position of officer and horseback riding attendant, but he still held the positions of general and secretary.

古文：是时，仆射到仲举虽参掌选事，铨衡汲引，并出于枢，其所举荐，多会上旨。
现代文：这时，仆射到仲举虽然参与掌管选拔人才之事，衡量任用，都出自袁枢的主意，他举荐的人，大多符合皇帝的旨意。
English: At this time, although he was involved in the management of the selection of talents, the measurement of appointments came from Yuan Zu's idea, and the people he recommended were mostly in line with the emperor's will.

古文：谨慎周密，清白自居，文武职司，鲜有游其门者。
现代文：袁枢为人处世谨慎周密，清白自居，文武官员，很少有出入其门和他交往的。
English: Yuan Zu is a prudent and meticulous person, a clean-living person, a literary and military official, and there are few people who come in and out of his door to interact with him.

古文：废帝即位，迁尚书左仆射。
现代文：废帝登位，升任尚书左仆射。
English: The deposed emperor ascended to the throne and was promoted to the post of Shangshu Zuopu Jiao.

古文：光大元年卒，时年五十一。
现代文：光大元年去世，当时年纪五十一岁。
English: Guangda died in the first year of the year, when he was 51 years old.

古文：赠侍中、左光禄大夫，谥曰简懿。
现代文：赠给侍中、左光禄大夫的官衔，谧号叫做简懿。
English: The official title given to the chamberlain, Sako Roku no daibu, and the posthumous name is Kanetsune.

古文：有集十卷行于世。
现代文：有着作十卷流行于世。
English: There is a ten-volume work that is popular in the world.

古文：弟宪，自有传。
现代文：他的弟弟袁宪另有传记。
English: His brother Yuan Xian has another biography.

古文：史臣曰：王冲、王通并以贵游，早升清贯，而允蹈礼节，笃诚奉上，斯为美焉。
现代文：史臣曰：王冲、王通都以贵族子弟身份年轻时就升任清贵的官职，而诚实地恪守礼节，真诚地侍奉君主，这是美好的品德啊。
English: The historian said, "Wang Chong and Wang Tong were both sons of aristocrats, and when they were young, they were promoted to noble official positions, and they honestly adhered to etiquette and sincerely served the monarch. This is a wonderful character.

古文：王劢之襟神夷淡，袁枢之端操沉冥，虽拘放为异，而胜概一揆，古所谓名士者，盖在其人乎！
现代文：王勤的胸怀精神恬静寡欲，室担的操守正直不求显达，他们虽然在处世中有拘谨和放达的不同，然而人品臻于佳境的准则是一样的，自古所谓的名士，就是这种人呀!
English: Wang Qin's heart spirit is quiet and modest, and the ethics of the chambermaids are honest and do not seek to show off. Although they are different in their way of life, they have the same standards for improving their character. Since ancient times, the so-called celebrities are such people!

