古文：夫主将之法，务揽英雄之心，赏禄有功，通志于众。
现代文：统率将领的办法，是务必要争取英雄的归心。把禄位赏赐给有功的人，把自己的意志转化为众人的意志。
English: The method of leading the generals is to win the hero's conversion. Give the position to the meritorious, and transform one's own will into the will of the people.

古文：故与众同好，靡不成；与众同恶，靡不倾。
现代文：所以，与众人追求的目标相同，这个目标没有不实现的；与众人所讨厌的相一致，没有克服不了的困难。
English: Therefore, there is no unattainable goal that is the same as the goal pursued by many people; there is no insurmountable difficulty that is consistent with what people dislike.

古文：治国安家，得人也；亡国破家，失人也。
现代文：国治家安，是因为得到了人心；国亡家破，是因为失去了人心。
English: To govern the country and keep the family safe is to win the hearts of the people; to ruin the country and break the family is to lose the hearts of the people.

古文：含气之类咸愿得其志。
现代文：但凡具有精神意志的一类人，都愿意实现自己的志向。
English: However, all people with spiritual will are willing to realize their aspirations.

古文：《军谶》曰： 柔能制刚，弱能制强。 
现代文：《军谶》说：柔能制服刚，弱能制服强。
English: "Military etiquette" says: the flexible uniform is stiff, the weak uniform is strong.

古文：柔者，德也；刚者，贼也。
现代文：柔，是一种德行，刚，是一种伤害。
English: Softness is a virtue, hardness is an injury.

古文：弱者人之所助，强者怨之所攻。
现代文：弱小者容易得到人们的同情和帮助，强大者容易受到人们的怨恨和攻击。
English: The weak are easy to get people's sympathy and help, and the strong are easy to get people's resentment and attack.

古文：柔有所设，刚有所施；弱有所用，强有所加；兼此四者，而制其宜。
现代文：有时候要用柔，有时候要用刚，有时候要示弱，有时候要用强。应该把这四者结合起来，根据情况的发展变化而运用的恰如其分。
English: Sometimes you need to use soft, sometimes you need to use hard, sometimes you need to show weakness, sometimes you need to use strength. You should combine these four and use them appropriately according to the development and change of the situation.

古文：端末未见，人莫能知；天地神明，与物推移；变动无常，因敌转化；不为事先，动而辄随。
现代文：事物的本末没有显示出来之前，一般人是难以认识其本质的。天地运行的玄妙规律，可以通过万物的变化表现出来。敌我双方的形势也是变化无常的，必须根据敌情的变化而制定不同的方略。
English: It is difficult for the average person to recognize the essence of things before the essentials are revealed. The mysterious laws of the movement of heaven and earth can be expressed through the changes of all things. The situation between the enemy and us is also fickle, and different strategies must be formulated according to the changes in the enemy situation.

古文：故能图制无疆，扶成天威，匡正八极，密定九夷。
现代文：在形势没有发展成熟之前不要贸然行事，一旦时机成熟，便应立即采取相应的对策。这样，就可以百战百胜，辅佐君王取威定霸、一统天下、安定四方了。
English: Don't act rashly before the situation is ripe for development. Once the time is ripe, you should immediately take corresponding countermeasures. In this way, you can win a hundred victories, assist the king to take Widingha, rule the world, and stabilize the four directions.

古文：如此谋者，为帝王师。
现代文：这样谋划的人，便可以做帝王的老师了。
English: He who plans in this way can be the emperor's teacher.

古文：故曰：莫不贪强，鲜能守微，若能守微，乃保其生。
现代文：所以说：没有不贪强好胜的，却很少有人掌握刚柔强弱这个幽深精微的道理。如果能掌握这个道理，也就可以保身了。
English: Therefore, it is said that there is no one who is not greedy for power and eager to win, but few people have mastered the profound and subtle principle of strength and weakness. If you can master this principle, you can protect yourself.

古文：圣人存之，动应事机。
现代文：圣人掌握了这个道理，他的行动总能抓住时机。
English: The sage grasped this principle, and his actions always seized the opportunity.

古文：舒之弥四海，卷之不盈怀；居之不以室宅，守之不以城郭；藏之胸臆，而敌国服。
现代文：这个幽深精微的道理，舒展开来足以遍布四海，收拢起来却不满一杯。无须用房舍去安置它，无须用城郭去守护它。只需要藏在心中，就能够使敌国臣服。《军谶》说： 既能柔，又能刚，则国运光明；既能弱，又能强，则国运昌盛。
English: This profound and subtle truth is easily spread all over the world, but it is not enough to gather it. It does not need to be placed in a building, and it does not need to be guarded by a castle. It only needs to be hidden in the heart, and it can make the enemy country submit. "Military Review" said: If it can be soft and firm, then the country's fortune is bright; if it can be weak and strong, then the country's fortune is prosperous.

古文：《军谶》曰： 能柔能刚，其国弥光；能弱能强，其国弥彰；纯柔纯弱，其国必削；纯刚纯强，其国必亡。 
现代文：单纯用柔用弱，则国力必然削弱；单纯用刚用强，国家必定灭亡。 治理国家的原则，在于依赖贤士与民众。
English: The principle of governing a country is to rely on sages and the people.

古文：夫为国之道，恃贤与民。
现代文：信任贤者如同自己的心腹，使用人民如用自己的手足，政令便不会有什么纰漏呢。
English: If you trust the wise as if they were your closest confidants, and if you use the people as if they were your own hands and feet, there will be no flaws in your decrees.

古文：信贤如腹心，使民如四肢，则策无遗。所适如支体相随，骨节相救；天道自然，其巧无间。
现代文：这样，行动起来便会像四肢与躯干一样协调，像各个关节一样互相照应，像天道运行一样顺乎自然，灵巧得没有一点造作痕迹。
English: In this way, the movement will be as coordinated as the limbs and torso, as the joints take care of each other, as natural as the heavenly path, and so deft that there is no trace of artificiality.

古文：军国之要，察众心，施百务。
现代文：统军治国的关键，在于体察众人的心理，采取相应的措施。
English: The key to governing the country as a unified army lies in observing the psychology of the people and taking corresponding measures.

古文：危者安之，惧者欢之，叛者还之，怨者原之，诉者察之，卑者贵之，强者抑之，敌者残之，贪者丰之，欲者使之，畏者隐之，谋者近之，谗者覆之，毁者复之，反者废之，横者挫之，满者损之，归者招之，服者居之，降者脱之。
现代文：处境危险的要使之安全，心存畏惧的要使之欢愉，离乡逃亡的要加以招还，含冤受屈的要予以昭雪，上告申诉的要调查清楚，地位卑贱的要加以提拔，恃强行暴的要加以抑制，与我为敌的要加以清除，贪图钱财的要厚给赏赐，自愿效力的要予以任用，怕人揭短的要替其隐讳，善于谋划的要与之亲近，爱进谗言的要弃之不用，诋毁之言要反复核实，反叛之人要坚决消灭。蛮横之人要挫其锋芒，骄傲自满的就要警告，愿意归顺的要招徕之，已被征服的要给予安置，战败投降的要给予宽大。
English: Those who are in danger should be made safe, those who are fearful should be made happy, those who have fled their hometowns should be invited back, those who have been wronged should be cleared, those who appeal should be investigated, those who are lowly should be promoted, those who are violent should be restrained, those who are enemies of mine should be eliminated, those who are greedy for money should be rewarded, those who are effective should be appointed, those who are afraid of being exposed should be covered up, those who are good at planning should be close to them, those who are fond of gossip should be discarded, those who slander should be repeatedly verified, and those who rebel should be resolutely

古文：获固守之，获阨塞之，获难屯之，获城割之，获地裂之，获财散之。
现代文：占领了坚固的地方要注意守卫，占领了险隘的地方要加以阻寒，占领了难以攻打的地方要驻兵把守，占领了城邑要分赏有功之臣，占领了土地要分封出力之士，获得了财物要赏赐给众人。
English: If you occupy a strong place, you should pay attention to the guard, if you occupy a narrow place, you should block the cold, if you occupy a place that is difficult to attack, you should station troops to guard, if you occupy a city, you should reward meritorious vassals, if you occupy a land, you should award those who have made efforts, and if you have obtained property, you should reward everyone.

古文：敌动伺之，敌近备之，敌强下之，敌佚去之，敌陵待之，敌暴绥之，敌悖义之，敌睦携之。
现代文：敌人行动要密切监视，敌人接近就要严加防备，敌人强大要卑而骄之，敌人安逸要引而避之，敌人盛气凌人要有待其衰，敌人凶暴要暂时退却，敌人悖逆要伸张正义，敌人和睦要分化离间。
English: The enemy's actions should be closely monitored, the enemy's approach should be strictly guarded, the enemy's powerful should be humble and proud, the enemy's ease should be avoided, the enemy's arrogance should be defeated, the enemy's ferocity should be temporarily retreated, the enemy's disobedience should be justice, and the enemy's harmony should be divided.

古文：顺举挫之，因势破之，放言过之，四网罗之。
现代文：顺应敌人的行动来挫败它，利用敌人的情势来击破它，散布假情报以造成敌人的过失，四面包围将其歼灭。
English: Comply with the enemy's actions to frustrate it, take advantage of the enemy's situation to break it, spread false information to cause the enemy's fault, and destroy it all around.

古文：得而勿有，居而勿守，拔而勿久，立而勿取。
现代文：胜利时不要将功劳归于自己，获得财物不要自己独占，攻打城池不要旷日持久，立其国之人为君而不要取而代之。
English: When you are victorious, do not take the credit for yourself, do not monopolize the acquisition of wealth, do not attack the city for a long time, and do not replace the person who established his country.

古文：为者则己，有者则士。焉知利之所在？
现代文：决策出于自己，功劳归之将士，哪里知道这才是真正的大利啊！
English: The decision-making comes from oneself, the credit goes to the soldiers, who knows where this is the real big profit!

古文：彼为诸侯，己在天子，使城自保，令士自处。
现代文：让别人做诸侯，由自己做天子。使他们各保城邑，让他们各自征收财赋。
English: Let others be lords, but themselves sons of God. Let each of them guard his own city, and let each of them collect his own revenue.

古文：世能祖祖，鲜能下下⑩；祖祖为亲，下下为君。
现代文：世上的君主能以礼祭祀祖先，却很少能爱护自己的民众。尊敬祖先是亲亲之道，爱护民众才是为君之道。
English: The monarchs of the world can worship their ancestors with rites and sacrifices, but they can rarely love their own people. Respecting ancestors is the way of kinship, and loving people is the way of being a king.

古文：下下者，务耕桑，不夺其时；薄赋敛，不匮其财；罕徭役，不使其劳；则国富而家娭，然后选士以司牧之。
现代文：爱护民众的君主，重视农桑，不违农时，减轻赋税，民众不贫。于是国家富足，民众安乐，然后再选拔贤士去管理他们。
English: The monarch who loves and protects the people, attaches importance to the farmers, does not go against the farmers, reduces taxes, and the people are not poor. So the country is rich, the people are happy, and then the sages are selected to manage them.

古文：夫所谓士者，英雄也。
现代文：所谓的贤士，就是人们所说的英雄。
English: The so-called sages are what people call heroes.

古文：故曰：罗其英雄则敌国穷。
现代文：所以说，网罗了敌国的英雄，敌国就会陷入困窘的境地。
English: Therefore, if the hero of the enemy country is captured, the enemy country will be in a difficult situation.

古文：英雄者，国之干；庶民者，国之本。
现代文：英雄是国家的骨干，民众是国家的根本。
English: Heroes are the backbone of the country, and the people are the foundation of the country.

古文：得其干，收其本，则政行而无怨。
现代文：得到了骨干，获取了根本，便能够政令畅通，民无怨言。
English: Having obtained the backbone, having obtained the foundation, they will be able to carry out the government smoothly, and the people will have no complaints.

古文：夫用兵之要，在崇礼而重禄。
现代文：用兵的要义，在于注重礼节，厚给俸禄。
English: The essence of the use of soldiers is to pay attention to etiquette and pay a high salary.

古文：礼崇，则智士至；禄重，则义士轻死。
现代文：注重礼节，智谋之士便会前来投奔，厚给俸禄，忠义之士便会视死如归。
English: If you pay attention to etiquette, the wise will come to you, the rich will pay you, and the loyal will come to you.

古文：故禄贤不爱财，赏功不逾时则下力并而敌国削。
现代文：所以，给予贤士俸禄时不应吝惜财物，奖赏有功之臣时不应拖延时日。这样，部属们便会同仇敌忾而削弱敌国了。
English: Therefore, when giving a reward to a wise man, one should not be stingy with wealth, and when rewarding a meritorious minister, one should not delay. In this way, the subordinates will weaken the enemy country with the enemy.

古文：夫用人之道，尊以爵，赡以财，则士自来；接以礼，励以义，则士死之。
现代文：用人的原则，应是封爵以尊崇他，厚禄以赡养他，这样贤士就会自动来归了。以礼节来接待他，用大义来激励他，贤士便会以死相报了。
English: The principle of employing a person should be to honor him with a knighthood, and to support him with a generous salary, so that the sage will automatically return. To receive him with courtesy, to encourage him with great righteousness, the sage will be rewarded with death.

古文：夫将帅者，必与士卒同滋味而共安危，敌乃可加。
现代文：身为将帅，必须与士卒同甘苦，共死生，才可与敌作战。
English: As a general, you must share the joys and sorrows of life and death with your soldiers before you can fight the enemy.

古文：故兵有全胜，敌有全因。
现代文：如此才会我军大获全胜，敌人全军覆没。
English: Only in this way will our army win a complete victory and the enemy's entire army will be wiped out.

古文：昔者良将之用兵，有馈箪醪者，使投诸河与士卒同流而饮。
现代文：以往良将用兵，有人送给他一坛美酒，他让人倒在河中，与士卒同流而饮。
English: In the past, a good general used soldiers. Someone gave him a jar of fine wine, and he let people fall into the river and drink with the soldiers.

古文：夫一箪之醪不能味一河之水，而三军之士思为致死者，以滋味之及己也。
现代文：一坛酒不能使一河之水都有酒味，而三军将士都想以死相报，这是因为将帅与自己同甘共苦而感激奋发啊。
English: A jar of wine cannot make the water of a river taste like wine, and the three generals all want to repay each other with death. This is because the generals are grateful and work hard together.

古文：《军谶》曰： 军井未达，将不言渴；军幕未办，将不言倦；军灶未炊，将不言饥。
现代文：《军谶》说：军井没有打好，将帅不说口渴；帐篷没有搭好，将帅不说疲劳；饭菜没有烧好，将帅不说饥饿。
English: The "Military Review" said: If the well is not well dug, the general will not say that he is thirsty; if the tent is not well set up, the general will not say that he is tired; if the meal is not well cooked, the general will not say that he is hungry.

古文：冬不服裘，夏不操扇，雨不张盖。 是谓将礼。
现代文：冬日不独自穿皮衣，夏日不独自用扇子，下雨不独自打雨伞，这就是所说的 将礼 。
English: In winter, do not wear a fur coat alone, do not use a fan alone in summer, and do not use an umbrella alone when it rains. This is what is called shourei.

古文：与之安，与之危，故其众可合而不可离，可用而不可疲；以其恩素蓄，谋素合也。故蓄恩不倦，以一取万。
现代文：能与士卒同甘苦，共患难，军队便会万众一心，不可分离，南征北战，不觉疲劳。这是由于将帅平日里积蓄恩惠、上下一心的缘故。
English: If you can share the joys and sorrows and the hardships with your subordinates, the army will be united and inseparable, and you will not feel tired when you go to the south and fight in the north. This is due to the fact that the commander-in-chief accumulates favors on a daily basis and has one heart.

古文：《军谶》曰： 将之所以为威者，号令也；战之所以全胜者，军政也；士之所以轻战者，用命也。 
现代文：所以说：不断地施恩惠于士卒，便可以赢得千万人的拥护。将帅的威严源于号令，作战的胜利在于军政，士卒的敢战根于听命。
English: Therefore, it is said that if you continuously do favors for your soldiers, you can win the support of tens of thousands of people. The majesty of the commander stems from the command, the victory of the battle lies in the military and politics, and the courage of the soldiers is rooted in obeying orders.

古文：故将无还令，赏罚必信；如天如地，乃可御人；士卒用命，乃可越境。
现代文：因此，将帅要令出必行，赏罚必信，像天地时令那样不可更易，这样，将帅才能统御士卒。士卒服从命令，才可以出境作战。
English: Therefore, it is necessary for the commander-in-chief to issue orders that must be carried out, and rewards and punishments must be credible, just as the order of heaven and earth cannot be easier. In this way, the commander-in-chief can control the soldiers. Only when the soldiers obey orders can they go abroad to fight.

古文：夫统军持势者，将也；制胜破敌者，众也。
现代文：统帅军队、把握态势的是将领，夺取胜利、打败敌人的是士卒。
English: It is the general who commands the army and grasps the situation, and it is the soldiers who win the victory and defeat the enemy.

古文：故乱将不可使保军，乖众不可使伐人。
现代文：所以，治军无方的将领不能让他统率三军，离心离德的士卒不能用以攻伐敌国。
English: Therefore, the generals who do not know how to lead the army cannot let him lead the three armies, and the centrifugal soldiers cannot be used to attack the enemy country.

古文：攻城则不拔，图邑则不废；二者无功，则士力疲弊。
现代文：这样的军队，攻打城池难以拔取，图谋市镇难以占领，两件事都做不到，反而会使军力疲惫不堪。
English: Such an army would not be able to attack cities and towns, and would not be able to occupy towns. On the contrary, it would make the military power exhausted.

古文：士力疲弊，则将孤众悖；以守则不固，以战则奔北。
现代文：军力疲惫不堪，就会使将领更加孤立，士卒更加抗命。这样的军队，用来守卫则阵地必不稳固，用来作战则士卒必然溃逃。
English: Exhausted military strength will make the generals more isolated and the soldiers more disobedient. Such an army, used to guard, the position will not be stable, and used to fight, the soldiers will inevitably flee.

古文：是谓老兵。兵老，则将威不行；将无威，则士卒轻刑；士卒轻刑，则军失伍；军失伍，则士卒逃亡；士卒逃亡，则敌乘利；敌乘利，则军必丧。《军谶》曰： 良将之统军也，恕己而治人，推惠施恩，士力日新，战如风发，攻如河决。 
现代文：敌人只能眼睁睁地看着这样的军队攻上来，却根本无力抵挡。
English: The enemy could only watch helplessly as such an army attacked, but it was powerless to resist.

古文：故其众可望而不可当，可下而不可胜。
现代文：敌人只能俯首向我投降，却没有任何取胜的希望。
English: The enemy can only bow down and surrender to me, but they have no hope of winning.

古文：以身先人，故其兵为天下雄。
现代文：将领能身先士卒，他的军队便可以称雄天下了。
English: If a general is able to lead his troops, his army will be able to dominate the world.

古文：《军谶》曰： 军以赏为表，以罚为里。 
现代文：《军谶》说：治军应当以奖赏为表，以惩罚为里。
English: "Military etiquette" says: military governance should be based on reward and punishment.

古文：赏罚明，则将威行；官人得，则士卒服；所任贤，则敌国震。
现代文：赏罚分明，将领的威信才能树立起来。选官用人得当，士卒们才会心悦诚服。重用德才兼备的人，敌国就会惧怕。
English: Only when rewards and punishments are clearly defined can the prestige of generals be established. Only when officials are chosen and employed properly can soldiers be well-pleased and sincerely satisfied. Only those who make good use of their talents and abilities will be feared by enemy countries.

古文：《军谶》曰： 贤者所适，其前无敌。 
现代文：《军谶》说：贤士归附的国家，一定会所向无敌。
English: "Military etiquette" said: the country that the wise men belong to will surely be invincible.

古文：故士可下而不可骄，将可乐而不可忧，谋可深而不可疑。
现代文：所以，对待贤士要谦恭而不可简慢，对待将帅要令其心情愉快而不可使之有隐忧，对于谋略要深思熟虑而不可犹豫不决。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to be courteous and not hasty in dealing with the wise men, to make the general happy and not worry about him, and to be thoughtful and not indecisive about the strategy.

古文：士骄，则下不顺；将忧，则内外不相信；谋疑，则敌国奋。
现代文：待贤简慢，下属就不会悦服。将有隐忧，君主与将领之间便互不信任。谋略犹豫，敌国就会乘机得势。
English: If you wait too long, your subordinates will not be pleased. There will be hidden worries, and there will be mutual distrust between the monarch and the generals. If you hesitate to strategize, the enemy country will take advantage of the opportunity to gain momentum.

古文：以此，攻伐则致乱。
现代文：这样去打仗，必然招致祸乱。
English: To go to war in this way is bound to bring disaster.

古文：夫将者，国之命也。
现代文：将帅是国家命运的掌握者。
English: The Generalissimo is the master of the country's destiny.

古文：将能制胜，则国家安定。
现代文：将帅能率军战胜敌人，国家才会安定。
English: Only when the general can lead the army to defeat the enemy can the country be stable.

古文：《军谶》曰： 将能清，能净；能平，能整；能受谏，能听讼；能纳人，能采言；能知国俗，能图山川；能表险难，能制军权。 
现代文：《军谶》上说：将帅应能清廉，能沉静，能公平，能严肃，能接受劝谏，能明断是非，能容纳人才，能博采众议，能知各国风俗，能通山川形势，能明险关要隘，能把握三军的形势。
English: The "Military Regulations" said: the general should be able to be clean, quiet, fair, serious, able to accept persuasion, able to judge right and wrong, able to accommodate talents, able to absorb public discussion, able to know the customs of various countries, able to communicate the situation of mountains and rivers, able to understand the dangers and difficulties, and able to grasp the situation of the three armies.

古文：故曰，仁贤之智，圣明之虑，负薪之言，廊庙之语，兴衰之事，将所宜闻。
现代文：所以说，举凡贤臣的睿智，君主的远虑，民众的议论，官员的意见，以及天下兴衰的往事，都是将帅所应当了解的。
English: Therefore, the wisdom of the wise men, the foresight of the monarch, the discussions of the people, the opinions of officials, and the rise and fall of the world are all things that the general should understand.

古文：将者，能思士如渴，则策从焉。
现代文：将帅能思贤如渴，有谋略的人就会聚集在他周围。
English: The general can think as if he were thirsty, and those who have a strategy will gather around him.

古文：夫将，拒谏，则英雄散；策不从，则谋士叛；善恶同，则功臣倦；专己，则下归咎；自伐，则下少功；信谗，则众离心；贪财，则奸不禁；内顾，则士卒淫。
现代文：将帅不听下属的意见，杰出的人才就会散去。
English: If the commander-in-chief does not listen to the opinions of his subordinates, outstanding talents will disperse.

古文：将有一，则众不服；有二，则军无式；有三，则下奔北；有四，则祸及国。
现代文：将帅如有上面的一条，士卒就不会心说诚服。有了两条，军队就没了法纪。有了三条，全军就会溃败。有了四条，就会给国家带来灾祸了。
English: If a general has one of the above, his soldiers will not be convinced. If he has two, the army will have no discipline. If he has three, the whole army will be defeated. If he has four, it will bring disaster to the country.

古文：《军谶》曰： 将谋欲密，士众欲一，攻敌欲疾。 
现代文：《军谶》上说：将帅的谋划要秘密，士卒的意志要统一，攻击的行动要迅速。
English: "Military Review" said: the commander's plan should be secret, the soldiers' will should be unified, and the attack should be swift.

古文：将谋密，则奸心闭；士众一，则军心结；攻敌疾，则备不及设。
现代文：将帅谋划秘密，奸细便无机可乘。士卒意志统一，军心便团结不离。攻击行动迅速，敌军便不及防备。
English: The general plans in secret, the spies take advantage of it. The soldiers have a unified will, and the military spirit is inseparable. The attack moves quickly, and the enemy is unprepared.

古文：军有此三者，则计不夺。
现代文：做到了这三条，军队的行动计划便不会失败了。
English: If these three points are achieved, the army's action plan will not fail.

古文：将谋泄，则军无势；外窥内，则祸不制；财入营，则众奸会。
现代文：将帅谋划泄露，军队的有利态势便失去了。奸细窥得内情，军队的祸患便无法制止了。不义的财物进入军营，各种坏事便一齐发生了。
English: When the general's plans were leaked, the advantageous situation of the army was lost. When the spies got the inside scoop, the army's woes could not be stopped. Unjust wealth entered the military camp, and all kinds of bad things happened at once.

古文：将有此三者，军必败。
现代文：将帅有了这三条，军队一定会溃败。
English: If a general has these three qualities, his army will surely be defeated.

古文：将无虑，则谋士去；将无勇，则吏士恐；将妄动，则军不重。
现代文：将帅谋浅虑短，谋士就会离去。将帅怯懦无勇，官兵就会惶恐。将帅轻举妄动，军心便不稳定。
English: If the commander-in-chief makes a hasty decision, the advisers will leave. If the commander-in-chief is cowardly and lacks courage, the officers and soldiers will panic. If the commander-in-chief acts rashly, the morale of the army will be unstable.

古文：将迁怒，则一军惧。
现代文：将帅迁怒于人，上下就会畏惧。
English: If the general directs his anger at someone, everyone will be afraid.

古文：《军谶》曰： 虑也，勇也，将之所重；动也，怒也，将之所用。 
现代文：《军谶》上说：谋深虑远，坚定勇敢，是将帅高贵的品德。适时而动，当怒而怒，是将帅用兵的艺术。
English: "Military etiquette" said: to think deeply and far ahead, to be firm and brave, is the noble character of being a soldier. To move at the right time, to be angry and angry, is the art of being a soldier.

古文：此四者，将之明诫也。
现代文：这四项，都是将帅要经常提醒自己的。
English: These four items are all things that a coach should constantly remind himself of.

古文：《军谶》曰： 军无财，士不来；军无赏，士不往。 
现代文：《军谶》上说：军中没有资财，士就不来归附。军中没有奖赏，士就不勇往直前。
English: "Military etiquette" said: If there is no wealth in the army, the soldiers will not come to join. If there is no reward in the army, the soldiers will not dare to move forward.

古文：《军谶》曰： 香饵之下，必有悬鱼；重赏之下，必有死夫。 
现代文：《军谶》说：在香美的鱼饵的引诱下，必定有上钩之鱼。在厚重的赏赐引诱之下，必定有敢死之士。
English: "Military Review" said: Under the lure of the fragrant bait, there must be fish on the hook. Under the lure of the heavy reward, there must be people who dare to die.

古文：故礼者，士之所归；赏者，士之所死。
现代文：所以，使士衷心归附的是礼，使士乐于效死的是赏。
English: Therefore, the envoy's heartfelt attachment is a courtesy, and the envoy's willingness to die is a reward.

古文：招其所归，示其所死，则求者至。
现代文：以礼来招徕重视礼节者，以赏来吸引追求赏赐者，那么所需要的人才也就来到了。
English: If courtesy is used to attract those who value etiquette, and rewards are used to attract those who pursue rewards, then the required talent will come to the fore.

古文：故礼而后悔者士不止；赏而后悔者士不使。
现代文：所以先以礼相待，后来又反悔的，士就不会留在营中。先以赏示人，后来又反悔的，士就不会为之效命。
English: Therefore, if you treat someone with courtesy first, and then repent, you will not remain in the camp. If you reward someone first, and then repent, you will not serve him.

古文：礼赏不倦，则士争死。
现代文：只有礼、赏始终如一，士才会争着为其赴死。
English: Only if the praise and reward are consistent will the scholars fight to the death for it.

古文：《军谶》曰： 兴师之国，务先隆恩；攻取之国，务先养民。 
现代文：《军谶》上说：要进行战争，务必事先厚施恩惠。要进攻别国，务必事先与民休息。
English: "Military etiquette" said: "To wage war, it is necessary to give a lot of favors in advance. To attack other countries, it is necessary to rest with the people in advance."

古文：以寡胜众者，恩也。
现代文：能以少胜多，是厚施恩惠的结果。
English: To be able to do more with less is the result of many favors.

古文：以弱胜强者民也。
现代文：能以弱胜强，是得到民众拥护与支持的结果。
English: Being able to use weakness to win over strength is the result of being embraced and supported by the people.

古文：故良将之养士，不易于身；故能使三军如一心，则其胜可全。
现代文：所以优秀的将帅像对待自己一样对待士卒。这样就能全军上下万众一心，在战争中百战百胜了。《军谶》上说：用兵的关键，在于首先查明敌情。
English: Therefore, an excellent commander treats his soldiers as if they were his own. In this way, the entire army can be united and win a hundred victories in the war. "Military Review" said: The key to using soldiers is to first identify the enemy situation.

古文：《军谶》曰： 用兵之要，必先察敌情：视其仓库，度其粮食，卜其强弱，察其天地，伺其空隙。 
现代文：了解其库存的实虚，估计其粮食的多少，判断其兵力的强弱，调查其天候与地形情况，寻找其薄弱环节。
English: Understand the reality of its inventory, estimate the amount of its grain, judge the strength of its troops, investigate its weather and terrain conditions, and look for its weak links.

古文：故国无军旅之难而运粮者，虚也；民菜色者，穷也。
现代文：所以，国家没有战争而运送粮食的，说明其国势空虚。
English: Therefore, if a country sends grain without a war, it is an empty country.

古文：千里馈粮，民有饥色；樵苏后爨，师不宿饱。
现代文：百姓面黄肌瘦的，说明其民众贫穷。从千里之外运粮，百姓就会饥饿。临时砍柴做饭，军队便无隔宿之饱。
English: If the people are yellow-faced and thin-skinned, it means that the people are poor. If grain is transported from thousands of miles away, the people will go hungry. If firewood is cut temporarily for cooking, the army will not have enough to live on.

古文：夫运粮百里，无一年之食；二百里，无二年之食；三百里，无三年之食，是国虚。
现代文：千里之外运粮，说明国家缺一年之粮。二千里之外运粮，说明国家缺两年之粮。三千里之外运粮，说明国家缺三年之粮。这正是国势空虚的表现。
English: If grain is transported thousands of miles away, it means that the country lacks grain for one year. If grain is transported two thousand miles away, it means that the country lacks grain for two years. If grain is transported three thousand miles away, it means that the country lacks grain for three years. This is exactly the manifestation of the emptiness of the country.

古文：国虚，则民贫；民贫，则上下不亲。
现代文：国势空虚，百姓就会贫穷。百姓贫穷，上下就不会亲睦。
English: If the country is weak, the people will be poor. If the people are poor, there will be no harmony between the upper and lower classes.

古文：敌攻其外，民盗其内，是谓必溃。
现代文：敌人从外面进攻，百姓在内部生变，国家就必然崩溃。
English: When the enemy attacks from the outside and the people change internally, the country will inevitably collapse.

古文：《军谶》曰： 上行虐，则下急刻；上推诿，则下倾覆；赋敛重数，刑罚无极，民相残贼；是谓亡国。 
现代文：《军谶》上说：君主暴虐无道，官吏便会苛切诛求。
English: "Military Review" said: The monarch is tyrannical and unreasonable, and officials will be demanding.

古文：《军谶》曰： 内贪外廉，诈誉取名；窃公为恩，令上下昏；饰躬正颜，以获高官；是谓盗端。 
现代文：横征暴敛，滥用酷刑，老百姓便会起来反抗。
English: People will rise up against arbitrary recruitment and the abuse of torture.

古文：《军谶》曰： 群吏朋党，各进所亲；招举奸枉，抑挫仁贤；背公立私，同位相讪；是谓乱源。 《军谶》曰： 强宗聚奸，无位而尊，威无不震；葛藟相连，种德立恩，夺在位权；侵侮下民，国内哗喧，臣蔽不言；是谓乱根。 
现代文：这就是人们所说的亡国之兆。《军谶》上说：内心贪婪而外表廉洁，以欺骗的手段猎取好的名声，盗用朝廷的爵禄以行私惠，使上上下下都认不清真相，伪为谦恭而外示正直，以此骗取高官，这就是人们所说的窃国之始。《军谶》上说：官吏结党营私，各自引进亲信，网罗奸邪之徒，压制仁人贤士，背弃公道，谋取私利，同僚之间，攻讦不已，这就是人们所说的大乱之源。《军谶》上说：强宗大族，相聚为奸，虽然没有国家授予的官职，却十分显赫，威风所至，无人不惧，彼此勾结，如同葛藤盘根错节一样，私布小恩小惠，侵夺朝廷大权，欺压穷苦百姓，国内怨声载道，骚动不安，群臣却隐蔽实情不敢直言，这就是人们所说的大乱之根。
English: This is what people call a sign of the country's downfall. "Military Review" said: greediness in the heart but honesty on the outside, hunting for a good reputation by deceptive means, embezzling the imperial honor to do personal favors, making the truth unclear from top to bottom, pretending to be humble while pretending to be honest, and deceiving high-ranking officials in this way, this is what people call the beginning of stealing the country. "Military Review" said: officials form a party for personal gain, each introducing cronies, entrapping evil-doers, suppressing benevolent sages, betraying justice, seeking personal gain, and fighting among

古文：《军谶》曰： 世世作奸，侵盗县官，进退求便，委曲弄文，以危其君；是谓国奸。 
现代文：《军谶》上说：世世代代，为奸作恶，侵蚀天子的权威，一举一动，皆为自己谋取私利，歪曲文法，连高高在上的君主都受到了威胁，这就是人们所说的国之奸贼。
English: "Military Review" said: for generations, for treachery to do evil, to erode the authority of the Son of Heaven, every move, all for their own selfish gain, distorted grammar, even high-ranking monarchs have been threatened, this is what people call the traitor of the country.

古文：《军谶》曰： 吏多民寡，尊卑相若，强弱相虏；莫适禁御，延及君子，国受其咎。 
现代文：《军谶》上说：官多民少，尊卑不分，以强凌弱，无力禁止，连君子也受到牵连，这样，国家必定要蒙受其难。
English: "Military Review" said: officials are many and people are few, there is no distinction between the high and the low, the strong dominate the weak, the powerless prohibit, even the gentleman is implicated, in this way, the country must suffer its difficulties.

古文：《军谶》曰： 善善不进，恶恶不退；贤者隐蔽，不肖在位；国受其害。 
现代文：《军谶》上说：喜爱好人而不任用，厌恶坏人而不贬斥，有才有德的人被迫隐退，品行恶劣的人却当权执政，这样国家必会深受其害。
English: "Military Review" said: "The country will suffer a great deal if people with good morals are favored but not appointed, if people with bad morals are disliked but not criticized, if people with good morals are forced into seclusion, and if people with bad morals are in power."

古文：《军谶》曰： 枝叶强大，比周居势；卑贱陵贵，久而益大；上不忍废，国受其败。 
现代文：《军谶》上说：宗室势力强大，互相勾结，窃居要位，欺下犯上，时间久了，势力将越来越大，而君主又不忍心铲除，这样，国家必定要遭到败坏。
English: "Military Review" said: the powerful family, colluding with each other, stealing important positions, deceiving and committing crimes. After a long time, the power will become more and more powerful, and the monarch will not have the heart to eradicate. In this way, the country must be corrupted.

古文：《军谶》曰： 佞臣在上，一军皆讼；引威自与，动违于众；无进无退，苟然取容◎；专任自己，举措伐功；诽谤盛德，诬述庸庸；无善无恶，皆与己同；稽留行事，命令不通；造作其政，变古易常；君用佞人，必受祸殃。 
现代文：《军谶》上说：奸佞之臣掌权在上，全军不满，这种人倚仗权势，自我吹嘘，他们行动违背众人意志。
English: "Military Review" said: "The vassals of traitors are in power, the whole army is dissatisfied, such people rely on power, boast of themselves, they act against the will of the people.

古文：《军谶》曰： 奸雄相称，障蔽主明；毁誉并兴，壅塞主聪；各阿所以，令主失忠。 
现代文：《军谶》上说：奸雄相互称许，遮掩君主的视线；谗毁赞誉同时出现，堵塞君主的耳听，各自偏袒私党，使君主失去忠臣。
English: "Military Review" said: the traitors praise each other, obscuring the monarch's line of sight; the detractors praise at the same time, blocking the monarch's ears, each favoring their own party, causing the monarch to lose loyalists.

古文：故主察异言，乃睹其萌；主聘儒贤，奸雄乃遁；主任旧齿，万事乃理；主聘岩穴，士乃得实；谋及负薪，功乃可述；不失人心，德乃洋溢。
现代文：所以，君主明察反常之言，才能发现祸乱的萌芽；人主聘用儒士贤才，奸雄就会逃遁；人主任用老臣，万事才会治理；人主聘用隐士，才是有真才实学的士人。人君谋划国事，倾听背柴平民的意见，其功业方可记述；不失民心，他的德行就远扬天下。
English: Therefore, only when the monarch clearly observes the abnormal words can he discover the germs of disaster; when the ruler hires a Confucian scholar, the traitor will flee; when the leader hires a veteran minister, everything will be governed; when the ruler hires a hermit, it is a scholar with real talent. When the ruler plans national affairs and listens to the opinions of the common people, his work can be recorded; without losing the people's heart, his virtue will spread far and wide.

