古文：◎哀宗上哀宗讳守绪，初讳守礼，又讳宁甲速，宣宗第三子。
现代文：哀宗名完颜守绪，初名完颜守礼，又名完颜宁甲速，宣宗皇帝的第三个儿子。
English: Aizong was the third son of Emperor Xuanzong. His first name was Yan Shuxu, and his middle name was Yan Shouli.

古文：母曰明惠皇后王氏，赐姓温敦氏，仁圣皇后之女兄也。
现代文：其母明圣皇后王氏，赐姓温敦氏，是仁圣皇后的姐姐。
English: His mother, Ming Sheng Quen Wang, was given the surname Winton and was the older sister of Empress Ren Sheng.

古文：承安三年八月二十三日生于翼邸，仁圣无子，养为己子。
现代文：承安三年八月二十三日生于翼府邸，仁圣皇后没儿子，把他收为自己的儿子。
English: Cheng An was born on August 23rd, 3rd, in the Wing Mansion. Queen Rinsheng did not have a son, so she adopted him as her own son.

古文：泰和中，授金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：泰和中期，哀宗被授予金紫光禄大夫。
English: In the middle of the Taihe period, Aizong was awarded the Golden Purple Award for Outstanding Physician.

古文：宣宗登极，进封遂王，授秘书监，改枢密使。
现代文：宣宗登基后，进封他为遂王，授秘书监，改任枢密使。
English: After Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, he was given the title of Sui Wang, given the title of Secretary Supervisor, and appointed as Privy Councilor.

古文：贞祐初，庄献太子守忠薨，立皇孙铿为皇太孙，寻又薨。
现代文：贞初年，庄献太子完颜守忠死去，立皇孙完颜铿为皇太孙，不久也死去。
English: In the first year of the reign of Empress Zhen, Prince Zhuo Jian died, and his grandchild, Prince Yan Shou Zhong, was appointed as the grandchild of the emperor. He also died soon after.

古文：四年正月己卯，立守礼为皇太子，仍控制枢密院事，诏略曰： 子以母贵，遂王守礼地邻冢嫡，庆集元妃，立为皇太子，其典礼有司条具以闻。 
现代文：贞四年正月二十五日，立完颜守礼为皇太子，仍控制枢密院事。
English: On the 25th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of Zhen, after Yan Shouli was installed as crown prince, he still controlled the Privy Council.

古文：四月甲午，用太子少保张行信言，更赐名守绪。
现代文：四月十一日，用太子少保张行信的话，改赐名完颜守绪。
English: On April 11, in the words of Prince Zhang Xingxin, he changed his name to Guan Yan Shouxu.

古文：元光二年十二月庚寅，宣宗崩。
现代文：元光二年十二月二十二日，宣宗皇帝死去。
English: On December 22nd of the second year of the Yuan Guang, Emperor Xuan Zong died.

古文：辛卯，奉遗诏即皇帝位于柩前。
现代文：二十三日，奉遗诏在灵柩前即皇帝位。二十四日，诏令大赦天下。
English: On the 23rd, he was enthroned as emperor in front of the coffin according to his last wishes. On the 24th, he granted amnesty to the world.

古文：壬辰，诏大赦，略曰： 朕述先帝之遗意，有便于时欲行而未及者，悉奉而行之。国家已有定制，有司往往以情破法，使人罔遭刑宪，今后有本条而不遵者，以故入人罪罪之。草泽士庶，许令直言军国利害，虽涉讥讽无可采取者，并不坐罪。 
现代文：诏略说 ：朕继承先帝之遗志，有想行而未能实行的事情，都实行。国家已有法规，有司往往以情徇法，让人罔遭刑罚，今后有法不循者，用故意判人罪的罪来判他。贫民百姓，允许说军国利害，即使有所讥讽而未被采取的，也不犯罪。 
English: The edict said: "I have inherited the last will of the former emperor. I will carry out all the things that I wanted to do but could not do. The country has laws and regulations, and judges often use the law of mercy to punish people. In the future, those who do not follow the law will be judged with the crime of deliberately convicting people. The poor people are allowed to say that the interests of the military state, even if it is ridiculed and not taken, will not commit a crime.

古文：正大元年春正月戊戌朔，诏改元正大。
现代文：正大元年春正月初一，诏令改元正大。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Zhengda, the imperial edict changed the name to Yuan Zhengda.

古文：庚子，上居庐，百官始奏事。
现代文：初三，哀宗皇帝居住在房室里，百官开始上奏议事。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Emperor Aizong was living in his chamber, and the officials began to discuss the matter.

古文：秘书监、权吏部侍郎蒲察合住改恒州刺史，左司员外郎泥旁古华山同知桢州军州事，逐二奸臣，大夫士相贺。
现代文：秘书监、权吏部侍郎蒲察合住改为恒州刺史，左司员外郎泥庞古华山改为同知桢州军州事，逐出二奸臣，士大夫互相道贺。
English: The secretary supervisor and the attendant of the authority department, the attendant of the authority department, the attendant of the authority department, the attendant of the authority department, the attendant of the authority department, the attendant of the authority department, the attendant of the authority department, the attendant of the authority department, the attendant of the authority department, the attendant of the authority department, the attendant of the authority department, the attendant of the authority department, the attendant of the authority department, the attendant of the authority department, the attendant of the authority department, the attendant of the authority department, the attendant of the authority department, the attendant of the authority department,

古文：邠州节度使移剌术纳阿卜贡白兔，诏曰： 得贤臣辅佐，年谷丰登，此上瑞也，焉事此为。
现代文：州节度使移剌术纳阿卜进贡白兔，皇帝哀宗下诏说 ：得此贤臣辅佐，年谷丰登，这是吉兆，为何要做此事。
English: During the state festival, the emperor sent a message to Emperor Aizong, saying, "It is a good omen that you have received this wise minister and assistant, Nien Gu Fongden. Why do you want to do this?

古文：令有司给道里费，从之本土。
现代文：命令有司给他返回费，让他把白兔放回本土。
English: He was ordered by a magistrate to pay a return fee to release the white rabbit back to the mainland.

古文：礼部其遍谕四方，使知朕意。 
现代文：礼部要告谕四方，让天下知道朕的意思。 
English: The etiquette department should tell everyone, let the world know what I mean.

古文：丁巳，诏朝臣议修复河中府。
现代文：二十日，诏令朝臣议论修复河中府。
English: On the 20th, the Emperor ordered the courtiers to discuss the restoration of Kawakuchifu.

古文：礼部尚书赵秉文、太常卿杨云翼等言，陕西民方疲敝，未堪力役。
现代文：礼部尚书赵秉文、太常卿杨云翼等人说，陕西百姓疲惫，不堪劳役。
English: Shangshu Zhao Bingwen of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Yang Yunyi of the First Secretary of the Communist Party of China, and others said that the people of Shaanxi were exhausted and unable to endure the labor service.

古文：遂止。
现代文：于是停止了此事。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：戊午，上始视朝。
现代文：二十一日，哀宗皇帝开始视朝。
English: On the twenty-first day, Emperor Aizong began to look to the North.

古文：大司农、守汝州防御使李蹊为太常卿，权参知政事。
现代文：大司农、守汝州防御使李蹊为太常卿、权参知政事。
English: As the chief of farmers and the guardian of the defense of Ruzhou, Li Jun was promoted to the position of Tai Changqing (太常卿) and was given the power to participate in political affairs.

古文：平章政事荆王守纯罢，判睦亲府。
现代文：平章政事荆王完颜守纯废为判睦亲府。
English: The government of Pingzhang and the administration of Jingwang were abolished and became the government of Hanmu.

古文：参知政事仆散五斤罢，充大行山陵使。
现代文：参知政事仆散五斤废为充大行山陵使。
English: Sanzhi's political servant, Sanzan Wujin, became the official envoy to the tomb.

古文：尊皇后温敦氏、元妃温敦氏皆为皇太后，号其宫一曰仁圣，一曰慈圣。
现代文：尊皇后温敦氏、元妃温敦氏都为皇太后，号其宫一曰 仁圣 ，一曰 慈圣 。
English: Both the revered Empress Winton and the former Empress Winton were empress dowager, and their palace was called "Ren Sheng" (仁聖) and "Mercy Sheng" (慈聖) on the same day.

古文：赤盏合喜权枢密副使。有男子服麻衣，望承天门且笑且哭。
现代文：百官到隆德殿祝贺。有一男子穿着麻衣，望着承天门且笑且哭。
English: Hundreds of officials came to the Lund Palace to offer congratulations. One man, dressed in linen, looked at the gate of heaven and laughed and cried.

古文：诘之，则曰： 吾笑，笑将相无人；吾哭，哭金国将亡。 
现代文：问他则说： 我笑，笑将相无人。我哭，哭金国将亡。 
English: When asked, he said: "I laugh, and no one will laugh with me. I cry, and the golden country will perish."

古文：群臣请置重典，上持不可，曰： 近诏草泽诸人直言，虽涉讥讪不坐。 
现代文：群臣请对他用重律，哀宗皇帝坚持说不可以，说 ：近来诏令平民直言，即使讥讽也不问罪。 
English: The courtiers begged him not to, but Emperor Aizong insisted that he could not, saying, "Recently, the emperor has ordered commoners to speak frankly, even if they are being sarcastic.

古文：法司唯以君门非笑哭之所，重杖而遣之。
现代文：法司认为君门不是哭笑的地方，重打之后赶走了他。
English: The legal department believed that Junmen was not a place for crying and laughing, and drove him away after a heavy beating.

古文：南阳民布陈谋反，伏诛。
现代文：南阳百姓布陈谋反被杀。
English: Nanyang citizen Bu Chenmou was killed.

古文：八月，巩州元帅田瑞反，行省军围之，其母弟十哥杀瑞出降，赦其罪，以为泾州节度使，世袭猛安。
现代文：夏四月初七，宣宗纎庙，大赦中外。六月初八，宰执请求打，哀宗皇帝因为心里不快没有批准。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, Emperor Xuanzong granted amnesty to both Chinese and foreigners, and on the 8th day of the 6th month, Emperor Yezong did not grant amnesty because he was not happy.

古文：九月，夏国和议定，以兄事金，各用本国年号，遣使来聘，奉国书称弟。冬十月，以夏国修好，诏中外。
现代文：二十五日，立妃子徒单氏为皇后。派枢密判官移剌蒲阿率兵到光州，张榜告谕宋朝边界军民金军不再南伐。十二月十三日，恒州刺史蒲察合住有罪被杀。二十二日，宣宗小祥祭祀，在德陵烧饭。左丞张行信说 ：先帝诏告国内，刑不上大夫，用廉耻治理。
English: On the 25th, Emperor Taizong made the concubine Tutan the empress. He sent the privy councillor Pu'a to Gwangju with an army, and issued a proclamation that the Song Dynasty border troops and the Jin Army would no longer march south. On the 13th of December, Pu'cha was found guilty of cohabitation in Hengzhou and was killed. On the 22nd, Emperor Xuanzong held a small sacrifice and cooked rice in Deling. Zhang Xingxin said: The former emperor told the country that the punishment was not a doctor, and that it should be administered with modesty.

古文：新军政改总领为都尉。
现代文：丞相高琪制定的官吏犯罪一百多条，请求改为旧制。 
English: The request to change to the old system came from the more than one hundred official offenses formulated by the chancellor Gao Qi.

古文：己酉，以诛田瑞诏中外。
现代文：哀宗皇帝不想彰明先帝的过失，略微施行了。
English: Emperor Aizong did not want to highlight the mistakes of the previous emperor, and implemented a slight change.

古文：癸亥，遣礼部尚书奥敦良弼、大理卿裴满钦甫、侍御史乌古孙弘毅为夏国报成使，国书称兄。
现代文：正大二年五月十七日，因为大旱，哀宗很自责，避开正殿，减去常膳，赦免罪犯。十月，因为西夏来修好，诏告中外。后派礼部尚书奥敦良弼、大理卿裴满钦甫、侍御史乌古孙弘毅为夏国报成使，国书自称兄。
English: On the 17th day of May in the second year of Zheng Da, because of the drought, Aizong was very self-reproachful, avoiding the main hall, subtracting the regular meal, and pardoning criminals. In October, because the Western Xia came to repair, he announced to China and abroad. Later, he sent the ceremonial department Shangshuo Aodong Liangyao, Daliqing Pei Manqin Fu, and the attendant Shi Wukusun Hongyi as Xia Guozheng Envoy, and Guoshu claimed to be his brother.

古文：乙亥，面谕台谏完颜素兰、陈规曰： 宋人轻犯边界，我以轻骑袭之，冀其惩创通好，以息吾民耳。
现代文：哀宗皇帝面谕台谏完颜素兰、陈规说： 宋朝人偶犯边界，我们用轻骑兵攻袭他们，希望惩罚他们而通好，以让我百姓生息罢了。
English: After Emperor Aizong's speech, Yan Xulan and Chen Gui said, "The Song Dynasty violated the border, we attacked them with light cavalry, hoping to punish them, but we agreed to let my people live.

古文：夏人从来臣属我朝，今称弟以和，我尚不以为辱。
现代文：西夏人从来向我朝称臣，现在称弟议和，我尚且不以为辱。
English: Western Xia people have always called me a courtier, and now they call me a younger brother to discuss peace, and I do not think it is a disgrace.

古文：果得和好，以安吾民，尚欲用兵乎。
现代文：如果和好了，以安息我百姓，不想用兵了。
English: If there is a reconciliation, I would like to rest in peace with my people and not have to use the army.

古文：禁宿、泗、青口巡边官兵，毋复擅杀过淮红衲军。
现代文：你们要理解朕的意思。 内族王家奴故意杀了鲜于主簿，权贵多说情救他，哀宗皇帝说： 英王是朕的哥哥，敢妄打一人吗？
English: You must understand what I mean. A servant of the royal family of the Inner Race deliberately killed a man who was less than his master, and the dignitaries pleaded for mercy to save him. The Emperor said, "The King of England is my brother. Would you dare to beat a man?

古文：诏赵秉文、杨云翼作《龟镜万年录》。
现代文：朕为皇帝，敢因无罪害一人吗？国家衰弱之际，生灵有多少，而内族之子恃势杀一主簿，我的百姓没主了？ 特命斩了他。
English: I am the emperor, how dare I kill a man for no crime? How many lives are lost when the country is weak, and a son of my own family is threatening to kill the head of the family, leaving my people without a master? I had him killed by special order.

古文：三年春正月丁巳朔，夏国遣使来贺。
现代文：正大三年春正月初一，西夏派使者来祝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of Zhengda Spring, Western Xia sent an envoy to congratulate.

古文：三月，陕西旱。
现代文：三月，陕西大旱。
English: In March, the drought in Shaanxi ended.

古文：平章政事胥鼎复请致仕，不许。
现代文：平章政事胥鼎又请求退休，没被批准。
English: Pingzhang Zhengjiding also requested to retire, but it was not approved.

古文：诏尚书省议省减用度。
现代文：诏令尚书省议论减少开支。
English: The Imperial Edict ordered the Ministry of Education and Culture to reduce expenditure.

古文：夏四月辛卯，亲享于太庙。郕国夫人车经御路，过庙前，驭者乘马，二婢坐车中，俱不下，诏系狱杖之。
现代文：夏四月初七，成阝国夫人车经御路，过庙前，驭者乘马，二婢坐车中，都不下来，诏令关进监牢拷打。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, when the car of the wife of Cheng Xuan Guo passed through the royal road and passed the temple, the driver rode a horse, and the two maids were in the car, but they did not come down, and they were ordered to be imprisoned and tortured.

古文：辛丑，以旱，遣官祷于济渎。
现代文：秋七月十七日，平章政事英国公胥鼎死去。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the British statesman Ping Zhang died.

古文：癸卯，祈于太庙。
现代文：十一月初九，议论与宋朝重修好。十七日，又议论此事。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month, they discussed the restoration of good relations with the Song Dynasty. On the 17th day, they discussed the matter again.

古文：禁伞扇。河南大雨雹。己酉，遣使虑囚，遣使捕蝗。
现代文：十八日，宋朝忠义军夏全从楚州来归降，楚州王义深、张惠、范成进都以城投降金朝，四人被封为郡王。正大四年春正月十二日，增筑中京城，疏通汴城外濠。
English: On the 18th, Xia Quan, a loyalist of the Song Dynasty, came from Chuzhou to surrender. Wang Yishen, Zhang Hui, and Fan Chengjin of Chuzhou all surrendered to the Jin Dynasty in the city, and the four were named county kings. On the 12th day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of Zhengda, the central capital city was added and the outer walls of the city were cleared.

古文：五月己未，大雨。
现代文：夏五月二十五日，议论向元朝求和。
English: On the 25th day of the 5th month of the summer, there was a discussion about suing the Yuan Dynasty for peace.

古文：以节制不一，并卫州帅府于恒山公府，命白华往经画之。
现代文：十一月二十日未时，太阳上有两道白虹。二十二日，哀宗皇帝在近郊打猎。
English: At the end of November 20th, there were two white rainbows on the sun. On the 22nd, Emperor Aizong went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：九月庚寅，雨足，始种麦。
现代文：正大五年春正月初二，哀宗皇帝亲祭三庙。
English: On the second day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the fifth year of Zheng Da, the three temples of the Emperor Aizong's pro-sacrifice began.

古文：冬十一月辛巳，进宣《宣宗实录》。
现代文：八月十五日，因为大旱，派使者到上清宫祈祷。九月二十日，雨水充足，开始种麦。
English: On the 15th of August, because of the drought, an envoy was sent to pray at the Shangqing Palace. On the 20th of September, there was enough rain to start planting wheat.

古文：十二月庚子朔，日有食之。完颜麻斤出以奉使不职，免死除名。
现代文：十二月初一，有日蚀。完颜麻斤出因没完成使命，免死除名。
English: On the first day of December, there was a solar eclipse. Due to his failure to complete his mission, he was stripped of his rank.

古文：壬子，完颜奴申改侍讲学士，充国信使。
现代文：十三日，完颜奴申改为侍讲学士，充国信使。
English: On the 13th, after Yan Nuxin's resignation, he was changed to an assistant lecturer and served as a national messenger.

古文：以陕西大寒，赐军士柴炭银有差。
现代文：因为陕西大寒，不同程度地赏赐军士柴炭银。
English: Because of the cold weather in Shaanxi, soldiers were rewarded with firewood, coal and silver to varying degrees.

古文：京兆、凤翔府司竹监进竹，令分给之。六年春二月丙辰，枢密院判官移剌蒲阿权枢密副使。
现代文：正大六年春二月十七日，枢密院判官移剌蒲阿为权枢密副使。
English: On the seventeenth day of February in the spring of the sixth year of Zheng Da, the judge of the Privy Council, Yibao Pu'a, became the deputy envoy of the Privy Council.

古文：耀州刺史李兴有战功，诏赐玉兔鹘带、金器。
现代文：耀州刺史李兴有战功，下诏赐玉兔鹘带、金器。
English: Li Xing, the governor of Yaozhou, was awarded the Jade Rabbit sash and gold utensils.

古文：以丞相完颜赛不行尚书省事于关中，召平章政事完颜合达还朝。
现代文：因丞相完颜赛不在关中行尚书省事，召平章政事完颜合达还朝。
English: Because the prime minister was not in Guanzhong to attend the ceremony, he was summoned to Pingzhang to attend the ceremony and return to the palace.

古文：移剌蒲阿率忠孝军总领完颜陈和尚忠孝军一千骑驻邠州。
现代文：移剌蒲阿率忠孝军总领完颜陈和尚的忠孝军一千骑兵驻扎州。
English: After Yan Chen Monk's loyal and filial army of one thousand cavalrymen was stationed in the state, the general leader of the loyal and filial army led by Pu'a moved to Yancheng.

古文：三月乙亥，忠孝军总领陈和尚有战功，授定远大将军、平凉府判官，世袭谋克。
现代文：三月初七，忠孝军总领陈和尚有战功，授予定远大将军、平凉府判官，世袭谋克。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month of the year, Chen Hezang, the leader of the loyal and filial army, was awarded the title of General Yuan, the judge of Pingliangfu, and the hereditary title.

古文：夏五月，陇州防御使石抹冬儿进黄鹦鹉，诏曰： 外方献珍禽异兽，违物性，损人力，令勿复进。 
现代文：夏五月，陇州防御使石抹冬儿进献黄鹦鹉，哀宗皇帝下诏说： 外边的人进献珍禽异兽，既违物性，又损人力，命令以后不要再进献。 
English: In the summer of May, the defense of Zhangzhou made Shima Dongren offer a yellow parrot, and Emperor Aizong issued an edict saying: People outside the country offer rare birds and beasts, which is both against the nature of things and a waste of manpower, and ordered that no more offerings be made.

古文：大元兵驻河中府。庆山奴弃京兆东还。
现代文：九月，洮、河、兰、会元帅颜盏虾虫麻进献西部马二匹，哀宗皇帝下诏说： 你武艺超群，此马可充战马，朕乘它不能尽其力。
English: In September, the marshals Yan Zhan, He, Lan and Hui presented two western horses to Emperor Aizong. Emperor Aizong said, "Your martial arts are superior. This horse can be used as a war horse. I cannot use it to the best of my ability."

古文：召合达、蒲阿赴汴，议引兵趋河中府，惧不敢行，还陕州，出师至冷水谷而归。
现代文：既然进献了，就算御马，现在用它赐给你，你要理解朕意。 正大七年春正月，副枢蒲阿、总帅牙吾塔、权签院事讹可解庆阳之围。用讹可驻守州，蒲阿、牙吾塔回到京兆。
English: Now that the offering has been made, even if it is a horse, use it to give it to you now, you have to understand my meaning. In the first month of the spring of the seventh year of the Zhengda era, the deputy pivotal Pu'a, the commander-in-chief Ga'wota, and the authorized signatory of the academy could break the siege of Qingyang. With the help of the Pu'a, they could stay in the state, and the Pu'a and Ga'wota could return to the capital.

古文：大元兵攻河中府，合达、蒲阿遣元帅王敢率兵万人救之。
现代文：夏五月，哀宗皇帝下诏释放清口的宋朝败军三千人，愿意留下来的有五百人，用以驻守许州，其余的都遣回了。
English: In the summer of May, Emperor Aizong issued an edict to release the 3,000 defeated soldiers of the Song Dynasty who had kept their mouths shut. Five hundred of them were willing to stay to garrison Huzhou, while the rest were sent back.

古文：冬十月，右丞相赛不致仕。
现代文：正大八年春正月，元朝军围攻凤翔府。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of Zheng Da, the Yuan Dynasty army besieged Fengxiangfu.

古文：十一月丁未，大元进兵峣峰关，由金州而东。
现代文：四月元朝军平定凤翔府。十一月二十五日，元朝进军峰关，由金州向东。
English: In April, the Yuan Dynasty army subdued Fengxiangfu. On November 25th, the Yuan Dynasty marched into Fengguan, moving east from Jinzhou.

古文：省院议以逸侍劳，未可与战。
现代文：省院讨论以逸待劳，不可以和他们作战。
English: It is not possible to fight with them.

古文：合达、蒲阿引军自邓州赴汴京。
现代文：哀宗皇帝告谕说： 南渡二十年，所在地的百姓，毁田地宅院，卖妻子儿子，竭尽肝脑以养军队。
English: Emperor Aizong announced: "After twenty years in the south, the local people have destroyed their fields and houses, sold their wives and sons, and worked hard to support the army.

古文：乙酉，以点检夹谷撒合为总帅，将步骑三万巡河渡，权近侍局使徒单长乐监其军。
现代文：现在元军来了却不能迎战，只用以自保，京城纵然存下来了，怎么为国，天下怎样看待我？朕考虑好了，存与亡有天命，只要不负我的百姓就可以了。 
English: Now the Yuan army has come but cannot fight, it is only used for self-protection. Even though the capital city has survived, how is the country, how does the world view me? I have thought about it, to exist and to perish have a destiny, as long as I do not fail my people.

古文：起近京诸色军家属五十万口入京。
现代文：于是诏令诸将驻军襄、邓两地。天兴元年春正月初一，太阳有两个晕。
English: Therefore, he ordered the generals to station their troops in Xiang and Deng. On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Tianxing, the sun had two halos.

古文：丙戌，大元兵既定河中，由河清县白坡渡河。
现代文：初五，元朝军平定河中后，由河清县白坡渡黄河。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, after the Yuan Dynasty army had subdued the middle of the river, they crossed the Yellow River from Baipo, Heqing County.

古文：丁亥，长乐、撒合引兵至封丘而还。
现代文：初六，长乐、撒合带兵到封丘而返。
English: On the sixth day of the first month, Changle and Sahao led the soldiers to Fengqiu and returned.

古文：戊子，左司郎中斜卯爱实上书请斩长乐、撒合以肃军政，不从。
现代文：初七，左司郎中斜卯爱实上书请求斩长乐、撒合，以整肃军政，没被批准。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the school year, Zuo Si Lang Zhong Xiang Wu Ai Si submitted a request to cut off Changle and Sahao in order to rectify the military government, but it was not approved.

古文：都尉乌林答胡土一军自潼关入援，至偃师，闻大元兵渡河，遂走登封少室山。
现代文：都尉乌林答胡土军从潼关支援，到偃师听说元朝军渡黄河，于是跑到登封少室山。
English: Captain Ulin asked the Turkish army from Shaoguan for support, and when he heard that the Yuan Dynasty army had crossed the Yellow River, he ran to Dengfeng Shomuroyama.

古文：都尉郑倜杀都尉苗英亦降。
现代文：十一日，卫州节度使完颜斜捻阿不弃城跑到汴。
English: On the 11th day of the Weizhou Festival, he ran to Handan after he had finished painting the town.

古文：秦、蓝总帅府经历商衡死之。
现代文：十三日，元朝军逼近郑州，与白坡军会合，守军元帅马伯坚以城投降，防御使乌林答咬住战死。
English: On the 13th, the Yuan Dynasty army approached Zhengzhou and rendezvoused with the Baipo army. The defending army marshal Ma Bo Jian surrendered the city, and the defense made Ulin Du bite and die in battle.

古文：大元兵下睢州。庚申，翰林待制冯延登北来归。乙丑，大元兵攻归德。
现代文：二十九日，许州军队叛变，杀死元帅古里甲石伦、粘合仝周、苏椿等人，以城投元朝。二月十四日，元朝军攻下归德。
English: On the 29th, the troops of Xuzhou mutinied and killed the marshals Gu Li, Jia Shi Lun, Gui Xuan Zhou, Su Qin and others, and surrendered the city to the Yuan Dynasty. On the 14th of February, the Yuan Dynasty troops were captured and returned to Germany.

古文：庚午，起复右丞相致仕赛不为左丞相。
现代文：十九日，起用退休右丞相赛不为左丞相。
English: On the 19th, Sae, the retired right-hand prime minister, was appointed as the left-hand prime minister.

古文：括京师民军二十万分隶诸帅，人月给粟一石有五斗。
现代文：召集京城军民二十万分给各个将帅，每人每月给一石五斗粮。
English: He called together the military and civilians of Beijing and distributed 200,000 rupees to each general, with each person receiving one stone and five dowels of grain per month.

古文：三月丁亥，大元军平中京，留守撒合辇投水死。
现代文：三月初六，元朝军平定中京，留守撒合辇投水而死。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month of the year, the Yuan Dynasty army had subdued central Beijing, and the left-behind Sahaoying was drowned.

古文：甲午，命平章政事白撒宿上清宫，枢密副使合喜宿大佛寺，以备缓急。
现代文：十三日，命令平章政事白撒住在上清宫，枢密副使合喜住在大佛寺，以防备紧急情况。
English: On the 13th, he ordered Pingzhang to stay at the Upper Qing Palace and Deputy Privy Councilor He Xi to stay at the Great Buddha Temple in case of an emergency.

古文：大元遣使自郑州来谕降，使者立出国书以授译史，译史以授宰相，宰相跪进，上起立受之，以付有司。
现代文：元朝派使者从郑州来招降，元使者站着拿出国书交给译史，译史交给宰相，宰相跪献哀宗，哀宗皇帝站起来接受交给有司。
English: The Yuan Dynasty sent an envoy from Zhengzhou to invite the emperor to abdicate. The former envoy stood up, took out the state book and handed it to the translator, the translator handed it to the prime minister, the prime minister kneeled down and offered it to the emperor, the emperor stood up and accepted it and handed it to the emperor.

古文：庚子，封荆王子讹可为曹王，议以为质。
现代文：十九日，封荆王的儿子讹可为曹王，议论用他作为人质。
English: On the 19th, King Fengjing's son, Yao, could become Cao Wang, and there was talk of using him as a hostage.

古文：密国公璹以曹王幼，请代行，上慰遣之，不听其代。
现代文：密国公王寿认为曹王年幼，请求代替，哀宗没同意。
English: Prince Mikuni Shou thought Cao Wang was too young and asked for a replacement, but Aizong did not agree.

古文：壬寅，尚书左丞李蹊送曹王出质，谏议大夫裴满阿虎带、太府监国世荣为请和使。
现代文：二十一日，尚书左丞李蹊送曹王到元朝做人质，谏议大夫裴满阿虎带、太府监国世荣为讲和使。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, Shangshu Zuorong Li Xi sent Cao Wang to the Yuan Dynasty as a hostage, and proposed that the doctor Pei Man and the overseer of the Tai Fu, Guo Shirong, should act as peace envoys.

古文：大元兵攻汴城，上出承天门抚西面将士。
现代文：元朝军攻打汴城，哀宗皇帝出承天门抚慰西面将士。
English: The Yuan Dynasty army attacked Shicheng, and Emperor Aizong of Heaven's Gate comforted the soldiers of Ximen.

古文：千户刘寿语不逊，诏释勿问。
现代文：千户刘寿出言不逊，诏令释放他不要追问。
English: Qianhu Liu Shou made an insolent remark, and he was ordered to be released without further questioning.

古文：癸卯，上复出抚东面将士，亲傅战伤者药于南薰门下，仍赐卮酒。
现代文：二十二日，哀宗皇帝又出宫抚慰东面将士，在南薰门下亲自给受伤将士上药，且赐卮酒。
English: On the twenty-second day, Emperor Aizong went out of the palace to comfort the Dongmen soldiers, and personally gave the wounded soldiers medicine under the South Gate, and gave them wine.

古文：出内府金帛器皿以赏战士。
现代文：拿出内府的金帛器皿赏给将士。
English: Take out the gold dishes from Naifu and give them to the soldiers.

古文：戮郑倜妻子。甲子，御端门肆赦，改元天兴。
现代文：夏四月初七，派户部侍郎杨居仁奉金帛到元朝军中求和。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, he sent Yang Juerin, the steward of the Household Division, to beg for peace among the Yuan Dynasty troops.

古文：诏内外官民能完复州郡者功赏有差。
现代文：十三日，明惠皇后陵被掘，灵柩被盗，派中官前往察视复得。
English: On the 13th, the tomb of Empress Minghui was excavated, the coffin was stolen, and a lieutenant-general was sent to inspect and recover it.

古文：出金帛酒炙犒饫军士。减御膳，罢冗员，放宫女。
现代文：用兵保护十个宫女出迎朔门奉柩到城下，设御幄围住灵柩，当夜又埋葬了。十四日，改元天兴。减去御膳，裁减冗员，放出宫女。
English: Ten maids of honour were sent to the castle with soldiers to protect them. They surrounded the coffin with palanquins and buried it the same night. On the 14th, the era was changed to Tianxing. The imperial diet was reduced, redundant staff were cut, and maids of honour were released.

古文：上书不得称圣，改圣旨为制旨。
现代文：上书不能称圣，把圣旨改为制旨。
English: The letter of transmittal cannot be sanctified, and the imperial edict should be changed to the imperial edict.

古文：释镐厉王、卫绍王二族禁锢，听自便。乙丑，百官初起居于隆德殿前。
现代文：五月初五，以南阳郡王的儿子思烈在邓州行尚书省，召集援兵。初六，在大庆殿拜天。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of May, the son of the king of Nanyang County, Sirei, went to Shangshu Province in Dengzhou to call for reinforcements. On the sixth day of the sixth month, he worshiped at Daqing Hall.

古文：辛卯，大寒如冬。
现代文：十一日，天气像冬天一样寒冷。
English: On the 11th day, the weather was as cold as winter.

古文：密国公璹薨。
现代文：密国公王寿死去。
English: Prince Mikuni Shou passed away.

古文：八月己酉朔，合喜屯杏花营，又益兵五千人，始进屯中牟故城。
现代文：八月初一，合喜驻守杏花营，又增兵五千人，开始进驻中牟故城。
English: On the first day of August, He Xi stationed at the camp of the apricot flowers, and increased the number of soldiers by five thousand, and began to enter the old city of Zhongmou.

古文：庚戌，发丁壮五千人运粮，饷合喜军。
现代文：初二，调五千壮丁运粮，送到合喜军中。
English: On the second day of the junior high school, five thousand soldiers were dispatched to transport grain to the Haxi Army.

