古文：景德中，河北用兵，车驾欲幸澶渊，中外之论不一，独寇忠愍赞成上意。
现代文：宋景德年间，在河北发生了战争，宋真宗想亲自到澶渊前线督战，朝廷内外都不赞成，只有寇准赞成皇帝的想法。
English: During the reign of Song Jingde, a war broke out in Hebei Province. Song Zhenzong wanted to personally supervise the war at the front line of the Yanyuan River. Both inside and outside the imperial court did not approve of this, and only Qojun approved of the emperor's idea.

古文：乘舆方渡河，虏骑充斥，至于城下，人情恟恟。
现代文：皇帝与随行车驾刚刚渡过黄河，敌方的骑兵便蜂拥而至，围到城下，宋人一个个惊恐不安。
English: The emperor and his entourage had just crossed the Yellow River, when the enemy cavalry swarmed in and surrounded the city. The Song people were terrified.

古文：上使人微觇準所为，而準方酣寝于中书，鼻息如雷。
现代文：皇帝派人暗暗观察寇准在做什么，寇准此时正在中书官署里酣睡，鼾声如雷。
English: The emperor sent someone to secretly observe what Kojun was doing. At this time, Kojun was dozing in the Chinese Calligrapher's Office, snoring loudly.

古文：人以其一时镇物，比之谢安。
现代文：人们因为寇准当时能够镇定自若、稳定军心，就把他比作东晋时以处变不惊而闻名的谢安。
English: People compared him to Xie'an, who was famous for not being surprised by changes everywhere during the Eastern Jin Dynasty, because Kojun was able to remain calm and steady at that time.

古文：许怀德为殿帅。尝有一举人，因怀德乳姥求为门客，怀德许之。
现代文：许怀德在做殿帅时，曾经有一个举人，通过许怀德的乳母说情，请求做许怀德的门客，许怀德同意了。
English: When Xu Huai De was a grand marshal, there was once a person who, through the intercession of Xu Huai De's nanny, asked to be Xu Huai De's concubine. Xu Huai De agreed.

古文：举子曳襴拜于庭下，怀德据座受之。
现代文：那个举人身着长装在庭下行拜见之礼，许怀德坐在堂上坦然接受。
English: The man in the long robe saluted the court below, and Xu Huide calmly accepted the salute while sitting in the courtroom.

古文：人谓怀德武人，不知事体，密谓之曰： 举人无没阶之礼，宜少降接也。 
现代文：别人以为许怀德是一员武将，不懂得礼仪方面的规矩，就悄悄提醒他说： 接见举人虽然不必从台阶上走到底，但也不能这样，你应该稍微往下走几节台阶去受拜。 
English: Others thought that Xu Huaide was a military commander and did not understand the rules of etiquette, so they quietly reminded him: Although you do not have to go all the way down the steps to receive the people, you should go down a few steps to worship.

古文：怀德应之曰： 我得打乳姥关节秀才，只消如此待之！ 
现代文：许怀德却说： 我得到了一个通过奶妈说情的举人，只要这样对他就够了。 
English: But Xu Huide said, "I got a sponsor through my wet nurse, and that's enough for him."

古文：郑毅夫自负时名，国子监以第五人选，意甚不平。
现代文：郑獬仗着自己小有名气而自负得很，在参加国子监考试时被定为第五名，为此他心里很不服气。
English: Taking advantage of his small fame, Zheng Qi was very conceited. He was ranked fifth when he took part in the national kindergarten exam, and he was very dissatisfied with this.

古文：谢主司启词，有 李广事业，自谓无双；杜牧文章，止得第五 之句。
现代文：在给主考官的答谢辞中，竟写出了 功业如同李广，自感举世无双；文章可比杜牧，却只得个第五 这样的句子。
English: In his thank-you speech to the examiner, he actually wrote, "My achievements are like Li Guang, I feel that I am unparalleled in the world; the article is comparable to Du Mu, but I only got a fifth sentence like this.

古文：又云： 骐骥已老，甘弩马以先之；臣鳌不灵，因顽石之在上。 
现代文：并且还说： 骏马已经老了，情愿让那些劣马跑到前面去；鳌龙已经不灵了，原来是有顽石压在身上。 
English: And he also said: "The horse is old and would rather let those inferior horses run to the front; the dragon has not worked, it turned out to be a stubborn stone on the body.

古文：主司深衔之。
现代文：主考官为此非常忌恨。
English: The chief examiner is very reluctant to do this.

古文：他日廷策，主司復为考官，必欲黜落，以报其不逊。
现代文：后来到了廷试的时候，那个主考官恰巧又主持考试，发狠一定要让郑獬落榜，以报复他的出言不逊。
English: Later, when it came to the court examination, the chief examiner happened to preside over the examination, and he was determined to make Zheng Yu fall off the list in order to retaliate against his insolent words.

古文：有试业似獬者，枉遭斥逐；既而发考卷，则獬乃第一人及第。
现代文：凡有试卷内容、风格与郑獬相似的，都枉遭贬斥落榜。不久到了发榜时，郑獬却以第一名及进士第。
English: Any examination paper whose content and style were similar to Zheng Yao's were unjustly disparaged and dropped from the list. However, when the list was released, Zheng Yao ranked first and was promoted.

古文：又嘉祐中，士人刘几，累为国学第一人。
现代文：另外，在宋嘉祐年间，有个叫刘几的士人，多次在国子监考试中得第一名。
English: In addition, during the Song Jiayu years, there was a scholar named Liu Jiayu, who repeatedly won the first place in the state examination.

古文：骤为怪嶮之语，学者翕然效之，遂成风俗。
现代文：他屡屡写出诡谲险怪的文句，学子们纷纷跟着仿效，一时形成了风气。
English: He repeatedly wrote witty and dangerous phrases, and the students followed suit, forming a culture for a while.

古文：欧阳公深恶之。
现代文：欧阳修非常憎恶这种文风。
English: Ouyang Xiu detested this style of writing.

古文：会公主文，决意痛惩，凡为新文者一切弃黜。
现代文：恰逢由欧阳修来主持考试，于是便下决心狠狠惩治一番，凡是写这种艰涩险怪文章的考生一概不取。
English: It just so happened that Ouyang Xiu was to preside over the examination, so he made up his mind to punish him severely. Any candidate who wrote such a difficult and dangerous article would not be accepted.

古文：时体为之一变，欧阳之功也，有一举人论曰： 天地轧，万物茁，圣人发。 
现代文：因此文风为之一变，这实在是欧阳修的功劳。有个举人在文章中议论道： 天地轧，万物茁，圣人发。 
English: Therefore, the literary style has changed, which is really the merit of Ouyang Xiu. A person quoted in the article discussed: Heaven and earth rolled, all things thrived, and sages were born.

古文：公曰： 此必刘几也。 
现代文：欧阳修说： 这个人一定就是那个刘几！ 
English: Ouyang Xiu said: This person must be that Liu Qi!

古文：戏续之曰： 秀才刺，试官刷。 
现代文：于是戏谑地在其后续写道： 秀才刺，试官刷。 
English: So he jokingly wrote in his follow-up: "A talent is pricked, an examiner is brushed."

古文：乃以大朱笔横抹之，自首至尾，谓之 红勒帛 ，判大纰缪字榜之。
现代文：还用大红笔把文章从头到尾横涂一道，称作 红勒帛 ，批上 大纰缪 三个字张榜公布。
English: He also used a big red pen to scribble the article from the beginning to the end, known as a red scribble, and published a list of three words.

古文：即而果几也。
现代文：后来发现这个人果然就是刘几。
English: Later, it was discovered that this person was indeed Liu Qi.

古文：復数年，公为御试考官，而几在庭。
现代文：过了几年，欧阳修担任廷试考官，发现刘几也来参加考试。
English: A few years later, Ouyang Xiu served as a court examiner and found that Liu Jia also came to take the exam.

古文：公曰： 除恶务本，今必痛斥轻薄子，以除文章之害。 
现代文：欧阳修说： 清除邪恶一定要彻底，今天一定要狠狠斥责这些个轻浮学子，以便铲除文坛祸患。 
English: Ouyang Xiu said, "We must thoroughly purge the evil, and today we must severely reprimand these frivolous scholars in order to eradicate the literary scourge."

古文：有一士人论曰： 主上收精藏明于冕旒之下。 
现代文：发现试卷中有一个人议论道： 主上收精藏明于冕旒之下。 
English: One of the people who found the examination paper commented: The essence of the main harvest is clearly hidden under the crown.

古文：公曰： 吾已得刘几矣。 
现代文：欧阳修说： 我已经找到刘几了！ 
English: Ouyang Xiu said, "I have found Liu Jia!

古文：既黜，乃吴人萧稷也，是时试《尧舜性仁赋》，有曰： 故得静而延年，独高五帝之寿；动而有勇，形为四罪之诛。 
现代文：于是就把这个人刷掉了不予录取，可是这个人却是吴地一个叫萧稷的。当时廷试《尧舜性仁赋》，有考生写道： 故得静而延年，独高五帝之寿；动而有勇，形为四罪之诛。 
English: Therefore, this person was brushed off and not admitted, but this person was a Wu Di called Xiao Yu. At the time of the court trial of "Toughness and Compassion," a candidate wrote: Therefore, it is quiet and prolongs life, which is the highest of the five emperors; it is moving and brave, which is the shape of the four sins.

古文：公大称赏，擢为第一人，及唱名，乃刘煇。
现代文：欧阳修对此大加赞赏，将这个考生定为第一名。等到公布姓名时，发现这个考生叫刘辉。
English: Ouyang Xiu greatly appreciated this and designated this candidate as the first. When the name was announced, it was found that this candidate was called Liu Hui.

古文：人有识之者曰： 此刘几也，易名矣。 
现代文：有认识刘辉的人告诉欧阳修： 他就是刘几，改名字了。 
English: Someone who knows Liu Hui told Ouyang Xiu: He is Liu Qi, he changed his name.

古文：公愕然久之。
现代文：欧阳修委实吃了一惊。
English: The Ouyang Rehabilitation Committee was really taken aback.

古文：因欲成就其名，小赋有 内积安行之德，盖禀于天 ，公以谓 积 近于学，改为 蕴 ，人莫不以公为知言。
现代文：于是欧阳修也就有了成全刘辉名声的想法。刘辉原赋中有 内积安行之德，盖禀于天 的句子，欧阳修认为这当中的 积 字有类似于 学 的意思，就将它改为 蕴 字，没有人不称赞欧阳修精通语言、改得恰当。
English: Therefore, Ouyang Xiu also had the idea of fulfilling Liu Hui's reputation. In Liu Hui's original work, there is a sentence that contains the virtue of inner accumulation and safe conduct, and covers the sky. Ouyang Xiu thought that the word "accumulation" in this sentence had a meaning similar to "learning," so he changed it to "accumulation." No one did not praise Ouyang Xiu for being proficient in language and for making appropriate changes.

古文：王文正太尉局量宽厚，未尝见其怒。
现代文：王文正太尉为人宽厚有度量，从未见他发脾气。
English: Lieutenant Wang Wenzheng is a generous and measured person. I have never seen him lose his temper.

古文：饮食有不精洁者，但不食而已。
现代文：饮食有不太干净的，他也只是不吃而已。
English: His diet is not very clean, he just doesn't eat.

古文：家人欲试其量，以少埃墨投羹中，公唯啖饭而已。
现代文：家人想试试他的度量，以少许锅灰投到肉汤中，他就只吃米饭而已。
English: His family tried to gauge his appetite by adding a bit of pot ash to the broth, but he would only eat rice.

古文：问其何以不食羹？曰： 我偶不喜肉。 
现代文：问他何以不喝汤，他说： 我今天偶尔不喜欢肉。 
English: Asked why he doesn't drink soup, he said: "Sometimes I don't like meat today.

古文：一日又墨其饭，公视之曰： 吾今日不喜饭，可具粥。 
现代文：有一天，家人又在他的米饭里弄了点灰，他看到后说： 我今天不想吃饭，可端上点粥来。 
English: One day, his family put some ash in his rice again. When he saw it, he said, "I don't want to eat today, but I can serve some porridge."

古文：其子弟愬于公曰： 庖肉为饔人所私，食肉不饱，乞治之。 
现代文：他的子弟们曾向他诉说： 厨房的肉叫厨子给私占了，肉吃不饱，请惩治厨子。 
English: His children once told him: "The cook has usurped the meat in the kitchen. We can't eat enough meat. Please punish the cook."

古文：公曰： 汝辈人料肉几何？ 
现代文：王公说： 你们每人一天该给的肉是多少？ 
English: Wang Gong said: How much meat should each of you be given each day?

古文：日： 一斤，今但得半斤食，其半为饔人所廋。 
现代文：子弟们说： 一斤。现在只能吃到半斤，另外半斤让厨子给藏起来了。 
English: The children said: One catty. Now we can only eat half a catty, the other half has been hidden by the cook.

古文：公曰： 尽一斤可得饱乎？ 
现代文：王公说： 给足你们一斤可以吃饱吗？ 
English: Wang Gong said, "If I give you a kilo of carp, will you have enough to eat?"

古文：曰： 尽一斤固当饱。 
现代文：子弟们说： 给足一斤当然可以吃饱。 
English: The children said: Of course, you can eat your fill if you are given a kilogram of tofu.

古文：曰： 此后人料一斤半可也。 
现代文：王公曰： 今后每人一天可以给你们一斤半。 
English: Wang Gong said: From now on, each person can give you one and a half catty a day.

古文：其不发人过皆类此。
现代文：他不愿揭发别人的过失都像这例子。
English: His reluctance to expose wrongdoing is a case in point.

古文：尝宅门坏，主者彻屋新之。暂于廊庑下启一门以出入。
现代文：他宅子的大门曾坏了，管家拆除门房新修，暂时从门廊下开了一个侧门出入。
English: The gate to his house had once been broken, but the housekeeper demolished the gatehouse and rebuilt it, temporarily opening a side door from under the porch.

古文：公至侧门，门低，据鞍俯伏而过，都不问。
现代文：王公至侧门，门太低，就在马鞍上伏下身子过去，什么都不问。
English: Wang Gong went to the side door, but the door was too low, so he got on his saddle, bent down, and walked past without asking anything.

古文：门毕，復行正门，亦不问。
现代文：大门修好了，再从正门走，他也还是什么都不问。
English: After the gate was repaired, he still didn't ask any questions as he walked through the main gate.

古文：有控马卒，歳满辞公，公问： 汝控马几时？ 
现代文：有个牵马的兵卒，服役期满向王公辞行，王公问： 你牵马多长时间了？ 
English: There was a soldier who had been leading a horse. At the end of his term of service, he resigned to Wang Gong. Wang Gong asked: How long have you been leading a horse?

古文：曰： 五年矣。 
现代文：兵卒说： 五年了。 
English: The soldier said, "It's been five years.

古文：公曰： 吾不省有汝。 
现代文：王公说： 我怎么不记得有你？ 
English: Wang Gong said: Why don't I remember you?

古文：既去，復呼回曰： 汝乃某人乎？ 
现代文：兵卒转身离去时，王公又把他唤了回来，说： 你是某某吧？ 
English: When the soldier turned to leave, the prince called him back and said, "Are you so-and-so?

古文：于是厚赠之。
现代文：于是赠送他不少财物。
English: So I gave him a lot of money.

古文：乃是逐日控马，但见背，未尝视其面；因去见其背，方省也。
现代文：原来是兵卒每日牵马，王公只看见他的背，不曾看过他的脸；当兵卒离去时又看到他的背，这才省悟过来。
English: Originally, it was a soldier who led the horse every day. The prince only saw his back and never saw his face. When the soldier left, he saw his back again, and then he came to his senses.

古文：李士衡为馆职，使高丽，一武人为副。
现代文：李士衡为馆职时，出使高丽，一武人为副使。
English: When Li Shiheng was in charge of the embassy, he sent an envoy to Korea, and a samurai was the deputy envoy.

古文：高丽礼币赠遗之物，士衡皆不关意。一切委于副使。
现代文：高丽赠送给他们的礼品和其他物品，士衡都不在意，一切都让副使去管。
English: Goryeo gifts and other items presented to them, do not care about the balance, everything let the deputy minister in charge.

古文：时船底疏漏，副使者以士衡所得缣帛藉船底，然后实已物，以避漏湿。
现代文：当时船底不严密，有些渗水，做副使的人就把高丽送给士衡的丝织品垫在船底，然后把自己所得的礼品放在上面，以防备被渗水打湿。
English: At that time, the bottom of the ship was not tight, some water seeped in, so the deputy steward padded the silk fabric that Goryeo gave to Shiheng on the bottom of the ship, and then put the gift he received on top to prevent it from being wet by seepage.

古文：至海中，遇大风，船欲倾覆，舟人大恐，请尽弃所载，不尔，船重必难免。
现代文：到了海上，遇到大风，船将要倾覆。驾船的人大为恐慌，请求把船上所载的物品全部弃掉，不然船太重，必难免沉船一死。
English: When they got to the sea, they encountered a strong wind and the boat was about to capsize. The boatman panicked and asked them to throw away everything they had on board. Otherwise, the boat would be too heavy and they would all die.

古文：副使仓惶，悉取船中之物投之海中，更不暇拣择。
现代文：副使仓皇不知所措，即取船中的财物投进海里，也来不及挑选。
English: The second officer was at a loss. Even if he took the ship's belongings and threw them into the sea, he would not have time to pick them up.

古文：约投及半，风息船定。
现代文：约投了一半，风停了，船又稳定下来。
English: About halfway into the race, the wind died down and the boat steadied.

古文：既而点检所投，皆副使之物。士衡所得在船底。一无所失。
现代文：随即点检所投，发现都是副使的物品，士衡所得礼物在船底，一无所失。
English: Then the spot check was made, and it was found that all the items were those of the deputy envoy. The gifts received by Shih Heng were at the bottom of the ship, and nothing was lost.

古文：旧制：天下贡举人到阙。悉皆入对，数不下三千人，谓之群见。
现代文：本朝旧例，天下参加贡举的举人到京城应试，全都一起受到皇上的接见，总数不下三千人，被称为 群见 。
English: In the old days of this dynasty, everyone who participated in the tribute was invited to the capital to take the examination, and all of them were received by the emperor together, with a total of no less than three thousand people, known as the group.

古文：远方士皆未知朝廷仪范，班列纷错，有司不能绳勒。见之日，先设禁围于著位之前，举人皆拜于禁围之外，盖欲限其前列也。
现代文：边远地区的士人都不懂朝廷的礼仪规范，列班排队纷然杂乱，有关部门不能控制，于是在皇上接见的当天，先设围栏于举人的站位之前，举人都在围栏之外行拜礼。
English: The courtiers in the outlying areas did not understand the etiquette norms of the imperial court. The procession was chaotic, and the relevant departments could not control it. Therefore, on the day of the Emperor's reception, a fence was first set up at the place where the people were to be called, and then the people were called to worship outside the fence.

古文：至有更相抱持，以望黼座者。
现代文：这本来是想限制前面的行列向前挤，结果导致后面的人更互相抱持，以求能看到皇上。
English: This was originally intended to limit the front of the line from pushing forward, but ended up causing those behind to hold each other closer in order to see the emperor.

古文：有司患之，近歳遂止令解头入见，然尚不减数百人。
现代文：有关部门头疼这种局面，所以近年就只让解头入见，然而仍不下数百人。
English: The relevant departments are worried about this situation, so in recent years they have only allowed the head to be seen, but there are still hundreds of people.

古文：嘉祐中。余忝在解头，别为一班，最在前列。目见班中唯从前一两行稍应拜起之节，自余亦终不成班缀而罢，每为閤门之累。
现代文：嘉祐年间，我有幸在解头之列，另被分到一队，站在最前列，亲眼看到班中只有前一两行稍能随着礼仪人员的赞呼行拜礼，其余还是终不能连缀成班而罢。
English: During the Jiayu years, I was fortunate enough to be in the first line of the parade, and I was also assigned to the first team, standing in the front row, and I saw with my own eyes that only the first one or two lines of the class could slightly perform the worship with the praise of the etiquette personnel, and the rest could not be connected into a class.

古文：常言殿庭中班列不可整齐者，唯有三色，谓举人、蕃人、骆驼。
现代文：这事常为閤门司的牵累，曾说殿庭中的班列无法整齐的只有三种，这就是举人、外邦人和骆驼。
English: This was often the fault of the steward, who used to say that there were only three things that could not be kept in order in the palace: people, foreigners and camels.

古文：孙之翰，人尝与一砚，直三十千。
现代文：有人曾送孙之翰一方砚台，据说值三十千钱。
English: Someone once gave Sun Zhihan a piece of jade, said to be worth thirty thousand yuan.

古文：孙曰： 砚有何异，而如此之价也？ 
现代文：孙说： 这砚台有何特别之处，而值这么多钱？ 
English: Sun said: What is so special about this ring that it is worth so much money?

古文：客曰： 砚以石润为贵，此石呵之则水流。 
现代文：这人说： 砚台以石料的润泽为贵，对着石料呵口气，就会有水在上面流。 
English: This person said: Xingtai values the moistness of the stone. If you breathe on the stone, water will flow from above.

古文：孙曰： 一日呵得一担水，才直三钱，买此何用？ 
现代文：孙说： 一日呵得一担水，才值三钱，买这玩意儿何用？ 
English: Sun said, "It only costs three yuan to fetch a load of water a day. What's the use of buying this thing?

古文：竟不受。
现代文：竟不接受。
English: It was not accepted.

古文：王荆公病喘，药用紫团山人参，不可得。
现代文：王荆公有哮喘病，用药需要紫团山人参，买不到。
English: Wang Jinggong has asthma and needs to use medicinal ginseng, which is not available.

古文：时薛师政自河东还，适有之，赠公数两，不受。
现代文：其时薛师政自河东还朝，正好有这药，就送给荆公几两，荆公不接受。
English: At that time, Xue Shizheng was still in power in the eastern part of the river, and he happened to have this medicine, so he gave Jing Gong a few dozen, but Jing Gong did not accept it.

古文：人有劝公曰： 公之疾非此药不可治，疾可忧，药不足辞。 
现代文：有人劝荆公说： 您的病，非这药不能治。病是可忧虑的，这点药物不值得推辞。 
English: Someone advised Jing Gong, "Your illness cannot be cured without this medicine. Illness is something to be worried about, and this medicine is not worth rejecting."

古文：公曰： 平生无紫团参，亦活到今日。 
现代文：荆公曰： 平生没有紫团参，也活到今天。 
English: Jing Gong said: I have never had purple truffles in my life, and I still live to this day.

古文：竟不受。
现代文：竟不接受。
English: It was not accepted.

古文：公面黧黑，门人忧之，以问医。
现代文：荆公脸面有些黑黄，门人忧虑，去问医生。
English: Jing Gong's face was a little black and yellow. The gatekeeper was worried and went to see a doctor.

古文：医曰： 此垢汗，非疾也。 
现代文：医生说： 这是污垢，不是疾病。 
English: The doctor said, "It's dirt, not a disease."

古文：进澡豆令公颒面。公曰： 天生黑于予，澡豆其如予何！ 
现代文：门生送澡豆叫荆公洗脸，荆公说： 天生黑于予，澡豆其如予何？ 
English: The protégé who brought the bath beans asked Jing Gong to wash his face. Jing Gong said, "It's naturally dark, so what's with the bath beans?

古文：王子野生平不茹荤腥，居之甚安。
现代文：王质这个人一辈子不吃荤食，生活得十分安逸。
English: The royal hostage did not eat junk food for the rest of his life and lived a very comfortable life.

古文：淮南孔旻，隐居笃行，终身不仕，美节甚高。
现代文：淮南的孔旻隐居汝州，为人惇厚仁慈，终身不愿做官，节操美好而高洁。
English: Confucius of Huainan lived in seclusion in Ruzhou. He was a man of great benevolence, never wanted to be an official, and had a beautiful and noble spirit.

古文：尝有窃其园中竹，旻愍其涉水冰寒，为架一小桥渡之。
现代文：曾有人去偷他家园子里的竹子，孔旻怜悯偷竹子的人要涉水来去太冷了，就架起一座小桥让其顺利通过。
English: Once, someone tried to steal the bamboo from his home. Compassionate that the thief was too cold to wade through the water, Kong Lan built a small bridge to let him pass.

古文：推此则其爱人可知。
现代文：由此可以推知孔旻的仁爱之心。
English: From this we can deduce the benevolent heart of Confucius.

古文：然余闻之，庄子妻死，鼓盆而歌。
现代文：不过我听说，庄子的妻子死了，敲起盆子唱起歌来。
English: But I heard that when Chuang Tzu's wife died, he beat a basin and began to sing.

古文：妻死而不辍鼓可也，为其死而鼓之，则不若不鼓之愈也。
现代文：妻子死了而不中止敲盆子是可以的，但如果是因为妻子死了而敲，反而不如不敲的好。
English: It is permissible for a man to continue beating his wife when she is dead, but if he is beating her because she is dead, it is better not to beat her.

古文：犹邴原耕而得金，掷之墙外，不若管宁不视之愈也。
现代文：就像邴原耕地时看到一块金子，捡起来以后再扔出墙外，反倒不如管宁那样看都不看的好。
English: It's like seeing a piece of gold while ploughing the fields in Kashihara, picking it up and then throwing it out of the wall. On the other hand, it's not as good as not looking at it at all, like Kauning.

古文：郭进有材略，累有战功。
现代文：郭进有干材谋略，屡立战功，曾为邢州刺史。
English: Guo Jin has a solid strategy, has repeatedly achieved military success, and has made history in Zhangzhou.

古文：尝刺邢州，今邢州城乃进所筑，其厚六丈，至今坚完；铠仗精巧，以至封贮亦有法度。
现代文：现在的邢州城即郭进所筑，城墙厚六丈，至今坚固完好。城中铠甲兵器精致，以至封存贮备也有制度。
English: The current Zhangzhou City, Guojin, was built with thick city walls, which are still strong and intact. The armored weapons in the city are exquisite, and there is even a system for sealing and storing them.

古文：进于城北治第，既成，聚族人宾客落之，下至土木之工皆与。
现代文：郭进在城北建宅第，施工结束后，聚集族人和宾客举行落成之礼，下至土工、木工都参加。
English: Guo Jin built a house in the north of the city. After the completion of the construction, the local people and guests gathered to hold a completion ceremony, and the civil engineers and carpenters all participated.

古文：乃设诸工之席于东庑，群子之席于西庑。
现代文：于是设工人的宴席于东庑，儿子们的宴席于西庑。
English: As a result, the workers' banquet was held in the East Pagoda and the sons' banquet was held in the West Pagoda.

古文：人或曰： 诸子安可与工徒齿？ 
现代文：有人说： 诸公子怎么能与工匠并列？ 
English: Some people say: How can nobles be ranked alongside craftsmen?

古文：进指诸工日： 此造宅者。 
现代文：郭进指着工人们说： 这些是造宅子的人。 
English: Guo Jin pointed at the workers and said: These are the people who build houses.

古文：指诸子曰： 此卖宅者，固宜坐造宅者下也。 
现代文：又指着儿子们说： 这些是卖宅子的人，当然应该坐在造宅子的人之下。 
English: And he spake of his sons, saying, These are the sellers of houses: of a truth they ought to sit under them that make them.

古文：进死，未几果为他人所有。今资政殿学土陈彦升宅，乃进旧第东南一隅也。
现代文：郭进死后没多久，他的宅子果然为他人所有，现在资政殿学士陈彦升的宅子，就是郭进旧府第的东南角。
English: Not long after Guo Jin's death, his mansion was indeed owned by others. Now, the mansion of Chen Yansheng, a scholar of the Palace of Councillors, is the southeast corner of Guo Jin's old residence.

古文：真宗皇帝时，向文简拜右仆射，麻下日，李昌武为翰林学士，当对。
现代文：真宗皇帝时，向文简拜右仆射。任命书下达之日，李昌武为翰林学士，正当入对皇上。
English: On the day of the appointment letter, Li Changwu was a scholar of Hanlin and duly entered the emperor.

古文：上谓之曰： 朕自即位以来，未尝除仆射，今日以命敏中，此殊命也，敏中应甚喜。 
现代文：皇上对他说： 朕自即位以来，未尝除授仆射之官。今天任命敏中为此官，这是不寻常的任命，敏中应该很高兴。 
English: The Emperor said to him, "Since I ascended the throne, I have not tried to abolish the post of conferring the title of Grand Marshal. Today, I have appointed Min Chung to this post. This is an unusual appointment. Min Chung should be happy.

古文：对曰： 臣今自早候对，亦未知宣麻，不知敏中何如？ 
现代文：昌武回答说： 臣今天从一大早就等候入对，也不知道宣布任命诏书的事，不知敏中现在是什么情况。 
English: Changwu replied, "The minister has been waiting since early this morning to be sworn in, and does not know about the announcement of the appointment of the edict, and does not know what the situation is now.

古文：上曰： 敏中门下，今日贺客必多。
现代文：皇上说： 敏中门下，今天祝贺的客人一定不少。
English: The emperor said, "Min Chung, there must be a lot of guests congratulating you today.

古文：卿往观之，明日却对来，勿言朕意也。 
现代文：您去看看，明天再来告诉我，不要说是朕的意思。 
English: You go and have a look, come back tomorrow and tell me, don't say that you meant me.

古文：昌武候丞相归，乃往见。
现代文：昌武等丞相回府，就去见他。
English: When Changwu and the other chancellors returned to the capital, they went to see him.

古文：丞相谢客，门阑，俏然已无一人。
现代文：丞相正谢绝客人，门栏内悄无一人。
English: The chancellor is thanking his guests, but no one is at the door.

古文：昌武与向亲，径入见之。
现代文：昌武与向公亲近，径直入府中见他。
English: Changwu was close to Xiangong and went straight into the palace to see him.

古文：徐贺曰： 今日闻降麻，士大夫莫不欢慰，朝野相庆。 
现代文：说了会话，才慢慢祝贺说： 今天听说降麻，士大夫莫不欢喜欣慰，朝野相庆。 
English: After the conversation, he slowly congratulated and said: Today, when I heard about the lowering of the birthrate, I couldn't help but feel happy and gratified, and I was overjoyed.

古文：公但唯唯。
现代文：向公不表态，只是唯唯诺诺地漫应着。
English: They don't take a stand for the public, they just meekly comply.

古文：又曰： 自上即位，未尝除端揆。
现代文：昌武又说： 自皇上即位以来，未尝除授仆射，这是不同寻常的任命。
English: Changwu also said, "Since the Emperor ascended the throne, there has been no change in the conferment of honors, which is an unusual appointment.

古文：此非常之命，自非勋德隆重，眷倚殊越，何以至此？ 
现代文：除非功勋德望隆重，皇上眷顾依靠不同一般，又怎能有这样的任命？ 
English: How can such an appointment be made, unless the merit and virtue are grand, and the emperor's patronage and reliance are different?

古文：公復唯唯，终未测其意，又历陈前世为仆射者勋劳德业之盛，礼命之重，公亦唯唯，卒无一言。
现代文：向公还是不置可否地漫应着，昌武到底揣摩不透他的心情。昌武又力陈前世为仆射者的勋劳德业之盛、礼遇受命之重，向公仍然唯唯不做声，最终也没有一句反映他心情的话。
English: Xiang Gong continued to respond to him noncommittally, and Changwu couldn't fathom his feelings. Changwu also insisted that in his previous life, as a gunner, he had been honored for his hard work and virtue, and had been treated with courtesy and respect. Xiang Gong remained silent, and in the end, there was not a single word that reflected his feelings.

古文：既退，復使人至庖厨中，问 今日有无亲戚宾客、饮食宴会？ 
现代文：昌武出来以后，又让人到向公的厨房中，问今天有没有亲戚朋友的饮食宴会，也寂静无一人。
English: After Changwu came out, people came to Xianggong's kitchen to ask if there was a food banquet for relatives and friends today. There was no one there.

古文：亦寂无一人，明日再对，上问： 昨日见敏中否？ 
现代文：第二天昌武再入对，皇上问： 昨天见到敏中了吗？ 
English: The next day, when Changwu re-entered the court, the emperor asked: Did you see Min Chung yesterday?

古文：然密院题名记：天禧元年二月，王钦若加仆射。
现代文：昌武回答说： 见到了。 皇上又问： 敏中的心情怎样？ 
English: Changwu replied, "I see." The emperor then asked, "How is Minjung's mood?

古文：晏元献公为童子时，张文节荐之于朝廷，召至阙下。
现代文：昌武就详细地回答了他所见到的情况。皇上笑笑说： 向敏中大耐官职。 晏元献公还是童子时，张文节就把他推荐给朝廷，召至京城。
English: Changwu answered in detail what he had seen. The emperor smiled and said, "Xiang Min was a junior high school student who wanted to become an official. When Xuan Yuan was still a boy, Zhang Wensi recommended him to the imperial court and summoned him to Beijing.

古文：适值御试进士，便令公就试。
现代文：正好赶上殿试进士，皇上便令晏公就试。
English: Just in time for the palace entrance exam, the emperor ordered Shoko to take the test.

古文：公一见试题，曰： 臣十日前已作此赋，有赋草尚在，乞别命题。 
现代文：晏公一见试题，就说： 我十天前已作过此赋，有赋的草稿还在，请另外命题。 
English: At the sight of the test questions, Yu Gong said: I have already done this assignment ten days ago, the assigned draft is still there, please come up with another proposition.

古文：上极爱其不隐。
现代文：皇上极喜欢他的不隐瞒。
English: The Emperor was very fond of his frankness.

古文：及为馆职时，天下无事，许臣寮择胜燕饮。
现代文：等到晏公为馆职，当时天下太平，允许各部门臣僚同事选择胜地聚会宴饮。
English: When Zeng Gong was appointed to the post, the country was at peace, and ministers and colleagues from various departments were allowed to choose the best places for gatherings and banquets.

古文：当时侍从文馆士大夫为燕集，以至市楼酒肆，往往皆供帐为游息之地。
现代文：当时文馆的侍从士大夫各为宴集，以至街市楼堂酒肆，往往都供设帷帐成为游乐憩息之所。
English: At that time, the attendants and doctors of the library each held a banquet, and even the town hall and the liquor store were often used to set up curtains to become a place for recreation.

古文：公是时贫甚，不能出，独家居，与昆弟讲习。
现代文：宴公是时贫困异常，不能出游，独自在家中与兄弟们讲学读书。
English: The banquet was held at a time when he was extremely poor, unable to travel, and studying alone at home with his brothers.

古文：一日选东宫官，忽自中批除晏殊。
现代文：有一天，朝廷选东宫官，忽然宫中传出皇上的批示，授晏殊为此官。
English: One day, the imperial court was selecting an official for the East Palace, and suddenly the emperor's order came from the palace, awarding him this post.

古文：执政莫谕所因，次日进覆，上谕之曰： 近闻馆阁臣寮，无不嬉游燕赏，弥日继夕。唯殊杜门，与兄弟读书。
现代文：执政大臣不明白其中的缘由，第二天入见皇上核实，皇上解释说： 近来听说馆阁臣僚无不嬉戏游乐、宴会赏景，流连尽日又继以夜晚，只有晏殊闭门不出而与兄弟们读书。
English: The ruling minister did not understand the reason for this, and the next day he went to see the emperor for verification. The emperor explained: Recently, I heard that the cabinet ministers were all playing games, enjoying banquets, and staying up all day and night. Only Gongshu did not close the door and read with his brothers.

古文：如此谨厚，正可为东宫官。 
现代文：如此谨厚，正可为东宫官。 
English: He is so dignified that he could be an official of the Eastern Court.

古文：公既受命，得对，上面谕除授之意，公语言质野，则曰： 臣非不乐燕游者，直以贫，无可为之。
现代文：晏公既受命为此职，得以入见皇上，皇上当面向他说明除授他为东宫官的用意。晏公语言质朴，就说： 臣并非不喜欢宴集游乐，仅仅是因为贫困，没有游乐的条件。
English: Since he had been appointed to this position, Shoko was able to see the emperor, and the emperor explained to him face to face his intention to remove him as the official of the East Palace. Shoko, in simple language, said: It is not that the minister does not like banqueting and amusement, it is just because of poverty, there are no conditions for amusement.

古文：臣若有钱，亦须往，但无钱不能出耳。 
现代文：臣要是有钱，也会参加，只是无钱不能出门。 
English: If you have money, you will participate, but if you don't, you can't go out.

古文：上益嘉其诚实，知事君体，眷注日深。
现代文：皇上更欣赏他的诚实，认为他懂得事君的大体，眷顾关注日益深厚。
English: The emperor appreciated his honesty even more, believing that he understood the general situation of the emperor, and that his care and concern were increasingly profound.

古文：仁宗朝，卒至大用。
现代文：到仁宗朝他终于获得重用。
English: It was not until the reign of Emperor Nanzong that he was finally given a second chance.

古文：石曼卿喜豪饮，与布衣刘潜为友。
现代文：石曼卿嗜酒而喜欢豪饮，与平民刘潜为友。
English: Lord Shiman is a heavy drinker and likes booze. He is friends with Liu Xuan, a commoner.

古文：尝通判海州，刘潜来访之，曼卿迎之于石闼堰，与潜剧饮。
现代文：在曼卿为海州通判时，刘潜曾去拜访他，他到石闼堰迎接，遂与刘潜痛饮。
English: When Lord Mann was the chief judge of Haizhou, Liu Qian went to visit him. He went to Shijiazhuang to meet him, and then had a drink with Liu Qian.

古文：中夜酒欲竭，顾船中有醋斗余，乃倾入酒中并饮之。
现代文：半夜酒要喝光了，他见船中有一斗多的醋，就倒入酒中，一并饮了起来。
English: In the middle of the night, when he was about to run out of wine, he saw a large jar of vinegar in the boat, so he poured it into the wine and drank it.

古文：至明日，酒醋俱尽。
现代文：到第二天，酒和醋都喝了个光。
English: By the next day, all the wine and vinegar had been drunk.

古文：每与客痛饮，露发跣足，着械而坐。谓之 囚饮 。饮于木杪，谓之 巢饮 。以束之，引首出饮，復就束，谓之 鳖饮 。
现代文：他每与客人痛饮，或披散着头发赤着脚，自戴枷锁而就座，称之为 囚饮 ；或爬到树梢上喝酒，称之为 巢饮 ；或用禾秸把身子捆起来，伸出头喝酒，喝完一杯再把头缩回去，称之为 鳖饮 。
English: Whenever he drank heavily with guests, or walked barefoot with his hair in disarray and sat down wearing chains, he called it "prison drinking"; or climbed to the treetops to drink, he called it "nest drinking"; or tied his body with straw, stretched out his head to drink, drank a cup and then pulled his head back, he called it "baby drinking."

古文：其狂纵大率如此。
现代文：其狂荡放纵大都像这样子。
English: Most of his wild escapades go something like this.

古文：廨后为一庵，常卧其间，名之日 扪虱庵 。
现代文：他的官署后面有个小庙，他常常躺在那里，名之为 扪虱庵 。
English: There is a small temple behind his office, where he used to lie down, called the "Cormorant Hermitage."

古文：未尝一日不醉。
现代文：没有一日不醉。
English: Not a day goes by without him being drunk.

古文：仁宗爱其才，尝对辅臣言，欲其戒酒，延年闻之。
现代文：仁宗爱惜其才能，曾对辅政大臣说，希望延年戒酒。
English: Ninsong cherished his talent and once said to the Vice-Minister of State that he hoped to abstain from alcohol for many more years.

古文：因不饮，遂成疾而卒。
现代文：延年闻知，就不再饮酒，竟因此成疾而卒。
English: After hearing about it for many years, he stopped drinking alcohol, and as a result, he became ill and passed away.

古文：朝士刘廷式，本田家。
现代文：朝廷命官刘廷式本为农家子。
English: Liu Tingshi, an official appointed by the imperial court, was originally the son of a farmer.

古文：邻舍翁甚贫，有一女，约与廷式为婚。
现代文：邻居家老翁很贫穷，有一个女儿，与廷式约为婚姻。
English: The old man next door was very poor and had a daughter who was about to be married to a courtier.

古文：后契阔数年，廷式读书登科，归乡闾。访邻翁，而翁已死；女因病双瞽，家极困饿。
现代文：后离别多年，廷式读书考中进士科，回乡里寻访邻家老人而老人已去世，其女儿也因病而双目失明，家中极为困苦饥荒。
English: After many years of separation, he entered the scholarly science in the imperial reading exam, returned to the countryside to visit the elderly neighbor and the old man had died, his daughter was also blinded by illness, and the family was extremely poor and hungry.

古文：廷式使人申前好，而女子之家辞以疾，仍以佣耕，不敢姻士大夫。
现代文：廷式托人到邻家重申以前的婚约，而女子的家人以女子的疾病推辞，且以为靠佣耕为生的人家，也不敢与士大夫通婚姻。
English: Courtly courtiers went to the neighbor's house to reaffirm the previous marriage contract, while the woman's family rejected the woman's illness, and those who thought they would live by farming did not dare to marry the scholar.

古文：廷式坚不可， 与翁有约，岂可以翁死子疾而背之？ 
现代文：廷式坚持不退婚，以为先前与老人有约定，怎么能因为老人去世、女儿有疾病就违背婚约呢？
English: The emperor insisted on not withdrawing from the marriage, thinking that he had previously made an agreement with the old man. How could he break the marriage contract because the old man died and his daughter was ill?

古文：卒与成婚。
现代文：最后还是与她成了婚。
English: In the end, he married her.

古文：闺门极雍睦，其妻相携而后能行，凡生数子。
现代文：婚后夫妻关系极为和睦，他妻子要搀扶着才能行走，生了几个孩子。
English: After marriage, the relationship between husband and wife was extremely harmonious. His wife had to be helped to walk and gave birth to several children.

古文：廷式尝坐小谴，监司欲逐之，嘉其有美行，遂为之阔略。
现代文：廷式曾因过错而当小有贬谪，监司本欲罢其官，因赞赏他的美德行事，遂宽免了他。
English: Ting Shih was once demoted for a minor offense. The supervisor wanted to dismiss him, but he pardoned him because he appreciated his virtue.

古文：其后廷式管干江州太平宫而妻死，哭之极哀。
现代文：后来廷式管理江州太平宫而妻子去世，他哭得很哀伤。
English: Later, he managed the Jiangzhou Taiping Palace in the imperial style, and his wife passed away. He cried very sadly.

古文：苏子瞻爱其义，为文以美之。
现代文：苏轼欣赏他的行义，曾专门撰文给以表彰。
English: Su Shi appreciated his actions and wrote a special article to commend him.

