古文：宋子曰：上古神农氏若存若亡，然味其徽号两言至今存矣。生人不能久生而五谷生之，五谷不能自生而生人生之。
现代文：人做不到只依靠自己长期生存下去，人能生活下去要靠五谷来供养；可是五谷也无法只依靠自己生长，需要人种植培育。
English: People can not rely on themselves to survive for a long time. If people can live, they must rely on grain to support them. However, grain can not grow on its own, it needs to be planted and cultivated by people.

古文：土脉历时代而异，种性随水土而分。
现代文：土壤的性质经过漫长的时代而有所改变，谷物的种类、特性也会因为环境变化而表现出差异。
English: The nature of the soil has changed over a long period of time, and the types and characteristics of cereals will also show differences due to environmental changes.

古文：不然，神农去陶唐，粒食已千年矣。耒耜之利，以教天下，岂有隐焉。而纷纷嘉种，必待后稷详明，其故何也？
现代文：然而，从神农时代到唐尧时代，人们食用五谷已经长达千年之久了，神农氏教导天下百姓耕种，使用耒耜等耕作工具的便利方法几乎没有人不了解，那么为什么那些后来培育出优良品种，一定要等到后稷出来才得到详细说明，这其中又是什么原因呢？
English: However, from the Shennong era to the Tang Dynasty era, people have been eating grains for thousands of years. Shennong taught the world's people to cultivate, and almost no one does not understand the convenient method of using ploughs and other farming tools. So why did those who later bred fine varieties have to wait until later to get a detailed explanation, and what is the reason for this?

古文：纨绔之子，以赭衣视笠蓑；经生之家，以农夫为诟詈。
现代文：那些贵族子弟将劳动人民看成地位最低贱的人；那些读书人把 农夫 二字当成辱骂人的话。
English: Those sons of the aristocracy regard the working people as the lowest of the low; those readers regard the word "farmer" as a term of abuse.

古文：晨炊晚饷，知其味而忘其源者众矣！
现代文：他们饱食终日，只知道早晚餐饭的味美，却忘了粮食是从哪里来的，这种人真是太多了！
English: There are too many people who eat all day long, only know the taste of breakfast and dinner, but forget where the food comes from!

古文：夫先农而系之以神，岂人力之所为哉！
现代文：这样看来，奉开创农业生产的先祖为 神 就十分自然了，这难道只是人为地制造出来的吗？
English: From this perspective, it is quite natural to worship the ancestors who pioneered agricultural production as gods. Is this just artificially created?

古文：总名
现代文：总名
English: Last name

古文：凡谷无定名，百谷指成数言。五谷则麻、菽、麦、稷、黍，独遗稻者，以著书圣贤起自西北也。
现代文： 谷 并不是某一种特定的粮食。 百谷 是说谷物种类繁多，这是就谷物的整体名称。 五谷 是指麻、菽、麦、稷、黍，其中唯独漏掉了稻子，这是因为著书的先贤多来自于西北，未曾听过这种生长于南方的作物。
English: Gu is not a specific kind of grain. 百谷 means that there are many kinds of grains, which is the overall name of the grain. 五谷 refers to hemp, buckwheat, wheat, barley, oats, of which only rice is omitted, this is because the sages who wrote the book were mostly from the northwest and had never heard of this crop growing in the south.

古文：今天下育民人者，稻居什七，而来、牟、黍、稷居什三。
现代文：但是现在全国百姓所吃的粮食之中，稻子占了十分之七，小麦、大麦、黍、稷一共占了十分之三。
English: However, rice now accounts for seven-tenths of the grain eaten by the people of the whole country, while wheat, barley, millet and sorghum together account for three-tenths.

古文：麻、菽二者，功用已全入蔬饵膏馔之中，而犹系之谷者。
现代文：麻和豆这两类已经被完全列为蔬菜、糕饼、脂油等副食使用了，之所以将它们归入五谷之中，只不过是沿用了以前的说法罢了。
English: The two types of hemp and beans have been fully classified as vegetables, cakes, fats and other side dishes. The reason why they are classified as grains is just a continuation of the previous argument.

古文：从其朔也。○稻凡稻种最多。
现代文：稻粮食作物中稻的种类最多。
English: Rice has the largest variety of grain crops.

古文：不粘者，禾曰稌，米曰粳。粘者，禾曰稌，米曰糯。
现代文：没有黏性的一类叫做粳稻，舂出的米叫做粳米，有黏性的稻叫糯稻，舂出的米叫做糯米。
English: A type of rice that is not sticky is called glutinous rice, the rice that is sprouted is called glutinous rice, the rice that is sticky is called glutinous rice, and the rice that is sprouted is called glutinous rice.

古文：质本粳而晚收带粘不可为酒，只可为粥者，又一种性也。
现代文：本来属于粳稻的一种而晚熟且带黏性的，不适合用来酿酒，只能用来煮粥，这是另一个稻种。
English: Originally a late-ripening and viscous kind of indica rice, it is not suitable for making wine, but can only be used to cook porridge, which is another kind of rice.

古文：凡稻谷形有长芒、短芒、长粒、尖粒、圆顶、扁圆面不一，其中米色有雪白、牙黄、大赤、半紫、杂黑不一。
现代文：从外形上区分，稻谷形状有长芒、短芒，长粒、尖粒、圆顶、扁粒等多种不一。其中米的颜色有雪白、淡黄、大红、淡紫、灰黑等不同颜色。
English: From the point of view of shape, the shape of rice grains varies from long grain, short grain, long grain, pointed grain, dome, flat grain, etc. Among them, the color of rice is snow-white, light yellow, red, light purple, gray-black and other different colors.

古文：湿种之期，最早者春分以前，名为社种，最迟者后于清明。
现代文：浸稻种的日期，最早的是在春分以前，叫做社种，最晚的则在清明以后。
English: The earliest date for soaking rice seeds is before the vernal equinox, which is called the social seed, and the latest is after the spring equinox.

古文：凡播种，先以稻麦稿包浸数日，俟其生芽，撒于田中，生出寸许，其名曰秧。
现代文：播种前，先用稻草或麦秆包好种子，放在水里浸泡几天，等种子发芽后再撒到秧田中。苗长到一寸多，就叫做秧。
English: Before sowing, first wrap the seeds with straw or wheat straw, soak them in water for a few days, wait for the seeds to germinate, and then scatter them in the straw field. If the seedlings grow to more than one inch, they are called strawberries.

古文：秧生三十日即拨起分栽。
现代文：秧龄满三十天，就可以拔起来分栽了。
English: When the chrysanthemums are 30 days old, they can be pulled up and planted separately.

古文：若田亩逢旱干、水溢，不可插秧。
现代文：如果稻田遇到干旱或者水涝，都不能插秧。
English: If there is drought or waterlogging in the paddy field, no rice can be transplanted.

古文：秧过期，老而长节，即栽于亩中，生谷数粒，结果而已。
现代文：秧苗过了育秧期就会变老而长节，这时即使再插到田里，结谷也很少。
English: After the nursery period, the seedlings will become old and long. At this time, even if they are replanted in the field, there will be few cuttings.

古文：凡秧田一亩所生秧，供移栽二十五亩。
现代文：通常一亩田的秧苗可以移栽成二十五亩稻田。
English: Normally, the seedlings of one mu of paddy can be transplanted into 25 mu of paddy.

古文：凡秧既分栽后，早者七十日即收获，最迟者历夏及冬二百日方收获。
现代文：插秧后，早熟的品种大约七十天就能收割。最晚熟的品种，要从夏天一直到入冬大约两百多天后才能收成。
English: After transplanting, early-ripening varieties can be harvested in about seventy days, and the latest-ripening varieties can be harvested from summer to winter in about two hundred days.

古文：其冬季播种、仲夏即收者，则广南之稻，地无霜雪故也。
现代文：还有一些是在冬天播种，五月就能收获的，这样的稻子多生长在广东省，因为那里终年没有霜雪。
English: Others are sown in winter and can be harvested in May. Such rice is mostly grown in Guangdong Province, because there is no frost all year round.

古文：凡稻旬日失水，即愁旱干。
现代文：如果稻田缺水，稻子十天就可能干枯了。
English: If there is a shortage of water in the paddy fields, the rice may dry up in ten days.

古文：夏种冬收之谷，必山间源水不绝之亩，其谷种亦耐久，其土脉亦寒，不催苗也。
现代文：夏天种、冬天收的水稻，要种在山间可以持续获得水源的田里，这类稻种生长周期长，土壤温度低，所以生长缓慢。
English: Summer-sown and winter-harvested rice should be planted in fields in the mountains where water can be continuously obtained. This type of rice has a long growth cycle and low soil temperature, so it grows slowly.

古文：湖滨之田，待夏潦已过，六月方栽者，其秧立夏播种，撒藏高亩之上，以待时也。
现代文：靠近湖边的田地，要等到夏季洪水过后，大约六月份才能插秧的。其秧苗应在立夏时节播种，还要播在地势较高的秧田里，等汛期过后才插秧。
English: In the fields near the lake, it is necessary to wait until after the summer floods, about June, to plant the seedlings. The seedlings should be sown at the beginning of the summer season, and they should also be sown in the higher-lying fields, and the seedlings should be planted after the planting season.

古文：南方平原，田多一岁两栽两获者。
现代文：南方平原地区栽种的稻子，大多一年可以收成两次。
English: Most of the rice grown in the Nanfang Plain region can be harvested twice a year.

古文：其再栽秧，俗名晚糯，非粳类也。
现代文：第二次插的秧俗名叫晚糯，不是粳稻。
English: The second insertion is commonly called the late rice, not the early rice.

古文：六月刈初禾，耕治老膏田，插再生秧。
现代文：六月割完早稻，田地经过犁耙后，插再生秧。
English: In June, after cutting the early rice, the fields are ploughed, and then the recycled ploughs are inserted.

古文：其秧清明时已偕早秧撒布。
现代文：这种秧是在清明就和早稻秧同时播种的。
English: This kind of alfalfa was sown at the same time as early rice alfalfa in Qingming.

古文：早秧一日无水即死，此秧历四五两月，任从烈日旱干无忧，此一异也。
现代文：早稻秧一天缺水就会死，而这种秧经过四月和五月两个月，任凭曝晒和干旱都不怕。这是一种不同的类型。
English: Early rice worms can die from a single day of water shortage, but these worms, after two months of April and May, are not afraid of exposure and drought. This is a different type.

古文：凡再植稻遇秋多晴，则汲灌与稻相终始。
现代文：晚稻遇到秋季多晴天时，就要经常不断地灌水。
English: When the late rice encounters more sunny days in autumn, it is necessary to constantly irrigate.

古文：农家勤苦，为春酒之需也。
现代文：农家这样辛勤的劳动，是为了酿造春酒的需要。
English: Such hard work of farmers is for the sake of brewing spring wine.

古文：凡稻旬日失水则死期至，幻出旱稻一种，粳而不粘者，即高山可插，又一异也。
现代文：水稻缺水十天就会要死掉。但后来却从中变化出一种旱稻，是不黏的粳稻，即使在高山上也可种植，这又是一种变异的类型。
English: Rice would die after ten days of water shortage, but later, a type of dry rice was developed from it. It is a non-sticky paddy rice that can be grown even in high mountains. This is another type of mutation.

古文：香稻一种，取其芳气以供贵人，收实甚少，滋益全无，不足尚也。
现代文：还有一种香稻，由于它有香气，通常专供富贵人家享用。然产量很低，也没有什么滋补的益处，不值得提倡。
English: There is also a kind of fragrant rice, which, because of its aroma, is usually reserved for the rich and famous. However, the yield is very low, and there is no nourishing benefit, so it is not worth promoting.

古文：○稻宜
现代文：稻宜
English: Inagi

古文：凡稻，土脉焦枯，则穗实萧索。
现代文：凡是稻子，如果栽种在土壤贫瘠的稻田里，生长出的稻穗上的谷粒就会稀疏不饱满。
English: In the case of rice, if it is planted in a rice field with poor soil, the grains on the growing ears will be sparse and not full.

古文：勤农粪田，多方以助之。
现代文：因此勤劳的农民就会使用多种方法施肥，帮助水稻生长。
English: Therefore, diligent farmers will use a variety of methods to fertilize and help rice grow.

古文：人畜秽遗、榨油枯饼、草皮木叶，以佐生机，普天之所同也。
现代文：比如人畜的粪便、榨了油的枯饼、草皮、树叶等。这些都被用来辅助肥力从而促进水稻生长，全国各地都是这样做的。
English: For example, human and animal feces, squeezed oil cake, turf, leaves, etc. These are all used to assist fertility and promote rice growth, and this is done all over the country.

古文：土性带冷浆者，宜骨灰蘸秧根，石灰淹苗足，向阳暖土不宜也。
现代文：对于长年受冷水浸泡的稻田一一 冷水田 ，插秧时稻秧的根要用骨灰点蘸，再用石灰撒于秧脚，但对于向阳的暖水田就不适用了。
English: For paddy fields that have been immersed in cold water for many years, especially cold paddy fields, the roots of the rice stalks should be sprinkled with bone ash and then sprinkled with lime, but this does not apply to warm paddy fields facing the sun.

古文：土脉坚紧者，宜耕陇，叠块压薪而烧之，填坟松土不宜也。
现代文：对于土质坚硬的田，应该把它耕成垄，将土块叠起堆放在柴草上烧，但对于黏土和土质疏松的稻田就不适合这样处理。
English: For fields with hard soil, it should be ploughed into ridges, and the soil blocks should be stacked and piled on firewood to burn, but this is not suitable for rice fields with clay and loose soil.

古文：○稻工
现代文：稻工
English: Rice workers

古文：凡稻田刈获不再种者，土宜本秋耕垦，使宿稿化烂，敌粪力一倍。
现代文：凡是收割后不再耕种的稻田，应该在当年秋季翻耕、开垦，使稻茬腐烂在稻田里，这样就可以让土壤获得养分，比得上多施一倍的肥。
English: All paddy fields that are no longer cultivated after harvest should be ploughed and cleared in the autumn of the year, so that the rice stalks rot in the paddy fields. In this way, the soil can be nourished and twice as much fertilizer can be applied.

古文：或秋旱无水及怠农春耕，则收获损薄也。
现代文：如果秋天干旱没有水，或者是懒散的农家误了农时，到第二年春天才翻耕，收成就会减少。
English: If there is no water in the dry autumn, or if lazy farmers miss the farming season and do not plough until the following spring, the harvest will be reduced.

古文：凡粪田若撒枯浇泽，恐霖雨至，过水来，肥质随漂而去。
现代文：在给稻田施肥的时候，最怕遇上暴雨，雨水一冲肥分就会随水漂走。
English: When fertilizing rice paddies, the worst thing is to encounter torrential rain, the rainwater will wash away the fertilizer with the water.

古文：谨视天时，在老农心计也。
现代文：因此密切注意掌握天气变化，就要靠老农的经验与智慧了。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to rely on the experience and wisdom of old farmers to pay close attention to weather changes.

古文：凡一耕之后，勤者再耕、三耕，然后施耙，则土质匀碎，而其中膏脉释化也。
现代文：稻田耕过一遍之后，有些勤快的农民还要耕上第二遍、第三遍，然后再耙田地，这样一来土质就会粉碎得很均匀，而其中的肥分也能均匀分散开了。
English: After the rice field has been ploughed once, some diligent farmers will plough the second and third times, and then plough the field again, so that the soil will be crushed very evenly, and the fertilizer in it can be evenly dispersed.

古文：凡牛力穷者，两人以扛悬耜，项背相望而起土。两人竟日仅敌一牛之力。
现代文：有的农民家里缺少畜力，两个人就在犁上绑一根杠子，两人一前一后拉犁翻耕，狠劲干一整天，才能抵得上一头牛的劳动效率。
English: Some farmers lack animal power at home, so two people tie a bar to the plow, and two people pull the plow forward and backward, and work hard for a whole day in order to match the labor efficiency of a cow.

古文：若耕后牛穷，制成磨耙，两人肩手磨轧，则一日敌三牛之力也。
现代文：如果犁耕后缺少畜力，就做个磨耙，两人用肩和手拉着耙，这样干上一整天可以完成三头牛的工作。
English: If there is a shortage of animal power after ploughing, make a mill, two people pull the plough with their shoulders and hands, so that you can complete the work of three cows for a whole day.

古文：凡牛，中国惟水、黄两种。
现代文：我国中原地区只有水牛、黄牛两种耕牛。
English: In the Central Plains region of China, only buffalo and yellow cattle are farmed.

古文：水牛力倍于黄。
现代文：其中水牛力气要比黄牛大一倍。
English: Among them, the buffalo is twice as strong as the cow.

古文：但畜水牛者，冬与土室御寒，夏与池塘浴水，畜养心计亦倍于黄牛也。
现代文：但是水牛冬天需要牛棚来抵御酷寒，夏天则要牵到池塘中泡水，养水牛所花费的心力，也要比养黄牛的多一倍。
English: But buffaloes need a cow shed in winter to withstand the cold, and in summer they have to be led to a pond to bathe. The effort required to raise a buffalo is also twice as much as raising a cow.

古文：凡牛春前力耕汗出，切忌雨点，将雨则疾驱入室。
现代文：耕牛在立春之前耕地时用力过度出了汗，一定要避免淋雨着凉，如果发现要下雨了，就赶紧将耕牛赶进牛棚。
English: Before the first day of spring, when the oxen plough the land, they sweat excessively. It is necessary to avoid the rain and get cold. If it is about to rain, the oxen should be hurried into the cow shed.

古文：候过谷雨，则任从风雨不惧也。
现代文：等到过了谷雨之后，任凭风吹雨淋也不怕了。
English: After waiting for the rain to pass, I wasn't afraid to let the wind blow and rain fall.

古文：吴郡力田者，以锄代耜，不藉牛力。
现代文：苏州一带的农民用铁锄代替犁，因此不用耕牛。
English: Farmers in the Suzhou area use shovels instead of ploughs, so they don't have to plough cows.

古文：愚见贫农之家，会计牛值与水草之资，窃盗死病之变，不若人力亦便。
现代文：我认为贫苦的农户，如果合计一下购买耕牛的本钱和水草饲料的费用以及被盗窃、生病和死亡等意外损失，倒还不如用人力耕作划算些。
English: I think that for poor farmers, if you add up the cost of buying cattle and the cost of aquatic feed, as well as unexpected losses such as theft, illness and death, it is better to use human cultivation.

古文：假如有牛者，供办十亩。无牛用锄而勤者半之。既已无牛，则秋获之后，田中无复刍牧之患，而菽麦麻蔬诸种，纷纷可种，以再获偿半荒之亩，似亦相当也。
现代文：比方说，有牛的农户能耕种十亩农田，而没牛的农户用铁锄，勤快些也能种上前者田数的一半，既然是没有牛，在秋收之后，也就不必考虑在田里种牛饲料及放牧的麻烦事儿，同时可以腾出手来种植豆、麦、麻、蔬菜等作物了。
English: For example, a farmer with cattle can cultivate ten mu of farmland, while a farmer without cattle can use a spade to diligently plant half the number of fields of the former. Since there is no cattle, after the autumn harvest, there is no need to consider the trouble of growing cattle feed and grazing in the field. At the same time, you can free your hands to grow beans, wheat, hemp, vegetables and other crops.

古文：凡稻分秧之后数日，旧叶萎黄而更生新叶。
现代文：这样，用二次收获来补偿荒废了的那一半田地的损失，似乎也就和有牛的家庭差不多了。
English: In this way, using the second harvest to compensate for the loss of the half of the field that was abandoned seems to be almost the same as a family with cattle.

古文：青叶既长，则耔可施焉。
现代文：水稻插秧以后，几天之内之前的叶子就会变得枯黄，新叶会很快长出来。
English: After the rice is transplanted, the previous leaves will turn yellow within a few days, and new leaves will grow quickly.

古文：植杖于手，以足扶泥壅根，并屈宿田水草，使不生也。
现代文：新叶长出来后，就可以耔田了。籽田的方法是手里拄着木棍，用脚把泥培在稻禾根上，并且把原来田里的小杂草踩进泥里，使它不能生长。
English: After the new leaves grow out, it is possible to plow the field. The method of the seed field is to hold a wooden stick in your hand, use your feet to grow mud on the rice roots, and trample the small weeds in the original field into the mud so that it cannot grow.

古文：凡宿田菵草之类，遇耔而屈折。
现代文：稻田里的水稗子草之类的杂草，用这种方法就能解决。
English: With this method, weeds such as water hyacinth in rice paddies can be eliminated.

古文：而ㄗ、稗与荼、蓼非足力所可除者，则耘以继之。
现代文：但是稗草、苦菜、水蓼等杂草却不是用脚力就能除掉的，必须用手拔除。
English: However, weeds such as rushes, bitter greens and leeches cannot be removed by foot, but must be pulled out by hand.

古文：耘者苦在腰手，辨在两眸。
现代文：除草的人腰和手会很辛苦，认真分辨稻禾和稗草则要靠人的两只眼睛。
English: Weeding can be hard on the waist and hands, but it's up to the eyes to distinguish between rice and weeds.

古文：非类既去，而嘉谷茂焉。
现代文：除净了杂草，禾苗就会生长茂盛。
English: Remove the weeds, and the seedlings will grow vigorously.

古文：从此泄以防潦，溉以防旱，旬月而 奄观銍刈 矣。
现代文：此后，还要排水防潦，灌溉防旱，一个月后，就要准备收割了。
English: After that, there will be drainage to prevent floods, irrigation to prevent droughts, and a month later, the crops will be ready for harvest.

古文：○稻灾
现代文：稻灾
English: Rice blight

古文：凡早稻种，秋初收藏，当午晒时烈日火气在内，入仓廪中关闭太急，则其谷粘带暑气。
现代文：旱稻的稻种要在初秋时收进谷仓，如果中午在烈日下曝晒，种子内的热气还没散发就装入谷仓，之后封闭谷仓又太急的话，稻种就会带着热气过冬。
English: The rice seeds of dry rice should be put into the barn in early autumn. If they are exposed to the hot sun at noon, the hot air inside the seeds will be loaded into the barn before it is released. If the barn is closed too soon, the rice seeds will carry the hot air through the winter.

古文：明年田有粪肥，土脉发烧，东南风助暖，则尽发炎火，大坏苗穗，此一灾也。
现代文：等到第二年播种后，田里的粪肥就会发酵使土壤温度升高，再加上东南风带来的暖热气息，整片田就会像被火烧一样发热，这会给禾苗和稻穗造成很大的损害。这是稻子的第一种灾害。
English: After the second year of sowing, the manure in the field will start to ferment, causing the soil temperature to rise. Coupled with the warm and hot air brought by the southeast wind, the entire field will heat up as if it were on fire, which will cause great damage to the seedlings and ears of rice. This is the first kind of disaster for rice.

古文：若种谷晚凉入廪，或冬至数九天收贮雪水、冰水一瓮，清明湿种时，每石以数碗激洒，立解暑气，则任从东南风暖，而此苗清秀异常矣。
现代文：如果稻种等到晚上凉了以后再入谷仓，应该在冬至的数九寒天时节收藏一缸冰水、雪水。到来年清明浸种的时候，每石稻种泼上几碗，热气就能够立刻解除。这样一来，任凭东南风吹拂带来多高的温度，禾苗稻穗都会生长得很好。
English: If you wait for the rice seeds to cool down in the evening before putting them in the barn, you should collect a tank of ice water and snow water during the coldest days of the winter solstice. When you soak the seeds in the coming year, pour a few bowls of hot water over each stone of rice seeds, and the hot air can be released immediately. In this way, no matter how high the temperature caused by the southeast wind, the seedlings and ears of rice will grow well.

古文：凡稻撒种时，或水浮数寸，其谷未即沉下，骤发狂风，堆积一隅，此二灾也。
现代文：播撒稻种时，如果田里积水过深，稻种没有来得及沉下，这时猛然刮起了狂风，谷种就会堆积在秧田的一个角落，这是第二种灾害。
English: When sowing rice seeds, if the water is too deep in the field and the rice seeds do not have time to sink, then a strong wind suddenly blows, and the grains will pile up in a corner of the paddy field. This is the second kind of disaster.

古文：谨视风定而后撒，则沉匀成秧矣。
现代文：因此要注意在风势平定以后再播撒稻种，种子就能均匀地沉下并育成秧苗。
English: Therefore, it is important to sow rice seeds after the wind subsides, so that the seeds can sink evenly and grow into seedlings.

古文：凡谷种生秧之后，防雀聚食，此三灾也。
现代文：稻种长出秧苗之后，就怕成群的雀鸟飞来啄食，这是第三种灾害。
English: After rice seedlings have sprouted, they are afraid of flocks of birds flying to peck at them. This is the third type of disaster.

古文：立标飘扬鹰俑，则雀可驱矣。
现代文：在稻田中竖立一根杆子，上面悬挂些假鹰、假人随风飘扬，就可以驱赶雀鸟了。
English: If you erect a pole in a paddy field and hang some fake eagles and dummies on it, they will fly with the wind and chase away the birds.

古文：凡秧沉脚未定，阴雨连绵，则损折过半，此四灾也。
现代文：移栽的稻秧还没有完全扎根的时候，一旦赶上阴雨连绵的天气，这样就会损坏一大半，这是第四种灾害。
English: When the transplanted rice stalks have not fully taken root, once the rainy weather catches up, it will damage more than half of the corms. This is the fourth type of disaster.

古文：邀天晴霁三日，则粒粒皆生矣。
现代文：只要求得连续三个晴天，秧苗就能全部成活了。
English: All it takes is three consecutive sunny days for the seedlings to come to life.

古文：凡苗既函之后，亩上肥泽连发，南风薰热，函内生虫，此五灾也。
现代文：秧苗返青长出新叶之后，土壤里的肥力不断散发出来，再加上南风带来的热气一熏，禾稻的叶鞘及茎秆里就会生虫，这是第五种灾害。
English: After the seedlings turn green and grow new leaves, the fertility in the soil is constantly released. Coupled with the hot air brought by the south wind, insects will grow in the leaf sheath and stem of the rice. This is the fifth kind of disaster.

古文：邀天遇西风雨一阵，则虫化而谷生矣。
现代文：盼望老天这时能遇上一阵西风雨，害虫就能被消灭，而禾稻便可以正常地生长了。
English: It is hoped that at this time, the heavens can encounter a storm, the pests can be eliminated, and the rice can grow normally.

古文：凡苗吐穑之后，暮夜 鬼火 游烧，此六灾也。此火乃朽木腹中放出。
现代文：禾稻抽穗之后，夜晚 鬼火 四处飘游烧焦禾稻，这是第六种灾害。 鬼火 是从腐烂的木头中散放出来的。
English: After the ears of rice have been plucked, nighttime "ghost fires" travel around and scorch the rice, which is the sixth type of disaster.

古文：凡木母火子，子藏母腹，母身未坏，子性千秋不灭。
现代文：木与火如同母与子，火藏在木头之中，木头不坏的时候，火也就永远藏在木头里面。
English: Wood and fire are like mother and son. Fire is hidden in wood, and as long as the wood does not deteriorate, fire will always be hidden in wood.

古文：每逢多雨之年，孤野坟墓多被狐狸穿塌。其中棺板为水浸，朽烂之极，所谓母质坏也。火子无附，脱母飞扬。
现代文：每逢多雨的年份，荒野中的坟墓多被狐狸挖穿而塌陷，坟里面的棺材板子被水浸透而腐烂，这就是所谓母体坏了，火子失去依附，于是离开母体而四处飞扬。
English: Every rainy year, the graves in the wilderness are mostly dug through by foxes and collapse, and the coffin board inside the grave is soaked with water and rots. This is the so-called parent body is broken, the fire loses its attachment, so it leaves the parent body and flies around.

古文：然阴火不见阳光，直待日没黄昏，此火冲隙而出，其力不能上腾，飘游不定，数尺而止。
现代文：但是阴火是见不得阳光的，只能等到黄昏太阳落山以后，这种鬼火才从坟墓的缝隙里冲出来，但又不能飞得更高，只能在几尺高的地方飘游不定。
English: However, dark fire cannot see the sunlight, and it is only after the sun sets in the evening that this kind of ghost fire rushes out from the crevice of the grave, but it cannot fly higher, and can only float in places a few feet high.

古文：凡禾穑叶遇之立刻焦炎。
现代文：禾叶和稻穗一旦遇上立刻就被烧焦。
English: Grass leaves and ears of rice are scorched as soon as they are touched.

古文：逐火之人则他处树根放光，以为鬼也。奋梃击之，反有鬼变枯柴之说。
现代文：驱逐 鬼火 的人，一看见有树根处有火光，便以为是鬼，举起棍棒用力去打，于是就有了 鬼变枯柴 的说法。
English: The people who drove out the ghost fire thought it was a ghost as soon as they saw the light of a fire at the root of a tree, and they raised their sticks to hit it hard. This gave rise to the saying that ghosts turn into dead wood.

古文：不知向来鬼火见灯光而已化矣。
现代文：他不知道 鬼火 向来都是一见灯光就会消失的。
English: He doesn't know that ghost fires always disappear at the first sight of light.

古文：凡苗自函活以至颖栗，早者食水三斗，晚者食水五斗，失水即枯，此七灾也。
现代文：秧苗自返青到抽穗结实，早熟稻每蔸需要水量三斗，晚熟稻每蔸需水量五斗，如果缺水就会枯死。这是第七种灾害。
English: Early-maturing rice needs three buckets of water per stalk, late-maturing rice needs five buckets of water per stalk. If there is a lack of water, it will wither and die. This is the seventh type of disaster.

古文：汲灌之智，人巧已无余矣。
现代文：这个时候要从别的地方引水灌溉，在这一方面，人们的聪明才智已经得到充分的发挥了。
English: At this time, it is necessary to divert water from other places for irrigation. In this regard, people's ingenuity has been fully exerted.

古文：凡稻成熟之时，遇狂风吹粒殒落，或阴雨竟旬，谷粒沾湿自烂，此八灾也。
现代文：稻子成熟的时候，如果遇到刮大风，谷粒就会被吹落；如果遇上连续十来天的阴雨天气，谷粒就会受潮发霉腐烂，这是第八种灾害。
English: When the rice is ripe, if there is a strong wind, the grains will be blown down; if there is a continuous rainy weather for more than ten days, the grains will be damp and rotten. This is the eighth kind of disaster.

古文：然风灾不越三十里，阴雨灾不越三百里，偏方厄难亦不广被。
现代文：但是风灾的范围一般不会超过方圆三十里。阴雨成灾的范围一般也不会超过方圆三百里，这都只是局部地区的灾害，涉及的范围并不很广。
English: However, the scope of wind disasters generally does not exceed a radius of thirty miles. The scope of rainstorm disasters generally does not exceed a radius of three hundred miles. These are only local disasters, and the scope is not very wide.

古文：风落不可为。
现代文：谷粒被风吹落这是没有办法的。
English: There is no way that the wind can blow the grain down.

古文：若贫困之家，苦于无霁，将湿谷升于锅内，燃薪其下，炸去糠膜，收炒糗以充饥，亦补助造化之一端矣。
现代文：如果贫苦的农家遇到阴雨天时，可以把湿稻谷放在锅里，烧火爆去谷壳，做炒米饭来充饥，这也算是度过天灾的一种补救办法吧。
English: If poor farmers encounter a rainy day, they can put the wet rice in a pot, burn it to remove the chaff, and make fried rice to satisfy their hunger. This is also a remedy to get through the natural disaster.

古文：○水利
现代文：水利
English: Water conservancy

古文：凡稻防旱藉水，独甚五谷。
现代文：在 五谷 之中，水稻是最怕旱情的，比其他各种谷物需要的水量更多。
English: Of the five grains, rice is the most drought-prone, requiring more water than any other grain.

古文：厥土沙、泥、硗、腻，随方不一。
现代文：稻田土壤有沙土、黏土及地力贫瘠、肥沃的差别，各地情况都不一样。
English: The soil of rice paddies varies from sandy soil to clay soil, and from poor to fertile. The situation varies from place to place.

古文：有三日即干者，有半月后干者。
现代文：有的稻田灌水三天之后干涸了，也有的半个月以后才干涸。
English: Some rice paddies dried up after three days of irrigation, while others only dried up after half a month.

古文：天泽不降，则人力挽水以济。
现代文：如果连续多天不降雨，就要靠人力引水浇灌来补救。
English: If it does not rain for several days in a row, it is necessary to rely on manual watering to remedy.

古文：凡河滨有制筒车者，堰陂障流，绕于车下，激轮使转，挽水入筒，一一倾于枧内，流入亩中。
现代文：靠近江河边有使用筒车的，在水边筑个水坝来阻挡水流，使水流绕过筒车的下方，冲激筒车的水轮旋转，并装水进入筒内，这样一筒筒的水便会倒进引水槽，然后导流进入田里。
English: If there is a tubular carriage used near a river, build a dam at the water's edge to block the water flow, so that the water flow bypasses the bottom of the tubular carriage, the water wheel of the impulse tubular carriage rotates, and water is loaded into the cylinder, so that the water of one cylinder will be poured into the diversion tank, and then the diversion will enter the field.

古文：昼夜不息，百亩无忧。
现代文：这样昼夜不停地引水，即便浇灌上百亩田地也不成问题。
English: In this way, water is diverted around the clock, and even if a hundred mu of fields are irrigated, it will not be a problem.

古文：其湖池不流水，或以牛力转盘，或聚数人踏转。
现代文：在没有流水的湖边、池塘边，有的使用牛力拉动转盘进而带动水车，有的用几个人一齐踩踏来转动水车。
English: On the edge of lakes and ponds where there is no running water, some use oxen to pull the turntable to drive the waterwheel, while others use several people to pedal together to turn the waterwheel.

古文：车身长者二丈，短者半之。
现代文：水车车身长的达两丈，短的也有一丈。
English: The length of the waterwheel is up to two meters, and the short one is also one meter.

古文：其内用龙骨拴串板，关水逆流而上。
现代文：车内用龙骨连接一块块串板，笼住一格格的水使它向上逆行。
English: Inside the car, the keel is used to connect piece by piece of string plate, enclosing a lattice of water to make it move backwards upwards.

古文：大抵一人竟日之力，灌田五亩，而牛则倍之。
现代文：一人用水车干一整天活儿，大概能浇灌田地五亩，用牛力功效就可以高出一倍。
English: One person can work all day with a water truck, and can probably irrigate five mu of fields, and the efficiency can be doubled with ox power.

古文：其浅池、小浍不载长车者，则数尺之车，一人两手疾转，竟日之功可灌二亩而已。
现代文：在较浅的水池和小水沟里没办法安置大型水车，就可以使用几尺长的手摇水车。一个人用两手握住摇把迅速转动，一天的工夫能浇灌两亩田地。
English: In shallower pools and small ditches, where it is not possible to place a large water wheel, it is possible to use a hand-cranked water wheel a few feet long. A person can hold the handle with both hands and turn it quickly. A day's work can irrigate two acres of fields.

古文：扬郡以风帆数扇，俟风转车，风息则止。
现代文：扬州一带稻农一般要制作几片风帆，用风力来带动水车，没有风力，水车就不会转动。
English: Rice farmers in the Yangzhou area generally have to make several sails and use wind power to drive the waterwheel. Without wind power, the waterwheel will not turn.

古文：此车为救潦，欲去泽水以便栽种。
现代文：这种车是专为排涝使用的，排除积水以便于栽种。
English: This vehicle is specifically used for weeding, removing standing water to facilitate planting.

古文：盖去水非取水也，不适济旱。
现代文：因为是用来排涝而不是用于取水灌溉的，所以不适合用来抗旱。
English: Because it is used for drainage and not for irrigation, it is not suitable for drought relief.

古文：用桔槔、辘轳，功劳又甚细已。
现代文：至于使用桔槔和辘轳取水灌溉，那工效就更加低了。
English: As for the use of orange peel and alfalfa for water irrigation, the efficiency is even lower.

古文：○麦
现代文：麦
English: Wheat

古文：凡麦有数种，小麦曰来，麦之长也；大麦曰牟、曰广；杂麦曰雀、曰荞；皆以播种同时、花形相似、粉食同功而得麦名也。
现代文：麦子有很多种类。小麦叫做 来 ，是麦子中最主要的一种。
English: There are many types of wheat. Wheat is called rye and is the most important type of wheat.

古文：四海之内，燕、秦、晋、豫、齐鲁诸道，民粒食，小麦居半，而黍、稷、稻、粱仅居半。
现代文：大麦有叫做 牟 的，也有叫做 穬 的。其他的杂麦有叫做 雀 的，有叫做 荞 的。因为播种期相近，花的形状相似，又都是磨成面粉用来食用的，所以都称作麦。在我国，河北、陕西、山西、河南、山东等地，老百姓吃的粮食当中，小麦占了一半，而黍子、小米、稻子、高粱等加起来总共占了一半。
English: There is barley called mu and there is barley called corm. Other weeds are called sparrow and thistle. Because the sowing period is similar, the shape of the flowers is similar, and they are all ground into flour for consumption, they are all called barley. In China, in Hebei, Shaanxi, Shanxi, Henan, Shandong and other places, wheat accounts for half of the grain eaten by the people, while hazelnuts, millet, rice, sorghum, etc. together account for half.

古文：西极川、云，东至闽、浙，吴、楚腹焉，方长六千里中种小麦者，二十分而一，磨面以为捻头、环饵、馒首、汤料之需，而饔飧不及焉。
现代文：最西向到四川、云南，东向到福建、浙江以及江苏和江西、湖南、湖北等中部地区，方圆六千里之中，种植小麦的大约占了二十分之一。将小麦磨成面粉用来做花卷、饼糕、馒头和汤面等食用，但早晚正餐都不用它。
English: As far west as Sichuan and Yunnan, and as far east as Fujian, Zhejiang, and the central regions of Jiangsu, Jiangxi, Hunan, and Hubei, wheat cultivation accounts for about one-twentieth of the 6,000-mile radius. Wheat is milled into flour and used to make flower rolls, cakes, steamed buns, and soup noodles, but it is not used for morning or evening meals.

古文：种余麦者五十分而一，闾阎作苦以充朝膳，而贵介不与焉。
现代文：种植其他麦类的只有五十分之一，民间贫苦百姓拿来当早餐吃，富贵人家是不会吃它们的。
English: Only one-fiftieth of the other types of wheat are grown, and the poor folk eat them for breakfast, but the rich and noble do not eat them.

古文：广麦独产陕西，一名青稞，即大麦，随土而变。而皮成青黑色者，秦人专以饲马，饥荒人乃食之。
现代文：稞麦只产在陕西一带，又叫青稞，也就是大麦，它随土质的差别而皮色相应变化，陕西人专门用它来喂马，只有在饥荒的时候人们才吃它。
English: Buckwheat is only produced in the Shaanxi region. It is also known as barley, and its skin color changes according to the difference in soil quality. People in Shaanxi only use it to feed horses, and only eat it in times of famine.

古文：雀麦细穗，穗中又分十数细子，间亦野生。
现代文：雀麦的麦穗比较细小，每个麦穗中又分长开十多个麦粒，这种麦偶尔也有野生的。
English: Sparrow's ears of wheat are relatively small, with more than ten grains of wheat growing in each ear. This kind of wheat is occasionally found in the wild.

古文：荞麦实非麦类，然以其为粉疗饥，传名为麦，则麦之而已。
现代文：至于荞麦，它实际上并不算是麦类，但因为人们也用它磨粉来充饥，麦的名称流传下来，所以也就归为麦类了。
English: As for buckwheat, it is not actually a type of wheat, but because people also use it to grind flour to satisfy their hunger, the name of wheat has been passed down, so it is also classified as wheat.

古文：凡北方小麦，历四时之气，自秋播种，明年初夏方收。
现代文：北方的小麦要历经春夏秋冬四季变化，秋天时候播种一直到第二年夏天才收成。
English: Wheat in the north has to go through the four seasons of spring, summer, autumn and winter. It is sown in autumn and harvested in the summer of the following year.

古文：南方者种与收期，时日差短。
现代文：南方的小麦，从播种到收割的时间相对短一些。
English: Wheat in the south has a relatively short time from sowing to harvesting.

古文：江南麦花夜发，江北麦花昼发，亦一异也。
现代文：江南麦子晚间开花，江北麦子白天开花，这也是一个奇异的现象。
English: Wheat in the south of the Yangtze River blooms in the evening, and wheat in the north of the Yangtze River blooms during the day, which is also a strange phenomenon.

古文：大麦种获期与小麦相同，荞麦则秋半下种，不两月而即收。
现代文：大麦的播种和收割的日期与小麦基本相同。荞麦则应在中秋时播种，不到两个月就可以收割了。
English: The sowing and harvesting dates for barley are basically the same as for wheat. Buckwheat should be sown in mid-autumn, and can be harvested in less than two months.

古文：其苗遇霜即杀，邀天降霜迟迟，则有收矣。
现代文：荞麦苗遇到霜就会冻死，所以希望得天时，降霜的时间相对晚些，荞麦就可能获得丰收了。
English: When the buckwheat seedlings encounter frost, they will freeze to death, so it is hoped that the weather will be favorable, the time of frost will be relatively late, and the buckwheat may get a bumper harvest.

古文：○麦工
现代文：麦工
English: Wheat workers

古文：凡麦与稻初耕垦土则同，播种以后则耘耔诸勤苦皆属稻，麦惟施耨而已。
现代文：麦田的翻土和整地工作与水稻相同。但在播种以后，稻田需要三番两次地除草挞禾，而麦田只要锄锄草就行了。
English: The work of turning over the soil and levelling the ground in the wheat field is the same as that of rice. However, after sowing, the rice field needs to be weeded three times twice, while the wheat field only needs to be weeded.

古文：凡北方厥土坟垆易解释者，种麦之法耕具差异，耕即兼种。
现代文：北方的土壤是容易耕作的疏松黑土，种麦的方法和工具都与种稻子有所不同，耕和种是同时进行的。
English: The soil in the north is loose black soil that is easy to cultivate. The methods and tools for growing wheat are different from those for growing rice. Cultivation and planting are carried out simultaneously.

古文：其服牛起土者，耒不用耕，并列两铁于横木之上，其具方语曰镪。镪中间盛一小斗，贮麦种于内，其斗底空梅花眼。
现代文：用牛拉着起土的农具，不装犁头，而装一根横木，在横木上并排着安装两块尖铁，方言把它称为 镪 。 镪 的中间装个小斗，斗内盛麦种，斗底钻些梅花眼。
English: The agricultural tools used to lift the soil with the help of oxen are not equipped with hoes, but with a crossbar, on which two pieces of pointed iron are installed side by side, the dialect calls it.  is equipped with a small bucket in the middle, the bucket contains wheat seeds, and plum blossom eyes are drilled into the bottom of the bucket.

古文：牛行摇动，种子即从眼中撒下。
现代文：牛走时摇动斗，种子就从眼中撒下。
English: The cow shakes as it walks, and seeds fall from its eyes.

古文：欲密而多，则鞭牛疾走，子撒必多；欲稀而少，则缓其牛，撒种即少。
现代文：如想要种得又密又多，就赶牛快走，种子就撒得多；如要稀些少些，就让牛慢走，撒种就少。
English: If you want to plant densely and abundantly, drive the ox quickly and sow more seeds; if you want to sow sparsely and less, let the ox walk slowly and sow fewer seeds.

古文：既播种后，用驴驾两小石团，压土埋麦。
现代文：播种后，用驴拖两个小石磙压土埋麦种。
English: After sowing, a donkey is used to drag two small stone rakes to bury the wheat seeds in the compacted soil.

古文：凡麦种紧压方生。
现代文：土压紧了，麦种才能发芽。
English: The soil pressure is tight, and the wheat seeds can only germinate.

古文：南地不与北同者，多耕多耙之后，然后以灰拌种，手指拈而种之。种过之后，随以脚根压土使紧，以代北方驴石也。
现代文：南方土壤与北方的不同，先将麦田经过多次地耕耙，然后用草木灰拌种，用手指拈着种子点播，接着用脚跟把土踩紧，代替北方用驴拉石磙子压土。
English: The soil in the south is different from that in the north. First, the wheat fields are ploughed repeatedly, then the seeds are mixed with grass and wood ash, the seeds are sown with the fingers, and then the soil is trodden with the heel. Instead of the north, the soil is pressed with a donkey pulling a stone rake.

古文：耕种之后，勤议耨锄。
现代文：播种后，要勤于锄草。
English: After sowing, be diligent in weeding.

古文：凡耨草用阔面大，麦苗生后，耨不厌勤，余草生机尽诛锄下，则竟亩精华尽聚嘉实矣。
现代文：锄草要用宽面大锄。麦苗生出来后，锄得越勤越好，杂草锄尽，田里的全部肥分就都可以用来结成饱满的麦粒了。
English: After the wheat seedlings have sprouted, it is better to hoe them as often as possible, the weeds are exhausted, and all the fertilizer in the field can be used to form full wheat grains.

古文：功勤易耨，南与北同也。
现代文：工夫勤奋，草就容易除净，这在南方和北方都是一样的。
English: The grass is easily cleared by diligent work, which is the same in the south and the north.

古文：凡粪麦田，既种以后，粪无可施，为计在先也。陕、洛之间忧虫蚀者，或以砒霜拌种子，南方所用惟炊烬也。
现代文：麦田应当预先施足基肥，在播种后就不要施肥了。陕西和河南洛水流域，怕害虫蛀蚀麦种，有用砒霜拌种的，南方则只用草木灰拌种。
English: Wheat fields should be pre-applied with foot base fertilizer, and do not apply fertilizer after sowing. In the Luoshui basin of Shaanxi and Henan, for fear of pests eating wheat seeds, it is useful to mix seeds with arsenic cream, while in the south, only use grass and wood ash to mix seeds.

古文：南方稻田有种肥田麦者，不粪麦实。当春小麦、大麦青青之时，耕杀田中，蒸罨土性，秋收稻谷必加倍也。
现代文：南方稻田有种麦子来肥田的，并不要求收获麦粒，当春小麦或大麦还在青绿的苗期时，就把它们耕翻压死在田里，作绿肥来改良土壤，秋收时稻谷的产量必定能倍增。
English: Nanfang rice fields have wheat seeds to fertilize the fields, and they do not require the harvest of wheat grains. When spring wheat or barley are still in the green seedling stage, they are plowed and crushed to death in the fields to make green fertilizer to improve the soil. The production of rice in the autumn harvest will surely double.

古文：凡麦收空隙，可再种他物。
现代文：麦收后的空隙，可以再种其他作物。
English: Other crops can be grown in the gaps left after the wheat harvest.

古文：自初夏至季秋，时日亦半载，择土宜而为之，惟人所取也。
现代文：从夏初到秋末，有近半年时间，完全可以因地制宜地来选种其他一些作物。
English: From early summer to late autumn, for nearly half a year, it is entirely possible to select other crops according to local conditions.

古文：南方大麦有既刈之后乃种迟生粳稻者。
现代文：南方就有在大麦收割后再种植晚熟粳稻的。
English: In the south, late-maturing indica rice is planted after barley harvest.

古文：勤农作苦，明赐无不及也。
现代文：农民的辛勤劳动，总会得到酬报。
English: The hard work of farmers will always be rewarded.

古文：凡荞麦，南方必刈稻，北方必刈菽、稷而后种。
现代文：荞麦是在南方收割水稻后和北方收割豆或谷子后才种的。
English: Buckwheat is grown after the rice harvest in the south and after the bean or grain harvest in the north.

古文：其性稍吸肥腴，能使土瘦。
现代文：荞麦的特性是吸收肥料较多，会使土壤变瘦。
English: The characteristic of buckwheat is that it absorbs more fertilizer, which makes the soil thin.

古文：然计其获入，业偿半谷有余，勤农之家何妨再粪也。
现代文：但算来它的产量抵得上原先谷物的一半还多，因此，勤劳的农家又何妨再施些肥料呢！
English: But its output is more than half of the original grain, so the hard-working farmers can't help but apply more fertilizer!

古文：○麦灾
现代文：麦灾
English: Wheat disaster

古文：凡麦防患抵稻三分之一。
现代文：种麦子的灾害相当于种植稻子的三分之一。
English: The damage to wheat crops is equivalent to one-third of the damage to rice crops.

古文：播种以后，雪、霜、晴、潦皆非所计。
现代文：播种以后，遇上雪天、霜天、晴天、洪涝天气都没有什么影响。
English: After sowing, snowy weather, frosty weather, sunny weather, and flooding weather have no effect.

古文：麦性食水甚少，北土中春再沐雨水一升，则秀华成嘉粒矣。
现代文：麦子的特性是它需要的水量很少，北方在中春时节再下一场痛快的能浇透地的大雨，麦子就能开花并结出饱满的麦粒了。
English: The characteristic of wheat is that it needs very little water. In the northern part of the Mid-Spring season, there will be another heavy rain that can water the ground, and the wheat will be able to bloom and produce full grains.

古文：荆、扬以南唯患霉雨。倘成熟之时晴干旬日，则仓禀皆盈，不可胜食。
现代文：在荆州、扬州这类长江以南的地区，最怕的就是 霉雨 天气，如果在麦子成熟的时段，天气晴上十来天，麦子就能确保大丰收，吃也吃不完了。
English: In areas south of the Yangtze River such as Jingzhou and Yangzhou, the most feared thing is mildew and rain. If the weather is fine for more than ten days during the period when the wheat is ripe, the wheat can ensure a large harvest, and you can't finish eating.

古文：扬州谚云 寸麦不怕尺水 ，谓麦初长时，任水灭顶无伤； 尺麦只怕寸水 ，谓成熟时寸水软根，倒茎沾泥，则麦粒尽烂于地面也。
现代文：扬州有句农业谚语说 寸麦不怕尺水 ，这就是说麦子刚成长的时候，任水淹没都没有什么关系。 尺麦只怕寸水 ，那是说等到麦子成熟的时候，哪怕一寸深的水就能把麦根泡软，茎秆就会倒伏在泥里，麦粒也就都烂在地里了。
English: There is an agricultural proverb in Yangzhou that says, "Inch barley is not afraid of inch of water," which means that when the wheat is just growing, it does not matter if it is flooded with water. "Inch barley is only afraid of inch of water," which means that when the wheat is ripe, even if the water is one inch deep, it can soften the wheat roots, the stalks will lie down in the mud, and the wheat grains will all rot in the ground.

古文：江南有雀一种，有肉无骨，飞食麦田数盈千万，然不广及，罹害者数十里而止。
现代文：江南有一种叫禾花雀的鸟，骨架小而肉多，常常成千上万地飞来啄食麦子，但受灾的范围不广，不过方圆几十里。
English: In southern Jiangsu Province, there is a bird called the grass finch. Its skeleton is small but it has a lot of meat. It often flies thousands of miles to nibble on wheat. However, the area affected by the disaster is not extensive, but covers a radius of several dozen miles.

古文：江北蝗生，则大之岁也。
现代文：而长江以北的地区，一旦出现蝗虫危害，那就会变成很大的灾患。
English: As for the areas north of the Yangtze River, once the locusts appear, it will become a big disaster.

古文：○黍稷粱粟
现代文：黍稷、粱粟
English: Syrup, poppy

古文：凡粮食，米而不粉者种类甚多。
现代文：在谷类中，碾成粒而不磨成粉来食用的粮食品种有很多。
English: Among the cereals, there are many kinds of grain foods that are ground into granules rather than ground into powder for consumption.

古文：相去数百里，则色、味、形、质随方而变，大同小异，千百其名。
现代文：只要种植的地域相隔几百里，它们的颜色、味道、形状和品质就都会跟着起变化，但总体说来大同小异，名字也有几千几百种。
English: As long as the planting areas are separated by several hundred miles, their color, taste, shape and quality will change accordingly, but overall they are very similar, and there are thousands and hundreds of names.

古文：北人唯以大米呼粳稻，而其余概以小米名之。
现代文：像北方人就只把粳稻叫做大米，其他的通通称为小米。
English: For example, people in the north only call indica rice "rice" and all others "millet."

古文：凡黍与稷同类，粱与粟同类。
现代文：黍与稷同属一类，高粱与粟又属同一类。
English: Alfalfa is in the same category as asparagus, and sorghum is in the same category as millet.

古文：黍有粘有不粘，稷有粳无粘。
现代文：黍也有黏的与不黏的之分，稷只有不黏的，没有黏的。
English: There is also a difference between sticky and non-sticky waxes. There are only non-sticky and non-sticky waxes.

古文：凡粘黍、粘粟统名曰秫，非二种外更有秫也。
现代文：黏黍、黏粟统称为 秫 ，除了这两种以外，还另有叫 秫 的作物。
English: Mucuna pruriens and mucilaginous poppies are collectively referred to as millet. In addition to these two, there are also other crops called millet.

古文：黍色赤、白、黄、黑皆有，而或专以黑色为稷，未是。
现代文：黍有红色、白色、黄色、黑色等各种颜色，有人专把黑黍称为稷，这是不对的。
English: Dragonflies have red, white, yellow, black and other colors. Some people call the black dragonfly a dragonfly, which is wrong.

古文：至以稷米为先他谷熟，堪供祭祀则当以早熟者为稷，则近之矣。
现代文：还有一种说法是，因为稷米比其他谷类早熟，更适宜于祭祀，因此把早熟的黍称做稷，这种说法还比较有道理。
English: Another theory is that because glutinous rice ripens earlier than other cereals, it is more suitable for sacrifice, so the early-ripening glutinous rice is called glutinous rice, which is more reasonable.

古文：凡黍在《诗》、《书》有虋、芑、、丕等名，在今方语有牛毛、燕颔、马革、驴皮、稻尾等名。
现代文：在《诗经》《尚书》中记载芑、秬、秠等名称，现在的方言中也有牛毛、燕颔、马革、驴皮、稻尾等名称。
English: In the "Song of Songs" and "Song of Songs," names such as,, and  are recorded. In the current dialect, there are also names such as cow hair, tern, horse leather, donkey skin, and rice tail.

古文：种以三月为上时，五月熟；四月为中时，七月熟；五月为下时，八月熟。
现代文：黍最早的在三月下种，五月份成熟；稍晚的也是在四月下种，七月份成熟；最晚则是五月下种，八月份成熟。
English: The earliest ones are planted in March and mature in May; the later ones are planted in April and mature in July; the latest ones are planted in May and mature in August.

古文：扬花结穗总与来、牟不相见也。
现代文：开花和结穗的时间总和麦子不同时。
English: The total time of flowering and earing is not the same as that of wheat.

古文：凡黍粒大小，总视土地肥硗、时令害育。
现代文：黍粒的大小是由土地肥力的厚薄、时令的好坏所决定的。
English: The size of the earthworm is determined by the thickness of the soil fertility and the season.

古文：宋儒拘定以某方黍定律，未是也。
现代文：宋朝的儒生死板地以某个地区的黍粒为依据来规定度量衡的标准，这是错误的。
English: It is wrong for the Confucianism of the Song Dynasty to rigidly stipulate the standards of measurement on the basis of the grain of rice in a certain region.

古文：凡粟与粱统名黄米。
现代文：粟与粱统称黄米，其中黏粟还可以用于做酒。
English: Millet and millet are collectively known as yellow rice, of which sticky millet can also be used to make wine.

古文：粘粟可为酒，而芦粟一种名曰高粱者，以其身高七尺如芦、荻也。
现代文：此外，有一种名叫高粱的芦粟，是因为它的茎秆高达七尺，很像芦、荻。
English: In addition, there is a kind of millet called sorghum, because its stalks are up to seven feet high, much like millet and millet.

古文：粱粟种类名号之多，视黍稷犹甚，其命名或因姓氏、山水，或以形似、时令，总之不可枚举。
现代文：粱粟的种类、名称，比黍和稷的还要多。它们有的用人的姓氏或山水来命名，有的则根据其形状和时令来命名，总之无法一一列举出来。
English: There are more types and names of opium poppies than poppies and poppy seeds. Some of them are named after people's surnames or landscapes, while others are named according to their shape and season. In short, it is impossible to list them all.

古文：山东人唯以谷子呼之，并不知粱粟之名也。
现代文：山东人并不知道梁粟有这些名称，把它们都统称为谷子。
English: The people of Shandong did not know that millet has these names, and they are collectively referred to as millet.

古文：已上四米皆春种秋获，耕耨之法与来、牟同，而种收之候则相悬绝云。
现代文：以上四种粮米，都是在春天播种而秋天收获的。耕作的方法与麦子的耕作方法相同，但播种和收割的时间，却和麦子相差很远。
English: The above four kinds of grain rice are all sown in spring and harvested in autumn. The method of cultivation is the same as that of wheat, but the time of sowing and harvesting is very different from that of wheat.

古文：○麻
现代文：麻
English: Hemp

古文：凡麻可粒可油者，惟火麻、胡麻二种。
现代文：麻类既可以作粮食又可以作油料的，只有大麻和胡麻两种。
English: Hemp can be used for both food and oil, but only hemp and sesame can be used for both.

古文：胡麻即脂麻，相传西汉始自大宛来。
现代文：胡麻就是芝麻，据说是西汉时期才从中亚的大宛国传来的。
English: Sesame is sesame, which is said to have been brought to China from Central Asia during the Western Han Dynasty.

古文：古者以麻为五谷之一，若专以火麻当之，义岂有当哉？
现代文：古时把麻列为 五谷 之一，如果是专指大麻，难道是恰当的吗？
English: In ancient times, hemp was listed as one of the five grains. If it specifically refers to cannabis, is it appropriate?

古文：窈意《诗》、《书》五谷之麻，或其种已灭，或即菽、粟之中别种，而渐讹其名号，皆未可知也。
现代文：在我看来，古代《诗经》《尚书》中所说 五谷 中的麻，或者已经绝种了，或者就是豆、粟中的某一种，后来逐渐被传错了名称，这都很难确定。
English: In my opinion, it is difficult to determine whether the hemp in the grain mentioned in the ancient "Song of Songs" and "Song of Songs" has become extinct, or whether it is a kind of bean or millet, and then gradually passed on the wrong name.

古文：今胡麻味美而功高，即以冠百谷不为过。
现代文：现在的芝麻，味道好，用途大，即使把它摆在百谷的首位也不过分。
English: Today's sesame seeds have a good taste and are widely used. It is not too much to put them at the top of the list.

古文：火麻子粒压油无多，皮为疏恶布，其值几何？
现代文：大麻子榨不出多少油，麻皮做成的又是粗布，它的价值不大。
English: Hemp seeds do not produce much oil, and hemp skin is made of coarse cloth, which is of little value.

古文：胡麻数龠充肠，移时不馁。
现代文：芝麻只要有少量进肚，很久都不会饿。
English: As long as you have a small amount of sesame seeds in your stomach, you will not be hungry for a long time.

古文：饵、饴饧得粘其粒，味高而品贵。
现代文：糕饼、糖果上黏点芝麻，就会使味道好而质量高。
English: Sticking sesame seeds on cakes and sweets will make them taste good and of high quality.

古文：其为油也，发得之而泽，腹得之而膏，腥膻得之而芳，毒厉得之而解。
现代文：芝麻油搽发能使头发光泽，吃了能增加脂肪，煮食能去腥臊而生香味，还能治疗毒疮。
English: Sesame oil can make hair shiny, can increase fat when eaten, can remove the pungent smell of cooking, and can also treat poisonous sores.

古文：农家能广种，厚实可胜言哉。
现代文：农家如果能多种些芝麻，那好处是说不尽的。
English: If farmers can grow more sesame seeds, the benefits are endless.

古文：种胡麻法，或治畦圃，或垄田亩。
现代文：种植芝麻的方法，有的起畦，有的作垄。
English: Some methods of planting sesame seeds have ridges, while others have ridges.

古文：土碎草净之极，然后以地灰微湿，拌匀麻子而撒种之。
现代文：把土块尽可能地打碎并把杂草清除，然后用潮湿的草木灰拌匀芝麻种子来撒播。
English: Break up the clod as much as possible and remove the weeds, then mix the sesame seeds with wet grass ash to spread.

古文：早者三月种，迟者不出大暑前。
现代文：早种的芝麻在三月种，晚种的芝麻要在大暑前播种。
English: Early-sown sesame seeds are sown in March, late-sown sesame seeds should be sown before the summer heat.

古文：早种者花实亦待中秋乃结。
现代文：早种的芝麻要到中秋才能开花结实。
English: Early-planted sesame seeds will not bloom until mid-autumn.

古文：耨草之功唯锄是视。其色有黑、白、赤三者。
现代文：除草全靠用锄。芝麻有黑、白、红三种颜色。
English: All weeding is done with hoes. Sesame seeds come in three colors: black, white and red.

古文：其结角长寸许有四棱者，房小而子少，八棱者房大而子多。
现代文：所结的果实，长约一寸多。果实有四棱的，果小粒少；有八棱的，果大粒多。
English: The fruit is about an inch long. Fruits with four edges have fewer small grains; those with eight edges have more large grains.

古文：皆因肥瘠所致，非种性也。
现代文：这都是由于土地肥瘦所造成的，跟品种的特性没有关系。
English: This is all caused by the thinness of the land, and has nothing to do with the characteristics of the variety.

古文：收子榨油每石得四十斤余，其枯用以肥田。若饥荒之年，则留供人食。
现代文：每石芝麻可榨油四十斤，剩下的枯渣用来肥田；若碰上饥荒的年份，就留给人吃。
English: Each stone of sesame can be squeezed for forty pounds of oil, and the remaining residue is used to fertilize fields; if there is a year of famine, it is left for people to eat.

古文：○菽
现代文：菽
English: 

古文：凡菽种类之多，与稻、黍相等，播种收获之期，四季相承。
现代文：豆子的种类与稻、黍的种类一样繁多，播种和收获的时间，在一年四季中接连不断。
English: There are as many types of beans as there are types of rice and bean curd, and the time of sowing and harvesting is continuous throughout the year.

古文：果腹之功在人日用，盖与饮食相终始。
现代文：人们将豆子视为日常饮食中始终离不开的重要食品。
English: People regard beans as an essential part of their daily diet.

古文：一种大豆，有黑、黄两色，下种不出清明前后。
现代文：一种是大豆，有黑色和黄色两种颜色，播种期都在清明节前后。
English: One is soybeans, which have two colors, black and yellow, and the planting period is around the Tomb-Sweeping Day.

古文：黄者有五月黄、六月爆、冬黄三种。五月黄收粒少，而冬黄必倍之。
现代文：黄色的有 五月黄 、 六月爆 和 冬黄 三种。 五月黄 产量低， 冬黄 则要比它高一倍。
English: There are three kinds of yellow: May Yellow, June Blast, and Winter Yellow. May Yellow has a low yield, while Winter Yellow is twice as high.

古文：黑者刻期八月收。淮北长征骡马必食黑豆，筋力乃强。
现代文：黑豆一定要到八月才能收获，淮北地区长途运载货物的骡马，一定要吃黑豆，才能筋强力壮。
English: Black beans must be harvested in August, and horses that carry goods long distances in Huaibei must eat black beans in order to grow strong.

古文：凡大豆视土地肥硗、耨草勤怠、雨露足悭，分收入多少。
现代文：大豆收获的多少，要视土质的好坏、锄草勤与不勤、雨水充足与否而定。
English: How much soybeans are harvested depends on whether the soil quality is good or bad, whether the weeding is diligent or not, and whether there is enough rain.

古文：凡为豉、为酱、为腐，皆于大豆中取质焉。
现代文：豆豉、豆酱和豆腐都是以大豆为原料做成的。
English: Soybean meal, soy sauce and tofu are all made from soybeans.

古文：江南又有高脚黄，六月刈早稻方再种，九十月收获。
现代文：江南还有一种叫做 高脚黄 的大豆，等到六月割了早稻时才种，九、十月便可收获。
English: In southern Jiangsu, there is also a kind of soybean called Gaofeng, which is not planted until the early rice is cut in June, and can be harvested in September and October.

古文：江西吉郡种法甚妙：其刈稻田竟不耕垦，每禾稿头中拈豆三四粒，以指扌及之，其稿凝露水以滋豆，豆性充发，复浸烂稿根以滋。
现代文：江西吉安一带大豆的种法十分巧妙，收割后的稻茬田，竟不再翻耕，只在每蔸稻茬中用手指捅进三四粒种豆。稻茬所凝聚的露水滋润着种豆，豆子胚芽长出以后，又有浸烂的稻根来滋养。
English: The cultivation method of soybeans in the Ji'an area of Jiangxi Province is very ingenious. After harvesting, the paddy fields are no longer ploughed, and only three or four seeds of soybeans are sprinkled into each paddy with a finger. The dew condensed by the paddy moistens the seeds, and after the bean germ grows, it is nourished by the soaked rice roots.

古文：已生苗之后，遇无雨亢干，则汲水一升以灌之。一灌之后，再耨之余，收获甚多。
现代文：豆子出苗后，遇到干旱无雨的时候，每蔸需浇灌约一升水。浇水以后，再除草一次，就可以获得丰收了。
English: After the beans have sprouted, when there is drought and no rain, each pod needs to be watered with about one liter of water. After watering, weeding once again, you can get a bumper harvest.

古文：凡大豆入土未出芽时，防鸠雀害，驱之惟人。
现代文：大豆播种后没发芽之时，要防避鸠雀祸害，这时就得有人去驱赶。
English: When soybeans do not germinate after sowing, it is necessary to prevent the scourge of starlings. At this time, someone has to drive them away.

古文：一种绿豆，圆小如珠。绿豆必小暑方种，未及小暑而种，则其苗蔓延数尺，结荚甚稀。
现代文：一种是绿豆，像珍珠一样又圆又小，必须在小暑时分播种，如果在小暑以前就下种，豆秧就会蔓生至好几尺长，结的豆荚却非常稀少。
English: One is the mung bean, round and small like a pearl. It must be sown during the summer heat. If it is sown before the summer heat, the pods will grow to several feet long, but the pods are very rare.

古文：若过期至于处暑，则随时开花结荚，颗粒亦少。
现代文：如果过了小暑甚至到了处暑时才播种，那就会随时开花结荚，豆粒数目会很少。
English: If you don't sow the beans until after a heatwave or even during a heatwave, the pods will bloom at any time, and the number of beans will be small.

古文：豆种亦有二，一曰摘绿，荚先老者先摘，人逐日而取之。
现代文：绿豆也有两个品种，一种叫做 摘绿 ，其豆荚先老的先摘，人们每天都要摘取。
English: There are also two varieties of mung beans. One is called "picking green," and its pods are picked first. People have to pick them every day.

古文：一曰拔绿，则至期老足，竟亩拔取也。
现代文：另一种叫做 拔绿 ，要等全部成熟时再一起收获。
English: The other is called "pulling greens," and it is necessary to wait until they are all ripe before harvesting them together.

古文：凡绿豆磨澄晒干为粉，荡片搓索，食家珍贵。
现代文：把绿豆磨成粉浆，澄去浆水，晒干可制成淀粉、粉皮、粉条，这都是人们十分喜爱的食品。
English: The mung beans can be ground into a powder, the water can be purified, and the beans can be dried to make starch, powdered skin, and powdered strips, which are all very popular foods.

古文：做粉溲浆灌田甚肥。
现代文：做豆粉剩下的粉浆水可以用来浇灌田地，肥效很高。
English: The pulp water left over from making bean powder can be used to irrigate fields, and is highly effective as a fertilizer.

古文：凡畜藏绿豆种子，或用地灰、石灰、马蓼，或用黄土拌收，则四五月间不愁空蛀。
现代文：储藏绿豆种子，有的人用草木灰、石灰，有的人用马蓼，有的人用黄土和种子拌匀后再进行收藏，这样，即使在四五月间也不必担心被虫蛀。
English: Store mung bean seeds. Some people use grass and lime, some people use horse manure, and some people use loess mixed with seeds before collecting them. In this way, even in April and May, you don't have to worry about being bitten by insects.

古文：勤者逢晴频晒，亦免蛀。
现代文：勤快的人，每逢晴天时就将绿豆拿出进行多次晾晒，这样也能避免虫蛀。
English: A diligent person will take the mung beans out and dry them several times every sunny day, so as to avoid insect bites.

古文：凡已刈稻田，夏秋种绿豆，必长接斧柄，击碎土块，发生乃多。
现代文：夏秋两季在已经收割后的稻田里种绿豆，必须使用接长了柄的斧头，将土块打碎，这样才能长出较稠的苗。
English: In summer and autumn, when growing mung beans in rice fields that have already been harvested, it is necessary to use an axe with a long handle to break up the soil so that thicker seedlings can grow.

古文：凡种绿豆，一日之内遇大雨扳土则不复生。
现代文：绿豆播种后，如果在当天遇上了大雨，土壤板结后，就长不出豆苗来了。
English: After sowing green beans, if there is heavy rain on the same day and the soil is compacted, the bean seedlings will not grow.

古文：既生之后，防雨水浸，疏沟浍以泄之。
现代文：绿豆出苗以后，要防止雨水浸泡，应该及时将田地里的水排出。
English: After mung bean seedlings emerge, to prevent rainwater soaking, the water in the field should be drained in time.

古文：凡耕绿豆及大豆田地，耒耜欲浅，不宜深入。盖豆质根短而苗直，耕土既深，土块曲压，则不生者半矣。 深耕 二字不可施之菽类。此先农之所未发者。
现代文：种绿豆和大豆时，耕地要浅而不能太深。因为豆子是根短苗直的作物，耕土过深的话，豆芽就会被土块压弯，起码会有一半长不出苗来。因此， 深耕 并不适用于豆类，这是过去的农民所不曾了解的。
English: When planting green beans and soybeans, the cultivated land should be shallow and not too deep. Because beans are short-rooted crops, if the soil is too deep, the bean sprouts will be bent by the soil, and at least half of them will not grow seedlings. Therefore, deep plowing is not suitable for beans, which was not understood by farmers in the past.

古文：一种豌豆，此豆有黑斑点，形圆同绿豆，而大则过之。
现代文：一种是豌豆，这种豆有黑斑点，形状圆圆的有些像绿豆，但又比绿豆大。
English: One is the pea, this bean has black spots, round shape somewhat like mung bean, but larger than mung bean.

古文：其种十月下，来年五月收。
现代文：十月播种，第二年五月份收获。
English: The seeds are sown in October and harvested in May of the following year.

古文：凡树木叶迟者，其下亦可种。
现代文：春天出叶晚的落叶树下也可以种植。
English: It can also be grown under deciduous trees that leaf out late in spring.

古文：一种蚕豆，其荚似蚕形，豆粒大于大豆。
现代文：一种是蚕豆，它的豆荚像蚕形，豆粒比大豆要大。
English: One is the broad bean, which has a silkworm-shaped pod and larger beans than soybeans.

古文：八月下种，来年四月收。西浙桑树之下遍环种之。
现代文：八月下种，第二年四月收获，浙江西部地区的人在桑树下普遍种植。
English: It is sown in August and harvested in April of the following year. People in western Zhejiang generally grow it under mulberry trees.

古文：盖凡物树叶遮露则不生，此豆与豌豆，树叶茂时彼已结荚而成实矣。
现代文：本来有树叶遮盖，作物就长不好，但蚕豆和豌豆等到树叶繁茂时，已经结荚长成豆粒了。
English: Originally, if there was a cover of leaves, the crops would not grow well, but when the leaves were flourishing, the broad beans and peas had already scabbed and grown into bean grains.

古文：襄、汉上流，此豆甚多而贱，果腹之功不啻黍稷也。
现代文：在湖北襄河和汉水上游一带，蚕豆很多而且价格便宜，当做粮食来吃，其价值并不比黍稷小。
English: In the upper reaches of Hubei's Xianghe River and Hanshui River, broad beans are plentiful and cheap. When eaten as food, their value is no less than that of carp.

古文：一种小豆，赤小豆入药有奇功，白小豆当冫食助嘉谷。
现代文：一种是小豆，红小豆入药有很高的特殊疗效，白小豆可以当饭吃一一饭食里掺进它就会更好吃了。
English: One is red bean. Red bean has a high special curative effect. White bean can be eaten as a meal. It will taste better if it is mixed into the meal.

古文：夏至下种，九月收获，种盛江淮之间。
现代文：小豆夏至时播种，九月份收获，大量种植于长江、淮河之间的地区。
English: Azuki beans are sown at the summer solstice, harvested in September, and planted in large quantities in the area between the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River.

古文：一种，此豆古者野生田间，今则北土盛种。
现代文：一种是稽豆，从前野生在田里，现在北方已经大量种植了。
English: One is bean curd, which used to grow wild in the fields, but is now grown in large quantities in the north.

古文：成粉荡皮可敌绿豆。
现代文：用来做淀粉、粉皮，可以抵得上绿豆。
English: Used to make starch, powdered skin, can be comparable to mung beans.

古文：燕京负贩者，终朝呼豆皮，则其产必多矣。
现代文：北京的小商贩整天叫卖 稽豆皮 ，可见它的产量一定是很多的了。
English: Small traders in Beijing have been selling bean skins all day long, so it is clear that there must be a lot of production.

古文：一种白藊豆，乃沿篱蔓生者，一名蛾眉豆。
现代文：一种是白扁豆，它是沿着篱笆而蔓生的，也叫蛾眉豆。
English: One is the white lentil, which grows along the fence and is also called the moth bean.

古文：其他豇豆、虎斑豆、刀豆，与大豆中分青皮、褐色之类，间繁一方者，犹不能尽述。
现代文：其他如豇豆、虎斑豆、刀豆与大豆中的青皮、褐皮等品种，仅在个别地方有种植的，就不能一一详尽叙述了。
English: Other varieties, such as the green and brown skins of peas, tiger beans, broad beans and soybeans, which are only grown in a few places, cannot be described in detail.

古文：皆充蔬代谷以粒民者，博物者其可忽诸！
现代文：这些豆类都是寻常百姓用来当做蔬菜或代替粮食吃的，关心自然的见识广博的读书人，怎么能够忽视它们呢！
English: These legumes are used by ordinary people as vegetables or as a substitute for food. How can well-informed readers who care about nature ignore them?

