古文：万章问曰： 诗云： 娶妻如之何？
现代文：万章问： 《诗经》上说： 娶妻应该怎么办？
English: Wan Zhang asked, "What does the Book of Songs say about how to marry a wife?"

古文：必告父母。 
现代文：必须要先禀告父母。 
English: You have to sue the parents first.

古文：信斯言也，宜莫如舜。
现代文：相信这话的，该没人比得上舜了。
English: If you believe that, there's no one better.

古文：舜之不告而娶，何也？ 
现代文：可是舜没有报告父母就娶妻了，这是为什么呢？ 
English: But why did he get married without telling his parents?

古文：孟子曰： 告则不得娶。
现代文：孟子说： 禀告了父母就娶不到妻子了。
English: Mencius said, "If you slander your parents, you will not be able to marry a wife."

古文：男女居室，人之大伦也。
现代文：男女结合成家，是人生的重大伦常。
English: The union of a man and a woman to form a family is one of the most important events in life.

古文：如告，则废人之大伦，以怼父母，是以不告也。 
现代文：如果禀告了，就要废弃这个伦常，结果便不免怨恨父母，所以就不先禀告父母了。 
English: If there is an obituary, it is necessary to abandon this custom, and the result will inevitably be resentment of the parents, so the parents will not be obituarized first.

古文：万章曰： 舜之不告而娶，则吾既得闻命矣；帝之妻舜而不告，何也？ 
现代文：万章说： 舜的不先禀告父母便娶妻的道理，我已聆听了您的教诲；帝尧嫁女儿给大舜而不禀告舜的父母，这又是为什么呢？ 
English: Wan Zhang said, "I have listened to your teaching on the principle of marrying a wife without first telling one's parents. Why would the emperor marry his daughter to a great-grandmother without telling her parents?

古文：曰： 帝亦知告焉则不得妻也。 
现代文：孟子说： 帝尧也知道如果告诉了舜的父母女儿就嫁不成了。 
English: Mencius said, "Empress Dowager Cixi also knew that if she told her parents, her daughter would not get married.

古文：万章曰： 父母使舜完廪，捐阶，瞽瞍焚廪。
现代文：万章说： 父母叫舜去整修谷仓顶，然后撤掉了梯子，父亲瞽瞍还放火焚烧谷仓。
English: Wanzhang said: My parents told me to go and fix the roof of the barn, and then removed the ladder. My father also set fire to the barn.

古文：使浚井，出，从而揜之。
现代文：又要舜去淘井，瞽瞍一出井就堵塞盖住了井口。
English: He also had to go to the well, but as soon as he got out of the well, the blockage covered the wellhead.

古文：象曰： 谟盖都君咸我绩。牛羊父母，仓廪父母，干戈朕，琴朕，弤朕，二嫂使治朕栖。 
现代文：舜的弟弟象说： 谋害舜都是我的功绩，牛羊分给父母，粮仓分给父母，兵器归我，琴归我，弤弓归我，让二位嫂子伺候我睡觉。 
English: Zou's younger brother Xiang said: "The murder of Zou is all my achievement. The cattle and sheep are divided among my parents, the granary is divided among my parents, the weapon is mine, the harp is mine, the bow is mine, and let the two sisters-in-law wait for me to sleep.

古文：象往入舜宫，舜在床琴。
现代文：象走进舜的屋子，舜却安坐在床上弹琴。
English: The elephant went into the baboon's house, but the baboon just sat on the bed and played the piano.

古文：象曰： 郁陶思君尔。 
现代文：象说： 我想你想得好苦啊。 
English: Elephant said: I think you're thinking too hard.

古文：忸怩。
现代文：显得很尴尬。
English: He looked very embarrassed.

古文：舜曰： 惟兹臣庶，汝其于予治。 
现代文：舜说： 我心里想的唯有臣子和百姓，你就协助我管理他们吧。 
English: Zou said, "All I have in mind are my vassals and the people. Please help me to manage them."

古文：不识舜不知象之将杀己与？ 
现代文：我不知舜当时知不知道象打算杀害自己？ 
English: I don't know if I knew at the time that I was going to kill myself.

古文：曰： 奚而不知也？
现代文：孟子说： 怎么会不知道呢？
English: Mencius said, "How could you not know?"

古文：象忧亦忧，象喜亦喜。 
现代文：象忧愁他也忧愁，象高兴他也高兴。 
English: As sorrowful, so is he; as glad, so is he.

古文：曰： 然则舜伪喜者与？ 
现代文：万章说： 那么，舜是假装高兴吗？ 孟子说： 不。
English: Wanzhang said, "So, are you pretending to be happy?" Mencius said, "No.

古文：曰： 否。昔者有馈生鱼于郑子产，子产使校人畜之池。校人烹之，反命曰： 始舍之圉圉焉，少则洋洋焉，攸然而逝。 
现代文：从前有人送条活鱼给郑国的子产，子产叫管理池沼的人把鱼养在池塘里，管池沼的人却把鱼煮来吃了，却向子产汇报说： 刚放它时，好象犯人一样死气沉沉的，过了一会，就欢乐起来，很快就悠然游往水深处而找不见了。 
English: Once upon a time, someone sent a live fish to a family in Zhengzhou. The family asked the man who managed the pond to keep the fish in the pond. The man who managed the pond boiled the fish and ate it, but reported to the family: When it was first released, it was as lifeless as a prisoner. After a while, it became happy, and soon swam leisurely to the depths of the water and disappeared.

古文：子产曰 得其所哉！得其所哉！ 
现代文：子产说： 它得到它所在的地方了，它得到它所在的地方了。 
English: The offspring says: It got where it is, it got where it is.

古文：校人出，曰： 孰谓子产智？
现代文：小吏退出后，对人说： 谁说子产很有智慧？
English: After the clerk left, he said to the man: "Who said that Zi Fang is very wise?

古文：予既烹而食之，曰：得其所哉？得其所哉。 
现代文：我已经把鱼煮熟吃了，他还说，它得到它所在的地方了，它得到它所在的地方了。 
English: I've cooked the fish and eaten it, he said, it's got where it is, it's got where it is.

古文：故君子可欺以其方，难罔以非其道。
现代文：所以对君子可以欺骗其方正，却难以蒙蔽他离开正道。
English: Therefore, it is possible to deceive a gentleman, but it is difficult to blind him from the right path.

古文：彼以爱兄之道来，故诚信而喜之，奚伪焉？ 
现代文：象用敬爱兄长的办法来欺骗舜，所以舜真诚地相信而感到高兴，怎么能说是假装的呢？ 
English: How can it be said to be feigned, when the elder brother's love is used to deceive the younger brother, so that the younger brother sincerely believes and feels happy?

