古文：孝桓皇帝讳志，肃宗曾孙也。祖父河间孝王开，父蠡吾侯翼，母匽氏。
现代文：孝桓皇帝刘志，肃宗章帝曾孙，祖父河间孝王刘开，父亲蠡吾侯刘翼，母亲匽氏。
English: Emperor Xiaohuan Liu Zhi, great-grandson of Emperor Su Zongzhang, grandfather of Kawama King Xiaowang Liu Kai, father of Emperor Xiaoguo Liu Ying, mother of Emperor Su Shi.

古文：翼卒，帝袭爵为侯。
现代文：刘翼死后，刘志袭为蠡吾侯。
English: After Liu Ying's death, Liu Zhigao became the lord of the manor.

古文：本初元年，梁太后征帝到夏门亭，将妻以女弟。
现代文：本初元年，梁太后征召刘志到洛阳城夏门亭，打算将她的妹妹嫁给刘志。
English: In the first year of this century, Empress Dowager Liang summoned Liu Zhi to Xia Mentei of Luoyang City, intending to marry her sister to Liu Zhi.

古文：会质帝崩，太后遂与兄大将军冀定策禁中，闰月庚寅，使冀持节，以王青盖车迎帝入南宫，其日即皇帝位，时年十五。
现代文：适逢质帝逝世，梁太后便与兄大将军梁冀决策宫中，闰六月初七，派梁冀持符节，以王青盖车接刘志入南宫，这一天就登帝位，时年十五岁。
English: At the time of Emperor Qiu's death, Empress Dowager Liang and her brother, General Liang Jie, were in the decision-making palace. On the 7th day of the 6th lunar month, Liang Jie sent Liang Jie to hold the Festival of the Rune, and took Wang Qingai's carriage to take Liu Zhi into the South Palace. On this day, she ascended the throne, at the age of fifteen.

古文：太后犹临朝政。
现代文：梁太后仍然临朝听政。
English: Empress Dowager Liang still attends the imperial court to listen to the government.

古文：秋七月乙卯，葬孝质皇帝于静陵。
现代文：秋季七月初二，葬孝质皇帝于静陵。
English: In the autumn, on the second day of the seventh month, Emperor Xiaojie was buried in Jingling Mausoleum.

古文：齐王喜薨。
现代文：齐王刘喜去世。
English: Liu Xi, the king of Qi, passed away.

古文：辛巳，谒高庙、光武庙。
现代文：二十八日，拜谒高庙、光武庙。
English: On the 28th, he paid homage to the Gonggao Temple and the Guangwu Temple.

古文：丙戌，诏曰： 孝廉、廉吏皆当典城牧民，禁奸举善，兴化之本，恒必由之。
现代文：丙戌，诏令说： 有孝心廉洁的人，不贪赃枉法的官吏，都应当守土牧民，禁奸邪举真善，兴旺教化的根本，常常由这里产生。
English: For example, the imperial edict said: Filial piety and integrity, and officials who do not corrupt the law, should protect the land and herdsmen, prohibit corruption and evil, promote truth and good, and promote the fundamentals of education, which often come from here.

古文：诏书连下，分明恳恻，而在所玩习，遂至怠慢，选举乖错，害及元元。
现代文：诏书连下，讲得很明白恳切悲悯，而所有单位，轻忽不重视，以至怠惰随便，选拔推举乱七八糟，都不得人心，因而害了老百姓。
English: The imperial rescript and the imperial edict all spoke very clearly and sincerely of compassion, and all units were careless and did not attach importance, and even lazily and casually, and the selection and promotion were chaotic and chaotic, and they were unpopular, thus harming the common people.

古文：顷虽颇绳正，犹未惩改。
现代文：近来虽然略有些改正，但还没有深切地吸取经验教训，痛改前非。
English: Although there have been some slight corrections recently, lessons have not been deeply learned, and it is too late to make amends.

古文：方今淮夷未殓，军师屡出，百姓疲悴，困于征发。庶望群吏，惠我劳民，蠲涤贪秽，以祈休详。
现代文：现在淮夷的寇盗没有消灭，讨伐的军队去了一批又一批，弄得老百姓疲惫憔悴，陷于当差的困境，希望全体官员，加惠于劳苦大众，蠲弃洗涤贪污浊秽，以期得到幸福吉祥。
English: Now that the bandits in Huaiyi have not been eliminated, and the crusading army has gone to one group after another, making the people tired and trapped in the predicament of duty, I hope that all officials will benefit the working people, abandon the washing of corruption and filth, and hope to be happy and auspicious.

古文：其令秩满百石，十岁以上，有殊才异行，乃得参选。
现代文：现命令官秩满百石，干了十年以上，有特殊才华和特异行为的人，才得参与选拔。
English: Now, officials are required to have a hundred-stone rank, have worked for more than ten years, and have special talents and special behaviors before they can participate in the selection.

古文：臧吏子孙，不得察举。
现代文：有贪污贿赂行为官员的子孙，不得荐举。
English: The descendants of officials who engage in acts of corruption and bribery shall not be recommended for promotion.

古文：杜绝邪伪请托之原。令廉白守道者得信其操。
现代文：杜绝邪恶虚伪走后门的根源，让那些廉洁清白坚守道义的人得以伸展他们高尚的节操。
English: Eliminate the root causes of evil and hypocrisy, and allow those who are clean and pure and adhere to morality to extend their noble principles.

古文：各明守所司，将观厥后。 
现代文：大家应尽自己的职责，我将考察今后的表现。 
English: Everyone should do their part and I will be looking at future performance.

古文：九月戊戌，追尊皇祖河间孝王曰孝穆皇，夫人赵氏曰孝穆皇后，皇考蠡吾侯曰孝崇皇。
现代文：九月戊戌，追尊皇祖河间孝王为孝穆皇，夫人赵氏为孝穆皇后，皇父蠡吾侯为孝崇皇。
English: In September, Emperor Wu was enthroned, and Emperor Xiaomu, the ancestor of Emperor He, was named Emperor Xiaomu, his wife, Empress Zhao, was named Empress Xiaomu, and his father, Empress Dowager Zhou, was named Emperor Xiaosong.

古文：冬十月甲午，尊皇母匽氏为孝崇博园贵人。
现代文：冬十月十二日，尊皇母氏为孝崇博园贵人。
English: On the 12th day of October in winter, His Imperial Highness the Empress was awarded the title of "Distinguished Person of Xiaosongbo Garden."

古文：建和元年春正月辛亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：建和元年春正月初一，日蚀。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of spring in the first year of Jianhe.

古文：诏三公、九卿、校尉各言得失。
现代文：诏三公、九卿、校尉对朝政各言得失。
English: Zhao San Gong, Jiu Jing, and the captain of the school all had their own opinions on the imperial government.

古文：戊午，大赦天下。
现代文：初八，大赦天下。
English: On the 23rd, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：赐史更劳一岁；男子爵，人二级，为父后及三老、孝悌、力田人三级；鳏、寡、孤、独、笃癃、贫不能自存者粟，人五斛；贞妇帛，人三匹。
现代文：赐吏更劳一岁；男子爵，每人二级，为父后及三老、孝悌、力田每人三级；鳏、寡、孤、独、患绝症、贫而不能生存的每人粟五斛；贞节妇人每人帛三匹。
English: For officials, it is one year of age; for men, it is second grade; for fathers, sons, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law, sons-in-law

古文：灾害所伤什四以上，勿收田租；其不满者，以实除之。
现代文：受灾害损失在十分之四以上的，不收田租；不及此数的照实际情况减免。
English: If the loss caused by disasters is more than four tenths, the farm rent will not be collected; if it is less than this number, it will be reduced or exempted according to the actual situation.

古文：二月，荆、扬二州人多饿死，遣四府掾分行赈给。
现代文：二月，荆、扬二州有很多人饿死，派四府掾巡视考察，进行赈灾救济。
English: In February, many people starved to death in the two prefectures of Jing and Yang. Four prefectural inspectors were sent to investigate and carry out disaster relief.

古文：沛国言黄龙见谯。
现代文：沛国上报黄龙见于谯。
English: Pei Guo reported that Huanglong was seen in Zhai.

古文：夏四月庚寅，京师地震。
现代文：夏季四月十一日，京师发生地震。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of summer, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：诏大将军、公、卿、校尉举贤良方正、能直言极谏者各一人。
现代文：诏令大将军、公卿、校尉，荐举贤良方正能大胆直言批评过错的人各一个。
English: The general, the court noble, and the captain of the school were each recommended by the imperial edict to nominate a virtuous person who could boldly and forthrightly criticize mistakes.

古文：又命列侯、将、大夫、御史、谒者、千石、六百石、博士、议郎、郎官各上封事，指陈得失。
现代文：又命列侯、将、大夫、御史、谒者、千石、六百石、博士、议郎、郎官各秘密上书，检举揭发，指陈利害得失。
English: He also ordered the lords, generals, doctors, magistrates, magistrates, governors, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general, governors-general,

古文：又诏大将军、公、卿、郡、国举至孝笃行之士各一人。
现代文：又诏令大将军、公卿、郡、国荐举十分孝顺笃实力行之士各一人。
English: He also ordered the general, court nobles, counties and the country to nominate one person each as a person of great filial piety and strength.

古文：壬辰，诏州郡不得迫胁驱逐长吏。
现代文：十三日，诏令州郡不得逼迫威胁驱逐长吏。
English: On the 13th, the imperial edict ordered prefectures and counties not to force or threaten to expel officials.

古文：长吏臧满三十万而不纠举者，刺史、二千石以纵避为罪。
现代文：长吏贪赃满三十万而不见纠劾举报者，刺史、二千石以纵容避匿论罪。
English: The magistrate embezzled over 300,000 yuan and did not punish the whistleblower. He was fined 2,000 koku and convicted of connivance and evasion.

古文：若有擅相假印绶者，与杀人同弃市论。
现代文：假使有擅自借给印绶关防以假文件作恶，与杀人同罪，弃市。
English: If anyone borrows money from the printing office without authorization and uses false documents to commit crimes, they will be guilty of the same crime as homicide and will be expelled from the city.

古文：丙午，诏郡国系囚减死罪一等，勿笞。
现代文：二十七日，诏令郡国系囚减死罪一等，不笞打。
English: On the 27th, the imperial edict ordered the county's national prisoners to reduce the death penalty to the first degree, and not to beat.

古文：唯谋反大逆，不用此书。
现代文：只有谋反大逆不道，不援用此诏。
English: Only conspiring to commit high treason is unethical, so this edict is not to be invoked.

古文：又诏曰： 比起陵茔，弥历时节，力役既广，徒隶尤勤。
现代文：又诏令说： 近来起静陵填坟茔，经历了很长时间，征召的劳役很多，判刑的奴隶更加勤苦。
English: The edict also said, "Recently, it has taken a long time for the Jingling Tomb to be filled in. There are a lot of conscripted laborers, and the sentenced slaves are even more diligent.

古文：顷雨泽不沾，密云复散，倘或在兹。
现代文：这些日子，不下一点雨，密云也散去了，出现天旱，也许原因就在这里。
English: These days, without a drop of rain, the thick clouds have dispersed, and there is a drought, perhaps the reason is here.

古文：其令徒作陵者减刑各六月。 
现代文：今命令凡囚徒作陵的减刑各六个月。 
English: He has now ordered that the sentences of all prisoners who have built tombs be reduced by six months.

古文：是月，立阜陵王代兄勃遒亭侯便为阜陵王。
现代文：这个月，立阜陵王刘代的哥哥勃遒亭侯刘便为阜陵王。
English: This month, the elder brother of King Liu of the Fuxing Dynasty, Prince Liu of Burgundy, became King of Fuxing.

古文：郡国六地裂，水涌井溢。
现代文：郡国六处发生地震，井水漫溢，坏屋杀人。
English: Earthquakes occurred in six places in the county, wells overflowed, and people were killed in dilapidated houses.

古文：芝草生中黄藏府。
现代文：芝草生于掌货币金银的中黄藏府。
English: Zhigusa was born in Zhonghuangzangfu, where gold and silver were the currency.

古文：六月，太尉胡广罢，大司农杜乔为太尉。
现代文：六月，太尉胡广罢免，任大司农杜乔为太尉。
English: In June, Captain Hu Guang was removed from his post, and Chief Superintendent Nongduqiao was appointed Captain.

古文：秋七月，勃海王鸿薨，立帝弟蠡吾侯悝为勃海王。
现代文：秋季七月，勃海王刘鸿逝世。立桓帝弟蠡吾侯刘悝为勃海王。
English: In the autumn of July, Bo Hai King Liu Hong passed away, leaving Emperor Huan's younger brother, Liu Ye, as the King of Bo Hai.

古文：八月乙未，立皇后梁氏。
现代文：八月十八日，立梁氏为皇后。
English: On August 18th, Li Liang became the empress.

古文：九月丁卯，京师地震。
现代文：九月二十一日，京师发生地震。
English: On September 21, an earthquake occurred in the capital city of Kyoto.

古文：太尉杜乔免。
现代文：太尉杜乔免职。
English: Captain Duccio relieved of duty.

古文：冬十月，司徒赵戒为太尉，司空袁汤为司徒，前太尉胡广为司空。
现代文：冬十月，任司徒赵戒为太尉，司空袁汤为司徒，前太尉胡广为司空。
English: In the winter of October, Zhao Jie, who served as a tutor, was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant, Yuan Tang, a tutor, was promoted to the rank of second lieutenant, and Hu Guang, a former second lieutenant, was promoted to second lieutenant.

古文：十一月，济阴言有五色大鸟见于己氏。
现代文：十一月，济阴上报有五色大鸟见于己氏。
English: In November, it was reported in Jiyin that a large five-colored bird was seen in Jishi.

古文：戊午，减天下死罪一等，戍边。
现代文：十二日，减天下死罪一等，送往戍边。
English: On the 12th, the death penalty was reduced to the first degree, and he was sent to Lijiang.

古文：清河刘文反，杀国相射暠，欲立清河王蒜为天子；事觉伏诛。
现代文：清河刘文反叛，杀害国相射詗，想立清河王刘蒜为天子；事变发觉，刘文被诛。
English: Liu Wen of Qinghe rebelled, killed the sovereign, and wanted to set up the king of Qinghe, Liu Garlic, as the son of heaven. When the incident was discovered, Liu Wen was arrested.

古文：蒜坐贬为尉氏候，徙桂阳，自杀。
现代文：刘蒜因而贬为尉氏侯，遣往桂阳，自杀。
English: As a result, Liu Garlic was demoted to the rank of lieutenant and sent to Guiyang, where he committed suicide.

古文：前太尉李固、杜乔皆下狱死。
现代文：前太尉李固、杜乔都监死狱中。
English: Former captain Li Gu and Du Qiao are both in prison.

古文：陈留盗贼李坚自称皇帝，伏诛。
现代文：陈留盗贼李坚自称皇帝，被杀。
English: Chenliu thief Li Jian claimed to be emperor and was killed.

古文：二年春正月甲子，皇帝加元服。
现代文：二年春正月十九日，皇帝加冠于首。
English: On the 19th day of the first month of the second year of Spring, the emperor crowned him.

古文：庚午，大赦天下。
现代文：二十五日，大赦天下。
English: On the 23rd, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：赐河间、勃海二王黄金各百斤，彭城诸国王各五十斤；公主、大将军、三公、特进、侯、中二千石、二千石、将、大夫、郎吏、从官、四姓及梁、邓小侯、诸夫人以下帛，各有差。年八十以上赐米、酒、肉，九十以上加帛二匹，绵三斤。
现代文：赐河间王刘建、勃海王刘悝各黄金百斤，彭城诸国王各五十斤；公主、大将军、三公、特进、侯、中二千石、二千石、将、大夫、郎吏、从官、樊、郭、阴、马及梁、邓小侯、诸夫人以下帛，各分别不等，年八十以上赐米、酒、肉，九十以上加帛二匹，绵三斤。
English: He gave 100 catties of gold to Liu Jian, the king of Hebei, and Liu Ye, the king of Bohai, and 50 catties of gold to the kings of Pengcheng; and 2,000 catties of gold to the princess, the general, the three princes, the special envoy, the vassal, the junior vassal, the general, the doctor, the vassal, the vassal, the vassal, the eunuch, the guo, the guo, the yin, the ma, and the liang, the vassal of Deng Xiao, and the ladies, respectively. He gave rice, wine, and meat

古文：三月戊辰，帝从皇太后幸大将军梁冀府。
现代文：三月戊辰，帝随皇太后梁氏到大将军梁冀府第。
English: In March, the emperor followed the Empress Dowager Liang to the General Liang Jifu's residence.

古文：白马羌寇广汉属国，杀长吏，益州刺史率板楯蛮讨破之。
现代文：白马羌寇掠广汉属国，杀长吏，益州刺史率领板楯蛮讨伐打败他们。
English: The White Horse raiders plundered the Guanghan vassal state, killed the officials, and Yizhou Shishi led the fierce crusade to defeat them.

古文：夏四月丙子，封帝弟硕为平原王，奉孝崇皇祀。尊孝崇皇夫人马氏为孝崇园贵人。
现代文：夏季四月初三，封帝弟刘硕为平原王，奉孝崇皇祀，尊孝崇皇夫人马氏为孝崇园贵人。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of summer, Liu Shuo, the emperor's younger brother, was named the king of the plain. He was worshipped as the emperor, and his wife, Ma, was honored as the noblewoman of Xiaosongyuan.

古文：嘉禾生大司农帑藏。
现代文：嘉禾生于大司农藏金币的地方。
English: Jiahe was born in a place where gold coins were hoarded by farmers.

古文：五月癸丑，北宫掖廷中德阳殿及左掖门火，车驾移幸南宫。
现代文：五月初十，北宫嫔妃居住的地方德阳殿及左掖门起火，帝移居南宫。
English: On the 10th day of the 5th month, Deyang Palace and Zuoanmen, where Empress Dowager Cixi lived in the North Palace, caught fire, and the emperor moved to the South Palace.

古文：六月，改清河为甘陵，立安平王得子经侯理为甘陵王。
现代文：六月，改清河为甘陵，立安平王刘得之子经侯刘理为甘陵王。
English: In June, Qinghe was changed to Ganling, and the son of Anping King Liu De, Liu Li, became the King of Ganling.

古文：秋七月，京师大水。
现代文：秋七月，京师发大水。
English: In autumn and July, large amounts of water are released in Beijing.

古文：河东言木连理。
现代文：河东报告，有树长出连理枝。
English: According to a report from Hedong, some trees have sprouted even more branches.

古文：冬十月，长平陈景自号 黄帝子 ，署置官属，又南顿管伯亦称 真人 ，并图举兵，悉伏诛。
现代文：冬季十月，长平陈景自号 黄帝子 ，成立官署设置官员，又南顿管伯也自称 真人 ，并企图起兵造，陈景、管伯都被诛灭。
English: In the winter of October, Changping Chenjing changed his name to Huangdiizi, established a government office and set up officials, and Nantong Guanbo also claimed to be a real person, and attempted to build an army. Chenjing and Guanbo were annihilated.

古文：三年春三月甲申，彭城王定薨。
现代文：三年春三月甲申，彭城王刘定逝世。
English: In March of the spring of the third year, King Liu Ding of Pengcheng passed away.

古文：夏四月丁卯晦，日有食之。
现代文：夏季四月三十日，发生日食。
English: In summer, a solar eclipse occurs on April 30th.

古文：五月乙亥，诏曰： 盖闻天生蒸民，不能相理，为之立君，使司牧之。
现代文：五月初八，诏令说 ：天生这么多老百姓，不能自己管理自己，于是为他们设立君王，派些官吏治理他们。
English: On the eighth day of the fifth month, the edict said, "Since there are so many common people and they cannot govern themselves, a king should be set up for them and some officials should be sent to govern them."

古文：君道得于下，则休祥著乎上；庶事失其序，则咎征见乎象。
现代文：君王推行的办法能得到下面百姓的拥护，那么幸福吉祥就在上天表现出来。今平民百姓所实行的众多事务混乱无序，那么咎戾的征兆就从自然现象上显示。
English: If the measures carried out by the monarch can be supported by the people below, then happiness and auspiciousness will be manifested in the heavens. If the many affairs carried out by the common people are chaotic and disorderly, then the signs of blame will be shown by natural phenomena.

古文：间者，日食毁缺，阳光晦暗，朕祗惧潜思，匪遑启处。
现代文：近来，日蚀损毁缺陷，阳光阴暗，我吓得私自反省思考，不得安居。
English: Recently, the eclipse damage and destruction defects, the sun is gloomy, I was scared to reflect on my own, and I could not live in peace.

古文：传不云乎： 日食修德，月食修刑。
现代文：《公羊传》不是说吗， 发生日蚀，我们就要修养德性；发生月蚀，我们就要修明刑事法制。 
English: Didn't "The Story of the Ram" say that when there is a solar eclipse, we must cultivate virtue; when there is a lunar eclipse, we must amend the criminal legal system?

古文：昔孝章帝愍前世禁徙，故建初之元，并蒙恩泽，流徙者使还故郡，没入者免为庶民。
现代文：以前孝章帝对前代禁锢或远徙犯人，深为怜悯，故在建初元年下诏，犯人都得到他的恩泽，流放徙边的使他们归还故土，没入为徒的免为庶民。
English: In the past, Emperor Xiaozhang had deep compassion for the previous generation of prisoners or exiled prisoners, so he issued an edict in the first year of the new year that the prisoners would all receive his grace, the exiles would be allowed to return to their homeland, and those who had been imprisoned would not be allowed to become commoners.

古文：先皇德政，可不务乎！
现代文：先皇的这种德政，不值得我们效法吗？
English: Isn't the Emperor's German policy worthy of emulation?

古文：其自永建元年迄乎今岁，凡诸妖恶，支亲从坐，及吏民减死徙边者，悉归本郡；唯没入者不从此令。 
现代文：现令自顺帝永建元年到今年，凡是妖邪作恶，旁支亲族株连坐罚，以及官吏平民减死罪徙边的，一律回归本郡；只有没入罪犯的家属不依从此令。 
English: From the first year of Emperor Yongjian's reign to this year, it is now ordered that all evil-doers, collateral relatives of the tribe who have been punished, and officials and civilians who have commuted the death penalty shall return to this county; only the families of criminals who have not been involved do not follow this order.

古文：六月庚子，诏大将军、三公、特进、侯，其与卿、校尉举贤良方正、能直言极谏之士各一人。
现代文：六月初四，诏令大将军、三公、特进、侯以及卿、校尉，各举荐贤良方正能讲实话提出批评之士一人。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the year, the general, the three princes, the special envoy, the marquis, the lord, and the captain of the school were each recommended by the emperor to be able to speak the truth and criticize one person.

古文：乙卯，震宪陵寝屋。
现代文：十九日，宪陵寝屋遭地震。
English: On the 19th, an earthquake hit the sleeping quarters of the gendarmerie.

古文：秋七月庚申，廉县雨肉。
现代文：秋季七月庚申，廉县像下雨一般落肉。
English: In autumn, in July, Koshin, Lian County is like rain.

古文：八月乙丑，有星孛于天市。
现代文：八月三十日，彗星出现于东北旗星十二颗中的天市星。
English: On August 30, the comet appeared among the twelve stars of the Northeastern Banner.

古文：京师大水。
现代文：京师涨大水。
English: The water level in Beijing has risen sharply.

古文：九月己卯，地震。
现代文：九月十四日，发生地震。
English: On September 14, an earthquake occurred.

古文：庚寅，地又震。诏死罪以下及亡命者赎，各有差。
现代文：二十五日，又发生地震，诏令对死罪以下及逃亡的赎罪，赎物分别不等。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, another earthquake occurred, and the edict decreed that the atonement for crimes less than the death penalty and escape, and the ransom were different.

古文：郡国五山崩。
现代文：郡国五处山崩。
English: Five landslides in the county.

古文：冬十月，太尉赵戒免。司徒袁汤为太尉，大司农河内张歆为司徒。
现代文：冬季十月，太尉赵戒免职，任司徒袁汤为太尉，任大司农河内张歆为司徒。
English: In the winter of October, Second Lieutenant Zhao Jie was relieved of his duties, and Yuan Tang, who had been appointed as an instructor, was promoted to Second Lieutenant, and Zhang Ye, who had been appointed as a senior director of farmers in Hanoi, was promoted to an instructor.

古文：十一月甲申，诏曰： 朕摄政失中，灾眚连仍，三光不明，阴阳错序。
现代文：十一月二十日，诏令说： 我在施政中失却中和，以致灾恶不断，日月星三光不明，阴阳颠倒。
English: On November 20th, the imperial edict said: I lost the balance of power in my administration, resulting in continuous disasters, the sun, moon and stars are not clear, and the yin and yang are reversed.

古文：监寐寤叹，疢如疾首。
现代文：寤寐不安，痛心疾首。
English: Sleep-deprived, anxious, heart-broken.

古文：今京师厮舍，死者相枕，郡县阡陌，处处有之，甚违周文掩胔之义。
现代文：现京师贫民住所，死去的人互相枕积成堆，郡县阡陌之间，处处都有死人，大大地违背了周文王掩骼埋的道义。
English: Now Beijing is a slum, and the dead people are piled up on each other, and there are dead people everywhere between counties and counties, which greatly violates the morality of King Zhou Wen's concealment and burial.

古文：其有家属而贫无以葬者，给直，人三千，丧主布三匹；若无亲属，可于官壖地葬之，表识姓名，为设祠祭。
现代文：死者有家属而贫穷得无力埋葬的，给以赏钱，每人三千，给丧主三匹布；如果没有亲属，可以葬在城郭旁地，标志姓名，并为祭奠。
English: If the deceased had relatives but were too poor to bury them, they were given a reward of three thousand rupees per person and three horses for the mourners. If there were no relatives, they could be buried next to the city walls, with their names marked and as a memorial.

古文：又徙在作部，疾病致医药，死亡厚埋藏。
现代文：又服刑的囚徒，在劳役的，生病给医药，死亡要善为掩埋。
English: In addition, prisoners who have served their sentence, those who are in forced labor, and those who are ill should be given medicine, and death should be buried properly.

古文：民有不能自振及流移者，禀谷如科。
现代文：平民无法自给，或流散迁移的，以廪谷赈济如已有的规定。
English: If the civilians are unable to provide for themselves, or if they are dispersed and migrate, they will be able to support themselves in Shibuya according to the existing regulations.

古文：州郡检察，务崇恩施，以康我民。 
现代文：这些，州郡要进行检查考察，务必施恩，让老百姓康宁。 
English: These, the state and county should carry out inspection and investigation, and be sure to be gracious and let the people know.

古文：和平元年春正月甲子，大赦天下，改元和平。
现代文：和平元年春正月初一，大赦天下，改元和平。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Heian era, the emperor pardoned the whole country and the era was changed to Heian era.

古文：乙丑，诏曰： 曩者遭家不造，先帝早世。永惟大宗之重，深思嗣续之福，询谋台辅，稽之兆占。
现代文：初二，诏令说： 往日，家遭不幸，先帝死得早，长久考虑天地原气事物本源的重大，深深想到子孙后嗣的福泽，咨询三公九卿，考查占卜吉凶。
English: On the second day of the first month, the imperial edict said: In the past, the family suffered misfortune, the former emperor died early, long considered the importance of the origin of things in the world, deeply thought about the blessings of the children and grandchildren, consulted the three princes and nine nobles, and examined divination.

古文：既建明哲，克定统业，天人协和，万国咸宁。
现代文：既然建立起了法则，就能奠定统一大业，天命人事上下谐和，万国都和睦安宁。
English: Now that the law has been established, it will be possible to lay the foundation for the great cause of unification, the harmony of man and nature, and the harmony and tranquility of all nations.

古文：元服已加，将即委付，而四方盗窃，颇有未静，故假延临政，以须安谧。
现代文：帝冠冕已加，即将委付大任，而四方盗窃，多有未静，因而暂且延长临朝听政，以求安谧。
English: The imperial crown has been added to the crown, and a great task is about to be entrusted, but the theft of the four parties is mostly not quiet, so it is temporarily extended to the imperial court to listen to politics in order to seek peace.

古文：幸赖股肱御侮之助，残丑消荡，民和年稔，普天率土，遐迩洽同。
现代文：幸赖百官御侮得力，残留的丑类消灭殆尽，人民和绥，年丰岁稔，普天之下，远近融洽同心。
English: Fortunately, thanks to the contempt of hundreds of officials, the remaining monsters have been eliminated, the people are peaceful, the years are prosperous, the whole world is in harmony, and the far and near are in harmony.

古文：远览 复子明辟 之义，近慕先姑归授之法，及今令辰，皇帝称制。
现代文：远察周公还政于成王之义，近慕阎太后归政授权于先帝的法则，趁今天吉日良辰，皇帝称制，总揽一切。
English: From afar, Zhou Gong returned to power in the king's righteousness, and he was close to the law of the former emperor authorized by the return of the Empress Yan to power. Taking advantage of today's auspicious day, the emperor praised the system and took everything.

古文：群公卿士，虔恭尔位，勠力一意，勉同断金。
现代文：全体官员，忠于本职，戮力同心，其利断金。
English: All officials, be loyal to their duties, work hard together, and make the best of it.

古文：展也大成 ，则所望矣。 
现代文：诚信为国，天下就太平了。这是我所期望的啊！ 
English: Integrity for the country, the world will be peaceful. This is what I expect!

古文：二月，扶风妖贼裴优自称皇帝，伏诛。
现代文：二月，扶风妖贼裴优自称皇帝，被杀。
English: In February, Pei You, the self-proclaimed emperor, was killed.

古文：甲寅，皇太后梁氏崩。
现代文：二十二日，皇太后梁氏逝世。
English: On the 22nd, Empress Dowager Liang died.

古文：三月，车驾徙幸北宫。甲午，葬顺烈皇后。
现代文：三月，帝迁居北宫。甲午，葬顺烈皇后。
English: In March, the emperor moved to the North Palace. In the afternoon, the funeral of Empress Shunli took place.

古文：夏五月庚辰，尊博园匽贵人曰孝崇皇后。
现代文：夏季五月十九日，尊博园贵人为孝崇皇后。
English: On the 19th day of May in summer, the dignitaries of the National Museum of Korea were crowned by Empress Xiaozong.

古文：秋七月，梓潼山崩。
现代文：秋季七月，梓潼山崩。
English: In the autumn of July, there was a landslide in Azusa.

古文：冬十一月辛巳，减天下死罪一等，徙边戍。
现代文：冬季十一月二十四日，减天下死罪一等，迁往戍边。
English: In winter, on November 24th, the death penalty was reduced to the first class in the world, and it was moved to Lijiang.

古文：元嘉元年春正月，京师疾疫，使光禄大夫将医药案行。
现代文：元嘉元年春正月，京师疾疫，使光禄大夫带着医生药品视察诊治。
English: In the first month of the spring of the year of Yuan Jia Yuan, the Beijing division of the epidemic caused Dr. Guanglu to take the doctor's medicine to inspect and treat.

古文：癸酉，大赦天下，改元元嘉。
现代文：十六日，大赦天下，改元元嘉。
English: On the 16th, the country was amnestied, and the era name was changed to Yuan Yuan Jia.

古文：二月，九江、庐江大疫。
现代文：二月，九江、庐江大疫。
English: In February, there was a major epidemic in Jiujiang and Minjiang.

古文：甲午，河间王建薨。
现代文：初七，河涧王刘建逝世。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Liu Jian, the king of river rafts, passed away.

古文：夏四月己丑，安平王得薨。
现代文：夏季四月初三，安平王刘得逝世。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of summer, Anping King Liu De passed away.

古文：京师旱。任城、梁国饥，民相食。
现代文：京师发生旱灾，任城、梁国饥荒，人吃人。
English: There was a drought in Beijing, and Rencheng and Liangguo suffered from famine. People were eating each other.

古文：司徒张歆罢，光禄勋吴雄为司徒。
现代文：司徒张歆罢免，任光禄勋吴雄为司徒。
English: Zhang Jun was removed from the post of secretary, and Guang Rukun Wu Xiong was appointed as secretary.

古文：秋七月，武陵蛮叛。
现代文：秋季七月，武陵蛮叛乱。
English: In the autumn of July, the Wuling Rebellion broke out.

古文：冬十月，司空胡广罢。
现代文：冬季十月，司空胡广罢免。
English: In the winter of October, Sikyong Hu Guang was dismissed.

古文：十一月辛巳，京师地震。
现代文：十一月二十八日，京师地震。
English: On November 28th, the Beijing earthquake occurred.

古文：闰月庚午，任城王崇薨。太常黄琼为司空。
现代文：闰十二月十八日，任城王刘崇逝世，任太常黄琼为司空。
English: On the 18th day of leap December, Liu Chong, the appointed king of the city, passed away, and Huang Qiong, the appointed ruler of the city, became the governor.

古文：二年春正月，西域长史王敬为于窴国所杀。
现代文：二年春季正月，西域长史王敬被于窴国所杀。
English: In the spring of the first month of the second year, the governor of the western region, Shi Wangjing, was killed in the state of Shandong.

古文：丙辰，京师地震。
现代文：丙辰，京师发生地震。
English: On the 17th, the Chang'an earthquake occurred.

古文：夏四月甲寅，孝崇皇后匽氏崩。
现代文：夏季四月初四，孝崇皇后匽氏去世。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of the summer, Empress Xiaozong passed away.

古文：庚午，常山王豹薨。
现代文：二十日，常山王刘豹逝世。
English: On the 20th, the king of Changshan, Liu Pao, passed away.

古文：五月辛卯，葬孝崇皇后于博陵。
现代文：五月十二日，葬孝崇皇后于博陵。
English: On May 12th, the funeral of Empress Xiaozong took place in Boling.

古文：秋七月庚辰，日有食之。八月，济阴言黄龙见句阳，金城言黄龙见允街。
现代文：秋季七月初二，日蚀。八月，济阴报告黄龙出现于句阳，金城报告黄龙出现于允。
English: In autumn, on the second day of the first month of July, there was a solar eclipse. In August, Jiyin reported that the yellow dragon appeared in Guyang, and Jincheng reported that the yellow dragon appeared in Yun.

古文：冬十月乙亥，京师地震。
现代文：冬十月二十八日，京师发生地震。
English: In the winter of October 28th, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：十一月，司空黄琼免。
现代文：十一月，司空黄琼被罢免。
English: In November, Siku Huang Qiong was removed from office.

古文：十二月，特进赵戒为司空。
现代文：十二月，任特进赵戒为司空。
English: In December, Zhao Jie, a special envoy, was appointed as the first secretary.

古文：右北平太守和旻坐臧，下狱死。
现代文：右北太守和旻因贪污，下狱处死。
English: The Right Northern Governor Kazuchika Kazuchika was sent to prison and executed for corruption.

古文：永兴元年春二月，张掖言白鹿见。
现代文：永兴元年春二月，张掖报告出现白鹿。
English: In the spring and February of the first year of Yongxing, Zhang Ye reported the appearance of white deer.

古文：三月丁亥，幸鸿池。
现代文：三月十二日，帝到鸿池。
English: On March 12th, the emperor arrived in Honchi.

古文：夏五月丙申，大赦天下，改元永兴。
现代文：夏季五月二十二日，大赦天下，改元永兴。
English: In the summer, on May 22nd, there was a general amnesty and the era was changed to Yongxing.

古文：丁酉，济南王广薨，无子，国除。
现代文：二十三日，济南王刘广逝世，无子，封国撤消。
English: On the 23rd, Liu Guang, the king of Jinan, died childless, and the state was revoked.

古文：秋七月，郡国三十二蝗。
现代文：秋季七月，郡国三十二处发生蝗灾。
English: In the autumn of July, locust plagues occurred in 32 places in the county.

古文：河水溢。
现代文：黄河水泛滥。
English: The Yellow River is flooding.

古文：百姓饥穷，流冗道路，至有数十万户，冀州尤甚。
现代文：百姓饥饿穷困。流离散失道路，以至有数十万户，冀州特别严重。
English: People are starving and destitute. Hundreds of thousands of households have been displaced and lost their roads. The situation in Jizhou is particularly serious.

古文：诏在所赈给乏绝，安慰居业。
现代文：诏令各所在地方赈给困乏绝食饥民，使之安心居业。
English: He ordered all localities to provide food to the destitute hunger strikers, so that they can live and work in peace.

古文：冬十月，太尉袁汤免，太常胡广为太尉。
现代文：冬季十月，太尉袁汤免职，任太常胡广为太尉。
English: In the winter of October, First Lieutenant Yuan Tang was relieved of his duties, and Second Lieutenant Hu Guang was appointed as First Lieutenant.

古文：司徒吴雄罢，司空赵戒免；以太仆黄琼为司徒，光禄勋房植为司空。
现代文：司徒吴雄罢免，司空赵戒免职，任太仆黄琼为司徒，任光禄勋房植为司空。
English: Wuxiong, the tutor, was dismissed, Zhao Jie, the secretary, was dismissed, Huang Qiong, the servant, was appointed as the tutor, and Guanglu Xunfang was appointed as the secretary.

古文：十一月丁丑，诏减天下死罪一等，徙边戍。
现代文：十一月初六，诏令减天下死罪一等，迁往戍边。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month, the imperial edict reduced the death penalty to the first class in the world, and moved to Lijiang.

古文：是岁，武陵太守应奉招诱叛蛮，降之。
现代文：这年，武陵太守应奉招抚诱导叛蛮投降。
English: This year, Wuling Taishu was induced to surrender.

古文：二年春正月甲午，大赦天下。
现代文：二年春正月二十四日，大赦天下。
English: On the 24th day of the first month of the second year of spring, the general amnesty came into effect.

古文：二月辛丑，初听刺史、二千石行三年丧服。
现代文：二月初二，开始听任刺史、二千石实行三年丧服。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, he began to listen to the stabbing of history, and the implementation of three years of mourning for two thousand stones.

古文：癸卯，京师地震，诏公、卿、校尉举贤良方正、能直言极谏者各一人。
现代文：初四，京师地震，诏令公、卿、校尉举荐贤良方正肯批评提意见的人各一个。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the year, there was an earthquake in Beijing, and the magistrate, the lord, and the captain each recommended one person who was willing to criticize and offer opinions.

古文：诏曰： 比者星辰谬越，坤灵震动，灾异之降，必不空发。
现代文：诏令说 ：近来天上的星辰错乱越位，地神震动，灾害及特异现象都不是偶然的，必有实际的事物相应照。
English: The edict said: "Recently, the stars in the sky have been out of alignment, the earth has been shaken, disasters and unusual phenomena are not accidental, and there must be actual things correspondingly reflected.

古文：敕己修政，庶望有补。
现代文：我们要修明政治，希望有所补益。
English: We want to clarify politics and hope to make some gains.

古文：其舆服制度有逾侈长饰者，皆宜损省。
现代文：车马服饰制度有过于奢侈炫耀的，都应当减少或省掉。
English: If there are any excessively extravagant or ostentatious elements in the carriage and horse dress system, they should be reduced or eliminated.

古文：郡县务存俭约，申明旧令，如永平故事。 
现代文：郡县务必保持俭约，申明原来的规定，如永平年间所作的一样。 
English: Counties and counties must maintain frugality and affirm the original provisions, as was done during the Yongping era.

古文：六月，彭城泗水增长逆流。
现代文：六月，彭城泗水高涨倒流。
English: In June, the water level in Pengcheng's Lishui River rose and flowed backwards.

古文：诏司隶校尉、部刺史曰： 蝗灾为害，水变仍至，五谷不登，人无宿储。其令所伤郡国种芜菁以助人食。 
现代文：诏令司隶校尉、部刺史说： 蝗灾为害，水灾也连连发生，五谷没有收获，百姓没有隔夜的口粮，现命令受灾郡国广种芜菁好补足民食。 
English: "The locusts have caused harm, the floods have also occurred in succession, the grain has not been harvested, and the people have no overnight rations. Now, it is ordered to supplement the food of the people in the affected counties with a wide variety of cochineal.

古文：京师蝗。东海朐山崩。
现代文：京师发生蝗灾，东海朐山崩。
English: Locust plagues in Beijing and landslides in the East China Sea.

古文：九月丁卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日蚀。
English: On the first day of September, the sun and moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：诏曰： 朝政失中，云汉作旱，川灵涌水，蝗螽孽蔓，残我百谷，太阳亏光，饥馑荐臻。
现代文：诏令说： 朝廷政治失之中和，天降旱灾，河流有水患，蝗虫遍野，残害百谷，太阳缺光，饥荒一再发生。
English: The imperial edict said: In the midst of the imperial court's political failure, droughts, floods, locusts, destruction of crops, lack of sunlight, and famine repeatedly occurred.

古文：其不被害郡县，当为饥馁者储。
现代文：没有遭灾的郡县，应当为受灾地区储备粮食。
English: Counties and counties that have not been affected by the disaster should reserve grain for the affected areas.

古文：天下一家，趣不糜烂，则为国宝。
现代文：天下一家，趣不糜烂，则为国宝。
English: A family under heaven, if it is not rotten, is a national treasure.

古文：其禁郡、国不得卖酒，祠祀裁足。 
现代文：现禁止郡国酿酒，祭祠尽量节制。 
English: It is now forbidden to brew alcohol in the county, and the shrines are as restrained as possible.

古文：太尉胡广免，司徒黄琼为太尉。
现代文：太尉胡广被罢免，任司徒黄琼为太尉。
English: Captain Hu Guang was removed from his post, and Sitou Huang Qiong was appointed captain.

古文：闰月，光禄勋尹颂为司徒。
现代文：闰九月任光禄勋尹颂为司徒。
English: In the leap September, he was appointed as a disciple of the Honorable Guanglu Yin Song.

古文：减天下死罪一等，徙边戍。
现代文：减天下死罪一等，徙去戍边。
English: Reduce the death penalty to the first class in the world, and move to the periphery.

古文：蜀郡李伯诈称宗室，当立为 太初皇帝 ，伏诛。
现代文：蜀郡李伯诈称宗室，当立为 太初皇帝 ，被诛。
English: Li Bo-zhu of Shu County is said to be the ancestral family, and Dang Li was the first emperor, and was executed.

古文：冬十一月甲辰，校猎上林苑，遂至函谷关，赐所过道傍年九十以上钱，各有差。
现代文：冬季十一月初九，帝校猎上林苑，并至函谷关，赏赐所过道旁九十岁以上的老人钱，分别不。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of winter, the imperial school hunted in Shangliyuan, and went to Hanyu Pass to reward the elderly over 90 years old next to the aisle of the school with money, respectively.

古文：太山、琅邪贼公孙举等反叛，杀长吏。
现代文：太山、琅笽贼公孙举等反叛，杀长吏。
English: Taishan, the usurper Gongsun and others rebelled and killed the magistrates.

古文：永寿元年春正月戊申，大赦天下，改元永寿。
现代文：永寿元年春正月十四日，大赦天下，改元永寿。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Yongshu, the world was amnestied and the era was changed to Yongshu.

古文：二月，司隶、冀州饥，人相食。
现代文：二月，司隶、冀州饥荒，人吃人。
English: In February, Sili and Jizhou suffered from famine, and people were eating each other.

古文：敕州郡赈给贫弱。
现代文：敕令州郡赈济贫民弱小。
English: Bailing out the poor in Lingzhou County.

古文：若王侯吏民有积谷者，一切貣十分之三，以助禀贷；其百姓吏民者，以见钱雇直。
现代文：如果王侯官员富民有积谷的，权且貣十分之三，以之帮助仓廪进行赈济，是百姓吏民的谷，以现金酬值。
English: If the officials of the princes and princes are rich and the people are poor, the power and the three-tenths of the power to help the peasants to make money is the people's wealth, and the cash reward is the value.

古文：王侯须新租乃偿。
现代文：是王侯的谷，要等新租上收以后偿还。
English: It is a vassal's valley, and it will have to be repaid after the new rent is collected.

古文：夏四月，白乌见齐国。
现代文：夏季四月，白乌现于齐国。
English: In the summer of April, Bai Wu appeared in Qi Province.

古文：六月，洛水溢，坏鸿德苑。
现代文：六月，洛水泛滥，淹坏鸿德苑。
English: In June, floods in Luo damaged Hongde Courtyard.

古文：南阳大水。
现代文：南阳大水。
English: Nanyang Dams.

古文：司空房植免，太常韩縯为司空。
现代文：司空房植免职，任太常韩纟寅为司空。
English: Sikyong Fong Zhi was relieved of his duties, and Sikyong Han Yong In was appointed as the new Sikyong.

古文：诏太山、琅琊遇贼者，勿收租、赋，复更、算三年。
现代文：诏令太山、琅笽遭贼盗侵害的人家，不收田租、赋税，免除更赋和人口税三年。
English: The imperial edict ordered the people of Taishan, whose homes had been violated by thieves, not to collect farm rents and taxes, and to be exempt from land tax and population tax for three years.

古文：又诏被水死流失尸骸者，令郡县钩求收葬；及所唐突压溺物故，七岁以上赐钱，人二千。
现代文：又诏令被水淹死流失了尸骸的，郡县要找到尸体收葬；有被冲撞压死溺死的，七岁以上每人赐钱二千。
English: It was also decreed that if a person was drowned and the body was lost, the county should find the body and bury it; if a person was knocked down and drowned, each person over the age of seven should be given 2,000 yuan.

古文：坏败庐舍，亡失谷食，尤贫者禀，人二斛。 
现代文：损坏了庐舍，冲走了谷物，特别穷的每人发二斛廪谷。
English: The huts were damaged, the grain washed away, and everyone who was particularly poor was sent to Erqiu Valley.

古文：巴郡、益州郡山崩。
现代文：巴郡、益州郡山崩。
English: The landslides occurred in Ba County and Yizhou County.

古文：秋七月，初置太山、琅邪都尉官。
现代文：秋季七月，初次设置太山、琅笽都尉官。
English: In the autumn of July, the first Taiyama and Shizuku posts were set up.

古文：南匈奴左薁鞬台耆、且渠伯德等叛，寇美稷，安定属国都尉张奂讨除之。
现代文：南匈奴左薁鞬台耆、且渠伯德等反叛，寇扰美稷，安定属国都尉把他们讨伐除掉。
English: The Southern Xiongnu, Zuoying, Taiyuan, and Quiboed rebelled and interfered with the United States, and the captain of the Stable Vassal State led a crusade to eliminate them.

古文：二年春正月，初听中官得行三年服。
现代文：二年春季正月，开始让中官可以实行三年丧服。
English: In the first month of the spring of the second year, it began to allow the lieutenant colonel to implement a three-year mourning dress.

古文：二月甲申，东海王臻薨。
现代文：二月二十六日，东海王刘臻去
English: On February 26th, the king of the East China Sea, Liu Zhen, went to

古文：三月，蜀郡属国夷叛。
现代文：三月，蜀郡属国夷人叛乱。
English: In March, the Shu County vassal state of the barbarians rebelled.

古文：秋七月，鲜卑寇云中。
现代文：秋季七月，鲜卑寇扰云中。
English: In the autumn of July, the fresh-faced peregrine falcon wanders among the clouds.

古文：太山贼公孙举等寇青、兖、徐二州，遣中郎将段颎讨，破斩之。
现代文：太山贼公孙举等寇扰青、兖、徐三州，派中郎将段赹讨伐，打破并杀掉他们。
English: Sun Zhe, the thief of Taishan, sent Zhong Lang to fight Duan Zhe, to break and kill them.

古文：冬十一月，置太官右监丞官。
现代文：冬季十一月，设置太官右监丞官。
English: In the winter of November, the position of Ekan Ukyojokan was established.

古文：十二月，京师地震。
现代文：十二月，京师地震。
English: In December, an earthquake occurred in Beijing's Chang'an District.

古文：三年春正月己未，大赦天下。
现代文：三年春季正月己未，大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the third year, the first month of the year has not yet come, and the general amnesty has begun.

古文：夏四月，九真蛮夷叛，太守皃式讨之，战殁；遣九真都尉魏朗击破之。
现代文：夏四月，九真蛮夷反叛，太守儿式讨伐，战死；派九真都尉魏朗去打败了他们。
English: In the summer of April, Jiu Zhen rebelled against the barbarian barbarians, and died in battle in the manner of an emperor's son; he sent Jiu Zhen's lieutenant Wei Lang to defeat them.

古文：复屯据日南。
现代文：恢复屯兵据守日南。
English: The garrison was restored, and Nichinan was defended.

古文：闰月庚辰晦，日有食之。六月，初以小黄门为守宫令，置冗从右仆射官。
现代文：闰五月三十日，日蚀。六月，开始以小黄门为守宫令，设置冗从右仆射官。
English: On the 30th day of leap May, there was a solar eclipse. In June, the order to guard the palace began with the small yellow gate, and the right-hand archer was set up.

古文：京师蝗。
现代文：京师发生蝗灾。
English: Locust plague in Beijing.

古文：秋七月，河东地裂。
现代文：秋季七月，河东地裂。
English: In the autumn of July, the eastern part of the river split.

古文：冬十一月，司徒尹颂薨。
现代文：冬季十一月，司徒尹颂去世。
English: In the winter of November, Sidu Yin Song passed away.

古文：长沙蛮叛，寇益阳。
现代文：长沙蛮叛乱，寇扰益阳。
English: Changsha rebels violently and invades Yiyang.

古文：司空韩縯为司徒，太常北海孙朗为司空。
现代文：任命司空韩縯为司徒，任太常北海孙朗为司空。
English: Han Kuo, the first secretary of the Air Force, was appointed as the first secretary, and Sun Lang, the first vice admiral of the North Sea, was appointed as the second secretary.

古文：延熹元年春三月己酉，初置鸿德苑令。
现代文：延熹元年春三月初四，开始设置鸿德苑令。
English: On the fourth day of March in the spring of the first year of Yancheng, the Hongdeyuan Order was established.

古文：夏五月己酉，大会公卿以下，赏赐各有差。
现代文：夏五月初四，大会公卿以下，赏赐各有不等。
English: On the 4th day of the 5th month of the summer, the nobles of the assembly and below receive different rewards.

古文：甲戌晦，日有食之。
现代文：二十九日，有日食发生。
English: October 30th, solar eclipse.

古文：京师蝗。
现代文：京师发生蝗灾。
English: Locust plague in Beijing.

古文：六月戊寅，大赦天下，改元延熹。
现代文：六月初四，大赦天下，改元延熹。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of June, the nation was amnestied, and the era name was changed to Yancheng.

古文：丙戌，分中山置博陵郡，以奉孝崇皇园陵。
现代文：十二日，分中山置博陵郡，以奉孝崇皇园陵。
English: On the 12th, Zhongshan was divided into Boling County to honor the emperor's tomb.

古文：大雩。
现代文：旱祭祈雨。
English: The festival is held to pray for rain.

古文：秋七月己巳，云阳地裂。
现代文：秋七月二十五日，云阳地裂。
English: On the 25th day of the 7th month of autumn, the clouds and sun parted.

古文：甲子，太尉黄琼免，太常胡广为太尉。
现代文：二十日，太尉黄琼免职，任太常胡广为太尉。
English: On the 20th, Captain Huang Qiong was relieved of his duties, and Captain Hu Guang was appointed.

古文：冬十月，校猎广成，遂幸上林苑。
现代文：冬季十月，在广成打猎，于是去到了上林苑。
English: In the winter of October, I was hunting in Guangcheng, so I went to Shanglinyuan.

古文：十二月，鲜卑寇边，使匈奴中郎将张奂率南单于击破之。
现代文：冬季十二月，鲜卑寇掠边境，使匈奴中郎将张奂率领南单于把他们打败。
English: In the winter of December, the Xianbei bandits raided the border, causing the Xiongnu middlemen to defeat them by leading Zhang Ye to Nan Shan.

古文：二年春二月，鲜卑寇雁门。
现代文：二年春二月，鲜卑寇掠雁门。
English: In the spring and February of the second year, a fresh pigeon raided the wild goose gate.

古文：己亥，阜陵王便薨。
现代文：二十九日，阜陵王刘便逝世。
English: On the 29th, King Liu of Fulin passed away.

古文：蜀郡夷寇蚕陵，杀县令。
现代文：蜀郡夷寇蚕陵，杀害县令。
English: In Shu County, they raided the tombs of silkworms and killed the county magistrate.

古文：三月，复断刺史、二千石行三年丧。
现代文：三月，再行停止刺史、二千石所实行的三年丧服。
English: In March, the three-year mourning period imposed by the 2,000-koku system was reinstated.

古文：夏，京师雨水。
现代文：夏天，京师雨水多。
English: In summer, there is a lot of rain in Kyoto.

古文：六月，鲜卑寇辽东。
现代文：六月，鲜卑寇掠辽东。
English: In June, the Xinbei corsair raided Liaodong Province.

古文：秋七月，初造显阳苑，置丞。
现代文：秋季七月，开始建造显阳苑、设丞。
English: In the autumn, in July, the construction of Hsien Yang Yuan and Jie Zheng began.

古文：丙午，皇后梁氏崩。
现代文：初二，皇后梁氏逝世。
English: On the second day of the new year, Empress Liang passed away.

古文：乙丑，葬懿献皇后于懿陵。
现代文：二十一日，葬懿献皇后于懿陵。
English: On the twenty-first day, the funeral pyre dedicated to the empress was set up in the imperial mausoleum.

古文：大将军梁冀谋为乱。八月丁丑，帝御前殿，诏司隶校尉张彪将兵围冀第，收大将军印绶，冀与妻皆自杀。
现代文：大将军梁冀阴谋作乱，八月初四，帝到前殿，诏令司隶校尉张彪领兵围梁冀邸第。收缴大将军印绶，梁冀与妻都自杀。
English: General Liang Jie plotted to start a riot. On the 4th day of the 8th month, the emperor arrived at the front hall, and the imperial commanding officer, Lieutenant Zhang Biao, led the troops to surround Liang Jie's residence. They confiscated the general's seal, and Liang Jie and his wife both committed suicide.

古文：卫尉梁淑、河南尹梁胤、屯骑校尉梁让、越骑校尉梁忠、长大校尉梁戟等，及中外宗亲数十人，皆伏诛。
现代文：卫尉梁淑、河南尹梁胤、屯骑校尉梁让、越骑校尉梁忠、长水校尉梁戟等及中外宗亲数十人，都被诛。
English: Guardsman Liang Shu, Henan Yin Liangyin, cavalry lieutenant Liang Zhan, Vietnamese cavalry lieutenant Liang Zhong, Changshui lieutenant Liang Qi, and dozens of Chinese and foreign relatives were all arrested.

古文：太尉胡广坐免。
现代文：太尉胡广因此免职。
English: As a result, Captain Hu Guang was relieved of his duties.

古文：司徒韩縯、司空孙朗下狱。
现代文：司徒韩纟寅、司空孙朗下狱。
English: Sentsu Han Yongin and Siku Sun Lang are released from prison.

古文：壬午，立皇后邓氏，追废懿陵为贵人冢。
现代文：初九，立皇后邓氏，追废懿陵为贵人冢。
English: In the early 9th century, the queen of the Deng clan was established, and her tomb was declared a noble tomb.

古文：诏曰： 梁冀奸暴，浊乱王室。
现代文：诏令说： 梁冀奸险残暴，把王室搞得混浊纷乱。
English: The imperial edict said: Liang Jizhong's treachery, danger and brutality have brought chaos to the royal family.

古文：孝质皇帝聪敏早茂，冀心怀忌畏，私行杀毒。
现代文：孝质皇帝聪敏早茂，梁冀心存忌恨畏惧，私行鸩杀。
English: Liang Jie was a filial son of Emperor Qumin. Liang Jie harbored hatred and fear in his heart, and fought and killed in his private life.

古文：永乐太后亲尊莫二，冀又遏绝，禁还京师，使朕离母子之爱，隔顾复之恩。
现代文：永乐太后亲尊莫二，梁冀又加阻遏隔绝不让从博园还住京师，以致使我们母子得不到团聚，以报养育之恩。
English: The empress dowager Yongle did not have much respect for him, and Liang Jie also prevented him from living in Beijing from the Bo Garden, so that our mother and son could not be reunited to repay the grace of raising.

古文：祸害深大，罪衅日滋。
现代文：祸害深广，罪孽凶兆日益严重。
English: For the calamity is great and very great, and the punishment of evildoers is severe.

古文：赖宗庙之灵，及中常侍单超、徐璜、具瑗、左悺、唐衡、尚书令尹勋等激愤建策，内外协同，漏刻之间，桀逆枭夷。
现代文：幸赖祖宗的威灵，及中常侍单超、徐璜、具瑗、左忄官、唐衡、尚书令尹勋等激于义愤建议对策，宫内外协同动作，顷刻之间，桀逆枭首除灭。
English: Fortunately, the will of the ancestors, as well as the middle and senior attendants, such as Shan Chao, Xu Xi, Gu Xi, Zuo Jian, Tang Heng, and Shang Shuling Yin Xun, were inspired by righteous indignation to suggest countermeasures, and coordinated actions inside and outside the palace. In an instant, the rebellious daggers were eliminated.

古文：斯诚社稷之佑，臣下之力，宜班庆赏，以酬忠勋。
现代文：这真是国家之福泽，臣下之奋力，应当颁布功勋，进行庆贺赏赐，用以酬答忠贞报国的元勋。
English: This is truly a blessing for the country and the best efforts of the subjects, and merits should be announced, celebrated and rewarded, and used to reward the loyalty to the country.

古文：其封超等五人为县侯，勋等七人为亭侯。 于是旧故恩私，多受封爵。
现代文：今封单超等五人为县侯，尹勋等七人为亭侯。 其他故旧私恩人等，多受封爵。
English: Five of them, including Imhozan Chocho, are now prefectural governors, and seven, including Yin Xun, are palace governors.

古文：大司农黄琼为太尉，光禄大夫中山祝恬为司徒，大鸿胪梁国盛允为司空。
现代文：任大司农黄琼为太尉，光禄大夫中山祝恬为司徒，大鸿胪梁国盛允为司空。
English: Farmer Huang Qiong, who was appointed as the chief secretary, was the captain, Dr. Zhongshan Zhu Rong, the doctor of Guanglu, was the scholar, and the great scholar Liang Guo Shengyong was the secretary.

古文：初置秘书监官。
现代文：开始设置秘书监官。
English: Start setting up a secretary supervisor.

古文：冬十月壬申，行幸长安。
现代文：冬季十月初五，帝王到长安巡视。
English: On the fifth day of the tenth month of winter, the emperor went to Chang'an for inspection.

古文：乙酉，幸未中宫。
现代文：十八日，到未央宫。
English: On the 18th, they arrived at Miang Palace.

古文：甲午，祠高庙。
现代文：二十七日，祭祀高庙。
English: On the 27th, the high temple was dedicated.

古文：十一月庚子，遂有事十一陵。
现代文：十一月初四，祭十一陵。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, the Eleven Tombs Festival begins.

古文：壬寅，中常侍单超为车骑将军。
现代文：初六，任中常侍单超为车骑将军。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, he was promoted to general of chariot and cavalry.

古文：十二月己巳，至自长安，赐长安民粟人十斛，园陵人五斛，行所过县三斛。
现代文：十二月初三，帝自长安回，赐长安老百姓每人十斛粟。园陵每人五斛，巡视所经过的县三斛。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, the emperor returned from Chang'an and gave the people of Chang'an ten opium poppies each, the gardens five poppies each, and the counties three poppies.

古文：烧当等八种羌叛，寇陇右，护羌校尉段颎追击于罗亭，破之。
现代文：烧当等八种羌人反叛，寇掠陇右，护羌校尉段赹在罗亭追击，把他们打败。
English: There were eight kinds of rebels, including burners, raiders, right-wingers, and guards, and Lieutenant Duan Yu pursued them in Luoting and defeated them.

古文：天竺国来献。
现代文：天竺国来献礼。
English: The kingdom of heaven has come to offer a gift.

古文：三年春正月丙申，大赦天下。
现代文：三年春正月初一，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of spring, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：丙午，车骑将军单超薨。
现代文：十一日，车骑将军单超逝世。
English: On the 11th day, the cavalry general Shan Chao passed away.

古文：闰月，烧何羌叛，寇张掖，护羌校尉段颎追击于积石，大破之。
现代文：闰正月，烧当羌反叛，寇掠张掖，护羌校尉段赹在积石追击，把他们打个大败。
English: In the first month of the leap year, the rebels burned Dangdang Pagoda, the robbers pillaged Zhangye Pagoda, and the captain of the garrison, Duan Qi, chased them with boulders and defeated them.

古文：白马令李云坐直谏，下狱死。
现代文：白马令李云因直言敢谏，批评朝政，监死狱中。
English: Bai Ma Ling Li Yun was sentenced to death in prison for his outspoken criticism of the imperial government.

古文：夏四月，上郡言甘露降。
现代文：夏季四月，上郡报告得了及时雨。
English: In the summer month of April, Shang County reported timely rain.

古文：五月甲戌，汉中山崩。
现代文：五月十一日，汉中山崩。
English: On May 11, the landslide occurred in Hanzhong.

古文：六月辛丑，司徒祝恬薨。
现代文：六月初八，司徒祝恬逝世。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, Szeto Zhu Xi passed away.

古文：秋七月，司空盛允为司徒，太常虞放为司空。
现代文：秋七月，任司空盛允为司徒，任太常虞放为司空。
English: In the autumn and July, Shengyong Zang was appointed as a disciple, and Guofang Taizhang was appointed as a disciple.

古文：长沙蛮寇郡界。
现代文：长沙蛮寇掠郡界。
English: Changsha bandits raid county borders.

古文：九月，太山、琅邪贼劳丙等复叛，寇掠百姓。遣御史中丞赵某持节督州郡讨之。
现代文：九月，太山、琅笽贼劳内等再度叛变，寇掠百姓，派御史中丞赵某持节督促州郡讨伐。
English: In September, Taishan, the bandit Laonai and others rebelled again, plundered the people, and sent the imperial historian Zhao Mou to urge the county to fight.

古文：丁亥，诏无事之官权绝奉，丰年如故。
现代文：二十六日，诏令无实际工作的官员，暂且停俸，丰年照旧给予。
English: On the 26th, officials without actual work were ordered to suspend their salaries for the time being and continue to receive them as usual in good years.

古文：冬十一月，日南蛮贼率众诣郡降。
现代文：冬十一月，日南蛮贼率领部众到郡投降。
English: In the winter of November, Nichinan barbarian bandits led the troops to the county to surrender.

古文：勒姐羌围允街，段颎击破之。
现代文：勒姐羌围允街，段赹把他们打败。
English: Ms. Le and Mr. Duan surrounded Yunjie Street and Mr. Duan defeated them.

古文：太山贼叔孙无忌攻杀都尉侯章。
现代文：太山贼叔孙无忌攻杀都尉侯章。
English: The great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-grandfather.

古文：十二月，遣中郎将宗资讨破之。
现代文：十二月，派中郎将宗资讨伐打败他们。
English: In December, he sent Zhong Lang to fight and defeat them.

古文：武陵蛮寇江陵，车骑将军冯绲讨，皆降散。
现代文：武陵蛮寇掠江陵，车骑将军冯绲去讨伐，降的降，逃散的逃散。
English: The Wuling barbarian invaders plundered the Ganges, and the chariot and cavalry general Feng Qi went to fight, the descent of the descent, the escape of the escape.

古文：荆州刺史度尚讨长沙蛮，平之。
现代文：荆州刺史度尚讨平长沙蛮。
English: Jingzhou's historical record is still better than that of Changsha.

古文：四年春正月辛酉，南宫嘉德殿火。
现代文：四年春季正月初二，南宫嘉德殿起火。
English: On the second day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year, the South Palace Jiade Hall caught fire.

古文：戊子，丙署火。
现代文：二十九日，丙署起火。
English: On the 29th, Station C caught fire.

古文：大疫。
现代文：大疫。
English: A great plague.

古文：二月壬辰，武库火。
现代文：二月初三，武库发生火灾。
English: On the third day of February, a fire broke out in the arsenal.

古文：司徒盛允免，大司农种暠为司徒。
现代文：司徒盛允免职，任大司农种詗为司徒。
English: Szeto Sheng Yun was relieved of his duties and appointed as the head of the Department of Agriculture and Planting as Szeto.

古文：三月，省冗从右仆射官。
现代文：三月，省去冗从右仆射官。
English: In March, he was relieved of his duties as right-hand gunner.

古文：太尉黄琼免。
现代文：太尉黄琼被罢免。
English: Captain Huang Qiong was dismissed.

古文：夏四月，太常刘矩为太尉。
现代文：夏季四月，任太常刘矩为太尉。
English: In the summer of April, Ren Taizhang promoted Liu Rui to the rank of first lieutenant.

古文：甲寅，封河间王开子博为任城王。
现代文：二十六日，封河间王刘开子刘博为任城王。
English: On the 26th day of the month, Liu Bo, the son of Liu Kaoshi, the king of Huanan, was appointed as the king of the city.

古文：五月辛酉，有星孛于心。
现代文：五月初四，彗星出现于心宿星。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month, the comet appeared in Antares.

古文：丁卯，原陵长寿门火。
现代文：初十，原陵长寿门起火。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the gate of Changshou Gate of the original mausoleum caught fire.

古文：己卯，京师雨雹。
现代文：二十二日，京师下了冰雹，大如鸡蛋。
English: On the 22nd, the capital was hit by hailstones as big as eggs.

古文：六月，京兆、扶风及凉州地震。
现代文：六月，京兆、扶风及凉州地震。
English: In June, the Keizhao, Fufeng and Liangzhou earthquakes occurred.

古文：庚子，岱山及博尤来山并穨裂。
现代文：十三日，岱山及博县尤来山一并倾颓崩裂。
English: On the 13th, Lushan Mountain and Yulai Mountain in Bo County both collapsed.

古文：己酉，大赦天下。
现代文：二十二日，大赦天下。
English: On the 22nd, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：司空虞放免，前太尉黄琼为司空。
现代文：司空虞放被罢免，任前太尉黄琼为司空。
English: Sifu Yu Fang was removed from office, and former First Lieutenant Huang Qiong became Sifu.

古文：犍为属国夷寇钞百姓，益州刺史山昱击破之。
现代文：犍为属国夷寇扰掠夺百姓，益州刺史山昱把他打败。
English: He plundered the people as a vassal state raider, and Yizhou stabbed him and defeated him.

古文：零吾羌与先零诸种并叛，寇三辅。
现代文：零吾羌与先零诸种一同叛变，寇掠三辅。
English: Zero Ugu Xuan and Zero Zhuang first mutinied together, leading to the robbery of Sanfu.

古文：秋七月，京师雩。
现代文：秋季七月，京师举行秋雨祭祀。
English: In autumn, in July, the autumn rain ritual is held in Kyoto.

古文：减公卿以下奉，貣王侯半租。
现代文：减少公卿以下官员薪俸，貣侯一半田租。
English: The salaries of officials below the rank of court noble will be reduced, and the farm rent will be reduced by up to half.

古文：占卖关内侯、虎贲、羽林、缇骑营士、五大夫钱各有差。
现代文：估计钱数出卖关内侯、虎贲、羽林、缇骑营士、五大夫等官衔，各分别不同。
English: Estimates of the amount of money sold ranged from the ranks of Guan Neihou, Tigress, Hailin, Hailu horseman, and Five Great Masters, each of which was different.

古文：九月，司空黄琼免，大鸿胪刘宠为司空。
现代文：九月，司空黄琼被罢免。任大鸿胪刘宠为司空。
English: In September, Sikyong Huang Qiong was ousted, and Liu Jie was appointed as Sikyong.

古文：冬十月，天竺国来献。
现代文：冬十月，天竺国来献礼。
English: In the winter of October, Tianzhu came to offer a gift.

古文：南阳黄武与襄城惠得、昆阳乐季訞言相署，皆伏诛。
现代文：南阳黄武与襄城惠得、昆阳乐季以邪恶的话，荧惑人心，都被诛杀。
English: Nanyang Huangwu, Xiangcheng Huide, and Kunyang Leji all killed each other with evil words that inflamed people's hearts.

古文：先零沈氐羌与诸种羌寇并、凉二州，十一月，中郎将皇甫规击破之。
现代文：先零沈氐羌与诸种羌寇掠并、凉二州，十一月，中郎将皇甫规打败了他们。
English: At the beginning of the year, Shen Zhao and all kinds of raiders raided and conquered Liang Erzhou, and in November, Zhong Lang defeated them by defeating the emperor.

古文：十二月，夫馀王遣使来献。
现代文：十二月，夫余王派使者来献礼。
English: In December, her husband, Yu Wang, sent an envoy to present gifts.

古文：五年春正月，省太官右监丞。
现代文：五年春季正月，省去太官右监丞。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fifth year, the eunuch Ukenjo was omitted.

古文：壬午，南宫丙署火。
现代文：二十九日，南宫丙署起火。
English: On the 29th, fire broke out in the Nan Gong C Station.

古文：三月，沈氐羌寇张掖、酒泉。
现代文：三月，沈氐羌寇掠张掖、酒泉。
English: In March, Shen Yigou raided Zhang Ye and Jiuquan.

古文：壬午，济北王次薨。
现代文：三十日，济北王刘次逝世。
English: On the 30th, Liu Zi, King of Jibei, passed away.

古文：夏四月，长沙贼起，寇桂阳、苍梧。
现代文：夏季四月，长沙贼起，寇掠桂阳、苍梧。
English: In the summer of April, the Changsha bandits began to raid Guiyang and Gansu.

古文：惊马逸象突入宫殿。
现代文：受惊的马逃亡的象闯入宫殿。
English: Frightened horses and fleeing elephants broke into the palace.

古文：乙丑，恭陵东阙火。
现代文：乙丑，恭陵墓门东边起火。
English: In the second case, a fire broke out on the east side of the gate of the Gong Mausoleum.

古文：戊辰，虎贲掖门火。
现代文：戊辰，虎贲所在宫中旁门起火。
English: At that time, a fire broke out at the gate next to the palace where Tigress was staying.

古文：己巳。太学西门自坏。
现代文：己巳，太学西门自行坏损。
English: As it turned out, the West Gate of Taigaku was self-destructing.

古文：五月，康陵园寝火。
现代文：五月，康陵园寝起火。
English: In May, the Kangling Garden caught fire.

古文：长沙、零陵贼起，攻桂阳、苍梧、南海、交阯，遣御史中丞盛修督州郡讨之，不克。
现代文：长沙、零陵寇贼兴起，攻掠桂阳、苍梧、南海、交阯，派御史中丞盛修督促州郡去讨伐，没有克服。
English: The Changsha and Luling bandits rose up and attacked and plundered Guiyang, Cangwu, Nanhai, and Jiaozuo, and sent the imperial historian Zhongzheng Sheng Xiu to urge the county to fight, but they did not overcome.

古文：乙亥，京师地震。
现代文：十八日，京师地震。
English: On the 18th, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：诏公、卿各上封事。
现代文：诏令公、卿秘密上书批评建议，检举揭发。
English: In accordance with the imperial edict, the princes and nobles secretly submitted a letter of criticism and suggestion, and the matter was reported and exposed.

古文：甲申，中藏府承禄署火。
现代文：二十七日，中藏府承禄署起火。
English: On the 27th, the Central Tibetan Administration's Chengluo Station caught fire.

古文：秋七月己未，南宫承善闼火。
现代文：秋季七月初八，南宫承善闼起火。
English: In the autumn, on the eighth day of the seventh month, fire broke out in the southern palace of Cheng Zhen.

古文：鸟吾羌寇汉阳、陇西、金城，诸郡兵讨破之。
现代文：鸟吾羌寇掠汉阳。陇西、金城，诸郡兵讨伐打败他。
English: Hanyang was plundered by the birds and robbers. Shaanxi, Jincheng, and county soldiers fought and defeated him.

古文：八月庚子，诏减虎贲、羽林住寺不任事者半奉，勿与冬衣；其公卿以下给冬衣之半。
现代文：八月二十日，诏令减少虎贲、羽林疲弱不胜军事留住官舍的人半薪，勿发冬衣；其公卿以下给一半冬衣。
English: On August 20th, the emperor decreed to reduce the half-salary of those who retained official residences, and not to give them winter coats; half of the winter coats were given to their noblemen and below.

古文：艾县贼焚烧长沙郡县，寇益阳，杀令。
现代文：艾县寇贼焚烧长沙郡县，侵掠益阳，杀长吏。
English: Burglars in Ai County burned Changsha County, invaded and plundered Yiyang, and killed officials.

古文：又零陵蛮亦叛，寇长沙。
现代文：又零陵蛮也叛乱，掠长沙。
English: There was also a rebellion in the city of Lingman, and Changsha was plundered.

古文：己卯，罢琅邪都尉官。
现代文：己卯，罢去琅笽都尉官。
English: You're fired, lieutenant.

古文：冬十月，武陵蛮叛，寇江陵，南郡太守李肃坐奔北弃市；辛丑，以太常冯绲为车骑将军，讨之。
现代文：冬季十月，武陵蛮叛乱，寇掠江陵，南郡太守李肃因临阵脱逃，斩于闹市。二十二日以太常冯绲为车骑将军，讨伐武陵蛮。
English: In the winter of October, there was a rebellion in Wuling and a raid on Jiangling. The governor of Nan County, Li Su, escaped from the battle and was beheaded in the city. On the 22nd, Emperor Taizang Feng Rong, as the general of chariots and cavalry, fought against the rebels in Wuling.

古文：假公卿以下奉。
现代文：借公卿以下薪俸。
English: Salaries below those of court nobles.

古文：又换王侯租以助军粮，出濯龙中藏钱还之。
现代文：又交换王侯田租以助军饷，拿出濯龙园中府库存钱偿还。
English: He also exchanged Wang Hou's farmland rent to help the war effort, and took out the money from the central government's inventory of the Dragon Garden to repay it.

古文：十一月，冯绲大破叛蛮于武陵。
现代文：十一月，冯绲在武陵大败叛蛮。
English: In November, Feng Yu defeated the rebels in Wuling.

古文：京兆虎牙都尉宗谦坐臧，下狱死。
现代文：京兆虎牙都尉宗谦因贪污，监死狱中。
English: The governor of Beijing, Zong Qian, was sentenced to death in prison for corruption.

古文：滇那羌寇武威、张掖、酒泉。
现代文：滇那羌寇掠武威、张掖、酒泉。
English: The invaders plundered Wuwei, Zhangye and Jiuquan.

古文：太尉刘矩免，太常杨秉为太尉。
现代文：太尉刘矩免职，任太常杨秉为太尉。
English: Second Lieutenant Liu Mom is relieved of duty, and Second Lieutenant Yang Bing is promoted to First Lieutenant.

古文：六年春二月戊午，司徒种暠薨。
现代文：六年春季二月十一日，司徒詗逝世。
English: On February 11th, in the spring of the sixth year, Szeto died.

古文：三月戊戌，大赦天下。
现代文：三月二十二日，大赦天下。
English: On March 22nd, the amnesty came into effect.

古文：卫尉颍川许栩为司徒。
现代文：任卫尉颍川许栩为司徒。
English: Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, Shikawa Hakuo, became a disciple.

古文：夏四月辛亥，康陵东署火。
现代文：夏季四月初五，康陵东署起火。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth month of summer, the Kangling East Station caught fire.

古文：五月，鲜卑寇辽东属国。
现代文：五月，鲜卑寇掠辽东属国。
English: In May, the Xinbei corsair raided the Liaodong vassal state.

古文：秋七月甲申，平陵园寝火。
现代文：秋季七月初十，平陵园寝起火。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of autumn, the fire broke out in the cemetery.

古文：桂阳盗贼李研等寇郡界。
现代文：桂阳盗贼李研等寇掠郡界。
English: Guiyang thief Li Yan and others raid the county.

古文：武陵蛮复叛，太守陈奉与战，大破降之。
现代文：武陵蛮再度叛乱，太守陈奉与战，大败敌人并使他们投降。
English: Wuling again rebelled, and the warlord Chen Bong led the battle, defeating the enemy and forcing them to surrender.

古文：陇西太守孙羌讨滇那羌，破之。
现代文：陇西太守孙羌讨伐滇那羌，把他们打败。
English: Sun Yat-sen, the governor of the Western Han Dynasty, fought against the Jurchens and defeated them.

古文：八月，车骑将军冯绲免。
现代文：八月，车骑将军冯绲免职。
English: In August, the General of Cavalry and Cavalry, Feng Xuan, was relieved of his duties.

古文：冬十月丙辰，校猎广成，遂幸函谷关、上林苑。
现代文：冬季十月十三日，帝校猎广成，并到函谷关、上林苑。
English: On October 13th, the winter, the imperial school hunted Guangcheng, and went to Hanyuguan and Shanglinyuan.

古文：十一月，司空刘宠免。
现代文：十一月，司空刘宠免职。
English: In November, Secretary Liu Jie was relieved of his duties.

古文：南海贼寇郡界。
现代文：南海盗贼寇掠郡界。
English: Southern pirates and thieves plunder county borders.

古文：十二月，卫尉周景为司空。
现代文：十二月，任卫尉周景为司空。
English: In December, Zhou Jing was appointed as the first lieutenant of the guards.

古文：七年春正月庚寅，沛王荣薨。
现代文：七年春正月十八日，沛王刘荣逝世。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, Liu Rong, the king of Pei, passed away.

古文：三月癸亥，陨石于鄠。
现代文：三月癸亥，陨石于鄠。
English: In March, the meteorite fell in the mountains.

古文：夏四月丙寅，梁王成薨。
现代文：夏季四月二十六日，梁王刘成逝世。
English: On April 26, Liang Wang Liu Cheng passed away.

古文：五月己丑，京师雨雹。
现代文：五月十九日，京师落冰雹。
English: On May 19th, the hail fell in Beijing.

古文：秋七月辛卯，赵王乾薨。
现代文：秋季七月二十二日，赵王刘乾逝世。
English: In the autumn, on July 22, Zhao Wang Liu Qian passed away.

古文：野王山上有死龙。
现代文：野王山上有死龙。
English: There is a dead dragon on Wild King Mountain.

古文：荆州刺史度尚击零陵、桂阳盗贼及蛮夷，大破平之。
现代文：荆州刺史度尚击零陵、桂阳盗贼及蛮夷，大败并平息了他。
English: Jingzhou stabbing history still hit zero mausoleum, Guiyang thieves and barbarians, defeated and pacified him.

古文：冬十月壬寅，南巡狩。
现代文：冬十月初五，帝巡视南部。
English: On the fifth day of the tenth month of winter, the emperor inspected the south.

古文：庚申，幸章陵，祠旧宅，遂有事于园庙，赐守令以下各有差。
现代文：二十三日，到章陵，告祠旧宅，祭祀园庙，赏赐守令以下各不等。
English: On the 23rd, they went to the mausoleum, the old house of the temple, the sacrificial garden and the temple, and were rewarded with the following orders.

古文：戊辰，幸云梦，临汉水；还，幸新野，祠湖阳、新野公主、鲁哀王、寿张敬侯庙。
现代文：十一月初一，到云梦，临汉水；返转，到新野，祭祀湖阳、新野公主、鲁哀王、寿张敬侯庙。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, go to Yunmen, near Hanshui; turn back, go to Nianye, and offer sacrifices to Hoyang, Nianye Princess, King Ruai, and Shou Zhang Jinghou Temple.

古文：护羌校尉段颎击当煎羌，破之。
现代文：护羌校尉段赹击当煎羌，打败他们。
English: The sergeant-major hit them with a frying pan and beat them.

古文：十二月辛丑，车驾还宫。
现代文：十二月初四，君王回到洛阳。
English: On the fourth day of the twelfth month, the emperor returned to Luoyang.

古文：八年春正月，遣中常侍左悺之苦县，祠老子。
现代文：八年春正月，派中常侍左忄官到苦县，祭祀老子。
English: In the first month of spring in the eighth year, he sent the middle attendant, Zu Yukan, to Ku County to worship Laozi.

古文：勃海王悝谋反，降为癭陶王。
现代文：勃海王刘悝阴谋造反，降为鞼陶王。
English: Bo Hai King Liu Ye conspired to rebel and was demoted to Bo Tao King.

古文：丙申晦，日有食之。诏公、卿、校尉举贤良方正。
现代文：三十日，日蚀。诏令公、卿、校尉举荐贤良方正的人士。
English: On the 30th, the sun eclipsed. The dairei (imperial edict) called for nobles, lords, and lieutenants to nominate virtuous and upright persons.

古文：二月己酉，南宫嘉德署黄龙见。千秋万岁殿火。
现代文：二月十三日，南宫嘉德署有黄龙出现，千秋万岁殿起火。
English: On February 13th, a yellow dragon appeared at the South Palace of the China Guardian, and the hall caught fire.

古文：太仆左称有罪自杀。
现代文：太仆左称有罪自杀。
English: The maid later pleaded guilty and committed suicide.

古文：癸亥，皇后邓氏废。
现代文：二十七日，皇后邓氏被废。
English: On the 27th, the Empress Deng Dynasty was abolished.

古文：河南尹邓万世、虎贲中郎将邓会下狱死。
现代文：后叔河南尹邓万世、后兄虎贲中郎将邓会监死狱中。
English: His uncle, Henan Yin Deng Mansei, and his brother, Torao Zhongro, imprisoned and killed Deng Hui.

古文：护羌校尉段颎击罕姐羌，破之。
现代文：护羌校尉段赹出击罕姐羌，把他们打败。
English: The bodyguard, Lieutenant Duan Yu, went out to attack the Han sisters and defeat them.

古文：三月辛巳，大赦天下。
现代文：三月十六日，大赦天下。
English: On March 16th, the amnesty came into effect.

古文：夏四月甲寅，安陵园寝火。
现代文：夏季四月十九日，安陵园寝起火。
English: On the 19th day of the 4th month of summer, Anlingyuan was set on fire.

古文：丁巳，坏郡国诸房祀。
现代文：二十二日，坏郡国诸祠堂。
English: On the 22nd, all the ancestral halls in the county were destroyed.

古文：济阴、东郡、济北河水清。
现代文：济阴、东郡、济北黄河水清。
English: The water of the Yellow River is clear in Jiyin, Donggun and Jibei.

古文：五月壬申，罢太山都尉官。
现代文：五月初八，罢去太山都尉官。
English: On the eighth day of the fifth month, Taiyama was dismissed from his position as lieutenant.

古文：丙戌，太尉杨秉薨。
现代文：二十二日，太尉杨秉逝世。
English: On the 22nd, Second Lieutenant Yang Bing passed away.

古文：六月丙辰，缑氏地裂。
现代文：六月二十二日，缑氏地裂。
English: On June 22nd, the Kuang clan split.

古文：桂阳胡兰、朱盖等复反，攻没郡县，转寇零陵，零陵太守陈球拒之；遣中郎将度尚、长沙太守抗徐等击兰、盖，大破斩之。
现代文：桂阳胡兰、朱盖再度造反，攻没郡县，转寇零陵，零陵太守陈球抵拒他们；帝派中郎将度尚、长沙太守抗徐等抗击胡兰、朱盖，大败并杀掉他们。
English: Guiyang Hulan and Zhugei rebelled again, conquered counties and counties, turned to Ziling, and Ziling's governor, Chen Gu, resisted them; Emperor's middlemen, Du Shang and Changsha's governor, Xu, resisted Hulan and Zhugei, defeated and killed them.

古文：苍梧太守张叙为贼所执，又桂阳太守任胤背敌畏懦，皆弃市。
现代文：苍梧太守张叙为贼所俘获，又桂阳太守任胤对敌恐惧软弱，两人都被斩于市。
English: Emperor Cangwu's father-in-law Zhang Xiu was captured by thieves, and Emperor Guiyang's father-in-law Renyin was weak and afraid of the enemy. Both were beheaded in the city.

古文：闰月甲午，南宫长秋和欢殿后钩楯、掖庭、朔平署火。
现代文：闰七月初一，南宫长秋和欢殿后钩楯、掖庭、朔平署起火。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of the leap year, after the South Palace Changqiu and Huan Hall, the hook, the garden and the Shuoping Office caught fire.

古文：六月，段颎击当煎羌于湟中，大破之。
现代文：六月，段赹出击当煎羌于湟中，大败敌军。
English: In June, Duan Xuan launched an attack on Deng Xuan in Yuzhong, defeating the enemy army.

古文：秋七月，太中大夫陈蕃为太尉。
现代文：秋季七月，太中大夫陈蕃为太尉。
English: In the autumn of July, Chen Qi, the First Lieutenant of the Imperial Household Agency, was promoted to Second Lieutenant.

古文：八月戊辰，初令郡国有田者亩敛税钱。
现代文：八月初六，开始命令郡国有田地的一亩收税十钱。
English: On the sixth day of the eighth month, the county government began to collect 10 yuan per mu of state-owned farmland.

古文：九月丁未，京师地震。
现代文：九月十五日，京师地震。
English: September 15th, Beijing earthquake.

古文：冬十月，司空周景免，太常刘茂为司空。
现代文：冬季十月，司空周景免职，任太常刘茂为司空。
English: In the winter of October, Zhou Jing was relieved of his duties as Secretary of the Air Force, and Liu Mao was appointed Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：辛巳，立贵人窦氏为皇后。
现代文：二十日，立贵人窦氏为皇后。
English: On the 20th, the noble Dou clan was established as the empress.

古文：勃海妖贼盖登等称 太上皇帝 ，有玉印、珪、璧、铁券，相署置，皆伏诛。
现代文：勃海妖贼盖登等称 太上皇帝 ，有玉印、王圭璧、铁券，设置官职并任用官吏，都被诛杀。
English: Emperor Gaiden, also known as the Great Emperor, had Jade Seal, Wang Gui Bi, Iron Coupon, set up official posts and appointed officials, all of whom were killed.

古文：十一月壬子，德阳殿西閤、黄门北寺火，延及广义、神虎门，烧杀人。
现代文：十一月二十一日，德阳殿西阁、黄门北寺起火，延及洛阳宫西广义、神虎门，烧死人。
English: On November 21, the west pavilion of Deyang Palace and the north temple of Huangmen caught fire, spreading to the west pavilion of Luoyang Palace and the gate of Shenhu, burning people to death.

古文：使中常侍管霸之苦县，祠老子。
现代文：派中常侍管霸到苦县，祭祀老子。
English: The middle-ranking officials of the faction often went to Ku County to worship Lao Zi.

古文：九年春正月辛卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：九年春正月初一，日蚀。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the ninth year of spring.

古文：诏公、卿、校尉、郡国举至孝。
现代文：诏令公、卿、校尉、郡国举荐至孝的人士。
English: Dairei-ko, Kyo, Kifu, and Gunkoku recommended persons of filial piety.

古文：沛国戴异得黄金印，无文字，遂与广陵人龙尚等共祭井，作符书，称 太上皇 ，伏诛。
现代文：沛国戴异得黄金印，无文字，于是与广陵人龙尚等共同祭井，作符书，称 太上皇 ，被诛。
English: Pei Guo Dai obtained a different gold seal, without writing, so he and Guangling people Long Shang and others jointly made a ritual well, made a certificate, called the emperor, and was beheaded.

古文：己酉，诏曰： 比岁不登，民多饥穷，又有水旱疾疫之困。
现代文：十九日，诏令说： 这几年五谷歉收，人民多数挨饿受穷，又有水患旱灾时疫的困扰。
English: On the 19th, the edict said: "In recent years, the grain harvest has been poor, most of the people have suffered from hunger and poverty, and they have been plagued by floods, droughts and epidemics.

古文：盗贼征发，南州尤甚。
现代文：因盗贼频频征用民间人力物力，长沙、桂阳、零陵等郡更加严重。
English: Due to the frequent requisition of civilian manpower and material resources by thieves, the situation in counties such as Changsha, Guiyang, and Luling is more serious.

古文：灾异日食，谴告累至。
现代文：灾患异象日蚀，谴责接二连三的到来。
English: The calamity of the vision of the eclipse, denouncing the arrival of one after another.

古文：政乱在予，仍获咎征。
现代文：这是政治紊乱所造成，责任完全在我，所以频繁地遭受咎戾和惩罚。
English: This was caused by the political turmoil, the responsibility was entirely mine, so I was frequently blamed and punished.

古文：其令大司农绝今岁调度征求，及前年所调未毕者，勿复收责。
现代文：现在命令大司农停止今年田租赋税的征调，以及前年征调未完的，不再收讨。
English: Now, the chief secretary ordered farmers to stop the collection of this year's field rent tax, as well as the previous year's unfinished collection, and no longer collect.

古文：其灾旱盗贼之郡，勿收租，馀郡悉半入。 
现代文：遭受了水旱疾疫盗贼损害的郡，不收租，其余的郡收半租。 
English: Counties that have suffered damage from floods, droughts, epidemics and thefts will not charge rent, and the remaining counties will charge half rent.

古文：三月癸巳，京师有火光转行，人相惊噪。
现代文：三月初四，京师有火光转行，人们相互惊诧而喧噪。
English: On the fourth day of the third month of the year, there was a flurry of activity in the Beijing division. People were surprised and noisy.

古文：司隶、豫州饥死者什四五，至有灭户者，遣三府掾赈禀之。
现代文：司隶、豫州饿死的人达十分之四、五，甚至有全户死光的，派三府掾发廪粮赈济。
English: Four-fifths of the people in Sili and Yuzhou died of starvation, and even entire families died. The three prefectures sent food to help.

古文：陈留太守韦毅坐臧自杀。
现代文：陈留太守因贪污自杀。
English: Chen Liu Taishou commits suicide due to corruption.

古文：夏四月，济阴、东郡、济北、平原河水清。
现代文：夏季四月，济阴、东郡、济北、平原黄河水清。
English: In the summer of April, the water of the Yellow River in Jiyin, Dong County, Jibei and the plain is clear.

古文：司徒许栩免。
现代文：司徒许栩被罢免。
English: Sutoh was removed from his post.

古文：五月，太常胡广为司徒。
现代文：五月，任太常胡广为司徒。
English: In May, Ren Taizhong took Hu Guang as his disciple.

古文：六月，南匈奴及乌桓、鲜卑寇缘边九郡。
现代文：六月，南匈奴及乌桓、鲜卑寇扰边缘九郡。
English: In June, the Southern Xiongnu, Wuhuan, and Xinbei invaded nine counties along the border.

古文：秋七月，沈氐羌寇武威、张掖。
现代文：秋季七月，沈氐羌寇掠武威、张掖。
English: In the autumn of July, Shen Yigou raided Wuwei and Zhang Ye.

古文：诏举武猛，三公各二人，卿、校尉各一人。
现代文：诏令举荐武猛的人士，三公各举二人，卿、校尉各举一人。
English: According to the imperial edict, the three emperors were to nominate two persons each, and the emperor and the captain were to nominate one person each.

古文：太尉陈蕃免。
现代文：太尉陈蕃免职。
English: Second Lieutenant Chen Yao relieved of duty.

古文：庚午，祠黄、老于濯龙宫。
现代文：庚午，祭祀黄帝、老子于濯龙宫。
English: In the evening of the 7th day of the 7th month, the worship of the Yellow Emperor and Laozi was held at the Dragon Palace.

古文：遣使匈奴中郎将张奂击南匈奴、乌桓、鲜卑。
现代文：遣使匈奴中郎将张奂出击南匈奴、乌桓、鲜卑。
English: He dispatched Xiongnu Zhongro to send Zhang Ye to attack Southern Xiongnu, Wuhuan and Xianbei.

古文：九月，光禄勋周景为太尉。
现代文：九月，任光禄勋周景为太尉。
English: In September, Ren Guanglu Xun Zhoujing was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant.

古文：南阳太守成瑨、太原太守刘质，并以谮弃市。
现代文：南阳太守成王晋、太原太守刘质，同以诬陷罪被斩于市。
English: Nanyang Daju Cheng Wang Jin and Taiyuan Daju Liu Jian were both beheaded in the city for the crime of framing.

古文：司空刘茂免。
现代文：司空刘茂免职。
English: Siku Liu Mao relieved of duty.

古文：大秦国王遣使奉献。
现代文：大秦国王派使者献礼。
English: King Daqin sent an envoy to present the gift.

古文：冬十二月，洛城傍竹柏枯伤。
现代文：冬季十二月，洛城旁竹柏枯伤。
English: Bamboo and cypress trees next to Los Angeles wither in the winter of December.

古文：光禄勋汝南宣酆为司空。
现代文：任光禄勋汝南宣邦为司空。
English: Ren Guangrokun Runan Xuanpang was appointed as Siku.

古文：南匈奴、乌桓率众诣张奂降。
现代文：南匈奴、乌桓率领部众到张奂跟前投降。
English: Nan Xiongnu and Wu Huan led the crowd to surrender in front of Zhang Ye.

古文：司隶校尉李膺等二百余人受诬为党人，并坐下狱，书名王府。
现代文：司隶校尉李膺等二百余人被诬为党人，因此一并下狱，书名王府。
English: More than two hundred people, including the police lieutenant Li Yan, were falsely accused of being party members, so they were all sent to prison together. The title of the book is Wangfu.

古文：永康元年春正月，先零羌寇三辅，中郎将张奂破平之。
现代文：永康元年春正月，先零羌寇掠三辅，中郎将张奂把他们打败平定。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of Yongkang, the first zero raiders plundered the three auxiliaries, and the middlemen defeated and subdued them.

古文：当煎羌寇武威，护羌校尉段颎追击于鸾鸟，大破之。
现代文：当煎羌寇掠武威，护羌校尉段赹追击于鸾鸟，大败他们。
English: When the peregrine falcon raided Wuwei, the peregrine falcon captain Duan Yu chased the peregrine falcon and defeated them.

古文：西羌悉平。
现代文：西羌全部平定。
English: All of Xidi has been pacified.

古文：夫馀王寇玄菟，太守公孙域与战，破之。
现代文：夫余王寇掠玄菟，太守公孙域战败他们。
English: Wang Qo, the husband of Yu, plundered Xuanzang, and the grand marshal Gong Sunji defeated them.

古文：夏四月，先零羌寇三辅。
现代文：夏季四月，先零羌寇掠三辅。
English: In the summer of April, the first zero raiders raid the three auxiliaries.

古文：五月丙申，京师及上党地裂。
现代文：五月十四日，京师及上党地裂。
English: On May 14th, the Beijing Division and the Upper Division split.

古文：庐江贼起，寇郡界。
现代文：庐江贼起，寇掠郡界。
English: The Lijiang River bandits began to raid the county.

古文：壬子晦，日有食之。诏公、卿、校尉举贤良方正。
现代文：三十日，日蚀。诏令公、卿、校尉荐举贤良方正的人士。
English: On the 30th, a solar eclipse, the Emperor issued an edict recommending officials, nobles, and lieutenants to nominate virtuous and upright people.

古文：六月庚申，大赦天下，悉除党锢，改元永康。
现代文：六月初八，大赦天下，全部解除党锢之禁，改元永康。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, the country was amnestied, the ban on party discipline was completely lifted, and the era was changed to Yongkang.

古文：丙寅，阜陵王统薨。
现代文：十四日，阜陵王刘统逝世。
English: On the 14th, Liu Tong, King of Fulin, passed away.

古文：秋八月，魏郡言嘉禾生，甘露降。
现代文：秋季八月，魏郡报告有嘉禾生长；又下及时雨。
English: In the autumn of August, Wei County reported the growth of Jiahe; it also rained in time.

古文：巴郡言黄龙见。
现代文：巴郡报告有黄龙出现。
English: Ba County reported the appearance of a yellow dragon.

古文：六州大水，勃海海溢。
现代文：六州大水，勃海海水漫溢。
English: The waters of the Six Provinces and the Bohai Sea overflow.

古文：诏州郡赐溺死者七岁以上钱，人二千；一家皆被害者，悉为收敛；其亡失谷食，禀人三斛。
现代文：诏令州郡赐给溺死者七岁以上每人钱二千；一家人都被害的，都为收殓；有漂失谷物的，每人廪粮三斛。
English: The edict ordered the prefecture and county to give each person over the age of seven who drowned 2,000 yuan; if a whole family was killed, the money would be collected; if there was lost grain, the grain would be collected for three yuan per person.

古文：冬十月，先零羌寇三辅，使匈奴中郎将张奂击破之。
现代文：冬季十月，先零羌寇掠三辅，使匈奴中郎将张奂击败了他们。
English: In the winter of October, the Xiongnu Chunglang defeated the Zhangye and the Xiongnu Chunglang after the Xiongnu Chunglang defeated the Zhangye and the Zhangye.

古文：十一月，西河言白菟见。
现代文：十一月，西河报告发现白虎。
English: In November, a white tiger was reported in the West River.

古文：十二月壬申，复癭陶王悝为勃海王。
现代文：十二月二十三日，恢复鞼陶王悝为勃海王。
English: On December 23rd, he was reinstated as the King of Bohei.

古文：丁丑，帝崩于德阳前殿。年三十六。
现代文：二十八日，帝在德阳前殿逝世，年三十六。
English: On the 28th, the emperor died at Deyangzen-den, at the age of 36.

古文：戊寅，尊皇后曰皇太后，太后临朝。
现代文：二十九日，尊皇后为皇太后，太后临朝。
English: On the 29th, His Majesty the Empress became the Empress Dowager, and the Empress Dowager became the Crown Princess.

古文：是岁，复博陵、河间二郡，比丰、沛。
现代文：这年，恢复博陵、河间二郡，如丰、沛一样。
English: This year, the two counties of Boling and Hema were restored, as were Feng and Pei.

古文：论曰：前史称桓帝好音乐，善琴笙。
现代文：史家评论说： 从前的史书称桓帝喜好音乐，善于琴笙。
English: Historians commented: Former history books said that Emperor Huan liked music and was good at the harp.

古文：饰芳林而考濯龙之宫，设华盖以祠浮图、老子，斯将所谓 听于神 乎！
现代文：以树木花草装饰成濯龙宫苑。设张华盖祭祀佛老，这可能就是所谓 国将亡，听于神 吧！
English: The dragon palace garden is decorated with trees, flowers and plants. Zhang Huagai is set up to worship Buddha, which may be the so-called death of the country, listen to God!

古文：及诛梁冀，奋威怒，天下犹企其休息。
现代文：及至诛梁冀，奋威怒，天下特别企盼休养生息。
English: The whole world is particularly looking forward to rest and recuperation.

古文：而五邪嗣虐，流衍四方。
现代文：可是却宠爱厚封单超等五宦官，以致五邪肆虐，流毒蔓溢四方。
English: However, he favored the five eunuchs with the highest rank, so that the five evils raged and the poisonous vines overflowed in all directions.

古文：自非忠贤力争，屡折奸锋，虽愿依斟流彘，亦不可得已。
现代文：如果不是李膺等忠贞贤德的义士直言极谏，屡屡折杀群奸的锋锐，那么桓帝虽想有夏帝相依附于诸侯斟灌和周厉王出奔于彘一样的结果，也是得不到的。 
English: If it weren't for the forthrightness of loyal, virtuous and virtuous knights such as Li Qian and the sharpness of repeatedly killing gangsters, then Emperor Huan would not have achieved the same results as Emperor Xia's attachment to the princes and King Zhou Li's departure to Shandong.

古文：赞曰：桓自宗支，越跻天禄。
现代文：史家赞说： 桓帝出自刘氏宗室的远房支系，超越次序而跻身天位。
English: Shi Jiazan said: Emperor Huan came from the distant branch line of Liu's family, and rose to the heavenly throne by transcending the order.

古文：政移五幸，刑淫三狱。
现代文：政柄滥移单超等五佞，刑狱滥施于李固等三狱。
English: Five years in prison for abuse of power, and three years in prison for abuse of power, including Li Gu.

古文：倾宫虽积，皇身靡续。
现代文：纳三皇后，宫女五六千。佳丽虽充斥寝宫，而终没有子嗣，皇身得不到延续。 
English: The Third Empress of China, with five or six thousand concubines. Although she had many concubines, she eventually had no children, and the imperial line could not be continued.

