古文：八年春正月己卯，烝。
现代文：八年春，正月，己卯日，拜烝祭後。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, on the first day of the new month, on the day of Jiwu, after the puja.

古文：天王使家父来聘。
现代文：周天子派遣家父来鲁国聘问。
English: Zhou Tianzi sent my father to Russia for an interview.

古文：夏五月丁丑，烝。
现代文：夏季，五月，丁丑日，祭祀。
English: In summer, in May, on the Day of the Ugly Goat, there is a ritual.

古文：秋，伐邾。
现代文：秋天，讨伐邾国。
English: In the autumn, the campaign against Shikoku begins.

古文：冬十月，雨雪。
现代文：冬季十月，下雪。
English: Winter in October, snowing.

古文：祭公来，遂逆王後于纪。
现代文：祭公到鲁国来，然后到纪国迎接王后。
English: The sacrificial prince came to Lu Province, and then to Ji Province to meet the queen.

古文：八年春，灭翼。
现代文：八年春季，曲沃伯灭亡了翼邑。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, Qu Wobo died in Tsubame.

古文：随少师有宠。
现代文：随国少师受到宠信。
English: He was favored by many young teachers in the country.

古文：楚鬥伯比曰： 可矣。仇有衅，不可失也。 
现代文：楚国的鬬伯比说： 可以了，敌国内部有了裂痕，不可以失掉机会。 
English: Chu's Zou Bo Bi said, "It's okay, the enemy has a crack inside, we can't lose the opportunity."

古文：夏，楚子合诸侯于沈鹿。
现代文：夏季，楚武王在沈鹿会合诸侯的军队。
English: In the summer, King Chuwu gathered the armies of the lords in Shenlu.

古文：黄、随不会。
现代文：黄、随两国不参加会见。
English: Huang, along with the two countries did not attend the meeting.

古文：使薳章让黄。楚子伐随，军于汉、淮之间。
现代文：楚武王派薳章去责备黄国，然后亲自讨伐随国，军队驻扎在汉水、淮水之间。
English: The king of Chuwu sent Yuanzhang to reproach Huang Guo, and then personally fought against Sui Guo. The army was stationed between Han Shui and Huai Shui.

古文：季梁请下之，弗许而后战，所以怒我而怠寇也。
现代文：季梁建议向楚人表示投降，说： 等他们不肯，然后作战，这样就可以激怒我军而使敌军懈怠。 
English: Ji Liang proposed to surrender to the Chu people, saying, "Wait for them to refuse, and then fight, so that we can infuriate our army and make the enemy army slack off."

古文：少师谓随侯曰： 必速战。不然，将失楚师。 
现代文：少师对随侯说： 必须速战，不这样，就会丢失战胜楚军的机会。 
English: The junior division said to the attendant: We must fight quickly, otherwise, we will lose the opportunity to defeat the Chu army.

古文：随侯御之，望楚师。
现代文：随侯率军抵御楚军。
English: Suiko led the army to resist the Chu army.

古文：季梁曰： 楚人上左，君必左，无与王遇。
现代文：远望楚国的军队，季梁说： 楚人以左为尊，国君一定在左军之中，不要和楚王正面作战，姑且攻击他的右军。
English: Looking far and wide at the army of the state of Chu, Ji Liang said: Chu people hold the left in high esteem, and the sovereign must be in the left army. Don't fight with King Chu head-on, but attack his right army.

古文：且攻其右，右无良焉，必败。
现代文：右军没有好指挥官，必然失败。
English: Without a good commander, the right-wing army is bound to fail.

古文：偏败，众乃携矣。 
现代文：他们的偏军一败，大众就离散了。 
English: As soon as their partisans were defeated, the crowd dispersed.

古文：少师曰： 不当王，非敌也。 
现代文：少师说： 不与楚王正面作战，这就表示我们和他不能对等。 
English: The young master said, "If we don't fight King Chu head-on, it means that we can't be equal to him."

古文：弗从。
现代文：随侯又没有听从季梁的话。
English: Akihiro didn't listen.

古文：战于速杞，随师败绩。
现代文：在速杞交战，随军大败。
English: He fought in the Battle of Hayabusa and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：随侯逸，鬥丹获其戎车，与其戎右少师。
现代文：随侯逃走，鬬丹俘获了随侯的战车和车右少师。
English: With Hou's escape, Huan Dan captured Huan Hou's chariot and his right-hand man.

古文：秋，随及楚平。
现代文：秋季，随国要同楚国讲和。
English: In the autumn, Sui wanted to make peace with Chu.

古文：楚子将不许，鬥伯比曰： 天去其疾矣，随未可克也。 
现代文：楚武王本拟不同意。鬬伯比说： 上天已经铲除他们讨厌的少师了，但随国还不可能战胜。 
English: King Chu-wu did not agree at all. Zou Bo-bi said, "Heaven has already eradicated their obnoxious little division, but it is still impossible for the Sui Kingdom to defeat them."

古文：乃盟而还。
现代文：于是订立了盟约而回国。
English: So they made a pact and returned home.

古文：冬，王命虢仲立晋哀侯之弟缗于晋。
现代文：冬季，周桓王命令虢仲立了晋哀侯的兄弟缗为晋侯。
English: In the winter, King Zhou Kuan ordered Zou Zhong to appoint Zou's brother Zou as Jinhou.

古文：祭公来，遂逆王后于纪，礼也。
现代文：祭公到鲁国来，然后到纪国迎接王后，这是合于礼的。
English: It is proper for the sacrificial prince to come to the kingdom of Lu and then to the kingdom of Ji to meet the queen.

