古文：万乘之国，兵不可以无主，土地博大，野不可以无吏，百姓殷众，官不可以无长，操民之命，朝不可以无政。
现代文：万辆兵车的大国，军队不可以没有统帅；领土广阔，农田不可以没有官吏；人口众多，官府不可无常法；掌握着人民命运，朝廷不可无政令。
English: A large country with ten thousand chariots cannot have an army without a commander; a vast territory and farmland cannot be without officials; a large population and government cannot be lawless; the people's destiny is in its hands and the imperial court cannot be without a decree.

古文：地博而国贫者，野不辟也，民众而兵弱者，民无取也。
现代文：地大而国家贫穷，是因为土地没有开辟；人多而兵力薄弱，是因为人民缺乏督促。
English: If a country is large and poor, it is because the land has not been developed; if it is large and weak, it is because the people have not been urged.

古文：故末产不禁，则野不辟。赏罚不信，则民无取。
现代文：所以，不禁止奢侈品的工商业，土地就不得开辟；赏罚不信实，人民就缺乏督促。
English: Therefore, if the industry and commerce of luxury goods are not prohibited, the land may not be developed; if rewards and punishments are not true, the people will lack supervision.

古文：野不辟，民无取，外不可以应敌，内不可以固守，故曰有万乘之号，而无千乘之用，而求权之无轻，不可得也。
现代文：土地没有开辟，人民缺乏督促，对外就不能抵御敌人，对内就不能固守国土。所以说，空有万辆兵车的大国虚名，而没有千辆兵车的实力，还想君主权力不被削弱，那是办不到的。
English: If the land is not developed, if the people are not urged, if the enemy cannot be resisted from the outside, and if the country cannot be defended from the inside, then a great country with ten thousand chariots is nothing, and without the strength of a thousand chariots, it is impossible for the monarch's power not to be weakened.

古文：地辟而国贫者，舟舆饰，台榭广也。
现代文：土地开辟了，而国家仍然贫穷，那是君主的舟车过于豪华、楼台亭阁过多的原故。
English: The land has been opened up, but the country is still poor, which is the reason why the monarch's carriage is too luxurious and there are too many pavilions.

古文：赏罚信而兵弱者，轻用众，使民劳也。
现代文：赏罚信实而兵力仍然薄弱，那是轻易兴师动众、使民过劳的原故。
English: If the rewards and punishments are faithful, but the military strength is still weak, that is the reason why it is easy to arouse the teachers to mobilize the masses and make the people overwork.

古文：舟车饰，台榭广，则赋敛厚矣。轻用众，使民劳，则民力竭矣。
现代文：因为，舟车豪华，楼台亭阁过多，就会使赋税繁重；轻易兴师动众，使民过劳，就造成民力枯竭。
English: Because if the carriage is luxurious and there are too many buildings and pavilions, it will make the taxation heavy; if it is easy to motivate the teachers and make the people overwork, it will cause the depletion of the people's strength.

古文：赋敛厚，则下怨上矣。民力竭，则令不行矣。
现代文：赋税繁重则人民怨恨朝廷，民力枯竭则政令无法推行。
English: If taxes are onerous, the people will resent the imperial court; if the people's power is exhausted, the government's decrees cannot be implemented.

古文：下怨上，令不行，而求敌之勿谋己，不可得也。
现代文：人民怨恨，政令不行，而求敌国不来侵略，那是办不到的。
English: It is impossible to appease the resentment of the people, to issue a decree, and to ask the enemy country not to invade.

古文：欲为天下者，必重用其国，欲为其国者，必重用其民，欲为其民者，必重尽其民力。
现代文：要想治好天下，必须珍惜本国国力；想要治好国家，必须珍惜国内人民；想要治好人民，必须珍惜民力之耗尽。
English: If you want to heal the world, you must cherish your own national strength; if you want to heal the country, you must cherish the domestic people; if you want to heal the people, you must cherish the exhaustion of people's power.

古文：无以畜之，则往而不可止也；无以牧之，则处而不可使也；远人至而不去，则有以畜之也。民众而可一，则有以牧之也。
现代文：没有办法养活人民，人们就要外逃而不能阻止；没有办法治理人民，即使留下来也不能使用。远地的人们来而不走，是因为有效地养活了他们；人口众多而可以统一号令，是因为有效地治理了他们。
English: If there is no way to feed the people, they will flee and cannot be stopped; if there is no way to govern the people, they cannot be used even if they stay. People from far away come and do not go because they are effectively fed; if the population is large and can be unified, it is because they are effectively governed.

古文：见其可也，喜之有征。见其不可也，恶之有刑。
现代文：见到人们做好事，喜悦而要有实际奖赏；见到人们做坏事，厌恶而要有具体惩罚。
English: To see people do good, joy, there must be an actual reward; to see people do bad, disgust, there must be a specific punishment.

古文：赏罚信于其所见，虽其所不见，其敢为之乎？
现代文：赏功罚过，对于亲身经历的人们确实兑现了，那末，没有亲身经历的也就不敢胡作非为了。
English: Rewards and punishments have been made for those who have personally experienced them, so those who have not personally experienced them will not dare to do anything wrong.

古文：见其可也，喜之无征；见其不可也，恶之无刑；赏罚不信于其所见，而求其所不见之为之化，不可得也。
现代文：如果见到人们做好事，空自喜悦而没有实际奖赏；见到人们做坏事，空自厌恶而没有具体惩罚；赏功罚过，对于亲身经历的都没有兑现，要指望没有经历的人们为之感化，那是办不到的。
English: If you see people doing good things, you are empty of joy and there is no actual reward; if you see people doing bad things, you are empty of disgust and there is no specific punishment; if you reward and punish, you have not fulfilled what you have personally experienced. It is impossible to expect people without experience to be inspired by it.

古文：厚爱利，足以亲之。明智礼，足以教之。
现代文：君主能够付出厚爱和厚利，就可以亲近人民，申明知识相礼节，就可以教育人民。
English: If the monarch can show great love and benefit, he can be close to the people, affirm knowledge and propriety, and educate the people.

古文：上身服以先之。审度量以闲之。
现代文：要以身作则来引导人民，审定规章制度来防范人民，设置乡的官吏来指导人民。
English: It is necessary to lead the people by example, validate the rules and regulations to prevent the people, and set up township officials to guide the people.

古文：乡置师以说道之，然后申之以宪令，劝之以庆赏，振之以刑罚，故百姓皆说为善，则暴乱之行无由至矣。
现代文：然后再用法令加以约束，用奖赏加以鼓励，用刑罚加以威慑。这样，百姓就都愿意做好事，暴乱的行为便不会发生了。
English: Then restrain them with laws, encourage them with rewards, and deter them with punishments. In this way, the people will be willing to do good things, and riotous behavior will not occur.

古文：地之生财有时，民之用力有倦，而人君之欲无穷，以有时与有倦，养无穷之君，而度量不生于其间，则上下相疾也。是以臣有杀其君，子有杀其父者矣。
现代文：土地生产财富，受时令的限制；人民花费劳力，有疲倦的时候；但是人君的欲望则是无止境的。以 生财有时 的土地和 用力有倦 的人民来供养欲望无穷的君主，这中间若没有一个合理的限度，上下之间就会互相怨恨，于是臣杀其君、子杀其父的现象产生了。
English: Land produces wealth, limited by time; people expend labor, and there are times of weariness; but the desires of princes are endless. If there is no reasonable limit between the land, which sometimes produces wealth, and the people, who are tired of effort, to support a monarch with endless desires, there will be mutual resentment between the upper and lower levels, and the phenomenon of a vassal killing his prince and a son killing his father will arise.

古文：故取于民有度，用之有止，国虽小必安；取于民无度，用之不止，国虽大必危。
现代文：因此，对人民征收有度，耗费又有节制的，国家虽小也一定安宁；对人民征收无度，耗费没有节制的，国家虽大也一定危亡。
English: Therefore, if the people are taxed moderately and the expenditure is moderate, the country will be peaceful even if it is small; if the people are taxed excessively and the expenditure is not moderate, the country will be in danger even if it is large.

古文：地之不辟者，非吾地也。民之不牧者，非吾民也。
现代文：有土地而不开辟，等于不是自己的土地；有人民而不治理，等于不是自己的人民。
English: If you have land but do not develop it, it is not your land; if you have people but do not govern them, it is not your people.

古文：凡牧民者。以其所积者食之。不可不审也。
现代文：凡是治理人民，对于按劳绩给予禄赏的问题，不可不审慎从事。
English: When governing the people, we must be prudent when it comes to the issue of awarding bonuses based on performance.

古文：其积多者其食多，其积寡者其食寡，无积者不食。
现代文：劳绩多的禄赏多，劳绩少的禄赏少，没有劳绩的就不给予禄赏。
English: Those with more achievements will be rewarded more, those with less achievements will be rewarded less, and those with no achievements will not be rewarded.

古文：或有积而不食者，则民离上；有积多而食寡者，则民不力；有积寡而食多者，则民多轴；有无积而徒食者，则民偷幸；故离上不力，多轴偷幸，举事不成，应敌不用。
现代文：如果有劳绩而没有禄赏，人们就离心离德；劳绩多而禄赏少，人们就不努力工作；劳绩少而禄赏多，人们就弄虚作假；无劳绩而空得禄赏，人们就贪图侥幸。凡是离心离德、工作不力、弄虚作假、贪图侥幸的，举办大事不会成功，对敌作战也不会尽力。
English: If there is merit but no reward, people will abandon virtue; if there is more merit but less reward, people will not work hard; if there is less merit but more reward, people will cheat; if there is no merit but no reward, people will be greedy for luck. If there is eccentricity, poor work, cheating, and greed for luck, the event will not be successful, and the enemy will not fight hard.

古文：故曰：察能授官，班禄赐予，使民之机也。
现代文：所以说，根据人的能力授予官职，按照劳绩差别赐予禄赏，这是用人的关键。
English: Therefore, it is the key to employ people to award official positions according to people's ability and to give bonuses according to performance differences.

古文：野与市争民。家与府争货，金与粟争贵，乡与朝争治；故野不积草，农事先也；府不积货，藏于民也；市不成肆，家用足也；朝不合众，乡分治也。
现代文：农田与市场往往争劳力，民家与官府往往争财货，货币与粮食往往争贵贱，地方与朝廷往往争治理权限。所以，让田野不积杂草，就应把农业放在首位；让官府不积财货，就应把财富藏于民间；让市场店铺不成行列，就需要做到家用自足；让朝廷不聚众议事，就需要做到分权到乡。
English: Farmland and market often compete for labor, private households and government often compete for wealth and goods, money and grain often compete for high and low prices, and localities and the imperial court often compete for governance authority. Therefore, if the fields do not accumulate weeds, agriculture should be placed first; if the government does not accumulate wealth and goods, the wealth should be hidden from the people; if the market stores do not line up, it is necessary to achieve household self-sufficiency; if the imperial court does not gather the public for deliberation, it is necessary to achieve decentralization to the township.

古文：故野不积草，府不积货，市不成肆。朝不合众，治之至也。
现代文：田野无杂草，官府无积货，市场店铺不成行列，朝廷不聚众议事，这些都是治国的最高水平。
English: Fields without weeds, government offices without accumulated goods, market shops without queues, and the imperial court without public deliberation are all the highest level of state governance.

古文：人情不二，故民情可得而御也。
现代文：人的本性没有什么两样，所以，人的思想性情是可以掌握的。
English: People's natures are no different, so people's thoughts and dispositions can be mastered.

古文：审其所好恶，则其长短可知也；观其交游，则其贤不肖可察也；二者不失，则民能可得而官也。
现代文：了解他喜欢什么和厌恶什么，就可以知道他的长处和短处；观察他同什么样的人交往，就能判断他是好人还是坏人。把握住这两点，就能够对人民进行管理了。
English: If you know what he likes and dislikes, you can know his strengths and weaknesses; if you observe the kind of people he associates with, you can judge whether he is a good person or a bad person. If you grasp these two points, you can manage the people.

古文：地之守在城，城之守在兵，兵之守在人，人之守在粟；故地不辟，则城不固。
现代文：国土的保障在于城池，城池的保障在于军队，军队的保障在于人民，而人民的保障在于粮食。因此，土地不开辟，就会造成城池不巩固。
English: The security of the country lies in the city, the security of the city lies in the army, the security of the army lies in the people, and the security of the people lies in food. Therefore, if the land is not developed, the city will not be consolidated.

古文：有身不治，奚待于人？
现代文：君主不能治理自身。怎么能治理别人？
English: A monarch cannot govern himself. How can he govern others?

古文：有人不治，奚待于家？
现代文：不能治人，怎能治家？不能治家，怎能治乡？
English: If you can't govern a person, how can you govern a family? If you can't govern a family, how can you govern a village?

古文：有家不治，奚待于乡？
现代文：不能治乡，怎能治国？不能治国，怎能治理天下？
English: If you can't govern a village, how can you govern a country? If you can't govern a country, how can you govern the world?

古文：有乡不治，奚待于国？有国不治，奚待于天下？
现代文：而天下又是以国为根本，国以乡为根本，乡以家为根本，家以人为根本，人以自身为根本，自身又以治世之道为根本。
English: And the world is based on the country, the country is based on the township, the township is based on the family, the family is based on the person, the person is based on himself, and he is based on the way of governing the world.

古文：天下者，国之本也；国者，乡之本也；乡者，家之本也；家者，人之本也；人者，身之本也；身者，治之本也。故上不好本事，则末产不禁；末产不禁，则民缓于时事而轻地利；轻地利，而求田野之辟，仓廪之实，不可得也。
现代文：所以，君主若不重视农业，就不肯禁止奢侈品的工商业，不禁止奢侈品的工商业，人们就会延误农时农事而轻忽土地之利。在轻忽地利的情况下，还指望田野开辟、仓廪充实，那是办不到的。商人在朝中掌权，财货贿赂就流往上层；妇人参与政事，赏功罚过就不能准确；男女没有界限，人民就不知廉耻。
English: Therefore, if the monarch does not attach importance to agriculture, he will not ban the industry and commerce of luxury goods. If he does not ban the industry and commerce of luxury goods, people will delay farming and neglect the interests of the land. In the case of neglect, it is impossible to expect fields to be opened up and barns to be filled. Merchants hold power in the government, and bribes flow to the upper class; women participate in politics, and rewards and punishments cannot be accurate; men and women have no boundaries, and people do not know shame.

古文：商贾在朝，则货财上流；妇言人事，则赏罚不信；男女无别，则民无廉耻；货财上流，赏罚不信，民无廉耻，而求百姓之安难，兵士之死节，不可得也。朝廷不肃，贵贱不明，长幼不分，度量不审，衣服无等，上下凌节，而求百姓之尊主政令，不可得也。
现代文：在货财上流、赏罚不信、民无廉耻的情况下，要求百姓为国家甘冒危难，兵士为国家献身死节，是办不到的。朝廷不整肃，贵贱无区别，长幼不分，制度不明，服制没有等级，君臣都超越应守的规范，这样，要求得百姓尊重君主的政令，是办不到的。
English: It is impossible to ask the people to risk their lives for the country, and the soldiers to sacrifice their lives for the country, when the wealth is flowing upstream, rewards and punishments are not trusted, and the people are shameless. The imperial court is not neat and tidy, there is no distinction between high and low, there is no distinction between old and young, the system is not clear, there is no rank in the service system, and the monarchs and ministers exceed the norms that should be observed. In this way, it is impossible to ask the people to respect the monarch's decrees.

古文：上好轴谋闲欺，臣下赋敛竞得，使民偷壹，则百姓疾怨，而求下之亲上，不可得也。
现代文：君主好搞阴谋欺诈，官吏争收苛捐杂税，使役人民只偷取一时之快，以致百姓怨恨，这样，要求得人民亲近君主，是办不到的。
English: Monarchs are fond of scheming and deception, officials compete to collect exorbitant fees and taxes, and make servants of the people steal only fleeting gains, so that the people resent them. In this way, it is impossible to ask the people to get close to the monarch.

古文：有地不务本事，君国不能壹民，而求宗庙社稷之无危，不可得也。
现代文：拥有土地而不注重农业，统治国家而不能统一号令人民，这样，要求国家不发生危机，是办不到的。
English: Owning land without paying attention to agriculture, ruling the country without being able to unify and command the people, it is impossible to ask the country not to have a crisis.

古文：上恃龟筮，好用巫医，则鬼神骤祟；故功之不立，名之不章，为之患者三：有独王者、有贫贱者、有日不足者。
现代文：君主行事依靠求神问卜，好用巫医，这样，鬼神反而会经常作起怪来。总之，功业不成，名声不显，将产生三种祸患：一是养成独断专横的君主；二是成为贫穷卑贱的君主；三是成为政务混乱、整日里疲于奔命的君主。
English: Monarchs rely on divination to make use of witch doctors, so the ghosts and gods will often do strange things. In short, if the work is not done and the reputation is not obvious, there will be three kinds of disasters: one is to develop an arbitrary and despotic monarch; the second is to become a poor and lowly monarch; the third is to become a monarch who is in political turmoil and is exhausted all day.

古文：一年之计，莫如树谷；十年之计，莫如树木；终身之计，莫如树人。
现代文：作一年的打算，最好是种植五谷；作十年的打算，最好是种植树木；作终身的打算，最好是培育人材。
English: For a one-year plan, it is best to plant cereals; for a ten-year plan, it is best to plant trees; for a lifelong plan, it is best to cultivate human resources.

古文：一树一获者，谷也；一树十获者，木也；一树百获者，人也。
现代文：种谷，是一种一收；种树，是一种十收；培育人材，则是一种百收的事情。
English: Planting corn is a kind of one harvest; planting trees is a kind of ten harvests; cultivating human resources is a kind of one hundred harvests.

古文：我茍种之，如神用之，举事如神，唯王之门。
现代文：如果我们注重培养人材，其效用将是神奇的；而如此举事收得神效的，只有王者之门才能够做到。
English: If we pay attention to cultivating human resources, its effect will be miraculous; and only the King's Gate can achieve such a miraculous effect.

古文：凡牧民者，使士无邪行，女无淫事。
现代文：凡是治理人民的，应该使男人没有邪僻行为，使女人没有淫乱的事情。
English: Those who rule over the people must keep the men from sexual immorality and the women from sexual immorality.

古文：士无邪行，教也。女无淫事，训也。
现代文：使男人不行邪僻，要靠教育；使女人没有淫乱，要靠训诲。
English: To keep a man from sexual immorality, education is needed; to keep a woman from sexual immorality, training is needed.

古文：教训成俗，而刑罚省，数也。
现代文：教训形成风气，刑罚就会减少，这是自然的道理。
English: It's only natural that as a culture of discipline develops, punishments will decrease.

古文：凡牧民者，欲民之正也；欲民之正，则微邪不可不禁也；微邪者，大邪之所生也；微邪不禁，而求大邪之无伤国，不可得也。
现代文：凡是治理人民的，都要求人民走正道。要求人民走正道，就不能不禁止小的邪恶。因为，小的邪恶是大的邪恶产生的根源。不禁止小的邪恶而想要大邪恶不危害国家，是办不到的。
English: Whoever governs the people must require the people to take the right path. In requiring the people to take the right path, it is impossible not to prohibit small evils. For small evils are the source of great evils. Without prohibiting small evils, it is impossible to prevent great evils from harming the country.

古文：凡牧民者，欲民之有礼也；欲民之有礼，则小礼不可不谨也；小礼不谨于国，而求百姓之行大礼，不可得也。
现代文：凡是治理人民的，都要求人民有 礼 。要求有礼，就不可不重视小礼。因为，在国内不重视小礼，而要求百姓能行大礼，是办不到的。
English: Anyone who governs the people must require the people to be courteous. If courtesy is required, then minor courtesy must be emphasized. For it is impossible to demand that the people can perform major courtesy without emphasizing minor courtesy in the country.

古文：凡牧民者，欲民之有义也；欲民之有义，则小义不可不行；小义不行于国，而求百姓之行大义，不可得也。
现代文：凡是治理人民的，都要求人民有 义 。要求有义，就不可不实行小义。因为，在国内不行小义，而要求百姓能行大义，是办不到的。
English: Whoever governs the people must require righteousness from the people. If righteousness is required, then lesser righteousness must be practiced. For it is not possible to practice lesser righteousness in the country, but it is impossible to require the people to practice greater righteousness.

古文：凡牧民者，欲民之有廉也；欲民之有廉，则小廉不可不修也；小廉不修于国，而求百姓之行大廉，不可得也。
现代文：凡是治理人民的，都要求人民有 廉 。要求有廉，就不可不重视小廉。因为，在国内不重视小廉，而要求百姓能行大廉，是办不到的。
English: Anyone who governs the people must require the people to be honest. If you require honesty, you must not pay attention to small dishonesty. Because, if you do not pay attention to small dishonesty in the country, but require the people to be able to practice great dishonesty, it is impossible.

古文：凡牧民者，欲民之有耻也，欲民之有耻，则小耻不可不饰也。
现代文：凡是治理人民的，都要求人民有 耻 。要求有耻，就不可不整顿小耻。
English: Whoever governs the people must require them to be shameless, and whoever requires them to be shameless must first rectify their shamelessness.

古文：小耻不饰于国，而求百姓之行大耻，不可得也。
现代文：因为，在国内不整顿小耻，而要求百姓能行大耻，是办不到的。
English: Because, without rectifying the petty shame in the country, it is impossible to ask the people to carry out the great shame.

古文：凡牧民者，欲民之修小礼、行小义、饰小廉、谨小耻、禁微邪、此厉民之道也。
现代文：凡治理人民，要求人民谨小礼、行小义、修小廉、饬小耻、禁止小的坏事，这都是训练人民的办法。
English: Those who govern the people and require the people to be modest, to act modestly, to be modestly honest, to be modestly honest, to be modestly shameless, and to forbid modestly evil deeds, are all methods of training the people.

古文：民之修小礼、行小义、饰小廉、谨小耻、禁微邪、治之本也。
现代文：而人民能够作到谨小礼、行小义、修小廉、饬小耻并禁止小的坏事，又正是治国的根本。
English: And the ability of the people to make small courtesy, small righteousness, small corruption, small shame and prohibit small bad things is the foundation of governing the country.

