古文：曹沫者，鲁人也，以勇力事鲁庄公。
现代文：曹沫，是鲁国人，凭勇敢和力气侍奉鲁庄公。
English: Cao Miao, a native of Lu, served Lu Zhuang with courage and strength.

古文：庄公好力。
现代文：庄公喜爱有勇力的人。
English: Zhuang Gong likes people with courage.

古文：曹沫为鲁将，与齐战，三败北。
现代文：曹沫任鲁国的将军，和齐国作战，多次战败逃跑。
English: Cao Miao served as the general of the State of Lu and fought against the State of Qi. He was defeated and fled many times.

古文：鲁庄公惧，乃献遂邑之地以和。
现代文：鲁庄公害怕了，就献出遂邑地区求和。
English: Lu Zhuangguo was afraid, so he offered the Suiyi region to make peace.

古文：犹复以为将。
现代文：但仍然让曹沫任将军。
English: However, Cao Miao was still appointed as general.

古文：齐桓公许与鲁会于柯而盟。
现代文：齐桓公答应和鲁庄公在柯地会见，订立盟约。
English: Lord Qi Kuan promised to meet Lord Lu Zhuang in Ke Di and make a covenant.

古文：桓公与庄公既盟于坛上，曹沫执匕首劫齐桓公，桓公左右莫敢动，而问曰： 子将何欲？ 
现代文：桓公和庄公在盟坛上订立盟约以后，曹沫手拿匕首胁迫齐桓公，桓公的侍卫人员没有谁敢轻举妄动，桓公问： 您打算做什么？ 
English: After Prince Huan and Prince Zhuang signed a covenant on the altar of alliance, Cao Miao took a dagger in his hand to coerce Prince Qi Huan. None of Prince Huan's bodyguards dared to make any move. Prince Huan asked: What are you going to do?

古文：曹沫曰： 齐强鲁弱，而大国侵鲁亦甚矣。
现代文：曹沫回答说： 齐国强大，鲁国弱小，以大国侵略鲁国也太过分了。
English: Cao Miao replied: Qi is strong, Lu is weak, and it is too much for a big country to invade Lu.

古文：今鲁城坏即压齐境，君其图之。 
现代文：如今鲁国都城一倒塌就会压到齐国的边境了，您要考虑考虑这个问题。 
English: Now, if the capital of the State of Lu were to collapse, it would crush the border of the State of Qi. You should consider this issue.

古文：桓公乃许尽归鲁之侵地。
现代文：于是齐桓公答应全部归还鲁国被侵占的土地。
English: As a result, Prince Qi Kuan promised to return all the occupied lands of Lu.

古文：既已言，曹沫投其匕首，下坛北面就群臣之位颜色不变，辞令如故。
现代文：说完以后，曹沫扔下匕首，走下盟坛，回到面向北的臣子的位置上，面不改色，谈吐从容如常。
English: After saying this, Cao Miao threw down his dagger, stepped down from the altar of alliance, and returned to the position of the north-facing vassal. His face did not change color, and he spoke calmly as usual.

古文：桓公怒，欲倍其约。
现代文：桓公很生气，打算背弃盟约。
English: Prince Kan is very angry and plans to renege on the agreement.

古文：管仲曰： 不可。
现代文：管仲说： 不可以。
English: Guanzhong said, "No."

古文：夫贪小利以自快，弃信于诸侯，矢天下之援，不如与之。 
现代文：贪图小的利益用来求得一时的快意，就会在诸侯面前丧失信用，失去天下人对您的支持，不如把土地还给鲁国。 
English: If you are greedy for a small profit and use it to seek a momentary pleasure, you will lose credibility in front of the princes and lose the support of the people of the world. It is better to return the land to Lu.

古文：于是桓公乃遂割鲁侵地，曹沫三战所亡地尽复予鲁。
现代文：于是，齐桓公就按照约定归还占领的鲁国的土地，曹沫多次打仗所丢失的土地全部回归鲁国。
English: As a result, in accordance with the agreement, Prince Qi Kuan returned the occupied land of Lu, and all the land lost by Cao Mo in many wars returned to Lu.

古文：其后百六十有七年而吴有专诸之事。
现代文：此后一百六十七年，吴国有专诸的事迹。
English: One hundred and sixty-seven years later, the state of Wuzhongzhu was founded.

古文：专诸者，吴堂邑人也：伍子胥之亡楚而如吴也，知专诸之能。
现代文：专诸，是吴国堂邑人。伍子胥逃离楚国前往吴国时，知道专诸有本领。
English: Zongzhu is a native of Wu Guotang. When Wu Ziqi fled Chu to Wu, he knew Zongzhu had the ability.

古文：伍子胥既见吴王僚，说以伐楚之利。
现代文：伍子胥进见吴王僚以后，用攻打楚国的好处劝说他。
English: After Wu Zihong met with Wu Wangliang, he persuaded him with the benefits of attacking Chu.

古文：吴公子光曰： 彼伍员父兄皆死于楚而员言伐楚，欲自为报私雠也，非能为吴。 
现代文：吴公子光说： 那个伍员，父亲、哥哥都是被楚国杀死的，伍员才讲攻打楚国，他这是为了报自己的私仇，并不是真正为吴国着想的。 
English: Wu Gongziguang said: That soldier, his father and brother were all killed by the State of Chu. The soldier only talked about attacking the State of Chu. He did this to avenge his own personal vendetta, and not really for the sake of the State of Wu.

古文：吴王乃止。
现代文：吴王就不再议伐楚的事。
English: King Wu would no longer discuss the matter with Chu.

古文：伍子胥知公子光之欲杀吴王僚。乃曰： 彼光将有内志，未可说以外事。 
现代文：伍子胥知道公子光打算杀掉吴王僚，就说： 那个公子光有在国内夺取王位的企图，现在还不能劝说他向国外出兵。 
English: Wu Zixuan knew that the young man only intended to kill Wu Wangliang, so he said: That young man only has the intention of seizing the throne at home, and now I can't persuade him to send troops abroad.

古文：乃进专诸于公子光。
现代文：于是就把专诸推荐给公子光。
English: As a result, he recommended chuzhu to Kimiko.

古文：光之父曰吴王诸樊。
现代文：公子光的父亲是吴王诸樊。
English: Prince Ziguang's father is Wu Wang Zhulong.

古文：诸樊弟三人：次曰余祭，次曰夷昧，次曰季子札。
现代文：诸樊有三个弟弟：按兄弟次序排，大弟弟叫余祭，二弟弟叫夷眛，最小的弟弟叫季子札。
English: Zhu Xi has three younger brothers: according to the order of the brothers, the eldest brother is called Yu Xi, the second brother is called Yixuan, and the youngest brother is called Ji Zi Fada.

古文：诸樊知季子札贤而不立太子，以次传三弟，欲卒致国于季子札。
现代文：诸樊知道季子札贤明，就不扶立自己的儿子作太子，想依照兄弟的次序把王位传递下去，最后好把国君的位子传给季子札。
English: Zhu Xi knew that Ji Zifan was wise, so he did not support his son to become the crown prince. He wanted to pass the throne down according to the order of brothers, and finally pass the position of the sovereign to Ji Zifan.

古文：诸樊既死，传余祭。
现代文：诸樊去世以后王位传给了余祭。
English: After the death of Zhu Xi, the throne passed to Yu Si.

古文：余祭死，传夷昧。
现代文：余祭死后，传给夷眛。
English: After Yosai's death, it was passed down to the Iroquois.

古文：夷昧死，当传季子札；季子札逃不肯立，吴人乃立夷昧之子僚为王。
现代文：夷眛死后本当传给季子札，季子札却逃避不肯立为国君，吴国人就拥立夷眛的儿子僚为国君。
English: After the death of Yixuan, it was actually passed down to Ji Zifan, but Ji Zifan evaded and refused to be made the sovereign, and the people of Wu supported Yixuan's son and colleague as the sovereign.

古文：公子光曰： 使以兄弟次邪，季子当立；必以子乎，则光真适嗣，当立。 
现代文：公子光说： 如果按兄弟的次序，季子当立；如果一定要传给儿子的话，那么我才是真正的嫡子，应当立我为君。 
English: Koko Hikaru said, "If, according to the order of brothers, kishi is the first, and if it must be passed down to sons, then I am the true legitimate son, and I should be made the ruler."

古文：故尝阴养谋臣以求立。
现代文：所以他常秘密地供养一些有智谋的人，以便靠他们的帮助取得王位。
English: Therefore, he often secretly supported some clever people in order to obtain the throne with their help.

古文：光既得专诸，善客待之。
现代文：公子光得到专诸以后，像对待宾客一样地好好待他。
English: After he got the post, he treated him like a guest.

古文：九年而楚平王死。
现代文：吴王僚九年，楚平王死了。
English: In the ninth year of King Wu's reign, King Chuping died.

古文：春，吴王僚欲因楚丧，使其二弟公子盖余、属庸将兵围楚之灊；使延陵季子于晋，以观诸侯之变。
现代文：这年春天，吴王僚想趁着楚国办丧事的时候，派他的两个弟弟公子盖余、属庸率领军队包围楚国的谮城，派延陵季子到晋国，用以观察各诸侯国的动静。
English: In the spring of that year, Wu Wangliang wanted to take advantage of the time when the state of Chu was holding a funeral, so he sent his two younger brothers Gaiyu and Zhenyong to lead an army to encircle Shicheng in Chu, and sent Yanling Jizi to Jin to observe the movements of the various states.

古文：楚发兵绝吴将盖余、属庸路，吴兵不得还。
现代文：楚国出动军队，断绝了吴将盖余、属庸的后路，吴国军队不能归还。
English: Chu dispatched an army and cut off the back way of Wu's generals Gaiyu and Zhenyong. Wu's army could not return.

古文：于是公子光谓专诸曰： 此时不可失，不求何获!
现代文：这时公子光对专诸说： 这个机会不能失掉，不去争取，哪会获得！
English: At this time, Prince Guang said to Zong Zhu: This opportunity cannot be lost, if you do not fight for it, you will not get it!

古文：且光真王嗣，当立，季子虽来，不吾废也。 
现代文：况且我是真正的继承人，应当立为国君，季子即使回来，也不会废掉我呀。 
English: Moreover, I am the true heir, and should be installed as the sovereign. Even if Kishi returns, he will not discard me.

古文：专诸曰： 王僚可杀也：母老子弱，而两弟将兵伐楚，楚绝其后。
现代文：专诸说： 王僚是可以杀掉的。母老子弱，两个弟弟带着军队攻打楚国，楚国军队断绝了他们的后路。
English: Zongzhu said: Wangli can be killed. The mother and son are weak, the two younger brothers take the army to attack Chu, and the Chu army cut off their back way.

古文：方今吴外困于楚，而内空无骨鲠之臣，是无如我何。 
现代文：当前吴军在外被楚国围困，而国内没有正直敢言的忠臣。这样王僚还能把我们怎么样呢。 
English: At present, the Wu army is besieged by the state of Chu outside, and there is no loyal subject who dares to speak honestly inside the country. How can the king's retainer take advantage of us like this?

古文：公子光顿首曰： 光之身，子之身也。 
现代文：公子光以头叩地说： 我公子光的身体，也就是您的身体，您身后的事都由我负责了。 
English: He patted her on the head and said, "I am responsible for my son's body, that is, your body, and everything behind you.

古文：四月丙子，光伏甲士于窟室中，而具酒请王僚。王僚使兵陈自宫至光之家，门户阶陛左右，皆王僚之亲戚也。
现代文：这年四月丙子日，公子光在地下室埋伏下身穿铠甲的武士，备办酒席宴请吴王僚，王僚派出卫队，从王宫一直排列到公子光的家里，门户、台阶两旁，都是王僚的亲信。
English: In April of this year, Prince Guang was ambushed in the basement by armor-clad warriors, preparing a banquet for Wu Wangliang. Wangliang sent guards, who lined up from the royal palace to Prince Guang's home. On both sides of the doorway and the steps were Wangliang's close friends.

古文：夹立侍，皆持长铍。
现代文：他们夹道侍立，都举着长矛。
English: They stood side by side, each holding a spear.

古文：酒既酣，公子光详为足疾，入窟室中，使专诸置首鱼炙之腹中而进之。
现代文：喝酒喝到畅快的时候，公子光假装脚有毛病，进入地下室，让专诸把匕首放到烤鱼的肚子里，然后把鱼进献上去。
English: After drinking until he was satisfied, he pretended to have a bad foot and went into the basement, where he asked Zeng Zhu to put the dagger into the belly of the grilled fish, and then presented the fish to him.

古文：既至王前，专诸擘鱼，因以首刺王僚，王僚立死。
现代文：来到王僚跟前，专诸掰开鱼，趁势用匕首刺杀王僚，王僚当时就死了。
English: When he came to Wang Liang, he took advantage of the situation to stab Wang Liang with a dagger. Wang Liang died at that time.

古文：左右亦杀专诸，王人扰乱。
现代文：侍卫人员也杀死了专诸，王僚手下的人一时混乱不堪。
English: The guards also killed Zeng Zhu, and Wang Liang's men were momentarily confused.

古文：公子光出其伏甲以攻王僚之徒。尽灭之，遂自立为王，是为阖闾。
现代文：公子光放出埋伏的武士攻击王僚的部下，全部消灭了他们，于是自立为国君，这就是吴王阖闾。
English: Prince Gu Ziguang unleashed the ambushed warriors to attack the subordinates of the king's colleagues, eliminated them all, and then became the sovereign himself. This is Wu Wang Yao.

古文：阖闾乃封专诸之子以为上卿，
现代文：阖闾于是封专诸的儿子为上卿。
English: Therefore, the sons of Fongzongzhu became Shangye.

古文：其后七十余年而晋有豫让之事。
现代文：此后七十多年，晋国有豫让的事迹。
English: More than seventy years later, the story of Jin's capitulation is well known.

古文：豫让者，晋人也，故尝事范氏及中行氏，而无所知名去而事智伯，智伯甚尊宠之。
现代文：豫让，是晋国人，过去曾经侍奉范氏和中行氏，但是没什么名声。他离开他们去奉事智伯，智伯非常尊重宠幸他。
English: Yu Zhan, a native of Jin, had served the Fan and Zhongxing clans in the past, but had little reputation. He left them to serve Zhibo. Zhibo highly respected and favored him.

古文：及智伯伐赵襄子，赵襄子与韩、魏合谋灭智伯，灭智伯之后而三分其地。
现代文：等到智伯攻打赵襄子时，赵襄子和韩、魏联合谋划灭了智伯；消灭智伯以后，三家分割了他的国土。
English: When Zhibo attacked Zhao Xiangzi, Zhao Xiangzi and Han and Wei jointly plotted to exterminate Zhibo; after eliminating Zhibo, the three families divided his land.

古文：赵襄子最怨智伯，漆其头以为饮器。
现代文：赵襄子最恨智伯，就把他的头盖骨漆成饮具。
English: Zhao Xiangzi hated Zhibo the most, so he painted his cranium into drinking utensils.

古文：豫让遁逃山中，曰： 嗟乎!
现代文：豫让潜逃到山中，说： 唉呀！
English: Yuzang absconded to the mountains, saying: Alas!

古文：士为知己者死，女为说己者容。
现代文：男儿应该为了解自己的人去死，好女子应该为爱慕自己的人梳妆打扮。
English: A man should die for someone who understands him. A good woman should dress for someone who adores her.

古文：今智伯知我，我必为报仇而死，以报智伯，则吾魂魄不愧矣。 
现代文：现在智伯是我的知己，我一定替他报仇，献出生命，来报答智伯，那么我就是死了，魂魄也没有什么可惭愧的了。 
English: Now Zhibo is my confidant, I will definitely avenge him and give my life to repay Zhibo, then I am dead, and my soul has nothing to be ashamed of.

古文：乃变名姓为刑人，入宫涂厕，中挟匕首，欲以刺襄子。
现代文：于是更名改姓，伪装成受过刑的人，进入赵襄子宫中修整厕所，身上藏着匕首，想要用它刺杀赵襄子。
English: So she changed her name, disguised herself as someone who had been punished, entered Zhao Xiang's womb to fix the toilet, and hid a dagger on her body, intending to use it to assassinate Zhao Xiangzi.

古文：襄子如厕，心动，执问涂厕之刑人，则豫让，内持刀兵，曰： 欲为智伯报仇！ 
现代文：赵襄子到厕所去，心一悸动，拘问修整厕所的刑人，才知道是豫让，衣服里面还别着利刃，豫让说： 我要替智伯报仇！ 
English: Zhao Xiangzi went to the toilet, his heart was pounding, he asked the person who was fixing the toilet, only to find out that it was Yu Zhan. There was still a sharp blade in his clothes. Yu Zhan said: I want to avenge Zhi Bo!

古文：左右欲诛之。
现代文：侍卫要杀掉他。
English: The guards want to kill him.

古文：襄子曰： 彼义人也，吾谨避之耳。
现代文：襄子说： 他是义士，我谨慎小心地回避他就是了。
English: Xiangzi said, "He is a righteous man, so I carefully avoided him."

古文：且智伯亡无后，而其臣欲为报仇，此天下之贤人也。 
现代文：况且智伯死后没有继承人，而他的家臣想替他报仇，这是天下的贤人啊。 
English: Moreover, Zhi Bo died without an heir, and his vassals wanted to avenge him. This is a wise man of the world.

古文：卒释去之。
现代文：最后还是把他走了。
English: In the end, they let him go.

古文：居顷之，豫让又漆身为厉，吞炭为哑，使形状不可知，行乞于市。
现代文：过了不久，豫让又把漆涂在身上，使肌肤肿烂，像得了癞疮，吞炭使声音变得嘶哑，使自己的形体相貌不可辨认，沿街讨饭。
English: Soon after, Yu Zhan applied the paint to his body again, making his skin swell and look like he had acne, swallowing charcoal to make his voice hoarse, making his body unrecognizable, and begging for food along the street.

古文：其妻不识也。
现代文：就连他的妻子也不认识他了。
English: Even his wife doesn't know him anymore.

古文：行见其友，其友识之，曰： 汝非豫让邪？ 曰： 我是也。 
现代文：路上遇见他的朋友，辨认出来，说： 你不是豫让吗？ 回答说： 是我。 
English: And meeting a friend of his on the road, he recognized him and said to him, "Are you not a Hebrew?" He answered, "I am."

古文：其友为泣曰： 以子之才，委质而臣事襄子，襄子必近幸子。
现代文：朋友为他流着眼泪说： 凭着您的才能，委身侍奉赵襄子，襄子一定会亲近宠爱您。
English: His friend shed tears for him and said, "With your talent, you have devoted yourself to serving Zhao Xiangzi, and Xiangzi will surely love and cherish you."

古文：近幸子，乃为所欲，顾不易邪？
现代文：亲近宠爱您，您再干您所想干的事，难道不是很容易的吗？
English: Isn't it easy to love you and let you do what you want?

古文：何乃残身苦形，欲以求报襄子，不亦难乎！ 
现代文：何苦自己摧残身体，丑化形貌，想要用这样的办法达到向赵襄子报仇的目的，不是更困难吗？ 
English: How hard it is to destroy one's own body and disfigure one's appearance. Wouldn't it be more difficult to use such a method to achieve the goal of taking revenge on Zhao Xiangzi?

古文：豫让曰： 既已委质臣事人，而求杀之，是怀二心以事其君也。
现代文：豫让说： 托身侍奉人家以后，又要杀掉他，这是怀着异心侍奉他的君主啊。
English: Yu Zhan said: "A monarch who serves others with a different heart and then wants to kill them after serving them selves.

古文：且吾所为者极难耳！然所以为此者，将以愧天下后世之为人臣怀二心以事其君者也。 
现代文：我知道选择这样的做法是非常困难的，可是我之所以选择这样的做法，就是要使天下后世的那些怀着异心侍奉国君的臣子感到惭愧！ 
English: I know that it is very difficult to choose such an approach, but the reason why I chose such an approach is to make those courtiers who serve the sovereign with a different heart feel ashamed in the world to come!

古文：既去，顷之，襄子当出，豫让伏于所当过之桥下。
现代文：豫让说完就走了，不久，襄子正赶上外出，豫让潜藏在他必定经过的桥下。
English: Yuzhang finished speaking and left. Soon, Xiangzi was catching up with going out, and Yuzhang was lurking under the bridge he must have passed.

古文：襄子至桥，马惊，襄子曰： 此必是豫让也。 
现代文：襄子来到桥上，马受惊，襄子说： 这一定是豫让。 
English: Xiangzi came to the bridge, the horse was frightened, Xiangzi said: This must be Yuzhen.

古文：使人问之，果豫让也，于是襄子乃数豫上曰： 子不尝事范、中行氏乎？
现代文：派人去查问，果然是豫让。于是襄子就列举罪过指责他说： 您不是曾经侍奉过范氏、中行氏吗？
English: He sent someone to investigate, and sure enough, it was Yu Zhan. So Xiangzi listed his sins and accused him, saying: "Didn't you once serve the Fan and Zhong Xing clans?

古文：智伯尽灭之，而子不为报仇，而反委质臣于智伯，智伯亦已死矣，而子独何以为之报仇之深也？ 
现代文：智伯把他们都消灭了，而您不替他们报仇，反而托身为智伯的家臣。智伯已经死了，您为什么单单如此急切地为他报仇呢？ 
English: Zhibo wiped them all out, and instead of avenging them, you pretend to be Zhibo's vassal. Zhibo is dead, why are you so eager to avenge him?

古文：豫让曰： 臣事范、中行氏，范、中行氏皆众人遇我，我故众人报之。
现代文：豫让说： 我侍奉范氏、中行氏，他们都把我当作一般人看待，所以我像一般人那样报答他们。
English: Yu Zhan said: I served the Fan clan and the Zhong Xing clan, and they all treated me as an ordinary person, so I repaid them like an ordinary person.

古文：至于智伯，国士遇我，我故国士报之。 
现代文：至于智伯，他把我当作国士看待，所以我就像国士那样报答他。 
English: As for Zhi Bo, he regards me as a statesman, so I repay him like a statesman.

古文：襄子喟然叹息而泣曰： 嗟乎豫子！
现代文：襄子喟然长叹，流着泪说： 唉呀，豫让先生！
English: Xiangzi sighed deeply and said with tears streaming down his face: Alas, Mr. Yuanzhang!

古文：子之为智伯，名既成矣，而寡人赦子，亦已足矣。
现代文：您为智伯报仇，已算成名了；而我宽恕你，也足够了。
English: You have gained a reputation for avenging your brother, and it is enough for me to forgive you.

古文：子其自为计，寡人不复释子！ 
现代文：您该自己作个打算，我不能再放过您了！ 
English: You should make your own plans, I can't let you go!

古文：使兵围之。
现代文：命令士兵团团围住他。
English: Order the soldiers to surround him.

古文：豫让曰： 臣闻明主不掩人之美，而忠臣有死名之义。
现代文：豫让说： 我听说贤明的君主不埋没别人的美名，而忠臣有为美名去死的道理。
English: Yu Zhan said: I have heard that a wise ruler does not bury the good name of others, but a loyal subject has the right to die for the good name.

古文：前君已宽赦臣，天下莫不称君之贤。
现代文：以前您宽恕了我，普天下没有谁不称道您的贤明。
English: You have forgiven me in the past, and there is no one in the world who does not praise your wisdom.

古文：今曰之事，臣固伏诛，然愿请君之衣而击之焉以致报仇之意，则虽死不恨。
现代文：今天的事，我本当受死罪，但我希望能得到您的衣服刺它几下，这样也就达到我报仇的意愿了，那么，即使死了也没有遗恨了。
English: Today's matter, I really suffer the death penalty, but I hope to get your clothes and stab it a few times, so that I can achieve my desire for revenge, then, even if I die, there is no hatred left.

古文：非所敢望也，敢布腹心！ 
现代文：我不敢指望您答应我的要求，我还是冒昧地说出我的心意！ 
English: I dare not hope that you will agree to my request, but I still venture to speak my mind!

古文：于是襄子大义之，乃使使持衣与豫让。
现代文：于是襄子非常赞赏他的侠义，就派人拿着自己的衣裳给豫让。
English: As a result, Xiangzi greatly appreciated his chivalry, and sent someone to take his clothes and give them to Yu.

古文：豫让拔剑三跃而击之，曰： 吾可以下报智伯矣！ 
现代文：豫让拔出宝剑多次跳起来击刺它，说： 我可用以报答智伯于九泉之下了！ 
English: Yu Zheng pulled out his sword and jumped up several times to stab it, saying, "I can use it to repay Zhi Bo under the Nine Springs!"

古文：遂伏剑自杀。
现代文：于是以剑自杀。
English: He then killed himself with a sword.

古文：死之曰赵国志士闻之，皆为涕泣。
现代文：自杀那天，赵国有志之士听到这个消息，都为他哭泣。
English: On the day of his suicide, all the patriots in Zhao heard the news and wept for him.

古文：其后四十余年而轵有聂政之事。
现代文：从这以后又过了四十多年，而轵有聂政的事迹。
English: More than forty years have passed since then, but there has been no sign of a coup d'état.

古文：聂政者，轵深井里人也。
现代文：聂政是轵邑深井里人。
English: Yan Zheng is a native of Fucheng in Yan'an.

古文：杀人避仇，与母、姊如齐，以屠为事。
现代文：他为杀人躲避仇家，和母亲、姐姐逃往齐国，以屠宰牲畜为职业。
English: He fled to Qi Province with his mother and sister to avoid his enemies for murder, and slaughtered livestock for a living.

古文：久之，濮阳严仲子事韩哀侯，与韩相侠累有郤。
现代文：过了很久，濮阳严仲子奉事韩哀侯，和韩国国相侠累结下仇怨。
English: After a long time, Shenyang Yan Zhongzi served as the Korean mourner, and the Korean statesman accumulated a grudge.

古文：严仲子恐诛，亡去，游求人可以报侠累者。
现代文：严仲子怕遭杀害，逃走了。他四处游历，寻访能替他向侠累报仇的人。
English: Fearing that he would be killed, Yan Zhongzi fled, traveling far and wide in search of someone who could avenge his death at the hands of the knights.

古文：至齐，齐人或言聂政勇敢士也，避仇隐于屠者之间。
现代文：到了齐国，齐国有人说聂政是个勇敢之士，因为回避仇人躲藏在屠夫中间。
English: When he arrived in Qi, some people in Qi said that Xizheng was a brave man, because he hid among the butchers to avoid the enemy.

古文：严仲子至门请，数反，然后具酒自畅聂政母前。
现代文：严仲子登门拜访，多次往返，然后备办了宴席，亲自捧杯给聂政的母亲敬酒。
English: Yan Zhongzi visited the door, went back and forth several times, then prepared a banquet, and personally raised a toast to the mother of Yan Zheng.

古文：酒酣，严仲子奉黄金百溢，前为聂政母寿。
现代文：喝到畅快兴浓时，严仲子献上黄金一百镒，到聂政老母跟前祝寿。
English: When he had drunk enough to be merry, Yan Zhongzi presented him with a hundred gold ingots and went to wish his mother a happy birthday.

古文：聂政惊怪其厚，固谢严仲子：严仲子固进，而聂政谢曰： 臣幸有老母，家贫，客游以为狗屠，可以旦夕得甘毳以养亲。亲供养备，不敢当仲子之赐。 
现代文：聂政面对厚礼感到奇怪，坚决谢绝严仲子。严仲子却执意要送，聂政辞谢说： 我幸有老母健在，家里虽贫穷，客居在此，以杀猪宰狗为业，早晚之间买些甘甜松脆的东西奉养老母，老母的供养还算齐备，可不敢接受仲子的赏赐。 
English: Hao Zheng was surprised by the generous gift and firmly declined Yan Zhongzi. Yan Zhongzi insisted on giving it to him, but Hao Zheng declined and said, "I am fortunate to have a healthy mother. Although my family is poor, I live here as a guest. I kill pigs and slaughter dogs for a living, and I buy some sweet and crunchy things to give to my elderly mother in the morning and evening. My mother's support is still sufficient, but I dare not accept the gift from Zhongzi."

古文：严仲子辟人，因为聂政言曰： 臣有仇，而行游诸侯众矣；然至齐，窃闻足下义甚高，故进百金者，将用为大人粗粝之费，得以交足下之骥，岂敢以有求望邪！ 
现代文：严仲子避开别人，趁机对聂政说： 我有仇人，我周游好多诸侯国，都没找到为我报仇的人；但来到齐国，私下听说您很重义气，所以献上百金，将作为你母亲大人一点粗粮的费用，也能够跟您交个朋友，哪里敢有别的索求和指望！ 
English: Yan Zhongzi avoided others and took advantage of the opportunity to say to Yan Zheng: I have an enemy, I have traveled around many states, and have not found anyone to avenge me; but when I came to Qi, I heard in private that you are very righteous, so I will offer a hundred gold, which will be the cost of a little coarse grain for your mother, and I can also make a friend with you, where dare there be other demands and hopes!

古文：聂政曰： 臣所以降志辱身居市井屠者徒幸以养老母；老母在，政身未敢以许人也。 
现代文：聂政说： 我所以使心志卑下，屈辱身分，在这市场上做个屠夫，只是希望借此奉养老母；老母在世，我不敢对别人以身相许。 
English: Hao Zheng said, "That's why I've lowered my spirit and humiliated myself to become a butcher in this market. I just hope to serve my elderly mother in this way. My mother is still alive, so I don't dare to commit myself to others.

古文：严仲子固让，聂政竞不肯受也。
现代文：严仲子执意赠送，聂政却始终不肯接受。
English: Yan Zhongzi insisted on giving it, but Jiang Zemin always refused to accept it.

古文：然严仲子卒备宾主之礼而去。
现代文：但是严仲子终于尽到了宾主相见的礼节，告辞离去。
English: However, Yan Zhongzi finally fulfilled the etiquette of meeting the guest and left.

古文：久之，聂政母死。既已葬，除服，聂政曰： 嗟乎!
现代文：过了很久，聂政的母亲去世，安葬完毕后，除去丧服，聂政说： 唉！
English: After a long time, Yan Zheng's mother passed away. After she was buried, removing her mourning clothes, Yan Zheng said: Alas!

古文：政乃市井之人，鼓刀以屠；而严仲子乃诸侯之卿相也，不远千里，枉车骑而交臣。
现代文：我不过是平民百姓，拿着刀杀猪宰狗，而严仲子是诸侯的卿相，却不远千里，委屈身分来结交我。
English: I'm just a commoner, killing pigs and dogs with a sword, while Yan Zhongzi is the nobleman of the princes, but he's not thousands of miles away, and it's an injustice to befriend me.

古文：臣之所以待之，至浅鲜矣，未有大功可以称者，而严仲子奉百金为亲寿，我虽不受，然是者徒深知政也。
现代文：我待人家的情谊是太浅薄太微不足道了，没有什么大的功劳可以和他对我的恩情相抵，但严仲子却献上百金为我母亲作为祝寿礼，我虽然没有接受，可是这件事足以说明他非常了解我。
English: My friendship with others is too shallow and insignificant, and no great merit can match his kindness to me. However, Yan Zhongzi offered a hundred gold coins as a birthday gift for my mother. Although I did not accept it, this incident is enough to show that he knows me very well.

古文：夫贤者以感忿睚眦之意而亲信穷僻之人，而政独安得嘿然而已乎！
现代文：贤德的人因感愤于一点小的仇恨，把我这个处于偏僻的穷困屠夫视为亲信，我怎么能一味地默不作声，就此完事了呢！
English: How can I be silent, how can I be silent, how can I be silent, how can I be silent, how can I be silent, how can I be silent?

古文：且前曰要政，政徒以老母；老母今以天年终，政将为知己者用。 
现代文：况且以前来邀请我，我只是因为老母在世，才没有答应。而今老母享尽天年，我该要为了解我的人出力了。 
English: Besides, I was invited before, but I didn't accept because my mother was still alive. Now that my mother has reached the end of her days, I have to make an effort for those who know me.

古文：乃遂西至濮阳，见严仲子曰： 前曰所以不许仲子者，徒以亲在；今不幸而母以天年终。
现代文：于是就向西到濮阳，见到严仲子说： 以前所以没答应仲子的邀请，仅仅是因为老母在世；如今不幸老母已享尽天年。
English: So he went west to Fenyang, and when he saw Yan Zhongzi, he said: I didn't accept Zhongzi's invitation before, just because my mother is still alive; unfortunately, my mother has now reached the end of her days.

古文：仲子所欲报仇者为谁？
现代文：仲子要报复的仇人是谁？
English: Who is the enemy Nakako wants to take revenge on?

古文：请得从事焉！ 
现代文：请让我办这件事吧！ 
English: Please let me do this!

古文：严仲子具告曰： 臣之仇韩相侠累，侠累又韩君之季父也，宗族盛多，居处兵卫甚设，臣欲使人刺之，终莫能就。
现代文：严仲子原原本本地告诉他说： 我的仇人是韩国宰相侠累，侠累又是韩国国君的叔父，宗族旺盛，人丁众多，居住的地方士兵防卫严密，我要派人刺杀他，始终也没有得手。
English: Yan Zhongzi had originally told him: My enemy is the Prime Minister of South Korea, Chakirei, Chakirei is also the uncle of the Korean sovereign, the clan is vigorous, there are many people, the soldiers living in the area are closely guarded, I want to send someone to assassinate him, but I have never succeeded.

古文：今足下幸而不弃，请益其车骑壮士可为足下辅翼者。 
现代文：如今承蒙您不嫌弃我，应允下来，请增加车骑壮士作为您的助手。 
English: Now, if you don't mind, I'd like to ask you to add a rider as your assistant.

古文：聂政曰： 韩之与卫，相去中间不甚远，今杀人之相，相又国君之亲，此其势不可以多人，多人不能无生得失，生得失则语泄，语泄是韩举国而与仲子为雠，岂不殆哉！ 
现代文：聂政说： 韩国与卫国，中间距离不太远，如今刺杀人家的宰相，宰相又是国君的亲属，在这种情势下不能去很多人，人多了难免发生意外，发生意外就会走漏消息，走漏消息，那就等于整个韩国的人与您为仇，这难道不是太危险了吗！ 
English: Hao Zheng said, "The distance between South Korea and the motherland is not too far. Now the assassin is the prime minister, and the prime minister is also a relative of the sovereign. Under such circumstances, many people cannot go. If there are more people, an accident will inevitably occur. If an accident occurs, information will be leaked. If information is leaked, it will be tantamount to the whole of South Korea becoming your enemy. Isn't this too dangerous?"

古文：遂谢车骑人徒，聂政乃辞独行。
现代文：于是谢绝车骑人众，辞别严仲子只身去了。
English: As a result, he declined to ride with the riders, and Yan Zhongzi went alone to say goodbye.

古文：杖剑至韩，韩相侠累方坐府上，持兵戟而卫侍者甚众。
现代文：他带着宝剑到韩国都城，韩国宰相侠累正好坐在堂上，持刀荷戟的护卫很多。
English: He took the sword to the capital of South Korea. The prime minister of South Korea was sitting in the hall with a lot of guards holding swords and shields.

古文：聂政直入，上阶刺杀侠累，左右大乱聂政大呼，所击杀者数十人，因自皮面决眼，自屠出肠，遂以死。
现代文：聂政径直而入，走上台阶刺杀侠累，侍从人员大乱。聂政高声大叫，被他击杀的有几十个人，又趁势毁坏自己的面容，挖出眼睛，剖开肚皮，流出肠子，就这样死了。
English: Yan Zheng walked straight in, walked up the steps, stabbed and killed the knight, and the attendants were in chaos. Yan Zheng shouted loudly, there were dozens of people killed by him, and took advantage of the situation to destroy his face, gouge out his eyes, cut open his belly, and drain his intestines, and died like this.

古文：韩取聂政尸暴于市，购问莫知谁子。
现代文：韩国把聂政的尸体陈列在街市上，出赏金查问凶手是谁家的人，没有谁知道。
English: South Korea displayed the body of Kim Jong-il on the street market and offered a bounty to find out who the murderer was. No one knows.

古文：于是韩县购之，有能言杀相侠累者予千金。
现代文：于是韩国悬赏征求，有人能说出杀死宰相侠累的人，赏给千金。
English: As a result, South Korea offered a reward for anyone who could name the person who killed the prime minister.

古文：久之莫知也。
现代文：过了很久，仍没有人知道。
English: After all this time, no one knows.

古文：政姊荣闻人有刺杀韩相者，贼不得，国不知其名姓，暴其尸而县之千金，乃於邑曰： 其是吾弟与?
现代文：聂政的姐姐聂荣听说有人刺杀了韩国的宰相，却不知道凶手到底是谁，全韩国的人也不知他的姓名，陈列着他的尸体，悬赏千金，叫人们辨认，就抽泣着说： 大概是我弟弟吧？
English: When Hae Jung's sister, Hae Ryong, heard that someone had assassinated the Prime Minister of South Korea, she didn't know who the murderer was, and the whole of South Korea didn't know his name. They displayed his corpse, offered a reward of thousands of dollars, and asked people to identify him. She sobbed and said, "It's probably my brother, right?"

古文：嗟乎，严仲子知吾弟! 
现代文：唉呀，严仲子了解我弟弟！ 
English: Alas, Yan Zhongzi understands my brother!

古文：立起，如韩之市，而死者果政也，伏尸哭极哀，曰： 是轵深井里所谓聂政者也。 
现代文：于是马上动身，前往韩国的都城，来到街市，死者果然是聂政，就趴在尸体上痛哭，极为哀伤，说： 这就是所谓轵深井里的聂政啊。 
English: So he set off immediately, headed for the capital of South Korea, came to the street market, and when the dead man turned out to be Kim Jong Il, he lay down on the corpse and wept bitterly, extremely sad, saying: This is the so-called Kim Jong Il in a deep well.

古文：市行者诸众人皆曰： 此人暴虐吾国相，王县购其名姓千金夫人不闻与？
现代文：街上的行人们都说： 这个人残酷地杀害我国宰相，君王悬赏千金询查他的姓名，夫人没听说吗？
English: Pedestrians on the street are saying: This man brutally murdered our prime minister, the king is offering a reward of thousands of dollars to find out his name. Hasn't your wife heard?

古文：何敢来识之也？ 
现代文：怎么敢来认尸啊？ 
English: How dare they come to identify the body?

古文：荣应之曰： 闻之。
现代文：聂荣回答他们说： 我听说了。
English: Gong Rong replied to them, "I heard about it."

古文：然政所以蒙污辱自弃于市贩之间者，为老母幸无恙，妾未嫁也。
现代文：可是聂政所以承受羞辱不惜混在屠猪贩肉的人中间，是因为老母健在，我还没有出嫁。
English: However, it was because my mother was still alive and I was still unmarried that I had to endure the humiliation of mingling with the hog slaughterers and meat traders.

古文：亲既以天年下世，妾已嫁夫，严仲子乃察举吾弟困污之中而交之，泽厚矣，可奈何!
现代文：老母享尽天年去逝后，我已嫁人，严仲子从穷困低贱的处境中把我弟弟挑选出来结交他，恩情深厚，我弟弟还能怎么办呢！
English: After my mother passed away, I have married a man, Yan Zhongzi selected my brother from the poverty-stricken and lowly situation and befriended him, with deep gratitude, what else can my brother do!

古文：士固为知己者死，今乃以妾尚在之故，重自刑以绝从，妾其奈何畏殁身之诛，终灭贤弟之名！ 
现代文：勇士本来应该替知己的人牺牲性命，如今因为我还活在世上的缘故，重重地自行毁坏面容躯体，使人不能辨认，以免牵连别人，我怎么能害怕杀身之祸，永远埋没弟弟的名声呢！ 
English: A brave man ought to have laid down his life for his friend, but now, because I am still alive, I have taken it upon myself to mutilate my face and body beyond recognition, so as not to implicate others. How can I be afraid of killing myself and ruining my brother's reputation forever?

古文：大惊韩市人。
现代文：这整个街市上的人都大为震惊。
English: The whole street was in shock.

古文：乃大呼天者三，卒於邑悲哀而死政之旁。
现代文：聂荣于是高喊三声 天哪 ，终于因为过度哀伤而死在聂政身旁。
English: Huan Rong then shouted three times, "Oh my God," and finally died next to Huan Zheng due to excessive grief.

古文：晋、楚、齐、卫闻之，皆曰： 非独政能也乃其姊亦烈女也。
现代文：晋、楚、齐、卫等国的人听到这个消息，都说： 不单是聂政有能力，就是他姐姐也是烈性女子。
English: When people from Jin, Chu, Qi, Wei and other countries heard this news, they all said: Not only is Ying Zheng capable, but his sister is also a fierce woman.

古文：乡使政诚知其姊无濡忍之志，不重暴骸之难，必绝险千里以列其名，姊弟俱谬于韩市者，亦未必敢以身许严仲子也。严仲子亦可谓知人能得士矣！ 
现代文：假使聂政果真知道他姐姐没有含忍的性格，不顾惜露尸于外的苦难，一定要越过千里的艰难险阻来公开他的姓名，以致姐弟二人一同死在韩国的街市，那他也未必敢对严仲子以身相许。严仲子也可以说是识人，才能够赢得贤士啊！ 
English: If He Zheng really knew that his sister did not have the character of forbearance, regardless of the suffering of exposing the corpse to the outside world, he must cross thousands of miles of hardships and obstacles to disclose his name, so that the two brothers died together in the streets of South Korea, then he would not dare to swear to Yan Zhongzi. Yan Zhongzi can also be said to be a connoisseur, to be able to win a sage!

古文：其后二百二十余年秦有荆轲之事。
现代文：从此以后二百二十多年，秦国有荆轲的事迹。
English: From then on, for more than 220 years, the state of Qin had a record of success.

古文：荆轲者，卫人也。其先乃齐人，徙于卫，卫人谓之庆卿。
现代文：荆轲是卫国人，他的祖先是齐国人，后来迁移到卫国，卫国人称呼他庆卿。
English: Jing Yao was a defender of the country. His ancestors were from Qi and later migrated to the defense of the country. The defenders called him Qing Qing.

古文：而之燕，燕人谓之荆卿。
现代文：到燕国后，燕国人称呼他荆卿。
English: After arriving in Yan Guo, Yan Guo people called him Jing Jing.

古文：荆卿好读书击剑，以术说卫元君，卫元君不用。
现代文：荆卿喜爱读书、击剑，凭借着剑术游说卫元君，卫元君没有任用他。
English: Jingqing loved reading and fencing, and used his swordsmanship to lobby Wei Yuanjun. Wei Yuanjun did not appoint him.

古文：其后秦伐魏，置东郡，徙卫元君之支属于野王。
现代文：此后秦国攻打魏国，设置了东郡，把卫元君的旁支亲属迁移到野王。
English: After that, Qin attacked Wei, set up Dong County, and moved Wei Yuanjun's collateral relatives to Yanwu.

古文：荆轲尝游过榆次，与盖聂论剑，盖聂怒而目之。
现代文：荆轲漫游曾路经榆次，与盖聂谈论剑术，盖聂对他怒目而视。
English: Jing Yao once passed by Gao Yao on the road and talked about swordsmanship with him. Gao Yao glared at him.

古文：荆轲出，人或言复召荆卿。
现代文：荆轲出去以后，有人劝盖聂再把荆轲叫回来。
English: After Jing Yao went out, someone persuaded Gao Yao to call Jing Yao back.

古文：盖曰： 曩者吾与论剑有不称者，吾目之；试往，是宜去，不敢留。 
现代文：盖聂说： 刚才我和他谈论剑术，他谈的有不甚得当的地方，我用眼瞪了他；去找找看吧，我用眼瞪他，他应该走了，不敢再留在这里了。 
English: Gaige said, "Just now, I was talking to him about swordsmanship. There was something inappropriate in his conversation. I stared at him with my eyes. Go look for it. I stared at him with my eyes. He should leave, he doesn't dare to stay here anymore."

古文：使使往之主人，荆卿则已驾而去榆次矣。
现代文：派人到荆轲住处询问房东，荆轲已乘车离开榆次了。
English: A person was sent to Jing Yao's residence to inquire about the landlord. Jing Yao had already left the city by car.

古文：使者还报，盖聂曰： 固去也，吾曩者目摄之！ 
现代文：派去的人回来报告，盖聂说： 本来就该走了，刚才我用眼睛瞪他，他害怕了。 
English: The person who was sent to report back, Gaige said: I should have left, just now I stared at him with my eyes, he was scared.

古文：荆轲游于邯郸，鲁勾践与荆轲博，争道，鲁勾践怒而叱之，荆轲嘿而逃去，遂不复会。
现代文：荆轲漫游邯郸，鲁勾践跟荆轲士博戏，争执博局的路数，鲁勾践发怒呵斥他，荆轲却默无声息地逃走了，于是不再见面。
English: Jing Yao wandered around, Lu Guochun played with Jing Yao's men, arguing about the number of roads in the Expo Bureau. Lu Guochun shouted at him in anger, but Jing Yao silently fled, so they never met again.

古文：荆轲既至燕，爱燕之狗屠及善击筑者高渐离。
现代文：荆轲到燕国以后，与一个以屠狗为业的人及擅长击筑的高渐离交好。
English: After Jing Yao arrived in Yan's country, he became friends with a person who was a dog butcher and Gao Zhen, who was good at construction.

古文：荆轲嗜酒，曰与狗屠及高渐离饮于燕市，酒酣以往，高渐离击筑，荆轲和而歌于市中，相乐也，已而相泣，旁若无人者。
现代文：荆轲特别好饮酒，天天和那个宰狗的屠夫及高渐离在燕市上喝酒，喝得似醉非醉以后，高渐离击筑，荆轲就和着拍节在街市上唱歌，相互娱乐，不一会儿又相互哭泣，身旁像没有人的样子。
English: Jing Yao was particularly good at drinking alcohol. Every day, he would drink with the butcher who slaughtered the dogs and Gao Qianliu at the swallow market. After drinking as if he were drunk, Gao Qianliu would leave the construction site, and Jing Yao would sing along with the music festival in the street market, entertaining each other, and soon they would be crying together, looking like there was no one around.

古文：荆轲虽游于酒人乎，然其为人沉深好书；其所游诸侯，尽与其贤豪长者相结。
现代文：荆轲虽说混在酒徒中，可以他的为人却深沉稳重，喜欢读书；他游历过的诸侯各国，都是与当地贤士豪杰德高望众的人相结交。
English: Although he mingled with drunkards, Jing Yao was a deep-rooted and stable person, and he liked to read. In all the countries he traveled to, he made friends with local sages and people who held Gao Jide in high esteem.

古文：其之燕燕之处士田光先生亦善待之，知其非庸人也。
现代文：他到燕国后，燕国隐士田光先生也友好地对待他，知道他不是平庸的人。
English: After he arrived in Yan Province, Mr. Tian Guang, the hermit of Yan Province, also treated him kindly, knowing that he was not a mediocre person.

古文：居顷之，会燕太子丹质秦亡归燕。
现代文：过了不久，适逢在秦国作人质的燕太子丹逃回燕国。
English: Soon after, Yanzi Dan, who had been held hostage in Qin, escaped back to Yan.

古文：燕太子丹者，故尝质于赵，而秦王政生于赵，其少时与丹骥。
现代文：燕太子丹，过去曾在赵国作人质，而秦王嬴政出生在赵国，他少年时和太子丹要好。
English: Yan Taizi Dan had been a hostage in Zhao in the past, while Qin Wang Yanzheng was born in Zhao. When he was a boy, he was better than Yan Taizi Dan.

古文：及政立为秦王，而丹质于秦。
现代文：等到嬴政被立为秦王，太子丹又到秦国作人质。
English: When Hezheng was established as the King of Qin, Prince Dan went to Qin as a hostage.

古文：秦王之遇燕太子丹不善，故丹怨而亡归。
现代文：秦王对待燕太子不友好，所以太子丹因怨恨而逃归。
English: The King of Qin treated Prince Yan unkindly, so Prince Dan fled home out of spite.

古文：归而求为报秦王者，国小，力不能其后秦出兵山东以伐齐、楚、三晋，稍蚕食诸侯，且至于燕燕君臣皆恐祸之至。
现代文：归来就寻求报复秦王的办法，燕国弱小，力不能及。此后秦国天天出兵山东，攻打齐、楚和三晋，像蚕吃桑叶一样，逐渐地侵吞各国。战火将波及燕国，燕国君臣唯恐大祸临头。
English: When he returned, he sought a way to take revenge on King Qin. Yan's country was weak and could not match his strength. After that, Qin sent troops to Shandong every day to attack Qi, Chu and Sanjin, gradually devouring various countries like a silkworm eating mulberry leaves. The war would spread to Yan's country, and the monarchs and subjects of Yan's country feared a great disaster.

古文：太子丹患之，问其傅鞠武。
现代文：太子丹为此忧虑，请教他的老师鞠武。
English: Prince Dan was worried about this and asked his teacher for advice.

古文：武对曰： 秦地遍天下，威胁韩、魏、赵氏，北有甘泉、谷口之固，南有泾、渭之沃擅巴、汉之饶，右陇、蜀之山，左关、锻之险民众而士厉，兵革有余。
现代文：鞠武回答说： 秦国的土地遍天下，威胁到韩国、魏国、赵国。它北面有甘泉、谷口坚固险要的地势，南面有泾河、渭水流域肥沃的土地，据有富饶的巴郡、汉中地区，右边有陇、蜀崇山峻岭为屏障，左边有殽山、函谷关做要塞，人口众多而士兵训练有素，武器装备绰绰有余。
English: He replied, "The land of Qin stretches all over the world, threatening Korea, Wei, and Zhao. To the north, it has Ganquan and Taniguchi with their rugged and precarious terrain, to the south, it has the fertile land of the Wei River and the Ershui River Basin, the rich Ba County and the Hanzhong region, to the right, it has the steep mountains of Kunlun and Shuzhong Mountain as a barrier, and to the left, it has the fortresses of Kunlun Mountain and Hanzhong Pass. It has a large population, well-trained soldiers, and more than enough weapons and equipment.

古文：意有所出，则长城之南，易水以北，未有所定也，奈何以见陵之怨，欲批其逆鳞哉！  丹曰： 然则何由？ 
现代文：有意图向外扩张，那么长城以南，易水以北就没有安稳的地方了。为什么您还因为被欺侮的怨恨，要去触动秦王的逆鳞呢！ 太子丹说： 既然如此，那么我们怎么办呢？ 
English: If there is an intention to expand outward, then there will be no safe place south of the Great Wall and north of the Yishui River. Why do you still want to touch the Qin King's inverse scale because of the resentment of being bullied! Prince Dan said: Since this is the case, then what should we do?

古文：对曰： 请入图之。 
现代文：鞠武回答说： 让我进一步考虑考虑。 
English: "Let me think about it some more," Marutake replied.

古文：居有间，秦将樊於期得罪于秦王，亡之燕，太子受而舍之。
现代文：过了一些时候，秦将樊於期得罪了秦王，逃到燕国，太子接纳了他，并让他住下来。
English: After some time, Qin Zhaojuan offended King Qin at the right time and fled to Yan Province. The prince accepted him and allowed him to live there.

古文：鞠武谏曰： 不可。
现代文：鞠武规劝说： 不行。
English: Juwu persuasion: Not possible.

古文：夫以秦王之暴而积怒于燕，足为寒心，又况闻樊将军之所在乎？
现代文：秦王本来就很凶暴，再积怒到燕国，这就足以叫人担惊害怕了，又何况他听到樊将军住在这里呢？
English: King Qin was originally very violent, and his anger accumulated to Yan's country, which was enough to frighten people, and what's more, he heard that General Zhai lived here?

古文：是谓 委肉当饿虎之蹊 也，祸必不振矣！
现代文：这叫作 把肉放置在饿虎经过的小路上 啊，祸患一定不可挽救！
English: It's called placing the meat on the path of a hungry tiger Ah, the disaster must be irreparable!

古文：虽有管、晏，不能为之谋也。
现代文：即使有管仲、晏婴，也不能为您出谋划策了。
English: Even if you have a chaperone or a babysitter, they will not be able to make suggestions for you.

古文：愿太子疾遣樊将军入匈奴以灭口。
现代文：希望您赶快送樊将军到匈奴去，以消除秦国攻打我们的借口。
English: I hope that you will quickly send General Zou to the Xiongnu to eliminate the excuse for Qin to attack us.

古文：请西约三晋，南连齐、楚，北购于单于，其后乃可图也。 
现代文：请您向西与三晋结盟，向南连络齐、楚，向北与单于和好，然后就可以想办法对付秦国了。 
English: Please make an alliance with Sanjin in the west, with Qi and Chu in the south, and with Shan in the north, and then you can find a way to deal with Qin.

古文：太子曰： 太傅之计，旷日弥久，心惛然，恐不能须臾。
现代文：太子丹说： 老师的计划，需要的时间太长了，我的心里忧闷烦乱，恐怕连片刻也等不及了。
English: Prince Dan said, "The teacher's plan is taking too long. My heart is sad and upset. I'm afraid I can't wait even a moment.

古文：且非独于此也，夫樊将军穷困于天下，归身于丹，丹终不以迫于强秦而弃所哀怜之交，置之匈奴，是固丹命卒之时也。
现代文：况且并非单单因为这个缘故，樊将军在天下已是穷途末路，投奔于我，我总不能因为迫于强暴的秦国而抛弃我所同情的朋友，把他送到匈奴去这应当是我生命完结的时刻。
English: Moreover, it is not just for this reason that General Zhai's departure from the world is already a dead end, rushing to me. I can't abandon my sympathetic friend and send him to the Xiongnu because I am forced by the violent Qin State. This should be the moment of the end of my life.

古文：愿太傅更虑之。 
现代文：希望老师另考虑别的办法。 
English: I hope the teacher will consider other options.

古文：鞠武曰： 夫行危欲求安，造祸而求福，计浅而怨深，连结一人之后交，不顾国家之大害，此所谓 资怨而助祸 矣。
现代文：鞠武说： 选择危险的行动想求得安全，制造祸患而祈请幸福，计谋浅薄而怨恨深重，为了结交一个新朋友，而不顾国家的大祸患，这就是所说的 积蓄仇怨而助祸患 了。
English: Jiwu said: "Choosing a dangerous action to seek safety, creating a calamity to pray for happiness, having a shallow plot but a deep grudge, and making a new friend regardless of the country's great calamity, this is what is called "accumulating grudges and helping the calamity."

古文：夫以鸿毛燎于炉炭之上，必无事矣。
现代文：拿大雁的羽毛放在炉炭上一下子就烧光了。
English: Take a goose feather and put it on the charcoal and it will burn out in no time.

古文：且以雕鸷之秦，行怨暴之怒，岂足道哉！
现代文：何况是雕鸷一样凶猛的秦国，对燕国发泄仇恨残暴的怒气，难道用得着说吗！
English: What's more, the Qin State, which is as fierce as the carved dragonfly, vented its hatred and violent anger on the Yan State, needless to say!

古文：燕有田光先生，其为人智深而勇沉，可与谋。 
现代文：燕国有位田光先生，他这个人智谋深邃而勇敢沉着，可以和他商量。 
English: Mr. Tian Guang, who is based in Yan Province, is a man of profound wisdom and courage, and we can discuss with him.

古文：太子曰： 愿因太傅而得交于田先生，可乎？ 
现代文：太子说： 希望通过老师而得以结交田先生，可以吗？ 
English: The prince said, "Is it okay if I hope to get to know Mr. Tian through my teacher?"

古文：鞠武曰： 敬诺。 
现代文：鞠武说： 遵命。 
English: Marutake said, "Follow my orders."

古文：出见田先生，道 太子愿图国事于先生也 。田光曰： 敬奉教。 
现代文：鞠武便出去拜会田先生，说： 太子希望跟田先生一同谋划国事。 田光说： 谨领教。 
English: Marutake then went out to visit Mr. Aida and said, "The prince wishes to plan the affairs of state together with Mr. Aida."

古文：乃造焉。
现代文：就前去拜访太子。
English: and went to visit the crown prince.

古文：太子逢迎，却行为导，跪而蔽席。
现代文：太子上前迎接，倒退着走为田光引路，跪下来拂拭座位给田光让坐。
English: The prince stepped forward to greet him, walked backwards to lead the way for Tian Guang, knelt down and wiped the seat to let Tian Guang sit down.

古文：田光坐定，左右无人，太子避席而请曰： 燕秦不两立，愿先生留意也。 
现代文：田光坐稳后，左右没别人，太子离开自己的座位向田光请教说： 燕国与秦国誓不两立，希望先生留意。 
English: After Tian Guang sat down, there was no one else around. The prince left his seat and asked Tian Guang for advice, saying, "Yan and Qin cannot stand side by side. I hope you will pay attention."

古文：田光曰： 臣闻骐骥盛壮之时，一曰而驰千里；至其衰老，驽马先之。
现代文：田光说： 我听说骐骥盛壮的时候，一日可奔驰千里，等到它衰老了，就是劣等马也能跑到它的前边。
English: Tian Guang said: I have heard that when a donkey is strong, it can run a thousand miles a day. When it is old, even an inferior horse can run ahead of it.

古文：今太子闻光盛壮之时，不知臣精已消亡矣。
现代文：如今太子光听说我盛壮之年的情景，却不知道我精力已经衰竭了。
English: Now, Prince Hikaru has heard about my heyday, but he doesn't know that my energy has been depleted.

古文：虽然，光不敢以图国事，所善荆卿可使也。 
现代文：虽然如此，我不能冒昧地谋划国事，我的好朋友荆卿是可以承担这个使命的。 
English: Even so, I can't presume to plan national affairs. My good friend Jing Ching can undertake this mission.

古文：太子曰： 愿因先生得结交于荆卿，可乎？ 田光曰： 敬诺。 
现代文：太子说： 希望能通过先生和荆卿结交，可以吗？ 田光说： 遵命。 
English: The prince said, "I hope I can make friends with Lord Jing through you, is that okay?" Tian Guang said, "Follow my orders."

古文：即起，趋出。
现代文：于是即刻起身，急忙出去了。
English: So he got up at once and hurried out.

古文：太子送至门，戒曰： 丹所报，先生所言者，国之大事也，愿先生勿泄也! 
现代文：太子送到门口，告诫说： 我所讲的，先生所说的，是国家的大事，希望先生不要泄露！ 
English: The crown prince was sent to the door and warned: What I have said, what you have said, is a matter of national importance. I hope you will not reveal it!

古文：田光侥而笑曰： 诺。 
现代文：田光俯下身去笑着说： 是。 
English: Tian Guang leaned down, smiled and said, "Yes."

古文：偻行见荆卿，曰： 光与子相善，燕国莫不知。今太子闻光壮盛之时，不知吾形已不逮也，幸而教之曰 燕秦不两立，愿先生留意也 。
现代文：田光弯腰驼背地走着去见荆卿，说： 我和您彼此要好，燕国没有谁不知道，如今太子听说我盛壮之年时的情景，却不知道我的身体已力不从心了，我荣幸地听他教诲说： 燕国、秦国誓不两立，希望先生留意。 
English: Tian Guang hunched over as he walked to see Jing Jing and said, "You and I should be good to each other. No one in Yan's country does not know. Now the prince has heard about the situation when I was in my prime, but he does not know that my body is no longer strong enough. I am honored to listen to his teachings and say, "Yan's country and Qin's country cannot stand on two legs. I hope you will pay attention."

古文：光窃不自外，言足下于太子也，愿足下过太子于宫。 荆轲曰： 谨奉教。 
现代文：我私下和您不见外，已经把您推荐给太子，希望您前往宫中拜访太子。 荆轲说： 谨领教。 
English: I have already recommended you to the Crown Prince, and I hope you will visit him at the Imperial Palace.Jing Hong said, "I am honored to receive your advice.

古文：田光曰： 吾闻之，长者为行，不使人疑之。
现代文：田光说： 我听说，年长老成的人行事，不能让别人怀疑他。
English: Tian Guang said: I've heard that if a person acts like an old man, he can't make others doubt him.

古文：今太子告光曰 所言者，国之大事也，愿先生勿泄 ，是太子疑光也。
现代文：如今太子告诫我说： 所说的，是国家大事，希望先生不要泄露 ，这是太子怀疑我。
English: Now the crown prince warned me: What I said is a national event, I hope you don't leak it, this is the reason why the crown prince doubts me.

古文：夫为行而使人疑之，非节侠也。 
现代文：一个人行事却让别人怀疑他，他就不算是有节操、讲义气的人。 
English: A person who acts in a way that makes others doubt him is not a man of integrity.

古文：欲自杀以激荆卿，曰： 愿足下急过太子，言光已死，明不言也。 
现代文：他要用自杀来激励荆卿，说： 希望您立即去见太子，就说我已经死了，表明我不会泄露机密。 
English: He wanted to use suicide to motivate Jing Jing, saying: I hope you will go to see the prince immediately, say that I am dead, and show that I will not reveal secrets.

古文：因遂自刎而死。
现代文：因此就刎颈自杀了。
English: So he hanged himself.

古文：荆轲遂见太子，言田光已死，致光之言。
现代文：荆轲于是便去会见太子，告诉他田光已死，转达了田光的话。
English: Jing Jun then went to meet the prince, told him that Tian Guang had died, and conveyed Tian Guang's words.

古文：太子再拜而跪，膝行流涕，有顷而后言曰： 丹所以诫田先生毋言者，欲以成大事之谋也。
现代文：太子拜了两拜跪下去，跪着前进，痛哭流涕，过了一会说： 我所以告诫田先生不要讲，是想使大事的谋划得以成功。
English: The prince bowed twice, knelt down, kneeled forward, wept bitterly, and after a while said: I told Mr. Tian not to speak because I wanted to make the big plan successful.

古文：今田先生以死明不言，岂丹之心哉! 
现代文：如今田先生用死来表明他不会说出去，难道是我的初衷吗！ 
English: Now Mr. Tian is using his death to show that he will not speak out. Wasn't that my original intention?

古文：荆轲坐定，太子避席顿首曰： 田先生不知丹之不肖，使得至前，敢有所道，此天之所以哀燕而不弃其孤也。
现代文：荆轲坐稳，太子离开座位以头叩地说： 田先生不知道我不上进，使我能够到您跟前，不揣冒昧地有所陈述，这是上天哀怜燕国，不抛弃我啊。
English: Jing Yao sat firmly, and the prince left his seat and tapped his head and said: Mr. Tian did not know that I would not go forward, so that I could come to you and make a statement without being presumptuous. This is God's mercy to Yan Guo, do not abandon me.

古文：今秦有贪利之心，而欲不可足也。
现代文：如今秦王有贪利的野心，而他的欲望是不会满足的。
English: Now King Qin has greedy ambitions, and his desires will not be satisfied.

古文：非尽天下之地，臣海内之王者，其意不厌。
现代文：不占尽天下的土地，使各国的君王向他臣服，他的野心是不会满足的。
English: His ambition will not be satisfied until he has filled the whole earth, and the kings of the nations are subject to him.

古文：今秦已虏韩王，尽纳其地。
现代文：如今秦国已俘虏了韩王，占领了他的全部领土。
English: Now Qin has captured King Han and occupied all of his territory.

古文：又举兵南伐楚，北临赵；王翦将数十万之众距漳、邺，而李信出太原、云中。
现代文：他又出动军队向南攻打楚国，向北逼近赵国；王翦率领几十万大军抵达漳水、邺县一带，而李信出兵太原、云中。
English: He also dispatched troops to the south to attack Chu and to the north to approach Zhao; Wang Xi led hundreds of thousands of troops to arrive in the areas of Surabaya and Shixian, while Li Xin sent troops to Taiyuan and Yunchu.

古文：赵不能支秦，必入臣，入臣则祸至燕。
现代文：赵国抵挡不住秦军，一定会向秦国臣服；赵国臣服，那么灾祸就降临到燕国。
English: If Zhao could not resist the Qin army, it would certainly submit to Qin; if Zhao submitted, then the disaster would befall Yan.

古文：燕小弱，数困于兵，今计举国不足以当秦。
现代文：燕国弱小，多次被战争所困扰，如今估计，调动全国的力量也不能够抵挡秦军。
English: Yan's country is weak and small, and has been plagued by war many times. It is now estimated that mobilizing the strength of the whole country will not be able to resist the Qin Army.

古文：诸侯服秦，奠敢合从。丹之私计愚，以为诚得天下之勇士使于秦，窥以重利；秦王贪，其势必得所愿矣。
现代文：诸侯畏服秦国，没有谁敢提倡合纵策政，我私下有个不成熟的计策，认为果真能得到天下的勇士，派往秦国，用重利诱惑秦王，秦王贪婪，其情势一定能达到我们的愿望。
English: The lords were afraid of Qin, and no one dared to advocate a unified policy. Privately, I had an immature strategy, thinking that we could really get the world's warriors to be sent to Qin to tempt the Qin king with heavy profits. The Qin king was greedy, and the situation would definitely meet our wishes.

古文：诚得劫秦王，使悉反诸侯侵地，若曹沫之与齐桓公，则大善矣；则不可，因而刺杀之。
现代文：果真能够劫持秦王，让他全部归还侵占各国的土地，像曹沫劫持齐桓公，那就太好了；如不行，就趁势杀死他。
English: If it is really possible to kidnap King Qin and make him return all the lands he occupied, like Cao Miao kidnapped King Qi, then that would be great; if not, then take advantage of the situation and kill him.

古文：彼秦大将擅兵于外而内有乱，则君臣相疑，以其间诸侯得合从，其破秦必矣。
现代文：他们秦国的大将在国外独揽兵权，而国内出了乱子，那么君臣彼此猜疑，趁此机会，东方各国得以联合起来，就一定能够打败秦国。
English: The generals of Qin monopolized military power abroad, while there was chaos at home, so the monarchs and courtiers were suspicious of each other. Taking this opportunity, if the countries of the East could unite, they would surely be able to defeat Qin.

古文：此丹之上愿，而不知所委命，唯荆卿留意焉。 
现代文：这是我最高的愿望，却不知道把这使命委托给谁，希望荆卿仔细地考虑这件事。 
English: This is my highest aspiration, but I do not know to whom to entrust this mission, and I hope that Jingqing will carefully consider this matter.

古文：久之，荆轲曰： 此国之大事也，臣驽下，恐不足任使。 
现代文：过了好一会儿，荆轲说： 这是国家的大事，我的才能低劣，恐怕不能胜任。 
English: After a while, Jing Ye said, "This is an important matter for the country. My talent is inferior, and I'm afraid I'm not up to the task."

古文：太子前顿首，固请毋让，然后许诺。
现代文：太子上前以头叩地，坚决请求不要推托，而后荆轲答应了。
English: The prince stepped forward, bowed his head to the ground, and firmly asked not to be put off, after which Jing Jun agreed.

古文：于是尊荆卿为上卿，舍上舍。
现代文：当时太子就尊奉荆卿为上卿，住进上等的宾馆。
English: At that time, the prince honored Jingqing as a high-ranking lord and lived in a first-class hotel.

古文：太子曰造门下，供太牢具，异物间进，车骑美女恣荆轲所欲，以顺适其意。
现代文：太子天天到荆轲的住所拜望。供给贵重的饮食，时不时地还献上奇珍异物，车马美女任荆轲随心所欲，以便满足他的心意。
English: The prince visited Jing Yao's residence every day, provided him with precious food, and from time to time presented him with rare and exotic objects. Jing Yao was allowed to have as many chariots, horses, and beautiful women as he wanted in order to satisfy his heart.

古文：久之，荆轲未有行意。
现代文：过了很长一段时间，荆轲仍没有行动的表示。
English: After a long period of time, Jing Tao still did not show any sign of action.

古文：秦将王翦破赵，虏赵王，尽收入其地，进兵北略地至燕南界。
现代文：这时，秦将王翦已经攻破赵国的都城，俘虏了赵王，把赵国的领土全部纳入秦国的版图。大军挺进，向北夺取土地，直到燕国南部边界。
English: At this time, the Qin general Wang Hui had broken through the capital city of Zhao, captured Zhao Wang, and incorporated the entire territory of Zhao into the territory of Qin. The army advanced and seized land to the north, up to the southern border of Yan.

古文：太子丹恐惧，乃请荆轲曰： 秦兵旦暮渡易水，则虽欲长侍足下，岂可得哉! 
现代文：太子丹害怕了，于是请求荆轲说： 秦国军队早晚之间就要横渡易水，那时即使我想要长久地侍奉您，怎么能办得到呢！ 
English: Prince Dan was afraid, so he asked Jing Ye: "The Qin army will cross the Yishui River sooner or later. Even if I wanted to serve you for a long time, how could I do it?

古文：荆轲曰： 微太子言，臣愿谒之。
现代文：荆轲说： 太子就是不说，我也要请求行动了。
English: Jing Yao said, "Even if the prince doesn't say anything, I'm going to ask for action."

古文：今行而毋信，则秦未可亲也。
现代文：现在到秦国去，没有让秦王相信我的东西，那么秦王就不可以接近。
English: Now, if I go to Qin, if I can't get the Qin King to believe in me, then the Qin King can't get close to me.

古文：夫樊将军，秦王购之金千斤，邑万家。
现代文：那樊将军，秦王悬赏黄金千斤、封邑万户来购买他的脑袋。
English: For that general, the Qin King offered a reward of a thousand catties of gold and the fiefdoms of ten thousand households to buy his head.

古文：诚得樊将军首与燕督亢之地图；奉献秦王，秦王必说见臣，臣乃得有以报。 
现代文：果真得到樊将军的脑袋和燕国督亢的地图，献给秦王，秦王一定高兴接见我，这样我才能够有机会报效您。 
English: If I really get the head of General Zou and the map of Yan Guodu, dedicated to the King of Qin, the King of Qin must be pleased to meet me, so that I can have the opportunity to repay you.

古文：太子曰： 樊将军穷困来归丹，丹不忍以己之私而伤长者之意，愿足下更虑之！ 
现代文：太子说： 樊将军到了穷途末路才来投奔我，我不忍心为自己私利而伤害这位长者的心，希望您考虑别的办法吧！ 
English: The prince said, "General Zou came to me when he was at the end of his rope. I can't bear to hurt this old man's heart for my own selfish gain. I hope you can think of another way!"

古文：荆轲知太子不忍，乃遂私见樊於期曰： 秦之遇将军可谓深矣，父母宗族皆为戮没。
现代文：荆轲知道太子不忍心，就自己去见樊于期说： 秦国对待将军，可以说是太狠毒了！您的父母和族人，都被杀死或被收为奴婢。
English: Knowing that the prince couldn't bear it, Jing Tao went to see Yu Yu on his own and said: Qin's treatment of the general can be said to be too cruel! Your parents and people were all killed or taken as slaves.

古文：今闻购将军首金千斤，邑万家，将奈何? 
现代文：现在又听说要用千斤黄金和万户封邑来征求将军的头，您打算怎么办呢？ 
English: Now I hear that they want to use a thousand pounds of gold and ten thousand fiefs to solicit the general's head. What are you going to do?

古文：於期仰天太息流涕曰： 於期每念之，常痛于骨髓，顾计不知所出耳！ 
现代文：樊于期抬头向天叹息，流着泪说： 我樊于期每当想到这些，常常痛入骨髓，只是想不出报仇的办法罢了！ 
English: "Whenever I think about these things, I always feel pain in my bones, but I just can't think of a way to take revenge!" he said with tears streaming down his face.

古文：荆轲曰： 今有一言可以解燕国之患，报将军之仇者，何如? 
现代文：荆轲说： 今天我有一句话可以解除燕国的祸患，为将军报仇雪恨，怎么样？ 
English: Jing Yao said, "Today, I have a sentence that can remove the scourge of Yan's country and avenge the general. How about it?"

古文：於期乃前曰： 为之奈何？ 
现代文：樊于期上前说： 对此该怎么办？ 
English: "What should we do about this?" he said ahead of the deadline.

古文：荆轲曰： 愿得将军之首以献秦王，秦王必喜而见臣，臣左手把其袖，右手攥其匈，然则将军之仇报而燕见陵之愧除矣。
现代文：荆轲说： 希望得到将军的头去献给秦王，秦王必定高兴而接见我。我用左手抓住秦王的衣袖，右手拿匕首击刺他的胸膛，这样，将军的仇恨洗雪了，燕国被欺凌的耻辱也涤除了！
English: Jing Yao said, "I hope to get the general's head to offer to King Qin. King Qin will surely be happy to receive me. I grabbed the sleeve of King Qin's coat with my left hand, and stabbed him in the chest with a dagger with my right hand. In this way, the general's hatred was washed away, and the shame of Yan's country being bullied was also removed!"

古文：将军岂有意乎？ 
现代文：将军还有什么想法吗？ 
English: Does the general have any other ideas?

古文：樊於期偏袒撤挽而进曰： 此臣之日夜切齿腐心也，乃今得闻教! 
现代文：樊于期袒露出一边肩膀，用一只手紧紧地握住另一只手腕，走近荆轲说： 这是我日夜咬牙切齿痛心疾首的事情，今天才能听到您的指教！ 
English: Zou Yuxuan exposed one shoulder, tightly grasped the other wrist with one hand, approached Jing Yao and said: This is what I have been gritting my teeth about day and night, I can only listen to your advice today!

古文：遂自刭。
现代文：樊于期便自杀死了。
English: On the due date, she committed suicide and died.

古文：太子闻之，驰往，伏尸而哭，极哀。
现代文：太子听到这个消息，驰车前往，伏在樊将军尸体上痛哭，极为悲哀。
English: When the prince heard the news, he drove to the spot and wept bitterly over the corpse of General Zou. He was extremely sad.

古文：既已不可奈何，乃遂盛樊於期首函封之。
现代文：已经没有办法了，就把樊于期的头装入匣子中密封起来。
English: There was nothing more to be done, so they put the head into a box and sealed it.

古文：于是太子豫求天下之利匕首，得赵人徐夫人匕首，取之百金，使工以药蟀之。以试人，血濡缕，人无不立死者。
现代文：当时太子已预先寻找天下最锋利的匕首，找到赵国人徐夫人的匕首，花了百金买下它，让工匠用毒水淬它，用人试验，只要见一丝儿血，没有不立刻死的。
English: At that time, the prince had already searched in advance for the sharpest dagger in the world, found the dagger of Mrs. Xu from Zhao, spent a hundred gold to buy it, let the craftsman douse it with poisoned water, and tested it with people. As long as he saw a trace of blood, he would not die immediately.

古文：乃装为遣荆卿。
现代文：于是就准备行装，送荆轲出发。
English: So they prepared to pack up and send Jing Tao on his way.

古文：燕国有勇士秦武阳，年十三，杀人，人不敢忤视。
现代文：燕国有位勇士叫秦舞阳，十三岁上就杀人，别人都不敢正面对着看他。
English: There was a warrior in Yan Province named Qin Muyang who killed people at the age of thirteen. No one dared to look at him directly.

古文：乃令秦武阳为副。
现代文：于是就派秦舞阳作助手。
English: So he sent Qin Muyang as his assistant.

古文：荆轲有所待，欲与俱；其人居远未来，而为治行。
现代文：荆轲等待一个人，打算一道出发；那个人住得很远，还没赶到，而荆轲已替那个人准备好了行装。
English: Jing Yao was waiting for someone and planned to set off together; that person lived far away and had not yet arrived, but Jing Yao had already prepared the luggage for that person.

古文：顷之，未发，太子迟之，疑其改悔，乃复请曰： 曰已尽矣，荆卿岂有意哉？
现代文：又过了些日子，荆轲还没有出发，太子认为他拖延时间，怀疑他反悔，就再次催请说： 日子不多了，荆卿有动身的打算吗？
English: A few more days passed, and Jing Yao had not yet set out. The prince thought he was stalling for time and suspected that he had changed his mind, so he urged him again, saying, "Time is running out. Does Jing Jing have any plans to set out?"

古文：丹请得先遣秦武阳。 
现代文：请允许我派遣秦舞阳先行。 
English: Please allow me to send Qin Muyang ahead.

古文：荆轲怒，叱太子曰： 何太子之遣？
现代文：荆轲发怒，斥责太子说： 太子这样派遣是什么意思？
English: Jing Ye became angry and rebuked the prince, saying, "What do you mean by sending the prince like this?

古文：往而不返者，竖子也!
现代文：只顾去而不顾完成使命回来，那是没出息的小子！
English: To go away and come back without completing his mission, that's a hopeless boy!

古文：且提一匕首入不测之强秦，仆所以留者，待吾客与俱。
现代文：况且是拿一把匕首进入难以测度的强暴的秦国。我所以暂留的原因，是等待另一位朋友同去。
English: Moreover, I took a dagger into the immeasurably violent Qin State. The reason why I stayed for a while was to wait for another friend to go with me.

古文：今太子迟之，请辞决矣！ 
现代文：眼下太子认为我拖延了时间，那就告辞决别吧！ 
English: Now that the crown prince thinks I've delayed things, it's time to say goodbye!

古文：遂发。
现代文：于是就出发了。
English: So they set off.

古文：太子及宾客知其事者，皆白衣冠以送之。
现代文：太子及宾客中知道这件事的，都穿着普通百姓的衣服去送荆轲。
English: The prince and the guests who knew about this all dressed in ordinary people's clothes to send Jing Tao.

古文：至易水之上，既祖，取道，高渐离击筑，荆轲和而歌，为变徵之声，士皆垂泪涕泣。又前而为歌曰： 风萧萧兮易水寒，壮士一去兮不复还！ 
现代文：到易水岸边，饯行以后，上路，高渐离击筑，荆轲和着拍节唱歌，发出苍凉凄惋的声调，送行的人都流泪哭泣，一边向前走一边唱道： 风萧萧兮易水寒，壮士一去兮不复还！ 
English: When they reached the bank of the Yishui River, after walking for a while, they set out on the road. Gao Qian left the construction site, and Jing Bao sang with the beat, emitting a bleak and desolate tone. The people who saw them off shed tears and wept. As they walked forward, they sang: The wind is low, the water is cold, and the strong man is gone, and will not return!

古文：复为羽声伉慨，士皆嗔目，发尽指冠。
现代文：复又发出慷慨激昂的声调，送行的人们怒目圆睁，头发直竖，把帽子都顶起来。
English: Again, there was an impassioned tone, and the send-off people glared, their hair stood on end, and their hats were raised.

古文：于是荆轲就车而去，终已不顾。
现代文：于是荆轲就上车走了，始终连头也不回。
English: So Jing Yao got on the bus and left, never looking back.

古文：遂至秦，持千金之资币物厚遗秦王宠臣中庶子蒙嘉。
现代文：一到秦国，荆轲带着价值千金的礼物，厚赠秦王宠幸的臣子中庶子蒙嘉。
English: Once arriving in Qin, Jing Zhe brought a gift worth thousands of gold, generously presented to Meng Jia, an illegitimate son of a favored vassal of the Qin king.

古文：嘉为先言于秦王曰： 燕王诚振怖大王之威，不敢举兵以逆军吏，愿举国为内臣，比诸侯之列，给贡职如郡县，而得奉守先王之宗庙。
现代文：蒙嘉替荆轲先在秦王面前说： 燕王确实因大王的威严震慑得心惊胆颤，不敢出动军队抗拒大王的将士，情愿全国上下做秦国的臣子，比照其他诸侯国排列其中，纳税尽如同直属郡县职分，使得以奉守先王的宗庙。
English: Meng Jia said in front of King Qin on behalf of Jing Xuan: King Yan was indeed shocked and frightened by the majesty of the great king. He did not dare to send troops to resist the great king's soldiers. He would rather be a Qin state's vassal throughout the country, ranking among other vassal states. He would pay taxes as if he were directly under the county and county posts, so that he could keep the ancestral temple of the former king.

古文：恐惧不敢自陈，谨斩樊於期之头，及献燕督亢之地图函封，燕王拜送于庭，使使以闻大王，唯大王命之。 
现代文：因为慌恐畏惧不敢亲自前来陈述。谨此砍下樊於期的首级并献上燕国督亢地区的地图，装匣密封。燕王还在朝廷上举行了拜送仪式，派出使臣把这种情况禀明大王，敬请大王指示。 
English: Because of panic and fear, he did not dare to come in person to make a statement. I hereby cut off the head of Yan in due time and presented a map of the area of Yan, the governor of Yan, and sealed the box. Yan Wang also held a send-off ceremony at the imperial court, and sent envoys to the king to clarify the situation and respectfully ask the king for instructions.

古文：秦王闻之，大喜，乃朝服，设九宾见燕使者咸阳宫。
现代文：秦王听到这个消息，非常高兴，就穿上了礼服，安排了外交上极为隆重的九宾仪式，在咸阳宫召见燕国的使者。
English: When King Qin heard the news, he was very happy. He put on a ceremonial robe and arranged a very grand diplomatic nine-guest ceremony to summon the envoy of Yan to Xianyang Palace.

古文：荆轲奉樊於期头函，而秦舞阳奉地图柙，以次进。至陛，秦武阳色变振恐，群臣怪之。
现代文：荆轲捧着樊於期的首级，秦舞阳捧着地图匣子，按照正、副使的次序前进，走到殿前台阶下秦舞阳脸色突变，害怕得发抖，大臣们都感到奇怪。
English: Jing Zheng held the head of the imperial eunuch, and Qin Wanyang held the map box. They marched in the order of the first and second envoys. When they reached the front steps of the hall, Qin Wanyang's face suddenly changed, and he was trembling with fear. The ministers were all surprised.

古文：荆轲顾笑武阳，前谢曰： 北蕃蛮夷之鄙人，未尝见天子，故振悃。
现代文：荆轲回头朝秦舞阳笑笑，上前谢罪说： 北方藩属蛮夷之地的粗野人，没有见过天子，所以心惊胆颤。
English: Jing Yao looked back at Qin and Wanyang with a smile, and stepped forward to thank them, saying, "The barbarians of the Northern Domain, who belong to the land of the barbarians, have never seen the Son of Heaven, so their hearts tremble with fear.

古文：愿大王少假借之，使得毕使于前。 
现代文：希望大王稍微宽容他，让他能够在大王面前完成使命。 
English: I hope that the king will be a little tolerant of him and allow him to fulfill his mission in front of the king.

古文：秦王谓轲曰： 取武阳所持地图。 
现代文：秦王对荆轲说： 递上舞阳拿的地图。 
English: Qin Wang said to Jing Yao: Hand over the map of Muyangla.

古文：轲既取图奏之，秦王发图，图穷而匕首见。
现代文：荆轲取过地图献上，秦王展开地图，图卷展到尽头，匕首露出来。
English: Jing Yao took the map and presented it, Qin Wang unfolded the map, the scroll was extended to the end, and the dagger was revealed.

古文：因左手把秦王之袖，而右手持匕首椹之。
现代文：荆轲趁机左手抓住秦王的衣袖，右手拿匕首直刺。
English: Jing Yao took the opportunity to grab Qin Wang's sleeve with his left hand and stab him with a dagger with his right hand.

古文：未至身，秦王惊，自引而起，袖绝。
现代文：未近身秦王大惊，自己抽身跳起，衣袖挣断。
English: Qin Wang was so shocked that he jumped up and his sleeves were torn off.

古文：拔剑，剑长，操其室。
现代文：慌忙抽剑，剑长，只是抓住剑鞘。
English: A hasty drawing of the sword, the sword is long, just grab the scabbard.

古文：时惶急，剑坚，故不可立拔。
现代文：一时惊慌急迫，剑又套得很紧，所以不能立刻拔出。
English: In a moment of panic and urgency, the sword was tightly fastened, so it could not be pulled out immediately.

古文：荆轲逐秦王，秦王环柱而走。
现代文：荆轲追赶秦王，秦王绕柱奔跑。
English: The cormorant chases the king of Qin, and the king of Qin runs around the pillar.

古文：群臣皆愕，卒起不意，尽失其度。
现代文：大臣们吓得发呆，突然发生意外事变，大家都失去常态。
English: The ministers were in a daze of fear, an unexpected event suddenly occurred, and everyone lost their normal state.

古文：而秦法，群臣侍殿上者不得持尺寸之兵；诸郎中执兵皆陈殿下，非有诏召不得上。
现代文：而秦国的法律规定，殿上侍从大臣不允许携带任何兵器；各位侍卫武官也只能拿着武器都依序守卫在殿外，没有皇帝的命令，不准进殿。
English: According to the laws of Qin, the attendants and ministers of the imperial court were not allowed to carry any weapons. The attendants and military attachés were also only allowed to guard the outside of the imperial court with weapons. They were not allowed to enter the imperial court without the emperor's order.

古文：方急时，不及召下兵，以故荆轲乃逐秦王。
现代文：正当危急时刻，来不及传唤下边的侍卫官兵，因此荆轲能够追赶秦王。
English: At the critical moment, it was too late to summon the guards and soldiers below, so Jing Yi was able to catch up with King Qin.

古文：而卒惶急，无以击轲，而以手共搏之。
现代文：仓促之间，惊慌急迫，没有用来攻击荆轲的武器，只能赤手空拳和荆轲搏击。
English: Between haste, panic and urgency, there is no weapon to attack the wren, only the bare hands and the wren fight.

古文：是时侍医夏无且以其所奉药囊提荆轲也。
现代文：这时，侍从医官夏无且用他所捧的药袋投击荆轲。
English: At this time, the attendant of the medical officer Xia Muzhuang used the medicine bag he was holding to hit Jing Yao.

古文：秦王方环柱走，卒惶急，不知所为，左右乃曰： 王负剑！ 
现代文：正当秦王围着柱子跑，仓猝慌急，不知如何是好的时候，侍从们喊道： 大王，把剑推到背后！ 
English: Just as King Qin was running around the pillar, panicking and not knowing what to do, his attendants called out, "Great King, put your sword behind your back!"

古文：负剑，遂拔以击荆轲断其左股。
现代文：秦王把剑推到背后，才拔出宝剑攻击荆轲，砍断他的左腿。
English: King Qin pushed the sword behind his back, and then pulled out his sword to attack Jing Yao, cutting off his left leg.

古文：荆轲废，乃引其首以摘秦王，不中，中桐柱。
现代文：荆轲残废，就举起他的匕首直接投刺秦王，没有击中，却击中了铜柱。
English: When he was crippled, he raised his dagger and directly stabbed King Qin. He didn't hit him, but he did hit the bronze pillar.

古文：秦王复击轲，轲被八创。
现代文：秦王接连攻击荆轲，荆轲被刺伤八处。
English: Qin Wang attacked Jing Yao one after another. Jing Yao was stabbed eight times.

古文：轲自知事不就，倚柱而笑箕踞以骂曰： 事所以不成者，以欲生劫之，必得约契以报太子也。 
现代文：荆轲自知大事不能成功了，就倚在柱子上大笑，张开两腿像簸箕一样坐在地上骂道： 大事之所以没能成功，是因为我想活捉你，迫使你订立归还诸侯们土地的契约回报太子。 
English: Knowing that the great undertaking could not succeed, Jing Yao leaned on the pillar and laughed loudly. He opened his legs and sat on the ground like a grasshopper and cursed: The reason why the great undertaking could not succeed was because I wanted to capture you alive and force you to sign a contract to return the land to the princes in return for the crown prince.

古文：于是左右既前杀轲，秦王不怡者良久。
现代文：这时侍卫们冲上前来杀死荆轲，而秦王也不高兴了好一会儿。
English: At this time, the attendants rushed forward to kill Jing Tao, and King Qin was not happy for a while.

古文：已而论功，赏群臣及当坐者各有差，而赐夏无且黄金二百溢，曰： 无且爱我，乃以药囊提荆轲也。 
现代文：过后评论功过，赏赐群臣及处置当办罪的官员都各有差别。赐给夏无且黄金二百镒，说： 无且爱我，才用药袋投击荆轲啊。 
English: Afterward, he commented on the merits and demerits, and there were differences in the rewards given to the ministers and the officials who dealt with the crimes to be dealt with. He gave Xia Mujia 200 gold ingots and said, "Mujia loved me, so he used a medicine bag to hit Jing Mujia."

古文：于是秦王大怒，益发兵诣赵，诏王翦军以伐燕。十月而拔蓟城。
现代文：于是秦王大发雷霆，增派军队前往赵国，命令王翦的军队去攻打燕国，十月攻克了蓟城。
English: As a result, King Qin flew into a rage, dispatched additional troops to Zhao, and ordered Wang Yao's troops to attack Yan. In October, they conquered Lucheng.

古文：燕王喜、太子丹等尽率其精兵东保于辽东。
现代文：燕王喜、太子丹等率领着全部精锐部队向东退守辽东。
English: Yan Wangxi, Prince Dan and others led all the elite troops to retreat eastward to defend Liaodong.

古文：秦将李信追击燕王急，代王嘉乃遗燕王喜书曰： 秦所以尤追燕急者，以太子丹故也。
现代文：秦将李信紧紧地追击燕王，代王嘉就写信给燕王喜说： 秦军之所以追击燕军特别急迫，是因为太子丹的缘故。
English: Li Xin, the Qin general, was in hot pursuit of Yan Wang, and Wang Jia, acting on his behalf, wrote to Yan Wangxi, saying: The reason why the Qin army was in such a hurry to pursue the Yan army was because of Prince Dan.

古文：今王诚杀丹献之秦王，秦王必解，而社稷幸得血食。 
现代文：现在您如果杀掉太子丹，把他的人头献给秦王，一定会得到秦王宽恕，而社稷或许也侥幸得到祭祀。 
English: Now, if you kill the Crown Prince Dan and offer his head to the King of Qin, you will certainly receive the King of Qin's forgiveness, and perhaps you will also be lucky enough to receive a sacrificial offering.

古文：其后李信追丹，丹匿衍水中，燕王乃使使斩太子丹，欲献之秦。
现代文：此后李信率军追赶太子丹，太子丹隐藏在衍水河中，燕王就派使者杀了太子丹，准备把他的人头献给秦王。
English: After that, Li Xun led the army to chase after Prince Dan. Prince Dan was hidden in the river, and King Yan sent an envoy to kill Prince Dan and prepare to offer his head to King Qin.

古文：秦复进兵攻之。
现代文：秦王又进军攻打燕国。
English: King Qin marched into and attacked Yan.

古文：后五年，秦卒灭燕，虏燕王喜。
现代文：此后五年，秦国终于灭掉了燕国，俘虏了燕王喜。
English: Five years later, Qin finally eliminated Yan and captured Yan Wangxi.

古文：其明年，秦并天下，立号为皇帝。
现代文：第二年，秦王吞并了天下，立号为皇帝。
English: The following year, King Qin annexed the whole country and assumed the title of emperor.

古文：于是秦逐太子丹、荆轲之客，皆亡。
现代文：于是通辑太子丹和荆轲的门客，门客们都潜逃了。
English: As a result, the clients of Tongzhi Prince Dan and Jingyao, the clients, all absconded.

古文：高渐离变名姓为人庸保，匿作于宋子。
现代文：高渐离更名改姓给人家当酒保，隐藏在宋子这个地方作工。
English: Gao Jianli changed his name and surname to become a bartender, working hidden in Songzi.

古文：久之，作苦，闻其家堂上客击筑，傍惶不能去。
现代文：时间长了，觉得很劳累，听到主人家堂上有客人击筑，走来走去舍不得离开。
English: The time was long, I felt very tired, I heard that there were guests in the master's house, and I was reluctant to leave.

古文：每出言曰： 彼有善有不善。 
现代文：常常张口就说： 那筑的声调有好的地方，也有不好的地方。 
English: He would often open his mouth and say, "There are good parts and bad parts to Natsuki's voice.

古文：从者以告其主，曰： 彼庸乃知音，窃言是非。 
现代文：侍候的人把高渐离的话告诉主人，说： 那个庸工懂得音乐，私下说是道非的。 
English: The waiter relayed Gao's words to his host, saying: "That mediocre worker knows music, and he said it was wrong in private.

古文：家丈人召使前击筑，一坐称善，赐酒。
现代文：家主人叫高渐离到堂前击筑，满座宾客都说他击得好，赏给他酒喝。
English: The owner of the house told Gao Qianli to hit in front of the hall, and all the guests said that he hit well and gave him wine to drink.

古文：而高渐离念久隐畏约无穷时，乃退。出其装匣中筑与其善衣，更容貌而前。举坐客皆惊，下与抗礼，以为上客。
现代文：高渐离考虑到长久他隐姓埋名，担惊受怕地躲藏下去没有尽头，便退下堂来，把自己的筑和衣裳从行装匣子里拿出来，改装整容来到堂前，满座宾客大吃一惊，离开座位用平等的礼节接待他，尊为上宾。
English: Gao Zhanyuan, considering that he had been hiding his name for a long time and was scared and frightened, retreated down the hall, took out his clothes and clothes from the packing box, and came to the front of the hall for a face-lift. All the guests were surprised and left their seats to receive him with equal courtesy, honoring him as the guest of honor.

古文：使击筑而歌，客无不流涕而去者。
现代文：请他击筑唱歌，宾客们听了，没有不被感动得流着泪而离去的。
English: Asking him to break into song, the guests listened and were moved to tears as they left.

古文：宋子传客之，闻于秦始皇。
现代文：宋子城里的人轮流请他去做客，这消息被秦始皇听到。
English: People in Song Zicheng took turns to invite him to be a guest, and this news was heard by Qin Shi Huang.

古文：秦始皇召见，人有识者，乃曰： 高渐离也。 
现代文：秦始皇召令进见，有认识他的人，就说： 这是高渐离。 
English: Qin Shi Huang called for an inspection, and those who knew him said, "This is Gao Qianlian.

古文：秦皇帝惜其善击筑，重赦之，乃嚯其目。
现代文：秦始皇怜惜他擅长击筑，特别赦免了他的死罪。
English: Qin Shihuang took pity on him because he was good at building, and especially pardoned his capital crime.

古文：使击筑，未尝不称善。
现代文：于是薰瞎了他的眼睛，让他击筑，没有一次不说好。
English: So I blindfolded him and made him do it, and not once did he say no.

古文：稍益近之，高渐离乃以铅置筑中。复进得近，举筑朴秦皇帝，不中。
现代文：渐渐地更加接近秦始皇。高渐离便把铅放进筑中，再进宫击筑靠近时，举筑撞击秦始皇，没有击中。
English: Gradually getting closer to Qin Shihuang. Gao Xuanliang put the lead into the building, and when he entered the palace and hit the building, the building hit Qin Shihuang, but did not hit.

古文：于是遂诛高渐离，终身不复近诸侯之人。
现代文：于是秦始皇就杀了高渐离。终身不敢再接近从前东方六国的人了。
English: As a result, Qin Shi Huang killed Gao Zhanyuan. He never dared to get close to the former Six Kingdoms of the East again.

古文：鲁勾践已闻荆轲之刺秦王，私曰： 嗟乎，惜哉其不讲于刺剑之术也!甚矣吾不知人也!
现代文：鲁句践听到荆轲行刺秦王的事，私下说： 唉！太可惜啦，他不讲究刺剑的技术啊，我太不了解这个人了！
English: Lu Qutian heard about Jing Xuan's stabbing of King Qin, and said privately: Alas! What a pity, he didn't pay attention to the technique of stabbing. I don't know this man very well!

古文：曩者吾叱之，彼乃以我为非人也！ 
现代文：过去我呵斥他，他就以为我不是同路人了。 
English: I used to yell at him and he thought I wasn't a fellow traveler.

古文：太史公曰：世言荆轲，其称太子丹之命， 天雨粟，马生角 也，太过。
现代文：太史公说：社会上谈论荆轲，当说到太子丹的命运时，说什么 天上像下雨一样落下粮食来，马头长出角来！ 这太过分了。
English: Taishigong said, "In society, people talk about Jing Zhuang, but when they talk about the fate of Prince Dan, they talk about grain falling from the sky like rain and horses' heads sprouting horns! This is too much.

古文：又言荆轲伤秦王，皆非也。
现代文：又说荆轲刺伤了秦王，这都不是事实。
English: It was also said that Jingyao stabbed King Qin, but this was not true.

古文：始公孙季功、董生与夏无且游，具知其事，为余道之如是。
现代文：当初公孙季功、董生和夏无且交游，都知道这件事，他们告诉我的就像我记载的。
English: At the beginning, Gongsun Qigong, Dongsheng and Xia Muxing all knew about this, and they told me just as I have recorded.

古文：自曹沫至荆轲五人，此其义或成或不成，然其立意较然，不欺其志，名垂后世，岂妄也哉！
现代文：从曹沫到荆轲五个人，他们的侠义之举有的成功，有的不成功，但他们的志向意图都很清楚明朗，都没有违背自己的良心，名声流传到后代，这难道是虚妄的吗！
English: The five people from Cao Mo to Jing Yao, some of their chivalrous deeds are successful, some are not successful, but their aspirations and intentions are very clear, they have not violated their conscience, and their reputation has been passed down to future generations. Is this false?

