古文：胜疏，盈胜虚，径胜行，疾胜徐，众胜寡，佚胜劳。
现代文：兵力集中胜过兵力分散，实力雄厚胜过薄弱虚空，走捷径进军胜过走大道，行动迅速胜过行动迟缓，兵力众多胜过兵力少的，部队安逸状态下作战胜过疲劳作战。
English: Concentration of forces is better than dispersion of forces, strength is better than weakness, shortcut is better than avenue, fast action is better than slow action, large forces are better than small forces, and troops are better at fighting when they are comfortable than when they are tired.

古文：积故积之，疏故疏之，盈故盈之，虚之，行故行之，疾故疾之，之，寡故寡之，佚故佚之，劳故劳之。
现代文：所以，兵力该集中就集中，该分散就分散，该雄厚就雄厚，该薄弱就薄弱，该走捷径就走捷径，该走大道就走大道，该迅速就迅速，该迟缓就迟缓，应该兵力多就增加兵员，应该兵力少就减少兵员，该安逸就安逸，该疲劳就以疲劳对战。
English: Therefore, the concentration of the concentration is the concentration, the dispersion is the dispersion, the strength is the strength, the weakness is the weakness, the shortcut is the shortcut, the avenue is the avenue, the swiftness is the swiftness, the slowness is the slowness, the more troops are the more troops, the less troops are the less troops, the ease is the ease, the fatigue is the fatigue.

古文：积疏相为变，盈虚变，疾徐相为变，众寡相为变。毋以积当积，毋以疏当疏，毋以盈当盈，毋以虚当虚，毋以疾当疾，毋以徐当徐，毋以众当众，毋以寡当寡，毋以佚当佚，毋以劳当劳。
现代文：部署作战时，兵力集中与兵力分散可以相互转变，实力雄厚与实力薄弱可以相互转变，走捷径和走大道可以相互转变，行动迅速和行动迟缓可以相互转变，兵力众多和兵力微少可以相互转变，安逸和疲劳可以相互转变。作战时千万不要以集中对战集中，不要以分散对战分散，不要以雄厚对战雄厚，不要以薄弱对战薄弱，不要以迅速对战迅速，不要以迟缓对战迟缓，不要以兵力众多对战兵力众多，不要以兵力微少对战兵力微少，不要以安逸之兵对战安逸之兵，不要以疲劳之师对战疲劳之师。
English: When deploying for combat, concentration of forces and dispersion of forces can be mutually transformed, strength and weakness can be mutually transformed, taking shortcuts and taking the high road can be mutually transformed, swift action and slow action can be mutually transformed, large forces and small forces can be mutually transformed, and comfort and fatigue can be mutually transformed. In combat, do not fight with concentration against concentration, do not fight with dispersion against dispersion, do not fight with strength against strength, do not fight with weakness against weakness, do not fight with speed against speed, do not fight with delay against delay, do not fight with large forces against large forces, do not fight with small forces against small forces, do not fight with comfort against

古文：积疏相当，盈虚相相当，佚劳相当。敌积故可疏，盈故可虚，径故可行，疾。
现代文：正确的做法应当是：以集中对战分散，以雄厚对战薄弱，以走捷径对战走大道，以迅速出兵对战行动迟缓，以兵力众多对战兵力微少，以安逸之师对战疲劳之兵。
English: The correct approach should be as follows: to fight with concentration against dispersion, to fight with strength against weakness, to fight with shortcuts against taking the high road, to fight with rapid dispatch against slowness of action, to fight with a large number of troops against a small number of troops, and to fight with a comfortable division against tired soldiers.

