古文：陈祐陈祐，一名天祐，字庆甫，赵州宁晋人，世业农。
现代文：陈祐，一名天祐，字庆甫，赵州宁晋人，其家世代以农为业。
English: Chen Yu, also known as Tian Yu, Qing Fu and Zhaozhou Ning Jin, has been a farmer for generations.

古文：祖忠，博究经史，乡党皆尊而师之，既殁，门人谥曰茂行先生。
现代文：祖父陈忠，精通经史，乡里皆尊他为师，死后，其学生谥曰 茂行先生 。
English: Grandfather Chen Zhong, who was well versed in the history of scripture, was respected as a teacher in the village. After his death, his student was named Mr. Mao Xing.

古文：祐少好学，家贫，母张氏尝剪发易书使读之，长遂博通经史。
现代文：祐自幼好学，家贫，母亲张氏曾剪发卖钱，为他买书。长大博通经史。
English: Yu has been eager to learn since he was a child. His family was poor, and his mother, Zhang, used to cut his hair and sell the money to buy books for him. He grew up with a broad knowledge of history.

古文：时诸王得自辟官属，岁癸丑，穆王府署祐为其府尚书，赐其父母银十铤、锦衣一袭。
现代文：当时诸王可自任官属，宪宗三年，穆王府任祐为该府尚书，赐其父母银十铤、锦衣一套。
English: At that time, kings were allowed to appoint their own officials, and three years after the establishment of the Confucianism, the Mu King's Palace appointed him as the official of the palace, and gave his parents ten pieces of silver and a set of brocade clothes.

古文：王既分土于陕、洛，表祐为河南府总管。
现代文：穆王的封藩地在陕、洛，任祐为河南总管。
English: Mu Wang's fiefdoms were in Shaanxi and Luo, and he appointed Yu as the Henan governor.

古文：下车之日，首礼金季名士李国维、杨杲、李微、薛玄，咨访治道，商议古今，奏免征西军数百家及椒竹诸税、粮料等钱，又上便民二十余事，朝廷皆从之。
现代文：他去上任那天，首先去拜访金末名士李国维、杨杲、李微、薛玄，向他们求教治世之道。他又奏请免征西军数百家的各种赋税，提出二十余件有利于人民的事，请朝廷施行。
English: On the day he took office, he first went to visit Li Guowei, Yang Hui, Li Wei and Xue Xuan, famous figures in the late Qing dynasty, and asked them for advice on how to rule the world. He also requested that hundreds of Western troops be exempted from all kinds of taxes, and proposed more than 20 things that were beneficial to the people, and asked the court to implement them.

古文：世祖即位，分陕、洛为河南西路。
现代文：这些都得到朝廷的采纳。世祖即位，将陕、洛地区划为河南西路。
English: These were all adopted by the imperial court. When the founder of the dynasty ascended the throne, he designated the regions of Shaanxi and Luo as the West Road of Henan.

古文：中统元年，真除祐为总管。
现代文：中统元年，任命祐为河南西路总管。
English: In the first year of China's unification, Yu was appointed as the general manager of Henan West Road.

古文：时州县官以未给俸，多贪暴，祐独以清慎见称，在官八年，如始至之日。
现代文：当时州县官吏因为未给俸禄，多贪婪暴虐，而唯有祐以清廉著称，在此为官八年，始终如一。
English: At that time, because the state and county officials did not give a salary, they were greedy and tyrannical, and only Yu was known for his integrity. He was an official here for eight years, and remained consistent.

古文：至元二年，调官法行，改南京路治中。
现代文：至元二年，调任南京治中。
English: In the 2nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was transferred to Nanjing Jizhong.

古文：适东方大蝗，徐、邳尤甚，责捕至急。
现代文：河南东部发生蝗灾，以徐州、邳州尤为严重，官府令百姓捕捉。
English: Locust plagues occurred in eastern Henan, with Xuzhou and Ganzhou being particularly serious, and the government ordered people to catch them.

古文：祐部民丁数万人至其地，谓左右曰： 捕蝗虑其伤稼也，今蝗虽盛，而谷已熟，不如令早刈之，庶力小而有得。 或以事涉专擅，不可，祐曰： 救民获罪，亦所甘心。 
现代文：祐到灾区视察后提出： 捕蝗恐伤庄稼，如今蝗虫虽多，但谷已熟，不如早开镰收割，可省捕蝗的劳力。 有人说请示上级，不可擅自做主。祐说： 为救民而获罪，我也甘心。 
English: After inspecting the disaster area, Yu said, "Catching locusts is afraid of damaging crops. Although there are many locusts now, the valley is already ripe. It is better to open the plow early and harvest, which can save the labor of catching locusts. Some people say that you should ask your superiors for instructions, and you should not make decisions without permission." Yu said, "I am willing to be punished for saving the people."

古文：即谕之使散去，两州之民皆赖焉。三年，朝廷以祐降官无名，乃赐虎符，授嘉议大夫、卫辉路总管。
现代文：即令捕蝗的人回去收割。至元三年，朝廷赐祐虎符，授嘉议大夫、卫辉路总管。卫辉是四方交通必经之地，一向难以统制。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court awarded Yuzhuafu, a doctor of medicine, and the head of Weihui Road. Weihui is a place where four-way traffic must pass, and it has always been difficult to control.

古文：卫当四方之冲，号为难治，祐申明法令，创立孔子庙，修比干墓，且请于朝著于祀典。
现代文：祐到任后，申明法令，建立孔子庙，修比干墓，进行祭祀。他离任后，这里的百姓为他立碑颂德。
English: After Yu came to office, he issued a decree to establish a Confucius temple, a tomb for Confucius, and to hold religious services. After he left office, the people here erected a monument in his honor.

古文：及去官，民为立碑颂德。尝上书世祖，言树太平之本有三：一曰太子国本，建立宜早；二曰中书政本，责成宜专；三曰人材治本，选举宜审。
现代文：他曾上书世祖，提出创立太平盛世的 三本 ：一为太子是国本，应早立太子；二为中书省是行政之本，应责成中书省专心于政务；三曰人材是治国之本，应慎重地选拔人材。
English: He once wrote to the founder of the dynasty, proposing three principles for the establishment of a prosperous Taiping dynasty: First, the crown prince is the national principle, and the crown prince should be established early; second, the central government is the administrative principle, and the central government should be instructed to concentrate on government affairs; third, human resources are the principle of governing the country, and human resources should be carefully selected.

古文：事虽未能尽行，时论称之。
现代文：这些意见虽未完全被采纳，但受到当时人的称赞。
English: Although these ideas were not fully adopted, they were praised by the people of the time.

古文：六年，置提刑按察司，首以祐为山东东西道提刑按察使。
现代文：至元六年，设置提刑按察司，首先任命祐为山东东西道提刑按察使。
English: In the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Criminal Investigation Department was set up, and Yu was first appointed as the Criminal Investigation Commissioner of Shandong East and West.

古文：时中书、尚书二省并立，世祖厌其烦，欲合为一，集大臣杂议之，祐还朝，特命预其议。
现代文：这时，中书、尚书两省并立，世祖打算把二者合而为一，召集大臣共同讨论。祐刚回朝，就特命他参议其事。
English: At this time, the provinces of Zhongshu and Shangshu were established side by side, and the ancestor planned to combine the two into one and convene the ministers to discuss it together. As soon as Yu returned to the imperial court, he was specially ordered to consult on the matter.

古文：阿合马为尚书平章政事，欲奏升中书右丞相安童为太师，因罢中书省，惧祐有异议，许进祐为尚书参知政事以啖之。
现代文：阿合马为尚书省平章政事，欲奏请升中书右丞相安童为太师，实际上是要夺中书省的权力，却又怕祐反对，因而企图以进祐为尚书省参知政事的官职来拉拢他。
English: Ahama was a member of the government of Pingzhang in Shangshu Province, and he wanted to play the role of asking Ando, the Minister of the Right of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of the Central Government of

古文：及入议，祐极言中书政本，祖宗所立，不可罢；三公古官，今徒存其虚位，未须设。
现代文：在讨论中，祐极力主张中书省为行政之本，是祖宗所创立的，不可废止；三公本为古代官制，今徒有虚位，不必设。
English: During the discussion, Yu strongly advocated that the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy is the administrative foundation, which was founded by the ancestors and cannot be abolished; the three public books are the ancient official system, and there is no need to establish them now.

古文：事遂罢。
现代文：废中书省的事就此结束。
English: This is the end of the matter of the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：阿合马怒其忤己，除祐佥中兴等路行尚书省事。
现代文：阿合马恼怒祐违反了他的意图，把他调出京外任佥中兴路行尚书省事。
English: In violation of his intention, Ahama Yan Ranyu transferred him from the Beijing Foreign Affairs Office to the Zhongxing Road Office.

古文：西凉隶永昌王府，其达鲁花赤及总管为人诬构，家各百余口，王欲悉致之法，祐力辨其冤。
现代文：西凉隶属于永昌王府，该地达鲁花赤及总管为人诬陷，王欲逮捕法办，祐竭力为他们申辩。
English: Xiliang is under the jurisdiction of the Yongchang Royal Palace. Daruhana Chia and the general manager of this place were framed. Wang wanted to arrest the legal department and tried his best to defend them.

古文：吏多震慑失措，祐因谓曰： 何必若是！
现代文：王虽大怒，而祐的辩护更强，王终于醒悟。二人皆免罪，认为祐是他们 再生父母 。
English: Although Wang was furious, Yu's defense was stronger, and Wang finally came to his senses. Both of them were exonerated, believing that Yu was their reincarnated parent.

古文：前为盗跖，今为颜子，吾以颜子待之；前为颜子，今为盗跖，吾以盗跖待之。 
现代文：朝廷大举伐宋，派祐征调军队，山东百姓多逃避，闻祐来，都出来应征。十三年，授祐为南京总管兼开封府尹，官吏多惊慌失措。祐对他们说： 何必如此惊慌！你们以前为盗跖，而今为颜渊，我就把你们当好人对待；若前为颜渊，而今为盗跖，我就会把你们当盗贼对待。 
English: In the thirteenth year, when Yu Yu was appointed as the governor of Nanjing and opened the imperial capital, many officials panicked. Yu said to them, "Why should you be so panicked? You were thieves before, but now you are rich people, so I will treat you as good people. If you were rich people before, but now you are thieves, I will treat you as thieves."

古文：由是吏知修饬，不敢弄法。
现代文：于是这些官吏安分守己，不敢违法。
English: As a result, these officials kept to themselves and did not dare to break the law.

古文：许、蔡间有巨盗，聚众劫掠，祐捕之急，逃入宋境；宋亡，随制置夏贵过汴，祐斥下马，挝杀之于市，民间帖然。
现代文：许、蔡之间有大盗，聚众抢劫，祐追捕则逃入宋朝境内。宋亡后，这些人随制置夏贵路过汴梁时，祐发现了他们，将他们当众杖杀。
English: Between Xu and Cai, there was a big thief who gathered a crowd to rob, while Su Chuan fled into the territory of the Song Dynasty. After the death of the Song Dynasty, when these people, accompanied by Xie Jia Gui, were passing through Qilian, Su found them and killed them in front of everyone.

古文：十四年，迁浙东道宣慰使。
现代文：十四年，调浙东道宣慰使。
English: Fourteen years later, he was transferred to the post of consul general in Zhejiang Province.

古文：时江南初附，军士俘虏温、台民男女数千口，祐悉夺还之。
现代文：江南刚刚平定，元军俘虏温州、台州百姓男女数千口为奴，祐强行释放归家。
English: The south of the Yangtze River had just been pacified, and thousands of Wenzhou and Taizhou common men and women, who had been taken captive by the former military, were forcibly released and returned home.

古文：未几，行省榷民商酒税，祐请曰： 兵火之余，伤残之民，宜从宽恤。 
现代文：不久，行省征收百姓和商人的酒税，祐提出： 战争之后，对于遭受兵刀之苦的百姓，应宽大怜恤。 
English: Soon, the provincial government levied liquor taxes on the people and merchants, and Yu proposed: After the war, the people who suffered from the sword should be treated with great mercy.

古文：不报。
现代文：但这意见未转达于朝廷。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：遣祐检覆庆元、台州民田。
现代文：朝廷派他去查核庆元、台州的民田。
English: The imperial court sent him to inspect the fields of Qingyuan and Taizhou.

古文：及还至新昌，值玉山乡盗，仓猝不及为备，遂遇害，年五十六。
现代文：回来行至新昌，遇到玉山乡盗贼，他猝不及防，被杀害，享年五十六岁。
English: On his way back to Xinchang, he encountered thieves in Yushan Township. He was caught off guard and was killed, at the age of fifty-six.

古文：诏赠推忠秉义全节功臣、江浙等处行中书省左丞，追封河南郡公，谥忠定。
现代文：诏赠推忠秉义全节功臣、江浙等处行中书省左丞，追封河南郡公，谥忠定。
English: The imperial edict was issued to commend all the meritorious soldiers of the Qing Dynasty, including those from Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provinces, as well as to award the title of Henan County Governor to Emperor Tadatsune.

古文：中统三年，李璮叛据济南，结宋为外援，河北河南宣慰司承制以天祥为千户，屯三汊口，防遏宋兵。事平罢归，居偃师南山，有田百余亩，躬耕读书，从之游者甚众。
现代文：江浙父老要求葬他于会稽，未获批准，便立祠纪念。祐能诗能文，著有《节斋集》。陈天祥字吉甫，陈祐之弟，因兄在河南做官，他便把全家由宁晋迁到洛阳。天祥年少时就列入军籍，善骑射，中统三年，李王在济南反叛，联络宋军为外援。河北河南宣慰司按规定授天祥为千户，令他屯兵三汊口以防御宋兵。李王之乱平定后，他罢职归家，住于偃师南山中，有田百余亩，边耕种边读书，来向他求教的人很多。
English: Chen Tianxiang, the younger brother of Chen Yu, moved the whole family from Ningjin to Luoyang because his older brother was an official in Henan. Tianxiang was enlisted in the military when he was young. He was good at riding and shooting. In the third year of the unification of China, Li Wang rebelled in Jinan and contacted the Song Army for foreign aid. The Henan Provincial Consolation Division of Hebei Province awarded Tianxiang a thousand households according to regulations, and ordered him to set up three entrances to defend the Song soldiers. After the Li Wang Rebellion was settled, he resigned from his post and returned home to live in Shannan.

古文：其居近缑氏山，因号曰缑山先生。
现代文：所住地方靠近缑氏山，因号 缑山先生 。
English: He lives near Shaoshan Mountain, hence his nickname, Mr. Shaoshan.

古文：初，天祥未知学，祐未之奇也，别去数岁，献所为诗于祐，祐疑假手它人，及与语，出入经史，谈辨该博，乃大称异。
现代文：起初，天祥并不好学，其兄也不认为他有什么奇才，几年以后，天祥将所写的诗献于，怀疑是别人代写的，同他交谈，知他在研究经史，学识渊博，大为称赞。
English: At first, Tianxiang was not good at studying, and his brother did not think he had any special talent. A few years later, Tianxiang dedicated the poem he had written to him, suspected that someone else had written it for him, talked with him, and knew that he was studying the history of scripture. He was highly praised for his profound knowledge.

古文：至元十一年，起家从仕郎、郢复州等处招讨司经历，从国兵渡江，因论军中事，深为行省参正贾居贞所器重。
现代文：至元十一年，始任从仕郎，后历任郢州、复州招讨司经历，随元军渡江伐宋，由于熟知兵法，深为行省参政贾居贞所器重。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was first appointed as a servant, and then successively served as a solicitor in Bozhou and Fuzhou. With the experience of the former army crossing the Song Dynasty, due to his familiarity with military methods, he was deeply involved in provincial politics.

古文：十三年，兴国军以籍兵器致乱，行省命天祥权知本军事。
现代文：至元十三年，兴国军因没收民间兵器而遭民众的强烈反抗，行省命天祥暂管兴国军的政事。
English: In the 13th year of the Yuan Dynasty, due to the confiscation of non-military weapons, the Xingguo Army was met with strong resistance from the people, and the provincial government ordered Tianxiang to temporarily manage the political affairs of the Xingguo Army.

古文：天祥领军士才十人，入其境，去城近百里，止二日乃至城中，父老来谒，天祥谕之曰： 捍卫乡井，诚不可无兵，任事者籍之过当，故致乱尔。
现代文：天祥领军士十人至兴国军境，在离城近百里地方停了两天才入城，父老来拜见，天祥告谕他们 ：捍卫乡井确实不可没有兵器，地方官吏收得过多，所以造成乱子。
English: Tianxiang led ten sergeants to the military border of Xingguo, stopped at a place nearly a hundred miles away from the city and entered the city two days later. Father and son came to visit, and Tianxiang told them: it is indeed impossible to defend the countryside without weapons. Local officials received too much, so they caused chaos.

古文：今令汝辈权置兵仗以自卫，何如？ 
现代文：今准许你们自备兵器以自卫，你们以为如何？ 
English: What do you think of the fact that you are now allowed to own weapons for self-defence?

古文：民皆称便。
现代文：百姓都说这样很好。
English: People say it's a good thing.

古文：乃条陈其事于行省曰： 镇遏奸邪，当实根本，若内无备御之资，则外生窥觎之衅，此理势必然者也。
现代文：他将此事上书给行省说 ：镇压奸邪，应当以巩固根本为主，若内无力防御，则外边会有奸邪之人乘机捣乱，这是必然之理。
English: He sent a letter to the provincial government, saying: "The suppression of treachery should be based on the principle of consolidation. If we are unable to defend ourselves internally, then there will be treacherous people outside who will take the opportunity to cause trouble. This is an inevitable truth."

古文：推此军变乱之故，正由当时处置失宜，疏于外而急于内。凡在军中者，寸铁尺杖不得在手，遂使奸人得以窃发，公私同被其害。
现代文：此次为乱正是由于处置失当，防内轻外所造成的。凡在本军境内之人，平时手无寸铁尺杖，让奸人得以乘机造乱，公私同受其害。
English: This time, the turmoil was caused by the improper handling of the situation and the neglect of internal and external defense. All people in the territory of our army are unarmed in peacetime, allowing the traitors to take advantage of the opportunity to create turmoil, and both private and public are harmed by it.

古文：今军中再经残破，单弱至此，若犹相防而不相保信，岂惟外寇可忧，第恐舟中之人皆敌国矣。
现代文：今兴国军又遭到破坏，十分虚弱，若军民相防而不相信任，岂只担心外寇入侵，恐怕内部军民相互为敌。
English: Now the national army of Xinxing has been destroyed and is very weak. If the military and the people are on the defensive and do not trust anyone, are they only worried about the invasion of foreign invaders? I am afraid that the military and the people inside will become enemies.

古文：莫若布推赤心于人，使戮力同心，与均祸福，人则我之人，兵则我之兵，靖乱止奸，无施不可。
现代文：莫如推心置腹，相互信任，戮力同心，祸福同当，把人民看作自己人，把兵看作自己的兵，平乱防奸，莫不可行。
English: We must put our hearts and souls into it, trust each other, work together as one, share the same misfortunes and blessings, regard the people as our own people, regard the soldiers as our own soldiers, and prevent and control chaos.

古文：惟冀少加优容，然后责其必成之效。 
现代文：希望对百姓宽容些，然后对他们提出要求。 
English: I hope they will be more tolerant of the people, and then make demands of them.

古文：行省许以从便处置。
现代文：行省接受他的意见并授以自行处置之权。
English: The province accepted his opinion and gave him the right to dispose of it.

古文：天祥凡所设施，皆合众望，由是流移复业，以至邻郡之民来归者相继，伐茅斩木，结屋以居。天祥命以十家为甲，十甲有长，弛兵禁以从民便。
现代文：天祥的一切措施都符合百姓的愿望，于是流亡在外的人相继回来，以致邻郡的百姓也移居到兴国军来。天祥加以组织，以十家为一甲，十甲设一长，废除对兵器的禁令，从民自便。
English: All of Tianxiang's measures were in line with the wishes of the people. As a result, the exiles returned one after another, so that the people of the neighboring counties also migrated to the Xingguo Army. Tianxiang organized it, with ten families as one, and ten families as one, and abolished the ban on weapons, from the convenience of the people.

古文：人心既安，军势稍振，用土兵收李必聪山寨，不戮一人。
现代文：于是人心安定，军队士气也振作起来了。借民兵之力，不杀一人便收降了李必聪山寨。
English: As a result, the hearts of the people were stabilized, and the morale of the army also perked up. With the help of the militia, Li Bicong's village was retaken without killing a single person.

古文：他寨闻之，各自散去，境内悉平。
现代文：其他山寨见此情形也各自散去，境内安定无事。
English: Other cottages saw this situation and dispersed independently, and there was no trouble in the territory.

古文：时州县官吏未有俸禄，天祥从便规措而月给之，以止其贪，民用弗扰。
现代文：当时州县官吏还有未给俸禄者，天祥自行规划，按月发给，以便防止他们的贪污行为，使百姓不受侵害。
English: At that time, there were state and county officials who were not paid a salary. Tianxiang made its own plan and paid them on a monthly basis in order to prevent their corruption and protect the people from infringement.

古文：邻邑分宁为变，谍者时至，吏请捕之，天祥曰： 彼以官吏贪暴故叛，今我一军三县，官无侵渔，民乐其业，使之归告其党，则谍者反为我用矣。 
现代文：邻近分宁县发生民变，刺探情报的常到兴国军，官吏请天祥下令逮捕，天祥说： 分宁县是因为官吏贪污暴虐而激起民变。今我军及所属三县，官吏不侵害百姓，百姓安居乐业。让那些刺探情报的人去把我们兴国军的情形告诉他们同党，这样，谍报员反而为我所用了。 
English: A popular uprising occurred in neighboring Fening County. Intelligence spies often came to the Xingguo Army, and officials asked Tianxiang to order their arrest. Tianxiang said: Fening County is because of the corruption and brutality of officials. Now our army and the three counties it belongs to, officials do not infringe on the people, and the people live and work in peace. Let those intelligence spies go and tell them about the situation of our Xingguo Army and the party. In this way, the spies were used for me.

古文：遂一无所问。及败，逃入兴国境者数千人，天祥命验口给粮，仍戒土人勿侵陵。事定，皆得保全而归，莫不服其威信。
现代文：分宁人民反抗失败，逃入兴国军境内者有数千人，天祥发给他们口粮，告诫本军百姓不要侵害他们，这些人都得以保全性命而归，对天祥无不服其威信。
English: The Fening people's resistance failed, and there were thousands of people who fled into the territory of the Xingguo Army. Tianxiang gave them rations and warned the people of our army not to infringe on them. These people were able to return with their lives intact, and they were all convinced of Tianxiang's authority.

古文：居岁余，诏改本军为路，有代天祥为总管者，务变更旧政，治隐匿兵者甚急，天祥去未久而兴国复变，邻郡寿昌府及大江南北诸城邑，多乘势杀守将以应之。
现代文：一年后，朝廷把兴国军改为兴国路，接替天祥为兴国路总管的人，完全改变天祥的政策，严厉制裁隐藏兵器的人。所以天祥离开后不久，兴国又发生民变，邻近的寿昌府及大江南北的各县城，叛民乘势杀死守将，响应兴国人民的起义。
English: A year later, the imperial court changed the Xingguo Army to Xingguo Road, replacing Tianxiang as the person in charge of Xingguo Road, completely changing Tianxiang's policy, and severely sanctioning those who concealed weapons. Therefore, shortly after Tianxiang left, there was another popular uprising in Xingguo, and the rebels took advantage of the situation to kill the guard and respond to the uprising of the people of Xingguo.

古文：时方改行省为宣慰司，参政忽都帖木儿、贾居贞，万户郑鼎臣为宣慰使。
现代文：当时刚改行省为宣慰司，参政忽都帖木儿、贾居贞、万户郑鼎臣为宣慰使。
English: At that time, he had just been promoted to the position of the provincial consolation secretary, and the consolation envoys were Tetsumu Er, Jia Ju Zhen, and Wanhu Zheng Ding Sheng, all of whom were involved in politics.

古文：鼎臣帅兵讨之，至樊口，兵败死。
现代文：鼎臣帅兵镇压，在樊口兵败身亡。
English: He was defeated by the soldiers of Dingvonshuai and died in Hekou.

古文：黄州遂声言攻阳罗堡，鄂州大震。
现代文：黄州叛民扬言要攻阳罗堡，鄂州官府大为震惊。
English: When the rebels in Huangzhou threatened to attack Yangluo Fort, the Ezhou government was greatly shocked.

古文：时忽都帖木儿恇怯不敢出兵，天祥言于居贞曰： 阳罗堡依山为垒，素有严备，彼若来攻，我之利也。
现代文：忽都帖木儿胆怯不敢出兵，天祥对居贞说 ：阳罗依山建垒，素来防备严密，彼若来攻，对我们有利。
English: All of a sudden, Timur was too timid to send out his troops, and Tian Xiang said to Ju Zhen: "Yang Loi Mountain is fortified and has always been well guarded. If he attacks, it will be to our advantage."

古文：且南人浮躁，轻进易退，官军凭高据险，而区区乌合之众，与之相敌，不二三日，死伤必多，遁逃者十八九，我出精兵以击之，惟疾走者乃始得脱。
现代文：且南人浮躁，轻进易退，我官军居高恃险，这些乌合之众来攻，不到两三天便多伤亡，逃者会十之八九。到那时我们再出精兵袭击，只有跑得快的才得免死。
English: Moreover, the Nan people are impetuous, easy to advance and retreat, and our official army is at high risk of attack. If these mobs attack, there will be more casualties in less than two or three days, and escapees will be nine times out of ten. At that time, we will attack with elite soldiers, and only those who can run fast can avoid death.

古文：乘此一胜，则大势已定。
现代文：乘此一胜，则大势已定。
English: With this victory, the general trend has been determined.

古文：然后取黄州、寿昌，如摧枯拉朽耳。 
现代文：然后再攻取黄州、寿昌，如摧枯拉朽。 
English: After that, it will attack Huangzhou and Shuchang, such as destroying the withered and pulling the rotten.

古文：居贞深然之，而忽都帖木儿意犹未决。
现代文：居贞深以为然，而忽都帖木儿还犹豫不决。
English: Ju Zhen was deeply convinced, but all of a sudden, Timur was still hesitant.

古文：初，行省闻变，尽执鄂州城中南人将杀之，以防内应，居贞救之不能得，天祥曰： 是州之人，与彼势本不相接，欲杀之者，利其财耳。 
现代文：闻叛民到了阳罗堡，居贞忙引兵前去迎战，屯兵于青山，第二天大败叛军，这一切完全符合天祥的预料。行省闻民变，将鄂州城中的南人一律逮捕起来，准备大屠杀，以防他们为叛军内应。居贞想拯救鄂州南人而又做不到。天祥说： 鄂州南人，与叛军本无关系，杀他们不过是要夺他们的财产而已。 
English: Hearing that the rebels had arrived at Yangluo Fort, Ju Zhen hurriedly brought troops to meet the battle, stationed troops in Qingshan, and defeated the rebels the next day, all of which was completely in line with Tian Xiang's expectations. After the province heard about the people's revolution, all the southerners in the city of Huzhou were arrested and massacred to prevent them from becoming rebels. Ju Zhen wanted to save the southerners of Huzhou but could not do it. Tian Xiang said: The southerners of Huzhou have nothing to do with the rebels, and killing them is just to take away their property.

古文：力止之，至是被执者皆纵去。
现代文：极力劝阻行省官员，将被捕的平民全部释放。
English: He tried his best to dissuade the provincial officials from releasing all the arrested civilians.

古文：复遣天祥权知寿昌府事，授兵二百余人。
现代文：派天祥去暂管寿昌府政事，给他二百兵卒。
English: He sent Tianxiang to temporarily manage the government affairs of Shuchang Prefecture and gave him two hundred soldiers.

古文：为乱者闻官军至，皆弃城依险而自保。
现代文：寿昌叛民听说官军来了，都离开寿昌城去恃险自保。
English: When the rebels in Shuchang heard that the government army was coming, they all left Shuchang City to protect themselves.

古文：天祥以众寡不敌，非可以力服，乃遣谕其徒使各归田里，惟生擒其长毛遇顺、周监斩于鄂州市。
现代文：天祥知寡不敌众，武力镇压是不行的，便派人去向他们说明利害祸福，劝他们各归田里，只将为首者毛遇顺、周监在鄂州市斩首示众。
English: Knowing that they were outnumbered and that it was not possible to suppress them by force, Tianxiang sent people to explain to them what was at stake, and advised them to return to their fields. They only beheaded the leaders, Mao Hunshun and Zhou Guan, in Huzhou City.

古文：得金二百两，询知为鄂州贾人之物，召而还之。
现代文：获得金二百两，打听到是鄂州商人的东西，物还原主。
English: Obtained two hundred taels of gold, found out that it was from a merchant in Ezhou, and returned it to the original owner.

古文：其党王宗一等十三人继亦就擒，以冬至日放令还家，约三日来归狱，皆如期而至，白宣慰司尽纵之，由是无复叛者，百姓为立生祠。二十一年三月，拜监察御史。
现代文：二十一年三月，天祥拜为监察御史。
English: In March 2011, Tian Xiangbai was appointed as the inspector general of history.

古文：会右丞卢世荣以掊克聚敛骤升执政，权倾一时。
现代文：右丞卢世荣因搜刮民财有功，升为执政大臣，其权力压倒一切。
English: The right-hand man, Lu Shirong, was promoted to the post of ruling minister due to his success in collecting people's wealth, and his power was overwhelming.

古文：御史中丞崔彧言之，帝怒，欲致之法，世荣势焰益张。
现代文：御史中丞崔弹劾他，世祖大怒，要将崔法办。世荣因而更加气焰嚣张。
English: Grand Historian Choe impeached him, and Sejo was furious and wanted to put Choe on trial. Seirong was even more furious.

古文：左司郎中周戭因议事微有可否，世荣诬以沮法，奏令杖一百，然后斩之，于是臣僚震慑，无敢言者。
现代文：左司郎中周寅戈，在议论政事时略表示一点不同意见，世荣便诬他违法，奏请令杖一百，然后处斩。于是朝廷大小官员都吓得不敢讲话。
English: When Zhou Yingge, the middle brother of Zuo Si Lang, expressed a slight difference of opinion while discussing political affairs, Shi Rong accused him of breaking the law, gave him a hundred strokes of the cane, and then beheaded him. As a result, officials both large and small in the imperial court were too scared to speak.

古文：二十二年四月，天祥上疏，极言世荣奸恶，其略曰：
现代文：二十二年四月，天祥上书，痛斥世荣的奸恶：
English: In April 22nd, Tianxiang published a letter, denouncing Shierong's treachery:

古文：卢世荣素无文艺，亦无武功，惟以商贩所获之赀，趋附权臣，营求入仕，舆赃辇贿，输送权门，所献不充，又别立欠少文券银一千锭，由白身擢江西榷茶转运使。
现代文： 卢世荣素无文才，也无武功，只知用他经商所赚来的钱来巴结权臣以求做官。他将贪污的大量财物送至权臣家中，还不够，又立下欠银一千锭的文契，于是能由一个普通百姓一跃而为江西榷茶转运使。
English: Lu Shirong had no literary talent or military prowess. He only knew how to use the money he earned in business to curry favor with powerful ministers in order to become an official. It wasn't enough for him to send a large amount of corrupt wealth to the homes of powerful ministers. He also signed a contract for a thousand baht in debt. As a result, he was able to jump from an ordinary citizen to become a courier for Jiangxi tea.

古文：于其任，专务贪饕，所犯赃私，动以万计。
现代文：上任以后，专门贪污钱财，动以万计。
English: After taking office, he dedicated himself to embezzling money and making all kinds of schemes.

古文：其隐秘者固难悉举，惟发露者乃可明言，凡其掊取于人及所盗官物，略计：钞以锭计者二万五千一百一十九，金以锭计者二十五，银以锭计者一百六十八，茶以引计者一万二千四百五十有八，马以匹计者十五，玉器七事，其余繁杂物件称是。
现代文：其隐藏于家内者固然难列举出来，只就已暴露出来可以统计的有：钞二万五千一百一十九锭，金二十五锭，银一百六十八锭，茶一万二千四百五十八引，马十五匹，玉器七件，还有许多其他物品。这是已经追究而交纳及未交纳现尚在追查之中者。
English: Although it is difficult to enumerate those hidden within the family, only the following have been revealed and can be counted: 25,119 baht in banknotes, 250 baht in gold, 168 baht in silver, 12,458 baht in tea, 15 horses, seven pieces of jade, and many other items. These are those that have been investigated and paid and those that have not been paid and are still being investigated.

古文：已经追纳及未纳见追者，人所共知。今竟不悔前非，狂悖愈甚，以苛刻为自安之策，以诛求为干进之门，既怀无餍之心，广畜攘掊之计，而又身当要路，手握重权，虽位在丞相之下，朝省大政，实得专之。
现代文： 如今，他竟不痛改前非，而是更加猖狂，以苛征百姓为自安之策，以向百姓诛求为升官的阶梯，他怀有贪求无厌之心，广泛搜刮民财之计。而且身居要职，手握重权，其职位虽在丞相之下，而朝廷大权实是由他专擅。
English: Today, instead of correcting his past mistakes, he is even more reckless. He takes the harsh recruitment of the people as a strategy for self-reliance, and asks the people for a promotion ladder. He has an insatiable appetite and a wide range of plans to collect people's wealth. Moreover, he is in an important position and holds a lot of power. Although his position is below the prime minister, the great power of the imperial court is really his expertise.

古文：是犹以盗跖而掌阿衡之任，不止流殃于当代，亦恐取笑于将来。
现代文：他是以盗贼之心来掌握宰相之权，不仅祸殃于当代，也恐怕会取笑于将来。
English: He wields the power of the prime minister with a thief's heart, which is not only a scourge to the present generation, but will also be laughed at in the future.

古文：朝廷信其虚诳之说，俾居相位，名为试验，实授正权。
现代文：朝廷相信他的谎言，使他居于相位，名为试用，实际上是授他以实权。
English: The court believed his lies and put him on probation, in effect giving him real power.

古文：若谓必须再试，止可叙以他官，宰相之权，岂宜轻授。
现代文：其才能其行为都丝毫没有值得一提的。这些事都足以表明试用的结果如何。如果还要试用，只能让他去做别的官，宰相之权岂可轻易授给他。
English: His abilities and his behavior are not worth mentioning at all. These things are enough to show what the result of the trial is. If there is still a trial, he can only be assigned to another post, and the power of prime minister cannot be given to him easily.

古文：夫宰天下，譬犹制锦。初欲验其能否，先当试以布帛，如无能效，所损或轻。
现代文：主宰天下，如同制作锦缎，能不能制作，先用布帛做试验，如果不成功损失也不重。
English: Ruling the world is like making brocade. If you can't make it, try it with cloth first. If it doesn't work out, it's not a big loss.

古文：今捐相位以试验贤愚，犹舍美锦以校量工拙，脱致隳坏，悔将何追！
现代文：今把相位做贤愚试验，如同把一幅美丽的锦缎去考核匠人的工艺能力，把美好的东西毁坏了，将追悔莫及。
English: Testing the phase for wisdom and folly now is like taking a beautiful brocade to test the craftsmanship of the craftsman. If you destroy something beautiful, you will regret it.

古文：国家之与百姓，上下如同一身，民乃国之血气，国乃民之肤体。血气充实则肤体康强，血气损伤则肤体羸病。未有耗其血气能使肤体丰荣者。
现代文： 国家与百姓的关系，如同身体，民是国家的血气，国家是民的体肤，只有血气充实才体肤康强，若血气损伤则体肤就会羸弱多病，未有消耗血气而能使体肤健康的。
English: The relationship between the state and the people is like the body. The people are the blood and gas of the state, and the state is the skin of the people. Only when the blood and gas are full is the body healthy and strong. If the blood and gas are damaged, the body and skin will be weak and sickly. Without consuming blood and gas, it can make the body and skin healthy.

古文：是故民富则国富，民贫则国贫，民安则国安，民困则国困，其理然也。
现代文：所以说，民富则国富，民贫则国贫，民安则国安，民困则国困，道理就是这样。
English: Therefore, people's wealth is the country's wealth, people's poverty is the country's poverty, people's security is the country's security, and people's difficulties are the country's difficulties. This is the reason.

古文：昔鲁哀公欲重敛于民，问于有若，对曰： 百姓足，君敦与不足；百姓不足，君孰与足？ 
现代文：春秋时代，鲁哀公要向百姓多征赋税，请教于有若，有若说 ：百姓丰衣足食，你做君王的怎么会不足；百姓不足，君王又怎能足。 
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, King Luei wanted to collect more taxes from the people. He asked the sages: "If the people were well-fed and clothed, how could you, as a king, not have enough; if the people were not well-fed, how could the king have enough?"

古文：以此推之，民必须赋轻而后足，国必待民足而后丰。
现代文：由此可见，民必须减轻赋税然后能足，国家必须是在百姓丰足之后才能富强。
English: From this, it can be seen that the people must reduce their taxes and then be able to have enough, and the country must be able to be rich and strong only after the people have enough.

古文：《书》曰： 民为邦本，本固邦宁。 
现代文：《书经》说 ：民为国家之本，根基巩固了国家才能太平。 
English: "The Classic of Confucianism" says: "The people are the foundation of the country, and only when the foundation is solid can the country be peaceful."

古文：历考前代，因百姓富安以致乱，百姓困穷以致治，自有天地以来，未之闻也。夫财者，土地所生，民力所集，天地之间岁有常数，惟其取之有节，故其用之不乏。
现代文：考察历史，自开天辟地以来，从未听说因百姓富裕安宁而导致国乱的，也没听说因百姓贫穷而国家太平康乐的。资财本土地所生，民力所集，天地资财的生产每年有定量，只能是有节制的索取，才用之不缺。
English: Looking back on history, since the heavens and earth were created, we have never heard of a country falling into chaos because the people were rich and peaceful, nor have we heard of a country becoming peaceful and happy because the people were poor. Wealth is born from the land, gathered from the people's strength, and the production of heaven and earth's wealth is rationed every year. It can only be obtained in moderation before it is used up.

古文：今世荣欲以一岁之期，将致十年之积；危万民之命，易一世之荣；广邀增羡之功，不恤颠连之患；期锱铢之诛取，诱上下以交征。
现代文： 如今，世荣是一年征十年的赋税；用万民的生命来换取他一人之荣耀。他只是图广取博敛之功，而不顾百姓的困苦死活；上下交征，锱铢必取。
English: Today, Shirong collects ten years of taxes every year; he exchanges the lives of all the people for the glory of one person. He is just trying to make a lot of money, regardless of the hardships of the people; he has to collect taxes from all sides.

古文：视民如雠，为国敛怨。
现代文：视百姓如仇敌，只能加深人民对国家的怨恨。
English: Treating the people as enemies can only deepen the people's resentment of the state.

古文：果欲不为国家之远虑，惟取速效于目前，肆意诛求，何所不得。
现代文：如果不考虑国家长远利益，只尽快的谋取眼前的效果，任意搜刮，不愁什么东西得不到。
English: If you do not consider the long-term interests of the country, only seek immediate results as soon as possible, scrape at will, you will not be able to get anything.

古文：然其生财之本既已不存，敛财之方复何所赖？
现代文：然而，生财的基础没有了，搜刮钱财的方法又有何用？
English: However, the basis for making money is no longer there, so what is the use of money-grabbing methods?

古文：将见民间由此凋耗，天下由此空虚，安危利害之机，殆有不可胜言者。
现代文：将会看到人民因此而凋敝，国家因此而空虚，其安危利害真是说不尽。
English: The people will be seen to wither away, the country will be seen to be empty, and its perilous interests will be truly inexhaustible.

古文：计其任事以来，百有余日，验其事迹，备有显明。
现代文： 卢世荣任职以来，已一百多天了，察验其事迹，其罪恶已十分明显。
English: It has been more than 100 days since Lu Shirong took office, and his deeds have been examined, and his crimes have become very obvious.

古文：今取其所行与所言而已不相副者，略举数端：始言能令钞法如旧，钞今愈虚；始言能令百物自贱，物今愈贵；始言课程增添三百万锭，不取于民而办，今却迫胁诸路官司增数包认；始言能令民快乐，凡今所为，无非败法扰民者。
现代文：今将他所言与所行不符合事略举几件：开始说他能使钞法不受到破坏，但今天钞币已成一张无用废纸；开始说他能使百物价贱，而今百物翔贵；开始说增课税三百万锭不取于民，而今却是强迫诸路官府包认所增课税；开始说他能使百姓快乐，而今所作所为，无不是破坏法制，侵害百姓。
English: Now, let me give a few examples of the inconsistencies between what he said and what he did: first, he said that he could keep the banknote law from being destroyed, but today the banknote has become a piece of useless waste paper; first, he said that he could make a hundred things cheap, but now a hundred things are expensive; first, he said that the tax increase of three million baht would not be taken from the people, but now he forced all government agencies to recognize the tax increase; first, he said that he could make the people happy, but what he is doing now is nothing but destroying the legal system and infringing on the people.

古文：若不早有更张，须其自败，正犹蠹虽除去，木病亦深，始嫌曲突徙薪，终见焦头烂额，事至于此，救将何及？臣亦知阿附权要则荣宠可期，违忤重臣则祸患难测，缄默自固，亦岂不能！
现代文：若不及早改变这种情形，必自取其祸。若不防患于未然，到头来大祸临头，那时挽救也来不及了。 臣也知道依附权臣，则可望得到荣誉宠信，违背重臣的意图则祸患不测；闭口不言，明哲保身，也不是做不到。
English: If you do not change this situation as soon as possible, you will bring disaster on yourself. If you do not prevent the disaster in advance, the disaster will eventually come to an end, and then it will be too late to save yourself. If a minister knows that he is dependent on a powerful minister, he can expect to receive honor and favor, and if he violates the intention of a senior minister, no harm will befall him; if he keeps his mouth shut, it is not impossible to protect himself.

古文：正以事在国家，关系不浅，忧深虑切，不得无言。
现代文：但正因事关国家存亡，关系不浅，臣深为担忧，经再三考虑，不得不说。 
English: However, precisely because it is a matter of national survival, the relationship is not shallow, and the minister is deeply worried. After repeated consideration, I have to say.

古文：世祖闻其语，遣使召天祥与世荣，俱至上都面质之。
现代文：世祖看了这个奏章，派人把天祥与世荣都召来上都，当面质问。
English: When the patriarch saw this record, he sent someone to summon both Tianxiang and Shirong to Shangdu and question them face to face.

古文：既至，即日有内官传旨，缚世荣于宫门外。
现代文：他们到达上都，宦官传旨：将世荣捆绑于官门外。
English: They arrived in Shangdu, and the eunuch sent a message: Shirong should be tied up outside the official gate.

古文：明日入对，天祥于帝前再举其所言与未及尽言者，帝皆称善，世荣遂伏诛。
现代文：第二天，天祥又在世祖面前讲了许多前所未讲的事，帝认为都对，将世荣处斩。
English: The next day, Tianxiang again spoke in front of the patriarch about many things that had never been spoken about before. The emperor thought that they were all right and had Shirong executed.

古文：五月，朝廷录天祥从军渡江及平兴国、寿昌之功，进秩五品，擢吏部郎中。
现代文：五月，朝廷列举天祥随大军渡江及平定兴国、寿昌民变之功，进升官秩五品，升为吏部郎中。
English: In May, the imperial court listed Tian Xiang's achievements in crossing the Yangtze River with a large army, pacifying and rejuvenating the country, and promoting the people's revolution, and promoted him to the rank of the fifth grade, and he was promoted to the junior member of the cadre department.

古文：二十三年四月，除治书侍御史。
现代文：二十三年四月，授治书侍御史。
English: In April 23rd, he was awarded the title of Shujishi Goshi.

古文：六月，命理算湖北湖南行省钱粮。
现代文：六月，命清理湖北湖南行省钱粮。
English: In June, it was ordered to clean up Hubei and Hunan to save money and grain.

古文：天祥至鄂州，即上疏劾平章岳束木凶暴不法。
现代文：天祥至鄂州，立即上疏弹劾平章政事岳束木之凶暴不法。
English: It is a good omen for Ezhou to immediately impeach the violent lawlessness of Pingzhang politician Yue Sokki.

古文：时桑哥窃国柄，与岳束木姻党，为其爪牙羽翼，诬天祥以罪，欲致之死，系狱几四百日。二十五年春正月，遇赦得释。
现代文：这时桑哥窃取政权，与岳束木联姻。岳束木为桑哥爪牙，以莫须有之罪诬陷天祥，欲置天祥于死地，在狱中关押了四百多天，直到至元二十五年正月才获释。
English: At this time, Sango stole power and married Yue Sokki. Yue Sokki was one of Sango's minions. He framed Tianxiang with a groundless crime and wanted to put Tianxiang to death. He was held in prison for more than 400 days and was not released until the first month of the 25th year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：二十八年，擢行台侍御史。
现代文：二十八年，升为行台侍御史。
English: In 1928, he was promoted to Gyodaishi.

古文：未几，以疾辞归。
现代文：不久，因病辞职归家。
English: Soon after, he resigned due to illness and returned home.

古文：三十年，授燕南河北道廉访使。
现代文：三十年，授燕南河北道廉访使。
English: For 30 years, he was awarded the title of Yangnan-Hebei Province Lianbo Envoy.

古文：元贞元年，改山东西道廉访使。
现代文：元贞元年，改任山东西道廉访使。
English: In the first year of Yuan Zhen, he was reappointed as the unlicensed envoy to the East and West.

古文：时盗贼群起，山东居多，诏求弭盗方略。
现代文：当时，全国各地盗贼蜂起，而以山东为多，朝廷寻求平息方略。
English: At that time, thieves were rising up all over the country, mostly in Shandong, and the imperial court was looking for a strategy to quell them.

古文：天祥上奏曰： 古者盗贼之起，各有所因，除岁凶饥馑，诿之天时，宜且勿论。
现代文：天祥上书，分析了反叛发生的原因，除天灾造成饥荒外，还有是由于连年战争，大兴土木，劳民伤财，无限制地征收课税，刑法紊乱等等所致。
English: Tian Xiang wrote a letter and analyzed the reasons for the rebellion. In addition to the natural disaster caused by famine, it was also caused by years of war, large-scale construction, labor and financial losses, unlimited tax collection, criminal law disorder and so on.

古文：诚非善化能移，惟以严刑可制。 所拟事条，皆切于时用。于是严督有司，捕得盗贼甚众，皆杖杀之。
现代文：朝廷平息反抗的方略是实行大赦。他认为这不是个好的方略，只是对一些小人有好处。他们杀了人，理应受到严惩，而朝廷却加恩释放。这些人早晨释放，晚上又会行凶打劫，既不感朝廷之恩，又不畏国家之法，不能使他们凶恶的本性善化。制服他们唯一的方略是严刑酷法。他提出了一些平息 盗贼 的办法，皆切于时用。
English: The strategy of the court to quell resistance is to implement an amnesty. He believes that this is not a good strategy, but it is good for some villains. They killed people and deserved to be severely punished, but the court released them. These people are released in the morning and commit violent robberies in the evening. They do not feel the grace of the court, and they do not fear the law of the country, which cannot make their vicious nature better. The only strategy to subdue them is the harsh law. He proposed some methods to quell thieves, all of which are timely.

古文：其亡入他境者，揣知所向，选捕盗官及弓兵，密授方略，示以赏罚，使追捕之，南至汉、江，二千余里，悉皆就擒，无得免者。由是东方群盗屏息。
现代文：他在山东严督当地官府捕获大批 盗贼 ，皆杖杀之。其余逃亡到别处的，进行追捕，南至汉、江二千余里，皆被擒获，无一幸免，于是东方的群 盗 平息。
English: He strictly controlled the local government in Shandong and captured a large number of thieves, all of whom were killed with a cane. The rest fled to other places and were pursued. They were all captured more than two thousand miles south to Han and Jiang, and none of them were spared. As a result, the bandits in the east were pacified.

古文：平阴县女子刘金莲，假妖术以惑众，所至官为建立神堂，愚民皆奔走奉事之，天祥谓同僚曰： 此妇以神怪惑众，声势如此，若复有狡狯之人辅翼之，仿汉张角、晋孙恩之为，必成大害。 
现代文：平阴县女子刘金莲，以妖术惑众，所到之处，官府为她建立神堂，一般百姓都去求福。天祥对同僚说 ：此妇人以神怪惑众，其声势如此之大，如果有狡猾之徒来帮助她，仿效汉代张角、晋代孙恩，号召起事，必成大害。 
English: Liu Jinlian, a woman from Pingyin County, bewitched people with magic. Wherever she went, the government built shrines for her, and ordinary people went to seek blessings. Tianxiang said to his colleagues: This woman bewitched people with gods, and her influence was so great that if there were cunning people to help her, following the example of Zhang Qiao in the Han Dynasty and Sun En in the Jin Dynasty, and calling for an uprising, it would cause great harm.

古文：遂命捕系而杖于市，自此神圣屏息。
现代文：于是把这个妇人逮捕起来，当众施以杖刑。
English: So they arrested the woman and flogged her with a whip in public.

古文：天祥言山东宣慰司官冗宜罢，因劾奏其使贪暴不法，事格不行，遂以任满辞去。
现代文：天祥认为山东宣慰司无事可做的官太多了，应罢黜一些，于是向朝廷劾奏这些官吏的贪暴不法行为。但他裁减官员的建议未得到采纳，因此他便在任满之后辞去了。
English: Tianxiang thought that there were too many officials in Shandong Xuanliao Division who had nothing to do and that some of them should be dismissed, so he complained to the imperial court about the corrupt and illegal behavior of these officials. However, his proposal to reduce the number of officials was not accepted, so he resigned after his term of office.

古文：大德三年六月，迁河北河南廉访使，以疾不起。
现代文：大德三年六月，天祥调任河北河南廉访使，但因病未就任。
English: In June of the 3rd year of the Taide era, Tianxiang was transferred to the post of Hebei Henan Lianyong envoy, but he did not take office due to illness.

古文：人有冤抑，往往就天祥家求直，天祥以不在其位，却去之。
现代文：受到冤枉的人往往到他家中来伸冤，天祥因自己不在任而推辞了。
English: People who have been wronged often come to his home to seek redress, but Tianxiang declined because he was not in office.

古文：六年，升江南行台御史中丞，上章论征西南夷事，曰：
现代文：大德六年，升为江南行台御史中丞。上书论朝廷征西南夷事，其中说：
English: Dade for six years, rose to the south of the Yangtze River, and became a middle-ranking official in the imperial court. He wrote a book on the imperial court's conquest of the southwestern part of the country, in which he said:

古文：兵有不得已而不已者，亦有得已而不已者。惟能得已则已，可使兵力永强，以备不得已而不已之用，是之谓善用兵者也。
现代文： 兵有不得已而用者，也有不当用而用者，不当用而能不用，则可保持兵力的强大，以备不得已时而用，这就是善用兵之法。
English: If soldiers are used as a last resort, they can also be used improperly. If soldiers are used improperly but can be used, they can maintain a strong military force, so that they can be used as a last resort. This is the way to make good use of soldiers.

古文：去岁，行省右丞刘深远征八百媳妇国，此乃得已而不已之兵也。
现代文：去年，行省右丞刘深远征八百媳妇国，这就是不当用而用。
English: Last year, Governor Liu Sheng went on an expedition to the country of 800 daughters-in-law. This is improper use.

古文：彼荒裔小邦，远在云南之西南又数千里，其地为僻陋无用之地，人皆顽愚无知。
现代文：八百媳妇是个蛮夷小邦，远在云南西南数千里之外，其地是偏僻无用之地，其人是愚昧无知之人。
English: Eight hundred daughters-in-law is a small barbarian state, thousands of miles away in the southwest of Yunnan. Its land is remote and useless, and its people are ignorant and ignorant.

古文：取之不足以为利，不取不足以为害。
现代文：攻取它并没有什么好处，不取也无害处。
English: There is no advantage in taking it, and no disadvantage in not taking it.

古文：深欺上罔下，帅兵伐之，经过八番，纵横自恣，恃其威力，虐害居民，中途变生，所在皆叛。
现代文： 刘深欺上骗下，帅兵征讨，经过八番之地，恣意横行，恃其武力，虐害居民，致使各地居民反叛。
English: Liu Sheng deceived and cheated, recruited soldiers, passed through the eighth place, arbitrarily rampant, instigated his force, abused the residents, causing the residents of various regions to rebel.

古文：深既不能制乱，反为乱众所制，军中乏粮，人自相食，计穷势蹙，仓黄退走，土兵随击，以致大败。深弃众奔逃，仅以身免，丧兵十八九，弃地千余里。
现代文：深既不能平定叛乱，反而受到反叛者的牵制，结果是军中乏粮，人自相食。毫无办法只得仓惶退走，以致大败，深弃众逃亡，军士损失十之八九，失地千余里。
English: Deeply unable to quell the rebellion, but on the contrary constrained by the rebels, the result was that the army was short of food and people were eating each other. There was no way but to retreat in a panic, resulting in a crushing defeat, abandonment and flight, loss of nine out of ten sergeants, and loss of more than a thousand miles.

古文：然数万之军，止仰今次一运之米，自此以后，又当如何？ 
现代文：朝廷又发陕西、河南、江西、湖广四省诸军，令刘二拔都统领，再度征讨，以图收得失地，湖北、湖南大量征调民夫运送军粮，至播州交纳，共二十余万人。
English: The imperial court also dispatched armies from the four provinces of Shaanxi, Henan, Jiangxi, and Hubei, and ordered Liu Erba to take command of all of them. In order to recover the lost territory, the imperial court once again conscripted and transferred a large number of people from Hubei and Hunan to transport military grain to Banzhou for payment, a total of more than 200,000 people.

古文：比问西征败卒及其将校，颇知西南远夷之地，重山复岭，陡涧深林，竹木丛茂，皆有长刺。
现代文：当此农忙之时，兴此大役，把贫困百姓强迫运粮于数千里外，来回之间什么事情都可能发生。
English: When the farmers are so busy, and they are forced to transport grain thousands of miles to poor people, anything can happen in between.

古文：军行径路在于其间，窄处仅容一人一骑，上如登天，下如入井，贼若乘险邀击，我军虽众，亦难施为也。
现代文：即或把米全部运到，然数万军士只仰赖于这一次运去的米粮，以后又当如何？ 近来访问西征败回的士卒及将校，才知西南这遥远蛮夷之地，山岭重重，丛林深谷，大军所经过的道路，窄处仅能走一人一骑，上如登天，下如落井。在这样不利的地理条件下，若贼据险袭击，我军虽多也难以应战。
English: All the rice may have been transported there, but tens of thousands of soldiers only rely on the grain that was transported this time. What will happen in the future? A recent visit to the soldiers and officers who were defeated in the Western Expedition made it clear that this remote and wild land in the southwest is full of mountains, jungles, and deep valleys. The road that the large army passed through was so narrow that only one person could ride on it. Going up was like climbing to the sky, and going down was like falling down a well. Under such unfavorable geographical conditions, if the bandits attacked dangerously, our army, although numerous, would have a hard time fighting.

古文：又其毒雾烟瘴之气，皆能伤人，群蛮既知大军将至，若皆清野远遁，阻其要害，以老我师，或进不得前，旁无所掠，士卒饥馁，疫病死亡，将有不战自困之势，不可不为深虑也。
现代文：再加上毒雾烟瘴，都可伤人。群蛮知大军将至，如果实行清野，远远逃遁，堵截险要之地，使我军进不得退不得，附近又无粮食可取，士兵饥饿，病疫死亡，将有不战自困之势，不能不令人深为忧虑。
English: Add to that the poisonous fumes and smoke, all of which can injure people. Hordes of barbarians know that a large army is coming, and if they clear the field, flee far away, block the dangerous places, make our army unable to retreat, and there is no food to be desired nearby, soldiers are starving, and diseases are dying, there will be a trend of not fighting and self-deprivation, which cannot but cause deep concern.

古文：且自征伐倭国、占城、交趾、爪哇、缅国以来，近三十年，未尝见有尺土一民内属之益，计其所费钱财，死损军数，可胜言哉！
现代文： 而且自征伐日本、占城、交趾、爪哇、缅国以来，已近三十年，未曾见有一尺土地一个百姓归附我天朝，而我朝所费钱财，所损士卒，不可胜计。
English: Moreover, it has been nearly thirty years since the conquest of Japan, the capture of the capital, Koto, Java, and Burma, and I have yet to see a single foot of land or a single citizen returned to my heavenly court. The amount of money I have spent and the number of soldiers I have lost are incalculable.

古文：去岁西征，及今此举，亦复何异。
现代文：去年西征与今年的再度西征又有什么两样。
English: What is the difference between last year's Western Expedition and this year's Western Expedition?

古文：前鉴不远，非难见也。
现代文：前车之鉴不远，并非难以看到。
English: The precedent is not far away, it is not difficult to see.

古文：军劳民扰，未见休期，只深一人，是其祸本。
现代文：劳军扰民，无休止之日，刘深一人为其祸根。
English: The labor army disturbs the people, the endless day, Liu Sheng alone is the root cause.

古文：又闻八番罗国之人，向为征西之军扰害，捐弃生业，相继逃叛，怨深入于骨髓，皆欲得其肉而分食之。
现代文： 又听说八番罗国之人，受征西军的侵害，抛弃他们的职业，相继反抗或逃亡，对刘深恨入骨髓，都要分食其肉。
English: It was also heard that the people of the Eight Dynasties and Eight Kingdoms, who suffered from the invasion of the Western Army, abandoned their occupations, resisted or fled one after another, and hated Liu deeply, had to share his meat.

古文：人心皆恶，天意亦憎，惟须上承天意，下顺人心，早正深之罪，续下明诏，示彼一方以圣朝数十年抚养之恩，仍谕今再无远征之役。
现代文：人们内心恨他，上天也憎恶他。望朝廷上承天意，下顺民心，早将刘深正法，向西南蛮夷再降明诏，表示圣朝数十年对他们抚养之恩，自今再不会有远征之役。
English: The people hated him in their hearts, and the heavens also hated him. Hoping that the imperial court would follow the will of heaven and the will of the people, Liu Shenzheng would have been put under the law, and the imperial edict would be issued to the southwestern barbarians, expressing the gratitude of the Holy Dynasty for their support for decades. From now on, there would be no more expeditionary campaigns.

古文：以此招之，自有相续归顺之日，使其官民上下，皆知未须远劳王师，与区区小丑争一旦之胜负也。
现代文：他们自然会归顺天朝。过去大舜退兵而苗族来归顺，赵充国不战而羌人安分守己，这些事载在经传之中，为后代万世效法。
English: They will naturally submit to the heavenly court. In the past, Dazhao withdrew and the Miao people submitted, and Zhao Chongguo did not fight and let the people keep their peace. These things are recorded in the scriptures and are imitated for generations to come.

古文：以我之镇静，御彼之猖狂，布恩以柔其心，畜威以制其力，期之以久，渐次服之。
现代文： 为今之计，最好是驻兵于靠近西南蛮夷地方的我边境之内，使水运交通达于远近，内地或用盐引茶引，或用钱钞来增价购买军粮；而且法令严明，官不失信。
English: For the time being, it is best to station troops within our border near the southwestern barbarian place, so that the water transport traffic can reach far and near. The mainland can either use salt to bring tea, or use money to increase the price to buy military food; and the laws are strict, and the officials will not lose their credibility.

古文：此王者之师，万全之利也。
现代文：这样就可使米船沿江而上运至边境，军粮自足，百姓也不受侵扰，达到内安根本，外固边防的目的。
English: In this way, the U.S. ships can be transported up the river to the border, the military food can be self-sufficient, and the people will not be disturbed, so as to achieve the goal of fundamental internal security and solid external border defense.

古文：若谓业已如此，欲罢不能，亦当虑其关系之大，审详成败，算定而行。
现代文：以我镇静之师，防御蛮夷的侵犯，恩威并施，久而久之，他们会渐渐驯服，这才是万全之策。如果说大军已出，欲罢不能，那也要考虑关系之大小，战事之成败，慎重而行。
English: With me as a calming instructor, defending against barbarian encroachments, and bestowing grace and favor, over time, they will gradually be tamed. This is the best strategy. If it is said that a large army has come out and cannot be stopped, then we must also consider the size of the relationship, the success or failure of the war, and proceed with caution.

古文：彼溪洞诸蛮，各有种类，今之相聚者，皆乌合之徒，必无久能同心敌我之理。
现代文：那里的少数民族，有各种各类，现在聚集者，都是乌合之众，必无同心长期与我为敌之理。
English: The ethnic minorities there are of various types, and those who are gathering now are a rabble, and there is no reason for them to be enemies with me for a long time.

古文：但急之则相救，缓之则相疑，以计使之互相雠怨，待彼有可乘之隙，我有可动之时，徐命诸军数道俱进。
现代文：但若我进攻得急，他们会相互救援，缓攻则相互猜疑，我们要施离间计，使他们相互为仇，等到有机可乘之时，再命诸军分路进攻。
English: But if I attack in haste, they will come to each other's rescue; if I attack slowly, they will suspect each other. We must make a diversionary tactic, make them enemies of each other, and wait until there is an opportunity, and then order the armies to attack in separate directions.

古文：服从者恩之以仁，拒敌者威之以武，恩威相济，功乃易成。
现代文：对于顺服者，予以宽大，抗拒者，武力镇压，恩威并用，易获功效。
English: For those who obey, be lenient, and for those who resist, use force to suppress, use grace and authority, and easily obtain efficacy.

古文：若舍恩任威，以蹈深之覆辙，恐他日之患，有甚于今日也。
现代文：若舍恩用威，蹈刘深之覆辙，恐将来之忧患更甚于今日。 
English: If Shao En uses his authority and follows Liu Sheng's example, I am afraid that the future troubles will be even greater than today.

古文：不报，遂谢病去。
现代文：天祥的奏章没得答复，他便托病辞官。
English: When there was no answer to the auspicious music, he asked to be excused.

古文：七年，召拜集贤大学士，商议中书省事。
现代文：大德七年，召天祥入朝，拜为集贤大学士，商议中书省事。
English: In the seventh year of the Great German Era, Tianxiang was summoned to the imperial court, and he was worshipped as a scholar of wisdom and prudence.

古文：八月，地震，河东尤甚，诏问弭灾之道。
现代文：八月，发生地震，河东尤为厉害，朝廷下诏，征询消灾之道。
English: In August, an earthquake occurred, particularly severe in Hedong, and the Imperial Court issued an edict to consult on how to eliminate the disaster.

古文：天祥上章，极言阴阳不和，天地不位，皆人事失宜所致。
现代文：天祥上章说这是因为阴阳不和，天地位置不正，而这些都是人事失宜所造成的。
English: Tianxiang said in the last chapter that this was due to the discord between yin and yang, and the improper position of heaven and earth, all of which were caused by personnel misconduct.

古文：执政者以其言切直，抑不以闻。
现代文：执政者认为这话太直，不敢转呈皇帝。
English: The governor thought this was too frank and did not dare to present it to the emperor.

古文：天祥自被召还京，至是且一岁，未尝得见言事，输忠无地，常郁郁不自释，又不欲苟糜禀禄，八年正月，移疾谢去。
现代文：天祥自奉诏还京，时达一年之久，未曾见到皇帝以表示他忠君之心，常郁郁不乐，又不愿空领俸禄，于八年正月称病辞官而去。
English: Tianxiang returned to Beijing with an imperial edict. For a year, he did not see the emperor to show his loyalty to the emperor. He was often depressed and unhappy, and did not want to receive a salary. In the first month of the eighth year, he called in sick and resigned.

古文：至通州，中书遣使追留，不还。
现代文：到了通州，中书省派人去追留。他还是不肯回朝。
English: When he arrived in Tongzhou, the Chinese Ministry of Education sent someone to track him down, but he still refused to return to China.

古文：至大四年，仁宗即位，复遣使召之，辞以老疾不起。
现代文：皇帝闻知，赐钞五千贯，派专官护送回家。九年五月，拜为中书右丞，参议枢密院事，提调诸卫屯田。五次派人送去任命诏书，他都以年老为由，不肯接受任命。
English: Emperor Wen Zhi gave him 5,000 yuan in banknotes and sent a special officer to escort him home. In May of the ninth year, he was appointed as the Second Secretary of the Central Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, and was appointed to the Privy Council. Five times he was sent an imperial edict to be appointed, but he refused to accept the appointment on the grounds of old age.

古文：延祐三年四月，卒于家，年八十。
现代文：至大四年，仁宗即位，又遣使去召他回朝，他还是以年老多病为理由辞谢。延三年卒于家，终年八十七岁。
English: When he was four years old, Emperor Nanzong ascended the throne and sent an envoy to summon him back to the imperial court, but he still declined, citing old age and illness. He died at home three years later, at the age of eighty-seven.

古文：累赠推忠正义全德佐理功臣、河南江北等处行中书省平章政事，追封赵国公，谥文忠。
现代文：赠推忠正义全德佐理功臣、河南江北等处行中书省平章政事，追封赵国公，谥 文忠 。
English: Zhao Guogong was posthumously awarded the title of Zhao Guogong, and Wenzhong was posthumously awarded the title of Zhao Guogong.

古文：刘宣刘宣，字伯宣，其先潞人也。
现代文：刘宣字伯宣，其先祖本潞州人，后由陕西移居太原。
English: Liu Xuan, whose ancestors were originally from Zhangzhou, later moved from Shaanxi to Taiyuan.

古文：因出戍，留居忻，金末避地于陕，后徙太原。
现代文：宣禀性沉静刚毅，在家孝敬父母，友爱兄弟。
English: He is a quiet and strong-willed person. At home, he respects his parents and loves his brothers.

古文：宣沉毅清介，居家孝友，自幼喜读书，有经世之志。宣抚张德辉至河东，见而器重之，还朝，荐为中书省掾。宣暇则往从国子祭酒许衡讲明理学。
现代文：自幼好读书，有治理国家的大志。宣抚张德辉至河东，见刘宣，很器重他，回朝举荐任中书省官员。宣在闲暇时去听国子祭酒许衡讲解理学。
English: He was good at reading from a young age and had a great ambition to govern the country. When Zhang Dehui went to see Liu Xuan in Hedong, he was very respectful to him and recommended him to return to China to be an official of the Ministry of Education. In his spare time, Xuan went to listen to Guozihai wine Xu Heng lecture on logic.

古文：初命为河北河南道巡行劝农副使。
现代文：后任命为河北河南道巡行劝农副使。
English: Later, he was appointed as the deputy agricultural envoy of Henan Province.

古文：至元十二年，入为中书户部郎中，改行省郎中。
现代文：至元十二年，刘宣入朝任中书省户部郎中，后改任行省郎中。
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Liu Xuan entered the imperial court and was appointed as a junior member of the household department of the Central Literature Department, and later he was appointed as a junior member of the line ministry.

古文：从丞相伯颜、平章阿术统军平江南，赞画居多。
现代文：随丞相伯颜、平章阿术统军平定江南，多出谋划策。
English: With the unification of the south of the Yangtze River by the chancellor Bo Yan and the general Ping Zhang Ah Shu, more plans were made.

古文：伯颜尝命宣诣阙上捷书，世祖召见，亲问以南征事，应对称旨，赐器服宠嘉之。
现代文：伯颜命宣回朝呈进捷报，世祖召见他，询问南征情形，宣的回答使世祖很满意，赐器物冠服以表示对他的嘉奖。
English: Bo Yan ordered Xuan to return to the imperial court to present the victory report. The ancestor summoned him to inquire about the situation of the Southern Expedition. Xuan's answer made the ancestor very satisfied, and he gave him a crown and a robe to express his appreciation.

古文：江南平，命宣沙汰江淮冗官，其所存革，悉合公论。
现代文：江南平定后，命宣去淘汰江淮一些无事可做的官员，他对官员去留的处理，均合公论。
English: After the pacification of Jiangnan, he was ordered to eliminate some officials of Jianghuai who had nothing to do. His treatment of officials leaving and staying was in line with public opinion.

古文：除知松江府，未几同知浙西宣慰司事。
现代文：宣受命任松江知府，不久改任同知浙西宣慰司事。
English: Xuan was appointed as the governor of Songjiang Province, and soon he was appointed as the secretary of Xuan comfort in West Zhejiang Province.

古文：在官五年，威惠并著。
现代文：为官五年，其名声政绩都称著于世。
English: As an official for five years, his reputation and political achievements are famous in the world.

古文：升江淮行省参议，擢江西湖东道提刑按察使。
现代文：升为江淮行省参议，再升为江西湖东道提刑按察使。
English: He was promoted to the Jianghuai-Hangzhou Provincial Councilor, and then promoted to the Jiangxi Lake host penalty according to the Inspector.

古文：二十三年，入为礼部尚书，遂迁吏部。
现代文：至元二十三年，宣入朝为礼部尚书，其后转为吏部尚书。
English: In the 23rd year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and later to the Ministry of Personnel.

古文：时将伐交趾，宣上言曰： 连年日本之役，百姓愁戚，官府扰攘，今春停罢，江浙军民欢声如雷。
现代文：朝廷将要征伐交趾，宣上书劝阻，书中说： 连年征讨日本，百姓抱怨，官府烦扰，今春停止征讨，江浙军民欢声如雷。
English: The imperial court was going to have a war of conquest against Japan, and a proclamation was issued to dissuade them. The proclamation said, "The war of conquest against Japan has been going on for years, and the people have been complaining, and the government has been bothering them. The war of conquest will be stopped this spring, and the people of Jiangsu and Zhejiang are rejoicing.

古文：安南小邦，臣事有年，岁贡未尝愆期，边帅生事兴兵，彼因避窜海岛，使大举无功，将士伤残。
现代文：安南小邦，臣服于中国已有若干年了，每年来朝贡，从未过期。边帅生事兴兵，交趾人逃入海岛，使我大军征讨无功，损兵折将。
English: Annan Xiaobang has been subject to China for several years. He pays tribute to the imperial court every year, and it has never expired. The border guard has caused trouble and raised an army, and the enemy has fled to the island, making the recruitment of my army useless and the loss of soldiers.

古文：今又下令再征，闻者莫不恐惧。
现代文：今又下令再征，人们听此消息，莫不恐惧。
English: Now they've ordered another round of conscription, and people are horrified by the news.

古文：自古兴兵，必须天时，中原平土，犹避盛夏，交广炎瘴之地，毒气害人，甚于兵刃。
现代文：自古用兵必先看天时如何，中原平川之地，还要避暑，交广炎热瘴疠之地，毒气害人甚于兵刀。
English: Since ancient times, soldiers must first see what the weather is like. In the Central Plains, the land of Hirakawa, it is necessary to take a break from the summer, cross the vast hot land, and poison gas is more harmful than a soldier's sword.

古文：今以七月，会诸道兵于静江，比至安南，病死必众，缓急遇敌，何以应之？
现代文：今令诸道兵马于七月会师静江，那时到了安南，病死的人一定不少，遇敌又如何应战。
English: Now all the Taoist soldiers and horses will join the Jingjiang division in July. When they arrived in Annan, there must have been a lot of people who died of illness. How would they fight if they met the enemy?

古文：又交趾无粮，水路难通，无车马牛畜驮载，不免陆运。
现代文：交趾无粮，水路难通，无车马牛畜驮运，只靠人力。
English: There is no grain, the waterway is difficult to pass, there is no vehicle to transport horses, cattle and livestock, and only human power is needed.

古文：一夫担米五斗，往还自食外，官得其半；若十万石，用四十万人，止可供一二月。
现代文：一夫担米五斗，除往返自食外，官仅得其半；如运十万石粮，用民夫四十万人，只供一二月之用。
English: If one man carries five bushels of rice, in addition to the round-trip self-catering, the official only gets half of it; if one hundred thousand koku of grain is transported, it will be used by four hundred thousand people, and it will only be used for one or two months.

古文：况湖广密迩，溪洞寇盗常多，万一奸人伺隙，大兵一出，乘虚生变，虽有留后，人马疲弱衰老，卒难应变。何不与彼中军官深知事体者，论量万全方略，不然，将复蹈前辙矣。 
现代文：除军粮外，还要搬运其他军需品，总共要五六十万人。广西、湖南调度频繁，民多离散，就是每户都来服役也是不够的。何况湖广邻近交趾地方，溪洞寇盗很多，大兵一出，万一奸人乘虚作乱，难以应付。何不与交趾军中之识事体的军官，共同商议一万全之策，否则将再蹈上次征讨交趾的覆辙。 
English: In addition to military rations, there are also other military supplies to be transported, a total of five or six hundred thousand people. In Guangxi and Hunan, the dispatching is frequent and the people are scattered, so even if every household comes to serve, it is not enough. Moreover, there are many robberies in the areas close to Kota Kinabalu, and there are many robberies in the creeks and caves. Once the soldiers come out, it is difficult to cope with the case that the ruffians take advantage of the chaos. Why not discuss the best strategy with the officers in the Kota Kinabalu army who are knowledgeable about things, otherwise we will repeat the mistakes of the

古文：及再征日本，宣又上言，其略曰： 近议复置征东行省，再兴日本之师，此役不息，安危系焉。
现代文：朝廷又要东征日本，宣又上书说： 近又决定设置征东行省，再次出兵日本。这场战争关系到我国家之安危。
English: The imperial court also wanted to march eastward to Japan, and the proclamation went on to say: Recently, it was decided to set up a province to march eastward and send troops to Japan again. This war is related to the safety and security of our country.

古文：唆都建伐占城，海牙言平交趾，三数年间，湖广、江西供给船只、军须粮运，官民大扰，广东群盗并起，军兵远涉江海瘴毒之地，死伤过半，即日连兵未解。
现代文：唆都建议讨伐占城，海牙提出南征交趾，三五年内，湖广、江西供应船只、军需、粮草，官民都大受骚扰，致使广东群盗并起。我军远涉江海瘴疠之地，士卒死伤过半。
English: Within three to five years, the supply ships, military supplies, grain and grass, government officials and civilians in Huguang and Jiangxi were greatly harassed, resulting in the simultaneous rise of gangs of thieves in Guangdong. Our army went far away to the place where the river was flooded, and more than half of the soldiers were killed and injured.

古文：且交趾与我接境，蕞尔小邦，遣亲王提兵深入，未见报功，唆都为贼所杀，自遗羞辱。
现代文：交趾与我国接壤，只是一个小国，遣亲王领兵深入，未见报功，唆都被杀，自遗羞辱。
English: It was only a small country, bordering on our country, that sent the prince to lead the troops deep into the country. He did not see any reward, and they were all killed, leaving him humiliated.

古文：况日本海洋万里，疆土阔远，非二国可比。
现代文：而日本与我隔着海洋，相距万里，国土辽阔，非占城、交趾二国可比。
English: Japan, on the other hand, is separated from us by an ocean, thousands of miles away, and has a vast territory, comparable to that of two countries.

古文：今次出师，动众履险，纵不遇风，可到彼岸，倭国地广，徒众猥多，彼兵四集，我师无援，万一不利，欲发救兵，其能飞渡耶？
现代文：如今出征，兴师动众，冒着危险，即或不遇飓风，可到彼岸，而倭国地广，人口众多，他们大军四集，我军无援，万一不利，就是再发救兵，能飞渡过去吗？
English: Now they are setting out, rousing the troops, and braving the danger, that is, if they do not encounter a hurricane, they can go to the other shore, but the land of Wa is vast and the population is large, their army is four sets, our army is helpless, in case of disadvantage, it is to send rescuers again, can they fly over?

古文：隋伐高丽，三次大举，数见败北，丧师百万。
现代文：隋朝伐高丽，三次大举进攻，都失败而还，丧师百万。
English: The Sui Dynasty attacked Korea three times in a big way, but all of them failed and were defeated, with the loss of millions of soldiers.

古文：大抵利民权物，其要自不妄用始，若欲济丘壑之用，非惟铸造不敷，抑亦不久自弊矣。 
现代文：唐太宗以英武自负，亲征高丽，虽夺取数城而还，但也很后悔。而且高丽平壤诸城皆处陆地，离我中原不远，隋唐两代尚不能征服，何况日本远在海中，与中国相离万里，又岂能征服！ 
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty was proud of his military prowess and personally conquered Goryeo. Although he took several cities and returned them, he also regretted it. Moreover, the cities of Goryeo and Pyongyang are all located on land, not far from our Central Plains. The Sui and Tang dynasties have not yet been able to conquer them. What's more, Japan is far away in the sea, thousands of miles away from China. How could they conquer it?

古文：属桑哥谋立尚书省，以专国柄，钱议遂罢。二十五年，由集贤学士除行台御史中丞。时江浙行省丞相忙古台悍戾纵恣，常虑台臣纠言其罪，而尤忌宣。
现代文：世祖认为他说得有理，加以采纳。至元二十五年，由集贤学士授行台御史中丞。当时江浙行省丞相忙古台恣意横暴，常怕台臣弹劾他的罪行，尤其忌恨刘宣。
English: The ancestor thought he was right and adopted it. In the year of Yuan, 25 years ago, the Taishi middle-ranking official was awarded the title of Taishi middle-ranking official by the Jixian Academy. At that time, the minister of the Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces was busy with the arbitrary violence of the ancient Taiwan, and he was often afraid that the Taiwanese would impeach him for his crimes, especially he hated Liu Xuan.

古文：一日，御史大夫与中丞出建康城，点视军船，群御史从。
现代文：有天，御史大夫与御史中丞出建康城检阅军船，御史们都随从。
English: One day, the Chief Historian and the Vice-President of the Council of Historians went to Jiankang to inspect the warships, and the historians followed them.

古文：有以军船载苇者，御史张谅诘之，知为行省官所使，诣扬州覆实。
现代文：有人用军船载运带草，御史张谅盘问，知行省官所派遣，便到扬州去进行核实。
English: Some people used military ships to carry grass, interrogated Zhang Peng, dispatched by provincial officials, and went to Yangzhou to verify.

古文：忙古台盛怒，即图报复。
现代文：忙古台大怒，立即图谋报复。
English: He was furious and immediately plotted revenge.

古文：时大夫之父，官于属郡，随被按劾。
现代文：御史大夫之父在该郡为官，随即被弹劾。
English: Dr. Mishi's father was an official in the county and was immediately impeached.

古文：遣其党造建康，伺台中违失，台官皆竦惧，阴往恳求自解，惟宣屹然不动。
现代文：忙古台派人去建康，窥视御史台在处理御史大夫父亲中的错误。台臣知道后都害怕，暗中去向忙古台求和解，只有宣不去。
English: He Gudai sent someone to Jiankang to spy on the mistakes made by the Imperial Historian in dealing with the father of the Imperial Historian. When the courtiers found out, they were afraid and secretly went to He Gudai to seek reconciliation, but Xuan would not go.

古文：忙古台怨宣愈甚，罗织宣之子，系扬州狱。又令建康酒务、淘金等官及录事司官以罪免者，诬告行台沮坏钱粮，以闻于朝，必欲置宣死地。
现代文：忙古台更加恨他，罗织罪名将宣之子下狱，又令建康酒务、淘金等官及录事司官员，诬告行台破坏粮食的输送，报告朝廷，必欲置宣于死地。
English: Busy Gutai hated him even more. He sent Xuan's son to prison on trumped-up charges, and ordered officials from Jiankang's liquor and gold mining departments, as well as officials from the Records Division, to falsely accuse Xiangtai of sabotaging grain transportation and report to the imperial court. He was determined to put Xuan to death.

古文：前治书侍御史霍肃为叙次其文，读者悲愤。
现代文：朝廷派官员二人来审理其事，宣及御史六人都被捕。九月初一日，宣自杀。
English: The court sent two officials to investigate the matter, and six people, including Xuan and Goshi, were arrested. On the first day of September, Xuan committed suicide.

古文：宣既引决，行省白于朝，以为宣知罪重自杀。
现代文：刘宣自杀前，曾把一封书信交给侄子刘自诚，其中表示他对恶势力宁死不屈的决心。
English: Before Liu Xuan committed suicide, he gave a letter to his nephew Liu Zicheng, in which he expressed his determination to die rather than give in to evil forces.

古文：前后构成其事者，郎中张斯立也。
现代文：另处还有一篇列举忙古台罪状的公文。读者为之悲愤。宣自杀后，行省报告了朝廷，以为他是畏罪自杀。
English: Elsewhere, there is a public document listing the charges against He Guotai. Readers are outraged and saddened. After he announced his suicide, the provincial government reported to the imperial court that he had committed suicide out of fear of punishment.

古文：然宣忠义节操，为世所重，闻者莫不嗟悼。
现代文：然宣为人忠义，注重节操，为世人所尊重。
English: However, it is declared to be loyal to people, pay attention to discipline, and is respected by the world.

古文：延祐四年，从子自持上宣行实，御史台以闻，制赠资善大夫、御史中丞、上护军，追封彭城郡公，谥忠宪。
现代文：直到延四年，其侄子自持把宣死的前因后果通过御史台上报朝廷。朝廷赠资善大夫、御史中丞、上护军，追封彭城郡公，谥 忠宪 。
English: Until four years later, his nephew reported the cause and effect of his death to the Imperial Court through the Imperial History Office. The Imperial Court presented him with the title of the Pengcheng County Governor, the title of the Imperial Historian, and the title of the Supreme Protector.

古文：何荣祖
现代文：何荣祖字继先，祖籍太原。
English: He Rongzu was the first, and his ancestral home was Taiyuan.

古文：何氏世业吏，荣祖尤所通习，遂以吏累迁中书省掾，擢御史台都事。
现代文：父何瑛，在金朝为官，授明威将军。金亡后迁家于广平。荣祖体貌魁伟，额上有红色纹，如两棵树，背突出，看相的说他将来会做大官，而且长寿。
English: His father, He Ying, was an official in the Jin Dynasty and was given the title of General Mingwei. After the death of Jin, the family moved to Guangping. Rong Zu had a great physique, a red stripe on his forehead, like two trees, and a protruding back. According to his appearance, he would be a high official in the future, and he had a long life.

古文：始折节读书，日记数千言。
现代文：何家世代为吏，荣祖也熟悉官府之事。
English: He has been a bureaucrat for several generations, and he is familiar with the government.

古文：阿合马方用事，置总库于其家，以收四方之利，号曰和市。
现代文：他由中书省的一个属吏而升为御史台都事。这时阿合马当政，在其家中设立总库，收纳四方之物，而称之为 和市 。
English: He rose from a subordinate official of the Ministry of Chinese Literature to become the governor of the Imperial Capital of History. At this time, Ahma was in power, and he set up a central warehouse in his home to store things from all over the country, which he called Wa City.

古文：监察御史范方等斥其非，论甚力。
现代文：监察御史范方等对此进行了弹劾。
English: Supervisor Goshifanfang and others impeached him.

古文：阿合马知荣祖主其谋，奏为左右司都事以隶己。
现代文：阿合马知道这是何荣祖出的主意，奏请调荣祖为左右司都司，把他置于自己的管辖之下。
English: Ahma knew that this was He Rongzu's idea. He asked that He Rongzu be transferred to the left and right capital departments and put him under his own jurisdiction.

古文：未几，御史台除治书侍御史，升侍御史，又出为山东按察使，而阿合马莫逞其志矣。
现代文：不久，御史台任荣祖为治书侍御史，升为侍御史。又调任山东按察使，阿合马的阴谋未能得逞。
English: Soon after, the Grand Historian was appointed to serve as the Grand Historian of Shandong Province, and Ahama's plot failed.

古文：有帖木剌思者，以贪墨为佥事李唐卿所劾。
现代文：帖木剌思贪赃枉法，为佥事李唐卿弹劾。
English: Temujin thought it was greedy and unfair, and impeached Li Tangqing for the anecdote.

古文：帖木剌思计无所出，适济南有上变告者，唐卿察其妄，取讼牒焚之。
现代文：帖木剌思想不出对付的办法。恰巧这时济南有人告发谋反事，唐卿察觉此是诬告，把起诉人的状子烧了。
English: At that time, someone in Jinan made an accusation of plotting against the emperor. Tang Xing realized that this was a false accusation and burned the accuser's complaint.

古文：帖木剌思乃摭取为辞，告唐卿纵反者，逮系数十人。
现代文：帖木剌思借此事指控唐卿放纵了谋反者，于是逮捕了数十人。
English: Using this incident to accuse Tang Ching of indulging the rebel plotters, he arrested dozens of people.

古文：狱久不决，诏荣祖与左丞郝祯、参政耿仁杰鞫之。
现代文：但此案长期不能判决。朝廷命荣祖与左丞郝祯、参政耿仁杰去审理。
English: However, the case could not be decided for a long time, and the imperial court ordered Rong Zu, Zuo Zheng, and politician Geng Renjie to be tried.

古文：荣祖得其情，欲抵告者罪。祯、仁杰议以失口乱言之罪坐之，荣祖不可。
现代文：他们了解事情的真象后，荣祖主张判诬告之罪，祯与仁杰认为对诬告者只判失口乱言之罪，荣祖不同意。
English: After they understood the truth of the matter, Rong Zu advocated the crime of false accusation. Zou and Renjie believed that the false accuser was only sentenced for the crime of loose talk. Rong Zu disagreed.

古文：俄迁河南按察使，二执政竟以失口乱言杖其人，而株连者俱得释，唐卿之诬遂白。
现代文：不久，荣祖调任河南按察使，祯与仁杰终以失口乱言之罪，对诬者处以杖刑，释放被株连的人，唐卿所蒙之冤得以昭雪。
English: Soon after, Rong Zu was transferred to the post of Henan's inspector general. Zou and Ren Jie were eventually found guilty of speaking out of turn, and were punished with the cane. The people who had been arrested were released, and the injustice suffered by Tang Jing was cleared up.

古文：平凉府言有南人二十余辈叛归江南，安西行省欲上闻，会荣祖来为参政，止之曰： 何必上闻朝廷，此辈去者皆人奴耳，今闻江南平，遁往求其家，移文召捕之可也。 
现代文：平凉府报告说，有南人二十余人逃往江南，安西行省欲将此事上报朝廷，刚好荣祖来任行省参政，阻止他们上报，他认为 ：何必上报朝廷，这些逃去的人都是奴隶，今闻江南已平，回去找自己家而已，可发文逮捕回来就是了。 
English: Ping Liangfu reported that there were more than twenty Nan people who fled to the south of the Yangtze River. Anxi Province wanted to report the matter to the imperial court. Just as Rong Zu came to the province to participate in politics, he prevented them from reporting. He thought, "Why report to the imperial court? These people who fled are slaves. Now that the south of the Yangtze River is flat, they only want to go back to find their own homes. They can just send a letter to arrest them and come back."

古文：已而逃者俱获，果人奴也，治以本罪而付其主。
现代文：后查明这些人果是奴隶，把他们交还给主人。
English: They were later found to be slaves and returned to their owners.

古文：其于事明决多类此。除云南行省参知政事，以母老辞。
现代文：荣祖被任命为云南行省参知政事，因母亲年迈，辞不赴任。
English: Rong Zu was appointed to the post of Yunnan Provincial Party Secretary, but he did not take up the post because his mother was too old.

古文：又拜御史中丞，复出为山东东西道按察使。
现代文：又拜御史中丞，出京任山东东西道按察使。
English: He also paid homage to the Grand Historian, and went to Beijing to serve as the inspector of Shandong's eastern and western provinces.

古文：召入为尚书参知政事。
现代文：后召入朝为尚书参知政事。
English: Later, he was called to the imperial court to participate in political affairs.

古文：时桑哥专政，亟于理算钱谷，人受其害。
现代文：桑哥专政，迫切地搜刮钱粮，人人受害。
English: Sango dictatorship, desperately scrounging for money and grain, everyone is a victim.

古文：荣祖请罢之，帝不从，屡恳请不已，乃稍缓之。而畿内民苦尤甚，荣祖每以为辞。
现代文：荣祖多次奏请停止，世祖不听从，畿内之民受害尤甚，荣祖又多次向皇帝报告畿内人民困苦，请求免去赋税。
English: Rong Zu repeatedly appealed to the Emperor to stop, but the Emperor did not listen, and the people in the Kinai region suffered the most. Rong Zu also repeatedly reported to the Emperor the hardships of the people in the Kinai region and asked to be exempted from paying taxes.

古文：同僚曰： 上既为免诸路，惟未及在京，可少止勿言也。 
现代文：同僚劝他再不要去劝谏了，荣祖执意不肯，不怕违背圣上旨意，不签署有关公文。
English: Colleagues advised him not to go to persuade Yao any more, but Rong Zu was adamant that he would not sign the relevant official document for fear of violating the will of the Almighty.

古文：荣祖执愈坚，至于忤旨不少屈，竟不署其牍。
现代文：不过一月，桑哥的害民之弊为大家所共知。
English: But by January, Sango's ills were well known.

古文：未逾月，而害民之弊皆闻，帝乃思荣祖言，召问所宜。
现代文：世祖这才想起荣祖过去所说的那些话，召他来问解救的办法。
English: It was only then that the patriarch remembered what Rong Zu had said in the past, and called him to ask for help.

古文：荣祖请于岁终立局考校，人以为便，立为常式，诏赐以钞万一千贯。
现代文：荣祖建议设立专门机构在年终时对征收钱粮情形进行考核。大家都认为这办法很好，以后长期实行。朝廷赐他钞一万贯以资奖励。
English: Rong Zu suggested setting up a special agency to assess the situation of the collection of money and grain at the end of the year. Everyone thought this was a good idea and would be implemented for a long time. The court gave him a reward of ten thousand yuan.

古文：荣祖条中外有官规程，欲矫时敝，桑哥抑不为通。
现代文：荣祖陈奏朝廷内外官员规则，以纠正弊病。但为桑哥所压制，不能实行。
English: The glorious ancestor Chen played the rule of officials inside and outside the court to correct the ills. However, it was suppressed by Sango and could not be implemented.

古文：荣祖既与之异议，乃以病告，特授集贤大学士。
现代文：荣祖与桑哥既意见不合，便借病告假，朝廷特授荣祖为集贤大学士。
English: Since Rong Zu and Sango did not see eye to eye, Rong Zu took a leave of absence due to illness, and the Imperial Court specially awarded Rong Zu with the title of Jixian University Scholar.

古文：未几，起为尚书右丞。
现代文：不久，起任尚书右丞。
English: Soon after, he took up the post of Shosho Ujo.

古文：又上言： 国家用度不可不足，天下百姓不可不安。
现代文：桑哥倒台后，改荣祖为中书省右丞。祖荣奏请施行《至元新格》，改提刑按察司为肃政廉访司。他上书说 ：国家财用不可不足，而天下百姓也不可不安。
English: After the fall of Sango, Rong Zu was changed to the right-hand man of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. Rong Zu asked for the implementation of the "Ji Yuan Xin Ge," and the Criminal Investigation Department was changed to the Political Corruption Investigation Department. He wrote a letter saying: The state's financial expenditure must not be insufficient, and the people of the world must not be worried.

古文：今理财者弗顾民力之困，言治者弗图国计之大。
现代文：今管理财政的人，不顾人民之困苦，谈政治者不规划国家的大政方针。
English: The people who manage the finances now do not care about the hardships of the people, and the politicians do not plan the country's major policies.

古文：且当用之人恒多，而得用之人恒少。
现代文：而且应当任用的人总是多，而得到任用的人却总是少。
English: And there are always more people who should be appointed and fewer people who are appointed.

古文：要之，省部实为根本，必择材而用之。
现代文：总之，中书省及各部为国家基础所在，必须选拔有才干者任用。
English: In short, the Ministry of Education and the ministries are the foundation of the country, and talented people must be selected and appointed.

古文：按察司虽监临一道，其职在于除蠹弊、安斯民，苟有弗至，则省台又当遣官体察之，庶有所益。 
现代文：按察司虽监督一道之政务，而其职责在于清除弊端，安抚该道百姓，如果还有未做到的事，行省和行台则应派官去考核，尽量做到于政有益。 
English: According to the inspector general, although supervising the government affairs of a province, his duty is to eliminate the drawbacks and appease the people of the province. If there are still things that have not been done, the province and the province should send officials to assess and try to be beneficial to politics.

古文：帝深然之。
现代文：世祖深以为然。
English: Xuanzong deeply felt justified.

古文：屡以老疾乞解机务，诏免署事，惟预议中书而食其禄。
现代文：荣祖多次因年老病而请求解除他的职务，朝廷诏令他不必负责具体事务，只是参预中书省商定政务，领取俸禄。
English: Rong Zu repeatedly requested to be relieved of his duties due to old age and illness, and the Imperial Court ordered him not to be responsible for specific affairs, but to participate in the preparatory work, coordinate government affairs, and receive a salary.

古文：寻拜昭文馆大学士，预中书省事，又加平章政事。
现代文：不久，拜荣祖为昭文馆大学士，参预中书省事，又加平章政事。
English: Soon after, Bai Rongzu became a scholar of the Zhaowen Library, attended the preparatory school of the Ministry of Education, and was awarded the title of the Minister of Political Affairs.

古文：以水旱请罢，不允。
现代文：发生水旱灾害，他以此为由，请求罢职，朝廷未准。
English: When a flood and drought disaster occurred, he used this as a reason to request resignation, but the Imperial Court did not approve.

古文：先是，荣祖奉旨定《大德律令》，书成已久，至是乃得请于上，诏元老大臣聚听之。未及颁行，适子秘书少监惠没，遂归广平，卒，年七十九。
现代文：荣祖曾奉旨定《大德律令》，此书早已完成，现在奏请诏命元老大臣审订。还未来得及颁行，因其子秘书少监何惠去世，他辞职回到广平，年七十九岁卒。
English: Rong Zu had ordered the "Grand Decrees," which had already been completed, to be submitted to the Minister of Elderly Affairs for review. However, he did not have time to issue them, as his secretary, Junior Inspector He Hui, had passed away. He resigned and returned to Guangping, at the age of 79.

古文：赠光禄大夫、大司徒、柱国，追封赵国公，谥文宪。
现代文：赠光禄大夫、大司徒、柱国，追封赵国公，谥 文宪 。
English: He bestowed the titles of Guanglu Daifu, Dazhi Tuo and Zhu Guo, and posthumously conferred the title of Zhao Guogong.

古文：荣祖身至大官，而僦第以居，饮器用青瓷杯。
现代文：荣祖身为大官，却租房居住，茶具是普通青瓷。
English: Rong Zu is a high-ranking official, but he lives in a rented house. The tea set is ordinary celadon.

古文：中宫闻之，赐以上尊，及金五十两、银五百两、钞二万五千贯，俾置器买宅，以旌其廉。
现代文：皇后闻知，赐上等饮具及金五十两、银五百两、钞二万五千贯，让他买宅添置用具，以表彰他的廉洁。
English: Empress Wen Zhi gave him first-class drinking utensils, as well as fifty-two taels of gold, five hundred taels of silver, and twenty-five thousand yuan in banknotes, and told him to buy a house and buy more utensils in recognition of his honesty.

古文：所著书，有《大畜》十集，又有《学易记》、《载道集》、《观物外篇》等书。
现代文：其著述有《大畜》十集，还有《学易记》、《载道集》、《观物外篇》等书。
English: He has written ten collections of "Big Cattle," as well as "Easy to Learn," "Dao Collection," "Outside Viewing" and other books.

古文：陈思济陈思济，字济民，柘城人也。
现代文：陈思济字济民，柘城人。
English: Chen Si Jizhi Zi Jimin, the people of Lucheng.

古文：世祖以京兆为国重镇，命廉希宪等行中书省于陕西。思济实与偕行，多所赞画。
现代文：幼读书，在同辈中以才气称著。世祖为太子时即闻其名，召入府做顾问。世祖即位，始建中书省和各部，令思济掌管朝臣的奏书。世祖认为京兆是国家重镇，命廉希宪等巡察陕西行中书省，思济同去，多出谋划策。
English: Reading books at a young age, he was known for his talent among his peers. When his father was crown prince, his name was known and he was called to the palace to be an adviser. When his father ascended the throne, he established the Ministry of Books and various departments, and put Siji in charge of the courtiers' reports. His father believed that Jingzhao was a national important town, and he wanted to inspect Shaanxi Province and the Ministry of Books. Siji went with him and made more suggestions.

古文：中统三年，诏诛王文统，召廉希宪入中书，思济还，仍掌敷奏。事无巨细，悉就准绳，姚枢、许衡皆器重之。
现代文：中统三年，诏令诛王文统，召廉希宪入中书省。思济也回朝，仍掌管奏书，事无巨细，皆按章办理，深为姚枢、许衡所器重。
English: Three years after the unification of China, the king of China, King Wen, issued an imperial edict calling Lian Xixian to join the Ministry of Literature. Siji also returned to the imperial court, still in charge of the record, and everything was handled according to the rules. He was deeply influenced by Yaozhu and Xu Heng.

古文：会阿合马入省，耻其位在希宪左，每欲肆意而行，希宪守正不从。
现代文：阿合马入中书省，其位在希宪之下，深以为耻，总是想任意行事，而希宪坚持不从。
English: When Ahma entered the Chinese Ministry of Education, his position was below that of He Xian, and he was deeply ashamed. He always wanted to act arbitrarily, but He Xian insisted on disobeying.

古文：及希宪去位，省臣晨集，掾属皆惮阿合马，莫敢前。思济独先以文牍进，阿合马辄于希宪位署押，思济遽掩以手曰： 此非君相署位也。 
现代文：希宪离职后，省臣都惧怕阿合马，早晨集会，都不敢向前，惟独思济手持公文去见他。阿合马在希宪座位上签署，思济指出 ：这不是你的座位。 
English: After He Xian left office, the provincial ministers were afraid of Ah Ma, and they did not dare to come forward at the morning meeting, but Sizi went to see him with a document in hand. Ah Ma signed on He Xian's seat, and Sizi pointed out: This is not your seat.

古文：阿合马怒目视之，众为之惧，思济神色自若。
现代文：阿合马怒目而视，众为他担心，而思济神色自若。
English: The horse glared angrily, the crowd worried for him, but Shiji looked confident.

古文：除右司都事，从希宪行省山东，未几召还。
现代文：授任为右司都事，随希宪巡视山东。不久召还。
English: He was appointed as the right secretary of the capital affairs, and inspected Shandong with He Xian. He was recalled soon.

古文：至元五年，分命中书省总百揆，御史台正百官，一时黜陟登庸，宪章程式，多出其手。
现代文：至元五年，命中书省总理政务，御史台监察百官，一时官吏的降升和选拔重用、典章制度，多是由思济草拟制定的。
English: By the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, more than a hundred officials, including the prime minister of Shuzhou Province, the inspector of the Imperial Historian's Office, the promotion and demotion of officials, the selection and re-use of officials, and the award system, were drafted by Siji.

古文：迁承务郎、同知高唐州事，以绩最闻，拜监察御史。
现代文：后历任承务郎、同知高唐州事，政绩卓著，拜监察御史。
English: Later, he was successively appointed as a successor and a friend of Gao Tang Zhou, with outstanding achievements in politics, and paid homage to the inspector.

古文：时阿合马立尚书省，权在中书右。
现代文：阿合马设立尚书省，其权在中书省之上。
English: The province of Western calligraphy was established in Ahmedabad, and its authority is superior to that of the Chinese calligraphy.

古文：思济与魏初等劾其不法，帝命近臣正之。
现代文：陈思济、魏初等弹劾阿合马的不法行径，帝命近臣去加以查证。
English: Chen Sizi and Wei Junior Impeached the illegal acts of Ahma, and the emperor ordered his close vassals to investigate.

古文：御史各以次对，思济独厉声曰： 御史言官也，非为辨讼设！ 
现代文：御史各以一些不重要的事来陈奏，只有思济厉声说道： 御史是言官，而不是为诉讼做辩护而设！ 
English: The magistrates each made a case out of some unimportant matter, only Siji snapped, "The magistrate is a spokesman, not a defense attorney!

古文：拂袖而出。
现代文：拂袖而去。
English: He stormed off.

古文：授奉训大夫、知沁州，为政简要，不务苛察。
现代文：授奉训大夫、沁州知州，他为政简要，不务苛刻。
English: He was awarded the title of Doctor of Education and the title of Zhangzhou Zhizhou. He was concise in politics, but not harsh.

古文：迁中顺大夫、同知绍兴路总管府事，承檄谳狱。
现代文：升中顺大夫、同知绍兴路总管府事，奉命审定刑事案件。
English: Sheng Zhongshun, a doctor and the chief administrator of Tongzhi Shaoxing Road, was ordered to verify the criminal case.

古文：桐庐有囚羸瘠将死，纵遣还家，候期来决，囚拜请曰： 闻公名久矣，若不早决，恐终不可保。 
现代文：桐庐有一囚犯，瘦弱得快死了，思济放他回家，到期来听候判决。囚犯向他拜谢道： 久闻公之名，若不早日判决，恐我性命难保。 
English: Tonglu had a prisoner who was so emaciated that he was on the verge of death. He wanted to let him go home so that he could await the verdict. The prisoner thanked him and said, "I've known you for a long time. If you don't reach a verdict soon, I'm afraid my life will be in danger."

古文：为阅其案而释之。
现代文：他审阅这囚犯的档案后，认为无罪，把他释放了。
English: After reviewing the prisoner's file, he found him not guilty and released him.

古文：转同知两浙都转运司事，胥吏侵渔，民困于赋役，悉蠲除之。
现代文：转任同知两浙都转运司事，该地区官吏进行勒索，百姓承受不住国家赋役，他全部予以免除。
English: He was transferred to the post of transportation secretary of Tongzhi and Zhedong, the officials in the region carried out extortion, the people could not bear the national service, and he was exempted from all of them.

古文：调陕西汉中道提刑按察副使，丁母忧去官。
现代文：调陕西汉中道提刑按察副使，母亲去世，他辞官归家守孝。
English: He was transferred to Shaanxi Hanzhong Road and promoted to vice-envoy of inspection. His mother died, and he resigned from his post and returned home to be a filial son.

古文：二十三年，加少中大夫、同知浙东道宣慰司事。
现代文：至元二十三年，加少中大夫、同知浙东道宣慰司事。
English: In the 23rd year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to Junior Middle Doctor and the secretary of the Tongzhi-Zhejiang Host.

古文：时浙西大水，民饥，浙东仓廪殷实，即转输以赈之，全活者众，檄上中书，奏允之。
现代文：浙西大水，人民啼饥号寒，而浙东仓廪充实，思济即将浙东仓中之粮运到浙西进行赈济，中书省奏报其事，世祖认可。
English: The west of Zhejiang was flooded and the people were starving, while the east of Zhejiang was well-stocked. It was thought that the grain stored in the east of Zhejiang would be transported to the west of Zhejiang to provide relief. The People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature reported the matter, which was approved by the founder.

古文：浙东复旱，祷于名山，雨大澍，民赖以苏。
现代文：浙东大旱，思济为民祈雨，授嘉议大夫、两淮都转运使。
English: East Zhejiang is in a severe drought, the government is praying for rain for the people, a doctor has been awarded a commendation, and two high-ranking officials have been transferred.

古文：两淮盐课不敷，授嘉议大夫、两淮都转运使，奸弊尽革，商贾通行，岁课以足。擢岭北湖南道肃政廉访使，改池州路总管。江浙行省平章也速答儿威势赫然，摘淘金户三千，括民间田亩，檄下，力上章以止之。
现代文：两淮盐课不足，思济革除奸弊，发展贸易通商，每年盐课也充足了。升岭北湖南道肃政廉访使，后改任池州路总管。江浙行省平章也速答儿威势赫赫，选取淘金户三千户，搜括民田，思济极力上书制止。
English: Two Huai salt courses were not enough, and Siji rectified the frauds and developed trade and commerce, and the annual salt course was also sufficient. Shengling North Hunan Province's anti-corruption envoy, and later became the general manager of Chizhou Road. Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province's Pingzhang also quickly responded to the situation, selected 3,000 gold-panning households, and collected people's fields, and Siji tried his best to stop it.

古文：累迁通议大夫、佥河南江北等处行中书省事。
现代文：后历升通议大夫、佥河南江北等处行中书省事。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of Doctor of Medicine, and traveled to the south of the Yangtze River and the north of the Yangtze River.

古文：赠通议大夫、礼部尚书、上轻车都尉、天水郡侯，谥文简。
现代文：大德五年冬病逝，终年七十岁。赠正议大夫、吏部尚书、上轻车都尉，追封颍川郡侯，谥 文肃 。
English: Dade died of illness in the winter of the fifth year, at the age of seventy. He was awarded the title of doctor, the title of secretary, the title of lieutenant, the title of county magistrate of Shichuan County, and the title of Bunsu.

古文：姚天福姚天福，字君祥，绛州人。
现代文：姚天福字君祥，绛州人。
English: Yao Tianfu, nicknamed Junxiang, is from Zhangzhou.

古文：父居实，避兵徙雁门。
现代文：父姚居实，因避兵难而迁全家于雁门。
English: His father, Yao Jushi, moved the whole family to Yanmen due to the difficulty of avoiding the enemy.

古文：天福幼读《春秋》，通大义。
现代文：天福幼读《春秋》，明了君臣大义。
English: When Tianfu read "Spring and Autumn" as a child, he understood the principle of "lord and vassal."

古文：及长，以材辟怀仁丞。
现代文：长大任怀仁县丞。
English: He served as the mayor of Huairen County.

古文：至元五年，诏立御史台，以天福为阁管勾，寻拜监察御史。
现代文：至元五年，朝廷设立御史台，以天福为架阁管勾，不久即拜为监察御史。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court set up the Imperial History Office, with Tianfu as the cabinet leader, and soon became the overseer of imperial history.

古文：每廷折权臣，帝嘉其直，锡名巴儿思，谓其不畏强悍，犹虎也。
现代文：天福常在朝廷上当面弹劾权臣，世祖嘉奖他的直率，赐名巴儿思，意思是不畏强悍，如虎一般，厚加赏赐以表彰他对朝廷的忠心。
English: Tianfu often impeached powerful ministers in front of the court. The founder praised his forthrightness and gave him the name Baersi, which means fearless and powerful, like a tiger. He was rewarded generously in recognition of his loyalty to the court.

古文：仍厚赐以旌其忠，天福曰： 臣职居抨弹，惟负爵禄是惧，敢贪厚赏，以重臣罪？ 
现代文：天福说 ：臣的职责就是弹劾臣僚们的错误。惟恐辜负了圣上给我的俸禄，怎敢再贪优厚赏赐而加重臣的罪过？ 
English: Tianfu said, "A minister's duty is to impeach the mistakes of his ministers. But if I fail to live up to the salary given to me by the Holy One, how can I dare to be greedy for a rich reward and add to the sins of a senior minister?"

古文：陛下不急拯之，久则紊不可理。 帝诏玉速帖木儿及孛罗谕之，孛罗以年幼自劾。
现代文：当时，御史台有二御史大夫，意见不能统一，工作反而不好办，天福以 一蛇二首，不能寸进 的比喻，劝世祖上设一个御史大夫。
English: At that time, the History Channel had two historians. Opinions could not be unified, and the work was not easy to do. Tianfu used the metaphor of "one snake, two songs, and no progress" to persuade the ancestors to set up a historian.

古文：天福时按行畿内，有出使者凌民取贿，天福乃易服间行得其状，奏戮之以徇，豪右慑服。
现代文：世祖采纳了他的建议。天福巡察畿内，有个朝廷派来的使臣欺压百姓，索取贿赂，天福身着便服进行调查，得其罪状，奏请朝廷将他斩首示众，豪强怕他，畏服于他。
English: The patriarch accepted his suggestion. Tenfuku was on a tour of the Kinai region, and an envoy sent by the imperial court was oppressing the people and demanding bribes. Tenfuku, dressed in civilian clothes, conducted an investigation, obtained a guilty verdict, and asked the imperial court to behead him in public. He was feared and obeyed by the powerful.

古文：十二年，诏罢各道按察司，天福白大夫玉速帖木儿曰： 是司之设，所以广视听、虞非常，虑至深远，不但绳有司而已也。 
现代文：至元十二年，朝廷废除各道按察司，天福对御史大夫玉速帖木儿说 ：按察司的设立，是为了广泛听取意见，防止非常事件的发生，意义深远，不只是纠正官吏的错误而已。 
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court abolished the inspector general of each province. Tianfu said to the imperial historian Tamehaya Timur: The inspector general was established in order to listen to a wide range of opinions and prevent the occurrence of extraordinary events. It has far-reaching significance, not just to correct the mistakes of officials.

古文：大夫骇然曰： 微公言，几失之。 
现代文：大夫大吃一惊地说 ：若非公提醒，几乎误了大事。 
English: The doctor was taken aback and said, "If you don't give a public warning, you'll almost miss the big event."

古文：夜入帝卧内，奏其言，帝大悟，诏复立之。
现代文：连夜入世祖卧室转奏天福的意见，世祖也明白过来，下诏恢复各道按察司。
English: He spent the night in the ancestor's bedroom to convey Tianfu's opinion, and the ancestor also came to understand, and issued an edict to resume the inspection of each province.

古文：权臣不悦，左迁天福朝列大夫、衡州路同知，不就，起为河东道提刑按察副使。
现代文：权臣对此很不高兴，降天福为朝列大夫、衡山路同知。天福辞不就任，后起任河东道提刑按察副使。
English: The powerful vassal was very unhappy about this. He demoted Tianfu to the rank of doctor of the imperial court, and they knew each other from Hengshan Road. Tianfu did not accept the appointment, and later became the vice-envoy of the Hebei Provincial Criminal Investigation Bureau.

古文：时北鄙兵兴，转输烦急，河东民苦徭役。
现代文：这时，北边用兵，军饷的输送又多又急，河东人民苦于运输的力役。
English: At this time, soldiers were used in the north, the transportation of military supplies was numerous and urgent, and the people of Hedong suffered from the hard work of transportation.

古文：天福以反侧为忧，劾执政失计，奏罢其役。
现代文：天福深怕人民会因此而闹事，弹劾执政者失策，奏请停止征发运输劳役。
English: Tianfu was deeply afraid that the people would riot because of this, impeach the ruling party's missteps, and petition to stop the conscription of transportation labor.

古文：征拜中顺大夫、治书侍御史。
现代文：召天福入朝，拜中顺大夫、治书侍御史。
English: Invite Tianfu to the imperial court, worship Dr. Zhong Shun, and serve the emperor.

古文：十六年，江南既平，授嘉议大夫、淮西道按察使。
现代文：十六年，授嘉议大夫、淮西道观察使。
English: Sixteen years later, he was awarded the title of doctor of medicine, and became an observer of the West Huaihai Road.

古文：淮甸当兵冲，将吏有豪猾为民害者，悉铲除之，民大悦。
现代文：淮甸是军事要地，屯驻在那里的将吏侵害百姓，天福一律清除，人民大喜。
English: Huai Tien is a military important place. The officers stationed there encroach on the people. Tianfu will clear them all, and the people are very happy.

古文：转湖北道按察使，发省臣赃事数十以闻。
现代文：转任湖北道按察使，揭发省臣贪赃事数十件，报告朝廷。
English: Transferred to the post of inspector of Hubei Province, he exposed dozens of cases of corruption by provincial officials and reported to the imperial court.

古文：二十六年，复为淮西按察使，按巨奸一人，没其家赀，政化大行。
现代文：二十年调为山北道按察使。该地百姓不知务农，天福教导他们种庄稼，使百姓富裕起来，百姓给他建生祠祝福，刻碑文记其事绩。
English: For twenty years, he was the inspector of Shanbei Province. The local people did not know how to farm. Tianfu taught them to grow crops, making the people rich. The people gave him the blessing to build a temple and inscribed an inscription to record his achievements.

古文：二十八年，桑哥败，考讯党援，平阳为多，以天福为平阳总管，俾穷治其事。
现代文：二十二年，入朝任刑部尚书，不久出京为扬州路总管。二十六年，再度任淮西按察使，惩处大奸一人，没收其家产。二十八年，桑哥倒台，其党羽在平阳较多，任天福为平阳总管。他在此任上，进行清查惩处。
English: In 1922, he entered the imperial court as the secretary of the Criminal Investigation Department, and soon left for Beijing as the head of Yangzhou Road. In 1926, he was appointed as the inspector of Huaixi Province again, punished a traitor, and confiscated his family property. In 1928, Sango fell, and there were more of his party members in Pingyang, and Tianfu was appointed as the head of Pingyang. In this position, he conducted a thorough investigation and punishment.

古文：俄拜甘肃行省参知政事，以母老辞。
现代文：不久拜为甘肃行省参知政事，因其母亲年迈，辞职。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of Gansu's acting provincial governor, but resigned because his mother was too old.

古文：三十一年，授陕西汉中道肃政廉访使，寻除真定路总管。
现代文：三十一年，授陕西汉中道肃政廉访使，不久又调任真定路总管，改变驿站所需财力的来源，减轻人民的负担。
English: In the 31st year, he was awarded the title of Shaanxi Hanzhong Road Anti-Corruption Envoy, and was soon transferred to the position of the general manager of Zhending Road, to change the source of financial resources needed by the station and reduce the burden on the people.

古文：或以闻，帝叹曰： 巴儿思母子虽生今世，其义烈之言当于古人中求之。 
现代文：其办法得到朝廷认可，并广泛推行于其他各地驿站。大德二年，授江西行省参政，因病辞职。
English: His method was approved by the imperial court and was widely implemented in other provinces and stations. In the second year of his reign, he was granted the right to participate in politics in Jiangxi Province, but resigned due to illness.

古文：子祖舜，秘书监著作郎；侃，内藏库副使。
现代文：四年，拜参知政事、大都路总管兼大兴府尹，使京畿地区得到很好的治理，为后来的府尹树立了榜样。六年，病卒，享年七十三岁。
English: In the fourth year of his reign, he was appointed as the political advisor to the prefectural governor, the general manager of Dadu Road, and the Daxing prefectural governor, so that the Gyeonggi region was well governed, setting an example for the later prefectural governor. In the sixth year of his reign, he died of illness at the age of 73.

古文：许国祯许国祯，字进之，绛州曲沃人也。
现代文：许国祯字进之，绛州曲沃人。
English: Xu Guozhong, a native of Quzhou, was one of them.

古文：祖济，金绛州节度使。父日严，荣州节度判官。
现代文：祖父许济，在金朝曾任绛州节度使，父许日严，曾任荣州节度判官。
English: His grandfather, Xu Jie, served as the envoy of the Yongzhou Festival in the Kim dynasty, and his father, Xu Rijan, served as the judge of the Yongzhou Festival.

古文：皆业医。
现代文：祖、父都曾以医为业。
English: My grandfather and father were both doctors.

古文：国祯博通经史，尤精医术。
现代文：国祯精通经史，尤其精于医术。
English: Guojun was well versed in the history of medicine, especially in the art of medicine.

古文：金乱，避地嵩州永宁县。
现代文：金末，为避战火而居住于嵩州永宁县。
English: He lived in Songzhou Yongning County in order to escape the war.

古文：河南平，归寓太原。
现代文：蒙古军占领河南后，国祯回到太原。
English: After the Mongolian army occupied Henan, the state seal returned to Taiyuan.

古文：世祖在潜邸，国祯以医征至翰海，留守掌医药。
现代文：世祖在即位前，把国祯作为医生召到翰海，从此留下来掌管医药。
English: Before ascending to the throne, King Sejong summoned Kunimoto to Hanhae as a doctor, and from then on he remained in charge of medicine.

古文：庄圣太后有疾，国祯治之，刻期而愈，乃张晏赐坐。
现代文：庄圣太后有病，经国祯诊治，不久即愈。当时太后年五十三岁，赐国祯白金五十三锭。
English: Empress Dowager Zhuang Sheng fell ill and was diagnosed and treated by the State Council. She soon recovered. At that time, the Empress Dowager was fifty-three years old and was awarded the State Prize of fifty-three yuan in platinum.

古文：太后时年五十三，遂以白金铤如年数赐之。伯撒王妃病目，治者针误损其明。世祖怒，欲坐以死罪，国祯从容谏曰： 罪固当死，然原其情乃恐怖失次所致。
现代文：伯撒王妃患眼病，有医生用针疗，不仅没治好，反而使王妃失明，世祖大怒，要判这个医生死罪，国祯从容谏劝道： 他的罪应当处死，但考察其原因是内心紧张。
English: Princess Betsa suffered from an eye disease. A doctor treated her with needles, but instead of curing her, he blinded her. The ancestor was furious. He wanted to sentence the doctor to death. The state councillor, Kong Rongjun, advised: His crime should be executed, but the reason for the investigation was inner tension.

古文：即诛之，后谁敢复进？ 
现代文：如果把他杀了，以后谁敢再来医治。 
English: If you kill him, who will dare to treat him again in the future?

古文：世祖意解，且奖之曰： 国祯之直，可作谏官。 
现代文：世祖明白了，夸奖道： 以国祯之耿直，可做谏官。 
English: The ancestor understood, and said in praise, "If you are an upright person, you can be a eunuch."

古文：宗王昔班屡请以国祯隶帐下，世祖重违其请，将遣之，辞曰： 国祯蒙恩拔擢，誓尽心以报，不敢易所事。 
现代文：宗王昔班多次请求将国祯拨归于他属下，世祖同意，国祯不愿意，他说： 国祯蒙殿下提拔，发誓要尽心报答，不敢再去侍奉别人。 
English: He said, "His Imperial Highness the Grand Duke was promoted, and he swore that he would do his best to repay the favor. He did not dare to serve others again."

古文：乃不果遣。
现代文：终于未去。
English: Finally, I didn't go.

古文：世祖过饮马湩，得足疾，国祯进药味苦，却不服，国祯曰： 古人有言：良药苦口利于病，忠言逆耳利于行。 
现代文：世祖饮白马乳过度，得足疾，国祯奉进的药味苦，世祖不愿喝，国祯劝道 ：古人说得好：良药苦口利于病，忠言逆耳利于行。 
English: The world's ancestors drank excessive white horse milk and suffered from foot disease. The imperial edict issued by the state council was bitter, and the world's ancestors did not want to drink it. The state council advised, "The ancients said it well: the bitter taste of good medicine is good for the disease, and it is good to act contrary to the advice."

古文：或在告，帝辄为之不悦。
现代文：仍未服，随后足疾复发，召国祯诊治，对他说： 不听你的劝告，果然旧病复发。 
English: Still unconvinced, the foot ailment subsequently recurred, summoned Kunlun for treatment, and told him: "I didn't listen to your advice, and the old ailment has indeed recurred.

古文：九年己未，世祖帅师围鄂州，获宋人数百族，诸将欲尽坑之，国祯力请止诛其凶暴，余皆获免。
现代文：国祯又进一步谏言 ：良药苦口已经明白了，忠言逆耳还愿陛下多加留意。 世祖大喜，赐他七宝马鞍。宪宗三年，国祯随大军征云南，参与机要，朝夕不离宪宗左右。九年，世祖领军围攻鄂州，俘宋人数百，诸将要把他们全部活埋，国祯极力请求止杀凶暴者，其余释放。
English: The Grandfather was overjoyed and gave him a seven-treasure horse saddle. In the third year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the Grandfather accompanied the great army to conquer Yunnan, and the Grandfather took part in important occasions, and did not leave the side of Emperor Xianzong in the morning and evening. In the ninth year, the Grandfather led the army to besiege Ezhou, captured hundreds of Song people, and was about to bury them all alive. The Grandfather strongly requested that the murderers be stopped, and the rest released.

古文：及师还，招降民数十万口，疲饿颠仆者满道，国祯白发蔡州军储粮赈之，全活甚众。
现代文：班师时，招纳归降百姓数十万口，但严重缺粮，沿途饿倒。国祯请发蔡州所储军粮赈救。
English: When he was in charge of the division, he recruited hundreds of thousands of returned people, but they were severely short of grain and starved along the way. The State Council requested that the military grain stored by the Caizhou Research Institute be sent to help.

古文：世祖即位，录前劳，授荣禄大夫、提点太医院事，赐金符。
现代文：世祖即位，根据国祯过去的功劳，授他为荣禄大夫、提点太医院事，赐金符。
English: When the patriarch ascended to the throne, he was awarded the title of doctor of honor, the title of doctor of the hospital, and the gold medal according to his past services to the state.

古文：至元三年，改授金虎符。
现代文：至元三年，改授金虎符。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was awarded the Golden Tiger Badge.

古文：十二年，迁礼部尚书。
现代文：十二年，升为礼部尚书。
English: In the twelfth year, he was promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：国祯尝上疏言：慎财赋、禁服色、明法律、严武备、设谏官、均卫兵、建学校、立朝仪，事多施行。
现代文：国祯曾上书建议慎重收支财赋，禁止违制的服装，公布法律，加强武备，设立谏官，建立学校，规定朝廷礼节仪式，多被采纳施行。
English: The state councillor had written to recommend prudent revenue and expenditure, prohibition of illegal clothing, promulgation of laws, strengthening of armaments, establishment of eunuchs, establishment of schools, and stipulation of imperial court etiquette ceremonies, and most of them were adopted and implemented.

古文：凡所荐引，皆知名士，士亦归重之。
现代文：他向朝廷举荐的人，都是当时的知名之士，士人也敬重他。
English: The people he recommended to the imperial court were all well-known people at the time, and the nobles also respected him.

古文：帝与近臣言及勋旧大臣，因谓国祯曰： 朕昔出征，同履艰难者，惟卿数人在尔。 遂拜集贤大学士，进阶光禄大夫。每进见，帝呼为许光禄而不名，由是内外诸王大臣皆以许光禄呼之。
现代文：世祖对国祯说： 朕昔日出征，共度艰难的，只有卿等数人还在。 于是拜为集贤大学士，进阶光禄大夫。每次进见，世祖叫他许光禄而不呼其名，因此朝廷内外诸王大臣都称他许光禄。
English: The ancestor said to the Grand Duke, "I went to war in the past, and we went through a difficult time together, and only Sir and a few others are still alive. Therefore, the ancestor worshiped him as a scholar of Jixian University and advanced doctor of Guanglu. Every time he went to the court, the ancestor called him Xu Guanglu without calling his name, so all the royal ministers inside and outside the court called him Xu Guanglu.

古文：升翰林集贤大学士。
现代文：又升为翰林集贤大学士。
English: He was also promoted to Hanlin Jixian University.

古文：卒年七十六。
现代文：终年七十六岁。
English: He was seventy-six years old.

古文：时大臣非有勋德为帝所知者，罕得赠谥，特赠国祯金紫光禄大夫，谥忠宪，人以为荣。
现代文：当时，大臣去世，除非有大功大德之人，一般是难以得到赠谥的，而对国祯却特赠金紫光禄大夫，谥 忠宪 。
English: At that time, when a minister passed away, it was generally difficult to receive an imperial pallium unless the person had made great contributions to the country. However, the imperial pallium was specially presented by Jin Ziguanglu, a doctor and loyal to the Constitution.

古文：后加赠推诚广德协恭翊亮功臣、翰林学士承旨、上柱国，追封蓟国公。
现代文：后加赠推诚广德协恭翊亮功臣、翰林学士承旨、上柱国，追封蓟国公。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of a meritorious scholar, the title of Hanlin Scholar, the title of Shangzhu Guo, and the posthumous title of the Prince of Shandong Province.

