古文：○王镕王镕，其先回鹘阿布思之遗种，曰没诺干，为镇州王武俊骑将，武俊录以为子，遂冒姓王氏。
现代文：王镕，他的先人是回鹊阿布思的后裔，叫做没诺干，任镇州王武俊的骑将，王武俊收他作为养子，于是冒姓王。
English: Wang Qian, whose ancestors were the descendants of Uighur Abu Si, was called Meng Nogan. He was the cavalry commander of Zhenzhou Wang Wujun. Wang Wujun adopted him as his son, so he changed his surname to Wang.

古文：没诺干子曰末垣活，末垣活子曰升，升子曰廷凑，廷凑子曰元达，元达子曰绍鼎、绍懿，绍鼎子曰景崇。
现代文：没诺干的儿子叫末坦活，末坦活的儿子叫升，升的儿子甽廷凄，廷凄的儿子叫元逵，元逵的儿子叫绍鼎、绍懿，绍鼎的儿子叫景崇。
English: Mengnogan's son was named Mertan Lv, Mertan Lv's son was named Zheng, Zheng's son was named Gao Tingfan, Tingfan's son was named Yuan Lv, Yuan Lv's son was named Shao Ding, Shao Lv, Shao Ding's son was named Jing Chong.

古文：自升以上三世，常为镇州骑将，自景崇以上四世五人，皆为成德军节度使。
现代文：从升以上三代，常常任镇州骑将，从景崇以上四代五人，都任成德军节度使。
English: From the three generations above the promotion, he was often appointed as the commander of the Zhenzhou cavalry, and from the four generations above the Jingzong, five people were appointed as the German military festival.

古文：景崇官至守太尉，封常山郡王，唐中和二年卒。
现代文：景崇官做到守太尉，封为常山郡王，唐中和二年死。
English: Jing Chong was promoted to the rank of captain of the guard, and was named the king of Changshan County. He died in the middle of the Tang Dynasty, two years later.

古文：子镕立，年十岁。
现代文：儿子王镕继位，只有十岁。
English: He was succeeded by his son Wang Qi, who was only ten years old.

古文：是时，晋新有太原，李匡威据幽州，王处存据中山，赫连鐸据大同，孟方立据邢台，四面豪杰并起而交争。
现代文：这时，晋刚刚占据太原，李匡威占据幽州，王处存占据中山，赫连铎占据大同，孟方立占据邢台，四方英雄豪杰都起兵相互争斗。
English: At this time, Jin had just occupied Taiyuan, Li Kuangwei occupied Yuzhou, Wang Shicun occupied Zhongshan, Heren Yu occupied Datong, Meng Fangli occupied Xingtai, and the heroes of the four sides all fought against each other.

古文：镕介于其间，而承祖父百年之业，士马强而畜积富，为唐累世籓臣。
现代文：王镕置身其中，而继承祖辈父辈百年家业，兵马强壮而蓄积丰富，是唐的世代藩臣。
English: Wang Hui was one of them, and he inherited the hundred-year family business of his forefathers and forefathers, the soldiers and horses were strong and richly accumulated, and he was Tang's generation of vassals.

古文：故镕年虽少，藉其世家以取重，四方诸镇废立承继，有请于唐者，皆因镕以闻。自晋兵出山东，已破孟迁，取邢、洺、磁三州，景福元年，乃大举击赵，下临城。
现代文：因此王镕虽然年龄小，但凭借他的家世而占据重要地位，四方各镇的废立继承，要向唐请求的，都藉王镕上报自从晋出兵山东，攻破孟迁，夺取邢、沼、磁三州后，景福元年，就大举出兵攻打赵，攻克临城。
English: Therefore, although Wang Qian is young, he occupies an important position by virtue of his family history. The succession of the abolition of the towns in the four directions is to be requested from the Tang. Since Wang Qian sent troops to Shandong, defeated Meng Qian, and captured the three states of Shandong, Numa, and Jiaozuo, in the first year of Jingfu, he sent troops to attack Zhao and conquered Lincheng.

古文：镕求救于李匡威，匡威来救，晋军解去。
现代文：王镕向李匡威求救，李匡威前来救援，晋军解围离去。
English: Wang Hui appealed to Li Kuangwei for help, Li Kuangwei came to the rescue, and the Jin army broke the siege and left.

古文：明年，晋会王处存攻镕坚固、新市。
现代文：第二年，晋会同王处存进攻王镕的坚固、新市。
English: In the second year, Jin and Wang attacked the fortified city of Xinshi in Wangye.

古文：晋王与处存皆自将，而镕未尝临军，遣追风都团练使段亮、翦寇都团练使马珂等，以兵属匡威而已。
现代文：晋王和王处存都亲自率兵，而王镕不曾亲临军中，派追风都团练使段亮、剪寇都团练使马珂等人，把军队交给李匡威罢了。
English: The King of Jin and the King of Sui personally led the troops, while the King of Wei did not come to the army in person. He sent Duan Liang to practice chasing the wind, and Ma Ke to practice cutting the crows, and so on. He just handed over the army to Li Kuangwei.

古文：匡威战磁河，晋军大败。
现代文：李匡威在磁河作战，晋军大败。
English: Li Kuangwei fought in the Magnetic River and defeated the Jin army.

古文：明年春，晋攻天长军，镕出兵救之，败于叱日岭，晋军遂出井陉。
现代文：第二年春，晋进攻天长军，王镕出兵救援，在叱日岭战败，晋军于是出军井陉。
English: In the spring of the second year, Jin attacked the Tianchang Army, and Wang Hui sent troops to rescue them. They were defeated at Zhaozhiling, and Jin's troops then marched to Jingshan.

古文：镕又求救于匡威，晋军解去。
现代文：王镕又向李匡威求救，晋军解围离去。
English: Wang Qian also asked Li Kuangwei for help, and the Jin army broke the siege and left.

古文：初，匡威悦其弟匡俦之妇美而淫之，匡俦怒，及其救镕也，诱其军乱而自立。
现代文：当初，李匡威喜欢他的弟弟李匡俦的妻子的美貌而和她淫乱，李匡俦发怒，到李匡威援救王镕时，就引诱李匡威的军队作乱而自立。
English: At first, Li Kuangwei liked the beauty of his brother Li Kuangyao's wife and had an affair with her. Li Kuangyao was angry, and when Li Kuangyao came to rescue Wang Yao, he lured Li Kuangyao's army into a riot and became independent.

古文：匡威内惭不敢还，乃以符印归其弟，而将奔于京师。
现代文：李匡威心中羞惭不敢返回，就把符印送归他的弟弟，而准备逃奔到京师。
English: Embarrassed and afraid to return, Li Kuangwei sent the seal to his brother and prepared to flee to Beijing.

古文：行至深州，镕德匡威救己，使人邀之，馆于梅子园，以父事之。
现代文：走到深州时，王镕感激李匡威救援自己，派人邀请他，住在梅子园，像父亲一样事奉他。
English: When he got to Shenzhou, Wang Yao was grateful to Li Kuangwei for rescuing him. He sent someone to invite him to live in the Plum Garden and serve him like a father.

古文：匡威客李正抱者，少游燕、赵间，每徘徊常山，爱之不能去。
现代文：李匡威的门客李正抱，年轻时游历燕、趟之间，每每在常山流连，喜爱它不愿离开。
English: Li Zhengbo, the protégé of Li Kuangwei, used to travel between Yan and Wata when he was young. He often stayed in Changshan and loved it so much that he didn't want to leave.

古文：正抱、匡威皆失国无聊，相与登城西高阁，顾览山川，泫然而泣，乃与匡威谋劫牜而代之。因诈为忌日，镕去卫从，晨诣馆慰，坐定，甲士自幕后出，持镕两袖，镕曰： 吾国赖公而存，诚无以报厚德，今日之事，是所甘心。 因叩头以位与匡威。
现代文：李正抱、李匡威都因失去国家而百无聊赖，一道登上城西高阁，眺览山河，伤心地流下眼泪，于是李正抱和李匡威策谋劫掠王镕而取代他于是谎称是忌日，王镕斥去随行卫士，早晨到馆中慰问李匡威，坐下后，身披镗甲的士兵从帷幕后面冲出，抓住王镕的两只袖子，王镕说： 我的国家靠你纔保存，确实没有什么能够报答你的大恩大德，今天的事，这是我心甘情愿的 于是叩头让位给李匡威。
English: Both Li Zhengbao and Li Kuangwei were bored due to the loss of the country. Together, they climbed to the west of the city, overlooking the mountains and rivers, and shed tears with sadness. So Li Zhengbao and Li Kuangwei plotted to rob Wang Qian and replace him. Then they falsely claimed that it was the day of death. Wang Qian refused to accompany the guards. In the morning, he went to the museum to console Li Kuangwei. After sitting down, the soldiers in armor rushed out from behind the curtain and grabbed Wang Qian's two sleeves. Wang Qian said: My country is saved by you. There is really nothing that can repay your great kindness

古文：匡威素少镕，以谓无能为也，因与镕方辔诣府，将代其位。
现代文：李匡威素来看不起王镕，认为他无能耐，就和王镕并驾前往府上，准备接替他的职位。
English: Li Kuangwei used to look down on Wang Qi and thought he was incompetent, so he drove with Wang Qi to the palace to prepare to take over his position.

古文：行过亲事营，军士闭门大噪，天雨震电，暴风拔木，屋瓦皆飞。
现代文：行经亲事营时，士兵们关门鼓噪，暴雨雷电，狂风拔起树木，屋土的瓦都飞起来了。
English: When passing through the relatives' camp, the soldiers closed the door and made a lot of noise. There was a rainstorm, thunder and lightning, the wind uprooted trees, and the roof tiles flew up.

古文：屠者墨君和望见镕，识之，从缺垣中跃出，挟镕于马，负之而走，乱军击杀匡威、正抱，燕人皆死。
现代文：屠夫墨君和望见王镕，认出他来，从墙缺口中纵身跃出，从马上挟住王镕，背起他就跑，乱军杀死李匡威、李正抱，燕人都逃跑了。
English: Butcher Mo Jun and Wang Jie saw Wang Yao, recognized him, jumped out of the gap in the wall, grabbed Wang Yao from the horse, picked him up and ran. The rebels killed Li Kuangwei and Li Zhengbao, and the swallows all fled.

古文：匡俦虽憾其兄，而阳以大义责镕甚急。
现代文：李匡俦虽然恨他的哥哥，但却假装用道义急切指责王镕。
English: Although Li Kuangyao hated his brother, he pretended to be moral and eagerly accused Wang Yao.

古文：镕既失燕援，而晋军急攻平山，劫镕以盟，镕遂与晋和。其后梁太祖下晋邢、洺、磁三州，乃为书诏镕，使绝晋而归梁，镕依违不决。
现代文：王镕既已失去了燕的援助，而晋军又猛攻平山，逼迫王镕结盟，王镕于是和晋言和，后来梁太祖攻克晋的邢、汛、磁三个州，于是写书信招王镕，让他和晋绝交而归附梁，王镕犹豫不能下决心。
English: Wang Yao had already lost Yan's support, and the Jin army stormed Pingshan and forced Wang Yao into an alliance. Wang Yao then made peace with Jin Yan, and later Liang Taizu conquered Jin's three states of Yao, Shao, and Zheng. Therefore, he wrote a letter to recruit Wang Yao, and let him sever diplomatic relations with Jin and return to Liang. Wang Yao hesitated and could not make up his mind.

古文：晋将李嗣昭复取洺州，梁太祖击败嗣昭，嗣昭弃洺州走。
现代文：晋将李嗣昭又攻取沼州，梁太祖打败李嗣昭，李嗣昭放弃沼州逃跑。
English: Jin general Li Shizhao also captured Nuzhou, Liang Taizu defeated Li Shizhao, Li Shizhao abandoned Nuzhou and fled.

古文：梁获其辎重，得镕与嗣昭书，多道梁事，太祖怒，因移兵常山，顾谓葛从周曰： 得镇州以与尔，尔为我先锋。 
现代文：梁缴获了他们的军需物资，发现王镕给李嗣昭的信，多谈及梁的情况，梁太祖发怒，于是调兵到常山，对葛从周说： 得到镇州就把它给你，你做我的先锋。 
English: Liang seized their military supplies, and found that Wang Xi's letter to Li Shizhao talked more about Liang's situation. Liang Taizu was angry, so he transferred troops to Changshan and said to Ge Zhou: "If you get Zhenzhou, give it to you, you will be my vanguard."

古文：从周至临城，中流矢，卧舆中，梁军大沮。
现代文：葛从周到临城，被飞箭射中，躺在车中，梁军士气低落。
English: Ge from Zhou to Lincheng, was shot by flying arrows, lying in the car, Liang's morale was low.

古文：梁太祖自将傅城下，焚其南关，镕惧，顾其属曰： 事急矣！
现代文：梁太祖亲自率兵迫近城下，焚毁州城南关，王镕害怕，望着他的僚属说： 情况危急了，怎么办？ 
English: Liang Taizu personally led the troops to approach the city and burned the south gate of the city. Wang Yao was afraid, looked at his colleagues and said: The situation is critical, what should we do?

古文：奈何？ 判官周式，辨士也，对曰： 此难与力争，而可以理夺也。 
现代文：判官周式，是个能言善辩的人，回答说： 这种情况很难和他们硬争，但可以以理取胜。 
English: Judge Zhou Shihong, an eloquent man, replied, "It's hard to argue with them in this situation, but you can win with reason.

古文：式与梁太祖有旧，因请入梁军。
现代文：周式和梁太祖有旧交情，于是请求去梁军。
English: Zhou Shi and Liang Taizu had an old friendship, so he asked to go to Liang Jun.

古文：太祖望见式，骂曰： 吾常以书招镕不来，今吾至此，而尔为说客，晚矣！
现代文：梁太祖看见周式，骂道： 我常常写信招降王镕，他却不来，现在我到了这里，他却让你做说客，晚了！
English: When Liang Taizu saw Zhou Shi, he scolded: "I often wrote letters to recruit Wang Yao, but he did not come. Now that I am here, he has made you a lobbyist. It's too late!"

古文：且晋吾仇也，而镕附之，吾知李嗣昭在城中，可使先出。 
现代文：况且晋是我的仇敌，而王镕依附它，我知道李嗣昭在城中，可让他先出来。 
English: Moreover, Jin is my enemy, and Wang Yao is attached to him. I know that Li Shizhao is in the city, but let him come out first.

古文：乃以所得镕与嗣昭书示式，式进曰： 梁欲取一镇州而止乎，而欲成霸业于天下也？
现代文：于是拿出缴获的王镕给李嗣昭的书信给周式看，周式上前说： 梁是想夺取一个镇州就作罢呢，还是想在天下成就霸业？
English: So he took out the captured letter from Wang Qian to Li Shizhao and showed it to Zhou Shikai. Zhou Shikai stepped forward and said: "If Liang wants to seize a town and county, let him do it, or does he want to achieve hegemony in the world?

古文：且霸者责人以义而不私，今天子在上，诸侯守封睦邻，所以息争，且休民也。
现代文：况且称霸的人用道义要求人而不谋求私利，如今皇帝在上，诸侯们坚守自己的国土，和邻国和睦相处，是为了停止争斗，并且让百姓休养生息。
English: Moreover, those who claimed supremacy used morality to require people to take action without seeking self-interest. Nowadays, the emperor is on the top, and the princes stick to their own land and live in harmony with their neighbors in order to stop fighting and let the people rest and recuperate.

古文：昔曹公破袁绍，得魏将吏与绍书，悉焚之，此英雄之事乎！
现代文：过去曹公攻破袁绍，得到魏的将吏写给袁绍的信，就全部烧掉了，造纔是英雄干的事情啊！
English: In the past, Cao Gong defeated Yuan Shao, and when Wei's generals got the letter written to Yuan Shao, they all burned it. Accomplishment is what heroes do!

古文：今梁知兵举无名，而假嗣昭以为辞。
现代文：现在梁知道没有理由出兵，就拿李嗣昭作为借口。
English: Now that Liang knows there is no reason to send troops, he is using Li Shizhao as an excuse.

古文：且王氏五世六公抚有此士，岂无死士，而待嗣昭乎？ 
现代文：况且王氏五代六公据有这片土地，难道没有誓死报国的人，而要等李嗣昭吗？ 
English: Moreover, the five generations and six princes of the Wang clan owned this land. Wasn't there anyone who swore to die for the country, and did they have to wait for Li Shizhao?

古文：太祖大喜，起牵式衣而抚之曰： 吾言戏耳。 
现代文：梁太祖十分高兴，起身拉住周式的衣服抚慰他说： 我的话是开玩笑的。 
English: Liang Taizu was very happy. He got up and took hold of Zhou's clothes to comfort him and said, "What I said was just a joke.

古文：因延式于上坐，议与镕和。
现代文：于是请周式到上座，讨论和王镕言和。
English: Therefore, he invited Zhou Shih to the upper seat to discuss and make peace with Wang Xuan.

古文：镕以子昭祚为质，梁太祖以女妻之。太祖即位，封镕赵王。
现代文：王镕拿儿子王昭祚作为人质，梁太祖把女儿嫁给他，梁太祖登位，封王镕为趟王。
English: Wang Xuan took his son Wang Zhaohui as a hostage, Liang Taizu married his daughter to him, Liang Taizu ascended the throne, and Wang Xuan was crowned king.

古文：镕祖母丧，诸镇皆吊，梁使者见晋使在馆，还言赵王有二志。
现代文：王镕的祖母去世，各个节镇都前往吊祭，梁的使臣看见晋的使臣在，回去说趟王有二心。
English: Wang Yao's grandmother passed away, and all the towns went to the hanging ceremony. When Liang's envoy saw Jin's envoy, he went back to say that Wang Yao had two hearts.

古文：是时，魏博罗绍威卒，梁因欲尽取河北，开平四年冬，遣供奉官杜廷隐监魏博将夏諲，以兵三千袭深、冀二州，以王景仁为北面行营招讨使。
现代文：这时，魏博罗绍威死，梁于是想全部占据河北，开平四年冬天，派供奉官杜廷隐监督魏博将领夏涟，率兵三干人袭击深、冀二州，任命王景仁为北面行营招讨使。
English: At this time, Wei Bo and Shaowi died, so Liang wanted to occupy all of Hebei. In the winter of the 4th year of Kaiping, he sent Du Ting, a tributary official, to supervise Wei Bo's general Xia Wei, and led three soldiers to attack the two states of Sheng and Hebei, and appointed Wang Jingren as an envoy to the north.

古文：镕惧，乞兵于晋。
现代文：王镕害怕，向晋求兵。
English: Wang Yao was afraid and asked Jin for soldiers.

古文：晋人击败景仁于柏乡，梁遂失镇、定，而庄宗由此益强，北破幽、燕，南并魏博，镕常以兵从。
现代文：晋人在柏乡打败王景仁，梁于是失去镇、定二州，而唐庄宗因此更加强大，在北方攻破幽、燕二州，在南方吞并魏博，王镕常常率兵跟随。
English: Jin defeated Wang Jingren in Baoxiang, Liang lost Zhen and Ding Erzhou as a result, and Tangzhuanzong became more powerful as a result, defeating Yu and Yan Erzhou in the north, and annexing Wei Bo in the south. Wang Xi often led the troops to follow.

古文：镕德晋甚。
现代文：王镕十分感激晋。
English: Wang Yao is very grateful to Jin.

古文：明年，会庄宗于承天军，奉觞为寿，庄宗以镕父友，尊礼之，酒酣为镕歌，拔佩刀断衣而盟，许以女妻镕子昭诲。
现代文：第二年，在承天军和唐庄宗相会，举杯祝寿，唐庄宗因王镕是父亲的朋友，尊敬礼待他，饮酒尽兴后为王镕唱歌，拔出佩刀割断衣襟发誓，答应把女儿嫁给王镕的儿子王昭诲。
English: The next year, at the meeting of the Cheng Tian Army and Tang Zhuangzong, they raised a toast to celebrate their anniversary. Tang Zhuangzong treated Wang Yao as a friend of his father and treated him with respect and courtesy. After drinking to their heart's content, they sang for Wang Yao, pulled out their sabers and cut off their collars to swear, and promised to marry their daughter to Wang Yao's son, Wang Zhaoyun.

古文：镕为人仁而不武，未尝敢为兵先，佗兵攻赵，常藉邻兵为救。
现代文：王镕为人仁厚而不擅长打仗，从来不敢身先士卒，别的军队进攻趟，常常靠邻国的军队救援。
English: Wang Yao was a kind-hearted person, but he was not good at fighting. He never dared to be the first to attack other armies, and often relied on the army of a neighboring country for rescue.

古文：当是时，诸镇相弊于战争，而赵独安，乐王氏之无事，都人士女褒衣博带，务夸侈为嬉游。
现代文：当时，各个藩镇都在战争中疲敝不堪而只有趟安定，人们喜欢王氏的相安无事，市人士女都穿宽大的衣裳束宽腰带，一意夸耀奢侈嬉戏游玩。
English: At that time, all the towns in the region were exhausted from the war and only had a few days of stability. People liked the relative peace and tranquility of the Wang clan, and the women of the city wore large clothes, wide belts, and boasted of luxury play and play.

古文：镕尤骄于富贵，又好左道，炼丹药，求长生，与道士王若讷留游西山，登王母祠，使妇人维锦绣牵持而上。
现代文：王镕在富贵方面特别骄纵，又喜好左道旁门，炼丹药，寻求长生不老，和道士王若讷留在西山游玩，登上王母祠，让妇人用锦绣牵着他们向上。
English: Wang Yao was particularly arrogant in terms of wealth, and also liked the left-hand side door, alchemy, seeking immortality. He stayed in the West Mountain to play with the Taoist Wang Rana, ascended the Queen Mother's Shrine, and let the woman lead them up with brocade.

古文：每出，逾月忘归，任其政于宦者。
现代文：每次出游，一个多月都不回来，把政事交托给宦官。
English: Each time he went on a trip, he did not return for more than a month, entrusting government affairs to eunuchs.

古文：宦者石希蒙与镕同卧起。
现代文：宦官石希蒙和王镕同起居。
English: The eunuch Shishimeng and Wang Xi lived together.

古文：天祐十八年冬，镕自西山宿鹘营庄，将还府，希蒙止之。
现代文：天佑十八年冬，王镕从西山到鹊营庄留宿，准备回府，石希蒙阻止他。
English: In the winter of the 18th year, with God's blessing, Wang Yao went from the West Mountain to stay in Yuyingzhuang to prepare to return to the capital. Shi Ximeng stopped him.

古文：宦者李弘规谏曰： 今晋王身自暴露以亲矢石，而大王竭军国之用为游畋之资，开城空宫，逾月不返，使一失闭门不纳从者，大王欲何归乎？ 
现代文：宦官李弘规谏阻说： 如今晋王置身于弓箭炮石中，而大王耗尽军国财物作为游猎的费用，城门大开，宫中空寂，一个多月不返回，假使有一人关闭城门不接纳你的随从，大王想回到哪里去呢？ 
English: The eunuch Li Hongzhi said, "Nowadays, the Jin king is surrounded by bows and arrows, and the great king has exhausted the military and national wealth as the cost of hunting. The city gate is wide open, the palace is empty, and he will not return for more than a month. If someone closes the city gate and does not accept your entourage, where does the great king want to go back to?

古文：镕惧，促驾，希蒙固止之。
现代文：王镕害怕，催促准备车驾，石希蒙坚决阻止他。
English: Wang Yao was afraid and urged him to prepare to drive the car. Shi Ximeng resolutely stopped him.

古文：弘规怒，遣亲事军将苏汉衡率兵擐甲露刃于帐前曰： 军士劳矣！
现代文：李弘规发怒，派亲事军将领苏汉衡率领军士，身穿镗甲，手持剑，来到营帐前说： 士兵们疲劳了！
English: Li Hongzhi was furious and sent Su Hanheng, the general of the relatives army, to lead the sergeants, dressed in armor and holding swords, to the camp and said: The soldiers are tired!

古文：愿从王归。 
现代文：希望跟你回去。 
English: I hope to go back with you.

古文：弘规继而进曰： 惑王者希蒙也，请杀之以谢军士！ 
现代文：接着李弘规上前说： 蛊惑大土的人是石希蒙，请求杀掉他来向士兵们谢罪！ 
English: Then Li Hongjie stepped forward and said, "The person who has bewitched the country is Shi Ximeng, and I beg you to kill him to apologize to the soldiers!"

古文：镕不答，弘规呼镕甲士斩希蒙首，掷于镕前，镕惧，遽归。
现代文：王镕不回答，李弘规呼唤王镕的士兵砍下石希蒙的头，丢到王镕面前，王镕恐惧，急忙返回。
English: Wang Yao did not answer, Li Hongzhi called Wang Yao's soldiers to cut off Shi Ximeng's head and throw it in front of Wang Yao. Wang Yao panicked and hurried back.

古文：使其子昭祚与大将张文礼族弘规、汉衡，收其偏将下狱，穷究反状，亲军皆惧。
现代文：派他的儿子王昭祚和大将张文礼把李弘规、苏汉衡两家灭族，收捕他们的副将投入狱中，追究反叛的事状，亲军们都很恐惧。
English: He sent his son, Wang Zhaohui, and General Zhang Wenli to exterminate the two families of Li Hongbei and Su Hanheng, and put the deputy generals who arrested them in prison to investigate the rebellion. The pro-army people were very afraid.

古文：文礼诱以为乱，夜半，亲军千馀人逾垣而入，镕方与道士焚香受箓，军士斩镕首，袖之而出，因纵火焚其宫室，遂灭王氏之族。
现代文：张文礼引诱作乱，半夜，亲军一千多人越墙而入，王镕正和道士烧香接受符镍，士乓砍下王镕的头，装起来带出去，又放火烧毁宫室，就将王氏灭族了。
English: In the middle of the night, more than a thousand pro-army troops entered through the wall. Wang Xizheng and Taoist priests burned incense to receive a nickel token. The priests cut off Wang Xizhen's head, dressed it up and took it outside. They also set fire to the palace and destroyed the palace, thus exterminating the Wang clan.

古文：镕小子昭诲，年十岁，其军士有德镕者，藏之穴中，乱定，髡其发，被以僧衣，遇湖南人李震，匿昭诲于茶笼中，载之湖南，依南岳为浮图，易名崇隐。
现代文：王镕的小儿子王昭诲，年方十岁，士兵当中有感激王镕的人，把他藏在洞中，兵变平定后，剃去他的头发，给他披上僧人的衣服，碰上湖南人李震，把王昭诲藏在茶笼中，载到湖南去，归附南岳寺庙作和尚，改名叫崇隐。
English: Wang Zhaoyan, the youngest son of Wang Hui, was ten years old. Among the soldiers, there was one who was grateful to Wang Hui. He hid him in a cave. After the mutiny was quelled, he shaved off his hair, put him in a monk's robe. He met Li Zhen, a man from Hunan. He hid Wang Zhaoyan in a tea cage and took him to Hunan. He was attached to the Nanyue Temple as a monk and changed his name to Chongyin.

古文：明宗时，昭诲已长，思归，而镕故将符习为宣武军节度使，震以归习，习表于朝。昭诲自称前成德军中军使以见，拜考功郎中、司农少卿。
现代文：唐明宗时，王昭诲已长大，想回去，而王镕过去的将领符习任宣武军节度使，李震把他送到符习那里，符习向朝廷上表，王昭诲自称是以前的成德军中军使进见，拜为考功郎中、司农少卿。
English: At the time of Tang Mingzong, Wang Zhaoyi had grown up and wanted to go back, while Wang Yao's former general Fu Xi was appointed as the festival envoy of the Xuanwu army, Li Zhen sent him to Fu Xi, Fu Xi presented to the imperial court, Wang Zhaoyi claimed to be the former military envoy of the Chengde army, and worshiped as a meritorious student and a junior minister of agriculture.

古文：周显德中，犹为少府监云。
现代文：周显德年间，还任少府监。
English: During Zhou Xiande's time, he also served as a minor prefectural inspector.

古文：张文礼者，狡狯人也，镕惑爱之，以为子，号王德明。
现代文：张文礼，是个狡诈奸猾的人，王镕受他迷惑而宠爱他，把他作为养子，叫王德明。
English: Zhang Wenli was a cunning and treacherous man. Wang Yao was bewitched by him and loved him. He adopted him as his son and named him Wang Deming.

古文：镕已死，文礼自为留后。
现代文：王镕死后，张文礼自任留后。
English: After Wang Hui's death, Zhang Wenli remained in his post.

古文：庄宗初纳之，后知其通于梁也，遣赵故将符习与阎宝击之。
现代文：唐庄宗开初接纳他，后来获知他和梁勾结，派赵的旧将符习和阎宝攻打他。
English: Tangzhuang Zongkai initially accepted him, but later learned that he had colluded with Liang and sent Zhao's former generals Fu Xi and Yan Bao to attack him.

古文：文礼家鬼夜哭，野河水变为血，游鱼皆死，文礼惧，病疽卒。
现代文：张文礼家晚上有鬼哭，野河水变成了血，游鱼都死了，张文礼害怕，患瘫疽病而死。
English: At night, ghosts cried in Zhang Wenli's home, the water of the wild river turned into blood, and the fish died. Zhang Wenli was afraid and died of paralytic gangrene.

古文：子处瑾秘丧拒守，击败习等。以李嗣昭代之，嗣昭中流矢卒，以李存进代之，存进辄复战殁，乃以符存审为招讨使，遂破之。
现代文：他的儿子张处瑾秘不发丧，抵御坚守，打败符习等人唐派李嗣昭代替符习，李嗣昭中飞箭而死，又派李存进代替李嗣昭，李存进不久又阵亡，于是任符存审为招讨使，纔攻破张处瑾。
English: His son Zhang Duanzhong secretly did not lose heart, resisted, stood firm, defeated Fuxi and others, Tang sent Li Sizhao to replace Fuxi, Li Sizhao died in the middle of flying arrows, and sent Li Cunjin to replace Li Sizhao, Li Cunjin soon died in battle, so he appointed Fu Cunxin as an envoy, and defeated Zhang Duanzhong.

古文：执文礼妻及子处瑾、处球、处琪等，折足归于晋。
现代文：俘获张文礼的妻子和儿子张处瑾、张处球、张处琪等人，折断他们的脚押送到晋。
English: They captured Zhang Wenli's wife and son, Zhang Zhanqian, Zhang Zhanqiu, Zhang Zhanqi and others, broke their legs and sent them to Jin.

古文：赵人请而醢之，磔文礼尸于市。○罗绍威罗绍威，字端己，其先长沙人。
现代文：趟人请求把他们剁成肉酱，在街市上将张文礼的尸体分割，罗绍威宇端己，他的先辈是长沙人。
English: At the request of a passerby, they were chopped up into meat sauce, and Zhang Wenli's body was cut up in the street market.

古文：祖让，北迁为魏州贵乡人。
现代文：祖父罗让，北迁到魏州贵乡。
English: His grandfather, Luo Zhan, moved north to Guixiang, Weizhou.

古文：父弘信，为牧监卒。
现代文：父亲罗弘信，是牧监的士兵。
English: His father, Luo Hongxin, was a soldier of the pastoral inspector.

古文：文德元年，魏博牙军乱，遂杀其帅乐彦贞，立其将赵文建为留后，已而又杀之。
现代文：文德元年，魏博牙军作乱，遂杀掉他们的军帅乐彦贞，拥立他们的将领赵文建做留后，不久又杀掉他。
English: In the first year of the Wende era, Wei Boga's army rioted and killed their commander, Le Yanzhen, and then killed their general, Zhao Wenjian, shortly after he was appointed.

古文：牙将未知所立，乃聚呼曰： 孰能为我帅者？ 
现代文：将官们不知道该拥立谁，于是聚众呼喊说： 谁能做我们的主帅？ 
English: The generals did not know whom to support, so the crowd shouted: Who can be our coach?

古文：弘信从众中出应曰： 我可为君等帅也。 
现代文：罗弘信从人群中走出来回答说： 我可以做你们的主帅。 
English: Luo Hongxin stepped out from the crowd and replied, "I can be your coach."

古文：弘信状貌奇怪，面色青黑，军中异之，共立为留后。
现代文：罗弘信的外貌长得很奇特，脸色青黑，军中人觉得他很奇异，共同拥立他为节度留后。
English: Luo Hongxin's appearance was very peculiar, his face was blue-black, and the soldiers thought he was very strange, and they jointly supported him to stay behind for the festival.

古文：唐昭宗即位，拜弘信节度使。
现代文：唐昭宗登位，拜罗弘信为节度使。
English: Emperor Zhaozong of Tang ascended to the throne, and Bai Luo Hongxin became the regent.

古文：梁太祖将攻晋，乞籴于弘信，弘信不与，由是有隙。
现代文：梁太祖将要攻打晋，向罗弘信请求买粮，罗弘信不给，因此产生矛盾。
English: Liang Taizu was going to attack Jin and asked Luo Hongxin to buy grain, but Luo Hongxin refused to give it to him, thus creating a conflict.

古文：梁兵攻魏，取黎阳、淇门、卫县。
现代文：梁军进攻魏州，攻取黎阳、淇门、卫县。
English: Liang's army attacked Weizhou and captured Liyang, Qimen and Weixian.

古文：战于内黄，魏兵五战五败，弘信惧，请盟，乃止。
现代文：在内黄作战，魏州兵五战五败，罗弘信害怕，请求结盟，纔作罢。
English: During the war in Inner Hwang, the Wei soldiers fought five battles and suffered five defeats. Luo Hongxin was afraid and asked for an alliance.

古文：是时，梁方东攻兗、郓，北敌晋，晋遣李存信救硃宣，假道于魏。
现代文：这时，梁军正在束边攻兖、鄣二州，北面和晋对峙，晋派李存信救援朱宣，向魏州借道通行。
English: At this time, Liang's army was attacking Shuxian and Shijiazhuang and confronting Jin in the north. Jin sent Li Cunxin to rescue Zhu Xuan and pass through to Weizhou.

古文：太祖闻，遣使语弘信曰： 晋人志在河朔，兵还灭魏矣。 
现代文：梁太祖获知后，派使臣告诉罗弘信说： 晋人的志向在河朔，军队返回时就会消灭魏州。 
English: After Liang Taizu learned of this, he sent an envoy to Luo Hongxin to tell him: The aspirations of the Jin people are in Hexuo, and when the army returns, it will destroy Weizhou.

古文：弘信以为然，乃发兵击存信于莘县，太祖遣葛从周助之。
现代文：罗弘信认为是这檨，于是出兵在莘县袭击李存信，梁太祖派葛从周援助他。
English: Luo Hongxin thought that this was wrong, so he sent troops to attack Li Cunxin in Luo County, and Liang Taizu sent Ge Zhou to help him.

古文：梁兵擒晋王子落落，送于魏，弘信杀之，乃与晋绝。
现代文：梁兵抓获晋王的儿子落落，送到魏州，罗弘信杀了落落，于是和晋绝交。
English: Liang soldiers captured the son of Jin Wang, Luo Luo, and sent him to Weizhou. Luo Hongxin killed Luo Luo, and then broke off diplomatic relations with Jin.

古文：太祖犹疑弘信有二心，乃以兄事弘信，常为卑辞厚币以聘魏。
现代文：梁太祖还是怀疑罗弘信有二心，就把罗弘信当作哥哥对待，常常派人以谦卑的话贵重的礼物去魏州通问致意。
English: Liang Taizu still suspected that Luo Hongxin was double-minded, so he treated Luo Hongxin as an older brother and often sent people to Weizhou to make inquiries with humble words and valuable gifts.

古文：魏使者至梁，太祖北面拜而受币，谓使者曰： 六兄于我有倍年之长，吾何敢慢之。 
现代文：魏州的使臣到梁，梁太祖向北下拜而后接受礼物，对使臣说： 六兄比我年龄大一倍，我怎敢怠慢他。 
English: An envoy from the state of Wei came to Liang. Liang Taizu bowed to the north and accepted the gift. He said to the envoy: My sixth brother is twice my age, how dare I neglect him.

古文：弘信大喜，以为厚己。
现代文：罗弘信十分高兴，认为是厚待自己。
English: Luo Hongxin is very happy and thinks that he is being treated well.

古文：以故太祖往来燕、赵之间，卒有河北者，魏不为之患也。
现代文：因此梁太祖往来于燕、趟之间，最终占据河北，魏州没有成为他的后患。
English: Therefore, Liang Taizu went back and forth between Yan and Watan, and eventually occupied Hebei. Weizhou did not become his aftereffect.

古文：弘信死，绍威立。
现代文：罗弘信死，罗绍威继任。
English: Luo Hongxin died and was succeeded by Luo Shaowei.

古文：绍威好学工书，颇知属文，聚书数万卷，开馆以延四方之士。
现代文：罗绍威好学，擅长书法，很懂得写文章，聚集图书数万卷，开馆招纳四方士人。
English: Roshowei was eager to learn, good at calligraphy, knew how to write articles, collected tens of thousands of volumes of books, and opened a library to recruit people from the four directions.

古文：弘信在唐，以其先长沙人，故封长沙郡王，绍威袭父爵长沙。
现代文：罗弘信在唐时，因为他的祖先是长沙人，故封长沙郡王，罗绍威继承父亲的长沙郡王封爵。
English: When Luo Hongxin was in the Tang Dynasty, because his ancestors were from Changsha, he was named the county king of Changsha. Luo Shouwei succeeded his father as the county king of Changsha.

古文：绍威新立，幽州刘仁恭以兵十万攻魏，屠贝州，绍威求救于梁，大败燕军于内黄。
现代文：罗绍威刚刚继位，幽州刘仁恭率十万大军进攻魏州，屠贝州城，罗绍威向梁求救，在内黄大败燕军。
English: Rossoway had just succeeded to the throne, Yuzhou Liu Rengong led a hundred thousand army to attack Weizhou, Tuibeizhou City, Rossoway asked Liang for help, and defeated Yan's army in Inner Huang.

古文：明年，梁太祖遣葛从周会魏兵攻沧州，取其德州，遂败燕军于老鸦堤，绍威以故德梁助己。
现代文：第二年，梁太祖派葛从周会同魏州兵攻打沧州，攻取德州，于是在老鸦堤打败燕军，罗绍威因此感激梁救助自己。
English: In the second year, Liang Taizu sent Ge from Zhouhui to attack Cangzhou with Wei soldiers and capture Texas, so he defeated Yan's army at Laowu Dike. Therefore, Rossowei was grateful to Liang for saving himself.

古文：魏博自田承嗣始有牙军，牙军岁久益骄，至绍威时已二百年，父子世相婚姻以自结。
现代文：魏博从田承嗣开始纔有牙军，时间长了牙军日益骄横，到罗绍威时已有两百年历史，父子相承，世世代代相互联姻用以结交外援。
English: From Tian Chengzhi, Weibo began to have a dental army. As time went on, the dental army became increasingly arrogant. By the time of Roshowe, it had a history of two hundred years. It was inherited from father to son, and was used by generations of intermarriage to make foreign aid.

古文：前帅史宪诚、何全皞、韩君雄、乐彦贞等，皆由牙军所立，怒辄遂杀之。
现代文：以前的军帅史宪诚、何全皡、韩君雄、乐彦贞等人，都是由牙军拥立的，牙军不高兴，于是就杀掉主帅。
English: Former military commanders such as Shi Xiancheng, He Quanzhang, Han Junxiong, and Lok Yanzheng were all supported by the Yaga army. The Yaga army was not happy, so they killed the commander.

古文：绍威为人精悍明敏，通习吏事，为政有威严，然其家世由牙军所立。
现代文：罗绍威为人精悍聪明机敏，通晓官吏事体，治政很有威严，但他的家世代是由牙军拥立的。
English: Rossoway was a brave, clever and quick-witted man. He was well-versed in the affairs of officials, and his governance was very dignified. However, his family generation was supported by the dental army.

古文：天祐二年，魏州城中地陷，绍威惧有变。
现代文：天佑二年，魏州城中地陷，罗绍威害怕有变故。
English: Two years later, when the city of Weizhou fell to the ground, Rossoway was afraid of change.

古文：已而牙校李公牷作乱，绍威诛之，乃间遣使告梁乞兵，欲尽诛牙军。
现代文：不久，牙军军校李公伶作乱，罗绍威诛杀了他，于是秘密派使臣向梁求兵，想要全部杀掉牙军。
English: Soon after, Li Gongyao of the Jia Army Military Academy started a riot and was killed by Rossowei, who then secretly sent envoys to Liang to solicit soldiers and wanted to kill all of the Jia Army.

古文：梁太祖许之，为遣李思安等攻沧州，召兵于魏，绍威因悉发魏兵以从，独牙军在。
现代文：梁太祖答应了，为他派李思安等人攻打沧州，到魏州招兵，罗绍威趁机派全部魏州兵随从，只留下牙军。
English: Liang Taizu agreed, and sent Li Sian and others to attack Cangzhou for him, to recruit soldiers in Weizhou. Rossoway took the opportunity to send all the soldiers from Weizhou to follow, leaving only the dental army.

古文：绍威子廷规娶梁女，会梁女卒，太祖阴遣客将马嗣勋选良兵实舆中，以长直军千人杂舆夫入魏，诈为助葬，太祖以兵继其后。绍威夜以奴兵数百，会嗣勋兵击牙军，并其家属尽杀之。
现代文：罗绍威的儿子罗廷规娶梁王的女儿属妻，恰逢梁女死，梁太祖暗中派客将马嗣勋挑选精兵藏在车中，派长直军一千人混杂在车夫中进入魏州，谎称是助葬，梁太祖率兵跟在后面罗绍威晚上派家奴兵数百人，会合马嗣勋的士兵攻打牙军，连同他们的家属一并杀掉。
English: Luo Shouwei's son Luo Ting Jie married Liang Wang's daughter and his wife, which coincided with the death of Liang's daughter. Liang Taizu secretly sent a guest to hide Ma Shihun's selected elite soldiers in a car. He sent a thousand-strong direct army mixed in with the coachmen to enter Weizhou, falsely claiming to be funeral attendants. Liang Taizu led the soldiers behind. In the evening, Luo Shouwei sent hundreds of family slave soldiers to meet Ma Shihun's soldiers to attack the Yaga army and kill them together with their families.

古文：太祖自内黄驰至魏，魏兵从攻沧州者行至历亭，闻之皆反，入澶、博诸州，魏境大乱，数月，太祖为悉平之。
现代文：梁太祖从内黄飞驰到魏州，跟随梁太祖攻打沧州的魏州士兵走到历亭，听到消息后都反叛了，逃到澶、博各州，魏州境内大乱，几个月后，梁太祖为罗绍威全部平定了叛军。
English: Liang Taizu flew from Neihuang to Weizhou, followed Liang Taizu's attack on Cangzhou's Weizhou soldiers to Liting, and after hearing the news, they all rebelled, fled to Shandong and Bogaozhou, and there was a great turmoil in Weizhou. A few months later, Liang Taizu quelled all the rebels for Roshowe.

古文：牙军死，魏兵悉叛，绍威势益孤，太祖乃欲夺其地，绍威始大悔。
现代文：牙军被消灭后，魏州兵全部反叛，罗绍威的势力更加孤立，梁太祖于是想侵夺他的土地，罗绍威纔开始追悔不已。
English: After the destruction of the Yaga army, the Wei soldiers all rebelled, and the power of Roshowe was more isolated. Liang Taizu then wanted to invade his land, and Roshowe began to repent.

古文：是岁，太祖复攻沧州，宿兵长芦，绍威馈给梁兵，自沧至魏五百里，起亭堠，供帐什物自具，梁兵数十万皆取足，绍威以此重困。
现代文：这年，梁太祖又攻打沧州，在长芦驻军，罗绍威供给梁军粮饷，从沧州到魏州五百里路，修建亭堡，自己准备各种供应物品，敷十万梁兵都取用充足，罗绍威因此越发困乏。
English: In the same year, Liang Taizu attacked Cangzhou again, and garrisoned his troops in Changlu. Rossoway supplied Liang's troops with food and provisions. He built a pavilion on the 500-mile road from Cangzhou to Weizhou, and prepared all kinds of supplies himself. Liang's 100,000 soldiers had enough supplies, and Rossoway became increasingly exhausted.

古文：昭宗东迁洛阳，诏诸镇缮理京师，绍威营太庙成，加拜守侍中，进封鄴王。
现代文：唐昭宗束迁到洛阳，诏令各镇修缮京师，罗绍威修建的太庙落成，加拜为守侍中，进封为邺王。
English: Emperor Zhaozong of Tang Dynasty moved to Luoyang, and ordered all towns to repair and renovate the imperial palace. The grand temple built by Emperor Roshowei was completed, and Gabai was appointed as the keeper of the palace, and Jinfeng was appointed as the king of Shanshan.

古文：太祖围沧州未下，刘守光会晋军破梁潞州。
现代文：梁太祖围攻沧州没有攻下，刘守光会合晋军攻破梁潞州。
English: Liang Taizu besieged Cangzhou but failed to conquer it. Liu Shouguang rallied the Jin army to conquer Liang Bozhou.

古文：太祖自长芦归，过魏，疾作，卧府中，诸将莫得见，绍威惧太祖终袭己，乃乘间入见曰： 今四方称兵，为梁患者，以唐在故也；唐家天命已去，不如早自取之。 
现代文：梁太祖从长芦返回，经过魏州，发病，躺在府中，将领们役人能见到他，罗绍威怕梁太祖最终袭击自己，于是趁空隙进见说： 如今四方战乱，梁的忧患，是因为唐存在的缘故；唐家的天命已完，不如趁早夺取唐。 
English: When Liang Taizu returned from Changlu, he passed through Weizhou, fell ill, and lay in the palace. The generals and officials could see him. Rossowei was afraid that Liang Taizu would eventually attack himself, so he took advantage of the gap to say: Nowadays, the four sides are at war, Liang's sorrow is due to the existence of Tang; the destiny of the Tang family is over, it is better to seize Tang as soon as possible.

古文：太祖大喜，乃急归。
现代文：梁太祖十分高兴，于是急忙返回。
English: Liang Taizu was very happy, so he hurried back.

古文：太祖即位，将都洛阳，绍威取魏良材为五凤楼、朝元前殿，浮河而上，立之京师。
现代文：梁太祖登位，将要在洛阳建都，罗绍威挑选魏州的好木材营建五凤楼、朝元前殿，木材沿黄河浮水而上，很快到达京师。
English: When Liang Taizu ascended to the throne, the capital would be built in Luoyang. Roshowe selected good timber from Weizhou to build the Five-Phoenix Tower and the Chao Yuan Front Hall. The timber floated up the Yellow River and soon reached Beijing.

古文：太祖叹曰： 吾闻萧何守关中，为汉起未央宫，岂若绍威越千里而为此，若神化然，功过萧何远矣！ 
现代文：梁太祖赞叹说： 我听说萧何守护关中，为漠营建未央宫，哪里比得上罗绍威不远千里送木材，像是有神助似的，功劳远远超过萧何了！ 
English: Liang Taizu said with admiration: I heard that Xiao He guarded Guanzhong and built the Weiyang Palace for the desert, which is comparable to Roshowe, who sent wood thousands of miles away, as if he had divine help. The merit is far more than Xiao He!

古文：赐以宝带名马。
现代文：赐给罗绍威宝带和名马。
English: He gave Roshau Weiping and a famous horse.

古文：燕王刘守光囚其父仁恭，与其兄守文有隙，绍威驰书劝守光等降梁。
现代文：燕王刘守光囚禁他的父亲刘仁恭，和他的哥哥刘守文有矛盾，罗绍威飞马送信劝说刘守光等人向梁投降。
English: Yan Wang Liu Shouguang imprisoned his father Liu Rengong, and there was a conflict with his brother Liu Shouwen. The Emperor sent a message to persuade Liu Shouguang and others to surrender to Liang.

古文：太祖闻之笑曰： 吾常攻燕不能下，今绍威折简，乃胜用兵十万。 
现代文：梁太祖听说后笑着说： 我经常攻打燕不能攻克，如今罗绍威写封信，就胜过用十万大车。 
English: After hearing this, Liang Taizu smiled and said, "I have often been unable to defeat Yan. Nowadays, it is better for Rossoway to write a letter than to use a 100,000-ton truck."

古文：太祖每有大事，多遣使者问之，绍威时亦驰简入白，使者相遇道中，其事往往相合。
现代文：梁太祖每当有大事情，多派使臣向他询问，罗绍威也不时派人驰马送信禀报梁太祖，使臣在路上相遇，所说的事往往相同。
English: Whenever Liang Taizu had a big event, many envoys would come to ask him about it. From time to time, Roshowe would also send people on horseback to send messages to inform Liang Taizu. The envoys would meet on the road and often said the same thing.

古文：绍威自以魏久不用兵，愿伐木安阳淇门为船，自河入洛，岁漕谷百万石，以供京师。太祖益以绍威尽忠，遣将程厚、卢凝督其役。
现代文：罗绍威因为魏川很久没有用兵打仗了，愿意砍伐安阳淇门的树木造船，从黄河入洛阳，每年从水道运送谷物一百万石，供应京师梁太祖更加认为罗绍威尽忠盎力，派将领程厚、卢凝监督劳役。
English: Because the Wei River had not used soldiers to fight for a long time, Rossowei was willing to cut down trees in Anyang and build ships. From the Yellow River into Luoyang, one million stones of grain were transported from the waterway every year. To supply Beijing, Liang Taizu believed that Rossowei was loyal. He sent generals to lead the way, and Lu Xun supervised the labor service.

古文：舟未成而绍威病，乃表言： 魏故大镇，多外兵，愿得梁一有功重臣临之，请以骸骨就第。 
现代文：船还没造成而罗绍威病了，于是上表说： 魏州是过去的大镇，有很多外籍士兵，希望梁派一个有功的重臣亲临魏州，请求让我归家而死。 
English: The ship had not yet been built and Rossoway was ill, so the table said: Weizhou is a big town in the past, there are many foreign soldiers, I hope Liang will send a meritorious senior minister to Weizhou to ask me to return home and die.

古文：太祖亟命其子周翰监府事，语使者曰： 亟行，语而主，为我强饭，如有不讳，当世世贵尔子孙。
现代文：梁太祖急忙命令他的儿子罗周翰监理府事，告诉使臣说： 快去，告诉你的主人，替我强迫自己多吃饭，如果去世，一定世世代代让他的子孙富贵。
English: Liang Taizu hurriedly ordered his son Luo Zhouhan to supervise the affairs of the government, telling the envoy: "Go quickly, tell your master to force himself to eat more for me. If he dies, he will surely make his children and grandchildren rich for generations to come."

古文：今使周翰监府事，尚冀卿复愈耳。 
现代文：现存让罗周翰监理府事，还希望他能病愈。 
English: There is still hope that Luo Zhouhan will be able to recover from his illness.

古文：绍威仕梁，累拜太师兼中书令，卒年三十四，赠尚书令，谥曰贞壮。
现代文：罗绍威在梁做官，累拜太师兼中书令，死时三十四岁，赠尚书令，赐谧号叫贞壮。
English: Luo Shaowei worked as an official in Liang, served as a deacon and chancellor, and was thirty-four years old at the time of his death. He was given the title of chancellor and the posthumous name Zheng Zhuang.

古文：子三人，廷规，官至司农卿卒。周翰袭父位，乾化二年八月为杨师厚所逐，徙为宣义军节度使，卒于官，年十四。
现代文：有儿子三人，罗廷规，官做到司农卿而死罗周翰继承父亲的职位，干化二年八月被杨师厚所驱逐，改任宣义军节度使，死在任上，年龄十四岁。
English: He had three sons, including Luo Tinggui, who became the Secretary of Agriculture and died in office, and Luo Zhouhan, who inherited his father's position, was expelled by Yang Shihou in August of the following year, and was appointed as the Commissioner of the Xuanwu Festival. He died in office, at the age of fourteen.

古文：周敬代为宣义军节度使，年十岁，徙镇忠武。
现代文：罗周敬代他任宣义军节度使，年龄十岁，改任忠武军节度使。
English: On his behalf, Luo Zhoujing was appointed as the envoy of the Xuanwu Rebellion, and at the age of ten, he was appointed as the envoy of the Loyalist Rebellion.

古文：明年，为秘书监、驸马都尉、光禄卿。
现代文：第二年，任秘书监、驸马都尉、光禄卿。
English: In the second year, he was appointed secretary superintendent, commander of the cavalry, and minister of finance.

古文：唐庄宗时为金吾大将军，明宗以为匡国军节度使，罢为上将军。
现代文：唐庄宗时任金吾大将军，唐明宗任命他为匡国军节度使，罢为上将军。
English: At that time, Tang Zhuozong was the general of Kingu, and Tang Mingzong appointed him as the commander of the Kuangguo Army and promoted him to general.

古文：晋天福二年卒，年三十二。
现代文：晋天福二年死，三十二岁。
English: Jin Tianfu died two years later, at the age of 32.

古文：廷规娶梁太祖二女，一曰安阳公主，一曰金华公主。
现代文：罗廷规娶梁太祖的两个女儿，一个是安阳公主，一个是金华公主。
English: Luo Tingjie married two daughters of Liang Taizu, one was Princess Anyang and the other was Princess Jinhua.

古文：周翰娶末帝女，曰寿春公主，周敬亦娶末帝女，曰晋安公主。
现代文：罗周翰娶梁末帝的女儿，叫寿春公主，罗周敬也娶梁末帝的女儿，叫晋安公主。
English: Luo Zhouhan married the daughter of Emperor Liangmu, called Princess Shuchun, and Luo Zhou Jing also married the daughter of Emperor Liangmu, called Princess Jinan.

古文：○王处直王处直，字允明，京兆万年人也。
现代文：王处直字允明，是京兆万年人。
English: Wang Zuoji Yunming is a Beijing billion-year-old.

古文：父宗，善殖财货，富拟王侯，为唐神策军吏，官至金吾大将军，领兴元节度使，子处存、处直。
现代文：父亲王宗，善于聚敛财物，富裕可和王侯之家相比，任唐神策军吏，官做到金吾大将军，领兴元节度使，儿子王处存、王处直。
English: His father, Wang Zong, was good at amassing wealth, and his wealth could be compared to that of a princely family. He was appointed military officer of the Tang Dynasty, and served as the general of Kingu, the leader of the Xingyuan Festival. His sons were Wang Shizhen and Wang Shanzhong.

古文：处存以父任为骁卫将军、定州已来制置内闲厩宫苑等使。
现代文：王处存因父亲的缘故被任命焉骁卫将军、定州已来制置内闲厩宫苑等使。
English: Because of his father, Wang Shuxun was appointed as the general of Yan Xianwei, and Dingzhou has come to set up the leisure stables and gardens.

古文：乾符六年，即拜义武军节度使。
现代文：干符六年，又拜为义武军节度使。
English: After six years of hard work, he was again appointed as the volunteer army's festival envoy.

古文：黄巢陷长安，处存感愤流涕，率镇兵入关讨贼。
现代文：黄巢攻陷长安，王处存感慨愤激而哭泣，率领本镇兵进关讨贼。
English: When Huang Chao invaded Chang'an, Wang Shide, weeping with emotion and indignation, led the town's soldiers into the pass to hunt down the thieves.

古文：巢败第功，而收城击贼，李克用为第一；勤王倡义，处存为第一。
现代文：黄巢被打败后，排定功劳，收复京城攻打贼军，李克用功劳第一；救援王室，倡导大义，王处存功劳第一。
English: After the defeat of Huang Chao, Li Ke was the first to use his merits to win back the capital and fight against the bandits. He was also the first to rescue the royal family and advocate for the greater good.

古文：乾宁二年，处存卒于镇，三军以河朔故事，推处存子郜为留后，即拜节度使，加检校司空、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：干宁二年，王处存死在任上，三军依照河朔旧例，推举王处存的儿子王郜任留后，又拜为节度使，加检校司空、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the second year of Qianning, Wang Shucheng died in office, and the three armies, in accordance with the old case of Hexuo, elected Wang Shucheng, the son of Wang Shucheng, to stay, and also made him the festival envoy, and promoted the inspector of the school to the sky, and the book gate of the same school to the next level.

古文：处直为后院中军都知兵马使。
现代文：王处直任后院中军都知兵马使。
English: The king's office was directly appointed as the rear courtyard of the Chinese army.

古文：光化三年，梁兵攻定州，郜遣处直率兵拒之，战于沙河，为梁兵所败。
现代文：光化三年，梁军进攻定州，王郜派王处直率兵抵抗，在沙河犬战，被梁兵打败。
English: In the third year of Guanghua, Liang's army attacked Dingzhou. Wang Yao sent his forthright soldiers to resist, but they were defeated by Liang's soldiers in the dogfight at Shahe.

古文：兵返入城逐郜，郜出奔晋，乱兵推处直为留后。
现代文：军队返回城中驱逐王郜，王郜出逃到晋，乱军推举王处直任留后。
English: The army returned to the city to expel Wang Qian, Wang Qian fled to Jin, and the rebel army elected Wang Shide to remain in office.

古文：梁兵围之，处直遣人告梁，请绝晋而事梁，出绢十万匹犒军，乃与梁盟。
现代文：梁兵围城，王处直派人告诉梁，请求与晋绝交而事奉梁，拿出十万匹绢犒赏军队，于是和梁结盟。
English: When Liang's soldiers besieged the city, Wang Zuanzhong sent someone to tell Liang that he should break off diplomatic relations with Jin and serve Liang. Liang offered 100,000 horses as a reward to the soldiers, and Liang agreed to an alliance.

古文：梁太祖表处直义武军节度使，累封太原王。太祖即位，封处直北平王。
现代文：梁太祖表奏王处直为义武军节度使，累封为太原王梁太祖即位，封王处直为北平王。
English: King Liang Taizu was appointed as the festival envoy of the volunteer army, and was enthroned as King Liang Taizu of the Taiyuan Kingdom, and King Liang Taizu was enthroned as the King of Peking.

古文：其后梁兵攻王镕，镕求救于晋，处直亦遣人至晋，愿绝梁以自效。
现代文：后来梁军进攻王镕，王镕向晋求救，王处直也派人到晋，愿意与梁鲍交而效力。
English: Later, Liang's army attacked Wang Hui, Wang Hui asked Jin for help, and Wang Shuzhi also sent people to Jin, willing to cooperate with Liang Bao.

古文：晋兵救镕，处直以兵五千从，破梁军于柏乡。
现代文：晋兵救援王镕，王处直率五千士兵随行，在柏乡攻破梁军。
English: Jin soldiers came to the rescue of Wang Qian, and Wang Zuochuan was accompanied by five thousand soldiers, and defeated Liang's army in Baixiang.

古文：其后晋北破燕，南取魏博，与梁战河上，十馀年，处直未尝不以兵从。
现代文：后来晋在北边攻破燕，在南边攻取魏博，和梁在黄河边作战，十多年，王处直未尝不率兵随同作战。
English: Later, Jin conquered Yan in the north, Wu Bo in the south, and Liang in the Yellow River. For more than ten years, Wang Shuxu never failed to lead his soldiers into battle.

古文：处直好巫，而客有李应之者，妖妄人也。
现代文：王处直喜好巫术，而有门客李应之，是个虚妄不实的妖人。
English: Wang Shanzhong likes witchcraft, and Li Yingzhu, a disciple of Wang Shanzhong, is a delusional demon.

古文：处直有疾，应之以左道治之而愈，处直益以为神，使衣道士服，以为行营司马，军政无大小，咸取决焉。
现代文：王处直患病，李应之用邪道治愈了他的病，王处直更加觉得神奇，让他穿上道士的衣服，任命为行营司马，军政事务无论大小，都取决于他。
English: Wang Shuzhi fell ill, and Li Yingzhi cured his illness with the evil way. Wang Shuzhi felt even more miraculous. He dressed him in the clothes of a Taoist and appointed him as a camp leader. Military and political affairs, no matter how big or small, all depended on him.

古文：初，应之于陉邑阑得小兒刘云郎，养以为子，而处直未有子，乃以云郎与处直，而绐曰： 此子生而有异。 
现代文：当初，李应之在陉邑捡到一个小孩刘云郎，收养作儿子，而王处直没有儿子，于是把刘云郎送给王处直，而欺骗他说： 这个孩子生下来就很奇异。 
English: At first, Li Yingzhi found a child, Liu Yunro, in Zouyi and adopted him as his son, but Wang Shanzhi did not have a son, so he gave Liu Yunro to Wang Shanzhi and deceived him by saying, "This child is born very strange."

古文：处直养以为子，更名曰都，甚爱之。
现代文：王处直收养作儿子，改名叫王都，十分喜爱他。
English: Wang Danzhong adopted him as his son and changed his name to Wang Du. He loved him very much.

古文：应之由此益横，乃籍管内丁壮，别立新军，自将之，治第博陵坊，四面开门，皆用左道。
现代文：李应之因此更加骄横，于是登记管辖范围内的壮丁，另建新军，自己统率，在博陵坊修建住宅，四面开门，都用邪道方法。
English: As a result, Li Yingzhi became even more arrogant. Therefore, he registered the able-bodied children within his jurisdiction, built a new army, led it himself, built a house in Bolingfang, and opened the doors on all sides, all of which were evil methods.

古文：处直将吏知其必为患，而莫能谏也。
现代文：王处直的将吏们知道他必定会造成灾患，而没有人能谏阻。
English: The king's loyal generals knew that he would surely bring disaster, and no one could stop him.

古文：是时，幽州李匡俦假道中山以如京师，处直伏甲城外，以备不虞。
现代文：这时，幽州李匡俦借道中山去京师，王处直在城外埋下伏兵，以防备不测。
English: At this time, Yuzhou Li Kuangtao took the Zhongshan Road to Beijing Division, and Wang Shide directly buried an ambush outside the city to prevent accidents.

古文：匡俦已去，甲士入城围应之第，执而杀之，因诣处直请杀都，处直不与。
现代文：李匡俦离开后，甲士们进城包围李应之的住宅，抓住他把他杀了，于是到王处直那里请求杀掉王都，王处直不同意。
English: After Li Kuangyao left, the knights entered the city and surrounded Li Yingzhi's house. They caught him and killed him, so they went to Wang Shanzhi to ask him to kill Wang Du. Wang Shanzhi did not agree.

古文：明日，第功行赏，因阴疏甲士姓名，自队长已上藏于别籍，其后因事诛之，凡二十年，无一人免者，而处直终为都所杀。
现代文：第二天，论功行赏，因而暗中记下甲士姓名，从队长以上登记在另外的册子上，后来藉别的事杀掉他们，共二十年，没有一个幸免的人，但王处直最终被王都杀死。
English: The next day, he secretly wrote down the names of the knights, from captain and above, and recorded them in a separate book, and then killed them by other means. In total, twenty years, no one was spared, but the king was eventually killed by the king.

古文：都为人狡佞多谋，处直以为节度副使。
现代文：王都为人狡猾谄媚，多阴谋诡计，王处直饪命他为节度副使。
English: Wang Du was a cunning and charming person, full of intrigue, and the king's office directly appointed him as the deputy envoy of the State Council.

古文：张文礼弑王镕，庄宗发兵讨文礼，处直与左右谋曰： 镇，定之蔽也，文礼虽有罪，然镇亡定不独存。 
现代文：张文礼杀王镕，唐庄宗出兵讨伐张文礼，王处直和手下人商量说： 镇州，是定州的屏障，张文礼虽然有罪，但镇州灭亡了，定州不能独存。 
English: Zhang Wenli killed Wang Xi, Tang Zhuangzong sent troops to fight against Zhang Wenli, Wang Shuzhi and his subordinates discussed and said: Zhenzhou is the barrier of Dingzhou, although Zhang Wenli is guilty, Zhenzhou has perished, Dingzhou cannot exist alone.

古文：乃遣人请庄宗毋发兵，庄宗取所获文礼与梁蜡书示处直曰： 文礼负我，师不可止。 
现代文：于是派人请求唐庄宗不要出兵，唐庄宗拿出获取的张文礼和梁的蜡书给王处直看，说： 张文礼对不起我，不能停止出兵。 
English: So he sent someone to ask Tang Zhuozong not to send troops. Tang Zhuozong took out the wax books of Zhang Wenli and Liang that he had obtained and showed them to the king, saying, "I'm sorry Zhang Wenli, I can't stop sending troops.

古文：处直有孽子郁，当郜之亡于晋也，郁亦奔焉，晋王以女妻之，为新州防御使。
现代文：王处直有个侍妾所生的儿子王郁，当王郜逃到晋时，王郁也逃奔出去，晋王把女儿嫁给了他，任为新州防御使。
English: Wang Shanzhi had a son, Wang Yu, born of a concubine. When Wang Yao fled to Jin, Wang Yu also fled. Jin Wang married his daughter to him and appointed him as the new state defense envoy.

古文：处直见庄宗必讨文礼，益自疑，乃阴与郁交通，使郁北招契丹入塞以牵晋兵，且许召郁为嗣，都闻之不说。
现代文：王处直见唐庄宗一定要讨伐张文礼，更生疑心，于是暗中和王郁交结，让王郁到北方招契丹入塞以便牵制晋兵，而且答应召王郁为继承人，王都知道后不高兴。
English: The king's office directly saw that Tangzhuangzong must fight against Zhang Wenli, and was suspicious, so he secretly crossed paths with Wang Yu, let Wang Yu go to the north to invite Khitan to enter Tibet in order to restrain Jin soldiers, and promised to call Wang Yu as an heir. The king knew that the queen was not happy.

古文：而定人皆言契丹不可召，恐自贻患，处直不听。
现代文：而定州人都说不能召契丹，害怕给自己留下后患，王处直不听。
English: But the people of Dingzhou all said that they could not summon Qidan, for fear of leaving a legacy for themselves, and the king's office did not listen.

古文：郁自奔晋，常恐处直不容，因此大喜，以为乘其隙可取之，乃以厚赂诱契丹阿保机。
现代文：王郁自从逃奔到晋，常常怕王处直不能容忍他，因此十分高兴，认为藉这个机会可以取王处直之位，于是用重金贿赂引诱契丹阿保机。
English: Since fleeing to Jin, Wang Yu had often feared that Wang Shizhi would not be able to tolerate him, so he was very happy and thought that he could take advantage of this opportunity to take Wang Shizhi's place, so he used heavy bribes to lure Khitan Ahok.

古文：阿保机举国入寇，定人皆不欲契丹之举，小吏和昭训劝都举事，都因执处直，囚之西宅，自为留后，凡王氏子孙及处直将校杀戮殆尽。
现代文：阿保机举国入侵，定州人都不愿契丹出兵，小吏和昭训劝说王都起兵反叛，王都于是抓捕王处直，把他囚禁在西宅，自任为留后，凡是王氏的子孙以及王处直的将校差不多都被杀光。
English: Ah Bao Ji invaded the whole country, and the people of Dingzhou did not want the Khitan to send troops. Xiaoli and Zhaoxun persuaded Wang Du to rebel. Wang Du then arrested Wang Shanzhi and imprisoned him in the West House. After he was appointed to stay, all the descendants of the Wang clan and Wang Shanzhi's officers were almost killed.

古文：明年正月朔旦，都拜处直于西宅，处直奋起揕其胸而呼曰： 逆贼！
现代文：第二年正月初一清晨，王都到西宅拜见王处直，王处直奋起抓他的胸，喊叫说： 反贼！
English: On the morning of the first day of the first month of the second year, Wang Du went to the West House to pay homage to Wang Zhizhi. Wang Zhizhi stood up, grabbed his chest and shouted: "Anti-thief!

古文：吾何负尔？ 
现代文：我有什么对不起你的？ 
English: What am I sorry about?

古文：然左右无兵，遂欲啮其鼻，都掣袖而走，处直遂见杀。
现代文：但周围没有兵器，于是想咬他的鼻子，王都扯掉衣袖跑了，王处直于是被杀。
English: But there were no weapons around, so he tried to bite his nose. Wang tore off his sleeves and ran away. Wang was killed immediately.

古文：初，有黄蛇见于碑楼，处直以为龙，藏而祠之，又有野鹊数百，巢麦田中，处直以为己德所致，而定人皆知其不祥，曰： 蛇穴山泽，而处人室，鹊巢乌，降而田居，小人窃位，而在上者失其所居之象也。 已而处直果被废死。
现代文：当初，有黄蛇在碑楼出现，王处直认为是龙，把它收藏起来祭祀，又有数百只野鹊，在麦田中筑巢，王处直认为是自己的德政招来的，而定州人都知道这些是不祥之兆，说： 蛇在山泽中打洞，却住在人的屋子里，鹊是筑巢而居的乌，却飞下来住在田中，这是小人篡位，而在上的人失去位置的征兆， 不久王处直果然被废置处死。
English: At first, there was a yellow snake in the monument. Wang Duan thought it was a dragon and collected it for sacrifice. There were also hundreds of wild grasshoppers that built nests in the wheat fields. Wang Duan thought it was caused by his German government. But the people of Dingzhou all knew that these were ominous signs. They said, "Snakes make holes in the mountains and streams, but live in people's houses. Dragonflies build nests and live in people's houses, but fly down to live in people's fields. This is a sign that the villain has usurped the throne, and the people at the top have lost their positions. Wang Duan was

古文：庄宗已败契丹于沙河，追奔过定州，与都相得欢甚，以其子继岌娶都女，以都为义武军节度使。
现代文：唐庄宗在沙河打败契丹后，追击时经过定州，和王都相处得很高兴，让他的儿子李继岌娶王都的女儿，任命王都为义武军节度使。
English: After Tang Zhuangzong defeated Khitan in Shahe, he passed through Dingzhou during the pursuit, and Wangdu got along very well. He let his son Li Jizhe marry Wangdu's daughter and appointed Wangdu as the volunteer army's festival envoy.

古文：同光二年，庄宗幸鄴，都来朝，赐与巨万。
现代文：同光二年，唐庄宗到邺，王都前来朝见，赐给他钱财不计其敷。
English: In the second year of Tongguang, Tangzhuang lived in Handan, and the king came to see him, and gave him money and wealth beyond all measure.

古文：庄宗以继岌故，待都甚厚，所请无不从。
现代文：唐庄宗因李继岌的缘故，对王都很好，王都的请求无不答应。
English: Tangzhuangzong was very kind to Wangdu because of Li Jizhe's death, and he agreed to Wangdu's request.

古文：及明宗立，颇恶都为人，而安重诲每以法绳之，都始有异志。
现代文：到唐明宗即位，十 分讨厌王都的为人，而安重诲每每依照法令来约束他，王都开始有别的打算。
English: When Emperor Mingzong ascended to the throne, Wangdu hated him intensely, and An Shouguang ordered him to be restrained according to the law. Wangdu began to have other plans.

古文：是时，唐兵击契丹，数往来定州，都供馈多阙，益不自安。
现代文：这时，唐兵攻打契丹，多次往来于定州，王都供给军队粮草不足，自己更加不安。
English: At this time, the Tang soldiers attacked the Khitan and repeatedly traveled to and from Dingzhou. The king did not supply enough grain and grass to the army, and he was even more uneasy.

古文：和昭训为都谋曰： 天子新立，四方未附，其势易离，可为自安之计。 
现代文：和昭训为王都出谋说： 天子刚刚即位，四方没有归咐，这种形势容易分离，可以考虑保住自己的计划。 
English: Both he and Zhaoxun made plans for the king, saying, "The Son of Heaven has just ascended the throne, and there is no order from the four quarters. This situation is easy to separate, and you can consider keeping your own plan.

古文：已而硃守殷反于汴州，都遂亦反，遣人以蜡书招青、徐、岐、潞、梓五镇，约皆举兵，而五镇不应。
现代文：不久朱守殷在汴州反叛，王都于是也反叛，派人用蜡书招青、徐、岐、潞、梓五个节镇，相约都举兵反叛，而五镇不响应。
English: Soon after, Zhu Shouyin rebelled in Zhangzhou, and Wangdu rebelled as well. He sent people to recruit the five towns of Qing, Xu, Qi, Zou and Zi with wax books. They all agreed to raise an army to rebel, but the five towns did not respond.

古文：明宗遣王晏球讨之。
现代文：唐明宗派王晏球讨伐他。
English: The Tang and Ming dynasties sent Wang Xuanqiu to fight against him.

古文：都复与王郁招契丹为援，契丹遣秃馁将万骑救都。
现代文：王都又和王郁招契丹军援救，契丹派秃馁率一万骑兵救援王都。
English: Wang Du and Wang Yu called on the Khitan army for rescue, and the Khitan sent vultures with ten thousand cavalry to rescue Wang Du.

古文：都遣指挥使郑季璘、龙泉镇将杜弘寿以二千人迎契丹，为晏球所败。
现代文：王都派指挥使郑季璘、龙泉镇将杜弘寿率两干人迎接契丹，被王晏球打败。
English: Wang Du sent a conductor to send Zheng Jizhe and Longquan Town Mayor Du Hongshou to lead two cadres to meet the Khitan, but they were defeated by Wang Yingqiu.

古文：季璘、弘寿被执，晏球责曰： 吾尝使人招汝，何故不降？ 
现代文：郑季璘、杜弘寿被俘，王晏球斥责说： 我曾派人招降你们，为什么不投降？ 
English: When Zheng Qichen and Du Hongshou were captured, Wang Bingqiu rebuked them, saying: I once sent someone to invite you to surrender, why didn't you surrender?

古文：弘寿对曰： 受恩中山两世矣，不敢有二心。 
现代文：杜弘寿回答说： 我受中山的恩德有雨代了，不敢有二心。 
English: Du Hongshou replied, "I have been repaid with the kindness of Zhongshan, and I dare not have second thoughts.

古文：遂见杀，弘寿临刑，神色自若。
现代文：于是被杀，杜弘寿临刑时，神态自如。
English: As a result, he was killed. When he was about to be sentenced, Du Hongsu looked at ease.

古文：晏球屯军望都，与都及契丹战，大败之曲阳，都及秃馁得数骑遁去，闭城不复出。
现代文：王晏球在望都驻军，和王都以及契丹军作战，在曲阳大败他们，王都和秃馁带着几个骑兵逃去，关闭城门不再出来。
English: Wang Yaoqiu garrisoned troops in Wangdu, fought with Wangdu and the Khitan army, and defeated them in Quyang. Wangdu and the vultures fled with a few cavalrymen, closed the gate and never came out.

古文：初，庄宗军中阑得一男子，爱之，使冒姓李，名继陶，养于宫中以为子。
现代文：当初，唐庄宗在军中收养一个男孩，很喜欢他，让他改姓李，名叫继陶，收养在宫中作儿子。
English: At first, Tang Zhuangzong adopted a boy in the army. He liked him very much, so he changed his surname to Li, named Ji Tao, and adopted him as his son in the palace.

古文：明宗即位，安重诲出以乞段徊，徊亦恶而逐之。
现代文：唐明宗即位，安重诲把他赶出宫中，向段徊乞请，段徊也讨厌他把他赶走。
English: When Emperor Tang Mingzong ascended the throne, An Chongyi ordered him to leave the palace. He begged Duan Wanguo to let him go, but Duan Wanguo did not want him to go.

古文：都使人求得之。
现代文：王都派人找到他。
English: The king sent someone to find him.

古文：至是，绐其众曰： 此庄宗太子也。 
现代文：到这时，欺骗众人说： 这是唐庄宗的太子。 
English: At this time, he deceived many people by saying, "This is the prince of Tangzhuangzong."

古文：被以天子之服，使巡城上，以示晏球军，军士识者曰： 继陶也。 
现代文：给他穿上天子的衣服，让他在城上巡视，来向王晏球的军队显示，认识他的士兵说： 这是李继陶。 一起骂他。
English: They dressed him in the robes of the Son of Heaven, and had him patrol the city to show the troops of Wang Bingqiu. The soldiers who knew him said, "This is Li Jitao." They all cursed him.

古文：共诟之。都居城中，兵少，惟以契丹二千人守城，呼秃馁为馁王，屈身事之。
现代文：王都住在城中，士兵少，只有用契丹的两干人守城，称呼秃馁为馁王，低三下四地事奉他。
English: The kings all lived in the city, and there were few soldiers. Only the two able-bodied men of Khitan guarded the city. They called the vulture the king of the vultures, and served him at all times.

古文：诸将有欲出降者，都伺察严密，杀戮无虚日，以故坚守经年。
现代文：将领们有的想出城投降，王都严密窥伺，没有哪一天不杀人，因此坚守了一年。
English: Some of the generals wanted to leave the city and surrender, but the king kept a close eye on them. There was never a day when he didn't kill someone, so he held out for a year.

古文：天成四年二月，城破，都与家属皆自焚死，王氏遂绝于中山。
现代文：天成四年二月，城被攻破，王都和他的家属都自焚而死，王氏于是在中山绝后。
English: In February of the 4th year of Tiancheng, the city was breached, Wang Du and his family members all self-immolated and died, and the Wang clan then died out in Zhongshan.

古文：而处存有子鄴，鄴子廷胤，与庄宗连外姻，为人骁勇，自为军校，能与士卒同辛苦，明宗时，历贝、忻、密、澶、隰州刺史。
现代文：而王处存有个儿子王邺，王邺的儿子王廷胤，和唐庄宗联外姻，为人骁悍勇猛，自从担任军校，能和士兵同甘共苦，唐明宗时，历任贝、忻、密、澶、隰五州刺史。
English: However, there was a son of Wang Zong, Wang Zong's son, Wang Tingran, who was married to a Tangzhuangzong. He was a brave and courageous person. Since he served as a military school, he was able to share the joys and sorrows with soldiers. When he was a Tangmingzong, he successively held the posts of Bei, Zong, Mi, Zong, and Zong of the Five Provinces.

古文：范延光反于鄴，晋高祖以廷胤为杨光远行营中军使。
现代文：范延光在邺反叛，晋高祖以王廷胤为杨光远行营中军使。
English: Fan Yanguang rebelled in Handan, and Wang Tingyan, Yang Guang's long-distance envoy, was the forefather of the promotion.

古文：破延光有功，拜彰德军节度使。
现代文：攻破范延光有功，拜为彰德军节度使。
English: He played a significant role in defeating Fan Yanguang and was hailed as an envoy who promoted the German army.

古文：初，处直为都所囚，幼子威北走契丹。
现代文：当初，王处直被王都囚禁，小儿子王威北逃到契丹。
English: At first, Wang Shanzhong was imprisoned by Wang Du, and his youngest son, Wang Weibu, fled to Khitan.

古文：契丹谓晋高祖曰： 吾欲使威袭其先人爵士，如何？ 
现代文：契丹主对晋高祖说： 我想让王威继承他先人的爵位土地，怎么样？ 
English: The Khitan lord said to the Shingaku ancestor: I want Wang Wei to inherit his ancestor's land, how about it?

古文：高祖对曰： 中国之法，自将校为刺史，升团练防御而至节度使，请送威归中国，渐进之。 
现代文：晋高祖回答说： 按中原的法规，从将校到刺史，升为团练防御使而后歪节度使，请送王威回归中原，逐渐进用他。 
English: Jin Gaozu replied: According to the regulations of the Central Plains, from the officer to the stabbing history, promoted to the group training defense and then to the crookedness, please send Wang Wei back to the Central Plains and gradually use him.

古文：契丹怒曰： 尔自诸侯为天子，岂有渐乎？ 
现代文：契丹主发怒说： 你从诸侯做到天子，难道是逐渐的吗？ 
English: The Khitan lord became angry and said: Did you rise from being a vassal to becoming the son of heaven gradually?

古文：高祖闻之，遽徙廷胤镇义武，曰： 此亦王氏之后也。 
现代文：晋高祖得知后，于是改王廷胤为义武节度使，说： 这也是王氏的后代。 
English: After learning of this, the ancestor of the Jin Gao Clan changed Wang Tingyin to an envoy of the Boxer Rebellion, saying, "This is also a descendant of the Wang Clan."

古文：后徙镇海而卒。
现代文：后来移任镇海而死。
English: He was later transferred to Zhenhai, where he died.

古文：○刘守光刘守光，深州乐寿人也。
现代文：刘守光是深州乐寿人。
English: Liu Shuguang is a resident of Shenzhen Leju.

古文：其父仁恭，事幽州李可举，能穴地为道以攻城，军中号 刘窟头。 
现代文：父亲刘仁恭，跟随幽州李可举，能挖地道来攻城，军队中称为 刘窟头 。
English: Liu Renkong's father, who followed Yuzhou Li Kefu, was able to dig tunnels to attack the city, and was known as Liu Guotong in the army.

古文：稍以功迁军校。
现代文：逐渐因军功升任为军校。
English: Gradually, it was promoted to a military school due to its military merits.

古文：仁恭为人有勇，好大言。
现代文：刘仁恭为人勇敢，喜欢说大话。
English: Liu Renyong is brave and likes to talk big.

古文：可举死，子匡威恶其为人，不欲使居军中，徙为瀛州景城县令。
现代文：李可举死，儿子李匡威讨厌他的为人，不愿他在军队中，调他为瀛州景城县令。
English: Li Kegui died, his son Li Kuangwei hated him as a person and did not want him in the army, so he transferred him to Jingcheng County, Zhangzhou.

古文：瀛州军乱，杀刺史，仁恭募县中得千人，讨平之，匡威喜，复以为将，使戍蔚州。
现代文：瀛州兵变，杀死刺史，刘仁恭在县中募兵一千人，讨平了兵变，李匡威很高兴，又任他为将领，让他戍守蔚州。
English: Bozhou mutiny, kill the assassin, Liu Rengong recruited a thousand soldiers in the county to settle the mutiny, Li Kuangwei was very happy, and appointed him as a general, let him stay in Ulshu.

古文：戍兵过期不得代，皆思归，出怨言。
现代文：戍守的士兵超过期限得不到代换，都想回家，口出怨言。
English: The soldiers who stayed beyond the deadline could not be replaced, they all wanted to go home and complained.

古文：匡威为弟匡俦所逐，仁恭闻乱，乃拥戍兵攻幽州，行至居庸关，战败，奔晋、晋以为寿阳镇将。
现代文：李匡威被弟弟李匡俦驱逐，刘仁恭听说叛乱，于是带领戍守的士兵攻打幽州，到达居庸关时，战败，逃奔到晋，晋任命他为寿阳镇将。
English: Li Kuangwei was expelled by his brother Li Kuangyao. Liu Rengong heard about the rebellion and led his soldiers to attack Yuzhou. When he reached Juyongguan, he was defeated and fled to Jin. Jin appointed him as the general of Shouyang Town.

古文：仁恭多智诈，善事人，事晋王爱将盖寓尤谨，每对寓涕泣，自言： 居燕无罪，以谗见逐。 
现代文：刘仁恭多智谋权诈，善于事奉人，事奉晋王的爱将盖寓尤其恭谨，每每对着盖寓哭泣，自称： 在燕无罪，因受诬告纔被驱逐。 
English: Liu Renkong was clever at scheming for power and deception. He was good at serving others. He was especially respectful to King Jin's favorite general, Gai Yue. He cried every time he saw Gai Yue. He said, "I am not guilty, I was expelled because I was falsely accused."

古文：因道燕虚实，陈可取之谋，晋王益信而爱之。
现代文：于是述说燕的虚实，陈述能够攻取的计谋，晋王更加信任喜欢他。
English: As a result, Yan's truth and falsehood were told, and the strategies that could be captured were stated. Jin Wang trusted and liked him more.

古文：乾宁元年，晋击破匡俦，乃以仁恭为幽州留后，留其亲信燕留得等十馀人监其军，为之请命于唐，拜检校司空、卢龙军节度使。
现代文：干宁元年，晋击破李匡俦，于是任刘仁恭为幽州留后，留下亲信燕留得等十多人监督军队，为他向唐请求任命，拜为检校司空、卢龙军节度使。
English: In the first year of the Eastern Han Dynasty, Jin defeated Li Kuangyao, so Liu Rengong was appointed to stay in Yuzhou, leaving more than a dozen people such as Yan, a close friend, to supervise the army. He asked the Tang Dynasty to appoint him as the school inspector and the festival envoy of the Lulong Army.

古文：其后晋攻罗弘信，求兵于仁恭，仁恭不与，晋王以书微责诮之，仁恭大怒，执晋使者，杀燕留得等以叛。
现代文：后来晋攻打罗弘信，向刘仁恭求兵，刘仁恭不给，晋王写信略微责备他，刘仁恭大怒，逮捕晋的使臣，杀掉燕留得等人反叛。
English: Later, Jin attacked Luo Hongxin and asked Liu Rengong for soldiers, but Liu Rengong refused, Jin Wang wrote a letter to slightly reproach him, Liu Rengong was furious, arrested Jin's envoys, and killed Yan Yu De and others who rebelled.

古文：晋王自将讨之，战于安塞，晋王大败。
现代文：晋王亲自率兵讨伐他，在安塞作战，晋王大败。
English: Jin Wang personally led an army to fight against him, and fought in Ansei. Jin Wang was soundly defeated.

古文：光化元年，遣其子守文袭沧州，逐节度使卢彦威，遂取沧、景、德三州。
现代文：光化元年，派他的儿子刘守文袭击沧州，驱逐节度使卢彦威，于是夺取沧、景、德三州。
English: In the first year of the Guanghua Dynasty, he sent his son Liu Shouwen to attack Cangzhou, expel the ruler Lu Yanwei, and then seize Cangzhou, Jing and Dezhou.

古文：为其子请命于唐，昭宗迟之，未即从，仁恭怒，语唐使者曰： 为我语天子，旌节吾自有，但要长安本色尔，何屡求而不得邪！ 
现代文：替他的儿子向唐请求任命，唐昭宗迟疑不决，没有立即答应，刘仁恭发怒，对唐的使臣说： 替我告诉天子，仪仗符节我自己就有，只是想要长安本色的罢了，为什么多次请求却得不到呢！ 
English: On behalf of his son, Tang Zhaozong asked Tang for the appointment, but Tang Zhaozong hesitated and did not immediately agree, and Liu Rengong became angry and said to Tang's envoy: "Tell the Son of Heaven for me, I have the festival of honor myself, I just want the true color of Chang'an, why can't I get it after many requests!

古文：昭宗卒以守文为横海军节度使。
现代文：唐昭宗最终任刘守文为横海军节度使。
English: Tang Zhaozong finally appointed Liu Shouwen as the Vice-Admiral of the Navy.

古文：仁恭父子率两镇兵十万，号称三十万以击魏，屠贝州。
现代文：刘仁恭父子率领雨镇兵十万人，号称三十万人攻打魏州，屠贝州城。
English: Liu Rengong and his son led 100,000 soldiers from Yuzhen, and claimed that 300,000 of them attacked Weizhou and Tuubeizhou.

古文：罗绍威求救于梁，梁遣李思安救魏，大败守文于内黄，斩首五万。
现代文：罗绍威向梁求救，梁振李思安救魏州，在内黄大败刘守文，杀死五万人。
English: Luo Shaowei asked Liang for help, Liang Zhen and Li Si'an saved Wei Zhou, and defeated Liu Shouwen in Neihuang, killing fifty thousand people.

古文：仁恭走，梁军追击之，自魏至长河，横尸数百里。
现代文：刘仁恭逃跑，梁军追击他，从魏州到长河，死尸布满几百里地。
English: Liu Renkong fled, Liang's army chased him, from Weizhou to Changhe, the dead bodies covered hundreds of miles.

古文：梁军自是连岁攻之，破其瀛、漠二州，仁恭惧，复附晋。
现代文：梁军从此连年攻打他，攻破他的瀛、漠二州，刘仁恭害怕，又依附置。
English: Since then, Liang's army has been attacking him for years on end, breaking through his shackles and deserting the two states. Liu Renkong is afraid of it and clings to it.

古文：天祐三年，梁攻沧州，仁恭调其境内凡男子年十五已上、七十已下，皆黥其面，文曰 定霸都 ，得二十万人，兵粮自具，屯于瓦桥。
现代文：天佑三年，梁进攻沧州，刘仁恭微调境内所有十五岁以上、七十岁以下的男子，都在脸上刻字，称 定霸都 ，得到二十万人，自备武器粮食，屯驻在瓦桥。
English: By the grace of God, in three years, Liang attacked Cangzhou, and Liu Rengong fine-tuned all the men over the age of fifteen and under the age of seventy in the territory, engraved on their faces, saying that they were determined to become the capital, obtained 200,000 people, prepared their own weapons and grain, and stationed in Tile Bridge.

古文：梁军壁长芦，深沟高垒，仁恭不能近。
现代文：梁军以长芦为堡垒，深沟高垒，刘仁恭不能接近。
English: Liang's army took Changlu as a fortress, deep ditch as a high fortress, Liu Renkong could not approach.

古文：沧州被围百馀日，城中食尽，人自相食，析骸而爨，或丸墐土而食，死者十六七。
现代文：沧州被包围一百多天，城中粮食耗尽，相互吃人，分解骨头烧火做饭，有的把泥土捏成丸子吃，死的人十有六七。
English: Cangzhou was besieged for more than a hundred days. The food in the city ran out, people ate each other, bones were broken down and cooked, and some people ate the soil into balls. Sixty-seven out of ten people died.

古文：仁恭求救于晋，晋王为之攻潞州以牵梁围，晋破潞州，梁军乃解去。
现代文：刘仁恭向晋求救，晋壬为他攻打潞州以牵制梁的包围，晋攻破潞州，梁军纔解围离去。
English: Liu Rengong asked Jin for help. Jin Ren attacked Bozhou for him to contain Liang's encirclement. Jin attacked and defeated Bozhou, and Liang's army broke through the encirclement and left.

古文：然仁恭幸世多故，而骄于富贵，筑宫大安山，穷极奢侈，选燕美女充其中。
现代文：但刘仁恭侥幸世道多变故，因富贵而骄横，在大安山修筑官殿，穷奢极侈，挑选燕地的美女住在里面。
English: However, Liu Rengong was fortunate in that the world is changeable, and because he was rich and arrogant, he built an official residence in Da'an Mountain, which was extremely luxurious, and he chose beautiful women from Yan'an to live in it.

古文：又与道士炼丹药，冀可不死。
现代文：又和道士炼丹药，希望能够长生不死。
English: and Taoist elixir, hoping to live forever.

古文：令燕人用墐土为钱，悉敛铜钱，銮山而藏之，已而杀其工以灭口，后人皆莫知其处。
现代文：命令燕人用泥土做钱，把铜钱全部收敛起来，挖山洞藏起来，不久又杀掉工匠灭口，后人都不知道藏钱的地方。
English: He ordered the swallows to make money from mud, collect all the copper money, dig a cave to hide it, and soon kill the craftsman, so that future generations would not know where the money was hidden.

古文：仁恭有爱妾罗氏，其子守光烝之，仁恭怒，笞守光，逐之。
现代文：刘仁恭有个爱妾罗氏，他的儿子刘守光和她通奸，刘仁恭发怒，鞭打刘守光，赶走了他。
English: Liu Renkong had a mistress, Luo Shi, and his son Liu Shuguang committed adultery with her. Liu Renkong got angry, whipped Liu Shuguang and drove him away.

古文：梁开平元年，遣李思安攻仁恭，仁恭在大安，守光自外将兵以入，击走思安，乃自称卢龙节度使，遣李小喜、元行钦以兵攻大安山，执仁恭而幽之。
现代文：梁开平元年，派李思安攻打刘仁恭，刘仁恭在大安山，刘守光从外面率兵攻入，赶走李思安，于是自称卢龙军节度使，派李小喜、元行钦率兵攻打大安山，抓住刘仁恭把他幽禁起来。
English: In the first year of Liang Kaiping, Li Si'an was sent to attack Liu Rengong, Liu Rengong was sent to attack Da'an Mountain, Liu Shouguang led an army from the outside to attack and drive out Li Si'an, so he called himself the Lulong Army Festival envoy, sent Li Xiaoxi and Yuan Xingqin led an army to attack Da'an Mountain, caught Liu Rengong and imprisoned him.

古文：其兄守文闻父且囚，即率兵讨守光，至于卢台，为守光所败，进战玉田，又败，乃乞兵于契丹。
现代文：他的哥哥刘守文听说父亲被囚禁，就率兵讨伐刘守光，到达卢台时，被刘守光打败，进军战于玉田，又被打败，于是向契丹求兵。
English: When his brother Liu Shouwen heard that his father was imprisoned, he led an army to fight against Liu Shouguang. When he reached Lutetia, he was defeated by Liu Shouguang. He marched to fight in Yutian and was defeated again, so he asked Khitan for soldiers.

古文：明年，守文将契丹、吐浑兵四万人战于鸡苏，守光兵败，守文阳为不忍，出于阵而呼其众曰： 毋杀吾弟！ 
现代文：第二年，刘守文率契丹、吐浑兵四万人在鸡苏作战，刘守光兵败，刘守文假装不忍心，走出战阵对众人呼喊说： 不要杀死我弟弟！ 
English: In the second year, Liu Shouwen led 40,000 Khitan and Tubun soldiers to fight in Gansu. Liu Shouguang was defeated. Liu Shouwen pretended that he couldn't bear it and walked out of the battle shouting to everyone: Don't kill my brother!

古文：守光将元行钦识守文，跃马而擒之，又囚之于别室，既而杀之。
现代文：刘守光的将领元行钦认识刘守文，驱马上前把他捉获，又把他囚禁在另一间屋子中，不久杀了他。
English: Liu Shouwang's general, Yuan Xingqin, knew Liu Shouwen, and he immediately captured him, imprisoned him in another room, and soon killed him.

古文：守文将吏孙鹤、吕兗等，立守文子延祚以距守光，守光围之百馀日，城中食尽，米斛直钱三万，人相杀而食，或食墐土，马相食其骏尾，兗等率城中饥民食以麹，号 宰务 ，日杀以饷军。久之，延祚力穷，遂降。
现代文：刘守文的将吏孙鹤、吕充等人，拥立刘守文的儿子刘延祚抗拒刘守光，刘守光包围他们一百多天，城中粮食耗尽，一斗米值三万钱，人们互相残杀吃其肉，有的吃泥土，马相互吃马鬃马尾，吕充等人搜捕来城中饥民，喂给他们酒曲，号称 宰务 ，每天杀饥民来供应军队，时间长了，刘延祚力尽，于是投降。
English: Liu Shouwen's generals, Sun He, Luchun and others, supported Liu Shouwen's son, Liu Yanjun, to resist Liu Shouguang. Liu Shouguang surrounded them for more than a hundred days. The food in the city was exhausted. A barrel of rice was worth 30,000 yuan. People killed each other to eat their meat. Some ate dirt. Horses ate each other's mane and horse tail. Luchun and others rounded up the starving people in the city and fed them liquor, known as zaibu. They killed starving people every day to supply the army. After a long time, Liu Yanjun exhausted himself and surrendered.

古文：守光素庸愚，由此益骄，为铁笼、铁刷，人有过者，坐之笼中，外燎以火，或刷剔其皮肤以死，燕之士逃祸于佗境。
现代文：刘守光历来昏庸愚蠢，从此更加骄懒，制成铁笼、铁刷，对有过失的人，把他放置到笼中，外面用火烤，或者用铁刷刷剔他的皮肤以致死，燕人都避祸逃到别的地方。
English: Liu Shouguang had always been dim-witted and stupid, and he became even more lazy. He made iron cages and iron brushes, and for those who had made mistakes, he placed them in the cage and roasted them with fire outside, or scratched his skin with an iron brush until he died. The swallows all fled to other places to avoid misfortune.

古文：守光身衣赭黄，谓其将吏曰： 我衣此而南面，可以帝天下乎？ 
现代文：刘守光穿着赭黄色的衣袍，对他的将吏说： 我穿上这样的衣袍而面向南方，能够在天下称帝吗？ 
English: Liu Shouguang, wearing a bright yellow robe, said to his officers: "If I put on such a robe and face south, will I be able to triumph in the world?"

古文：孙鹤切谏以为不可。
现代文：孙鹤急切谏阻认为不行。
English: Sun He did not think it was possible to be impatient.

古文：梁攻赵，赵王王镕求救于守光，孙鹤曰： 今赵无罪，而梁伐之，诸侯救赵之兵，先至者霸，臣恐燕军未出，而晋已先破梁矣，此不可失之时也。 
现代文：梁攻打赵，趟王王镕向刘守光求救，孙鹤说： 如今趟没有罪，而梁攻伐它，诸侯救趟的军队，先到的称霸，我怕燕军还没有出动，而晋已先攻破梁了，这是不能失去的机会。 
English: Liang attacked Zhao, and then Wang Wangqi asked Liu Shuguang for help. Sun He said, "Nowadays, there is no crime in attacking Liang, while Liang is attacking it. The army of the princes to rescue Liang is the first to claim hegemony. I am afraid that Yan's army has not yet set out, but Jin has attacked Liang first. This is an opportunity that cannot be lost."

古文：守光曰： 赵王尝与我盟而背之，今急乃来归我；且两虎方斗，可待之，吾当为卞庄子也。 
现代文：刘守光说： 趟王曾和我结聊而又背叛了我，现在危急了纔来归附我；而且两只老虎正相争斗，可以等待其结果，我应做卞庄子。 
English: Liu Shouguang said, "Wat Wang once befriended me and betrayed me, but now he is in a critical situation, he has come to join me; moreover, two tigers are fighting, we can wait for the outcome, I should be the ringleader."

古文：遂不出兵。
现代文：于是不出兵。
English: So he did not send troops.

古文：晋王果救赵，大败梁兵于柏乡，进掠邢、洺，至于黎阳。
现代文：晋王果然救趟，在柏乡大败梁军，进而掠夺邢、沼二州，到达黎阳。
English: Jin Wang really came to the rescue, defeated Liang's army in Baixiang, and then plundered Yunnan and Shandong, and reached Liang.

古文：守光闻晋空国深入梁，乃治兵戒严，遣人以语动镇、定曰： 燕有精兵三十万，率二镇以从晋，然谁当主此盟者？ 
现代文：刘守光听说晋以全国军队深入梁，于是整治军队戒严，派人游说煽动镇、定二州说： 燕有精兵三十万人，率领两镇跟从晋，然而谁当主盟呢？ 
English: Liu Shouguang heard that Jin had penetrated deep into Liang with the national army, so he set about rectifying the army's martial law, sent people to lobby and incite towns, and set up two states, saying: Yan has 300,000 elite soldiers and leads two towns to follow Jin, but who will be the main ally?

古文：晋人患之，谋曰： 昔夫差争黄池之会，而越入吴；项羽贪伐齐之利，而汉败楚。
现代文：晋人对此很忧虑，商议说： 过去夫差在黄池之会争主盟之位，而越人攻入昊；项羽贪图攻伐齐国之利，而漠打败楚。
English: The Jin people were very worried about this, and discussed: In the past, the husband and wife were competing for the position of the main alliance in the Huangchi meeting, while the Yue people invaded Hao; Xiang Yu was eager to attack the interests of Qi country, but the desert defeated Chu.

古文：今吾越千里以伐人，而强燕在其后，此腹心之患也。 
现代文：如今我们跨越千里攻伐别人，而强大的燕在后面，这是心腹之患。 
English: Now we are crossing thousands of miles to attack others, while the powerful swallows are behind us. This is a headache for us.

古文：乃为之班师。
现代文：就凶此回师。
English: That's why I'm coming back.

古文：守光益以为诸镇畏其强，乃讽诸镇共推尊己，于是晋王率天德宋瑶、振武周德威、昭义李嗣昭、义武王处直、成德王镕等，以墨制册尊守光为尚书令、尚父。
现代文：刘守光认为各个节镇畏惧他的强大，就暗示各镇共同推尊自己，于是晋王率领天德宋瑶、振武周德威、昭义李嗣昭、义武王处直、成德王镕等人，用墨制册封尊刘守光为尚书令、尚父。
English: Liu Shuguang thought that the various towns were afraid of his power, suggesting that the towns should jointly promote and respect him. Therefore, Jin Wang, led by Tiande Songjun, Zhenwu Zhoudewei, Shouyi Li Shizhao, Yiwu Wang Shanzhong, Chengde Wangjun and others, used ink to seal Liu Shuguang as Shang Shuling and Shang Father.

古文：守光又遣告于梁，请授己河北兵马都统，以讨镇、定、河东。
现代文：刘守光又派人告诉梁，请求任命自己为河北兵马都统，以便讨伐镇州、定州、河东。
English: Liu Shouguang also sent someone to tell Liang, asking him to appoint himself as the Hebei Terracotta Warriors and Horses, in order to fight against Zhenzhou, Dingzhou and Hedong.

古文：梁遣阁门使王瞳拜守光河北采访使。
现代文：梁派阀门使王瞳拜刘守光为河北采访使。
English: Liang sent valve to make Wang Hitomi and Liu Shuguang as Hebei interview envoys.

古文：有司白守光，尚父受册，用唐册太尉礼仪，守光问曰： 此仪注何不郊天改元？ 
现代文：有关官府告诉刘守光，尚父受册封，用唐代册封太尉的礼仪，刘守光问道： 这一仪式条文中为何不谈郊外祭天、改用年号呢？ 
English: The relevant government told Liu Shouguang that his father had been awarded the title of captain, using the etiquette of the Tang Dynasty. Liu Shouguang asked: Why did this ceremony not mention the suburb festival and use the year instead?

古文：有司曰： 此天子之礼也，尚父虽尊，乃人臣耳。 
现代文：有关人员说： 这是天子的礼仪，尚父虽然尊贵，不过是别人的臣于罢了。 
English: The people concerned said: This is the etiquette of the Son of Heaven. Although the father is honorable, he is only a subject of others.

古文：守光怒曰： 我为尚父，谁当帝者乎？
现代文：刘守光发怒说： 我做尚父，谁应当做皇帝呢？
English: Liu Shouguang said angrily, "If I am the Shang father, who should be the emperor?

古文：且今天下四分五裂，大者称帝，小者称王，我以二千里之燕，独不能帝一方乎？ 
现代文：况且现在天下四分五裂，强大的称帝，弱小的称王，我以两千里地的燕，鸡道不能在一方称帝吗？ 
English: Moreover, the world is now torn apart, the powerful claim to be emperor, the weak claim to be king, I am a swallow of two thousand miles, can the chicken road not claim to be emperor on the one hand?

古文：乃械梁、晋使者下狱，置斧钅质于其庭，令曰： 敢谏者死！ 
现代文：于是给梁、晋的使臣戴上刑具投入狱中，把大斧木砧放在庭上，命令说： 敢进谏的人处死！ 
English: So he put the instruments of torture on Liang and Jin's envoys and threw them into prison. He placed the axe in the yard and ordered: "Anyone who dares to enter the stocks will be put to death!"

古文：孙鹤进曰： 沧州之败，臣蒙王不杀之恩，今日之事，不敢不谏。 
现代文：孙鹤进谏说： 沧州被打败时，我蒙受你不杀的恩德，今天的事，不敢不进谏。 
English: Sun He Jinjun said: When Cangzhou was defeated, I received the grace of not killing you. Today, I dare not not kill you.

古文：守光怒，推之伏钅质，令军士割而啖之。
现代文：刘守光发怒，把他推到木砧上，命令军士割他的肉吃。
English: Outraged, Liu Shouguang pushed him onto the raft and ordered the sergeant to cut up his flesh and eat it.

古文：鹤呼曰： 不出百日，大兵当至！ 
现代文：孙鹤呼叫说： 不出一百天，大军当至！ 
English: Sun He called out, "In less than a hundred days, the great army will arrive!"

古文：命窒其口而醢之。
现代文：命令堵住他的嘴而把他剁成肉酱。
English: An order to gag him and make mincemeat of him.

古文：守光遂以梁乾化元年八月自号大燕皇帝，改元曰应天，以王瞳、齐涉为左右相。
现代文：刘守光于是在梁干化元年八月，自称大燕皇帝，改年号叫应天，任命王瞳、齐涉为左右宰相。
English: In August of the first year of Liang Ganhua, Liu Shouguang proclaimed himself the Emperor of the Great Swallow, changed his name to Ying Tian, and appointed Wang Hitomi and Qi Zhu as the left and right prime ministers.

古文：晋遣太原少尹李承勋贺册尚父，至燕，而守光已僭号。
现代文：晋派太原少尹李承勋祝贺册封尚父，到达燕时，而刘守光已经自封帝王称号。
English: The Jin Dynasty sent the Taiyuan minor Yin Li Chengxun to congratulate the canonization of his father, but by the time he arrived in Yan, Liu Shuguang had already made himself the title of emperor.

古文：有司迫承勋称臣，承勋不屈，以列国交聘礼入见，守光怒，杀之。
现代文：有关官府逼迫李承勋自称臣子，李承勋不屈服，按照诸侯国之间交往的礼节进见，刘守光发怒，杀了他。
English: The relevant authorities persecuted Li Chengxun, who claimed to be a vassal. Li Chengxun refused to give in and proceeded in accordance with the etiquette of interaction between principalities. Liu Shuguang was angry and killed him.

古文：明年，晋遣周德威将三万人，会镇、定之兵以攻燕，自祈沟关入，其澶、涿、武、顺诸州皆迎降。
现代文：第二年，晋派周德威率领三万人，会同镇、定二州的军队进攻燕，从祈沟关攻入，燕的澶、涿、武、顺各州都迎接投降。
English: In the second year, the Jin sent Zhou Dewei, leading 30,000 people, together with the army of the town and Ding Erzhou, to attack Yan. They broke into Yan from Qidouguan, and Yan's provinces of Handan, Handan, Wuxi and Shun all welcomed the surrender.

古文：守光被围经年，累战常败，乃遣客将王遵化致书于德威曰： 予得罪于晋，迷而不复，今其病矣，公善为我辞焉。 
现代文：刘守光被包围一年，多次被打败，于是派客将王遵化写信给周德威说： 我得罪了晋，迷途不知返，现在我病了，你好好替我解释吧！ 
English: Liu Shuguang was besieged for a year and repeatedly defeated, so he sent a guest, Wang Zunhua, to write to Zhou Dewei, saying: I have offended Jin, I have lost my way, and now I am sick, you should explain it for me!

古文：德威谓遵化曰： 大燕皇帝尚未郊天，何至此邪？
现代文：周德威对王遵化说： 大燕皇帝还没有在郊外祭天，怎么就这样了呢？
English: Zhou Dewei said to Wang Zunhua: Emperor Dayan has not yet held a divine service in the suburbs, how can this be?

古文：予受命以讨僭乱，不知其佗也。 
现代文：我奉命讨伐僭位叛乱之人，不知道别的。 
English: I was ordered to fight the rebels and I don't know anything else.

古文：守光益窘，乃献绢千匹、银千两、锦百段，遣其将周遵业谓德威曰： 吾王以情告公，富贵成败，人之常理；录功宥过，霸者之事也。
现代文：刘守光更加窘困，于是进献一千匹绢、一千两白银、一百段锦锈，派他的将领周遵业对周德威说： 我王以实情告诉你，富贵成败，人之常理；录用有功的人，宽恕有过失的人，是称霸的人的事。
English: Liu Shouguang was even more embarrassed, so he offered a thousand horses, a thousand taels of silver, and a hundred pieces of brocade. Zhou Zunye, the general who sent him, said to Zhou Dewei: My king will tell you the truth, wealth and success are human common sense; hiring people with merits, forgiving those who have made mistakes, is a matter for those who seek hegemony.

古文：守光去岁妄自尊崇，本不能为硃温下耳，岂意大国暴师经年，幸少宽之。 
现代文：刘守光去年妄自尊大，原本不能位在朱温之下，哪里料到你们大国军队在外暴露一年，希望稍稍宽宥我们。 
English: Liu Shouguang was arrogant last year and originally could not be placed under Zhu Wen. He did not expect that the military of your great power would be exposed for a year. I hope he will forgive us a little.

古文：德威不许。
现代文：周德威不答应。
English: Zhou Dewei did not agree.

古文：守光登城呼德威曰： 公三晋贤士，独不急人之危乎？ 
现代文：刘守光登城呼喊周德威说： 你是三晋贤士，偏不为别人的危急着急吗？ 
English: Liu Shuguang went to the city and shouted to Zhou Dewei, saying, "You are a three-jin sage, why don't you worry about other people's crisis?

古文：遣人以所乘马易德威马而去，因告曰： 俟晋王至则降。 
现代文：派人用他自己骑的马交换周德威的马离去，于是告诉说； 等晋王到了就投降。 
English: He sent someone to exchange his own horse for Zhou Dewei's horse to leave, and then told him that he would surrender when the Jin king arrived.

古文：晋王乃自临军，守光登城见晋王，晋王问将如何？
现代文：晋王于是亲自到军中，刘守光登城见到晋王，晋王问他准备怎么办？
English: Jin Wang then personally went to the military, Liu Shuguang went to the city to see Jin Wang, Jin Wang asked him what to do?

古文：守光曰： 今日俎上肉耳，惟王所为也！ 
现代文：刘守光说： 如今成了砧板上的肉，王想怎么处置就怎么处置！ 
English: Liu Shuguang said: Now it has become meat on the chopping board, and Wang can dispose of it as he wishes!

古文：守光有嬖者李小喜，劝其毋降，守光因请俟佗日。
现代文：刘守光宠信的人李小喜，劝他不要投降，刘守光因而请求等以后再说。
English: Liu Shouguang's favorite person, Li Xiaoxi, advised him not to surrender, and Liu Shouguang therefore requested to wait until later.

古文：是夕，小喜叛降于晋军。
现代文：这天晚上，李小喜反叛向晋军投降。
English: That evening, Li Xiaoxi rebelled and surrendered to the Jin army.

古文：明旦，晋军攻破其城，执仁恭及其家族三百口。守光与其妻李氏、祝氏，子继珣、继方、继祚等，南走沧州，迷失道，至燕乐界中，数日不得食，遣其妻祝氏乞食于田家，田家怪而诘之，祝氏以实告，乃被擒送幽州。
现代文：第二天早晨，晋军攻破城，抓获刘仁恭和他的家族三百人刘守光和他的妻子李氏、祝氏，儿刘继殉、刘继方、刘继祚等人，南逃到沧州，迷路，走到燕乐地界，敷天没有得到吃的，派他出妻子祝氏向农家乞讨食物，农家觉得奇怪而盘问她，祝氏以实情相告，于是被擒送到幽州。
English: The next morning, the Jin army broke through the city, captured Liu Rengong and his family of three hundred people, Liu Shuguang and his wife Li, Zhu, sons Liu Jizhi, Liu Jifang, Liu Jizhe and others, fled south to Cangzhou, lost their way, went to the border of Yanle, did not get food, sent his wife Zhu to the farmer to beg for food, the farmer felt strange and interrogated her, Zhu told the truth, so he was sent to Yuzhou.

古文：晋王方大飨军，客将引守光见，晋王戏之曰： 主人何避客之遽也？ 
现代文：普王正在大肆犒劳军队，客将引见刘守光，晋王对他开玩笑说： 主人避客为什么这样急呢？ 
English: King Pu was lavishly rewarding the troops. The guests were about to be introduced to Liu Shuguang. King Jin joked to him, "Why is the host so anxious to avoid the guests?

古文：守光叩头请死，命械守光并其父仁恭以从军。
现代文：刘守光叩头请求处死，晋王命令给刘守光和他的父亲刘仁恭戴上刑具随军。
English: Liu Shouguang kowtowed and asked to be executed. The Jin king ordered Liu Shouguang and his father, Liu Rengong, to wear torture devices to accompany the army.

古文：军还过赵，赵王王镕会晋王，置酒，酒酣请曰： 愿见仁恭父子。 
现代文：军队返回时经过赵，趟王王镕会见晋王，摆酒宴，酒酣耳热时请求说： 希望见到刘仁恭父子。 
English: When the troops returned, they passed through Zhao, went to Wang Wangye to meet with Jin Wangye, held a wine banquet, and when the wine was hot, they requested: I hope to see Liu Rengong and his son.

古文：晋王命破械出之，引置下坐。
现代文：晋王命令解除械锁让他们出来，带他们到下座。
English: Jin Wang ordered to release the mechanical lock to let them out and take them to the next seat.

古文：饮食自若，皆无惭色。
现代文：喝酒吃饭神态自如，都没有愧色。
English: They drink and eat with a relaxed attitude, without any shame.

古文：晋王至太原，仁恭父子曳以组练，献于太庙。
现代文：晋王到太原，刘仁恭父子被用绳子捆着，献于太庙。
English: When Jin Wang went to Taiyuan, Liu Rengong and his son were tied with ropes and dedicated to the Imperial Temple.

古文：守光将死，泣曰： 臣死无恨，然教臣不降者，李小喜也，罪人不死，臣将诉于地下。 
现代文：刘守光将死，哭着说： 我死了没有遗憾，但教我不投降的人，是李小喜，有罪的人不死，我将在地下申诉。 
English: As Liu Shuguang was about to die, he cried and said, "I have no regrets about dying, but the person who taught me not to surrender was Li Xiaoxi. Guilty people don't die. I will appeal underground."

古文：晋王使召小喜，小喜真目曰： 囚父弑兄，蒸其骨肉，亦小喜教尔邪？ 
现代文：晋王派人召李小喜，李小喜瞪着眼睛说： 囚禁父亲杀死哥哥，和骨肉之亲通奸，也是我李小喜教你的吗？ 
English: The king of Jin sent someone to summon Li Xiaoxi. Li Xiaoxi stared at him and said, "Did I, Li Xiaoxi, also teach you to imprison your father, kill your brother, and commit adultery with your own flesh and blood?"

古文：晋王怒，命先斩小喜。
现代文：晋王发怒，命令先杀掉李小喜。
English: Jin Wang became angry and ordered Li Xiaoxi to be killed first.

古文：守光知不免，呼曰： 王将复唐室以成霸业，何不赦臣使自效？ 
现代文：刘守光知道不能免死，大呼说： 王准备恢复唐室成就霸业，为什么不赦免我让我效力呢？ 
English: Liu Shuguang knew that he could not avoid death, and shouted: "The king is preparing to restore the Tang Dynasty and achieve hegemony. Why not pardon me and let me serve?

古文：其二妇从旁骂曰： 事已至此，生复何为？愿先死！ 
现代文：他的两个妻子在一旁骂道： 事情已到了这地步，活着做什么？希望先死！ 
English: His two wives scolded him: "Things have come to this, what is there to live for? I hope to die first!"

古文：乃俱死。
现代文：于是都被杀死。
English: They were all killed.

古文：晋王命李存霸执仁恭至雁门，刺其心血以祭先王墓，然后斩之。
现代文：晋王命令李存霸押解刘仁恭到雁门，刺他的心用血祭祀先王的坟墓，然后斩首。
English: The Jin king ordered Li Cunha to escort Liu Rengong to the Wild Goose Gate, stab him in the heart with blood to sacrifice to the tomb of the former king, and then behead him.

