古文：姜才，濠州人。
现代文：姜才，濠州人。
English: Jiang Cai, from Zhangzhou.

古文：貌短悍。
现代文：相貌矮小强悍。
English: He is short and strong-looking.

古文：少被掠入河朔，稍长亡归，隶淮南兵中，以善战名，然以来归人不得大官，为通州副都统。
现代文：小时候被掠到河朔，逐渐长大逃了回来，隶籍淮南军队中，以善战著名，但因来归人不能够做大官，任通州副都统。
English: When he was a child, he was abducted to Hexuo. Gradually, he grew up and escaped and came back. He belonged to the Huainan Army and was famous for his skill in battle. However, because he was a returnee, he was not able to become a high-ranking official. He was appointed deputy governor of Tongzhou.

古文：时淮多健将，然骁雄无逾才。
现代文：当时淮地多健将，但勇猛雄杰没有人超过姜才。
English: At that time, there were many talented generals, but no one was more courageous than Jiang Cai.

古文：才知兵，善骑射，抚士卒有恩，至临阵，军律凛凛。
现代文：姜才知晓兵法，善长骑马射箭，安抚士兵有恩惠，到临战，军纪令人敬畏。
English: Jiang Cai knows the art of war. He is a good horseman and archer. He has the grace to pacify soldiers. When it comes to war, his military discipline is awesome.

古文：其子当战，回白事，才望见以为败也，拔剑驰逐，几杀之。
现代文：他的儿子正在战斗，回来报告情况，姜才看见认为是败退，拔剑赶快追逐，几乎差点杀掉了儿子。
English: His son was fighting and came back to report the situation. When Jiang saw that he thought it was a defeat, he drew his sword and quickly chased after him, almost killing his son.

古文：贾似道出师，才以兵属孙虎臣为先锋，相拒于丁家洲。
现代文：贾似道出兵，姜才以士兵的身份隶属孙虎臣为先锋，在丁家洲相拒敌人。
English: Jia Lian Dao dispatched troops, and Jiang Cai, as a soldier, belonged to Sun Huchen as a vanguard and resisted the enemy in Dingjiazhou.

古文：大军设炮架彀车弩江滨，中流数千艘，旌旗联亘，鼓行而下。
现代文：元军在长江边设置炮架张满车弩，江中船几千艘，旌旗连接绵延，击鼓而下。
English: The Yuan army set up gun mounts along the Yangtze River, full of carts, thousands of ships in the river, and flags stretching, drumming down.

古文：才奋兵前接战，锋已交，虎臣遽过其妾所乘舟，众见之，欢曰： 步帅遁矣。 于是诸军皆溃，才亦收兵入扬州。
现代文：姜才奋兵前去接战，已经交锋，孙虎臣马上转移到他的妾所乘坐的船上，众人看见他，喧哗说： 步兵主帅逃跑了。 于是诸军都溃败，姜才也收兵进入扬州。
English: Jiang Cai led his troops to fight, and the battle was over. Sun Huchen immediately transferred to the ship that his concubine was on. People saw him and shouted, "The infantry commander has fled." As a result, all the troops were routed, and Jiang Cai also gathered his troops and entered Yangzhou.

古文：大兵乘胜攻扬州，才为三叠阵逆之三里沟，战有功。
现代文：元兵乘胜攻打扬州，姜才结为三叠阵在三里沟迎敌，战斗有功。
English: The Yuan soldiers took advantage of the victory to attack Yangzhou, and Jiang Cai formed a three-tiered formation to meet the enemy in Sanli ditch, and the battle was a success.

古文：又与元帅战扬子桥，日暮兵乱，流矢贯才肩，才拔矢挥刀而前，所向辟易。
现代文：又与元兵主帅战于扬子桥，天晚兵乱，乱箭贯穿姜才的肩膀，姜才拔掉箭挥刀向前，所向惊疾狂奔。
English: He also fought with the commander-in-chief of the former soldiers at Yangtze Bridge, and there was a mutiny in the evening. A random arrow pierced Jiang Cai's shoulder. Jiang Cai pulled out the arrow and swung his sword forward, and he ran in fright.

古文：已而大军筑长围，自扬子桥竟瓜洲，东北跨湾头至黄塘，西北至丁村，务欲以久困之，时德祐元年也。
现代文：不久元兵修筑长围，从扬子桥到瓜洲，东北跨过湾头至黄塘，西北到丁村，志在打算长久围困他们，当时是德元年。
English: Soon the Yuan soldiers built a long siege, from Yangtze Bridge to Guazhou, northeast across the Bay to Huangtang, northwest to Ding Village, intending to besiege them for a long time. It was the first year of the German Empire.

古文：明年正月，宋亡。
现代文：第二年正月，宋朝灭亡。
English: In the first month of the second year, the Song Dynasty fell.

古文：二月，五奉使及一阁门宣赞舍人持谢太后诏来谕降，才发弩射却之，复以兵击五奉使于召伯堡，大战而退。
现代文：二月，五位奉使和一位阁门宣赞舍人手拿谢太后的诏书来劝谕投降，姜才发射弓弩射退他们，又以军队在召伯堡阻击五奉使，大战而退。
English: In February, the five envoys and a high-ranking courtier took the Empress Dowager Xie's edict to persuade them to surrender. Jiang Cai fired a bow and arrow to drive them away, and then used the army to block the five envoys at the castle, and retreated in a big battle.

古文：未几，瀛国公至瓜洲，才与庭芝泣涕誓将士出夺之。将士皆感泣。
现代文：不久，瀛国公到达瓜洲，姜才与李庭芝痛哭流涕告诫将士出击夺回瓜洲，将领和士兵都感动得流泪哭泣。
English: Soon after, the Duke of Yan arrived in Guazhou, and Jiang Cai and Li Tingzhi, with tears streaming down their faces, warned the generals to attack and recapture Guazhou. The generals and soldiers were moved to tears.

古文：乃尽散金帛犒兵，以四万人夜捣瓜洲，战三时，众拥瀛国公避去。才追战至浦子市，夜犹不退。
现代文：于是全部散发黄金布帛犒劳军队，以四万人夜捣瓜洲，战斗三个小时，众人簇拥瀛国公逃避而去，姜才追战到浦子市，夜晚仍不撤退。
English: As a result, all the gold cloth soldiers were dispersed, and 40,000 men were sent to attack Melon Island at night, and the battle lasted for three hours. Many people flocked to the prince to escape, and Jiang Cai chased the battle to Urazi City, and still did not retreat at night.

古文：阿术使人招之，才曰： 吾宁死，岂作降将军邪！ 四月，才以兵攻湾头栅。
现代文：阿术派人招降他，姜才说： 我宁可死，怎能做投降将军呢！ 四月，姜才以军队攻打湾头栅栏。
English: Ah Shu sent someone to recruit him, but Jiang Cai said: I would rather die, how can I be a surrendering general! In April, Jiang Cai attacked the Bay Head Fence with his army.

古文：五月，复攻之，骑旋泞而止，乃舍骑步战，至四鼓，全师以归。
现代文：五月，再次攻打，骑兵因泥泞盘旋而停止，于是舍弃坐骑步行作战，一直到晚上四更时分，整个部队返回。
English: In May, another attack, the cavalry stopped because of the muddy circling, so they abandoned their mounts to fight on foot, until four o'clock in the evening, the entire force returned.

古文：扬食尽，才时出运米真州、高邮以给兵。
现代文：扬州食物已尽，姜才当时出真州、高邮运米以给养军队。
English: Yangzhou had run out of food, so Jiang Zai went to Zhenzhou and Gaopeng to transport rice to feed the army.

古文：六月，护饷至马家渡，万户史弼将兵击夺之，才与战达旦，弼几殆，阿术驰兵来援，乃得免去。
现代文：六月，保护军饷到马家渡，万户史弼率领部队阻击抢夺军饷，姜才与史弼战斗通宵达旦，史弼所部几乎殆尽，阿术派兵疾驰来救援，才得以免死离去。
English: In June, the troops to protect the army came to Majiadu. Wanyu Shihong led the troops to prevent the looting of the army. Jiang Cai and Shihong fought all night long. Shihong's headquarters were almost exhausted. Ahshu sent soldiers to come to the rescue, and they were able to escape with their lives.

古文：庭芝以在围久。召才计事，屏左右，语久之，第闻才厉声云： 相公不过忍片时痛耳。 左右闻之俱汗下。
现代文：李庭芝因被围困很久，召见姜才商量事情，屏退左右之人，与他谈了很久，只听姜才厉声说 ：相公不过忍受片刻沉痛罢了。 左右听说都汗直流。
English: Since Li Tingzhi had been besieged for a long time, he summoned Jiang Cai to discuss the matter. The people on both sides of the screen retreated and talked with him for a long time, only to hear Jiang Cai say in a strong voice: "My father-in-law can only endure the pain for a moment. I heard that both sides were sweating profusely.

古文：才自是以兵护庭芝第，期与俱死。
现代文：姜才从此以军队保护李庭芝住宅，相约与他一起死。
English: From then on, Jiang Cai used the army to protect Li Tingzhi's residence and agreed to die with him.

古文：七月，益王在福州，以龙神四厢都指挥使、保康军承宣使召才，才与庭芝东至泰州，将入海。
现代文：七月，益王在福州，以神龙四厢都指挥使、保康军承宣使召用姜才，姜才与李庭芝东行到泰州，将要入海。
English: In July, in Fuzhou, Yi Wang, with the commanding envoy of the Four Quarters of the Divine Dragon and the propaganda envoy of the Hongkang Army, summoned Jiang Cai. Jiang Cai and Li Tingzhi traveled east to Taizhou and were about to enter the sea.

古文：阿术以兵追及，围泰州，使使者招之降，才不听。
现代文：阿术以兵追到，包围泰州，派使臣招他们投降，姜才没有顺从。
English: Ah Shiu chased them with soldiers, encircled Taizhou, and sent envoys to persuade them to surrender, but Jiang Cai did not obey.

古文：阿术驱扬兵士妻子至城下，会才疽发胁不能战，诸将遂开门降。
现代文：阿术驱赶扬州兵士们的妻子儿女到泰州城下，适逢姜才胁下痈疽发作不能战斗，诸将于是打开城门投降。
English: Ah Shiu drove the wives and children of Yangzhou soldiers to the city of Taizhou. When Jiang Cai, under the threat of gangrene, could not fight, they would open the city gate and surrender.

古文：都统曹安国入才卧内，执之以献。
现代文：都统曹安国进入姜才卧室内，捉住姜才献给元兵。
English: Cao Anguo entered Jiang Cai's bedroom and captured him, dedicating him to the veterans.

古文：宋都命刘槃、吕师夔坐城楼，引佑楼下，以金符遗之，许以官，佑不受，语侵般、师夔，益不逊。
现代文：阿术爱惜姜才的忠义勇敢，想招降而任用他，姜才任意说些怠慢的话，阿术责怪李庭芝不投降，姜才说 ：不投降的人是我姜才。 又愤愤不已，阿术发怒，在扬州把姜才凌迟处死。
English: Ah Shu cherished Jiang Cai's loyalty and bravery, wanted to recruit him and appointed him, Jiang Cai arbitrarily said some negligent words, Ah Shu blamed Li Tingzhi for not surrendering, Jiang Cai said: "The person who does not surrender is me, Jiang Cai." And indignant, Ah Shu was angry, and executed Jiang Cai Ling in Yangzhou.

古文：又令佑子说之曰： 父死，子安之？ 佑斥曰： 汝行乞于市，第云密都统子，谁不怜汝也。 怡然自解其衣请刑，遂死。观者皆泣下。
现代文：姜才临刑前，降将夏贵出现在他的旁边，姜才咬牙切齿说： 你见到我难道不会羞愧死吗？ 
English: Before Jiang Cai's execution, the general Xia Gui appeared next to him. Jiang Cai gritted his teeth and said, "Wouldn't you die of shame if you saw me?

古文：张世杰，范阳人。
现代文：张世杰，范阳人。
English: Zhang Shijie, Fan Yangren.

古文：少从张柔戍杞，有罪，遂奔宋，隶淮兵中，无所知名。
现代文：少时随从张柔戍守杞州，有犯法的行为，于是奔逃到宋州，隶籍淮兵中，没有人知道他的名字。
English: When he was a boy, he followed Zhang Ronglu to Bozhou and committed illegal acts, so he ran away to Songzhou. He was a member of the Huaihe Army, and no one knew his name.

古文：阮思聪见而奇之，言之吕文德，文德召为小校。
现代文：阮思聪见到他认为他是奇才，告诉了吕文德，吕文德征召他为小校。
English: Seeing that he thought he was a prodigy, Ruan Sicong told Lu Wende that Lu Wende had recruited him as a junior high school student.

古文：累功至黄州武定诸军都统制。
现代文：多次立功升到黄州武定诸军都统制。
English: He was promoted many times for meritorious service to the command of all the armies in Wuding, Huangzhou.

古文：攻安东州，战疾力，与高达援鄂州有功，转十官。
现代文：攻打安东州，战斗猛烈，与高达援救鄂州有功，迁调官职十阶。
English: Attacked Andongzhou, fought fiercely, and contributed greatly to the rescue of Ezhou, and was transferred to the tenth rank of officials.

古文：寻从贾似道入黄州，战萍草坪，夺还所俘，加环卫官，历知高邮军、安东州。
现代文：不久随从贾似道进入黄州，战于騣草坪，夺回敌人所俘获的东西，加官环卫官，历任知高邮军、安东州。
English: Soon after, he followed Jia Li Dao into Huangzhou, fought in the grasslands of Yunnan, recaptured what the enemy had captured, and became an environmental protection officer, and successively served in the Zhigao Post Army and the Andong Province.

古文：咸淳四年，大军筑鹿门堡，吕文德请益兵于朝，调世杰与夏贵赴之。
现代文：咸淳四年，元军修筑鹿门堡，吕文德向朝廷请求增兵，调张世杰与夏贵前往。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Xianjun, the Yuan army built Lumen Fort. Lü Wende requested the imperial court to increase the number of soldiers, and Zhang Shijie and Xia Gui were transferred to the fort.

古文：及吕文焕以襄阳降，命世杰将五千人守鄂州。
现代文：等到吕文焕以襄阳投降，命令世杰率领五千人驻守鄂州。
English: When Lü Wenhuan surrendered in Xiangyang, he ordered Shijie to lead five thousand men to garrison Ezhou.

古文：世杰以铁縆锁两城，夹以炮弩，其要津皆施杙，设攻具。
现代文：世杰用铁索封锁两城，夹以火炮、弓弩，其显要之地都散布木桩，设置攻打器具。
English: Shijie cordoned off the two cities with iron ropes, armed with artillery and bows and arrows, and spread wooden stakes in the most important places, and set up attack equipment.

古文：大军破新城，长驱而下，世杰力战，不得前，遣人招之，不听。
现代文：元军攻破新城，长驱而下，世杰奋力战斗，使元军不能前进，元军派人招降他，不顺从。
English: The Yuan Army broke through Xincheng and drove the Long March down. Shijie fought hard so that the Yuan Army could not advance. The Yuan Army sent someone to invite him to surrender, but he did not comply.

古文：丞相伯颜阳攻严山隘，潜自唐港荡舟入汉，东攻鄂，鄂降。
现代文：丞相伯颜明里攻打严山隘，暗中从唐港以水军冲锋陷阵进入汉水，东攻鄂州，鄂州投降。
English: General Secretary Boyan openly attacked Yanshan Pass, secretly stormed into Hanshui from Tang Port with naval forces, attacked Ezhou in the east, and Ezhou surrendered.

古文：世杰提所部兵入卫，道复饶州，乃入朝。
现代文：张世杰率领所部军队入卫临安，又经过饶州，才入朝廷。
English: Zhang Shijie led the troops of the headquarters into Lin'an, and passed through Raozhou before entering the imperial court.

古文：时方危急，征诸将勤王多不至，独世杰来，上下叹异。
现代文：当时正危急，召诸将救援朝廷多没有到达，只有世杰来到，皇帝叹息惊异。
English: At that time, it was in a critical situation. Most of those summoned to rescue the imperial court did not arrive, only Shijie came, and the emperor was surprised with a sigh.

古文：自和州防御使不数月累加至保康军承宣使，总都督府兵。
现代文：世杰从和州防御使不到几个月多次加官到保康军承宣使，总都督府兵。
English: In less than a few months, Shijie was promoted several times from the defense of He Prefecture to the Hokang Army, and became the commander-in-chief of the prefectural soldiers.

古文：遣将四出，取浙西诸郡，复平江、安吉、广德、溧阳诸城，兵势颇振。
现代文：派遣将领四处出击，取得浙西各郡，收复平江、安吉、广德、溧阳诸城，军势颇为振奋。
English: He dispatched generals to attack in all directions, won the counties in western Zhejiang, and recovered the cities of Pingjiang, Anji, Guangde, and Shenyang. The military situation was quite exciting.

古文：七月，与刘师勇诸将大出师焦山，令以十舟为方，碇江中，非有号令毋发碇，示以必死。
现代文：七月，与刘师勇等将领大规模出师焦山，命令用十条船结为并船，下碇停泊在江中，没有命令不得启碇，表示以必死的决心。
English: In July, with Liu Shiyong and other generals, he marched out of Jiaoshan on a large scale, ordered ten ships to be tied together as a joint ship, anchored in the middle of the river, and no orders were allowed to sail, expressing his determination to die.

古文：元帅阿术载彀士以火矢攻之，世杰兵乱，无敢发碇，赴江死者万余人。
现代文：元主帅阿术载着张满弓弩的士兵用火箭攻打并船，世杰军队乱了阵脚，没人敢启碇，投江而死的有一万多人。
English: Field Marshal Ah Jiu, carrying a full complement of soldiers armed with bows and arrows, attacked and boarded the ship with a rocket. Shijie's army was disorganized, no one dared to set sail, and more than 10,000 people died after falling into the river.

古文：大败，奔圌山。
现代文：世杰大败，奔逃山。
English: World champion defeated, fled to the mountains.

古文：上疏请济师，不报。
现代文：向朝廷上奏疏请求救援的军队，没有得到答复。
English: There was no reply to the imperial court from the army that requested rescue.

古文：寻擢龙、神卫四厢都指挥使。
现代文：不久提升为龙、神、卫四厢都指挥使。
English: He was soon promoted to be the commander of the Dragon, the God, and the Four Guards.

古文：十月，进沿江招讨使，改制置副使、兼知江阴军。
现代文：十月，升任沿江招讨使，改任制置副使、兼知江阴军。
English: In October, he was promoted to be the envoy to invite and dissuade people along the river, and changed his position to be the deputy envoy, and also became the leader of the Jiangyin Army.

古文：已而大军至独松关，召文天祥入卫，以世杰为保康军节度使、知平江。
现代文：不久元军到独松关，朝廷召文天祥入卫，以张世杰为保康军节度使，知平江。
English: Soon after, the Yuan army arrived in Doksongguan, and the imperial court summoned Wen Tianxiang to enter the imperial guard, with Zhang Shijie as the envoy of the Hokang army, and Zhipingjiang.

古文：寻亦召入卫，加检校少保。
现代文：不久也被征召入卫朝廷，加官检校少保。
English: Soon after, he was also called up to the Imperial Palace Guard, and became a junior bodyguard.

古文：二年正月，大军迫临安，世杰请移三宫入海，而与天祥合兵背城一战。丞相陈宜中方遣人请和，不可，白太皇太后止之。
现代文：德二年正月，元军迫近临安，世杰请转移皇帝、皇后、太后三宫进入海上，而与文天祥合兵背城一战，丞相陈宜中正派人向元军请和，世杰不同意，报告太皇太后阻止。
English: In the first month of the second year of the German era, the Yuan army was approaching Lin'an. Shige Jie requested the transfer of the Emperor, Empress, and Empress Dowager into the sea, and joined forces with Wen Tianxiang to back the city. The Prime Minister Chen Yizhong sent someone to the Yuan army to ask for peace. Shige Jie did not agree, and the report was blocked by the Empress Dowager.

古文：未几，和议亦沮。
现代文：没有多久，和议也终止。
English: It didn't take long for the peace talks to end.

古文：兵至皋亭山，世杰乃提兵入定海。
现代文：元兵到达皋亭山，世杰于是领兵进入定海。
English: The Yuan soldiers arrived at Shanting Mountain, whereupon Shijie led the soldiers into the Dinghai Mountains.

古文：石国英遣都统卞彪说之使降，世杰以为彪来从己俱南也，椎牛享之，酒半，彪从容为言，世杰大怒，断其舌，磔之巾子山。
现代文：石国英派都统卞彪劝说世杰投降，世杰以为卞彪是来随从自己一起南下，用椎杀牛让他享用，酒吃到一半，卞彪从容说话，世杰大怒，割断他的舌头，在巾子山把他裂尸。
English: Shi Guoying sent all of his generals to persuade Shijie to surrender. Shijie thought that Shijie had come to follow him to the south. Shijie killed a cow for Shijie to enjoy, and drank half of the wine. Shijie was furious, cut off Shijie's tongue, and dismembered him on Hanzi Mountain.

古文：四月，从二王入福州。
现代文：四月，随二王进入福州。
English: In April, he entered Fuzhou with the two kings.

古文：五月，与宜中奉昰为主，拜签书枢密院事。
现代文：五月，与陈宜中尊奉赵曰正为君主，世杰被任命为签书枢密院事。
English: In May, with Chen Yizhong venerating Zhao Jizheng as the monarch, Shijie was appointed as the signatory of the Privy Council.

古文：王世强导大军攻之，世杰乃奉益王入海，而自将陈吊眼、许夫人诸畬兵攻蒲寿庚，不下。
现代文：王世强引导元军攻打，世杰于是侍奉益王进入海上，而自己率领陈吊眼、许夫人等畲族军队攻蒲寿庚，没有攻克。
English: Wang Shikang led the Yuan army to attack, and Shijie then served King Yik into the sea, while he himself led Chen Hangyan, Mrs. Xu and other Yi troops to attack Pu Shugang, but did not conquer.

古文：十月，元帅唆都将兵来援泉，遂解去。
现代文：十月，元军主帅唆都率领军队来支援泉州，于是撤兵退去。
English: In October, the former army commander Atsuto led the army to support Quanzhou, and the troops withdrew.

古文：既而唆都遣人招益王，又遣经历孙安甫说世杰，世杰拘安甫军中不遣。
现代文：不久唆都派人招降益王，又派经历孙安甫劝说世杰，世杰把孙安甫拘留在军中不让他回去。
English: Soon after, the capital sent someone to recruit and demote Yi Wang, and also sent the experienced Sun Anfu to persuade Shijie. Shijie detained Sun Anfu in the army and would not let him go back.

古文：招讨刘深攻浅湾，世杰兵败，移王居井澳，深复来攻井澳，世杰战却之，因徒石碙洲。
现代文：招讨刘深攻打浅湾，世杰战败，把益王移居井澳，刘深又来攻打井澳，世杰击退了刘深，因而迁到硇州。
English: Summoned Liu Sheng to attack Shallow Bay, defeated Shijie, moved Yi Wang to Jing'ao, Liu Sheng attacked Jing'ao again, Shijie repulsed Liu Sheng, and thus moved to Zhangzhou.

古文：至元十五年正月，遣将王用攻雷州，用败绩。
现代文：至元十五年正月，元派大将王用攻打雷州，王用战败。
English: In the first month of the 15th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Yuan Dynasty sent the general Wang Ying to attack Leizhou, and Wang Ying was defeated.

古文：四月，益王殂，卫王昺立，拜世杰少傅、枢密副使。
现代文：四月，南宋益王死，卫王赵籨被立为皇帝，拜世杰为少傅、枢密副使。
English: In April, the Southern Song Dynasty's Yi Wang died, and Wei Wang Zhao Jie was made emperor, and Bai Shijie was made junior minister and confidential deputy envoy.

古文：五月，遣琼州安抚张应科攻雷州，三战皆不利。
现代文：五月，元派琼州安抚张应科攻雷州，三战都不顺利。
English: In May, Yuan sent Qiongzhou to appease Zhang Yingke and attack Leizhou. The three battles were not successful.

古文：六月，再决战雷城下，应科死之。
现代文：六月，再次决战于雷州城下，张应科战死。
English: In June, Zhang Yingke was killed in another decisive battle at the foot of Leizhou Castle.

古文：世杰以碙洲不可居，徙王新会之崖山。
现代文：世杰认为硇州已不能居住，将赵籨转移到新会的山。
English: Shijie thought that Zhangzhou was no longer habitable, and transferred Zhao Jun to Xinhui Mountain.

古文：八月，封越国公。
现代文：八月，被封为越国公。
English: In August, he was given the title of Duke of Yue.

古文：发琼州粟以给军。
现代文：散发琼州的粮食供给军队。
English: to distribute grain from Qiongzhou to supply the army.

古文：十月，遣凌震、王道夫袭广州，震败绩。
现代文：十月，派凌震、王道夫袭击广州，凌震战败。
English: In October, Ling Zhen and Wang Daofu attacked Guangzhou, and Ling Zhen was defeated.

古文：明年，元帅张弘范等兵至崖山，或谓世杰曰： 北兵以舟师塞海口，则我不能进退，盍先据海口。
现代文：第二年，元军主帅张弘范等人的军队到达山，有人对世杰说： 北兵用水军堵住海口，我军就不能进退了，为什么不先占据海口。
English: The following year, when the troops of former army commander Zhang Hongfan and others reached the mountain, someone said to Shijie: The Northern soldiers blocked Haikou with water troops. Our army cannot advance or retreat. Why not occupy Haikou first?

古文：幸而胜，国之福也；不胜，犹可西走。 世杰恐久在海上有离心，动则必散，乃曰： 频年航海，何时已乎？
现代文：侥幸取胜，这是国家的福份；不能取胜，仍然可以向西撤退。 世杰担心军队长时间在海上有离散之心，就说 ：连年航行在海上，什么时候是个了呢？
English: A fluke victory is a blessing for the country; if you can't win, you can still retreat to the west.Worried that the army would be disunited by being at sea for a long time, Sejie said, "After years of sailing at sea, when will it be over?

古文：今须与决胜负。 悉焚行朝草市，结大舶千余作水砦，为死守计，人皆危之。
现代文：现在应该与敌人决一胜负。 全部烧毁了皇帝临时驻地的集市，将一千多艘大船连结起来做成水寨，以为死守之计，人人都感到形势危险。
English: Now it was time to fight the enemy to a standstill, and everyone felt that the situation was dangerous, as they had burned down the entire bazaar where the emperor was temporarily stationed, and had linked more than a thousand large ships together to form a watchtower as a last-ditch defense.

古文：已而弘范兵至，据海口，樵汲道绝，兵茹干粮十余日，渴甚，下掬海水饮之，海咸，饮即呕泄，兵大困。
现代文：不久张弘范的兵开到，占据海口，打柴、汲水的道路全被堵死，宋军啃干粮啃了十多天，口渴了，向下捧海水来喝，海水味咸，喝了就呕吐泄肚，宋军极度困乏。
English: Zhang Hongfan's soldiers soon arrived and occupied Haikou. The roads for collecting firewood and water were all blocked. The Song army had been hoarding dry rations for more than ten days. Thirsty, they took seawater down to drink. The seawater tasted salty. After drinking, they vomited to relieve themselves. The Song army was extremely exhausted.

古文：世杰率苏刘义、方兴日大战。
现代文：世杰率领苏刘义、方兴每天大战。
English: Shi Jie led Su Liu Yi and Fang Xing to fight every day.

古文：弘范得世杰甥韩，命以官，使三至招之，世杰历数古忠臣曰： 吾知降，生且富贵，但为主死不移耳。 二月癸未，弘范等攻崖山，世杰败，走卫王舟。
现代文：张弘范得到世杰一个姓韩的外甥，给他官做，三次派他前去招降世杰，世杰历数古代的君臣说： 我知道投降了，不仅能生存而且能富贵，但是我为皇帝死的志向是不能动摇的。 二月二十日，张弘范等人攻打山，世杰战败，退保卫王所乘坐的船。
English: Zhang Hongfan got a nephew of Shijie, surnamed Han, gave him an official post, and sent him three times to recruit Shijie. Shijie recited the ancient monarchs and courtiers said: I know that I surrendered, not only can I survive but also can I be rich, but my ambition to die for the emperor cannot be shaken. On February 20, Zhang Hongfan and others attacked the mountain, Shijie was defeated, and the ship in which the king was riding was withdrawn.

古文：大军薄中军，世杰乃断维，以十余舰夺港去。
现代文：元军接近宋军的中军，世杰才割断拴船的绳子，带着十一艘大船冲出港口。
English: When the Yuan army approached the Chinese army of the Song army, Shijie cut the rope of the anchor ship and rushed out of the port with eleven large ships.

古文：生三岁，其父徙家镇江。稍长，从其乡人孟先生学，孟之徒恒百余，独指秀夫曰： 此非凡儿也。 景定元年，登进士第。
现代文：其余的人收军回到山，刘自立击败了他们，降服了他们的将领方遇龙、叶秀荣、章文秀等四十多人。世杰还想侍奉杨太后寻求赵氏的后代而立位，不久，强劲的大风摧毁了他们的船只，世杰被溺死在平章山下。陆秀夫，字君实，楚州盐城人。还在他三岁的时候，他的父亲就把家迁徙到了镇江。稍大以后，就跟随本乡的两位孟先生读书学习，孟先生的学生经常有百余人，但他单单指着陆秀夫说： 这小家伙不一般哪。 
English: The rest of the people gathered their forces and returned to the mountain. Liu defeated them on his own and subdued their generals, more than forty people, including Fang Yulong, Ye Xiu Rong, Zhang Wenxiu. Shijie also wanted to serve the Yang Empress Dowager to seek the descendants of the Zhao clan and stood up. Soon, a strong gale destroyed their ships, and Shijie was drowned under Pingzhang Mountain. Lu Xiu Fu, Zi Junshi, from Yancheng, Chuzhou. When he was three years old, his father moved the family to Zhenjiang. After a little older, he studied with two Mengs from his

古文：李庭芝镇淮南，闻其名，辟置幕中。
现代文：景定元年，考上了进士。李庭芝镇守淮南时，听说了陆秀夫，就将他罗致到自己的幕府中。
English: In the first year of Jingding, Li Tingzhi was admitted as a scholar. When Li Tingzhi was the town guard of Huainan, he heard about Lu Hsiu-fu and sent him to his own shogunate.

古文：时天下称得士多者，以淮南为第一，号 小朝廷 。
现代文：当时天下人称搜罗人材最多的，以淮南李庭芝为第一名，号称 小朝廷 。
English: At that time, the world was said to have the largest number of human resources, with Huainan Li Tingzhi as the first, known as the Small Court.

古文：秀夫才思清丽，一时文人少能及之。
现代文：陆秀夫才思清丽，在当时的文人中很少有能够赶得上他的。
English: Lu Xiuwu was able to think clearly, and very few of the literati at that time were able to catch up with him.

古文：性沉静，不苟求人知，每僚吏至阁，宾主交欢，秀夫独敛焉无一语。
现代文：性格沉静，不苟求被别人知道，每当幕僚们到官署请见，宾主共欢同乐，只有陆秀夫一人默默地不发一言。
English: With a quiet personality, he did not seek to be known by others. Whenever the staff members came to the government office to see him, the guests were all happy. Only Lu Xiuwu silently did not say a word.

古文：或时宴集府中，坐尊俎间，矜庄终日，未尝少有希合。
现代文：有时在府中举行宴会，在宴席上，他总是正襟危坐，矜持庄重，很少与人交往。
English: Sometimes a banquet is held in the mansion. At the banquet, he always sits up straight, holds himself with dignity, and rarely interacts with people.

古文：至察其事，皆治，庭芝益器之，虽改官不使去己，就幕三迁至主管机宜文字。
现代文：等到考察他的事务，他都治理得很好，李庭芝由是更加器重他，即使调任官职，也不让陆秀夫离开自己，自从他到李庭芝幕府中，曾三次进升，直到主管机宜文字。
English: After the inspection of his affairs, he managed everything well, so Li Tingzhi paid more attention to him. Even if he was transferred to an official post, he would not let Lu Hideo leave him. Since he came to Li Tingzhi's shogunate, he had been promoted three times until the supervisor was able to write.

古文：咸淳十年，庭芝制置淮东，擢参议官。
现代文：咸淳十年李庭芝任淮东制置使，提升陆秀夫为参议官。
English: In the tenth year of Xianjun, Li Tingzhi was appointed as the designated envoy of Huadong Province, and Lu Hsiufu was promoted to the post of senator.

古文：德祐元年，边事急，诸僚属多亡者，惟秀夫数人不去。
现代文：德元年，边防紧急，幕僚大多逃走了，只有陆秀夫几个人没有离开。
English: In the first year of the German Republic, there was an emergency at the border, and most of the staff members fled. Only Lu Xiuwu and a few others did not leave.

古文：庭芝上其名，除司农寺丞，累擢至宗正少卿兼权起居舍人。
现代文：李庭芝向朝廷举荐陆秀夫，因此他被任为司农寺丞，屡次升迁，直到任为宗正少卿兼代理起居舍人。
English: Li Tingzhi recommended Lu Hsiu-fu to the imperial court, as a result of which he was appointed as the chief priest of the temple, and was promoted several times until he was appointed as the deputy chief priest of the temple and acting chief priest.

古文：二年正月，以礼部侍郎使军前请和，不就而反。
现代文：德二年正月，以礼部侍郎身份到前线讲和，还没有到达，敌人就又反悔了。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Tokugawa shogunate, he went to the front as a ceremonial attendant to talk about peace, but before he arrived, the enemy repented again.

古文：二王走温州，秀夫与苏刘义追从之，使人召陈宜中、张世杰等皆至，遂相与立益王于福州。
现代文：二王到温州，陆秀夫与苏刘义，追随二王而去，派人召回了陈宜中、张世杰等，于是大家共同拥立益王于福州。
English: The two kings went to Wenzhou, and Lu Hsiu-fu and Su Liu-yi followed the two kings. They sent someone to call back Chen Yizhong, Zhang Shijie, and so on, so everyone supported Yi Wang in Fuzhou.

古文：进端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
现代文：进升为端明殿学士、签发枢密院事。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Duanming palace bachelor, issued by the Privy Council.

古文：宜中以秀夫久在兵间，知军务，每事咨访始行，秀夫亦悉心赞之，无不自尽。
现代文：陈宜中因为陆秀夫长期在军队里，熟知军务，每当有事都征求陆秀夫的意见然后办理，陆秀夫也全心全意为他参谋，言无不尽。
English: Chen Yizhong, because Lu Xiufu had been in the army for a long time, was familiar with military affairs. Whenever something happened, he would seek Lu Xiufu's opinion and then deal with it. Lu Xiufu was also a full-hearted staff officer for him, and his words were inexhaustible.

古文：旋与议宜中不合，宜中使言者劾罢之。
现代文：不久因议事与陈宜中产生矛盾，陈宜中指使谏官上奏弹劾陆秀夫并罢免了他。
English: Soon conflicts arose with Chen Yizhong as a result of the deliberation. Chen Yizhong ordered the eunuch to impeach Lu Hsiu-fu and dismissed him.

古文：张世杰让宜中曰： 此何如时，动以台谏论人？ 宜中皇恐，亟召秀夫还。
现代文：张世杰责备陈宜中说 ：这都是什么时候了，还动辄让台谏官弹劾人？ 陈宜中非常惶恐不安，急忙召回了陆秀夫。
English: Zhang Shijie reproached Chen Yi, saying: "When did this all start, and are you still going to allow Taiwanese eunuchs to impeach people? Chen Yi Zhong was very frightened and anxious, and hastily recalled Lu Hideo.

古文：时君臣播越海滨，庶事疏略，杨太妃垂帘，与群臣语犹自称奴。
现代文：当时君臣流亡海滨，大小政事都疏于治理，杨太妃垂帘听政，与臣下说话还自称为奴。
English: At that time, sovereigns and subjects were exiled to the seashore, and political affairs of all sizes were neglected in governance. Yang Taifei listened to politics, and even called herself a slave when talking to her subjects.

古文：每时节朝会，秀夫俨然正笏立，如治朝，或时在行中，凄然泣下，以朝衣拭泪，衣尽浥，左右无不悲动者。
现代文：每当群臣朝会的时候，陆秀夫仍端持着手板，俨然像过去上朝一样，有时在行程途中，凄然泪下，用朝衣拭泪，衣服都湿透了，左右的人为他所感染都无不悲痛欲绝。
English: Whenever a group of courtiers gathered for a court meeting, Lu Hideo would still hold the handboard, as if it were the previous morning. Sometimes, on the way, he would burst into tears, wipe his tears with his morning coat, and his clothes would be soaked, and everyone around him would be overwhelmed with grief for his infection.

古文：属井澳风，王以惊疾殂，群臣皆欲散去。
现代文：因井澳大风的原因，益王惊惧而死，群臣都想借此机会离开。
English: As a result of the great wind of Jing, the king of Yiwu died of fright, and all the courtiers wanted to take this opportunity to leave.

古文：秀夫曰： 度宗皇帝一子尚在，将焉置之？
现代文：陆秀夫说： 度宗皇帝有一个儿子还在，把他怎么办呢？
English: Lu Hideo said, "Emperor Dudong has a son still alive, what should we do with him?"

古文：古人有以一旅一成中兴者，今百官有司皆具，士卒数万，天若未欲绝宋，此岂不可为国邪？ 乃与众共立卫王。
现代文：古人中曾有过仅凭借一旅即成就中兴的，而我们现今百官都在，还有数万军队，上天如果还没想灭绝大宋，难道就不能凭此振兴国家吗？ 于是与众大臣共同拥立卫王。
English: Among the ancients, there were people who achieved prosperity by virtue of a single journey, but today we have hundreds of officials and tens of thousands of troops. If God did not want to exterminate the Great Song Dynasty, could He not use this to revitalize the country? So, together with the ministers, they supported Wei Wang.

古文：时陈宜中往占城，以与世杰不协，屡召不至。
现代文：当时陈宜中前往占城去了，因与张世杰不合，所以屡次征召他都不到。
English: At that time, Chen Yizhong went to Zhancheng. Because he did not get along with Zhang Shijie, he was repeatedly called up but never came.

古文：乃以秀夫为左丞相，与世杰共秉政。
现代文：于是以陆秀夫为左丞相，与张世杰共同秉政。
English: As a result, Lu Hideo was appointed as the left chancellor, and he and Zhang Shijie jointly upheld the government.

古文：时世杰驻兵崖山，秀夫外筹军旅，内调工役，凡有所述作，又尽出其手。
现代文：其时张世杰领兵驻守山，陆秀夫则既要筹措军旅，又要调集工役，而且凡是有什么需要写的，也都由他亲自动手。
English: At that time, Zhang Shijie led the troops stationed on the mountain, and Lu Xiuwu not only had to raise an army brigade, but also had to mobilize laborers, and whatever needed to be written was also done by his own hands.

古文：虽匆遽流离中，犹日书《大学章句》以劝讲。
现代文：虽然在颠沛流离之中，事务繁多，时间匆忙，他每天都还是要写《大学章句》以劝讲别人。
English: Although he was in the midst of wandering, with many affairs and time in a hurry, he still had to write "University Chapter" every day to persuade others.

古文：至元十六年二月，崖山破，秀夫走卫王舟，而世杰、刘义各断维去，秀夫度不可脱，乃杖剑驱妻子入海，即负王赴海死，年四十四。
现代文：至元十六年二月，山被攻破，陆秀夫护卫卫王的船一起逃走，而张世杰、苏刘义则各自逃生去了，陆秀夫考虑到难以逃脱，于是将自己的妻子儿女赶下海去，自己背着卫王赴海而死，当时他年仅四十四岁。
English: In February of the 16th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the mountain was breached, and Lu Hsiu-fu escorted Wei Wang's ship and fled together, while Zhang Shijie and Su Liu-yi escaped separately. Lu Hsiu-fu considered it difficult to escape, so he drove his wife and children down to the sea and died carrying Wei Wang on his back. He was only forty-four years old at the time.

古文：翰林学士刘鼎孙亦驱家属并辎重沉海，不死被执，搒掠无完肤，一夕得脱，卒蹈海。
现代文：翰林学士刘鼎孙也将自己的家眷驱入海中，并将各辎重物沉入海底，也投海自尽未能如愿，被抓起来拷打得体无完肤，一天晚上得以逃脱，最后还是蹈海而死。
English: The scholar of Hanlin, Liu Dingsun, also drove his family into the sea, and sank all the heavy objects to the bottom of the sea. He also tried to commit suicide by throwing himself into the sea, but was unable to do so. He was caught and tortured to the full extent of his body. He was able to escape one night, and finally died in the sea.

古文：优哉悠哉，吾得其所！ 遂投南流江而死。张珏，字君玉，陇西凤州人。
现代文：刘鼎孙字伯镇，江陵人，进士。陆秀夫在海上的时候，将二王的事都详细地记述下来汇成一书，并将书授给礼部侍郎邓光荐说： 你如果侥幸不死，就把书传出去。 后来山平定，邓光荐将此书带回了庐陵。
English: When Lu Xiufu was at sea, he wrote down the events of the two kings in detail and compiled them into a book, and gave the book to the attendant of the ceremonial department, Deng Guangyin, saying: If you are lucky enough not to die, pass the book out. Later, the mountain was leveled, and Deng Guangyin brought the book back to Fuling.

古文：年十八，从军钓鱼山，以战功累官中军都统制，人号为 四川虓将 。
现代文：邓光荐去世，这部书的存亡就无从得知了，所以那段海上的事，世人就再也无法得知其详情了。张珏字君玉，陇西凤州人。十八岁时，在钓鱼山从军，以战功累官中军都统制，人们号称他为 四川九虎将 。
English: When Deng Guangren died, there was no way to know whether this book still existed or not, so the world could no longer know the details of that part of the sea. Zhang Zhezhi Junyu, a native of Fengzhou, Shaanxi Province. At the age of eighteen, he joined the army in Diaoyu Mountain, and with his war achievements, he controlled the Chinese army. People called him the Sichuan Nine Tigers.

古文：宝祐末，大兵攻蜀，破吉平隘，拔长宁，杀守将王佐父子。
现代文：宝末年，元兵攻蜀州，破吉平隘，攻克长宁县，杀死守将王佐父子。
English: In the last year of Bao's reign, Yuan soldiers attacked Shuzhou, broke through Jiping Pass, conquered Changning County, and killed the commander Wang Zuo and his son.

古文：至阆州，降安抚杨奫，推官赵广死之。
现代文：到达阆州，降服南宋安抚杨渊，推官赵广死于阆州。
English: Arriving in Zhangzhou, he surrendered to the Southern Song Dynasty to appease Yang Yuan, and the pusher Zhao Guang died in Zhangzhou.

古文：至蓬州，降守将张大悦，运使施择善死之。
现代文：到蓬州，降服守将张大悦，运使施择善死。
English: In Pengzhou, Zhang Dayue, the surrendering general, dispatched Shi Zeng to die a good death.

古文：顺庆、广安诸郡，破竹而下。
现代文：顺庆、广安诸郡，势如破竹而被攻克。
English: Shunqing and Guang'an counties were taken by surprise.

古文：明年，合诸道兵围合州，凡攻城之具无不精备。
现代文：第二年，元合各道军队围攻合州，凡是攻城器具无不精良。
English: In the second year, the armies of the various provinces of Yuanhe besieged Hezhou, and all the siege equipment was excellent.

古文：珏与王坚协力战守，攻之九月不能下。
现代文：张珏和王坚协力战斗守御，元军攻打合州九个月都不能攻克。
English: Zhang Xuan and Wang Jian worked together to fight and defend, and the Yuan Army could not attack and conquer Hezhou for nine months.

古文：景定初，合守王坚征入朝，以马千代守合。
现代文：景定初年，合州守将王坚被召入朝廷，以马千代替防守合州。
English: In the first year of Jingding, Wang Jian, the governor of Hezhou, was summoned to the imperial court, and Ma Qian took the place of defending Hezhou.

古文：四年，千子馈饷至虎相山，为东川兵所得，屡以书劝千降，朝廷乃以珏代千。
现代文：四年，马千的儿子运送兵饷到虎相山，被东川元兵所擒获，多次写信劝马千投降，南宋朝廷就用张珏代替马千。
English: In the fourth year, Ma Qian's son transported soldiers to Huxiang Mountain and was captured by Dongchuan Yuan's soldiers. He repeatedly wrote letters to persuade Ma Qian to surrender, and the Southern Song Dynasty court replaced Ma Qian with Zhang Qian.

古文：珏魁雄有谋，善用兵，出奇设伏，算无遗策。
现代文：张珏魁伟雄勇有谋略，善于用兵打仗，出奇兵设立埋伏，算谋从没有失策。
English: Zhang Xuan Kuiwei was brave and strategic. He was good at using soldiers to fight wars, setting up ambushes with surprise soldiers, and never made mistakes in his calculations.

古文：其治合州，士卒必练，器械必精，御部曲有法，虽奴隶有功必优赏之，有过虽至亲必罚不贷，故人人用命。
现代文：他治理合州，士兵必定精练，器械必定精良，驾御军队有法度，即使是奴隶有功必优厚奖赏，有过错即使是最亲近的人必惩不贷，所以人人听从他的命令。
English: He governs Heshou, the soldiers must be refined, the equipment must be excellent, there are laws for driving the army, even if they are slaves, they must be rewarded for their merits, and even if they are closest to them, they must be punished for their mistakes, so everyone obeys his orders.

古文：自全汝楫失大良平，大兵筑虎相山，驻兵两城，时出攻梁山、忠万开达，民不得耕，兵不得解甲而卧，每饷渠，竭数郡兵护送，死战两城之下始克入。
现代文：自从全汝楫丢大良平，元兵在虎相山筑城，在两城驻扎军队，时时出兵攻打梁山、忠、万、开、达州，百姓不能耕种，军队不能解去铠甲而睡觉，每每运军粮到渠州，宋竭尽几郡的兵力护送，以死战于两城之下才能够进入。
English: Ever since Quanzhang abandoned Dalianping, the Yuan soldiers began to build a city in Huxiang Mountain, stationed troops in the two cities, and constantly sent troops to attack Liangshan, Zhong, Wan, Kai, and Dazhou. The people could not cultivate, the army could not remove armor and sleep, and every time the military grain was transported to Quzhou, Song exhausted the military escort of several counties, and fought to the death under the two cities before being able to enter.

古文：咸淳二年十二月，珏遣其将史炤、王立以死士五十斧西门入，大战城中，复其城。
现代文：咸淳二年十二月，张珏派他的部将史火召、王立用五十敢死壮士用斧头砍杀从西门进入，大战于城中，收复了他们的城堡。
English: In December of the second year of Xianjun, Zhang Ye sent his general Shi Huo Zong and Wang Li entered from the West Gate with fifty brave men and killed them with axes. They fought a great battle in the city and recovered their castle.

古文：三年四月，平章赛典赤提兵入，坏重庆麦，道出合城下，珏碇舟断江中为水城，大兵数万攻之不克，遂引去。
现代文：咸淳三年四月，元平章赛典赤领兵攻入，破坏重庆的麦子，经过合州城下，张珏把船下碇停泊在江中为水城，几万元兵进攻没有成功，于是退去。
English: In April of the third year of the Xianjun era, Yuanping Zhang Saiten's red-collar soldiers invaded and destroyed Chongqing's wheat. After passing under the city of Hezhou, Zhang Ye moored his boat in the middle of the river as a water city. The attack of tens of thousands of soldiers was not successful, so he retreated.

古文：合州自余玠用二冉生策，徙军钓鱼山，城壁甚固。
现代文：合州自从余用冉氏兄弟的策略，将军队迁到钓鱼山，城墙营垒坚固。
English: Since Hezhou Yu used the strategy of the Ran brothers to move the army to Diaoyu Mountain, the city walls have been fortified.

古文：然开、庆受兵，民凋弊甚，珏外以兵护耕，内教民垦田积粟，未再期，公私兼足。
现代文：但开州、庆州遭受兵祸，百姓非常困苦，张珏对外用军队保护耕种，在内教百姓开垦田地积储粮食，不到两个月，公私用度兼而充足。
English: However, Kaizhou and Gyeongju suffered from military disasters, and the people were very poor. Zhang Ye used the army to protect and cultivate outside the country, and taught the people to cultivate and store grain inside the country. Less than two months later, both public and private consumption were sufficient.

古文：九年，叛将刘整复献计，欲自青居进筑马鬃、虎顶山，扼三江口以图合，匣刺统军率诸翼兵以筑之。
现代文：咸淳九年，叛将刘整又向元献计，打算从青居进而筑马、虎顶山，控扼江口以图取合州，元将匣刺统军率领各路军队修筑。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianjun, the renegade general Liu Zhengyi once again presented a plan to Yuan, intending to build a horse, a tiger-topped mountain, and control the mouth of the Yangtze River from Qingju in an attempt to take Heshou. The former general Guizhidun Army led the various armies to build.

古文：左右欲出兵与之争，珏不可，曰： 芜菁平母德、彰城，汪帅劲兵之所聚也，吾出不意而攻之，马鬃必顾其后，不暇城矣。 乃张疑兵嘉渠口，潜师渡平阳滩攻二城，火其资粮器械，越砦七十里，焚船场，统制周虎战死，马鬃城卒不就。
现代文：张珏左右之人想出兵与元兵争夺二地，张珏不同意，说 ：芜菁平母德、彰城，是汪元帅所聚集的地方，我们出其不意而攻袭他，马兵一定顾及其后路，而顾不上筑城了。 于是在嘉渠口张布疑兵，暗中出兵渡过平阳滩进攻二城，火烧元军的钱粮器械，越寨七十里，烧毁船场，统制周虎战死，马城终于没能筑成。
English: People around Zhang Rong wanted to send soldiers to compete with the Yuan soldiers for the two places, but Zhang Rong disagreed, saying: Fenjing Pingmu De, Zhangcheng, is the place where Marshal Wang gathered, we attacked him by surprise, the horse soldiers must pay attention to his subsequent path, but can't pay attention to building the city. Therefore, Zhang Bu suspected soldiers at Jiqugou, secretly sent troops to cross the Pingyang Beach to attack the two cities, burned the money and grain equipment of the Yuan army, traveled seventy miles, burned the shipyard, and died in battle, and finally failed to build the horse city.

古文：十年，加宁江军承宣使。
现代文：咸淳十年，张珏被加官宁江军承宣使。
English: In the tenth year of the reign of Emperor Xianjun, Zhang Ye was appointed as the envoy of the Ningjiang Army.

古文：德祐元年，升四川制置副使、知重庆府。
现代文：德元年，升任四川制置副使、知重庆府。
English: In the first year of the German era, he was promoted to Vice-Minister of Sichuan Province and Chongqing Prefecture.

古文：五月，加检校少保。
现代文：五月，加检校少保。
English: In May, he was promoted to junior security guard.

古文：征其兵入卫，蜀道断，不得达。
现代文：召他的军队入卫朝廷，蜀州道路断绝，不能到达。
English: He called his army to enter the imperial palace, and the road to Shuzhou was cut off and could not be reached.

古文：六月，昝万寿以嘉定及三龟、九顶降，守将侯都统战死。
现代文：六月，昝万寿以嘉定及三龟、九顶投降，守将侯都统战死。
English: In June, Jian Wan Shou surrendered to Jiading, Sange and Jiu Ding, and the garrison commander Hou Du Tong died in the battle.

古文：已而泸、叙、长宁、富顺、开、达、巴、渠诸郡不一月皆下，合兵围重庆，作浮梁三江中，断援兵。
现代文：不久以后，泸、叙、长宁、富顺、开、达、巴、渠各郡不到一个月都被元兵攻克，元军合兵包围重庆，在三江中制作浮桥，断绝援兵。
English: Soon after, the counties of Min, Shuxiu, Changning, Fushun, Kai, Da, Ba and Qu were conquered by the Yuan soldiers in less than a month. The Yuan soldiers surrounded Chongqing, made floating bridges in the three rivers, and cut off reinforcements.

古文：自秋徂冬，援绝粮尽，珏屡以死士间入城，许以赴援，且为之画守御计。
现代文：从秋天到冬天，援绝粮尽，张珏多次派敢死的武士从小路入城，答应前去援助，而且为他们谋划守御之计。
English: From autumn to winter, when the food supply ran out, Zhang Ye repeatedly sent warriors who were willing to die to enter the city from the side road, promised to go to help, and planned a defense plan for them.

古文：二年正月，遣其将赵安袭青居，执安抚刘才、参议马嵩归。
现代文：德二年正月，派他的部将赵安袭击青居，活捉元安抚刘才、参议马嵩返回。
English: In the first month of the second year of De, he sent his subordinate Zhao An to attack Qingju, and captured the former pacifier Liu Cai and the councillor Ma Song alive.

古文：二月，遣张万以巨舰载精兵，断内水桥，入重庆。
现代文：二月，元派张万用巨舰载着精锐的军队，绝断内水桥，进入重庆。
English: In February, the Yuan Dynasty dispatched the Zhangwanzhong, a huge warship carrying elite troops, to cut off the Inner Water Bridge and enter Chongqing.

古文：四月，合重庆兵出攻凤顶诸砦。
现代文：四月，元军汇合重庆军队出兵进攻凤顶诸寨。
English: In April, the Yuan army converged with the Chongqing army to attack the villages of Fengding.

古文：珏结泸士刘霖、先坤朋为内应。
现代文：张珏结交泸州士人刘霖、先坤朋作为内应。
English: Zhang Ye made friends with Zhangzhou statesmen Liu Lin and Xian Kunpeng as his inner circle.

古文：六月，遣赵安破神臂门，执梅应春杀之，复泸州。
现代文：六月，张珏派赵安攻破神臂门，捉住梅应青并杀死，收复泸州。
English: In June, Zhang Ye sent Zhao An to break through the Gate of Divine Arms, capture and kill Mei Yingqing, and recover Zhangzhou.

古文：重庆兵渐解去，围泸州。
现代文：重庆元兵渐渐撤去，包围泸州。
English: The Chongqing Yuan soldiers gradually withdrew and surrounded Zhangzhou.

古文：十二月，赵定应迎珏入重庆为制置。
现代文：十二月，赵定应迎接张珏入重庆为制置。
English: In December, Zhao Ding should welcome Zhang Xuan into Chongqing.

古文：时阳立以涪州降，珏遣张万攻走立，俘其僚属冯巽午等。
现代文：当时阳立以涪州投降，张珏派张万攻打赶走阳立，俘虏他的僚属冯巽午等人。
English: At that time, Yang Li surrendered to Zhang Zhou, Zhang Ye sent Zhang Wan to attack and drive away Yang Li, and captured his colleague, Feng Xianguo and others.

古文：立复合兵来决战，史进、张世杰战死，万不支，俘立妻子及安抚李端以归。
现代文：阳立再合兵来决战，史进、张世杰战死，张万坚持不住，俘获阳立的妻子儿女以及安抚李端返回。
English: Yang Li re-joined the army for a decisive battle, Shi Jin and Zhang Shijie died in the battle, Zhang Wan could not hold out, captured Yang Li's wife and children and pacified Li Duan to return.

古文：珏以都统程聪守涪。
现代文：张珏以都统程聪守涪州。
English: Zhang Ronggui was the first governor of Ganzhou with the title of Duodu Cheng Cong.

古文：重庆兵尽退。
现代文：重庆元兵全部退走。
English: All Chongqing veterans withdrew.

古文：珏闻二王立广中，遣兵数百人求王所。
现代文：张珏听说益、卫二王在广州立位，派兵几百人寻求二王所在的地方。
English: When Zhang Ye heard that Yi and Wei were in Guangzhou, he sent several hundred soldiers to find out where the two kings were.

古文：调史训忠、赵安等援泸州。
现代文：调史训忠、赵安等援救泸州。
English: Jin Shi, Xun Zhong, Zhao An and others came to the rescue of Zhangzhou.

古文：张万入夔，连忠、涪兵拔石门及巴巫砦，获将士百余人，解大宁围，攻破十八砦。
现代文：张万入夔州，联合忠、涪州的军队攻克石门及巴巫寨，获取元军将士一百多人。解大宁围，攻破十八寨。
English: Zhang Wan entered Bozhou, and the armies of United Loyalty and Bozhou conquered Shimen and Bawuzhai, and obtained more than one hundred former soldiers. They lifted the siege of Danying and broke through eighteen villages.

古文：明年六月，张德润复破涪州，执守将程聪。
现代文：第二年六月，元将张德润又攻破涪州，捉住守将程聪。
English: In June of the following year, Zhang Derun, the original general, broke through Zhangzhou again and captured the garrison commander Cheng Cong.

古文：先是，聪在重庆力主守城之议，珏入，不知也，使出守涪。
现代文：在此之前，程聪在重庆极力主张守城的意见，张珏入重庆，与他不相契，派他出守涪州。
English: Prior to this, Cheng Cong had strongly advocated the idea of defending the city in Chongqing. Zhang Ye entered Chongqing, which did not suit him, and sent him to defend Zhangzhou.

古文：聪至郡怏怏，不设备，至是被执。
现代文：程聪到涪州因不平而郁郁不乐，不设防备，到这时被捉。
English: When Cheng Cong arrived in Zhangzhou, he was depressed and unhappy due to his dissatisfaction. He did not take precautions and was caught at this time.

古文：德润以肩舆载聪归，语之曰： 若子鹏飞为参政矣，旦晚可会聚也。 聪曰： 我执彼降，非吾子也。 
现代文：张德润用轿子抬着程聪返归，告诉他说： 你儿子程鹏飞任参政了，你可以日夜与他相聚。 程聪说 ：我被捉，他投降，不是我的儿子。 
English: Zhang Derun returned with a palanquin carrying Cheng Cong and told him: "Your son Cheng Pengfei has entered politics, you can meet with him day and night."Cheng Cong said: "I was captured, he surrendered, he is not my son."

古文：是月，梁山军袁世安降。
现代文：这个月，梁山军袁世安投降。
English: This month, Yuan Shian's Liangshan Army surrendered.

古文：十月，万州破，杀守将上官夔。
现代文：十月，万州被攻破，元兵杀死守将上官夔。
English: In October, Wanzhou was defeated, and the former soldiers who killed the guards were demoted.

古文：十一月，泸州食尽，人相食，遂破之，安抚王世昌自经死。
现代文：十一月，泸州粮食尽净，人们互相吃人，于是元兵破泸州，安抚王世昌自缢而死。
English: In November, the grain supply in Zhangzhou was exhausted, and people were eating each other. Therefore, the Yuan soldiers invaded Zhangzhou to pacify Wang Shichang, and Wang Shichang committed suicide.

古文：大兵会重庆，驻佛图关，以一军驻南城，一军驻朱村坪，一军驻江上。
现代文：元兵会军重庆，驻扎佛图关，以一军驻扎南城，一军驻扎朱村坪，一军驻扎长江上。
English: The army of the Chongqing Veterans' Association was stationed in Fotuguan, with one army stationed in Nancheng, one army stationed in Zhucunping, and one army stationed on the Yangtze River.

古文：遣泸州降将李从招降，珏不从。
现代文：派泸州降将李从招降，张珏没有顺从。
English: He ordered Zhang Zhou to demote Li, but Zhang Ye did not comply.

古文：十二月，达州降将鲜汝忠破咸淳皇华城，执守将马堃，军使包申巷战死。
现代文：十二月，达州降将鲜汝忠攻破咸淳皇华城，捉守将马，军使包申在里巷的战斗中战死。
English: In December, Dazhou surrenders, defeats Xian Ruzhong, captures the general Ma, and the military envoy Baoshen is killed in the battle of Li Xiang.

古文：至元十五年春，珏遣总管李义将兵由广阳，一军皆没。
现代文：至元十五年春，张珏派总管李义率领军队经过广阳，全军都被消灭。
English: In the spring of the 15th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Li Yi, the head of the Zhangye faction, led the army through Guangyang, and the entire army was wiped out.

古文：二月，大兵破绍庆府，执守将鲜龙，湖北提刑赵立与制司幕官赵酉泰皆自杀。
现代文：二月，元兵破绍庆府，捉守将鲜龙，湖北提刑赵立与制司幕官赵酉泰都自杀。
English: In February, the Yuan soldiers defeated the Shaoqing government, and the warden, Xianglong, the warden of Hubei Province, Zhao Li, and the procurator of Hubei Province, Zhao Bingtai, both committed suicide.

古文：珏率兵出薰风门，与大将也速儿战扶桑壩，诸将从其后合击之，珏兵大溃。
现代文：张珏率兵冲出薰风门，与元大将也速儿战于扶桑坝，诸将从张珏的后面联合袭击，张珏军队大败。
English: Zhang Ye and his soldiers rushed out of the Fengfeng Gate, and quickly fought with the former general in Fusangba. They will jointly attack from behind Zhang Ye, and Zhang Ye's army will be defeated.

古文：城中粮尽，赵安以书说珏降，不听。
现代文：重庆城中粮食已尽，赵安写信劝说张珏投降，张珏不同意。
English: Chongqing had run out of food, and Zhao An wrote a letter to persuade Zhang Ye to surrender. Zhang Ye did not agree.

古文：安乃与帐下韩忠显夜开镇西门降。
现代文：赵安就与帐下韩忠显夜间打开镇西门投降。
English: Zhao An and his subordinate Han Zhongxian opened the west gate of the town at night and surrendered.

古文：珏率兵巷战不支，归索鸩饮，左右匿鸩，乃以小舟载妻子东走涪。中道大憾，斧其舟欲自沉，舟人夺斧掷江中，珏踊跃欲赴水，家人挽持不得死。
现代文：张珏率兵在里巷展开战斗，力量不支，回去索要鸩酒喝，左右之人把鸩酒藏了起来，于是用小船载着妻子儿女向东逃往涪州，中途大为愤恨，用斧头砍船打算自沉，船夫夺掉斧头丢入长江中，张珏跳起来想投水被家人挽持住不得死。
English: Zhang Xuan led his soldiers to fight in the alleys. He was exhausted. He went back to ask his comrades for wine. The people around him hid the wine. So he took his wife and children in a small boat and fled east to Zhangzhou. Midway, he was very angry. He used an axe to cut the boat and planned to sink it. The boatman took the axe and threw it into the Yangtze River. Zhang Xuan jumped up and wanted to throw it into the water. He was held by his family to keep him from dying.

古文：明日，万户铁木儿追及于涪，执之送京师。
现代文：第二天，万户铁木儿追到涪州，把他捉住送往京师。
English: The next day, Wanyu Tiemu'er chased him to Zhangzhou, caught him and sent him to Beijing.

古文：重庆降，制机曹琦自经死，张万、张起岩出降。
现代文：重庆投降，制机曹琦自缢而死，张万、张起崖出城投降。
English: Chongqing surrenders, the machine maker Cao Yu commits suicide and dies, Zhang Wan and Zhang Qizhang leave the city and surrender.

古文：进攻合州，破外城。
现代文：元军进攻合州，破外城。
English: The Yuan army attacked Hezhou and broke through the outer city.

古文：三月，王立亦降。
现代文：三月，王立也投降。
English: In March, Wang Li also surrendered.

古文：珏至安西赵老庵，其友谓之曰： 公尽忠一世，以报所事，今至此，纵得不死，亦何以哉？ 珏乃解弓弦自经厕中，从者焚其骨，以瓦缶葬之死所。
现代文：张珏到达西安赵老庵，他的朋友对他说 ：你尽忠一世，以报答所从事的事业，现在到了这个地步，即使得以不死，又有什么呢？ 张珏就解下弓弦在厕所中自缢，随从的人焚烧了他的尸骨，用瓦罐把他埋葬在死的地方。
English: Zhang Xuan arrived at the Zhao Lao'an in Xi'an. His friend said to him, "You have been loyal for a lifetime to repay the cause you have been engaged in. Now that you have reached this stage, even if you can not die, what is there? Zhang Xuan then loosened the bowstring and hanged himself in the toilet. His followers burned his bones and buried him in the dead place with a crock pot.

