古文：起重光协洽，尽重光大荒落，凡十一年。
现代文：起重光协洽，尽重光大荒落，一共十一年。
English: A total of eleven years have passed since then.

古文：高宗天皇大圣大弘孝皇帝中之下
现代文：高宗天皇大圣大弘孝皇帝中之下
English: Emperor Gaozong and Emperor Daisho and Daigokucho, middle and lower

古文：咸亨二年辛未，公元六七一年
现代文：唐高宗咸亨二年春季正月，甲子，唐高宗来到东都洛阳。
English: In the first month of the spring of the second year of Tang Gaozong's reign, Tang Gaozong came to the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：春，正月，甲子，上幸东都。夏，四月，甲申，以西突厥阿史那都支为左骁卫大将军兼匐延都督，以安集五咄陆之众。
现代文：夏季，四月，甲申，唐朝任命西突厥阿史那都支为左骁卫大将军兼匐延都督，以安抚五咄陆的部众。
English: In the summer, in April, in Jiaxing, the Tang Dynasty appointed the Western Turk Ashinadu branch as Zuoyanwei general and Jianyan governor, in order to appease the subordinates in the Five Provinces.

古文：初，武元庆等既死，皇后奏以其姊子贺兰敏之为士彟之嗣，袭爵周公，改姓武氏，累迁弘文馆学士、左散骑常侍。
现代文：当初，皇后武则天的哥哥武元庆等已死，皇后便上奏唐高宗，以她姐姐的儿子贺兰敏之作为她父亲武士的嗣子，承袭周国公爵位，改姓武氏。武敏之连续升官，此时任弘文馆学士、左散骑常侍。
English: At that time, Empress Wu Zetian's brother, Bu Yuanqing, and others had already died. The Empress then summoned Tang Gaozong, and chose her sister's son, Horan Minzhi, as the heir of her father, a samurai, to succeed to the Dukedom of Zhou, and changed his surname to Bu.

古文：魏国夫人之死也，上见敏之，悲泣曰： 向吾出视朝犹无恙，退朝已不救，何仓卒如此！ 
现代文：魏国夫人被武则天毒死时，唐高宗遇见武敏之，悲痛哭泣，说： 早上我外出临朝听政时，她还安然无恙，退朝时就无法抢救了，为何死得如此匆促？ 
English: When Wei Guo's wife was poisoned to death by Wu Zetian, Tang Gaozong met Wu Minzhi and wept with grief, saying: In the morning, when I went out to the Lin Dynasty to listen to politics, she was still safe and sound. When I left the dynasty, I couldn't save her. Why did she die so quickly?

古文：敏之号哭不对。
现代文：武敏之只是大哭，并不答话。
English: Wu Minzhi just burst into tears and did not answer.

古文：后闻之，曰： 此儿疑我！ 
现代文：武则天听到这个情况后，说： 这小子怀疑我。 
English: After hearing this, Wu Zetian said, "This boy is suspicious of me.

古文：由是恶之。
现代文：于是开始憎恨他。
English: So I started to hate him.

古文：敏之貌美，蒸于太原王妃；及居妃丧，释衰绖，奏妓。
现代文：武敏之相貌漂亮，与他外祖母太原王妃杨氏乱；在为杨氏守丧期间，他又脱去丧服，命歌妓奏乐歌舞。
English: Wu Min's beautiful appearance coincided with his grandmother, the Queen of Taiyuan, the Yang Clan War. During the mourning period for the Yang Clan, he took off his mourning clothes and ordered a prostitute to play music and dance.

古文：司卫少卿杨思俭女，有殊色，上及后自选以为太子妃，昏有日矣，敏之逼而淫之。
现代文：司卫少卿杨思俭的女儿美貌出众，唐高宗和武则天亲自选她为太子妃，婚期已定，武敏之竟á奸了她。
English: The daughter of Siyu Shaoqing Yang Sijian was exceptionally beautiful. Tang Gaozong and Wu Zetian personally chose her to be the princess. The wedding date had already been set, but Wu Minzhi actually raped her.

古文：后于是表言敏之前后罪恶，请加窜逐。
现代文：武则天于是给唐高宗上书，揭露他前后的罪恶，请求将他放逐到边远地区。
English: Wu Zetian then sent a letter to Tang Gaozong, exposing his past and present sins and requesting that he be banished to a remote area.

古文：六月，丙子，敕流雷州，复其本姓。
现代文：六月，丙子，唐高宗命令把武敏之流放到雷州，恢复他的本姓贺兰。
English: In June, Tang Gaozong ordered Wu Min to be exiled to Leizhou and to restore his original surname, Helan.

古文：至韶州，以马缰绞死。
现代文：敏之走到韶州，被用马缰绳绞死。
English: Minzhi went to Ganzhou and was hanged with a horse bridle.

古文：朝士坐与敏之交游，流岭南者甚众。
现代文：朝廷官吏中不少人因曾与他交游，被流放岭南。
English: Many of the imperial officials were exiled to the south of Lingnan because they had been friends with him.

古文：秋，七月，乙未朔，高侃破高丽馀众于安市城。
现代文：秋季，七月，乙未朔，高侃在安市城打败叛唐的高丽残余部队。
English: In the autumn, in July, at the dawn of the new year, Gao Kan defeated the remnants of the rebellious Tang Dynasty in the city of An.

古文：九月，丙申，潞州刺史徐王元礼薨。
现代文：九月，丙申，潞州刺史徐王李元礼去世。
English: In September, Xu Wang Li Yuanli passed away in Bishen, Luzhou.

古文：冬，十一月，甲午朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十一月，甲午朔，出现日食。
English: In winter, in November, at the stroke of midnight, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：车驾自东都幸许、汝；十二月，癸酉，校猎于叶县；丙戌，还东都。
现代文：唐高宗由东都洛阳巡游许州、汝州；十二月，癸酉，在叶县进行围猎；丙戌，返回东都洛阳。
English: Tang Gaozong traveled from the eastern capital Luoyang to Huzhou and Ruzhou; in December, he went hunting in Ye County; he returned to the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：咸亨三年壬申，公元六七二年春，正月，辛丑，以太子右卫副率梁积寿为姚州道行军总管，将兵讨叛蛮。
现代文：咸亨三年春季正月，辛丑，唐朝任命太子左卫副率梁积寿为姚州道行军总管，率领军队讨伐叛蛮。庚戌，昆明蛮十四姓二万三千户归附唐朝。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year of Xianheng, Xinwu, the Tang Dynasty appointed Prince Zuo Wei and his deputy, Liang Jizhou, as the general manager of the Yaozhou Road March, leading the army to fight against the rebels. Twenty-three thousand households with 14 surnames in Genghui and Kunming were attached to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：庚戌，昆明蛮十四姓二万三千户内附，置殷、敦、总三州。二月，庚午，徙吐谷浑于鄯州浩亹水南。
现代文：唐朝在他们的居住地区设置殷州、敦州和总州。二月，庚午，唐朝将吐谷浑迁移到鄯州浩水以南。
English: The Tang Dynasty set up Yinzhou, Dunzhou and Chongzhou in their residential areas. In February, at noon, the Tang Dynasty moved Tuyugun to the south of Ganzhou Haoshui.

古文：吐谷浑畏吐蕃之强，不安其居，又鄯州地狭，寻徙灵州，以其部落置安乐州，以可汗诺曷钵为刺史。
现代文：吐谷浑因畏惧吐蕃的强大，在鄯州住不踏实，同时也因该地区狭小，不久又迁移到灵州。唐朝在他们的新住地设置安乐州，任命他们的可汗诺曷钵为州刺史。
English: Due to the fear of the powerful Tu Han, the Tu Gu Hun did not live securely in Zhangzhou, and at the same time, due to the narrowness of the area, they soon moved to Lingzhou. The Tang Dynasty set up Anle Prefecture in their new place of residence and appointed their Khan, Nozhu, as the prefectural governor.

古文：吐谷浑故地皆入于吐蕃。
现代文：吐谷浑原来的居住地都被吐蕃吞并。
English: All of Tugu Hun's original places of residence were absorbed by Tugu.

古文：己卯，侍中永安郡公姜恪薨。
现代文：己卯，侍中、永安郡公姜恪去世。
English: Ji Wu, a chamberlain, and Yongan County's Gong Jiang Ke passed away.

古文：夏，四月，庚午，上幸合璧宫。
现代文：夏季四月，庚午唐高宗巡幸合璧宫。
English: In the summer of April, the Emperor Gaozong of the Tang Dynasty went on a tour of the Hebei Palace.

古文：吐蕃遣其大臣仲琮入贡，上问以吐蕃风俗，对曰： 吐蕃地薄气寒，风俗朴鲁；然法令严整，上下一心，议事常自下而起，因人所利而行之，斯所以能持久也。 
现代文：吐蕃派遣大臣仲琮入朝进贡，唐高宗向他询问吐蕃地方的风俗，他回答说： 吐蕃土地贫瘠，天气寒冷，民风诚朴迟钝，但法令严肃而完备，上下一心，讨论政事常常自下而上，根据人们的利益所在而实施。这是吐蕃能够长期存在的原因。 
English: Tang Gaozong asked him about the local customs of Tubo, and he replied: Tubo's land is barren, the weather is cold, and the folk customs are simple and dull, but the laws are serious and complete, the government is one-sided, and political affairs are often discussed from the bottom up and implemented according to people's interests. This is the reason why Tubo can exist for a long time.

古文：上诘以吞灭吐谷浑、败薛仁贵、寇逼凉州事，对曰： 臣受命贡献而已，军旅之事，非所闻也。 
现代文：唐高宗又责问他有关吐蕃吞灭吐谷浑，打败薛仁贵，以及侵逼凉州等事。他回答说： 我的任务只是前来进贡，至于军事方面的事，则不是我所应当知道的。 
English: Tang Gaozong also asked him about the events of Tujing devouring Tujugun, defeating Xue Rengui, and invading and forcing Liangzhou. He replied: My task is only to come to pay tribute, as for military affairs, it is not for me to know.

古文：上厚赐而遣之。
现代文：唐高宗赏赐他优厚的礼物，打发他返回吐蕃。
English: Emperor Gaozong of Tang rewarded him with a generous gift and sent him back to Tubo.

古文：癸未，遣都水使者黄仁素使于吐蕃。
现代文：癸未，唐朝派遣都水使者黄仁素出使吐蕃。
English: Not long after, the Tang Dynasty dispatched Huang Rensu, the emissary of capital water, to Tibet.

古文：秋，八月，壬午，特进高阳郡公许敬宗卒。
现代文：秋季八月，壬午，特进高阳郡公许敬宗去世。
English: In the autumn of August, in the morning, the special envoy to Goyang County, Gong Xu Jingzong, passed away.

古文：太常博士袁思古议： 敬宗弃长子于荒徼，嫁少女于夷貊。按《谥法》， 名与实爽曰缪， 请谥为缪。 
现代文：讨论为他定谥号时，太常博士袁思古评论说： 许敬宗遗弃大儿子于边远地区，将小女儿嫁给夷貊，按照《谥法》： 名与实不符称为缪 ，请给他以 缪 的谥号。 
English: When discussing the choice of name for him, Dr. Yuan Shigu commented: Xu Jingzong abandoned his eldest son in a remote area and married his youngest daughter to a barbarian. According to the "Law of the Dragon": If the name does not match the reality, please call him Miao. Please give him the nickname of Miao.

古文：敬宗孙太子舍人彦伯讼思古与许氏有怨，请改谥。
现代文：许敬宗的孙子太子舍人许彦伯指责袁思古与许家有私怨，请求改定别的谥号。
English: Xu Yanbo, the grandson of Prince Xu Jingsong, accused Yuan Shigu of having a personal grudge against the Xu family, and requested that the family name be changed.

古文：太常博士王福畤议，以为： 谥者得失一朝，荣辱千载。
现代文：太常博士王福认为： 一时的得失，关系到千载的荣辱。
English: Too often, Dr. Wang Fu believes: A momentary gain or loss is related to a thousand years of honor and disgrace.

古文：若嫌隙有实，当据法推绳；如其不然，义不可夺。 
现代文：如借机泄私怨是事实，应当依法论罪；否则，袁思古提的谥号按理是不应更改的。 
English: If taking the opportunity to vent personal grudges is a fact, it should be a crime according to law; otherwise, Yuan Shikuti's nickname should not be changed.

古文：户部尚书戴至德谓福畤曰： 高阳公任遇如是，保以谥之为缪？ 
现代文：户部尚书戴至德对王福说： 高阳郡公在朝廷中有这样高的职位和待遇，何以给予 缪 的谥号？ 
English: The head of the household, Shang Shudei Zhi De, said to Wang Fu: Goyang County Duke has such a high position and treatment in the imperial court, why give him the nickname of Miao?

古文：对曰： 昔晋司空何曾既忠且孝，徒以日食万钱，秦秀谥之曰 缪 。
现代文：王福回答说： 从前晋朝司空何曾既忠且孝，只因每日饮食耗费万钱，秦秀在他死后就给定谥号为 缪 。
English: Wang Fu replied, "In the past, Emperor Jinsong's son-in-law Qin Xiu was both loyal and filial, and he spent tens of thousands of yuan on daily meals. After his death, Qin Xiu gave him the posthumous name Miao.

古文：许敬宗忠孝不逮于曾，而饮食男女之累过之，谥之曰 缪 ，无负许氏矣。 
现代文：许敬宗忠和孝都不及何曾，而饮食女色的耗费却超过他。给予 缪 的谥号，已对得起许敬宗了。 
English: Xu Jingzong's loyalty and filial piety were second to none, but his spending on women's food and drink exceeded his. The nickname given to him, Miao, was worthy of Xu Jingzong.

古文：诏集五品已上更议，礼部尚书阳思敬议： 按《谥法》，既过能改曰恭。请谥曰恭。 
现代文：唐高宗下诏令召集五品以上官员重新评议。礼部尚书阳思敬评议说： 按照《谥法》，有了过失能改正称为 恭 ，请给他定谥号为 恭 。 
English: Tang Gaozong issued an imperial edict to convene officials of five grades and above for re-evaluation. The ceremonial department Shang Shuyang Si respectfully commented: In accordance with the "Law of Honor," if there is a correction of negligence, it is called "Kong," please give him a nickname of "Kong."

古文：诏从之。
现代文：唐高宗下诏接受这个意见。
English: He complied.

古文：敬宗尝奏流其子昂于岭南，又以女嫁蛮酋冯盎之子，多纳其货，故思古议及之。
现代文：许敬宗曾向皇帝奏请将他儿子许昂流放岭南，又曾将女儿嫁给蛮族首领冯盎的儿子，并多收取他的财物，所以袁思古的评议谈到了此事。
English: Xu Jingzong had petitioned the emperor to exile his son Xu Ang to Lingnan, and had married his daughter to the son of the barbarian leader Feng Ang, and collected more of his property, so Yuan Shigu's review talked about this matter.

古文：福畤，勃之父也。
现代文：王福就是王勃的父亲。
English: Wang Fu is Wang Bo's father.

古文：九月，癸卯，徙沛王贤为雍王。
现代文：九月，癸卯，唐朝改封沛王李贤为雍王。
English: In September, the Tang Dynasty changed the title of Pei Wang Li Xian to Yong Wang.

古文：冬，十月，己未，诏太子监国。
现代文：冬季十月，己未，唐高宗下诏，令皇太子监理国家政事。
English: In the winter of October, Tang Gaozong issued an edict, ordering the crown prince to supervise state affairs.

古文：壬戌，车驾发东都。
现代文：壬戌，唐高宗车驾从东都洛阳出发。
English: Tang Gaozong set off from the eastern capital Luoyang by car.

古文：十一月，戊子朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月，戊子朔，出现日食。
English: November, the first day of spring, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：甲辰，车驾至京师。
现代文：甲辰，唐高宗车驾回到京师长安。
English: At that time, Tang Gaozong drove back to the capital Chang'an.

古文：十二月，高侃与高丽馀众战于白水山，破之。
现代文：十二月，唐将高侃与高丽残余部队战于白水山，高侃把他们打败。
English: In December, Tang sent Gao Kan to fight the remnants of the Goryeo army in Baishuishan, and Gao Kan defeated them.

古文：新罗遣兵救高丽，侃击破之。
现代文：新罗派兵援救高丽，高侃也把他们打败。
English: Silla sent troops to rescue Goryeo, but Gao Kan also defeated them.

古文：癸卯，以左庶子刘仁轨同中书门下三品。
现代文：癸卯，唐朝任命左庶子刘仁轨为同中书门下三品。
English: At the same time, the Tang Dynasty appointed Liu Renlu, the left illegitimate son, as the third grade of the same middle school.

古文：太子罕接宫臣，典膳丞全椒邢文伟辄减所供膳，并上书谏太子。
现代文：太子很少接近东宫的属官，典膳丞全椒人邢文伟便减少他的膳食，并上书规劝太子。
English: The prince rarely approached the subordinate officials of the East Palace, and the person in charge of the ceremonial meal, Zou Wenwei, reduced his meal and wrote to the prince to persuade him.

古文：太子复书，谢以多疾及入侍少暇，嘉纳其意。
现代文：太子在给他的复信中承认错误，表示接受他的意见，提出产生这种情况的原因是自己多病，而且需要经常入宫侍候皇帝，空闲时间少。
English: In his reply, the crown prince admitted his mistake and said that he accepted his opinion, suggesting that the reason for this situation was that he was ill, and that he often had to go to the palace to wait for the emperor and had little free time.

古文：顷之，右史缺，上曰： 邢文伟事吾子，能撤膳进谏，此直士也。 擢为右史。
现代文：不久，右史职位出现空缺，唐高宗说： 邢文伟侍奉我儿子，能用撤减膳食的方式进行规劝，这是耿直的人 ，于是提升他为右史。
English: Soon, the position of Right Historian became vacant, and Tang Gaozong said: "He served my son and was able to use the method of reducing meals to persuade him. This is a man of integrity, so he was promoted to Right Historian.

古文：太子因宴集，命宫臣掷倒，次至左奉裕率王及善，及善曰： 掷倒自有伶官，臣若奉令，恐非所以羽翼殿下也。 
现代文：太子在一次宴会时，命令东宫的属官表演 掷倒 的杂耍。当依次该左奉裕率王及善表演时，他说： 表演 掷倒 ，本是乐官的事，如果我执行您的命令，恐怕就失去辅佐殿下的身份了。 
English: During a banquet, the prince ordered the officials of the East Palace to perform a juggling act of throwing down. When, in turn, the left vassal Yu led the king and the good to perform, he said: Performing throwing down is a matter for the musicians. If I carry out your order, I am afraid I will lose my status as an assistant to His Royal Highness.

古文：太子谢之。
现代文：太子向他承认了错误。
English: The prince admitted his mistake to him.

古文：上闻之，赐及善缣百匹，寻迁左千牛卫将军。
现代文：唐高宗听说这个情况后，赏赐给王及善缣一百匹，不久又提升他为左千牛卫将军。
English: When Tang Gaozong heard about this, he rewarded Wang and Zensheng with a hundred horses, and soon promoted him to General Zuo Qian Niuwei.

古文：咸亨四年癸酉，公元六七三年春，正月，丙辰，绛州刺史郑惠王元懿薨。
现代文：咸亨四年春季正月，丙辰，唐朝绛州刺史郑惠王李元懿去世。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fourth year of Xianheng, Zheng Hui Wang Li Yuanqi, the Tang Dynasty's governor of Bozhou, passed away.

古文：三月，丙申，诏刘仁轨等改修国史，以许敬宗等所记多不实故也。
现代文：三月，丙申，唐高宗下诏书，命刘仁轨等改修国史，因为原来许敬宗等所记录的国史多不符合事实。
English: In March, Emperor Gaozong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict, ordering Liu Renzhong and others to revise the national history, because most of the national history originally recorded by Xu Jingzong and others did not conform to the facts.

古文：夏，四月，丙子，车驾幸九成宫。
现代文：夏季四月，丙子，唐高宗车驾到达九成宫。
English: In the summer of April, Tang Gaozong drove to Jiu Chenggong Palace.

古文：闰五月，燕山道总管、右领军大将军李谨行大破高丽叛者于瓠芦河之西，俘获数千人，馀众皆奔新罗。
现代文：闰五月，燕山道总管、右领军大将军李谨行在瓠芦河以西大败高丽反叛者，俘虏数千人，其余的都投奔新罗。
English: On leap May, the general manager of Yanshan Road and the right-hand leading general Li Zhengying defeated the Koryo rebels west of the Huludao River, captured thousands of people, and the rest went to Silla.

古文：时谨行妻刘氏留伐奴城，高丽引靺鞨攻之，刘氏擐甲帅众守城，久之，虏退。
现代文：当时李谨行的妻子刘氏居留伐奴城，高丽带领人来攻城，刘氏披甲率众守城，相持一段时间后，敌人终于撤退了。
English: At that time, Liu, the wife of Li Jianxing, stayed in Falu Town. Goryeo led the people to attack the city. Liu, wearing armor, led the people to defend the city. After holding each other for a period of time, the enemy finally withdrew.

古文：上嘉其功，封燕国夫人。
现代文：唐高宗嘉奖她的功劳，封她为燕国夫人。
English: Tang Gaozong commended her for her service and made her the wife of Yan Guo.

古文：谨行，靺鞨人突地稽之子也，武力绝人，为众夷所惮。
现代文：李谨行是人突地稽的儿子，勇猛过人，使许多夷人畏惧。
English: Li Zhengying was the son of a journeyman acrobat. He was extremely brave and made many barbarians afraid of him.

古文：秋，七月，辛巳，婺州大水，溺死者五千人。
现代文：秋季七月，婺州发生大水灾，被淹死的有五千人。
English: In the autumn of July, a major flood occurred in Zhangzhou, in which five thousand people drowned.

古文：八月，辛丑，上以疟疾，令太子于延福殿受诸司启事。
现代文：八月，辛丑，唐高宗因患疟疾，命令太子在延福殿接受各部门陈述事情。
English: In August, in Xinwu, Tang Gaozong, suffering from malaria, ordered the crown prince to receive a report from various departments at Yanfu Hall.

古文：冬，十月，壬午，中书令阎立本薨。
现代文：冬季，十月，壬午，中书令阎立本去世。
English: In the winter, in October, at noon, Yan Liben passed away.

古文：乙巳，车驾还京师。
现代文：乙巳，唐高宗车驾返回京师长安。
English: Suddenly, Tang Gaozong drove back to Beijing Shi Chang'an.

古文：十二月，丙午，弓月、疏勒二王来降。
现代文：十二月，丙午，弓月王和疏勒王来投降唐朝。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the 12th month, King Yunyue and King Shule came to surrender to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：西突厥兴昔亡可汗之世，诸部离散，弓月及阿悉吉皆叛。
现代文：当初，西突厥兴昔亡可汗统治的时候，属下诸部离散，弓月和阿悉吉都反叛。
English: At first, during the reign of the Western Turkic Khans, the subordinate ministries were scattered, and both the Bow Moon and the Asirji rebelled.

古文：苏定方之西讨也，擒阿悉吉以归。弓月南结吐蕃，北招咽面，共攻疏勒，降之。
现代文：后来唐将苏定方领兵讨伐西突厥，擒阿悉吉返回唐朝，弓月便向南边勾结吐蕃，向北边招引咽面，共同进攻疏勒，迫使疏勒投降。
English: Later, the Tang Dynasty sent the Suding side to lead the troops to fight against the Western Turks, and Shao Aserji returned to the Tang Dynasty. Yunyue then colluded with Tubo in the south, and lured Gokmen to the north, and jointly attacked Shule, forcing Shule to surrender.

古文：上遣鸿胪卿萧嗣业发兵讨之。
现代文：于是唐高宗派遣鸿胪卿萧嗣业发兵讨伐弓月。
English: As a result, Emperor Gaozong of Tang dispatched Hongyuqing Xiao Ziye to send an army to fight against the Yueyue.

古文：嗣业兵未至，弓月惧，与疏勒皆入朝；上赦其罪，遣归国。
现代文：萧嗣业率领的兵马尚未到达，弓月畏惧，便与疏勒一起来唐朝投降。唐高宗赦免他的罪过，遣送他回国。
English: The soldiers and horses led by Xiao Ziye had not yet arrived, and fearing the bow and arrow, he came to the Tang Dynasty with Shule to surrender. Tang Gaozong pardoned his sins and sent him back to China.

古文：上元元年甲戌，公元六七四年
现代文：上元元年
English: In the first year of Shangyuan

古文：春，正月，壬午，以左庶子、同中书门下三品刘仁轨为鸡林道大总管，卫尉卿李弼、右领军大将军李谨行副之，发兵讨新罗。
现代文：春季，正月，壬午，唐高宗任命左庶子、同中书门下三品刘仁轨为鸡林道大总管，卫尉卿李弼、右领军大将军李谨行为刘仁轨的副手，领兵讨伐新罗。
English: In the spring, on the first day of the month, at noon, Tang Gaozong appointed Liu Renzhong, the third son of the second son and the third grade of the same middle school, to be the general manager of the Jilin Road, and the lieutenant of the guard, Li Qian, and the right leader of the army, Li Jian, to be the deputy of Liu Renzhong and lead the army to fight against Silla.

古文：时新罗王法敏既纳高丽叛众，又据百济故地，使人守之。
现代文：当时新罗王金法敏既接纳高丽叛兵，又占据百济原有的土地，并派人镇守。
English: At that time, King Jinfamin of Silla not only accepted the Goryeo rebels, but also occupied the original land of Baekje and sent people to guard the town.

古文：上大怒，诏削法敏官爵；其弟右骁卫员外大将军、临海郡公仁问在京师，立以为新罗王，使归国。
现代文：唐高宗对此十分愤怒，下令削除新罗王金法敏的官爵；另立他居留在京师长安的弟弟右骁卫大将军、临海郡公金仁问为新罗王，并派他回国。
English: Tang Gaozong was very angry about this and ordered the removal of the official title of King of Silla, Jin Farmin; he also appointed his brother, General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guards, and the governor of Linhai County, Jin Ren, who had stayed in Beijing and Chang'an, as King of Silla, and sent him back to China.

古文：三月，辛亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月，辛亥朔，出现日食。
English: In March, Xinhai New Year, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：贺兰敏之既得罪，皇后奏召武元爽之子承嗣于岭南，袭爵周公，拜尚衣奉御；夏，四月，辛卯，迁宗正卿。
现代文：贺兰敏之获罪以后，皇后武则天奏请从岭南召回她哥哥武元爽的儿子武承嗣，承袭周国公的爵位，担任尚衣奉御。夏季，四月，辛卯，升任宗正卿。
English: After Horan Minzhi was convicted, Empress Wu Zetian asked Wu Chengzhi, the son of her brother Wu Yuan Shuang, to be recalled from Lingnan to inherit the title of Zhou Guogong and serve as Shangyi Bogo. In the summer, April, Xinwu, he was promoted to Sozhengqing.

古文：秋，八月，壬辰，追尊宣简公为宣皇帝，妣张氏为宣庄皇后；懿王为光皇帝，妣贾氏为光懿皇后；太武皇帝为神尧皇帝，太穆皇后为太穆神皇后；文皇帝为太宗文武圣皇帝，文德皇后为文德圣皇后。
现代文：秋季，八月，壬辰，唐高宗追尊他的七世祖宣简公李熙为宣皇帝，七世祖母张氏为宣庄皇后；六世祖懿王李天赐为光皇帝，六世祖母贾氏为光懿皇后；祖父太武皇帝李渊为神尧皇帝，祖母太穆皇后为太穆神皇后；父亲文皇帝李世民为太宗文武圣皇帝，母亲文德皇后为文德圣皇后。
English: In the autumn, in August, in Renchen, Tang Gaozong honored his seventh-generation ancestor Xuan Jian Gong Li Xi as Xuan Emperor, the seventh-generation grandmother Zhang as Xuan Zhuang Empress; the sixth-generation ancestor Zou Wang Li Tian Zi as Guang Guang Emperor, the sixth-generation grandmother Jia as Guang Yao Empress; the grandfather Taimu Emperor Li Yuan as Shen Yao Emperor, the grandmother Taimu Empress as Taimu Shen Empress; the father Wen Emperor Li Shimin as Taizong Wenwu Holy Emperor, the mother Wende Empress as Wende Holy Empress.

古文：皇帝称天皇，皇后称天后，以避先帝、先后之称。改元，赦天下。
现代文：为了回避已故皇帝、皇后的称号，唐高宗改称天皇，皇后武则天改称天后；改年号为上元，赦免天下罪人。
English: In order to avoid the titles of the late emperor and empress, Tang Gaozong changed his name to Emperor, and Empress Wu Zetian changed her name to Queen of Heaven; he changed his era name to Shangyuan and pardoned all the sinners in the world.

古文：戊戌，敕： 文武官三品以上服紫，金玉带；四品服深绯，金带；五品服浅绯，金带；六品服深绿，七品服浅绿，并银带；八品服深青，九品服浅青，并鍮石带；庶人服黄，铜铁带。
现代文：戊戌，唐高宗诏命： 文武官员三品以上穿紫色衣服，佩金玉带；四品穿深红色衣服，佩金带；五品穿浅红色衣服，佩金带；六品穿深绿色衣服，七品穿浅绿色衣服，都佩银带；八品穿深青色衣服，九品穿浅青色衣服，都佩黄铜带；无官爵的平民百姓穿黄色衣服，佩铜铁带。
English: In Wuyi, Tang Gaozong issued an edict: Civil and military officials of three or more classes should wear purple clothes with gold and jade bands; four classes should wear dark red clothes with gold bands; five classes should wear light red clothes with gold bands; six classes should wear dark green clothes, seven classes should wear light green clothes, all with silver bands; eight classes should wear dark blue clothes, nine classes should wear light blue clothes, all with brass bands; commoners without titles should wear yellow clothes with copper and iron bands.

古文：自非庶人，不听服黄。 
现代文：其余工商杂户，不许穿黄色衣服。 
English: Other industrial and commercial miscellaneous households are not allowed to wear yellow clothes.

古文：九月，癸丑，诏追复长孙晟、长孙无忌官爵，以无忌曾孙翼袭爵赵公，听无忌丧归，陪葬昭陵。
现代文：九月，癸丑，唐高宗命令恢复长孙晟、长孙无忌官爵，让长孙无忌曾孙长孙翼承袭赵公爵位；准许长孙无忌的遗体从流放地黔州送回长安，陪葬在唐太宗的昭陵。
English: In September, Emperor Gaozong of Tang ordered the restoration of the title of nobility to the eldest grandson Zhao and the eldest grandson Mujie, so that the eldest grandson Mujie and the great-grandson Ying of the eldest grandson Mujie would succeed to the title of Duke of Zhao; the body of the eldest grandson Mujie was allowed to be sent back to Chang'an from the place of exile, Luzhou, to be buried in the mausoleum of Emperor Taizong.

古文：甲寅，上御翔鸾阁，观大甫。分音乐为东西朋，使雍王贤主东朋，周王显主西朋，角胜为乐。
现代文：甲寅，唐高宗登翔鸾阁，观看大会饮，分乐队为东西两部分，让雍王李贤主持东半部，周王李显主持西半部，东西两部分相比赛胜负以取乐。
English: A Yin, Tang Gaozong ascended to the pavilion, watched the grand banquet, divided the orchestra into east and west two parts, let Yong Wang Lixian preside over the eastern half, Zhou Wang Lixian preside over the western half, and the east and west two parts competed to win and lose to have fun.

古文：郝处俊谏曰： 二王春秋尚少，志趣未定，当推梨让枣，相亲如一。
现代文：郝处俊对唐高宗规劝说： 雍王和周王还属少年，志趣尚未定型，应当 推梨让枣 ，互谅互让，亲密无间。
English: Gong Chengjun persuaded Tang Gao Zongjiao: Yong Wang and Zhou Wang are still juveniles, their interests have not yet been stereotyped, they should push the pear to the date, mutual understanding and mutual concession, intimate.

古文：今分二朋，递相夸竞，俳优小人，言辞无度，恐其交争胜负，讥诮失礼，非所以崇礼义，劝敦睦也。 
现代文：现在分成两部分互相夸耀竞争，歌舞艺人，言语本来就没有节制，为了争胜负，恐怕难免互相讥讽指责而失礼，这不是崇尚礼义，鼓励亲爱和睦的做法。 
English: Now it is divided into two parts, boasting and competing with each other. Song and dance artists have no restraint in their speech. In order to compete, I am afraid it is inevitable that they will make fun of each other and be rude. This is not a practice of advocating propriety and encouraging love and harmony.

古文：上瞿然曰： 卿远识，非众人所及也。 
现代文：唐高宗震惊地说： 你的远见卓识，不是大家所能及的。 
English: Tang Gaozong was shocked and said, "Your far-sightedness is beyond everyone's reach.

古文：遽止之。
现代文：于是立即下令停止比赛。
English: order to stop immediately.

古文：是日，卫尉卿李弼暴卒于宴所，为之废甫一日。
现代文：这一天，卫尉卿李弼暴死在宴会上，为悼念他，停止大会饮一天。
English: On this day, Guards Lieutenant Li Qian died violently at a banquet. In order to mourn him, the assembly stopped drinking for a day.

古文：冬，十一月，丙午朔，车驾发京师；己酉，校猎华山之曲武原；戊辰，至东都。
现代文：冬季，十一月，丙午朔，唐高宗从京师长安出发；己酉，在华山下的曲武原围猎；戊辰，到达东都洛阳。
English: In winter, in November, at the crack of dawn, Tang Gaozong set out from the capital of Beijing, Chang'an; from Ji'an, he hunted in the Quwu Plain under the Huashan Mountains; and from Wuchen, he arrived at the eastern capital, Luoyang.

古文：箕州录事参军张君澈等诬告刺史蒋王恽及其子汝南郡王炜谋反，敕通事舍人薛思贞驰传往按之。
现代文：箕州录事参军张君澈等诬告箕州刺史蒋王李恽和他的儿子汝南郡王李炜谋反。唐高宗命令通事舍人薛思贞乘驿站的马车赶去审查此事。
English: Zhang Junche and others falsely accused Jiang Wang Lijun and his son, Runan County King Lijun, of plotting a rebellion. Tang Gaozong ordered his secretary, Xue Sizhen, to take a carriage from Handan Station to investigate the matter.

古文：十二月，癸未，恽惶惧，自缢死。
现代文：十二月，癸未，蒋王李恽畏惧，上吊自杀。
English: In late December, Jiang Wang Lijun was afraid and hanged himself.

古文：上知其非罪，深痛惜之，斩君澈等四人。
现代文：唐高宗知道他没有罪，深感痛惜，于是处死张君澈等四人。
English: Tang Gaozong knew that he was not guilty and deeply regretted it, so he executed Zhang Junche and four others.

古文：戊子，于阗王伏阇雄来朝。
现代文：戊子，于阗王尉迟伏雄前来朝见天子。
English: On the 13th, King Fuxin came to see the emperor.

古文：辛卯，波斯王卑路斯来朝。
现代文：辛卯，波斯王卑路斯前来朝见天子。
English: On the 16th, the Persian king Pelusius came to see the emperor.

古文：壬寅，天后上表，以为： 国家圣绪，出自玄元皇帝，请令王公以下皆习《老子》，每岁明经，准《孝经》、《论语》策试。 
现代文：壬寅，天后武则天上表高宗，认为： 国家圣业的开端，出自玄元皇帝，请皇帝命令王公以下各级官员都学习《老子》，每年明经科加试《老子》，考试方法同《孝经》、《论语》一样。 
English: Ren Yin, the queen of heaven, Wu Zetian, the high priest of heaven, believes that: The beginning of the national sacred cause came from Emperor Xuan Yuan. He asked the emperor to order the officials at all levels below the prince to study "Lao Zi." Every year, the students of Mingjing Science should take the "Lao Zi" examination. The examination method is the same as that of "Xiao Zing" and "Analects."

古文：又请 自今父在，为母服齐衰三年。
现代文：又请求 从现在起，父亲仍在世，为死去的母亲服丧，着齐衰三年。
English: From now on, my father is still alive, mourning for my dead mother, and it has been three years.

古文：又，京官八品以上，宜量加俸禄。 及其馀便宜，合十二条。
现代文：又，八品以上在京官员，应当酌量增加俸禄 ，以及其他应办的事情，共十二条。
English: In addition, officials in Beijing with eight or more pins should increase their salary as much as possible, as well as other matters to be dealt with, a total of 12 articles.

古文：诏书褒美，皆行之。
现代文：唐高宗下诏对武则天给予表扬，全部接受并实行她的建议。
English: Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty praised Wu Zetian and accepted and implemented all of her suggestions.

古文：是岁，有刘晓者，上疏论选，以为： 今选曹以检勘为公道，书判为得人，殊不知考其德行才能。
现代文：本年，有个叫刘晓的人，给唐高宗上书论选拔人才。他以为： 现今吏部以考查功过为公平，以书法和判文作为获取人才的手段，而不知道考察人的道德品行和才能。
English: This year, a man named Liu Xiao gave Tang Gaozong a book on the selection of talents. He thought: Nowadays, the cadre department is fair in examining merits, and uses calligraphy and sentence as a means of acquiring talents, but does not know how to examine people's moral conduct and talents.

古文：况书判借人者众矣。
现代文：何况假借别人的书法和判文的人多着呢！
English: What's more, there are many people who borrow other people's calligraphy and sentences!

古文：又，礼部取士，专用文章为甲乙，故天下之士，皆舍德行而趋文艺，有朝登甲科而夕陷刑辟者，虽日诵万言，何关理体！文成七步，未足化人。
现代文：能在行走七步的时间内写成文章，不足以教化百姓。况且把心思全贯注在花草树木之间，将笔墨全耗费在云霞之际，这种情况竟成为风气，岂不是太荒谬了！
English: To be able to write an article in the time it takes to walk seven steps is not enough to educate the people. Moreover, to concentrate one's mind on the flowers and trees, to spend all one's pen and ink on the occasion of clouds and haze, this situation has become a tradition, isn't it too absurd!

古文：况尽心卉木之间，极笔烟霞之际，以斯成俗，岂非大谬！夫人之慕名，如水趋下，上有所好，下必甚焉。陛下若取士以德行为先，文艺为末，则多士雷奔，四方风动矣！ 
现代文：人们羡慕声名的本性，就像水必然向下流一样，在上位的人喜欢什么，在下位的人喜欢的程度就一定会超过他们。陛下如果选拔人才，首先考虑道德品行，写作技巧只放在末位，则众多的士人就会雷厉风行地修养德行，四方就会闻风响应。 
English: People envy the nature of fame, just as water inevitably flows downhill, what people in the upper ranks like, people in the lower ranks will definitely like more than them. If your Majesty selects talent, first of all consider moral conduct, and writing skills are only in the last place, then many scholars will vigorously cultivate moral conduct, and the four parties will respond to the trend.

古文：上元二年乙亥，公元六七五年
现代文：上元二年
English: 2nd year of Shangyuan

古文：春，正月，丙寅，以于阗国为毘沙都督府，分其境内为十州，以于阗王尉迟伏阇雄为毘沙都督。
现代文：春季正月，丙寅，唐朝在于阗国设立毗沙都督府，将于阗国分为十州，任命于阗王尉迟伏雄为毗沙都督。
English: In the first month of the spring, the Tang Dynasty set up the Visha Governor's Office in the State of Min, divided the State of Min into ten prefectures, and appointed Yu Wangfei Fuxiong as the Governor of Min.

古文：辛末，吐蕃遣其大臣论吐浑弥来请和，且请与吐谷浑复修邻好；上不许。
现代文：辛未，吐蕃派遣大臣论吐浑弥到唐朝求和，而且请求与吐谷浑恢复睦邻关系；唐高宗不允许。
English: In Xinwei, Tubo sent a minister, Tong Tubunyi, to the Tang Dynasty to sue for peace, and requested the restoration of good-neighborly relations with Tubun; Tang Gaozong did not allow it.

古文：二月，刘仁轨大破新罗之众于七重城，又使靺鞨浮海略新罗之南境，斩获甚众。
现代文：二月，刘仁轨在七重城大败新罗的部队；又让从海路夺取新罗南部地区，杀死和俘虏很多人。
English: In February, Liu Renlu defeated the Silla forces in Qizhe City; he also seized the southern part of Silla by sea, killing and capturing many people.

古文：仁轨引兵还。
现代文：刘仁轨率兵返回。
English: Liu Renzhong returned with his soldiers.

古文：诏以李谨行为安东镇抚大使，屯新罗之买肖城以经略之，三战皆捷，新罗乃遣使入贡，且谢罪；上赦之，复新罗王法敏官爵。
现代文：唐高宗下诏任命李谨行为安东镇抚大使，屯兵新罗的买肖城，以经营该地区，李谨行打了三仗都取得胜利，新罗于是派遣使者到唐朝进贡，并且请罪；唐高宗赦免了他们，并恢复新罗王金法敏的官职和爵位。
English: Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict appointing Li Jian as the ambassador of Andong Zhenfu and sent troops to buy Xiao Cheng from Silla to manage the region. Li Jianxing fought three battles and won. Silla then sent an envoy to Tang Dynasty to pay tribute and plead guilty. Emperor Gaozong pardoned them and restored the official post and title of King Jinfamin of Silla.

古文：金仁问中道而还，改封临海郡公。
现代文：金法敏的弟弟金仁问中途返回唐朝，改封为临海郡公。
English: The younger brother of Jin Fomin, Jin Renqian, returned to the Tang Dynasty halfway and changed his title to Linhai County.

古文：三月，丁巳，天后祀先蚕于邙山之阳，百官及朝集使皆陪位。
现代文：三月，丁巳，天后武则天在邙山之南祭蚕神，朝廷官员及各州的朝集使，都出席陪祭。
English: In March, Emperor Ding Si and Empress Wu Zetian held a festival for the silkworm god in the southern part of Lushan Mountain. Officials from the imperial court and imperial envoys from various states attended the accompanying festival.

古文：上苦风眩甚，议使天后摄知国政。中书侍郎同三品郝处俊曰： 天子理外，后理内，天之道也。
现代文：唐高宗受严重风眩病的困扰，商议由天后武则天代理国家政事，中书侍郎、同三品郝处俊说： 皇帝治理外朝，皇后治理后宫，是天经地义的。
English: Tang Gaozong was plagued by severe vertigo, and the discussion was led by the Queen of Heaven, Wu Zetian, acting as the national government. The Chinese scribe, and the same three court ladies, said: The emperor governs the outer court, and the queen governs the harem. It is natural.

古文：昔魏文帝著令，虽有幼主，不许皇后临朝，所以杜祸乱之萌也。
现代文：从前魏文帝曹丕曾立下法令，虽然皇帝幼小，也不许太后临朝听政，为的是防止祸乱发生。
English: Former Wei Emperor Cao Pi once issued a decree that, although the emperor was young, the empress dowager was not allowed to listen to politics, in order to prevent the occurrence of calamity.

古文：陛下奈何以高祖、太宗之天下，不传之子孙而委之天后乎！ 
现代文：陛下为何不将高祖、太宗的天下传给子孙，而托付给天后呢！ 
English: Why did His Majesty not pass on the world of Emperor Gaozong and Emperor Taizong to his descendants, but entrusted it to the Empress Dowager?

古文：中书侍郎昌乐李义琰曰： 处俊之言至忠，陛下宜听之。 
现代文：中书侍郎昌乐人李义琰说： 郝处俊的话是最忠诚的，陛下应当听取！ 
English: Li Yijun, the chancellor of the Chinese Academy of Letters and Changle Musician, said: The words of Xing Duqun are the most loyal, and His Majesty should listen to them!

古文：上乃止。
现代文：唐高宗于是放弃原来的打算。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：天后多引文学之士著作郎元万顷、左史刘祎之等，使之撰《列女传》、《臣轨》、《百僚新戒》、《乐书》，几千馀卷。
现代文：天后武则天广泛招揽文人学士，如著作郎元万顷、左史刘之等，要他们撰写《列女传》、《臣轨》、《百僚新戒》、《乐书》，共一千多卷。
English: Empress Dowager Wu Zetian extensively recruited literati and scholars, such as the writers Langyuan Wanhe and Zuo Shi Liu, and asked them to write "Biographies of Women," "Subject Trails," "A Hundred New Precepts" and "Music Book," a total of more than one thousand volumes.

古文：朝廷奏议及百司表疏，时密令参决，以分宰相之权，时人谓之北门学士。
现代文：朝廷的奏议及各部门的表疏，时常秘密地让他们参与裁决，以此来削减宰相的权力，当时的人称这批人为北门学士。
English: In order to reduce the power of the prime minister, they were often secretly allowed to participate in the decision by the Imperial Court's petition and the representations of various departments. At that time, these people were called the North Gate Bachelors.

古文：祎之，子翼之子也。
现代文：刘之就是刘子翼的儿子。
English: Liu Zhi is the son of Liu Ziying.

古文：夏，四月，庚辰，以司农少卿韦弘机为司农卿。
现代文：夏季四月，庚辰，唐朝任命司农少卿韦弘机为司农卿。
English: In the summer of April, Geng Chen, the Tang Dynasty appointed Wei Hongji, Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, as Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture.

古文：弘机兼知东都营田，受诏完葺宫苑。
现代文：韦弘机兼管东都洛阳屯田事务，奉命维修东都的宫殿园林。
English: Wei Hongji was also in charge of the East Capital Luoyang Tunden Affairs, and was ordered to maintain the palace gardens of the East Capital.

古文：有宦者于苑中犯法，弘机杖之，然后奏闻。
现代文：有宦官在皇帝园林里犯法，韦弘机先行杖打，然后再向唐高宗报告。
English: When a eunuch broke the law in the emperor's garden, Wei Hongji first beat him with a cane, and then reported to Tang Gaozong.

古文：上以为能，赐绢数十匹，曰： 更有犯者，卿即杖之，不必奏也。 
现代文：唐高宗认为他办事能干，赏赐他数十匹绢，说： 再有类似的犯法者，你就拷打，不必报告。 
English: Tang Gaozong thought he was competent and rewarded him with dozens of donkeys, saying, "If there are any similar lawbreakers, you can torture them without having to report it."

古文：初，左千牛将军长安赵瑰尚高祖女常乐公主，生女为周王显妃。
现代文：当初，左千牛将军长安人赵娶唐高祖的女儿常乐公主，所生女儿即周王李显的妃。
English: At first, Zhao Chang'an, the general of the Left Thousand Cows, married the daughter of Tang Gaozu, Princess Changle, and the daughter she gave birth to was the wife of Zhou Wang Lixian.

古文：公主颇为上所厚，天后恶之。
现代文：常乐公主得到唐高宗的厚待，天后武则天因此憎恨她。
English: Princess Changle was treated well by Emperor Gaozong of Tang, but Empress Dowager Wu Zetian hated her.

古文：辛巳，妃坐废，幽闭于内侍省，食料给生者，防人候其突烟，已而数日烟不出，开视，死腐矣。
现代文：辛巳，周王的妃因犯罪被废黜，禁闭在内侍省，送给的食物都是生的，看守观察她的烟囱是否冒烟，后来发现有几天不冒烟，打开门一看，人已死去并腐烂了。
English: According to Xin, Zhou Wang's wife was deposed for a crime and confined to the Ministry of the Interior. The food she was given was all raw. The guards observed whether her chimney emitted smoke. Later, they found that it did not emit smoke for several days. When they opened the door, they saw that the person had died and rotted.

古文：瑰自定州刺史贬括州刺史，令公主随之官，仍绝其朝谒。
现代文：赵也由定州刺史贬为栝州刺史，同时命令常乐公主随他赴任，不许他们回京师长安朝见唐高宗。
English: Zhao also downgraded Dingzhou to Zhangzhou, and ordered Princess Changle to follow him to the post, forbidding them to return to Beijing to see Tang Gaozong.

古文：太子弘仁孝谦谨，上甚爱之；礼接士大夫，中外属心。
现代文：太子李弘仁爱孝顺、谦虚谨慎，唐高宗很喜欢他。他对士大夫能以礼相待，得到了朝廷内外的爱戴。
English: Prince Li Hongren loved filial piety, modesty and prudence, and Tang Gaozong liked him very much. He was able to treat Shidafu with courtesy and was loved both inside and outside the court.

古文：天后方逞其志，太子奏请，数迕旨，由是失爱于天后。
现代文：天后武则天正要施展个人抱负，太子李弘奏事多次违反她的旨意，因此武则天对他不喜欢。
English: Empress Dowager Wu Zetian was about to fulfill her personal ambition, and Prince Li Hongzhu repeatedly violated her wishes. Therefore, Emperor Wu Zetian did not like him.

古文：义阳、宣城二公主，萧淑妃之女也，坐母得罪，幽于掖庭，年逾三十不嫁。
现代文：义阳、宣城二位公主，是萧淑妃的女儿，因受母亲牵连而获罪，被囚禁在后宫中，年过三十不能结婚。
English: The two princesses, Yiyang and Xuancheng, are the daughters of Xiao Shufei. Because they were implicated by their mother, they were convicted, imprisoned in the harem, and cannot marry after the age of thirty.

古文：太子见之惊恻，遽奏请出降，上许之。
现代文：太子李弘见到这种情况，既吃惊又同情，便立即上奏请求准许她们出嫁，得到唐高宗的批准。
English: When Prince Li Hong saw this, he was both surprised and sympathetic, and immediately petitioned for permission to marry them, which was approved by Tang Gaozong.

古文：天后怒，即日以公主配当上翊卫权毅、王遂古。
现代文：武则天很恼火，当天便把她们分别嫁给正在值班的翊卫权毅、王遂古。
English: Wu Zetian was very annoyed, and on the same day he married them separately to the guards, Quan Yi and Wang Suigu, who were on duty.

古文：己亥，太子薨于合璧宫，时人以为天后鸩之也。
现代文：己亥，太子李弘死于合璧宫，当时人以为是被天后武则天用鸩酒毒死的。
English: In the same year, Prince Li Hong died in the Palace of He Bi. At the time, it was thought that he was poisoned by the Queen Mother Wu Zetian with poisoned wine.

古文：壬寅，车驾还洛阳宫。
现代文：壬寅，唐高宗回到洛阳宫。
English: Minshin, Tang Gaozong returned to Luoyang Palace.

古文：五月，戊申，下诏： 朕方欲禅位皇太子，而疾遽不起，宜申往命，加以尊名，可谥为孝敬皇帝。 
现代文：五月，戊申，唐高宗下诏说： 朕正准备把帝位禅让给太子，而他忽然一病不起。应当重申以前的旨意，给予尊贵的名号，可定谥号为孝敬皇帝。 
English: In May, Wushin, Tang Gaozong issued an edict saying: I am preparing to cede the imperial throne to the prince, but he suddenly fell ill. It is necessary to reiterate the previous will and give him an honorable name, and may set the posthumous name as the emperor of filial piety.

古文：六月，戊寅，立雍王贤为皇太子，赦天下。
现代文：六月，戊寅，唐朝立雍王李贤为皇太子，赦免天下罪人。
English: In June, Wu Yin of the Tang Dynasty made Yong Wang Li Xian the crown prince and pardoned all the sinners in the world.

古文：天后恶慈州刺史杞王上金，有司希旨奏其罪；秋，七月，上金坐解官，澧州安置。
现代文：天后武则天厌恶慈州刺史杞王李上金，有关部门迎合她的旨意奏报他有罪。秋季，七月，李上金因此被解除职务，在澧州安置。
English: Emperor Wu Zetian detested Li Shangjin, the king of Zizhou, and the relevant departments catered to her wishes to report his guilt. In the autumn, in July, Li Shangjin was therefore relieved of his duties and resettled in Zizhou.

古文：八月，庚寅，葬孝敬皇帝于恭陵。
现代文：八月，庚寅，唐朝葬孝敬皇帝李弘于恭陵。
English: In August, Geng Yin and the Tang Dynasty buried Emperor Li Hongzhang in the Gongling Mausoleum.

古文：戊戌，以戴至德为右仆射，庚子，以刘仁轨为左仆射，并同中书门下三品如故。
现代文：戊戌，唐朝任命戴至德为右仆射，庚子，任命刘仁轨为左仆射，两人都仍担任同中书门下三品。
English: The Tang Dynasty appointed Dai Zhide as the right-hand man and Geng Zi and Liu Renluo as the left-hand man, and both of them still served as the third grade of the same middle school.

古文：张文瓘为侍中，郝处俊为中书令，李敬玄为吏部尚书兼左庶子，同中书门下三品如故。
现代文：任命张文为侍中，郝处俊为中书令；李敬玄为吏部尚书兼左庶子，仍然担任同中书门下三品。
English: Zhang Wen was appointed as a chamberlain, Xing Shujun as a secretary, and Li Jing Xuan as a clerk and the left illegitimate son, still serving as the third grade of the same secretary.

古文：刘仁轨、戴志德更日受牒诉，仁轨常以美言许之，至德必据理难诘，未尝与夺，实有冤结者，密为奏辨。
现代文：刘仁轨、戴至德按日轮流接受讼辞。刘仁轨常用动听的言词答应递讼辞人的要求，戴至德定要据理责问，未曾轻易答应或否定，确实有冤枉的，才私下上奏皇帝为其申辩。
English: Liu Renzhong and Dai Zhide took turns to accept the pleadings on a daily basis. Liu Renzhong often used beautiful words to agree to the request of the petitioner, and Dai Zhide always asked for reasoned criticism. He did not easily agree or deny, and if there was indeed wrongdoing, he would privately appeal to the emperor for his defense.

古文：由是时誉皆归仁轨。
现代文：因此，当时美好的声誉都归于刘仁轨。
English: Therefore, the good reputation at that time was attributed to Liu Renlu.

古文：或问其故，至德曰： 威福者人主之柄，人臣安得盗取之！ 
现代文：有人问戴至德，这是什么缘故，他说： 刑罚和赏赐都是皇帝的权力，作臣下的怎能盗用呢！ 
English: Someone asked Dai Zhide what was the reason for this, and he said: "Punishment and reward are the emperor's powers. How can a subject usurp them?

古文：上闻，深重之。
现代文：唐高宗听到这话后，很器重他。
English: After hearing this, Tang Gaozong held him in high esteem.

古文：有老妪欲诣仁轨陈牒，误诣至德，至德览之未终，妪曰： 本谓是解事仆射，乃不解事仆射邪！
现代文：曾有老妇人要找刘仁轨呈递讼辞，错找了戴至德。戴至德还未完看完讼辞，老妇人发现找错了，说： 原来以为是懂事的仆射，竟是不懂事的仆射！快把讼辞还我！ 
English: There was an old woman who wanted to find Liu Renliao to submit a statement of claim, but she found Dai Zhide by mistake. Dai Zhide had not yet finished reading the statement of claim, but the old woman found out that she had made a mistake and said: "I thought it was a clever minion, but it was an incompetent minion! Quickly return the statement of claim to me!"

古文：归我牒！ 至德笑而授之。
现代文：戴至德笑着把讼辞交还她。
English: Dai Zhide smiled and handed her back the statement of claim.

古文：时人称其长者。
现代文：当时人称赞他是个恭谨忠厚的人。
English: At the time, he was praised as a respectful and loyal man.

古文：文瓘时兼大理卿，囚闻改官，皆恸哭。
现代文：张文当时兼任大理卿，囚犯们听说他改任侍中，无不痛哭。
English: At that time, Zhang Wen also served as the Lord of Dali. When the prisoners heard that he had been changed to a chamberlain, they all cried bitterly.

古文：文瓘性严正，诸司奏议，多所纠驳，上甚委之。
现代文：张文秉性严肃正直，各部门向皇帝陈述问题的上书，他常加以纠正或提出异议，唐高宗很依靠他。
English: Zhang Wen was a serious and honest person. All departments submitted a letter to the emperor stating the problem. He often corrected or raised objections. Tang Gaozong relied on him a lot.

古文：仪凤元年丙子，公元六七六年
现代文：仪凤元年春季正月，壬戌，唐朝改封冀王李轮为相王。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the Yi and Feng Dynasty, the Tang Dynasty changed the title of Ji Wang Li Lun to the King of the Sang.

古文：春，正月，壬戌，徙冀王轮为相王。纳州獠反，敕黔州都督发兵讨之。
现代文：纳州獠人反叛唐朝，唐高宗命令黔州都督发兵讨伐。
English: The people of Nanzhou revolted against the Tang Dynasty, and Tang Gaozong ordered the governor of Nanzhou to send an army to crush the rebellion.

古文：二月，甲戌，徙安东都护府于辽东故城；先是有华人任安东官者，悉罢之。
现代文：二月，甲戌，唐朝将安东都护府迁至辽东故城；这以前有华人在安东任官的，一律免职。
English: In February, in Jiaozuo, the Tang Dynasty moved the capital of Andong to the old city of Liaodong. Previously, any Chinese official in Andong was dismissed.

古文：徙熊津都督府于建安故城；其百济户口先徙於徐、兗等州者，皆置于建安。
现代文：又将熊津都督府迁至建安故城；原先已迁至徐、兖等州居住的百济人，都安置在建安。
English: In addition, the Kumazu governor's office was moved to the former city of Jian'an; Baekje people who had previously moved to the provinces of Xu and Handan were resettled in Jian'an.

古文：天后劝上封中岳；癸未，诏以今冬有事于嵩山。
现代文：天后武则天劝唐高宗封中岳嵩山；癸未，唐高宗下诏说，定于今年冬季封嵩山。
English: Emperor Wu Zetian advised Tang Gao Zong to seal Zhongyue Songshan; before long, Tang Gao Zong issued an edict to seal Songshan this winter.

古文：丁亥，上幸汝州之温汤。
现代文：丁亥，唐高宗到达汝州温泉。
English: Dinghai, Tang Gaozong arrived at Ruzhou Hot Spring.

古文：三月，癸卯，黄门侍郎来恒、中书侍郎薛元超并同中书门下三品。
现代文：三月，癸卯，黄门侍郎来恒、中书侍郎薛元超都任同中书门下三品。
English: In March, Zou Wu, Huangmen waiter Lai Heng, and Zhongshu waiter Xue Yuanchao were all appointed to the three lower ranks of Zhongshu.

古文：恒，济之兄；元超，收之子也。
现代文：来恒是来济的哥哥；薛元超是薛收的儿子。
English: Lai Heng is the elder brother of Lai Jie; Xue Yuanchao is the son of Xue Ju.

古文：甲辰，上还东都。
现代文：甲辰，唐高宗返回东都洛阳。
English: At that time, Tang Gaozong returned to Luoyang, the eastern capital.

古文：闰月，吐蕃寇鄯、廓、河、芳等州，敕左监门卫中郎将令狐智通发兴、凤等州兵以御之。
现代文：闰三月，吐蕃侵扰鄯、廓、河、芳等州，唐高宗命令左监门卫中郎将令狐智通征发兴、凤等州的兵士抵御他们。
English: In the intercalary month of March, Tubo invaded Gansu, Guizhou, Hebei, and Fang, and Tang Gaozong ordered the left guard of the gate to order the soldiers of Fuxi, Daxing, Feng and other provinces to resist them.

古文：己卯，诏以吐蕃犯塞，停封中岳。
现代文：己卯，唐高宗下诏说，因吐蕃侵犯边塞，停止封中岳嵩山。
English: At the same time, Emperor Gaozong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict saying that the sealing of Mount Zhongdake should be stopped because of the encroachment of the border fortress by the Tuoba.

古文：乙酉，以洛州牧周王显为洮州道行军元帅，将工部尚书刘审礼等十二总管，并州大都督相王轮为凉州道行军元帅，将左卫大将军契苾何力等，以讨吐蕃。
现代文：乙酉，唐朝任命洛州牧周王李显为洮州道行军元帅，率领工部尚书刘审礼等十二总管；并州大都督相王李轮为凉州道行军元帅，率领左卫大将军契何力等人，讨伐吐蕃。
English: In Yixing, the Tang Dynasty appointed the Luozhou Patriarch Zhou Wang Lixian as the marshal of the march on Luzhou Road, leading the 12 general managers such as Shangshu Liu Xunli of the Ministry of Industry; and the provincial governor Wang Lirong as the marshal of the march on Liangzhou Road, leading the left guard general Qi He Li and others to fight against the Tuyi.

古文：二王皆不行。庚寅，车驾西还。
现代文：李显、李轮都没有到任。庚寅，唐高宗西返长安。
English: Li Xian and Li Ran did not take up their posts. Geng Yin and Tang Gao Zong Xi returned to Chang'an.

古文：甲寅，中书侍郎李义琰同中书门下三品。
现代文：甲寅，中书侍郎李义琰同中书门下三品。
English: On the 17th, Li Yixuan, the attendant of Chinese calligraphy, was promoted to the third grade of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：戊午，车驾至九成宫。
现代文：戊午，唐高宗到达九成宫。
English: At noon, Tang Gaozong arrived at Jiu Chenggong Palace.

古文：六月，癸亥，黄门侍郎晋陵高智周同中书门下三品。
现代文：六月，癸亥，黄门侍郎晋陵人高智周同中书门下三品。
English: In June, in the Year of the Rooster, Gao Zhizhou, the attendant of the Yellow Gate and the person in charge of the Jin Mausoleum, became the third in line to the throne.

古文：秋，八月，乙未，吐蕃寇叠州。
现代文：秋季，八月乙未，吐蕃侵扰叠州。
English: In the autumn, in August, the Tibetan mastiff invades Liaozhou.

古文：壬寅，敕： 桂、广、交、黔等都督府，比来注拟土人，简择未精，自今每四年遣五品已上清正官充使，仍令御史同往注拟。 
现代文：壬寅，唐高宗命令： 桂、广、交、黔等都督府，近来任命当地人中为官，挑选不当。从现在起，每四年一次，派遣五品以上清正官员充任使者，并令御史一同前往选任官员。 
English: Minshin, Tang Gaozong ordered: Gui, Guang, Jiao, Zou and other prefectural governments have recently appointed local people as officials, and the selection is improper. From now on, once every four years, send five or more Qing officials to serve as envoys, and have the governor go together to select officials.

古文：时人谓之南选。
现代文：当时人称它为南选。
English: At that time, it was known as the Southern Election.

古文：九月，壬申，大理奏左威卫大将军权善才、右监门中郎将范怀义误斫昭陵柏，罪当除名；上特命杀之。
现代文：九月，壬申，大理寺上奏说左威卫大将军权善才、左监门中郎将范怀义误砍昭陵柏树，论罪应当除去官吏名籍；唐高宗特意命令处死他们。
English: In September, in Jinshin, a report was made to the Dali Temple that General Zuo Wei Wei, General Quan Zenzai, and the left guard, Lieutenant General Fan Huaiyi, had mistakenly cut down the Shoryo cypress tree, and that the names of the officials should be removed; Tang Gaozong specifically ordered them to be put to death.

古文：大理丞太原狄仁杰奏： 二人罪不当死。 
现代文：大理丞太原人狄仁杰上奏说： 这两人的罪行不够处死。 
English: Dai Licheng Taiyuan's Di Renjie said: The crimes of these two people are not enough to be executed.

古文：上曰： 善才等斫陵柏，我不杀则为不孝。 
现代文：唐高宗说： 权善才等砍昭陵柏树，我不杀他们就是不孝。 
English: Tang Gaozong said: It is not filial piety if I do not cut down the Shao Ling cypress tree.

古文：仁杰固执不已，上作色，令出，仁杰曰： 犯颜直谏，自古以为难。
现代文：狄仁杰一再坚持自己的意见，唐高宗满脸怒色，命令他出去，狄仁杰说： 冒犯皇帝的威严，直言规劝，自古以来就认为很难作到。
English: Di Renjie insisted on his opinion again and again. Tang Gaozong was furious and ordered him to leave. Di Renjie said, "Offending the majesty of the emperor and giving frank advice have been considered difficult since ancient times.

古文：臣以为遇桀、纣则难，遇尧、舜则易。
现代文：我以为遇到桀、纣则困难，遇到尧、舜则容易。
English: I thought that it would be difficult to encounter  and, but easy to encounter  and.

古文：今法不至死而陛下特杀之，是法不信于人也，人何所措其手足！
现代文：现在依照法律不该处死的人，而陛下特意杀他，是法律不能取信于人，人们将何所适从？
English: Now, according to the law, a person who should not be put to death, and your majesty deliberately kills him, is the law unable to gain the trust of the people, what will the people do?

古文：且张释之有言： 设有盗长陵一抔土，陛下何以处之？ 
现代文：汉朝张释之对文帝说过： 假如有人盗取高祖长陵一土，陛下如何处分他？ 
English: Zhang Xizhi of the Han Dynasty said to Emperor Wen: If someone steals the land of Gao Zuo's Mausoleum, how will His Majesty punish him?

古文：今以一株柏杀二将军，后代谓陛下为何如矣？
现代文：现在因砍一棵柏树而杀两位将军，后代会认为陛下是怎么样的君主？
English: Now that he has killed two generals for cutting down a cypress tree, what kind of monarch will future generations think His Majesty is?

古文：臣不敢奉诏者，恐陷陛下于不道，且羞见释之于地下故也。 
现代文：我之所以不执行处死他们的命令，是恐怕使陛下陷于无道的处境，而且无脸见张释之于九泉之下的缘故。 
English: The reason why I did not carry out the order to execute them is that I feared that it would put His Majesty in a hopeless situation, and he would be left without a face.

古文：上怒稍解，二人除名，流岭南。
现代文：唐高宗的怒气这才消解，权善才、范怀义被除去名籍，流放岭南。
English: It was only then that Tang Gaozong's anger subsided, and Quan Zencai and Fan Huaiyi were stripped of their family names and exiled to Lingnan.

古文：后数日，擢仁杰为侍御史。
现代文：几天以后，朝廷提升狄仁杰为侍御史。
English: A few days later, the imperial court promoted Di Renjie to the position of imperial attendant.

古文：初，仁杰为并州法曹，同僚郑崇质当使绝域。
现代文：当初，狄仁杰为并州法曹，同事郑崇质应当出使遥远的地区。
English: At the beginning, Di Renjie was the legal officer of the merged state, and his colleague Zheng Chongqing should be sent to distant regions.

古文：崇质母老且病，仁杰曰： 彼母如此，岂可使之有万里之忧！ 
现代文：郑崇质的母亲年老又有病，狄仁杰说： 他母亲的情况如此，怎么可以让她有万里离别的忧愁！ 
English: Zheng Chongqing's mother is old and sick, Di Renjie said: His mother's condition is so, how can she have the sorrow of parting!

古文：诣长史蔺仁基，请代之行。
现代文：于是找到长史蔺仁基，请求代替郑崇质承担出使的任务。
English: So he found Chang Shi Renji and asked him to take on the task of the envoy in place of Zheng Chongqing.

古文：仁基素与司马李孝廉不叶，因相谓曰： 吾辈岂可不自愧乎！ 
现代文：蔺仁基一贯与司马李孝廉不和，这时候两人不禁相对说： 我们难道自己不感到羞愧么？ 
English: Yan Renki had always been at odds with Sima Li Xiaolian. At this time, the two could not help but say: Aren't we ashamed of ourselves?

古文：遂相与辑睦。
现代文：以后两人和睦相处。
English: From then on, the two got along well.

古文：冬，十月，车驾还京师。
现代文：冬季十月，唐高宗返回京师长安。
English: In the winter of October, Tang Gaozong returned to the capital Chang'an.

古文：丁酉，祫享太庙，用太学博士史璨议，禘后三年而祫，祫后二年而禘。
现代文：丁酉，唐朝集合祖先神主于太庙举行祭，采纳太学博士史璨的建议，祭以后三年举行祭，祭以后二年举行祭。
English: According to Ding Xi, the Tang Dynasty gathered the ancestors of the gods to hold a festival in the Great Temple, and adopted the suggestion of the doctor of science Shi Xi. The festival was held three years after the festival, and the festival was held two years after the festival.

古文：郇王素节，萧淑妃之子也，警敏好学。
现代文：郇王李素节是萧淑妃的儿子，机敏好学。
English: Xiao Wang Li Su Jie is the son of Xiao Shu Fei. He is quick-witted and eager to learn.

古文：天后恶之，自岐州刺史左迁申州刺史。
现代文：天后武则天讨厌他，自岐州刺史降职为申州刺史。
English: Emperor Wu Zetian hated him, and he was demoted from the post of Qizhou stabbing historian to the post of Shenzhou stabbing historian.

古文：乾封初，敕曰： 素节既有旧疾，不须入朝。 
现代文：乾封初年，唐高宗命令说： 李素节既然有病，就不必入宫朝见。 
English: In the first year of Qianfeng, Tang Gaozong ordered: "Since Li Su Jie is ill, there is no need to visit the palace in the morning.

古文：而素节实无疾，自以久不得入觐，乃著《忠孝论》。
现代文：其实李素节并没有病。自己觉得长期不得朝见皇帝，便撰写了《忠孝论》。
English: In fact, Li Su Jie was not ill. Feeling that he would not be able to see the emperor for a long time, he wrote "On Fidelity and Filial Piety."

古文：王府仓曹参军张柬之因使潜封其论以进。
现代文：他的王府仓曹参军张柬之派人悄悄将他的《忠孝论》密封呈送唐高宗。
English: The envoy sent by Zhang Kamm, who was a member of the Wangfu Cang Cao's army, quietly presented his "On Fidelity and Filial Piety" to Tang Gaozong under seal.

古文：后见之，诬以赃贿，丙午，降封翻阳王，袁州安置。
现代文：天后武则天见到后，诬告李素节贪赃受贿，丙午，降封他为鄱阳郡王，在袁州安置。
English: After Wu Zetian saw him, he falsely accused Li Su Jie of corruption and bribery. In the afternoon of the 4th day, he was demoted from the title of King of Shenyang County and resettled in Yuanzhou.

古文：十一月，壬申，改元，赦天下。
现代文：十一月，壬申，唐高宗更改年号为仪凤，赦天下。
English: In November, in Jinshin, Tang Gaozong changed his era name to Ji Feng and pardoned the world.

古文：庚寅，以李敬玄为中书令。
现代文：庚寅，唐朝任命李敬玄为中书令。
English: Goyang, the Tang Dynasty appointed Li Jingxuan as the chief of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：十二月，戊午，以来恒为河南道大使，薛元超为河北道大使，尚书左丞鄢陵崔知悌、国子司业郑祖玄为江南道大使，分道巡抚。
现代文：十二月，戊午，唐朝任命来恒为河南道大使，薛元超为河北道大使，尚书左丞鄢陵人崔知悌、国子司业郑祖玄为江南道大使，分别前往各道巡视、安抚。
English: In the afternoon of December, the Tang Dynasty appointed Lai Heng as the ambassador of Henan Province, Xue Yuanchao as the ambassador of Hebei Province, Cui Zhisheng as the ambassador of Shangshu Zuorong Mausoleum, and Zheng Zuyuan as the ambassador of Jiangnan Province. They went to each province to inspect and pacify.

古文：仪凤二年丁丑，公元六七七年
现代文：仪凤二年春季正月，乙亥，唐高宗举行耕种藉田典礼。
English: In the first month of the spring of the second year of Yi Feng, Tang Gaozong held a ceremony of cultivating and renting fields.

古文：春，正月，乙亥，上耕籍田。初，刘仁轨引兵自熊津还，扶馀隆畏新罗之逼，不敢留，寻亦还朝。
现代文：当初，唐朝将领刘仁轨领兵从熊津返回，扶余隆畏惧新罗逼迫，不敢逗留，不久也返回了唐朝。
English: At first, the Tang Dynasty general Liu Renliao led the troops back from Kumazu, but Fu Yulong was afraid of Silla's persecution and did not dare to stay. He soon returned to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：二月，丁巳，以工部尚书高藏为辽东州都督，封朝鲜王，遣归辽东，安辑高丽馀众；高丽先在诸州者，皆遣与藏俱归。
现代文：二月，丁巳，唐朝任命工部尚书高藏为辽东州都督，封朝鲜王，送回辽东，安抚高丽余众；高丽人先已安置在各州的，都与高藏一起送回辽东。
English: In February, the Tang Dynasty appointed Shangshu Gaozang of the Ministry of Industry as the governor of Liaodong Province, crowned him as the king of Korea, and sent him back to Liaodong to pacify the rest of the Goryeo people. The Goryeo people had already been resettled in various provinces, and they were sent back to Liaodong together with Gaozang.

古文：又以司农卿扶馀隆为熊津都督，封带方王，亦遣归安辑百济馀众，仍移安东都护府于新城以统之。
现代文：又任命司农卿扶余隆为熊津都督，封带方王，也送他回去安抚百济余众，又迁移安东都护府于新城，以统辖辽东州和熊津。
English: He also appointed Fu Yulong, the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, as the governor of Kumatsu, and sent him back to pacify the people of Baekje. He also moved the capital city of Andong to Xincheng to supervise Liaodong and Kumatsu.

古文：时百济荒残，命隆寓居高丽之境。
现代文：当时百济荒芜残破，命令扶余隆寓居高丽境内。
English: At that time, Baekje was a deserted ruin, and Fuyulong was ordered to live in Goryeo.

古文：藏至辽东，谋叛，潜与靺鞨通；召还，徙邛州而死，散徙其人于河南、陇右诸州，贫者留安东城傍。
现代文：高藏来到辽东，阴谋反叛，暗通；被唐朝召回，迁徙到邛州后死去，他的部下被分散迁徙到河南、陇右各州，贫穷的留在安东城附近。
English: Gaozang came to Liaodong, plotted to rebel, and conspired; he was recalled by the Tang Dynasty, migrated to Zhangzhou, and died. His subordinates were dispersed and migrated to Henan and Shandong provinces, and remained poor near Andong City.

古文：高丽旧城没于新罗，馀众散入靺鞨及突厥，隆亦竟不敢还故地，高氏、扶馀氏遂亡。
现代文：高丽旧城被新罗吞没，余众分散投奔和突厥，扶余隆最终也不敢返回原居留地区，高氏、扶余氏于是灭亡。
English: The old city of Goryeo was swallowed up by Silla, and the remaining people scattered and joined the Turks. Fuyulong eventually did not dare to return to the original residence area, and the Gao and Fuyulong clans perished.

古文：三月，癸亥朔，以郝处俊、高智周并为左庶子，李义琰为右庶子。
现代文：三月，癸亥朔，唐朝任命郝处俊、高智周为左庶子，李义琰为右庶子。
English: In March, the Tang Dynasty appointed Gong Chengjun and Gao Zhizhou as the left illegitimate son and Li Yixuan as the right illegitimate son.

古文：夏，四月，左庶子张大安同中书门下三品。
现代文：夏季四月，左庶子张大安同中书门下三品。
English: In the summer of April, Zhang Da'an, the left illegitimate son, was promoted to the third grade of junior high school.

古文：大安，公谨之子也。
现代文：张大安是张公瑾的儿子。
English: Zhang Da'an is the son of Zhang Gongyao.

古文：诏以河南、北旱，遣御史中丞崔谧等分道存问赈给。侍御史宁陵刘思立上疏，以为： 今麦秀蚕老，农事方殷，敕使抚巡，人皆竦扌卞，忘其家业，冀此天恩，聚集参迎，妨废不少。
现代文：唐高宗下诏，因河南、河北发生旱灾，派遣御史中丞崔谧等分别到各道慰问救济，侍御史宁陵人刘思立上书认为： 现在正当麦子抽穗春蚕吐丝的季节，农事正忙，皇帝派遣使者巡视安抚，百姓翘首企待，欢欣鼓舞，忘了生产，期望得到皇帝的恩惠，聚集起来参拜、欢迎使者，对农事妨碍很大。
English: Tang Gaozong issued an edict that, due to droughts in Henan and Hebei, he would send the imperial historian Choe Hee and others separately to each province to offer condolences and relief. Liu Sili, the attendant of the Shining Tomb, wrote that: Now is the season of wheat-pulling spring silkworms and silk-spinning, agricultural affairs are busy, the emperor sent an envoy to inspect and pacify, the people are waiting, rejoicing, forgetting production, expecting to receive the emperor's favor, gathering to visit and welcome the envoy, which greatly hinders agricultural affairs.

古文：既缘赈给，须立簿书，本欲安存，更成烦扰。
现代文：皇帝本意是安抚慰问百姓，结果却造成对他们的困扰。
English: The emperor's intention was to appease and comfort the people, but the result was to cause trouble for them.

古文：望且委州县赈给，待秋深务闲，出使褒贬。 
现代文：既然是为了救济，官署应建立支付的帐薄，希望先委派各州县救济，等到秋后农闲，再派出使者到各地考核救济工作的好坏。 
English: Since it is for relief, the government office should establish a payment ledger. It is hoped that the relief will be assigned to each state and county first, and then the envoy will be sent to various regions to assess the quality of the relief work after the fall.

古文：疏奏，谧等遂不行。
现代文：奏疏上达后，崔谧等便没有出使。
English: After the report was submitted, Cui Gan and others did not send any envoys.

古文：五月，吐蕃寇扶州之临河镇，擒镇将杜孝升，令赍书说松州都督武居寂使降，考升固执不从。
现代文：五月，吐蕃侵扰唐朝扶州的临河镇，擒获镇将杜孝升，命令他送信说服松州都督武居寂投降，杜孝升坚决拒绝。
English: In May, Tubo invaded Linhe Town in Fuzhou of the Tang Dynasty. Du Xiaosheng, the commander of the captured town, ordered him to send a letter to persuade Songzhou Governor Wu Jiajia to surrender. Du Xiaosheng firmly refused.

古文：吐蕃军还，舍孝升而去，孝升复帅馀众拒守。
现代文：吐蕃撤退时，没有把杜孝升带走，于是他又率领余部防守临河镇。
English: When Tubo retreated, he did not take Du Xiaosheng with him, so he led the rest of the defense of Linhe Town.

古文：诏以孝升为游击将军。
现代文：唐高宗下令任命杜孝升为游击将军。
English: Tang Gaozong ordered the appointment of Du Xiaosheng as a guerrilla general.

古文：秋，八月，徙周王显为英王，更名哲。
现代文：秋季八月，唐朝改封周王李显为英王，改名为李哲。
English: In the autumn of August, the Tang Dynasty changed the title of Zhou Wang Lixian to Yingwang and changed his name to Li Zhe.

古文：命刘仁轨镇洮河军。
现代文：唐朝命令刘仁轨镇守洮河军。
English: The Tang Dynasty ordered Liu Renlu to garrison the Li River Army.

古文：冬，十二月，乙卯，诏大发兵讨吐蕃。
现代文：冬季，十二月，乙卯，唐高宗下令大规模发兵讨伐吐蕃。
English: In winter, in December, Emperor Gaozong of Tang ordered a large-scale expedition to fight the Tuyn.

古文：诏以显庆新礼，多不师古，其五礼并依《周礼》行事。
现代文：唐高宗下令：因显庆年间所推行的新礼，多不效法古礼，其后五礼均依照《周礼》执行。
English: Tang Gaozong ordered: Due to the new rites introduced during the Xianqing period, most of them do not follow the old rites, and the following five rites are carried out in accordance with the "Weekly Rites."

古文：自是礼官益无凭守，每有大礼，临时撰定。
现代文：从此礼官更加无所凭据，每次遇到大礼仪时，才临时选定。
English: Since then, the etiquette officer has been even more unsubstantiated, and is only temporarily selected every time a major etiquette is encountered.

古文：仪凤三年戊寅，公元六七八年春，正月，辛酉，百官及蛮夷酋长朝天后于光顺门。刘仁轨镇洮河，每有奏请，多为李敬玄所抑，由是怨之。
现代文：仪凤三年春季正月，辛酉，唐朝百官及蛮夷首领朝见天后武则天于光顺门。刘仁轨镇守洮河，每次上书向唐高宗提出什么要求，多被李敬玄压制，因此对他怀恨。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year of the Yi and Feng Dynasties, the hundred officials of the Tang Dynasty and the barbarian chieftains of the Tang Dynasty met with the Empress Dowager Wu Zetian at the Guangshun Gate. Liu Renluo, the town guard of the Li River, was suppressed by Li Jingyuan every time he submitted a request to Tang Gaozong, so he held a grudge against him.

古文：仁轨知敬玄非将帅才，欲中伤之，奏言： 西边镇守，非敬玄莫可。 
现代文：刘仁轨明知道李敬玄并无将帅的才能，为了陷害他，便上奏说： 西边的镇守任务，非李敬玄不能胜任。 
English: Liu Renzhong clearly knew that Li Jingxuan did not have the ability to be a general. In order to frame him, he said: "If Li Jingxuan is not capable of the task of guarding the west side of the town, he is not competent.

古文：敬玄固辞，上曰： 仁轨须朕，朕亦自往，卿安得辞！ 
现代文：李敬玄对此一再推辞。唐高宗对他说： 刘仁轨如果需要朕，朕也亲自去，你怎么能推辞呢！ 
English: Li Jingxuan repeatedly refused. Tang Gaozong said to him: "If Liu Ronglu needs me, I will go in person. How can you refuse?"

古文：丙子，以敬玄代仁轨为洮河道大总管兼安抚大使，仍检校鄯州都督。
现代文：丙子任命李敬玄接替刘仁轨为洮河道大总管兼安抚大使，并任检校鄯州都督。
English: He Zi appointed Li Jingxuan to succeed Liu Renlu as the general manager of Minhe University and the ambassador of appeasement, and served as the inspector of the school and the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：又命益州大都督府长史李孝逸等发剑南、山南兵以赴之。
现代文：又命令益州大都督府长史李孝逸等发剑南、山南兵支援他。
English: He also ordered the governor of Yizhou, Shi Li Xiaoyi, to send soldiers from Jiannan and Shannan to support him.

古文：孝逸，神通之子也。
现代文：李孝逸是淮安王李神通的儿子。
English: Li Xiaoying is the son of the king of Huai'an, Li Shengtong.

古文：癸未，遣左金吾将军曹怀舜等分往河南、北募猛士，不问布衣及仕宦。
现代文：癸未，唐朝派遣金吾将军曹怀舜等分别往河南、河北招募勇士，不论平民还是官员都可应募。
English: Not long ago, the Tang Dynasty sent Kingu General Cao Huaiqi and others to Henan and Hebei respectively to recruit warriors. Both civilians and officials can apply.

古文：夏，四月，戊申，赦天下，改来年元为通乾。
现代文：夏季四月，戊申，唐朝大赦天下罪人，改明年年号为通乾。
English: In the summer of April, Boushen, the Tang Dynasty amnestied all the sinners in the world, and changed the name of the next year to Tongxian.

古文：五月，壬戌，上幸九成宫。
现代文：五月，壬戌，唐高宗到达九成宫。
English: In May, Tang Gaozong arrived at Jiu Chenggong Palace.

古文：丙寅，山中雨，大寒，从兵有冻死者。
现代文：丙寅，山中下雨，天气寒冷，随从的士兵有人被冻死。
English: Hsin Yin, it was raining and cold in the mountains, and some of his soldiers froze to death.

古文：秋，七月，李敬玄奏破吐蕃于龙支。
现代文：秋季七月，李敬玄上奏唐高宗说，在龙支打败吐蕃。
English: In the autumn of July, Li Jingxuan quoted Tang Gaozong as saying that he would defeat Tubo in Longzhi.

古文：上初即位，不忍观《破阵乐》，命撤之。
现代文：唐高宗初即位时，没耐心观看歌舞《破阵乐》，下令撤除。
English: When Emperor Gaozong of Tang ascended the throne for the first time, he did not have the patience to watch the song and dance "Breaking the Bands" and ordered it to be removed.

古文：辛酉，太常少卿韦万石奏： 久寝不作，惧成废缺。
现代文：辛酉，太常少卿韦万石上奏说： 久不演唱，《破阵乐》恐怕要失传。
English: Xin Zhen, too often Shaoqing Wei Wanshi said: "I haven't sung for a long time, and I'm afraid that "Broken Band" will be lost.

古文：请自今大宴会复奏之。 
现代文：请求今后遇到大宴会时恢复演唱。 
English: Please resume singing in the event of a large banquet in the future.

古文：上从之。
现代文：唐高宗听从他的意见。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：九月，辛酉，车驾还京师。
现代文：九月，辛酉，唐高宗返回京师长安。
English: In September, Tang Gaozong returned to the capital Chang'an.

古文：上将发兵讨新罗，侍中张文瓘卧疾在家，自舆入见，谏曰： 今吐蕃为寇，方发兵西讨；新罗虽云不顺，未尝犯边，若又东征，臣恐公私不堪其弊。 
现代文：唐高宗将要发兵讨伐新罗，侍中张文卧病在家，得知后便自己坐轿入宫晋见唐高宗，规劝说： 现在吐蕃侵扰，正发兵向西讨伐；新罗虽说不驯服，但还未曾侵犯边境，如果又发兵东征，我恐怕官府和百姓都难于承受这种负担。 
English: Tang Gaozong was going to send troops to fight against Silla. Zhang Wen, an aide-de-camp, was ill at home. When he learned of this, he drove himself in a sedan to the palace to see Tang Gaozong and persuade him: Now that Tibet is encroaching, troops are being sent to fight in the west; although Silla is not tamed, it has not yet encroached on the border. If troops are sent to fight in the east again, I am afraid that the government and the people will find it difficult to bear this burden.

古文：上乃止。
现代文：唐高宗于是停止发兵东征。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：癸亥，文瓘薨。
现代文：癸亥，张文去世。
English: Zhang Hai, Zhang Wen passed away.

古文：丙寅，李敬玄将兵十八万与吐蕃将论钦陵战于青海之上，兵败，工部尚书、左卫大将军彭城僖公刘审礼为吐蕃所虏。
现代文：丙寅，李敬玄率兵十八万与吐蕃将领论钦陵交战于青海之上，打了败仗，工部尚书、右卫大将军彭城僖公刘审礼被吐蕃俘虏。
English: Hsin-yin, Li Jing-hun led 180,000 soldiers to fight against the Tuy generals in Qingling on the top of Qinghai, and lost the battle. Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry and Pengcheng and Liu Jirei, the right guard general, were captured by the Tuy.

古文：时审礼将前军深入，顿于濠所，为虏所攻，敬玄懦怯，按兵不救。
现代文：当时刘审礼正率前军深入敌境，驻扎在濠所，被吐蕃攻击，李敬玄畏惧，不敢前去救援。
English: At that time, Liu Xunli was leading the front army deep into the enemy territory, stationed in Shaoso, and was attacked by Tu Wei. Li Jingyuan was afraid and did not dare to go to the rescue.

古文：闻审礼战没，狼狈还走，顿于承风岭，阻泥沟以自固，虏屯兵高冈以压之。
现代文：听说刘审礼战败被俘，他又狼狈后撤，驻扎在承风岭，利用泥沟自我防卫，吐蕃屯兵高岗，居高临下向他施加压力。
English: Hearing that Liu Xunli was defeated and captured, he retreated in disarray, stationed in Chengfengling, using the muddy ditch for self-defense, setting up a high post for the soldiers, and exerting pressure on him.

古文：左领军员外将军黑齿常之，夜帅敢死之士五百人袭击虏营，虏众溃乱，其将跋地设引兵遁去，敬玄乃收馀众还鄯州。
现代文：左领军员外将军黑齿常之，夜间率领敢死队五百人袭击吐蕃军营，吐蕃军溃散，他们的将领跋地设领兵逃走，李敬玄于是收集残余士兵返回鄯州。
English: The left-hand leader of the foreign soldiers, General Black Tooth Changzhi, led a death squad of five hundred people to attack the Tubo military camp at night. The Tubo army broke up, and their generals hurriedly led the soldiers to flee. Li Jingxuan then collected the remaining soldiers and returned to Zhangzhou.

古文：审礼诸子自缚诣阙，请入吐蕃赎其父；敕听次子易从诣吐蕃省之。
现代文：刘审礼的几个儿子自己捆绑着来到皇宫门前，请求赴吐蕃赎回他们的父亲。唐高宗准许他的次子刘易从去吐蕃探望。
English: Several sons of Liu Xunli came to the front of the imperial palace with their hands tied, requesting to go to Tubo to redeem their father. Tang Gaozong allowed his second son Liu Yi to visit Tubo.

古文：比至，审礼已病卒，易从昼夜号哭不绝声；吐蕃哀之，还其尸，易从徒跣负之以归。
现代文：等到他抵达吐蕃时，刘审礼已病死。刘易从日夜不停地痛哭；吐蕃人同情他，交还他父亲的遗体。刘易从背着父亲遗体，赤足步行而归。
English: By the time he arrived in Tubo, Liu Xirei had died of illness. Liu Yi wept bitterly day and night; Tubo people sympathized with him and returned his father's body. Liu Yi carried his father's body on his back and walked home barefoot.

古文：上嘉黑齿常之之功，擢拜左武卫将军，充河源军副使。
现代文：唐高宗嘉奖黑齿常之的功劳，提升他为左武卫将军，充任河源军副使。
English: Tang Gaozong commended the merits of He Zuozhong, promoted him to Zuowei General, and appointed him as deputy envoy of the Heyuan Army.

古文：李敬玄之西征也，监察御史原武娄师德应猛士诏从军，及败，敕师德收集散亡，军乃复振。
现代文：李敬玄西征时，监察御史原武人娄师德在朝廷招募勇士时应募从军。西征失败，唐高宗命令娄师德收集被打散的兵卒，军力又得以恢复，于是又命令他出使吐蕃。
English: During the Western Expedition of Li Jingxuan, the inspector of the Imperial Historian, the warrior Zou Shidong, was recruited to join the army when the imperial court was recruiting warriors. The Western Expedition failed, Tang Gaozong ordered Zou Shidong to collect the scattered soldiers, and the military strength was restored, so he also ordered him to send Tujun.

古文：因命使于吐蕃，吐蕃将论赞婆迎之赤岭。师德宣导上意，谕以祸福，赞婆甚悦，为之数年不犯边。
现代文：吐蕃将领论赞婆在赤岭迎接他。他向论赞婆传达唐高宗的旨意，指明利害关系，论赞婆很高兴，为此好几年没有侵扰唐朝边境。
English: He conveyed the will of Tang Gaozong to Onzanba and pointed out the interests. Onzanba was very pleased and did not invade the border of the Tang Dynasty for several years.

古文：师德迁殿中侍御史，充河源军司马，兼知营田事。
现代文：娄师德升任殿中侍御史，充任河源军司马，兼管屯田事宜。
English: Zou Shide was promoted to the position of palace attendant, acting as the military governor of Heyuan, and also in charge of the affairs of Tonden.

古文：上以吐蕃为忧，悉召侍臣谋之，或欲和亲以息民；或欲严设守备，俟公私富实而讨之；或欲亟发兵击之。
现代文：唐高宗认为与吐蕃的关系是可忧虑的事情，于是召集全部身边的大臣讨论对策，有人想用和亲的办法求取和平，使百姓得到休息；有人想加强守备，待公私都富足时再讨伐；有人想马上发兵讨伐。
English: Tang Gaozong thought that the relationship with Tubo was a worrisome matter, so he called together all the ministers around him to discuss countermeasures. Some wanted to use the amicable method to seek peace and give the people a rest; some wanted to strengthen their defenses and wait until both the public and private sectors were rich before fighting; some wanted to send troops to fight immediately.

古文：议竟不决，赐食而遣之。
现代文：讨论到最后也没有取得一致意见，只好赐给大家一顿饭吃，然后让他们散去。
English: The discussion did not reach a consensus until the end, so they had to give everyone a meal and then let them disperse.

古文：太学生宋城魏元忠上封事，言御吐蕃之策，以为： 理国之要，在文与武。
现代文：太学生宋城人魏元忠给唐高宗上密封的奏章，献防御吐蕃的计策，认为： 治理国家，关键在文和武两个方面。
English: Wei Yuanzhong, a student from Songcheng, presented Tang Gao Zong with a sealed musical score and a strategy to defend against Tubo. He believed that the key to governing the country lay in the two aspects of literature and military affairs.

古文：今言文者则以辞华为首而不及经纶，言武者则以骑射为先而不知方略，是皆何益于理乱哉！
现代文：现今讲文的人只以言词华丽为首要，而不涉及筹划治理国家大事；讲武的人只以骑马射箭为先，而不涉及计谋策略。这对国家的治乱有什么益处呢？
English: Nowadays, those who preach literature are only concerned with ornate words, but not with the planning of national affairs; those who preach martial arts are only concerned with horse riding and archery, but not with strategic planning. What is the benefit of this for the country's governance?

古文：故陆机著《辨亡》之论，无救河桥之败，养由基射穿七札，不济鄢陵之师，此已然之明效也。
现代文：所以陆机著《辩亡论》，总结孙吴兴亡的原因，但挽救不了他自己在河桥的败亡；楚国大夫养由基有射穿七层甲片的勇力，也不能避免楚军在鄢陵之战中失败。
English: Therefore, Lu Ji, in his "Theory of Debating Death," summarized the reasons for the death of Sun Wu Xing, but he could not save his own defeat at the river bridge; Dr. Chu Guo Yaoyu had the courage to shoot through seven layers of armor, and he could not avoid the defeat of the Chu army in the Battle of Fuling.

古文：古语有之： 人无常俗，政有理乱；兵无强弱，将有巧拙。 
现代文：这已经是人所共知的事实。古语中有这样的说法： 人没有一成不变的习俗，政事却有治理得好和坏；兵士无所谓强与弱，将领却有聪明和笨拙。 
English: This is a well-known fact. There is an ancient saying: People do not have immutable customs, but government affairs have good and bad governance; soldiers are not strong and weak, but generals are smart and clumsy.

古文：故选将当以智略为本，勇力为末。
现代文：所以选择将领应当以谋赂为根本，勇力为次要。
English: Therefore, the selection of generals should be based on bribery, with courage being secondary.

古文：今朝廷用人，类取将门子弟及死事之家，彼皆庸人，岂足当阃外之任！
现代文：现今朝廷用人，一般都录用将门子弟和为国事而牺牲的人的家属。他们都是平庸的人，怎么能担当军事重任！
English: Nowadays, when the imperial court hires people, they generally hire the sons and sons of generals and the families of those who have sacrificed themselves for the country. They are all mediocre people, how can they be responsible for important military tasks!

古文：李左车、陈汤、吕蒙、孟观，皆出贫贱而立殊功，未闻其家代为将也。
现代文：李左车、陈汤、吕蒙、孟观，都出身贫贱而建立特殊功勋，未曾听说他们家世代都是武将。
English: Li Zuozhe, Chen Tang, Lv Meng and Meng Guan were all born poor and built up special merits. I had never heard that their family generations were all warlords.

古文： 夫赏罚者，军国之切务，苟有功不赏，有罪不诛，虽尧、舜不能以致理。
现代文： 赏功罚罪，是军队和国家最迫切的事务，假如有功不奖赏，有罪不处罚，虽尧、舜再生也不能使国家得到治理。
English: Rewarding merit and punishing crime are the most pressing matters for the army and the country. If there is no reward for merit and no punishment for guilt, the country cannot be governed even if it is reformed.

古文：议者皆云： 近日征伐，虚有赏格而无事实。 
现代文：人们都议论说： 近来征伐，颁赏的等级、标准有名无实。 
English: People have been saying that the awarding of grades and standards is a myth.

古文：盖由小才之吏不知大体，徒惜勋庸，恐虚仓库。
现代文：这大概由于才识短小的官吏不识大体，只吝惜授给功勋，恐怕仓库空虚。
English: This is probably due to the fact that officials with little talent do not know much, only grudgingly awarding merit, and I am afraid that the warehouse is empty.

古文：不知士不用命，所损几何！
现代文：而不知道将士不舍命效劳损失有多大？
English: And do not know how great the loss of life-saving services will be?

古文：黔首虽微，不可欺罔。
现代文：百姓地位虽卑微，但也是欺骗不了的。
English: Although the status of the common people is low, they cannot be cheated.

古文：岂得悬不信之令，设虚赏之科，而望其立功乎！
现代文：怎么能靠发布没有信用的法令，规定不能兑现的颁赏条例，就指望他们奋勇立功呢！
English: How can it be expected that they will do their best by issuing unreliable decrees and stipulating award regulations that cannot be honored!

古文：自苏定方征辽东，李勣破平壤，赏绝不行，勋仍淹滞，不闻斩一台郎，戮一令史，以谢勋人。
现代文：自从苏定方征伐辽东，李世攻破平壤，赏赐就不再实行，有功劳的人得不到提升，没有听说斩一名掌管记功颁赏的台郎、令史，以向有功劳的人表示歉意。
English: Since the Soviet Union invaded Liaodong and the Lee Dynasty conquered Pyongyang, rewards are no longer given, meritorious people are not promoted, and it is not unheard of to apologize to meritorious people by beheading a Tai Lang and Ling Shi, who are in charge of recording and awarding merits.

古文：大非川之败，薛仁贵、郭待封等不即重诛，向使早诛仁贵等，则自馀诸将岂敢失利于后哉！
现代文：大非川的失败，薛仁贵、郭待封等没有处以重刑，假使早处死薛仁贵等，则其余诸将后来怎么还敢失利呢！
English: The failure of the Great African River, Xue Rengui, Guo Zhifeng and others were not punished with severe punishment. If Xue Rengui and others were executed early, how would the other generals dare to lose later?

古文：臣恐叶蕃之平，非旦夕可冀也。
现代文：我恐怕吐蕃的平定，并非短期内能指望实现的。
English: I am afraid that the pacification of Tibet cannot be expected to be achieved in the short term.

古文： 又，出师之要，全资马力。
现代文： 还有，出兵时重要的一条，全仰仗马力。
English: Also, an important one when sending troops, it all depends on horsepower.

古文：臣请开畜马之禁，使百姓皆得畜马；若官军大举，委州县长吏以官钱增价市之，则皆为官有。
现代文：我请求废除养马的禁令，使百姓都能够养马；若官军大规模行动，即委托州县长官用官钱加价购买，则马就全都成为国家所有了。
English: I request that the ban on horse breeding be repealed so that the people can breed horses; if the government forces a large-scale action, that is, entrusting state and county governors to purchase horses with government money, then the horses will all become state-owned.

古文：彼胡虏恃马力以为强，若听人间市而畜之，乃是损彼之强为中国之利也。 
现代文：胡人本来依赖马力逞强，如果允许民间买马饲养，便是减弱他们的有利条件，进而变为我们的有利条件了。 
English: The Hu people originally depended on horsepower. If the people are allowed to buy and breed horses, it will weaken their favorable conditions, and then become our favorable conditions.

古文：先是禁百姓畜马，故元忠言之。
现代文：原来唐朝禁止百姓养马，所以魏元忠上奏时提到它。
English: Originally, the Tang Dynasty prohibited people from keeping horses, so Wei Yuanzhong mentioned it when he played the harp.

古文：上善其言，召见，令直中书省，仗内供奉。
现代文：唐高宗认为他的意见很好，召见了他，并命令他在中书省任事，朝会时得随百官朝见皇帝。
English: Tang Gaozong thought his opinion was very good, summoned him, and ordered him to work in the Chinese Literature Department. When the imperial court met, he had to accompany the hundred officials to meet the emperor.

古文：冬，十月，丙午，徐州刺史密贞王元晓薨。
现代文：冬季十月，丙午，徐州刺史密贞王李元晓去世。
English: In the winter of October, on the afternoon of the 4th day of the 4th month, Li Yuanxiao, the King of Xuzhou, passed away.

古文：十一月，壬子，黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品来恒薨。
现代文：十一月，壬子，黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品来恒去世。
English: In November, Ren Zi, the Yellow Gate waiter and the third-ranked disciple of the same school, passed away.

古文：十二月，诏停来年通乾之号，以反语不善故也。
现代文：十二月，唐高宗诏令停止原定明年改用的通乾年号，原因是它的反语不好。调露元年
English: In December, Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict to stop using the name "Tong Qian Nian," which was originally planned to be used next year, because of its negative connotation.

古文：春，正月，己酉，上幸东都。
现代文：春季正月，己酉，唐高宗来到东都洛阳。
English: In the first month of spring, Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty came to Luoyang, the eastern capital of China.

古文：司农卿韦弘机作宿羽、高山、上阳等宫，制度壮丽。
现代文：司农卿韦弘机营建宿羽、高山、上阳等宫，规模壮丽。
English: Wei Hongji, the Minister of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, built Sukpo, Takayama, Shangyang and other palaces, which are magnificent in scale.

古文：上阳宫临洛水，为长廊亘一里。
现代文：上阳宫临洛水，建有绵延一里长的长廊。
English: Shangyang Palace is located in Loushui, with a mile-long promenade.

古文：宫成，上移御之。
现代文：宫殿落成后，唐高宗移居其中。
English: After the palace was completed, Tang Gaozong moved into it.

古文：侍御史狄仁杰劾奏弘机导上为奢泰，弘机坐免官。
现代文：侍御史狄仁杰上奏弹劾韦弘机引导皇帝奢侈无度，韦弘机因此获罪被免官。
English: Attendant Shi Di Renjie impeached Wei Hongji for leading the emperor to extravagance, and Wei Hongji was convicted and removed from office.

古文：左司郎中王本立恃恩用事，朝廷畏之。
现代文：左司郎中王本立依仗皇帝的恩宠滥用权力，朝廷百官都畏惧他。
English: King Benli, the middle son of the Left Hand, abused his power by relying on the emperor's favor, and all the officials in the court were afraid of him.

古文：仁杰奏其奸，请付法回，上特原之，仁杰曰： 国家虽乏英才，岂少本立辈！
现代文：狄仁杰上奏揭发他的邪恶行径，要求将他交给司法部门查办。唐高宗特意赦免他。狄仁杰说： 国家虽缺乏优秀人才，但并不缺少像王本立这类人！
English: Di Renjie denounced his evil deeds and demanded that he be handed over to the judicial department for investigation. Tang Gaozong specifically pardoned him. Di Renjie said: Although the country lacks outstanding talents, it does not lack people like Wang Benli!

古文：陛下何惜罪人，以亏王法。
现代文：陛下为何爱惜有罪的人，从而损害王法。
English: Why does your majesty spare the guilty, to the detriment of the royal law?

古文：必欲曲赦本立，请弃臣于无人之境，为忠贞将来之诫！ 
现代文：如果一定要赦免王本立，那就请先将我流放到荒无人烟的地方，作为将来忠贞之臣的鉴戒。 
English: If you must pardon Wang Benli, then please exile me to a deserted place first, as a warning to future loyal subjects.

古文：本立竟得罪，由是朝廷肃然。
现代文：王本立终于被治罪。从此朝廷严肃有法度。
English: Wang Benli was finally convicted. From then on, the imperial court took the law seriously.

古文：庚戌，右仆射、太子宾客道恭公戴至德薨。
现代文：庚戌，右仆射、太子宾客道恭公戴至德去世。
English: Geng Yao, his right-hand man Yao, and the prince's guest Daogong Dai all died in Germany.

古文：二月，壬戌，吐蕃赞普卒，子器弩悉弄立，生八年矣。
现代文：二月，壬戌，吐蕃赞普去世，他八岁的儿子器弩悉弄继位。
English: In February, Rinchen Tsangpo died and was succeeded by his eight-year-old son.

古文：时器弩悉弄与其舅麹萨若诣羊同发兵，有弟生六年，在论钦陵军中。
现代文：当时器弩悉弄同他舅舅麴萨若去羊同国征兵，他六岁的弟弟正在论钦陵军中。
English: At that time, his six-year-old brother was enlisting in the Qingling Army.

古文：国人畏钦陵之强，欲立之，钦陵不可，与萨若共立器弩悉弄。
现代文：吐蕃人畏惧论钦陵拥有强兵，想让他弟弟继位，论钦陵不同意，与麴萨若共同拥立器弩悉弄。
English: The people of Tubo feared that Qinling had a strong army and wanted his younger brother to succeed him. Qinling did not agree with this, and if they had a common leader with Zesa, they would have a quarrel.

古文：上闻赞普卒，嗣主未定，命裴行俭乘间图之。
现代文：唐高宗得知赞普去世，命令裴行俭乘机进攻吐蕃。
English: When Tang Gaozong learned of Zampu's death, he ordered Pei Xingjian to take the opportunity to attack Tubo.

古文：行俭曰： 钦陵为政，大臣辑睦，未可图也。 
现代文：裴行俭说： 论钦陵掌权，大臣团结和睦，不能进攻。 
English: Pei Xingjian said: On the subject of Qinling taking power, the ministers are united and harmonious, and cannot attack.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是没有行动。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：夏，四月，辛酉，郝处俊为侍中。
现代文：夏季四月，辛酉，郝处俊任侍中。
English: In the summer of April, Xin Yao and Xing Du Shun were promoted to the position of chamberlains.

古文：偃师人明崇俨，以符呪幻术为上及天后重，官至正谏大夫。
现代文：偃师人明崇俨，依仗符咒幻术为唐高宗和天后武则天所器重，官做到正谏大夫。
English: His teachers were all highly respected. Tang Gaozong and the Queen of Heaven Wu Zetian were famous for their magic and incantations, and he was appointed to the post of Grandmaster.

古文：五月，壬午，崇俨为盗所杀，求贼，竟不得。
现代文：五月，壬午，明崇俨被盗贼杀死，搜捕盗贼，竟没有捕到。
English: In May, at noon, Ming Chongyi was killed by a thief. A search for the thief failed to catch him.

古文：赠崇俨侍中。
现代文：唐高宗追赠他为侍中。
English: Tang Gaozong posthumously made him a chamberlain.

古文：丙戌，命太子监国。
现代文：丙戌，唐高宗命令太子监理国家政事。
English: Tang Gaozong ordered the prince to supervise state affairs.

古文：太子处事明审，时人称之。
现代文：太子处理事情明白周密，受到当时人的称赞。
English: The prince handled the matter clearly and thoroughly, and was praised by the people at the time.

古文：戊戌，作紫桂宫于渑池之西。
现代文：戊戌，唐朝在渑池之西营建紫桂宫。
English: In Wuyi, the Tang Dynasty built Shigui Palace in the west of Dianchi Lake.

古文：六月，辛亥，赦天下，改元。
现代文：六月，辛亥，唐朝大赦天下罪人，更改年号。
English: In June, Xinhai, the Tang Dynasty amnestied the world's sinners and changed the year.

古文：初，西突厥十姓可汗阿史那都支及其别帅李遮匐与吐蕃连和，侵逼安西，朝议欲发兵讨之。
现代文：当初，西突厥十姓可汗阿史那都支同他的别帅李庶匐与吐蕃联合，侵逼安西，朝廷讨论想发兵讨伐西突厥。
English: At first, the Western Turkic Khan Ashina, supported by his second-in-command Li Shobao, allied with Tubo to invade Anxi, and the imperial court discussed sending troops to fight the Western Turks.

古文：吏部侍郎裴行俭曰： 吐蕃为寇，审礼覆没，干戈未息，岂可复出师西方！
现代文：吏部侍郎裴行俭说： 吐蕃侵扰，刘审礼全军覆没，现在战事还未停息，怎么可以再出兵西方！
English: Pei Xingjian, an attendant of the cadre department, said: "Tu Xi intruded, Liu Xunli annihilated the whole army, and now the war has not stopped, how can we send troops to the west again!

古文：今波斯王卒，其子泥洹师为质在京师，宜遣使者送归国，道过二虏，以便宜取之，可不血刃而擒也。 
现代文：现今波斯王已死，他儿子泥洹师作为人质还留在京师长安，应该派遣使者送他回国，在途经阿史那都支和李庶匐统治区时，见机行事袭取他们，可以不经激战而将他们擒获。 
English: Now that the king of Persia is dead, and his son Mudan Shiv still remains as a hostage in the Beijing Division of Chang'an, it is necessary to send an envoy to send him back to the country. When passing through the Ashina Prefecture and the territory ruled by Li Shih-tao, seize the opportunity to attack them and capture them without a fierce battle.

古文：上从之，命行俭册立波斯王，仍为安抚大食使。行俭奏肃州刺史王方翼以为己副，仍令检校安西都护。
现代文：唐高宗采纳裴行俭的意见，裴行俭上奏要求任命肃州刺史王方翼为自己的副职，并充任检校安西都护。
English: Tang Gaozong adopted Pei Xingjian's opinion, and Pei Xingjian sent a petition to the emperor requesting that he appoint Suizhou Shishi Wang Fangyi as his deputy, and serve as inspector of Anxi Capital.

古文：秋，七月，己卯朔，诏以今年冬至有事于嵩山。
现代文：秋季七月，己卯朔，唐高宗下诏定于今年冬至封嵩山。
English: In the autumn of July, Tang Gaozong issued an edict to seal off Mount Song for the winter solstice.

古文：初，裴行俭尝为西州长史，及奉使过西州，吏人郊迎，行俭悉召其豪杰子弟千馀人自随，且扬言天时方热，未可涉远，须稍凉乃西上。
现代文：当初，裴行俭曾任西州长史，等到他奉命出使，路过西州，当地的官吏和百姓都到郊外迎接。裴行俭将当地豪杰子弟千余人招来充当自己的随从，而且声称天气正热，不适合远行，等待天气凉爽后再西进。
English: At first, Pei Xingjian had served as the governor of Xizhou, and when he was ordered to pass through Xizhou, local officials and people went to the suburbs to meet him. Pei Xingjian invited more than a thousand local heroes to serve as his entourage, and claimed that the weather was hot and not suitable for long-distance travel, and waited for the weather to cool before heading west.

古文：阿史那都支觇知之，遂不设备。
现代文：阿史那都支侦察到这一情况，于是不加防备。
English: Ashinadu scouted the situation and went unprepared.

古文：行俭徐召四镇诸胡酋长谓曰： 昔在西州，纵猎甚乐，今欲寻旧赏，谁能从吾猎者？ 
现代文：裴行俭便从容不迫地召集龟兹、毗沙、焉耆、疏勒四镇的胡人酋长，对他们说： 从前我在西州时，打猎很愉快，现在想寻求往日的欢乐，谁愿意同我一起打猎去？ 
English: Pei Xingnian then calmly called together the Hu chiefs of the four towns of Guizi, Bisha, Yanqi and Shule, and said to them: Once upon a time, when I was in Xizhou, hunting was very pleasant. Now I want to seek the joys of the past. Who would like to go hunting with me?

古文：诸胡子弟争请从行，近得万人。
现代文：胡人子弟争相要求随行，又召集到将近万人。
English: Hu's followers clamored to accompany him, and nearly ten thousand people were summoned.

古文：行俭阳为畋猎，校勒部伍，数日，遂倍道西进。
现代文：裴行俭佯装打猎，整编队伍，数日后便兼程迅速西进。
English: Pei Xingjian pretended to go hunting and assembled a team. A few days later, he made a quick trip west.

古文：去都支部落十馀里，先遣都支所亲问其安否，外示闲暇，似非讨袭，续使人促召相见。
现代文：到距离阿史那都支部落十多里处，先派遣与他亲近的人去向他问安，表现出安闲无事，并非要讨伐袭击他的样子，接着又派使者急召他前来相见。
English: At a distance of more than ten miles from the Ashnadu tribe, they first sent someone who was close to him to ask him for greetings, to show that there was nothing to worry about, and not to attack him, and then sent an envoy to urge him to come and see him.

古文：都支先与李遮匐约，秋中拒汉使，猝闻军至，计无所出，帅其子弟迎谒，遂擒之。
现代文：阿史那都支原先与李庶匐相约，到八月时一起抗拒唐朝的使者，突然听说唐军到达，一时想不出对付的办法，只好率领子弟出来迎接，于是被擒获。
English: Originally, the Ashina branch of the Nadu family had made an appointment with Li Shizhen. By August, they had begun to resist the Tang dynasty's envoys together. Suddenly, they heard that the Tang army had arrived. For a moment, they could not think of a way to deal with it. They had no choice but to lead their son out to meet it, and then they were captured.

古文：因传其契箭，悉召诸部酋长，执送碎叶城。
现代文：接着又用他的令箭召集他属下诸部的酋长，一起押送碎叶城。
English: He then used his magic arrows to summon the chiefs of his subordinate departments, and together they escorted the Broken Leaf City.

古文：简其精骑，轻赍，昼夜进掩遮匐，途中，获都支还使与遮匐使者同来；行俭释遮匐使者，使先往谕遮匐以都支已就擒，遮匐亦降。
现代文：然后挑选精锐骑兵，轻装前进，日夜兼程突袭李庶匐。进军途中，俘获阿史那都支从李庶匐处返回的使者和与他同行的李庶匐的使者。裴行俭释放李庶匐的使者，让他先去通知李庶匐，说阿史那都支已经就擒，李庶匐便投降了。
English: Then, he selected elite cavalrymen, lightly loaded and advanced, and raided Li Shizhen both day and night. On the way to the army, he captured the envoy of the Ashina branch returning from Li Shizhen and the envoy of Li Shizhen who accompanied him. Pei Xingjian released the envoy of Li Shizhen, and let him go first to inform Li Shizhen that the Ashina branch had fallen asleep, and Li Shizhen surrendered.

古文：于是囚都支、遮匐以归，遣波斯王自还其国，留王方翼于安西，使筑碎叶城。
现代文：于是裴行俭拘押阿史那都支和李庶匐回长安，打发波斯王自己返回他的国家，留王方翼于安西，让他修筑碎叶城。
English: As a result, Pei Xingjian detained Ashina Duzhi and Li Shizhen and sent them back to Chang'an. He also sent the Persian king back to his own country, leaving the Persian king in Anxi to build the City of Broken Leaves.

古文：冬，十月，单于大都护府突厥阿史德温傅、奉职二部俱反，立阿史那泥熟匐为可汗，二十四州酋长皆叛应之，众数十万。
现代文：冬季十月，单于大都护府突厥阿史德温傅、奉职两部一起反抗唐朝，拥立阿史那泥熟匐为可汗，二十四州酋长一起反叛，响应他们，拥兵数十万。
English: In the winter of October, the Turk, Ashdevinf, who was the protector of Dadu alone, and the two provinces that served him together rebelled against the Tang Dynasty and supported Ashina Mudra as the khan. Twenty-four state chiefs rebelled together and responded to them, supported by hundreds of thousands of soldiers.

古文：遣鸿胪卿单于大都护府长史萧嗣业、右领军卫将军花大智、右千牛卫将军李景嘉等将兵讨之。
现代文：唐朝派遣鸿胪卿单于大都护府长史萧嗣业、右领军卫将军花大智、右千牛卫将军李景嘉等率兵讨伐他们。
English: The Tang Dynasty sent Hong Zhenqing to single-handedly fight against them at the head of the Great Capital Protector Shi Xiao Ziye, the right leader of the army, General Hua Da Zhi, and the right leader of the army, General Li Jing Jia.

古文：嗣业等先战屡捷，因不设备；会大雪，突厥夜袭其营，嗣业狼狈拔营走，众遂大乱，为虏所败，死者不可胜数。
现代文：萧嗣业等开始时作战接连告捷，因而不注意防备；遇上下大雪，突厥人乘夜偷袭他们的军营，萧嗣业狼狈拔营逃走，部队于是大乱，被突厥兵打败，被打死的士兵很多。
English: At the beginning of the war, Xiao Ziyi and others had success after success, so they did not pay attention to prevention; in the event of heavy snow, the Turks attacked their military camp at night, Xiao Ziyi's camp fled in confusion, and the troops were in turmoil, defeated by the Turkish soldiers, and many soldiers were killed.

古文：大智、景嘉引步兵且行且战，得入单于都护府。
现代文：花大智、李景嘉率领步兵且战且走，得以退入单于都护府。
English: Hua Dazhi and Li Jingjia led the infantry and fought and walked, and were able to retreat to the capital alone.

古文：嗣业减死，流桂州，大智、景嘉并免官。
现代文：萧嗣业免除死罪，流放桂州，花大智、李景嘉都被免官。
English: Xiao Ziyi was exempted from the death penalty and exiled to Guizhou, while Hua Dazhi and Li Jingjia were both dismissed from their posts.

古文：突厥寇定州，刺史霍王元轨命开门偃旗，虏疑有伏，惧而宵遁。
现代文：突厥人侵扰定州，刺史霍王李元轨命令打开城门，放下旗帜。突厥人怀疑有埋伏，畏惧而乘夜间天黑撤走。
English: The Turks invaded Dingzhou, and Li Yuanlu, the king of Shishi, ordered the gate to be opened and the flag to be lowered. The Turks suspected an ambush and fled in the dark of night.

古文：州人李嘉运与虏通谋，事泄，上令元轨穷其党与，元轨曰： 强寇在境，人心不安。若多所逮系，是驱之使叛也。 
现代文：定州人李嘉运与突厥人暗通，事情败露后，唐高宗命令李元轨彻底追究他的同党。李元轨说： 强敌临境，人心不安，如果过多逮捕人，会逼使他们叛变。 
English: Li Jiayun from Dingzhou colluded with the Turks. After the affair was exposed, Tang Gaozong ordered Li Yuanlu to thoroughly investigate his fellow party members. Li Yuanlu said: A strong enemy is approaching, people are worried, if too many people are arrested, it will force them to rebel.

古文：乃独杀嘉运，馀无所问，因自劾违制。
现代文：于是只杀李嘉运，其余的都不追究，并上书说自己违反了命令。
English: As a result, he only killed Li Jiayun, and the rest were not investigated, and he wrote a letter saying that he had violated the order.

古文：上览表大喜，谓使者曰： 朕亦悔之，向无王，失定州矣。 
现代文：唐高宗阅读他的奏表后很高兴，对使者说： 朕也后悔了，假使没有霍王，便失去定州了。 
English: After reading his report, Tang Gaozong was very pleased and said to the envoy: "I also regret it. If there had been no King Huo, we would have lost Dingzhou.

古文：自是朝廷有大事，上多密敕问之。
现代文：从此，朝廷有大事，唐高宗多下密诏征询他的意见。
English: From then on, whenever there was a major event in the imperial court, Tang Gaozong often sent secret orders to solicit his opinion.

古文：壬子，遣左金吾卫将军曹怀舜屯井陉。右武卫将军崔献屯龙门，以备突厥。
现代文：壬子，唐朝派遗左金吾卫将军曹怀舜屯兵井陉，右武卫将军崔献屯兵龙门，以防备突厥。
English: According to the legend, the Tang Dynasty sent Cao Huai, the last left-wing general of the Jin and Wu armies, to garrison Jingshan, and the right-wing general of the Wu armies, Cui Xian, to garrison Longmen, in order to prevent the Turks.

古文：突厥扇诱奚、契丹侵掠营州，都督周道务遣户曹始平唐休璟将兵击破之。
现代文：突厥煽动诱惑奚、契丹侵掠营州，都督周道务派遣户曹始平人唐休领兵将他们打败。
English: The Turks instigated and tempted the Mongols, the Khitans invaded and plundered Yingzhou, and the governor Zhou Daowu dispatched Cao Shihping and Tang Xiu to lead the troops to defeat them.

古文：庚申，诏以突厥背诞，罢封嵩山。
现代文：庚申，唐高宗下诏，因突厥违抗朝命不受调度约束，停止封嵩山。
English: According to the edict issued by Emperor Gaozong of the Tang Dynasty, the Turks were not subject to scheduling constraints due to their defiance of the imperial order, and the blockade of Songshan was stopped.

古文：癸亥，吐蕃文成公主遣其大臣论塞调傍来告丧，并请和亲，上遣郎将宋令文诣吐蕃会赞普之葬。
现代文：癸亥，吐蕃文成公主派遣大臣论塞调傍来长安报告赞普的丧事，并请求和亲。唐高宗派遣郎将宋令文去吐蕃参加赞普的葬礼。
English: At that time, Princess Wencheng of Jianhai and Tubo dispatched a minister to Chang'an to report the funeral of Zampu, and requested a relative. Emperor Gaozong of Tang dispatched his son-in-law Song Lingwen to Tubo to attend Zampu's funeral.

古文：十一月，戊寅朔，以太子左庶子、同中书门下三品高智周为御史大夫，罢知政事。
现代文：十一月，戊寅朔，唐朝任命太子左庶子、同中书门下三品高智周为御史大夫，罢知政事。
English: In November, Wu Yinshuo, the Tang Dynasty, appointed Prince Zuo's illegitimate son, and the third grade of Gaozhi Zhou, a disciple of the same school, as the imperial historian, and he was in charge of political affairs.

古文：癸未，上宴裴行俭，谓之曰： 卿有文武兼资，今授卿二职。 
现代文：癸未，唐高宗宴请裴行俭，对他说： 你兼有文武才能，现在授予你两个职务。 
English: Not long ago, Tang Gaozong invited Pei Xingjian to a banquet and said to him: You have both literary and military talents, and now you have been awarded two positions.

古文：乃除礼部尚书兼检校右卫大将军。
现代文：于是任命他为礼部尚书兼检校右卫大将军。
English: As a result, he was appointed General of the Right Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：甲辰，以行俭为定襄道行军大总管，将兵十八万，并西军检校丰州都督程务挺、东军幽州都督李文暕总三十馀万以讨突厥，并受行检节度。
现代文：甲辰，任命裴行俭为定襄道行军大总管，领兵十八万，会同西军检校丰州都督程务挺、东军幽州都督李文总共三十余万兵以讨伐突厥，他们都受裴行俭调度指挥。
English: Jia Chen appointed Pei Xingjian as the general manager of the Dingxiang Road march, leading 180,000 soldiers, together with the Western military inspection school, Fongzhou Governor Cheng Mu Ting, and the Eastern Army Yuzhou Governor Li Wen, a total of more than 300,000 soldiers to fight the Turks. They were all under the command of Pei Xingjian.

古文：务挺，名振之子也。
现代文：程务挺就是程名振的儿子。
English: Cheng Mu Ting is the son of Cheng Nam Ting.

古文：永隆元年庚辰，公元六八零年
现代文：永隆元年
English: in the first year of Yonglong

古文：春，二月，癸丑，上幸汝州之温汤；戊午，幸嵩山处士三原田游岩所居；己未，幸道士宗城潘师正所居，上及天后、太子皆拜之。
现代文：春季二月，癸丑，唐高宗到汝州温泉；戊午，到嵩山处士三原人田游岩住所；己未，到道士宗城人潘师正住所，唐高宗、天后武则天、太子都向他行礼。
English: In the spring of February, at dusk, Tang Gaozong went to Ruzhou Hot Spring; at noon, he went to the residence of Songshan official Sanyuan person Tian Youyan; at dusk, he went to the residence of Taoist Zongcheng person Pan Shizheng. Tang Gaozong, the Queen of Heaven Wu Zetian, and the prince all bowed to him.

古文：乙丑，还东都。
现代文：乙丑，唐高宗等返回东都洛阳。
English: Second Ugly, Tang Gaozong and others returned to the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：三月，裴行俭大破突厥于黑山，擒其酋长奉职，可汗泥熟匐为其下所杀，以其首来降。
现代文：三月，裴行俭大败突厥兵于黑山，擒获他们的酋长奉职；可汗泥熟匐被部下杀死，他的部下拿着他的脑袋前来投降。
English: In March, Bae defeated the Turks in Montenegro and captured their chieftain; the khan was killed by his subordinates, and his subordinates came to surrender with his head.

古文：初，行俭行至朔川，谓其下曰：用兵之道，抚士贵诚，制敌尚诈。
现代文：当初，裴行俭进军到朔州，曾对他的下属说： 用兵之道，安抚士卒要出于诚心诚意，对付敌人就不惜虚伪欺诈。
English: At first, Pei Xingjian marched into Shuozhou and said to his subordinates: Use the military way, the pacifier should be sincere, and deal with the enemy with hypocrisy and deception.

古文：前日萧嗣业粮运为突厥所掠，士卒冻馁，故败。
现代文：上次萧嗣业运送的军粮被突厥人掠夺，士卒受冻挨饿，所以失败。
English: The last time Xiao Ziyi transported grain for the army, it was plundered by the Turks, and the soldiers froze and starved, so it was a failure.

古文：今突厥必复为此谋，宜有以诈之。 
现代文：现在突厥人必然再用同一策略，应当用计策欺骗他们。 
English: Now the Turks are bound to try the same trick again, and they must be tricked.

古文：乃诈为粮车三百乘，每车伏壮士五人，各持陌刀、劲弩，以羸兵数百为之援，且伏精兵于险要以待之；虏果至，羸兵弃车散走。
现代文：于是伪装运粮车三百辆，每辆车中潜伏壮士五人，各持大刀、强弩，派老弱兵数百人跟车，又埋伏精兵在险要处等待敌人。敌人果然来抢粮车，跟车的老弱残兵弃车逃散。
English: As a result, they disguised three hundred grain trucks, with five strong men lurking in each vehicle, each holding a large sword and a strong shield, and sent hundreds of old and weak soldiers to follow the truck. They also ambushed the enemy at critical points to wait for the enemy. The enemy indeed came to rob the grain truck, and the old and weak soldiers abandoned the truck and fled.

古文：虏驱车就水草，解鞍牧马，欲取粮，壮士自车中跃出，击之，虏惊走，复为伏兵所邀，杀获殆尽，自是粮草运行者，虏莫敢近。
现代文：敌人把粮车赶到有水草的地方，解鞍放马，准备取车上的粮食，这时壮士从车中跳出，袭击他们。敌人受惊逃走，又受到伏兵阻击，几乎全被俘虏和杀死。从此，敌人再也不敢靠近唐军的运粮车队。
English: The enemy drove the grain wagon to a place with water weeds, unsaddled the horses and prepared to take the grain on the wagon, when a strong man jumped out of the wagon and attacked them. The enemy fled in fright, was ambushed, and almost all of them were captured and killed. From then on, the enemy no longer dared to approach the Tang army's grain convoys.

古文：军至单于府北，抵暮，下营，掘堑已周，行俭遽命移就高冈；诸将皆言士卒已安堵，不可复动，行俭不从，趣使移。
现代文：裴行俭进军到单于府以北，已近傍晚，宿营后，周围的壕沟已经挖好。裴行俭突然命令全军往高岗上转移；诸将都说士卒已经安顿好，不可以再移动，裴行俭不答应，还催促快转移。
English: Pei Xingjian marched to the north of Shan Yu Fu, it was already late afternoon, after the camp, the surrounding trenches had been dug. Pei Xingjian suddenly ordered the whole army to move to the high post; the generals all said that the soldiers had settled well and could not be moved again, but Pei Xingjian did not agree and urged them to move quickly.

古文：是夜，风雨暴至，前所营地，水深丈馀。
现代文：当夜，发生暴风雨，原来的营地水深一丈多。
English: That night, there was a storm, and the original camp was more than a meter deep.

古文：诸将惊服，问其故，行俭笑曰： 自今但从我命，不必问其所由知也。 
现代文：诸将既惊异又佩服，问他为何能预先知道这情况，裴行俭笑着说： 今后只管服从我的命令，不必问我怎么知道的。 
English: The generals were both surprised and impressed. They asked him why he knew about the situation in advance. Pei Xingyan smiled and said, "From now on, just obey my orders, don't ask me how I know."

古文：奉职既就擒，馀党走保狼山。
现代文：奉职被擒以后，他的余党退守狼山。
English: After he was arrested for doing his duty, the rest of his party retreated to Wolf Mountain.

古文：诏户部尚书崔知悌驰传诣定襄宣慰将士，且区处馀寇，行俭引军还。
现代文：唐高宗命令户部尚书崔知悌乘驿站马车，奔赴定襄，传达皇帝慰问将士的旨意，而且负责对付残余敌人，让裴行俭领军返回。
English: Tang Gaozong ordered the head of the household, Shangshu Cui Zhisheng, to take a stagecoach and rush to Dingxiang to convey the emperor's condolences to the soldiers, and was also responsible for dealing with the remaining enemies and letting Pei Xingran lead the army back.

古文：夏，四月，乙丑，上幸紫桂宫。
现代文：夏季四月，乙丑，唐高宗来到紫桂宫。
English: In the summer of April, the second Ugly, Tang Gaozong came to Zi Gui Palace.

古文：戊辰，黄门侍郎闻喜、裴炎、崔知温、中书侍郎京兆王德真并同中书门下三品。
现代文：戊辰，黄门侍郎闻喜人裴炎、崔知温、中书侍郎京兆人王德真都任同中书门下三品。
English: Wu Chen, Huangmen waiter Wang Xijin, Pei Yan, Cui Zhiwen, and Beijing scholar Wang Dezhen were all appointed as the third grade of the same middle school.

古文：知温，知悌之弟也。
现代文：崔知温就是崔知悌的弟弟。
English: Choi Ji-won is Choi Ji-soo's younger brother.

古文：秋，七月，吐蕃寇河源，左武卫将军黑齿常之击却之。
现代文：秋季七月，吐蕃侵扰河源，左武卫将军黑齿常之把他们击退。
English: In the autumn of July, the Tubo invaded Heyuan, and Zuo Wei General Black Tooth Changzhi repulsed them.

古文：擢常之为河源军经略大使。
现代文：唐朝提升黑齿常之为河源军经略大使。
English: The Tang Dynasty promoted the black-toothed horse to be the strategic ambassador of the Heyuan Army.

古文：常之以河源冲要，欲加兵戍之，而转输险远，乃广置烽戍七十馀所，开屯田五千馀顷，岁收五百馀万石，由是战守有备焉。
现代文：黑齿常之因为河源地处要冲，打算增兵戍守，但运输道路遥远而且艰险，于是增设烽火台戍守点七十余处，开屯田五千余顷，每年收获粮食五百余万石，从此战争和防守都有足够的粮食贮备。
English: Because the source of the river was in a rush, the Black Tooth Tribe planned to increase the number of soldiers to defend it, but the transportation route was distant and arduous. Therefore, more than seventy campfire defense points were added, more than five thousand hectares of farmland were set aside, and more than five million koku of grain were harvested each year. Since then, there have been sufficient grain reserves for war and defense.

古文：先是，剑南募兵于茂州西南筑安戎城，以断吐蕃通蛮之路。
现代文：在这以前，剑南招募士兵，在茂州西南修筑安戎城，用它来阻断吐蕃通蛮的道路。
English: Prior to this, Jian Nan recruited soldiers to build An Rong City in the southwest of Mochou, and used it to block the road from Tubo to Zhuang.

古文：吐蕃以生羌为乡导，攻陷其城，以兵据之，由是西洱诸蛮皆降于吐蕃。
现代文：吐蕃用生羌人为向导，攻陷安戎城，并驻兵镇守，从此西洱诸蛮都投降吐蕃。
English: He used a raw oyster as a guide to attack An Rong City, and stationed soldiers to guard the town. From then on, all the barbarians in Xidi surrendered to him.

古文：吐蕃尽据羊同、党项及诸羌之地，东接凉、松、茂、巂等州；南邻天竺，西陷龟兹、疏勒等四镇，北抵突厥，地方万馀里，诸胡之盛，莫与为比。
现代文：吐蕃全部据有羊同、党项及诸羌住地，东面连接唐朝的凉、松、茂、等州，南面与天竺相邻，西边攻陷龟兹、疏勒等四镇，北边抵达突厥，地方万余里，诸胡中最强盛的也不能与之相比。
English: On the east, it is connected to Liang, Song, Mao and other prefectures of the Tang Dynasty; on the south, it is adjacent to Tianzhu; on the west, it has invaded and occupied four towns including Guzezi and Shule; and on the north, it has reached Turku, more than 10,000 miles away. The strongest of Zhuhu cannot be compared to it.

古文：丙申，郑州刺史江王元祥薨。
现代文：丙申，郑州刺史江李元祥去世。
English: Li Yuanxiang, a member of the Zhengzhou Zhishi Jiang, passed away.

古文：突厥馀众围云州，代州都督窦怀悊、右领军中郎将程务挺将兵击破之。
现代文：突厥余众围攻云州，唐朝代州都督窦怀哲、右领军中郎将程务挺领兵将他们打败。
English: The Turks besieged Yunnan, and the Tang Dynasty's governor of Yunnan, Dou Huai Zhe, and the right-hand leader of the army, Zhong Lang, sent Cheng Mu Ting to lead the troops to defeat them.

古文：八月，丁未，上还东都。
现代文：八月，丁未，唐高宗返回东都洛阳。
English: In August, Ding Wei, Tang Gaozong returned to the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：中书令、检校鄯州都督李敬玄，军既败，屡称疾请还；上许之。
现代文：唐朝中书令、检校鄯州都督李敬玄，打了败仗后，一再声称有病请求返回长安；唐高宗批准他的请求。
English: After losing the battle, Li Jingxuan, the governor of Bozhou, who was the scribe and inspector of schools in the Tang Dynasty, repeatedly claimed to be ill and requested to return to Chang'an; Tang Gaozong approved his request.

古文：既至，无疾，诣中书视事；上怒，丁巳，贬衡州刺史。
现代文：回来后，他根本没有病，还到中书省办公。唐高宗对他很为恼火，丁巳，贬他为衡州刺史。
English: When he came back, he was not sick at all, and even went to the office of the Ministry of Chinese Literature. Tang Gaozong was very annoyed with him, Ding Si, and relegated him to the history of Hengzhou.

古文：太子贤闻宫中窃议，以贤为天后姊韩国夫人所生，内自疑惧。
现代文：太子李贤听到宫中私下议论说，他是天后武则天的姐姐韩国夫人所生，暗自疑惑畏惧。
English: When Prince Rihyon heard the palace whisper that he was the son of the South Korean wife of the sister of Empress Dowager Wu Ze Tian, he was secretly suspicious and afraid.

古文：明崇俨以厌胜之术为天后所信，尝密称 太子不堪承继，英王貌类太宗 。又言 相王相最贵 。
现代文：明崇俨凭借用诅咒制胜的迷信法术获得天后武则天的信任，常私下说 太子不能够继承帝位，英王李哲的相貌像唐太宗 ，又说 相王李轮相貌最显贵 。
English: By virtue of the superstitious magic of using a curse to win, Ming Chongzhen gained the trust of the goddess Wu Zetian. He often said in private that the prince could not inherit the throne, the appearance of the king Li Zhe was like that of Tang Taizong, and that the appearance of the king Li Lan was the most valuable.

古文：天后尝命北门学士撰《少阳正范》及《孝子传》以赐太子，又数作书诮让之，太子愈不自安。
现代文：天后武则天曾命北门学士撰《少阳正范》及《孝子传》赏赐给太子，又几次写信谴责他，太子心里越来越不安。
English: The Empress Dowager Wu Zetian once ordered the North Gate Scholar to write "Shaoyang Zhengfan" and "The Biography of a Filial Son" to reward the prince, and wrote to him several times to condemn him. The prince became more and more uneasy.

古文：及崇俨死，贼不得，天后疑太子所为。
现代文：及至明崇俨死去，捕不到杀死他的盗贼，天后武则天便怀疑这事是太子所干。
English: When Ming Chongzhen died and the thieves who killed him could not be caught, the Queen Mother Wu Zetian suspected that it was the work of the prince.

古文：太子颇好声色，与户奴赵道生等狎昵，多赐之金帛。司议郎韦承庆上书谏，不听。
现代文：太子颇好音乐、女色，与家奴赵道生等亲近，多赏赐他们金帛，司议郎韦承庆上书规劝，太子不听。
English: The prince was quite good at music and women. He was close to his house slave, Zhao Daosheng, and rewarded them with more gold ingots. The moderator, Wei Chengqing, wrote to the prince to persuade him, but the prince did not listen.

古文：天后使人告其事。
现代文：天后武则天指使人告发这些事。
English: The day after tomorrow, Wu Zetian will order people to denounce these things.

古文：诏薛元超、裴炎与御史大夫高智周等杂鞫之，于东宫马坊搜得皁甲数百领，以为反具；道生又款称太子使道生杀崇俨。
现代文：唐高宗命令薛元超、裴炎与御史大夫高智周等一起审问太子，在东宫马坊搜查出黑甲数百件，作为谋反物证；赵道生又供认太子指使他杀死明崇俨。
English: Tang Gaozong ordered Xue Yuanchao, Pei Yan and the chief historian Gao Zhizhou to interrogate the prince, and hundreds of black coats were found in the East Palace Ma Fang as material evidence of conspiracy; Zhao Daosheng also confessed that the prince ordered him to kill Ming Chongyi.

古文：上素爱太子，迟回欲宥之，天后曰： 为人子怀逆谋，天地所不容；大义灭亲，何可赦也！ 
现代文：唐高宗一贯喜爱太子，迟疑不决，想赦免他，天后武则天说： 作为人子而有叛逆之心，天地所不容。应该大义灭亲，怎么可以敕免！ 
English: Tang Gaozong always loved the prince, hesitated, and wanted to pardon him. The Queen Mother Wu Zetian said, "As the son of man, he has a rebellious heart, which is unacceptable to heaven and earth. If relatives should be killed, how can they be pardoned?"

古文：甲子，废太子贤为庶人，遣右监门中郎将令狐智通等送贤诣京师，幽于别所，党与皆伏诛，乃焚其甲于天津桥南以示士民。
现代文：甲子，废太子李贤为平民，派遣右监门中郎将令狐智通等送李贤到京师，幽禁于别所，同党都被处死，搜查出的黑甲在洛阳天津桥南焚烧示众。
English: The first son, the former crown prince, Li Xian, was a commoner. He was sent to Beijing by the right supervisor, the gatekeeper, who ordered Fox Zhitong and others to send Li Xian to Beijing. He was confined to another place. His fellow party members were all executed. The black armour that was found was burned in the south of Tianjin Bridge in Luoyang for public display.

古文：承庆，思谦之子也。
现代文：韦承庆就是韦思谦的儿子。
English: Wei Chengqing is the son of Wei Sichen.

古文：乙丑，立左卫大将军、雍州牧英王哲为皇太子，改元，赦天下。
现代文：乙丑，唐朝立左卫大将军、雍州牧英王李哲为太子，更改年号，大赦天下。
English: Second ugly, the Tang Dynasty established General Zuo Wei, and Li Zhe, King of Yongzhou Muying, became the prince, changed the year, and was pardoned by the world.

古文：太子洗马刘讷言尝撰《俳谐集》以献贤，贤败，搜得之，上怒曰： 以《六经》教人，犹恐不化，乃进俳谐鄙说，岂辅导之义邪！ 
现代文：太子洗马刘讷言曾经撰写《俳谐集》献给李贤；李贤的事情败露，被搜查出来。唐高宗十分恼怒，说： 用《六经》教人，还恐怕不能感化；竟然进献戏谑取笑之类鄙俗杂说，哪里有辅导太子的意思！ 
English: Tang Gaozong was very angry and said, "I'm afraid I can't use the "Six Classics" to teach people, and I can't use it to influence them; I can't even use it to tell jokes and make fun of such vulgar stories, what's the point of teaching the prince!"

古文：流讷言于振州。
现代文：于是将刘讷言流放振州。
English: As a result, Liu Naiyan was exiled to Zhengzhou.

古文：左卫将军高真行之子政为太子典膳丞，事与贤连，上以付其父，使自训责。
现代文：左卫将军高真行的儿子高政任太子典膳丞，与李贤的事有牵连。唐高宗将他交给他父亲，让他父亲自己教训责罚。
English: Gao Zhengren, the son of General Gao Zhengyong of the Left Division, was implicated in the Li Xian affair. Tang Gaozong handed him over to his father and let his father punish him.

古文：政入门，真行以佩刀刺其喉，真行兄户部侍郎审行又刺其腹，真行兄子璿断其首，弃之道中。
现代文：高政一进门，高真行先用佩刀刺他咽喉，高真行的哥哥户部侍郎高审行又刺他腹部，高真行哥哥的儿子高又砍下他的脑袋，并抛弃在路上。
English: As soon as Gao Zheng walked through the door, Gao Zhengying stabbed him in the throat with a saber. Gao Zhengying's brother, Hube Zhilang Gaozhong, stabbed him in the abdomen. Gao Zhengying's brother's son, Gao, cut off his head and left it on the road.

古文：上闻之，不悦，贬真行为睦州刺史，审行为渝州刺史。
现代文：唐高宗听说后，很不高兴，贬高真行为睦州刺史，贬高审行为渝州刺史。
English: After hearing this, Tang Gaozong was very unhappy. He belittled the truth to make history in Mutsu Province and belittled the trial to make history in Yuzhou Province.

古文：真行，士廉之子也。
现代文：高真行是高士廉的儿子。
English: Gao Zhengyong is Gao Shilian's son.

古文：左庶子、同中书门下三品张大安坐阿附太子，左迁普州刺史，其馀宫僚，上皆释其罪，使复位，左庶子薛元超等皆舞蹈拜恩；右庶子李义琰独引咎涕泣，时论美之。
现代文：左庶子、同中书门下三品张大安因逢迎依附太子，被降职为普州刺史。其余太子东宫的僚属，唐高宗都赦免了他们的罪，并恢复他们的职位。对此，左庶子薛元超等都手舞足蹈，拜谢皇恩；只有右庶子李义琰承认过失而痛哭流涕，得到舆论的称赞。
English: Zhang Da'an, the left illegitimate son and the third grade of the same middle school, was demoted to the position of the prince of Puzhou because of his attachment to the prince. The remaining colleagues of the East Palace of the prince, Tang Gaozong, pardoned their sins and restored their positions. For this, the left illegitimate son Xue Yuanchao and others all danced with their hands and feet, thanking the royal grace; only the right illegitimate son Li Yixuan admitted his fault and cried bitterly, which was praised by the public opinion.

古文：九月，甲申，以中书侍郎、同中书门下三品王德真为相王府长史，罢政事。
现代文：九月，甲申，唐朝任命中书侍郎、同中书门下三品王德真为相王府长史，罢除相职。
English: In September, the Tang Dynasty appointed Wang Dezhen, the attendant of Zhongshu and the disciple of Zhongshu, as the chief historian of the King's Palace, and removed him from the post.

古文：冬，十月，壬寅，苏州刺史曹王明、沂州刺史嗣蒋王炜，皆坐故太子贤之党，明降封零陵郡王，黔州安置；炜除名，道州安置。
现代文：冬季十月，壬寅，苏州刺史曹王李明，沂州刺史嗣蒋王李炜，都因是原太子李贤的同党而获罪，李明降封为零陵郡王，在黔州安置；李炜被撤销官吏名籍，在道州安置。
English: In the winter of October, Ren Yin, the Suzhou assassin Cao Wang Li Ming, and the Zhangzhou assassin Jiang Wang Li Yao, were all found guilty of being the same party as the former prince Li Xian. Li Ming was demoted to the position of the King of Ziling County and resettled in Zhangzhou; Li Yao was revoked his official registration and resettled in Daozhou.

古文：丙午，文成公主薨于吐蕃。
现代文：丙午，文成公主在吐蕃去世。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Princess Wencheng passed away in Tubo.

古文：己酉，车驾西还。
现代文：己酉，唐高宗西还长安。
English: Jizhong, Tang Gao Zongxi and Chang'an.

古文：十一月，壬申朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月，壬申朔，出现日食。
English: November, Jinshen New Year's Eve, a solar eclipse.

古文：开耀元年辛巳，公元六八一年
现代文：开耀元年春季正月，突厥侵扰唐朝原、庆等州。
English: At the beginning of the first month of the spring of the first year, the Turks invaded the provinces of Tang Dynasty such as Yuan and Qing.

古文：春，正月，突厥寇原、庆等州。乙亥，遣右卫将军李知十等将兵屯泾、庆二州以备突厥。
现代文：乙亥，唐朝派遣右卫将军李知十等屯兵泾、庆二州以防备突厥。
English: In the Year of the Boar, the Tang Dynasty dispatched the tenth-ranked right guard general, Li Zhi, to garrison and fortify Qing Erzhou in preparation for the Turks.

古文：庚辰，以初立太子，敕宴百官及命妇于宣政殿，引九部伎及散乐自宣政门入。
现代文：庚辰，因初立太子，唐高宗命令宴请百官及有封号的妇女于宣政殿，领九部乐队和民间乐舞杂技艺人由宣政门进入宣政殿。
English: Geng Chen, due to the early establishment of the prince, Tang Gaozong ordered a banquet for hundreds of officials and women with sealed numbers in the Xuancheng Palace, leading nine bands and folk music and dance acrobats from the Xuancheng Gate into the Xuancheng Palace.

古文：太常博士袁利贞上疏，以为： 正寝非命妇宴会之地，路门非倡优进御之所，请命妇会于别殿，九部伎自东西门入，其散乐伏望停省。 
现代文：太常博士袁利贞上疏认为： 皇帝治事的正殿不是有封号的妇女宴会的地方，正殿的大门也不是歌舞杂技艺人所应该进入的。请让有封号的妇女在偏殿参加宴会，九部乐队由东西侧门进入，民间乐舞杂技则希望予以免除。 
English: Dr. Yuan Lizhen Shangsuo thought: The main hall of the emperor's palace is not a place for women's banquets with a sealed number, and the main hall's gate is not for singing and dancing acrobats to enter. Please let the women with a sealed number attend the banquet in the side hall, nine bands enter through the east and west side doors, and folk music and dance acrobatics are exempted.

古文：上乃更命置宴于麟德殿；宴日，赐利贞帛百段。
现代文：唐高宗于是下令改在麟德殿设宴；设宴当天，赏赐袁利贞帛一百段。
English: Tang Gaozong then ordered a banquet to be held in the Lin De Hall instead; on the day of the banquet, Yuan Li Zhengyu was awarded one hundred dan.

古文：利贞，昂之曾孙也。
现代文：袁利贞是袁昂的曾孙。
English: Yuan Lizhen is Yuan Ang's great-grandson.

古文：利贞族孙谊为苏州刺史，自以其先自宋太尉淑以来，尽忠帝室，谓琅邪王氏虽奕世台鼎，而为历代佐命，耻与为比，尝曰： 所贵于名家者，为其世笃忠贞，才行相继故也。
现代文：袁利贞远房侄孙袁谊任苏州刺史，自认为他的先辈自宋太尉袁淑以来为历朝皇帝尽忠；而琅邪王氏虽累世居于三公的高位，但又成为历代篡权者的辅佐之臣。他耻与王氏相比，曾说： 著名家族之所以尊贵，是因为它世代坚守忠贞，有才干和操行的人相继不断。
English: Yuan Li Zhenyuan's great-nephew, Sun Yuan Yi, was appointed as the first president of Suzhou, and he believed that his ancestors had been loyal to the emperors of all dynasties since Song Taifeng Yuan Shu. However, although the Yuyao Wang clan had lived in the high positions of the Three Princes for many generations, they had become the auxiliary vassals of the usurpers of power throughout the ages. Compared with the Wang clan, he once said: The reason why a famous family is noble is because it has been loyal for generations, and people with talent and conduct continue to succeed one another.

古文：彼鬻婚姻求禄利者，又乌足贵乎！ 
现代文：那些靠出卖婚姻以求利禄的人，又有什么值得尊贵的呢！ 
English: What is so honorable about those who sell their marriage for financial gain?

古文：时人是其言。
现代文：当时人们赞同他的说法。
English: At the time, people agreed with him.

古文：裴行俭军既还，突厥阿史那伏念复自立为可汗，与阿史德温傅连兵为寇。
现代文：唐将裴行俭的军队返回后，突厥阿史那伏念又自立为可汗，与阿史德温傅联合出兵侵扰唐朝边境。
English: After Tang returned Pei Xingjian's army, the Turk Ashina Fuxiong became a khan again, and he and Ashide Wenfu jointly sent troops to invade the border of Tang Dynasty.

古文：癸巳，以行俭为定襄道大总管，以右武卫将军曹怀舜、幽州都督李文暕为副，将兵讨之。
现代文：癸巳，唐朝任命裴行俭为定襄道大总管，以右武卫将军曹怀舜、幽州都督李文为他的副手，领兵讨伐突厥。
English: Soon after, the Tang Dynasty appointed Pei Xingjian as the chief administrator of Dingxiang Road, with Cao Huaiqi, the right military commander, and Li Wen, the governor of Yuzhou, as his deputies to lead the army to fight the Turks.

古文：二月，天后表请赦杞王上金、鄱阳王素节之罪；以上金为沔州刺史，素节为岳州刺史，仍不听朝集。
现代文：二月，天后武则天上表请求赦免杞王李上金、鄱阳王李素节的罪过；任命李上金为沔州刺史，李素节为岳州刺史，仍不许朝见皇帝。
English: In February, Empress Dowager Wu Zetian made an appeal to heaven to pardon the sins of the Shao King Li Shang Jin and the Shoyang King Li Su Jie; Li Shang Jin was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou and Li Su Jie as the governor of Yuezhou, but they were still not allowed to meet the emperor.

古文：三月，辛卯，以刘仁轨兼太子少傅，馀如故。以侍中郝处俊为太子少保，罢政事。
现代文：三月，辛卯，唐朝任命刘仁轨兼任太子少傅，原任职务不变；任命侍中郝处俊为太子少保，罢除相职。
English: In March, Xinwu, the Tang Dynasty appointed Liu Renglu as the prince's junior tutor, and the original position remained unchanged; appointed the chamberlain Zou Shidejun as the prince's junior tutor, and dismissed the official position.

古文：少府监裴匪舒，善营利，奏卖苑中马粪，岁得钱二十万缗。
现代文：少府监裴匪舒，善于营利，奏请出卖宫苑中的马粪，每年可收入二十万缗钱。
English: Baibanshu, a minor prefectural inspector, was good at making a profit. He was asked to sell horse manure from the palace garden, which brought in 200,000 baht a year.

古文：上以问刘仁轨，对曰： 利则厚矣，恐后代称唐家卖马粪，非嘉名也。 
现代文：唐高宗为此问刘仁轨，回答说： 利是很厚的，但恐怕后代说唐朝皇家卖马粪，不是好名声。 
English: Tang Gaozong asked Liu Renluo about this and replied: The profit is very high, but I am afraid that future generations will say that the Tang Dynasty royal family sold horse manure, which is not a good reputation.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是停止出卖马粪。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：匪舒又为上造镜殿，成，上与仁轨观之，仁轨惊趋下殿。
现代文：裴匪舒又为唐高宗建造镜殿，落成后，唐高宗与刘仁轨一起参观，刘仁轨受惊急忙下殿。
English: Baibanshu also built the Hall of Mirrors for Tang Gaozong. After it was completed, Tang Gaozong visited it together with Liu Renzhong. Liu Renzhong was alarmed and hurried down to the hall.

古文：上问其故，对曰： 天无二日，土无二王，适视四壁有数天子，不祥孰甚焉！ 
现代文：唐高宗问他这是为什么，他回答说： 天上无二日，地上无二主，刚才看见四周墙上有几位天子，还有什么比这更不祥的呢！ 
English: Tang Gaozong asked him why this was, and he replied: There are no two days in the sky, and there are no two masters on the earth. Just now, I saw several gods on the walls around me. What could be more ominous than this?

古文：上遽令剔去。
现代文：唐高宗命令立即将镜剔去。
English: Tang Gaozong ordered that the mirror be immediately removed.

古文：曹怀舜与裨将窦义昭将前军击突厥。
现代文：曹怀舜与偏将窦义昭率领前军进击突厥。
English: Cao Huaiqi and the partial general Dou Yizhao led the front army to attack the Turks.

古文：或告 阿史那伏念与阿史德温傅在黑沙北，左右才二十骑以下，可径往取也。 
现代文：有人报告 阿史那伏念与阿史德温傅在黑沙，身边只有不到二十名骑兵，可以直接去擒拿。 
English: It was reported that Ashinafuneen and Ashdevinfo were in the Black Sands with less than twenty horsemen, and they could go straight to Jinnah.

古文：怀舜等信之，留老弱于瓠芦泊，帅轻锐倍道进，至黑沙，无所见，人马疲顿，乃引兵还。
现代文：曹怀舜等相信这情报，于是将老弱留在瓠芦泊，率领轻锐队伍，以加倍的速度前进，到达黑沙时，连人影也没看见，人困马乏，只好领兵返回。
English: Cao Huaiyu and others believed this information, so they left the old and weak in Hulubo, led the light team, and advanced at double the speed. When they reached Heisha, they did not even see a shadow of a person. They were so exhausted that they had to lead the soldiers back.

古文：会薛延陀部落欲西诣伏念，遇怀舜军，因请降。
现代文：这时候薛延陀部落想往西投奔阿史那伏念，途中与曹怀舜军相遇，投降了曹军。
English: At this time, the Xueyanta tribe wanted to go west to Ashina Furen, and on the way they encountered Cao Huai's army and surrendered to Cao's army.

古文：怀舜等收散卒，敛金帛以赂伏念，与之约和，杀牛为盟。
现代文：经过一天后，阿史那伏念趁顺风进击唐军，唐军大乱，曹怀舜等收集被打散的士卒，收聚金帛贿赂阿史那伏念，同他议和，杀牛订盟。
English: After a day, Ashina Funei took advantage of the tailwind to attack the Tang army, the Tang army was in chaos, Cao Huaiqi and others collected the scattered soldiers, collected gold ingots to bribe Ashina Funei, negotiated with him, and made an alliance to kill cows.

古文：伏念北去，怀舜等乃得还。
现代文：阿史那伏念北撤，曹怀舜等才得以返回。
English: Ashina Fuxiong considered withdrawing to the north, but Cao Huaiya and others were able to return.

古文：夏。五月，丙戌，怀舜免死，流岭南。
现代文：夏季，五月，丙戌，曹怀舜被免除死罪，流放岭南。
English: In the summer, in May, He Pingyao and Cao Huaiyao were exonerated from the death penalty and exiled to Lingnan.

古文：己丑，河源道经略大使黑齿常之将兵击吐蕃论赞婆于良非川，破之，收其粮畜而还。
现代文：己丑，河源道经略大使黑齿常之领兵进击，在良非川打败吐蕃论赞婆，获取他们的粮食牲畜而返回。
English: In spite of his ugliness, the ambassador of Heyuan economic strategy, Black Tooth Changzhi, led the troops to attack, defeated Tuyuan Zanba in Liangfei River, obtained their grain and livestock, and returned.

古文：常之在军七年，吐蕃深畏之，不敢犯边。
现代文：黑齿常之在军中七年，吐蕃人很害怕他，不敢进犯唐朝边地。
English: He was in the army for seven years, and the people of Tibet were very afraid of him and did not dare to attack the outskirts of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：初，太原王妃之薨也，天后请以太平公主为女官以追福。
现代文：当初，太原王王妃逝世，天后武则天请求让自己女儿太平公主为女道士，为死者乞求冥福。
English: At first, after the death of Princess Taiyuan, the Queen Mother Wu Zetian requested that her daughter, Princess Taiping, become a female Taoist to pray for the repose of the dead.

古文：及吐蕃求和亲，请尚太平公主，上乃为之立太平观，以公主为观主以拒之。
现代文：后来吐蕃要求和亲，请求娶太平公主，唐高宗便为她建立太平观，任她为观主，以拒绝吐蕃。
English: Later, Tubo requested to be reconciled and asked to marry the Taiping Princess. Tang Gaozong then established the Taiping concept for her and allowed her to be the subject of the concept in order to refuse Tubo.

古文：至是，始选光禄卿汾阴薛曜之子绍尚焉。
现代文：到这时候，才选择光禄卿汾阴人薛曜的儿子薛绍结婚。
English: It was only at this time that he chose Xue Xiao, the son of Xue You, the son of Guanglu Jing and Gu Yin, to marry.

古文：绍母，太宗女城阳公主也。
现代文：薛绍的母亲就是唐太宗的女儿城阳公主。
English: Xue Shao's mother was the daughter of Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty, Princess Chengyang.

古文：秋，七月，公主适薛氏，自兴安门南至宣阳坊西。燎炬相属，夹路槐木多死。
现代文：秋季七月，太平公主出嫁薛家时，自兴安门南至宣阳坊西，火炬接连不断，路两边的槐树多被烧死。
English: In the autumn of July, when Princess Taiping married into the Xue family, torches were lit continuously from Xing'anmen south to Xuanyangfang west, and most of the eucalyptus trees on both sides of the road were burned to death.

古文：绍史顗以公主宠盛，深忧之，以问族祖户部郎中克构，克构曰： 帝甥尚主，国家故事，苟以恭慎行之，亦何伤！
现代文：薛绍的哥哥薛因太平公主恩宠太盛，深为忧虑，询问远房叔祖父户部郎中薛克构该怎么办，薛克构说： 皇帝的外甥娶公主，是皇家旧例，如果以恭敬谨慎的态度对待，又有什么关系！
English: Xue Shao's brother Xue was deeply worried because the favor of Princess Taiping was too great. He asked his distant uncle and grandfather, Hube's son-in-law, Xue Kejie, what he should do. Xue Kejie said: The emperor's nephew marrying a princess is an old royal custom. If he treats her with respect and caution, what does it matter?

古文：然谚曰： 娶妇得公主，无事取官府。 不得不为之惧也。
现代文：但有谚语说： 娶妻得公主，无事抓进官府 ，不能不令人担忧。 
English: However, there is a proverb that says: "Marry a wife to get a princess, and get into the government without any problems, which is worrying."

古文：天后以顗妻萧氏及顗弟绪妻成氏非贵族，欲出之，曰： 我女岂可使与田舍女为妯娌邪！
现代文：天后武则天认为薛的妻子萧氏和他弟弟薛绪的妻子成氏不是贵族，想让薛家遗弃她们，说： 怎么能让我女儿与田舍翁的女儿作妯娌呢！ 
English: Emperor Wu Zetian thought that Xue's wife, Xiao, and his brother Xue Xu's wife, Cheng, were not aristocrats, and wanted the Xue family to abandon them, saying: "How can I let my daughter marry Tian Xue Weng's daughter!

古文：或曰： 萧氏，瑀之侄孙，国家旧姻。 
现代文：有人说： 萧氏，是萧的侄孙女，皇家的旧姻亲。 
English: Some people said, "Ms. Xiao is Xiao's granddaughter-in-law, an old relative of the royal family.

古文：乃止。
现代文：事情才算了结。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：夏州群牧使安元寿奏： 自调露元年九月以来，丧马一十八万馀匹，监牧吏卒为虏所杀掠者八百馀人。 
现代文：夏州群牧使安元寿上奏说： 自调露元年九月以来，夏州损失马一十八万多匹，监督放牧的吏卒被敌人杀死和掠走的有八百多人。 
English: Xiazhou herdsmen's envoy An Yuan Shou said in his report: Since September of the first year of Lu, Xiazhou has lost more than 180,000 horses, and more than 800 officials supervising herding have been killed and plundered by the enemy.

古文：薛延陀达浑等五州四万馀帐来降。
现代文：薛延陀达浑等五州四万余帐来投降唐朝。
English: Xue Yanduadagun and other five states with more than forty thousand accounts surrendered to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：甲午，左仆射兼太子少傅、同中书门下三品刘仁轨固请解仆射；许之。
现代文：甲午，左仆射兼太子少傅、同中书门下三品刘仁轨坚持请求解除自己的仆射职务，获得批准。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Liu Renlu, the third-ranked disciple of the Third Grade of the Third Grade of the Third Grade of the Third Grade of the Third Grade of the Third Grade of the Third Grade of the Third Grade of the Third Grade of the Third Grade of the Third Grade of the Third Grade of the Third Grade of the First Grade of the First Grade of the First Grade of the First Grade of the First Grade of the First Grade of the First Grade of the First Grade of the First Grade of the First Grade of the First Grade of the First Grade of the First Grade of the First Grade of the First Grade of the First Grade of the First Grade of the First Grade of

古文：闰七月，丁未，裴炎为侍中，崔知温、薛元超并守中书令。
现代文：闰七月，丁未，裴炎任侍中，崔知温、薛元超均守中书令。
English: In leap July, Ding Wei and Pei Yan were appointed as junior attendants, and Cui Zhian and Xue Yuanchao were appointed as junior secretaries.

古文：上征田游岩为太子洗马，在东宫无所规益。
现代文：唐高宗征召隐士田游岩为太子洗马，在东宫对太子无所规劝教益。
English: Emperor Gaozong of Tang summoned the hermit Tian Youyan to wash the prince's horse, and he did his best to persuade the prince in the East Palace.

古文：右卫副率蒋俨以书责之曰： 足下负巢、由之俊节，傲唐、虞之圣主，声出区宇，名流海内。
现代文：右卫副率蒋俨写信责备他说： 您依恃隐士巢父、许由那样高的节操，傲视唐尧、虞舜那样的圣君，声誉远播境外，名望流传海内。
English: Jiang Yu, the deputy head of the Right Division of the Inner Palace Guards, wrote a letter to him, reproaching him: "You have clung to your hermit father, Xu Yu, with such high self-restraint, and you look down on saints such as Tang Xuan and Yu Yu. Your reputation has spread far beyond the borders, and your fame has spread within the sea.

古文：主上屈万乘之重，申三顾之荣，遇子以商山之客，待子以不臣之礼，将以辅导储贰，渐染芝兰耳。
现代文：皇上委屈万乘之尊，给您三顾茅庐的荣幸，待您像汉高祖对商山四皓那样，对您不以臣下之礼相待，为的是请您辅导太子，使他逐渐养成美德。
English: Your Majesty, the Emperor's great-great-grandson, gives you the honor of looking into the matter, and treats you like Han Gao Zu did to Shangshan Si Yao, and does not treat you with the courtesy of a vassal, in order to ask you to tutor the prince, so that he gradually develops virtue.

古文：皇太子春秋鼎盛，圣道未周，仆以不才，犹参庭诤，足下受调护之寄，是可言之秋，唯唯而无一谈，悠悠以卒年岁。
现代文：皇太子年纪正当兴盛时期，圣人的道德尚未完备。本人才智低下，还当众直言规劝，您受教育扶持太子的重托，正是应当进言的时候，却恭敬顺从而无一次进言，悠闲地打发着岁月。
English: When the crown prince was in the prime of his life, the morals of a saint were not yet complete. I myself was of low intelligence, and I openly admonished him. You were entrusted with the education and support of the crown prince, but when it was time to speak, you were respectful and obedient, so you did not speak once, and you spent your time leisurely.

古文：向使不餐周粟，仆何敢言！禄及亲矣，以何酬塞？
现代文：如果您像伯夷、叔齐那样不食周粟，我不敢说什么，可是您俸禄已惠及父母，将拿什么来酬答呢？
English: If you, like Bo Yi and Uncle Qi, do not eat cornflowers, I dare not say anything, but your salary has benefited your parents, what will you take as a reward?

古文：想为不达，谨书起予。 
现代文：我的想法很浅陋，恭敬地写下来希望得到您的教诲。 
English: My thoughts are shallow and I respectfully write to ask for your guidance.

古文：游岩竟不能答。
现代文：田游岩竟无言以对。
English: Tian Youyan was speechless.

古文：庚申，上以服饵，令太子监国。
现代文：庚申，唐高宗因服食丹药，命令太子监理国事。
English: According to Goshun, Tang Gaozong ordered the prince to supervise state affairs because he had taken drugs.

古文：裴行俭军于代州之陉口，多纵反间，由是阿史那伏念与阿史德温傅浸相猜贰。
现代文：裴行俭驻军于代州的陉口，多用反间策略，因此阿史那伏念与阿史德温傅日渐互相猜疑。
English: As Bae stationed his troops at the mouth of the Daeju River and used countermeasures, Ashina Funei and Ashide Winfu became increasingly suspicious of each other.

古文：伏念留妻子辎重于金牙山，以轻骑袭曹怀舜。
现代文：阿史那伏念留妻子儿女和辎重于金牙山，率轻骑兵袭击曹怀舜。
English: Ashina Fu left his wife and children and his baggage on the Golden Tooth Mountain, and led the light cavalry to attack Cao Huaiya.

古文：行俭遣裨将何迦密自通漠道，程务挺自石地道掩取之。
现代文：裴行俭派遣副将何迦密从通漠道，程务挺从石地道，突然袭取金牙山。
English: Pei Xingjian dispatched vice-commander He Jia Mi from Tongmo Road and Cheng Mu Ting from Shidi Road to suddenly attack Jinya Mountain.

古文：伏念与曹怀舜等约和而还，比至金牙山，失其妻子辎重，士卒多疾疫，乃引兵北走保细沙，行俭又使副总管刘敬同、程务挺等将单于府兵追蹑之。
现代文：阿史那伏念与曹怀舜讲和后返回，到达金牙山，已失去妻子儿女和辎重，士卒又多患传染病，便领兵北走细沙。裴行俭又派副总管刘敬同、程务挺等率领单于府兵追踪他。
English: After Ashinafu Nian made peace with Cao Huaiya, he returned and reached Jinya Mountain. He had lost his wife, children and heavy baggage, and many of his soldiers were suffering from infectious diseases. He led his soldiers north to walk through the fine sand. Pei Xingjian also sent the deputy general manager Liu Jingdong and Cheng Mu Ting to lead the soldiers to track him down.

古文：伏念请执温傅以自效，然尚犹豫，又自恃道远，唐兵必不能至，不复设备。
现代文：阿史那伏念请求捉拿阿史德温傅向唐朝报效，但还犹豫不决，又自以为道路遥远，唐兵一定不能赶上，于是不加防备。
English: Ashina Fuxiong requested to capture Ashide Wenfu to repay the Tang Dynasty, but he still hesitated, and thought that the road was far away and the Tang soldiers would not be able to catch up, so he did not take precautions.

古文：敬同等军到，伏念狼狈，不能整其众，遂执温傅，从间道诣行俭降。
现代文：刘敬同等率军一到，阿史那伏念十分狼狈，不能集合队伍，于是捉拿阿史德温傅，从小路前去裴行俭处投降。
English: As soon as Liu Jing arrived with the same army, Ashina Fuxiong was very confused and could not assemble the team, so he captured Ashide Wenfu and went to Pei Xiangyan's place from the side road to surrender.

古文：候骑告以尘埃涨天而至，将士皆震恐。行俭曰： 此乃伏念执温傅来降，非他盗也。
现代文：侦察骑兵报告说，尘埃冲天而来，将士都震惊，裴行俭说： 这是阿史那伏念捉拿阿史德温傅来投降，不是其他盗贼。
English: The scout cavalry reported that the dust came from the sky, the soldiers were shocked, and Pei Xingyan said: This is Ashina Fuxiong capturing Ashdevin Fu to surrender, not other thieves.

古文：然受降如受敌，不可无备。 
现代文：但接受投降如同应付敌人，不可以没有防备。 
English: But accepting surrender is like dealing with the enemy, you can't be caught off guard.

古文：乃命严备，遣单使迎前劳之。
现代文：于是命令严加防备，只派遣一名使者到前边迎接慰劳他们。
English: So the order was given to be on the alert, and only one messenger was sent to the front to meet and comfort them.

古文：少选，伏念果帅酋长缚温傅诣军门请罪。
现代文：过不多久，阿史那伏念果然率领酋长捆绑着阿史德温傅到军营前请罪。
English: Not long after, Ashina Fumene led the chiefs to bind Ashdevinfu to the military camp to plead guilty.

古文：行俭尽平突厥馀党，以伏念、温傅归京师。
现代文：于是裴行俭全部平定突厥余党，把阿史那伏念、阿史德温傅带回京师长安。
English: As a result, Pei Xingjian completely subdued the remaining Turks and brought Ashina Fucheng and Ashide Wenfu back to Beijing and Chang'an.

古文：冬，十月，丙寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季十月，丙寅朔，出现日食。
English: In winter, in October, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：壬戌，裴行俭等献定襄之俘。
现代文：壬戌，裴行俭等进献定襄道的俘虏。
English: Rinchen, Pei Xingjian and other captives who went to Xiangdao.

古文：乙丑，改元。
现代文：乙丑，唐朝更改年号。
English: Second Ugly, the Tang Dynasty changed the year.

古文：丙寅，斩阿史那伏念、阿史德温傅等五十四人于都市。
现代文：丙寅，公开处决阿史那伏念、阿史德温傅等五十四人。
English: Hsin Yin publicly executed fifty-four people, including Ashina Fumen and Ashide Winfu.

古文：初，行俭许伏念以不死，故降。
现代文：当初，裴行俭曾许诺不杀阿史那伏念，所以他才投降。
English: At first, Pei Xingjian had promised not to kill Ashina Fucheng, so he surrendered.

古文：裴炎疾行俭之功，奏言： 伏念为副将张虔勖、程务挺所逼，又回纥等自碛北南向逼之，穷窘而降耳。 
现代文：后来裴炎妒忌裴行的功劳，便上奏说： 阿史那伏念被副将张虔勖、程务挺逼迫，同时回纥等从漠北向南进逼，走投无路才投降的。 
English: Later, Pei Yan was jealous of Pei Xing's achievement, so he made a report: Ashina Funei was persecuted by Vice Generals Zhang Qianqian and Cheng Mu Ting, and at the same time, Hui Xing and others advanced from the north of the desert to the south, and they had no choice but to surrender.

古文：遂诛之。
现代文：于是将他处决。
English: So they killed him.

古文：行俭叹曰： 浑、浚争功，古今所耻。
现代文：裴行俭感叹说： 王浑、王浚争功，古人和今人都认为是耻辱的事情。
English: Pei Xingjian sighed and said: Wang Hun and Wang Jun competing for merit is something that both ancient and modern people consider to be a disgrace.

古文：但恐杀降，无复来者。 
现代文：但恐怕杀了投降的人，今后不会再有人投降了。 
English: But I'm afraid they killed those who surrendered, and no one will surrender in the future.

古文：因称疾不出。
现代文：因此声称有病，不出家门。
English: Therefore, he claims to be ill and does not leave the house.

古文：丁亥，新罗王法敏卒，遣使立其子政明。
现代文：丁亥，新罗王金法敏去世，唐朝派遣使者立他儿子金政明为新罗王。
English: Dinghai, Silla King Jin Fa Min died, the Tang Dynasty sent an envoy to appoint his son Kim Zhengming as King of Silla.

古文：十一月，癸卯，徙故太子贤于巴州。
现代文：十一月，癸卯，将原太子李贤流放到巴州。
English: In November, Emperor Wu exiled the former crown prince Li Xian to Bazhou.

