古文：乐二蔡邕论叙汉乐曰：一曰郊庙神灵，二曰天子享宴，三曰大射辟雍，四曰短箫铙歌。
现代文：蔡邕论述汉朝的乐舞说：第一部分是郊庙神灵，第二部分是天子享宴，第三部分是大射辟雍。第四部分是短箫铙歌。
English: Describing the music and dance of the Han Dynasty, Cai Qi said: the first part is the spirit of the suburb temple, the second part is the heavenly son enjoying the banquet, the third part is the big shot, and the fourth part is the short elegy.

古文：晋郊祀歌五篇，傅玄造：
现代文：晋郊祀歌五篇：傅玄作
English: Five Shin Suburbs Worship Songs: Composed by Fu Xuan

古文：天命有晋，穆穆明明。
现代文：上天降命我晋，端庄盛美，察视明明。
English: Heaven gave the order to the Jin Dynasty, because the heavenly way is far-reaching and the emperor has wisdom and virtue.

古文：我其夙夜，祗事上灵。
现代文：我晋朝夕不懈，恭敬地事奉上天神灵。
English: I will lie awake in the night and worship God.

古文：常于时假，迄用有成。
现代文：经常处在美好的时机，至今而大有所成。
English: He's always been in the right place at the right time, and he's done a great job so far.

古文：于荐玄牡，进夕其牲。
现代文：于是献上黑色的雄牛，当晚就进呈牺牲。
English: Black bulls are offered as an offering, and on the eve of the sacrifice, people come to see the animals being prepared for the sacrifice.

古文：崇德作乐，神祗是听。
现代文：崇敬功德而演奏乐舞，天神地神来欣赏倾听。
English: Worship the merits and perform music and dance, and the gods and goddesses come to enjoy and listen.

古文：右祠天地五郊夕牲歌一篇。
现代文：上为祠天地五郊夕牲歌一篇。
English: Above is an excerpt from a poem about the evening sacrifice in the Five Suburbs of the Ancestral Hall.

古文：宣文烝哉，曰靖四方。
现代文：宣帝、文帝前来受享，每日裹安定四方。
English: Emperor Xuanxuan and Emperor Wen came to enjoy it, and they were surrounded by it every day.

古文：永言保之，夙夜匪康。
现代文：永久庇护我晋，早晚都得安康。
English: Forever shelter me Jin, sooner or later I will be healthy.

古文：光天之命，上帝是皇。
现代文：光大上天的降命，上天就赞美他为王。
English: He submitted to the command of the glorious Heaven, and the Heaven praised him as a king.

古文：嘉乐殷荐，灵祚景详。
现代文：盛设美好的乐舞祭献，国家大吉大祥。
English: A beautiful music and dance festival was held, and the country was greatly blessed.

古文：神祗隆假，享福无疆。
现代文：天地之神降临是何等嘉美，享受神的福佑万载无疆。
English: What a blessing it is when the God of heaven and earth descends. Enjoy God's blessings forever and ever.

古文：右祠天地五郊迎送神歌一篇。
现代文：上为祠天地五郊迎送神歌一篇。
English: Above is an excerpt from the hymn of welcome to the Five Suburbs of Ancestral Hall, Heaven and Earth.

古文：天祚有晋，其命惟新。
现代文：上天赐福我晋，我晋受命惟新。
English: God sent an angel to the Jin Dynasty to rule the world and ordered the establishment of the New Deal.

古文：受终于魏，奄有兆民。
现代文：在魏国灭亡时兴起，就拥有了亿万子民。
English: It arose at the time of the fall of the Wei dynasty, and now has hundreds of millions of followers.

古文：燕及皇天，怀柔百神。
现代文：宴享至尊的上天，招徕安抚众多神灵。
English: Feasting on the supreme heaven, inviting and appeasing many gods.

古文：不显遗烈，之德之纯。
现代文：晋所留下的功业不是很显明么?是这样的美德，这样的纯正。
English: Isn't the work that Jin left behind very obvious? It's such virtue, such purity.

古文：享其玄牡，式用肇禋。
现代文：荐享黑色雄牛，开始进行祭天的大礼。
English: Presenting a black bull, imitating the way in which Western Zhou opened the country.

古文：神祇来格，福禄是臻。
现代文：天地之神来受祭，福分和禄位就一齐到来。
English: The gods of heaven and earth come to receive the sacrifice, and the blessing and reward come together.

古文：时迈其犹，昊天子之。
现代文：及时地施行治国谋划，上天便对他加以抚爱。
English: On time, marching across the country and the world, Wu Tian God bless us.

古文：祐享有晋，兆民戴之。
现代文：保佑我晋，受享我晋，亿万人民都十分拥戴。
English: Bless my Jin, enjoy my Jin, hundreds of millions of people are very supportive.

古文：畏天之威，敬授民时。
现代文：畏惧上天的威严，谨慎地使百姓不误农时。
English: Fearing the majesty of heaven, he cautiously let the people not miss the farming time.

古文：不显不承，于犹绎思。
现代文：怎能不光大继承，仍然要寻绎深思。
English: How can it not only be a great inheritance, but still have to be deduced and pondered.

古文：皇极斯建，庶绩咸熙。
现代文：帝王实位兴建起来，各种事业都非常兴盛。
English: After the emperor's enthronement, various undertakings flourished.

古文：庶几夙夜，惟晋之祺。
现代文：就希望日日夜夜，我晋大吉大利。
English: I just hope day in and day out that I'll be lucky enough to get promoted.

古文：宣文惟后，克配彼天。
现代文：宣帝、文帝都是天子，能够附祭上天。
English: I hope you will work hard day and night for the auspicious prosperity of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：抚宁四海，保有康年。
现代文：安抚全国人民，保持富足的丰年。
English: Emperor Xuan and Emperor Wen, as monarchs, can conform to the will of heaven, pacify and calm the four seas, and maintain prosperity.

古文：于乎缉熙，肆用靖民。
现代文：这是多么光明，就因此而安定黎民。
English: Respect, diligence and continuous efforts can stabilize the people of the world.

古文：爰立曲制，爰修礼纪。作民之极，莫匪资始。
现代文：于是制定典章制度，修订礼数法纪做人民的榜样，没有不是靠从开始做起的。
English: Therefore, the establishment of the code system and the revision of the code of etiquette to serve as an example for the people did not start from scratch.

古文：克昌厥后，永言保之。
现代文：能使后代子孙繁荣昌盛，永远将帝位保持。
English: It can make future generations prosperous and keep this foundation forever.

古文：右飨天地五郊歌三篇。
现代文：上为飨天地五郊歌三篇。
English: Above are three songs from the five suburbs.

古文：前所作天地郊明堂歌五篇，傅玄造：
现代文：前所作天地郊明堂歌五篇：傅玄作
English: The five songs of the Temple of Heaven and Earth in the Suburbs of Myeongdong previously composed: composed by Fu Xuan

古文：皇矣有晋，时迈其德。
现代文：伟大啊我晋，及时地施行惠德。
English: The great Jin Dynasty, marching on time to carry out his German policy.

古文：受终于天，光济万国。
现代文：受天命继承王位，光辉照耀着万国。
English: From the heavens above, to inherit the world, all the provinces of Puji.

古文：万国既光，神定厥祥。
现代文：万国既在光辉照临之中，神灵定下了这些吉祥。
English: The vassal states have been pacified, and the gods have confirmed the goodness of those who have been appointed.

古文：虔于郊祀，祗事上皇。
现代文：虔诚地在郊外祭祀天地，恭敬地侍奉天皇。
English: Piously treat suburban worship, respectfully serve the emperor.

古文：祗事上皇，百禄是臻。
现代文：恭敬地侍奉天皇，各种福禄就一定来到。
English: If you respectfully serve the emperor, all kinds of benefits will surely come to you.

古文：巍巍祖考，克配彼天。
现代文：多么伟大的祖先，能够附祭那上天。
English: Great ancestors, able to conform to the will of heaven.

古文：嘉牲匪歆，德馨惟飨。
现代文：丰富的祭牲哪个来享用，美好的馨香衹是来上祭。
English: The rich sacrificial animals are for enjoyment, and the beautiful incense sticks are for offering.

古文：受天之祚，神和四暢。
现代文：受到上天的福佑，神灵欢欣而各方通畅。
English: Blessed by heaven, the gods are happy and all parties are smooth.

古文：右天地郊明堂夕牲歌。
现代文：上为天地郊明堂夕牲歌。
English: Above is the Tianchi Countryside Ming-tang Evening Animal Song.

古文：于赫大晋，膺天景祥。
现代文：赫赫大晋，承受上天所赐的福祥。
English: He He Dajin, inheriting the blessings bestowed by heaven.

古文：二帝迈德，宣兹重光。
现代文：宣、文二帝施行德治，宣告造日月重光。
English: Emperor Xuan and Emperor Wen II implemented the rule of virtue and proclaimed the creation of the sun, moon and heavy light.

古文：我皇受命，奄有万方。
现代文：我皇上受命即位，广有天下四方。
English: I, as emperor, bear the mandate of heaven, and own the land and people of the world.

古文：郊祀配享，礼乐孔章。
现代文：郊祀时附祭祖先，制礼作乐非常显彰。
English: Large-scale rituals are held in the suburbs, and the ancestors are honored, and the ceremonial music is very strict and grand.

古文：神祇嘉飨，祖考是皇。
现代文：天地之神来受祭，祖先就赞美他为王。
English: The God of heaven and earth came to be sacrificed, and the ancestors praised him as king.

古文：克昌厥后，保祚无疆。
现代文：能够使后代昌盛，永远使国祚绵长。
English: Able to make future generations prosper, keep the foundation and never fail.

古文：右天地郊明堂降神歌。
现代文：上为天地郊明堂降神歌。
English: Above is the song of God's descent to Myeongdong in the suburbs of heaven and earth.

古文：整泰坛，祀皇神。
现代文：打扫天坛，祭祀天神。
English: Sweep the Temple of Heaven and offer sacrifices to the Tenjin.

古文：精气感，百灵宾。
现代文：精诚相感，百神降临。
English: The spirit of the elves has been sensed, and all the gods have come together.

古文：蕴硃火，燎芳薪。
现代文：积聚红火，焚烧香薪。
English: Build a bonfire and burn incense.

古文：紫烟游，冠青云。
现代文：紫烟飘游，超越青云。
English: Purple smoke curled up and drifted above the blue clouds.

古文：神之体，靡象形。
现代文：神灵躯体，无所象形。
English: There are no visible traces of the deities' bodies.

古文：旷无方，幽以清。
现代文：辽阔无比，幽远深清。
English: Vast and boundless, profound and lofty.

古文：神之来，光景照。
现代文：天神到来，光影朗照。
English: When Tenjin arrives, light and shadow shine brightly.

古文：听无闻，视无兆。
现代文：听声无形，视形无兆。
English: Can't hear the sound, can't see the image.

古文：神之至，举歆歆。
现代文：天神已至，一起歆享。
English: When the angels arrived, everyone was moved with joy.

古文：灵爽协，动余心。
现代文：精爽和协，感动我心。
English: Touch my heart by sensing the spirit.

古文：神之坐，同欢娱。
现代文：天神高坐，共同欢娱。
English: The heavenly deities have taken their seats, and everyone is happy.

古文：泽云翔，化风舒。
现代文：好云飞翔，好风卷舒。
English: The clouds that moisturize all things swirl around, and the gentle breeze that nurtures all things blows.

古文：嘉乐奏，文中声。
现代文：佳乐演奏，文饰商声。
English: The music is beautifully played, creating a positive and harmonious sound.

古文：八音谐，神是听。
现代文：八音谐和，天神倾听。
English: The voices of the various musical instruments were in harmony, and the gods listened to them.

古文：咸洁斋，并芬芳。
现代文：人人斋戒，个个芬芳。
English: Everyone is fasting, everyone is fragrant.

古文：烹牷牲，享玉觞。
现代文：烹煮牲畜，高举酒觞。
English: The whole head of a pure-coloured animal is cooked and presented with fine wine in a jade cup.

古文：神说飨，歆禋祀。
现代文：天神愉悦，受享祭祀。
English: The gods are pleased, and the sacrifices are enjoyed.

古文：祐大晋，降繁祉。
现代文：保佑大晋，多赐福祉。
English: Bless the great Jin Dynasty and bring down a lot of welfare.

古文：胙京邑，行四海。
现代文：位在京都，政行四海。
English: He is based in Kyoto and travels all over the world.

古文：保天年，穷地纪。
现代文：永保天年，穷尽地纪。
English: Preserving heaven and earth, governing the earth.

古文：右天郊飨神歌。
现代文：上为天郊飨神歌。
English: Suburbs in the desert worship gods, and there are also three words. Above is the song of the gods in the suburbs.

古文：夜将极，时未移。
现代文：打扫地坛，等待地衹。仪。
English: The night is drawing to a close, and time seems to have stood still.

古文：祗之体，无形象。
现代文：陈设暗祭，施行吉礼。移。地祇之体，没有形象。荒。
English: Bodies of the earth gods, no image.

古文：潜泰幽，洞忽荒。
现代文：地祇出临，似无似有。
English: It's like nothing else on earth.

古文：祗之出，渼若有。灵无远，天下母。
现代文：众神感动,长夜将尽,潜居幽阴,神灵不远,群灵来,时辰未,贯穿大,天下人母。
English: The gods are moved, the long night is coming to an end, lurking in the gloom, the gods are not far away, the spirits are coming, the hour is not yet, penetrating the world, the world is mother.

古文：祗之来，遗光景。
现代文：地祇来到，遣留光影。
English: The gods of the earth have come, leaving a trail of light.

古文：照若存，终冥冥。
现代文：照耀若存，终归冥冥。
English: If it shines brightly, it will eventually fade away.

古文：祗之至，举欣欣。
现代文：地衹到来，人人欢欣。
English: When the earth gods arrived, they were all overjoyed.

古文：舞象德，歌成文。
现代文：舞蹈象德，歌咏成文。
English: They danced a dance symbolizing virtue, and sang a song of praise that formed a chorus.

古文：祗之坐，同欢豫。
现代文：地衹高坐，共同悦乐。
English: Sitting high above the ground, enjoying the music together.

古文：泽雨施，化云布。
现代文：好雨施行，好云施布。
English: The rain that waters all things falls, and the clouds that nurture all things are dispersed.

古文：乐八变，声教敷。
现代文：奏乐八变，声教广铺。
English: Music has numerous movements, and vocal education has become widespread.

古文：物咸享，祗是娱。
现代文：遍享祭物，地祇欢娱。
English: Enjoying the offerings everywhere, the deities are rejoicing.

古文：斋既洁，侍者肃。
现代文：斋戒芳洁，侍者肃敬。
English: Fasting and abstinence are auspicious, and waiters are to be respected.

古文：玉觞进，咸穆穆。
现代文：进献美酒，人人恭谨。
English: Present the goblet of fine wine and bow respectfully together.

古文：飨嘉庆，歆德馨。
现代文：同受嘉庆，共享德馨。
English: Share the joy, share the happiness.

古文：胙有晋，暨群生。
现代文：踢福我晋，广及众民。
English: and spread the good fortune to all the people.

古文：溢九壤，格天庭。
现代文：功满九州，德感天庭。
English: Beyond the land of Kyushu, moved heaven.

古文：保万寿，延亿龄。
现代文：长保千载，绵延万年。
English: It has a lifespan of tens of thousands of years, extending to hundreds of millions of years.

古文：右地郊飨神歌。
现代文：卜为地郊飨神歌。
English: The song of the gods is sung in the suburbs.

古文：经始明堂，享祀匪懈。
现代文：开始营建明堂，祭享不敢懈怠。
English: Dare not slack off in building Myeongdong and enjoying the sacrificial rites.

古文：于皇烈考，光配上帝。
现代文：啊，我伟大的祖先，功德媲美上帝。
English: Glorious ancestors, gloriously worthy of God.

古文：赫赫上帝，既高既崇。
现代文：上帝多么显赫，多么崇高。
English: Glorious God, how great, how exalted.

古文：圣考是配，明德显融。
现代文：祖先能从祀上帝，完美的德性显明。
English: The holy ancestors were honored in the enclosure, and the virtuous deeds of the saints were made known.

古文：率土敬职，万方来祭。
现代文：境内臣民敬谨供职，万国都来上祭。
English: Officials from all over the country honored their duties, and people from all over the world came to pay homage.

古文：常于时假，保胙永世。
现代文：经常有美好时光，保有国祚万世。
English: Always have a good time, keep the national anthem forever.

古文：右明堂飨神歌。
现代文：上为明堂飨神歌。
English: Above is Myeongdong's rendition of a sacred song.

古文：宋南郊雅乐登歌三篇，颜延之造：
现代文：宋南郊雅乐登歌三篇：颜延之作
English: Southern Song Dynasty Suburbs Elegance Song Three: Yan Yan's Song

古文：夤威宝命，严恭帝祖。
现代文：敬畏天命的威严，恭谨地侍奉上帝祖先。
English: fearing the majesty of destiny and reverently serving God's ancestors.

古文：表海炳岱，系唐胄楚。
现代文：四海为屏，炳耀岱宗。继承唐尧，荆楚子孙。
English: The four seas are the screen, the Zhao Yao and the Zong. The descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of Tang and Chu.

古文：灵鉴浚文，民属睿武。
现代文：上天垂察，百姓归顺，有深明的文德武功。
English: Looking up to heaven, the people surrendered, with profound literary and military achievements.

古文：奄受敷锡，宅中拓宇。
现代文：广受天命而布行教化，位居中央而开拓四境。
English: Widely propagated and educated by the Mandate of Heaven, occupying the center and opening up the four frontiers.

古文：亘地称皇，罄天作主。
现代文：在整个天下地上，称王作帝。
English: In the whole world, the king is called the emperor.

古文：月来宾，日际奉土。开元首正，礼交乐举。
现代文：任何边远的地方，都来朝贡称臣。在庆祝新年正月时，举行典礼，演奏音乐。
English: In any remote place, people come to pay tribute to the emperor. During the celebration of the New Year, ceremonies are held and music is played.

古文：六曲联事，九官列序。
现代文：六种典法联合治事，九等官职排列有序。
English: Six kinds of legal codes jointly govern affairs, and nine ranks of officials are arranged in an orderly manner.

古文：有牷在涤，有洁在俎。
现代文：有洗涤干净的纯色牛，陈设在几案上。
English: There are cleanly washed pure-coloured cattle on display in several cases.

古文：以荐王衷，以答神祜。
现代文：用来祭献先王之善，答谢神灵之福。
English: It is used to offer the kindness of the previous king and to thank the gods for their blessings.

古文：右天地郊夕牲歌。
现代文：上为天地郊夕牲歌。
English: Above is the song of the animals at dusk on the outskirts of the world.

古文：维圣飨帝，维孝飨亲。
现代文：衹有圣君才能供奉上帝，衹有孝子才能供奉先亲。美啊!
English: Only a saint can worship God, and only a filial son can worship his ancestors. Beautiful!

古文：皇乎备矣，有事上春。
现代文：一切都准备好了，正有祭事在初春进行。
English: Everything is ready, there is a festival going on in the early spring.

古文：礼行宗祀，敬达郊禋。
现代文：行宗庙祭祀之礼，恭敬地在郊外祭祀天地。
English: Perform the ritual of the temple, and respectfully perform the ritual of heaven and earth in the suburbs.

古文：金枝中树，广乐四陈。
现代文：在树上挂着金枝玉叶，天上的乐曲四面陈设演奏。
English: In the tree hangs a golden branch and a jade leaf, and the heavenly music is played on all four sides.

古文：陟配在京，降德在民。
现代文：在京都登临配享，德惠普施黎民。
English: In Kyoto, it's a de luxe, de luxe, de luxe.

古文：奔精照夜，高燎炀晨。
现代文：星月照亮了黑夜，高高的火炬在清晨焚烧。
English: The stars and the moon lit up the night, and the tall torch burned in the early morning.

古文：阴明浮烁，沈崇深沦。
现代文：明暗的光浮动闪烁，沉下的成捆芳草深深埋没。
English: Bright and dark lights float and flicker, sunken bunches of fragrant grasses are deeply buried.

古文：告成大报，受厘元神。
现代文：完成了报祭大礼，受到大神的赐福。
English: They have completed the great ceremony of announcing the festival, and have been blessed by the Great God.

古文：月御按节，星驱扶轮。
现代文：月神驾驶车子，星神卫护车轮。
English: The moon god drives the car, and the star god guards the wheels.

古文：遥兴远驾，耀耀振振。
现代文：长途旅行开始启程，向远方驶去，神光照耀，威武雄盛。
English: A long-distance journey begins, and we sail off into the distance, God's light shines, and His might abounds.

古文：右天地郊迎送神歌。
现代文：上马天地郊迎送神歌。
English: Shangma Tianchi Suburbs Welcome the Divine Song.

古文：营泰畤，定天衷。
现代文：经营泰时，以定天福。
English: When running a Thai business, it is best to rely on good fortune.

古文：思心睿，谋筮从。
现代文：思心明智，谋筮相从。
English: Think wisely and act accordingly.

古文：建表蕝，设郊宫。
现代文：建立位次，设置郊宫。
English: Establish the rank, set up the suburban palace.

古文：田烛置，爟火通。
现代文：田头燃烛，燎火相通。
English: Candles are lit in the fields and bonfires are lit.

古文：历元旬，律首吉。
现代文：年历正月，律首大吉穴。
English: In the first month of the lunar calendar, the head of the Ritsuryo court is in luck.

古文：饰紫坛，坎列室。
现代文：中星显兆，六神有序。谧。
English: The middle star shows a sign, and the six deities are in order.

古文：中星兆，六宗秩。
现代文：大孝昭明，祭礼供献。奉。
English: Daiko Akimei, the ritual offering. Homage.

古文：乾宇晏，地区谧。
现代文：祭器陈列，备具礼容。传。
English: The sacrificial vessels are displayed, and the ceremony is prepared.

古文：大孝昭，祭礼供。
现代文：拜望天门，神灵启程。溢。
English: Worshipping the heavenly gate, the gods set off. Overflow.

古文：牲日展，盛自躬。
现代文：整治酒食，娱悦太一。日。
English: Rectify food and drink, entertain Taichi. Day.

古文：具陈器，备礼容。
现代文：奠礼已始，献礼又终。穹。
English: The ceremony has begun, and the offering is over. The dome is up.

古文：飨宋德，胙王功。
现代文：歆飨宋德，祚佑王功。
English: Song De, You Wang Gong.

古文：休命永，福履充。右天地飨神歌。
现代文：充。上为天地飨神歌。
English: The heavens and the earth sing God's song.

古文：宋明堂歌，谢庄造：
现代文：宋明堂歌：地维安谧，天星流回。
English: Song Ming-tang's song: The earth is peaceful and tranquil, the stars are streaming back.

古文：地纽谧，乾枢回。
现代文：开。旌旗蔽日，车骑如云。氲。
English: Drive. The flag covers the sun, and the car rides like a cloud.

古文：华盖动，紫微开。
现代文：照耀京都，辉煌帝邑。集。
English: Shining Kyoto, glorious imperial city. Collection.

古文：旌弊日，车若云。
现代文：连结玉轴，耸动珠帘。檐。
English: Connect the bead shaft, shake the bead curtain. Bang.

古文：驾六气，乘芃缊。
现代文：舞队回旋，乐声和融。风。
English: The dance team swirls around, the music harmonizes with the wind.

古文：晔帝京，辉天邑。
现代文：牲牛净洁，盘餐丰盛，诚。
English: The cattle are clean, the food plentiful and sincere.

古文：皇德远，大孝昌。
现代文：皇德深远，大孝明昌。
English: Imperial virtue is profound and far-reaching, and filial piety is profound and far-reaching.

古文：贯九幽，洞三光。
现代文：光神灵舒适，脱下銮铃。欣。
English: Light deities comfortable, take off the dumbbells.

古文：神之安，解玉銮。景福至，万宇欢。
现代文：修饰紫坛，挖掘坎天空清朗，地区安牺牲展列，亲自进舞队连结，歌声广神灵降临，晨光洋明辉照夜，华天耀香烟畅茂，上报清美命长久，福禄盈华盖启动，紫微星驱使六气，乘坐氤圣主降临，五灵齐星光拂帷，月色栖停驻流光，止歇行恭行祭礼，百官虔贯彻九幽，洞照三大福到来，全国欢
English: The purple altar is decorated, the clear sky is excavated, the regional peace and sacrifice exhibition is displayed, the dance team is personally connected, the songs of the gods come down, the morning sun shines brightly, the sky shines brightly at night, the sky shines brightly, the cigarette is thick, the report is long, the fortune is rich, the lid is started, the purple star drives the six spirits, the holy saint comes down on the horse, the five spirits are aligned with the starlight, the moon stops at the streamer, the pause is performed, the ritual is performed, the officials are pious, the three great blessings come, and the whole country is happy.

古文：右迎神歌诗。
现代文：上为迎神歌诗。
English: Above is a poem to welcome the gods.

古文：雍台辨朔，泽宫练辰。
现代文：依汉郊祀迎神，三言，四句一转韵。雍台辨明初一，泽宫选定时辰。
English: According to the Han suburb worship, the god is greeted with three words and four sentences with a rhyme. Yongtai identifies the first day of the year, and the palace selects the time.

古文：洁火夕照，明水朝陈。
现代文：晚上有明亮的火光照耀，早晨有清洁的水洒洗。
English: In the evening, a bright fire shines, and in the morning, clean water is sprinkled.

古文：六瑚贲室，八羽华庭。昭事先圣，怀濡上灵。
现代文：六种器皿放在祭室，八样干羽装饰殿庭，侍奉光明的先圣，怀念上帝的恩泽。
English: Six kinds of vessels are placed in the altar room, eight kinds of dried feathers decorate the courtyard, serve the bright prelate, and remember God's grace.

古文：《肆夏》式敬，升歌发德。
现代文：演奏《肆夏》来表示敬意，登堂唱歌来发扬美德。
English: Play Wu Xia to show respect, and sing in the hall to promote virtue.

古文：永固鸿基，以绥万国。
现代文：永久保有帝王基业，用来安定天下人民。
English: The emperor's legacy should be preserved forever and used to stabilize the people of the world.

古文：右登歌词。
现代文：上为登歌词。
English: Above are the lyrics.

古文：旧四言。
现代文：旧四言。
English: The old four syllables.

古文：维天为大，维圣祖是则。
现代文：衹有上天最为高大，衹有圣祖才足学习的榜样。
English: Heaven is the most lofty, and the Holy Ancestors are the models for learning.

古文：辰居万宇，缀旒下国。
现代文：他如同北极星高高在上，统治着全国人民。
English: He is as high as the North Star, ruling the people of the whole country.

古文：内灵八辅，外光四瀛。
现代文：在内有群臣辅佐，对外光照四海。
English: He was assisted by a group of vassals, and shined his light far and wide.

古文：蒿宫仰盖，日馆希旌。
现代文：蒿宫仰望他车盖降临，曰馆希求他旌旗来到。
English: The palace looked up to see his car cover coming down, saying that the palace hoped that he would come with the flag.

古文：复殿留景，重檐结风。
现代文：复殿留下了光影，屑檐盘旋着来风。
English: The Fudenn left a shadow of light, and the wind whirled around the debris.

古文：刮楹接纬，达响承虹。
现代文：吹堂柱而触纬星，传声响而承彩虹。
English: Blow the pillar and touch the star, sound transmission and receive the rainbow.

古文：设业设虚，在王庭。
现代文：在王的殿庭中，摆下钟磬木架。横设挂版，竖设直柱。
English: In the king's courtyard, a wooden belfry was set up, with a hanging plate on the side and a straight column.

古文：肇禋祀，克配乎灵。
现代文：祭祀大礼开始，能够配祀神灵。
English: At the beginning of the grand ritual, it is possible to worship the deities.

古文：我将我享，维孟之春。以孝以敬，以立我烝民。
现代文：在这春季正月，圣祖调养受享，用孝顺和恭敬，来成就众民。
English: In this first month of spring, the holy ancestors nurtured and enjoyed, with filial piety and respect, to achieve the people.

古文：右歌太祖文皇帝词。
现代文：上为歌太祖文皇帝词。
English: Above is a poem by Emperor Taizu.

古文：依《周颂》体。
现代文：依《周颂》体。
English: Adapted from "Zhouxiang."

古文：参映夕，驷照晨。
现代文：参星映夕，房星照晨。
English: The morning star shines in the morning, and the evening star shines in the evening.

古文：灵乘震，司青春。
现代文：神居震位，管领青春。
English: God is at the epicenter, presiding over youth.

古文：雁将向，桐始蕤。
现代文：雁将北飞，桐花盛开。
English: The geese will fly north, and the Paulownia flowers will bloom.

古文：柔风舞，暄光迟。
现代文：柔风回舞，暖光迟迟。
English: The gentle breeze dances back, the warm light lingers.

古文：萌动达，万品新。
现代文：幼芽出土，万物一新。
English: When the young shoots are unearthed, everything is new.

古文：润无际，泽无垠。
现代文：滋润无际，雨露无垠。
English: Endless moisture, endless rain and dew.

古文：右歌青帝词。
现代文：上为歌青帝词。
English: Above is the lyrics of the song.

古文：三言，依木数。
现代文：三言，依木数。
English: Three words, depending on the number of trees.

古文：龙精初见大火中。
现代文：龙神开始出现在大火星中。
English: The Dragon God began to appear in the Great March.

古文：硃光北至圭景同。
现代文：红光照北，日影相同。
English: The red light shines to the north, the shadow is the same.

古文：帝位在《离》实司衡。
现代文：赤帝处在《离》位，实为主宰。
English: The Red Emperor is in the "away" position, actually dominating.

古文：水雨方降木槿荣。
现代文：水雨正在降落，木槿开花。
English: The rain is falling and the hedges are blooming.

古文：庶物盛长咸殷阜。恩覃四溟被九有。
现代文：万物长得都很茂盛，恩及四海，广覆九州。
English: Everything is growing very luxuriantly, thanks to the four seas, covering Kyushu.

古文：右歌赤帝辞。
现代文：上为歌赤帝辞。
English: Above is the song Red Emperor Resignation.

古文：七言，依火数。
现代文：七言，依火数。
English: Seven words, depending on the number of fires.

古文：履建宅中宇，司绳御四方。
现代文：黄帝施行建树，位居宇内中央。管领万物，驾御四方。
English: The Yellow Emperor builds trees and sits at the center of the universe. He rules over all things and governs all directions.

古文：裁化遍寒燠，布政周炎凉。
现代文：裁度大化，有寒有暖，施行政教，有炎有凉。
English: There are cold and warm, and there are hot and cold.

古文：景丽条可结，霜明冰可折。凯风扇硃辰，白云流素节。
现代文：春天景物艳丽，枝条成长；冬天白霜严明，寒冰摧折；夏天南风在曰光下吹拂，秋天白云在天空飘荡。
English: In spring, the scenery is gorgeous and the branches are growing; in winter, the white frost is severe and the cold ice is devastating; in summer, the south wind blows under the sun, and in autumn, white clouds float in the sky.

古文：分至乘结晷，启闭集恆度。
现代文：晷度随时运转，四时相互承接。
English: The system is in operation at all times and takes over from each other at 4 a.m.

古文：帝运缉万有，皇灵澄国步。
现代文：帝运缉理万物，神灵安定国运。
English: The emperor controls all things, and the gods stabilize the country.

古文：右歌黄帝辞。
现代文：上为歌黄帝辞。
English: The above is the song of Huangdi's resignation.

古文：五言，依土数。
现代文：五言，依土数。
English: Five words, depending on the soil.

古文：百川如镜，天地爽且明。
现代文：江河水平如镜，天地爽洁清明。
English: The river level is like a mirror, the world is fresh and clear.

古文：云冲气举，德盛在素精。
现代文：云气向上腾举，德性兴盛在白色精灵。
English: The clouds are rising, and virtue is flourishing in the White Elves.

古文：木叶初下，洞庭始扬波。
现代文：树叶开始飘落，洞庭趔开始扬起波涛。
English: The leaves began to fall, and the gourds began to make waves.

古文：夜光彻地，翻霜照悬河。
现代文：月光遍照大地，飞霜映着瀑布。
English: Moonlight shines all over the land, and flying frost reflects on the waterfall.

古文：庶类收成，岁功行欲宁。
现代文：万物收获，一年的事情就要圆满完成。
English: The harvest of all things, the things of the year must be completed successfully.

古文：浃地奉渥，罄宇承秋灵。
现代文：遍地受到滋润，全天下承奉秋灵。
English: Everywhere is moisturized, and the whole country follows the autumn spirit.

古文：右歌白帝辞。
现代文：上为歌白帝辞。
English: The song ends with the emperor's resignation.

古文：九言，依金数。
现代文：九言，依金数。
English: Nine words, depending on the amount of money.

古文：岁既晏，日方驰。
现代文：一年将尽，曰光止在飞驰。
English: The year is coming to an end, and the year is flying by.

古文：灵乘坎，德司规。
现代文：神灵居坎位。盛德领万物。
English: The spirit of God reigns supreme. Virtue governs all things.

古文：玄云合，晦鸟路。
现代文：乌云四合，使飞鸟的道路晦暗。
English: Dark clouds converge, darkening the path for the birds.

古文：白云繁，亘天涯。
现代文：白云密布，横亘天边。
English: White clouds are dense, stretching across the horizon.

古文：雷在地，时未光。
现代文：雷在地下，时辰没有明亮。
English: The thunder is underground, the hour is not bright.

古文：饬国典，闭关梁。
现代文：整治国法，繁闭阗梁。
English: To rectify the country's laws, we must be open and transparent.

古文：四节遍，万物殿。
现代文：历经四季，万物处在最后的日子。
English: After four seasons, everything is in its final days.

古文：福九域，祚八乡。
现代文：赐福九州，保佑八乡。
English: Bless Kyushu, bless Hachigo.

古文：晨晷促，夕漏延。
现代文：白昼光阴短促，夜晚时间延长。
English: The days are short and the nights are long.

古文：大阴极，微阳宣。
现代文：阴气到了极盛的时候，微弱的阳气已经显示出来。
English: When the yin has reached its peak, the weak yang has already appeared.

古文：鹊将巢，冰已解。
现代文：鸟鹊将做新巢，坚冰已经化解。
English: The stork will make a new nest, the ice has melted.

古文：气濡水，风动泉。
现代文：春气浸濡流水，春风吹动清泉。
English: The spring breeze soaks up the wet running water, and the spring breeze blows the clear spring.

古文：右歌黑帝辞。
现代文：上马歌黑帝辞。
English: Let's sing the Black Emperor's resignation song.

古文：六言，依水数。
现代文：六言，依水数。
English: Six words, depending on the amount of water.

古文：蕴礼容，余乐度。
现代文：蕴含着礼节，余下了乐度。
English: It contains etiquette, and the rest is music.

古文：灵方留，景欲暮。
现代文：神灵正要停留，时光已将昏暮。
English: The gods are about to stop, and time is running out.

古文：开九重，肃五达。
现代文：开启宫门，肃清道路。
English: Open the palace gate and clear the road.

古文：凤参差，龙已秣。
现代文：凤凰高低飞舞，龙马已经喂饱。
English: The phoenix flies high and low, the dragon horse has been fed.

古文：云既动，河既梁。
现代文：云彩已经飘动，河上已经架好桥梁。
English: The clouds are already drifting, and bridges have been built across the river.

古文：万里照，四空香。
现代文：万里神光照耀，四空一片馨香。
English: God's light shines everywhere, and the sky is filled with the fragrance of love.

古文：神之车，归清都。
现代文：神灵的车驾，返回了天宫。
English: The god's chariot returned to the heavenly palace.

古文：旋庭寂，玉殿虚。
现代文：院宇寂静，殿庭空虚。
English: The courtyard is silent, the courtyard is empty.

古文：睿化凝，孝风炽。
现代文：皇上教化凝聚，孝亲的风气炽盛。
English: The Emperor's teachings have been condensed, and the culture of filial piety is flourishing.

古文：顾灵心，结皇思。
现代文：回顾神灵之心，结下了美好的思念。
English: Looking back at the heart of the gods, I have a wonderful memory.

古文：右送神歌辞。
现代文：上为送神歌辞。
English: The above is a poem to send to the gods.

古文：右天郊飨神歌。
现代文：漠郊祀送神，亦三言。上为天郊飨神歌。
English: Suburbs in the desert worship gods, and there are also three words. Above is the song of the gods in the suburbs.

古文：魏《俞兒舞歌》四篇，王粲造：
现代文：魏《俞儿舞》歌四篇：魏国初建所用，后于太祖庙并作之。王粲作
English: Four songs from the Wei Dynasty's "Dance of the Children": Originally used in the founding of the State of Wei, and later also composed at Taizu Temple. Composed by Wang Luo

古文：汉初建国家，匡九州。
现代文：漠初建立国家，统一九州。
English: The country was established at the beginning of the year and Kyushu was unified.

古文：蛮荆震服，五刃三革休。
现代文：蛮荆震畏降服，从此停息了用兵。
English: Brute Jing Zhenyi capitulated, and the use of troops was suspended.

古文：安不忘备武乐修。
现代文：虽然国家安宁，不忘记预备武事，乐于兴修文教。
English: Although the country is at peace, they do not forget to prepare for martial arts and are happy to engage in culture and education.

古文：宴我宾师，敬用御天，永乐无忧。
现代文：宴请我的师友，恭敬地用以侍奉上天，永远快乐而无忧虑。
English: Invite my teachers and friends, respectfully use them to serve God, and always be happy and worry-free.

古文：子孙受百福，常与松乔游。
现代文：子孙享受多种福禄，常与神仙交游。
English: Their descendants enjoy a variety of blessings and often travel with the gods.

古文：蒸庶德，莫不咸欢柔。
现代文：百姓感恩戴德，人人都欢欣顺服。
English: The people were grateful, and everyone obeyed happily.

古文：右《矛俞新福歌》。
现代文：上为《矛俞新福歌》。
English: Above is "Spear-Shaped New Good Luck Song."

古文：材官选士，剑弩错陈。
现代文：将军检阅士兵，刀剑弓弩交错陈列。
English: Generals review soldiers, swords, bows and arrows are displayed in a staggered manner.

古文：应桴蹈节，俯仰若神。
现代文：随着鼓声有节奏地动作，一俯一仰似有神助。
English: With the rhythmic movement of the drums, it seems that there is a divine help.

古文：绥我武烈，笃我淳仁。
现代文：武功使我安定，仁政使我笃厚。
English: Martial arts have made me stable, benevolent government has made me strong.

古文：自东自西，莫不来宾。
现代文：四面八方，没有不来朝贡称臣。
English: From all directions, there is no one who does not come to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：右《弩俞新福歌》。
现代文：上为《弩俞新福歌》。
English: Above is "A New Song of Good Fortune."

古文：我功既定，庶士咸绥。
现代文：我的武功既已平定天下，百姓都已安宁。
English: My martial arts have already pacified the world, and the people are at peace.

古文：乐陈我广庭，式宴宾与师。
现代文：在广阔的殿庭中陈设乐舞，宴请宾客与师友。
English: Music and dance were set up in the vast courtyard to entertain guests and teachers.

古文：昭文德，宣武威。
现代文：昭明文德，宣扬武威。
English: Shining light on literature and morals, and promoting martial arts.

古文：平九有，抚民黎。
现代文：平定九州，安抚黎民。
English: To pacify Kyushu, to appease the people of Lai.

古文：荷天宠，延寿尸。
现代文：受到上天恩宠，寿命得以延长。
English: By the grace of God, life expectancy has been extended.

古文：千载莫我违。
现代文：千年万载，不要违背我心愿。
English: For the thousandth time, do not go against my wishes.

古文：右《安台新福歌》曲。
现代文：上为《安台新福歌》曲。
English: Above is the "Andai New Fortune Song" melody.

古文：神武用师士素厉。
现代文：指挥军队神明而又威武，士卒一向非常振奋。
English: The commander of the army is divine and powerful, and the soldiers have always been very excited.

古文：仁恩广覆，猛节横逝。
现代文：仁慈的恩德普遍施及天下，猛烈的志节则突然消逝。
English: Benevolent benevolence prevails throughout the world, and fierce ambition suddenly disappears.

古文：自古立功，莫我弘大。
现代文：自古以来建功立业，没有谁比我朝广阔弘大。
English: Since ancient times, no one has made greater contributions to the world than I have.

古文：桓桓征四国，爰及海裔。
现代文：用强大的武力征讨四方，于是一直到遥远的海边。
English: With a strong force to conquer the four directions, and then went to the distant shore.

古文：汉国保长庆，垂祚延万世。
现代文：汉国保有永久的福庆，皇位绵延到千年万代。
English: Hanzhong preserves the eternal Fuqing, and the imperial throne extends to a thousand generations.

古文：右《行辞新福歌》曲。
现代文：上为《行辞新福歌》曲。
English: The above is a piece from "The New Song of Songs."

古文：晋《宣武舞歌》四篇，傅玄造：
现代文：置《宣武舞》歌四篇：傅玄作
English: Four "Xuanwu Dance" songs: composed by Fu Xuan

古文：《惟圣皇篇》《矛俞》第一：
现代文：《惟圣皇篇》《矛俞》第一
English: "Holy Emperor" and "The Spear" take first place

古文：惟圣皇，德巍巍，光四海。
现代文：我圣明的帝王，功德巍巍，光照四海。
English: My holy emperor, your merits and virtues are shining all over the world.

古文：礼乐犹形影，文武为表里，乃作《巴俞》。
现代文：制礼作乐如同形影，文治武功作为表裹。于是制作《巴俞》乐舞，舞蹈的武士陈列着。
English: The ceremonial music is like a shadow, and the literature and martial arts are like a tablecloth. Therefore, the music and dance of "Baju" were made, and the dancing samurai were displayed.

古文：肆舞士，剑弩齐列，戈矛为之始。
现代文：刀剑弓弩一齐排开，挥动戈矛作乐舞的开始。
English: Swords, swords, bows and arrows are lined up, and the music dance begins with the waving of spears.

古文：进退疾鹰鹞，龙战而豹起。
现代文：一进一退有如鹰鹞迅捷，龙一般地战斗，豹也似地跃起。
English: One advances and retreats as swiftly as an eagle, fights like a dragon, and leaps like a panther.

古文：如乱不可乱，动作顺其理，离合有统纪。《短兵篇》《剑俞》第二：
现代文：看似杂乱却并非杂乱，舞士的动作符合它的规律，舞队的离合有它的统率纲纪。《短兵篇》《剑俞》第二
English: Seemingly chaotic but not chaotic, the dancers' movements conform to its rules, and the dance team's separation has its leadership discipline.

古文：剑为短兵，其势险危。
现代文：剑是一种短小的武器，它的运用之势惊险危急。
English: The sword is a short weapon, and its use is fraught with danger.

古文：疾逾飞电，回旋应规。
现代文：舞蹈时迅捷处超过飞射的电光，迥旋时符合一定的规则。
English: When dancing, the speed exceeds the flying electric light, and when twirling, it conforms to certain rules.

古文：武节齐声，或合或离。
现代文：武舞的节奏配合乐声，舞队有时聚合有时分离。
English: The rhythm of the martial dance matches the music, and the dance teams sometimes merge and sometimes separate.

古文：电发星骛，若景若差。
现代文：电一般地射出，如光影闪耀，星一般地奔驶，似前后参差。
English: Electricity shoots out in a general way, shining like light and shadow, and rushes in a general way like a star, appearing to be jagged.

古文：兵法攸象，军容是仪。
现代文：是兵法的象征，是军容的仪则。
English: It is the symbol of military tactics and the etiquette of military appearance.

古文：《军镇篇》《弩俞》第三：
现代文：《军镇篇》《弩俞》第三
English: "Military Town" "" third chorus

古文：弩为远兵军之镇，其发有机。
现代文：弩箭是射远的武器，作战中有镇敌的效用。它射出时须有机械。
English: The crossbow is a long-range weapon, and its use in combat is to subdue the enemy. When it is fired, it must have a mechanism.

古文：体难动，往必速，重而不迟。
现代文：箭身不轻易发动，一旦发动必然迅速，虽然持重，却并不缓慢。
English: The body of the arrow is not easy to launch, and once it is launched, it will certainly rise quickly. Although it is heavy, it is not slow.

古文：锐精分袴，射远中微。
现代文：用铜制成的箭镞十分尖锐，能向远处射中细小的目标。
English: The arrowheads made of copper are very sharp and can hit small targets at a distance.

古文：《弩俞》之乐，一何奇！
现代文：《弩俞》的乐舞，是多么奇异!
English: The music and dance of "Dragonfly" are so bizarre!

古文：变多姿，退若激，进若飞。
现代文：变化间多态多姿，向后退好像水势阻遏，向前进就有如腾飞。
English: There are many shapes and forms between the changes. Going backwards is like being held back by the water, and going forwards is like taking off.

古文：五声协，八音谐。
现代文：五声调协，八音和谐。
English: Five-part harmony, eight-part harmony.

古文：宣武象，赞天威。
现代文：这是宣示武功的象征，赞颂上天的声威。
English: This is a symbol of proclaiming martial arts and praising the voice of heaven.

古文：《穷武篇》《安台行乱》第四：
现代文：《穷武篇》《安台行乱》第四
English: "The Poor Soldier" "The Andai Riot" 4th

古文：穷武者丧，何但败北。
现代文：穷兵黩武的人丧国亡家，哪裹仅仅是打败仗。
English: A poor soldier loses his country and his home, which is nothing but a defeat.

古文：柔弱亡战，国家亦废。
现代文：如果柔弱无力，不能作战，国家也将灭亡。
English: If a country is too weak to fight, it will perish.

古文：秦始徐偃，既已作戒前世。
现代文：区王堡已在前代作出鉴戒。
English: The district king's castle has already issued a warning to the previous generation.

古文：先王鉴其机，修文整武艺。
现代文：先王审察其中机微，既修文德，也整治武艺。
English: Emperor Qianlong examined the subtleties of it, not only to improve literature and ethics, but also to rectify martial arts.

古文：文武足相济，然后得光大。
现代文：文、武两方面足以相互济助，然后才能发扬光大。
English: The two aspects of literature and military affairs are sufficient to help each other, and then they can carry forward.

古文：乱曰：高则亢，满则盈。亢必危，盈必倾。
现代文：尾声说：凡事不能太高，不能过满，太高必然危险，太满必然倾覆。
English: The epilogue says: Everything can't be too high, can't be too full, too high is bound to be dangerous, too full is bound to topple.

古文：去危倾，守以平。
现代文：远离危险与倾覆，持守平衡与稳定。
English: Keep away from danger and overturning, maintain balance and stability.

古文：冲则久，浊能清。混文武，顺天经。
现代文：冲淡可以持久，混浊而能澄清，混同文治武功，顺应地义天经。
English: Dilution can be long-lasting, muddy and can be clarified, mixed with the martial arts, in accordance with the precepts of heaven.

古文：晋《宣文舞歌》二篇，傅玄造：
现代文：置《宣文舞》歌二篇：傅玄作《羽籥舞》歌：
English: Two "Xuanwen Dance" songs: Fu Xuan composed "Feather Dance" song:

古文：《羽龠舞歌》：羲皇之初，天地开元。网罟禽兽，群黎以安。
现代文：在上古盏皇的初始，天地刚刚开辟。用纲罟捕捉禽兽，百姓赖以安定。
English: At the beginning of the last century, the heavens and the earth were just opening up. People depended on the stable to catch animals and beasts.

古文：神农教耕，创业诚难。民得粒食，澹然无所患。
现代文：神农教人耕种，创业确实艰难，百姓有了饭吃，淡泊自然而没有什么忧虑。
English: Shennong taught people to cultivate, starting a business is really difficult, the people have food to eat, and there is nothing to worry about.

古文：黄帝始征伐，万品造其端。军驾无常居，是曰轩辕。
现代文：从董查起有了征伐的事情，各种典制都创建起来，因为他的车驾没有固定的住处，造就称为轩辕氏。
English: From the time of Dong Zhaojun, there was a conquest, and all kinds of dynasties were created, because his chariot did not have a fixed place of residence, creating what is known as the Xuanwu clan.

古文：轩辕既勤止，尧舜匪荒宁。
现代文：聋堕既是非常勤劳，袁和忧也不懈怠宁息。
English: Deaf and deaf are both very hardworking, and Yuan Hezhen does not slack off.

古文：夏禹治水，汤武又用兵。
现代文：夏禹治理洪水，商荡、周武又率兵征伐。
English: Xia Yu dealt with floods, merchants, and Zhou Wu led the army in the conquest.

古文：孰能保安逸，坐致太平？
现代文：他们哪一个能过安逸的日子，而使天下太平?
English: Which one of them can live a life of ease and bring peace to the world?

古文：圣皇迈乾乾，天下兴颂声，穆穆且明明。
现代文：我们圣明的皇上自强不息，天下兴起了歌颂之声，端庄盛美而又察视清明。
English: Our saintly emperor is self-reliant, and the world is singing his praises. He is dignified, magnificent, and has a clear vision.

古文：惟圣皇，道化彰。澄四海，清三光。万机理，庶事康。
现代文：我圣明的皇上教化昌明，使四海澄清，三光明朗，纷繁的政事得以治理，各种事情安宁康定。
English: My saintly emperor enlightened the world, making the four seas clear, the three seas bright, the complex political affairs to be governed, and all kinds of things to be peaceful and stable.

古文：潜龙升，仪凤翔。
现代文：潜藏的龙也飞升，朝见的凤在翱翔。
English: The hidden dragon also soars, and the phoenix seen in the morning soars.

古文：风雨时，物繁昌。
现代文：风调雨顺，物产丰富。
English: The weather is fine and the produce is plentiful.

古文：却走马，降瑞祥。
现代文：放逐善于奔跑的马，上天赐予瑞祥。
English: Expel a horse that is good at running, and heaven will give you Ruixiang.

古文：扬仄陋，简忠良。
现代文：拔举隐逸的人才，选用忠良的贤臣。
English: To select the hidden talent, to choose the loyal and virtuous.

古文：百禄是荷，眉寿无疆。
现代文：承受着诸般福禄，万寿无疆。
English: It bears all kinds of blessings, and has unlimited longevity.

古文：《羽铎舞歌》：昔在浑成时，两仪尚未分。阳升垂清景，阴降兴浮云。
现代文：《羽铎舞》歌：从前在宇宙混沌的时候，阴阳两仪尚未分开，阳气上升而呈现清明光影，阴气下降而兴起浮云。
English: "Feather Dance" song: Once upon a time, when the universe was chaotic, yin and yang were not yet separated, yang was rising and showing clear light and shadow, and yin was falling and floating clouds were emerging.

古文：中和含氛氲，万物各异群。
现代文：阴阳中和而含有氛氲之气，产生了各种不同的物类。
English: Yin and yang are balanced and contain the atmosphere of the dragonfly, resulting in a variety of different species.

古文：人伦得其序，众生乐圣君。
现代文：人际关系有了上下尊卑的次序，百姓们乐于有圣明的君主。
English: Interpersonal relationships have an order of superiority and inferiority, and the people are happy to have a saintly monarch.

古文：三统继五行，然后有质文。
现代文：黑白赤三统继承金木水火土五行，然后才有质有文。
English: The black-white-red trinity inherits the five elements of gold, wood, water, fire and earth, and only then does it have quality.

古文：皇王殊运代，治乱亦缤纷。
现代文：为皇称王有不同的运转替代，或治或乱也纷纷不一。
English: There are different alternatives for the operation of the emperor-claimed king, and the rule or chaos are also different.

古文：伊大晋，德兼往古。
现代文：衹有我大晋王朝，道德兼有往昔的上古。
English: There is my Great Jin Dynasty, and morality is both ancient and immemorial.

古文：越牺农，邈舜禹。
现代文：迈越伏羲、神农，远超虞爱、夏鱼。
English: He has surpassed Fuxi and Shennong, and far surpassed Yuai and Xia Rong.

古文：参天地，陵三五。
现代文：与天地并立，凌驾三统五行。
English: Standing side by side with heaven and earth, transcending the three unities and five elements.

古文：礼唐周，乐《韶武》。岂唯《箫韶》六代具举。
现代文：礼有卢、周之礼，乐有《韶》、《武》之乐，不衹是有《箫韶》之声，六代所有一一齐备。
English: Lu and Zhou's worship, the music of "Ren" and "Wu," and the voice of "Ren" are all present in the six generations.

古文：泽霑地境，化充天宇。
现代文：恩德润泽地境，教化广充天宇。
English: Ende Runze landscape, enlighten the vast sky.

古文：圣明临朝，元凯作辅，普天同乐胥。
现代文：圣明的天子临朝听政，有元、凯那样的贤臣辅佐，普天之下共同欢乐。
English: The heavenly son of the holy light attends the imperial court and listens to the government, and the wise ministers such as Arimoto and Kai assist him, and the whole world rejoices together.

古文：浩浩元气，遐哉太清。
现代文：浩浩的元气流转，天空是多么旷远。
English: How vast is the sky, how vast the air currents.

古文：五行流迈，日月代征。
现代文：五行轮流运转，日月交替行进。
English: The five lines run in rotation, with the sun and the moon moving alternately.

古文：随时变化，庶物乃成。
现代文：随着天时的变化，各种物类就得以形成。
English: With the change of time, all kinds of things can be formed.

古文：圣皇继天，光济群生。
现代文：我圣明的皇上承受天命，光辉济助广大人民。
English: My sacred emperor has received the heavenly mandate to help the broad masses of the people.

古文：化之以道，万国咸宁。
现代文：用道德来进行教化，万国都安定康宁。
English: Use morality to carry out enlightenment, and all countries will be stable and prosperous.

古文：受兹介福，延于亿龄。
现代文：承受这一大福，绵延到千年万载。
English: To receive this great blessing will last for tens of thousands of years.

古文：晋宗庙歌十一篇，傅玄造：
现代文：置宗庙歌十一篇：傅玄作
English: The 11th temple song of Okisong: composed by Fu Xuan

古文：我夕我牲，猗欤敬止。
现代文：在祭祀前夕查看祭品用具，啊!
English: I came at dusk to see the sacrificial animals, how respectful they are.

古文：嘉豢孔时，供兹享祀。
现代文：这是多么诚敬。饲养牲畜很及时，以供奉这每一次的祭祀。
English: Carefully reared according to the season, this bundle is offered as a sacrificial offering.

古文：神鉴厥诚，博硕斯歆。
现代文：神灵鉴察这一片心意，来受享肥硕的祭牲。
English: The gods, seeing the sincerity, accept these fat offerings.

古文：神考降飨，以虞孝孙之心。
现代文：祖先也降临配享，使孝敬的子孙欢喜。
English: Ancestors also descend to share, bringing joy to the children of filial piety.

古文：右祠庙夕牲歌。
现代文：上为祠庙夕牲歌。
English: Above is the ancestral temple evening animal song.

古文：呜呼悠哉！
现代文：啊!多么悠久!
English: Ah! how ancient!

古文：日鉴在兹。
现代文：神灵每曰在这裹鉴察。
English: The deities are wrapped up here and inspected every day.

古文：以时享祀，神明降之。
现代文：按时举行祭礼，神灵降临受祭。
English: According to the dedication and sacrifice of the season, the gods will descend.

古文：神明斯降，既祐飨之。
现代文：神灵降临后，已经佐助受享。
English: After the arrival of the gods, Sasuke has already received it.

古文：祚我无疆，受天之祜。
现代文：使我皇位万年不尽，受着天神福佑。
English: so that I may reign on the throne for a thousand years without end, blessed by the gods.

古文：赫赫太上，巍巍圣祖。
现代文：显赫盛大的太上，功德巍巍的圣祖。
English: so that our inheritance will have no end and we will receive heaven's endless blessings.

古文：明明烈考，丕承继序。
现代文：明察的祖先，一代代继守祖业。
English: The ancestors of Mingzhao have continued to follow the ancestral profession for generations.

古文：右祠庙迎送神歌。
现代文：上为祠庙迎送神歌。
English: Above is the hymn of welcome to the ancestral temple.

古文：经始宗庙，神明戾止。
现代文：开始营建宗庙，神灵到来。
English: The foundation of the Sima family temple was laid, and the gods came.

古文：申锡无疆，祗承享祀。
现代文：一再的赐予无穷无尽，恭奉祭祀之礼。美啊!
English: The bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty

古文：假哉皇祖，绥予孙子。
现代文：我的皇祖，安抚我子子孙孙。
English: O good ancestors, grant peace to our descendants.

古文：燕及后昆，锡兹繁祉。
现代文：受到后代的祭享，赐给这众多的福祉。
English: Benefactors influence their heirs and give us happiness.

古文：右祠征西将军登歌。
现代文：上为祠征西将军登歌。
English: Above is a poem for the General of the Ancestral Hall.

古文：嘉乐肆庭，荐祀在堂。
现代文：美好的乐舞陈列庭中，在堂上举行祭祀。
English: Beautiful music and dance are on display in the courtyard, and sacrifices are held in the hall.

古文：皇皇宗庙，乃祖先皇。
现代文：多么美盛的宗庙，是祭祀祖先的地方。
English: What a splendid ancestral temple, a place of ancestor worship.

古文：济济辟公，相予烝尝。
现代文：众多的诸侯，辅助我秋冬两祭。
English: Many lords assisted me in organizing the autumn and winter festivals.

古文：享祀不忒，降福穰穰。右祠豫章府君登歌。
现代文：祭礼没有差错，祖先多多降福。上为祠豫章府君登歌。啊!
English: There are no mistakes in the festival, and many ancestors have been blessed. Above is the small shrine, where Emperor Yuanzhang is featured in a song. Ah!

古文：于邈先后，实司于天。
现代文：久远的先皇!确实受命于天。
English: Our distant ancestors, the emperors, were actually heavenly officials.

古文：显矣皇祖，帝祉肇臻。
现代文：显赫的皇祖，上帝赐给福祥。
English: great ancestors, began to lay the foundation of the empire.

古文：本支克昌，资始开元。
现代文：嫡系和庶出的子孙能够昌盛，凭藉初始而创立大业。
English: The legitimate and illegitimate children and grandchildren can prosper and create a great career by virtue of the initial.

古文：惠我无疆，享祚永年。
现代文：赐赠给我的无穷无尽，享有皇位千年万年。
English: Grant me the bounty of bounty, and let me be blessed forever.

古文：右祠颍川府君登歌。
现代文：上为祠颖川府君登歌。
English: The above is a poem about a shrine in Yingchuan.

古文：于惟曾皇，显显令德。
现代文：啊!
English: The emperor's great-grandfather was a man of incomparable virtue.

古文：高明清亮，匪竞柔克。
现代文：我的曾祖!美德多么显明。生性高明清亮，以柔和之道治事却不用争竞。
English: My great-grandfather, how clear the virtues are, how bright and clear-sighted, how gentle and non-competitive.

古文：保乂命祜，基命惟则。
现代文：安定国家而赐福人民，依据法则而登基受命。
English: He blessed the people with a stable country and ascended to the throne in accordance with the law.

古文：笃生圣祖，光济四国。
现代文：生下圣祖得天独厚，光辉遍及天下四方。
English: Nurture the Holy Ancestors, and the light will shine in all directions.

古文：右祠京兆府君登歌。
现代文：上为祠京兆府君登歌。
English: The above is a poem about the ancestral shrine of Kyoshofukun.

古文：于铄皇祖，圣德钦明。
现代文：啊!
English: Oh, great grandfather of the emperor, you are a man of holiness, reverence and discernment.

古文：勤施四方，夙夜敬止。
现代文：我光辉的皇祖!至高无上的德行多么显明，辛劳地治理四方，曰日夜夜端庄敬肃。
English: Diligently manage the four parties, day and night prudently in the line of duty.

古文：载敷文教，载扬武烈。
现代文：既广施礼乐教化，又显扬勇武威猛。
English: widely spread literature and education, and promote martial arts.

古文：匡定社稷，龚行天罚。
现代文：扶正安定天下，恭敬地行使上天的惩罚。
English: Assisting the stabilization of society, pursuing the punishment of heaven.

古文：经始大业，造创帝基。
现代文：开始营建伟大的事业，创建新的王朝。
English: Laying the foundation for a great career and creating a solid foundation.

古文：畏天之命，于时保之。
现代文：畏惧上天的使命，及时保卫国家。
English: Adhere to the Mandate of Heaven and guard it at all times.

古文：右祠宣皇帝登歌。
现代文：上为祠宣皇帝登歌。
English: Above is the Emperor's anthem for the ancestral hall.

古文：执竞景皇，克明克哲。
现代文：慑服强敌的量皇查，既英明又圣哲。
English: Self-reliant, Ji Wang Tong is able to see right from wrong.

古文：旁作穆穆，惟祗惟畏。
现代文：辅佐天子时柔和沉静，衹是畏惧恭敬。
English: Do all things with forethought. Keep awe in your heart.

古文：纂宣之绪，耆定厥功。
现代文：继承宣皇帝的业绩，到老就确定这一成功。
English: Inheriting the achievements of Emperor Xuan Zi and achieving his own merits.

古文：登此隽乂，纠彼群凶。
现代文：升进这些才能出众的人，纠察那群奸邪小人。
English: Promote those with superior talent and morality, and correct those who are violent.

古文：业业在位，帝既勤止。
现代文：在位兢兢业业，景皇帝非常勤劳。
English: The emperor was very diligent during his reign.

古文：维天之命，于穆不已。
现代文：他承受天命，令人赞叹不已。
English: He was destined for greatness.

古文：右祠景皇帝登歌。
现代文：上为祠景皇帝登歌。
English: Above is the Emperor's anthem.

古文：于皇时晋，允文文皇。聪明睿智，圣敬神武。
现代文：啊!我太置多么盛美，塞皇壶善于文治。他聪明睿智，圣敬神武。
English: Ah! How splendidly I am placed, how skillful in literature he is, how wise he is, how holy he is, how mighty he is.

古文：万机莫综，皇斯清之。
现代文：纷繁的政务难以综治，他就加以清理。
English: There are so many problems in the government that no one can handle them, so the emperor has to solve them.

古文：虎兕放命，皇斯平之。
现代文：凶邪的人不受约束，他就予以平定。
English: When the wicked man is unrestrained, he will be subdued.

古文：柔远能迩，简授英贤。
现代文：他怀柔远人而使之能近，选拔英贤任职。
English: We should cherish the softness of the far and nurture the softness of the near, and select and appoint outstanding and wise people.

古文：创业垂统，勋格皇天。
现代文：创立帝业传于后世，他的功勋感通皇天。
English: A record-setting legacy has been passed down, and the achievements are legion.

古文：右祠文皇帝登歌。
现代文：上为祠文皇帝登歌。
English: The above is the Emperor's anthem.

古文：曰晋是常，享祀时序。
现代文：我左置重视伦常，按时祭祀。
English: As is customary in the Jin Dynasty, the dedication and sacrifice followed the seasons.

古文：宗庙致敬，礼乐具举。
现代文：向宗庙致以敬意，礼乐一一举行。
English: Pay homage to your ancestors at the ancestral temple, complete with stocking ceremony music.

古文：牺樽既奠，清酤既载。
现代文：普天下的人，无不来进行祭祀。
English: Sacrificial barrels have been set up, sake has been filled to the brim.

古文：亦有和羹，荐羞斯备。
现代文：进献牛形酒杯，杯中装满清酒。还有调配得很好的羹汤，肴馔造就齐备。
English: There is also a delicious yakitori soup prepared, and delicious food is also ready.

古文：蒸蒸永慕，感时兴思。
现代文：孝顺的心咏叹思慕，有感于时而兴起想念。
English: Endless thoughts full of filial piety, inspired by the situation at the time.

古文：登歌奏舞，神乐其和。
现代文：登堂唱歌跳舞，神灵为乐舞和美而欢乐。
English: They perform a song and dance in the temple, and the gods are happy because of the harmony and beauty.

古文：祖考来格，祐我邦家。
现代文：祖先来与我感通，保佑我的国家。
English: The ancestors have all come to bless our national home.

古文：敷天之下，罔不休嘉。
现代文：所有天下的人，无不深受其福。
English: All the people in the world are deeply blessed.

古文：肃肃在位，济济臣工。
现代文：群臣排列有序，人人庄重。
English: The incumbent, who is respected and revered, is surrounded by hundreds of courtiers.

古文：四海来格，礼仪有容。
现代文：四海都来祭祀，仪节有法有度。
English: The four seas all come to offer sacrifices, and rituals have their own laws and degrees.

古文：钟鼓振，管弦理。舞开元，歌永始。
现代文：敲钟击鼓，吹管调弦，跳开元舞，唱永始歌。
English: Ringing bells and beating drums, blowing wind and tuning strings, dancing the Yuan dance, and singing the Yongshi Song.

古文：神胥乐兮。
现代文：神灵都感到欢乐啊!
English: The gods are rejoicing!

古文：肃肃在位，臣工济济。小大咸敬，上下有礼。
现代文：群臣排列有序，人人庄重，不论职位高低，都来表示敬意，上下尊卑，依次行礼。
English: The group of courtiers are arranged in an orderly manner, everyone is solemn, regardless of their position, they all come to show their respect, and the higher and lower ranks salute in turn.

古文：理管弦，振鼓钟。
现代文：吹管调弦，敲钟击鼓。
English: Winding and tuning the strings, striking the bells and beating the drums.

古文：舞象德，歌咏功。
现代文：跳象征盛德的舞，唱咏颂丰功的歌。
English: They danced a dance symbolizing virtue and sang a song praising merit.

古文：神胥乐兮。
现代文：神灵都感到欢乐啊!
English: The gods are rejoicing!

古文：肃肃在位，有来雍雍。
现代文：群臣庄重地排列，人人容仪温文。
English: With all due respect to the incumbent, the guests left in a relaxed and generous manner.

古文：穆穆天子，相惟辟公。
现代文：天子有穆穆的美容，助祭的是诸侯公卿。
English: The son of heaven has a magnificent beauty, and the assistant priest is the prince of princes and nobles.

古文：礼有仪，乐有则。
现代文：礼有仪度，乐有法则。
English: Etiquette has etiquette, pleasure has rules.

古文：舞象功，歌咏德。
现代文：跳象征丰功的舞，唱咏颂盛德的歌。
English: They danced a dance symbolizing merit and sang a song in praise of Shengde.

古文：神胥乐兮。
现代文：神灵都感到欢乐啊!
English: The gods are rejoicing!

古文：右祠庙飨神歌二篇。晋江左宗庙歌十三篇，曹毗造十一首，王珣造二首：
现代文：上为祠庙飨神歌二篇，晋江左宗庙歌十三篇，曹毗作十一首，王殉作二首。
English: On the top, there are two ancestral shrines and temples' songs, thirteen Jinjiang Zuoshu temple songs, eleven songs composed by Cao Pi, and two songs composed by Wang Zhiru.

古文：歌高祖宣皇帝，曹毗造：
现代文：歌高祖宣皇帝：曹毗作啊!
English: Emperor Song Gao's ancestor Xuan: Cao Pi made it!

古文：于赫高祖，德协灵符。
现代文：我显赫的高祖!德行与灵符相合。
English: Woe to my great-grandfather, the embodiment of virtue and the symbol of the spirit.

古文：应运拨乱，厘整天衢。
现代文：顺应天的气数而拨乱反正，重新整顿朝纲。
English: Corresponding to the timing of the operation of the chaotic world, the rectification of the political capital of the morning.

古文：勋格宇宙，化动八区。
现代文：他的功勋震动宇宙，他的教化感动四方。
English: Distinguished service shakes the universe, and enlightenment moves the eight districts.

古文：肃以典刑，陶以玄珠。
现代文：用刑律来整肃法纪，用智慧来教育百姓。
English: For the rectification of discipline, capital punishment is used, and for the enlightenment of the people, the Gem is used.

古文：神石吐瑞，灵芝自敷。
现代文：神石显示了瑞兆，灵芝自行生长。
English: The spirit of God stone spits out auspiciousness, and the knowledge of Ganoderma lucidum comes from Chenji.

古文：肇基天命，道均唐虞。
现代文：承受天命而创帝业，他的治道媲美唐尧、虞舜。
English: The founding of the foundation was in accordance with the will of heaven, and was from the benevolent to the virtuous Tang Dynasty.

古文：歌世宗景皇帝：
现代文：歌世宗景皇帝：
English: Emperor Sejongjong sings:

古文：景皇承运，纂隆洪绪。
现代文：景皇承受天运，继承了帝王大业。
English: Emperor Jing inherited the fortune of the times and was succeeded by Emperor Xing.

古文：皇维重抗，天晖再举。
现代文：王朝纲纪重新整顿，皇帝的光辉再次照耀。
English: The dynastic system was reorganized, and the glory of the emperor shone once again.

古文：蠢矣二寇，扰我扬楚。
现代文：那愚蠢的册丘俊？蠢矣二寇，侵扰我握、楚地区。
English: Stupid two thieves, bother me to raise public opinion.

古文：乃整元戎，以膏齐斧。
现代文：于是整治兵众，用来膏润征伐之斧。
English: Crush the vehicle and kill the enemy with an axe.

古文：亹亹神算，赫赫王旅。
现代文：多么美的神妙计谋，多么威武的王家军队。
English: The use of soldiers is like a divine calculation, and the war is a great success.

古文：鲸鲵既平，功冠帝宇。
现代文：凶恶的人已经平定，他的功勋居全国之首。
English: The ferocious rebellion has already been quelled, and the meritorious service has been crowned.

古文：歌太祖文皇帝：
现代文：歌太祖文皇帝：
English: Song Emperor Zuwen:

古文：太祖齐圣，王猷诞融。
现代文：太祖智虑敏达，谋划宏大明融。
English: Taizhuang respected Shengming, and Wang Yuan Yuan was very bright.

古文：仁教四塞，天基累崇。
现代文：仁慈的教化充满四方，屡受皇天尊崇。
English: Benevolent teachings spread to the four domains, and the imperial foundation gained more and more respect.

古文：皇室多难，严清紫宫。
现代文：皇室多有祸难，他清除宫禁奸凶。
English: The imperial family's life is full of difficulties, and the Purple Palace has been sternly clarified.

古文：威厉秋霜，惠过春风。
现代文：威严有如肃杀的秋霜，恩惠有如温暖的春风。
English: Dignity prevails over the autumn frost, grace and benefit prevail over the spring breeze.

古文：平蜀夷楚，以文以戎。
现代文：他平定酉蜀和楚地，兼有文德武功。
English: The two regions of Shu and Chu were pacified, and the longitude and latitude were improved.

古文：奄有参墟，声流无穷。
现代文：拥有参宿分野之地，声誉流传无穷。
English: He was highly regarded in the Three Kingdoms, and his fame spread far and wide.

古文：歌世祖武皇帝：
现代文：歌世祖武皇帝：
English: Song of Emperor Shizuo:

古文：于穆武皇，允龚钦明。
现代文：啊!我壮美的逮皇壶，多么恭敬圣明。
English: Mu Mu I am the Emperor Wu, the successor of the ancestor Qin Ming.

古文：应期登禅，龙飞紫庭。
现代文：适时接受惮让，登上帝王之位。
English: Long Fei ascended to the throne at the right time.

古文：百揆时序，听断以情。
现代文：前前后后的众多政务，他按实际情况听取处理。
English: The hearing was orderly, and the case was dismissed with prejudice.

古文：殊域既宾，伪吴亦平。
现代文：外国既已宾服，伪吴也被平定。
English: Exotic guest clothes and pseudo-Wu Sweeping.

古文：晨流甘露，宵映朗星。
现代文：清晨甘露下降，夜晚明星照映。
English: In the morning, the stream of nectar flows, and in the evening, the stars shine.

古文：野有击壤，路垂颂声。
现代文：野外有人击壤而歌，道路上一片颂声。
English: There are songs about hitting the ground, and songs about the road.

古文：歌中宗元皇帝：
现代文：歌中宗元皇帝：
English: In the song, Emperor Zongyuan sings:

古文：运屯百六，天罗解贯。
现代文：遭逢到阳九厄运，法纲解开了绳索。
English: Times are tough, and Skynet is trying to figure it out.

古文：元皇勃兴，网笼江汉。
现代文：元皇帝勃然兴起，网笼了江汉地域。
English: Emperor Zhen Zhaozhong, Zhan Luo Guo Liao Jiao.

古文：仰齐七政，俯平祸乱。
现代文：仰齐曰月五星，俯平人间祸乱。
English: Uprightness brings about the seven political systems, while downrightness brings about chaos.

古文：化若风行，泽犹雨散。
现代文：教化如风吹草偃，恩泽如雨露遍洒。
English: Indoctrination is all the rage, and the benefits of education are few and far between.

古文：沦光更耀，金辉复焕。
现代文：沉没的光重又照耀，金色的光辉再行焕发。
English: The sunken light shines again, the golden radiance is reborn.

古文：德冠千载，蔚有余粲。
现代文：德行居历史之首，千年万载后仍有余辉。
English: A thousand years of sacred virtue crowned, the text is still brilliant.

古文：歌肃祖明皇帝：
现代文：歌肃祖明皇帝：
English: Emperor Zuming of Gansu wrote:

古文：明明肃祖，阐弘帝胙。
现代文：我明察的明皇帝，继承帝位而发扬光大。
English: Emperor Ming, whom I have observed closely, succeeded to the throne and flourished.

古文：英风夙发，清晖载路。
现代文：早就表现出杰出的气概，清亮的光辉洒遍道路。
English: He was handsome and dashing at an early age, with a bright and shining future.

古文：奸逆纵忒，罔式皇度。
现代文：奸邪凶徒恣行作恶，不遵守皇家的法度。
English: Treacherous traitors act arbitrarily, ignoring the Emperor's edicts.

古文：躬振硃旗，遂豁天步。
现代文：他亲自举起红旗，于是使国运豁然开朗。
English: Bowing down and waving the red flag, he suddenly became cheerful.

古文：宏猷渊塞，高罗云布。
现代文：宏大的谋划笃实深远，高张的法纲如云密布。
English: The grand plan is truly far-reaching, and the lofty legal framework is like a dense cloud.

古文：品物咸宁，洪基永固。
现代文：万物都康定安宁，帝王的基业永久牢固。
English: All things were peaceful, and Hongji was secure forever.

古文：歌显宗成皇帝：
现代文：歌显宗成皇帝：
English: Emperor Go-Hsien Tsung-cheng sings:

古文：于休显宗，道泽玄播。
现代文：啊!多么美善的成皇帝，治道默默地播扬。
English: I'm so beautiful I can't write, I'm so deep I can't see.

古文：式宣德音，暢物以和。
现代文：他宣示诏令，使万物通畅而和美。
English: The sound of the law and the joint proclamation will bring prosperity to all things.

古文：迈德蹈仁，匪礼弗过。
现代文：他遵循仁德的规范，于礼不合就不超越。
English: He follows the norms of benevolence and does not overstep the bounds of propriety.

古文：敷以纯风，濯以清波。
现代文：用纯朴之风普施教化，用清洁之水洗濯民众。
English: The virtue of trees is like the pure wind of cloth, and the practice of benevolence is just like the clear wave of ripples.

古文：连理映阜，鸣凤栖柯。
现代文：连生一起的树枝照映山岗，飞鸣的凤凰栖息枝条。
English: LianRenMoku reflects the earth, and the auspicious bird sings FengSuiShuKe.

古文：同规放勋，义盖山河。
现代文：典范同于唐尧，道义压倒山河。
English: The four aspects of edification and reform are in accordance with the emperor's edict, and benevolence and righteousness are implemented to cover mountains and rivers.

古文：歌康皇帝：
现代文：歌康皇帝：
English: Emperor Gokang:

古文：康皇穆穆，仰嗣洪德。
现代文：康皇帝端庄盛美，继承了前代大德。
English: Mu Mu, I am Emperor Kang, calling his heir Hong De.

古文：为而不宰，雅音四塞。闲邪以诚，镇物以默。
现代文：四方充满了纯正的雅声。用诚敬防闲奸邪，用静默镇抚人情。
English: Shifang is full of pure elegance. Use sincerity and respect to prevent idle evil, and use silence to appease people's feelings.

古文：威静区宇，道宣邦国。
现代文：皇威使区宇宁静，皇道在邦国宣扬。
English: In the grandeur of Jingyunai, the province declared itself a state.

古文：歌孝宗穆皇帝：
现代文：歌孝宗穆皇帝：
English: Song of Emperor Zongmu:

古文：孝宗夙哲，休音允臧。
现代文：穆皇帝一向圣哲，他的名声多么善美。
English: Emperor Mu has always been a saint. How good and beautiful his reputation is.

古文：如彼晨离，耀景扶桑。
现代文：就像早晨的太阳，在束方闪耀光辉。
English: Virtue is like the morning light, the sun shines on the morning dew.

古文：垂训华幄，流润八荒。
现代文：在宫禁中垂示教训，全国都受到恩惠。
English: The drills were held in Huazhu, and the drills flowed to Happo.

古文：幽赞玄妙，爰该曲章。
现代文：道德精微达玄妙之境，深通典章制度。
English: Morality is subtle to the point of being mysterious, and the disciplinary system is profound.

古文：西平僭蜀，北静旧疆。
现代文：在西部扫平僭号的伪蜀，在北部安定原先的边疆。
English: Pinghu and Shuxu in the west, and the old territory of Jing in the north.

古文：高猷远暢，朝有遗芳。
现代文：高远的谋划畅达远地，今日在朝廷仍留有芬芳。
English: Gao Miao reaches far and wide, generation after generation, there are envoys.

古文：歌哀皇帝：
现代文：歌哀皇帝：
English: Emperor Goei sings:

古文：于穆哀皇，圣心虚远。
现代文：啊!多么美的塞皇帝，他的心虚静深远。
English: Ah! how beautiful is the Emperor of Tibet, how profound is the stillness of his heart.

古文：雅好玄古，大庭是践。
现代文：一向好玄好占，依循上古的帝王大庭。
English: The style favors the ancient, while the practice is controlled by the modern.

古文：道尚无为，治存易简。
现代文：治道崇尚无为，行政但存简易。
English: Morality is not yet effective, and it is easier to keep politics simple.

古文：化若风行，民犹草偃。
现代文：教化如风行草上，百姓如草受风吹而倒。
English: Indoctrination is like the wind blowing on the grass, and the people are like the grass blown down by the wind.

古文：虽曰登遐，徽音弥阐。
现代文：虽说他已经逝世，而美好的名声却更加发扬。
English: Although the emperor has passed away, the virtue of the emperor has become more and more prominent.

古文：愔愔《云》《韶》，尽美尽善。
现代文：就如和悦安闲的《云》、《韶》之乐，已达到美善的极境。
English: "Clouds," "Clouds," "Clouds," "Clouds," "Clouds," "Clouds," "Clouds," "Clouds," "Clouds,"

古文：歌太宗简文皇帝，王珣造：
现代文：歌太宗简文皇帝：王殉作
English: Emperor Taizong of Qianwen: Wang Zhisaku

古文：皇矣简文，于昭于天。
现代文：美啊简文帝，他的功德明见于上天。
English: Emperor Jianwen, whose light shines in the sky.

古文：灵明若神，周淡如渊。
现代文：机敏明察仿佛有神，细密冲淡有如深渊。
English: The shrewd observation seems to have a god, and the delicate dilution is like an abyss.

古文：冲应其来，实与其迁。
现代文：以平和恬静应接万物，与万物一同变迁。
English: Falsehood follows it, and truth goes with it.

古文：娓娓心化，日用不言。
现代文：勤勉不倦地以心化育，曰日施行却静默无言。
English: They diligently and tirelessly educate with heart, but when it comes to implementation, they are silent.

古文：易而有亲，简而可传。
现代文：平易而令人可亲，简约却可以流传。
English: Easy and familiar, simple and transferable.

古文：观流弥远，求本愈玄。
现代文：观察他的源流愈觉深远，探求他的本末更是妙玄。
English: Observing his source is more profound, and exploring his essence is even more profound.

古文：歌烈宗孝武皇帝，王珣造：
现代文：歌烈宗孝武皇帝：王殉作
English: Emperor Songzong Xiaowu: Wang Zhisaku

古文：天鉴有晋，钦哉烈宗。
现代文：上天鉴察我大晋，令人钦敬啊孝武皇帝。
English: Heaven is looking down on me, the great Jin, the admirable Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：同规文考，玄默允龚。
现代文：典范同于简文皇帝，沉静无为而庄敬。
English: The model is the same as the Emperor Jianwen, quiet and dignified.

古文：威而不猛，约而能通。
现代文：有威严却不猛厉，虽简约却能会通。
English: Dictatorship rather than violence, simplicity and order prevail.

古文：神钲一震，九域来同。
现代文：征伐的神釭一声震响，九州归于一统。
English: The sound of God's shofar shakes the sea, and there is no place in the nine regions where it is not heard.

古文：道积淮海，《雅》《颂》自东。
现代文：治道聚于淮海，《雅》《颂》来自东方。
English: The administration of justice gathers in Huaihai, and "Beauty" and "Ode" come from the East.

古文：气陶淳露，化协时雍。
现代文：和气陶陶有如淳露，教化协和而时世太平。
English: Tao Tao is like a dewdrop, teaching and culture are harmonious, and the world is peaceful.

古文：四时祠祀歌，曹毗造：
现代文：四时祠祀歌：曹毗作
English: Four o'clock ancestral shrine worship song: composed by Cao Pi

古文：肃肃清庙，巍巍圣功。
现代文：多么庄严的宗庙，多么伟大的圣功。
English: The solemn ancestor Qing Temple, the sacred merit.

古文：万国来宾，礼仪有容。
现代文：万国都来朝贡，礼仪极有法度。
English: Princes from all over the world come to the DPRK, and they behave with proper etiquette.

古文：钟鼓振，金石熙。
现代文：敲鼓撞钟，呜金击石。
English: The sound of the bells and drums, Kim Seok Hee.

古文：宣兆祚，武开基。
现代文：宣皇帝为帝位创始，逮皇壹登基称帝。
English: Emperor Xuan Zhaohui and Emperor Wu laid the foundation stone.

古文：神斯乐兮。
现代文：神灵是何等欢乐啊!
English: What joy for the gods!

古文：理管弦，有来斯和。
现代文：调理管弦，万民协和。
English: Manage my orchestra, and it will come and go.

古文：说功德，吐清歌。
现代文：称说功德，咏唱清歌。
English: Describe the merits, to spit out a clear song.

古文：神斯乐兮。
现代文：神灵是何等欢乐啊!
English: What joy for the gods!

古文：洋洋玄化，润被九壤。
现代文：至德的教化多么美盛，滋润、覆盖万国九州。
English: The music of Westernization, starring Ren Deze and Jiuzhaigou.

古文：民无不悦，道无不往。
现代文：百姓们没有一个不快活，治道没有一处不通畅。
English: There is no discontent among the people, and there is no reluctance on the part of the politicians.

古文：礼有仪，乐有式。
现代文：礼有仪经，乐有法式。
English: The etiquette has festivals, the music has rhythms.

古文：咏九功，永无极。
现代文：唱六府三事之功，永远无穷无尽。
English: There is no end to the enjoyment of singing the nine meritorious deeds.

古文：神斯乐兮。
现代文：神灵是何等欢乐啊!
English: What joy for the gods!

古文：宋宗庙登歌八篇，王韶之造：
现代文：宗庙登歌八篇：王韶之作
English: Eight pieces of songs performed at the ancestral temple: composed by Wang Xi

古文：绵绵遐绪，昭明载融。
现代文：悠久的传统绵延不绝，多么光明融和。
English: The long tradition continues, how bright and harmonious.

古文：汉德未远，尧有遗风。
现代文：近有塑腿的盛德，远有帝尧的遣风。啊!
English: Near is the shengde of the plastic leg, far is the wind of the imperial scepter. Ah!

古文：于穆皇祖，永世克隆。
现代文：多么美的皇祖，世代相传而能隆盛。
English: What a beautiful imperial ancestor, handed down from generation to generation and able to flourish.

古文：本枝惟庆，贻厥靡穷。
现代文：皇族都很幸福，留给后代无尽无穷。
English: The royal family is very happy, leaving endless wealth for future generations.

古文：右祠北平府君登歌。
现代文：上为祠北平府君登歌。
English: Above is Beipingfujun's ancestral shrine.

古文：乃立清庙，清庙肃肃。
现代文：宗庙建立起来，宗庙多么庄严!
English: When the ancestral temple is built, how solemn it is!

古文：乃备礼容，礼容穆穆。
现代文：礼仪准备起来，礼仪多么美善。
English: When etiquette is prepared, how good is etiquette.

古文：显允皇祖，昭是嗣服。
现代文：我光明公允的皇祖，明告要继承先人的事业。
English: My bright and fair imperial ancestor has announced that he will carry on the work of his predecessors.

古文：锡兹繁祉，聿怀多福。
现代文：赐给我们这么多幸福，要永远怀念，福气更多。
English: For giving us so much happiness, we should always cherish the memory, and be more blessed.

古文：右祠相国掾府君登歌。
现代文：上为祠相国掾府君登歌。
English: Above is a poem about the ancestral shrine, the country and the prefectural government.

古文：四县既序，箫管既举。
现代文：四厢已经安排好乐器，箫管已经演奏起来。
English: The musical instruments have been arranged in the four rooms, and the gongs have begun to play.

古文：堂献六瑚，庭舞八羽。
现代文：堂上敬献祭品，庭中执羽而舞。
English: Sacrifices were offered in the hall, and feathers were ruffled in the courtyard.

古文：先王有典，克禋皇祖。丕显洪烈，永介休祜。
现代文：先王定有制度，里祀皇家先祖，大显伟绩丰功，永远增大好福气。
English: The previous king had a system in place to enshrine royal ancestors who had performed great feats and made great contributions, forever increasing good fortune.

古文：右祠开封府君登歌。
现代文：上为祠开封府君登歌。
English: Above is a poem about the founding of the shrine.

古文：钟鼓喤喤，威仪将将。
现代文：钟鼓声声声响亮，仪仗队步伐铿锵。
English: The sound of bells and drums was loud, and the honor guard marched in step.

古文：温恭礼乐，敬享曾皇。
现代文：以温文恭敬行礼作乐，祭祀曾祖。
English: The music is composed in a warm and respectful manner, and is dedicated to the ancestors.

古文：迈德垂仁，系轨重光。
现代文：勉行其德而垂示仁政，维系的法则重放光明。
English: Practice virtue and show benevolence, and the law of sustaining the system will shine brightly again.

古文：天命纯嘏，惠我无疆。
现代文：上天赐给大福，对我的惠爱无穷无尽。
English: God has given me great blessings, and His love for me is inexhaustible.

古文：右祠武原府君登歌。
现代文：上为祠武原府君登歌。
English: The above is a poem about the ancestral shrine of the governor of Wuhara Prefecture.

古文：铄矣皇祖，帝度其心。
现代文：多么辉煌啊皇祖，上帝忖度他的心意。
English: What a glorious emperor, God rest his soul.

古文：永言配命，播兹徽音。
现代文：咏颂他德配天命，播送他的德音。
English: eulogize his virtue and destiny, and broadcast his virtue.

古文：思我茂猷，如玉如金。
现代文：怀念他美好的谋划，就如同白玉黄金。
English: I miss his wonderful plans, just like white jade gold.

古文：骏奔在陛，是鉴是歆。
现代文：迅速地奔走在陛下，皇祖来鉴察受享。
English: Run swiftly, your majesty, the emperor's ancestors have come to inspect and enjoy.

古文：右祠东安府君登歌。
现代文：上为祠柬安府君登歌。
English: Above is a poem about Anfu Kun, the ancestral shrine of the Kamian dynasty.

古文：烝哉孝皇，齐圣广渊。
现代文：来祭祀啊耋皇童，智虑敏达而有如广渊。
English: Come and make offerings to Ah Zi Wang Tong, who is as wise and alert as the vast ocean.

古文：发祥诞庆，景胙自天。
现代文：他启发吉祥，诞生喜庆，皇位受之于天。
English: His inspiration is auspicious, his birth is auspicious, and his enthronement is blessed by heaven.

古文：德敷金石，道被管弦。
现代文：他德行治道，传唱在金石管弦。
English: He is a man of virtue and justice, singing in the golden stone orchestra.

古文：有命既集，徽风永宣。
现代文：天命既已钟聚，德音永久四宜。
English: Since the destinies of heaven and earth have already converged, the four eternal virtues should prevail.

古文：右祠孝皇帝登歌。
现代文：上为祠孝皇帝登歌。
English: Above is Emperor Ancestor's Anthem.

古文：惟天有命，眷求上哲。
现代文：上天有所任命，顾念搜求德才最高超的人。
English: Appointed by God to search for the most talented people.

古文：赫矣圣武，抚运桓拨。
现代文：多么显赫的武皇帝，乘时运而拨乱反正。
English: What an eminent Emperor Wu, taking advantage of the opportunity to turn things around.

古文：功并敷土，道均汝坟。
现代文：功勋与吴天敷土相同，道德与文王化行汝坟相等。
English: The merits are the same as those of the soil of Wu Tianji, and the morality is the same as that of the tomb of King Wen.

古文：止戈曰武，经纬称文。
现代文：能停息战争而叫做武，善于治理而称做文。
English: Being able to stop a war is called bu, and being good at governance is called do wen.

古文：鸟龙失纪，云火代名。
现代文：司马氏丧失纲纪，刘旦代之而起。
English: Sima lost his discipline, and Liu Dan took his place.

古文：受终改物，作我宋京。
现代文：承受帝位而改变文物制度，兴起我大宋王朝。
English: He inherited the imperial throne and changed the cultural relics system, giving rise to the Great Song Dynasty.

古文：至道惟王，大业有劭。
现代文：最高的道衹有我王，帝王大业多么美好。
English: The highest roadblock is my king, how beautiful is the emperor's great cause.

古文：降德兆民，升歌清庙。
现代文：将恩德赐给万民，在宗庙歌舞颂梼。
English: He will bestow grace on all people and sing and dance in his ancestral temple.

古文：右祠高祖武皇帝登歌。
现代文：上为祠高祖武皇帝登歌。
English: Above is the ancestral hall Gao Zuwu Emperor singing.

古文：奕奕寝庙，奉璋在庭。
现代文：多么高大盛美的宗庙，在朝廷奉献玉璋。
English: What a grand and beautiful ancestral temple, dedicated to the imperial court.

古文：笙龠既列，牺象既盈。
现代文：笙篙已经陈列，酒樽已经斟满。
English: The urns are on display and the wine jars are full.

古文：黍稷匪芳，明祀惟馨。
现代文：黍稷祭品芳美，祭祀神灵馨香。
English: The sacrificial offerings are fragrant, and the sacrificial deities are sweet-smelling.

古文：乐具礼充，洁羞荐诚。
现代文：乐舞具备而祭礼充盈，祭肴芳洁而进献真诚。
English: The music and dance are present and the festival is full, the dishes are fragrant and the offerings are sincere.

古文：神之格思，介以休祯。
现代文：神灵来受享，赐给大吉大祥。
English: Deities come to enjoy and bestow great fortune.

古文：济济群辟，永观厥成。
现代文：济济路跆的众臣啊，永远观看你们大有所成。
English: O courtiers of the Qizhi Road, I will always watch you achieve great success.

古文：右祠七庙享神登歌。
现代文：上为祠七庙享神登歌。
English: Above are the seven shrines and temples where the deities are enshrined.

古文：世祖孝武皇帝歌，谢庄造：
现代文：并以歌章太后篇。世祖孝武皇帝歌：邀蓝作
English: And with the song of the Empress Dowager. Song of the Emperor Xiaowu: Invitation Blue

古文：帝锡二祖，长世多祜。
现代文：上帝赐我直担、世担，绵续久存而大有福分。
English: God has given me a direct burden, a world burden, which has lasted for a long time and has great blessings.

古文：于穆睿考，袭圣承矩。
现代文：啊，我圣明的孝武皇帝，沿袭先圣而继承规矩。
English: Ah, my saintly Emperor Xiaowu, following in the footsteps of the ancients and inheriting the rules.

古文：玄极弛驭，乾纽坠绪。
现代文：当宇宙失去控制，君权失去承继。
English: When the universe loses control, the monarchy loses its succession.

古文：辟我皇维，缔我宋宇。
现代文：开辟我皇家纪纲，缔造我左塞王朝。
English: Opened up my royal curriculum and created my Zoser dynasty.

古文：刊定四海，肇构神京。
现代文：平定了全国，开始营建帝都。
English: He pacified the whole country and began to build the imperial capital.

古文：复礼辑乐，散马堕城。
现代文：恢复礼乐制度，不再进行战争。
English: Restoration of the ceremonial music system, no more wars.

古文：泽牣九有，化浮八瀛。
现代文：恩泽盈满九州，教化遍布四海。
English: Blessings abound in Kyushu, and enlightenment spreads throughout the four seas.

古文：庆云承掖，甘露飞甍。肃肃清庙，徽徽宫。
现代文：祥云上临宫掖，甘露飞降屋脊多么庄严的宗庙，多么美好的祠堂。
English: The clouds rise over the Imperial Palace, and the nectar flies down from the roof. What a majestic temple, what a beautiful ancestral hall.

古文：舞蹈象德，笙磬陈风。
现代文：舞蹈象征王德，笙磬表现王风。
English: The dance symbolizes virtue, and the gong expresses the royal style.

古文：黍稷非盛，明德惟崇。
现代文：黍稷祭品多么芳美，完美的德性令人尊崇。
English: How sweet the burnt offering, how excellent the oblation!

古文：神其歆止，降福无穷。
现代文：神霞前来受享，赐给福祉无尽无穷。
English: Sheng Xia came to enjoy and give endless well-being.

古文：宣皇太后庙歌：
现代文：宣皇太后庙歌：
English: The temple song of Empress Dowager Xuan:

古文：禀祥月辉，毓德轩光。
现代文：禀呈吉祥如明月之辉，孕育美德如轩星之光。
English: It is as auspicious as the light of the moon, and as conducive to virtue as the light of the stars.

古文：嗣徽妫，思媚周姜。
现代文：继承妈、油二妃的美名，好似可爱的周代太姜。
English: Heir to his mother's and Empress Dowager Cixi's fame, he resembles the lovely Zhou Dynasty's Tai Jiang.

古文：母临万宇，训蔼紫房。
现代文：慈母般地关怀全国人民，在宫室中教导和蔼。
English: Cares for the people of the whole country like a mother, and teaches kindness in the palace.

古文：硃弦玉龠，式载琼芳。
现代文：演奏朱弦和玉籥，颂美她玉洁花芳。
English: Playing the cinnabar chord and the jade gong, singing the praises of her Jade Jiehuafang.

古文：晋四厢乐歌三首，傅玄造：
现代文：晋四箱乐歌三首：傅玄作
English: Three Jinshihang Music Songs: Composed by Fu Xuan

古文：天鉴有晋，世祚圣皇。
现代文：上天鉴察我大晋，圣皇世代有福。
English: Heaven is watching over me, and the generation of emperors is blessed.

古文：时齐七政，朝此万方。
现代文：及时整治七件政事，万方都来朝贺。
English: Seven political affairs were rectified in a timely manner, and all parties came to congratulate.

古文：钟鼓斯震，九宾备礼。
现代文：其一钟鼓一起奏鸣，设置九宾大礼。
English: The one-bell drum sounded together, setting off a nine-guest grand finale.

古文：正位在朝，穆穆济济。
现代文：圣皇在朝廷南面正坐，群臣端庄排列。
English: The Holy Emperor is seated in the southern part of the court, surrounded by dignified courtiers.

古文：煌煌三辰，实丽于天。
现代文：其二光辉灿烂的曰月星，实在附着于天空。
English: The second brilliant star, the so-called moon star, is really attached to the sky.

古文：君后是象，威仪孔虔。
现代文：君后是它的象征，礼仪极为恭敬。
English: The queen is its symbol, and the etiquette is extremely respectful.

古文：率礼无愆，莫匪迈德。
现代文：其三循守礼法而没有过失，没有不是勉行其德。
English: The other three followed the rules of etiquette and did not make any mistakes.

古文：仪刑圣皇，万邦惟则。
现代文：圣皇作为模范，各国诸侯都要效法。
English: The Holy Emperor, as a model, should be emulated by the princes of all countries.

古文：右《天鉴》四章，章四句。
现代文：其四上为《天鉴》四章，章四句。
English: On the fourth, there are four chapters and four sentences from the "Heavenly Reader."

古文：正旦大会行礼歌。
现代文：正旦大会行礼歌。
English: The ceremonial song of the General Assembly of the Korean People's Army.

古文：于赫明明，圣德龙兴。
现代文：啊!声势赫赫而威灵明明，皇上登基如飞龙在天。
English: Ah! With a resounding roar and a clear wailing, the emperor ascended to the throne like a dragon in the sky.

古文：三朝献酒，万寿是膺。
现代文：正月元旦进献寿酒，祝皇上万寿无疆。
English: On the New Year's Day of the first month of the year, we will offer longevity wine to wish the emperor longevity without borders.

古文：敷佑四方，如日之升。
现代文：普遍地庇护四方人民，就像太阳升起。
English: To universally shelter the people of the four directions is like the rising of the sun.

古文：自天降祚，元吉有征。
现代文：上天赐给福祉，大吉大利已有验证。
English: Provided by heaven for welfare, the great good fortune has been verified.

古文：右《于赫》一章，八句。
现代文：上为《于赫》一章，八句。
English: The above is a chapter of "Yu He," eight sentences.

古文：上寿酒歌。
现代文：上寿酒歌。
English: Shang Shou wine song.

古文：天命大晋，载育群生。
现代文：上天降命大晋，抚养一切生灵。
English: Heaven orders the great Jin to nurture all living beings.

古文：于穆上德，随时化成。
现代文：啊，帝王的功德，顺应时势而教化成功。
English: Ah, the emperor's virtue, conforming to the trend of the times and succeeding in enlightenment.

古文：自祖配命，皇皇后辟。
现代文：其一自从皇祖上合天命，历代君主多么盛美。
English: On the one hand, since the emperor's ancestors met the fate of heaven, the successive monarchs have been so magnificent.

古文：继天创业，宣文之绩。
现代文：继承天命而开创帝业，是宣帝、文帝的功绩。
English: It is the achievement of Emperor Xuan and Emperor Wen to inherit the Mandate of Heaven and create an empire.

古文：丕显宣文，先知稼穑。克恭克俭，足教足食。
现代文：其二宣、塞二帝多么圣明，天生深通农事。能够恭敬勤俭，使人民有充足的教化和粮食。
English: The Second Emperor Xuanxuan and the Second Emperor Xie were so holy, and they were born with a profound knowledge of agriculture. They were able to be respectful and diligent, so that the people had sufficient enlightenment and food.

古文：既教食之，弘济艰难。
现代文：其三既使人民有教有食，度遇了危困艰难。
English: The third is that the people have been educated and fed, and they have been through the perils and hardships.

古文：上帝是祐，下民所安。
现代文：全靠上帝保佑，人民得以平安。
English: Thanks to God's blessing, the people were able to leave in peace.

古文：天祐圣皇，万邦来贺。
现代文：其四上天保佑我圣皇，各国都来朝贺。
English: On the fourth day, God bless my Holy Emperor, all countries came to pay homage.

古文：虽安勿安，乾乾匪暇。
现代文：虽然国家太平却不敢安逸，自强不息而没有空闲。
English: Although the country is at peace, it does not dare to be at ease. It is self-improving and has no leisure.

古文：乃正丘郊，乃定冢社。
现代文：其五于是端正祖墓，制定郊社祭礼。
English: The fifth was to rectify the ancestral tomb and establish a suburb festival.

古文：暠暠作宗，光宅天下。
现代文：恭恭敬敬地做一宗之祖，拥有天下。
English: Respectfully and reverently become the ancestor of a family and possess the whole world.

古文：惟敬朝飨，爰奏食举。
现代文：其六恭敬地祭祀太庙，于是奏称进食。
English: Six of them respectfully offered sacrifices to the Imperial Temple, and then reported that they had eaten.

古文：尽礼供御，嘉乐有序。
现代文：供奉完全符合礼节，美好的乐舞依次演奏。
English: The offering was completely in line with etiquette, and the beautiful music and dance were performed in turn.

古文：树羽设业，笙镛以间。
现代文：其七设立挂版彩羽，笙和镝放在中间。
English: In the seventh, a hanging plate of feathers is set up, and the cormorant and heron are placed in the middle.

古文：琴瑟齐列，亦有篪埙。
现代文：琴和瑟一齐排开，也有篪埙乐器。
English: The harp and the psaltery are lined up side by side, and there are also cymbals.

古文：喤々鼓钟，枪枪磬管。
现代文：其八鼓钟声唣隍，磬管声绘沧。
English: Its eight drums, bells and gongs, gongs and pipes ring out.

古文：八音克谐，载夷载简。
现代文：八音演奏和谐，显得恬淡质朴。
English: The eight-tone performance is harmonious and appears to be light and simple.

古文：既夷既简，其大不御。
现代文：其九既然恬淡质朴，它的大德不可抵御。
English: Ninth, since it is simple and simple, its great virtue is irresistible.

古文：风化潜兴，如云如雨。
现代文：教化自然兴起，就如同兴云降雨。
English: Indoctrination arises naturally, just like clouds and rain.

古文：如云之覆，如雨之润。
现代文：其十像云一般覆盖，像雨一样滋润。
English: Ten of them are covered like clouds and are moist like rain.

古文：声教所暨，无思不顺。
现代文：声威和教化所到之处，没有不依归和顺。
English: There is no non-conformity and non-conformity wherever there is preaching and enlightenment.

古文：教以化之，乐以和之。
现代文：其十一用礼来教化人民，用乐来谐和人民。
English: The eleventh is to use etiquette to enlighten the people, and to use music to harmonize the people.

古文：和而养之，时惟邕熙。
现代文：谐和而又能养育人民，那就天下太平。
English: harmonious and can nurture the people, then the world will be at peace.

古文：礼慎其仪，乐节其声。
现代文：其十二对礼的仪命有所慎重，对乐的音声有所节制。
English: Its twelve pairs of etiquette are cautious, and the sound of the music is restrained.

古文：于铄皇繇，既和且平。
现代文：啊，我皇上的谋划何等辉煌，谐和而又平易。
English: Ah, how splendid, how harmonious, and how easy is my Emperor's plan.

古文：右《天命》十三章，章四句。
现代文：其十三上马《天命》十三章，章四句。
English: Its thirteenth chapter, "Manifest Destiny," has thirteen chapters and four sentences.

古文：食举东西厢歌。
现代文：食举东西箱歌。
English: It's a food-lifting song.

古文：晋《正德大豫》二舞歌二篇，傅玄造：
现代文：晋《正德》《大豫》二舞歌二篇：傅玄作
English: Jin "Zhengde" "Dai Yu" two dance songs two parts: Fu Xuan

古文：天命有晋，光济万国。
现代文：上天降命我大晋，光辉照耀万国。
English: The heavens have decreed that I am the Great Jin, and my glory will radiate to all nations.

古文：穆穆圣皇，文武惟则。
现代文：我端庄盛美的圣明皇上，效法文王武王。
English: I, the dignified and magnificent Emperor Shengming, follow the example of King Wu, the King of France.

古文：在天斯正，在地成德。
现代文：在上天允为正道，在人世可称盛德。
English: In heaven, righteousness is the right way; in the world, it is called virtue.

古文：载韬政刑，载崇礼教。
现代文：既有政刑谋略，又崇尚礼教。
English: It has both the strategy of political punishment and the advocation of etiquette.

古文：我敷玄化，臻于中道。
现代文：我施行至德的教化，到达中庸之道。
English: I carry out moral education and reach the middle way.

古文：右《正德舞歌》。
现代文：上为《正德舞》歌。
English: Above is the "Zhengde Dance" song.

古文：于铄皇晋，配天受命。
现代文：啊!我辉煌的大晋，德配于天而受天命。
English: Ah! my brilliant Dajin, worthy of heaven and destined by heaven.

古文：熙帝之光，世德惟圣。
现代文：使上帝的光辉兴盛，世代流传的功德至高无上。
English: To make God's glory flourish, the merits passed down from generation to generation are supreme.

古文：嘉乐《大豫》，保祐万姓。
现代文：演奏美好的乐舞《大豫》，保佑天下百姓。
English: They performed the beautiful music and dance "Da Yu" to bless the people of the world.

古文：渊兮不竭，冲而用之。
现代文：圣道渊深而无穷无尽，以平和淡泊来运用它。
English: The holy path is profound and inexhaustible. Use it with peace and equanimity.

古文：先天弗违，虔奏天时。
现代文：先于上天行事而没有违背，后于上天而谨遵天时。
English: To act in advance of heaven without violating it, and later to act in accordance with heaven without violating it.

古文：右《大豫舞歌》。
现代文：上为《大豫舞》歌。
English: Above is the "Big Hen Dance" song.

古文：晋四厢乐歌十七篇，荀勖造：
现代文：晋四箱乐歌十七篇：荀勖作
English: Seventeen pieces of music in the four boxes of the Jin Dynasty

古文：正旦大会行礼歌四篇：于皇元首，群生资始。
现代文：正旦大会行礼歌四篇：
English: Four ceremonial songs will be sung at the General Assembly:

古文：履端大享，敬御繁祉。
现代文：啊!多么盛美的一岁之首，一切生物从此开始。在元旦举行筵会，迎接众多福祉。
English: Ah, what a glorious first day of the year, from which all living things begin. On New Year's Day, a dragonfly meeting is held to welcome many well-being.

古文：肆觐群后，爰及卿士。
现代文：诸侯都来觐见，于是及于卿士。
English: All the lords came to see him, and so did the nobles.

古文：钦顺则元，允也天子。
现代文：以顺善为法则，多么公平啊天子!
English: To follow the law of benevolence, how fair is that, my son!

古文：《于皇》一章，八句。
现代文：《于皇》一章，八句。
English: "At the Emperor's" one chapter, eight sentences.

古文：明明天子，临下有赫。
现代文：当《于赫》。多么明察的天子，统驭臣下而威严赫赫。
English: When "Yu Heh." What a clear-sighted heavenly son, controlling his vassals with great majesty.

古文：四表宅心，惠浃荒貊。
现代文：四方人民归心，恩惠沾润蛮荒。
English: The people of the four directions have come to their senses, and the bounty has dipped into the savage wilderness.

古文：柔远能迩，孔淑不逆。
现代文：怀柔远人而使之能近，甚为良善而不再叛逆。
English: It is good to draw near to the one who is far away, and not to rebel against him.

古文：来格祁祁，邦家是若。《明明》一章，八句。
现代文：众多的各族人民到来，国家于是选择了他。《明明》一章，八句。
English: A large number of people from all ethnic groups came, and the country chose him. "Mingming" one chapter, eight sentences.

古文：光光邦国，天笃其祜。
现代文：当《巍巍》。多么光明的大晋国家，上天厚赐他的福分。
English: What a bright country Dajin is. Heaven has blessed him abundantly.

古文：丕显哲命，顾柔三祖。
现代文：大大显耀他明智的任命，顾念三位先祖的柔和谦顺。
English: His wise appointment, mindful of the gentleness and humility of his three forefathers, shines brightly.

古文：世德作求，奄有九土。
现代文：以世代相传的功德来求索，就拥有了天下万国。
English: Seeking merits handed down from generation to generation is the way to possess all the nations of the world.

古文：思我皇度，彝伦攸序。
现代文：考虑我皇家法制，伦常极有次序。
English: Considering our royal legal system, it's always very orderly.

古文：《邦国》一章，八句。
现代文：《邦国》一章，八句。
English: "Bongguo" one chapter, eight sentences.

古文：惟祖惟宗，高朗缉熙。
现代文：当《洋洋》。我大晋的祖宗，高朗而又光明。
English: When "Yangyang." My great-grandfather's ancestors, noble and bright.

古文：对越在天，骏惠在兹。
现代文：功德与天配称，留下了极大的惠爱。
English: His merits are said to be worthy of Heaven, and he has left behind a great legacy.

古文：聿求厥成，我皇崇之。
现代文：为了取得这些成就，我皇上尊崇祖宗。
English: In order to achieve these achievements, His Majesty revered his ancestors.

古文：式固其犹，往敬用治。《祖宗》一章，八句。
现代文：坚持祖宗的谋划，恭敬地遵守而天下大治。《祖宗》一章，八句。
English: Adhere to the ancestor's plan, respectfully abide by it, and the world will be great. "Ancestor" one chapter, eight sentences.

古文：正旦大会王公上寿酒歌一篇
现代文：当《鹿呜》。正旦大会王公上寿酒歌一篇：
English: When "鹿呜."正旦大会王公上寿酒歌一篇:

古文：践元辰，延显融。
现代文：庆贺元旦，延引日出。
English: Offer good wine and pray for a better future.

古文：献羽觞，祈令终。
现代文：进献杯酒，祈祷寿终。
English: Offer a glass of wine and pray for the end of life.

古文：我皇寿而隆，我皇茂而嵩。
现代文：我皇上长寿而隆盛，我皇上旺茂而高大。
English: My emperor lives long and prosperously, my emperor is vigorous and tall.

古文：本枝奋百世，休祚钟圣躬。《践元辰》一章，八句。
现代文：嫡系旁支世代振作，福祉钟聚在我皇身上。《践元辰》一章，八句。
English: The next generation of the direct and collateral branches of the imperial family are working hard, and the clock of welfare is ticking for our emperor. In the first chapter of "Jin Yuan Chen," there are eight sentences.

古文：食举乐东西厢歌十二篇：
现代文：当《羽觞行》。食举乐东西箱歌十二篇：
English: When "Feather kite line. Food lifting fun thing box song twelve:

古文：煌煌七耀，重明交暢。
现代文：北斗七星明亮，日月互放光芒。
English: The Big Dipper is bright, and the sun and the moon shine on each other.

古文：我有嘉宾，是应是贶。
现代文：我有美好的客人，要酬应招待。
English: I have wonderful guests and I want to treat them well.

古文：邦政既图，接以大飨。
现代文：国家大事已经安排妥当，用盛大宴会来招待。
English: The state and national affairs have been planned, followed by a grand banquet.

古文：人之好我，式遵德让。
现代文：人家爱好我啊，都遵守礼仪谦让。
English: People are friendly to me and observe good manners and courtesy.

古文：《煌煌》一章，八句。
现代文：《煌煌》一章，八句。
English: "Glory" one chapter, eight sentences.

古文：宾之初筵，蔼蔼济济。
现代文：当《鹿鸣》。嘉宾们登堂入席，许多人挨挨挤挤。
English: The guests began to take their seats.

古文：既朝乃宴，以洽百礼。
现代文：朝拜毕宴会开始，用以洽合百礼。
English: After the Last Supper, a banquet was held to harmonize all kinds of etiquette.

古文：颁以位叙，或廷或陛。
现代文：颁赐按爵位排列次序，有人在廷上而有人在陛下。
English: The honours are handed out in order of precedence, some to the court and some to His Majesty.

古文：登傧台叟，亦有兄弟。
现代文：升进骀背老人，也有我的兄弟。
English: Let the three elders take their seats, and also take care of the brothers.

古文：胥子陪僚，宪兹度楷。
现代文：小吏和陪僚一类人，都按照这等级制度入席。
English: Petty officials and attendants, for example, were all seated according to this hierarchy.

古文：观颐养正，降福孔偕。《宾之初筵》一章，十二句。
现代文：观游颐养而合乎正道，上天普遍降福。《宾之初筵》一章，十二句。
English: It is in accordance with the righteous path to observe and cultivate, and it is generally blessed by heaven. "Bin no Hatsune Maki" one chapter, twelve sentences.

古文：昔我三后，大业是维。
现代文：当《于穆》。从前我三位皇祖，维系帝王大业。
English: Once upon a time, our three emperors laid a great foundation.

古文：今我圣皇，焜耀前晖。奕世重规，明照九畿。
现代文：如今我圣明的皇上，使原有的光辉更为焕发，继代重又规划，英明照察全国。
English: Now, my sacred emperor, the original glory is more radiant, the succession is heavy and planned, and the wise survey the whole country.

古文：思辑用光，时罔有违。
现代文：一切和安光明，时代没有不合。
English: The idea is to unite the people and the country, and there is no contradiction at any time.

古文：陟禹之迹，莫不来威。
现代文：凡夏噩所到之处，没有不来朝贡而畏威。
English: Following in Dayu's footsteps, there is no such thing as not being invited.

古文：天被显禄，福履是绥。
现代文：卜天赐给显明的福禄，永远安享。
English: God-given dignified status, enjoy this blessing.

古文：《三后》一章，十二句。
现代文：《二后》一章，卜二句。
English: Chapter one of "The Empress Dowager" contains two sentences.

古文：赫矣太祖，克广明德。
现代文：当《昭昭》。多么显赫的越旦，能够扩大完美的德性。
English: How great was our great-grandfather, who was able to propagate the virtues of Shing Ming.

古文：廓开宇宙，正世立则。
现代文：他开展宇宙，端正时世而制定法度。
English: He unfolds the universe, arranges the times, and establishes the laws.

古文：变化不经，民无瑕慝。
现代文：虽然有所变化而不合常规，百姓却没有疾苦过失。
English: To change the absurd and careless, so that the people do not make mistakes.

古文：创业垂统，兆我晋国。《赫矣》一章，八句。
现代文：创立帝王大业而世代相传，是我置压的开始。《赫矣》一章，八句。
English: I started to put pressure on myself when I founded Emperor Daiei, which has been passed down from generation to generation. "He yiddo" has one chapter and eight sentences.

古文：烈文伯考，时惟帝景。
现代文：当《华华》。有武功文德的伯父，是世宗景皇帝。
English: In "Hua Hua," the uncle with martial arts skills is Emperor Shizongjing.

古文：夷险平乱，威而不猛。
现代文：他平定险恶叛乱，虽有威严而不猛厉。
English: Overcoming hardships and calms world turmoil, he is powerful but not fierce.

古文：御衡不迷，皇涂焕炳。
现代文：统治国家没有迷误，他的道路闪耀着光辉。
English: There is no error in ruling the country, and his path is shining.

古文：七德咸宣，其宁惟永。《烈文》一章，八句。
现代文：七德都得到发扬，国家永远康宁。《烈文》一章，八句。
English: The seven virtues have all been promoted, and the country has always been prosperous. "Lingwen" one chapter, eight sentences.

古文：猗欤盛欤，先皇圣文。
现代文：多么盛美!先皇圣明的文帝。
English: How splendidly beautiful! Emperor Shengming's Emperor Wen.

古文：则天作孚，大哉为君。
现代文：以天为法而为诚信，作为君主是多么伟大。
English: It is truly great to be a monarch who emulates heaven in establishing integrity.

古文：慎徽五典，帝载是勤。
现代文：谨慎地谋求五常之善，文帝从开始就勤勉不懈。
English: Respectfully proclaim the Five Classics, and diligently pursue the imperial cause.

古文：文武发挥，茂建嘉勋。
现代文：发扬文德和武功，建立了丰美的功勋。
English: Literary talent and martial arts have been brought into play together, and many wonderful feats have been established.

古文：修己济治，民用宁殷。怀远烛幽，玄教氛氲。
现代文：自修其身来治理国家，百姓安宁富实怀柔远人而烛照幽隐，至高无上的教化多么盛美。
English: Self-cultivation to govern the country, the people are peaceful, rich and flexible, and the candlelight is dim, how beautiful is the supreme enlightenment.

古文：善世不伐，服事参分。
现代文：改善时世而不自矜伐，群臣各任其职。
English: To improve the times without self-deprecation, the vassals each perform their duties.

古文：德博化隆，道冒无垠。
现代文：恩德广被而教化隆盛，治道覆盖之处无边无际。
English: Ende is widely spread and enlightenment is flourishing, and the areas covered by governance are boundless.

古文：《猗欤》一章，十六句。
现代文：《猗欤》一章，十六句。
English: "" one chapter, sixteen sentences.

古文：隆化洋洋，帝命溥将。
现代文：当《盛德》。昌隆的教化多么美盛，上帝之命普遍奉行。
English: The atmosphere is thick and boundless, and the emperor's command is so vast.

古文：登我晋道，越惟圣皇。
现代文：使我置治道登进，是我圣明的皇上。
English: It was my holy emperor who made me enter the priesthood.

古文：龙飞革运，临焘八荒。
现代文：改朝换代而即帝位，临覆八方荒远的地方。
English: Like a dragon taking flight, it innovates time and fortune, and shelters places far and wide.

古文：睿哲钦明，配踪虞唐。
现代文：多么聪智明察，上可比美虞、唐。
English: Wise, reverent, and keenly observant, his deeds are worthy of the top echelons of the eunuchs of the Yue and Tang Dynasties.

古文：封建厥福，骏发其祥。
现代文：封土建国而有大福，迅速地呈现祯祥。
English: The founding of the country as a fief enjoyed its share of blessings, and the results of extensive reclamation and cultivation were very auspicious.

古文：三朝习吉，终然允臧。
现代文：元旦吉事因袭，终于用以美善。
English: In the days of the Three Dynasties, all the divination got good omens, and in the end it was really good.

古文：其臧惟何，总彼万方。
现代文：造美善是些什么?总领天下万方。
English: What is the creation of beauty and goodness? The leader of the world.

古文：元侯列辟，四岳蕃王。时见世享，率兹有常。
现代文：诸侯列国，四岳藩王，不断前来进献，从此成为常规。
English: Princes from all over the country, as well as the king of the Shidake Domain, kept coming to make offerings, and it has since become customary.

古文：旅揖在庭，嘉客在堂。
现代文：在庭中相互揖让，嘉宾来到殿堂。
English: Many people were making bonfires in the courtyard, and the guests were dancing in the hall.

古文：宋卫既臻，陈留山阳。
现代文：宋、卫已经到了，还有陈贸、业坠。
English: Song, Wei will gather together Ding, as well as Chen Liu Wang and Sanyang.

古文：我有宾使，观国之光。
现代文：我有宾客使者，前往上国观光。
English: I have a guest emissary going to Shangguan for sightseeing.

古文：贡贤纳计，献璧奉璋。
现代文：贡进贤人而纳其计谋，奉献玉璧玉璋。
English: Recommend sages to put forward strategies, and present the gems to the emperor.

古文：保祐命之，申锡无疆。
现代文：上天授命保佑，赐福万载无疆。
English: Bless them and give them life, for there is no end to your unfathomable riches.

古文：《隆化》一章，二十八句。
现代文：《隆化》一章，二十八句。
English: "Longhua" one chapter, twenty-eight sentences.

古文：振鹭于飞，鸿渐其翼。
现代文：当绥莴邦》。一群白鹭在那裹飞，鸿雁逐渐展开了羽翼。
English: Like flocks of egrets gathering to fly, like great crested newts taking wing.

古文：京邑穆穆，四方是式。
现代文：京城端庄盛美，全国视为楷式。
English: The huge city is majestic and majestic, and it is a model in all directions.

古文：无竞惟人，王纲允敕。
现代文：没有谁能够更强，朝廷纲纪整饬。
English: No one can be stronger than the imperial court.

古文：君子来朝，言观其极。
现代文：君子前来朝觐，观看其中正的准则。
English: All the nobles came to pay homage and watch such a grand occasion.

古文：《振鹭》一章，八句。
现代文：《振鹭》一章，八句。
English: "The Tremors" one chapter, eight sentences.

古文：翼翼大君，民之攸暨。信理天工，惠康不匮。
现代文：当《朝朝》。庄严雄伟的天子，是百姓的倚仗，舒伸治天的职能，惠康没有穷尽。
English: As the "Morning Star," the solemn and majestic son of heaven, is the support of the people, the expansion of the function of governing heaven, and the well-being is inexhaustible.

古文：将远不仁，训以淳粹。
现代文：疏远没有仁义的人，训化朴实完美。
English: Alienate those who have no benevolence and righteousness, and train them to be simple and perfect.

古文：幽明有伦，俊乂在位。
现代文：善恶贤愚有条有理，贤德的人在位视事。
English: The good, the evil, the wise and the foolish have a hierarchy, and outstanding talents get positions.

古文：九族既睦，庶邦顺比。
现代文：宗族间亲睦相处，众邦国和顺服从。
English: The nine ethnic groups have been reconciled, and there is no conflict between the common people and the state.

古文：开元布宪，四海鳞萃。
现代文：新年裹公布法令，全国人民鱼鳞般地聚集。
English: At the dawn of the new era, a constitutional decree was issued, and people from all over the world came in droves.

古文：协时正统，殊涂同致。
现代文：协和时世而端正帝系，道路虽殊而归向一致。
English: According to the current situation of the world of rectitude and unity, the same goal can be achieved through different means.

古文：厚德载物，灵心隆贵。
现代文：深厚的德性包容万物，灵智的心思隆盛高贵。
English: Virtue is a deep carrier of all things, and the heart is inspired to elevate the noble.

古文：敷奏谠言，纳以无讳。
现代文：群臣陈奏正直的话，都认真接受而没有忌讳。
English: He presented his honest opinion to the emperor and did not hesitate to accept it.

古文：树之典象，诲之义类。
现代文：将典范形象树立起来，按义分类来进行教诲。
English: Set an example and teach them by being a good person.

古文：上教如风，下应如卉。
现代文：君上的教化有如风吹，下民接受有如倒伏的草卉。
English: The teachings above are like the wind, and the responses below are like flowers.

古文：一人有庆，群萌以遂。
现代文：一个人有了喜庆，全民都感到遂意。
English: When one person celebrates, the whole nation feels fulfilled.

古文：我后宴喜，令闻不坠。
现代文：我皇上宴饮欢乐，美善的声誉不坠。
English: My Emperor feasts and rejoices, and his reputation for beauty and kindness remains unbroken.

古文：《翼翼》一章，二十六句。
现代文：《翼翼》一章，二十六句。
English: "Wings and Wings," one chapter, twenty-six sentences.

古文：既宴既喜，翕是万邦。礼仪卒度，物有其容。
现代文：当《顺天》。宴饮非常快乐，全国上下和合，礼节极尽法度，各物都有其仪容。
English: When "Sunrise." The banquet is very happy, the whole country is harmonious, the etiquette is the utmost, and everything has its appearance.

古文：々庭燎，喤喤鼓钟。
现代文：明亮的是庭中火炬，唣唣的是击鼓撞钟。
English: The bright one is the torch in the courtyard, and the ringing one is the drumming bell.

古文：笙磬咏德，万舞象功。
现代文：笙磬歌咏美德，万舞象征丰功。
English: The skull and crossbones are in praise of virtue, and the dance is a symbol of hard work.

古文：八音克谐，俗易化从。
现代文：八音能合节奏，移风易俗而顺从教化。
English: The sound of various musical instruments is very harmonious, and customs change accordingly, and enlightenment follows.

古文：其和如乐，庶品时邕。《既宴》一章，十二句。
现代文：那和谐就如同音乐，万物安定太平。《既宴》一章，十二句。
English: That harmony is like music, and all things are stable and peaceful.

古文：时邕份份，六合同尘。
现代文：当《陟天庭》。时世太平而文质兼备，全国都统一起来。
English: When "The Garden of Earthly Delights" was published, the times were peaceful and the literature was rich, and the whole country was unified.

古文：往我祖宣，威静殊邻。
现代文：从前我先祖宣皇帝，声威使邻邦宁静。
English: Once upon a time, our ancestors Emperor Xuan, Wizhen's neighbors in all directions.

古文：首定荆楚，遂平燕秦。
现代文：首先平定了趔楚，于是又平定夔、台。
English: First, the Jingchu region in the south was stabilized, and then the Yanqin region in the north was pacified.

古文：娓娓文皇，迈德流仁。
现代文：文皇帝勤勉不倦，使仁德流布四方。
English: Emperor Wen diligently and tirelessly spread benevolence in all directions.

古文：爰造草昧，应乾顺民。
现代文：于是在混乱状态中草创万事，应天命而顺民心。
English: At the beginning of the creation, we obeyed the will of heaven and the people.

古文：灵瑞告符，休征飨震。
现代文：符命宣告了神灵的瑞应，震雷显示出吉祥的征兆。
English: The fortune-teller proclaimed the auspicious response of the gods, and the thunderbolt showed an auspicious sign.

古文：天地弗违，以和神人。
现代文：他不违背天地，神舆人之间得以协和。
English: Heaven and earth do not contradict each other, and gods and humans have a harmonious relationship.

古文：既戡庸蜀，吴会是宾。
现代文：平定了卢、蜀以后，呈、会也朝贡称臣。
English: After defeating Lu and Shu, the Zhen and Hui also paid tribute to their vassals.

古文：肃慎率职，楛矢来陈。
现代文：厨堕那样的属国奉行职事，将贡物前来贡陈。
English: Suspicion came to pay tribute, Chen Xianqian, bow and arrow.

古文：韩惛进乐，均协清《钧》。
现代文：整、递进献的音乐，曲调和谐清美。
English: Neat, progressive music, the melody is harmonious and beautiful.

古文：西旅献獒，扶南效珍。
现代文：西边的筮迩呈上獒犬，南方的迭亩国献出珍宝。
English: The tribes in the south of the country sent strange and rare dogs, while the tribes in the west of the country presented dogs.

古文：蛮裔重译，玄齿文身。
现代文：这些是语言不通的少数民族，黑色牙齿而又纹身。
English: There are places where the barbaric four races need multiple translations, those with black teeth or tattoos.

古文：我皇抚之，景命惟新。
现代文：我皇安抚他们，天授之命曰新月异。
English: Our emperor appeased them, and the great destiny of heaven favored the new dynasty.

古文：《时邕》一章，二十六句。
现代文：《时邕》一章，二十六句。
English: "Time and Tide" one chapter, twenty-six sentences.

古文：愔愔嘉会，有闻无声。
现代文：当《参两仪》。和悦安闲的美好宴会，虽有人听却无人发声。
English: A beautiful banquet of harmony and joy, with a good reputation and no noise.

古文：清酤既奠，笾豆既馨。礼充乐备，《箫韶》九成。
现代文：清酒既已奠祭，祭物既已香美，礼仪与乐舞无不充备，多次演奏了《箫韶》乐曲。
English: The sake has already been poured, the sacrificial offerings have already been made, the etiquette and music and dance have all been prepared, and the music of "Dragonfly" has been played many times.

古文：恺乐饮酒，酣而不盈。
现代文：饮酒多么安乐，酣畅却不滥醉。
English: Drink cheerfully and enjoyably, sipping but not to excess.

古文：率土欢豫，邦国以宁。
现代文：全体人民都很欢欣邦国得以安宁。
English: And there was joy in all the land; and the country was quiet.

古文：王猷允塞，万载无倾。《嘉会》一章，十二句。
现代文：皇上的谋划充实完美，千年万载都不会倾覆。《嘉会》一章，十二句。
English: The emperor's plan is complete and perfect, and will not be overturned for thousands of years. "Jia Hui" one chapter, twelve sentences.

古文：晋《正德》《大豫》二舞歌二篇，荀勖造：
现代文：置《正德》《大豫》二舞歌二篇：茎显作
English: Set "Zhengde" "Daiyuan" two dance songs two pieces: stems show work

古文：人文垂则，盛德有容。
现代文：人文垂示法则，盛德有其仪容。
English: According to the laws of humanities, virtue has its appearance.

古文：声以依咏，舞以象功。
现代文：用音声体现歌咏，用舞蹈表现德功。
English: Using voice to embody the song, using dance to express virtue.

古文：干戚发挥，节以笙镛。
现代文：手中挥动着盾斧，配合节拍的有笙和锈。
English: A shield and axe are waved in his hand, and there is a rattle and rust to match the beat.

古文：羽龠云会，翊宣令踪。
现代文：雉羽与籥如云聚集，辅助显示俊美的舞踪。
English: The dragonflies and damselflies gather like a cloud, helping to display the beautiful dance.

古文：敷美尽善，允协时邕。
现代文：铺陈美而且尽善，完全表现时代的太平。
English: It is both beautiful and perfect, fully expressing the peacefulness of the times.

古文：焕炳其章，光乎万邦。
现代文：文采辉煌灿烂，照耀得万国生光。
English: The literature is brilliant and brilliant, shining all over the world.

古文：万邦洋洋，承我晋道。
现代文：万国多么美盛，继承我大晋传统。
English: How prosperous is the world, inheriting the tradition of the Great Jin Dynasty.

古文：配天作享，元命有造。
现代文：配祀上天而受享祭礼，天命有所成就。
English: To worship the heavens and enjoy the rites is to fulfill one's destiny.

古文：上化如风，民应如草。
现代文：在上的德化如风，百姓响应如草。
English: The virtuous transformation on the top is like the wind, and the people's response is like the grass.

古文：穆穆斌斌，形于缀兆。文武旁作，庆流四表。
现代文：端庄盛美一齐表演，喜庆流布四方。文武旁作，庆流四表。
English: Dignified beauty and grandeur performed together, the joyous celebration spread in all directions. Literary and martial arts by-play, celebration four tables.

古文：无竞维烈，永世是绍。右《正德舞歌》。
现代文：没有谁有这更强的丰功，世世代代要继承下来。上为《正德舞》歌。
English: No one has this stronger merit, which should be inherited from generation to generation. Above is the "Zhengde Dance" song.

古文：豫顺以动，大哉惟时。
现代文：豫卦说顺应时运而动作，时运是多么伟大。
English: Yu Gua said to act in accordance with the times, how great the times are.

古文：时迈其仁，世载邕熙。
现代文：顺时运而勉行仁德，社会就太平安乐。
English: The society is peaceful and happy when benevolence is practiced in accordance with the times.

古文：兆我区夏，宣文是基。
现代文：创建我大晋国家，宣、文二帝打下了根基。
English: After the founding of our great Jin Dynasty, Emperor Xuan and Emperor Wen laid the foundation.

古文：大业惟新，我皇隆之。
现代文：帝王大业一新，是我皇上使其隆盛。
English: The Emperor's great undertaking has been renewed, and it is I, the Emperor, who have made it flourish.

古文：重光累曜，钦明文思。
现代文：日月重放光明，全凭皇上明圣。
English: The sun and the moon reflect the light, all thanks to the Emperor Ming Sheng.

古文：迄用有成，惟晋之祺。
现代文：迄今有所成就，都是大晋之福。
English: All the achievements so far are the blessings of the Great Jin.

古文：穆穆圣皇，受命既固。
现代文：端庄盛美的皇上，承受天命既已安定。
English: The dignified and magnificent emperor has already been able to bear the weight of his destiny.

古文：品物咸宁，芳烈云布。
现代文：万事万物都得以安宁，美好的事迹如云密布。
English: All things are peaceful, and good deeds are thick as clouds.

古文：文教旁通，笃以淳素。
现代文：礼法文教四方通达，用淳朴使民俗敦厚。
English: The etiquette, law, literature and education are universal, and the folk customs are enriched with simplicity.

古文：玄化洽暢，被之暇豫。作乐崇德，同美《韶》、《濩》。
现代文：至德的教化多么和畅，戴着首饰多么愉快，制作乐舞而推崇功德，可与《韶》、《濩》比美。
English: How smooth the teaching of virtue is, how pleasant it is to wear jewelry, and how meritorious it is to make music and dance, can be compared with "" and "."

古文：浚邈幽遐，式遵王度。
现代文：意义多么深远，遵守王家的法度。
English: How far-reaching is the observance of the royal law.

古文：右《大豫舞歌》。
现代文：上为《大豫舞》歌。
English: Above is the "Big Hen Dance" song.

古文：晋四厢乐歌十六篇，张华造：
现代文：晋四厢乐歌十六篇：张华作
English: Sixteen Songs of the Four Quarters of the Jin Dynasty: Composed by Zhang Hua

古文：称元庆，奉寿觞。
现代文：称颂元庆，进奉寿觞。
English: In praise of Yuanqing, and in homage to Shouwen.

古文：后皇延遐祚，安乐抚万方。
现代文：皇上福祚远延，安乐而抚有万方。
English: The emperor's good fortune extends far and wide, and there are countless ways to be at ease.

古文：右王公上寿诗一章。
现代文：上为王公上寿诗一章。
English: Above is a chapter from Wang Gong's last birthday poem.

古文：明明在上，丕显厥繇。
现代文：皇上明察在上，大显他的谋猷。
English: The emperor saw what was going on and made his intentions clear.

古文：翼翼三寿，蕃后惟休。
现代文：恭敬地祝贺高寿，蕃育后代多喜多庆。
English: I respectfully congratulate you on your long life, and wish you many more years of happiness in raising future generations.

古文：群生渐德，六合承流。
现代文：一切生物浸润盛德，天地四方承受恩泽。
English: All living things are permeated with virtue, and the four directions of heaven and earth receive blessings.

古文：三正元辰，朝庆鳞萃。
现代文：在元旦的时候，聚集在朝廷举行庆会。
English: On New Year's Day, everyone gathered at the Imperial Court for a celebration.

古文：华夏奉职贡，八荒觐殊类。
现代文：华夏进献职方的贡物，八荒的异族也来朝见。
English: Huaxia paid tribute to the workers, and eight foreign tribes came to see the emperor.

古文：黻冕充广庭，鸣玉盈朝位。
现代文：身着礼服礼冠的充斥广庭，腰佩玉饰的站满朝位。
English: Dressed in ceremonial robes and crowns, the vast courtyard was full of people, with many standing in the morning with their waists adorned with jewels.

古文：济济朝位，言观其光。
现代文：朝廷的班列济济多人，观瞻国家的盛德光辉。
English: The imperial banquet was attended by a large number of people, who came to see the country's prosperity and glory.

古文：仪序既以时，礼文涣以彰。
现代文：仪式一一依次进行，礼节多么灿烂鲜明。
English: The ceremony is carried out one by one, and the etiquette is so brilliant and vivid.

古文：思皇享多祜，嘉乐永无央。
现代文：皇上享有多福，快乐永远不尽。
English: The emperor is blessed with an inexhaustible supply of happiness.

古文：九宾在庭，胪赞既通。
现代文：朝会大典在朝廷设置九宾，殿上到殿下传唱相通。
English: The grand ceremony of the Imperial Court is set up for nine guests at the Imperial Court, and the songs are passed down from the Imperial Court to the Imperial Family.

古文：升瑞奠贽，乃侯乃公。
现代文：登堂祝瑞并进献礼品，有侯爵和公爵。
English: A marquis and a duke entered the hall to congratulate Rui and present gifts.

古文：穆穆天尊，隆礼动容。
现代文：天子之尊端庄盛美，举止仪容周旋隆重。
English: The image of the Son of Heaven is dignified and beautiful, and his demeanor and appearance are grand.

古文：履端承元吉，介福御万邦。
现代文：一年之始大吉大利，统治全国有大福。
English: The beginning of the year is auspicious, and the country is ruled by good luck.

古文：朝享上，下咸雍。
现代文：朝廷举行宴饮，上下都很和谐。
English: The imperial court held a banquet, and everyone was in harmony.

古文：崇多仪，繁礼容。
现代文：崇尚众多仪式，礼节繁琐复杂。
English: Many ceremonies are advocated, and the etiquette is cumbersome and complicated.

古文：舞盛德，歌九功。
现代文：舞蹈表现盛德，歌唱颂美九功。
English: The dance shows great virtue, and the song praises the Nine Virtues.

古文：扬芳烈，播休踪。
现代文：传扬美好的功绩，播送美善的事迹。
English: To spread the good deeds, to broadcast the good deeds.

古文：皇化洽，洞幽明。
现代文：皇上的教化协和，贯穿阴阳两界。
English: The emperor's concord of enlightenment and reform runs through the two realms of yin and yang.

古文：怀柔百神，辑祥祯。
现代文：招来安抚一众神灵，聚集各种吉祥祯瑞。
English: Invite to appease a host of gods, gather all kinds of auspicious charms.

古文：潜龙跃，雕虎仁。
现代文：潜伏的龙腾跃而起，有花纹的虎也知仁义。
English: The lurking dragon leaps up, and the patterned tiger knows benevolence.

古文：仪凤鸟，届游麟。
现代文：凤凰来朝，祥麟游至。
English: The phoenix comes to the morning, and the xianglin comes to the evening.

古文：枯蠹荣，竭泉流。
现代文：枯树开花，涸泉流水。
English: Dead trees blossom, dry springs flow.

古文：菌芝茂，枳棘柔。
现代文：菌芝茂盛，枳棘也变得柔软。
English: The mycelium is flourishing, and the thorns have become soft.

古文：和气应，休征滋。
现代文：和气相应而生，瑞兆普遍出现。
English: Harmony arose accordingly, and auspicious signs generally appeared.

古文：协灵符，彰帝期。
现代文：与符命相合，表明称帝的期运。
English: It coincides with the fate of the charm, indicating that the emperor's time has come.

古文：绥宇宙，万国和。
现代文：使宇宙安定，使全国和宁。
English: To make the universe stable and the whole country peaceful.

古文：昊天成命，赉皇家，赉皇家。
现代文：上天有已定的明命，赐给我大晋皇家。
English: Heaven has a predetermined and clear destiny, and has bestowed upon me the title of Imperial Prince.

古文：世资圣哲，三后在天，启鸿烈。
现代文：时世依凭圣哲君主，宣、景、文三位先帝已在天上，是他们开拓了伟大功业。
English: At that time, the world relied on the sage monarchs, and the three emperors, Xuan, Jing, and Wen, were already in heaven. It was they who pioneered great achievements.

古文：启鸿烈，隆王基。
现代文：开拓了伟大功业，使左置王基隆盛。
English: He pioneered great achievements and made Zuo Jie Wangji prosperous.

古文：率土讴吟，欣戴于时。
现代文：全国人民歌唱，为逢时而欢欣。
English: People all over the country are singing and rejoicing for the auspicious occasion.

古文：恆文示象，代气著期。
现代文：渐趋盈满的新月垂示征象，大晋代魏已有定期。
English: The crescent moon, which is gradually becoming full, is showing signs that the Great Jin Dynasty and Wei Dynasty have become regular.

古文：太始开元，龙升在位。
现代文：叁始年号是左置创始，逮壶身登帝位。
English: At the beginning of the year, the year number was left at the beginning, and the emperor ascended the throne.

古文：四庾同风，燮宁殊类。
现代文：四方边远地区风化统一，协和不同的民族而使其安定。
English: The remote areas in the four directions should be unified and harmonized with different ethnic groups to make them stable.

古文：五韪来备，嘉生以遂。
现代文：五种气候一齐具备，茂盛的谷物得以生长。
English: All five climates are present, allowing lush crops to grow.

古文：凝庶绩，臻太康。
现代文：聚集各种事功，到达太平盛世。
English: Gather all kinds of achievements and achieve a peaceful and prosperous world.

古文：申繁祉，胤无疆。
现代文：伸展众多的福祉，后嗣无穷无尽。
English: Extending a multitude of well-being, heirs are endless.

古文：本枝百世，继绪不忘。继绪不忘，休有烈光。
现代文：嫡系和旁支绵延百代，永不忘记承继先业。
English: The direct lineage and collateral support extend for hundreds of generations, never forgetting to carry on the previous business.

古文：永言配命，惟晋之祥。
现代文：永不忘记承继先业，盛美的事业大放光芒。永远配祀上天，是我大晋的吉祥。
English: I will never forget to carry on my predecessor's work, and shine brightly for the cause of prosperity and beauty. I will forever be worthy of worshipping God, which is the auspicious sign of my promotion to the highest rank.

古文：圣明统世，笃皇仁。
现代文：圣明的君主制驭时世，一意施行仁德。
English: The holy monarchy controls the times and the world, and is determined to practice benevolence.

古文：广大配天地，顺动若陶钧。
现代文：广大之处可媲美天地，顺时而动有如造物。
English: The vastness of the place is comparable to heaven and earth, and it moves like a creation.

古文：玄化参自然，至德通神明。
现代文：无为的教化参赞自然，最高的道德感通神明。
English: The inaction of the guidance counselor is natural, the highest moral sense is divine.

古文：清风暢八极，流泽被无垠。
现代文：清和的风吹拂四方，恩泽流覆无边无际。
English: The wind of Qinghe blows in all directions, and the blessings are boundless.

古文：于皇时晋，奕奕齐圣。
现代文：多么美啊我左置，累世的君主智虑敏达。
English: How beautiful I am left-handed, the monarchs of past generations are wise and sensitive.

古文：惟天降嘏，神祇保定。
现代文：上天降赐大福，神祇保护扶持。
English: Heaven bestows great blessings, and the gods protect and support us.

古文：弘济区夏，允集大命。
现代文：广泛救助中原，使上天赋予的使命取得成就。
English: Extensive relief of the Central Plains, so that the mission given by God can be achieved.

古文：有命既集，光帝猷。
现代文：上天的使命既得完成，皇帝的计划多么光荣。
English: Heaven's mission accomplished, how glorious the emperor's plan.

古文：大明重耀，鉴六幽。
现代文：日月重放光明，照亮了天地四方幽远之处。
English: The sun and the moon reflect light, illuminating the four corners of the world and the remotest places.

古文：声教洋溢，惠滂流。
现代文：声威和教化广泛传播，恩德流布波澜壮阔。
English: His authority and enlightenment were widely spread, and his benevolence spread far and wide.

古文：惠滂流，移风俗。
现代文：恩德滂布而流，全国移风易俗。
English: Ende is flowing, and the whole country is changing customs.

古文：多士盈朝，贤俊比屋。
现代文：满朝有众多士子，家家都有贤良俊杰。
English: There were many scholars in the Manchu Dynasty, and every family had its own virtuous person.

古文：敦世心，斫雕反素朴。
现代文：使世人的心地敦厚，去华巧而返归素朴。
English: To make the hearts of the people of the world grow fonder, and to return to simplicity.

古文：反素朴，怀庶方。
现代文：返归素朴，安抚众方。
English: Return to simplicity, appease everyone.

古文：干戚舞阶庭，疏狄说遐荒。
现代文：执盾斧在阶庭起舞，疏远的边荒也很悦乐。
English: Holding shields and axes, they dance in the courtyard, and the distant wasteland is also very pleasant.

古文：扶南假重译，肃慎袭衣裳。
现代文：迭亩固凭藉辗转翻译，肃慎国袭用衣裳。
English: With the help of the translation of the translation, the dress of the country is solemnly used.

古文：云覆雨施，德洽无疆。
现代文：有如覆云施雨，德化洽濡不尽。
English: It's like pouring rain on a cloudy day.

古文：旁作穆穆，仁化翔。
现代文：群臣恭谨辅佐，仁慈的教化多么安舒。
English: The courtiers are courteous and helpful, and the benevolent education is so comfortable.

古文：朝元日，宾王庭。
现代文：元旦举行朝会，群臣齐集王庭。
English: On New Year's Day, a court meeting was held, and all the courtiers gathered in the royal court.

古文：承宸极，当盛明。
现代文：奉承皇上面对圣明。
English: Flatter the emperor in front of Shomei.

古文：衍和乐，竭祗诚。
现代文：衍漾和乐，竭尽恭诚。
English: To pursue peace and harmony, and to be as sincere as possible.

古文：仰嘉惠，怀德馨。
现代文：仰受皇上的恩惠，心怀皇上的美德。
English: He admired the emperor's grace and cherished the emperor's virtue.

古文：游淳风，泳淑清。
现代文：游于敦厚之风，泳于纯明之境。
English: Swim in the wind of Dunhuang, swim in the land of purity.

古文：协亿兆，同欢荣。
现代文：调协亿万人民，共同欢乐荣盛。
English: hundreds of millions of people, and achieve common happiness and prosperity.

古文：建皇极，统天位。
现代文：建立帝业准则，总领帝王大位。
English: To establish the imperial standard, the emperor's throne is supreme.

古文：运阴阳，御六气。
现代文：运转阴阳，驾御六气。
English: Running yin and yang, driving the wind.

古文：殷群生，成性类。王道浃，治功成。
现代文：使一切生物殷盛，让它们各得其性。王道通透，治功有成。
English: Let all living things flourish, and let them each have their own nature. The king's way is transparent, and the cure is successful.

古文：人伦序，俗化清。
现代文：人伦有序，风俗清纯。
English: The human relations are orderly and the customs are pure.

古文：虔明祀，祗三灵。
现代文：虔诚地祭祀神明，敬奉天、地、人三灵。
English: Devoutly worship the gods, and venerate the three spirits of heaven, earth, and man.

古文：崇礼乐，式仪刑。
现代文：崇尚制礼作乐，遵守法式。
English: Admire etiquette and etiquette, observe French etiquette.

古文：庆元吉，宴三朝。播金石，咏泠箫。奏《九夏》，舞《云》《韶》。
现代文：庆祝元旦首吉，举行盛大朝宴，敲击金钟石磬，咏吹轻妙的管箫，奏《九夏》之乐，舞《云》《韶》之舞。
English: To celebrate the auspicious beginning of New Year's Day, a grand morning banquet was held, with the chiming of the bell's stone gong, the blowing of the light pipe gong, the music of "Ninth Summer," and the dance of "Cloud" and "Dragonfly."

古文：迈德音，流英声。
现代文：遍行美誉，流布英声。
English: Good reputation everywhere, spread the Ying Zheng.

古文：八珣一，六合宁。
现代文：天下一统，世间太平。
English: The world is united, the world is peaceful.

古文：六合宁，承圣明。
现代文：世间太平，敬承圣明。
English: The world is at peace, and reverence for the sacred begins.

古文：王泽洽，道登隆。
现代文：王泽广布，治道登隆。
English: Wang Zeguangbu, the governance of the road uplift.

古文：绥函夏，总华戎。
现代文：安定函夏，总领华戎。
English: Stable Han Xia, General Hua Rong.

古文：齐德教，混殊风。
现代文：齐一德教，混同异俗。
English: Unity of virtue, mixing of different customs.

古文：混殊风，康万国。
现代文：混同异俗，万国安康。
English: Mixing and mingling with different cultures is good for the world.

古文：崇夷简，尚敦德。
现代文：政从平简，治尚敦德。
English: Politics should be simple and straightforward, and governance should be straightforward.

古文：弘王度，表遐则。
现代文：恢宏王度，永表远范。
English: Magnificent kingship, always far ahead of the times.

古文：右食举东西厢乐诗十一章。
现代文：上为食举东西厢乐诗十一章。
English: The above is the 11th chapter of the Eastern and Western Fan Music Poem.

古文：于赫皇祖，迪哲齐圣。
现代文：啊!多么显赫的皇祖，贤明而又智虑敏达。
English: Ah! what an illustrious progenitor, wise and sagacious.

古文：经纬大业，基天之命。
现代文：规划帝王大业，开始受命于天。
English: The planning of the emperor's great undertaking began to be ordered by heaven.

古文：克开洪绪，诞笃天庆。
现代文：能开创伟大功绩，笃于上天之庆。
English: To be able to achieve great feats is worthy of God's celebration.

古文：旁济彝伦，仰齐七政。
现代文：通助天地常道，整齐日月五星的法则。
English: To help the heavens and earth to run smoothly, and to keep the order of the sun, moon and stars.

古文：烈烈景皇，克明克聪，静封略，定勋功。
现代文：我威武的景皇帝，多么明智聪慧。使边疆安静，立下了功勋。
English: How wise and clever I, the mighty and powerful Emperor Jing, have been. I have made the frontier quiet, and I have made a great achievement.

古文：成民立政，仪刑万邦。
现代文：成就人民而推行政事，为全国景仰的楷模。
English: He is a role model admired by the whole country for achieving great things for the people and leading the government.

古文：式固崇轨，光绍前踪。
现代文：依循旧有的法式与准则，继承并光大前人事业。
English: Follow the old French style and standards, inherit and magnify the predecessor's cause.

古文：允文烈考，浚哲应期。
现代文：我烈祖文皇帝富有文德，智慧深邃而顺应运期。
English: My ancestor, Emperor Wen, was full of culture and virtue, and his wisdom was profound and in accordance with his age.

古文：参德天地，比功四时。
现代文：德行可配天地，功业可比四时。
English: Virtue can match heaven and earth, and deeds can match four o'clock.

古文：大亨以正，庶绩咸熙。
现代文：通达无阻而坚守正道，各种事业都很兴盛。
English: Access is unimpeded and the right path is adhered to. All kinds of undertakings are flourishing.

古文：肇启晋宇，遂登皇基。
现代文：始建大晋王朝。于是登基称帝。
English: He founded the Great Jin Dynasty and ascended to the throne.

古文：明明我后，玄德通神。
现代文：我武皇帝多么明察，深玄的品德入化通神。
English: My Emperor Wu is so clear-sighted, and his profound moral character has been transformed into a psychic.

古文：受终正位，协应天人。
现代文：继武皇帝而登帝位，上应天命而下合人心。
English: He ascended to the throne following Emperor Wu, responding to the will of heaven and the will of the people.

古文：容民厚下，育物流仁。
现代文：对民宽容而待下亲厚，养育万物而流布仁慈。
English: Be tolerant and kind to the people, nurture all things and spread benevolence.

古文：跻我王道，晖光日新。
现代文：使我晋升登王道，光辉日日更新。
English: Let me be promoted to the royal road, and my glory will be renewed day by day.

古文：右雅乐正旦大会行礼诗四章。
现代文：上为雅乐正旦大会行礼诗四章。
English: The above is a four-chapter poem for the Elegance and Sincerity Conference.

古文：晋《正德》、《大豫》二舞歌二篇，张华造：
现代文：置《正德》、《大豫》二舞歌二篇：张华作
English: Placing "Zhengde" and "Dai Yu" and two dance songs: composed by Zhang Hua

古文：《正德舞》歌诗：
现代文：《正德舞》歌诗：
English: "Zhengde Dance" lyrics:

古文：曰皇上天，玄鉴惟光。
现代文：多么伟大的上天，有如明镜照临人间。
English: What a great heaven, like a bright mirror shining on the world.

古文：神器周回，五德代章。
现代文：朝代有所更换，五德轮流彰明。
English: The emperor's sacred objects were held in turn, and the five virtues of the dynasty were displayed alternately.

古文：祚命于晋，世有哲王。
现代文：上天赐予大晋皇位，世代都有圣明的君主。
English: Heaven has blessed Jin, and generations of emperors have been blessed with sages.

古文：弘济区夏，甄陶万方。
现代文：广泛地济助中原，培育教化四方。
English: Extensively help the Central Plains, cultivate and enlighten the four directions.

古文：大明垂曜，旁烛无疆。
现代文：有如曰月下垂光亮，普遍照耀而无际无疆。
English: The great radiance shines down, illuminating everything without end.

古文：蚩蚩庶类，风德永康。
现代文：扰攘的众多物类，深受德化而长久安康。
English: Humble and ignorant of all kinds of things, the demeanor of virtue is always Kangning.

古文：皇道惟清，礼乐斯经。
现代文：帝王之道惟在清明，筹划制礼作乐。
English: The rules of governing a country can only be clear, and ceremonial music relies on this kind of implementation.

古文：金石在县，万舞在庭。
现代文：悬挂金石乐器，各种舞蹈在堂前表演。
English: Hanging gold and stone musical instruments, various dances are performed in front of the hall.

古文：象容表庆，协律被声。
现代文：它象征仪度而表达喜庆，调协乐律而及于音声。
English: The face of the symbol of the country shows a good omen, and the rhythm of the music is reflected in the pleasant sound.

古文：轶《武》超《濩》，取节六英。
现代文：超越了《武》《濩》乐舞，撷取节奏于古乐《六英》。
English: It surpasses the music and dance of "Wu" and "Shu" and captures the rhythm of the ancient music "Liuying."

古文：同进退让，化渐无形。
现代文：舞人同进同退，教化渍染而不着迹形。
English: Let's advance and retreat together, and rectify the indoctrination order invisibly.

古文：太和宣洽，通于幽冥。《大豫舞》歌诗：
现代文：阴阳元气宣畅洽和，到达暗昧的地方。《大豫舞》歌诗：
English: Yin and yang, and the breath of life, proclaim a smooth harmony, and arrive at a dark place.

古文：惟天之命，符运有归。
现代文：上天赋予使命，符瑞表明了天下的归附。
English: Heaven-sent life, great fortune has a destination.

古文：赫赫大晋，三后重晖。
现代文：多么显赫的大置，三帝如曰月重辉。
English: In the great Jin Dynasty, the three emperors mirrored each other.

古文：继明绍世，光抚九围。
现代文：承明时而继后世，光辉照抚九州。
English: Inherit the Holy Light and pass it on to future generations, and extensively pacify the places within the nine realms.

古文：我皇绍期，遂在璿玑。
现代文：我皇上继登帝位，就在璇玑玉衡。
English: My Emperor ascended to the throne, right in the middle of Yu Heng's reign.

古文：群生属命，奄有庶邦。
现代文：众多生灵顺从归附，拥有了天下万国。
English: The people obey orders and rule the world.

古文：慎徽五典，玄教遐通。
现代文：谨慎地完善五常，至高无上的教化无远不通。
English: Respectfully promote the Five Classics, and the enlightenment will spread to all parties.

古文：万方同轨，率土咸雍。
现代文：全国高度统一，境内都很和乐。
English: The same system in all directions, and harmony everywhere.

古文：爰制《大豫》，宣德舞功。
现代文：于是制作《大豫》之舞，宣扬盛德而表现丰功。
English: As a result, he created the "Great Henan" and promoted the virtues of German politics.

古文：淳化既穆，王道协隆。
现代文：淳美的教化既已庄美，先王的正道和盛。
English: Junmei's education has already been dignified, and the former king's righteous path has flourished.

古文：仁及草木，惠加昆虫。
现代文：仁爱施及草木，恩惠施加昆虫。
English: Benevolence pervades plants and trees, benevolence involves insects.

古文：亿兆夷人，说仰皇风。
现代文：亿万平民百姓，仰悦皇上之德。
English: Hundreds of millions of ordinary people admire the Emperor's virtue.

古文：丕显大业，永世弥崇。
现代文：帝王大业大为显耀，世代相传而更加尊崇。
English: The great and bright foundation industry has been more and more developed from generation to generation.

古文：晋四厢歌十六篇，成公绥造：
现代文：晋四厢歌十六篇：成公绥作
English: Sixteen Songs of the Four Quarters of the Jin Dynasty: Composed by Cheng Gong

古文：上寿酒，乐未央。
现代文：进献寿酒，欢乐未尽。
English: Celebrate your birthday with a bottle of wine. The fun is not over yet.

古文：大晋应天庆，皇帝永无疆。
现代文：大晋顺应天庆，皇帝万寿无疆。
English: The Great Jin conformed to Tianqing, and the emperor had unlimited longevity.

古文：右诗一章，王公上寿酒所用。
现代文：上为诗一章，王公上寿酒所用。
English: The above is one chapter of a poem, used by Wang Gong to celebrate his birthday.

古文：穆穆天子，光临万国。
现代文：庄严盛美的天子，光辉照临万国。
English: Majestic Son of Heaven, rule all nations.

古文：多士盈朝，莫匪俊德。
现代文：满朝廷众多士子，没有不是有才有德的人。
English: The court was full of talented people, and there was no one who was not talented, virtuous and noble.

古文：流化罔极，王猷允塞。
现代文：流布的教化无远弗届，帝王的计划多么充实。
English: There is no end to influence and indoctrination, and the royal road runs through the world.

古文：嘉会置酒，嘉宾充庭。
现代文：盛会置备酒宴，嘉宾充满堂前。
English: A splendid banquet is laid out on the banquet table, and beautiful guests fill the courtyard.

古文：羽旄耀辰极，钟鼓振泰清。
现代文：羽旗照耀北极星，钟鼓声震天空。
English: Feathered banners shine the North Star, and the sound of bells and drums shakes the sky.

古文：百辟朝三朝，彧彧明仪刑。
现代文：诸侯王来朝贺元旦，那容态多么优美。
English: Princes and queens come to congratulate the New Year's Day, how graceful they look.

古文：济济锵锵，金振玉声。
现代文：盛仪跆跆济济，但闻金钟、玉磬之声。
English: The pomp and ceremony abound, but the sound of bells and gongs is deafening.

古文：礼乐具，宴嘉宾。眉寿祚圣皇，景福惟日新。
现代文：礼乐具备，宴饮嘉宾，祝圣皇万岁，大福曰日更新。
English: The liturgical music is available, the banquet guests, the long life of the Holy Emperor, and the great blessing are updated every day.

古文：群后戾止，有来雍雍。
现代文：诸侯王一齐到来，与会的人一片和谐。
English: A group of courtiers arrived together, and the visitors were gracious and generous.

古文：献酬纳贽，崇此礼容。
现代文：彼此酬酢并损送礼物，崇尚这一礼节。
English: They toast each other and give each other a meeting gift, and they respect this kind of ceremonial behavior.

古文：丰肴万俎，旨酒千钟。
现代文：盘中尽是丰盛的菜肴，美酒斟满干杯。
English: The plate is full of sumptuous dishes, and the glasses are filled with fine wine.

古文：嘉乐尽乐宴，福禄咸攸同。乐哉！
现代文：宴饮中奏乐尽欢，大众都同享福禄。多么快乐啊!
English: The music played at the banquet was very enjoyable, and everyone enjoyed the good fortune together. How happy they were!

古文：天下安宁。
现代文：天下安宁。
English: The world is at peace.

古文：道化行，风俗清。
现代文：教化施行，风俗淳清。
English: The royal way of education is practiced everywhere, and the folk customs are clear.

古文：《箫韶》作，咏九成。
现代文：制作《箫韶》，歌咏九成。
English: Produced "," 90% of the songs are sung.

古文：年丰穰，世泰平。
现代文：年成丰收，时世太平。
English: A bumper harvest year after year, and a time of peace.

古文：至治哉！
现代文：最为完美的政治啊!
English: The most perfect politics!

古文：乐无穷。
现代文：快乐无穷。
English: The happiness is endless.

古文：元首聪明，股肱忠。
现代文：皇上聪智明察，群臣努力效忠。
English: The Fuhrer is clever and loyal.

古文：澍丰泽，扬清风。
现代文：沾润厚泽，传颂清风。
English: Like the good rain that moistens everything, like the gently blowing warm wind.

古文：嘉瑞出，灵应彰。
现代文：嘉瑞出现，灵应彰明。
English: Beautiful auspiciousness appears, and the channeling of inspiration is highlighted.

古文：麒麟见，凤皇翔。
现代文：麒麟来到，凤凰飞翔。
English: The unicorn comes out, the phoenix flies.

古文：醴泉涌，流中唐。
现代文：甘泉涌出，流于院庭。
English: The spring gushed forth and flowed through the courtyard.

古文：嘉禾生，穗盈箱。
现代文：嘉禾生长，谷穗满箱。
English: Jiahe grows up and fills the storeroom.

古文：降繁祉，祚圣皇。
现代文：天降多福，佑我圣皇。
English: Descend to Dafu and help the Holy Emperor.

古文：承天位，统万国。
现代文：继承帝位，统率万邦。
English: He will inherit the heavenly throne and rule over all nations.

古文：受命应期，授圣德。
现代文：受命应运，天授圣德。
English: Ordered to be on the move, he was endowed with holiness.

古文：四世重光，宣开洪业，景克昌，文钦明，德弥彰。
现代文：四代重光，宣帝开启大业，基壶昌大，文帝钦明，晋德更明。
English: Four generations of heavy light, Emperor Xuan initiated a great cause, Ji Jiu Changda, Emperor Wenqingming, Emperor Jinde more clear.

古文：泰始建元，凤皇龙兴。
现代文：创建大晋王朝，帝位相承而无穷无尽。
English: The establishment of the first year, Taizhi, is like a phoenix taking off.

古文：龙兴伊何，享祚万乘。
现代文：泰始初建年号，有凤凰飞龙兴起，飞龙兴起如何?享有天子之位。
English: What does it look like to take off and enjoy the blessings of the Prince of Ten Thousand Blessings?

古文：奄有八荒，化育黎蒸。
现代文：拥有全国，教化众民。
English: It has far-flung and desolate places, and has educated and nurtured the Li people.

古文：图书焕炳，金石有征。
现代文：河图盗书焕发光辉，金石都有征兆。
English: The map of the river glows with brilliance, and the precious stones show signs of rust.

古文：德光大，道熙隆。
现代文：皇上的德行光大，治道熙和隆盛。
English: Virtue shines brightly, righteousness prospers.

古文：被四表，格皇穹。
现代文：及于四海，通于上天。
English: Affecting the four directions, reaching up to the heavens.

古文：奕奕万嗣，明明显融。
现代文：万代盛美，光明而又显融。
English: Magnificent for thousands of years, bright and harmonious.

古文：高朗令终。保兹永祚，与天比崇。
现代文：高明有好的结局，保佑这国祚长久，与上天等同高崇。
English: Wisdom has a good ending, bless this country for a long time, and hold it in the same high regard as heaven.

古文：圣皇君四海，顺人应天期。
现代文：圣皇君临四海，顺人心而应天命。
English: The Emperor of the Holy Light reigns over the four seas, pleasing the people and responding to the expectations of heaven.

古文：三叶合重光，泰始开洪基。
现代文：三世合有重光，童盘创建帝业。
English: Three generations have inherited the glory of eternity and created a magnificent foundation from the beginning.

古文：明耀参日月，功化侔四时。
现代文：明耀可配曰月，功化可齐四时。
English: The brightness can match that of the moon, and the efficiency can be as high as four o'clock.

古文：宇宙清且泰，黎庶咸雍熙。
现代文：宇宙清明而安泰，百姓都和睦快乐。
English: The universe is clear and safe, and the people are harmonious and happy.

古文：善哉雍熙。
现代文：多么好啊!
English: How good it is!

古文：惟天降命，翼仁祐圣。
现代文：和睦快乐。上天降命，辅佑仁圣之君。啊!
English: Heaven has decreed a great destiny to assist the benevolent and bless the sages.

古文：于穆三皇，载德弥盛。
现代文：多么美的三帝，他们的道德更为隆盛。
English: The three great emperors were dignified and great, and their virtue was even greater.

古文：总齐璇玑，光统七政。
现代文：总齐璇玑玉衡，光统曰月五星七曜之政。
English: The general seizes power and is in charge of the seven governments.

古文：百揆时序，化若神圣。
现代文：庶政依时施行，教化有如神圣。
English: A hundred officials are competent, and the rule of saints can be compared to the rule of gods.

古文：四海同风，兴至仁。
现代文：四海同德，兴起至仁。
English: The four seas are the same kind of weathering, with the highest benevolence.

古文：济民育物，拟陶钧。拟陶钧，垂惠润。
现代文：济助百姓而养育万物，可与造物者类比，留传的恩惠普遍沾润。
English: Helping the people and nurturing all things can be compared to the creator, and the legacy of grace is generally rich.

古文：皇皇群贤，峨峨英俊。
现代文：众贤臣多么端庄，众才士多么盛美。
English: How dignified are all the wise men, how beautiful are all the talented people.

古文：德化宣，芬芳播来胤。
现代文：德化宣扬，芬芳传至后代。
English: Virtue is taught and spread, and fragrance is passed on to future generations.

古文：播来胤，垂后昆。
现代文：芬芳传至后代，永远垂裕子孙。
English: To be passed on to future generations, to be emulated by future generations.

古文：清庙何穆穆，皇极辟四门。
现代文：宗庙多么肃穆，皇帝开放了四方之门。
English: How solemn and solemn the imperial temple is. The emperor has set up four Ming-style halls.

古文：皇极辟四门，万机无不综。
现代文：皇上开放了四方之门，纷繁的政务无不总揽。
English: The emperor set up four courthouses and dealt with all state affairs.

古文：娓娓翼翼，乐不及荒，饥不遑食。
现代文：勤勉不倦而恭谨小心，行乐不至于荒废事务，荒年就顾不上进食。
English: Diligent and tireless, but respectful and careful, entertainment will not be a waste of time, and in a year of famine, it will not be possible to eat.

古文：大礼既行，乐无极。
现代文：祭祀大礼已行，欢乐无穷无尽。
English: Now that the grand ceremony has taken place, the joy is boundless.

古文：登昆仑，上增城。
现代文：登上昆仑山，登上蜡墟。
English: Climb Mount Kunlun, climb the wax market.

古文：乘飞龙，升泰清。
现代文：乘驾飞龙，升上天空。
English: Ride the dragon and soar into the sky.

古文：冠日月，佩五星。
现代文：头戴曰月，身佩五星。
English: With the sun and the moon as the crown, with the five stars as the peak.

古文：扬虹霓，建彗旌。
现代文：扬起彩虹，树建彗旌。
English: Raise the rainbow, the tree builds the comet cocoon.

古文：披庆云，廕繁荣。
现代文：庆云披覆，繁花遮荫。
English: Dressed in festive clouds, decorated with flowers.

古文：览八极，游天庭。
现代文：遍观八极，畅游天庭。
English: View the eight poles, tour the heavenly garden.

古文：顺天地，和阴阳。
现代文：顺应天地，协和阴阳。
English: Conform to heaven and earth, and harmonize yin and yang.

古文：序四气，耀三光。
现代文：序列四气，辉耀三光。
English: Sequence of four airs, shining three lights.

古文：张帝网，正皇纲。
现代文：开张帝纲，端正皇纲。
English: Open the imperial syllabus, correct the imperial syllabus.

古文：播仁风，流惠康。
现代文：传播仁风，流布惠康。
English: We will widely implement benevolent policies and expand the scope of benevolence and conning.

古文：迈洪化，振灵威。
现代文：勉行大化，奋起灵威。
English: diligently in the grand enlightenment, carry forward the authoritative power.

古文：怀万方，纳九夷。
现代文：怀柔万方，接纳九夷。
English: To make all parties come to their senses, and to make Jiujiang pay tribute.

古文：朝阊阖，宴紫微。
现代文：朝拜阎阖，宴饮紫微。
English: Those who come to pay homage seem to be in heaven, and the banquet is like being wrapped in a purple star.

古文：建五旗，罗钟虡。
现代文：树建五旗，罗列钟虞。
English: Five flags are raised, and the bell is rung.

古文：列四县，奏《韶》《武》。
现代文：陈设四悬，演奏姗》、《武》。
English: The table is set up on all fours, and the music is "Koto" and "Bu."

古文：铿金石，扬旌羽。
现代文：钟磬铿锵，旌羽飞扬。
English: Gold pebbles ricochet, dragonfly wings flutter.

古文：纵八佾，巴渝舞。
现代文：腾跃八列，舞有《巴》、《渝》。
English: There are eight prancing columns, and the dances include "Ba" and "Chong."

古文：咏《雅》《颂》，和律吕。
现代文：咏歌《雅》《颂》，谐和律吕。
English: Song "Ya" "Ode," harmony and harmony.

古文：于胥乐，乐圣主。
现代文：哟!大家都在欢乐啊!乐在有了圣主。
English: Rejoice and be glad in the Lord.

古文：化荡荡，清风泄。
现代文：教化荡荡，清风泄泄。
English: The culture is clear.

古文：总英雄，御俊杰。
现代文：总领英雄，驾驭俊杰。
English: Leading the heroes, driving the heroes.

古文：开宇宙，扫四裔。
现代文：开拓宇宙，扫平四边。
English: Open up the era, sweep away the four descendants.

古文：光缉熙，美圣哲。
现代文：光明渐积，颂美圣哲。
English: Shining bright, beautiful saint.

古文：超百代，扬休烈，流景祚，显万世。
现代文：超越百代，称扬伟功，永传帝位，显耀百世。
English: Transcending a hundred generations, praising great achievements, perpetuating the imperial throne, and shining for a hundred generations.

古文：皇皇显祖，翼世佐时。宁济六合，受命应期。
现代文：多么美啊显祖宣皇帝，他辅翼时世，安定济助中原，受天命而应帝期。
English: How beautiful is Emperor Xianzu Xuan, who has aided the times, brought stability to the Central Plains, and fulfilled the mandate of the emperor.

古文：神武鹰扬，大化咸熙。
现代文：神明威武如鹰奋扬，广深的教化周遍熙和。
English: The divine majesty and martial prowess are soaring like an eagle, and the extensive and profound enlightenment is spreading everywhere.

古文：廓开皇衢，用成帝基。
现代文：打开皇家的大路，奠定了帝王基业。
English: Opened the royal road and laid the foundation of the emperor.

古文：光光景皇，无竞维烈。
现代文：多么光明显耀的景皇帝，没有更强的是他的武功。
English: How brightly shines the Jing Emperor, no stronger is his martial arts.

古文：匡时拯俗，休功盖世。
现代文：匡正时弊而拯救民俗，盛美的功业盖世无双。
English: To save the people is a great achievement.

古文：宇宙既康，九域有截。
现代文：宇宙既已安康，九州整齐顺服。
English: The inland sea is safe and sound, and the situation in nine regions is clear.

古文：天命降鉴，启祚明哲。
现代文：天命有所鉴察，明哲之君开启帝位。
English: As fate would have it, Emperor Mingzhe took the throne.

古文：穆穆烈考，克明克俊。
现代文：端庄盛美的烈考文皇帝，英明而又俊迈。
English: The dignified and beautiful Emperor Lykaowen, wise and handsome.

古文：实天生德，诞膺灵运。
现代文：上天给予品德，于是膺受福运。
English: Heaven bestows virtue, so you will receive good fortune.

古文：肇建帝业，开国有晋。
现代文：始建帝王大业，开创国家太置。
English: He founded the Imperial Dynasty and the Jin Dynasty and founded the country.

古文：载德奕世，垂庆洪胤。
现代文：累代都有美德，福庆留传后嗣。
English: Virtue is handed down from generation to generation.

古文：明明圣帝，龙飞在天。
现代文：多么明察的逮皇奁，像龙飞上高空。
English: Emperor Shengming, dragons soar into the sky.

古文：与灵合契，通德幽玄。
现代文：与神灵彼此相合，道德畅通幽玄。
English: It is in accordance with God's will and is in accordance with divine principles.

古文：仰化清云，俯育重渊。
现代文：教化上同清云，养育下垂重渊。
English: Indoctrination is like a clear cloud, and upbringing is like a heavy abyss.

古文：受灵之祐，于万斯年。
现代文：受有神灵的庇佑，啊!享位千年万年。
English: It has been protected for billions of years.

古文：右雅乐正旦大会行礼诗十五章。
现代文：上为雅乐正旦大会行礼诗十五章。
English: The above is the 15th chapter of the elegiac poem for the Gala Zhengtang Conference.

古文：宋四厢乐歌五篇，王韶之造：
现代文：晋四箱乐歌五篇：王韶之作啊!
English: Five pieces of music from the four boxes of the Jin Dynasty: the work of Wang Xuan!

古文：于铄我皇，礼仁包元。
现代文：我皇上多么辉煌，礼义仁德包举善美。
English: My Emperor, how splendid, courtesy, benevolence, kindness and beauty.

古文：齐明日月，比量乾坤。陶甄百王，稽则黄轩。
现代文：可与日月齐明，可与乾坤比大，造就历代帝王，稽考董壶法则。
English: Can be as bright as the sun and the moon, can be greater than the universe, create the emperors of all ages, review the rules of the pot.

古文：訏谟定命，辰告四蕃。
现代文：制作大计划并审定法令，及时向四方藩国宣告。
English: The grand plan was made and the decree was approved, and it was announced to the four provinces in a timely manner.

古文：将将蕃后，翼翼群僚。
现代文：济济锵锵的诸侯王，恭谨小心的群臣。
English: Princes who are generous are followed by courteous and careful courtiers.

古文：盛服待晨，明发来朝。
现代文：衣冠齐整地等待早晨，天明时上朝朝贺。
English: They wait for the morning with their coats neatly trimmed, and at dawn they go out to greet the morning.

古文：飨以八珍，乐以九《韶》。
现代文：用珍肴美味来宴享，用演奏《箫韶》来娱乐。
English: Feast on delicious delicacies, and be entertained by a performance of "Cherry Blossom."

古文：仰祗天颜，厥猷孔昭。
现代文：仰敬皇上的容颜，致治的谋划甚是显明。
English: Looking up to the emperor's countenance, the plot to overthrow him is very clear.

古文：法章既设，初筵长舒。
现代文：法令既已设置，摆开宴席入座。
English: Now that the decree has been set, the banquet is set out and the guests are seated.

古文：济济列辟，端委皇除。
现代文：众多的王臣，在皇上庭阶前衣冠楚楚。
English: A large number of royal courtiers are dressed to the nines in front of the imperial steps.

古文：饮和无盈。
现代文：饮酒和畅而不过度，不失庄严的容貌举止。
English: Drink moderately, but not excessively, and maintain a dignified appearance and demeanor.

古文：威仪有余。温恭在位，敬终如初。
现代文：在位任职温良恭谨，敬事皇上始终如一。
English: During his reign, he served the Emperor with gentleness and respect, and he always treated the Emperor with respect.

古文：九功既歌，六代惟时。
现代文：既已歌颂六府三事之功，又见黄、唐六代之盛。
English: It has already sung the praises of the achievements of the six prefectures and three provinces, and has also seen the prosperity of the six dynasties of the Yellow and Tang dynasties.

古文：被德在乐，宣道以诗。
现代文：用乐舞来表现美德，用诗歌来宣扬大道。
English: Music and dance are used to express virtue, and poetry is used to promote virtue.

古文：穆矣太和，品物咸熙。
现代文：多么美啊这太平时世，众生无不欢乐。
English: How beautiful it is in this time of peace, when all beings are happy.

古文：庆积自远，告成在兹。
现代文：福庆积聚则自然远大，大功告成就在今天。
English: The accumulation of blessings is naturally far-reaching, and great achievements have been made today.

古文：右《肆夏》乐歌四章。
现代文：上为《肆夏》乐歌四章。
English: Above are four chapters of songs from Wu Xia.

古文：大哉皇宋，长发其祥，纂系在汉，统源伊唐。
现代文：多么伟大啊皇宋，久已发现它的祯祥。继承谱系在刘漠，皇统远源在唐尧。
English: How great is the Emperor Song, who has long discovered its auspiciousness. The line of succession is in Liu Mo, and the imperial lineage has its origins in Tang Xi.

古文：德之克明，休有烈光。
现代文：功德能够显耀，美啊!有很大荣光。
English: Merit can shine, beauty! There is great glory in it.

古文：配天作极，辰居四方。
现代文：配天地而登帝位，如北极星光照四方。
English: He ascended to the throne in harmony with heaven and earth, shining like the North Star in all directions.

古文：皇矣我后，圣德通灵。
现代文：多么盛美啊我天子，圣德与神灵相通。
English: How beautiful it is, my son, when holiness and divinity meet.

古文：有命自天，诞授休祯。
现代文：有使命来自上天，付与吉庆祯祥。
English: If you have a mission from heaven, it will bring you good luck.

古文：龙飞紫极，造我宋京。
现代文：像龙飞上高空，创建王朝。
English: Like a dragon flying high into the sky, creating a dynasty.

古文：光宅宇宙，赫赫明明。
现代文：居有天下万邦，声势赫赫而威灵明明。
English: There are all kinds of countries in the world, and their voices are loud and clear.

古文：右大会行礼歌二章。
现代文：上为大会行礼歌二章。
English: The above is the second chapter of the anthem for the conference.

古文：献寿爵，庆圣皇。灵祚穷二仪，休明等三光。
现代文：姑洗箱作。进献寿酒，庆祝圣皇，帝位与天地同存，盛美与三光相等。
English: It was made for a purifying box. It was used to offer longevity wine and celebrate the holy emperor. The imperial throne co-existed with heaven and earth, and the grandeur of beauty was equal to that of the three lights.

古文：右王公上寿歌一章。
现代文：上为王公上寿歌一章。
English: Above is a chapter of Wang Gong's birthday song.

古文：明明大宋，缉熙皇道。
现代文：黄钟箱作。多么明盛的大宋，皇家正道大放光明。
English: Made of yellow bell box. How brightly the Song Dynasty flourished, and the royal righteous path shone brightly.

古文：则天垂化，光定天保。
现代文：以天为法而施行教化，国运大为安定。
English: With heaven as the law, enlightenment is carried out, and national development is very stable.

古文：天保既定，肆觐万方。
现代文：国运既已安定，万方都来朝见。
English: Now that the national economy has stabilized, people from all over the world come to see the emperor.

古文：礼繁乐富，穆穆皇皇。
现代文：礼乐十分繁富，多么端庄盛美。
English: The liturgy is very rich, how dignified and beautiful.

古文：沔彼流水，朝宗天池。
现代文：那流水多么浩渺，前往朝拜大海。
English: How vast is the flowing water, going to worship the sea.

古文：洋洋贡职，抑抑威仪。
现代文：多么丰盛的贡物，多么恭谨的礼节。
English: What rich tributes, what respectful etiquette.

古文：既习威仪，亦闲礼容。
现代文：既熟悉礼仪细节，也熟练礼节法度。
English: Both familiar with the details of etiquette and skilled in the rules of etiquette.

古文：一人有则，作孚万邦。
现代文：皇上一人遵循法则，就受到全国的信任。
English: If only the emperor followed the law, he would be trusted by the whole country.

古文：烝哉我皇，固天诞圣。
现代文：上祭啊我的皇上，本来是上天所生圣人。
English: Priest: O my Emperor, you are a saint born of heaven.

古文：履端惟始，对越休庆。
现代文：在造新年的开始，答受美命而称扬喜庆。
English: At the beginning of the Chinese New Year, in response to the call of the United States, the celebration was held.

古文：如天斯久，如日斯盛。
现代文：像天地这样长久，像太阳这样明盛。
English: As long as heaven and earth, as bright as the sun.

古文：介兹景福，永固骏命。
现代文：上天佑助大福，永远稳固天命。
English: Heaven's blessing is a great blessing. Heaven's destiny is forever secure.

古文：右殿前登歌三章，别有金石。
现代文：上为殿前登歌三章，别有金石。
English: Above, there are three chapters of songs in front of the hall, each with a gemstone.

古文：晨羲载耀，万物咸睹。
现代文：早晨的太阳照耀，万物都看得清楚。
English: The morning sun is shining, everything is clear to see.

古文：嘉庆三朝，礼乐备举。
现代文：元旦举行庆祝，礼乐一一具备。
English: Celebrated on New Year's Day, the ceremonial music is ready.

古文：元正肇始，典章晖明。
现代文：元旦是一年的开始，典章制度的光彩明亮。
English: New Year's Day is the beginning of the year, and the glory of the award system is bright.

古文：万方毕来贺，华裔充皇庭。
现代文：全国都来朝贺，各族人民充满皇庭。
English: The whole country came to pay morning greetings, and people of all ethnic groups filled the imperial court.

古文：多士盈九位，俯仰观玉声。
现代文：众多的士子坐满了许多席位，俯仰进退问听到玉佩之声。
English: A large number of scholars filled many seats, leaning forward and backward to listen to the voice of Yu Pei.

古文：恂恂俯仰，载烂其辉。
现代文：恭顺地周旋揖让，衣物华美鲜明。
English: Respectfully circled around, the clothes are gorgeous and bright.

古文：鼓钟震天区，礼容塞皇闱。
现代文：鼓钟声震动天空，礼节法度充塞皇宫。
English: The sound of drums and bells shook the sky, and the palace was filled with etiquette.

古文：思乐穷休庆，福履同所归。五玉既献，三帛是荐。
现代文：喜庆时极尽欢乐，人人共有福禄。呈上五色玉器，进献三色丝帛。
English: When it's time to celebrate, everyone will share in the joy. Five-colored jade and three-colored silk scarves will be presented.

古文：尔公尔侯，鸣玉华殿。
现代文：你们公爵侯爵，在殿堂中佩玉锵呜。
English: You, Duke and Marquis, wear your crowns in the hall of fame.

古文：皇皇圣后，降礼南面。
现代文：端庄盛美的圣皇，面南而坐，降临行礼。
English: The dignified and magnificent Holy Emperor, sitting facing south, descends and salutes.

古文：元首纳嘉礼，万邦同欢愿。
现代文：皇上接受庆贺，全国共同欢乐祝愿。
English: The Emperor accepted the congratulations, and the whole country sent their best wishes.

古文：休哉！
现代文：美啊!
English: So beautiful!

古文：君臣嘉燕。
现代文：君臣在一起宴聚。
English: Princes and courtiers feasted together.

古文：建五旗，列四县。
现代文：树立五色之旗，陈列四悬乐器。
English: The five-colored flag was set up, and four musical instruments were displayed.

古文：乐有文，礼无倦。
现代文：乐舞富于文采，礼仪没有倦怠。
English: The music and dance are rich in literature, and the etiquette is not tired.

古文：融皇风，穷一变。
现代文：皇风融融和乐，穷尽而有一变。
English: The imperial style is harmonious and harmonious, and there is a change after exhaustion.

古文：体至和，感阴阳。
现代文：包容至和之气，感通阴阳之道。
English: The spirit of tolerance and harmony, the path of yin and yang.

古文：德无不柔，繁休祥。
现代文：皇上大德无不怀柔，吉祥频频来临。
English: The Emperor's great virtue is always gentle, and auspicious signs come frequently.

古文：瑞徽璧，应嘉钟。舞灵凤，跃潜龙。
现代文：玉璧表现瑞兆，嘉钟显出征应，灵凤出而飞翔，潜龙跃于深渊。
English: The gem shows auspiciousness, the bell shows auspiciousness, the phoenix flies, and the dragon leaps into the abyss.

古文：景星见，甘露坠。
现代文：景星呈现天上，甘露下降人间。
English: The stars appear in the sky, and the nectar descends to the earth.

古文：木连理，禾同穗。
现代文：树木连理同枝，嘉禾一生双穗。
English: The trees are connected with the same branches, and Jiahe has double ears all his life.

古文：玄化洽，仁泽敷。
现代文：至德的教化和洽，仁爱的恩泽施行。
English: The teaching of the highest virtue and the practice of harmony and benevolence are carried out.

古文：极祯瑞，穷灵符。
现代文：这一切吉兆，在灵符中充分表现出来。
English: All these auspicious signs are fully manifested in the spiritual symbols.

古文：怀荒裔，绥齐民。
现代文：招抚边远的人民，安定一般百姓。
English: Appealing to people in remote areas and stabilizing the general public.

古文：荷天祐，靡不宾。
现代文：承蒙上天保佑，无不朝贡称臣。
English: With God's blessing, all of them paid tribute to their vassals.

古文：靡不宾，长世弘盛。
现代文：无不朝贡称臣，弘盛绵续久存。
English: They all paid tribute to their vassals, and prospered for a long time.

古文：昭明有融，繁嘉庆。
现代文：光明而又融和，喜庆之事繁多。
English: Bright and harmonious, there are many things to celebrate.

古文：繁嘉庆，熙帝载。
现代文：喜庆之事繁多，皇上的盛世多么欢乐。
English: There are many things to celebrate, and the emperor's golden age was a joyous one.

古文：合气成和，苍生欣戴。
现代文：聚合诸气而成和气，百姓高兴地深受其福。
English: The people are happily blessed with the harmony that comes from the convergence of all energies.

古文：三灵协瑞，惟新皇代。
现代文：天、地、人三灵协同祥瑞，我皇朝日新月异。
English: The three spirits of heaven, earth, and man cooperate with the auspiciousness, and my emperor changes with each passing day.

古文：王道四达，流仁布德。
现代文：王道四方通达，流布仁慈恩德。
English: The royal road reaches all directions, spreading benevolence and grace.

古文：穷理咏乾元，垂训顺帝则。
现代文：深究义理而咏颂上天，垂示训诫而依顺帝法。
English: Deeply investigate the principles of righteousness and praise the heavens, and obey the emperor's law while giving exhortation.

古文：灵化侔四时，幽诚通玄默。
现代文：灵化舆四时相等，幽诚与玄默相通。
English: Spiritualization and contemplation are equal at the same time, and the profound and the subtle are interrelated.

古文：德泽被八珣，乾宁轨万国。
现代文：德泽覆盖四方，皇上是万国楷模。
English: Dezer covers the four directions, and the emperor is a model for all countries.

古文：皇猷缉，咸熙泰。
现代文：缉理帝王的计划，人民都和乐安泰。
English: The people are happy and safe because of the emperor's plan.

古文：礼仪焕帝庭，要荒服遐外。
现代文：礼仪在朝廷炳焕，边荒各族也在远地臣服。
English: The etiquette of the imperial court is in full swing, and all the tribes in the borderlands are also subject to it in distant lands.

古文：被发袭缨冕，左衤任回衿带。
现代文：披头发的戴上冠帽，前襟向左的系上衣带。
English: The hair-covered wear a crown and cap, and the front collar is tied to the left with a belt.

古文：天覆地载，流泽汪惛。
现代文：在天地之中，恩泽流布深广。
English: In heaven and earth, the blessings are spread far and wide.

古文：声教布濩，德光大。
现代文：声威和教化广泛传播，圣德昭明而盛大。
English: His fame and enlightenment spread far and wide, and his virtue was obvious and grand.

古文：开元辰，毕来王。奉贡职，朝后皇。
现代文：在元旦这一天，诸王一齐到来，奉献贡物，朝贺皇帝。
English: On New Year's Day, all the kings came together to pay tribute and congratulate the emperor.

古文：鸣珩佩，观典章。
现代文：一行玉佩锵鸣，观光典章礼制。
English: A line of jade peacocks chirps, and the sightseeing ceremony begins.

古文：乐王度，说徽芳。陶盛化，游太康。
现代文：为王者政教而欢乐，为王者美德而喜悦，陶育于盛美的教化，生活在太平时世。
English: Rejoice for the king of politics and religion, rejoice for the king of virtue, cultivate in the enlightenment of prosperity and beauty, and live in a time of peace.

古文：丕昭明，永克昌。
现代文：大放光明，长久昌盛。
English: Shine brightly and prosper for a long time.

古文：惟永初，德丕显。
现代文：惟永初建年号，德丕大为显明。
English: However, in the first year of construction, the virtue of Yongzheng was very obvious.

古文：齐七政，敷五典。
现代文：整治七政，传布五典。
English: rectify the seven policies and spread the five principles.

古文：彝伦序，洪化阐。
现代文：建立伦序，弘扬教化。
English: Establish moral order and promote enlightenment.

古文：王泽流，太平始。
现代文：王泽流布，太平开始。
English: Wang Ze spread, and the Taiping era began.

古文：树声教，明皇纪。
现代文：树立声教，明定纲纪。
English: Establish vocal education, and clearly define the discipline.

古文：和灵祇，恭明祀。
现代文：协和神灵，恭奉明祀。
English: A deity of harmony, worshipped with reverence.

古文：衍景祚，膺嘉祉。
现代文：帝位绵延，永受福祉。
English: The reign of the emperor is long, and he is always well-off.

古文：礼有容，乐有仪。
现代文：礼有法度，乐有仪式。
English: Etiquette has rules, pleasure has rituals.

古文：金石陈，牙羽施。
现代文：陈列金石乐器，装施乐架牙羽。
English: Display of gold and stone musical instruments, equipped with a Xerox rack of dental floss.

古文：迈《武》《濩》，均《咸池》。
现代文：超越《武》、《濩》之乐，可与《咸池》相比。
English: It surpasses the music of "Wu" and "Shu" and can be compared to the melody of "Hamchi."

古文：歌《南风》，舞德称。
现代文：演唱《南风》之歌，乐舞与美德相称。
English: Singing the "South Wind" song, music and dance are commensurate with virtue.

古文：文武焕，颂声兴。
现代文：文治武功炳焕，一片颂声兴起。
English: The civil and military exploits were highly praised, and a chorus of praise arose.

古文：王道纯，德弥淑。
现代文：王道善美，王德尤贤。
English: Wang Dao Zhenmei, Wang De Youxian.

古文：宁八表，康九服。
现代文：宁定四方，安抚全族。
English: Ningding four sides, to appease the whole nation.

古文：道礼让，移风俗。
现代文：礼让为先，移风易俗。
English: Compromise first, change customs later.

古文：移风俗，永克融。
现代文：移风易俗，永远和乐。
English: Changing customs, always harmonious.

古文：歌盛美，告成功。
现代文：歌唱盛美，上告成功。
English: She sang beautifully, and the appeal was successful.

古文：咏徽烈，邈无穷。
现代文：咏颂伟业，远远不尽。
English: There is no end to the glorification of great deeds.

古文：右食举歌十章。
现代文：上为食举歌十章。
English: There are ten chapters of poems about food.

古文：宋《前舞》《后舞》歌二篇，王韶之造：
现代文：宋《前舞》《后舞》歌二篇：王垄之作
English: Song "fore-dance" "after-dance" song two parts: the work of Wang Ren

古文：于赫景明，天监是临。
现代文：阳光照耀多么显赫，面临着上天的监视。
English: How brilliantly the sun shines, in the face of heavenly surveillance.

古文：乐来伊阳，礼作惟阴。
现代文：奏乐与作礼并行，体现了阴阳的和谐。
English: The music is played in parallel with the ritual, reflecting the harmony of yin and yang.

古文：歌自德富，儛由功深。
现代文：歌唱因颂德而丰富，舞蹈因表功而厚深。
English: Singing is enriched by praising virtue, and dancing is deepened by expressing merit.

古文：庭列宫县，陛罗瑟琴。翿龠繁会，笙磬谐音。
现代文：庭中陈设宫悬，陛下罗列琴瑟，翱籥繁声相应，笙磬音节和谐。
English: In the courtyard, there is a palace hanging, and His Majesty is playing the lute, the cymbals are correspondingly loud, and the syllables are harmonious.

古文：《箫韶》虽古，九成在今。
现代文：《箫韶》虽是古乐，如今也多次演奏。
English: Although "Koto" is an ancient piece of music, it has been performed many times.

古文：道志和声，德音孔宣。光我帝基，协灵配乾。
现代文：传达心志而协调乐声，宣扬了皇上的德音。光大我帝王基业，协配神灵上天。
English: Conveying the heart's desire and harmonizing the music, the emperor's virtue was proclaimed. "Glory be to the Emperor Gyeonggi, and may the gods go with him to heaven."

古文：仪刑六合，化穆自然。
现代文：为全国作出楷模，教化自然和穆。
English: To set an example for the whole country, to inculcate nature and morality.

古文：如彼云汉，为章于天。
现代文：就和那星河一样，在天空白成文彩。
English: Just like the starry river, it is written in white in the sky.

古文：熙熙万类，陶和当年。击辕中《韶》，永世弗骞。右《前舞歌》一章。
现代文：熙熙攘攘的各类生物，在那时快乐逍遥，敲着车辕唱的歌能和于《韶乐》，世代相传而永无亏损。上为《前舞》歌一章。
English: All kinds of bustling creatures are happy and carefree at that time, and the song sung by knocking on the chariot can be combined with "Gongle," which is passed down from generation to generation and never loses money. The above is a chapter of "Fore-dance" song.

古文：假乐圣后，实天诞德。
现代文：多么好多么快乐的圣王，上天赋予他大德。
English: What a good and happy holy king, Heaven has endowed him with great virtue.

古文：积美自中，王猷四塞。
现代文：他的美积自衷心，他的谋划充塞四方。
English: He plans from the bottom of his heart, and his plans are far-reaching.

古文：龙飞在天，仪刑万国。
现代文：他像龙飞在天空，成为天下的楷模。
English: He flew in the sky like a dragon and became a role model for the world.

古文：钦明惟神，临朝渊默。
现代文：他明察一切有如神霞，但端坐朝廷深沉静默。
English: He saw everything as if it were a mirage, but deep silence reigned in the imperial court.

古文：不言之化，品物咸德。
现代文：这种用不着言语的教化，使万物都受到了恩惠。
English: This non-verbal teaching has been a boon to all.

古文：告成于天，铭勋是勒。
现代文：向上天告示成功，刊刻下丰功伟绩。
English: Announce the success to the heavens, and publish the great achievements.

古文：翼翼厥犹，娓娓其仁。
现代文：他制定国策谨慎小心，施行仁政勤勉不倦。
English: He formulated national policies cautiously and carefully, and implemented benevolent policies diligently and tirelessly.

古文：顺天创制，因定和神。
现代文：顺应天命而有所创建，于是安定国家而洽和入神。
English: Created in accordance with God's predestination, the country was stable and peaceful.

古文：海外有截，九围无尘。
现代文：海外也这样整齐顺服，九州更是安静无尘。
English: Overseas, they are also neatly obedient, and Kyushu is even more quiet and dust-free.

古文：冕旒司契，垂拱临民。
现代文：身着帝王衣冠总揽朝纲，垂衣拱手而治理人民。
English: Dressed in imperial robes and crowns, he is in charge of the government and governs the people.

古文：乃舞《大豫》，钦若天人。
现代文：于是舞《大豫》之舞，钦仰他是有道之人。
English: As a result, they danced the dance of "Dai Yu" and admired him as a virtuous person.

古文：纯嘏孔休，万载弥新。右《后舞歌》一章。
现代文：上为《后舞》歌一章。置《大豫之舞，蕤宾箱奏。
English: Above is a chapter of songs from "The Back Dance," with "The Dance of the Great Hen, Performed by a Band of Guests."

古文：章庙乐舞歌祠。
现代文：童庙乐舞歌词：杂歌都同用太庙词，祇有三后另行撰写。
English: Children's temple music and dance lyrics: all the miscellaneous songs use the same words of the temple, only the last three are written separately.

古文：殷淡造：
现代文：殷淡作
English: Yin Bland Works

古文：宾出入奏《肃成乐》歌词二章：
现代文：宾出入奏《肃成乐》歌词二章：
English: The guests enter and exit to the music of "Su Cheng Le" lyrics of the second chapter:

古文：彝承孝曲，恭事严圣。
现代文：禀承孝典的常道，恭谨地事奉尊敬的圣君。
English: To follow the path of filial piety and respectfully serve the revered saint.

古文：浃天奉赆，罄壤齐庆。
现代文：普天下奉献财礼，全国人齐表庆贺。
English: All over the world, people have made offerings, and the whole country has come together to celebrate.

古文：司仪具序，羽容夙彰。
现代文：司仪具陈礼节次序，乐舞早就展开。
English: Ceremonies and proprieties are in the order of the festival, and the music and dance have already begun.

古文：芬枝飏烈，黼构周张。助宝奠轩，酎珍充庭。
现代文：花枝飘扬浓烈的香气，有斧形花纹的屏风周遍张设资助的实物放在轩中，进献的珍品充斥堂前。
English: The branches of the flowers exude a strong aroma, the screen with an axe-shaped pattern is spread all around, the actual objects of funding are placed in the hall, and the donated treasures fill the front of the hall.

古文：璆县凝会，涓硃伫声。
现代文：玉磬凝聚会合，红色的填留下声音。
English: The cymbals converge, the red fills leave a sound.

古文：先期选礼，肃若有承。
现代文：期前选行仪礼，肃敬而有所承。
English: The ceremony was chosen ahead of time, and it was held with solemnity and commitment.

古文：祗对灵祉，皇庆昭膺。
现代文：敬对神灵降福，承受皇家的喜庆。
English: Respect for the gods to grant blessings, to bear the joy of the royal family.

古文：尊事威仪，晖容昭叙。迅恭神明，梁盛牲俎。
现代文：恭敬地奉事礼仪，光辉的礼容昭显有序，快快恭迎神衹，祭器中已放上黍粱牲畜。
English: Respectfully serve the etiquette, the brilliant etiquette is clear and orderly, quickly welcome the deities, and the sacrificial animals have been placed in the altar.

古文：肃肃严宫，蔼蔼崇基。皇灵降祉，百祗具司。
现代文：多么肃静的庄严宫庙，多么盛美的高大台基，天神降赐福祉，百神一一管领。
English: What a serene and solemn palace and temple, what a grand and tall foundation, what a blessing from the gods, what a leader of a hundred gods.

古文：戒诚望夜，端列承朝。
现代文：以诚相戒而等待天明，端正行列来承奉早朝。
English: Waited for the dawn with sincere forbearance, and came to the service early in the morning in an orderly line.

古文：依微昭旦，物色轻霄。
现代文：黎明时曙光依稀，天空中景色轻淡。
English: At dawn, the light is faint, and the scenery in the sky is faint.

古文：鸿庆遐鬯，嘉荐令芳。
现代文：大庆久远通畅，美好的荐祭多么芬芳。
English: Daqing has been smooth for a long time, and the beautiful recommendation festival is so fragrant.

古文：翊帝明德，永祚流光。
现代文：辅佐皇帝的明德，福祚久远而流布光辉。
English: The Emperor's wisdom and virtue, and the long-lasting prosperity and glory.

古文：牲出入奏《引牲乐》歌词：
现代文：牲出入奏《引牲乐》歌词：
English: "The Music of the Animals" lyrics:

古文：维诚洁飨，维孝奠灵。
现代文：以诚意清洁祭品，以孝心进献神灵。
English: Clean the offerings with sincerity, and offer the deities with filial piety.

古文：敬芬黍稷，敬涤牺牲。
现代文：敬奉芬香的黍稷，敬奉涤净的牺牲。
English: Honor the incense burners, honor the sacrifices of the pure.

古文：骍茧在豢，载溢载丰。
现代文：豢养的赤色马和蚕茧，多么满溢而丰盛。
English: The reared red horse and the silkworm cocoon, how full and rich.

古文：以承宗祀，以肃皇衷。
现代文：用以承奉宗庙的祭祀，用以肃敬皇福。
English: It is used to celebrate the rituals of the ancestral temple and to pay homage to the emperor.

古文：萧芳四举，华火周传。
现代文：艾蒿的芳香四举。明亮的灯火遍传。
English: The fragrance of mugwort wafts everywhere. Bright lights shine everywhere.

古文：神监孔昭，嘉是柔牷。
现代文：神灵监临甚明，嘉许这柔嫩的纯色全牛祭品。
English: The spirit of the gods is very clear, praising this tender, pure-colored whole cow sacrifice.

古文：荐豆呈毛血奏《嘉荐乐》歌词：
现代文：荐豆呈毛血奏《嘉荐乐》歌词：
English: "Jiayuan Music" lyrics:

古文：肇禋戒祀，礼容咸举。
现代文：开始准备祭祀，礼节都一一遵行。
English: Preparations for the ritual began, and all the proper etiquette was followed.

古文：六典饰文，九司昭序。
现代文：六典整治礼制，九司昭明礼序。
English: The six rules regulate the etiquette, and the nine rules clarify the etiquette.

古文：牲柔既昭，仪刚既陈。
现代文：牺牲有柔有刚，都已明明陈列。
English: Sacrifices, both soft and hard, have been clearly displayed.

古文：恭涤惟清，敬事惟神。
现代文：恭敬地洗涤清爽，将它奉献神灵。
English: Wash it respectfully and dedicate it to the gods.

古文：加笾再御，兼俎重荐。
现代文：增加的果品再次奉进，双份的牲重又荐献。
English: The increased fruit was again offered, and a double portion of the animal's weight was also recommended.

古文：节动轩越，声流金县。
现代文：金石乐器发声演奏，那音节轩举飞越。
English: The syllables of the Kinshi musical instrument are soaring as it plays.

古文：奕奕幄，娓娓严闱。
现代文：多么盛美的合宫帷幄，在严肃的宫阐中勤勉不倦。
English: What a magnificent palace curtain, diligently working tirelessly in a serious palace.

古文：洁诚夕鉴，端服晨晖。
现代文：傍晚时洁己恭诚，早晨时端整冠服。
English: In the evening, you should be clean and respectful, and in the morning, you should wear a full-length robe.

古文：圣灵戾止，翊我皇则。
现代文：圣灵来到以后，辅佐我皇上法则。
English: After the coming of the Holy Spirit, I was assisted by the imperial law.

古文：上绥四宇，下洋万国。
现代文：上则安定宇宙四方，下则和乐万国人民。
English: On the top, the universe is stable in all directions, and on the bottom, the people of all nations are at peace.

古文：永言孝飨，孝飨有容。
现代文：永远尽孝祭祀，祭祀有其礼容。
English: Always perform filial piety and worship, and worship has its own etiquette.

古文：傧僚赞列，肃肃雍雍。
现代文：傧从官吏济济行列，多么肃敬雍和。
English: He is from a long line of government officials, how much he reveres Yonghe.

古文：右夕牲歌词。
现代文：上为夕牲歌词。
English: Above are the evening sacrifice lyrics.

古文：迎神奏《韶夏乐》歌词：
现代文：迎神奏《韶夏乐》歌词：
English: Ying Sheng Shuo "Summer Song" Lyrics:

古文：宫黝黝，复殿微微。
现代文：塱宜多么黑盛，复殿多么幽静。
English: How prosperous Changi is, how quiet Fudong is.

古文：璇除肃炤，釭璧彤辉。
现代文：石阶引导火炬，灯上玉璧闪耀红光。
English: The stone steps guide the torch, and the jade gems on the lamp shine red.

古文：黼帟神凝，玉堂严馨。
现代文：纹幕一片宁静，宫殿香气浓烈。
English: The curtain is quiet, the palace aroma is strong.

古文：圆火夕耀，方水朝清。
现代文：祭天的圆坛在晚间灯火照耀，祭地的方丘在早晨水色澄清。
English: The round altar of the festival shines with lights in the evening, and the square mound of the festival clears up in the morning.

古文：金枝委树，翠镫伫县。
现代文：树上有金枝玉叶，悬挂着翠色的灯盏。
English: There are gold leaves on the trees and emerald lanterns hanging from the branches.

古文：渟波澄宿，华汉浮天。
现代文：平静的水波映着星宿，华美的银河浮在天空。
English: The calm water waves reflect the stars, and the gorgeous Milky Way floats in the sky.

古文：恭事既夙，虔心有慕。
现代文：一向恭谨侍奉，虔诚的心有所向往。
English: He has always served respectfully, and his pious heart yearns for more.

古文：仰降皇灵，俯宁依祚。
现代文：迎接皇灵降临，安定善美的皇位。
English: To welcome the arrival of the Emperor's spirit, and the stability of the good and beautiful imperial throne.

古文：皇帝入庙北门奏《永至乐》歌词：皇明鬯矣，孝容以昭。
现代文：皇帝入庙北门奏《永至乐》歌词：皇帝圣明畅达，孝礼得以显示。
English: The emperor enters the north gate of the temple and plays "Eternal Bliss" Lyrics: The emperor's wisdom is clear, and filial piety can be shown.

古文：銮华羽，拂汉涵滈。
现代文：行进的车驾仪仗，上拂云汉而下映水光。
English: The marching car drove ceremoniously, whisking clouds up and down to reflect the light of water.

古文：申申嘉夜，翊翊休朝。
现代文：多么舒和的良夜，多么虔敬的吉朝。
English: What a soothing good night, what a pious good morning.

古文：行金景送，步玉风《韶》。
现代文：步行有金饰玉佩之声，伴随着好风美景。
English: On foot, there is the sound of gold jewelry, accompanied by a good wind and beautiful scenery.

古文：师承祀则，肃对禋祧。
现代文：祭典一脉相承，恭敬地祭天祭祖。
English: The festival follows the same lineage, respectfully honoring the ancestors of the festival.

古文：太祝稞地奏登歌乐词二章：
现代文：太祝裸地奏登歌乐词二章：
English: Too Zhu naked to play the song lyrics of the second chapter:

古文：帝容承祀，练时涓日。
现代文：皇帝承奉祭礼，选择吉曰良时。
English: The emperor followed the ritual and chose the auspicious time.

古文：九重彻关，四灵宾室。
现代文：上天打开天门，四方神灵入室作客。
English: Heaven opened the gate of heaven, and the gods of the four directions entered the room as guests.

古文：肃倡函音，庶旄委佾。
现代文：引领林钟音律，旄舞挥动牛尾。
English: The ringing of the bells in the forest leads the way, and the wagging of the cow's tail accompanies the breakdance.

古文：休灵告飨，嘉荐尚芬。
现代文：神灵前来受享，嘉美的祭品多么芬芳。
English: How fragrant are the offerings of Jimei, which the gods come to enjoy.

古文：玉瑚饰列，桂簋昭陈。
现代文：盛粮食的玉瑚和桂簋，都显明而优美地陈列。
English: The jade arrow and the cinnamon stick, both of which are rich in grain, are clearly and beautifully displayed.

古文：具司选礼，翼翼振振。
现代文：司仪齐整行礼，多么庄严振作。
English: The master of ceremonies performs the formalities in unison, what a solemn gesture.

古文：稞崇祀典，酎恭孝时。
现代文：祭礼崇尚奠酒，孝时恭进酎金。
English: The festival reveres libation, and filial piety is rewarded with liquor.

古文：礼无爽物，信靡愧词。
现代文：礼物没有差错，使者没有愧词。
English: The gift is without fault, and the messenger without reproach.

古文：精华孚鬯，诚监昭通。
现代文：精神孚信畅达，诚监昭明贯通。
English: The spirit of Fuxin is unimpeded, and the supervision of sincerity is clear.

古文：升歌翊节，下管调风。
现代文：堂上歌唱配合音节，堂下管弦伴奏歌唱。
English: The choir sings in tune with the syllables, and the orchestra accompanies the singing.

古文：皇心履变，敬明尊亲。
现代文：皇帝谨慎小心，恭敬地侍奉尊亲。
English: The emperor cautiously and respectfully served his cousin.

古文：大哉孝德，至矣交神。章皇太后神室奏《章德凯容》之乐舞歌词：
现代文：孝德多么伟大，贯通神灵已至极境。章皇太后神室奏《章德凯容》之乐舞歌词：
English: How great filial piety is, penetrating the spirit of the gods to the extreme. The music and dance lyrics of "Chang De Kai Rong" performed by Empress Dowager Zhang's Divine Office:

古文：幽瑞浚灵，表彰嫔圣。
现代文：幽深的神灵吉祥，表彰我章皇太后。
English: The profound deities are auspicious and commend the Empress Dowager Zhang to me.

古文：翊载徽文，敷光崇庆。
现代文：文册中记载着美好的辅佐业绩，大放光辉而积聚吉庆。
English: The beautiful performance of the assistant is recorded in the textbook, and the glory and good luck are accumulated.

古文：上纬缠祥，中维饰咏。
现代文：在天上有五星佐的瑞征，在宫中维系后妃的美德。
English: In heaven, there is the five-star Sui Zheng, in the palace to maintain the virtue of the concubine.

古文：永属辉猷，联昌景命。
现代文：长久追随皇帝的光辉谋划，共同昌大上天赋予的使命。
English: To follow the brilliant plan of the emperor for a long time, and to jointly carry out the mission given by heaven.

古文：昭皇太后神室奏《昭德凯容》之乐舞歌词，明帝造：
现代文：昭皇太后神室奏《昭德凯容》之乐舞歌词：明帝作
English: Music and dance of "Zhao De Kai Rong" performed by the Divine Office of Empress Dowager Zhao Lyrics: Written by Emperor Ming

古文：表灵缠象，缵仪纬风。
现代文：上见曰月五星天象，下承辅佐风仪。
English: Above, the five-star constellation of the moon and the stars; below, the Suo Feng instrument.

古文：膺华丹耀，登瑞紫穹。
现代文：膺受五星光辉，升登天空祥瑞。
English: The dragonfly receives the five-star radiance and ascends to the sky auspiciously.

古文：训形霄宇，武彰宸宫。
现代文：效法天体运行，在皇宫中冠带鲜明。
English: Following the celestial bodies, the crown is clearly visible in the royal palace.

古文：腾芬金会，写德声容。
现代文：金杯玉盏腾起芬芳，音乐舞蹈表现美德。
English: The gold cup and the jade lamp release fragrance, and the music and dance show virtue.

古文：宣皇太后神室奏《宣德凯容》之乐舞歌词，明帝造：
现代文：宣皇太后神室奏《宣德凯容》之乐舞歌词：明帝作
English: Music and dance of "Xuan De Kai Rong" performed by the Divine Office of Empress Dowager Xuan Lyrics: By Emperor Ming

古文：天枢凝耀，地纽俪辉。
现代文：天枢凝聚明照，地纽也偕有光辉。
English: The center of heaven gathers light, and the nexus of the earth is also radiant.

古文：联光腾世，炳庆翔机。
现代文：天地联光而腾耀于世，吉庆炳焕而机务得理。
English: Heaven and earth are united and shine brightly in the world, and auspicious and auspicious things are radiant and opportune.

古文：薰蔼中宇，景缠上微。
现代文：人间充满和气，天上曰月放光。
English: The world is full of harmony, and the moon shines brightly in the sky.

古文：玉颂镂德，金龠传徽。
现代文：玉磬和金籥演奏起来，传颂她的美德。
English: The tambourine and cymbals play, proclaiming her virtues.

古文：皇帝还东壁受福酒奏《嘉时》之乐舞词：
现代文：皇帝还束壁受福酒奏《嘉时》之乐舞词：
English: The emperor also received the blessing of the wine and played the music and dance lyrics of "Jia Shi":

古文：礼荐洽，福时昌。
现代文：献酒之礼和协，受福之时昌盛。
English: The gift of wine brings peace and harmony, and prosperity comes when you are blessed.

古文：皇圣膺嘉祐，帝业凝休祥。
现代文：皇上受神明佑助，帝王大业大吉大利。
English: The emperor was blessed by the gods, and the emperor's great undertaking was a great success.

古文：居极乘景运，宅德瑞中王。
现代文：居位而乘大运，存德而有帝王的祥瑞。
English: Take advantage of the great fortune by staying in place, and have the emperor's good fortune by being virtuous.

古文：澄明临四表，精华延八乡。
现代文：君临天下而政治清明，光辉照遍八方。
English: The emperor reigns supreme, the politics are clear, and the glory shines in all directions.

古文：洞海周声惠，彻宇丽乾光。灵庆缠世祉，鸿烈永无疆。
现代文：全国处处歌颂惠德，整个天空充满阳光，世世代代受神灵的福庆，伟大功业永垂不朽。
English: All over the country, people sing the praises of Hui De, the whole sky is full of sunshine, generations of generations have been blessed by the gods, and great achievements are immortal.

古文：送神奏《昭夏》之乐舞歌词二章：
现代文：送神奏《昭夏》之乐舞歌词二章：
English: The music and dance lyrics of the second chapter of the "Summer Song" are as follows:

古文：大孝备，盛礼丰。
现代文：大孝备至，盛礼丰美。
English: Great filial piety is prepared, and the feast is rich.

古文：神安留，嘉乐充。
现代文：神灵安留，嘉乐洪亮。
English: God's spirit remains, and joy and happiness shine brightly.

古文：旋驾耸，泛青穹。
现代文：起身回驾，浮游青穹。
English: Get up and drive back, floating in the blue sky.

古文：延八虚，辟四空。
现代文：延引八虚，疏通四空。
English: Delay the eight eclipses, clear the four skies.

古文：蔼流景，肃行风。
现代文：蔼蔼流影，肃肃行风。
English: An amiable figure, with a solemn demeanor.

古文：昭融教，缉风度。
现代文：昭明和美教化，缉理仪容气度。
English: Zhao Ming and aesthetic education, the appearance of the appearance of the appearance.

古文：恋皇灵，结深慕。
现代文：不舍神灵离去，结下深深思慕。
English: Not willing to let the gods go, he knotted a deep yearning.

古文：解羽县，辍华树。
现代文：停止音乐歌舞，不再欣赏花树。
English: Stop listening to music, singing and dancing, and stop admiring the flowers and trees.

古文：背璇除，端玉辂。
现代文：离开白石台阶，乘上华美大车。
English: Leave the white stone steps and take the magnificent carriage.

古文：流汪惛，庆国步。
现代文：流德多么深广，庆祝国家时运。
English: How profound and broad the stream of virtue is, celebrating the national fortune.

古文：皇帝诣便殿奏《休成》之乐歌词：
现代文：皇帝诣便殿奏《休成》之乐歌词：
English: Emperor Zou Bin's palace plays the music of "Hue Cheng"

古文：酾醴具登，嘉俎咸荐。
现代文：斟满的甜酒一一呈上，美味的佳肴都已进献。
English: Bottles of sweet wine were presented one by one, and the delicious dishes had all been presented.

古文：飨洽诚陈，礼周乐遍。
现代文：享受和协而群臣献诚，礼节周到而音乐遍奏。
English: Enjoy the harmony while the ministers are devoted, the etiquette is thoughtful and the music is played.

古文：祝词罢稞，序容辍县。
现代文：祝词已献而停赐饮，礼节已行而止音乐。
English: The eulogies have been offered, but the drinking has stopped; the etiquette has been observed, but the music has stopped.

古文：跸动端庭，銮回严殿。
现代文：正庭开始清道，皇上车驾回到便殿。
English: The main court began to clear, and the emperor drove back to the hall.

古文：神仪驻景，华汉亭虚。
现代文：曰月留驻光影，银河停蓄虚空。
English: That is to say, the moon remains a light and shadow, and the Milky Way stops accumulating the void.

古文：八灵案卫，三祗解途。
现代文：八种灵物进行巡卫，三位地神发送路途。
English: Eight kinds of spiritual creatures patrol, and three gods of the earth lead the way.

古文：翠盖耀澄，璟奕凝宸。
现代文：翠色的华盖照耀清水，明亮的大旗凝映宸星。
English: The emerald canopy shines on the clear water, and the bright flag reflects the twinkling stars.

古文：玉镳息节，金辂怀音。
现代文：皇上的车驾停了下来，还像听到车轮滚动的声音。
English: The Emperor's carriage came to a halt, and the sound of the wheels seemed to rumble.

古文：式诚达孝，底心肃感。
现代文：尽忠诚而表孝思，内心充满严肃之感。
English: He is loyal and shows filial piety, and his heart is full of seriousness.

古文：追凭皇鉴，思承渊范。
现代文：追托上天鉴察，继承渊深的模范。
English: Relying on God's inspection, inheriting the profound model.

古文：神锡懋祉，四纬昭明。
现代文：神灵赐以大福，四纬昭昭显明。
English: God's Spirit bestows great blessings, which are clearly evident in the four dimensions.

古文：仰福帝徽，俯齐庶生。
现代文：上受天帝佑助，下治天下众生。
English: Above, he is aided by the heavenly emperor; below, he governs all beings in the world.

