古文：二十日晨起，小雨霏霏。
现代文：二十日早晨起床，小雨霏霏。
English: I woke up on the morning of the 20th, and it was drizzling.

古文：待夫，而饭后至。
现代文：等待派夫，可饭后才到。
English: Waiting for the postman, but he doesn't arrive until after dinner.

古文：乃雨止，而云不开。
现代文：于是雨停了，但云层不开。
English: So the rain stopped, but the clouds didn't.

古文：于是东向转入山峡，半里，循南崖之嘴转而北，循北崖之共半里，出一隘门，循西山之麓北行二里，山撞而成峒。
现代文：从这里向东转入山峡，半里，沿南面山崖的山嘴转向北，沿北面山崖的口共走半里，走出一个隘门，沿西山山麓北行二里，山体相撞而成酮。
English: From here, turn east into the gorge, half a mile, turn north along the promontory of the south-facing cliff, walk a total of half a mile along the mouth of the north-facing cliff, walk out of a narrow gate, walk two miles north along the foot of the West Mountain, and the mountains collide into ketones.

古文：乃转而东一里，又东出一隘门，即循北山之麓。
现代文：于是转向东一里，又向东走出一个隘门，立即沿北山的山麓走。
English: So he turned one mile to the east, walked out of a narrow gate to the east, and immediately walked along the foot of the North Mountain.

古文：又东一里上一岭，共一里，逾而下，复东行一里，随小水转而北。
现代文：又向东一里上登一座山岭，共一里，翻越后下走，又往东行一里，随小溪转向北。
English: And he went a mile eastward, and went up into a mountain, and went a mile, and passed over, and came down, and went a mile eastward, and turned northward by the brook.

古文：其处山峡长开东西两界，中行平畴，山俱深木密藤，不辨土石。
现代文：此处山峡长长地分开成了东西两列山，在中间行走在平旷的田野中，山上全是深树密藤，辨不出是土山还是石山。
English: Here, the mountain gorge is separated into two long mountain ranges, east and west. Walking in the middle, in the middle of a flat field, the mountain is full of deep trees and dense vines, and it is not possible to distinguish whether it is a dirt mountain or a rock mountain.

古文：共北二里半，渡小水，傍西麓北行。
现代文：共往北行二里半，渡过小溪，紧靠西麓向北行。
English: A total of two and a half miles northbound, across the creek, close to the western foot of the northbound.

古文：又二里，稍东北，经平畴半里，已复北入峡中。
现代文：又走二里，稍向东北，经平旷的田野走半里，不久又向北走入峡中。
English: I walked another two miles, a little to the northeast, half a mile through flat fields, and soon I was walking north into the canyon.

古文：其中水草沮洳，路循西麓，崎嵚而隘。
现代文：峡中满是水草泥沼，路沿西麓走，崎岖而狭窄。
English: The gorge is full of aquatic plants and mud, and the road along the western foot of the gorge is rugged and narrow.

古文：二里，渡峡而东上东岭，一里跻其巅，东下一里，抵其麓。
现代文：二里，越过山峡向东上登东岭，一里登上岭头，往东下走一里，抵达山麓。
English: Two miles, across the gorge to the east to climb Dongling, one mile to the top of the ridge, and one mile to the east to reach the foot of the mountain.

古文：其岭峻甚，西则下土而上石，东则上土而下石，皆极峭削，是为镇远、佶伦分界。
现代文：此岭十分陡峻，西面下边是土而上面是石，东面却上边是土而下面是石，都极其陡峭峻削，这里是镇远州、结伦州的分界处。
English: This ridge is very steep. On the west side, the lower side is dirt and the upper side is stone. On the east side, the upper side is dirt and the lower side is stone. Both are extremely steep. This is the dividing point of Zhenyuanzhou and Jielunzhou.

古文：又东行坞中一里，复稍上而下，共一里，逾小石脊。
现代文：又向东在山坞中行一里，又稍上走后下走，共一里，越过小石脊。
English: Another mile eastward in the middle of the dock, and then a little up and down, a total of one mile, over a small ridge.

古文：又东北平行半里，乃直下石崖中，半里，已望见佶伦村聚矣。
现代文：又向东北平缓行半里，于是一直下到石崖中，半里，已望见结伦的村落了。
English: I slowly walked half a mile to the northeast, and then I went down to the middle of the cliff. Within half a mile, I could already see the village of Yulun.

古文：既下，又东行平畴一里，有小水自西南山夹来，又一大溪自南来，二水合而北注，北望土山开拓。
现代文：下来后，又向东在平坦的田野中行一里，有小溪自西南山峡中流来，又有一条大溪自南流来，两条水流会合后往北流注，远望北方土山开阔。
English: After descending, it continued eastward for one mile in a flat field. A small stream flowed from the middle of the southwestern mountain gorge, and a large stream flowed from the south. After the two streams met, they flowed northward, and the open mountains of the north could be seen in the distance.

古文：乃涉溪而东。
现代文：于是涉到溪流东岸。
English: So I waded into the east bank of the stream.

古文：是为佶伦今作进结，止于铺舍。
现代文：这是结伦州，停在释站客馆中。
English: This is Jelenia Gora, parked in the Jiefang Guest House.

古文：适暮，微雨旋止。
现代文：适好天黑，微微下了些雨随即停了。
English: It was well after dark, a light drizzle fell and then it stopped.

古文：佶伦在向武东南，都结西南，土上林在其北，结安在其南。
现代文：都康州在镇安府东南，龙英州北面，胡润寨、下雷州东面，向武州西南，是左、右二江之间山脉主干经过之处，再往东就是镇远州、结伦州。
English: Dukang Prefecture is located in the southeast of Zhen'an Prefecture, the north of Longying Prefecture, the east of Hurun Village and Lower Leizhou, and the southwest of Wuzhou. It is the place where the main mountain range passes between the two rivers on the left and right. Further east is Zhenyuan Prefecture and Qilian Prefecture.

古文：其水自西南龙英山穴中流出，北流经结安，又北至佶伦，绕州宅前，复东北入山穴，出土上林而入右江。疑即志所称泓渰，从佶伦东北入石穴，出向武境、土上林，与枯榕俱入右江者。二十一日浓云密布而无雾。
现代文：当地人时常绑架行人转卖给交夷，如是壮年人可卖三十两黄金，老弱者也不下十两黄金。如结伦各土州相隔较远，那就辗转从邻州顺次卖出去；向当局控告，再辗转追寻赎买归来，但十人中不到二三人。结伦州在向武州东南，都结州西南，上林土县在它北面，结安州在它南面。这里的水流自西南龙英州的山洞中流出，向北流经结安州，又往北流到结伦州，绕过州衙府第前，再向东北流入山洞中，在上林土县流出后流入右江。二十一日浓云密布而无雾。
English: Locals often kidnap pedestrians and sell them to Jiaoying. If you are an adult, you can sell 30 taels of gold, and if you are old and weak, you can sell no less than 12 taels of gold. If the provinces of Jiaoying are far apart, you can sell them sequentially from neighboring provinces; you can complain to the authorities and then return to seek redemption, but there are less than two or three out of ten people. Jiaoying is southeast of Wuzhou, Du is southwest of Jiezhou, Shanglin is north of Jiaoying, and Jia'an is south of Jiaoying. The water flows here from the caves

古文：候夫未至。
现代文：等候派夫未到。
English: Wait for the courier to arrive.

古文：饭后散步东阜，得古梅一株，花蕊明密，幽香袭人。
现代文：饭后在东面的土山上散步，见到一棵古梅，花蕊明丽浓密，幽香袭人。
English: After dinner, I went for a walk on the hill to the east and saw an ancient plum tree. The flower buds were bright and dense, and the fragrance was intoxicating.

古文：徘徊其下不能去，折奇枝二，皆虬干珠葩。
现代文：徘徊在树下不能离去，折下两枝奇特的花枝，都是拳曲的枝干玉珠样的花朵。
English: Wandering under the tree, unable to leave, he broke off two strange flower branches, both of which were the branches and trunks of Boxing's jade-beaded flowers.

古文：南望竹崖间一岩岈然，披荆入之，其门北向。
现代文：望见南边竹丛石崖间一个岩洞十分深邃，拨开荆棘走入洞中，洞口向北。
English: Looking south, between the bamboo thicket and the rock cliff, a very deep cave can be seen. The thorns are pushed aside to enter the cave, and the cave opens to the north.

古文：由隘窦入，中分二岐，一南向入，一东南下，皆不甚深。
现代文：由窄洞中进去，从中分为两个岔洞，一个向南进去，一个向东南下走，都不怎么深。
English: Enter through the narrow hole, from which it is divided into two narrow holes, one to the south and one to the southeast, neither of which is very deep.

古文：还铺舍，觅火炙梅枝。
现代文：返回骚站客馆，找火来烤梅枝。
English: Back to the So Station Guest House, find a fire to roast plum branches.

古文：微雨飘扬，拈村醪对之，忘其为天涯岁暮也。
现代文：细雨飘扬，面对梅枝手捏乡村酿制的浊酒，忘了此时此地是天涯岁末了。
English: The drizzle is drifting, and in the face of plum branches hand-pinched from the countryside, I forget that this is the end of the world.

古文：既午雨止，日色熹微，夫始至，复少一名，久之乃得行。
现代文：中午后雨停了，天色微亮，脚夫这才来到，又少了一名，很久才得以上路。
English: After midday, the rain stopped and the sky brightened slightly. The porter had just arrived, and one person was missing. It took a long time to get on the road.

古文：从东南盘崖间小岩一里，路循坞而南，度小溪，有岐东向入土山。
现代文：从东南绕着山崖上的小岩洞走一里，路顺着山坞往南行，渡过小溪，有岔路向东走入土山中。
English: From the southeast, walk around the small rock cave on the cliff for one mile. The road follows the dock to the south, crosses the creek, and there is a forked road to the east into the mountains.

古文：从坞南行又一里，有岐西南溯大溪，结安、养利大道，为此中入郡者。
现代文：从坞中向南又行一里，有岔路往西南溯大溪而去，是去结安州、养利州的大道，是这一带进府城的路。
English: From the dock, it is another mile to the south, and there is a winding road to the southwest along the river, which is the road to Jianzhou and Yaolizhou, and this is the road to the capital.

古文：又正南行一里，折而东入土山之峡。
现代文：又向正南行一里，折向东走入土山的峡谷。
English: I walked one mile due south and turned east into the canyon of Tsuchiyama.

古文：从土峡中东行一里，遂跻土山而上。又一里，逾山之巅，即依岭南行。
现代文：此处西面是从镇远州来穿越过的地方，石峰峭拔聚集如林；东面是土山，自结伦州北面往南绕向西，远远裹住西面的石峰；中间是开阔的大山坞，也是从西南转向北去。
English: Here, to the west is a place that has been traversed from Zhenyuanzhou, and the stone peaks are clustered like a forest; to the east is the earthen mountain, from the north of Jielunzhou to the south and west, far from the stone peaks in the west; in the middle is the open large dock, also from the southwest to the north.

古文：一里，出南岭之巅，东向循岭半行，又一里，转南半里，又东下半里，抵山之麓。
现代文：从土山峡中向东行一里，于是登土山而上。又走一里，越过山顶，立即紧依山岭南走。一里，到达南岭的岭头，往东望去曲折的山谷东边又有石山远远排列，从东北环绕耸立到西南。向东沿山岭半中腰走，又是一里，转向南半里，又往东下行半里，抵达山麓。
English: From the Tu Shan Gorge, walk one mile eastward, then walk up the Tu Shan. Walk another mile, cross the top of the mountain, and immediately follow the mountains to the south. One mile, reach the ridge head of the South Ridge. Looking east, there are rocky mountains far away on the east side of the meandering valley, towering from the northeast to the southwest. Walk eastward along the ridge half-way, another mile, turn to the south half-mile, and walk down to the east half-mile to reach the foot of the mountain.

古文：遂从坞东南行二里，越一南来小水，又北越一西北来小水，得一村倚东山下，众夫遂哄然去。
现代文：于是从坞中往东南行二里，越过一条南来的小溪，又向北越过一条从西北来的小溪，见到一个村庄紧靠在东山下，众脚夫便哄然而去。
English: So they sailed two miles southeast from the dock, crossed a stream coming from the south, and crossed a stream coming from the northwest to the north. When they saw a village close to the eastern foot of the mountain, all the porters were lured away.

古文：余执一人絷之，始知其地为旧州，乃佶伦旧治，而今已移于西北大溪之上。
现代文：我拉住一人拘押了他，这才了解到此地是旧州，是结伦的旧治所，而现在已迁到西北的大溪之上。
English: I grabbed one man and detained him, only to learn that this was the old prefecture, the old seat of power in Gulen, and that it had now been moved to the north-west over the river.

古文：两处止隔一土山，相去十里，而州、站乃互相推委。
现代文：两地只隔着一座土山，相距十里，而州里和骚站便互相推诱。
English: The two places are only separated by a dirt hill, ten miles apart, and Shuli and Suo stations push each other.

古文：从新州至都结，直东逾山去，今则曲而东南，欲委之旧州也。
现代文：从新州到都结州，应一直向东翻山而去，现在却绕到东南来，是想把我推给旧州。
English: From Xinzhou to Dujiuzhou, I should have gone all the way to the east through the mountains, but now I have come around to the southeast, trying to push me to the old state.

古文：始，当站者避去，见余絷其夫，一老人乃出而言曰： 铺司姓廖，今已他出，余当代为催夫。
现代文：起始，主管骚站的人躲避出去，见我拘押了他的脚夫，一位老人才出来讲话说： 掌管骚站的人姓廖，今天已出门去别的地方，我当代为催派差夫。
English: At the beginning, the person in charge of the police station hid out and saw that I had detained his porter. An old man came out to speak and said: The person in charge of the police station, surnamed Liao, has left today to go somewhere else. I am the one who sent the policeman.

古文：但都结须一日程，必明日乃可。 
现代文：但去都结须要一天路程，必得要明天才行了。 
English: But it's a day's journey to the capital, so it'll have to be tomorrow.

古文：候余上架餐饭，余不得已，从之。
现代文：又让我上高架的茅屋去吃饭，我不得已，听从了他。
English: He also asked me to go to dinner in an elevated thatched hut. I had no choice but to obey him.

古文：检行李，失二鸡，乃镇远所送者。仍絷前夫不释。
现代文：检查行李，丢失了两只鸡，仍扣押先前那个脚夫不放。
English: Checked the luggage, lost two chickens, still detained the previous porter.

古文：久之，二村人召鸡，释夫去。
现代文：很久后，村里两个人去召人找鸡，放脚夫去了。
English: After a long time, two people in the village went to call someone to look for the chicken and let the porter go.

古文：是日止行十里，遂止旧州今作离州。二十二日早起，天无雾而云密布。
现代文：这天只走了十里，便停在旧州。二十二日早晨起床，天上无雾但浓云密布。
English: On the 22nd, I got up in the morning and there was no fog in the sky, but there were thick clouds.

古文：饭后，村人以二鸡至，比前差小。
现代文：饭后，村里人拿了两只鸡来，比先前的略小。
English: After the meal, the villagers brought two chickens, slightly smaller than before.

古文：既而夫至，乃行。
现代文：随后脚夫来到，于是动身。
English: Then the porter came and they set off.

古文：一里，东北复登土山，四里，俱从土山脊上行。
现代文：一里，向东北又登土山，四里路，全是在土山脊上行走。
English: One mile to the northeast, and then up the hill, four miles, all walking on the ridge.

古文：已下一坞，水乃东北行，遂西北复上土山，一里逾脊。
现代文：不久下到一个山坞中，水流于是向东北流，我就向西北再次上登土山，一里越过山脊。
English: Soon I went down to a dock, and the water flowed to the northeast, so I went up to the northwest and climbed up the hill again, crossing the ridge for a mile.

古文：又东北行岭上二里，转而西北二里，始与佶伦西来路合。
现代文：又往东北行走在岭上二里，转向西北二里，这才与结伦州向西来的路会合。
English: I walked to the northeast for two miles on the ridge and turned to the northwest for two miles, and this is where I met the road coming west from the state of Zulun.

古文：乃下山，得一村曰陆廖村今作陆连，数家之聚在山半。
现代文：于是下山，走到一个村庄叫陆廖村，是个在山腰上有几家人的村落。
English: So I went down the mountain and walked to a village called Lu Liao village, a village with several families on the mountainside.

古文：其夫哄然去，余执一人絷之，盖其夫复欲委之村人也。
现代文：那些脚夫哄然而去，我拉住一人扣押了他，大概是这些脚夫又想把我推给村里人了。
English: The porters ran away. I stopped one of them and detained him. It was probably the porters who wanted to push me back to the villagers.

古文：度其地止去佶伦东十余里，因其委旧州，旧州欲委此村，故展转迂曲。
现代文：估计此地只离东面的结伦州十多里，因为那些人推给旧州，旧州人想推给此村，所以辗转绕弯子。
English: It is estimated that this place is only more than ten miles away from the eastern state of Kelen, because those people pushed it to the old state, and the old state people wanted to push it to this village, so they turned around.

古文：始村人不肯承，所絷夫遍号呼之，其逃者亦走山巅遍呼村人。
现代文：开始村里人不肯承当派夫，但被押的脚夫遍处呼唤村里人，那些逃走的脚夫也在山头奔走遍叫村里人派夫。
English: At first, the villagers did not want to accept being sent, but the arrested porters called out to the villagers everywhere, and the fleeing porters also ran all over the mountains to call the villagers to send.

古文：久之，一人至，邀余登架，以鸡黍饷而聚夫，余乃释所絷者。
现代文：很久后，一个人来到，邀请我登上高架的茅屋，用鸡肉饭食款待并招集脚夫，我于是放了扣押的脚夫。
English: After a long time, a person came and invited me to go up to the elevated hut, treat me with chicken meal and call porters, so I released the detained porters.

古文：日午乃得夫，遂东上。
现代文：时光到中午才得到脚夫，于是向东上岭。
English: It wasn't until midday that we got a porter, so we headed east up the ridge.

古文：岭头有岐，直北者为果化道，余从东岐循岭南而东向行。
现代文：岭头有岔路，一直往北去的是通果化州的路，我从东边的岔道沿岭南向东行。
English: There is a fork in the road at the head of the ridge. The road that leads all the way to the north is the road that leads to Guohazhou. I followed the fork on the east side along the south of the ridge to the east.

古文：半里，遂东北下山，一里而及山坞，有小水自北坞中来，折而东去。
现代文：半里，便往东北下山，一里后到达山坞，有小溪从北面山坞中流来，折向东流去。
English: After half a mile, I went down the mountain to the northeast, and after one mile I reached the dock. There was a stream coming from the middle of the dock on the north side, and it turned to the east.

古文：渡之复北上岭，一里逾岭北，循之东向行。
现代文：渡过小溪又向北上岭，一里越到岭北，沿山岭向东行。
English: Cross the stream and head north up the ridge, one mile to the north of the ridge, and head east along the ridge.

古文：半里，有岐直东从岭畔去，即都结大道。以就村故，余从东北岐下山。
现代文：半里，有岔路一直向东从岭畔而去；因为要去就近的村子的缘故，我从东北的岔路下山。
English: For half a mile, there was a dirt road heading east from the edge of the ridge; because I wanted to go to a nearby village, I took the dirt road from the northeast down the mountain.

古文：复一里抵山坞，有小水自北来，折而东南去。
现代文：又走一里抵达山坞，有小溪自北流来，折向东南流去。
English: I walked another mile and arrived at the dock. There was a stream coming from the north and flowing to the southeast.

古文：渡之，复东北逾一小岭，共一里半，前所渡水穿西南山夹来，又一小水从西北山夹下，共会而东，路遂因之。
现代文：渡过小溪，再向东北越过一座小岭，共走一里半，前边渡过的溪水穿过西南的山峡流来，又有一条小溪从西北的山峡中下流，共同会合后往东流，路便顺着水流走。
English: They crossed a stream and then a ridge to the northeast, walking a total of one and a half miles. The stream they crossed in front of them flowed through a mountain gorge to the southwest, and another stream flowed down from the middle of a mountain gorge to the northwest. After meeting together, they flowed eastward, and the road followed the water flow.

古文：屡左右渡，凡四渡，共东行三里，又一小水从南坞来合之北去。
现代文：屡次渡到左岸渡到右岸，共渡了四次，共往东行三里，又有一条小溪从南面的山坞中流来与它合流后向北流去。
English: Repeatedly passed to the left bank, passed to the right bank, passed a total of four times, a total of three miles eastbound, and a stream from the middle of the dock in the south came to join it and then flowed north.

古文：又东渡之，复上岭，一里，逾岭东下，其水复从北而南。
现代文：又向东渡过溪流，再上岭，一里，越岭向东下走，那溪水又从北流向南。
English: He also crossed the stream to the east, and then walked up the ridge, one mile, and then walked down the ridge to the east. The water of the stream flowed from north to south.

古文：又东渡之，复上山，随之东行一里半，水直东去，路折入东北峡。
现代文：又向东渡过，再上山，顺溪流往东行一里半，溪水一直往东流去，路折进东北的峡中。
English: I crossed to the east again, and then went up the mountain. I followed the stream eastward for a mile and a half. The stream continued to flow eastward, and the road turned into the northeastern gorge.

古文：一里，得数家之聚，曰那印村。
现代文：一里，走到一个几家人的村落，叫那印村。
English: I walked one mile to a village of several families, called Naayin village.

古文：夫复委之，其郎头他出，予执一夫絷而候之。
现代文：脚夫又推给此村，村中的郎头去别的地方了，我拉住一个脚夫扣押起来等候郎头。
English: The porter was pushed to this village again, and the village's steward went elsewhere. I grabbed one of the porters and held him waiting for the steward.

古文：时甫下午，天复明霁，所行共二十余里。
现代文：此时刚到下午，天重新转晴，所走的路共有二十多里。
English: At this time, just after noon, the sky turned clear again, and the total distance traveled was more than twenty miles.

古文：问去都结尚一日程，而中途无村可歇，须明日早行，即郎头在亦不及去矣。
现代文：问知距都结还有一天的路程，可途中无村庄可以停歇，必须明天早晨动身，即使郎头在也来不及前去了。
English: There was still a day to go, but there was no village to stop at on the way. They had to leave tomorrow morning, and even if the head of the family was there, it would be too late to go.

古文：余为怏怏，登架坐而待之。
现代文：我为此闷闷不乐，登上高架茅屋坐等郎头。
English: I sulked about it, and went up to the high-pitched hut to wait for the farmer.

古文：久之郎头返，已薄暮矣。
现代文：很久之后郎头返回来，已是傍晚了。
English: After a long time, the farmer returned, and it was already late in the evening.

古文：其饷以鲫为供。
现代文：他用螂鱼作饭食来款待。
English: He treated himself to a meal of mantis fish.

古文：二十三日早雾四塞，既饭而日已东出。
现代文：二十三日早晨浓雾四处充塞，吃饭后旭日已在东方升起。
English: On the morning of the 23rd, dense fog was everywhere. After dinner, the rising sun had already risen in the east.

古文：促夫至，仍欲从东北坞行。
现代文：催促脚夫来后，仍想从东北的山坞中前行。
English: After urging the porter to come, he still wanted to go forward from the dock in the northeast.

古文：余先问都结道，当东逾岭，窥其意，以都结道远，复将委之有村处也。
现代文：我事先问知去都结的路，应该向东越岭，窥测他们的意思，因为去都结的路远，又将把我推给有村庄的地方了。
English: I inquired in advance about the way to the capital, and I should go east across the ridge and spy on their intentions, because the way to the capital is far, and it will push me to a place with a village.

古文：盖其地先往果化，则有村可代，而东南往都结，无可委之村，故那印夫必不肯东南。
现代文：原来此地先去果化州，就有村子可以替换，但往东南去都结，没有可以推楼的村子，所以那印村的脚夫必定不肯往东南走。
English: Originally, if you go to Gouhazhou first, there are villages that can be replaced, but if you go to the southeast, there are no villages that can be built, so the porters of Na'in village will certainly refuse to go to the southeast.

古文：久之，一人来劝余，此地东往龙村，名囤龙，亦佶伦。即都结属，但稍迂，多一番换夫耳。
现代文：很久后，一人来劝我，从此地向东去龙村，就是都结州的属地，仅只是稍微绕点弯子，多换一次夫罢了。
English: After a long time, someone came to persuade me to go east from here to Longcun, which belongs to Duzhou, just to make a slight detour and change my husband once more.

古文：余不得已，从之。乃东北入坞中，半里，复与前西南来之水遇，遂循之东向行。
现代文：我不得已，听从了他，于是向东北走入山坞中，半里，又与前一天从西南流来的溪水相遇，便沿着溪水向东行。
English: I had no choice but to listen to him, so I walked half a mile northeast into the dockyard, where I met the stream that had flowed from the southwest the day before, and followed the stream to the east.

古文：二里，下坞中，忽望见北坞石山回耸。
现代文：二里，下到坞中，忽然望见北面的山坞石山回绕高耸。
English: Two miles down to the middle of the dock, I suddenly saw the dock on the north side, surrounded by the towering mountains of Ishiyama.

古文：又半里，路右东行之水，又与一东南来水会而北去。
现代文：又走半里，路右边往东流的溪水，又与一条从东南流来的溪水会合后向北流去。
English: After another half-mile, the east-flowing stream on the right side of the road joins up with a stream coming from the southeast and flows north.

古文：东向涉之，复上岭，东北一里，逾岭上。
现代文：向东涉过溪水，又上岭，往东北行一里，越到岭上。
English: I waded eastward across the stream, then up the ridge, traveled one mile to the northeast, and crossed over to the ridge.

古文：又北行岭脊半里，望西北石山与所登土山分条而东，下隔绝壑，有土脊一枝横属其间，前所渡北流之水，竟透脊而入其坞穴中，不从山涧行矣。
现代文：又向北在岭脊上前行半里，远望西北的石山与所登的土山分为条状延向东，下边隔着断绝的壑谷，有一支土山山脊横向连接在其间，先前渡过的向北流的溪水，竟然透过山脊后流入山坞里的洞穴中，不从山涧中流了。
English: I also walked northward on the ridge for half a mile. The stone mountain in the northwest and the earthen mountain I climbed were divided into strips and stretched to the east. The lower side was separated by a broken valley. There was a earthen mountain ridge horizontally connected between them. The stream water that had previously flowed northward actually flowed through the ridge and into the cave in the dock, and did not flow from the mountains.

古文：路既逾岭，循岭上东行三里，过一脊，又平行一里，始东南下。
现代文：路越过岭后，沿着岭上向东行三里，越过一道山脊，又平缓地前行一里，这才向东南下山。
English: After crossing the ridge, the road traveled east along the ridge for three miles, crossed a ridge, and slowly traveled one mile before descending to the southeast.

古文：一里半，及坞底，忽见溪水一泓深碧盈涧，随之东下，渐闻潺潺声，想即入脊之水至此而出也。
现代文：一里半，走到坞底，忽然望见一片深碧色的溪水充盈在山涧里，顺着溪水向东下走，渐渐听到潺潺的水声，猜想就是流入山脊的溪水到此地流出来了。
English: A mile and a half later, when I reached the bottom of the dock, I suddenly saw a deep blue stream filling the mountainside. As I followed the stream to the east, I gradually heard the sound of rushing water. I guessed that the stream water flowing into the ridge had flowed out here.

古文：东行半里，又有小水自东峡而出，溯之行一里，溪四壑转，始见溪田如掌。
现代文：东行半里，又有小溪自东面峡中流出，溯溪行一里，溪水回绕着壑谷流转，开始见溪畔有如手•掌大的田地。
English: Half a mile to the east, there is a small stream flowing out of the East Face Gorge, follow the stream for a mile, the stream flows back and forth around Shibuya, and you begin to see the streamside like a field the size of your hand.

古文：复随之东南行一里，水穷峡尽，遂东上一里，登岭。
现代文：再沿溪水向东南行一里，溪水到头峡谷完后，就向东上走一里，登岭。
English: Then walk one mile southeast along the stream. When the stream reaches the end of the canyon, walk one mile east and climb the ridge.

古文：平行岭北半里，又东南坦下者半里，过一脊，又东北逾岭半里而上，逾其阴，望东北坞中，开洋成塍。
现代文：平缓地行走在岭北半里，又往东南平缓地下走半里，越过一条山脊，又向东北越岭半里后登上去，越到岭北，望见东北山坞中，非常开阔，垦为田亩。
English: Walked smoothly for half a mile in the northern part of the ridge, then walked for half a mile in the southeastern part of the ridge, crossed a ridge, crossed the ridge to the northeast for half a mile and climbed up, crossed to the northern part of the ridge, looking into the middle of the northeastern mountain dock, very open, with fields.

古文：又东北半里，始东向下山，半里，午抵囤龙村今作隆屯。
现代文：又往东北行半里，开始向东下山，半里，中午时抵达囤龙村。
English: Another half-mile to the northeast, began to descend the mountain to the east, half-mile, at noon arrived in Longjing Village.

古文：土人承东往果化，不肯北向都结，亦以都结无村代也。
现代文：当地人接受差役向东前去果化州，不肯向北去都结州，也是因为去都结没有村子替换。
English: The local people accept the errand runners to go east to Guowazhou, but refuse to go north to Duyuizhou, also because there is no village to replace Duyuizhou.

古文：饭于郎头家。
现代文：在郎头家吃了饭。
English: We had dinner at the steward's house.

古文：下午夫至，郎头马姓者告余曰： 此地亦属佶伦，若往往送都结，其径已迂，恐都结村人不承，故本村不敢往；往果化则其村为顺，不敢违耳。 
现代文：下午脚夫来到时，姓马的郎头告诉我说： 此地也属于结伦州，如果送去都结州，那路已绕远了，恐怕都结州所属村子的人不接受，所以本村不敢去；前往果化州那么那一带的村庄驯顺，不敢违抗了。 
English: When the porter arrived in the afternoon, the groom, surnamed Ma, told me: This place also belongs to Yulun Prefecture. If you send it to Duyuzhou, the road is too far. I am afraid that the people of the village belonging to Duyuzhou will not accept it, so this village will not dare to go; if you go to Guohua Prefecture, then the villages in that area will be submissive and will not dare to resist.

古文：盖其地往都结，尚有一村曰捺村，仍须从所来高岭之脊南向而去。
现代文：原来从此地前往都结，还有一个村庄叫捺村，仍须从来时走过的高岭上的山脊向南而去。
English: Originally, there was a village called Xingcun on the way to Duye from here, but it still had to go south from the ridge on the high mountain that it had been walking on.

古文：是日上午行二十里而已。
现代文：我不得已，仍听从了他。及登轿时，还少三人，进山中遍处追赶他们。
English: I had to, but I still obeyed him. When I boarded the sedan, there were still three people missing, and I chased them all over the mountains.

古文：二十四日早起，霁色如洗；及饭，反有雾蒙四山；日出而净如故。
现代文：等他们来到时，落日已坠入西山，我有戒备之心，最终停下来不走了。二十四日清早起床，天色转晴碧空如洗；到吃饭时，反而有雾蒙在四面群山之上；日出后明净如故。
English: By the time they arrived, the sunset had already fallen into the West Mountain. I was on the alert and finally stopped walking. On the 24th, I got up early in the morning, the sky turned clear and the sky was so blue; when it was time to eat, there was fog on the mountains on all sides; after sunrise, it was clear as before.

古文：及起行，土人复欲走果化，不肯走都结，即迂往其村，亦不肯送。
现代文：到起身上路时，本地人又想走果化，不肯去都结，即绕道前往他们村子。
English: When they got on the road, the local people wanted to go to Juhua, but they didn't want to go all the way, so they took a detour to their village.

古文：盖与都结有仇杀，恐其执之也。
现代文：原来他们与都结互相仇杀，害怕被都结抓住。
English: It turned out that they were feuding with Touzie and were afraid of being caught by him.

古文：余强之不能，遂复送向那印。
现代文：我不能强迫他们，最终又送向那印村。
English: I can't force them and end up sending them to Nain village.

古文：盖其正道在旧州，此皆迂曲之程也。
现代文：原来去都结的正道在旧州，这些都是曲折绕道的路程。
English: Originally, the right road to the capital was in the old state, but these are all tortuous detours.

古文：遂西南行田陇间，半里，穿石隙登土山西向平上，半里及其巅。
现代文：于是向西南行走在田野间，半里，穿过石缝登土山向西平缓上走，半里到达山顶。
English: So I walked southwest, half a mile between fields, through a stone crevice, up a dirt hill, and slowly walked up to the west plain, half a mile to the top of the mountain.

古文：又半里，越岭而南，稍下度一脊。
现代文：又是半里，越岭往南走，稍下走越过一条山脊。
English: Another half-mile, over the ridge to the south, a short walk down over a ridge.

古文：又平上半里，复逾巅西下。
现代文：又平缓上行半里，再越过山头往西下山。
English: Another gentle half-mile uphill, then over the mountain to the west downhill.

古文：一里，及坞中，遂循水痕西北行。
现代文：一里，到达坞中，于是顺着溪水流淌的痕迹往西北行。
English: One mile later, we arrived at the dock, so we followed the trail of the stream to the northwest.

古文：一里，有小水自北坞来，与东来小水合而西去。
现代文：一里，有小溪自北面山坞中流来，与东来的小溪合流后往西流去。
English: For a mile, a stream flows from the middle of the dock on the north side, merges with a stream coming from the east, and then flows west.

古文：又随之西一里，复有小水自北坞来，与东来之水合而南去。
现代文：又顺溪流向西一里，又有小溪从北面山坞中流来，与东来的溪水合流后往南流去。
English: There is also a stream that flows west for a mile, and a small stream that flows from the middle of the dock on the north side, merging with the stream from the east and flowing south.

古文：路西上山，直上者一里半，平行岭上者二里，又西向下者一里半，下及坞底。
现代文：路向西上山，一直上走一里半，平缓地在岭上行二里，又向西下走一里半，下到坞底。
English: The road goes west up the mountain, up to a mile and a half, slowly up the ridge for two miles, and then west down a mile and a half, down to the bottom of the dock.

古文：忽有水自南峡来，涵碧深沉，西向去，过坞半里，从北山西上一里，登岭上又一里，稍下，过一脊复上，始依岭北，旋依岭南，俱西向平行岭上，南望高岭，即旧州走都结者。
现代文：忽然有溪水自南面峡中流来，澄碧深沉，向西流去。穿过山坞有半里，从北山向西上登一里，登到岭上又走一里，稍下走，越过一条山脊又上走，开始时靠着岭北走，随即靠着岭南走，都是向西平行在岭上，远望南边的高岭，就是由旧州通向都结的地方。
English: Suddenly, there was a stream coming from the middle of Nanmen Gorge. It was clear and deep, and it flowed westward. It ran through the dock for half a mile, climbed westward from the North Mountain for a mile, climbed to the ridge for another mile, went down a bit, crossed a ridge and went up again. At the beginning, it went north of the ridge, and then south of the ridge. It was parallel to the west on the ridge, looking south to the high ridge, which is the place leading from the old state to the capital.

古文：共三里始西南下，一里半而及其坞，则前所过南峡之水，与那印之水东西齐去，而北入石山之穴。
现代文：共三里才向西南下山，一里半后到达山坞，就见前边走过的南面峡谷中的溪水，与那印村流来的溪水一东一西齐头流去，而后向北流入石山的洞穴中。
English: It took a total of three miles to go down the mountain to the southwest, and after a mile and a half to reach the dock, I saw the stream in the southern canyon that I walked in front of, flowing east to west with the stream from Na'in village, and then flowing north into the caves of Stone Mountain.

古文：截流而西，溯东来之水三里，饭于那印。
现代文：横渡溪流往西行，溯东来的溪水走三里，在那印村吃饭。
English: Cross the stream to the west, walk three miles through the stream water coming from the east, and eat in that Indian village.

古文：候夫至下午，不肯由小径向都结，仍返佶伦。
现代文：等候派夫直到下午，他们不肯由小径去都结，仍返回结伦州。
English: After waiting for Paif until the afternoon, they did not want to leave the trail to Tsengdu and returned to Gulen prefecture.

古文：初由村左西北上山，转西南共一里，登岭上行。
现代文：最初由村子左侧向西北上山，转向西南共走一里，登到岭上走。
English: At first, go up the mountain from the left side of the village to the northwest, turn to the southwest for a total of one mile, and go up to the ridge.

古文：西南五里，稍下，度一脊复上，西南行岭上六里，转出南坳。
现代文：向西南五里，略下走，越过一条山脊又上走，向西南在岭上行六里，转出南面的山坳。
English: Go five miles southwest, go down a little, cross a ridge and go up again, go six miles southwest on the ridge, turn out of the southern mountains.

古文：又西南行六里，稍东转，仍向西南，始东见旧州在东南山谷，佶伦尖山在西南山谷。
现代文：又往西南行六里，稍向东转，仍走向西南，这才向东望见旧州在东南的山谷里，结伦州所在的尖山在西南的山谷里。
English: After another six miles to the southwest, a slight turn to the east, and still heading southwest, I looked east and saw the old prefecture in the southeast valley, and Jianshan, where Kailun prefecture is located, in the southwest valley.

古文：又西二里，始下，南渡坞塍，始见塍水出北矣。
现代文：又向西二里，开始下山，向南越过坞中的田野，这才见田间的水从北边流出了。
English: After another two miles to the west, he began to descend the mountain, crossing the fields in the dock to the south, only to see the water in the fields flow out from the north.

古文：又南逾山半里，又渡塍逾小山一里，得一村颇大，日已暮。
现代文：又向南翻山半里，又穿过田野翻越小山一里，遇上一个大点的村庄，夭色已晚。
English: Another half-mile to the south, another mile through the fields and over the hill, and I came across a larger village. It was too late.

古文：从其南渡一支流，复与南来大溪遇。
现代文：从村南渡过一条支流，再次与南来的大溪相遇。
English: I crossed a tributary from the south of the village and again encountered a large stream coming from the south.

古文：是日约行四十余里，皆迂路也。
现代文：往南越过一条土垅，溯大溪向西南行走在田野间，又走一里半到了结伦州。
English: I crossed a mound to the south, followed the stream to the southwest, walked through the fields, and walked another mile and a half to Kulen County.

古文：二十五日凌晨，权州者复送二里，至北村，坐而促夫者竟日，下午始行。
现代文：州衙宅第无围墙，州官姓冯还很幼小。又向南渡过大溪，住宿在代理州官的人家里。二十五日凌晨，代理州官的人又送了二里路，来到北村，坐着催促派夫用了一整天，下午才动身。
English: In the early morning of the 25th, the acting state official's person drove another two miles and came to the North Village, and sat and urged Paif to use the whole day, and only left in the afternoon.

古文：即从村东南上山一里，始东北逾岭，旋转东南，绕州后山脊行。
现代文：马上从村子向东南上山一里，开始时向东北越岭，随即转向东南，绕到州城后的山脊上行。
English: Immediately from the village to the southeast up the mountain one mile, at the beginning to the northeast over the ridge, then turn to the southeast, around the ridge behind the state capital.

古文：六里，少庭脊，复上行岭畔者三里，又稍下。
现代文：六里，在脊上稍停，又从岭畔上行三里，又稍稍下走。
English: Six miles, stop a little on the ridge, and then walk three miles up from the ridge, and then walk a little bit down.

古文：其处深茅没顶，舆人又妄指前山径中多贼阵，余辈遥望不见也。
现代文：此处茅草深得没过头顶，轿夫又胡乱指着说前面山路中有很多盗贼的巢穴，我们这些人离得远看不见。
English: Here, the thatch is too deep to see over your head, and the driver is pointing wildly, saying that there are many thieves' nests in the mountain road ahead, and that we are too far away to see them.

古文：又前下一里，渡脊，始与前往陆廖时所登山径遇，遂东瞰山谷，得旧州村落。
现代文：又向前下行一里，越过山脊，这才与先前去陆廖村时所登的山路相遇，于是向东俯瞰山谷中，见到旧州的村落。
English: Another mile downhill, over the ridge, only to meet the mountain road previously climbed when going to Lu Liao village, so I looked east over the valley and saw the villages of the old prefecture.

古文：又东南下者半里，时及麓，舆夫遂哄然遁去。
现代文：又向东南下走半里，此时将到山麓，轿夫便哄然一声逃去了。
English: Another half-mile to the southeast, and by this time we were at the foot of the mountain, and the driver fled in a huff.

古文：时日已薄暮，行李俱弃草莽中。
现代文：此时太阳已是傍晚，行李全丢弃在草丛中。
English: By this time the sun had set and the luggage was completely abandoned in the grass.

古文：余急趋旧州，又半里下山，又行田塍间一里，抵前发站老人家，己昏黑，各家男子俱遁入山谷，老人妇卧暗处作呻吟声。
现代文：我急忙赶去旧州，又下山半里，又在田野间行一里，到达先前出发时的骚站的老人家中，天已昏黑，各家的男人全逃入山谷中，老人的妻子躺在暗处发出呻吟声。
English: I hurried to the old canton, walked another half-mile down the mountain and another mile through the fields, and arrived at the old man's house at the station where I had left earlier. It was already dark, the men of all families had fled into the valley, and the old man's wife lay in the dark and moaned.

古文：余恐行李为人所攫，遍呼人不得。
现代文：我担心行李被人攫取去，四处叫人找不到。
English: I'm worried that my luggage will be taken away and no one will be able to find it.

古文：久之，搜得两妇执之出，谕以无恐，为觅老人父子归，令取行李。
现代文：很久以后，搜到两个妇女抓住她们出来，告诉她们不要害怕，替我去找老人父子回来，命令他去取行李。
English: After a long time, I found two women who grabbed them and told them not to be afraid. I went to find the old man and his son and ordered him to get the luggage.

古文：既而顾仆先携二囊至，而舆担犹弃暗中。
现代文：随后顾仆先带着两包行李来到，但轿子担子还丢弃在黑暗中。
English: Gu then arrived first with two bags of luggage, but the palanquin was still abandoned in the darkness.

古文：己而前舍有一客户客居该地的人家来询，谕令往取，其人复遁去。
现代文：不久前边茅舍中有一个客户前来询问，命令他去取，那人重又逃去。
English: Shortly before, a customer in the hut came to inquire, ordered him to fetch it, and the man fled again.

古文：余追之执于前舍架上，强之下，同顾仆往取。
现代文：我追到前边茅舍的高架上抓住他，强令他下去，同顾仆前去取行李。
English: I chased him to the ledge of the hut in front, grabbed him and forced him to go down and get the luggage with his servant.

古文：久之，前所遣妇归，云： 老人旋至矣。 
现代文：很久后，先前派去的妇女归来，说： 老人马上来了。 
English: After a long time, the women who had been sent earlier returned and said, "The old man is coming soon."

古文：余令其速炊，而老人犹不至。
现代文：我命令她们速去煮饭，可老人仍不见到来。
English: I ordered them to quickly cook the rice, but the old man still did not come.

古文：盖不敢即来见余，亦随顾行后，往负行李也。
现代文：原来是不敢马上来见我，也跟随在顾行后面，前去担行李了。
English: Originally, he didn't dare to come to see me right away, so he followed Gu Xing and went to carry his luggage.

古文：半晌，乃得俱来。
现代文：半晌，才一起到来。
English: Half an hour later, they arrived together.

古文：老人惧余鞭其子若孙，余谕以不责意。
现代文：老人害怕我鞭打他的儿子或者孙子，我把不责怪的意思晓谕他。
English: The old man was afraid that I would whip his son or grandson, so I told him that I meant no offense.

古文：已晚餐，其子跛立，予叱令速觅夫，遂卧。
现代文：不久吃完晚餐，他的儿子跋着脚站着，我斥令他速去找脚夫，便躺下了。
English: Soon after dinner, his son was staggering on his feet, so I told him to find a porter and lie down.

古文：二十六日凌晨饭。
现代文：二十六日凌晨开饭。
English: Dinner was served in the early hours of the 26th.

古文：久之，始有夫两人、马一匹。
现代文：很久，才有两个脚夫、一匹马。
English: It has been a long time since there were two porters and a horse.

古文：余叱令往齐各夫。
现代文：我斥令前去调齐各个脚夫。
English: I ordered the porters to be brought forward.

古文：既久，复不至。
现代文：很久之后，还是不来。
English: After a long time, he still didn't come.

古文：前客户来告余： 此路长，须竟日。
现代文：前边的客户来告诉我： 这条路长，要走一整天。
English: The customer in front of me came to tell me: This road is long, it takes a whole day to walk.

古文：早行，兹已不及。
现代文：绝早动身，现在已来不及。
English: It's too late to leave early.

古文：明晨早发，今且贳跛者，责令其举夫可也。 
现代文：明晨绝早出发，今天暂且宽赦了瘸子，可责令他去调集脚夫。 
English: We will set out very early in the morning. Today, we have pardoned the mule for the time being, but we may order him to call in the porters.

古文：余不得已，从之。
现代文：我不得已，听从了他。
English: I had no choice but to listen to him.

古文：是日，早有密云，午多日影。
现代文：这一天，早上有浓云，中午多有日光。
English: On this day, there were thick clouds in the morning, and there was more sunlight at noon.

古文：即饭，遂东向随溪入石山峡，一里，两石山对束，水与路俱从其中。
现代文：饭后，就沿溪流向东走入石山峡中，一里，两面石山相向束拢，溪水与道路都从其中经过。
English: After the meal, I walked along the stream to the east into the middle of the stone mountain gorge. For one mile, the two sides of the stone mountain were close together, and the stream and the road passed through it.

古文：东入又半里，路分两岐，一东北逾坳，一西南入峡。
现代文：向东又走进去半里，路分成两条岔道，一条向东北越过山坳，一条往西南通入峡中。
English: After walking half a mile to the east, the road splits into two branch roads, one going northeast over the mountains, and one going southwest into the gorge.

古文：水随西南转，轰然下坠，然深茅密翳，第闻其声耳。
现代文：溪水顺着西南转去，轰鸣着下坠，然而深茅草密蔽，只能听到水声而已。
English: The stream turns to the southwest, roaring and falling, but the deep thatch is so dense that only the sound of rushing water can be heard.

古文：已西南逾坳，则对东西山之后脊也，溪已从中麓坠穴，不复见其形矣。
现代文：不久向西南越过山坳，则正对着东西两山后面的山脊，溪水已从山麓中间坠入洞穴，不再能见到它的踪影了。
English: Soon I crossed the ridge to the southwest and was facing the ridge behind the east and west mountains. The stream had fallen from the middle of the foothills into the cave, and I could no longer see it.

古文：乃转至分岐处，披茅觅溪，欲观所坠处，而溪深茅丛，层转不能得。
现代文：于是转到道路分岔之处，拨开茅草找溪水，想观看溪水下坠之处，可溪流深藏茅草成丛，一层层转进去不能找到。
English: So he turned to the fork in the road, pushed aside the thatch to find the stream, and wanted to see where the stream fell under the water, but the stream was deep in the thickets of thatch, and he could not find it by turning in layer after layer.

古文：又出至两峰对束处，渡水陟西峰，又溯之南，茅丛路寒，旋复如溪之北也。
现代文：又出来到两面山峰相向束拢之处，渡水后上登西峰，又溯溪水南岸走，茅草成丛道路堵塞，旋即又走到溪水的北岸。
English: They came out again to a place where the peaks on both sides converge. After crossing the water, they climbed the west peak, and walked along the south bank of the stream. The road was blocked by clumps of thatch, and they immediately walked to the north bank of the stream.

古文：乃复从来处度旧路，望见东峰崖下行洞南向，已得小路在莽中，亟披之。
现代文：于是再从来的地方走过原路，望见东峰山崖下有个向南的洞，随即在丛莽中找到小路，急忙分开茅草进去。
English: So he walked the original path from the place he came from, saw a hole to the south under the cliff of Dongfeng Mountain, then found a path in the thicket and hurriedly parted the thatch to get in.

古文：其洞门南向，有石中悬，内不甚扩，有穴分两岐，水入则黑而隘矣。
现代文：这个洞洞口向南，有岩石悬在当中，洞内不十分宽阔，有洞穴分为两个岔洞，踩着水进去便又黑又窄了。
English: The mouth of this cave is to the south, there is a rock hanging in the middle, the cave is not very wide, there is a cave divided into two grottoes, and it is black and narrow when entering the water.

古文：出洞，见其东复有一洞颇宽邃，其门西南向，前有圆石界为二门，右门为大。
现代文：出洞来，见它东边还有一个洞相当宽大深邃，洞口朝向西南，前边有块圆石隔成两个洞口，右边的洞口大些。
English: When I came out of the cave, I saw on the east side of it a hole of considerable width and depth, the mouth of the cave facing south-west, with a boulder in front separating the two openings, the one on the right being larger.

古文：其内从右入，深十余丈，高约三丈，阔如之，后壁北转渐隘而黑，然中觉穹然甚远，无炬不能从也。
现代文：洞内从右边进去，深十多丈，高约三丈，宽处如同高处，后洞壁向北转去渐渐又窄又黑，然而觉得洞中弯然隆起十分深远，没有火把不能顺着走了。
English: Entering the cave from the right, the depth is more than ten meters, the height is about three meters, the width is like a high place, the back wall of the cave turns north and gradually becomes narrow and dark, but I feel that the curved bulge in the cave is very far away, and I can't follow it without a torch.

古文：其外从左南扩，复分两岐，一东北，一东南，所入皆不深，而明爽剔透，有上下旁穿者。
现代文：它外面从左边向南扩开，又分为两个岔洞，一个向东北，一个往东南，进去的地方都不深，但明亮剔透，有上下旁通的洞穴。
English: It extends outward from the left to the south, and is divided into two grottoes, one to the northeast and one to the southeast. The places to enter are not deep, but bright and clear, with caves passing up and down.

古文：况其两门之内，下俱甚平，上则青石穹覆，盘旋竟尺，圆宕密布无余地。
现代文：何况它的两个洞口之内，底下都十分平坦，顶上则是青石弯隆下覆，盘旋之处整整一尺，圆形小坑密布没有余地。
English: What's more, inside its two openings, the bottom is very flat, and the top is covered with bluestone bends, with a hovering place of a whole foot, and there is no room for round pits.

古文：又有黄石倒垂其间，舞蛟悬萼，纹色俱异，有石可击，皆中商吕都能发出优美和谐的声音，此中一奇境也。
现代文：又有黄色岩石倒垂在其中，如蛟龙飞舞，花粤高悬，纹路颜色全很奇异，有岩石可以敲击，都能发出优美和谐的声音，是此地的一处奇境。
English: There are also yellow rocks hanging upside down in it, such as dragons flying, flowers hanging high, and the colors of the lines are all very strange. There are rocks that can be struck and can emit beautiful and harmonious sounds. It is a wonderland here.

古文：出洞，仍一里，返站架。
现代文：出洞后，仍走一里，返回释站高架上的茅屋。
English: After getting out of the cave, he still walked one mile and returned to the hut on the overpass of the release station.

古文：日色甚暖，不胜重衣，夜不胜覆絮。
现代文：天气十分温暖，穿不住两层衣服，夜里盖不住棉被。
English: The weather is very warm, I can't wear two layers of clothes, and I can't cover myself with a quilt at night.

古文：是日手疮大发，盖前佶伦两次具餐，俱杂母猪肉于中也。
现代文：这天手上的疮猛然发作，大概是前两次在结伦准备的饭菜中，都杂有母猪肉的缘故。
English: On this day, the sores on my hands flared up, probably due to the fact that the first two meals prepared at the settlement had sows' meat mixed in.

古文：二十七日早起雾甚。
现代文：二十七日早晨起床雾很大。
English: On the morning of the 27th, I woke up to heavy fog.

古文：既散，夫骑至乃行。
现代文：雾散之后，脚夫坐骑来到就上路。
English: After the fog dissipated, the porter arrived on horseback and went on his way.

古文：仍从东北一里，上土山，与前往陆廖道相去不远。
现代文：仍从东北走一里，登上土山，与先前去陆廖村的路相距不远。
English: He still walked one mile from the northeast and ascended a dirt hill, not far from the previous road to Luliao Village.

古文：一里登岭，雾收而云不开，间有日色。
现代文：一里登上岭头，雾散去但云层不开，间或有些阳光。
English: One mile up the ridge, the fog dissipates but the clouds do not open, and occasionally there is some sunshine.

古文：从岭上北转一里，仍东北二里，又下一里，度一水，复东北上二里，岭畔遂多丛木。
现代文：从岭上向北转一里，仍向东北二里，又下走一里，渡过一条水流，再向东北上行二里，岭畔于是丛林很多。
English: From the ridge, turn north for one mile, continue northeast for two miles, walk down another mile, cross a stream, and then go northeast for two miles, so there is a lot of jungle on the ridge.

古文：丛木中行岭上者三里，从林木少断处，下瞰左右旋谷中，木密树丛，飞鸟不能入也。
现代文：在岭上的丛林中行三里，从林木稍微断开之处，下瞰左右两侧旋绕的山谷中，树木密密丛丛，飞鸟不能飞入。
English: Walking three miles through the jungle on the ridge, from where the trees are slightly disconnected, looking down into the valley that swirls on both sides, the trees are densely clustered, and birds cannot fly in.

古文：又半里乃下，甚峻。
现代文：又走半里于是下山，非常陡峻。
English: Walked another half mile and then down the mountain, very steep.

古文：一里半乃及坞底，则木山既尽，一望黄茅弥山谷间矣。
现代文：一里半才到达坞底，走完长满树木的山之后，一眼望去是黄色的茅草弥漫在山谷间了。
English: It's a mile and a half to the bottom of the dock, and after walking up the tree-covered hill, all you can see at a glance is yellow thatch filling the valley.

古文：从坞中披茅行，始有小水东流峡谷。
现代文：从山坞中分开茅草前行，开始有小溪向东流入峡谷。
English: The thatch separated from the dockyard, and a stream began to flow east into the canyon.

古文：随之涉水而东，从南麓行，复渡水从北麓上，又东下坞渡水，复东上岭，一里登其巅。
现代文：顺溪流涉水往东走，从南麓前行，又渡过溪水从北麓上走，又向东下到坞中渡水，再向东上岭，一里登上岭头。
English: Wading along the stream to the east, walking from the southern foot, walking across the stream from the northern foot, and going east to the dock in the middle of the water, and then east to Shangling, one mile up to the ridge head.

古文：行其上者三里，又直下坞中者一里，则前水复自南北注向峡中去。
现代文：在岭上行三里，又一直下到坞中一里，就见前边的溪水又一次自南往北向峡中流注而去。
English: After travelling three miles up the ridge and one mile down to the middle of the dock, we saw that the stream in front of us was once again flowing from the south to the north towards the middle of the canyon.

古文：又东逾一小岭，有水自东坞来，自南向北绕，与西来水合。
现代文：又向东越过一座小岭，有水流自东边的山坞中流来，自南向北回绕，与西来的水流会合。
English: It also crosses a small ridge to the east, with water flowing from the middle of the dock on the east side, circling from south to north, and meeting with water coming from the west.

古文：既涉东来水，复东上山登其巅，盘旋三里，出岭。
现代文：涉过东来的水流后，又向东上山登上山顶，盘旋了三里，走出岭来。
English: After wading through the eastward flow of water, he climbed eastward to the top of the mountain, circled for three miles, and came out of the ridge.

古文：二里，得一平脊，乃路之中，赍饭者俱就此餐焉。
现代文：二里，走到一个平缓的山脊上，是这一站路的适中处，带饭的人都在此处用餐。
English: Two miles away, on a gentle ridge, is the middle of the road at this stop, where people with meals eat.

古文：既饭，复东从岭北行，已渐入丛木。
现代文：饭后，再向东从岭北行，不久渐渐步入丛林中。
English: After the meal, I walked eastward from the ridge to the north, and soon I gradually walked into the jungle.

古文：出山南，又度一脊，于是南望皆石峰排列，而东南一峰独峻出诸峰之上；北望则土山层叠，丛木密翳。
现代文：走到山南，又越过一条山脊，在这里向南望去全是排列着的石峰，而东南方一座峻峭的山峰唯独越出群峰之上；往北望去却是层层叠叠的土山，丛林密蔽。
English: Walking to the south of the mountain, I crossed another ridge. Here, looking south, I saw all the stone peaks lined up, and a steep peak in the southeast was the only one to rise above the peaks; looking north, it was layers of dirt mountains, densely covered with jungle.

古文：过脊稍下而北，转而东上，直造所望石峰之北，始东南下。
现代文：越过山脊稍往北下走，转向东上山，直达先前望见的东南方峻峭石峰的北面，开始向东南下行。
English: Cross the ridge and walk slightly north, turn to the east up the mountain, straight to the north of the previously seen southeastern steep stone peak, and begin to descend to the southeast.

古文：一里半而及坞底，有细流在草中行，路随之。
现代文：一里半后到达坞底，有细小的水流在草中流动，路顺着水流走。
English: After a mile and a half, we reached the bottom of the dock. There was a small stream of water flowing through the grass, and we walked along the stream.

古文：半里入峡，两崖壁立，丛木密覆，水穿峡底，路行其间。
现代文：半里走入山峡，两面的山崖墙壁样矗立，丛林密布，水穿流在峡底，路行走在林木间。
English: Half a mile into the canyon, the cliffs on both sides stand like walls, the jungle is dense, the water flows through the bottom of the canyon, and the road is between the trees.

古文：半里，峡流南汇成陂，直漱峻峰之足。
现代文：半里，峡中的水流在南边汇成池塘，直接冲刷着峻峭石峰的山脚。
English: For half a mile, the water flow in the gorge merges into a pond on the south side, directly washing the foot of the steep stone peak.

古文：复溯流入，行水中者一里，东南出峡，遂复仰见天光，下睹田塍，于是山分两界，中有平坞，若别一天地也。
现代文：再逆流走进去，在水中行一里，向东南走出山峡，于是重又抬头见到天光，下瞰田野，从这里起山分为两列，中间有平坦的山坞，好像是另外一个天地了。
English: Then I walked against the current, walked a mile in the water, and walked out of the gorge to the southeast, so I looked up again and saw the skylight, overlooking the fields. From here, the mountains are divided into two rows, with a flat dock in the middle, as if it were another world.

古文：东行坞中，坞尽复攀石隘登峺，峺石峻耸如狼牙虎齿，前此无其巉峭者也。
现代文：从坞中往东行，山坞完后又攀着石隘口登硬，硬石陡峻高耸如狼牙虎齿，这之前没有见过如此高险陡峭的了。
English: From the dock to the east, after the dock is finished, climb the stone pass. The hard stone is as steep as the teeth of a tiger. I have never seen it so high and steep before.

古文：逾岭从坞中行二里，循岭平上一里，平下一里，平行坞一里，穿平峡一里，穿峡又行坞中一里，逾岭上下又一里，始得长峡。
现代文：越过岭从山坞中前行二里，沿山岭平缓上走一里，平缓下行一里，平缓行走在坞中一里，穿越平坦的峡谷一里，穿过峡谷又在坞中行一里，越岭上下又是一里，这才走入长峡谷。
English: Cross the ridge and walk for two miles from the middle of the dock, walk gently up the ridge for one mile, walk gently down the ridge for one mile, walk gently in the middle of the dock for one mile, walk through the flat canyon for one mile, cross the canyon and walk in the middle of the dock for one mile, cross the ridge up and down for one mile, and then walk into the long canyon.

古文：行四里，又东行坞与西同。
现代文：行四里，又向东行走在坞中与在西面时相同。
English: A four-mile walk eastwards is the same in the dock as it is in the west.

古文：三里，逾北山之嘴，南山之麓始有茅三四架，于是山坞渐开。
现代文：三里，越过北山的山嘴，南山的山麓这才有三四间高架的茅屋，到这里山坞渐渐开阔起来。
English: Three miles away, beyond the mouth of the North Mountain, at the foot of the South Mountain, there are only three or four high-rise huts, and here the dock gradually opens up.

古文：南山之东有尖峰复起，始望之而趋，过其东，则都结州治矣。
现代文：南山的东面又有尖峰耸起，开始望着它赶去，走过山峰东面，就见到都结州治所了。
English: On the east side of Nanshan, another peak rose up, and I began to watch it hurrying away. When I walked past the eastern side of the peak, I saw the Duye County Detention Center.

古文：州室与聚落俱倚南山向北，有小水经其前东注，宅无垣墙，廨亦聩圮。
现代文：州城的房屋与村落全都背靠南山面向北方，有小河流经州前往东流注，宅第没有墙垣，衙门也颓败倒塌。
English: The houses and villages in the state capital all face north with their backs to the South Mountain. Small rivers flow through the state to the East Stream. Houses have no walls, and gates have collapsed.

古文：铺司狞甚，竟不承应，无夫无供，盖宛然一夜郎矣。
现代文：骤站役吏非常凶恶，竟然不肯应差，没有脚夫没有饭食，大概宛如是一个自高自大的夜郎国了。
English: The stationmaster was so vicious that he wouldn't budge, and there was no porter and no food. It was like a haughty country of night watchmen.

古文：州官农姓。是日为余生辰，乃所遇旧州夫既恶劣，而晚抵铺司复然，何触处皆穷也。
现代文：这天是我的生日，只是在旧州遇上的脚夫既已恶劣，而晚上到达的释站役吏又是这样，为何这般走投无路呢！
English: It's my birthday, but since the porter I met in the old canton is bad, and so is the stationmaster who arrives in the evening, why am I so desperate?

古文：二十八日早起，寒甚而霁。
现代文：二十八日清早起床，非常寒冷而后晴开。
English: I got up early in the morning on the 28th. It was very cold and then it cleared up.

古文：铺司不为传餐，上午始得粝饭二盂，无蔬可下。以一刺令投，亦不肯去。
现代文：骤站役吏不为我送漏食，上午才得到两钵盂糙米饭，无菜可下饭,拿出一个名帖愈令他投递进去，也不肯去。
English: Suddenly, the station official refused to send me the missing food. In the morning, I only got two bowls of brown rice. I could eat without a dish. The more I asked him to send me a famous postcard, the more he refused to go.

古文：午后，忽以马牌掷还云： 既为相公，请以文字示。 
现代文：午后，忽然把马牌掷还来说：一既严尹卫读书的相公，请出示文章。 
English: In the afternoon, he suddenly threw the horse back and said, "As a relative of strict Yin Wei, please show me the article."

古文：余拒无文，以一诗畀之，乃持刺去。
现代文：我拒绝没有文章，把一首诗交给他，这才拿着名帖去了。
English: I refused to give him a poem without an article, so I went with a famous postcard.

古文：久之，以复刺来，中书人题曰： 有德者必有言，有言者亦。 
现代文：很久之后，拿来一个答复的名帖，其中写着一个题目说： 有德的人必定有言论，有言论的人也必定有德。 
English: A long time later, I got a reply from a famous poster, in which a title was written: "Those who have virtue must have speech, and those who have speech must also have virtue."

古文：无聊甚。
现代文：无聊极了。
English: It's so boring.

古文：倚筐磨墨，即于其刺后漫书一文界之。
现代文：靠着竹筐磨好墨，就在他的名帖背后随便写了一篇文草交给他。
English: Leaning against a bamboo basket, I sharpened the ink and wrote a random essay on the back of his famous postcard and handed it to him.

古文：既去，薄暮始以刺饶，复书一题曰： 子路拱而立，止子路宿。 
现代文：客馆役吏去了之后，傍晚才拿来名帖，另外增添了鸡酒米肉，又写了一个题目说： 子路拱手而立，留子路住宿。 
English: After the hotel clerk left, the famous postcard was brought in the evening. In addition, chicken wine and rice were added, and a topic was written saying: "Zi Road stands out, stay Zi Road accommodation."

古文：余复索灯书刺尾畀之，遂饭而卧。
现代文：我又要来油灯在名帖末尾写了交给他，于是吃过饭躺下。
English: I wrote "I want to come to the oil lamp" at the end of the famous post and handed it to him, so I had dinner and lay down.

古文：馆人是晚供牛肉为咹既卧，复有人至，订明口联骑行郊，并今馆人早具餐焉。
现代文：客馆中的人这天晚上供给牛肉作为宴席。躺上床后，又有人来到，约定明天并肩骑马去游郊野，并命令客馆里的人早早准备饭菜。
English: That night, the people in the guesthouse served beef as a banquet. After lying in bed, someone else came and agreed to go horseback riding in the countryside tomorrow, and ordered the people in the guesthouse to prepare meals early.

古文：二十九日早寒，日出丽甚。
现代文：二十九日早晨寒冷，日出后十分艳丽。
English: The morning of the 29th was cold, but it was very beautiful after sunrise.

古文：晨起，餐甫毕，二骑至矣。
现代文：早晨起床，刚吃完饭，两匹马来到了。
English: I got up in the morning and had just finished eating when two horses arrived.

古文：一候余，一候太平府贡生何洞玄。
现代文：一匹马等我，一匹马等太平府的贡生何洞玄。
English: A horse is waiting for me, a horse is waiting for the tributary of Taiping Prefecture, He Dongxuan.

古文：同行者乃骑而东，又有三骑自南来，其当先者，即州主农姓也。
现代文：同行的人于是骑马向东而去，又有三匹马从南边来，其中跑在最前的，就是姓农的州官。
English: His companions then rode off to the east, and three more horses came from the south, the foremost of which was a state official with the surname of Nong.

古文：各于马上拱手揖而东行。
现代文：各自在马上拱手作揖后往东走。
English: Each of them immediately made a ruckus and then walked east.

古文：三里，渡一溪，又东二里，随溪入山峡，又东五里，东北逾一岭。
现代文：三里，渡过一溪，又向东二里，顺溪流走入山峡，又向东五里，向东北越过一座岭。
English: Three miles, across a stream, two miles to the east, along the stream into the gorge, five miles to the east, and over a ridge to the northeast.

古文：其岭颇峻，农君曰： 可骑而度，不必下。 
现代文：此岭很陡峻，农君说： 可骑着越过去，不必下马。 
English: This ridge is very steep, the farmer said: You can ride over it without dismounting.

古文：其骑腾跃峻石间，有游龙之势。
现代文：那坐骑腾跃在陡峻的山石之间，有神龙游动的气势。
English: The mount leapt between the steep rocks with the momentum of a dragon.

古文：共逾岭二里，山峒颇开，有村名那吝，数十家在其中央，皆分茅各架，不相连属。
现代文：越岭共走二里，山峒十分开阔，有个村庄名叫那吝，有数十家人在山炯中央，都是各自分别架起茅屋，不相连接。
English: It was a two-mile walk across the ridge, and the ridge was very open. There was a village called Naqiu, and there were dozens of families in the middle of the ridge. They all erected their huts separately, and they were not connected.

古文：过而东，又二里，复东逾一岭。
现代文：往东走过去，又走二里，又向东越过一岭。
English: Walked east, walked another two miles, and crossed a ridge to the east.

古文：其峻弥甚，共二里，越之。
现代文：此岭更加陡峻，共二里，越过此岭。
English: This ridge is steeper, a total of two miles, over this ridge.

古文：又东一里，行平坞间，有水一泓，亦自西而东者，至是稍北折，而南汇涧二丈余，乃禁以为鱼塘，其处名相村。
现代文：又往东一里，行走在平坦的山坞间，有水一片，也是自西流向东的，流到这里稍折向北流去，而南边水积成二丈多宽的山涧，就封禁起来作为鱼塘，此处名叫相村。
English: Another mile to the east, walking between the flat docks, there is a piece of water, also flowing from west to east, flowing here slightly to the north, and the south side of the water accumulates into a two-storey wide ridge, it is sealed up as a fish pond, here called the village of phase.

古文：比至，已架茅于其上，席地临。
现代文：及来到之时，已在鱼塘上架起茅屋，席地而坐。
English: By the time they arrived, they had erected a hut on the pond and were sitting down.

古文：诸峒丁各举缯西流，而渔得数头，大止尺五，而止有锦鲤，有绿鳜，辄驱牛数十蹂践其中。
现代文：俯视众峒丁各自在西面流水中举曹捕鱼，捕到数条，只大一尺五，而且只有红鲤鱼、绿级鱼，立即赶数十头牛到水中蹂践。
English: Looking down on the crowd of fishermen, they each caught fish in the west-flowing water. They caught several fish, only one foot and five meters in size, and only red snapper and green fish. They immediately drove dozens of cows into the water.

古文：已复匝而缯焉，复得数头，其余皆细如指者。
现代文：不久又用昏环绕鱼塘捕鱼，又捕到几条，其余都是细如手指的。
English: Soon he fished around the pond with the fishhook and caught a few more fish, but the rest were as thin as fingers.

古文：乃取巨鱼细切为脍，置大碗中，以葱及姜丝与盐醋拌而食之，以为至味。
现代文：于是取来大鱼细切成生鱼片，放在大碗中，用葱和姜丝与盐、醋生拌后吃，认为是最美的滋味。
English: So he took a large fish and finely chopped it into sashimi, placed it in a large bowl, mixed it with onion and ginger with salt and vinegar, and ate it. He thought it was the most beautiful taste.

古文：余不能从，第啖肉饮酒而已。
现代文：我不能跟着吃，只是吃肉饮酒而已。
English: I can't go along with it, I just eat meat and drink alcohol.

古文：既饭，日已西，乃五里还至那吝村。
现代文：饭后，日已西沉，便行五里返回到那吝村。
English: After the meal, when the sun had set, they walked the five miles back to the village.

古文：登一茅架，其家宰猪割鸡献神而后食，切鱼脍复如前。
现代文：登上一个茅屋架，这家人宰猪杀鸡祭神后再吃，又像先前一样切生鱼片。
English: Up on a thatched roof, the family slaughter a pig, kill a chicken, sacrifice it to the gods, and then eat it again, cutting up sashimi as before.

古文：薄暮，十余里抵州，别农马上，还宿于铺。
现代文：傍晚，骑马走十多里抵达州治，在马上辞别姓农的，返回到释站住宿。
English: In the evening, he rode more than ten miles to arrive in Zhouzhi. He immediately said goodbye to the farmer and returned to the release station for accommodation.

古文：三十日日丽而寒少杀。
现代文：三十日红日艳丽而寒气稍微减弱。
English: On the 30th, the red sun is brilliant and the cold air is slightly weakened.

古文：作《骑游诗》二首畀农。
现代文：作了两首《骑游诗》送给农君。
English: He composed two "riding poems" and sent them to the farmer.

古文：时有南宁生诸姓者来，袖文一篇，即昨题也。
现代文：此时有南宁府一个姓诸的儒生来到，袖中装来一篇文章，就是昨天的题目了。
English: At this time, a Confucian scholar surnamed Zhu from Nanning Prefecture arrived, carrying an article in his sleeve, which was yesterday's topic.

古文：盖昨从相村遇此生来谒，晚抵州官以昨题命作也。
现代文：原来昨天从相村来时遇上这个儒生前来拜见，晚上到达州里州官用昨天的题目命令他作文。
English: It turned out that when I came from the same village yesterday, I met this Confucian scholar who came to visit me. When he arrived in the evening, the prefect of the prefecture ordered him to write an essay using yesterday's topic.

古文：观其文毫无伦次，而何生漫以为佳。
现代文：观看他的文章毫无条理次序，可姓何的儒生漫不经心地以为是佳作。
English: Viewing his articles in an unstructured order, the Confucian scholar surnamed He casually thought it was an excellent work.

古文：及入农，果能辨之，亟令人候余曰： 适南宁生文，不成文理，以尊作示之，当骇而走耳。 
现代文：到送给农君看时，果然能够察辨好坏，急忙令人来侍候我说： 刚才南宁儒生的文章，不成文理，把尊作拿给他看，应当会吃惊而走的。 
English: When it came time to show it to the farmer, he was able to discern the good from the bad. He hurriedly had someone come to wait on me and said, "The article by Nanning Confucius just now is not a literary work. If you show him this masterpiece, he should be surprised and walk away.

古文：乃布局手谈。
现代文：于是摆开棋盘下棋。
English: So he opened the board to play chess.

古文：抵暮，盛馔，且以其族国瑚讦，揭发告事求余为作一申文，白诸当道，固留再迟一日焉。
现代文：到黄昏时，盛宴款待，并且以他的族人农国瑚揭发控告他隐私的事求我为他写一篇申辩的文书，向当权者辨白，坚决挽留再推迟一天走。
English: At dusk, feasting and hospitality, and with the help of his relative, the farmer Guohui, he denounced the accusation against his privacy and asked me to write a pleading document for him, to argue with those in power, and to resolutely hold back and postpone his departure for another day.

