古文：王忠干王偁李元一鱼万盈于李回强伯达僧惟恭王淝董进朝康仲戚吴可久开行立僧法正沙弥道荫何老勾龙义赵安
现代文：王忠干王偁李元一鱼万盈于李回强伯达僧惟恭王淝董进朝康仲戚吴可久开行立僧法正沙弥道荫何老勾龙义赵安
English: Wang Zhongkang, Wang Jian, Li Yuan, Li Huiqiang, Bao Da, Wei Gong, Wang Jian, Dong Jin, Zhao Kang, Wu Keku, Kai Xing, Zhao An, Fa Zheng, Shami, Tao Yin, Ho Lao, Ho Long, Yi Zhao An

古文：王忠干
现代文：王忠干
English: Wang Zhonggan

古文：唐大和三年，李同捷阻兵沧景，帝命李祐统齐德军讨之。
现代文：唐朝元和三年，李同捷在沧州景州一带阻止兵进。皇帝命李祐统帅齐德军讨伐他。
English: In the first and third years of the Tang Dynasty, Li Tongjie blocked the advance of troops in the area of Cangzhou and Jingzhou. The emperor ordered Li Yu to lead the Qi German army to fight him.

古文：初围德州城，城坚不拔。
现代文：起初围德州城，城坚固不能拿下。
English: At first they besieged the city of Texas, but it was too strong to be taken.

古文：翌日又攻之，自卯至未，伤十八九，竟不能拔。
现代文：第二天又攻打，从卯时到未时，共伤了十八九个人，竟然不能攻下。
English: The next day, they attacked again, and from dusk to dawn, they injured a total of eighteen or nineteen people, but were unable to attack.

古文：时有齐州衙内八将官健儿王忠干，博野县人，长念金刚经，积二十余年，日数不缺。
现代文：当时在齐州衙内有个八将官健儿王忠干，是博野县人，常念金刚经，一共二十多年，一天也不缺。
English: At that time, there was an eighth general officer, Jian'er Wang Zhongrugan, in Qizhou, a native of Bono County, who often recited the Diamond Sutra, for a total of more than twenty years, not missing a day.

古文：其日，忠干上飞梯，将及堞，身中箭如猬，为卯木击落。
现代文：有一天，忠干上飞梯，将要到城墙上，身上中箭象刺猬一样，被雷木击落。
English: One day, Zhonggan climbed a flight of stairs and was about to reach the city wall, when he was hit by an arrow, like a hedgehog, shot down by a thunder tree.

古文：同火卒曳出羊马城外，置之水濠里岸。
现代文：同伙兵卒把他拉到羊马城外，把他放在水濠岸里。
English: His fellow soldiers dragged him outside the city of Yangma and left him on the bank of the river.

古文：祐以暮夜，命抽军，其时城上矢下如雨，同火忙，忘取忠干尸。
现代文：李祐见天黑了，于是命撤军。当时城上箭如雨下，同伙忙乱之中，忘记带走忠干的尸体。
English: Li Yu saw that it was getting dark, so he ordered his troops to withdraw. At that time, it was raining arrows on the city, and his comrades were so busy that they forgot to take away Zhong Gan's body.

古文：忠干即死，如梦，至荒野，遇大河，欲渡无因，仰天哭。
现代文：忠干已经死了，就象做梦一样，到了荒野。遇见一大河，欲要过去又没有凭借的东西，就仰天大哭。
English: When he reached the wilderness, he found a large river, and wanted to cross it, but had no means to do so, so he cried out to the heavens.

古文：忽闻人语声，忠干见一人，长丈余，疑其神人，因求指营路。
现代文：忽然听到人说话声，忠干看见一人，一丈多高。忠干疑心他是神人，因此向他请求指条通向军营的路。
English: Suddenly, he heard people talking and saw a tall man. He suspected that the man was a god and asked him for directions to the camp.

古文：其人云： 尔莫怕，我令尔可得渡此河。 
现代文：那个人说： 你不要害怕，我可让你渡过这条河。 
English: The man said, "Don't be afraid, I can get you across the river.

古文：忠干拜之，才头低未举，神人把腰，掷之空中，久方著地。
现代文：忠干拜谢他，才低头还没抬起来，神人便搂住他的腰，把他扔到空中，很久才落地。
English: He bowed his head in thanks, but before he could raise it, the man of God grabbed him by the waist and threw him into the air. It took a long time for him to land.

古文：忽如梦觉，闻贼城上交二更。
现代文：忽然象梦醒了一样，听到贼城上打二更。
English: Suddenly, as if waking from a dream, I heard two more shots ring out in the Thieves' Town.

古文：初不记过水，亦不知疮，抬手扪面，血涂眉睫，方知伤损。乃举身强行，百余步却倒，复见向人持刀叱曰： 起起！ 
现代文：起初不记得自己过河，也不知道是受伤。抬手摸脸，满脸是血，才知道受了伤，于是站起来强走，走了一百多步就又摔倒了，又看见先前的那个人拿着刀呵叱道： 起来，起来！ 
English: At first he did not remember that he had crossed the river, and did not know that he was injured. He raised his hand and touched his face, which was covered with blood, and only then did he know that he had been injured. So he stood up and forced his way out. After walking more than a hundred steps, he fell down again, and saw the previous man holding a knife and scolding him: "Get up, get up!

古文：忠干惊惧，走一里余，坐歇，方闻本军喝号声，遂及本营。
现代文：忠干惊慌害怕，走了一里多路。坐下来休息，正听到本军的号令声，于是就到了本营。
English: Frightened and panicked, he walked for more than a mile. He sat down to rest, and just as he heard the call of his army, he arrived at the main camp.

古文：访同火卒，方如其身死水濠岸里，即是梦中所过的河也。
现代文：问同伙兵卒，才知道自己死在水濠岸里，就是梦中所过的河。
English: It was only when he asked his fellow soldiers that he realised he had died on the banks of the Otaki, the river he had been crossing in his dream.

古文：王偁
现代文：王偁
English: Wang Yao

古文：王偁家于晋州，性顽鄙。
现代文：王偁家住在晋州，为人固执粗俗。
English: Wang Yingjia lived in Jinzhou and was a stubborn and vulgar person.

古文：唐元和四年，其家疾疫，亡者十八九，唯偁偶免。
现代文：唐元和四年，他家人得了瘟疫，死了十八九个人，唯独王偁得免。
English: In the fourth year of the Tang and Yuan Dynasties, his family fell victim to the plague. Eighteen or nineteen people died, but Wang Yao was spared.

古文：方疾，食狗肉，目遂盲，不知医药，唯祷鬼神，数年无报。
现代文：他正得病，吃了狗肉眼睛就失明了，不知道求医用药，只是祈祷鬼神，几年也没有报应。
English: He was ill, he ate dog meat and his eyes went blind, he didn't know how to seek medical treatment, he just prayed to ghosts and gods, and there was no retribution for several years.

古文：忽有一异僧请饭，谓曰： 吾师之文，有金刚经，能排众苦，报应神速，居士能受之乎？ 
现代文：忽然有一个奇怪的和尚前来化斋，对他说： 我师傅有金刚经，能排除众人的苦难，报应很快，你能念吗？ 
English: Suddenly, a strange monk came to him and said, "My master has the Diamond Sutra, which can eliminate the suffering of many people. Retribution is swift. Can you recite it?"

古文：偁辞愚，又无目，固不可记。
现代文：王偁言称自己笨，又眼瞎，一定记不住。
English: Wang Xuanyan said that he was stupid, blind, and could not remember.

古文：僧劝写之。偁从其言，得七卷，请僧诵之。
现代文：和尚劝他写下来，王偁听从了他的话，写了七卷，请和尚吟诵。
English: The monk advised him to write it down, and Wang Xi listened to his words and wrote seven volumes. He asked the monk to recite them.

古文：数日，梦前僧持刀决其目，乃惊寤，觉有所见，久而遍明，数月如旧。
现代文：几天后，梦见和尚手拿刀子挖他的眼睛，才惊醒过来，觉得有点能看见了，过了很久眼睛全看见了，几个月之后就和原先的一样。
English: A few days later, he had a dream that a monk was digging out his eyes with a knife, only to wake up with a start and feel that he could see a little. After a long time, his eyes could see everything, and after a few months, they were the same as before.

古文：偁终身转经不替。
现代文：王偁便终身撰写经书不停。
English: Wang Yao continued to write scriptures for the rest of his life.

古文：李元一
现代文：李元一
English: Lee Won-il

古文：李元一，唐元和五年任饶州司马。
现代文：李元一，唐代元和五年任饶州司马。
English: Li Yuan I, Tang Dynasty Yuan and the five-year appointment of Raozhou Sima.

古文：有女居别院，中宵忽见神人，惊悸而卒，颜色不改。
现代文：有一个女儿住在另一个院中。半夜中忽然看见神人，惊吓而死，她的颜色并不改变。
English: There was a daughter who lived in another hospital. She suddenly saw a godman in the middle of the night, and died of fright. Her color did not change.

古文：其夫严讷自秦来，至苍湖，恍惚见其妻行水上而至。
现代文：她的丈夫严讷从秦来，到达苍湖。恍恍惚惚地看见他的妻子从水上走过来。
English: Her husband Yan Ne came from Qin and arrived at Canghu. He saw his wife coming from the water in a daze.

古文：讷惊问之，妻泣曰： 某已亡矣，今鬼也。 
现代文：严讷惊讶地问。他的妻子哭泣着说： 我已经死了。今天成了鬼了。 
English: His wife wept and said, "I'm dead. I'm a ghost today."

古文：讷骇异之。
现代文：严讷惊讶而奇怪。
English: Strictly surprised and weird.

古文：曰： 近此雁浦村，有严夫子，教众学，彼有奇术，公往恳请哀救，某庶得复生矣。 
现代文：他的妻子又说： 离这不远有个雁浦村。
English: His wife added, "There is a wild goose village not far from here.

古文：讷后果见严夫子，拜谒泣诉，尽启根本。
现代文：有一个严夫子。教了许多学生，他有奇术。
English: There was a strict teacher. He taught many students, and he had magic.

古文：严初甚怒： 郎君风疾，何乃见凌！ 
现代文：你去恳请哀救，我差不多能够复活。 
English: You go and plead for help. I can almost be revived.

古文：讷又拜悲泣，久乃方许，曰： 杀夫人者，王将军也。
现代文：严讷以后果然见到了严夫子。拜见哭泣地把事情的始末完全告诉了他。严夫子起初很生气： 你妻是不是得上急病，怎么来欺负我？ 
English: After Yan Na, he actually met Yan Fu Zi. Weeping, Yan Fu Zi told him the whole story. Yan Fu Zi was very angry at first: Did your wife suddenly fall ill? How could you bully me?

古文：葬在此堂内西北柱下，可为写金刚经，令僧转读，于其所祠焉，小娘子必当还也。 
现代文：严讷又哭泣又拜请，很久，严夫子才答应了，说： 杀死你夫人的是王将军，他葬在这厅堂内西北的柱子下，你可以写金刚经。让和尚为她诵读，就在那被害处供奉，你的娘子一定能复活。 
English: It took a long time for Yan Fuzi to agree, saying, "It was General Wang who killed your wife. He is buried under a pillar in the northwest of this hall. You can write the Diamond Sutra. Let the monk read it for her, and offer it at the place of the injury. Your daughter will surely come back to life."

古文：讷拜谢，疾往郡城。
现代文：严讷拜谢，快速地去了郡城。
English: I thanked him profusely and hurried to the county seat.

古文：明日到，具白元一，写经，速令读之。
现代文：第二天就把这些事告诉了元一。于是元一去写经书，并让和尚诵读了七遍经书。
English: The next day, he told Genichi about these things. So Genichi went to write a scripture and had the monk recite the scripture seven times.

古文：七遍，女乃开目，久之能言，愧谢其夫曰： 兹堂某柱下，有王将军枯骨，抱一短剑，为改葬之，剑请使留，以报公德。 
现代文：他的女儿才睁开眼睛，过了很久才能说话。她惭愧地感谢丈夫说： 在这厅堂某某柱子下，有王将军的尸骨，抱着一只短剑。改换一个地方埋葬他，把他的剑留下，来报答您的恩德。 
English: It was a long time before his daughter opened her eyes and was able to speak. She thanked her husband with shame and said: "In this hall, under such and such a pillar, there is the skeleton of General Wang, holding a short sword. Change a place to bury him, leave his sword, to repay your kindness."

古文：发之果验，遂改瘗，留其剑。
现代文：挖开后果然如说的那样。于是改葬王将军，留下他的剑。
English: The result of the excavation was as described. So they reburied General Wang, leaving his sword behind.

古文：元一因写经数百卷，以施冥寞。
现代文：元一于是写经书几百卷，以报答冥间的恩德。
English: Genichi then wrote several hundred volumes of scriptures to repay the kindness of the underworld.

古文：鱼万盈
现代文：鱼万盈
English: Plenty of Fish

古文：鱼万盈，京兆市井粗猛之人。
现代文：鱼万盈，是京兆市井中的粗野之人。
English: Yu Man Ying is a rough-hewn man from Jingzhong.

古文：唐元和七年，其所居宅有大毒蛇，其家见者皆惊怖。
现代文：唐朝元和七年。他所住的房子有大毒蛇，他的家人看见都惊恐害怕。
English: He was seven years old in the Yuan and Tang Dynasties. The house he lived in was infested with venomous snakes, and his family was terrified when they saw them.

古文：万盈怒，一旦持巨棒，伺其出，击杀之，烹炙以食，因得疾，脏腑痛楚，遂卒，心尚微暖。
现代文：万盈发怒，一天拿着一根大棒，等蛇出来，就把它打死了，并且烹烤而食因此得了病，五脏六腑疼痛难忍，于是就死了。
English: Man Ying got angry. One day, she took a big stick, waited for the snake to come out, and killed it. She also cooked it and ate it. As a result, she got sick. The pain in her internal organs was unbearable, so she died.

古文：七日后苏，云：初见冥使三四人追去，行暗中十余里，见一人独行，其光绕身，四照数尺，口念经。
现代文：但心还是暖热的，七天后才复苏。他说： 刚看到冥间的使者三四个人追出去，在黑暗中走了十多里，看见一个人独自行走，光围绕着他的周身，四下里照出去几尺，嘴里念着经。
English: But his heart was still warm, and he did not recover until seven days later. He said: I just saw the messengers of the underworld, three or four of them, go out in pursuit, walking more than ten miles in the dark. I saw a man walking alone, with light surrounding his body, shining a few feet in all directions, and reciting scripture.

古文：随走就其光，问姓字，云： 我姓赵名某，常念金刚经者，汝但莫离我。 
现代文：就借着光跟着他走。问他姓名，他说： 我姓赵名某，常念金刚经的人，你只是别离开我。 
English: I asked him his name, and he said, "My name is Zhao Ming, and I am a reciter of the Diamond Sutra. Just don't leave me."

古文：使者不敢进，渐失所在。
现代文：使者就不敢靠近，渐渐地不见了。
English: The messenger did not dare to approach and gradually disappeared.

古文：久之，至其家，万盈拜谢曰： 向不遇至人，定不回矣。 
现代文：过了很久，便到了他家，万盈拜谢说： 先前不遇到你，一定不能回来了。 
English: After a long time, they arrived at his house, and Wan Ying said to Bai Xie: "If I hadn't met you before, I wouldn't have been able to come back."

古文：其人授以金刚经，念得遂还。
现代文：那个人送给他金刚经，念完后就复活了。
English: The man gave him the Diamond Sutra, and after reciting it, he came back to life.

古文：及再生，持本重念，更无遗缺，所疾亦失。
现代文：再生后，拿着经书念，更不敢有一点马虎遗漏，所得的病也没了。
English: After regeneration, holding the scripture and reading it, he dared not make a careless omission, and the resulting illness was gone.

古文：因断酒肉，不复杀害，日念经五十遍。
现代文：万盈于是断绝酒肉，不再杀生，每天念五十遍经。
English: Therefore, Man Ying gave up eating meat and drinking alcohol, stopped killing animals, and recited the sutra fifty times a day.

古文：于李回
现代文：于李回
English: Yu Li backs down

古文：于李回举进士，唐元和八年，下第将归。
现代文：于李回考进士，唐朝元和八年，应举落第而回。
English: In Li Hui's examination for admission to the priesthood, in the eighth year of the Tang Dynasty, it should be raised and lowered for the first time.

古文：有僧劝曰： 郎君欲速及第，何不读金刚经？ 
现代文：有一次和尚说： 你想很快地中举，为什么不读金刚经呢？ 
English: Once a monk said: If you want to be promoted quickly, why not read the Diamond Sutra?

古文：遂日念数十遍。
现代文：于是李回便每日念几十遍。
English: As a result, Li Huibin is recited dozens of times a day.

古文：至王桥宿，因步月，有一美女与言，遂被诱去。十余里至一村舍，戏笑甚喧，引入升堂，见五六人皆女郎。
现代文：有一次去王桥住下，在月下散步，忽然有一个美女和他说话，他便被诱骗而去，走了十多里路到了一个村舍，戏笑声很大，美女把他领进正堂，看见五六个人都是女郎。
English: Once he went to live in Wangqiao and took a walk under the moon. Suddenly, a beautiful woman spoke to him, and he was lured away. He walked more than ten miles to a village house. There was a lot of laughter. The beautiful woman led him into the main hall and saw that five or six people were girls.

古文：李回虑是精怪，乃阴念经，忽有异光自口出，群女震骇奔走。
现代文：李回想到这是妖精，就暗中念经。忽然有一道异光从口中射出，群怪惊骇而逃走。
English: When Li remembered that it was a fairy, he secretly recited a sutra. Suddenly, a strange light shot out of the mouth, and the group of monsters fled in fright.

古文：但闻腥秽之气，盖狐狸所定，榛棘满目，李回茫然，不知所适。
现代文：只闻到了腥秽的气味，这大概是狐狸的住所。李回一看，到处是荆棘，李回茫然不知所措。
English: He only smelled a foul odor, which was probably the fox's residence. Li Hui looked back and saw thorns everywhere. Li Hui was at a loss.

古文：俄有白犬，色逾霜雪，似导李回前行，口中有光，复照路，逡巡达本所。
现代文：不一会，有一只白色的狗，颜色比霜雪更白，好象引着李回往前走，口中也有光，又照着前面的路，曲折地到达他住的原处。
English: A moment later, a white dog, whiter than the frost and snow, seemed to be leading Li back and forth, with a light in its mouth, and following the road ahead, winding its way to where he lived.

古文：后至数万遍。
现代文：以后他念经达到几万遍。
English: Since then, he has chanted the sutras tens of thousands of times.

古文：强伯达
现代文：强伯达
English: John Podesta

古文：唐强伯达，元和九年，家于房州，世传恶疾，子孙少小，便患风癞之病，二百年矣。
现代文：唐朝元和九年，强伯达家住在房州，祖传的疾病，子孙后代，都患风癞病，已二百年了。
English: In the first and ninth years of the Tang Dynasty, the Qiangbaoda family lived in Fangzhou. The ancestral disease, the descendants, have suffered from rheumatism and rickets for two hundred years.

古文：伯达才冠便患，嘱于父兄： 疾必不起，虑贻后患，请送山中。 
现代文：伯达刚到二十岁就患了这种病，对他的父兄说： 病一定不能好，担心的是留下后患，请把我送到山里去。 
English: When he was just twenty years old, Bao Da fell ill with this disease. He said to his father and brother, "This illness will definitely not get better. I'm worried about the after-effects of staying behind. Please send me to the mountains."

古文：父兄裹粮送之岩下，泣涕而去。
现代文：父兄带着粮食把他送到岩石下，洒泪而别。
English: His father and brother carried him under a rock with grain and bade him a tearful farewell.

古文：绝食无几，忽有僧过，伤之曰： 汝可念金刚经内一四句偈，或脱斯苦。 
现代文：伯达绝食不久，就有一个和尚路过这里，同情他说： 你可以念金刚经里一个四句的偈语，也许能摆脱这种苦痛。 
English: Soon after Baida went on a hunger strike, a monk passed by and sympathized with him, saying, "You can recite a four-sentence verse from the Diamond Sutra, and maybe you can get rid of this pain."

古文：伯达既念，数日不绝。
现代文：伯达就念经，几天不停。
English: Birda chanted the sutras non-stop for days.

古文：方昼，有虎来，伯达惧甚，但瞑目至诚念偈。
现代文：一天白天，有老虎来，伯达非常恐惧，只是闭着眼睛一心念经，老虎就舐遍了他全身的疮。
English: One day during the day, a tiger came, and he was very afraid. He just closed his eyes and chanted, and the tiger licked the sores all over his body.

古文：虎乃遍舐其疮，唯觉凉冷，如傅上药，了无他苦，良久自看，其疮悉已干合。
现代文：他只觉得凉冷，象敷上了药一样，他一点也没有痛苦，过了好一会他自己一看，身上疮全都已愈合。
English: He only felt cool and cold, as if he had been medicated. He had no pain at all, and after a while he saw for himself that the sores on his body had all healed.

古文：明旦，僧复至，伯达具说。僧即于山边，拾青草一握以授，曰： 可以洗疮，但归家，煎此以浴。 
现代文：第二天早晨，和尚又到了，伯达都告诉了他，和尚就在山边，拾来一把青草给他说： 可以用它洗浴，只管回家，把这草煮了之后洗浴。 
English: The next morning, the monk arrived again, and the bird told him that the monk was on the mountain side, picked up a handful of grass and said to him: You can use it to bathe, just go home, boil the grass and then bathe.

古文：乃呜咽拜谢。
现代文：伯达流泪拜谢。
English: Birda bids a tearful farewell.

古文：僧抚背而别。
现代文：和尚抚摸着他的后背而走。
English: The monk stroked his back and walked away.

古文：及到家，父母大惊异，因启本末。
现代文：他到家中，父母非常惊异，于是他把经过说了一遍。
English: When he got home, his parents were very surprised, so he told them what had happened.

古文：浴讫。身体鲜白。都无疮疾。
现代文：用草液洗完，身体便变得白净，都没有疮病了。
English: After washing with grass liquid, the body becomes white and clean, and there are no sores.

古文：从此相传之疾遂止，念偈终身。
现代文：从此祖传的病就没有了，伯达便终身念经。
English: Since then, the ancestral disease has disappeared, and Boda has been chanting the sutras for life.

古文：僧惟恭
现代文：僧惟恭
English: Monk Weigong

古文：唐荆州法性寺僧惟恭，三十余年念金刚经，日五十遍，不拘僧仪。
现代文：唐朝荆州法性寺和尚惟恭，念金刚经三十多年，每天念五十遍。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, the monk Wei Gong of the Legal Temple in Jingzhou recited the Diamond Sutra for more than thirty years, fifty times a day.

古文：好酒，多是非，为众僧所恶。
现代文：不受和尚的规矩所拘泥，好喝酒、搬弄是非，被众僧厌恶。
English: He was not constrained by the rules of the monks, he liked to drink and flirt, and was disliked by all the monks.

古文：及晚回，入寺闻钟声，惟恭已死。
现代文：问来，进入寺中听到钟声，惟恭已死了。
English: When asked, he entered the temple and heard the bells ringing, only to find that Gongsun had already died.

古文：因说向来所见。
现代文：于是诉说了他先前的所见所闻。
English: He then recounted what he had seen and heard.

古文：其日，合寺闻丝竹声，竟无乐人入寺。
现代文：那天，整个寺中都听到丝竹的声音，竟然没有奏乐的人进入寺内。
English: On that day, the entire temple heard the sound of the silk bamboo, and no musician entered the temple.

古文：当时名僧云： 惟恭盖承经之力，生不动国，亦以其迹勉灵岿也。 
现代文：当时的名僧说： 惟恭大概托经书的力量，生不动国死后也是用他的表现来劝勉灵岿的。 
English: A famous monk at the time said: "Wengong probably relied on the power of the scriptures. When he was alive, and after his death, he used his performance to exhort the dead.

古文：灵岿感悟，折节缁门。
现代文：灵岿受感动终于明白了，终守佛们。
English: Moved by the coffin, they finally understood, and they finally became Buddhists.

古文：王淝
现代文：王淝
English: Wang Yao

古文：唐元和中，严司空绶在江陵时，岑阳镇将王淝，常持金刚经。
现代文：唐朝元和年中，严司空在江陵做官，岑阳镇将王淝，常念金刚经。
English: In the first and middle years of the Tang Dynasty, Yan Siku was an official in Gangneung, and Wang Yao, the general of Puyang Town, often recited the Diamond Sutra.

古文：因使归州勘事，回至咤滩，船破，五人同溺。
现代文：因被派他回州办理公事，回来到咤滩，船破了，五人一齐落入水中。
English: Because he was sent back to the state to handle official business, he came back to Fengtan, the boat broke, and all five of them fell into the water.

古文：淝初入水，若有人授竹一竿，随波出没，至下牢镇，著岸不死。
现代文：王淝刚入水，就好象有人给他一根竹竿，随波而出没，一直到下牢镇，靠岸免死。
English: As soon as Wang Yao entered the water, it was as if someone had given him a bamboo pole, and he disappeared with the waves, all the way down to the prison town, avoiding death by the shore.

古文：视手中物，乃金刚经也。
现代文：看手中拿的东西，原来是金刚经。
English: Look what I'm holding, it's the Diamond Sutra.

古文：咤滩至于下牢镇三百余里。
现代文：咤滩到下牢镇有三百多里路。
English: There are more than three hundred miles of roads from Lintan to Xiaodiao Town.

古文：董进朝
现代文：董进朝
English: Dong Jinchao

古文：董进朝，唐元和中入军，时宿直城东楼上。
现代文：董进朝，唐朝元和年中参军，当时住在城东门楼上。
English: Dong Jin Dynasty, Tang Dynasty Yuan and mid-year joined the army, then lived in the East Gate of the city.

古文：一夕月明，忽见四人著黄从东来，聚立城下，说己姓名，状若追捕。
现代文：一天晚上月明，忽然看见四个穿着黄衣服的人从东面来，都站在城下，说自己的姓名，好象要追捕他。
English: One moonlit evening, he suddenly saw four men in yellow clothing coming from the east, all standing under the castle, saying their names as if they were going to hunt him down.

古文：因相语曰： 董进朝常持金刚经，以一分功德祝庇冥司，我辈蒙惠，如何杀之？
现代文：他们商议说： 董进朝常念金刚经，用一分的功德祝福庇祐冥司，我等蒙受他的恩惠，怎么能杀他呢？
English: They deliberated and said, "Dong Jin Chao often recites the Diamond Sutra and blesses the guardian deities with one point of merit. How can we kill him until we receive his grace?"

古文：须枉命相待。若此人他去，我等无所赖矣。 
现代文：必须枉命来等待他，如果这个人走去其他地方，我们就没有什么可抓的了。 
English: We have to wait for him in vain, if this person goes somewhere else, we will have nothing to catch.

古文：其一人云： 董进朝对门有一人，同年同姓，寿根相埒，可以代矣。 
现代文：其中的一个人说： 董进朝对门有一个人和他同年同姓，寿命相近，可以代替他。 
English: One of them said: "There is a person with the same surname as Dong Jin Cha on the other side of the door, with a similar life expectancy, who can replace him.

古文：因忽不见，进朝惊异之。
现代文：于是忽然就不见了这些人。
English: Then all of a sudden they were gone.

古文：及明，闻对门哭声，问其故，死者父母云： 子昨宵暴卒。 
现代文：进朝惊异，到天亮，听到对门的哭声，问他原因，死者的父母说： 儿子昨天清早突然死去了。 
English: In the morning, he was surprised. At dawn, he heard crying on the other side of the door. When he asked the reason, the parents of the deceased said: My son died suddenly yesterday morning.

古文：进朝感泣说之，因为殡葬，供养其母。
现代文：进朝感动地流泪说了，并为他殡葬，供养他的母亲。
English: Jinchao was moved to tears and said, and buried him and provided for his mother.

古文：后出家，法名慧通，住兴元寺。
现代文：以后他便出家，法名叫慧通，住在兴元寺。
English: After that, he became a monk, taking the Buddhist name of Heitong, and lived in the Xingyuan Temple.

古文：康仲戚
现代文：康仲戚
English: Well-off relatives

古文：康仲戚，唐元和十一年往海东，数岁不归。其母唯一子，日久忆念。有僧乞食，母具语之。
现代文：康仲戚，唐朝元和十一年去海东，几年不回来，他的母亲只有他这一个儿子，时间长了非常想念，有一个和尚前来化斋，母亲对他说了。
English: In the eleventh year of the Tang Dynasty, Geng Zong, a relative of Kang Zhong, went to the East Sea and did not return for several years. His mother had only one son, and she missed him very much. A monk came to have a meal, and his mother told him.

古文：僧曰： 但持金刚经，儿疾回矣。 
现代文：和尚说： 只要念金刚经，你的儿子很快就会回来了。 
English: The monk said, "Just recite the Diamond Sutra, and your son will come back soon."

古文：母不识字，令写得经，乃凿屋柱以陷之，加漆其上，晨暮敬礼。
现代文：他的母亲不识字，叫别人写了很多经书，就凿开屋子的柱子放在那里，在柱子上涂上油漆，早晚敬礼。
English: His mother, who could not read, had a lot of scriptures written by others. She chiseled the pillars of the house and placed them there. She painted the pillars and offered prayers in the morning and evening.

古文：一夕，雷霆大震，拔此柱去。
现代文：一天晚上，雷霆大震，这个柱子就被拔走了，一个多月，她的儿子果然回来了。
English: One night, there was a thunderous earthquake, and the pillar was uprooted. After more than a month, her son did indeed return.

古文：月余，儿果还，以锦囊盛巨木以至家，入拜跪母。母问之，仲戚曰： 海中遇风，舟破坠水，忽有雷震，投此木于波上，某因就浮之，得至岸。
现代文：用锦囊盛着巨大的木回到家里，入房跪拜母亲，母亲问他，仲戚说： 大海上遇到狂风，船破落入水中，忽然有雷霆震动，把这块木扔到水上，我就靠着它浮在水上，才能够到达岸边。
English: He came back home with a huge piece of wood in a bag and went into the house to kneel before his mother. When his mother asked him about it, his relative said: When the sea encountered a strong wind, the ship broke into the water, and suddenly there was a thunder vibration. I threw this piece of wood onto the water, and I floated on the water by leaning on it before I could reach the shore.

古文：某命是其所与，敢不尊敬！ 
现代文：我的命就是它所给的，怎敢不尊敬它。 
English: My life is what it gives, how dare I not respect it.

古文：母惊曰： 必吾藏经之柱。 
现代文：母亲惊奇地说： 一定是我藏经的柱子。 
English: Surprised, my mother said, "It must be the pillar I hid the sutra under."

古文：即破柱得经，母子常同诵念。
现代文：于是打开柱子找到了经书，母子俩常常一起诵念。
English: So they opened the pillar and found a scripture book. The mother and son often chanted together.

古文：吴可久
现代文：吴可久
English: Wu Kegui

古文：吴可久，越人，唐元和十五年居长安，奉摩尼教。
现代文：吴可久是越地的人，唐朝元和十五年住在长安，信奉摩尼教。
English: Wu Kegui was a native of Yue, and lived in Chang'an for fifteen years during the Yuan and Tang Dynasties. He was a Manichaean.

古文：妻王氏，亦从之。
现代文：他的妻子王氏，也跟从他信教。
English: His wife, Wang, is also a believer.

古文：岁余，妻暴亡，经三载，见梦其夫曰： 某坐邪见为蛇，在皇子陂浮图下，明旦当死，愿为请僧，就彼转金刚经，冀免他苦。 
现代文：一年多，他的妻子突然死去了，过了三年，托梦给她的丈夫说： 我犯了罪才被变成蛇，在皇子陂浮图下，明天将死，希你为我向和尚请求，就在那念金刚经，希望能免除别的苦难。 
English: After more than a year, his wife died suddenly. Three years later, she told her husband in a dream: "I committed a crime and was turned into a snake. Under the emperor's influence, I will die tomorrow. I hope you will pray to the monk for me and recite the Diamond Sutra there, hoping to be spared other suffering."

古文：梦中不信，叱之。妻怒，唾其面。
现代文：因梦中是不可信的，所以丈夫叱责她，妻子发怒，唾他的脸。
English: Because the dream was not credible, the husband scolded her, and the wife became angry and spat in his face.

古文：惊觉，面肿痛不可忍。
现代文：不久惊醒，脸肿痛不能忍。
English: Soon after waking up, I couldn't stand the pain in my swollen face.

古文：妻复梦于夫之兄曰： 园中取龙舌草，捣傅立愈。 
现代文：妻子又托梦给他丈夫的哥哥说： 园中取龙舌草，捣乱敷在上面就立刻好了。 
English: The wife also told the dream to her husband's brother, saying, "Take some agave from the garden, rub it on it, and it will immediately get better.

古文：兄寤走取，授其弟，寻愈。
现代文：他哥哥醒来急忙去园中取来，送给弟弟，不久弟弟脸消了肿。
English: When his brother woke up, he rushed to the park to fetch it and give it to his brother. Soon, his brother's swollen face disappeared.

古文：诘旦，兄弟同往，请僧转金刚经。
现代文：第二天一早，兄弟俩一起前往，请和尚念金刚经。
English: The next morning, the two brothers went together to ask the monk to recite the Diamond Sutra.

古文：俄有大蛇从塔中出，举首遍视，经终而毙。
现代文：忽然有条大蛇从塔中出来，抬头四处观看。
English: Suddenly, a big snake came out of the tower and looked around.

古文：可久归佛，常持此经。
现代文：经念完了它就死了。可久归于佛门，常念这个经书。
English: After he finished reading the sutra, he died. He was able to return to the Buddhist path for a long time and often read this sutra.

古文：开行立
现代文：开行立
English: Start of operations

古文：唐开行立，陕州人，不识字。
现代文：唐朝开行立是陕州人，不识字。
English: The first emperor of the Tang Dynasty was from Shaanxi Province and could not read.

古文：长庆初，常持金刚经一卷随身，到处焚香拜礼。
现代文：长庆年初常把一卷金刚经随身携带，每到一处便焚香礼拜。
English: At the beginning of the year, people often carry a scroll of the Diamond Sutra with them, and burn incense at each place of worship.

古文：忽驮货出同州，遇十余贼，行立弃货而逃。
现代文：忽然一次驮着货物出同州，遇到十几个贼，行立便丢下货物逃走。
English: Suddenly, he was carrying goods out of Dongzhou at the same time. When he encountered more than a dozen thieves, he left the goods and ran away.

古文：不五六十斤，贼举之，竟不能动。
现代文：货物不到五六十斤，贼拿它，竟然拿不动。
English: The goods weighed less than fifty or sixty kilos, and the thief couldn't even hold it.

古文：相视惊异，追行立，问之。对曰： 中有金刚经，恐是神力。 
现代文：彼此惊异，追上行立，问他，回答说： 当中有金刚经，恐怕是神的力量。 
English: Surprised, they caught up with him and asked him about it, to which he replied: "There's the Diamond Sutra in it. I'm afraid it's the power of God."

古文：贼发囊，果有经焉，却与百余千。请其去，誓不作贼，受持终身。
现代文：贼便打开货物，果然有经书。就给他几百上千钱，请去经书，发誓不再作贼，终身念经。
English: The thief opened the goods, and sure enough, there was a scripture. So he gave him hundreds and thousands of money. Please go to the scripture, swear not to be a thief anymore, and study the scripture for life.

古文：僧法正
现代文：僧法正
English: The Monk Hojo

古文：唐江陵开元寺般若院僧法正，日持金刚经三七遍。
现代文：唐朝江陵开元寺般若院的和尚法正，每天念金刚经三到七遍。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, the monks of the Prajna Temple in Gangneung's Kaiyuan Temple chanted the Diamond Sutra three to seven times a day.

古文：长庆初，得病卒。
现代文：长庆年初，得病而死。
English: At the beginning of Changqing, he fell ill and died.

古文：至冥司，见若王者，问师生平作何功德。
现代文：到了冥司，看见一个象大王的人，问： 师傅平生有什么功德？ 
English: When he arrived at Hades, he saw a man resembling a great king and asked, "What are the merits of the master in his lifetime?"

古文：答曰： 常念金刚经。 
现代文：回答说： 常念金刚经。 
English: He replied: Reciting the Diamond Sutra.

古文：乃揖上殿，登绣座，念经七遍。
现代文：于是请上殿，登上绣座，念七遍经。
English: Therefore, please go up to the main hall, climb onto the embroidered seat, and recite the sutras seven times.

古文：侍卫悉合掌，阶下考掠论对，皆停息而听。
现代文：侍卫都合掌，阶下的考问对答都停下来听，念完，就派一官吏领他回去。
English: The guards clapped their hands. His subordinates paused to listen to the questions and answers. When he had finished, an official was sent to take him back.

古文：念毕，遣一吏引还，王下阶送曰： 上人更得三十年在人间，忽废读诵。 
现代文：大王下阶送他说： 你还能在人间活三十年，不要荒废了读诵的机会。 
English: The lower echelons of the Great King sent him this message: You can still live for thirty years on earth, so don't waste the opportunity to read and recite.

古文：因随吏行数十里，至一大坑，吏因临坑，自后推之，若陨空焉。
现代文：于是法正就跟着官吏走了几十里，到了一个大坑。官吏于是对着坑从他背后推他。他好象落到空中一样。
English: So Fa Zheng walked with the official for dozens of miles and arrived at a large pit. The official then pushed him up against the pit from behind. It was as if he had fallen into the air.

古文：死已七日，惟面不冷。
现代文：已经死了七天了，只是面容不冷。
English: He has been dead for seven days, but his face is not cold.

古文：荆州僧常靖亲见其事。
现代文：荆州和尚常靖亲眼看见这件事。
English: Jingzhou and Shang Changjing saw this with their own eyes.

古文：沙弥道荫
现代文：沙弥道荫
English: Shami Doi

古文：唐石首县，有沙弥道荫，常念金刚经。
现代文：唐朝石首县，有一个沙弥道荫，常念《金刚经》。
English: In Shishou County of the Tang Dynasty, there was a priest named Tao Yin, who often recited the Diamond Sutra.

古文：长庆初，因他出夜归，中路忽遇虎，吼掷而前。
现代文：长庆年初，因为到别处，夜里才回来，半路上忽然遇见老虎，吼叫地奔到他跟前。
English: At the beginning of the Changqing Festival, because he went to another place, he only came back at night. Halfway there, he suddenly met a tiger, which ran to him roaring.

古文：沙弥知不免，乃闭目坐，默念金刚经，心期救护。
现代文：沙弥知道不能免死，就闭目静坐，默念金刚经，心里期望救护。
English: Knowing that he could not avoid death, the priest sat with his eyes closed, silently recited the Diamond Sutra, and hoped for rescue.

古文：虎遂伏草守之。及曙，村中人来往，虎乃去。视其蹲处，涎流于地。
现代文：老虎就趴在草边守着他，等到天亮了，村中人来来往往，老虎才走了，看虎蹲坐的地方，满地都是虎流的口水。
English: The tiger lay down on the grass to guard him, and waited until dawn, when people in the village came and went, and the tiger left. Looking at the place where the tiger was crouching, the tiger's saliva was all over the ground.

古文：何老
现代文：何老
English: How old

古文：何老，鄂州人，常为商，专诵金刚经唐长庆中，因佣人负货，夜憩于山路，忽困寐，为佣者刭其首，投于涧中取货而趋市，方鬻，见何老来，惶骇甚。
现代文：何老是鄂州人，常常行商，专诵读金刚经。唐朝长庆年中，雇用佣人背货，夜里在山路上休息，忽然困乏而睡，被佣人砍了他的头，投到深涧里。拿了货而快速到了集市。正要卖掉，看见何老走来，非常害怕。
English: He Lao was from Ezhou, often traveled as a merchant, and specialized in reciting the Diamond Sutra. In the middle of the Longqing year of the Tang Dynasty, he hired a servant to carry goods. At night, he rested on the mountain road. Suddenly, he was sleepy and sleepy. The servant cut off his head and threw it into the deep. He took the goods and quickly went to the bazaar. He was about to sell them when he saw He Lao coming. He was very afraid.

古文：何曰： 我得诵经之力，誓不言于人。 
现代文：何老说： 我得到诵读金刚经的帮助，发誓不和别人说。 
English: He Lao said: I got help from reciting the Diamond Sutra and vowed not to tell others.

古文：遂相与为僧。
现代文：于是就一同做了和尚。
English: So they became monks together.

古文：勾龙义
现代文：勾龙义
English: Gokuryongyi

古文：勾龙义，间州俚人。唐长庆中，于郪县佣力自给。
现代文：勾龙义是简州里人，唐朝长庆年中，在郪县靠出卖劳力而自给。
English: Goryongyi was a native of Jianzhou. In the middle of the Changqing period of the Tang Dynasty, he became self-sufficient in Jixian County by selling his labor.

古文：常以邑人有疾，往省之，见写金刚经，龙义无故毁弃而止绝之。
现代文：曾因乡人有病，前去探望，看见他写金刚经。龙义无缘无故地毁掉，不让他写。
English: Once, because a villager was ill, he went to visit him and saw him writing the Diamond Sutra. Longyi destroyed it for no reason and would not let him write it.

古文：归即喑哑，医不能愈，顽嚣无识，亦竟不悔。
现代文：回家后就哑了，治了也不好。他固执傲慢没有见识，终竟不悔改。
English: After returning home, he became mute, and it was not easy to cure him. He was stubborn, arrogant and ignorant, and ultimately did not repent.

古文：仅五六年，忽闻邻人有念是经者，惕然自责曰： 我前谤真经，得此哑病。今若悔谢，终身敬奉，却能言否。 
现代文：仅仅五六年，忽然听到邻居有人念金刚经的。猛然省悟，自责道： 我以前毁谤真经，才得了这种哑病，今天如果悔改谢罪，终身敬奉真经，能不能说话呢？ 
English: Just five or six years ago, he suddenly heard a neighbor reciting the Diamond Sutra. He suddenly came to his senses and reproached himself: "I used to slander the real sutra, and that's how I got this dumb disease. Today, if I repent and give thanks, and honor the real sutra for life, will I be able to speak?"

古文：自后每闻念经，即倚壁专心而听之，月余，疑如念得。数日，偶行入寺，逢一老僧，礼之。僧问何事，遂指口中哑。
现代文：从此后每当听到念经，就倚着墙壁专心听经。一个多月，疑心自己象能够念经一样，几天后，偶然进入寺庙，碰着一个老和尚，施礼，和尚问他何事，他就指着口中告诉和尚他说不出话。
English: For more than a month, he doubted that he was able to recite the sutras. A few days later, he accidentally entered a temple, met an old monk, bowed, and when the monk asked him what was wrong, he pointed to his mouth and told the monk that he couldn't speak.

古文：僧遂以刀割舌下，便能语。
现代文：和尚就用刀割他的舌头下面，就能说话了。
English: So the monk cut him under the tongue with a knife and he was able to speak.

古文：因与念经。正如邻人之声。
现代文：也和和尚一起念经，正象邻居的声音。
English: They also chanted sutras with the monk, just like the voices of their neighbors.

古文：久而访僧，都不复见。
现代文：过了很久想拜访和尚，都没有看见。
English: After a long time I wanted to visit the monk, but I didn't see him.

古文：壁画须菩提，指曰： 此是也。 
现代文：墙壁上画着须菩提，指着说： 这就是那个和尚。 
English: On the wall is a painting of Subhuti, and he points to it and says, "This is the monk."

古文：乃写经，画须菩提像，终身礼拜。
现代文：于是他就写经，画须菩提的像，终身礼拜。
English: So he wrote a sutra, drew an image of Subhuti, and worshipped for life.

古文：赵安
现代文：赵安
English: Zhao An

古文：赵安，成都人，唐大和四年，常持金刚经，日十遍。
现代文：赵安，是成都人，唐朝大和四年，常念金刚经，每天十遍。
English: Zhao An, a native of Chengdu, was four years old during the Tang Dynasty. He often recited the Diamond Sutra ten times a day.

古文：会蛮寇退归，安于道中见军器，辄收置于家，为仇者所告。
现代文：正赶上蛮寇退归，在路上看见了军队的兵器，就收到家中，被仇人所诬告。
English: Just in time for the return of the barbarians, he saw the army's weapons on the road, received them at home, and was falsely accused by the enemy.

古文：吏捕至门，涕泣礼经而去。为狱吏所掠，遂自诬服，罪将科断。
现代文：官吏到他家去逮捕他，他洒泪拜经而别，又被狱吏所打，就被冤枉而认供，将判定他有罪。
English: Officials went to his home to arrest him. He left in tears, bowing to the scriptures. He was beaten by prison officials. He was falsely accused and confessed. He will be found guilty.

古文：到节帅厅，枷杻自解。
现代文：到了节帅大堂上，枷锁自然脱落。
English: When they arrived at the grand hall, the shackles naturally fell off.

古文：乃诘之，安曰： 某不为盗，皆得之巷陌，每读金刚经，恐是其力。 
现代文：于是就责问他，赵安说： 我不是盗贼，这些都是在巷道里捡来的，常常读金刚经，恐怕是它的神力吧？ 
English: So he scolded him, and Zhao An said, "I am not a thief. I picked these up in the alley. I often read the Diamond Sutra. I'm afraid it's its divine power, isn't it?"

古文：节帅叱之不信。及过次，忽于安名下书一放字，后即云余并准法，竟不知何意也。
现代文：节帅叱责他并不相信，等到点到了赵安的时候，忽然就在赵安的名字下面写着一个 放 字，以后就都说其余的一并按法处理，竟然不知道是什么用意。
English: The commander scolded him, saying that he didn't believe him. When the time came for Zhao An to leave, he suddenly wrote an open letter under Zhao An's name. After that, they all said that they would handle the rest in accordance with the law. They didn't even know what the intention was.

古文：及还，洗浴礼经，开匣视之，其经揉裂折轴，若壮夫之拉也。
现代文：等他被放回来，洗了澡，对着经书礼拜，打开匣子看，那个经书已皱裂断轴就象是被大力士拉扯过似的。
English: When he was put back, he took a shower, prayed over the scripture, and opened the box to see that the scripture had been crumpled and the broken shaft was as if it had been pulled by a strong man.

古文：妻曰： 某忽闻匣中有声，如有斫扑。 
现代文：他的妻子说： 我忽然听到匣子里有声音，就象有砍扑的声音。 
English: His wife said: "I suddenly heard a noise in the box, like a slap.

古文：乃安被考讯之时，无差失也。
现代文：正是赵安被拷打审讯的时候，丝毫也没有差错。
English: It was precisely when Zhao An was tortured and interrogated that there was no mistake at all.

