古文：孟尝君舍人有与君之夫人相爱者。
现代文：孟尝君门客之中，有个人非常爱慕孟尝君的夫人。
English: Among Meng Yaojun's customers, there is a person who is very fond of Meng Yaojun's wife.

古文：或以问孟尝君曰： 为君舍人而内与夫人相爱，亦甚不义矣，君其杀之。 
现代文：有人把这事告诉了孟尝君，并说： 食君之禄，却爱慕您的夫人，这人也太不仗义了，您何不杀了他？ 
English: Someone told Meng Yaojun about this, and said, "This man, who has a king's salary, but adores your wife, is too disloyal. Why don't you kill him?"

古文：君曰： 睹貌而相悦者，人之情也，其错之勿言也。 
现代文：孟尝君说： 看到别人长得好看而心生爱慕，是人之常情，你就不要再说这件事情了。 
English: Meng Yijun said, "It is human nature to see someone who is good-looking and fall in love with them, so please stop talking about it."

古文：居期年，君召爱夫人者而谓之曰： 子与文游久矣，大官未可得，小官公又弗欲。
现代文：过了一年，孟尝君召来那个爱慕他的夫人的门客，对他说： 你在我处时日也不算短了，一直未能为先生觅到好职位。
English: A year later, Meng Yaojun summoned the concierge who had admired his wife, and said to him: "Your time with me has not been short, and you have not been able to find a good position for your husband.

古文：卫君与文布衣交，请具车马皮币，愿君以此从卫君游。 
现代文：小的官职您又不愿意做，卫君和我是布衣之交，我给你准备了车马和盘缠，你乘车带上盘缠去投到卫君门下吧。 
English: You don't want to do a small official post, and I am a close friend of Wei Jun. I have prepared a carriage and coils for you. Take the carriage and coils and go to Wei Jun's door.

古文：于卫甚重。
现代文：这个门客去到卫国以后，很受卫君的看重。
English: After this concierge went to the Emperor, he was highly valued by the Emperor.

古文：齐、卫之交恶，卫君甚欲约天下之兵以攻齐。
现代文：后来齐、卫两国关系一度出现剑拔弩张的局面，卫君极想纠集诸侯进攻齐国。
English: Later, the relations between Qi and Wei were strained, and Wei desperately wanted to gather princes to attack Qi.

古文：是人谓卫君曰： 孟尝君不知臣不肖，以臣欺君。
现代文：这时那个门客站出来对卫君说： 孟尝君不知道臣无德无能，把臣推荐于王。
English: At this time, the doorkeeper stood up and said to Wei Jun: Meng Ya Jun did not know that the vassal had no virtue or ability, and recommended the vassal to the king.

古文：且臣闻齐、卫先君，刑马压羊，盟曰： 齐、卫后世无相攻伐，有相攻伐者，令其命如此。 
现代文：臣曾闻先王之事，过去齐、卫两国君王杀马宰羊，彼此立下盟约： 齐、卫子孙，不得刀兵相向，若违背誓言出兵攻伐的，下场有如此马此羊！ 
English: The vassal had heard about the former king, and in the past, the kings of Qi and Wei had killed horses and slaughtered sheep, and made a covenant with each other: Qi, descendants of Wei, must not face each other with swords and soldiers. If you violate your oath and send troops to attack, you will end up with such a horse and sheep!

古文：今君约天下之兵以攻齐，是足下倍先君盟约而欺孟尝君也。
现代文：如今大王约集天下诸侯，准备进攻齐国，正是大王您违背了先王的盟约，而且还欺骗了孟尝君。
English: Now the great king has gathered all the princes of the world and is preparing to attack Qi. It is you, the great king, who have violated the previous king's covenant and deceived Meng Yaojun.

古文：愿君勿以齐为心。
现代文：我希望大王不要再把齐国放在心上。
English: I hope the king doesn't care about Qi any more.

古文：君听臣则可；不听臣，若臣不肖也，臣辄以颈血湔足下衿。 
现代文：大王听从臣的劝告也就罢了，如果不听的话，就是我这样不肖的，也会把自己脖颈里的血溅到您的衣襟上！ 
English: If you don't listen, even I, who am so handsome, will splash the blood from my neck onto your collar!

古文：卫君乃止。
现代文：卫君于是打消了伐齐的念头
English: Therefore, the prince of the guards dispelled the idea of a battle.

古文：齐人闻之曰： 孟尝君可语善为事矣，转祸为功。 
现代文：齐人听到这件事，都赞叹道： 孟尝君真可谓善于待人处事，不杀门客，因此才能使齐国转危为安。 
English: When the Qi people heard about this, they all said with admiration: Meng Yatong is really good at dealing with people, not killing guests, so he can turn the country around.

