古文：李宗勉袁甫刘黻王居安
现代文：李宗勉，字强父，富阳人。
English: Li Zongcheng, a strong-willed father, from Fuyang.

古文：李宗勉，字强父，富阳人。开禧元年进士。
现代文：考中开禧元年进士。
English: He passed the junior high school entrance examination at the beginning of the first year.

古文：历黄州教授、浙西茶盐司、江西转运司干官。
现代文：历任黄州教授、浙西茶盐司、江西转运司干官。
English: He has served as a professor in Huangzhou, the tea and salt department of West Zhejiang Province, and the transportation department of Jiangxi Province.

古文：嘉定十四年，主管吏部架阁，寻改太学正。
现代文：嘉定十四年，他主管吏部架阁，不久改任太学正。
English: In the 14th year of Jiading, he was put in charge of the cadre department, and soon he was promoted to Taigaku Zheng.

古文：明年为博士，又明年迁国子博士。
现代文：第二年为博士，第三年升为国子博士。
English: He was promoted to doctor in the second year, and to Kuniko doctor in the third year.

古文：宝庆初，添差通判嘉兴府。
现代文：宝庆初年，添差通判嘉兴府。
English: In the first year of Baoqing, Jiaxing was chosen as the winner.

古文：三年，召为秘书郎。
现代文：宝庆三年，他被召用为秘书郎。
English: In the third year of Baoqing, he was called to be a secretary.

古文：绍定元年，迁著作郎。
现代文：绍定元年，他升为著作郎。
English: In the first year of Shao Ding, he was promoted to the post of a scholar.

古文：入对，言边事宜夙夜震惧，以消咎殃。
现代文：入朝廷奏对，说边事应该时刻警惕，以消除灾祸。
English: When he entered the imperial court, he said that we should always be vigilant about side issues in order to eliminate the scourge.

古文：明年，兼权兵部郎官。
现代文：第二年，他兼任权兵部郎官。
English: In the second year, he also served as a deputy of the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：时李全叛谋已露，人莫敢言，宗勉独累疏及之。
现代文：这时李全反叛的阴谋已暴露，人们都不敢说，李宗勉独自多次上疏论及此事。
English: At this time, Li Quan's plot to rebel had been exposed, and people were afraid to say that Li Zongmeng had discussed the matter on his own many times.

古文：又言： 欲人谋之合，莫若通下情。
现代文：又说 ：想使人们与陛下合谋，不如使下情上达。
English: He also said: "If you want people to conspire with His Majesty, it is better to get them to agree."

古文：人多好谄，揣所悦意则侈其言，度所恶闻则小其事。
现代文：人们大多喜欢谄媚，揣测陛下喜欢的就多说，估计陛下讨厌的就少讲。
English: Most people like to be flattered. Speculate what your majesty likes and say more, estimate what your majesty dislikes and say less.

古文：上既壅塞，下亦欺诬，则成败得失之机、理乱安危之故，将孰从而上闻哉？
现代文：上面已被堵塞，下面也欺骗，那么成败得失的关键、治乱安危的原因，将有谁能向陛下讲呢？
English: The above has been blocked, and the below has been deceived, so who will be able to tell His Majesty the key to success and failure, the reasons for chaos and danger?

古文：不闻则不戒，待其事至乃骇而图之，抑已晚矣。
现代文：不知道则不戒备，等事情发生了惊骇并去处理它，已经晚了。
English: If you don't know, you're not alert, and it's too late to panic and deal with it when it happens.

古文：欲财计之丰，莫若节国用。
现代文：想财计丰富，不如节省国家开支。
English: If you want to be financially rich, it is better to save on state expenses.

古文：善为国者常使财胜事，不使事胜财。
现代文：善于治国的人常使财富多于用度，不使用度多于财富。
English: Those who are good at governing the country often make more wealth than use, and do not use more than wealth.

古文：今山东之旅，坐糜我金谷，湖南、江右、闽中之寇，蹂践我州县，苟浮费泛用，又从而侵耗之，则漏卮难盈，蠹木易坏。
现代文：现在山东的军队，白白浪费我们的钱、粮，湖南、江右、闽中的寇盗，蹂躏我们的州县，如果再奢侈浪费，从而侵耗财用，那就会形成漏杯难盈、蠹木易坏的情形。
English: At present, Shandong's army is wasting our money and grain in vain, and the robbers from Hunan, Jiangyou, and Yunnan are ravaging our prefectures and counties. If they continue to be extravagant and wasteful, thereby encroaching on the use of money, it will lead to a situation where it is difficult to fill the leaking cup and the elm tree is easy to deteriorate.

古文：设有缓急，必将窘于调度，而事机失矣。
现代文：如果有缓急，必将因为财用窘困，而失去成事的机会。
English: If there is a priority, it will be because of financial difficulties, and lost the opportunity to get things done.

古文：欲邦本之固，莫若宽民力。
现代文：想要巩固国家的根本，不如宽民力。
English: If you want to consolidate the fundamentals of the country, it is better to have broad popular support.

古文：州县之间，聚敛者多，椎剥之风，浸以成习。
现代文：州县之间，聚敛的人很多，残酷剥削的风气，已慢慢形成习惯。
English: Between states and counties, there are many people who gather, and the culture of cruel exploitation has slowly become a habit.

古文：民生穷踧，怨愤莫伸，啸聚山林，势所必至。
现代文：民生穷困，怨愤不能伸张，他们聚集到山林中反抗，也是势所难免。
English: The people's livelihood is poor, and their resentment cannot be expressed. It is inevitable that they will gather in the mountains and forests to resist.

古文：救焚拯溺，可不亟为之谋哉？ 寻改兼侍右郎官。
现代文：拯救那些在水深火热中的人，能不赶快确定办法吗？ 不久他改兼为侍右郎官。
English: Can we not quickly determine a way to save those who are in the depths of the fire? Soon he was also appointed as an attendant and right-hand man.

古文：明年入对，言天灾甚切。
现代文：第二年入朝奏对，说天灾的事十分恳切。
English: The next year, when he entered the imperial court, he spoke about the natural disaster very earnestly.

古文：四年，差知台州。
现代文：绍定四年，李宗勉被差遣为台州知州。
English: In the fourth year of Shaoding, Li Zongmeng was sent to Chizhou, Taizhou.

古文：明年，直秘阁、知婺州。
现代文：第二年，他为直秘阁、婺州知州。
English: In the second year, he became the direct secretary of the cabinet and the governor of Zhangzhou and Chizhou.

古文：六年冬，召赴行在，未行。
现代文：绍定六年冬，他被召赴行在，没成行。
English: In the winter of the sixth year of Shaoding, he was called to march, but he did not go.

古文：端平元年，进直宝章阁，依旧任。
现代文：端平元年，他升为直宝章阁，仍任原职。
English: In the first year of Duanping, he was promoted to Zhibao Zhangge, still in his original position.

古文：越月，以宗正丞兼权右司召，改尚左郎官，兼职仍旧。
现代文：一个月后，他以宗正丞兼权右司的身份被召，改为尚左郎官，兼职仍旧。
English: A month later, he was called to the post of Mune no Tadamasa, concurrently acting as the right-hand man of the shogun, and was changed to the post of Shozaro, although he continued to work part-time.

古文：寻兼左司。
现代文：不久兼左司。
English: He was soon promoted to deputy director.

古文：五月，面对，言四事： 守公道以悦人心，行实政以兴治功，谨命令以一观听，明赏罚以示劝惩。 次言楮币： 愿诏有司，始自乘舆宫掖，下至百司庶府，核其冗蠹者节之，岁省十万，则十万之楮可捐，岁省百万，则百万之楮可捐也。
现代文：五月，在皇上面前奏对，讲四件事 ：守公道以悦众心，行实政以兴治功，谨命令以统一认识和行动，明赏罚以示勉力和惩戒。 其次讲纸币 ：希望向各部门下诏，从皇上和后宫开始，下至百官和各级政府，都要核实出那些冗费，从而节省它们，一年节省十万，就可减少十万纸币，一年节省百万，就可减少百万纸币。
English: In May, he made a speech in front of the emperor, saying four things: to keep justice to please the public, to carry out real politics to promote good governance, to respectfully order a unified understanding and action, and to reward and punish clearly to show effort and discipline.Secondly, he spoke about paper money: he hoped to issue a decree to all departments, starting with the emperor and the harem, down to the hundred officials and governments at all levels, to verify those unnecessary expenses and thus save them, to save one hundred thousand a year would reduce one hundred thousand paper money, and to save one million a year would reduce one million paper money.

古文：行之既久，捐之益多，钱楮相当，所至流转，则操吾赢缩之柄不在楮矣。 
现代文：实行的时间长了，减少的纸币就越来越多，铜钱和纸币相当，进行流通，那么操纵我们赢余和亏欠的关键就不是纸币了。 
English: If the implementation time is longer, the reduction of banknotes will increase more and more, and the circulation of copper money will be equivalent to that of banknotes. Then, the key to manipulating our surplus and deficit will not be banknotes.

古文：拜监察御史。
现代文：李宗勉被任命为监察御史。
English: Lee Jong-hun was appointed as the inspector general of history.

古文：时方谋出师汴、洛，宗勉言： 今朝廷安恬，无异于常时。
现代文：当时正谋划出师汴京、洛阳，李宗勉说 ：如今朝廷安静，和平常一样。
English: At that time, he was planning to visit Beijing and Luoyang. Li Zongmeng said, "Nowadays, the imperial court is quiet, as usual.

古文：士卒未精锐，资粮未充衍，器械未犀利，城壁未缮修。
现代文：士卒不精锐，资粮不充足，器械不锋利，城墙没修缮。
English: The soldiers are not elite, the supplies are not sufficient, the equipment is not sharp, and the city walls have not been repaired.

古文：于斯时也，守御犹不可，而欲进取可乎？
现代文：此时守御还不能做好，却想进取能行吗？
English: At this time, the guard can't do it well, but if you want to be aggressive, can you do it?

古文：借曰今日得蔡，明日得海，又明日得宿、毫，然得之者未必可守。
现代文：就算是今日得到蔡州，明日得到海州，后日得到宿州、亳州，然而得到的未必能守住。
English: Even if you get Caizhou today, Haizhou tomorrow, and Suzhou and Zhangzhou the day after, you may not be able to hold on to what you get.

古文：万一含怒蓄忿，变生仓猝，将何以济？
现代文：万一含怒蓄忿，仓猝间发生变故，将怎么处理？
English: In the unlikely event of a sudden change in the situation, how will it be handled?

古文：臣之所陈，岂曰外患之终不可平、土宇终不可复哉？
现代文：臣所讲的，怎能说是外患始终不能平息、国土始终不能收复呢？
English: How can it be said that the foreign invaders can never be pacified and the country can never be recovered from what the minister said?

古文：亦欲量力以有为、相时而后动耳。
现代文：也是想量力而行、适时而动。
English: I also want to do my best and move at the right time.

古文：愿诏大臣，爱日力以修内治，合人谋以严边防，节冗费以裕邦财，招强勇以壮国势。
现代文：希望诏示大臣，爱惜时间以修内政，综合众人的谋略以加强边防，节省冗费以使国家财富充裕，招募强壮勇敢的兵卒以壮大国势。
English: He hoped that the minister would spare time to improve domestic affairs, integrate the strategies of all people to strengthen the border defense, save unnecessary expenses to make the national wealth abundant, and recruit strong and brave soldiers to strengthen the national power.

古文：仍饬沿边将帅，毋好虚名而受实害，左控右扼，毋失机先。
现代文：仍告诫沿边将帅，不要贪图虚名而受到危害，左控右扼，毋失良机。
English: He still cautioned the generals along the border, not to be harmed by coveting a false name, left-hand control, right-hand control, without losing a good opportunity.

古文：则以逸待劳，以主御客，庶可保其无虞。
现代文：那么以逸待劳，以主人的身份防御客人，也就可保边境无忧患。
English: In that case, it would be possible to secure the border without any worries by taking advantage of idleness, and defending the guests as the host.

古文：若使本根壮固，士马精强，观衅而动，用兵未晚。 已而洛师溃，又言： 昔之所虑者在当守而冒进，今之所虑者在欲守而不能。
现代文：如果使国家的根本壮大巩固，兵士战马都精锐强壮，见机而动，用兵不晚。 不久进攻洛阳的军队溃败，他又说 ：过去担心的是应该防守但却贸然进攻，如今担心的是想防守却不能。
English: If the fundamental growth and consolidation of the country is made, the soldiers and horses are all elite and strong, they will move at the right time, and it is not too late to use soldiers. The army that attacked Luoyang was soon defeated, he added: In the past, it was worried that it should be defended but rashly attacked, and now it is worried that it wants to defend but cannot.

古文：何地可控扼，何兵可调遣，何将可捍御，何粮可给饷，皆当预作措画。 又言内降之敝，大略谓： 王府后宅之宫僚，戚里奄寺之恩赏，纶綍直下，不经都省，竿牍陈请，时出禁廷，此皆大臣所当执奏。
现代文：什么地方可控扼敌人，哪支军队可调遣，哪位将领可御敌，哪里的粮食可作为军饷，都应事先做出筹划。 李宗勉又论及皇帝直接发布命令的弊病，大致是： 王府后宫的官员，皇帝内侍的恩赏，都是制令直接发出，不经过都省，各种书札陈请，时常出于后宫，这些都是大臣应该上奏的。
English: It should be planned in advance where the enemy can be controlled, which army can be dispatched, which general can defeat the enemy, and where the grain can be used as military pay. Li Zongmin also discussed the drawbacks of the emperor directly issuing orders, roughly speaking: the officials of the imperial palace and the emperor's courtiers are issuing orders directly, without going through the capital and provinces, and all kinds of books and documents are requested, often from the harem. These are all things that the minister should report.

古文：夫先事而言，见几而谏，不可谓之专。
现代文：事先说出，见到微小的失误就劝谏，这不能说是专权。
English: It cannot be said to be an absolute right to speak out in advance and to give advice in the event of minor mistakes.

古文：善则行之，否则止之，不可谓之专。
现代文：好的就施行，坏的就停止，这不能说是专权。
English: It can't be said to be an absolute right to implement what is good and stop what is bad.

古文：命出君上，政归中书，不可谓之专。
现代文：命令出于皇上，政事归中书，这不能说是专权。
English: Orders emanate from the emperor, and government affairs are the responsibility of the central government, which cannot be said to be an absolute power.

古文：苟以专权为嫌，不以救过为急，每事希旨迎合，迨其命令已下，阙失已彰，然后言事之人从而论列之，其累圣德亦多矣。
现代文：如果以专权为嫌疑，不以挽救过错为急事，每件事都迎合皇上的旨意，等皇上的命令已下达，错误已显露，然后言官才议论它们，这就会连累皇上的很多德政。
English: If autocratic power is suspected, if saving mistakes is not an urgent matter, if everything conforms to the emperor's will, if the emperor's orders have been issued, if mistakes have been revealed, and then officials discuss them, this will affect the emperor's many virtues.

古文：况言之未必听，听之未必行乎？ 
现代文：何况议论的也未必听，听的也未必实行呢？ 
English: How much more, those who hear the word and do it, but do not do it?

古文：进左司谏。
现代文：李宗勉升为左司谏。
English: Li Zong was promoted to Zuo Jie.

古文：明年春，兼侍讲。首言： 均、房、安、蕲、光、化等处兵祸甚烈，然江面可藉以无忧者，犹有襄州，今又告变矣。
现代文：第二年春天，他兼任侍讲，他首先奏道： 均、房、安、蕲、光、化等处兵祸十分严重，长江沿岸可凭借而没有忧患的，只有襄州，现在襄州又有变化了。
English: In the spring of the second year, he also served as an assistant lecturer. He first recited: The military disasters in the provinces of Quanzhou, Fang, An, Handan, Guangxi and Hebei are very serious. The Yangtze River coast can rely on and have no worries, only Xiangzhou. Now Xiangzhou has changed again.

古文：襄州失则江陵危，江陵危则长江之险不足恃。
现代文：襄州失守则江陵危险，江陵危险则长江之险不能凭借。
English: If Xiangzhou is out of control, the Yangtze River will be in danger. If the Yangtze River is in danger, the Yangtze River cannot be relied on.

古文：昔之所虑犹在秋，今之所虑者祗在旦夕。
现代文：从前担心的是在秋天，现在担心的就在旦夕。
English: In the past, people were worried about the autumn, but now they are worried about the impending winter.

古文：江陵或不守，则事迫势蹙，必有存亡之忧，悔将何及？ 拜殿中侍御史。
现代文：江陵如果失守，那么事情紧迫形势危急，必有生死存亡的忧患，后悔怎能来得及？ 李宗勉被任命为殿中侍御史。
English: If Gangneung is lost, then the matter is urgent and the situation is critical, and there must be the sorrow of life and death. How can regret come in time? Li Zongnian was appointed as the attendant of history in the palace.

古文：时淮西制置使兼沿江制置副使史嵩之兼知鄂州，就鄂建牙。
现代文：这时淮西制置使兼沿江制置副使史嵩之兼鄂州知州，在鄂州建衙门。
English: At this time, Shi Songzhi, the western construction commissioner of Huai and the deputy construction commissioner along the Yangtze River, and Chizhou of Ezhou, built a gate in Ezhou.

古文：宗勉言： 荆、襄残破，淮西正当南北之交，嵩之当置司淮西，则脉络相连，可以应援，邈在鄂渚，岂无鞭不及腹之虑。
现代文：李宗勉说： 荆、襄残破，淮西正当南北之间，史嵩之应该在淮西设衙门，那就脉络相连，可以应援，远在鄂渚，那就会有鞭长莫及的忧虑。
English: Li Zongcheng said: Jing and Xiang remain broken, Huaixi is right between the north and the south, Shi Songzhi should set up a gate in Huaixi, then the veins are connected and can receive assistance, far away in Ezhu, then there will be worries beyond the reach of the whip.

古文：若云防江为急，欲藉嵩之于鄂渚经理，然齐安正与武昌对，如就彼措置防扼，则藩篱壮而江面安矣。
现代文：如果说防卫长江是急事，想依靠史嵩之在鄂渚经画，然而齐安正与武昌隔江相望，如果在齐安措置防扼，那就会屏障坚固而江面安全了。
English: If the defense of the Yangtze River is an urgent matter, and you want to rely on Shi Songzhu in Hunan, but Qi'an is across the river from Wuchang, if you take measures to prevent choking in Qi'an, then the barrier will be strong and the river will be safe.

古文：所谓欲保江南先守江北也。
现代文：这就是所谓的要保江南先守江北。
English: This is the so-called need to protect the south of the Yangtze River before the north.

古文：当别择鄂守，径令嵩之移司齐安。 
现代文：应该另选鄂州守将，命令史嵩之把衙门移到齐安。 
English: He should have chosen another Ezhou governor and ordered Shi Songzhi to move the gate to Qian.

古文：诏侍从、两省、台谏条陈边事，宗勉率合台奏： 蜀之四路，已失其二，成都隔绝，莫知存亡。
现代文：诏命侍从、两省、台谏逐条上奏边事，李宗勉率僚属上奏说： 蜀地四路，已失去二路，成都隔绝，不知存亡。
English: The emperor ordered the attendants, the two provinces and Taiwan to report on the side issues one by one. Li Zongmeng led his subordinates to report: Shu four roads, two roads have been lost, Chengdu is isolated, I don't know whether it will survive or not.

古文：诸司退保夔门，未必能守。
现代文：各官署退保夔门，未必能守住。
English: It is not likely that the various government agencies will be able to keep their doors open.

古文：襄汉昨失九郡，今郢破，荆门又破，江陵孤城，何以能立？
现代文：襄汉先失去九郡，现在郢又被攻破，荆门也被攻破，剩下江陵一座孤城，怎能独存？
English: Xianghan first lost nine counties, and now Shantou has been breached again, Jingmen has also been breached, leaving Gangneung a lonely city. How can it survive alone?

古文：两淮之地，人民奔迸，井邑丘墟，呜呼危哉！
现代文：两淮地区，人民奔逃，背井离乡，十分危险了！
English: It is very dangerous for people to run away and leave their hometowns in the Shuaihuai region!

古文：陛下诚能亟下哀痛之诏，以身率先，深自贬损，服御饮宴，一从简俭，放后宫浮食之女，罢掖庭不急之费，止锡赍，绝工役，出内帑储蓄以风动四方。
现代文：陛下果真能马上下哀痛之诏，以身作则，大大减少各种费用，衣服、车马、宴会，都应从简，放后宫中不耕而食的宫女，罢去宫中不急需的费用，停止赏赐和修建各种亭台楼阁，拿出皇室的储蓄来感召天下。
English: His Majesty really can immediately issue a decree of sorrow, lead by example, greatly reduce various expenses, clothes, cars, horses, banquets, should be from Jane, put the palace maids who do not work and eat in the harem, eliminate unnecessary expenses in the palace, stop rewarding and building various pavilions and pavilions, and take out the royal savings to inspire the world.

古文：然后劝谕戚畹、世臣，随力输财，以佐公家之调度。
现代文：然后劝谕皇亲国戚，世代臣僚，根据自己的能力拿出自己的财产，来帮助解决国家的财政困难。
English: Then he advised the emperor's relatives, relatives of the country, and generational ministers to take out their own property according to their ability to help solve the country's financial difficulties.

古文：分上流淮西、淮东为三帅，而以江淮大帅总之。
现代文：分上游淮西、淮东为三帅，由江淮大帅统一指挥。
English: The upstream Huaixi and Huaidong were divided into three commands, under the unified command of the Jianghuai general.

古文：或因今任，或择长才，分地而守，听令而行。
现代文：或者就按现在的官职，或者选拔人才，让他们分地防守，听到命令就行动。
English: Either they will act in accordance with their current official position, or they will select talented people, let them defend separately, and act when they hear orders.

古文：以公私之财分给四处，俾之招溃卒，募流民之强壮者，以充游兵，以补军籍。
现代文：把公私的财物分给各地，让他们招集散兵，招募强壮的流民，使他们充当游兵，来补充军队的缺额。
English: Distribute public and private wealth to all regions so that they can recruit foot soldiers, recruit strong migrants, and make them serve as guerrillas to supplement the army's shortfall.

古文：仍选沿流诸郡将士为捍御之图，犹可支吾。
现代文：仍选沿江各郡的将士做好防御的准备，才能支撑局面。
English: It is still necessary to select soldiers from counties along the river to prepare for defense in order to support the situation.

古文：不然将水陆俱下，大合荆楚之众，扰我上流，江以南震荡矣。
现代文：不然金人将水陆并进，集结荆楚的力量，侵扰我方的上游，江南就危险了。
English: Otherwise, the Jin people will advance along the water and land, gather the strength of the Jing Chu, and invade our upstream, and the south of the river will be in danger.

古文：或谓其势强盛，宜于讲和，欲出金缯以奉之，是抱薪救火，空国与敌矣。 
现代文：有人认为金人气势强盛，应与他们讲和，想拿金帛献给他们，这是抱薪救火，让我们把国家的财富都给敌人啊。 
English: Some people think that the gold people are powerful and should make peace with them, and want to take the gold ingot to them. This is to save the fire, let's give the country's wealth to the enemy.

古文：进工部侍郎兼给事中，仍侍讲。
现代文：李宗勉升为工部侍郎兼给事中，仍为侍讲。
English: Li Zong was promoted to the position of the attendant of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce and was still an attendant speaker.

古文：复上疏言： 陛下忧勤于路朝之顷，而入为宴安所移，切劘于广厦之间，而退为便佞所惑。
现代文：他又上疏说 ：陛下在朝廷上对国家的安危忧虑、操心，但入后宫后就被享乐所转移；在朝廷上还与群臣切磋，退朝后就被那些能接近皇上的邪佞小人所迷惑。
English: He went on to say: His Majesty worried and worried about the safety of the country at court, but after entering the harem, he was diverted by pleasure; at court, he also competed with the courtiers, and after retiring, he was confused by those evil villains who could get close to the emperor.

古文：不闻减退宫女，而嫔嫱已溢于昔时；不闻褒录功臣，而节钺先加于外戚；不闻出内贮以犒战士，而金帛多靡于浮费。
现代文：没听说减放宫女，而嫔嫱比过去还多；没听说奖励功臣，而节钺先给外戚；没听说拿出皇家储备来犒赏战士，而金帛多被浪费。
English: I have not heard that the number of imperial concubines has been reduced, while the number of imperial concubines has increased; I have not heard that meritorious warriors have been rewarded, while the first imperial concubines have been given to relatives; I have not heard that imperial reserves have been taken out to reward warriors, while more imperial gold has been wasted.

古文：陛下之举动，人心所视以为卷舒者也。
现代文：陛下的举动，是人心向背的依据。陛下既然不以为忧，那么谁会替陛下担忧呢？ 
English: His Majesty's action is the basis for people's hearts to turn back. Since His Majesty is not worried, then who will worry for His Majesty?

古文：陛下既不以为忧，则谁复为陛下忧。 擢谏议大夫兼侍读。
现代文：李宗勉被提升为谏议大夫兼侍读。
English: Li Zongcheng has been promoted to the post of chief advisor and attendant.

古文：首言边事当增兵防托上流。
现代文：他首先讲边防的事应该增兵防御上游。
English: First of all, he said that the border defense should increase the number of troops to defend the upstream.

古文：又言： 求谏非难而受谏为难，受谏非难而从谏为难。
现代文：又说 ：求谏不难而接受劝谏难，接受劝谏不难而执行劝谏难。
English: He also said: it is not difficult to ask for advice, but it is difficult to accept advice; it is not difficult to accept advice, but it is difficult to implement advice.

古文：苟闻之不以为戒，玩之不以为信，卒使危言鲠论，无益于世用，无救于时危，其与拒谏者相去一间耳。 
现代文：如果听一劝谏不做戒备，轻视它而不相信，最终会使正直的言论，对国家无益，对当时的危局无救，这和拒绝劝谏的人只相差一点了。 
English: If you listen to a persuasion without being alert, if you despise it and do not believe in it, you will eventually make an honest speech, which is not beneficial to the country and not helpful to the current crisis, which is only a little different from those who refuse to persuade.

古文：进端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事。
现代文：李宗勉升为端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事。
English: Li Zong was promoted to Duanming palace bachelor, and signed the same letter to the Privy Council.

古文：未几，进签书。
现代文：不久，升为签书。
English: Soon, he was promoted to a signer.

古文：时王楫复求岁币银绢各二十万，宗勉言： 轻诺者多后患，当守元约可也。
现代文：这时王鰗又索求岁币银绢各二十万，李宗勉说： 轻易许诺的事后患很多，应该遵守原来的条约。
English: At this time, Wang Yao also asked for two hundred thousand yuan and silver ingots respectively. Li Zongmeng said: There are many problems after the event of easy promises, and we should abide by the original treaty.

古文：然比之开禧时，物价腾踊奚啻倍蓰矣。 史嵩之开督府，力主和议，宗勉言： 使者可疑者三。
现代文：但同开禧年间比，物价已涨几倍了。 史嵩之设督府，力主和议，李宗勉说 ：使者可疑者有三点。
English: However, compared to the same period in the first half of the year, prices have risen several times. Shi Song's establishment of the governor's office, the main force of the peace talks, Li Zongmeng said: There are three points that are suspicious of the messenger.

古文：嵩之职在督战，如收复襄、光，控扼施、澧，招集山砦，保固江流，皆今所当为。
现代文：史嵩之的职责是督战，如收复襄、光，控制施、澧，招集各山寨，保护和巩固江防，都是他现在该做的。
English: Shi Songzhi's duty is to supervise the war, such as recovering Xiang and Guang, controlling Shi and Yan, summoning all the villages, protecting and consolidating the river defense, all of which he should do now.

古文：若所主在和，则凡有机会可乘，不无退缩之意，必至虚捐岁月，坐失事功。 
现代文：如果他主和，那么凡有机会可乘，他都会退缩，定会虚度岁月，坐失灭敌的良机。 
English: If he makes peace, then whenever there is an opportunity to take advantage of, he will shrink back, will certainly waste time, and miss the opportunity to destroy the enemy.

古文：进参知政事。
现代文：李宗勉升为参知政事。
English: Li Zong was promoted to the post of vice-governor.

古文：甫少服父驯，谓学者当师圣人，以自得为贵。
现代文：他被任命为左丞相兼枢密使后，遵守法度，抑制侥幸，不私亲党，召用老成的人，尤其爱听正直的话。
English: After he was appointed as the Minister of the Left and the Minister of the Privy Council, he abided by the law, restrained luck, was not selfishly pro-party, used experienced people, and especially loved to listen to honest words.

古文：又从杨简问学，自谓 吾观草木之发生，听禽鸟之和鸣，与我心契，其乐无涯 云。刘黻，字声伯，乐清人。
现代文：赵汝胜曾认为李宗勉是公正清廉的宰相。李宗勉以光禄大夫、观文殿大学士的身份辞官，他去世后，被赠为少师，谥号 文清 。刘黻，字声伯，乐清人。
English: Zhao Rusheng once believed that Li Zongmeng was a fair and honest prime minister. Li Zongmeng served as a magistrate in the capacity of a doctor of Guanglu and a scholar of Guanwen Temple. After his death, he was presented as a young teacher, with the nickname Wenqing. Liu Wei, a poet, was a person of Yueqing.

古文：早有令闻，读书雁荡山中僧寺。
现代文：早有好名声，在雁荡山的僧寺中读书。
English: He already had a good reputation and studied at a Buddhist monastery in the Wild Goose Mountains.

古文：年三十四，以淳祐十年试入太学，侪辈已翕然称之。
现代文：三十四岁时，参加淳十年的考试进入太学，同辈已很赞赏他。
English: At the age of thirty-four, he took the Jun 10 exam to enter Taigaku, and his peers already appreciated him very much.

古文：时丁大全方为台属，劾奏丞相董槐，迫逐去国，将夺其位。
现代文：当时丁大全正为御史，劾奏丞相董槐，迫使他退职，将夺取他的相位。
English: At that time, Ding Daquan was in charge of the imperial history, and he impeached the Minister of Song, Dong Xuan, and forced him to retire, and he would seize his position.

古文：黻率同舍生伏阙上书，大概言朝廷进退大臣，须当以礼。
现代文：刘黻率同舍生拜伏在宫殿下上书，大概说朝廷任用和罢免大臣，都应符合礼。
English: Liu Bei and his sons prostrated themselves at the foot of the palace and wrote a letter, saying that the appointment and dismissal of ministers by the imperial court should be in accordance with etiquette.

古文：书上，忤执政，送南安军安置，归别其母解氏。
现代文：上书后，触犯了执政，刘黻被送到南安军安置，他回家与母亲解氏告别。
English: After the letter was published, he violated the ruling, and Liu Wei was sent to the Nan'an Army for resettlement. He went home to bid farewell to his mother.

古文：解氏曰： 为臣死忠，以直被贬，分也。
现代文：解氏说： 做臣的应死于忠，你因直言被贬，是本分。
English: Mr. Xie said: It is the duty of a minister to die for loyalty, and it is the duty of a minister to be demoted for speaking out.

古文：速行！ 黻至南安，尽取濂、洛诸子之书，摘其精切之语，辑成书十卷，名曰《濂洛论语》。
现代文：赶快上路吧！ 刘黻到南安，把濂、洛学派每个人的书都拿来，摘录他们的精切之语，编辑成一本十卷的书，叫《濂洛论语》。
English: Hurry up and get on your way! Liu Bei went to Nan'an, brought the books of everyone from the Luo and Luo schools, extracted their fine sayings, and edited them into a ten-volume book called "The Analects of Luo."

古文：及大全贬，黻还太学。
现代文：丁大全被贬后，刘黻回到太学。
English: After Ding Daquan was demoted, Liu Yao returned to Taixu.

古文：未几，侍御史陈垓诬劾程公许，右正言蔡荥诬劾黄之纯，二公罢出，六馆相顾失色，黻又率诸生上书言：
现代文：不久，侍御史陈垓诬陷程公许，右正言蔡荥诬陷黄之纯，程、黄二人都被罢出朝廷，六馆的人相见失色，不敢申辩，刘黻又率太学生上书说：
English: Not long after, the courtier and historian Chen Zhi framed Cheng Guoxian, and the right-wing righteous Cai Zhi framed Huang Zhunchun. Both Cheng and Huang were expelled from the imperial court. The people of the Six Pavilion lost their color and did not dare to defend themselves. Liu Zhi also led the students to write:

古文：黻等蒙被教养，视国家休戚利害若己痛养。
现代文： 刘黻等蒙受教养，把国家的休戚利害看成自己的痛痒。
English: Liu Wei and others have been educated to regard the interests of the country as their own.

古文：朝廷进一君子，台谏发一公论，则弹冠相庆，喜溢肺膺。
现代文：朝廷进用一个君子，台谏发出一个公论，我们就高兴地庆贺，喜悦充满肺腹。
English: The imperial court promoted a gentleman, the emperor issued a public opinion, we are happy to celebrate, joy fills the lungs.

古文：至若君子郁而不获用，公论沮而不克伸，则忧愤忡结，寝食俱废。
现代文：如果君子忧郁而不被任用，公论被阻止而不能伸张，我们就忧愤不安，吃不下饭，睡不好觉。
English: If a gentleman is gloomy and is not appointed, and public speech is prevented and cannot be extended, we will be sad and anxious, unable to eat and sleep well.

古文：臣闻扶植宗社在君子，扶植君子在公论。
现代文：我们听说辅佐国家靠君子，辅助君子靠公论。
English: We have heard that supporting the country depends on the gentleman, and supporting the gentleman depends on public opinion.

古文：陛下在位几三十年，端平间公正萃朝，忠谠接武，天下翕然曰： 此小元祐也。 淳祐初，大奸屏迹，善类在位，天下又翕然曰： 此又一端平也。 奈何年来培养保护之初心，不能不为之转移。
现代文：陛下在位将近三十年，端平年间公正的人都聚集在朝中，忠直的人层出不穷，天下人都说： 这是小元啊。 淳初年，奸邪的人被斥退，善良的人掌权，天下人又都说 ：这是又一个端平啊。 无奈近年来被培养、保护的最初的志向，不能不为之转移。
English: His Majesty has been on the throne for nearly thirty years. During the Deng era, fair-minded people gathered in the center of the government, and loyal and upright people came out in droves. People all over the world said, "This is Xiao Yuan." In the first year of the Deng era, evil-doers were driven out, and good-hearted people took power. People all over the world said, "This is another Deng." However, the original aspiration, which has been nurtured and protected in recent years, cannot but be transferred.

古文：祖宗建置台谏，本以伸君子而折小人，昌公论而杜私说。
现代文： 祖宗设置台谏，本来是用于替君子伸张而驳斥小人，提倡公论而杜绝私说。
English: The ancestor set up a platform, which was originally used to refute the villain on behalf of the gentleman, and to promote public discourse and eliminate private discourse.

古文：乃今老饕自肆，奸种相仍，以谄谀承风旨，以倾险设机阱，以淟涊盗官爵。
现代文：如今老练的贪官为所欲为，奸邪的人相继出现，他们靠阿谀逢迎秉承皇上的旨意，用尽阴险的手段设置陷阱，靠污浊的手段盗取官位爵位。
English: Nowadays, experienced corrupt officials do whatever they want, and traitors appear one after another. They rely on flattery to adhere to the emperor's will, use insidious means to set traps, and use dirty means to steal official positions and titles.

古文：陛下非不识拔群贤，彼则忍于空君子之党；陛下非不容受直言，彼则勇于倒公议之戈。
现代文：陛下不是不知道选拔贤能的人们，他们却忍心没有君子；陛下不是不接受忠直的话，他们却敢于背叛公议。
English: It is not that your majesty does not know how to select men of ability, but that they do not have the heart to be gentlemen; it is not that your majesty does not accept honest words, but that they dare to betray public opinion.

古文：不知陛下何负此辈，而彼乃负陛下至此耶？
现代文：不知陛下什么地方违背了他们，他们就这样辜负陛下吗？
English: Did they betray your majesty in this way without your majesty knowing where they had been betrayed?

古文：当陛下诏起汇髦之秋，而公许起自家食，正君子觇之，以为进退之机。
现代文： 当陛下下诏命召贤纳士的时候，而程公许以平民百姓的身份入朝为官，正人君子知道后，认为是进君子退小人的时机。
English: When His Majesty issued an imperial edict calling for the virtuous, and Cheng Kung-hsi agreed to enter the imperial court as a commoner, the upright gentleman knew that it was the right time for him to retire.

古文：乃今坐席未温，弹章已上，一公许去，若未害也，臣恐草野诸贤，见几深遁，而君子之脉自此绝矣。
现代文：而今坐席还没热乎，被弹劾的奏章已经献上，一个程公许离开，好像没有什么危害，我们恐怕没出来做官的各位贤人，看见这种情况就隐居起来，而君子的体系从此就不存在了。
English: Now, however, the seat is not yet warm, the impeachment report has been presented, and there seems to be no harm in one Cheng Gong leaving. I am afraid that all of you wise men who did not come out to be officials will see this situation and go into seclusion, and the gentleman's system will no longer exist.

古文：比年朋邪记焰，缄默成风，奏事者不过袭陈言、应故事而已。
现代文：近年来一伙邪恶的人煽风点火，不议论朝政得失形成风气，奏事的人不过是沿袭旧话、用旧事应付而已。
English: In recent years, a group of evil people have fanned the flames, forming a culture of not discussing the gains and losses of the government. Those who report the matter are just following the old saying and dealing with the old matter.

古文：幸而之纯两疏，差强人意。
现代文：幸而黄之纯两次上疏，符合人心。
English: Fortunately, Huang Zi's pure double ascension is in line with the people's will.

古文：乃今软媚者全身，鲠直者去国，一之纯去，若未害也，臣恐道路以目，欲言辄沮，而公论之脉自此绝矣。
现代文：而今软弱献媚的人得以保全，而刚直的人被罢免，一个黄之纯离去，好像没有什么危害，我们恐怕人们慑于暴政，敢怒而不敢言，而公论的体系从此不存在了。
English: But now the weak and flattering are preserved, and the upright are deposed. A yellow-and-pure departure seems to be no harm. We are afraid that people will be intimidated by tyranny, dare to be angry and dare not speak, and the system of public opinion will no longer exist.

古文：况今天下可言之事不为少，可攻之恶不为不多。
现代文： 何况现在可以讲的事不少，可以指责的罪恶不是不多。
English: Moreover, there are many things that can be talked about now, and there are not many evils that can be blamed.

古文：术穷桑、孔，浸有逼上之嫌；势挟金、张，滥处牧民之职。
现代文：奸邪的人用尽桑弘羊和孔仅的理财方法，逐渐有逼迫皇上的嫌疑，权势超过金日石单和张汤这样的功臣世族，滥任管理百姓的职务。
English: The treacherous people have exhausted the financial management methods of Kuang, Hongyang and Kong, and are gradually suspected of persecuting the emperor. Their power exceeds that of heroes such as Kim Il-sung and Zhang Tang, and they abuse their duties to manage the people.

古文：以乳臭騃子而躐登从橐，以光范私人而累典辅藩。钱神通灵于旁蹊，公器反类于互市。
现代文：使幼稚和愚呆的人超升到谋划国事的要职，使自己荣光却连累了地方。用钱神打通歪门邪道很灵验，名位、爵禄反而同商品类似，可以买卖。
English: They have elevated naive and stupid people to important positions in the planning of national affairs, and they have made themselves glorious, but they have also burdened the localities. It is very effective to use the god of money to break through the crooked doors and evil ways. On the contrary, the name and peerage are similar to commodities and can be bought and sold.

古文：天下皆知之，岂陛下独不知之。
现代文：天下的人都知道这些，难道只有陛下不知道嘛？
English: Everyone in the world knows this. Is it only His Majesty who doesn't know?

古文：正惟为陛下纪纲者知为身谋，不为陛下谋。
现代文：正是替陛下制定法度的人知道为自己打算，不为陛下打算。
English: It is those who make laws for His Majesty who know how to make them for themselves, not for His Majesty.

古文：陛下明烛事几，讵可堕此辈蒙蔽术中，何忍以祖宗三百年风宪之司，而坏于一二小人之手耶？
现代文：陛下明察秋毫，哪能落入这些人的蒙蔽中，怎能忍心让祖宗三百年的御史台和谏院坏在一二个小人的手中呢？
English: Your Majesty clearly sees what is going on, how can you fall into the trap of these people, how can you bear to let the 300-year-old Imperial History Museum and the Imperial Summer Palace fall into the hands of one or two villains?

古文：臣汝腾，陛下之刘向也，则以忠鲠斥；臣子才、臣栋、臣伯玉，陛下之汲黯也，则以切直罢。
现代文：赵汝腾，是陛下的刘向，却因为忠直被贬斥；牟子才、杨栋、李伯玉，是陛下的汲黯，却因为忠直被罢免。
English: Zhao Ruten, the Liu Xiang of His Majesty, was disparaged because of his loyalty; Mu Zi Cai, Yang Dong, and Li Boyu, the Kuching of His Majesty, were dismissed because of their loyalty.

古文：遂使淳祐诸君子日消月磨，至今几为之一空。
现代文：于是就使淳时众多的君子日消月磨，到如今几乎是没有了。
English: As a result, Junshi's numerous courtiers were worn out day by day, and now they are almost nonexistent.

古文：彼诚何心哉？
现代文：他们到底是安的什么心？
English: What do they really think of Ann?

古文：高宗绍兴二十年之诏，有谓 台谏风宪之地，年来用人非据，与大臣为友党，济其喜怒，甚非耳目之寄。 臣窃观近事，不独台谏为大臣友党，内简相传，风旨相谕，且甘为鹰犬而听其指嗾焉。
现代文： 高宗绍兴二十年的诏书，其中讲道 ：台谏是劝谏皇帝、监督百官的地方，近年来，任用的台谏官不可靠，他们和大臣结成党羽，帮助他们说话，实在不能作为耳目。 我们观察最近的事，台谏不仅和大臣结成党羽，在统治者内部互通风声和信息，皇上有什么想法也及时相告，而且还甘心作为爪牙听从他们的指使。
English: Gao Zong's edict for the 20th year of Shaoxing, in which he preached: Taibei is the place to advise the emperor and supervise the hundred officials. In recent years, the appointed Taibei officials are unreliable. They have formed a party with the minister to help them speak, and they really cannot be the eyes and ears. We observe the recent events. Taibei not only formed a party with the minister, exchanged rumors and information within the ruler, and promptly told the emperor what ideas he had, but also willingly obeyed their orders as a minion.

古文：宰相所不乐者，外若示以优容，而阴实颐指台谏以去之；台谏所弹击者，外若不相为谋，而阴实奉承宰相以行之。
现代文：宰相不喜欢的人，表面上好像对他态度很好，而暗地里实际在指使台谏弹劾他，使他罢官；台谏弹劾攻击的人，表面上好像没与宰相共同谋划，而暗地里实际是秉承宰相的意思而施行的。
English: Those who are disliked by the prime minister seem to have a good attitude towards him on the surface, but secretly they are actually instructing the emperor to impeach him and remove him from office; those who are impeached and attacked by the emperor seem to have no common plan with the prime minister on the surface, but secretly they are actually carrying out the prime minister's will.

古文：方公许之召也，天下皆知独断于宸衷，及公许之来也，天下亦知尝得罪于时宰，岂料陛下之恩终不足恃，宰相之嗔竟不可逃耶？
现代文：在程公许被召用时，天下人都知道是出自陛下的心意，程公许来了之后，天下人也知道他曾得罪了当时的宰相，哪料到陛下的恩惠最终是靠不住的，宰相的不满最终是不能逃脱的呢？
English: When Cheng Kung Ho was summoned, the whole world knew that it came from His Majesty's heart. After Cheng Kung Ho came, the whole world also knew that he had offended the then Prime Minister. Who would have expected that His Majesty's favor would eventually be unreliable, and that the Prime Minister's dissatisfaction would eventually be unavoidable?

古文：陛下万机之暇，试以公许、之纯与垓、荥等熟思而静评之，其言论孰正孰邪，孰忠孰佞，虽中智以下之主，犹知判别是非，况以陛下明圣而顾不察此？
现代文： 陛下在处理繁杂事务的空闲时间，试着把程公许、黄之纯同陈垓、蔡荥等人认真思考并平心静气地评判一番，他们的言论谁的正、谁的邪，谁的忠诚，谁的奸佞，即使是中等智力以下的君主，还知道判别是非，何况凭着陛下的圣明，能不察觉这些？
English: In his leisure time, when dealing with complex matters, His Majesty tries to seriously think about and calmly judge Cheng Gongzhuang, Huang Zhichun, Chen Qi, Cai Qi and others. Whose speech is right, whose is evil, whose is loyal, whose is treacherous? Even a monarch with less than average intelligence still knows how to judge right and wrong. What's more, with His Majesty's holiness, can he not detect these?

古文：近见公许奏疏，尝告陛下揭至公以示天下；垓则以秘密之说惑上听，公许尝告陛下以宠赂日章，官邪无警，欲塞幸门，绝曲径；垓则纵侠客以兜揽关节，持阔扁以胁取举状，开赂门以簸弄按章。
现代文：近日见到程公许的奏疏，他曾告诉陛下要持公正给天下人看；陈垓则用秘密的思想来蛊惑陛下。程公许曾告诉陛下私宠和贿赂日益明显，官吏违法失职没有警告，希望能堵塞权贵亲幸之门，断绝邪路；陈垓则怂恿侠客搞通贿请托的事，依仗自己知道事情的底细来强制性地取得官员的推荐，开贿赂之门以玩弄检举官员过失的奏章。
English: Recently, I saw Cheng Gongxu's report. He had told His Majesty to be fair to the people of the world; Chen Yao used secret thoughts to seduce His Majesty. Cheng Gongxu had told His Majesty that favoritism and bribery were becoming increasingly obvious, that officials were violating the law and failing to perform their duties without warning, hoping to block the door of power and wealth and break the evil path; Chen Yao was a knight who engaged in bribery, relying on his knowledge of the details of the matter to compulsively obtain the recommendation of officials, opening the door to bribery by playing the role of investigating the negligence of officials.

古文：至若之纯之告陛下，力伸邪正之辩，明斥媚相之非，謇謇谔谔，流出肺肝；荥身居言责，闻其风声，自当愧死，尚敢妄肆萋菲，略无人心乎？
现代文：至于黄之纯告诉陛下，要大力伸张对邪恶和正直的分辨，明确斥责巴结宰相的罪过，这些话慷慨激昂，出自肺腹；蔡荥身为言官，听到黄之纯的话，本该惭愧，他竟敢妄加篡改，还有点人心吗？
English: As for Huang Zhichun telling His Majesty to vigorously assert the distinction between evil and honesty, and to clearly rebuke the sins of Prime Minister Bao Jie, these words were impassioned and came from his heart; Cai Ye, as a spokesman, should have been ashamed to hear Huang Zhichun's words. How dare he tamper with them? Does he still have a heart?

古文：且陛下擢用台谏，若臣磊卿、臣咨夔、臣应起、臣汉弼、臣凯、臣燧，光明俊伟，卓为天下称首，然甫入而遽迁，或一鸣而辄斥，独垓、荥辈贪饕顽忍，久污要津，根据而不拔，刘向所谓 用贤转石，去佞拔山 者，乃今见之，可不畏哉？
现代文： 况且陛下任用台谏，像磊卿、咨夔、应起、汉弼、凯、燧等大臣，他们光明磊落，被天下人称赞，但他们才任职不久就马上被调走，有的人刚一讲话就被贬，只有陈垓、蔡荥之流贪婪愚顽，长期玷污显要的职位，根深蒂固，不能动摇，刘向所说的 任用贤能就像搬石头那么容易，除去奸佞就像拔掉山那么困难 这句话，现在看到了，能不害怕吗？
English: Moreover, His Majesty appointed ministers such as Lei Xie, Zhe Jun, Ying Zhi, Han Zheng, Kai, Zhai, etc. They were honest and praised by the world, but they were transferred out immediately after taking office. Some people were demoted as soon as they spoke. Only Chen Zheng and Cai Zheng were greedy and stupid. They had long tarnished prominent positions. They were entrenched and could not be shaken. Liu Xiang said, "Appointing a competent person is as easy as moving a stone, and removing a traitor is as difficult as pulling up a mountain." Can you not be afraid of this sentence when you see it now?

古文：矧今国嗣未正，事会方殷，民生膏血，朘削殆尽，所赖以祈天命，系人心，惟君子与公论一脉耳。
现代文：况且现在还没立皇太子，事情很多，老百姓的财富，几乎被剥削光了，所依赖的是祈求天命，维护人心，只有君子和公论才能做到。
English: Moreover, there is still no crown prince, there are many things to be done, the wealth of the common people has almost been exploited, and what is relied on is to pray for the fate of heaven and safeguard the hearts of the people, which can only be done by a gentleman and a public opinion.

古文：小人以不恤之心，为无忌惮之事，其意不过欲爵位日穹，权势日盛，以富贵遣子孙耳，岂暇为国家计哉。
现代文：小人以不体恤国家的心，做那些肆无忌惮的事，他们的用意不过是想使自己的爵位越来越高，权势越来越大，把富贵传给子孙罢了，哪有时间替国家谋划呢？
English: The villains do those unscrupulous things with a heart that does not sympathize with the country. Their intention is just to make their ranks higher and higher, to gain more and more power, and to pass on wealth to their children and grandchildren. How can they have time to plan for the country?

古文：自昔天下之患，莫大于举朝无公论，空国无君子。
现代文： 自古天下的祸患，没有比整个朝中没有公论，整个国家没有君子更大的。
English: Since ancient times, there has been no greater calamity in the world than an entire dynasty without a public opinion and an entire country without a gentleman.

古文：我朝本无大失德于天下，而乃有宣、靖之祸，夫岂无其故哉？
现代文：我朝本来在天下没失大德，却出现了宣和、靖康之祸，这难道没有其中的原因吗？
English: Originally, my dynasty did not lose its great virtue in the world, but the calamity of proclamation of peace and pacification occurred. Is this not one of the reasons?

古文：始则邪正交攻，更出迭入，中则朋邪翼伪，阴陷潜诋，终则倒置是非，变乱黑白，不至于党祸不止。
现代文：开始时是奸邪和忠正互相攻击，轮番取胜，中期则是奸邪的人结成朋党掩蔽诡诈，暗中陷害和诋毁忠良，最后则是是非颠倒，黑白混淆，不造成党祸不罢休。
English: At the beginning, the treacherous and the loyal attacked each other and took turns to win. In the middle, the treacherous people formed a crony party to cover up the treachery, secretly framed and slandered the loyal. Finally, they reversed the rights and wrongs, confused black and white, and did not stop at causing the party disaster.

古文：向使刘安世、陈瓘诸贤尚无恙，杨畏、张商英、周秩辈不久据台纲，其祸岂至此烈。
现代文：如果刘安世、陈馞这些贤人还平安无事，杨畏、张商英、周秩之流不长期把持言路，哪能有那么大的祸端。
English: If Liu Anshi and Chen Xi, these wise men, are still safe and sound, and Yang Di, Zhang Shangying, and Zhou Ritchi do not hold the road of speech for a long time, how can there be such a big disaster.

古文：古语云： 前车覆，后车戒。 今朝廷善类无几，心怀奸险者，则以文藻饰佞舌；志在依违者，则以首鼠持圆机。
现代文：古语说 前车的覆辙，是后车的借鉴 。如今朝廷善良的人所剩无几，心怀奸险的人，就用华丽的词藻装饰自己能说会道的舌头；心思不定的人，就用首鼠两端的办法保持自己的完整。
English: The ancients said that what goes around comes around. Today, there are few good people left in the imperial court. Those with treacherous hearts decorate their tongues with ornate words; those with uncertain hearts keep themselves whole by using both ends of the stick.

古文：宗社大计，孰肯明目张胆为陛下伸一喙者，则其势必终于空国无君子，举朝无公论。
现代文：国家大计，有谁肯替陛下说一句话，这就势所必然地出现整个国家没有君子，整个朝廷没有公论的局面。
English: In the grand scheme of things, who would say a word on behalf of His Majesty? This inevitably led to a situation in which the entire country was without a gentleman and the entire imperial court was without public discourse.

古文：无君子，无公论，脱有缓急，彼一二憸人者，陛下独可倚仗之乎？
现代文：没有君子，没有公论，假如有危急，那一二个小人，陛下只能倚仗他们吗？
English: There is no gentleman, no public opinion, if there is a crisis, those one or two villains, your majesty can only rely on them?

古文：若垓之罪，又浮于荥，虽两观之诛，四裔之投，犹为轻典，陛下留之一日，则长一日之祸，异时虽借尚方剑以砺其首，尚何救于国事之万一哉？
现代文： 陈垓的罪过，又超过蔡荥，即使对他处以两观之诛，把他流放到最偏远的地方，仍然是处治的轻，陛下留他一天，就增加一天的祸患，到那时即使用尚方剑砍他的头，又怎么挽救国家出现的危机呢？ 
English: Chen Xuan's sins are even greater than Cai Xuan's. Even if he were to be sentenced to exile to the most remote place, it would still be a light punishment. If His Majesty kept him for a day, it would only add to his woes. At that time, even if he were to use the Shangfang sword to cut off his head, how would he be able to save the country from the crisis?

古文：又曰： 自昔大奸巨孽，投闲散地，惟觇朝廷意向，以图进用之机。
现代文：刘黻又说： 自古大奸邪，都居于闲散不重要的职位，他们侦察皇帝的意图，以便谋求被任用的机会。
English: Liu Ye also said: Since ancient times, the great traitors have all lived in idle, unimportant positions. They scout the emperor's intentions in order to seek the opportunity to be appointed.

古文：元祐间，章惇、吕惠卿皆在贬所。
现代文：元年间，章、吕惠卿都在被贬谪的地方。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, Zhang and Lü Huiqing were both demoted.

古文：自吕大防用杨畏为御史，初意不过信用私人，牢护局面，不知小人得志，摇唇鼓吻，一时正人旋被斥逐，继而章惇复柄用，虽大防亦不能安其身于朝廷之上。
现代文：自从吕大防任用杨畏担任御史，最初不过是想任用自己的亲信，巩固自己的地位，不知道小人得志后，摇唇鼓舌，当时的正人君子很快被斥逐，接着章又被任用，就是吕大防也不能在朝廷安身。
English: Since the appointment of Yang Jie as the imperial historian by Lv Dadafo, at first, he just wanted to appoint his cronies to consolidate his position. He did not know that after the villain won the title, his lips quivered. The righteous gentleman at that time was quickly expelled, and then Zhang was appointed again. Even Lv Dadafo could not settle down in the imperial court.

古文：今右辖久虚，奸臣垂涎有日矣。
现代文：如今右丞的官职长期空缺，奸臣垂涎这个位置已有些日子了。
English: Now Ujo's post has been vacant for a long time, and the treacherous vassal has coveted this position for some time.

古文：闻之道路，馈遗不止于鞭靴，脉络潜通于禁近，正陛下明察事机之时。
现代文：在路上听说，现在贿赂的东西不仅仅是马鞭和靴子，贿赂的途径也是暗中与宫内的人相通，这正是陛下明察事情的关键的时机。
English: On the way, I heard that nowadays bribery is not just about horsewhips and boots, but the means of bribery is also secretly communicating with people in the palace. This is the crucial time for His Majesty to see things clearly.

古文：若公论不明，正人引去，则迟回展转，钧衡重寄，必归于章惇等乃止。
现代文：如果公论不鲜明，正人君子被罢去，那么徘徊辗转，评量人才的重托，必然归属于章等人。
English: If the public opinion is not clear, and the upright gentleman is ousted, then the wandering, the re-assignment of the evaluation of talents will inevitably belong to Zhang and others.

古文：今日之天下，乃祖宗艰难积累之天下，岂堪此辈再坏耶？ 
现代文：今日的天下，是祖宗艰难创业而积累起来的天下，怎能承受这些人再破坏呢？ 
English: Today's world is the world that our ancestors built up through hard work and entrepreneurship. How can it withstand further destruction by these people?

古文：又谏游幸疏曰：
现代文：刘黻又在劝谏游玩巡幸的奏疏中说：
English: Liu Ye also said in the recitation of the exhortation to the troupe to go sightseeing:

古文：天下有道，人主以忧勤而忘逸乐；天下无道，人主以逸乐而忘忧勤。
现代文： 国家政治清明，是人主由于忧愁和劳苦而忘了安逸和享乐；国家政治腐败，是人主由于安逸和享乐而忘了忧愁和劳苦。
English: When a country's politics are clean, it is because the people's masters have forgotten ease and pleasure because of sorrow and toil; when a country's politics are corrupt, it is because the people's masters have forgotten sorrow and toil because of ease and pleasure.

古文：自昔国家乂安，四夷宾服，享国日久，侈心渐生，若汉武帝之单于震慑，而有千门万户之观，唐明皇之北边无事，而有骊山温泉之幸。
现代文：自古国家安定，周围的少数民族臣服，统治的时间久了，就渐渐产生了侈奢的心理，如汉武帝使匈奴单于震动和畏惧后，他就去游览各地，唐明皇时北方安定，他就去骊山温泉巡幸。
English: Since ancient times, when the country was stable and the surrounding ethnic minorities were subjugated, and the time of rule was long, a luxurious mentality gradually emerged. For example, after Emperor Hanwu made the Xiongnu tremble and fear, he went to visit various places. When the north was stable during the reign of Emperor Tangming, he went to Lushan Hot Spring.

古文：至于隋之炀帝，陈之后主，危亡日迫，游观无度，不足效也。
现代文：至于隋炀帝、陈后主，在国家危亡日益迫近的时候，还是游玩无度，这不值得仿效。
English: As for Emperor Sui and Empress Chen, it is not worth emulating when the country is in imminent danger.

古文：尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武之竞业祗惧，终始忧勤，《无逸》言： 游畋则不敢，日昃则不暇食。
现代文：尧帝、舜帝、大禹、商汤、周文王、周武王谨慎戒惧，始终忧愁和劳苦，《无逸》说：游览和打猎的事不敢做，太阳西斜时也不停下工作去吃饭。
English: Emperor Gong, Emperor Gong, Dayu, Shang Tang, King Zhouwen, and King Zhouwu were cautious and fearless, and always worried and worked hard. "Mujie" said: They did not dare to do sightseeing and hunting, and they did not stop working to eat when the sun was setting.

古文：曷尝借祈禳之说，以事游观之逸。
现代文：何况以祈求消灾免祸为借口，去做游山玩水这类的享乐事。
English: What's more, on the pretext of praying for disaster relief, they go out to enjoy activities such as hiking and playing in the water.

古文：比年以来，以幸为利，以玩为常，未免有轻视世故、眇忽天下之心。
现代文：近年以来，认为巡幸对国家有利，认为玩乐是表示平安，这不免有轻视世间的一切事情、小看天下的心。
English: In recent years, the belief that sightseeing is beneficial to the country and that having fun is a sign of peace has inevitably led to a disregard for everything in the world and a small view of the heart of the world.

古文：单于未尝震慑，而有武帝多欲之费耗；北边未尝无事，而有明皇宴安之鸩毒。
现代文：匈奴单于不曾震动畏惧，却有汉武帝满足多种欲望的耗费；北部边境不曾无事，却有唐明皇安逸的毒害。
English: The Xiongnu alone did not shake and fear, but Emperor Hanwu spent a lot of money to satisfy various desires; the northern border was not without incident, but it was poisoned by Emperor Tangming's ease.

古文：陛下春秋尚少，贻谋垂宪之机，悉在陛下，作而不法，后嗣何观？
现代文： 陛下还很年轻，把计谋和法度传给后世的机会，全在陛下掌握，制定了却不实行，后世怎么看？
English: Your Majesty is still very young. The opportunity to pass down the strategies and laws to future generations is entirely in your Majesty's hands. What will future generations think of you if you enact them but fail to implement them?

古文：自十数年间，创龙翔，创集庆，创西太一，而又示之以游幸，导之以祷祠，蛊之以虚诞不经之说。
现代文：这十几年之内，创建龙翔宫、集庆宫、西太一宫，而又以游玩巡幸给天下人看，以祈祷引导天下人，以没有根据的学说来蛊惑天下人。
English: During these ten years, he built Longxiang Palace, Jieqing Palace, and Xidai Palace, and showed them to the world with tours, guided the world with prayers, and bewitched the world with baseless theories.

古文：孔子曰： 少成若天性，习惯如自然。 积久惯熟，牢不可破，谁得而正之？
现代文：孔子说 ：少成若天性，习惯如自然。 积累久了，已习惯成熟了，牢不可破，谁能纠正它们？
English: Confucius said: "Less is more, and habit is natural. Accumulated for a long time, habits have matured and are unbreakable. Who can correct them?

古文：且西太一之役，佞者进曰： 太一所临分野则为福，近岁自吴移蜀。 信如祈禳之说，西北坤维按堵可也。
现代文：况且西太一宫工程，邪佞的人上奏说： 太一宫分别建在两处才是福气，近年从吴地移到蜀地。 如果像祈求消灾免祸那样可信，西北地区应该平安。
English: Moreover, regarding the West Taichi-gu Shrine project, the evil-doers made the following statement: It is a blessing that the Taichi-gu Shrine was built in two places separately, and recently it was moved from Wudi to Shudi. If it is as credible as praying for disaster prevention and relief, the northwest region should be safe.

古文：今五六十州，安全者不能十数，败降者相继，福何在邪？
现代文：如今五六十州，安全的不能用十去数，失败和投降的一个接一个，福气在哪儿呢？
English: Now there are fifty or sixty states, safety cannot be counted by tens, defeat and surrender are one after another, where is the blessing?

古文：武帝祠太一于长安，至晚年以虚耗受祸，而后悔方士之缪。
现代文：汉武帝在长安建太一宫祭祀，到晚年因浪费财物而蒙受灾祸，才后悔听信方士的错误。
English: Emperor Hanwu built the Taiyi Temple in Chang'an, and only in his later years, when he was plagued by the waste of his wealth, did he regret the mistake he had made in listening to the magicians.

古文：虽其悔之弗早，犹愈于终不知悔者也。
现代文：虽然他后悔的不早，还是比始终不知后悔的人强。
English: Although he did not regret early, he was still better than those who did not know how to regret.

古文：大凡人主不能无过，脱有过言过行，宰执、侍从当言之，给舍、台谏当言之，缙绅士大夫当言之，皆所以纳君于当道者也。
现代文： 一般来说，人主不能没有过错，如果有错误的言行，宰执、侍从应该指出来，给舍、台谏应该指出来，官僚士大夫应该指出来，都是为了使君王成为有道明君。
English: Generally speaking, the human master cannot be without fault. If there are wrong words and deeds, the chief and attendants should point it out, the servants should point it out, and the bureaucrats should point it out, all in order to make the king a wise ruler.

古文：今陛下未为不知道，未为不受人言，宰执以下希宠而不言，与夫言之而不力，皆非所以爱陛下也。
现代文：如今陛下不是不知道，不是不接受别人的话，宰执以下都希望得到恩宠而不说，那些说了但不尽力的人，都不是爱护陛下。
English: Today, His Majesty does not not know, does not not accept the words of others, and everyone from the chief steward on down hopes to receive the grace not to speak, and those who speak but do not do their best are not loving His Majesty.

古文：其心岂以此为当而不必言哉？
现代文：其心难道以此为当而不必言吗？
English: Does his heart take it for granted that he does not have to speak?

古文：直以陛下为不足以望尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武之主，而以汉武、明皇待陛下也。
现代文：只是认为不能希望陛下成为尧帝、舜帝、大禹、商汤、周文王、周武王那样的君主，而把陛下看待成汉武帝、唐明皇那样的君主。 
English: However, I do not think that His Majesty can be expected to become a monarch like Emperor Gong, Emperor Gong, Emperor Dayu, Emperor Shangtang, King Zhouwen, or King Zhouwu, but that His Majesty should be seen as a monarch like Emperor Hanwu and Emperor Tangming.

古文：以材署昭庆军节度掌书记，由学官试馆职。
现代文：刘黻凭着才能担任昭庆军节度掌书记，由学官试馆职。
English: Liu Wei served as the secretary of the Shaoqing Army Festival with his talent, and the academic officer tried the post of the museum.

古文：咸淳三年，拜监察御史，论内降恩泽曰：
现代文：咸淳三年，他被任命为监察御史，他论奏皇帝直接颁降恩泽说：
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Xianjun, he was appointed as the inspector of imperial history. He said about the emperor's direct grant of grace:

古文：治天下之要，莫先于谨命令，谨命令之要，莫先于窒内批。
现代文： 治理天下的关键，没有先于谨慎命令的事，谨慎命令的关键，没有先于制止皇上直接批文的事。
English: The key to governing the world does not precede a prudent order, and the key to a prudent order does not precede stopping the emperor's direct approval.

古文：命令，帝王之枢机，必经中书参试，门下封驳，然后付尚书省施行，凡不由三省施行者，名曰 斜封墨敕 ，不足效也。
现代文：命令，是帝王的关键，必须经过中书参预制定，门下审查，然后交给尚书省施行，凡是不经过这三省而施行的命令，称为 斜封墨敕 ，不值得仿效。
English: An order, which is the key to the emperor, must go through the pre-formulation of the Chinese book, the examination under the door, and then be handed over to the Shang Province for implementation. Any order that does not go through these three provinces, called the oblique seal ink, is not worth emulating.

古文：臣睹陛下自郊祀庆成以来，恩数绸缪，指挥烦数，今日内批，明日内批，邸报之间，以内批行者居其半，窃为陛下惜之。
现代文：臣见陛下自从到郊外祭祀天地，庆贺成功以来，恩惠一个接一个，诏命很多，今日一个内批，明日一个内批，朝廷的官报中登载的诏令，因为是内批而施行的占一半，我私下里替陛下可惜。
English: Your Majesty, since you came to the suburbs to offer sacrifices to heaven and earth and celebrate your success, I have seen many favors one after another, many imperial decrees. Today there is an internal approval, tomorrow there will be an internal approval, and the imperial decrees published in the official gazette of the imperial court, because they are internal approvals, account for half of the execution. I privately feel sorry for Your Majesty.

古文：出纳朕命载于《书》，出纳王命咏于《诗》，不专言出而必言纳者，盖以命令系朝廷之大，不能皆中乎理，于是有出而复有纳焉。
现代文： 《书》中记载的是向下宣告的皇帝的诏命和下面意见向皇上报告的内容，《诗》中歌咏的是向下宣告的王者的命令和下面意见向王者汇报的内容，不专门说帝王向下宣告的诏命而一定说把下面的意见向帝王报告的，是因为命令是有关朝廷的大事，不能都符合道理，于是有帝王向下宣告的诏命，也有下面向帝王陈述的意见。
English: The "Book" records the content of the emperor's edict and the following opinion reported to the emperor, and the "Poem" sings the content of the king's order and the following opinion reported to the king. It does not specifically say the emperor's edict and must say that the following opinion is reported to the emperor, because the order is a major matter concerning the imperial court and cannot all be reasonable. Therefore, there is the emperor's edict and the opinion reported to the emperor.

古文：祖宗时，禁中处分军国事付外者谓之内批，如取太原、下江南，韩琦袖以进呈，英宗悚然避坐，此岂非谨内批之原哉？
现代文：祖宗时，宫中处理军队和国家的事交给外面执行的称为内批，如攻取太原、拿下江南，韩琦把内批装在衣袖中进献给英宗，英宗惶恐地离开坐位，这难道不是对内批的根源很恭敬吗？
English: At the time of Emperor Taizong, the palace's handling of the army and the country's affairs was outsourced to the outside for execution, which was called the inner sanction. For example, when the Taiyuan was conquered and the southern part of the Yangtze River was won, Han Zheng put the inner sanction in his sleeve and presented it to Emperor Yingzong. Emperor Yingzong left his seat in fear. Isn't this very respectful to the root of the inner sanction?

古文：臣日夜念此，以为官爵陛下之官爵，三省陛下之三省，所谓同奉圣旨，则是三省之出命，即出陛下之命也，岂必内批而后为恩？
现代文：臣日夜想这件事，认为官位和爵禄是陛下的官位和爵禄，三省是陛下的三省，所说的同时奉行皇帝的旨意，则是三省发出的命令，就是发出的陛下的命令，难道必须是内批之后才是恩惠吗？
English: The vassal thought about this matter day and night, thinking that the official rank and peerage were His Majesty's official rank and peerage, and the three provinces were His Majesty's three provinces. What was said about carrying out the emperor's will at the same time was an order issued by the three provinces, that is, an order issued by His Majesty. Does it have to be a favor after internal approval?

古文：缘情起事，以义制欲，某事当行，某事当息，具有条贯，何不自三省行之，其有未穆于公论者，许令执奏，顾不韪欤。
现代文：根据具体情况做事，以义抑制欲望，某件事应该施行，某件事应该停止，都有规定，为什么不从三省开始执行，其中有不符合公论的，允许奏明，这样就没有错误了。
English: Doing things according to the specific situation, suppressing desires with righteousness, something should be implemented, something should be stopped, there are regulations, why not start implementation from three provinces, some of which are not in line with public opinion, allow clarification, so there is no mistake.

古文：元祐间，三省言李用和等改官移镇恩例，今高氏、朱氏，皆举故事，皇太后曰： 外家恩泽，方欲除损，又可增长乎？ 治平初，欲加曹佾使相，皇太后再三不许；又有圣旨，令皇后本家分析亲的骨肉闻奏，亦与推恩，司马光力谏，以为皇太后既损抑外亲，则后族亦恐未宜褒进。
现代文： 元年间，三省上奏讲李用和等人改任官职的旧例，现在高氏、朱氏，都举出旧例，皇太后说： 对外戚的恩惠，正想减少，怎么又可以增加呢？ 治平初年，皇上想给曹修节度使或宰相的官职，皇太后怎么也不同意；又有皇帝的诏命，下令皇后本家分别列出亲缘的远近上奏给皇上，也给予恩惠，司马光极力劝谏，认为皇太后已经减少和压抑了对亲属的恩惠，那么皇后的亲属也恐怕不应该受这样的恩惠。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, the empress dowager did not agree with the emperor's wish to give Cao Xiu the post of regent or chancellor; the emperor's edict also ordered the empress's family to separately list the relatives near and far, and to report to the emperor and also grant favors. Sima Guang strongly advised the empress dowager that the empress dowager had reduced and suppressed favors to relatives, so the relatives of the empress dowager should not receive such favors

古文：乃今前之恩数未竟，后之恩数已乘。
现代文：而现在前面的恩惠还没完，后面的恩惠已经到来。
English: And now the former boon is not over, the latter boon has arrived.

古文：宰执惧有所专而不敢奏，给舍、台谏惧有所忤而不敢言，更如此者数年，将何以为国？
现代文：宰执怕被认为是专权而不敢上奏，给舍、台谏怕触怒皇上及亲贵而不敢讲话，像这样数年以后，将以什么立国？
English: For fear of being thought of as an autocracy, the emperor did not dare to play, and for fear of offending the emperor and his relatives, he did not dare to speak. After several years like this, what kind of country will be established?

古文：故政事由中书则治，不由中书则乱，天下事当与天下共之，非人主所可得私也。
现代文：因此政命由中书发出则太平，不由中书发出则混乱，天下事应该与天下人共同去做，不是人主可以私自做主的。 
English: Therefore, if the government order is issued from the Chinese book, it will be peaceful, and if it is not issued from the Chinese book, it will be chaotic. World affairs should be done together with people around the world. It is not the owner who can make decisions on his own.

古文：四年，改正字，言： 正学不明则义理日微，异端不息则鼓惑转炽。
现代文：咸淳四年，刘黻改任正字，他说 ：正统的学说不明确那么义理就越来越少，邪说不停止那么蛊惑人心的气焰就越来越盛。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Haman, Liu Bei changed his name to Zhengzhi, saying: "If the orthodox doctrine is not clear, then there will be less and less righteousness, and if the heresy does not stop its demagogy, it will become more and more popular."

古文：臣非不知犯颜逆耳，臣子所难，实以君德世道，重有关系，不容不恳恻开陈。
现代文：臣不是不知道忤逆陛下的话不好听，臣说的这些，确实与君德世道有重大关系，不容许我不恳切地向陛下陈述。
English: It is not as if the minister did not know that the words of his disobedient majesty are not pleasant to listen to. What the minister said is indeed of great importance to the principles of the monarchy, and it is not permissible for me not to sincerely explain this to his majesty.

古文：疏上逾日，未蒙付外。
现代文：我的奏疏进上已过了一天，没蒙受恩德交到外朝。
English: It's been a day since my sono shojin, and I haven't received any favors from the foreign government.

古文：孟轲有云： 有言责者，不得其言则去 。
现代文：孟轲有言 ：负有向帝王进言责任的，帝王没采纳他的话就应该离去。 
English: Meng Xuan had a saying: "He who has the responsibility to speak to the emperor should leave if the emperor does not accept his words."

古文：臣忝职谏省，义当尽言，今既不得其言，若更贪慕恩荣，不思引去，不惟有负朝廷设官之意，其于孟轲明训，实亦有慊。 
现代文：臣愧为谏官，从义上讲，应当对陛下言无不尽，现在既然不能讲那些话，如果贪图和羡慕恩宠和荣华富贵，不想离去，不仅有负朝廷设置言官的本意，对孟轲的明训，实在也有愧。 
English: As a eunuch, a vassal should, as a matter of justice, say as much as he can to his majesty. Since he cannot say those words now, if he covets and envies the grace and glory and wealth, and does not want to leave, he not only fails to live up to the original intention of the imperial court to set up a vassal, but also fails to live up to Meng Xuan's clear teachings.

古文：会丁父忧去位，服除，授集英殿修撰，沿海制置、知庆元府事。
现代文：刘黻恰巧遭父丧免去官职，为父守丧期满后，他被任命为集英殿修撰，沿海制置、庆元府知府。
English: Liu Wei was coincidentally relieved of his official position by his father's death. After the period of mourning for his father expired, he was appointed as the governor of Shuxin, the coastal prefecture, and the governor of Qingyuan.

古文：建济民庄，以济士民之急，资贡士春官之费，备郡庠耆老缓急之需。
现代文：刘黻创建济民庄，用来救济百姓的危难，资助贡士春官的费用，防备州学和老人紧急时的需要。
English: Liu Wei founded Jimin Village to relieve the distress of the people, subsidize the expenses of the Gongshichun official, and prepare for the needs of the state school and the elderly in an emergency.

古文：又请建慈湖书院。
现代文：他又请求建慈湖书院。
English: He also requested the construction of Cihu Academy.

古文：八年，召还，拜刑部侍郎。
现代文：咸淳八年，他被召回京城，担任刑部侍郎。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Xianjun, he was called back to Beijing to serve as a sergeant of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：九年，改朝奉郎，试吏部尚书，兼工部尚书，兼中书舍人，兼修玉牒，兼侍读。
现代文：咸淳九年，刘黻改任朝奉郎，试吏部尚书，兼工部尚书，兼中书舍人，兼修玉牒，兼侍读。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianchun, Liu Ye was appointed as a court official, probation officer, engineer, middle school teacher, tutor, and attendant.

古文：上疏请给王十朋祠堂田土。
现代文：刘黻上疏请求拨土地给王十朋的祠堂。
English: Liu Xuan Shangsu requested that land be allocated for Wang Shibo's ancestral hall.

古文：十年，丁母忧。
现代文：咸淳十年，他遭母丧。
English: In the tenth year of Xianjun, his mother passed away.

古文：明年，江上溃师，丞相陈宜中起复黻为端明殿学士，不起，及贾似道，韩震死，宜中谋拥二王由温州入海，以兵逆黻共政，将逊相位，于是黻托宗祀于母弟成伯，遂起，及罗浮，以疾卒。
现代文：第二年，宋兵在长江上惨败，丞相陈宜中重新起用正在为母亲守丧的刘黻为端明殿学士，刘黻没接受这个职位。贾似道、韩震死后，陈宜中打算保护宗室二王从温州到海上，派兵去迎接刘黻来共同执政，要退去宰相的位置，于是刘黻把祭祀祖宗的事托付给同母弟弟刘成伯，就重新去任职，他到罗浮后，因病去世。
English: The following year, Song Bing suffered a crushing defeat on the Yangtze River, and the chancellor Chen Yizhong reappointed Liu Bei, who was attending his mother's funeral, as the academician of the Duanming Palace, but Liu Bei did not accept this position. After the death of Jia Lian Dao and Han Zhen, Chen Yizhong planned to protect the two kings of the family from Wenzhou to the sea, send soldiers to meet Liu Bei to jointly govern, and retire from the position of prime minister. Therefore, Liu Bei entrusted the matter of sacrificing ancestors to his younger brother Liu Cheng Bo, and went back to work. He died of illness after

古文：初，陈宜中梦人告之曰： 今年天灾流行，人死且半，服大黄者生。 继而疫疠大作，服者果得不死，及黻病，宜中令服之，终莫能救。
现代文：当初，陈宜中在梦中有人告诉他说： 今年天灾流行，将有一半人死去，吃大黄的人能活命。 不久瘟疫流行，吃大黄的人果然不死，刘黻病后，陈宜中命令他吃大黄，最终也没救活他。
English: At first, someone told Chen Yizhong in a dream: "This year, there will be a natural disaster, and half of the people will die, but those who eat rhubarb can live." Soon, a plague broke out, and those who ate rhubarb did not die. After Liu Yao fell ill, Chen Yizhong ordered him to eat rhubarb, but ultimately did not save his life.

古文：其配林氏举家蹈海。
现代文：刘黻的夫人林氏及全家人跳海而死。
English: Liu Yao's wife Lin and the whole family jumped into the sea and died.

古文：未几，海上事亦瓦解矣。
现代文：不久，宋军在海上失败，南宋灭亡。
English: Soon, the Song Army was defeated at sea, and the Southern Song Dynasty was destroyed.

古文：黻有《蒙川集》十卷行于世。
现代文：刘黻有《蒙川集》十卷在世间流行。
English: Liu Bei's ten-volume "Mengchuan Collection" is popular in the world.

