古文：田需死。昭鱼谓苏代曰： 田需死，吾恐张仪、薛公、犀首之有一人相魏者。 
现代文：田需死了，昭鱼对苏代说： 田需死了，我担心张仪、薛公、公孙衍之中有一个人做魏国相国。 
English: Tian Bo died, and Zhaoyu said to Su Dai: Tian Bo is dead, I am worried that one of Zhang Yi, Xue Gong, and Gong Sunyan will become the prime minister of Wei.

古文：代曰： 然则相者以谁而君便之也? 
现代文：苏代说： 那么用谁做相国对您有利呢？ 
English: Sudai said, "Then it is to your advantage who you use as a partner country?"

古文：昭鱼曰： 我欲太子之自相也。 
现代文：昭鱼说： 我想让魏国太子做国相。 
English: Zhaoyu said, "I want the Crown Prince of Wei to be the Minister of State."

古文：代曰： 请为君北见梁王，必相之矣。 昭鱼曰： 奈何? 
现代文：苏代说： 请让我为您北上见魏王，一定能让魏太子做相国。 昭鱼说： 会怎么做呢？ 
English: Sudai said, "Please let me go to the north to see the Wei King for you, I will surely be able to make the Wei Crown Prince my father-in-law." Zhaoyu said, "What will you do?"

古文：代曰： 君其为梁王，代请说君。 
现代文：苏代说： 您大概是为魏王着想，请允许我去为您游说。 
English: Sudai said: You are probably thinking of Wei Wang, please allow me to lobby for you.

古文：昭鱼曰： 奈何? 
现代文：昭鱼说： 那又能怎么说呢？ 
English: Shoyu said, "How can I say that?

古文：对曰： 代也从楚来，昭鱼甚忧。
现代文：苏代回答说： 就说我从楚国来，昭鱼很担心。
English: Sudai replied, "Just say that I came from the state of Chu. Shoyu is very worried."

古文：代曰： 君何忧? 
现代文：我问： 您有什么担忧的？ 
English: I asked: What are you worried about?

古文：曰： 田需死，吾恐张仪、薛公、犀首有一人相魏者。 
现代文：昭鱼回答说： 田需死了，我担心张仪、薛公、公孙衍之中有一个人做魏国相国。 
English: Zhaoyu replied: Tian Bo is dead. I am worried that among Zhang Yi, Xue Gong and Gongsunyan, there is a person who will be the next emperor of Wei.

古文：代曰： 勿忧也。
现代文：我说： 大王不必担忧。
English: I said: Don't worry, Your Majesty.

古文：梁王，长主也，必不相张仪。
现代文：魏王，年长成熟，一定不会任命张仪为榴国。
English: The Wei king, who was older and more mature, would certainly not have appointed Zhang Yi as Guo Guo.

古文：张仪相魏，必右秦而左魏。
现代文：张仪如做了魏国相国，一定亲近秦国而疏远魏国。
English: If Zhang Yi had been a partner of Wei, she must have been close to Qin and distant from Wei.

古文：薛公相魏，必右齐而左魏。
现代文：薛公做了魏国相国，一定亲近齐国而疏远魏国。
English: Xue Gong made Wei a neighboring country, and he must have been close to Qi but distant from Wei.

古文：犀首相魏，必右韩而左魏。
现代文：公孙衍做了魏国相国，一定亲近韩国而疏远魏国。
English: Gongsunyan made Wei a neighboring country, and he must have been close to South Korea and alienated from Wei.

古文：梁王，长主也，必不使相也。 
现代文：魏王，年长成熟，一定不会让他们做相国。 
English: The Wei king, who was older and more mature, would certainly not let them become a sister country.

古文：代曰： 莫如太子之自相。
现代文：我说： 不如让太子自己做相国。
English: I said: It would be better to let the crown prince be his own fatherland.

古文：是三人皆以太子为非固相也，皆将务以其国事魏，而欲丞相之玺。
现代文：这三个人都会认为太子本来不该做相国，都将尽力用他们的国家来服事魏国，想得到魏国的丞相大印。
English: All three of them would think that the crown prince should not have been made the imperial consort, and they would do their best to use their countries to serve the state of Wei and get the imperial seal of the prime minister of Wei.

古文：以魏之强，而持三万乘之国辅之，魏必安矣。
现代文：凭魏国的强大，有三个拥有万辆兵车的国家辅助，一定很安全了。
English: With the strength of the State of Wei and the support of three countries with ten thousand chariots, it must be very safe.

古文：故曰，不如太子自相也。  
现代文：所以说不如太子自己做相国。  
English: Therefore, it would be better for the prince to become a countryman himself.

古文：遂北见梁王，以此语告之，太子果自相。
现代文：苏代于是北上去拜见魏王，把这番话告诉了魏王，果然魏国太子自己做了相国。
English: So Su Dai went to the north to meet the Wei King and told him these words. As expected, the Wei Crown Prince made himself a brother-in-law.

