古文：语云： 脱谷为糠，其髓斯存 ，神之谓也。 山骞不崩，唯石为镇 ，骨之谓也。
现代文：俗话说： 稻谷脱下的外壳，就是没有多大用途的谷糠，但稻谷的精华米仍然存在，不会因外壳磨损而丢失。 
English: As the saying goes: The husk taken off the rice grain is a grain husk of little use, but the essence of the rice grain still exists and will not be lost due to husk wear.

古文：一身精神，具乎两目；一身骨相，具乎面部。
现代文：这个精华，就像是一个人的内在精神状态。 高山表面的泥土虽然经常脱落流失，但山却不会倒塌破碎，因为山有硬如钢铁的岩石在支撑着，不会被风吹雨打去。 
English: This essence is like a person's inner state of mind. Although the soil on the surface of the mountain often falls off and is lost, the mountain will not collapse and break, because the mountain is supported by rock as hard as steel and will not be blown away by wind and rain.

古文：他家兼论形骸，文人先观神骨。
现代文：这里所说的 镇石 ，就相当于支撑人形体的骨骼。
English: The keystone mentioned here is equivalent to the skeleton that supports the human body.

古文：开门见山，此为第一。
现代文：所以本书 开门见山 ，把 神骨 问题作为第一篇。
English: Therefore, in this book, Getting to the Bottom of the Matter, the problem of the skeleton of God is the first article.

古文：文人论神，有清浊之辨。清浊易辨，邪正难辨。欲辨邪正，先观动静；静若含珠，动若木发；静若无人，动若赴的，此为澄清到底。
现代文：古之医家、文人在研究、观察人的 神 时，一般都把 神 分为清明与昏浊两种类型。 神 的清明与昏浊是比较容易区别的，但因为清明又有奸邪与忠直之分，这奸邪与忠直则不容易分辨。要考察一个人是奸邪还是忠直，应该先看他处于动静两种状态下的表现。
English: When ancient physicians and scholars studied and observed the gods of man, they generally divided the gods into two types: clear and confused. It is relatively easy to distinguish between God's clarity and confusion, but because clarity also has the distinction between treachery and loyalty, it is not easy to distinguish between this treachery and loyalty. To investigate whether a person is treacherous or loyal, one should first look at his performance in two states of movement and rest.

古文：静若萤光，动若流水，尖巧而喜淫；静若半睡，动若鹿骇，别才而深思。一为败器，一为隐流，均之托迹于清，不可不辨。
现代文：眼睛处于静态的时候，目光安详沉稳而又有光，真情深蕴，宛如两颗晶亮的明珠，含而不露；处于动态之时，眼中精光闪烁，眼神敏锐犀利，就如春木抽出的新芽。双眼处于静态之时，目光清明沉稳，旁若无人。
English: When the eyes are in a static state, the gaze is tranquil, steady and bright, with deep feelings, like two crystal-bright pearls, contained but not exposed; when the eyes are in a dynamic state, the eyes sparkle, and the eyes are sharp and sharp, just like new shoots extracted from spring wood. When the eyes are in a static state, the gaze is clear and steady, as if no one is around.

古文：凡精神，抖擞处易见，断续处难见。
现代文：处于动态的时候，目光暗藏杀机，锋芒外露，宛如瞄准目标，一发中的，待弦而发。以上两种神情，澄明清澈，属于纯正的神情。
English: When in motion, the gaze hides the killing machine, the edge is exposed, like aiming at the target, one shot, waiting for the string. The above two expressions, clear and clear, belong to the pure expression.

古文：断者出处断，续者闭处续。道家所谓 收拾入门 之说，不了处看其脱略，做了处看其针线。小心者，从其不了处看之，疏节阔目，若不经意，所谓脱略也。
现代文：对于率直豪放的人，要在做事的过程中仔细考察他，如果表面上粗枝大叶，做起事来却处处小心谨慎、注意细节，不轻率行事，不随意举动，最终使事情得以成功，这种人是可以被重用的。
English: For an outspoken person, it is necessary to carefully examine him in the process of doing things. If he is rough on the surface, but is careful and careful in doing things, pays attention to details, does not act rashly, does not act arbitrarily, and ultimately makes things successful, such a person can be reused.

古文：大胆者，从其做了处看之，慎重周密，无有苟且，所谓针线也。二者实看向内处，稍移外便落情态矣，情态易见。
现代文：上述两种精神状态，实际上都存在于内心世界，但是它们只要稍微流露，立刻就会变为情态，而情态则是比较容易看到的。
English: Both of the above states of mind actually exist in the inner world, but as soon as they are slightly revealed, they immediately turn into moods, and moods are relatively easy to see.

古文：骨有九起：天庭骨隆起，枕骨强起，顶骨平起，佐串骨角起，太阳骨线起，眉骨伏犀起，鼻骨芽起，颧骨若不得而起，项骨平伏起。
现代文：九贵骨各有各的姿势：天庭骨丰隆饱满；枕骨充实显露；顶骨平正而突兀；佐串骨像角一样斜斜而上，直入发际；太阳骨直线上升；眉骨骨棱显而不露，隐隐约约像犀角平伏在那里；鼻骨状如芦笋竹芽，挺技而起；颧骨有力有势，又不陷不露；项骨平伏厚实，又约显约露。
English: Each of the nine precious bones has its own posture: the celestial bone is plump and full; the occipital bone is full and exposed; the parietal bone is flat and protruding; the sagittal bone is inclined like a horn and goes straight into the hairline; the solar bone rises in a straight line; the brow bone is prominent but not exposed, vaguely lying there like a rhinoceros horn; the nasal bone is shaped like a reed bud and rises sharply; the tibia is strong and powerful, but does not fall and is not exposed; the neckbone is flat and thick, and is also slightly exposed.

古文：在头，以天庭骨、枕骨、太阳骨为主；在面，以眉骨、颧骨为主。
现代文：看头部的骨相，主要看天庭、枕骨、太阳骨这三处关键部位；看面部的骨相，则主要看眉骨、颧骨这两处关键部分。
English: Looking at the bone phase of the head, we mainly see the three key parts of the crown, occipital bone and solar bone; looking at the bone phase of the face, we mainly see the two key parts of the brow bone and tibia.

古文：五者备，柱石之器也；一则不穷；二则不贱；三则动履稍胜；四则贵矣。
现代文：如果以上五种骨相完美无缺，此人一定是国家的栋梁之材；如果只具备其中的一种，此人便终生不会贫穷；如果能具备其中的两种，此人便终生不会卑贱；如果能具备其中的三种，此人只要有所作为，就会发达起来；如果能具备其中的四种，此人一定会显贵。
English: If the above five qualities are perfect, the person must be a pillar of the country; if only one of them is possessed, the person will never be poor; if two of them are possessed, the person will never be lowly; if three of them are possessed, the person will be developed as long as he does something; if four of them are possessed, the person will certainly be distinguished.

古文：骨有色，面以青为贵， 少年公卿半青面 是也。
现代文：骨有不同的颜色，面部颜色，则以青色最为高贵。俗话说的 少年公卿半青面 ，就是这个意思。
English: Bones have different colors, and the color of the face is the most noble, with blue being the most noble. This is the meaning of the saying, "The young nobles are half-blue."

古文：紫次之，白斯下矣。
现代文：黄中透红的紫色比青色略次一等，面如枯骨着粉白色则是最下等的颜色。
English: The yellow-reddish purple is slightly inferior to the blue, and the bone-pinkish white is the lowest color.

古文：骨有质，头以联者为贵。碎次之。
现代文：骨有一定的气势，头部骨骼以相互关联、气势贯通最为高贵，互不贯通、支离散乱则略次一等。
English: The bones have a certain momentum, and the bones of the head are the most noble because they are interrelated and have momentum, while the bones that are not interconnected and are scattered are slightly inferior.

古文：总之，头上无恶骨，面佳不如头佳。
现代文：总之，只要头上没有恶骨，就是面再好也不如头好。
English: In short, as long as there are no bad bones in the head, no matter how good the face is, it is not as good as the head.

古文：然大而缺天庭，终是贱品；圆而无串骨，半是孤僧；鼻骨犯眉，堂上不寿。颧骨与眼争，子嗣不立。
现代文：然而，如果头大而天庭骨却不丰隆，终是卑贱的品位；如果头圆而佐串骨却隐伏不见，多半是要成为僧人的；如果鼻骨冲犯两眉，父母必定不会长寿；如果颧骨紧贴眼尾而颧峰凌眼，必定没有子孙后代。
English: However, if the head is large, but the crown bone is not plump, it will eventually be a low grade; if the head is round, but the bones are hidden, it is most likely to become a monk; if the nose bone impinges on the eyebrows, the parents will not live long; if the cheekbones are close to the eye tail, but the peak of the eyebrows is not visible, there will be no offspring.

古文：此中贵贱，有毫厘千里之辨。
现代文：这里的富贵与贫贱差别，有如毫厘之短与千里之长，是非常大的。
English: The difference between rich and poor here, like the difference between a millimeter and a thousand miles, is very large.

