古文：昔汉宣帝以爲 政平讼理，其惟良二千石乎 。
现代文：从前汉宣帝认为 政治稳定，狱讼得以妥善处理，恐怕靠的是郡守一级的地方长官了 。
English: In the past, Emperor Xuan of the Han Dynasty believed that political stability and the proper handling of prison cases depended on local governors at the county level.

古文：前史亦云,今之郡守，古之诸侯也。
现代文：前代史书也说， 如今的郡守，就是古代的诸侯啊 。
English: The ancient history books also say that today's county governors are the ancient princes.

古文：故长吏之职，号曰亲人。
现代文：所以各级官吏的职责，就是要爱惜百姓。
English: Therefore, the duty of officials at all levels is to cherish the people.

古文：至于道德齐礼，移风易俗，未有不由之矣。
现代文：至于道德教化，移风易俗，没有不要靠他们的。
English: As for moral education, there is no need to rely on them to change customs.

古文：宋武起自匹庶，知人事艰难，及登庸作宰，留心吏职。
现代文：宋武帝出身百姓，知道民众生活的艰难，等到做了帝王，常留心吏治。
English: Emperor Songwu was born as a commoner and knew the hardships of the common people's life. When he became the emperor, he often paid attention to the officials.

古文：而王略外举，未遑内务，奉师之费，日耗千金。
现代文：然而朝廷忙于对外战争，顾不上修整内务，军费开支日耗千金。
English: However, the imperial court was busy with foreign wars and did not pay attention to the improvement of domestic affairs. Military expenditures consumed thousands of dollars every day.

古文：播兹宽简，虽所未暇，而黜己屏欲，以俭御身，左右无幸谒之私，闺房无文绮之饰。
现代文：虽说没机会减轻民众负担，但能克制自己的物质欲望，用节俭来律己，左右没有宠幸的小人，居室没有豪华的装饰。
English: Although there is no opportunity to reduce the burden on the people, they can restrain their material desires, use frugality to discipline themselves, there are no favored villains around, and there is no luxurious decoration in the living room.

古文：故能戎车岁驾，邦甸不扰。
现代文：所以能够连年兴兵，而不烦扰境内百姓。
English: As a result, it has been able to raise an army year after year without disturbing the local people.

古文：文帝幼而宽仁，入纂大业，及难兴陕服，六戎薄伐，兴师命将，动在济时。
现代文：文帝自幼宽怀仁爱，承续帝业，后来陕西战乱，北魏南侵，宋朝廷兴军遣将，是为了拯救天下。
English: Emperor Wen was kind-hearted and benevolent from a young age, and he succeeded to the throne. Later, there were wars in Shaanxi, the Northern Wei Dynasty invaded the South, and the Song Dynasty dispatched military commanders in order to save the world.

古文：费由府实，事无外扰。
现代文：军费也都出自库存，没有加重百姓负担。
English: Military spending also comes from stockpiles, without burdening the people.

古文：自此方内晏安，甿庶蕃息，奉上供徭，止于岁赋，晨出暮归，自事而已。
现代文：那时境内太平，百姓安居乐业，缴纳的赋税和徭役，只限于常年的定额。人民早出晚归，只是为自己的生计忙碌。
English: At that time, the territory was peaceful, the people lived and worked in peace, and the amount of taxes and taxes paid was limited to the annual quota. People went out early and came back late, but they were busy with their own livelihood.

古文：守宰之职以六期爲断，虽没世不徙，未及曩时，而人有所系，吏无苟得，家给人足，即事虽难，转死沟渠，于时可免。
现代文：州郡长官的任职以六年为期，虽说比不上前代终身不改任那样稳定，然而人民有所依靠，官吏不事聚敛，家家还能吃穿不乏。虽然时事艰难，但沟死路埋之事，尚可幸免。
English: The term of office of the prefect of the prefecture is six years, although it is not as stable as the previous generation of life-long tenure. However, the people have something to rely on, the officials do not gather, and the family can eat and wear. Although the current situation is difficult, it is still possible to avoid the road being buried in the ditch.

古文：凡百户之乡，有市之邑，歌谣舞蹈，触处成群，盖宋世之极盛也。
现代文：只要是有百户人的乡村，有集市的市镇，都有人们聚会欢乐，歌谣舞蹈，那是宋代的极盛之时。
English: As long as there are villages with hundreds of households and towns with markets, people will have fun gatherings, songs and dances. That was the heyday of the Song Dynasty.

古文：暨元嘉二十七年，举境外捍，于是倾资扫蓄，犹有未供，深赋厚敛，天下骚动。
现代文：到了元嘉二十七年，倾全国之力抵御外患，耗尽积蓄，尚不足用，于是重赋厚敛，天下动荡不安。
English: In the 27th year of the Yuan and Jia dynasties, the whole country's strength to resist external disasters was exhausted and the savings were not enough, so the resources were reallocated and the country was in turmoil.

古文：自兹迄于孝建，兵连不息。
现代文：从此直到孝武帝孝建年间，战乱不止。
English: From that time until the reign of Emperor Xiaowu and Emperor Xiaojian, there were many wars.

古文：以区区江东，蕞尔迫隘，荐之以师旅，因之以凶荒，向时之盛，自此衰矣。
现代文：以区区江东，地域狭窄，承受连年战争，又加上灾害饥荒，以前的繁盛景象，从此衰亡。
English: In the east of the Yangtze River, the region is narrow, enduring years of war, coupled with disasters and famines, the former prosperity has been fading away.

古文：晋世诸帝多处内房，朝宴所临，东西二堂而已。
现代文：晋朝历代帝王多居于内房，朝会宴享，不过在东西二堂举行。
English: The emperors of the Jin Dynasty mostly lived in the inner room and enjoyed the imperial banquets, but they were held in the east and west halls.

古文：孝武末年，清暑方构，及永初受命，无所改作，所居唯称西殿，不制嘉名，文帝因之，亦有合殿之称。
现代文：晋孝武末年，才建有清暑殿。及宋武帝受命为帝，也没什么改变，他所居之处只称为西殿，并不造华丽的名号。文帝承袭不改，便也有合殿的名称。
English: It was not until the last years of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu that the Qing Xiaowu Hall was built. And Emperor Song Wu was appointed as the emperor, and nothing changed. The place where he lived was only called the West Hall, and did not make a gorgeous name. Emperor Wen inherited and did not change, and it also had the name of the Fitting Hall.

古文：及孝武承统，制度滋长，犬马馀菽粟，土木衣绨绣。
现代文：及宋孝武帝即位，赋税征调越来越多，朝廷的犬马大量糟踏粮食，宫室装饰奢华无比。
English: With Emperor Song Xiaowu's accession to the throne, more and more taxes were levied, the imperial court's dogs and horses squandered a large amount of grain, and the decoration of the palace was incomparably luxurious.

古文：追陋前规，更造正光、玉烛、紫极诸殿。
现代文：鄙视前代简朴的规制，又加造正光、玉烛、紫极诸殿。
English: He despised the simple regulations of the previous generation, and added the Zhengguang, Yuceng, and Zibo temples.

古文：雕栾绮节，珠窗网户，嬖女幸臣，赐倾府藏，竭四海不供其欲，殚人命未快其心。
现代文：雕梁画栋，珠窗秀户，对于宠爱的嬖女幸臣，赏赐起来几乎倾国库所有；竭尽四海的物产也难以满足帝王的欲望，搭上人的性命也不能让他称心。
English: Carved beams, paintings, and beautiful beaded windows were lavished on his favorite favorite concubine, Yuko, to the point that the national treasury was almost depleted; it was difficult to satisfy the emperor's desires with all the goods in the world, and he could not be satisfied with the life of a human being.

古文：明皇继祚，弥笃浮侈，恩不恤下，以至横流。
现代文：明帝即位后，生活更加奢华，对下民毫无体恤，以至国家动荡。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended the throne, he lived a more luxurious life and showed no consideration for his subjects, which led to national turmoil.

古文：莅人之官，迁变岁属，突不得黔，席未暇暖，蒲、密之化，事未易阶。
现代文：治民的地方官吏，年年更换，灶上的烟囱还没熏黑，炕上的席子尚未暖热，怎能够做出什么政绩。
English: The local officials who govern the people change from year to year, the chimney on the stove is not yet blackened, the mat on the hearth is not yet warm, how can they make any political achievements.

古文：岂徒吏不及古，人乖于昔，盖由爲上所扰，致化莫从。
现代文：难道能只怪官吏不如古时，民心与往昔不同，都是上边把事情弄坏，致使教化难以实现。
English: Can it be blamed on the fact that the officials are not as good as in the old days, and the people's minds are not the same as in the past, but that things have been corrupted from above, making it difficult to achieve enlightenment?

古文：齐高帝承斯奢纵，辅立幼主，思振人瘼，风移百城。
现代文：齐高帝在这种奢侈纵欲的风习下，辅立幼主，想救民疾苦，整顿世风。
English: Emperor Qigong, under the influence of this extravagant and debauched custom, supported the young lord and wanted to save the people's sufferings and rectify the world.

古文：爲政未期，擢山阴令傅琰爲益州刺史，乃损华反朴，恭己南面，导人以躬，意存勿扰。
现代文：当政不到一年，提拔山阴县令傅琰为益州刺史，于是减免奢华，恢复简朴，做帝王严于律己，亲身为民众作表率，本心就是为不侵扰百姓。
English: Less than a year into his reign, he promoted Fu Xi, the governor of Shanyin County, to the highest position in the history of Yizhou. Therefore, he reduced extravagance, restored simplicity, made himself a strict ruler, and personally set an example for the people. His real intention was not to disturb the people.

古文：以山阴大邑，狱讼繁滋，建元三年，别置狱丞，与建康爲比。
现代文：因为山阴是大城邑，官司案件繁多，建元三年，另设狱丞一职，与建康同等。
English: Because Shanyin is a large city, there are many lawsuits. In the third year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, a post of prison warden was established, equal to that of Jiankang.

古文：永明继运，垂心政术，杖威善断，犹多漏网，长吏犯法，封刃行诛。
现代文：武帝继承帝业，用心治理天下，仗帝王之威而善于裁断，尚且还有错漏，官吏犯法，令其自裁。
English: Emperor Wu inherited the imperial inheritance, governed the world with his heart, fought for the emperor's authority and was good at making decisions. In addition, there were mistakes and omissions, officials broke the law, and they were ordered to make their own decisions.

古文：郡县居职，以三周爲小满。
现代文：郡县长官任职，以三年为期满。
English: The term of office of the county magistrate shall be three years.

古文：水旱之灾，辄加振恤。
现代文：遇有水旱灾荒，便对百姓抚恤赈济。
English: In the event of floods, droughts and natural disasters, the people will be given subsidies.

古文：十许年中，百姓无犬吠之惊，都邑之盛，士女昌逸，歌声舞节，袨服华妆。
现代文：十来年当中，百姓未受丝毫惊扰，都市繁盛，男女老少安居乐业，载歌载舞，盛服华妆。
English: During the next ten years, the people were not disturbed in the slightest, the city flourished, men and women, young and old, lived and worked in peace, sang and danced, and wore splendid clothes and makeup.

古文：桃花渌水之间，秋月春风之下，无往非适。
现代文：桃花绿水之间，秋月春风之下，无处不是乐土。
English: Between the peach blossoms and the green water, under the autumn moon and the spring breeze, there is nowhere that is not a paradise.

古文：明帝自在布衣，达于吏事，及居宸扆，专务刀笔。未尝枉法申恩，守宰由斯而震。
现代文：明帝未登基之前，就了解为官之道，等即位以后，专门留心官吏对官司案件的处理，从不曾枉法宽容渎职者，地方官吏由此感到震慑。
English: Before Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he knew how to be an official. After he ascended to the throne, he paid special attention to the handling of court cases by officials. He never forgave those who abused their duties. Local officials were shocked by this.

古文：属以魏军入伐，疆埸大扰，兵车连岁，不遑啓居，军国糜耗，从此衰矣。
现代文：后来因为魏军入侵，国家动荡，战火连年不息，没有喘息之机，战争耗费巨大，国势从此衰落。
English: Later, due to the invasion of the Wei army, the country was in turmoil, the war raged for years on end, there was no respite, the war was very costly, and the national situation declined from then on.

古文：继以昏乱，政由群孽，赋调云起，傜役无度。
现代文：接下来朝廷昏乱，政权被一伙坏人把持，赋税繁多，徭役无度。
English: Next, the imperial court was in disarray, the government was controlled by a group of bad people, taxes were numerous, and there was a lot of corruption.

古文：守宰多倚附权门，互长贪虐，裒刻聚敛，侵扰黎甿。
现代文：地方官依附权贵，相互间助长贪婪暴虐，搜刮聚敛，侵扰黎民。
English: Local officials cling to those in power, encourage greed and brutality among each other, collect bribes, and harass the people.

古文：天下摇动，无所措其手足。
现代文：天下人心动荡，不知所措。
English: People everywhere are in turmoil, at a loss for what to do.

古文：梁武在田，知人疾苦，及定乱之始，仍下宽书。东昏时杂调咸悉除省，于是四海之内始得息肩。
现代文：梁武帝未登基前，已知民间疾苦，等他刚刚平定齐末的混乱局面，就颁布文告，废除东昏侯时所有额外的繁杂赋税，于是天下百姓才得以减轻重负。
English: Before Emperor Liangwu ascended to the throne, it was known that the people were suffering. As soon as he had settled the chaotic situation, he issued a proclamation to abolish all the additional complex taxes imposed by Dongwu, so the people of the world were able to reduce the burden.

古文：及践皇极，躬览庶事，日昃听政，求瘼恤隐。
现代文：登基之后，亲自过问民间事务，每天处理政务直到太阳偏西。
English: After ascending to the throne, he personally inquired into civil affairs and dealt with government affairs every day until the sun set.

古文：乃命輶轩以省方俗，置肺石以达穷人。
现代文：关心抚慰人民疾苦，派使臣到四方了解风土民情，在朝廷外设置肺石，让穷苦人下情上达。
English: Concerned with soothing the suffering of the people, he sent envoys to the four directions to learn about the customs and conditions of the people, and set up a lung stone outside the imperial court to let the poor people reach the bottom.

古文：劳己所先，事唯急病。
现代文：努力先取信于民，所做的都是民众急难之事。
English: Efforts were made to gain the trust of the people first, and everything that was done was a matter of urgency for the people.

古文：元年，始去人赀，计丁爲布。
现代文：天监元年，开始废除按户征收绢绵实物的户调，改为按实际丁口征收。
English: In the first year of Tianjing, it began to abolish the per-household levying of tangible goods, and changed to levying according to the actual amount.

古文：在身服浣濯之衣，御府无文锦之饰。
现代文：自己身穿旧衣，宫内没有华丽的装饰。
English: She wore old clothes and there was no ornate decoration inside the palace.

古文：太官常膳，唯以菜蔬，圆案所陈，不过三盏，盖以俭先海内也。
现代文：日常御膳，惟有素食，饭桌上摆酒不过三盏，这是要先为天下作俭仆的表率啊。
English: Daily meals, only vegetarian food, with only three glasses of wine on the table, this is to set an example of frugality for the world.

古文：故每选长吏，务简廉平，皆召见于前，亲勖政道。
现代文：所以每当选任官吏时，一定挑那些廉洁公正的人，并都亲自召见，勉励他们好好为官。
English: Therefore, whenever officials are elected, they must choose those who are honest and fair, and personally summon them to encourage them to do a good job as officials.

古文：始擢尚书殿中郎到溉爲建安内史，左户侍郎刘鬷爲晋安太守。
现代文：先前曾提拔尚书殿中郎到溉为建安内史，左户侍郎刘繞为晋安太守。
English: In the past, the middle son of Shoshoden was promoted to Irrigation for the internal history of Jianan, and the servant of the left house, Liu Yu, was promoted to the governor of Jinan.

古文：溉等居官，并以廉洁着。
现代文：到溉等人在任上都以廉洁著称。
English: Both Zuorigi and the others were known for their integrity while in office.

古文：又着令：小县有能，迁爲大县令，大县有能，迁爲二千石。
现代文：又下令：小县长官有才能，可升任大县令；大县长官有才能，升任州郡太守。
English: He also ordered that if a small county magistrate had talent, he could be promoted to the position of large county magistrate; if a large county magistrate had talent, he could be promoted to the position of prefectural governor.

古文：于是山阴令丘仲孚有异绩，以爲长沙内史，武康令何远清公，以爲宣城太守。
现代文：山阴县令丘仲孚有突出政绩，升为长沙内史；武康县令何远清廉正直，升任宣城太守。
English: Sanyin County's Lingqiu Zhongfu had outstanding political achievements and was promoted to Changsha Inner History; Wu Kang County's Ling He Yuan was clean and honest and was promoted to Xuancheng Dazhou.

古文：自下畏服，莫敢犯禁。
现代文：因此那时作官的都受到这种风气的影响。
English: Therefore, the officials at that time were all influenced by this culture.

古文：卒于官。
现代文：这是近代勉励为官者的好办法。
English: He died in office.

古文：杜骥字度世，京兆杜陵人也。
现代文：按前代史书各立有《循吏传》，记述其美德，如今也采集此类事，以著成此篇。杜骥字度世，京兆杜陵人。
English: According to the previous generation of history books, there are "Biographies of Officials" to record their virtues, and now they are also collecting such things to write this article.

古文：高祖预，晋征南将军。
现代文：高祖杜预，是晋朝的征南将军。
English: Gao Zu Du Yuan was a general of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：曾祖耽，避难河西，因仕张氏。
现代文：曾祖杜耽，到河西避难，所以曾在前凉张氏那里作官。
English: Zengzu Du Tan took refuge in Hexi, so he worked as an official for the former Liang Zhang clan.

古文：苻坚平凉州，父祖始还关中。
现代文：苻坚平定凉州后，祖父和父亲才回到关中。
English: Grandfather and father returned to Guanzhong only after Yu Jian had pacified Liangzhou.

古文：兄坦颇涉史传，宋武帝平长安，随从南还。
现代文：杜骥哥哥杜坦对史籍颇有研究，宋武帝打下长安，他跟随南下。
English: Du Yao's brother, Du Tan, has done a lot of research on historical records. When Emperor Song Wudi conquered Chang'an, he followed him to the south.

古文：元嘉中，位青、冀二州刺史，晚度北人，南朝常以伧荒遇之，虽复人才可施，每爲清途所隔，坦恒以此慨然。
现代文：元嘉年间，作青、冀二州刺史。晚期南渡的北方人，南朝士族常把他们视为粗鄙之人，即使有才干，往往受士族压抑排斥，杜坦常因此感慨不平。
English: During the Yuan Jia era, he wrote the history of the two states of Qing and Ji. The northerners who came to the south in the late period were often regarded as rude people by the Southern Dynasty. Even if they were talented, they were often suppressed and excluded by the warrior class. Du Tan often felt uneasy because of this.

古文：尝与文帝言及史籍，上曰： 金日磾忠孝淳深，汉朝莫及，恨今世无复此辈人。 
现代文：一次和文帝论及史籍。文帝说： 金日石单忠孝淳朴深厚，汉朝无人比得上，遗憾的是今天再没有这种人了。 
English: Once, discussing historical records with Emperor Wen, Emperor Wen said: Kim Il Sung was a man of profound loyalty and simplicity, and no one in the Han Dynasty was comparable to him. Unfortunately, there is no such man today.

古文：坦曰： 日磾之美，诚如圣诏，假使出乎今世，养马不暇，岂办见知。 
现代文：杜坦说： 日石单的美德，诚如陛下所言，假如他生在今世，养马都忙不过来，怎有机会被赏识重用。 
English: Dutan said, "The virtue of Nisshizan is, as His Majesty said, if he were born in this world, he would be too busy to keep horses, so how could he have the opportunity to be appreciated and reused.

古文：上变色曰： 卿何量朝廷之薄也。 
现代文：文帝变了脸色说： 你怎么把朝廷看得这么狭隘刻薄呢。 
English: Emperor Wen changed his face and said, "How can you see the imperial court as so narrow and mean?

古文：坦曰： 请以臣言之，臣本中华高族，亡曾祖因晋氏丧乱，播迁凉土，直以南度不早，便以荒伧赐隔。
现代文：杜坦回答： 就拿我来说吧，我本出身中原高门大族，先曾祖因为晋朝丧乱，流落到西凉，仅仅因为南渡不早，便被当成伧俗视为异类。
English: Dutan replied: Let's take me for example. I am originally from the Central Plains high gate clan. My ancestors were displaced to Xilang due to the turmoil of the Jin Dynasty. Just because I did not go to the south early, I was regarded as a vulgar and outlier.

古文：日磾胡人，身爲牧圉，便超入内侍，齿列名贤。
现代文：日石单本是胡人，养马的出身，被破格提拔到皇帝身边，位置与大臣并列。
English: Nisshidan was originally a horse-breeder from Hu, and was exceptionally promoted to the emperor's side, a position on a par with a minister.

古文：圣朝虽复拔才，臣恐未必能也。 
现代文：本朝虽也能提拔人才，我怕未必能有金日石单这样的事。 
English: Although we can promote talent this morning, I'm afraid we may not be able to have such a thing as a Kim Il Sung list.

古文：上默然。
现代文：文帝默然无言。
English: The Emperor was speechless.

古文：北土旧法，问疾必遣子弟。
现代文：北方传统风俗，探问病人都要派自己的子弟前去。
English: It is a traditional custom in the north for people to send their children to inquire after the sick.

古文：骥年十三，父使候同郡韦华。
现代文：杜骥十三岁时，父亲派他去问候同郡的韦华。
English: When Du Juan was thirteen years old, his father sent him to greet Wei Hua from the same county.

古文：华子玄有高名，见而异之，以女妻焉。
现代文：韦华儿子韦玄很有名望，见到杜骥觉得他很不寻常，便把女儿许配给他。
English: Wei Hua's son, Wei Xuan, was very famous. Seeing him, Du Yao thought he was very unusual, so she gave her daughter to him.

古文：累迁长沙王义欣后军录事参军。
现代文：杜骥以后逐步升任长沙王刘义欣的后军录事参军。
English: After Du Xuan, he was gradually promoted to join the army after the army record of Changsha King Liu Yixin.

古文：元嘉七年，随到彦之入河南，加建武将军。
现代文：元嘉七年，跟随到彦之入河南，加封建武将军。
English: In the seventh year of Yuan Jia, he followed Zhu Yan into Henan, and added the feudal general Jianwu.

古文：魏撤河南戍悉归河北，彦之使骥守洛阳。
现代文：北魏撤去河南防务全部退回河北，到彦之派杜骥守洛阳。
English: The Northern Wei retreated to Henan, and all the defences were returned to Hebei. Du Xuan was sent to defend Luoyang.

古文：洛阳城废久，又无粮食，及彦之败退，骥欲弃城走，虑爲文帝诛。
现代文：洛阳城荒废已久，又无粮食，到彦之兵败退走时，杜骥也想弃城逃跑，又怕被文帝诛杀。
English: Luoyang City had been deserted for a long time, and there was no food. When Yan's defeated soldiers retreated, Du Xi also wanted to abandon the city and flee, and was afraid of being killed by Emperor Wen.

古文：初，武帝平关、洛，致锺虡旧器南还。
现代文：起先，武帝攻下长安、洛阳后，把宫廷内的钟鼎乐器等物运回江南，一口大钟掉到了洛水中。
English: At first, after Emperor Wu conquered Chang'an and Luoyang, he transported the palace musical instruments and other things back to the south of the Yangtze River, and a large bell fell into the Luoshui River.

古文：一大锺坠洛水中，至是帝遣将姚耸夫领千五百人迎致之。
现代文：这时文帝派将军姚耸夫带一千五百人来这儿把它弄回去。
English: At this time, Emperor Wen sent General Yao Shengfu with fifteen hundred men to bring it back here.

古文：时耸夫政率所领牵锺于洛水，骥乃遣使紿之曰： 虏既南度，洛城势弱，今修理城池，并已坚固，军粮又足，所乏者人耳。
现代文：当姚耸夫带人在洛水正往外打捞时，杜骥派人来向他谎称： 夏军南下，洛阳势弱，如今我修理城池，都已坚固，军粮又充足，所缺少的只是人力。
English: When Yao Shengfu and his men were on their way to salvage Luoshui, Du Xi sent a man to lie to him, saying: The Xia army is heading south, Luoyang is weak, now I am repairing the city, everything is solid, there is plenty of military food, all that is missing is manpower.

古文：君率衆见就，共守此城，大功既立，取锺无晚。 
现代文：你不如率众人到我这儿来，共守此城，立了大功以后，再取钟也不晚。 
English: You might as well come to me with all your men and jointly defend this city. After you have accomplished great feats, it will not be too late to retrieve the bell.

古文：耸夫信之，率所领就骥。
现代文：耸夫相信了他的话，领着他带来的人到杜骥这儿来。
English: Shoufu believed his words and led the people he had brought to Cuckoo.

古文：及至城不可守，又无粮食，于是引衆去，骥亦委城南奔。
现代文：等到了洛阳，才知道难以坚守，又无粮食，于是带人离去，杜骥也弃城南逃。
English: When they arrived in Luoyang, they realized that it would be difficult to hold out and that there was no food, so they took people with them and left. Du Wei also fled south of the city.

古文：白文帝： 本欲以死固守，姚耸夫入城便走，人情沮败，不可复禁。 
现代文：他对文帝说： 本打算以死固守，可是姚耸夫进了城就走，弄得人心沮丧恐慌，不可收拾。 
English: He said to Emperor Wen: I had planned to hold out to the death, but when Yao Shengfu entered the city, he just left, which made everyone so depressed and panicked that they couldn't get over it.

古文：上怒，使建威将军郑顺之杀耸夫于寿阳。
现代文：文帝发怒，使建威将军郑顺之在寿阳杀耸夫。
English: Emperor Wen was so angry that he ordered General Jianwei Zheng Shunzhi to kill his husband in Shouyang.

古文：耸夫，吴兴武康人，勇果有气力，宋偏裨小将莫及。
现代文：耸夫是吴兴武康县人，勇敢果断有气力，宋朝的下级军官无人比得上。
English: Shoufu was from Wu Xingwu Kang County. He was brave, decisive and powerful. No lower-ranking officer in the Song Dynasty could match him.

古文：十七年，骥爲青、冀二州刺史，在任八年，惠化着于齐土。
现代文：永嘉十七年，杜骥作青、徐二州刺史，在任八年，恩惠德化显著于齐地。
English: In the 17th year of Yongjia, Du Qian became the youngest and Xu Erzhou became the oldest. In his eight years in office, the benevolence and virtue were significantly enhanced in Qi.

古文：自义熙至于宋末，刺史唯羊穆之及骥爲吏人所称咏。
现代文：自义熙年间直到宋末，作刺史的只有羊穆之和杜骥受到吏民称颂。
English: From the reign of Emperor Yixi to the end of the Song Dynasty, only Yang Muzhi and Du Xi, who wrote the history of barbed wire, were praised by officials and the people.

古文：后征爲左军将军，兄坦代爲刺史，北土以爲荣焉。
现代文：后来被征召作左军将军，其兄杜坦代为刺史，北方人都引以为荣。
English: Later, he was conscripted as a general of the Left Army, and his brother, Dutan, served as his deputy, which made the northerners proud.

古文：坦长子琬爲员外散骑侍郎，文帝尝有函诏敕坦，琬辄开视。
现代文：杜坦长子杜琬作员外散骑侍郎，文帝曾有书信给杜坦，杜琬擅自拆看；信还没来得及送出去，他又要回来看。
English: Du Tan's eldest son, Du Xuan, was a horseback riding attendant. Emperor Wen once had a letter for Du Tan, which Du Xuan opened and read without permission. Before the letter could be sent out, he wanted to return to read it.

古文：寻有诏，以岐勤劳，封南丰县侯。
现代文：信发走以后，此事被大肆追问。文帝派主书来责问杜骥，并追查私拆信函的人。
English: After the letter was sent, the matter was vigorously pursued. Emperor Wen sent the chief scribe to question Du Juan and track down the person who illegally opened the letter.

古文：固辞不受。宫城失守，岐带疾出围，卒于宅。
现代文：杜骥回答说： 开信的是我的四儿子季文，我等待朝廷处罚。 
English: Du Juan replied: It was my fourth son, Jiwen, who opened the letter. I am waiting for the imperial court to punish him.

古文：虞愿字士恭，会稽余姚人也。
现代文：文帝特加开恩不予追问。杜骥后来死在任上。虞愿字士恭，会稽余姚人。
English: Wen Di, Tegaka, and Kian were not questioned. Du Xi later died in office. Gu Zheng, Zi Jing, and Yu Yao were the auditors.

古文：祖赉，给事中、监利侯。
现代文：祖父虞赉，作过给事中，被封为监利侯。
English: His grandfather, Yu Yao, was appointed as a procurator of the imperial treasury.

古文：父望之早卒。
现代文：父亲虞望之早死。
English: His father, Yu Wanzhong, died young.

古文：赉中庭橘树冬熟，子孙竞来取之。愿年数岁独不取，赉及家人皆异之。
现代文：虞赉院子里有棵桔树冬天成熟，家里的孩子们都争着来摘，虞愿才不过是几岁的孩子，却独独不去摘取，虞赉和家里人都觉得他很怪。
English: There was an orange tree in Yu's yard that was ripe for picking in the winter. The children in the family were all competing to pick it. Yu Xian, who was only a few years old, was the only one who didn't want to pick it. Yu and his family all thought he was very strange.

古文：宋元嘉中，爲湘东王国常侍。
现代文：宋元嘉年间，虞愿作湘东王国常侍。
English: During the Song and Yuan Dynasties, Gu was willing to serve as the equerry of the Shandong Kingdom.

古文：及明帝立，以愿儒吏学涉，兼蕃国旧恩，意遇甚厚。
现代文：等明帝即位，因为虞愿是出身儒生的官吏，有学识修养，又是自己以前藩国的旧属，待他很是优厚。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he was treated very generously because he was a scholarly and cultured official from a Confucian background and a former vassal of his own domain.

古文：除太常丞，尚书祠部郎，通直散骑侍郎。
现代文：委任他为太常丞、尚书祠部郎、通直散骑侍郎。
English: He was appointed as Taijo-jo, Shosho Chokibu-ro, and Tsuchida Sanki-saji-ro.

古文：帝性猜忌，体肥憎风，夏月常着小皮衣。
现代文：明帝生性猜忌，肥胖怕风，夏天常穿着小皮衣。
English: Emperor Ming was suspicious of sex, obese and afraid of the wind, and often wore a small fur coat in summer.

古文：拜左右二人爲司风令史，风起方面，辄先啓闻。
现代文：封左右二人为司风令史，哪面来了风，要先告诉他。
English: The two people on the left and right of the seal are responsible for the wind direction. Which side the wind comes from should be told first.

古文：星文灾变，不信太史，不听外奏，敕灵台知星二人给愿，常内省直，有异先啓，以相检察。
现代文：星象有灾变，不相信太史，也不听朝官的意见，下令让灵台两名知星官听虞愿调遣。虞愿常在宫内值班，有什么异常征兆先启奏明帝，以作参考。
English: The astrologer had a cataclysmic change of fortune, did not believe in too much history, and did not listen to the opinions of the imperial officials, so he ordered the two astrologers of the spiritual platform to listen to the dispatch of Yu Zheng. Yu Zheng was often on duty in the palace, and if there were any abnormal signs, he would first ask Emperor Ming for reference.

古文：帝以故宅起湘宫寺，费极奢侈。
现代文：明帝在旧宅基上盖湘宫寺，极为奢华，花费很大。
English: Emperor Ming built the Xianggu Temple on the foundation of the old mansion, which was extremely luxurious and expensive.

古文：以孝武庄严刹七层，帝欲起十层，不可立，分爲两刹，各五层。
现代文：因为孝武帝建庄严刹有七层，明帝便打算建十层，但太高盖不成，就分成两座，各五层。
English: Because Emperor Xiaowu built a seven-storey palace, Emperor Ming planned to build a ten-storey palace, but the roof was too high, so it was divided into two five-storey palaces.

古文：新安太守巢尚之罢郡还见帝，曰： 卿至湘宫寺未？
现代文：新安太守巢尚之免职后回京见明帝，明帝问他： 你去过湘宫寺没有？
English: Emperor Ming asked Emperor Anta, who had returned to Beijing after being relieved of his duties, "Have you ever been to Xianggong Temple?"

古文：我起此寺是大功德。 
现代文：我建成此寺是大功德。 
English: It is my great merit to have built this temple.

古文：愿在侧曰： 陛下起此寺，皆是百姓卖儿贴妇钱，佛若有知，当悲哭哀湣。
现代文：虞愿在一旁说： 陛下建这座寺，用的都是百姓卖儿典妻的钱，佛如有灵，一定会伤心痛哭。
English: His Majesty built this temple with the money from the people who sold their children to be married off. If the Buddha had a spirit, he would surely weep bitterly.

古文：罪高佛图，有何功德！ 
现代文：罪孽比宝塔还高，哪儿有什么功德！ 
English: Sins are higher than pagodas, no matter what merits!

古文：尚书令袁粲在坐，爲之失色。
现代文：尚书令袁粲在座，吓得脸都变了色。
English: Shang Shu ordered Yuan Qi to be present, and Yuan Qi's face turned pale with fright.

古文：帝好围碁，甚拙，去格七八道，物议共欺爲第三品，与第一品王抗围碁，依品赌戏。
现代文：明帝大怒，叫人把他拉出殿去，虞愿脸不变色从容离去。因为他和明帝有旧时情分，不几天又被召回宫内。明帝好下围棋，但很笨拙，棋艺不佳。
English: Emperor Ming was furious and ordered someone to drag him out of the palace. Gu was willing to leave calmly without changing his face. Because he and Emperor Ming had a past relationship, he was called back to the palace a few days later. Emperor Ming was good at playing Go, but he was very clumsy and his chess skills were not good.

古文：抗饶借帝，曰： 皇帝飞碁，臣抗不能断。 
现代文：被舆论评为第三品。他和第一品王抗下棋，自认为是同一品级。王抗让他，慌称： 皇帝下的飞棋，臣无法隔断。 
English: He was rated as the third grade by the public opinion. He played chess with the first grade Wang Quan, and he thought that they were the same grade. Wang Quan let him play, saying, "The emperor plays chess, and the vassal cannot be separated."

古文：帝终不觉，以爲信然，好之愈笃。
现代文：明帝始终不觉察，以为真是如此，便对下棋更为迷恋。
English: Emperor Ming was never aware of this, but thought it was true, and became even more obsessed with playing chess.

古文：愿又曰： 尧以此教丹朱，非人主所宜好也。 
现代文：虞愿又对他说： 尧用这教他的不肖之子丹朱，所以这不是人主所应喜爱的东西。 
English: Gu Zheng also said to him: "He used this to teach his ugly son, Dan Zhu, so this is not something that a human master should like.

古文：虽数忤旨，而蒙赏赐犹异馀人。
现代文：虽然数次忤逆明帝的心意，但受到的赏赐还是高于别人。
English: Although he rebelled against Emperor Ming's will several times, his reward was still higher than that of others.

古文：迁兼中书郎。
现代文：后来升迁兼任中书郎。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of chushiro.

古文：帝寝疾，愿常侍医药。
现代文：明帝卧病时，虞愿常在身边服侍端药。
English: When Emperor Ming was ill in bed, Yu would often be at his side to administer medicine.

古文：帝尤好逐夷，以银钵盛蜜渍之，一食数钵。
现代文：明帝尤其喜欢吃一种叫逐夷的鱼干，用银钵盛蜂蜜腌制，一次就能吃好几钵。
English: Emperor Ming particularly liked to eat a type of dried fish called 逐夷, which was marinated in silver vinegar and honey and could be eaten several times at a time.

古文：谓扬州刺史王景文曰： 此是奇味，卿颇足不？ 
现代文：他问扬州刺史王景文： 这东西好吃得很，你有没有过过瘾？ 
English: He asked Yangzhou barber Wang Jingwen: This food is very delicious. Have you ever had a craving?

古文：景文答曰： 臣夙好此物，贫素致之甚难。 
现代文：景文回答： 臣历来爱吃这东西，只是贫穷很难得到。 
English: Jingwen replied, "Our subjects have always loved this food, but it is difficult to obtain due to poverty.

古文：帝甚悦。
现代文：明帝听了很高兴。
English: Emperor Ming was very happy to hear this.

古文：食逐夷积多，胸腹痞胀，气将绝。
现代文：吃逐夷积累得多了，胸腹结块鼓胀，眼看要断气。
English: I have accumulated a lot of food, my chest and abdomen are bulging with lumps, and I feel like I'm going to pass out.

古文：左右啓饮数升酢酒，乃消。
现代文：左右启奏可饮几升醋酒，闷胀才消下去。
English: You can drink several liters of vinegar after the left and right opening, and the stuffiness will disappear.

古文：疾大困，一食汁滓犹至三升。
现代文：病已很重了，一顿还要吃三升肉羹。
English: He is already very ill, and has to eat three litres of meat soup for every meal.

古文：水患积久，药不复效。
现代文：肚里油水积累太多，吃药也不见效了。
English: There is too much oil and water accumulating in my stomach, and taking medicine is no longer effective.

古文：大渐日，正坐呼道人，合掌便绝。
现代文：病危那天，正坐着招呼和尚，一合掌便咽了气。
English: On the day when he was critically ill, he was sitting and greeting a monk, and then he choked to death.

古文：愿以侍疾久，转正员郎。
现代文：虞愿因为长期在明帝患病时服侍他，被转为正员郎。
English: Because he had served Emperor Ming for a long time when he was ill, he was transferred to the position of official attendant.

古文：出爲晋平太守。
现代文：出京作晋平太守。
English: He went to Kyoto to become the Shimpidai no kami.

古文：在郡不事生业。
现代文：在任上不置产业。
English: He did not acquire any properties while in office.

古文：前政与百姓交关，质录其儿妇，愿遣人于道夺取将还。
现代文：前任官员和百姓发生冲突，扣压人家的妻儿，虞愿派人到半路上劫夺回来。
English: Former officials and ordinary people clashed, the wife and children of others were detained, and the state was willing to send people to the middle of the road to snatch them back.

古文：在郡立学堂教授。
现代文：在郡内开设学校。
English: schools in the county.

古文：郡旧出髯蛇，胆可爲药。
现代文：晋平郡以前产髯蛇，胆可以作药。
English: Jinping County used to produce boa constrictors, and the gall can be used as medicine.

古文：有遗愿蛇者，愿不忍杀，放二十里外山中。
现代文：有人送给虞愿一条，虞愿不忍杀它，把它放还到二十里外的山中。
English: Someone gave Yu Zhen a camel, Yu Zhen could not bear to kill it and returned it to the mountains twenty miles away.

古文：一夜蛇还床下。复送四十里山，经宿复归。
现代文：一天夜里蛇回到他床底下，又送到四十里外的山里，过了一夜又回来了。
English: One night the snake went back under his bed, was carried forty miles into the mountains, and came back again the next night.

古文：论者以爲仁心所致。
现代文：人们都说这是他的仁爱之心的结果。
English: People said it was the result of his benevolence.

古文：海边有越王石，常隐云雾，相传云 清廉太守乃得见 。
现代文：海边有一块越王石，经常隐没在云雾里，相传 清廉的太守才能看得见 。
English: There is a rock on the seashore that is often lost in the clouds, and it is said that only a virtuous ruler can see it.

古文：愿往就观视，清彻无所隐蔽。
现代文：虞愿前去观看，结果清彻不见遮挡。
English: The state is willing to go to watch, the result is clear and not obscured.

古文：后琅邪王秀之爲郡，与朝士书曰： 此郡承虞公之后，善政犹存，遗风易遵，差得无事。 
现代文：后来琅笽王秀之来作郡太守，给朝中的官员写信说： 此郡在虞公之后，善政犹存，留下的良好风尚被习惯遵从，因此还算是太平无事。 
English: Later, Shao Wang Xiuzhi came to serve as the county governor and wrote a letter to the officials of the central government, saying: After Yugong, good governance still existed in this county, and the good customs left behind were customarily followed, so it was considered to be peaceful.

古文：以母老解职，除后军将军。
现代文：因为母亲年老而辞去职务，被委任为后军将军。
English: Because of his mother's old age, he resigned his post and was appointed as a rear-army general.

古文：褚彦回尝诣愿，愿不在，见其眠床上积尘埃，有书数帙。
现代文：褚彦回曾去拜访虞愿，虞愿不在家，只见他床上落满了尘土，有书数函。
English: Yan Yan Hui once went to visit Yu Zhen, Yu Zhen was not at home, only to see his bed covered with dust and several letters.

古文：彦回叹曰： 虞君之清至于此。 
现代文：彦回叹息道： 虞君竟清贫到如此地步。 
English: Yan Hui sighed, "Yu Jun is so poor.

古文：令人扫地拂床而去。
现代文：让人帮他扫地扫床后离去。
English: Have someone sweep the floor and bed for him and then leave.

古文：迁中书郎，领东观祭酒。
现代文：改任中书郎，负责东观祭酒。
English: He was reassigned to the position of chushiro, in charge of brewing the Tokan Matsuri sake.

古文：兄季爲上虞令卒，愿从省步出还家，不待诏便归东。
现代文：他哥哥虞季为上虞县令，死在任上，虞愿听说后从中书省徒步赶回家中，不等皇帝诏令批准便东归故乡。
English: His brother, Yu Ji, was the county magistrate of Shangyu County and died in office. After hearing of his death, Yu Ji hurried home on foot from Cangshu Province without waiting for the Emperor's edict to be approved and returned to his hometown.

古文：除骁骑将军，迁廷尉，祭酒如故。
现代文：后任骁骑将军，又改任廷尉，祭酒职务不变。
English: Later, he was appointed as the general of the imperial cavalry, and then he was appointed as the imperial lieutenant, but his duties of offering the sacrificial wine remained unchanged.

古文：愿尝事宋明帝，齐初，神主迁汝阴庙，愿拜辞流涕。
现代文：虞愿曾侍奉宋明帝。齐初，宋朝神主迁到汝阴庙，虞愿流泪拜别。
English: At the beginning of the Qi Dynasty, the god of the Song Dynasty moved to the Ruyin Temple, and Gu Xiang bade farewell with tears.

古文：沈瑀字伯瑜，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：建元元年去世。虞愿著有《五经论问》，又撰《会稽记》，有文章数十篇。沈瑀字伯瑜，吴兴武康人。
English: He died in the first year of Jianyuan. He was the author of the "Five Classics Discussion" and the author of the "Congregation Audit," with dozens of articles. He was a member of the Wu Xingwu Kang people.

古文：父昶，事宋建平王景素。
现代文：父亲沈昶，在宋朝建平王刘景素手下做事。
English: His father, Shen Yi, worked under the Song Dynasty's Jianping King Liu Jingsu.

古文：景素谋反，昶先去之，及败坐系狱。
现代文：景素谋反，沈昶事先离开了他，等景素事败，他受牵连下狱。
English: When Jing Su plotted a rebellion, Shen Yao left him in advance. When Jing Su was defeated, he was implicated and sent to prison.

古文：瑀诣台陈请得免罪，由是知名。
现代文：沈蠫到朝廷陈述原委而得以免罪，沈蠫也因此知名。
English: Shen Yi went to the Imperial Court to present his case to the court of first instance and was exonerated. This is how Shen Yi became famous.

古文：爲奉朝请，尝诣齐尚书左丞殷濔，濔与语及政事，甚器之，谓曰： 观卿才干，当居吾此职。 
现代文：后来作奉朝请，曾到齐尚书左丞殷氵尔处，殷氵尔和他谈论到国家大事，很器重他，对他说： 看起来以你的才干，应该担任我的职务。 
English: Later, when he was invited to serve the imperial court, he went to the office of Qi Shangshu Zuoxiao Yin Kun. Yin Kun talked with him about national affairs, held him in high esteem, and said to him: "It seems that with your talent, you should hold my position."

古文：司徒竟陵王子良闻瑀名，引爲府行参军，领扬州部传从事。
现代文：司徒竟陵王萧子良听到沈蠫的名声，招引他作王府行参军，兼扬州部传从事。
English: When King Xiao Ziliang heard of Shen Qi's fame, he invited him to join the army as a prince, and also engaged in Yangzhou's military history.

古文：时建康令沈徽孚恃势傲瑀，瑀以法绳之，衆惮其强。
现代文：当时建康县令沈徽孚仗势傲视沈蠫，沈蠫就按法律惩治他，众人因此都惧怕他的强硬。
English: At that time, the governor of Jiankang County, Shen Hui Fuzhong, was proud of Shen Yi, and Shen Yi punished him according to the law, so everyone was afraid of his toughness.

古文：子良甚相知赏，虽家事皆以委瑀。
现代文：子良对他非常赏识，即使是家里的事也都交给他去办。
English: Xiao Ziliang appreciates him very much. Even the household chores are left to Shen Ma.

古文：子良薨，瑀复事刺史始安王遥光，尝使送人丁，速而无怨，遥光谓同使吏曰： 尔何不学沈瑀所爲。 
现代文：子良去世后，沈蠫又到刺史始安王萧遥光门下做事，遥光曾派他押送丁役，结果丁役们到达得快而且没有怨言，遥光对同沈蠫一起去办事的其他人说： 你们怎么不学学沈蠫那样干呢。 
English: After Ziliang's death, Shen Rong again worked under the tutelage of Xiao Yaoguang, the king of Shi An. Yaoguang had sent him to escort Ding. As a result, Ding's servants arrived quickly and without complaint. Yaoguang said to the others who went to work with Shen Rong, "Why don't you learn from Shen Rong's way of doing things?"

古文：乃令瑀专知州狱事。
现代文：于是让沈蠫专门管理州里的官司诉讼。
English: As a result, Shen Wei was specifically put in charge of managing the lawsuits in the state.

古文：湖熟县方山埭高峻，冬月，公私行侣以爲艰。
现代文：湖熟县的方山埭又高又陡，到了冬天，无论是办公还是私事的行人都觉得难受。
English: The Fangshan ravine in Hukou County is high and steep, and in winter, both office and private pedestrians feel uncomfortable.

古文：明帝使瑀行修之。
现代文：齐明帝派沈蠫去修整它。
English: Emperor Qiming sent Shen Xuan to repair it.

古文：瑀乃开四洪，断行客就作，三日便办。
现代文：沈蠫挖四条大沟，拦住行人让他们参加劳动，三天就完了工。
English: Shen Hao dug four large ditches, stopped pedestrians to let them participate in the work, and completed the work in three days.

古文：扬州书佐私行，诈称州使，不肯就作，瑀鞭之四十。
现代文：扬州书佐办私事从这儿过，谎称是为州里出差，不肯去干活儿，沈蠫打了他四十鞭。
English: The Yangzhou assistant secretary-general of the Communist Party of China (CPC) passed by here on a personal matter, falsely claiming to be on a business trip to the prefecture. He refused to go to work, and Shen Qi gave him forty lashes.

古文：书佐归诉遥光，遥光曰： 沈瑀必不枉鞭汝。 
现代文：书佐回去后向遥光告状，遥光说： 沈蠫一定不会错打你。 
English: Shosa went back to complain to Xiao Yaoguang. Xiao Yaoguang said: Shenma will not whip you for no reason.

古文：覆之果有诈。
现代文：经调查果然是他说了假话。
English: After an investigation, it turned out that he had lied.

古文：明帝复使瑀筑赤山塘，所费减材官所量数十万。帝益善之。
现代文：明帝又让沈蠫修筑赤山塘，花费比预算少用了几十万，明帝更加赏识他。
English: Emperor Ming also allowed Shen Qi to build the Red Mountain Pond, spending hundreds of thousands less than the budget, and Emperor Ming appreciated him even more.

古文：爲建德令，教人一丁种十五株桑、四株柿及梨栗，女子丁半之。
现代文：沈蠫作建德县令，让百姓一丁种十五棵桑树，四棵柿树或是梨树栗树，女丁种一半。
English: Shen Yi issued an order for Jiande County, asking the people to plant 15 mulberry trees, four persimmon trees or pear trees and chestnut trees, and half of the female trees.

古文：人咸欢悦，顷之成林。
现代文：人人都很高兴，不久就成了林。
English: Everyone was happy and it soon became a forest.

古文：去官还都，兼行选曹郎，随陈伯之军至江州。
现代文：沈蠫辞官回京，兼任行选曹郎，跟随陈伯之军队到江州。
English: Returning to Beijing as a retired officer, and concurrently serving as a selection sergeant, he followed Chen Bo's army to Jiangzhou.

古文：会梁武起兵围郢城，瑀说伯之迎武帝。伯之泣曰： 馀子在都。 
现代文：赶上梁武帝起兵围郢城，沈蠫劝伯之叛齐奉迎武帝，伯之流泪说： 我的儿子还在京城里。 
English: Catching up with Emperor Liangwu, he started an army to encircle the city of Handan. Shen Rong persuaded him to rebel and serve Emperor Wu. He shed tears and said, "My son is still in the capital."

古文：瑀曰 不然人情匈匈，皆思改计；若不早图,衆散难合 。
现代文：沈蠫说： 不这样的话人心动荡，都在另打别的主意，如不早作打算，恐怕众心离散难以统率。 
English: Shen Yao said, "Otherwise, people's minds would be in turmoil, and they would all have other ideas. If you don't make plans in advance, I'm afraid it would be difficult to lead the scattered hearts."

古文：伯之遂降。
现代文：伯之于是降归武帝。
English: Therefore, he surrendered to Emperor Wu.

古文：初，瑀在竟陵王家，素与范云善，齐末尝就云宿，梦坐屋梁柱上，仰见天中有字曰 范氏宅 。
现代文：当初，沈蠫在竟陵王家，一直和范云很好，齐朝末年曾到范云家过夜，梦见坐在屋子梁柱上，仰头看见天上有字写着 范氏宅 。
English: At the beginning, Shen Yao had always been on good terms with Fan Yun at the royal family of Jingling. At the end of the Qi Dynasty, he had stayed overnight at Fan Yun's house. He dreamed that he was sitting on the beams and pillars of the house. Looking up, he saw a word written in the sky: "Fan's house."

古文：至是瑀爲帝说之,帝曰： 云得不死，此梦可验。 
现代文：这时沈蠫和梁武帝说起此事，武帝说： 范云能不死，此梦就是验证。 
English: At this time, Shen Rong and Liang Wudi talked about the matter, and Wudi said: Fan Yun can not die, this dream is a verification.

古文：及帝即位，云深荐瑀，自暨阳令擢兼尚书右丞。
现代文：等武帝即位，范云极力推荐沈蠫，于是把他从暨阳县令提拔为兼尚书右丞。
English: When Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, Fan Yun strongly recommended Shen Qi, and promoted him from Ji Yang County Commander to concurrently hold the title of Shang Shuyuan.

古文：时天下初定，陈伯之言瑀催督运输，军国获济。
现代文：当时天下初定，陈伯之说沈蠫催督运送物资，对国家有功。
English: At that time, the world initially decided that Chen Bozhi said that Shen Rong's act of urging the governor to transport materials was a service to the country.

古文：帝以爲能，迁尚书驾部郎，兼右丞如故。
现代文：梁武帝认为他很能干，升任他为尚书驾部郎，仍兼右丞。
English: Emperor Liang Wudi thought him very capable, and he was promoted to be Shang Shuxu's second-in-command, still concurrently the second-in-command.

古文：瑀荐族人沈僧隆、僧照有吏干，帝并纳之。
现代文：沈蠫推荐他的族人沈僧隆、僧照有作官的才干，武帝一并任用。
English: Emperor Wu also appointed Shen Zanglong and Zangzhao, who were recommended by Shen Zanglong, a member of his clan, for their ability to serve as officials.

古文：以母忧去职，起爲余姚令。
现代文：因为母亲去世辞职，又起用为余姚县令。
English: Because of his mother's death, he resigned and was appointed as Yuyao County magistrate.

古文：县大姓虞氏千馀家，请谒如市，前后令长莫能绝。
现代文：县里大姓虞氏有千余家，很多家都和县衙结有关系，前后县令都无法禁绝。
English: There are more than a thousand families with the surname Yu in the county, and many of them have a relationship with the county, and the county orders can not be prohibited.

古文：自瑀到，非讼诉无所通，以法绳之。
现代文：自从沈蠫到任，不是打官司概不来往，处处依法办事。
English: Since Shen Rong took office, he has not been involved in any lawsuits, and everything has been done in accordance with the law.

古文：县南又有豪族数百家，子弟纵横，递相庇荫，厚自封植，百姓甚患之。
现代文：县南又有有势力的大族数百家，子弟们横行霸道，各家互相包庇，大事聚敛，百姓深受其害。
English: In the southern part of the county, there are hundreds of influential large families. Their children are domineering, each family protects each other, major events gather, and the people are deeply harmed.

古文：瑀召其老者爲石头仓监，少者补县僮，皆号泣道路，自是权右屏迹。
现代文：沈蠫征召这些人家的老者去看守石头仓，年轻的补充为县衙仆役。这些人在街上痛哭哀号，从此豪强敛迹。
English: The old men of these families were conscripted by Shen Yu to guard the stone warehouse, and the younger ones to serve as servants of the county magistrate. These people cried and wailed in the streets, and from then on bravely retreated.

古文：瑀初至，富吏皆鲜衣美服以自彰别，瑀怒曰： 汝等下县吏，何得自拟贵人！ 
现代文：沈蠫刚来时，富有的县吏们都衣锦华美以表明他们与众不同，沈蠫发怒说： 你们不过是下等县吏，怎么能自比贵人！ 
English: When Shen Rong first arrived, the rich county officials were all dressed up to show that they were different. Shen Rong said angrily, "You are just low-ranking county officials, how can you compare yourselves to the nobles!"

古文：悉使着芒屦粗布，侍立终日，足有蹉跌，辄加榜捶。
现代文：都令他们换上草鞋粗布衣，终日侍立，脚下站立不稳，就加以抽打。
English: All of them were made to change into straw sandals and coarse cloth clothes, and were made to stand all day. If they could not stand steadily, they were beaten.

古文：瑀微时尝至此鬻瓦器，爲富人所辱，故因以报焉。
现代文：沈蠫贫贱时曾到这里卖过陶器，被富人侮辱，所以就这样报复他们。
English: When he was poor, he used to sell pottery here and was insulted by the rich, so he took revenge on them in this way.

古文：由是士庶骇怨。瑀廉洁自守，故得遂行其意。
现代文：于是士绅们又怕又恨，但沈蠫廉洁自守，因此能按自己的意志行事。
English: As a result, the gentry both fear and hate him, but he is incorruptible and self-protective, so he can act according to his own will.

古文：后爲安南长史、寻阳太守。
现代文：后来作安南长史、寻阳太守。
English: Later, he became Annan Changshi and Huanyang Taishu.

古文：江州刺史曹景宗卒，仍爲信威萧颖达长史，太守如故。
现代文：江州刺史曹景宗死后，任信威将军萧颖达长史，太守之职不变。
English: After the death of Jiangzhou assassin Cao Jingzong, Ren Xinwei and General Xiao Ying had a long history, and the position of the governor-general remained unchanged.

古文：瑀性屈强，每忤颖达，颖达衔之。
现代文：沈蠫本性倔强，屡次顶撞颖达，颖达对他怀恨。
English: Shen Yao's character was stubborn, and he often rebelled against Xiao Yingda. Xiao Yingda held a grudge against him.

古文：天监八年，因入谘事，辞又激厉。颖达作色曰： 朝廷用君作行事邪？ 
现代文：天监八年，因为到颖达处议事，又言辞过激，颖达变了脸说： 朝廷用你来作行事吗？ 
English: In the eighth year of the Celestial Inspector's reign, because Yingda had arrived for a meeting, and because his words were too violent, Yingda changed his face and said: Does the Imperial Court use you to act?

古文：瑀出，谓人曰： 我死而后已，终不能倾侧面从。 
现代文：沈蠫出来，对别人说： 我死了才能不这样，总不能老对他低头称是。 
English: Shen Yi went out of the palace and said to the people: I will not stop arguing until I am dead. You must not agree with me in front of others.

古文：衆共伺之，不能记也。
现代文：当天在路上被人杀害，人们多认为是颖达害了他。
English: On the same day, a man was killed on the road. Most people think that Ying Dahu killed him.

古文：后爲征西谘议参军、中抚军司马，卒。
现代文：其子沈续屡次上告。遇上颖达不久死去，事情也就不再追究。
English: His son Shen Zong repeatedly appealed. If Ying Da died soon, the matter would no longer be investigated.

古文：郭祖深，襄阳人也。
现代文：沈续布衣蔬食过了一辈子。郭祖深是襄阳人。
English: Guo Zu Sheng is from Yangyang and has spent his entire life living off cloth, clothes and vegetables.

古文：梁武帝初起，以客从。
现代文：梁武帝初起兵时，以门客的身份跟随。
English: When Emperor Liangwu raised an army for the first time, he followed as a concubine.

古文：后随蔡道恭在司州。
现代文：后来又跟随蔡道恭在司州。
English: Later, he followed Cai Daogong to Sizhou.

古文：陷北还，上书言境上事，不见用。
现代文：北方沦陷后南归。上书陈说边境的情况，不被采用。
English: After the fall of the North, they returned to the South. The petition stating the situation at the border was not accepted.

古文：选爲长兼南梁郡丞，徙后军行参军。
现代文：后被选拔为县令兼南梁郡丞，改任后军行参军。
English: After that, he was selected as county magistrate and Nanliang county magistrate, and joined the army after he was reassigned.

古文：帝溺情内教，朝政纵弛，祖深舆榇诣阙上封事，其略曰：
现代文：梁武帝对家人溺爱疏于教育，朝政废弛，祖深就抬着棺材上殿上奏封事，大略如下：
English: Emperor Liangwu doted on his family and neglected education, and the imperial government was wasteful. So Zu Sheng carried the coffin to the palace to perform the sealing ceremony, roughly as follows:

古文：大梁应运，功高百王，慈悲既弘，宪律如替。愚辈罔识，褫慢斯作。各竞奢侈，贪秽遂生。
现代文： 大梁应天命而生，功业盖过历代帝王，既广施慈悲，宪律便近于废弃；愚顽之人无知，懈怠之风从此而起；各人竞相奢侈，贪婪丑行就滋生起来。
English: The great beam was born in accordance with the destiny of heaven, the work surpassed the emperors of all times, and since the mercy was widely practiced, the constitutional law was close to being abandoned; the ignorant people were ignorant, and the slack wind arose from this; each person competed for luxury, and greed and ugliness were bred.

古文：颇由陛下宠勋太过，驭下太宽，故廉洁者自进无途，贪苛者取入多径，直弦者沦溺沟壑，曲鈎者升进重遝。
现代文：这多少是由于陛下恩宠赏赐过多，对下属过于宽大，故廉洁者入仕无路可走，而贪苛者作官门路很多。直如弦者饿死沟壑，曲如钩者升任成群。
English: This is more or less due to the fact that His Majesty rewards too much grace and is too generous to his subordinates. Therefore, there is no way for the incorruptible to enter the service, but there are many ways for the greedy to become an official. Straight as a string, people starve to death, and crooked as a hook, people are promoted in droves.

古文：饰口利辞，竞相推荐，讷直守信，坐见埋没。
现代文：能说会道的，竞相推荐，口拙诚信的，空被埋没。
English: Those who can speak eloquently, compete to recommend, speak with sincerity, and the sky is buried.

古文：劳深勋厚，禄赏未均，无功侧入，反加宠擢。
现代文：劳苦功高的，奉禄赏赐不够，无功幸进的，反加宠爱提拔。
English: If one's hard work is highly meritorious, the reward will not be enough. If one is fortunate to advance without merit, he will be favored and promoted.

古文：昔宋人卖酒，犬恶致酸，陛下之犬，其甚矣哉。
现代文：以前宋国人卖酒，因为店里养狗太凶无人敢来，以至把酒放酸，陛下的狗，比他厉害多了。
English: In the past, people in the Song Dynasty sold liquor because no one dared to keep a dog in the store, even to the point of souring the liquor. His Majesty's dog is much stronger than him.

古文：臣闻人爲国本，食爲人命，故礼曰国无六年之储，谓非其国也。
现代文： 臣闻民为国家根本，食为百姓的命根子，所以《礼》说国家没有六年的积蓄，就不成为国家。
English: Subjects and citizens are the foundation of the country, and food is the lifeblood of the people. Therefore, the "Ritual" says that if a country does not have six years of savings, it will not become a country.

古文：推此而言，农爲急务。
现代文：据此而言，农业为当务之急。
English: In this regard, agriculture is a top priority.

古文：而郡县苛暴，不加劝奖，今年丰岁稔，犹人有饥色，设遇水旱，何以救之？
现代文：然而郡县官吏苛刻暴虐，对农耕不加鼓舞奖励，如今粮食丰收，百姓尚面有饥色，如果遇上水旱之灾，拿什么来赈救？
English: However, county and prefectural officials are harsh and tyrannical, and do not encourage and reward farming. Today, there is a bumper grain harvest, but the people are still hungry. If there is a flood or drought, what can be done to help?

古文：陛下昔岁尚学，置立五馆，行吟坐咏，诵声溢境。
现代文：陛下往年崇尚儒学，设立五经学馆，国内到处洋溢着读书声。
English: In previous years, His Majesty advocated Confucianism and established the Five Classics Academy, and the country was filled with the sound of reading.

古文：比来慕法，普天信向，家家斋戒，人人忏礼，不务农桑，空谈彼岸。
现代文：近来却仰慕佛教，结果普天下都信奉皈依，家家持斋受戒，人人忏悔礼拜，不务农业，空谈佛理。
English: Recently, however, they have been admiring Buddhism, and as a result, the whole world has been converted, families have been fasting and taking vows, everyone has been doing penance and worship, not farming, but talking about Buddhism.

古文：夫农桑者今日济育，功德者将来胜因，岂可堕本勤末，置迩效赊也。
现代文：耕种纺织是当前的生活必需，修行功德是来世的善果，怎么能够荒本劳末，舍近求远呢。
English: Farming and weaving are the current necessities of life, and cultivating merit is the good fruit of the next life. How can we work hard and spare no effort to get closer and farther?

古文：今商旅转繁，游食转衆，耕夫日少，杼轴日空。
现代文：如今经商者和吃闲饭的越来越多，种地的越来越少，织机空闲的一天比一天多。
English: Nowadays, there are more and more businessmen and idlers, less and less land is cultivated, and looms are idle for more and more days.

古文：陛下若广兴屯田，贱金贵粟，勤农桑者擢以阶级，惰耕织者告以明刑。
现代文：陛下如果广兴屯田，贱视金玉重视粮食，努力生产的加以提拔，懒于耕织的明正典刑。
English: Your Majesty, if Guangxing tunden, low regard for gold and jade, attach importance to grain, strive to promote production, lazy to weave the Mingzheng ceremonial punishment.

古文：如此数年，则家给人足，廉让可生。
现代文：这样数年以后，则家家富足，廉洁礼让便有了产生的条件。
English: After such a few years, the family is rich, and the conditions for honesty and courtesy have arisen.

古文：夫君子小人，智计不同，君子志于道，小人谋于利。
现代文： 君子和小人，所想的不一样：君子志于行道，小人盘算得利。
English: A gentleman and a ruffian think differently. A gentleman aims at the road ahead, while a ruffian plans to make a profit.

古文：志于道者安国济人，志于利者损物图己。
现代文：志于道者安国济民，志于利者损人利己。
English: Those who aspire to virtue benefit the people, and those who aspire to gain profit benefit themselves.

古文：道人者害国小人也，忠良者捍国君子也。
现代文：僧人是害国的小人，忠良是卫国的君子。
English: A monk is a villain who harms the country, while a churl is a gentleman who defends the country.

古文：臣见疾者诣道士则劝奏章，僧尼则令斋讲，俗师则鬼祸须解，医诊则汤熨散丸，皆先自爲也。
现代文：臣见患病的人去找道士治病便让你打醮画符，找僧尼则让你戒斋听讲经，民间巫师则要驱妖捉鬼，医生则用药外敷内服，这全在于你自己的事先选择。
English: It is entirely up to your own prior choice whether you go to a Taoist for healing or to a monk or nun for fasting and listening to sermons, to a folk sorcerer for exorcism and ghost hunting, or to a doctor for medication.

古文：臣谓爲国之本，与疗病相类，疗病当去巫鬼，寻华、扁，爲国当黜佞邪，用管、晏。
现代文：臣认为治国之本，和治病相似，治病应摒弃巫师鬼怪，去找华佗、扁鹊；治国应当黜退奸佞之徒，而用管仲、晏婴。
English: The vassal believed that the basis of governing the country was similar to that of curing a disease. To cure a disease, one should abandon wizards and ghosts and go to Hua Tuo and Bian Tuo. To govern the country, one should drive away the traitors and use Guanzhong and Guanzhong.

古文：今之所任，腹背之毛耳。
现代文：如今所信用的人，只不过是腹背上的毛罢了。
English: The people you trust now are just the hair on your back.

古文：论外则有勉、舍，说内则有云、旻。
现代文：谈论外事则有徐勉、周扌舍，谈论内务则有云？
English: When it comes to foreign affairs, there are Xu and Zhou; when it comes to domestic affairs, there are clouds?

古文：云、旻所议则伤俗盛法，勉、舍之志唯愿安枕江东。
现代文：云、所说的都是败坏风俗扩张佛教，徐勉、周扌舍所想的只是苟安于江东。
English: Yun and Zhou were talking about corrupting customs and expanding Buddhism, while Xu and Zhou were only thinking about settling in the east of the Yangtze River.

古文：主慈臣恇，息谋外甸，使中国士女南望怀冤，若贾谊重生，岂不恸哭。
现代文：君主慈悲臣下怯懦，不图进取，使得中原百姓怀恨南望，如果贾谊重生，岂不为之痛哭。
English: The cowardice of the monarch's benevolent vassals and their unwillingness to forge ahead have made the people of the Central Plains hold a grudge against Nanbo. If Jia Yi is reborn, they will weep bitterly.

古文：臣今直言犯顔，罪或容宥，而乖忤贵臣，则祸在不测。
现代文：臣如今直言冒犯了陛下，可能还会被宽恕，而得罪贵臣，就有不测之祸。
English: Now, if a vassal offends His Majesty directly, he may still be forgiven, but if he offends a high-ranking vassal, there will be an unforeseen disaster.

古文：所以不惮鼎镬区区必闻者，正以社稷计重而蝼蚁命轻。
现代文：臣之所以不避死罪知无不言，正是以国家社稷为重而以个人性命为轻。
English: The reason why vassals do not avoid death, knowing that it is a crime, is precisely because the state and society are more important, and personal life is less important.

古文：使臣言入身灭，臣何所恨。
现代文：假使能采纳臣的意见，杀了我也死而无憾。 谋臣良将，哪个朝代没有？
English: If only I could adopt my father-in-law's opinion, I would have no regrets if I killed him.

古文：夫谋臣良将，何代无之，贵在见知，要在用耳。陛下皇基兆运二十余载，臣子之节，谏争是谁？
现代文：难得的是被了解，重要的在于任用罢了。陛下登基历时二十余年，有谁能尽臣节直言诤谏？
English: It is rare to be understood, the important thing is to be appointed. It has been more than twenty years since His Majesty ascended to the throne. Who can speak the truth?

古文：执事皆同而不和，答问唯唯而已。
现代文：百官只是表面苟同而不肯齐心合力，回答陛下询问不过惟惟喏喏而已。
English: The officials only agree with each other on the surface, but are not willing to work together, and answer His Majesty's inquiries, but only grumble.

古文：入对则言圣旨神衷，出论则云谁敢逆耳。
现代文：在朝廷上只说圣旨英明，出了门议论就说谁敢说逆耳之言。
English: In the imperial court, only the sacred will is said to be wise, and when there is a discussion outside the door, it is said that who dares to say what is contrary to the ear.

古文：过实在下而谪见于上，遂使圣皇降诚，躬自引咎，宰辅晏然，曾无谦退。
现代文：过失在下面而使上面受怪罪，于是使得皇上开诚布公，引咎自责，而宰辅大臣们都心安理得，一点儿没有自责之心。
English: The fault was below and the blame was put on above, which made the emperor open up and blame himself, while the vice-ministers were at ease and had no feelings of self-blame.

古文：且百僚卿士，少有奉公，尸禄竞利，不尚廉洁。累金积镪，侍列如仙，不田不商，何故而尔？
现代文：百官群僚，少有奉公尽职的，都是白食俸禄追逐私利，不重廉洁，家中积累金银；上朝列班侍立如同神仙，不种田不经商，为什么能够这样享受？
English: It is rare to find a hundred officials and officials who are dedicated to their duties. They are all free-loaders, chasing personal gain. They are not scrupulously clean, and accumulate gold and silver at home. They attend the imperial court as if they were immortals. They do not farm or do business. Why can they enjoy this?

古文：法者人之父母，惠者人之仇雠，法严则人思善，德多则物生恶，恶不可长，欲不可纵。
现代文：刑法是人的父母，利禄是人的仇敌；刑法严厉就人心思善，好处多了就人生恶念，恶念不可助长，贪欲不可放纵。
English: Criminal law is a person's parent, and lilo is a person's enemy; criminal law is strict on people's good thoughts, more benefits on people's evil thoughts, evil thoughts should not be encouraged, and greed should not be indulged.

古文：伏愿去贪浊，进廉平，明法令，严刑罚，禁奢侈，薄赋敛，则天下幸甚。
现代文：但愿能去除贪浊之官，任用廉洁之士，明法令，严刑罚，禁奢侈，薄赋敛，则天下幸甚。
English: If we could only get rid of corrupt officials, appoint honest people, have clear laws, severe punishments, ban extravagance, and restrain wealth, then the world would be a much happier place.

古文：谨上封事二十九条，伏愿抑独断之明，少察愚瞽。
现代文：谨呈上封事二十九条，但愿圣上别忙于英明决断，先听听臣的愚见。 
English: I have the honour to present to you the 29th article of the Imperial Rescript. I hope that His Holiness will not be preoccupied with making wise decisions, but will first listen to the foolish opinions of his vassals.

古文：时帝大弘释典，将以易俗，故祖深尤言其事，条以爲：
现代文：当时武帝正在大兴佛教，要用它来改换中国的习俗，因此祖深特别说到这件事，上书的条目中认为：
English: At that time, Emperor Wu was promoting Buddhism and wanted to use it to change Chinese customs. Therefore, Zu Sheng specifically mentioned this matter. In the article of the book, he said:

古文：都下佛寺五百馀所，穷极宏丽。
现代文： 京都佛寺五百余所，都极为宏伟华丽。
English: There are more than five hundred Buddhist temples in Kyoto, all of which are extremely magnificent.

古文：僧尼十余万，资産丰沃。
现代文：僧尼十余万，资产丰厚。
English: There are more than one hundred thousand monks and nuns, with rich assets.

古文：所在郡县，不可胜言。
现代文：至于各郡县，就数也数不清了。
English: As for counties, there are too many to count.

古文：道人又有白徒，尼则皆畜养女，皆不贯人籍，天下户口几亡其半。
现代文：和尚又有不出家的俗弟子，叫作白徒，尼姑则都收留养女，都不在民籍注册，天下户口几乎减少一半。
English: Monks also have lay disciples who do not go out of the house, called white monks, and nuns have adopted daughters. They are not registered in the civil register, and the world's household registration has almost been reduced by half.

古文：而僧尼多非法，养女皆服罗纨，其蠹俗伤法，抑由于此。
现代文：而僧尼多不守教规，养女都身穿绵缎，败坏世风，损伤佛门，大概都由此而生。
English: But monks and nuns do not abide by the rules, and they all dress their daughters in pajamas, corrupting the world and damaging the Buddhist gate. This is probably how they all came into being.

古文：请精加检括，若无道行，四十已下，皆使还俗附农。
现代文：请朝廷细加考查，如果没有什么道行，都令其还俗务农。
English: Please ask the imperial court to make a detailed examination, and if there is no Taoism, order him to return to mundane agricultural work.

古文：罢白徒养女，听畜奴婢。婢唯着青布衣，僧尼皆令蔬食。
现代文：废止白徒养女，听候发作奴婢，婢女只能穿青布衣，僧尼都令他们吃粗食。
English: Abolished the raising of daughters by pagans, waited for the appearance of slaves and maids, the maids could only wear blue cloth, and the monks and nuns made them eat coarse food.

古文：如此，则法兴俗盛，国富人殷。
现代文：这样，才能使僧俗都得以兴盛，国家富足人民殷实。
English: Only in this way can both the religious and the secular flourish, and the country be prosperous and the people prosperous.

古文：不然，恐方来处处成寺，家家剃落，尺土一人，非复国有。
现代文：不然，恐怕将来处处都成寺庙，家家都剃发为僧，连一尺土一个人也都非国家所有了。
English: Otherwise, I am afraid that in the future, temples will be built everywhere, every family will shave their heads and become monks, and even a single foot of soil will no longer be owned by the state.

古文：朝廷擢用勋旧，爲三陲州郡，不顾御人之道，唯以贪残爲务。迫胁良善，害甚豺狼。
现代文： 朝廷任用前朝旧臣，作边境上州郡长官，这些人不顾为官之道，只会贪婪残暴，欺压良民，为害甚于豺狼。
English: The imperial court appointed former ministers of the former imperial court to serve as governors of Shangzhou County on the border. These people, regardless of the way they act as officials, will only be greedy and cruel, oppress good people, and do more harm than wolves.

古文：江、湘人尤受其弊。
现代文：江、湘人民尤受其害。
English: The people of Jiangsu and Hunan are particularly affected.

古文：自三关以外，是处遭毒。
现代文：自三关以外，处处遭受荼毒。
English: Apart from the three passes, they were poisoned everywhere.

古文：而此勋人投化之始，但有一身，及被任用，皆募部曲。
现代文：而且这些人来归顺时，只有光杆一个，等被任用以后，都各自招募部曲。
English: Moreover, when these people came to submit, there was only one light pole, and after they were appointed, they were all recruited separately.

古文：而扬、徐之人，逼以衆役，多投其募，利其货财。
现代文：而扬州、徐州的民众，被繁多的劳役逼迫，多来投奔，以获取一点儿钱财。
English: The people of Yangzhou and Xuzhou, on the other hand, were forced to do a lot of labor, and many of them ran away to get a little money.

古文：皆虚名上簿，止送出三津，名在远役，身归乡里。
现代文：但都大多是只署一个虚名，仅送出三津以外，名字在远方服役，本人又回到家乡。
English: However, most of them signed only a fictitious name, only sent out of Mitsu, the name served in a distant place, and I returned to my hometown.

古文：又惧本属检问，于是逃亡他境，侨户之兴，良由此故。
现代文：又怕上头查问，于是逃亡他乡，侨户的兴起，很大程度都是由于这个原因。
English: They were also afraid of being questioned, so they fled their hometowns. The rise of overseas Chinese households is largely due to this reason.

古文：又梁兴以来，发人征役，号爲三五。
现代文：另外梁朝以来，征发民众服役，称为三五。
English: In addition, since the Liang Dynasty, people were conscripted into military service, known as the 35th Five-Year Plan.

古文：及投募将客，主将无恩，存恤失理，多有物故，辄刺叛亡。
现代文：等编到将官属下，主将残暴无情，不顾其死活，丁役死亡很多，都被作为叛逃记录下来。
English: After being assigned to the subordinates of generals, the commander was cruel and merciless, regardless of his life and death, and many Dingyong died, all of which were recorded as defections.

古文：或有身殒战场，而名在叛目，监符下讨，称爲逋叛，录质家丁。
现代文：有的甚至牺牲在战场，也记在叛逃名下，上边下文出来查办，都把他们作为叛逃者，扣押其家属。
English: Some even died on the battlefield, and their names were recorded as defectors, and they were investigated from top to bottom, and their families were detained as defectors.

古文：合家又叛，则取同籍，同籍又叛，则取比伍，比伍又叛，则望村而取。
现代文：逼得全家叛逃，就抓捕同族的人；同族的都叛逃了，就抓捕同一比伍的；同比伍的都叛逃了，就把整个村子的人都抓起来。
English: If the whole family is forced to defect, arrest the members of the same clan; if all the members of the same clan defect, arrest the members of the same troop; if all the members of the same troop defect, arrest the entire village.

古文：一人有犯，则合村皆空。
现代文：这样一人犯事，则全村皆空。
English: If such a person commits a crime, the whole village will be empty.

古文：虽肆眚时降，荡涤惟始，而监符犹下旧日，限以严程。
现代文：虽然朝廷不时发布赦免令，表示既往不咎，但旧时的查办公文仍在下发，并限时严办。
English: Although the imperial court has issued amnesty orders from time to time, indicating that there is no blame in the past, the old investigation documents are still being issued, and they are strictly limited in time.

古文：上不任信下，转相督促。
现代文：上司对下属信不过，逐级督促。
English: Bosses do not write to their subordinates, but supervise them step by step.

古文：台使到州，州又遣押使至郡，州郡竞急切，同趣下城。
现代文：朝廷使臣催到州里，州又派使者到郡，州郡一个比一个催得急，一同到县里催逼。
English: The imperial envoys were hurried to the prefectures, and the prefectures sent emissaries to the counties. The prefectures were hurried one by one, and together they hurried to the counties.

古文：令宰多庸才，望风畏伏。
现代文：县级长官多为庸才，上边有风吹草动就吓得不行。
English: Most of the county-level officials are mediocre. If there is any wind or movement on the top, they will be too scared.

古文：于是敛户课，荐其筐篚，使人纳重货，许立空文。
现代文：于是就搜刮民财，孝敬上官，逼人交重礼，答应在上司面前写报告遮掩。
English: So he scrounged for people's money, showed filial piety to his superiors, forced people to pay heavy tribute, and promised to write a report in front of his superiors to cover it up.

古文：其百里微欲矫俗，则严科立至，自是所在恣意贪利，以事上官。
现代文：如果哪个县稍微想纠正一下这种风气，就会马上遭到上司严厉斥责，因此到处都在随心所欲贪谋私利，以侍奉上官。 
English: If any county tries to correct this culture even a little, it will immediately be severely reprimanded by the boss, so everywhere they are greedy for self-interest to serve the superior.

古文：又 请断界首将生口入北，及关津废替,须加纠擿 ；又言 庐陵年少，不宜镇襄阳；左仆射王暕在丧，被起爲吴郡，曾无辞让 。
现代文：又有建议阻断界首关口，以阻止劫掠人口往北方贩运，以及当前许多关隘都已废弃，需加以整顿的建议。又说庐陵王年少，镇守襄阳不合适；左仆射王日柬居丧时，被起用为吴郡太守，却一点儿也没有推托。
English: There are also suggestions to block the border crossings to prevent the trafficking of robbers to the north, as well as suggestions that many of the current border crossings have been abandoned and need to be rectified. It is also said that King Fuling is young and is not suitable to be the town guard of Xiangyang; when the left-hand servant of King Shao of Japan and Cambodia was in mourning, he was appointed as the governor of Wuxi County, but he did not hesitate at all.

古文：其言深刻。
现代文：话说得都很重。
English: It's all very heavy.

古文：又 请复郊四星 。
现代文：又奏请让武帝再去郊祀四星。
English: Also, please let Emperor Wu go to the countryside to worship the four stars.

古文：帝虽不能悉用，然嘉其正直，擢爲豫章锺陵令，员外散骑常侍。
现代文：武帝虽不能都采用，但赞赏他的正直，提拔他为豫章钟陵县令，员外散骑常侍。
English: Although Emperor Wu could not adopt all of them, he appreciated his honesty and promoted him to be the county magistrate of Yuzhang Zhongling County and the non-commissioned officer of the cavalry.

古文：普通七年，改南州津爲南津校尉，以祖深爲之。
现代文：普通七年，改南州津为南津校尉，让祖深去任职。
English: After seven years of service, he was promoted to Nanzhoujin as a Nanzhoujin school lieutenant, leaving Zu Sheng to take up the post.

古文：加云骑将军，秩二千石。
现代文：加衔云骑将军，俸禄二千石。
English: He was promoted to the rank of General Yunji, and received a stipend of 2,000 koku.

古文：使募部曲二千。
现代文：让他招募两千部曲。
English: Let him recruit two thousand.

古文：及至南州，公严清刻。
现代文：到了南州后，一切事秉公严断。
English: After arriving in Nanzhou, everything was done fairly and strictly.

古文：由来王侯势家出入津，不忌宪纲，侠藏亡命。
现代文：以前王侯贵人出入关口，无视法令，挟带逃亡人口。
English: In the past, princes and dignitaries used to enter and leave the pass, ignoring the law and taking fugitives with them.

古文：祖深搜检奸恶，不避强御，动致刑辟。
现代文：祖深对于不法行为严格检查，不避权势，不行就动刑法。
English: Zu Shen strictly checks for illegal acts, does not avoid power, and if necessary, invokes the criminal law.

古文：奏江州刺史邵陵王、太子詹事周舍赃罪。
现代文：奏弹江州刺史邵陵王、太子詹事周扌舍有受贿罪。
English: Shao Ling Wang, Prince Zhan Zhi Zhou, who played the role of Jiangzhou acolyte Shao Ling Wang, and Prince Zhan Zhi Zhou Yanshe, were found guilty of accepting bribes.

古文：远近侧足，莫敢纵恣。淮南太守畏之如上府。
现代文：远近畏惧，无人敢于随意胡为，淮南太守竟像对上司那样怕他。
English: He was feared far and wide, and no one dared to act arbitrarily. Huainan's governor was actually afraid of him, as he was of his boss.

古文：常服故布襦，素木案，食不过一肉。
现代文：他常穿着旧外衣，用不油漆的白木桌子，每顿饭不超过一个肉食。
English: He often wears an old coat, uses an unpainted white wooden table, and eats no more than one piece of meat per meal.

古文：有姥饷一早青瓜，祖深报以疋帛。
现代文：有一位老妇人送他一个早摘的青瓜，祖深用一匹帛来回报她。
English: An old woman gave him an early-picked cucumber, and Zu Sheng gave her a donkey in return.

古文：后有富人效之以货，鞭而徇衆。
现代文：后来有一个富人仿效此事用青瓜去贿赂他，被他鞭打示众。
English: Later, a rich man followed suit and tried to bribe him with a cucumber, but he whipped him in public.

古文：朝野惮之，绝于干请。所领皆精兵，令行禁止。
现代文：朝野人士都怕他这点儿，对他不敢行贿拉拢。
English: People in both the government and opposition are afraid of him, and dare not offer bribes to win him over.

古文：有所讨逐，越境追禽。
现代文：他所带领的都是精兵，纪律严明。
English: The soldiers he led were all elite soldiers with strict discipline.

古文：江中尝有贼，祖深自率讨之，列阵未敢进，仍令所亲人先登，不时进，斩之。
现代文：有什么讨伐追捕的任务，往往越境也要把人犯抓获。长江曾经有贼寇，祖深亲自带人去讨伐，列阵后无人敢向前进，他就命令他最亲近的人先上，不按要求前进的斩首。
English: There used to be bandits in the Yangtze River, and Zu Shen personally led people to fight them. After the battle, no one dared to advance, so he ordered his closest people to go first, and beheaded those who did not advance as required.

古文：遂大破贼，威振远近，长江肃清。
现代文：于是大破贼寇，威震远近，长江肃清。
English: As a result, the Great Thieves and Robbers were defeated, the earthquake was felt far and near, and the Yangtze River was cleared.

古文：论曰：善政之于人，犹良工之于埴也，用功寡而成器多焉。
现代文：评论：善政对于民众，好比优秀的陶工和陶土的关系一样，用的工夫少而制成的器物多。
English: Comment: For the people, good governance is like the relationship between an excellent potter and clay. Less effort is required to produce more ware.

古文：汉世户口殷盛，刑务简阔，郡县之职，外无横扰，劝赏威刑，事多专断，尺一诏书，希经邦邑。
现代文：汉代人口繁盛，刑罚宽简，作郡县长官的，没有外部干扰，奖赏刑罚，都可按自己的意志行事，朝廷也很少下诏干涉下面事务。
English: During the Han Dynasty, the population flourished, punishments were more lenient, county governors could act as they wished without external interference, and punishments were rewarded. The imperial court rarely issued an edict to interfere in the following matters.

古文：吏居官者或长子孙，皆敷德政以尽人和，兴义让以存简久。
现代文：由于社会稳定，有些官员在一个地方任职往往已生子生孙还未调离，都能普及德政促使人民和睦，提倡仁义礼让使淳朴之风不变。
English: As a result of social stability, some officials in one place often have children and grandchildren who have not yet been transferred. They can popularize German politics, promote people's harmony, advocate benevolence and courtesy, and keep the simple style unchanged.

古文：故龚、黄之化，易以有成。
现代文：因此汉代龚遂、黄霸那样的政绩，就容易达到。
English: Therefore, it is easy to achieve political achievements such as the Han Dynasty and the Yellow Dynasty.

古文：降及晚代，情僞繁起，人减昔时，务殷前世。
现代文：等到了末代，各种伪诈滋生，人口少于以前，而赋税劳役却比从前繁重。
English: By the last generation, all kinds of frauds were rampant, the population was smaller than before, and tax labor was more onerous than before.

古文：立绩垂风，难易百倍。
现代文：想做出政绩，树立风范，要比从前难上百倍。
English: If you want to make political achievements and set an example, it will be a hundred times more difficult than before.

古文：若以上古之化，御此世之人，今吏之良，抚前代之俗，则武城弦歌，将有未暇，淮阳卧镇，如或可勉。
现代文：若用上古时的教化来治理当世之民，那么今天优秀的官吏，在古代那样淳厚的风俗中，像子游治武城、汲黯治淮阳那样的成就，都是可以做出来的。
English: If the people of today were to be governed according to the teachings of the ancients, then today's outstanding officials would be able to achieve the achievements of Ziyu in ruling Wucheng and Gu Ying in ruling Huaiyang in the pure customs of the ancients.

古文：未必今才陋古，盖化有醇薄者也。
现代文：未必是今天的人才不如古人，只是世风有淳厚与浇薄之分啊。
English: It is not necessarily that today's talent is not as good as the ancients, but the world has a thick and thin distinction.

