古文：黄帝问曰：有病心腹满，旦食则不能暮食，此为何病？
现代文：黄帝问道：有一种心下的腹部胀满的病，早晨吃了饭，晚上就不能再吃，这是什么病呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "There is a disease in which the abdomen under the heart swells up. If you eat in the morning, you can't eat again in the evening. What kind of disease is this?"

古文：岐伯对曰：名为鼓胀。
现代文：岐伯回答说：这叫 鼓胀 病。
English: Qi Bo replied, "It's called bloating disease.

古文：帝曰：治之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：怎样治疗呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How to treat it?

古文：岐伯曰：治之以鸡矢醴，一剂知，二剂已。
现代文：岐伯说：可用鸡矢醴来治疗，一剂就能见效，两剂病就好了。
English: Qi Bo said, "Chicken arrowroot can be used for treatment. One dose can be effective, and two doses are enough to cure the disease."

古文：帝曰：其时有复发者何也？
现代文：黄帝说：这种病有时还会复发是为什么呢？
English: Huang Di said: This disease sometimes relapses, why is that?

古文：岐伯曰：此饮食不节，故时有病也。
现代文：岐伯说：这是因为饮食不节制，所以病有时复发。
English: Qi Bo said: This is because of eating without restraint, so the disease sometimes relapses.

古文：虽然其病且已，时故当病，气聚于腹也。
现代文：这种情况多是正当疾病将要痊愈时，而又复伤于饮食，使邪气复聚于腹中，因此鼓胀就会复发。
English: This situation is mostly due to the fact that when the disease is about to be cured, it is re-injured by the diet, causing the evil spirit to re-aggregate in the abdomen, so the bloating will recur.

古文：帝曰：有病胸胁支满者，妨于食，病至则先闻腥臊臭，出清液，先唾血，四肢清，目眩，时时前后血，病名为何？
现代文：黄帝说：有一种胸胁胀满的病，妨碍饮食，发病时先闻到腥臊的气味，鼻流清涕，先唾血，四肢清冷，头目眩晕，时常大小便出血，这种病叫什么名字？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "There is a disease in which the chest is distended and full, which hinders one's diet. At the onset of the disease, one first smells a foul smell, the runny nose is clear, the first thing one does is spit blood, the limbs are cold, the head is dizzy, and the urine and feces often bleed. What is the name of this disease?"

古文：何以得之？
现代文：是什么原因引起的呢？
English: How did you get it?

古文：岐伯曰：病名血枯，此得之年少时，有所大脱血，若醉入房中，气竭肝伤，故月事衰少不来也。
现代文：岐伯说：这种病的名字叫 血枯 ，得病的原因是在少年的时候患过大出血的病，使内脏有所损伤，如果这样的人不知自我养护，在醉后肆行房事，使肾气竭，肝血伤，所以月经闭止而不来。
English: Qi Bo said: the name of this disease is hemoptysis. The reason for getting the disease is that when a teenager, he suffered from a major bleeding disease, which caused some damage to the internal organs. If such a person does not know how to take care of himself, and indulges in house affairs after getting drunk, the kidneys are exhausted and the liver is bloody, so the menstruation stops and does not come.

古文：帝曰：治之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：怎样治疗呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How to treat it?

古文：复以何术？
现代文：用什么方法使其恢复呢？
English: How can it be restored?

古文：岐伯曰：以四乌鲗骨，一藘茹，二物并合之，丸以雀卵，大如小豆，以五丸为后饭，饮以鲍鱼汁，利肠中及伤肝也。
现代文：岐伯说：用四份乌贼骨，一份茜草，二药混合，用麻雀蛋浆调和做成药丸，大小如小豆，每次服五丸，饭前服药，用鲍鱼汁送服。这个方法可以通利肠道，补益损伤的肝脏。
English: Qi Bo said: use four parts of cuttlefish bone, one part of horseradish, mix the two medicines, and mix with sparrow's mayonnaise to make a pill, the size of a red bean, take five pills each time, take the medicine before meals, and take it with abalone juice. This method can benefit the intestine and replenish the damaged liver.

古文：帝曰：病有少腹盛，上下左右皆有根，此为何病？
现代文：黄帝说：病有小腹坚硬盛满，按压上下左右都很坚硬像有根，这是什么病呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "The patient has a hard and full lower abdomen. When pressed, it is hard and feels like it has a root. What kind of disease is this?"

古文：可治不？
现代文：可以治疗吗？
English: Can it be treated?

古文：岐伯曰：病名曰伏梁。
现代文：岐伯说：病的名字叫 伏梁 。
English: Qi Bo said: The name of the disease is Fuliang.

古文：帝曰：伏梁何因而得之？
现代文：黄帝说：伏梁是怎样引发的呢？
English: Huang Di said: How did Fuliang cause this?

古文：岐伯曰：裹大脓血，居肠胃之外，不可治，治之每切按之致死。
现代文：岐伯说：小腹腔内充满大量脓血，居于肠胃之外，不能治愈，诊治每因切按而致死。
English: Qi Bo said: the small abdominal cavity is filled with a large amount of pus and blood, which lives outside the intestine and stomach, and cannot be cured. Diagnosis and treatment are fatal due to incision.

古文：帝曰：何以然？
现代文：黄帝说：为什么呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Why?

古文：岐伯曰：此下则因阴，必下脓血，上则迫胃脘，生鬲，侠胃脘内痈。
现代文：岐伯说：伏梁病发的部位，在肚脐以下为小腹及二阴，切按则使脓血下出；在肚脐以上是胃脘部，切按则上迫胃脘，出横膈，使胃脘发生内痈。
English: Qi Bo said: The site of the onset of Fuliang's disease, below the navel, is the lower abdomen and second yin, and the incision is made so that the pus blood comes out; above the navel is the gastric umbilicus, and the incision is made to force the gastric umbilicus, and the transverse umbilicus is made, so that the gastric umbilicus occurs.

古文：此久病也，难治。
现代文：此为根深蒂固的久病，故难治疗。
English: This is a deep-rooted and long-term disease, so it is difficult to treat.

古文：居脐上为逆，居脐下为从，勿动亟夺。
现代文：一般地说，这种病生在脐上的为逆症，生在脐下的为顺症，不可切按，以防其夺命。
English: Generally speaking, this kind of disease on the eyelid is an inverse disease, and the one born under the eyelid is a concomitant disease. It should not be cut and pressed to prevent it from being fatal.

古文：论在《刺法》中。
现代文：关于本病的治法，在《刺法》中有所论述。
English: The treatment of this disease is described in the "Stabbing Method."

古文：帝曰：人有身体髀股胻皆肿，环脐而痛，是为何病？
现代文：黄帝说：有人身体臀部、大腿、小腿部位都发肿，且环绕脐部疼痛，这是什么病呢？
English: Huang Di said: Some people have swelling in the buttocks, thighs, and calves, and pain around the hips. What kind of disease is this?

古文：岐伯曰：病名伏梁，此风根也。
现代文：岐伯说：病的名字也叫 伏梁 ，这是由于受到风寒所致。
English: Qi Bo said: The name of the disease is also called Fu Liang, which is caused by exposure to wind and cold.

古文：其气溢于大肠而着于肓，肓之原在脐下，故环脐而痛也。
现代文：风寒之气充溢于大肠而留着于肓膜，肓膜的根源在脐下气海穴，所以绕脐而痛。
English: The cold wind fills the large intestine and remains in the diaphragm. The root of the diaphragm is in the submental air pocket, so it is painful around the diaphragm.

古文：不可动之，动之为水溺涩之病。
现代文：这种病不可用攻下的方法治疗，如果误用攻下，就会发生小便涩滞不利的病。
English: This kind of disease cannot be treated with the method of attack. If the attack is misused, the disease of unfavorable urinary retention will occur.

古文：帝曰：夫子数言热中消中，不可服高梁、芳草、石药。石药发瘨，芳草发狂。
现代文：黄帝说：先生屡次说患 热中 、 消中 病的，不能吃肥甘厚腻的食物，也不能用芳香类药草和金石类药物，因为金石药物能使人发癫，芳草药物能使人发狂。
English: Huang Di said, "My husband has repeatedly said that if you suffer from heatstroke or heatstroke, you should not eat rich, sweet and fatty foods, and you should not use aromatic herbs and gemstone drugs, because gemstone drugs can make people crazy, and herbal drugs can make people crazy.

古文：夫热中消中者，皆富贵人也，今禁高梁，是不合其心，禁芳草石药，是病不愈，愿闻其说。
现代文：患热中、消中病的，多是富贵之人，现在如禁止他们吃肥甘厚味，则不适合他们的心理，不使用芳草、金石药物，又治不好他们的病，这种情况如何处理呢？
English: Most of those who suffer from fever and heatstroke are rich and affluent people. If they are now prohibited from eating rich, sweet and thick food, it is not suitable for their psychology. If they do not use herbs and herbal medicines, it is not possible to cure their diseases. How should this situation be handled?

古文：岐伯曰：夫芳草之气美，石药之气悍，二者其气急疾坚劲，故非缓心和人，不可以服此二者。
现代文：我愿意听听你的意见。岐伯说：芳草药物气多香窜，金石药物气多猛悍，这两类药物的性能都是急疾坚劲的，若非性情和缓的人，不可以服用这两类药物。
English: I am willing to listen to your opinion. Qibo said: the herbal medicine gas is more fragrant, and the gemstone medicine gas is more fierce. The performance of these two types of drugs is very strong. If you are not a gentle person, you should not take these two types of drugs.

古文：帝曰：不可以服此二者，何以然？
现代文：黄帝说：富贵之人不可以服用这两类药物，是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di said: Rich people can not take these two types of drugs, what is the reason?

古文：岐伯曰：夫热气慓悍，药气亦然，二者相遇，恐内伤脾。脾属土而恶木，服此药者，至甲乙日更论。
现代文：岐伯说：因为这种人平素嗜食肥甘厚腻而生内热，热气本身是剽悍的，药物的性能也是这样，两者遇在一起，恐怕会损伤人的脾气，脾属土而恶木，所以服用这类药物，在甲、乙日肝木主令时，病情就会更加严重。
English: Qi Bo said: Because this kind of person is addicted to food, fat, sweet, thick and greasy and has internal heat, the heat itself is fierce, and the performance of the drug is also like this. If the two are encountered together, it is feared that it will damage the person's temper. The spleen is earthy and evil, so when taking this kind of drug, the condition will be more serious when the liver is the main order on days A and B.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：好。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：有病膺肿、颈痛、胸满、腹胀，此为何病？
现代文：有人患胸肿、颈痛、胸腹胀满，这是什么病呢？
English: Some people suffer from chest swelling, neck pain, and fullness in the chest and abdomen. What kind of disease is this?

古文：何以得之？
现代文：是什么原因引起的呢？
English: How did you get it?

古文：岐伯曰：名厥逆。
现代文：岐伯说：病名叫 厥逆 。
English: Qibo said, "The disease is called Juegong.

古文：岐伯曰：灸之则瘖，石之则狂，须其气并，乃可治也。
现代文：岐伯说：这种病如果用艾灸便会失音，用针刺、砭石就会发狂，必须等到阴阳之气上下相合，才能进行治疗。
English: Qi Bo said: If this disease is treated with moxibustion, it will lose its tone, and if it is treated with acupuncture and vermiculite, it will go mad. It must wait until the yin and yang of qi are in harmony before it can be treated.

古文：岐伯曰：阳气重上，有余于上，灸之则阳气入阴，入则瘖；石之则阳气虚，虚则狂。须其气并而治之，可使全也。帝曰：善。
现代文：岐伯说：上本为阳，阳气又逆于上，重阳在上，则有余于上，若再用灸法，是以火助火，阳气更加亢盛耗损阴液，阴液不能滋养喉咙就会发生失音；若用砭石、针刺，阳气随刺外泄会导致阳气亏虚，阳气无法滋养心神就会发狂；必须在阳气从上下降，阴气从下上升，阴阳二气交并以后再进行治疗，才可以获得痊愈。黄帝说：好。
English: Qibo said: The upper part is yang, yang qi is contrary to the upper part, and the double yang is on the upper part, then there is more than the upper part. If the moxibustion method is used again, with fire to help the fire, the yang qi is more concentrated and consumes the yin liquid, and if the yin liquid cannot nourish the throat, there will be a loss of sound; if the vermiculite and acupuncture are used, the yang qi will leak out with the sting, which will cause the yang qi to be deficient, and if the yang qi cannot nourish the mind, it will go mad

古文：何以知怀子之且生也？
现代文：妇女怀孕且要生产是如何知道的呢？
English: How does a woman know she is pregnant and about to give birth?

古文：岐伯曰：身有病而无邪脉也。
现代文：岐伯说：月经绝但不见有病脉，就可以诊为妊娠。
English: Qi Bo said: If menstruation ceases but no symptoms are found, it can be diagnosed as pregnancy.

古文：帝曰：病热而有所痛者，何也？
现代文：黄帝说：有病发热而兼有疼痛，是什么原因呢？
English: Huang Di said: What is the reason for having fever and pain at the same time?

古文：岐伯曰：病热者，阳脉也。
现代文：岐伯说：阳脉是主热证的，外感发热是三阳受邪，故三阳脉动甚。
English: Qi Bo said: the yang vein is the main heat symptom, and the external heat is caused by the three yang, so the three yang pulses are even.

古文：以三阳之动也，人迎一盛少阳，二盛太阳，三盛阳明，入阴也。
现代文：若人迎之脉，一倍于寸口脉，是病在少阳；二倍于寸口，是病在太阳；三倍于寸口，是病在阳明，从阳明传入于阴经。
English: If a person has a pulse of Ying, twice the pulse of Cunkou, the disease is in Shaoyang; twice the pulse of Cunkou, the disease is in the sun; three times the pulse of Cunkou, the disease is in Yangming, from Yangming to Yinjing.

古文：夫阳入于阴，故病在头与腹，乃䐜胀而头痛也。帝曰：善。
现代文：病在三阳则发热头痛，病在三阴则腹部胀满，所以病人有腹胀和头痛的症状。黄帝说：好。
English: Sanyang disease is characterized by fever and headache, and Sanyin disease is characterized by abdominal distension, so the patient has symptoms of abdominal distension and headache. Huang Di said: Good.

