古文：《书》始嫔虞，《诗》兴《关雎》。
现代文：《尚书》开篇即讲述尧下嫁二女于舜的事，《诗经》首篇也是歌颂男女之情的《关睢》篇。
English: The opening chapter of "Shoshu" tells the story of the marriage of two daughters under his command, and the first chapter of "Shisho" is also the "Guan Xi" chapter, which praises the love between men and women.

古文：国史记载，往往自家而国，以立天下之本。
现代文：后世的国史记录，往往是由家而国，以家为立天下之本。
English: Later generations of national history records, often from the family and the country, with the family as the foundation of the world.

古文：然尊卑之分，不可易也。
现代文：然而尊与卑之分别，是不能更改的。
English: However, the distinction between superior and inferior cannot be changed.

古文：司马迁列吕后于《纪》；班固因之，而传元后于外戚之后；范晔登后妃于《帝纪》。
现代文：司马迁将吕后传列于《本纪》；班固沿袭之，而将其他后、妃的传记列于外戚传之后；范晔将后妃事记于《帝纪》中。
English: Sima Qian listed the biography of Lv Hou in the "Original History"; Bang Gu Cang followed it, but listed the biographies of other queens and empresses after those of their maternal relatives; Fan Xuan recorded the history of queens and empresses in the "Imperial History."

古文：天子纪年以叙事谓之《纪》，后曷为而纪之？
现代文：对于天子，按年月来编排纪事，称之《本纪》，后妃的事迹怎么也能列于《本纪》中呢？
English: For the Son of Heaven, how can the deeds of the Empress Dowager be included in the chronicle, which is arranged by year and is called the "Chronicle"?

古文：自晋史列诸后以首《传》，隋、唐以来，莫之能易也。
现代文：所以自晋史开始，人们将诸后列传列于各《传》之首，沿袭成例，再也没有谁能更改。
English: Therefore, since the beginning of the history of the Jin Dynasty, people have listed the successive lineages at the top of each "heritage" and followed the example, and no one can change it.

古文：辽因突厥，称皇后曰 可敦 ，国语谓之 脦俚寋 ，尊称曰 耨斡 ，盖以配后土而母之云。
现代文：辽沿袭突厥语，称皇后为 可敦 ，国语叫作 忒俚蹇 ，尊称则为 耨斡麽 ，大约是与地神相配而以之为母的意思。
English: Liao follows the Turkic language, and the queen is called Kordun, the national language is called, and the honorific is 斡or, which roughly means to match the earth god and take it as a mother.

古文：重熙二十一年，追尊宣简皇后。
现代文：太祖称帝，尊祖母为太皇太后，母亲为皇太后，妻子为皇后。
English: His great-grandfather was emperor, his grandmother was empress dowager, his mother was empress dowager, and his wife was empress.

古文：太祖淳钦皇后述律氏，讳平，小字月理朵。
现代文：并比照褒美赞扬的尊号，加给她们以夸美的称号，比起隋、唐来要质朴一些，比起旧俗来又文雅一些。后族只有乙室、拔里两姓，然而世代担任国之要职。
English: And according to the honorific name of reward and praise, they were given the title of praise. Compared to the Sui and Tang dynasties, they were more simple and more elegant than the old customs. The later generation had only two surnames, Biju and Baili, but they held important positions in the country for generations.

古文：其先回鹘人糯思，生魏宁舍利，魏宁生慎思梅里，慎思生婆姑梅里，婆姑娶匀德恝王女，生后于契丹右大部。
现代文：太祖仰慕汉高皇帝，所以耶律也可称为刘氏；以乙室、拔里二姓比之萧相国，于是后族遂被称为萧氏。耶律俨、陈大任所撰《辽史·后妃传》，大同小异，斟酌取舍，取其与篇目相符者记录于本篇内。太祖淳钦皇后述律氏，名平，乳名月理朵。其祖先为回鹘人糯思，他生了魏宁舍利，魏宁生慎思梅里，慎思生婆姑梅里，婆姑娶匀德恝王之女，生述律氏于契丹右大部。
English: The great-grandfather admired Emperor Han Gao, so Yelu could also be called the Liu clan; with the second wife and the second family name of Baili, it was compared to Xiao Sanguo, so the later generation was called the Xiao clan. "Liao Shi, The Biography of the Empress Dowager," written by Yelu Yao and Chen Dayin, is very similar, and it is recorded in this article. The great-grandfather, Queen Junqin, was a member of the Liu clan, whose name was Ping and whose maiden name was Yue Li Duo. Her ancestor was the Uygur people, who gave birth to Wei Ning Sheli, Wei

古文：婆姑名月碗，仕遥辇氏为阿紥割只。
现代文：婆姑名叫月木宛，在遥辇氏时出任阿扎割只。
English: Her grandmother's name was Tsukiki-wan, and she was an Azawara dancer when she was a member of the Harukas.

古文：后简重果断，有雄略。
现代文：皇后庄严持重。遇事果断，有非凡之谋略。
English: The empress is dignified and dignified. She is decisive and has an extraordinary strategy.

古文：尝至辽、土二河之会，有女子乘青牛车，仓卒避路，忽不见。
现代文：曾经到辽河、土河之交汇处，有女子乘坐青牛车，仓猝间避路而去，忽然间就看不见了。
English: Once, at the confluence of the Liao River and the Tu River, there was a woman riding in a young ox cart, who suddenly avoided the road and suddenly disappeared.

古文：未几，童谣曰： 青牛妪，曾避路。 
现代文：不久，童谣说： 青牛妪，曾避路。 
English: Soon, the nursery rhyme said: "The young bull calf, once dodged the road."

古文：盖谚谓地祇为青牛妪云。
现代文：大约俗语称地神为青牛妪之意。
English: There is a common saying that the earth god is the meaning of a young ox.

古文：太祖即位，群臣上尊号曰地皇后。
现代文：太祖即位，群臣奉皇后以尊号曰地皇后。
English: The great-grandfather acceded to the throne, and a group of ministers followed the empress with the honorific title of "Empress of the Land of Japan."

古文：神册元年，大册，加号应天大明地皇后。
现代文：神册元年，举行大册礼，加号为应天大明地皇后。
English: In the first year of the Divine Book, the Great Book Ceremony was held, and she was given the additional title of Empress of Heaven and Earth.

古文：行兵御众，后尝与谋。
现代文：行军打仗，统率部众，皇后常常参加谋划。
English: She marched into battle, led the troops, and often took part in the planning.

古文：太祖尝渡碛击党项，黄头、臭泊二室韦乘虚袭之；后知，勒兵以待，奋击，大破之，名震诸夷。
现代文：太祖曾经越过沙漠进攻党项，黄头、臭泊二部室韦乘虚袭击；皇后得知，整顿兵马严阵以待，奋力出击，大破之，威名震慑诸夷。
English: The great-great-grandfather once crossed the desert to attack the party, and Huang Tou, Odor Po and the second division of Murovei took advantage of the false attack; the queen learned that the rectification of the soldiers and horses was waiting, and they fought hard, broke it, and the prestige shocked the barbarians.

古文：时晋王李存勖欲结援，以叔母事后。
现代文：当时，晋王李存勖想要与太祖互相结交为援，把皇后当作叔母事奉。
English: At that time, the King of Jin, Li Cunxu, wanted to make friends with his great-grandfather to help each other, and served the queen as an aunt.

古文：幽州刘守光遣韩延徽求援，不拜，太祖怒，留之，使牧马。
现代文：幽州刘守光派韩延徽求援，韩不行跪拜礼，太祖发怒，扣留了他，让他牧马。
English: Yuzhou Liu Shouguang sent Han Yanhui to ask for help, but Han could not kneel and pray. The great-grandfather got angry, detained him, and made him herd horses.

古文：后曰： 守节不屈，贤者也，宜礼用之。 
现代文：皇后说： 自持节操不肯屈服，乃是贤明之士。
English: The Empress said, "He is a wise man who is self-controlled and does not want to give in."

古文：太祖乃召延徽与语，大悦，以为谋主。
现代文：应该待之以礼以便为我所用。 太祖于是召来韩延徽，与之交谈，大为赏识，以之为主要谋士。
English: My grandfather then summoned Han Yanhui and had a conversation with him, greatly appreciating him as his chief strategist.

古文：吴主李掞献猛火油，以水沃之愈炽。
现代文：吴主李升进献猛火油，用水浇它却会越浇越旺，太祖选派三万骑进攻幽州。
English: The lord of Wu, Li Shengjin, poured oil on a raging fire, but pouring water on it would only make it grow more and more prosperous. The great ancestor sent thirty thousand horsemen to attack Yuzhou.

古文：太祖选三万骑以攻幽州，后曰： 岂有试油而攻人国者？ 指帐前树曰： 无皮可以生乎？ 太祖曰： 不可。 
现代文：皇后说 ：哪有为了试验油性而去进攻别国的呢？ 用手指着帐幕之前的树说 ：没有皮还可以活吗？ 太祖说 ：不能。 
English: The queen said, "Who would attack a foreign country to test its oil? Point to the tree in front of the tabernacle and say, 'Can it live without its skin?' The patriarch said, 'No.'

古文：后曰： 幽州之有土有民，亦犹是耳。
现代文：皇后说： 幽州能够保有土地和人民，也与此类似。
English: The empress said: It is similar to Yuzhou's ability to retain land and people.

古文：吾以三千骑掠其四野，不过数年，困而归我矣，何必为此？
现代文：我们派三千骑兵骚扰攻掠其四境，不过几年，便会因困顿而归顺于我，又何必要这么做呢？
English: We sent three thousand cavalry to harass and plunder its four borders, but after a few years, it would be in trouble and submit to me, so why do it?

古文：万一不胜，为中国笑，吾部落不亦解体乎！ 
现代文：万一招致失败，为中土所取笑，我们部落不也就分崩离析了吗？ 
English: In the unlikely event that this ploy fails and is ridiculed by the Middle Earth, won't our tribe fall apart?

古文：其平渤海，后与有谋。
现代文：后来太祖平定渤海，皇后也参与了谋划。
English: Later, Emperor Taizu pacified the Bohai Sea, and the empress also participated in the planning.

古文：太祖崩，后称制，摄军国事。
现代文：太祖崩逝，皇后临朝称制，暂时摄理军国大事。
English: The great-grandfather passed away, the Empress Lintong declared martial law and temporarily took charge of military affairs.

古文：及葬，欲以身殉，亲戚百官力谏，因断右腕纳于柩。
现代文：待到太祖下葬时，想要以身殉葬，亲戚百官全力劝谏，于是斩断右腕放到灵柩内。
English: When the great-grandfather was buried, he wanted to be buried with his own body. Relatives and officials tried their best to dissuade him, so he cut off his right arm and placed it in the coffin.

古文：太宗即位，尊为皇太后。
现代文：太宗即位，尊为皇太后。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, and she became the empress dowager.

古文：会同初，上尊号曰广德至仁昭烈崇简应天皇太后。
现代文：会同初年，奉上尊号为广德至仁昭烈崇简应天皇太后。
English: In the first year of the association, she was given the title of Guangde ZhiRen ShouRen ChongJianYing, the empress dowager.

古文：初，太祖尝谓太宗必兴我家，后欲令皇太子倍避之，太祖册倍为东丹王。
现代文：当初，太祖曾说，太宗一定会兴盛我们家，皇后想让皇太子耶律倍避开，太祖便册立倍为东丹王。
English: At first, the great-grandfather had said that Emperor Taizong would surely prosper our family. The empress wanted to keep Crown Prince Yerutube away, so the great-grandfather made Yerutube the king of Dongdan.

古文：太祖崩，太宗立，东丹王避之唐。
现代文：太祖崩逝，太宗继立，东丹王避地唐国。
English: Emperor Taizu passed away, Emperor Taizong succeeded him, and King Dongdan fled to Tang.

古文：太后常属意于少子李胡。
现代文：太后曾有意让少子李胡即位。
English: The empress dowager had intended for her younger son, Li Hu, to ascend the throne.

古文：太宗崩，世宗即位于镇阳，太后怒，遣李胡以兵逆击。
现代文：太宗崩逝，世宗即位于镇阳，太后发怒，派李胡率兵迎击。
English: When Emperor Taizong passed away, Shizong was located in Zhenyang. The empress dowager was angry and sent Li Hu to lead the troops to meet the attack.

古文：李胡败，太后亲率师遇于潢河之横渡。
现代文：李胡兵败，太后亲自率军与太宗相持于潢河之横渡。
English: Li Hu was defeated, and the Empress Dowager personally led the army to cross the Li River with Emperor Taizong.

古文：景宗睿知皇后萧氏，讳绰，小字燕燕，北府宰相思温女。
现代文：幸得耶律屋质出面劝谏，双方才停止用兵。世宗迁太后于祖州。应历三年崩逝，年七十五岁，附葬于祖陵，谥为贞烈。
English: Fortunately, both sides stopped using soldiers only after Yerutoya's father-in-law came forward to persuade them. The Empress Dowager Shizong Qian died in Zhou three years later, at the age of seventy-five, and was buried in the ancestral mausoleum. She was a virtuous woman.

古文：早慧。
现代文：重熙二十一年，改为今谥。
English: In the 21st year of Chongxi, it was changed to its current form.

古文：思温尝观诸女扫地，惟后洁除，喜曰： 此女必能成家。 
现代文：景宗睿智皇后萧氏，名绰，乳名燕燕，北府宰相萧思温之女。少时聪慧。思温曾经观察女儿们扫地，只有睿智后扫的干净，高兴地说： 此女必定能成就我们家！ 
English: Empress Xiao Jingzong Rui Zhi, nicknamed Yan Yan, is the daughter of Xiao Siwen, the prime minister of Beifu. When she was young, she was very clever. Siwen once observed that her daughters swept the floor, but only Rui Zhi swept it clean, and said happily, "This woman will surely make our family complete!"

古文：帝即位，选为贵妃。
现代文：景宗即位，选为贵妃。
English: When King Gyeongjong ascended the throne, she was chosen as the crown princess.

古文：寻册为皇后，生圣宗。
现代文：不久册立为皇后，生圣宗。
English: Soon after, she was crowned empress, and she was born as Seongjong.

古文：景宗崩，尊为皇太后，摄国政。
现代文：景宗崩逝，睿智后被尊奉为皇太后，摄理国政。
English: After the death of Emperor Jingzong, Emperor Ruizhi was honored as empress dowager and served as regent of state affairs.

古文：后泣曰： 母寡子弱，族属雄强，边防未靖，奈何？ 
现代文：睿智后哭着说 ：做母亲的守了寡，儿子又幼弱，各族属势力强大，边防又未能安宁，该如何是好？ 
English: After being wiser, she cried and said: How should it be when a mother is widowed, her son is young and weak, the various ethnic groups are powerful, and the border defense is not peaceful?

古文：耶律斜轸、韩德让进曰： 信任臣等，何虑之有！ 
现代文：耶律斜轸、韩德让进言说： 只要信任我们，又有什么可忧虑的呢！ 
English: "As long as you trust us, there's nothing to worry about," said Jeroen and Handejan.

古文：于是后与斜轸、德让参决大政，委于越休哥以南边事。
现代文：于是皇后与斜轸、德让一同协商决断国家大事，将南边军政事务委托于休哥。
English: As a result, the empress, together with Xizang and Dejan, negotiated and decided on national affairs, entrusting the southern military and political affairs to Xiu Ge.

古文：统和元年，上尊号曰承天皇太后。
现代文：统和元年，奉上尊号曰承天皇太后。
English: In the first year of unification, she was given the honorific title of "Emperor Jocho's Empress Dowager."

古文：二十四年，加上尊号曰睿德神略应运启化承天皇太后。
现代文：二十四年，加上尊号曰睿德神略应运启化承天皇太后。
English: Twenty-four years later, with the addition of the honorific title of "Rui De Shenli," she became the empress dowager to succeed the emperor.

古文：二十七年崩，谥曰圣神宣献皇后。
现代文：二十七年崩逝，谥曰圣神宣献皇后。
English: Twenty-seven years after her death, the Holy Spirit proclaimed her Empress.

古文：重熙二十一年，更今谥。
现代文：重熙二十一年，改为今谥。
English: In the 21st year of Chongxi, it was changed to its current form.

古文：后明达治道，闻善必从，故群臣咸竭其忠。
现代文：皇后通晓治国之道，闻善必从，所以群臣都能竭忠尽力。
English: The Empress is well-versed in the ways of governing the country, and the wise must follow her, so all her ministers can be loyal and do their best.

古文：习知军政，澶渊之役，亲御戎军，指麾三军，赏罚信明，将士用命。
现代文：皇后熟悉军事，澶渊之战中，亲自统率大军作战，赏罚严明，将帅士卒乐于听命。
English: The empress was familiar with military affairs. During the Battle of Shibuya, she personally led a large army into battle. Rewards and punishments were strict, and the commanders were happy to follow orders.

古文：圣宗称辽盛主，后教训为多。
现代文：圣宗号称有辽一代明主，很大程度上有赖皇后之教导训诲。
English: Shengzong's claim to be the founder of the Liao Dynasty is largely based on the teachings of the empress.

古文：圣宗仁德皇后萧氏，小字菩萨哥，睿知皇后弟隗因之女。
现代文：圣宗仁德皇后萧氏，乳名菩萨哥，睿智皇后弟隗因之女。
English: She was the daughter of Empress Xiao of the Holy Sect of Benevolence, the half-brother of Bodhisattva of the Milk Name, and the half-brother of Empress Rui Zhi.

古文：年十二，美而才，选入掖庭。
现代文：年十二，貌美而多才，选入后宫掖庭。
English: In the twelfth year, beautiful and multi-talented, she was selected into the harem court.

古文：统和十九年，册为齐天皇后。
现代文：统和十九年，册封为齐天皇后。
English: She was enthroned as the Empress Dowager of Emperor Qi in the 19th year of Unification.

古文：尝以草莛为殿式，密付有司，令造清风、天祥、八方三殿。
现代文：曾经用草茎制成宫殿式样，暗地交付有司，命造清风、天祥、八方三殿。
English: In the past, a grass stalk was used to make a palace-style pattern, which was secretly handed over to a steward, and the three halls were named "Clear Wind," "Heavenly Blessing" and "Eight Sides."

古文：既成，益宠异。
现代文：造成后，更加宠幸非常。
English: After it was made, it became even more of a favourite.

古文：所乘车置龙首鸱尾，饰以黄金。
现代文：所乘之车设置龙首鸱尾，以黄金加以装饰。
English: The car he is riding in has a dragon's head and tail, and is decorated with gold.

古文：又造九龙辂、诸子车，以白金为浮图，各有巧思。
现代文：又造九龙辂、诸子车，以白金做伞顶，均有灵活高妙的构想、设计。
English: He also built the Kowloon mastiff and all the children's cars, and used platinum to make umbrella tops, all of which had flexible and ingenious ideas and designs.

古文：夏秋从行山谷间，花木如绣，车服相错，人望之以为神仙。
现代文：夏秋时节从行于山谷之间，花草树木犹如锦绣一般，车乘、服饰互相辉映，人望之以为神仙。
English: During the summer and autumn seasons, they travel between the valleys. The flowers, plants and trees are like embroidered fabrics, and the vehicles and clothing reflect each other. People think they are gods.

古文：生皇子二，皆早卒。
现代文：生皇子二人，均早死。
English: Two princes were born, but both died early.

古文：开泰五年，宫人耨斤生兴宗，后养为子。
现代文：开泰五年，宫女耨斤生兴宗，皇后养为己子。
English: In the 5th year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, the daughter of the Emperor Taizong gave birth to Xingzong, who was raised by the Empress as her own son.

古文：帝大渐，耨斤詈后曰： 老物宠亦有既耶！ 
现代文：皇上染病不起。耨斤骂皇后说 ：老东西你也会有末日吗？ 
English: The Emperor could not afford to fall ill. He scolded the Empress and said, "Old thing, will you also have the end of days?"

古文：左右扶后出。
现代文：左右扶皇后出去。
English: Help the queen out, left and right.

古文：帝崩，耨斤自立为皇太后，是为钦哀皇后。
现代文：皇上崩，耨斤自立为皇太后，这就是钦哀皇后。
English: When the emperor died, she became the empress dowager. This was the beginning of the mourning for the empress.

古文：护卫冯家奴、喜孙等希旨，诬告北府宰相萧浞卜、国舅萧匹敌谋逆。
现代文：护卫冯家奴、喜孙等迎合钦哀之意旨，诬告北府宰相萧浞卜、国舅萧匹敌谋反。
English: The guards Feng Jianu and Xisun catered to the intention of Qin Mu and falsely accused the prime minister of Beifu, Xiao Zhibu, and the uncle of the state, Xiao Bi, of plotting a rebellion.

古文：诏令鞫治，连及后。
现代文：诏令审讯治罪，株连到仁德皇后。
English: The imperial edict ordered the trial and punishment of the crime, and the case was transferred to Empress Yan De.

古文：兴宗闻之曰： 皇后侍先帝四十年，抚育眇躬，当为太后；今不果，反罪之，可乎？ 
现代文：兴宗知道后说 ：皇后侍奉先帝四十年，将我抚育成人，本当做太后；现在没有做成，反而要拿她治罪，怎么行呢？ 
English: After knowing this, Xingzong said, "The empress served the former emperor for forty years, nurtured me into an adult, and truly made me the empress dowager; but now, instead of accomplishing this, she wants to punish me. How can this be done?

古文：钦哀曰： 此人若在，恐为后患。 
现代文：钦哀说： 此人若在，恐怕成为后患。 
English: "If this person is still alive, I'm afraid he will be a problem for the future," Kinnai said.

古文：帝曰： 皇后无子而老，虽在，无能为也。 
现代文：皇上说 ：皇后没有儿子而且年老，即使在我们这儿，也做不了什么事。 
English: The Emperor said, "The Empress has no son and is old, and even here she can do nothing.

古文：钦哀不从，迁后于上京。
现代文：钦哀不听，迁仁德后于上京。
English: However, he did not listen and moved to Tokyo.

古文：车驾春蒐，钦哀虑帝怀鞠育恩，驰遣人加害。
现代文：皇上春猎，钦哀担心皇上怀念养育之恩，急速派人加害仁德。
English: The emperor was hunting in the spring, and he was worried that the emperor missed the kindness of his upbringing, so he quickly sent someone to harm the benevolence.

古文：使至，后曰： 我实无辜，天下共知。
现代文：使者到，仁德后说： 我确实是无辜的，天下人共知。
English: When the messenger arrived, Rendez-Vous said: "I am indeed innocent, everyone knows that.

古文：卿待我浴而后就死，可乎？ 
现代文：你等我沐浴一下身子，然后去死，可以吗？ 
English: Can you wait for me to take a shower and die?

古文：使者退。
现代文：使者退下。
English: Stand down, messenger.

古文：比反，后已崩，年五十。
现代文：待到回来，仁德后已崩，年五十岁。
English: By the time he returned, Rende had passed away at the age of 50.

古文：是日，若有见后于木叶山阴者，乘青盖车，卫从甚严。
现代文：这一天，有人在木叶山北仿佛看见仁德后，乘坐青盖车，护卫侍从十分严整。
English: On this day, some people in the north of Mubei Mountain seemed to see Rende, and took the blue-covered car, escorted by a very strict attendant.

古文：追尊仁德皇后。
现代文：追尊仁德皇后。
English: The Empress Suizhong Rende.

古文：与钦哀并祔庆陵。
现代文：与钦哀一同礻付葬于庆陵。
English: He was buried in the Qingling Mausoleum with full honors.

古文：圣宗钦哀皇后萧氏，小字耨斤，淳钦皇后弟阿古只五世孙。
现代文：圣宗钦哀皇后萧氏，乳名耨斤，淳钦皇后弟阿古只的五世孙。
English: He is the fifth-generation grandson of Empress Xiao, also known as Empress Dowager Xiao, and Empress Junqin's younger brother, Emperor Agu.

古文：黝面狠视。
现代文：面色黝黑，目光凶狠。
English: Dark complexion, fierce eyes.

古文：母尝梦金柱擎天，诸子欲上不能；后后至，与仆从皆升，异之。
现代文：其母曾经梦见一金柱擎天而上，诸子想上去却不能；钦哀后后到，与其仆人都登了上去，其母心中很是奇怪。
English: His mother had once dreamt of a golden column ascending to heaven, but her sons wanted to go up but couldn't. When they arrived after the funeral, she and her servants went up, which was very strange to her mother.

古文：久之，入宫。尝拂承天太后榻，获金鸡，吞之，肤色光泽胜常。
现代文：过了很久，进入宫中，曾经在为承天皇太后掸扫床榻时，获得一只金鸡，便吞了它，肤色变得光泽超常。
English: After a long time, he entered the palace. Once, when he was sweeping the bed for Empress Dowager Shōnen, he obtained a golden rooster. He swallowed it, and his complexion became extraordinarily shiny.

古文：太后惊异曰： 是必有奇子！ 
现代文：太后惊奇地说 ：这一定是怀了奇子！ 
English: The empress dowager said in surprise: "This must be a strange child!"

古文：已而生兴宗。
现代文：不久生下兴宗。
English: Soon after, Xingzong was born.

古文：仁德皇后无子，取而养之如己出。
现代文：仁德皇后无子，便收留兴宗并把他当亲生子一般养大。
English: Empress Rende had no children, so she took in Xingzong and raised him as her own son.

古文：后以兴宗侍仁德皇后谨，不悦。
现代文：钦哀后因为兴宗侍奉仁德皇后十分恭谨，很不高兴。
English: After the tribute, he was very unhappy because Xingzong served Empress Yan De very respectfully.

古文：圣宗崩，令冯家奴等诬仁德皇后与萧浞卜、萧匹敌等谋乱，徙上京，害之。
现代文：圣宗崩逝，钦哀后让冯家奴等人诬蔑仁德皇后与萧浞卜、萧匹敌等图谋作乱，将她迁至上京，杀害了她。
English: After the death of the Holy Father, Feng Jianlu and others falsely accused Empress Rende of plotting with Xiao Zhibu and Xiao Biqi to create turmoil, moved her to Shangjing, and killed her.

古文：自立为皇太后，摄政，以生辰为应圣节。
现代文：自立为皇太后，摄理国政，将自己的生辰定作应圣节。
English: She established herself as the empress dowager, acting as the regent of state affairs, and set her birthday to coincide with a holy day.

古文：重熙元年，尊为仁慈圣善钦孝广德安靖贞纯宽厚崇觉仪天皇太后。
现代文：重熙元年，尊为仁慈圣善钦孝广德安靖贞纯宽厚崇觉仪天皇太后。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongxi, she was honored as the benevolent, holy, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous.

古文：三年，后阴召诸弟议，欲立少子重元。
现代文：三年，钦哀后暗里召集诸弟商议，想立少子重元为帝，重元将其谋划告知于皇上。
English: Three years later, after a period of mourning, he secretly convened his brothers to discuss the idea of elevating his younger son, Chogen, to the throne. Chogen informed the emperor of his plans.

古文：重元以所谋白帝，帝收太后符玺，迁于庆州七括宫。六年秋，帝悔之，亲驭奉迎，侍养益孝谨。
现代文：皇上收了太后的符绶玉玺，迁她到庆州七括宫。六年秋，皇上后悔先前的举动，亲自驾车迎回太后，侍奉赡养更加孝顺恭谨。
English: The emperor received the empress dowager's jade bracelet and moved her to the Gyeongju Palace of the Seven Empresses. In the autumn of the sixth year, the emperor regretted his previous action, personally drove back to welcome the empress dowager, and served and supported her in a more filial and respectful manner.

古文：后常不怿。
现代文：钦哀后总是不大高兴。
English: Tribute is always followed by displeasure.

古文：帝崩，殊无戚容。
现代文：兴宗崩逝，她也毫无悲戚之色。
English: When Xingzong passed away, she was not at all sad.

古文：见崇圣皇后悲泣如礼，谓曰： 汝年尚幼，何哀痛如是！ 
现代文：看见崇圣皇后依礼节悲恸哭泣，对她说： 你年纪还小，何至于这么哀痛！ 
English: Seeing Empress Chong Sheng weeping with grief, he said to her, "You are still young, why are you so sad?

古文：清宁初，尊为太皇太后。
现代文：清宁初，尊为太皇太后。
English: At the beginning of the Qing Dynasty, she was revered as the great empress dowager.

古文：崩，谥曰钦哀皇后。
现代文：崩逝，谥为钦哀皇后。
English: She passed away and was buried with great reverence and respect.

古文：后初摄政，追封曾祖为兰陵郡王，父为齐国王，诸弟皆王之，虽汉五侯无以过。
现代文：钦哀后初摄国政时，追封曾祖为兰陵郡王，父亲为齐国王，诸弟也都封王，其贵显即使是汉代的五侯也无法超过。
English: At the time of the first regency after the funeral, his great-grandfather was crowned the king of Lanling County, his father was crowned the king of Qi, and his younger brothers were also crowned kings. Even the five princes of the Han Dynasty could not surpass his prestige.

古文：兴宗仁懿皇后萧氏，小字挞里，钦哀皇后弟孝穆之长女。
现代文：兴宗仁懿皇后萧氏，乳名挞里，钦哀皇后弟萧孝穆长女。
English: The eldest daughter of Xiao Xiaomu, the Empress Xiao of Xingzong Renzhen and the Empress Xiao's younger brother Xiao Xiaomu.

古文：性宽容，姿貌端丽。
现代文：秉性宽厚容人，姿态容貌端庄美丽。
English: By nature, she has a generous face, and her posture and appearance are dignified and beautiful.

古文：帝即位，入宫，生道宗。
现代文：兴宗即位，仁懿后入宫，生下道宗。
English: Xingzong ascended to the throne, entered the palace after Ren Ren, and gave birth to Tao Zong.

古文：重熙四年，立为皇后。
现代文：重熙四年，立为皇后。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Chongxi, she was enthroned as empress.

古文：二十三年，号贞懿慈和文惠孝敬广爱崇圣皇后。
现代文：二十三年，被尊为贞懿慈和文惠孝敬广爱崇圣皇后。
English: In the 23rd year of her reign, she was revered as the queen of chastity, benevolence and filial piety.

古文：道宗即位，尊为皇太后。
现代文：道宗即位，尊为皇太后。
English: Daozong ascends the throne and is revered as empress dowager.

古文：清宁二年，上尊号曰慈懿仁和文惠孝敬广爱宗天皇太后。
现代文：清宁二年，上尊号为慈懿仁和文惠孝敬广爱宗天皇太后。
English: In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, the title of nobility was conferred on Empress Dowager Cixin Ren and Empress Dowager Wen Hui Xiao Jing Guang Aizong.

古文：九年秋，敦睦宫使耶律良以重元与其子涅鲁古反状密告太后，乃言于帝。
现代文：九年秋，敦睦宫使耶律良将重元与其子涅鲁古谋反之事密告于太后，太后将此事说知皇上。
English: In the autumn of the ninth year, the Dunmu Palace sent Yeruliang to inform the empress dowager of the fact that Chogen had conspired with his son Nehru, and the empress dowager reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：帝疑之，太后曰： 此社稷大事，宜早为计。 
现代文：皇上怀疑是诬告，太后说： 这是事关社稷传承的大事，应当及早谋划。 
English: The emperor suspected that the accusation was false, and the empress dowager said, "This is an important matter concerning the succession of the imperial family, and it should be planned well in advance."

古文：帝始戒严。
现代文：皇上便开始警惕戒惧。
English: The Emperor began to be on his guard.

古文：兴宗贵妃萧氏，小字三蒨，驸马都尉匹里之女。
现代文：待到交战，太后亲自督率卫士，攻破逆党。大康二年，崩逝，谥为仁懿皇后。
English: When the war broke out, the empress dowager personally led the guards and defeated the rebel party. Two years after the Great Prosperity, she passed away and was crowned the Empress of China.

古文：选入东宫。
现代文：皇后仁慈贤良谨慎，内外官员均感激其恩德。
English: The empress is benevolent, virtuous and prudent, and officials at home and abroad are grateful for her kindness.

古文：帝即位，立为皇后。
现代文：凡是大年初一及生辰日各国进献的钱物，一概赐给贫穷之人。
English: All the money and goods donated by countries on the first day of the year and on the day of birth are given to the poor.

古文：重熙初，以罪降贵妃。
现代文：她曾经梦见重元说： 我的尸骨在太子山北，不能忍受寒冷。 
English: She once dreamed of Chongyuan saying: My bones are in the north of Mount Taizi, I can't bear the cold.

古文：道宗宣懿皇后萧氏，小字观音，钦哀皇后弟枢密使惠之女。
现代文：醒来后，当即派人为之造屋，其仁慈悯恻大多类此。道宗宣懿皇后萧氏，乳名观音，钦哀皇后弟枢密使萧惠之女。
English: After waking up, he immediately sent someone to build a house for him, and his benevolence and compassion were mostly like this. Taoist Emperor Xuanwu's Empress Xiao, known as Guanyin, paid tribute to the Empress's brother, the daughter of the Privy Councilor Xiao Hui.

古文：姿容冠绝，工诗，善谈论。
现代文：姿容冠绝一世，擅长做诗，又善于谈吐。
English: He has the best appearance of all time, is good at writing poetry, and is good at talking.

古文：自制歌词，尤善琵琶。
现代文：自己创作歌词，尤其擅长弹琵琶。
English: He composes his own lyrics and is particularly good at playing the pipa.

古文：重熙中，帝王燕赵，纳为妃。
现代文：重熙年间，道宗时为燕赵王，纳为王妃。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongxi, Daozong was King Yan Zhao and Na was his wife.

古文：清宁初，立为懿德皇后。
现代文：清宁初年，立为懿德皇后。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, she was crowned the Empress of Shunde.

古文：皇太叔重元妻，以艳冶自矜，后见之，戒曰： 为贵家妇，何必如此！ 
现代文：皇太叔重元之妻，因为艳丽妖冶而矜矜自得，皇后见了，告诫她说 ：身为高贵人家之妇人，何必如此！ 
English: The wife of the Emperor's uncle, Chogen, was self-satisfied because of her glamorous appearance. When the Empress saw her, she admonished her: "As the wife of a noble family, why do you have to be like this?

古文：后生太子浚，有专房宠。
现代文：皇后生太子耶律浚，有独占侍寝之宠爱。
English: The Empress's son, Prince Ye Lujun, has a penchant for exclusive sleepovers.

古文：好音乐，伶官赵惟一得侍左右。
现代文：喜好音乐，伶官赵惟一得以侍从左右。
English: Preferring music, the eunuch Zhao Wei was the only one who was allowed to serve around the table.

古文：大康初，宫婢单登、教坊朱顶鹤诬后与惟一私，枢密使耶律乙辛以闻。
现代文：大康初年，宫婢单登、孝坊朱顶鹤诬告皇后与赵惟一有私情，枢密使耶律乙辛奏闻。
English: In the first year of the Great Prosperity, the palace maidservant and the filial boy Zhu Dinghe falsely accused the empress and Zhao of having a private affair, which was reported by the confidential envoy Yelu Yixin.

古文：天祚文妃萧氏，小字瑟瑟，国舅大父房之女。
现代文：诏令耶律乙辛与张孝杰审理其罪状，因而证实之。族诛赵惟一，赐皇后自尽，由娘家收归其尸。
English: The imperial edict ordered Yelu Yixin and Zhang Xiaojie to investigate the charges against her, which confirmed them. Zhao Zizhi was the only member of the family to order the empress to commit suicide, and her daughter's family collected her body.

古文：乾统初，帝幸耶律挞葛第，见而悦之，匿宫中数月。
现代文：乾统初年，追谥为宣懿皇后，合葬于庆陵。天祚文妃萧氏，乳名瑟瑟，国舅大父房之女。乾统初年，皇上行幸耶律挞葛府第，见到她，很是喜爱，藏在宫中几个月。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Qianlong, Chouyi was the Empress of Xuanwu, and they were buried together in the Qingling Mausoleum. Tianyu Wenfei Xiao, nicknamed Su Su, was the daughter of Emperor Guotao's father. In the first year of the reign of Emperor Qianlong, when the emperor went on a trip to Yeluding Gefu, he was very fond of her and hid her in the palace for several months.

古文：皇太叔和鲁斡劝帝以礼选纳，三年冬，立为文妃。
现代文：皇太叔和鲁斡劝皇上依礼制选聘，三年冬，立为文妃。
English: The emperor's uncle and Lu Yuxuan advised the emperor to select and hire according to the etiquette system, and in the winter of the third year, she was appointed as Princess Wen.

古文：生蜀国公主、晋王敖卢斡，尤被宠幸。
现代文：生蜀国公主、晋王敖卢斡，格外受宠于皇上。
English: She was born a princess of the State of Shu and was especially favored by the emperor.

古文：以柴册，加号承翼。
现代文：因为行柴册礼，加号承翼。
English: Because of the performance of the firecracker ceremony, the additional number of bearing wings.

古文：善歌诗。
现代文：她擅长咏唱诗篇。
English: She is good at singing hymns.

古文：女直乱作，日见侵迫。
现代文：女真之乱发生，我国一天天遭到侵犯凌逼。
English: The Genuine Women's Revolt broke out, and our country was invaded and oppressed day by day.

古文：帝畋游不恤，忠臣多被疏斥。
现代文：皇上田猎游幸，不恤国情民情，忠臣大多遭到疏远罢斥。
English: Emperor Ueda's hunting trip was not in accordance with the national sentiment, and most of his loyal vassals were ostracized.

古文：妃作歌讽谏，其词曰： 勿嗟塞上兮暗红尘，勿伤多难兮畏夷人。不如塞奸邪之路兮，选取贤臣。
现代文：文妃做歌讽谏，其词为： 不要嗟叹北方的阴云啊迷漫了原本清亮的天空，不要枉自伤情于多灾多难啊，畏惧夷人之侵迫；不如堵塞奸佞升迁之路啊，选取贤臣辅国。
English: Wenfei made a satirical poem, the words of which were: Don't lament the gloomy clouds in the north that have confused the originally clear sky, don't hurt yourself in vain because of the many disasters and difficulties, and fear the oppression of the barbarians; it is better to block the road of promotion and relocation of the traitors, and choose a wise minister to help the country.

古文：直须卧薪尝胆兮，激壮士之捐身。可以朝清漠北兮，夕枕燕云。 
现代文：正该卧薪尝胆啊，激励壮士们为国捐躯；如此我们便可早晨廓清漠北的妖雾，傍晚荡平燕、云而安枕于寝宫。 
English: It is time for us to be brave and inspire the brave to sacrifice their lives for the country. In this way, we can clear the fog of the north in the morning and sleep peacefully in the evening.

古文：又歌曰： 丞相来朝兮剑佩鸣，千官侧目兮寂无声。
现代文：又咏唱道： 丞相来上朝啊，宝剑和垂佩叮当作响，群臣束手侧目啊噤口无声。
English: Another chorus sang: The prime minister came to the court, the swords and lances clanged, the courtiers kept their hands tied, their eyes averted, their mouths silent.

古文：养成外患兮嗟何及，祸尽忠臣兮罚不明。
现代文：养成外患坐大啊到今日嗟叹何及！忠臣尽被残害啊刑罚如此不明。
English: To this day, we can't help but lament the fact that an outsider was allowed to grow up. Loyal subjects were brutally murdered, and the punishment was so unclear.

古文：亲戚并居兮藩屏位，私门潜畜兮爪牙兵。
现代文：他的亲戚啊都占据着那么多的要塞，私家门里啊暗地畜养着爪牙之兵。
English: His relatives all occupy so many fortresses, secretly raising minion soldiers in their private homes.

古文：可怜往代兮秦天子，犹向宫中兮望太平！ 
现代文：可怜我们的幻想如往古之秦皇那样一统山河的天子啊，还在面对宫门啊，想望着那遥遥无期的太平！ 
English: Alas for our illusions! Like the Qin Emperor of old, the Son of Heaven, who united the mountains and rivers, is still facing the palace gate, longing for that eternal peace!

古文：天祚见而衔之。
现代文：天祚见了，记恨于心。
English: The heavens have seen it, remember the hatred in your heart.

古文：播迁以来，郡县所失几半，上颇有倦勤之意。
现代文：天子流亡以来，郡县几乎失陷了一半，皇上颇有些厌倦于政事的辛劳，有传位之意。
English: Since the emperor's exile, almost half of the counties have been lost, and the emperor is somewhat tired of the hard work of politics, with the intention of passing on the throne.

古文：诸皇子敖卢斡最贤，素有人望。
现代文：诸皇子中以敖卢斡最贤明，一向得人心。
English: Of all the princes, he was the wisest in his dealings with Lu, and he always won the hearts of the people.

古文：元妃兄萧奉先深忌之，诬南军都统余睹谋立晋王，以妃与闻，赐死。
现代文：元后兄萧奉先十分忌恨于他，便诬告南军都统余睹阴谋扶立晋王，诬称文妃也知情，赐死。
English: The former queen's brother, Xiao Bongxian, hated him so much that he falsely accused the Southern Army of witnessing the conspiracy to help establish the Jin king, falsely claiming that Princess Wen also knew about it, and sentenced him to death.

