古文：孝灵皇帝下中平五年
现代文：起，止，一共三年。汉灵帝中平五年
English: It lasted for a total of three years, from the reign of Emperor Hanling to the middle of the Heian period.

古文：春，正月，丁酉，赦天下。
现代文：春季，正月，丁酉，大赦天下。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, Ding Zhen, the general amnesty.

古文：二月，有星孛于紫宫。
现代文：二月，有异星出现于紫微星旁。
English: The February Comet is now in the constellation of Ursa Major.

古文：黄巾馀贼郭大等起于河西白波谷，寇太原、河东。
现代文：黄巾军残部郭大等人在河西白波谷起兵，进攻太原郡、河东郡。
English: The remnants of the Yellow Turban Army, including Guo Da and others, raised an army in Baibo Valley, Hexi, and attacked Taiyuan County and Hedong County.

古文：三月，屠各胡攻杀并州刺史张懿。
现代文：三月，匈奴屠各部落进攻并州，杀并州刺史张懿。
English: In March, the Huns and other tribes attacked and annexed the prefecture, killing the prefect of the annexed prefecture, Zhang Ye.

古文：太常江夏刘焉见王室多故，建议以为： 四方兵寇，由刺史威轻，既不能禁，且用非其人，以致离叛。
现代文：太常江夏人刘焉看到汉朝王室多难，向灵帝建议： 各地到处发生叛乱，是由于刺史权小威轻，既不能禁制，又用人不当，所以引起百姓叛离朝廷。
English: Liu Yan, a native of Jiangxia, saw how difficult it was for the royal family of the Han Dynasty, and suggested to Emperor Lingdi: The reason why rebellions occurred everywhere in various regions was that the power of the crown prince was weak and could not be prohibited, and he employed people improperly, which caused the people to defect from the imperial court.

古文：宜改置牧伯，选清名重臣以居其任。 
现代文：应该改置州牧，选用有清廉名声的重臣担任。 
English: The position of provincial governor should be changed, and a senior minister with a reputation for probity should be selected.

古文：焉内欲求交趾牧。侍中广汉董扶私谓焉曰： 京师将乱，益州分野有天子气。 
现代文：刘焉内心里想担任交趾牧，但侍中、广汉人董扶私下里对刘焉说： 京城洛阳将要发生大乱，根据天象，益州地区将出现新的皇帝。 
English: Liu Yan in his heart wanted to serve as a kotezimaki, but the attendant, the Guanghan person Dong Fu privately said to Liu Yan: The capital Luoyang will have a great disturbance, according to the celestial elephant, a new emperor will appear in the Yizhou region.

古文：焉乃更求益州。
现代文：于是，刘焉改变主意，要求去益州。
English: As a result, Liu Yan changed his mind and asked to go to Yizhou.

古文：会益州刺史郤俭赋敛烦扰，谣言远闻，而耿鄙、张懿皆为盗所杀，朝廷遂从焉议，选列卿、尚书为州牧，各以本秩居任。
现代文：正好益州刺史俭横征暴敛，有关他的暴政的民谣广泛流传；再加上耿鄙、张懿都被盗贼杀死，朝廷就采纳刘焉建议，选用列卿、尚书为州牧，各自以本来的官秩出任。
English: Just as Yizhou stabbed Shizhen for excessive taxation, folk songs about his tyranny were widely circulated. Coupled with the fact that Geng Di and Zhang Ye were both killed by thieves, the imperial court adopted Liu Yan's suggestion and selected Lixing and Shang Shu as provincial governors, each of whom served in their original official rank.

古文：以焉为益州牧，太仆黄琬为豫州牧，宗正东海刘虞为幽州牧。
现代文：任命刘焉为益州牧、太仆黄琬为豫州牧、宗正东海人刘虞为幽州牧。
English: He appointed Liu Yan as the herdsman of Yizhou, the eunuch Huang Qi as the herdsman of Yuzhou, and the East Sea man Liu Yu as the herdsman of Yuzhou.

古文：州任之重，自此而始。
现代文：各州长官权力的增重由此开始。
English: The importance of the state's pastoral status begins here.

古文：焉，鲁恭王之后；虞，东海恭王之五世孙也。
现代文：刘焉是鲁恭王刘余的后代，刘虞是东海恭王刘强的五世孙。
English: Liu Yan is the descendant of Liu Yu, the King of Lugong, and Liu Yu is the fifth grandchild of Liu Qiang, the King of Tunghai.

古文：虞尝为幽州刺史，民夷怀其恩信，故用之。
现代文：刘虞曾担任过幽州刺史，百姓与夷人都怀念他的恩德与信誉，因而朝廷有这一任命。
English: Liu Yu once served as the governor of Yuzhou, the people and the barbarians all miss his kindness and credibility, so the court has this appointment.

古文：董扶及太仓令赵韪皆弃官，随焉入蜀。
现代文：董扶与太仓令赵韪都辞去官职，随同刘焉到益州去。
English: Both Dong Fu and Taicang ordered Zhao Jun to resign from his official post and follow Liu Yan to Yizhou.

古文：诏发南匈奴兵配刘虞讨张纯，单于羌渠遣左贤王将骑诣幽州。
现代文：灵帝下诏征发南匈奴兵，分配给刘虞，去征伐张纯。南匈奴单于羌渠派遣左贤王率领骑兵赴幽州听候调遣。
English: Emperor Ling issued an edict to conscript Southern Xiongnu soldiers and assigned them to Liu Yu to conquer Zhang Chun. Southern Xiongnu sent Zuoxian Wang and his cavalry to Yuzhou to await the dispatch.

古文：国人恐发兵无已，于是右部盆落反，与屠各胡合，凡十馀万人，攻杀羌渠。
现代文：匈奴人害怕以后不断征发兵员，于是右部落反叛，与屠各胡部落联合，共有十余万人，进攻并杀死羌渠。
English: The Huns were afraid that they would continue to conscript soldiers in the future, so the Right Tribe rebelled and united with the Tulkuhu Tribe, a total of more than one hundred thousand people, attacked and killed Yanqiao.

古文：国人立其子右贤王于扶罗为持至尸逐侯单于。
现代文：匈奴人立羌渠的儿子右贤王於扶罗为持至尸逐侯单于。
English: King Ugyen, the son of the Huns who built the canal, was held in Guro until his death.

古文：夏，四月，太尉曹嵩罢。
现代文：夏季，四月，太尉曹嵩被免职。
English: In the summer, in April, Lieutenant Cao Song was removed from his post.

古文：五月，以永乐少府南阳樊陵为太尉；六月，罢。
现代文：五月，任命永乐少府南阳樊陵为太尉；六月，将他免职。
English: In May, Yongle Shofu Nanyang Yuling was appointed lieutenant; in June, he was removed from his post.

古文：益州贼马相、赵祗等起兵绵竹，自号黄巾，杀刺史郤俭，进击巴郡、犍为，旬月之间，破坏三郡，有众数万，相自称天子。
现代文：益州人马相、赵祗等在绵竹起兵，自称为 黄巾 ，杀死刺史俭，进攻巴郡、犍为，不过一个月，连破三郡，有部众数万人，马相自称天子。
English: In Mianzhu, the people of Yizhou, including Ma Xiang and Zhao Yao, raised an army, called themselves the Yellow Scarf, killed Jian Shijian, and attacked Ba County and Yingwei. However, within a month, they had broken through three counties, with tens of thousands of troops. Ma Xiang called himself the Son of Heaven.

古文：州从事贾龙率吏民攻相等，数日破走，州界清静。
现代文：益州从事贾龙等率领官吏及百姓进攻马相等，几天后将他们打败，马相等逃跑，益州界内安宁。
English: Jia Long and other leading officials and common people in Yizhou attacked Ma Zheng, defeated them a few days later, Ma Zheng fled, and there was peace within Yizhou.

古文：龙乃选吏卒迎刘焉。
现代文：贾龙于是选派官兵去迎接刘焉。
English: Jia Long then sent officers and soldiers to meet Liu Yan.

古文：焉徙治绵竹，抚纳离叛，务行宽惠，以收人心。
现代文：刘焉将州府迁到绵竹，招抚离散叛乱的百姓，为政宽容，施行恩德，以收揽人心。
English: Liu Yan moved the state capital to Mianzhu, to appease the scattered rebellious people, to be tolerant, to practice benevolence, to win the hearts and minds of the people.

古文：郡国七大水。
现代文：有七个郡、国发生水灾。
English: Seven places in the county have been affected by the floods.

古文：故太傅陈蕃子逸与术士襄楷会于冀州刺史王芬坐，楷曰： 天文不利宦者，黄门、常侍真族灭矣。 
现代文：已故太傅陈蕃的儿子陈逸与法术家襄楷在冀州刺史王芬处见面，襄楷说： 从天象来看，不利于宦官，那些黄门、常侍们真的要被灭族了。 
English: Chen Yi, the son of the late Grandmaster Chen Yi, met with the magician Xiang Kai at the Jizhou Jishi Wang Fen. Xiang Kai said: From the perspective of the celestial body, it is not good for the eunuchs, those yellow doors and regular attendants are really going to be exterminated.

古文：逸喜。
现代文：陈逸对此非常高兴。
English: Chen Yizhong is very happy about this.

古文：芬曰： 若然者，芬愿驱除！ 
现代文：王芬说： 如果真是这样，我愿意充当干这件事的先锋。 
English: Wang Fen said: If this is really the case, I am willing to act as a pioneer in this matter.

古文：因与豪杰转相招合，上书言黑山贼攻劫郡县，欲因以起兵。
现代文：就与各地的豪杰互相联系，上书说黑山地区的盗贼攻打抢劫他属下的郡、县，想以此为借口起兵。
English: He contacted heroes from all over the country, and wrote a letter saying that thieves in Montenegro attacked and robbed his county, and he wanted to use this as an excuse to raise an army.

古文：会帝欲北巡河间旧宅，芬等谋以兵徼劫，诛诸常侍、黄门，因废帝，立合肥侯，以其谋告议郎曹操。
现代文：正好灵帝想到北方来巡视他在河间的旧居，王芬等计划用武力来劫持灵帝，杀死那些常侍、黄门，然后废黜灵帝，另立合肥侯为皇帝。王芬等将这个计划告诉议郎曹操。
English: It just so happened that Lingdi wanted to go to the north to inspect his former residence in Hexi. Wang Fen and others planned to use force to kidnap Lingdi, kill those attendants and the Yellow Gate, and then depose Lingdi and establish another Hefei marquis as emperor. Wang Fen and others told this plan to the negotiator Cao Cao.

古文：操曰： 夫废立之事，天下之至不祥也。
现代文：曹操说： 废立皇帝是天下最不吉祥的事。
English: Cao Cao said: Abolishing the emperor is the most unlucky thing in the world.

古文：古人有权成败、计轻重而行之者，伊、霍是也。
现代文：古代，有的人衡量轻重、计算成败后施行，伊尹和霍光便是如此。
English: In ancient times, some people measured the weight, calculated and implemented after success or failure, such as Yi Yin and Huo Guang.

古文：伊、霍皆怀至忠之诚，据宰辅之势，因秉政之重，同众人之欲，故能计从事立。
现代文：这两个人都满怀忠诚，以宰相的地位，凭借执政大权，加上同众人的愿望一致，故此能实现计划，成就大事。
English: Both of them are full of loyalty, with the status of prime minister, with the power to govern, and with the wishes of the people, so that they can realize the plan and achieve great things.

古文：今诸君徒见曩者之易，未睹当今之难，而造作非常，欲望必克，不亦危乎！ 
现代文：如今，各位只看到他们当初的轻而易举，而未看到现在的困难。用这种非常的手段，想一定达到目的，难道不觉得危险吗？ 
English: Today, you only see the ease with which they did it in the beginning, but you don't see the difficulties now. Don't you think it's dangerous to use such extraordinary means to achieve one's goal?

古文：芬又呼平原华歆、陶丘洪共定计。
现代文：王芬又邀请平原人华歆、陶丘洪来共同策划。
English: Wang Fen also invited the plains people Hua Wei and Tao Qiu Hong to jointly plan.

古文：洪欲行，歆止之曰： 夫废立大事，伊、霍之所难。
现代文：陶丘洪准备动身，华歆进行劝阻，说： 废立皇帝的大事，伊尹、霍光都感觉很困难。
English: Tao Chuhong is getting ready to leave, and Hua Tuo is trying to dissuade him, saying: The important matter of abolishing the emperor, both Yi Yin and Huo Guang feel very difficult.

古文：芬性疏而不武，此必无成。 
现代文：何况王芬疏阔而又缺乏威武气概，这次举动一定会失败。 
English: What's more, Wang Fen is broad-minded and lacks military prowess. This move is sure to fail.

古文：洪乃止。
现代文：陶丘洪于是没有去。
English: Tao Chuhong did not go.

古文：会北方夜半有赤气，东西竟天，太史上言： 北方有阴谋，不宜北行。 
现代文：这时候，北方天空在半夜时候有一道赤气，从东到西，横贯天际，负责观测天象的太史上书说： 北方地区有阴谋，陛下不宜去北方。 
English: At this time, in the middle of the night, the northern sky has a line of equatorial air, from east to west, across the sky, and the astrology book responsible for observing the celestial objects said: There is a conspiracy in the northern region, and it is not appropriate for His Majesty to go to the north.

古文：帝乃止。敕芬罢兵，俄而征之。
现代文：灵帝于是作罢，命令王芬解散已集结的士兵。不久，征召王芬到洛阳去。
English: Lingdi then gave up and ordered Wang Fen to disband the assembled soldiers. Soon, Wang Fen was conscripted to go to Luoyang.

古文：芬惧，解印绶亡走，至平原，自杀。
现代文：王芬害怕，就解下印绶逃亡，跑到平原时自杀了。
English: Wang Fen was afraid, so she took off her seal and ran away. When she reached the plain, she committed suicide.

古文：秋，七月，以射声校尉马日磾为太尉。
现代文：秋季，七月，任命射声校尉马日为太尉。
English: In the autumn, in July, Lieutenant Ma Rong was promoted to Second Lieutenant.

古文：日磾，融之族孙也。
现代文：马日他是马融的族孙。
English: He is a descendant of Ma Rong.

古文：八月，初置西园八校尉，以小黄门蹇硕为上军校尉，虎贲中郎将袁绍为中军校尉，屯骑校尉鲍鸿为下军校尉，议郎曹操为典军校尉，赵融为助军左校尉，冯芳为助军右校尉，谏议大夫夏牟为左校尉，淳于琼为右校尉；皆统于蹇硕。
现代文：八月，开始设置西园八校尉。任命小黄门蹇硕为上军校尉，虎贲中郎将袁绍为中军校尉，屯骑校尉鲍鸿为下军校尉，议郎曹操为典军校尉，赵融为助军左校尉，冯芳为助军右校尉，谏议大夫夏牟为左校尉，淳于琼为右校尉，都由蹇硕统一指挥。
English: In August, the eight West Park lieutenants began to be set up. Xiao Huangmen Shanshuo was appointed as the first lieutenant of the upper army, Tigress Zhonglang Yuan Shao as the first lieutenant of the middle army, Tuncai lieutenant Baohong as the first lieutenant of the lower army, He Long Cao Cao as the first lieutenant of the first army, Zhao Rong as the second lieutenant of the left army, Feng Fang as the second lieutenant of the right army, Zou Ying Dafu Xia Mou as the second lieutenant of the left army, and Jun Yu Qiong as the second lieutenant of the right army, all under the unified command of Shanshu

古文：帝自黄巾之起，留心戎事；硕壮健有武略，帝亲任之，虽大将军亦领属焉。
现代文：灵帝自黄巾军起事以后，开始留心军事。蹇硕身体壮健，又通晓军事，很受灵帝信任，连大将军也要听从他的指挥。
English: After the Yellow Turban Rebellion, Emperor Lingdi began to pay attention to military affairs. He was tall, physically strong, and knowledgeable about military affairs. He was trusted by Emperor Lingdi, and even great generals obeyed his command.

古文：九月，司徒许相罢；以司空丁宫为司徒，光禄勋南阳刘弘为司空。
现代文：九月，司徒许相被免职。任命司空丁宫为司徒，光禄勋南阳人刘弘为司空。
English: In September, the tutor, Xu Xiang, was removed from his post, and the tutor, Siku Dinggu, was appointed as the tutor, and Liu Hong, a member of the Nanyang Honor Society, was appointed as the tutor.

古文：以卫尉条侯董重为票骑将军。
现代文：任命卫尉、条侯董重为票骑将军。
English: He appointed Lieutenant of the Guards and Marshal of the Horse, Dong Chong, as General of the Horse.

古文：重，永乐太后兄子也。
现代文：董重是灵帝母亲永乐太后哥哥的儿子。
English: Dong Chong is the son of the elder brother of Ling Di's mother, Empress Dowager Yongle.

古文：冬，十月，青、徐黄巾复起，寇郡县。
现代文：冬季，十月，青州、徐州的黄巾军再度起兵，攻掠郡县。
English: In the winter, in October, the Yellow Turban Army of Qingzhou and Xuzhou once again raised an army to attack and plunder counties.

古文：望气者以为京师当有大兵，两宫流血。
现代文：用观察云气来预言吉凶的法术家认为，京城洛阳将有兵灾，南北两宫会发生流血事件。
English: Magicians who use observation of clouds to predict good or bad fortune believe that there will be a military disaster in the capital Luoyang, and bloodshed will occur in the two palaces in the north and south.

古文：帝欲厌之，乃大发四方兵，讲武于平乐观下，起大坛，上建十二重华盖，高十丈。坛东北为小坛，复建九重华盖，高九丈。
现代文：灵帝想通过法术来压制，于是大批征调各地的军队，在平乐观下举行阅兵仪式。修筑一个大坛，上面立起十二层的华盖，高达十丈；在大坛的东北修筑了一个小坛，又立起九层的华盖，高九丈。
English: Lingdi wanted to suppress it through magic, so he conscripted and transferred a large number of troops from all over the country, and held a military parade ceremony under the general optimism. He built a large altar, on top of which a twelve-story flower cover was erected, up to ten meters high; in the northeast of the large altar, he built a small altar, and erected a nine-story flower cover, nine meters high.

古文：列步骑数万人，结营为陈。
现代文：步骑兵数万人列队，设营布阵。
English: Tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry lined up and set up camp.

古文：甲子，帝亲出临军，驻大华盖下，大将军进驻小华盖下。
现代文：甲子，灵帝亲自出来阅兵，站在大华盖之下，大将军何进站大小伞盖之下。
English: Ah Zi, Ling Di himself came out of the military parade, standing under the large flower cover, and the general stood under the large umbrella cover.

古文：帝躬擐甲、介马，称 无上将军 ，行陈三匝而还，以兵授进。
现代文：灵帝亲自披戴甲胄，骑上有护甲的战马，自称 无上将军 ，绕军阵巡视三圈后返回，将武器授予何进。
English: Lingdi himself wore armor and rode an armor-plated warhorse, claiming to be the supreme general. After three rounds of inspection around the army, he returned and awarded weapons to He Jin.

古文：帝问讨虏校尉盖勋曰： 吾讲武如是，何如？ 
现代文：灵帝问讨虏校尉盖勋说： 我这样检阅大军，你觉得怎样？ 
English: Ling Di asked the interrogator, Captain Gay Xun, "How do you feel about me inspecting the army like this?"

古文：对曰： 臣闻先王翟德不观兵。
现代文：盖勋回答： 我听说从前圣明的君王显示恩德，不炫耀武力。
English: Gai Xun replied, "I heard that in the past, the kings of Shengming showed benevolence and did not flaunt their power.

古文：今寇在远而设近陈，不足以昭果毅，只黩武耳！ 
现代文：如今，贼寇都在远地，陛下却在京城阅兵，不足以显示消灭敌人的决心，只表现为黩武罢了。 
English: Today, the thieves and robbers are all far away, but His Majesty is holding a military parade in the capital. This is not enough to show the determination to eliminate the enemy, but only to show that He is a warrior.

古文：帝曰： 善！恨见君晚，群臣初无是言也。 
现代文：灵帝说： 你的看法很对，可惜我见到你太晚，群臣当初没有讲过这样的话。 
English: Ling Di said: Your opinion is very right, but unfortunately I saw you too late, the ministers did not say such a thing at the beginning.

古文：勋谓袁绍曰： 上甚聪明，但蔽于左右耳。 
现代文：盖勋对袁绍说： 皇帝很聪明，只是被他左右的人蒙蔽住了。 
English: Gai Xun said to Yuan Shao: The emperor is very clever, but he is blinded by the people around him.

古文：与绍谋共诛嬖幸，蹇硕惧，出勋为京兆尹。
现代文：他与袁绍密谋一起诛杀宦官。蹇硕感到恐惧，将他调离京城，派到长安去担任京兆尹。
English: He conspired with Yuan Shao to assassinate the eunuch. Shenshuo was horrified and transferred him out of Beijing and sent him to Chang'an to serve as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：十一月，王国围陈仓。
现代文：十一月，王国包围陈仓。
English: In November, the kingdom surrounded Chen Cang.

古文：诏复拜皇甫嵩为左将军，督前将军董卓，合兵四万人以拒之。
现代文：灵帝下诏再次任命皇甫嵩为左将军，统率前将军董卓，共有军队四万人，去抵抗王国。
English: Emperor Lingzhao once again appointed Emperor Fusong as the left general, commanding the former general Dong Zhuo, with a total army of forty thousand, to resist the kingdom.

古文：张纯与丘力居钞略青、徐、幽、冀四州；诏骑都尉公孙瓚讨之。
现代文：张纯与乌桓酋长丘力居在青、徐、幽、冀四州境内到处抢掠。灵帝下诏命骑都尉公孙瓒进行讨伐。
English: Zhang Chun and the Wuhuan chieftain Qiu Liguo plundered everywhere in the four states of Qing, Xu, Yu and Hebei. Emperor Ling ordered the cavalry captain Gong Sunqi to carry out the crusade.

古文：瓚与战于属国石门，纯等大败，弃妻子，逾塞走；悉得所略男女。
现代文：公孙瓒在辽东属国的石门山与他们交战，张纯等大败，丢弃妻子儿女，越过边塞逃跑。
English: Gongsun Rong fought with them at Shimen Mountain in the eastern province of Liaodong. Zhang Chun and others were defeated, abandoned their wives and children, and fled across the border.

古文：瓚深入无继，反为丘力居等所围于辽西管子城，二百馀日，粮尽众溃，士卒死者什五六。
现代文：他们所抢掠浮虏的男女百姓，都被公孙瓒夺回。公孙瓒乘胜深入追击，但没有后援，反被丘力居等包围在辽西郡管子城，过了二百余日，粮尽而全军溃散，士兵死亡了十分之五六。
English: The men and women they plundered and carried away were all recaptured by Gongsun Yao. Gongsun Yao successfully pursued them, but had no backup. Instead, he was encircled by Qiu Ligu and others in Guanzi City, Liaoxi County. After more than two hundred days, the entire army collapsed due to lack of food, and fifty-six out of ten soldiers died.

古文：董卓谓皇甫嵩曰： 陈仓危急，请速救之。 
现代文：董卓对皇甫嵩说： 陈仓形势危急，请赶快救援。 
English: Dong Zhuo said to Wang Fusong: Chen Cang is in a critical situation, please rescue quickly.

古文：嵩曰： 不然。百战百胜，不如不战而屈人兵。
现代文：皇甫嵩说： 不然，百战百胜，不如不战而胜。
English: Emperor Fusang said: Otherwise, it is better to win without fighting.

古文：陈仓虽小，城守固备，未易可拔。
现代文：陈仓虽小，但城垣坚固，守卫严密，不容易攻破。
English: Although Chen Cang is small, the city wall is strong and well guarded, and it is not easy to break through.

古文：王国虽强，攻陈仓不下，其众必疲，疲而击之，全胜之道也，将何救焉！ 
现代文：王国兵力虽强，但攻不下陈仓，部众必然疲乏，我们乘他们疲乏，发动攻击，这是获得彻底胜利的策略，用得着什么援救呢！ 
English: Although the kingdom's troops are strong, they cannot attack Chen Cang. The troops are bound to be tired. We will take advantage of their fatigue and launch an attack. This is a strategy for achieving complete victory. What is the need for rescue?

古文：国攻陈仓八十馀日，不拔。
现代文：王国围攻陈仓八十余天，未能攻破。
English: The kingdom besieged Chen Cang for more than eighty days, but failed to break through.

古文：孝灵皇帝下中平六年
现代文：中平六年
English: Zhongping six years old

古文：春，二月，国众疲敝，解围去，皇甫嵩进兵击之。董卓曰： 不可。
现代文：春季，二月，王国的部队疲惫不堪，解围撤退。皇甫嵩下令进军追击，董卓说： 不行。
English: In the spring, in February, the kingdom's troops were exhausted and retreated to relieve the siege. Emperor Fusang ordered the army to pursue, and Dong Zhuo said: No.

古文：兵法，穷寇勿迫，归众勿追。 
现代文：兵法上说： 穷寇勿迫，归众勿追。  
English: According to the law of war: Don't force the poor thief, don't chase the crowd.

古文：嵩曰： 不然。前吾不击，避其锐也；今而击之，待其衰也；所击疲师，非归众也；国众且走，莫有斗志，以整击乱，非穷寇也。 
现代文：皇甫嵩说： 不然，以前我们不进攻，是躲避他们的锐气；现在发动进攻，是等到他们士气已经低落。我们现在所攻击的是疲惫之师，而不是 归众 ；王国的部队正要逃走，已无斗志，并不是 穷寇 。 
English: Emperor Fusang said, "Otherwise, before, we did not attack, because we were trying to avoid their sharpness; now, we launch an attack, waiting until their morale has fallen. What we are attacking now is a tired division, not a general; the kingdom's troops are about to flee, they have no fighting spirit, they are not poor robbers.

古文：遂独进击之，使卓为后拒，连战，大破之，斩首万馀级。
现代文：于是皇甫嵩独自率军进击，命令董卓作后援。皇甫嵩边连续进攻，大获全胜，斩杀一万多人。
English: Therefore, Emperor Fusang led his army to attack alone and ordered Dong Zhuo to support him. Emperor Fusang attacked continuously and won a complete victory, killing more than ten thousand people.

古文：卓大惭恨，由是与嵩有隙。
现代文：董卓大为羞惭恼恨，从此与皇甫嵩结下仇恨。
English: Dong Zhuo was very ashamed and angry, and from then on, he had a grudge against Wang Fusong.

古文：韩遂等共废王国，而劫故信都令汉阳阎忠使督统诸部。
现代文：韩遂等人共同废掉王国的首领地位，胁迫前信都县令汉阳人阎忠担任首领，统率各部。
English: Han Sui and others jointly abolished the position of the head of the kingdom and coerced the former Xindu County commander Hanyang Yanzhong to serve as the head and head all departments.

古文：忠病死，遂等稍争权利，更相杀害，由是寝衰。
现代文：阎忠病死，韩遂等人逐渐争权夺利，继而互相攻杀，于是势力逐渐衰弱。
English: Yan Zhong died of illness, Han Sui and others gradually competed for power and profit, and then attacked and killed each other, so the forces gradually weakened.

古文：幽州牧刘虞到部，遣使至鲜卑中，告以利害，责使送张举、张纯首，厚加购尝。
现代文：幽州牧刘虞到任后，派使臣到鲜卑部落去，告诉他们利害，责令他们斩送张举和张纯的人头，悬以重赏。
English: After Liu Yu, the Yuzhou herdsman, took office, he sent envoys to the Xianbei tribe, told them what was at stake, ordered them to cut off the heads of Zhang He and Zhang Chun, and offered a heavy reward.

古文：丘力居等闻虞至，喜，各遣译自归。
现代文：丘力居等听说刘虞来到幽州，都很高兴，各派翻译来晋见刘虞，自动归降。
English: When Qiu Liju and others heard that Liu Yu had arrived in Yuzhou, they were all very happy. They each sent an envoy to meet Liu Yu and withdrew their troops.

古文：举、纯走出塞，馀皆降散。
现代文：张举、张纯逃到塞外，所余部下全都投降或逃散。
English: Zhang Qiu and Zhang Chun fled outside of Tibet, and the rest of their subordinates all surrendered or fled.

古文：虞上罢诸屯兵，但留降虏校尉公孙瓚，将步骑万人屯右北平。
现代文：刘虞上奏，请求将征集的各部队全部遣散，只留下降虏校尉公孙瓒，率领步、骑兵一万人，驻扎在右北平。
English: Liu Yu made a report, requesting that all the troops that had been enlisted be demobilized, leaving only the cavalry lieutenant Gong Sun Ye, leading ten thousand infantry and cavalry, stationed in the right Beiping.

古文：三月，张纯客王政杀纯，送首诣虞。
现代文：三月，张纯的门客王政刺杀张纯，带张纯的人头去见刘虞。
English: In March, Zhang Chun's protégé Wang Zheng assassinated Zhang Chun and took Zhang Chun's head to meet Liu Yu.

古文：公孙瓚志欲扫灭乌桓，而虞欲以恩信招降，由是与瓚有隙。
现代文：公孙瓒决心用武力消灭乌桓部落，而刘虞想用恩德和信义来招降他们，因此两人之间产生矛盾。
English: Gongsun Yao was determined to use force to wipe out the Wuhuan tribe, while Liu Yu wanted to use benevolence and sincerity to win them over, which led to a conflict between the two.

古文：夏，四月，丙子朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，四月，丙子朔，出现日食。
English: In the summer of April, the solar eclipse occurs.

古文：太尉马日磾免；遣使即拜幽州牧刘虞为太尉，封容丘侯。
现代文：太尉马日被免职。灵帝派遣使臣到幽州去任命幽州牧刘虞为太尉，封为容丘侯。
English: The Emperor Lingdi sent an envoy to Yuzhou to appoint the Yuzhou herdsman Liu Yu as the first lieutenant, and crowned him as the Yongqiu marquis.

古文：蹇硕忌大将军进，与诸常侍共说帝遣进西击韩遂；帝从之。
现代文：蹇硕忌恨大将军何进，与诸常侍共同劝说灵帝派遗何进西征韩遂，灵帝同意了。
English: Gong Shuo hated the great general He Jin, and together with the attendants persuaded Emperor Ling to send He Jin to the West to conquer Korea, and Emperor Ling agreed.

古文：进阴知其谋，奏遣袁绍收徐、兗二州兵，须绍还而西，以稽行期。
现代文：何进暗中获悉他们的阴谋后，上奏请求派袁绍到徐州和兖州去调集军队，要等到袁绍回来再进行西征，以便拖延行期。
English: After He Jin secretly learned of their plot, he requested that Yuan Shao be sent to Xuzhou and Zhangzhou to mobilize the army. He wanted to wait for Yuan Shao to return before going on the Western Expedition, in order to delay the implementation period.

古文：初，帝数失皇子，何皇后生子辩，养于道人史子眇家，号曰 史侯 。
现代文：当初，灵帝连续死去了几个儿子，因此，何皇后生下儿子刘辩后，就送到道人史子眇家去抚养，故被称为 史侯 。
English: At first, Emperor Lingdi had several sons die in a row. Therefore, after Empress He gave birth to her son Liu Fen, she sent him to the family of Taoist historian Zi Jun to be raised. Therefore, he was called Shuo.

古文：王美人生子协，董太后自养之，号曰 董侯 。
现代文：王美人生下儿子刘协，由董太后亲自抚养，被称为 董侯 。
English: Wang Mei gave birth to a son, Liu Xie, who was raised by Empress Dowager Dong herself and was known as Dong Hou.

古文：群臣请立太子。
现代文：群臣请求灵帝立太子。
English: The courtiers asked Emperor Ling to set up a crown prince.

古文：帝以辩轻佻无威仪，欲立协，犹豫未决。
现代文：灵帝认为刘辩为人轻佻，缺乏威仪，想立刘协，但犹豫未决。
English: Ling Di thought that Liu Dian was frivolous and lacked dignity. He wanted to establish Liu Xie, but hesitated.

古文：会疾笃，属协于蹇硕。
现代文：正在这时，灵帝病重，把刘协托付给蹇硕。
English: At this time, Ling Di was seriously ill and entrusted Liu Xie to Gong Shuo.

古文：丙辰，帝崩于嘉德殿。
现代文：丙辰，灵帝于嘉德殿驾崩。
English: Hsin-Chen, the Holy Emperor passed away at the Jia De Hall.

古文：硕时在内，欲先诛何进而立协，使人迎进，欲与计事；进即驾往。
现代文：蹇硕当时在皇宫中，想先杀何进，然后立刘协为皇帝。他派人去接何进要与他商议事情，何进即刻乘车前往。
English: Zeng Shuo was in the imperial palace at the time, and he wanted to kill He Jin first, and then make Liu Xie the emperor. He sent someone to meet He Jin to discuss the matter with him, and He Jin immediately took a car to go.

古文：硕司马潘隐与进早旧，迎而目之。
现代文：蹇硕的司马潘隐与何进早有交谊，在迎接他时用眼神示意。
English: The portly Sima Pan'in has been friends with He Jin for a long time. When greeting him, he gestures with his eyes.

古文：进惊，驰从儳道归营，引兵入屯百郡邸，因称疾不入。
现代文：何进大惊，驰车抄近道跑回自己控制的军营，率军进驻各郡国在京城的官邸，声称有病，不再进宫。
English: He was so shocked that he took a shortcut and ran back to the military camp under his control, leading the army to the official residence of each county and province in Beijing, claiming that he was ill and would no longer enter the palace.

古文：戊午，皇子辩即皇帝位，年十四。
现代文：戊午，皇子刘辩即帝位，当时他十四岁。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, Prince Liu Yan ascended to the throne, when he was 14 years old.

古文：尊皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：尊称母亲何皇后为皇太后。
English: The revered empress is the empress dowager.

古文：太后临朝。赦天下，改元为光熹。
现代文：何太后临朝主持朝政，大赦天下，改年号为光熹。
English: The Empress Dowager Lin presided over the imperial court, granted amnesty to the whole country, and changed the era name to Guangxu.

古文：封皇弟协为渤海王。协年九岁。
现代文：封皇弟刘协为勃海王，当时他只有九岁。
English: He was only nine years old when he named his younger brother Liu Xie as the King of Bohai.

古文：以后将军袁隗为太傅，与大将军何进参录尚书事。
现代文：任命后将军袁隗为太傅，与大将军何进共同主持尚书事务。
English: After the appointment, General Yuan Qi was appointed as Taifu, and he and General He Jin jointly presided over the book business.

古文：进既秉朝政，忿蹇硕图己，阴规诛之。
现代文：何进既已掌握朝政大权，怨恨蹇硕想谋害自己，暗中计划将他杀死。
English: Since He Jin had already seized the supreme political power of the dynasty, he wanted to kill himself out of resentment and secretly planned to kill him.

古文：袁绍因进亲客张津，劝进悉诛诸宦官。
现代文：袁绍通过何进的亲信门客张津，劝说何进将所有的宦官一网打尽。
English: Yuan Shao, through He Jin's trusted disciple Zhang Jin, persuaded He Jin to kill all the eunuchs.

古文：进以袁氏累世贵宠，而绍与从弟虎贲中郎将术皆为豪桀所归，信而用之。
现代文：何进因袁氏历代都有人作高官，袁绍与堂弟虎贲中郎将袁术又为天下豪杰所拥戴，因此相信并任用他们。
English: He Jin believed in and appointed Yuan Shao and his cousin, Hu Yao Zhong Lang, because Yuan Shao and his cousin, Hu Yao Zhong Lang, were both high-ranking officials in the Yuan Dynasty. Yuan Shao and his cousin, Hu Yao Zhong Lang, also believed that Yuan Shou was the world's hero.

古文：复博征智谋之士何颙、荀攸及河南郑泰等二十馀人，以颙为北军中候，攸为黄门侍郎，泰为尚书，与同腹心。
现代文：又广泛征聘有智谋的人士何、荀攸及河南人郑泰等二十人，任命何为北军中侯，荀攸为黄门侍郎，郑泰为尚书，把他们都作为自己的心腹。
English: He also extensively recruited twenty people, including the resourceful people He, Zou You and Zheng Tai, a Henan native, and appointed He as the middle marquis of the Northern Army, Zou You as the Yellow Gate attendant, and Zheng Tai as Shang Shu, all of whom were his confidants.

古文：攸，爽之从孙也。
现代文：荀攸是荀爽的族孙。
English: Zou You is the grandson of Zou Shuang.

古文：蹇硕疑不自安，与中常侍赵忠、宋典等书曰： 大将军兄弟秉国专朝，今与天下党人谋诛先帝左右，扫灭我曹，但以硕典禁兵，故且沉吟。
现代文：蹇硕心里疑虑不安，写信给中常侍越忠、宋典等人说： 大将军何进兄弟控制朝政，独断专行，如今与天下的党人策划要诛杀先帝左右的亲信，消灭我们。只是因为我统率禁军，所以暂且迟疑。
English: With doubts and uneasiness in his heart, Zou Shuo wrote to the middle-ranking attendants Yue Zhong, Song Dian and others, saying, "General He Jin's brothers control the imperial government and act arbitrarily, and now they are plotting with the party members around the world to kill the cronies around the former emperor and eliminate us. It is only because I am leading the forbidden army that I am hesitant for the time being.

古文：今宜共闭上阁，急捕诛之。 
现代文：现在应该一起动手，关闭宫门，赶快将何进逮捕处死。 
English: Now we should work together to shut down the cabinet and kill it quickly.

古文：中常侍郭胜，进同郡人也，太后及进之贵幸，胜有力焉，故亲信何氏；与赵忠等议，不从硕计，而以其书示进。
现代文：中常侍郭胜与何进是同郡之人，何太后及何进能有贵宠的地位，他帮了很大的忙，因此他亲近信赖何氏。郭胜与赵忠等人商议后，拒绝蹇硕的提议，而把蹇硕的信送给何进看。
English: Guo Sheng, the vice-premier's personal attendant, was from the same county as He Jin. He was of great help to the Dowager Empress Dowager He and He Jin, who had the status of favorites. Therefore, he was close to and trusted Mr. He. After discussing with Zhao Zhong and others, Guo Sheng rejected the proposal of Zeng Shuo and sent the letter of Zeng Shuo to He Jin.

古文：庚午，进使黄门令收硕，诛之，因悉领其屯兵。
现代文：庚午，何进令黄门令逮捕蹇硕，将他处死，于是把禁军全部置于自己指挥之下。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, He Jin ordered Huang Menling to arrest Zeng Shuo and put him to death. He then placed the entire forbidden army under his own command.

古文：票骑将军董重，与何进权势相害，中官挟重以为党助。
现代文：票骑将军董重与何进互争权力，宦官们依靠董重做为党援。
English: The eunuchs rely on Dong Chong as a party aide.

古文：董太后每欲参干政事，何太后辄相禁塞，董后忿恚詈曰： 汝今舟张，怙汝兄耶！
现代文：董太后每次想要干预国家政事，何太后都加以阻止。董太后感到愤恨，骂道： 你现在气焰嚣张，是依仗你的哥哥何进！
English: Every time Empress Dowager Dong wanted to intervene in the country's political affairs, Empress Dowager He prevented it. Empress Dowager Dong felt resentful and scolded: You are now arrogant, relying on your brother!

古文：吾敕票骑断何进头，如反手耳！ 
现代文：我如命令票骑将军董重砍下何进的人头，只是举手之劳！ 
English: If I were to order the ticket rider to chop off General Dong Chong's head, it would only take a wave of my hand!

古文：何太后闻之，以告进。
现代文：何太后听到后，告诉给何进。
English: After hearing what the empress dowager heard, she told him what to do.

古文：五月，进与三公共奏： 孝仁皇后使故中常侍夏恽等交通州郡，辜较财利，悉入西省。
现代文：五月，何进与三公共同上奏： 董太后派前中常侍夏恽等与州、郡官府相互勾结，搜刮财物，都存在她所住永乐宫。
English: In May, He Jin and the three princes jointly made a report: the Dowager Empress Dong sent the former middle attendant Xia Wei and others to collude with the state and county government to search for property, all of which existed in the Yongle Palace where she lived.

古文：故事，蕃后不得留京师；请迁宫本国。 
现代文：按照过去的贯例，藩国的王后不能留住在京城，请把她迁回本国。 
English: According to past practice, the queen of the domain cannot stay in the capital, so please move her back to her home country.

古文：奏可。
现代文：何太后批准了这一奏章。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：辛巳，进举兵围票骑府，收董重，免官，自杀。
现代文：辛巳，何进举兵包围了票骑将军府，逮捕董重，免除他的职务，董重自杀。
English: Soon after, He Jin raised an army and surrounded the general's residence of the ticket rider, arrested Dong Chong, relieved him of his duties, and Dong Chong committed suicide.

古文：六月，辛亥，董后忧怖，暴崩。
现代文：六月，辛亥，董太后又忧又怕，突然死去。
English: In June, Xinhai, Empress Dowager Dong was worried and afraid, and died suddenly.

古文：民间由是不附何氏。辛酉，葬孝灵皇帝于文陵。
现代文：从此以后，何进一家失去民心。辛酉，把灵帝安葬在文陵。
English: From then on, the He Jin family lost the hearts of the people. Xin Yao buried Ling Di in Wenling.

古文：何进惩蹇硕之谋，称疾，不入陪丧，又不送山陵。
现代文：何进警惕会发生蹇硕那样的阴谋，自称有病，不入宫去陪丧，也不送灵帝的棺椁到墓地。
English: How many are on the alert for a conspiracy similar to that of Emperor Lingzhuo, who claimed to be ill and did not enter the palace to attend the funeral, nor did he send Emperor Lingzhuo's coffin to the cemetery.

古文：大水。
现代文：发生水灾。
English: It's a big mess.

古文：秋，七月，徙渤海王协为陈留王。
现代文：秋季，七月，改封勃海王刘协为陈留王。
English: In the autumn, in July, Liu Xie, the king of Buhai, was renamed Chen Rui Wang.

古文：司徒丁宫罢。
现代文：司徒丁宫被免职。
English: Let's go to the Stouting Palace.

古文：袁绍复说何进曰： 前窦武欲诛内宠而反为所害者，但坐言语漏泄；五营兵士皆畏服中人，而窦氏反用之，自取祸灭。
现代文：袁绍又向何进建议说： 从前窦武他们想要消灭宦官，反而被宦官所杀害，只是因为消息泄露。五营兵士一向畏惧宦官的权势，而窦氏反而利用他们，所以自取灭亡。
English: Yuan Shao also suggested to He Jin that: In the past, Dou Wu and they wanted to eliminate eunuchs, but they were killed by eunuchs, just because the news leaked out. Five battalions of soldiers have always feared the power of eunuchs, but the Dou clan used them instead, so they killed themselves.

古文：今将军兄弟并领劲兵，部曲将吏皆英俊名士，乐尽力命，事在掌握，此天赞之时也。
现代文：如今将军兄弟同时统帅禁军劲族，部下将领官吏都是俊杰名士，乐于为您效命，事情全在掌握之中，这是天赐良机。
English: Today, the generals and brothers are also the commanders of the Forbidden Army, and their subordinates, generals and officials, are all handsome and famous. They are willing to serve you. Everything is under control. This is a heaven-sent opportunity.

古文：将军宜一为天下除患，以垂名后世，不可失也！ 
现代文：将军应该一举为天下除去大害，垂名后世，不要错过这个机会！ 
English: The general should remove the great harm for the world in one fell swoop, and be famous for generations to come. Don't miss this opportunity!

古文：进乃白太后，请尽罢中常侍以下，以三署郎补其处。
现代文：何进于是向太后建议，请求全部撤换中常侍及以下的宦官，委派三署郎官代替他们的职务。
English: He Jin then proposed to the empress dowager, requesting that all the eunuchs of the middle and lower eunuchs be replaced, and that three eunuchs be appointed to replace them.

古文：太后不听，曰： 中官统领禁省，自古及今，汉家故事，不可废也。
现代文：何太后不答应，说： 从古至今，都是由宦官来管理皇宫内的事情，这条汉朝的传统制度，不能废掉。
English: The empress dowager did not listen and said, "From ancient times to the present, the eunuchs have been in charge of the provinces, and the old rules of the Han family must not be abandoned.

古文：且先帝新弃天下，我奈何楚楚与士人共对事乎！ 
现代文：何况先帝刚刚去世，我怎能衣冠整齐地与士人相对共事呢！ 
English: What's more, the former emperor had just died, how could I neatly work with the nobles!

古文：进难违太后意，且欲诛其放纵者。
现代文：何进难以违背太后的意思，打算暂且诛杀最跋扈的宦官。
English: He couldn't go against the empress dowager's wishes and wanted to kill those at the top.

古文：绍以为中官亲近至尊，出纳号令，今不悉废，后必为患。
现代文：袁绍认为宦官最亲近太后和皇帝，百官的奏章及皇帝诏命都由他们来回传递，现在如果不彻底除掉，将来一定会有后患。
English: Yuan Shao believed that eunuchs were the closest to the empress dowager and the emperor. They passed the imperial rescript and the emperor's edict back and forth. If they are not completely eliminated now, there will definitely be future problems.

古文：而太后母舞阳君及何苗数受诸宦官赂遣，知进欲诛之。数白太后为其障蔽；又言： 大将军专杀左右，擅权以弱社稷。 
现代文：但是何太后的母亲舞阳君和弟弟何苗多次接受宦官们的贿赂，知道何进要消灭宦官，屡次向何太后进言阻止，又说： 大将军擅自杀害左右近臣，专权独断，削弱国家。 
English: But the Empress Dowager He's mother, Muyangjun, and her brother, He Miao, repeatedly accepted bribes from eunuchs. They knew that He Jin wanted to eliminate eunuchs, and they repeatedly advised the Empress Dowager He to stop it. They also said: "The great general dares to commit suicide, harms his subordinates, exercises arbitrary power, and weakens the country."

古文：太后疑以为然。
现代文：太后心中疑虑，认为他们的话有理。
English: The Empress suspected that this was the case.

古文：进新贵，素敬惮中官，虽外慕大名而内不能断，故事久不决。
现代文：何进新近掌握重权，但他一向对宦官们既尊敬又畏惧，虽然羡慕得到除去宦官的美名，但心中不能当机立断，因此事情拖下来，久久不能决定。
English: He Jin has recently seized power, but he has always respected and feared the eunuchs. Although he envied the reputation of the eunuchs, he could not make a decision in his heart, so things dragged on and could not be decided for a long time.

古文：绍等又为画策，多召四方猛将及诸豪杰，使并引兵向京城，以胁太后；进然之；主簿广陵陈琳谏曰： 谚称 掩目捕雀 ，夫微物尚不可欺以得志，况国之大事，其要以诈立乎！
现代文：袁绍又为何进出谋划策，劝他多召各地的猛将和英雄豪杰，让他们都率军向京城洛阳进发，以此来威胁何太后，何进同意了这一计划。主簿、广陵人陈琳劝阻说： 民间有一句谚语，叫 闭起眼睛捉麻雀 。像那样的小事，尚且不可用欺诈手段达到目的，何况国家大事，怎么可以用欺诈办成呢？
English: Why did Yuan Shao also go in and out to plan and advise him to call up more fierce generals and heroic heroes from all over the country, and let them all lead the army to Luoyang, Beijing, in order to threaten the Empress He. He agreed to this plan. Chen Lin, the main book and Guangling person, dissuaded him, saying: There is a folk saying, "Close your eyes and catch a sparrow." A small matter like that cannot be achieved by fraudulent means, let alone a national event, how can it be done by fraud?

古文：今将军总皇威，握兵要，龙骧虎步，高下在心，此犹鼓洪炉燎毛发耳。
现代文：如今将军身集皇家威望，手握兵权，龙行虎步，为所欲为。这样对付宦官，好比是用炉火去烧毛发。
English: Now that the general is supreme, in command of the army, and the dragon and the tiger are marching, up or down, it's all in your heart. It's like stoking the furnace, what's the problem?

古文：但当速发雷霆，行权立断，则天人顺之。
现代文：只要您发动，用雷霆万钧之势当机立断，发号施令，那么上应天意，下顺民心，很容易达到目的。
English: As long as you start, use the thunderous momentum to make decisions and give orders, then it is easy to achieve the goal in accordance with the will of heaven and the people's will.

古文：而反委释利器，更征外助，大兵聚会，强者为雄，所谓倒持干戈，授人以柄，功必不成，只为乱阶耳！ 
现代文：然而如今反而放弃手中的权柄，去征求外援。等到各地大军聚集时，强大者就将称雄，这样做就是所谓倒拿武器，而把手柄交给别人一样，必定不会成功，只会带来大乱罢了。 
English: However, now they are giving up their power and asking for foreign aid. When large armies gather from all over the world, the strongest will be victorious. This is called taking up arms and handing over the reins to others. It will not succeed and will only lead to chaos.

古文：进不听。
现代文：何进不听。
English: I don't listen to anything.

古文：典军校尉曹操闻而笑曰： 宦者之官，古今宜有，但世主不当假之权宠，使至于此。
现代文：典军校尉曹操听说后笑着说： 在宫中服务的宦官，古今都应该有，只是君王不应该给予大权和宠信，使他们发展到现在这个程度。
English: After hearing this, Lieutenant Cao Cao smiled and said: There should have been eunuchs serving in the palace from ancient times to the present, but the king should not have given them the power and favor to develop to this extent.

古文：既治其罪，当诛元恶，一狱吏足矣，何至纷纷召外兵乎！
现代文：既然要惩治他们，应当除去首恶，只要一个狱吏就足够了。何至于纷纷攘攘地征召各地部队呢！
English: Since we want to punish them, we should get rid of the first evil, just one warden is enough. Why not call up troops from all over the country?

古文：欲尽诛之，事必宣露，吾见其败也。 
现代文：假如要想将他们一网打尽，事情必然会泄露，我将看到此事的失败。 
English: If I want to finish them off, it's going to come out and I'm going to see it fail.

古文：初，灵帝征董卓为少府，卓上书言： 所将湟中义从及秦、胡兵皆诣臣言： 牢直不毕，禀赐断绝，妻子饥冻。 
现代文：起初，灵帝征召董卓入朝担任少府。董卓上书说： 我所统领的湟中地区的志愿附属军以及羌、胡兵都来见我，说： 没有发给足够的粮饷，没有赏赐，妻子儿女都饥寒交迫。 
English: At first, Lingdi conscripted Dong Zhuo into the imperial court to serve as the Young Prefect. Dong Zhuo said in the letter: The volunteer subordinate army in the Central Yunnan region that I commanded, as well as the soldiers from Shao and Hu, all came to see me and said: Not enough grain was distributed, there was no reward, and my wife and children were starving.

古文：率挽臣车，使不得行。
现代文：把我的车子拖住，使我无法动身。
English: Dragged my car so I couldn't get out.

古文：羌、胡憋肠狗态，臣不能禁止，辄将顺安慰。
现代文：这些羌、胡人都心肠险恶，很难驾驭，我不能让他们听从命令，只能先留下来进行安抚。
English: These baboons and geese are very dangerous and difficult to control. I can't make them follow my orders, so I have to stay and pacify them first.

古文：增异复上。 
现代文：有新的情况，再随时汇报。 
English: We will keep you informed of any new developments.

古文：朝廷不能制。
现代文：朝廷无法约束董卓。
English: The imperial court could not restrain Dong Zhuo.

古文：及帝寝疾，玺书拜卓并州牧，今以兵属皇甫嵩。
现代文：到灵帝病重时，下诏任命董卓为并州牧，命令他把军队交给皇甫嵩指挥。
English: When Emperor Ling was gravely ill, he issued an imperial edict appointing Dong Zhuo as concubine and ordered him to put the army under the command of Emperor Fusong.

古文：卓复上书言： 臣误蒙天恩，掌戎十年，士卒大小，相狎弥久，恋臣畜养之恩，为臣奋一旦之命，乞将之北州，效力边垂。 
现代文：董卓又上书说： 我得到陛下信任，掌兵达十年之久。在全军上下，久已培养起感情，他们眷恋我的恩德，愿意一朝为我效死。
English: Dong Zhuo also wrote: I have gained Your Majesty's trust, and I have been in charge of soldiers for ten years. In the whole army, feelings have been cultivated for a long time. They are attached to my kindness and are willing to die for me one day.

古文：嵩从子郦说嵩曰： 天下兵柄，在大人与董卓耳。
现代文：请求陛下准许我把这支军队带到并州，为国家守卫边疆。 皇甫嵩的侄子皇甫郦向皇甫嵩建议说： 全国的军权，主要握在您和董卓手中。
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to allow me to take this army to Nianzhou to guard the border for the country.Wang Fusong, the nephew of Wang Fusong, suggested to Wang Fusong: The military power of the whole country is mainly in your and Dong Zhuo's hands.

古文：今怨隙已结，势不俱存，卓被诏委兵而上书自请，此逆命也。
现代文：现在双方已结下仇怨，势必不能共存。董卓接到命令他交出军权的诏书，但他却上书请求带走军队，是违抗皇帝的诏命。
English: Now that the two sides have forged a grudge, it is inevitable that they cannot coexist. Dong Zhuo received the edict ordering him to surrender military power, but he submitted a request to take away the army, defying the emperor's edict.

古文：彼率京师政乱，故敢踌躇不进，此怀奸也。
现代文：他认为朝中政治混乱，所以敢于拖延时间，按兵不动，这是心怀奸诈。
English: He believes that the DPRK and China are in political turmoil, so he dares to delay the time and not to act. This is treacherous.

古文：二者，刑所不赦。
现代文：这两项都是不能赦免的大罪。
English: Both are unpardonable offenses.

古文：且其凶戾无亲，将士不附。
现代文：而且他凶暴残忍，不受将士拥戴。
English: He's a vicious, ruthless man with no loyalty.

古文：大人今为元帅，杖国威以讨之，上显忠义，下除凶害，无不济也。 
现代文：您现在身为元帅，倚仗国威去讨伐他，对上表示您的忠义，又为下边消除一个祸害，无往不利。 
English: You are now a marshal, relying on the national prestige to fight him, to show your loyalty to the top, and to eliminate a scourge for the bottom, no disadvantage.

古文：嵩曰： 违命虽罪，专诛亦有责也。不如显奏其事，使朝廷裁之。 
现代文：皇甫嵩说： 尽管董卓违抗诏命有罪，但不得朝廷批准，就擅自讨伐他，也有罪，不如公开奏报这件事，由朝廷来裁决。 
English: Emperor Fusong said: Although Dong Zhuo was guilty of disobeying the imperial edict, but without the approval of the imperial court, he was also guilty of fighting against him without authorization. It is better to publicly report this matter and let the imperial court decide.

古文：乃上书以闻。
现代文：于是，上书奏明。
English: As a result, the notice of appeal was issued.

古文：帝以让卓。
现代文：灵帝下诏责备董卓。
English: Ling Di issued an edict to reprimand Dong Zhuo.

古文：卓亦不奉诏，驻兵河东以观时变。
现代文：董卓仍不肯服从，把军队驻扎在河东郡，以观察时局变化。
English: Dong Zhuo still refused to obey and stationed his army in Hedong County to observe the changes in the situation.

古文：何进召卓使将兵诣京师。
现代文：何进召董卓率军到洛阳来。
English: He summoned Dong Zhuo and his army to Luoyang.

古文：侍御史郑泰谏曰： 董卓强忍寡义，志欲无厌，若借之朝政，授以大事，将恣凶欲，必危朝廷。
现代文：侍御史郑泰劝谏说： 董卓为人强悍，不讲仁义，又贪得无厌。假如朝廷依靠他的支持，授以兵权，他将为所欲为，必然会威胁到朝廷的安全。
English: The chamberlain, Shi Zheng Tai, advised him: "Dong Zhuo is a strong man, does not care about benevolence, and is insatiably greedy. If the court relies on his support and grants him military power, he will do whatever he wants and will inevitably threaten the security of the court.

古文：明公以亲德之重，据阿衡之权，秉意独断，诛除有罪，诚不宜假卓以为资援也！
现代文：您作为皇帝国戚，掌握国家大权，可以依照本意独断独行，惩治那些罪人，实在不应该依靠董卓作为外援！
English: As a relative of the emperor and ruler of the country, you can arbitrarily punish those criminals according to your original intention. You really should not rely on Dong Zhuo for foreign aid!

古文：且事留变生，殷鉴不远，宜在速决。 
现代文：而且事情拖得太久，就会起变化，先前窦武之事的教训并不久远，应该赶快决断。 
English: Moreover, if things are delayed for too long, changes will occur. The lessons of the Douwu incident are not far away, and a decision should be made quickly.

古文：尚书卢植亦言不宜召卓，进皆不从。
现代文：尚书卢植也认为不应当召董卓，何进都不接受。
English: Shangshu Lu Zhe also believed that Dong Zhuo should not be summoned, and would not accept any advance.

古文：泰乃弃官去，谓荀攸曰： 何公未易辅也。 
现代文：郑泰于是辞职而去，告诉荀攸说： 何进是个不容易辅佐的人。 
English: Zheng Tai then resigned and left, telling Zou You that: He Jin is not an easy person to assist.

古文：进府掾王匡，骑都尉鲍信，皆泰山人，进使还乡里募兵；并召工郡太守桥瑁屯成皋，使武猛都尉丁原将数千人寇河内，烧孟津，火照城中，皆以诛宦官为言。
现代文：何进的僚属王匡与骑都尉鲍信都是泰山人，何进让他们回乡去召募军队。又召东郡太守桥瑁屯兵成，让武猛都尉丁原率领数千人进军河内郡，焚烧黄河的孟津渡口，火光直照到洛阳城中。这些行动都以消灭宦官作为口号。
English: He Jin's colleagues Wang Kuang and cavalry captain Bao Xin were both from Mount Taishan. He let them return to their hometowns to recruit troops. He also summoned the East County Taishou Qiaoqian to form a garrison, and let Captain Wu Meng Ding Yuan lead thousands of people to march into Hanoi County, burn the Mengjin Ferry Port on the Yellow River, and shine the fire directly into Luoyang City. These actions all used the elimination of eunuchs as a slogan.

古文：董卓闻召，即时就道，并上书曰： 中常侍张让等，窃幸承宠，浊乱海内。
现代文：董卓接到何进召他进京的命令，立刻上路出发。同时上书说： 中常侍张让等人，利用得到皇帝宠幸之机，扰乱天下。
English: When Dong Zhuo received the order from Ho to summon him to Beijing, he immediately set out on the road. At the same time, he sent a letter saying, "Middle Chamberlain Zhang Zhan and others are using the opportunity of being favored by the emperor to disrupt the world.

古文：臣闻扬汤止沸，莫若支薪；溃痈虽痛，胜于内食。
现代文：我曾听说，扬汤止沸。不如釜底抽薪；疮痈溃烂虽然疼痛，但胜于向内侵蚀脏腑。
English: I have heard it said that it is better to lance a boil than to poke a boil; that it is more painful for a boil to fester than for a boil to erode.

古文：昔赵鞅兴晋阳之甲以逐君侧之恶，今臣辄鸣钟鼓如雒阳，请收让等以清奸秽！ 
现代文：从前赵鞅统率晋阳的军队来清除君王身边的恶人，如今我则敲响钟鼓到洛阳来，请求逮捕张让等人，以清除奸邪！ 
English: In the past, Zhao Hongtong led the army of Jinyang to purge the wicked people around the king, but now I am ringing the bell and drum to come to Luoyang to request the arrest of Zhang Zhan and others to purge the evil!

古文：太后犹不从。
现代文：太后仍然不答应。
English: The Empress Dowager still did not agree.

古文：何苗谓进曰： 始共从南阳来，俱以贪贱依省内以致富贵，国家之事，亦何容易。
现代文：何苗对何进说： 我们当初一起从南阳来，出身贫贱，都是依靠宦官的扶助，才有今天的富贵。国家大事，又谈何容易，覆水难收，应该多加考虑。
English: He Miao said to He Jin: We originally came from Nanyang together, we were born poor, and we all relied on the support of eunuchs to become rich and wealthy today. National affairs, and how easy it is to talk about, and how difficult it is to collect water, should be given more consideration.

古文：覆水不收，宜深思之，且与省内和也。 卓至渑池，而进更狐疑，使谏议大夫种邵宣诏止之。
现代文：应暂且与宦官们和解。 董卓到渑池时，何进更加犹豫不决，派谏议大夫种邵拿着皇帝诏书去阻止董卓。
English: He should reconcile with the eunuchs for the time being. When Dong Zhuo arrived in Dianchi, He Jin was even more hesitant, and he sent Zeng Wei's doctor Zeng Shao to stop Dong Zhuo with the Emperor's edict.

古文：卓不受诏，遂前至河南；邵迎劳之，因譬令还军。
现代文：董卓不接受诏命，一直进军到河南。种邵迎接尉劳他的军队，并劝令他退军。
English: Dong Zhuo did not accept the imperial order and marched all the way to Henan. Zeng Shao greeted his army and persuaded him to withdraw.

古文：卓疑有变，使其军士以兵胁邵。
现代文：董卓疑心洛阳政局已发生变动，命部下用武器威胁种邵。
English: Dong Zhuo suspected that the political situation in Luoyang had changed, and his subordinates threatened him with weapons.

古文：邵怒，称诏叱之，军士皆披，遂前质责卓；卓辞屈，乃还军夕阳亭。
现代文：种邵大怒，用皇帝的名义叱责他们，士兵都害怕地散开。于是种邵上前当面责问董卓，董卓理屈辞穷，只好撤军回到夕阳亭。
English: Shao was furious and scolded them in the name of the emperor. The soldiers were scared and dispersed. So Shao went to confront Dong Zhuo in person. Dong Zhuo Li made a poor excuse and had to withdraw back to Xiyangting.

古文：邵，暠之孙也。
现代文：种邵是种的孙子。
English: Zeng Shao is Zeng's grandson.

古文：袁绍惧进变计，因胁之曰： 交构已成，形势已露，将军复欲何待而不早决之乎？
现代文：袁绍怕何进改变主意，便威胁他说： 矛盾已经形成，行动迹象已经显露，将军还想等待什么，而不早作决断？
English: Yuan Shao was afraid that He Jin would change his mind, so he threatened him: The contradiction has already formed, the signs of action have already appeared, what else does the general want to wait for without making a decision?

古文：事久变生，复为窦氏矣！ 
现代文：事情拖得太久会发生变化，就要重演窦武被害的惨剧了！ 
English: If things are delayed too long, things will change, and the tragedy of Douwu's death will be repeated!

古文：进于是以绍为司隶校尉，假节，专命击断；从事中郎王允为河南尹。
现代文：何进于是任命袁绍为司隶校尉，假节，有不经请示就逮捕或处死罪犯的权力。又任命从事中郎王允为河南尹。
English: He Jin then used Yuan Shao as the captain of the Sili school, holding the sign section, and ordered him to break it off; Wang Yun, who was engaged in the middle, was Henan Yin.

古文：绍使雒阳方略武吏司察宦者，而促董卓等使驰驿上奏，欲进兵平乐观。
现代文：袁绍命属下的方略武吏去侦察宦官动静，又催促董卓等人，让他们派驿使紧急上奏，在奏章上声称要进军到平乐观。
English: Yuan Shao ordered the strategical military officers under him to investigate the eunuch's movements, and urged Dong Zhuo and others to send an envoy to make an urgent report, claiming in the report that they would march to Pingxing.

古文：太后乃恐，悉罢中常侍、小黄门使还里舍，唯留进素所私人以守省中。
现代文：于是何太后大为恐惧，把中常侍、小黄门等宦官都罢免回家，只留下一些何进所亲信的人守在宫中。
English: As a result, the Empress Dowager He was greatly frightened, and dismissed the eunuchs such as the middle attendant and the little yellow door to go home, leaving only some of He Jin's close confidants to guard the palace.

古文：诸常侍、小黄门皆诣进谢罪，唯所措置。
现代文：诸常侍、小黄门都去向何进请罪，表示一切听从他的处置。
English: All the regular attendants and the little yellow doors went to plead with him, saying that they would do whatever he wanted.

古文：进谓曰： 天下匈匈，正患诸君耳。
现代文：何进对他们说： 天下动荡不定，只是由于厌恨你们。
English: He said to them: Disturbances are occurring all over the world, and it is you who are to blame!

古文：今董卓垂至，诸君何不早各就国！ 
现代文：如今董卓马上就要来了，你们为什么还不早日各自回到自己的封国去！ 
English: Now that Dong Zhuo is coming soon, why don't you all go back to your own fiefdoms as soon as possible!

古文：袁绍劝进便于此决之，至于再三；进不许。
现代文：袁绍劝何进乘此机会一网打尽，以至再三申明理由，但何进不许。
English: Yuan Shao advised He Jin to make the most of this opportunity, and even repeatedly stated the reasons, but He Jin was not allowed.

古文：绍又为书告诸州郡，诈宣进意，使捕案中官亲属。
现代文：袁绍又用公文通知各州、郡官府，假借何进的名义，要各地逮捕宦官们的亲属。
English: Yuan Shao also wrote a letter to all prefectures and counties, falsely announcing Ho Jin's intention to arrest the eunuch's relatives.

古文：进谋积日，颇泄，中官惧而思变。
现代文：何进的密谋因时间太长，泄露了不少。宦官们感到恐惧，想改革局面。
English: No advance planning for too long, things leak, eunuchs are afraid to change.

古文：张让子妇，太后之妹也，让向子妇叩头曰： 老臣得罪，当与新妇俱归私门。
现代文：张让的儿媳是何太后的妹妹，张让向她叩头请求说： 我现在犯下罪责，理应全家回到家乡。
English: Zhang Zhan's daughter-in-law was the Empress Dowager He's younger sister, Zhang Zhan bowed to her and said, "I have committed a crime now, and the whole family should return to their hometown."

古文：唯受恩累世，今当远离宫殿，情怀恋恋，愿复一入直，得暂奉望太后陛下颜色，然后退就沟壑，死不恨矣！ 
现代文：想到我家几代蒙受皇恩，如今要远离宫殿，心中恋恋不舍。我愿再入宫侍候一次，得以暂时见到太后，趋承颜色，然后退到沟壑，死也没有遗恨了！ 
English: Thinking of how many generations of my family have been favored by the emperor, I now want to stay away from the palace, and my heart is in love with it. I would like to enter the palace again to wait, to be able to temporarily see the empress dowager, to inherit the color, and then retreat to the ravine. Death has no hatred left!

古文：子妇言于舞阳君，入白太后，乃诏诸常侍皆复入直。
现代文：这位儿媳向母亲舞阳君说情，舞阳君又入宫向何太后说情。于是何太后下诏，让诸常侍全都重新入宫服侍。
English: The maiden said to Muyangjun, Muyangjun told the empress dowager, so the emperor ordered all the regular attendants to return to the palace.

古文：八月，戊辰，进入长乐宫，白太后，请尽诛诸常侍。
现代文：八月，戊辰，何进入长乐宫，奏告何太后，请求杀死全体中常侍。
English: In August, when Wu Chen entered the Changle Palace, he sent a report to Empress Dowager He, requesting to kill all the attendants.

古文：中常侍张让、段珪相谓曰： 大将军称疾，不临丧，不送葬，今欻入省，此意何为？
现代文：中常侍张让、段商议说： 大将军何进自称有病，不参加先帝的丧礼，不送葬到墓地去，如今突然入宫，这是什么意图？
English: Zhang Zhan and Duan deliberated and said: General He Jin claimed to be ill, did not attend the funeral of the former emperor, did not send him to the cemetery, and now suddenly entered the palace, what is the intention?

古文：窦氏事竟复起邪？ 
现代文：难道窦武事件竟要重演吗？ 
English: Is the former Dou clan making a comeback?

古文：使潜听，具闻其语。
现代文：派人去窃听何进兄妹的谈话，获知全部谈话内容。
English: He sent someone to eavesdrop on the conversation between He Jin and his brother and sister, and learned the entire conversation.

古文：乃率其党数十人持兵窃自侧闼入，伏省户下，进出，因诈以太后诏召进，入坐省阁。
现代文：于是率领自己的党羽数十人，手持武器，偷偷从侧门进去，埋伏在殿门下。等何进出来，就假传太后的旨意召他。何进入宫，坐在省。
English: So he led dozens of his followers, armed with weapons, secretly entered through a side door and lay in wait under the palace gate. When he came out, he falsely proclaimed the will of the empress dowager and summoned him. When he entered the palace, he sat in the province.

古文：让等诘进曰： 天下愦愦，亦非独我曹罪也。
现代文：于是张让等人责问何进说： 天下大乱，也不单是我们宦官的罪过。
English: So Zhang Zhan and others chided He Jin and said: The chaos in the world is not just the fault of our eunuchs.

古文：先帝尝与太后不快，几至成败，我曹涕泣救解，各出家财千万为礼，和悦上意，但欲托卿门户耳。
现代文：先帝曾经跟太后生气，几乎废黜太后，我们流着泪进行解救，各人都献出家财千万作为礼物，使先帝缓和下来，只是要托身于你的门下罢了。
English: The former emperor was once at odds with the empress dowager, and almost abandoned her. We cried for help, and each of us offered tens of millions of family wealth as a gift, and with the Emperor's blessing, we just want to rely on you, Mr. Ho.

古文：今乃欲灭我曹种族，不亦太甚乎！ 
现代文：如今你竟想把我们杀死灭族，不也太过分了吗！ 
English: Now you want to kill us and exterminate our people. Isn't that going too far?

古文：于是尚方监渠穆拔剑斩进于嘉德殿前。
现代文：于是尚方监渠穆拔出剑来，在喜德殿前杀死何进。
English: As a result, Shangfang Guanqiu had to draw his sword and cut his way into the front of the Jiade Palace.

古文：让、珪等为诏，以故太尉樊陵为司隶校尉，少府许相为河南尹。
现代文：张让、段等写下诏书，任命前太尉樊陵为司隶校尉，少府许相为河南尹。
English: Zhang Zhan, Duan Wang Gui and others issued the following edict, using the tomb of the late Taifu Gong as the sibling, and Shofu Xu Xiang as Henan Yin.

古文：尚书得诏板，疑之，曰： 请大将军出共议。 
现代文：尚书看到诏书，觉得可疑，说： 请大将军何进出来共同商议。 
English: Shang Shuxin said, "Please invite the general to come out and have a discussion."

古文：中黄门以进头掷与尚书曰： 何进谋反，已伏诛矣！ 
现代文：中黄门将何进的人头扔给尚书，说： 何进谋反，已被处死了！ 
English: In the middle of the Yellow Gate, he threw the heads of some of the rebels to Shang Shu, saying, "Those who plotted to rebel have been executed!"

古文：进部曲将吴匡、张璋在外，闻进被害，欲引兵入宫，宫门闭。
现代文：何进部下的军官吴匡、张璋在皇宫外，听到何进被杀害，打算率军入宫，但宫门已关闭。
English: When Wu Kuang and Zhang Ye, officers under He Jin, heard outside the palace that He Jin had been killed, they planned to lead an army into the palace, but the palace gates were already closed.

古文：虎贲中郎将袁术与匡共斫攻之，中黄门持兵守阁。
现代文：虎贲中郎将袁术与吴匡等共同进攻皇宫，用刀劈砍宫门，中黄门等则手持武器，防住宫门。
English: Tigress Chung Lang attacked the imperial palace together with Yuan Shu and Wu Kuang, slashing the palace gate with a sword, while Zhonghuangmen and others held weapons to defend the palace gate.

古文：会日暮，术因烧南宫青琐门，欲以胁出让等。
现代文：适逢黄昏，袁术于是纵火烧南宫的青琐门，想以此威胁宫中交出张让等人。
English: At dusk, Yuan Shou then set fire to the South Palace's Qingzo Gate, intending to use it as a threat to force the palace to hand over Zhang Zhenru and the others.

古文：让等入白太后，言大将军兵反，烧宫，攻尚书闼，因将太后、少帝及陈留王，劫省内官属，从复道走北宫。
现代文：张让等人到后宫禀告何太后，说： 大将军何进的部下谋反，纵火烧宫，并进攻尚书门。 他们裹胁着何太后、少帝、陈留王刘协，劫持宫内的其他官员从天桥阁道逃向北宫。
English: Zhang Zhan and others went to the harem to deliver an obituary notice to Empress He, saying: The subordinates of General He Jin plotted a rebellion, set fire to the palace, and attacked Shang Shumen. They threatened Empress He, the young emperor, Chen Liu Wang, and other officials in the palace, and fled from Tianqiao Pavilion Road to the North Palace.

古文：尚书卢植执戈于阁道窗下，仰数段珪；珪惧，乃释太后，太后投阁，得免。
现代文：尚书卢植手持长戈站在阁道的窗下，仰头斥责段，段惊恐害怕，于是放开何太后，何太后从窗口跳下，得以幸免。
English: Shang Shul Rü Zi stood at the window of the loft road holding a long pole. He looked up and scolded Duan, Duan was terrified and afraid, so he let go of the Empress Dowager He. The Empress Dowager jumped from the window and was spared.

古文：袁绍与叔父隗矫诏召樊陵、许相，斩之。
现代文：袁绍与他叔父袁隗假传圣旨，召来樊陵、许相，把他们处斩。
English: Yuan Shao and his uncle Yuan Shao falsely preached the holy will, summoned Huling and Xu Xiang, and executed them.

古文：绍及何苗引兵屯硃雀阙下，捕得赵忠等，斩之。
现代文：袁绍与何苗等率兵驻扎在朱誉门下，捉住赵忠等人处斩。
English: Yuan Shao and He Miao and other soldiers stationed under Zhu Rongmen captured Zhao Zhong and others and executed them.

古文：吴匡等素怨苗不与进同心，而又疑其与宦官通谋，乃令军中曰： 杀大将军者，即车骑也，吏士能为报仇乎？ 
现代文：吴匡等人一向就怨恨何苗不与何进同心，而且怀疑他与宦官有勾结，于是号令军中说： 杀死大将军的人就是车骑将军何苗，将士们能为大将军报仇吗？
English: Wu Kuang and others had always resented He Miao for not being of the same mind as He Jin, and suspected that he had colluded with the eunuch, so they called out to the army and said: The person who killed the general was the chariot and cavalry general He Miao, can the soldiers avenge the general?

古文：绍因进兵排宫，或上端门屋，以攻省内。
现代文：何进部下都流着泪说： 愿拼死为大将军报仇！ 
English: Yuan Shao marched into the palace, and some of the upper gatehouses attacked the palace.

古文：庚午，张让、段珪等困迫，遂将帝与陈留王数十人步出谷门，夜，至小平津，六玺不自随，公卿无得从者，唯尚书卢植、河南中部掾闵贡夜至河上。
现代文：于是吴匡就率兵与董卓的弟弟董旻一起攻杀何苗，把他的尸体扔在宫苑里。于是袁绍关上北宫门，派兵捉拿宦官，不论老少，一律杀死，共二千余人毙命，有人因为未长胡须而被误杀。袁绍乘势率军进攻，扫荡宫禁，有的士兵爬上端门屋，向宫内冲击。庚午，张让、段等被困宫中，无计可施，只好带着少帝、陈留王刘协等数十人步行出门。夜里，到达小平津。皇帝所用的六颗御玺没有随身带上，没有公卿跟随，只有尚书卢植、河南中部掾闵贡夜里到达黄河岸边。
English: As a result, Wu Kuang led his troops to attack and kill He Miao together with Dong Zhuo's younger brother, Dong Yao, and threw his body in the palace courtyard. So Yuan Shao closed the North Palace Gate and sent troops to capture eunuchs, both old and young, and killed them all. A total of more than two thousand people were killed, and some were mistakenly killed because they did not have long beards. Yuan Shao led his troops to attack and sweep the palace, and some soldiers climbed onto the gatehouse and stormed the palace. In the afternoon, Zhang Zhan and Duan were trapped in the palace, and there was nothing to be done, so they had

古文：贡厉声质责让等，且曰： 今不速死，吾将杀汝！ 
现代文：闵贡厉声斥责张让等人，而且说： 你们如今还不快死，我就要来杀你们！ 
English: Gongong harshly reprimanded Zhang Zhan and the others, saying, "You are not yet ready to die, so I will come and kill you!"

古文：因手剑斩数人。让等惶怖，叉手再拜，叩头向帝辞曰： 臣等死，陛下自爱！ 
现代文：于是用手中的剑砍死数名宦官，张让等又惊又怕，拱手再拜，又向少帝叩头辞别说： 我们死了，请陛下自己保重！ 
English: So he killed several eunuchs with the sword in his hand. Zhang Zhang and others were shocked and afraid, bowed their heads, and bowed to the young emperor and said: We are dead, please take care of yourself, Your Majesty!

古文：遂投河而死。
现代文：于是投河而死。
English: He fell into the river and died.

古文：贡扶帝与陈留王夜步逐萤光南行，欲还宫，行数里，得民家露车，共乘之，至雒舍止，辛未，帝独乘一马，陈留王与贡共乘一马，从雒舍南行，公卿稍有至者。
现代文：闵贡扶着少帝与陈留王刘协，在夜里追着萤火虫的微光徒步向南走，想回到宫中。
English: Shigong supported the young emperor and Chen Liu Wang Liu Xie in the night, chasing the glow of fireflies on foot to the south, wanting to return to the palace.

古文：董卓至显阳苑，远见火起，知有变，引兵急进；未明，到城西，闻帝在北，因与公卿往奉迎于北芒阪下。
现代文：走了几里地，得到百姓家一辆板车，大家一齐上车，到达洛舍歇息。辛未，找到马匹，少帝独自骑一匹，陈留王刘协和闵贡合骑一匹，从洛舍向南走，这时才逐渐有公卿赶来。董卓率军到显阳苑，远远望见起火，知道发生变故，便统军急速前进。天还没亮，来到城西，听说少帝在北边，就与大臣们一齐到北芒阪下奉迎少帝。
English: After walking for several miles, they got a flat-bed car from a commoner's home, and everyone got on the car together and arrived at Loshe for a rest. Xin Wei found horses, the young emperor rode one alone, Chen Liu Wang Liu Xie and Shigong rode one together, and walked south from Loshe. Only then did the noblemen gradually arrive. Dong Zhuo led the army to Xianyangyuan, saw the fire from a distance, and knew that something had happened, so the unified army advanced rapidly. It was not yet dawn, when they came to the west of the city, they heard that the young emperor was in the north, and they went together with the

古文：帝见卓将兵卒至，恐怖涕泣。
现代文：少帝见董卓突然率大军前来，吓得哭泣。
English: The young emperor was afraid and cried when he saw Dong Zhuo coming with his horses and chariots.

古文：群公谓卓曰： 有诏却兵。 
现代文：大臣们对董卓说： 皇帝下诏，要军队后撤。 
English: The ministers said to Dong Zhuo, "The emperor has issued an edict to withdraw the troops.

古文：卓曰： 公诸人为国大臣，不能匡正王室，至使国家播荡，何却兵之有！ 
现代文：董卓说： 你们这些人身为国家大臣，不能辅佐王室，致使皇帝在外流亡，为什么要军队后撤！ 
English: Dong Zhuo said: You people, as ministers of state, cannot assist the royal family, causing the emperor to go into exile. Why should the army retreat?

古文：卓与帝语，语不可了；乃更与陈留王语，问祸乱由起，王答，自初至终，无所遗失。
现代文：董卓上前参见少帝，少帝说起话来语无伦次。于是董卓又与陈留王刘协交谈问起事变经过，刘协一一回答，从始至终，毫无遗漏。
English: When the young emperor spoke, his words were incoherent. Therefore, Dong Zhuo talked with Chen Liu Wang and Liu Xie to ask about the incident. Liu Xie answered one by one, from beginning to end, without omission.

古文：卓大喜，以王为贤，且为董太后所养，卓自以与太后同族，遂有废立之意。
现代文：董卓十分高兴，觉得刘协贤能，而且又是由董太后养大的，他认为自己与董太后同族，于是心里有了废黜少帝，改立刘协为皇帝的念头。
English: Dong Zhuo was very happy. He felt that Liu Xie was very capable and had been raised by Empress Dowager Dong. He thought that he was a member of the same family as Empress Dowager Dong. Therefore, he had the idea of dethroning the young emperor and reinstating Liu Xie as emperor.

古文：是日，帝还宫，赦天下，改光熹为昭宁。
现代文：当天，少帝回到宫中，大赦天下，改后号将光熹元年改为昭宁元年。
English: On the same day, the young emperor returned to the palace, pardoned the whole world, and changed the post-amendment number from the first year of Guangxi to the first year of Shoning.

古文：失传国玺，馀玺皆得之。
现代文：传国御玺丢失了，皇帝六玺中的其他五玺全都找到。
English: The imperial scepter was lost, but the other five of the emperor's six scepters were all found.

古文：以丁原为执金吾。
现代文：任命丁原为执金吾。
English: Ding Yuan was appointed as the acting King.

古文：骑都尉鲍信自泰山募兵适至，说袁绍曰： 董卓拥强兵，将有异志，今不早图，必为所制；乃其新至疲劳，袭之，可禽也！ 
现代文：骑都尉鲍信到泰山郡募兵，恰到这时归来，他劝说袁绍： 董卓统率强兵，将有不轨的打算。现在不早作打算，必然会被他控制。应该乘他刚到，兵马都很疲惫，发动袭击，可以生擒董卓！ 
English: The cavalry captain Bao Xin went to Taishan County to recruit soldiers. He returned just at that time and persuaded Yuan Shao: Dong Zhuo Tong led a strong army and will have a bad plan. If you don't make a plan now, you will inevitably be controlled by him. You should take advantage of him just arrived, the soldiers and horses are very tired, launch an attack, you can kill Dong Zhuo!

古文：绍畏卓，不敢发。
现代文：袁绍畏惧董卓，不敢发动进攻。
English: Yuan Shao was afraid of Dong Zhuo and did not dare to send troops.

古文：信乃引兵还泰山。
现代文：于是鲍信率领部队返回泰山郡。
English: So Baoxin led the troops back to Taishan County.

古文：董卓之入也，步骑不过三千，自嫌兵少，恐不为远近所服，率四五日辄夜潜出军近营，明旦，乃大陈旌鼓而还，以为西兵复至，雒中无知者。
现代文：董卓到洛阳，手下只有步、骑兵三千人。嫌自己兵力单薄，担心不能使远近慑服。于是，每隔四五天，就派军队夜里悄悄出发到军营附近处，第二天早上，再严整军容，大张旗鼓地返回，让人以为西方凉州又派来了援军，而洛阳城中没有人知道他的底细。
English: Dong Zhuo arrived in Luoyang with only three thousand infantry and cavalry under his command. He was afraid that his forces were too thin, and worried that he would not be able to deter the enemy from approaching. Therefore, every four or five days, he would send troops to quietly set out in the night to the vicinity of the military camp. The next morning, he would return with great fanfare, making people think that Western Liangzhou had sent reinforcements, while no one in Luoyang knew the details about him.

古文：俄而进及递苗部曲皆归于卓，卓又阴使丁原部曲司马五原吕布杀原而并其众，卓兵于是大盛。
现代文：不久，何进与何苗的部下都投靠董卓，董卓又暗中指使丁原部下的司马、五原人吕布杀死丁原而吞并了他的部队，从此董卓兵力大增。
English: Soon, He Jin and He Miao's subordinates all sided with Dong Zhuo, and Dong Zhuo secretly ordered Ding Yuan's subordinates Sima and Wuyuan's Lv Bu to kill Ding Yuan and annex his troops. From then on, Dong Zhuo's military strength greatly increased.

古文：乃讽朝廷，以久雨，策免司空刘弘而代之。
现代文：于是他暗示朝廷，以下雨不停止为理由，让皇帝颁策罢免司空刘弘的职务，由自己接任。
English: He then hinted to the imperial court that the rain would not stop, so that the emperor would issue a decree to dismiss Siku Liuhong from his post, and he would take over.

古文：初，蔡邕徙朔方，会赦得还。
现代文：董卓大怒，骂道： 我能把蔡邕全族杀得一个不剩！ 
English: Dong Zhuo flew into a rage and cursed, "I can kill every single member of Cai Ye's entire family!

古文：五原太守王智，甫之弟也，奏蔡邕谤讪朝廷；邕遂亡命江海，积十二年，董卓闻其名而辟之，称疾不就。卓怒，詈曰： 我能族人！ 
现代文：蔡邕感到恐惧，只得接受命令。
English: Cai Qi was terrified and had to accept the order.

古文：邕惧而应命，到，署祭酒，甚见敬重，举高第，三日之间，周历三台，迁为侍中。
现代文：他到洛阳后，被任命为司空祭酒。董卓对蔡邕十分敬重，以考绩优秀为理由举荐他，使他在三日内连续升迁三次，在三个不同的官署任职，最后被任命为侍中。
English: After he arrived in Luoyang, he was appointed as the priest of the Sky Festival. Dong Zhuo respected Cai Jun very much and recommended him on the grounds of excellent performance, so that he was promoted three times in three days, served in three different government departments, and was finally appointed as an attendant.

古文：董卓谓袁绍曰： 天下之主，宜得贤明，每念灵帝，令人愤毒！董侯似可，今欲立之，为能胜史侯否？
现代文：董卓对袁绍说： 天下的君主，应该由贤明的人来担任。每当想起灵帝，就使人愤恨。 董侯 看似不错，现在我打算改立他为皇帝，不知他是否能胜过 史侯 ？
English: Dong Zhuo said to Yuan Shao: The ruler of the world should be a wise person. Whenever the spirit emperor is thought of, it makes people angry. Dong Hou seems to be good, now I plan to make him emperor, I don't know if he can beat Shi Hou?

古文：人有小智大痴，亦知复何如？
现代文：有的人小事聪明，大事糊涂，谁知道他又会怎样？
English: Some people are clever with small things and clueless with big things. Who knows what will happen to him?

古文：为当且尔。刘氏种不足复遗！ 
现代文：如果他也不行，刘氏就不值得再留种了！ 
English: If he can't, Mr. Liu isn't worth keeping!

古文：绍曰： 汉家君天下四百许年，恩泽深渥，兆民戴之。
现代文：袁绍说： 汉朝统治天下约四百年，恩德深厚，万民拥戴。
English: Yuan Shao said: The Han Dynasty ruled the world for about four hundred years. Its benevolence was profound, and it was supported by all the people.

古文：今上富于春秋，未有不善宣于天下。
现代文：如今皇上年龄尚幼，没有什么过失传布天下。
English: Now that the emperor is still young, there is no fault to spread around the world.

古文：公欲废嫡立庶，恐众不从公议也。 
现代文：您想废嫡立庶，恐怕众人不会赞同您的提议！ 
English: You want to abolish illegitimate children, I'm afraid people will not agree with your proposal!

古文：卓按剑叱绍曰： 竖子敢然！
现代文：董卓手按剑柄，呵叱袁绍说： 小子，你胆敢这样放肆！
English: Dong Zhuo put his hand on the hilt of his sword and scolded Yuan Shao, saying, "Boy, how dare you be so impudent!

古文：天下之事，岂不在我！
现代文：天下大事，难道不由我决定！
English: Isn't it up to me to decide what is important in the world?

古文：我欲为之，谁敢不从！
现代文：我要想这样做，谁敢不服从？
English: I want to do it, who dares not obey!

古文：尔谓董卓刀为不利乎！ 
现代文：你以为董卓的刀不锋利吗！ 
English: Do you think that Dong Zhuo's knife is not sharp!

古文：绍勃然曰： 天下健者，岂惟董公！ 
现代文：袁绍勃然大怒，说： 天下的英雄豪杰，难道只有你董公一个人！ 
English: Yuan Shao flew into a rage and said, "If there is a tyrant in the world, it must be you, Dong Guo!

古文：引佩刀，横揖，径出。
现代文：袁绍把佩刀横过来，向众人作了一个揖，径直而出。
English: Yuan Shao turned his saber sideways, made a sign to the crowd, and walked straight out.

古文：卓以新至，见绍大家，故不敢害。
现代文：董卓因新到洛阳，见袁绍是累代高官的大家，所以没敢害他。
English: Because Dong Zhuo was new to Luoyang, he saw that Yuan Shao was a family of successive high-ranking officials, so he did not dare to harm him.

古文：绍县节于上东门，逃奔冀州。
现代文：袁绍把司隶校尉的符节悬挂在上东门，离开洛阳逃奔冀州。
English: Yuan Shao left Luoyang and fled to Jizhou, hanging the insignia of Lieutenant Sili on the Upper East Gate.

古文：九月，癸酉，卓大会百寮，奋首而言曰： 皇帝暗弱，不可以奉宗庙，为天下主。
现代文：九月，癸酉，董卓召集文武百官，蛮横地说： 皇帝没有能力，不可以奉承宗庙，做统治天下的君主。
English: In September, Dong Zhuo gathered hundreds of civil and military officials and said arrogantly: The emperor has no ability, he cannot flatter the ancestral temple and be the ruler of the world.

古文：今欲依伊尹、霍光故事，更立陈留王，何如？ 
现代文：如今，我想依照伊尹、霍光的前例，改立陈留王为皇帝，你们觉得怎样？ 
English: Now you want to follow the old example of Yi Yin and Huo Guang and re-establish Chen Rui Wang, how about that?

古文：公卿以下皆惶恐，莫敢对。
现代文：公卿及以下官员都十分惶恐，没有人敢回答。
English: The Lord High Steward and all the officials below him were so terrified that no one dared to answer.

古文：卓又抗言曰： 昔霍光定策，延年按剑。
现代文：董卓又高声说： 从前霍光定下废立的大计后，田延年手握剑柄，准备诛杀反对的人。
English: Dong Zhuo also said in a loud voice: After the grand plan of abolishing the former Huo Guang was set, Tian Yannian held a sword handle in his hand and prepared to fight and kill the opponents.

古文：有敢沮大议，皆以军法从事！ 
现代文：现在有谁胆敢反对这项计划，都以军法从事！ 
English: Now anyone who dares to oppose this plan will be prosecuted under military law!

古文：坐者震动，尚书卢植独曰： 昔太甲既立不明，昌邑罪过千馀，故有废立之事。
现代文：在座的人无不震骇。只有尚书卢植说： 从前太甲继位后昏庸不明，昌邑王有千余条罪状，所以有废立之事发生。
English: Everyone present was shocked. Only Shangshu Lu Zhi said: In the past, after the succession of Taiga, it was unclear. King Changyi had more than a thousand criminal charges, so there was a case of abdication.

古文：今上富于春秋，行无失德，非前事之比也。 卓大怒，罢坐。
现代文：现在的皇帝年龄尚幼，行为没有过失，不能与前例相比。 董卓大怒，离座而去。
English: The current emperor is still young, and his behavior is not negligent and cannot be compared with the precedent. Dong Zhuo was furious and left the seat.

古文：将杀植，蔡邕为之请，议郎彭伯亦谏卓曰： 卢尚书海内大儒，人之望也。
现代文：他准备杀卢植，蔡邕为卢植求情，议郎彭伯也劝阻董卓，说： 卢尚书是全国有名的大儒，受人尊敬。
English: He was preparing to kill Lu Zhi, Cai Zhen pleaded for Lu Zhi, and the mediator Peng Bo also dissuaded Dong Zhuo, saying: Lu Shangshu is a famous great scholar in the country and is respected.

古文：今先害之，天下震怖。 
现代文：现在先杀了他，将使全国都陷入恐怖之中。 
English: To kill him now would plunge the whole country into terror.

古文：卓乃止，但免植官，植遂逃隐于上谷。
现代文：董卓这才停止动手，只是免去卢植的官职。于是，卢植逃到上谷郡隐居起来。
English: It was only then that Dong Zhuo stopped the attack, but only by removing Lu Zhi from his official position. Lu Zhi then fled to Shanggu County to live in seclusion.

古文：卓以废立议示太傅袁隗，隗报如议。
现代文：董卓派人把废立皇帝的计划送到太傅袁隗看，袁隗回报同意。
English: Dong Zhuo sent someone to show the plan to depose the emperor to Yuan Shao, and Yuan Shao agreed in return.

古文：甲戌，卓复会群僚于崇德前殿，遂胁太后策废少帝，曰： 皇帝在丧，无人子之心，威仪不类人君，今废为弘农王，立陈留王协为帝。 
现代文：九月甲戌，董卓又在崇德前殿召集百官，威胁何太后下诏废黜少帝刘辩，诏书说： 皇帝为先帝守丧期间，没有尽到作儿子的孝心，而且仪表缺乏君王应有的威严。如今，废他为弘农王，立陈留王为皇帝。 
English: At the end of September, Dong Zhuo gathered hundreds of officials in the front hall of Chongde and threatened the Empress Dowager He with a decree to depose the young emperor Liu Bei. The decree said: The emperor did not fulfill his filial duty as a son during the funeral of the former emperor, and his appearance lacked the majesty that a monarch should have. Today, he was deposed as the king of Hongnong and Chen Liu Wang was appointed as the emperor.

古文：袁隗解帝玺绶，以奉陈留王，扶弘农王下殿，北面称臣。
现代文：袁隗把少帝刘辩身上佩带的玺绶解下来，进奉给陈留王刘协。然后扶弘农王刘辩下殿，向坐在北面的刘协称臣。
English: Yuan Xuan took off the cassock worn by the young emperor Liu Bei and presented it to the Chenliu king Liu Xie. He then sent Liu Xie to the palace of the peasant king Liu Bei and praised him to Liu Xie, who was sitting to the north.

古文：太后鲠涕，群臣含悲，莫敢言者。
现代文：何太后哽咽流涕，群臣都心中悲伤，但没有一个人敢说话。
English: The empress dowager was choking, and the courtiers were sad, but no one dared to speak.

古文：卓又议： 太后踧迫永乐宫，至令忧死，逆妇姑之礼。 
现代文：董卓又提出： 何太后曾经逼迫婆母董太皇太后，使她忧虑而死，违背了儿媳孝敬婆母的礼制。 
English: Dong Zhuo also said: Why did the empress dowager force her mother-in-law, Empress Dowager Dong, to die of anxiety, violating the etiquette of filial piety for daughters-in-law.

古文：乃迁太后于永安宫。
现代文：于是，把何太后迁到永安宫。
English: As a result, the Empress Dowager He was moved to Yongan Palace.

古文：赦天下，改昭宁为永汉。
现代文：大赦天下，把年号昭宁改为永汉。
English: He amnestied the whole country and changed the era name from Shonin to Yonghan.

古文：丙子，卓鸩杀何太后，公卿以下不布服，会葬，素衣而已。
现代文：丙子，董卓用毒药害死何太后。公卿及以下官员不穿丧服，在参加丧礼时，只穿白衣而已。
English: Dong Zhuo used poison to kill the Empress Dowager He. Court nobles and lower-ranking officials did not wear mourning clothes, but only wore white clothes when attending the funeral.

古文：卓又发何苗棺，出其尸，支解节断，弃于道边，杀苗母舞阳君，弃尸于苑枳落中。
现代文：董卓又把何苗的棺木掘出来，取出尸体，肢解后砍为节段，扔在道边。还杀死何苗的母亲舞阳君，把尸体扔在御树篱墙的枳苑中。
English: Dong Zhuo also dug out He Miao's coffin, took out the body, dismembered it, cut it into sections, and threw it on the roadside. He also killed He Miao's mother, Mai Yangjun, and threw the body in the gourd garden of the imperial hedge wall.

古文：诏除公卿以下子弟为郎，以补宦官之职，侍于殿上。
现代文：下诏，任命朝中公卿及以下官员的子弟为郎官，以填补原来由宦官担任的职务，在宫殿侍侯皇帝。
English: He issued an edict to appoint the sons of court nobles and other officials as retainers to fill the positions previously held by eunuchs, and to serve the emperor in the palace.

古文：乙酉，以太尉刘虞为大司马，封襄贲侯。
现代文：乙酉，任命太尉刘虞为大司马，封襄贲侯。
English: Yixuan, appointed Lieutenant Liu Yu as the chief steward, and appointed Xiang Yu as the marquis.

古文：董卓自为太尉，领前将军事，加节传、斧钺、虎贲，更封郿侯。
现代文：董卓自己担任太尉，兼前将军，并加赐代表皇帝权力的符节，以及作为仪仗的斧钺和虎贲卫士，进封为侯。
English: Dong Zhuo himself served as a captain and a former general, and added the symbols of power on behalf of the emperor, as well as the axe and vise guards as a ceremonial battle, and was knighted.

古文：丙戌，以太中大夫杨彪为司空。
现代文：丙戌，任命太中大夫杨彪为司空。
English: He appointed Yang Biao, the First Vice-Admiral of the Chinese Navy, as the Vice-Admiral.

古文：甲午，以豫州牧黄琬为司徒。
现代文：甲午，任命豫州牧黄琬为司徒。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, he appointed Yu Zhou Mu Huangqi as his disciple.

古文：董卓率诸公上书，追理陈蕃、窦武及诸党人，悉复其爵位，遣使吊祠，擢用其子孙。
现代文：董卓率领三公等大臣上书，请求重新审理陈蕃、窦武以及党人的案件，一律恢复爵位，派使者去祭悼他们的坟墓，并擢用他们的子孙为官。
English: Dong Zhuo led the three public ministers to submit a letter, requesting the re-trial of the cases of Chen Xi, Dou Wu and the party members, the restoration of their peerage, the sending of envoys to mourn their graves, and the promotion of their children and grandchildren to official positions.

古文：自六月雨至于是月。
现代文：自六月到九月，大雨连绵不断。
English: From June to September it is rainy and cloudy.

古文：冬，十月，乙巳，葬灵思皇后。
现代文：冬季，十月，乙巳，安葬何太后。
English: In winter, in October, on the first day of the second lunar month, Empress Dowager He was buried.

古文：白波贼寇河东，董卓遣其将牛辅击之。
现代文：白波叛军进攻河东郡，董卓派部下将领牛辅率军讨伐。
English: Bai Bo's bandits raided the eastern part of the river, and Dong Zhuo sent him to attack Niu Fu.

古文：初，南单于于扶罗既立，国人杀其父者遂叛，共立须卜骨都侯为单于。
现代文：当初，南匈奴单于於扶罗继位后，谋杀他父亲的南匈奴人于是叛变，共同拥立须卜骨都侯为单于。
English: At first, after the Southern Huns succeeded to the throne, the Southern Huns, who had murdered his father, rebelled and jointly supported the Suibok capital of the Southern Huns.

古文：于扶罗指阙自讼。
现代文：於扶罗到洛阳向朝廷控告他们。
English: He went to Luoyang to complain to the imperial court.

古文：会灵帝崩，天下大乱，于扶罗将数千骑与白波贼合兵寇郡县。
现代文：正赶上灵帝驾崩，天下大乱，於扶罗便率领数千骑兵联合白波叛军共同攻击郡、县。
English: Just in time for the death of Emperor Ling, the world was in turmoil, and he led thousands of cavalrymen to join the Baiwa rebels in attacking counties and counties.

古文：时民皆保聚，钞掠无利，而兵遂挫伤。
现代文：当时百姓都聚集在坞堡里自守，於扶罗没有抢掠到什么东西，自己的部队却有不少伤亡。
English: At that time, the people gathered in the dockyard fort to defend themselves. They did not loot anything in Guro, but there were many casualties among their own troops.

古文：复欲归国，国人不受，乃止河东平阳。
现代文：他想再回到自己的领地去，但南匈奴人不接纳他，他便停留在河东郡的平阳县。
English: He wanted to go back to his own territory, but the Southern Huns did not accept him, so he stayed in Pingyang County, Hedong County.

古文：须卜骨都侯为单于一年而死，南庭遂虚其位，以老王行国事。
现代文：须卜骨都侯做了一年单于后就去世了，南匈奴于是空下王位，而由须卜骨都侯的父亲代行单于职权。
English: Subotsu died a year later, leaving the position vacant and the elderly prince in charge of domestic affairs.

古文：十一月，以董卓为相国，赞拜不名，入朝不趋，剑履上殿。
现代文：十一月，任命董卓为相国。允许他在参拜皇帝时不唱名，上朝不趋行，佩剑穿鞋上殿。
English: In November, he appointed Dong Zhuo as his consort. He was allowed not to chant his name when visiting the emperor, not to go to the imperial court, and to wear a sword and shoes when entering the palace.

古文：十二月，戊戌，以司徒黄琬为太尉，司空杨彪为司徒，光禄勋荀爽为司空。
现代文：十二月，戊戌，任命司徒黄琬为太尉，司空杨彪为司徒，光禄勋荀爽为司空。
English: In December, Emperor Wu appointed the scholar Huang Qi as the first lieutenant, the scholar Yang Biao as the scholar, and the scholar Guanglu Xun as the scholar.

古文：初，尚书武威周毖、城门校尉汝南伍琼，说董卓矫桓、灵之政，擢用天下名士以收众望，卓从之，命毖、琼与尚书郑泰、长史何颙等沙汰秽恶，显拔幽滞。
现代文：起初，尚书、武威人周毖，城门校尉、汝南人伍琼劝说董卓矫正桓帝、灵帝时的弊政，征召天下有名望的士人，以争取民心。董卓采纳了这个建议，命令周毖、伍琼与尚书郑泰、长史何等淘汰贪脏枉法与不称职的官员，选拔被压抑的人才。
English: At first, Shang Shu, the powerful warrior Zhou Qi, the captain of the city gate, and the South Korean Wu Qiong persuaded Dong Zhuo to correct the maladministration of Emperor Huan and Emperor Ling, and to recruit world-renowned scholars to win the hearts of the people. Dong Zhuo accepted this suggestion and ordered Zhou Shu, Wu Qiong, and Shang Shu Zheng Tai and Chang Shi to eliminate corrupt and incompetent officials and select suppressed talents.

古文：于是征处士荀爽、陈纪、韩融、申屠蟠。
现代文：于是，征召未作过官的士人荀爽、陈纪、韩融、申屠蟠入朝任职。
English: As a result, officials who had never served in government, such as Gao Shuang, Chen Ji, Han Rong, and Shen Tuo, were conscripted to serve in the imperial court.

古文：复就拜爽平原相，行至宛陵，迁光禄勋，视事三日，进拜司空。
现代文：又派使者到荀爽家乡去任命他为平原国相，荀爽赴任途中走到宛陵，又被任命为光禄勋。荀爽到任办公三天，又升任司空。
English: He also sent an envoy to Gao Shuang's hometown to appoint him as the Minister of the Plains. On his way to the post, Gao Shuang went to Wanling, and was also appointed as a Guanglu Hon. Gao Shuang arrived at the office for three days, and was promoted to the Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：自被征命及登台司，凡九十三日。
现代文：从他被征召，到升任三公，一共九十三天。
English: From the time he was conscripted to the time he was promoted to San Gong, a total of ninety-three days passed.

古文：又以纪为五官中郎将，融为大鸿胪。纪，寔之子；融，韶之子也。
现代文：又任命陈纪为五官中郎将，韩融为大鸿胪，陈纪是陈的儿子，韩融是韩韶的儿子。
English: He also appointed Chen Ji as the general of the five departments, and Han Rong as the great general. Chen Ji is the son of Chen, and Han Rong is the son of Han Yu.

古文：爽等皆畏卓之暴，无敢不至。
现代文：荀爽等人都害怕董卓的残暴，被征召就不敢不来。
English: Hao Shuang and others were afraid of Dong Zhuo's brutality, and they did not dare not to come if they were conscripted.

古文：独申屠蟠得征书，人劝之行，蟠笑而不答，卓终不能屈，年七十馀，以寿终。
现代文：只有申屠蟠接到被征召的命令后没有动身，别人都劝他前往，他笑而不答。董卓到底没能勉强他作官，他活到七十余岁，在家寿终正寝。
English: Only Shen Tuoqi did not leave after receiving the order to be conscripted, others advised him to go, he laughed and did not answer. Dong Zhuo did not manage to force him to be an official, he lived to be more than seventy years old, and died at home.

古文：卓又以尚书韩馥为冀州牧，侍中刘岱为兗州刺史，陈留孔伷为豫州刺史，东平张邈为陈留太守，颍川张咨为南阳太守。
现代文：董卓又任命尚书韩为冀州牧，侍中刘岱为兖州刺史，陈留人孔为豫州刺史，东平人张邈为陈留太守，颖川人张咨为南阳太守。
English: Dong Zhuo also appointed Shang Shuhan as the governor of Jizhou, Liu Jie as the governor of Zhangzhou, Chen Ruzhen Kong as the governor of Yuzhou, Dongping Zhang Jie as the governor of Chen Ruzhen, and Yingchuan Zhang Zhe as the governor of Nanyang.

古文：卓所亲爱，并不处显职，但将校而已。
现代文：董卓自己的亲信都没有担任高官，只是在军队中担任中郎将、校尉一类的职务。
English: Dong Zhuo's cronies are not in prominent positions, they are just officers.

古文：诏除光熹、昭宁、永汉三号。
现代文：下诏废除光熹、昭宁、永汉三个年号，仍称本年为中平六年。
English: The following edict abolished the names of the three years of Guangyao, Zhaoning and Yonghan, and still said that this year was the sixth year of the Middle Kingdom.

古文：董卓性残忍，一旦专政，据有国家甲兵、珍宝，威震天下，所愿无极，语宾客曰： 我相，贵无上也！ 
现代文：董卓性情残忍，一旦控制朝政大权，全国武装力量和国库中的珍宝等全由他掌握，威震天下，欲望没有止境。他对门下的宾客说： 我的相貌，是尊贵无上的！ 
English: Dong Zhuo had a cruel nature. Once he gained control of the supreme political power, the national armed forces and the treasures in the national treasury were all in his hands. He held sway over the world, and his desires knew no bounds. He said to the guests at his door: My appearance is the height of dignity!

古文：侍御史扰龙宗诣卓白事，不解剑，立挝杀之。
现代文：侍御史扰龙宗晋见董卓汇报事情，没有解下佩剑，立刻就被打死。
English: The attendant, Shih Xuan Long Zong Jin, saw Dong Zhuo to report the matter, but he did not take off his sword and was immediately killed.

古文：是时，洛中贵戚，室第相望，金帛财产，家家充积，卓纵放兵士，突其庐舍，剽虏资物，妻略妇女，不避贵贱。
现代文：当时，洛阳城内的皇亲国戚很多，宅第相望，家家都堆满了金银财宝。董卓放纵部下的士兵冲入他们的内宅，强夺财物，奸淫掳略妇女不回避皇亲国威。
English: At that time, there were many imperial relatives and relatives of the country in Luoyang City, and they looked at each other's homes, and their homes were full of gold, silver and treasure. Dong Zhuo indulged the soldiers of his subordinates to rush into their homes, forcibly seize property, rape and kidnap women, and did not avoid the imperial relatives and national prestige.

古文：人情崩恐，不保朝夕。
现代文：致使人心惶恐，朝不保夕。
English: Causing people's hearts to tremble and making them feel unsafe.

古文：卓购求袁绍急，周毖、伍琼说卓曰： 夫废立大事，非常人所及。
现代文：董卓悬赏捉拿袁绍，催逼急迫。周毖、伍琼对董卓说： 废立皇帝这种大事，不是平常人所能明白的。
English: Zhou Yu and Wu Qiong said to Dong Zhuo, "Such a big event as the dethronement of the emperor is not something that ordinary people can understand.

古文：袁绍不达大体，恐惧出奔，非有它志。
现代文：袁绍不识大体，得罪了您以后，心里害怕而出奔，并没有别的想法。
English: Yuan Shao does not understand the overall situation, fear of fleeing, and does not have other ideas.

古文：今急购之，势必为变。
现代文：如今急着悬赏捉拿他，势必会使他反叛。
English: Now the rush to offer a reward for him is bound to cause a sudden turn of events.

古文：袁氏树恩四世，门生故吏遍于天下，若收豪杰以聚徒众，英雄因之而起，则山东非公之有也。
现代文：袁氏家族连续四世建立恩德，门生、故吏遍布天下，假若袁绍收罗豪杰以聚集徒众，其他的豪杰便会乘机起事，那样的话崤山以东地区就不归您所有了。
English: The four generations of the Yuan family have been generous with their favors, and their disciples and former subordinates are all over the world. Once you have collected heroes, gathered soldiers, and heroes have arisen, I am afraid that Taihang Shandong will not belong to you.

古文：不如赦之，拜一郡守，绍喜于免罪，必无患矣。 
现代文：不如赦免袁绍，任命他为一个郡的太守，他因赦免而感到高兴，就必定不会再有后患。 
English: It would be better to pardon Yuan Shao and make him a county magistrate. Yuan Shao would be happy to be absolved of criminal responsibility, and there would be no disaster.

古文：卓以为然，乃即拜绍勃海太守，封邟乡侯。
现代文：董卓认为有理，于是派使臣去任命袁绍为勃海太守，封乡侯。
English: Dong Zhuo thought it was reasonable, so he sent an envoy to appoint Yuan Shao as the governor of Bohai, and named him the mayor of the town.

古文：又以袁术为后将军，曹操为骁骑校尉。
现代文：又任命袁术为后将军，曹操为骁骑校尉。
English: He also appointed Yuan Shou as Rear Admiral and Cao Cao as Lieutenant of the Horse Cavalry.

古文：术畏卓，出奔南阳。
现代文：袁术害怕董卓，出奔南阳。
English: Yuan Shuxu was afraid of Dong Zhuo and fled to Nanyang.

古文：操变易姓名，间行东归，过中牟，为亭长所疑，执诣县。
现代文：曹操改名换姓，从小路向东逃回家乡，经过中牟县时，亭长疑心他来历不明，促起来送到县里。
English: Cao Cao changed his name and fled to his hometown from a small road to the east. When he passed through Zhongmou County, the warden suspected that his origin was unknown and sent him to the county.

古文：时县已被卓书，唯功曹心知是操，以世方乱，不宜拘天下雄俊，因白令释之。
现代文：当时县里已收到董卓下令缉捕曹操的公文，只有功曹心里知道他是曹操，认为天下正乱，不应该拘捕英雄豪杰，就向县令建议，把曹操释放。
English: At that time, the county had already received the official document from Dong Zhuo ordering the arrest of Cao Cao. Only Gong Cao knew in his heart that he was Cao Cao. He thought that the world was in turmoil and that the heroic hero should not be arrested, so he proposed to the county magistrate to release Cao Cao.

古文：操至陈留，散家财，合兵得五千人。
现代文：曹操回到陈留郡，把家产出卖，集结起五千人的部队。
English: Cao Cao returned to Chenliu County, sold his family's produce, and gathered 5,000 troops.

古文：是时，豪杰多欲起兵讨卓者，袁绍在勃海，冀州牧韩馥遣数部从事守之，不得动摇。
现代文：这时候，天下的豪杰之士多准备起兵讨伐董卓。袁绍在勃海郡，冀州牧韩派了几个部从事来监视他，使他无法起兵。
English: At this time, most of the world's heroes were preparing to raise an army to fight against Dong Zhuo. Yuan Shao in Bohai County, Jizhou Province sent several departments to monitor him, so that he could not raise an army.

古文：东郡太守桥瑁，诈作京师三公移书与州郡，陈卓罪恶，云： 见逼迫，无以自救，企望义兵，解国患难。 
现代文：东郡太守桥瑁伪造了一份京城中三公给各州、郡的文书，陈述董卓的种种罪恶，说： 我们受到逼迫，无法自救，盼望各地兴起义兵，解除国家的大难。 
English: Dong County Tai Shou Qiaojuan forged a document from the three princes of Beijing Middle School to the states and counties, stating the various evils of Dong Zhuo, saying: We are persecuted, unable to save ourselves, and hope that volunteers will arise from all over the country to relieve the country's great difficulties.

古文：馥得移，请诸从事问曰： 今当助袁氏邪，助董氏邪？ 
现代文：韩得到这份文书，请属下的从事们来商议，向他们说： 如今应当帮助袁绍呢，还是帮助董卓呢？ 
English: When Han received this document, he asked his subordinates to discuss it and said to them: Should we help Yuan Shao now, or should we help Dong Zhuo?

古文：治中从事刘子惠曰： 今兴兵为国，何谓袁、董！ 
现代文：治中从事刘子惠说： 如今起兵是为了国家，怎么谈到袁绍、董卓！ 
English: Liu Zihui, who is engaged in the mid-term governance, said: Today, the military is for the country, how can we talk about Yuan Shao and Dong Zhuo!

古文：馥有惭色。
现代文：韩面有惭愧之色。
English: Korean noodles are the color of shame.

古文：子惠复言： 兵者凶事，不可为首。
现代文：刘子惠又说： 起兵是很凶险的事情，不能抢先发动。
English: Liu Zihui also said: Drafting soldiers is a very dangerous thing, and it cannot be started ahead of time.

古文：今宜往视他州，有发动者，然后和之。
现代文：现在应派人去看其他各州，有人发动，我们然后再响应。
English: Now it's time to send someone to look at the other states, someone to launch, and then we'll respond.

古文：冀州于他州不为弱也，他人功未有在冀州之右者也。 
现代文：冀州的势力不比其他州弱，别人的功劳不会在冀州之上。 
English: The power of Jizhou is not weaker than that of other states, and the merit of others will not be superior to Jizhou.

古文：馥然之。馥乃作书与绍，道卓之恶，听其举兵。
现代文：韩认为有理，于是写信给袁绍，讲述董卓的罪恶，对他起兵表示赞同。
English: Han thought it was reasonable, so he wrote a letter to Yuan Shao, telling him about Dong Zhuo's crimes and expressing his approval for him to raise an army.

古文：孝献皇帝甲
现代文：孝献皇帝甲
English: Filial piety to Emperor A

古文：孝灵皇帝下初平元年
现代文：汉献帝初平元年
English: Emperor Han Xian in the first year of the Heian period

古文：春，正月，关东州郡皆起兵以讨董卓，推渤海太守袁绍为盟主。
现代文：春季，正月，函谷关以东的各州、郡全都起兵讨伐董卓，推举勃海太守袁绍为盟主。
English: In the spring and the first month of the year, all the states and counties east of the Hangeul Pass raised an army to fight against Dong Zhuo, and elected Yuan Shao, the governor of the Bohai Sea, as their leader.

古文：绍自号车骑将军，诸将皆板授官号。
现代文：袁绍自称车骑将军，诸将全都被临时授予官号。
English: Yuan Shao claimed to be a chariot and cavalry general, and all generals were temporarily given official titles.

古文：绍与河内太守王匡屯河内，冀州牧韩馥留鄴，给其军粮，豫州刺史孔伷屯颍川，兗州刺史刘岱、陈留太守张邈、邈弟广陵太守超、东郡太守桥瑁、山阳太守袁遗、济北相鲍信与曹操俱屯酸枣，后将军袁术屯鲁阳，众名数万。
现代文：袁绍与河内郡太守王匡驻军河内、冀州牧韩留守邺城，供应军粮。豫州刺史孔驻军颖川，兖州刺史刘岱、陈留郡太守张邈、张邈的弟弟广陵郡太守张超、东郡太守桥瑁、山阳郡太守袁遗、济北国相鲍信和曹操都驻军酸枣，后将军袁术驻军鲁阳。各路军马都有数万人。
English: Yuan Shao and the governor of Hanoi County, Wang Kuang, were stationed in Hanoi, and the governor of Jizhou Province, Mu Han, was stationed in Fucheng to supply military supplies. The governor of Henan Province, Zhishikong, was stationed in Yingchuan, the governor of Ganzhou Province, Liu Hui, the governor of Chenliu County, Zhang Hui, Zhang Hui's brother, the governor of Guangling County, Zhang Chao, the governor of Dong County, Qiao Hui, the governor of Shanyang County, Yuan Yue, the minister of North Jeolla Province, Bao Xin, and Cao Cao were stationed in Juj

古文：豪杰多归心袁绍者，鲍信独谓曹操曰： 夫略不世出，能拨乱反正者，君也。
现代文：各路豪杰多拥戴袁绍，只有鲍信对曹操说： 现在谋略超群，能拨乱反正的人，就是阁下了。
English: The heroes of all walks of life mostly supported Yuan Shao, only Bao Xin said to Cao Cao: Now, the person who has the best strategy and can stir up trouble is your excellency.

古文：苟非其人，虽强必毙。
现代文：假如不是这种人才，尽管强大，却必将失败。
English: If it were not for this kind of talent, despite being strong, it would certainly fail.

古文：君殆天之所启乎！ 
现代文：您恐怕是上天所派来的吧！ 
English: I'm afraid you've been sent from heaven!

古文：辛亥，赦天下。
现代文：辛亥，大赦天下。
English: Xinhai, amnesty to the world.

古文：癸酉，董卓使郎中令李儒鸩杀弘农王辩。
现代文：癸酉，董卓派郎中令李儒用毒酒杀死了弘农王刘辩。
English: Later, Dong Zhuo sent his henchman Li Ru to kill the King of Hongnong, Liu Fen, with poisoned wine.

古文：卓议大发兵以讨山东。
现代文：董卓准备大规模发兵去讨伐崤山以东地区。
English: Dong Zhuo is preparing to send a large-scale army to fight the area east of Lushan.

古文：尚书郑泰曰： 夫政在德，不在众也。 
现代文：尚书郑泰说： 为政在于德，而不在于兵多。 
English: Shangshu Zheng Tai said: The success of politics lies in virtue, not in the number of soldiers.

古文：卓不悦曰： 如卿此言，兵为无用邪！ 
现代文：董卓很不高兴地说： 照你这么讲，军队就没有用吗？ 
English: Dong Zhuo said with displeasure: According to you, the army is useless?

古文：泰曰： 非谓其然也，以为山东不足加大兵耳。
现代文：郑泰说： 我不是那个意思，而是认为崤山以东不值得出动大军讨伐。
English: Zheng Tai said: I don't mean that, but I think that it is not worth dispatching a large army to the east of Lushan.

古文：明公出自西州，少为将帅，闲习军事。
现代文：您在西州崛起，年轻时就出任将帅，熟飞军事。
English: You have risen in Xizhou, served as a general when you were young, and are familiar with military affairs.

古文：袁本初公卿子弟，生处京师，张孟卓东平长者，坐不窥堂，孔公绪清谈高论，嘘枯吹生。并无军旅之才，临锋决敌，非公之俦也。
现代文：而袁绍是个公卿子弟，生长在京城；张邈是东平郡的忠厚长者，坐在堂上，眼睛都不会东张西望；孔中会高谈阔论，褒贬是非；这些人全无军事才能，临阵交锋，决不是您的对手。
English: But Yuan Shao was the son of a nobleman and grew up in Beijing; Zhang Ye was a loyal elder from Dongping County. When he sat in the hall, his eyes would not look east or west; Kong Zhong would talk at length, praising and criticizing; these people had no military talent at all and would never be your opponent in a face-to-face confrontation.

古文：况王爵不加，尊卑无序，若恃众怙力，将各棋峙以观成败，不肯同心共胆，与齐进退也。
现代文：何况他们的官职都是自己封的，未得朝廷任命，尊卑没有次序。如果倚仗兵多势强来对阵，这些人将各自保存实力，以观成败，不肯同心合力，共进共退。
English: What's more, all of them were appointed to their official posts by themselves, without being appointed by the imperial court, and there was no order of rank. If they had to fight against more powerful soldiers, these people would each preserve their strength, view success and failure from a different perspective, and refuse to work together as one, advancing and retreating together.

古文：且山东承平日久，民不习战；关西顷遭羌寇，妇女皆能挟弓而斗，天下所畏者，无若并、凉之人与羌、胡义从；而明公拥之以为爪牙，譬犹驱虎兕以赴犬羊，鼓烈风以扫枯叶，谁敢御之！
现代文：而且崤山以东地区太平的时间已很长，百姓不熟悉作战，函谷关以西地区新近受过羌人的攻击，连妇女都能弯弓作战。无下人的畏惧，没有像对并州、凉州的军队作为爪牙，作起战来，犹如驱赶老虎猛兽去捕捉狗羊，鼓起强风去扫除枯叶，谁能抵抗！
English: Moreover, the time of peace in the area east of Lushan has been very long, and the people are not familiar with war. The area west of Hankow Pass has recently been attacked by the barbarians, and even women can bend their bows to fight. There is no fear of inferior people, and there is no army of the annexed states and Liangzhou as minions to fight, like driving tigers and ferocious beasts to catch dogs and sheep, and stirring up strong winds to sweep away dead leaves. Who can resist!

古文：无事征兵以惊天下，使患役之民相聚为非，弃德恃众，自亏威重也。 
现代文：无事征兵会惊动天下，使得怕服兵役的人聚集作乱。放弃德政，而动用军队，是损害自己的威望。 
English: If nothing happens, conscription will alarm the world, causing people who are afraid of military service to gather and cause trouble. Abandoning German politics and using the army is damaging to one's own prestige.

古文：卓乃悦。
现代文：董卓这才高兴。
English: This made Dong Zhuo happy.

古文：董卓以山东兵盛，欲迁都以避之，公卿皆不欲而莫敢言。
现代文：董卓认为崤山以东的军事联盟声势浩大，打算把京都由洛阳迁到长安进行躲避。公卿都不愿意，但没有敢说。
English: Dong Zhuo thought that the military alliance to the east of Lushan was very powerful, and planned to move Kyoto from Luoyang to Chang'an to avoid it. The nobles were reluctant, but did not dare to speak out.

古文：卓表河南尹硃俊为太仆以为己副，使者召拜，俊辞，不肯受，因曰： 国家西迁，必孤天下之望，以成山东之衅，臣不知其可也。 
现代文：董卓上表推荐河南尹朱俊为太仆，作为自己的副手，派使者去召朱俊接受任命。朱俊拒不接受，对使者说： 把京都向西迁徒，必然会使天下失望，反而给崤山以东的联军造成了机会，我认为不应该这样作。 
English: The Dong table recommended Yin Zhujun from Henan Province to be the eunuch, as his deputy, and sent an envoy to summon Zhu Jun to accept the appointment. Zhu Jun refused to accept, saying to the envoy: Moving Kyoto to the west will inevitably disappoint the world, but it has created an opportunity for the allied forces east of Shaoshan. I think this should not be done.

古文：使者曰： 召君受拜而君拒之，不问徙事而君陈之，何也？ 
现代文：使者说： 召您接受太仆的任命，而您拒绝了，没有问起迁都的事情，您却说了许多，这是为什么？ 
English: The messenger said: I called you to accept the appointment of a maid of honor, but you refused, you did not ask about the transfer of the capital, but you said a lot, why is that?

古文：俊曰： 副相国，非臣所堪也；迁都非计，事所急也。
现代文：朱俊说： 作为相国的副手，是我所不能承担的重任；而迁都是失策，又很急迫。
English: Zhu Jun said: As the vice-chairman of the partner country, it is a heavy task that I cannot undertake; and the relocation is both a misstep and very urgent.

古文：辞所不堪，言其所急，臣之宜也。 
现代文：我拒绝无力承担的重任，说出认为是当务之急的事情，正是作臣子的本分。 
English: It is my duty as a vassal to refuse a heavy task that I cannot undertake, and to state what I consider to be an urgent matter.

古文：由是止不为副。
现代文：因此，董卓不再勉强朱俊作自己的副手。
English: Therefore, Dong Zhuo no longer forced Zhu Jun to be his deputy.

古文：卓大会公卿议，曰： 高祖都关中，十有一世，光武宫雒阳，于今亦十一世矣。
现代文：董卓召集公卿商议迁都，说： 高祖建都关中，共历十一世；光武帝建都洛阳，到现在也是十一世了。
English: Dong Zhuo convened the court nobles to discuss the relocation of the capital, saying: Gao Zu built Guanzhong, and he was the 11th generation; Guangwu Emperor built Luoyang, and now he is the 11th generation.

古文：案《石包谶》，宜徙都长安，以应天人之意。 
现代文：按照《石包谶》的说法，应该迁都长安，以上应天意，下顺民心。 
English: According to the saying of "Shi Baoqi," the capital should be moved to Chang'an, and the above should be in accordance with the will of heaven and the will of the people.

古文：百官皆默然。
现代文：百官都默不作声。
English: All the officials were silent.

古文：司徒杨彪曰： 移都改制，天下大事，故盘庚迁亳，殷民胥怨。
现代文：司徒杨彪说： 迁都改制，是天下大事。殷代盘庚迁都毫邑，就引起殷民的怨恨。
English: Yang Biao, a scholar, said: "The relocation of the capital and the reform of the system is a major event in the world. In the Yin Dynasty, the relocation of the capital to a small town caused resentment among the Yin people.

古文：昔关中遭王莽残破，故光武更都雒邑，历年已久，百姓安乐。
现代文：从前关中地区遭到王莽的破坏，所以光武帝改在洛阳建都，历时已久，百姓安乐。
English: In the past, Guanzhong area was destroyed by Wang Mang, so Emperor Guangwu built the capital in Luoyang, which lasted for a long time, and the people were happy.

古文：今无故捐宗庙，弃园陵，恐百姓惊动，必有糜沸之乱。
现代文：现在无缘无故地抛弃皇家宗庙与先帝的陵园，恐怕会惊动百姓，定将导致大乱。
English: Abandoning the royal ancestral temple and the former emperor's mausoleum now without any reason is likely to alarm the people and will surely lead to chaos.

古文：《石包谶》，妖邪之书，岂可信用！ 
现代文：《石包谶》是一本专谈妖邪的书，怎么能相信使用！ 
English: "Shek Bao Yao" is a book about evil spirits, how can you believe in it!

古文：卓曰： 关中肥饶，故秦得并吞六国。
现代文：董卓说： 关中土地肥饶，所以泰国能吞并六国，统一天下。
English: Dong Zhuo said: Guanzhong's land is fertile, so Thailand can annex six countries and unify them.

古文：且陇石材木自出，杜陵有武帝陶灶，并功营之，可使一朝而办。
现代文：而且陇右地区出产木材，杜陵在武帝留下的烧制陶器的窑灶，全力经营，很快就能安顿好。
English: Moreover, Shanzhu area produces wood, and the kiln for firing pottery left by Du Ling in Wudi is fully operational and will soon be settled.

古文：百姓何足与议！若有前却，我以大兵驱之，可令诣沧海。 
现代文：跟百姓怎么值得商量，如果他们在前面反对，我以大军在后驱赶，可以让他们直赴沧海。 
English: It is not worth discussing with the people. If they object in front, I will drive them back with a large army, and they can go straight to the sea of vicissitudes.

古文：彪曰： 天下动之至易，安之甚难，惟明公虑焉！ 
现代文：杨彪说： 动天下是很容易的，但再安天下就很困难了，愿您考虑！ 
English: Yang Biao said: It is easy to move the world, but it is very difficult to make the world safe again. I hope you will consider it!

古文：卓作色曰： 公欲沮国计邪！ 
现代文：董卓变脸说： 你要阻挠国家大计吗？ 
English: Dong Zhuo changed his face and said: Do you want to obstruct the national plan?

古文：太尉黄琬曰： 此国之大事，杨公之言得无可思？ 
现代文：太尉黄琬说： 这是国家大事，杨公所说的，恐怕是可以考虑的。 
English: Captain Huang Qi said: This is a national event, and what Yang Gong said can probably be considered.

古文：卓不答。
现代文：董卓不答话。
English: Dong Zhuo did not answer.

古文：司空荀爽见卓意壮，恐害彪等，因从容言曰： 相国岂乐此邪！
现代文：司空荀爽看见董卓已很生气，恐怕他要伤害杨彪等人，于是和缓地说： 难道相国是乐于这样做吗！
English: Seeing that Dong Zhuo was already very angry, he feared that he would hurt Yang Biao and the others, so he said gently: "Is our country willing to do this?"

古文：山东兵起，非一日可禁，故当迁以图之，此秦、汉之势也。 
现代文：崤山以东起兵，不是一天可以平定的，所以要先迁都，以对付他们。
English: The troops raised east of Lushan could not be subdued in a day, so the capital had to be moved first to deal with them.

古文：卓意小解。
现代文：这正与秦朝和汉初的情况相同。 
English: This is exactly the same as the situation in the Qin Dynasty and the early Han Dynasty.

古文：琬退，又为驳议。
现代文：董卓怒气才稍平息。黄琬退下后，又上书反对迁都。
English: It took a while for Dong Zhuo's anger to subside. After Huang Qi stepped down, he wrote a letter to oppose the relocation of the capital.

古文：二月，乙亥，卓以灾异奏免琬、彪等，以光禄勋赵谦为太尉，太仆王允为司徒城门校尉伍琼、督军校尉周毖固谏迁都，卓大怒曰： 卓初入朝，二君劝用善士，故卓相从。而诸君到官，举兵相图，此二君卖卓，卓何用相负！ 
现代文：二月，乙亥，董卓以灾异为借口，上奏皇帝，免除黄琬、杨彪的职务。任命光禄勋赵谦为太尉，太仆王允为司徒。城门校尉伍琼、督军校尉周毖坚决劝谏，反对迁都，董卓大怒，说： 我初入朝，你们两个劝我选用良善之士，我听从了，而这些人到任后，都起兵反对我，这是你们两个人出卖我，我有什么对不起你们！ 
English: In February, Yihai, Dong Zhuo, on the pretext of natural disasters, appealed to the emperor to relieve Huang Qi and Yang Biao of their duties. He appointed the Guanglu Medalist Zhao Qian as the first lieutenant, and the servant Wang Yun as the second lieutenant. The city gate captain Wu Qiong and the military commander captain Zhou Qi resolutely advised him to oppose the relocation of the capital, and Dong Zhuo was furious, saying: I first entered the imperial court, you two advised me to choose good men, I obeyed, and these people, after taking office, all took up arms against me. This is the two of you betraying me. What am I sorry for

古文：庚辰，收琼、毖，斩之。
现代文：庚辰，逮捕伍琼、周毖，将他们处斩。
English: Geng Chen, arrest Wu Qiong and Zhou Qi, and execute them.

古文：杨彪、黄琬恐惧，诣卓谢，卓亦悔杀琼、毖，乃复表彪、琬为光禄大夫。
现代文：杨彪、黄琬恐惧，就到董卓那里谢罪。董卓也因杀死伍琼、周毖而感到后悔，于是上表推举杨彪、黄琬为光禄大夫。
English: Yang Biao and Huang Qi were afraid, so they went to Dong Zhuo to apologize. Dong Zhuo also regretted killing Wu Qiong and Zhou Qi, so Yang Biao and Huang Qi were elected as Guanglu doctors.

古文：卓征京兆尹盖勋为议郎，时左将军皇甫嵩将兵三万屯扶风。勋密与嵩谋讨卓。
现代文：董卓征召京兆尹盖勋为议郎。这时左将军皇甫嵩统兵三万驻扎在扶风，盖勋秘密与皇甫嵩商议讨伐董卓。
English: Dong Zhuo conscripted Jing Zhaoying Gaishun as a negotiator. At this time, the left general Wang Fusong and 30,000 soldiers were stationed in Fufeng, and Gaishun secretly negotiated with Wang Fusong to fight Dong Zhuo.

古文：会卓亦征嵩为城门校尉，嵩长史梁衍说嵩曰： 董卓寇掠京邑，废立从意，今征将军，大则危祸，小则困辱。
现代文：正在这时，董卓也征召皇甫嵩为城门校尉。皇甫嵩的长史梁衍向皇甫嵩建议说： 董卓在京城抢掠，随自己的心意废立皇帝。如今征召将军，大将有性命之忧，小则会受到羞辱。
English: It was at this time that Dong Zhuo also conscripted Wang Fusong as the captain of the city gate. Wang Fusong's father, Shi Liangyan, suggested to Wang Fusong: "Dong Zhuo plundered the capital and deposed the emperor according to his own will. Nowadays, if you conscript a general, the major will fear for his life, while the minor will be humiliated.

古文：今及卓在雒阳，天子来西，以将军之众迎接至尊，奉令讨逆，征兵群帅，袁氏逼其东，将军迫其西，此成禽也！ 
现代文：现在乘董卓在洛阳，天子到西方来，将军统率大军迎接皇帝，然后奉皇帝之命讨伐叛逆董卓，向各地将领征兵，袁绍等人在东边进攻，将军在西边夹击，这就能生擒董卓！ 
English: Now Dong Zhuo is in Luoyang, Tianzi is coming to the west, the general is leading a large army to meet the emperor, and then, according to the emperor's order, he will fight the rebellious Dong Zhuo, recruit soldiers from generals around the country, Yuan Shao and others will attack in the east, and the general will attack in the west. This will be able to capture Dong Zhuo!

古文：嵩不从，遂就征。
现代文：皇甫嵩没有采纳他的建议，接受了征召，动身去洛阳。
English: Emperor Fusang did not comply, so he was conscripted.

古文：勋以众弱不能独立，亦还京师。
现代文：盖勋因自己兵弱不能独立，也回到洛阳。
English: Gai Xun, unable to become independent because of his weak army, also returned to Luoyang.

古文：卓以勋为直骑校尉。
现代文：董卓任命盖勋为越骑校尉。
English: Dong Zhuo appointed Gai Xun as the Vietcong cavalry captain.

古文：河南尹硃俊为卓陈军事，卓折俊曰： 我百战百胜，决之于心，卿勿妄说，且污我刀！ 
现代文：河南尹朱俊对董卓分析军事形势，董卓轻蔑地说： 我百战百胜，胸中自有主张。你不要胡说，否则你的血将玷污我的宝刀！ 
English: Yin Zhujun of Henan Province analyzed the military situation to Dong Zhuo, and Dong Zhuo scornfully said: I have won a hundred battles and a hundred victories, and I have my own ideas in my heart. Don't talk nonsense, otherwise your blood will tarnish my precious sword!

古文：盖勋曰： 昔武丁之明，犹求箴谏，况如卿者，而欲杜人之口乎！ 
现代文：盖勋说： 从前武丁那样圣明的君王，还请求别人提建议，何况象您这样的人，竟要封住别人的嘴吗？ 
English: Gai Xun said, "Once upon a time, a saintly king like Wuding asked others for advice. How can a person like you shut others' mouths?

古文：卓乃谢之。
现代文：董卓于是表示歉意。
English: Dong Zhuo then expressed his apologies.

古文：卓遣军至阳城，值民会于社下，悉就斩之，驾其车重，载其妇女，以头系车辕，歌呼还雒，云攻贼大获。
现代文：董卓派军队到阳城，正好百姓在祭祀土地神的场所集会。军队就当场把男人全部斩杀，用他们的车子，装载俘虏的妇女，把人头系在车辕上，唱着叫着回到洛阳，宣称： 攻击叛军，大获全胜！ 
English: Dong Zhuo sent the army to Yangcheng, just as the people were gathering at the place where the land god was worshipped. The army killed all the men on the spot, loaded the captured women with their cars, tied the human heads to the car frame, sang and shouted back to Luoyang, and declared: Attack the rebels, win a complete victory!

古文：卓焚烧其头，以妇女与甲兵为婢妾。
现代文：董卓把人头烧掉，把妇女分给士兵做奴婢或妾。
English: Dong Zhuo burned the heads and distributed the women to the soldiers as slaves or concubines.

古文：丁亥，车驾西迁。
现代文：丁亥，献帝刘协西迁长安。
English: Dinghai, dedicated to Emperor Liu Xie, moved west to Chang'an.

古文：董卓收诸富室，以罪恶诛之，没入其财物，死者不可胜计。
现代文：董卓逮捕洛阳城中富豪，加以罪恶之名处死，把他们的财物没收，死者不计其数。
English: Dong Zhuo arrested the rich in Luoyang City, executed them in the name of crime, confiscated their property, and the dead are countless.

古文：悉驱徙其馀民数百万口于长安。
现代文：驱赶剩下的数百万居民，都向长安迁徒。
English: The remaining millions of residents were forced to move to Chang'an.

古文：步骑驱蹙，更相蹈藉，饥饿寇掠，积尸盈路。
现代文：命步兵、骑兵在后逼迫，马踏人踩，互相拥挤，加上饥饿和抢掠，百姓不断死去，沿途堆满尸体。
English: Desperate infantry and cavalry chased after them, horse-riders trampled and jostled each other, coupled with starvation and looting, the people kept dying, and corpses piled up along the way.

古文：卓自留屯毕圭苑中，悉烧宫庙，官府、居家，二百里内，室屋荡尽，无复鸡犬。
现代文：董卓自己留驻在毕圭苑中，命部下纵火焚烧一切宫殿、官府及百姓住宅，二百里内，房屋尽毁，不再有鸡犬。
English: Dong Zhuo himself stayed in Biguiyuan Middle and ordered his subordinates to set fire to all the palaces, government offices and people's homes. Within 200 miles, the houses were completely destroyed and there were no more chickens and dogs.

古文：又使吕布发诸帝陵及公卿以下冢墓，收其珍宝。
现代文：又让吕布率兵挖掘历代皇帝陵寝和公卿及以下官员的墓地，搜罗珍宝。
English: He also had Lü Bu and his soldiers excavate the tombs of emperors and nobles of all ages, as well as the cemeteries of lower-ranking officials, to collect precious treasures.

古文：卓获山东兵，以猪膏涂布十馀匹，用缠其身，然后烧之，先从足起。
现代文：董卓曾捉到一批山东兵，他命人用十余匹涂上猪油的布裹到这些山东兵的身上，然后从脚点火，将他们烧死。
English: Dong Zhuo once caught a group of Shandong soldiers. He ordered someone to wrap the bodies of these Shandong soldiers with more than ten pieces of cloth coated with lard, and then light a fire from their feet and burn them to death.

古文：三月，乙巳，车驾入长安，居京兆府舍，后乃稍葺宫室而居之。
现代文：三月，乙巳，献帝到达长安，在京兆尹的府中住下。后将宫殿稍加修整，才搬入宫中。
English: In March, Emperor Xian arrived in Chang'an and lived in the palace of Emperor Jingzhoyin. Later, the palace was slightly renovated before being moved into the palace.

古文：时董卓未至，朝政大小皆委之王允。
现代文：这时董卓还未到长安，朝中大小事务都交给司徒王允负责。
English: At this time, Dong Zhuo had not yet arrived in Chang'an, and the affairs of the North and the Middle Kingdom were all handed over to the responsibility of Szu Wangyong.

古文：允外相弥缝，内谋王室，甚有大臣之度，自天子及朝中皆倚允。
现代文：王允在外补救缺失，在内为王室筹划，很有大臣风度，从天子到文武百官，都倚靠王允。
English: Wang Yun remedied the deficiency outside, planned for the royal family inside, and had a great minister's demeanor. From the emperor to the civil and military officials, they all relied on Wang Yun.

古文：允屈意承卓，卓亦雅信焉。
现代文：王允对董卓曲意逢迎，而董卓也一直信任王允。
English: Wang Yun is very friendly to Dong Zhuo Qu, and Dong Zhuo has always trusted Wang Yun.

古文：董卓以袁绍之故，戊午，杀太傅袁隗、太仆袁基，及其家尺口以上五十馀人。
现代文：董卓因袁绍的缘故，戊午，杀死太傅袁隗、太仆袁基，及其袁家婴孩以上的五十余口。
English: For the sake of Yuan Shao, Dong Zhuo, in the afternoon, killed the daifu Yuan Shao, the daibu Yuan Ji, and more than fifty babies of the Yuan family.

古文：初，荆州刺史王睿，与长沙太守孙坚共击零、桂贼，以坚武官，言颇轻之。
现代文：起初，荆州刺史王睿与长沙太守孙坚共同讨伐零陵、桂阳二郡的叛贼。王睿因孙坚是个武官，言语之中，很轻视他。
English: At the beginning, Wang Rui, the Jingzhou assassin, and Sun Jian, the governor of Changsha, jointly fought against the traitors in the two counties of Jiling and Guiyang. Wang Rui despised Sun Jian because he was a military officer.

古文：及州郡举兵讨董卓，睿与坚亦皆起兵。
现代文：及至各州、郡起兵计伐董卓时，王睿与孙坚也一同起兵。
English: Wang Rui and Sun Jian also raised an army together when it came to the states and counties raising an army to overthrow Dong Zhuo.

古文：睿素与武陵太守曹寅不相能，扬言当先杀寅。
现代文：王睿一向与武陵太守曹寅互不相下，扬言要先杀死曹寅。
English: Wang Rui has always been on a par with Cao Yin, the governor of Wuling, and threatened to kill Cao Yin first.

古文：寅惧，诈作按行使者檄移坚，说睿罪过，令收，行刑讫，以状上。
现代文：曹寅害怕了，就伪造一份朝廷按行使者的公文给孙坚，宣布王睿的罪状，要孙坚拘捕王睿，行刑后，再把情况上报。
English: Cao Yin was afraid, so he forged a copy of the official document issued by the imperial court to Sun Jian, declaring Wang Rui's guilt, asking Sun Jian to arrest Wang Rui, execute him, and then report the situation.

古文：坚承檄，即勒兵袭睿。
现代文：孙坚得到这份公文，就率军袭击王睿。
English: When Sun Jian received this document, he led his army to attack Wang Rui.

古文：睿闻兵至，登楼望之，遣问： 欲何为？ 
现代文：王睿听说孙坚部队到来，登上城楼眺望，派人前去询问： 你们要干什么？ 
English: When Wang Rui heard that Sun Jian's troops had arrived, he climbed the tower to look out over the city, and sent someone to inquire: What are you going to do?

古文：坚前部答曰： 兵久战劳苦，欲诣使君求资直耳。 
现代文：孙坚的前锋部队回答说： 士兵长期征战，很辛苦，想面见刺史请求发给军饷。 
English: Sun Jian's front-line troops replied: "The soldiers have been fighting for a long time, and it is very hard. If you want to meet the war dead, please send a request to the War Office.

古文：睿见坚惊曰： 兵自求赏，孙府君何以在其中？ 
现代文：王睿在楼上见到孙坚，大惊，问他： 士兵自来求赏，孙太守怎么也在其中？ 
English: When Wang Rui saw Sun Jian upstairs, he was shocked and asked him, "Soldiers come to ask for rewards, why is Sun Taizhou among them?

古文：坚曰： 被使者檄诛君！ 
现代文：孙坚说： 接到使者的公文，要处死你。 
English: Sun Jian said: After receiving the messenger's official letter, I want to execute you.

古文：睿曰： 我何罪？ 
现代文：王睿说： 我犯了什么罪？ 
English: Wang Rui said: What crime have I committed?

古文：坚曰： 坐无所知！ 睿穷迫，刮金饮之而死。
现代文：孙坚说： 你犯了 无所知 的罪， 王睿被逼无奈，只好刮下金屑，吞饮而死。
English: Sun Jian said, "You have committed a sin that you did not know about. Wang Rui was forced to do nothing. He had no choice but to scrape off the gold dust, swallow it and die.

古文：坚前至南阳，众已数万人。
现代文：孙坚率军前进到南阳，部众已经有数万人。
English: Sun Jian led the army to advance to Nanyang, with tens of thousands of followers.

古文：南阳太守张咨不肯给军粮，坚诱而斩之；郡中震栗，无求不获。
现代文：南阳太守张咨不肯供给军粮，孙坚将他诱出而斩杀。南阳郡中十分震恐，孙坚要什么就给什么。
English: Zhang Zi, the grand abbot of Nanyang, refused to supply grain for the army, so Sun Jian lured him out and killed him. Nanyang County was very shocked, and gave Sun Jian whatever he wanted.

古文：前到鲁阳，与袁术合兵。
现代文：孙坚进军到鲁阳，与袁术合兵。
English: Sun Jian marched into Luyang and joined forces with Yuan Shu.

古文：术由是得据南阳。表坚行破虏将军，领预州刺史。
现代文：袁术因此得以占领南阳，上表保奏孙坚代理破虏将军、兼豫州刺史。
English: As a result, Yuan Shu was able to occupy Nanyang, and the above table shows that Sun Jian acted as the general who defeated the invaders, and also wrote the history of Yuzhou.

古文：诏以北军中候刘表为荆州刺史。
现代文：献帝下诏任命北军中候刘表为荆州刺史，当时遍地都是盗贼，阻断了道路。
English: In the imperial edict of dedication, Liu Biao, a middle-ranking officer of the Northern Army, was appointed to write the history of Jingzhou. At that time, there were thieves everywhere, blocking the road.

古文：时寇贼纵横，道路梗塞，表单马入宜城，请南郡名士蒯良、蒯越与之谋曰： 今江南宗贼甚盛，各拥众不附，若袁术因之，祸必至矣。
现代文：刘表单人匹马进入宜城，请来南郡的名士蒯良、蒯越，与他们商议说： 如今江南宗党势力十分强大，各自拥兵独立，假如袁术借助他们的力量乘机来攻，必然会大祸监头。
English: Liu Biao entered Yicheng alone on horseback, invited the famous men of Nan County, Gong Liang and Gong Yue, and discussed with them: Nowadays, the Jiangnan Zong Party is very powerful, and each of them supports the soldiers independently. If Yuan Shou uses their strength to attack, it will inevitably be a big disaster for the overseer.

古文：吾欲征兵，恐不能集，其策焉出？ 
现代文：我想征兵，但恐怕征集不起来，你们有什么高见！ 
English: I want to enlist, but I'm worried that I won't be able to join the army. What strategy should I use?

古文：蒯良曰： 众不附者，仁不足也；附而不治者，义不足也。
现代文：蒯良说： 民众不归附，是宽仁不够；归附而不能治理，是恩义不足。
English: Hailiang said: If the people do not adhere, it is a lack of benevolence; if they adhere but cannot govern, it is a lack of gratitude.

古文：苟仁义之道行，百姓归之如水之趣下，何患征兵之不集乎？ 
现代文：只要施行仁义之道，百姓就会归附，像水向下流一样，为什么担心征集不到呢？ 
English: As long as the path of benevolence and righteousness is practiced, the people will adhere to it. Like water flowing downhill, why worry about not being able to collect it?

古文：蒯越曰： 袁术骄而无谋，宗贼帅多贪暴，为下所患，若使人示之以利，必以众来。
现代文：蒯越说： 袁术骄傲而缺乏谋略。宗党首领多贪残凶暴，部下离心离德，若让人显示好处，这些首领必然会率众前来。
English: Hao Yue said: Yuan Shuxiong is proud and lacks strategy. The patriarchal party leaders are greedy, cruel and violent, and their subordinates are disinterested and immoral. If people show benefits, these leaders will inevitably lead the people to come.

古文：使君诛其无道，抚而用之，一州之人有乐存之心，闻君威德，必襁负而至矣。
现代文：您把横行无道者处死，招扶收编他们的部下，州内百姓都想安居乐业，听说了您的威望和恩德，一定会扶老携幼，前来投奔。
English: You have put the rampant scoundrels to death, recruited and recruited their subordinates, and the people in the state all want to live and work in peace. Having heard about your prestige and benevolence, they will certainly help the elderly with their children and come to take refuge.

古文：兵集众附，南据江陵，北守襄阳，荆州八郡可传檄而定。
现代文：聚集兵众后，据守江陵和襄阳这南、北两处，荆州境内的八郡，发布公文就可平定。
English: The soldiers gathered, the people surrendered, the south occupied Jiangling, the north defended Xiangyang, and the eight counties under the jurisdiction of Jingzhou could be pacified with a single imperial edict.

古文：公路虽至，无能为也。 表曰： 善！ 
现代文：即使那时袁术来攻，也无计可施。 刘表说： 很好！ 
English: Even if Yuan Shu attacked at that time, there was nothing he could do. Liu Biao said, "Very good!

古文：乃使越诱宗贼帅，至者五十五人，皆斩之而取其众。
现代文：就派蒯越去引诱各宗党首领，有五十五个首领来到，刘表把他们全部处斩，吞并他们的部队。
English: He sent Yao Yue to lure the leaders of the various religious sects. Fifty-five leaders came, and Liu Bei executed them all and absorbed their troops.

古文：遂徙治襄阳，镇抚郡县，江南悉平。
现代文：于是把州府移到襄阳，镇压安抚郡县，荆州属下的长江以南地区全部平定。
English: As a result, the state capital was moved to Yangyang, the county of Anping was suppressed, and the areas south of the Yangtze River under the jurisdiction of Jingzhou were all pacified.

古文：董卓在雒阳，袁绍等诸军皆畏其强，莫敢先进。
现代文：董卓镇守洛阳，袁绍等各部队都畏惧董卓军力强盛，无人胆敢先行进攻。
English: Dong Zhuo garrisoned Luoyang, Yuan Shao and other troops were afraid of Dong Zhuo's military strength, and no one dared to attack first.

古文：曹操曰： 举义兵以诛暴乱，大众已合，诸君何疑！
现代文：曹操说： 我们兴起义兵来诛除暴乱，大军已经集结，诸位还有什么迟疑！
English: Cao Cao said, "We have raised a volunteer army to put down the riot. A large army has been assembled. Why are you hesitating?

古文：向使董卓倚王室，据旧京，东向以临天下，虽以无道行之，犹足为患。
现代文：假如董卓倚仗皇帝的权威，据守洛阳，向东进军，尽管他凶残无道，也会成为我们的大患。
English: If Dong Zhuo relies on the authority of the emperor, defends Luoyang, and marches eastward, he will become a great danger to us, despite his ruthlessness.

古文：今焚烧宫室，劫迁天子，海内震动，不知所归，此天亡之时也，一战而天下定矣。 
现代文：如今他烧毁宫殿，强迫天子迁徒，全国震动，不知道该跟从谁，这正是上天赐予我们灭亡董卓的时机，一战就可以平定天下。 
English: Now he has burned down the palace, forced the Son of Heaven to move his followers, and the whole country is shaken, not knowing who to follow. This is exactly the time that Heaven has given us to destroy Dong Zhuo. One battle can pacify the world.

古文：遂引兵西，将据成皋，张邈遣将卫兹分兵随之。
现代文：于是，曹操率军向西进发，准备攻占成，张邈拨出部分军队，派部将卫兹率领，随曹操一同进军。
English: As a result, Cao Cao led the army westward, preparing to capture Chengdu, Zhang Ye allocated part of the army, led by Wei Zi, and marched with Cao Cao.

古文：进至荥阳汴水，遇卓将玄菟徐荣，与战，操兵败，为流矢所中，所乘马被创。
现代文：曹军行进到荥阳汴水，与董卓部将玄菟人徐荣的部队相遇，双方交战，曹军战败。曹操被流箭射中，所骑的马也受了伤。
English: Cao Cao's army marched to Shiyang and Surabaya, and met the troops of Xu Rong, the general of Dong Zhuo's army. The two sides fought, and Cao Cao was defeated. Cao Cao was shot by a stray arrow, and the horse he was riding was also injured.

古文：从弟洪以马与操，操不受。洪曰： 天下可无洪，不可无君！ 
现代文：他的堂弟曹洪把马让给他，他不肯接受，曹洪说： 天下可以没有曹洪，不可以没有您！ 
English: His cousin Cao Hong gave him the horse, but he refused to accept it. Cao Hong said: The world can do without Cao Hong, but not without you!

古文：遂步从操，夜遁去。
现代文：于是曹操上马，曹洪步行跟从，乘着黑夜逃走。
English: So Cao Cao mounted his horse, and Cao Hong followed on foot, riding away into the night.

古文：荣见操所将兵少，力战尽日，谓酸枣未易攻也，亦引兵还。
现代文：而徐荣见曹操虽然兵少，但奋战了一整天才败退，认为酸枣不容易攻破，也率军返回。
English: But Xu Rong saw that although Cao Cao had fewer soldiers, he fought hard for a whole day until he was defeated. He thought that it was not easy to break through the jujube, and he also led the army back.

古文：操到酸枣，诸军十馀万，日置酒高会，不图进取，操责让之，因为谋曰： 诸君□能听吾计，使渤海引河内之众临孟津，酸枣诸将守成皋，据敖仓，塞轘辕、太谷，全制其险，使袁将军率南阳之军军丹、析，入武关，以震三辅，皆高垒深壁，勿与战，益为疑兵，示天下形势，以顺诛逆，可立定也。
现代文：曹操回到酸枣，见到各路军马十余万，每天只是喝酒聚会，没人图谋进取。曹操责备他们，并建议说： 你们如能听从我的计划，请袁绍率领河内诸军进逼孟津，而驻扎酸枣的各位将领则据守成，占领敖仓，封锁辕、太谷，控制全部险要地区；请袁术率领南阳军阴进驻丹水、析县，攻入武关，以威胁三辅地区。各部队全都高筑营垒，坚守不战，多布置疑兵，显示出天下大军汇集的形势，然后名正言顺地讨征叛逆，可以很快平定局势。
English: Cao Cao returned to Xizhuang and saw more than a hundred thousand soldiers and horses on all sides, just drinking and partying every day, with no one trying to make any progress. Cao Cao scolded them and suggested: "If you can follow my plan, please ask Yuan Shao to lead the armies of Hanoi into Mengjin, while the generals stationed at Xizhuang are under guard, occupying Huancang, sealing off Fen and Tai Valley, and controlling all the critical areas; please ask Yuan Shu to lead the Nanyang Army into Danshui and Jing County, and enter Wuguan to threaten the Sanfu area. All the troops built high camps,

古文：今兵以义动，持疑不进，失天下望，窃为诸君耻之！ 
现代文：如今我们号称义兵，但一直迟疑不前，使天下人失望，我为大家感到羞耻！ 
English: Now we call ourselves volunteers, but we have been dragging our feet and disappointing the world. I am ashamed of all of us!

古文：邈等不能用。
现代文：张邈等不采纳他的建议。
English: Zhang Ye and others did not adopt his strategy.

古文：操乃与司马沛国夏侯惇等诣扬州募兵，得千馀人，还屯河内。
现代文：于是曹操与司马沛国人夏侯等到扬州去召募新兵，得一千余人，返回后驻扎在河内郡。
English: As a result, Cao Cao and Xia Hou, a native of Sima Pei, waited until Yangzhou to recruit new soldiers, got more than a thousand people, and stationed in Hanoi County after returning.

古文：顷之，酸枣诸军食尽，众散。
现代文：不久，驻在酸枣的各路军队因为粮食吃尽，兵众四散。
English: Soon, all the armies stationed in Yaju ran out of food, and the soldiers scattered.

古文：刘岱与桥瑁相恶，岱杀瑁，以王肱领东郡太守。
现代文：兖州刺史刘岱与东郡太守桥瑁相互敌视，刘岱杀死桥瑁，任命王肱兼任东郡太守。
English: Liu Ye and Qiao Ye resented each other. Liu Ye killed Qiao Ye and made Wang Ye concurrently the governor of Dong County.

古文：青州刺史焦和亦起兵讨董卓，务及诸将西行，不为民人保障，兵始济河，黄巾已入其境。
现代文：青州刺史焦和也起兵讨伐董卓，想与各路将领会合，一道西征，没有保护本州人民的安全。他的军队刚开始渡黄河，黄巾军已进入了青州。
English: The governor of Qingzhou, Jiao He, also raised an army to fight against Dong Zhuo. He wanted to meet with generals from all over the country and march west together, but he did not protect the safety of the people of his state. His army had just begun to cross the Yellow River, but the Yellow Turban Army had already entered Qingzhou.

古文：青州素殷实，甲兵甚盛，和每望寇奔北，未尝接风尘、交旗鼓也。性好卜筮，信鬼神。
现代文：青州地区一向富庶，军队装备很优良，但焦和每次作战都望风而逃，从来没有与敌人正面交过锋。他非常相信占卜，信奉鬼神。
English: The Qingzhou region has always been rich and well-off, and the army is well-equipped. However, Jiao He has always run away from every battle, and has never faced the enemy head-on. He is a great believer in divination and ghosts.

古文：入见其人，清谈干云，出观其政，赏罚淆乱，州遂萧条，悉为丘墟。
现代文：见面观察他，他长于高谈阔论，出来看他的政务，则赏罚不明。结果全州一派萧条景象，到处都是废墟。
English: To see him is to see a smooth talker, to see him in government is to see an uncertain reward or punishment, and the result is a state-wide depression, with ruins everywhere.

古文：顷之，和病卒，袁绍使广陵臧洪领青州以抚之。
现代文：不久，焦和病死，袁绍派广陵人臧洪兼任青州刺史，安抚百姓。
English: Not long after, Jiao He died of illness, and Yuan Shao sent the Guangling man Zou Hong to concurrently serve as the Qingzhou magistrate to pacify the people.

古文：夏，四月，以幽州牧刘虞为太傅，道路壅塞，信命竟不得通。
现代文：夏季，四月，任命幽州牧刘虞为太傅，因为道路阻断，使者和诏书无法到达。
English: In the summer, in April, Liu Yu, the herdsman of Yuzhou, was appointed Taifu, because the road was blocked and the messenger and the imperial edict could not reach him.

古文：先是，幽部应接荒外，资费甚广，岁常割青、冀赋调二亿有馀以足之。
现代文：以前，由于幽州境外是边远地区，所需费用很多，每年都从青、冀二州所交的赋税中拨出两亿多钱，来补助幽州。
English: In the past, because the outlying areas outside Yuzhou were very expensive, more than 200 million yuan was allocated each year from the taxes paid by Qingdao and Hebei to subsidize Yuzhou.

古文：时处处断绝，委输不至，而虞敝衣绳屦，食无兼肉，务存宽政，劝督农桑，开上谷胡市之利，通渔阳盐铁之饶，民悦年登，谷石三十，青、徐士庶避难归虞者百馀万口，虞皆收视温恤，为安立生业，流民皆忘其迁徙焉。
现代文：这时，各地的联系都困战乱而断绝，补助也运不到。刘虞身披破旧认裳，脚穿草鞋，进餐时只吃一个肉菜，为政宽厚，劝导督促百姓从事农业、桑蚕业，开放上谷郡的胡市，与胡人交易取利，发展渔阳郡的盐、铁生产，使百姓欢悦，粮食丰收，每石谷价只有三十钱。青州、徐州的士人和百姓为了避难来投奔刘虞的达到一百余万人。刘虞将他们全部收留，加以安扶，为他们安家立业，使这些人都忘记自己是流亡在外。
English: At this time, the contacts of all parts of the country were cut off due to the war, and the subsidies could not be transported. Liu Yu was dressed in a shabby old robe, his feet wore straw shoes, and he ate only one meat dish at dinner. For the sake of political clemency, he advised and urged the people to engage in agriculture and mulberry sericulture, opened Hu City in Shanggu County, traded with Hu people for profit, developed salt and iron production in Yuyang County, which made the people happy, and had a bumper grain harvest. The price of grain per stone was only thirty yuan. More than one million people from Qingzhou and Xuzhou came to Liu

古文：五月，司空荀爽薨。
现代文：五月，司空荀爽去世。
English: In May, Siku passed away.

古文：六月，辛丑，以光禄大夫种拂为司空。
现代文：六月，辛丑，任命光禄大夫种拂为司空。
English: In June, in Xinwuxi, he appointed Guanglu Dafu Zenghu as his deputy.

古文：拂，邵之父也。
现代文：种拂是种邵的父亲。
English: Seed beater is the father of seed sowing.

古文：董卓遣大鸿胪韩融、少府阴修、执金吾胡毋班、将作大匠吴修、越骑校尉王瑰安集关东，解譬袁绍等。
现代文：董卓派大鸿胪韩融、少府阴、执金吾胡毋班、将作大匠吴、越骑校尉王去招抚关东将领，劝说袁绍等人服从朝廷。
English: Dong Zhuo sent Da Hongjun Han Rong, Shao Fu Yin, Xing Jinwu Hubeoban, Zhao Daishi Wu, and Yue Cavalry Lieutenant Wang to cajole the Guandong generals and persuade Yuan Shao and others to obey the imperial court.

古文：胡毋班、吴修、王瑰至河内，袁绍使王匡悉收系杀之。
现代文：胡毋班、吴、王走到河内，袁绍命令王匡把他们全都抓起来杀掉。
English: When Hu Beobang, Wu and Wang went to Hanoi, Yuan Shao ordered Wang Kuang to arrest and kill them all.

古文：袁术亦杀阴修，惟韩融以名德免。
现代文：袁术也杀死了阴，只有韩融因德高望重，免于一死。
English: Yuan Shu also killed Yin, only Han Rong was spared death because of his high moral standards.

古文：董卓坏五铢钱，更铸小钱，悉取雒阳及长安铜人、钟虡、飞廉、铜马之属以铸之，由是货贱物贵，谷石至数万钱。
现代文：董卓废除五铢钱，另铸小钱作为货币。把洛阳及长安所有的铜人、鹿头龙身铜像、雀头鹿身蛇尾铜像、铜马等都熔掉铸钱，从此钱贱物贵，物价猛涨，每石谷价高达数万钱。
English: Dong Zhuo abolished the five-baht coin and minted small coins as currency. He melted down all the bronze people, bronze statues of deer heads and dragon bodies, bronze statues of duck heads and deer bodies and snake tails, and bronze horses in Luoyang and Chang'an and minted money. Since then, money has become expensive, prices have soared, and the price of grain has reached tens of thousands of yuan per stone.

古文：冬，孙坚与官属会饮于鲁阳城东，董卓步骑数万猝至，坚方行酒谈笑，整顿部曲，无得妄动。
现代文：冬季，孙坚与部下官员正在鲁阳城东饮酒聚会，董卓部下数万步、骑兵忽然来到。孙坚一边敬洒谈笑，一边整顿军队，不许轻举妄动。
English: In winter, Sun Jian and his subordinate officials were having a drinking party in the eastern part of Luyang City. Dong Zhuo's subordinates walked tens of thousands of steps, and the cavalry suddenly arrived. Sun Jian was chatting and laughing, while reorganizing the army, and was not allowed to make any rash moves.

古文：后骑渐益，坚徐罢坐，导引入城，乃曰： 向坚所以不即起走，恐兵相蹈藉，诸君不得入耳。 
现代文：后来骑兵逐渐增多，孙坚才慢慢站起身。他率领大家入城后，才说： 刚才，我所以没有立即起身。是恐怕部队慌乱，互相拥挤，使你们无法入城。 
English: Later, as the number of cavalry gradually increased, Sun Jian slowly stood up. After he led everyone into the city, he said: "Just now, that's why I didn't get up immediately. I'm afraid the troops are panicking and crowding each other, making it impossible for you to enter the city."

古文：卓兵见其整，不敢攻而还。
现代文：董卓的军队看孙坚部伍严整，不敢进攻而退还。
English: Dong Zhuo's army saw that Sun Jian's army was well-organized and did not dare to attack.

古文：王匡屯河阳津，董卓袭击，大破之。
现代文：王匡驻在河阳津，董卓派军袭击，大破王匡军队。
English: Wang Kuang was stationed in Heyangjin, and Dong Zhuo sent troops to attack and destroy Wang Kuang's army.

古文：左中郎将蔡邕议： 孝和以下庙号称宗者，皆宜省去，以遵先典。 
现代文：左中郎将蔡邕提议： 孝和帝以后的皇帝，庙号称 宗 的，都应该撤去，以遵循传统的典制。 
English: Zuo Zhonglang proposed to Cai Wei: Xiao and the emperor after the emperor, the temple called Zong, should all be removed to follow the traditional ceremony.

古文：从之。
现代文：献帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：中郎将徐荣荐同郡故冀州刺史公孙度于董卓，卓以为辽东太守。
现代文：中郎将徐荣向董卓推荐同郡人、前冀州刺史公孙度，董卓任命他为辽东郡太守。
English: Zhonglang recommended Xu Rong to Dong Zhuo and the former governor of Jizhou Province, Sun Du, and Dong Zhuo appointed him as the governor of Liaodong County.

古文：度到官，以法诛灭郡中名豪大姓百馀家，郡中震栗，乃东伐高句骊，西击乌桓，语所亲吏柳毅、阳仪等曰： 汉祚将绝，当与诸卿图王耳。 
现代文：公孙度到任后，依照法律处死郡中豪门大姓一百余家，全郡的人震惊战。于是他向东征伐高句骊，向西攻击乌桓部族。他对亲信官吏柳毅、阳仪等说： 汉朝的统治将要完结，我要和你们一同建立起一个王国。 
English: After Gongsundu took office, according to the law, he executed more than a hundred families of the most powerful families in the county, and the people of the whole county were shocked by the war. So he marched to the east to cut down Goguryeo and attacked the Wuhuan tribe to the west. He said to his trusted officials Liu Yi and Yang Yi: The reign of the Han Dynasty is coming to an end, and I want to build a kingdom with you.

古文：于是分辽东为辽西、中辽郡，各置太守，越海收东莱诸县，置营州刺史。
现代文：于是分割辽东郡的一部分，设置辽西郡、中辽郡，各设太守。并渡海去占领东莱各县，设置营州，委派营州刺史。
English: As a result, a part of Liaodong County was divided, Liaoxi County and Zhongliao County were set up, and governors were set up in each. And they went across the sea to occupy Donglai counties, set up camp states, and appointed camp states to make history.

古文：自立为辽东侯、平州牧，立汉二祖庙，承制，郊祀天地，藉田，乘鸾路，设旄头、羽骑。
现代文：公孙度自称为辽东侯、平州牧，建立汉朝高祖刘邦和世祖光武帝刘秀的祭庙，代表皇帝发号施令，在郊外祭祀天地，并举行藉田之礼，以表示重视农业。
English: Gongsundu called himself the prince of Liaodong and the herdsman of Pingzhou, established the temple of the Han Dynasty's great ancestor Liu Bang and the ancestor of Emperor Guangwu Liu Xiu, issued orders on behalf of the emperor, sacrificed heaven and earth in the suburbs, and held the ceremony of renting fields to show the importance of agriculture.

