古文：或为六国说秦王曰： 土广不足以为安，人众不足以为强。
现代文：有人从六国的利益角度游说秦王，说： 疆土辽阔不足以永保安定，人民众多不足以逞强恃能。
English: Some people lobbied the Qin king from the perspective of the interests of the six countries, saying: The vast territory is not enough to maintain stability forever, and the large number of people is not enough to be strong.

古文：若土广者安，人众者强，则桀、纣之后将存。
现代文：如果认定疆域辽阔可永享太平，人民众多就可长盛不衰，那么夏舛、商纣的后代便能世袭为君。
English: If it is determined that a vast territory can always enjoy peace, and a large number of people can enjoy long-term prosperity, then the descendants of Xia Yao and Shang Yao can inherit the throne.

古文：昔者赵氏亦尝强矣。曰赵强何若?举左案齐，举右案魏，厌案万乘之国，二国，千乘之宋也。
现代文：过去盛极一时的赵氏，东可以震慑齐国，西可以压制魏国，除了这两个万乘大国，还围困住宋国。
English: In the past, the Zhao clan, which was very popular at the time, could deter Qi in the East and suppress Wei in the West. In addition to these two great countries, it also besieged Song.

古文：筑刚平，工无东野，刍牧薪采莫敢窥东门。
现代文：赵人筑起刚平城，使得卫都东门几乎没有郊野，卫人连放牧打柴都不敢迈出东门。
English: The people of Zhao built the city of Gangping, so that there was almost no countryside at the east gate of the Wei capital, and the guards did not dare to step out of the east gate even for grazing and firewood.

古文：当是时，卫危于累卵，天下之士相从谋曰： 吾将还其委质，而朝于邯郸之君乎! 于是天下有称伐邯郸者，莫不令朝行。
现代文：其时卫国岌岌可危。这时天下游说之士相与谋划说： 如今赵国大有威服天下的气势，如果不早点有所作为，顷刻之间便危及自身，试问我们又怎甘心质子邯郸，向赵氏称臣呢？ 
English: At that time, the defense of the country was in a precarious situation. At that time, the world's lobbyists and strategists said: Today, Zhao Guoda has the power to conquer the world. If we don't do something soon, we will endanger ourselves in an instant. How can we be content to be a proton and a minister to the Zhao family?

古文：魏伐邯郸，因退为逢泽之遇，乘夏车，称夏王，朝为天子，天下皆从。
现代文：于是有人倡议攻打赵国，诸侯便群起而应。晚上发出命令，第二天清晨就行动起来。魏惠王出兵攻破邯郸，在逢泽这个地方主持诸侯会盟，他乘坐夏车，自称夏王，率领诸侯朝见周天子。迫于威势，诸侯们不敢不从。
English: Therefore, someone proposed to attack Zhao, and the lords responded in droves. An order was issued in the evening, and the action began in the early morning of the next day. Wei Hui Wang sent troops to break the shackles and presided over the lords' alliance in this place, He took a summer car, called himself the summer king, and led the lords to see Zhou Tianzi. Under pressure, the lords dared not disobey.

古文：齐太公闻之，举兵伐魏，壤地两分，国家大危。
现代文：齐侯听说这回事后，出兵讨伐魏国。魏国丧师失地，濒于危亡。
English: After Qi Hou heard about this, he sent troops to fight against Wei. Wei lost its territory and was on the verge of extinction.

古文：梁王身抱质执璧，请为陈侯臣，天下乃释梁。
现代文：魏惠王不得已，带上重礼向齐侯请罪，表示愿意俯首称臣。
English: As a last resort, Wei Hui Wang brought a heavy salute to Qi Hou to plead guilty and expressed his willingness to bow his head and become a vassal.

古文：郢威王闻之，寝不寐，食不饱，帅天下百姓，以与申缚遇于泗水之上，而大败申缚。
现代文：诸侯们这才停止对魏国的打击。可是楚威王听到齐侯有开始称霸就寝食难安，便统率各路诸侯与齐将申缚大战于泗水之上，大败齐军。
English: It was only then that the princes stopped attacking Wei. However, when King Chu Wei heard that it was difficult for the Qi princes to sleep and eat when they began to dominate, he led all the princes and the Qi generals to wage a great war on Surabaya and defeated the Qi army.

古文：赵人闻之至枝桑，燕人闻之至之格道。格道不通，平际绝。
现代文：赵人乘势占领枝桑，燕人则出兵攻占了格道，隔绝齐国平际之途。
English: The Zhao people took advantage of the situation to occupy Shisang, while the Yan people dispatched troops to capture Ge Dao and cut off the road between the two countries.

古文：齐战败不胜，谋则不得，使陈毛释剑掫，委南听罪，西说赵，北说燕，内喻其百姓，而天下乃齐释。
现代文：齐国欲战不能，欲谋不得，只好以陈毛为使，南下请罪于楚王，同时对赵、燕两国好言相求，在国内安抚人民，这样天下诸侯才放弃对齐的穷追猛打。
English: Since Qi could not fight and had no choice but to use Chen Mao as a tool, it had no choice but to go to the south to plead with King Chu, and at the same time to seek the goodwill of Zhao and Yan, and to appease the people at home. Only in this way could the world's princes give up the relentless pursuit of alignment.

古文：于是夫积薄而为厚，聚少而为多，以同言郢威王于侧纣之间。
现代文：积薄渐厚，积少成多，楚威王渐渐得势，又成为众矢之的。
English: The accumulation of thin gradually thickens, the accumulation of less becomes more, King Chu Wei gradually gains momentum, and becomes the leader of the crowd.

古文：臣岂以郢威王为政衰谋乱以至于此哉?
现代文：这难道是因为楚威王政治腐败、谋略失误吗？
English: Was this due to political corruption and strategic blunders on the part of King Chu Wei?

古文：郢为强，临天下诸侯，故天下乐伐之也。 
现代文：这是因为楚王好勇逞强、妄自尊大啊！ 
English: This is because King Chu is brave, courageous and arrogant!

