古文：齐宣王见颜斶，曰： 斶前！ 
现代文：齐宣王召见颜斶喊道： 颜斶你上前来。 
English: Qi Xuanwang summoned Yan Xuan and shouted: "Yan Xuan, come forward."

古文：斶亦曰： 王前! 
现代文：颜斶也叫道： 大王您上前来。 
English: Yan Yan also called out, "Great King, please come forward."

古文：宣王不悦。
现代文：齐宣王听了很不高兴。
English: Qi Xuanwang was very unhappy to hear this.

古文：左右曰： 王，人君也。斶，人臣也。王曰 斶前 ，亦曰 王前 ，可乎? 
现代文：左右臣都责备颜斶： 大王是一国之君，而你颜斶，只是区区一介臣民，大王唤你上前，你也唤大王上前，这样做成何体统？ 
English: Both the right and left ministers scolded Yan Qi: The great king is the sovereign of a country, and you, Yan Qi, are just a subordinate subject. The great king calls you forward, and you call the great king forward. How is this done?

古文：斶对曰： 夫斶前为慕势，王前为趋士。
现代文：颜斶说： 如果我上前，那是贪慕权势，如果大王过来，那就是谦虚恭敬的对待贤士。
English: Yan Xuan said: If I come forward, it is to covet power, if the great king comes over, it is to treat the wise men with modesty and respect.

古文：与使斶为趋势，不如使王为趋士。 
现代文：与其让我蒙受趋炎附势的恶名，倒不如让大王获取礼贤下士的美誉。 
English: It would be better for the king to gain the reputation of a virtuous corporal, rather than for me to suffer the notoriety of a tyrant.

古文：王忿然作色曰： 王者贵乎?士贵乎? 
现代文：齐宣王气得脸色大变，斥道： 究竟是君王尊贵，还是士人尊贵？ 
English: Qi Xuan Wang's face changed dramatically with anger, and he rebuked: "Is it the king who is noble, or is it the scholar who is noble?

古文：对曰： 士贵耳，王者不贵。 
现代文：颜不卑不亢回答说： 自然是士人尊贵，君王不尊贵。 
English: Yan replied, "Naturally, a scholar is honorable, but a king is not.

古文：王曰： 有说乎? 
现代文：齐王问： 此话怎讲？ 
English: Qi Wang asked: How can this be said?

古文：斶曰： 有。昔者秦攻齐，令曰： 有敢去柳下季垄五十步而樵采者，死不赦。 
现代文：答道： 以前秦国征伐齐国，秦王下令： 有敢在柳下惠坟墓周围五十步内打柴的，一概处死，决不宽赦！ 
English: Answer: Before Qin conquered Qi, King Qin issued an order: Anyone who dared to gather firewood within fifty paces of Liu Xiahui's tomb would be put to death without mercy!

古文：令曰： 有能得齐王头者，封万户侯，赐金千镒。 
现代文：又下令： 能取得齐王首级的，封侯万户，赏以千金。 
English: He also ordered: If anyone can obtain the first rank of Qi Wang, he will be rewarded with a thousand gold coins.

古文：由是观之，生王之头，曾不若死士之垄也。 
现代文：由此看来，活国君的头颅，比不上死贤士的坟墓。 
English: From this point of view, the head of a living sovereign cannot be compared to the grave of a dead sage.

古文：宣王默默不悦。
现代文：宣王哑口无言，内心极不高兴。
English: Xuan Wang was speechless and very unhappy inside.

古文：左右皆曰： 斶来，斶来！
现代文：左右侍臣指责说： 颜斶！颜斶！
English: Right and left, the courtiers rebuked him, saying, "Yan Xuan! Yan Xuan!

古文：大王据千乘之地，而建千石钟，万石。天下之士，仁义皆来役处；辩知并进，莫不来语；东西南北，莫敢不服。
现代文：大王据千乘之国，重视礼乐，四方仁义辩智之士，仰慕大王圣德，莫不争相投奔效劳；四海之内，莫不臣服；万物齐备，百姓心服。
English: According to the country of the thousand rides, the great king attaches importance to liturgy, the four sides of the benevolence and righteousness debate the wise men, admire the great king's holiness, do not compete to rush to serve; within the four seas, do not submit; everything is ready, the people are satisfied.

古文：求万物无不备具，而百姓无不亲附。
现代文：而即便是最清高的士人，其身份也不过是普通民众，徒步而行，耕作为生。
English: But even the most high-ranking scholar, his identity is nothing more than ordinary people, walking on foot, farming for a living.

古文：今夫士之高者，乃称匹夫，徒步而处农亩，下则鄙野、监门、闾里，士之贱也，亦甚矣! 斶对曰： 不然。
现代文：至于一般士人，则居于鄙陋穷僻之处，以看守门户为生涯，应该说，士的地位是十分低贱的。 颜斶驳道： 这话说得不对。
English: As for the ordinary scholar, he lives in a humble and remote place, guarding a portal for a lifetime. It should be said that the status of a scholar is very low. Yan Xuan refuted: This is not true.

古文：斶闻古大禹之时，诸侯万国。
现代文：我听说上古大禹之时有上万个诸侯国。
English: I heard that in ancient times, there were tens of thousands of vassal states.

古文：何则?
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：德厚之道，得贵士之力也。
现代文：道德淳厚的世道得力于重用士人。
English: A virtuous world owes its strength to hard-working people.

古文：故舜起农亩，出于野鄙，而为天子。
现代文：由于尊贤重才，虞舜这个出身于乡村鄙野的农夫，得以成为天子。
English: Because of the reverence for the virtuous and the talented, Yuxuan, a farmer from the countryside, was able to become the son of heaven.

古文：及汤之时，诸侯三千。当今之世，南面称寡者，乃二十四。
现代文：到商汤之时，诸侯尚存三千，时至今日，只剩下二十四。
English: By the time of Shang Tang, there were still three thousand princes, and to this day, only twenty-four remain.

古文：由此观之，非得失之策与?
现代文：从这一点上看，难道不是因为政策的得失才造成了天下治乱吗？
English: From this point of view, isn't it because of the gains and losses of policy that the world is in turmoil?

古文：稍稍诛灭，灭亡无族之时，欲为监门、闾里，安可得而有乎哉?是故《易传》不云乎： 居上位，未得其实，以喜其为名者，必以骄奢为行。
现代文：当诸侯面临亡国灭族的威胁时，即使想成为乡野穷巷的寻常百姓，又怎么可能办到？所以《易传》中这样讲， 身居高位而才德不济，只一味追求虚名的，必然骄奢傲慢，最终招致祸患。
English: When princes are faced with the threat of the destruction of the country and the extermination of the people, even if they want to become ordinary people in the countryside, how can they do it? Therefore, "I Chuan" said that, if you are in a high position and have poor moral character, and only blindly pursue a false name, you will inevitably be arrogant and arrogant, and eventually lead to disaster.

古文：据慢骄奢，则凶从之。是故无其实而喜其名者削，无德而望其福者约，无功而受其禄者辱，祸必握。 
现代文：无才无德而沽名钓誉的会被削弱；不行仁政却妄求福禄的要遭困厄；没有功劳却接受俸禄的会遭受侮辱，祸患深重。 
English: Those who have no talent, no virtue, and do not seek fame and reputation will be weakened; those who do not practice benevolence but seek rewards will suffer hardships and misfortunes; those who do not have merit but accept remuneration will be humiliated, and the disaster will be serious.

古文：故曰： 矜功不立，虚愿不至。 此皆幸乐其名，华而无其实德者也。是以尧有九佐，舜有七友，禹有五丞，汤有三辅，自古及今而能虚成名于天下者，无有。
现代文：所以说， 居功自傲不能成名，光说不做难以成事 ，这些都是针对那些企图侥幸成名，华而不实的人，正因为这样，尧有九个佐官，舜有七位师友，禹有五位帮手，汤有三大辅臣，自古至今，还未有过凭空成名的人。
English: Therefore, it is not possible to become famous by taking credit and pride, and it is difficult to achieve something without doing anything, these are all for those who try to become famous by chance, flashy and insincere people. It is precisely because of this that there are nine commanders, seven teachers and friends, five helpers, and three assistant ministers. Since ancient times, there has never been a person who has become famous out of thin air.

古文：是以君王无羞亟问，不市下学；是故成其道德而扬功名于后世者，尧、舜、禹、汤、周文王是也。
现代文：因此，君主不以多次向别人请教为羞，不以向地位低微的人学习为耻，以此成就道德，扬名后世。唐尧、虞舜、商汤、周文王都是这样的人。
English: Therefore, the monarch is not ashamed to repeatedly ask others for advice, and is not ashamed to learn from people of low status, so as to achieve morality and make a name for future generations. Tang Jun, Yu Jun, Shang Tang, and Zhou Wenwang are all such people.

古文：故曰： 无形者，形之君也。
现代文：所以又有 见微知著 这样的说法。
English: That's why there's such a thing as "seeing is believing."

古文：无端者，事之本也。 夫上见其原，下通其流，至圣人明学，何不吉之有哉!老子曰： 虽贵，必以贱为本；虽高，必以下为基。 
现代文：若能上溯事物本源，下通事物流变，睿智而多才，则哪里还有不吉祥的事情发生呢？《老子》上说： 虽贵，必以贱为本；虽高，必以下为基。 
English: If you can trace the origin of things upstream, change the flow of things downstream, and be wise and multi-talented, then where will there be any unlucky things? "Lao Zi" said: Although expensive, it must be based on cheap; although high, it must be based on the following.

古文：是以侯王称孤寡不谷。是其贱之本与!
现代文：所以诸侯、君主皆自称为孤、寡或不谷，这大概是他们懂得以贱为本的道理吧。
English: That's why lords and monarchs all describe themselves as lonely, widowed, or destitute, which is probably why they understand the principle of being humble.

古文：非夫孤寡者，人之困贱下位也，而侯王以自谓，岂非下人而尊贵士与?
现代文：孤、寡指的是生活困窘、地位卑微的人，可是诸侯、君主却用以自称，难道不是屈已尚贤的表现吗？
English: "Alone" and "widow" refer to people with a difficult life and low status, but princes and monarchs use them to call themselves. Isn't it a sign of having succumbed to the virtuous?

古文：夫尧传舜，舜传禹，周成王任周公旦，而世世称曰明主，是以明乎士之贵也。 
现代文：像尧传位给舜、舜传位给禹、周成王重用周公旦，后世都称他们是贤君圣主，这足以证明贤士的尊贵。 
English: Like Zhou passed the throne to Zhou, Zhou passed the throne to Yu, and Zhou Chengwang used Zhou Gongdan, future generations will call them sages and saints, which is enough to prove the dignity of sages.

古文：宣王曰： 磋乎!
现代文：宣王叹道： 可叹呀！
English: Xuan Wang sighed: What a pity!

古文：君子焉可侮哉，寡人自取病耳!
现代文：怎么能够侮慢君子呢？我这是自取其辱呀！
English: How can you insult a gentleman? I'm humiliating myself!

古文：及今闻君子之言，乃今闻细人之行，愿请受为弟子。
现代文：今天听到君子高论，才明白轻贤慢士是小人行径。希望先生能收我为弟子。
English: Today, after listening to the high-minded gentleman's speech, I understood that the light-hearted scholar is a villain. I hope that my teacher can accept me as a disciple.

古文：且颜先生与寡人游，食必太牢，出必乘车，妻子衣服丽都。 
现代文：如果先生与我相从交游，食必美味，行必乘车，先生的妻子儿女也必然锦衣玉食。 
English: If my husband and I travel together, the food must be delicious, and we must travel by car, and my husband's wife and children must also be well-fed.

古文：颜斶辞去曰： 夫玉生于山，制则破焉，非弗宝贵矣，然夫璞不完。
现代文：颜斶听到宣王的话，就要求告辞回家，对宣王说： 美玉产于深山，一经琢磨则破坏天然本色，不是美玉不再宝贵，只是失去了它本真的完美。
English: When Yan Qi heard what Xuan Wang said, he asked to go home and said to Xuan Wang, "Beauty jade is produced deep in the mountains, and once it is polished, it destroys its natural color. It is not that beauty jade is no longer precious, but it has lost its original perfection.

古文：士生乎鄙野，推选则禄焉，非不得尊遂也，然而形神不全。
现代文：士大夫生于乡野，经过推荐选用就接受俸禄，这也并不是说不尊贵显达，而是说他们的形神从此难以完全属于自己。
English: Shidafu were born in the countryside, and after recommendation and selection, they receive a salary. This does not mean that they are not honorable, but that it is difficult for them to fully belong to themselves.

古文：斶愿得归，晚食以当肉，安步以当车，无罪以当贵，清静贞正以自虞。
现代文：臣只希望回到乡下，晚一点进食，即使再差的饭菜也一如吃肉一样津津有味；缓行慢步，完全可以当作坐车；无过无伐，足以自贵；清静无为，自得其乐。
English: The minister only hopes to return to the countryside, eat later, and even if the meal is poor, it is as delicious as eating meat; walk slowly and slowly, it can be completely used as a car; no fault and no felling, enough to be proud of; quiet and inactive, enjoy oneself.

古文：制言者王也，尽忠直言者斶也。
现代文：纳言决断的，是大王您；秉忠直谏的，则是颜斶。
English: It is you, the king, who makes the final decision; it is Yan Xun who is loyal and straightforward.

古文：言要道已备矣，愿得赐归，安行而反臣之邑屋。 则再拜而辞去也。
现代文：臣要说的，主旨已十分明了，望大王予以赐归，让臣安步返回家乡。 于是，再拜而去。
English: The minister wanted to say that the main purpose had become very clear, and he hoped that the great king would grant it and let the minister return to his hometown safely.

古文：斶知足矣，归反扑，则终身不辱也。
现代文：颜斶可以说是知足的人了，返璞归真，那就终生不会受到羞辱。
English: Yan Xuan can be said to be a contented person, and if he returns to the truth, he will not be humiliated for life.

