古文：靳德进，其先潞州人，后徙大名。
现代文：靳德进，祖先潞州人，后迁大名。
English: Zheng Dejin, ancestor of Zhengzhou people, later moved to be a daimyo.

古文：祖璇，业儒。
现代文：祖父靳璇，是儒生。
English: My grandfather was a Confucian.

古文：国初，玉出干刘敏行省于燕，辟祥置幕下，佩以金符。
现代文：父靳祥，曾以陵川郝温为师，兼善星历。金末兵乱，祥与母散失，母亲因悲泣而双目失明，祥后来找到母亲，用舌舐母眼，百日后复明，人称其孝。
English: His father, Zou Xiang, had been a student of Lingchuan Zouwen, and was also good at astrology. At the end of the Jin Dynasty, Zou lost his mother in the war, and his mother lost her sight due to grief and tears. Zou later found his mother, licked his mother's eyes with his tongue, and regained his sight after 100 days. People called him Xiao.

古文：时藩帅得擅生杀，无辜者多赖祥以免。
现代文：当时蕃帅有生杀之权，许多无辜的人，多由于祥而得免。
English: At that time, Gong Shuai had the power of life and death, and many innocent people were spared because of Xiang.

古文：赠集贤大学士，谥安靖。
现代文：祥去世后，朝廷赠集贤大学士，谥安靖。
English: After the death of Xiang, the imperial court presented a collection of scholars, including Jian Anjing.

古文：德进为人材辨，幼读书，能通大义，父殁，益自刻励，尤精于星历之学。
现代文：德进有才干，幼读书，能通大义。父死后，更加刻苦自励，尤精于星历之学。
English: Dejin was talented, read books at a young age, and was able to understand the Great Righteousness. After his father's death, he worked even harder, and was especially good at studying the astrological calendar.

古文：世祖命太保秉忠选太史官属，德进以选授天文、星历、卜筮三科管勾，凡交蚀躔次、六气侵沴，所言休咎辄应。
现代文：世祖命太保刘秉忠选太史官属吏，德进因秉忠的推选，授为天文、星历、卜筮三科管勾。举凡日月交蚀，星体运行的位置，自然变化的六种现象相侵相克等等，所说的好事坏事总是可以应验。
English: Liu Bingzhong, the father of the world, was elected as the official of the Grand Historian by Liu Bingzhong, the father of the world, and Dejin was elected as the official of the three sciences of astronomy, ephemeris and divination by virtue of Bingzhong's election. Taking into account the eclipse of the sun and moon, the position of the movement of the stars, the six phenomena of natural change, and so on, the said good and bad things can always be fulfilled.

古文：时因天象以进规谏，多所裨益。累迁秘书监，掌司天事。
现代文：有时，因观天象的启发而对皇帝有所规谏，对元朝的统治很有好处，故累迁秘书监，掌司天事。
English: Sometimes, due to the inspiration of watching the celestial phenomenon, the emperor has some rules and regulations, which is very beneficial to the reign of the Yuan Dynasty. Therefore, the secretary and superintendent have been relocated to be in charge of the weather.

古文：从征叛王乃颜，揆度日时，率中机会。
现代文：随从皇帝出征叛王乃颜，推算吉日良辰，一般都准确。
English: Naoyan, who accompanied the emperor on his expedition to rebel against the king, was generally accurate in predicting auspicious dates.

古文：诸将欲剿绝其党，德进独陈天道好生，请缓师以待其降。
现代文：诸将欲剿灭叛王之党，德进独持异议，他向皇帝说明上天有好生之德，要缓兵以待叛王投降。
English: The generals wanted to annihilate the traitor's party, but Dejin was the sole dissenter. He explained to the emperor that heaven has the virtue of a good life, and that the army should be delayed until the traitor surrendered.

古文：俄奏言： 叛始由惑于妖言，遂谋不轨，宜括天下术士，设阴阳教官，使训学者，仍岁贡有成者一人。 
现代文：他又上奏说： 叛变之始，由于为妖言所迷惑，才谋图不轨的。宜搜集天下的术士，设阴阳教官以训之，每岁贡一个有成就的人。 
English: He went on to say: At the beginning of the rebellion, because they were bewitched by the oracle, they plotted to go astray. It is advisable to collect magicians from all over the world, set up Yin and Yang instructors to train them, and pay tribute to an accomplished person every year.

古文：帝从之，遂著为令。
现代文：皇帝采纳了他的话，并成为制度。
English: The emperor took his words and made them into a system.

古文：成宗以皇孙抚军北边，帝遣使授皇太子宝，德进预在行，凡攻战取胜，皆豫克期日，无不验者。
现代文：成宗以皇孙的身份在北边带兵，世祖遣使授与成宗以皇太子印，德进也在使者行列，凡攻战取胜，德进皆能先定日期，事后总得应验。
English: Chengzong led the troops in the north as the grandson of the emperor. The ancestor sent an envoy to award Chengzong with the crown prince's seal. Dejin was also among the envoys. Dejin can set the date first for every victory in battle, and it must be fulfilled afterwards.

古文：亦间言事得失，多所裨益。
现代文：有时也言事得失，使成宗得到教益。
English: Sometimes, Chengzong learned from his mistakes.

古文：成宗即位，历陈世祖进贤纳谏、咨询治乱之原，帝嘉纳之。
现代文：后来，成宗即位，德进又历陈世祖如何进贤纳谏，咨询治乱的原因等事情，成宗认为他说得有理，也采纳了。
English: Later, when Chengzong ascended to the throne, Dejin went through the story of how Chen Shizhu received the imperial edict and consulted on the causes of the turmoil, etc. Chengzong thought he was right and also adopted it.

古文：授昭文馆大学士，知太史院，领司天台事，赐金带宴服。
现代文：成宗还授他为昭文馆大学士，知太史院，领司天台事，赐金带宴服。
English: Chengzong also awarded him the degree of Shouwenguang University Scholar, Zhitai History Institute, Tiantai Leader, and gave him a gold belt to wear at the banquet.

古文：都城以荻苫廪，或请以瓦易之，帝以问德进，对曰： 若是役骤兴，物必踊贵，民力重困，臣愚未见其可。 
现代文：都城以荻草编成的草荐来遮盖仓库，有人要求代之以瓦，帝问德进，答道 ：若此事办起来，物价必然上涨，人民的经济承受力会遇到大的困难，我不能认为这样是对的。 
English: The capital covered the warehouses with straw mats made of reeds. Some people asked to replace them with tiles. The emperor asked Dejin and replied: If this is done, prices will inevitably rise, and the people's economic capacity will encounter great difficulties. I can't think this is right.

古文：议遂寝。
现代文：于是盖瓦的意见没有采纳。
English: The discussion then came to an end.

古文：敕中书自今凡集议政事，必使德进预焉。
现代文：帝下令中书，自今以后，凡集议政事，必定要使德进参加。
English: According to the imperial decree, from now on, anyone who gathers to discuss political affairs must have Dejin participate.

古文：所建明多见于施行。
现代文：故德进的建议，多被采纳施行。
English: Most of the recommendations of the late Dejin were adopted and implemented.

古文：寻以病丐闲。
现代文：不久，因为生病，德进要求休假。
English: Soon after, because of illness, Dejin asked for a leave of absence.

古文：仁宗时在东宫，特令中书加官以留之。会车驾自上京还，召见白海行宫，授资德大夫、中书右丞，议通政院事。
现代文：仁宗还在东宫当太子的时候，特令中书给德进加官以挽留德进，恰好帝自上京还，召见德进于白海行宫，授德进以资德大夫、中书右丞、议通政院事。
English: When Ninsong was still the crown prince in the East Palace, he issued a special order in the middle of the book to give Dejin an additional official to retain Dejin. Just as the emperor returned to Beijing, he summoned Dejin to the White Sea to the palace, and awarded Dejin with the title of doctor of finance, the middle of the book, and the discussion of the political affairs.

古文：仁宗即位，命领太史院事，力辞不允。
现代文：及仁宗即位，命德进领太史院事。他力辞，仁宗不允，后因病去世。
English: When Emperor Ninsong ascended to the throne, he ordered Dede to be promoted to the position of the Grand Historian. He insisted, but Emperor Ninsong did not agree, and Emperor Ninsong later died of illness.

古文：以疾卒于位。赠推诚赞治功臣、荣禄大夫、大司徒、柱国、魏国公，谥文穆。
现代文：赠推诚赞治功臣、荣禄大夫、大司徒、柱国、魏国公，谥文穆。子道泰为工部侍郎。
English: Presents were given to Zhencheng Zanzhi, a meritorious vassal, Ronglu Daifu, Dazhi Tuo, Zhu Guo, Wei Guo Gong, and Zou Wenmu. His son Doutai was a chamberlain in the engineering department.

古文：子泰，工部侍郎。张康，字汝安，号明远，潭州湘潭人。
现代文：张康字汝安，号明远，潭州湘潭人。
English: Zhang Kang Zi Ruan, known as Mingyuan, is from Tanzhou, Xiangtan.

古文：祖安厚，父世英。
现代文：祖名安厚，父名世英。
English: His ancestral name was Ankoh, and his father's name was Shimei.

古文：康早孤力学，旁通术数。
现代文：康早年丧父，学习努力，还通晓算命卜卦。
English: Kang lost his father at an early age, studied hard, and learned fortune-telling.

古文：宋吕文德、江万里、留梦炎皆推重之，辟置幕下。
现代文：宋朝吕文德、江万里、留梦炎都很推重他，召他于幕下。
English: Lu Wende, Jiang Wanli, and Lu Mengyan of the Song Dynasty all pushed him and called him to the backstage.

古文：宋亡，隐衡山。
现代文：宋亡后，在衡山隐居。
English: After Song's death, he lived in seclusion in Hengshan.

古文：至元十四年，世祖遣中丞崔彧祀南岳，就访隐逸。
现代文：至元十四年，世祖遣中丞崔祭南岳，顺便访问当地的隐逸之士。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the ancestor sent Chujo Cui to the Nangaku Festival to visit the local secluded people.

古文：彧兄湖南行省参政崔斌言康隐衡山，学通天文地理。
现代文：兄崔斌是湖南行省参政，对谈到康在衡山隐居的情况，并说他学通天文、地理。
English: His elder brother, Cui Bin, was a provincial politician in Hunan Province. He talked about the situation of Kang's seclusion in Hengshan, and said that he was well versed in astronomy and geography.

古文：彧还，具以闻，遣使召康，与斌偕至京师。
现代文：回京，将此情况告世祖，世祖便遣使召见康，康与崔斌同到京师。
English: He returned to Beijing and reported the situation to his ancestor, who then sent an envoy to summon Kang. Kang and Cui Bin went to Beijing together.

古文：十五年夏四月，至上都见帝，亲试所学，大验，授著作佐郎，仍以内嫔松夫人妻之。
现代文：十五年夏四月，在上都见世祖，世祖亲自考试他的学问，果然很不错，乃授与著作佐郎头衔，还将内嫔松夫人嫁给他。
English: In April of the summer of the fifteenth year, he met Shiso in Shangdu. Shiso personally examined his learning, and it was indeed very good. He was awarded the title of Shosakusaro, and married Mrs. Uchisho to him.

古文：十八年，康上奏： 岁壬午，太一理艮宫，主大将客、参将囚，直符治事，正属燕分。明年春，京城当有盗兵，事干将相。 
现代文：凡在召见答问之时，总给予丰厚的礼遇，称他 明远 而不直呼其名。世祖曾当面对他说，凡所问的事，都可畅所欲言。十八年，康上奏皇帝，说根据星象，明年春天，京城当有盗兵，事关朝中将相。
English: Whenever he was summoned to answer questions, he was always treated with great courtesy, and he was referred to as Mingyuan (明远) rather than by his first name. The ancestor once said to him face to face that he could speak freely about anything he asked. In 18 years, Emperor Kang Zengso said that according to the stars, next spring, there would be robbers in the capital, and it would be a matter of the generals of the dynasty.

古文：十九年三月，盗果起京师，杀阿合马等。
现代文：十九年三月，京师果然有盗兴起，杀死阿合马等。
English: In March of the 19th year, there was indeed a bandit rising in Beijing, killing a horse and so on.

古文：帝欲征日本，命康以太一推之，康奏曰： 南国甫定，民力未苏，且今年太一无算，举兵不利。 
现代文：世祖欲征日本，命康以道学推算。康说，南方刚平定，民力没有恢复，且今年天象显示出兵不利。
English: Kang said that the south has just been pacified, the people's strength has not recovered, and this year's celestial phenomenon shows that the soldiers are unfavorable.

古文：从之。
现代文：帝听后，没有出兵。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：尝赐太史院钱，分千贯以与康，不受，众服其廉。
现代文：又帝曾赠钱给太史院时，分出一千贯钱给康，康未接受，众人都佩服他廉洁。
English: When Emperor Taishi once gave money to Taishi Academy, he allocated a thousand crowns to Kang, but Kang did not accept it. Everyone admired his integrity.

古文：久之，乞归田里，优诏不许，迁奉直大夫、秘书监丞。
现代文：久之，要求回家，帝亲切挽留，迁任直奉大夫、秘书监丞。
English: After a long time, he asked to go home, but the emperor kindly kept him on, and he was transferred to the post of direct assistant doctor, secretary and supervisor.

古文：年六十五卒。
现代文：年六十五去世。
English: He died in 1965.

古文：家既富厚，无事于技，操有余以自重，人不敢以医名之。
现代文：李杲字明之，出身镇之富豪家。幼好医学，曾捐千金就学于燕赵名医易人张元素，数年就学到了张元素的医术。因家境富裕，不愿以行医为业，只作为业余爱好，所以人们不敢称他为医生。
English: Li Xizhi was born into a wealthy family in the town. As a child, he was good at medicine. He donated thousands of yuan to study the famous medicine of Yan Zhao and Zhang element, and learned the medicine of Zhang element for several years. Because of his wealthy family, he did not want to practice medicine as a career, but only as a hobby, so people did not dare to call him a doctor.

古文：大夫士或病其资性高謇，少所降屈，非危急之疾，不敢谒也。
现代文：士大夫也怕他禀性清高正直，很少圆通，如非危急之症，也不敢贸然求他医治。
English: The magistrate is also afraid of his stubbornness, clarity, and honesty, and he is rarely well-rounded. If it is not a critical illness, he will not dare to ask him for treatment.

古文：其学于伤寒、痈疽、眼目病为尤长。
现代文：李杲在医学方面，伤寒、痈疽、眼等科尤为所长。
English: In terms of medicine, Li Wei is especially a director of typhoid fever, gangrene, eye and other departments.

古文：北京人王善甫，为京兆酒官，病小便不利，目睛凸出，腹胀如鼓，膝以上坚硬欲裂，饮食且不下，甘淡渗泄之药皆不效。
现代文：北京人王善甫为京兆酒官，小便不通，眼睛凸出，腹胀如鼓，膝以上坚硬，饮食不下。吃各种甜淡的渗透与排泄之药，都不见效。
English: Wang Shanfu, a Beijing resident, is an official of the Beijing Municipal Bureau of Alcoholic Beverages. He cannot pass urine, his eyes are protruding, his abdomen is swollen like a drum, he is stiff above the knees, and he cannot eat. He takes all kinds of sweet and light drugs for penetration and excretion, but they have no effect.

古文：杲谓众医曰： 疾深矣。
现代文：杲对诸医生说： 此病沉重了！
English: The baboon said to the doctors: This disease is serious!

古文：《内经》有之：膀胱者，津液之府，必气化乃出焉。
现代文：《内经》曾说过，膀胱乃津液之府，必先气化，津液乃出。
English: "The Inner Canon" once said that the bladder is the home of sexual fluid, which must first be vaporized, and then sexual fluid is released.

古文：今用渗泄之剂而病益甚者，是气不化也。启玄子云： 无阳者阴无以生，无阴者阳无以化。 
现代文：今用渗透和排泄之药而病加重，是因为气不化的缘故，启玄子说 ：无阳则阴无以生，无阴则阳无以化。 
English: The reason why the disease is aggravated by the medicine of penetration and excretion is because the qi does not change, Kai Xuan Zi said: Without yang, yin cannot be born, and without yin, yang cannot be transformed.

古文：甘淡渗泄皆阳药，独阳无阴，其欲化得乎？ 
现代文：现在吃的都是阳药，只有阳而没有阴，怎能气化呢？ 
English: What we eat now is all yang medicine. There is only yang and no yin. How can it be vaporized?

古文：明日，以群阴之剂投，不再服而愈。
现代文：次日，便使服纯阴药，没等吃第二剂病便愈了。
English: The next day, she took pure yin medicine and was cured without waiting for the second dose.

古文：西台掾萧君瑞，二月中病伤寒发热，医以白虎汤投之，病者面黑如墨，本证不复见，脉沉细，小便不禁。
现代文：西台萧君瑞二月中患伤寒，发高烧，医生使服白虎汤，病者面黑如墨，本症虽消失，但脉沉细，小便失禁。
English: Xiao Junrui of Xidai suffered from typhoid fever in mid-February. He had a high fever. The doctor made him drink white tiger soup. The patient's face was as black as ink. Although the disease had disappeared, his pulse was shallow and he was incontinent.

古文：杲初不知用何药，及诊之，曰： 此立夏前误用白虎汤之过。
现代文：杲初不知用何药，诊视后便说： 这是立夏前误服白虎汤的过错。
English: At first, she didn't know what medicine to use. After the examination, she said, "It's the fault of taking Baihu Tang by mistake before the summer."

古文：白虎汤大寒，非行经之药，止能寒腑藏，不善用之，则伤寒本病隐曲于经络之间。或更以大热之药救之，以苦阴邪，则他证必起，非所以救白虎也。
现代文：白虎汤大寒，非通经络之药，该药只能寒腑脏。不善用此药，则伤寒本病便隐于经络之间，如更以大热之药救之，以大热克大寒，则必引发别的病，这不是挽救因错服白虎汤而患他病的办法。
English: Baihu Tang Dajian, a medicine that does not pass through the meridians, the medicine can only chill the body. If this medicine is not used well, the typhoid disease will be hidden between the meridians. If it is saved by the medicine of great heat, and the great cold is cured by great heat, it will inevitably cause other diseases. This is not a way to save other diseases caused by taking Baihu Tang incorrectly.

古文：有温药之升阳行经者，吾用之。 
现代文：我的治法是采用升阳通经的温药。 
English: My cure is to use the warm medicine of the rising sun.

古文：有难者曰： 白虎大寒，非大热何以救，君之治奈何？ 
现代文：有人故意为难他，说： 白虎大寒，非大热不能救；你不用大热，何以能治？ 
English: Some people deliberately puzzled him, saying: "White tiger, big cold, can't be saved without big heat; if you don't need big heat, how can you cure it?

古文：杲曰： 病隐于经络间，阳不升则经不行，经行而本证见矣。本证又何难焉。 
现代文：杲说 ：伤寒病服白虎汤后，本症隐于经络之间，阳不升则经不通，经通才能见本症伤寒，伤寒显露后，就不难治了。 
English: Zou said: After the typhoid fever wears the white tiger soup, the disease is hidden between the meridians. If the sun does not rise, it will not pass through the meridians. It is only through the meridians that the disease can be seen. After the typhoid fever is revealed, it is not difficult to cure.

古文：果如其言而愈。
现代文：杲乃用温药，萧病果如其言而愈。
English: He used warm medicine, and his symptoms improved as he said.

古文：魏邦彦之妻，目翳暴生，从下而上，其色绿，肿痛不可忍。杲云： 翳从下而上，病从阳明来也。
现代文：魏邦彦之妻，眼睛突然生绿翳，从下而上，肿痛难忍。杲说： 翳自下而上，病从阳明而来。
English: Wei Bangyan's wife, her eyes suddenly turned green and swollen from the bottom up, and the pain was unbearable. She said: "It's from the bottom up, the disease comes from the sun.

古文：既效矣，而他日病复作者三，其所从来之经，与翳色各异。乃曰： 诸脉皆属于目，脉病则目从之。
现代文：绿非正色，可能是肺与肾都患了病。 于是，杲用药泻肺肾的邪气，病情有好转，但后来又复发几次。李杲说 ：诸脉皆与目连续，脉病则目也随之有病。
English: Green is not a positive color, it may be that both the lungs and the kidneys are diseased. As a result, the evil spirits of the lungs and kidneys were eased with medicine, and the condition improved, but later it relapsed several times. Li Wei said: All veins are continuous with the eyes, and if the pulse is diseased, the eyes will also be diseased.

古文：此必经络不调，经不调，则目病未已也。 
现代文：此必经络不调，经不调，则目病不会好。 
English: If this is the case, the meridians will not be in tune, and if the meridians are not in tune, the eyes will not be good.

古文：问之果然，因如所论而治之，疾遂不作。
现代文：问之，果然如是。于是便按他的话诊治，病乃愈。
English: I asked him about it, and sure enough, that's what happened. So I followed his advice and was diagnosed and treated, and my illness went away.

古文：冯叔献之侄栎，年十五六，病伤寒，目赤而顿渴，脉七八至，医欲以承气汤下之，已煮药，而杲适从外来，冯告之故。杲切脉，大骇曰： 几杀此儿。
现代文：冯叔献之侄冯栎，年十五、六岁，害伤寒病，眼红，经常口渴，脉在一呼一吸间有七八次。医生想让他服 承气汤 。正在熬药时，杲适从外来，听冯讲病情及用药处方，大惊： 几乎杀死此儿了。
English: Uncle Feng's nephew Feng Yao, aged 15 and 6, suffers from typhoid fever, has red eyes, is often thirsty, and has a pulse rate of seven or eight beats per breath. The doctor wants him to take qi soup. When he was preparing the medicine, he was surprised to hear Feng explain the condition and prescription of the medicine from the outside. He said, "I almost died here."

古文：《内经》有言： 在脉，诸数为热，诸迟为寒。 
现代文：《内经》有言： 在脉的方面，脉搏快速则常为热症，缓慢则常为寒症。 
English: "The Inner Canon" says: In terms of pulse, a fast pulse is often a fever, and a slow pulse is often a cold.

古文：今脉八九至，是热极也。
现代文：今脉在一呼一吸间至七八次，是极热也。
English: The current pulse goes up to seven or eight times between one call and one inhalation, it is also extremely hot.

古文：而《会要大论》云： 病有脉从而病反者何也？
现代文：《会要大论》说 ：病有脉顺而病反者，是什么原故呢？
English: "Congressional Review" said: "What is the reason for those who are ill and have a pulse and are ill?

古文：脉至而从，按之不鼓，诸阳皆然。 
现代文：脉至而顺，按之不鼓胀，各种实热的阳症都是这样。 
English: The pulse is smooth, it does not swell, and all kinds of real heat are like this.

古文：此传而为阴证矣。
现代文：此转而为虚寒的阳症。
English: This turns out to be a cold impotence.

古文：令持姜、附来，吾当以热因寒用法处之。 
现代文：因其热是寒起作用的缘故，故今用姜及附子等热性药物，采用治寒症的办法来医治。 
English: Because its heat is caused by cold, it is now treated with hot drugs such as ginger and aconite to treat colds.

古文：药未就而病者爪甲变，顿服者八两，汗寻出而愈。
现代文：药未就时病者的指甲变色，顿时服八两，马上出汗而病愈了。
English: When the medicine did not work, the patient's fingernails discolored, he immediately took two pills, immediately sweated and recovered.

古文：陕帅郭巨济病偏枯，二指著足底不能伸，杲以长针刺骫中，深至骨而不知痛，出血一二升，其色如墨，又且谬刺之。
现代文：杲用长针刺骨曲处，深至骨而不知痛，出黑血一二升。
English: Long needles were used to pierce the bony folds, which was painless and went deep into the bone. One or two liters of black blood came out.

古文：如此者六七，服药三月，病良已。
现代文：又刺六七次，服药三月，病乃愈。
English: He was stung another six or seven times, took medicine for three months, and his illness was cured.

古文：裴择之妻病寒热，月事不至者数年，已喘嗽矣。
现代文：裴择之妻患寒热病，既喘且咳，月经不至已数年。
English: Peizhe's wife was suffering from a cold and fever, she was wheezing and coughing, and she had not had a period for several years.

古文：医者率以蛤蚧、桂、附之药投之，杲曰： 不然，夫病阴为阳所搏，温剂太过，故无益而反害。
现代文：医者一般使服蛤蚧、桂、附子等药，杲不以为然，他认为，此病是寒为热所包，治以温剂则过热，不唯无益，而且有害。
English: Doctors generally use drugs such as ginger, cinnamon, and aconite, but he does not think so. He believes that this disease is caused by cold and heat, and the treatment with warming agents is overheating, which is not only useless, but also harmful.

古文：投以寒血之药，则经行矣。 
现代文：若投以寒血之药，则经便通了。
English: If cold-blooded medicine is used, it will pass through the stool.

古文：已而果然。
现代文：后来果然是这样。
English: Afterward, it really was like that.

古文：杲之设施多类此。
现代文：杲治病的办法，很多都是这样。
English: Many of the methods of treating diseases are like this.

古文：当时之人，皆以神医目之。所著书，今多传于世云。
现代文：当时的人皆视为神医。其所著之书，今多流传于世。
English: People at the time regarded him as a divine physician, and many of his books have been passed down to this day.

古文：工艺孙威，浑源人。
现代文：孙威，浑源人。
English: Sun Wei is from Hunyuan.

古文：幼沉鸷，有巧思。
现代文：年幼时沉着勇猛，思想敏锐。
English: When he was young, he was calm and brave, with a sharp mind.

古文：金贞祐间，应募为兵，以骁勇称。
现代文：金朝贞年间，应募为兵，以骁勇闻名。
English: During the reign of Kim Jong Il, he enlisted as a soldier and became famous for his bravery.

古文：及云中来附，守帅表授义军千户，从军攻潞州，破凤翔，皆有功。
现代文：及自云中归附蒙古，蒙古守帅表授孙威为义军千户，随军攻潞州，破凤翔，皆有战功。
English: And since Yunzhong was annexed to Mongolia, the Mongolian commander-in-chief awarded Sun Wei a thousand households as a rebel army, followed the army to attack Bozhou, and defeated Fengxiang. All of them have war exploits.

古文：善为甲，尝以意制蹄筋翎根铠以献，太祖亲射之，不能彻，大悦。赐名也可兀兰，佩以金符，授顺天安平怀州河南平阳诸路工匠都总管。
现代文：威又善于制护身之甲，曾精心用蹄筋和鸟毛的根制成铠甲献给太宗。太宗亲自箭射，不能穿破此甲，十分喜悦，特赐威名也可兀兰，还赐佩金符，授顺天、安平、怀州、河南、平阳诸路工匠都总管。
English: He was also good at making body armor. He once made armor for Emperor Taizong with hoof muscles and bird feathers. Emperor Taizong personally shot an arrow, but it could not pierce the armor. He was very pleased. He also gave Emperor Taizong the special title of "Wanglan" and a gold badge. He was also given the title of "Head of Craftsmen of Shuntian, Anping, Huizhou, Henan and Pingyang."

古文：从攻邠、乾，突战不避矢石，帝劳之曰： 汝纵不自爱，独不为吾甲胄计乎！ 
现代文：孙威随太宗攻、乾等地时，勇往直前，不避矢石。帝安慰他说： 你即使不自爱，难道还能不为我的甲胄着想而去冒死吗？ 
English: When Sun Wei followed Emperor Taizong to attack, conquer and so on, he bravely advanced and did not avoid the arrow stones. The emperor comforted him and said, "Even if you do not love yourself, can you not risk death for the sake of my armor?"

古文：因命诸将衣其甲者问曰： 汝等知所爱重否？ 
现代文：因而询问诸将中穿有威的铠甲的人说 ：你们知道你们爱重的东西吗？ 
English: So he asked the generals, who were dressed in full armour: "Do you know what you hold dear?

古文：诸将对，皆失旨意。
现代文：诸将的回答，都不合帝意。
English: None of the generals' answers were in line with the emperor's wishes.

古文：太宗曰： 能捍蔽尔辈以与我国家立功者，非威之甲耶！
现代文：太宗乃说 ：能保卫你们而为我国家立功的，难道不是威所制的铠甲吗？
English: Taizong said, "Isn't it the armor made by you that can defend you and make a contribution to our country?"

古文：而尔辈言不及此，何也？ 
现代文：你们都不提此事，是何缘故？ 
English: You don't talk about it. Why?

古文：复以锦衣赐威。
现代文：又以锦衣赐孙威。
English: He also gave Sun Wei a brocade robe.

古文：每从战伐，恐民有横被屠戮者，辄以搜简工匠为言，而全活之。
现代文：威每次随帝出征，恐民众横遭杀戮，便常以搜聚工匠为名，使百姓都能得以活命。
English: Every time Emperor Wei went to war with the emperor, he was afraid that the people would be killed, so he often called for the gathering of craftsmen so that the people could live.

古文：岁庚子，卒，年五十八。
现代文：太宗十二年逝世，时五十八岁。
English: Taizong died at the age of fifty-eight in the twelfth year of his reign.

古文：至大二年，赠中奉大夫、武备院使、神川郡公，谥忠惠。
现代文：至大二年，赠中奉大夫、武备院使、神川郡公，谥忠惠。
English: In her second year of university, she was given the titles of middle school doctor, military attaché to the Imperial Palace, and governor of Kamikawa County.

古文：子拱，为监察御史，后袭顺天安平怀州河南等路甲匠都总管。巧思如其父，尝制甲二百八十袭以献。
现代文：威之子孙拱，为监察御史，后继为顺天、安平、怀州、河南等路甲匠都总管，聪明如其父，曾制造铠甲二百八十件献上。
English: Wei's son, Sun Gong, was the overseer of the imperial history, and later became the general manager of armor makers in Shuntian, Anping, Huizhou, and Henan. He was as clever as his father, and once made 280 pieces of armor for presentation.

古文：至元十一年，别制叠盾，其制，张则为盾，敛则合而易持。
现代文：至元十一年，另又制造叠盾。其制法，打开则为盾，收起来则合而便于携带。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, a stacked shield was also made. The method of making it was to open it as a shield, and then close it so that it was easy to carry.

古文：世祖以为古所未有，赐以币帛。
现代文：世祖因见此物是古所未有的，是一大发明，故赐以币帛。
English: The founder of the world, seeing that this was unprecedented and a great invention, gave him a money bowl.

古文：丞相伯颜南征，以甲胄不足，诏诸路集匠民分制。
现代文：丞相伯颜南征时，因甲和头盔不足，世祖下诏要诸路集中匠民分制。
English: At the time of the Southern Expedition of the Minister of War, because of the shortage of armor and helmets, the founder of the dynasty decreed that all roads should be concentrated in the division of craftsmen and the people.

古文：拱董顺天、河间甲匠，先期毕工，且象虎豹异兽之形，各殊其制，皆称旨。
现代文：拱统帅顺天、河间的甲匠，提前完成任务。而且样子都呈虎豹异兽的形状，制法各不相同，但都能合帝的要求。
English: The arch-commander Shuntian and the armourer of Kawama completed their tasks ahead of schedule. Moreover, the appearance was in the shape of a tiger and a leopard. The production methods were different, but they all met the emperor's requirements.

古文：十五年，授保定路治中。
现代文：十五年，授拱保定路治中。
English: Fifteen years later, he was awarded the Arch of Baoding Luji Middle School.

古文：适岁饥，议开仓赈民，或曰： 宜请于朝。 
现代文：恰好此时闹饥荒，商议开仓赈民，有人说 ：宜请示朝廷。 
English: Just at this time, there was a famine, and people began to discuss opening storehouses to feed the people. Some people said, "It would be better to ask the imperial court."

古文：拱曰： 救荒事不可缓也，若得请而后发粟以赈之，则民馁死矣。
现代文：拱说： 救荒事不宜迟，若请示后再发粟赈饥，则老百姓都已饿死了。
English: Gong said: It is not appropriate to start the relief work late. If the famine occurs again after the request, then the people have already starved to death.

古文：苟见罪，吾自任之。 
现代文：假若皇上见罪，由我担当。 
English: If the emperor is found guilty, I will be in charge.

古文：遂发粟四千五百石以赈饥民。
现代文：于是发粟四千五百石以赈饥民。
English: As a result, 4,500 koku of poppy seeds were planted to feed the hungry.

古文：高阳土豪据沙河桥取行者钱，人以为病，拱执而罪之。
现代文：高阳土豪霸占沙河桥以收过路行人的钱，人以为害，拱将他抓起来治罪。
English: Gaoyang local tyrants occupied the Shahe Bridge to collect money from passers-by. People thought it was harmful, so they arrested him and punished him.

古文：二十二年，除武备少卿，迁大都路军器人匠总管，升工部侍郎。
现代文：二十二年，世祖先后任命他为武备少卿、大都路军器人匠总管、工部侍郎。
English: Twenty-two years later, he was appointed as Wu Bei Shaoqing (武備少卿), the general manager of the military ware craftsmen of Datu Road, and the chamberlain of the workshop.

古文：成宗即位，典朝会供给，赐银百两、织纹段五十匹、帛二十五匹、钞万贯。
现代文：成宗即位，拱负责朝会供给，得赐银百两、锦缎五十匹、帛二十五尺、钞万贯。
English: Chengzong ascended the throne, and the arch was responsible for supplying the imperial court. He was given 100 taels of silver, 50 koi carp, 25 shaku of bamboo shoots, and 10,000 yuan in banknotes.

古文：元贞二年，授大同路总管，兼府尹。
现代文：元贞二年授大同路总管，兼府尹。
English: In her second year, Yuan Zhen was awarded the post of the chief administrator of Tonglu, and also the post of prefectural governor.

古文：大德五年，迁两浙都转运使。
现代文：大德五年迁两浙都转运使。
English: In the fifth year of the Great German Reunification, the two capitals of Zhejiang Province were transferred.

古文：盐课旧二十五万引，岁不能足，拱至增五万引，遂为定额。
现代文：盐税原有二十五万引，年用不足。拱至，增加五万引，逐成定额。
English: The salt tax was originally 250,000 dinars, which was insufficient for annual use. It has been raised to 50,000 dinars, which is a fixed amount.

古文：九年，改益都路总管，兼府尹，仍出内府弓矢宝刀赐之。
现代文：九年，又改任拱为益都路总管，兼府尹，将内府弓、矢、宝刀赐与他。
English: In the ninth year, he was reappointed as the general manager of Yidu Road and the prefectural governor, and the bow, arrow and sword of the prefectural government were given to him.

古文：卒于官。
现代文：后来死在任上。
English: He died in office.

古文：赠大司农、神川郡公，谥文庄。
现代文：赠大司农、神川郡公，谥文庄。
English: He was awarded the title of Grand Secretary of Agriculture and the title of Kanagawa County Governor.

古文：阿老瓦丁，回回氏，西域木发里人也。
现代文：阿老瓦丁，回族，西域木发里人。
English: Ah Lao Wading, Hui ethnic group, Xidi Mufari people.

古文：至元八年，世祖遣使炮匠于宗王阿不哥，王以阿老瓦丁、亦思马因应诏，二人举家驰驿至京师，给以官舍。
现代文：至元八年，世祖派人向宗王阿不哥征发炮匠，王便将阿老瓦丁及亦思马因献给世祖，二人全家便由驿站赶到京师。
English: In the 8th year of the 1st century, the patriarch sent a man to request a gunner from the patriarch Anko, and the king then offered Alaowadin and Ismaein to the patriarch, and the whole family of the two rushed from the post station to the capital.

古文：首造大炮竖于五门前，帝命试之，各赐衣段。
现代文：给世祖建作坊，第一批造的大炮立于五门前，试放成功，各赐衣缎若干。
English: A workshop was built for Shizu, and the first batch of cannons were set up in front of five doors. The trial firing was successful, and each was given a number of coats of arms.

古文：十一年，国兵渡江，平章阿里海牙遣使求炮手匠，命阿老瓦丁往，破潭州、静江等郡，悉赖其力。
现代文：十一年元军渡江，平章阿里海牙遣使求炮匠，乃命阿老瓦丁前往，破潭州、静江等郡，都是靠阿老瓦丁之力。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, the army crossed the Yangtze River. Pingzhang Ali of the Hague sent an envoy to ask for a gunner, but he was ordered by Alaowading to go. The counties of Batangzhou and Jingjiang all relied on Alaowading's strength.

古文：十五年，授宣武将军、管军总管。
现代文：十五年，元帝授阿老瓦丁为宣武将军、管军总管。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Yuan conferred the title of Xuanwu General to Alowading, and he became the commander-in-chief of the army.

古文：十七年，陛见，赐钞五千贯。
现代文：十七年，在元帝宫殿的台阶前召见，赐钞五千贯。
English: In the seventeenth year, he summoned me in front of the steps of the Yuan Emperor's palace and gave me five thousand yuan in banknotes.

古文：十八年，命屯田于南京。
现代文：十八年，又命屯田于南京。
English: In 18 years, he was again ordered to settle in Nanjing.

古文：二十二年，枢密院奉旨，改元帅府为回回炮手军匠上万户府，以阿老瓦丁为副万户。
现代文：二十二年枢密院奉旨，改元帅府为回回炮手军匠上万户府，以阿老瓦丁为副万户。
English: In 1922, by order of the Privy Council, the Marshal's Office was changed to the Office of the Returning Gunner, the Armourer, and the Ten Thousand Households, with Arowadin as the Deputy Ten Thousand Households.

古文：大德四年告老。子富谋只，袭副万户。
现代文：大德四年告老，子富谋只，继袭副万户。
English: Dade was four years old, and only his son, Fu Mu, succeeded to the vice-ten thousand households.

古文：皇庆元年卒，子马哈马沙袭。
现代文：皇庆元年去世，子马哈马沙继之。
English: Emperor Qing died in the first year of the year, followed by his son Ma Hamasa.

古文：亦思马因，回回氏，西域旭烈人也。
现代文：亦思马因，回族，西域旭烈人。
English: He is also a Ma'in, a member of the Hui ethnic group, and a member of the Western Hui ethnic group.

古文：善造炮，至元八年与阿老瓦丁至京师。
现代文：会造炮，至元八年与阿老瓦丁同至京师。
English: He learned how to make cannons, and in the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he went to Beijing with Alaowading.

古文：十年，从国兵攻襄阳未下，亦思马因相地势，置炮于城东南隅，重一百五十斤，机发，声震天地，所击无不摧陷，入地七尺。
现代文：十年，随元军攻打襄阳，未攻下。亦思马因观察地势后，置炮于城的东南角。炮重一百五十斤，机关一发动，声震天地，炮弹入地七尺，可说无坚不摧。
English: Ten years later, the Yuan army attacked Xiangyang, but failed to capture it. After observing the terrain, Yishima placed a cannon in the southeast corner of the city. The cannon weighed 150 pounds, and once the organ was launched, the sound shook the heavens and the earth, and the cannonball fell seven feet into the ground, which can be said to be indestructible.

古文：宋安抚吕文焕惧，以城降。
现代文：宋朝安抚吕文焕很骇怕，便投降了。
English: Lu Wenhuan, the pacifier of the Song Dynasty, was so terrified that he surrendered.

古文：既而以功赐银二百五十两，命为回回炮手总管，佩虎符。
现代文：因为立了功，世祖赐银二百五十两，命为回回炮手总管，佩虎符。
English: Because of his meritorious service, the ancestor gave him 250 taels of silver and ordered him to be the chief gunner and wear a tiger emblem.

古文：十一年，以疾卒。子布伯袭职。
现代文：十一年因病逝世，子布伯袭职。
English: He died of illness in the eleventh year, and his son Buber succeeded him.

古文：时国兵渡江，宋兵陈于南岸，拥舟师迎战，布伯于北岸竖炮以击之，舟悉沉没。后每战用之，皆有功。
现代文：当元军渡江时，宋兵列阵于南岸，还拥有水军准备迎战。布伯在北岸竖炮击宋军，击沉宋军所有的兵船，后来每次战斗，只要用布伯的炮击，都会立功。
English: When the Yuan army crossed the river, the Song soldiers were lined up on the south bank, and they also had a naval force ready to meet the battle. Buber shelled the Song army on the north bank, sinking all the warships of the Song army. Later, every battle, as long as it was shelled by Buber, would be meritorious.

古文：十八年，佩三珠虎符，加镇国上将军、回回炮手都元帅。
现代文：十八年，世祖赐布伯佩三珠虎符、加镇国上将军、回回炮手都元帅。
English: In the 18th year, the founder gave Bu Bo Pei the Three Pearl Tiger Emblem, the title of general, and the title of marshal.

古文：明年，改军匠万户府万户。
现代文：十九年，改任为军匠万户府万户，迁刑部尚书。
English: In 19 years, he was reappointed as a military craftsman of Wanyufu Wanyufu, and moved to the Penal Department.

古文：子亚古袭。阿尼哥，尼波罗国人也，其国人称之曰八鲁布。
现代文：又封其弟亦不剌金为万户，佩元降虎符，任广威将军。布伯不久又进通奉大夫、浙东道宣慰使，赐钞二万五千贯，以供养老。阿尼哥，尼波罗国人，本国人称他为八鲁布。
English: In addition, his younger brother was also awarded the title of million households, and Pei Yuan was demoted to the rank of tiger, and was appointed as Guangwei General. Bu Bo soon became a doctor of medicine and a consolation envoy of Zhejiang Province, and was given a banknote of twenty-five thousand crowns to provide for his old age. Anigo, a native of Niporo, was called eight rupees by his countrymen.

古文：幼敏悟异凡儿，稍长，诵习佛书，期年能晓其义。
现代文：幼时与一般孩童不同，特别聪明，稍长能诵习佛经。一年后能知其义。
English: When he was young, he was different from other children. He was very smart and could recite Buddhist sutras a little longer. He was able to understand their meaning after a year.

古文：同学有为绘画妆塑业者，读《尺寸经》，阿尼哥一闻，即能记。
现代文：同学中，有为绘画或雕塑业的，读《尺寸经》，阿尼哥听一遍，便能记住。
English: Among his classmates, there are some who are good at painting or sculpture. When reading "Dimension Sutra," Anigo can listen to it once and remember it.

古文：长善画塑，及铸金为像。
现代文：长大后，会绘画雕塑，还能铸金为像。
English: When he grows up, he will be able to paint and sculpt, as well as cast gold statues.

古文：中统元年，命帝师八合斯巴建黄金塔于吐蕃，尼波罗国选匠百人往成之，得八十人，求部送之人未得。
现代文：中统元年世祖命帝师八合斯巴建黄金塔于吐蕃，尼波罗国要挑选一百个工匠去完成，但只得八十人。要求地区送人，未送走。
English: In the first year of the Middle Kingdom, Emperor Yahe of Sparta ordered the construction of a golden pagoda in Tubo. Nibiru wanted to select a hundred craftsmen to complete it, but only got eighty. He asked the region to send someone, but they didn't.

古文：阿尼哥年十七，请行，众以其幼，难之。
现代文：阿尼哥年十七，请求前往。众人以为他年幼，难当此任。
English: In the seventeenth year of his life, Anigo asked to go. People thought he was too young to be given the position.

古文：对曰： 年幼心不幼也。 
现代文：阿尼哥却说 ：我年幼但心不幼。 
English: But Anigo said: "I'm young but I'm not young at heart.

古文：乃遣之。
现代文：大家才放他走。
English: And when he had thus spoken, he sent him away.

古文：帝师一见奇之，命监其役。
现代文：帝师一见到他，就感到他有出奇之处，乃命他监督这个工程。
English: As soon as the emperor saw him, he felt that there was something strange about him and ordered him to supervise the project.

古文：明年，塔成，请归，帝师勉以入朝，乃祝发受具为弟子，从帝师入见。
现代文：第二年，塔成，要求回尼波罗国，帝师却勉励他到蒙古的朝廷去。于是，他便削发受戒为弟子，随帝师入朝。
English: The following year, Tacheng asked to return to Nipporu, but the emperor encouraged him to go to the Mongolian court. Therefore, he was ordained as a disciple and entered the court with the emperor.

古文：帝视之久，问曰： 汝来大国，得无惧乎？ 
现代文：帝视之良久，问道 ：你来我大国，不害怕吗？ 
English: For a long time, Teijin asked: Aren't you afraid to come to our great country?

古文：对曰： 圣人子育万方，子至父前，何惧之有。 
现代文：回答说： 圣人像对自己孩子一样抚育万方臣民，那么，孩子到父亲面前，何惧之有？ 
English: He replied, "A sage brings up all subjects of the world as if they were his own children, so what is there to fear when a child comes before his father?

古文：又问： 汝来何为？ 
现代文：帝又问： 你来做什么？ 
English: The emperor asked again: What are you doing here?

古文：对曰： 臣家西域，奉命造塔吐蕃，二载而成。
现代文：答道： 我家在西域，奉命建塔吐蕃，两年便建成了。
English: Answer: My home is in the western region. I was ordered to build a pagoda, and it was completed in two years.

古文：见彼土兵难，民不堪命，愿陛下安辑之，不远万里，为生灵而来耳。 
现代文：但见那里士兵生活艰难，民不堪命，愿陛下安抚他们。所以，我不远万里，是为了百姓的死活而来的。 
English: However, I have seen that the soldiers there have a difficult life, and the people are miserable. May His Majesty appease them. Therefore, I am not thousands of miles away, but have come for the sake of the people.

古文：又问： 汝何所能？ 
现代文：又问： 你有什么能耐呢？ 
English: And he said, What are you able to do?

古文：对曰： 臣以心为师，颇知画塑铸金之艺。 
现代文：答道： 我以心为师，很懂绘画、塑、铸金的手艺。 
English: Answer: I take the heart as my teacher, and I understand the craftsmanship of painting, sculpture and casting very well.

古文：帝命取明堂针灸铜像示之曰： 此宣抚王楫使宋时所进，岁久阙坏，无能修完之者，汝能新之乎？ 
现代文：帝命取明堂针灸铜像给阿尼哥看，并说 ：此宣抚王木戢使宋时所进，岁久阙坏，没有能将它完善地修好的人，你能铸一尊新的吗？ 
English: The emperor ordered to take the bronze statue of Ming-tang acupuncture and moxibustion to show to Anigo, and said, "This Xuan Fu Wang Muxuan was made by Song Dynasty, and it has been deteriorating for a long time. There is no one who can repair it perfectly. Can you cast a new statue?"

古文：对曰： 臣虽未尝为此，请试之。 
现代文：答道： 我虽未曾做此事，但可试试看。 
English: Answer: I haven't done this before, but I can try.

古文：至元二年，新像成，关鬲脉络皆备，金工叹其天巧，莫不愧服。
现代文：至元二年新像成，经络穴位都有，金匠们赞叹他巧夺天工，莫不愧服。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, a new image was made, with meridians and points. Goldsmiths praised his skillful workmanship, which was well-deserved.

古文：凡两京寺观之像，多出其手。
现代文：凡两京之寺与观的像，多由他塑造。
English: All the images of the two temples in Kyoto and the view are mostly shaped by him.

古文：为七宝镔铁法轮，车驾行幸，用以前导。
现代文：他又制七宝镔铁法轮，皇帝车队出行，用为前导。
English: He also made the Cloisonne Iron Law Wheel, which was used as a guide for the emperor's motorcade.

古文：原庙列圣御容，织锦为之，图画弗及也。
现代文：原太庙中各朝皇帝的像，他用丝织成，连图画也不及这些织物逼真。
English: The images of the emperors of all the dynasties in the original temple were woven by him with silk, and even the pictures are not as realistic as these fabrics.

古文：至元十年，始授人匠总管，银章虎符。
现代文：至元十年，始任命他为人匠总管，赐银章、虎符。
English: In the 10th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was first appointed as the chief craftsman, and was given a silver medal and a tiger emblem.

古文：十五年，有诏返初服，授光禄大夫，大司徒，领将作院事，宠遇赏赐，无与为比。
现代文：十五年有诏让阿尼哥辞官，授光禄大夫、大司徒、领将作院事，对其宠遇赏物，是无人可比的。
English: In 15 years, there was a decree to make Anigo a retired official, awarding him the title of doctor, grand steward, and captain, and making him an academician. There is no one comparable to his favors and rewards.

古文：卒，赠太师、开府仪同三司、凉国公、上柱国，谥敏慧。
现代文：去世后，又赠太师、开府仪同三司、凉国公、上柱国，谥敏慧。
English: After his death, he also bestowed the title of Grand Master, the title of Kaifu with three offices, the title of Liang Guogong, the title of Shangzhu Guogong, and the title of Gong Minhui.

古文：子六人，曰阿僧哥，大司徒；阿述腊，诸色人匠总管府达鲁花赤。
现代文：子六人，有阿僧哥，是大司徒。阿述腊，是诸色人匠总管府达鲁花赤。
English: He had six children, one of whom, Asango, was a Daisetsu, and one of whom, Asura, was a master craftsman.

古文：有刘元者，尝从阿尼哥学西天梵相，亦称绝艺。
现代文：刘元曾随阿尼哥学西天佛教相面之术，堪称绝艺。
English: Liu Yuan once followed Anigo to learn the face-to-face technique of Western Buddhism, which can be called a supreme skill.

古文：元字秉元，蓟之宝坻人。
现代文：元字秉元，蓟之宝坻人。
English: The original word is 秉元, which means "treasure" or "person."

古文：始为黄冠，师事青州把道录，传其艺非一。
现代文：始为道士，师从青州把道录，学得许多技艺。
English: He started out as a Taoist monk and studied Taoism with a master from Qingzhou, learning many skills along the way.

古文：至元中，凡两都名刹，塑土、范金、搏换为佛像，出元手者，神思妙合，天下称之。
现代文：至元年间，凡上都大都的名寺，无论土塑、金铸的佛像，一出刘元之手，就惟妙惟肖，栩栩如生，受到天下人称赞。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, most of the famous temples in the world, whether earthenware or gold-cast Buddha statues, as soon as Liu Yuan's hand came out, they were so vivid and lifelike that they were praised by people all over the world.

古文：其上都三皇尤古粹，识者以为造意得三圣人之微者。
现代文：上都三皇之像，尤其精于原型。了解的人认为这些像的造意是得三圣人的精微。
English: The statues of the three emperors in Shangdu are especially good at prototypes, and people who know them think that the intention of these statues is to get the subtleties of the three saints.

古文：由是两赐宫女为妻，命以官长其属，行幸必从。
现代文：因此，两次赐宫女为其妻，命以官封其家属，皇帝外出必使其随从。
English: Therefore, the empress twice gave him a concubine as his wife, ordered him to appoint his family members as officials, and the emperor would have them accompany him when he went out.

古文：仁宗尝敕元非有旨不许为人造他神像。
现代文：仁宗曾有令，不许刘元为别人造其他神像。
English: Rinzong once had an order not to allow Liu Yuan to make other statues of gods for others.

古文：后大都南城作东岳庙，元为造仁圣帝像，巍巍然有帝王之度，其侍臣像，乃若忧深思远者。
现代文：后大都南城建东岳庙，元为此庙造仁圣帝像，巍然有帝王的风度。其侍臣的像，也像在深谋远虑的人。
English: After the capital Nancheng, Dongyue Temple was built. Originally, a statue of the benevolent Holy Emperor was made for this temple. It seems to have the demeanor of the emperor. The image of his attendants is also like a person who is deep in forethought.

古文：始元欲作侍臣像，久之未措手，适阅秘书图画，见唐魏征像，矍然曰： 得之矣，非若此，莫称为相臣者。 
现代文：开始刘元想做侍臣像，但许久没有下手。恰恰因为看到秘书图画，看到唐朝魏征的像，便吃惊地说： 得到了，若不是这幅像，是不能说他是宰相之臣的。 
English: At first, Liu Yuan wanted to make a portrait of a vassal, but he didn't start for a long time. It was precisely because he saw a picture of a secretary and a portrait of Wei Zheng of the Tang Dynasty that he was surprised and said, "I got it. If it wasn't for this portrait, I wouldn't be able to say that he was a vassal of the prime minister."

古文：遽走庙中为之，即日成，士大夫观者，咸叹异焉。
现代文：急忙到庙中动手制作，即日成功。士大夫看到此像的，都感叹其奇异。
English: He hurried to the temple to start making it, and it was a success the same day. When the scholar-officials saw this image, they all lamented its strangeness.

古文：其所为西番佛像多秘，人罕得见者。
现代文：他所做的西番佛像，多秘而未露，人们很少得见。
English: The Buddha statues he made are secretive and unrevealed, and people rarely see them.

古文：元官为昭文馆大学士、正奉大夫、秘书卿，以寿终。
现代文：刘元官为昭文馆学士、正奉大夫、秘书卿，后无病而终。
English: Liu Yuanguan was a scholar of the Zhaowen Museum, a doctor, a secretary, and later died without illness.

