古文：《新唐书》：存孝，飞狐人。少于俘囚中得隶纪纲，给事帐中。
现代文：李存孝，本姓安，名敬思。少年时在俘囚中被录用为仆人，服务帐中。
English: Li Cunxiao, whose real surname is An and whose given name is Jingsi, was hired as a servant when he was a juvenile prisoner of war. He appears in the service account.

古文：及壮，便骑射，骁勇冠绝，常将骑为先锋，未尝挫败；从武皇救陈、许，逐黄寇，及遇难上源，每战无不克捷。
现代文：长大后，善骑马射箭，骁勇冠绝一时，经常率领骑兵充当先锋，未曾失败过。随从武皇援救陈、许二州，驱逐黄巢军队，一直到上源遇难，每次作战无不取胜。
English: After he grew up, he was good at riding horses and shooting arrows, and he was always the most courageous. He often led the cavalry to act as the vanguard, and he never failed. He followed the Emperor Wu to rescue Chen and Xu Erzhou, and drove out the Yellow Nest army, until Shangyuan was killed. He won every battle.

古文：张浚之加兵于太原也，潞州小校冯霸杀其帅李克恭以城叛。时汴将硃崇节入潞州，梁祖令张全义攻泽州。
现代文：张浚对太原用兵时，潞州小校冯霸杀死自己的主帅李克恭据城叛乱，此时汴将朱崇节进入潞州，梁太祖又令张全义进攻泽州。
English: When Zhang Jun sent troops to Taiyuan, Zhengzhou schoolboy Feng Ba killed his boss Li Keqiong in a rebellion in Zhengzhou. At this time, Zheng sent Zhu Chongjie into Zhengzhou, and Liang Taizu ordered Zhang Quanyi to attack Zhezhou.

古文：李罕之告急于武皇，武皇遣存孝率骑五千援之。
现代文：李罕之向武皇告急，武皇派李存孝率五千骑兵援救。
English: Li Hanzhi sent an urgent message to Emperor Wu, who sent Li Cunxiao and five thousand cavalry to rescue him.

古文：初，汴人攻泽州，呼罕之曰： 相公常恃太原，轻绝大国，今张相公围太原，葛司空已入潞府，旬日之内，沙陀无穴自处，相公何路求生耶！ 
现代文：起初，汴军进攻泽州时，对李罕之呼喊道： 相公你常常依靠太原，轻易与大国绝交，现在张相公已包围了太原，葛司空已进潞府，十来天之内，沙陀人就连洞穴都住不上了，相公你还有什么活路呢？ 
English: At first, when the Shan army attacked Zezhou, he shouted to Li Han, "Brother-in-law, you often rely on Taiyuan and easily break off diplomatic relations with big countries. Now, Zhang Sangong has encircled Taiyuan, Ge Si Kong has entered Shifu, and within ten days, the Sado people can't even live in caves. Brother-in-law, what other way do you have to survive?

古文：存孝闻其言不逊，选精骑五百，绕汴营呼曰： 我，沙陀求穴者，俟尔肉馔军，可令肥者出斗！ 
现代文：李存孝听这话太可气，挑选五百精锐骑兵，绕着汴军军营呼喊道 ：我，就是寻找洞穴的沙陀人，等着用你们的肉来供应军队，可派长得肥的出来作战！ 
English: Li Cunxiao was too angry to listen to this, so he selected five hundred elite cavalrymen and shouted around the Shao army camp: I am the Shado man looking for caves, waiting to use your meat to supply the army, you can send the fat ones out to fight!

古文：汴将有邓季筠者，亦以骁勇闻，乃引军出战。存孝激励部众，舞槊先登，一战败之，获马千匹，生擒季筠于军中。
现代文：汴将邓季筠，也以骁勇闻名，于是带着军队前来应战，李存孝激励部下，挥舞长矛冲锋在前，一战即打败汴军，获马千匹，在军中生擒邓季筠。
English: The warlord Deng Jizhe, also known for his bravery, came to the battle with an army. Li Cunxiao encouraged his subordinates, waved a spear and charged forward. In the first battle, he defeated the warlord's army, won a thousand horses, and raised Deng Jizhe in the army.

古文：是夜，汴将李谠收军而遁，存孝追击至马牢山，俘斩万计，遂退攻潞州。
现代文：这一夜，汴将李谠收军逃走，李存孝追击到马牢山，俘斩数万，再退回攻打潞州。
English: On this night, Yao collected Li Yao's army and fled, and pursued Li Cunxiao to Ma Liao Mountain, captured and killed tens of thousands of people, and then retreated to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：时朝廷命京兆尹孙揆为昭义节度使，令供奉官韩归范送旌节至平阳，揆乃仗节之潞；梁祖与揆牙兵三千为纪纲，时揆为张浚副招讨，所部万人。
现代文：当时朝廷任命京兆尹孙揆为昭义节度使，命令供奉官韩归范送旗帜节仗到平阳，孙揆便持节仗投奔潞州，梁太祖拨给孙揆三千牙兵供他使用。此时孙揆是张浚的副招讨，部下有一万人。
English: At that time, the imperial court appointed Jing Zha Yin Sun Qian as the envoy of the Shouyi Festival, and ordered the official Han Guifan to send a banner to Pingyang for the festival. Sun Qian then held the festival and went to Ganzhou. Liang Taizu assigned Sun Qian three thousand tooth soldiers for his use. At this time, Sun Qian was the deputy of Zhang Jian, with ten thousand subordinates.

古文：八月，自晋、绛逾刀黄岭趋上党。
现代文：八月，孙揆从晋州、绛州越过刀黄岭去上党。
English: In August, Sun Yat-sen crossed the Yellow Ridge from Jinzhou and Zhangzhou to join the Party.

古文：存孝引三百骑伏于长子西崖间。
现代文：李存孝带三百骑兵埋伏在长子以西山崖之间。
English: Li Cunxiao with three hundred horsemen lay in ambush between the cliffs west of the eldest son.

古文：揆褒衣大盖，拥众而行，俟其军前后不属，存孝出骑横击之，擒揆与归范及俘囚五百，献于太原；存孝乃急攻潞州。
现代文：孙揆身穿宽衣，撑着大盖，在众人簇拥下行进，等他的军队前后不相连时，李存孝出击横扫，擒获孙揆、韩归范以及五百俘虏，献给太原。李存孝于是急攻潞州。
English: Sun Yat-sen, wearing a broad robe and holding a large hood, marched in a crowd of people. When his army was not connected, Li Cunxiao launched a sweeping attack and captured Sun Yat-sen, Han Kui-fan and five hundred prisoners, dedicated to Taiyuan. Li Cunxiao then suddenly attacked Zhangzhou.

古文：九月，葛从周弃城夜遁，存孝收城，武皇乃表康君立为潞帅。存孝怒，不食者累日。
现代文：九月，葛从周放弃潞州城趁夜逃走，李存孝收复该城，武皇却上表推荐康君立为潞州主帅，李存孝大怒，几天不吃饭。
English: In September, Ge Zhou abandoned Zhangzhou City and fled at night. Li Cunxiao recaptured the city, but Emperor Wu recommended Kang Junli as the head coach of Zhangzhou. Li Cunxiao was furious and did not eat for several days.

古文：十月，存孝引收潞州之师，围张浚于平阳，营于赵城。
现代文：十月，李存孝带领收复潞州的军队，在平阳包围张浚，在赵城扎营。
English: In October, Li Cunxiao led the army to recover Zhangzhou, encircled Zhangjun in Pingyang, and encamped in Zhaocheng.

古文：华州韩建遣壮士三百夜犯其营，存孝谍知，设伏以击之，尽殪；进压晋州西门，获贼三千，自是闭壁不出。
现代文：华州韩建派三百名壮士夜里袭击他的营地，李存孝侦探到了，设埋伏击杀，全部消灭了他们，接着进军逼近晋州西门，俘虏敌人三千，晋州从此闭关不出。
English: Huazhou Han Jian sent three hundred strong men to attack his camp at night. Detective Li Cunxiao arrived, set up an ambush and killed them all, then marched to approach the west gate of Jinzhou, captured three thousand enemies, and Jinzhou could not be closed from then on.

古文：存孝引军攻绛州。
现代文：李存孝率军队进攻绛州。
English: Li Cunxiao led the army to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：十一月，刺史张行恭弃城而去，张浚、韩建亦由含口而遁。存孝收晋、绛，以功授汾州刺史。
现代文：十一月，绛州刺史张行恭弃城逃走，张浚、韩建也从含口逃走，李存孝收复晋州、绛州，以战功被授予汾州刺史。
English: In November, Zhang Xing abandoned the city and fled, Zhang Jun and Han Jian also fled from Hankou, Li Cunxiao recovered Jinzhou and Zhangzhou, and was awarded the title of Zhang Xing of Zhangzhou for his military exploits.

古文：大顺二年三月，邢州节度使安知建叛入汴军，武皇令存孝定邢、洺，因授之节钺。
现代文：大顺二年三月，邢州节度使安知建叛变归顺汴军，武皇命令李存孝平定邢州、氵名州，因此授予他邢氵名节度使。
English: In March of the second year of Dashun, the Bozhou Festival made Anchijian rebel and surrender to the Shunhui army. Emperor Wu ordered Li Cunxiao to pacify Bozhou and Enmei, so he was awarded the Bozhou Festival.

古文：时幽州李匡威与镇州王镕屡弱中山，将中分其疆土。
现代文：这时幽州李匡威与镇州王钅容屡次削弱中山，准备瓜分中山疆土。
English: At this time, Yuzhou Li Kuangwei and Zhenzhou Wang Qirong repeatedly weakened Zhongshan and prepared to carve up Zhongshan's territory.

古文：定州王处存求援于武皇；武皇命存孝侵镇、赵之南鄙，又令李存信、李存审率师出井陉以会之，并军攻临城、柏乡。
现代文：定州王处存向武皇求援。武皇命令李存孝侵入镇州、赵州的南部边地，又命令李存信、李存审军队出井陉与李存孝会合，联军攻打临城、柏乡。
English: Emperor Wu ordered Li Cunxiao to invade the southern border of Zhenzhou and Zhaozhou, and also ordered Li Cunxin and Li Cunxin's army to meet Li Cunxiao at the well, and the allied forces attacked Lincheng and Baixiang.

古文：李匡威救至，且议旋师。
现代文：这时，李匡威救兵赶到临城，李存孝便打算回师。
English: At this time, Li Kongwei's rescuers rushed to Lincheng, and Li Cunxiao planned to return to his division.

古文：李存信与存孝不协，因构于武皇，言存孝望风退衄，无心击贼，恐有私盟也。
现代文：李存信与李存孝不和，便到武皇跟前陷害他，说李存孝望风而逃，无心杀敌，大概有私下结盟之事。
English: Li Cunxin did not get along with Li Cunxiao, so he went to Emperor Wu to frame him, saying that Li Cunxiao was running away from the wind, had no intention of killing the enemy, and probably had a private alliance.

古文：存孝知之，自恃战功，郁郁不平，因致书通王镕，又归款于汴。
现代文：李存孝知道了，自以为有战功，郁郁不平，因而写信给王钅容通好，又与汴州结交。
English: When Li Cunxiao learned of this, he thought he had achieved something in the war and was depressed, so he wrote a letter to Wang Yunyong, and made friends with Zhangzhou.

古文：明年，武皇自出井陉，将逼真定，存孝面见王镕陈军机。
现代文：第二年，武皇亲自出井陉，将要逼近真定，李存孝当面见王钅容陈述军机大事。
English: In the second year, Emperor Wu personally went to Jing'an, and Li Cunxiao saw Wang Qirong face to face as he was about to approach Zhending to report on military matters.

古文：武皇暴怒，诛先获汴将安康八方旋师。
现代文：武皇暴怒，杀掉以前俘获的汴将安康八后回师。
English: Emperor Wu flew into a rage and killed the previously captured general Ankang Hachigo.

古文：《新唐书》：王镕失幽州助，因乞盟，进币五十万，归粮二十万，请出兵助讨存孝。武皇蒐于栾城。李存信屯琉璃陂。
现代文：七月，又出兵讨伐李存孝，从缚马关东下，攻平山，渡滹水，击镇州四关城。王钅容害怕，派使者求和，并愿出三万兵力协助武皇攻打李存孝，武皇同意了。武皇在栾城阅兵，李存信驻扎在琉璃陂。
English: In July, troops were dispatched to fight against Li Cunxiao. They marched eastward from Guzhu Ma Guan, attacked Pingshan, crossed the Yanshui River, and attacked Zhenzhou Shiguang City. Wang Shurong was afraid, sent an envoy to sue for peace, and agreed to send thirty thousand troops to assist Emperor Wu to attack Li Cunxiao. Emperor Wu held a military parade in Lucheng, and Li Cunxin was stationed in Lulishan.

古文：九月，存孝夜犯存信营，奉诚军使孙考老被获，存信军乱。
现代文：九月，李存孝夜里攻击李存信营地，奉诚军使孙考老被俘，李存信军队混乱。
English: In September, Li Cunxiao attacked Li Cunxin's camp at night. The Fengcheng Army captured Sun Kao, and Li Cunxin's army was in disarray.

古文：武皇进攻邢州，深沟高垒以环之，旋为存孝冲突，沟堑不成。
现代文：武皇进攻邢州，用深沟高垒环绕该城，旋即被李存孝冲击，沟堑没有挖成。
English: Emperor Wu attacked Bozhou and encircled the city with deep ditches and high walls. He was immediately attacked by Li Cunxiao, but the ditches were not dug.

古文：有军校袁奉韬者，密令人谓存孝曰： 大王俟堑成即归太原，如堑垒未成，恐无归志。
现代文：军校袁奉韬秘密派人对李存孝说 ：大王等沟堑建成后便回太原，如没建成，恐怕没有回去的意思。
English: Yuan Fengyao of the military school secretly sent a message to Li Cunxiao, saying that he would return to Taiyuan after the Great King and other ravines were built. If they were not built, I am afraid he had no intention of returning.

古文：尚书所畏惟大王耳，料诸将孰出尚书右。
现代文：尚书你所害怕的只有大王，料想其余各将没有超过你的。
English: Shang Shu, the only one you fear is the Great King, and you should expect that the others will not surpass you.

古文：王若西归，虽限以黄河，亦可浮渡，况咫尺之洫，安能阻尚书锋锐哉！ 
现代文：大王如果西归，虽然有黄河阻隔，也可以渡过去，况且几尺宽的沟堑，怎么能阻挡尚书您的锋芒呢！ 
English: If the great king returns to the west, although there is a barrier of the Yellow River, he can also cross over, and moreover, a few feet wide gully, how can you stop Shangshu's sharpness!

古文：存孝然之，纵兵成堑。
现代文：李存孝同意了他的说法，让武皇兵士建成堑垒。
English: Li Cunxiao agreed with him and let Emperor Wu's soldiers build the fort.

古文：居旬日，深沟高垒，飞走不能及，由是存孝至败，城中食尽。
现代文：过了十几天，深沟高垒，不能越过。因此李存孝失败，城中食物已尽。
English: After a dozen days, the ditch was too high to cross, so Li Cunxiao failed and the food in the city ran out.

古文：乾宁元年三月，存孝登城首罪，泣诉于武皇曰： 兒蒙王深恩，位至将帅，苟非谗慝离间，曷欲舍父子之深恩，附仇雠之党！
现代文：乾宁元年三月，李存孝登城请罪，向武皇哭诉说： 儿深受大王恩典，官至将帅，如果不是进谗言的小人离间，怎么会割舍父子之恩，转附敌人为党？
English: In March of the first year of the Qianning Dynasty, Li Cunxiao went to the city to plead guilty, crying to the Emperor Wu and saying: "My son is deeply blessed by the great king, officials to generals, if it is not a small person who is involved in slander, how can he cut off the grace of his father and son, and turn to the enemy as a party?

古文：兒虽褊狭设计，实存信构陷至此，若得生见王面，一言而死，诚所甘心。 
现代文：儿虽然见识偏狭，实在是李存信构陷才到这个地步，如能活着见到大王面，说上三言两语而死，也是甘心的。 
English: Although he is narrow-minded, it is really Li Cunxin who has fallen to this level. If he can live to see the great king's face, say three words and die, he is also willing.

古文：武皇愍之，遣刘太妃入城慰劳。太妃引来谒见，存孝泥首请罪曰： 兒立微劳，本无显过，但被人中伤，申明无路，迷昧至此！ 
现代文：武皇怜悯他，派刘太妃进城慰劳，太妃带他进见武皇，李存孝叩首请罪说： 儿立过微小的功劳，本来没有大的过错，但被人中伤，无法申明心迹，迷乱以至如此。 
English: Emperor Wu took pity on him and sent Liu Tofei to the city to comfort him. Tofei took him to see Emperor Wu. Li Cunxiao bowed his head and pleaded guilty, saying, "I have made a small contribution, and originally there was no great fault, but I have been slandered by others, and I cannot declare my feelings. I am so confused.

古文：武皇叱之曰： 尔与王镕书状，罪我万端，亦存信教耶！ 
现代文：武皇斥责他说 ：你写给王的信，列举我万条罪状，也是李存信教的吗？ 
English: Emperor Wu rebuked him, saying, "Your letter to the king, listing my ten thousand crimes, is it because Li Cun is a believer?

古文：絷归太原，车裂于市。然武皇深惜其才。
现代文：于是把他缚着送回太原，在街市上车裂处死，然而武皇很爱惜他的才能。
English: So he was bound and sent back to Taiyuan, where he was flogged to death in the market. However, Emperor Wu was very fond of his talent.

古文：存孝每临大敌，被重铠橐弓坐槊，仆人以二骑从，阵中易骑，轻捷如飞，独舞铁楇，挺身陷阵，万人辟易，盖古张辽、甘宁之比也。
现代文：李存孝每当临阵对敌，身穿重铠带硬弓长矛，由仆人带两匹马跟随，在战斗中换骑战马，轻捷如飞，独自舞动铁木过，挺身冲锋陷阵，万人都要避开，大概可以比作古代的张辽、甘宁。
English: Whenever Li Cunxiao faced the enemy, wearing a heavy sash with a hard bow and spear, followed by a servant with two horses, he changed horses during the battle. He was as light as a feather. He danced alone through the iron and wood, and charged into the battle. Everyone had to avoid him. He could probably be compared to the ancient Zhang Liao and Ganning.

古文：存孝死，武皇不视事旬日，私憾诸将久之。
现代文：李存孝死后，武皇有十几天没心思办事，私下对各位将军埋怨了很久。
English: After the death of Li Cunxiao, Emperor Wu did not want to do anything for a dozen days, and privately complained to the generals for a long time.

