古文：○宁宗一宁宗法天备道纯德茂功仁文哲武圣睿恭孝皇帝，讳扩，光宗第二子也，母曰慈懿皇后李氏。
现代文：宁宗法天备道纯德茂功仁文哲武圣睿恭孝皇帝，名扩，光宗的第二个儿子，母亲为慈爵皇后李氏。
English: Emperor Ningzong, the second son of Emperor Mingzong, the second son of Emperor Ningzong, the second son of Emperor Ningzong, the second son of Emperor Ningzong, the second son of Emperor Ningzong, the second son of Emperor Ningzong, the second son of Emperor Ningzong, the second son of Emperor Ningzong, the second son of Emperor Ningzong, the second son of Emperor Ningzong, the second son of Emperor Ningzong, the second son of Emperor Ningzong, the second son of Emperor Ningzong, the second son of Emperor Ningzong, the second son of Emperor Ningzong, the second son of Emperor Ningzong

古文：光宗为恭王，慈懿梦日坠于庭，以手承之，已而有娠。
现代文：光宗为恭王，慈爵皇后梦到太阳坠人庭中，她用手托住，不久怀孕。
English: Emperor Guangzong was King Gong, and the Empress Dowager dreamed that the sun was setting in the courtyard. She held it with her hand and soon became pregnant.

古文：乾道四年十月丙午，生于王邸，五年五月，赐今名。
现代文：乾道四年十月十九日，宁宗出生在王府。乾道五年五月，赐给现名。
English: Ningzong was born in Wangfu on October 19th of the 4th year of the Heian period. He was given his current name in May of the 5th year of the Heian period.

古文：十一月乙丑，授右千牛卫大将军。
现代文：十一月十三日，授为右千牛卫大将军。
English: On November 13th, he was awarded the title of General of the Right Qian Niu Guards.

古文：七年，光宗为皇太子。
现代文：乾道七年，光宗为皇太子。
English: After seven years on the throne, Mitsumune became crown prince.

古文：淳熙五年十月戊午，迁明州观察使，封英国公。
现代文：淳熙五年十月二十八日，迁为明州观察使，封为英国公。
English: On October 28th, Aung Hee's fifth year, he was transferred to the post of Ming State Observation Envoy and given the title of British prince.

古文：七年二月，初就傅。
现代文：淳熙七年二月，开始从师就学。
English: In February of Aung Hee's seventh year, he began to study under a teacher.

古文：九年正月，始冠。
现代文：淳熙九年正月，满十五岁，为成人。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of Aung Hee, he turned fifteen and became an adult.

古文：十年九月己巳，始预朝参。
现代文：淳熙十年九月初七，开始同大臣一道到朝廷参见皇上。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month of the 10th year of the reign of Emperor Junxi, he went to the imperial court with the minister to see the emperor.

古文：十一年，当出阁，两宫爱之，不欲令居外，乃建第东宫之侧，以十月甲戌迁焉。
现代文：淳熙十一年，应当出夙两宫都很喜欢他，不想让他搬到宫外居住，于是在东宫侧面建造府第，十月十九日迁居于此。
English: In the eleventh year of King Aung Hee's reign, both palaces liked him very much and did not want him to move to live outside the palace, so they built a palace on the side of the East Palace and moved there on October 19th.

古文：十二年三月乙酉，迁安庆军节度使，封平阳郡王。
现代文：淳熙十二年三月初二，迁为安庆军节度使，封为平阳郡王。
English: On the second day of the third month of the twelfth year of Aung Hee, he was transferred to the Anqing Army as a festival envoy, and was named the king of Pingyang County.

古文：八月辛酉，纳夫人韩氏。
现代文：八月十一日，娶夫人韩氏。
English: On August 11, he married his wife, Han.

古文：十六年二月壬戌，光宗受禅。
现代文：淳熙十六年二月初二，光宗受禅即皇帝位。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 16th year of Aung Hee, Gwangjong was enthroned as emperor.

古文：三月己亥，拜少保、武宁军节度使，进封嘉王。
现代文：三月初九，宁宗被授为少保、武宁军节度使，进封为嘉王。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month, Ningzong was awarded the title of Shao Bao and the Military Governor of the Wu Ning Army, and was given the title of Jia Wang.

古文：帝自弱龄，尊师重傅，至是，始置翊善，以沈清臣为之。
现代文：宁宗从小的时候起，就养成了尊敬老师的习惯，到这时，开始设置诩善，任命沈清臣担任。
English: Since he was a child, Ningzong had developed the habit of respecting his teachers. At this time, he began to set up the school and appointed Shen Qingchen as his teacher.

古文：绍熙元年春，宰相留正请立帝为储嗣。
现代文：绍熙元年春，宰相留正请求立宁宗为皇太子。
English: In the spring of the first year of the reign of Emperor Shōhō, the prime minister, Ruzheng, requested that Rinninzong become crown prince.

古文：五年六月戊戌，孝宗崩，光宗以疾不能出。
现代文：绍熙五年六月初九，孝宗逝世，光宗因疾病不能出来主丧。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month of the 5th year of the reign of Emperor Xiaoxi, Emperor Xiaozong passed away. Emperor Guangzong was unable to attend the funeral due to illness.

古文：壬寅，宰臣请太皇太后垂帘听政，不许；请代行祭奠之礼，从之。
现代文：十三日，宰臣请太皇太后垂帘听政，没有应允；请求代行祭奠之礼，采纳了。
English: On the 13th, the Vice-Minister asked the Grand Empress Dowager to listen to the government, but she did not agree; she requested that the ceremony be held on her behalf, which was accepted.

古文：丁未，宰臣奏云： 皇子嘉王，仁孝夙成。
现代文：十八日，宰臣上奏说： 皇子嘉王，天性仁孝。
English: On the 18th, the vice-minister of the imperial court delivered a report saying, "Prince Jiawang, you are kind and filial by nature.

古文：宜正储位，以安人心。 
现代文：应该确立皇位继承人，从而安定人心。 
English: The heir to the throne should be established in order to stabilize the hearts of the people.

古文：越六日，奏三上，从之。
现代文：六天后奏疏三次递上，被采纳。
English: Six days later, it was resubmitted three times and accepted.

古文：明日，遂拟旨以进。
现代文：又过了一天，于是草拟诏旨进呈。
English: Another day passed, and the draft edict was submitted.

古文：是夕，御批付丞相云： 历事岁久，念欲退闲。 
现代文：这天晚上，光宗交给宰相的御札说： 历事岁久，念欲退闲。 
English: That evening, Guangzong gave the prime minister a note saying, "Things have been going on for a long time, and I want to retire.

古文：七月辛酉，留正以疾辞去。
现代文：七月初二，留正因病辞退离去。
English: On the second day of July, Ruzheng resigned due to illness and left.

古文：知枢密院事赵汝愚见正去，乃遣韩侂胄因内侍张宗尹以禅位嘉王之意请于太皇太后，不获。
现代文：知枢密院事赵汝愚见留正离开了朝廷，于是派遣韩青通过内侍张宗尹，向太皇太后请求让光宗禅位给嘉王，没有成功。
English: The privy councilor Zhao Ru Guchen left the imperial court, so he sent Han Qing to request Guangzong Zen to the Empress Dowager through the chamberlain Zhang Zongyin, but without success.

古文：遇提举重华宫关礼，侂胄因其问，告之。
现代文：遇到提举重华宫关礼，韩青于是向他询问情况，告诉关礼自己想要办的事。
English: When Han Qing met Guan Rai, who was in charge of the Chonghua Palace, he asked him about the situation and told Guan Rai what he wanted to do.

古文：礼继入内，泣请于太皇太后，太皇太后乃悟，令谕侂胄曰： 好为之！ 侂胄出，告汝愚，命殿帅郭杲夜分兵卫南北内。
现代文：关礼随即进人宫内，哭着向太皇太后请求，太皇太后才醒悟，命令关礼告诉韩青： 好为之广韩青出来后，告诉了赵汝愚，命令殿帅郭呆夜里分兵把守南北宫。
English: Guan Li then entered the palace, crying and pleading with the Grand Empress Dowager. The Grand Empress Dowager only woke up and ordered Guan Li to tell Han Qing: After Guang Han Qing came out, he told Zhao Rugu and ordered Grand Marshal Guo to stay up all night and divide the soldiers to guard the North and South Palaces.

古文：翌日禫祭，汝愚率百官诣大行柩前，太皇太后垂帘，汝愚率同列再拜，奏： 皇帝疾，不能执丧，臣等乞立皇子嘉王为太子，以安人心。 
现代文：第二天举行除服祭礼，赵汝愚率领文武百官到孝宗皇帝灵枢前，太皇太后垂帘，赵汝愚率臣僚两拜后，上奏： 光宗皇帝患病，不能主丧，臣等请求立皇子嘉王为太子，从而安定人心。 
English: On the second day, a ceremony was held to remove the emperor's clothes. Zhao Ruwu led hundreds of military and civilian officials to the spiritual center of Emperor Xiaozong. The curtain of the grand empress dowager hung down. After two days of worship, Zhao Ruwu led his ministers to play: Emperor Guangzong was ill and unable to mourn, and his ministers requested that the prince Jia Wang be made the crown prince, thereby stabilizing the hearts of the people.

古文：乃奉御批八字以奏。
现代文：于是奉上御批八字一起上奏。
English: As a result, I was given the go-ahead to play the first eight syllables of the chorus.

古文：太皇太后曰： 既有御笔，卿当奉行。 
现代文：太皇太后说： 既然有御批，你们应当遵守奉行。 
English: The great empress dowager said, "Since you have the royal approval, you should abide by it."

古文：汝愚曰： 内禅事重，须议一指挥。 
现代文：赵汝愚说： 内禅事关重大，必须有一个让臣下执行的命令。 
English: Zhao Ruwu said: Inner Zen is very important, there must be an order for the vassals to carry out.

古文：太皇太后允诺。
现代文：太皇太后答应下一个命令。
English: The empress dowager agreed to the next order.

古文：汝愚袖出所拟以进，云： 皇帝以疾，未能执丧，曾有御笔，欲自退闲，皇子嘉王扩可即皇帝位。
现代文：赵汝愚从袖子中拿出拟好的诏令进呈，说： 光宗皇帝因病不能主丧，曾经亲笔书写诏书，说自己想退闲让位，皇子嘉王赵扩可以即皇帝位。
English: Zhao Ruwu took out a fictitious imperial edict from his sleeve and presented it, saying: Emperor Guangzong was unable to attend the funeral due to illness. He once wrote an imperial edict in his own handwriting, saying that he wanted to retire and give up his position, and the prince Jia Wang Zhao Zhan could be the emperor.

古文：尊皇帝为太上皇，皇后为太上皇后。 
现代文：尊皇帝为太上皇，皇后为太上皇后。 
English: The emperor is the supreme emperor and the empress is the supreme empress.

古文：太皇太后览毕，曰 甚善。 
现代文：太皇太后看完后，说： 很好。 
English: After watching it, the Empress Dowager said, "It's very good.

古文：汝愚出，以旨谕帝，帝固辞曰： 恐负不孝名。 
现代文：赵汝愚出来后，把太皇太后的意思告诉宁宗，宁宗力辞说： 恐怕会拖累我仁孝的名声。 
English: After Zhao Rugu came out, he told Ningzong the meaning of the great empress dowager. Ningzong said emphatically: I am afraid it will drag down my reputation of benevolence and filial piety.

古文：汝愚曰： 天子当以安社稷、定国家为孝，今中外忧乱，万一变生，置太上皇何地！ 众扶入素幄，披黄袍，方却立未坐，汝愚率同列再拜。
现代文：赵汝愚说： 天子应当以安定社翟、国家为孝，今天朝廷内外忧心忡忡，害怕混乱，万一发生意外变乱，置太上皇于何地了大家把他扶到素殿，披上黄袍，宁宗正在后退尚没有坐下，赵汝愚率领同僚朝拜两次。
English: Zhao Ruwu said, "The Son of Heaven should be filial to a stable society and country. Today, people inside and outside the imperial court are worried and afraid of chaos. In case of unexpected turmoil, where should the emperor be placed? Everyone took him to the Su-den and draped him in a yellow robe. Ning Zong was retreating and had not yet sat down. Zhao Ruwu led his colleagues in two prostrations.

古文：帝诣几筵殿。哭尽哀。
现代文：宁宗到经筵殿，哭着尽哀。
English: Ning Zong went to the imperial court and wept bitterly.

古文：须臾立仗讫，催百官班，帝衰服出，就重华殿东庑素幄立，内侍扶掖，乃坐。
现代文：不久设立仪仗完毕，催百官按位次排列，宁宗穿丧服出来，站在重华宫东边走廊临时宫殿里，内侍扶持，才坐。
English: Soon after the ceremony was over, the hundreds of dignitaries were lined up in order of precedence, and Ning Zong came out in his mourning clothes and stood in the temporary palace in the eastern corridor of Chonghua Palace, supported by the palace attendants, before sitting down.

古文：百官起居讫，乃入行禫祭礼。
现代文：百官起居完毕，才除行服祭祀。
English: Only after all the officials have moved in are they allowed to perform the ritual.

古文：诏建泰安宫，以奉太上皇、太上皇后。
现代文：下诏建造泰安宫，让太上皇、太上皇后居住。
English: He issued an edict to build the Tai'an Palace for the Emperor and Empress Dowager to live in.

古文：汝愚即丧次请召
现代文：赵汝愚在这时请求召回留正。
English: At this time, Zhao Ruwu requested that Remy Zheng be recalled.

古文：牷沽粽页螅侍竺⒊绻蛉撕衔屎蟆笊狻０俟俳纫患叮椭罹Ｚ导菸迦找怀┌补俟僭铝匠约次桓嬗谔斓亍⒆诿怼⑸琊ⅰ丁卯，侍御史张叔椿劾留正擅去相位，诏以叔椿为吏部侍郎。戊辰，诏求直言。
现代文：初八，侍御史张叔椿弹勃留正擅自离开相位，下诏任命张叔椿为吏部侍郎。初九，诏求直言。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the attendant of the historian Zhang Shuzhu, who was absent without permission, was appointed as the attendant of the cadres. On the ninth day of the month, the attendant asked for a direct speech.

古文：遣郑湜使金告禅位。
现代文：派遣郑出使金国报告禅位消息。
English: Zheng sent an envoy to China to report the news of Zen.

古文：己巳，以赵汝愚兼参知政事。
现代文：初十，任命赵汝愚兼参知政事。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Zhao Ruwu was appointed to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：庚午，召秘阁修撰、知潭州朱熹诣行在。
现代文：十一日，召秘阁修撰潭州知州朱熹到行在。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhu Xi from Shuxian Tangzhou Chizhou was summoned to the secret lodge.

古文：壬申，建泰安宫。
现代文：十三日，建造泰安宫。
English: On the 13th, the Tai'an Palace was built.

古文：乙亥，以赵汝愚为右丞相，参知政事陈骙知枢密院事，余端礼参知政事，仍兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：十六日，任命赵汝愚为右承相，参知政事除癸为知枢密院事，余端礼为参知政事，并且兼同知枢密院事。
English: On the 16th, Zhao Ruwu was appointed as the Minister of Right Succession, and the Councillor of the Privy Council was appointed as the Councillor of the Privy Council, and the Councillor of the Privy Council was appointed as the Councillor of the Privy Council, and the Councillor of the Privy Council was appointed as the Councillor of the Privy Council and the Councillor of the Privy Council.

古文：汝愚辞不拜。
现代文：赵汝愚推辞不拜。
English: Zhao Rugu refused to bow.

古文：赐前宰执、侍从诏，访以得失。
现代文：赐给前任宰执、侍从诏书，询问朝政得失。
English: He gave the imperial rescript to his predecessor and attendants, and inquired about the merits and demerits of the imperial government.

古文：丙子，大风。
现代文：十七日，刮大风。
English: On the 24th, the wind picked up.

古文：戊寅，诏：秋暑，太上皇帝未须移御，即以寝殿为泰安宫。
现代文：十九日，下诏：秋季暑热，太上皇帝不须移居，即以寝殿为泰安宫。
English: On the 19th, the following edict was issued: It was hot in the autumn, so the empress dowager did not have to move, and used the bed chamber as the Tai'an Palace.

古文：以殿前都指挥使郭杲为武康军节度使，庚辰，率群臣拜表于泰安宫。
现代文：任命殿前都指挥使郭呆为武康军节度使。二十一日，率领大臣到泰安宫拜表。
English: On the 21st, he led the minister to the Tai'an Palace to worship the table.

古文：辛巳，以赵汝愚为枢密使，保大军节度使郭师禹为攒宫总护使。
现代文：二十二日，任命赵汝愚为枢密使，保大军节度使郭师禹为攒宫总护使。
English: On the 22nd, Zhao Ruwu was appointed as the envoy of the Privy Council, and Guo Shiyu was appointed as the chief guardian of the Great Hall of the People.

古文：壬午，侍御史章颖等劾内侍林亿年、陈源、杨舜卿，诏亿年、源与在外宫观，舜卿在京宫观。
现代文：二十三日，侍御史章颖等弹勃内侍林亿年、陈源、杨舜卿，下诏林亿年、陈源任在外宫观职，杨舜卿任在京宫观职。
English: On the 23rd, the chamberlains Shi Zhang Ying and others played the role of the inner chamberlains Lin Ren, Chen Yuan and Yang Jieqing, and the lower chamberlains Lin Ren Ren, Chen Yuan and Yang Jieqing played the role of the outer palace, and Yang Jieqing played the role of the inner palace.

古文：韩侂胄落阶官，为汝州防御使。
现代文：韩青起用为阶官，担任汝州防御使。
English: Han Qing was appointed as a magistrate and served as a defense envoy of Ruzhou.

古文：癸未，余端礼辞兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：二十四日，余端礼辞去兼同知枢密院事。
English: On the 24th, Yu Duanli resigned and became a member of the Privy Council.

古文：甲申，以兵部尚书罗点签书枢密院事。
现代文：二十五日，任命兵部尚书罗点为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 25th, Shang Shuro-tang of the Military Department was appointed as the Privy Councillor for the signing of the document.

古文：诏两省官详定应诏封事，具要切者以闻。
现代文：下诏两省官详细审定应诏封事，摘录重要的言论报上。
English: The following is the detailed approval of the two provincial officials on the matter of sealing the imperial rescript, and an excerpt of the important remarks on the newspaper.

古文：戊子，诏百官轮对。
现代文：二十九日，下诏百官轮对。
English: On the 29th, the next round of 100 officials will be announced.

古文：罢杨舜卿在京宫观，林亿年常州居住，陈源抚州居住。
现代文：罢杨舜卿任在京宫观闲职，林亿年常州居住，陈源抚州居住。
English: Yang Jieqing was appointed to the position of inspector in the Beijing Palace, Lin Yiren lived in Changzhou, and Chen Yuan lived in Fuzhou.

古文：八月己丑朔，安定郡王子涛薨。
现代文：八月初一，安定郡王赵子涛逝世。
English: On the first day of August, Zhao Zitao, the Prince of Anning County, passed away.

古文：辛卯，初御行宫便殿听政。
现代文：初三，初到行宫便殿处理政事。
English: On the third day of junior high school, he went to the palace hall for the first time to deal with political affairs.

古文：癸巳，以朱熹为焕章阁待制兼侍讲。
现代文：初五，任命朱熹为焕章阁待制兼侍讲。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Zhu Xi was appointed as an attendant and assistant lecturer of Huan Zhangge.

古文：甲午，增置讲读官，以给事中黄裳、中书舍人陈傅良、彭龟年等为之。
现代文：初六，增置讲读官，任命给事中黄裳、中书舍人陈傅良、彭龟年等担任。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, additional lecturers were appointed, including Huang Mo, Chen Fu Liang, and Peng Guiren.

古文：丁酉，以生日为天祐节。
现代文：初九，以生日为天节。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the birthday is celebrated.

古文：己亥，率群臣朝泰安宫。
现代文：十一日，率领大臣朝拜泰安宫。
English: On the 11th, he led the ministers to pay homage to the Tai'an Palace.

古文：辛丑，诏诸道举廉吏、纠污吏。
现代文：十三日，下诏各道举荐廉吏、纠察贪官污吏。
English: On the 13th, the following edict was issued to recommend corrupt officials and picket corrupt officials in each province.

古文：壬寅，诏经筵官开陈经旨，救正阙失。
现代文：十四日，下诏经筵陈说经旨，纠正缺失。
English: On the 14th, the following sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra sutra

古文：进封弟许国公抦为徐国公。
现代文：进封弟许国公赵摘为徐国公。
English: Jinfeng's younger brother Xu Guogong Zhao Zhan became Xu Guogong.

古文：癸卯，加嗣濮王士歆少师，郭师禹少傅，夏执中少保。
现代文：十五日，加嗣攫王赵士散为少师，郭师禹为少傅，夏执中为少保。
English: On the fifteenth day, Zhao Shisan, the king of Qazhong, was appointed as a junior teacher, Guo Shiyu as a junior master, and Xia Rongzhong as a junior guard.

古文：乙巳，诏晚讲官会讲。
现代文：十七日，诏令晚讲官坐着讲解。
English: On the 17th, in the evening of the imperial edict, the lecturer sat down to give a lecture.

古文：丁未，复罢经筵坐讲，命三省议振恤诸路郡县水旱。
现代文：十九日，又废罢经筵坐讲。命令三省官贩济抚恤各路郡县水早灾民。
English: On the 19th, he also abolished the ban on reciting the sutras. He ordered the three provincial officials to give alms to the flood victims in various counties.

古文：乙卯，加安南国王李龙思忠功臣。
现代文：二十七日，加安南国王李龙为思忠功臣。
English: On the 27th, Li Long, the king of K'aan Nan, was awarded the title of Si Zhong Gong Su.

古文：诏岁减广西盐额十万缗。
现代文：下诏每年减免广西盐额十万络。
English: The following decree will reduce and exempt the amount of salt in Guangxi by 100,000 yuan every year.

古文：丙辰，留正罢，以观文殿大学士判建康府。
现代文：二十八日，留正被罢免，以观文殿大学士判建康府。
English: On the 28th, Ruzheng was dismissed, and Jiankangfu was awarded the title of Grand Scholar of the Academy of Fine Arts.

古文：以赵汝愚为右丞相。
现代文：任命赵汝愚为右承相。
English: Zhao Rugu was appointed as the Minister of the Right.

古文：丁巳，诏侍从、两省、台谏各举通亮公清、不植党与、曾任知县者二人。
现代文：二十九日，诏令侍从、两省、台谏官各自举荐豁达公正、不搞派别、曾任知县者二人。
English: On the 29th, the Emperor ordered the attendants, the two provinces, and the Taiwanese eunuchs to each recommend two people who were open-minded and fair, did not engage in factions, and had served as county magistrates.

古文：九月己巳，命赵汝愚朝献景灵宫。
现代文：九月十二日，命令赵汝愚祭祀景灵官。
English: On September 12th, Zhao Rugu was ordered to offer sacrifices to the Jingling official.

古文：庚子，命嗣秀王伯圭朝飨太庙。
现代文：十三日，命令嗣秀王赵伯圭祭祀太庙。
English: On the thirteenth day, he ordered the heir of King Shiu, Zhao Bokei, to make a sacrifice to the Great Temple.

古文：是日，罗点薨。
现代文：这天，罗点逝世。
English: On this day, Lotte passed away.

古文：辛未，合祭天地于明堂，大赦。
现代文：十四日，在明堂合祭天地，大赦。
English: On the 15th, an amnesty was held in Myeongdong.

古文：壬申，以刑部尚书京镗签书枢密院事。
现代文：十五日，任命刑部尚书京锁为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 15th, he appointed the head of the Criminal Department, Shang Shuxu, to be the Privy Councillor to sign the document.

古文：甲戌，下诏抚谕诸将。改天祐节为瑞庆节。
现代文：十七日，下诏抚谕诸将，改天节为瑞庆节。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued to the generals, changing the day of the festival to the Ruiqing Festival.

古文：冬十月己丑，右谏议大夫张叔椿再劾留正擅去相位，诏落正观文殿大学士。
现代文：冬十月初二，右谏议大夫张叔椿再次弹勃留正擅自离开相位，下诏免除留正观文殿大学士职务。
English: On the second day of October in winter, Zhang Shuzhu, the right-hand man of the Council of State, once again made an order to dismiss Ruzhengguan from his post as a member of the Council of State.

古文：庚寅，更泰安宫为寿康宫。
现代文：初三，改泰安宫为寿康宫。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Tai'an Palace was changed to Shukang Palace.

古文：辛卯，命四川制置司铨量诸州守臣。
现代文：初四，命令四川制置司考核各州守臣。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, he ordered Sichuan to set up a department to evaluate the states' retainers.

古文：癸巳，雷。
现代文：初六，打雷。
English: On the 26th, thunder.

古文：乙未，诏以阴阳谬盭，雷电非时，令台谏、侍从，各疏朝政阙失以闻。
现代文：初八，因阴阳错乱，雷电非时，诏令台谏、侍从官员，各自奏陈朝政缺失上报。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, due to the disorder of yin and yang, lightning and electricity were not in time, the emperor ordered the emperor and the attendant officials to report the absence of Chen Dynasty to the government.

古文：戊戌。复许武举人试换文资。庚子，以久雨，命大理、三衙、临安府、两浙州县决系囚，释杖以下。
现代文：十一日，因久雨不晴，下命大理寺、三衙、临安府、两浙州县审理在押囚犯，释放杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the 11th day, due to the long rain and cloudy weather, it was ordered that prisoners in Dali Temple, Samye, Lin'an and two counties in Zhejiang Province should be tried, and prisoners sentenced to caning or less should be released.

古文：辛丑，减两浙、江东西路和市折帛钱，蠲两浙路丁盐、身丁钱一年。
现代文：十四日，减免两浙和江东西路和买折帛钱，免除两浙路丁盐和身丁钱一年。
English: On the 14th, the deduction and exemption of the two Zhejiang and Jiangxi East-West Road and the purchase discount, and the exemption of the two Zhejiang Road salt and body money for one year.

古文：雅州蛮寇边，土丁拒退之，寻出降。
现代文：雅州蛮攻打边境，土丁打退他们，蛮人不久出降。
English: The Yazhou barbarians attacked the border, the local people repulsed them, and the barbarians soon surrendered.

古文：甲辰，以朱熹言，趣后省看详应诏封事。
现代文：十七日，因朱熹建议，督促后省详看应诏封事。
English: On the 17th, as a result of Zhu Xi's suggestion, he urged the provincial government to take a closer look at the matter.

古文：乙巳，上大行至尊寿皇圣帝谥曰哲文神武成孝皇帝，庙号孝宗。
现代文：十八日，上大行至尊寿皇圣帝溢号为哲文神武成孝皇帝，庙号孝宗。
English: On the 18th day of the month, Shangdaigyong Supreme Longevity Emperor Holy Emperor's posthumous name was Jebun Shenwu Chengxiao Emperor, and his temple name was Xiaozong.

古文：丙午，复以朱熹奏请，却瑞庆节贺表。
现代文：十九日，又因朱熹奏请，拒绝瑞庆节进献贺表。
English: On the 19th, it also refused to send a congratulatory card on the occasion of the National Day of the People's Republic of China.

古文：庚戌，改上安穆皇后谥曰成穆皇后，安恭皇后谥曰成恭皇后。
现代文：二十三日，改上安穆皇后溢号为成穆皇后，安恭皇后溢号为成恭皇后。
English: On the 23rd, the surrogate name of Empress Anmu was changed to Empress Chengmu, and the surrogate name of Empress Angyong was changed to Empress Chenggyong.

古文：壬子，遣曾三复使金贺正旦。
现代文：二十五日，派遣曾三复出使金国祝贺新春。
English: On the 25th, the delegation of Zeng San returned to China to congratulate the country on the Spring Festival.

古文：丙辰，上孝宗皇帝册宝于重华殿，成穆皇后、成恭皇后册宝于本室。
现代文：二十九日，到重华殿上孝宗皇帝册宝，到本室上成穆皇后、成恭皇后册宝。
English: On the 29th, Emperor Xiaozong and Empress Chengmu and Empress Chenggong came to the Chonghua Hall to collect the treasures.

古文：是月，建福宁殿。
现代文：这个月，建造福宁殿。
English: This month, the construction of the Fu Ning Hall began.

古文：闰月庚申，以吏部尚书郑侨等奏请祧僖、宣二祖，正太祖东向之位，寻立僖祖别庙，以藏顺、翼、宣三祖之主。
现代文：闰十月初三，因吏部尚书郑侨等奏请迁去嘻祖、宣祖神主，正太祖东向之位，不久立嘻祖别庙，安置顺、翼、宣三祖神主。
English: On the 3rd day of the 10th month of the leap year, due to the request of Shangshu Zhengqiao and others in the cadre department, the three ancestral deities of He Zu, Xuan Zu and Zheng Da Zu were moved to Dong Xiang's place, and the He Zu Temple was soon established, and the three ancestral deities of Shun, Ying and Xuan were placed.

古文：乙丑，遣林季友使金报谢。
现代文：初八，派遣林季友出使金国答谢。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Lin Jiyu was dispatched as an envoy from the State of Kim to express thanks.

古文：戊辰，金遣使来吊祭。
现代文：十一日，金国派遣使臣来吊祭。
English: On the 11th, Kim sent an envoy to the hanging ceremony.

古文：戊寅，侍讲朱熹以上疏忤韩侂胄罢，赵汝愚力谏，不听；台谏、给舍交章请留朱熹，亦不听。
现代文：二十一日，侍讲朱熹因上疏违背韩青意愿被罢免，赵汝愚力谏，没被采纳；台谏、给舍官交相上章请留朱熹，也没有被采纳。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhu Xi, the attendant speaker, was dismissed due to the fact that he went against the wishes of Han Qing, Zhao Rugu Lijian, was not adopted; Taiwan, to give the official diplomatic chapter, asked Zhu Xi to stay, and was not adopted.

古文：诏两省、台谏、侍从各举宗室有文学器识者二人。
现代文：诏令两省、台谏、侍从官员各自举荐有文学才能的宗室子弟二人。
English: The imperial edict ordered the two provinces, the Taiwan Provincial Government, and the attendant officials to each recommend two sons of the family with literary talent.

古文：壬午，诏改明年为庆元元年。
现代文：二十五日，下诏改明年为庆元元年。
English: On the 25th, the following edict changed the next year to the first year of the Qingyuan.

古文：十一月甲午，复加安南国王李龙济美功臣。
现代文：十一月初七，又加安南国王李龙为济美功臣。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, King Lirong of Annam became a meritorious subject of Jimei.

古文：丙午，帝自重华宫还大内。
现代文：十九日，宁宗从重华宫回到皇宫。
English: On the 19th, Ningzong returned to the Imperial Palace from Chonghua Palace.

古文：庚戌，以宜州观察使韩侂胄兼枢密都承旨。
现代文：二十三日，任命宜州观察使韩青兼枢密都承旨。
English: On the 23rd, Han Qing, who is also a Privy Councillor, was appointed to observe Yizhou.

古文：辛亥，雨木冰。
现代文：二十四日，降木冰。
English: On the 24th, the snow began to fall.

古文：诏行孝宗三年丧制，命礼官条具典礼以闻。
现代文：下诏行孝宗三年丧制，命令礼官陈述典礼报上。
English: He issued the following edict to carry out the three-year mourning system for Xiaozong, and ordered the etiquette official to report the ceremony.

古文：升明州为庆元府。
现代文：升明州为庆元府。
English: Shengming Prefecture is now Qingyuan Prefecture.

古文：乙卯，权欑孝宗皇帝于永阜陵。
现代文：二十八日，暂葬孝宗皇帝于永阜陵。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Xiaozong was temporarily buried in Yongfu Mausoleum.

古文：十二月丁巳朔，禁民间妄言宫禁事。
现代文：十二月初一，禁止民间妄言宫内事情。
English: On the first day of December, it was forbidden for the public to speculate about matters within the palace.

古文：乙丑，吏部侍郎彭龟年上疏言韩侂胄假托声势，窃弄威福，乞黜之，以解天下之疑。
现代文：初九，吏部侍郎彭龟年上疏，说韩青假借声势，窃弄威福，请求罢除，从而解除全国人的疑虑。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Peng Jianlian, the secretary of the personnel department, said that Han Qing had taken advantage of the situation, teased Weifu, and requested to remove him, thus relieving the doubts of the whole country.

古文：诏罢龟年，进侂胄一官，与在京宫观。
现代文：下诏罢免彭龟年；韩青进升一宫，授为在京宫观。
English: In the following edict, Peng Kuei was dismissed; Han Qing was promoted to the first palace, and was awarded the title of In the Imperial Palace.

古文：赵汝愚请留龟年，不听。
现代文：赵汝愚请求留任彭龟年，没被采纳。
English: Zhao Rugu's request to stay on as Peng Jiaxin was not accepted.

古文：御史中丞谢深甫劾陈傅良，罢之。
现代文：御史中承谢深甫弹勃陈傅良，被罢免。
English: In history, Chen Fu-liang was deposed and replaced by Cheng Xie Shenpo.

古文：戊辰，以陈康伯配飨孝宗庙庭。
现代文：十二日，以陈康伯配享孝宗庙庭。
English: On the 12th, Chen Kangbo was presented with the Xiaozong Temple Garden.

古文：己巳，陈骙罢。
现代文：十三日，除癸被罢免。
English: On the 13th, he was removed from office.

古文：庚午，以余端礼知枢密院事，京镗参知政事，郑侨同知枢密院事。
现代文：十四日，任命余端礼为知枢密院事，京锁为参知政事，郑侨为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 14th, Yu Duanli was appointed as a member of the Privy Council, Jing Zhao as a member of the Council of State, and Zheng Qiao as a member of the Privy Council of Tongzhi.

古文：辛未，监察御史刘德秀劾起居舍人刘光祖，罢之。
现代文：十五日，监察御史刘德秀弹勃起居舍人刘光祖，罢免了他。
English: On the 15th, Liu Dexiu, the inspector general of history, removed Liu Guangzu from his post after he got an erection.

古文：癸酉，金遣使来贺登位。
现代文：十七日，金国派遣使臣来祝贺宁宗即位。
English: On the 17th, Kim sent an envoy to congratulate Ningzong on his enthronement.

古文：戊寅，加郭师禹少师，进封永宁郡王。
现代文：上孝宗庙乐为伏伦之舞。十八日，在太庙附祭孝宗神主。
English: On the 18th, a festival was held in the main temple to celebrate the god of the filial piety.

古文：癸未，金遣使来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十一日，减轻临安、绍兴二府死罪以下囚犯罪刑，释放杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the 21st, Lin'an and Shaoxing prefectures commuted the sentences of prisoners sentenced to death or less, and released prisoners sentenced to caning or less.

古文：是岁，两浙、淮南、江东西路水旱，振之，仍蠲其赋。
现代文：免除百姓因殡宫服役者的赋税。这一年，两浙、淮南、江东西路水灾早灾，贩济这些地区灾民，并免除他们的赋税。
English: This year, the floods in Zhejiang, Huainan and the East-West River caused early disasters, and the traffickers helped the victims in these areas and exempted them from paying taxes.

古文：庆元元年春正月丁巳朔，蠲两淮租税。
现代文：庆元元年春正月丁巳朔，免除两淮租税。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the Qingyuan, it was exempted from the two-huai tax.

古文：壬寅，黎州蛮寇边，官军战却之。
现代文：十六日，黎州蛮攻打边境，官军打退他们。
English: On the 16th, Lizhou made a bold attack on the border, and the government army repulsed them.

古文：乙巳，蠲台、严、湖三州贫民身丁、折帛钱一年。
现代文：十九日，免除台、严、湖三州贫民身丁钱和折帛钱一年。
English: On the 19th, the poor people in the three states of Taiwan, Yan and Hubei were exempted from the payment of Ding Qian and Oshi Qian for one year.

古文：诏两浙、淮南、江东路荒歉诸州收养遗弃小儿。
现代文：下诏两浙、淮南、江东路荒歉各州收养被遗弃的小孩。
English: The following is an apology to Zhejiang, Huainan and Jiangdong provinces for the adoption of abandoned children.

古文：辛亥，以久雨，振给临安贫民。
现代文：二十五日，因久雨不晴，贩济临安贫民。
English: On the 25th, due to the long rain and cloudy weather, the vendors came to give alms to the poor in Lin'an.

古文：丙辰，白虹贯日。
现代文：三十日，白色虹遮掩太阳。
English: On the 30th, a white rainbow covers the sun.

古文：二月丁巳朔，诏两淮诸州劝民垦辟荒田。
现代文：二月初一，下诏两淮各州劝民开辟荒田。
English: On the first day of February, the two Huai states issued an edict to persuade people to open up wasteland.

古文：壬戌，诏嗣秀王伯圭赞拜不名。
现代文：初六，诏令嗣秀王赵伯圭赞拜不称姓名。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, the emperor issued an edict ordering Zhao Bokei, the heir of King Xiu, to not give his name.

古文：癸亥，以久雨，释大理、三衙、临安府、两浙路杖以下囚。
现代文：初七，因久雨不晴，释放大理寺、三衙、临安府、两浙路杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, due to the long rain and cloudy weather, the prisoners below the sentence of Dali Temple, Samye, Lin'an, and two Zhejiang roads were released.

古文：丁卯，诏帅臣、监司岁终考察郡守臧否以闻。
现代文：十一日，诏令帅臣、监司年终考察郡守称职与否上报。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the grand marshal ordered his subordinates and supervisors to conduct a year-end inspection and report on the competency of the county magistrate.

古文：戊寅，以右正言李沐言，罢赵汝愚为观文殿大学士、知福州。
现代文：二十二日，因右正言李沐议论，罢免赵汝愚为观文殿大学士、知福州。
English: On the 22nd, Zhao Ruwu was removed from his post as a scholar of Guanwenden University and Zhifu Prefecture because of his discussion of the Right Upright Scholar Li Mu.

古文：己卯，雨土。
现代文：二十三日，天上降土。
English: On the 23rd, the sky rained down earth.

古文：以余端礼兼参知政事。
现代文：任命余端礼兼参知政事。
English: Appointed Yu Duanli and also a member of the Council of State.

古文：庚辰，兵部侍郎章颖以党赵汝愚罢。
现代文：二十四日，兵部侍郎章颖因与赵汝愚结党被罢免。
English: On the 24th, Zhang Ying, the secretary of the military department, was removed from his post for joining the party with Zhao Ruyong.

古文：甲申，谢深甫等再劾汝愚，诏与宫观。
现代文：二十八日，谢深甫等再次弹勃赵汝愚，下诏授给宫观闲职。
English: On the 28th, Xie Shenfu and others once again played Bo Zhao Rugu, and the following edict was issued to give Gongguan the sinecure.

古文：三月丙戌朔，日有食之。庚寅，太白经天。
现代文：三月初一，日食。初五，太白星显现一天。
English: On the first day of March, a solar eclipse. On the fifth day of the first month, a white star appears for one day.

古文：辛亥，诏四川岁发西兵诣行在，如旧制。
现代文：二十六日，下诏四川每年派西兵到行在，如旧制。
English: On the 26th, it was decreed that Sichuan would send western soldiers to march in the parade every year, as in the old system.

古文：癸丑，命侍从、台谏、两省集议江南沿江诸州行铁钱利害。
现代文：二十八日，命令侍从、台谏、两省官员一起讨论江南沿江各州实行铁钱的利害。
English: On the 28th, he ordered his attendants, the Taiwans, and the officials of the two provinces to discuss the benefits of implementing iron money in the states along the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：甲寅，国子祭酒李祥、博士杨简以党赵汝愚罢。
现代文：二十九日，国子祭酒李样、博士杨简因与赵汝愚结党被罢免。
English: On the 29th, Li So and Yang Jian, both doctors, were removed from their posts for forming a party with Zhao Rugu.

古文：夏四月丁巳，太府寺丞吕祖俭坐上疏留赵汝愚及论不当黜朱熹、彭龟年等，忤韩侂胄，送韶州安置。
现代文：夏四月初二，太府寺承吕祖俭因上疏要求留用赵汝愚和建议不应当罢除朱熹、彭龟年等， 降逆韩青，送往韶州安置。
English: On the 2nd day of the 4th month of the summer, Lv Zu Jian, the successor of Taifu Temple, requested to retain Zhao Rugu and suggested that Zhu Xi and Peng Kunen should not be dismissed, and Han Qing should be sent to Zhangzhou for resettlement.

古文：己未，以余端礼为右丞相，京镗知枢密院事，郑侨参知政事，谢深甫签书枢密院事。
现代文：初四，任命余端礼为右承相，京锁为知枢密院事，郑侨为参知政事，谢深甫为签书枢密院事。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Yu Duanli was appointed as the Minister of the Right, Jing Zhao as the Secretary of the Privy Council, Zheng Qiao as the Councillor of the Privy Council, and Xie Shenfu as the Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：庚申，太学生杨宏中等六人以上书留赵汝愚、章颖、李祥、杨简，请黜李沐，诏宏中等各送五百里外编管。
现代文：初五，太学生杨宏中等六人因上书请求留任赵汝愚、章颖、李样、杨简，请求罢默李沐，诏令杨宏中分别送到五百里外编管。
English: On the fifth day of the first semester, six students from Yanghong Middle School, Zhao Ruwu, Zhang Ying, Li Saming, and Yang Jian, were asked to remain in their positions due to the request of the letter. Li Mu was asked to be silent, and Yanghong Middle School was ordered to be sent to the 500-li extracurricular management.

古文：中书舍人邓驲上疏救之，不听。
现代文：中书舍人又吗上疏为之辩解，没被采纳。
English: It was not adopted, with the excuse that the Chinese text was too sparse.

古文：戊辰，临安大疫，出内帑钱为贫民医药、棺敛费及赐诸军疫死者家。
现代文：十三日，临安发生大规模疾疫，拿出内库钱为贫民购置医药、棺材，并赐给各军因疫而死者家属络钱。
English: On the 13th, a large-scale epidemic occurred in Lin'an, and the treasury money was taken out to purchase medicine and coffins for the poor, and the families of those who died due to the epidemic were given money.

古文：五月戊子，吕祖俭改送吉州安置。
现代文：五月初四，吕祖俭改送吉州安置。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month, Lv Zu Jian was transferred to Jizhou for resettlement.

古文：戊戌，诏戒百官朋比。
现代文：十四日，下诏严禁百官结为朋党。
English: On the 14th, the following edict strictly forbade hundreds of officials from forming crony parties.

古文：丙午，诏诸路提举司置广惠仓，修胎养令。
现代文：二十二日，诏令各路提举司设置广惠仓，修胎养令。
English: On the 22nd, it was decreed that all roads should set up Guanghui warehouses and repair tires.

古文：辛亥，减大理、三衙、临安府杂犯死罪以下囚，释杖以下。
现代文：二十七日，减轻大理寺、三衙、临安府杂犯死罪以下囚犯罪刑，释放杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the 27th, the death penalty for Dalian Temple, Sanlu and Lin'an minor offenders was reduced, and prisoners sentenced to caning were released.

古文：六月丁巳，复留正观文殿大学士，充醴泉观使。
现代文：六月初四，恢复留正为观文殿大学士，担任醛泉观使。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the year, he was reinstated as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and served as a Confucian scholar of Aldehyde Spring.

古文：右正言刘德秀请考核真伪，以辨邪正。
现代文：右正言刘德秀请求考核真伪，从而辨别邪正。
English: Liu Dexiu, the Right Upright Scholar, requested that the authenticity be examined in order to distinguish the true from the false.

古文：己未，遣汪义端贺金主生辰。
现代文：初六，派遣汪义端祝贺金主生日。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, Wang Yibuan was dispatched to congratulate Jin on his birthday.

古文：庚午，诏三衙、江上诸军主帅、将佐，初除举自代一人，岁荐所知二人。
现代文：十七日，下诏三衙、江上各军主帅、将佐，初到任时推举自代一人，每年荐举所知二人。
English: On the 17th day of the 3rd month, the commander-in-chief of all the armies on the river and the vice-commander-in-chief were appointed. When they first took office, one person was appointed on their own behalf, and two people were appointed each year.

古文：癸酉，以韩侂胄为保宁军节度使、提举万寿观。
现代文：二十日，任命韩青为保宁军节度使、提举万寿观。
English: On the 20th, Han Qing was appointed as the envoy of the Baoding Military Festival, and the concept of longevity was raised.

古文：秋七月壬辰，加周必大少傅。
现代文：秋七月初九，加周必大为少傅。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of autumn, Ka Zhou will be promoted from Da to Shao Fu.

古文：丁酉，落赵汝愚观文殿大学士，罢宫观。
现代文：十四日，免除赵汝愚观文殿大学士职务，罢宫观。
English: On the 14th, Zhao Ruyuguan was relieved of his post as a scholar of the Temple of Literature and the Palace.

古文：己亥，太白昼见。
现代文：十六日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 16th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：八月己巳，诏内外诸军主帅条奏武备边防之策以闻。
现代文：八月十七日，诏令内外诸军主帅陈述武备边防策略奏上。
English: On August 17th, the commander-in-chief of all armed forces at home and abroad was ordered to report on the armed border defense strategy.

古文：九月壬午朔，蠲临安府水灾贫民赋。
现代文：九月初一，免除临安府水灾贫民赋税。
English: On the first day of September, the flood-stricken poor in Lin'an were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：乙酉，以久雨，决系囚。
现代文：初四，因久雨不晴审理在押囚犯。
English: On the fourth day of the new school year, the trial of a prisoner in custody was delayed due to persistent rain.

古文：丙戌，灾惑入太微。
现代文：初五，荧惑星侵人太微垣。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the invading fluorescent planets are too small.

古文：甲辰，遣黄艾使金贺正旦。
现代文：二十三日，派遣黄艾出使金国祝贺正旦。
English: On the 23rd, Huang Ai sent an envoy to Kim Guo to congratulate Zheng Dan.

古文：己酉，蠲台、严、湖三州被灾民丁绢。
现代文：二十八日，免除台、严、湖三州遭灾百姓丁绢。
English: On the 28th, the disaster-stricken people in the three states of Taiwan, Yan and Hubei were exempted from Dingyao.

古文：冬十月己卯，诏三省、枢密院条上合教诸军例。
现代文：冬十月己卯日，诏令三省、枢密院制定适合教练各军条例奏上。
English: In the winter of October, the three provinces and the Privy Council were ordered to formulate regulations suitable for the coaches of each army.

古文：乙丑，升秀州为嘉兴府，舒州为安庆府，嘉州为嘉定府，英州为英德府。
现代文：十四日，升秀州为嘉兴府，舒州为安庆府，嘉州为嘉定府，英州为英德府。
English: On the 14th, Xiangxiu Prefecture became Jiaxing Prefecture, Shuzhou became Anqing Prefecture, Jiazhou became Jiading Prefecture, and Yingzhou became Yingde Prefecture.

古文：戊辰，金遣吴鼎枢来贺瑞庆节。
现代文：十七日，金国派遣吴鼎枢来祝贺瑞庆节。
English: On the 17th, Kim Guo sent Wu Ding Zuo to congratulate the Ruiqing Festival.

古文：壬申，封子恭为安定郡王。
现代文：二十一日，封赵子恭为安定郡王。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhao Zigong was crowned the king of Ding'an County.

古文：十一月己丑，雨土。
现代文：十一月初八，天上降土。
English: On the 8th day of the 11th month, the sky fell to the ground.

古文：庚寅，以弟徐国公抦为昭庆军节度使。
现代文：初九，任命弟徐国公赵俩为昭庆军节度使。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, he appointed his brother Xu Guogong Zhao to be the festival envoy of the Shaoqing Army.

古文：戊戌，加上寿圣隆慈备福太皇太后尊号曰寿圣隆慈备福光佑太皇太后，寿成皇太后曰寿成惠慈皇太后，太上皇曰圣安寿仁太上皇，太上皇后曰寿仁太上皇后。
现代文：十七日，加上寿皇隆慈备福太皇太后尊号为寿圣隆慈备福光佑太皇太后，寿成皇太后为寿成惠慈皇太后，太上皇为圣安寿仁太上皇，太上皇后为寿仁太上皇后。
English: On the 17th, the names of the empress dowager of Shouwanglongcubefu were added as Shoushenglongcubefuguangyou, the empress dowager of Shoucheng, the empress dowager of Shouchenghui, the empress dowager of Shoucheng, the empress dowager of Sheng'an Shouren, and the empress dowager of Shoucheng.

古文：丙午，以监察御史胡纮言，责授赵汝愚宁远军节度副使、永州安置。
现代文：二十五日，采纳监察御史胡的建议，贬降赵汝愚为宁远军节度副使，永州安置。
English: On the 25th, Zhao Rugu was demoted to vice-envoy of the Ningyuan Army and relocated to Yongzhou upon the recommendation of the inspector Gu Shihu.

古文：丁未，命宰执大阅。
现代文：二十六日，命令宰执阅军。
English: On the 26th, the commander-in-chief ordered the parade.

古文：十二月癸亥，置楚州弩手效用军。
现代文：十二月十三日，设置楚州弩手效用军。
English: On December 13th, the Chuzhou Armored Utility Corps was established.

古文：丙子，命朱熹为焕章阁待制，辞。
现代文：二十六日，命令朱熹为焕章阁待制，朱熹推辞。
English: On the 26th, Zhu Xi was ordered to wait for Huan Zhangge, and Zhu Xi declined.

古文：丁丑，金遣纥石烈正来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣给石烈正来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, Kim Guo sent Shi Retseng to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：二年春正月庚寅，以余端礼为左丞相，京镗为右丞相，郑侨知枢密院事，谢深甫参知政事，御史中丞何澹同知枢密院事，庚子，赵汝愚卒于永州。
现代文：庆元二年春正月初十，任命余端礼为左承相，京锁为右承相，郑侨为枢密院事，谢深甫为参知政事，御史中承何澹为同知枢密院事。二十日，赵汝愚在永州去世。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the second year of Qingyuan, Yu Duanli was appointed as the Left Vice-Minister, Jing Zhao as the Right Vice-Minister, Zheng Qiao as the Privy Councillor, Xie Shenfu as the Councillor of State, and He Jian as the Councillor of the Privy Councillor. On the 20th day, Zhao Rugu died in Yongzhou.

古文：甲辰，右谏议大夫刘德秀劾留正引用伪学之党，诏落正观文殿大学士，罢宫观。
现代文：二十四日，右谏议大夫刘德秀弹勃留正推荐引用伪学党人，诏令免除留正观文殿大学士职务，罢免宫观闲职。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Liu Dexiu, the doctor of the Right Hand Council, issued an edict exempting Ruizhengguan from the post of academician and dismissing Gongguan from the post of layman.

古文：二月辛酉，诏追复赵汝愚官，许归葬，以中书舍人吴宗旦言，罢之。
现代文：二月十一日，诏令追还赵汝愚官职，允许归葬家乡，因中书舍人吴宗旦议论，又被罢除。
English: On February 11, the imperial edict restored Zhao Ruwu to his official position and allowed him to be buried in his hometown. However, he was dismissed again because of Wu Zontan's discussion.

古文：辛未，再蠲临安府民身丁钱三年。
现代文：二十一日，再次免除临安府百姓身丁钱三年。
English: On the 21st, the people of Lin'an were once again exempted from paying body tax for three years.

古文：三月丙申，命诸军射铁帘。
现代文：三月十六日，命令各军射铁帘。
English: On the 16th of March, he ordered all the armies to shoot at the iron curtain.

古文：己亥，进封弟抦为吴兴郡王。
现代文：十九日，进封弟赵摘为吴兴郡王。
English: On the 19th, Jinfeng's younger brother Zhao Zhan became the king of Wuxing County.

古文：丙午，有司上《庆元会计录》。
现代文：二十六日，有关部门呈上庆元会计录。
English: On the 26th, the relevant departments submitted the Qingyuan accounting record.

古文：夏四月甲子，余端礼罢。
现代文：夏四月十五日，余端礼被罢免。
English: On the 15th day of the 4th month of summer, Yu Duanli was dismissed.

古文：壬申，以何澹参知政事，吏部尚书叶翥签书枢密院事。
现代文：二十三日，任命何澹为参知政事，吏部尚书叶蠢为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 23rd, He Jian was appointed as a member of the Council of State, and Shang Shufu Yebu of the Ministry of Personnel was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：乙亥，增置监察御史一员。
现代文：二十六日，增置临察御史一员。
English: On the 26th, a member of the inspection team was added.

古文：五月辛巳，以旱，祷于天地、宗庙、祖稷。
现代文：五月初二，因早灾到天地、宗庙、社翟祈祷降雨。
English: On the second day of the fifth month, due to the early disaster, the heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community prayed for rain.

古文：诏大理、三衙、临安府、两浙州县决系囚。
现代文：下诏大理寺、三衙、临安府、两浙州县审理在押囚犯。
English: The following Dalian Temple, Samye, Lin'an and two counties in Zhejiang Province will hold trials for prisoners in custody.

古文：乙酉，申严狱囚瘐死之罚。
现代文：初六，重申囚犯死在狱中的惩罚制度。
English: Sixth, reiterate the punishment system for prisoners who die in prison.

古文：辛卯，赐礼部进士邹应龙以下四百九十有九人及第、出身。
现代文：十二日，赐礼部进士邹应龙等四百九十九人及第、出身。
English: On the 12th, 499 members of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, including Gong Yinglong, were conferred with honorary titles.

古文：甲午，减诸路和市折帛钱三年。
现代文：十五日，减各路和买折帛钱三年。
English: On the fifteenth day of the same month, the reduction of all roads and the purchase of money for three years.

古文：建华文阁，以藏孝宗御集。
现代文：建造华文阁，用来保存孝宗御集。
English: Huabun Pavilion was built to preserve the collection of Emperor Xiaozong.

古文：甲辰，更慈福宫为寿慈宫。
现代文：二十五日，改慈福宫为寿慈宫。
English: On the 25th, the name of Cifu Palace was changed to Shouci Palace.

古文：六月庚戌，遣吴宗旦贺金主生辰，乙丑，命监司、帅守臧否县令，分三等，丙子，子埈生。
现代文：六月初二，派遣吴宗旦祝贺金主生日。十七日，命令监司、帅守考核县令，分为三等。二十八日，子赵极出生。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, Wu Zongtan was dispatched to congratulate Jin on his birthday. On the 17th, he ordered the supervisors and marshals to examine the county ordinance and divide it into three classes. On the 28th, his son Zhao Ji was born.

古文：秋七月癸未，飨于太庙。
现代文：秋七月初六，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the ritual of Taimyo begins.

古文：丙戌，减诸路死罪囚，释流以下。
现代文：初九，减轻各路死罪囚犯罪刑，流刑以下释放。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, commute the sentences of all death-row prisoners, and release those sentenced to exile.

古文：戊子，量徙流人吕祖俭等于内郡。
现代文：十一日，流放人吕祖俭被命令适当迁往内地。
English: On the 11th day, the exile Lv Zu Jian was ordered to move to the mainland.

古文：诏检正、都司考核诸路守臣便民五事以闻。
现代文：下诏检正、都司考核各路守臣便民五事上报朝廷。
English: The following are the five matters reported to the Imperial Court by the Imperial Procuratorate and the Provincial Procuratorate for the assessment of the convenience of the people.

古文：戊戌，以韩侂胄为开府仪同三司、万寿观使。
现代文：二十一日，任命韩青为开府仪同三司、万寿观使。
English: On the 21st, Han Qing was appointed as Kaifu Yi Tong San Si and Wan Shou Guan Envoy.

古文：八月癸丑，奉安孝宗皇帝、成穆皇后、成恭皇后神御于景灵宫。
现代文：八月初六，恭敬安置孝宗皇帝、成穆皇后、成恭皇后神主于景灵宫。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, Emperor Xiaozong, Empress Chengmu and Empress Chenggong were respectfully placed in Jingling Palace.

古文：丙辰，以太常少卿胡纮请，权住进拟伪学之党。
现代文：初九，采纳太常少卿胡的请求，暂停进拟伪学党人。
English: On the first day of the ninth month of the year, he accepted the request of Taizang Shaoqing Hu and suspended the party members who wanted to be pseudo-academics.

古文：壬戌，子埈薨，追封兖王，谥冲惠。
现代文：十五日，子赵极去世，追封为充王，溢号冲惠。
English: On the 15th, Zhao Ji's son Zhao Ji passed away, and he was posthumously crowned as the crown prince.

古文：九月丁亥，复分利州为东西、路。
现代文：九月十一日，又分利州路为利州东西路。
English: On September 11, Lizhou Road was divided into Lizhou East-West Road.

古文：癸巳，嗣濮王士歆薨，追封韶王。
现代文：十七日，嗣攫王赵士散逝世，追封为韶王。
English: On the seventeenth day, Zhao Shisan, the heir to the throne, died and was posthumously crowned the king.

古文：甲午，流星昼陨。
现代文：十八日，流星白天坠落。
English: On the 18th, a meteor fell during the day.

古文：丁酉，遣张贵谟使金贺正旦。
现代文：二十一日，派遣张贵漠出使金国祝贺正旦。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhang Guimou was sent as an envoy from China to congratulate Zhengdan.

古文：冬十月戊申，率群臣奉上寿圣隆慈备福光佑太皇太后、寿成惠慈皇太后、圣安寿仁太上皇、寿仁太上皇后册宝于慈福、寿康宫。
现代文：冬十月初三，率领大臣到慈福宫、寿康宫奉上寿圣隆慈备福光佑太皇太后、寿成惠慈皇太后、圣安寿仁太上皇、寿仁太上皇后册宝。初六，册立皇后。
English: On the third day of the third month of October in winter, he led the minister to the Cifu Palace and the Shukang Palace to present the treasures to the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager, and the Empress Dowager.

古文：辛亥，册皇后。壬戌，金遣张嗣来贺瑞庆节。甲戌，大阅。
现代文：十七日，金国派遣张嗣前来祝贺瑞庆节。二十九日，举行盛大阅军仪式。
English: On the 17th, the DPRK sent Zhang Ci to congratulate the Ruiqing Festival, and on the 29th, a grand military parade was held.

古文：十一月庚寅，诣寿康宫，上《太上皇帝宽恤诏令》。
现代文：十一月十五日，宁宗到寿康宫，呈上汰上皇帝宽恤诏令。
English: On November 15th, Ning Zong went to Shukang Palace to present the Emperor's decree of clemency.

古文：壬辰，京镗等上《孝宗皇帝宽恤诏令》。
现代文：十七日，京锁等呈上孝宗皇帝宽恤诏令。
English: On the 17th, Beijing Lock and others submitted to Emperor Xiaozong's pardon decree.

古文：癸卯，赏宜州捕降峒寇功。
现代文：二十八日，奖赏宜州捕降酮寇的有功人员。
English: On the 28th, a reward was given to the meritorious personnel who caught and brought down the keto mosquito in Yizhou.

古文：十二月辛未，金遣完颜崇道来贺明年正旦。
现代文：十二月二十六日，金国派遣完颜崇道来祝贺明年新春。
English: On December 26th, Kim Jong Un sent Kangyan Chongdao to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：是月，监察御史沈继祖劾朱熹，诏落熹秘阁修撰，罢宫观。
现代文：这个月，监察御史沈继祖弹勃朱熹，下诏免除朱熹秘阁修撰，罢除为宫观闲职。
English: This month, the inspector of imperial history, Shen Jizzu, fired Zhu Xi, the next edict exempted Zhu Xi from secret cabinet revision, and dismissed him as an idle person.

古文：窜处士蔡元定于道州。
现代文：处士蔡元定被流放道州。
English: The official, Cai Yuanding, was exiled to Doushou.

古文：三年春正月壬寅，郑侨罢。
现代文：庆元三年春正月二十八日，郑侨被罢免。
English: On the 28th day of the first month of the third year of the Qing Dynasty, Zheng Qiao was dismissed.

古文：癸卯，以谢深甫兼知枢密院事。
现代文：二十九日，任命谢深甫兼知枢密院事。
English: On the 29th, he appointed Xie Shenfu and Jian Zhi as Privy Councillors.

古文：二月己酉，京镗等上《神宗玉牒》、《高宗实录》。
现代文：二月初五，京锁等呈上件申宗玉牌、滴宗实录。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, the Beijing lock and others submitted the application for the Zongyu card and the drop of the Zong solid record.

古文：丁巳，以大理司直邵褎然请诏大臣自今权臣、伪学之党，勿除在内差遣。诏下其章。
现代文：十三日，因大理司直邵娜然请诏大臣以后权臣、伪学党人不除在内差遣，诏下其章。
English: On the thirteenth day, because of the sudden appearance of the chief editor, Shona, the minister was asked to issue an edict, after which the influential ministers and pseudo-academic party members were sent, and the edict was issued.

古文：三月乙未，建东华门。
现代文：三月二十一日，建东华门。
English: On March 21, the East China Gate was built.

古文：庚子，禁浙西州军围田。
现代文：二十六日，禁止浙西州军围田。
English: On the 26th, the Western Zhejiang Army was prohibited from encircling the fields.

古文：壬寅，诏自今有司奏谳死罪不当者，论如律。 
现代文：二十八日，下诏： 从今以后有关部门奏请朝廷复审的死罪案件有不当者，按律论处。 
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued: From now on, if there is any impropriety in the death penalty cases submitted by the relevant departments to the Imperial Court for review, it will be dealt with according to the law.

古文：夏四月丙午，雨土。
现代文：夏四月初三，天上降土。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, the earth fell from the sky.

古文：命不去为嗣濮王。
现代文：命令赵不法为嗣攫王。
English: He ordered Zhao to become the illegitimate heir to the throne.

古文：壬子，以旱祷于天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：初九，因早灾祈祷天地、宗庙、社翟。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, due to the early disaster, the heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community prayed.

古文：乙丑，雨雹。
现代文：二十二日，降冰雹。
English: On the third day of the new year, hail fell.

古文：六月戊辰，颁《淳熙宽恤诏令》。
现代文：六月二十六日，颁布停熙宽恤诏令。
English: On June 26th, the decree to suspend Xi's amnesty was issued.

古文：闰月甲戌，内出铜器付尚书省毁之，命申严私铸铜器之禁。
现代文：闰六月初二，从宫内拿出铜器交给尚书省毁掉，命令申严私铸铜器之禁。
English: On the second day of the second month of June, he took out the bronze ware from the palace and gave it to Shangshu to destroy, and ordered that the private casting of bronze ware be strictly prohibited.

古文：乙亥，遣卫泾贺金主生辰。
现代文：初三，派遣卫径祝贺金主生日。
English: On the third day of junior high school, sent Wei path to congratulate Jin Lord's birthday.

古文：甲午，诏留正分司西京、邵州居住。
现代文：二十二日，下诏留正分司西京，邵州居住。
English: On the 22nd, he was transferred to the West Beijing Sub-branch of the General Office of the Communist Party of China and resided in Shaozhou.

古文：是夏，广东提举茶盐徐安国遣人捕私盐于大奚山，岛民遂作乱。
现代文：这年夏季，广东提举茶盐徐安国派在大奚山捕获私盐贩，岛民于是反叛作乱。
English: In the summer of that year, when the tea salt was raised in Guangdong and the Xu'an Guo faction captured the salt smugglers in Dalat Mountain, the islanders rebelled and rioted.

古文：秋七月庚午，监察御史沈继祖录淹囚四百余条来上，诏进二官。
现代文：秋七月二十九日，监察御史沈继祖录淹囚四百多条来上，下诏进二官。
English: On the 29th day of the 7th month of the autumn, more than 400 entries of the records of the ancestors of Emperor Shen and his successors were inspected, and two officials were promoted.

古文：八月戊子，复置严州神泉监。
现代文：八月十七日，重新设置严州神泉监。
English: On August 17th, Yanzhou Shensen Supervisor was re-established.

古文：辛卯，知广州钱之望遣兵入大奚山，尽杀岛民。
现代文：二十日，广州知州钱之望派兵进人大奚山，尽杀岛民。
English: On the 20th, Guangzhou Chizhou Qian Rongwang sent soldiers into the Lushan Mountain to kill the islanders.

古文：甲午，均诸路职田。
现代文：二十三日，均各路职田。
English: On the 23rd, all the fields were leveled.

古文：九月壬寅，以四川旱，诏蠲民赋。
现代文：九月初二，因四川早灾免除百姓赋税。
English: On the second day of September, due to the Sichuan earthquake, people were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：辛酉，遣曾炎使金贺正旦。
现代文：二十一日，派遣曾炎出使金国祝贺正旦。
English: On the 21st, Zeng Ying sent an envoy to Kim Guo to congratulate Zheng Dan.

古文：乙丑，申严帅臣、监司臧否郡守之制。
现代文：二十五日，申严帅臣、监司考核郡守之制。
English: On the 25th, Shen Yan, a senior officer, and the supervisor of the assessment of the county guard system were promoted.

古文：是月，诏监司、帅守荐举改官，勿用伪学之人。
现代文：这个月，诏令监司、帅守荐举改官，不用伪学党人。
English: This month, the prefectural supervisors and superintendents were recommended to change their posts, without the need for pseudo-study party members.

古文：冬十月癸酉，雷。
现代文：冬十月初四，打雷。
English: In winter, on the fourth day of October, there is thunder.

古文：丙戌，金遣完颜愈来贺瑞庆节。
现代文：十七日，金国派遣完颜愈来祝贺瑞庆节。
English: On the 17th, after the dispatch of Kim Guo, more and more congratulated Ruiqing Festival.

古文：癸卯，朝飨于太庙。
现代文：二十七日，因太皇太后身体不适，举行赦免。
English: On the 27th, because the empress dowager was unwell, an amnesty was held.

古文：甲辰，祀天地于圜丘，大赦。乙巳，诏为大行太皇太后服期。
现代文：十一月初二，加孝宗皇帝溢号为绍统同道冠德昭功哲文神武明圣成孝皇帝。太皇太后吴氏逝世。初三，祭祀景灵宫。初五，诏令为太皇太后吴氏服丧。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Emperor Gao Xiaozong was crowned as Emperor Shao Tong Tong Dao Guan De Zhaogong Zhe Wen Shen Wu Ming Sheng Cheng Xiao. Empress Dowager Wu passed away. On the third day of the first month, a memorial service was held at Jingling Palace. On the fifth day of the first month, it was decreed that Empress Dowager Wu would be buried.

古文：丁未，遣赵介使金告哀。
现代文：初九，派遣赵介出使金国告哀。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, Zhao Jie sent an envoy to China to mourn.

古文：十二月丙子，始御正殿。
现代文：十二月初八，始到正殿。
English: On the eighth day of the twelfth month, the procession began to the main hall.

古文：丁丑，以大行太皇太后欑宫，蠲绍兴府贫民明年身丁、折帛绵绢。
现代文：初九，因太皇太后殡宫，免除绍兴府贫民明年身丁钱、折帛绵绢。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the poor people of Shaoxing will be exempted from paying the funeral expenses of the great empress dowager next year.

古文：庚辰，罢文武官纳官告绫纸钱。
现代文：十二日，罢除文武官纳官告绩纸钱。
English: On the 12th, the civil and military attaché was dismissed, and the salary officer announced the performance of paper money.

古文：甲申，雷，雨土。
现代文：十六日，打雷，降土。
English: On the 16th, thunder and hail fell.

古文：乙未，金遣奥屯忠孝来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣奥屯忠孝来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, the State of Kim sent Otun Zhongxiao to congratulate the New Year next year.

古文：丁酉，以知绵州王沇请，诏省部籍伪学姓名。
现代文：二十九日，采纳绵州知州王沈的请求，下诏省部登记伪学姓名。
English: On the 29th, at the request of Wang Shen of Mianzhou Chizhou, the provincial government issued an order to register pseudo-academic names.

古文：四年正月己卯，上钦宗皇后谥曰仁怀皇后。
现代文：庆元四年春正月己卯，上钦宗皇后溢号为仁怀皇后。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fourth year of the Qing Dynasty, Empress Shangqinzong was given the title Empress Renhuai.

古文：丙寅，以叶翥同知枢密院事。
现代文：二十八日，以叶蠢为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 28th, Ye Bu was appointed as Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：丁卯，诏有司宽恤两浙、江淮、荆湖、四川流民。
现代文：二十九日，下诏有关部门宽恤两浙、江淮、荆湖、四川流民。
English: On the 29th, the relevant departments issued a decree to grant amnesty to the displaced people in Zhejiang, Jianghuai, Jinghu and Sichuan.

古文：二月辛未，诏两省、侍从、台谏各举所知一二人，毋荐宰执亲党。
现代文：二月初三，下诏两省、侍从、台谏官各自推举所知一至二人，不要推荐宰执的亲党。
English: On the 3rd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：丙子，上大行太皇太后谥曰宪圣慈烈皇后。
现代文：初八，上刚去世太皇太后溢号为宪圣慈烈皇后。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the newly deceased empress dowager was given the title of Empress Kensei.

古文：三月甲子，权欑宪圣慈烈皇后于永思陵。
现代文：三月二十七日，宪圣慈烈皇后暂葬永思陵。
English: On March 27th, the temporary burial of Empress Gensheng Cirel took place at Yongsi Mausoleum.

古文：乙丑，金遣乌林答天益来吊祭。
现代文：二十八日，金国派遣乌林答天益来吊祭。
English: On the 28th, the State of Jin dispatched Ulin to answer Tianyi's call for a hanging ceremony.

古文：夏四月丙戌，祔仁怀皇后、宪圣慈烈皇后神主于太庙。
现代文：夏四月十九日，在太庙附祭仁怀皇后、宪圣慈烈皇后神主。
English: On the 19th day of the 4th month of the summer, the Queen of Compassion, the Empress of Mercy, and the Empress of Compassion, were enshrined in the temple.

古文：己丑，蠲临安、绍兴二府租税有差。
现代文：二十二日，免除临安、绍兴二府租税不等。
English: On the 22nd, the two prefectures of Lin'an and Shaoxing were exempted from taxes.

古文：丙申，始御正殿。
现代文：二十九日，始到正殿。
English: On the 29th, the parade started from the main hall.

古文：是月，右谏议大夫张釜请下诏禁伪学。
现代文：这个月，右谏议大夫张釜请求下诏禁止伪学。
English: This month, the Right Rev. Dr. Zhang Kama issued an edict banning pseudoscience.

古文：遣汤硕使金报谢。
现代文：派遣汤硕出使金国答谢。
English: Tong Shuo was dispatched as an envoy from the People's Republic of China to express thanks.

古文：五月己亥，加韩侂胄少傅，赐玉带。
现代文：五月初二，加韩青为少傅，赐给玉带。
English: On the second day of the fifth lunar month, Han Qing was promoted to sous chef and given a jade belt.

古文：己酉，诏禁伪学。
现代文：十二日，下诏禁止伪学。
English: On the 12th, the following edict prohibited pseudoscience.

古文：六月己巳，遣杨王休贺金主生辰。
现代文：六月初三，派遣杨王休祝贺金主生日。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, Yang Wangxu was dispatched to congratulate Jin Lord on his birthday.

古文：癸酉，以弟吴兴郡王抦为开府仪同三司。
现代文：初七，以弟吴兴郡王赵俩为开府仪同三司。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Wang Zhao, the younger brother of Wuxing County, was appointed as the head of the ceremony and the three departments.

古文：秋七月辛酉，叶翥罢。
现代文：秋七月二十五日，叶蠢被罢免。
English: On the 25th day of the 7th month of autumn, Ye Jie was removed from office.

古文：八月丁卯朔，以久雨，决系囚。
现代文：八月丁卯朔，因久雨不晴审理在押囚犯。
English: In August, Ding Ushuo, a prisoner on remand, was detained due to the rain.

古文：丙子，以谢深甫知枢密院事兼参知政事，吏部尚书许及之同知枢密院事。
现代文：十一日以谢深甫为知枢密院事兼参知政事，吏部尚书许及之为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 11th, Xie Shenfu was appointed as a member of the Privy Council as well as a member of the Council of State.

古文：庚辰，白气亘天。
现代文：十五日，白气布满天空。
English: On the 15th, white gas filled the sky.

古文：丙戌，诏以太上皇圣躬清复，率群臣上寿。
现代文：二十一日，下诏因太上皇圣躬清复，率领大臣祝寿。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the emperor issued the following edict, leading the ministers in a celebration of the emperor's long life.

古文：寻不克行。
现代文：不久没有成行。
English: It didn't take long.

古文：九月壬寅，太白昼见。
现代文：九月初七，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：癸卯，太白经天。
现代文：初八，太白星显现一天。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, a white star streaks across the sky.

古文：丁未，颁《庆元重修敕令格式》。
现代文：十二日，颁布扶元重修救令格寿。
English: On the 12th, the Gu Yuan Renovation and Rescue Order for Geshou was issued.

古文：庚申，遣马觉使金贺正旦。
现代文：二十五日，派遣马觉出使金国祝贺正旦。
English: On the 25th, Ma Jietu sent an envoy to Kim Guo to congratulate Zheng Dan.

古文：是月，诏造新历。
现代文：这个月，下诏制作新历。
English: This month, a new calendar will be produced.

古文：冬十月戊子，金遣孙铎来贺瑞庆节。
现代文：冬十月二十四日，金国派遣孙铎来祝贺瑞庆节。
English: On the 24th day of winter in October, the State of Kim sent Sun Yat-sen to congratulate the Ruiqing Festival.

古文：十二月丙戌，再蠲临安府民身丁钱三年。
现代文：十二月二十三日，再免临安府百姓身丁钱三年。
English: On December 23rd, the people of Lin'an will be exempted from paying taxes for another three years.

古文：己丑，金遣杨庭筠来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十六日，金国派遣杨庭箔来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 26th, the People's Republic of China sent Yang Ting Foil to congratulate the New Year next year.

古文：五年春正月庚子，枢密院直省官蔡琏诉赵汝愚定策时有异谋，诏下大理捕鞫彭龟年、曾三聘等，以实其事。
现代文：庆元五年春正月初八，枢密院直省官蔡琏诉赵汝愚定策时有野心，下诏大理寺捕讯彭龟年、曾三聘等来核实其事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the first month of the fifth year of the Qing dynasty, Cai Qi, a direct provincial official of the Privy Council, vied with Zhao Ruyun to determine the time of ambition, and issued an edict to check the matter by arresting Peng Kuei at Dali Temple and hiring Zeng San.

古文：中书舍人范仲艺力争之于韩侂胄，事遂寝。
现代文：中书舍人范仲艺在韩青面前力争，此事于是停罢。
English: Fan Zhongyi, a scholar of Chinese calligraphy, argued in front of Han Qing, and the matter was stopped.

古文：张釜等复请穷治，诏停龟年、三聘官。
现代文：张釜又请求追究到底，下诏停止彭龟年、曾三聘官职。
English: Zhang Kama also requested that the investigation be carried out to the end, and the next edict was to stop Peng Kuei and Zeng San from holding official positions.

古文：壬戌，建玉堂。
现代文：三十日，建玉堂。
English: On the 30th, the Jade Hall was built.

古文：二月癸酉，白气亘天。
现代文：三月十一日，白气布满天空。
English: On March 11th, white gas filled the sky.

古文：乙酉，张釜劾刘光祖附和伪学，诏房州居住。
现代文：二十三日，张釜弹勃刘光祖附和伪学党人，诏令房州居住。
English: On the 23rd, Zhang Kama shot Liu Guangzu, a party member affiliated with the pseudo-scholarship, and ordered him to live in Fangzhou.

古文：三月甲午，罢监司臧否郡守之制。
现代文：三月初二，罢除监司考核郡守之制。
English: On the second day of March, the system of supervisors' assessment of county governors was abolished.

古文：夏五月壬辰朔，新历成，赐名曰《统天》。
现代文：夏五月初一，新历编制成功，赐名为统天历。
English: On the first day of May in summer, the new calendar was successfully compiled and given the name the Unified Celestial Calendar.

古文：戊戌，赐礼部进士曾从龙以下四百十有一人及第、出身。
现代文：初七，赐礼部进士曾从龙等四百一十二人及第、出身。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, there were 412 students from Long and other schools who were admitted to the Ceremonial Division.

古文：戊申，以久雨，民多疫，命临安府振恤之。
现代文：十七日，因久雨不晴，百姓多患疾病，命令临安府贩济抚恤。
English: On the 17th, due to the prolonged rain and lack of clear weather, the people suffered from many diseases, and Lin'an prefecture ordered the vendors to give alms.

古文：壬子，诏诸路州学置武士斋，选官按其武艺。
现代文：二十一日，诏令各路州学设置武士斋，选择官员考核武艺。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the emperor ordered all prefectures to set up samurai schools and select officials to examine martial arts.

古文：六月癸亥，遣李大性贺金主生辰。
现代文：六月初三，派遣李大性祝贺金主生日。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, Li Daxiong was dispatched to congratulate Jin on his birthday.

古文：秋七月甲寅，禁高丽、日本商人博易铜钱。
现代文：秋七月二十四日，禁止高丽、日本商人博易铜钱。
English: On the 24th day of the 7th month of autumn, Goryeo banned the Japanese merchant Bo Yi copper money.

古文：八月乙亥，白气亘天。
现代文：八月十五日，白气布满天空。
English: On August 15th, white gas filled the sky.

古文：辛巳，太祖庙楹生芝，率群臣诣寿康宫上寿，始见太上皇，成礼而还。
现代文：二十一日，太祖庙前柱生出芝草，宁宗率领大臣到寿康宫祝寿，始见太上皇，行礼后回宫。
English: On the twenty-first day, the front pillar of the Grand Ancestor's Temple sprouted turf grass, and Ning Zong led the minister to Shukang Palace to celebrate his birthday. He first met the retired emperor and returned to the palace after bowing.

古文：甲申，以过宫上寿礼成，中外奉表称贺。
现代文：二十四日，因宁宗祝寿礼成，中外奉表称庆祝贺。
English: On the 24th, due to the birthday celebration of Ning Zong, both Chinese and foreigners were invited to celebrate.

古文：丙戌，诏减诸路流囚，释杖以下，推恩如庆寿故事。
现代文：二十六日，诏令减轻各路流罪囚犯罪刑，释放杖刑以下囚犯，按庆寿惯例施予恩惠。
English: On the 26th, the imperial edict commuted the sentences of all common criminals, released prisoners sentenced to the cane or less, and granted favors according to the custom of celebrating one's birthday.

古文：丁亥，进京镗等官一级。
现代文：二十七日，进升京锁等人官一级。
English: On the 27th, Jin Sheng and other officials of the Beijing lock were promoted to the first level.

古文：戊子，立沿边诸州武举取士法。
现代文：二十八日，立沿边各州武举取士法。
English: On the 28th, martial law was enacted in the bordering states.

古文：九月庚寅朔，加韩侂胄少师，封平原郡王。
现代文：九月初一。加韩青为少师，封为平原郡王。
English: On the first day of September, Han Qing was promoted to Junior Division, and he was named the King of Pingyuan County.

古文：丙辰，遣朱致知使金贺正旦。
现代文：二十七日，派遣朱致知出使金国祝贺正旦。
English: On the 27th, Zhu Zhizhi sent an envoy to Kim Guo to congratulate Zheng Dan.

古文：冬十月庚申朔，封郭师禹为广陵郡王。
现代文：冬十月初一，封郭师禹为广陵郡王。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Guo Guo Shi Yu became the king of Guangling County.

古文：丙子，金遣仆散琦来贺瑞庆节。
现代文：十七日，金国派遣仆散琦来祝贺瑞庆节。
English: On the 17th, the DPRK dispatched a troupe of minions to congratulate the Ruiqing Festival.

古文：十一月己丑朔，诏复右司一员。
现代文：十一月初一，下诏恢复右司一员。
English: On the first day of November, a member of the Right Division was reinstated.

古文：十二月辛酉，嗣濮王不去薨。
现代文：十二月初三，嗣攫王赵不祛去世。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, King Zhao died.

古文：庚午，命广东水土恶弱诸州建安仁宅、惠济仓库，给士大夫死不能归者。
现代文：十二日，命令广东水土恶劣各州建造安仁宅、惠济仓库，给死而不能归的士大夫。
English: On the 12th, he ordered all the provinces in Guangdong with bad water and soil to build a relief house and a relief warehouse for the scholar-officials who died and could not return.

古文：己亥，奉安仁怀皇后、宪圣慈烈皇后神御于景灵宫。
现代文：十七日，恭敬安置仁怀皇后、宪圣慈烈皇后神主于景灵宫。
English: On the 17th, the benevolent empress and the empress deity were respectfully placed in the Jingling Palace.

古文：甲申，金遣范楫来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十六日，金国派遣范揖来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 26th, China sent Fan Ye to congratulate the upcoming Spring Festival.

古文：是岁，饶、信、江抚、严、衢、台七州、建昌、兴国军、广东诸州皆水，振之。
现代文：这一年，饶州、信州、江州、抚州、严州、瞥州和建昌军、兴国军以及广东各州都发生水灾，贩济这些地区灾民。
English: In this year, floods occurred in Raozhou, Xinshou, Jiangzhou, Fuzhou, Yanzhou, Sheshou, Jianchang Army, Xingguo Army, as well as Guangdong provinces, and the victims in these areas were helped.

古文：六年春正月己亥，子坦生。
现代文：庆元六年春正月十二日，子赵坦出生。
English: On the twelfth day of the first month of the spring of the sixth year of the Qing Dynasty, Zhao Tan was born.

古文：二月戊辰，减诸路杂犯死罪囚，释徒以下。
现代文：二月十二日，减轻各路杂犯死罪囚犯罪刑，释放徒刑以下囚犯。
English: On February 12, it commuted the sentences of all death-row prisoners and released prisoners who had been sentenced to less than life imprisonment.

古文：己巳，雨土。
现代文：十三日，降土。
English: On the 13th, the earth came down.

古文：己卯，率群臣奉上《圣安寿仁太上皇玉牒》、《圣政》、《日历》、《会要》于寿康宫。甲申，封婕妤杨氏为贵妃。
现代文：二十三日，宁宗率大臣到寿康宫奉上圣安寿仁太上皇玉牌、圣班、《日厉、会要。二十八日，封婕好杨氏为贵妃。
English: On the 23rd, Ning Zong and his ministers went to Shukang Palace to present the Imperial Regalia of the Grand Empress Dowager Shujin to the emperor. On the 28th, the Yang clan was made an honorary consort.

古文：闰月庚寅，以京镗为左丞相，谢深甫为右丞相，何澹知枢密院事兼参知政事。
现代文：闰二月初四，以京锁为左承相，谢深甫为右承相，何澹为知枢密院事兼参知政事。
English: On the 4th day of the 2nd month of the leap year, Keijo was appointed as the left successor, Xie Shenfu as the right successor, and He Ying as the Privy Councilor and a member of the government.

古文：乙巳，复留正少保、观文殿大学士致仕。
现代文：十九日，恢复留正为少保、观文殿大学士退休。
English: On the 19th, he was reinstated as a junior high school student and retired as a scholar of the Kwun Tong University.

古文：丁未，雨土。
现代文：二十一日，降土。
English: On the twenty-first day, the earth fell.

古文：辛亥，以殿前副都指挥使吴曦为昭信军节度使。
现代文：二十五日，任命殿前副都指挥使吴曦为昭信军节度使。
English: On the 25th, Wu Xi, the former deputy commander of the palace, was appointed as the festival envoy of the army of Zhaoxin.

古文：三月甲子，朱熹卒。
现代文：三月初九，朱熹去世。
English: On March 9, Zhu Xi passed away.

古文：辛未，从寿成惠慈皇太后幸聚景园。
现代文：十六日，随从寿成惠慈皇太后到聚景园。
English: On the 16th, he accompanied Empress Dowager Shoucheng Huizhi to the scenic garden.

古文：己卯，安定郡王子恭薨。
现代文：二十四日，安定郡王赵子恭去世。
English: On the 24th, Zhao Zigong, the Prince of Anning County, passed away.

古文：夏四月己酉，命不璺为嗣濮王。
现代文：夏四月二十四日，命令赵不设为嗣攫王。
English: On the 24th day of the 4th month of the summer, he ordered that Zhao should not be made the heir to the throne.

古文：五月丙辰，以旱，决中外系囚。
现代文：五月初二，因早灾处理中外在押囚犯。
English: On the second day of May, due to the early disaster, the prisoners in custody at home and abroad were not dealt with.

古文：除茶盐赏钱。
现代文：废除茶盐赏钱。
English: Abolish the tea and salt reward money.

古文：有司上《庆元宽恤诏令》、《役法撮要》。
现代文：有关部门呈上庆元宽恤诏令、股法撮要。
English: Relevant departments submitted summary of Shang Qingyuan's decree of clemency and the Stock Law.

古文：癸亥，避正殿，减膳。
现代文：初九，不上正殿处理国事，减少饮食。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, he did not go to the main hall to deal with state affairs, and reduced his diet.

古文：丙寅，诏大理、三衙、临安府及诸路阙雨州县释杖以下囚。
现代文：十二日，诏令大理寺、三衙、临安府和各路缺雨州县释放杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the 12th, the Emperor issued an order to release prisoners from Dali Temple, Samcheok, Lin'an Prefecture, and various counties in Shuangzhou who had been sentenced to caning or less.

古文：戊辰，诏侍从、台谏、两省、卿监、郎官、馆职疏陈阙失及当今急务。
现代文：十四日，诏令侍从、台谏、两省、卿监、郎官、馆职上疏陈述朝政缺失和当今急切需要办理的事务。
English: On the 14th, the Emperor ordered the attendants, the Taiwu, the two provinces, the chancellor, the vassals, and the liaison officers to report on the shortcomings of the imperial government and the urgent matters that needed to be handled.

古文：辛未，以久不雨，诏中外陈朝廷过失及时政利害。
现代文：十七日，因长久没有降雨，诏令中外官员陈述朝廷过失和时政利害。
English: On the 17th, because there had been no rain for a long time, Chinese and foreign officials were ordered to report the faults of the imperial court and the current political interests.

古文：壬申，雨。
现代文：十八日，降雨。
English: On the 18th, it rained.

古文：丁丑，诏三省、枢密院择臣僚封事可行者以闻。
现代文：二十三日，诏令三省、枢密院选择臣僚封事可行者上报朝廷。
English: On the 23rd, the three provinces and the Privy Council were ordered to select the ministers who could report to the Imperial Court.

古文：六月乙酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of June, a solar eclipse.

古文：丁亥，以太上皇后违豫，赦。
现代文：初三，因太上皇后身体不适，命令赦免囚犯。
English: On the third day of the new year, the Empress Dowager was unwell and ordered the prisoners to be pardoned.

古文：戊子，太上皇后李氏崩。
现代文：初四，太上皇后李氏逝世。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Empress Dowager Ri passed away.

古文：壬辰，遣赵善义贺金主生辰，吴旴使金告哀。
现代文：初八，派遣赵善义祝贺金主生日，吴牙出使金国告哀。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Zhao Zenyi was dispatched to congratulate the birthday of the emperor, and Wu Ya sent an envoy to pay his respects to the emperor.

古文：戊申，许及之以母忧去位。
现代文：二十四日，许及之因母丧离职。
English: On the 24th, Xu and his mother passed away and he left the company.

古文：秋七月己未，初御后殿。
现代文：秋七月初五，初到后殿。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, I came to the back hall for the first time.

古文：丁卯，以御史中丞陈自强签书枢密院事。
现代文：十三日，任命御史中承陈自强为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 13th, Chen Ziqiang was appointed as the Privy Councillor to sign the document.

古文：八月庚寅，以太上皇违豫，赦。
现代文：八月初七，因太上皇身体不适，宣布赦免。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month, due to the Emperor's ill health, an amnesty was announced.

古文：辛卯，太上皇崩。
现代文：初八，太上皇逝世。
English: On the eighth day of the eighth month, the Retired Emperor died.

古文：甲午，遣李寅仲使金告哀。
现代文：十一日，派遣李寅仲出使金国告哀。
English: On the 11th, Li Yingzhong was dispatched as an envoy of the State of Kim to mourn.

古文：乙未，日中有黑子。
现代文：十二日，太阳中出现黑子。
English: On the 12th, a spot appeared in the sun.

古文：丙申，上大行太上皇后谥曰慈懿皇后。
现代文：十三日，上大行太上皇后溢号为慈爵皇后。
English: On the thirteenth day of the month, Shangdaigyong became Empress Dowager and was given the title Empress Dowager.

古文：丁酉。京镗薨。
现代文：十四日，京锁去世。
English: On the 14th, Jingzhu passed away.

古文：壬寅，子坦薨，追封邠王，谥冲温。
现代文：十九日，子赵坦逝世，追封为王，溢号冲温。
English: On the 19th, Zi Zhao Tan passed away and was enthroned as king.

古文：癸卯，权攒慈懿皇后于临安府南山之修吉寺。
现代文：二十日，暂葬慈爵皇后于临安府南山修吉寺。
English: On the 20th, the temporary burial of Empress Jijie took place at Nanshan Shuji Temple in Lin'an.

古文：九月乙卯，祔慈懿皇后神主于太庙。
现代文：九月初二，在太庙附祭慈爵皇后神主。
English: On the 2nd day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, there will be a memorial service for Empress Jijie in the Great Temple.

古文：甲子，婺州布衣吕祖泰上书，请诛韩侂胄、苏师旦，逐陈自强等，以周必大代之。
现代文：十一日，姿州布衣吕祖泰上书，请求诛杀韩青、苏师旦，驱逐陈自强等，以周必大代替他们。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zizhou Bui Lyu Zu Tai sent a letter, requesting to kill Han Qing and Su Shidan, expel Chen Zi Qiang, and replace them with Zhou Bida.

古文：诏杖祖泰，配钦州牢城。
现代文：下诏杖吕祖泰，流配钦州牢城。
English: Under the imperial scepter, Lyu Zu Tai, the current ruler of Qinzhou Prison.

古文：己巳，命谢深甫朝献景灵宫。
现代文：十六日，命令谢深甫祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 16th, he ordered Xie Shenfu to make a sacrifice at Jingling Palace.

古文：庚午，命嗣濮王不璺朝飨太庙。
现代文：十七日，命令嗣攫王祭祀太庙。
English: On the seventeenth day, he ordered his heir, Shao Wang, to make a sacrifice at the Great Temple.

古文：辛未，合祭天地于明堂。
现代文：十八日，在明堂合祭天地。大赦。
English: On the 18th, the heavens and the earth will join in a festival at Myeongdong. An amnesty will take place.

古文：大赦。丙子，遣丁常任为金国遗留国信使。
现代文：二十三日，派遣丁常任为金国遗留国信使。
English: On the 23rd, Ding Zheng was sent as a messenger to the remaining countries of China.

古文：冬十月丙戌，加韩侂胄太傅。
现代文：冬十月初三，加韩青为太傅。
English: On the third day of the first month of October in winter, Han Qing was added as Taifu.

古文：戊子，遣林桷使金贺正旦。
现代文：初五，派遣林确出使金国祝贺新春。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Lin Jizhe sent an envoy to the People's Republic of China to congratulate the New Year.

古文：庚子，复加安南国王李龙保节功臣。
现代文：十七日，又加安南国王李龙保节功臣。
English: On the 17th, he was also awarded the title of meritorious vassal by the King of Annam, Li Long Bao.

古文：辛丑，雨土。
现代文：十八日，降土。
English: On March 16, hail fell.

古文：十一月癸丑朔，诏宗子与愿更名严，为福州观察使。
现代文：十一月初一，诏令宗子赵与愿改名为赵严，为福州观察使。
English: On the first day of November, the emperor ordered Zhao Youyi to change his name to Zhao Yan and become the Fuzhou observation envoy.

古文：己未，皇后韩氏崩。
现代文：初七，皇后韩氏逝世。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Empress Han passed away.

古文：癸亥，子增生。
现代文：十一日，子赵增出生。
English: On the 11th, his son Zhao Zeng was born.

古文：丙寅，东北地震。
现代文：十四日，东北地震。
English: On the 14th, the Tohoku earthquake occurred.

古文：上大行太上皇谥曰宪仁圣哲慈孝皇帝，庙号光宗。
现代文：上大行太上皇溢号为宪仁圣哲慈孝皇帝，庙号光宗。
English: The posthumous name of the last emperor of the Shang Dynasty was Emperor Xianren Shenzhe Ci Xiao, and the temple name was Guangzong.

古文：乙亥，上大行皇后谥曰恭淑皇后。
现代文：二十三日，上大行皇后溢号为恭淑皇后。
English: On the 23rd, the name of the empress of Shangdaizhang was changed to Queen Gongshu.

古文：十二月癸未朔，子增薨，追封郢王，谥冲英。
现代文：十二月初一，子赵增去世，追封为即王，溢号为冲英。
English: On the first day of December, his son Zhao Zeng passed away. He was posthumously crowned as the king, and his posthumous name was Chong Ying.

古文：乙酉，日中有黑子。
现代文：初三，太阳中出现黑子。
English: On the third day of the new year, a spot appeared in the sun.

古文：辛卯，雨土。
现代文：初九，降土。
English: On the morning of the 9th, the earth fell.

古文：权攒宪仁圣哲慈孝皇帝于永崇陵。
现代文：暂葬宪仁圣哲慈孝皇帝于永崇陵。
English: Emperor Xianren Shengzhe Ciqiao was temporarily buried in Yongzhong Mausoleum.

古文：己亥，金遣乌古论谊来吊祭。
现代文：十七日，金国派遣乌古论谊来吊祭。
English: On the 17th, the state of Jin dispatched the Wu Gu Xunyi to come to the hanging ceremony.

古文：壬寅，权攒恭淑皇后于临安府南山之广教寺。
现代文：二十日，暂葬恭淑皇后于临安府南山广教寺。
English: On the 20th, the temporary burial of Empress Gongshu took place at Nanshan Guangye Temple in Lin'an.

古文：癸卯，祔光宗皇帝神主于太庙。遣虞俦使金报谢。
现代文：二十一日，在太庙附祭光宗皇帝神主。派遣虞侍回访答谢金国。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Emperor Kōzō held a memorial service for the god at the Imperial Temple, and sent a retainer to pay a return visit to express his gratitude to the Golden State.

古文：诏改明年为嘉泰元年。
现代文：诏令改明年为嘉泰元年。
English: The imperial edict changed the next year to the first year of Jia Tai.

古文：乙巳，日中黑子灭。
现代文：二十三日，太阳黑子消失。
English: On the 23rd, the sunspot disappeared.

古文：蠲临安、绍兴二府民缘攒宫役者赋。
现代文：免除临安、绍兴二府百姓因殡宫服役者赋税。
English: The people of Lin'an and Shaoxing of the two prefectures were exempted from paying taxes because they served in a funeral home.

古文：戊申，金遣纥石烈忠定来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十六日，金国派遣给石烈忠定来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 26th, Kim Guo sent a delegation to Shi Lie Zhongding to congratulate him on the upcoming Chinese New Year.

古文：己酉，加吴曦太尉。
现代文：二十七日，加吴曦为太尉。
English: On the 27th, Wu Xi was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant.

古文：庚戌，祔恭淑皇后神主于太庙。
现代文：二十八日，在太庙附祭恭淑皇后神主。
English: On the 28th, a memorial service was held at the Imperial Temple to pay respects to Empress Shinshu.

古文：诏罢四川总领所所增关外四州营田租。
现代文：诏令废罢四川总领所增关外四州营田租税。
English: The Imperial Edict abolished the Sichuan Consulate-General's tax increase on yakitori fields in four prefectures.

古文：是岁，建宁府、徽、严、衢、婺、饶、信、南剑七州水，建康府、常、润、杨、楚、通、泰和七州、江阴军旱，振之。
现代文：这一年，建宁府、徽州、严州、衢州、婺州、饶州、信州、南剑州七州水灾，建康府和常州、润州、扬州、楚州、通州、泰州、和州以及江阴军早灾，贩济这些地区的灾民。
English: In this year, the floods in seven prefectures of Jianning, Huizhou, Yanzhou, Zhangzhou, Shandong, Raozhou, Shinshu and Nanjian, and the early disasters in Jiankang, Changzhou, Runzhou, Yangzhou, Chuzhou, Tongzhou, Taizhou, Hezhou and Jiangyin, helped the victims in these areas.

