古文：王处存，京兆万年人。
现代文：王处存是京兆府万年县人。
English: Wang Shicun is a resident of Wannen County, Beijing.

古文：世籍神策军，家胜业里，为天下高赀。
现代文：世代隶属神策军，家住在胜业里，是全国的大富户。
English: He has been a member of the Shinsaku army for generations, his family lives in Sengyo, and he is one of the richest people in the country.

古文：父宗，巧射利，侈靡自奉，僮千人，以此奋，累除检校司空、金吾大将军，遥领兴元节度使。
现代文：他父亲王宗，善于赚钱，奢侈挥霍，有奴仆一千人，凭这起家，多次升官后任检校司空、金吾大将军，兼任兴元节度使。
English: His father, Wang Zong, was good at making money, extravagant and profligate, with a thousand slaves. With this family, he was promoted many times and later served as the school inspector, Kingu General, and also served as the Xingyuan Festival envoy.

古文：处存自右军镇使历检校刑部尚书、定州制置使，累迁义武节度使。
现代文：王处存从右军镇使当过检校刑部尚书、定州制置使，多次升官后任义武节度使。
English: Wang Shucun was promoted from the Right Army Town Envoy to the Inspection and Punishment Department of Shangshu and Dingzhou System Envoy, and was appointed to the Yiwu Festival Envoy after several promotions.

古文：黄巢陷京师，处存号哭，不俟诏，分麾下兵二千间道至山南卫乘舆。外约王重荣连盟，进屯渭桥，而泾州行军司马唐弘夫亦屯渭北。
现代文：黄巢攻占了长安，王处存痛哭，不等诏令，派手下两千军队抄小路到山南去保卫皇帝，又和王重荣相约结盟，进驻渭桥，泾州行军司马唐弘夫也在渭河北岸扎营。
English: Huang Chao captured Chang'an, the king cried bitterly, did not wait for the imperial edict, and sent his two thousand troops to follow the path to Shannan to defend the emperor. He also made an alliance with Wang Chongrong and stationed in Qianqiao. Ma Tanghongfu, the commander of the Qianzhou march, also camped on the north bank of the Qianhe River.

古文：诏处存检校尚书右仆射督战，俄拜东南面行营招讨使。
现代文：有诏任命王处存为检校尚书右仆射监督作战，不久被任命为南面行营招讨使。
English: An imperial edict appointed Wang Shicun as the inspector of the school, the right-hand man of Shang Shu to supervise the battle, and he was soon appointed as the envoy to the south.

古文：中和二年授京城东面都统。
现代文：中和二年，被任命为京城东面都统。
English: In 1902, he was appointed as the governor of the eastern part of Kyoto.

古文：每痛国难未夷，语辄流涕，军中多处存义，愈为之用。
现代文：他常对国难未平息感到悲痛，说到这就流泪，兵将们敬佩他的节义，更愿为他效力了。
English: He often felt saddened by the unceasing national tragedy, and shed tears when he spoke of it. The generals admired his selflessness and were more willing to serve him.

古文：素善李克用，又故婚好，遣使十辈晓譬迎劝，卒共平京师。
现代文：他一向和李克用要好，又是过去的亲家，共派了十次使者去劝告欢迎，终于共同收复了长安。
English: He had always been on good terms with Li Ke, and was a relative of his in the past. He sent ten emissaries to advise and welcome, and finally jointly recovered Chang'an.

古文：王鐸差兴复功，以勤王举义处存为第一，收城破贼克用为第一。
现代文：王铎评价收复京城的功劳，认为派兵救国难倡大义王处存是首功，攻城破敌李克用是首功。
English: Wang Hui evaluated the merits of recovering the capital, and believed that dispatching troops to save the country was the first merit, and attacking the city and defeating the enemy was the first merit.

古文：迁检校司空。
现代文：后升任检校司空。
English: He was later promoted to the position of school inspector.

古文：复出兵三千属大将张公庆会诸军捕巢泰山，灭之。
现代文：又派三千军队委托大将张公庆会合各军在泰山抓黄巢，把他消灭了。
English: He also dispatched three thousand troops and entrusted General Zhang Gongqing to gather all the armies to capture Huang Chao on Mount Tai and exterminate him.

古文：进检校司徒、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：又升任检校司徒、同中书门下平章事。
English: He was also promoted to the post of school inspector, and became a member of the academic staff of the same school.

古文：田令孜讨王重荣，徙处存节度河中，上书言： 重荣有大功，不可改易，摇诸侯之心。 
现代文：田令孜讨伐王重荣，调王处存任河中节度使，王处存上奏说： 王重荣立有大功劳，不能调动，使众藩镇担心。 
English: Tian Lingzi fought against Wang Chung Rong, and transferred him to serve as the envoy to the mid-river festival. Wang Chung Rong reported that Wang Chung Rong had made great contributions and could not be transferred, which worried all the provinces and towns.

古文：不纳，趣上道。
现代文：皇帝没采纳，催他上路。
English: The emperor did not accept and urged him to go.

古文：军次晋州，刺史冀君武闭门不内，而重荣拒诏。
现代文：他的军队到达晋州，晋州刺史冀君武关闭城门不接纳他，王重荣也拒绝接受诏令。
English: When his army arrived in Jinzhou, the governor of Jinzhou, Jizhi Ji Junwu, closed the city gates and refused to receive him. Wang Chongrong also refused to accept the imperial edict.

古文：处存临事通便宜，有大将风。
现代文：王处存遇事善于处理，有大将风度。
English: Wang Shide is good at handling things and has a general demeanor.

古文：幽、镇兵悍马强，其地势也，而易定介于其间，侵轶岁至。
现代文：幽州、镇州军队强大，占有地利，易、定州夹在中间，每年都受侵犯。
English: The Yuzhou and Zhenzhou armies are powerful and occupy territory, while the Yi and Dingzhou armies are caught in the middle and are encroached upon every year.

古文：及李匡威得志，谋并取之。
现代文：到李匡威得势，想兼并他。
English: When Li Kuangwei gained power, they wanted to annex him.

古文：处存善修邻欢，内抚民有恩，痛折节下贤，协穆太原以自助，远近同心。
现代文：王处存善于和邻近地区处好关系，对内治理人民有仁政，特别礼敬贤人，和太原友好作为外援，远近的人都向着他。
English: The king's office is good at maintaining good relations with the neighboring regions, has benevolent policies for the internal governance of the people, special respect for the wise, and friendship with Taiyuan as foreign aid, and people near and far are attracted to him.

古文：岁时讲兵，与诸镇抗，无能侵轧者。
现代文：他每年训练军队，和各藩镇对抗，没有人能占他的便宜。
English: He trains the army every year, and confronts the provinces and towns. No one can take advantage of him.

古文：累加侍中、检校太尉。
现代文：他多次升官后任侍中、检校太尉。
English: He was promoted several times and later served as a chamberlain and inspector first lieutenant.

古文：卒，年六十五，赠太子太师，谥曰忠肃。
现代文：后去世了，享年六十五岁，赠官太子太师，赐谥号叫忠肃。
English: Later, he passed away at the age of sixty-five. He was given the title of Crown Prince and Grand Master, and was given the posthumous name of Tadanori.

古文：三军迹河朔旧事，推子郜由副使为留后，昭宗从之。
现代文：他的军队按河北的惯例，推举他儿子王郜从副使升任留后，唐昭宗同意了。
English: Tang Zhaozong agreed after his army promoted his son, Wang Qi, from vice-envoy to stay on, as is customary in Hebei.

古文：累拜节度使，加检校司空、同中书门下平章事，又进太保。
现代文：他多次升官后任节度使，兼检校司空、同中书门下平章事，后又升任太保。
English: He was promoted many times to the post of festival envoy, and also served as the inspector of the school, the secretary of the school, and the secretary of the school, and later he was promoted to the position of the security guard.

古文：光化三年，硃全忠使张存敬攻幽州，以瓦桥泞潦，道祁沟关。
现代文：光化三年，朱全忠派张存敬进攻幽州，因为瓦桥泥泞积水，就从祁沟关进兵。
English: In the third year of the Gwanghwamun era, Zhu Quanzhong sent Zhang Cunjing to attack Yuzhou. Because the tile bridge was covered with mud and water, the troops marched in from Shuguoguan.

古文：郜方与刘守光厚，乃畀叔处直兵扰其尾，令骑将甄琼章次义丰，而存敬游奕骑已至，且战且引十余里，执琼章。
现代文：王郜当时正和刘守光很好，就派叔叔王处直率军尾随骚扰，派骑兵将领甄琼章驻扎在义丰，但张存敬的游弈骑兵已经到了，边战边走了十多里路，抓住了甄琼章。
English: At that time, Wang Xuan was on good terms with Liu Shuguang, so he sent his uncle Wang Shuzhuang to follow and harass the cavalry general Zhen Qiongzhang stationed in Yifeng, but Zhang Cun Rong's cavalrymen had already arrived, walked more than ten miles along the battlefield, and caught Zhen Qiongzhang.

古文：而氏叔琮下深泽，执大将马少安，围祁州，屠之，斩刺史杨约，休兵十日。
现代文：氏叔琮攻下了深泽，抓住了大将马少安，包围了祁州，屠杀了全城，处死了刺史杨约，军队休息了十天。
English: His uncle seized Fukasawa, captured the general Ma Shaoan, surrounded Zhangzhou, slaughtered the whole city, executed the assassin Shi Yangyo, and the army rested for ten days.

古文：处直壁沙河，存敬军河北，挑战，处直不出，涉河乃战，处直大败，亡大将十五，士死者数万。
现代文：王处直在沙河扎营，张存敬在河北岸扎营，又挑战，王处直不出战，张存敬涉过沙河他才接战，被打得大败，战死大将十五名，兵将死了几万。
English: Wang Zuo camped directly on the Sand River, Zhang Cunjing camped on the north bank of the river, and challenged again. Wang Zuo did not fight directly, Zhang Cunjing waded across the Sand River before he joined the battle, and was defeated. Fifteen generals died in the battle, and tens of thousands of soldiers died.

古文：存敬收械甲以赋战士，而焚其余，遂围定州。
现代文：张存敬将缴获的军械、铠甲补充了部队，把其余的都烧了，于是包围了定州。
English: Zhang Cunjing replenished his troops with captured armaments and armor, burned the rest, and then encircled Dingzhou.

古文：郜斩亲吏梁汶，移书存敬，且请盟。
现代文：王郜杀死了亲近的官员梁汶，写信给张存敬，并请求结盟。
English: Wang Hui killed a close official, Liang Wen, and wrote to Zhang Cunxing, asking for an alliance.

古文：俄而外郛陷，郜以其族奔太原，使处直主留后。
现代文：不久外城被攻陷了，王郜率他的家族逃到太原，派王处直主持留守事务。
English: Not long after, the outer city was captured, and Wang Xi and his family fled to Taiyuan, sending Wang to directly preside over the affairs of those left behind.

古文：全忠亦至，处直辞曰： 敝邑事上未尝不忠，事邻未尝不礼，弗虞君之见攻也。 
现代文：朱全忠也去了，王处直说： 我们对皇上没有不忠处，对邻近地区也不曾做不合礼制的事，没想到您会进攻我们。 
English: Zhu Quanzhong also went there, and Wang Shuanzhong said: "We have not been disloyal to the emperor, nor have we done anything unseemly in the neighboring regions. I did not expect you to attack us.

古文：全忠责何故事克用，答曰： 太原藉兄弟之旧，修好往来，常道也。
现代文：朱全忠责问为什么要和李克用友好，他回答说： 他和我们是亲戚，友好往来是人之常情。
English: When Zhu Quanzhong asked why he should be friendly with Li Keqiang, he replied: He and I are relatives, and it is human nature to be friendly.

古文：君苟为罪，请改图。 
现代文：您如果认为不该这样，请让我们改正。 
English: If you think otherwise, please let us know.

古文：全忠许之。
现代文：朱全忠答应了他。
English: Zhu Quanzhong agreed.

古文：处直以从孙为质，上所持节，即献绢三十万，具牛酒犒师。
现代文：王处直将叔伯的孙子作为人质，呈上符节，又进献绢绸三十万匹，用肉和酒犒劳军队。
English: Wang Danzhong took his uncle's grandson as a hostage, presented him with a rune festival, donated 300,000 pieces of silk, and rewarded the army with meat and wine.

古文：存敬取成而还。
现代文：张存敬订立盟约后回去了。
English: Zhang Cunjing went back after signing the treaty.

古文：全忠表处直为节度留后、检校尚书左仆射。
现代文：朱全忠呈报王处直任节度留后、检校尚书左仆射。
English: Zhu Quanzhong presented the report to the king's office directly in charge of the festival, after which the inspection of the school was left.

古文：郜至太原，克用表为检校太尉，卒。
现代文：王郜到了太原，李克用呈报他任检校太尉，后去世了。
English: When Wang Yao arrived in Taiyuan, Li Ke used to report that he was appointed as a school inspector, and then he passed away.

古文：处直，字允明，天复初为太原郡王。
现代文：王处直的字叫允明，天复初年任太原郡王。
English: Wang Shanzhong's character is called Yunming, and Tianfu was the king of Taiyuan County in the first year.

