古文：起重光赤奋若七月，尽玄黓摄提格，凡一年有奇。
现代文：起重光赤奋若七月，尽玄黓摄提格，凡一年有奇。
English: If the lifting light is reddish in July, it will be completely dark in September. Every year is strange.

古文：穆宗睿圣文惠孝皇帝中
现代文：穆宗睿圣文惠孝皇帝中
English: Mu Zongrui, a middle-aged disciple of Emperor Wenhui

古文：长庆元年辛丑，公元八二一年
现代文：唐穆宗长庆元年
English: The first year of Tang Mu Zong's reign

古文：秋，七月，甲辰，韦雍出，逢小将策马冲其前导。雍命曳下，欲于街中杖之。
现代文：秋季七月，甲辰，韦雍外出，碰到一个小将骑马冲撞他的仪仗前导，韦雍下令把小将从马上拉下来，打算在街道中间杖责。
English: In the autumn of July, when Jia Chen and Wei Yong were out, they met a young soldier on horseback who ran into his ceremonial forerunner. Wei Yong ordered the young soldier to be pulled down from the horse, intending to scold him in the middle of the street.

古文：河朔军士不贯受杖，不服。
现代文：河朔地区的军士不习惯受杖责，拒不服从。
English: The sergeants in the Heshaku area are not used to being punished by the cane and refuse to obey.

古文：雍以白弘靖，弘靖命军虞候系治之。
现代文：韦雍于是报告张弘靖，张弘靖命令军虞候把小将拘捕治罪。
English: Wei Yong then reported to Zhang Hongjing, who ordered the military magistrate to arrest and prosecute the young general.

古文：是夕，士卒连营呼噪作乱，将校不能制，遂入府舍，掠弘靖货财、妇女，囚弘靖于蓟门馆，杀幕僚韦雍、张宗元、崔仲卿、郑埙、都虞候刘操、押牙张抱元。
现代文：当晚，士卒连营呼噪作乱，将校制止不住，士卒便冲入节度使府舍，掠夺张弘靖的财产和妻妾，随后，把张弘靖关押在蓟门馆，杀死他的幕僚韦雍、张宗元、崔仲卿、郑埙、都虞候刘操、押牙张抱元。
English: That night, a company of soldiers made a lot of noise, and the officers couldn't stop them. The soldiers then stormed into the residence of the Chinese envoy and plundered Zhang Hongjing's property and his wife and concubine. Later, they detained Zhang Hongjing in the Shimen Pavilion and killed his staff members Wei Yong, Zhang Zongyuan, Cui Zhongqing, Zheng Qi, Du Yu Liu Cao, and Zhang Bao Yuan.

古文：明日，军士稍稍自悔，悉诣馆谢弘靖，请改心事之，凡三请，弘靖不应，军士乃相谓曰： 相公无言，是不赦吾曹。军中岂可一日无帅！ 
现代文：第二天，军士渐渐悔悟，都到蓟门馆向张弘靖请罪，表示愿意洗心革面，仍然跟随张弘靖，做他的部从。军士几次请求，张弘靖闭口不言。于是，军士商议说： 张相公闭口不言，是不愿赦免我们，但是，军中岂可一日没有统帅！ 
English: The next day, the sergeant gradually repented, and they all went to the Imperial Palace to plead guilty to Zhang Hongjing, expressing their willingness to wash their hearts and change their faces, and still follow Zhang Hongjing and be his subordinates. The sergeant asked several times for Zhang Hongjing to keep his mouth shut. So, the sergeant discussed: Zhang Xianggong kept his mouth shut, unwilling to pardon us, but how can there be no commander in chief in the army!

古文：乃相与迎旧将硃洄，奉以为留后。
现代文：便一齐去迎接幽州的老将朱洄，拥戴他为留后。
English: They all went to meet the veteran of Yuzhou, Zhu Xi, and supported him to stay.

古文：洄，克融之父也，时以疾卧家，自辞老病，请使克融为之，众从之。
现代文：朱洄，即朱克融的父亲，这时由于身患疾病，在家卧床休养，他以自己年老多病，辞谢留后，请求让给儿子朱克融，军士都表示同意。
English: Zhu Rong, the father of Zhu Ke Rong, was ill at the time and was at home in bed recuperating. Taking advantage of his old age and illness, he asked to be transferred to his son Zhu Ke Rong, and the sergeants agreed.

古文：众以判官张彻长者，不杀。彻骂曰： 汝何敢反，行且族灭！ 
现代文：军士因为判官张彻年长而没有杀他，张彻骂道： 你们怎敢反叛朝廷，马上就会被族灭的！ 
English: The sergeant did not kill the judge, Zhang Che, because he was too old. Zhang Che cursed: "How dare you rebel against the imperial court? You will soon be exterminated by your own people!"

古文：众共杀之。
现代文：军士一拥而上，把张彻杀死。
English: The sergeants swarmed up and killed Zhang Che.

古文：壬子，群臣上尊号曰文武孝德皇帝。
现代文：壬子，群臣百官向唐穆宗奏上尊号，称为文武孝德皇帝。
English: On the 18th, the courtiers gave Mu Zong the honorary title of Emperor Wenwu Xiaode.

古文：赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Pardons all around.

古文：甲寅，幽州监军奏军乱。
现代文：甲寅，幽州监军奏报军乱。
English: Jia Yin, the military inspector of Yuzhou Province, reported a military riot.

古文：丁巳，贬张弘靖为宾客、分司。
现代文：丁巳，穆宗贬张弘靖为太子宾客、分司东都。
English: Soon after, Mu Zong dethroned Zhang Hongjing as the prince's guest and deputy governor of Dongdu.

古文：己未，再贬吉州刺史。
现代文：己未，再贬张弘靖为吉州刺史。
English: If he fails to do so, Zhang Hongjing will be relegated to the annals of the history of Jishu.

古文：庚申，以昭义节度使刘悟为卢龙节度使。
现代文：庚申，任命昭义节度使刘悟为卢龙节度使。
English: Goshun, the appointment of Zhao Yi as the festival envoy made Liu Gou as the Lulong festival envoy.

古文：悟以硃克融方强，奏请 且授克融节钺，徐图之。 
现代文：刘悟认为朱克融势力正强，奏请 暂且任命朱克融为节度使，然后，再慢慢想办法除掉他 。
English: Liu Wuguo thought that Zhu Ke Rong's power was very strong, so he asked that Zhu Ke Rong be appointed as the Minister of State for the time being, and then he would slowly find a way to get rid of him.

古文：乃复以悟为昭义节度使。
现代文：于是，仍任命刘悟为昭义节度使。
English: As a result, Liu Gou was still appointed as Shao Yi's regent.

古文：辛酉，太和公主发长安。
现代文：辛酉，太和公主从长安出发，前往回鹘国。
English: Xin Xuan, the Empress Dowager and the princess set off from Chang'an and headed for the country of Huizhou.

古文：初，田弘正受诏镇成德，自以久与镇人战，有父兄之仇，乃以魏兵二千从赴镇，因留以自卫，奏请度支供其粮赐。
现代文：当初，田弘正被任命为成德节度使，自认为以往长期与成德人打仗，有父兄之仇，于是，率魏博兵二千人随行赴任，然后留在成德用来自卫，奏请朝廷度支供给这二千人的军饷。
English: At first, Tian Hongzheng was appointed as the Chengde Festival envoy. He thought that he had been at war with the Chengde people for a long time in the past, and that he had a grudge against his father and brother. Therefore, he led two thousand Wei Bo soldiers to accompany him to the post, and then stayed in Chengde to defend himself, and asked the imperial court to support and provide military pay for these two thousand people.

古文：户部侍郎、判度支崔倰，性刚褊，无远虑，以为魏、镇各自有兵，恐开事例，不肯给。
现代文：户部侍郎、判度支崔性情刚愎，气量狭小，缺乏深思熟虑，认为魏博、成德各自有兵，恐怕此事开一先例，因而，不肯供给。
English: Hubei waiter and judge Shicui were stubborn, narrow-minded, and lacked forethought. They thought that Wei Bo and Chengde had soldiers of their own, and feared that this would set a precedent. Therefore, they refused to supply.

古文：弘正四上表，不报；不得已，遣魏兵归。
现代文：田弘正四次上表朝廷，崔不加理会。田弘正不得已，把魏博兵遣返回镇。
English: Tian Hongzheng petitioned the imperial court four times, but Cui ignored him. As a last resort, Tian Hongzheng sent Wei Bo soldiers back to the town.

古文：倰，沔之孙也。
现代文：崔是开元初大臣崔沔的孙子。
English: Choi is the grandson of Choi Min, the first minister of the founding of the People's Republic.

古文：弘正厚于骨肉，兄弟子侄在两都者数十人，竞为侈靡，日费约二十万，弘正辇魏、镇之货以供之，相属于道。
现代文：田弘正厚待自己的家人，他的兄弟、儿子、侄子在长安、洛阳两都居住的有几十个人，生活竞相奢侈靡丽，每天花费约二十万钱，田弘正运魏博、成德两镇的货供给，车辆来往于道路。
English: Tian Hongzheng treated his family well. There are dozens of people, including his brothers, sons and nephews, living in both Chang'an and Luoyang. They live a luxurious life, spending about 200,000 yuan a day. Tian Hongzheng is responsible for the supply of goods in Weibo and Chengde, and vehicles travel between the two towns.

古文：河北将士颇不平。
现代文：河北的将士十分不满。
English: The soldiers in Hebei are very dissatisfied.

古文：诏以钱百万缗赐成德军，度支辇运不时至，军士益不悦。
现代文：穆宗下诏，赐钱一百万缗给成德将士，度支却没有按时运送到达，将士更加不满。
English: Mu Zong issued an edict to give one million baht to Chengde soldiers, but the money did not arrive on time, which made the soldiers even more dissatisfied.

古文：都知兵马使王庭凑，本回鹘阿布思之种也，性果悍阴狡，潜谋作乱，每抉其细故以激怒之，尚以魏兵故，不敢发。
现代文：都知兵马使王庭凑，原属回鹘阿布思族的后裔，性情果敢狡诈，阴谋作乱，经常借小事以激怒将士，但由于魏博二千兵士尚在，不敢贸然行动。
English: They all knew that the soldiers and horses made Wang Tingpiao, who was originally a descendant of the Hui Abusi tribe, had a bold and cunning temperament, plotted to create chaos, and often used trifles to provoke the soldiers, but because Wei Bo still had two thousand soldiers, he did not dare to act rashly.

古文：及魏兵去，壬戌夜，庭氵奏结牙兵噪于府署，杀弘正及僚佐、元从将吏并家属三百馀人。
现代文：等到魏博兵士返回以后，壬戌夜间，王庭凑交结牙兵，噪乱于节度使府，杀死田弘正及其僚佐、随从将吏和他们的家属三百多人。
English: After Wei Bo's soldiers returned, in the middle of the night, Wang Ting and his soldiers made a ruckus in the imperial palace, killing Tian Hongzheng, his aides, his attendants, and more than 300 members of their families.

古文：庭氵奏自称留后，逼监军宋惟澄奏求节钺。
现代文：王庭凑自称留后，逼迫监军宋惟澄为他向朝廷上奏，请求授予节度使符节。
English: After Wang Tingqin claimed to stay, he forced Song Weizheng, the overseer of the army, to appeal to the imperial court for him, requesting the award of the festival to send the festival.

古文：八月，癸巳，惟澄以闻，朝廷震骇。
现代文：八月，己巳，宋惟澄把以上情况上报朝廷，举朝震惊。
English: In August, Song Weizheng reported the above situation to the imperial court, shocking the imperial court.

古文：崔倰于崔植为再从兄，故时人莫敢言其罪。
现代文：崔是宰相崔植的族兄弟，所以，朝官没有人敢抨击他的罪行。
English: Cui is the ethnic brother of Prime Minister Cui Zhi, so no one in the imperial court dared to criticize his crime.

古文：初，朝廷易置魏、镇帅臣，左金吾将军杨元卿上言，以为非便，又诣宰相深陈利害。
现代文：当初，朝廷调换魏博、成德节度使和僚佐时，左金吾将军杨元卿曾上言，认为这样做很不适宜，他又面见宰相，反复陈述利害得失。
English: At the beginning, when the imperial court transferred Wei Bo, Chengde Jiedu envoy and colleagues, Zuo Kingu General Yang Yuanqing once said that it was very inappropriate to do so. He also met with the prime minister and repeatedly stated the advantages and disadvantages.

古文：及镇州乱，上赐元卿白玉带。
现代文：等到成德军乱后，穆宗赐给杨元卿一条白玉带。
English: After the Chengde Rebellion, Mu Zong gave Yang Yuanqing a white jade belt.

古文：辛未，以元卿为泾原节度使。
现代文：辛未，任命杨元卿为泾原节度使。
English: Xin Wei appointed Yang Yuanqing as the chief envoy of Shenyuan.

古文：瀛莫将士家属多在幽州，壬申，莫州都虞候张良佐潜引硃克融兵入城，刺史吴晖不知所在。
现代文：瀛州和莫州的将士家属大多留居在幽州，壬申，莫州都虞候张良佐暗中勾结朱克融的兵马入城，刺史吴晖不知去向。
English: Most of the families of soldiers from Zhangzhou and Mozhou stayed in Yuzhou. Zhang Liangza, the governor of Jinshin and Mozhou, secretly colluded with Zhu Ke Rong's soldiers and horses to enter the city, and he did not know where to go.

古文：癸酉，王庭凑遣人杀冀州刺史王进岌，分兵据其州。
现代文：癸酉，王庭凑派人杀死冀州刺史王进岌，分兵占领冀州。
English: At the same time, Wang Ting sent people to kill the Jizhou assassin Wang Jin, and the detachment occupied Jizhou.

古文：魏博节度使李愬闻田弘正遇害，素服令将士曰： 魏人所以得通圣化，至今安宁富乐者，田公之力也。
现代文：魏博节度使李听到田弘正遇害的消息，身着丧服命令将士说： 魏博人之所能够得到皇上的教化，至今生活安定，富贵享乐，都是田公的功劳。
English: The Wei Bo Festival made Li hear the news of Tian Hongzheng's murder. Dressed in mourning clothes, he ordered the soldiers to say: What Wei Bo people have been able to get from the emperor's enlightenment, and their stable life and rich enjoyment so far, are all thanks to Tian Gong.

古文：今镇人不道，辄敢害之，是轻魏以为无人也。
现代文：现在，成德人大逆不道，竟敢把他无故杀害，这是轻视魏博，以为我们没有人才。
English: Now, Chengde people have rebelled and dared to kill him for no reason. This is to despise Wei Bo and think that we have no talent.

古文：诸君受田公恩，宜如何报之？ 
现代文：诸位曾受田公的恩惠，应当怎样回报他呢？ 
English: You have been favored by Tian Gong, how should you repay him?

古文：众皆恸哭。
现代文：将士都大声痛哭。
English: Everyone was crying.

古文：深州刺史牛元翼，成德良将也，愬使以宝剑、玉带遗之，曰： 昔吾先人以此剑创立大勋，吾又以之平蔡州，今以授公，努力翦庭凑！ 
现代文：深州刺史牛元翼是成德的优秀将领，李把自己的宝剑和玉带送给他，说： 过去，我的父亲曾用此剑平定朱叛乱，立过大功。后来，我又用这把剑平定蔡州吴元济叛乱。现在，我把这剑授予你，希望你用它努力翦灭王庭凑。 
English: In the past, my father had used this sword to put down the Zhu Rebellion and achieved great feats. Later, I also used this sword to put down the Caizhou Wuyuanji Rebellion. Now, I bestow this sword on you, hoping that you will use it to eradicate Wang Tianzhi.

古文：元翼以剑，带徇于军，报曰： 愿尽死！ 
现代文：牛元翼带着剑和玉带在军中环绕一周，然后回来报告说： 愿尽死效力！ 
English: Taking his sword and jade belt, Niu Yuan Ying circled the army for a week, and then came back to report: "May I be as effective as possible!"

古文：愬将出兵，会疾作，不果。
现代文：李正准备出兵讨伐王庭凑，正好得病而未成行。
English: Li was preparing to send troops to fight Wang Tingpiao, but he fell ill and did not go.

古文：元翼，赵州人也。
现代文：牛元翼是赵州人。
English: Niu Yuan Ying is from Zhaozhou.

古文：乙亥，起复前泾原节度使田布为魏博节度使，令乘驿之镇。
现代文：乙亥，唐穆宗任命正在为父亲田弘正服丧的前泾原节度使田布为魏博节度使，命他乘驿马赴任。
English: According to Yi Hai, Tang Mu Zong appointed Tian Bu, who was attending the funeral of his father Tian Hongzheng, as Wei Bo's ceremonial envoy, and ordered him to ride a horse to the post.

古文：布固辞不获，与妻子宾客诀曰： 吾不还矣！ 
现代文：田布一再推辞而未得允许，于是，和妻子、宾客诀别说： 我此行不打算生还了！ 
English: Tianbu repeatedly declined and was not allowed to leave, so he said goodbye to his wife and guests: I don't plan to survive this trip!

古文：悉屏去旌节导从而行，未至魏州三十里，被发徒跣，号哭而入，居于垩室。
现代文：下令撤除节度使旌节和所有前导随行人员，然后出发上任。距离魏州三十里时，散发赤脚，大声痛哭而入州城，住在垩室，为父亲服丧。
English: When he was thirty miles away from Weizhou, he went barefoot, wept loudly, and entered the city of Weizhou, where he lived in a room and mourned for his father.

古文：月俸千缗，一无所取，卖旧产，得钱十馀万缗，皆以颁士卒，旧将老者兄事之。
现代文：他每月应得俸禄一千缗，一文不要，却把自己家留在魏博的产业卖掉，得到十几万缗现钱，全部用来赐士卒。对于父亲原在魏博的部将和年长的将吏，都以兄弟的礼节来礼遇他们。
English: He was entitled to a monthly salary of 1,000 baht, but he didn't want a penny. Instead, he sold the property that his family had left behind in Weibo and received more than 100,000 baht in cash, all of which was used to reward his soldiers. He treated his father's former subordinates and senior officers in Weibo with brotherly courtesy.

古文：丙子，瀛州军乱，执观察使卢士玫及监军僚佐送幽州，囚于客馆。
现代文：丙子，瀛州发生军乱，士卒逮捕观察使卢士玫以及监军和僚佐，押送幽州，拘禁在客馆。
English: C, there was a military riot in Zhangzhou, the officers arrested the observation envoy Lu Shimei, as well as the supervisors and assistants, escorted him to Yuzhou, and detained him in the guest house.

古文：王庭氵奏遣其将王立攻深州，不克。
现代文：王庭凑派遣他的部将王立攻打深州，未能攻克。
English: Wang Ting sent his subordinate Wang Li to attack Shenzhou, but failed to conquer it.

古文：丁丑，诏魏博、横海、昭义、河东、义武诸军各出兵临成德之境，若王庭凑执迷不复，宜即进讨。
现代文：丁丑，唐穆宗下诏，命令魏博、横海、昭义、河东、义武等镇军队派兵，兵临成德边境，如果王庭凑还执迷不误，抗拒朝廷的话，就进兵攻讨。
English: Ding Xi, Tang Mu Zong issued an edict, ordering the town armies of Weibo, Henghai, Zhao Yi, Hedong and Yiwu to send troops to the German border, and if Wang Tingpiao still persisted and resisted the imperial court, he would enter the army to fight.

古文：成德大将王俭等五人谋杀王庭凑，事泄，并部兵三千人皆死。
现代文：成德大将王俭等五人密谋暗杀王庭凑，不料消息泄露，这五人和他们的部下士卒三千人都被杀死。
English: Chengde's general Wang Jian and five others conspired to assassinate Wang Tianzhi, but the news leaked out that these five and their 3,000 subordinates were all killed.

古文：己卯，以深州刺史牛元翼为深冀节度使。
现代文：己卯，唐穆宗任命深州刺史牛元翼为深冀节度使。
English: At the same time, Tang Mu Zong appointed Shenzhou Zhishi Niuyuan Ying as the Shenji Festival envoy.

古文：丁亥，以殿中侍御史温造为起居舍人，充镇州四面诸军宣慰使，历泽潞、河东、魏博、横海、深冀、易定等道，谕以军期。
现代文：丁亥，唐穆宗任命殿中侍御史温造为起居舍人，充任镇州四面诸军宣慰使，前往昭义、河东、魏博、横海、深冀、易定等道，传达进兵日期的命令。
English: Ding Hai, Tang Mu Zong appointed the palace attendant, Shi Wen Zong, as a resident, acting as a messenger of comfort to the troops on all sides of the town and state, traveling to Shouyi, Hedong, Wei Bo, Henghai, Shenji, Yiding and other roads to convey the order of the date of entering the army.

古文：造，大雅之五世孙也。
现代文：温造是唐高祖时黄门侍郎温大雅的第五代孙子。
English: Unzo was the fifth-generation grandson of the Yellow Gate's steward, Wendaia, at the time of the founding of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：己丑，以裴度为幽、镇两道招抚使。
现代文：己丑任命裴度为幽州、镇州两道招抚使。
English: Ji Jiu appointed Pei Du as the two-way promotion envoy of Yuzhou and Zhenzhou.

古文：癸已，王庭凑引幽州兵围深州。
现代文：癸巳，王庭凑勾引幽州兵围攻深州。
English: Soon after, Wang Ting coaxed Yuzhou soldiers to besiege Shenzhou.

古文：九月，乙已，相州军乱，杀刺史邢濋。
现代文：九月，乙巳，相州发生军乱，刺史邢被杀。
English: In September, a military conflict broke out in Sangju at the eleventh hour, and Sashihime was killed.

古文：吐蕃遣其礼部尚书论讷罗来求盟。
现代文：吐蕃国派遣礼部尚书论纳罗来唐朝请求缔结会盟条约。
English: Naro, who had been sent by Tubo to request the conclusion of a treaty of alliance, came to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：庚戌，以大理卿刘元鼎为吐蕃会盟使。
现代文：庚戌，唐穆宗任命大理卿刘元鼎为吐蕃会盟使。
English: Geng Zong, Tang Mu Zong appointed Daliqing Liu Yuan Ding as the envoy of the Tujia Association.

古文：壬子，硃克融焚掠易州、涞水、遂城、满城。
现代文：壬子，朱克融出兵焚烧掠夺易州、涞水、遂城、满城。
English: Jinsi, Zhu Ke Rong sent troops to burn and plunder Yizhou, Surabaya, Suicheng, and Mancheng.

古文：自定两税法以来，钱日重，物日轻，民所输三倍其初，诏百官议革其弊。
现代文：自从建中元年实行两税法以来，钱的价值越来越高，而实物的价值越来越低，百姓纳税的数额比建中元年实际高出三倍之多。唐穆宗下诏，命百官商议革除两税法的弊端。
English: Since the implementation of the two-tax law in the first year of Jianzhong, the value of money has become higher and higher, while the value of physical goods has become lower and lower. The amount of tax paid by the people is more than three times higher than the actual amount in the first year of Jianzhong. Tang Mu Zong issued an edict ordering all officials to discuss and eliminate the drawbacks of the two-tax law.

古文：户部尚书杨于陵以为： 钱者所以权百货，留迁有无，所宜流散，不应蓄聚。
现代文：户部尚书杨於陵认为： 钱是用来衡量货物价值的东西，天下商人贩运买卖，无处不有，所以，钱也应四处流通，不应当蓄积一处。
English: Shangshu Yang Yuling, head of the Household Department, believes that: Money is used to measure the value of goods. Merchants all over the world are trafficking and buying and selling, and they are everywhere. Therefore, money should also circulate everywhere, and should not accumulate in one place.

古文：今税百姓钱藏之公府。
现代文：现在，百姓交纳的钱，都收藏在官府仓库。
English: Now, the money paid by the people is all stored in the government warehouse.

古文：又，开元中天下铸钱七十馀炉，岁入百万，今才十馀炉，岁入十五万，又积于商贾之室及流入四夷。
现代文：另外，开元时期全国铸钱七十多炉，每年收入一百万缗；而现在铸钱十几炉，每年收入才十五万缗。这些钱又大多集中于商人，以及夷狄的手中。
English: In addition, in the first half of the 19th century, there were more than 70 money-minting furnaces across the country, with an annual income of one million baht; while now there are more than a dozen money-minting furnaces, with an annual income of only one hundred and fifty thousand baht. Most of this money is concentrated in the hands of merchants and the rich.

古文：又，大历以前淄青、太原、魏博贸易杂用铅铁，岭南杂用金、银、丹砂、象齿，今一用钱。
现代文：还有，大历年以前，淄青、太原、魏博商品交易兼用钱和铅、铁，岭南则兼用金、银、丹砂、象牙，现在，都统一用钱。
English: Moreover, before the year of the great calendar, the commodity transactions of Bitumen, Taiyuan and Weibo used both money and lead and iron, while Lingnan used both gold, silver, Tanzanite and ivory. Now, they all use money.

古文：如此，则钱焉得不重，物焉得不轻！
现代文：这样一来，钱的价值怎么能不高，而实物的价值又怎么能不低呢？
English: In this way, how can the value of money not be high, and the value of physical goods not be low?

古文：今宜使天下输税课者皆用谷、帛，广铸钱而禁滞积及出塞者，则钱日滋矣。 
现代文：现在，应当下令全国纳税的人都交纳粮食和布帛，增加铸钱而禁止蓄积以及钱流出塞外。如果这样，钱就会逐渐多起来。 
English: Now, it is necessary to order the taxpayers throughout the country to pay grain and cloth, increase the minting of money and prohibit the accumulation and outflow of money from the country. If so, the money will gradually increase.

古文：朝廷从之，始令两税皆输布、丝、纩；独盐、酒课用钱。
现代文：朝廷采纳杨於陵的建议，下令以后两税都交纳布、丝和丝棉；惟独盐、酒专卖仍然用钱。
English: The imperial court adopted Yang Yuling's suggestion and ordered that the two taxes should be paid in nabu, silk and silk wool; however, the salt and liquor monopolies still used money.

古文：冬，十月，丙寅，以盐铁转运使、刑部尚书王播为中书侍郎、同平章事，使职如故。
现代文：冬季，十月，丙寅，唐穆宗任命盐铁转运使、刑部尚书王播为中书侍郎、同平章事，仍兼盐铁转运使。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor He, Tang Mu Zong appointed the salt and iron transport envoy, the criminal department's Shang Shou Wang was appointed as the middle secretary, and Tong Ping Zhangji was still the salt and iron transport envoy.

古文：播为相，专以承迎为事，未尝言国家安危。
现代文：王播担任宰相，专门阿谀奉迎皇上，很少谈论朝廷安危。
English: Wang Huan served as prime minister, and was especially devoted to welcoming the emperor. He rarely talked about the safety and security of the imperial court.

古文：以裴度为镇州四面行营都招讨使。
现代文：唐穆宗任命裴度为镇州四面行营都招讨使。
English: Tang Mu Zong appointed Pei Du to be the envoy to all four sides of Zhenzhou.

古文：左领军大将军杜叔良，以善事权幸得进；时幽、镇兵势方盛，诸道兵未敢进，上欲功速成，宦官荐叔良，以为深州诸道行营节度使。以牛元翼为成德节度使。
现代文：左领军大将军杜叔良由于善于巴结当朝权贵得到提拔，这时，幽州、镇州的兵力正处于强盛，诸道出兵讨伐的军队都不敢进攻。穆宗想尽快看到胜利成果，而宦官又推荐杜叔良，于是，任命叔良为深州诸道行营节度使，任命牛元翼为成德节度使。
English: Du Shuliang, the general leading the left army, was promoted due to his ability to curry favor with the aristocrats of the time. At that time, the troops of Yuzhou and Zhenzhou were in full strength, and the armies of the various provinces did not dare to attack. Mu Zong wanted to see the results of the victory as soon as possible, and the eunuch recommended Du Shuliang. Therefore, he appointed Shuliang as the festival envoy to the various provinces of Shenzhou, and appointed Niu Yuan Ying as the festival envoy to Chengde.

古文：癸酉，命宰相及大臣凡十七人与吐蕃论讷罗盟于城西。
现代文：癸酉唐穆宗命宰相和大臣共十七人，与吐蕃国礼部尚书论纳罗在京城西会盟。
English: Seventeen ministers and chancellors were appointed by Emperor Muzong of the Southern Tang Dynasty, and they entered into an alliance with Shoshu Naro, the ceremonial minister of Tubo Province, in the western part of the capital.

古文：遣刘元鼎与讷罗入吐蕃，亦与其宰相以下盟。
现代文：随后，派遣刘元鼎和论纳罗赴吐蕃国，与吐蕃国宰相及其大臣会盟。
English: Subsequently, Liu Yuan Ding and Onnaro were sent to Tubo Province to form an alliance with the Prime Minister of Tubo Province and his ministers.

古文：乙亥，以沂州刺史王智兴为武宁节度使。
现代文：乙亥，唐穆宗任命沂州刺史王智兴为武宁节度副使。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yihai, Emperor Muzong of Tang appointed Wang Zhixing, a scholar from Zhangzhou, as the deputy envoy to the Wu Ning Festival.

古文：先是，副使皆以文吏为之，上闻智兴有勇略，欲用之于河北，故是以宠之。
现代文：以前，藩镇节度副使都任用文官，穆宗听说智兴有勇有谋，想调他到河北前线，所以，用这个职务表示对他的恩宠。
English: In the past, all deputy envoys of the Han and town festivals were appointed as civilian officials. Mu Zong heard that Zhixing was brave and resourceful and wanted to transfer him to the Hebei front line, so he used this position to show his favor.

古文：丁丑，裴度自将兵出承天军故关以讨王庭凑。
现代文：丁丑，裴度亲自率军，经由原承天军驻地娘子关到达河北，讨伐王庭凑。
English: Ding Yuxi and Pei Du personally led the army, and arrived in Hebei via the original Chengtian Army's garrison town of Niu Ziguan, to fight against Wang Tingqiao.

古文：硃克融遣兵寇蔚州。
现代文：朱克融派兵侵犯蔚州。
English: Zhu Ke Rong sent troops to invade Ulsan.

古文：戊寅，王庭凑遣兵寇贝州。
现代文：戊寅，王庭凑派兵侵犯蔚州。
English: Wu Yin and Wang Ting jointly sent troops to invade Ulshu.

古文：己卯，易州刺史柳公济败幽州兵于白石岭，杀千馀人。
现代文：己卯，易州刺史柳公济在白石岭打败幽州兵马，杀一千多人。
English: At the same time, Liu Gongji defeated the Yuzhou soldiers and horses in Baishiling, killing more than a thousand people.

古文：庚辰，横海军节度使乌重胤奏败成德兵于饶阳。
现代文：庚辰，横海节度使乌重胤奏报，在饶阳打败成德兵马。
English: Geng Chen and Henghai Jiedu defeated Wu Chongyan and defeated Chengde soldiers and horses in Raoyang.

古文：辛巳，魏博节度使田布将全军三万人讨王庭凑，屯于南宫之南，拔其二栅。
现代文：辛巳，魏博节度使田布率全军三万人讨伐王庭凑，屯驻在南宫县南，攻拔王庭凑两个营栅。
English: Soon after, the Wei Bo Festival made Tian Bu lead the whole army of 30,000 people to fight Wang Tingpiao, stationed in the south of Nangong County, and attacked Wang Tingpiao's two camp gates.

古文：翰林学士元稹与知枢密魏弘简深相结，求为宰相，由是有宠于上，每事咨访焉。
现代文：翰林学士元稹和知枢密魏弘简深相勾结，求做宰相，由此而得到唐穆宗的宠任，朝政大事都向他咨询。
English: The scholar of Hanlin, Yuan Zang, and the scholar of the imperial court, Wei Hongjian, were in deep collusion and sought to be the prime minister. As a result, he was favored by Tang Mu Zong and consulted him on the major events of the imperial government.

古文：稹无怨于裴度，但以度先达重望，恐其复有功大用，妨己进取，故度所奏画军事，多与弘简从中沮坏之。
现代文：元稹和裴度虽然没有仇怨，但由于裴度在他得到重用前就有很高的威望，恐怕裴度在讨伐幽州、成德时立功，再度得到朝廷重用，妨碍自己升迁。所以，凡是裴度上奏的军事谋划，他经常和魏弘简二人从中阻挠，使他不能实施。
English: Although there was no animosity between Yuan Zheng and Pei Du, since Pei Du had a high prestige before he was reused, I am afraid that Pei Du made great contributions when he fought against Yuzhou and Chengde, and was reused by the imperial court again, which hindered his promotion. Therefore, whenever Pei Du had a military plan, he and Wei Hongjian often obstructed it, so that he could not implement it.

古文：度乃上表极陈其朋比奸蠹之状，以为： 逆竖构乱，震惊山东，奸臣作朋，挠败国政。
现代文：于是，裴度上表，极力指责元稹和宦官朋比为党，奸邪害国的罪状，认为： 王庭凑、朱克融逆臣竖子叛乱，震惊山东；奸臣朋比为党，则搅乱朝政。
English: As a result, Pei went to the table and vigorously accused Yuan Zheng and eunuch Peng Bi of being a party and the crime of betraying and harming the country. He believed that: Wang Tingpiao and Zhu Ke Rong rebelled against their vassals and shocked Shandong; while the treacherous vassal Peng Bi was a party and disrupted the government of the dynasty.

古文：陛下欲扫荡幽、镇，先宜肃清朝廷。
现代文：陛下如果想扫平幽州、镇州叛乱的话，应当首先肃清朝廷奸党。
English: If His Majesty wants to put down the Yuzhou and Zhenzhou rebellions, he should first purge the imperial court traitors.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：为患有大小，议事有先后。
现代文：因为灾祸有大有小，考虑事情也有先有后。
English: The harm varies from large to small, and the deliberation varies from large to small.

古文：河朔逆贼，只乱山东；禁闱奸臣，必乱天下；是则河朔患小，禁闱患大。
现代文：河朔的叛臣贼党，只能扰乱山东，而宫中的奸臣，则必定祸乱天下。所以，对国家来说，河朔的叛臣危害小，而宫中的奸臣危害大。
English: The traitorous party in Hexuo can only disturb Shandong, while the traitorous minister in the palace is bound to wreak havoc on the world. Therefore, for the country, the traitor in Hexuo is less harmful, while the traitorous minister in the palace is more harmful.

古文：小者臣与诸将必能翦灭，大者非陛下觉寤制断无以驱除。
现代文：对于河朔的叛臣，我和诸位将领肯定能够翦灭，但宫中的奸臣，如果陛下不觉悟，则断然无法驱除。
English: As for the traitors in Heshaku, I and all the generals will certainly be able to annihilate them, but the traitors in the palace, if His Majesty does not wake up, will definitely not be able to expel them.

古文：今文武百寮，中外万品，有心者无不愤忿，有口者无不咨嗟，直以奖用方深，不敢抵触，恐事未行而祸已及，不为国计，且为身谋。
现代文：现在，朝廷文武百官，京城和各地众多臣僚，凡是有心对朝廷尽忠的人，对奸臣的所做所为无不愤怒，能够开口讲话的人也无不嗟叹。只是由于陛下正信用他们，才不敢指责，恐怕奸臣未能翦除，而祸已及身。这并非他们不为国家考虑，而是担心自己受牵连的缘故。
English: Now, hundreds of courtiers and military officials of the Imperial Court, numerous ministers in Beijing and all over the country, all of whom are loyal to the Imperial Court, are furious at the actions of the traitorous ministers, and those who can speak out are also sighing. It is only because His Majesty trusts them that they dare not blame them. I am afraid that the traitors have not been eliminated, but the disaster has already reached them. This is not because they do not think about the country, but because they are worried about being implicated.

古文：臣自兵兴以来，所陈章疏，事皆要切，所奉书诏，多有参差，蒙陛下委付之意不轻，遭奸臣抑损之事不少。
现代文：自从朝廷兴兵讨伐幽州和成德以来，我所上奏陈述的用兵方略，都事关紧要。但所接到的朝廷诏书，却指令不一。我受陛下重托，指挥诸军讨代，责任实在不轻，但遭奸臣从中阻挠的事情，也实在不少。
English: Since the time when the imperial court raised an army to fight Yuzhou and Chengde, the military strategies I have reported are all important. However, the imperial edicts I have received are not consistent. I have been entrusted by His Majesty to command the armies to fight on his behalf. The responsibility is not light, but there are also many things that have been obstructed by treacherous vassals.

古文：臣素与佞幸亦无仇嫌，正以臣前请乘传诣阙，面陈军事，奸臣最所畏惮，恐臣发其过恶，百计止臣。
现代文：我向来和奸臣无怨，只是由于前不久我上奏朝廷，请求乘驿马到京城，当面向陛下陈述用兵方略，奸臣最害怕的，是怕我向陛下揭发他们的罪过，所以百般阻挠我进京。
English: I have always had no grudge against my treacherous vassals, but because I recently appealed to the Imperial Court, requesting to be taken to the capital on a horse-drawn carriage to present my military strategy to His Majesty, my treacherous vassals are most afraid that I will expose their crimes to His Majesty, and so they have obstructed my entry into the capital in every possible way.

古文：臣又请与诸军齐进，随便攻讨，奸臣恐臣或有成功，曲加阻碍，逗遛日时。进退皆受羁牵，意见悉遭蔽塞。
现代文：同时，我又上奏朝廷，请准许我率兵和诸军一同进攻，随机应变，讨伐叛乱。但奸臣恐怕我可能成功，于是，用各种理由加以阻挠，以致我军停滞很久，无论进退，都受到他们的牵制，上奏朝廷的意见，也都被他们从中阻塞。
English: At the same time, I appealed to the imperial court again, asking permission for me to lead my troops to attack together with all the troops, make random contingencies, and fight against the rebellion. But the traitors feared that I might succeed, so they used various reasons to obstruct it, so that our army stagnated for a long time. Whether advancing or retreating, they were held back by them, and the appeal to the imperial court was also blocked by them.

古文：但欲令臣失所，臣无成，则天下理乱，山东胜负，悉不顾矣。
现代文：他们这样做的目的，就是要让我出兵失利，不能成功，对于国家治乱，山东前线的胜负大局，却全然不顾。
English: The purpose of their doing this is to make my military deployment a failure, not a success, while completely disregarding the overall situation of the country's anti-riot and the victory or defeat of the Shandong front.

古文：为臣事君，一至于此！
现代文：作为臣下侍奉皇上，他们就是这样做的！
English: That's what they do when they serve the emperor as his vassals!

古文：若朝中奸臣尽去，则河朔逆贼不讨自平；若朝中奸臣尚存，则逆贼纵平无益。
现代文：如果朝中的奸臣全部能够驱除，那么，河朔的叛臣贼党就会不讨自平；但如果朝中奸臣仍然存在的话，则虽然讨平叛臣贼党，对于朝廷也没有什么好处。
English: If all the treacherous vassals of the central government can be driven out, then the traitorous and treacherous party in Hexuo will not be satisfied; but if there are still treacherous and treacherous vassals in the central government, then even if the traitorous and treacherous party is satisfied, it will be of no benefit to the imperial court.

古文：陛下倘未信臣言，乞出臣表，使百官集议，彼不受责，臣当伏辜。 
现代文：陛下如果不相信我的话，请求把我的奏章公布，让百官一起讨论，如果奸臣不遭到百官的遣责，我愿受到应有的惩罚。 
English: If Your Majesty does not believe me, I request that my report be published and discussed by a hundred officials. If the traitor is not reprimanded by a hundred officials, I would like to receive the punishment I deserve.

古文：表三上，上虽不悦，以度大臣，不得已，癸未，以弘简为弓箭库使，稹为工部侍郎。
现代文：裴度多次上奏指斥元稹等人的罪行，穆宗虽然很不高兴，但考虑到裴度是朝廷中威望很高的大臣，不得不作出让步。癸未，贬魏弘简为弓箭库使，元稹为工部侍郎。
English: Although Mu Zong was very unhappy, he had to make concessions, considering that Pei Du was a highly respected minister in the imperial court. At the same time, Wei Hong Jian was demoted to the position of bow and arrow warehouse clerk, and Yuan Jian was demoted to the position of workshop attendant.

古文：稹虽解翰林，恩遇如故。
现代文：元稹虽然被解除翰林学士的职务，但仍然和过去一样，受到穆宗的宠信。
English: Although he was removed from the post of Hanlin Scholar, Yuan Zang was still favored by Mu Zong as in the past.

古文：宿州刺史李直臣坐赃当死，宦官受其赂，为之请，御史中丞牛僧孺固请诛之。上曰： 直臣有才，可惜！ 
现代文：宿州刺史李直臣贪污，根据法律，应当判处死刑。宦官受了他的贿赂，为他辩护。御史中丞牛僧孺一再请求杀掉，穆宗说： 直臣很有才能，杀了可惜！ 
English: The eunuch was bribed by him to defend him. Goshi Chujo Niu Sangyo repeatedly asked to kill him, Mu Zong said: Nao-min is very talented, it's a pity to kill him!

古文：僧孺对曰： 彼不才者，无过温衣饱食以足妻子，安足虑！
现代文：牛僧孺回答说： 那些没有才能的人，整天考虑的不过是吃饱穿暖，满足妻子的要求，对这些人，国家又有什么可顾虑的！
English: The Cow Monk replied, "For those who have no talent, who only think about getting enough to eat and satisfy their wives, the country has nothing to worry about!"

古文：本设法令，所以擒制有才之人。
现代文：制定法律的目的，本来就是约束那些有才能的人。
English: The very purpose of making laws is to restrain those who have talent.

古文：安禄山、硃泚皆才过于人，法不能制者也。 
现代文：安禄山、朱都才智过于常人由于法律未能约束，才胆敢发动叛乱的。 
English: An Lushan and Zhu Du are more intelligent than ordinary people, and they dare to launch a rebellion because the law cannot restrain them.

古文：上从之。
现代文：穆宗听从了他的意见。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：横海节度使乌重胤将全军救深州，诸军倚重胤独当幽、镇东南，重胤宿将，知贼未可破，按兵观衅。
现代文：横海节度使乌重胤率全军救援深州，诸军依赖乌重胤独自抵挡幽州、镇州的东南方向。乌重胤是经验丰富的老将，知道敌人不可能一时被击破，于是，按兵不动观察敌军动静。
English: Henghai Sedo ordered Wu Chung-tin to lead the whole army to rescue Shenzhou. The army relied on Wu Chung-tin to single-handedly resist the southeast direction of Yuzhou and Zhenzhou. Wu Chung-tin was an experienced veteran and knew that the enemy could not be defeated at one time, so he observed the movement of the enemy army.

古文：上怒，丙戌，以杜叔良为横海节度使，徙重胤为山南西道节度使。
现代文：穆宗大怒，任命杜叔良为横海节度使，调乌重胤为山南道节度使。
English: Mu Zong was furious and appointed Du Shuliang as the envoy to the Henghai Festival and transferred Wu Shigetian as the envoy to the Shannan Festival.

古文：灵武节度使李进诚奏败吐蕃三千骑于大石山下。
现代文：灵武节度使李进诚上奏：在大石山下打败吐蕃三千骑兵。
English: The spirit of martial arts made Li Jinsheng play the first part: defeating the three thousand cavalrymen of Tubo at the foot of the Daishi Mountain.

古文：十一月，辛酉，淄青节度使薛平奏突将马廷崟作乱，伏诛。
现代文：十一月，辛酉，淄青节度使薛平上奏：突将马廷作乱被杀。
English: In November, at the height of the Xinjiang Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur Uygur

古文：时幽、镇兵攻棣州，平遣大将李叔佐将兵救之。
现代文：当时，幽州和镇州派兵攻打棣州，薛平派大将李叔佐率兵救援。
English: At that time, Yuzhou and Zhenzhou sent troops to attack Zhangzhou, and Xue Ping sent General Li Shuzo to lead the troops to rescue.

古文：刺史王稷供馈稍薄，军士怨怒，宵溃，推廷崟为主，行且收兵至七千馀人，径逼青州。
现代文：棣州刺史王稷供给军队物资稍少，军士怨恨愤怒，乘夜晚溃逃。军士推马廷为道领，一边行走，一边收兵，共达七千多人，直向青州逼近。
English: Shishi Wangqi, the governor of Zhangzhou, supplied the army with a little less material. The sergeant was resentful and angry, and fled by night. The sergeant pushed Martin to be the leader, while walking, while collecting troops, a total of more than seven thousand people, directly approaching Qingzhou.

古文：城中兵少，不敌，平悉发府库及家财召募，得精兵二千人，逆战，大破之，斩廷崟，其党死者数千人。
现代文：青州城中兵少，不足以抵抗逃兵，于是，薛平把仓库和自己家的私财全部拿出，招募士卒，得精兵二千人，出城迎城，大败逃兵，把马廷斩首，逃兵死亡几千人。
English: There were not enough soldiers in the city of Qingzhou to resist the deserters, so Xue Ping took out the warehouse and all the private money of his family, recruited soldiers, got two thousand elite soldiers, went out of the city to meet the city, defeated the deserters, beheaded Martin, and several thousand deserters died.

古文：横海节度使杜叔良将诸道兵与镇人战，遇敌辄北。
现代文：横海节度使杜叔良率领诸道兵马与镇州军队交战，每战皆败。
English: The Henghai Festival made Du Shuliang lead the soldiers and horses of various provinces to fight against the Zhenzhou army, and they were defeated in every battle.

古文：镇人知其无勇，常先犯之。
现代文：镇州人知道他胆怯无勇，常常首先向他发起进攻。
English: The people of Zhenzhou knew that he was a coward and often attacked him first.

古文：十二月，庚午，监军谢良通奏叔良大败于博野，失亡七千馀人。
现代文：十二月，庚午，监军谢良通奏报杜叔良在博野大败，损失逃亡七千多人。
English: In the afternoon of December, Xie Liang, the supervisor of the army, reported that Du Shuliang was defeated in Bono, and more than seven thousand people fled.

古文：叔良脱身还营，丧其旌节。
现代文：杜叔良脱身回到军营，但丢失了节度使的旌节。
English: Du Shuliang escaped and returned to the military camp, but he lost his temper.

古文：丁丑，义武节度使陈楚奏败硃克融兵于望都及北平，斩获万馀人。戊寅，以凤翔节度使李光颜为忠武节度使、兼深州行营节度使，代杜叔良。
现代文：丁丑，易州刺史柳公济在白石岭打败幽州兵马，杀一千多人。戊寅，唐穆宗任命凤翔节度使李光颜为忠武节度使、兼深州行营节度使，替代杜叔良。
English: Ding Gou, Yizhou chief Liu Gongji defeated Yuzhou soldiers and horses in Baishiling, killing more than a thousand people. Wu Yin, Tang Mu Zong appointed Feng Xiang as the commander of Li Guangyan as the commander of Zhongwu, and also as the commander of Shenzhou Campaign, replacing Du Shuliang.

古文：自宪宗征伐四方，国用已虚，上即位，赏赐左右及宿卫诸军无节，及幽、镇用兵久无功，府藏空竭，势不能支。
现代文：自从唐宪宗征讨四方叛乱以来，国库已空虚。唐穆宗即位后，赏赐左右和禁卫诸军毫无节制，等到朝廷对幽州、镇州用兵，旷日持久而未立功，国库空竭，难以继续维持。
English: Since Emperor Xianzong of Tang conquered the four-sided rebellion, the national treasury has been empty. After Emperor Muzong of Tang ascended the throne, there was no restraint in rewarding the left and right and defending the troops. When the imperial court used troops against Yuzhou and Zhenzhou, it took a long time and did not do any good. The national treasury was depleted and it was difficult to continue to maintain.

古文：执政乃议： 王庭氵奏杀田弘正而硃克融全张弘靖，罪有重轻，请赦克融，专讨庭氵奏。 
现代文：于是，当政大臣建议说： 王庭凑杀害了田弘正，而朱克融尚能保全张弘靖的性命，二人罪行各有轻重，请求赦免克融，集中全力讨伐王庭凑。 
English: As a result, the current minister of state suggested: Wang Tingcheng killed Tian Hongzheng, while Zhu Ke Rong was still able to save Zhang Hongjing's life. The two men's crimes were of different degrees of seriousness. He asked for an amnesty for Kereng and concentrated all his efforts on fighting Wang Tingcheng.

古文：上从之。
现代文：穆宗采纳了他们的意见。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：乙酉，以硃克融为平卢节度使。
现代文：乙酉，任命朱克融为卢龙节度使。
English: Acetylene, appointed Zhu Ke Rong as the secretary of the Lulong Festival.

古文：戊子，义武奏破莫州清源等三栅，斩获千馀人。
现代文：戊子，义武上奏、攻破莫州清源等三个营栅，斩首和俘虏敌军一千多人。
English: Three camp gates were breached, including the gate of Wuzi, the gate of Yiwu, and the gate of Mozhou Qingyuan, and more than a thousand enemy soldiers were beheaded and captured.

古文：长庆二年壬寅，公元八二二年
现代文：长庆二年春季，正月，丁酉，幽州出兵攻陷弓高县城。
English: In the spring of the second year of Changqing, in the first month of the year, Dingwu and Yuzhou sent troops to capture the county seat of Yugao.

古文：春，正月，丁酉，幽州兵陷弓高。先是，弓高守备甚严，有中使夜至，守将不内，旦，乃得入，中使大诟怒。
现代文：以前，弓高守卫很严，一次，一个宦官出使弓高，半夜到达，守将根据军法条例，拒不放他入城；天明后，宦官方才进城。宦官大怒，责骂守将。幽州的探马得知此事后，报告主将。
English: In the past, the guard of Yuguo was very strict. Once, a eunuch sent to Yuguo arrived in the middle of the night. According to the military law regulations, the commander refused to let him enter the city. The eunuch was furious and scolded the commander. After Yuzhou's probing horse learned about this, it reported to the commander.

古文：贼谍知之，他日，伪遣人为中使，投夜至城下，守将遽内之，贼众随之，遂陷弓高。
现代文：过了不久，幽州派人伪装成宦官，半夜来到弓高城下，守将即让他入城，幽州兵随后赶到，因而攻陷弓高。
English: Not long after, Yuzhou sent someone disguised as a eunuch to the city of Yugang in the middle of the night. The governor immediately let him enter the city, and Yuzhou soldiers arrived later, thus capturing Yugang.

古文：又围下博。
现代文：接着，又围攻下博县城。
English: Next, they besieged the city of Xiabo.

古文：中书舍人白居易上言，以为： 自幽、镇逆命，朝廷征诸道兵，计十七八万，四面攻围，已逾半年，王师无功，贼势犹盛。
现代文：中书舍人白居易上书，认为： 自从幽州、镇州叛乱以来，朝廷征发诸道兵马讨伐，总计有十七八万人，四面围攻，已超过半年时间。但官军至今没有进展，贼军兵势却仍然强盛。
English: Bai Juyi, the author of the book, wrote: Since the Yuzhou and Zhenzhou rebellions broke out, the imperial court has conscripted and dispatched a total of 1.78 million soldiers and horses from various provinces to fight, and they have been besieged on all sides for more than half a year. However, the government army has not made any progress so far, but the rebel army is still strong.

古文：弓高既陷，粮道不通，下博、深州，饥穷日急。
现代文：弓高失陷后，通往前线的运粮道路无法通行，下博和深州的将士，饥饿困乏，情况日益紧急。
English: After the fall of Yugang, the grain transport road leading to the front line was impassable. The soldiers in Shimo Bo and Shenzhou were starving and exhausted, and the situation became increasingly urgent.

古文：盖由节将太众，其心不齐，莫肯率先，递相顾望。
现代文：这都是由于前线节度将领太多，反而心不齐，都不肯率先进攻，相互观望的缘故。
English: This is all due to the fact that there are too many front-line generals, but they are not of the same mind, they are not willing to lead the advance and wait for each other.

古文：又，朝廷赏罚，近日不行，未立功者或已拜官，已败衄者不闻得罪。
现代文：另外，朝廷对将士的赏罚，近来也不见成效，没有立功的人有的已经授予官衔，作战失败的人却没说被朝廷惩罚。
English: In addition, the imperial court's rewards and punishments for soldiers have not been effective recently. Some people who have not rendered meritorious service have been awarded official ranks, but those who have failed in battle have not said that they were punished by the imperial court.

古文：既无惩劝，以至迁延，若不改张，必无所望。
现代文：由于赏罚不明，因而将士拖延不进。若不改弦更张，胜利就没有指望了。
English: Because the reward and punishment are not clear, the generals are delaying their advance. If they do not change course, there is no hope for victory.

古文：请令李光颜将诸道劲兵约三四万人从东速进，开弓高粮路，合下博诸军解深、邢重围，与元翼合势。
现代文：请求陛下命李光颜率领诸道精兵三四万人从东面急速进兵，打通到弓高的粮道，以便解除敌军对深州的重重包围，和牛元翼的军队会合一起。
English: I request His Majesty to order Li Guangyan to lead 30,000 to 40,000 elite soldiers from all over the country to rapidly advance from the east and open up the grain route to the height of the bow, so as to lift the enemy's encirclement of Shenzhou and join the army of Niuyuan Wing.

古文：令裴度将太原全军兼招讨旧职，西面压境，观衅而动。若乘虚得便，即令同力翦除；若战胜贼穷，亦许受降纳款。
现代文：再命裴度率领太原的全部人马，仍兼招讨使的职务，从西面压敌边境，观察敌军动静，如能乘虚得手，即令两支兵马同力讨伐，一举歼敌。
English: He then ordered Pei Du to lead all the men and horses of Taiyuan, still holding the post of envoy, to suppress the enemy's border from the west, observe the movement of the enemy army, and if he could take advantage of the situation, he would order the two armies to fight together and destroy the enemy at one stroke.

古文：如此，则夹攻以分其力，招谕以动其心，必未及诛夷，自生变故。
现代文：如果官军节节取胜，敌军困窘，也应当许可前线将领接受敌军的投降。这样部署指挥，就可以两面夹攻，使敌人分散兵力，并通过招降来动摇对方军心。其结果，敌人尚未灭亡，内部必定发生兵变，不战自降。
English: If the officers and soldiers are victorious and the enemy army is in a quandary, the front-line generals should also be allowed to accept the surrender of the enemy army. By deploying the command in this way, it is possible to make a two-pronged attack, make the enemy disperse its forces, and shake the other side's military spirit by inviting surrender. As a result, the enemy has not yet perished, and there must be a mutiny inside, and surrender without a fight.

古文：又请诏光颜选诸道兵精锐者留之，其馀不可用者悉遣归本道，自守土疆。
现代文：同时，再请陛下下诏，命李光颜从前线诸道兵士中挑选精锐者留下，其余老弱病残都遣反本道，各守故土。
English: At the same time, please ask Your Majesty to issue an edict, ordering Li Guangyan to select the elite soldiers from the frontline soldiers to stay, and the rest of the old, weak and sick will be sent back to their homelands.

古文：盖兵多而不精，岂唯虚费资粮，兼恐挠败军陈故也。
现代文：大凡兵多则不精，不仅虚耗国家衣物钱粮，而且也会消弱官军自身士气，导致失败。
English: Many ordinary soldiers are not diligent, not only wasting the country's clothing, money and grain, but also weakening the morale of the officers and soldiers themselves, leading to failure.

古文：今既只留东西二帅，请各置都监一人，诸道监军，一时停罢。
现代文：现只留李光颜、裴度两支兵马，请陛下各置都监一人，各道的监军，都予以罢除。
English: Now only Li Guangyan and Pei Du's two armies and horses are left. I would like to ask Your Majesty to appoint one inspector for each capital, and to remove the inspectors for each province.

古文：如此，则众齐令一，必有成功。
现代文：这样，就会队伍整齐，军令统一，最后必定取得胜利。
English: In this way, the team will be neat, the military order will be unified, and finally victory will be achieved.

古文：又，朝廷本用田布，令报父仇，今领全师出界，供给度支，数月已来，都不进讨，非田布固欲如此，抑有其由。
现代文：再有，朝廷命田布为魏博节度使的本意，是让他为父报仇。现在，田布率领全部兵马出境讨敌，由朝廷度支供给衣粮，但几个月以来，魏博军队从未攻讨。这并非田布按兵不动，而是有他难言的苦衷。
English: Furthermore, the intention of the court to appoint Tianbu as Wei Bo's regent was to let him avenge his father. Now, Tianbu led all the soldiers and horses to go abroad to fight the enemy, supported by the court to supply food and clothing, but for several months, Wei Bo's army has never attacked. This is not Tianbu's immobility, but his unspeakable pain.

古文：闻魏博一军，屡经优赏，兵骄将富，莫肯为用。
现代文：听说魏博军队经由朝廷多次优厚的赏赐，兵士骄横，将领富有，反而不愿作战。
English: It is said that the Wei Bo army was given many generous rewards by the imperial court. The soldiers were arrogant and the generals were rich, but they did not want to fight.

古文：况其军一月之费，计实钱二十八万缗，若更迁延，将何供给？
现代文：况且委博军，每月的军费按货币折算，即达二十八万缗。如果继续拖廷下去，朝廷用什么来供给呢？
English: Moreover, the monthly military expenditure of the Communist-Bolshevik army, calculated in terms of currency, amounts to 280,000 baht. If the delay continues, what will the imperial court use to supply it?

古文：此尤宜早令退军者也。
现代文：仅就此而言，也应早日下令魏博退军。
English: For this reason alone, Weibo should be ordered to withdraw at an early date.

古文：若两道止共留兵六万，所费无多，既易支持，自然丰足。
现代文：如果仅李光颜和裴度两道共留六万兵力，军费不多，朝廷易于供给，军需自然丰足。
English: If only Li Guangyan and Pei Du were to leave a total of sixty thousand troops, the military expenditure would not be much, the imperial court would be easy to supply, and the military demand would naturally be abundant.

古文：今事宜日急，其间变故远不可知。
现代文：现在，前线战事日益紧迫，中间或许还会发生什么变故，难以预料。
English: Now, the frontline battle is becoming increasingly urgent, and it is difficult to predict what may happen in the middle.

古文：苟兵数不抽，军费不减，食既不足，众何以安！
现代文：如果不及时抽减兵力，致使军费浩大，粮食不足，将士怎能安心作战。
English: If the troops are not reduced in time, resulting in huge military expenses and food shortages, how can soldiers fight with confidence?

古文：不安之中，何事不有！
现代文：军心不定，随时都可能发生意外变故！
English: The military spirit is uncertain, accidents can happen at any time!

古文：况有司迫于供军，百端敛率，不许即用度交阙，尽许则人心无憀。
现代文：况且度支迫于供军，千方百计盘剥百姓，如果朝廷不准许，则军需匮乏，若准许则人心动摇。
English: Moreover, the government is forced to rely on military supplies, and is doing everything possible to exploit the people. If the imperial court does not allow it, there will be a shortage of military supplies, and if it does allow it, the people will be shaken.

古文：自古安危皆系于此，伏乞圣虑察而念之。 疏奏，不省。
现代文：自古以来，朝政安危都在于此。请求陛下说细了解并加以慎重考虑。 奏折递上去后，穆宗不理。
English: Since ancient times, the safety and security of the imperial court have been at stake here. I asked His Majesty to explain in detail and consider it carefully. After the report was submitted, Mu Zong ignored it.

古文：己亥，度支馈沧州粮车六百乘，至下博，尽为成德军所掠。
现代文：已亥，度支供给沧州军粮车六百辆行至下博县时，全部遭成德军抢夺。
English: Already in the winter, when six hundred Cangzhou army grain trucks, supplied by Doushi, went to Shimo-Bo County, they were all robbed by the German army.

古文：时诸军匮乏，供军院所运衣粮，往往不得至院，在涂为诸军邀夺，其悬军深入者，皆冻馁无所得。
现代文：这时官军诸道兵马军需匮乏，供军院所运衣粮，往往未到行营供军院，在半路就被诸军哄抢。凡孤军深入的兵马，都饥寒交迫而得不到补给。
English: At this time, the soldiers and horses of the government army and all the sects were in short supply, and the clothing and grain for the military academy were often not delivered to the camp for the military academy, and they were robbed by the army in the middle of the road. All the soldiers and horses that went deep into the lone army were hungry and cold and could not get supplies.

古文：初，田布从其父弘正在魏，善视牙将史宪诚，屡称荐，至右职。
现代文：当初，田布随从他的父亲田弘正在魏博时，对牙将史宪诚十分重视，多次向田弘正称赞推荐，以至史宪诚被提拔但任要职。
English: At the beginning, when Tian Bu followed his father Tian Hong Zheng to Wei Bo, he attached great importance to the dentist Shixian Cheng, praised and recommended him to Tian Hong Zheng many times, so that Shixian Cheng was promoted but held an important position.

古文：及为节度使，遂寄以腹心，以为先锋兵马使，军中精锐，悉以委之。
现代文：等到田布被任命为魏博节度使，于是，把他作为自己的亲信，任命为先锋兵马使，军中的精锐兵力，都委托到来统辖。
English: When Tianbu was appointed as the envoy of the Wei Bo Festival, he was appointed as the vanguard envoy of the soldiers and horses, and the elite troops in the army were entrusted to him as his close friend.

古文：宪诚之先，奚人也，世为魏将。
现代文：史宪诚的祖先是奚族人，世代在魏博为将。
English: Shi Xiancheng's ancestors were Yi people, and he was a general in Weibo for generations.

古文：魏与幽、镇本相表里，及幽、镇叛，魏人固摇心。
现代文：魏博和幽州、镇州本来就相互依赖互为表里，待到幽州和成德叛乱以后，魏博的人心已经动摇。
English: Wei Bo and Yuzhou and Zhenzhou were originally mutually dependent on each other. After the rebellion of Yuzhou and Chengde, the people's hearts of Wei Bo have been shaken.

古文：布以魏兵讨镇，军于南宫，上屡遣中使督战，而将士骄惰，无斗志，又属大雪，度支馈运不继。
现代文：田布率魏博军队讨伐镇州，驻扎在南宫县。唐穆宗多次派遣宦官前往督战，而魏博将士骄横懈怠，毫无斗志。这时正好又下了一场大雪，度支供给难以接续。
English: Tang Mu Zong repeatedly sent eunuchs to supervise the battle, but Wei Bo's generals were arrogant and slack, and had no fighting spirit. At this time, another heavy snow fell, and it was difficult to continue the supply of food.

古文：布发六州租赋以供军，将士不悦，曰： 故事，军出境，皆给朝廷。
现代文：田布命征发魏博六州的租赋供给军需，将士很不高兴，说： 按照惯例，我军出境后，都由朝廷供给。
English: The general was very displeased, saying, "According to the usual practice, after our troops leave the country, they are all supplied by the imperial court.

古文：今尚书刮六州肌肉以奉军，虽尚书瘠己肥国，六州之人何罪乎！ 
现代文：现在，田尚书刮我六州的民脂民膏来供军，虽然尚书这样做是克已奉国，但六州百姓为什么要遭这份罪呢？ 
English: Now, Tian Shangshu scrapes the people's fat of the six states to supply the army. Although Shangshu has served the country, why should the people of the six states suffer this crime?

古文：宪诚阴蓄异志，因众心不悦，离间鼓扇之。
现代文：史宪诚暗中早在纂夺节度使的野心，于是，乘机挑拨煽动士卒的不满情绪。
English: Shi Xiancheng secretly harbored the ambition of overthrowing the Qing Dynasty, and took the opportunity to incite the discontent of the soldiers.

古文：会有诏分魏博军与李光颜，使救深州。
现代文：正在这时，穆宗下诏，命魏博分兵由李光颜指挥，前往救援深州。
English: At this time, Mu Zong issued an edict, ordering the Wei Bo detachment, commanded by Li Guangyan, to go to the rescue of Shenzhou.

古文：庚子，布军大溃，多归宪诚，布独与中军八千人还魏。壬寅，至魏州。
现代文：庚子，田布的军队溃乱士卒大多归史宪诚。田布独自率新军八千人返回魏州，壬寅，到达魏州。
English: Geng Zi and Tian Bu's army routed the rebels, and most of the soldiers and pawns belonged to Shi Xiancheng. Tian Bu alone led the new army of eight thousand people back to Weizhou, and Ren Yin reached Weizhou.

古文：癸卯，布复召诸将议出兵，诸将益偃蹇，曰： 尚书能行河朔旧事，则死生以之。若使复战，则不能也！ 
现代文：癸卯，田布再次召集部将，商议出兵。诸将更加傲慢，说： 田尚书如果能按以往河朔割据的惯例办的话，我们就舍生忘死跟从您；但如果要让我们出战，则不能服从。 
English: Suddenly, Tian Bu once again summoned his generals to discuss sending troops. The generals became even more arrogant, saying: "Tian Shangshu, if you can follow the previous custom of splitting the territory, we will follow you without hesitation; but if you want us to go to war, we cannot obey.

古文：布无如之何，叹曰： 功不成矣！ 
现代文：田布无可奈何，叹道： 我立功报国的愿望无法实现了！ 
English: Unable to help himself, Tabu sighed: My wish to make a contribution to my country could not be fulfilled!

古文：即日，作遗表具其状，略曰： 臣观众意，终负国恩。
现代文：当天，他写下遗书，把以上情况向穆宗报告，大意是： 我观察将士的意向，终必背叛朝廷，辜负皇上的恩德。
English: On the same day, he wrote a suicide note and reported the above situation to Mu Zong, to the effect that: I observe the soldiers' intentions and will eventually betray the imperial court and betray the emperor's grace.

古文：臣既无功，敢忘即死。
现代文：我既然未能立功，只好就死。
English: Since I couldn't do any good, I had to die.

古文：伏愿陛下速救光颜、元翼，不然者，义士忠臣皆为河朔屠害矣！ 
现代文：愿陛下尽快派兵救援李光颜、牛元翼，不然的话，这些忠臣义士都将被河朔的叛党屠害！ 
English: May His Majesty send troops to rescue Li Guangyan and Niu Yuanyi as soon as possible, otherwise, these loyalists will be slaughtered by the rebels in Heshaku!

古文：奉表号器，拜授幕僚李石，乃入启父灵，抽刀而言曰： 上以谢君父，下以示三军。 
现代文：他手捧遗书大声痛哭，然后，拜倒在地，授予幕僚李石，让他转呈朝廷。接着，他走到父亲的灵位前，抽出刀说： 我以死对上向皇上和父亲表示我未能立功报国的罪责；对下向三军将士表示我忠君爱国的决心。 
English: Holding the suicide note in his hand, he cried loudly and bitterly. Then, he prostrated himself on the ground and gave it to his staff member Li Shi, asking him to present it to the imperial court. Next, he walked to his father's place of worship, drew his sword and said, "I face the emperor and my father with my death to show my guilt for failing to contribute to the country; and face down to the three soldiers to show my determination to be loyal to the king and patriotic."

古文：遂刺心而死。
现代文：于是，用刀刺心而死。
English: As a result, he stabbed himself to death with a knife.

古文：宪诚闻布已死，乃谕其众，遵河北旧事。
现代文：史宪诚听说田布已经自杀，于是，向将士宣布，他将遵循河朔的惯例，实行割据。
English: Shi Xiancheng heard that Tianbu had committed suicide, so he announced to the soldiers that he would follow the practice of Heshaku and implement the separation.

古文：众悦，拥宪诚还魏，奉为留后。
现代文：将士十分高兴，族拥史宪诚回到魏州，推兴他为留后。
English: The general was very happy that the family of Shi Xiancheng returned to Weizhou and encouraged him to stay.

古文：戊申，魏州奏布自杀。
现代文：戊申，魏州奏报田布自杀。
English: Wushin, Weizhou reported that Tianbu committed suicide.

古文：己酉，以宪诚为魏博节度使。
现代文：已酉，穆宗任命史宪诚为魏博节度使。
English: After his death, Mu Zong appointed Shi Xiancheng as Wei Bo's regent.

古文：宪诚虽喜得旄钺，外奉朝廷，然内实与幽、镇连结。
现代文：宪诚虽然为得到节度使的旌节而高兴，表面遵奉朝廷，但暗地里却和幽州、镇州相勾结。
English: Although Xiancheng was happy to receive the patronage of the emperor, and ostensibly obeyed the imperial court, he secretly colluded with Yuzhou and Zhenzhou.

古文：庚戌，以德州刺史王日简为横海节度使。
现代文：庚戌，唐穆宗任命德州刺史王日简为横海节度使。
English: Geng Zong, Tang Mu Zong appointed Texhou Sisi Wang Rijan as the envoy of the Henghai Festival.

古文：日简，本成德牙将也。
现代文：王日简原本是成德的牙将。
English: Wang Rijian was originally a dentist from Chengde.

古文：壬子，贬杜叔良为归州刺史。
现代文：壬子，贬杜叔良为归州刺史。
English: Ren Zi, dismissing Du Shuliang as a returnee.

古文：王庭凑围牛元翼于深州，官军三面救之，皆以乏粮不能进。
现代文：王庭凑出兵把牛元翼围困在深州，官军从东、北、西三个方向前进救授，都因缺粮而无法前进。
English: Wang Ting gathered soldiers to besiege Niu Yuan Ying in Shenzhou, and the government army advanced from the east, north and west in three directions to rescue him, but they were unable to advance due to lack of grain.

古文：虽李光颜亦闭壁自守而已。
现代文：即使是名将李光颜，也只能是闭壁自守而已。
English: Even the famous Li Guangyan, can only be a closed-wall self-protection.

古文：军士自采薪刍，日给不过陈米一勺。
现代文：兵士都自己去打柴草，每天每人不过领到陈米一勺。
English: The soldiers all went to collect firewood and grass on their own, but each received only a spoonful of stale rice each day.

古文：深州围益急，朝廷不得已，二月，甲子，以庭凑为成德节度使，军中将士官爵皆复其旧；以兵部侍郎韩愈为宣慰使。
现代文：这时深州被围攻，形势日益严重，朝廷不得已，于月，甲子，任命王庭凑为成德节度使，凡成德将士，一律官复原职。同时，任命兵部侍郎韩愈为宣慰使。
English: At this time, Shenzhou was besieged, and the situation was becoming increasingly serious. The imperial court was forced to appoint Wang Tingpai as the Chengde Festival envoy in January, and all Chengde soldiers were reinstated. At the same time, Han Yu, the military attaché, was appointed as the consolation envoy.

古文：上之初即位也，两河略定，萧俛、段文昌以为 天下已太平，渐宜消兵，请密诏天下，军镇有兵处，每岁百人之中限八人逃、死。 
现代文：唐穆宗刚刚即位的时候，河南、河北的叛乱藩镇都已平定，宰相萧、段文昌认为： 天下已以太平，应当逐渐载减国家的军事武装。请陛下给各地秘密下诏，凡是有兵的军镇，每年每一百个兵士中，允许有八人逃走和死亡，注销军籍。 
English: When Emperor Muzong had just ascended to the throne, the rebellious towns of Henan and Hebei had all been pacified. The prime ministers Xiao and Duan Wenchang believed that the world was at peace and that the military armament of the country should be gradually reduced. His Majesty was asked to issue a secret decree to all regions that in every military town with soldiers, eight out of every hundred soldiers would be allowed to escape and die each year, and their military registration would be cancelled.

古文：上方荒宴，不以国事为意，遂可其奏。
现代文：当时穆宗整日游乐饮宴，不理朝政，于是，批准二人的建议。
English: At that time, Mu Zong spent the whole day enjoying the banquet, ignoring the government, so he approved the two people's suggestion.

古文：军士落籍者众，皆聚山泽为盗。
现代文：兵士注销军籍的人很多，都聚集在深山江湖中成为盗贼。
English: There are many soldiers who have been deregistered from the military, and they have gathered in the mountains and rivers to become thieves.

古文：及硃克融、王庭凑作乱，一呼而亡卒皆集。
现代文：待到朱克融、王庭凑叛乱时，一呼百应，逃亡的兵士都投奔他们的麾下。
English: When Zhu Ke Rong and Wang Ting joined the rebellion, they were welcomed with open arms, and the soldiers who had fled went to join them.

古文：诏征诸道兵讨之，诸道兵既少，皆临时召募，乌合之众。
现代文：朝廷下召征发诸道兵讨伐，诸道兵力既少，因而都临时召募，不过是乌合之众。
English: The imperial court summoned and dispatched soldiers from all sects for the crusade. Since the number of soldiers from all sects was small, they were all recruited on an ad hoc basis, but they were just a rabble.

古文：又，诸节度既有监军，其领偏师者亦置中使监陈，主将不得专号令，战小胜则飞驿奏捷，自以为功，不胜则迫胁主将，以罪归之。
现代文：同时，朝廷在诸道已设置监军，对于他们部将所统辖的军队也派宦官临时监陈，以致主将不能专制军权。凡攻战取得小胜，监军就飞书向朝廷奏捷，作为自己的功劳；不胜则胁迫主将，把罪责推给他们。
English: At the same time, the imperial court had set up supervisors in various provinces, and also sent eunuchs to temporarily supervise the armies under the command of their commanders, so that the commander-in-chief could not dictate military power. Whenever a small victory was achieved in a battle, the supervisors would report the victory to the imperial court as their own merit; if the victory was not achieved, they would coerce the commander-in-chief and shift the blame to them.

古文：悉择军中骁勇以自卫，遣赢懦者就战，故每战多败。
现代文：监军还把军中骁勇的兵力挑选出来，用来自卫，其余老弱病残的兵士，派遣他们去攻战，以致每次战斗，大多失败。
English: The supervisors also selected the brave soldiers in the army and used them to defend themselves, and sent the rest of the old, weak and sick soldiers to attack the war, so that most of them failed in every battle.

古文：又凡用兵，举动皆自禁中授以方略，朝令夕改，不知所从。
现代文：另外，大凡前线的军事行动，都由朝廷授予作战方略，朝令夕改，将士不知所措。
English: In addition, the military operations on the front line are all granted by the imperial court. The morning orders are changed at dusk, and the soldiers are at a loss.

古文：不度可否，惟督令速战。
现代文：朝廷不管作战方略是否切实可行，只是责令将士遵照执行，急速出战。
English: The imperial court, regardless of whether the battle strategy was practical, simply ordered the generals to comply with the implementation and quickly go to war.

古文：中使道路如织，驿马不足，掠行人马以继之，人不敢由驿路行。
现代文：宦官出使前线传达诏令，来往不息，如同穿梭，驿马不足，竟掠抢行人马匹，以至行人不敢由驿路行走。
English: Eunuchs were sent to the front to deliver the imperial edict, and they went back and forth like a shuttle. They were so short of horses that they actually robbed pedestrians of their horses, so that pedestrians did not dare to walk on the side streets.

古文：故虽以诸道十五万之众，裴度元臣宿望，乌重胤、李光颜皆当时名将，讨幽、镇万馀之众，屯守逾年，竟无成功，财竭力尽。
现代文：所以，虽然朝廷征发诸道十五万大军，所任用的招讨使裴度是很有威望的老臣，乌重胤、李光颜也都是当时的名将，仅仅讨伐幽州、成德一万多人，但屯守一年多的时间，最后，竟然没有结果，而国家却财力耗竭。
English: Therefore, although the imperial court conscripted and dispatched an army of 150,000 soldiers from all provinces, and appointed Baidu, a very prestigious veteran minister, Wu Chung-yin, and Li Guangyan, both famous generals at the time, only to fight Yuzhou and Chengde, more than 10,000 people, but stayed for more than a year, in the end, there was no result, and the country was exhausted.

古文：崔植、杜元颖、王播为相，皆庸才，无远略。
现代文：崔植、杜元颖作为宰相，都是没有远见的卓识的平庸人物。
English: As prime ministers, Cui Zhi and Du Yuanying are mediocre figures with no foresight.

古文：史宪诚既逼杀田布，朝廷不能讨，遂并硃克融、王庭氵奏以节钺授之。
现代文：史宪诚逼田布自杀以后，朝廷无力征讨，于是将他和朱克融、王庭凑一起，都任命为节度使。
English: After Shi Xiancheng forced Tianbu to commit suicide, the imperial court was unable to collect the money, so he and Zhu Ke Rong and Wang Ting were appointed as festival envoys.

古文：由是再失河朔，讫于唐亡，不能复取。
现代文：由此朝廷再度丢失河朔地区，直到唐朝最终灭亡，一直未能收复。
English: As a result, the imperial court once again lost the area of Hexuo, and was unable to recover it until the Tang Dynasty finally perished.

古文：硃克融既得旌节，乃出张弘靖及卢士玫。
现代文：朱元融被任命为幽州节度使后，才放出张弘靖和卢士玫。
English: Zhang Hongjing and Lu Shimei were only released after Zhu Yuan Rong was appointed as Yuzhou Festival envoy.

古文：丙寅，以牛元翼为山南东道节度使，以左神策行营乐寿镇兵马使清河傅良弼为沂州刺史，以瀛州博野镇遏使李寰为忻州刺史。
现代文：丙寅，唐穆宗任命牛元翼为山南东道节度使，任命左神策行营乐寿镇兵马使、清河人傅良弼为沂州刺史，任命瀛州博野镇遏使李寰为忻州刺史。
English: Hsin Yin, Tang Mu Zong appointed Niu Yuan Ying as the Shannan host festival envoy, appointed Zuo Shen Zhaojing Camp Lezhu Town Terracotta Warriors and Horses Envoy, Qinghe people Fu Liang Yao as the Zhangzhou stabbing history, appointed Zhangzhou Bono Town Jian Yao Li Yao as the Zhangzhou stabbing history.

古文：良弼、寰所戍在幽、镇之间，硃克融、王庭氵奏互加诱胁，良弼、寰不从，各以其众坚壁，贼竟不能取，故赏之。
现代文：良弼、李寰所戍守的地方位于幽州、成德之间，朱元融和王庭凑交相引诱胁迫，二人拒而不人，各率士卒坚守，叛贼最终也未能攻取。
English: The place where Liang Kun and Li Kun were holding out was located between Yuzhou and Chengde. Zhu Yuan Rong and Wang Ting conspired to seduce and coerce, but the two men refused to be coerced. Each of their soldiers held out, and the traitors were ultimately unable to capture it.

古文：丙子，赐横海节度使王日简姓名为李全略。
现代文：所以，朝廷对他们加官进爵，表彰他们对朝廷的忠诚。丙子，唐穆宗赐予横海节度使王日简姓名李全略。
English: Therefore, the imperial court promoted them to officials and knighted them in recognition of their loyalty to the imperial court.

古文：辛已，中书侍郎、同平章事崔植罢为刑部尚书，以工部侍郎元稹同平章事。
现代文：辛巳，唐穆宗罢免中书侍郎、同平章事崔植的宰相职务，任命他为刑部尚书。任命工部侍郎元稹为同平章事。
English: Soon after, Tang Mu Zong dismissed Choe Ji, the secretary of the Ministry of Justice, and Tong Ping, the secretary of the Ministry of Justice, and appointed him as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice, and appointed the secretary of the Ministry of Industry, Geng Yao, as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：癸未，加李光颜横海节度、沧景观察使，其忠武、深州行营节度如故。
现代文：癸未，唐穆宗任命李光颜为横海节度使、沧景观察使，仍兼任忠武、深州行营节度使。
English: At that time, Tang Mu Zong appointed Li Guangyan as the envoy to the Henghai Festival and the observation of the vicissitudes of history, and he also served as the envoy to the Zhongwu Festival and the Shenzhou Campaign Festival.

古文：以横海节度使李全略为德棣节度使。
现代文：任命横海节度使李全略为德棣节度使。
English: The appointment of Henghai Sect Emissary made Li Quanlio become Deyu Sect Emissary.

古文：时朝廷以光颜悬军深入，馈运难通，故割沧景以隶之。
现代文：这时，朝廷考虑到李光颜孤军深入，军需供给的道路很难打通，因此，分割横海的沧、景二州隶属他统辖，以便就近供给军需。
English: At this time, the imperial court took into account that Li Guangyan's lone army was deeply entrenched, and it was difficult to open the way for the supply of military supplies. Therefore, the two states of Cang and Jing, which divided the sea, were under his jurisdiction in order to supply military supplies nearby.

古文：王庭凑虽受旌节，不解深州之围。
现代文：王庭凑虽然被任命为成德节度使，但仍然不撤除对深州的包围。
English: Although Wang Tingqian was appointed as Chengde Festival Commissioner, he still did not lift the siege on Shenzhou.

古文：丙戌，以知制诰东阳冯宿为山南东道节度副使，权知留后，仍遣中使入深州督牛元翼赴镇。
现代文：丙戌，唐穆宗任命知制诰东阳人冯宿为山南东道节度副使，暂时代理留后。同时，派遣宦官出使深州，督促牛元翼赶赴山南东道上任。
English: At the same time, Tang Mu Zong sent eunuchs to Shenzhou to urge Niu Yuan Ying to rush to Shannan to take office.

古文：裴度亦与幽、镇书，责以大义。硃克融即解围去，王庭凑虽引兵少退，犹守之不去。
现代文：裴度也给幽州、镇州两道写信，责备朱克融和王庭凑仍然包围深州，抗拒朝命，并用忠君奉国的大道理劝说二人退兵。朱克融随即退兵撤围，王庭凑虽然率兵稍微后撤，但仍然屯守在那里不走。
English: Pei Du also wrote letters to Yuzhou and Zhenzhou, reproaching Zhu Ke Rong and Wang Ting Piao for still besieging Shenzhou and resisting the imperial order, and using the principle of loyalty to the emperor and service to the country to persuade the two to withdraw. Zhu Ke Rong immediately withdrew his troops and withdrew the siege, and Wang Ting Piao, although he withdrew his troops slightly, still stayed there and did not leave.

古文：元稹怨裴度，欲解其兵柄，故劝上雪王庭凑而罢兵。
现代文：元稹忌恨裴度，想让穆宗解除他的兵权，因而劝说穆宗赦免王庭凑，停止对幽州、成德继续用兵。
English: Yuan Shun hated Pei Du and wanted Mu Zong to relieve him of his military power, so he persuaded Mu Zong to pardon Wang Tianzhi and stop using soldiers against Yuzhou and Chengde.

古文：丁亥，以度为司空、东都留守，平章事如故。
现代文：丁亥，唐穆宗任命裴度为司空、东都留守，仍带同平章事的荣誉官衔。
English: Dinghai, Tang Mu Zong appointed Pei Du as the Secretary of the Air Force, and Dong Du stayed behind, still with the honorary title of the same rank.

古文：谏官争上言： 时未偃兵，度有将相全才，不宜置之散地。 
现代文：谏官争相上奏，认为： 朝廷对河朔藩镇的战争还未平息，裴度有将相全才，不应任命他为闲散的官职。 
English: The eunuchs quarreled with each other, arguing that: the war of the imperial court against the hanzhong of Hexuo has not yet subsided, Pei Du has the ability to be a general, and he should not be appointed to an idle official post.

古文：上乃命度入朝，然后赴东都。
现代文：于是，穆宗命裴度先到京城，然后再赴东都上任。
English: As a result, Mu Zong's successor Pei Du first came to the capital, and then went to the eastern capital to take office.

古文：以灵武节度使李听为河东节度使。
现代文：唐穆宗任命灵武节度使李听为河东节度使。
English: Tang Mu Zong appointed Lingwu Jiedu to be the Jiedu envoy to Hedong.

古文：初，听为羽林将军，有良马，上为太子，遣左右讽求之，听以职总亲军，不敢献。
现代文：当初，李听任羽林将军时，有一匹上等的好马，穆宗当时为皇太子，派身边的人暗示李听把马奉献给自己，李听考虑到自己在禁军中任职，不敢奉献。
English: At the beginning, when Li Huan was General Ulin, he had a top-class horse. Mu Zong, who was the crown prince at the time, sent people around him to suggest that Li Huan dedicate the horse to himself. Considering that he was serving in the forbidden army, Li Huan did not dare to dedicate it.

古文：及河东缺帅，上曰： 李听不与朕马，是必可任。 
现代文：这时，正好河东缺节度使，穆宗说： 李听不向朕献马，刚直不阿，这种人一定可以信用。 
English: At this time, just as there was a lack of discipline in Hedong, Mu Zong said: Li He would not offer a horse to me, he would not be straightforward, this kind of person can definitely be trusted.

古文：遂用之。
现代文：于是，下达了任命诏书。
English: Appointed to understand the fox.

古文：昭义监军刘承偕恃恩，陵轹节度使刘悟，数众辱之，又纵其下乱法。
现代文：昭义监军刘承偕凭借他拥立唐穆宗的功劳，擅权不法，凌辱节度使刘悟，多次当着将士的面污辱他，又纵容部下败坏法纪。
English: Liu Chengyao, the inspector of the Shouyi army, by virtue of his merit of supporting Tang Muzong, abused his power and authority, insulted Liu Wugu, repeatedly insulted him in front of the officers, and allowed his subordinates to corrupt the legal discipline.

古文：阴与磁州刺史张汶谋缚悟送阙下，以汶代之。
现代文：他还暗中和磁州刺史张汶密谋，企图寻找借口，把刘悟缚送朝廷，由张纹替代。
English: He also secretly conspired with Zhang Wen, the magnetic statesman, in an attempt to find an excuse to send Liu Wuzhong to the imperial court, to be replaced by Zhang Zhuang.

古文：悟知之，讽其军士作乱，杀汶。
现代文：刘悟得知刘承偕的服谋，暗示部下士卒作乱，杀死张汶。
English: When Liu Wuguo learned of Liu Chengyao's conspiracy, he hinted that his subordinates had rioted and killed Zhang Wen.

古文：围承偕，欲杀之，幕僚贾直言入，责悟曰： 公所为如是，欲效李司空邪！
现代文：士卒围住刘承偕，正准备杀他，幕僚贾直言进来，责备刘悟说： 您这样做，是想效法李师道吗？
English: The soldiers surrounded Liu Chengyao and were preparing to kill him. Jia Zhiguo, an aide, came in and scolded Liu Wuguo, saying, "Are you doing this to follow the way of Li Shidao?

古文：此军中安知无如公者，使李司空有知，得无笑公于地下乎！ 
现代文：您怎么能知道军中没有像您一样的人，也效法您当年杀李师道那样而谋害您呢？如果李师道还有知的话，能不在地下嘲笑您吗？ 
English: How can you know that there is no one like you in the army, who would also plot to kill you in the same way that you killed Li Shidao? If Li Shidao still knew, wouldn't he laugh at you underground?

古文：悟遂谢直言，救免承偕，囚之府舍。
现代文：于是，刘悟向贾直言承认做得不对，把刘承偕救出来，拘留在节度使府舍。
English: As a result, Liu Wugu bluntly admitted to Jia that what he had done was wrong, rescued Liu Chengyao, and detained him in the governor's residence.

古文：初，上在东宫，闻天下厌苦宪宗用兵，故即位，务优假将卒以求姑息。
现代文：当初，唐穆宗在东宫为皇太子时，听说天下人苦于宪宗长期用兵削藩伐叛，因此，即位以后，尽量宽容和优赏将士，以求相安无事。
English: At first, when Tang Mu Zong was crown prince in the East Palace, he heard that the people of the world were suffering from the long-term use of troops by Kenzong to cut down the rebellion of the domain. Therefore, after the enthronement, he tried to be tolerant and reward the soldiers as much as possible in order to ensure mutual peace.

古文：三月，壬辰朔，诏： 神策六军使及南牙常参武官具由历、功绩，牒送中书，量加奖擢。
现代文：三月，壬辰，下诏： 凡北衙禁军神策军，羽林、龙武、神武六军军使，以及南衙常参武官，各将自己所历任军职、功绩报达中书省，朝廷根据各人情况，适当予以奖励提拔。
English: In March, the following edict was issued: All the military commanders of the Northern Forbidden Army, the military envoys of the Six Armies, including Hulin, Longwu and Shenwu, as well as the Southern Forbidden Army's permanent military attaché, should report their military posts and achievements to the Ministry of Education and Culture, and the Imperial Court should give them appropriate awards and promotions according to their circumstances.

古文：其诸道大将久次及有功者，悉奏闻，与除官。
现代文：诸道大将任职已久及有功者，也都报告朝廷，授予官职。
English: Generals of all ranks who had served for a long time and had meritorious achievements were also reported to the imperial court and granted official positions.

古文：应天下诸军，各委本道据守旧额，不得辄有减省。 
现代文：各地军队，都由本道遵循以往既定的兵额，不得随便裁减人数。 
English: The armed forces of all regions must adhere to the previously established troop levels, and must not arbitrarily reduce the number of personnel.

古文：于是商贾、胥吏争赂籓镇，牒补列将而荐之，即升朝籍。
现代文：诏书下达后，各地商贾和官府中的小吏都争相贿赂藩镇节度使、观察使、以便由藩镇补授一个军将的职务，再推荐到朝廷，授予官衔。
English: After the imperial edict was issued, merchants from all over the country and petty officials from the government offices all competed to bribe the festival and observation envoys of the towns, so that the towns could supplement the post of a general, and then recommend it to the imperial court and grant the official title.

古文：奏章委职，士大夫皆扼腕叹息。
现代文：各道的奏章成批的堆积在中书省，士大夫都扼腕叹息授官太滥，而无可奈何。
English: Batches of transcripts from all the schools were piled up in the Ministry of Chinese Literature, and the scholars and doctors all wrung their hands and sighed that it was too extravagant, but there was nothing they could do about it.

古文：武宁节度副使王智兴将军中精兵三千讨幽、镇，节度使崔群忌之，奏请即用智兴为节度使，不则召诣阙，除以他官。
现代文：武宁节度副使王智兴率领军中精兵三千人讨伐幽州、成德，节度使崔群忌怕王智兴，奏请朝廷任命王智兴为节度使，否则就召入京城，授予其它官职，让他离开武宁。
English: Wang Zhixing, deputy envoy of the Wu Ning Festival, led 3,000 elite soldiers of the army to fight in Yuzhou and Chengde. The festival made Cui Qun afraid of Wang Zhixing and asked the court to appoint Wang Zhixing as the festival envoy, otherwise he would be called to Beijing and granted other official positions, so that he would leave Wu Ning.

古文：事未报，智兴亦自疑。
现代文：朝廷尚未答复，王智兴自己已产生疑心。
English: The imperial court has not yet responded, and Wang Zhixing himself has become suspicious.

古文：会有诏赦王庭凑，诸道皆罢兵，智兴引兵先期入境。
现代文：正好这时朝廷下诏赦免王庭凑，诸道参加讨伐的军队都已停罢。王智兴率兵先行一步，回到武宁境内。
English: Just at that time, the imperial court issued an edict to pardon Wang Tingpai, and all the armies participating in the crusade were stopped. Wang Zhixing led the troops one step ahead and returned to the territory of Wuming.

古文：群惧，遣使迎劳，且使军士释甲而入。
现代文：崔群听说王智兴已率兵入境，十分恐惧，派人前往迎接慰问，并让士卒放下武器，然后入城。
English: When Cui Qun heard that Wang Zhixing had entered the city with his soldiers, he was very frightened and sent someone to greet him and ask the soldiers to lay down their weapons before entering the city.

古文：智兴不从。乙巳，引兵直进，徐人开门待之，智兴杀不同己者十馀人，乃入府牙，见群及监军，拜伏曰： 军众之情，不可如何！ 
现代文：王智兴拒不从命，乙巳，率兵径直向徐州城挺进，城中人开门待命，王智兴杀异已者十多人，然后来到节度使衙署，面见崔群和监军，拜倒在地说： 这都是将士的意思，我个人毫无办法。 
English: Wang Zhixing refused to comply with the order. At this time, he and his soldiers marched straight to Xuzhou City. People in the city opened their doors and stood by. Wang Zhixing killed more than ten dissidents. Then he came to the Festival Envoy Office, met Cui Qun and the supervisors, and bowed down and said: This is all the meaning of the soldiers, I personally have no way.

古文：为群及判官、从吏具人马及治装，皆素所办也，遣兵卫送群，至埇桥而返。
现代文：他为崔群和判官以及随行人员准备护送的人员、马匹和行装，其实，都早已准备好了。随后，率兵护送崔群前往京城，到桥返回。
English: In fact, he had already prepared the escort personnel, horses and baggage for Cui Qun, the judge and the entourage. Subsequently, he led the soldiers to escort Cui Qun to the capital and returned to the bridge.

古文：遂掠盐铁院钱帛，及诸道进奉在汴中者，并商旅之物，皆三分取二。
现代文：桥有朝廷设置的盐铁院仓库，于是，王智兴纵兵大掠盐铁院储藏的钱币和布帛，以及诸道向朝廷进奉而经过汴河中的船只，以及商人和行人在船上的财物，也都掠抢三分之二。
English: The bridge had a warehouse of the Salt Iron Yard set up by the imperial court, so Wang Zhixing's soldiers looted two-thirds of the money and cloth stored in the Salt Iron Yard, as well as the ships that passed through the Wei River on their way to the imperial court, and the possessions of merchants and pedestrians on the ship.

古文：丙午，加硃克融、王庭凑检校工部尚书。
现代文：丙午，唐穆宗任命朱克融、王庭凑为检校工部尚书。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Tang Mu Zong appointed Zhu Ke Rong and Wang Ting Tong as inspectors of the inspection department.

古文：上闻其解深州之围，故褒之，然庭凑之兵实犹在深州城下。
现代文：穆宗听说朱克融和王庭凑已经撤除了包围深州的军队，所以，加官予以褒奖。其实，王庭凑的军队仍然在深州城下未撤。
English: Mu Zong heard that Zhu Ke Rong and Wang Tingpiao had withdrawn the army encircling Shenzhou, so he praised them. In fact, Wang Tingpiao's army still remained under Shenzhou.

古文：韩愈既行，众皆危之。
现代文：韩愈被任命为宣慰使，既将出发，百官都为他的安全担忧。
English: Han Yu has been appointed as a messenger of condolence. Since he is about to leave, all officials are worried about his safety.

古文：诏愈至境更观事势，勿遽入，愈曰： 止，君之仁；死，臣之义。 
现代文：穆宗诏命韩愈到成德边境后，先观察形势变化，不要急于入境，以防不测，韩愈说： 皇上命我暂停入境，这是出于仁义而关怀我的人身安危；但是，不畏死去执行君命，则是我作为臣下应尽的义务。 
English: Mu Zong Zhao ordered Han Yu to observe the changes in the situation after arriving at the Chengde border, and not to rush to enter the country to prevent accidents. Han Yu said: The emperor ordered me to suspend my entry into the country. This is out of benevolence and concern for my personal safety; however, it is my duty as a subject to carry out the king's order without fear of death.

古文：遂往，至镇，庭凑拔刃弦弓以逆之，及馆，甲士罗于庭。
现代文：于是毅然支身前往。到镇州后，王庭凑将士拔刀开弓迎接韩愈。韩愈到客房后，将士仍手执兵器围在院中。
English: Therefore, he resolutely went there. After arriving in Zhenzhou, Wang Ting and his soldiers drew their swords and opened their bows to welcome Han Yu. After Han Yu arrived at the guest room, the soldiers were still holding their weapons in the courtyard.

古文：庭凑言曰： 所以纷纷者，乃此曹所为，非庭凑心。 
现代文：王庭凑对韩愈说： 之所以这么放肆无礼，都是这些将士干的，而不是我的本意。 
English: Wang Tingchi said to Han Yu, "The reason why I was so impudent and disrespectful was because of these generals, not because of my intention.

古文：愈厉声曰： 天子以尚书有将师材，故赐之节钺，不知尚书乃不能与健儿语邪！ 
现代文：韩愈严厉地说： 皇上认为你有将帅的才能，所以任命你为节度使，却想不到你竟指挥不动这些士卒！ 
English: Han Yu said sternly, "The emperor thought you had the ability to be a general, so he appointed you as the commander, but he didn't expect you to actually command these soldiers!"

古文：甲士前曰： 先太师为国击走硃滔，血衣犹在，此军何负朝廷，乃以为贼乎！ 
现代文：有一士卒手执兵器上前几步说： 先太师王武俊为国家击退朱滔，他的血衣仍在这里。我军有什么地方辜负了朝廷，以致被作为叛贼征讨！ 
English: One soldier stepped forward a few steps holding a weapon and said, "The previous grandmaster, Wang Wujun, fought off Zhu Tao for the country, and his blood coat is still here. In what way did our army fail the imperial court, so that it was conscripted as a traitor!"

古文：愈曰： 汝曹尚能记先太师则善矣。夫逆顺之为祸福岂远邪！
现代文：韩愈说： 你们还能记得先太师就好了，他开始时叛乱，后来归顺朝廷，加官进爵，因此，由叛逆转变而为福贵难道还远吗？
English: Han Yu said, "If only you could remember the First Grand Master. He first rebelled, then submitted to the imperial court, and was promoted to the peerage. So, is it still a long way off for him to turn from being a rebel to being blessed?

古文：自禄山、思明以来，至元济、师道，其子孙有今尚存仕宦者乎！
现代文：从安禄山、史思明到吴无济、李师道，割据叛乱，他们的子孙至今还有存活做官的人没有？
English: From Anlu Mountain and Shi Siming to Wu Wuzhi and Li Shidao, separated by the rebellion, are there any of their descendants still alive today to serve as officials?

古文：田令公以魏博归朝廷，子孙虽在孩提，皆为美官；王承元以此军归朝廷，弱冠为节度使；刘悟、李祐，今皆为节度使；汝曹亦闻之乎！ 
现代文：田弘正举魏博以归顺朝廷，他的子孙虽然还是孩提，但都被授予高官；王承元以成德归顺朝廷，还未成人就被任命为节度使；刘悟、李当初跟随李师道、吴元济叛乱，后来投降朝廷，现在，都是节度使。这些情况，你们都听说过吗！ 
English: Tian Hongzheng raised Wei Bo to submit to the imperial court, and although his children and grandchildren were still children, they were all awarded high-ranking officials; Wang Chengyuan surrendered to the imperial court with great virtue, and was appointed as a ceremonial envoy before he was an adult; Liu Gou and Li initially followed Li Shidao and Wu Yuanji's rebellion, and later surrendered to the imperial court, and now they are all ceremonial envoys. Have you all heard about these situations?

古文：庭凑恐众心动，麾之使出，谓愈曰： 侍郎来，欲使庭凑何为？ 
现代文：王庭凑恐怕将士军心动摇，命令他们出去，然后，对韩愈说： 您这次来成德，想让我干什么呢？ 
English: Wang Tingpiao was afraid that the soldiers would be shaken, ordered them to go out, and then said to Han Yu: You came to Chengde this time, what do you want me to do?

古文：愈曰： 神策六军之六如牛元翼者不少，但朝廷顾大体，不可弃之耳！
现代文：韩愈说： 神策军和羽林军、龙武、神武六军的将领，像牛元翼这样的人不在少数，但朝廷顾全大局，不能把他丢弃不管。
English: Han Yu said: The generals of the Shenzhao Army and Ulin Army, Longwu and Shenwu Six Armies, like Niuyuan Ying, are not a few, but the imperial court is concerned about the overall situation and cannot ignore him.

古文：尚书何为围之不置。 
现代文：为什么你到现在仍包围深州，不放他出城？ 
English: Why are you still surrounding Shenzhou and not letting him leave the city?

古文：庭凑曰： 即当出之。
现代文：王庭凑说： 我马上就放他出城。 
English: Wang Tianzhi said: I will let him out of the city immediately.

古文：因与愈宴，礼而归之。未几，牛元翼将十骑突围出，深州大将藏平等举城降，庭凑责其久坚守，杀平等将吏百八十馀人。
现代文：于是，和韩愈一起饮宴，然后，用隆重的礼节从深州突围出城深州大将臧平等人举城投降王庭凑，王庭凑指责臧平等人一直坚守，杀臧平等将吏一百八十多人。
English: As a result, they had a banquet together with Han Yu, and then, with grand propriety, they broke out of the city from Shenzhou. Shenzhou's generals and equals raised the city and surrendered to Wang Tingpiao. Wang Tingpiao accused the equals of the equals of the equals of the equals of the equals of the equals of the equals of the equals of the equals of the equals of the equals of the equals.

古文：戊申，裴度至长安，见上，谢讨贼无功。
现代文：戊申，裴度抵达长安，面见唐穆宗，对自己率军讨伐幽州、成德而未能取胜表示请罪。
English: After arriving in Chang'an, Pei Du met with Tang Mu Zong and pleaded guilty for leading the army to fight against Yuzhou and Chengde and failing to win.

古文：先是，上诏刘悟送刘承偕诣京师，悟托以军情，不时奉诏。
现代文：在此以前，穆宗曾下诏，命刘悟把监军刘承偕送还京城，刘悟假托将士不服从自己，拒不执行。
English: Prior to this, Mu Zong had issued an edict, ordering Liu Wugu to send Liu Chengyao back to the capital, but Liu Wugu disobeyed and refused to carry out the order.

古文：上问度： 宜如何处置？ 
现代文：穆宗问裴度： 这件事应如何处理？ 
English: Mu Zong asked Pei Du: How should this matter be handled?

古文：度对曰： 承偕在昭义，骄纵不法，臣尽知之，悟在行营与臣书，具论其事。
现代文：裴度回答说： 刘承偕在昭义骄横放纵的情况，我都知道。当时刘悟出兵在行营时，曾写信给我，报告过这些情况。
English: Baidu replied: "I know all about Liu Chengyao's arrogance and indulgence in Zhao Yi. At that time, when Liu Gou was marching out, he wrote to me and reported these circumstances.

古文：时有中使赵弘亮在臣军中，持悟书去，云 欲自奏之 ，不知尝奏不？ 
现代文：宦官赵弘亮当时出使在我军中，他临行时拿走了刘悟的这封信，说： 我要亲自向皇上禀报 ，不知他是否向陛下上奏？ 
English: The eunuch Zhao Hongliang was on a mission in our army at that time. When he left, he took this letter from Liu Gou and said: I want to report to the emperor in person. I don't know if he reported to His Majesty.

古文：上曰： 朕殊不知也，且悟大臣，何不自奏！ 
现代文：穆宗说： 朕根本就不知道此事，况且刘悟是大臣，为什么不自己上奏？ 
English: Mu Zong said, "I didn't know about this at all. Besides, Liu Wuxu is a minister. Why didn't he play it himself?"

古文：对曰： 悟武臣，不知事体。
现代文：裴说： 刘悟是武将，不懂朝廷制度。
English: Bae said, "Liu Wou is a military commander, he doesn't understand the imperial court system.

古文：然今事状藉藉如此，臣等面论，陛下犹不能决，况悟当日单辞，岂能动圣听哉！ 
现代文：不过，这件事现在已弄的议论纷纷，我和其他人向陛下当面说明，陛下仍然不能决断，况且刘悟当时只是一面之词，怎能说动陛下呢？ 
English: However, this matter has now been the subject of much discussion, and I and others have explained to Your Majesty in person that Your Majesty is still undecided, and moreover, Liu Wugu was just a figure of speech at the time, so how can I persuade Your Majesty?

古文：上曰： 前事勿论，直言此时如何处置？ 
现代文：穆宗说： 以前的事就不说了，你只说现在怎么办？ 
English: Muzong said, "Let's stop talking about the past. To be honest, how should we handle this now?"

古文：对曰： 陛下必欲收天下心，止应下半纸诏书，具陈承偕骄纵之罪，令悟集将士斩之，则籓镇之臣。
现代文：裴度说： 陛下如果能下决心收取天下人心的话，只要下达一道诏书，指出刘承偕骄横放纵的罪行，命刘悟集合将士，当众把他斩首就可以了。
English: Pei Du said, "If Your Majesty can make up your mind to win the hearts and minds of the people of the world, you only need to issue an edict, point out Liu Chengyao's arrogant and indulgent crime, order Liu Wou to gather his soldiers, and behead him in public.

古文：孰不思为陛下效死！非独悟也。 
现代文：这样，不仅刘悟，而且全国各个藩镇的节度使都会认为陛下执法如山，谁不愿为陛下尽死效力呢！ 
English: In this way, not only Liu Wugu, but also the festivals of all the provinces and towns across the country will think that His Majesty's law enforcement is like a mountain, and who would not be willing to work hard for His Majesty!

古文：上俯首良久，曰： 朕不惜承偕，然太后以为养子，今兹囚絷，太后尚未知之，况杀之乎；卿更思其次。 
现代文：穆宗低头沉默很久，说： 朕并不可惜承偕，但皇太后把他收为养子，现在刘悟拘留了他，都没敢让皇太后知道，何况杀掉他呢！请你再想其他的办法。 
English: Mu Zong bowed his head in silence for a long time and said, "I'm not sorry I adopted him, but the Empress Dowager adopted him. Now Liu Gou has detained him, and he didn't even dare to let the Empress Dowager know, let alone kill him! Please think of another way."

古文：度乃与王播等奏请 流承偕于远州，必得出。 
现代文：于是，裴度和王播等人奏请 把刘承偕流放到遥远偏僻的州县，刘悟肯定会释放他。 
English: As a result, Pei Du and Wang Boan and others requested that Liu Chengyao be exiled to a distant and remote prefecture. Liu Gou would certainly release him.

古文：上从之。
现代文：穆宗采纳了二人的意见。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：后月馀，悟乃释承偕。
现代文：下诏流放刘承偕，过了一个多月，刘悟才释放了刘承偕。
English: The following edict exiled Liu Chengyao. It took more than a month for Liu Wuguo to release Liu Chengyao.

古文：李光颜所将兵闻当留沧景，皆大呼西走，光颜不能制，因惊惧成疾。
现代文：李光颜统辖的许州兵得知皇上已经下诏停罢了诸道在河朔前线的军队，而自己还要留守沧州和景州，都大声喧华起来，往西奔走，要回许州。李光颜制止不住，以致受惊得病。
English: When the Xuzhou soldiers under the command of Li Guangyan learned that the emperor had issued an edict to stop all the troops on the front line in Hexuo, and that he himself had to stay in Cangzhou and Jingzhou, they all shouted loudly and rushed westward to return to Xuzhou. Li Guangyan could not stop them, and was so shocked that he fell ill.

古文：己酉，上表固辞横海节，乞归许州。
现代文：已酉，李光颜向朝廷上奏，一再请求辞去横海节度使，乞求批准自己返回许州。
English: After his death, Li Guangyan appealed to the imperial court, repeatedly requested to resign as the envoy of the Henghai Festival, and begged for permission to return to Huzhou.

古文：许之。
现代文：穆宗批准。
English: The customs officer allowed him to pass through.

古文：壬子，以裴度为淮南节度使，馀如故。
现代文：壬子，唐穆宗任命裴度为淮南节度使，仍兼任原来的其他职务。
English: According to Jinzi, Tang Mu Zong appointed Pei Du as the Huainan Festival envoy, and he still concurrently held other original positions.

古文：加刘悟检校司徒，馀如故。
现代文：唐穆宗任命刘悟为检校司徒，仍兼任原来的其他职务。
English: Tang Mu Zong appointed Liu Gou as the inspector of the school, still holding other original positions.

古文：自是悟浸骄，欲效河北三镇，招聚不逞，章表多不逊。
现代文：从此以后，刘悟逐渐骄横跋扈，想效仿河朔三镇，实行割据。于是，招聚在各地不得志的那些狂妄之徒，上奏朝廷的章表也往往出言不逊。
English: From then on, Liu Gou gradually became arrogant and wanted to follow the example of the three towns in Heshuo and implement the partition. As a result, those arrogant people who were unable to gather in various parts of the country often made insolent remarks when presenting the imperial table.

古文：裴度之讨幽、镇也，回鹘请以兵从。朝议以为不可，遣中使止之。
现代文：裴度当初奉命征讨幽州和成德时，回鹘国请求出兵参战，朝廷商议以后，认为不可，于是，穆宗派宦官出使制止。
English: When Baidu was originally ordered to recruit Yuzhou and Chengde, Uighur requested to send troops to participate in the war. After deliberation by the imperial court, it was considered impossible, so Mu Sect sent eunuchs to stop it.

古文：回鹘遣其臣李义节将三千人已至丰州北，却之，不从。
现代文：不料回鹘国派遣大臣李义节率领三千人马已到达丰州的北部。
English: Unexpectedly, Li Yixi, the minister dispatched by the Uygur State, led three thousand horses and arrived in the north of Fuzhou.

古文：诏发缯帛七万匹以赐之，甲寅，始还。
现代文：宦官命李义节退回，李义节不听，于是，穆宗下诏，发放丝织品七万匹赠送回鹘国。甲寅，李义节才率兵退回。
English: The eunuch ordered Li Yixi to return, but Li Yixi did not listen, so Mu Zong issued an edict to distribute seventy thousand silk products and send them back to the country. In the end, Li Yixi led the troops back.

古文：王智兴遣轻兵二千袭濠州。
现代文：王智兴派遣轻装士卒二千人袭击濠州。
English: Wang Zhixing sent 2,000 light-armed soldiers to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：丙辰，刺史侯弘度弃城奔寿州。
现代文：丙辰，濠州刺史侯弘度弃城逃奔寿州。
English: Hsin-Chen, Bozhou, Jishi, Hou, and Hongdu abandoned the city and fled to Shoushou.

古文：言事者皆谓裴度不宜出外，上亦自重之。
现代文：凡是向朝廷上奏的臣僚都认为裴度不应当到外地去任职，而应留在朝廷。
English: All the ministers who appealed to the imperial court believed that Pei Du should not go abroad to serve, but should stay in the imperial court.

古文：戊午，制留度辅政，以中书侍郎、同平章事王播同平章事，代度镇淮南，仍兼诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：穆宗也器重裴度，戊午，命裴度留京辅佐朝政。任命中书侍郎、同平章事王播带同平章事的荣誉官衔，代替裴度为淮南节度使，仍兼诸道盐铁转运使。
English: Mu Zong also re-appointed Pei Du to Beijing as a vice-councilor of the imperial government, and appointed him as the secretary of the Central Government, the secretary of the Central Government, the secretary of the Central Government, the secretary of the Central Government, the secretary of the Central Government, the secretary of the Central Government, the secretary of the Central Government, the secretary of the Central Government, the secretary of the Central Government, and the secretary of the Central Government.

古文：李寰帅其众三千出博野，王庭凑遣兵追之。
现代文：李寰率领他的部下三千人从博野突围，王庭凑派兵追击。
English: Li Qian led 3,000 of his subordinates to break out of the encirclement in Bono, and Wang Ting sent troops to pursue them.

古文：寰与战，杀三百馀人，庭凑兵乃还，馀众二千犹固守博野。
现代文：李寰迎战，杀伤三百多人，王庭凑的士兵才返还不再追击。李寰剩余的二千人仍坚守博野。
English: Li Gan went to war and killed more than three hundred people. Wang Tingpiao's soldiers only returned and no longer pursued. Li Gan's remaining two thousand people still held on to Bono.

古文：朝廷以新罢兵，力不能讨徐州，己未，以王智兴为武宁节度使。
现代文：朝廷考虑到刚刚对幽州、成德的讨伐，无力再讨王智兴的叛乱，已未，任命王智兴为武宁节度使。
English: Considering that the imperial court had just launched a crusade against Yuzhou and Chengde and was no longer able to suppress Wang Zhixing's rebellion, it appointed Wang Zhixing as the military envoy to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：复以德棣节度使李全略为横海节度使。
现代文：唐穆宗仍任命德棣节度使李全略为横海节度使。
English: However, Tang Mu Zong still appointed Li Quan Li as the envoy to the Henghai Festival.

古文：夏，四月，辛酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季四月，辛酉朔，出现日食。
English: In the summer of April, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：甲戌，以傅良弼、李寰为神策都知兵马使。
现代文：甲戌，唐穆宗任命傅良弼、李寰为神策都知兵马使。
English: Armor-plated, Tang Mu Zong appointed Fu Liang Zang and Li Zang as the divine strategists of the Du Shi Terracotta Army.

古文：户部侍郎、判度支张平叔上言： 官自粜盐，可以获利一倍。 又请 令所由将盐就村粜易。 又乞 令宰相领盐铁使。 又请 以粜盐多少为刺史、县令殿最。 又乞 检责所在实户，据口团保，给一年盐，使其四季输价。 又 行此策后，富商大贾或行财贿，邀截喧诉，其为首者所在杖杀，连状人皆杖脊。 
现代文：户部侍郎、判度支张平叔上奏，建议： 由官府自已粜盐，朝廷每年获利可增加一部 ；又建议 命各道掌管食盐专卖的官吏把盐送到村里出粜交易 ；又建议 命宰相兼领盐铁使 ；又建议 各道以粜盐多少作为考察刺史、县令政绩优劣的依据 ；请求 命各道核查当地的户口，根据各户人口的多少，若干户组织在一起，给一年的食盐，让他们相互作保，一年分四次向官府交纳盐钱 ；又说： 实行这项政策后，如果那些有钱的大商人向官府行贿，或者出于不满而喧哗闹事，或向上控诉的话，对于为首者，命各地用刑杖打死，凡联名上诉的人都给予杖背的惩罚。 
English: Zhang Pingxu, the head of the Household Department and the Judiciary, proposed that: the government should collect salt by itself, and the annual profit of the imperial court could increase by a part; it was also suggested that the officials in charge of the salt monopoly in each province should be ordered to send salt to the village for sale; it was also suggested that the prime minister should also be appointed as the salt envoy; it was also suggested that each province should use the amount of salt collected as the basis for examining the history of the province and the performance of the county government; it was requested that each province should check the local hukou, according to the population of each household, several households should be organized together, give

古文：诏百官议其可否。
现代文：穆宗下诏，命百官讨论他的建议是否可行。
English: Mu Zong issued an edict, ordering hundreds of officials to discuss whether his suggestion was feasible.

古文：兵部侍郎韩愈上言，以为： 城郭之外，少有见钱籴盐，多用杂物贸易。
现代文：兵部侍郎韩愈上奏，认为： 在城市以外的地方，很少有人用钱买盐，而大多用各种杂物交换。
English: Han Yu, a waiter of the military department, said: In places outside the city, few people use money to buy salt, but most of them exchange it with various miscellaneous goods.

古文：盐商则无物不取，或赊贷徐还，用此取济，两得利便。
现代文：盐商，则什么东西都可用来交换，或者先赊帐以后再还。这种交易方式，买卖双方都很方便。
English: In the case of salt merchants, anything can be used for exchange, or it can be returned after being credited first. This type of transaction is convenient for both buyers and sellers.

古文：今令人吏坐铺自粜，非得见钱，必不敢受。
现代文：现在，如果朝廷下令让官吏自设摊铺卖盐，那么，官吏必定只要现钱，其他杂物，肯定不敢收。
English: Now, if the court orders officials to set up their own stalls to sell salt, then officials will only accept cash and other miscellaneous items.

古文：如此，贫者无从得盐，自然坐失常课，如何更有倍利！
现代文：这样的话，手头没钱的贫苦百姓就无从买盐，国家自然减少盐业专卖的税收，怎么能说反而增加一倍的收益呢？
English: In this case, the poor people who have no money at hand will not be able to buy salt, and the state will naturally reduce the tax on the sale of salt, but how can it be said to double the income?

古文：又若令人吏将盐家至户到而粜之，必索百姓供应，骚扰极多。又，刺史、县令职在分忧，岂可惟以盐利多少为之升黜，不复考其理行！又，贫家食盐至少，或有淡食动经旬月，若据口给盐，依时征价，官吏畏罪，必用威刑，臣恐因此所在不安，此尤不可之大者也。 
现代文：其次，如果命官吏把盐送到村里让百姓按户买那，那么，官吏必定借接待为名，乘机勒索百姓，骚扰极多；再次，刺史和县令的职能是为皇上分担责任，治理百姓，岂可仅仅以获取食盐专卖的收入多少作为迁升和降职的依据，而不再考虑他们的政绩；最后，贫苦的百姓吃盐都很少，有的甚至十天半月的淡食，如果按户口给盐，按时收钱，官吏恐怕不能按时把盐钱收上来而被上司怪罪，必然会对百姓严刑威吓。
English: Secondly, if officials are ordered to deliver salt to villages so that the people can buy it according to their households, then the officials will certainly take advantage of the opportunity to blackmail the people and harass them in the name of hospitality. Again, the function of the chief historian and the county magistrate is to share responsibility for the emperor and govern the people. Can they just use the income from the salt monopoly as the basis for promotion and demotion, and no longer consider their political achievements? Finally, the poor people rarely eat salt, and some even eat light food for ten and a half days. If salt is given according to the household and the money is collected on time, the officials may not be able to collect the salt

古文：中书舍人韦处厚议，以为： 宰相处论道之地，杂以鹾务，实非所宜。
现代文：我担心这样一来，各地可能产生骚乱而不安定，这是他的建议不可行的最重要的一点。 中书舍人韦处厚在讨论时认为： 宰相的职责是议决国家的大政方针，如果兼管盐业专卖这类具体事务，实在是不适宜的。
English: I am worried that this may lead to unrest and instability in various regions, which is the most important point that his proposal is not feasible. During the discussion, CFS believed that: The prime minister's duty is to decide on the country's general policy, and it is really inappropriate to manage specific matters such as the salt industry monopoly.

古文：窦参、皇甫镈皆以钱谷为相，名利难兼，卒蹈祸败。
现代文：当年窦参、皇甫都是以管理财政而兼任宰相，由于两方面事务难以兼顾，以致最终出了问题而被罢免。
English: At that time, both Dou Sang and Wang Fu concurrently served as prime minister in charge of financial management. Due to the difficulty of balancing the two aspects of affairs, they eventually had problems and were dismissed.

古文：又欲以重法禁人喧诉，夫强人之所不能，事必不立；禁人之所必犯，法必不得矣。 
现代文：同时，要想以严刑峻法禁止商人喧哗上诉，也是不可能的。凡是强迫人们去做无法做到的事情，这种事情肯定不能成功；凡是制定人们一定会违犯的法律，这种法律就肯定难以贯彻执行。 
English: At the same time, it is impossible to prohibit merchants from making noise and appeal with severe punishments.Anything that forces people to do things that cannot be done will certainly not succeed; any law that people are sure to violate will certainly be difficult to enforce.

古文：事遂寝。平叔又奏征远年逋欠。
现代文：于是，张平叔的建议被搁置而未能实行。张平叔又奏请征收百姓多年所欠的赋税。
English: As a result, Zhang Pingxu's proposal was shelved and could not be implemented. Zhang Pingxu also requested the collection of taxes owed by the people for many years.

古文：江州刺史李渤上言： 度支征当州贞元二年逃户所欠钱四千馀缗，当州今岁旱灾，田损什九。
现代文：江州刺史李渤上奏： 朝廷度支征收支本州贞元二年逃户所欠钱四千多缗。本州今年遭受旱灾，庄稼损失十分之九。
English: The imperial court levied a tax of more than 4,000 baht to pay the debts of families who fled their homes in the second year of the reign of Emperor Zhenyuan. Honshu suffered from drought this year, with crops losing nine-tenths of their value.

古文：陛下奈何于大旱中征三十六年前逋负！ 
现代文：陛下为什么要在大旱之年征收三十六年前百姓所欠的赋税？ 
English: Why does His Majesty want to collect taxes owed by the people 36 years ago in a year of drought?

古文：诏悉免之。
现代文：穆宗下诏全部免除。
English: All of them were exempted from the edict issued by Emperor Mu.

古文：邕州人不乐属容管，刺史李元宗以吏人状授御史，使奏之。
现代文：邕州人不愿隶属容管经略使统辖，剌史李元宗把本州官吏百姓写的上诉书交给朝廷的出使御史，请他上奏朝廷。
English: The people of Zhangzhou did not want to be under the control of the government. Li Yuanzong, the governor of Zhangzhou, gave the appeal letter written by the officials and people of Zhangzhou to the imperial envoy, and asked him to report to the imperial court.

古文：容管经略使严公素闻之，遣吏按元宗擅以罗阳县归蛮酋黄少度。
现代文：容管经略使严公素得知后，派遣官吏审查李元宗擅自把罗阳县归还黄洞蛮酋长黄少度的问题。
English: After learning of this, the Regency Administration sent officials to examine the issue of Li Yuanzong returning Luoyang County to Huangdong barbarian chieftain Huang Shao Du without authorization.

古文：五月，壬寅，元宗将兵百人并州印奔黄洞。
现代文：五月，壬寅，李元宗率兵五百人，并携带州印投奔黄洞蛮。
English: In May, Li Yuanzong led 500 soldiers and went to Huangdong with the state seal.

古文：王庭凑之围牛元翼也，和王傅于方欲以奇策于进，言于元稹，请 遣客王昭、于友明间说贼党，使出元翼。
现代文：王庭凑当初围攻深州牛元翼的时候，和王李绮的师傅于方想出奇计以求升迁，于是，向宰相元稹建议： 请派遣说客王昭、于友明二人去游说王庭凑的部下，以便放牛元翼出城。
English: When Wang Tianzhu initially besieged Niu Yuan Ying in Shenzhou, he and Wang Lijun's master Yu Fang came up with a strange plan to seek promotion. Therefore, he suggested to Prime Minister Yuan Ying: Please send the two lobbyists Wang Zhao and Yu Youming to lobby Wang Tianzhu's subordinates in order to release Niu Yuan Ying from the city.

古文：仍赂兵、吏部令史伪出告身二十通，令以便宜给赐。 
现代文：同时给尚书省所辖兵部、吏部赠送钱财，请求给予文官和武官的假任命书二十张，让王、于二人游说时随时见机授予。 
English: At the same time, he gave money and gifts to the Ministry of Military Affairs and the Ministry of Civil Affairs under the jurisdiction of Shangshu Province, and asked for 20 fake appointment letters for civil servants and military attaches, so that Wang and Yu could grant them at any time when they were lobbying.

古文：稹皆然之，有李赏者，知其谋，乃告裴度，云方为稹结客刺度，度隐而不发。
现代文：元稹表示同意。有一个名叫李赏的人，听说于方的计谋后，便告诉了裴度，说于方为元稹交结刺客，阴谋暗杀裴度。裴度得知后，将此事压在心中，没有发作。
English: Yuan Shao agreed. After hearing of Yu Fang's plot, a man named Li Yun told Pei Du that Yu Fang was an assassin who was in league with Yuan Shao and plotted to assassinate Pei Du. After learning this, Pei Du kept the matter to himself and did not act.

古文：赏诣左神策告其事。
现代文：于是，李赏到左神策军上告。
English: As a result, Li Yan appealed to the Zuo Sheng Zao Army.

古文：丁巳，诏左仆射韩皋等鞫之。
现代文：丁巳，唐穆宗下诏，命左仆射韩皋等人审问这个案件。
English: At the same time, Tang Mu Zong issued an edict, ordering his left-hand man, Han Zang, and others to interrogate the case.

古文：戊午，幽州节度使硃克融进马万匹，羊十万口，而表云先请其直充犒赏。
现代文：戊午，幽州节度使朱克融声称要向朝廷进奉马一万匹，羊十万头。不过，他的进奉奏章上说，先请朝廷付给这些马和羊的价钱，作为对将士的犒赏，然后再进奉朝廷。
English: In the afternoon, the Yuzhou Festival made Zhu Ke Rong claim that he would donate 10,000 horses and 100,000 sheep to the imperial court. However, his donation song said that he would first ask the imperial court to pay the price of these horses and sheep as a reward for the soldiers, and then donate them to the imperial court.

古文：三司按于方刺裴度事，皆无验。
现代文：韩皋主持刑部、大理寺和御史台会审于方阴谋暗杀裴度的案件，毫无证据。
English: Han Wei presided over the Criminal Investigation Department, Dali Temple and the History Channel to try the case of Yufang's conspiracy to assassinate Pei Du, without any evidence.

古文：六月，甲子，度及元稹皆罢相，度为右仆射，稹为同州刺史。
现代文：六月，甲子，裴度和元稹都被免去宰相职务，裴度被降为右仆射，元稹为同州刺史。
English: In June, Koji, Pei Du and Yuan Shao were all removed from the post of prime minister. Pei Du was demoted to the position of right-hand man, and Yuan Shao was demoted to the position of secretary of state.

古文：以兵部尚书李逢吉为门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：唐穆宗任命兵部尚书李逢吉为门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: Tang Mu Zong appointed Li Fengji, the secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, as a subordinate attendant and a peer.

古文：党项寇灵州、渭北，掠官马。
现代文：党项族部落侵扰灵州、渭北，掠取国家牧场上的马匹。
English: The Dongxiang tribe invaded Lingshou and northern Anhui and plundered horses on the national pasture.

古文：谏官上言： 裴度无罪，不当免相。
现代文：谏官上言： 裴度无罪，不应当免去他的宰相职务。
English: Eunuch's last words: Pei Du is not guilty, he should not be removed from his post as prime minister.

古文：元稹与于方为邪谋，责之太轻。
现代文：而元稹和于方一起策划奸谋，处置太轻。 
English: However, Yuan Xuan and Yu Fang plotted together, and the punishment was too light.

古文：上不得已，壬申，削稹长春宫使。
现代文：穆宗不得已，壬申，免去元稹所兼任的长春宫使的职务。
English: As a last resort, Mu Zong, Jinshin, removed the post of Changchun Palace Envoy, which was also held by the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：吐蕃寇灵武。
现代文：吐蕃国出兵侵犯灵武。
English: Tubo sent troops to invade Lingwu.

古文：庚辰，盐州奏党项都督拔跋万诚请降。
现代文：庚辰，盐州上奏：党项族都督拔跋万诚请求投降。
English: Geng Chen, Yanzhou Shangso: the Dangxiang people's governor made a sincere request for surrender.

古文：壬午，吐蕃寇盐州。
现代文：壬午，吐蕃国出兵侵犯盐州。
English: In the morning of the second day of the third lunar month, Tubo sent troops to invade Yanzhou.

古文：戊子，复置邕管经略使。
现代文：戊子，唐穆宗下令重新设置邕管经略使。
English: In response, Tang Mu Zong ordered the re-establishment of the position of vice-commander.

古文：初，张弘靖为宣武节度使，屡赏以悦军士，府库虚竭。
现代文：当初，张弘靖任宣武节度使时，多次赏赐军士，以求取悦士心，致使府库空竭。
English: At first, when Zhang Hongjing was appointed as the envoy of the Xuanwu Festival, he repeatedly rewarded the soldiers in order to please the hearts of the soldiers, resulting in the depletion of the government treasury.

古文：李愿继之，性奢侈，赏劳既薄于弘靖时，又峻威刑，军士不悦，愿以其妻弟窦瑗典宿直兵；瑗骄贪，军中恶之。
现代文：李愿继任为节度使后，喜好奢侈，对军士的赏赐已经大大少于张弘靖在任时的数额，而且，又严刑峻法，军士很不满。李愿任用他的内弟窦瑗掌管护卫亲兵，窦瑗骄横贪婪，将士都憎恶他，牙将李臣则等人乘机作乱。
English: After succeeding Zhang Hongjing as the festival envoy, Li Yan liked luxury. The reward for the sergeant was much less than the amount when Zhang Hongjing was in office. Moreover, the punishment was very severe, and the sergeant was very dissatisfied. Li Yan appointed his brother-in-law Dou Xuan to be in charge of guarding his soldiers. Dou Xuan was arrogant and greedy, and the soldiers all hated him, while the commander Li Chen and others took the opportunity to make trouble.

古文：牙将李臣则等作乱，秋，七月，壬辰夜，即帐中斩瑗头，因大呼，府中响应。
现代文：秋季，七月，壬辰夜晚，李臣则等在军帐中把窦瑗杀死，然后，大声呼叫，将士群起响应。
English: In the autumn, in July, in the evening of Imjin, Li Qian waited in the military account to kill Dou Qi, and then, shouting loudly, the soldiers responded.

古文：愿与一子逾城奔郑州。乱兵杀其妻，推都押牙李为留后。
现代文：李愿和他的一个儿子逃往郑州，乱兵杀死他的妻子，公推都押牙李为留后。
English: Li Jian and one of his sons fled to Zhengzhou. The soldiers killed his wife, and the court ordered Li Jian to stay behind.

古文：丙申，宋王结薨。
现代文：丙申，宋王李结去世。
English: Bishin, Song King Li Jie passed away.

古文：戊戌，宣武监军奏军乱。
现代文：戊戌，宣武监军奏报发生军乱。
English: In Wuyi, the military inspector of propaganda reported that there was a military conflict.

古文：庚子，李自奏已权知留后。
现代文：庚子，李上奏，自称已暂时主持留后。
English: Geng Zi, Li Shangso, claimed to have temporarily presided over the opera.

古文：乙已，诏三省官与宰相议汴州事，皆以为宜如河北故事，授李节。
现代文：乙巳，唐穆宗下诏，命中书、门下、尚书三省长官和宰相商议如何处置宣武的军乱，参加会议的官员多数都认为应当按照河北藩镇的惯例，任命李为节度使。
English: At this time, Tang Mu Zong issued an edict, and the three provincial governors and the prime minister discussed how to deal with the military disturbance caused by the proclamation of martial law. Most of the officials who attended the meeting believed that Li should be appointed as the festival envoy in accordance with the practice of Hebei's towns.

古文：李逢吉曰： 河北之事，盖非获已。
现代文：李逢吉说： 河北藩镇割据跋扈，朝廷予以承认，是不得已的事。
English: Li Fengji said: It is a matter of last resort for the imperial court to recognize the partition of the Hebei province and town.

古文：今若并汴州弃之，则是江、淮以南皆非国家有也。 
现代文：现在，如果连宣武也一并放度，恐怕江淮以南的广大地区都要脱离朝廷。 
English: Now, if even the proclamation of martial law is allowed to go unchecked, I am afraid that the vast areas south of the Yangtze and Huai Rivers will have to secede from the imperial court.

古文：杜元颖、张平叔争之曰： 奈何惜数尺之节，不爱一方之死乎！ 
现代文：杜元颖、张平叔和他争论说： 为什么要可惜几尺长的节度使符节，而不爱惜宣武一方百姓的生命呢？ 
English: Du Yuanying and Zhang Pingtu argued with him, saying: "Why should we be sorry for a few feet in length to make a festival, but not be sorry for the lives of the people on the proclamation side?

古文：议未决，会宋、毫、颍三州刺史各上奏，请别命帅。
现代文：讨论尚未决定，正在这时，宣武管辖的宋州、亳州、颍州各向朝廷上奏，请求另外任使节度使。
English: The discussion has not yet been decided. At this time, Songzhou, Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou, which are under the jurisdiction of Xuanwu, each appealed to the imperial court to request another envoy for the festival.

古文：上大喜，以逢吉议为然，遣中使诣三州宣慰。
现代文：穆宗大喜，认为李逢吉的意见正确，于是，派遣宦官出使三州安抚将士。
English: Mu Zong was overjoyed and thought that Li Fengji's opinion was correct, so he sent eunuchs to pacify the three states.

古文：逢吉因请 以将军征入朝，以义成节度使韩充镇宣武。
现代文：李逢吉接着奏请： 任命李为将军，召他来京城，同时，任命义成节度使韩充为宣武节度使。
English: Li Fengji then made a request: to appoint Li as a general and call him to Beijing, and at the same time, to appoint Yicheng Festival and Hanchong as Xuanwu Festival.

古文：充，弘之弟，素宽厚得众心。
现代文：韩充，即前宣武节度使韩弘的弟弟，向来以宽容得将士受戴。
English: Han Chong, the younger brother of Han Hong, who was promoted by the former proclamation of martial law, has always been respected for his tolerance.

古文：脱旅拒，则命徐、许两军攻其左右而滑军蹙其北，充必得入矣。 
现代文：假如李举兵抗拒朝廷命令，就命武宁和忠武两支军队攻打他的左右，而命义成军队从北面压境。这样，韩充肯定能够率兵进入宣武。 
English: If Li raised an army to resist the imperial order, he would order the two armies of Wu Ning and Zhongwu to attack his right and left, and order the Yi Cheng army to press the border from the north. In this way, Han Chong would certainly be able to lead the army into Xuanwu.

古文：上皆从之。
现代文：穆宗全部采纳了他的意见。
English: The emperor obeyed him.

古文：丙午，贬李愿为随州刺史，以韩充为宣武节度兼义成节度使。
现代文：丙午，唐穆宗贬李愿为随州刺史，任命韩充为宣武节度使兼义成节度使。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Tang Mu Zong dethroned Li Xian as Suizhou scribe, and appointed Han Chong as Xuanwu scribe and Yingren scribe.

古文：征李为右金吾将军，不奉诏。
现代文：同时召李进京，任命他为右金吾将军。李拒不执行朝廷命令。
English: At the same time, he summoned Li to Beijing and appointed him as the Right Kingu General. Li refused to carry out the imperial order.

古文：宋州刺史高承简斩其使者，遣兵二千攻之，陷宁陵、襄邑。
现代文：宋州刺史高承简把李派去的使者斩首，李派遣二千人马攻打宋州，攻陷宁陵、襄邑两县。
English: Songzhou assassin Gao Chengjian beheaded the envoy sent by Li, and Li dispatched two thousand horses to attack Songzhou, capturing Ningling and Xiangyi counties.

古文：宋州有三城，贼已陷其南城，承简保北二城，与贼十馀战。
现代文：宋州有三座城，李的兵马已攻陷南城，高承简率兵坚守北边的两座城，和敌兵大战十多次。
English: There are three cities in Songzhou. Li's soldiers and horses have captured the southern city, Gao Chengzhan and his soldiers have held on to the two cities in the north, and have fought with enemy soldiers more than ten times.

古文：癸丑，忠武节度使李光颜将兵二万五千讨李，屯尉氏。
现代文：癸丑，忠武节度使李光颜率兵二万五千人讨伐李，屯驻在尉氏县。
English: Li Guangyan led twenty-five thousand soldiers to fight against Li, and was stationed in Jiu County.

古文：兗海节度使曹华闻作乱，不俟诏，即发兵讨之。
现代文：兖海节度使曹华得知李叛乱的消息后，不待朝廷下诏，就主动出兵征讨。
English: After the Bohai Festival made Cao Hua know the news of Li's rebellion, he did not wait for the imperial court to issue an edict, but took the initiative to send troops to investigate.

古文：遣兵三千人攻宋州，适至城下，丙辰，华逆击，破之。
现代文：李派兵三千人攻打宋州，刚到城下，丙辰，曹华率兵迎击，大败李兵马。
English: Li sent three thousand soldiers to attack Songzhou. As soon as he arrived at the outskirts of the city, Hsin-Chen and Cao-Hua led the troops to counterattack and defeated Li's soldiers and horses.

古文：丁已，李光颜败宣武兵于尉氏，斩获二千馀人。
现代文：丁巳，李光颜在尉氏打败宣武的军队，斩首和俘虏二千多人。
English: Soon after, Li Guangyan defeated the army of Xuanwu, beheading and capturing more than two thousand people.

古文：八月，辛酉，大理卿刘元鼎自吐蕃还。
现代文：八月，辛酉，大理卿刘元鼎出使吐蕃国会盟后，回到京城。
English: In August, Liu Yuanding, Lord of Dali, returned to Beijing after sending an envoy to the National League of Tibetans in Xinjiang.

古文：甲子，韩充入汴境，军于千塔。
现代文：甲子，韩充率兵进入汴州境内，驻军于千塔。
English: At the same time, Han Chong led the troops into the territory of Ganzhou and stationed the troops in Senta.

古文：武宁节度使王智兴与高承简共破宣武兵，斩首千馀级，馀众遁去。
现代文：武宁节度使王智兴和宋州刺史高承简联合打败宣武的军队，斩首一千多人，其余兵逃亡。
English: The Wu Ning Festival made Wang Zhixing and Songzhou assassin Gao Chengjian jointly defeat the army of military propaganda, behead more than a thousand people, and the remaining soldiers fled.

古文：壬申，韩充败宣武兵于郭桥，斩首千馀级，进军万胜。
现代文：壬申，韩充在郭桥镇打败宣武的军队，斩首一千多人。接着，乘胜进军万胜镇。
English: In Jinshin, Han Chong defeated the army of Xuanwu in Guoqiao Town, beheading more than a thousand people. Then, he marched into Wansheng Town.

古文：初，李既为留后，以都知兵马使李质为腹心。
现代文：当初，李自称宣武留后，以都知兵马使李质作为自己的心腹，等到李被朝廷任命为右金吾将军时，拒不执行朝廷的任命，李质多次劝谏而不听。
English: At the beginning, Li claimed that after he was appointed to stay in Xuanwu, he made Li Qian his confidant with the help of the Tudor soldiers and horses. However, when Li was appointed as the General of the Right Jingu by the imperial court, he refused to carry out the imperial court's appointment. Li Qian did not listen to Li Qian's repeated persuasion.

古文：及除将军，不奉诏，质屡谏不听，会疽发于首，遣李臣则等将兵拒李光颜于尉氏。
现代文：正好这时李的头上长了一个毒疮，他派遣李臣则等人率兵前往尉氏县抵抗李光颜的忠武军队。
English: Just at this time, a poisonous sore grew on Li's head, and he sent Li Zhenzhe and others to lead an army to resist Li Guangyan's loyal army in Guozhi County.

古文：既而官军四集，兵屡败，疾甚，悉以军事属李质，卧于家。
现代文：随后，官军四面围攻，宣武军队屡战屡败，李的毒疮也越来越重。于是，把军事的指挥权都交给李质，自己卧病在家。
English: Subsequently, the government army was besieged on all sides, the propaganda army was repeatedly defeated in repeated battles, and Li's poisonous sores became increasingly severe. Therefore, he handed over the military command to Li Jian and lay ill at home.

古文：丙子，质与监军姚文寿擒，杀之。诈为牒，追臣则等，至，皆斩之。
现代文：丙子，李质和宣武监军姚文寿活提李，把他杀死，于是，假传李的手令，派人把李臣则等人追回。
English: Cun Zi, Li Ching and the propaganda and arms inspector Yao Wenshou took Li alive and killed him. Therefore, they sent someone to recover Li Chen Ze and others by falsely transmitting Li's order.

古文：执四子送京师。
现代文：李臣则等人回到汴州，都被斩首。
English: Li Chen and the others returned to Zhangzhou and were all beheaded.

古文：韩充未至，质权知军务，时牙兵三千人，日给酒食，物力不能支。
现代文：李质和姚文寿又逮捕李的四个儿子，押送到京城。韩充尚未抵达汴州，李质暂时掌管宣武军队。这时，宣武共有牙兵三千人，每天由官府供给酒食，宣武的财力已难以继续供给。
English: Li Qian and Yao Wenshou also arrested Li's four sons and escorted them to Beijing. Han Chong had not yet arrived in Zhangzhou, and Li Qian temporarily took charge of the Xuanwu army. At this time, Xuanwu had a total of three thousand soldiers, and the government provided alcohol and food every day. It was difficult to continue to provide financial resources for Xuanwu.

古文：质曰： 若韩公始至而罢之，则人情大去矣！
现代文：李质说： 如果韩充刚来宣武上任，就罢除对牙兵的优待，那么，就肯定大失军心！
English: Lijian said, "If Hancheng, who has just taken office to promote the armed forces, removes the preferential treatment for dental soldiers, then it will definitely be a great loss of morale!"

古文：不可留此弊以遗吾帅。 
现代文：因此，不能把这个弊端留给我们的新任节度使来处理。 
English: So we can't leave it to our new governor to deal with.

古文：即命罢给而后迎充。
现代文：于是，下令罢除对牙兵的优厚供给，然后，去迎接韩充。
English: As a result, he ordered the removal of the generous supply of dental soldiers, and then went to meet Han Chong.

古文：丁丑，充入汴。
现代文：丁丑，韩充进入汴州城。
English: Ding Yuxi and Han Zheng enter Zhangzhou City.

古文：癸未，以韩充专为宣武节度使。以曹华为义成节度使，高承简为兗、海、沂、密节度使，加李光颜兼侍中，以李质为右金吾将军。
现代文：癸未，唐穆宗任命韩充专为宣武节度使；任命曹华为义成节度使，高承简为兖、海、沂、密节度使；任命李光颜兼任侍中，李质为右金吾将军。
English: At that time, Tang Mu Zong appointed Han Zheng as the envoy to the Xuanwu Festival; appointed Cao Hua as the envoy to the Yicheng Festival; appointed Gao Chengjian as the envoy to the Zhai, Hai, Zhai, and Miyu Festivals; appointed Li Guangyan as a chamberlain, and appointed Li Qian as the general of the Right Jingu.

古文：韩充既视事，人心粗定，乃密籍军中为恶者千馀人，一朝，并父母妻子悉逐之，曰： 敢少留境内者斩。 
现代文：于是秘密调查登记军中一贯作恶多端的将士，共一千多人。一天，下令将这些人和他们的父母、妻子全家都驱逐出境。韩充说： 谁敢在宣武境内稍微迟疑停留，一律斩首。 
English: As a result, a secret investigation was conducted to register more than a thousand soldiers in the army who had consistently committed various evils. One day, it was ordered to expel these people and their parents, wives and entire families. Han Chong said: Anyone who dares to stay in the territory of Xuanwu with the slightest hesitation will be beheaded.

古文：于是军政大治。
现代文：于是，军政大治。
English: As a result, military rule followed.

古文：九月，戊子朔，浙西观察使京兆窦易直奏大将王国清作乱，伏诛。
现代文：九月，戊子朔，浙江西道观察使、京兆府人窦易直奏报大将王国清作乱，已被斩首。
English: In September, Wu Zishuo, the Zhejiang West Road Observation Envoy, and Dou Yi, a person from Beijing's Zhaozhou Prefecture, directly reported that the general Wang Guoqing had made a disturbance and had been beheaded.

古文：初，易直闻汴州乱而惧，欲散金帛以赏军士，或曰： 赏之无名，恐益生疑。 
现代文：当初，窦易直听说宣武军乱，十分恐惧，想从库房拿出金银布帛来赏剔将士，有人对他说： 赏赐而无名目，恐怕将士更生疑心。 
English: At first, Dou Yizhi heard about the Xuanwu Rebellion and was very afraid. He wanted to take out gold and silver cloth bags from the storeroom to praise the soldiers. Someone said to him: "A reward without a name, I'm afraid the soldiers will be suspicious."

古文：乃止。而外已有知之者，故国清作乱，易直讨擒之，并杀其党二百馀人。
现代文：于是，窦易直打消了这个念头，但是，外面已有人得知这个消息。因此，王国清乘人心不定而作乱，被窦易直讨平，杀王国清和他的党羽共二百多人。
English: As a result, Dou Yizhi dispelled this idea, but someone outside had already learned the news. Therefore, Guo Guoqing took advantage of the uncertainty of the people to create turmoil and was leveled by Dou Yizhi, killing Guo Guoqing and more than two hundred of his followers.

古文：德州刺史王稷，承父锷馀赀，家富厚。
现代文：德州刺史王稷继承父亲王锷的遗产，家庭富裕，财产丰厚。
English: Wang Xi inherited the inheritance of his father, Wang Xi, and his family was rich and well-to-do.

古文：横海节度使李景略利其财，丙申，密教军士杀稷，屠其家，纳其女为妾，以军乱闻。
现代文：横海节度李景略贪图的他的家产，丙申，秘密地指使军士暗杀王稷和他的全家，娶他的女儿为小妾。然后，向朝廷奏报，发生了军乱。
English: Li Jingliao coveted his family's property, and secretly ordered the sergeant to assassinate Wang Qian and his entire family, marrying his daughter as a concubine. Then, he reported to the court, and there was a military coup.

古文：朝廷之讨李也，遣司门郎中韦文恪宣慰魏博，史宪诚表请授旌节，又于黎阳筑马头，为渡河之势，见文恪，辞礼倨慢；及闻死，辞礼顿恭，曰： 宪诚，胡人，譬如狗，虽被捶击，终不离主耳。 冬，十一月，庚午，皇太后幸华清宫。辛未，上自复道幸华清宫，遂畋于骊山，即日还宫。太后数日乃返。
现代文：后来得知李已死，对李文恪的言辞和礼节顿时都恭敬起来。自嘲说： 宪诚是胡族人，就像家中的狗一样，虽然挨打，但始终不离开主人。 冬季，十一月，庚午，皇太后到达华清宫，辛未，唐穆宗从复道出京城，到达华清宫。于是，在骊山打猎游乐，当天，返回宫中。皇太后过了很多天才返回兴庆宫。
English: Later, when he learned that Li was dead, he suddenly respected Li Wencu's words and etiquette. He said with a laugh: "Xiancheng is a Hu, just like a dog at home, although he was beaten, he never left his master. In winter, November, the afternoon of the 7th, the Empress Dowager arrived at the Huaqing Palace. In Xinwei, Tang Mu Zong left Beijing from Fudao and arrived at the Huaqing Palace. Therefore, he went hunting in Shaoshan and returned to the palace on the same day. The Empress Dowager returned to the Xingqing Palace after many days.

古文：丙子，集王缃薨。
现代文：丙子，集王李缃去世。
English: On the 20th, Ji Wang Lijun passed away.

古文：庚辰，上与宦者击球于禁中，有宦者坠马，上惊，因得风疾，不能履地，自是人不闻上起居。
现代文：庚辰，唐穆宗和宦者在宫中踢球，有一宦官不慎从马上掉下来，穆宗受惊，得手足麻木的疾病，不能下地走路。以后，百官都不知穆宗的日常活动和行踪。
English: Geng Chen, Tang Mu Zong and Zou were playing football in the palace, when one of the officials accidentally fell off his horse. Mu Zong was frightened and suffered from a disease that numbed his hands and feet, so he couldn't walk. From then on, all the officials were unaware of Mu Zong's daily activities and whereabouts.

古文：宰相屡乞入见，不报。
现代文：宰相多次请求入宫面见，都没有答复。
English: The prime minister's repeated requests to visit the palace have gone unanswered.

古文：裴度三上疏请立太子，且请入见。
现代文：裴度多次上奏，请求立皇太子，并请入宫面见穆宗。
English: Pei Du repeatedly petitioned for the crown prince to be appointed, and invited him to the palace to meet Mu Zong.

古文：十二月，辛卯，上见群臣于紫宸殿，御大绳床，悉去左右卫官，独宦者十馀人侍侧，人情稍安。
现代文：十二月，辛卯，穆宗在紫宸殿接见群臣百官，坐在大绳床上，命左右禁卫兵暂且退下，仅留十多个宦官在身边侍候。于是，人心逐渐安定。
English: In December, Xinwu, Mu Zong received a group of ministers and hundreds of officials in the Courtyard of the Empress Dowager, sat on a large rope bed, and ordered the guards to temporarily withdraw, leaving only more than ten eunuchs to wait around. As a result, people's hearts gradually stabilized.

古文：李逢吉进言： 景王已长，请立为太子。 
现代文：李逢吉上言说： 景王已长大成人，请立为皇太子。 
English: Li Fengji said, "King Jing has become an adult, please make him crown prince."

古文：裴度请速下诏，副天下望。
现代文：裴度请求穆宗尽快下诏立皇太子，以便符合天下人们的心意。
English: Pei Du asked Mu Zong to issue an edict to appoint a crown prince as soon as possible, so as to conform to the will of the people of the world.

古文：上无言。既而两省官亦继有请立太子者。
现代文：接着，中书、门下两省的官员也有人相继上奏，请求立皇太子。
English: Next, officials from the Chinese Academy of Letters and the two provinces under its jurisdiction also petitioned successively, requesting the establishment of a crown prince.

古文：癸巳，诏立景王湛为皇太子。
现代文：癸巳，穆宗下诏，立景王李湛为皇太子。
English: Soon after, Emperor Muzong issued an edict to make King Lichan the crown prince.

古文：上疾浸瘳。是岁，初行《宣明历》。
现代文：这一年，全国开始行用《宣明历》。
English: This year, the "Xuanming Calendar" began to be used throughout the country.

