古文：九年春，天子使南季来聘。
现代文：九年春季，周天子派遣南季前来鲁国聘问。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, Zhou Tianzi sent Nanji to come to Lu for an interview.

古文：三月癸酉，大雨震电。
现代文：同年三月癸酉，天久下大雨，且打雷闪电。
English: In March of the same year, it rained heavily for a long time, and thunder and lightning occurred.

古文：庚辰，大雨雪。
现代文：庚辰，下起了大雪。
English: Geng Chen, it snowed heavily.

古文：挟卒。
现代文：挟去世。
English: She passed away.

古文：夏，城郎。
现代文：夏季，在郎地筑城。
English: In summer, build a castle in the countryside.

古文：秋七月。
现代文：秋七月无事。
English: Autumn in July.

古文：冬，公会齐侯于防。
现代文：冬季，隐公和齐僖公在防地会面。
English: In winter, Ying Gong and Qi Ying Gong met at the fort.

古文：九年春，王三月癸酉，大雨霖以震，书始也。
现代文：九年春季，周王朝历法的三月初十日，天久下大雨而且打雷闪电，《春秋》记载了开始的日期。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, on the tenth day of the third month of the Zhou Dynasty calendar, it rained heavily for a long time and thundered and lightning struck. "Spring and Autumn" recorded the start date.

古文：庚辰，大雨雪，亦如之。
现代文：十七日，又久下大雨雪，《春秋》也只记开始的日期。
English: On the 17th, there was heavy rain and snow for a long time, and "Spring and Autumn" only recorded the start date.

古文：书时失也。
现代文：所以记载，是由于天时不正常的缘故。
English: Therefore, the record is due to the abnormal time of day.

古文：凡雨，自三日以往为霖。
现代文：凡是下雨，连续下三天以上就叫 霖 。
English: Whenever it rains, it rains for more than three days in a row.

古文：平地尺为大雪。
现代文：平地雪深一尺就叫 大雪 。
English: A foot of snow on the ground is called heavy snow.

古文：夏，城郎，书不时也。
现代文：夏季，在郎地筑城。《春秋》记载这件事，由于妨碍农时。
English: In the summer, the city was built in the countryside. "Spring and Autumn" recorded this event, because it interfered with farming time.

古文：宋公不王。
现代文：宋殇公不去朝见周桓王。
English: Song Yigong did not go to the court to see King Zhou Kan.

古文：郑伯为王左卿士，以王命讨之，伐宋。
现代文：这时郑庄公正担任周桓王的卿士，于是用天子的名义讨伐他。
English: At this time, Zheng Zhuang justly served as the nobleman of King Zhou Huan, so he fought him in the name of Tianzi.

古文：宋以入郛之役怨公，不告命。
现代文：郑国进攻宋国。宋国由于被攻外城那次战役对隐公不满，不来报告。
English: Zheng attacked Song, but Song was not happy with Ying and did not report the attack.

古文：公怒，绝宋使。
现代文：隐公发怒，就断绝与宋国的往来。
English: Enraged, Hinkong broke off relations with Song.

古文：秋，郑人以王命来告伐宋。
现代文：秋季，郑国人用天子的名义前来报告进攻宋国。
English: In the autumn, the Zheng people came to report the attack on Song in the name of Tianzi.

古文：冬，公会齐侯于防，谋伐宋也。
现代文：冬季，隐公和齐僖公在防地会面，策划进攻宋国。
English: In winter, Ying Gong and Qi Yong Gong met at the defense site and planned to attack Song.

古文：北戎侵郑，郑伯御之。
现代文：北戎人侵略郑国。
English: The North Korean troops invaded Zheng.

古文：患戎师，曰： 彼徒我车，惧其侵轶我也。 
现代文：郑庄公率兵抵御他们，又忧心戎军力量强大，说： 他们是步兵，我们用战车，我很担心他们从后边突然绕到我军之前袭击我们。 
English: Zheng Zhuang Gong led the troops to resist them, and worried about the strength of the troops, said: They are infantry, we use chariots, I am very worried that they will suddenly attack us from behind before our army.

古文：公子突曰： 使勇而无刚者尝寇，而速去之。君为三覆以待之。
现代文：公子突说： 派遣一些勇敢而不刚毅的兵士，和敌人一接触就赶紧退走，君王就设下三批伏兵等待他们。
English: The prince suddenly said, "Let's send some brave but unyielding soldiers to retreat as soon as they come into contact with the enemy. The king will set up three groups of ambush soldiers to wait for them."

古文：戎轻而不整，贪而无亲，胜不相让，败不相救。
现代文：戎人轻率而不整肃，贪婪而不团结，打赢了各不相让，打败了各不相救。
English: The soldiers were imprudent but not disciplined, greedy but not united, they won without conceding, and they defeated without rescuing each other.

古文：先者见获必务进，进而遇覆必速奔，后者不救，则无继矣。
现代文：走到前面的见到有财物俘虏，必然一意前进，前进而遭遇伏兵，必然赶快奔逃。走在后面的人不去救援，敌兵就没有后继者了。
English: If you go to the front and see that there are captives with property, you must go forward. If you go forward and encounter an ambush, you must run away quickly. If the person walking behind does not go to the rescue, the enemy soldier will have no successor.

古文：乃可以逞。 
现代文：这样，我们就可以得胜。 
English: That way, we can win.

古文：从之。
现代文：郑庄公听从了公子突的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：戎人之前遇覆者奔。祝聃逐之。衷戎师，前后击之，尽殪。
现代文：戎人的前锋部队遇到了伏兵就奔逃，祝聃追逐他们，把戎军从中截断，前后夹攻，将戎军全部歼灭。
English: When the army's forward troops encountered the ambush, they ran away. Zhu Xi chased them, cut off the army from them, attacked back and forth, and completely annihilated the army.

古文：戎师大奔。
现代文：戎军后继部队拼命奔逃。
English: The army's follow-up troops fled in desperation.

古文：十一月甲寅，郑人大败戎师。
现代文：十一月二十六日，郑人把戎军打得大败而逃。
English: On November 26th, Zheng Ren defeated the army and fled.

