古文：唐檀字子产，豫章南昌人也。
现代文：唐檀传，唐檀字子产，豫章南昌人。
English: Tang Dang Chuan, Tang Dang Zi Zi, Yu Zhang Nanchang people.

古文：少游太学，习《京氏易》、《韩诗》、《颜氏春秋》，尤好灾异星占。
现代文：年少时游太学，学习《京氏易》、《韩诗》、《颜氏春秋》，尤其爱好灾异星占。
English: When he was young, he was an avid student, studying "Beijing Yi," "Korean Poetry" and "Yan's Spring and Autumn," with a particular fondness for astrology.

古文：后还乡里，教授常百余人。
现代文：后来回到乡里，教授学生常有百余人。
English: Later, back in the countryside, there were often more than a hundred students.

古文：元初七年，郡界有芝草生，太守刘祗欲上言之，以问檀。
现代文：元初七年，郡界有芝草生长，太守刘礻氏想向上言之，问檀的意见。
English: In the first seven years of the Yuan Dynasty, there was a growth of turf grass in the county, and the governor Liu Wei wanted to ask the opinion of the dragonfly.

古文：檀对曰： 方今外戚豪盛，阳道微弱，斯岂嘉瑞乎？ 
现代文：檀答道 ：当前外戚豪威，阳道微弱，这难道是好兆么？ 
English: Dang replied, "Currently, the foreign relative is powerful and the yang road is weak. Is this a good sign?"

古文：祗乃止。
现代文：刘礻氏就停止了上报。
English: Mr. Liu Yao stopped submitting the report.

古文：永宁元年，南昌有妇人生四子，祗复问檀变异之应。
现代文：永宁元年，南昌有妇人生了四个孩子，刘礻氏又问唐檀有什么变异。
English: In the first year of the Yongning era, a woman in Nanchang gave birth to four children, and Liu Yuxi asked what kind of variation there was in Tangdan.

古文：檀以为京师当有兵气，其祸发于萧墙。至延光四年，中黄门孙程扬兵殿省，诛皇后兄车骑将军阎显等，立济阴王为天子，果如所占。
现代文：檀认为京师当有兵气，其祸发生在朝廷内部，至延光四年，中黄门孙程举兵于殿省，杀了皇后兄车骑将军阎显等，立济阴王做太子，果然像他所占的那样。
English: Dang believed that the Beijing division should have military strength, and the disaster occurred within the imperial court. In the fourth year of Yan Guang, Sun Cheng, a member of the Yellow Gate, raised an army in the palace province, killed the queen's brother, the chariot and cavalry general Yan Xian, and made Jiyin Wang the prince, just as he had envisioned.

古文：永建五年，举孝廉，除郎中。
现代文：永建五年，唐檀被举为孝廉，除为郎中。
English: In the fifth year of the Yongjian era, Tang Dang was elevated to the rank of filial piety and removed from his position as a vassal.

古文：是时白虹贯日，檀因上便宜三事，陈其咎征。
现代文：这时天上出现白虹贯日，便上书讲了三件事，陈述它的咎征。
English: At this time, a white rainbow appeared in the sky, and he wrote down three things, stating its signs.

古文：书奏，弃官去。
现代文：书奏上，弃官而去。
English: When it comes to calligraphy, resign and go.

古文：著书二十八篇，名为《唐子》。
现代文：著书二十八篇，名叫《唐子》。
English: He is the author of twenty-eight books, including "Tang Zi Rong."

古文：卒于家。
现代文：死在家中。
English: He died at home.

古文：公沙穆字文乂，北海胶东人也。
现代文：公沙穆传，公沙穆字文癐，北海胶东人。
English: Gongshamuzhuan, Gongshamuzi Wenjuan, Beihai Jiaodong people.

古文：家贫贱，自为兒童不好戏弄，长习《韩诗》、《公羊春秋》，尤锐思《河》、《洛》推步之术。
现代文：家贫贱。自从做儿童时起就不好戏弄玩耍，年长学习《韩诗》、《公羊春秋》，特别喜钻研《河洛》推步的法术。
English: His family was poor. Since he was a child, he was not good at teasing and playing. When he was older, he studied "Han Poetry" and "Ram Spring and Autumn," and he especially liked to study the magic of "Halo."

古文：居建成山中，依林阻为室，独宿无侣。
现代文：他住在建成山中，依树林做房子，独宿没有伴侣。
English: He lives in the mountains, makes his house in the woods, and lives alone without a partner.

古文：时，暴风震雷，有声于外，呼穆者三，穆不与语。
现代文：这时暴风震雷大作，有声音在外面喊穆的有多次，穆不和他答话。
English: At this time, a thunderstorm was raging, and there was a voice outside shouting at Mu several times, but Mu did not answer him.

古文：有顷，呼者自牖而入，音状甚怪，穆诵经自若，终亦无它妖异，时人奇之。
现代文：一会儿，喊的人从窗户进来，声音形状很怪，可公沙穆照常念他的经，最后也没有别的妖异，当时人感到奇怪。
English: After a while, the caller came in through the window. The shape of the voice was strange, but Gong Samu recited his sutra as usual. In the end, there was no other strange phenomenon. At that time, people felt strange.

古文：后遂隐居东莱山，学者自远而至。
现代文：后来隐居东莱山，学生从远处到来。
English: Later, he lived in seclusion in Donglaishan, and students came from far away.

古文：有富人王仲，致产千金。
现代文：有位富人王仲，有家产值千金。
English: There is a rich man, Wang Zhong, who has a house worth thousands of dollars.

古文：谓穆曰： 方今之世，以货自通，吾奉百万与子为资，何如？ 
现代文：对穆说 ：当今的时代，有了财货自然通行，我送百万给你做本钱，怎么样？ 
English: He said to Mu: In today's era, with the natural passage of wealth and goods, how about I give you a million as capital?

古文：对曰： 来意厚矣。夫富贵在天，得之有命。以货求位，吾不忍也。 
现代文：答道： 来意很好，可是富贵自有天意，得到它要有命，用财货求职位，我不忍心。 
English: He replied, "It's all very well to want to be rich, but wealth has its own providence. To obtain it, one must have a life. I can't bear to use wealth and goods to seek a position.

古文：后举孝廉，以高第为主事，迁缯相。
现代文：公沙穆后来被举为孝廉，因高第做主事，升为缯县之相。
English: Later, Gongsamu was elevated to the position of filial piety, and he was promoted to the highest position in the county because Gao Di was in charge.

古文：时缯侯刘敞，东海恭王之后也，所为多不法，废嫡立庶，傲很放恣。
现代文：这时缯侯刘敞，东海恭王的后代，所作所为多不合法，废嫡子，立庶子，骄傲放恣。
English: At this time, Prince Liu Zhan, a descendant of King Gong of the East China Sea, did many illegal things, such as abolishing his legitimate son, establishing an illegitimate son, and being proud and unrestrained.

古文：穆到官，谒曰： 臣始除之日，京师咸谓臣曰 缯有恶侯 ，以吊小相。
现代文：穆到官后，谒见时说 ：臣开始受命的时候，京师的人都对臣说： 缯有恶侯。 
English: After Mu arrived at the office, he said to the emperor: When the vassal began to receive orders, the people in Beijing said to the vassal: You have a bad omen.

古文：明侯何因得此丑声之甚也？
现代文：来替我担心，明侯为什么有这个丑恶的名声呢？
English: Come and worry for me, why does Ming Hou have this ugly reputation?

古文：幸承先人之支体，传茅土之重，不战战兢兢，而违越法度，故朝廷使臣为辅。
现代文：幸而秉承先人的支体，继承茅土之重，不战战兢兢，小心谨慎，而违越法律制度，所以朝廷使臣为辅。
English: Fortunately, adhering to the branch of the ancestors, inheriting the weight of the thatch, not trembling, cautious, and violating the legal system, so the imperial envoys are supplemented.

古文：愿改往修来，自求多福。 
现代文：希望明侯改变过去的错误，修补未来，自求多福。 
English: I hope that you can change the mistakes of the past, mend the future, and seek your own happiness.

古文：乃上没敞所侵官民田地，废其庶子，还立嫡嗣。
现代文：于是上面没收敞所侵占官民的田地，废了他的庶子，还立嫡子为嗣。
English: As a result, the higher authorities confiscated the fields occupied by the government and the people, abolished his illegitimate son, and appointed his legitimate son as his heir.

古文：其苍头兒客犯法，皆收考之。
现代文：他们的苍头儿客犯了法，都收捕审问。
English: Their father-son guests broke the law and were all arrested and interrogated.

古文：因苦辞谏敞，敞涕泣为谢，多从其所规。
现代文：并苦辞谏刘敞。敞哭着感谢，多听从他所规劝。
English: And bitterly scolded Liu Zang. Zang cried and thanked him, and listened to his advice.

古文：迁弘农令。
现代文：后来升为弘农令。
English: Later, he was promoted to Kono-Ryo.

古文：县界有螟虫食稼，百姓惶惧。
现代文：县界有螟虫吃庄稼，百姓很害怕。
English: There are aphids eating crops on the county border, and the people are very afraid.

古文：穆乃设坛谢曰： 百姓有过，罪穆之由，请以身祷。 
现代文：公沙穆于是设坛谢道： 百姓有过错，穆有罪是根由，请以自身祈求。 
English: Therefore, he set up the altar and gave thanks, saying, "The people are at fault, my guilt is the root cause, please pray for yourself."

古文：于是暴雨，不终日，既霁而螟虫自销，百姓称曰神明，永寿元年，霖雨大水，三辅以东莫不湮没。
现代文：于是下了一场暴雨，雨止后而螟虫自行消亡，百姓称之为神明。永寿元年，霖雨大水暴涨，三辅以东地域，没有不被淹没的。
English: As a result, a torrential rain fell. After the rain stopped, the aphids died out on their own, and the people called them gods. In the first year of Yongshu, the rain and heavy water surged, and there was no area east of Sanfu that would not be flooded.

古文：穆明晓占候，乃豫告令百姓徙居高地，故弘农人独得免害。
现代文：公沙穆懂得占卜，于是预告百姓叫他们迁居高地，所以弘农人独得免害。
English: Kangsamu knew divination, so he warned the people and told them to move to the highlands, so Hongnongren was spared from harm.

古文：迁辽东属国都尉，善得吏人欢心。
现代文：后来迁为辽东属国都尉，很得官吏百姓的欢心。
English: Later, he was transferred to Liaodong Province as a provincial captain, which was well received by the officials and the people.

古文：年六十六，卒官。
现代文：六十六岁死于官位。
English: He died in office at the age of sixty-six.

古文：六子皆知名。
现代文：六个儿子都很有名。
English: All six sons are famous.

古文：许曼者，汝南平舆人也。
现代文：许曼传，许曼，汝南平舆人。
English: Xu Man Chuan, Xu Man, Ru Nanping Shih Ren.

古文：祖父峻，字季山，善卜占之术，多有显验，时人方之前世京房。
现代文：祖父许峻，字季山，长于卜占之术，多有明显的效验。当时人将他比作前世京房。
English: Grandfather Xu Jun, surnamed Qishan, was good at divination, with obvious effectiveness. At that time, people compared him to the previous generation of Beijing.

古文：自云少尝笃病，三年不愈，乃谒太山请命，行遇道士张巨君，授以方术。
现代文：自己说年少时害过大病，三年没有治愈，于是拜谒太山请求神灵保佑，半路遇见道士张巨君，传授了方术给他。
English: He said that he had suffered from a serious illness when he was young and had not been cured for three years, so he prayed to Mount Tai for the blessing of the gods. Halfway there, he met the Taoist Zhang Jijun and taught him the art of the square.

古文：所著《易林》，至今行于世。
现代文：所著《易林》，至今通行于世。
English: His book "Yilin" is still popular in the world.

古文：曼少传峻学。
现代文：许曼少时继承祖父的业。
English: Xu Man inherited his grandfather's business when he was young.

古文：桓帝时，陇西太守冯绲始拜郡，开绶笥，有两赤蛇分南北走。
现代文：桓帝时，陇西太守冯绲开始拜郡，打开绶笥，有两条赤蛇分南北逃走。
English: During the reign of Emperor Huan, Feng Xuan, the governor of Shaanxi Province, began to pay homage to the county, opened the cocoon, and two red snakes fled north and south.

古文：绲令曼筮之，封成，曼曰： 三岁之后，君当为边将，官有东名，当东北行三千里。
现代文：绲叫许曼筮之，卦已成，许曼说： 三年之后，君当做边将，官有东名，当东北行三千里。
English: "Three years from now, you will be a border guard, your official title will be East, and you will travel three thousand miles to the Northeast," said Xu Man.

古文：复五年，更为大将军，南征。 
现代文：再过五年，更为大将军，南征。 
English: In another five years, even more generals, the Southern Expedition.

古文：延熹元年，绲出为辽东太守，讨鲜卑，至五年，复拜车骑将军，击武陵蛮贼，皆如占。其余多此类云。
现代文：延熹元年，冯绲出为辽东太守，讨伐鲜卑。到了第五年，又拜为车骑将军，攻打武陵蛮贼，都像占卜所说，其余多这类事。
English: In the first year of Yancheng, Feng Rong was appointed as the governor of Liaodong and fought against the Xianbei. In the fifth year, he was appointed as the general of chariots and cavalry and fought against the barbarians of Wuling. As the fortune-teller said, there were many other such things.

古文：赵彦者，琅邪人也。
现代文：赵彦传，赵彦，琅笽人。
English: Zhao Yanyuan, Zhao Yanyuan, Yanyuan.

古文：少有术学。
现代文：少时有术学。
English: At a young age, he studied art.

古文：延熹三年，琅邪贼劳丙与太山贼叔孙无忌杀都尉。攻没琅邪属县，残害吏民。
现代文：延熹三年，琅笽贼劳丙与太山贼叔孙无忌杀了都尉，攻陷琅笽属县，残害官吏与百姓。
English: Three years later, the bandit Lao Ping and the bandit's great-uncle and great-grandson killed the captain, invaded the county, and harmed the officials and the people.

古文：朝廷以南阳宗资为讨寇中郎将，杖钺将兵，督州郡合讨无忌。
现代文：朝廷派南阳宗资做讨寇中郎将，杖钺将兵，督促州郡联合讨伐无忌。
English: The imperial court sent Nanyang Munezai to be the leader of the crusade, and Jiejun to be the soldier, urging the state and county to jointly fight the crusade.

古文：彦为陈 孤虚 之法，以贼屯在莒，莒有五阳之地，宜发五阳郡兵，从孤击虚以讨之。
现代文：赵彦替他陈《孤虚》之法，认为贼人驻在莒，莒有五阳之地，应该调动五阳郡兵，从孤击虚来讨伐。
English: Zhao Yan used the method of "solitary void" for him, believing that the thieves were stationed in Yao, the land of Yao and Wuyang, and that the soldiers of Wuyang County should be mobilized to fight against the lonely void.

古文：资具以状上，诏书遣五阳兵到。
现代文：宗资把情况上报，诏书遣五阳兵到。
English: Sozu reported the situation and sent five Yang soldiers.

古文：彦推遁甲，教以时进兵，一战破贼，燔烧屯坞，徐、兗二州，一时平夷。
现代文：赵彦推遁甲，教他们以时进兵，一战就打败了贼人，烧了贼人的屯坞，徐州、兖州一时平定夷人。
English: Zhao Yan pushed the armor, taught them to march in time, defeated the thieves in the first battle, burned the thieves' dockyard, and Xuzhou and Zhangzhou temporarily subdued the barbarians.

古文：樊志张者，汉中南郑人也。
现代文：樊志张传，樊志张，汉中南郑人。
English: Zou Zhi Zhang Chuan, Zou Zhi Zhang, Han Zhongnan Zheng Ren.

古文：博学多通，隐身不仕。
现代文：博学多通，隐居不做官。
English: Erudite and versatile, he lives in seclusion and does not hold public office.

古文：尝游陇西，时破羌将军段颎出征西羌，请见志张。
现代文：曾经游历陇西，当时被羌将军段赹出征西羌，请求见志张。
English: He once traveled to the west of Shanxi Province. At that time, he was asked by the general of Shanxi Province to go to the west of Shanxi Province, and he asked to see Zhi Zhang.

古文：其夕，颎军为羌所围数重，因留军中，三日不得去。
现代文：当晚，赹军被羌人包围几层，于是樊志张留在军中，三天不得出去。
English: That night, the Yao army was surrounded by several layers of Yao people, so Zou Zhi Zhang remained in the army and was not allowed to go out for three days.

古文：夜谓颎曰： 东南角无复羌，宜乘虚引出，住百里，还师攻之，可以全胜。 
现代文：晚上樊对赹说： 东南角没有羌人，应该趁虚而出，住百里远，回师进攻，可以得到全胜。 
English: In the evening, Zou said to Zou: There are no Zou people in the southeast corner. You should take advantage of the situation, live a hundred miles away, return to the division and attack, and you can get a complete victory.

古文：颎从之，果以破贼。
现代文：段赹听从了，果然破了贼兵。
English: Duan Qi obeyed and defeated the bandits.

古文：于是以状表闻。
现代文：于是把情况上闻。
English: So I reported the situation.

古文：又说其人既有梓慎、焦、董之识，宜冀圣朝，咨询奇异。
现代文：又说，樊志张之为人，有梓慎、焦延寿、董仲舒的学识，应该辅佐圣朝，咨询一些奇异现象。
English: He also said that Zhang Zizhi, as a person, has the knowledge of Zizhen, Jiao Yanshou, and Dong Zhongshu, and should assist the Holy Dynasty and consult some strange phenomena.

古文：于是有诏特征，会病终。
现代文：于是有诏特召，碰上樊病死了。
English: So there was a special call, and he died of rickets.

古文：单飏字武宣，山阳湖陆人也。
现代文：单飏传，单飏字武宣，山阳湖陆人。
English: Sanzhongzhuan, Sanzhongzha Wuxuan, Sanyanghu Lu Ren.

古文：以孤特清苦自立，善明天官、算术。
现代文：以孤特清苦自立生活，会天官、算术。
English: To live a lonely, hard-working, independent life, to be able to understand the heavenly government and arithmetic.

古文：举孝廉，稍迁太史令，侍中。
现代文：被举为孝廉，不久升为太史令、侍中。
English: He was raised to the rank of filial piety, and was soon promoted to Taishi-rei and Samurai chujo.

古文：出为汉中太守，公事免。
现代文：出为汉中太守，因公事免职。
English: He was appointed as the vice-governor of Hanzhong, but was dismissed for official business.

古文：后拜尚书，卒于官。
现代文：后来拜为尚书，死在官位。
English: He later became a scholar and died in office.

古文：初，熹平末，黄龙见谯，光禄大夫桥玄问飏： 此何祥也？ 
现代文：起初，熹平末年，黄龙出现在谯，光禄大夫桥玄问单飏 ：这是什么祥兆？ 
English: At first, at the end of the Heian period, the Yellow Dragon appeared in Goryeo. Dr. Guanglu Qiao Xuan asked: What is this auspicious sign?

古文：飏曰： 其国当有王者兴。
现代文：飏说 ：国家应当有王者兴起。
English: Zou said: The country should have a king emerge.

古文：不及五十年，龙当复见，此其应也。 
现代文：不到五十年，龙当再现，这就是应验。 
English: Less than fifty years later, Longtang reappears, which is a fulfillment.

古文：魏郡人殷登密记之。
现代文：魏郡人殷登暗地记下来。
English: Wei County people secretly jotted down.

古文：至建安二十五年春，黄龙复见谯，其冬，魏受禅。
现代文：到建安二十五年春天，黄龙又出现在谯，这年冬天，魏受禅让。
English: In the spring of the 25th year of Jian'an, Huanglong reappeared in Jie, and in the winter of the same year, Wei was transferred to Zen.

古文：韩说字叔儒，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：韩说传，韩说字叔儒，会稽山阴人。
English: According to Korean legend, the Korean word for uncle is shuju, and the person who practices it is shangyin.

古文：博通五经，尤善图纬之学。
现代文：博通《五经》，特别长于图纬之学。
English: He is well-versed in the "Five Classics" and is particularly good at the study of graphs.

古文：举孝廉。
现代文：被举为孝廉。
English: He was raised as a filial son.

古文：与议郎蔡邕友善。
现代文：与议郎蔡邕是好朋友。
English: He is good friends with the speaker of the Diet, Cai Jun.

古文：数陈灾眚，及奏赋、颂、连珠。
现代文：多次陈报灾眚，以及奏赋、颂、连珠。
English: He repeatedly recited the annals of disasters and calamities, as well as played the fu, ode, and rendition.

古文：稍迁侍中。
现代文：不久升为侍中。
English: He was soon promoted to Samurai Junior Middle Officer.

古文：光和元年十月，说言于灵帝，云其晦日必食，乞百官严装。
现代文：光和元年十月，韩说对灵帝说，月之三十日必有日食，请求百官严装等待。
English: In October of the first year of Guanghe, Han said to Lingdi that there would be a solar eclipse on the 30th day of the month, and asked the officials to be prepared to wait.

古文：帝从之，果如所言。
现代文：皇上听从了，果然像他所说的。
English: The Emperor obeyed and did as he had said.

古文：中平二年二月，又上封事，克期宫中有灾。
现代文：中平二年二月，又上封事，说期宫中有灾。
English: In February of the 2nd year of Zhongping, another letter was sent, saying that there was a disaster in the imperial palace.

古文：至日南宫大火。
现代文：到了那天南宫大火。
English: Then came the fire at the South Palace.

古文：迁说江夏太守，公事免，年七十，卒于家。
现代文：升说为江夏太守，因公事免官。年七十岁，死在家中。
English: He was said to be the governor of Jiangxia, but was removed from office for official business. At the age of seventy, he died at home.

古文：董扶字茂安，广汉绵竹人也。
现代文：董扶传，董扶字茂安，广汉绵竹人。
English: Dong Fu Chuan, Dong Fu Zi Maoan, Guanghan Mianzhu Ren.

古文：少游太学，与乡人任安齐名，俱事同郡杨厚，学图谶。
现代文：年少时游太学，与同乡人任安名声相等，都与同郡杨厚学习图谶之学。
English: When he was young, Yu Taigaku had the same reputation as his countryman Ren An, and both of them studied with Yang Hou of the same county.

古文：还家讲授，弟子自远而至。
现代文：回家讲授，学生自远方而来。
English: Teaching at home, students come from far away.

古文：前后宰府十辟，公车三征，再举贤良方正、博士、有道，皆称疾不就。
现代文：前后宰府十次征召，公车三次征召，再推为贤良方正、博士、有道，都称病不就。
English: He was summoned to Zaifu ten times, and to the public bus three times, and then promoted to the position of a virtuous person, a doctor, and a scholar, all of which were considered to be ill-advised.

古文：灵帝时，大将军何进荐扶，征拜侍中，甚见器重。
现代文：灵帝时，大将军何进推荐董扶，召拜为侍中，非常器重他。
English: When Emperor Ling was alive, the great general He Jin recommended Dong Fu and summoned him to be an attendant. He held him in high esteem.

古文：扶私谓太常刘焉曰： 京师将乱，益州分野有天子气。 
现代文：董扶私自对太常刘焉说： 京师将乱，益州分野有天子气。 
English: Dong Fuxi said to Taizang Liu Yan: Beijing will be in turmoil, and the Yizhou sector has the spirit of a son of heaven.

古文：焉信之，遂求出为益州牧，扶亦为蜀郡属国都尉，相与入蜀。
现代文：刘焉相信了他的话，于是请求做益州牧，董扶也为蜀郡属国都尉，一同到蜀。
English: Liu Yan believed his words, so he asked to be the pastor of Yizhou, and Dong Fu, who was also the provincial captain of Shu County, came to Shu together.

古文：去后一岁，帝崩，天下大乱，乃去官还家。
现代文：去后一年，皇帝驾崩，天下大乱，于是离开官位回家。
English: A year after he left, the emperor died and the country was in turmoil, so he left his post and returned home.

古文：年八十二卒。
现代文：八十二岁死去。
English: He died at the age of 82.

古文：后刘备称天子于蜀，皆如扶言。
现代文：后来刘备称天子在蜀，都像董扶所言。
English: Later, Liu Bei said that the Son of Heaven was in Shu, just like what Dong Fu said.

古文：蜀丞相诸葛亮问广汉秦密，董扶及任安所长。
现代文：蜀丞相诸葛亮问广汉秦密董扶和任安所长是什么。
English: Shu chancellor Zhuge Liang asked Guanghan Qin Mi Dong Fu and Ren An what the director was.

古文：密曰： 董扶褒秋毫之善，贬纤介之恶。
现代文：秦密说 ：董扶奖励很小的善事，贬责点滴的坏事。
English: Qin Mi said: "Dong Fu rewards very small good deeds, and disparages the drip drip of bad deeds.

古文：任安记人之善，忘人之过 云。
现代文：任安记人的好处，忘记人的过失。 
English: Always remember people's benefits, and forget people's faults.

古文：郭玉者，广汉雒人也。
现代文：郭玉传，郭玉，广汉雒人。
English: Guo Yu Chuan, Guo Yu, Guang Han Xuan Ren.

古文：初，有老父不知何出，常渔钓于涪水，因号涪翁。
现代文：起初，有老头不知从何处来，常在涪水钓鱼，大家称为涪翁。
English: In the beginning, there was an old man from I don't know where, who often went fishing in Surabaya, and everyone called him "Dao Weng."

古文：乞食人间，见有疾者，时下针石，辄应时而效，乃著《针经》、《诊脉法》传于世。
现代文：老头常向人乞食，遇见病人，就用针石给人治病，能立刻见效。后来著《针经》、《诊脉法》传给后代。
English: The old man often begged from people, and when he met a sick person, he would cure the person with a needle stone, which could have an immediate effect. Later, he passed it on to future generations with "The Book of the Needles" and "The Method of Diagnosing the Pulse."

古文：弟子程高，寻求积年，翁乃授之。
现代文：学生程高跟随老师多年，老翁才把书传授给他。
English: Student Cheng Gao has been following his teacher for many years, and it took the old man to pass the book on to him.

古文：高亦隐迹不仕。
现代文：程高也隐居不做官。
English: Chenggao also lives in seclusion and does not work as an official.

古文：玉少师事高，学方诊六微之技，阴阳隐侧之术。
现代文：郭玉年轻时曾拜程高为师，学习方诊六微的技巧，阴阳推算的方法。
English: When Guo Yu was young, he went to Cheng Gao as a teacher to learn the techniques of the six microspheres and the method of calculating yin and yang.

古文：和帝时，为太医丞，多有效应。
现代文：和帝时，做了太医丞，治病多有效应。
English: When he was emperor, he became a great physician, and he was very effective in curing the sick.

古文：帝奇之，仍试令嬖臣美手腕者与女子杂处帷中，使玉各诊一手，问所疾苦。
现代文：皇帝很觉奇怪。有一次，叫一个手臂秀美的宠臣和一女子躲在帐中，各伸出一只手来，叫郭玉诊脉，问是得了什么病。
English: The emperor felt very strange. On one occasion, he had a favorite retainer with a beautiful arm and a woman hide in a drawer. Each of them stretched out a hand and called Guo Yu to check his pulse and ask what kind of illness he had.

古文：玉曰： 左阳右阴，脉有男女，状若异人。臣疑其故。 
现代文：郭玉说 ：左阳右阴，脉有男女，好像怪人，臣怀疑其中必有缘故。 
English: Guo Yu said, "The yang and yang, the male and female, are like ghosts. I suspect there must be a reason for it."

古文：帝叹息称善。
现代文：皇帝感叹，称赞他不错。
English: The emperor sighed and praised him.

古文：玉仁爱不矜，虽贫贱厮养，必尽其心力，而医疗贵人，时或不愈。
现代文：郭玉心地仁慈，不骄矜，即使是给贫贱的奴仆诊病，也一定尽心竭力，但给贵人治病，有时反而不见效。
English: Guo Yu is kind-hearted and not arrogant. Even if he diagnoses a poor servant, he will do his best. However, when he treats a noble person, sometimes it is not effective.

古文：帝乃令贵人羸服变处，一针即差。
现代文：皇帝使贵人穿着破衣服就诊，一针下去病就好了。
English: The emperor made the noblewoman wear ragged clothes to go to the doctor, and she got better with just one injection.

古文：召玉诘问其状。
现代文：皇帝把郭玉找来问其原因，郭玉说： 医就是意。
English: The emperor called Guo Yu to ask the reason, and Guo Yu said: Medicine is the will.

古文：腠理至微，随气用巧，针石之间，毫芒即乖。
现代文：皮肤纹理很细，随气用巧，针石之间，有丝毫差错都不行。
English: The skin texture is very fine, it is easy to use with the wind, and there is not the slightest error between the needles.

古文：神存于心手之际，可得解而不可得言也。
现代文：我治病时，精神集中在心与手之间，可以解除病痛但说不出道理。
English: When I treat patients, I focus on the connection between the heart and the hands. I can relieve pain, but I can't explain why.

古文：夫贵者处尊高以临臣，臣怀怖慑以承之。
现代文：那些富贵之人处在尊高的地位叫我替他治病，我怀着害怕的心理去接受任务。
English: I accepted the task with trepidation, having been asked to treat the rich man in his exalted position.

古文：其为疗也，有四难焉；自用意而不任臣，一难也；将身不谨，二难也；骨节不强，不能使药，三难也；好逸恶劳，四难也。
现代文：这样治病，有四种难处：病者自作主张而不听我吩咐，这是一难；病人不注意爱护身体，这是二难；病人骨节不强壮，不能使药力生效，这是三难；病人好逸恶劳，这是四难。
English: There are four kinds of difficulties in curing the disease in this way: the patient makes his own suggestions and does not listen to my orders, this is a difficulty; the patient does not pay attention to the care of the body, this is the second difficulty; the patient's bones are not strong and cannot make the medicine effective, this is the third difficulty; the patient likes to escape and hates to work, this is the fourth difficulty.

古文：针有分寸，时有破漏，重以恐惧之心，加以裁慎之志，臣意且犹不尽，何有于病哉！
现代文：针有分寸，有时不免出点误差，加上我有害怕心理，小心翼翼，我的意念没有完全到位，怎么能集中精力在病情上呢？
English: The needle is measured, sometimes there is a little error, plus I am afraid, careful, my thoughts are not completely in place, how can I concentrate on the condition?

古文：此其所为不愈也。 
现代文：这就是治不好病的原因。 
English: This is the reason why the disease cannot be cured.

古文：帝善其对。
现代文：皇帝认为他的话很有道理。
English: The emperor thought his words were very reasonable.

古文：年老卒官。
现代文：郭玉老了，死在太医丞任上。
English: He died of old age in office.

古文：华佗字元化，沛国谯人也，一名旉。
现代文：华佗传，华佗，字元化，沛国谯人。又名甫方。
English: The characters of the Chinese character 华 have been digitized. He is a native of Pei County, Shandong Province, also known as.

古文：游学徐土，兼通数经。
现代文：在徐州游历学习，通晓几种经书。
English: He left his hometown and went to Xuzhou to study. He is familiar with several scriptures.

古文：晓养性之术，年且百岁而犹有壮容，时人以为仙。
现代文：懂得修心养性的方法，年将五十还有壮年的容貌，当时人认为他是神仙。
English: He knew how to cultivate his mind and nurture his character, and at the age of fifty he still had the appearance of a man in his prime. At that time, people thought he was a god.

古文：沛相陈珪举孝廉，太尉黄琬辟，皆不就。
现代文：沛国宰相陈王圭推举他作孝廉，太尉黄琬也推荐他，他都不去上任。
English: Pei's partner, Chen Gui, recommended him to Xiao Lian, and Tai Lai Huang Qi recruited him, but neither of them took up the post.

古文：精于方药，处齐不过数种，心识分铢，不假称量，针灸不过数处。
现代文：华佗精通药方，他处方用药很少，心中有数，不必用秤称。他用针灸也不过几处地方。
English: Hua Wei is well-versed in prescriptions. He uses very few prescription drugs. He knows the number in his heart and does not need to use a scale. He uses acupuncture in only a few places.

古文：若疾发结于内，针药所不能及者，乃令先以酒服麻沸散，既醉无所觉，因刳破腹背，抽割积聚。
现代文：如果疾病发自内脏，针药达不到，他就叫患者先饮麻沸散药酒，等到麻醉后失去知觉，便在腹部或背部开刀，割去病根再行缝合。
English: If the disease originates from the internal organs, and the needles cannot reach it, he will first ask the patient to drink the medicinal liquor, wait until he loses consciousness after the anesthesia, then he will make an incision in the abdomen or back, cut off the root of the disease and then suture it.

古文：若在肠胃，则断截湔洗，除去疾秽，既而缝合，傅以神膏，四五日创愈，一月之间皆平复。
现代文：如果病在肠胃，就将肠胃截开用药水洗涤，除去病灶，再把它缝合，涂上神膏，过四五天创口愈合，一个月后完全复原。
English: If the disease is in the intestine and stomach, the intestine and stomach will be cut open and washed with medicinal water to remove the focus of the disease, then it will be sutured and coated with God's ointment. After four or five days, the wound will be healed, and after one month, it will be completely restored.

古文：佗尝行道，见有病咽塞者，因语之曰： 向来道隅有卖饼人，萍齑甚酸，可取三升饮之，病自当去。 
现代文：华佗在外行走，看见一个咽喉生病的人，便对病人说： 前面路边有卖饼的人，他用的萍荠甚酸，你向他要三升喝下，病就会好。 
English: When Hua Tuo was out walking, he saw a man with a sore throat. He said to the patient, "There is a man selling cakes on the road in front of you. He uses very strong vinegar. If you ask him to drink three liters of it, your illness will be cured."

古文：即如佗言，立吐一蛇，乃悬于车而候佗。
现代文：病人果然照办，喝下之后，立刻吐出一条蛇来，便把蛇挂在车上等候华佗转来。
English: The patient did as he was told. After drinking it, he immediately vomited up a snake. He then hung the snake on the car and waited for Hua Wei to come.

古文：时佗小兒戏于门中，逆见，自相谓曰： 客车边有物，必是逢我翁也。 
现代文：当时华佗的小儿子正在门内玩耍，看见病人，迎进屋，就道： 客人车边有蛇，一定是见到我家老头子了。 
English: At that time, Hua Yao's younger son was playing inside the door. When he saw the patient, he welcomed him into the house and said, "There is a snake next to the guest's car. I must have seen the old man of my family."

古文：及客进，顾视壁北，悬蛇以十数，乃知其奇。
现代文：等到客人进屋，看到北墙上挂着十多条蛇，才知道华佗的医术奇妙。
English: It is not until the guests enter the house and see more than ten snakes hanging on the north wall that they realize how wonderful Hua Wei's medical skills are.

古文：又有一郡守笃病久，佗以为盛怒则差。
现代文：又有一位郡守病了很久，华佗看病之后认为患者必须大发一顿脾气病才会好。
English: Another county magistrate had been ill for a long time. After seeing a doctor, Hua Wei thought that the patient had to have a big temper tantrum in order to get better.

古文：乃多受其货而不加功。无何弃去，又留书骂之。
现代文：于是受了郡守很多财物而不去给他看病，不久就离开了，又留下一封信骂郡守。
English: As a result, he took a lot of property from the county magistrate and did not go to see him, and soon left, leaving a letter scolding the county magistrate.

古文：太守果大怒，令人追杀佗，不及，因瞋恚，吐黑血数升而愈。
现代文：郡守果然大怒，并派人追杀华佗，没有追上，于是便发脾气，吐出几升黑血而病却好了。
English: The county governor was furious, and sent someone to chase and kill Hua Tuo, but he couldn't catch up, so he lost his temper, vomited out several liters of black blood, but his illness was cured.

古文：又有疾者，诣佗求疗，佗曰： 君病根深，应当剖破腹。
现代文：又有一位病人，到华佗那里求医，华佗说： 你的病根很深，应该剖腹。
English: Another patient went to Hua Jun to seek medical treatment. Hua Jun said, "Your illness is very deep-rooted. You should have your abdomen cut open."

古文：然君寿亦不过十年，病不能相杀也。 
现代文：但是你的寿命不过十年，病不能断根。 
English: But your lifespan is only ten years, and the disease cannot be eradicated.

古文：病者不堪其苦，必欲除之，佗遂下疗，应时愈。十年竟死。
现代文：病人忍不了痛苦，一定要除去病根。华佗就依法治疗，当时病好了，十年后终于死去。
English: The patient could not bear the pain and had to have the root of the disease removed. Hua Wei was treated in accordance with the law. At that time, her illness was cured, and she finally died ten years later.

古文：广陵太守陈登，忽患匈中烦懑，面赤不食。
现代文：广陵太守陈登忽患胸中烦闷的病，脸孔红红的，不思饮食。
English: Chen Denghuang, the governor of Guangling, suddenly suffered from an annoying disease in his chest, his face was red, and he did not want to eat.

古文：佗脉之，曰： 府君胃中有虫，欲成内疽，腥物所为也。 
现代文：华佗把了脉，便说 ：府君胃中有虫，将成为内疽，这是吃多了腥物的缘故。 
English: Hua Yan checked his pulse and said, "Fujun has worms in his stomach and will become gangrene, this is due to eating too many bad things."

古文：即作汤二升，再服，须臾，吐出三升许虫，头赤而动，半身犹是生鱼脍，所苦便愈。
现代文：于是酌药酒二升，喝了两次，不久，吐出三升虫，红头蠕蠕而动，后半节还是生鱼脍，于是病就好了。
English: So he drank two liters of medicinal wine, drank it twice, and soon vomited out three liters of worms, the red head wriggled, and the second half was raw fish gills, so the disease was cured.

古文：佗曰： 此病后三期当发，遇良医可救。
现代文：华佗说 ：这病过三年还会发作，遇上良医可救。 
English: Hua Wei said: This disease will still occur after three years, and it can be cured by a good doctor.

古文：登至期疾动，时佗不在，遂死。
现代文：过了三年，陈登病复发，时华佗不在，就死了。
English: After three years, Chen Deng's illness relapsed and he died in the absence of Shi Huajun.

古文：曹操闻而召佗，常在左右，操积苦头风眩，佗针，随手而差。
现代文：曹操听到这些传说，把华佗找来，常在自己身边。曹操长期为头风症所苦，华佗给扎针灸，随即好了。
English: Cao Cao heard these legends and brought Hua Wei to stay with him. Cao Cao had suffered from a head cold for a long time. Hua Wei was given acupuncture and immediately recovered.

古文：有李将军者，妻病，呼佗视脉。佗曰： 伤身而胎不去。 
现代文：有位李将军，妻子生病，请华佗看脉，佗说： 她身体有伤而胎没去掉。 
English: There was a General Li whose wife was ill. He asked Hua Yao to check her pulse. Hua Yao said, "She was injured, but the fetus was not removed."

古文：将军言间实伤身，胎已去矣。
现代文：将军说： 身体确有伤，胎已去掉。 
English: The general said: "There are indeed injuries on the body, and the fetus has been removed.

古文：佗曰： 案脉，胎未去也。 
现代文：佗说： 据脉，胎未去掉。 
English: Hua Wei said, "Now that the vein has been diagnosed, the fetus has not yet dropped.

古文：将军以为不然。
现代文：将军认为不对。
English: The general thought it was wrong.

古文：妻稍差，百余日复动，更呼佗。
现代文：妻病稍好，过百多天胎又动，再请佗来。
English: My wife's illness is a little better. After more than a hundred days, the fetus is moving again. Please come again.

古文：佗曰： 脉理如前，是两胎。
现代文：佗说 ：脉理和前次一样，这是两胎。
English: Zou said: "The rhythm is the same as last time, this is two births.

古文：先生者去血多，故后兒不得出也。
现代文：第一胎生下，失血过多，所以第二胎不能出来。
English: When the first baby was born, there was too much blood loss, so the second baby couldn't come out.

古文：胎既已死，血脉不复归，必燥著母脊。 
现代文：胎儿已经死了，血脉不再周流，一定会使母体生病。 
English: The fetus is already dead, the blood is no longer circulating, and it will definitely make the mother sick.

古文：乃为下针，并令进汤。
现代文：于是替她扎针，并叫她服药。
English: So they gave her an injection and told her to take her medicine.

古文：妇因欲产而不通。
现代文：女人于是将生产但又生不下。
English: The woman will then produce but not give birth.

古文：佗曰： 死胎枯燥，势不自生。 
现代文：华佗说： 死胎干枯了，不能自然生下。 
English: Hua Wei said: The dead fetus is dry and cannot give birth naturally.

古文：使人探之，果得死胎，人形可识，但其色已黑。
现代文：使人探之，果然取出死胎，胎儿像人形，皮肤发黑。
English: The dead fetus, which resembled a doll and had dark skin, was successfully removed.

古文：佗之绝技，皆此类也。
现代文：佗的医术绝技，都像这样。
English: The medical feats of baboons are all like this.

古文：为人性恶，难得意，且耻以医见业，又去家思归，乃就操求还取方，因托妻疾，数期不反。
现代文：华佗为人脾气不好，很不得意，对以行医为职业感到羞耻，又离家太久想回去，于是向曹操请假，说是回去取药，到了京，说妻有病，过期不回来。
English: Hua Wei is a bad-tempered person, very disappointed, ashamed of practicing medicine as a profession, and wants to go back after being away from home for too long, so he asked Cao Cao for leave, saying that he would go back to pick up medicine. When he arrived in Beijing, he said that his wife was ill and would not return after the deadline.

古文：操累书呼之，又敕郡县发遣，佗恃能厌事，独不肯至。操大怒，使人廉之，知妻诈疾，乃收付狱讯，考验首服。
现代文：曹操多次写信找他，又下令郡县催促，华佗自恃有本事不肯回，曹操大怒，派人打听，得知华佗之妻并未生病，于是将华佗抓来关在狱中，审讯后，华佗承认有罪。
English: Cao Cao wrote to him many times, and ordered the county to urge him. Hua Wei refused to return, claiming that he had the ability to do so. Cao Cao was furious and sent someone to inquire. He learned that Hua Wei's wife was not ill, so he arrested Hua Wei and put him in prison. After the trial, Hua Wei pleaded guilty.

古文：荀彧请曰： 佗方术实工，人命所悬，宜加全宥。 
现代文：荀彧请求曹操说 ：华佗医术高明，能救人命，应该宽恕他。 
English: Zou pleaded with Cao Cao, saying: Hua Zou is a skilled doctor and can save lives, so he should be forgiven.

古文：操不从，竟杀之。
现代文：曹操不听，最后杀了华佗。
English: Cao Cao did not listen, and finally killed Hua Tuo.

古文：佗临死，出一卷书与狱吏，曰： 此可以活人。 
现代文：华佗临死前，拿出一卷医书给狱吏，说： 凭这可以救活病人。 
English: Before her death, Hua Wei handed a book to her jailer and said, "This can save lives."

古文：吏畏法不敢受，佗不强与，索火烧之。
现代文：狱吏害怕受牵连，不敢接受，华佗也不勉强，用火把书烧掉了。
English: The warden, afraid of being implicated, did not dare to accept it, and Hua Wei did not hesitate to burn the book.

古文：初，军吏李成苦咳，昼夜不寐。
现代文：起初，军吏李成咳嗽很厉害，白天晚上都不能入睡。
English: At first, Li Cheng, a military officer, had such a bad cough that he couldn't sleep at night or during the day.

古文：佗以为肠痈，与散两钱服之，即吐二升脓血，于此渐愈。
现代文：华佗认为是肠病，给药两钱，吃后，吐出两升脓血，于是病就好了。
English: Hua Yao thought it was an intestinal disease. She gave him two coins for the medicine. After eating, he vomited two liters of blood, and his illness was cured.

古文：乃戒之曰： 后十八岁，疾当发动，若不得此药，不可差也。 
现代文：华佗对李成说： 十八年后，病又会发作，如果找不到这种药，不可能好。 
English: Hua Wei said to Li Chengluo: After eighteen years, the disease will occur again, if you can't find this medicine, it can't be good.

古文：复分散与之，后五六岁，有里人如成先病，请药甚急，成愍而与之，乃故往谯更从佗求，适值见收，意不忍言。
现代文：于是把药给他。过五六年，有同里人得病和李成相同，需药甚急，李成同情他，把自己的药给他。再到谯国去找华佗要药，恰逢华佗坐牢去了，不忍开口。
English: So he gave him the medicine. Fifty-six years later, a fellow villager fell ill with the same disease as Li Cheng and needed medicine urgently. Li Cheng sympathized with him and gave him his own medicine. He then went to Shandong Province to find Hua Wei to ask for medicine. Just as Hua Wei went to prison, he couldn't bear to open his mouth.

古文：后十八年，成病发，无药而死。
现代文：过了十八年，李成病发作了，找不到药，终于死去。
English: Eighteen years later, Li Cheng fell ill, could not find a cure, and finally died.

古文：广陵吴普、彭城樊阿，皆从佗学。
现代文：广陵吴普、彭城樊阿都从华佗学医。
English: Guangling Wu Pu and Peng Chengyao both studied medicine in Hualien.

古文：普依准佗疗，多所全济。
现代文：吴普依照华佗的方法，救活了许多人。
English: Wu Pu saved many people's lives according to Hua Xi's method.

古文：佗语普曰： 人体欲得劳动，但不当使极耳。
现代文：华佗对吴普说： 人体要经常运动，但是不能过度。
English: Hua Wei said to Wu Pu: The human body should exercise regularly, but not excessively.

古文：动摇则谷气得销，血脉流通，病不得生，譬犹户枢，终不朽也。
现代文：多运动就能使饮食消化，血脉流通，病不得生，像户枢一样，经常转动，不易腐朽。
English: More exercise can make the diet digestion, blood circulation, disease can not be born, like the hub, often rotate, not perishable.

古文：是以古之仙者，为导引之事，熊经鸱顾，引挽腰体，动诸关节，以求难老。
现代文：因此古之神仙常常引导人体运动，模仿熊鸱的动作，使腰部头部活动，关节运动，用来延缓衰老。
English: Therefore, the ancient gods and goddesses often guided human movement, imitated the movements of the bear cub, made the head of the waist move, and the joints move, which was used to delay aging.

古文：吾有一术，名五禽之戏：一曰虎，二曰鹿，三曰熊，四曰猿，五曰鸟。
现代文：我有一套法子，叫五禽戏。五禽：一是虎，二是鹿，三是熊，四是猴，五是鸟。
English: I have a method called the five-bird play. Five birds: one is a tiger, two is a deer, three is a bear, four is a monkey, and five is a bird.

古文：亦以除疾，兼利蹄足，以当导引。
现代文：模仿它们的动作，用来除去疾病，让手足多活动，用来代替神仙的导引方法。
English: Imitating their movements is used to remove diseases, to make the hands and feet more active, and to replace the guidance method of the gods.

古文：体有不快，起作一禽之戏，恰而汗出，因以著粉，身体轻便而欲食。 
现代文：身体有不舒服时，起来作一禽的动作，身体出汗，再用药粉扑身，身体就轻快而增进食欲。 
English: When the body is uncomfortable, get up and make a fowl movement, the body sweats, and then use the powder to flutter, the body is brisk and increases appetite.

古文：普施行之，年九十余，耳目聪明，齿牙完坚。
现代文：吴普照着做去，九十多岁，耳目聪明，牙齿完好坚实。
English: Wu Pu did as he was told. He was over ninety years old, his eyes and ears were sharp, and his teeth were intact and solid.

古文：阿善针术。
现代文：樊阿会针灸。
English: Yaa is good at needlework.

古文：凡医咸言背及匈藏之间不可妄针，针之不可过四分，而阿针背入一二寸，巨阙匈藏乃五六寸，而病皆瘳。
现代文：一般医生都说背和胸不可乱用针，即使用针也不能超过四分，而樊阿针背进入一二寸，扎胸进入五六寸，而病都好了。
English: General doctors say that the back and chest should not be used indiscriminately. Even if the needle is used, it should not exceed four points, and the back of the needle should enter one or two inches, and the chest should enter five or six inches, and the disease will be cured.

古文：鲁女生数说显宗时事，甚明了，议者疑其时人也。
现代文：樊阿向华佗求长期服用有益的药方，华佗给他漆叶青黏散，即漆叶屑一斗，青黏十四两，用这作标准。据说服久了，可以去三虫，利五脏，使身体减肥，头发不白。
English: Zhao Ah asked Hua Wei for a long-term prescription of beneficial drugs. Hua Wei gave him the standard of lacquer leaf sticky, that is, one bucket of lacquer leaf crumbs, fourteen sticky, and used this as a standard. It has been convinced for a long time that it can go to the three insects, benefit the five organs, make the body lose weight, and the hair is not white.

古文：董卓乱后，莫知所在。
现代文：樊阿听从了，活了百多岁。
English: Yaa obeyed, and lived to be over a hundred years old.

古文：徐登者，闽中人也。本女子，化为丈夫。
现代文：徐登传，徐登，闽中人，本来是女子，变为丈夫。
English: Xu Deng Chuan, Xu Deng, a middle-aged man, was originally a woman, but became a husband.

古文：善为巫术。
现代文：善于巫术。
English: Good at witchcraft.

古文：又赵炳，字公阿，东阳人，能为越方。
现代文：又有赵炳，字公阿，东阳人，能为越方。
English: There is also Zhao Wei, also known as Gongao, a Dongyang man, who can play for Yuefang.

古文：时遭兵乱，疾疫大起，二人遇于乌伤溪水之上，遂结言约，共以其术疗病。
现代文：当时适逢兵乱，疾疫大发作。两人相会在乌伤溪水之上，于是结言约，共用他们的法术治病。
English: At that time, coinciding with the outbreak of war and disease, the two men met on the waters of the Black Wound Creek, whereupon they made a pact to share their healing spells.

古文：各相谓曰： 今既同志，且可各试所能。 
现代文：他们互相商量道 ：现在既是同志，暂可各试所能。 
English: They said to each other: Now that we are comrades, we can try our best for the time being.

古文：登乃禁溪水，水为不流；炳复次禁枯树，树即生荑，二人相视而笑，共行其道焉。
现代文：徐登便禁溪水，水就不流；赵炳接着禁枯树，树上立即发芽，两人对看着笑，共同行使其方法。
English: Xu Deng then forbids the water of the stream, the water does not flow; Zhao Wei then forbids the dead tree, the tree immediately sprouts, the two people look at each other and laugh, and jointly practice their methods.

古文：登年长，炳师事之。
现代文：徐登年纪稍长，赵炳把他当老师事之。
English: Xu Deng was a little older, and Zhao Wei treated him as a teacher.

古文：贵尚清俭，礼神唯以东流水为酌，削桑皮为脯。
现代文：他们崇尚清俭，祭神时只用东流水为供水，削桑皮做干肉。
English: They advocated frugality, and only used the Dongliu water to supply water to their deities, and peeled mulberry bark to make dried meat.

古文：但行禁架，所疗皆除。
现代文：只要行使禁术，所治的病便除掉。
English: As long as the prohibition is exercised, the treated disease will be eliminated.

古文：后登物故，炳东入章安，百姓未之知也。
现代文：后来徐登死去，赵炳向东进入章安，百姓并不知道。
English: Later, Xu Deng died, and Zhao Yao moved eastward into Zhang'an, unbeknownst to the people.

古文：炳乃故升茅屋，梧鼎而爨，主人见之惊懅，炳笑不应。既而爨孰，屋无损异。
现代文：赵炳于是故意登上茅屋，用梧树干支撑着锅煮东西吃，主人看见了大惊，赵炳笑而不答，不久菜煮熟了，屋没损坏。
English: Zhao Yao then deliberately boarded the thatch house, using the trunk of a willow tree to support the pot to cook something to eat. The owner saw the shock, Zhao Yao laughed and did not answer. Soon the dish was cooked, and the house was not damaged.

古文：又尝临水求度，船人不和之，炳乃张盖坐其中，长啸呼风，乱流而济，于是百姓神服，从者如归。
现代文：又曾经到河边求渡河。驾船的不许可，赵炳便打着伞坐在船中，大声呼风，经过乱流而过去了。于是百姓神服，跟从他的像回家的一般。
English: Once again, he went to the river to ask for permission to cross the river. When he was not allowed to drive the boat, Zhao Wei sat in the boat with an umbrella, blew the wind loudly, and passed through the turbulent current. So the people were amazed and followed him as if they were going home.

古文：章安令恶其惑众，收杀之。
现代文：章安县令讨厌他用妖术惑众，将他收捕并杀了他。
English: The Zhang'an County magistrate hated him for using magic to deceive the public, arrested him and killed him.

古文：人为立祠室于永康，至今蚊蚋不能入也。
现代文：百姓替他立庙在永康，到现在蚊蚋不进庙中去。
English: The people built a temple for him in Yongkang. To this day, mosquitoes do not enter the temple.

古文：费长房者，汝南人也。曾为市掾。
现代文：费长房传费长房，汝南人，曾做过市里官佐。
English: Fei Changfang Fei Changfang, a native of Yunnan Province, once served as a deputy of the municipal government.

古文：市中有老翁卖药，悬一壶于肆头，及市罢，辄跳入壶中。
现代文：市中有老翁卖药，挂一把壶在店门前，等买卖做完，自己就跳入壶中，市人谁也没看见。
English: There is an old man in the city who sells medicine, hangs a pot in front of the shop door, and after the transaction is done, he jumps into the pot, and no one in the city sees him.

古文：市人莫之见，唯长房于楼上睹之，异焉，因往再拜奉酒脯。
现代文：只有长房在楼上看见，很奇怪。于是拿着酒和干肉去拜见老翁。
English: It was strange to see only Nagafusa upstairs, so I went to see the old man with wine and dried meat.

古文：翁知长房之意其神也，谓之曰： 子明日可更来。 
现代文：老翁知道长房是因为自己的神奇而来的，便对长房说 ：你明日可再来。 
English: The old man knew that Nagafusa had come because of his own magic, so he said to Nagafusa: You can come again tomorrow.

古文：长房旦日复诣翁，翁乃与俱入壶中。
现代文：长房次日天明又到老翁那里，老翁就带长房一起进入壶中。
English: The next day, Nagafusa went to the old man again, and the old man took Nagafusa into the pot with him.

古文：唯见玉堂严丽，旨酒甘肴，盈衍其中，共饮毕而出。
现代文：只见壶里玉堂庄严华丽，美酒好菜满满的，两人一道喝完酒才出来。
English: I could only see the stately and gorgeous Jade Hall in the pot, full of good wine and good food, and the two of them only came out after drinking wine together.

古文：翁约不听与人言之。
现代文：老翁嘱他不与别人讲及此事。
English: The old man told him not to tell anyone about it.

古文：后乃就楼上候长房曰： 我神仙之人，以过见责，今事毕当去，子宁能相随乎？
现代文：后来老翁到楼上等候长房并说道： 我本是神仙，因为犯了过失受处分，现在事情已完应当回去，你能同我一道走吗？
English: Later, the old man went upstairs to wait for the chief steward and said, "I am originally a fairy godmother. I was punished for committing a fault. Now that the matter is over, I should go back. Can you come with me?"

古文：楼下有少酒，与卿与别。 
现代文：楼下有少量的酒，特来和你告别。 
English: There's a small amount of alcohol downstairs. I've come to say goodbye.

古文：长房使人取之，不能胜，又令十人扛之，犹不举。
现代文：长房派人下楼取酒，拿不动，又派十人去抬，还是抬不起。
English: Nagafusa sent someone downstairs to fetch the wine, but he couldn't hold it. He also sent ten people to carry it, but they still couldn't lift it.

古文：翁闻，笑而下楼，以一指提之而上。
现代文：老翁听见了，笑着下楼，用一个指头就提上来了。
English: Hearing this, the old man laughed, went downstairs and picked it up with one finger.

古文：视器如一升许，而二人饮之终日不尽。
现代文：看那装酒的容器不过装一升的样子，可是两人喝一整天还喝不完。
English: Look at that container of wine, it only looks like it holds one litre, but the two of them have been drinking all day and still can't finish it.

古文：长房遂欲求道，而顾家人为忧。
现代文：长房想求做神仙之道，可是怕家人着急。
English: Nagafusa wants to become a god, but is afraid of upsetting his family.

古文：翁乃断一青竹，度与长房身齐，使悬之舍后。
现代文：老翁就砍一段青竹，估计与长房身高相等，叫长房把青竹挂在屋后边。
English: The old man cut a piece of bamboo, estimated to be the same height as Nagafusa, and told Nagafusa to hang the bamboo behind the house.

古文：家人见之，即长房形也，以为缢死，大小惊号，遂殡葬之。
现代文：家人见了，就是长房的形象，以为长房自缢死了。一家大小惊异号哭，于是将青竹埋葬起来。
English: When the family saw it, it was the image of Nagafusa, and they thought that Nagafusa had strangled himself to death. The whole family cried out in surprise, so they buried Aotake.

古文：长房立其傍，而莫之见也。
现代文：其实长房就站在旁边，家人没有看出来。
English: In fact, Nagafusa was standing right next to them, and the family didn't see him.

古文：于是遂随从入深山，践荆棘于群虎之中，留使独处，长房不恐。
现代文：从此就跟老翁到了深山，脚踩荆棘，进入群虎之中，老翁叫长房一个人留下来，长房一点也不害怕。
English: From then on, he and the old man went deep into the mountains, stepping on thorns, into the midst of a group of tigers. The old man asked Nagafusa to stay alone, and Nagafusa was not afraid at all.

古文：又卧于空室，以朽索悬万斤石于心上，众蛇竞来啮索且断，长房亦不移。
现代文：又叫长房睡在一间空屋里，用朽索吊一块万斤重的石头在心窝之上，许多蛇争来咬索，索快要断了，长房也不动一下。
English: He also told Nagafusa to sleep in an empty room. He used a rotten rope to hang a stone weighing ten thousand kilos above his heart socket. Many snakes fought to bite the rope. The rope was about to break, but Nagafusa did not move.

古文：翁还，抚之曰： 子可教也。 
现代文：老翁回来，抚摸长房道： 你是可教育好的。 
English: When the old man came back, he stroked Changfang and said, "You can be educated.

古文：复使食粪，粪中有三虫，臭秽特甚，长房意恶之。
现代文：又叫长房吃粪便，粪里有三虫，又臭又脏，长房感到恶心。
English: He also made Nagafusa eat excrement. There were three worms in the excrement, which was smelly and dirty. Nagafusa felt nauseous.

古文：翁曰： 子几得道，恨于此不成，如何！ 
现代文：老翁说： 你差不多要得道了，可惜这一关没通过，怎么办？ 
English: The old man said, "You almost made it, but unfortunately, you didn't pass. What should you do?"

古文：长房辞归，翁与一竹杖，曰： 骑此任所之，则自至矣。
现代文：长房辞别老翁，老翁给他一根竹杖，说道 ：你骑上它，让它随便跑，就自然到家了。
English: Nagafusa said goodbye to the old man. The old man gave him a bamboo cane and said, "If you ride it and let it run as it pleases, it will naturally get you home."

古文：既至，可以杖投葛陂中也。 
现代文：到家之后，可把竹杖丢进葛陂中去。 
English: After arriving home, you can throw the bamboo cane into the worms.

古文：又为作一符，曰： 以此主地上鬼神。 
现代文：又替长房画一道符，说道： 凭这可以主宰地上的鬼神。 
English: He also drew a symbol for Nagafusa, saying, "With this, you can dominate the ghosts and gods on earth."

古文：长房乘杖，须臾来归，自谓去家适经旬日，而已十余年矣。 
现代文：长房骑着竹马，一会儿就到家了，自己以为离家过十天了，哪知已过了十多年了。
English: Nagafusa rode the bamboo horse and arrived home in a moment. He thought he had been away from home for ten days, but it had been more than ten years.

古文：即以杖投陂，顾视则龙也。
现代文：就把竹杖投入陂塘，一看竟变为龙了。
English: He threw the bamboo cane into the pond, and it turned into a dragon.

古文：家人谓其久死，不信之。
现代文：家人说他死去很久了，不信他能活着回来。
English: His family said he had been dead for a long time and did not believe he would come back alive.

古文：长房曰： 往日所葬，但竹杖耳。 
现代文：长房说： 从前埋葬的不是我，是一根竹杖哩！ 
English: Nagafusa said, "I wasn't the one who was buried, it was a bamboo cane!"

古文：乃发冢剖棺，杖犹存焉。
现代文：于是叫人挖坟开棺，杖棍还在。
English: So they had someone dig up the grave and open the coffin, but the cane was still there.

古文：遂能医疗众病，鞭笞百鬼，及驱使社公。
现代文：从此长房能给人医治百病，能用鞭子赶百鬼，还能调遣土地公公。
English: From then on, Nagafusa was able to cure people of all kinds of diseases, drive away hundreds of ghosts with a whip, and dispatch land stewards.

古文：或在它坐，独自恚怒，人问其故，曰： 吾责鬼魅之犯法者耳。 
现代文：有时坐着，独自大发脾气，别人问他为什么，他说： 我正在审问犯法的鬼呢！ 
English: Sometimes he sits alone and loses his temper. When asked why, he says: "I'm interrogating a criminal!"

古文：汝南岁岁常有魅，伪作太守章服、诣府门椎鼓者，郡中患之。
现代文：汝南年年闹鬼，有的鬼伪装太守，到府门击鼓，郡里人都害怕。
English: Runan is haunted year after year. Some ghosts disguise themselves as governors and come to the gate to play the drums. Everyone in the county is afraid of them.

古文：时魅适来，而逢长房谒府君，惶惧不得退，便前解衣冠，叩头乞活。
现代文：有一次鬼刚来到，正碰上长房拜见府君，鬼害怕，一时无法退出，便上前解下衣冠，叩头请求饶命。
English: Once upon a time, a ghost had just arrived and was bumping into Nagafusa to visit the prefect. The ghost was afraid and couldn't leave for a moment, so he went forward, took off his robe, and bowed down to beg for his life.

古文：长房呵之云： 便于中庭正汝故形！ 
现代文：长房大声呵斥道 ：你就在庭中现原形来！ 
English: Nagafusa shouted loudly, "You just show yourself in the garden!"

古文：即成老鳖，大如车轮，颈长一丈。
现代文：鬼即变为老鳖，有车轮般大，颈长一丈。
English: The ghost immediately turns into an old woman, as big as a wheel, with a long neck.

古文：长房复令就太守服罪，付其一札，以敕葛陂君。
现代文：长房又叫他到太守前认罪，交给他一封书札，要他送给葛陂君。
English: Nagafusa also asked him to plead guilty before the Empress Dowager, and handed him a bookplate, asking him to give it to Ge Yuejun.

古文：魅叩头流涕，持札植于陂边，以颈绕之而死。
现代文：鬼叩头流泪，拿着札站在陂塘边，用颈绕着信札而死。
English: The ghost bowed his head and shed tears, stood on the edge of the pond holding the letter, and died with his neck around the letter.

古文：后东海君来见葛陂君，因淫其夫人，于是长房劾系之三年，而东海大旱。
现代文：后来东海君来见葛陂君，淫乱其夫人，于是长房将东海君锁住三年，而东海发生大旱灾。
English: Later, Donghae Jun came to see Ge Yingjun, and fornicated with his wife, so Nagafusa locked Donghae Jun up for three years, and a great drought occurred in Donghae.

古文：长房至海上，见其人请雨，乃谓之曰： 东海君有罪，吾前系于葛陂，今方出之，使作雨也。 
现代文：长房到了海边，看见许多人求雨，就对大家说： 东海龙君有罪，我从前把它关在葛陂，现在才让它出来作雨呢。 
English: When Nagafusa arrived at the seashore, he saw many people begging for rain, so he said to everyone, "The East Sea Dragon is guilty. I used to keep it in the basket, but now I let it come out to make rain."

古文：于是雨立注。
现代文：于是大雨倾盆而下。
English: As a result, torrential rain poured down.

古文：长房曾与人共行，见一书生黄巾被裘，无鞍骑马，下而叩头，长房曰： 还它马，赦汝死罪。 
现代文：长房曾与人外出，看见一位书生头戴黄巾，身披羊裘，骑着没有鞍子的马，下来向长房叩头。长房说： 还马给人家，免你死罪。 
English: Nagafusa used to go out with people and saw a scholar with a yellow scarf on his head, dressed in a sheepskin coat, riding a horse without a saddle. He came down and bowed to Nagafusa. Nagafusa said: Give the horse back to the people, and you will be spared the death penalty.

古文：人问其故，长房曰： 此狸也，盗社公马耳。 
现代文：别人问其缘故，长房道： 这是一只狐狸，偷着土地公公的马。 
English: When others asked the reason, Nagafusa said, "It's a fox, stealing the land and my grandfather's horse.

古文：又尝坐客，而使至宛市鲊，须臾还，乃饭。
现代文：有一次，家中来客，派人至宛市买鱼乍鱼，一会儿就回来，赶上吃饭。
English: Once upon a time, a guest at home sent someone to Wan Shi to buy fish guts, and came back in a moment to catch up with dinner.

古文：或一日之间，人见其在千里之外者数处焉。
现代文：有时一天之内，别人看见他在千里之外出现几处。
English: Sometimes, within a day, others saw him appear thousands of miles away in several places.

古文：后失其符，为众鬼所杀。
现代文：后来，长房的符丢失了，长房便被众鬼杀死了。
English: Later, Nagafusa's amulet was lost, and Nagafusa was killed by the ghosts.

古文：蓟子训者，不知所由来也。
现代文：蓟子训传，蓟子训，不知是从哪来的。
English: I don't know where the story of the son of a whore, the son of a whore, came from.

古文：建安中，客在济阴宛句。
现代文：建安年间，客居在济阴宛句。
English: During the Jian'an period, the guest house was located in Jiyin Wanzhu.

古文：有神异之道。
现代文：有神异的法术。
English: There are supernatural spells.

古文：尝抱邻家婴兒，故失手墯地而死，其父母惊号怨痛，不可忍闻，而子训唯谢以过误，终无它说，遂埋藏之。后月余，子训乃抱兒归焉。
现代文：曾经抱住邻家的婴儿，故意失手让婴儿堕地而死，他的父母惊号怨痛，不可忍闻，可是子训只说声失错，再不讲别的，于是把婴儿埋葬了，后来过了一月余，子训抱着婴儿回来了。
English: Once, he held a neighbor's baby, and deliberately let the baby fall to the ground and die. His parents cried out in pain, which was unbearable to hear, but Zixun only said that he made a mistake, and did not say anything else, so he buried the baby. Later, after more than a month, Zixun returned with the baby.

古文：父母大恐，曰： 死生异路，虽思我兒，乞不用复见也。 
现代文：父母很恐慌，说道： 死生是异路的，虽然思念我的儿子，但请求不再见了。 
English: Panicked, the parents said: "Life and death are two different things. Although I miss my son, I can't ask for anything more.

古文：兒识父母，轩渠笑悦，欲往就之，母不觉揽取，乃实兒也。
现代文：可婴儿认识父母，大声笑着，想扑到父母怀中去，母亲不觉用手揽取，竟是自己的儿子。
English: But the baby recognizes his parents, laughs loudly, wants to jump into his parents' arms, and his mother unwittingly grabs him with her hand, and it turns out to be her own son.

古文：虽大喜庆，心犹有疑。乃窃发视死兒，但见衣被，方乃信焉。
现代文：虽然大喜庆祝，心里还有疑惑，于是偷偷地挖开死去儿子的坟，只看见衣被，才相信了。
English: Although he was overjoyed to celebrate, he still had doubts in his heart, so he secretly dug up his dead son's grave and only saw the quilt before he believed.

古文：于是子训流名京师，士大夫皆承风向慕之。
现代文：从此子训名字流传在京师，士大夫都承风向慕他。
English: Since then, his name has been passed down among scholars in Beijing, and many scholars and professors have come to admire him.

古文：后乃驾驴车，与诸生俱诣许下。
现代文：后来便驾着驴车，与诸生同到许下。
English: Later, he drove a donkey cart and went to Hushan with all the living beings.

古文：道过荥阳，止主人舍，而所驾之驴忽然卒僵，蛆虫流出，主遽白之。
现代文：路过荥阳，住在主人家，而所驾的驴忽然死去，蛆虫爬了出来，主人连忙告诉他。
English: He passed by Fenyang and stayed at his master's house. The donkey he was driving suddenly died, and maggots crawled out. His master hurried to tell him.

古文：子训曰： 乃尔乎？ 
现代文：子训说： 是这样么？ 
English: Zixun said, "Is that so?"

古文：方安坐饭，食毕，徐出以杖扣之，驴应声奋起，行步如初，即复进道。
现代文：正安坐吃饭，饭吃完，慢慢出来用杖打着，驴子应声奋起，走路和当初一样，又能上道。
English: Zheng An sat down to eat. After finishing the meal, he slowly came out and beat his donkey with a cane. The donkey stood up at the sound of his voice and walked as before, and was able to go on the road again.

古文：其追逐观者常有千数。
现代文：那些追着看热闹的常有千数人。
English: Those following the action often number in the thousands.

古文：既到京师，公卿以下候之者，坐上恒数百人，皆为设酒脯，终日不匮。
现代文：已经到了京师，公卿以下等候他的，座上常有几百人，都替他们安排酒菜，整天不缺乏。
English: He has arrived in Beijing, and courtiers and the like are waiting for him. There are often several hundred people at the table, and they are all arranging wine and food for them. There is no shortage of food all day long.

古文：后因遁去，遂不知所止。
现代文：后来因为遁去，就不知到哪里了。
English: Later, I didn't know where I was going because I was running.

古文：初去之日，唯见白云腾起，从旦至暮，如是数十处。
现代文：刚去之时，只见白云升起，从早到晚，有好几十处。
English: When I first arrived, I saw dozens of white clouds rising from morning to night.

古文：时有百岁翁，自说童兒时见子训卖药于会稽市，颜色不异于今。
现代文：这时有位百岁老人，自己说在做小孩时看见子训在会稽市卖过药，脸上颜色和现在差不多。
English: At this time, there was a hundred-year-old man who said that when he was a child, he saw Zixun selling medicine in the auditing market, and the color of his face was similar to now.

古文：后人复于长安东霸城见之，与一老公共摩挲铜人，相谓曰： 适见铸此，已近五百岁矣。 
现代文：后来有人又在长安东霸城看见他，与一老人共同摩挲铜人，两人交谈道： 刚才看到铸些铜人，已经近五百年了。 
English: Later, someone saw him again in Dongba City, Chang'an. Together with an old man, they made a bronze man. The two talked and said, "Just now, I saw some bronze men being cast. It's been nearly five hundred years.

古文：顾视见人而去，犹驾昔所乘驴车也。
现代文：回头看看人们便走了，还是驾着从前所乘的车哩。
English: When I look back, people have left, still driving the same cars they used to.

古文：见者呼之曰： 蓟先生小住。 
现代文：看见的人喊他道 ：蓟先生小住一下吧！ 
English: People who saw him called out to him, "Mr. Zou, stop for a moment!

古文：并行应之，视若迟徐，而走马不及，于是而绝。
现代文：边走边答应他，看来好像走得很慢，可是走马还赶不上，于是就绝无消息了。
English: As he walked, he promised, and it seemed that he walked very slowly, but the horse could not catch up, so there was no news.

古文：刘根者，颍川人也。
现代文：刘根传，刘根，颍川人。
English: Liu Genchuan, Liu Gen, and the people of Suichuan.

古文：隐居嵩山中。
现代文：隐居在嵩山中。
English: He lived in seclusion in the mountains of Song.

古文：诸好事者，自远而至，就根学道，太守史祈以根为妖妄，乃收执诣郡，数之曰： 汝有何术，而诬惑百姓？若果有神，可显一验事。不尔，立死矣。 
现代文：一些好事者从远方而来，向他学习道法，太守史祈认为刘根是妖妄，于是将他拘捕送到郡里，数落他道： 你有什么法术，而诬惑百姓；如果有神，可显一事应验，不然，立刻处死你了。 
English: Some good-doers came from far away to learn the Tao from him. The Taishou Shih Chien thought that Liu Gen was delusional, so they arrested him and sent him to the county. They scolded him: "What kind of magic do you have, to mislead the people? If you have a god, you can manifest the fulfillment of a matter, otherwise, you will be immediately executed."

古文：根曰： 实无它异，颇能令人见鬼耳。 
现代文：刘根说： 确实没有别的法术，很能叫人看见鬼罢了。 
English: Liu Gen said, "There is really no other magic, it can only make people see ghosts.

古文：祈曰： 促召之，使太守目睹，尔乃为明。 
现代文：史祈说 ：赶快召进来，使太守亲自见见，这样才算明白。 
English: Shi Qian said: Call him in as soon as possible and make him meet the governor-general in person. Only then will it be clear.

古文：根于是左顾而啸，有顷，祈之亡父祖近亲数十人，皆反缚在前，向根叩头曰： 小兒无状，分当万坐。 
现代文：刘根于是向左回头看看大啸一声，不一会，史祈死去的父亲、祖辈近亲数十人，都反绑着手走上前，向刘根叩头道： 小儿没有礼貌，罪该万死。 
English: Liu Gen then turned his head to the left to look at the roar of the thunder. After a while, Shi Qi's dead father and dozens of close relatives of his ancestors all walked forward with their hands tied behind their backs and bowed to Liu Gen, saying, "Children have no manners and deserve to die."

古文：顾而叱祈曰： 汝为子孙，不能有益先人，而反累辱亡灵！可叩头为吾陈谢。 
现代文：那班鬼魂回头叱责史祈道： 你作子孙的，不能有益于先人，而反累辱亡灵，可叩头替我们陈谢。 
English: The group of ghosts turned around and scolded Shi, praying: "You, as a descendant, cannot benefit the ancestors, but on the contrary, you dishonor the spirits of the dead. You can bow down and give thanks for us.

古文：祈惊惧悲哀，顿首流血，请自甘罪坐。根嘿而不应，忽然俱去，不知在所。
现代文：史祈惊怕悲哀，磕头流血，请求自己甘愿受罪，刘根嘿嘿却不答应，忽然一起离开了，不知到了哪里。
English: Shi Qi was frightened and sad, Shantou was bleeding, he asked himself to be willing to suffer, but Liu Genhei did not agree, and they suddenly left together, not knowing where they were going.

古文：左慈字元放，庐江人也。
现代文：左慈传，左慈，字元放，庐江人。
English: Zuo Ci Zi Yuan Fang, a native of Lijiang, Jiangxi Province.

古文：少有神道。
现代文：年轻时得了神道。
English: He was introduced to Shintoism at a young age.

古文：尝在司空曹操坐，操从容顾众宾曰： 今日高会，珍羞略备，所少吴松江鲈鱼耳。 
现代文：曾经在司空曹操那里作客，曹操从容不迫地对众宾说道 ：今日难得的盛会，山珍园蔬略有准备，只缺少吴松江的鲈鱼。 
English: Cao Cao was once a guest at Siku Cao's house. Cao Cao calmly said to all the guests: Today's rare event, the mountain garden vegetables are slightly prepared, only the eel from Wuzhongjiang is missing.

古文：放于下坐应曰： 此可得也。 
现代文：元放在下面答道 ：这可以办到。 
English: The source replied: "It can be done."

古文：因求铜盘贮水，以竹竿饵钓于盘中，须臾引一鲈鱼出。
现代文：于是找一个铜盘装着水，用竹竿鱼食向盘中垂钓，不一会就钓出一条鲈鱼。
English: So he found a copper tray filled with water and used a bamboo rod to fish into the tray. Soon he caught a catfish.

古文：操大拊掌笑，会者皆惊。
现代文：曹操鼓掌大笑，在座的都很惊奇。
English: Cao Cao clapped and laughed, and everyone present was surprised.

古文：操曰： 一鱼不周坐席，可更得乎？ 
现代文：曹操说： 一条鱼不够大家吃，还可多钓几条吗？ 
English: Cao Cao said, "One fish is not enough for everyone to eat, how many more can we catch?"

古文：放乃更饵钩沉之，须臾复引出，皆长三尺余，生鲜可爱。
现代文：元放于是换了鱼食再钓起来，不一会又钓出许多条，都是三尺多长一条，新鲜活泼。
English: The former fisherman then changed the fish food and fished again, and soon he caught many more, all more than three feet long, fresh and lively.

古文：操使目前会之，周浃会者。
现代文：曹操叫人当场做熟，让大家都尝到鲜鱼。
English: Cao Cao asked someone to cook the fish on the spot, so that everyone could taste the fresh fish.

古文：操又谓曰： 既已得鱼，恨无蜀中生姜耳。 
现代文：曹操又说道： 鱼已经到手，可惜没有四川出产的生姜啊！ 
English: Cao Cao also said: The fish has arrived, but unfortunately there is no ginger from Sichuan!

古文：放曰： 亦可得也。 
现代文：元放说 ：这也可办到。 
English: Yuan Fang said: This can also be done.

古文：操恐其近即所取，因曰： 吾前遣人到蜀买锦，可过敕使者，增市二端。 
现代文：曹操怕他就在近边找到生姜，便道 ：我前次派人到四川采购绸缎，请通知他，多买两匹好吗？ 
English: Cao Cao was afraid that he would find ginger nearby, so he said: The last time I sent someone to Sichuan to purchase silk cocoons, please inform him, can I buy two more?

古文：语顷，即得姜还，并获操使报命。
现代文：话刚说完，姜就买回，并且得到曹操派出的使者的回信。
English: As soon as he finished speaking, Jiang bought it back and received a reply from the messenger sent by Cao Cao.

古文：后操使蜀反，验问增锦之状及时日早晚，若符契焉。
现代文：后来，使者回来，盘问他买绸缎的情形和时间早晚，说得一点不差。
English: Later, the emissary came back and asked him about the circumstances and time of the purchase of silk and satin, and he said it was not bad at all.

古文：后操出近郊，士大夫从者百许人，慈乃为赍酒一升，脯一斤，手自斟酌，百官莫不醉饱。
现代文：后来曹操出游近郊，士大夫跟随者一百多人，左慈就拿着酒一升，干肉一斤，亲手给大家斟酒，百官无一不是酒醉饭饱。
English: Later, Cao Cao went on a trip to the suburbs. There were more than a hundred followers of Shidafu. Zuo Ci took a liter of wine and a pound of dried meat and personally poured wine for everyone. All the officials were drunk.

古文：操怪之，使寻其故，行视诸垆，悉亡其酒脯矣。
现代文：曹操很觉奇怪，令人探究缘故，检查那些酒馆，发现酒和干肉都不见了。
English: Cao Cao found it very strange and puzzling, checked the taverns, and found that the wine and dried meat were gone.

古文：操怀不喜，因坐上收，欲杀之，慈乃却入壁中，霍然不知所在。
现代文：曹操很不高兴，于是借故将左慈关起来，想杀掉他，左慈就逃入墙壁里面，忽然看不见他在哪里。
English: Cao Cao was very unhappy, so he locked up Zuo Ci for some reason and wanted to kill him. Zuo Ci ran into the wall and suddenly couldn't see where he was.

古文：或见于市者，又捕之，而市人皆变形与慈同，莫知谁是。
现代文：有人发现他在市场上，又派人去抓，可是市人都变得与左慈形象相同，不知谁是左慈。
English: Someone found him in the market and sent someone to catch him, but the townspeople all became identical with Zuo Ci's image. They didn't know who Zuo Ci was.

古文：后人逢慈于阳城山头，因复逐之，遂入走羊群。
现代文：后来有人碰见左慈在阳城山头，又派人去追，左慈逃进羊群去了。
English: Later, someone met Zuo Ci on the top of Yangcheng Mountain, and sent someone to chase him. Zuo Ci fled into the sheep.

古文：操知不可得，乃令就羊中告之曰： 不复相杀，本试君术耳。 
现代文：曹操知道无法找到左慈，于是派人到羊群中告诉左慈道 ：我不再杀你了，只是测试一下你的本领罢了。 
English: Cao Cao knew that he would not be able to find Zuo Ci, so he sent someone to the sheep to tell Zuo Ci: "I won't kill you anymore, I just want to test your skills."

古文：忽有一老羝屈前两膝，人立而言曰： 遽如许。 
现代文：忽然有一头老公羊弯着前面两条腿，像人一般站着说话道 ：怎么突然做这种事？ 
English: Suddenly, there was an old male goat with his front two legs bent, standing like a human and saying, "How can you suddenly do such a thing?

古文：即竞往赴之，而群羊数百皆变为羝，并屈前膝人立，云 遽如许 ，遂莫知所取焉。
现代文：于是追者争相跑进羊群，可是几百头羊都变成老公羊，都弯着前腿站起来，口中说着 ：怎么突然做这种事？ 
English: The pursuers then rushed into the herd, but the hundreds of sheep all turned into rams and stood up on their front legs, saying, "How could you do such a thing all of a sudden?"

古文：不探精远，歇感灵效？
现代文：追者就不知道该抓哪一只老公羊了。
English: The pursuer doesn't know which of the rams to catch.

