古文：耶律韩八，字嘲隐，倜傥有大志，北院详稳古之五世孙。
现代文：耶律韩八，字嘲隐。卓异不凡，胸有大志，北院详稳耶律古的五世孙。
English: Jeru Hanpachi, his name is a play on words. Extraordinary and ambitious, he is the fifth-generation descendant of the founder of the Northern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：太平中，游京师，寓行宫侧，惟囊衣匹马而已。
现代文：太平年间，游学于京师，寄住于行宫旁边，随身所有只有一包衣服一匹马而已。
English: During the Taiping era, he traveled to study in Beijing and stayed next to the Imperial Palace. All he had with him was a pack of clothes and a horse.

古文：帝微服出猎，见而问之曰： 汝为何人？ 
现代文：圣宗皇上微服出外打猎，见到他问道 ：你是何人？ 
English: Emperor Shōzō went out hunting in his night clothes. When he saw him, he asked, "How many of you are there?"

古文：韩八初不识，漫应曰： 我北院部人韩八，来觅官耳。 
现代文：韩八初时不认识皇上，随口答道： 我是北院部人韩八，来找官做。 
English: Hanpachi didn't know the emperor when he was young, so he casually replied, "I'm Hanpachi from the North Infirmary, and I'm looking for a job."

古文：帝与语，知有长才，阴识之。
现代文：皇上跟他交谈，得知他有优异的才能，暗里记住了他。
English: The emperor talked to him, learned that he had great talent, and secretly remembered him.

古文：会北院奏南京疑狱久不决，帝召韩八驰驿审录，举朝皆惊。
现代文：适逢北院奏称南京疑案长期不能决断，皇上征召韩八赶往审讯，朝臣们全都十分惊讶。
English: When the Northern Court reported that the Nanjing dubious case could not be decided for a long time, the emperor summoned Hanpachi to rush to the trial, and the courtiers were all very surprised.

古文：韩八量情处理，人无冤者。
现代文：韩八酌情处理，没有称冤者。
English: Hanpachi handled it as he saw fit, and there were no complaints.

古文：上嘉之。
现代文：皇上嘉许不已。
English: The Emperor was very appreciative.

古文：籍群牧马，阙其二，同事者考寻不已，韩八略不加诘，即先驰奏，帝益信任。
现代文：后来登记牧马官，缺两名，同事者考究寻绎个没完没了，韩八丝毫不加追查，即先飞书上奏，皇上更加信任他。
English: Later, the registration of wranglers, two are missing, colleagues are endlessly searching, Hanba did not pursue, that is, the first to fly to the book, the emperor trusted him more.

古文：景福元年，为左夷离毕，徙北面林牙，眷遇优异。
现代文：景福元年，任左夷离毕，改任北面林牙，皇上特别地恩遇于他。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Gyeongbokgol, after Ren Zuoyi left, he was reassigned to Beomyeon Lin Ya. The emperor was especially grateful to him.

古文：重熙六年，改北院大王，政务宽仁，复为左夷离毕。
现代文：重熙六年，改任北院大王，为政致力于宽厚仁慈，再任左夷离毕。
English: In the sixth year of Chongxi, he was reappointed as the Great King of the Northern Court, and devoted himself to the policy of clemency and benevolence. He was reappointed as Zuoying and left the position.

古文：十二年，再为北院大王。
现代文：十二年，再任北院大王。
English: In the twelfth year, he was reappointed as the Great King of the Northern Court.

古文：入朝，帝从容谓曰： 卿守边任重，当实府库、振贫乏以报朕。 
现代文：入朝，皇上从容地对他说 ：你守卫边疆，责任重大，应当充实府库、赈济贫乏以报效朕对你的信任。 
English: When he entered the imperial court, the emperor calmly said to him, "You guard the frontier. You have a great responsibility. You should enrich the government treasury and help the poor in return for my trust in you."

古文：既受诏，愈竭忠谨，知无不言，便益为多。
现代文：韩八受诏之后，更加尽心地忠诚敬慎，知无不言，对皇上补益很多。
English: After receiving the imperial edict, Hanpachi became more conscientious, loyal, and prudent. He knew everything and had a lot of benefits for the emperor.

古文：卒，年五十五。
现代文：不久去世，年五十五岁。
English: He died shortly afterwards, aged 55.

古文：上闻，悼惜。
现代文：皇上闻讯，十分哀伤惋惜。
English: When the Emperor heard the news, he was very sad and sorry.

古文：死之日，箧无旧蓄，椸无新衣，遣使吊祭，给葬具。
现代文：死的那天，他的箱箧中没有旧日积蓄，衣架上也没有新衣服，派使者前往吊唁祭祀，赐给葬具。
English: On the day of his death, he had no old savings in his trunk and no new clothes on his hanger. An emissary was sent to offer condolences and give him funeral paraphernalia.

古文：韩八平居不屑细务，喜愠不形。
现代文：韩八平时居处不注重小节，喜怒不形于色。
English: Hanpachi doesn't pay much attention to the details of where he lives in ordinary times, and his feelings of joy and anger don't show.

古文：尝失所乘马，家僮以同色者代之，数月不觉。
现代文：他曾经丢失了乘坐的马匹，家僮用相同毛色的马代替，而他竟一连几个月也没有发觉。
English: He once lost the horses he was riding, and the family mule was replaced with a horse of the same color, and he didn't find out for months.

古文：耶律唐古，字敌隐，于越屋质之庶子。
现代文：耶律唐古，字敌隐，于越屋质的庶子。
English: Yelu Tanggu, also known as Jingyin, was the illegitimate son of Yu Yueya.

古文：廉谨，善属文。
现代文：廉洁谨慎，擅长做文。
English: He is honest and prudent, and good at writing.

古文：统和二十四年，述屋质安民治盗之法以进，补小将军，迁西南面巡检，历豪州刺史、唐古部详稳。
现代文：统和二十四年，阐述屋质安民治盗之法而呈进，补为小将军，迁西南面巡检，历任豪州刺史、唐古部详稳。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of unification, he elaborated on the law of rooftop safety and theft prevention, and was promoted to be a minor general, and the inspection was moved to the southwest, and the successors of the history of Australia and the Tang Dynasty were detailed and stable.

古文：严立科条，禁奸民鬻马于宋、夏界。
现代文：严格订立条款，禁止奸民到宋、夏边界卖马。
English: Strictly stipulate the terms and prohibit the villains from selling horses to the Song and Xia borders.

古文：因陈弭私贩安边境之要。
现代文：接着陈奏制止私自贩售和安定边境的要点。
English: He then went on to outline the key points of stopping illicit trafficking and stabilizing the border.

古文：太后嘉之，诏边郡遵行，著为令。
现代文：太后嘉许，诏令边郡遵行，并写成法令。
English: The Empress Dowager commended the edict and ordered Bian County to comply with it, and it was written into a decree.

古文：朝议欲广西南封域，黑山之西，绵亘数千里，唐古言： 戍垒太远，卒有警急，赴援不及，非良策也。 
现代文：朝议想要拓展西南疆域，即占领黑山以西绵延数千里的地方，唐古说： 戍堡太远，猝然之间有警报急事，赶往援救来不及，这不是好办法。 
English: Tanggu said that if the imperial court wanted to expand its southwestern territory, that is, occupy a place stretching thousands of miles west of Montenegro, it would be a bad idea to build a bunker too far away, and then suddenly there would be an emergency warning, and it would be too late to rush to the rescue.

古文：从之。
现代文：圣宗听从了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：西番来侵，诏议守御计，命唐古劝督耕稼以给西军，田于胪朐河侧，是岁大熟。
现代文：西蕃前来侵袭，诏令商议守卫之法，命令唐古劝课监督耕作以供给西军，在胪朐河畔耕种，这一年大丰收。
English: When the Western Wei came to invade, the Emperor issued an edict to discuss the method of guarding, and ordered the Tang court to supervise the cultivation to supply the Western army, and cultivated on the banks of the Wei River. This year was a bumper harvest.

古文：明年，移屯镇州，凡十四稔，积粟数十万斛，斗米数钱。
现代文：次年，移往镇州屯田，总计十四个丰年，积聚起粟米数十万斛，一斗米只需几个钱就能买到。
English: The following year, it was moved to Tunden, Zhenzhou. In a total of fourteen years of plenty, it accumulated hundreds of thousands of bags of corn. A barrel of rice can be bought for just a few dollars.

古文：重熙间，改隗衍党项部节度使。
现代文：重熙年间，改任隗衍党项部节度使。
English: During the reign of Chongxi, he was reassigned to the post of the party secretary of Suiyan.

古文：先是，筑可敦城以镇西域。
现代文：这之前，已修筑可敦城以镇抚西域。
English: Prior to this, the town of Kedun had been built to the west of the town.

古文：诸部纵民畜牧，反招寇掠。
现代文：诸部放纵百姓放牧，反而招致侵扰劫掠。
English: The various departments indulge the people in grazing, but instead invite intrusion and looting.

古文：重熙四年，上疏曰： 自建可敦城已来，西蕃数为边患，每烦远戍。
现代文：重熙四年，唐古上疏称： 自从建可敦城以来，西蕃多次成为边境之患害，总是要烦劳百姓远远地去戍守。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Chongxi, Tang Gu Shang Zuo said: Since the construction of Kedun City, Xidi has repeatedly become a border disaster, and it is always difficult for the people to stay far away.

古文：岁月既久，国力耗竭。
现代文：年长日久，国力消耗殆尽。
English: With the passage of time, the national strength has been exhausted.

古文：不若复守故疆，省罢戍役。 
现代文：不如再守旧疆域，废除戍守之役。 
English: It would be better to no longer defend the old territory and abolish the garrison.

古文：不报。
现代文：皇上没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：是年，致仕。
现代文：这一年，辞官。
English: This year, the dictionary.

古文：乞勒其父屋质功于石，帝命耶律庶成制文，勒石上京崇孝寺。
现代文：请求为其父屋质刻石纪功，皇上下令耶律庶成撰文，刻石于上京崇孝寺。
English: The request was to engrave stone carvings for his father's house, and the emperor ordered Yerutsushige to write an article, and the stone was engraved at Shangjing Chongxiao Temple.

古文：卒，年七十八。
现代文：不久去世，年七十八岁。
English: He died shortly afterwards, aged 78.

古文：萧术哲，字石鲁隐，孝穆弟高九之子。
现代文：萧术哲，字石鲁隐，萧孝穆弟高九之子。
English: He is the son of Xiao Shuzhe, Zhaishi Luyin, and Xiao Xiao Mudi, a ninth-grade student.

古文：以戚属加监门卫上将军。
现代文：因系皇亲，加监门卫上将军。
English: Because he was a relative of the Emperor, he was promoted to General of the Imperial Guards.

古文：重熙十三年，将卫兵讨李元昊有功，迁兴圣宫使。
现代文：重熙十三年，率卫兵讨伐李元昊，立有战功，迁为兴圣宫使。
English: In the thirteenth year of the reign of Chongxi, he led the guards to fight against Li Yuanhao, achieved great military exploits, and was transferred to be the envoy of Xing Sheng Gong.

古文：蒲奴里部长陶得里叛，术哲为统军都监，从都统耶律义先击之，擒陶得里。
现代文：蒲奴里部首领陶得里反叛，术哲任统军都监，随从都统耶律义先攻打他，擒获陶得里。
English: The leader of the Banuri Department, Taodri, rebelled, and Shuzhe was appointed as the overseer of the unified army. He was attacked by the follower of the unified army, Yeli, who captured Taodri.

古文：术哲与义先不协，诬义先罪，免官。
现代文：术哲与义先不合，诬陷义先，因此而获罪被免官。
English: Zhu Zhe did not get along with Yixian, framed Yixian, and was therefore convicted and removed from office.

古文：稍迁西南面招讨都监，坐事下狱，以太后言，杖而释之。
现代文：后来慢慢地升迁为西南面招讨都监，犯事入监，因为太后出面说话，杖击后得以释免。
English: Later, he was slowly promoted to the southwestern side to invite the city supervisor, and was imprisoned for the crime, because the empress dowager came forward to speak, and he was released after being beaten with a cane.

古文：清宁初，为国舅详稳、西北路招讨使，私取官粟三百斛，及代，留畜产，令主者鬻之以偿。
现代文：清宁初，任国舅详稳、西北路招讨使，私自取用官府粟米三百斛，及至卸任，留下畜产，让主管人卖掉来偿付。
English: At the beginning of the Qing and Ning Dynasties, Guozhu Zhaozhen, the Northwest Road Recruiting Envoy, privately used the government's 300 mu of corn, and when he left office, he left livestock and let the supervisor sell it to pay for it.

古文：后族弟胡睹到部发其事，帝怒，决以大杖，免官。
现代文：后来族弟胡睹到衙署告发其事，道宗皇上发怒，判决击以大杖，免去官职。
English: Later, Hu Jian, a younger brother of Emperor Daozong, reported the matter to the Imperial Household Agency. Emperor Daozong was furious and sentenced him to be beaten with a cane and removed from his official post.

古文：寻起为昭德军节度使，征为北院宣徽使。
现代文：不久起用为昭德军节度使，征召为北院宣徽使。
English: He was soon appointed as the Zhaotie Army's festival envoy and enlisted as the North Court's heraldic envoy.

古文：上嘉其宿卫严肃，迁右夷离毕。
现代文：九年，皇上因为术哲曾任招讨，威令行于诸部，再任他为西北路招讨使。
English: In the ninth year, because the emperor had been appointed as a summoner because of his skill, the command was carried out in various departments, and he was reappointed as the northwest road summoning envoy.

古文：夏王李乾顺为宋所攻，求解，帝命药师奴持节使宋，请罢兵通好，宋从之。
现代文：他训练士卒，增加器械，减省徭役之催逼，严明号令。无人敢于侵犯，边境安静无事。十年，入京朝见，封为柳城郡王。
English: He trained officers and men, increased equipment, reduced the number of forced laborers, and issued strict orders. No one dared to encroach, and the border was quiet. Ten years later, he went to Beijing to see the emperor and was crowned the king of Liucheng County.

古文：拜南面林牙，改汉人行宫副部署。
现代文：咸雍三年，拜为北府宰相，为北院枢密使耶律乙辛所忌恨，诬陷术哲与护卫萧忽古等人谋害乙辛。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Xianlong, Bai was the prime minister of Beifu, and he was hated by Ye Luyi Yixin, the top secret envoy of Beifu, who framed the conjurer and escort Xiao Ku Gu and others for plotting to kill Yixin.

古文：乾统初，出为安东军节度使，卒。
现代文：诏令审讯，没有实据，罢去其相位，出京镇抚顺义军。不久去世，追封晋、宋、梁三国王。
English: The trial by imperial edict, without evidence, was dismissed, and the Fushun rebels left Beijing. He died soon after, and was succeeded by Kings Jin, Song, and Liang.

古文：耶律玦，字吾展，遥辇鲜质可汗之后。
现代文：耶律玦，字吾展，遥辇鲜质可汗的后代。
English: Yeludong, also known as Wuzhen, is a descendant of Yeludong Qingshan.

古文：重熙初，召修国史，补符宝郎，累迁知北院副部署事。
现代文：重熙初，被征召修撰国史，补为符宝郎，累迁为知北院副部署事。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, he was conscripted to compile the national history, supplemented as a treasure hunter, and successively relocated as a deputy director of Chihoku-in.

古文：入见太后，后顾左右曰： 先皇谓玦必为伟人，果然。 
现代文：入宫见太后，太后回头对左右说： 先帝说玦儿必会成为伟人，果然如此！ 
English: Entering the palace and meeting the empress dowager, the empress dowager turned to her right and left and said, "The late emperor said that my son would surely become a great man, and so it is!

古文：除枢密副使，出为西南面招讨都监，历同签南京留守事、南面林牙。
现代文：除为枢密副使，出京任西南面招讨都监，历任同签南京留守事、南面林牙。
English: In addition to being a Privy Vice-Envoy, he went to Beijing to serve as the Southwestern District Supervisor, and each of his successors signed the same agreement to stay in Nanjing and to work in the Southern District.

古文：皇弟秦国王为辽兴军节度使，以玦同知使事，多所匡正。
现代文：皇弟秦国王担任辽兴军节度使，以耶律玦为同知使事，玦对秦国王为政多有匡补救正。
English: Emperor Qin's younger brother, King Qin, served as the envoy of the Liao Xing Army for the festival, with Yeludong as the co-envoy. He had a lot to do with the politics of King Qin.

古文：十年，复为枢密副使。
现代文：十年，再任枢密副使。
English: Ten years later, he was reappointed as Deputy Privy Counsellor.

古文：咸雍初，兼北院副部署。
现代文：咸雍初，兼任北院副部署。
English: At the beginning of Xiamen and Yonghe, he also served as deputy director of the North Hospital.

古文：及秦国王为西京留守，请玦为佐，从之。
现代文：及至秦国王任西京留守，请求以耶律玦为副职，从之。
English: When King Qin was appointed to stay in the West, he requested that Yeludong serve as his deputy.

古文：岁中狱空者三，召为孟父房敞稳。
现代文：一年中监狱空无一人共有三次，征召为孟父房敞稳。
English: During the year, the prison was empty a total of three times, and Meng's father was conscripted.

古文：玦不喜货殖，帝知其贫，赐宫户十。
现代文：耶律玦不好营利，道宗知道他家贫，赐给他宫户十户。
English: Yerutsune was not good at making a profit. Knowing that his family was poor, Daozong gave him ten households.

古文：尝谓宰相曰： 契丹忠正无如玦者，汉人则刘伸而已。
现代文：皇上曾经对宰相说： 契丹人中忠诚正直没有比得上耶律玦的，汉人中则仅有刘伸而已。
English: The emperor once said to the prime minister: "Among Khitan people, there is no one who is as loyal and honest as Yeludong, while among Han people, there is only Liu Shin."

古文：然熟察之，玦优于伸。 
现代文：然而仔细地考察辨析，耶律玦还要强于刘伸。 
English: However, after careful examination and analysis, Ye Lucheng is still stronger than Liu Sheng.

古文：先是，西北诸部久不能平，上遣玦问状，执弛慢者痛绳之。
现代文：在此以前，西北诸部长期不能平定，皇上派耶律玦去问情况，抓住懈怠轻忽者则严加治罪。
English: Prior to this, the northwestern provinces could not be pacified for a long time. The emperor sent Yerudong to inquire about the situation, and those who caught slackness and negligence were severely punished.

古文：以酒疾卒。
现代文：后耶律玦因为饮酒过量而去世。
English: Later, Yerutong died from drinking too much alcohol.

古文：耶律仆里笃，字燕隐，六院林牙突吕不也四世孙。
现代文：耶律仆里笃，字燕隐，六院林牙突吕不也的四世孙。
English: He is the fourth-generation descendant of Yerutsu's servant Ritoku, Zi Yanyin, and the sixth-generation descendant of Lin Dadu and Lu Buya.

古文：开泰间，为本班郎君。
现代文：开泰年间，任本班郎君。
English: During the reign of Emperor Keitai, he served as Benbanro-kun.

古文：有捕盗功，枢密使萧朴荐之，迁率府率。
现代文：有捕获盗贼之功，枢密使萧朴荐举他，迁为率府率。
English: He was credited with the capture of a thief, and was recommended by the Privy Councilor, Xiao Pu, to be transferred to be the head of the government.

古文：太平中，同知南院宣徽事，累迁彰圣军节度使。
现代文：太平年间，同知南院宣徽事，累迁至彰圣军节度使。
English: During the Taiping era, Tongzhi Nanyuan promulgated the emblem, and successively moved to the Zhang Shengjun Festival envoy.

古文：重熙十六年，知兴中府，以狱空闻。
现代文：重熙十六年，知兴中府，因为治内监狱中空无一人而闻名。
English: In the 16th year of the Heisei era, Chixing Zhongfu was famous for the fact that there was no one in the inner city prison.

古文：十八年，伐夏，摄西南面招讨使。
现代文：十八年，讨伐夏国，摄西南面招讨使。
English: In the 18th year, he led a campaign to subjugate Xia, and invited envoys from the south-west.

古文：十九年，夏人侵金肃军，败之，斩首万余级，加右武卫上将军。
现代文：十九年，夏人侵犯金肃军，击败之，斩首万余级，加为右武卫上将军。
English: In the 19th year, Xia invaded the Kinshu army, defeated it, beheaded more than 10,000 people, and was promoted to the top general of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards.

古文：时近边群牧数被寇掠，迁倒塌岭都监以治之，桴鼓不鸣。
现代文：当时边境附近群牧多次遭到侵扰劫掠，迁仆里笃为倒塌岭都监以治理之，战鼓为之不鸣。
English: At that time, herdsmen near the border were repeatedly harassed and plundered, and the war drums did not sound.

古文：二十年，知金肃军事。
现代文：二十年，知金肃军事。
English: Twenty years of military service in Kinshū.

古文：宰相赵惟节总领边城桥道刍粟，请贰，帝命仆里笃副之，以称职闻。
现代文：宰相赵惟节总领边城桥道刍粟，请求派个副手，兴宗皇上命令仆里笃担任副职，在任内以称职著称。
English: The Prime Minister, Zhao Wei Jie, and the commander-in-chief, Biancheng Qiao Dao Poppy, requested to send a deputy, and Emperor Xingzong ordered the servant, Ritu, to serve as the deputy. During his tenure, he was known for his competence.

古文：清宁初，历长宁、匡义二军节度使，致仕。
现代文：清宁初，历任长宁、匡义二军节度使，辞官。
English: At the beginning of the Qing Dynasty, the successive heads of the Changning and Kuangyi Second Army, resigned from their posts.

古文：咸雍间卒。
现代文：咸雍年间去世。
English: He died during the reign of Emperor Xianyong.

古文：子阿固质，终倒塌岭都监。
现代文：子阿固质，官至倒塌岭都监。
English: His son, Agogyo, rose to the position of the governor of the collapsed ridge.

