古文：赵知微击竹子张浚金州道人李生徐明府华阴店妪李客蜀城卖药人
现代文：赵知微击竹子张浚金州道人李生徐明府华阴店妪李客蜀城卖药人
English: Zhao Zhiwei shoots bamboo, Zhang Jian, Jinzhou Taoist, Li Sheng, Xu Mingfu, Huayin shopkeeper, Li Ke, Shucheng medicine seller

古文：刘处士张武茅山道士逆旅客教坊乐人子蒋舜卿赵知微九华山道士
现代文：刘处士张武茅山道士逆旅客教坊乐人子蒋舜卿赵知微九华山道士
English: Liu Manager Zhang WuMaoshan TaoistInverse TravelerTeaching WorkshopMusic Man's SonChiang YuQingZhao ZhiWeiJiuhuashan Taoist

古文：赵知微
现代文：赵知微
English: Zhao Zhiyi

古文：赵知微乃皇甫玄真之师，少有凌云之志，入兹山，结庐于凤皇岭前，讽诵道书，炼志幽寂，蕙兰以为服，松柏以为粮。
现代文：九华山道士赵知微是皇甫玄真的师傅。他年轻时怀有凌云之志，进了这座山，住在凤凰岭前面，整日诵读道家的书籍，锻炼自己的心志使其变得幽远静寂，以蕙兰作衣服，以松柏作粮食。
English: Jiuhua Mountain Taoist Zhao Zhiwei is the master of Wang Fu Xuan Zhen. When he was young, he had the ambition of Lingyun, entered this mountain, lived in front of Fenghuangling, read Taoist books all day long, and trained his ambition to become distant and quiet. He made clothes with yakitori and food with pine and cypress.

古文：赵数十年，遂臻玄牝。由是好奇之士，多从之。
现代文：赵知微就这样苦修数十年，终于达到了道家的最高境界，像微妙的母体一样，能够包容万物生殖万物。于是，天下许多好奇的人，都去跟他学道。
English: Zhao Zhiwei practiced asceticism for decades in this way, and finally reached the highest level of Taoism, like a subtle matrix, able to contain all things and reproduce all things. Therefore, many curious people around the world went to study Tao with him.

古文：玄真即申弟子礼，殷勤执敬，亦十五年。
现代文：玄真就是他的弟子，他在赵知微身边殷勤服侍，恭恭敬敬地学习，长达十五之久。
English: Xuan Zhen was his disciple. He served Zhao Zhiwei diligently and studied respectfully for fifteen years.

古文：至咸通辛卯岁，知微以山中炼丹须西土药者，乃使玄真来京师，寓于玉芝观之上清院。皇甫枚时居兰陵里第，日与相从，因询赵君事业。
现代文：到咸通十二年，赵知微因为山里炼丹须用西方的药，便派遣玄真来到京师。玄真在京师住在玉芝观的上清院，皇甫枚当时住在兰陵里面的房子里，天天与玄真来往，他便打听起赵知微在事业上的情况。
English: In the twelfth year of Hamdong, Zhao Zhiwei sent Xuan Zhen to Beijing to learn about Zhao Zhiwei's career, because he needed to use Western medicine to make dan in the mountains. Xuan Zhen lived in the Shangqing Academy in Yuzhiguang. At that time, the emperor lived in a house in Lanling and met with Xuan Zhen every day.

古文：玄真曰： 自吾师得道，人不见其惰容。
现代文：玄真说： 自从我师傅得了道，谁也看不见他脸上有困倦的神情。
English: Xuan Zhen said, "Since my master became enlightened, no one can see the sleepy look on his face.

古文：常云： 分杯结雾之术，化竹钓鲻之方，吾久得之，固耻为耳。 
现代文：他常说： 分杯结雾之术，化竹钓鲻之方，我早就掌握了，只是不屑去干这些玩艺儿罢了。 
English: He used to say: I have long mastered the art of dividing a cup of fog and the way to make a bamboo fishing rod, but I just don't care to do these things.

古文：去岁中秋，自朔霖霪，至于望夕。玄真谓同门生曰： 堪惜良宵而值苦雨。 
现代文：去年八月，从初一开始下大雨，直下到十五那天夜晚。我对师兄们说： 可惜中秋良宵偏偏苦雨下个没完。 
English: Last August, it rained heavily from the very beginning until the night of the 15th. I said to my brothers and sisters, "It's a pity that it's raining so hard on the Mid-Autumn Festival Eve.

古文：语顷。赵君忽命侍童曰： 可备酒果。 遂遍召诸生谓曰： 能升天柱峰玩月否？ 
现代文：我说完了不一会儿，师傅忽然吩咐侍童准备酒果，又把我们都召到面前，问道： 能不能登上天柱峰去赏月亮？ 
English: Not long after I finished speaking, the master suddenly ordered the waiters to prepare the wine and fruit, and then called us all to the front and asked: Can you climb Tianzhu Peak to admire the moon?

古文：诸生虽唯应，而窃议以为浓阴駚雨如斯，若果行，将有垫巾角折屐齿之事。
现代文：大家虽然都答应说 能 ，私下里却在议论，以为如此天黑下雨，真要走路，肯定有跌跤折断草鞋的事。
English: Although everyone promised to do it, they were discussing it in private, thinking that it was so dark and raining that if they really had to walk, they would surely fall and break their sandals.

古文：少顷，赵君曳杖而出，诸生景从。
现代文：不一会儿，师傅便拄着拐杖出门了，大家只好紧跟在后面。
English: Soon after, the master left the house on crutches, and everyone had to follow closely behind.

古文：既辟荆扉，而长天廓清，皓月如昼，扪萝援筱，及峰之巅。
现代文：大家开开院门走出去后，天空豁然晴朗，明月高照，亮如白昼。我们牵萝援藤，穿行丛林山道，终于登上天柱峰顶。
English: After everyone opened the gate of the hospital and walked out, the sky suddenly became clear, the bright moon shone high, bright as day. We took Luo Yuan Rattan, walked through the jungle mountain road, and finally climbed to the top of Tianzhu Peak.

古文：赵君处玄豹之茵，诸生藉芳草列侍。俄举卮酒，咏郭景纯游仙诗数篇。
现代文：师傅坐在玄色豹皮的垫子上，各位弟子分列两旁坐在芳草地上，一会儿，大家举起酒杯，一面饮酒一面吟诵郭景纯的几篇游仙诗。
English: The master sat on a cushion of black leopard skin, and his disciples sat on either side of him on the lush grass. For a while, everyone raised their glasses and, while drinking, recited several of Guo Jingjun's poems about wandering immortals.

古文：诸生有清啸者、步虚者、鼓琴者，以至寒蟾隐于远岑，方归山舍。
现代文：弟子们有的清音缭绕对空长啸，有的步虚踏峰，有的鼓琴奏乐，直至月亮隐没在远山后面，大家才返回住地的山舍。
English: Some of the disciples were whistling around the sky, some were stepping on the peaks, and some were playing the drums. It wasn't until the moon had disappeared behind the distant mountains that everyone returned to their mountain huts.

古文：既各就榻，而凄风飞雨宛然，众方服其奇致。
现代文：等一个个全都上床之后，外面立即风雨交加，跟我们出发之前一模一样，大家这才敬服师傅的奇妙道术真已登峰造极。 
English: After everyone went to bed, the weather outside immediately turned stormy, exactly the same as before we set off. Everyone's admiration for the master's wonderful Taoism has really reached its peak.

古文：玄真棋格无敌，黄白术复得其要妙，壬辰岁春三月归九华，后亦不更至京洛。
现代文：玄真的棋艺没有敌手，炼丹术也深得其精要奥妙。他于壬辰春季三月回到九华山，以后再也没有到京师洛阳去。
English: He returned to Jiuhuashan in March of the spring of Imjin, and never went to Luoyang, the capital city, after that.

古文：击竹子
现代文：击竹子
English: Bamboo shoots

古文：击竹子不言姓名，亦不知何许人，年可三十余。
现代文：有个敲竹子的，自己不说姓名，别人也不知道他是个什么人，年龄大约有三十出头儿。
English: There is a bamboo cutter, he does not say his name, others do not know who he is, he is about thirty years old.

古文：在成都酒肆中，以手持二竹节相击，铿然鸣响，有声可听，以唱歌应和，乞丐于人，宛然词旨皆合道意。得钱多饮酒，人莫识之。
现代文：他在成都的酒店里手拿两节竹子互相敲击，发生铿锵动听的声音，嘴里唱着歌互相应和，向人家乞讨，好像歌词的含义都合乎道家的意义，乞讨到的钱多数用来买酒喝了。
English: In a hotel in Chengdu, he took two pieces of bamboo in his hands and tapped them against each other, creating a thumping sound. He sang songs to harmonize with each other and begged from people, as if the meaning of the lyrics was in line with the meaning of Taoism. Most of the money he got from begging was used to buy and drink alcohol.

古文：如此则十余年矣。
现代文：没有认识他到底是个什么样的人，就这样已经有十多年了。
English: For more than a decade, I didn't know who he really was.

古文：一旦，自诣东市卖生药黄氏子家，从容谓曰： 余知长者好道，复多气义，有日矣。
现代文：有一天，他自己到东市场卖药材的老黄家，从容地对他说： 很长时间以来，我就知道您喜爱道家的思想，又颇重义气。
English: One day, he went to the old Huang family, who sold medicinal herbs in the East Market, and calmly said to him: "For a long time, I have known that you love Taoist thought and have a strong sense of loyalty.

古文：今欲将诚素奉讫，得否？ 黄氏子曰： 君有事，但得言之。 
现代文：今天我想把自己的一桩心愿告诉您，不知可以不？ 老黄说： 你若有事，只管说。 
English: Today, I would like to tell you about one of my wishes. I don't know if I can or not. Lao Huang said, "If you have something to say, just say it."

古文：击竹子谓曰： 我乞丐之人也，在北门外七里亭桥下盘泊。
现代文：敲竹子的说： 我是个讨饭的，在北门外七里亭桥下落脚。
English: Knocking on the bamboo, he said, "I am a beggar. I have fallen off the Qili Pavilion Bridge outside the North Gate.

古文：今病甚，多恐不济。
现代文：现在病得很厉害，大概治不好了。
English: He's very ill now, and probably won't get better.

古文：若终焉之后，敢望特与烧爇。
现代文：如果我死在那里，万望您费心把我的尸体烧了。
English: If I die there, I hope you take the trouble to burn my body.

古文：今自赍钱两贯文，买买柴用。
现代文：现在我带来的两贯钱，留作买柴用的。
English: Now I have brought two bushels of money, which I will use to buy firewood.

古文：慎勿触我之心肝，是所讬也。阴骘自有相报。 
现代文：火化的时候，当心不要碰坏我的心肝。这就是我对您的拜托，到了阴间自有相报。 
English: When I am cremated, be careful not to break my heart. This is my request to you. You will have to answer for it in the afterlife.

古文：因留其钱，黄氏自不取，则固留而去，黄氏子翌曰至桥下。
现代文：说完便留下他的钱，老黄自然是不能收的，但他一定要留下，然后才走了。
English: After saying this, he left his money. Of course, Lao Huang couldn't take it back, but he had to stay and then he left.

古文：果见击竹子卧于蒹葭之上。见黄氏子来，忻然感谢。徐曰： 余疾不起。 
现代文：老黄第二天来到桥下，果然看见那个敲竹子的躺在芦苇上，他见老黄来了高兴地表示感谢，慢慢地说： 我已经病得起不来了。 
English: Old Huang came under the bridge the next day and saw the bamboo-cutter lying on the reeds. He was happy to see Old Huang and thanked him. He said slowly, "I'm too sick to come."

古文：复与黄氏子金二斤，又曰： 昨言不用令人触我心肝则幸也，珍重且辞。 
现代文：又递给老黄二斤金子，说： 昨天说不要叫人碰我的心肝，能做到这一点，我就高兴了。
English: He also handed the old man two jingles of gold and said, "Yesterday I said not to let anyone touch my heart. If I can do this, I will be happy."

古文：言讫而逝。
现代文：你多多保重吧。 
English: Take good care of yourself.

古文：黄氏子亦悯然出涕，太息者久之。
现代文：说完就去世了。
English: After saying this, he died.

古文：遂令人易衣服，备棺敛，将出于郊野，堆积柴炭，祭而焚之。
现代文：老黄也伤心地流了泪，叹息了好长时间，然后令人换衣服、备棺材、入敛，抬到郊外堆好木柴木炭，祭奠之后点火焚化。
English: Old Huang also shed tears with sadness and sighed for a long time, and then had people change their clothes, prepare the coffin, enter it, carry it to the suburbs to pile up firewood and charcoal, and after the ceremony, light the fire and incinerate it.

古文：即闻异香馥郁，林鸟鸣叫。
现代文：一股奇异的香味浓郁扑鼻，招引得林中的禽鸟叫个不停。
English: A strange, rich scent wafts through the air, enticing the birds in the forest to chirp incessantly.

古文：至晚，只余其心，终不燃终，复又其大如斗。
现代文：烧到晚上，只剩下心脏一直烧不化，而且又膨胀得像斗那样大。
English: Burned until the evening, only the heart remained unburned, and it swelled to the size of a bucket.

古文：黄氏子收以归城。
现代文：老黄收拾起来要回城。
English: Old Huang wants to pack up and go back to the city.

古文：速语令人以杖触之，或闻炮烈，其声如雷，人马皆骇。
现代文：急忙叫人用棍子去碰那个心脏，有人听到像炮火爆炸一样，发生雷鸣般的声响，人听了害怕马听了受惊。
English: People were quickly called to touch the heart with a stick, and someone heard a thunderous sound like an explosion of gunfire. People were afraid and horses were frightened.

古文：逡巡。有人长尺余，自烟焰中出，乃击竹子也。手击其竹，嘹然有声。杳杳而上。黄氏子悔过作礼，众人皆叹奇异。
现代文：过了一会儿，有个身高一尺多的人从烟火里走了出来，原来就是那个敲竹子的，他敲着手里的竹子，发出响亮的声音，飘飘然飞上天空，老黄悔过，忙叩头行礼；众人无不惊叹，个个深感奇异。
English: After a while, a person more than a foot tall came out of the fireworks. It turned out to be the one who knocked on the bamboo. He knocked on the bamboo in his hand, made a loud sound, and floated into the sky. Lao Huang repented and quickly bowed down. Everyone was amazed and felt deeply strange.

古文：于戏！
现代文：呜呼！
English: Alas!

古文：得非不触其心。复在人间乎？
现代文：如果当初不去碰他的心脏，他能还人间吗？
English: If you don't touch his heart first, can he return to the world?

古文：触其心，便可上宾乎？
现代文：碰了他的心脏，他就可以升天成为天上的客人吗？
English: If you touch his heart, can he ascend to heaven and become a heavenly guest?

古文：复欲于黄氏子显其蜕化乎？
现代文：还是他要通过老黄来显示和实现自己蜕化升天的愿望呢？
English: Or does he want to use Lao Huang to show and realize his desire to be reborn and ascend to heaven?

古文：始知成都乃神仙所聚之处，如击竹子者，亦以多矣。大凡不可以贫贱行乞之士而轻易者焉。
现代文：通过这件事，我们才知道，成都乃是神仙集中的地方。像这个敲竹子一样的人，实在多得很，人们不应该因为他们贫贱，是乞讨的，而去轻视他们呵！
English: Through this incident, we came to know that Chengdu is a place where immortals are concentrated. There are so many people like this bamboo-cutter. People should not despise them because they are poor and begging.

古文：张浚
现代文：张浚
English: Zhang Jun

古文：黄巢犯阙，僖宗幸蜀。
现代文：黄巢起事的时候，唐僖宗逃难到了西蜀。
English: When the Yellow Nest Uprising broke out, Tang Xizong fled to Xishu.

古文：张浚白身未有名第，时在河中永乐庄居。
现代文：张浚当时是个没有及第没有官位的平民，家住河中永乐庄。
English: At that time, Zhang Jun was a commoner with no official rank, living in Yonglezhuang, Hechu.

古文：里有一道人，或麻衣，或羽帔，不可亲狎。
现代文：村里有个道人，无论是身穿麻布衣服的平民百姓，还是身着羽冠霞帔的诰命大员，都不敢侮辱他。
English: There is a Taoist in the village, and no one dares to insult him, whether he is a commoner in a sackcloth robe or a high-ranking official in a feathered cap.

古文：一日张在村路中行。后有唤： 张三十四郎，驾前待尔破贼。 
现代文：一天，张浚在村里路上行走，背后有人招呼： 张三十四郎，皇上那边等你去破贼寇呢！ 
English: One day, Zhang Jun was walking on the village road, and someone behind him called out: Zhang Sanqichilang, the emperor is waiting for you to go and break up the bandits!

古文：回顾，乃是此道人。
现代文：回头一看，原来是那个道人。
English: Looking back, it turned out to be that Taoist.

古文：浚曰： 一布衣尔，何阶缘而能破贼乎？ 
现代文：张浚说： 我只是一个平民百姓，凭着什么去破贼呢？ 
English: Zhang Jun said, "I am just a commoner. What can I rely on to defeat the thief?"

古文：道者勉其入蜀，时浚母有疾，未果南行。道者乃遗两粒丹曰： 服此可十年无恙。 
现代文：道人劝他去西蜀，当时张浚的母亲正有病，所以没有去成，道士送给他两粒丹药，说： 吃了这两粒药，可以保证十年之内不生病。 
English: The Taoist advised him to go to Xishu. At that time, Zhang Jun's mother was ill, so he could not go. The Taoist gave him two pills and said, "If you take these two pills, you can guarantee that you will not get sick for ten years."

古文：浚得药奉亲，所疾痊复。
现代文：张浚得了药拿去送给母亲吃，母亲吃了以后立即痊愈了。
English: Zhang Jun took the medicine and gave it to his mother to eat. After eating it, his mother immediately recovered.

古文：后历登台辅，道者亦不复见。
现代文：后来张浚官运亨通，得坐高位，这个道人再也没有见到。
English: Later, Zhang Jun, a successful official, was appointed to a high position. This Taoist was never seen again.

古文：破贼之说，何其验哉。
现代文：当时这位道人的破贼之说，是多么灵验呵！
English: At that time, this Taoist's way of defeating the thief was so effective!

古文：金州道人
现代文：金州道人
English: Jinzhou Daohin

古文：金统水在金州。
现代文：金统河在金州境内。
English: The Jinling River is located in Jinzhou.

古文：巢寇犯阙之年，有崔某为安康守，大驾已幸岷峨。
现代文：黄巢的军队进犯京城的那一年，有个姓崔的镇守安康，皇帝避难到了四川的岷山峨嵋山一带。
English: In the year that Huang Chao's army invaded Beijing, there was a town guard named Cui Ankang, and the emperor took refuge in the Lushan Emei Mountain area of Sichuan.

古文：惟金州地僻，户口晏如。
现代文：金州地处偏僻，人口稀少。
English: Jinzhou is remote and sparsely populated.

古文：忽有一道人诣崔言事曰： 方今中原版荡，乘舆播迁，宗社陵夷，鞠为茂草，使君岂无心殄寇乎？ 
现代文：忽然有个道人找到这个姓崔的告诉他一件事，说： 眼下中原地区动荡不定，皇上的车驾已经迁移，祖宗社稷遭受践踏，成为荒草。您难道没想到去平灭贼寇吗？ 
English: Suddenly, a Taoist found this man surnamed Cui and told him one thing, saying: At present, the Central Plains region is unstable, the emperor's chariot has been relocated, and the ancestral shrine has been trampled and has become a wasteland. Didn't you think of crushing the bandits?

古文：崔曰： 泰山既颓，一木搘之可乎？ 
现代文：崔说： 泰山都倒了，一根柱子能顶起来吗？ 
English: Cui said: Mount Tai has fallen down, can a pillar stand up?

古文：客曰： 不然，所言殄者，不必以剑戟争锋，力战原野。 崔曰： 公将如何？ 
现代文：道人说： 不是这个意思。我所说的平灭贼寇，不一定就是持刀拿枪去争高低，与敌人征战在疆场上。 崔说： 那你将要我怎样呢？ 
English: The man said, "That's not what I mean. What I mean by "smashing the bandits" is not necessarily to fight with swords and guns, to fight with the enemy on the battlefield." Cui said, "Then what do you want me to do?"

古文：客曰： 使君境内有黄巢谷统水，知之乎？ 
现代文：道人说： 你管辖的地区内有一条黄巢谷金统河，知道吗？ 崔说： 不知道。 
English: The Taoist said, "Do you know that there is a Yellow Nest Valley Jinling River in the area under your jurisdiction?" Cui said, "I don't know."

古文：客曰： 巢贼禀此而生，请使君差丁役，赍畚锸，同往掘之，必有所得。 
现代文：询问金州人，金州人说有这么条金统河。道人说： 黄巢逆贼因为有了它才能活。请你差遣劳力，带上土篮锹镐，一块儿去把它挖了，肯定会有收获。 
English: Ask the people of Jinzhou, the Jinzhou people say that there is such a Jinling River. Taoist said: the Yellow Nest traitor can only live because he has it. Please send labor, take a dirt basket and dig it together, there will definitely be a harvest.

古文：乃去州数百里，深山中果有此名号者。客遂令寻源而劚之，仍使断其山冈，穷其泉源。泉源中有一窟，窟中有一黄腰人，既逼之，遂举身自扑，呦然而卒。
现代文：他们带着人到了离金州城几百里的地方，在深山沟里果然有一条叫金统河的，道人便让大家寻找源头动手挖掘，挖断山梁一直挖到泉源，在泉源中发现有一个洞，洞里有一个黄腰的人，当人们靠近他时，他就自己纵身扑倒在地，叫了一声就死了。
English: They took people to a place several hundred miles away from Jinzhou City. In a deep ravine, there was indeed a river called the Jintong River. The Taoists then asked everyone to look for the source and start digging, digging through the mountain beams all the way to the spring source. In the spring source, they found a hole. There was a yellow-waisted man in the hole. When people approached him, he threw himself to the ground, screamed and died.

古文：穴中又获宝剑一。
现代文：在洞穴里还找到一把宝剑。
English: A sword was also found in the cave.

古文：客又曰： 吾为天下破贼讫。 
现代文：道人说： 我为天下破除贼寇的工作，现在已经结束了。 
English: The Taoist said, "My work of eliminating the Kleptocracy for the whole world is now over.

古文：崔遂西向进剑及黄腰，未逾剑利，闻巢贼已平，大驾复国矣。
现代文：崔于是向着峨嵋方向进献宝剑及黄腰人，还没走到剑利便听到黄巢贼寇已经平息，皇上已经恢复了天下。
English: Cui then went in the direction of Emei to offer the sword and the yellow-waisted person. Before he reached Jianli, he heard that the Yellow Nest bandit had calmed down, and the emperor had restored the world.

古文：李生
现代文：李生
English: Li Sheng

古文：中和末。有明经李生应举如长安，途遇道士同行宿，数日，言意相得。
现代文：唐朝中和末年，有个李生要到西安去参加明经科目的科举考试，途中遇见一个道士与他一同赶路一起住宿，相处多日，两人说得很投机。
English: In the middle and late years of the Tang Dynasty, there was a Li Sheng who wanted to go to Xi'an to take the examination of the Ming Dynasty. On the way, he met a Taoist monk who was traveling with him and stayed with him. They got along for many days, and the two talked very opportunistically.

古文：入关相别，因言黄白之术。道士曰： 点化之事，神仙浅术也。但世人多贪，将以济其侈，故仙道秘之。
现代文：入关相别时，因为谈到炼丹术，道士说： 炼丹一事在神仙看来很浅显的技术；但世上的多数人很贪婪，用它来满足过分的欲望；所以成仙得道的人便对此严守秘密。
English: At the time of parting, because of the alchemy, the Taoist said: The alchemy is a very shallow technology in the eyes of the gods; but most people in the world are greedy and use it to satisfy excessive desires; so the people who have become gods keep it a secret.

古文：夫至道不烦，仙方简易，今人或贵重其药，艰难其事，皆非也。
现代文：实上，最高的道术并不烦琐，神仙的妙方最为简易，当今人们不是以为炼丹所用的药多么贵重，就是把炼丹技术看得如何艰难，都是不对的。
English: In fact, the highest Taoism is not cumbersome, and the miraculous cure of the immortals is the simplest. Nowadays, people either think that the medicine used in the alchemy is very precious, or they think that the alchemy technique is very difficult. Both are wrong.

古文：吾观子性静而寡欲，似可教者。今以方授子，趣以济乏绝而已。
现代文：我看你的性情恬谈寡欲，好像是可以教授的人，现将方法教授给你，聊以此方解救困乏绝望而已。
English: I look at your temperament and talk about lack of desire, as if you are a person who can be taught, now I will teach you the method, and talk about how to relieve the hardship and despair.

古文：如遂能不仕，亦当不匮衣食。
现代文：如果不能及第享受官禄时，靠了此方也不会挨冻受饿。
English: If you can't enjoy your official salary, you won't freeze and starve by relying on this side.

古文：如得禄，则勿复为，为之则贪也，仙道所不许也。 
现代文：如能得到官位利禄，那就不要再使用此方，再用就是贪婪，这是为仙之道所不允许的。 
English: If you can get the official position relu, then do not use this side again. Reuse is greed, which is not allowed by the Way of Immortals.

古文：因手疏方授之而别。
现代文：道士在手上将秘方一条条注明教授给他，然后分手告别。
English: In his hand, the Taoist indicated the secret recipe to the professor, and then said goodbye.

古文：方常药草数种而已。
现代文：药方里面只有几种平平常常的药草而已。
English: There are only a few common herbs in the recipe.

古文：每遇乏绝，依方为之，无不成者。
现代文：每当陷入困乏绝望的时候，李生按照此方配制，没有不成功的时候。
English: Whenever he was in a desperate situation, Li Sheng followed this formula and there was never a time when he failed.

古文：后及第，历州县官，时时为之，所得转少。
现代文：后来考试及第，历任州县官吏，李生时常运用此方，但是所得甚微。
English: Later, after passing the exam, Li Sheng, the successive state and county officials, often used this side, but the income was very small.

古文：及为南昌令，复为之，绝不成矣。
现代文：等他做了南昌县令时，又运用此方，那就绝无成果了。
English: When he became the governor of Nanchang County, he used this tactic again, but it had no effect.

古文：从子智修为沙门，李以数丸与之，智修后游钟离，止卖药家。烧银得二十两，以易衣。
现代文：李的侄儿智修是个出家修道的，李生曾把几丸仙丹给他，智修后来云游到钟离，住在卖药的家里，他把这几粒仙丹烧化之后得到二十两银子，用这银子换了几件衣服。
English: Li's nephew Zhi Xiu was an ordained practitioner. Li Sheng had given him a few cacti. Zhi Xiu later traveled to Zhongli and lived in the house of a medicine seller. After he burned these few cacti, he got 22 pieces of silver and used this silver to replace several pieces of clothing.

古文：时刘仁轨为刺史，方好其事，为人所告，遁而获免。
现代文：当时刘仁轨当刺史，正喜好炼丹这件事，被人告发了，后因潜逃才未被捉到。
English: At that time, Liu Renzhong, who had a penchant for puerh, was reported by someone, but he was not caught because he absconded.

古文：徐明府
现代文：徐明府
English: Xuming Prefecture

古文：金乡徐明府者，隐而有道术，人莫能测。
现代文：金乡有个徐明府，有道术但不显露，别人都不知道他的底细。
English: There is a Xu Mingfu in Jinxiang. He is good at Taoism, but he does not show it. No one knows the details about him.

古文：河南刘崇远，崇龟从弟也，有妹为尼，居楚州。常有一客尼寓宿，忽病劳，瘦甚且死。
现代文：河南的刘崇远，是崇龟的堂弟，有个姐姐出家为尼，住在楚州，有个外地的尼姑经常在这里住宿，忽然患了痨病，非常消瘦，快要死了。
English: Liu Chongyuan from Henan Province, a cousin of Chongke, has a sister who has become a nun and lives in Chuzhou. A foreign nun often stays here. She suddenly fell ill with rickets, became very thin and was on the verge of death.

古文：其姊省之，众共见病者身中有气如飞虫，入其姊衣中，遂不见。
现代文：刘崇远的姐姐去看望她，大家都看到病人体内有一缕气体像飞虫一样，钻进刘崇远姐姐的衣服里便不见了。
English: Liu Chongyuan's sister went to visit her, and everyone saw that there was a wisp of gas in the patient's body like a flying insect, which got into Liu Chongyuan's sister's clothes and disappeared.

古文：病者死，姊亦病。俄而刘氏举院皆病，病者辄死。
现代文：病人死了，刘的姐姐也病了，不久刘氏全家都病了，得上病的就死。
English: The patient died, and Liu's sister also fell ill. Soon, Liu's entire family fell ill, and when they got sick, they died.

古文：刘氏既函崇远求于明府。徐曰： 尔有别业在金陵，可致金陵绢一匹，吾为尔疗之。 
现代文：刘氏写信给崇远让他去求徐明府，徐明府说： 你有座别墅在金陵，可以送给我金陵的系娟一匹，我给你治疗。 
English: Mr. Liu wrote to Mr. Chongyuan to ask him to go to Xu Ming Prefecture. Xu Ming Prefecture said: You have a villa in Jinling, you can give me one of Jinling's egrets, and I will treat you.

古文：如言送绢讫。
现代文：崇远照他说的送完了丝绢。
English: As he said, Chongyuan finished delivering silk cocoons.

古文：翌曰，刘氏梦一道士执简而至，以简遍抚其身，身中白气腾上如炊。
现代文：第二天，刘氏梦见一个道士拿着书简来到面前，道士用书简在她全身上抚弄，她的体内有一股白气往上升腾，好像缕缕炊烟。
English: The next day, Mr. Liu dreamed that a Taoist came to him with a bookmark. The Taoist used the bookmark to caress her whole body. There was a white gas rising in her body, like wisps of smoke.

古文：既寤，遂轻爽能食，异于常日。
现代文：醒来之后便觉得轻松清爽，能吃饭了，与往日大为不同。
English: After waking up, I feel relaxed and refreshed, and I can eat, which is very different from the past.

古文：顷之，徐封绢而至，曰： 置绢席下，寝其上即差矣。 
现代文：没多久，徐明府派人送来的丝绢就到了，说： 把丝绢放在床席下面，睡在上面病就会减轻。 
English: Not long after, the silk cocoon sent by Xu Ming Prefecture arrived, saying: Put the silk cocoon under the bed, and sleeping on it will alleviate the illness.

古文：如其言遂愈。
现代文：刘氏按他的话办。疾病果然痊愈。
English: Mr. Liu did as he was told and recovered from his illness.

古文：已而视其绢，乃画一持简道士，如所梦者。
现代文：病好后看看那块丝绢。上面画的是一个手里拿着书简的道士，就象梦里看见的那个道士一样。
English: When you are well, take a look at that piece of silk. It depicts a Taoist monk holding a book in his hand, just like the one you saw in your dream.

古文：华阴店妪
现代文：华阴店妪
English: Huayin Store

古文：杨彦伯，庐陵新淦人也，童子及第，天复辛酉岁，赴选，至华阴，舍于逆旅。
现代文：杨彦伯是庐陵新淦人，少年中举，唐朝天复辛酉年赴京参加选拔进士的考试，到华阴后住在客店里。
English: Yang Yanbo is from Xincheng, Fuling. He won the junior middle school prize. He went to Beijing to participate in the examination for the selection of young scholars, and lived in a guest house after arriving in Huayin.

古文：时京国多难，朝无亲识，选事不能如期，意甚忧闷。
现代文：当时京城多灾多难，皇帝不能亲自管理朝政，考试的事情不按期举行，彦伯心里颇为忧闷。
English: At that time, there were many disasters and difficulties in Beijing, the emperor could not personally manage the imperial government, the examination was not held on schedule, and Yanbo was quite depressed.

古文：会豫章邸吏姓杨，乡里旧知，同宿于是，因教己云： 凡行旅至此，未尝不祷金天，必获梦寐之报。纵无梦，则此店之妪亦能知方来事，苟获一言，亦可矣。 
现代文：恰好有个豫章府的差役，姓杨，是彦伯过去就认识的老乡，也在这家客店住宿。他便教给彦伯说： 凡属行旅之人到了这里，没有不祭祀古帝金天氏的，祭奠之后必能得到一个梦，暗示给你吉凶福祸；即使没有梦，这家客店的老板娘也能知道未来的事，如能从她那里得到一句话，也可以。 
English: There happened to be a messenger from Yuzhang Prefecture, surnamed Yang, who was a fellow villager that Yanbo had known in the past, and who was also staying at this inn. He taught Yanbo to say: "When all the travelers come here, there is no one who does not worship the ancient emperor Jintian. After the worship, you will surely get a dream, suggesting good luck, bad luck and disaster to you. Even without a dream, the owner of this inn can know the future, and if you can get a word from her, you can do it.

古文：彦伯因留一日，精意以祠之，尔夕竟无梦。
现代文：彦伯又在客店留了一天，诚心诚意地做了祭祀，但那天晚上竟然没有梦。
English: Hikobo stayed at the inn for another day and sincerely performed the ritual, but that night he had no dreams.

古文：既曙，店妪方迎送他客，又无所言。
现代文：天亮后，老板娘正忙着迎送其他客人，又没对他说什么话，彦伯的心情便更加深重起来。
English: After dawn, the owner's daughter was busy welcoming other guests, and she didn't say anything to him, which made Hikobo's mood even deeper.

古文：彦伯愈怏怏，将行，复失其所着鞋，诘责童仆甚喧。
现代文：正要起程，又丢失了穿的鞋，便大声吵着责问书童仆人。
English: When he was about to set out, he lost the shoes he was wearing, and he loudly and noisily questioned the servant boy.

古文：既即路，妪乃从而呼之曰： 少年何其喧耶？ 
现代文：上路后，老板娘便跟在后面喊他道： 年轻人，你为什么事情这样吵闹？ 
English: When he was on his way, the boss's daughter called after him, "Young man, why are you making so much noise?

古文：彦伯因具道其事。
现代文：彦伯便把自己的事情都告诉了她。
English: Hikobo told her everything about himself.

古文：妪曰： 嘻，此即神告也。
现代文：老板娘说： 噢，这就是神灵在告诫你呀。
English: The boss said, "Oh, that's what the spirit is telling you.

古文：夫将行而失其鞋，是事皆不谐矣，非徒如此而已也。京国将有乱，当不可复振，君当百艰备历，然无忧也。
现代文：大凡要走路而丢失了自己的鞋，就是诸事都不顺利。不只是这样，京城里面将要发生祸乱，一定不能重新振兴，你会历经千难万险。
English: If you have to walk and lose your shoes, everything is not going well. Not only that, there will be a disaster in the capital, it must not be revitalized, you will go through all kinds of difficulties.

古文：子之爵禄皆在江淮，官当至门下侍郎。 
现代文：然而不必担忧，你的官爵利禄之分都在江淮，官位会升到门下侍郎。 
English: However, there is no need to worry. Your official position will be elevated to that of a footman.

古文：彦伯因思之，江淮安得有门下侍郎。
现代文：彦伯心想，江淮哪会有什么门下侍郎，于是登程到了长安。
English: Yan Bo thought to himself, what kind of servant will Jianghuai have, so he went to Chang'an.

古文：遂行至长安，适会大驾西幸，随至岐陇。
现代文：正赶上皇帝避乱而迁，他随着到了岐陇。
English: Just in time for the emperor to escape the turmoil and relocate, he followed to Jiading.

古文：梁寇围城三年，彦伯辛苦备至。
现代文：梁军围城三年之久，彦伯备尝艰难困苦。
English: Liang's army besieged the city for three long years, and Yan Bo was prepared to suffer hardships.

古文：驾既出城。彦伯逃还吉州。
现代文：皇帝出城之后，彦伯逃回了吉州。
English: After the emperor left the city, Yanbo fled back to Jizhou.

古文：刺史彭珍厚遇之，累摄县邑。
现代文：判史彭珍给予他优厚的待遇，让他长期充任县令。
English: Judge Shi Pengzhen gave him generous treatment and allowed him to serve as county magistrate for a long time.

古文：伪吴平江西，复见选用，登朝至户部侍郎，会临轩策命齐王，彦伯摄门下侍郎行事。
现代文：伪吴国统治江西后，彦伯又被选用，进入朝廷当了户部侍郎，在临轩策命齐王时，彦伯担任门下侍郎行事。
English: After the pseudo-Wu state ruled Jiangxi, Yanbo was selected again and entered the imperial court as a household attendant. When Lin Xuan was ordered by King Qi, Yanbo acted as a subordinate attendant.

古文：既受命，思店妪之言，大不悦，数月遂卒。
现代文：受命任职之后，彦伯回想起当年那位老板娘所说的话，极不愉快，几个月之后便死了。
English: After being appointed to the post, Hikobo recalled what the boss's daughter had said that year, which was extremely unpleasant, and he died a few months later.

古文：李客
现代文：李客
English: Li Ke rises

古文：李客者，不言其名，常披蓑戴笠，系一布囊，在城中卖杀鼠药，以一木鼠记。或有人买药，即曰： 此不惟杀鼠，兼能疗人众病。
现代文：有个姓李的流浪人，从不说自己叫什么名字，经常身披蓑衣头戴草帽腰里拴着个布口袋，在城里卖灭鼠药。如有人来买药，他就说： 此药不仅能杀死老鼠，同时还能治疗人的百病。
English: There was a vagabond surnamed Li, who never said his name, and often wore a straw hat and a straw coat with a cloth bag around his waist. He sold rodenticide in the city. If someone came to buy the drug, he would say, "This drug can not only kill rats, but also cure all kinds of human diseases."

古文：但将伴餐之，即愈。 
现代文：只要将它跟饭一起吃下去，就能药到病除。 
English: As long as you eat it with your meal, you can get rid of the disease.

古文：人恶其鼠药，少有服饵者。
现代文：人们嫌恶它是耗子药，很少有人服用的。
English: It is hated as rat poison and is rarely used.

古文：有百姓张赞，卖书为业。父年七十余，久患风疾。
现代文：有个老百姓叫张赞，以卖书为业，父亲七十多岁了，久患风湿病。
English: There was a commoner named Zhang Zan, who sold books for a living. His father was over seventy years old and had suffered from rheumatism for a long time.

古文：一日因鼠啮其文字数卷，赞甚怒，买药将以饲鼠。赞未寝，灯下见大鼠数头出，争食之，赞言必中其毒。倏忽俄见皆有羽翼，望门飞出。
现代文：一天，因为老鼠啃坏了几卷书，张赞气坏了，就去买药来喂老鼠，张赞没有睡觉，在灯光下看见几只大老鼠从洞里钻出来，争着去吃，张赞心说这几只老鼠肯定中毒，转眼之间便见它们都生出翅膀，朝着门口飞出去了。
English: One day, because a mouse had chewed up several volumes of books, Zhang Zang lost his temper and went to buy medicine to feed the mice. Zhang Zang did not sleep. Under the light, he saw several large mice come out of the hole and compete to eat. Zhang Zang said in his heart that these mice must be poisoned. In the blink of an eye, he saw that they all sprouted wings and flew out towards the door.

古文：赞深异之。因就李客语之。客曰： 应不是鼠，汝勿诞言。 
现代文：张赞对此非常惊异，便去跟姓李的卖鼠药的说了这件事，李说： 该不是老鼠，你不要胡说。 
English: Zhang Zan was very surprised by this, so he went to talk to the seller of rat poison with the surname Li. Li said: It's not a rat, don't talk nonsense.

古文：赞更求药，言已尽矣。
现代文：张赞还要跟他买药，他说已经卖完了。
English: Zhang Zan also wanted to buy medicine from him, but he said he had already sold out.

古文：从此遁去。其父取鼠残食之，顿觉四体能屈伸，下床履步如旧日。蜀城卖药人
现代文：此人从此就不见了，张赞的父亲把老鼠吃剩的药拿来吃了，顿觉四肢能够屈伸，像得病之前那样下床走路了。蜀城卖药人
English: The man has since disappeared. Zhang Zan's father took the medicine left over from the mice and ate it. Suddenly, he felt that his limbs could flex and he could get out of bed and walk as he did before he fell ill.

古文：前蜀嘉王顷为亲王镇使，理廨署得一铁镜，下有篆书十二字，人莫能识。
现代文：前蜀的嘉王顷做亲王镇使，在整理官署时得到一面铁镜子，下边写着十三个篆字没有人能认识。
English: Former Shu's Jia Wang was once a prince town envoy, and when he was sorting out the government office, he got an iron mirror with thirteen characters written on the bottom, which no one could recognize.

古文：命工磨拭，光可鉴物，挂于台上。百里之内并见。
现代文：让工人磨擦干净后，光亮得可以照见东西，把它挂在高台上，一百里之内都能照见。
English: After the workers have rubbed it clean, the light is bright enough to illuminate things. If it is hung on a high platform, it can be seen from a hundred miles away.

古文：复照见市内有一人弄刀枪卖药，遂唤问此人。云： 只卖药，不弄刀枪。 
现代文：在铁镜子里照见市内有个人正在舞弄刀枪卖药，便把此召唤到面前盘问，这个人说他只是卖药，没有玩弄刀枪。
English: In the iron mirror, he saw a person in the city who was playing with knives and guns to sell drugs, and he summoned this person to the front for questioning. This person said that he was only selling drugs, not playing with knives and guns.

古文：嘉王曰： 吾有铁镜，照见尔。 
现代文：嘉王说： 我有铁镜子，照见你了。 
English: King Jia said, "I have an iron mirror, and I can see you.

古文：卖药者遂不讳，仍请镜看。
现代文：卖药人于是不再隐讳。
English: As a result, drug sellers are no longer secretive.

古文：以手臂破肚，内镜于肚中，足不著地，冉冉升空而去。
现代文：他向嘉王要镜子看看，镜子递给他后，他用手掌劈开自己的肚子，便把镜子放进肚子里去，脚不着地，冉冉升起，在天空中飘飘然飞走了。
English: He asked King Jia for a mirror to look at. After the mirror was handed to him, he split his stomach open with the palm of his hand, then put the mirror into his stomach. He couldn't put his feet on the ground, soared up, and floated away in the sky.

古文：竟不知何所人。
现代文：谁也不知道他究竟是什么地方的人。
English: No one knows who he really is.

古文：刘处士
现代文：刘处士
English: Officer Liu

古文：张易在洛阳，遇处士刘某，颇有奇术。易恒与之游。
现代文：张易在洛阳遇到个处士刘某，刘处士颇有奇异的法术，张易总跟他一起游玩。
English: Zhang Yi met a clerk Liu in Luoyang, Liu clerk has quite a strange spell, Zhang Yi always play with him.

古文：刘尝卖银与市中人，欠其值。刘从易往索之，市人既不酬值，且大骂刘。
现代文：刘处士曾经卖银子给一个人，这人欠他的钱，刘与张易去跟他要，这个市民既不还钱，还破口大骂刘处士。
English: Officer Liu once sold silver to a man who owed him money. Liu and Zhang Yi went with him. The citizen did not pay back the money, but also cursed Officer Liu.

古文：刘归，谓易曰： 彼愚人不识理于是，吾当小惩之。不尔，必将为土地神灵之所重谴也。 
现代文：刘处士回来后对张易说： 那个笨蛋如此不懂道理，我应当小小地惩罚他一下，不然的话，必将受到本地神灵严重的谴责。 
English: After returning, Officer Liu said to Zhang Yi: That idiot is so unreasonable, I should punish him in a small way, otherwise, I will surely be severely condemned by the local gods.

古文：既夜，灭烛就寝。
现代文：到了夜晚。
English: Into the night.

古文：刘床前炽炭烧药。易寐未熟。暗中见一人，就炉吹火。火光中识其面，乃向之市人也，迨曙不复见。
现代文：刘与张易吹灭蜡烛上床就寝，在刘的床前烧着红红的炭火在熬药，张易没有睡熟，黑暗中他见有一人对着炉子吹火，借着火光能识别这个人的面孔，乃是原先欠钱不还的那个人，到天亮时这个人就不再见了。
English: Liu and Zhang Yi blew out the candles and went to bed. In front of Liu's bed, a red-hot charcoal fire was burning to boil the medicine. Zhang Yi did not sleep well. In the dark, he saw a person blowing fire on the stove. By the light of the fire, he could recognize the person's face. It was the person who owed money and did not pay it back. By dawn, this person was no longer visible.

古文：易后求之，问市人，云： 一夕梦人召去，逼使吹火，气殆不续，既寤，唇肿气乏，旬日乃愈。
现代文：张易后来找到了这个人，说起那件事，他回答说： 一天晚上梦见被人召唤了去，逼着让我吹火，气用完了，再也上不来气，醒过来之后，嘴唇肿胀气力贫乏。过了十天才痊愈了。 
English: Zhang Yi later found this person, and when talking about the incident, he replied: One night, I dreamt that someone summoned me and forced me to blow fire. I ran out of breath and couldn't get it up again. When I woke up, my lips were swollen and I had no energy. It took me ten days to recover.

古文：刘恒为河南尹张全义所礼，会与梁太祖食，思鱼鲙。
现代文：刘处士经常受到河南尹张全义的礼遇，有一次，刘正在张全义处作客，赶上张全义与梁太祖一起就餐。
English: Officer Liu was often treated with courtesy by Yin Zhangquan of Henan Province. On one occasion, Liu was a guest at Zhangquan's place and caught up with Zhangquan and Liang Taizu for a meal.

古文：全义曰： 吾有客，能立致之。 
现代文：他们想吃鱼肉，张全义说： 我有位客人，他能马上弄到。 
English: They want to eat fish meat, Zhang Quanyi said: I have a guest, he can get it immediately.

古文：即召刘。
现代文：就把刘处士招呼了去。
English: and sent for Officer Liu.

古文：刘使掘小坎，汲水满之，垂钓良久，即获鱼数头。
现代文：刘让人掘了个小坑，提水把坑灌满，自己垂线在坑内钓了一会儿，便得到几条鱼。
English: Liu had someone dig a small pit, filled the pit with water, and fished inside the pit with a vertical line for a while. He caught a few fish.

古文：梁祖大怒曰： 妖妄之甚者也。 
现代文：梁太祖大怒道： 你这种妖术太狂妄了！ 
English: Liang Taizu said angrily, "This kind of magic is too arrogant!

古文：即杖背二十，械系于狱，翌日将杀之，其夕亡去。
现代文：当即在刘的背上打了二十棍子，又带上枷锁关在牢狱里。第二天就要把他杀掉，他却在当天夜里逃走了。
English: They immediately beat Liu's back with twenty sticks and locked him up in jail with shackles. They were going to kill him the next day, but he escaped that night.

古文：刘友人为登封令，其日至县，谓令曰： 吾有难，从此逝矣。 
现代文：刘处士有个朋友是登封县令，那天他来到县里，对县令说， 我现在有灾难，从现在开始我要消失了。 
English: Officer Liu has a friend who is a Dengfeng County magistrate. That day, he came to the county and said to the county magistrate, "I'm in trouble now. I'm going to disappear from now on."

古文：遂去，不知所之。
现代文：说完便走了，不知去了什么地方。
English: After saying this, he left, and I don't know where he went.

古文：张武
现代文：张武
English: Zhang Wu

古文：张武者，始为庐江道中一镇副将，颇以拯济行旅为事。
现代文：张武原先是庐江道中一个镇的副将，他把帮助出门在外的行旅之人看成一件大事。
English: Zhang Wu used to be the vice-commander of a town in the middle of the Li River, and he regards helping out out-of-town travelers as a big deal.

古文：尝有老僧过其所。武谓之曰： 师年老，前店尚远，今夕止吾庐中可乎？ 
现代文：曾经有个老和尚路过他那里，张武对他说： 师傅年纪大了，前面的客店离这里还很远，今晚上就住在我屋里可以吗？ 
English: Once, an old monk passed by him, and Zhang Wu said to him, "Master, you are old, and the inn in front of you is still far away from here. Can you stay in my house tonight?"

古文：僧忻然。
现代文：和尚很高兴。
English: The monk was delighted.

古文：其镇将闻之怒曰： 今南北交战，间谍如林，知此僧为何人，而敢留之也。 
现代文：这个镇的镇将听说后气愤地说： 当今南北交战，到外都是间谍。你知道这个和尚是什么人，竟敢把他留下！ 
English: When the mayor of the town heard about this, he was furious and said, "Today, the north and south are at war, and there are spies everywhere. You know who this monk is, how dare you leave him behind!"

古文：僧乃求去。武曰： 吾业已留师，行又益晚，但宿无苦也。 
现代文：和尚请求离去，张武说： 我现在已经留下了师傅，要走又太晚了。只管睡在这里，不要苦恼。 
English: The monk asked to leave, and Zhang Wu said, "I have now left my master behind, and it's too late to leave. Just sleep here, and don't worry."

古文：武室中唯有一床，即以奉其僧，己即席地而寝。
现代文：张武卧室里只有一张床，便把这张床让给和尚，自己就睡在屋地上。
English: Zhang Wu only had one bed in his bedroom, so he gave it to the monk and slept on the roof.

古文：盥濯之备，皆自具焉。
现代文：洗漱用具，自己都有。
English: Toiletries, I have them all.

古文：夜数起视之。
现代文：夜间几次起来看他。
English: I get up several times in the night to see him.

古文：至五更，僧乃起而叹息，谓武曰： 少年乃能如是耶。
现代文：到五更时，和尚便起来在那里叹息，他对张武说： 年轻轻的就能这个样子，实在难得。
English: When it was five o'clock, the monk stood up and sighed. He said to Zhang Wu, "It is rare for a young man to be able to look like this.

古文：吾有药，赠子十丸，每正旦吞一丸，可延十年之寿，善自爱。 
现代文：我有药，赠给你十丸，每年正月初一吞一丸，可以延长十年的寿命。
English: I have medicine. I'll give you ten pills. Swallow one pill at the first day of the month every year. It can extend your life by ten years.

古文：珍重而去，出门忽不见。
现代文：你要好好地爱护自己。 道一声珍重便走了，出了房门忽然不见了。
English: You have to take good care of yourself. He left with a cry for help, went out the door and suddenly disappeared.

古文：武今为常州团练副使，有识者计其年已百岁，常自称七十，轻健如故。
现代文：张武现在是常州团练副使。有认识他的人计算他的岁数已有百岁了，他常常自称是七十岁，仍然跟过去一样轻捷矫健。
English: Zhang Wu is now the deputy envoy of the Changzhou Reunions. Some people who know him calculate that he is already a hundred years old. He often claims to be seventy years old, still as light and agile as before.

古文：茅山道士
现代文：茅山道士
English: Mao Shan Taoist

古文：茅山道士陈某，壬子岁游海陵，宿于逆旅。
现代文：茅山道士陈某，在壬子年云游海陵时，有一天住宿在客店里。
English: Chen Mou, a Taoist monk from Moushan, stayed in a guest house one day when he was traveling to the Mausoleum of Confucius in the Year of the Monkey.

古文：雨雪方甚，有同宿者，身衣单葛，欲与同寝。而嫌其垢弊，乃曰： 寒雪如此，何以过夜？ 答曰： 君但卧，无以见忧。 
现代文：天正下大雪，有个与他住在一起的人身上还穿着单衣，想与陈某在一块儿睡，陈某嫌他身上太脏太破。便说： 天这么冷，又下大雪，怎么熬过这一夜呢？ 答道： 您只管躺下，用不着担忧。 
English: It was snowing heavily, and a person who lived with him was still wearing a singlet and wanted to sleep with Chen. Chen thought his body was too dirty and worn. He said, "It's so cold and it's snowing heavily, how can I get through the night?" He replied, "Just lie down, there's no need to worry."

古文：既皆就寝，陈窃视之。见怀中出三角碎瓦数片，炼条贯之，烧于灯上。
现代文：两人都睡下之后，陈某偷偷地看那个人，见他从怀里掏出几片三角形碎瓦片，瓦片用链子串着，他拿到灯上烧烤。
English: After they both fell asleep, Chen secretly watched the man and saw him take out a few triangular pieces of broken tiles from his arms. The tiles were strung with a chain, and he took them to the lamp to grill.

古文：俄而火炽，一室皆暖，陈去衣被乃得寝。
现代文：一会儿火便燃烧得很旺，整个屋里都暖和和的，陈某掀掉身上的衣被才能入睡。
English: After a while, the fire was burning very vigorously, and the whole room was warm. Chen could only fall asleep after taking off his clothes.

古文：未明而行，竟不复也。
现代文：没到天亮这个人就走了，一直没有回来。
English: The man left before dawn and never returned.

古文：逆旅客
现代文：逆旅客
English: Reverse passengers

古文：大梁逆旅中有客，不知所从来。
现代文：大梁的一家客店里住着一个客人，不知道是从什么地方来的。
English: In an inn in Dalian, there is a guest who lives there. I don't know where he came from.

古文：恒卖皂荚百茎于市，其荚丰大，有异于常。
现代文：天天在市场上出卖皂荚百茎，他的皂荚特别丰满肥大，跟平常皂荚不一样。
English: Every day, he sells hundreds of stems of saponins in the market. His saponins are particularly plump and large, unlike ordinary saponins.

古文：日获百钱，辄饮而去。
现代文：他一天卖得一百个钱，买了酒喝完就走。
English: He makes a hundred bucks a day, buys liquor, drinks it and leaves.

古文：有好事者知其非常人，乃与同店而宿。及夜，穴壁窥之。
现代文：有个好奇的人知道他不是寻常人，便跟他到同一个客店里住宿，到了夜晚，在墙上掏了个小洞偷偷地观察他。
English: A curious person, knowing that he was not an ordinary person, went to stay with him in the same inn, and at night, secretly observed him by digging a small hole in the wall.

古文：方见锄治床前数尺之地甚熟，既而出皂荚实数枚种之。少顷即生，时窥之，转复滋长，向曙则已垂实矣。
现代文：只见他把床前几尺见方的地方用锄头整治得松松散散，然后拿出几颗皂荚种子种在土里，不大一会儿就生长出皂荚小苗，他不断地在观察这幼苗，幼苗迅速生长，天亮时就已挂满了果实。
English: I saw him using a hoe to loosely tidy up the area a few feet square in front of the bed, and then he took out a few saponin seeds and planted them in the soil. Soon, small saponin seedlings grew. He kept watching the seedlings. The seedlings grew rapidly and were full of fruit by dawn.

古文：即自采掇，伐去其树，锉而焚之。
现代文：他立即动手采摘，把皂荚树伐倒，劈碎烧了。
English: He immediately began to pick, cut down the sassafras trees, chopped and burned them.

古文：及明携之而去。
现代文：到天亮便带上皂荚出了门。
English: At dawn, he put on a pair of socks and went out.

古文：自是遂出，莫知所之。
现代文：从此他就走了，没有人知道他去什么地方。
English: Since then, he has left, and no one knows where he is going.

古文：教坊乐人子
现代文：教坊乐人子
English: The Musician's Son

古文：教坊乐人有儿年十余岁，恒病，黄瘦尤甚。
现代文：有个教坊的乐人，他有个儿子十多岁了，总闹病，自来就长得又黄又瘦，得病以后就更厉害了。
English: There was a music teacher who had a ten-plus-year-old son who was always ill. He was always yellow and thin, and it got worse after he got sick.

古文：忽遇一道士于路，谓之曰： 汝病食症耳，吾能疗之。 
现代文：有一天，他忽然在路上碰见一个道士，这位道士对他说： 你的病属于食症，我能给你治。 
English: One day, he suddenly met a Taoist on the road. The Taoist said to him, "Your illness is an eating disorder. I can cure you."

古文：因袖中出药数丸使吞之。
现代文：便从袖筒里拿出几丸药叫他吞了下去。
English: She then took out a few pills from her sleeve and told him to swallow them.

古文：既而复视袖中曰： 嘻，误矣。
现代文：然后，又看了看袖筒里说： 嗬！弄错了。
English: Then he looked in the sleeve again and said, "Oops, I made a mistake.

古文：此辟谷药也。自此当不食。然病亦瘳矣。
现代文：给你吃的是辟谷药，从现在开始你应当不再吃饭，但你的病也会痊愈的。
English: What you are being given is grain medicine. From now on, you should not eat any more, but your illness will be cured.

古文：尔必欲食，尝取少木耳食之。
现代文：你肯定想吃饭，那就尝取少许木耳当饭吃。
English: If you're sure you want to eat, try a little wood ear as a meal.

古文：吾他日复以食症药遗尔也。 
现代文：我改日再来送给你治食症的药。 说完就走了。
English: I'll come back another day to give you some medicine for your eating disorder.

古文：遂去。儿归一二月，病愈。
现代文：儿子回家后一两天，病就痊愈了。
English: A day or two after his son returned home, his illness was cured.

古文：然其父母恒以不食为忧，竟逼使饵木耳，遂饭噉如故。
现代文：但他的父母总是为他不吃饭而担忧，后来终于逼着他吃木耳，于是又跟从前一样地吃起饭来。
English: But his parents always worried about him not eating, and finally forced him to eat wood ear, so he started eating again as before.

古文：已而自悔曰： 我饵仙药而不自知。
现代文：过了一段时间，儿子自己悔悟道： 我吃了仙药自己还不知道。
English: After a period of time, the son himself came to his senses and said, "I ate the elixir and didn't even know it."

古文：道士许我复送药来，会当再见乎？ 
现代文：道士答应我还送药来，能够再见到他吗？ 
English: The moralist promised to send me the medicine. Will I be able to see him again?

古文：因白父母，求遍历名山，寻访道士。
现代文：想到这里，便跟父母表示，自己要遍求名山，去寻访那位道士。
English: When I thought of this, I told my parents that I wanted to go all over the famous mountain to visit that Taoist.

古文：母不许，其父许之曰： 向使不愈，今亦死矣。
现代文：母亲不允许，父亲同意他这样做，说： 原先如果病治不好，到现在也死了。
English: His mother did not allow it, but his father agreed to let him do it, saying: "If the disease was not treated well before, it would have died by now.

古文：既志坚如此，或当有分也。 
现代文：既然志向如此坚定，或许是有缘分吧！ 
English: Since the ambition is so firm, perhaps it is fate!

古文：遂遣之，今不知所在。
现代文：于是，就把儿子打发走了。如今不知道教坊乐人的这个儿子在什么地方。
English: So he sent his son away, and now he doesn't know where the son of the music teacher is.

古文：蒋舜卿
现代文：蒋舜卿
English: Chiang Kai-shek

古文：光州检田官蒋舜卿行山中，见一人方采林檎一二枚，与之食，因尔不饥。
现代文：光州有个检田官叫蒋舜卿，他在山里走路碰见一个人刚摘了一两个林檎果，给他吃了。从此他就不思饮食。
English: In Gwangju, there was a procurator of rice fields named Jiang Qianqing. He was walking in the mountains when he met a man who had just picked one or two apple fruits and gave them to him to eat. From then on, he didn't think about eating.

古文：家人以为得鬼食，不治将病。
现代文：家里人以为他是吃了鬼给的食物，不赶紧治疗就会得病。
English: His family thought that he had eaten food given to him by a ghost, and that he would get sick if he didn't get treatment right away.

古文：求医甚切，而不能愈。
现代文：尽管急着找医生治疗，但是一直治不好。
English: Despite the urgency to find a doctor to treat her, she has not been able to be cured.

古文：后闻寿春有叟善医，乃往访之。始行一日，宿一所旅店，有老父问以所患，具告之。
现代文：后来听说在寿春有个老头儿医道高明，蒋舜卿就去拜访他，刚走了一天，晚上住宿在一家旅店里，有个老大爷问他患的是什么病，舜卿把病情告诉了他。
English: Later, he heard that there was an old man in Shouchun who was an expert in medicine. Jiang Yuqing went to visit him. After just one day, he stayed in a hotel in the evening. An old man asked him what illness he was suffering from, and Jiang Yuqing told him the condition of his illness.

古文：父曰： 吾能救之，无烦远行也。 
现代文：老大爷说： 我能救你，用不着走那么远。 
English: The old man said: I can save you, you don't have to go that far.

古文：出药方寸七服之，此二林檎如新。
现代文：他拿出个一寸七的药方让舜卿服了下去，两个林檎果便吐了出来，就跟新鲜的一样。
English: He took out a one-inch-seven-gram prescription and had Gongqing take it. Two apple pips were vomited out, just like fresh ones.

古文：父收之去，舜卿之饮食如常。
现代文：老人将这两个林檎果收了起来，舜卿的饮食又恢复原状。
English: The old man gathered up the two apple pips, and Gongqing's diet was back to normal.

古文：既归，他日复访之。店与老父，俱不见矣。
现代文：舜卿回家之后，过了几天又去看望老人，旅店与老大爷都不见了。
English: After Gongqing returned home, he visited the old man again a few days later. Both the inn and the old man were gone.

