古文：武王问太公曰： 兵道如何？ 
现代文：武王问太公说： 用兵之道是什么？ 
English: King Wu asked the Grand Duke, "What is the best way to employ soldiers?"

古文：太公曰： 凡兵之道莫过乎一，一者能独往独来。
现代文：太公回答道： 一般的用兵之道，没有比指挥上的高度统一更重要的了。指挥高度统一，军队就能自由行动，所向无敌。 
English: The grand duke replied, "There is no more important way to employ soldiers than to have a high degree of unity of command. With a high degree of unity of command, the army can move freely and is invincible.

古文：黄帝曰： 一者阶于道，几于神 。
现代文：黄帝说： 统一指挥基本上符合用兵的规律，几乎可以达到神妙莫测的用兵境界。 
English: Huangdi said: unified command basically conforms to the law of using troops, and can almost reach the realm of mysterious and unpredictable use of troops.

古文：用之在于机，显之在于势，成之在于君。
现代文：运用这条原则，关键在于把握时机；显示这一原则，关键在于利用态势；成功地利用这一原则，关键在于君主。
English: To apply this principle, the key is to seize the opportunity; to show this principle, the key is to take advantage of the situation; to successfully use this principle, the key is the monarch.

古文：故圣王号兵为凶器，不得已而用之。
现代文：所以古代圣明的君王称兵器为凶器，只有在不得已时的时候才使用它。
English: That is why the kings of ancient China called weapons deadly weapons, and only used them when they had to.

古文：今商王知存而不知亡，知乐而不知殃，夫存者非存，在于虑亡；乐者非乐，在于虑殃。
现代文：现在商纣王只知道他的国家存在，却不知道他的国家即将覆灭；只知道纵情享乐，却不知即将大难临头。国家能否长久的存在，不在于眼下是否存在，而在于能否做到居安思危；君主能否享乐，不在于眼前是否享乐，而在于能否做到乐不忘忧。
English: Now the merchant king only knows that his country exists, but does not know that his country is about to perish; only knows indulgence and enjoyment, but does not know that great difficulties are approaching. Whether the country can exist for a long time does not depend on whether it exists at the moment, but on whether it can achieve peace of mind; whether the monarch can enjoy is not based on whether it is enjoyable in front of him, but on whether it can be fun without forgetting worries.

古文：今王已虑其源，岂忧其流乎！ 
现代文：现在武王您已考虑了这个根本问题，还须担忧其它枝节问题吗？ 
English: Now that you have considered this fundamental issue, do you still need to worry about other side issues?

古文：武王曰： 两军相遇，彼不可来，此不可往，各设固备，未敢先发，我欲袭之，不得其利，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武王问道： 两军相遇，敌人不能来进攻我，我也不能去攻打敌人。双方都设置坚固的守备，谁也不敢率先发起攻击，我方想袭击他，但又没有有利条件，应该怎么办呢？ 
English: King Wu asked: The two armies meet, the enemy cannot attack me, and I cannot attack the enemy. Both sides have set up a solid defense, and no one dares to attack first. We want to attack him, but there are no favorable conditions. What should we do?

古文：太公曰： 外乱而内整，示饥而实饱，内精而外钝，一合一离，一聚一散，阴其谋，密其机，高其垒，伏其锐。
现代文：太公回答说： 要外表佯装混乱，而内部实际严整；对外装作饥饿而实际给养充足；实际战斗力强大，而对外装作软弱。使军队或合或离，或聚或散，隐藏真实目的，迷惑敌人，加高巩固壁垒。
English: The grand duke replied: It is necessary to pretend to be chaotic on the outside, but to be strict on the inside; to pretend to be hungry on the outside, but to be well-fed on the inside; to pretend to be strong in actual combat, but to be weak on the outside; to make the army either merge or separate, or gather or scatter, to hide the true purpose, to confuse the enemy, and to raise and consolidate the barriers.

古文：士寂若无声，敌不知我所备。欲其西，袭其东。 
现代文：把精锐部队埋伏起来，寂若无声，敌人不知我方部署，想打西边，却先佯攻东边。 
English: The elite troops were ambushed, it was silent, the enemy did not know our deployment, they wanted to attack the west, but they attacked the east first.

古文：武王曰： 敌知我情，通我谋，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武王问道： 如果敌人已经知道我军的军情，掌握了我军的军事策划，这又应该怎么办呢？ 
English: King Wu asked: If the enemy already knows the military situation of our army and has mastered the military planning of our army, what should we do?

古文：太公曰： 兵胜之术，密察敌人之机而速乘其利，复疾击其不意。 
现代文：太公答说： 作战取胜的方法，在于周密地察明敌情，迅速把握有利战机，然后出其不意地快速出击。 
English: The father-in-law replied: The way to win the battle is to thoroughly detect the enemy situation, quickly grasp the advantageous fighter plane, and then make a quick surprise attack.

