古文：著雍涒滩，一年。
现代文：著雍涒滩，一年。
English: By Yonglu Beach, one year later.

古文：高祖武皇帝八大通二年
现代文：梁武帝大通二年
English: Two years after Emperor Liangwu's death

古文：春，正月，癸亥，魏以北海王颢为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、相州刺史。
现代文：春季，正月癸亥，北魏任命北海王元颢为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、相州刺史。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the Year of the Pig, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Beihai Wang Yuanqi as the cavalry general, the keeper of the imperial residences and the three departments, and the chief historian of Xiangzhou.

古文：魏北道行台杨津守定州城，居鲜于修礼、杜洛周之间，迭来攻围；津蓄薪粮，治器械，随机拒击，贼不能克。
现代文：北魏北道行台杨津守定州城，处于鲜于礼和杜洛周两军之间，鲜于礼和杜洛周不断来围攻定州城。杨津积蓄柴草粮食，修治兵甲器械，相机抵御抗击贼军，敌军不能攻克定州城。
English: Yangjin, a trading post in the Northern Wei Northern Road, guarded Dingzhou City. It was located between the two armies of Shanzhuangli and Dulozhou. Shanzhuangli and Dulozhou constantly besieged Dingzhou City. Yangjin accumulated firewood and grain, repaired armored equipment, and cameras to resist the anti-theft army. The enemy army could not conquer Dingzhou City.

古文：津潜使人以铁券说贼党，贼党有应津者，遗津书曰： 贼所以围城，正为取北人耳。城中北人，宜尽杀之，不然，必为患。 
现代文：杨津暗中派人持铁券游说贼军，贼军中有响应杨津的人，给杨津写信说： 贼军之所以包围定州城，只是为了得到城中北方人罢了，城中的北方人，应全部杀掉，不这样的话，一定成为后患。 
English: Yang Jin secretly sent people with iron coupons to lobby the Kleptocrats. Some of the Kleptocrats who responded to Yang Jin wrote a letter to Yang Jin saying, "The reason why the Kleptocrats surrounded Dingzhou City was just to get the northerners in the city. The northerners in the city should all be killed. If not, they will definitely become a hindrance."

古文：津悉收北人内子城中而不杀，众无不感其仁。
现代文：于是，杨津将定州城中的北方人全部集中于内城中，却并未杀掉他们，这些北方人对杨津的仁义之举无不感激。
English: As a result, Yangjin concentrated all northerners in the city of Dingzhou in the inner city, but did not kill them. These northerners are very grateful for Yangjin's benevolent act.

古文：及葛荣代修礼统众，使人说津，许以为司徒；津斩其使，固守三年。
现代文：等到葛荣代替鲜于礼统领军队后，派人向杨津游说，许诺让杨津做司徒。杨津杀掉了葛荣的使者，固守定州城三年。
English: After Ge Rong took the place of Sun Yat-sen in commanding the army, he sent someone to lobby Yang Jin, promising to make Yang Jin a tutor. Yang Jin killed Ge Rong's envoy and held fast to Dingzhou City for three years.

古文：杜洛周围之，魏不能救。
现代文：因杜洛周包围着定州城，北魏的军队不能来相救。
English: Due to the encirclement of Dingzhou City by the Duke of Luo, the Northern Wei army could not come to the rescue.

古文：津遣其子遁突围出，诣柔然头兵可汗求救。
现代文：杨津派自己的儿子杨遁突围出去，来到柔然国向头兵可汗求救。
English: Yang Jin sent his own son, Yang Xuan, to break out of the encirclement and come to Juran to ask the head soldier, Khan, for help.

古文：遁日夜泣请，头兵遣其从祖吐豆发帅精骑一万南出。
现代文：杨遁日夜哭泣恳请，于是头兵可汗派他的堂祖父吐豆发率一万精锐骑兵南下救援。
English: Yang Xuan cried day and night and begged for help, so the head soldier Khan sent his great-uncle Tu Dou to send ten thousand elite cavalry to the south for rescue.

古文：前锋至广昌，贼塞隘口，柔然遂还。
现代文：前锋行至广昌县时，贼兵扼守住了隘口，柔然军队于是又退了回去。
English: When the vanguard marched to Guangchang County, the bandits held the pass, and the army then retreated.

古文：乙丑，津长史李裔引贼入，执津，欲烹之，既而舍之。
现代文：乙丑，杨津的部下长史李裔引贼军进入了城中，抓住了杨津，贼军打算烹了杨津，后来又放了他。
English: Second Ugly, Yangjin's subordinate, Shi Li, led the thief army into the city and captured Yangjin. The thief army planned to cook Yangjin, and later released him.

古文：瀛州刺史元宁以城降洛周。
现代文：瀛州刺史元宁率全城投降了杜洛周。
English: The whole city surrendered to Douluo Zhou led by Zhangzhou Jishi Yuanning.

古文：乙丑，魏潘嫔生女，胡太后诈言皇子。
现代文：乙丑，北魏孝明帝的潘嫔生了一个女儿，胡太后诈称是皇子。
English: Second ugly, Northern Wei Emperor Xiaoming's Pan Ye gave birth to a daughter, the Empress Dowager Hu fraudulently claimed to be the prince.

古文：丙寅，大赦，改元武泰。
现代文：丙寅，北魏实行大赦，改元为武泰。
English: Hsin-yin, the Northern Wei Dynasty implemented amnesty, and the Yuan Dynasty changed to Wu-tai.

古文：萧宝寅围冯翊，未下；长孙稚军至恒农，行台左丞杨侃谓稚曰： 昔魏武与韩遂、马超据潼关相拒，遂、超之才，非魏武敌也，然而胜负久不决者，扼其险要故也。
现代文：萧宝寅包围了冯翊县城，没有攻下。长孙稚的军队到了恒农，行台左丞杨侃对长孙稚说： 从前魏武帝曹操跟韩遂、马超在潼关交战，相持不下，韩遂、马超的才能，远不能与魏武帝相匹敌，但是却很长时间决不出胜负来，原因就在于韩遂、马超扼守住了险要关口。
English: Xiao Baoying encircled the county seat of Fengye, but failed to capture it. Nagasun Chih's army arrived at Hengnong, and Yang Kan, the commander of the Left Division, said to Nagasun Chih: Once upon a time, the Wei Emperor Cao Cao fought with Han Sui and Ma Chao at Shaoguan, and they couldn't stand against each other. The talent of Han Sui and Ma Chao was far from being able to match that of Wei Emperor Wu, but they couldn't decide whether to win or lose for a long time. The reason was that Han Sui and Ma Chao held on to the crucial pass.

古文：今贼守御已固，虽魏武复生，无以施其智勇。
现代文：现在敌人守备防御已经稳固。即使魏武帝曹操再生，也施展不出他的本事。
English: Now that the enemy's defense has been stabilized, even if the Wei Emperor Cao Cao were to be reborn, he would not be able to demonstrate his ability.

古文：不如北取蒲阪，渡河而西，入其腹心，置兵死地，则华州之围不战自解，潼关之守必内顾而走。
现代文：您不如向北夺取蒲反城，渡过黄河向西，进入敌人的腹地，置军于必死之地。这样华州之围便会不战而自解，潼关守敌必定顾虑后方而逃走。
English: It would be better for you to seize the city of Putang to the north, cross the Yellow River to the west, enter the enemy's hinterland, and set up an army in the place of death. In this way, the siege of Huazhou would be lifted without a fight, and the enemy defenders of Shaoguan would surely worry about the rear and flee.

古文：支节既解，长安可坐取也。
现代文：周围的城池解决了，长安城便可坐而取之。
English: The surrounding cities have been resolved, and Chang'an City can sit back and take it.

古文：若愚计可取，愿为明公前驱。 
现代文：如果我的计策可行的话，我愿意为您做前锋。 
English: If my plan works, I'd like to be your striker.

古文：稚曰： 子之计则善矣；然今薛修义围河东，薛凤贤据安邑，宗正珍孙守虞坂不得进，如何可往？ 
现代文：长孙稚说： 您的计策倒是很好，但是崐现在薛义包围着河东、薛凤贤据守着安邑，宗正珍孙把守着虞坂，无法通过，怎么能到达呢？ 
English: The eldest grandson said, "Your strategy is very good, but now Xue Yizhang is encircling Hedong, Xue Fengxian is holding An'yun, and Zong Zheng Jinsun is holding Yuzhan. They can't get through, so how can they get there?"

古文：侃曰： 珍孙行陈一夫，因缘为将，可为人使，安能使人！
现代文：杨侃说： 珍孙只不过是一介武夫，因偶然的机缘得以成为将领，他只能被人驱使，哪能指挥得了别人！
English: Yang Kan said: Jinsun is just a warrior. He was able to become a general by chance. He can only be driven by others, how can he command others!

古文：河东治在蒲反，西逼河漘，封疆多在郡东。
现代文：河东郡的治所在蒲反城，蒲反城西边靠近黄河，所辖区域大部分在郡治所的东部。
English: The county seat of Hedong County is in Putang City. The west side of Putang City is close to the Yellow River, and most of the area under its jurisdiction is in the east of the county seat.

古文：修义驱帅士民西围郡城，其父母妻子皆留旧村，一旦闻官军来至，皆有内顾之心，必望风自溃矣。 
现代文：薛义率军队、百姓向西包围了郡的治所蒲反城，他们的父母、妻子、儿女却还都留在原来的村庄，一旦听说官军到了，他们都会有内顾之忧的，一定会望风披靡不战自溃。 
English: Xue Yi led the army and the people to encircle the county seat of Putang City to the west, but their parents, wives, and children still remained in the original village. Once they heard that the government army had arrived, they would all be worried, and they would certainly hope for victory and self-defeat.

古文：稚乃使其子子彦与侃帅骑兵自恒农北渡，据石锥壁，侃声言： 今且停此以待步兵，且观民情向背。
现代文：长孙稚于是便派儿子长孙子彦与杨侃一起率骑兵从恒农北渡黄河，占据了石锥壁。杨侃声言： 现在暂时停在这里等待步兵，并且看一看民心所向。 
English: The eldest grandson then sent his son, the eldest grandson Zihang, together with Yang Kan, to lead the cavalry from Hengnong Beidu to the Yellow River and occupy the stone cone wall.Yang Kan said: Now temporarily stop here to wait for the infantry and see what the people's hearts are like.

古文：命送降名者各自还村，俟台军举三烽，当亦举烽相应；其无应烽者，乃贼党也，当进击屠之，以所获赏军。 
现代文：于是命令那些送来投降者的名单的人各自回到村子，并且告诉他们： 等到官军燃起三堆烽火时，你们也要燃举烽火相呼应。那些不举烽火相呼应的人，便是贼军的同党，要杀掉他们，将没收的财产犒赏军队。 
English: Then he ordered those who had brought the list of those who had surrendered to return to the village individually, and told them: When the government army lights three bonfires, you will also light bonfires in unison. Those who do not light bonfires in unison are the same party as the thief army, they should be killed, and the confiscated property should be rewarded to the army.

古文：于是村民转相告语，虽实未降者亦诈举烽，一宿之间，火光遍数百里。
现代文：于是村民们相互转告，即使内心不想投降的人也假装举起烽火，一夜之间，火光遍布数百里。
English: So the villagers told each other that even those who did not want to surrender in their hearts pretended to hold a bonfire. Overnight, the flames spread across hundreds of miles.

古文：贼围城者不测其故，各自散归；修义亦逃还，与凤贤俱请降。
现代文：围攻蒲反城的贼兵不知其中原委，各自溃散逃归。薛义也逃回了老家，与薛凤贤一起请求投降。
English: The bandits who besieged the city of Putang did not know which of them was the original committee, and they scattered and fled. Xue Yi also fled back to his hometown, and together with Xue Fengxian, he asked for surrender.

古文：丙子，稚克潼关，遂入河东。
现代文：丙子，长孙稚攻克了潼关，于是进入了河东郡。
English: His eldest grandson conquered Shaoguan and entered Hedong County.

古文：会有诏废盐池税，稚上表以为： 盐池天产之货，密迩京畿，唯应宝而守之，均赡以理。
现代文：这时候正赶上孝明帝下诏书要废除掉盐池税，于是长孙稚便上书申明自己的看法： 盐池是天然物产，靠近京城，正应该把它当作宝贝好好守护，依据常理均衡地补给百姓。
English: At this time, Emperor Xiaoming issued an edict to abolish the salt pond tax, so the eldest grandson sent a letter to affirm his opinion: The salt pond is a natural product, close to the capital, and it should be well protected as a treasure, and supplied to the people in a balanced manner according to common sense.

古文：今四方多虞，府藏罄竭，冀、定扰攘，常谓之绢不复可收，唯仰府库，有出无入。
现代文：当今之时，四方多难，国家府库空虚，冀州、定州叛乱纷起，国家正常的户调绢帛无法收上来，一切全靠府库的储备，只有支出，没有收入。
English: At the present time, there are many difficulties in the four directions, the state treasury is empty, the Jizhou and Dingzhou rebellions have arisen, and the country's normal budget cannot be collected. Everything depends on the reserves of the treasury, only expenditure, no income.

古文：略论盐税，一年之中，准绢而言，不减三十万匹，乃是移冀、定二州置于畿甸。
现代文：大致估算一下盐税收入，一年之中，按绢的价值计算的话，不少于三十万匹绢的收入，这就犹同将冀州、定州这两个州置于京郊一样。
English: Roughly estimating the salt tax revenue, in a year, if calculated according to the value of straw, it is not less than 300,000 straw, which is the same as placing the two states of Jizhou and Dingzhou in the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：今若废之，事同再失。
现代文：现在如果再废除盐池税的话，那可就是两次失计了。
English: If the salt pond tax were to be abolished now, it would be a double loss.

古文：臣前仰违严旨，而先讨关贼，径解河东者，非缓长安而急薄阪，一失盐池，三军乏食。
现代文：臣上次之所以敢违抗您的圣旨，没有先讨伐关内的贼兵，而是先径直解除了河东之围，这并不是以长安为缓而以蒲反为急，而是如果一旦失去盐池，则三军势必会缺乏粮食。
English: The reason why the minister dared to defy your sacred will last time was that he did not first fight the bandits in Guan, but directly lifted the siege of Hedong. This is not because Chang'an is slow and Putang is urgent, but if the salt pond is lost, the three armies are bound to lack food.

古文：天助大魏，兹计不爽。
现代文：上天助我大魏，这一计策果然是正确的。
English: Heaven help me, this strategy turned out to be correct.

古文：昔高祖升平之年，无所乏少，犹创置盐官而加典护，非与物竞利，恐由利而乱俗也。
现代文：过去孝文帝太平之年，什么都不缺少，尚且创置盐官对盐池加以管理、保护，那样做的目的，并不是要跟老百姓争利，而是担心由于利益冲突而导致社会动乱。
English: In the past, in the peaceful years of Emperor Xiaowen, there was no shortage of anything, and salt officials were created to manage and protect salt ponds. The purpose of doing so was not to compete with the common people, but to worry about social unrest caused by conflicts of interest.

古文：况今国用不足，租征六年之粟，调折来岁之资，此皆夺人私财，事不获已。
现代文：何况当今国家财政不足，租税已经提前征收了六年，户调已经折合到明年，这些都是掠取百姓私财的措施，事情出于不得已。
English: Moreover, today's national finances are insufficient, taxes have been levied six years in advance, and the household adjustment has been converted to next year. These are all measures to plunder the people's private wealth, things out of necessity.

古文：臣辄符同监将、尉，还帅所部，依常收税，更听后敕。 
现代文：我这就让那些管理、保护盐池的将、尉们，回去率领他们的部下，仍按往常一样征收盐税，是否废除，再听陛下以后的诏令。 
English: I will let the generals and lieutenants who manage and protect the salt ponds go back and lead their subordinates to continue to collect salt tax as usual. Whether to abolish it will be decided by His Majesty later.

古文：萧宝寅遣其将侯终德击毛遐。
现代文：萧宝寅派部将侯终德攻打毛遐的部队。
English: Xiao Baoying sent troops to attack Mao Kun's troops.

古文：会郭子恢等屡为魏军所败，终德因其势挫，还军袭宝寅；至白门，宝寅始觉，丁丑，与终德战，败，携其妻南阳公主及其少子帅麾下百馀骑自后门出，奔万俟丑奴。
现代文：正值郭子恢等人屡次被北魏军队打败，侯终德趁着萧宝寅势力受到削弱之际，回去袭击萧宝寅，侯终德的部队已到了白门的时候，萧宝寅才刚刚发觉。丁丑，萧宝寅与侯终德交战，结果战败。萧宝寅携带妻子南阳公主和他们的小儿子，带着部下一百多名骑兵从后门逃出，投奔了万俟奴。
English: At a time when Guo Zhihuai and others were repeatedly defeated by the Northern Wei army, Hou Zhengde took advantage of the weakening of Xiao Baotian's power to go back and attack Xiao Baotian. When Hou Zhengde's troops arrived at the White Gate, Xiao Baotian had just discovered it. Ding Qiu, Xiao Baotian fought with Hou Zhengde and was defeated. Xiao Baotian, carrying his wife, Nanyang Princess, and their young son, escaped from the back door with more than a hundred cavalrymen and fled to Wanzhennu.

古文：丑奴以宝寅为太傅。
现代文：万俟奴封萧宝寅为太傅。
English: If all else fails, appoint Xiao Baotang as the grand tutor.

古文：二月，魏以长孙稚为车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、雍州刺史、尚书仆射、西道行台。
现代文：二月，北魏任命长孙稚为车骑大将军、开府仪同三司、雍州刺史、尚书仆射、西道行台。
English: In February, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the eldest grandson as the general of the chariot and cavalry, the three divisions of the Kaifu ceremony, the history of Yongzhou, the history of Shang, and the west road.

古文：群盗李洪攻烧巩西阙口以东，南结诸蛮；魏都督李神轨、武卫将军费穆讨之。
现代文：群盗李洪等攻取烧毁了巩县以西、伊阙口以东的大片地区，并与南方诸蛮相勾结。北魏都督李神轨、武卫将军费穆率军征讨李洪。
English: The bandits Li Hong and others captured and burned a large area west of Gong County and east of Ilukou, and colluded with the barbarians in the south. The Northern Wei Governor Li Shenlu and the Wuwei General Feimu led the army to conquer Li Hong.

古文：穆败洪于阙口南，遂平之。
现代文：费穆在伊阙口南打败了李洪，最后终于平定了匪乱。
English: Fei Mu defeated Li Hong in the south of Yilongkou, and finally quelled the banditry.

古文：葛荣击杜洛周，杀之，并其众。
现代文：葛荣率军攻打杜洛周，杀了杜洛周，收编了他的部众。
English: Ge Rong led the army to attack Du Luo Zhou, killed Du Luo Zhou, and collected his subordinates.

古文：魏灵太后再临朝以来，嬖幸用事，政事纵弛，威恩不立，盗贼蜂起，封疆日蹙。
现代文：北魏胡太后再次当政以来，宠信之徒横行专权，政事松弛，朝廷的威信树立不起来，盗贼纷起，边界一天天缩小。
English: Since the Empress Dowager Hu of the Northern Wei Dynasty came to power again, her favorites have rampantly exercised authoritarian power, political affairs have been slack, the prestige of the imperial court has not been established, thieves have arisen, and the borders have shrunk day by day.

古文：魏肃宗年浸长，太后自以所为不谨，恐左右闻之于帝，凡帝所爱信者，太后辄以事去之，务为壅蔽，不使帝知外事。
现代文：孝明帝年纪渐渐长大，胡太后本人也认为自己的所作所为不够谨慎，担心左右会向孝明帝汇报，于是凡孝明帝平时所宠信的人，太后便借某种事由除掉他们，竭力堵塞孝明帝视听，不让他知道外面发生的事情。
English: As Emperor Xiaoming gradually grew older, Empress Dowager Hu herself also thought that her actions were not prudent enough, fearing that the left and right would report to Emperor Xiaoming. As a result, the empress dowager removed all of Emperor Xiaoming's favorite people for some reason, and tried her best to block Emperor Xiaoming's audio-visual and prevent him from knowing what was happening outside.

古文：通直散骑常侍昌黎谷士恢有宠于帝，使领左右；太后屡讽之，欲用为州，士恢怀宠，不愿出外，太后乃诬以罪而杀之。
现代文：通直散骑常侍、昌黎人谷士恢深受孝明帝宠爱，命他统领宫中卫士。胡太后多次含蓄地暗示谷士恢，想把他调为地方官，但谷士恢受孝明帝宠幸，不愿离开京城，于是胡太后便罗织罪名将他杀了。
English: Emperor Xiaoming was very fond of Gu Zhiguo, the Changli man who was a regular attendant of the imperial cavalry, and ordered him to take charge of the palace guards. Empress Dowager Hu repeatedly hinted that she wanted to appoint him as a local official, but he was favored by Emperor Xiaoming and did not want to leave the capital, so Empress Dowager Hu killed him on trumped up charges.

古文：有蜜多道人，能胡语，帝常置左右，太后使人杀之于城南，而诈悬赏购贼。
现代文：有一个密多道人，会说胡话，孝明帝经常让他在身边服侍。胡太后派人在城南杀了他，还假装悬赏缉拿罪犯。
English: There was a man of the Midao sect who spoke nonsense, and Emperor Xiaoming often had him serve at his side. Empress Dowager Hu sent someone to kill him in the south of the city, and also pretended to offer a reward for the capture of the criminal.

古文：由是母子之间嫌隙日深。
现代文：从此胡太后和孝明帝母子二人之间，隔阂越来越深。
English: From then on, the rift between Empress Dowager Hu and Emperor Xiaoming's mother and son grew deeper and deeper.

古文：是时，车骑将军、仪同三司、并、肆、汾、广、恒、云六州讨虏大都督尔硃荣兵势强盛，魏朝惮之。
现代文：当时，车骑将军、仪同三司及并、肆、汾、广、恒、云六州讨虏大都督尔朱荣，兵势强盛，北魏朝廷很是害怕。
English: At that time, the general of the cavalry and cavalry, the three departments of the imperial etiquette, and Zhu Rong, the governor of the six states of Anhui, Shandong, Guangxi, Henan and Yunnan, had a strong army, and the Northern Wei Dynasty was very afraid.

古文：高欢、段荣、尉景、蔡俊先在杜洛周党中，欲图洛周，不果，逃奔葛荣，又亡归尔硃荣。
现代文：高欢、段荣、尉景、蔡俊等人原先在杜洛周手下，本想图谋取代杜洛周，结果没成功，于是逃奔葛荣，接着又投奔尔朱荣。
English: Gao Huan, Duan Rong, Lv Jing, Cai Jun and others were originally under Du Luo Zhou, and they originally wanted to replace Du Luo Zhou, but the result was not successful, so they fled to Ge Rong, and then joined Er Zhu Rong.

古文：刘贵先在尔硃荣所，屡荐欢于荣，荣见其憔悴，未之奇也。
现代文：先前便在尔朱荣处做事的刘贵，多次向尔朱荣推荐高欢，尔朱荣见高欢身形瘦弱，相貌憔悴，并没有觉出他有什么出奇之处。
English: Liu Gui, who had previously worked at Le Zhu Rong's place, repeatedly recommended Gao Huan to Le Zhu Rong. Le Zhu Rong saw Gao Huan's thin body and gaunt appearance, and did not notice anything unusual about him.

古文：欢从荣之马厩，厩有悍马，荣命欢剪之，欢不加羁绊而剪之，竟不蹄啮；起，谓荣曰： 御恶人亦犹是矣。 
现代文：一次高欢随尔朱荣来到马棚，马棚中有一匹强悍凶猛的马，尔朱荣令高欢给这匹马修剪。高欢对这匹马没套上马笼头和捆住马脚便修剪起来，这匹马竟然也没踢没咬。高欢修剪完后站起身来，对尔朱荣说： 制服坏人也跟这是同一道理。 
English: One time, Gao Huan came to the stable with Lzhu Rong. There was a strong and fierce horse in the stable. Lzhu Rong ordered Gao Huan to trim the horse. Gao Huan trimmed the horse without putting on the horse's head and tying the horse's feet. The horse actually did not kick or bite. Gao Huan stood up after trimming and said to Lzhu Rong: It is the same reason for subduing bad people.

古文：荣奇其言，坐欢于床下，屏左右，访以时事。
现代文：尔朱荣很惊奇他能说出这样的话来，于是请高欢坐在床下，屏退左右，向他征询当前的国家大事。
English: Le Zhu Rong was very surprised that he could say such a thing, so he asked Gao Huan to sit under the bed, screen back and forth, and ask him about current national events.

古文：欢曰： 闻公有马十二谷，色别为群，畜此竟何用也？ 
现代文：高欢说道： 我听说您有十二群马，按颜色分成不同的马群，这样畜养到底是要做什么用呢？ 
English: Gao Huan said, "I heard that you have twelve herds of horses, divided into different herds according to color. What is the use of such animal husbandry?

古文：荣曰： 但言尔意！ 
现代文：尔朱荣说： 请只管说出你的看法！ 
English: Le Zhu Rong said: Please just say what you think!

古文：欢曰： 今天子暗弱，太后淫乱，嬖孽擅命，朝政不行。
现代文：高欢说： 现在皇上软弱，太后乱，奸佞小人专权，朝廷的政策不能贯彻执行。
English: Gao Huan said: Now that the emperor is weak, the empress dowager is in turmoil, and the scoundrels are in power, the policies of the imperial court cannot be implemented.

古文：以明公雄武，乘时奋发，讨郑俨、徐纥之罪以清帝侧，霸业可举鞭而成，此贺六浑之意也。 
现代文：凭您的雄才大略，若乘此时起兵，讨伐郑俨、徐纥的罪行，肃清皇上身边的奸佞小人。那么您的霸业挥鞭之际便可成就，这就是我高欢的主意。 
English: Relying on your great talent, if you take advantage of this time to raise an army, fight against the crimes of Zheng He and Xu Xi, and clean up the villains around the emperor, then you will be able to achieve your goal when you wield the whip. This is my high-spirited idea.

古文：荣大悦。语自日中至夜半乃出，自是每参军谋。
现代文：尔朱荣听了非常高兴，二人从中午谈至半夜才出来。从此以后，高欢便经常参与尔朱荣的军事谋划。
English: Le Zhu Rong was very happy to hear this, and the two talked from noon until midnight before coming out. Since then, Gao Huan has often participated in Le Zhu Rong's military planning.

古文：并州刺史元天穆，孤之五世孙也，与荣善，荣兄事之。
现代文：并州刺史元天穆，是元孤的五世孙，跟尔朱荣关系很密切，尔朱荣对他就象对待哥哥一样。
English: He is the fifth-generation grandson of Yuan Guo, and has a close relationship with Zhu Rong. Zhu Rong treated him like an older brother.

古文：荣常与天穆及帐下都督贺拔岳密谋，欲举兵入洛，内诛嬖幸，外清群盗，二人皆劝成之。
现代文：尔朱荣经常跟元天穆及部下都督贺拔岳密谋，打算发兵进入洛阳，对内诛杀奸佞之人，对外肃清各地匪盗，元天穆和贺拔岳二人都劝尔朱荣这样做。
English: Er Zhu Rong often conspired with Yuan Tianmu and his subordinate, the governor He Batyue, and planned to send troops into Luoyang to kill the traitors within and to clean up the bandits around the country. Both Yuan Tianmu and He Batyue advised Er Zhu Rong to do so.

古文：荣上书，以 山东群盗方炽，冀、定覆没，官军屡败，请遣精骑三千东援相州。 
现代文：于是，尔朱荣便向朝廷上书说： 山东群盗的活动正猖獗，冀州、定州已经失陷敌手，官军屡战屡败，我请求派遣三千精锐骑兵向东增援相州。 
English: As a result, Le Zhu Rong wrote a letter to the imperial court, saying: The activities of the bandits in Shandong are rampant, Jizhou and Dingzhou have fallen to the enemy, and the government army has been defeated repeatedly. I request the dispatch of three thousand elite cavalrymen to the east to reinforce Xiangzhou.

古文：太后疑之，报以 念生枭戮，宝寅就擒，丑奴请降，关、陇已定。
现代文：胡太后对此很是怀疑，便回答尔朱荣说： 莫折念生已斩首，萧宝寅被活捉，万俟奴已请求投降，这样，关、陇地区的贼盗已经平定。
English: The Empress Dowager Hu was very suspicious about this, so she replied to Le Zhu Rong, saying, "Mo Rong Nian has been beheaded, Xiao Baoying has been captured alive, and Wan Xunnu has requested surrender. Thus, the thieves in the Guan and Handan regions have been pacified.

古文：费穆大破群蛮，绛蜀渐平。
现代文：费穆大破群蛮，绛蜀地区也逐渐平定。
English: Feimu broke the barbarian hordes, and the Lushu region was gradually pacified.

古文：又，北海王颢帅众二万出镇相州，不须出兵。 
现代文：再者，北海王元颢已率军二万出镇相州，因此你不必再出兵增援了。 
English: Furthermore, the North Sea King Yuan Shao has led an army of twenty thousand out of the town of Xiangzhou, so you don't have to send reinforcements.

古文：荣复上书，以为： 贼势虽衰，官军屡败，人情危怯，恐实难用。
现代文：尔朱荣又上书朝廷，认为： 贼兵的势力虽然衰落，但官军却屡次失败，军心畏惧，所以恐怕官军实际上很难起作用。
English: Le Zhu Rong also wrote to the imperial court, saying: Although the power of the robber soldiers has declined, the official army has repeatedly failed, and the army is afraid, so I am afraid that the official army is actually difficult to play a role.

古文：若不更思方略，无以万全。
现代文：如果不另想策略的话，则不能确保万无一失。
English: If you don't think about a different strategy, then you can't ensure that everything is foolproof.

古文：臣愚以为蠕蠕主阿那瑰荷国厚恩，未应忘报，宜遣发兵东趣下口以蹑其背，北海之事严加警备以当其前。
现代文：以微臣愚见，蠕蠕国国王阿那环受我魏朝厚恩，不应忘记报答，因此，应该让他发兵东至下口以攻击贼兵的背后，令北海王元颢的部队严加戒备以攻击贼兵的正面。
English: According to the opinion of Weizhong, King Anahong of Hebei should not forget to repay the favor he received from the Wei Dynasty. Therefore, he should send his troops to the east to attack the rear of the bandits, and the troops of the North Sea King Yuancheng should be on high alert to attack the front of the bandits.

古文：臣麾下虽少，辄尽力命。自井陉以北，滏口以西，分据险要，攻其肘腋。
现代文：我的部队虽然很少，也要尽全力命他们从井陉以北，滏口以西，分路占据险要地区，从侧面攻击贼兵。
English: Although my troops are few, I will do my best. They will attack the bandits from the side, occupying the critical area from the north of the shaft and the west of the mouth of the shaft.

古文：葛荣虽并洛周，威恩未著，人类差异，形势可分。 
现代文：葛荣虽然吞并了杜洛周的部队，但威信还未树立，部下并非一族，可以使他们分崩离析。 
English: Although Ge Rong has absorbed Dulozhou's troops, his prestige has not yet been established, and his subordinates are not a clan, which can cause them to fall apart.

古文：遂勒兵，召集义勇，北捍马邑，东塞井陉。
现代文：于是尔朱荣便命令部队征召义勇之人充军，向北守卫马邑城，向东占据了井陉。
English: As a result, Er Zhurong ordered the troops to conscript volunteers to join the army, guarding Ma'i City to the north, and occupying Jiuyuan to the east.

古文：徐纥说太后以铁券间荣左右，荣闻而恨之。
现代文：徐纥劝胡太后派人持铁券离间尔朱荣的部下，尔朱荣听说后，很忌恨徐纥。
English: Xu Rong advised the Empress Dowager Hu to send people with iron coupons to separate Zhu Rong's subordinates. After hearing this, Zhu Rong hated Xu Rong very much.

古文：魏肃宗亦恶俨、纥等，逼于太后，不能去。
现代文：北魏孝明帝也很厌恶郑俨、徐纥等人，碍于胡太后，不能把他们除掉。
English: Emperor Xiaoming of the Northern Wei Dynasty also disliked Zheng Qi, Xu Qi and others, and could not get rid of them because of Empress Hu.

古文：密诏荣举兵内向，欲以胁太后。
现代文：于是孝明帝秘密下诏书命尔朱荣发兵至京城，想以此来胁迫胡太后。
English: As a result, Emperor Xiaoming secretly issued an edict ordering Zhu Rong to send troops to the capital in an attempt to coerce Empress Dowager Hu.

古文：荣以高欢为前锋，行至上党，帝复以私诏止之。
现代文：尔朱荣任命高欢为前锋，部队行至上党时，孝明帝又下密诏阻止了这一行动。
English: Zhu Rong appointed Gao Huan as a forward, and when the troops marched to the top of the party, Emperor Xiaoming again issued a secret edict to stop this action.

古文：俨、纥恐祸及己，阴与太后谋鸩帝。
现代文：郑俨、徐纥担心灾祸会降临到自己头上，便暗中与胡太后策划阴谋毒死孝明帝。
English: Zheng Yao and Xu Yao were worried that disaster would befall themselves, so they secretly plotted with Empress Dowager Hu to poison Emperor Xiaoming.

古文：癸丑，帝暴殂。
现代文：癸丑，北魏孝明帝突然去世。
English: Tragically, Emperor Xiaoming of the Northern Wei Dynasty died suddenly.

古文：甲寅，太后立皇女为帝，大赦。
现代文：甲寅，胡太后立皇女为皇帝，大赦天下。
English: Emperor Jia Yin and Empress Dowager Hu made the princess emperor, and she was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：既而下诏称： 潘充华本实生女，故临洮王宝晖世子钊，体自高祖，宜膺大宝。
现代文：不久又下诏书宣称： 潘充华实际上生的是女儿。原来的临洮王元宝晖的后代元钊，是孝文帝的嫡系后代，应该做皇帝。
English: Soon after, an imperial edict was issued declaring: Pan Chonghua was actually born a daughter. The descendants of the original Linyi king, Yuan Baojun, were the legitimate descendants of Emperor Xiaowen, and should be emperor.

古文：百官文武加二阶，宿卫加三阶。 
现代文：文武百官各进二级官位，宿卫进三级官位。 
English: All the civil and military officials were promoted to the second-level official rank, and the guards were promoted to the third-level official rank.

古文：乙卯，钊即位。
现代文：乙卯，元钊即位。
English: Emperor Wu and Empress Yuan ascended the throne.

古文：钊始生三岁，太后欲久专政，故贪其幼而立之。
现代文：元钊这时才刚刚三岁，胡太后想长久地独揽大权，所以看中了元钊年纪小才立他为帝。
English: Yuan Shao was just three years old at the time, and Empress Dowager Hu wanted to hold on to power for a long time, so she took a fancy to Yuan Shao's young age and made him emperor.

古文：尔硃荣闻之，大怒，谓元天穆曰： 主上晏驾，春秋十九，海内犹谓之幼君；况今奉未言之儿以临天下，欲求治安，其可得乎！
现代文：尔朱荣听说这事之后，非常恼怒，对元天穆说： 皇上去世了。他年纪已十九岁了，而天下还仍把他看作是小皇帝，何况现在立一个还不会说话的幼儿来统治天下，想求得国家长治久安，怎么可能呢？
English: After hearing about this, Le Zhu Rong was very angry and said to Yuan Tianmu: The emperor has passed away. He was nineteen years old, but the world still regarded him as a small emperor. Moreover, how is it possible to establish a toddler who cannot speak to rule the world and seek long-term peace and stability for the country?

古文：吾欲帅铁骑赴哀山陵，剪除奸佞，更立长君，何如？ 
现代文：我打算率骑兵奔赴国都哀悼皇帝，除掉奸佞之人，重新立一位年纪大一点的皇帝，你们看怎么样？ 
English: I plan to lead the cavalry to rush to the country to mourn the emperor, remove the traitors, and re-establish an older emperor. What do you think?

古文：天穆曰： 此伊、霍复见于今矣！ 
现代文：元天穆说： 这真是伊尹、霍光今日再生啊！ 
English: Yuan Tianmu said, "This is really the rebirth of Yi Yin and Huo Guang today!"

古文：乃抗表称： 大行皇帝背弃万方，海内咸称鸩毒致祸。
现代文：于是尔朱荣上书朝廷，声称： 大行皇帝离开人世，天下都认为是被毒酒害死的。
English: As a result, Er Zhu Rong wrote to the imperial court, claiming: Emperor Da Xing passed away, and the whole world believes that he was killed by poisoned wine.

古文：岂有天子不豫，初不召医，贵戚大臣皆不侍侧，安得不使远近怪愕！
现代文：哪儿有皇帝生病，竟然不召医生看视，贵戚大臣都不服侍左右的道理？ 这怎能不让天下之人感到奇怪、诧异呢！
English: Where is there an emperor who falls ill, but does not call for a doctor to examine him, and where the nobles and ministers do not attend to him? How can this not make people all over the world feel strange and surprised!

古文：又以皇女为储两，虚行赦宥。上欺天地，下惑朝野。
现代文：又立皇女为皇位继承人，妄自实行大赦，宽恕罪犯，对上欺骗天地，对下迷惑朝野之人。
English: He also made the princess the heir to the throne, arbitrarily granted amnesty, pardoned criminals, deceived heaven and earth on the one hand, and confused the people of the court and the field on the other.

古文：已乃选君于孩提之中，实使奸竖专朝，隳乱纲纪，此何异掩目捕雀，塞耳盗钟！
现代文：接着又选立孩童为帝，实际上让奸臣佞子把持朝政，毁坏国家纲纪，这与掩目捕雀、塞耳盗铃有何区别？
English: Next, they elected a child as emperor, and actually let the traitorous vassal Shanzi take control of the government and destroy the national discipline. What is the difference between this and covering one's eyes to catch birds and plugging one's ears to steal bells?

古文：今群盗沸腾，邻敌窥窬，而欲以未言之儿镇安天下，不亦难乎！
现代文：现在各地盗匪猖獗，邻国之敌暗中窥伺，朝廷却打算让一个还不会说话的孩子来镇抚安定天下，不是太难了么！
English: Now bandits are rampant all over the country, the enemies of neighboring countries are spying on us, but the imperial court is planning to let a child who can't speak yet pacify and stabilize the world. Isn't that too difficult?

古文：愿听臣赴阙，参预大议，问侍臣帝崩之由，访禁卫不知之状，以徐、郑之徒付之司败，雪同天之耻，谢远近之怨，然后更择宗亲以承宝祚。 
现代文：希望朝廷允许我回到京城，参与商讨国家大计，向侍卫之臣询问皇帝驾崩的原因，访查侍卫们不知道的真实情况，将徐纥、郑俨之徒交给法官查办，以雪之耻，消除远近各地的怨恨之情，然后重新选择一位皇族成员承继皇位。 
English: I hope that the imperial court will allow me to return to Beijing, participate in the discussion of the national grand plan, ask the bodyguards about the reasons for the emperor's death, investigate the real situation that the bodyguards do not know, and submit the Xu Wei and Zheng Wei's followers to the judge for investigation. With the shame of the snow, eliminate the resentment of the far and near places, and then re-select a member of the royal family to succeed the throne.

古文：荣从弟世隆，时为直阁，太后遣诣晋阳慰谕荣；荣欲留之，世隆曰： 朝廷疑兄，故遣世隆来，今留世隆，使朝廷得预为之备，非计也。 
现代文：尔朱荣的崐堂弟尔朱世隆，当时任直官，胡太后派他到晋阳慰问安抚尔朱荣。尔朱荣打算留下尔朱世隆，尔朱世隆说道： 朝廷现在怀疑兄长您，所以才派我来您这里，现在您却要留下我，这就会使得朝廷能够预先做好防备，不是好计策呀。 
English: Zhu Rong's second cousin, Zhu Shilong, who was then a direct official, was sent by the Empress Dowager Hu to Jinyang to comfort and pacify Zhu Rong. Zhu Rong planned to keep Zhu Shilong, and Zhu Shilong said: The court is now suspicious of your brother, so they sent me here, but now you want to keep me, which will enable the court to prepare in advance, which is not a good strategy.

古文：乃遣之。
现代文：于是尔朱荣便仍让尔朱世隆回去了。
English: And when he had thus spoken, he sent him away.

古文：三月，癸未，葛荣陷魏沧州，执刺史薛庆之，居民死者什八九。
现代文：三月癸未，葛荣攻陷北魏的沧州，抓获了刺史薛庆之，平民被杀的占十之八九。
English: Shortly before March, Ge Rong invaded Cangzhou of the Northern Wei Dynasty and captured the assassin Shi Xue Qingzhi. Civilians accounted for nine out of ten of those killed.

古文：乙酉，魏葬孝明皇帝于定陵，庙号肃宗。
现代文：乙酉，北魏将孝明帝安葬于定陵，庙号为肃宗。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaoming was buried in the Dingling Mausoleum. The temple's name was Su Zong.

古文：尔硃荣与元天穆议，以彭城武宣王有忠勋，其子长乐王子攸，素有令望，欲立之。
现代文：尔朱荣跟元天穆商议，认为彭城武宣王元勰有功勋，他的儿子长乐王元子攸平素声望很高，打算立元子攸为帝。
English: Le Zhu Rong discussed with Yuan Tianmu and thought that Pengcheng Wuxuan Wang Yuanqi had meritorious service, and his son, Changle Wang Yuan Zi Youping, had a high reputation, and planned to establish Yuan Zi You as emperor.

古文：又遣从子天光及亲信奚毅、仓头王相入洛，与尔硃世隆密议。
现代文：尔朱荣又派侄子尔朱天光及亲信奚毅、仆人王相来到洛阳，与尔朱世隆秘密商议。
English: Zhu Rong also sent his nephew, Zhu Tianguang, his close confidant, Zou Yi, and his servant, Wang Xiang, to Luoyang to secretly negotiate with Zhu Shilong.

古文：天光见子攸，具论荣心，子攸许之。
现代文：尔朱天光见到元子攸后，向他详细地讲了尔朱荣的想法，元子攸答应了。
English: After Er Zhu Tianguang saw Yuan Zi You, he told him in detail the idea of Er Zhu Rong, and Yuan Zi You agreed.

古文：天光等还晋阳，荣犹疑之，乃以铜为显祖诸子孙各铸像，唯长乐王像成。
现代文：尔朱天光等人回到晋阳，尔朱荣仍犹疑不定，于是便用铜为皇室的子孙们每人都铸铜像，以此占卜谁能做皇帝，结果只有长乐王元子攸的铜像铸成了。
English: When Lzhu Tianguang and others returned to Jinyang, Lzhu Rong was still hesitant, so he used copper to cast bronze statues for each of the royal family's descendants, thus divining who could become emperor. As a result, only the bronze statue of Chao Le Wang Yuan Zi You was cast.

古文：荣乃起兵发晋阳，世隆逃出，会荣于上党。
现代文：尔朱荣这才起兵从晋阳出发，尔朱世隆逃出京城，在上党与尔朱荣相会。
English: It was only then that Lr Zhu Rong raised an army and set out from Jinyang. Lr Zhu Shilong fled the capital and met with Lr Zhu Rong in Shangdang.

古文：灵太后闻之，甚惧，悉召王公等入议，宗室大臣皆疾太后所为，莫肯致言。
现代文：胡太后听说后，非常恐惧，将王公大臣全部召入宫中商议对策。皇族宗室和大臣们都很痛恨胡太后平日的所作所为，因此没有人发言。
English: When the Empress Dowager Hu heard about this, she was very frightened and summoned all the princes and ministers to the palace to discuss countermeasures. The royal family and the ministers all hated what the Empress Dowager Hu did in her daily life, so no one spoke.

古文：徐纥独曰： 尔硃荣小胡，敢称兵向阙，文武宿卫足以制之。
现代文：只有徐纥说： 尔朱荣这个小胡人，竟敢起兵冒犯朝廷，文武禁卫军足以将他制伏。
English: Only Xu Yao said: "Er Zhu Rong, a small Hu man, dared to raise an army to offend the imperial court. The armed guards were enough to subdue him.

古文：但守险要以逸待劳，彼悬军千里，士马疲弊，破之必矣。 
现代文：只要守住险要地区以逸待劳，尔朱荣的孤军千里而来，兵马疲惫不堪，一定能够打败他。 
English: As long as we hold on to the dangerous areas and wait for labor, Le Zhu Rong's lone army will come from thousands of miles away, and the soldiers and horses will be exhausted, and they will surely be able to defeat him.

古文：太后以为然，以黄门侍郎李神轨为大都督，帅众拒之，别将郑季明、郑先护将兵守河桥，武卫将军费穆屯小平津。
现代文：胡太后认为徐纥说的很对，于是任命黄门侍郎李神轨为大都督，率兵迎击尔朱荣，副将郑季明、郑先护率兵守卫河桥，武卫将军费穆驻扎在小平津。
English: The Empress Dowager Hu thought that what Xu Xi said was very right, so she appointed Li Shenlu, the Yellow Gate's steward, as the grand governor. He led the troops to meet Zhu Rong, Vice-General Zheng Jiming and Zheng Xiangu led the troops to guard the river bridge, and General Fei Mu was stationed in Xiaopingjin.

古文：先护，俨之从祖兄弟也。
现代文：郑先护是郑俨的堂祖父兄弟。
English: Zheng Xianwu was Zheng Yao's cousin.

古文：荣至河内，复遣王相密至洛，迎长乐王子攸。
现代文：尔朱荣的军队到达河内后，尔朱荣又派王相秘密进到洛阳城，迎接长乐王元子攸。
English: After his army arrived in Hanoi, Le Chu Rong sent Wang Xiang to secretly enter Luoyang City to meet the Changle King, Yuan Zi You.

古文：夏，四月，丙申，子攸与兄彭城王劭、弟霸城公子正潜自高渚渡河，丁酉，会荣于河阳，将士咸称万岁。
现代文：夏季，四月丙申，元子攸与他的哥哥彭城王元劭、弟弟霸城公元子正偷偷从高渚渡过黄河，丁酉，在河阳跟尔朱荣见了面，将士们都高呼万岁。
English: In the summer, in April, Yuan Ziyou and his elder brother Pengcheng Wangyuan and younger brother Ba Chengyong were secretly crossing the Yellow River from Gaozhu, and Ding Ziyou met with Er Zhu Rong in Heyang. The soldiers all shouted "Long live!"

古文：戊戌，济河，子攸即帝位，以勋为无上王，子正为始平王；以荣为侍中、都督中外诸军事、大将军、尚书令、领军将军、领左右，封太原王。
现代文：戊戌，尔朱荣等渡过黄河，元子攸即皇帝位，任命元劭为无上王，元子正为始平王，任命尔朱荣为侍中、都督中外诸军事、大将军、尚书令、领军将军、领左右，并封为太原王。
English: Wu Xi, Er Zhu Rong and others crossed the Yellow River, and Yuan Zi You, the emperor, appointed Yuan Zi as the supreme king, Yuan Zi Zheng as the first king of Ping, and appointed Er Zhu Rong as the attendant, the governor of the military, the general, the shogun, the leading general, the leader of the left and right, and the king of Taiyuan.

古文：郑先护素与敬宗善，闻帝即位，与郑季明开城纳之。
现代文：郑先护平素与孝庄帝元子攸的关系很密切，听说他已即位做了皇帝，便与郑季明一起打开城门将尔朱荣的部队接进城中。
English: Zheng Xianbao Pingsu had a close relationship with Emperor Xiaozhuang Yuan Zi You. When he heard that he had been enthroned as emperor, he and Zheng Jiming opened the gate to let Zhu Rong's troops enter the city.

古文：李神轨至河桥，闻北中不守，即遁还；费穆弃众先降于荣。
现代文：李神轨来到河桥后，听说北中城已失守，便立即逃回了洛阳城；费穆丢下士兵自己先投降了尔朱荣。
English: After Li Shenliao came to the river bridge, he heard that Beizhong City had been lost, and he immediately fled back to Luoyang City; Feimu left the soldiers and surrendered to Le Zhu Rong first.

古文：徐纥矫诏夜开殿门，取骅骝厩御马十匹，东奔兗州，郑俨亦走还乡里。
现代文：徐纥假传圣旨夜里打开宫殿大门，牵出了十匹养在骅骝厩中的御马，向东逃奔了兖州。郑俨也逃回了老家。
English: Xu Xi opened the palace gate at night, took out ten horses raised in the stables, and fled to the east of Zhangzhou. Zheng Xi also fled back to his hometown.

古文：太后尽召肃宗后宫，皆令出家，太后亦自落发。
现代文：胡太后将孝明帝的后宫嫔妇们召集在一起，命令她们都出家为尼，太后自己也削了发。
English: Empress Dowager Hu gathered together the concubines from Emperor Xiaoming's harem and ordered them all to become nuns. The Empress Dowager herself also cut her hair.

古文：荣召百官迎车驾，己亥，百官奉玺绶，备法驾，迎敬宗于河桥。
现代文：尔朱荣召令文武百官迎接圣驾，己亥，文武百官捧着皇帝的印玺、绶带，准备了车辇，从河桥迎回魏孝庄帝。
English: Zhu Rongzhao called on the civil and military officials to welcome the saint, and the civil and military officials held the emperor's seal and sash, prepared the carriage, and welcomed Wei Xiaozhuang from the river bridge.

古文：庚子，荣遣骑执太后及幼主，送至河阴。太后对荣多所陈说，荣拂衣而起，沉太后及幼主于河。
现代文：庚子，尔朱荣派骑兵抓获了胡太后和小皇帝，将他们送到了河阴，胡崐太后对尔朱荣讲了许多求情的话，尔朱荣拂袖而起，命人将胡太后和小皇帝沉入了黄河之中。
English: Geng Zi and Er Zhurong sent cavalry to capture Empress Dowager Hu and Emperor Xiao, and sent them to Heyin. Empress Dowager Hu spoke many words of plea to Er Zhurong. Er Zhurong stood up and ordered someone to sink Empress Dowager Hu and Emperor Xiao into the Yellow River.

古文：费穆密说荣曰： 公士马不出万人，今长驱向洛，前无横陈，既无战胜之威，群情素不厌服。
现代文：费穆暗中劝尔朱荣说： 您兵马不足万人，现在远道而至洛阳，前面没有遇到任何抵抗，既没有什么战胜之威，平素人们心中对您又不畏服。
English: Fei Mu secretly advised Le Zhu Rong, saying: You have less than ten thousand soldiers and horses, and now you have come all the way to Luoyang. You have not encountered any resistance in front of you, neither do you have the power to win, and ordinary people are not afraid of you in their hearts.

古文：以京师之众，百官之盛，知公虚实，有轻侮之心。
现代文：因京城军队众多，文武百官势力强盛，如果知道了您的虚实的话，便会对您有所轻视。
English: Due to the large number of troops in Beijing and the strong influence of civil and military officials, if they knew your truth, they would despise you.

古文：若不大行诛罚，更树亲党，恐公还北之日，未度太行而内变作矣。 
现代文：若不狠狠地实行诛杀、惩治，另外培植亲信，恐怕您回到北方之时，还未过太行山，内乱便会发生。 
English: If you do not ruthlessly carry out killings and punishments, and cultivate cronies, I am afraid that when you return to the north, you will not have passed Taihang Mountain, and civil unrest will occur.

古文：荣心然之，谓所亲慕容绍宗曰： 洛中人士繁盛，骄侈成俗，不加芟剪，终难制驭。
现代文：尔朱荣内心认为费穆的话很对，于是便对亲信慕容绍宗说： 洛阳人口众多，骄侈成习，如不加以整饬，终究难以控制。
English: In his heart, Le Zhurong thought that Feimu's words were right, so he said to his close friend Murong Shaosong: Luoyang has a large population and has become arrogant. If it is not rectified, it will eventually be difficult to control.

古文：吾欲因百官出迎，悉诛之，何如？ 
现代文：我打算趁文武百官出迎之际，全部杀掉他们，你看怎样？ 
English: I'm going to take advantage of the arrival of hundreds of officers and men and kill them all. What do you think?

古文：绍宗曰： 太后荒淫失道，嬖幸弄权，淆乱四海，故明公兴义兵以清朝廷。
现代文：慕容绍宗说道： 太后荒淫无道，奸佞小人专权，将天下搞得混乱不堪，所以您才起义兵以整肃朝廷。
English: Murong Shaosong said, "The empress dowager was a senseless womanizer, and she usurped the power of a villain. She made the world an unbearable mess. That's why you raised the army to clean up the imperial court."

古文：今无故歼夷多士，不分忠佞，恐大失天下之望，非长策也。 
现代文：现在却无故杀戮许多官员，不分忠臣奸臣，恐怕会使天下大人失所望，这不是上策。 
English: Now, however, the killing of many officials for no reason, regardless of whether they are loyalists or traitors, will probably disappoint the adults of the world. This is not the best strategy.

古文：荣不听，乃请帝循河西至淘渚，引百官于行宫西北，云欲祭天。
现代文：尔朱荣不听，于是请孝庄帝沿黄河向西来到淘渚这个地方，尔朱荣率百官来到皇帝行宫的西北，说是要祭天。
English: Er Zhu Rong did not listen, so he invited Emperor Xiaozhuang to travel west along the Yellow River to the place of Taozhuang. Er Zhu Rong led hundreds of officials to the northwest of the emperor's palace, saying that he wanted to sacrifice to heaven.

古文：百官既集，列胡骑围之，责以天下丧乱，肃宗暴崩，皆由朝臣贪虐，不能匡弼。
现代文：文武百官集中起来后，尔朱荣布置骑兵四面包围了他们，指责这些文武百官们说，天下动乱，孝明帝突然死去，都是由于他们这些朝廷大臣贪脏枉法，酷虐无忌，不能匡辅社稷所造成的，因此命令部队诛杀了他们。
English: After the civil and military officials gathered together, Er Zhurong arranged cavalry to surround them on all sides, accusing these civil and military officials saying that the turmoil in the world and the sudden death of Emperor Xiaoming were all caused by the fact that they, the ministers of the court, were greedy, cruel and unscrupulous, and could not help the society. Therefore, he ordered the troops to kill them.

古文：因纵兵杀之，自丞相高阳王雍、司空元钦、仪同三司义阳王略以下，死者二千馀人。
现代文：从丞相高阳王元雍、司空元钦、仪同三司义阳王元略以下，被杀的达两千多人。
English: More than two thousand people were killed, from the chancellor Gaoyang Wang Yuan Yong, the secretary Kuang Yuan Qin, and the secretary of the three departments of Yidong and Yiyang Wang Yuan Rong.

古文：前黄门郎王遵业兄弟居父丧，其母，敬宗之从母也，相帅出迎，俱死。
现代文：原黄门郎王遵业兄弟正在居父丧，王遵业的母亲是魏孝庄帝的伯母，他们一起出来迎接皇帝，结果也都被杀掉了。
English: The brothers Wang Zunye, the original Huangmen Lang, were in mourning for their father. Wang Zunye's mother was the aunt of Emperor Wei Xiaozhuang. They came out together to greet the emperor, but they were all killed as a result.

古文：遵业，慧龙之孙也，俊爽涉学，时人惜其才而讥其躁。
现代文：王遵业是王慧龙的孙子，聪明豪爽而又博学，他死之后人们一方面很怜惜他的才学，一方面又讥讽他过于躁进。
English: Wang Zunye was the grandson of Wang Huilong. He was smart, courageous and knowledgeable. After his death, people pitied his talent for learning on the one hand, and ridiculed him for being too pushy on the other.

古文：有朝士百馀人后至，荣复以胡骑围之，令曰： 有能为禅文者免死。 
现代文：有一百多名朝廷官员后来才到，尔朱荣又让骑兵们包围了他们，对这些官员下令说： 如果谁能作一篇元氏禅让皇位于尔朱氏的文告，就可以免死。 
English: More than a hundred court officials arrived later, and Er Zhu Rong ordered the cavalry to surround them, saying to these officials: If anyone can make a statement that the Yuan Dynasty will give the emperor to the Er Zhu clan, he will be spared death.

古文：侍御史赵元则出应募，遂使为之。
现代文：侍御史赵元则站出来响应，于是便让他起草禅让文告。
English: Zhao Yuan, the chamberlain, stood up to respond, so he asked him to draft a letter of resignation.

古文：荣又令其军士言： 元氏既灭，尔硃氏兴。 
现代文：尔朱荣又命令他的士兵们高呼： 元氏既灭，尔朱氏兴。 
English: Lzhu Rong also ordered his soldiers to chant: The Yuan Dynasty is dead, the Lzhu Dynasty is rising.

古文：皆称万岁。
现代文：士兵们一齐山呼万岁。
English: Long live the thieves.

古文：荣又遣数十人拔刀向行宫，帝与无上王劭、始平王子正俱出帐外。
现代文：尔朱荣又派数十人持刀来到行宫，孝庄帝与无上王元劭、始平王元子正一起来到账外。
English: Zhu Rong also sent dozens of people armed with swords to the imperial court, and Emperor Xiaozhuang, together with the Supreme King Yuancheng and Prince Shihei Wangyuan, came to the palace.

古文：荣先遣并州人郭罗刹、西部高车叱列杀鬼侍帝侧，诈言防卫，抱帝入帐，馀人即杀劭及子正，又遣数十人迁帝于河桥，置之幕下。
现代文：尔朱荣先派并州人郭罗刹、西部高车人叱列杀鬼侍立在孝庄帝两侧，假装说是保护皇帝，将孝庄帝抱入账中，其余的人便杀了元劭和元子正。接着尔朱荣又派数十人将孝庄帝迁到了河桥，置于他的账下。
English: First, Er Zhurong sent Guo Luocheng, a person from Anhui Province, and Gaocheng, a person from western China, to stand on both sides of Emperor Xiaozhuang, pretending to protect the emperor. They took Emperor Xiaozhuang into their account, and the rest of the people killed Yuan Shao and Yuan Zizheng. Next, Er Zhurong sent dozens of people to move Emperor Xiaozhuang to Heqiao and put him under his account.

古文：帝忧愤无计，使人谕旨于荣曰： 帝王迭兴，盛衰无常。
现代文：孝庄帝忧伤愤慨但却无计可施，派人向尔朱荣传达旨意说： 帝王迭兴，盛崐衰无常。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang was saddened and indignant, but there was nothing he could do. He sent someone to convey his will to Le Zhu Rong, saying: "Emperor Dui Xing, prosperity is fickle.

古文：今四方瓦解，将军奋袂而起，所向无前，此乃天意，非人力也。
现代文：现在天下纷乱，将军奋而起兵，所向无敌，这是天意，不是靠人的力量所能达到的。
English: Now the world is in turmoil, the generals have risen up, and they are invincible. This is the will of heaven, and cannot be achieved by human power.

古文：我本相投，志在全生，岂敢妄希天位！
现代文：我原来投奔于你，只是希望能够活下来罢了，哪敢妄想登上皇位！
English: I originally ran to you, just hoping to survive, how dare I dream of ascending to the throne!

古文：将军见逼，以至于此。
现代文：将军你逼我做皇帝，我才到了现在这个地步。
English: General, you forced me to become emperor, and I only got to where I am now.

古文：若天命有归，将军宜时正尊号；若推而不居，存魏社稷，亦当更择亲贤而辅之。 
现代文：如果上天有意安排你做皇帝的话，将军你应选好时机登上皇位。如果你推辞而不做，想保存大魏的社稷，那么您也应该另选一位亲信而又贤明的人做皇帝，您对他加以辅佐。 
English: If heaven intends to make you emperor, general, you should choose a good time to ascend the throne. If you refuse and do not do it, and want to preserve the Wei dynasty, then you should also choose another close and wise person to be emperor, and you should support him.

古文：时都督高欢劝荣称帝，左右多同之，荣疑未决。
现代文：当时，都督高欢劝尔朱荣称帝，尔朱荣的部下大多赞同，尔朱荣犹疑未决。
English: At that time, the governor Gao Huan advised Lzhu Rong to proclaim himself emperor. Most of Lzhu Rong's subordinates agreed, but Lzhu Rong hesitated.

古文：贺拔岳进曰： 将军首举义兵，志除奸逆，大勋未立，遽有此谋，正可速祸，未见其福。 
现代文：贺拔岳进言道： 将军您首先发起义兵，志在铲除奸逆，大功还未告成，便急着有这种打算，恐怕只能很快招来灾祸，我看不出有什么好处。 
English: He Batyue said, "General, you first initiated the volunteer soldiers, aiming to eradicate treachery. The great work has not yet been completed, so you are in a hurry to have such a plan. I am afraid it can only bring disaster soon. I do not see any benefit.

古文：荣乃自铸金为像，凡四铸，不成。
现代文：尔朱荣于是便自己用黄金铸像，共铸了四次，均未成功。
English: Le Zhu Rong then used gold to cast the statue himself, casting it a total of four times, all without success.

古文：功曹参军燕郡刘灵助善卜筮，荣信之，灵助言天时人事未可。
现代文：功曹参军燕郡人刘灵助善于占卜，尔朱荣对他很信任。刘灵助认为无论从天时来看，还是从人事上看都不可以称帝。
English: Liu Lingsu, a meritorious soldier from Yan County, was good at divination, and Zhu Rong trusted him very much. Liu Lingsu believed that no matter from the point of view of time, or from the point of view of personnel, he could not be called an emperor.

古文：荣曰： 若我不吉，当迎天穆立之。 
现代文：尔朱荣说道： 如果我做皇帝不吉利的话，便应当迎请元天穆做皇帝。 
English: Le Zhurong said: If it is unlucky for me to be emperor, then I should invite Yuan Tianmu to be emperor.

古文：灵助曰： 天穆亦不吉，唯长乐王有天命耳。 
现代文：刘灵助说： 元天穆也不吉利，只有长乐王元子攸符合天意。 
English: Liu Lingsu said: Yuan Tianmu is also unlucky, only Changle Wang Yuan Zi is in line with the will of heaven.

古文：荣亦精神恍惚，不自支持。久而方寤，深自愧悔曰： 过误若是，唯当以死谢朝廷。 
现代文：尔朱荣这时也精神恍惚，支持不住了，过了很长时间才清醒过来，深感惭愧悔恨地说： 错到这个地步，我只有以死来向朝廷谢罪了。 
English: At this time, Le Zhu Rong was also in a trance, unable to support himself. It took him a long time to come to his senses. Deeply ashamed and remorseful, he said, "I made such a mistake, I can only apologize to the imperial court by dying."

古文：贺拔岳请杀高欢以谢天下，左右皆曰： 欢虽复愚疏，言不思难，今四方多事，须藉武将，请舍之，收其后效。 
现代文：贺拔岳请求杀掉高欢来谢罪天下，尔朱荣的部下们说： 高欢虽然愚蠢粗陋，说话没有考虑到会有灾难，但是现在天下混乱，还须依靠武将，请您饶了他，让他以后为您效力。 
English: He Batyue requested that Gao Huan be killed to atone for the sins of the world, and Er Zhurong's subordinates said: Although Gao Huan is stupid and coarse, and his words do not take into account that there will be a disaster, but now the world is in chaos, and we still have to rely on the warlord. Please spare him, and let him serve you in the future.

古文：荣乃止。
现代文：尔朱荣这才作罢。
English: Jiurong did not execute Qi Shenwu.

古文：夜四更，复迎帝还荣，荣望马首叩头请死。
现代文：夜里四更时，又迎请孝庄帝回到军营，尔朱荣朝着皇帝的马头叩头请求死罪。
English: At four o'clock in the evening, he invited Emperor Xiaozhuang to return to the military camp. Er Zhurong bowed to the emperor's horse and asked for the death penalty.

古文：荣所从胡骑杀朝士既多，不敢入洛城，即欲向北为迁都之计。
现代文：尔朱荣所率领的胡人骑兵因杀朝廷大臣太多，不敢进入洛阳城，便想将国都迁到北方。
English: The Hu cavalry led by Er Zhu Rong did not dare to enter Luoyang City because they had killed too many imperial ministers, so they wanted to move the capital to the north.

古文：荣狐疑甚久，武卫将军汎礼固谏。
现代文：尔朱荣犹疑了很长时间，武卫将军泛礼坚决反对迁都。
English: Le Zhu Rong hesitated for a long time, and General Wu Wei resolutely opposed the relocation of the capital.

古文：辛丑，荣奉帝入城。
现代文：辛丑，尔朱荣护送孝庄帝进入洛阳城。
English: Xin Ugly, Er Zhu Rong escorted Xiaozhuang Emperor into Luoyang City.

古文：帝御太极殿，下诏大赦，改元建义。
现代文：孝庄帝登上太极殿，下诏大赦天下，改年号为建义。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang ascended the Taiji Hall, issued a decree to pardon the world, and changed the year name to Jianyi.

古文：从太原王将士，普加五阶，在京文官二阶，武官三阶，百姓复租役三年。
现代文：跟从太原王尔朱荣的将士，全部晋升为五级官阶，在京城中的文官晋升二级官阶，武官晋升三级，百姓免除租役三年。
English: The soldiers who followed the Taiyuan King Er Zhu Rong were all promoted to the fifth rank, the civil officers in the capital were promoted to the second rank, the military officers were promoted to the third rank, and the people were exempted from rent service for three years.

古文：时百官荡尽，存者皆窜匿不出，唯散骑常侍山伟一人拜赦于阙下。
现代文：当时文武百官已荡然无存，即使活下来的也大都逃窜藏匿起来，不再露面，只有散骑常侍山伟一人拜见皇帝，接受赦免。
English: At that time, hundreds of civil and military officials had disappeared, and even if they survived, most of them fled and hid, and no longer appeared. Only the errant equerry, Shan Wei, visited the emperor and accepted the pardon.

古文：洛中士民草草，人怀异虑，或云荣欲纵兵大掠，或云欲迁都晋阳。
现代文：洛阳城中的官员百姓都很担惊害怕，人人都另有所虑，有的说尔朱荣要纵兵大肆掠取，有的说尔朱荣要迁都晋阳。
English: The officials and people in Luoyang were very worried and scared, and everyone had different concerns. Some said that Le Zhurong wanted to send troops to plunder extensively, while others said that Le Zhurong wanted to move the capital to Jinyang.

古文：富者弃宅，贫者襁负，率皆逃窜，什不存一二，直卫空虚，官守旷废。
现代文：于是富贵人家放弃了住宅，贫困人家携带包裹，都纷纷逃奔他乡，城中人口还剩下不到十分之一二，守备空虚，政府各部门都空无一人。
English: As a result, the rich abandoned their homes, the poor fled to other towns with their parcels, and less than two-tenths of the population remained in the city. The garrison was empty, and all government departments were deserted.

古文：荣乃上书，称： 大兵交际，难可齐壹，诸王朝贵，横死者众，臣今粉躯不足塞咎，乞追赠亡者，微申私责。
现代文：尔朱荣于是向孝庄帝上书说： 大兵往来接触，很难整齐统一，朝廷中的王、大臣、横遭杀戮的很多，我现在即使粉身碎骨也不足以抵消所犯的罪责，所以我请求圣上追封那些死去的大臣们，以稍微弥补一下我的罪责。
English: Er Zhurong then wrote to Emperor Xiaozhuang, saying, "It is difficult to unify the army because of the large number of soldiers coming and going. There are many kings and ministers in the imperial court who were killed indiscriminately. Now, even if I were to be crushed to death, it would not be enough to offset the guilt I have committed. Therefore, I ask the emperor to canonize those dead ministers to make up for my guilt.

古文：无上王请追尊为无上皇帝，自馀死于河阴者，诸王赠三司，三品赠令、仆，五品赠刺史，七品已下及白民赠郡、镇；死者无后听继，即授封爵。
现代文：请求追封无上王为无上皇帝，其余在河阴被杀的人，凡原先是分封王的，追封三司，三品官员封赠令、仆，五品官员封赠刺史，七品官员以下至布衣封赠郡守、镇将。死者如果没有后代听任另择继承人，立即授予封爵。
English: The remaining people who were killed in Hekinotsu, all of whom were originally sub-emperors, are to be posthumously awarded the titles of Sanji (三司), Sanbon (三品官员) (gifted by the king), Bu (僕), Wanshi (五品官员) (gifted by the king), and County Governor (郡守) and Town Marshal (镇将) (gifted by the governor) (from the seventh rank of officials down to Buyi). If there are no descendants of the deceased who are willing to choose another successor, they will be immediately awarded a knighthood.

古文：又遣使者循城劳问。 
现代文：另外，再派使者慰问城内的百姓。 
English: In addition, an envoy was sent to offer condolences to the people in the city.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：孝庄帝下诏同意这样做。
English: He complied.

古文：于是朝士稍出，人心粗安。
现代文：于是朝廷官员这才渐渐地出头露面，人心才稍微安定下来。
English: As a result, officials from the imperial court gradually began to appear, and people's hearts began to settle down a bit.

古文：封无上王之子韶为彭城王。
现代文：追封无上王之子元韶为彭城王。
English: Emperor Wu's son, Yuan Zang, became the king of Pengcheng.

古文：荣犹执迁都之议，帝亦不能违。
现代文：尔朱荣仍坚持迁都的主张，孝庄帝也不敢违背他的意愿。
English: Zhu Rong still insisted on the idea of moving the capital, and Emperor Xiaozhuang did not dare to go against his wishes.

古文：都官尚书元谌争之，以为不可，荣怒曰： 何关君事，而固执也！
现代文：都官尚书元谌跟尔朱荣争辩迁都之事，认为不能迁都，尔朱荣怒冲冲地说： 这跟你有什么关系，你却这么顽固！
English: The city official, Shang Shouyuan, argued with Le Zhu Rong about the relocation of the capital, arguing that the capital could not be moved. Le Zhu Rong said angrily: "What does this have to do with you, you are so stubborn!"

古文：且河阴之役，君应知之。 
现代文：况且河阴之事，你应该知道吧。 
English: Besides, you should know about the river shade.

古文：谌曰： 天下事当与天下论之，奈何以河阴之酷而恐元谌！
现代文：元谌说道： 天下大事应该让天下人共同议论，您何必用在河阴残酷杀戮百官之事来吓唬我元谌呢崐！
English: Yuan Xuan said: The world's major events should be discussed by the whole world. Why do you have to frighten me, Yuan Xuan, with the brutal killing of a hundred officials in the shadows of the river?

古文：谌，国之宗室，位居常伯，生既无益，死复何损！
现代文：我元谌是皇族宗室，位居尚书之职，既然活着也没什么益处，那么死了又能减少什么呢？
English: I am a member of the imperial family, and I hold the post of Imperial Secretary. Since it is of no benefit to me to be alive, what can I lose by dying?

古文：正使今日碎首流肠，亦无所惧！ 
现代文：即使我今日肝脑涂地，也没什么可畏惧的。 
English: Even if I have a brain haemorrhage today, there is nothing to fear.

古文：荣大怒，欲抵谌罪，尔硃世隆固谏，乃止。
现代文：尔朱荣听了非常恼怒，想治元谌之罪，尔朱世隆死死劝谏，尔朱荣这才作罢。
English: Hearing this, Le Zhu Rong was very angry and wanted to cure Yuan Qi's sin. Le Zhu Shilong advised him to die. Only then did Le Zhu Rong give up.

古文：见者莫不震悚，谌颜色自若。
现代文：当时在场见到这种情形的人没有不感到害怕的，而元谌却神色如故。
English: At that time, there was no one who was present to see this situation and did not feel scared, but Yuan Xuan still looked the same.

古文：后数日，帝与荣登高，见宫阙壮丽，列树成行，乃叹曰： 臣昨愚暗，有北迁之意，今见皇居之盛，熟思元尚书言，深不可夺。 
现代文：几天以后，孝庄帝与尔荣登高远眺，看到宫殿巍峨壮丽，树木成行，尔朱荣这才感叹地说： 微臣我过去太愚蠢胡涂了，竟会有向北迁都的想法，现在我看到皇宫如此壮丽雄伟，仔细想一想元谌尚书的话，深深感到他说的对。 
English: A few days later, Emperor Xiaozhuang and Er Rong ascended to the top of the mountain and gazed far and wide. They saw the palace towering majestically and the trees in full bloom. It was only then that Er Rong said with regret, "Weixin, I was too stupid and foolish in the past to have the idea of moving the capital to the north. Now I see the imperial palace so magnificent and majestic. When I think about what Yuan Shanshu said, I deeply feel that he was right.

古文：由是罢迁都之议。
现代文：于是便打消了迁都的主张。
English: As a result, the proposal to move the capital was cancelled.

古文：谌，谧之兄也。
现代文：元谌是元谧的哥哥。
English: Yuanzhang is Yuanzhang's older brother.

古文：癸卯，以江阳王继为太师，北海王颢为太傅；光禄大夫李延寔为太保，赐爵濮阳王；并州刺史元天穆为太尉，赐爵上党王；前侍中杨椿为司徒；车骑大将军穆绍为司空，领尚书令，进爵顿丘王；雍州刺史长孙稚为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，赐爵冯翊王；殿中尚书元谌为尚书右仆射，赐爵魏郡王；金紫光禄大夫广陵王恭加仪同三司；其馀起家暴贵者，不可胜数。
现代文：癸卯，北魏朝廷任命江阳王元继为太师，北海王元颢为太傅；任命光禄大夫李延为太保，赐爵为濮阳王；任命并州刺史元天穆为太尉，赐爵为上党王；任命前侍中杨椿为司徒；任命车骑大将军穆绍为司空，兼尚书令，进爵位为顿丘王；任命雍州刺史长孙稚为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，赐爵为冯翊王；任命殿中尚书元谌为尚书右仆射，赐爵为魏郡王；加封金紫光禄大夫广陵王元恭为仪同三司；其余突然从平民成为显贵官员的人，不计其数。
English: At the same time, the Northern Wei Dynasty court appointed Jiangyang Wangyuan Yuan as the successor of the Grand Master, and Beihai Wangyuan Yuan as the Grand Master; appointed Guanglu doctor Li Yan as the Grand Master and knighted as the King of Shenyang; appointed and Shuzhi Yuan Tianmu as the First Lieutenant and knighted as the King of the Upper Party; appointed the former attendant Yang Chin as the apprentice; appointed the chariot and cavalry general Mushao as the Secretary of the Sky, concurrently the Secretary of the Book, and knighted as the King of Dongqiu; appointed Yongzhou Shizhi Chosunzhu as the General of the Horse and Cav

古文：延寔，冲之子也，以帝舅故得超拜。
现代文：李延是李冲的儿子，由于是皇帝舅舅的缘故，得以被破格提拔加封。
English: Li Yan was the son of Li Chong, and because he was the emperor's uncle, he was able to be promoted and sealed in an unprecedented way.

古文：徐纥弟献伯为北海太守，季产为青州长史，纥使人告之，皆将家属逃去，与纥俱奔泰山。
现代文：徐纥的弟弟徐献伯是北海太守，徐季产是青州长史，徐纥派人通知了他们朝廷的变故。因此他们都带着家眷逃离了原地，与徐纥一起投奔了泰山郡。
English: Xu Xi's brother, Xu Xianbo, was the governor of the North Sea, and Xu Jizang was the governor of the Qing Dynasty. Xu Xi sent someone to inform them of the change of the imperial court. Therefore, they all fled the original place with their families and went to Taishan County with Xu Xi.

古文：郑俨与从兄荥阳太守仲明谋据郡起兵，为部下所杀。
现代文：郑俨和堂兄荥阳太守郑仲明图谋占领郡城起兵反叛，结果被部下杀掉了。
English: Zheng Yao and his cousin Zheng Zhongming, the governor of Shenyang, plotted to occupy the county seat and rebel, but were killed by their subordinates.

古文：丁未，诏内外解严。
现代文：丁未，孝庄帝颁布诏令，解除京城内外的戒严。
English: Ding Wei, Emperor Xiaozhuang issued a decree to lift the martial law in and around Beijing.

古文：魏郢州刺史元显达请降，诏郢州刺史元树迎之，夏侯夔亦自楚城往会之，遂留镇焉。
现代文：北魏的郢州刺史元显达向梁朝请求投降，梁武帝诏令郢州刺史元树迎接元显达，夏侯夔也从楚城前往郢州与他们相见，于是便留下来镇守郢州。
English: The Northern Wei Emperor Liangwu ordered Liangwu Emperor to send Liangwu Emperor to Liangwu to meet Yuan Xianda. Xia Houyi also traveled from Chu City to Liangwu to meet with them, so he stayed to guard Liangwu.

古文：改魏郢州为北司州，以夔为刺史，兼督司州。
现代文：梁朝将北魏的郢州改为北司州，任命夏侯夔为北司州刺史，兼管司州。
English: The Liang Dynasty changed the name of Bozhou in the Northern Wei Dynasty to Beishizhou, and appointed Xia Houyi as the historian of Beishizhou and the governor of Beishizhou.

古文：夔进攻毛城，逼新蔡；豫州刺史夏侯亶围南顿，攻陈项；魏行台源子恭拒之。
现代文：夏侯夔进攻北魏的毛城，逼近新蔡；豫州刺史夏侯包围了南顿，攻打陈项城；北魏行台源子恭据城抵抗。
English: Xia Houyi attacked Mao Cheng of the Northern Wei Dynasty and approached Xin Cai; Xia Houyi, the governor of Yuzhou, encircled Nantong and attacked Chen Xiangcheng; Yuan Zi Gongli of the Northern Wei Dynasty resisted.

古文：庚戌，魏赐尔硃荣子义罗爵梁郡王。
现代文：庚戌，北魏孝庄帝赐封尔朱荣的儿子尔朱义罗为梁郡王。
English: Emperor Gaozong of the Northern Wei Dynasty and Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Northern Wei Dynasty bestowed the title of King of Liang County on Er Zhu Rong's son, Er Zhu Yiro.

古文：柔然头兵可汗数入贡于魏，魏诏头兵赞拜不名，上书不称臣。
现代文：柔然国头兵可汗多次向北魏上贡，于是北魏孝庄帝诏令准许头兵可汗参拜时不称名，向皇帝上书可以不称臣。
English: Zhu Ranzhong's head soldier Khan repeatedly paid tribute to the Northern Wei Dynasty, so the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaozhuang issued a decree to allow the head soldier Khan to visit without naming, and to send a letter to the emperor without naming the minister.

古文：魏汝南王悦及东道行台临淮王彧闻河阴之乱，皆来奔。
现代文：北魏汝南王元悦和东道行台、临淮王元听说了河阴之乱后，都来投奔梁朝。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, King Yuan Rong of the South and his hosts, Emperor Xingtai and Emperor Huai of the Northern Wei Dynasty, both came to the Liang Dynasty after hearing about the Heyin Rebellion.

古文：先是，魏人降者皆称魏官为伪，彧表启独称魏临淮王；上亦体其雅素，不之责。
现代文：过去，北魏投降梁朝的人都称自己在北魏的官职为伪官，只有元在向梁武帝上表时却仍自称是北魏临淮王；梁武帝也很赞赏他的儒雅风度，并未加以责难。
English: In the past, those who surrendered to the Liang Dynasty in the Northern Wei Dynasty called themselves fake officials in the Northern Wei Dynasty. Only Yuan still claimed to be the Northern Wei Dynasty's Linhuai King when he presented himself to Emperor Liangwu; Emperor Liangwu also appreciated his refined demeanor and did not blame him.

古文：魏北海王颢将之相州，至汲郡，闻葛荣南侵及尔硃荣纵暴，阴为自安之计，盘桓不进；以其舅殷州刺史范遵行相州事，代前刺史李神守鄴。
现代文：北魏北海王元颢前往相州上任，行至汲郡时，听说了葛荣大肆南犯和尔朱荣残暴杀戮文武百官之事，于是便暗中做好了安全方面的考虑，故意在路上拖延推迟；又让他的舅舅殷州刺史范遵兼管相州的政事，并代替原来的相州刺史李神守卫邺城。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Wang Yuanxuan of the North Sea went to Xiangzhou to take office. When he went to Qian County, he heard about Ge Rong's large-scale southern crime and Er Zhu Rong's brutal killing of hundreds of civil and military officials. Therefore, he secretly prepared safety considerations and deliberately delayed on the road. He also let his uncle Yinzhou Xizhi Fan Zun also manage the political affairs of Xiangzhou, and replaced the original Xizhou Xizhi Li Shen to guard the city.

古文：行台甄密知颢有异志，相帅废遵，复推李神摄州事，遣兵迎颢，且察其变。
现代文：行台甄密知道元颢另有他谋，便联合他人废掉了范遵，仍推举李神管理相州的事务，并派兵迎接元颢，同时观察元颢的变化。
English: Knowing that Yuan Shao had other plans, Gangdai Zhenmi and others abolished Fan Zun, but still appointed Li Shen to manage the affairs of Xiangzhou, and sent soldiers to meet Yuan Shao, while observing the changes in Yuan Shao.

古文：颢闻之，帅左右来奔。
现代文：元颢听崐说了之后，便率领部下前来投奔梁朝。
English: After hearing this, Yuan Shao led his subordinates to rush to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：密，琛之从父弟也。
现代文：甄密是甄琛的堂弟。
English: Zhenmi is Zhenyao's cousin.

古文：北青州刺史元世俊、南荆州刺史李志皆举州来降。
现代文：北魏北青州刺史元世俊、南荆州刺史李志都率全州人马投降了梁朝。
English: Northern Wei, Northern Qingzhou, Northern Qingzhou, Northern Wei, Northern Qingzhou, Northern Qingzhou, Northern Qingzhou, Northern Qingzhou, Southern Qingzhou, Southern Qingzhou, Southern Qingzhou, Southern Qingzhou, Southern Qingzhou, Southern Qingzhou, Southern Qingzhou, Southern Qingzhou, Southern Qingzhou, Southern Qingzhou, Southern Qingzhou, Southern Qingzhou, Southern Qingzhou, Southern Qingzhou, Southern Qingzhou, Southern Qingzhou,

古文：五月，丁巳朔，魏加尔硃荣北道大行台。
现代文：五月丁巳朔，北魏朝廷加封尔朱荣为北道大行台。
English: In May of the same year, the Northern Wei Dynasty, Jiafeng and Zhu Rong, became the Great Northern Road.

古文：以尚书右仆射元罗为东道大使，光禄勋元欣副之，巡方黜陟，先行后闻。
现代文：任命尚书右仆射元罗为东道大使，又让光禄勋元欣做他的副手，巡视地方，凡赏罚升降之事，可全权处理，先斩后奏。
English: He appointed Shangshu's right-hand man, Shao Yuanluo, as the host ambassador, and let Guanglu Xun Yuanxin be his deputy to inspect the localities. Any matter of reward and punishment promotion and demotion could be handled with full power, first to chop and then to play.

古文：欣，羽之子也。
现代文：元欣是元羽的儿子。
English: Yuan Xin is the son of Yuan Yu.

古文：尔硃荣入见魏主于明光殿，重谢河桥之事，誓言无复贰心。帝自起止之，因复为荣誓，言无疑心。
现代文：尔朱荣进到明光殿参见北魏孝庄帝，为在河桥残杀百官之事深深地向皇帝谢罪，发誓决不会对朝廷有二心，孝庄帝起身亲自阻止了尔朱荣，同时也对尔朱荣发誓说决不会对他有疑心。
English: Le Zhu Rong entered the Mingguang Palace to see the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaozhuang. He deeply apologized to the emperor for killing hundreds of officials in Heqiao, and swore that he would never have a second thought about the imperial court. Emperor Xiaozhuang got up and personally stopped Le Zhu Rong, and also swore to Le Zhu Rong that he would never have doubts about him.

古文：荣喜，因求酒饮之，熟醉；帝欲诛之，左右苦谏，乃止，即以床舆向中常侍省。
现代文：尔朱荣非常高兴，便要来酒喝，结果喝得烂醉如泥。孝庄帝想趁机杀了他，左右大臣苦苦劝谏，这才作罢，便让人用床辇将尔朱荣抬到了中常侍省。
English: Le Zhu Rong was very happy, so he wanted to come and drink, and as a result, he got very drunk. Emperor Xiaozhuang wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to kill him, and the ministers around him tried hard to dissuade him, but this did not work, so someone used a mattress to carry Le Zhu Rong to the Ministry of the Middle Palace.

古文：荣夜半方寤，遂达旦不眠，自此不复禁中宿矣。
现代文：尔朱荣半夜才清醒过来，于是直到天亮也没有合上眼，从此以后尔朱荣再也不敢在宫城中留宿了。
English: Le Zhu Rong only woke up in the middle of the night, so he did not close his eyes until dawn. From then on, Le Zhu Rong no longer dared to stay in Miyagi.

古文：荣女先为肃宗嫔，荣欲敬宗立以为后，帝疑未决，给事黄门侍郎祖莹曰： 昔文公在秦，怀嬴入侍；事有反经合义，陛下独何疑焉！ 
现代文：尔朱荣的女儿过去是孝明帝的妃子，尔朱荣想让孝庄帝立她为皇后，孝庄帝犹疑不决。黄门侍郎祖莹劝皇帝说： 从前晋文公在秦国避难的时候，弟媳怀嬴就侍候了他；有时会有违背经典但却合乎道理的事情，陛下您何必疑虑呢！ 
English: Zhu Rong's daughter used to be Emperor Xiaoming's concubine. Zhu Rong wanted Emperor Xiaozhuang to make her his empress, but Emperor Xiaozhuang was hesitant. Huangmen's servant Zu Ying advised the emperor, "Once upon a time, when the Prince of Jin took refuge in Qin, his sister-in-law Huai Yao served him. Sometimes there are things that go against the classics, but are reasonable. Your Majesty, why should you have any doubts?"

古文：帝遂从之，荣意甚悦。
现代文：于是孝庄帝采纳了祖莹的建议，尔朱荣心中十分高兴。
English: As a result, Emperor Xiaozhuang accepted Zu Ying's suggestion, which made Zhu Rong very happy.

古文：荣举止轻脱，喜驰射，每入朝见，更无所为，唯戏上下马；于西林园宴射，恒请皇后出观，并召王公、妃主共在一堂。
现代文：尔朱荣神态举止轻佻、放达，喜欢骑马射箭，每次入朝参见孝庄帝，别的什么也不做，只是以骑马为戏；每次尔朱荣在西林园设宴比赛射箭时，总要请皇后出来观看，并且将王公妃嫔、公主都召集到同一大厅。
English: Le Zhu Rong's demeanor is light-hearted and playful, and he likes to ride a horse and shoot arrows. Every time he enters the imperial court to see Emperor Xiaozhuang, he does nothing else but ride a horse as a play. Every time Le Zhu Rong holds a banquet and an archery competition in the West Forest Garden, he always invites the queen to come out and watch, and calls the prince and princess to the same hall.

古文：每见天子射中，辄自起舞叫，将相卿士悉皆盘旋，乃至妃主亦不免随之举袂。
现代文：每次看到皇帝射中了，尔朱荣总要起舞狂叫，文武百官跟着纷纷起舞，就连妃嫔、公主们也不由得随之挥袖舞动。
English: Every time he saw that the emperor had been shot, Le Zhurong would dance and shout wildly. Hundreds of civil and military officials danced in succession, and even the concubines and princesses could not help waving their sleeves and dancing.

古文：及酒酣耳热，必自匡坐唱虏歌；日暮罢归，与左右连手蹋地唱《回波乐》而出。
现代文：等到酒酣耳热之时，尔朱荣一定要正襟危坐高唱胡歌；日暮黄昏罢宴回府时，尔朱荣与左右手拉着手，踏地为节拍，同唱《回波乐》曲离开皇宫。
English: When the wine is hot, Le Zhu Rong must sit up straight and sing the hu song; when returning to the palace at dusk, Le Zhu Rong will hold hands with his right and left hands, step on the ground to the beat, and sing the "Echo" song to leave the palace.

古文：性甚严暴，喜愠无恒，刀槊弓矢，不离于手，每有瞋嫌，即行击射，左右恒有死忧。
现代文：尔朱荣生性非常严酷残暴，喜怒无常，刀槊、弓箭总是不离身边。每当他对人发怒之时，便要殴打射杀，因此他手下之人总是担心会被杀头。
English: Lzhu Rong was very cruel and capricious by nature. He was always around with a sword, a halberd, and a bow and arrow. Whenever he was angry with someone, he would beat and shoot them, so his subordinates always feared that they would be beheaded.

古文：尝见沙弥重骑一马，荣即令相触，力穷不复能动，遂使旁人以头相击，死而后已。
现代文：曾经有一次，尔朱荣看到两个和尚骑在同一匹马上，尔朱荣便命令他们互相触撞，两人没劲不能动弹了，就让旁边的人拉着两人的头相撞，直到死了为止。
English: Once upon a time, when Er Zhu Rong saw two monks riding on the same horse, he ordered them to bump into each other, and when the two were too weak to move, he had someone pull them together so that their heads would collide until they died.

古文：辛酉，荣还晋阳，帝饯之于邙阴。
现代文：辛酉，尔朱荣回晋阳，孝庄帝在邙阴设宴为他送行。
English: Xin Zheng and Er Zhu Rong returned to Jinyang, and Emperor Xiaozhuang held a banquet in Suyin to see him off.

古文：荣令元天穆入洛阳，加天穆侍中、录尚书事、京畿大都督兼领军将军，以行台郎中桑干硃瑞为黄门侍郎兼中书舍人，朝廷要官，悉用其腹心为之。
现代文：尔朱荣命元天穆到洛阳，加封元天穆为侍中、录尚书事、京畿大都督兼领军将军，又任命行台郎中桑乾人朱瑞为黄门侍郎兼中书舍人。于是，朝廷的重要官职，都由尔朱荣的心腹之人担任。
English: Er Zhurong ordered Yuan Tianmu to Luoyang, appointed Yuan Tianmu as an aide-de-camp, recorder of records, governor of Gyeonggi Province and leading general, and appointed Gyotai's servant Zhongzang Qianren Zhu Rui as Huangmen's aide-de-camp and secretary of records. As a result, important official positions in the imperial court were held by Er Zhurong's confidants.

古文：丙寅，魏主诏： 孝昌以来，凡有冤抑无诉者，悉集华林东门，当亲理之。 
现代文：丙寅，北魏国主孝庄帝下诏令： 自孝昌年间以来，凡是有冤屈无处投诉的，都集中到华林东门，朕要亲自审问。 
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Northern Wei Dynasty issued a decree: Since the time of Emperor Xiaochang, all those who had grievances and nowhere to complain were gathered at the East Gate of Hualin, and I would personally interrogate them.

古文：时承丧乱之后，仓廪虚竭，始诏 入粟八千石者赐爵散侯，白民输五百石者赐出身，沙门授本州统及郡县维那。 
现代文：当时正值动乱之后，国家仓库空虚，于是下诏令： 凡向国家交纳八千石粮食的人赐爵散侯；平民百姓交纳五百石的，赐给做官的资格，和尚则授予本州僧统或本郡县的知事僧。 
English: At that time, after the turmoil, the state warehouse was empty, so the emperor issued a decree: Anyone who paid eight thousand koku of grain to the state would be given a knighthood; ordinary people who paid five hundred koku would be given the qualification to be an official, and a monk would be awarded the status of the head monk of his state or the head monk of his county.

古文：尔硃荣之趣洛也，遣其都督樊子鹄取唐州，唐州刺史崔元珍、行台郦恽拒守不从。
现代文：尔朱荣到洛阳之时，派都督樊子鹄攻取唐州，唐州刺史崔元珍、行台郦恽死守唐州不降。
English: When Le Zhurong arrived in Luoyang, he sent the governor of the capital, Jianzhong, to conquer Tangzhou. Tangzhou stabbed Cui Yuanzhen, and Xingtaibao stubbornly defended Tangzhou from falling.

古文：乙亥，子鹄拔平阳，斩元珍及恽。
现代文：乙亥，樊子鹄攻占了平阳城，斩杀了崔元珍和郦恽。
English: Yihai and Shanzi captured the city of Pingyang and killed Cui Yuanzhen and Yao.

古文：元珍，挺之从父弟也。
现代文：崔元珍是崔挺的堂弟。
English: Cui Yuanzhen is Cui Ting's cousin.

古文：将军曹义宗围魏荆州，堰水灌城，不没者数板。
现代文：梁朝的将军曹义宗包围北魏的荆州，筑坝堵水，淹了荆州城，只差几板高没被淹没。
English: Cao Yizong, a general of the Liang Dynasty, surrounded Jingzhou in the Northern Wei Dynasty, built a dam to block the water, and flooded the city of Jingzhou. It was only a few board heights away from being flooded.

古文：时魏方多难，不能救，城中粮尽，刺史王罴煮粥，与将士均分食之。
现代文：当时北魏正是多难之秋，不能派兵救援荆州，荆州城中粮食吃尽了，刺史王罴就跟将士们一起煮粥分食。
English: At that time, the Northern Wei Dynasty was in a difficult situation. It was not possible to send soldiers to rescue Jingzhou. The grain in the city of Jingzhou was exhausted, and Sisi Wang Yao cooked porridge and shared it with the generals.

古文：每出战，不擐甲胄，仰天大呼曰： 荆州城，孝文皇帝所置，天若不祐国家，令箭中王罴额；不尔，王罴必当破贼！ 
现代文：王罴每次出战，身上连铠甲都不披，总是仰天大叫道： 荆州城是孝文皇帝创置的，上天如果不保佑我大魏社稷的话，那么就让箭射中我王罴的额头吧；否则，我王罴一定要打败敌人的。 
English: Every time Wang Yao went out to fight, he didn't even wear armor. He always shouted to the heavens, "Jingzhou City was founded by Emperor Xiaowen. If the heavens don't bless me, then let the arrow hit my Wang Yao's forehead; otherwise, I must defeat the enemy."

古文：弥历三年，前后搏战甚众，亦不被伤。
现代文：这样持续了三年，王罴前后出战多次，也并没有受过伤。
English: This went on for three years. Wang Qian fought many times before and after, and was not injured.

古文：癸未，魏以中军将军费穆都督南征诸军事，将兵救之。
现代文：癸未，北魏命令中军将军费穆负责南征的军事行动，率兵救援荆州。
English: Soon after, the Northern Wei Dynasty ordered the Chinese general Fei Mu to be responsible for the military operations of the Southern Expedition and led the soldiers to rescue Jingzhou.

古文：魏临淮王彧闻魏主定位，乃以母老求还，辞情恳至。
现代文：北魏临淮王元听说北魏国主孝庄帝的地位已经确定，便以母亲年老为由请求回到北魏，言词极为恳切。
English: When the Northern Wei ruler Huai Wangyuan heard that the position of the Northern Wei sovereign Emperor Xiaozhuang had been determined, he requested to return to Northern Wei on the grounds of his mother's old age, and his words were very earnest.

古文：上惜其才而不能违，六月，丁亥，遣彧还。
现代文：梁武帝很爱惜元的才能，却又不能拒绝他提出的请求，六月丁亥，梁武帝让元回到了北魏。
English: Emperor Liangwu was very fond of Yuan's talent, but he could not refuse his request. In June of Dinghai, Emperor Liangwu allowed Yuan to return to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏以彧为侍中、骠骑大将军，加仪同三司。
现代文：北魏朝廷任命元为侍中、骠骑大将军，加封仪同三司。
English: The Northern Wei imperial court appointed Yuan as a chamberlain and cavalry general, and he was awarded the imperial seal and promoted to the Third Division.

古文：魏员外散骑常侍高乾，祐之从子也，与弟敖曹、季式皆喜轻侠，与魏主有旧。
现代文：北魏员外散骑常侍高乾是高的侄子，跟弟弟高敖曹、高季式都是豪爽侠义之人，在孝庄帝没有登上帝位时与他有过往来。
English: Gao Qian, a member of the Northern Wei Dynasty, was Gao's nephew. Gao's younger brothers, Gao Xizhao and Gao Jixi, were brave and chivalrous. Gao had dealings with Emperor Xiaozhuang before he ascended to the throne.

古文：尔硃荣之向洛也，逃奔齐州，闻河阴之乱，遂集流民起兵于河、济之间，受葛荣官爵，频破州军。
现代文：尔朱荣到洛阳的时候，他们逃奔到齐州，听说了河阴之乱后，便聚集流民在黄河、济水之间起兵。他们还接受了葛荣的官职爵位，多次打败北魏各州郡的军队。
English: When Ge Rong went to Luoyang, they fled to Chizhou. After hearing about the Heyin Rebellion, they gathered refugees to raise an army between the Yellow River and Jishui. They also accepted Ge Rong's official title and rank, and repeatedly defeated the armies of the counties in Northern Wei.

古文：魏主使元欣谕旨，乾等乃降。
现代文：孝庄帝派元欣前往宣布谕旨，他们才归降。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang sent Yuanxin to announce the edict, and only then did they surrender.

古文：以乾为给事黄门侍郎兼武卫将军，敖曹为通直散骑侍郎。
现代文：北魏朝廷任命高乾为给事黄门侍郎，并兼武卫将军，又任命高敖曹为通直散骑侍郎。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty court appointed Gao Qian as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and also the general of Wuwei, and also appointed Gao Yu Cao as the attendant of the Straight Horse.

古文：荣以乾兄弟前为叛乱，不应复居近要，魏主乃听解官归乡里。
现代文：尔朱荣认为高乾兄弟以前曾背叛朝廷，发动叛乱，不应该还让他们担任重要官职，孝庄帝于是只好解除了高乾兄弟等人的官职，让他们回到家乡。
English: Zhu Rong believed that the Gaoqian brothers had previously betrayed the imperial court and launched a rebellion, and that they should not be allowed to hold important official positions. Emperor Xiaozhuang therefore had no choice but to dismiss the Gaoqian brothers and others from their official positions and let them return to their hometown.

古文：敖曹复行抄掠，荣诱执之，与薛修义同拘于晋阳。
现代文：高敖曹回到家乡后又干起了打家劫舍的勾当，被尔朱荣诱捕后，跟薛义一同拘押在晋阳。
English: After Gao Bing Cao returned to his hometown, he started robbing homes again. After being trapped by Er Zhu Rong, he was detained together with Xue Yi in Jinyang.

古文：敖曹名昂，以字行。
现代文：高敖曹名叫高昂，敖曹是他的字，人们一直以字称他。
English: Gao Rong Cao's name is Gao An, and "Rong Cao" is his nickname. People have always called him by his nickname.

古文：葛荣军乏食，遣其仆射任褒将军南掠至沁水。
现代文：葛荣的军队由于缺乏粮食，于是葛荣便派遣他的仆射任褒率兵向南侵犯，到了沁水县。
English: As Ge Rong's army was short of food, Ge Rong sent his henchmen to invade the south, arriving in Surabaya.

古文：魏以元天穆为大都督东北道诸军事，帅宗正珍孙等讨之。
现代文：北魏任命元天穆为大都督东北道诸军事，率领宗正珍孙等将领讨伐葛荣。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Yuan Tianmu as the grand governor of the Northeast Military Region, and he led generals such as Zong Zheng Jinsun to fight Ge Rong.

古文：前幽州平北府主簿河间邢杲帅河北流民十万馀户反于青州之北海，自称汉王，改元天统。
现代文：北魏前幽州平北府主簿、河间人邢杲率河北流民十几万户在青州北海郡起兵造反，自称汉王，改年号为天统。
English: Before the Northern Wei Dynasty, Yuzhou, the main book of Pingbei Prefecture, and more than 100,000 families of Hebei exiles led by people from Hebei revolted in Beihai County, Qingzhou. They called themselves Han Wang, and changed the year name to Tian Tong.

古文：戊申，魏以征东将军李叔仁为车骑大将军、仪同三司，帅众讨之。
现代文：戊申，北魏任命征东将军李叔仁为车骑大将军、仪同三司、率军讨伐邢杲。
English: Wushin, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the Eastern Expeditionary Force General Li Shuren as the General of Cavalry and Cavalry, the Third Division of Cavalry and Cavalry, and led the army to fight against the Mongols.

古文：辛亥，魏主诏曰： 朕当亲御六戎，扫静燕、代。 
现代文：辛亥，北魏孝庄帝下诏： 朕要亲自统领六军，扫除平定燕、代地区的匪患。 
English: In Xinhai, Northern Wei Emperor Xiaozhuang issued an edict: I will personally lead the Six Armies to eliminate the banditry in Dingyan and Dai regions.

古文：以大将军尔硃荣为左军，上党王穆为前国，司徒杨椿为右军，司空穆绍为后军。
现代文：并任命大将军尔朱荣率领左军，上党王元天穆率领前军，司徒杨椿为右军，司空穆绍率领后军。
English: He also appointed the general Er Zhu Rong to lead the left army, the king of the Shang Dynasty, Yuan Tianmu, to lead the front army, Stu Yang Tsubing to lead the right army, and Siku Musho to lead the rear army.

古文：葛荣退屯相州之北。
现代文：葛荣的军队退守相州城北。
English: Ge Rong's army retreated to the north of the city of Xiangzhou.

古文：秋，七月，乙丑，魏加尔硃荣柱国大将军、录尚书事。
现代文：秋季，七月乙丑，北魏加封尔朱荣为柱国大将军、录尚书事。
English: In the autumn, in the second month of July, Zhu Rong, the Northern Wei governor of Gafong, became the great general of the pillar country, recorded in the records.

古文：壬子，魏光州民刘举聚众反于濮阳，自称皇武大将军。
现代文：壬子，北魏光州人刘举在濮阳聚众造反，自称皇武大将军。
English: In Imzi, Liu Jiu, a native of Gwangju in the Northern Wei Dynasty, gathered a crowd to rebel in Fenyang and called himself Emperor Wu.

古文：是月，万俟丑奴自称天子，置百官。
现代文：这一月，万俟奴自称天子，设置了文武百官。
English: This month, Manchukuo claimed to be the son of heaven and set up a hundred civil and military officials.

古文：会波斯国献师子于魏，丑奴留之，改元神兽。
现代文：正赶上波斯国向北魏献狮子，被万俟奴将狮子截留下来，于是万俟奴便改年号为神兽。
English: It was just in time for the Persian Empire to offer a lion to the Northern Wei Dynasty, but the lion was intercepted by Wan Xunnu, so Wan Xunnu changed the year name to the Divine Beast.

古文：魏泰山太守羊侃，以其祖规尝为宋高祖祭酒从事，常有南归之志。
现代文：北魏泰山郡太守羊侃，因祖父羊规曾做过刘宋高宗的祭酒从事，因此常常有南归梁朝的想法。
English: Yang Kan, the grand marshal of Taishan County, Northern Wei, often had the idea of returning south to the Liang Dynasty because his grandfather Yang Jie had been engaged in the sacrificial wine of Liu Song Gao Zong.

古文：徐纥往依之，因劝侃起兵，侃从之。
现代文：徐纥投奔羊侃后，便趁机劝羊侃起兵反叛北魏，羊侃听从了徐纥的建议。
English: After Xu Xi defected to Yang Jian, Yang Jian took the opportunity to persuade Yang Jian to rebel against the Northern Wei Dynasty. Yang Jian followed Xu Xi's advice.

古文：兗州刺史羊敦，侃之从兄也，密知之，据州拒侃。
现代文：北魏兖州刺史羊敦，是羊侃的堂兄，暗中知道了这件事，便凭据州城抗击羊侃。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, the statesman Shi Yangdong, a cousin of Yang Kan, secretly knew about this matter and fought against Yang Kan on the basis of the state capital.

古文：八月，侃引兵袭敦，弗克，筑十馀城守之，且遣使来降；诏广晋县侯泰山羊鸦仁等将兵应接。
现代文：八月，羊侃率兵袭击羊敦，没能成功，于是羊侃便在兖州周围修筑了十几座城堡进行围困，并派使者来梁朝请求投降。梁武帝下诏，令广晋县侯、泰山郡人羊鸦仁等率部接应羊侃。
English: In August, Yang Kan led his troops to attack Yodong, but they were not successful. Therefore, Yang Kan built more than a dozen castles around Zhangzhou to besiege it, and sent an envoy to the Liang Dynasty to request surrender. Emperor Liang Wu issued an edict, ordering the Guangjin County and Taishan County people, such as Yang Rongren, to lead the troops to respond to Yang Kan.

古文：魏以侃为骠骑大将军、泰山公、兗州刺史，侃斩其使者不受。
现代文：北魏则任命羊侃为缥骑大将军、泰山公、兖州刺史，羊侃斩杀了北魏派来的使者，没有接受北魏的任命。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty, on the other hand, appointed Yang Kan as General of the Horse, Prince of Mount Taishan, and Governor of Zhangzhou. Yang Kan killed the envoy sent by the Northern Wei Dynasty and did not accept the appointment of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：将军王弁侵魏徐州，蕃郡民续灵珍拥众万人攻蕃城以应梁；魏徐州刺史杨昱击灵珍，斩之，弁引还。
现代文：梁朝将军王弁率兵侵犯北魏的徐州，蕃郡人续灵珍率万余人攻打蕃郡以响应梁军。北魏徐州刺史杨昱击溃了续灵珍的部队，斩杀了续灵珍，王弁只好率部返回梁朝。
English: Liang Dynasty general Wang Ben led troops to invade Northern Wei's Xuzhou, and the people of Jiu County, led by more than ten thousand people, attacked Jiu County in response to Liang's army. The Northern Wei Xuzhou assassin Yang Wei defeated the troops of Jiu Ling Zhen and killed Jiu Ling Zhen. Wang Ben had no choice but to return to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：甲辰，魏大都督宗正珍孙击举于濮阳，灭之。
现代文：甲辰，北魏大都督宗正珍孙率兵在濮阳攻打刘举，消灭了刘举的队伍。
English: Jia Chen, the Northern Wei Grand Duke Zong Zheng Zhen Sun led an army to attack Liu Jiu in Fenyang, eliminating Liu Jiu's team.

古文：葛荣引兵围鄴，众号百万，游兵已过汲郡，所至残掠，尔硃荣启求讨之。
现代文：葛荣率军包围了邺城，军队号称有百万，散游之兵已经过了汲郡，所到之处大肆残杀掠夺。尔朱荣上表请求率军讨伐葛荣。
English: Ge Rong led the army to encircle the city of Handan. The army was said to be one million strong. The wandering soldiers had already passed through the county of Kyu, killing and plundering wherever they went. Er Zhu Rong requested to lead the army to fight against Ge Rong.

古文：九月，尔硃荣召从子肆州刺史天光留镇晋阳，曰： 我身不得至处，非汝无以称我心。 
现代文：九月，尔朱荣将侄子肆州刺史尔朱天光召来，命他留守晋阳，对他说： 我本人不能到的地方，只有你在，才能使我放心。 
English: In September, Lv Zhurong called his nephew, Zhouzhou acolyte Lv Zhu Tianguang, and ordered him to stay in Jinyang. He said to him, "Where I can't go myself, only you can reassure me."

古文：自帅精骑七千，马皆有副，倍道兼行。东出滏口，以侯景为前驱。葛荣为盗日久，横行河北，尔硃荣众寡非敌，议者谓无取胜之理。
现代文：尔朱荣自己率七千精锐骑兵，各备两匹战马，以侯景为前锋，从近路加倍行军，向东出了滏口，葛荣叛乱为时已久，一直横行于黄河以北，尔朱荣的兵马很少，与敌人相差悬珠，人们议论纷纷，认为尔朱荣断无获胜的道理。
English: Le Zhurong himself led seven thousand elite cavalry, each equipped with two horses, with Hou Jing as the forward, doubled the march from the short road, and went out of the gate to the east. Ge Rong's rebellion has been going on for a long time, and has been rampant north of the Yellow River. Le Zhurong's soldiers and horses are few, and they are very different from the enemy. People have been talking about it, and they think that Le Zhurong has no reason to win.

古文：葛荣闻之，喜见于色，令其众曰： 此易与耳，诸人俱办长绳，至则缚取。 
现代文：葛荣听说后，喜形于色，命令他的部队说： 尔朱荣很好对付，诸位每人都准备一根长绳，到时候只管捆绑敌人就是了。 
English: Upon hearing this, Ge Rong was overjoyed and ordered his troops to say: "Er Zhu Rong is very easy to deal with. Each of you should prepare a long rope, and when the time comes, just tie up the enemy."

古文：自鄴以北，列陈数十里，箕张而进。
现代文：于是葛荣从邺城往北，排成数十里的长阵，队伍如张开的簸箕一样向前推进。
English: As a result, Ge Rong went north from Lucheng, lined up in a long line of dozens of miles, and the team pushed forward like an open cocoon.

古文：尔硃荣潜军山谷，为奇兵，分督将已上三人为一处，处有数百骑，令所在扬尘鼓噪，使贼不测多少。
现代文：尔朱荣将队伍伏在山谷之中，作为奇兵。分派督少将以上的军官每三人为一处，每处有数百名骑兵，命令各处故意扬起尘土，擂起战鼓，大声喊叫，使敌人摸不清有多少人马。
English: Lv Zhurong made his troops lie down in the valley as soldiers of wonder. Every three officers above the rank of major-general were assigned to one place, and there were hundreds of cavalrymen in each place. He ordered them to deliberately raise dust, beat war drums, and shout loudly so that the enemy could not figure out how many men and horses there were.

古文：又以人马逼战，刀不如棒，勒军士赍袖棒一枚，置于马侧，至战时虑废腾逐，不听斩级，以棒棒之而已。
现代文：尔朱荣又考虑到人马近战时，用刀不如用棒，便命令士兵们每人带一根短棒，放在马肚的一侧，到交战时担心下马斩首会影响骑兵追逐，便不允许斩首计功崐，只令用棒子打而已。
English: Considering that when men and horses are in close combat, using a knife is not as good as using a stick, Er Zhu Rong ordered the soldiers to each bring a short stick and put it on the side of the horse's belly. When it came to fighting, he was worried that decapitating the horse would affect the cavalry's pursuit. Therefore, he did not allow decapitation to be used as a measure of merit, but only ordered the soldiers to beat the horse with a stick.

古文：分命壮勇所向冲突，号令严明，战士同奋。
现代文：各路战士冲杀之处，号令严明，将士们同仇敌忾，个个奋勇争先。
English: Soldiers from all directions rushed to the scene of the killing, giving strict orders. The soldiers fought together with the enemy, each of them fighting bravely for the lead.

古文：尔硃荣身自陷陈，出于贼后，表里合击，大破之。于陈擒葛荣，馀众悉降。
现代文：尔朱荣亲自冲锋陷阵，从敌人背后杀出，里应外合，内外夹击，大破贼兵，在阵前抓住了葛荣，其余的部众全部投降了。
English: Le Zhu Rong personally charged into the battle, fought from behind the enemy, inside and outside the battle, inside and outside the battle, the great thief soldier, caught Ge Rong before the battle, and the rest of the troops all surrendered.

古文：以贼徒既众，若即分割，恐其疑惧，或更结聚，乃下令各从所乐，亲属相随，任所居止。
现代文：因贼军众多，如果马上将他们分开的话，恐怕会引起贼军的疑虑恐惧，说不定还会再次聚集起来，于是尔朱荣下令让他们各随其便，亲属相随，任意在哪儿定居均可。
English: Because of the large number of thieves, if they were separated immediately, it would probably cause the doubts and fears of the thieves, and perhaps they would gather again, so Er Zhu Rong ordered them to settle wherever they wanted, with their relatives following.

古文：于是群情大喜，登即四散，数十万众一朝散尽。
现代文：这样一来，投降的士兵人人欢喜，很快便四处逃散，几十万大军一早晨便遣散光了。
English: As a result, the soldiers who had surrendered were overjoyed and quickly fled in all directions. Hundreds of thousands of soldiers were disbanded in the morning.

古文：待出百里之外，乃始分道押领，随便安置，咸得其宜。
现代文：等到这些士兵已经走出百里之外，尔朱荣这才开始去分路押解他们，随他们之便加以安置，使大家都感到满意。
English: They waited until the dispersed soldiers were a hundred miles away before they were sent on their separate ways, and when they found a suitable place, they were resettled. These people were all given satisfactory accommodation.

古文：擢其渠帅，量才授任，新附者咸安，时人服其处分机速。
现代文：尔朱荣又从葛荣的队伍中选拔了一批将领，根据他们的才能，分别授予适当的官职，这些新归附的将领们心情都安定了下来，当时人们对尔朱荣处置事情如此迅速果断都很佩服。
English: Le Zhurong also selected a group of generals from Ge Rong's team, and according to their talents, they were respectively awarded the appropriate official positions. These newly attached generals were in a stable mood. At that time, people were very impressed with Le Zhurong's handling of the matter so quickly and decisively.

古文：以槛车送葛荣赴洛，冀、定、沧、瀛、殷五州皆平。
现代文：尔朱荣又派人用囚车将葛荣送到洛阳，这样，冀、定、沧、瀛、殷五州就全部平定了。
English: Le Zhu Rong also sent someone to take Ge Rong to Luoyang in a prison van. In this way, the five states of Hebei, Ding, Cang, Handan and Yin were all pacified.

古文：时上党王天穆军于朝歌之南，穆绍、杨椿犹未发，而葛荣已灭，乃皆罢兵。
现代文：此时，上党王元天穆驻军于朝歌城南，穆绍、杨椿还未及发兵，而葛荣的军队便已经被尔朱荣消灭了，于是元天穆等都停止发兵。
English: At this time, the upper party king, Yuan Tianmu, stationed his troops in the south of the morning song, Musao and Yang Tsz-ch'ing had not yet sent troops, and Ge Rong's army had already been eliminated by Lzhu Rong, so Yuan Tianmu and others all stopped sending troops.

古文：初，宇文肱从鲜于修礼攻定州，战死于唐河。
现代文：当初，宇文肱跟从鲜于礼攻打定州，在唐河战死。
English: At the beginning, Uwen Zang followed Shanzhu to attack Dingzhou, and died in the battle of Tanghe.

古文：其子泰在修礼军中，修礼死，从葛荣；葛荣败，尔硃荣爱泰之才，以为统军。
现代文：他的儿子宇文泰也在鲜于礼军中，鲜于礼死后，宇文泰又投奔了葛荣。葛荣兵败之后，尔朱荣爱惜宇文泰的才干，让他做了统军。
English: His son, Uwentai, was also in the army of King Li, and after the death of King Li, Uwentai joined the army of Ge Rong. After the defeat of Ge Rong, King Rong cherished the talent of Uwentai and made him the leader of the united army.

古文：乙亥，魏大赦，改元永远。
现代文：乙亥，北魏实行大赦，改年号为永安。
English: In 1911, the Northern Wei Dynasty implemented an amnesty and changed the year name to Yong'an.

古文：辛巳，以尔硃荣为大丞相、都督河北畿外诸军事，荣子平昌公文殊、昌乐公文畅并进爵为王，以杨椿为太保，城阳王徽为司徒。
现代文：辛巳，北魏孝庄帝任命尔朱荣为大丞相、都督河北畿外诸军事，尔朱荣的儿子平昌公尔朱文殊、昌乐公尔朱文畅也都晋升爵位为王。同时，又任命杨椿为太保，城阳王元徽为司徒。
English: At the same time, Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Er Zhurong as the grand chancellor and the military governor of Hebei, Kinai and other provinces. Er Zhurong's sons, Pyeongchang Gonger Zhu Wenshu and Changle Gonger Zhu Wenshang, were also promoted to the title of king. At the same time, he also appointed Yang Tsubing as Taibo and Chengyang Wang Yuanhui as Sito.

古文：冬，十月，丁亥，葛荣至洛，魏主御阊阖门引见，斩于都市。
现代文：冬季，十月丁亥，葛荣被押至洛阳，北魏孝庄帝亲临阊阖门，葛荣被押来见过孝庄帝后，在都市斩首。
English: In the winter, in October of Dinghai, Ge Rong was taken to Luoyang. The Northern Wei Emperor Xiaozhuang personally visited the imperial palace. Ge Rong was taken to see the Empress Xiaozhuang and beheaded in the city.

古文：帝以魏北海王颢为魏王，遣东宫直閤将军陈庆之将兵送之还北。
现代文：梁武帝封北魏北海王元颢为魏王，并派东宫直阁将军陈庆之带兵护送他返回北方。
English: Emperor Liangwu crowned the Northern Wei Beihai King Yuan Zang as the Wei King, and sent the Eastern Palace General Chen Qingzhi with soldiers to escort him back to the north.

古文：丙申，魏以太原王世子尔硃菩提为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司；丁酉，以长乐等七郡各万户，通前十万户，为太原王荣国；戊戌，又加荣太师；皆赏擒葛荣之功也。
现代文：丙申，北魏孝庄帝任命太原王尔朱荣的嫡长子尔朱菩提为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。丁酉，孝庄帝又将长乐等七郡各万户，连同先前已有的十万户，做为太原王尔朱荣的采邑。戊戌，又加封尔朱荣为太师。这些都是奖赏他平定葛荣的功劳。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaozhuang appointed Er Zhu Bodi, the eldest legitimate son of the Taiyuan King Er Zhu Rong, as the general of the imperial cavalry and the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency. In addition, Emperor Xiaozhuang made 10,000 households in each of the seven counties, including Changle, together with the previously existing 100,000 households, as the capital of the Taiyuan King Er Zhu Rong. Wu Xi, and Gafeng Er Zhu Rong as the grandmaster. These are all rewards for his efforts to pacify Ge Rong.

古文：壬子，魏江阳武烈王继卒。
现代文：壬子，北魏江阳武烈王元继去世。
English: Ren Zi, Northern Wei Jiangyang martial artist Wang Yuanji passed away.

古文：魏使征虏将军韩子熙招谕邢杲，杲诈降而复反。
现代文：北魏派遣征虏将军韩子熙招降邢杲，邢杲诈降，随后便又反叛了。
English: The Northern Wei dispatched the conscript general Han Zixi to instigate a surrender, blackmail a surrender, and then rebelled again.

古文：李叔仁击杲于潍水，失利而还。
现代文：李叔仁在惟水攻击邢杲，结果未能成功，只好退回。
English: Li Shuren attacked the dragonfly in Wei Shui, but the result was not successful, so he had to retreat.

古文：魏费穆奄至荆州，曹义宗军败，为魏所擒，荆州之围始解。
现代文：北魏费穆率军很快来到荆州。曹义宗战败，被北魏军队俘获，至此，荆州之围才被解除。
English: The Northern Wei army led by Feimu soon came to Jingzhou. Cao Yizong was defeated and captured by the Northern Wei army, and the siege of Jingzhou was lifted.

古文：元颢取魏铚城而据之。
现代文：元颢率军袭击并占据了北魏的城。
English: Yuan Shao led an army to attack and occupy the Northern Wei city of Chongqing.

古文：魏行台尚书左仆射于晖等兵数十万，击羊侃于瑕丘，徐纥恐事不济，说侃请乞师于梁，侃信之，纥遂来奔。
现代文：北魏行台尚书左仆射于晖等率军几十万，在瑕丘攻击羊侃。徐纥担心崐大事不好，劝说羊侃允许他去向梁朝请求救兵，羊侃相信了徐纥的话，于是徐纥便前来投奔了梁朝。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Shanshu Zuo led several hundred thousand soldiers, including Yu Xi, to attack Yang Jian in Kejiu. Xu Xi was worried that the situation was not good, and persuaded Yang Jian to allow him to go to the Liang Dynasty to ask for help. Yang Jian believed Xu Xi's words, so Xu Xi came and joined the Liang Dynasty.

古文：晖等围侃十馀重，机中矢尽，南军不进。
现代文：于晖等将羊侃里外包围了十几层，寨中的箭已用完，梁朝军队又未前来救援。
English: Yu Qian and others surrounded the sheep inside and outside more than a dozen layers, the arrows in the stockade had been used up, and the Liang Dynasty army did not come to the rescue.

古文：十一月，癸亥夜，侃溃围出，且战且行，一日一夜乃出魏境，至渣口，众尚万馀人，马二千匹。
现代文：十一月，癸亥夜，羊侃率军突围而出，边战边走，经过一天一夜才逃出北魏的国境，来到渣口这个地方，队伍还剩下一万多人，战马二千匹。
English: In November, on the night of Xinhai, Yang Kan led the army to break out of the encirclement and walked along the battlefield. After one day and one night, he escaped from the border of the Northern Wei Dynasty and came to this place in Jiekou. There were still more than 10,000 people in the team and 2,000 horses.

古文：士卒皆竟夜悲歌，侃乃谢曰： 卿等怀土，理不能见随，幸适去留，于此为别。 
现代文：士兵们整夜放声悲歌，羊侃向将士们谢罪道： 你们大家都很怀恋故土，按人之常情，我不能强迫大家跟从于我，请大家或去或留，自己决定，我们就在这儿分手吧！ 
English: The soldiers sang a dirge all night long, and Yang Kan thanked the soldiers, saying, "You are all very fond of your homeland. According to human nature, I can't force everyone to follow me. I invite you to go or stay. You can decide for yourself. Let's break up here!"

古文：各拜辞而去。
现代文：于是大家各自拜谢，告辞离去。
English: The soldiers bowed to him before leaving.

古文：魏复取泰山。
现代文：北魏便又收复了泰山郡。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty then recovered Taishan County.

古文：晖，劲之子也。
现代文：于晖是于劲的儿子。
English: Yu Qi is the son of Yu Jin.

古文：戊寅，魏以上党王天穆为大将军、开府仪同三司，世袭并州刺史。
现代文：戊寅，北魏任命上党王元天穆为大将军、开府仪同三司，世袭并州刺史。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, the king of the upper party, Yuan Tianmu, was appointed as the general, the keeper of the imperial rescript and the three departments, and the succession and the history of the state.

古文：十二月，庚子，魏诏于晖还师讨邢杲。
现代文：十二月，庚子，北魏诏令于晖回师讨伐邢杲。
English: In December, Geng Zi, the Northern Wei Dynasty issued an edict to fight against the Kuomintang.

古文：葛荣馀党韩楼复据幽州反，北边被其患。
现代文：葛荣的余党韩楼又占据了幽州再次反叛，北魏的北部地区受到叛军的威胁和蹂躏。
English: Ge Rong's remaining party Hanlu occupied Yuzhou and rebelled again, and the northern regions of the Northern Wei Dynasty were threatened and ravaged by the rebels.

古文：尔硃荣以抚军将军贺拔胜为大都督，镇中山；楼畏胜威名，不敢南出。
现代文：尔朱荣任命抚军将军贺拔胜为大都督，镇守中山；韩楼畏惧贺拔胜的威名，不敢向南进犯。
English: Er Zhu Rong appointed the general of the Fuzhou army, He Baxian, as the grand governor and the town guard of Zhongshan; Han Lou was afraid of He Baxian's prestige and did not dare to attack the south.

