古文：太宗初即位，中书令房玄龄奏言： 秦府旧左右未得官者，并怨前宫及齐府左右处分之先己。 
现代文：唐太宗刚即位时，中书令房玄龄上奏说： 秦王府的老部下没有做上官的，他们都埋怨陛下，说前太子宫和齐王府的部下都比他们早先安排了官职。 
English: When Emperor Taizong of Tang just ascended the throne, the Chinese scribe Fang Xuanling said: The old subordinates of the Qin royal court did not become senior officials, they all complained to His Majesty, saying that the former crown prince and the subordinates of the Qi royal court had arranged official positions earlier than them.

古文：太宗曰： 古称至公者，盖谓平恕无私。
现代文：太宗说： 古时候所谓的大公无私，是指宽容公正而无私心。
English: Emperor Taizong said: In ancient times, the so-called "great selflessness" meant tolerance, fairness and selflessness.

古文：丹朱、商均，子也，而尧、舜废之。管叔、蔡叔，兄弟也，而周公诛之。
现代文：丹朱、商均是尧、舜的儿子，而尧、舜却废黜了他们，管叔、蔡叔是周公的兄弟，而周公却把他们杀掉。
English: Danzhu and Shang were sons of Zou and Zou, but Zou and Zou dethroned them. Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai were brothers of Zhou Gong, but Zhou Gong killed them.

古文：故知君人者，以天下为公，无私于物。
现代文：由此可知，作为治理百姓的君主，要以天下为公，不存偏私之心。
English: From this it can be seen that, as a monarch who governs the people, it is necessary to take the whole world as the public, without any partiality.

古文：昔诸葛孔明，小国之相，犹曰 吾心如称，不能为人作轻重，况我今理大国乎？
现代文：从前诸葛孔明，只是蜀国的丞相，他还说 我的心就像秤那样公平，不能因人而轻重有别 。何况我如今治理一个泱泱大国呢？
English: Once upon a time, Zhuge Kongming was only the prime minister of Shu. He also said, "My heart is as fair as a scale, and cannot be weighed according to one's weight." How is it that I am now governing a vast country?

古文：朕与公等衣食出于百姓，此则人力已奉于上，而上恩未被于下，今所以择贤才者，盖为求安百姓也。
现代文：我们的衣食都出自百姓，这就是说，百姓的人力已奉献给了朝廷，而我们的恩泽却没有遍及民间，如今朝廷之所以要选择贤才，就是要安抚百姓。
English: Our food and clothing come from the people. That is to say, the people's manpower has been dedicated to the imperial court, but our grace has not spread to the people. Now the reason why the imperial court wants to choose a wise man is to appease the people.

古文：用人但问堪否，岂以新故异情？
现代文：用人只问是否有能力胜任，怎能因亲疏、新旧关系而区别对待呢？
English: Employers only ask whether a person has the ability to do a job, so how can they treat someone differently because they are distant relatives or have a new relationship with them?

古文：凡一面尚且相亲，况旧人而顿忘也！
现代文：凡是见过一面的人尚且感到亲近，何况是旧的下属，怎会一下子就忘掉呢？
English: How can anyone who has seen a face and felt close to it, let alone an old subordinate, suddenly forget it?

古文：才若不堪，亦岂以旧人而先用？
现代文：如果才能不堪胜任，怎能因为是旧的下属而先任用？
English: If the talent is incompetent, how can they be appointed in the first place because they are old subordinates?

古文：今不论其能不能，而直言其嗟怨，岂是至公之道耶？ 
现代文：如今你们不谈论他们能不能胜任，而只说他们有怨言，这难道是至公之道吗？ 
English: Now you don't talk about whether they are competent or not, but only that they have complaints. Is this the fairest way?

古文：贞观元年，有上封事者，请秦府旧兵并授以武职，追入宿卫。
现代文：贞观元年，有人上书请求把秦府旧兵都授予武职，补充进宫中做侍卫。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, someone submitted a letter requesting that all the old soldiers of Qin be awarded military posts and be added to the palace as bodyguards.

古文：太宗谓曰： 朕以天下为家，不能私于一物，惟有才行是任，岂以新旧为差？
现代文：太宗说： 我以天下为家，不能偏私于一人。只要有才能德行的人就任用，怎能因为新旧关系而有所分别呢？
English: Emperor Taizong said, "I regard the whole world as my home, and I cannot favor one person over another. As long as people with talent and virtue are appointed, how can there be any difference between the old and new relationships?

古文：况古人云： 兵犹火也，弗戢将自焚。 
现代文：况且古人说： 士兵就像火一样，不控制就会把自己烧死。 
English: Moreover, the ancients said: "Soldiers are like fire, if not controlled, they will burn themselves to death."

古文：汝之此意，非益政理。 
现代文：你的提议，对治理国家没有好处。 
English: Your proposal is not conducive to governing the country.

古文：贞观元年，吏部尚书长孙无忌尝被召，不解佩刀入东上阁门，出阁门后，监门校尉始觉。
现代文：贞观元年，吏部尚书长孙无忌曾经被皇帝召见，不解下腰间的佩刀，向东走上阁门，走出阁门之后，监门校尉才发觉。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, the eldest grandson of the head of the cadres, Shang Shu, was once summoned by the emperor. Without taking off the sword from his waist, he walked eastward to the pavilion door. After he walked out of the pavilion door, he was discovered by the gatekeeper.

古文：尚书右仆射封德彝议，以监门校尉不觉，罪当死，无忌误带刀入，徒二年，罚铜二十斤。
现代文：尚书右仆射封德彝认为，由于监门校尉没有觉察，其罪行该当死，无忌失误地带刀进入，判刑两年，罚铜二十斤。
English: Shangshu's right-hand man, Shaofeng Deqi, believed that since the guard captain did not notice, his crime deserved to die, he could not help but mistakenly bring the knife into the prison, and was sentenced to two years and fined twenty catties of copper.

古文：太宗从之。
现代文：太宗听从了他的建议。
English: Emperor Taizong followed his advice.

古文：大理少卿戴胄驳曰： 校尉不觉，无忌带刀入内，同为误耳。夫臣子之于尊极，不得称误，准律云： 供御汤药、饮食、舟船，误不如法者，皆死。 
现代文：大理少卿戴胄反驳道： 校尉没有察觉，无忌带刀进入，同样是失误，臣子位于极度尊贵的地位，不可以称之为是失误，按照律法上说的： 供给皇上汤药，饮食，舟船，失误不按照法规的人，都应当死。 
English: Dali Shaoqing Dai Yao countered: The school captain did not notice the mistake, there is no reason to enter with a knife, it is also a mistake, the vassal is in an extremely honorable position, it can not be called a mistake, according to the law: to supply the emperor with soup and medicine, diet, boat, people who make mistakes and do not follow the rules should die.

古文：陛下若录其功，非宪司所决；若当据法，罚铜未为得理。 
现代文：皇上如果要将功折罪，从轻处理，这便不是司法部门所能够决定的；如果应当按照律法，罚款铜不符合法理。 
English: If the emperor wants to treat the merits and demerits of the crime lightly, this is not something that the judicial department can decide; if it should be in accordance with the law, a fine of copper is not consistent with the legal principle.

古文：太宗曰： 法者非朕一人之法，乃天下之法，何得以无忌国之亲戚，便欲挠法耶？ 
现代文：太宗说： 法律，不是我一人的法律，是天下的法律，怎么能够因为无忌是皇亲国戚，便想要变动法律呢？ 
English: Taizong said: The law is not my law alone, it is the law of the world. How can you want to change the law just because you are a relative of the emperor?

古文：更令定议。
现代文：让臣子们更改命令订立议案。
English: Let the courtiers amend the order and make a motion.

古文：德彝执议如初，太宗将从其议，胄又驳奏曰： 校尉缘无忌以致罪，于法当轻，若论其过误，则为情一也，而生死顿殊，敢以固请。 
现代文：德彝坚持他原来的想法，太宗即将跟从他的建议，胄又驳斥道： 校尉因为无忌的缘故以招致罪害，按照法律当从轻处理，如果讨论他的过失和错误，则是为了感情的缘故，然而生死差距巨大，我才敢于顽固地请求。 
English: Decheng persisted in his original idea, Taizong was about to follow his suggestion, and Zang also refuted: The schoolmaster should be treated lightly according to the law because of the crime he caused, and if his faults and mistakes were discussed, it was for emotional reasons. However, the gap between life and death was huge, so I dared to stubbornly request.

古文：太宗乃免校尉之死。
现代文：太宗于是免了校尉的死罪。
English: Taizong then pardoned the captain from the death penalty.

古文：是时，朝廷大开选举，或有诈伪阶资者，太宗令其自首，不首，罪至于死。俄有诈伪者事泄，胄据法断流以奏之。
现代文：这个时候，朝廷大力开展选择察举，有干过奸诈虚伪的事情的人，太宗命令他们自首，不自首，判罪则至死，偶尔有奸诈虚伪的人事情败露，胄根据法律判断他的罪行并予以奏告。
English: At this time, the imperial court vigorously carried out selective investigation and enquiries. People who had committed treacherous and hypocritical things were ordered by the emperor to surrender, and if they did not surrender, they would be sentenced to death. Occasionally, the treacherous and hypocritical people's affairs were revealed, and their crimes were judged according to the law and reported.

古文：太宗曰： 朕初下敕，不首者死，今断从法，是示天下以不信矣。 
现代文：太宗说： 我开始下命令，不自首的死罪，如今根据法律来作决断，这向天下显示政府没有信用。 
English: Emperor Taizong said: I began to issue orders, the death penalty for not surrendering, and now the decision is made according to the law, which shows to the world that the government has no credibility.

古文：胄曰： 陛下当即杀之，非臣所及，既付所司，臣不敢亏法。 
现代文：胄说： 皇上应当立即杀了他们，不是我能够做到的，既然已经交付司法部门处理，我不敢不按照法。 
English: Zou said, "The emperor should immediately kill them. It is not something I can do. Since it has been handed over to the judicial department, I dare not disobey the law."

古文：太宗曰： 卿自守法，而令朕失信耶？ 
现代文：太宗说： 你自己守法，却让我失信于天下吗？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "You yourself are a law-abiding person, yet you want me to betray my trust to the world?

古文：胄曰： 法者，国家所以布大信于天下，言者，当时喜怒之所发耳。陛下发一朝之忿，而许杀之，既知不可，而置之以法，此乃忍小忿而存大信，臣窃为陛下惜之。 
现代文：胄说： 法律是国家用来向天下人布道他的大信用的，说话是说话的时候喜怒的表现而已，皇上发动整个朝廷的愤恨，而许诺杀他们，既然知道不可以，却将他放到司法部门来解决，这是人主小的愤恨而存留大的信用，我私下认为皇上应当珍惜它。 
English: Zou said: The law is used by the state to preach to the people of the world about its great credibility. Speaking is just an expression of joy and anger when speaking. The emperor unleashed the resentment of the entire court, and promised to kill them. Since he knew it was impossible, he put him in the judicial department to solve it. This is a small resentment of the people and a great trust. I privately think that the emperor should cherish it.

古文：太宗曰： 朕法有所失，卿能正之，朕复何忧也！ 
现代文：太宗说： 我的法律有过失，你能够纠正它，我还有什么可以担忧呢？ 
English: Taizong said: My law is faulty, you can correct it, what do I have to worry about?

古文：贞观二年，太宗谓房玄龄等曰： 朕比见隋代遗老，咸称高颎善为相者，遂观其本传，可谓公平正直，尤识治体，隋室安危，系其存没。
现代文：贞观二年，唐太宗对房玄龄等人说： 我近来见到隋代的旧臣遗老，他们都称赞高颎是做宰相的人才，于是我就去翻阅他的本传。此人真可说是公平正直，能识大体，治国方面尤其突出。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to Fang Xuanling and others: I recently saw the old vassals of the Sui Dynasty. They all praised Gao Qi as a prime minister, so I went to read his biography. This person can really be said to be fair and honest, able to understand the general situation, and especially outstanding in terms of governing the country.

古文：炀帝无道，枉见诛夷，何尝不想见此人，废书钦叹！
现代文：隋室的安危，跟他的生死关系密切。可惜遇到隋炀帝这样的无道昏君，却被冤枉诛杀了。我何尝不想见到这样的人呢？
English: The safety of Emperor Sui's family was closely related to his life and death. It was a pity to meet such a senseless and dim-witted ruler as Emperor Sui, but he was unjustly killed. How could I not want to meet such a person?

古文：又汉、魏已来，诸葛亮为丞相，亦甚平直，尝表废廖立、李严于南中，立闻亮卒，泣曰： 吾其左衽矣！ 
现代文：就连读书时也时常放下书来对他钦仰、叹息。再者，汉、魏以来，诸葛亮做丞相，也非常公平正直，他曾经上表把廖立、李严罢官放逐到南中，后来廖立听到诸葛亮逝世，哭着说： 我们大概要亡国了！ 
English: Even when he was studying, he often put down his books to admire and sigh at him. Moreover, Zhuge Liang was a very fair and honest prime minister since the Han and Wei Dynasties. He once banished Liao Li and Li Yan to the Southern Middle School. Later, when Liao Li heard of Zhuge Liang's death, he cried and said: We have probably lost our country!

古文：严闻亮卒，发病而死。
现代文：李严听到诸葛亮逝世，也发病而死。
English: When Li Yan heard that Zhuge Liang had died, he also fell ill and died.

古文：故陈寿称： 亮之为政，开诚心，布公道，尽忠益时者，虽仇必赏；犯法怠慢者，虽亲必罚。 
现代文：所以陈寿称： 诸葛亮执政，开诚心，布公道，尽忠国家，在当时做了不少有益于国家的事，虽是仇人，该赏的也必须奖赏，对违犯法纪玩忽职守的人，虽是最亲近的人也必须惩罚。 
English: Therefore, Chen Shou said: Zhuge Liang in power, open-minded, fair-minded, loyal to the country, at that time did a lot of things beneficial to the country. Although he is an enemy, he must be rewarded, and those who violate laws and regulations and neglect their duties must be punished, even if they are the closest people.

古文：卿等岂可不企慕及之？
现代文：你们难道不仰慕学习他们吗？
English: Don't you just love learning from them?

古文：朕今每慕前代帝王之善者，卿等亦可慕宰相之贤者，若如是，则荣名高位，可以长守。 
现代文：我如今常仰慕前代那些贤德的帝王，你们也可仰慕那些贤德的宰相，如果能这样做，那么荣耀的名声和高贵的地位，就可以长久保持了。 
English: I now often admire the virtuous emperors of the past, and you can also admire the virtuous prime ministers. If you can do this, then the glorious reputation and noble status can be maintained for a long time.

古文：玄龄对曰： 臣闻理国要道，在于公平正直，故《尚书》云： 无偏无党，王道荡荡。无党无偏，王道平平。 
现代文：房玄龄对答道： 臣听说治理国家的关键，在于公平正直，所以《尚书》说： 不结党营私，王道就浩浩荡荡，不结党营私，王道就平平坦坦。 
English: Fang Xuanling replied: The minister heard that the key to governing the country lies in fairness and honesty, so the "Shang Shu" said: If you don't join the party, the royal road will be vast, and if you don't join the party, the royal road will be flat.

古文：又孔子称 举直错诸枉，则民服 。
现代文：此外，孔子还说： 举用正直的人而废弃邪恶的人，百姓就心服归顺。 
English: In addition, Confucius also said: "Appoint honest people and discard evil people, and the people will be obedient."

古文：今圣虑所尚，诚足以极政教之源，尽至公之要，囊括区宇，化成天下。 
现代文：如今圣上推崇的治国原则，确实体现了政教的根本，极尽至公的要义，可以用来囊括宇内，教化天下。 
English: The principles of governing the country, which are now held in high esteem, truly embody the fundamentals of politics and religion, the most important and most public principles, and can be used to embrace the world and enlighten the world.

古文：太宗曰： 此直朕之所怀，岂有与卿等言之而不行也？ 
现代文：太宗说： 这正是我所想的，但我怎能只对你们说说而不去实行呢？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "This is exactly what I have in mind, but how can I just tell you this and not put it into practice?"

古文：长乐公主，文德皇后所生也。
现代文：长乐公主是太宗文德皇后所生。
English: Princess Changle was born to Empress Wente of Taizong.

古文：贞观六年将出降，敕所司资送，倍于长公主。
现代文：贞观六年将要出嫁，太宗敕令有司陪送的财礼，比当年高祖之女永嘉长公主出嫁时高出一倍。
English: Zhenguan will be getting married in six years, and the financial gift that Emperor Taizong ordered to be accompanied by a priest is twice as high as that of Princess Yongjia, Gao Zu's daughter, when she got married.

古文：魏征奏言： 昔汉明帝欲封其子，帝曰： 朕子岂得同于先帝子乎？
现代文：魏徵上奏说： 以前东汉明帝准备封赏他的儿子，说道： 我的儿子怎么能跟先帝的儿子得到同样多的封赏呢？
English: Wei Zheng Shangsoo said: In the past, the Eastern Han Dynasty Emperor Ming prepared to reward his son, saying: How can my son get as much reward as the son of the former emperor?

古文：可半楚、淮阳王。 
现代文：参照先帝之子楚王、淮阳王的一半去封赏吧。 
English: Refer to the half of the son of the former emperor, King Chu and King Huaiyang, to reward it.

古文：前史以为美谈。
现代文：以前的史家以此作为美谈。
English: Historians in the past have treated this as a fairy tale.

古文：天子姊妹为长公主，天子之女为公主，既加长字，良以尊于公主也，情虽有殊，义无等别。
现代文：现在皇帝的姊妹称为长公主，女儿称为公主，既然在前面多了一个长字，那么就说明要比公主的身份尊贵，虽然在感情上不尽相同，可是道理却是一样的，没有什么差别。
English: Now the emperor's sister is called the eldest princess, and his daughter is called the princess. Since there is an extra long character in front, it means that they are more noble than the princess. Although they are not emotionally the same, the reason is the same, there is no difference.

古文：若令公主之礼有过长公主，理恐不可，实愿陛下思之。 
现代文：如果公主的礼节逾越了长公主，道理上恐怕是不妥的，希望您能够三思。 
English: If the etiquette of the princess exceeds that of the eldest princess, I'm afraid it's not right. I hope you'll reconsider.

古文：太宗称善。
现代文：太宗十分赞同。
English: Taizong agreed wholeheartedly.

古文：乃以其言告后，后叹曰： 尝闻陛下敬重魏征，殊未知其故，而今闻其谏，乃能以义制人主之情，真社稷臣矣！
现代文：于是将这些话告诉了皇后，皇后听完赞叹道： 曾经听说您对魏徵十分敬重，可是对于其中的缘故知之甚少，现在听到他进谏的这番话，可见他能够用道义来抑制帝王的私欲，真是国家社稷忠臣啊！
English: So he told these words to the empress, and after listening to them, the empress said admiringly: "I once heard that you had great respect for Wei Zheng, but you knew very little about the reasons for it. Now that I have heard these words from him, I can see that he is able to restrain the emperor's selfish desires with morality. He is truly a loyal member of the national society!"

古文：妾与陛下结发为夫妻，曲蒙礼敬，情义深重，每将有言，必俟颜色，尚不敢轻犯威严，况在臣下，情疏礼隔？
现代文：我和您结发做了夫妻，承蒙您的敬重礼待，情深意重，每当有话要说的时候，也要察言观色，尚且不敢轻易触怒您的威严，何况作为臣下，和陛下情谊疏远、礼仪相隔呢？
English: You and I have become husband and wife. We have received your respectful and courteous treatment, and our feelings are deep. Whenever there is something to say, we also have to watch our words. However, we do not dare to easily offend your majesty. What's more, as a subject, are we estranged from your majesty's feelings and separated from etiquette?

古文：故韩非谓之说难，东方朔称其不易，良有以也。
现代文：因此韩非子将此称为 说难 ，东方朔将其称为 不易 ，真的是非常有道理的。
English: Therefore, Han Feizi called this difficult to say, Dongfang Shuo called it not easy, it is really very reasonable.

古文：忠言逆耳而利于行，有国有家者深所要急，纳之则世治，杜之则政乱，诚愿陛下详之，则天下幸甚！ 
现代文：忠言逆耳利于行，对于拥有家国的人来说是最重要的事，如果能采纳这些忠言，国家就能长治久安，如果杜绝这些忠言，政局就会混乱不堪，我希望您能够仔细体会其中的含义，那就是天下的大幸了。 
English: It is the most important thing for those who have their own country to listen to and act on the advice. If we can adopt these advice, the country will be able to maintain long-term stability. If we eliminate these advice, the political situation will be chaotic. I hope you can carefully understand the meaning of this. That is the great fortune of the world.

古文：因请遣中使赍帛五百匹，诣征宅以赐之。
现代文：于是，长孙皇后请求太宗派遣中使带五百匹锦帛送到魏徵家中赏赐他。
English: As a result, the Empress's eldest grandson asked Emperor Taizong to send an envoy with five hundred brocade horses to Wei Zheng's home to reward him.

古文：刑部尚书张亮坐谋反下狱，诏令百官议之，多言亮当诛，惟殿中少监李道裕奏亮反形未具，明其无罪。
现代文：刑部尚书张亮因谋反罪被关进监狱，唐太宗下诏，命令百官商议惩处他的办法，许多人都说张亮应该杀头，只有殿中少监李道裕上奏说张亮谋反的证据不足，应赦免其无罪。
English: Zhang Liang, the head of the criminal investigation department, was sent to prison for the crime of plotting rebellion. Emperor Taizong issued an edict, ordering hundreds of officials to discuss the means of punishing him. Many people said that Zhang Liang should be killed. Only Li Daoyu, the junior warden of the palace, reported that there was insufficient evidence of Zhang Liang's plotting rebellion, and that he should be pardoned.

古文：太宗既盛怒，竟杀之。
现代文：但唐太宗当时正处在盛怒之下，竟把张亮给杀掉了。
English: However, Emperor Taizong was in a rage at the time and killed Zhang Liang.

古文：俄而刑部侍郎有阙，令宰相妙择其人，累奏不可。
现代文：不久，刑部侍郎空缺，唐太宗叫宰相精心选择称职的人，可宰相多次上奏推荐人才，唐太宗都没有同意。
English: Soon, there was a vacancy for the head of the Criminal Investigation Department. Tang Taizong asked the prime minister to carefully select a competent person. The prime minister repeatedly appealed to recommend talents, but Tang Taizong did not agree.

古文：太宗曰： 吾已得其人矣。往者李道裕议张亮云 反形未具 ，可谓公平矣。
现代文：太宗说： 其实，我已找到合适的人了，先前李道裕在拟议处置张亮的办法时，说 他谋反证据不足 ，可见此人很公平。
English: Taizong said, "Actually, I have found the right person. Previously, when Li Daoyu proposed a way to deal with Zhang Liang, he said that there was insufficient evidence that he was plotting, so this person is very fair.

古文：当时虽不用其言，至今追悔。 
现代文：我当时没有采用他的意见，至今仍追悔莫及。 
English: I didn't take his advice at the time, and I still regret it.

古文：遂授道裕刑部侍郎。
现代文：于是就任命李道裕为刑部侍郎。
English: So he appointed Li Daoyu as the head of the criminal investigation department.

古文：贞观初，太宗谓侍臣曰： 朕今孜孜求士，欲专心政道，闻有好人，则抽擢驱使。
现代文：贞观初年，唐太宗对侍臣说： 我现在孜孜不倦地寻找贤才，想要把心思都用在治理国家政治上，一听说哪里有贤能的人才，就派使者前去打探。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to his courtiers: I am now tirelessly searching for talents, and I want to devote all my thoughts to governing the country and politics. As soon as I hear that there are talented people, I will send an envoy to investigate.

古文：而议者多称 彼者皆宰臣亲故 ，但公等至公，行事勿避此言，便为形迹。古人 内举不避亲，外举不避仇 ，而为举得其真贤故也。
现代文：但人们还是议论纷纷，说 那些官员都是朝廷重臣的亲戚、朋友 。但是你们做事不要因此而有所忌讳和回避，古人说， 推举人才对内不避亲，对外不避仇 ，只要推举的人是真正的贤才。
English: But people are still talking about it, saying that those officials are relatives and friends of the court dignitaries. However, you should not avoid doing things because of this. The ancients said that those who are elected should not avoid relatives and enemies, as long as they are true talents.

古文：但能举用得才，虽是子弟及有仇嫌，不得不举。 
现代文：唯才是举，只要是人才，即使是自己的子弟或仇人，也不可不推举。 
English: As long as it is talent, even if it is one's own child or enemy, it must be promoted.

古文：贞观十一年，时屡有阉宦充外使，妄有奏，事发，太宗怒。
现代文：贞观十一年，当时常常有宦官外出担任使者，他们欺瞒朝廷，胡乱上报情况，事情败露后，唐太宗非常生气。
English: In the eleventh year of Zhenguan, when eunuchs often went out to serve as messengers, they deceived the court and reported the situation in a chaotic manner. After the matter was revealed, Tang Taizong was very angry.

古文：魏征进曰： 阉竖虽微，狎近左右，时有言语，轻而易信，浸润之谮，为患特深。
现代文：魏徵说： 宦官虽然卑微，但他们侍奉在天子左右，常常发表议论，容易使天子轻信，慢慢地，便造成很大的危害。
English: Wei Zheng said: Although eunuchs are lowly, they serve around the heavenly son, often make comments, easily make the heavenly son gullible, and slowly cause great harm.

古文：今日之明，必无此虑，为子孙教，不可不杜绝其源。 
现代文：现在陛下圣明，可以无此顾虑，可是为了子孙后代，不可不断绝这种祸患。 
English: Now that His Majesty is a saint, there is no need to worry about this, but for the sake of future generations, this scourge must not be allowed to continue.

古文：太宗曰： 非卿，朕安得闻此语？
现代文：唐太宗说： 不是你，我怎么会听到如此中肯的意见呢？
English: Tang Taizong said, "If it wasn't you, how could I have heard such a pertinent opinion?"

古文：自今已后，充使宜停。 
现代文：从今以后，宦官不可再担任使者。 
English: From now on, eunuchs may no longer serve as messengers.

古文：魏征因上疏曰：
现代文：魏徵事后又写了一篇奏书，进献唐太宗：
English: Wei Zheng later wrote a report, which was presented to Tang Taizong:

古文：臣闻为人君者，在乎善善而恶恶，近君子而远小人。
现代文：我听说国君贵在表扬善事，贬斥劣迹，亲近君子，远离小人。
English: I have heard that the Emperor praises good deeds, condemns bad deeds, is close to the gentleman and far from the villain.

古文：善善明，则君子进矣；恶恶著，则小人退矣。
现代文：如果善事得到发扬，那么君子就会为国效劳；贬斥劣迹，那么小人就会自行隐退。
English: If the good deeds are promoted, then the gentleman will serve the country; if the bad deeds are denounced, then the villain will retreat on his own.

古文：近君子，则朝无粃政；远小人，则听不私邪。
现代文：亲近君子，那么朝廷不会有劣政，远离小人，则不会偏听。
English: If you are close to the gentleman, then the court will not have bad politics, and if you are far from the villain, then you will not be biased.

古文：小人非无小善，君子非无小过。
现代文：小人并非没有微小的优点，君子并非没有小小的差错。
English: A villain is not without small merits, a gentleman is not without small faults.

古文：君子小过，盖白玉之微瑕；小人小善，乃铅刀之一割。
现代文：君子小小的过失，是白玉上的瑕疵。小人那小小的优点，则如铅刀上锋利的地方。
English: The small faults of a gentleman are the blemishes on a diamond. The small merits of a villain are like the sharp points on a lead knife.

古文：铅刀一割，良工之所不重，小善不足以掩众恶也；白玉微瑕，善贾之所不弃，小疵不足以妨大美也。
现代文：铅刀上那一点锋利的地方能工巧匠是不会看重的，这小小的优点不足以掩盖许多缺点。白玉微瑕，好的商人不会嫌弃，小小的斑点不会妨碍白玉整体的美丽。
English: A skilled craftsman would not pay attention to the sharp point on a lead knife. This small advantage is not enough to cover up many shortcomings. A good merchant would not dislike the white jade's slight imperfections, and small spots would not hinder the overall beauty of the white jade.

古文：善小人之小善，谓之善善，恶君子之小过，谓之恶恶，此则蒿兰同嗅，玉石不分，屈原所以沉江，卞和所以泣血者也。
现代文：赞扬小人的优点，而认为这是对善的正确判断；贬斥君子的过失，而认为这是对恶的正确判断，这如同认为蒿草和兰花的香味一致，白玉和顽石的质地一样，是美丑不分，善恶不辨，这也是屈原投江自尽，卞和吐血的原因。
English: Praising the merits of a villain, and thinking that this is the correct judgment of good; disparaging the faults of a gentleman, and thinking that this is the correct judgment of evil. This is like thinking that the fragrance of eucalyptus and orchid is the same, and the texture of white jade and hard stone. Beauty and ugliness are indistinguishable, and good and evil are indistinguishable. This is also the reason why Qu Yuan threw himself into the river and vomited blood.

古文：既识玉石之分，又辨蒿兰之臭，善善而不能进，恶恶而不能去，此郭氏所以为墟，史鱼所以遗恨也。
现代文：如果认识了玉石的差别，蒿兰的不同，但不能进善退恶，也是不明智的，这也是历史上郭国之所以被齐国所灭、史鱼之所以抱恨终生的原因。
English: If you know the difference between jade and lapis lazuli, but can't be good or evil, it is also unwise. This is also the reason why Guo was destroyed by Qi in history, and the reason why Shi Yu held a grudge for life.

古文：陛下聪明神武，天姿英睿，志存泛爱，引纳多途，好善而不甚择人，疾恶而未能远佞。
现代文：陛下聪明神武，天姿英睿，爱护百姓，广开言路。能从各种途径选拔人才，但陛下喜好贤才却不善于选择贤才，痛恨邪恶，但还没能远离小人。
English: His Majesty is intelligent and powerful, has a heavenly appearance and wisdom, loves the people, and speaks widely. He can select talents from various ways, but His Majesty likes talents but is not good at selecting talents, and hates evil, but has not been able to stay away from villains.

古文：又出言无隐，疾恶太深，闻人之善或未全信，闻人之恶以为必然。
现代文：并且，陛下言语毫不隐讳，疾恶如仇，听到善行未必全信，听到劣迹就认为绝无错误。
English: Moreover, His Majesty does not hold back his words, he is not afraid of evil. When he hears of good deeds, he may not fully believe, but when he hears of bad deeds, he believes that there is no mistake.

古文：虽有独见之明，犹恐理或未尽。
现代文：虽有远见卓识，但臣恐怕陛下有些地方还有不妥之处。
English: Despite his foresight, I'm afraid there's something wrong with your majesty.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：君子扬人之善，小人讦人之恶，闻恶必信，则小人之道长矣，闻善或疑，则君子之道消矣。
现代文：君子愿意表扬别人的善行，小人专门诋毁别人的缺点，如果听到劣迹就确信无疑，那么就会助长小人的气焰。听到善行就怀疑，那么君子会很失望。
English: A gentleman is willing to praise the good deeds of others, while a villain is dedicated to denigrating the shortcomings of others. If he hears the bad deeds and is convinced beyond doubt, then it will boost the villain's pride. If he hears the good deeds and doubts, then the gentleman will be very disappointed.

古文：为国家者，急于进君子而退小人，乃使君子道消，小人道长，则君臣失序，上下否隔，乱亡不恤，将何以治乎？
现代文：为了国家的利益着想，急于进用君子而斥退小人，结果反使君子受怀疑，小人得志，那么就会君臣失序、上下隔阂、国家混乱。哪里还称得上政治清明呢？
English: For the sake of the interests of the country, they are eager to promote the gentleman and repel the villain, but the result is that the gentleman is suspected and the villain is encouraged, then the prince and the minister will be out of order, the top and bottom will be estranged, and the country will be in chaos. Where else can it be said to be politically clear?

古文：且世俗常人，心无远虑，情在告讦，好言朋党。
现代文：并且，世俗之人，缺乏深思熟虑，喜欢搬弄是非。
English: Moreover, worldly people, lacking forethought, like to play games.

古文：夫以善相成谓之同德，以恶相济谓之朋党，今则清浊共流，善恶无别，以告讦为诚直，以同德为朋党。
现代文：一般而言，我们把戮力同心做好事称作同德，把一起参与做坏事称作朋党。可现在清浊同流，善恶无别，把奸邪的人视为诚实正直，把同心同德的人称作朋党。
English: Generally speaking, we call it the same virtue to work together to do good things, and the same virtue to participate in doing bad things together. But now, there is no difference between good and evil, and those who commit evil are regarded as honest and upright, and those who are of the same mind are called the same party.

古文：以之为朋党，则谓事无可信；以之为诚直，则谓言皆可取。
现代文：被称作朋党的人，他们的言行就不被信任；被称作诚实正直的人，那么他们的一切都是可取的。
English: Those who are called cronies are not to be trusted in word or deed; those who are called honest and upright are to be commended in all they do.

古文：此君恩所以不结于下，臣忠所以不达于上。
现代文：这就是为什么陛下的恩德没有散布臣子中间，臣子的忠诚没有传达到朝廷上的原因。
English: This is why His Majesty's kindness has not spread among his courtiers, and why his courtiers' loyalty has not spread to the Imperial Court.

古文：大臣不能辩正，小臣莫之敢论，远近承风，混然成俗，非国家之福，非为治之道。适足以长奸邪，乱视听，使人君不知所信，臣下不得相安。
现代文：地位高的大臣们不敢矫正朝廷的偏差，地位低的臣子们又不敢指出来，于是这种做法就形成风气，对国家极为有害，这足以助长奸邪，扰乱视听，如果不断绝这种风气的根源，将贻害无穷。
English: High-ranking ministers do not dare to correct the deviation of the imperial court, and low-ranking courtiers do not dare to point it out, so this practice has formed a culture that is extremely harmful to the country. This is enough to promote adultery and disrupt audio-visual. If the root cause of this culture is constantly eliminated, the harm will be endless.

古文：若不远虑，深绝其源，则后患未之息也。今之幸而未败者，由乎君有远虑，虽失之于始，必得之于终故也。
现代文：幸运的是，如今国家还没有出现大的祸害，这完全归功于陛下的深谋远虑，国政现在虽然有所偏差，可是必然能够改正。
English: Fortunately, the country has not yet seen any major disasters, which is entirely due to His Majesty's foresight. Although there are some deviations in national politics, they can certainly be corrected.

古文：若时逢少隳，往而不返，虽欲悔之，必无所及。既不可以传诸后嗣，复何以垂法将来？且夫进善黜恶，施于人者也；以古作鉴，施于己者也。
现代文：如果现在遇到小的祸害，不加以制止，任由其发展，将来定会悔之莫及，这样的话，既不能将社稷传给后代，又拿什么作为后世的楷模呢？扬善除恶，有利于人，以古为鉴，有利于己。
English: If we encounter a small scourge now, do not stop it, and allow it to develop, we will certainly regret it in the future. In this case, we can neither pass on the society to future generations, nor what should we take as a model for future generations? Promoting good and eliminating evil is beneficial to people, and learning from the past is beneficial to ourselves.

古文：鉴貌在乎止水，鉴己在乎哲人。
现代文：照容貌，要用平静的水面做镜子；照自己的德行，要以前的圣哲作借鉴。
English: According to one's appearance, one should use the calm surface of the water as a mirror; according to one's virtue, one should learn from the previous sages.

古文：能以古之哲王鉴于己之行事，则貌之妍丑宛然在目，事之善恶自得于心，无劳司过之史，不假刍荛之议，巍巍之功日著，赫赫之名弥远。
现代文：如果能以古代圣明的帝王为自己的借鉴，那么自己行为的善恶就一目了然，何须史官的评判，何须百姓们的议论，帝王自然会功勋卓著，声名远扬。
English: If you can take the emperors of ancient times as your reference, then the good and evil of your actions will be clear at a glance. No need for the judgment of historians, no need for the discussion of the people, the emperor will naturally be distinguished and famous.

古文：为人君者不可务乎？
现代文：国君追求的不正是这样吗？
English: Isn't that what the Emperor is after?

古文：臣闻道德之厚，莫尚于轩、唐，仁义之隆，莫彰于舜、禹。欲继轩、唐之风，将追舜、禹之迹，必镇之以道德，弘之以仁义，举善而任之，择善而从之。
现代文：我听说，若论道德的崇高，没人可以超过黄帝、尧帝；若论仁义的深厚，没人可比得上舜帝、大禹，如果要追慕黄帝、唐尧的风范，追上虞舜、夏禹的业绩，只有推行道德仁义，择善而从。
English: I have heard that when it comes to the loftiness of morality, no one can surpass the Yellow Emperor and Emperor Gong; when it comes to the depth of benevolence, no one can match Emperor Gong and Emperor Dayu. If you want to emulate the demeanor of the Yellow Emperor and Emperor Tang and catch up with the performance of Emperor Yu and Emperor Xia, the only way is to promote moral benevolence and choose the good.

古文：不择善任能，而委之俗吏，既无远度，必失大体。
现代文：如果不能选拔有才能的臣子，而把政务委托给凡庸的人，他们没有眼光和胸襟，必然会使国家的大体丧失殆尽。
English: If talented courtiers cannot be selected, and the government affairs are entrusted to mediocre people, they have no vision and no heart, and they will inevitably cause the country to lose everything.

古文：惟奉三尺之律，以绳四海之人，欲求垂拱无为，不可得也。
现代文：如果严刑峻法，以控制天下的百姓，要想无为而治，也是不可能的。
English: If strict punishment and harsh laws are the best way to control the people of the world, it is also impossible to do nothing.

古文：故圣哲君临，移风易俗，不资严刑峻法，在仁义而已。故非仁无以广施，非义无以正身。惠下以仁，正身以义，则其政不严而理，其教不肃而成矣。
现代文：所以圣贤的国君治理天下，移风易俗，不用严刑峻法，只是推行 仁义 二字，没有 仁 就无法广泛地在天下施行，没有 义 就无法端正自身，用 仁 来向天下人施行恩惠，用 义 来端正自身，这样，国家政务就可以不严酷而达到太平，教化就可以不严峻而有所成就。
English: Therefore, the wise and virtuous sovereigns rule the world, change the customs, do not use harsh punishment and harsh laws, but only promote the two words of benevolence and righteousness. Without benevolence, they cannot be widely implemented in the world. Without righteousness, they cannot rectify themselves. Use benevolence to grant favors to the people of the world, and use righteousness to rectify themselves. In this way, state affairs can be peaceful without being harsh, and enlightenment can be achieved without being severe.

古文：然则仁义，理之本也；刑罚，理之末也。
现代文：仁义是治国的根本，而刑罚是治国的辅助手段。
English: Righteousness is the foundation of statecraft, while punishment is an auxiliary means of statecraft.

古文：为理之有刑罚，犹执御之有鞭策也，人皆从化，而刑罚无所施；马尽其力，则有鞭策无所用。
现代文：用刑罚来治国，就像赶马车用鞭子，百姓们都已服从教化，那么刑罚就没有地方可施行了；马能自觉地尽力奔跑，那么鞭子也就没有什么用处了。
English: To govern a country by punishment is like driving a carriage with a whip. If the people have already submitted to education, then there is no place for punishment. If the horse can consciously run as hard as possible, then the whip is of no use.

古文：由此言之，刑罚不可致理，亦已明矣。
现代文：由此可见，刑罚不能使国家太平，这个道理是很明显的。
English: Thus, it is clear that punishment cannot pacify the country.

古文：故《潜夫论》曰： 人君之治莫大于道德教化也。
现代文：所以王符在《潜夫论》中写道： 帝王的治国之道没有比道德教化更重要的了。
English: Therefore, Wang Fu wrote in "The Subterfuge": The emperor's way of governing the country is no more important than moral enlightenment.

古文：民有性、有情、有化、有俗。
现代文：百姓有自己的本性、情感，行为、风俗。
English: People have their own natures, emotions, behaviors, and customs.

古文：情性者，心也，本也；化俗者，行也，末也。是以上君抚世，先其本而后其末，顺其心而履其行。
现代文：本性、情感是根本；行为、风俗是枝节。因此圣明的君主治国，崇本抑末，顺应民心，从而矫正他们的行为。
English: Nature and emotion are the foundation; behavior and customs are the branches. Therefore, the holy monarchs rule the country, respect the original and suppress the latter, conform to the people's hearts, and thus correct their behavior.

古文：心情苟正，则奸慝无所生，邪意无所载矣。是故上圣无不务治民心，故曰： 听讼，吾犹人也，必也使无讼乎？ 
现代文：百姓本性纯正，那么奸邪之念就不会产生。所以有着上上智的圣人，无不关注和教化民心，所以说： 听百姓的心声，顺从民意，是为了让百姓没有意见。 
English: The people's nature is pure, so the thought of treachery and evil will not arise. Therefore, the saints with the highest wisdom, all pay attention to and educate the people's hearts, so they say: Listen to the people's heart, obey the people's will, in order to let the people have no objection.

古文：道之以礼，务厚其性而明其情。
现代文：君王用礼去教化百姓，使他们本性淳厚，明白他们的心愿。
English: The monarch uses etiquette to educate the people, so that they have a pure nature and understand their wishes.

古文：民相爱，则无相伤害之意；动思义，则无畜奸邪之心。
现代文：百姓相互爱护，坚守仁义之道，那么就不会彼此伤害怀疑。
English: If people love and care for each other and stick to the path of benevolence and righteousness, then they will not hurt or doubt each other.

古文：若此，非律令之所理也，此乃教化之所致也。圣人甚尊德礼而卑刑罚，故舜先敕契以敬敷五教，而后任咎繇以五刑也。
现代文：这些都不是刑罚能够办得到的，只有依赖教化之功。圣人崇尚道德礼仪，轻视刑罚，所以舜命令契推行五教，可是后来又让咎繇设置了五种酷刑。
English: These are not punishments that can be carried out, but only rely on the work of enlightenment. The saint advocated moral etiquette and despised punishment, so he ordered the implementation of the Five Teachings, but later he let Guan Yu set up five kinds of torture.

古文：凡立法者，非以司民短而诛过误也，乃以防奸恶而救祸患，检淫邪而内正道。
现代文：立法的目的，不是为了制裁百姓的短处和错误的，而是用来防范邪恶、补救祸患、约束邪恶从而使其纳入正道的。
English: The purpose of legislation is not to punish the shortcomings and mistakes of the people, but to prevent evil, remedy evils, and restrain evil so that it can be put on the right track.

古文：民蒙善化，则人有士君子之心；被恶政，则人有怀奸乱之虑。
现代文：人们受到好的教化，就会怀有君子之心；受到恶政的统治就会产生邪乱之意。
English: If people are well-educated, they will have the heart of a gentleman; if they are ruled by an evil government, they will have the spirit of chaos.

古文：故善化之养民，犹工之为曲豉也。
现代文：所以好的教化对于人民的作用，就像酿酒工匠手中的曲酵一样。
English: So good education is to the people as leaven is to the brewer.

古文：六合之民，犹一荫也，黔首之属，犹豆麦也，变化云为，在将者耳！
现代文：全国的老百姓就像温室里有待发酵的豆麦，怎样发展变化，全在于治政者的善恶啊！
English: The common people across the country are like beans and wheat waiting to be fermented in a greenhouse. How they develop and change depends entirely on the good or evil of those in power.

古文：遭良吏，则怀忠信而履仁厚；遇恶吏，则怀奸邪而行浅薄。
现代文：遇到好的官吏就心怀忠信而言行仁厚；遇到坏的官僚就心怀奸邪而言行浅薄。
English: When encountering good officials, be benevolent in terms of loyalty; when encountering bad bureaucrats, be shallow in terms of treachery.

古文：忠厚积，则致太平；浅薄积，则致危亡。
现代文：人们都忠厚了，就可以使国家太平；人们都浅薄了，就会导致国家危亡。
English: If the people are loyal, the country will be peaceful; if the people are shallow, the country will be in danger.

古文：是以圣帝明王，皆敦德化而薄威刑也。
现代文：因此，圣明的君主都致力于德化而鄙薄酷刑。
English: Therefore, the wise monarchs are committed to virtue and despise torture.

古文：德者，所以循己也，威者，所以治人也。
现代文：德，是用来要求自己的；威，是用来管束别人的。
English: Virtue is used to claim one's own; power is used to control others.

古文：民之生也，犹铄金在炉，方圆薄厚，随溶制耳！
现代文：人生在世就像炉中化金一样，铸出来的东西的方圆厚薄全在于模子的形状啊！
English: Life in this world is like melting gold in a furnace. The thickness of the cast object depends entirely on the shape of the mold!

古文：是故世之善恶，俗之薄厚，皆在于君。
现代文：因此，世事的善恶，风俗的厚薄都取决于一国之君。
English: Therefore, the rights and wrongs of the world, and the thickness of customs, all depend on the ruler of a country.

古文：世之主诚能使六合之内、举世之人，感忠厚之情而无浅薄之恶，各奉公正之心，而无奸险之虑，则醇酽之俗，复见于兹矣。 
现代文：治世的君主如果真能使普天下的人民都怀有忠厚之情而无浅薄之意，有奉公之善而无奸邪之恶，那么淳朴的风俗就又可以出现了。 
English: If the reigning monarch can really make the people of the whole world have a loyal heart and not a shallow mind, and have the good of public service and not the evil of evil, then simple customs can appear again.

古文：后王虽未能遵，专尚仁义，当慎刑恤典，哀敬无私，故管子曰： 圣君任法不任智，任公不任私。 
现代文：后来的帝王虽然不能这样崇尚仁义，也应当慎重地运用刑典，力求公正无私，所以《管子》上说： 圣君用法度礼仪而不用酷刑奸智，用至公之道而不用营私之心。 
English: Although later emperors could not advocate benevolence and righteousness in this way, they should also carefully use the criminal code and strive to be fair and selfless. Therefore, "The Pipe" said: "Saints use the law and etiquette without torture and treachery, and use the way of justice without selfishness."

古文：故王天下，理国家。
现代文：所以能够取得天下，治理好国家。
English: That is why we can win the world and govern the country well.

古文：贞观之初，志存公道，人有所犯，一一于法。
现代文：贞观初年，国家的法令一视同仁，人民如果有违法乱纪的，都依法严办了。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, the state's laws and regulations were all treated equally, and if the people broke the law or violated discipline, they were strictly dealt with according to the law.

古文：纵临时处断或有轻重，但见臣下执论，无不忻然受纳。
现代文：即使断案有轻有重，朝廷听到臣下议论，无不欣然接受意见。
English: Even if the decision on the case is a matter of weight and light, the Imperial Court hears the discussion of the vassals and gladly accepts the opinions.

古文：民知罪之无私，故甘心而不怨；臣下见言无忤，故尽力以效忠。
现代文：百姓知道皇帝惩罚他们并非出于私心，所以都心悦诚服；臣子看到自己直言进谏并没有触犯龙颜，于是也更加尽职尽忠。
English: The people knew that the emperor's punishment of them was not out of selfishness, so they were all pleased and convinced; the courtiers saw that they did not offend the dragon's face, so they were more dutiful and loyal.

古文：顷年以来，意渐深刻，虽开三面之网，而察见渊中之鱼，取舍在于爱憎，轻重由乎喜怒。
现代文：可是近年来，您处理政事慢慢变得严苛，即使仍有网开一面之心，但是仍然过分苛刻地审察，常根据自己的好恶来判断事物、做出取舍，按照自己的喜好来决定赏罚的轻重。
English: However, in recent years, your handling of political affairs has gradually become harsh. Even if you still have an open mind, you still scrutinize things excessively harshly, often judging things according to your own likes and dislikes, making trade-offs, and deciding on the severity of rewards and punishments according to your own preferences.

古文：爱之者，罪虽重而强为之辞；恶之者，过虽小而深探其意。
现代文：对于自己喜爱的人，即使罪过再大也会网开一面，寻找各种理由为他开脱；对于厌恶的人，即使过失非常微小，也会挖空心思加重他的刑罚。
English: For a person they like, even if the crime is very big, they will dig a hole and find all kinds of reasons to excuse him; for a person they dislike, even if the crime is very small, they will dig a hole and increase his punishment.

古文：法无定科，任情以轻重；人有执论，疑之以阿伪。
现代文：执法失去了准确的定罪法则，凭着自己的心情和好恶来减轻或者加重罪名；臣子如果直言进谏，就会被怀疑是结党营私，欺瞒圣上。
English: Law enforcement has lost the accurate law of conviction, relying on one's own feelings and likes and dislikes to mitigate or aggravate the crime; if a courtier speaks frankly, he will be suspected of forming a party and deceiving the saint.

古文：故受罚者无所控告，当官者莫敢正言。
现代文：因此受冤枉的人有口难辩，知情的官员不敢直言。
English: As a result, those who have been wronged find it difficult to speak out, and informed officials are afraid to speak out.

古文：不服其心，但穷其口，欲加之罪，其无辞乎！
现代文：不去想如何使他们心服，反而只是强逼他们闭嘴，这样一来，欲加之罪又何患无辞呢？
English: Instead of thinking about how to win their hearts and minds, they just force them to shut up. In this way, there is no excuse for committing crimes.

古文：又五品已上有犯，悉令曹司闻奏。
现代文：另外，五品以上的官员犯罪，曹司必须上奏圣上。
English: In addition, if an official of the Fifth Rank or higher commits a crime, he or she must report it to the Emperor.

古文：本欲察其情状，有所哀矜；今乃曲求小节，或重其罪，使人攻击惟恨不深。
现代文：这样做的本意是想明察真实的情况，从而酌情减刑；可是现在却是一味探求小节，甚至有些反而加重了刑罚，致使掌管司法的官员加大了对那些犯法官吏的打击，甚至因为自己的打击力度不够而深感遗憾。
English: The intention was to see what was really going on, so that sentences could be reduced if necessary; but now, instead of investigating the details, some have even increased the sentences, causing the officials in charge of justice to intensify the crackdown on those criminal officials, and even deeply regret that their crackdown is not strong enough.

古文：事无重条，求之法外所加，十有六七，故顷年犯者惧上闻，得付法司，以为多幸。
现代文：有的事情并没有重罚的法律规定，就在法律之外寻找理由重罚，十有六七都是这样做的，所以近年来犯法的官员都害怕被皇帝知道，一旦得知自己被交付司法纠察的部门，都觉得侥幸。
English: In some cases, there is no legal provision for heavy punishment, so they look for reasons outside the law to impose heavy punishment. In 67 out of 10 cases, this is what they do. Therefore, in recent years, officials who have violated the law are afraid of being known by the emperor. Once they learn that they have been handed over to the judicial picketing department, they all feel lucky.

古文：告讦无已，穷理不息，君私于上，吏奸于下，求细过而忘大体，行一罚而起众奸，此乃背公平之道，乖泣辜之意，欲其人和讼息，不可得也。
现代文：这致使告讦的人接踵而来，加大治理却不能平息，君主在上面按照私心办事，官吏则在下面心怀欺诈，过于追究细节，不顾大体，对一个人处罚，却引起了众人的营私舞弊，这是与刑罚的公正背道而驰的，背弃了大禹对罪人哭泣的初衷，这样却希望人们和睦相处，使诉讼平息，是办不到的。所以《体论》上说： 奸淫盗窃，是百姓所痛恨的。
English: As a result, the accusers came one after another, the governance was intensified but could not be calmed down, the monarch acted selfishly at the top, and the officials were deceitful at the bottom, too much attention was paid to details, regardless of the overall situation, the punishment of one person caused many people to act selfishly, which was contrary to the justice of the punishment, and betrayed the original intention of Dayu to weep for the sinners, but it was impossible to hope that people would live in harmony and quell the lawsuit. Therefore, the "Body Theory" said: Adultery and theft are hated by the people.

古文：故《体论》云： 夫淫泆盗窃，百姓之所恶也，我从而刑罚之，虽过乎当，百姓不以我为暴者，公也。怨旷饥寒，亦百姓之所恶也，遁而陷之法，我从而宽宥之，百姓不以我为偏者，公也。
现代文：我顺从百姓的心意处罚他们，即使过重，百姓也不会认为残暴，这是因为我是出于公心的缘故。怨旷饥寒，也是百姓所痛恨的，为了摆脱这种境遇而触犯法律，我体谅他们而宽大处理，百姓也不会认为是偏私，这也是因为我是出于公心的缘故。
English: I obey the will of the people in punishing them. Even if I punish them too severely, the people will not think I am cruel, because I am acting out of a sense of justice. The people also hate to complain about the cold and hunger, and break the law in order to get out of this situation. I understand them and treat them with leniency. The people will not think I am being selfish, because I am acting out of a sense of justice.

古文：我之所重，百姓之所憎也；我之所轻，百姓之所怜也。
现代文：法律重处的是百姓憎恶的事物，从轻处罚的是百姓所怜惜的。
English: The law places the emphasis on the things that the people abhor, and the lightest punishment on the things that the people pity.

古文：是故赏轻而劝善，刑省而禁奸。 
现代文：所以应该奖赏微薄却能鼓励善行，减轻刑罚却能禁止奸邪。 
English: Therefore, it is necessary to reward the meager but can encourage good deeds, reduce the penalty but can prohibit adultery.

古文：由此言之，公之于法，无不可也，过轻亦可。
现代文：这样说来，刑法如果是出于公心的，那么就没有什么不可以的，量刑过轻也是可以的。
English: In this way, if the criminal law is out of a sense of justice, then there is nothing that cannot be done, and it is also possible to impose too light a sentence.

古文：私之于法，无可也，过轻则纵奸，过重则伤善。
现代文：如果刑法是出于私心的就没有好处了，量刑过轻就会助长奸恶，量刑过重就会伤害到善良的人。
English: If the criminal law is out of selfishness, there will be no benefit. If the sentence is too light, it will promote evil, and if the sentence is too heavy, it will hurt good people.

古文：圣人之于法也公矣，然犹惧其未也，而救之以化，此上古所务也。
现代文：圣人实施刑法都是出于公心了，然而仍然担心有不完善的地方，于是就加上教化来补救，这是古代的人所关注的地方。
English: The implementation of criminal law by the sages was out of public interest, but they were still worried about imperfections, so they added indoctrination to remedy them, which was a concern of the ancients.

古文：后之理狱者则不然：未讯罪人，则先为之意，及其讯之，则驱而致之意，谓之能；不探狱之所由，生为之分，而上求人主之微旨以为制，谓之忠。
现代文：后世治理刑狱的人却并不这样做；还没有审讯有罪的人，就已经先主观臆断，到了审讯他的时候，就将预先想好的罪名强加给他，并且将这种行为称为有才能；不探究犯人犯罪的原因，却生硬的将其分类，按照皇帝的旨意作为处罚标准，却将这种行为称为忠心。
English: Subsequent generations of penitentiary administrators did not do this; they made a subjective assessment of a guilty person before he was tried, and when he was tried, they imposed preconceived charges on him and called this behavior talented; they did not explore the reasons for the prisoner's crime, but rigidly classified it, according to the emperor's will as a punishment standard, but called this behavior loyalty.

古文：其当官也能，其事上也忠，则名利随而与之，驱而陷之，欲望道化之隆，亦难矣。
现代文：为官有才干之名，事主有忠诚之称，那么名利都会随之而来，这些人再驱逐百姓陷入法网，有这样的风气存在而想要使国家的道德教化纯正、隆厚，恐怕是很难的。
English: It is difficult to make the moral education of the country pure and lofty if such a culture exists, in which officials are praised for their talents and officials are praised for their loyalty, then fame and fortune will follow, and these people will drive the people into the net of the law.

古文：凡听讼理狱，必原父子之亲，立君臣之义，权轻重之序，测浅深之量。
现代文：凡是审理案子，都要按照父子的亲情，依照君臣的情分，权衡轻重先后，测量深浅程度。
English: Whenever a case is tried, it must be in accordance with the father-son kinship, in accordance with the feelings of the monarch and the minister, weighing the weight in succession, and measuring the depth.

古文：悉其聪明，致其忠爱，疑则与众共之。
现代文：展现自己全部的聪明才智，将忠君爱民之心发挥到极致，如果有疑问就和大家一起商讨。
English: Demonstrate all your ingenuity, bring your loyalty and love for the people to the extreme, and if you have any questions, discuss them with everyone.

古文：疑则从轻者，所以重之也，故舜命咎繇曰：汝作士，惟刑之恤。 
现代文：存在疑问就从轻量刑，这就是对刑法的慎重。所以舜告诫咎繇： 你作为一名官吏，在量刑的时候要心存怜悯。 
English: When in doubt, start with a light sentence, which is a prudent approach to criminal law. Therefore, a word of caution: As an official, you should have compassion when sentencing.

古文：又复加之以三讯，众所善，然后断之。是以为法，参之人情。故《传》曰： 小大之狱，虽不能察，必以情。 
现代文：又规定一个案子要经过群臣、群吏、万民三次审讯，大家都认可了，才能定罪。可见，律令必然也参有人情。所以《左传》说： 大小案子，虽然不能明察，但肯定有人情的因素在里面。 
English: It was also stipulated that a case had to be tried three times by a group of ministers, officials, and people, and approved by all, before it could be convicted. It can be seen that the laws and regulations must also involve human feelings. Therefore, "Zo Zhuan" said: Although the size of the case cannot be directly observed, there must be a human factor in it.

古文：而世俗拘愚苛刻之吏，以为情也者取货者也，立爱憎者也，右亲戚者也，陷怨仇者也。
现代文：但是，那些世俗苛刻、不知变通的官吏，用人情来获取财物，对有人情案子就放宽处理，对于仇人，就加以陷害。
English: However, those officials who are worldly harsh and do not know how to adapt, use human feelings to obtain wealth, and treat human cases with leniency, and frame enemies.

古文：何世俗小吏之情，与夫古人之悬远乎？
现代文：为什么世俗小人的人情和古人宽大为怀的情感有着天壤之别呢？
English: Why is there a world of difference between the human feelings of the vulgar and the generous feelings of the ancients?

古文：有司以此情疑之群吏，人主以此情疑之有司，是君臣上下通相疑也，欲其尽忠立节，难矣。
现代文：主管部门因为这样的人情而对司法官员们产生了怀疑，天子又因为这样的人情而对主管部门产生了怀疑。这是君臣之间上下之间在互相怀疑，这样却想要群臣树立节操，尽忠为国，那就太难了。
English: The competent authorities have doubts about the judicial officials because of such human feelings, and the emperor has doubts about the competent authorities because of such human feelings. This is a mutual suspicion between the monarchs and the ministers, but it is very difficult for the ministers to establish discipline and be loyal to the country.

古文：凡理狱之情，必本所犯之事以为主，不严讯，不旁求，不贵多端，以见聪明，故律正其举劾之法，参伍其辞，所以求实也，非所以饰实也，但当参伍明听之耳，不使狱吏锻炼饰理成辞于手。
现代文：凡是审理案件的情形，必须以犯罪事实为主，不严刑逼供，不节外生枝，不以牵连的头绪多来显示审判者的聪明。所以要对检举弹劾的法律加以修正，多方取证，广泛调查，是为了弄清事实，而不是要掩盖事实；多方调查，听取意见，是为了不使狱吏徇私枉法的奸计得逞。
English: Whenever a case is tried, it must be based on the facts of the crime, not on the severity of the punishment to force a confession, not on extraneous matters, and not on the implication of clues to show the wisdom of the judge. Therefore, the law on prosecution and impeachment should be amended. Multi-party evidence collection and extensive investigation is to clarify the facts, not to cover up the facts; multi-party investigation and listening to opinions is to prevent the prison officials from succeeding in their selfish scheme.

古文：孔子曰： 古之听狱，求所以生之也；今之听狱，求所以杀之也。 
现代文：孔子说： 古人审理案子，是为被告的人寻找生存的理由，今天呢，是千方百计地要将其置于死地。 
English: Confucius said: The ancients tried cases to find a reason for the defendant to survive, but today, they are trying their best to put him to death.

古文：故析言以破律，任案以成法，执左道以必加也。
现代文：所以，随心所欲地解释法律，任何案件都要定罪，施展手段强加罪名的情形就出现了。
English: Therefore, the law is interpreted at will, any case must be convicted, and the situation of using means to impose criminal charges has emerged.

古文：又《淮南子》曰： 沣水之深十仞，金铁在焉，则形见于外。
现代文：《淮南子》上写道： 沣水有十仞深，可是把金铁放在里面也看得见。
English: "Huainanzi" wrote: "The water is ten fathoms deep, but you can see the gold and iron placed in it.

古文：非不深且清，而鱼鳖莫之归也。 
现代文：如果水不清或者很浅，鱼也不会在里面生存。 
English: If the water is not clear or very shallow, the fish will not survive in it.

古文：故为上者以苛为察，以功为明，以刻下为忠，以讦多为功，譬犹广革，大则大矣，裂之道也。
现代文：所以，作为上司，把苛刻当做明察，把功多当做明智，把刻薄下属当忠心，把诽谤他人当功劳，这就像一张大皮，虽然很大，但用来制造用品，就得裁开使用。
English: Therefore, as a boss, to regard harshness as discernment, to regard merit as wisdom, to regard mean subordinates as loyal, and to regard slandering others as merit, is like a large piece of leather. Although it is large, it must be cut and used to make products.

古文：夫赏宜从重，罚宜从轻，君居其厚，百王通制。
现代文：赏赐应该从重，处罚应该从轻，君王应宽厚为怀，这是历代帝王普遍的治国之术。
English: The reward should be heavy, the punishment should be light, and the monarch should be generous. This is the universal statecraft of emperors throughout the ages.

古文：刑之轻重，恩之厚薄，见思与见疾，其可同日言哉！
现代文：刑罚轻还是重，恩遇厚还是寡，被人感念还是嫉恨，这两种做法的效果，怎可同日而语呢？
English: Whether the punishment is light or heavy, whether the reward is great or small, whether one is admired or envied, how can the effect of these two practices be the same?

古文：且法，国之权衡也，时之准绳也。
现代文：法律，犹如国家的准绳和天平，天平是用来称重量的，准绳是用来测定曲直的。
English: The law is like the yardstick and balance of the state. The balance is used to weigh the weight, and the yardstick is used to measure the curvature.

古文：权衡所以定轻重，准绳所以正曲直，今作法贵其宽平，罪人欲其严酷，喜怒肆志，高下在心，是则舍准绳以正曲直，弃权衡而定轻重者也，不亦惑哉？
现代文：法律贵在宽大公平，而判人之罪却极其严酷如今法律轻重全由人的喜怒而定。这就等于舍掉准绳来端正曲直，抛开权衡来确定轻重，怎能不令人迷惑不解呢？
English: The law is lenient and fair, but the crime of judging people is extremely harsh. Nowadays, the importance of the law is entirely determined by people's emotions. This is tantamount to giving up the yardstick to straighten out the crookedness, and setting aside the balance to determine the importance. How can it not be confusing?

古文：诸葛孔明，小国之相，犹曰： 吾心如秤，不能为人作轻重。 
现代文：诸葛亮只是小国蜀国的丞相，他还说： 我的心是一杆秤，不能因人而使标准有别。 
English: Zhuge Liang was only the prime minister of the small country of Shu. He also said, "My heart is a balance, and the standard cannot be different for different people.

古文：况万乘之主，当可封之日，而任心弃法，取怨于人乎！
现代文：更何况大国的君主呢？在天下升平的时候，怎能随意放弃法律的公平，让老百姓心生怨恨呢？
English: How much more the monarch of a great power? When the world is leveling out, how can he arbitrarily give up the fairness of the law and make the people resentful?

古文：又时有小事，不欲人闻，则暴作威怒，以弭谤议。
现代文：陛下有时做的一些小事，不想让别人知道，就以威严和权力压人，以此来消除舆论。
English: His Majesty sometimes does little things that he doesn't want others to know about, and uses his majesty and power to suppress people and thus eliminate public opinion.

古文：若所为是也，闻于外其何伤？
现代文：只要做得对，让老百姓知道又何妨呢？
English: As long as it's done right, what's wrong with letting people know?

古文：若所以非也，虽掩之何益？
现代文：如果做得不对，掩盖又有何用？
English: What good is a cover-up if it's not done right?

古文：故谚曰： 欲人不知，莫若不为；欲人不闻，莫若勿言。 
现代文：所以谚语说： 若要人不知，除非己莫为；若要人不听见，除非自己不说。 
English: So the proverb says: If you want people not to know, you have to do nothing yourself; if you want people not to hear, you have to not say anything yourself.

古文：为之而欲人不知，言之而欲人不闻，此犹捕雀而掩目，盗钟而掩耳者，只以取诮，将何益乎？
现代文：做了却想不被人知，就像遮住眼睛捕捉麻雀，掩住耳朵去偷铃，自以为神不知，鬼不觉，其实是荒唐可笑的举动。
English: Doing it but not wanting it to be known is like covering one's eyes to catch a sparrow, covering one's ears to steal a bell, and thinking that one doesn't know what one is doing. In fact, it is an absurd and ridiculous act.

古文：臣又闻之，无常乱之国，无不可理之民者。
现代文：又有什么好处呢？
English: What are the benefits?

古文：夫君之善恶由乎化之薄厚，故禹、汤以之理，桀、纣以之乱；文、武以之安，幽、厉以之危。
现代文：我又听说，没有永远动荡的国家，没有不能治理的百姓，国君的善恶是根据教化的厚薄而定的，所以大禹、商汤时天下太平，夏桀、商纣时天下大乱；周文王、周武王时国泰民安，周幽王、周厉王时遭到危亡。
English: I also heard that there is no country that is always in turmoil, there is no people that cannot be governed, and the good and evil of the sovereign is determined according to the thickness of the education. Therefore, the world was peaceful in the time of Dayu and Shangtang, and the world was in turmoil in the time of Xiaqi and Shangguan; the country was safe and the people were safe in the time of King Zhou Wen and King Zhou Wu, and the country was in peril in the time of King Zhou Yu and King Zhou Li.

古文：是以古之哲王，尽己而不以尤人，求身而不以责下。
现代文：所以古代圣明的帝王，尽心尽力却不埋怨别人，严于律己不苟责臣下。
English: That is why the emperors of ancient times, the sages, did their best but did not complain about others. They were strict with themselves and disciplined their subjects.

古文：故曰： 禹、汤罪己，其兴也勃焉；桀、纣罪人，其亡也忽焉。 
现代文：所以说： 大禹、商汤责备自己，故国家兴旺；夏桀、商纣怪罪别人，所以迅速灭亡。 
English: Therefore, it is said: Dayu and Shangtang blamed themselves, so the country prospered; Xia Yu and Shangtang blamed others, so they quickly perished.

古文：臣闻尧有敢谏之鼓，舜有诽谤之木，汤有司过之史，武有戒慎之铭。此则听之于无形，求之于未有，虚心以待下，庶下情之达上，上下无私，君臣合德者也。魏武帝云： 有德之君乐闻逆耳之言。犯颜之诤，亲忠臣，厚谏士，斥谗慝，远佞人者，诚欲全身保国，远避灭亡者也。 
现代文：苛责过多，与恻隐之心相违，其实是为奸邪开辟了方便之门。汉代温舒曾上书说狱吏太残酷，只可惜不被采纳，我听说过尧专门设置了进谏用的锣鼓，大禹树立了提意见用的木头，商汤有专门处罚官吏过错的史富，周武王在桌几、盘碟、盆盖上写有告诫自己要谨慎的铭文，这样做是防微杜渐，虚心接受各方意见的表现。魏武帝曹操说： 有德的君王高兴听到逆耳的忠言，他们亲近忠臣，厚待进谏的臣子，斥退小人，是希望保全自身和国家，避免灭亡的灾害。 
English: Too much harsh punishment is contrary to compassion, and actually opens a convenient door for treachery. In the Han Dynasty, Wenshu wrote a letter saying that the prison officials were too cruel, but unfortunately it was not accepted. I have heard that Shao specially set up a gong drum for entering the gong, Dayu set up a piece of wood for making suggestions, Shang Tang had a special punishment for officials' mistakes, Shifu, and King Zhouwu wrote inscriptions on tables, plates, and pot lids warning himself to be cautious. This is a manifestation of prevention and humbly accepting opinions from all sides. Wei Emperor Cao Cao said: Virtuous kings are happy to hear

古文：凡百君子，膺期统运，纵未能上下无私，君臣合德，可不全身保国，远避灭亡乎？
现代文：凡是承受天命君临天下的国君，纵使做不到君臣同德、上下一心，难道不想保全自己和国家，避免灭亡吗？
English: Don't all sovereigns, who bear the fate of heaven and earth, want to preserve themselves and the country, and avoid destruction, even if they can't be a monarch and a subject with the same morality and the same heart?

古文：然自古圣哲之君，功成事立，未有不资同心，予违汝弼者也。
现代文：然而自古以来能够功成名就、建立伟业的国君，没有不靠君臣上下同心同德、虚心纳谏、改正错误的。
English: However, since ancient times, there has never been a sovereign who has been able to achieve success and build a great career without relying on the monarch and his or her subjects to be of the same mind, accept advice with an open mind, and correct mistakes.

古文：昔在贞观之初，侧身励行，谦以受物。
现代文：以前在贞观初期，陛下兢兢业业身体力行，虚怀若谷，谦虚待人。
English: Previously, in the early days of chastity, His Majesty diligently and conscientiously worked hard, was open-minded, and treated people with modesty.

古文：盖闻善必改，时有小过，引纳忠规，每听直言，喜形颜色。
现代文：因为您闻善必行，即使偶尔有小过失，都可以接纳忠言规谏，每当听到直言良谏，都会喜形于色。
English: Because you have to do what you feel is right, even if you occasionally make a small mistake, you can accept the rules and regulations, and you will be overjoyed whenever you hear good words.

古文：故凡在忠烈，咸竭其辞。
现代文：因此只要是忠烈之士，都竭尽自己的忠诚来进谏。
English: Therefore, as long as they are loyal martyrs, they will do their best to win the crown.

古文：自顷年海内无虞，远夷慑服，志意盈满，事异厥初。
现代文：但近年来，四海升平，外族降服，陛下志得意满，处理事务就跟以前不同了。
English: However, in recent years, with the rise of the four seas, the subjugation of foreigners, and His Majesty's satisfaction, the handling of affairs is different from before.

古文：高谈疾邪，而喜闻顺旨之说；空论忠谠，而不悦逆耳之言。
现代文：尽管口中高谈阔论自己如何痛恨邪恶，却只喜欢听阿谀之辞，空口说倡导直言敢谏的行为，却厌恶逆耳之言。
English: Although they talk a lot about how they hate evil, they only like to listen to flattery. They advocate speaking out and daring to act, but they hate words that go against the grain.

古文：私嬖之径渐开，至公之道日塞，往来行路，咸知之矣。
现代文：私心渐起，公道日消，路上来往的普通百姓，都知道了这种变化。
English: Selfishness is gradually on the rise, justice is disappearing day by day, and ordinary people who come and go on the road know this change.

古文：邦之兴衰，实由斯道。
现代文：自古国家兴盛与衰亡，无不因此而起。
English: Since ancient times, the prosperity and decline of countries have all been caused by this.

古文：为人上者，可不勉乎？
现代文：作为至高无上的君主，怎能不小心警惕呢？
English: As the supreme ruler, how could he not be wary?

古文：臣数年以来，每奉明旨，深惧群臣莫肯尽言。
现代文：我数年以来，每次接到圣明的旨意，都非常担忧群臣不能竭尽忠诚直言国政的得失。
English: Over the past few years, every time I have received the will of the Holy Light, I have been very worried about the ministers not being able to do their best to be loyal and outspoken about the gains and losses of national politics.

古文：臣切思之，自比来人或上书，事有得失，惟见述其所短，未有称其所长。
现代文：我认真思考了这个问题，发现近来臣子上书，不敢畅所欲言。如果所述之事有所出入，就只看到您批评他的缺点，而不见表扬其长处的。
English: I have given this matter serious thought, and I find that recently the minister has written a letter in which he does not dare to speak freely, and if there is any discrepancy between what is said and what is not said, I only see you criticizing his shortcomings and not praising his strengths.

古文：又天居自高，龙鳞难犯，在于造次，不敢尽言，时有所陈，不能尽意，更思重竭，其道无因。
现代文：再加上您的地位至高无上，龙鳞难犯，臣子偶尔有机会，也不敢轻率进言，即使有时上书，也不能全部表达其意，事后再想进言，却找不到机会了。
English: Coupled with the fact that your position is supreme, it is extremely difficult to commit crimes, ministers occasionally have the opportunity, but they do not dare to speak rashly, even if they sometimes write, they cannot express all their thoughts, and if they want to speak afterwards, they will not find the opportunity.

古文：且所言当理，未必加于宠秩，意或乖忤，将有耻辱随之，莫能尽节，实由于此。
现代文：而且就算自己所说的合情合理，也未必能加官晋爵得到荣宠；但是如果万一忤逆圣意，就会落到耻辱的结局。群臣不能尽忠直言，可能就是因此而起的。
English: Moreover, even if what they say is reasonable, they may not be able to be promoted to higher ranks and receive honors; however, if they violate the sacred will, they will end up in disgrace. This may be the reason why ministers are unable to speak honestly.

古文：虽左右近侍，朝夕阶墀，事或犯颜，咸怀顾望，况疏远不接，将何以极其忠款哉？
现代文：即使您左右的侍从，与您朝夕相处，但遇到触犯龙颜之事，都心怀顾虑。更何况一些被疏远的下臣百姓，又怎么竭尽自己的忠恳之意呢？
English: Even if your attendants around you get along with you morning and evening, but when they encounter something that offends the dragon's face, they are worried. Not to mention some of the alienated vassals, how can they fulfill their loyalty?

古文：又时或宣言云： 臣下见事，只可来道，何因所言，即望我用？ 
现代文：您曾经宣称： 臣子有事，只管前来进谏，但为什么任何意见，都希望我能采纳呢？ 
English: You once declared: "If a courtier has a problem, he can just come to me, but why do you expect me to accept any opinion?

古文：此乃拒谏之辞，诚非纳忠之意。
现代文：这其实是拒绝进谏之辞，而非接纳忠言的意思。
English: This is actually the meaning of refusing to enter the oath, rather than accepting the oath.

古文：何以言之？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why do you say that?

古文：犯主严颜，献可替否，所以成主之美，匡主之过。
现代文：臣子冒着顶撞圣上的危险进谏，实则在成就君王的美名，纠正君王的过失。
English: The courtiers risked the danger of offending the emperor to enter the palace, but in fact they were fulfilling the king's reputation and correcting the king's mistakes.

古文：若主听则惑，事有不行，使其尽忠谠之言，竭股肱之力，犹恐临时恐惧，莫肯效其诚款。
现代文：如果君主一听见直谏心里就不痛快，所提的建议也未必能实行，即使让臣子们尽情直言心中所想，竭尽全力辅佐帮助，仍然会担心他会恐惧而不能尽忠。
English: If the monarch does not feel happy as soon as he hears the direct speech, and the suggestions made may not be able to be implemented, even if the courtiers are allowed to speak their minds and do their best to help, they will still be afraid that he will be afraid and unable to be loyal.

古文：若如明诏所道，便是许其面从，而又责其尽言，进退将何所据？
现代文：如果像陛下的诏书那样，就是一方面要臣子顺从自己言行，一方面又要臣子能够直言敢谏，不知道这样臣子应该根据什么样的标准来进退呢？
English: If, as in His Majesty's edict, it is on the one hand necessary for a vassal to obey his own words and actions, and on the other hand, it is necessary for a vassal to be able to speak frankly and boldly, I do not know what standard such a vassal should use to advance and retreat.

古文：欲必使乎致谏，在乎好之而已。
现代文：要想使臣下大胆进谏，关键在于君主是否真正喜好这样做。
English: The key to daring your subjects to step up to the plate is whether or not the monarch actually likes doing it.

古文：故齐桓好服紫，而合境无异色；楚王好细腰，而后宫多饿死。
现代文：因此过去齐桓公喜欢穿紫色的衣服，结果国境之内的臣民再没有穿其他颜色的服饰。楚王喜欢细腰的美女，结果后宫佳丽很多都因节食而饿死了。
English: Therefore, in the past, King Qi Huan liked to wear purple clothes, as a result, the subjects within the borders did not wear other colors of clothing. King Chu liked thin-waisted beauties, as a result, many harem beauties died of starvation due to dieting.

古文：夫以耳目之玩，人犹死而不违，况圣明之君求忠正之士，千里斯应，信不为难。
现代文：像这些供耳目之娱的行为，国人尚且宁愿豁出性命去追求，何况是明君征召天下忠诚中正之士，那些忠诚中正之士不远千里来应招，必定并非难事。
English: The people of the country would rather give up their lives to pursue such entertainment for the eyes and ears, not to mention the fact that the Emperor has called up loyal and upright people from all over the world. It must not be difficult for those loyal and upright people to come thousands of miles to be recruited.

古文：若徒有其言，而内无其实，欲其必至，不可得也。
现代文：如果只是一句空话罢了，而没有切实实行的打算，却要想听到臣下的忠言，是万万不可能的。
English: It is impossible to listen to the loyal advice of one's subordinates if it is just empty talk and there is no plan to put it into practice.

古文：太宗手诏曰：
现代文：看后，唐太宗亲自写了诏书作为答复：
English: After reading it, Emperor Taizong personally wrote an edict in reply:

古文：省前后讽谕，皆切至之意，固所望于卿也。
现代文：我仔细看了你前后几次讽喻的奏疏，都情正意切，这本来就是我对你所寄予厚望之处。
English: I have carefully looked at your several sarcastic recitations, and they are all sincere, which is what I have high hopes for you.

古文：朕昔在衡门，尚惟童幼，未渐师保之训，罕闻先达之言。
现代文：我当年生长在民间，年幼时，没有得到老师的训诫，更很少听到先哲的至理名言。
English: When I was young, growing up in the folk, I did not receive any admonition from my teachers, and I rarely heard the wise sayings of the sages.

古文：值隋主分崩，万邦涂炭，惵惵黔黎，庇身无所。
现代文：正遇到隋炀帝荒淫无道，隋代分崩离析，生灵涂炭，天灾人祸，老百姓流离失所。
English: Sui and Qian Dynasties were in a desolate state, the Sui Dynasty was falling apart, people were suffering from natural and man-made disasters, and the common people were being displaced.

古文：朕自二九之年，有怀拯溺，发愤投袂，便提干戈，蒙犯霜露，东西征伐，日不暇给，居无宁岁。
现代文：我十八岁，就怀有拯济天下之心，投身军旅，手持刀枪，不畏寒暑，东征西讨，劳碌终日，没有一天过得安宁。
English: When I was eighteen years old, I had the heart to save the world. I joined the army, armed with a knife and a gun, braved the cold and the heat, marched east and west, toiled all day, and never had a day of peace.

古文：降苍昊之灵，禀庙堂之略，义旗所指，触向平夷。
现代文：幸而苍天护佑，遵守庙堂的韬略，使义军所到之处，都能所向披靡。
English: Fortunately, God's protection and the temple's strict rules were observed, so that the rebels were able to defeat the enemy wherever they went.

古文：弱水、流沙，并通輶轩之使；被发左衽，皆为衣冠之域。
现代文：弱水、流沙这些偏远蛮夷之地都派遣使者来进贡；风俗大相径庭的异族，也都身穿华夏服装。
English: Weak water, quicksand, these remote and barbaric places, have all sent emissaries to pay tribute; foreign tribes, whose customs are very different, are also wearing Chinese clothing.

古文：正朔所班，无远不届。
现代文：国家法律颁布之后，没有不能到达的地方。
English: After the promulgation of the national law, there is no place that cannot be reached.

古文：及恭承宝历，寅奉帝图，垂拱无为，氛埃靖息，于兹十有余年，斯盖股肱罄帷幄之谋，爪牙竭熊罴之力，协德同习，以致于此。
现代文：我接管天下登上皇位，继承先帝留下的基业，休养生息，崇尚无为而治，四海升平，尘埃不起，已经十几年了。这全都仰仗众位大臣运筹帷幄，善战武将竭尽骁勇，戮力同心，才取得了如此辉煌的业绩。
English: It has been more than ten years since I took over the world and ascended to the imperial throne, inheriting the legacy left by the former emperor, taking a rest and recuperating, advocating doing nothing but governing, leveling the four seas, and not raising dust. All of this depends on the work of numerous ministers, and it took the courage and concerted efforts of good military commanders to achieve such a brilliant performance.

古文：自惟寡薄，厚享斯休，每以抚大神器，忧深责重，常惧万机多旷，四聪不达，战战兢兢，坐以待旦。
现代文：可是我是一个寡德少能的人，却享受着如此洪福，因此一想到自己肩负天下重任，忧患责任深重，于是总是担心政治得失，不能兼听四方民众的疾苦，因此常常战战兢兢，夜不能寐。
English: However, I am a man of few virtues and few abilities, but I enjoy such abundant blessings. Therefore, when I think of the heavy responsibilities I shoulder, and the heavy responsibilities of sorrow, I am always worried about political gains and losses. I cannot listen to the sufferings of the people in all four directions at the same time, so I often tremble and can't sleep at night.

古文：询于公卿，以至隶皂，推以赤心。庶几明赖，一动以钟石；淳风至德，永传于竹帛。
现代文：我常常询问公卿大臣，甚至是下臣小吏，对人推心置腹，以希望自己能够耳聪目明，做出一番能够垂范后世的功德，将其刻于钟鼎碑石之上；让我们大唐的德行，能够永垂史册。
English: I often ask nobles and ministers, and even minor officials, to put their hearts and stomachs into people, in the hope that they will be able to listen and see clearly, make the most exemplary merit for future generations, and engrave it on the bell monument; let the virtues of the Great Tang Dynasty live forever in the history books.

古文：克播鸿名，常为称首。
现代文：能够协助我传播盛名伟业的人，我一直把你当成第一个。
English: I've always looked to you as the first person who could help me spread the word about this great cause.

古文：朕以虚薄，多惭往代，若不任舟楫，岂得济彼巨川？
现代文：我因为自己才德微薄，愧对前世圣君明主，如果不能依靠贤明大臣的辅佐，怎么能够建立起宏功伟业呢？
English: If I cannot rely on the assistance of a wise minister, how can I build a great career?

古文：不藉盐梅，安得调夫五味？
现代文：就好像如果不使用船和浆，怎么能够渡过大江大河？如果不依赖你们做的盐和梅，我怎能调出五味？
English: It's like, if I don't use boats and pulp, how can I cross the great rivers? If I don't rely on your salt and plums, how can I make five flavors?

古文：赐绢三百匹。
现代文：因此，赐给你绢三百匹以示嘉奖。
English: Therefore, I am giving you three hundred yakitori to show my appreciation.

