古文：厍狄峙，其先辽东人，本姓段氏，匹磾之后也，因避难改焉。
现代文：库狄峙，祖先是辽东人，本来姓段，是段匹蝉的后代，因为躲避祸难而改姓。
English: Ku Diqi, whose ancestor was from the eastern part of Liaoning Province, was originally surnamed Duan, a descendant of Duan Pi Zi, but changed his surname to avoid misfortune.

古文：后徙居代，世为豪右。
现代文：后来迁徙居住代地，世代成为豪门大族。
English: Later, they migrated to a new place of residence and became a powerful family for generations.

古文：祖凌，武威郡守。
现代文：祖父库狄棱，任武威郡太守。
English: His grandfather, Ku Di Ren, was the governor of Wuwei County.

古文：父贞，上洛郡守。
现代文：父亲库狄贞，任上洛郡太守。
English: Her father, Ku Di Zhen, became the governor of Luo County.

古文：峙少以弘厚知名，善骑射，有谋略。
现代文：库狄峙年少时以宽厚知名，擅长骑马射箭，富有计谋策略。
English: When he was young, Cudi was known for his generosity, excelled at horseback archery, and was full of cunning strategies.

古文：仕魏，位高阳郡守。
现代文：在魏做官，任高阳郡太守。
English: He worked as an official in Wei and served as the governor of Gaoyang County.

古文：为政仁恕，百姓颇悦之。
现代文：施政仁爱宽厚，百姓很喜欢他。
English: His policies are benevolent and generous, and the people like him very much.

古文：孝武西迁，峙乃弃官从入关。
现代文：孝武帝向西迁徙，库狄峙就舍弃官职跟随入关。
English: Emperor Xiaowu migrated to the west, and Cudi gave up his official position to follow him.

古文：大统元年，拜中书舍人，参掌机密，以恭谨见称。
现代文：大统元年，任中书舍人，参与掌管机密事务，以恭敬谨慎被称许。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he was appointed as a clerk, participated in the management of confidential affairs, and was praised for his respect and caution.

古文：迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：升任黄门侍郎。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Huangmen waiter.

古文：时与东魏争衡，戎马不息，蠕蠕乘虚，屡为边患。
现代文：当时与束魏争强斗胜，战争不停，蠕蠕族乘虚而入，屡次成为边防的忧患。
English: At that time, they were competing with the Shu Wei for supremacy, and the war was incessant. The Cree people took advantage of the situation and repeatedly became a worry for the border guards.

古文：朝议欲结和亲，乃使峙往。
现代文：朝廷商议想与之和睦相亲，就派遣库狄峙前往。
English: The imperial court wanted to have a friendly relationship with him, so they sent Ku Diwei to visit him.

古文：峙状貌魁梧，善于辞令。
现代文：库狄峙容貌魁梧，善于说话。
English: Cuddy is a burly, fast-talking man.

古文：蠕蠕主雅信重之，自是不复为寇。
现代文：蠕蠕族君主非常信任看重他，从此不再犯边。
English: The monarch of the Dem Dem people trusted and valued him very much, and from then on, he would no longer cross the border.

古文：太祖谓峙曰： 昔魏绛和戎，见称前史。
现代文：太祖告诉库狄峙说： 往昔魏绛与戎讲和，被前代历史称许。
English: The great-grandfather told Ku Diwei that: In the past, Wei Wei and Eun spoke of peace, which was praised by the previous history.

古文：以君方之，彼有愧色。 封高邑县公，邑八百户。
现代文：用你比拟他，他应有惭愧的神色。 封为高邑县公，食邑八百户。
English: He should be ashamed to be compared to you. He was made the county magistrate of Gaoyu County and served 800 households in Gaoyu.

古文：迁骠骑将军、岐州刺史，加散骑常侍，增邑二百户，开府仪同三司。
现代文：升骠骑将军、岐州刺史，加授散骑常侍，增加食邑二百户，开府仪同三司。
English: He was promoted to General of Horse Cavalry, Governor of Guizhou Province, and was awarded the Distinguished Cavalryman of the Year. He increased the number of restaurants by 200, and established the prefectural government with three divisions.

古文：恭帝元年，征拜侍中。
现代文：恭帝元年，征召授任为侍中。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Kyo, he was conscripted and appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：蠕蠕灭后，突厥强盛，虽与文帝通好，而外连齐氏。
现代文：蠕蠕族灭亡之后，突厥强盛，虽然与文帝往来交好，但是另外又与齐连结。
English: After the demise of the Cree, the Turks flourished. Although they had friendly relations with Emperor Wen, they also had ties with Qi.

古文：太祖又令峙衔命喻之。
现代文：太祖又命令犀狄峙奉命前往晓谕。
English: The great-grandfather also ordered the rhinoceros to go to the oracle.

古文：突厥感悟，即执齐使，归诸京师。
现代文：突厥受到感动而醒悟，立即逮捕了齐的使者，将他送归京师。
English: Moved and enlightened, the Turks immediately arrested Qi's envoy and sent him back to Beijing.

古文：录前后功，拜大将军、安丰郡公，邑通前二千户。
现代文：记录前后的功劳，授任大将军、安丰郡公，食邑通前二千户。
English: His achievements before and after the record were awarded the title of General, Anfeng County Governor, and the top 2,000 households in Shuyuridori.

古文：寻除小司空。
现代文：不久任小司空。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of junior steward.

古文：孝闵践阼，转小司寇。
现代文：孝闵帝登位，调任小司寇。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, and he was transferred to the position of Xiaosikang.

古文：世宗初，为都督益潼等三十一州诸军事、益州刺史。
现代文：世宗初年，任都督益潼等三十一州诸军事、益州刺史。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, he was appointed as the military governor of thirty-one states, including Iksan.

古文：峙性宽和，尚清静，甚为夷獠所安。
现代文：库狄峙性格宽厚温和，崇尚清静，蛮夷都感到非常安定。
English: Ku Diwei's personality is generous and gentle, advocating tranquility, and the barbarians all feel very stable.

古文：保定四年，除州刺史。
现代文：保定四年，授任宜州刺史。
English: In Baoding for four years, he was awarded the title of Yizhou stabbing history.

古文：天和三年，入为少师。
现代文：天和三年，召入为少师。
English: At the age of three, he was called up as a junior teacher.

古文：峙以年老，表乞骸骨，手诏许之。
现代文：库狄峙因为年老，上表请求退休，皇帝亲手下诏答应他。
English: Because of his old age, Cudi asked the emperor to retire, and the emperor personally granted his request.

古文：五年，卒。
现代文：五年，去世。
English: He died five years later.

古文：赠同州刺史。
现代文：追赠同州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the state sashimi record.

古文：谥曰定。
现代文：谧号为定。
English: The nickname is final.

古文：子嶷嗣。
现代文：儿子库狄嶷继承。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Kudia.

古文：少知名，起家吏部上士。
现代文：年少知名，由吏部上士起家做官。
English: Well-known from a young age, he started his career as a staff sergeant in the personnel department.

古文：历小内史、小纳言，授开府阶，迁职方中大夫，为蔡州刺史。
现代文：历任小内史、小纳言，授开府阶，升职方中大夫，任蔡州刺史。
English: Successively served as Xiaonai Shi, Xiaonagan, awarded the prefectural level, promoted to the position of Fangzhongdaifu, and served as the secretary of Caizhou.

古文：卒于官。
现代文：在官任上去世。
English: He died in office.

古文：子授嗣。
现代文：儿子库狄授继嗣。
English: His son Kudi succeeds him.

古文：杨荐字承略，秦郡宁夷人也。
现代文：杨荐字承略，是秦郡宁夷人。
English: Yang Wei is a native of Qin County, Ningyi.

古文：父宝，昌平郡守。
现代文：父亲杨宝，任昌平郡太守。
English: His father, Yang Bao, served as the governor of Changping County.

古文：荐幼孤，早有名誉。
现代文：杨荐年幼丧父，很早就有名声赞誉。
English: Yang Recommend lost his father at a young age, and gained fame and praise very early.

古文：性廉谨，喜怒不形于色。
现代文：性格廉洁谨慎，喜怒不在脸上表现出来。
English: His character is incorruptible and prudent, and his joy and anger do not show on his face.

古文：魏永安中，随尔朱天光入关讨群贼，封高邑县男。
现代文：魏永安年间，跟随尔朱天光入关讨伐群贼，封为高邑县男。
English: During the Wei and Yong'an dynasties, he followed Er Zhu Tianguang into the pass to fight the bandits, and was named the best man in Gaoyi County.

古文：文帝临夏州，补帐内都督。
现代文：文帝驾临夏州，补为帐内都督。
English: Emperor Wen rode to Linxia and became the new governor of the province.

古文：及平侯莫陈悦，使荐入洛阳请事。
现代文：到平定侯莫陈悦。派遣杨荐进入洛阳请示。
English: To Pingding Hou Mo Chen Yue. Send Yang Recommend to enter Luoyang and ask for instructions.

古文：魏孝武帝授文帝关西大行台，仍除荐直合将军。
现代文：魏孝武帝授任文帝为关西大行台，仍授杨荐为直合将军。
English: Emperor Xiaowu of the Wei Dynasty appointed Emperor Wen as the Kansai Da Xingtao, and still recommended Yang as the Zhihe general.

古文：时冯翊长公主嫠居，孝武意欲归诸文帝，乃令武卫元毘喻旨。
现代文：当时冯翊长公主寡居，孝武帝想将她嫁给文帝，就下令武卫元昆宣谕旨意。
English: At that time, Princess Feng Rong Chang was widowed, and Emperor Xiaowu wanted to marry her to Emperor Wen, so he ordered Emperor Wuwei to issue an edict.

古文：荐归白，文帝又遣荐入洛阳请之。
现代文：杨荐返归禀告，文帝又派遣杨荐进入洛阳请求。
English: Yang Recommend returned to obituary, and Emperor Wen sent Yang Recommend to Luoyang to make a request.

古文：孝武即许焉。
现代文：孝武帝立即答应。
English: Emperor Xiaowu immediately agreed.

古文：孝武欲向关中，荐赞成其计。
现代文：孝武帝想向关中进兵。杨荐赞成他的计划。
English: Emperor Xiaowu wanted to send troops to Guanzhong. Yang Xianlin agreed to his plan.

古文：孝武曰： 卿归语行台迎我。 
现代文：孝武帝说： 你回去告诉行台迎接我。 
English: Emperor Xiaowu said: You should go back and tell the emperor to meet me.

古文：文帝又遣荐与长史宇文测出关候接。
现代文：文帝又派遣杨荐与长史宇文测出关等候迎接。
English: Emperor Wen also sent Yang Rui and Changshi Yuwen to wait outside the gate to greet them.

古文：孝武至长安，进爵清水县子。
现代文：孝武帝到了长安，晋爵为清水县子。
English: Emperor Xiaowu arrived in Chang'an, and Prince Jin was born in Shimizu County.

古文：魏大统元年，蠕蠕请和亲。
现代文：魏大统元年，蠕蠕族请求和亲。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification of Wei and Qin Dynasties, the Demu-Chu people requested to be reunited.

古文：文帝遣荐与杨宽使，并结婚而还。
现代文：文帝派遣杨荐与杨宽为使者，与蠕蠕族结为婚姻而返回。
English: Emperor Wen sent Yang Xian and Yang Guang as envoys, and they married with the Demu-Demu people and returned.

古文：进爵为侯。
现代文：晋为侯爵。
English: He was promoted to marquis.

古文：又使荐纳币于蠕蠕。
现代文：又派遣杨荐到蠕蠕族交纳礼品。
English: He also sent Yang Ruian to the Cree Cree tribe to deliver gifts.

古文：魏文帝郁久闾后崩，文帝遣仆射赵善使蠕蠕更请婚。
现代文：魏文帝郁久闾后驾崩，文帝派遣仆射趟善出使蠕蠕族请求再结婚姻。
English: When Emperor Wen of Wei died after reigning for a long time, Emperor Wen sent an envoy to Geng to ask Geng to remarry.

古文：善至夏州，闻蠕蠕贰于东魏，欲执使者。
现代文：趟善到了夏州，听说蠕蠕族对束魏怀有贰心，想逮捕使者。
English: When Wuzhen arrived in Xiazhou, he heard that the Cree had a grudge against the Shu Wei and wanted to arrest the envoy.

古文：善惧，乃还。
现代文：趟善很害怕，就逃回来了。
English: Wisazen was very scared and ran back.

古文：文帝乃使荐往，赐黄金十斤、杂彩三百疋。
现代文：文帝又派遣杨荐前往，赏赐黄金十斤、杂色丝绸三百匹。
English: Emperor Wen also sent Yang Xian to reward him with ten catties of gold and three hundred pieces of motley silk.

古文：荐至蠕蠕，责其背惠食言，并论结婚之意。
现代文：杨荐到了蠕蠕族，责备他们忘恩失信，并谈论结为婚姻的意向。
English: Yang introduced himself to the Cree, scolded them for being ungrateful and untrustworthy, and discussed his intention to marry.

古文：蠕蠕感悟，乃遣使随荐报命焉。
现代文：蠕蠕族受到感动而醒悟，就派遣使者跟随杨荐回去覆命。
English: Moved and awakened, the Cree sent an emissary to follow Yang Rui back to his death.

古文：及侯景来附，文帝令荐与镇遏。
现代文：到侯景前来归附，文帝命令杨荐参与镇守遏制。
English: When Emperor Wen came to annex Houjing, he ordered Yang Jian to take part in the suppression of the townspeople.

古文：荐知景翻覆，遂求还，具陈事实。
现代文：杨荐知道侯景为人翻覆，就请求回来，全部陈述事情的实际情况。
English: Yang Recommend knew that Hou Jing was a ruffian, so he asked him to come back and give a full account of the actual situation.

古文：文帝乃遣使密追助景之兵。
现代文：文帝就派遣使者秘密追击帮助侯景的军队。
English: Emperor Wen sent an envoy to secretly pursue the army that helped Hou Jing.

古文：寻而景叛。
现代文：不久侯景背叛了。
English: Hou Jing soon defected.

古文：十六年，大军东讨。
现代文：十六年，大军往东征讨。
English: Sixteen years ago, a large army went to the East to fight.

古文：文帝恐蠕蠕乘虚寇掠，乃遣荐往更论和好，以安慰之。
现代文：文帝恐怕蠕蠕族乘虚进攻抢掠，就派遣杨荐前往再论和睦交好，以便安慰他们。
English: Emperor Wen was afraid that the Cree Cree people would take advantage of the false attack and loot, so he sent Yang Xian to talk about reconciliation and friendship again in order to comfort them.

古文：进使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加侍中。
现代文：进使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，加授侍中。
English: He was given the title of Jinzhi Jie, Zou Jie Da Gen, Kaifu Yi and Sanji, and was also awarded the title of Jizhong.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，除御伯大夫，进爵姚谷县公。
现代文：孝闵帝登位，任御伯大夫，晋爵为姚谷县公。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, he was appointed as the imperial uncle doctor, and he was promoted to the peerage as the governor of Yaogu County.

古文：仍使突厥结婚。
现代文：又出使突厥结为婚姻。
English: He also sent a Turk to marry her.

古文：突厥可汗弟地头可汗阿史那库头居东面，与齐通和，说其兄欲背先约。
现代文：突厥可汗的弟弟地头可汗阿史那库头居住在束面，与齐通和，劝说他的兄长想背弃以前的盟约。
English: The Turkic khan's younger brother, the local khan, Ashenakutov, who lived in Sokhumi, made peace with Tsitong and persuaded his brother to abandon the previous treaty.

古文：计谋已定，将以荐等送齐。
现代文：计谋已定，将要把杨荐等人送往齐。
English: The plan has been decided, and Yang Recommend and the others will be sent to the same place.

古文：荐知其意，乃正色责之，辞气慷慨，涕泗横流。
现代文：杨荐知道他的心意，就严正地责备他，言辞意气慷慨激昂，泪流满面。
English: Yang Xian knew his intention, so he sternly rebuked him, his words were impassioned, and his face was full of tears.

古文：可汗惨然良久曰： 幸无所疑，当共平东贼，然后发遣我女。 乃令荐先报命，仍请东讨。
现代文：可汗心情凄惨了很久，说： 好在没有什么可疑虑的，应当共同平定束方的贼寇，然后嫁出我的女儿。 就下令杨荐先回去覆命，再请求向东征讨。
English: Khan was in a gloomy mood for a long time and said, "Fortunately, there are no suspicious concerns, we should jointly quell the bandits in Shukou, and then marry off my daughter." He ordered Yang Ruiqi to go back and die first, and then ask for a campaign to the East.

古文：以奉使称旨，迁大将军。
现代文：因为奉命出使符合皇帝意旨，升为大将军。
English: Because he was ordered to send an envoy in accordance with the emperor's wishes, he was promoted to general.

古文：保定四年，又纳币于突厥。
现代文：保定四年，又到突厥交纳礼品。
English: After four years in Baoding, he went to Turkestan again to receive gifts.

古文：还，行小司马，又行大司徒。
现代文：返回之后，代理小司马，又代理大司徒。
English: After returning, he acted as a proxy for Little Sima, and also as a proxy for Big Sita.

古文：从陈公纯等逆女于突厥，进爵南安郡公。
现代文：跟随陈公宇文纯等人到突厥迎接公主，晋爵为南安郡公。
English: Chen Gong, Wu Wenzhong and others went to Turku to meet the princess, and Jinjie became the governor of Nan'an County.

古文：天和三年，迁总管、梁州刺史。
现代文：天和三年，升总管、梁州刺史。
English: Tianhe three years, Sheng general manager, Liangzhou stabbing history.

古文：后以疾卒。
现代文：后来因病去世。
English: At that time, powerful, rich and noble families were all competing to be the most luxurious and gorgeous.

古文：赵刚字僧庆，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：赵刚字僧庆，是河南洛阳人。
English: Zhao Gangzhi Sengqing is from Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：曾祖蔚，魏并州刺史。
现代文：曾祖赵蔚，任魏并州刺史。
English: Zengzu Zhao Wei served as Wei and state history.

古文：祖宁，高平太守。
现代文：祖父赵宁，任高平太守。
English: Zhao Ning's grandfather, Gao Ping, was appointed as the de facto ruler.

古文：父和，太平中，陵江将军，南讨度淮，闻父丧，辄还。
现代文：父亲趟和，太平年间，任陵江将军，往南征讨，渡过淮河，听到父亲的死讯，就回来了。
English: During the Taiping era, my father was appointed as the general of the Lingjiang River, went to the south to fight, crossed the Huai River, heard the news of my father's death, and came back.

古文：所司将致之于法，和曰： 罔极之恩，终天莫报。
现代文：主管官员将要按法治罪，赵和说： 父母的恩情，如天之久远无法报答。
English: The responsible official will be punished according to the rule of law, Zhao He said: The parents' kindness can not be repaid for a long time.

古文：若许安厝，礼毕而即罪戮，死且无恨。 言讫号恸，悲感傍人。
现代文：如果允许安葬，丧礼完毕，就判罪杀头，我死也没有遗憾。 说完号哭悲伤，悲痛感动旁边的人。
English: If I am allowed to be buried and the funeral is over, I will be convicted of beheading, and I have no regrets about my death.

古文：主司以闻，遂宥之。
现代文：主管官员把这些情况上报，就原谅了他。
English: The officer in charge reported the situation and forgave him.

古文：丧毕，除宁远将军。
现代文：丧礼完毕，任宁远将军。
English: After the funeral, General Ningyuan retired.

古文：大统初，追赠右将军、胶州刺史。
现代文：大统初年，追赠右将军、胶州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, the Right General and Jiaozhou Sashimi were posthumously awarded.

古文：刚少机辩，有干能。
现代文：赵刚年少时机敏善辩，很有才干能力。
English: At a young age, Zhao Gang was quick-witted, good at arguing, and very talented.

古文：起家奉朝请。
现代文：由奉朝请起家做官。
English: If you'd like to serve the Emperor, go ahead.

古文：累迁镇东将军、银青光禄大夫，历大行台郎中、征东将军，加金紫阶，领司徒府从事中郎，加合内都督。
现代文：屡经升迁为镇束将军、银青光禄大夫，历任大行台郎中、征束将军，加授金紫阶，兼领司徒府从事中郎，加授合内都督。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the position of Zhenzoku general, silver Qingguanglu doctor, successively held the positions of Daigongdaira junior, Zhezushu general, awarded the gold and purple rank, concurrently served as the leader of the Jiuzu Prefecture, and awarded the position of Inner Governor.

古文：及魏孝武与齐神武构隙，刚密奉旨召东荆州刺史冯景昭率兵赴阙。
现代文：到魏孝武帝与齐神武帝感情上有了裂痕，趟刚秘密奉旨召束荆州刺史冯景昭带兵奔赴京师。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu and Emperor Qi Shenwu had a rift in their feelings, so Emperor Wei secretly summoned Feng Jingzhao, the governor of Jingzhou, to lead the troops to Beijing.

古文：未及发，而神武已逼洛阳，孝武西迁。
现代文：尚未来得及出发，神武帝已逼近洛阳，孝武帝只好向西迁徙。
English: Before they could leave, Emperor Shenwu was already approaching Luoyang, and Emperor Xiaowu had no choice but to migrate west.

古文：景昭集府僚文武，议其去就。
现代文：冯景昭召集同僚文武官员，商议去向。
English: Feng Jingzhao called together his colleagues, military and civilian officials, to discuss his future.

古文：司马冯道和请据州待北方处分。
现代文：司马冯道和提议占据束荆州等待北方吩咐。
English: Sima Feng road and proposed to occupy a bunch of Jingzhou waiting for the North ordered.

古文：刚曰： 公宜勒兵赴行在所。 
现代文：趟刚说： 你应该带兵奔赴天子所在的地方。 
English: Watanaga said, "You should lead an army to the place where the Son of Heaven is."

古文：久之更无言者。
现代文：过了很久再没有发言的人。
English: People who haven't spoken in a long time.

古文：刚抽刀投地曰： 公若为忠臣，可斩道和；如欲从贼，可见杀。 
现代文：趟刚抽出刀丢在地上说： 您如果做忠臣，可以杀死冯道和；如果想跟随贼寇。
English: He just took out his sword and threw it on the ground and said, "If you are a loyal subject, you can kill Feng Daowu; if you want to follow the bandits, you can follow the bandits."

古文：景昭感悟，遂率众赴关右。
现代文：可以杀我。 冯景昭受到感动有所醒悟，就带领部众奔赴关右。
English: Feng Jingzhao was deeply moved and led his army to Guanzhong.

古文：属侯景逼穰城，东荆州人杨祖欢等起兵应景，以其众邀景昭于路。
现代文：适逢侯景逼近穣城，束荆州人杨圭噬等人起兵接应退，用他的徒众在路上拦截冯景昭。
English: When Hou Jing was approaching Lucheng, Yang Gui Zha, a man from Shu Jing Prefecture, and others took up arms to fight back, using his followers to intercept Feng Jing Zhao on the road.

古文：景昭战败，刚遂没于蛮。
现代文：冯景昭战败，龃就沦没在蛮。
English: In a strategic defeat, Zhao Gang was captured by the barbarians.

古文：后自赎免。
现代文：后来自己赎身免罪。
English: He later pardoned himself.

古文：乃见东魏东荆州刺史李魔怜，劝令归关西。
现代文：就拜见束魏束荆州刺史李魔怜，规劝他归附关西。
English: He paid a visit to Sok Wei Sok Jing Zhou Zhishi Li Maoli and persuaded him to annex Kansai.

古文：魔怜纳之，使刚至并州密观事势。
现代文：李魔怜采纳了他的意见，派遣赵则到韭业秘密观察事情的形势。
English: Li Maorai accepted his opinion and sent Zhao Zeng to secretly observe the situation of the matter.

古文：神武引刚内宴，因令刚赍书申敕荆州。
现代文：神武帝带领趟剧参加宫内宴会，于是下令赵刚送书信告诫荆丛。
English: Emperor Shenwu led the troupe to attend a banquet at the palace, so he ordered Zhao Gang to send a letter of admonition to Jing Cong.

古文：刚还报魔怜，仍说魔怜斩祖欢等，以州归西。
现代文：趟刨返回报告奎庐垡，又劝说奎庐垡斩杀扰担趑等人，以塞垄咖归附翘西。
English: He went back to report to Qui Xuan, and persuaded Qui Xuan to kill the troublemakers and others, and return to the west.

古文：魔怜乃使刚入朝。
现代文：奎驰就派遣趟剧入朝。
English: Kuichi sent a play into the morning.

古文：大统初，刚于霸上见太祖，具陈关东情实。
现代文：左铲初年，卷刚在灵上拜见左担，具体陈述飓束的实际情况。
English: In the first year of the left shovel, the volume just visited the left shoulder in the spirit, specifically stating the actual situation of the hurricane bundle.

古文：太祖嘉之，封阳邑县子，邑三百户，除车骑将军、左光禄大夫。
现代文：太祖嘉奖他，封为阳邑县子，食邑三日产，授车骑将军、左光禄大夫。
English: The great-grandfather awarded him, and he was named the son of Yangyi County, the three-day production of food in Yangyi County, the general of carriage and cavalry, and the doctor of the left light.

古文：论复东荆州功，进爵临汝县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：评定收复束荆州的功劳，升爵为临汝县伯，食邑五百户。
English: He was promoted to the peerage of Lin Ryu County for his contribution to the recovery of Jingzhou, with 500 households in his hometown.

古文：初，贺拔胜、独孤信以孝武西迁之后，并流寓江左。
现代文：起初，贺送塍、独孤信在茎亘嬷往西迁徙之后，一起在辽左寄寓他乡。
English: At first, He Baxing and Du Guoxin were both exiled to the Yangtze River area after moving west due to Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：至是刚言于魏文帝，请追而复之。
现代文：到这个时候，趟刚向魏塞童进言，请求追回他们，恢复他们的官职。
English: By this time, I had just spoken to Wei Seidong, requesting to recover them and restore their official positions.

古文：乃以刚为兼给事黄门侍郎，使梁魏兴，赍移书与其梁州刺史杜怀宝等论邻好，并致请胜等移书。
现代文：就任命趟剑为兼给事黄门侍郎，出使梁国魏兴，送上官方文书给凿业刺史丛趋等人商议睦邻友好，并传达请求贺拔胜等人北归的官方文书。
English: He appointed Tong Jian as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, sent an envoy to Liang Guo Wei Xing, and sent an official document to the people of Jianye Zhishu Congcheng to discuss good-neighborly and friendly relations, and conveyed an official document requesting He Bansheng and others to return to the north.

古文：宝即与刚盟歃，受移赴建康，仍遣行人随刚报命。
现代文：杜坏宣立即与壁删歃血结盟，接受官方文书送往建尘，仍派遣使者跟随趟刚覆命。
English: Du Bad Xuan immediately made an alliance with Qian Qian, accepted the official document sent to Jian Chen, and still sent an envoy to follow the trip.

古文：是年，又诏刚使三荆，听在所便宜从事。
现代文：这一年，又下诏趟剑出使三荆，听任所到之处小待上奏，自行决断处置。
English: In the same year, the imperial court ordered him to travel to the Three Thorns, and he was allowed to take his camera with him wherever he went.

古文：使还，称旨，进爵武城县侯，除大丞相府帐内都督。
现代文：出使返回，符合皇帝的意旨，升爵为武越题堡，授大丞相府帐内都督。
English: The envoy returned, in line with the emperor's will, was promoted to the nobility as the Wu Yue Qi Fort, and was awarded the title of grand chancellor of the cabinet.

古文：复使魏兴，重申前命。寻而梁人礼送贺拔胜、独孤信等。
现代文：又出使魏兴，重新申明前次的命令不久梁人以礼节送回贺拔胜、独孤信等人。
English: Wei Xing was also dispatched to re-affirm the previous order, and soon the Liang people sent back He Baxing, Du Guoxin and others with courtesy.

古文：顷之，御史中尉董绍进策，请图梁汉。
现代文：不久，御史中尉童鲤进奏策言，请求图谋梁汉。
English: Not long after, Mishi's lieutenant Tong Hao-jin made a speech, asking Liang Han to join the plot.

古文：以绍为行台、梁州刺史，率士马向汉中。刚以为不可，而朝议已决，遂出军。
现代文：任命董绉为行台、梁州刺史，带领人马奔向曲趟剧认为不能这样做，但朝廷的商议已经决定，就出师了。
English: He thought it was not possible to appoint Dong Xuan as the governor of Xingtai and Liangzhou as the governor of Liangzhou, leading the people and horses to rush to the opera, but the deliberation of the imperial court had already been decided, and he became a teacher.

古文：诏竟无功而还，免为庶人。除刚颍川郡守，加通直散骑常侍、卫大将军。
现代文：董绍终于没有成果而返回，被免为平民，授塑则为堕上岖太守，加授通直散骑常侍、卫大将军。
English: Dong Shao finally returned without any results, and was exempted from being a commoner. He was awarded the title of "fallen and promoted to the highest echelon of provincial governors," and was also awarded the title of "straight-line horseman" and "general of the garrison."

古文：从复弘农。
现代文：跟随收复了丛崖。
English: Following the recovery of the jungle cliff.

古文：进拜大都督、东道军司，节度开府李延孙等七军，攻复阳城，擒太守王智纳。
现代文：升任大都督、束道军司，节制调度开府奎至鳄等七军，进攻收复了阳城，活捉太守王智纳。
English: He was promoted to the position of the great governor and the military commander of Sokudo Province. He controlled the movement of seven armies, including Kaifu Kui and Kwaku. He attacked and recaptured Yangcheng, and captured Daju Wang Zhina alive.

古文：转陈留郡守。
现代文：调任陈留郡太守。
English: Transferred to the position of Chenrui County Governor.

古文：东魏行台吉宁率众三万攻陷郡城，刚突出，还保颍川，重行郡事。
现代文：东魏行台吉宁带兵三万人攻陷郡城，趟刚突围而出，退保颖川，重新代行郡中事务。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Jining led 30,000 soldiers to capture the county seat, and just after breaking out of the encirclement, withdrew to Bao Yingchuan and resumed acting for the county middle school affairs.

古文：复为侯景所破，乃率余众赴洛阳。
现代文：又被侯景攻破，就带领剩下的兵众奔赴洛阳。
English: He was defeated again by Hou Jing and led the remaining soldiers to Luoyang.

古文：大行台元海遣刚还郡征粮。时景众已入颍川，刚于西界招复阳翟二万户，转输送洛。
现代文：大行台元海派遣趟刚回郡征收粮食、当时侯景的部队已经进入颖川，趟刚在西部的边界上招集收复阳翟两万户，转送到洛。
English: At that time, Hou Jing's troops had already entered Yingchuan, and he had just summoned and collected twenty thousand households in Fuyang County on the western border and transferred them to Luo.

古文：明年，洛阳不守。
现代文：第二年，洛阳失守。
English: The following year, Luoyang was defeated.

古文：刚远隔敌中，连战破东魏广州刺史李仲侃。
现代文：趟刚远隔在敌人之中，连续作战打败束魏广州刺史李仲儡。
English: He was separated from the enemy by a long distance, and continuously fought to defeat Wei, Guangzhou, and Li Zhongjiao.

古文：时侯景别帅陆太、颍川郡守高冲等众八千人，寇襄城等五郡。
现代文：当时侯景的别帅陆太、颖川郡太守高冲等部众八千人，侵犯襄城等五郡。
English: At that time, there were eight thousand people, including Luta, the second-in-command of Houjing, and Gaochong, the governor of Yingchuan County, who invaded five counties including Xiangcheng.

古文：刚简步骑五百，大破冲等。
现代文：赵刚挑选步兵骑兵五百人，大败高冲等人。
English: Zhao Gang selected 500 infantry and cavalry and defeated Gaochong and others.

古文：开府李延孙为长史杨伯简所害，刚击斩之。
现代文：开府李延孙被长史杨伯简杀害，趟刚攻击杀死了杨伯简。
English: Li Yansun, the governor of Kaifu, was killed by Yang Bojan, the chief of Shi, who attacked and killed Yang Bojan.

古文：又攻拔广州，进军阳翟。
现代文：又攻下广州，进军阳翟。
English: He also captured Guangzhou and marched into Yangtze River.

古文：侯景自邺入鲁阳，与刚接战。
现代文：侯景从邺进入鲁阳，与赵刚交战。
English: Hou Jing entered Luyang from Handan and fought with Zhao Gang.

古文：旬有三日，旋军宜阳。
现代文：相持十三日，接着驻扎在宜阳。
English: On the 13th, he was stationed in Yiyang.

古文：时河南城邑，一彼一此。
现代文：当时河南的城邑，一时归这个人，一时归那个人。
English: At that time, the cities and towns in Henan Province belonged to one person at a time.

古文：刚复出军伊、洛，侯景亦度河筑城。
现代文：赵刚又出师到伊、洛，侯景也渡河筑城。
English: Zhao Gang also went to Italy and Luo, and Hou Jing also crossed the river to build a city.

古文：刚前后下景三郡，获郡守一人，别破其行台梅迁，斩首千余级。
现代文：赵刚先后攻下侯景三郡，俘获郡守一人，另外打败他的行台梅迁，斩首一千多级。
English: Zhao Gang successively captured three counties of Houjing, captured one county governor, and defeated another county governor, Gang Tai Mei Qian, beheading more than a thousand people.

古文：除尚书金部郎中。
现代文：授任尚书金部郎中。
English: He was appointed as a junior high school student of Shosho Kinbe.

古文：高仲密以北豫州来附，兼大行台左丞，持节赴颍川节度义军。
现代文：高仲密以北豫州来归附，兼任大行台左丞，持节杖奔赴颖川节制调度义军。
English: Gao Zhongmi came from North Henan Province to join the rebels, and concurrently served as the left assistant commander of the Grand Marching Band. He rushed to Yingchuan with a staff to control and dispatch the rebels.

古文：师还，刚别破侯景前驱于南陆，复获其郡守二人。
现代文：军队回还，赵刚另外在南陆打败侯景的前锋，又俘获他的郡守两人
English: Zhao Gang was appointed the governor of Beichuan County. He defeated Hou Jing's vanguard troops in Nanlu and captured two of his governors.

古文：时有流言传刚东叛，齐神武因设反间，声遣迎接。
现代文：当时有流言传说趟刚向东背叛，齐神武帝趁机设下反问计，声称派人迎接。
English: At that time, there was a rumor that he had just betrayed the East, and Emperor Qishenwu took the opportunity to set up a counter-inquiry, claiming to send someone to meet him.

古文：刚乃率骑袭其下坞，拔之，露板言状。
现代文：赵刚就带领骑兵袭击齐国的下坞，攻下了它，用不封缄的文书说明情况。
English: Zhao Gang led the cavalry to attack the lower dock of Qi, captured it, and used an unsealed document to explain the situation.

古文：太祖知刚无贰，乃加赏赉焉。
现代文：太祖知道赵刚没有贰心，就加以赏赐。
English: The great-grandfather knew that Zhao Gang didn't have the heart to do it, so he rewarded him.

古文：除营州刺史，进爵为公，增邑二百户，加大都督、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
现代文：授任营州刺史，晋为公爵，增加食邑二百户。加授为人都督、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍
English: He was awarded the title of Yingzhou Shishi, promoted to Duke, and increased the number of households by 200 households. He was also awarded the title of People's Governor, General of Cavalry, Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, and General of Cavalry.

古文：州民郑五丑构逆，与叛羌傍乞铁匆相应，令刚往镇之。
现代文：渭州人郑五丑造反，与叛逆羌傍乞铁忽互相呼应。下令趟刚前往镇压。
English: Zheng Wuxiu, a native of Zhangzhou, rebelled, which was echoed by the traitor Zhou Binlian. He ordered his troops to go and suppress the rebellion.

古文：将发，魏文帝引见内寝，举觞属刚曰： 昔侯景在东，为卿所困。
现代文：将要出发，魏文帝在内室召见趟刚，举起酒杯嘱咐赵刚说： 往昔侯景在东面，被您围困。
English: When he was about to leave, Emperor Weiwen met him in the Inner Court, raised his glass and said to him: In the past, Hou Jing rebelled in the east and was besieged by you.

古文：黠羌小竖，岂足劳卿谋虑也。 时五丑已克定夷镇，所在立栅。
现代文：狡猾的羌入小子，哪襄值得烦劳您谋虑呢! 当时郑五丑已攻克定夷镇，所到之处树立栅栏。
English: At that time, Zheng Wuxu had already conquered Dingyi Town and set up fences everywhere he went.

古文：刚至，并攻破之，散其党与。
现代文：赵刚到达，一起攻破了他们，解散他的党徒。
English: After Zhao Gang arrived with his army, he broke all of his strongholds and disbanded his party.

古文：五丑于是西奔铁匆。
现代文：郑五丑于是往西投奔铁忽。
English: Zheng Wuqiu then rushed to the west.

古文：刚又进破铁匆伪广宁郡。
现代文：趟刚又进军攻破铁忽的伪广宁郡。
English: They have just marched into the pseudo-Guangning County to break through the Iron Curtain.

古文：属宇文贵等西讨，诏以刚行渭州事，资给粮饩。铁匆平，所获羌卒千人，配刚军中，教以戎旅，皆尽其力用。
现代文：适逢宇文贵等人向西征讨，下韶任命赵刚代理渭州事务，资助供给粮食，铁忽被平定，俘获羌人士兵一千人，分配到趟刚的军队中，用军事教育他们，都尽他们的力量加以使用。
English: At the same time that Wu Wengui and others went to the west to recruit, Zhao Gang was appointed by the Lower Yangtze as the agent of Yanzhou affairs to subsidize the supply of grain. The Iron Curtain was suddenly pacified, and a thousand soldiers of the Yangtze people were captured and assigned to the troops of the Western Yangtze. They were given military education and used to the best of their ability.

古文：加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，入为光禄卿。
现代文：升骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，召入任光禄卿。
English: Zheng Wuxiu fled westward and went to Pancheng. Zhao Gang led the army westward and broke through Guangning County, which was hastily established by Pancheng.

古文：六官建，拜膳部中大夫。
现代文：六官建立，授任膳部中大夫。
English: The imperial court ordered Yu Wengui and others to continue the Westernization, and ordered Zhao Gang to perform the duties of the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，进爵浮阳郡公。
现代文：孝闵帝登位，晋爵为浮阳郡公。
English: Emperor Xiaoyan ascended to the throne, and Jinjie became the governor of Fuyang County.

古文：出为利州总管、利沙方渠四州诸军事。
现代文：出任利州总管、利沙方渠四州诸军事。
English: He was appointed as the chief administrator of Lishu and the military of the four states of the Lisha Canal.

古文：沙州氐恃险逆命，刚再讨服之。
现代文：沙州氐人倚仗险阻违背命令，赵刚两次征讨使他们归服。
English: The people of Shazhou were reluctant to disobey the order, and Zhao Gang twice forced them to submit.

古文：方州生獠自此始从赋役。
现代文：方州的僚人，从此开始交赋服役。
English: Fangzhou's colleague has since begun his military service.

古文：刚以伪信州滨江负阻，远连殊俗，蛮左强犷，历世不宾，乃表请讨之。
现代文：趟刚认为伪信州濒临长江，背负险阻，远连不同的习俗，蛮夷强横粗犷，经历多世也不服从，就上表请求讨伐他们。
English: As soon as I thought that the hypocritical states were on the edge of the Yangtze River, burdened with dangers, far away from different customs, barbaric, strong, rude, and disobedient after many lifetimes, I asked the table to fight them.

古文：诏刚率利沙等十四州兵，兼督仪同十人、马步一万往经略焉。
现代文：下诏赵刚率领利沙等十四州的军队，另督促仪同十人、骑兵步兵一万人前往策划治理。
English: In the following edict, Zhao Gang led the troops of fourteen states, including Lisha, and urged Yi and ten people, as well as ten thousand cavalry and infantry, to go to plan and govern.

古文：仍加授渠州刺史。
现代文：于是任命其为渠州刺史。
English: As a result, he was appointed as Quzhou chief historian.

古文：刚初至，渠帅惮其军威，相次降款。
现代文：赵刚初到，部落酋长害怕他的军威，一个接一个地投降顺服。
English: When Zhao Gang first arrived, the tribal chiefs were afraid of his military prowess and surrendered one after another.

古文：后以刚师出踰年，士卒疲弊，寻复亡叛。
现代文：后来因为赵刚出师超过了一年，兵士疲劳困苦，不久又逃亡叛变。
English: Later, because it had been more than a year since Zhao Gang had left the division, the soldiers were exhausted and distressed, and they soon fled and mutinied.

古文：后遂以无功而还。
现代文：后来终于没有成果而回。
English: He eventually returned without any results.

古文：又与所部仪同尹才失和，被征赴阙。
现代文：又与所管辖的仪同尹才不和，被征召回朝。
English: He also fell out with Yin Cai, the eunuch under his jurisdiction, and was called back to the imperial court.

古文：遇疾，卒于路。
现代文：遇上疾病，在路上去世。
English: He fell ill and died on the way.

古文：年五十七。
现代文：终年五十七岁。
English: He was fifty-seven years old.

古文：赠淅涿三州刺史。
现代文：追赠中淅涿三州刺史。
English: A posthumous gift from the Central Academy of Fine Arts of the Three Provinces.

古文：谥曰成。
现代文：谧号为成。
English: 号成.

古文：子元卿嗣。
现代文：儿子趟元卿继嗣。
English: His son, Watamoto-kyo, became his successor.

古文：王庆字兴庆，太原祁人也。
现代文：王庆字兴庆，是太原祁人。
English: Wang Qingzhe Xingqing is a Taiyuan native.

古文：父因，魏灵州刺史、怀德县公。
现代文：父亲王因，任魏灵州刺史、怀德县公。
English: His father, Wang Yin, served as the governor of Weiling Prefecture and the governor of Huai De County.

古文：庆少开悟，有才略。
现代文：王庆年少时很有悟性，很有才干和谋略。
English: When he was young, Wang Qingnian was very insightful, very talented and strategic.

古文：初从文帝征伐，复弘农，破沙苑，并有战功，每获殊赏。
现代文：起初跟随文帝征伐，收复弘农，攻破沙苑，都有战功，常常获得特殊的奖赏。
English: At the beginning, they followed Emperor Wen's conquest, recovered Hongnong, and broke through Shayuan, all of which were war exploits, and often won special awards.

古文：大统十年，授殿中将军。
现代文：大统十年，授任殿中将军。
English: In the tenth year of the Great Unification, he was awarded the title of General of the Palace.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，晋公护引为典签。
现代文：孝闵帝登位，晋公字文护引荐为典签。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, and Jin Gong's signature was the word "Wen Guo" (文護).

古文：庆枢机明辨，渐见亲待。
现代文：王庆明辨事物的关键，逐渐被作为亲信看待。
English: Wang Qingming, the key to distinguishing things, was gradually seen as a close confidant.

古文：授大都督。
现代文：授任大都督。
English: He was appointed Grand Governor.

古文：武成元年，以前后功，赐爵始安县男。
现代文：武成元年，凭藉前后功劳，赐爵为始安县男。
English: In the first year of Wu Cheng, he was awarded a knighthood as the man of Shi'an County on the basis of his past and present merits.

古文：二年，行小宾部。
现代文：二年，代理小宾部。
English: Two years, acting as a guest.

古文：保定二年，使吐谷浑，与共分疆，仍论和好之事，浑主悦服，遣所亲随庆贡献。
现代文：保定二年，出使吐谷浑，与他一起划分疆土，仍商议和睦交好的事宜。窿谷浑的君主心悦诚服，派遣他的亲信跟随王庆进贡。
English: In the second year of Baoding, he sent an envoy, Tu Guhun, to divide the territory with him, and still discussed the matter of friendly relations. The monarch of Tu Guhun was pleased and sent his cronies to follow Wang Qing to pay tribute.

古文：初，突厥与周和亲，许纳女为后。
现代文：起初，突厥与周联姻，答应送女儿作为皇后。
English: At first, Turku and Zhou married and promised to send their daughter as the empress.

古文：而齐人知之，惧成合从之势，亦遣使求婚，财馈甚厚。
现代文：但齐人知道这件事后，害怕形成联合之势，也派遣使者前来求婚，赠送的财物很丰厚。
English: However, after the Qi people knew about this, they were afraid of forming a union, and they also sent an envoy to propose marriage. The gifts were very rich.

古文：突厥贪其重赂，便许之。
现代文：突厥贪图齐的众多礼物，就答应了齐。
English: Turk coveted Qi's many gifts and agreed to Qi.

古文：朝议以魏氏昔与蠕蠕结婚，遂为齐人离贰。
现代文：朝廷议论认为魏氏往昔与蠕蠕结为婚姻，就被齐人离间产生贰心。
English: The imperial court argued that the Wei clan had been married to the Cree in the past, and it was caused by the separation of Qi people.

古文：今者复恐改变，欲遣使结之。
现代文：现今又恐怕有改变，想派遣使者交结突厥。
English: Now, I am afraid, there is a change and they want to send an envoy to meet the Turks.

古文：遂授庆左武伯，副杨荐为使。
现代文：就授王庆为左武伯，佐助杨荐作为使者。
English: On this occasion, Wang Qing was awarded the title of Zuo Wubo, and Sasuke Yang was recommended as an envoy.

古文：是岁，遂兴入并之役。
现代文：这一年，就发动了进入并的战役。
English: In the same year, the campaign to join the Union was launched.

古文：庆乃引突厥骑，与随公杨忠至太原而还。
现代文：王庆就带领突厥的骑兵，与随公杨忠到太原而回。
English: Wang Qing led the Turkic cavalry and followed Yang Zhong back to Taiyuan.

古文：以齐人许送皇姑及世母，朝廷遂与通和。
现代文：因为齐人答应送回皇姑及伯母，朝廷就与其来往交好。
English: Because the Qi people promised to send back the imperial aunt and aunt, the imperial court made friends with them.

古文：突厥闻之，复致疑阻，于是又遣庆往喻之。
现代文：突厥听到这个消息，又产生了疑虑阻隔，于是又派遣王庆前往开导他。
English: When the Turks heard this news, they had doubts again, so they sent Wang Qing to enlighten him.

古文：可汗感悦，结好如初。
现代文：可汗感动喜悦，交结友好如同当初一般。
English: Khan was touched with joy, and the friendship continued as usual.

古文：五年，复与宇文贵使突厥逆女。
现代文：五年，又与宇文贵出使突厥迎接公主。
English: Five years later, he and Umenoki sent an envoy to Turkey to greet the princess.

古文：自此，以庆信着北蕃，频岁出使。
现代文：从此，因为王庆在北番信用卓著，多年出使。
English: Since then, because Wang Qing has outstanding credit in Beipan, he has been dispatched for many years.

古文：后更至突厥，属其可汗暴殂，突厥谓庆曰： 前后使来，逢我国丧者，皆剺面表哀。
现代文：后来又到突厥，适逢其可汗突然死亡，突厥对王庆说： 前后使者来到，遇上我们国丧的，都割面流血，表示哀痛。
English: Later, he went to Turkestan, which coincided with the sudden death of its khan. Turkestan said to Wang Qing: Envoys came back and forth, and those who met with the death of our country all cut their faces and bled to express their grief.

古文：况今二国和亲，岂得不行此事。 
现代文：况且现今两国联姻，难道能不实行这种做法吗? 王庆严辞拒绝。
English: Moreover, now that the two countries are united, can this practice not be implemented? Wang Qing refused to do so.

古文：庆抗辞不从，突厥见其守正，卒不敢逼。武帝闻而嘉之。
现代文：突厥看见他坚守正道，终于不敢相逼。武帝听到逭件事，就嘉奖他。
English: When the Turks saw that he was sticking to the right path, they finally dared not to force him. When Emperor Wu heard about this, he praised him.

古文：录庆前后使功，迁开府仪同三司、兵部大夫，进爵为公。
现代文：记录王庆前后出使的功劳，升为开府仪同三司、兵部大夫，晋为公爵。
English: Records the merits of the envoys sent by Wang Qing before and after, he was promoted to Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, Hyobu Doctor, and promoted to Duke.

古文：历丹、中二州刺史。
现代文：历任丹、中两州刺史。
English: Successive Dan, middle and two states have made history.

古文：为政严肃，吏不敢欺。
现代文：施政严谨而有法度，官吏不敢相欺。
English: The government is strict and lawful, and officials do not dare to deceive each other.

古文：大象元年，授小司徒，加上大将军、总管汾石二州五镇诸军事、汾州刺史。
现代文：大象元年，授小司徒，加授上大将军、总管途石二州五镇诸军事、汾州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Elephant, he was awarded the title of Junior Scholar, and was also awarded the title of Senior General, and was in charge of the military of the five towns of the two states and the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：又除延州总管，进位柱国。
现代文：又授任延州总管，晋为柱国。
English: He was also appointed as the Governor of Yanzhou and promoted to a pillar state.

古文：开皇元年，进爵平昌郡公。
现代文：开皇元年，晋爵为平吕郡公。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, Jinjie became the governor of Pinglu County.

古文：卒于镇。
现代文：在节镇上去世。
English: Illness in the balance of the season made the appointment.

古文：赠上柱国，谥曰庄。
现代文：追赠上柱国，谧号为庄。
English: He was posthumously awarded Shangzhu Province, and his posthumous name was Zhuang.

古文：子淹嗣。
现代文：儿子王淹继嗣。
English: His son Wang Wan succeeded him.

古文：赵昶字长舒，天水南安人也。
现代文：赵昶字垦鱼，是玉丛直玉人。
English: Zhao Yongzhi, a carp, is a jade cluster straight jade person.

古文：曾祖襄，仕魏至中山郡守，因家于代。
现代文：曾祖叠速，在魏做官到中山郡太守，于是在伐安家。
English: Zengzu Jianfa, in Wei, was an official to the governor of Zhongshan County, so he was in the Fahuan family.

古文：祖泓，广武令。
现代文：祖父赵逊，任卢武令。
English: His grandfather, Zhao Xiong, was a military commander.

古文：父琛，上洛郡守。
现代文：父亲产遮，任上盗锂太守。
English: His father was born in Zhaozhou, and he was appointed the governor of Zhaozhou.

古文：昶少聪敏，有志节。
现代文：赵昶年少时聪明机敏，很有志向气节。
English: When he was young, Zhao Wei was smart and quick-witted. He was very ambitious.

古文：弱冠，以材力闻。
现代文：二十岁，以勇力闻名。
English: Twenty years old, famous for his bravery.

古文：孝昌中，起家拜都督，镇小平津。
现代文：孝昌年间，由都督起家做官，镇守小平津。
English: During the reign of Takamasa, he rose from the position of governor to that of town guard of Kodaira-tsu.

古文：魏北中郎将高千甚敬重之。
现代文：毯北中郎将直工非常敬重他。
English: He was held in high esteem by the general manager of the Northern Carpet Company.

古文：千牧兖州，以昶行临涣、北梁二郡事。
现代文：壶干任蛮塑刺史，任命叠邀代理监逸、韭梁两郡的政事。
English: Jucang was appointed to supervise the political affairs of the two counties of Yiyu and Qiliang.

古文：大统初，千还镇陕，又以昶为长史、中军都督。
现代文：大铲初年，产王返回镇守肿，又任命趟塑为长史、中军都督。
English: In the first year of the big shovel, the king of production returned to the town guard of the swamp, and appointed Watanabe as the long history, the Chinese military governor.

古文：太祖平弘农，擢为相府典签。
现代文：太祖平定弘农，升为相府典签。
English: The great-great-grandfather, Hirasada Hirono, was promoted to the post of Sangu.

古文：大统九年，大军失律于邙山，清水氐酋李鼠仁自军逃还，凭险作乱。
现代文：大统九年，大军在邙山失利，清水氐人酋长李鼠仁从军队中逃跑回来，凭藉险阻作乱。
English: In the ninth year of the Great Reunification, the great army was defeated in Lushan, and the chief of the Qingshui people, Li Ruiren, ran away from the army and returned to cause trouble by taking advantage of the danger.

古文：陇右大都督独孤信频遣军击之，不克。
现代文：陇右大都督周巫值多次派遣军队攻击他，没有取胜。
English: Zhou Wuzhen, the right-wing governor, repeatedly sent troops to attack him, but failed to win.

古文：太祖将讨之，欲先遣观其势。
现代文：赵旦将要讨伐他，想先派人观察他的形势。
English: Zhao Dan is going to fight him and wants to send someone to observe his situation first.

古文：顾问谁可为。
现代文：顾视询问谁可以出使。
English: Gu Si inquired who could be dispatched.

古文：左右莫对。
现代文：左右的人没有人回答。
English: They looked at each other in surprise, not knowing what to say.

古文：昶曰： 此小竖尔，以公威，孰不听命。 太祖壮之，遂令昶使焉。
现代文：赵面说： 造不过是小子而已，凭藉您的神威，谁敢不听从命令。 太祖认为他的话很雄壮，就下令圭选出使。
English: Zhao Mian said, "He is just a boy, but with your authority, who would dare to disobey an order?" Grandfather thought his words were very powerful, so he ordered Gui to choose an envoy.

古文：昶见鼠仁，喻以祸福。
现代文：毒巡见到奎勇迄，用祸福的道理开导他。
English: The poisons inspector went as far as seeing Qui Yong, and enlightened him with the truth of misfortune and fortune.

古文：群凶聚议，或从或否。
现代文：群凶聚集商议，有的听从，有的不听从。
English: A group of thugs gathers to discuss, some obey, some disobey.

古文：其逆命者，复将加刃于昶。
现代文：那些违抗命令的人，又想用刀剑杀害趟昶。
English: Those who disobeyed the order also wanted to use swords to kill wabi-sabi.

古文：而昶神色自若，志气弥厉。
现代文：但赵昶神色不变，志气更加振奋。
English: But Zhao Yao's expression remained unchanged, and his spirit was even more uplifted.

古文：鼠仁感悟，遂相率降。
现代文：李鼠仁受到感动而醒悟，就带领兵士投降。
English: Li Ruiren was moved to wake up and led the soldiers to surrender.

古文：氐梁道显叛，攻南由。
现代文：氐人梁道显叛乱，进攻南由。
English: Liang Daoxian rebelled and attacked Nanyu.

古文：太祖复遣昶慰谕之，道显等皆即款附。
现代文：太祖又派遣赵昶慰问开导他，梁道显等人都立即诚心归附。
English: The great-grandfather also sent Zhao Jun condolences to enlighten him, and Liang Daoxian and others immediately sincerely adhered.

古文：东秦州刺史魏光因徙其豪帅四十余人并部落于华州，太祖即以昶为都督领之。
现代文：东秦州刺史魏光趁此迁徙他的豪帅四十多人并部落到华州，太祖立即任命赵昶为都督统率他们。
English: The Eastern Qin statesman Shi Wei Guang took advantage of this to migrate more than forty of his generals and tribes to Huazhou, and the great-grandfather immediately appointed Zhao Jun as the governor to lead them.

古文：先是，汾州胡叛，再遣昶慰劳之，皆知其虚实。
现代文：在此之前，汾州胡人叛乱，又派遣赵昶慰问犒劳他们，都知道了他们的虚实。
English: Prior to this, the Hu people of Zhangzhou rebelled, and Zhao Jun sent condolences to them, and they all knew their falsity and truth.

古文：及大军往讨，昶为先驱，遂破之。
现代文：到大军前往征讨，赵昶为先锋，就打败了他们。
English: When a large army went to fight, Zhao Wei, as the vanguard, defeated them.

古文：以功封章武县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：凭藉功劳封为章武县伯，食邑五百产。
English: He was awarded the title of Zhangwu County's Hero with Meritorious Service, and produced 500 food products.

古文：十五年，拜安夷郡守，带长蛇镇将。
现代文：十五年，任安夷郡太守，兼长她镇将。
English: For fifteen years, he served as the governor of Anyi County, and also served as the mayor of her town.

古文：氐族荒犷，世号难治，昶威怀以礼，莫不悦服。
现代文：氐族荒远猛悍，世人号称难以治理，赵昶按照礼节威德并用，没有人不心悦诚服。
English: The Yao people are wild and fierce, and the world claims that they are difficult to govern. Zhao Yao uses both etiquette and wisdom, and no one is offended.

古文：期岁之后，乐从军者千余人。
现代文：一年之后，乐于参加军队的有一千多人。
English: A year later, more than a thousand people were willing to join the army.

古文：加授帅都督。
现代文：升任帅都督。
English: Promoted to Shuai Tudoku.

古文：时属军机，科发切急，氐情难之，复相率谋叛。
现代文：当时适逢军中有机要之事，摊派征发很迫切紧急，氏人情理上很难做到，又相继谋划叛乱。
English: At that time, it coincided with an organic and important matter in the army. It was urgent and urgent to assign and conscript soldiers, which was difficult to do in a rational manner, and they successively plotted a rebellion.

古文：昶又潜遣诱说，离间其情，因其携贰，遂轻往临之。
现代文：赵昶又暗中派人诱导劝说，离间他们的感情，趁他们渐生离心，就轻装前往到达他们那儿。
English: Zhao Wei also secretly sent people to induce and persuade, to separate their feelings, to take advantage of their gradual detachment, and to travel lightly to reach them.

古文：群氐不知所为，咸来见昶。
现代文：众多的氐人不知怎么办，都来拜见赵昶。
English: Not knowing what to do, many people came to visit Zhao Yao.

古文：乃收其首逆者二十余人斩之，余众遂定。
现代文：就逮捕那些带头谋反的二十多人杀死他们，其余的人就安定了。
English: They arrested the more than twenty people who led the rebellion and killed them, and the rest of the people were stabilized.

古文：朝廷嘉之，除大都督，行南秦州事。
现代文：朝廷嘉奖他，授任大都督，代理南秦州政事。
English: The imperial court commended him and appointed him as the grand governor, acting as the leader of Southern Qin politics.

古文：时氐帅盖闹等反，昶复讨擒之。
现代文：当时氐帅盖闹等人谋反，赵昶又讨伐活捉了他。
English: At that time, Zou Shuaikai and others were plotting a rebellion, and Zhao Wei captured him alive.

古文：进抚军将军，加通直散骑常侍，又与史宁破宕昌羌、獠二十余万。
现代文：升抚军将军，加授通直散骑常侍。又与史宁打败宕昌羌、签二十多万人。
English: He was promoted to the rank of General of the General Staff, and was awarded the title of General of the Horse Cavalry. He and Shi Ning defeated Tang Changyu, and more than two hundred thousand people signed up.

古文：拜武州刺史、车骑大将军、仪同三司、诸州军事。
现代文：授武州刺史、车骑大将军、仪同三司、诸州军事。
English: He was awarded the Military History of Wuzhou, the General of Cavalry and Cavalry, the Three Departments of Military Affairs, and the Military of Zhuzhou.

古文：魏恭帝初，加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：魏恭帝初年，加授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wei Gong, he was awarded the title of General of the Horse Cavalry and the title of Grand Marshal of the People's Republic of China.

古文：潭水羌叛，杀武陵、潭水二郡守。
现代文：潭水羌人叛乱，杀害武陵、潭水二郡太守。
English: The people of Tansui rebelled and killed the governors of Wuling and Tansui counties.

古文：昶率仪同骆天釜等骑步五千讨平之。
现代文：赵昶率领仪同骆天义等骑兵步兵五千人讨伐平定他们。
English: Five thousand cavalry and infantry soldiers led by Zhao Jun fought with Luo Tianyi and others to subdue them.

古文：世宗初，凤州人仇周贡、魏兴等反，自号周公，有众八千人。
现代文：世宗初年，凤州人仇周贡、魏兴等人谋反，自称周公，有徒众八千人。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, the people of Fengzhou plotted a rebellion against Zhou Gong, Wei Xing, and others, calling themselves Zhou Gong, with a total of eight thousand followers.

古文：破广化郡，攻没诸县，分兵西入，围广业、修城二郡。
现代文：攻破广化郡，攻陷各县，分兵向西进攻，包围广业、修城二郡。
English: They broke through Guanghua County, conquered all counties, attacked westward, surrounded Guangye, and rebuilt two counties.

古文：广业郡守薛爽、修城郡守杜杲等请昶为援。
现代文：广业垫太守坚塞、修越邓太守拄呈等人请求垄趟援救。
English: Guangye Mat Tai Shou Jian Ce, Xiu Yue Deng Tai Shou Jian and others requested a rescue.

古文：昶遣使报杲，为周贡党樊伏兴等所获。
现代文：赵昶派遣使者回覆杜呆，被仇周贡的党羽樊优兴等俘获。
English: Zhao Yu sent an envoy to reply to Du Dun, but he was captured by the enemies of Zhou Gong, such as Zou Youxing.

古文：兴等知昶将至，解修城围，据泥功岭，设六伏以待昶。
现代文：矾丛兴等人知道趟垦将要来到，就解除修城的包围，占据泥功岭，设下六处伏兵来等待趟赵。
English: Zou Congxing and others knew that the parade was coming, so they lifted the siege of the city, occupied Mud Gongling, and set up six ambushes to wait for the parade.

古文：昶至，遂遇其伏，合战，破之。
现代文：趟越来到，就遇上伏兵，双方交战，打败了他们。
English: When they arrived, they were ambushed, engaged, and defeated.

古文：广业之围亦解。
现代文：广业的包围也解除了。
English: The siege of Guangye was also lifted.

古文：昶追之至泥阳川而还。
现代文：赵昶追击到泥阳就返回了。
English: Zhao Wei chased it into the mud and then returned.

古文：兴州人段咤及氐酋姜多复反，攻没郡县，昶讨斩之。
现代文：兴州人段吒及氐酋姜多又谋反，攻陷郡县，赵昶征讨杀了他们。
English: The Xingzhou people, Duan Yu and the Yao chief, Jiang Duo, again plotted a rebellion and invaded the county. Zhao Bingzheng fought and killed them.

古文：语在氐传。
现代文：记录的文字在《氏传》。
English: The recorded words are in the "Heritage."

古文：昶自以被拔擢居将帅之任，倾心下士。
现代文：赵昶自己认为被提拔充当将帅的重任，全心谦恭地对待贤士。
English: Zhao Wei himself believed that being promoted to be a general was an important task, and he treated the wise men humbly and wholeheartedly.

古文：虏获氐、羌，抚而使之，皆为昶尽力。
现代文：俘获氐、羌百姓，安抚并使用他们，他们都为趟昶尽力。
English: They captured, pacified, and used the people, and they did their best to get rid of them.

古文：太祖常曰： 不烦国家士马而能威服氐、羌者，赵昶有之矣。 至是，世宗录前后功，进爵长道郡公，赐姓宇文氏，赏劳甚厚。
现代文：太祖经常说： 不烦劳国家人马而能以威力使氐、羌归附的，赵昶有这样的功劳。 到此，世宗记录前后功劳，晋爵为长道郡公，赐姓宇文氏，赏赐犒劳非常丰厚。
English: The great-great-grandfather often said: "If you do not bother the country's people and horses, but can use your power to make the yang and yang subordinate, Zhao Yu has such a merit. To this end, the dynasty records the merits before and after, the prince is the governor of Changdao County, the surname is Uwen, and the reward is very rich.

古文：二年，征拜宾部中大夫，行吏部。
现代文：二年，召入拜授宾部中大夫，代理吏部。
English: Two years later, he was called up to be a junior doctor in the visiting guest department, acting as the head of the administrative department.

古文：寻以疾卒。
现代文：不久因病去世。
English: He died of illness shortly afterwards.

古文：王悦字众喜，京兆蓝田人也。
现代文：王悦字众喜，是京兆蓝田人。
English: Wang Yuezi Zongxi is from Beijing-Shanghai-Lantian.

古文：少有气干，为州里所称。
现代文：年少时有才干，被家乡的人所称道。
English: He was praised by the village for his talent since childhood.

古文：魏永安中，尔朱天光西讨，引悦为其府骑兵参军，除石安令。
现代文：魏永安年间，尔朱天光向西征讨，引荐王悦为其官府的骑兵参军，授任五安县令。
English: During the Wei and Yong'an dynasties, Er Zhu Tianguang went to the west to recruit, recommended Wang Yue to join the cavalry of his government, and was awarded the position of Wu'an County Commander.

古文：太祖初定关、陇，悦率募乡里从军，屡有战功。
现代文：太祖刚平定关、陇，王悦率领招募的家乡人参军，屡次立有战功。
English: The great ancestor Gang Ping Ding Guan and Gong, Wang Yue led the recruitment of hometown people to join the army, and repeatedly made war achievements.

古文：大统元年，除平东将军、相府刑狱参军，封蓝田县伯，邑六百户。
现代文：大统元年，任干束将军、相府刑狱参军，封为蓝田县伯，食邑六百户。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he joined the army as a general of Gansu and a prison warden of Shoufu, and was given the title of the governor of Lantian County, with 600 households in Shuei.

古文：四年，东魏将侯景攻围洛阳，太祖赴援。
现代文：四年，束魏将领侯景进攻包围洛阳，太祖前往救援。
English: Four years later, Sok Wei attacked and besieged Luoyang, and Taizu went to the rescue.

古文：悦又率乡里千余人，从军至洛阳。
现代文：王悦又率领家乡一千多入，从军到洛阳。
English: Wang Yue also led more than a thousand people from his hometown to join the army and go to Luoyang.

古文：将战之夕，悦磬其行资，市牛飨战士。
现代文：将要交战的前夕，王悦用尽他出门所带钱财，买牛款待战士。
English: On the eve of the impending battle, Wang Yue spent all the money he had brought with him to buy cattle to entertain the soldiers.

古文：乃战，悦所部尽力，斩获居多。
现代文：到了交战的时候，王悦的部队竭尽全力，斩首俘获居多。
English: When it came to fighting, Wang Yue's troops did their best, and most of the captives were beheaded.

古文：六年，加通直散骑常侍，迁大行台右丞。
现代文：六年，加授通直散骑常侍，升大行台右丞。
English: In the sixth year, he was promoted to the rank of a regular attendant of the Imperial Cavalry, and was promoted to the rank of Grand Marshal.

古文：十年，转左丞。
现代文：十年，改任左丞。
English: Ten years later, he was reassigned to the position of Sojo.

古文：久居管辖，颇获时誉。
现代文：长期处于机要的地位，颇能获得当时的称誉。
English: In the 13th year of the Great Reunification, Hou Jing surrendered Henan Province to the Western Wei Dynasty and requested the dispatch of troops.

古文：十二年，齐神武亲率诸军围玉壁，大都督韦孝宽拒守累旬，敌方引退。
现代文：十二年，齐神武帝亲自率领各军包围玉壁，大都督韦孝宽拒敌防守几十曰，敌军才退兵。
English: In the twelfth year, Emperor Qishenwu personally led the armies to encircle the Jade Wall, and the great governor Wei Xiaokuan refused to defend the enemy for dozens of days. Only then did the enemy army retreat.

古文：朝廷以宽勋重，遣尚书长孙绍远为大使，悦为副使，劳问宽等，并校定勋人。
现代文：朝廷认为韦孝宽功勋高，派遣尚书长孙绍远为大使，王悦为副使，犒劳慰问韦孝宽等人，并考核审定立功的入。
English: The imperial court considered Wei Xiaokang to be highly meritorious, dispatched Sun Shaoyuan, the head of Shangshu, as ambassador, and Wang Yue as deputy envoy, paid tribute to Wei Xiaokang and others, and examined and approved the entry of meritorious service.

古文：十三年，侯景据河南来附，仍请兵为援。
现代文：十三年侯景占据河南前来归附，仍请派军队作为援助。
English: Hou Jing, who had occupied Henan for 13 years, came to annex it, but still asked for troops to be sent as assistance.

古文：太祖先遣韦法保、贺兰愿德等帅众助之。
现代文：太祖先派遣韦法保、贺兰愿德等人率领部队援助他。
English: Emperor Taizong sent Wei Fa Bao, Horan Jide and others to lead the troops to help him.

古文：悦言于太祖曰： 侯景之于高欢，始则笃乡党之情，末乃定君臣之契，位居上将，职重台司，论其分义，有同鱼水。
现代文：王悦向太祖进言说： 侯景对于高欢，开始时就有深厚的同乡之情，最后又确定了君臣之间的意气相合，官位居于上将，职位重在台司，评论他们之间的情分义气，有着如同鱼水一般的关系。
English: Wang Yue made a suggestion to the great-grandfather, saying: "Hou Jing had a deep hometown feeling for Gao Huan at the beginning, and finally determined the spirit of harmony between the monarchs and ministers. The official rank was the admiral, and the position was the director, and he commented on the feelings and loyalty between them, and they had a relationship like fish and water.

古文：今欢始死，景便离贰。
现代文：现今高欢刚死，侯景就离心怀有异志。
English: Now that Gao Huan has just died, Hou Jing has a different vision.

古文：岂不知君臣之道有亏，忠义之礼不足？
现代文：他难道不知道有亏于忠臣之道、不足于忠义之礼吗?
English: Doesn't he know that it is not enough to be a loyal subject, not enough to be loyal?

古文：盖其所图既大，不恤小嫌。
现代文：大概是他谋划的目标很大，所以不顾虑小的嫌疑。
English: He was probably planning something big, so he didn't care about minor suspicions.

古文：然尚能背德于高氏，岂肯尽节于朝廷。
现代文：但他尚且能对高氏背叛恩德，难道肯对朝廷尽节吗?
English: But he could still betray his gratitude to Gao, would he be able to break his promise to the imperial court?

古文：今若益之以势，援之以兵，非唯侯景不为池中之物，亦恐朝廷贻笑将来也。 太祖纳之，乃遣行台郎中赵士宪追法保等，而景寻叛。
现代文：现今如果用势力加强他，用军队支援他，不衹是侯景不会成为池中之物受到控制，也恐怕朝廷给将来留下笑柄。 太祖采纳了他的意见，就派遣行台郎中趟士宪追回韦法保等人，果然侯景不久就叛乱了。
English: Today, if we strengthen him with power and support him with troops, then Hou Jing will not be controlled, and I am afraid that the imperial court will leave a laughing stock in the future. The great-grandfather adopted his opinion, and sent the middle-ranking official Han Xian to recover Wei Fa Bao and others. As expected, Hou Jing soon rebelled.

古文：十四年，授雍州大中正、帅都督，加卫将军、右光禄大夫、都督。
现代文：十四年，授任壅蛆大中正、帅都督，加授卫将军、右光禄大夫、都督。
English: In the 14th year, he was awarded the titles of Senior Vice-President of the University of Shandong, Senior Governor of Shandong Province, Senior Vice-Admiral of Shandong Province, Senior Vice-Admiral of Shandong Province, Senior Vice-Admiral of Shandong Province, and Senior Governor of Shandong Province.

古文：率所部兵从大将军杨忠征随郡、安陆，并平之。
现代文：率领部下跟随大将军圭眯征讨堕登、岂堕，一起平定了两地。
English: He led his subordinates to follow the great general Gui Xuan to fight against the rise and fall, and together they pacified the two places.

古文：时悬兵深入，悦支度路程，勒其部伍，节减粮食。
现代文：当时孤军深入敌境，王悦计算路程，约束他的部下，节省减少粮食。
English: At that time, a lone army penetrated deep into the enemy territory. Wang Yue calculated the distance, restrained his subordinates, saved and reduced grain.

古文：及至竟陵，诸军多有匮乏，悦出禀米六百石分给之。
现代文：等到了竟陵，各军多缺乏粮食，王坦拿出储藏的米六百石分给他们。
English: By the time they reached Jingling, most of the troops were short of food, so Wang Tan took out 600 kilos of stored rice and gave it to them.

古文：太祖闻而嘉焉。
现代文：太祖听说逭件事就嘉奖他。
English: When the great-grandfather heard about this, he praised him.

古文：寻拜京兆郡守，加使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍，迁大行台尚书。
现代文：不久授任京兆郡太守，加授使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍，升大行台尚书。
English: He was soon appointed the governor of Jingzhao County, and was also awarded the title of Jizhixing, the general of chariot and cavalry, the three departments of ceremony and etiquette, and the attendant of horseback riding, and was promoted to the rank of Gaotai Shangshu.

古文：又领所部兵从达奚武征梁汉。
现代文：又率领部下士兵跟随达奚武征讨梁汉。
English: He also led his subordinate soldiers to follow Dajin to conquer Lianghan.

古文：军出，武令悦说其城主杨贤。
现代文：大军出发，达墨茎下令垄区劝说城主荡竖。
English: The great army set out, and Damo ordered the ridge district to persuade the lord of the city to stand up.

古文：悦乃贻之书曰： 夫惟德是辅，天道之常也；见机而作，人事之会也。
现代文：旦区就送书信给圭疆说： 辅佐有德之人，是天道的规律；看见时机再行动，是人事的机会。
English: Danzhong District sent a letter to Guizhong, saying: "It is the law of heaven to support virtuous people; it is a personnel opportunity to see the opportunity and then act.

古文：梁主内亏刑政，外阙藩篱。
现代文：梁主国内亏缺刑罚和政令，外面缺乏守卫。
English: There is a shortage of punishments and decrees in the country, and a lack of guards outside.

古文：匹夫攘袂，举国倾覆。
现代文：平民奋起，全国倾覆。
English: Civilians rose up and the whole country was overthrown.

古文：非直下民离心，抑亦上玄所弃。
现代文：不衹是下民离心，也是上天所抛弃。
English: No, it is the people who are off-centered, and it is also abandoned by God.

古文：我相公膺千龄之运，创三分之业，道洽区中，威振方外。
现代文：我相公秉承千年的时运，创立天下三分的基业，道行在区域内和洽，威震远方。
English: Adhering to the thousand-year time fortune, we have established the world's three-point foundation, and the Taoism is harmonious in the region and powerful in the distance.

古文：声教所被，风行草偃；兵车所指，云除雾廓。
现代文：声威和教化所到达的地方，风行草偃；兵车所指向的地方，云消雾散。
English: Where the voice of authority and the edification of the people reach, the grasshopper will flourish; where the chariot points, the clouds will dissipate.

古文：斯固天下所共闻，无俟二谈也。
现代文：这本来是天下人所共同听到的，不必等待谈论两次。
English: It was meant to be heard by the whole world, not to be talked about twice.

古文：大将军高阳公，韫韬略之秘，总熊罴之旅，受脤庙堂，威怀巴汉。
现代文：大将军直阳公，蕴藏用兵谋略的秘密，统率壮如熊熊的军队，在朝廷上接受祭肉，在巴还威德并用。
English: The great general Naoyang contains the secret of using military strategy, leading a strong army, receiving sacrificial meat at the imperial court, and using it in the restoration of Ba Weide.

古文：先附者必赏，后服者必诛。
现代文：先归附的人必有奖赏，后降服的人必有责罚。
English: Whoever surrenders first will be rewarded, and whoever surrenders last will be punished.

古文：君兵粮既寡，救援路绝。
现代文：您军粮已经很少，救援的道路已经断绝。
English: Your rations are running low, and the road to rescue has been cut off.

古文：欲守，则城池无萦带之险；欲战，则士卒有土崩之势。
现代文：想防守，但城池没有垣环水抱的险阻；想交战，但士兵有土崩瓦解的形势。
English: They want to defend, but the city is not surrounded by walls and surrounded by water; they want to fight, but the soldiers are in a state of collapse.

古文：以此求安，未见其可。
现代文：凭藉这些求得安全，不见得是可行的。
English: It is not always possible to achieve security by these means.

古文：昔韩信背项，前典以为美谈；黄权归魏，良史称其盛烈。
现代文：往昔韩信背弃项羽，以前的典籍认为是人们乐于称道的好事；黄权归附魏国，优秀的史官称道他的盛大功业。
English: In the past, Han Xin turned his back on Xiang Yu, and the previous classics believed that it was a good thing that people were happy to praise; Huang Quan was attached to Wei, and excellent historians praised his great achievements.

古文：事有变通，今其则也。 贤于是遂降。
现代文：事情有随宜变更，现今是效法的时候了。 杨贤于是就投降了。
English: Things have changed, and now is the time to follow suit. Yang Xian then capitulated.

古文：悦白武云： 白马要冲，是必争之地。
现代文：王恒禀告达奚武说： 皇屋处于交通紧要之处，是兵家必争之地。
English: Wang Hengxuan told Dagongwu: The imperial palace is located in a critical traffic area and is a place where soldiers must fight.

古文：今城守寡弱，易可图也。
现代文：现今城池的防守兵少力弱，容易圆谋。
English: Now the Liang army defending the city is few and weak, and it is easy to take.

古文：若蜀兵更至，攻之实难。 武然之，令悦率轻骑七百，径趣白马。
现代文：如果蜀兵又来到，攻打他们实在困难。 达奚武认为说得对，下令王悦率领轻骑七百人，直奔白马。
English: If the Shu soldiers came again, it would be very difficult to attack them. Dadu Wu thought he was right and ordered Wang Yue to lead seven hundred light cavalrymen straight to Baima.

古文：悦先示其祸福，其将梁深遂以城降。
现代文：王悦先向他们指出灾祸和幸福的关系，守城的将领梁深就献城投降。
English: Wang Yue first pointed out to them the relationship between disaster and happiness, and the general of the city's defenders, Liang Sheng, surrendered the city.

古文：梁武陵王纪果遣其将任奇率步骑六千，欲先据白马。
现代文：梁武陵王萧纪果然派遣他的将领任奇率领步兵骑兵六千人，想抢先占据白马。
English: King of Liangwuling, Xiao Ji, sent his general to lead the infantry cavalry of six thousand people, hoping to occupy the White Horse first.

古文：行次阙城，闻已降，乃还。
现代文：行军到阙城，听到梁深已经投降，于是回去了。
English: They marched to Lucheng and heard that Liang Sheng had surrendered, so they went back.

古文：及梁州平，太祖即以悦行刺史事。
现代文：到了梁州乎定，太祖立即任命王悦代理刺史之事。
English: When he arrived at Liangzhou Khuding, the great ancestor immediately appointed Wang Yue as the deputy to assassinate him.

古文：招携初附，民吏安之。
现代文：安抚刚刚归附的人，百姓官员都很安定。
English: To appease the newly annexed people, the people's officials are very stable.

古文：魏废帝二年，征还本任。
现代文：魏废帝二年，征入返就本任。
English: In the second year of the Wei Dynasty, he was conscripted and returned to his original post.

古文：属改行台为中外府，尚书员废，以仪同领兵还乡里。
现代文：适逢改行台为中外府，尚书员被废，以仪同的身份带兵返回家乡。
English: With the change of station to Zhonggaifu, Shang Shucai was abolished, and he returned to his hometown as a soldier with the same identity.

古文：悦既久居显职，及此之还，私怀怏怏。
现代文：王悦已经长期居于显贵的官职，到逭时回乡，私下怀有不服气。
English: Wang Yue has been in a prominent official position for a long time. When he returned to his hometown at the end of his life, he was privately dissatisfied.

古文：犹陵驾乡里，失宗党之情。
现代文：他还凌驾于乡里之上，失去了宗族的情谊。
English: He still dominates the countryside and has lost the affection of his clan.

古文：其长子康，恃旧望，遂自骄纵。
现代文：他的长子王康，依仗其世家望族，就自己骄横放纵。
English: His eldest son Wang Kang, relying on his family's prestige, arrogantly indulged himself.

古文：所部军人，将有婚礼，康乃非理凌辱。
现代文：部下军人，将有婚礼，王康却无理欺凌侮辱。
English: His subordinate soldiers will have a wedding, but Wang Kang is unreasonably bullying and insulting.

古文：军人诉之。
现代文：军人投诉他。
English: Military personnel filed a complaint against him.

古文：悦及康并坐除名，仍配流远防。
现代文：王悦及王康一起连坐除名，并发配流放到远方的边防。
English: Wang Yue and Wang Kang were jointly removed from their posts and exiled to a distant frontier.

古文：及于谨伐江陵，平，悦从军展效，因留镇之。
现代文：等于谨讨伐江陵，平定了，王悦参军效力，于是留下他镇守。
English: Wang Yue joined the army and served as a town guard, which was tantamount to fighting for the right to cut down the Ganges.

古文：孝闵践阼，依例复官。
现代文：孝闵帝登位，依照惯例恢复官职。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne and resumed his official duties in accordance with the usual practice.

古文：授郢州。
现代文：授任郢州刺史。
English: He was awarded the title of the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：寻拜使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大都督、司水中大夫，进爵蓝田县侯。
现代文：不久拜使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、大都督、司水中大夫，晋爵为蓝田县侯。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the position of envoy, grand general of cavalry, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, grand governor, and sub-prefect of Sisui, and was given the title of prince of Lantian County.

古文：迁司宪中大夫，赐姓宇文氏，又进爵河北县公。
现代文：升为司宪中大夫，赐姓宇文氏，又晋爵为河北县公。
English: He was promoted to the position of Sikan Junior Doctor, given the surname of Uwen, and promoted to the rank of Hebei County Commissioner.

古文：悦性俭约，不营生业，虽出入荣显，家徒四壁而已。
现代文：王悦性格俭省节约，不经营谋生之业，虽然出入为官荣华显贵，但家中贫乏。
English: Wang Yue's character is frugal and thrifty, and he does not run a business to earn a living. Although he is a high-ranking official, his family is poor.

古文：世宗手敕劳勉之，赐粟六百石。
现代文：世宗亲手下诏慰劳勉励他，赐粟六百石。
English: Sejong's own men encouraged him and gave him 600 koku of millet.

古文：保定元年，卒于位。
现代文：保定元年，在官位上去世。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he died in office.

古文：康嗣。
现代文：儿子王康继嗣。
English: His son Wang Kang succeeded him.

古文：官至司邑下大夫。
现代文：官做到司邑下大夫。
English: The official became a doctor in the magistrate's office.

古文：赵文表，其先天水西人也，后徙居南郑。
现代文：趟文表，他的祖先是天水西人，后来迁居亩郑。
English: His ancestor was a Westerner from Tianshui who later moved to Mu Zheng.

古文：累世为二千石。
现代文：世代为俸禄二千石的大官。
English: Generations of high-ranking officials with a salary of 2,000 koku.

古文：父江，性方严，有度量。
现代文：父亲赵江，性格方正严肃，很有气度器量。
English: The father, Zhao Jiang, is a serious character and has a lot of stamina.

古文：历官东巴州刺史、计部中大夫、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、御伯中大夫，封昌国县伯。
现代文：历任东巴州刺史、计部中大夫、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、御伯中大夫，封为昌国县伯。
English: He held the posts of Dongba Prefecture chief historian, junior doctor of the Department of Statistics, grand marshal of the imperial cavalry, secretary of the Kaifu Rites and Ceremonies, and junior doctor, and was awarded the title of Shangguo County magistrate.

古文：赠虞绛二州刺史，谥曰贞。
现代文：追赠虞、绛二州刺史，谧号为贞。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of "Yu" and was awarded the title of "Zhishi" in two states. His posthumous name was Zhen.

古文：文表少而修谨，志存忠节。
现代文：赵文表年少时修身严谨，志向存有忠心气节。
English: When he was young, Zhao Wenbiao was self-disciplined and rigorous, and his ambition was to be loyal.

古文：便弓马，能左右驰射。
现代文：擅长骑射，能够左右奔驰射箭。
English: He is good at shooting from horseback and can shoot arrows from both sides.

古文：好读左氏春秋，略举大义。
现代文：喜好阅读《左氏春秋》，能粗略地说明大义。
English: Like to read "Zao's Spring and Autumn," can roughly explain the meaning.

古文：起家为太祖亲信。
现代文：由太祖亲信起家做官。
English: His great-grandfather Kinshin started the family as a government official.

古文：魏恭帝元年，从开府田弘征山南，以功授都督。
现代文：魏恭帝元年，跟随开府旦旦征讨山南，以功任都督。
English: In the first year of Wei Gong Emperor, he followed Kaifu to conquer Shannan and was appointed as the governor.

古文：复从平南巴州及信州，迁帅都督。
现代文：又跟随平定南巴州及信州，升为帅都督。
English: He also followed the pacification of Nanba Prefecture and Shinshu, and was promoted to be the supreme governor.

古文：又从许国公宇文贵镇蜀，行昌城郡事。
现代文：又跟随许国公宇文贵镇守蜀地，代理昌城郡政事。
English: He also followed Xu Guogongwu to Wengui Town to defend Shu, and acted as the representative of Changcheng County.

古文：加中军将军、左金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：加授中军将军、左金紫光禄大夫。
English: He was also awarded the title of General of the Chinese Army and the title of Doctor of the Left Gold and Purple Star.

古文：保定元年，除许国公府司马，转大都督。
现代文：保定元年，授任许国公府司马，改任大都督。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was appointed as the secretary of the provincial government of Xu Province, and was reappointed as the grand governor.

古文：五年，授畿伯下大夫。
现代文：五年，授任畿伯下大夫。
English: Five years later, he was appointed as a junior doctor of Kibo.

古文：又为许国公府长史。
现代文：又任许国公府长史。
English: He was also appointed as the chief historian of Kogoku-fu.

古文：寻拜车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：不久拜为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to General of Chariot and Cavalry and the Third Division of Cavalry.

古文：仍从宇文贵使突厥，迎皇后，进止仪注，皆令文表典之。
现代文：仍跟随宇文贵出使突厥，迎接皇后，举止的礼法制度，都下令趟文表掌管。
English: He still followed Uwengui in dispatching envoys to Turkey, greeted the empress, and ordered the etiquette system to be in charge of the schedule.

古文：文表斟酌而行，皆合礼度。
现代文：趟文表商讨考虑，以定取舍，然后行动，都符合礼节制度。
English: It is in line with the etiquette system to discuss and consider the application form, make a decision, and then act.

古文：及皇后将入境，突厥托以马瘦，行除。
现代文：到皇后将进入国境，突厥以马瘦作为托辞，行动缓慢。
English: When the Empress will enter the border, the Turks will use the thin horse as an excuse and move slowly.

古文：文表虑其为变，遂说突厥使罗莫缘曰： 后自发彼藩，已淹时序，途经沙漠，人马疲劳。
现代文：赵文表担心有变，就劝说突厥使者罗莫缘说： 皇后从突厥出发，已经很长时间了，途中经过沙漠，人马疲劳。
English: Fearing a change, Zhao Wenbai persuaded the Turkic emissary, Romo Yuan, to say: "It has been a long time since the empress set out from the Turks. On the way, she passed through the desert, and the men and horses were tired.

古文：且东寇每伺间隙，吐谷浑亦能为变。
现代文：况且束部的强寇经常窥伺间隙，吐谷浑也能制造变乱。
English: Moreover, Sokube's powerful mugger often spies on the gaps, and Tukigun can also create chaos.

古文：今君以可汗之爱女，结姻上国，曾无防虑，岂人臣之体乎。 莫缘然之，遂倍道兼行，数日至甘州。
现代文：现今您以可汗的爱女，与上国结为婚姻，竟然毫无预防的考虑，难道是人臣的体统吗? 罗莫缘认为他说得对，就兼程而行，数日到了甘州。
English: Now you are marrying the beloved daughter of Khan to Shangguo without any precautionary consideration, is it the style of a vassal? Romo Yuan thought he was right, so he made a side trip and arrived in Ganzhou a few days later.

古文：以迎后功，别封伯阳县伯，邑六百户。
现代文：因为迎接皇后有功，另封为伯阳县伯，食邑六百户。
English: Because of the meritorious service of welcoming the empress, another award was given to six hundred households in Bojang County.

古文：天和三年，除梁州总管府长史。
现代文：天和三年，任梁州总管府长史。
English: He served as the governor of Liangzhou for three years.

古文：所管地名恒陵者，方数百里，并生獠所居，恃其险固，常怀不轨。
现代文：所管之地有名叫恒陵的，方圆数百里，都是生僚居住的地方，依仗那裹的险阻牢固，经常怀有不遵守法度之心。
English: The area under his administration is a famous place called Hengling, hundreds of miles in circumference, all of which are the places where his former colleagues live. He relies on the danger that surrounds him, and often harbors the spirit of not abiding by the law.

古文：文表率众讨平之。
现代文：赵文表率兵讨伐平定了他们。
English: Zhao Wenbiao led the troops to fight and leveled them.

古文：迁蓬州刺史，政尚仁恕，夷獠怀之。
现代文：升蓬州刺史，为政崇尚仁爱宽容，夷僚归向他。
English: Sheng Pengzhou engraved history, advocating benevolence, love and tolerance for politics, and his compatriots flocked to him.

古文：加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：升骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: He was awarded the title of General of Horse Cavalry and the title of Kaifu Yi and Sanji.

古文：又进位大将军，爵为公。
现代文：又升位为大将军，爵位为公。
English: He was also promoted to the rank of general and given a peerage.

古文：大象中，拜吴州总管。
现代文：大象年间，任吴州总管。
English: During the Year of the Elephant, he served as the governor of Wuzhou.

古文：时开府于顗为吴州刺史。
现代文：当时开府于颛为吴州刺史。
English: At that time, the establishment of the capital in Handan was a milestone in the history of Wuzhou.

古文：及隋文帝执政，尉迟迥等举兵，远近骚然，人怀异望。
现代文：到隋文帝执掌政权，尉迟迥等人兴兵，远近之地都不安静，人们怀有反叛的心愿。
English: By the time Sui Emperor Wen was in charge of the political power, soldiers such as Fei Chi and others were raised, and the land far and near was restless, and people harbored the desire to rebel.

古文：顗自以族大，且为国家肺腑，惧文表图己，谋欲先之。
现代文：于颢自以为是大族，并且是国家的重臣，恐怕赵文表谋害自己，策划想先动手杀他。
English: Yu Yao thought that he was a member of a big clan and a chief minister of the country. I am afraid that Zhao Wenbo plotted to kill himself and planned to kill him first.

古文：乃称疾不出。
现代文：就声称有病不出来议事。
English: He claimed to be ill and unable to attend the meeting.

古文：文表往问之，顗遂手刃文表。
现代文：趟文表前往问候他，于颉就亲手杀死了赵文表。
English: When Zhao Wenbo went to greet him, Yu Yao killed Zhao Wenbo with his own hands.

古文：因令吏人告云 文表谋反 ，仍驰启其状。
现代文：趁此下令官吏告发 赵文表谋反 ，于是迅速地上奏陈述相关情况。
English: Taking advantage of this, he ordered officials to denounce Zhao Wen for plotting a rebellion, and then quickly went to the ground to report the relevant situation.

古文：隋文以诸方未定，恐顗为变，遂授顗吴州总管以安之。
现代文：隋文帝因为各方没有平定，恐怕于颉作乱，就授于颉以吴州总管之职，用来安抚他。
English: Because the parties were not pacified, Emperor Sui Wen, fearing that Zhai might start a riot, gave Zhai the post of governor of Wuzhou to appease him.

古文：后知文表无异志，虽不罪顗，而听其子仁海袭爵。
现代文：后来知道趟文表没有反叛的意图，虽然不给于颉治罪，但听任赵文表的儿子赵仁海继承爵位。
English: Later, it was learned that Watanabe had no intention of rebelling, and although he was not given the crime of sedition, he allowed Zhao's son, Zhao Renhai, to inherit the title.

