古文：张隆吉宕石富阳人给使甄法崇谢晦谢灵运梁清徐道饶东莱陈氏谢道欣沈寂之王胡陶继之朱泰戴承伯章授旋续门生张道虚
现代文：张隆吉宕石富阳人给使甄法崇谢晦谢灵运梁清徐道饶东莱陈氏谢道欣沈寂之王胡陶继之朱泰戴承伯章授旋续门生张道虚
English: Zhang Longji, Tang, Shifu, Yang, and others gave the following awards to Zhang Daohui's disciple Zhang Daohui:

古文：张隆
现代文：张隆
English: Zhang Long

古文：宋永初三年，吴郡张隆家，忽有一鬼。云：汝与我食，当相佑助。
现代文：南朝宋代永初三年，吴郡张隆家里忽然来了个鬼，对张隆说：你给我东西吃，我就保祐你帮助你。
English: In the first three years of the Southern Song Dynasty, a ghost suddenly came to Zhang Long's home in Wu County and said to Zhang Long: "If you give me something to eat, I will help you."

古文：后为作食，因以大刀斫其所食处。便闻数十人哭，哭亦甚悲，云：死何由得棺？
现代文：张隆给鬼作好了饭给鬼吃，然后对着鬼在的地方用大刀猛地砍下去，就听见几十个人都哭了起来，而且哭得很悲痛。听见鬼说：死了上哪儿弄棺材去啊！
English: Zhang Long prepared food for the ghost to eat, and then he slashed the place where the ghost was with a big knife. He heard dozens of people crying, and they were crying with great sorrow. He heard the ghost say, "Where are you going to get a coffin when you die?"

古文：又闻云：主人家有破船，奴甚爱惜，当取为棺。
现代文：又听鬼说：这家有条破船，主人那家伙挺喜欢，就拿来做棺材吧。
English: I also heard the ghost say: the family has a broken boat, the owner likes it, so let's use it to make a coffin.

古文：隆皆不见，惟闻处分。
现代文：然后就看见鬼把船抬来了，并听见斧子锯子的声音。
English: Then they saw the demon lift up the boat, and they heard the sound of the axe and the saw.

古文：便见船渐升空，入云宵中。及灭后，复闻如有数十人大笑云：汝那能杀我也，但向以恶我憎汝，故隐没汝船耳。
现代文：天黑后，只听得鬼们吵吵嚷嚷地把尸体放在船里，但张隆却看不见什么，只能听见他们在忙忙活活的干什么。过了一阵，就见那破船渐渐升起在空中，一直钻进云层里了。等到什么都消失以后，又听见好像有几十个人大笑着说：你能杀得了我吗？刚才是因为你讨厌我，我报复你才故意把你的船弄走了。
English: After dark, all he could hear was the ghosts noisily putting the bodies in the boat, but Zhang Long couldn't see anything, he could only hear what they were busy doing. After a while, he saw the wrecked boat gradually rising in the air and sinking into the clouds. After everything had disappeared, he heard dozens of people laughing and saying, "Can you kill me? Just now, because you hate me, I took revenge on you and took your boat away on purpose."

古文：隆便回意奉事此鬼，问吉凶及将来之计，语隆曰：汝可以大瓮著壁角中，我当为觅物也。
现代文：张隆就改了主意，开始敬奉这个鬼，并向鬼求问吉凶祸福的事。鬼对张隆说，你可以在墙角放一个大坛子，我会给你找来东西放进去的。
English: Zhang Long changed his mind, and began to worship the ghost, and asked the ghost for good luck. The ghost said to Zhang Long, "You can put a large jar in the corner of the wall, and I will find something for you to put in it."

古文：十日一倒，有钱及金银铜铁鱼腥之属。
现代文：后来张隆每十天倒一回坛子，里面就会有钱和金银铜铁以及鱼虾等一类东西。
English: Later, Zhang Long would empty the jar once every ten days, and there would be money, gold, silver, copper, iron, fish and shrimp, and other things inside.

古文：吉宕石
现代文：吉宕石
English: Yoshitago Stone

古文：吉未翰从弟名宕石，先作檀道济参军。
现代文：吉未翰的堂弟叫宕石，给檀道济做参军。
English: Kivihan's cousin, called Tagoishi, joined the army as a volunteer.

古文：尝病，因见人著朱衣前来，揖云：特来相迎。
现代文：有一次生了病，看见一个穿朱衣的人来到面前向他行了礼说：我是专门来接你去阴间的。
English: Once, when he was ill, he saw a man in a scarlet robe come up to him, salute him and say: I have come especially to take you to the underworld.

古文：宕石厚为施设，求免。
现代文：宕石赶快安排了丰盛的酒饭款待鬼，然后请求鬼免他一死。
English: Tagoishi quickly arranged a sumptuous meal to entertain the ghost, and then asked the ghost to spare his life.

古文：鬼曰：感君延接，当为少停。
现代文：鬼说：感谢你对我的盛情接待，我可以给你缓一些日子。
English: The ghost said, "Thank you for your generous reception of me. I can give you some days off.

古文：乃不复见。宕石渐差。
现代文：鬼就不见了，宕石的病也好了。
English: The ghost disappeared, and Tagoishi's illness got better.

古文：后丁艰，还寿阳，复见鬼曰：迎使寻至，君便可束妆。
现代文：后来宕石的老人去世，他回到寿阳，又看见那个鬼来对他说：迎接你的专使一会儿就到，你快收拾一下吧。
English: Later, the old man from Tagoishi passed away. He returned to Shouyang and saw the ghost again, who said to him, "The special envoy to greet you will be arriving in a moment. You should quickly clean up."

古文：宕石曰：君前已留怀，复得见愍否？
现代文：宕石对鬼说上次你已经放过了我，现在不能再可怜我一次吗？
English: "Tagoishi said to the ghost, "You let me go last time, can't you have pity on me again now?"

古文：鬼曰：前召欲相使役，故停耳。
现代文：鬼说：上一次是我想召你去替我出点力，所以我可以说了算，就暂时放了你。
English: The ghost said, "The last time, I wanted to call on you to do something for me, so I had the final say, so I let you go for the time being."

古文：今泰山屈君为主簿，又使随至，不可辞也。
现代文：这次是泰山府君任命你到阴司当主簿，而且派来接你的专使是跟着我来的，没法再拖延了。
English: This time, the governor of Taishan Prefecture has appointed you to be the chief steward, and the special envoy sent to pick you up has come with me. I can't delay it any longer.

古文：便见车马传教，油戟罗列于前，指示家人，人莫见也。
现代文：这时只见车马随从排着队伍来到跟前，并告诉宕石不许让家里人看见。
English: At this time, I only saw the chariots and horses following the queue come to the front, and told the stones not to let the family see them.

古文：宕石介书呼亲友告别，语笑之中，便奄然而尽。
现代文：宕石就留下书信给家人，呼唤来亲友们告别，谈笑之中就突然死去。
English: Tagoishi left a letter to his family, called his relatives and friends to say goodbye, and died suddenly while they were talking and laughing.

古文：富阳人
现代文：富阳人
English: People from Fuyang

古文：宋元嘉初，富阳人姓王，于穷渎中作蟹簖。
现代文：南朝宋代元嘉初年时，有个姓王的富阳人在小河里插了竹栅栏抓蟹。
English: In the first year of the Southern Song Dynasty's Yuan Jia, a Fuyang man surnamed Wang put a bamboo fence in a small river to catch crabs.

古文：旦往视，见一材头，长二尺许，在簖裂开，蟹出都尽，乃修治簖，出材岸上。
现代文：第二天去看，发现一个二尺来长的木头把栅栏撞开，螃蟹都跑了。王某就修好栅栏，把那块木头扔到河岸上。
English: The next day, he went to look and found that a two-foot-long piece of wood had knocked the fence open, and the crabs had run away. Wang repaired the fence and threw the piece of wood onto the riverbank.

古文：明往看之，见材复在簖中，败如前。王又治簖，再往视，所见如初。
现代文：第二天再去看，见那块木头又跑到竹栅里，栅栏又给撞坏了，就又修好栅栏。再去看时，又是那样。
English: When I looked again the next day, I saw that the piece of wood had run into the bamboo fence again, the fence had been knocked down again, and the fence had been repaired. When I looked again, it was the same.

古文：王疑此材妖异，乃取纳蟹笼中，系担头归，云：至家当破燃之。
现代文：王某就怀疑那块木头是什么妖物，就把木头装进蟹笼里，绑在扁担头上回家，说：到家我就把你烧掉。
English: Wang suspected that the piece of wood was a monster, so he put the wood in a crab cage, tied it to the head of a flatbed and went home, saying, "I'll burn you when I get home."

古文：未之家三里，闻中倅动，转顾，见向材头变成一物，人面猴身，一手一足，语王曰：我性嗜蟹，此实入水破若蟹簖，相负已多，望君见恕。
现代文：离家还有三里地时，听见蟹笼子里沙沙有声，回头一看，那木头变成了个怪物，人脸猴身子，只有一只手一只脚。怪物对王某说：我天性爱吃螃蟹，你的栅栏是我弄坏的，实在太对不起你了，希望你能原谅我，把笼子打开放了我吧。
English: When he was still three miles away from home, he heard a rustling sound in the crab cage. Looking back, the wood turned into a monster, a monkey with a human face and body, with only one hand and one foot. The monster said to Wang Mou: My nature loves to eat crabs, I broke your fence, I am so sorry for you, I hope you can forgive me and open the cage for me.

古文：开笼出我，我是山神，当相佑助，使全簖大待蟹。
现代文：我就是山神，你放了我，我能帮助你，让你每次栅栏里都装满螃蟹。
English: I am the mountain god, you let me go, I can help you, let you fill the fence with crabs every time.

古文：王曰：汝犯暴人，前后非一，罪自应死。
现代文：王某说：你祸害了我，又变来变去的吓唬人，我非整死你不可！
English: Wang said that if you harm people, and not just once, you should be put to death.

古文：此物转顿，请乞放，又频问君姓名为何，王回顾不应答。
现代文：那妖物变得非常悲哀的样子，请求放掉它，并再三问王某的姓名，王某看看它，一直没说出自己的姓名。
English: The monster became very sad, begged to be let go, and repeatedly asked Wang for his name. Wang looked at it and never said his name.

古文：去家转近，物曰：既不放我，又不告我姓名，当复何计，但应就死耳。
现代文：离家越来越近了，那怪物说：你既不放我，又不告诉我你的姓名，我还有什么办法呢，只有等死了。
English: Closer and closer to home, the monster said, "Since you won't let me go, and won't tell me your name, what choice do I have but to die?"

古文：王至家，炽火焚之，后寂无复异。
现代文：王某到家以后，立刻点起火把那块木头烧了，烧了之后，也没有再发生什么异常的事，原来那个怪物就是民间所说的山魈。
English: After Wang arrived home, he immediately lit a fire to burn the piece of wood. After it was burned, nothing unusual happened. Originally, that monster was what people called a hawthorn.

古文：土俗谓之山魈，云：知人姓名，则能中伤人，所以勤问，正欲害人自免。
现代文：传说山魈如果知道了人的姓名，就会伤害那个人，所以那怪物再三问王某的姓名，正是想害了他以逃脱自身。
English: According to legend, if the hawthorn knows a person's name, it will hurt that person, so the monster repeatedly asked Wang's name, just to hurt him and escape himself.

古文：给使
现代文：给使
English: To the Envoy

古文：近世有人得一小给使，频求还家未遂。
现代文：最近有个人雇了个小听差，这小听差几次请假要求回家，主人都没准。
English: Recently, a person hired a small errand boy. This little errand boy asked for leave to go home several times, but the owner was not sure.

古文：后日久，此吏在南窗下眠。此人见门中有一妇人，年五六十，肥大，行步艰难。
现代文：过了很久，有一天小听差在南窗下睡觉时，主人看见门外走近一个女人，有五六十岁，特别胖，走路都很困难。
English: After a long time, one day, when the servant was sleeping under the south window, his master saw a woman approaching outside the door. She was in her fifties or sixties, very fat, and had difficulty walking.

古文：吏眠失复，妇人至床边，取被以复之。
现代文：小听差睡觉时被子掉了，那女人就来到床边，把被子给盖好，就出门走了。
English: While the little steward was sleeping, the quilt fell off, and the woman came to the bedside, tucked the quilt in, and went out.

古文：回复出门去，吏转侧衣落，妇人复如初。
现代文：不一会小听差翻身时衣服又掉了，那女人又进来把衣服给他盖好。
English: A moment later, when the boy turned around, his clothes fell off again, and the woman came in again to put them back on.

古文：此人心怪，明问吏：以何事求归？吏云：母病。
现代文：主人心里很奇怪，第二天就问听差为什么要请假回家，听差说母亲病了。
English: The owner was very puzzled. The next day, he asked the receptionist why he wanted to go home on leave. The receptionist said that his mother was ill.

古文：次问状貌及年，皆为所见，唯云形瘦不同。又问母何患，答云：病肿。
现代文：主人又问他母亲的身材相貌和年龄，回答都和他看见的那个女人相同，只是说他母亲挺瘦，这一点和那女人不同，就又问他母亲得了什么病，回答说得了浮肿病。
English: The master asked him again about his mother's stature, appearance and age, and the answers were the same as the woman he had seen, except that his mother was very thin, which was different from the woman. He also asked him what illness his mother had, and he answered that she had an edema disease.

古文：而即与吏假，使出。
现代文：于是主人就准假让他回家。
English: So the owner gave him leave to go home.

古文：便得家信云：母丧。
现代文：听差的刚一出门，就有人送来了家信，说他母亲已去世。
English: As soon as the attendant left the house, someone sent a letter home saying that his mother had died.

古文：追什所见之肥，乃是其肿状也。
现代文：主人回想他所见的女人正是听差的母亲，她那么胖，则是得了水肿病的原因。
English: The owner recalled that the woman he saw was the attendant's mother, and that she was so fat that she was the cause of the oedema.

古文：甄法崇
现代文：甄法崇
English: Zhenfa Zong

古文：宋甄法崇，永初中，为江陵令，在任严明。
现代文：宋时永初年间，甄法崇在江陵当县令，为政清正严明。
English: In the early years of Song Dynasty, Zhenfa Chong was the county magistrate of Jiangling County, and he was very strict about political correctness.

古文：其时南平缪士为江安令，卒于官。
现代文：当时南平人缪士是江安县令，死在任上。
English: At that time, Nanping's muse was the governor of Jiang'an County, and died in office.

古文：后一年，崇在厅，忽见一人从门而入，云：缪士谨通。
现代文：一年后，有一天甄法崇正在县衙大厅上，忽然看见一个人从门外进来说：缪士特来拜访。
English: A year later, one day, Zhenfa Chong was in the hall of the county magistrate's office, when he suddenly saw a person enter from outside the door and say: "The Muses have come to visit."

古文：法崇知其亡，因问卿貌何故瘦，答云：我生时所行，善不补恶，罹系苦，复勤剧理墨。
现代文：甄法崇知道缪士已经死了，就问：你怎么这样消瘦啊？缪士说：我活着的时候，所作的好事不如坏事多，受罪罚之苦，又加上不断地抄写，才这样消瘦。
English: When Yan Fa Chong knew that Mu Shi was dead, he asked, "How did you get so thin?" Mu Shi said, "When I was alive, I did not do as many good things as bad things. It was the suffering of punishment and the constant copying that made me so thin."

古文：又云：卿县民某甲，负我米千余担，无券书。悍不还。
现代文：又说：贵县属下有个某甲，生前欠我一千多石米，因为没写契约，现在他硬是赖账不还。
English: He also said: There is a certain subordinate of Guizhou County, who owed me more than a thousand stone meters in his lifetime, because he did not write a contract, and now he does not pay back the debt.

古文：今儿累穷毙，乞为严勑。
现代文：现在害得我儿子穷得快饿死了，请您严肃处理这件事。
English: Now you have made my son so poor that he is starving to death. Please take this matter seriously.

古文：法崇曰：卿可作词。
现代文：甄法崇说：你可以写个状子，我给你办。
English: Zhenfa Chong said: You can write a petition, I will do it for you.

古文：士云：向不赍纸，且又不复书矣。
现代文：缪士说：我没有带纸，而且也不会写字了。
English: "I don't have any paper with me, and I can't write anymore," Muse said.

古文：法崇令省事取笔，疏其语，士口授，其言历历。
现代文：甄法宗就叫手下人取来纸笔，由缪士口授，说得清清楚楚，为他代写了一张状子。
English: Zhen Bozong asked his subordinates to fetch a pen and paper, dictated by the muse, spoke clearly, and wrote a letter on his behalf.

古文：词成，谢而去。
现代文：写完后，缪士拜谢后走了。
English: After he finished writing, Muse bowed and left.

古文：法崇以事问缪家，云：有此。
现代文：甄法崇就查问缪士的家人，家人说确有某甲欠一千石米硬不还的事。
English: Zhenfa Chong asked the family members of the muses, and the family members said that there was indeed a thing that a certain A owed a thousand stone meters and would not pay it back.

古文：登时摄问，负米者畏怖，依实输还。
现代文：于是就把某甲抓来，一审问，某甲十分害怕，立刻如数把米还给了缪士家。
English: So they arrested and interrogated a certain A. A certain A was very scared and immediately returned the exact amount of rice to the Mushi family.

古文：谢晦
现代文：谢晦
English: Thank you.

古文：谢晦在荆州，壁角间有一赤鬼，长可三尺，来至其前，手擎铜盘，满中是血。
现代文：谢晦在荆州时，看见墙角有一个红色的鬼，有三尺来高。鬼来到他面前，手里拿着个铜盘子，里面满满一盘血。
English: When Xie Yu was in Jingzhou, he saw a red ghost in the corner of the wall, three feet tall. The ghost came to him, holding a copper plate in his hand, which was full of blood.

古文：晦得乃纸盘，须臾而没。
现代文：谢晦接过来，铜盘变成了纸盘，不一会儿鬼就不见了。
English: Xie Yu picked it up, the copper plate turned into a paper plate, and soon the ghost was gone.

古文：谢灵运
现代文：谢灵运
English: Xie Lingyun

古文：谢灵运以元嘉五年，忽见谢晦，手提其头，来坐别床，血流淋落，不可忍视。
现代文：元嘉五年时，谢灵运忽然看见死去的谢晦手里提着自己的头，进屋坐在另一个床上，鲜血不停地流，惨不忍睹。
English: When Yuan Jia was five years old, Xie Lingyun suddenly saw the dead Xie Xiuquan holding his head in his hands, entering the house and sitting on another bed, with blood flowing incessantly. It was horrible to see.

古文：又所服貂裘，血淹满箧。
现代文：后来他又发现自己装貂皮袍子的衣箱里被血浸满了。
English: Later, he found the trunk of his mink robe soaked with blood.

古文：及为临川郡，饭中欻有大虫。
现代文：后来谢灵运当临川郡守时，吃饭时饭里忽然有大虫子。
English: Later, when Xie Lingyun was governor of Linchuan County, there were suddenly large insects in the rice during the meal.

古文：遂被诛。
现代文：不久他就被杀了。
English: He was killed soon after.

古文：梁清
现代文：梁清
English: Liang Qing

古文：宋文帝世，天水梁清，家在京师新亭。
现代文：宋文帝时，天水人梁清，家住京城新亭。
English: At the time of Emperor Songwen, Tianshui man Liang Qing lived in the Jingsheng Xinting.

古文：腊月将祀，使婢于爨室造食，忽觉空中有物，操杖打婢。
现代文：腊月祭神前，他让女仆在厨房作上供的饭菜。忽然空中有个东西用棒子打女仆，女仆跑去告诉梁清。
English: Before the Rakugetsu festival, he asked his maid to prepare a meal for him in the kitchen. Suddenly, something in the sky hit the maid with a stick, and the maid ran to tell Liang Qing.

古文：婢走告清，清遂往，见瓯器自运，盛饮斟羹，罗列案上，闻哺啜之声。
现代文：梁清到厨房看，只见锅碗餐具自己移动，吃的喝的都盛在碗盘里摆在桌上，并听到吃喝的声音。
English: When Liang Qing looked into the kitchen, he saw that the pots and dishes were moving by themselves. All the food and drink were placed on the table in bowls, and he heard the sounds of eating and drinking.

古文：清曰：何不形见？
现代文：梁清就说：何必不现出形来呢？
English: Liang Qing said, "Why don't you show yourself?"

古文：乃见一人，著平上帻，乌皮裤褶，云：我京兆人，亡没飘寄，闻卿好士，故来相从。
现代文：鬼就现了形，戴着头巾，穿着有褶的黑皮裤子。鬼说：我是京城人，死后到处游荡。听说你喜欢结交读书人，特地来拜访你。
English: The ghost appeared, wearing a headscarf and black leather trousers with pleats. The ghost said, "I'm from Kyoto, and after I die, I'm going to wander around. I heard that you like to make friends with readers, so I came to visit you."

古文：清便席地共坐，设肴酒。
现代文：梁清就和鬼一起坐在地上，摆上酒菜和鬼共饮。
English: Liang Qing sat on the ground with the ghost, and set out wine and vegetables to drink with the ghost.

古文：鬼云：卿有祀事云云。
现代文：鬼说：我知道你家有祭神的事。
English: The demon said, "I know that there is a god in your house.

古文：清图某郡，先以访鬼，鬼云，所规必谐。某月某日除出，果然。
现代文：梁清想到某郡活动个官当，就请教鬼。鬼说：你的谋划一定能成功，某月某日你就会得到郡里的任命。
English: When Liang Qing thought of becoming an official in a certain county, he consulted a ghost. The ghost said, "Your plan will surely succeed, and you will be appointed by the county on a certain day of a certain month."

古文：鬼云：郡甚优闲，吾愿周旋。
现代文：到了鬼说的那个日子，梁清果然被郡里任命了。鬼说：此郡很是轻闲自在，我也愿意与你同往。
English: On the day the ghost said, Liang Qing was indeed appointed by the county. The ghost said: This county is very easy-going, and I am willing to go with you.

古文：清答：甚善。
现代文：梁清说很好。
English: Liang Qing said it very well.

古文：后停舟石头，待之五日，鬼不来。
现代文：后来梁清坐船到石头城，船停着等了五天，鬼没有来。
English: Later, Liang Qing took a boat to Stone Town. The boat stopped and waited for five days, but the ghost did not come.

古文：于是引路，达彭城，方见至。
现代文：梁清又改走旱路，到了彭城，鬼才来。
English: Liang Qing took the dry road again, and arrived at Pengcheng.

古文：同在郡数年，还都，亦相随而返。
现代文：鬼和梁清一块在郡里待了好几年，后来梁清回到京城，鬼也跟他一同回京了。
English: The ghost and Liang Qing stayed together in the county for several years. Later, Liang Qing returned to Beijing, and the ghost also returned to Beijing with him.

古文：徐道饶
现代文：徐道饶
English: Xu Daorao

古文：徐道饶，以元嘉十年，忽见一鬼，自言是其先人。
现代文：元嘉十年，徐道饶忽然看见一个鬼，自称是他家的先辈。
English: In the tenth year of Yuan Jia, Xu Daorao suddenly saw a ghost, claiming to be the ancestor of his family.

古文：于时冬日，天气清朗，先积稻屋下，云：汝明日可曝谷，天方大雨，未有晴时。
现代文：当时是冬天，天晴的时候徐家库房里堆积着很多稻子，鬼就对徐道饶说：明天你可把稻子运到场上晒一晒，天将下雨，后头再没有晴的时候。
English: At that time, it was winter. When the weather was fine, there was a lot of rice piled up in the warehouse of the Xu family. The ghost said to Xu Daorao: "Tomorrow, you can carry the rice to the field and let it dry. It will rain, and there will be no sunny weather in the future."

古文：饶从其教，鬼亦助辇。
现代文：但徐道饶听从鬼的指教，把稻子运出来晒上，鬼也帮着他运。
English: But Xu Daorao listened to the ghost's advice and carried the rice out to the sun, and the ghost also helped him.

古文：后果霖雨。时有见者，形如狝猴。
现代文：日后果然下起了连绵大雨，这鬼有时也现形，像只猴子。
English: Day after day, torrential rain fell, and the ghost sometimes appeared, like a monkey.

古文：饶就道士请符，悬著窗户。
现代文：徐道绕就去请道士写了一道驱鬼的符挂在窗子上。
English: Xu Daowuan went to ask the Taoist priest to write an exorcism sign and hang it on the window.

古文：鬼便大笑：欲以此断我，我自能从狗窦中入。
现代文：鬼就大笑说：你想用符挡住我吗？我从狗洞子也能钻到你家来。
English: The ghost laughed loudly and said, "Do you want to block me with a sign? I can get into your house from the dog hole."

古文：虽则此语，而不复进。
现代文：鬼虽然这样说了，但以后再也没进屋。
English: Although the ghost said this, it never entered the house again.

古文：经数日，叹云：徐叔宝来，吾不宜见之。
现代文：过了几天，听见鬼叹息说：徐叔宝要来，我可不能看见他。
English: A few days later, I heard the ghost sigh and say, "Xu Shubao is coming, but I can't see him."

古文：后日果至，于是遂绝。
现代文：后两天，徐叔宝果然到家来了，那鬼从此就再也不来了。
English: Two days later, Xu Shubao did indeed come home, and the ghost never came back.

古文：东莱陈氏
现代文：东莱陈氏
English: The Chen Clan of Donglai

古文：东莱有一家姓陈，家百余口。
现代文：东莱有一家姓陈的，全家一百多口。
English: In Donglai, there is a family with the surname Chen, with more than a hundred members.

古文：朝炊釜不沸，举甑看之，忽有一白头公，从釜中出。
现代文：有天早上作饭，锅怎么烧也不开，揭开锅一看，一个白发老头从锅里跳了出来。
English: One morning I was cooking and the pot wouldn't open no matter how hot it was. When I opened the pot, an old man with white hair jumped out of the pot.

古文：便诣师，师云：此大怪，应灭门。
现代文：陈某就跑去问巫师。巫师说：这是个大妖怪，你家将遭到灭门之灾。
English: Chen ran to ask the sorcerer. The sorcerer said, "This is a big monster. Your home will be destroyed."

古文：便归大作械，械成，使置门壁下，坚闭门在内。
现代文：你回去赶快多做一些打仗用的木棒和家伙，做好了就放在大门影壁下，然后把大门好好关严。
English: When you get back, hurry up and make some more wooden sticks and things for fighting. When you're done, put them under the shadow wall of the gate, and then close the gate tightly.

古文：有马骑麾盖来叩门者，慎勿应。
现代文：如果有骑马或乘车带有仪仗的来敲门，千万不要应声开门。
English: If someone on horseback or in a car knocks on your door, do not open the door.

古文：从人窥门内，见大小械百余。
现代文：陈某回来后，大家动手砍伐制作了一百多个大棒子，做好后放在屋门下。
English: After Chen came back, everyone started cutting down and made more than a hundred large sticks, which were then placed under the door.

古文：出门还说如此，帅大惶惋。
现代文：不久果然有人叫门，叫了半天也没有应。
English: Not long after, someone did indeed knock on the door, but the knocking went unanswered for half a day.

古文：语左右云：教速来。
现代文：领头的大怒，叫手下人从门上翻过去。
English: The leader, furious, ordered his men to climb over the door.

古文：不速来，遂无复一人当去，何以解罪也？
现代文：这时有个手下人看见堆在门内的大大小小的一百多个棒子，就告诉了头儿。头儿一听又害怕又懊恼，对手下人说：叫你们快点来你们不快点来。
English: At this time, one of his subordinates saw more than a hundred sticks, large and small, piled up inside the door, and told the boss. The boss was frightened and annoyed when he heard this, and said to his subordinates: "Tell you to come quickly, and don't hurry."

古文：从此北行，可八十里，有一百三口，取以当之。
现代文：现在一个替死的都抓不回去，我们怎么赎罪呀？从这儿往北走，再走八十里吧，那里有个人家全家有一百零三口，只好去抓他们顶数了。
English: How can we atone for our sins when we can't bring back even one of the people who died in our place? Go north from here and walk another eighty miles. There's a family with a hundred and three members, and we'll have to catch them all.

古文：后十日中，此家死亡都尽。
现代文：以后十天以内，八十里外那家人果然都死尽了。
English: Within the next ten days, the family 80 miles away died.

古文：此家亦姓陈。
现代文：那家也姓陈。
English: The family's surname is also Chen.

古文：谢道欣
现代文：谢道欣
English: Xie Daoxin

古文：会稽郡常有大鬼，长数丈，腰大数十围，高冠玄服。
现代文：会稽郡曾有过一个大鬼，好几丈高，有好几十抱粗，戴着高帽子，穿着黑色衣服。
English: Once upon a time, there was a giant ghost in Huiqi County. He was several feet tall, had dozens of arms and legs, wore a tall hat, and wore black clothes.

古文：郡将吉凶，先于雷门示忧喜之兆。
现代文：郡里将要有什么吉凶福祸，这鬼会先在雷门上给作出预兆。
English: If there is going to be any good or bad fortune in the county, this ghost will be the first to give the omen at the Thunder Gate.

古文：谢氏一族，忧喜必告。
现代文：谢弘道的母亲死前几个月时，那鬼就早晚都来。
English: When Xie Hongdao's mother was a few months away from death, the ghost would come sooner or later.

古文：谢弘道未遭母艰数月，鬼晨夕来临。
现代文：后来他快提升当吏部尚书时，那鬼就又拍手又跳舞，从大门到院里来回地蹦。
English: Later, when he was in charge of the library, the ghost clapped his hands and danced, skipping back and forth from the gate to the courtyard.

古文：及后将转吏部尚书，拊掌三节舞，自大门至中庭，寻而迁问至。谢道欣遭重艰，至离塘行墓地。
现代文：不久升迁喜讯便到了。谢道欣的父母双亡，到离塘的墓地送葬时，天将要赤，见离塘里有两只火把。
English: Soon, the good news of promotion arrived. Xie Daoxin's parents both died, and when they went to the cemetery in Liutang for the funeral, the sky was turning red, and there were two torches in Liutang.

古文：往向夜，见离塘有双炬。须臾，火忽入水中，仍舒长数十丈，色白如练。稍稍渐还赤，散成数百炬，追逐车从而行。
现代文：不一会儿，两只火把进了水中，火越伸越长，有好几十丈，起初火色像白绸，后来又变成红色，后来又散开变成了几百个火把跟着送葬的车队走。
English: Soon, two torches entered the water. The flames grew longer and longer, reaching dozens of meters. At first, the flames looked like white silk, but later they turned red, and then they dispersed into hundreds of torches that followed the funeral procession.

古文：悉见火中有鬼，甚长大，头如五石罗，其状如大醉者，左右小鬼共扶之。
现代文：在火光中可以看见一个很高大的鬼，像喝醉了似的，头有能装五石米的大罗筐那么大，大鬼的两旁有小鬼们搀扶着。
English: In the light of the fire, a very tall ghost can be seen, as if drunk, with a head as big as a large basket that can hold five kilos of rice. On both sides of the ghost, there are small ghosts supporting it.

古文：是年孙恩作乱，会稽大小，莫不翼戴。
现代文：这一年孙恩造反，会稽的人都受到株连。
English: In the year of Sun En's rebellion, everyone who was a member of the Audit Committee was punished by the Company of Corporals.

古文：时以为欣之所见，乱之征也。
现代文：所以当时的人都认为谢道欣看见的那些情景，就是天下大乱前的预兆。
English: Therefore, people at that time thought that the scenes seen by Xie Daoxin were a harbinger of the world's turmoil.

古文：禹会诸侯会稽，防风之鬼也。沈寂之
现代文：古时大禹在会稽召集诸侯，就是为了抵御风鬼。沈寂之
English: In ancient times, the Great Yu summoned the lords at the council, in order to fend off the wind ghost.

古文：吴兴沈寂之，以元嘉中，忽有鬼于空中语笑。或歌或哭，至夜偏盛。
现代文：元嘉年间，吴兴人沈寂之有一天忽然听见鬼在空中说笑，有时又唱歌号哭，到夜晚闹得更厉害了。
English: During the Yuan Jia era, one day when Wu Xingren was in deep silence, he suddenly heard a ghost laughing in the air, sometimes singing and crying, and the noise was even worse at night.

古文：寂之有灵车，鬼共牵走，车为坏。
现代文：沈寂之有台灵车，被鬼们推着拉走，把车都搞坏了。
English: In the silence, there was a hearse, which the ghosts pushed and pulled away, ruining the vehicle.

古文：寂之有长刀，乃以置瓮中，有大镜，亦摄以纳器中。
现代文：沈寂之有把长刀，鬼拿来塞进大坛子里。沈寂之还有个大镜子，也让鬼收起来装在这个家什里了。
English: Shen Zhizhi had a long knife, which the ghost took and stuffed into a large jar. Shen Zhizhi also had a large mirror, which the ghost also put away and installed in this room.

古文：王胡
现代文：王胡
English: Wang Hu

古文：宋王胡者，长安人也。
现代文：宋代有个叫王胡的人，是长安人。
English: In the Song Dynasty, there was a man named Wang Hu, who was from Chang'an.

古文：叔死数载，元嘉二十三年，忽形见还家。责胡以修谨有缺，家事不理，罚胡五杖。
现代文：他的叔叔死了好几年后，突然在元嘉二十三年现形回家，责备王胡行为不检点，不好好管理家中的事，应该罚打五棍子。
English: Several years after his uncle died, he suddenly returned home in person in the 23rd year of the Yuan Jia and reproached Wang Hu for behaving improperly, not managing the affairs of the family well, and should be punished with five sticks.

古文：傍人及邻里，并闻其语及杖声，又见杖瘢，而不见其形。唯胡独得亲接。
现代文：旁边的邻人和亲戚立刻就听到打棍子声和王胡叔叔的说话声，又看见王胡身上被杖打后的印迹，但看不见叔叔本人，只有王胡才能看得见。
English: Neighbors and relatives nearby immediately heard the sound of beating with a stick and Uncle Wang Hu's voice, and saw the marks on Wang Hu's body after he was beaten with a stick, but they could not see the uncle himself, only Wang Hu could see.

古文：叔谓胡曰：吾不应死，神道须吾算诸鬼录。
现代文：叔叔对王胡说：我本来不该去世，是由于阴间需要我清查鬼们的行为记录。
English: My uncle said to Wang Hu, "I shouldn't have died in the first place. It was because the underworld needed me to check the records of the ghosts."

古文：今大从吏兵，恐惊损乡里，故不将进耳。
现代文：我这次来带了不少阴司的官员和随众，怕他们惊动乡亲们，所以没让他们进来。
English: This time I came with a lot of officials and their entourages, afraid that they would alarm the villagers, so I didn't let them in.

古文：胡亦大见众鬼纷闹于村外。
现代文：王胡也真看见村外有不少鬼在吵吵闹闹地。
English: Wang Hu also saw a lot of ghosts outside the village making a lot of noise.

古文：俄而辞去曰：吾来年七月七日，当复暂还。
现代文：叔叔呆了一会儿就走了，临走时说：我明年七月七日还回来一趟。
English: My uncle stayed for a while and then left. As he was leaving, he said, "I'll be back on July 7th next year."

古文：欲将汝行，游历幽途，使知罪福之报也。
现代文：那时我打算领你一起走，让你游一游阴曹地府，好知道罪福和因果报应的事。
English: At that time, I planned to take you along and let you take a tour of the underworld, so that you would know about sin, blessing and karma.

古文：不须费设，若意不已，止可茶食耳。
现代文：到时候你也不用拿更多的东西供祀我。如果你觉得过意不去，只须供一点饭食茶水就可以了。
English: At that time, you don't have to take more things to worship me. If you feel sorry, you only need to provide a little food and water.

古文：至期果还，语胡家人云：吾今将胡游观，观毕当还，不足忧也。
现代文：第二年七月初七，王胡的叔叔果然又回来了。叔叔对家里人说：我现在要带王胡到阴间看一看，看完就让他回来，你们不必担心。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the second year, Wang Hu's uncle did indeed return. The uncle said to the family members, "I am now going to take Wang Hu to the underworld to have a look, and when I have finished, I will let him come back. You don't have to worry."

古文：胡即顿卧床上，泯然如尽。
现代文：只见王胡安然倒在床上，就像死了一样无声无息。
English: Wang Hu collapsed peacefully on the bed, as if he had died, without a sound.

古文：叔于是将胡遍观群山，备观鬼怪。末至嵩高山，诸鬼道胡，并有馔设，其品味不异世中，唯姜甚脆美。
现代文：叔叔就领着王胡游遍了阴曹地府的山，看了所有的鬼怪，最后来到嵩高山，鬼怪们都来和王胡交谈，并摆下吃食招待王胡。
English: The uncle led Wang Hu to travel all over the mountains of Yin Cao Di Fu, saw all the ghosts, and finally came to Song Gao Mountain. The ghosts all came to talk to Wang Hu, and set out to eat and entertain Wang Hu.

古文：胡怀之将还，左右人笑云：止可此食，不得将远也。
现代文：王胡吃那些东西和人间的食品没有什么不同，只有姜吃起来又脆又香，王胡就揣了几块姜打算带回人世。鬼怪们笑着：只能在这儿吃，不能带远啊。
English: Wang Hu ate those things and human food is no different, only ginger tastes crispy and fragrant, Wang Hu took a few pieces of ginger and planned to bring it back to life. The ghosts laughed: You can only eat it here, you can't take it far.

古文：胡又见一处，屋宇华旷，帐筵精美，有二少僧居焉。
现代文：王胡又来到一个地方，见房舍高大威严，陈设十分精美，里面住着两个年轻的和尚，王胡就拜访了他们。
English: Wang Hu came to another place. He saw a lofty and dignified house with exquisite furnishings. Two young monks lived there. Wang Hu paid them a visit.

古文：胡造之，二僧为设杂果槟榔等，胡游历久之，备见罪福苦乐之报，及辞归，叔谓曰：汝即已知善之当修，返家寻白足阿练。
现代文：两个和尚为王胡拿来些水果和槟榔请他吃。
English: Two monks brought some fruit and betel nuts for Wang Hu and invited him to eat.

古文：此人戒行精高，可师事也。
现代文：王胡在阴间游历了很久，把罪福苦乐因果报应的事都看全了。
English: Wang Hu has traveled for a long time in the underworld, and has seen all the things of sin, fortune, bitterness, joy, karma and retribution.

古文：长安道人足白，故时人谓为白足阿练也。甚为魏虏所敬，虏王事为师。
现代文：临回阳间前，叔叔对他说：你现在既然知道在人世应该积德行善，那你回去后就找白足阿练，这个人修行的境界很高，你可以拜他为师。长安道人足白，所以当时人叫他 白足阿练 ，魏国那些敌人们很敬重他，连魏王都拜他为师哩。
English: Before returning to the sun, his uncle said to him, "Since you now know that you should accumulate virtue and do good deeds while you are alive, when you go back, you should look for Bai Foo Ah Lien. This man's level of practice is very high, and you can worship him as a teacher. Chang'an Dao people are very white-skinned, so at that time people called him Bai Foo Ah Lien. Those enemies of Wei respected him very much, and even the King of Wei worshiped him as a teacher.

古文：胡即奉此训，遂与嵩山上年少僧者游学。
现代文：王胡记住了叔叔的教导，回来后，就和嵩山上的年轻和尚一起学习。
English: Wang Hu remembered his uncle's teaching, and after returning, he studied with the young monk on Songshan Mountain.

古文：众中忽见二僧，胡大惊，与叙乖阔，问何时来此。
现代文：有一天，忽然在和尚群里看见了在阴间认识的那两个和尚，王胡大吃一惊，连忙上前问候，向他们诉说离别后的思念之情，问他们什么时候到阳间的嵩山来的。
English: One day, he suddenly saw the two monks whom he had known in the underworld in the group of monks. Wang Hu was greatly surprised and hurried forward to greet them. He told them of his feelings of longing after their parting and asked them when they came to Songshan in the sun.

古文：二僧云：贫道本住此寺，往日不意与君相识。
现代文：两个和尚说：我们本来就是这个寺里的，过去我们从来没见过你呀！
English: The two monks said, "We are originally from this temple, and we have never seen you before!"

古文：陶继之，元嘉末为秣陵令，尝枉杀乐伎。
现代文：陶继之元嘉末年，陶继之当秣陵令时，错杀了一个乐队的乐工。
English: In the last years of Tao Jizhi's reign, when Tao Jizhi was in charge of the imperial tombs, he killed a musician of an orchestra by mistake.

古文：夜梦伎来云：昔枉见杀，诉天得理，今故取君。
现代文：夜里陶继之梦见乐工来对他说：你错杀了我，我告到阴司，阴司已经受理我的冤案，现在我就来抓你去。
English: In the night, Tao Jizhi had a dream that a musician came to him and said, "You killed me by mistake. I reported it to my wife. My wife has accepted my unjust case. Now I'm coming to catch you."

古文：遂跳入陶口，仍落腹中。须臾复出，乃相谓曰：今直取陶秣陵，亦无所用，更议上丹阳耳。
现代文：说罢就跳进陶继之的嘴里，又落进他肚子里，不一会又钻出来了说，我今天直接把你抓去也没什么用，我还待找王丹阳一块算帐。
English: As soon as he said that, he jumped into Tao Jizhi's mouth, fell into his stomach again, and soon came out again to say, "It's no use for me to arrest you directly today, I still have to settle accounts with Wang Danyang."

古文：言讫并没。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：陶未几而卒，王丹阳果亡。
现代文：陶继之不久就死了，王丹阳果然也死了。
English: Tao died soon after, and Wang Danyang also died.

古文：朱泰
现代文：朱泰
English: Zhu Tai

古文：朱泰家在江陵。
现代文：朱泰家在江陵。
English: Zhu Tai's home is in Gangneung.

古文：宋元徽中，病亡未殡，忽形见，还坐尸侧，慰勉其母，众皆见之，指挥送终之具，务从俭约，谓母曰：家比贫，泰又亡殁。
现代文：宋元徽年间，朱泰病死，还没有入殓时，他的鬼魂突然出现，就坐在他的尸体旁，劝慰他的母亲，并告诉料理丧事的人，一切用品都要节俭，这情形当时在场的人都看见了。
English: During the Song and Yuan dynasties, when Zhu Tai died of illness and was still in his infancy, his ghost suddenly appeared and sat beside his corpse, comforting his mother and telling the mourners to be frugal with all their supplies, which was witnessed by everyone present at the time.

古文：永违侍养，殡殓何可广费？戴承伯
现代文：朱泰的鬼魂还对母亲说：咱家这么穷，我又死了，永远也不能侍奉赡养你老人家，丧事怎么可以多化钱呢？戴承伯
English: Zhu Tai's ghost also said to his mother: "Our family is so poor, if I die, I will never be able to serve and support your old man. How can you spend more money on a funeral? Dai Chengbo

古文：宋戴承伯，元徽中，买荆州治下枇杷寺，其额乃悮东空地为宅。日暮，忽闻恚骂之声。
现代文：宋代元徵年间，戴承伯买下荆州的枇杷寺。由于买价牵涉，在寺东空地建了住屯，天黑时，忽然听见有谩骂的声音。
English: During the Song Dynasty and the Yuan Dynasty, Dai Chengbo bought the Lushan Temple in Jingzhou. Due to the purchase price involved, he built a settlement in the eastern open space of the temple. When it was dark, he suddenly heard abusive voices.

古文：起视，有人形状可怪，承伯问之，答曰：我姓龚，本居此宅。
现代文：起来看，见一个形状奇怪的人。戴承伯问他，他说：我姓龚，本来住在这里。
English: Looking up, he saw a man with a strange shape. When Dai Chengbo asked him about it, he said, "My surname is Yao, and I used to live here.

古文：君为何强夺？
现代文：你为什么强夺我的住宅？
English: Why did you take my house by force?

古文：承伯曰：戴瑾卖地，不应见咎。
现代文：承伯说：是戴瑾卖的地，你不应该责备我。
English: Chengbo said, "You should not reproach me for selling the land.

古文：鬼曰：利身妨物，何预瑾乎？不速去，当令君知。
现代文：鬼说：你利己而妨害别人和戴瑾有什么关系，不快快搬走，我让你知道厉害！
English: The ghost said, "What does it have to do with you being selfish and disturbing others and wearing a shackle? If you're not happy, move away quickly. I'll show you how bad it is!"

古文：言讫而没，承伯性刚，不为之动。旬日，暴疾卒。
现代文：承伯为人刚强，没理那一套，十多天后，就得了暴病死去。
English: Cheng Bo was a strong man, and he did not care about that. After more than ten days, he got violently ill and died.

古文：章授
现代文：章授
English: Professor Zhang Zeng

古文：丹阳郡史章授，使到吴郡，经毗陵。
现代文：丹阳郡有个官员章授，奉派到吴郡出差。
English: An official from Danyang County, Zhang Du, was sent to Wu County on a business trip.

古文：有一人，年三十余，黄色单衣，从授寄载笥。
现代文：经过毗陵时，有一个三十多岁的人，请求往章授的船上寄存一个箱子。
English: While passing by the tomb, a man in his thirties asked Zhang Zhu for a box to be stored on the boat.

古文：行数日，略不食，所过乡甲，辄周旋。
现代文：这人和章授一块走了好几天，却不吃东西。所经过的村镇，那人都要去转一转。
English: The man and Zhang Zhi walked together for several days, but did not eat anything. In every village and town they passed through, the man wanted to take a turn.

古文：里中即闻有呼魄者，良久还船。
现代文：然后就会听见村镇里传出来哭丧招魂声。过了很久那人才回到船上来。
English: Then there would be wailing and mourning in the village, and after a long time the man would come back to the boat.

古文：授疑之，伺行后，发其笥，有文书数卷，皆是吴郡诸人名。
现代文：章授起了疑心，就趁那人走后偷偷打开他的箱子，见里面有几卷文书。上面都是吴郡的一些人名。
English: Zhang Zhaozhu became suspicious and took advantage of the man's absence to secretly open his suitcase. Inside, he found several volumes of documents, all of which contained the names of people from Wuxi County.

古文：又有针数百枚，去或将一管。
现代文：箱子里还有几百根针。每次那人上村镇里去时都拿一管针。
English: There are still hundreds of needles in the box. Every time the man goes to the village, he takes a needle.

古文：后还，得升余酒，数片脯，谓授曰：君知我是鬼也，附载相烦，求得少酒，相与别。
现代文：有一次他回来，拿了一些酒几片肉。对章授说：麻烦你为我寄存了箱子，我要来了一点酒，来和你告别。
English: Once he came back with some wine and a few pieces of meat. He said to Zhang Zhu: "Please deposit the box for me. I'll bring some wine and say goodbye to you."

古文：所以多持针者，当病者，以针针其神焉。
现代文：我每次拿一些针走，都是去找那些应该得病的人，用针扎他们的魂灵。
English: Every time I take some needles, I go to the people who are supposed to be sick and prick their souls with needles.

古文：今所至皆此郡人，丹阳别有使往。
现代文：现在我去找的都是本郡人，丹阳郡另外有人去。
English: Now I'm looking for people from this county, but there are other people from Danyang county.

古文：今年多病，君勿至病者家。
现代文：今年得病的多，你千万别到病人家。
English: There will be a lot of illnesses this year. You must not go to the homes of the sick.

古文：授从乞药，答言：我但能行病杀人，不主药治病也。
现代文：章授向他求药，他说：我只能传病杀人，不会治病救人。
English: Zhang Zhu asked him for medicine. He said, "I can only transmit diseases and kill people, but I can't cure or save people."

古文：元嘉末，有长安僧什昙爽，来游江南，具说如此也。
现代文：元嘉末年，有个法名叫什昙爽的长安和尚到江南游历，说这件事说得很详细。
English: In the last years of Yuan Jia, there was a Buddhist monk from Chang'an named Shifang Shuang who traveled to the south of the Yangtze River. He described this event in great detail.

古文：施续门生
现代文：施续门生
English: Succession of a pupil

古文：吴兴施续，有门生，常秉无鬼论。
现代文：吴兴的施续有个门生，常常坚持无鬼论。
English: Wu Xing's executor had a protégé who often insisted on the absence of ghosts.

古文：忽有一单衣白袷客，与共语，遂及鬼神。移日，客辞屈，乃曰：君辞巧，理不足。
现代文：有一天，忽然来了个穿单白袍子的人和他谈话，谈了一天，白袍人说不过门生了，就说：你很能说，但道理不能服我。
English: One day, a man wearing a single white robe suddenly came to talk with him. They talked for a day. The man in the white robe said that he was no more than a disciple, and said, "You are very good at talking, but you cannot convince me with reason."

古文：仆即是鬼，何以云无？
现代文：我就是个鬼，你怎么说没有鬼呢？
English: I am a ghost. How can you say there is no ghost?

古文：问鬼何以来，答曰：受使来取君，期尽明日食时。
现代文：门生问鬼来作什么，鬼说：我奉命来抓你，明天吃饭的时候就是你的死期。
English: The disciple asked the ghost what it had come to do, and the ghost said, "I have been ordered to catch you. Tomorrow at dinner time is the time of your death."

古文：门生请乞酸苦，鬼问：有人似君者否？
现代文：门生就苦苦哀求别抓他，鬼就问：有没有和你相似的人呢？
English: The disciple pleaded with the devil not to take him, and the devil asked, "Is there anyone like you?"

古文：云：施续帐下都督，与仆相似。
现代文：门生说：施续帐下的都督和我相似。
English: The protégé said: The governor under the execution account is similar to me.

古文：便与俱往。与都督对坐，鬼手中出一铁凿，可尺余，安著都督头，便举椎打之。
现代文：鬼就和门生一同到都督那儿去，和都督对而坐下。鬼拿出一个铁凿子，有一尺多长，对准都督的头，就举起铁锤打凿子。
English: The ghost went with his disciples to the governor and sat down opposite him. The ghost took out an iron chisel, more than a foot long, aimed at the governor's head, and lifted the hammer to hit the chisel.

古文：都督云：头觉微痛。
现代文：都督说：我怎么头有点痛呢？
English: The governor said: "Why do I have a slight headache?

古文：向来转剧，食顷便亡。
现代文：不一会儿头就疼得十分厉害，一顿饭工夫就死去了。
English: In a short time, the pain in his head became very severe, and he died within an hour of eating.

古文：张道虚
现代文：张道虚
English: Zhang Daohu

古文：吴郡张道虚、张顺，知名士也，居在阊门。
现代文：吴郡的张道虚、张顺，是知名的学士，住在阊门。
English: Zhang Daohu and Zhang Shun from Wuxi County are well-known academicians and live in Xiamen.

古文：遭母丧中，买新宅。
现代文：母亲去世后，买了新府宅。
English: After his mother died, he bought a new mansion.

古文：日暮，闻人扣门云：君是佳人，何为危人自安也？
现代文：一天晚上，听见有人敲门说：你们是有教养的名人，怎么干出这种利己害人的事呢？
English: One night, I heard someone knock on my door and say: "You are educated celebrities, how can you do such a selfish and harmful thing?"

古文：答云：仆自买宅，得君棺器，为市甓作冢相移，有何负？
现代文：回答说：我们买下这住宅时，发现了你的棺木，我为你买了砖把坟迁移了，有什么对不起你的呢？
English: He replied: "When we bought this house, we found your coffin. I bought bricks for you and moved the grave. What's wrong with you?

古文：鬼曰：移身著吴将军冢，吾是小人，日夜斗，不可堪忍。
现代文：鬼说：你们把我移到吴将军的坟地，我是个小小老百姓，他们日夜争斗，我实在受不了。
English: The ghost said, "You moved me to General Wu's graveyard. I'm a little commoner. They fight day and night. I really can't stand it."

古文：不信，君可随我视之。
现代文：不信，你们可以跟我去看看。
English: If you don't believe me, you can come with me to see it.

古文：于是二张恍惚，便至阊门外。二张听之，但闻冢中淘淘打拍。
现代文：于是张道虚、张顺两人恍恍惚惚地就到了吴将军坟地，一听，果然坟墓里传出辟辟啪啪的格斗声。
English: So Zhang Daohu and Zhang Shun both went to General Wu's grave in a daze. As soon as they heard it, the sound of a fierce fight was heard in the grave.

古文：鬼便语云：当令君知。
现代文：鬼说：我让你们知道我的厉害。
English: The ghost said, "I'll show you how powerful I am."

古文：少时兄弟俱亡。
现代文：不久，二张兄弟就都死了。
English: Before long, both brothers were dead.

