古文：初六日，晨餐后，作二诗别郑、杨诸君。
现代文：初六日早餐后，作了两首诗辞别郑、杨诸君。
English: After breakfast on the sixth day of the first semester, he composed two poems to bid farewell to Zheng and Yang Zhujun.

古文：郑君复强少留，以一诗酬赠焉。
现代文：郑君又强逼着稍作停留，用一首诗回赠给我。
English: Zheng Jun forced me to stay for a while and gave me a poem in return.

古文：遂下山，西南一里入大道，东南一里过南溪桥。
现代文：于是下山，向西南一里走上大道，往东南一里过了南溪桥。
English: So I went down the mountain, walked one mile southwest on the main road, and walked one mile southeast over the Nanxi Bridge.

古文：南溪之由高峙桥东，有水自西南直上逼西麓，石梁跨其上，即所谓南溪也。
现代文：南溪的山高高耸立在桥东，有水流自西南流来一直向上逼近西麓，绕到山的东北流入漓江去，石桥跨在水上，就是所谓的南溪了。
English: The Nanxi Mountain stands tall to the east of the bridge. Water flows from the southwest all the way up to the western foot. It flows around the mountain to the northeast and flows into the Minjiang River. The stone bridge spans the water. This is the so-called Nanxi River.

古文：白龙洞在山椒。
现代文：白龙洞在山顶。
English: Bailong Cave is at the top of the mountain.

古文：累级而上，洞门高涨，西向临溪，两石倒悬洞口，岂即所谓白龙者耶？
现代文：沿层层台阶上去，洞口高张着，朝向西边面临溪流，两块岩石倒悬在洞口，莫非就是所谓的白龙吗？
English: Going up the steps, the mouth of the cave is high, facing the stream to the west, and two rocks are hanging upside down at the mouth of the cave. Is this the so-called white dragon?

古文：洞下广列崇殿，仰望不知为。
现代文：洞下排列着许多高大的殿宇，抬头望去不知道是山洞。
English: Under the cave, there are many tall buildings. If you look up, you might not know it's a cave.

古文：由殿左透级上，得璇室雕饰华丽的宫室如层楼，内有自然之龛，置千手观音。
现代文：由殿左通过台阶上去，走到一处雕饰华丽的殿堂，如同高楼，里边有自然形成的石完，安放着千手观音。
English: From the left of the hall, go up the steps and walk to a gorgeously carved hall, like a high-rise, with a naturally formed stone finish inside, where the Thousand-armed Goddess is placed.

古文：前临殿室之上，环瞻洞顶，此洞最胜处。
现代文：站在前边面临殿堂之上，环顾洞顶；是此洞最优美之处。
English: Standing at the front, facing the hall, looking around the top of the cave; this is the most beautiful part of the cave.

古文：从此北向东转，遂成昏黑。
现代文：从此往北转向东，便变得昏黑下来。
English: From there, it turns north to east and becomes dark.

古文：先是，买炬山僧，僧言由洞内竟可达刘仙岩，不必仍由此洞出。
现代文：这之前，向山中的和尚买火把，和尚说由洞内一直走可到达刘仙岩，不必仍从此洞出来。
English: Before that, they bought torches from a monk in the mountains. The monk said that they could walk all the way from the cave to the Liu Xian Rock, and there was no need to come out of the cave.

古文：及征钱篝火入，中颇宽宏多岐。
现代文：到拿出钱买火把点亮后进洞，只见洞中十分宽阔宏大，岔洞很多。
English: After taking out money to buy torches and lighting them, I went into the cave and saw that it was very wide and grand, with many holes.

古文：先极其东隅，上跻一隙，余以为刘仙道也，途穷莫进。
现代文：首先走到洞内东隅的尽头，上登一条裂缝，我以为是去刘仙岩的路了，路竟然断了无法前进。
English: First of all, I walked to the end of the east corner of the cave and climbed up a crack. I thought it was the road to Liu Xianyan, but the road was actually broken and I couldn't move forward.

古文：又南下一洼，则支窦傍午，上下交错，余又以为刘仙道也，山僧言： 护珠岩道，崄巇莫逾。
现代文：又向南走下一个洼坑，就见旁洞四通八达，上下交错，我又以为是去刘仙岩的路了，山上的和尚说： 这是去护珠岩的路，艰险崎岖无法通过。
English: I also walked south to a sinkhole, where I saw side caves in all directions, intersecting up and down. I thought it was the road to Liu Xianyan. The monk on the mountain said, "This is the road to Zhuoyan Rock. It is too difficult and rugged to pass.

古文：与其踯躅于杳黑，不若出洞平行为便。 
现代文：与其徘徊在深黑之中，不如出洞在平地走更为方便些。 
English: Instead of wandering in the deep darkness, it is more convenient to go out of the cave and walk on the flat ground.

古文：时所赍茅炬已浪爇垂尽，乃随僧仍出白龙。
现代文：此时带着的茅草火把已经白白地将要烧尽，只好跟随和尚仍然出了白龙洞。
English: At this time, the thatched torch he was carrying was about to burn out in vain, so he had to follow the monk out of the White Dragon Cave.

古文：下山至桥，望白龙之右复有洞盘空，而急于刘岩，遂从桥东循山南东转，则南面一崖，层突弥耸，下亦有窍旁错，时交臂而过。
现代文：下山走到桥边，望见白龙洞的右边又有个洞盘在高空，但急着去刘仙岩，便从桥东头沿南面的山向东转，就见南面有一座石崖，层层突起更加高耸，下边也有洞穴四处交错，时时擦肩而过。
English: Walking down the mountain to the bridge, I saw another cave dish high in the sky on the right side of the White Dragon Cave. However, I was in a hurry to get to Liu Xianyan, so I turned east from the east end of the bridge along the mountain on the south side. I saw a cliff on the south side, with more towering protrusions. There were also caves interlaced everywhere on the lower side, which I passed by from time to time.

古文：忽山雨复来，乃奔憩崖下，跻隙坐飞石上，出胡饼啖之。
现代文：忽然山雨再次降临，便跑到石崖下休息，登上裂缝坐在飞突的岩石上，拿出烧饼来吃。
English: Suddenly, the mountain rain came down again, so he ran to rest under the stone cliff, climbed up the crack to sit on the flying rock, and took out the biscuits to eat.

古文：仙仙乎有凌餐霞之想。久之雨止，岩，转岩之东，则刘仙岩在是矣。
现代文：向外看去是一层雨帘，里边如映照着乳白色的筛幕，仙仙然使人有腾云驾雾吞吐云霞的想法。很久雨才停，下了岩洞，转到岩洞的东边，刘仙岩就在这里了。
English: Looking outside, there is a layer of rain curtain. Inside, it is like a milky white screen, and the fairy godmother seems to make people have the idea of flying clouds, driving fog and swallowing clouds and haze. It took a long time for the rain to stop, get out of the cave, turn to the east of the cave, and Liu Xianyan is here.

古文：与白龙洞东西分向，由山南盘麓而行，相去不过一里，而避雨之岩正界其中，有观在岩下。
现代文：在上洞右壁刘仙人用篆字刻有雷符，又有寇忠憨公的大字，都是我所想要得到的东西。
English: On the right wall of the upper cave, Liu Xianren engraved a thunderbolt with the character for thunderbolt, and there is also a large character for Kuo Zhongxiong, both of which are things I want to get.

古文：先入觅道士炊饭，而道枕未醒，有童子师导从观右登级，先穿门西入，旋转逾门上，复透门出，又得一岩，东南向，中看三仙焉，则刘仙与其师张平叔辈也。又左由透门之上，再度而北，又开一岩，中置仙妃，岩前悬石甚巨，当洞门，若树屏，若垂帘。
现代文：我来到刘仙岩，立即遍览了各个洞穴。
English: When I came to Liu Xianyan, I immediately scanned all the caves.

古文：刘仙篆雷符于上岩右壁，又有寇忠愍ǐ准大书，俱余所得者。
现代文：询问与白龙洞暗中相通之处，始终找不到。这才知道白龙洞通着的，是避雨那个岩洞的下洞，也就是导游的僧人所说的护珠岩了。
English: When I inquired about the secret passage to the White Dragon Cave, I couldn't find it. It was only then that I learned that the passage to the White Dragon Cave was through the lower cave of the cave that was sheltered from the rain, which is what the monks who guided the tour referred to as the protective bead rock.

古文：时雨复连绵不止，余仍令顾仆随童子师下观，觅米自炊。
现代文：此时雨又连绵不停地下起来，我仍旧命令顾仆随道童下到道观中，找米自己做饭。
English: At this time, it rained incessantly, and I still ordered Gu Min to go down to the Taoist center with the Taoist children to find rice and cook it myself.

古文：余出匣中手摹雷符及寇书，而石崖歌则，石雨淋漓，抵暮而所摹无几。
现代文：我拿出匣子中的纸笔亲手摹拓雷符及寇准的字，但石崖倾斜，石壁上雨水淋漓，到天黑时都没有摹好多少。
English: I took out the pen and paper in the box and wrote down the words "Tuo Lei Fu" and "Kou Jian" with my own hands, but the cliff was sloping, and rain was pouring down on the stone walls. By nightfall, it was not much better.

古文：又令静闻抄录张、刘二仙《金丹歌》，亦未竟。
现代文：又命令静闻抄录张、刘二位仙人的《金丹歌》，也没有抄完。
English: He also ordered Jinghan to transcribe Zhang and Liu Xianren's "Jintan Song," but he did not finish the transcription.

古文：又崖间镌刘仙《养气汤方》及唐少卿《遇仙记》未录，遂宿观。
现代文：另外崖壁间镌刻着刘仙人的《养气汤方》及唐少卿的《遇仙记》，没有抄，只好就住在道观中。
English: In addition, Liu Xianren's "Nourishing Qi Tang Fang" and Tang Shaoqing's "Meet the Immortals" were engraved between the cliff walls. Without copying, they had to live in Taoism.

古文：道士出粥以饷。
现代文：道士拿出稀粥来给我们吃。
English: The Taoist priest brought out thin gruel for us to eat.

古文：中夜大雨，势若倒峡。
现代文：半夜下大雨，雨势如山峡崩塌下来。
English: Heavy rain fell in the middle of the night, and the rain collapsed like a mountain canyon.

古文：刘仙名景，字仲远，乃平叔弟子，各有《金丹秘歌》镌崖内，又有《俞真人歌》在洞门崖上，半已剥落，而《养气汤方》甚妙，唐少卿书奇，俱附镌焉。
现代文：刘仙人名叫刘景，字仲远，是张平叔的弟子，各人都有《金丹秘歌》凿刻在崖壁上，又有《佘真人歌》在洞口的崖壁上，一半已经剥落，而《养气汤方》十分奇妙，唐少卿的字很罕见，都附带刻在壁上。
English: Liu Xianren's name is Liu Jing, the characters are far away from each other, he is a disciple of Zhang Pingru. Each of them has "The Secret Song of Jintan" chiseled on the cliff wall, and "The Song of Shizhen" on the cliff wall at the mouth of the cave, half of which has been peeled off, and "Raising Qi Tang Fang" is very strange. The words of Tang Shaoqing are very rare, they are all engraved on the wall.

古文：初七日，雨滂沱不止。
现代文：初七日大雨涝沱不止。
English: On the first seven days, it rained and rained.

古文：令顾仆炊饭观中。
现代文：命令顾仆在道观中煮饭。
English: He ordered his servants to cook rice according to Taoism.

古文：余与静闻冒雨登岩，各完未完之摹录。
现代文：我与静闻冒雨登上岩洞，各人完成未摹完的崖刻。
English: Jing Huan and I climbed the cave in the rain, and each of us completed the unfinished cliff carving.

古文：遂由玉皇祠后，寻草中伏级，向东北登山。
现代文：于是从玉皇祠后，找到草中隐伏着的石阶，向东北登山。
English: So, after leaving the Jade Emperor's Ancestral Hall, he found the stone steps hidden in the grass and climbed up to the northeast.

古文：草深雨湿，里衣沾透，而瞻顾岩石，层层犹不能已。
现代文：草深雨湿，内衣都湿透了，可环视左右的岩石，一层层的仍见不到头。
English: The grass was deep and wet from the rain, and my underwear was soaked. I could look around at the rocks to the right and left, but I still couldn't see my head.

古文：而童子师追寻至岩中，顾不见客，高声招餐，余乃还饭寺中。
现代文：而道童追寻我们来到岩洞中，四顾不见客人，高声招唤我们去用餐，我便返回寺中吃饭。
English: But the Taoist Dao chased us into the cave, looked around and saw no guests, called out loudly for us to go to dinner, and I returned to the temple to eat.

古文：饭后，道士童师导由穿云岩。
现代文：饭后，道士与道童领路游穿云岩。
English: After the meal, Taoists and Taoist children lead the way through the cloud rock.

古文：其岩上岩东南绝壁下，洞口亦东南向。
现代文：这个岩洞在上岩东南的绝壁上，洞四也是朝东南。
English: This cave is on the cliff southeast of Shangyan, and Cave 4 is also in the southeast.

古文：其洞高穹爽朗，后与左右分穿三窍，左窍旁透洞前，后与右其窍小而暗，不暗行也。洞内镌《桂林十二岩十二洞歌》，乃宋人笔。
现代文：岩洞高高弯隆起，高爽明朗，后面与左右两边分别通着一个洞穴，共三个，左边的洞穴从旁边通到洞前，后面与右边的洞穴又小又暗，无法在黑暗中前行、洞内刻有《桂林十二岩十二洞歌》，是宋代人的笔迹。
English: There are three caves in total. The cave on the left leads from the side to the front of the cave. The caves on the right and behind are small and dark, making it impossible to move forward in the dark. The cave is inscribed with the "Song of the Twelve Caves of the Twelve Rocks of Guilin," which was written in the Song Dynasty.

古文：余喜其名，欲录之，而高不可及。道士取二梯倚崖间，缘缘分录，录完出洞。
现代文：我喜爱它的名字，打算抄录它，可是太高够不到；道士取来两把梯子靠在崖壁上，分头顺着抄录，抄完出洞。
English: I loved its name and wanted to copy it, but it was too high to reach; the priest took two ladders, leaned them against the cliff, and copied along the edge of the cliff until he reached the cave.

古文：洞右有文昌祠，由其而东过仙人足迹。迹在石上，比余足更长其半，而阔亦如之，深及五寸，指印分明，乃左足也。
现代文：洞右有个文昌祠，由它前面往东经过仙人足迹言脚印在岩石上，比我的脚掌还长那么一半，而且宽处也是这样，探达五寸，指头印清清楚楚，是左脚。
English: To the right of the cave there is a Wenchang Shrine. From the front of it to the east, a crane passes by the footprints of a fairy. The footprints on the rock are half as long as the soles of my feet, and the width is also the same, reaching five inches, the fingerprints are clear, it is the left foot.

古文：其侧石上书 仙迹 二字， 迹 字乃手指所画，而 仙 字乃凿镌成之者。
现代文：它侧面的石头上写着 仙迹 两个字声迹 字是用手指划出来的，可 仙 字是凿刻成的。
English: On the stone on the side of it was written "Fairytale" in two syllables. The syllables were drawn with a finger, but the fairy tale was carved with a chisel.

古文：由迹北上，即为仙迹岩。
现代文：由脚印往北上去，就是仙迹岩。
English: To the north of the footprints is Fairy Rock.

古文：岩在穿云东北崖之上，在上岩东隅，洞口亦东南向，外亦高朗，置老君像焉。
现代文：岩洞在穿云岩东北的山崖之上、在上岩的东隅，洞口也是朝向东南，外边也很高大明朗，在洞中放置了老君像。
English: The cave is on top of the cliff in the northeast of Pier Yunyan, in the eastern corner of Shangyan. The mouth of the cave also faces southeast, and the outside is also tall and clear. A statue of an old man was placed in the cave.

古文：其内乳柱倒垂，界为两重，洞岩穿窦两岐，俱不深，而玲珑有余。
现代文：洞内钟乳石柱倒垂，分隔为两层，好像是衙门大堂的后边，陈列着窗格状的屏风，分隔成内、外室的样子。洞中岩石上通着两岔洞，都不深，可玲珑小巧有余。
English: The stalactite pillars in the cave are inverted and separated into two layers, as if they were the back of the gate lobby, displaying a window-like screen, separated into inner and outer rooms. There are two holes in the rock in the cave, neither of which is deep, but rather small.

古文：徘徊久之，雨霏不止，仍从仙迹石一里，抵观前。
现代文：徘徊了很久，雨霏霏不止，仍从仙迹石走一里，到达道观前。
English: I wandered for a long time, the rain and hail continued, and I still walked one mile from the miracle stone to reach the Taoist temple.

古文：别道士童师，遂南行十里铺。
现代文：告别了道士和道童， 就向南行二里，到了十里铺。
English: After bidding farewell to the Taoist and the Taoist disciple, he walked two miles south and arrived at the ten-mile shop.

古文：由铺南进灵懿石坊，东向岐路，入一里，北望穿山，隔江高悬目窦，昔从北顾，今转作南瞻，空濛雨色中，得此圆明，疑是中秋半晴半雨也。
现代文：十里铺在斗鸡山西边，在府城通往平乐府的大道上。由铺南走进灵鼓石坊，向东走上岔路，深入一里，朝北望穿山，隔着江流高悬着一个眼睛一样的洞穴，以前从北面看，今天转到南边观看，在这空檬雨色之中，见到这个明亮的圆洞，怀疑是在中秋节的半晴半雨之时了。
English: Ten miles of pavement on the west side of the Toutou Mountain, on the main road leading to Pinglefu in the capital city. From the south of the pavement, walk into the Linggu Shifang, walk east on the branch road, go one mile deep, look north across the mountain, across the river flow hangs an eye-like cave. Previously seen from the north, today turn to the south to watch. In this lemon-rain color, seeing this bright round hole, it is suspected that it is the time of the Mid-Autumn Festival.

古文：再前，望崖头北隅梳妆台下，飞石嵌江，剜成门阙，远望之，较水月似小，而与雉山石门，其势相似。
现代文：再往前走，望见崖头北隅的梳妆台下，飞石嵌入江中，剑成门网，远望它，比水月洞似乎小些，可与堆山的石门，气势相似。
English: Further ahead, you can see under the dresser in the northern corner of the cliff, the flying stones are embedded in the river, and the sword is a door net. Looking at it from afar, it seems to be smaller than the water moon cave, but it is similar to the stone door of the mountain.

古文：然急流涌其中，荡漾尤异，倏忽之间，上见圆明达云，下睹方渚嵌水，瞻顾之间，奇绝未有。
现代文：然而急流奔涌在石门中，荡漾之状尤其奇异，忽然之间，往上看见明亮的圆洞直达云霄，向下看方方的小洲嵌入水中，顾盼之间，奇绝的景致从未有过。
English: However, the rapids rushing through the stone gate, the ripples are particularly strange. Suddenly, looking up, you can see a bright round hole reaching up to the sky, and looking down, you can see small islands embedded in the water. Looking down, there has never been such an amazing landscape.

古文：共一里，东至崖头庙。
现代文：共行一里，往东来到崖头庙。
English: We walked for a mile and came to the East, to the Cliff Head Temple.

古文：其山在雉山之南，乃城南第三重当午之案也。
现代文：此山在难山的南面，是城南第三重正南的案山。
English: This mountain is in the south of Nanshan and is the third highest mountain in the south of the city.

古文：漓江西合阳江于雉山，又东会拖剑水及漓江支水于穿山，奔流南下，此山当其冲。
现代文：漓江往西在堆山与阳江合流，又向东在穿山会合拖剑江及漓江的支流，往南奔流而下，此山正当江流的要冲。
English: To the west, the Lijiang River meets the Yangjiang River in the mountains, and to the east, the tributaries of the Tongjian River and the Lijiang River meet in the mountains and flow southward. This mountain is the point of the river flow.

古文：山不甚高，而屹立扼流，有当熊之势。
现代文：山不怎么高，可屹立于此扼住江流，有迎面挡熊的气势。
English: The mountain is not very high, but it can stand here to hold back the river flow, and it has the momentum to face the bear.

古文：西向祀嘉应妃，甚灵，即灵懿庙。
现代文：有庙向西，供奉嘉应妃，十分灵验，就是灵爵庙。
English: There is a temple to the west, dedicated to Princess Jiaying, which is very effective. It is the Lingzhu Temple.

古文：宋嘉定间加封嘉应善利妃。其北崖有亭，为梳妆台，下即飞崖悬嵌，中剜成门处，而崖突波倾，不能下瞰，但见回浪跃澜，漩石而出，时跫然有声耳。
现代文：庙北的山崖上有亭子，是梳妆台，下边就是飞崖悬空下嵌，中间卿空成门洞的地方，山崖突起波涛倾注，不能往下俯瞰，只见回浪跃澜，回旋的水流从石门中旋转而出，不时发出脚步声一样的声音。
English: There is a pavilion on the cliff to the north of the temple, it is a dressing table, the bottom is where the cliff hangs in the air, the middle is empty and the door is a hole, the cliff protrudes and the waves pour in, you can't look down, you can only see the waves, the swirling water current rotates out of the stone door, and from time to time it makes a sound like footsteps.

古文：坐久之，返庙中。
现代文：坐了根久，返回庙中。
English: After sitting for a long time, he returned to the temple.

古文：由其后入一洞，其门西向。
现代文：由庙后进入一个洞，洞口向西。
English: From the back of the temple you enter a cave, which opens to the west.

古文：穿门历级下，其后岈然通，有石肺垂洞中，其色正绿，叠覆田田荷叶相连的样子，是为荷叶洞。
现代文：穿过洞口沿台阶下去，那后面十分深远，四处都望得见，有肺叶状的岩石垂在洞中，石色纯绿，层层叠叠覆盖下来，似荷叶相连，这就是荷叶洞。
English: After passing through the mouth of the cave and going down the steps, the back is very deep and can be seen everywhere. There are lung-shaped rocks hanging in the cave, the stone color is pure green, and they are covered in layers, like lotus leaves. This is the lotus leaf cave.

古文：穿叶底透山东北，即通明之口也，漓江复潆其下。
现代文：穿过荷叶底下钻到山的东北面，就是透入亮光的洞口了，漓江重又潇绕在山下。
English: Drilling through the bottom of the lotus leaves to the northeast side of the mountain is the entrance to the bright light, and the Lijiang River is heavy and winding around under the mountain.

古文：由叶前左下，东转深黑中，其势穹然，不及索炬而入。
现代文：由荷叶前往左下走，向东转入漆黑之中，洞势弯隆，来不及找火把进去了。
English: Walk from the lotus leaves to the bottom left, turn east into the pitch black, the cave is steep, and it's too late to find a torch.

古文：初，余自雉山僧闻荷叶洞之名，问之不得其处，至是拭崖题知之，得于意外，洞亦灵幻，不负雨中踯躅。
现代文：起初，我从堆山的僧人那里听到荷叶洞的名字，询问他又不知道它的位置，来到这里擦拭崖壁上的题记知道是这里，得之于意料之外，山洞也灵光变幻，不辜负在雨中来回走了一趟。
English: At first, I heard the name "Lotus Leaf Cave" from the monk who was building the mountain, asked him if he knew its location, and came here to wipe the inscription on the cliff wall to know it was here. Unexpectedly, the cave also changed its appearance, and it was worth going back and forth in the rain.

古文：庙中无居人，赛神携火就崖而炊，前后不绝。
现代文：庙中无人住，参加赛神的人带着火种来就着石崖烧饭，前后不断。
English: There is no one living in the temple, and people who take part in Saishin come with kindling to cook on the cliff, which goes on and on.

古文：其东北隅石崖插江，山名 净瓶 以此，须泛舟沿流观之，其上莫窥也。
现代文：岩洞向东桐口高耸。下到峡中，由南边的山侧向东进入上洞；向东上登必定要经由北面的深洞，全都高深幽远，没有火把不能远游。
English: The rock cave rises high to the east of Tongkou. When descending into the gorge, one enters the upper cave from the south side of the mountain to the east; when ascending to the east, one must pass through the deep cave to the north, all of which are high, deep, and remote, and one cannot travel far without a torch.

古文：仍二里出大道，傍十里铺，饭而雨霁。
现代文：洞前的钟乳石柱缤纷交呈，不比白龙洞差。上边刻着 玄岩 ，字写得十分古朴。出洞后，吃过饭后雨停了。
English: The stalactite pillars in front of the cave are colorful, no worse than Bai Long Cave. Basalt is engraved on the top, the words are very simple. After leaving the cave, it stopped raining after eating.

古文：五里入宁远门，南门。返寓，易衣浣污焉。
现代文：走五里进了宁远门，返回寓所，换衣服洗去污垢。
English: I walked five miles to the Ningyuan Gate, returned to the apartment, changed clothes and washed off the dirt.

古文：初八日，晨餐后，市石于按察司东初旸，令顾仆先携三小者返寓，以三大者留为包夹焉。
现代文：初八日早餐后，到按察使司东侧王孙朱初肠家买石头，命令顾仆先一步带着三块小的返回寓所，把三块大的留下为我用夹板包装好。
English: After breakfast on the eighth day of the first lunar month, I went to the east side of Wang Sun Zhu, the inspector, to buy a stone. I ordered my servant to return to the apartment with three small stones first, and leave the three large stones for me to pack with a splint.

古文：余遂同静闻里半出北门，转而东半里，北入支径，过一塘，遂登刘岩山。
现代文：我于是同静闻走一里半出了北门，转向东行半里，向北走上岔开的小径，路过一个水塘，于是上登刘岩山。
English: I then walked with Jingwen for a mile and a half out of the north gate, turned eastbound for half a mile, walked north on a paved path, passed a pond, and then climbed Mount Liuyan.

古文：先有庵在山麓，洞当其后，为刘岩洞。
现代文：先有座寺庵在山麓，洞正位于庵后，是刘岩洞。
English: There is a temple and a hermitage at the foot of the mountain, and a cave just behind the hermitage, the Liuyan Cave.

古文：洞门西向，东下渊黑，外置门为藏蒌之所。
现代文：洞口向西，往东下去是漆黑的深渊，外边安了门作为收藏篓嵩的地方。
English: The mouth of the cave is a dark abyss to the west and to the east. A gate has been set up on the outside as a place to collect dragonflies.

古文：此岩以刘姓者名，与城南刘仙同名实异也。
现代文：这个岩洞是因姓刘的人得的名，与城南的刘仙岩同名而实际上是不同的。
English: This cave was named after a man surnamed Liu, and is actually different from the Liu Xianyan in the south of the city, which has the same name.

古文：由洞右跻危级而上，是为明月洞。
现代文：由洞右登高高的石阶上去，这是明月洞。
English: From the right side of the cave, climb up the high stone steps. This is the bright moon cave.

古文：其洞高缀危崖之半，上削千尺，下临重壑，洞门亦西向。
现代文：这个洞高高点缀在高崖的半中腰，上面陡削有千尺高，下临重重深壑，洞口也是向西。
English: This cave is dotted high up in the middle of the cliff. The steep slope above is a thousand feet high, while the one below is much deeper. The mouth of the cave also faces west.

古文：僧白云架佛阁于洞门之上，层叠倚岩，有飞云缀空之势。
现代文：白云和尚在洞口之上架设了佛阁，层层叠叠靠着岩石，有飞在云上点缀在天空的气势。
English: Baiyun Monk erected a Buddhist pavilion on top of the cave entrance, layered on top of each other against the rock, with the momentum of flying on the clouds and dotting the sky.

古文：洞在阁下，东入岈然，然昏黑莫辨，无甚奇。
现代文：洞在佛阁下，向东走进去十分深邃，但是昏黑得无法辨清东西，没有什么奇特之处。
English: The cave is in the Buddha's honor, and it is very deep when you go to the east, but it is so dark that you can't see anything. There is nothing special about it.

古文：出洞，觅所谓望夫山。
现代文：出洞来，寻找所谓的望夫山。
English: They came out of the cave, looking for the so-called "Wangfu Mountain."

古文：山在其北，犹掩不可睹。
现代文：山在洞的北面，仍然被挡住不能看见。
English: The mountain to the north of the cave is still blocked from view.

古文：乃饭而下，崖半见北有支径，遂循崖少北，复见一洞西向，其门高悬，为僧伐木倒架，纵横洞前，无由上跻。
现代文：使吃了饭下山，在山崖半腰看见北边有条岔开的小径，就沿着山崖稍往北走，又见到一个山洞向西，洞口高悬，僧人砍伐树木，纵横交错地倒架在洞前，无从上登。
English: After eating dinner, he went down the mountain. Halfway down the cliff, he saw a path that had been cut open on the north side. He walked a little north along the cliff and saw a cave to the west. The mouth of the cave was high up. The monks were cutting down trees and standing in front of the cave in a criss-cross manner. There was no way to climb up.

古文：方徘徊间，而白云自上望之，亟趋而下，怂恿引登。
现代文：正在徘徊之间，白云从上边望见了，连忙赶下来，鼓励并领我们上登。
English: While we were wandering, Baiyun saw us from above and hurried down to encourage and lead us up.

古文：梯叠门而上，一石当门树屏；由其左透隙，则宛转玲珑；逾石脊东下，穹然直透山腹；辟门东出，外临层崖，内列堂奥，凭空下瞰，如置身云端也。
现代文：用梯子一层层上到洞口，一块岩石挡在洞口，像竖立的屏风；由岩石左侧穿过石缝，则弯弯曲曲玲珑精致；越过石脊向东下走，十分深广，直通到山腹之中；从东边张开的洞口出来，外边下临层层山崖，洞内罗列着深深的殿堂 ；凌空下瞰冲口置身于云天之上。
English: Use the ladder to climb up layer by layer to the mouth of the cave, a rock is blocked at the mouth of the cave, like a vertical screen; from the left side of the rock through the stone slit, the bends are exquisitely delicate; walk down the ridge to the east, very deep and wide, straight into the mountainside; come out of the open hole on the east side, outside the lower layer of the cliff, the cave is lined with deep halls; fly down and look at the punch to be above the clouds.

古文：洞门乳柱纵横，径窦逆裂，北有一径高穹下坠，东转昏黑，亦有门东出，暗不复下。
现代文：洞口钟乳石柱纵横排列，迸裂的缝隙径穿石洞，北边有一条通道，从高高隆起的崖上深坠下去，转向东洞昏黑下来，也有洞口往东出去，因为太暗不再下走。
English: The stalactite columns at the mouth of the cave are arranged vertically and horizontally, and the cracked crevices run through the stone cave. There is a passage on the north side, which plunges down from the high cliff and turns to the east cave to get dark. There is also a hole to the east, because it is too dark to go down.

古文：复与白云分踞石脊之中，谈此洞灵异。
现代文：又与白云分别坐在石脊的中间，谈论此洞的灵异之处。
English: He and Baiyun also sat separately in the middle of the ridge, talking about the strangeness of the cave.

古文：昔其徒有不逞者，入洞迷昧，不知所往。
现代文：以前他的徒弟中有个迷胡的人，进洞神智迷乱，不知到什么地方去了。
English: Once upon a time, one of his apprentices was lost. He went into a cave, lost his wits and didn't know where he was going.

古文：白云遍觅无可得，哀求佛前。
现代文：白云四处寻找无法找到，在佛前哀求。
English: Baiyun searched everywhere but couldn't find it, and begged in front of the Buddha.

古文：五日，复自洞侧出，言为神所缚，将置之海，以师乞免贳通赦之。
现代文：五天后，那徒弟又从洞旁出来，说是被神捆绑起来，将要投入苦海，因为师傅乞求免罪才赦免了他。
English: Five days later, the apprentice came out of the cave again, saying that he had been tied up by God and would be thrown into the sea of suffering, because the master had forgiven him after he begged for forgiveness.

古文：然先是觅洞中数遍，不知从何出也。
现代文：然而在这之前在洞中寻找了几遍，不知是从何处出来的。
English: However, they had searched the cave several times before and did not know where it had come from.

古文：此间东西透豁，而有脊有门中界之。下洞，别白云。
现代文：洞的东西两头透亮开阔，有道石脊有个石门隔在中央，不像穿山、叠彩山、中隐山、南峰各山诸洞，十分空阔，平敞柑通，向下望去，明亮皎洁，里边没有其他隐秘之处了。
English: The east and west ends of the cave are transparent and open, and there is a stone door separated by a stone ridge in the center. Unlike the caves in the mountains of Pengshan, Stacked Colorful Mountains, Central Hidden Mountains, and South Peaks, it is very open, spacious and bright. Looking down, it is bright and clean, and there is no other hidden place inside.

古文：仍一里，西过北门，门西峰当面起，削山为城。
现代文：由洞中下来，告别了白云。仍然走一里路，往西经过北门，城门西边的山峰迎面耸起，辟山筑起城墙。
English: After coming down from the cave, he said goodbye to Baiyun. He still walked one mile, passing the north gate to the west. The mountain peaks on the west side of the city gate rose up to meet him, and the city wall was built.

古文：循其北麓转西北城角，下盘层石，上削危城。
现代文：沿着山的北麓转到城墙的西北兔，下面盘踞着层层岩石，上面耸立着高峻的城墙。
English: Along the northern foot of the mountain to the northwest corner of the city wall, with layers of rock below and the towering walls above.

古文：其西正马留山东度之脉；其南濒城为池，南汇与凉水洞桥新西门外。而南入阳江；其北则洼汇山塘，而东浅于虞山接龙桥下者。
现代文：它的西面正是马留山往东延伸的山脉；它的南面濒临城墙处是护城河，往南与凉水洞桥之水会流再向南流入阳江；它的北面侧低洼汇水，成为群山环绕的水塘，而东边比虞山龙桥下的水塘浅。
English: To the west of it are the mountains of Mount Malu stretching to the east; to the south of it, there is a moat on the edge of the city wall. To the south, the water of the Liangshui Cave Bridge flows southward and then flows southward into the Yangjiang River; to the north of it, the low-lying catchment water becomes a pond surrounded by mountains, while to the east is the shallow pond under the Dragon Bridge of Mount Biyu.

古文：西峰南麓，王阳明祠。
现代文：志书所称的始安娇应当就在那个地方了。
English: Shi'an Jiao, as it is called in the book, is said to have originated in that place.

古文：因之为城，锁钥甚壮。然北城随山南转，故北隅甚狭，渐迤而南，则东西开扩矣。
现代文：北门在两座山相夹之中，东西两座山峰陡峭地竖起，顺着山势筑城，是军事要地，极其雄壮。不过北面的城墙随着山势转向南，所以城北隅十分狭窄，渐渐透巡向南，则东西方向就开阔起来了。
English: The north gate is sandwiched between two mountains. The two peaks rise steeply from east to west, and the city is built along the mountain range. It is a military important place and extremely majestic. However, the northern wall turns south with the mountain range, so the northern corner of the city is very narrow. Gradually, as it passes south, the east-west direction opens up.

古文：余少憩城外西北角盘崖之上，旋入北门，西谒阳明祠。
现代文：我在城外西北角盘踞的石崖上稍作休息，随即进入北门，向西去拜渴了王阳明祠。
English: I took a short break on the stone cliff outside the northwest corner of the city, then entered the north gate and went west to worship the thirsty Wang Yangming Shrine.

古文：复东由大街南行，则望洞西岩之穴正当明处，若皎月高悬焉。
现代文：再向东经由大街往南行，就望见洞西岩的洞穴正好位于透出亮光的地方，如皎洁的明月高悬着。
English: Going further east along the main street to the south, you can see the cave of Dongxi Rock just where the light comes through, like a bright moon hanging high.

古文：又南，共一里，至《桂岭碑》侧，西向濒城，复得一山，则华景洞在焉。
现代文：又向南，共一里，来到《桂岭碑》侧边，向西走近城墙，又见到一座山，就见华景洞在这里。
English: Further south, a total of one mile, came to the side of the "Guiling Monument," approached the city wall to the west, and saw a mountain. Here you can see Hua Jing Cave.

古文：洞门东向，前有大池，后倚山，则亦因为西城者。
现代文：洞口向东，前边有个大水池，后面靠山，便也是顺着山势建西面的城墙。
English: The mouth of the cave faces east, in front of it there is a large pool, behind it there is a hill, so the western wall was also built along the mountain.

古文：洞前岩平朗，上覆外敞，其南昔有楼阁，今俱倾圮莫支，僧移就岩栖焉。
现代文：洞前部岩洞平坦明亮，上面有岩石覆盖着，外边宽敞，洞南从前有楼阁，今天全部倒塌了，没有任何支撑物，僧人搬到岩洞中栖身。
English: At the front of the cave, the cave is flat and bright, covered with rocks on the top and spacious on the outside. In the south of the cave, there used to be mansions, but today they have all collapsed. Without any support, the monks moved to the cave to live.

古文：岩后穿穴为门，其内崡岈，分而为三：南入者，洼暗而邃；西透者，昔穿城外，因为城门，后甃井石塞而断焉，北转者，上出若前，下履飞石，东临岩上。
现代文：岩洞后面穿穴为洞门，洞内十分幽深，又分为三个洞：向南进去的，低洼黑暗而深邃；往西穿去的，从前通到城外，因而作为城门，后来用石块砌起来塞断了；转向北的，往上出岩前，脚下踩着飞突的岩石，在岩洞上方向东俯视。
English: At the back of the cave, there is a hole, which is the entrance to the cave. The cave is very deep and is divided into three caves: the one to the south is a dark and deep depression; the one to the west leads to the outside of the city, and thus serves as the city gate, which was later bricked up with stones and blocked; the one to the north goes up and out of the rock, stepping on flying rocks underfoot, and looking down to the east over the cave.

古文：崖有旧镌一，为开庆元年手敕，乃畀其镇将者。开庆不知是何年号，其词翰俱为可观。
现代文：崖壁上有旧时的刻石一块，是开庆元平皇帝的亲笔语书，是赐给他镇守边地的大将的开庆不知是什么年号，诏书的词章文采都值得观赏。
English: On the cliff wall, there is a piece of old carved stone. It is the handwritten speech of Emperor Kaikei Yuanping, which was given to the general of the town guarding the border. I don't know what year it is. The words and phrases of the edict are worth watching.

古文：而下有谢表井跋，则泐è裂开不能读矣。
现代文：而下边有谢恩的奏章与跋文，却剥落得不能读了。
English: But underneath there are Shane's scores and essays, but they are so peeled off that I can't read them.

古文：此顶当是宝积山。《志》言宝积与华景相连，上有危石怪木，当今又为卧龙山，想一山而南北异名耳。
现代文：不久又出到前边的岩洞来，和尚说从洞左沿城墙攀登上去，山的绝顶之上有《诸葛碑》。我听了他的话很惊奇，急忙往西登上城墙上的女墙，就沿着城墙往南上登，不多一会儿，从花尊般成丛错杂的岩石中攀登到山顶。
English: Soon I came to the rock cave in front of me. The monk said that from the left side of the cave, climb up along the city wall. At the top of the mountain, there is the "Monument of Zhuge." I was very surprised to hear his words. I hurried to the west to climb the female wall on the city wall, and then climbed south along the city wall. In a short while, I climbed to the top of the mountain from the flower-like jumble of rocks.

古文：顶南荒草中有两碑，一为成化间开府孔镛撰文，一为嘉靖间阃帅俞大酞修记。
现代文：山顶南边的荒草中有两块碑，一块是成化年间开府孔铺撰写的碑文，一块是嘉靖年间总兵俞大酞撰修的碑记。
English: In the scrub on the south side of the mountain top, there are two inscriptions. One is the inscription written by Kaifu Kongpu during the Chenghua period, and the other is the inscription written by the General of the Chinese People's Liberation Army Daqi during the Jiajing period.

古文：皆言此山昔名卧龙，故因而祀公，以公德业在天下，非以地拘也。
现代文：都是说，此山从前名叫卧龙山，所以就在这里祭祀诸葛亮先生，因为先生的功德勋业遍天下，不能拘泥于地区。
English: They all said that this mountain was once called Wolong Mountain, so it was here that Mr. Zhuge Liang was sacrificed, because Mr. Zhuge Liang's merits and achievements were all over the world and could not be confined to the region.

古文：今顶祠已废，更创山麓。
现代文：今天山顶的祠堂已经废弃了，重新建在山麓。
English: Today, the ancestral hall at the top of the mountain has been abandoned and rebuilt at the foot of the mountain.

古文：从其上东俯宫衢，晚烟历历，西瞰濛绪，荷叶田田，近则马留山倒影，远则侯山诸峰列翠，虽无诸葛遗踪，亦为八桂胜地。
现代文：从山顶上向东俯视宫室街道，傍晚炊烟历历在目，往西鸟瞰空潦中的小洲，荷叶田田，近处就是马留山的倒影，远处则是侯山诸峰遍环翠色，虽然没有诸葛亮的遗踪，也算是桂林府的胜地。
English: Looking down from the top of the mountain to the east, you can see the streets of Gongmuro. The smoke from the evening cooking is visible. To the west, you can get a bird's-eye view of the small islands in the sky and the fields of lotus leaves. Nearby is the reflection of Mount Malu, and in the distance are the peaks of Mount Hou, which are full of emerald green. Although there is no trace of Zhuge Liang, it is also a resort of Guilin Prefecture.

古文：其侧崖棘中，有百合花一枝，五萼，甚钜，因连根折之，肩而下山，即为按察司后矣。
现代文：山顶侧面山崖上的荆棘中，有一枝百合花，有五朵花沂反大，因而连根折了它，扛在肩上下山来，马上就是按察使司后面了。
English: Among the thorns on the cliff on the side of the mountaintop, there was a sprig of lilies. There were five flowers and it was too big, so I broke it at the root and carried it on my shoulder up and down the mountain. I was immediately behind the inspector.

古文：薄暮，共二里，抵寓。
现代文：傍晚，共走二里，到达寓所。
English: In the evening, I walked a total of two miles to reach my apartment.

古文：初九日，余少憩寓中。
现代文：初九日我在寓所中稍作休息。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, I took a short break in my apartment.

古文：上午，南自大街一里过樵楼，市扇欲书《登秀诗》赠绀谷、灵室二僧，扇无佳者。
现代文：上午，往南自大街走一里过了谁楼，买扇子打算写《登秀诗》赠给钳谷、灵室二位僧人，没有好扇子。
English: In the morning, I walked one mile to the south from the main street and passed the Who's House. I wanted to buy a fan to write "Dengxiu Poem" and give it to Shibuya and the two monks in the mausoleum, but I didn't have a good fan.

古文：乃从县后街西入宗室廉泉园。
现代文：于是从临桂县衙的后街向西走入王族廉泉的花园。
English: So I walked west from the back streets of Handan, Lingui County, into the garden of the royal family Lianquan.

古文：廉泉丰仪修整，礼度谦厚，令童导游内园甚遍。园在居右，后临大塘，远山近水，映带颇盛，果树峰石，杂植其中，而亭榭则雕镂缋饰，板而无纹也。
现代文：园子在居室的右方，后边临近大水塘，远山近水，互相映衬，十分优美，果树石峰，杂乱地种植在园中，可亭台楼榭却雕镂绘饰，搞得很呆板而花纹没有特点。
English: The garden is on the right side of the living room, the back is close to the large pond, the distant mountains are close to the water, they contrast each other, very beautiful. Fruit trees and stone peaks are randomly planted in the garden, but the pavilions and towers are carved and painted. They are very stiff and the pattern has no characteristics.

古文：停憩久之。
现代文：停下休息了很久。
English: I stopped and rested for a long time.

古文：东南一里，过五岳观。
现代文：往东南一里，过了五岳观。
English: One mile to the southeast, past Mt. Wudong.

古文：又一里，出文昌门，乃东南门也，南溪山正对其前。
现代文：又一里，走出文昌门，就是东南方的城门，南澳山正面对城门前。
English: Another mile, out of the Wenchang Gate, is the southeastern city gate. Nan'ao Mountain is directly in front of the city gate.

古文：转若一指，直上南过石粱，即东转而行，半里，过桂林会馆，又半里，抵石山南麓，则三教庵在焉。
现代文：转过好像一指宽的地方，直接上桥向南过石桥，桥下就是阳江在北边分出的支流。马上转向东行，半里，过了桂林会馆，又走半里，抵达石山南麓，就有三教庵在这里。
English: Turn around the place that seems to be a finger's width wide, go directly to the bridge and cross the stone bridge to the south. Under the bridge is the tributary of the Yangjiang River in the north. Immediately turn to the east, half a mile, pass the Guilin Clubhouse, walk another half mile, and arrive at the southern foot of the stone mountain, there is the Sangyoan here.

古文：庵后为右军崖，即方信孺结轩处。
现代文：庵后是右军崖，就是方信孺建造书斋的地方。
English: Behind the hermitage is the Right Army Cliff, the place where Fang Xinyi built his study.

古文：方诗刻庵后石崖上，犹完好可拓。
现代文：方信孺的诗刻在庵后的石崖上，还保存完好可以摹拓。
English: Fang Xinyan's poem is engraved on the stone cliff behind the hermitage. It is still well preserved and can be expanded.

古文：其山亦为漓山，今人呼为象鼻山，与雉土人藏篓其中也。
现代文：此山也是漓山认现在的人称为象鼻山，与难山的漓山，一座在彼一座在此，不知应当偏袒谁贬低谁。
English: This mountain is also known as Elephant's Nose Mountain by the people of Lushan Mountain, and Lushan Mountain of Difficult Mountain, one is here and one is there, I don't know who should be favored and who should be belittled.

古文：洞不甚宽广，昔直透东北隅，今其后窍已叠石掩塞。
现代文：山的东南隅，也有洞向南，就在庵旁，但设了栅栏加了锁，这是因为当地人在洞中收藏萎嵩。洞不怎么宽广，从前一直通到东北隅，现在它的后洞已砌上石块堵塞起来。
English: In the southeast corner of the mountain, there is also a cave to the south, right next to the hermitage, but a fence has been set up and a lock added, this is because the locals collect withered logs in the cave. The cave is not very wide, it used to go all the way to the northeast corner, and now its back hole has been blocked with stones.

古文：循石崖东北，遂抵漓江。
现代文：沿石崖往东北走，便抵达漓江边。
English: Walk along the cliff to the northeast and you will arrive at the edge of the Li River.

古文：乃盘山溯行，从石崖危嵌中又得一洞，北向，名南极洞。
现代文：于是绕着山溯江行，在高高嵌入江中的石崖上又见到一个洞，洞口向北，名叫南极洞。
English: As a result, I went around the mountain to the river, and on the high cliff embedded in the river, I saw another hole, the mouth of which was to the north, called the South Pole Hole.

古文：其中不甚深。
现代文：洞中不怎么深。
English: The hole isn't very deep.

古文：出其前，直盘至西北隅，是为象鼻岩，而水月洞现焉。
现代文：出来到洞前，一直绕到西北隅，这是象鼻岩，而水月洞出现在这里。
English: Out to the front of the cave, all the way around to the northwest corner, this is the elephant trunk rock, and the water moon cave appears here.

古文：盖一山而皆以形象异名也。飞崖自山顶飞跨，北插中流，东西俱高剜成门，阳江从城南来，流贯而合于漓。
现代文：原来这一座山便都是由于形状相象而名称不同飞崖自山顶飞跨而下，向北插在江流之中，东西两面都高高地剑空成为石门，阳江从城南流来，从门中穿流而过又与漓江合流。
English: Originally, this mountain was named differently due to its similar shape. The cliff flew down from the top of the mountain and was inserted into the river flow to the north. The east and west sides were high and empty to become a stone gate. The Yangjiang River flowed from the south of the city, passed through the gate and merged with the Lijiang River.

古文：上既空明如月，下复内外潆波， 水月 之称以此。
现代文：上边既是中空明亮有如月亮，下边又在内外潇洞着水波， 水月 的名称就因此而得。
English: As the upper side is hollow and bright like the moon, and the lower side has water waves inside and outside, the name "water moon" comes from this.

古文：而插江之涯，下跨于水，上属于山，中垂外掀，有卷鼻之势， 象鼻 之称又以此。
现代文：而插入江中的石崖扩下边跨在水中，上面连着山，中部下垂外侧举起，有卷起鼻子的气势， 象鼻 的名称又是因此而得。
English: But the lower edge of the stone cliff extending into the river is straddled in the water, with a mountain above it, and the central part hangs down and is raised on the outside, with the momentum of rolling up the nose. The name "elephant's nose" is derived from this.

古文：水洞之南，崖半又辟陆洞。
现代文：水洞的南面，石崖半中腰又开有一个陆洞。
English: To the south of the water cave, halfway down the cliff, there is another land cave.

古文：其崖亦自山顶东跨江畔，中剜圆窍，长若行廊，直透水洞之上，东西交穿互映之景，真为胜绝。宋范石湖作铭勒窍壁以存。
现代文：那石崖也是从山顶向东跨到江畔，中间宛成圆洞、长长的好像走廊，直通到水洞之上，向北坐在洞侧，下瞰水洞、东西两面相通互相掩映的景色，真是优美绝顶二宋代范石湖作有碑铭刻在洞壁上以便存世。
English: The stone cliff also spans from the top of the mountain to the east to the river bank, with a round hole in the middle, long like a corridor, leading directly to the top of the water cave, sitting on the north side of the cave, overlooking the water cave, and the two sides of the east and west are connected and cover each other. It is really a beautiful peak of the Second Song Dynasty Fan Shih Lake. There is a monument inscribed on the cave wall in order to survive.

古文：字大小不一，半已湮泐消蚀隐没和裂断，此断文蚀柬，真可与范铭同珍，当觅工拓之，不可失也。
现代文：字的大小不一致，一半已经磨灭脱落，这一处断缺蚀坏的铭文，真与范成大的铭记同样珍贵，应当找工匠来摹拓它，不可错过了。
English: The size of the characters is inconsistent, and half of them have been worn off. This broken inscription is as precious as the memory of Fan Chengda. It is necessary to find a craftsman to expand it. It should not be missed.

古文：时有渔舟泊洞口崖石间，因令棹余绕出洞外，复穿入洞中，兼尽水陆之观。
现代文：此时有渔舟停泊在洞口的崖石间，就叫他载着我绕出洞外，再穿进洞中，兼带尽览水陆的景观。
English: At this time, there was a fishing boat moored between the cliffs at the mouth of the cave, so I asked him to carry me around the outside of the cave and then into the cave, with a full view of the land and water.

古文：乃南行一里，渡漓江东岸，又二里抵穿山下。其山西与斗鸡山相对。
现代文：两座山在东西两面夹住漓江，鸡冠怒张，鸡爪凸起，两座山应当合起来叫斗鸡山，只不过东面的山中空透亮如同圆圆的镜子，所以另外用穿山来命名它。
English: The Lijiang River is sandwiched between two mountains on the east and west sides. The rooster's crown is furious, and the chicken's claws are raised. The two mountains should be combined to be called the fighting rooster mountain, but the mountain in the east is as bright as a round mirror, so it is also named after the mountain.

古文：山之西又有一峰危立，初望之为一，抵其下，始见竖石下剖，直抵山之根，若岐若合，亭亭夹立。
现代文：山的西侧又有一座山峰矗立，乍一望以为是一座山，到达山下，才见到竖起的石峰向下剖开，直达山峰的根部，如分如合，高高地相对耸立。
English: On the west side of the mountain, there is another peak. At first glance, it seems to be a mountain, but when you get to the bottom of the mountain, you will see the standing stone peak cut down to reach the base of the mountain. It is as if it is divided and connected, towering high above the ground.

古文：盖山以脆薄飞扬见奇也，土人名为荷叶山，殊得之也。
现代文：原来此山是以脆薄飞扬见奇的，本地人起名叫荷叶山，这是非常恰当的。
English: Originally, this mountain was named "Lotus Leaf Mountain" by the locals, which is very appropriate.

古文：穿山北麓，嘉熙拖剑之水直漱崖根，循山而南，遂与漓合。
现代文：穿山的北麓，嘉熙桥下流来的拖剑江水直接冲刷着山崖的根部，沿着山往南流，于是与漓江合流。
English: At the northern foot of the mountain crossing, the water of the Tojian River flowing under the Jiaxi Bridge directly washes the base of the cliff, flows south along the mountain, and then joins the Minjiang River.

古文：余始至其北，隔溪不得渡。
现代文：我起初来到江北，隔着溪流不能渡过去。
English: When I first came to the north of the river, I couldn't cross the stream.

古文：望崖壁危悬，洞门或明或暗，纷纷错列，即渡亦不得上。
现代文：望见崖壁高悬，洞口或明或暗，纷纷错杂罗列，即使是渡过去也不能上去。
English: You can see the cliff wall hanging high, the mouth of the cave is either bright or dark, they are all mixed up, even if you cross over, you can't go up.

古文：乃随溪南行，隔水东眺，则穿岩已转，不睹空明，而山侧成峰，尖若竖指矣。
现代文：于是顺着溪流往南行，隔着溪水向东眺望，就见穿岩已转换了方位，看不到中空明亮之处，而山的侧面形成峰，尖尖的好像是竖起的手指头了。
English: So I followed the stream to the south, looked across the stream to the east, and saw that the pierced rock had changed its position, I could not see the hollow bright place, and the side of the mountain formed peaks, the pointed ones seemed to be erect fingers.

古文：又以小舟东渡，出穿山南麓，北面而登。
现代文：又乘小船渡到东岸，来到穿山南麓，向北上登。
English: I also took a small boat to the east coast, came to the southern foot of the mountain, and climbed northward.

古文：拨草寻磴，登一岩，高而倚山半，其门南向，即穿岩矣。
现代文：拨开草丛找到石橙，登上一个岩洞，洞高高地斜靠在半山腰，洞口向南，怀疑就是穿岩了。
English: He pushed aside the bushes to find the stone oranges and climbed into a rock cave. The cave was high up and leaned against the mid-mountain slope. The cave entrance faced south, and it was suspected that it was through the rock.

古文：而其内乳柱中悬，琼楞层叠，殊有曲折之致。
现代文：而洞内钟乳石柱悬垂在当中，琼玉般的石棱条层层叠叠，颇有些曲曲折折的景致。
English: The stalactite pillars in the cave overhang in the middle, and the jade-like stone edges are stacked on top of each other, creating a somewhat meandering landscape.

古文：由其左深入，则渐洼而黑，水汇于中。
现代文：从洞壁左侧深入进去，便渐渐下洼并黑下来，水积在其中。
English: As you go deeper into the cave from the left side of the cave wall, it gradually sinks and darkens, and water accumulates in it.

古文：知非穿岩，乃出。
现代文：明白这不是穿岩，便出来。
English: Realizing that it was not a rockfall, he came out.

古文：由其右复攀跻而上，则崇岩旷然，平透山腹，径山十余丈，高阔俱五六丈，上若卷桥，下如甬道，中无悬列之石，故一望通明。
现代文：由洞右再次攀登，就见高大的岩洞十分空旷，平平地穿透山腹，径直穿过山十多丈，高处宽处都有五六丈，上方似拱桥，下边如雨道，中间没有悬挂罗列的岩石，所以一眼望去通明透亮。
English: Climbing again from the right of the cave, you can see that the tall rock cave is very empty, flatly penetrating the mountainside, straight through the mountain more than ten heights, the height and width are five or six heights, the top is like an arched bridge, the bottom is like a rain channel, there is no hanging row of rocks in the middle, so it is clear and bright at a glance.

古文：洞北崖右有镌为 空明 者，由其外攀崖东转，又开一洞，北向与穿岩并列，而后不中通，内分层窦，若以穿岩为皇堂，则此为奥室矣。
现代文：洞非边右侧的崖壁上凿有 空明 二字。由洞外攀着山崖向东转，又开有一洞，向北，与穿岩并列，可后部中间不通，洞内分出层层洞穴，如果把穿岩比喻为宽敞的殿堂，那么此洞就是幽深的内室了。
English: From the outside of the cave, climbing the cliff to the east, there is another hole, to the north, parallel to the pierced rock, but there is no passage in the middle of the back, and there are layers of caves in the cave. If the pierced rock is likened to a spacious hall, then this hole is a deep inner room.

古文：穿岩之南，其上复悬一洞，南向与穿岩叠起，而后不北透，内列重帏，若以穿岩为平台，则此为架阁矣。
现代文：它东边还有三个洞口，从下面可以望见，来到这里却峻峭陡削没有路。穿岩的南边，洞上又高悬着一个洞，向南，与穿岩重叠着高张而起，可后部不向北方穿透，洞内岩石如罗列着的重重筛帐，如果把穿岩比作平台，那么此洞就是高架起来的楼阁了。
English: To the east of it, there are three more openings, which can be seen from below, but there is no steep path to get here. On the south side of the pierced rock, there is a hole high above the hole. To the south, it overlaps with the pierced rock and rises high, but the back does not penetrate to the north. The rocks in the cave are like a series of heavy screens. If the pierced rock is compared to a platform, then this hole is a high-rise castle.

古文：凭眺久之，仍由旧路东水岩。
现代文：凭眺了许久，仍经原路向东下到积水的岩洞。
English: After looking around for a long time, I still followed the original path down to the east to the water-logged cave.

古文：将南抵山麓，复见一洞，门亦南向，而列于汇水之东。
现代文：将要往南抵达山麓时，又见到一个洞，洞口也是向南，但位于积水岩洞的东面。
English: When I was about to head south to the foot of the mountain, I saw another cave. The mouth of the cave also faces south, but it is located to the east of the cave.

古文：其内亦有支窍，西入而隘黑无奇。
现代文：洞内也有旁洞，向西进去后又窄又黑，无奇特之处。
English: There is also a side cave in the cave, which is narrow and dark after entering to the west. There is nothing unusual about it.

古文：时将薄暮，遂仍西渡荷叶山下。
现代文：此时将近傍晚，于是仍然向西渡到荷叶山下。
English: At this time, it was almost evening, so I still went west to the foot of Mt. Lotte.

古文：北二里，过河舶所，溯漓江东岸，又东北行三里，渡浮桥而返寓。
现代文：往北行二里，路过河舶所，溯漓江东岸，又向东晰三里，过浮桥后返回寓所。
English: Walk north for two miles, pass the Hebei Shipyard, trace the east bank of the Minjiang River, then walk east for three miles, cross the pontoon bridge and return to the apartment.

古文：初十日，余憩寓中。
现代文：初十日我在寓所中休息。
English: On the tenth day, I rested in my apartment.

古文：上午，令取前留初旸所裹石，内一黑峰，多斧接痕。
现代文：上午，叫顾仆去取前天留在朱初肠处包裹的石头，内中有一块黑峰石，有许多斧凿粘接的痕迹。
English: In the morning, Gu called his servant to fetch the stone that was wrapped around Zhu's intestines the day before yesterday. There was a piece of black stone in it, with many traces of axe and chisel bonding.

古文：下午，复亲携往换，而初旸观戏王城后门，姑以石留其家。
现代文：下午，又亲自带着石头前去调换，可朱初肠到王城后门去看戏去了，暂且把石头留在他家。
English: In the afternoon, he personally took the stone to exchange it, but Zhu Hanzhong went to the back gate of the royal city to watch a play, leaving the stone at his home for the time being.

古文：遂同静闻以所书诗扇及岳茗赍送绀谷。
现代文：于是同静闻拿着题好诗的扇子及岳麓山的茶叶去送给给谷。
English: So, together with Jingwen, he took a fan inscribed with a good poem and tea leaves from Yuelu Mountain to give to the valley.

古文：比抵王城后门，时方演剧，观者拥列门阑，不得入。
现代文：及到王城后门时，正在演戏，看戏的人拥挤在门前的栅栏前，不能进去。
English: When he reached the back gate of the royal city, a play was being performed, and the spectators were crowded in front of the fence in front of the door, and could not enter.

古文：静闻袖扇茗登忏坛。
现代文：静闻把扇子、茶叶装在袖中登上了礼佛坛。
English: Jing Wen put the fan and tea leaves in her sleeve and climbed onto the altar.

古文：适绀谷在坛，更为订期十三。
现代文：恰巧维谷在坛上，重新约定在十三日登峰。
English: It just so happened that Wei Gu was on the altar, and they renewed their agreement to climb the peak on the 13th.

古文：余时暴日中暑甚，不欲观戏，急托阑内僧促静闻返，乃憩寓中。
现代文：我此时在暴热的太阳下中暑，十分严重，不想看戏，急忙托付栅栏内的僧人催促静闻返回来，便歇息在寓所中。
English: At this time, I was suffering from heatstroke under the blazing sun. It was so severe that I didn't want to watch the play. I hurriedly asked the monks inside the fence to urge Jing He to come back, and then I rested in the apartment.

