古文：钱镠，字具美，杭州临安人也。
现代文：钱镠字具美，是杭州临安人。
English: Qian Qi's handwriting is beautiful. He is from Hangzhou Lin'an.

古文：临安里中有大木，镠幼时与群兒戏木下，镠坐大石指麾群兒为队伍，号令颇有法，群兒皆惮之。
现代文：临安里巷中有一株大树，钱锷小时候和小孩们在树下游戏，钱锷坐在大石上指挥小孩们组成队伍，发号施令很有法度，小孩们都怕他。
English: There is a big tree in Lin'an Lane. When Qian Qi was a child, he would play with the children under the tree. Qian Qi would sit on the boulder and command the children to form a team. He was very authoritative in giving orders, and the children were afraid of him.

古文：及壮，无赖，不喜事生业，以贩盐为盗。
现代文：长大后，无固定职业，木喜欢从事生产，以贩盐做了盗贼。
English: After growing up, he had no fixed occupation. He liked to engage in production and became a thief by selling salt.

古文：县录事钟起有子数人，与镠饮博，起尝禁其诸子，诸子多窃从之游。
现代文：县录事锺起有几个儿子，和钱铿一起饮酒赌博，锺起曾禁止他的儿子们这样，儿子们常常暗中随钱铿游荡。
English: The county recorder had several sons who drank and gambled with Qian Ye. Qian Ye had forbidden his sons to do so, and his sons often roamed with Qian Ye secretly.

古文：豫章人有善术者，望牛斗间有王气。
现代文：豫章有个擅长方衍的人，望见牛、斗二宿间有王者气象。
English: There is a person in Yuzhang who is good at Fangyan, and there is a kingly weather between Niu and Dou Ershuku.

古文：牛斗，钱塘分也，因游钱塘。
现代文：牛、斗，是钱塘的分野，于是游历钱塘。
English: Cattle and fighting is the field of Qiantang, so he traveled to Qiantang.

古文：占之在临安，乃之临安，以相法隐市中，阴求其人。
现代文：占卜王气在临安，于是前往临安，以看相隐名于街市中，暗中寻找那个将会称王的人。
English: The king of divination was in Lin'an, so he went to Lin'an to look for the person who would become king.

古文：起与术者善，术者私谓起曰： 占君县有贵人，求之市中不可得，视君之相贵矣，然不足当之。 
现代文：锺起和这个术士关系好，衍士私下对锺起说： 占卜得知你们县有贵人，在街市上寻找没找到，看你的相是富贵相了，但还不够称王。 
English: Zouqi had a good relationship with this sorcerer, and the sorcerer said to Zouqi in private: The diviner learned that there are nobles in your county, and he looked for them in the street market, but did not find them. He saw that you were rich and noble, but not enough to be called a king.

古文：起乃为置酒，悉召贤豪为会，阴令术者遍视之，皆不足当。
现代文：锺起于是为他摆酒，召来所有贤士豪杰聚会，暗中让术士一一观察，都不配称王。
English: He then set out to serve him wine, called for a gathering of all the sages and heroes, and secretly let the sorcerers observe one by one. None of them deserved to be called a king.

古文：术者过起家，镠适从外来，见起，反走，术者望见之，大惊曰： 此真贵人也！ 
现代文：术士拜访锺起家，钱镠恰好从外面进来，见了锺起，转身就走，术士望见他，大吃一惊说： 这真是贵人！ 
English: The sorcerer paid a visit to Qian Qi's home. Qian Qi happened to come in from outside. When he saw Qian Qi, he turned around and left. The sorcerer looked at him and said in surprise, "This is really a noble person!"

古文：起笑曰： 此吾旁舍钱生尔。 
现代文：锺起笑着说： 这是我的邻居钱生罢了。 
English: He smiled and said, "This is my neighbor Qian Sheng.

古文：术者召镠至，熟视之，顾起曰： 君之贵者，因此人也。 
现代文：术士召钱铿来，仔细打量他望着锺起说： 你的富贵，靠这个人。 
English: The sorcerer summoned the moneylender, examined him carefully, looked up at him and said: "Your wealth depends on this man.

古文：乃慰镠曰： 子骨法非常，愿自爱。 
现代文：于是慰勉钱铿说： 你的骨相不同寻常，希望你自爱！ 
English: So the consoling Qian Ye said: Your bone shape is unusual, I hope you love yourself!

古文：因与起诀曰： 吾求其人者，非有所欲也，直欲质吾术尔。 
现代文：于是和锺起告别说： 我寻找这个人，不想得到什么，只是想证实我的方术而已。 
English: So he bid farewell to the dragonfly and said, "I am looking for this person, I don't want to get anything, I just want to prove my skills."

古文：明日乃去。
现代文：第二天就离去了。
English: He left the next day.

古文：起始纵其子等与镠游，时时贷其穷乏。
现代文：锺起纔放任他的儿子们和钱锷交往，并常常周济他的穷困。
English: He allowed his sons to associate with Qian Ye, and often helped him out of poverty.

古文：镠善射与槊，稍通图纬诸书。
现代文：钱铿善于射箭和舞弄长矛，略通各类图籍、谶纬书。
English: Qian Ye is good at archery and dancing with spears, and is familiar with all kinds of picture books and calligraphy books.

古文：唐乾符二年，浙西裨将王郢作乱，石鉴镇将董昌募乡兵讨贼，表镠偏将，击郢破之。
现代文：唐干符二年，浙西偏将王郢作乱，石鉴镇将董昌招募乡兵讨贼，表奏钱镠为偏将，攻破王郢。
English: In the second year of Tang Ganfu, the West Zhejiang Choshu Wangye made a disturbance, Shijian Town recruited Dongchang to fight against the bandits, and presented Qianye as the Choshu Choshu to defeat Wangye.

古文：是时，黄巢众已数千，攻掠浙东，至临安，镠曰： 今镇兵少而贼兵多，难以力御，宜出奇兵邀之。 
现代文：这时，黄巢已有士兵数干人，进攻掠夺浙东，到达临安，钱铿说： 如今镇兵少而贼兵多，难以力拒，应当出奇兵拦击他们。 
English: At this time, the Yellow Nest already had several hundred soldiers, attacking and plundering eastern Zhejiang, and arrived at Lin'an. Qian Ye said: Nowadays, the town soldiers are few and the thief soldiers are many. It is difficult to resist. It is necessary to make a surprise attack to stop them.

古文：乃与劲卒二十人伏山谷中，巢先锋度险皆单骑，镠伏弩射杀其将，巢兵乱，镠引劲卒蹂之，斩首数百级。
现代文：于是和劲兵二十人埋伏在山谷中，黄巢的先锋军兵都单骑度遇险隘，钱锷预先埋伏的弩射死他们的将领，黄巢的士兵大乱，钱铿率劲兵冲撞践踏他们，斩数百人。
English: As a result, he and twenty strong soldiers lay in ambush in the valley. The vanguard soldiers of the Yellow Nest all rode alone and were in dire straits. Qian Ye's ambush killed their generals. The soldiers of the Yellow Nest were in chaos. Qian Ye and his strong soldiers ran into them and trampled on them, killing hundreds of people.

古文：镠曰： 此可一用尔，大众至何可敌邪！ 
现代文：钱镑说： 这种方法只可以用一次而已，大部队到了怎可对付呢！ 
English: Money Pound said, "This method can only be used once, how can we deal with a large army?"

古文：乃引兵趋八百里，八百里，地名也，告道旁媪曰： 后有问者，告曰： 临安兵屯八百里矣。  巢众至，闻媪语，不知其地名，曰： 向十余卒不可敌，况八百里乎！ 
现代文：于是率兵奔赴八百里，八百里是个地名，告诉路旁的老妇人说： 后面有问你的人，你告诉他们说： 临安兵屯驻八百里了。 ，黄巢兵众到来，听了老妇人的话，不知八百里是地名，说： 先前十多个士兵都不能对付，何况八百里呢！ 
English: So he led the soldiers to go 800 miles. 800 miles is the name of a place. He told the old woman on the side of the road and said, "There are people asking about you in the back. Tell them, 'The Lin'an soldiers are stationed 800 miles away.' The Yellow Nest soldiers came and listened to the old woman. They didn't know that 800 miles was the name of a place. They said, 'The first ten soldiers couldn't handle it, let alone 800 miles!

古文：遂急引兵过。
现代文：于是急忙率兵通过。
English: So he hurriedly led his soldiers through.

古文：都统高骈闻巢不敢犯临安，壮之，召董昌与镠俱至广陵。
现代文：都统高骈听说黄巢不敢侵犯临安，认为了不起，召董昌和钱铿都到广陵。
English: After hearing that Huang Chao did not dare to invade Lin'an, Du Tong Gao Yao thought it was great and summoned both Dong Chang and Qian Ye to Guangling.

古文：久之，骈无讨贼意，昌等不见用，辞还，骈表昌杭州刺史。
现代文：遇了很久，高骈并无讨伐贼人的打算，董昌等人不受重用，告辞回去，高骈表奏董昌为杭州刺史。
English: After a long time, Gao Gan had no intention of fighting against the thieves, and Dong Chang and others were not reused. Gao Gan said goodbye and went back, and Gao Gan played Dong Chang for the history of Hangzhou.

古文：是时，天下已乱，昌乃团诸县兵为八都，以镠为都指挥使，成及为靖江都将。
现代文：这时，天下已乱，董昌于是团聚各县兵组成八都，任钱锷为都指挥使，成及焉靖江都将。
English: At this time, the world was in turmoil, so Dong Chang gathered soldiers from all counties to form the Eight Capitals, and appointed Qian Ye as the commander and envoy of the eight capitals.

古文：中和二年，越州观察使刘汉宏与昌有隙，汉宏遣其弟汉宥、都虞候辛约，屯兵西陵。
现代文：中相二年，越州观察使刘汉宏和董昌产生矛盾，刘摸宏派他的弟弟刘汉宥、都虞候辛约，屯兵于西陵。
English: In the second year of the middle phase, Liu Hanhong and Dong Chang had a conflict because of the observation of Yuezhou. Liu Ganhong sent his younger brother Liu Hanyu and the duke Xinyo to camp in Xiling.

古文：镠率八都兵渡江，窃取军号，斫其营，营中惊扰，因焚之，汉宥等皆走。
现代文：钱铿率八都兵渡江，窃取军中号令，袭击营寨，军营中士兵惊慌扰乱，于是焚毁军营，型送宥等人都逃走。
English: Qian Rong led eight soldiers to cross the river, stole the order from the middle of the army, attacked the camp, the soldiers in the camp panicked and disturbed, so they burned the camp, and everyone fled.

古文：汉宏复遣将黄珪、何肃屯诸暨、萧山，镠皆攻破之。
现代文：刘汉宏又派将领黄珪、何肃屯驻诸暨、萧山，钱铿都攻破他们。
English: Liu Hanhong also sent generals Huang Qi, He Su Tun stationed in Zhuji, Xiaoshan and Qian Ye to defeat them.

古文：与汉宏遇，战，大败之，杀何肃、辛约。
现代文：和刘汉宏相遇，交战，大败刘漠宏，杀死何肃、辛约。
English: And Liu Hanhong met, fought, defeated Liu Mo Hong, killed He Su, Xin Yu.

古文：汉宏易服持脍刀以遁，追者及之，汉宏曰： 我宰夫也。 
现代文：刘漠宏改换衣服手持菜刀而逃，追兵追上他，刘汉宏说： 我是屠夫。 
English: Liu Mo Hong changed his clothes and ran away with a kitchen knife in hand. The pursuing soldiers caught up with him. Liu Han Hong said: I am a butcher.

古文：举刀示之，乃免。
现代文：举起屠刀给他们看，纔得以逃脱。
English: Raising his butcher knife to show them, the baboon managed to escape.

古文：四年，僖宗遣中使焦居璠为杭、越通和使，诏昌及汉宏罢兵，皆不奉诏。
现代文：四年，唐僖宗派中使焦居墦任杭、越通和使，诏董昌和刘汉宏罢兵休战，都不接受诏命。
English: In four years, Jiao Jiuyong, Ren Hang, Yue Tong, He Zhi, Zhao Dongchang, and Liu Hanhong of the Tang and Song sects called for a truce and did not accept the edict.

古文：汉宏遣其将硃褒、韩公玫、施坚实等以舟兵屯望海。
现代文：刘漠宏派他的将领朱褒、韩公玫、施坚实等人率水军屯驻于望海。
English: Liu Mo Hong sent his generals Zhu Bo, Han Gong Mei, Shi Jianshi and others to lead the naval forces stationed in the sea.

古文：镠出平水，成及夜率奇兵破褒等于曹娥埭，进屯丰山，施坚实等降，遂攻破越州。
现代文：钱铿出兵平水，成及晚上率领奇兵在曹娥埭攻破朱褒等人，进军屯驻于丰山，施坚实等人投降，于是攻破越州。
English: Qianlong sent troops to Pingshui, and in the evening, Chengyi led the "miraculous soldiers" to defeat Zhubao and others in Cao'er, marched to the garrison in Fengshan, and Shi Jianshi and others surrendered, thus defeating Yuezhou.

古文：汉宏走台州，台州刺史执汉宏送于镠，斩于会稽，族其家。
现代文：刘汉宏逃到台州，台州刺史抓获刘汉宏送给钱铿，在会稽斩首，把他家减族。
English: Liu Hanhong fled to Taizhou, and the Taizhou magistrate captured Liu Hanhong and sent him to Qian Ye, beheaded him at the meeting, and reduced his family.

古文：镠乃奏昌代汉宠，而自居杭州。
现代文：钱镠于是上表奏请董昌替代刘汉宏，而自己居于杭州。
English: Qian Ye then asked Dong Chang to replace Liu Hanhong at the top table, while he lived in Hangzhou.

古文：光启三年，拜镠左卫大将军、杭州刺史，昌越州观察使。
现代文：光启三年，封钱铿为左卫大将军、杭州刺史，董昌为越州观察使。
English: In the first three years of the Guangqi era, Feng Qianqian was the General of the Left Division of the Wei Dynasty, the historian of Hangzhou, and Dong Chang was the observer of Yuezhou.

古文：是岁，毕师鐸囚高骈，淮南大乱，六合镇将徐约攻取苏州。
现代文：这年，毕师铎拘囚高骈，淮南大乱，六合镇将徐约攻取苏州。
English: In this year, Bi Shizhen detained Gao Wei, Huainan Rebellion, and Liuhe Town captured Suzhou.

古文：润州牙将刘浩逐其帅周宝，宝奔常州，浩推度支催勘官薛朗为帅。
现代文：润州牙将刘浩赶走他的主帅周宝，周宝逃奔到常州，刘浩推举度支催勘官薛朗做主帅。
English: Renzhou Fang drove Liu Hao away from his coach, Zhou Bao. Zhou Bao fled to Changzhou, and Liu Hao chose Xue Lang, a surveyor, as his coach.

古文：镠遣都将成及、杜棱等攻常州，取周宝以归，镠具军礼郊迎，馆宝于樟亭，宝病卒。
现代文：钱镠派都将成及、杜棱等人攻打常州，夺得周宝而回，钱镠备军礼在郊外迎接，安排周实在樟亭住下，周宝病死。
English: The Qianlong faction will all succeed, Du Ren and others will attack Changzhou, capture Zhou Bao and return, Qianlong will prepare for the military ceremony in the suburbs, arrange for Zhou Jicheng to live in the pavilion, and Zhou Bao will die of illness.

古文：棱等进攻润州，逐刘浩，执薛朗，剖其心以祭宝。
现代文：杜棱等人进攻润州，驱逐刘浩，抓获薛朗，挖他的心祭祀周实。
English: Du Ren and others attacked Rongzhou, expelled Liu Hao, captured Xue Lang, and dug up his heart.

古文：然后遣其弟钅求攻徐约，约败走入海，追杀之。
现代文：钱铿然后派他的弟弟钱銶攻打徐约，徐约败逃入海，钱銶追击杀掉他。
English: Qian Ye then sent his younger brother Qian Ye to attack Xu You. Xu You fled into the sea, and Qian Ye chased and killed him.

古文：昭宗拜镠杭州防御使。
现代文：唐昭宗封钱铿焉杭州防御使。
English: Emperor Zhaozong of Tang Dynasty appointed Qian Xuan as the defense envoy of Hangzhou.

古文：是时，杨行密、孙儒争淮南，与镠战苏、常间。
现代文：这时，杨行密、孙儒争夺淮南，和钱铿在苏、常二州问作战。
English: At this time, Yang Xingmi and Sun Ru were fighting for Huainan, and Qian Ye was fighting in Suzhou and Changzhou.

古文：久之，儒为行密所杀，行密据淮南，取润州，镠亦取苏、常。
现代文：遇了很久，孙儒被杨行密杀掉，杨行密占据淮南，攻取润州，钱镠也攻取苏、常二州。
English: After a long encounter, Sun Ru was killed by Yang Xingmi, Yang Xingmi occupied Huainan and captured Renzhou, and Qian Ye also captured Suzhou and Changji.

古文：唐升越州威胜军，以董昌为节度使，封陇西郡王；杭州武胜军，拜镠都团练使，以成及为副使。
现代文：唐升越州为威胜军，任命董昌为节度使，封为陇西郡王；升杭州为武胜军，拜钱镠为都团练使，任命成及焉副使。
English: Tang promoted Yuezhou to the victorious army, appointed Dong Chang as the envoy to the festival, and named him the king of Shaanxi County; promoted Hangzhou to the victorious army, and appointed Bai Qianyuan as the training envoy of the capital regiment, and appointed Cheng Yi Yan as the deputy envoy.

古文：及字弘济，与镠同事攻讨，谋多出于及，而镠以女妻及子仁琇。
现代文：成及字弘济，和钱锷共同攻战讨伐，计谋多出自成及，而钱铿把女儿嫁给成及的儿子成仁玛。
English: Cheng Ji, also known as Hongji, and Qian Ye jointly attacked and fought. The strategy was mostly from Cheng Yi, and Qian Ye married his daughter to Cheng Yi's son, Cheng Renma.

古文：镠乃以杜棱、阮结、顾全武等为将校，沈崧、皮光业、林鼎、罗隐为宾客。
现代文：钱铿于是任命杜棱、阮结、顾全武等人为将校，沈崧、皮光业、林鼎、罗隐为幕僚。
English: Qianlong then appointed Du Ren, Ruan Jie, Gu Quanwu and others as officers, and Shen Yao, Pi Guangye, Lin Ding and Luo Yin as staff officers.

古文：景福二年，拜镠镇海军节度使、润州刺史。
现代文：景枢二年，封钱镑焉镇海军节度使、润州刺史。
English: In the second year of Jingzhu, Fucheng Pound was appointed as the naval festival envoy of Yanzhen Town, and the history of Runzhou was written.

古文：乾宁元年，加同中书门下平章事。
现代文：干宁元年，加同中书门下平章事。
English: In the first year of the Qianning era, he was added to the Zhongshumen Shimohei chapter.

古文：二年，越州董昌反。
现代文：二年，越州董昌反叛。
English: Two years later, Yuezhou Dongchang rebelled.

古文：昌素愚，不能决事，临民讼，以骰子掷之，而胜者为直。
现代文：董昌历来愚蠢，不能决断事情，处理百姓案件，掷骰子决胜负，谁胜谁有理。
English: Dong Chang has always been stupid, unable to decide things, deal with people's cases, throw the dice to decide who wins, and who is right.

古文：妖人应智王温、巫韩媪等，以妖言惑昌，献鸟兽为符瑞。
现代文：妖人应智王温、巫师韩媪等人，用妖言蛊惑董昌，进献鸟兽作为吉祥物。
English: The goblins, including the sage Wang Wen and the sorcerer Han Zheng, used magical words to bewitch Dong Chang and presented birds and beasts as mascots.

古文：牙将倪德儒谓昌曰： 曩时谣言有罗平鸟主越人祸福，民间多图其形祷祠之，视王书名与图类。 
现代文：牙将倪德儒对董昌说： 过去民间谚语说罗平乌主宰越人的祸福，民间常画罗平鸟祈祷祭祀，我看你的签名和乌图相像。 
English: Ni Deru, a dental technician, said to Dong Chang: In the past, folk sayings said that Luo Pingwu dominated the misfortunes and blessings of the people, and folk paintings often depicted Luo Pingwu praying and sacrificing. I think your signature is similar to that of Wu Tu.

古文：因出图以示昌。昌大悦，乃自称皇帝，国号罗平，改元顺天。分其兵为两军，中军衣黄，外军衣白，铭其衣曰 归义 。
现代文：于是拿出鸟图给董昌看，董昌非常高兴，于是自称皇帝，国号罗平，改年号叫顺天，把他的士兵分为两军，中军穿黄衣服，外军穿白衣服，衣上大书 归义 二字。
English: So he took out the bird chart and showed it to Dong Chang. Dong Chang was very happy, so he called himself the emperor, the country name was Luoping, and the year name was changed to Shuntian. He divided his soldiers into two armies, the Chinese army wore yellow clothes, and the foreign army wore white clothes, with the word "Guiyi" written on the clothes.

古文：副使黄竭切戒昌以为不可，昌大怒，使人斩竭，持其首至，骂曰： 此贼负我好圣，明时三公不肯作，乃自求死邪！ 
现代文：副使黄竭急切告诫董昌认为不能这样，董昌大怒，派人杀掉黄竭，拿他的头来，骂道： 这贼人对不起我，放着天子圣明时候的三公不肯做，却自己寻死！ 
English: Vice-envoy Huang Zhe urgently admonished Dong Chang that this could not be done. Dong Chang was furious and sent someone to kill Huang Zhe, take his head, and scolded: I'm sorry for this thief, but the Three Sovereigns did not want to do it, but they themselves sought death!

古文：投之圊中。
现代文：把头扔到厕所中。
English: Throw your head in the toilet.

古文：昌乃以书告镠，镠以昌反状闻。
现代文：董昌于是写信告诉钱铿，钱锷把董昌反叛事状上奏朝廷。
English: Therefore, Dong Chang wrote a letter to Qian Ye, and Qian Ye reported Dong Chang's rebellion to the imperial court.

古文：昭宗下诏削昌官爵，封镠彭城郡王，浙江东道招讨使。
现代文：唐昭宗下诏削夺董昌的官爵，封钱铿为彭城郡王，浙江柬道招讨使。
English: Under Emperor Zhaozong of Tang Dynasty, Emperor Zhaozong cut off the official title of Dongchang, and made Feng Qianjun the king of Pengcheng County. He was also the envoy of Zhejiang Province to invite and discuss the Cambodian way of life.

古文：镠曰： 董氏于吾有恩，不可遽伐。 
现代文：钱铿说： 董氏对我有恩，不能匆忙就讨伐他。 
English: Qian Ye said: Mr. Dong is very kind to me, so I can't rush to fight him.

古文：以兵三万屯迎恩门，遣其客沈滂谕昌使改过。
现代文：率兵三万人屯驻在迎恩门，派他的门客沈滂劝说董昌让他改过自新。
English: He stationed 30,000 soldiers at Ying'en Gate and sent his protégé, Shen Yao, to persuade Dong Chang to rehabilitate him.

古文：昌以钱二百万犒军，执应智等送军中，自请待罪，镠乃还兵。
现代文：董昌用二百万钱犒劳军队，拘拿应智等人送到钱铿军中，自己请求等待治罪，钱镠于是回师。
English: Dong Chang used two million money to reward the army, detained Yingzhi and others and sent them to Qian Ye's army. He asked to wait for the crime to be punished, so Qian Ye returned to his division.

古文：昌复拒命，遣其将陈郁、崔温等屯香严、石侯，乞兵于杨行密，行密遣安仁义救昌。
现代文：董昌又抗拒命令，派他的将领陈郁、崔温等人屯驻于香严、石侯，向杨行密求兵，杨行密派安仁义援救董昌。
English: Dongchang also resisted the order and sent his generals Chen Yu, Cui Wen and others to settle in Xiangyan and Shihou to solicit soldiers from Yang Xingmi. Yang Xingmi sent Anren to rescue Dongchang.

古文：镠遣顾全武攻昌，斩崔温。
现代文：钱镑派顾全武进攻董昌，斩崔温。
English: Qian Pound sent Gu Quanwu to attack Dong Chang and behead Cui Wen.

古文：昌所用诸将徐珣、汤臼、袁邠皆庸人，不知兵，遇全武辄败。
现代文：董昌所任用的将领徐殉、汤臼、袁合都是平庸之人，不懂用兵，遇上顾全武就被打败。
English: The generals appointed by Dong Chang, Xu Zhidi, Tang Usu and Yuan He, were all mediocre people who did not know how to use soldiers and were defeated by Gu Quanwu.

古文：昌兄子真，骁勇善战，全武等攻之，逾年不能克。
现代文：董昌哥哥的儿子董真，骁悍勇猛善战，顾全武等人攻打他，一年多不能攻克。
English: Dong Zhen, the son of Dong Chang's elder brother, was fierce, brave and good at fighting. Gu Quanwu and others attacked him, but could not defeat him for more than a year.

古文：真与其裨将刺羽有隙，羽谮之，昌杀真，兵乃败。
现代文：董真和他的副将刺羽有矛盾，刺羽诋毁他，董昌杀掉董真，军队纔被打败。
English: Dong Zhen and his vice-commander Zha Yu had a conflict, Zha Yu slandered him, Dong Chang killed Dong Zhen, and the army was defeated.

古文：全武执昌归杭州，行至西小江，昌顾左右曰： 吾与钱公俱起乡里，吾尝为大将，今何面复见之乎！ 
现代文：顾全武抓获董昌送回杭州，走到西小江时，董昌望着手下人说： 我和钱公都出身乡间，我曾做大将，现在又有什么脸面见他呢！ 
English: Gu Quanwu captured Dong Chang and sent him back to Hangzhou. When he reached Xixiaojiang, Dong Chang looked at his subordinates and said, "I and Qian Gong both come from the countryside. I used to be a general. How can I face him now?"

古文：左右相对泣下，因真目大呼，投水死。
现代文：手下人相对而哭，董昌于是瞪大眼睛大呼，投水自杀。
English: As his subordinates wept on the other side, Dong Chang opened his eyes wide and shouted loudly, throwing himself into the water.

古文：昭宗以宰相王溥镇越州，溥请授镠，乃改威胜军为镇东军，拜镠镇海、镇东军节度使、加检校太尉、中书令，赐铁券，恕九死。
现代文：唐昭宗任命宰相王溥镇守越州，王溥谪求以越州授钱铿，于是改威胜军为镇柬军，拜钱镠为镇海、镇柬军节度使、加检校太尉、中书令，赐给铁券，赦免九死。
English: Tang Zhaozong appointed the prime minister, Wang Qizhen, to defend Yuezhou. Wang Qizhen asked for money to be given to Yuezhou, so the victorious army was changed to the Zhen-Cambodian army, and Bai Qizhen became the Zhenhai, the Zhen-Cambodian army's festival envoy, the second lieutenant of the inspection school, and the Chinese book order. He was given iron coupons and pardoned nine deaths.

古文：镠如越州受命，还治钱塘，号越州为 东府 。
现代文：钱铿到越州接受任命，返回钱塘，作为官府所在，称越州为 束府 。
English: Qianlong went to Yuezhou to accept the appointment and returned to Qiantang. As the seat of the government, Yuezhou was called Sokfu.

古文：光化元年，移镇海军于杭州，加镠检校太师，改镠乡里曰广义乡勋贵里，镠素所居营曰衣锦营。
现代文：光化元年，移镇海军到杭州，加钱镠焉检校太师，改钱镑的乡里为广义乡勋贵里，钱镠平常住的营寨叫衣锦营。
English: In the first year of the Gwanghwa era, the navy moved to Hangzhou, and Qian Xuan was promoted to the rank of inspector. The township where Qian Xuan was stationed was changed to Guangyi Township, and the camp where Qian Xuan usually lived was called Shijin Camp.

古文：婺州刺史王坛叛附于淮南，杨行密遣其将康儒应坛，因攻睦州。
现代文：婺州刺史王坛反叛归附淮南，杨行密派他的将领康儒接应王坛，趁机进攻睦州。
English: Bozhou rebelled to annex Huainan, and Yang Xingmi sent his general Kang Ru to meet Bozhou and take the opportunity to attack Mutsu.

古文：镠遣其弟钅求败儒于轩渚，坛奔宣州。
现代文：钱镠派他的弟弟钱銶在轩渚打败康儒，王坛逃奔往宣州。
English: Qian Rong sent his younger brother Qian Rong to defeat Kang Rhu at Xuan Zi, and Wang Tan fled to Xuan Zhou.

古文：昭宗诏镠图形凌烟阁，升衣锦营为衣锦城，石鉴山曰衣锦山，大官山曰功臣山。
现代文：唐昭宗下诏在凌烟阁为钱镠画像，升衣锦营为衣锦城，改石鉴山叫衣锦山，大官山叫功臣山。
English: Emperor Zhaozong of the Tang Dynasty decreed that Lingyan Pavilion should be called Qianlong Image, Shengjin Camp should be called Shujin City, Zhaishijian Mountain should be called Shujin Mountain, and Dajian Mountain should be called Gongshen Mountain.

古文：镠游衣锦城，宴故老，山林皆覆以锦，号其幼所尝戏大木曰 衣锦将军 。
现代文：钱镠游衣锦城，宴请故老乡亲，山上林木都披上锦缎，称他小时候曾玩耍的大树叫 衣锦将军 。
English: Qian Ye toured the brocade city and held a banquet for his fellow countrymen. The trees on the mountain were covered with brocade. He said that the big tree he used to play with when he was a child was called the brocade general.

古文：天复二年，封镠越王。
现代文：天复二年，封钱锷为越王。
English: In the second year of Tianfu, Feng Qianqian became the king of Yue.

古文：镠巡衣锦城，武勇右都指挥使徐绾与左都指挥使许再思叛，焚掠城郭，攻内城，镠子传瑛及其将马绰、陈为等闭门拒之。
现代文：钱锷巡视衣锦城，武勇右都指挥使徐绾和左都指挥使许再思反叛，焚毁攻陷外城，进攻内城，钱铿的儿子钱传瑛和他的将领马绰、陈为等人关闭城门抵抗。
English: Qian Qian inspected the city of Jijin. The commander of the Right Capital, Wuyong, ordered Xu Qian, and the commander of the Left Capital, Xu Zaisi, to rebel. They burned and captured the outer city and attacked the inner city. Qian Qian's son Qian Chuan Ying and his generals Ma Qiao and Chen Wei closed the city gate to resist.

古文：镠归，至北郭门不得入。
现代文：钱镠返回，到达北城门不能进去。
English: Qian Ye returned, and when he reached the north gate, he could not enter.

古文：成及代镠与绾战，斩首百余级，绾屯龙兴寺。
现代文：成及代替钱镠跟徐绾交战，杀敌一百多人，徐绾屯驻于龙兴寺。
English: Cheng and Qian fought against Xu in place of Qian and killed more than a hundred of the enemy. Xu was stationed at Longxing Temple.

古文：镠微服逾城而入，遣马绰、王荣、杜建徽等分屯诸门，使顾全武备东府，全武曰： 东府不足虑，可虑者淮南尔，绾急，必召淮兵至，患不细矣。
现代文：钱铿穿上百姓的衣服越过城墙进入城中，派马绰、王荣、杜建徽等人分别屯守各门，派顾全武防备束府，顾全武说： 东府不值得担心，忧虑的是淮南，徐绾危急时，必定会召淮南军队来，祸患不小啊。
English: Qianlong put on the people's clothes, crossed the city wall and entered the city. He sent Maqiao, Wang Rong, Du Jianhui and others to guard each gate separately, and sent Gu Quanwu to guard and prepare the capital. Gu Quanwu said: Dongfu is not worth worrying about, it is Huainan that is worried. When Xu Rong is in a critical situation, he will certainly call the Huainan army to come. The disaster is not small.

古文：杨公大丈夫，今以难告，必能闵我。 
现代文：杨公是大丈夫，现在向他告难，必定会同情我们。 
English: Yang Gong is fine. If we appeal to him now, he will surely sympathize with us.

古文：镠以为然。
现代文：钱铿认为对。
English: Qian Ye thought it was right.

古文：全武曰： 独行，事必不济，请择诸公子可行者。 
现代文：顾全武说： 我独自去，必定不能成事，请求在各位公子中选一个可以和我同去的人。 
English: Gu Quanwu said, "I will not be able to accomplish anything if I go alone. I would like to ask you to choose one of your nobles who can go with me."

古文：镠曰： 吾尝欲以元鳷婚杨氏。 
现代文：钱镠说： 我曾想让钱元琮和杨氏联姻。 
English: Qian Rong said: I once wanted Qian Yuan Rong and Mr. Yang to marry.

古文：乃使随全武如广陵。
现代文：于是派钱元璟随顾全武去广陵。
English: So he sent Qianyuan to Guangling with Gu Zengwu.

古文：绾果召田頵于宣州。
现代文：徐绾果然往宣州召田头求救。
English: Xu Yao went to Xuanzhou to call for help from Tian Tou.

古文：全武等至广陵，行密以女妻元鳷，亟召頵还。
现代文：顾全武等人到达广陵，杨行密把女儿嫁给钱元璩，急召田颓返回。
English: Gu Zhenwu and others arrived at Guangling, Yang Xingmi married his daughter to Qian Yuanlu, and urgently summoned Tianlu to return.

古文：頵取镠钱百万，质镠子元瓘而归。
现代文：田额取钱镑一百万钱，以钱铿的儿子钱元璀作人质返回。
English: He took one million pounds from the land and returned with Qian Yuan's son Qian Yuan as a hostage.

古文：天祐元年，封镠吴王，镠建功臣堂，立碑纪功，列宾佐将校名氏于碑阴者五百人。
现代文：天佑元年，封钱铿为昊王，钱镑修建功臣堂，立碑纪功，在碑的背面刻幕僚、官吏、将校五百人的姓名。
English: In the first year of the year of God's blessing, Qianqian was appointed as the king of Hao, Qianqian built a hall of heroes, erected a monument to commemorate the achievements, and engraved the names of 500 staff members, officials, and officers on the back of the monument.

古文：四年，升衣锦城为安国衣锦军。
现代文：四年，升衣锦城为安国衣锦军。
English: In four years, Shangyi Jincheng was promoted to the An Guo Yi Jin Army.

古文：梁太祖即位，封镠吴越王兼淮南节度使。
现代文：梁太祖即位，封钱镑为昊越王兼淮南节度使。
English: Liang Taizu ascended to the throne, sealing the money pound for Hao Yue Wang and Huainan Festival.

古文：客有劝镠拒梁命者，镠笑曰： 吾岂失为孙仲谋邪！ 
现代文：有门客劝钱镠拒绝梁的任命，钱锷笑着说： 我难道不能做孙仲谋吗！ 
English: A client urged Qian Ye to reject Liang's appointment. Qian Ye smiled and said, "Can't I be Sun Zhongzhuang?"

古文：遂受之。
现代文：于是接受任命。
English: He accepted the appointment.

古文：太祖尝问吴越进奏吏曰： 钱镠平生有所好乎？ 
现代文：梁太祖曾问昊越进奏官说： 钱铿平生有什么喜好？ 
English: Liang Taizu once asked Hao Yue, the consul, saying: What are Qian Ye's lifelong preferences?

古文：吏曰： 好玉带、名马。 
现代文：进奏官说： 喜欢玉带、名马。 
English: The usher said: I like the jade belt and the famous horse.

古文：太祖笑曰： 真英雄也。 
现代文：梁太祖笑着说： 真是个荚雄。 
English: Liang Taizu said with a smile, "He really is a hero."

古文：乃以玉带一匣、打球御马十匹赐之。
现代文：于是拿玉带一匣、打球御马十匹赐给钱镠。
English: So he gave Qian Ye a jade belt, a box, and ten horses to play with.

古文：江西危全讽等为杨渥所败，信州危仔倡奔于镠，镠恶其姓，改曰元。
现代文：江西危全讽等人被杨渥打败，信州危仔倡投奔钱镑，钱铿讨厌他们的姓，改为元。
English: Jiangxi Jingquanli and others were defeated by Yang Wo, Shinshu Jingzai advocated to join Qian Pound, Qian Yao hated their surnames and changed their surnames to Yuan.

古文：开平二年，加镠守中书令，改临安县为安国县，广义乡为衣锦乡。
现代文：开平二年，加钱镠守中书令，改临安县焉安国县，广义乡为衣锦乡。
English: In the second year of Kaiping, Qiaqian Xuzhong Shuling was changed to Lin'an County, Yan'an Guo County, and Guangyi Township was changed to Yijin Township.

古文：三年，加守太保。
现代文：三年，加守太保。
English: After three years, he was promoted to the additional post of governor.

古文：杨渥将周本、陈章围苏州，镠遣其弟锯、镖救之。
现代文：杨渥的将领周本、陈章包围苏州，钱铿派他的弟弟钱锯、钱镖救援他们。
English: Yang Wou's generals Zhou Ben and Chen Zhang besieged Suzhou. Qian Ye sent his brother Qian Saw and Qian Dar to rescue them.

古文：淮兵为水栅环城，以铜铃系网沈水中，断潜行者。
现代文：淮军筑水栅包围州城，把铜铃系在网上沉入水中，隔断潜水进出的人。
English: The Huai army surrounded the state capital by building water grids, sinking copper bells into the water on the net, and cutting off people who were diving in and out.

古文：水军卒司马福，多智而善水行，乃先以巨竹触网，淮人闻铃声遂举网，福乃过，入城中，其出也亦然。
现代文：水军士兵司马福，多智谋而又善于潜水，就先用大竹竿碰水中的网，淮人听见铃声就拉起网，司马福于是藉机遇网，进入城中，出来也是这样。
English: The naval soldier Sima Fu, who was resourceful and good at diving, first touched the net in the water with a large bamboo pole. When he heard the bell, he pulled up the net. Sima Fu then used the opportunity net to enter the city and came out the same way.

古文：乃取其军号，内外夹攻，号令相应，淮人以为神，遂大败之，本等走，擒其将闾丘直、何明等。
现代文：于是取得城中守军号令，内外夹攻，号令相应，淮军以为有神相助，于是大败淮军，周本等人逃跑，擒获他们的将领阎丘直、何明等人。
English: As a result, the defenders of the city were ordered to attack both inside and outside the city. The Huai Army thought that there was divine assistance, so the Huai Army was defeated, Zhou Ben and others fled, and their generals Yan Qiu Zhi, He Ming and others were captured.

古文：四年，镠游衣锦军，作《还乡歌》曰： 三节还乡兮挂锦衣，父老远来相追随。
现代文：四年，钱谬游衣锦军，作《还乡歌》唱道： 持节回乡啊身穿锦衣，故乡父老从速处来追随。
English: In the fourth year, Qian Muyuan dressed in brocade and sang "Homecoming Song": "I'm returning to my hometown for the festival, wearing a brocade dress. My hometown parents are following me at a fast pace."

古文：牛斗无孛人无欺，吴越一王驷马归。 
现代文：牛斗无光人无欺，昊越王乘驷马高车返回。 
English: There is no cheating in the bullfight, and Hao Yue Wang returned by horse-drawn carriage.

古文：乾化元年，加镠守尚书令，兼淮南、宣润等道四面行营都统。
现代文：干化元年，加钱锷守尚书令，兼淮南、宣润等道四面行营都统。
English: In the first year of the Qianhua era, Qian Qian Shou Shang Shuling, as well as Huainan, Xuanrun and other roads, were all unified.

古文：立生祠于衣锦军。
现代文：在衣锦军建立钱镠生祠。
English: The Qianlong Ancestral Shrine was established in Itamjin.

古文：镠弟镖居湖州，擅杀戍将潘长，惧罪奔于淮南。
现代文：钱锷的弟弟钱镖居湖州，擅自杀守将潘辰，畏罪投奔到淮南。
English: Qian Yao's younger brother Qian Dar, who lived in Huzhou, committed suicide to defend General Pan Chen, and fled to Huainan for fear of his life.

古文：二年，梁郢王友珪立，册尊镠尚父。
现代文：二年，梁郢王朱友珪登位，降册命尊崇钱镑为尚父。
English: Two years later, Zhu Youya, the King of Liangyao, ascended to the throne. He was ordered to respect the money pound as his father.

古文：末帝贞明三年，加镠天下兵马都元帅，开府置官属。
现代文：梁末帝贞明三年，加钱镑天下兵马都元帅，开府设置属官。
English: In the third year of Emperor Zhenmin of Liangming, he became the marshal of all the armies and horses in the world and the subordinate official of the capital.

古文：四年，杨隆演取虔州，镠始由海路入贡京师。
现代文：四年，杨隆演攻取虔州，钱镠开始从海路向京师进贡。
English: In the fourth year, Yang Longyan conquered Kenzhou, and Qian Ye began to pay tribute to the Beijing division from the sea.

古文：龙德元年，赐镠诏书不名。
现代文：龙德元年，赐给钱镑的诏书不称名。
English: In the first year of the Long Duc Dynasty, the edict to give money pounds was not famous.

古文：唐庄宗入洛，镠遣使贡献，求玉册。
现代文：唐庄宗进入洛阳，钱铿派使臣进贡，请求玉册。
English: When Tang Zhuangzong entered Luoyang, Qian Ye sent envoys to collect tribute and request a jade scroll.

古文：庄宗下其议于有司，群臣皆以谓非天子不得用玉册，郭崇韬尤为不可，既而许之，乃赐镠玉册金印。
现代文：唐庄宗把他的请求下给官府商议，群臣都认为不是天子不能用玉册，郭崇韬尤其认为不行，不久同意了，于是赐给钱铿玉册、金印。
English: Tang Zhuangzong submitted his request to the government for deliberation. The ministers all believed that it was not the Son of Heaven who could not use the jade book, and Guo Chongyi in particular thought that it was not possible. He soon agreed, so he gave Qian Xuan the jade book and the gold seal.

古文：镠因以镇海等军节度授其子元瓘，自称吴越国王，更名所居曰宫殿、府曰朝，官属皆称臣，起玉册、金券、诏书三楼于衣锦军，遣使册新罗、渤海王，海中诸国，皆封拜其君长。
现代文：钱镠于是任命他的儿子钱元璀为镇海等军节度，自称昊越国王，所住的地方改称宫殿、官府叫朝，属官都称臣，在衣锦军修建玉册、金券、诏书三楼，派使臣册封新罗、渤海王，对海中各国，钱镠都给他们的君长授封职号。
English: Qianlong then appointed his son Qianyuanqian as the military governor of Zhenhai and other provinces, claiming to be the king of Hao Yue. The place where he lived was renamed the palace, the government office was called the court, and the subordinate officials all praised the vassals. He built the third floor of jade books, gold certificates, and imperial decrees in the Yi Jin Army, and sent envoys to crown the kings of Silla and Erhai. For the countries in the middle of the sea, Qianyuan gave their monarchs the title of nobility.

古文：明宗即位，安重诲用事，镠致书重诲，书辞嫚，重诲大怒。
现代文：唐明宗登位，安重诲专权，钱镠致信安重诲，信中语言轻慢，安重诲大怒。
English: Emperor Mingzong of Tang ascended to the throne, An Chongyun gained exclusive power, Qian Rong sent a letter to An Chongyun, the letter was careless in language, and An Chongyun was furious.

古文：是时，供奉官乌昭遇、韩玫使吴越，既还，玫诬昭遇称臣舞蹈，重诲乃奏削镠王爵、元帅、尚父，以太师致仕。
现代文：逭时，供奉官盅昭遇、韩玫出使昊越，返回后。韩玫诬告乌昭遇对昊越称臣行舞蹈礼，安重诲于是上奏削夺钱铿的王爵、元帅、尚父，以太师辞官。
English: At that time, Han Mei falsely accused Wu Zhaoyu of performing a dance ritual on Hao Yue, who was a vassal of Han Mei, and ordered him to cut off Wang Jue, Marshal, Shang Fuzi, and Ether Teacher, who were trying to extort money from him.

古文：元瓘等遣人以绢表间道自陈。
现代文：钱元璀等派人从小路进献绢绸上表白陈。
English: Qian Yuanlu and others sent people to offer silk from the path to express their gratitude.

古文：安重诲死，明宗乃复镠官爵。
现代文：安重诲死后，唐明宗纔恢复钱锷的官爵。
English: After the death of An Chongyun, Tang Ming Zongyi restored Qian Ye's official title.

古文：长兴三年，镠卒，年八十一，谥曰武肃。
现代文：长兴三年，钱镑去世，终年八十一岁，谧号叫武肃。
English: Changxing three years, Qianping died, 81 years old, nicknamed Wuxu.

古文：子元瓘立。
现代文：儿子钱元璀继位。
English: His son Qian Yuanjun succeeded to the throne.

古文：元瓘字明宝，少为质于田頵。
现代文：钱元璀字明宾，年轻时被田颓当作人质。
English: Qian Yuanxuan, nicknamed Mingbin, was taken hostage by Tian Yao when he was young.

古文：頵叛于吴，杨行密会越兵攻之，頵每战败归，即欲杀元瓘，頵母尝蔽护之。
现代文：田头反叛昊，杨行密会同越兵攻打他，田头每当战败而回，就想杀掉钱元璀，田颓的母亲常保护他。
English: Tian Tou rebelled, Yang Xing conspired with Vietnamese soldiers to attack him. Whenever Tian Tou was defeated and returned, he wanted to kill Qian Yuanhao. Tian Tou's mother often protected him.

古文：后頵将出，语左右曰： 今日不胜，必斩钱郎。 
现代文：后来田颓准备出战时，对手下人说： 今天如果不取胜，必定斩钱郎。 
English: Later, when Tian Xuan was preparing to go into battle, his opponent said: "If I don't win today, I will surely behead Qian Lang."

古文：是日頵战死，元瓘得归。
现代文：这天田颓战死，钱元瑾得以回来。
English: On this day, Tian Tian died in battle, and Qian Yuan was able to return.

古文：镠卧病，召诸大将告之曰： 吾子皆愚懦，不足任后事，吾死，公等自择之。 
现代文：钱镠卧病不起，召来大将告诉他们说： 我的儿子都愚蠢懦弱，不配担当以后的大事，我死后，你们自己挑选继承人。 
English: Qian Ye lay ill and summoned the general to tell them: My sons are all stupid and cowardly, and are not worthy of being in charge of important matters in the future. When I die, you can choose your own heirs.

古文：诸将泣下，皆曰： 元瓘从王征伐最有功，诸子莫及，请立之。 
现代文：将领们流着眼泪，都说： 钱元璀跟随你征伐功劳最大，其余的儿子没有人能赶上他，请求立他焉王。 
English: With tears streaming down their faces, the generals all said, "Qian Yuanjun did the greatest service in following you on the campaign. None of the other sons can catch up with him. Please make him the king."

古文：镠乃出管钥数箧，召元瓘与之曰： 诸将许尔矣。 
现代文：钱镠纔拿出几匣子钥匙，召来钱元瑾交给他说： 将领们都同意你了。 
English: Qian Ye took out several boxes of keys, summoned Qian Yuan and handed them to him, saying, "The generals all agree with you.

古文：镠卒，元瓘立，袭封吴越国王，玉册、金印，皆如镠故事。
现代文：钱镠死，钱元璀登位，袭封为昊越国王，玉册、金印，都依钱铿时的旧例。
English: Qian Xuan died, Qian Yuanzhang ascended to the throne, and was crowned King of Hao Yue. The jade scroll and gold seal are all in accordance with the old case of Qian Xuan.

古文：王延政自立于建州，闽中大乱，元瓘遣其将仰诠、薛万忠等攻之，逾年，大败而归。
现代文：王延政在建州，自立，闽中大乱，钱元堆派他的将领仰诠、薛万忠等人攻打他，一年多，大败而回。
English: Wang Yanzheng in Jianzhou, self-reliance, in the middle of the turmoil, Qianyuan sent his generals to attack him, more than a year, defeated and returned.

古文：元瓘亦善抚将士，好儒学，善为诗，使其国相沈崧置择能院，选吴中文士录用之。
现代文：钱元罐也善于安抚将士，喜好儒学，善于做诗，让他的国相沈崧设置择能院，挑选昊中文人加以录用。
English: Qianyuan can also be good at placating generals, likes Confucianism, and is good at making poems. He asked his minister of state, Shen Zhen, to set up a talent selection institute and select Hao Chinese to be hired.

古文：然性尤奢僭，好治宫室。
现代文：但性格尤其奢侈僭越，喜好建造宫殿。
English: However, his personality is particularly extravagant, with a penchant for building palaces.

古文：天福六年，杭州大火，烧其宫室迨尽，元瓘避之，火辄随发。元瓘大惧，因病狂。是岁卒，年五十五，谥曰文穆。
现代文：天福六年，杭州大火，把宫室差不多全部烧光，钱元罐避火，火就跟着他烧，钱元堆十分恐惧，因而患病精神失常，这年去世，当年五十五岁，谧号叫文穆。
English: In the sixth year of Tianfu, the great fire of Hangzhou burned down almost all of the palace. Qianyuan cans were sheltered from the fire, and the fire burned with him. Qianyuan piles were very afraid, so they suffered from mental disorders. He died this year, at the age of fifty-five. His nickname was Wenmu.

古文：子佐立。
现代文：儿子钱佐继位。
English: His son Qian Sa succeeded to the throne.

古文：佐字祐，立时年十三，诸将皆少佐，佐初优容之，诸将稍不法，佐乃黜其大将章德安于明州、李文庆于睦州，杀内都监杜昭达、统军使阚璠，由是国中皆畏恐。
现代文：镗住字佑，登位时十三岁，将领们都看不起钱佐，钱佐起初宽容他们，将领们逐渐不守法，钱佐于是在明州罢黜大将章德安、在睦州废罢李文庆，杀内都监杜昭达、统军使板瑨，于是国中之人都感到恐惧。
English: He was thirteen years old when he ascended the throne. The generals all looked down on Chenza. At first, Chenza tolerated them. Gradually, the generals did not abide by the law. Chenza then ousted General Zhang De'an in Mingshou, ousted Li Wenqing in Mengzhou, killed Du Zhaoda, the procurator of the Inner Capital, and the envoy of the unified army, and everyone in the country felt fear.

古文：王延义、延政兄弟相攻，卓俨明、硃文进、李仁达等自相篡杀，连兵不解者数年。
现代文：王延羲、王延政兄弟相互攻击，卓俨明、朱文进、李仁达等人自相篡夺攻杀，几年来交战不断。
English: The brothers Wang Yanxuan and Wang Yanzheng attacked each other, and Zhuo Yiming, Zhu Wenjin, Li Renda and others usurped and killed each other. For several years, the war continued.

古文：仁达附于李景，已而又叛，景兵攻之，仁达求救于佐。
现代文：李仁达归附李景，不久又反叛，李景的军队攻打他，李仁达向钱佐求救。
English: Li Renda became a vassal of Li Jing, and soon rebelled. Li Jing's army attacked him, and Li Renda appealed to Qian Zuo for help.

古文：佐召诸将计事，诸将皆不欲行，佐奋然曰： 吾为元帅，而不能举兵邪？
现代文：钱佐召集将领商量，将领们都不想去，钱佐激动地说： 我是元帅，而不能发兵吗？
English: Qianza called the generals together for a discussion, but none of them wanted to go. Qianza said excitedly, "I'm a marshal, but can't I send troops?

古文：诸将吾家素畜养，独不肯以身先我乎？
现代文：我象一直养着你们这些将领，难道不愿意先我而战吗？
English: I've been raising you generals, don't you want to fight for me first?

古文：有异吾议者斩！ 
现代文：对我的话有异议的靳！ 
English: Anyone who disagrees with what I've said, shut up!

古文：乃遣其统军使张筠、赵承泰等率兵三万，水陆赴之。
现代文：于是派他的统军使张筠、趟承泰等人率兵三万人，水陆并进援救李仁逵。
English: As a result, he sent his unified army to send Zhang Qian, Watan Cheng Tai and others with 30,000 soldiers to rescue Li Renyao by land and sea.

古文：遣将誓军，号令齐整。
现代文：派遣将领，阅兵誓师，号令整齐。
English: Send the generals, parade the oath-takers, and give the order in an orderly manner.

古文：筠等大败景兵，俘馘万计，获其将杨业、蔡遇等，遂取福州而还，由是诸将皆服。
现代文：张筠等人大败李景的军队，俘虏斩首敷以万计，抓获他们的将领杨业、蔡遇等，于是攻取福州而回，从此将领们都佩服他了。
English: Zhang Ye and others defeated Li Jing's army, decapitated the captives with all their might, captured their generals Yang Ye, Cai Yu, etc., and then returned to capture Fuzhou. Since then, the generals have admired him.

古文：佐立七年，袭封吴越国王，玉册、金印，皆如元瓘。
现代文：钱佐登位七年，袭封昊越国王，玉册、金印，都依钱元璀时旧例。
English: Qian Zuo ascended to the throne for seven years, and was succeeded by King Ho Yue. The jade scroll and gold seal are all in accordance with the old case when Qian Yuan was enthroned.

古文：开运四年，佐卒，年二十，谥曰忠献。
现代文：开运四年，钟佐去世，时年二十岁，谧号叫忠献。
English: Four years after the start of the expedition, Zhong Zuo died at the age of twenty. His posthumous name was Zhong Xian.

古文：弟俶立。
现代文：弟弟钱仿登位。
English: His younger brother Qian Fong ascended to the throne.

古文：俶字文德。
现代文：钱傲字文德。
English: Qian Ao Zi Wen De.

古文：佐卒，弟倧以次立。
现代文：钱佐死后，弟弟钱系按顺序继位。
English: After Qian Sa's death, his younger brother Qian Zhou succeeded him in order.

古文：初，元瓘质于宣州，以胡进思、戴恽等自随，元瓘立，用进思等为大将。
现代文：当初，钱元罐在宣州作人质，以胡进思、戴惮等人跟从自己，钱元璀登位，任用胡进思等人做大将。
English: At first, Qianyuan Jian was a hostage in Xuanzhou, with Hu Jinshi, Dai Shuo and others following him. Qianyuan Jian ascended the throne and appointed Hu Jinshi and others as generals.

古文：佐既年少，进思以旧将自待，甚见尊礼，及倧立，颇卑侮之，进思不能平。
现代文：钱佐既年轻，胡进思把自己当作老将，很受尊敬礼遇，到钱家登位后，颇为轻侮看不起他，胡进思愤愤不平。
English: Although Qianza was young, Hu Jinshi regarded himself as a veteran and was highly respected. After he ascended to the throne of the Qian family, he was rather scorned and despised. Hu Jinshi was indignant.

古文：倧大阅兵于碧波亭，方第赏，进思前谏以赏太厚，倧怒掷笔水中曰： 以物与军士，吾岂私之，何见咎也！ 
现代文：钱家在碧波亭大阅兵，正依次行赏，胡进思上前谏阻说赏赐太重，钱惊发怒把笔扔到水中说： 拿财物赏给军士，我难道私吞了，为什么受到责备？ 
English: The Qian family was holding a grand military parade in Bibo Pavilion, and they were awarding medals one after another. Hu Jin thought of putting forward an objection, saying that the awards were too heavy. Qian flew into a rage and threw the pen into the water, saying, "I awarded the wealth to the sergeant. Did I swallow it, why am I being reproached?"

古文：进思大惧。
现代文：胡进思十分畏惧。
English: Hu Jinshi was very afraid.

古文：岁除，画工献《钟馗击鬼图》，倧以诗题图上，进思见之大悟，知倧将杀己。
现代文：年终，画工进献《钟馗击鬼图》，钱家在画上题诗，胡进思读了猛然醒悟，知道钱家要杀自己了。
English: At the end of the year, the painter presented "The Bell Tolls for the Devil," and Qian Jia was painting the poem. Hu Jinshi suddenly woke up after reading it and knew that Qian Jia was going to kill himself.

古文：是夕拥卫兵废倧，囚于义和院，迎俶立之，迁倧于东府。
现代文：这天晚上带着卫兵废除钱惊，拘囚在义和院，迎接钱傲，立为国君，把钱家迁到束府。
English: That evening, he took guards to abolish the fear of money, took prisoners to the Yihwa Courthouse, greeted the pride of money, established himself as the ruler of the country, and moved the money house to Sokufu.

古文：俶历汉、周，袭封吴越国王，赐玉册、金印。
现代文：钱椒经历漠、周两朝，袭封昊越国王，赐给玉册、金印。
English: Qianfei experienced the desert, the Zhou Dynasty and the Two Dynasties, attacked the King of Feng Ho Yue, and gave him the Jade Brochure and the Golden Seal.

古文：世宗征淮南，诏俶攻常、宣二州以牵李景，俶治国中兵以待。
现代文：周世宗征伐淮南，诏令钱仿进攻常、宣二州以牵制李景，钱傲整治国中军队待命。
English: Zhou Shizong conquered Huainan, the emperor ordered Qian to attack frequently, proclaim two states to contain Li Jing, and Qian Ao to rectify the country. The army was on standby.

古文：景闻周师将大举，乃遣使安抚，境上皆戒严。
现代文：李景听说周军将大举出动，于是派使臣安抚，边境上都戒严了。
English: Li Jing heard that Zhou's army would make a large-scale move, so he sent envoys to appease, and martial law was imposed on the border.

古文：苏州候吏陈满不知景使，以谓朝廷已克诸州，遣使安抚矣，亟言于俶，请举兵以应。
现代文：苏州迎宾官吏陈满不知道是李景的使臣，认为朝廷已经攻克各州，派使臣前来安抚了，急忙告诉钱假，请求派兵响应。
English: Chen Man, the Suzhou welcoming official, did not know that he was Li Jing's envoy. He thought that the imperial court had conquered all the states and had sent envoys to pacify them. He hurriedly told Qian Shen and asked for a troop response.

古文：俶相国吴程遽调兵以出，相国元德昭以为王师必未渡淮，与程争于俶前，不可夺。
现代文：钱傲的宰相昊程匆忙调遣军队出动，宰相元德昭认为王师必定没有渡过淮河，和昊程在钱假面前争执，没有改变前议。
English: Qian's proud prime minister, Hao Cheng, hastily dispatched troops. Prime minister, Yuan Dezhao, believed that Wang Shih must not have crossed the Huai River. He and Hao Cheng argued in front of Qian and did not change the previous discussion.

古文：程等攻常州，果为景将柴克宏所败，程裨将邵可迁力战，可迁子死马前，犹战不顾，程等仅以身免。
现代文：昊程等人进攻常州，果然被李景的将领柴克宏打败，昊程的偏将邵可迁奋力作战，邵可迁的儿子死于马前，饱还继续作战不顾，昊程等人仅仅单身逃命。
English: Haocheng and others attacked Changzhou, and were defeated by Li Jing's general Zhai Kehong. Haocheng's general Shao Keqian fought hard, Shao Keqian's son died before the horse, but continued to fight regardless. Haocheng and others only fled for their lives.

古文：周师渡淮，俶乃尽括国中丁民益兵，使邵可迁等以战船四百艘、水军万七千人至于通州以会期。
现代文：周军渡过淮河，钱傲于是征召圃中全部成年百姓补充军队，派邵可迁等人率领四百艘战船、一万七千水兵到通州会合周军。
English: When Zhou's army crossed the Huai River, Qian Ao then conscripted all adult citizens in the garden to supplement the army, and sent Shao Keqian and others to lead four hundred warships and seventeen thousand sailors to Tongzhou to join the Zhou army.

古文：吴越自唐末有国，而杨行密、李昪据有江淮。
现代文：昊越自从唐末建国以来，而杨行密、李升占据江淮。
English: Since the founding of the country at the end of the Tang Dynasty, Hao Yue, Yang Xingmi and Li Sheng have dominated the Jianghuai.

古文：吴越贡赋，朝廷遣使，皆由登、莱泛海，岁常飘溺其使。
现代文：昊越交纳赋税，朝廷派遣使臣，都从登、莱二州航海前往，每年常常冲走淹没他们的使臣。
English: Hao Yue paid taxes, and the imperial court sent envoys, all of whom sailed from the two states of Deng and Lai, and often washed away the envoys who flooded them every year.

古文：显德四年，诏遣左谏议大夫尹日就、吏部郎中崔颂等使于俶，世宗谕之曰： 朕此行决平江北，卿等还当陆来也。 
现代文：显德四年，下诏派左谏议大夫尹日就、吏部郎中崔颂等人出使钱仿，周世宗向他们宣布说： 朕此行决心平定长江以北，你们回来时就会走陆路了。 
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Xiande's reign, Yin Riji, the doctor of the Left Division of the Imperial Court, and Cui Song, the middle-ranking official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, sent Qian Fong. Zhou Shizong announced to them: "I am determined to pacify the north of the Yangtze River on this trip, and when you return, you will go by land.

古文：五年，王师征淮，正月克静海军，而日就等果陆还。
现代文：五年，朝廷大军征讨淮，正月攻克静海军，而尹日就等人果然从陆路返回。
English: In the fifth year, the imperial army recruited Huai and conquered Jing navy in the first month, while Yin and others successfully returned from the land route.

古文：世宗已平淮南，遣使赐俶兵甲旗帜、橐驼羊马。
现代文：周世宗平定淮南后，派使臣赐给钱椒武器、镗甲、旗帜、骆驼、羊、马。
English: After Zhou Shizong conquered Huainan, he sent envoys to give Qianfei weapons, armor, flags, camels, sheep, and horses.

古文：钱氏兼有两浙几百年，其人比诸国号为怯弱，而俗喜淫侈，偷生工巧，自镠世常重敛其民以事奢僭，下至鸡鱼卵鷇，必家至而日取。每笞一人以责其负，则诸案史各持其簿列于廷；凡一簿所负，唱其多少，量为笞数，以次唱而笞之，少者犹积数十，多者至笞百余，人尤不胜其苦。
现代文：钱氏拥有两浙将近百年，那里的人比其它各国的人更胆怯懦弱，而风俗喜好淫逸奢侈，苟且偷生，工艺精巧，自从钱谬在世时就常常对百姓加重赋税，从事奢侈越分的事，下至鸡、鱼、蛋、雏禽，必定挨家挨卢按日收取赋税，常常鞭打一人来追缴拖欠的赋税，各案的官史就分别拿着账簿站立在公堂上，凡账簿上所拖欠的赋税，报出多少数量，折合为鞭打的次数，依次报敷而鞭打民户，少的也被鞭打几十下，多的达到一百多，人们不能忍受痛苦。
English: The Qian family has owned the two Zhejiang provinces for nearly a hundred years. The people there are more timid and cowardly than people in other countries, and their customs are fond of lascivious luxury, living a life of deception, and exquisite craftsmanship. Since Qian Mu was alive, he often increased taxes on the people and engaged in extravagant and extravagant affairs. From chickens, fish, eggs, and chicks, he must collect taxes from house to house on a daily basis. He often whipped one person to recover the tax arrears. The official history of each case stood in the court with the account books separately. In each case, the amount of tax arrears on the

古文：又多掠得岭海商贾宝货。
现代文：又抢得很多岭南海外商人的财宝。
English: He also robbed many treasures from overseas merchants in Lingnan.

古文：当五代时，常贡奉中国不绝。及世宗平淮南，宋兴，荆、楚诸国相次归命，俶势益孤，始倾其国以事贡献。
现代文：在五代时，常常不断向中原国家进贡，到周世宗平定淮南，宋朝兴起时，剂、楚各国相继归附，钱傲的势力更加孤立，便倾尽国家财富来进贡。
English: During the Five Dynasties, tribute was often paid to the Central Plains countries. By the time of Zhou Shizong's subjugation of Huainan, and the rise of the Song Dynasty, the states of Jia and Chu had successively been annexed, and the power of Qian Ao had become more isolated. They poured all of the country's wealth into paying tribute.

古文：太祖皇帝时，俶尝来朝，厚礼遣还国，俶喜，益以器服珍奇为献，不可胜数。
现代文：宋太祖皇帝时，钱仿曾经来朝拜，宋用厚礼送他回国，钱散心喜，增加进贡珍奇器物，不可胜敷。
English: When Emperor Song Taizu, Qian Fong once came to pay homage. Song sent him back to China with a heavy gift. Qian was overjoyed and increased the tribute of rare items.

古文：太祖曰： 此吾帑中物尔，何用献为！ 
现代文：宋太祖说： 这些不过是我仓库中的财物罢了，何用进献！ 
English: Song Taizu said, "These are just belongings in my storehouse, what's the use of donating them?

古文：太平兴国三年，诏俶来朝，俶举族归于京师，国除。其后事具国史。
现代文：太平兴国三年，诏令钱傲来朝，钱傲全族到京师，亡国以后的事记载在本朝国史中。
English: In the third year of the Taiping Restoration, Qian Ao was ordered by the emperor to come to China, and the whole Qian Ao family went to Beijing to study. The events after the fall of the country are recorded in the national history of this dynasty.

古文：呜呼！
现代文：唉！
English: Alas!

古文：天人之际，为难言也。
现代文：上天、人世的关系，难以说清啊。
English: It's hard to explain the relationship between heaven and earth.

古文：非徒自古术者好奇而幸中，至于英豪草窃亦多自托于妖祥，岂其欺惑愚众，有以用之欤？
现代文：不祇是从古到今的术士喜好猎奇而侥幸说中，以至于英雄豪杰、草莽盗贼也常常以妖妄的征兆自托，难道不是欺骗愚民，有它的用处吗？
English: Not only have magicians from ancient times to the present liked to indulge in whimsy and chance, to the extent that heroes and daredevils, as well as unscrupulous thieves, often rely on magical omens. Isn't it useful to deceive the foolish?

古文：盖其兴也，非有功德渐积之勤，而黥髡盗贩，倔起于王侯，而人亦乐为之传欤？
现代文：大概在兴起的时候，并非有逐渐积累的功德辛劳，而服刑的罪犯、私贩商贾，或崛起而成为王侯，而人们也乐于传播这些妖妄之事吧？
English: Probably at the time of its rise, there was no gradual accumulation of merit and toil, but criminals serving sentences, smugglers, or rising to become princes, and people are also happy to spread these delusions, right?

古文：考钱氏之始终，非有德泽施其一方，百年之际，虐用其人甚矣，其动于气象者，岂非其孽欤？
现代文：考察钱氏立国的始终，并没有功德恩泽布施一方，一百年之间，残酷地役使百姓到了极点，其表现于天文历象的，难道不是妖孽吗？
English: Examining the history of Qian's founding of the country, there is no merit on the part of the benevolence, between a hundred years, the cruel service brought the people to the extreme, its performance in the astronomical calendar, is not it a witchcraft?

古文：是时四海分裂，不胜其暴，又岂皆然欤？
现代文：这时四海分裂，人们经受不了这种暴虐，又难道都是这样吗？
English: At this time, the four seas are divided, and people can't stand this kind of tyranny. Is it all like this?

古文：是皆无所得而推欤？
现代文：这都是无所得而推想出来的吗？
English: Is this all conjecture with no substance?

古文：术者之言，不中者多，而中者少，而人特喜道其中者欤？
现代文：方术家的话，不应验的多，应验的少，而人们只是喜欢称道那些应验的吧！
English: There are more unfulfilled promises than fulfilled ones, and people only like to praise those that are fulfilled, right?

