古文：以功名为心，贪军旅之寄，此自将帅习气，虽古为贤卿大夫，未有能知止自敛者也。
现代文：把功名放在心上，热心于寄身军队之中，这本来就是将帅的习气，即使是自古以来的贤明的卿大夫，也没有能知足而自己收敛的。
English: It is the habit of generals to keep their achievements in mind and to devote themselves to the army. Even the wisest generals since ancient times have not been able to be content and restrain themselves.

古文：廉颇既老，饭斗米，肉十斤，被甲上马，以示可用，致困郭开之口，终不得召。
现代文：廉颇已经年老，吃一斗米，十斤肉，身披战甲上马，表示还可以被任用，但遭到郭开的谗言，终于不能被征召。
English: Renpo is already old, eats a bucket of rice and ten pounds of meat, puts on his battle armor, and says that he can still be appointed, but is criticized by Guo Kai and finally cannot be conscripted.

古文：汉武帝大击匈奴，李广数自请行，上以为老，不许。良久乃许之，卒有东道失军之罪。
现代文：汉武帝大举进攻匈奴，李广几次请求随同出征，武帝认为李广老了，不允许，很久才允许他去，最后终于在东边路上迷路，延误了期限而犯下罪过。
English: Emperor Han Wudi launched a large-scale attack on the Xiongnu, Li Guang several times requested to go with him. Emperor Wu thought that Li Guang was old and did not allow him to go. It took a long time before he was allowed to go. Finally, he lost his way on the east road, delayed the deadline and committed a crime.

古文：宣帝时，先零羌反，赵充国年七十余，上老之，使丙吉问谁可将，曰： 亡逾于老臣者矣。 
现代文：汉宣帝时，先零羌造反，赵充国已经七十多岁，皇上认为他老了，让丙吉去询问他谁可以当将领，他说： 没有能超越老臣我的了。 
English: At the time of Emperor Han Xuan's rebellion, Zhao Chongguo was already over seventy years old. The emperor thought he was old, so he asked Bingji to ask him who could be a general. He said, "There is no one who can surpass my old minister."

古文：即驰至金城，图上方略，虽全师制胜，而祸及其子卬。
现代文：就驰马到金城，呈献地图和破敌计划，虽然保全部队取得胜利，但却使他的儿子赵卬遭到灾祸。
English: He galloped to Jincheng, presented a map and a plan to defeat the enemy, and although the whole team achieved victory, it brought disaster to his son Zhao Yu.

古文：光武时，五溪蛮夷畔，马援请行，帝愍其老，未许。援自请曰： 臣尚能被甲上马。 
现代文：汉光帝时，五溪的少数民族反叛，马援请求出征，光武帝可怜他年老，没有同意，马援请求说： 我还能够披甲跨马。 
English: At the time of Han Guangdi, the ethnic minorities of Wuxi rebelled, Ma Yuan requested to go to war. Emperor Guangwu took pity on his old age and did not agree. Ma Yuan requested: I can still wear armor and ride a horse.

古文：帝令试之，援据鞍顾盼，以示可用。
现代文：光武帝让他试一试，马援跨上战马左顾右盼，来表示可以被任用。
English: Emperor Guangwu asked him to give it a try, and Ma Yuan straddled the warhorse, looking left and right, to show that he could be appointed.

古文：帝笑曰： 矍铄哉！是翁也！ 
现代文：光武帝笑着说： 这个老者真是勇健哪！ 
English: Emperor Guangwu smiled and said, "This old man is really brave!"

古文：遂用为将，果有壶头之厄。
现代文：于是用他为将，果然在壶头山遭到厄运。
English: So he used him as a pawn, and sure enough, he met with bad luck in Kuguchiyama.

古文：李靖为相，以足疾就第，会吐谷浑寇边，即往见房乔曰： 吾虽老，尚堪一行。 
现代文：李靖当过宰相，因为脚有毛病辞职，遇上吐谷浑进犯边疆，就去见房乔说： 我虽然老了，但还能出征一次。 
English: Li Jing was once the prime minister, but resigned because of a foot problem. When he encountered Tu Gu Hun invading the frontier, he went to see Fang Qiao and said: Although I am old, I can still go to war once.

古文：既平其国，而有高甑生诬罔之事，几于不免。
现代文：平定了吐谷浑国，却又遭到高甑生诬陷欺骗的事，几乎不能幸免。
English: It is almost impossible to avoid the fate of having pacified Tugu Hunkuo, only to be slandered and cheated by high school students.

古文：太宗将伐辽，召入谓曰： 高丽未服，公亦有意乎？ 
现代文：唐太宗打算攻打辽东，召他进来对他说： 高丽还不臣服，您也有出征的意思吗？ 
English: Tang Taizong planned to attack Liaodong, called him in and said to him: Goryeo is not yet subjugated, do you also intend to go to war?

古文：对曰： 今疾虽衰，陛下诚不弃，病且瘳矣。 
现代文：他回答说： 现在我有病虽然衰弱，但陛下真的不嫌弃我的话，我的病很快就好了。 
English: He replied: Now I am ill, although weak, but Your Majesty really does not hate my words, my illness will soon be over.

古文：帝悯其老，不许。
现代文：皇帝怜悯他年龄老了，不同意。
English: The emperor took pity on his old age and did not agree.

古文：郭子仪年八十余，犹为关内副元帅、朔方河中节度，不求退身，竟为德宗册罢。
现代文：郭子仪八十多岁，还担任着关内副元帅和朔方、河中节度使，不求隐退，最后被唐德宗下令罢免。
English: Guo Ziyi was more than eighty years old. He also served as the deputy marshal of the Guanzhong and the deputy marshal of the Shuo, and the deputy marshal of the Mid-Autumn Festival. He did not seek seclusion, and was finally dismissed by the order of Tang Dezong.

古文：此诸公皆人杰也，犹不免此，况其下者乎！
现代文：这些人都是人中英杰，还不能免于贪功求名，何况是比他们低下的人呢？
English: These people are all outstanding among the people, but they are not free from the greed for fame, let alone those who are lower than them?

