古文：子贡问于孔子曰： 晋文公实召天子而使诸侯朝焉。
现代文：子贡问孔子说： 晋文公在温地的会盟，实际召请来周天子，而让诸侯来朝见。
English: Zigong asked Confucius, "Jinwengong's alliance in Warmi actually invited Zhou Tianzi, but let the princes come to the imperial court.

古文：夫子作春秋，云天王狩于河阳，何也？ 
现代文：老师您编写《春秋》时写道： 天王在河阳打猎。 
English: Teacher, when you were compiling "Spring and Autumn," you wrote: The emperor is hunting in the river Yang.

古文：孔子曰： 以臣召君，不可以训，亦书其率诸侯事天子而已。 
现代文：这是为什么呢？ 孔子说： 以臣下的身份召请君主，这不可以效法。所以我如此写，就是要写成晋文公率诸侯来朝见天子。 
English: Why is that? Confucius said, "It is not right to follow the example of summoning the sovereign as a subject. Therefore, I wrote it as follows: to write it as follows: the prince Jinwen led the princes to come to the imperial court to meet the emperor.

古文：孔子在宋，见桓魋自为石椁，三年而不成，工匠皆病。
现代文：孔子在宋国，看见桓魋为自己预做石椁，做了三年还没有完工，工匠都为此感到忧虑。
English: When Confucius was in the Song Dynasty, he saw that Huan Yao had made a stone coffin for himself, but it had not been completed for three years. The craftsmen were worried about this.

古文：夫子愀然曰： 若是其靡也。死不如朽之速愈。 
现代文：孔子面有忧色，说： 像这样奢靡，死了还不如快点腐朽的好。 
English: With a gloomy face, Confucius said, "With such a luxurious life, it would be better to rot away rather than die."

古文：冉子仆曰： 礼，凶事不豫，此何谓也？ 
现代文：冉有跟随侍奉孔子，说： 《礼》书说，凶事不可能预先就料到。
English: Ran Yu, who followed and served Confucius, said: "The Book of Rites says that it is impossible to anticipate evil.

古文：夫子曰： 既死而议谥，谥定而卜葬，既葬而立庙，皆臣子之事，非所豫属也，况自为之哉。 
现代文：这是指的什么呢？ 孔子说： 人死了以后再议定谥号，谥号定了以后再选择下葬地点日期，安葬完毕再建立宗庙，这些事都应该由属下的臣子来办，并非是预先就操办好，更何况是自己为自己操办呢？ 
English: What does this mean? Confucius said, "After a person dies, the family name should be agreed upon, the date for choosing the burial place should be set, and the family temple should be built after the burial. These things should be done by the subordinate vassals, not by doing it in advance, let alone doing it for themselves."

古文：南宫敬叔以富得罪于定公，奔卫，卫侯请复之，载其宝以朝。
现代文：南公敬叔因富有而得罪了鲁定公，逃到了卫国。卫侯请求鲁定公恢复敬叔的官位。
English: Nankong Jingshu offended Ludinggu because of his wealth and fled to Wei Province. Wei requested Ludinggu to restore Jingshu's official rank.

古文：夫子闻之曰： 若是其货也，丧不若速贫之愈。 
现代文：敬叔就载着他的宝物来朝见鲁定公。孔子听到这件事，说： 像这样使用财货进行贿赂，丢了官位还不如迅速贫穷的好呢！ 
English: When Confucius heard of this, he said, "It is better to lose one's official position than to quickly become poor by using wealth to bribe in this way."

古文：子游侍曰： 敢问何谓如此？
现代文：子游正侍奉孔子，说： 请问这话是什么意思呢？ 
English: Zoyu, who was serving Confucius, said, "What does this mean?"

古文：孔子曰： 富而不好礼，殃也，敬叔以富丧矣，而又弗改，吾惧其将有后患也。 
现代文：孔子说： 富而不好礼，必定会招致灾祸。南宫敬叔因富有而丧失官位，却仍不知改悔，我恐怕他将来还会有祸患啊！ 
English: Confucius said: "Being rich but not having good manners is sure to bring about disaster." Namgong Jingzhu lost his official position due to being rich, but still did not repent. I am afraid that he will still have disasters in the future!

古文：敬叔闻之，骤如孔氏，而后循礼施散焉。
现代文：南宫敬叔听到孔子的话，马上去见孔子，从此以后他做事遵循礼节，还把自己的财产施舍给百姓。
English: Upon hearing the words of Confucius, Namgong Jingzhu immediately went to see Confucius. From then on, he did things according to etiquette, and also gave away his property to the people.

古文：孔子在齐，齐大旱，春饥。
现代文：孔子在齐国的时候，齐国大旱，春季出现了饥荒。
English: When Confucius was in Qi, there was a great drought in Qi, and a famine occurred in the spring.

古文：景公问于孔子曰： 如之何？ 
现代文：齐景公问孔子说： 怎么办呢？ 
English: Qi Jing Gong asked Confucius, "What should we do?"

古文：孔子曰： 凶年则乘驽马，力役不兴，驰道不修，祈以币玉，祭祀不悬，祀以下牲，此贤君自贬以救民之礼也。 
现代文：孔子说： 遇到灾荒年景，出门乘坐要用劣马，不兴劳役，不修驰道，国君有所祈祷，用币和玉，不用牲畜，祭祀不奏乐，祭祀用的牲畜也用次等的。这是贤明君主自己降低等级以拯救民众的礼啊！ 
English: Confucius said: In a time of calamity and famine, inferior horses should be used for riding, labor service should not be favored, roads should not be built, the sovereign should pray, use coins and jade, no livestock should be used, no music should be played for sacrifices, and the livestock used for sacrifices should be of a lower grade. This is the courtesy of a wise monarch to lower the grade himself to save the people!

古文：孔子适季氏，康子昼居内寝。孔子问其所疾。康子出见之。
现代文：孔子到季康子家去，见康子白天在内室睡觉，孔子探问他的病情，康子出来接见孔子。
English: Confucius went to Ji Kangzi's home, saw Kangzi sleeping in the inner room during the day, Confucius inquired about his condition, and Kangzi came out to meet Confucius.

古文：言终，孔子退，子贡问曰： 季孙不疾而问诸疾，礼与？ 
现代文：说完话，孔子就退了出来。子贡问孔子说： 季康子没有病，而您却探问他的病，这合乎礼吗？ 
English: When he had finished speaking, Confucius withdrew. Zigong asked Confucius, "Is it proper for you to inquire about Ji Kangzi's illness when he is not ill?"

古文：孔子曰： 夫礼，君子不有大故，则不宿于外。
现代文：孔子说： 根据礼，君子没有遇到大的变故，则不睡在外室。
English: Confucius said, "According to the etiquette, a gentleman does not sleep in the outer room unless he has encountered a big change.

古文：非致齐也，非疾也，则不昼处于内，是故夜居外，虽吊之，可也。
现代文：如果不是祭祀、不是有病，白天也不在内室睡觉，因此，夜里睡在外室，即使吊问，也是可以的。
English: If it is not a religious service or if you are ill, you should not sleep in the inner room during the day. Therefore, it is okay to sleep in the outer room at night, even if you are suspended.

古文：昼居于内，虽问其疾，可也。 
现代文：白天在内室睡觉，即使探问他的病情，也是可以的。 
English: You can sleep in the inner room during the day, even if you want to inquire about his condition.

古文：孔子为大司寇，国厩焚，子退朝而之火所，乡人有自为火来者，则拜之，士一，大夫再。
现代文：孔子担任大司寇的时候，国家的马厩失火，孔子退朝后来到着火的地方。有乡亲来慰问的，孔子都对他们拜谢，对士拜谢一次，对大夫拜谢两次。
English: When Confucius was the grand secretary of the Kuomintang, the country's stables caught fire. Confucius retreated and later arrived at the place of the fire. When people from his hometown came to offer condolences, Confucius thanked them all. He thanked the priest once and the doctor twice.

古文：子贡曰： 敢问何也？ 
现代文：予贡问为什么这么做呢？ 
English: Why did you do that, I wonder?

古文：孔子曰： 其来者亦相吊之道也。
现代文：孔子说： 他们来这里，也是慰问的礼节。
English: Confucius said, "Their coming here is also a courtesy of condolence.

古文：吾为有司，故拜之。 
现代文：我是主管官员，所以要拜谢。 
English: I'm the officer in charge, so thank you.

古文：吴延陵季子聘于上国，适齐，于其返也，其长子死于嬴博之间。
现代文：吴国的延陵季子到齐国去访问，在返回的途中，他的大儿子死在齐国的嬴、博之间。
English: Yanling Jizi from Wu went to Qi to visit. On the way back, his eldest son died between Zou and Bo in Qi.

古文：孔子闻之曰： 延陵季子，吴之习于礼者也？
现代文：孔子听到此事，说： 延陵季子是吴国精通礼仪的人。 
English: When Confucius heard of this, he said, "Yanling Jizi is a person who is proficient in etiquette in the State of Wu.

古文：而观其葬焉。 
现代文：于是前往观看他主持的葬礼。
English: So they went to see the funeral he presided over.

古文：其敛，以时服而已，其圹掩坎，深不至于泉；其葬无明器之赠。
现代文：延陵季子给儿子入殓时，穿着平时的衣服，墓穴的坑不深，不至于见水，没有陪葬的明器。
English: When Yanling Qizi buried her son, she was wearing her usual clothes. The grave was not deep enough to see the water, and there was no grave marker.

古文：既葬，其封广轮掩坎，其高可肘隐也；既封，则季子乃左袒右还其封，且号者三，曰： 骨肉归于土，命也，若魂气则无所不之，则无所不之。 
现代文：下葬之后，坟头的长宽正好封住坑，高度比胳膊肘高。坟头做好后，延陵季子袒露左臂，从右向左绕着坟头走，并且哭喊了三次，说： 骨肉回归于土，这是命呀！你的魂魄无所不往，无所不往！ 
English: After the burial, the length and width of the grave head just sealed the pit, and the height was higher than the elbow. After the grave head was ready, Yanling Qizi bared his left arm, walked around the grave head from right to left, and cried three times, saying: "Flesh and bones return to the earth, this is life! Your soul is omnipresent, omnipresent!

古文：而遂行。
现代文：说完就走了。
English: After saying this, he left.

古文：孔子曰： 延陵季子之礼，其合矣。 
现代文：孔子说； 延陵季子主持的葬礼，是很合乎礼制的。 
English: Confucius said that the funeral presided over by Yanling Qizi was very proper.

古文：子游问丧之具。
现代文：子游问丧事操办的流程。
English: Ziyu asked about the process of conducting a funeral.

古文：孔子曰： 称家之有亡焉。 
现代文：孔子说： 根据家庭的贫富程度来办就可以了。 
English: Confucius said: It is enough to do it according to the level of wealth of the family.

古文：子游曰： 有亡恶于齐？ 
现代文：子游说： 贫和富的限度又该如何掌握呢？ 
English: Sub-lobbying: How should the limits of poverty and wealth be controlled?

古文：孔子曰： 有也，则无过礼。
现代文：孔子说： 家庭富裕也要依礼行事，不要超过礼的规定。
English: Confucius said: Wealthy families should also act according to etiquette, and should not exceed the rules of etiquette.

古文：苟亡矣，则敛手足形，还葬悬棺而封，人岂有非之者哉。
现代文：如果不富裕，只要衣被能遮住身体，简单地安葬，用绳子悬吊着棺木下葬，又有谁会责难你失礼呢？
English: If you are not rich, as long as you can cover your body with clothes, have a simple burial, and be buried with a coffin hanging from a rope, who will blame you for being rude?

古文：故夫丧亡，与其哀不足而礼有余，不若礼不足而哀有余也；祭祀，与其敬不足而礼有余，不若礼不足而敬有余也。 
现代文：所以举办丧事，与其哀痛不足而礼仪完备，不如礼仪不足而哀痛有余；举行祭祀，与其恭敬不足而礼仪完备，不如礼仪欠缺而恭敬有余。 
English: Therefore, to hold a funeral, it is better to have a complete etiquette than a lack of mourning; to hold a sacrifice, it is better to have a lack of etiquette than a lack of respect than a complete etiquette.

