古文：耶律楚材耶律楚材，字晋卿，辽东丹王突欲八世孙。
现代文：耶律楚材，字晋卿，契丹族人，辽东丹王突欲八世孙。
English: Yerutchu Zhai, Zi Jinqing, a member of the Khitan ethnic group, and the eighth-generation grandson of the Liaodong Emperor.

古文：父履，以学行事金世宗，特见亲任，终尚书右丞。
现代文：其父名履，金世宗时任尚书右丞。
English: His father's name was Meguri, and at the time of the Kim Sejong Dynasty, he was Shoshu Ujo.

古文：楚材生三岁而孤，母杨氏教之学。
现代文：楚材三岁丧父，母亲杨氏教养成人。
English: Chuzai lost his father at the age of three, and his mother, Yang, raised him to adulthood.

古文：及长，博极群书，旁通天文、地理、律历、术数及释老、医卜之说，下笔为文，若宿构者。
现代文：他学识渊博，精通天文、地理、历法、术数及佛学、老庄学说、医学、卜算等，下笔成文，曾任金王朝开州同知。
English: He was well-read and well-versed in astronomy, geography, calendars, magic numbers and Buddhist studies, Lao Zhuang doctrine, medicine, divination, etc. He wrote down his findings and served as the Keshu Tongzhi of the Kim dynasty.

古文：帝重其言，处之左右，遂呼楚材曰吾图撒合里而不名，吾图撒合里，盖国语长髯人也。
现代文：贞二年，金宣宗迁都汴京，完颜福兴掌尚书省事，留守燕京，任楚材为左右司员外郎。太祖铁木真攻克燕京后，闻楚材之名，召见了他，留在身边任事，因楚材美髯宏声，太祖叫他为 吾图撒合里 ，蒙语长胡须人的意思。
English: In the second year of Zhen, Kim Xuan Zong moved the capital to Beijing, and after completing his studies, he stayed in Yanjing, and appointed Chu Zai as the right and left secretary. After the great-grandfather Tie Muzhen conquered Yanjing, he heard the name of Chu Zai, summoned him, and stayed with him to work. Because of the beautiful and grand voice of Chu Zai, the great-grandfather called him "Wu Tusa Hari," meaning "Mongolian long-bearded man."

古文：己卯夏六月，帝西讨回回国。
现代文：太祖十四年六月西讨回回国。
English: In June of the 14th year of Taizu's reign, he returned to Japan.

古文：祃旗之日，雨雪三尺，帝疑之，楚材曰： 玄冥之气，见于盛夏，克敌之征也。 
现代文：出兵那天大雪三尺，太祖犹豫不决，楚材说 ：阴暗的气象只夏季才有，如今出现，这是克敌的象征。 
English: On the day the troops were sent out, there was three feet of heavy snow, and Taizu hesitated. Chu Zai said, "The gloomy weather only comes in the summer, but now it has appeared. This is a symbol of defeating the enemy."

古文：庚辰冬，大雷，复问之，对曰： 回回国主当死于野。 
现代文：次年冬雪，太祖又问楚材是何征兆，他回答说： 回回国王死了。 
English: In the winter of the following year, the great-grandfather asked Chuzai what the omen was, and he replied: "The king is dead."

古文：后皆验。
现代文：这些预言都成为事实。
English: These predictions have all come to pass.

古文：夏人常八斤，以善造弓见知于帝，因每自矜曰： 国家方用武，耶律儒者何用。 
现代文：夏国人常八斤，因善造弓，受到太祖的赏识，因而认为 ：国家正在用兵之时，耶律这样的儒生有何用？ 
English: The people of Xia were often praised by their great-grandfathers for their skill in making bows, so they thought: When the country is using soldiers, what is the use of a Confucian like Ye Lu?

古文：楚材曰： 治弓尚须用弓匠，为天下者岂可不用治天下匠耶？ 
现代文：楚材知道后进言说 ：造弓需弓匠，坐天下岂能不用治天下的匠人。 
English: After Chu Zai learned of this, he said, "It takes an archer to make a bow, so how can we rule the world without craftsmen?"

古文：帝闻之甚喜，日见亲用。
现代文：太祖甚是高兴，以后更加重用楚材。
English: The great-great-grandfather was very pleased, and used more chu wood in the future.

古文：西域历人奏五月望夜月当蚀，楚材曰： 否。 
现代文：据西域主持历法的人奏报，本年五月十五日夜有月蚀。楚材却断定是夜无月蚀，结果如楚材所言。
English: According to the report of the person who presided over the calendar in the western region, there was a lunar eclipse on the night of May 15 this year. However, Chu Zai concluded that there was no lunar eclipse at night, and the result was as Chu Zai said.

古文：卒不蚀。明年十月，楚材言月当蚀，西域人曰不蚀，至期果蚀八分。壬午八月，长星见西方，楚材曰： 女直将易主矣。 
现代文：楚材说次年七月有月蚀，西域人说没有，到时果有月蚀。太祖十七年八月彗星出于西方，楚材说： 女真族将换国王了。 
English: Chu Zai said that there would be a lunar eclipse in July of the following year, and the Westerners said no, there would be a lunar eclipse at the right time. In August of the seventeenth year of Taizu, the comet came from the west, and Chu Zai said: The Jurchen people will change their king.

古文：明年，金宣宗果死。
现代文：第二年金宣宗死了。
English: The second pension, Xuan Zong, is dead.

古文：帝每征讨，必命楚材卜，帝亦自灼羊胛，以相符应。
现代文：太祖每次征讨都要楚材卜问凶吉，自己也以烤羊胛来与卜卦相应。
English: Every time the great-grandfather went out to fight, he had to consult the oracle of good and evil, and he also used roasted mutton to correspond with the oracle.

古文：指楚材谓太宗曰： 此人天赐我家。尔后军国庶政，当悉委之。 
现代文：有天指着楚材对太宗说： 这人是天赐我的，你以后当把军国大事都委托给他。 
English: One day, pointing at Chu Zaim, he said to Emperor Taizong, "This man was given to me by Heaven. You should entrust all military affairs to him in the future."

古文：甲申，帝至东印度，驻铁门关，有一角兽，形如鹿而马尾，其色绿，作人言，谓侍卫者曰： 汝主宜早还。 
现代文：太祖二十一年冬，蒙古军攻下灵武，诸将抢夺子女、金银、绸缎，而楚材只收集书籍和大黄药材，不久士卒得传染病，楚材以大黄治愈。
English: In the winter of the twenty-first year of Taizu, the Mongolian army captured Lingwu, and the generals robbed the children, gold and silver, and silk and satin, while Chu Zai only collected books and rhubarb medicinal materials. Soon, the soldiers got an infectious disease, and Chu Zai was cured with rhubarb.

古文：燕多剧贼，未夕，辄曳牛车指富家，取其财物，不与则杀之。
现代文：太祖忙于西征，无暇制定各种军政制度，以致州郡官吏任意烧杀抢掠，燕蓟留后长官石抹咸得卜尤其贪暴，杀人无数。
English: The great-grandfather was busy with the Western Expedition and had no time to establish various military and political systems. As a result, the state and county officials arbitrarily burned, killed, and plundered. After Yan Xun stayed, the governor Shi Magham Deb was particularly corrupt and killed countless people.

古文：时睿宗以皇子监国，事闻，遣中使偕楚材往穷治之。楚材询察得其姓名，皆留后亲属及势家子，尽捕下狱。
现代文：楚材知道后立即奏报太祖，并请下令各州郡官吏，非奉太祖命令不得擅自征发百姓当差，凡判处死刑者必须上报批准，否则治以死罪。
English: As soon as Chu Zai learned of this, he reported it to the Grand Patriarch, and asked him to order the officials of each state and county not to conscript people without the Grand Patriarch's order. Anyone sentenced to death must report to the Grand Patriarch for approval, otherwise they will be sentenced to death.

古文：其家赂中使，将缓之，楚材示以祸福，中使惧，从其言，狱具，戮十六人于市，燕民始安。
现代文：经过这样一番整顿，贪暴之风稍稍收敛。燕京地带盗贼横行，楚材奉皇太子睿宗拖雷之命去治理，访察得知盗贼都是蒙古军留后官吏的子弟和亲属，尽把他们逮捕下狱，不准说情，斩杀十六人，燕京人民始得安宁。
English: After such a rectification, the wind of corruption slightly abated. Thieves were rampant in the Yanjing area, and Chu Zai was ordered by Crown Prince Ruizong to control them. The inspection learned that the thieves were the sons and relatives of the officials left behind by the Mongolian army. They were all arrested and sent to prison. They were not allowed to intercede, and 16 people were killed. The people of Yanjing began to have peace.

古文：己丑秋，太宗将即位，宗亲咸会，议犹未决。
现代文：太祖于二十二年崩，由皇子拖雷监国，第三年，太宗将即位，宗亲诸王集会，商议皇位继承事，议而未决。
English: The great-grandfather died in 1922, and the prince became the overseer of the country. In the third year, the emperor ascended the throne, and the princes gathered to discuss the succession to the throne, but the matter was not resolved.

古文：时睿宗为太宗亲弟，故楚材言于睿宗曰： 此宗社大计，宜早定。 
现代文：时睿宗为太宗亲弟，楚材对睿宗说： 此国家大事，早定为好。 
English: Shiruizong was Taizong's younger brother. Chu Zai said to Shiruizong, "This national event should have been decided long ago.

古文：睿宗曰： 事犹未集，别择日可乎？ 
现代文：睿宗说 ：还未商议好，改日即位可否？ 
English: Ruizong said, "We haven't discussed it yet, can we take the throne another day?"

古文：楚材曰： 过是无吉日矣。 
现代文：楚材说： 过了这天再无吉日了。 
English: Chu Zai said, "After this day, there will be no more auspicious days."

古文：遂定策，立仪制，乃告亲王察合台曰： 王虽兄，位则臣也，礼当拜。
现代文：于是确定太宗继承皇位，并制定群臣朝拜礼制。对亲王察合台说： 王虽皇兄，位则为臣，按礼当拜。
English: As a result, it was determined that Emperor Taizong would succeed to the throne, and a system of court worship for all vassals was established. To Prince Chagatai, he said, "Although the king is the emperor's elder brother, he is a vassal, and must worship according to the ritual."

古文：王拜，则莫敢不拜。 
现代文：王拜，其他人莫敢不拜。 
English: Wang Bai, others should not dare not to worship.

古文：王深然之。
现代文：察合台深以为是。
English: Chagatai deeply believed this to be true.

古文：及即位，王率皇族及臣僚拜帐下。
现代文：太宗即位时，亲王察合台率皇族及臣僚拜于帐下。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, Prince Chagatai led the royal family and ministers to bow to him.

古文：既退，王抚楚材曰： 真社稷臣也。 
现代文：朝拜完毕，察合台对楚材说 ：你真是社稷之臣。 
English: After the morning worship, Chagatai said to Chuzai, "You are truly a social retainer."

古文：国朝尊属有拜礼自此始。
现代文：元朝对于皇帝及长辈行跪拜礼是由此时开始的。
English: It was at this time that the Yuan Dynasty began to kneel and worship the emperor and the elders.

古文：时朝集后期应死者众，楚材奏曰： 陛下新即位，宜宥之。 
现代文：太宗登基大典之后，一些犯有死罪的人要处死，楚材奏曰： 陛下新即位，应大赦天下。 
English: After the enthronement ceremony of Emperor Taizong, some people who had committed capital crimes were to be executed. Chu Zaixiao said, "Your Majesty's new enthronement should be a great mercy to the world."

古文：太宗从之。
现代文：太宗采纳了他的意见。
English: Emperor Taizong followed his advice.

古文：中原甫定，民多误触禁网，而国法无赦令。
现代文：中原刚刚平定，百姓多误触禁网，而国法中无宽赦的规定。
English: The Central Plains have just been pacified, and many people have mistakenly touched forbidden nets, but there is no provision for clemency in the national law.

古文：楚材议请肆宥，众以为迂，楚材独从容为帝言。诏自庚寅正月朔日前事勿治。
现代文：楚材不顾别人的反对，奏请皇帝行大赦令。太宗采纳，诏令自二年正月初一以前犯禁者，不予治罪。
English: Despite the opposition of others, Chu Zai petitioned the emperor to issue an amnesty. Emperor Taizong accepted, and the imperial edict stated that anyone who violated the ban before the first day of the first month of the second year would not be punished.

古文：且条便宜一十八事颁天下，其略言： 郡宜置长吏牧民，设万户总军，使势均力敌，以遏骄横。
现代文：楚材还拟定军政法规十八条颁行天下。其内容大致是 ：各郡应设置官吏来管理百姓；设万户统领军队，各万户间势力均衡，相互节制，以防骄横。
English: Chu Zai also drafted 18 articles of military and political regulations to be promulgated to the world. Its contents are roughly: each county should set up officials to manage the people; set up 10,000 households to lead the army, and balance the power between each 10,000 households, and restrain each other to prevent arrogance.

古文：中原之地，财用所出，宜存恤其民，州县非奉上命，敢擅行科差者罪之。贸易借贷官物者罪之。蒙古、回鹘、河西诸人，种地不纳税者死。监主自盗官物者死。
现代文：中原是国家财政源泉，应该安抚百姓，不得任意苛征，州县长官非奉上司之命而自行征发粮差者，按律治罪；州县长官将官物进行买卖或借贷者，按律治罪；蒙古、回骨鸟、河西诸族人，凡种地而不纳税者，按律处以死刑；监察官盗物者处死。
English: The Central Plains is the source of national finance, and should appease the people, and must not be arbitrarily harshly levied. The state and county governors who do not follow the orders of their superiors and collect and distribute grain on their own, shall be punished according to the law; the state and county governors who sell or lend government goods, shall be punished according to the law; Mongolia, Huibo, and the peoples of Hexi, who do not pay taxes, shall be sentenced to death according to the law; the inspectors who steal things shall be sentenced to death.

古文：应犯死罪者，具由申奏待报，然后行刑。
现代文：应判死罪者，均该申报朝廷，批准后才能行刑。
English: Anyone who should be sentenced to death should be reported to the Imperial Court, and only after approval can the sentence be carried out.

古文：贡献礼物，为害非轻，深宜禁断。 
现代文：各地贡献礼物，为害不浅，应加禁绝。 
English: Contributing gifts from all over the country is harmful and should be prohibited.

古文：帝悉从之，唯贡献一事不允，曰： 彼自愿馈献者，宜听之。 
现代文：以上这些情况，除贡献一事外，其余均允准实行。太宗认为，贡献系各地自愿，可听之任之。
English: In the above cases, except for the contribution, the rest are allowed to be implemented. Taizong believes that the contribution is voluntary in all regions and can be left to others.

古文：楚材曰： 蠹害之端，必由于此。 
现代文：楚材说： 损政殃民，必由此贡献开其端。 
English: Chu Zai said: If the people are to be harmed by bad politics, this must be the starting point.

古文：帝曰： 凡卿所奏，无不从者，卿不能从朕一事耶？ 太祖之世，岁有事西域，未暇经理中原，官吏多聚敛自私，赀至巨万，而官无储侍。
现代文：太宗还是不听从。太祖在世时，忙于用兵征讨西域，无暇过问中原的事，以致官吏多损公肥私，大臣别迭说： 汉人留着于国家无用，不如把他们统统赶走，把他们的土地用来放牧。 
English: Emperor Taizong still did not listen. When Emperor Taizu was alive, he was too busy conscripting soldiers to conquer the Western Regions and had no time to inquire about the Central Plains. As a result, government officials were wasting public and private resources. The minister repeatedly said, "It is useless to keep Han Chinese in the country. It is better to drive them all away and use their land for grazing."

古文：近臣别迭等言： 汉人无补于国，可悉空其人以为牧地。 楚材曰： 陛下将南伐，军需宜有所资，诚均定中原地税、商税、盐、酒、铁冶、山泽之利，岁可得银五十万两、帛八万匹、粟四十余万石，足以供给，何谓无补哉？ 
现代文：楚材针锋相对地反驳道 ：陛下将南伐宋朝，需大量军费，如果让老百姓安于农商各业，政府征收田赋、商税以及盐、酒、铁等税，每年可得银五十万两、帛八万匹、粮食四十余万石，足供国家一切费用，怎能说汉人于国家无用？ 
English: Chu Zai countered in a tit-for-tat manner: His Majesty will invade the Song Dynasty from the south, which will require a large amount of military expenditure. If the common people are allowed to settle down in the various fields of agriculture and commerce, and the government collects land tax, commercial tax, and salt, liquor, iron and other taxes, it can obtain 500,000 taels of silver, 780,000 horses, and more than 400,000 kilos of grain every year, which is enough to cover all the expenses of the country. How can it be said that the Han people are useless to the country?

古文：帝曰： 卿试为朕行之。 
现代文：太祖采纳了楚材的意见，并设立十路征收课税使。
English: The great-grandfather adopted Chuzai's opinion and set up ten tax collection agencies.

古文：乃奏立燕京等十路征收课税使，凡长贰悉用士人，如陈时可、赵昉等，皆宽厚长者，极天下之选，参佐皆用省部旧人。
现代文：太宗三年秋，皇帝到云中时，十路都送来所征的课税。皇帝非常高兴，对楚材说： 你没有离开我就能使国家充足，金国的臣子有像你这样的吗？ 
English: In the autumn of the third year of Taizong's reign, when the emperor came to Yunzhong, all ten provinces sent the collected taxes. The emperor was very happy and said to Chuzai: I can make the country sufficient without you leaving. Are there any courtiers in Jin like you?

古文：辛卯秋，帝至云中，十路咸进廪籍及金帛陈于廷中，帝笑谓楚材曰： 汝不去朕左右，而能使国用充足，南国之臣，复有如卿者乎？ 对曰： 在彼者皆贤于臣，臣不才，故留燕，为陛下用。 帝嘉其谦，赐之酒。
现代文：楚材回答说： 金国的臣僚都比我强，我不才故留在燕京为陛下效力。 
English: Chu Zai replied: The ministers of the State of Kim are all better than me, so I have to stay in Yanjing to serve His Majesty.

古文：即日拜中书令，事无巨细，皆先白之。
现代文：太宗当即授楚材为中书令，军国大小事务都先告知他。
English: Emperor Taizong immediately awarded Chuzai with the title of Chushirei, and informed him of military and state affairs first.

古文：楚材奏： 凡州郡宜令长吏专理民事，万户总军政，凡所掌课税，权贵不得侵之。 
现代文：楚材建议： 州郡长官只主办民事，万户专管军政，他们所掌握的课税，权贵不得侵占。 
English: Chu Zai's suggestion: State and county governors should only be responsible for civil affairs, and all households should be in charge of military affairs. Those in charge of taxation should not be usurped by the powerful.

古文：又举镇海、粘合，均与之同事，权贵不能平。
现代文：这些规定遭到蒙古权贵们的反对，贵族咸得卜诬蔑他任人唯亲，怀有二心，非杀不可。太宗查明此系不实之词，谴责了权贵。
English: These regulations were opposed by the Mongolian magnates, and the nobles slandered him as a cronyist, double-minded, and a murderer. Emperor Taizong found out that this was untrue and condemned the magnates.

古文：咸得卜以旧怨，尤疾之，谮于宗王曰： 耶律中书令率用亲旧，必有二心，宜奏杀之。 
现代文：其后，有人控告咸得卜违法事，太宗命楚材去审理，楚材说 ：咸得卜骄傲，易招人毁谤，现要征讨金国，这事以后再办。 
English: Afterwards, someone accused Hamdeb of an illegal act, and Emperor Taizong ordered Chu Zai to investigate. Chu Zai said, "Hamdeb is proud, and easily lures people to slander him. Now he wants to collect money from Kim Guo. This matter will be dealt with later."

古文：宗王遣使以闻，帝察其诬，责使者，罢遣之。
现代文：太宗对侍臣说 ：楚材不计较私仇，为人宽厚，你们应当效法。 
English: Emperor Taizong said to his courtiers, "Chuzai is generous, regardless of personal animosity. You should follow his example."

古文：或曰： 此辈急则降，缓则走，徒以资敌，不可宥。 楚材请制旗数百，以给降民，使归田里，全活甚众。
现代文：楚材十分爱恤民力。太宗令西京宣德府征发万金户去开采金银和到西域去栽种葡萄，楚材劝阻了。太宗四年，蒙古军征讨金国时诏令难民来降者免死。楚材制旗数百发给降民，免遭屠杀，各自回乡种田。
English: Chu Zai was very sympathetic to the people. Emperor Taizong ordered the Xijing Xuande Prefecture to collect and send ten thousand gold households to mine gold and silver and to plant grapes in the western region, but Chu Zai dissuaded him. In the fourth year of Emperor Taizong, when the Mongolian army was collecting gold, the refugees were exempted from death. Hundreds of Chu Zai flags were issued to the people who had surrendered, and they were spared from being slaughtered and returned to their hometowns to farm.

古文：旧制，凡攻城邑，敌以矢石相加者，即为拒命，既克，必杀之。汴梁将下，大将速不台遣使来言： 金人抗拒持久，师多死伤，城下之日，宜屠之。 
现代文：按蒙军原来规定，攻城时如受到抵抗，破城之后抵抗者尽杀不留。蒙军攻汴梁将下，大将速不台遣使奏报太宗说： 金人顽强抵抗，我军多有死伤，攻克后应屠杀其民。 
English: According to the original regulations of the Mongolian army, if resistance is encountered during the siege of the city, the resisters should be killed after the city is breached. The Mongolian army attacked Liang Liang, and the general hastened to send a message to Taizong, saying: The Jin people resisted tenaciously, our army had many deaths and injuries, and they should slaughter their people after the conquest.

古文：楚材驰入奏曰： 将士暴露数十年，所欲者土地人民耳。
现代文：楚材忙入奏劝阻说 ：将士们在外征战数十年，希望得到被征服的土地和人民，若把百姓都杀了，要土地何用。 
English: Chu Zai hurriedly interjected to dissuade: "The soldiers have been fighting abroad for decades, hoping to get the conquered land and people. If they kill the people, what is the use of the land?"

古文：又率大臣子孙，执经解义，俾知圣人之道。
现代文：太宗还是犹豫不定，楚材又说： 汴京是奇工巧匠和财富集中的地方，若把城中百姓杀尽，将一无所获。 
English: Taizong still hesitated, and Chu Zai also said, "Beijing is a place of concentration of craftsmen and wealth. If you kill all the people in the city, you will gain nothing.

古文：置编修所于燕京、经籍所于平阳，由是文治兴焉。时河南初破，俘获甚众，军还，逃者十七八。
现代文：太宗采纳楚材的意见，只下诏谴责金朝皇室完颜氏的罪行。由于楚材的劝阻，使汴梁城中一百四十万余人保全生命。蒙军平定河南，被俘人口中十之七八逃走了。
English: Emperor Taizong accepted the opinion of Chu Zaim and issued an edict condemning the crimes of the Kim dynasty's imperial family and the Guan Yan clan. Due to Chu Zaim's dissuasion, more than 1.4 million people in the city of Qilian were saved. The Mongol army conquered Henan, and 78% of the captured population escaped.

古文：有旨：居停逃民及资给者，灭其家，乡社亦连坐。
现代文：太宗下令：凡收留和资助逃民者，杀其全家，同乡邻里亦治罪。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered that anyone who sheltered and supported the fugitives should have his or her entire family killed, and his or her neighbors in the same town should also be punished.

古文：由是逃者莫敢舍，多殍死道路。
现代文：于是逃难的人民不敢避居人家中，多饿死于路旁。
English: As a result, the people who had to flee did not dare to take refuge in other people's homes, and many died of starvation on the side of the road.

古文：楚材从容进曰： 河南既平，民皆陛下赤子，走复何之！
现代文：楚材进谏说： 河南既已平定，那里的百姓就是陛下的赤子，他们会逃向哪里？
English: Chu Zaizhen said: Henan has already been pacified, and the people there are His Majesty's babies. Where will they flee to?

古文：奈何因一俘囚，连死数十百人乎？ 
现代文：何必因一俘囚而使数人遭到株连。 
English: There is no need for one prisoner to cause several people to be beaten up.

古文：帝悟，命除其禁。
现代文：太宗醒悟了，废除原来的旨令。
English: Taizong came to his senses and abolished the original edict.

古文：金之亡也，唯秦、巩二十余州久未下，楚材奏曰： 往年吾民逃罪，或萃于此，故以死拒战，若许以不杀，将不攻自下矣。 诏下，诸城皆降。
现代文：蒙军在灭金时，只有秦、巩等二十余州未攻下，楚材建议太宗下令赦免这些州郡抵抗蒙军的人民。结果，诏令一下，这些地方都开门降顺了。
English: When the Mongolian army was destroying the gold, only Qin, Gong and other twenty-odd prefectures remained unconquered. Chu Zai suggested that Emperor Taizong issue an order to pardon the people of these prefectures and counties who had resisted the Mongolian army. As a result, with a single edict, all these places opened their doors and surrendered.

古文：甲午，议籍中原民，大臣忽都虎等议，以丁为户。楚材曰： 不可。丁逃，则赋无所出，当以户定之。 
现代文：楚材善于理财，太宗六年，灭金后登记中原地区的户口，大臣忽都虎等主张以丁为户，楚材以为不妥，丁逃则失去征赋对象，主张按户口登记。
English: Chu Zaim is good at financial management, Taizong has been in power for six years, after extinguishing the gold, he registered the hukou of the Central Plains region, Minister Hu Duhu and others advocated using Ding as a household, Chu Zaim thought it was not appropriate, and Ding Du lost the object of recruitment, and advocated registration according to the hukou.

古文：争之再三，卒以户定。时将相大臣有所驱获，往往寄留诸郡，楚材因括户口，并令为民，匿占者死。
现代文：争论多时，最后还是按户登记，并且将将相大臣私自占有为奴隶的人口也搜刮出来了，明令今后凡再私自占有者处以死刑。
English: After much debate, it was finally decided to register by household, and the people who had been enslaved by the minister were also searched out, and it was made clear that in the future, anyone who had enslaved another person would be sentenced to death.

古文：有于元者，奏行交钞，楚材曰： 金章宗时初行交钞，与钱通行，有司以出钞为利，收钞为讳，谓之老钞，至以万贯唯易一饼。民力困竭，国用匮乏，当为鉴戒。今印造交钞，宜不过万锭。 
现代文：太宗八年春，有个叫于元的人奏请通行交钞，楚材说： 金章宗时初行交钞与钱流通，但官府只印发不收回。钞价贬值，一万贯只能买一个饼子，以致民穷国贫，应当引以为戒，今若发行交钞，不能超过万锭。 
English: In the spring of the eighth year of Emperor Taizong's reign, a man named Yu Yuan played a song to request the circulation of banknotes. Chu Zai said: At the beginning of Emperor Jinzhang's reign, banknotes and money were circulated, but the government only printed and did not withdraw them. The value of banknotes depreciated, and ten thousand yuan could only buy one cake, so that the people were poor and the country was poor. It should be cautioned that if banknotes were issued now, they could not exceed ten thousand yuan.

古文：从之。
现代文：太宗采纳他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：秋七月，忽都虎以民籍至，帝议裂州县赐亲王功臣。楚材曰： 裂土分民，易生嫌隙，不如多以金帛与之。 帝曰： 已许奈何？ 
现代文：同年七月，忽都虎呈上户口登记册，太宗打算把所属州县土地和人民分赐给亲王功臣，楚材以为不当，不如多赐给他们金银绸帛。太宗说 ：已允许给他们了怎么办？ 
English: In July of the same year, all of a sudden, Togo submitted his household registration. Taizong planned to distribute the land and people of his prefecture to the prince's meritorious retainers. Chu Zai thought it was inappropriate, so it was better to give them more gold, silver and silk. Taizong said, "What should we do now that we have been allowed to give them?"

古文：楚材曰： 若朝廷置吏，收其贡赋，岁终颁之，使毋擅科征，可也。 
现代文：楚材说 ：朝廷可派官员去分封地方，帮助征收赋税，并且年终加以公布，不使亲王功臣们自己任意苛征。 
English: Chu Zai said: The imperial court can send officials to the fiefs to help collect taxes, and publish them at the end of the year, so that the princes and heroes do not arbitrarily impose taxes.

古文：帝然其计，遂定天下赋税，每二户出丝一斤，以给国用；五户出丝一斤，以给诸王功臣汤沐之资。
现代文：太宗采纳了这个办法，于是规定：天下赋税，每二户出丝一斤作为国家财政收入。五户出丝一斤作为诸王功臣的生活费用。
English: Emperor Taizong adopted this method, and then stipulated: the whole country should pay taxes, and every two households should contribute one jin of silk as national fiscal revenue, and every five households should contribute one jin of silk as the living expenses of the kings and heroes.

古文：地税，中田每亩二升又半，上田三升，下田二升，水田每亩五升；商税，三十分而一；盐价，银一两四十斤。
现代文：地税，中等田每亩征粮二升半，上等田三升，下等田二升，水田每亩五升。商税三十取一。盐价，四十斤值银一两。
English: Land tax, 2.5 liters of grain per mu in medium-sized fields, 3 liters in high-grade fields, 2 liters in low-grade fields, and 5 liters per mu in paddy fields. Commercial tax, 1.

古文：既定常赋，朝议以为太轻，楚材曰： 作法于凉，其弊犹贪，后将有以利进者，则今已重矣。 时工匠制造，糜费官物，十私八九，楚材请皆考核之，以为定制。
现代文：内府工匠制造器物，耗费原料很多，且十之八九为私人所有。楚材请朝廷加以考察核实，应该用料多少，定为制度。朝廷计划向民间征取牝马，楚材劝阻说： 凡种粮养蚕的地方，并不产马，若施行征马，以后必有害于民。 
English: Craftsmen in Naifu made utensils, consuming a lot of raw materials, and most of them were privately owned. Chuzai asked the Imperial Court to investigate and verify how much material should be used, and set it up as a system. The Imperial Court planned to requisition horses from the people, and Chuzai dissuaded them by saying: Any place that grows grain and raises silkworms does not produce horses. If horses are requisitioned, it will be harmful to the people in the future.

古文：时侍臣脱欢奏简天下室女，诏下，楚材尼之不行，帝怒。
现代文：太宗又采纳了他的意见。当时州郡长官多向商人借高利贷，称 羊羔儿利 ，其后卖妻卖子也还不清。楚材奏请规定贷利息不得多于本金，定为永久制度。
English: Emperor Taizong also adopted his opinion. At that time, the state and county governors mostly borrowed usurious loans from merchants, saying that it was profitable to sell lambs, and it was not clear after that to sell wives and children. Chu Zaiso requested that the loan interest should not exceed the principal, and it was made a permanent system.

古文：楚材进曰： 向择美女二十有八人，足备使令。
现代文：民间有借债不能偿还者，官府代还。在楚材的建议和主持下，建立起各项制度，人民得以安居乐业。
English: If there are people who cannot repay their debts, the government will repay them on their behalf. Under the advice and auspices of Chu Zaim, various systems have been established so that people can live and work in peace.

古文：今复选拔，臣恐扰民，欲覆奏耳。 
现代文：富人刘忽笃马、涉猎发丁、刘廷玉等人，以上纳白银一百四十万两来包买国家课税。
English: Rich people such as Liu Huducma, Wanghuang Ding, Liu Tingyu and others paid more than 1.4 million taels of silver to pay the national tax.

古文：帝良久曰： 可罢之。 
现代文：楚材认为这些人是贪利之徒，欺上压下，为害甚大，奏请取缔。
English: Chu Zai believes that these people are greedy, deceiving and oppressing, causing great harm, so please ban them.

古文：事若合理，自当奉行，如不可行，死且不避，况截手乎！ 
现代文：自太宗二年确立课税定额后，至六年时增时减。至太宗十年课银增到一百一十万两。
English: Since the establishment of the taxation quota in the second year of Taizong, it has increased and decreased every six years. By the tenth year of Taizong, the silver levy has increased to 1.1 million taels.

古文：后不悦。楚材辨论不已，因大声曰： 老臣事太祖、太宗三十余年，无负于国，皇后亦岂能无罪杀臣也！ 
现代文：译史安天合提出增加到二百二十万两。
English: Shi An Tianhe proposed to increase it to 2.2 million taels.

古文：后虽憾之，亦以先朝旧勋，深敬惮焉。
现代文：楚材竭力反对，无效，叹息道： 百姓从此更加贫困了。 
English: Chu Zai tried his best to object, but to no avail. He sighed and said, "The people have become even more impoverished.

古文：甲辰夏五月，薨于位，年五十五。
现代文：楚材久居相位，直到乃马真皇后三年去世，终年五十五岁。
English: Chuzai stayed at the top for a long time, until Empress Naima died three years later, at the age of 55.

古文：皇后哀悼，赙赠甚厚。
现代文：他一生清廉，从不贪图公物、徇私情。
English: He was incorruptible all his life and never coveted public property or indulged in personal affairs.

古文：后有谮楚材者，言其在相位日久，天下贡赋，半入其家。
现代文：曾对行省刘敏说 ：若讲睦亲之义，我自应把自己的俸禄去资助亲友，但若令我从政，则不能徇私因以违国法。 死后有人进谗言，说他在做宰相时，把天下贡赋一半吞为私有。
English: He once said to Liu Min, who was in charge of the provincial government, "If I preach the righteousness of amicable relations, I should use my salary to support my relatives and friends, but if I am forced to become a politician, I cannot support myself because it is against the law of the country." After his death, some people criticized him, saying that when he was prime minister, he swallowed up half of the national tribute for private use.

古文：后命近臣麻里紥覆视之，唯琴阮十余，及古今书画、金石、遗文数千卷。
现代文：皇后命近臣麻里扎去调查，其家中只有琴阮十余及古今书画、金石、遗文数千卷。
English: The empress ordered her close retainer, Mariza, to investigate. There were only more than ten guqin Ruan and thousands of volumes of ancient and modern calligraphy, paintings, precious stones and relics in her home.

古文：至顺元年，赠经国议制寅亮佐运功臣、太师、上柱国，追封广宁王，谥文正。
现代文：至顺元年，文宗赠封楚材为经国议制寅亮佐运功臣、太师、上柱国，追封为懿宁王、谥文正。
English: By the first year of Shun, Wenzong presented Chu Zhai with the titles of Ting Liang, Sanyun, meritorious vassal, grand master, and upper pillar of the state, followed by the titles of Xuning Wang and Xun Wenzheng.

古文：子铉、铸。
现代文：有子二人，名耶律铉、耶律铸。
English: They have two sons, named Yerutso and Yerutsu.

古文：铸字成仲，幼聪敏，善属文，尤工骑射。楚材薨，嗣领中书省事，时年二十三。
现代文：耶律铸字成仲，自幼聪敏，长于文辞，尤精于骑射，其父耶律楚材去世后，他继领中书省事，这时年二十三岁。
English: After the death of his father, Ye Lu Chu Zai, he took over the leadership of Zhongshu, at the age of twenty-three.

古文：铸上言宜疏禁网，遂采历代德政合于时宜者八十一章以进。
现代文：铸奏请皇帝宽政爱民，并将历代德政之可行于令者，列举八十一章进呈。
English: The cast invited the emperor to be lenient and love the people, and enumerated the eighty-one chapters of the history of German politics.

古文：戊午，宪宗征蜀，诏铸领侍卫骁果以从，屡出奇计，攻下城邑，赐以尚方金锁甲及内厩骢马。乙未，宪宗崩，阿里不哥叛，铸弃妻子，挺身自朔方来归，世祖嘉其忠，即日召见，赏赐优厚。
现代文：宪宗八年，征伐四川，诏令铸率领侍卫军之勇猛者随行，铸在战争中屡出奇计，攻下城邑。九年，宪宗崩，阿里不哥反叛，铸抛妻弃子，挺身自北方来归，世祖嘉奖其忠，当天就召见，赏赐优厚。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Emperor Zhao sent the emperor to invade Sichuan, accompanied by the valiant men of the imperial guard led by the emperor's son, Emperor Xizong. Emperor Xizong made many extraordinary plans in the war and captured the city. In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Emperor Ali rebelled, abandoned his wife and son, and came back from the north. Emperor Xizong commended his loyalty, summoned him on the same day, and rewarded him generously.

古文：中统二年，拜中书左丞相。
现代文：中统二年，拜为中书左丞相。
English: In the second year of unification, he was appointed as the Minister of the Left Division of the Central Government.

古文：初，清庙雅乐，止有登歌，诏铸制宫悬八佾之舞。
现代文：是年冬，世祖令他领兵防御北边。铸打败阿里不哥于上都之北。
English: In the winter of the year, the patriarch ordered him to lead an army to defend the northern side.

古文：四年春三月，乐舞成，表上之，仍请赐名《大成》，制曰 可 。六月，改荣禄大夫、平章政事。
现代文：至元元年，加光禄大夫，奏定法令三十七章，官民称便。二年，任山东行省中书令，不久召还，令制宫廷音乐舞蹈。四年三月，乐、舞制成，赐名《大成》。六月，改荣禄大夫、平章政事。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Dr. Jia Guanglu was in charge of writing the 37 chapters of the decree, which was considered convenient by the government and the people. In the second year, he was appointed to Shandong to carry out the provincial middle book order, and was soon recalled to set up the court music and dance. In March of the fourth year, he made music and dance, and was given the name "Dacheng." In June, he was promoted to Dr. Ronglu and Pingzhang.

古文：五年，复拜光禄大夫、中书左丞相。
现代文：至元五年复拜为光禄大夫、中书左丞相。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to the post of Guanglu Doctor and Chushu Zuojo Minister.

古文：十年，迁平章军国重事。
现代文：十年调任平章军国重事。
English: Ten years later, he was transferred to Pingzhang for military affairs.

古文：十三年，诏监修国史。朝廷有大事，必咨访焉。
现代文：十三年，奉诏监修国史，同时，朝廷有大事，必先向他咨询。
English: In the thirteenth year, he was appointed to supervise the national history. At the same time, the imperial court had important matters to consult with him first.

古文：年二十，奉命使西域三十余国，宣畅国威，敷布政条，俾皆籍户口属吏，乃归，帝于是有大用意。
现代文：十九年，复拜中书左丞相。二十年十月，因失职违纪而罢官，并没收其家产之半，迁往山后。至元二十二年卒，年六十五岁。杨惟中，字彦诚，弘州人，知书，有胆识谋略，为太宗所器重。二十岁时，奉命出使西域三十余国，宣扬蒙古国威，颁布蒙古政令，使各国官民户口皆归于蒙古，太宗准备大大重用他。
English: In 1919, he was promoted to the position of Vice-Minister of the Left, and in October 1920, he was dismissed for dereliction of duty and violation of discipline, and half of his family property was confiscated, and he moved to Shanhou. He died in 1922, at the age of sixty-five. Yang Weizhong, surnamed Hikonsheng, a native of Hongzhou, had a knowledge of literature, courage, and strategy, which was important to Taizong. At the age of twenty, he was ordered to send envoys to more than thirty countries in the western region, to promote Mongolia's national prestige, and to promulgate Mongolian government decrees, so that

古文：皇子阔出伐宋，命惟中于军前行中书省事。
现代文：皇子阔出伐宋，命惟中于军前行中书省事。
English: The prince went out to fight in the Song Dynasty, but was ordered to stay at home during the march.

古文：克宋枣阳、光化等军，光、随、郢、复等州，及襄阳、德安府，凡得名士数十人，收伊、洛诸书送燕都，立宋大儒周惇颐祠，建太极书院，延儒士赵复、王粹等讲授其间，遂通圣贤学，慨然欲以道济天下。
现代文：蒙古大军攻克枣阳、光化、光州、随州、郢州、复州、襄阳府、德安府，得名士数十人。杨惟中收集宋程颐、程颢的著作送至燕都，建立宋大儒周敦颐祠，还设立 太极书院 ，聘请儒士赵复、王粹等来授课。惟中一心要以圣贤之学来治理天下。
English: The Mongolian army conquered Zaoyang, Gwanghwa, Gwangju, Suizhou, Ganzhou, Fuzhou, Xiangyang and De'an, gaining dozens of famous people. Yang Weizhong collected the works of Song Chengyu and Chengyu and sent them to Yandu, established the Song Dynasty Confucianist Zhou Dunhuang Shrine, and also set up a Taiji Academy, hiring Confucianists Zhao Fu and Wang Zi to teach. However, the school is committed to governing the world with the teachings of sages.

古文：拜中书令，太宗崩，太后称制，惟中以一相负任天下。
现代文：拜为中书令后，太宗驾崩，太后听政，国家大政由惟中一人主持。
English: After Emperor Taizong died, Empress Dowager listened to the government, and the national government was presided over by only one person.

古文：定宗即位，平阳道断事官斜彻横恣不法，诏惟中宣慰，惟中按诛之。
现代文：定宗即位，平阳道断事官斜彻目无法纪，肆意横行，惟中奉诏为该道宣慰使，将斜彻依法处决。
English: When Emperor Jianzong ascended to the throne, the Pingyang Court adjudicator, Xie Che, became undisciplined and wantonly rampant. However, as the court's propaganda envoy, Xie Che was executed according to the law.

古文：金亡，其将武仙溃于邓州，余党散入太原、真定间，据大明川，用金开兴年号，众至数万，剽掠数千里，诏会诸道兵讨之，不克。
现代文：金亡之后，金将武仙也在邓州被击溃，余党散于太原、真定之间，占据大明川，用金朝的开兴年号，有兵将共数万人，到处掠夺百姓。朝廷诏令诸道会兵讨伐，未能消灭。
English: After the death of Kim, Kim's general Wuxian was also defeated in Dangzhou, and the remaining troops were scattered between Taiyuan and Zhending, occupying the Daming River. Using the name of the year of the rise of the Kim dynasty, tens of thousands of soldiers and generals plundered the people everywhere. The imperial court ordered the soldiers of all sects to fight, but they could not be eliminated.

古文：惟中仗节开谕，降其渠帅，余党悉平。
现代文：杨惟中持皇上圣旨去招安，主帅投诚，其下官兵都归附于蒙古。
English: Yang Wei Zhong held the emperor's sacred will to recruit peace, the commander-in-chief surrendered, and his subordinate officers and soldiers were attached to Mongolia.

古文：宪宗即位，世祖以太弟镇金莲川，得开府，专封拜。
现代文：宪宗即位，世祖为皇弟，镇守金莲川，有权在所领地区立官府，拜官封爵。
English: Emperor Gensong ascended to the throne. His ancestor was a younger brother of the emperor and the town guard of Jinlianchuan. He had the right to establish government offices in his territory and to be knighted.

古文：乃立河南道经略司于汴梁，奏惟中等为使，俾屯田唐、邓、申、裕、嵩、汝、蔡、息、亳、颍诸州。
现代文：于是在汴梁设立河南道经略司，奏请以杨惟中为经略使，使他在唐、邓、申、裕、嵩、汝、蔡、息、亳、颍诸州屯田。
English: Therefore, the Henan Provincial Secretary for Economic Affairs was set up in Qiliang, and Yang Weizhong was requested to be the Minister of Economic Affairs, so that he would be stationed in Tang, Deng, Shen, Yu, Song, Ru, Cai, Xixi, Handan and Handan Provinces.

古文：初，灭金时，以监河桥万户刘福为河南道总管，福贪鄙残酷，虐害遗民二十余年。
现代文：金亡之初，任命监河桥万户刘福为河南道总管。刘福既贪婪，又残忍，迫害金朝遗民二十余年。
English: At the beginning of Jin's death, Liu Fu, the overseer of thousands of households in Heqiao, was appointed as the general manager of Henan Province. Liu Fu was both greedy and cruel, persecuting the remnants of the Kim dynasty for more than 20 years.

古文：惟中至，召福听约束，福称疾不至，惟中设大梃于坐，复召之，使谓福曰： 汝不奉命，吾以军法从事。 
现代文：惟中把刘福召来，要他听从管束，刘福托病不来。惟中强行召至官厅大堂，先布置衙役执刑仗于两边，然后派人去对刘福说： 你若不来，我将以军法从事。 
English: However, the Central Committee summoned Liu Fu to the hall of the government office and ordered him to obey the regulations. Liu Fu was too ill to come, so the Central Committee forcibly summoned him to the hall of the government office. First, they arranged the guards to carry out the punishment on both sides, and then sent someone to say to Liu Fu: "If you don't come, I will use military law."

古文：福不得已，以数千人拥卫见惟中，惟中即握大梃击仆之。数日福死，河南大治。
现代文：福不得已，带着数千卫队来见惟中，惟中用大梃将他打倒，不数日即死，河南从此太平无事。
English: As a last resort, Fu brought thousands of guards to see Yezhong, who knocked him down with a sledgehammer and died a few days later. Henan has been peaceful ever since.

古文：迁陕右四川宣抚使。
现代文：调任陕右四川宣抚使。
English: He was transferred to the post of Shaanxi-Sichuan Propaganda Envoy.

古文：时诸军帅横侈病民，郭千户者尤甚，杀人之夫而夺其妻，惟中戮之以徇，关中肃然。
现代文：当地驻军统帅骄奢不法，深为民害，特别是郭千户尤甚，杀人之夫，夺人之妻。惟中将他斩首示众，关中军纪肃然。
English: The local garrison commander was arrogant, lawless, and deeply harmful to the people, especially Guo Qianhu, the husband of a murderer and the wife of a murderer. However, he was beheaded in public, and the Guanzhong army was shocked.

古文：语人曰： 吾非好杀，国家纲纪不立，致此辈贼害良民，无所控告，虽欲不去，可乎！ 
现代文：惟中常说 ：并非我好杀人，国家纲纪不立，以致这些人虐害良民，而民又无处控告，不去掉这些人是不行的。 
English: However, he often said, "It's not that I'm so good at killing people, it's that the state doesn't have any rules and regulations, so these people abuse and harm good people, and the people have nowhere to file a complaint. It's impossible not to get rid of these people."

古文：岁己未，世祖总统东师，奏惟中为江淮京湖南北路宣抚使，俾建行台，以先启行，宣布恩信，蒙古、汉军诸帅并听节制。
现代文：宪宗九年，世祖统领蒙军东师南征，奏请杨惟中为江淮京湖南北路宣抚使，令他建立行台，宣布皇帝恩德，蒙古军攻汉军均受他节制。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Shizu, the leader of the Mongolian army's eastward and southward expedition, requested Yang Weizhong to act as the envoy for the north-south road of Jianghuaijing Lake, and ordered him to establish a road station, declare Emperor Ende, and restrain the Mongolian army from attacking the Chinese army.

古文：师还，卒于蔡州，年五十五。
现代文：蒙军北还时惟中卒于蔡州，年五十五岁。
English: Meng Junbei was still in middle school when he died in Caizhou, aged fifty-five.

古文：中统二年，追谥曰忠肃公。
现代文：中统二年追谥忠肃公。
English: Two years after the unification of China and Korea, the persecution of Tadanobu continued.

