古文：晋平公使叔誉于周，见太子晋而与之言。五称而三穷，逡巡而退，其言不遂。
现代文：晋平公派大夫叔向去成周。叔向见到太子晋并与他交谈，讲了五件事有三件事无言以对，很惭愧地退了出来。
English: Uncle Yang went to see Prince Jin and had a conversation with him. He told him five things, three of which were speechless. He was very ashamed and withdrew.

古文：归告公曰： 太子晋行年十五，而臣弗能与言。君请归，声就复与田，若不反，及有天下，将以为诛。 
现代文：他们的交谈没有结果。回到晋国告诉平公说： 太子晋只有十五岁，而我不能与他交谈，请您把声就、复与两处的、田地还给周。如果不归还，等到他继位有了天下，将因此而惩处我们。 
English: When they returned to Jin, they told Ping Gong, "Prince Jin is only fifteen years old, and I can't talk to him. Please return the throne, the throne and the two fields to Zhou. If we don't return them, when he succeeds to the throne, we will be punished for it."

古文：平公将归之，师旷不可曰： 请使瞑臣往与之言，若能幪予，反而复之。 
现代文：晋平公想归还两邑，大夫师旷不同意，说： 请让我盲臣去与他交谈，若能胜过我，等我回来后再回复他。 
English: Jinping Gong wanted to return the two towns, but Doctor Shigu disagreed, saying, "Please let my blind vassal go and talk to him. If he can outwit me, I will reply to him when I return."

古文：师旷见太子，称曰： 吾闻王子之语，高于泰山，夜寝不寐，昼居不安，不远长道，而求一言。 
现代文：师旷见了太子晋，说道： 我听说王子讲的话比泰山还高，所以晚上睡不着觉，白天坐立不安，不嫌路远而来求太子一句话。 
English: Shi Kuang saw Prince Jin and said, "I have heard that the words spoken by the prince are higher than Mount Tai, so I can't sleep at night, I can't sit still during the day, and I don't mind coming a long way to ask the prince for a word.

古文：王子应之曰： 吾闻太师将来，甚喜。
现代文：太子晋回答说： 我听说太师要来，非常高兴而又畏惧。
English: Prince Jin replied, "I heard that the Grand Master was coming, and I was very happy and afraid.

古文：热又惧吾年臣少，见子而慎，尽忘吾其度。 
现代文：我年纪很。小，见了您心里害怕，完全忘了我内心的想法。 
English: I am very young, and when I saw you, I was so scared that I completely forgot what I was thinking.

古文：师旷曰： 吾闻王子，古之君子，甚成不骄，自晋始如周，行不知劳。 
现代文：师旷说： 我听说太子您，如同古代的君子，成就很大而不骄傲。我从晋国到成周来见您，行程也不感到劳累。 
English: Shigeaki said, "I have heard that you, the crown prince, like the ancient nobles, are not proud of your great achievements. I have come all the way from Jin Province to Chengdu to see you, and I don't feel tired from the journey.

古文：王子应之曰： 声之君子，其行至慎，委积施关，道路无限，百姓悦之，相将而远，远人来欢，视道如咫。 师旷告善，又称曰： 古之君子，其行可则，由舜而下，其孰有广德？ 
现代文：太子晋回答说： 古代的君子，他的行为极其谨慎。
English: Prince Jin replied: An ancient gentleman, he is extremely cautious in his behavior.

古文：王子应之曰： 如舜者天，舜居其所以利天下，奉翼远人，皆得己仁，此之谓天。
现代文：积聚粮食，放松关卡：道路上没有阻碍。老百姓喜欢他，相互搀扶从远方而来。远方人前来欢聚，视远道如同咫尺。 
English: Accumulating grain, easing checkpoints: there are no obstacles on the road. The people like him and help each other come from far away. People from far away come to gather and see the distant road as a shortcut.

古文：如禹者，圣劳而不居，以利天下，好取不好与，必度其正，是谓之圣。如文王者，其大道仁，其小道惠。
现代文：师旷称赞他讲得好，又说道： 古代的君子，他的行为可堪效法。自舜以下，还有谁具有广博的道德呢? 
English: Shiguang praised him for speaking well, and said: An ancient gentleman, his behavior is worthy of imitation. Who else has a broad morality below self-deprecation?

古文：三分天下而有其二，敬人无方，服事于商，既有其众，而返失其身，此之谓仁。
现代文：好施与而不好索取，凡事一定考虑是否正大，这就叫做 圣 。像文王这样的人，他处事的大原则是爱人，具体办事讲求柔和。三分天下他占有两分，仍然敬重别人，不愿抗命，服事商朝。已经有了天下，他反而离开人世。这就叫做 仁 。像武王这样的人，是 义 。
English: It is better to give than to receive, and one must consider whether or not everything is right and proper. This is called holiness. A person like King Wen, his main principle in dealing with things is to love others, and to be gentle in his specific actions. He owns two-thirds of the world, still respects others, does not want to disobey orders, and serves the merchant dynasty. He has already gained the world, but he has left the world. This is called benevolence. A person like King Wu is righteousness.

古文：如武王者义，杀一人而以利天下，异姓同姓各得其所，是之谓仪。 
现代文：杀死纣王一人而有利于全天下。使异姓、同姓都各得其所，这就叫做 义 。 ：
English: It is called righteousness to kill the king of the devils for the benefit of the whole world, and to make the different surnames and the same surname each have their own place.

古文：师旷告善。又称曰： 宣辨名命，异姓恶之。王侯君公，何以为尊，何以为上？ 
现代文：师旷称赞他讲得好，又说道： 公开区分名号，包括异姓外邦，王、侯、君、公等等，以哪个最为尊，哪个最为上? 
English: Shiguang praised him for speaking well, and said: Openly distinguish names, including foreign names, king, lord, prince, etc., which is the most respected, which is the most superior?

古文：王子应之曰： 人生而重丈夫，谓之胄子；胄子成人能治上官，谓之士；士率众时作，谓之曰伯；伯能移善于众，与百姓同，谓之公；公能树名生物，与天道俱，谓之侯，侯能成群，谓之君。君有广德，分任诸侯而敦信，曰予一人；善至于四海，曰天子，达于四荒曰天王。四荒至，莫有怨訾，乃登为帝。 
现代文：太子晋回答说： 人们一生来就看重男孩子，称之为 胄子 ；胄子成人以后，能理事做官，称之为 士 ；士率领众人按时劳作，就称之为 伯 ；伯能向众人推广善事，与百姓爱憎相同，称之为 公 ；公能树立名声、养育他物，与天道共存，称之为 侯 ；侯能成就群体，称之为 君 ；君有大德，分任诸侯而敦厚守信的，叫 予一人 ；善事广达四海，叫 天子 ；达于四荒的，叫 天王 ；四方荒远都来朝见，没有人怨恨与非议，就升而为帝。 
English: Prince Jin replied: People value boys throughout their lives and call them sons; when sons reach adulthood, they are called judges if they are able to serve as officials; when judges lead the people to work on time, they are called knights; when knights can promote good deeds to the people, they are the same as the people's love and hate, they are called public; when the public can establish a reputation, nurture other things, and coexist with the heavenly way, they are called princes; when princes can achieve a group, they are called kings; when a prince has great virtue, is assigned to princes, and is generous and trustworthy, he is called a person; when good deeds reach the four seas,

古文：师旷罄然。又称曰： 温恭敦敏，方德不改，闻物□□，下学以起，尚登帝臣，乃参天子，自古谁？ 
现代文：师旷肃然起敬，又说道： 性情温柔，厚道敏捷，不改常德，从头学起，从下而上升为帝臣，最后才参配天子的，自古以来有谁呢? 
English: His teacher was awestruck with respect and said, "Who is there from ancient times who has a gentle disposition, is kind and quick-witted, does not change his morals, learns from the beginning, rises from the bottom to become an imperial subject, and finally becomes an attendant of the Son of Heaven?

古文：王子应之曰： 穆穆虞舜，明明赫赫，立义治律，万物皆作，分均天财，万物熙熙，非舜而谁能？ 
现代文：太子晋回答说： 堂堂虞舜，光明显赫，立标准，定律令，百业兴旺，均分自然财富，百姓安宁，除了舜又有谁呢？
English: Prince Jin replied, "The country is prosperous, the light is bright, standards are set, laws and regulations are issued, all industries are flourishing, natural wealth is evenly distributed, and the people are peaceful. Who else is there but the dragonfly?

古文：师旷东躅其足，曰： 善哉，善哉！ 王子曰： 太师何举足骤？ 
现代文：师旷原地踏脚，说道： 好啊!好啊，太子晋说： 太师为何抬脚那么频繁? 
English: The teacher stepped on his foot in the wilderness and said, "Good! Good!" Prince Jin said, "Why does the teacher lift his foot so often?"

古文：师旷曰： 天寒足跔，是以数也。 
现代文：师旷说： 天冷，腿脚容易抽筋，所以频频踏脚。 
English: Shimeki said: It's cold, and my legs and feet cramp easily, so I step on my feet frequently.

古文：王子曰： 请入坐。 
现代文：太子晋说： 请进里面坐! 
English: Prince Jin said, "Please come in and sit down!"

古文：遂敷席注瑟。
现代文：于是铺好座席，把瑟交他。
English: So they made him a seat and gave him a towel.

古文：师旷歌无射，曰： 国诚宁矣，远人来观，修义经矣，好乐无荒。 
现代文：师旷弹奏《无射》曲，唱道： 国家真正安宁了，远方的人会来观光；研修仁义的时间长了，就会喜好音乐而不放纵。 
English: Shiguang played the "No Shooting" song and sang: When the country is truly peaceful, people from far away will come to visit; when the training of benevolence and righteousness takes a long time, they will like music but not indulge.

古文：乃注瑟于王子，王子歌峤曰： 何自南极，至于北极，绝境越国，弗愁道远。 
现代文：唱完就把瑟交给太子。太子晋弹奏《峤》曲，唱道： 为何从遥远的南方，来到遥远的北方?横穿国境，跨越邻国，而不怕路远? 
English: After singing, he handed the soul to the prince. Prince Jin played the "Dragonfly" tune and sang: Why did you come from the far south to the far north? Cross the border, cross the neighboring countries, and not be afraid of the long journey?

古文：师旷蹶然起，曰： 瞑臣请归。 
现代文：师旷急忙起身说道： 盲臣我请求回去! 
English: Shimei hurriedly stood up and said, "Blind retainer, I beg you to go back!

古文：王子赐之乘车四马，曰： 太师亦善御之。 
现代文：太子晋赐给他一辆车四匹马，说： 太师还善于驾车吗? 
English: Prince Jin gave him a car and four horses, saying, "Is the Grandmaster still good at driving?"

古文：师旷对曰： 御吾未之学也。 
现代文：师旷回答说： 驾车，我没有学过。 
English: Shi Ku replied: I haven't studied driving.

古文：王子曰： 汝不为夫《诗》，《诗》云： 马之刚矣，辔之柔矣，马亦不刚，辔亦不柔，志气镳镳，取予不疑。 
现代文：太子晋说： 你不是研究《诗》吗?《诗》里面说： 马儿刚烈，缰绳就柔软；马不刚烈，缰绳就不柔软。要志气勇武，收放果断。 
English: Prince Jin said, "Didn't you study "Poetry"? In "Poetry" it says, "If the horse is strong, the bridle will be soft; if the horse is not strong, the bridle will not be soft.

古文：以是御之。 
现代文：就用这方法驾车。 
English: That's the way to drive.

古文：师旷对曰： 瞑臣无见，为人辩也，唯耳之恃，而耳又寡闻而易穷。
现代文：师旷回答说： 盲臣我看不见， 与人辩论，只凭耳朵，而耳朵又少听到什么，就容易辞穷。
English: Shi Ku replied, "As a blind person, I can't see. When I argue with someone, I only use my ears, and since my ears can't hear much, it's easy to give up.

古文：王子，汝将为天下宗乎？ 
现代文：太子，你将成为天下的宗主吗? 
English: Prince, will you become the world's sovereign?

古文：王子曰： 太师何汝戏我乎？
现代文：太子晋说： 太师，为何你戏耍我呢!
English: Prince Jin said, "Teacher, why are you teasing me?"

古文：自太昊以下，至于尧舜禹，未有一姓而再有天下者，夫大当时而不伐，天何可得？
现代文：从太嗥以来，一直到尧、舜、禹，还没有一姓人两度占有天下的。那树木，当伐不伐，怎么可得到呢?
English: Since the time of Taejo, all the way to So, So, Yu, there has not been a single person who has occupied the world twice. How can trees be obtained if they are not cut down?

古文：吾闻汝知人年之长短，告吾。 
现代文：我还听说你知道人的年寿长短，请告诉我的寿命。 
English: I also heard that you know the length of a person's lifespan. Please tell me about my lifespan.

古文：师旷对曰： 汝声清汗，汝色赤白，火色不寿。 
现代文：师旷回答说： 你的声音清亮而带汗味，你的脸色当是白中带红。面有红色，不长寿。 
English: Shi Ku replied, "Your voice is clear and sweaty, and your face should be white with a reddish tinge. Your face is red, and you won't live long.

古文：王子曰： 然。
现代文：太子晋日： 是啊。
English: Prince Jinni: Yes.

古文：吾后三年，将上宾于帝所，汝慎无言，殃将及汝。 
现代文：我过三年就要到上天那里作客。你小心不要说出去。说出去要殃及到你。 
English: In three years, I will be a guest in heaven. Be careful not to speak out. If you do, it will affect you.

古文：师旷归，未及三年，告死者至。
现代文：师旷回到晋国。不到三年，传告太子晋死讯的人就到了。
English: Shigeki returned to Jin. Less than three years later, the messenger arrived with the news of Prince Jin's death.

