古文：凡奉者当心，提者当带。
现代文：凡是捧东西，要让双手与胸口齐平；凡是提东西，要让手弯曲与腰带齐平。
English: When holding something, make sure your hands are level with your chest; when lifting something, make sure your hands are bent and level with your belt.

古文：执天子之器则上衡，国君则平衡，大夫则绥之，士则提之。
现代文：如果捧的是天子的器物，就要双手高于胸口；如果捧的是国君的器物，就要双手与胸口齐平；如果捧的是大夫的器物，就要双手低于胸口；如果是士人的东西，只需要用手提着即可。
English: If you are holding the son of heaven's utensils, your hands should be higher than your chest; if you are holding the sovereign's utensils, your hands should be level with your chest; if you are holding the doctor's utensils, your hands should be lower than your chest; if it is a scholar's thing, you only need to carry it with your hands.

古文：凡执主器，执轻如不克。
现代文：凡捧天子的器物，不管器物有多轻，也要小心翼翼像拿不动似的。
English: Whoever holds the Son of God's utensils, no matter how light they are, should be careful not to move them.

古文：执主器，操币圭璧，则尚左手，行不举足，车轮曳踵。立则磬折垂佩。主佩倚，则臣佩垂。
现代文：如果国君直立，腰佩附贴在身，那么臣子就要弯下腰使腰佩自然下垂；如果国君弯腰使腰佩自然下垂，那么臣子就要高度弯腰，使腰佩垂及地面。
English: If the sovereign stands upright with the loincloth clinging to his body, then the vassal should bend down and let the loincloth fall naturally; if the sovereign bends down and lets the loincloth fall naturally, then the vassal should bend down high and let the loincloth fall to the ground.

古文：主佩垂，则臣佩委。执玉，其有藉者则裼；无藉者则袭。国君不名卿老世妇，大夫不名世臣侄娣，士不名家相长妾。
现代文：臣子在捧玉时，如果玉下使用束帛，则臣子就要袒开正服的左襟，露出裼衣；如果玉下不用束帛，就要将正服的前襟掩好，不使裼衣露出。国君不可以直呼上卿、世妇的名字，大夫不可以直呼世臣、侄娣的名字，士不可以直呼家相、长妾的名字。
English: When a vassal is holding a jewel, if the next vassal uses a sash, the vassal should open the left collar of the formal dress to reveal the sash; if the next vassal does not use a sash, the front collar of the formal dress should be covered so that the sash is not exposed. The sovereign may not directly call the name of the lord or lady-in-waiting, the doctor may not directly call the name of the vassal or nephew, and the scholar may not directly call the name of the minister of the family or the long-time concubine.

古文：君大夫之子，不敢自称曰 余小子 ；大夫士之子，不敢自称曰 嗣子某 ，不敢与世子同名。
现代文：国君和大夫之子居丧时，不可对人自称 余小子 。大夫与士之子居丧时，亦不可对人自称 嗣子某 。大夫与士之子不敢与太子同名。
English: When the son of the sovereign and the doctor is in mourning, he must not call himself "yokozo." When the son of the doctor and the scholar is in mourning, he must not call himself "heir." The son of the doctor and the scholar dare not have the same name as the prince.

古文：君使士射，不能，则辞以疾；言曰： 某有负薪之忧。 
现代文：国君命士陪着客人比试射箭，士人如果对射箭一窍不通，就要借口有病，说 某有负薪之忧 。
English: If a scholar does not know anything about archery, he should use the excuse that he is ill, saying that he is worried about losing his salary.

古文：侍于君子，不顾望而对，非礼也。
现代文：在君子身旁陪坐，君子提出问题后，如果不环顾周围是否有胜于己者就贸然回答，是不符合礼的。
English: It is not proper etiquette to sit next to a gentleman and, after the gentleman asks a question, answer without looking around to see if there is someone better than you.

古文：君子行礼，不求变俗。
现代文：君子虽然移居他国，行礼也不要务求改变故国的礼俗。
English: Even if a gentleman immigrates to another country, he should not try to change the etiquette of his home country.

古文：祭祀之礼，居丧之服，哭泣之位，皆如其国之故，谨修其法而审行之。
现代文：例如祭祀的礼节，居丧的服制，哭泣死者的位置，等都应该像在自己国家时一样，小心地遵循故国的法度而审慎地加以实行。
English: For example, the rites of sacrifice, the mourning dress, the position of the weeping dead, etc. should be carefully implemented in accordance with the laws of the home country, as in their own country.

古文：去国三世，爵禄有列于朝，出入有诏于国，若兄弟宗族犹存，则反告于宗后；去国三世，爵禄无列于朝，出入无诏于国，唯兴之日，从新国之法。
现代文：如果离开故国已超过三代，但家族中还有在朝廷担任官职的人，或遇到喜事丧事与国内尚有来往的，以及兄弟族人中尚有留在国内的，在这种情况下，遇到喜事和丧事，要派人回国报告宗子。如果离开故国已超过三代，家族中没有在朝廷担任官职的，遇到喜事和丧事也与国内无来往的，就不需要向本国国君报告了，只有担任他国官职时，才要遵循居住国的法度。
English: If more than three generations have left their home country, but there is still someone in the family who has held an official position in the Imperial Court, or if there is someone who still has contacts in the country when there is a happy event or a sad event, and if there are brothers and sisters who still remain in the country, in this case, if there is a happy event or a sad event, they should send someone back to report to their father. If there is more than three generations who have left their home country, and there is no one in the family who has held an official position in the Imperial Court, or if there is someone who still has contacts in the country when there is a happy event or a sad event

古文：君子已孤不更名。
现代文：君子在父亲死后就不会再改动自己的名字。
English: A gentleman does not change his name after his father's death.

古文：已孤暴贵，不为父作谥。居丧，未葬，读丧礼；既葬，读祭礼；丧复常，读乐章。
现代文：父亡之后，作儿子的突然发迹成为显贵，也不须为父定个美谥，因为那样做像是嫌弃父亲贫贱，不宜为贵人之父。居父母之丧，在未葬之前，应研究丧礼；已葬，应研究祭礼。居丧期满，恢复正常，就可以讽诵诗歌了。
English: After the father's death, the son's sudden rise to prominence is not necessary to set a beauty mark for the father, because doing so is like rejecting the father's poverty, and it is not appropriate to be the father of a noble man. Before the parents are buried, the funeral should be studied; after they are buried, the ritual should be studied. After the mourning period is over and normalcy is restored, it is possible to recite poetry.

古文：居丧不言乐，祭事不言凶，公庭不言妇女。
现代文：居丧时不谈乐事，祭祀时不谈凶事。在办公的地方不谈论有关妇女的事。
English: Don't talk about music at funerals, don't talk about bad things at religious services, and don't talk about women at the office.

古文：振书、端书于君前，有诛。
现代文：在国君面前掸去文书上的灰尘，或者在国君面前整理文书，这表明准备工作没做好，都要受罚。
English: Dusting off paperwork in front of the sovereign, or tidying up paperwork in front of the sovereign, indicates that the preparation work is not done well and must be punished.

古文：倒策侧龟于君前，有诛。
现代文：在国君面前颠倒占卜用的龟策，也要受罚。
English: Anyone who reverses a divination trick in front of the sovereign will also be punished.

古文：龟策、几杖、席盖、重素、袗絺绤，不入公门。
现代文：臣子的龟策、几杖、席盖，或通身著素，有似凶服，或只穿一层单布内衣，形近猥亵，皆不可进入朝廷大门。
English: A courtier's kamezake, a few canes, a seat cover, or a full-body veil, resembling a costume, or wearing only a layer of single-layer underwear, which is almost indecent, are not allowed to enter the imperial gate.

古文：苞屦、扱衽、厌冠，不入公门。
现代文：穿着丧鞋，戴着丧冠，或是作扱衽打扮的，也不可进入朝廷大门。
English: Wearing mourning shoes, wearing a mourning crown, or dressing up as a skull and crossbones, is also not allowed to enter the imperial gate.

古文：书方、衰、凶器，不以告，不入公门。
现代文：记载助丧者姓名及所赠物品的木板、孝服、冥器，不通过报告得到许可，也不可进入朝廷大门。
English: Wooden boards, filial piety clothes, and sacred vessels that record the names of the mourners and the items they have donated are not permitted without a report, nor are they allowed to enter the imperial gate.

古文：公事不私议。
现代文：公家的事不可私下议论。
English: Public affairs should not be discussed in private.

古文：君子将营宫室：宗庙为先，厩库为次，居室为后。
现代文：国君将要营造宫室，应当先建宗庙，其次建厩库，最后才建自己的住室。
English: If the sovereign wants to build a palace, he should first build a family temple, then a stable, and finally his own living quarters.

古文：凡家造：祭器为先，牺赋为次，养器为后。
现代文：大夫打算制作器物用具，首先应当先制造祭祀用的器皿，其次是向百姓征收祭祀用的贡品，最后才制作日常所用的器具。
English: The doctor intends to make utensils and tools. First, he should first make utensils for sacrifices, then collect tribute from the people for sacrifices, and finally make utensils for daily use.

古文：无田禄者不设祭器；有田禄者，先为祭服。
现代文：没有田产俸禄的人，不需要置办祭祀用的器具。有田产傣禄的人，先要备办祭服。
English: Those who do not have a farm stipend do not need to purchase equipment for rituals. Those who do have a farm stipend must first prepare a ceremonial robe.

古文：君子虽贫，不粥祭器；虽寒，不衣祭服；为宫室，不斩于丘木。
现代文：君子即使再贫穷，也不会卖掉祭器；即使再寒冷，夜不会穿祭服御寒；建造宫室，不可从坟头上砍伐树木。
English: Even if a gentleman is poor, he will not sell the sacrificial vessels; even if it is cold, he will not wear the sacrificial clothes at night to keep out the cold; to build a palace, he must not cut trees from the head of the grave.

古文：大夫、士去国，祭器不逾竟。
现代文：大夫、士因得罪国君而离开本国，不能携带祭器出境。
English: Doctors and magistrates who leave the country for offending the sovereign are not allowed to leave the country with the sacred vessels.

古文：大夫寓祭器于大夫，士寓祭器于士。
现代文：大夫的祭器要寄放在本国大夫那里，士的祭器要寄放在本国的士那里。
English: Let the vessels of the physicians be with the physicians of their fathers' houses, and the vessels of the judges with the judges of their fathers' houses.

古文：大夫、士去国：逾竟，为坛位乡国而哭。
现代文：大夫、士因得罪而离开本国，过了国境以后，就要除地为坛，向着国家的方向哭泣。
English: If a doctor or a judge leaves his or her home country because of a sin, after crossing the border, he or she should turn the ground into an altar and weep in the direction of the country.

古文：素衣，素裳，素冠，彻缘，鞮屦，素簚，乘髦马。不蚤鬋。不祭食，不说人以无罪；妇人不当御。
现代文：上穿素衣，下穿素裳，头戴素冠，去掉里衣的彩色镶边、穿着没有鞋鼻的草鞋，驾着鬃毛未加修剪的马，不去修剪自己的手脚指甲和须发，不向别人辩解说自己无罪，吃饭时也不行祭食之礼，不与妇人同房。
English: To wear a plain coat on the top, a plain dress on the bottom, a plain crown on the head, to remove the colored border of the inner garment, to wear straw sandals without a toe, to ride a horse with untrimmed mane, not to trim one's own hands and feet, nails and hair, not to justify oneself to others, not to offer the sacrifice of food when eating, and not to share a room with a woman.

古文：三月而复服。
现代文：三个月后就可以恢复正常的生活了。
English: After three months, you can return to normal life.

古文：大夫、士见于国君，君若劳之，则还辟，再拜稽首；君若迎拜，则还辟，不敢答拜。
现代文：出聘他国的大夫、士进见主国国君，国君倘亲加慰劳，大夫、士要闪身躲避，并再拜叩头。国君倘在门外迎而拜之，大夫、士也要闪身躲避，表示不敢接受其拜，自然也不答拜。
English: If a doctor or a scholar from another country is invited to visit the sovereign of the host country, the sovereign should be comforted by his relatives, and the doctor or scholar should dodge and dodge, and then bow. If the sovereign is greeted and bowed to outside the door, the doctor or scholar should also dodge and dodge, indicating that he does not dare to accept his bow, and naturally does not bow.

古文：大夫、士相见，虽贵贱不敌，主人敬客，则先拜客；客敬主人，则先拜主人。
现代文：不同国家的大夫与士相见，虽然身份不相当，但若主人尊敬客人，就先拜客；若客人尊敬主人，就先拜主人。
English: When a doctor and a scholar from different countries meet, although their status is not the same, if the host respects the guest, he will first bow to the guest; if the guest respects the host, he will first bow to the host.

古文：凡非吊丧、非见国君，无不答拜者。
现代文：总之，只要不是吊丧，不是士进见本国国君，受拜者都要回拜。
English: In short, as long as it is not a funeral, not a priest entering to see his country's sovereign, the worshipers must return the worship.

古文：大夫见于国君，国君拜其辱。
现代文：大夫进见主国国君，国君要行拜礼感谢他的屈驾光临。
English: The doctor went to see his master, the sovereign, and the sovereign wanted to make a prayer to thank him for coming.

古文：士见于大夫，大夫拜其辱。
现代文：士进见大夫，大夫也要如此行礼。
English: When you go to see a doctor, the doctor should do the same.

古文：同国始相见，主人拜其辱。
现代文：同国之人初次相见，就不论身份高低，应由主人先拜，感谢客人的光临。
English: When meeting someone from the same country for the first time, regardless of status, the host should bow first and thank the guest for coming.

古文：君于士，不答拜也；非其臣，则答拜之。
现代文：国君对于本国的士，因地位悬殊，不须答拜；但对于他国的士，因为不是自己的臣子，则须答拜。
English: The sovereign does not have to bow to his own vassals because of the disparity in their status, but he does have to bow to the vassals of other countries because they are not his vassals.

古文：大夫于其臣，虽贱，必答拜之。
现代文：大夫不能和国君相比，对于家臣，无论其贵贱，都要答拜。
English: A doctor cannot be compared to a sovereign, and vassals, no matter how high or low, must be obeyed.

古文：男女相答拜也。
现代文：男女尽管有别，但互相答拜的礼也不可少。
English: Despite the differences between men and women, there is no shortage of reciprocal worship.

古文：国君春田不围泽；大夫不掩群，士不取麑卵。
现代文：国君在春季行猎的时候，不会将整个猎场都包围起来；大夫不可猎捕兽群；士人不可猎捕幼兽和鸟卵。
English: When the sovereign goes hunting in the spring, he will not surround the entire hunting ground; the doctor may not hunt and catch animals; the scholar may not hunt and catch young animals and bird eggs.

古文：岁凶，年谷不登，君膳不祭肺，马不食谷，驰道不除，祭事不县。大夫不食粱，士饮酒不乐。
现代文：遇到旱涝的灾荒年，收成不好，国君就不能杀生祭祀，马匹不喂谷类，驰车的大道不除草，祭祀时也不再演奏乐曲；大夫们不吃粟米，士人宴客不能用乐待宾。
English: In a year of drought and famine, when the harvest is poor, the sovereign cannot kill the sacrifice, the horses do not feed the grain, the highway is not weeded, and the music is no longer played during the sacrifice; the doctors do not eat corn, and the nobles cannot entertain the guests with music.

古文：君无故，玉不去身；大夫无故不彻县，士无故不彻琴瑟。
现代文：国君如果没有缘故，佩玉不离身。大夫没有缘故，不撤除佩玉。读书人没有缘故，不撤除琴瑟。
English: If there is no reason for the sovereign, the pearl will not leave his body. If there is no reason for the doctor, the pearl will not be removed. If there is no reason for the reader, the lyre will not be removed.

古文：士有献于国君，他日，君问之曰： 安取彼？ 
现代文：士进献给国君东西，后来国君问士： 这些东西是从哪里得到的？ 
English: The scholar presented something to the sovereign, who later asked the scholar: Where did you get these things?

古文：再拜稽首而后对。
现代文：士要先行再拜叩头之礼，然后回答。
English: They should first bow and then answer.

古文：大夫私行出疆，必请。反，必有献。
现代文：大夫因私事出境，必须报告国君得到许可，回来后还要献上土仪。
English: If a doctor leaves the country for personal reasons, he must report that the sovereign has given permission, and he must also present a local ceremony upon his return.

古文：士私行出疆，必请；反，必告。
现代文：士人因私事出境，也必须报告国君得到许可，回来后不必馈献土仪，但须报告国君销假。
English: If a scholar leaves the country for personal reasons, he must also report that the sovereign has given permission. After returning, he does not have to give a gift, but he must report that the sovereign is on vacation.

古文：君劳之，则拜；问其行，拜而后对。
现代文：国君如果对出境返回者加以慰劳，要拜谢；如果问及旅途上的情形，就要先拜礼然后再回答。
English: If the sovereign consoles those who have returned from abroad, he should offer thanks; if he asks about the circumstances of the journey, he should first offer prayers and then answer.

古文：国君去其国，止之曰： 奈何去社稷也！ 
现代文：国君如果要离开自己的国家，要对他进行劝阻，说： 为什么要丢弃自己的江山社稷呢？ 
English: If the sovereign wants to leave his country, he should be dissuaded, saying, "Why do you want to abandon your country and society?"

古文：大夫，曰： 奈何去宗庙也！ 
现代文：如果大夫要离开自己的国家，左右要劝阻他，说： 为什么要抛弃自己的宗庙呢？ 
English: If a doctor wants to leave his country, the left and right should dissuade him, saying: Why should you abandon your ancestral temple?

古文：士，曰： 奈何去坟墓也！ 
现代文：如果士要离开自己的国家，左右要劝阻他，说： 为什么要抛弃祖宗的坟墓呢？ 
English: If a person wants to leave his country, the left and the right try to dissuade him, saying: "Why should you abandon the graves of your ancestors?

古文：国君死社稷，大夫死众，士死制。
现代文：国君应当为了自己的国家而死，大夫应当率领民众保卫国家，直到自己战死，士人应当为法制所规定的卫国责任而死。
English: The sovereign should die for his country, the doctor should lead the people to defend the country until he dies in battle, and the scholar should die for the responsibility of defending the country as stipulated by the legal system.

古文：君天下，曰天子。
现代文：君临天下的人被称之为 天子 。
English: He who rules the world is called the Son of Heaven.

古文：朝诸侯，分职授政任功，曰予一人。
现代文：在诸侯朝见时，在分六官之职，授之以政，任之以功时，天子自称 予一人 。
English: When the princes met with the emperor, when the offices of the six officials were divided, when the government was bestowed, and when merit was conferred, the heavenly son claimed to bestow it on one person.

古文：践阼临祭祀：内事曰孝王某，外事曰嗣王某。
现代文：新天子登基，亲临祭祀，如果是自己的祖宗，祝辞上就写 孝王某 ；如果是天神地祗，祝辞上就写 嗣王某 。
English: When a new heavenly son ascends to the throne and attends the sacrifice in person, if it is one's own ancestor, write "Takehito" on the congratulatory message; if it is a celestial god, write "Successor" on the congratulatory message.

古文：临诸侯，畛于鬼神，曰有天王某甫。
现代文：天子巡视诸侯，遣人致敬于诸侯国内诸神，祝辞要称 有天王某甫 。
English: The heavenly son inspected the provinces and sent people to pay homage to the gods in the provinces. The congratulatory speech should be called "There is a heavenly king."

古文：崩，曰天王崩。
现代文：天子去世，史书上应该记作 天王崩 。
English: The death of the heavenly son should be recorded in the history books as the death of the heavenly king.

古文：复，曰天子复矣。
现代文：为天子招魂的时候，应高喊 天子归来吧！ 
English: When calling forth the soul for the heavenly son, you should shout, "Let the heavenly son return!"

古文：告丧，曰天王登假。
现代文：为天子发讣告，应当说 天王升天而去 。
English: To publish an obituary for the heavenly son, it should be said that the heavenly king ascended to heaven and departed.

古文：措之庙，立之主，曰帝。
现代文：把天子的牌位祔于宗庙，牌位上应题写 某帝 。
English: Put the card of the son of heaven in the ancestral temple, and write "a certain emperor" on the card.

古文：天子未除丧，曰予小子。
现代文：新天子守丧期还没过的时候，不可称 予一人 ，而应称 予小子 。
English: When the period of mourning for the new heavenly son has not yet passed, he should not be called "a person," but should be called "a child."

古文：生名之，死亦名之。天子有后，有夫人，有世妇，有嫔，有妻，有妾。
现代文：如果守丧期还没结束就死掉了的王子，既然生前就称之为 小子王某 ，那么死后也仍然这样称他。天子的内宫中有很多女性，其职位各不相同，包括王后、夫人、世妇、嫔、妻、妾等。
English: If the prince who died before the mourning period was over, since he was called the child king before his death, he will still be called so after his death. There are many women in the inner palace of the son of heaven, and their positions are different, including the queen, the wife, the concubine, the concubine, the wife, and the concubine.

古文：天子建天官，先六大：曰大宰、大宗、大史、大祝、大士、大卜，典司六典。
现代文：天子设立官位的时候，先设事鬼神、奉天时的天官，即大宰、大宗、大史、大祝、大士、大卜，此六官各按一定的法典行事。
English: When the Son of Heaven established the official ranks, He first set up the heavenly officials who dealt with things, spirits, and gods, and who were subject to Heaven, namely, the Dazai, the Daizong, the Daishi, the Daizhu, the Daishi, and the Daibu. These six officials each acted according to a certain code.

古文：天子之五官：曰司徒、司马、司空、司士、司寇，典司五众。
现代文：天子又设立总管人事的五官，即司徒、司马、司空、司士、司寇，此五官各自统辖所属各官。
English: Tianzi also set up five officials in charge of personnel affairs, namely, Sito, Sima, Siku, Sisi, and Siko. These five officials each have their own subordinate officials.

古文：天子之六府：曰司土、司木、司水、司草、司器、司货，典司六职。
现代文：天子又设掌管府库之官六名，即司土、司木、司水、司草、司器、司货，此六官各司其职。
English: Tianzi also set up six officials in charge of the prefectural treasury, namely, the director of soil, the director of wood, the director of water, the director of grass, the director of utensils, and the director of goods. These six officials each performed their duties.

古文：天子之六工：曰土工、金工、石工、木工、兽工、草工，典制六材。
现代文：为天子服务的工匠有六种，即土工、金工、石工、木工、兽工、草工，他们各自负责用其所长制造器物。
English: There are six kinds of artisans who serve the Son of Heaven, namely, earthworker, metalworker, mason, woodworker, veterinarian, and grassworker, and they are each responsible for making utensils with their skills.

古文：五官致贡，曰享。
现代文：到了年终，五官把一年的成绩报告给天子，这叫 享 。
English: At the end of the year, the five officials report the year's results to the emperor, which is called "gathering."

古文：五官之长，曰伯：是职方。
现代文：五官之长叫做伯，他们是主管国家一个方面的大吏。
English: The head of the five officials is called a bu, and they are the officials in charge of one aspect of the country.

古文：其摈于天子也，曰天子之吏。
现代文：他们进见天子时，负责通报的要称之为 天子之吏 。
English: When they visit the emperor, the person in charge of the announcement should be called the emperor's official.

古文：天子同姓，谓之伯父；异姓，谓之伯舅。
现代文：他们如果是天子的同姓，天子就称之为 伯父 。他们如果是天子的异姓，天子就称之为 伯舅 。
English: If they have the same family name as the Son of Heaven, the Son of Heaven calls them uncles. If they have a different family name from the Son of Heaven, the Son of Heaven calls them uncles.

古文：自称于诸侯，曰天子之老，于外曰公；于其国曰君。
现代文：对于天下的诸侯，他们自称 天子之老 。在他们的封国以外，自称曰 公 ；在封国之内，自称曰 君 。
English: To the princes of the world, they call themselves the sons of heaven. Outside their fiefdom, they call themselves "public"; within the fiefdom, they call themselves "kimi."

古文：九州岛之长入天子之国，曰牧。
现代文：九州诸侯的首领，进入天子畿内，自称曰 牧 。
English: The leader of the Kyushu lords entered the Kinai region and called himself Maki.

古文：天子同姓，谓之叔父；异姓，谓之叔舅；于外曰侯，于其国曰君。
现代文：他们如果是天子的同姓，天子就称之为 叔父 ；如果是天子的异姓，天子就称之为 叔舅 。对国外，自称曰侯；在国内，自称曰君。
English: If they have the same surname as Tenshi, Tenshi calls them "uncle"; if they have a different surname from Tenshi, Tenshi calls them "uncle." Abroad, they call themselves "Hou"; at home, they call themselves "Jun."

古文：其在东夷、北狄、西戎、南蛮，虽大，曰子。于内自称曰不谷，于外自称曰王老。
现代文：散处四夷的诸侯的首领，如其朝见天子，负责通报的人就称之为 子 。他们在国内，自称曰 不谷 ；在国外，自称曰 王老 。
English: The leaders of the principalities scattered throughout the four provinces, if they see the Son of Heaven in the morning, the person in charge of the announcement will call him the Son. At home, they call themselves "Not Gu"; abroad, they call themselves "Wang Lao."

古文：庶方小侯入天子之国，曰某人，于外曰子，自称曰孤。
现代文：至于散处四夷的小诸侯，进入天子瓷内，自称曰 某国人 。在国外，自称曰 子 ；在国内，自称曰 孤 。
English: As for the small lords scattered in Shiyi, when they enter Tianzi Porcelain, they claim to be "citizens of a certain country." Abroad, they claim to be "children"; at home, they claim to be "orphans."

古文：天子当依而立，诸侯北面而见天子，曰觐。
现代文：天子背靠绣有斧文的屏风，面南而立，诸侯面向北而拜见天子，这叫 觐 。
English: The emperor stood with his back against a screen embroidered with axe script, facing south, while the princes faced north to pay homage to the emperor. This is called.

古文：天子当宁而立，诸公东面、诸侯西面，曰朝。
现代文：天子站在殿门与屏风之间，面南，诸公面向东、诸侯面向西而拜见天子，这叫 朝 。
English: The Son of Heaven stands between the gate of the hall and the screen, facing south, the princes face east, the lords face west and worship the Son of Heaven. This is called morning.

古文：诸侯未及期相见曰遇，相见于郤地曰会。
现代文：诸侯在约定的日期之前相见，叫做 遇 。诸侯在两国交界处相见，叫做 会 。
English: If the princes meet before the agreed date, it is called a rendezvous. If the princes meet at the border between the two countries, it is called a meeting.

古文：诸侯使大夫问于诸侯曰聘，约信曰誓，莅牲曰盟。
现代文：诸侯之间派遣大夫互访，叫做 聘 。订立彼此必须信守的条约，叫做 誓 。
English: Dispatching doctors between lords for mutual visits is called 聘, and concluding a treaty that must be respected by both parties is called 誓.

古文：诸侯见天子曰臣某、侯某；其与民言，自称曰寡人；其在凶服，曰适子孤。
现代文：书面订立条约，在神灵面前献血宣读，叫做 盟 。诸侯朝见天子，自称曰 臣某侯某 。诸侯与本国百姓讲话，自称 寡人 。诸侯丧服还未除去，相礼者对吊宾称诸侯为 嫡子孤某 。
English: A treaty concluded in writing and read aloud in front of the gods after donating blood is called a covenant. A vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of

古文：临祭祀，内事曰孝子某侯某，外事曰曾孙某侯某。
现代文：诸侯主持祭祀，如果是祭宗庙中的列祖列宗，就自称 孝子某侯某 ；如果是祭天神地祗，就自称 曾孙某侯某 。
English: Princes preside over the rituals, and if it is the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors in the temple, they call themselves the filial son of a certain prince; if it is the god of the earth, they call themselves the great-grandson of a certain prince.

古文：死曰薨，复曰某甫复矣。
现代文：诸侯去世，史策上应记作 薨 。招魂时应呼其字，高喊 某甫回来吧 ！
English: When lords die, it should be recorded in history as. When summoning spirits, you should call their name and shout, "Come back soon!"

古文：既葬见天子曰类见。
现代文：已葬之后，继位的诸侯在丧中朝见天子，叫 类见 。
English: After being buried, the princes who succeeded to the throne went to see the heavenly son in the middle of the funeral, called "Kodimi."

古文：言谥曰类。
现代文：继位的诸侯为去世的诸侯请谥，叫 类 。
English: The lords who succeeded to the throne asked for a gong for the deceased lords, called 类.

古文：诸侯使人使于诸侯，使者自称曰寡君之老。
现代文：诸侯派使者聘于诸侯，使者自称 寡君之老 。
English: Princes sent emissaries to be employed by princes, and the emissaries called themselves 寡君之老.

古文：天子穆穆，诸侯皇皇，大夫济济，士跄跄，庶人僬僬。
现代文：天子严肃静穆，诸侯恭敬端庄，大夫庄严恭敬，士容止有节，庶人行走急促。
English: The son of heaven is serious and quiet, the lords are respectful and dignified, the doctors are solemn and respectful, the scholars are dignified and dignified, and the commoners walk quickly.

古文：天子之妃曰后，诸侯曰夫人，大夫曰孺人，士曰妇人，庶人曰妻。
现代文：天子的配偶叫后，诸侯的配偶叫夫人，大夫的配偶叫孺人，士的配偶叫妇人，庶人的配偶叫妻。
English: The spouse of the son of heaven is called the empress, the spouse of the princes is called the lady, the spouse of the doctor is called the eunuch, the spouse of the magistrate is called the woman, and the spouse of the commoner is called the wife.

古文：公侯有夫人，有世妇，有妻，有妾。
现代文：五等诸侯的内宫有夫人，有世妇，有妻，有妾。
English: The inner court of the fifth-class lords had a wife, a concubine, a wife and a concubine.

古文：夫人自称于天子，曰老妇；自称于诸侯，曰寡小君；自称于其君，曰小童。
现代文：诸侯的夫人，在天子面前自称 老妇 ，在他国诸侯面前、自称 寡小君 ，在本国国君面前自称 小童 。
English: The wife of a prince calls herself an old woman in front of the Son of God, a widow in front of the princes of other countries, and a child in front of the sovereign of her own country.

古文：自世妇以下，自称曰婢子。
现代文：自世妇以下，因其地位卑贱，所以自称 婢子 。
English: Because of their lowly status, they call themselves "handmaids" even though they are lower than worldly women.

古文：子于父母则自名也。
现代文：子女在父母面前皆自称己名。
English: The children all say their names in front of their parents.

古文：列国之大夫，入天子之国曰某士；自称曰陪臣某。
现代文：诸侯的大夫到天子那里访问，负责通报的官员就称其为 某国之士某人 ，该大夫对天子则自称 陪臣某 。
English: When a doctor from a feudal lord visited the emperor, the official in charge of the notification called him "a person from a certain country," while the doctor called himself "a vassal" to the emperor.

古文：于外曰子，于其国曰寡君之老。
现代文：他国之人尊称此大夫曰 子 ，本国人对外介绍则称之为 寡君之老 。
English: People from other countries respectfully call this doctor "son," while locals refer to him as "old widower."

古文：使者自称曰某。天子不言出，诸侯不生名。君子不亲恶。
现代文：为人臣之礼，在规劝国君过失时，要讲究方式、场合，不可有损其威严，如果多次规劝而国君仍不醒悟，臣子就可以离开他。
English: For the courtesy of a vassal, when exhorting the sovereign to commit a fault, it is necessary to pay attention to the manner and occasion, and not to impair his majesty. If the sovereign does not wake up after repeated exhortation, the vassal can leave him.

古文：诸侯失地，名；灭同姓，名。为人臣之礼：不显谏。三谏而不听，则逃之。子之事亲也：三谏而不听，则号泣而随之。
现代文：做儿子的侍奉父亲，父亲有了过失，做儿子的多次规劝也不听，就应继之以号泣，希望感动父亲，使他知悟而改。
English: As a son serving his father, if the father makes a mistake or does not listen to the son's repeated exhortations, he should follow up with crying, hoping to move the father and make him understand and change.

古文：君有疾，饮药，臣先尝之。
现代文：国君生病吃药，臣子要先尝。
English: When the sovereign is ill and takes medicine, the vassal must first taste it.

古文：亲有疾，饮药，子先尝之。
现代文：父亲生病吃药，儿子要先尝。
English: When the father is ill and takes medicine, the son has to taste it first.

古文：医不三世，不服其药。
现代文：不是世代相传的医生，由于其医术不精，所以不服其药。
English: He is not a doctor who has been handed down from generation to generation. Because his medical skills are not refined, he does not take his medicine.

古文：儗人必于其伦。
现代文：拿人作比拟的时候，一定要注意只有同类的人才能相比。
English: When comparing people, be sure to note that only people of the same kind can be compared.

古文：问天子之年，对曰： 闻之：始服衣若干尺矣。 
现代文：若有人询问天子年龄，应该回答说： 听说开始穿多长的衣服了。 
English: If someone asks him how old he is, he should reply, "I heard that I have started to wear longer clothes."

古文：问国君之年：长，曰能从宗庙社稷之事矣；幼，曰未能从宗庙社稷之事也。
现代文：若询问国君的年龄，如果国君年长，就回答说： 能主持宗庙社稷的祭祀了。 如果年幼就回答说： 还不能主持宗庙社稷的祭祀。 
English: If you inquire about the age of the sovereign, if the sovereign is old, he will answer, "I can preside over the sacrificial rites of the ancestral temple," if he is young, he will answer, "I cannot preside over the sacrificial rites of the ancestral temple."

古文：问大夫之子：长，曰能御矣；幼，曰未能御也。
现代文：若问大夫之子的年龄，如果年长就回答说： 能驾驭马车了。 
English: If you asked the doctor's son how old he was, if he was older he would reply: "I can drive a carriage."

古文：问士之子：长，曰能典谒矣；幼，曰未能典谒也。
现代文：如果年幼就回答说： 还不能驾驭马车。 若问士人之子的年龄，若其年长，就回答说： 能接客传话了。 如果年幼就回答说： 还不能接客传话。 
English: And if a man ask the age of a man's son, whether he be old or young, he shall say, I can go and fetch; and if he be young, he shall say, I cannot go and fetch; and if he be old, he shall say, I cannot go and fetch; and if he be young, he shall say, I cannot go and fetch.

古文：问庶人之子：长，曰能负薪矣；幼，曰未能负薪也。
现代文：若问庶人之子的年龄，如果年长就回答说： 能负薪了。 
English: If you ask the age of a commoner's son, if he is older, he will answer: I can earn a salary.

古文：问国君之富，数地以对，山泽之所出。
现代文：如果年幼就回答说： 还不能负薪。 若有人问起国君的财富，可先回答国土的总面积，再回答山泽的各种出产。
English: If you are young, you can answer, "I can't earn a salary yet." If someone asks about the wealth of the sovereign, you can first answer the total area of the country, and then answer the various products of the mountains.

古文：问大夫之富，曰有宰食力，祭器衣服不假。
现代文：若问起大夫的财富，可以回答：有采地若干，采地百姓提供的赋税有若干，祭器祭服用不着借。
English: If you ask about the doctor's wealth, you can answer: there are some mining lands, and there are some taxes provided by the people of the mining lands. You can't borrow the sacrificial offerings.

古文：问士之富，以车数对。
现代文：若问起士的财富，可答以士拥有的车数。
English: If you ask him about his wealth, he can tell you how many cars he owns.

古文：问庶人之富，数畜以对。
现代文：若间起庶人的财富，可答以他拥有的牲口数。
English: The wealth of a common man, if it be but little, may be reckoned by the number of cattle he possesses.

古文：天子祭天地，祭四方，祭山川，祭五祀，岁遍。
现代文：天子祭天神地祇，祭四方五岳四渎之神，祭山川之神，祭户神、灶神、中霤神、门神、行神，每年祭一遍。
English: The Tenshi Festival celebrates the gods of heaven and earth, the gods of the four directions, the five mountains, and the four defilements, the gods of the mountains and rivers, the gods of the household, the hearth, the mid-temple, the door, and the procession, and is held once a year.

古文：诸侯方祀，祭山川，祭五祀，岁遍。
现代文：诸侯祭所在地方之神，祭其境内的山川，祭户神、灶神、中霤神、门神、行神，每年祭一遍。
English: The gods of the place where the festival is held are the gods of the mountains and rivers within the territory of the festival, and the gods of the house, the hearth, the middle god, the door god, and the walking god are the gods. The festival is held once a year.

古文：大夫祭五祀，岁遍。
现代文：大夫祭户神、灶神、中霤神、门神、行神，每年祭一遍。
English: The house god, the hearth god, the middle god, the door god, and the walking god are enshrined by the chief priest. The festival is held once a year.

古文：士祭其先。
现代文：士人只祭其祖先。
English: The nobles only sacrificed to their ancestors.

古文：凡祭，有其废之莫敢举也，有其举之莫敢废也。
现代文：祭祀哪些神是有常规的，有的神被前代废掉了后代也不敢恢复，有的神一直受前代供奉后代也不敢随便废掉。
English: The worship of which gods is regular, some gods were abolished by the previous generation and the future generations do not dare to restore, and some gods have been worshiped by the previous generation and the future generations do not dare to casually abolish.

古文：非其所祭而祭之，名曰淫祀。
现代文：对不应当祭祀的神进行祭祀，这叫 淫祀 。
English: It is immoral to offer sacrifices to gods that should not be offered.

古文：淫祀无福。
现代文：淫祀是不会得到神的庇佑的。
English: Sexual immorality will not be blessed by God.

古文：天子以牺牛，诸侯以肥牛，大夫以索牛，士以羊豕。
现代文：祭祀所用的牺牲，天子是毛色纯一的牛，诸侯是精心饲养的牛，大夫是经过挑选的牛，士人是羊或猪。
English: In the sacrifices used in religious rites, the son of heaven is a pure-colored ox, the princes are carefully bred cattle, the doctors are selected cattle, and the judges are sheep or pigs.

古文：支子不祭，祭必告于宗子。
现代文：凡庶子，换言之，凡非嫡长子，都不能主持祭祀，如果遇到特殊情况需要他主持祭祀，也需要向嫡长子禀告。
English: Any illegitimate son, in other words, anyone who is not the legitimate eldest son, cannot preside over the sacrificial rites. If there are special circumstances that require him to preside over the sacrificial rites, it is also necessary to inform the legitimate eldest son.

古文：凡祭宗庙之礼：牛曰一元大武，豕曰刚鬣，豚曰腯肥，羊曰柔毛，鸡曰翰音，犬曰羹献，雉曰疏趾，兔曰明视，脯曰尹祭，槁鱼曰商祭，鲜鱼曰脡祭，水曰清涤，酒曰清酌，黍曰芗合，粱曰芗萁，稷曰明粢，稻曰嘉蔬，韭曰丰本，盐曰咸鹾，玉曰嘉玉，币曰量币。
现代文：凡祭宗庙之礼，各种祭品皆有美号。牛称为 一元大武 ，猪称为 刚鬣 ，小猪称为 腯肥 ，羊称为 柔毛 ，鸡称为 翰音 ，犬称为 羹献 ，雉称为 疏趾 ，兔称为 明视 ；干肉称为 尹祭 ，干鱼称为 商祭 ，鲜鱼称为 脡祭 ；水称为 清涤 ，酒称为 清酌 ；黍称为 芗合 ，粱称为 芗萁 ，稷称为 明粢 ，稻称为 嘉蔬 ；韭菜称为 丰本 ，盐称为 咸鹾 ；玉称为 嘉玉 ，帛称为 量币 。
English: Cows are called "one yuan dawu," pigs are called "gondoliers," piglets are called "pig manure," sheep are called "soft wool," chickens are called "chicken sound," dogs are called "soup offering," donkeys are called "sow toe," rabbits are called "clear sight"; dried meat is called "yin sacrifice," dried fish is called "merchant sacrifice," fresh fish is called "chicken sacrifice"; water is called "cleansing," wine is called "cleansing drink"; donkeys are called "conjugation," donkeys are called "suckling," donkeys are called "clear suckling," rice is called "jia vegetable";

古文：天子死曰崩，诸侯曰薨，大夫曰卒，士曰不禄，庶人曰死。
现代文：天子去世，文告上称 崩 ，诸侯称 莞 ，大夫称 卒 ，士称 不禄 ，庶人称 死 。
English: When the son of heaven died, the announcement said "death," the princes said "guan," the doctors said "pupil," the nobles said "unlucky," and the commoners said "death."

古文：在床曰尸，在棺曰柩。
现代文：死者尚在床上，叫尸；死者已经入棺，叫柩。
English: The dead, still in bed, cried corpse; the dead, already in the coffin, cried wail.

古文：羽鸟曰降，四足曰渍。
现代文：飞鸟死称 降 ，四足之兽死称 渍 。
English: A bird dies and is called down, a four-footed beast dies and is called up.

古文：死寇曰兵。
现代文：为保卫国家而牺牲者，称 烈士 。
English: Those who died defending the country are called martyrs.

古文：祭王父曰皇祖考，王母曰皇祖妣。父曰皇考，母曰皇妣。夫曰皇辟。
现代文：祭祀去世的祖父，称之为 皇祖考 ，祖母则称之为 皇祖妣 ，父则称之为 皇考 ，母则称之为 皇妣 ，丈夫则称之为 皇辟 。
English: Grandfathers who died in sacrifice are called 皇祖考, grandmothers are called 皇祖, fathers are called 皇考, mothers are called 皇, and husbands are called 皇辟.

古文：生曰父、曰母、曰妻，死曰考、曰妣、曰嫔。
现代文：活着的时候，要用 父 、 母 、 妻 这些字眼，死了以后，要分别改用 考 、 妣 、 嫔 的字眼。
English: When you are alive, you should use the words father, mother, and wife. After you die, you should separately use the words 考,, and.

古文：寿考曰卒，短折曰不禄。天子视不上于袷，不下于带；国君，绥视；大夫，衡视；士视五步。
现代文：对于有道德而未曾出来作官的人，如果是年老自然死亡，就比照大夫称为 卒 ，如果是短命夭折的，就比照士称为 不禄 。
English: For those who are virtuous and have never served as officials, if they die of natural causes at an old age, they are referred to as "pawn" according to the doctor, and if they die prematurely, they are referred to as "unlucky" according to the doctor.

古文：凡视：上于面则敖，下于带则忧，倾则奸。君命，大夫与士肄。
现代文：臣子瞻视天子，目光要上不及其交领，下不低于腰带。臣子瞻视国君，目光应该在面部以下，交领之上。
English: A courtier gazes at the emperor, his eyes should be above the collar, not below the belt. A courtier gazes at the sovereign, his eyes should be below the face, above the collar.

古文：在官言官，在府言府，在库言库，在朝言朝。
现代文：若君命涉及板图文书，就在官习议；若君命涉及宝藏货贿，就在府习议；若君命涉及车马兵甲，就在库习议；若君命涉及政事，就在朝习议。
English: If the king's life involves board-and-chart documents, it will be discussed in the cabinet; if the king's life involves treasures and bribes, it will be discussed in the government; if the king's life involves chariots, horses, armor, it will be discussed in the treasury; if the king's life involves political affairs, it will be discussed in the court.

古文：朝言不及犬马。
现代文：在议政之处不可言及犬马，否则有亵朝堂。
English: Dogs and horses must not be mentioned in the place of political discussion, otherwise there will be a desecration of the Imperial Palace.

古文：辍朝而顾，不有异事，必有异虑。
现代文：已经散朝还回头看，即表明此人不是有别的事情欲讲未讲，就是此人对议定之事另有想法。
English: To look back after the meeting is over indicates either that the person has other things to say or that the person has other ideas about what was agreed upon.

古文：故辍朝而顾，君子谓之固。
现代文：所以，散朝以后还回头看，君子谓之粗鄙无礼。
English: Therefore, after the fall of the Han Dynasty, looking back, a gentleman is said to be rude.

古文：在朝言礼，问礼对以礼。
现代文：在朝廷上要言必称礼，问话要称引礼，答话也要称引礼。
English: In the imperial court, a speech must be greeted with a bow, a question must be greeted with a bow, and a reply must be greeted with a bow.

古文：大飨不问卜，不饶富。
现代文：祭祀五天帝的大飨，不须每天帝一卜时日，但总卜一次而已。
English: In the Great Puja for the Five Heavenly Kings, it is not necessary to pray for the emperor every day, but only once.

古文：凡挚，天子鬯，诸侯圭，卿羔，大夫雁，士雉，庶人之挚匹；童子委挚而退。野外军中无挚，以缨，拾，矢，可也。
现代文：祭品达到规定的数目即可，不可额外增加。凡见面的礼品，天子用鬯，诸侯用圭，卿用羊羔，大夫用雁，士用雉，庶人用鸭子。童子献给老师的见面礼，不用亲手递交，可以放到地上便走。
English: The number of offerings that meet the requirements is sufficient and cannot be increased. For gifts that meet face-to-face, the son of heaven should use a donkey, the lord of the manor should use a donkey, the lord should use a lamb, the doctor should use a goose, the scholar should use a donkey, and the common man should use a duck. The meeting gift that a boy gives to his teacher does not need to be handed over by hand, it can be placed on the ground and left.

古文：妇人之挚，椇榛、脯修、枣栗。纳女于天子，曰备百姓；于国君，曰备酒浆；于大夫，曰备扫洒。
现代文：结婚时，如果女儿是嫁给天子，女方的使者应当谦言 备百姓 ；如果是嫁给国君，应当谦言 备酒浆 。如果是嫁给大夫，应当谦言 备扫洒 。
English: At the time of marriage, if the daughter is to marry the son of heaven, the woman's messenger should humbly prepare the people; if she is to marry the sovereign, she should humbly prepare the wine; if she is to marry the doctor, she should humbly prepare the sprinkles.

