古文：洪武元年三月，徐达下济宁，克坚称疾，遣希学来见，达送之京师。
现代文：洪武元年三月，徐达攻下济宁，克坚有病，遣希学见徐达，达把他送到京师南京。
English: In March of the first year of Hongwu, Xu Da captured Jining. Ke Jian was ill, and sent Xu Da to Beijing and Nanjing.

古文：希学奏父病不能行，太祖敕谕克坚，末言 称疾则不可 。
现代文：希学向太祖奏称其父因病不能行。太祖在给克坚的诏令中最后说 ：称病则不可。 
English: He Xue reported to his great-grandfather that his father was unable to perform due to illness. In the final edict to Ke Jian, the great-grandfather said, "You can't claim illness."

古文：因顾侍臣曰： 先圣后，特优礼之，养以禄而不任以事也。 
现代文：你家为先圣之家，子孙不可不学。你子温厚，使他进学。 
English: For yours is the first house of the saints: therefore your son doth not need to go without learning.

古文：十一月命希学袭封衍圣公。置官属，曰掌书，曰典籍，曰司乐，曰知印，曰奏差，曰书写，各一人。
现代文：洪武元年十一月，命希学袭封衍圣公，为他置官吏，这些官吏是：掌书、典籍、司乐、知印、奏差、书写各一人。
English: In November of the first year of Hongwu's reign, he appointed officials to succeed Fengyan Shenggu, and these officials were: one each of the chief scribe, classics, music director, seal reader, recorder, and scribe.

古文：立孔、颜、孟三氏教授司，教授、学录、学司各一人。
现代文：又立孔、颜、孟三氏教授司，置教授、学录、学司各一人。
English: In addition, the professor's office of Kong, Yan and Meng San was set up, with one professor, one academic record and one academic secretary.

古文：立尼山、洙泗二书院，各设山长一人。
现代文：立尼山、洙泗两书院，各设山长一人。
English: Linyi Mountain and Handan two colleges, each with a head of the mountain.

古文：复孔氏子孙及颜、孟大宗子孙徭役。
现代文：免去孔氏子孙及颜、孟大宗子孙徭役。
English: The descendants of the Kong clan and Yan, the descendants of Meng Da Zong, were exempted from the role.

古文：又命其族人希大为曲阜世袭知县。
现代文：又命其族人希大为曲阜世袭知县。
English: He also ordered his kinsman, Hida, to be the hereditary governor of Qufu.

古文：而进衍圣公秩二品，阶资善大夫。
现代文：进衍圣公官秩二品，官阶为资善大夫。
English: Jin Yan Sheng was a public official with the rank of second grade, and his official rank was that of senior doctor.

古文：九月辞归，命翰林官饯于光禄寺，赉白金文绮。
现代文：希大官阶承事郎。洪武三年春，克坚因病请求归回曲阜，帝遣宦官慰问，赐白金锦缎，行至邳州而卒。
English: In the spring of the third year of Hongwu, Kekian requested to return to Qufu due to illness, the emperor sent eunuchs to offer condolences, gave platinum brocade, and went to Zhangzhou to die.

古文：明年二月，希学言： 先圣庙堂廊庑圮坏，祭器、乐器、法服不备，乞命有司修治。
现代文：六年八月，希学服丧期满入朝，九月辞别皇帝回曲阜。七年二月，希学上书说 ：先圣庙堂廓屋坍塌，祭器、乐器、法服都不完备，请命官府来进行修治。
English: In August of the sixth year, He Xuefu's period of mourning came to an end, and in September, He Xuefu bid farewell to the emperor and returned to Qufu. In February of the seventh year, He Xuefu wrote a letter saying, "The gable of the holy temple collapsed earlier, and the sacrificial vessels, musical instruments, and legal clothing are all incomplete. Please order the government to carry out repairs."

古文：先世田，兵后多芜，而征赋如故，乞减免。 
现代文：先世田，兵后多荒芜，而仍旧征赋，请求减免。 
English: The previous generation of fields were mostly deserted after the war, but they were still requisitioned and requested relief.

古文：希学好读书，善隶法，文词尔雅。
现代文：这些都得到准允。从此以后，希学每年入朝，朝见皇帝时，其位置仅在丞相之后，每次都赐宴赐赏。
English: These were all approved. From then on, He Xuecong entered the imperial court every year, and when he met the emperor, his position was only after the prime minister, and he was given a banquet and reward every time.

古文：每宾客宴集，谈笑挥洒，烂然成章。
现代文：希学好读书，善于写隶书，文词典雅，烂然成章。
English: He is good at studying and reading, good at writing, and has an elegant vocabulary.

古文：承大乱之后，庙貌服物，毕力修举，尽还旧观。
现代文：元末战乱之后，庙宇、服装、器物都进行修复，与已往一样。
English: After the war at the end of the Yuan Dynasty, temples, clothing and utensils were repaired, as in the past.

古文：十四年卒。
现代文：洪武十四年希学逝世。
English: She died in the 14th year of Sadamoto.

古文：命守臣致祭。
现代文：朝廷命守臣致祭。
English: The Imperial Court ordered the retainers to make a sacrifice.

古文：子讷，字言伯，十七年正月袭封。命礼官以教坊乐导送至国学，学官率诸生二千馀人迎于成贤街。
现代文：希学子孙：孔讷、孔公鉴、孔彦缙、孔承庆、孔弘绪、孔弘泰、孔闻韶、孔尚贤、孔荫植、孔彦绳、孔承美、孔弘章、孔闻音、孔贞运等相继袭封衍圣公爵位。
English: The descendants of He Xuexue: Kong Ne, Kong Gongjian, Kong Yanqin, Kong Chengqing, Kong Hongxu, Kong Hongtai, Kong Wenqin, Kong Shangxian, Kong Yingzhi, Kong Yanjie, Kong Chengmei, Kong Hongzhang, Kong Wenyin, Kong Zhengyun and so on successively succeeded to the title of Duke of Fuyang.

