古文：齐负郭之民有孤狐咺者，正议闵王，斮之檀街，百姓不附。
现代文：齐国有个靠着城墙居住的人，名字叫狐晅，他直言批评齐闵王的过失，被齐闵王杀死在檀衢，从此百姓不再服从齐闵王。
English: In the state of Qi, there was a man who lived along the city wall, his name was Foxtail. He openly criticized the faults of King Qi, and was killed by King Qi in Dangdang. From then on, the people no longer obeyed King Qi.

古文：齐孙室子陈举直言，杀之东闾，宗族离心。
现代文：齐国宗室中有个叫陈举的人，也直言不讳，被闵王处死在东城门外，齐国宗族从此和齐闵王离心。
English: A member of the Qin family named Chen Jiu, who was also outspoken, was executed by the King of Qi and died outside the East City Gate. From then on, the Qin family was estranged from the King of Qi.

古文：司马穰苴为政者也，杀之，大臣不亲。
现代文：司马穰苴，在齐国为政，也被齐闵王杀死，大臣们从此不再亲近齐闵王。
English: Sima Qian, who ruled the state of Qi, was also killed by King Qi, and the ministers were no longer close to King Qi.

古文：以故燕举兵，使昌国君将而击之。齐使向子将而应之。
现代文：因为这些，燕国发动军队，派昌国君乐毅做统帅进攻齐国，齐国派触子率领军队迎战。
English: Because of these, Yan launched an army and sent Chang Gu Jun Le Yi as commander to attack Qi. Qi sent Tentacle to lead the army into battle.

古文：齐军破，向子以舆一乘亡。
现代文：齐国大败，触子驾着一辆车逃跑了。
English: After the great defeat of Qi, Tentacle ran away in a car.

古文：达子收余卒，复振，与燕战，求所以偿者，闵王不肯与，军破走。
现代文：齐国大将达子收拾残兵败将，重整旗鼓，与燕国军队作战，达子要求齐闵王对士兵进行犒劳，齐闵王不愿意犒劳，齐国军队再次败北。
English: The general of Qi, Dazi, gathered the remnants of the defeated soldiers, regrouped, and fought with the Yan army. Dazi asked the king of Qi to reward the soldiers. The king of Qi did not want to reward the soldiers, and the army of Qi was defeated again.

古文：王奔莒，淖齿数之曰： 夫千剩、博昌之间，方数百里，雨血沾衣，王知之乎？ 王曰： 不知。 
现代文：齐闵王逃跑到了莒城，齐国相国淖齿面见齐闵王，列举了齐闵王的数条罪状，说： 那次在千乘与博昌之间数百里的地方，天降血雨，污秽了人衣，这件事大王知道吗？ 齐闵王说： 不知道。 
English: King Qizong fled to the city of Handan. King Qizong met King Qizong face-to-face. He enumerated several of King Qizong's crimes and said: That time, hundreds of miles away between Qizong and Bochang, the sky rained blood and dirtied people's clothes. Does the great king know about this? King Qizong said: I don't know.

古文： 嬴、博之间，地坼至泉，王知之乎？ 
现代文： 嬴、博之间，大地裂开涌出泉水，这件事大王知道吗？ 
English: Does the king know that the earth is split open and springs of water gush forth between the two seas?

古文：王曰： 不知。 
现代文：齐闵王说： 不知道。 
English: The king of Qi Gong said: I don't know.

古文： 人有当阙而哭者，求之则不得，去之则闻其声，王知之乎？ 王曰： 不知。 
现代文： 有人在宫门前哭泣，去寻找却找不到人，离开了却又听见哭泣的声音，这件事大王知道吗？ 齐闵王说： 不知道。 
English: Did the great king know that there was someone weeping in front of the palace gate, that he went to look for someone but couldn't find anyone, that he left but heard the sound of crying? King Qi said: I don't know.

古文：淖齿曰： 天雨血沾衣者，天以告也；地坼至泉者，地以告也；人有当阙而哭者，人以告也。
现代文：淖齿说： 天下血雨沾到了衣服上，这是老天在警告；地裂出泉，这是大地在警告；有人在宫门哭泣，这是人事在警告。
English: Fang Fang said: The rain of blood under the sky has stained clothes, which is God's warning; the earth has split open a spring, which is the earth's warning; someone is crying at the palace gate, which is the people's warning.

古文：天地人皆以告矣，而王不知戒焉，何得无诛乎？ 
现代文：天、地、人都给您警告，但您却不知道警惕，又怎能不遭受上天的诛杀呢？ 
English: Heaven, earth, and man all give you warning, but you do not know how to be alert, and how can you not be killed by heaven?

古文：于是杀闵王于鼓里。
现代文：于是淖齿就在鼓里这个地方杀死了齐闵王。
English: So he killed Qizhi Wang right here in Guli.

