古文：炀帝上炀皇帝，讳广，一名英，小字阿摐，高祖第二子也。
现代文：炀皇帝名广，一名英，小名阿摐，是隋高祖的第二个儿子。
English: Emperor Gao was the second son of Emperor Gaozu of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：母曰文献独孤皇后。
现代文：母亲是文献独狐皇后。
English: His mother was the only queen mentioned in documents.

古文：上美姿仪，少敏慧，高祖及后于诸子中特所钟爱。
现代文：皇上的容貌仪表很美，从小机敏聪慧，在诸王子中他特别得到高祖及皇后的宠爱。
English: The Emperor's appearance and manners were very beautiful, and he was clever and intelligent from a young age. Among the princes, he was especially loved by Emperor Gaozu and the Empress.

古文：在周，以高祖勋，封雁门郡公。
现代文：在北周，凭借高祖的功勋，他被封为雁门郡公。
English: In the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Ganmen County Grand Duke on the basis of Gao Zu's merits.

古文：开皇元年，立为晋王，拜柱国、并州总管，时年十三。
现代文：开皇元年，他被立为晋王，授予柱国、并州总管职务，时年十三岁。
English: In the first year of the emperor's reign, he was appointed as the king of Jin, the head of the pillar country and the head of the state, at the age of thirteen.

古文：寻授武卫大将军，进位上柱国、河北道行台尚书令，大将军如故。
现代文：不久他被授予武卫大将军，又晋升为上柱国、河北道行台尚书令，大将军头衔依旧。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of General Wuwei and promoted to Shangzhu Guo and Shangshu Ling of Xingtai, Hebei Province. He still holds the title of General.

古文：高祖令项城公韶、安道公李彻辅导之。
现代文：高祖令项城公王韶、安道公李彻二人辅导他。
English: Gao Zu ordered Xiangcheng Gong Wang Yao and Ando Gong Li Che to tutor him.

古文：上好学，善属文，沉深严重，朝野属望。
现代文：炀帝爱学习，善于写文章，性格深沉隐晦，严肃庄重，引起朝野注目。
English: Emperor Zou loved to study and was good at writing articles. His personality was deep and obscure, serious and solemn, which attracted the attention of the court.

古文：高祖密令善相者来和遍视诸子，和曰： 晋王眉上双骨隆起，贵不可言。 
现代文：高祖秘密安排擅长相术的来和普遍地审视各个王子，来和说： 晋王眉上双骨隆起，贵不可言。 
English: Gaozhu secretly arranged for people who were good at the art of physiognomy to come and inspect the princes in general. They came and said: Jin Wang's brow has a bony bump on it, he is very precious.

古文：既而高祖幸上所居第，见乐器弦多断绝，又有尘埃，若不用者，以为不好声妓，善之。
现代文：不久，高祖到炀帝的府宅，看到乐器的丝弦大多断绝，又沾满尘埃，好像是好久不用的，就以为炀帝不喜好歌舞声色，觉得他很好。
English: Not long after, Gao Zu went to Emperor Gong's mansion and saw that most of the strings of the musical instruments were broken and covered with dust, as if they had not been used for a long time. He thought that Emperor Gong did not like singing and dancing, and thought that he was very good.

古文：上尤自矫饰，当时称为仁孝。
现代文：炀帝特别爱故意做作，掩盖真象，当时被称为仁爱孝顺。
English: Jin Wang paid special attention to pretending and disguising himself. At that time, people praised him as a kind and filial person.

古文：尝观猎遇雨，左右进油衣，上曰： 士卒皆沾湿，我独衣此乎！ 
现代文：有一次他去观看狩猎活动，碰上下雨，左右送上雨衣，炀帝说： 士兵们都浸湿了衣衫，只我一个人穿雨衣吗？ 
English: He once encountered heavy rain while watching a hunt. The people around him gave him a rainproof oil coat. Jin Wang said, "The soldiers are all wet. Can I wear this coat alone?"

古文：乃令持去。
现代文：于是命令把雨衣拿走。
English: and let them take it away.

古文：六年，转淮南道行台尚书令。
现代文：开皇六年，炀帝改任淮南道行台尚书令。
English: Six years after the founding of the emperor, he was transferred to Huainan Dao Xingtao Shang Shuling.

古文：其年，征拜雍州牧、内史令。
现代文：这一年，又征召任命他为雍州牧、内史令。
English: In the same year, he was called up again, and was appointed as Yongzhou herdsman and secretary of internal history.

古文：八年冬，大举伐陈，以上为行军元帅。
现代文：开皇八年冬，高祖大举进军攻打陈国，委任炀帝做行军元帅。
English: In the winter of the eighth year, the Sui army launched a large-scale attack on Chen Guo and appointed Yang Guang as the marching marshal.

古文：及陈平，执陈湘州刺史施文庆、散骑常侍沈客卿、市令阳慧朗、刑法监徐析、尚书都令史暨慧，以其邪佞，有害于民，斩之右阙下，以谢三吴。
现代文：平定陈国后，拘捕了陈国湘州刺史施文庆、散骑常侍沈客卿、市令阳慧朗、刑法监徐析、尚书都令史暨慧。因为他们奸邪谄佞、祸害人民，在陈皇宫门前右边望楼下面将他们斩决，借此向三吴人民谢罪。
English: After subduing Chen Guo, they arrested Chen Guo's Xiangzhou assassin Shi Wenqing, errant equerry Shen Keqing, city magistrate Yang Huilang, criminal law supervisor Xu Jing, and Shang Shudu commander Shi Jihui. Because they were traitors and scourges to the people, they were executed under the watchtower on the right side of the front of the Chen Royal Palace, thereby thanking the people of Sanwu for their crimes.

古文：于是封府库，资财无所取，天下称贤。
现代文：于是封官库，资财无所取，天下称贤。
English: As a result, the official treasury was sealed, no funds were taken, and the whole world praised him.

古文：进位太尉，赐辂车、乘马，衮冕之服，玄珪、白璧各一。
现代文：晋升为太尉，高祖赐给他大车，四匹马，绣龙的礼服和礼帽，黑玉、白玉各一块。
English: When he was promoted to captain, Gao Zu gave him a carriage, four horses, a dragon-embroidered dress and hat, and a piece of black jade and a piece of white jade.

古文：复拜并州总管。
现代文：又任命他为并州总管。
English: He was also appointed as the state's chief administrator.

古文：俄而江南高智慧等相聚作乱，徙上为扬州总管，镇江都，每岁一朝。
现代文：不久江南高智慧等人聚众叛乱，高祖调炀帝任扬州总管，坐镇江都，每年进京朝见天子一次。
English: Soon, high-level intellectuals from the south of the Yangtze River gathered together to make trouble, and Emperor Wen appointed him as the governor of Yangzhou and the governor of the Yangtze River. He came to Beijing once a year to meet with the emperor.

古文：高祖之祠太山也，领武候大将军。
现代文：高祖祭祀泰山的时候，炀帝兼任武侯大将军。
English: When Gao Zu was worshiping Mount Tai, he was the grand marshal of Wuhou.

古文：明年归籓。
现代文：次年回到江都。
English: The following year he returned to Edo.

古文：后数载，突厥寇边，复为行军元帅，出灵武，无虏而还。
现代文：其后数年，突厥侵犯边境，炀帝再次出任行军元帅，率兵出灵武，没有遇到敌兵而回师。
English: A few years later, the Turks invaded the border, and Emperor Zhou once again served as a marching marshal, led the troops out of Lingwu, and returned to the division without encountering enemy soldiers.

古文：及太子勇废，立上为皇太子。
现代文：等到太子杨勇被废黜后，高祖立炀帝为皇太子。
English: After Prince Yang Yong was deposed, Emperor Gaozong made Emperor Gaozong the crown prince.

古文：是月，当受册。
现代文：这月，应当接受封立太子的策命。
English: This month, it should accept the policy orders of the crown prince.

古文：高祖曰： 吾以大兴公成帝业。 
现代文：高祖说： 我凭借大兴公的爵位成就帝业。 
English: Gao Zu said, "I achieved imperial success through Daxing Gong.

古文：令上出舍大兴县。
现代文：于是令炀帝出宫在大兴县居住。
English: As a result, Emperor Qian was ordered to leave the palace and live in Daxing County.

古文：其夜，烈风大雪，地震山崩，民舍多坏，压死者百余口。
现代文：那天晚上，狂风大雪，地动山塌，居民房屋大多损坏，压死一百多人。
English: That night, strong winds, heavy snow, an earthquake and a landslide destroyed many houses, crushing more than a hundred people to death.

古文：仁寿初，奉诏巡抚东南。
现代文：仁寿初年，奉高祖命令巡抚东南地区。
English: In the first year of his life, he was appointed as the magistrate of the southeastern region.

古文：是后高祖每避暑仁寿宫，恆令上监国。
现代文：此后高祖每逢在仁寿宫避暑时，就令炀帝留守，代行处理国政。
English: After that, whenever Gao Zu spent the summer at Renshou Palace, he would ask Emperor Xuan to stay behind and handle state affairs on his behalf.

古文：四年七月，高祖崩，上即皇帝位于仁寿宫。
现代文：仁寿四年七月，高祖逝世，炀帝于仁寿宫即皇帝位。
English: In July of the fourth year, Gaozu died, and Yang Guang ascended to the throne at Renshou Palace.

古文：今所营构，务从节俭，无令雕墙峻宇复起于当今，欲使卑宫菲食将贻于后世。
现代文：八月，护送高祖的灵柩回京城。并州总管汉王杨琼起兵谋反，诏令尚书左仆射杨素率兵讨伐平定了叛乱。九月十二日，任用备身将军崔彭为左领军大将军。十一月初三，驾临洛阳。
English: In August, he escorted Gao Zu's coffin back to Beijing. He also ordered Yang Qiong, the governor of Hanzhong Province, to raise an army to plot a rebellion, and ordered Shangshu's second-in-command, Yan Yangsu, to lead an army to fight and quell the rebellion. On September 12, he appointed the reserve general, Cui Peng, as the general leading the left army. He arrived in Luoyang on early November 3.

古文：有司明为条格，称朕意焉。十二月乙丑，以右武卫将军来护兒为右骁卫大将军。
现代文：初四，征调成年男子数十万人挖掘壕沟，从龙门向东连接长平、汲郡，抵达临清关，渡过黄河后，再延伸到浚仪、襄城，最后到达上洛，用以设置关卡加强防卫。二十一日，下诏令营建东都。十二月初三，任命右武卫将军来护儿为右骁卫大将军。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, hundreds of thousands of adult men were conscripted to dig trenches, connecting Changping and Gu County from Longmen to the east, reaching Linqing Pass. After crossing the Yellow River, it extended to Dongyi and Xiangcheng, and finally reached Shangluo, to set up checkpoints to strengthen defense. On the 21st day, the edict was issued to build Dongdu. On the third day of the first month of December, General Yu Wuwei was appointed to protect the children as General Yu Xiwei.

古文：戊辰，以柱国李景为右武卫大将军。以右卫率周罗为右武候大将军。
现代文：初六，任命柱国李景为右武卫大将军，任命右卫率周罗睢为右武侯大将军。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Li Jing, the pillar state, was appointed as the right guard general, and Zhou Luoqi, the right guard leader, was appointed as the right guard general.

古文：大业元年春正月壬辰朔，大赦，改元。立妃萧氏为皇后。改豫州为溱州，洛州为豫州。废诸州总管府。
现代文：大业元年正月初一，实行大赦，更改年号，立妃子萧氏为皇后，改豫州为溱州，洛州为豫州，废除各州的总管府。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Daye, an amnesty was implemented, the year name was changed, the concubine Xiao was appointed as the empress, the state of Henan was changed to Zhangzhou, the state of Luo was changed to Henan, and the headquarters of each state were abolished.

古文：丙申，立晋王昭为皇太子。
现代文：初五，立晋王杨昭为皇太子。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, King Jin Zhao was crowned crown prince.

古文：丁酉，以上柱国宇文述为左卫大将军，上柱国郭衍为左武卫大将军，延寿公于仲文为右卫大将军。
现代文：初六，任命上柱国宇文述为左卫大将军，上柱国郭衍为左武卫大将军，延寿公于仲文为右卫大将军。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Shangzhu Guo Wenshu was appointed as General of the Left Division, Shangzhu Guo Yan as General of the Left Division, and Yanzhukong Yu Zhongwen as General of the Right Division.

古文：己亥，以豫章王暕为豫州牧。
现代文：初八，任命豫章王杨日柬为豫州牧。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he appointed Yu Zhangwang as the Herdsman of Yuzhou.

古文：戊申，发八使巡省风俗。
现代文：十七日，派遣八位使臣巡回视察各地风俗。
English: On the 17th, eight emissaries were sent to inspect local customs.

古文：下诏曰：昔者哲王之治天下也，其在爱民乎。
现代文：下诏书说：从前贤明的君王治理国家，关键是在于爱护百姓吧？
English: The next edict said: In the past, wise kings governed the country, the key is to love the people, right?

古文：既富而教，家给人足，故能风淳俗厚，远至迩安。
现代文：既使人民富裕又进而施行礼教，家家丰裕、人人富足，所以能使风尚淳朴，习俗敦厚，远方的人前来归顺，近处的人安定。
English: It not only made the people rich, but also promoted the practice of etiquette. Families were prosperous and everyone was well-off, so it could make the style simple, customs strong, people from far away came to submit, and people in the vicinity were stable.

古文：治定功成，率由斯道。
现代文：凡政治稳定、事业成功的，大都经由这条道路。
English: Wherever there is political stability and business success, it is mostly through this road.

古文：朕嗣膺宝历，抚育黎献，夙夜战兢，若临川谷。
现代文：朕恭敬地承继了帝王之位，安抚培育黎民百姓，日夜恐惧戎慎，好像面临大河深谷。
English: I respectfully succeeded to the throne of the emperor, pacified and nurtured the people of Li, and was afraid and cautious day and night, as if facing a deep valley.

古文：虽则聿遵先绪，弗敢失坠，永言政术，多有缺然。
现代文：虽然努力遵奉前辈的功业，不敢出现差错，从长远来看，处理政事的策略、手段还有许多缺欠。
English: Although he followed the way of the former king, he did not dare to lose his way, and his long speech and political skills were mostly lacking.

古文：况以四海之远，兆民之众，未获亲临，问其疾苦。
现代文：况且国家幅员辽远，人口众多，朕未得亲临各地，询问民间的疾苦。
English: Moreover, with the distance of the four seas, trillions of people are unable to come in person, and the visit is suffering.

古文：每虑幽仄莫举，冤屈不申，一物失所，乃伤和气，万方有罪，责在朕躬，所以寤寐增叹，而夕惕载怀者也。
现代文：常常忧虑那些隐居不仕的人尚未被举荐，受冤的人还不曾申冤，一物失所，就会损害谐和的气氛，四方有作恶犯法的事，责任在朕身上，所以日夜增多叹息，戎慎恐惧充满胸怀。
English: I often worry that those who live in seclusion have not yet been recommended, and those who have been wronged have not been vindicated. If one thing is lost, it will damage the harmonious atmosphere. All sides have done evil and violated the law, and the responsibility is on me. Therefore, day and night, sighs increase, and wary fear fills the mind.

古文：今既布政惟始，宜存宽大。
现代文：现在刚刚开始施行政教，应实行宽大政策。
English: Now that we are at the beginning of the political process, we should be lenient.

古文：可分遣使人，巡省方俗，宣扬风化，荐拔淹滞，申达幽枉。
现代文：可以分头派遣使臣，巡视各地风俗民情，宣扬风俗教化，举荐选拔那些沉抑下层、不得升进的人才，为无辜被囚的人申冤。
English: You can assign emissaries, inspect parties and customs, promote manners, recommend stagnant people, and claim that you have been wronged.

古文：孝悌力田，给以优复。
现代文：孝顺父母、敬爱兄长、努力耕田的人，要给予优抚。
English: Those who are filial and diligent will be given preferential treatment and exempted from military service.

古文：鳏寡孤独不能自存者，量加赈济。
现代文：对难以生存的鳏夫、寡妇、孤老、孤儿，要适当加以帮助救济。
English: For widowers, widows, the elderly and orphans who are struggling to survive, appropriate help and relief should be provided.

古文：义夫节妇，旌表门闾。
现代文：对信守节义的男人，气节高尚的妇女，要在其家族乡里中予以表彰。
English: On the occasion of the Day of the Righteous Husband, women should keep their watches and doors locked.

古文：高年之老，加其版授，并依别条，赐以粟帛。
现代文：对高年的老人，要授给官衔，并且依据另外的条款，赐给他们粮食和布帛。
English: Senior citizens are to be given official titles and, according to another article, they are to be given food and cloth.

古文：笃疾之徒，给侍丁者，虽有侍养之名，曾无赒赡之实，明加检校，使得存养。
现代文：患重病的人，供给侍候他的人，虽有侍养之名，而无救济供养之实，要查核清楚，使他们得到真正的抚恤侍养。
English: For those who are seriously ill and provide for those who attend them, although there is the name of attendance, but there is no relief and support, it is necessary to check clearly so that they can get real support and maintenance.

古文：若有名行显著，操履修洁，及学业才能，一艺可取，咸宜访采，将身入朝。
现代文：如果有声名显著，操行美好纯洁，以及在学业才能上有一技可取的，都应访询选择，引领他们入朝任职。
English: If they have a distinguished reputation, good and pure conduct, and good academic ability, they should be interviewed and selected to lead them to work in the DPRK.

古文：所在州县，以礼发遣。
现代文：所在州县的官员，要按一定的礼仪送遣他们。
English: If you live in a state or county, it will be sent as a gift.

古文：其有蠢政害人，不便于时者，使还之日，具录奏闻。
现代文：对那些败坏政事、危害人民、不利于时世的，使臣还朝的时候，应全部记录在案，奏报朕知。
English: For those envoys who corrupted politics, harmed the people, and were unfavorable to the times, when they were still in power, they should all be recorded and reported to me.

古文：己酉，以吴州总管宇文弼为刑部尚书。
现代文：一月十八日，任命吴州总管宇文弼为刑部尚书。
English: On the 18th, Wuzhou Governor U Wenjun was appointed as the head of the Criminal Law Department.

古文：二月己卯，以尚书左仆射杨素为尚书令。
现代文：二月十八日，任命尚书左仆射杨素为尚书令。
English: On February 18th, Yang Su, Shang Shu's left-hand man, was appointed as Shang Shu's regent.

古文：三月丁未，诏尚书令杨素、纳言杨达、将作大匠宇文恺营建东京，徙豫州郭下居人以实之。
现代文：三月十七日，命令尚书令杨素、纳言杨达、将作大匠宇文恺营建东京，迁徙豫州城下的居民来充实那里。
English: On March 17th, he ordered Shang Shuling Yang Su and Nagan Yang Da to build Tokyo as a grand master Uwenshu, and to migrate the residents under the castle of Yuzhou to enrich it.

古文：戊申，诏曰： 听采舆颂，谋及庶民，故能审政刑之得失。
现代文：十八日，下诏令说： 倾听收集众人的议论，与平民百姓商量，所以能审辨政治、刑罚的得失。
English: On the 18th, the imperial edict said: Listen to and collect the opinions of the people, and consult with the common people, so as to be able to judge the gains and losses of politics and punishment.

古文：是知昧旦思治，欲使幽枉必达，彝伦有章。
现代文：由此可知早晚思考治理天下大事，是想使无辜被囚的冤情得以昭雪，伦理道德有章可循，而各地官员称职。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to think about it sooner or later, so that the wrongdoers will be punished, and the human relations will be orderly.

古文：而牧宰任称朝委，苟为徼幸，以求考课，虚立殿最，不存治实，纲纪于是弗理，冤屈所以莫申。
现代文：如为邀功请赏而请求考查，搞个假优秀，并无真实的政绩，纲纪就乱了，冤屈就无法伸了。
English: If you ask for examination in order to solicit merit and reward, engage in a fake excellent, and there is no real political achievement, the discipline will be chaotic, and the grievances will not be able to reach.

古文：关河重阻，无由自达。朕故建立东京，躬亲存问。
现代文：关河阻隔，真实情况无法传到京师，所以朕建立东京，以便亲自处理。
English: With the Guanhe River as a barrier, the true situation could not be transmitted to the capital, so I established Tokyo in order to deal with it myself.

古文：今将巡历淮海，观省风俗，眷求谠言，徒繁词翰，而乡校之内，阙尔无闻。
现代文：现在我将要巡视淮海地区，观察了解那里的风俗，着重访求正直的言论。但徒然有许多词章，在乡校之内，根本听不到这种言论。
English: Now I'm going to tour the Huaihai area, observe and understand the customs there, and revisit the honest speech. But there are a lot of phrases in vain. In the township school, you can't hear this kind of speech at all.

古文：恇然夕惕，用忘兴寝。
现代文：我感到恐惧，因而忽视了饮食起居。
English: I was terrified, so I neglected my diet and exercise.

古文：其民下有知州县官人政治苛刻，侵害百姓，背公徇私，不便于民者，宜听诣朝堂封奏，庶乎四聪以达，天下无冤。 
现代文：如果老百姓知道州县官员行政措施苛刻，侵扰危害百姓，违背公义徇私枉法，不利于百姓的，应当听任他们密封呈文奏进，广开四方视听，使上下沟通，天下就没有冤情了。 
English: If the common people know that the administrative measures of state and county officials are harsh, intrude on and endanger the people, violate justice and abuse the law for personal gain, and are not conducive to the people, they should allow them to submit sealed documents, widely open the four-way audio-visual, so that the upper and lower levels can communicate, and there will be no grievances in the world.

古文：又于皁涧营显仁宫，采海内奇禽异兽草木之类，以实园苑。
现代文：又在卑涧营建显仁宫，采集全国各地珍奇的禽兽和花草树木，来充实皇家园林。
English: He also built the Xianren Palace in Baizhimen, collecting exotic birds and animals, plants and trees from the sea to enrich the garden.

古文：徙天下富商大贾数万家于东京。
现代文：把各地几万富商迁徙到东京。
English: Tens of thousands of the world's richest business tycoons also migrated to Tokyo.

古文：辛亥，发河南诸郡男女百余万，开通济渠，自西苑引谷、洛水达于河，自板渚引河通于淮。
现代文：二十一日，征调黄河以南各郡县的男女民工一百余万人，开挖通济渠，从西苑引谷水、洛水通向黄河，从板渚引黄河水通向淮河。
English: On the 21st, more than one million men and women migrant workers from counties and counties south of the Yellow River were recruited and dispatched to dig channels to channel water from the West Garden to the Yellow River, from the Luo Water to the Yellow River, and from the Pan River to the Huai River.

古文：庚申，遣黄门侍郎王弘、上仪同于士澄往江南采木，造龙舟、凤甗、黄龙、赤舰、楼船等数万艘。
现代文：三十日，派黄门侍朗王弘、上仪同于士澄往江南采集树木，建造龙舟、凤舟冒、黄龙、赤舰、楼船等大船数万艘。
English: On the 30th, the Yellow Gate Chamberlains Wang Hong and Shang Yi together with Shizheng sent to the south of the Yangtze River to collect trees and build tens of thousands of large ships such as dragon boats, phoenix boats, yellow dragons, red ships and houseboats.

古文：夏四月癸亥，大将军刘方击林邑，破之。
现代文：四月初三，大将军刘方攻打林邑，攻占了它。
English: On the third day of the fourth month, General Liu Fang attacked Linyi and captured it.

古文：五月庚戌，民部尚书义丰侯韦冲卒。
现代文：五月二十一日，民部尚书义丰侯韦冲去世。
English: On May 21st, the Minister of the People's Department, Yi Fenghou Wei Chong, passed away.

古文：六月甲子，荧惑入太微。
现代文：六月初五，荧惑星进入太微星的位置。
English: On the fifth day of the sixth month, the fluorescent planet entered the position of the faint star.

古文：秋七月丁酉，制战亡之家给复十年。
现代文：七月初九，下令免除阵亡将士的家庭十年徭役。
English: On the ninth day of the seventh month, it was ordered to exempt the families of fallen soldiers from ten years of military service.

古文：丙午，滕王纶、卫王集并夺爵徙边。
现代文：十八日，滕王杨纶、卫王杨集被一起剥夺爵位，流放到边境。
English: On the 18th, both Teng Wangyao and Wei Wangji were stripped of their titles and exiled to the border.

古文：闰七月甲子，以尚书令杨素为太子太师，安德王雄为太子太傅，河间王弘为太子太保。
现代文：闰七月初六，任命尚书令杨素为太子太师，安德王杨雄为太子太傅，河间王杨弘为太子太保。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month, Shang Shuling appointed Yang Su as the prince's daishi, Ando Wangxiong as the prince's taifu, and Kawama Wanghong as the prince's taibo.

古文：丙子，诏曰：君民建国，教学为先，移风易俗，必自兹始。
现代文：十八日，下诏书说：统治人民，建设国家，教育和学习应当先抓，要改变风尚习俗，也必须从这里开始。
English: On the 18th, the next imperial edict said: to rule the people and build the country, education and learning should be taken first, and to change customs and habits, we must also start from here.

古文：而言绝义乖，多历年代，进德修业，其道浸微。
现代文：然而正确的言论断绝，适宜的做法被背离，已经历了许多年代。增进道德，修治功业，其道已日渐衰微。
English: But if the path of speech is cut off, the path of righteousness is tortuous and takes many years; if the path of virtue is advanced, the path of virtue is weak.

古文：汉采坑焚之余，不绝如线，晋承板荡之运，扫地将尽。
现代文：汉代收录了焚书坑儒后的剩残典籍和人才，文化传承尚不绝如缕。晋代承受着政局变乱的命运，文教事业被扫除殆尽。
English: The Han Dynasty collected the remaining classics and talents after the book-burning of Confucianism, and the cultural inheritance is still unbroken. The Jin Dynasty suffered the fate of political turmoil, and the cultural and educational cause was swept away.

古文：自时厥后，军国多虞，虽复黉宇时建，示同爱礼，函丈或陈，殆为虚器。
现代文：自这以后，军队国家颇多忧患，虽然也时常修建学舍，不过表示人们共同的爱重之意而已。
English: Since then, the military state has been plagued by problems. Although school buildings are often built, they only express the common love of the people.

古文：遂使纡青拖紫，非以学优，制锦操刀，类多墙面。
现代文：老师的手杖有的虽还摆在学舍里，但几乎都成为虚设的器物。于是造成了佩带青紫印绶的贵官，并非学习优秀；当县令的人，大多是不学无术之徒。
English: Although some teachers' canes are still displayed in the schoolhouse, almost all of them have become empty vessels. This has resulted in dignitaries wearing blue and purple seals, which is not a sign of academic excellence; most people who become county magistrates are uneducated and unskilled.

古文：上陵下替，纲维靡立，雅缺道消，实由于此。
现代文：朝廷上下衰落，纲纪法度未能确立，文明缺废正道消失，实由于教育不力所致。
English: The decline and fall of the imperial court, the failure to establish a legal system of discipline, and the disappearance of a civilized and righteous path were actually caused by poor education.

古文：朕纂承洪绪，思弘大训，将欲尊师重道，用阐厥繇，讲信修睦，敦奖名教。
现代文：朕继承了盛大事业，想弘扬先王的教令，准备尊师重道，以开创治国之路，讲究信用，谋求亲善，督促奖励礼教兴立。
English: I have inherited a great cause. I want to carry forward the teachings of the late king, prepare to respect teachers, create a path for governing the country, pay attention to trust, seek goodwill, and encourage and reward the rise of etiquette.

古文：方今宇宙平一，文轨攸同，十步之内，必有芳草，四海之中，岂无奇秀！
现代文：当今天下太平统一，文字、车轨相同，十步之内，必有芳草，四海之中，岂无奇才！
English: When today's Taiping is unified, the characters and tracks are the same, within ten steps, there must be fragrant grass, among the four seas, there is no miracle!

古文：诸在家及见入学者，若有笃志好古，耽悦典坟，学行优敏，堪膺时务，所在采访，具以名闻，即当随其器能，擢以不次。
现代文：众多在家及现在校学习的人，如有专心致志好尚古道，沉浸在古代文籍中，学业品行优秀勤勉，能够承受时务的，所在地的官吏就要加以上报，并根据他们各自的才能，加以破格提拔任用。
English: Many people who study at home and now at school, if they are dedicated to the ancient path, immersed in ancient literature, have excellent academic performance and diligence, and can withstand the current affairs, the local officials will be required to add the above report, and according to their respective talents, they will be exceptionally promoted and appointed.

古文：若研精经术，未愿进仕者，可依其艺业深浅，门廕高卑，虽未升朝，并量准给禄。
现代文：如有精深地研究经学，不愿入朝作官的，可以根据他才艺学业的深浅，凭借祖先功勋应得官职的高低，即使他们并未入朝，也都就地酌情给予薪俸。
English: For those who have studied the classics in depth and do not want to join the imperial court as an official, they can be given a salary according to the depth of their talents and studies and the level of official positions they deserve by virtue of their ancestors' merits. Even if they do not join the imperial court, they will be given a salary as appropriate.

古文：庶夫恂恂善诱，不日成器，济济盈朝，何远之有！
现代文：希望经过有步骤的好好引导，不久就能使这些人成为有用之材，众多的人才充盈朝廷，这天还会是遥远的吗！
English: I hope that through systematic and good guidance, we will soon be able to make these people useful, and the numerous talents will fill the imperial court. Will this day be far away?

古文：其国子等学，亦宜申明旧制，教习生徒，具为课试之法，以尽砥砺之道。
现代文：国子监等学校，也应郑重申明原先的制度，教授学生，完备考查的方法，以充分达到磨练人才之目的。
English: Kuniko and other schools should also affirm the old system, teach students, formulate the law of examination, and do their best to motivate.

古文：八月壬寅，上御龙舟，幸江都。
现代文：八月十五日，炀帝乘龙舟，驾临江都。
English: On August 15th, Emperor Xizong rode a dragon boat to Jiangdu.

古文：以左武卫大将军郭衍为前军，右武卫大将军李景为后军。
现代文：任命左武卫大将军郭衍为前军统领，右武卫大将军李景为后军统领。
English: He appointed Zuo Wuwei General Guo Yan as the commander of the former army and Zuo Wuwei General Li Jing as the commander of the latter army.

古文：文武官五品已上给楼船，九品已上给黄蔑。
现代文：随行的文武官员，五品以上的供给楼船，九品以上的供给黄篾大船。
English: Accompanying cultural and military officials, more than five supplies of buildings and ships, more than nine supplies of large ships.

古文：舳舻相接，二百余里。
现代文：船只首尾相接，迤逦二百余里。
English: Vessels of all kinds come and go, stretching for more than two hundred miles.

古文：冬十月己丑，赦江淮已南。
现代文：十月初二，赦免江淮以南地区罪犯。
English: On the second day of October, criminals in areas south of the Yangtze River and Huai River were pardoned.

古文：扬州给复五年，旧总管内给复三年。
现代文：扬州免除徭役五年，旧扬州总管的辖区内免除徭役三年。
English: Yangzhou is exempted from corvee service for five years, and the area under the jurisdiction of the former Yangzhou head office is exempted from corvee service for three years.

古文：十一月己未，以大将军崔仲方为礼部尚书。
现代文：十一月初三，任命大将军崔仲方为礼部尚书。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, General Cui Zhongfang was appointed as the ceremonial secretary.

古文：二年春正月辛酉，东京成，赐监督者各有差。
现代文：大业二年春正月初六，东京建成，按等级赏赐监督营建的官员。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the second year of the Taiei era, Tokyo was completed, and the officials who supervised the construction were rewarded according to their ranks.

古文：以大理卿梁毗为刑部尚书。
现代文：任命大理卿梁毗为刑部尚书。
English: He appointed Liang Pi, the Minister of Justice, as the head of the Criminal Law Department.

古文：丁卯，遣十使并省州县。
现代文：十七日，派遣十位使臣一起去检查州县工作。
English: On the 17th, ten envoys were sent to inspect the work of counties and prefectures.

古文：二月丙戌，诏尚书令杨素、吏部尚书牛弘、大将军宇文恺、内史侍郎虞世基、礼部侍郎许善心制定舆服。
现代文：二月初一，下诏令尚书令杨素、吏部尚书牛弘、大将军守文恺、内史侍郎虞世基、礼部侍郎许善心制定各级官员乘车衣冠章服的规范。
English: On the first day of February, it was decreed that Yang Su, Niu Hong, Uwen Yao, Yu Shiji, and Xu Zenshin of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies should work out the dress code.

古文：始备辇路及五时副车。
现代文：这才使天子的车驾以及春、夏、季夏、秋、冬五个时节皇帝侍从的车辆完备。
English: This made the chariot of the son of heaven and the chariots of the attendants of the emperor in the five seasons of spring, summer, midsummer, autumn and winter complete.

古文：上常服，皮弁十有二琪，文官弁服，佩玉，五品已上给犊车、通幰，三公亲王加油络，武官平巾帻，裤褶，三品已上给瓟槊。
现代文：皇上的常服，皮帽上饰有十二块美玉；文官的礼帽礼服，以佩玉为饰；五品以上官员供给牛车，车前设帷幔；三公亲王的车上加悬垂的丝质绳网；武官戴头巾，穿军服；三品以上官员配给作仪饰的击杖。
English: The emperor's regular clothes, the leather cap is decorated with twelve pieces of gems; the civil servant's ceremonial hat dress, decorated with jade beads; officials with more than five goods are provided with ox carts, and the front of the car is set with curtains; the three princes add a hanging silk rope net to the car; military officers wear headscarves and wear military uniforms; officials with more than three goods are assigned a cane as a ceremonial decoration.

古文：下至胥吏，服色皆有差。
现代文：往下直至小官吏，服饰都有等次。
English: All the way down to minor officials, there is a hierarchy of clothing.

古文：非庶人不得戎服。
现代文：不是官府的吏役不许穿军服。
English: Non-civilians are not allowed to wear military uniforms.

古文：戊戌，置都尉官。
现代文：十三日，设置都尉官。
English: On the 13th, he was appointed captain.

古文：三月庚午，车驾发江都。
现代文：三月十六日，皇帝从江都出发。
English: On March 16th, the driver set off from Jiangdu.

古文：先是，太府少卿何稠、太府丞云定兴盛修仪仗，于是课州县送羽毛。
现代文：在这之前，太府少卿何稠、太府丞云定兴大力修饰了仪仗，为此督促各州县交送羽毛。
English: Earlier, Taifu Shosho Ho Choso and Taifu Cho Yun Dingxing overhauled ceremonial war supplies, and ordered all prefectures and counties to send feathers.

古文：百姓求捕之，网罗被水陆，禽兽有堪氅毦之用者，殆无遗类。至是而成。
现代文：百姓捕鸟，水上、陆地布满捕鸟的网，凡是皮毛能做装饰之用的禽兽，几乎没有幸存的。这一活动直到这时才完成。
English: The people hunted birds, the water and land were full of nets for catching birds, and there were almost no animals whose fur could be used for decoration. This activity was not completed until this time.

古文：夏四月庚戌，上自伊阙陈法驾，备千乘万骑，入于东京。
现代文：夏四月二十六日，皇上从伊阙开始陈列法驾，准备了千车万马，浩浩荡荡开进东京。
English: On the 26th day of the 4th month of the summer, the emperor began to display the dharma chariot from Ili, prepared thousands of chariots and horses, and drove into Tokyo.

古文：辛亥，上御端门，大赦，免天下今年租税。
现代文：二十七日，皇上到端门，宣布大赦，免收天下今年租税。
English: On the 27th, the emperor came to the front gate and announced a general amnesty, exempting the world from tax this year.

古文：癸丑，以冀州刺史杨文思为民部尚书。
现代文：二十九日，任命冀州刺史杨文思为民部尚书。
English: On the 28th, Yang Wensi, a prominent scholar from Jizhou, was appointed as the Minister of People's Affairs.

古文：五月甲寅，金紫光禄大夫、兵部尚书李通坐事免。
现代文：五月初一，全紫光禄大夫、兵部尚书李通因事获罪被免职。
English: On the first day of May, Jin Zi Guanglu, a doctor, and Li Tong, a military official, were removed from their posts.

古文：乙卯，诏曰： 旌表先哲，式存飨祀，所以优礼贤能，显彰遗爱。
现代文：初二，下诏说： 表彰古代贤人，保存对他们的祭祀，是要借此优侍礼遇贤能的人，使他们的后代得到表彰。
English: On the second day of the first month, the next imperial edict said: "To honor the ancient sages and preserve their sacrifices is to use this opportunity to treat the sages and their descendants with honor.

古文：朕永鉴前修，尚想名德，何尝不兴叹九原，属怀千载。
现代文：朕永远借鉴前贤，崇尚怀念德高望重的人，何尝不面对九州大地感叹，归心于千百年的圣哲。
English: I will always follow the example of the sages and think of their great virtues. How can I not sigh in Jiuhara and feel nostalgic for thousands of years!

古文：其自古已来贤人君子，有能树声立德、佐世匡时、博利殊功、有益于人者，并宜营立祠宇，以时致祭。
现代文：那些自古来的贤人君子，凡能树立声名、建立贤德、佐治世务、医救时弊、广利他人、创建殊勋、有益于人民的人，都应为他们修建祠堂庙宇，按时祭祀。
English: Those wise men and gentlemen from ancient times, who can establish fame, establish virtue, manage affairs, cure diseases, benefit others, create honors, and benefit the people, should build ancestral halls and temples for them and offer sacrifices on time.

古文：坟垄之处，不得侵践。
现代文：他们的坟墓所在地，不许干犯践踏。
English: Where their graves are, let no trespasser pass.

古文：有司量为条式，称朕意焉。 
现代文：有关官员据此商酌定出具体条规，就符合朕的心意了。 
English: It is in line with my intention that the officials concerned should make specific regulations based on this consultation.

古文：六月壬子，以尚书令、太子太师杨素为司徒。进封豫章王暕为齐王。
现代文：六月二十九日，任命尚书令、太子太师杨素为司徒，晋封豫章王杨为齐王。
English: On June 29th, Shang Shuling and Yang Su, the prince and grandmaster, were appointed as the tutors, and Yu Zhang Wang Yang was appointed as the king of Qi.

古文：秋七月癸丑，以卫尉卿卫玄为工部尚书。
现代文：七月初一，任命卫尉卿卫玄为工部尚书。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Wei Xuan, a lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, was appointed as the official of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：庚申，制百官不得计考增级，必有德行功能灼然显著者擢之。
现代文：初九，下令规定百官不能凭一般考核而增高品级，必须具有显著的道德品行、功绩才能才可提拔。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, it was ordered that officials could not be promoted by general assessment, and must have significant moral conduct and merit.

古文：壬戌，擢籓邸旧臣鲜于罗等二十七人官爵有差。
现代文：初十，提拔旧时自己为晋王时的王府旧臣鲜于罗等二十七人，授予不同的官职爵位。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he promoted twenty-seven people, including the king's old vassal, Xianyu Luo, who was the king of Jin at the time, and awarded them different official ranks.

古文：甲戌，皇太子昭薨。
现代文：二十二日，皇太子杨昭去世。
English: On the 22nd, Crown Prince Akira passed away.

古文：乙亥，上柱国、司徒、楚国公杨素薨。
现代文：二十三日，上柱国、司徒、楚国公杨素去世。
English: On the 23rd, Yang Su, the prince of Shangzhu, Szeto and Chu, passed away.

古文：八月辛卯，封皇孙倓为燕王，侗为越王，侑为代王。
现代文：八月初九，封皇孙杨絯为燕王，杨侗为越王，杨侑为代王。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month, Emperor Sun Wenyan was named the king of Yan, the king of Yue, and the acting king.

古文：九月乙丑，立秦孝王俊子浩为秦王。
现代文：九月十三日，立秦孝王杨俊的儿子杨浩为秦王。
English: On September 13th, Yang Hao, the son of Yang Jun, the Qin Emperor's son, was proclaimed King of Qin.

古文：冬十月戊子，以灵州刺史段文振为兵部尚书。
现代文：十月初七，任命灵州刺史段文振为兵部尚书。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of winter, Lingzhou's top military official, Duan Wenzhen, was appointed to the post of military commissar.

古文：十二月庚寅，诏曰： 前代帝王，因时创业，君民建国，礼尊南面。
现代文：十二月初十，下诏令说： 前代的帝王，依凭时机创立帝业，统治人民，建立国家，面南执政，倍受礼尊。
English: On the tenth day of the twelfth month, the following edict was issued: The former emperor, because of the time, started a business, built a country, and lived in the south with dignity.

古文：而历运推移，年世永久，丘垄残毁，樵牧相趋，茔兆堙芜，封树莫辨。
现代文：然而时代变迁，年代长久，前代帝王的坟墓已残破毁坏，成了樵夫、牧童前去打柴放牧的地方。
English: However, with the passage of time and the passage of time, the tombs of the former emperors have been damaged and destroyed, and have become a place where woodcutters and shepherds go to collect firewood and graze.

古文：兴言沦灭，有怆于怀。
现代文：墓地荒芜，坟头标记也分辨不清了。提起这种沉沦破灭的情景，内心无比凄怆。
English: Every time I feel the feeling of being doomed, my heart sinks.

古文：自古已来帝王陵墓，可给随近十户，蠲其杂役，以供守视。
现代文：对自古以来的帝王陵墓，可供给附近十户人家，免除他们的杂役，让他们看守陵墓。 
English: For the imperial mausoleum since ancient times, it can be given to ten nearby families, exempting them from chores and letting them guard the mausoleum.

古文：三年春正月癸亥，敕并州逆党已流配而逃亡者，所获之处，即宜斩决。
现代文：大业三年正月十四日，命令对并州逆党中已被发配到边远地区而又逃跑了的人，在抓获他们的地方，即行斩决。
English: On the 14th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the Taiei era, it was ordered that those who had been dispatched to remote areas and had escaped from the anti-Party forces in the annexed prefectures would be executed in the place where they were captured.

古文：丙子，长星竟天，出于东壁，二旬而止。
现代文：二十七日，长星掠过天空，它是从东边出现的，这现象二十天后才终止。
English: On the 27th, the long star light shined all over the sky and came out from the east wall, and it only ended after 20 days.

古文：是月，武阳郡上言，河水清。
现代文：这月，武阳郡呈报说：黄河水清。
English: This month, Wuyang County reported that: the Yellow River water is clear.

古文：二月己丑，彗星见于奎，扫文昌，历大陵、五车、北河，入太微，扫帝坐，前后百余日而止。
现代文：二月初十，彗星出现于奎宿位置，掠过文昌星，经大陵、五车、北河诸星，进入太微星，又掠过帝座星，前前后后百余天，这现象才终止。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month of the year, the comet appeared in Kui's position, passed by Wenchang Star, passed by the stars of Daling, Wuchang and Beihe, entered Taimixing, and then passed by the star of the Emperor. It took more than a hundred days before this phenomenon ended.

古文：三月辛亥，车驾还京师。
现代文：三月初二，皇上返回京城。
English: On the second day of March, I drove back to Beijing.

古文：壬子，以大将军姚辩为左屯卫将军。
现代文：初三，任命大将军姚辩为左屯卫将军。
English: In the third year of junior high school, he appointed General Yao Yan as General Zuotunwei.

古文：癸丑，遣羽骑尉硃宽使于流求国。
现代文：初四，派遣羽骑尉朱宽出使流求国。
English: In the fourth year of his junior high school, Zhu Guang, a feathered cavalry officer, was sent out to seek a country.

古文：乙卯，河间王弘薨。
现代文：初六，河间王杨弘去世。
English: At the age of six, Kawama Wanghiro passed away.

古文：夏四月庚辰，诏曰： 古者帝王观风问俗，皆所以忧勤兆庶，安集遐荒。
现代文：四月初二，下诏书说： 古代帝王观察民风询访民俗，都是为广大百姓而忧愁劳苦，也为了要安抚边远地区的人民。
English: On the second day of the fourth month, the next imperial edict said: The ancient emperors observed the customs of the people and inquired into the folk customs, all of which were for the broad masses of the people, and also in order to appease the people in remote areas.

古文：自蕃夷内附，未遑亲抚，山东经乱，须加存恤。
现代文：自从周边少数民族归附以来，来不及亲自抚慰，崤山以东地区经历动乱，更须加以慰问抚恤。
English: Since the annexation of Shanxi Province, Shandong Province should be given a pension, despite the lack of personal condolences.

古文：今欲安辑河北，巡省赵、魏。
现代文：现在打算去安抚黄河以北地区，巡视赵、魏两地，主管官员要按规矩办事。 
English: Now he is planning to pacify the areas north of the Yellow River and inspect the Zhao and Wei regions. The responsible officials should act in accordance with the rules.

古文：所司依式。 甲申，颁律令，大赦天下，关内给复三年。
现代文：初六，颁布法律命令，大赦天下，关内免除徭役三年。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, a legal order was issued to grant amnesty to the whole world, and Guanai was exempted from forced labor for three years.

古文：壬辰，改州为郡。改度量权衡，并依古式。改上柱国已下官为大夫。
现代文：十四日，改州制为郡制，改变度量衡制，全都依照古代的规格，改上柱国以下官职为大夫。
English: On the 14th, the state system was changed to the county system, and the measurement system was changed, all in accordance with the ancient specifications, and the official position below the pillar country was changed to the doctor.

古文：甲午，诏曰：天下之重，非独治所安，帝王之功，岂一士之略。
现代文：十六日，下诏说：天下的重大，决不是靠一人独自治理所能安定的；帝王的功业，岂能只依靠一个人的谋略。
English: On the sixteenth day, the next edict said: The great events of the world can never be stabilized by one person alone; the emperor's work can only rely on the strategy of one person.

古文：自古明君哲后，立政经邦，何尝不选贤与能，收采幽滞。
现代文：自古以来，贤明的君王在推行政事、治理国家的时候，何尝不选用举荐有德有才的人，吸收有才情而失意不得进仕的人。
English: Since ancient times, when wise kings and emperors promoted administrative affairs and governed the country, they would not hesitate to select and recommend virtuous and talented people, and to recruit talented people who were discouraged from entering the service.

古文：周称多士，汉号得人，常想前风，载怀钦伫。
现代文：周朝宣称士子众多，汉代号称能得人才，朕常追念前代风范，而满怀敬仰思慕之情。
English: The Zhou Dynasty claimed to have a large number of scholars, and the Han Dynasty claimed to be able to obtain talent. I often recall the style of the previous generation, and I am full of admiration.

古文：朕负扆夙兴，冕旒待旦，引领岩谷，置以周行，冀与群才共康庶绩。
现代文：朕未明即起，背依屏风，整饰衣冠，等待天明，伸颈远望居于岩谷的隐士，想使他们置身于朝官的行列，希望与众多的人才一道安治各种事务。
English: I get up before dawn, lean my back against the screen, adjust my crown, wait for the dawn, crane my neck to see the hermits who live in Iwatani, I want them to be in the ranks of the imperial officials, I hope to work with many talented people to handle various affairs safely.

古文：而汇茅寂寞，投竿罕至，岂美璞韬采，未值良工，将介石在怀，确乎难拔？
现代文：然而进用贤才的事显得寂寞冷清，垂钓的隐士很少前来，难道是美玉藏匿其光彩，尚未遇到优秀的工匠，抑或他们隐居不仕的志操确坚似石，确乎难于改变？
English: However, the use of talents seems lonely and cold, and the fishing hermit rarely comes. Is it that the beauty is hiding its brilliance, and has not yet encountered excellent craftsmen, or is their seclusion really like a stone, and is it really difficult to change?

古文：永鉴前哲，怃然兴叹！
现代文：比照前哲，使朕失望和叹息！
English: Compared to the previous Zhe, I am disappointed and sigh!

古文：凡厥在位，譬诸股肱，若济巨川，义同舟楫。
现代文：举凡在职的官员，好些是朕的左臂右膀，如果渡过大河，大臣们就如同是船和桨。
English: All the officials in office are more like my right arm than my left arm. If you cross a large river, the ministers are like the boat and the oars.

古文：岂得保兹宠禄，晦尔所知，优游卒岁，甚非谓也。
现代文：怎么能保有自己的荣华富贵，却隐藏着你们所知道的人才，只知终年悠闲自得，这是很没有意思的。
English: How can you keep your glory and wealth, but hide the talent you know, only to be lazy and complacent all year round, which is very uninteresting.

古文：祁大夫之举善，良史以为至公，臧文仲之蔽贤，尼父讥其窃位。
现代文：从前祁奚大夫竭力举荐贤才，优秀的史官认为他大公无私；臧文仲埋没贤才，孔夫子讥刺他窃取官位。
English: In the past, Dr. Zou tried his best to recommend talents, and excellent historians considered him to be selfless; Zou Wenzhong buried talents, and Confucius ridiculed him for stealing official positions.

古文：求诸往古，非无褒贬，宜思进善，用匡寡薄。
现代文：探求古代历史，对用人的事并非没有褒贬，你们要考虑举荐贤才，以辅佐朕这寡德之人。
English: Exploring ancient history, it is not without praise and criticism for the employment of people. You should consider recommending talents to assist this virtuous person.

古文：夫孝悌有闻，人伦之本，德行敦厚，立身之基。
现代文：孝顺父母、尊敬兄长而获得好名声，这是人伦的根本；道德操守诚实宽厚，这是立身的基础。
English: Obtaining a good reputation through filial piety and respect for one's elder brother is the foundation of human relations; moral integrity, honesty, and generosity are the foundation of one's life.

古文：或节义可称，或操履清洁，所以激贪厉俗，有益风化。
现代文：有的人气节道义值得称道，有的人操守品行纯洁，可借助他们遏止贪欲，振奋习俗，有益于风俗教化。
English: Some popular festivals are praiseworthy in terms of morality, while others are virtuous and pure. With their help, greed can be curbed, customs can be invigorated, and customs can be enlightened.

古文：强毅正直，执宪不挠，学业优敏，文才美秀，并为廊庙之用，实乃瑚琏之资。
现代文：为人刚强正直，执行法令，从不屈服，学问优异，文才美好出众，这些人才都可为朝廷任用，确实具有堪当大任的资质。
English: They are tough and honest, enforce laws, never give in, have excellent knowledge, and outstanding literary talent. These talents can be appointed to the imperial court, and they really have the qualifications worthy of the great responsibility.

古文：才堪将略，则拔之以御侮，膂力骁壮，则任之以爪牙。
现代文：如果有人具有用兵的谋略，就要选拔他率兵抵御外侮；如果有人四肢有力，勇猛健壮，就让他做武臣。
English: If someone has a strategy of using soldiers, he should be selected to lead soldiers to resist foreign attacks; if someone has strong limbs, brave and robust, let him be a warrior.

古文：爰及一艺可取，亦宜采录，众善毕举，与时无弃。以此求治，庶几非远。
现代文：只要有一技之长，也应选用。各类优秀人才全都被举荐任用，而没有被弃置的人才，靠这来追求天下大治，大概不会是遥远的事吧。
English: As long as there is a skill, it should be used. All kinds of outstanding talents have been recommended for appointment, and those who have not been abandoned, relying on this to pursue world domination, is probably not a far-off thing.

古文：文武有职事者，五品已上，宜依令十科举人。
现代文：有具体职务的文武官员，五品以上，应当按照法令在规定的十项科目中荐举人才。
English: The cultural and military officials who have specific positions and are above grade five shall, in accordance with the law, recommend and nominate talents in the prescribed ten subjects.

古文：有一于此，不必求备。
现代文：只要有一项合要求即可，不必求其全能。
English: As long as there is a matching requirement, there is no need to ask for its omnipotence.

古文：朕当待以不次，随才升擢。
现代文：朕要不按寻常的次序，根据各自的才能提升他们。
English: We want to promote them out of the usual order, according to their respective talents.

古文：其见任九品已上官者，不在举送之限。
现代文：那些现任的九品以上官员，不在被举送的范围之内。
English: All current officials with nine or more pins are not included in the list.

古文：丙申，车驾北巡狩。
现代文：十八日，皇上到北方巡视。
English: On the 18th, I went on a driving tour of the north.

古文：丁酉，以刑部尚书宇文弼为礼部尚书。
现代文：十九日，任命刑部尚书宇文弼为礼部尚书。
English: On the 19th, he appointed the head of the Ministry of Justice, U Wenjun, as the head of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：戊戌，敕百司不得践暴禾稼，其有须开为路者，有司计地所收，即以近仓酬赐，务从优厚。
现代文：二十日，命令百官不许践踏损害庄稼，遇到须开辟成道路的田地，主管官员应核算被占土地的收成，就从附近的仓库拨粮食赐给被占土地的主人，务必从优酬偿。
English: On the 20th, officials were ordered not to trample on crops that were damaged, and if they encountered fields that needed to be made into roads, the officials in charge should calculate the harvest of the occupied land, allocate grain from the nearby warehouse and give it to the owner of the occupied land, and must be compensated from the premium.

古文：己亥，次赤岸泽。以太牢祭故太师李穆墓。
现代文：二十一日，皇上住在赤岸泽，用牛、羊、猪三牲祭奠已故太师李穆的陵墓。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor lived in Akagansawa, and used cattle, sheep, and pigs to pay tribute to the mausoleum of the late Grand Master Li Mu.

古文：五月丁巳，突厥启民可汗遣子拓特勤来朝。
现代文：五月初九，突厥启民可汗派遣儿子拓特勤入京朝见天子。
English: On the ninth day of the fifth month, the Turkic Qimin Khan sent his son, Tuo, on a special mission to Beijing to meet the emperor.

古文：戊午，发河北十余郡丁男凿太行山，达于并州，以通驰道。
现代文：初十，征调黄河以北十余郡的成年男子开凿太行山，直达并州，以使驰道畅通。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, adult men from more than ten counties north of the Yellow River were conscripted and dispatched to excavate the Taihang Mountains, reaching the state, in order to make the road smooth.

古文：丙寅，启民可汗遣其兄子毗黎伽特勤来朝。
现代文：十八日，启民可汗派遣他的侄子毗黎伽特勤来京朝见天子。
English: On the 18th, the Qimin Khan sent his nephew, Virajgar, to Beijing to meet the emperor.

古文：辛未，启民可汗遣使请自入塞，奉迎舆驾。
现代文：二十三日，启民可汗派使者请求允许他入塞，奉迎皇帝车驾。
English: On the 23rd, the Khan of the Qin Dynasty sent an envoy to request permission to enter the citadel and welcome the emperor.

古文：上不许。
现代文：皇上不允许。
English: The Emperor did not give his permission.

古文：癸酉，有星孛于文昌上将，星皆动摇。
现代文：癸酉，有彗星进入文昌座上将宿，众星都动摇了。
English: Suddenly, a comet entered the constellation of Virgo. All the stars were shaken.

古文：六月辛巳，猎于连谷。
现代文：六月初四，皇上在连谷打猎。
English: On the fourth day of the sixth month, the emperor went hunting in Lian Valley.

古文：丁亥，诏曰：聿追孝飨，德莫至焉，崇建寝庙，礼之大者。
现代文：初十，下诏书说：行孝道、祭先祖，是最高的道德；把祖庙建高建大是最大的礼节。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the next imperial edict said: to practice filial piety and to offer sacrifices to ancestors is the highest morality; to build ancestral temples is the greatest etiquette.

古文：然则质文异代，损益殊时，学灭坑焚，经典散逸，宪章湮坠，庙堂制度，师说不同。
现代文：然而质朴与文采在不同时代各有所重，增减变易因时而异，坑儒焚书使学说毁灭，文献典籍散失，典章制度埋没，有关宗庙的制度，经师的说法各不相同。
English: However, simplicity and literary taste have their own importance in different eras, the increase and decrease vary from time to time, the burning of Confucianism destroyed the doctrine, the literature and classics were lost, the award system was buried, and the system of the ancestral temple and the saying of the scribes are different.

古文：所以世数多少，莫能是正，连室异宫，亦无准定。
现代文：所以应立多少代祖先的庙，谁也说不清楚。祖先们是应同在一庙中连室而居，还是每人各主一庙，也没定准。
English: Therefore, no one can say how many generations of ancestors' temples should be built. It is not certain whether the ancestors should live together in a temple, or each of them should be the head of a temple.

古文：朕获奉祖宗，钦承景业，永惟严配，思隆大典。
现代文：朕获得奉祀祖宗的权利，恭敬地继承帝位，长想庄严地祭享祖先，使祭祀大典隆重。
English: I obtained the right to worship my ancestors, respectfully inherited the imperial throne, and longed to solemnly celebrate my ancestors and make the grand ritual grand.

古文：于是询谋在位，博访儒术。
现代文：为此，与众多居官任职的人商议，广泛访问儒士。
English: To this end, he consulted with many local officials and made extensive visits to Confucianists.

古文：咸以为高祖文皇帝受天明命，奄有区夏，拯群飞于四海，革凋敝于百王，恤狱缓刑，生灵皆遂其性，轻徭薄赋，比屋各安其业。
现代文：大家都认为高祖文皇帝承受上天的圣明之命，拥有华夏，拯救了四海的生灵，革除了百王的弊政，抚恤囚犯，减缓刑罚，人民都得以顺遂他们的习性，减轻徭役和赋税，家家户户全都安居乐业。
English: Everyone believes that Emperor Gao Zuwen received the sacred mission from heaven, possessed China, saved the creatures of the four seas, eliminated the maladministration of hundreds of kings, pardoned prisoners, and mitigated punishments. The people were able to follow their habits, reduce taxes and taxes, and all households lived and worked in peace.

古文：恢夷宇宙，混壹车书。
现代文：国家完整安定，车轨、文字统一。
English: The country is complete and stable, and the railway tracks and characters are unified.

古文：东渐西被，无思不服，南征北怨，俱荷来苏。
现代文：中原文明向东流传，向西传播，没有不信服的。往江南征伐北方人的仇敌，江南人民获得重生。
English: The Central Plains civilization spread eastward and westward, and no one was unconvinced. The people south of the Yangtze River were reborn as they went south to conquer the enemies of the northerners.

古文：驾毳乘风，历代所弗至，辫发左衽，声教所罕及，莫不厥角关塞，顿颡阙庭。
现代文：乘风驾橇的边远地方，历代帝王不曾去过，头上梳辫、前襟向左开的少数民族区域，声威和教化很少传播到。现在这些地方的人无不到关塞叩头请降，到朝廷跪拜称臣。
English: The emperors of past generations never went to the far-flung places where they rode on the wind and waves, and the ethnic minority areas where the hair was combed and the front collar turned to the left, and the prestige and enlightenment rarely spread to them. Nowadays, people in these places can't get to the gate without bowing their heads and kneeling to the imperial court.

古文：译靡绝时，书无虚月，韬戈偃武，天下晏如。
现代文：译文交换无时断绝，书信往返每月都有，收藏兵器，停息武备，天下太平。
English: The exchange of translated texts is uninterrupted at all times, letters are sent back and forth every month, weapons are collected, armaments are suspended, and the world is at peace.

古文：嘉瑞休征，表里禔福，猗欤伟欤，无得而名者也。
现代文：祥瑞吉利的征兆屡见，内外安福。这真是太宏大壮美了，无法用言语表达。
English: There are many signs of auspiciousness, both at home and abroad. This is really too grand and magnificent to be expressed in words.

古文：朕又闻之，德厚者流光，治辨者礼缛。
现代文：朕又听说，道德淳厚的人，他的福泽能流传后世，治事明察的人，他的礼节繁多。
English: I have also heard that a person with high moral standards can pass on his good fortune to future generations, and that a person who governs with discernment has a wide range of etiquette.

古文：是以周之文、武，汉之高、光，其典章特立，谥号斯重，岂非缘情称述，即崇显之义乎？
现代文：因此周朝的文王、武王，汉代的高祖、光武帝，他们的法令制度卓异出众，他们的谥号都很显贵高尚，这难道不是依据实情加以称述，亦即尊崇德高望重之人的意思吗？
English: Therefore, the Zhou Dynasty's King Wen and King Wu, the Han Dynasty's Emperor Gaozu and Emperor Guangwu, their legal system is extraordinary and outstanding, and their nicknames are very noble and noble. Isn't this based on the truth, that is, the meaning of respecting and revering people who are highly respected?

古文：高祖文皇帝宜别建庙宇，以彰巍巍之德，仍遵月祭，用表蒸蒸之怀。
现代文：高祖文皇帝应当另立庙宇，来表彰他崇高的道德，仍遵守每月祭祀的规矩，以表达朕孝顺的心怀。
English: Emperor Gaozowen should build another temple to commend his lofty morality, and still observe the rules of monthly sacrifices to express his filial piety.

古文：有司以时创选，务合典制。
现代文：有关部门要按时建造，一定要符合典章制度。
English: Relevant departments must build on time and must comply with the award system.

古文：又名位既殊，礼亦异等。
现代文：另外声名地位既异，所用的礼仪也要有不同。
English: In addition, since the fame and status are different, the etiquette used should also be different.

古文：天子七庙，事著前经，诸侯二昭，义有差降，故其以多为贵。
现代文：古时天子建立七代祖先的庙，这在前人经典中已明白记载，诸侯二昭、二穆，共立五代祖先的宗庙，礼仪有差别，所以古时以庙多为贵。
English: In ancient times, the Son of Heaven established temples for seven generations of ancestors. This has been clearly recorded in the classics of the ancients. Princes Er Zhao and Er Mu jointly established ancestral temples for five generations of ancestors. The etiquette is different, so in ancient times, temples were more valuable.

古文：王者之礼，今可依用，贻厥后昆。
现代文：往昔帝王的礼仪，如今可以沿用，还要传给后代。
English: The etiquette of emperors in the past can still be used today and passed on to future generations.

古文：戊子，次榆林郡。丁酉，启民可汗来朝。
现代文：十一日，皇上住在榆林郡，启民可汗前来朝拜。
English: On the 11th day, the emperor lived in Yulin County, and the Qimin Khan came to worship.

古文：己亥，吐谷浑、高昌并遣使贡方物。
现代文：二十日，吐谷浑、高昌等国都派使臣来贡献土产。
English: On the 22nd, envoys from both Tuyuhun and Gaochang paid tribute with local specialties.

古文：甲辰，上御北楼，观渔于河，以宴百僚。
现代文：二十七日，皇上登北楼，观看人们在黄河捕鱼，随后宴请百官。
English: On the 26th, the emperor ascended the north tower, watched the fishing in the Yellow River, and held a banquet for hundreds of officials.

古文：秋七月辛亥，启民可汗上表请变服，袭冠带。
现代文：秋七月初四，启民可汗上表请求改变服饰，沿用汉族的帽子和腰带。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the Qimin Khan made a request to change the original costume and use the Central Plains crown.

古文：诏启民赞拜不名，位在诸侯王上。
现代文：下诏规定启民朝见皇帝时可不自称名字，地位在诸侯王之上。
English: The following edict stipulated that when the Qimin Dynasty met the emperor, they could not call themselves by their names, and their status was above the princes and kings.

古文：甲寅，上于郡城东御大帐，其下备仪卫，建旌旗，宴启民及其部落三千五百人，奏百戏之乐。
现代文：初七，皇上在郡城东设大帐，帐下设仪仗、卫队，竖立旌旗，宴请启民及其部落三千五百人，表演散乐杂技助兴。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the emperor set up a large account in the east of the county seat, set up a ceremonial battle and a guard under the account, erected a banner, invited 3500 people from the Qin people and their tribe to a banquet, and performed Sanzhong acrobatics for entertainment.

古文：赐启民及其部落各有差。
现代文：依等级赏赐启民及其部落成员。
English: Awarded to members of the Kai people and their tribes according to their rank.

古文：丙子，杀光禄大夫贺若弼、礼部尚书宇文弼、太常卿高颎。
现代文：十九日，杀光禄大夫贺若弼、礼部尚书宇文弼、太常卿高赹。
English: On the 19th, He Ruojuan, the doctor of Guanglu, Shangshu Wenyuan of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Gao Yao, the Grand Councilor, were killed.

古文：尚书左仆射苏威坐事免。
现代文：尚书左仆射苏威连坐免职。
English: Shangshu's left-hand man, Sha Suwei, was removed from his post as a result of the incident.

古文：发丁男百余万筑长城，西距榆林，东至紫河，一旬而罢，死者十五六。
现代文：征调成年男子百余万人修筑长城，西到榆林，东至紫河，十天就停止了，死亡民工十分之五六。
English: More than a million adult men were conscripted to build the Great Wall, stretching from Yulin in the west to Zihe in the east, but the work stopped after ten days. Fifty-six out of ten migrant workers died.

古文：八月壬午，车驾发榆林。
现代文：八月初六，皇上车驾从榆林出发。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, I drove from Yulin.

古文：乙酉，启民饰庐清道，以候乘舆。
现代文：初九，启民装饰庐舍，清扫道路，等候皇上的车驾。
English: On the ninth day of the first lunar month, the people of Qin decorated their houses, swept the roads, and waited for the emperor's chariot.

古文：帝幸其帐，启民奉觞上寿，宴赐极厚。
现代文：皇帝驾莅他的帐蓬，启民捧杯为皇上祝寿，皇上留下宴饮并厚赐他。
English: The emperor pulled up his tent and invited the people to raise a glass to the emperor to wish him a happy birthday. The emperor left the banquet and gave him a generous gift.

古文：上谓高丽使者曰： 归语尔王，当早来朝见。
现代文：皇上对高丽使者说： 回去后告诉你们国王，应当及早来朝拜。
English: The emperor said to the envoy of the Koryo Kingdom: Go back and tell your king that he should come to see you early in the morning.

古文：不然者，吾与启民巡彼土矣。 
现代文：不然的话，我要和启民一起去巡视你那国土了。 
English: Otherwise, I and Qimin Khan are ready to inspect the land.

古文：皇后亦幸义城公主帐。
现代文：皇后也驾临义城公主的大帐。
English: The empress also entered the tent of the princess of Yicheng.

古文：己丑，启民可汗归蕃。
现代文：十三日，启民可汗回突厥。
English: On the 13th, Qimin Khan returned to the mainland.

古文：癸巳，入楼烦关。
现代文：十七日，皇上进入楼烦关。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor entered the palace.

古文：壬寅，次太原。
现代文：壬寅，停留太原。
English: Minshin, stay in Taiyuan.

古文：诏营晋阳宫。
现代文：诏令营建晋阳宫。
English: The imperial edict ordered the construction of Jinyang Palace.

古文：九月己未，次济源。
现代文：九月十三日，停留济源。
English: On September 13th, we stopped at Jiyuan.

古文：幸御史大夫张衡宅，宴享极欢。
现代文：驾临御史大夫张衡的住宅，酒宴极为欢乐。
English: When we arrived at the residence of Grand Historian Zhang Heng, the wine banquet was extremely joyful.

古文：己巳，至于东都。
现代文：二十三日，到达东都。
English: On the 23rd, I arrived in Dongdu.

古文：壬申，以齐王暕为河南尹、开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十六日，任命齐王杨日柬为河南尹、开府仪同三司。
English: On the 26th, he appointed Qi Wang as the Henan Yin, Kaifu Yi and Three Departments.

古文：癸酉，以民部尚书杨文思为纳言。
现代文：二十七日，任命民部尚书杨文思为纳言。
English: On the 27th, Yang Wensi, a senior official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed as the prime minister.

古文：四年春正月乙巳，诏发河北诸郡男女百余万开永济渠，引沁水，南达于河，北通涿郡。
现代文：大业四年正月初一，下令征调黄河北部各郡男女百余万人开挖永济渠，引沁水南到黄河，北通涿郡。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of the Taiye era, he ordered the conscription and transfer of more than one million men and women from counties in the northern part of the Yellow River to excavate the Yongji Canal and divert water south to the Yellow River and Beitong County.

古文：庚戌，百僚大射于允武殿。丁卯，赐城内居民米各十石。
现代文：初六，在允武殿同百官举行大射礼。二十三日，赐给东都城内居民每户各十石米。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, a grand shooting ceremony was held with hundreds of officials at the Yobu-den. On the 23rd day, residents of the eastern capital were given ten koku of rice per household.

古文：壬申，以太府卿元寿为内史令，鸿胪卿杨玄感为礼部尚书。
现代文：二十八日，任命太府卿元寿为内史令，鸿胪卿杨玄感为礼部尚书。
English: On the 28th, Grand Mufu Emperor Yuan Shou was appointed to the post of Inner Historian, and Hongwu Emperor Yang Xuanxuan was appointed to the post of Ceremonial Secretary.

古文：癸酉，以工部尚书卫玄为右候卫大将军，大理卿长孙炽为民部尚书。
现代文：二十九日，命工部尚书卫玄为右侯卫大将军，大理卿长孙炽为民部尚书。
English: On the 29th, Shangshu Wei Xuan of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce was appointed as the grand marshal of the Right, and Dali Qing's eldest grandson Blazing was appointed as Shangshu of the Ministry of the People.

古文：二月己卯，遣司朝谒者崔毅使突厥处罗，致汗血马。
现代文：二月初六，派遣司朝谒者崔君毅出使突厥处罗，求取汗血马。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the year, the person in charge of the pilgrimage, Cui Yi, sent an envoy to the Turkic Office, Luo Khan, to ask for a blood-sweat horse.

古文：三月辛酉，以将作大匠宇文恺为工部尚书。
现代文：三月十八日，命将作大匠宇文恺为工部尚书。
English: On March 18th, the appointment of the great craftsman Uwen Wei as the head of the engineering department was announced.

古文：壬戌，百济、倭、赤土、迦罗舍国并遣使贡方物。
现代文：十九日，百济、倭、赤土、迦罗舍等国都派使臣前来上贡土产。
English: On the 19th, Baekje, Wa, Chakdo, Garoshe and other countries sent envoys to pay tribute to local products.

古文：乙丑，车驾幸五原，因出塞巡长城。
现代文：二十二日，皇上驾莅五原，趁势出塞巡视长城。
English: In the second year of the Ugly Emperor, Emperor Gong arrived at Wuhuan, and went out of the fortress to inspect the Great Wall.

古文：丙寅，遣屯田主事常骏使赤土，致罗刹。
现代文：二十三日，派屯田主事常骏出使赤土，求取罗刹。
English: On the 23rd, the governor of Tonden sent an envoy to the Red Earth in search of Rosha.

古文：夏四月丙午，以离石之汾源、临泉、雁门之秀容为楼烦郡。
现代文：夏四月初四，把离石的汾源、临泉，雁门的秀容等地并为楼烦郡。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 7th month of the 7

古文：起汾阳宫。
现代文：建造汾阳宫。
English: Shenyang Palace was built.

古文：癸丑，以河内太守张定和为左屯卫大将军。
现代文：十一日，任命河内太守张定和为左屯卫大将军。
English: On the 11th, Zhang Dinghe, the governor of Hanoi, was appointed General of the Left Division.

古文：乙卯，诏曰： 突厥意利珍豆启民可汗率领部落，保附关塞，遵奉朝化，思改戎俗，频入谒觐，屡有陈请。
现代文：十三日，下诏书说： 突厥意利珍豆启民可汗率领部落归附边关要塞，遵奉朝廷教化，想改变本族习俗，经常入京朝拜，屡屡上言请示。
English: On the 13th, the next imperial edict said: "Turkic Yili Jianzhu Qimin Khan led the tribe to annex the border fortress, obeyed the imperial court's indoctrination, wanted to change the customs of his own people, often went to Beijing to worship, and repeatedly petitioned for instructions.

古文：以氈墙毳幕，事穷荒陋，上栋下宇，愿同比屋。
现代文：因他们位在毡帐中，物资贫乏，荒凉简陋，汉人居处上有正梁，下有屋檐，他们希望同汉人成为邻居。
English: Because they are in debt, poor in materials, desolate and simple, and the Han people live in places with straight beams and eaves, they hope to become neighbors with the Han people.

古文：诚心恳切，朕之所重。
现代文：这真诚的心愿十分恳切，朕很重视他们的请求。
English: Very sincerely, I attach great importance to it.

古文：宜于万寿戍置城造屋，其帷帐床褥已上，随事量给，务从优厚，称朕意焉。 
现代文：应当在万寿戍建立城镇修造房屋，惟幕、床铺、被褥以上用品，根据办事的需要酌量供给，务必优厚对待，这才符合朕的心意。 
English: Towns and houses should be built in Manshukou, but the curtain, bed, bedding and other supplies should be provided according to the needs of the work, and they must be treated generously. This is in line with my heart.

古文：五月壬申，蜀郡获三足乌，张掖获玄狐，各一。
现代文：五月初一，蜀郡捕获三足乌鸦，张掖捕获黑狐，各一只。
English: On the first day of May, Shu County captured a three-legged bird, and Zhangye captured a black fox.

古文：秋七月辛巳，发丁男二十余万筑长城，自榆谷而东。
现代文：秋七月初十，征调成年男子二十余万人修筑长城，从榆谷向东修。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of the autumn, more than 200,000 adult men were conscripted to build the Great Wall, from Shibuya to the east.

古文：乙未，左翊卫大将军宇文述破吐谷浑于曼头、赤水。
现代文：二十四日，左翊卫大将军宇文述在曼头、赤水打败吐谷浑。
English: On the 24th, General of the Left Division Yu Wenshu defeated Tuyagun at Mantou and Chishui.

古文：八月辛酉，亲祠恆岳，河北道郡守毕集。
现代文：八月二十一日，皇上亲自祭祀恒岳，河北道的郡守全部聚集于恒岳。
English: On August 21st, the county governors of Hebei Province all came to personally offer sacrifices to Hengyue.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：对全国实行大赦。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：车驾所经郡县，免一年租调。
现代文：皇上所经过的郡县，免收一年租税。
English: The counties and counties that the emperor passed through were exempt from tax for one year.

古文：九月辛未，征天下鹰师悉集东京，至者万余人。
现代文：九月初一，征召全国的驯鹰师全部集中在东京，有万多人应征。
English: On the first day of September, eagle trainers from all over the country were called up and concentrated in Tokyo, with more than 10,000 people enlisting.

古文：戊寅，彗星出于五车，扫文昌，至房而灭。
现代文：初八，彗星从五车星座出现，掠过文昌星，到房星后陨灭。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the comet appeared from the constellation of the Five Chariots, passed over the star of Wenchang, and after reaching the star of Fang, it faded away.

古文：辛巳，诏免长城役者一年租赋。
现代文：十一日，下诏免收在长城服役的人一年租税。
English: On the 11th, the next edict exempted those who served on the Great Wall from paying taxes for one year.

古文：冬十月丙午，诏曰： 先师尼父，圣德在躬，诞发天纵之姿，宪章文武之道。
现代文：冬十月初八，下诏说： 先师尼父孔子，具有最高的智慧和道德，发挥了天赋的资质，效法文王、武王的思想，著名于当世，承受天命，积聚上述品质而成素王。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of winter, the following edict was issued: Confucius, our forefather and teacher, possessed the highest wisdom and morality, exerted his innate qualities, emulated the thoughts of the French King and the King of Wu, was famous in the contemporary world, bore the destiny of heaven, and accumulated the above-mentioned qualities to become a king.

古文：命世膺期，蕴兹素王，而颓山之叹，忽逾于千祀，盛德之美，不存于百代。
现代文：他在临终前发出了泰山其颓乎的叹息声，很快已距今千年，而他的美好道德，却未能保存于百代人之中。
English: On his deathbed, he let out a sigh that sounded like Mount Tai, and soon it was a thousand years ago, but his beautiful morality could not be preserved among hundreds of generations.

古文：永惟懿范，宜有优崇。
现代文：我长久地思念他美好的风范，认为应当对他优礼尊崇。
English: I have long thought of his fine manners and that he should be treated with courtesy and respect.

古文：可立孔子后为绍圣侯。有司求其苗裔，录以申上。 
现代文：可以封孔子的后代为绍圣侯，主管官员应去访求他的后裔，登记好上报朝廷。 
English: The descendants of Confucius can be named Shao Sheng Hou. The competent officials should visit his descendants, register them and report them to the imperial court.

古文：辛亥，诏曰： 昔周王下车，首封唐虞之胤，汉帝承历，亦命殷周之后。
现代文：十二日，下诏说： 从前周王即位，首先分封尧、舜的后代，汉帝承继帝位，也授给殷、周的后代名号。
English: On the twelfth day, the next edict said: Since the former King Zhou ascended the throne, the descendants of Zhou and Zhou were first assigned to the Han Dynasty to succeed the throne, and the descendants of Yin and Zhou were also given names.

古文：皆所以褒立先代，宪章在昔。
现代文：这样做都是为了褒扬树立前代的明君，效法古时的贤王。
English: All of them have been established in this way to praise their predecessors, and the charter has been around since ancient times.

古文：朕嗣膺景业，傍求雅训，有一弘益，钦若令典。
现代文：朕继承帝业，依傍追求雅正的教诲，只要略有一点增益，就要遵守前典。
English: I am the inheritor of a great cause, and I am seeking to learn from others, and I have received a boon, which is regarded as a command.

古文：以为周兼夏殷，文质大备，汉有天下，车书混一，魏晋沿袭，风流未远。
现代文：朕认为周的礼制兼有夏、殷的长处，文采与质朴齐备，汉建立政权后，使车辙文字统一，魏晋沿袭汉制，风俗教化相去不远。
English: I think that Zhou's etiquette system has the strengths of both Xia and Yin, and is both elegant and simple. After the Han Dynasty established its political power, it unified the script, while the Wei and Jin Dynasties followed the Han system, and their customs and education are not far apart.

古文：并宜立后，以存继绝之义。
现代文：都应当封立他们的后代，以维护使已断绝了的世禄得到接续的道理。
English: Heirs should be established for all of them, in order to preserve the principle of succession.

古文：有司可求其胄绪列闻。 
现代文：主管官员应该去访求周、汉、魏、晋帝王的子孙列名上报。 
English: The responsible officials should visit and ask for the names of the descendants of the Zhou, Han, Wei and Jin emperors.

古文：乙卯，颁新式于天下。
现代文：十六日，向全国颁布新的度量衡规格。
English: On the 16th, the new regulations were promulgated to the world.

古文：五年春正月丙子，改东京为东都。
现代文：大业五年正月初八，改东京为东都。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, Tokyo was renamed the eastern capital.

古文：癸未，诏天下均田。
现代文：十五日，下诏令天下平均田地。
English: Soon after, Emperor Qian decreed that the whole country would implement the equal-field system.

古文：戊子，上自东都还京师。
现代文：二十日，皇上从东都回京城。
English: On the 20th, the emperor returned to Kyoto from the eastern capital.

古文：己丑，制民间铁叉、搭钩、槊刃之类，皆禁绝之。
现代文：二十一日，命令民间使用的铁叉、搭钩一类铁器，全部禁绝。
English: On the 21st, it was ordered that all types of iron utensils such as forks and hooks used by the general public be banned.

古文：太守每岁密上属官景迹。
现代文：太守每年要向朝廷密报其下属官员的政绩。
English: The Tai Shou secretly reports the status and deeds of the officials who belong to it every year.

古文：二月戊戌，次于阌乡。
现代文：二月初一，皇上车驾停留在阌乡。
English: On the first day of February, the emperor arrived in Handan.

古文：诏祭古帝王陵及开皇功臣墓。
现代文：命令祭奠古代帝王的陵墓以及文帝开皇年间功臣的坟墓。
English: The lower hall enshrines the ancient imperial mausoleum and the tomb of a meritorious subject from the time of the founding emperor.

古文：庚子，制魏、周官不得为廕。
现代文：初三，命令西魏、北周两朝官员不能享受荫庇子孙承袭官爵的待遇。
English: On the third day of the first month, the officials of the Western Wei and Northern Zhou Dynasties were ordered not to enjoy the treatment of inheriting the peerage from their descendants.

古文：辛丑，赤土国遣使贡方物。
现代文：初四，赤土国派使者前来贡献土产。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Red Earth country sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：戊申，车驾至京师。
现代文：十一日，皇上抵达京城。
English: On the 11th day, I arrived in Kyoto by car.

古文：丙辰，宴耆旧四百人于武德殿，颁赐各有差。
现代文：十九日，在武德殿宴请老人四百人，分别赐给他们财物。
English: On the 19th, a banquet was held at the Wude Hall for four hundred elderly people of high moral standing, and gifts were given, the amount of which varied.

古文：己未，上御崇德殿之西院，愀然不怡，顾谓左右曰： 此先帝之所居，实用增感，情所未安，宜于此院之西别营一殿。 
现代文：二十二日，皇上到崇德殿的西院，满脸忧伤很不高兴，回过头对侍从说： 这是先帝居住的地方，实在令人增加感慨，心情不能平静，应该在这院的西边另外营建一座宫殿。 
English: On the 22nd, the emperor went to the West Courtyard of the Chongde Hall, looking sad and very unhappy. He turned back to his attendant and said, "This is the place where the former emperor lived. It really increases one's emotion, and one's mood cannot be calm. A separate palace should be built on the west side of this courtyard."

古文：壬戌，制父母听随子之官。
现代文：二十五日，诏令父母可任意跟随做官的儿子赴任。
English: On the 25th, it was stipulated that parents could accompany their sons to live in government offices.

古文：三月己巳，车驾西巡河右。
现代文：三月初二，皇上向西巡视黄河北部地区。
English: On the second day of March, the car drove westward to Hexi.

古文：庚午，有司言，武功男子史永遵与从父昆弟同居。上嘉之，赐物一百段，米二百石，表其门闾。
现代文：初三，主管官员报告，武功一男子史永遵与其叔伯兄弟同住在一起，皇上嘉奖他，赐给布帛一百段，米二百石，旌表他的家族乡里。
English: On the third day of the junior high school year, the responsible official reported that a man of martial arts, Shi Yongzun, lived with his uncle and brother. The emperor commended him and gave him a hundred pieces of cloth, two hundred koku of rice, and a watch from his family's hometown.

古文：乙亥，幸扶风旧宅。
现代文：初八，驾临扶风旧宅。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, I went to Fu Feng's old mansion.

古文：夏四月己亥，大猎于陇西。
现代文：四月初三，会猎于陇西。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of summer, there was a large-scale goose hunting in Shaanxi.

古文：壬寅，高昌、吐谷浑、伊吾并遣使来朝。
现代文：初六，高昌、吐谷浑、伊吾都派使臣来朝见天子。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Gaochang, Tugu, and Igu all sent envoys to the emperor.

古文：乙巳，次狄道，党项羌来贡方物。
现代文：初九，车驾停住狄道，党项羌前来进贡地方特产。
English: On the morning of the 9th, the car stopped on Di Road, and the party came to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：癸亥，出临津关，渡黄河，至西平，陈兵讲武。
现代文：二十七日，车驾出临津关，渡黄河，到达西平，在那里陈兵布阵，讲习武艺。
English: On the 27th, the car drove out of Imjinguan, crossed the Yellow River, and arrived at Xiping, where soldiers were lined up and martial arts were taught.

古文：五月乙亥，上大猎于拔延山，长围周亘二千里。
现代文：五月初九，皇上会猎于拔延山，猎场方圆二千里。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month, the emperor would go hunting in Bajian Mountain, a hunting ground with a radius of two thousand miles.

古文：庚辰，入长宁谷。
现代文：十三日，进入长宁谷。
English: On the 14th, it entered the Changning Valley.

古文：壬午，度星岭。
现代文：十五日，翻越星岭。
English: On the 16th, they crossed the Xingling Mountains.

古文：甲申，宴群臣于金山之上。
现代文：十八日，在金山之上大宴群臣。
English: On the 18th, a large banquet was held for the ministers on top of the mountain.

古文：丙戌，梁浩亹御马度而桥坏，斩朝散大夫黄亘及督役者九人。
现代文：二十日在浩架桥，皇上的马过桥后桥就坏了，杀掉朝散大夫黄亘及监工的官员九人。
English: On the 20th day, the bridge was built in Hao. After the emperor's horse crossed the bridge, the bridge broke, killing Dr. Huang Wai and nine supervisors.

古文：吐谷浑王率众保覆袁川，帝分命内史元寿南屯金山，兵部尚书段文振北屯雪山，太仆卿杨义臣东屯琵琶峡，将军张寿西屯泥岭，四面围之。
现代文：吐谷浑王率兵守卫覆袁川，皇上分别命令内史元寿南屯金山，兵部尚书段文振北屯雪山，太仆卿杨义臣东屯琵琶峡，将军张寿西屯泥岭，从四面围困吐谷浑的军队。
English: King Tutankhamen led his troops to guard the Yuan River. The emperor separately ordered the Inner History Yuan Shou, the South Tun Jinshan, the War Department Shang Shuxuan, the North Tun Xue Shan, the Great Servant Yang Yichen, the East Tun Biwa Gorge, and the General Zhang Shou, the West Tun Mud Ling, to besiege the army of Tutankhamen from all sides.

古文：浑主伏允以数十骑遁出，遣其名王诈称伏允，保车我真山。
现代文：吐谷浑三军国主伏允带领几十名骑兵逃跑，派他的一个著名的王冒充伏允，据守车我真山。
English: The lord of the three armies, Fuxun of Tugu, led dozens of cavalrymen to escape, and sent one of his famous kings to impersonate Fuxun, according to the guard car, I'm a mountain.

古文：壬辰，诏右屯卫大将军张定和往捕之。
现代文：二十二日，皇上命令右屯卫大将张定和前去捉拿。
English: On the 26th, he ordered Zhang Dinghe, the general of the Right Tunwei, to go in pursuit.

古文：定和挺身挑战，为贼所杀。
现代文：定和挺身挑战，被贼寇所杀。
English: Zhang Dinghe challenged and was killed by the enemy.

古文：亚将柳武建击破之，斩首数百级。
现代文：副将柳建武击败吐谷浑部，斩首数百级。
English: Vice-commander Liu Wu Jian defeated the enemy and beheaded hundreds of them.

古文：甲午，其仙头王被围穷蹙，率男女十余万口来降。
现代文：二十四日，吐谷浑部仙头王被围，无路可走，率领男女十余万人投降。
English: On the 24th, King Hunbe of Tugu was surrounded and had no choice but to surrender, leading more than 100,000 men and women.

古文：六月丁酉，遣左光禄大夫梁默、右翊卫将军李琼等追浑主，皆遇贼死之。
现代文：六月初二，派左光禄大夫梁默，右翊卫将军李琼等追击吐谷浑国主，都遭遇贼寇战死。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, Liang Mo, the doctor of the Left Guanglu, and Li Qiong, the general of the Right Han Guard, were sent to pursue the lord of the Tuyuhun Kingdom. They were both killed by the bandits.

古文：癸卯，经大斗拔谷，山路隘险，鱼贯而出。
现代文：初八，经过大斗拔谷，山路狭窄险要，只得像鱼群相接而出。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, after a big battle to pull up the valley, the mountain road was narrow and dangerous, and I had to go out like a shoal of fish.

古文：风霰晦冥，与从官相失，士卒冻死者太半。
现代文：风雪弥漫，天昏地暗，炀帝与随从官员失去联系，士兵冻死一大半。
English: The wind and snow were in full swing, the sky was dark and gloomy, Emperor Xuan lost contact with his officials, and more than half of the soldiers froze to death.

古文：丙午，次张掖。
现代文：十一日，驻扎在张掖。
English: On the 11th day, we arrived in Zhangye.

古文：辛亥，诏诸郡学业该通才艺优洽、膂力骁壮超绝等伦、在官勤奋堪理政事、立性正直不避强御四科举人。
现代文：十六日，命令各郡按照学业完备通达，才能技艺优秀广博；四肢有力，勇猛健壮，超过同辈；居官勤奋，有能力办政事；立性正直，不畏强暴等四科来推举人才。
English: On the 16th, it ordered all counties to nominate talents according to four subjects, including academic excellence, talent, excellent and extensive skills; powerful limbs, brave and robust, surpassing peers; diligent officials, capable of handling government affairs; upright and honest, and not afraid of violence.

古文：壬子，高昌王麹伯雅来朝，伊吾吐屯设等献西域数千里之地。上大悦。
现代文：十七日，高昌王曲伯雅前来朝见天子，伊吾吐屯设等献西域数千里土地，皇上十分高兴。
English: On the 17th, King Qu Boya of Gaochang came to see the emperor, and offered thousands of miles of land in the western region, such as Igu Tutun, to the emperor. The emperor was very happy.

古文：癸丑，置西海、河源、鄯善、且末等四郡。
现代文：十八日，设置西海、河源、鄯善、且末等四个郡。
English: On the 18th, four counties were set up, including Saikai, Heyuan, Zhengyi, Zhen and Matsu.

古文：丙辰，上御观风行殿，盛陈文物，奏九部乐，设鱼龙曼延，宴高昌王、吐屯设于殿上，以宠异之。
现代文：二十一日，皇上到观风行殿，大摆文物，演奏九部乐，表演鱼龙曼延百戏，宴请高昌王、吐屯设于殿上，以示对他们的特殊宠爱。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor went to the observation hall, displayed cultural relics, played nine pieces of music, performed a long series of plays, and invited Gaochang Wang and Tutun to the hall to show their special favor.

古文：其蛮夷陪列者三十余国。
现代文：有三十多个国家的异族首领陪席。二十三日，全国实行大赦。
English: More than 30 foreign heads of state were in attendance. On the 23rd, a nationwide amnesty was implemented.

古文：戊午，大赦天下。开皇已来流配，悉放还乡，晋阳逆党，不在此例。
现代文：凡开皇年间以来流放发配的人，一律放回故乡，只有晋阳叛逆集团，不在此之列。
English: All those who have been exiled since the time of Emperor Gaozong will be allowed to return to their hometowns, except for the Jinyang rebel group.

古文：陇右诸郡，给复一年，行经之所，给复二年。
现代文：陇西各郡，免除徭役一年。皇上此次行经州县，免除徭役二年。
English: The counties in Shaanxi Province are exempted from corvee service for one year. The Emperor's visit to Jingzhou County this time is exempted from corvee service for two years.

古文：秋七月丁卯，置马牧于青海渚中，以求龙种，无效而止。
现代文：秋七月初二，放置马匹在青海中的小岛上，用以求得良种马，无效而中止。
English: On the second day of the seventh month of autumn, the horse was put on the small island of Qinghai Lake for grazing, trying to seek dragon mating, but there was no effect and it was stopped.

古文：九月癸未，车驾入长安。
现代文：九月十九日，皇上车驾进入长安。
English: On September 18, he drove back to Chang'an.

古文：冬十月癸亥，诏曰： 优德尚齿，载之典训，尊事乞言，义彰胶序。
现代文：冬十月二十九日，下诏令说： 优待品德高尚的人和尊崇老年人的做法，记载在前代的文献典籍中。
English: On the 29th day of the 10th month of winter, the following edict was issued: "The practice of giving preferential treatment to people of high moral character and respecting the elderly has been recorded in previous literatures and classics.

古文：鬻熊为师，取非筋力，方叔元老，克壮其猷。
现代文：尊奉德高望重的老人，认真地向他们求教，这一正确的做法应当在学校里弘扬。
English: Respecting the elderly, who are held in high esteem, and earnestly seeking their advice is a correct practice that should be promoted in schools.

古文：朕永言稽古，用求至治，是以庞眉黄发，更令收叙，务简秩优，无亏药膳，庶等卧治，伫其弘益。
现代文：鬻熊做周文王的老师，所用的并不是他的筋骨气力，方叔虽然老了，却仍能定出宏伟计谋。朕长久地效法古事，以期达到最完美的政治。因此对眉发皆黄的老人，更要收录叙用，务必给予优厚的待遇，不能亏缺了药物饮食，庶可使他们卧治天下，盼望他们能有所增益。
English: As the teacher of Zhou Wenwang, the raccoon did not use his strength. Although Uncle Fang was old, he was still able to set up a grand strategy. I have long imitated ancient things in order to achieve the most perfect politics. Therefore, for the elderly with yellow eyebrows, they should be included and used, and they must be given preferential treatment. They must not lack medicine and diet, and they can make them rule the world, hoping that they can gain something.

古文：今岁耆老赴集者，可于近郡处置。年七十以上，疾患沉滞，不堪居职，即给赐帛，送还本郡。其官至七品已上者，量给廪，以终厥身。 
现代文：今年前来京师汇集的老人，可在京师附近的郡里安置，年龄在七十岁以上，身患重病，不能任职的，就赐给布帛，送回本郡；那些官位达到七品以上的，由官府酌量供给粮食，以终其天年。 
English: The old people who came to Beijing Division to gather this year can be resettled in counties near Beijing Division. Those who are over seventy years old, seriously ill, and unable to hold office will be given to Buyeo and sent back to this county; those officials who have reached more than seven products will be provided with grain by the government at its discretion to last for a long time.

古文：十一月丙子，车驾幸东都。
现代文：十一月十五日，皇上车驾莅临东都。
English: On November 13th, he drove to Dongdu.

古文：六年春正月癸亥朔，旦，有盗数十人，皆素冠练衣，焚香持华，自称弥勒佛，入自建国门。
现代文：大业六年正月初一，早晨，有数十名强盗，都戴着白帽，穿白衣，点着香拿着花，自称是弥勒佛，从建国门入城。
English: On the morning of the first day of the first month of the sixth year of the Taiei era, dozens of robbers, all wearing white hats and white clothes, lit incense and carried flowers, claiming to be Maitreya Buddha, entered the city from Jianguomen.

古文：监门者皆稽首。
现代文：守城门的人都向他们叩头致意。
English: The keepers of the gate bowed to them.

古文：既而夺卫士仗，将为乱。
现代文：不一会他们抢夺卫士的兵器，准备作乱。
English: They immediately snatched the guards' weapons and prepared to riot.

古文：齐王暕遇而斩之。
现代文：齐王杨遇到了，就杀了他们。
English: After seeing them, King Qi of Japan and Cambodia beheaded them.

古文：于是都下大索，与相连坐者千余家。
现代文：于是京都进行大搜捕，相互牵连而判罪的有一千多家。
English: As a result, there was a large-scale manhunt in Kyoto, and as many as a thousand people were implicated in the incident.

古文：丁丑，角抵大戏于端门街，天下奇伎异艺毕集，终月而罢。
现代文：十五日，表演摔跤杂技在端门街，天下奇特怪异的技艺全部汇集，演了整整一个月才结束。
English: On the 15th, a wrestling acrobatics show was held in Danmen Street, bringing together all the strange and bizarre skills in the world. The show lasted a whole month before it ended.

古文：帝数微服往观之。
现代文：炀帝曾多次穿便服前去观看。
English: Emperor Xizong wore casual clothes many times to watch the parade.

古文：己丑，倭国遣使贡方物。
现代文：二十七日，倭国派使臣前来贡献土产。
English: On the 27th, Wakoku sent an envoy to contribute to the production.

古文：二月乙巳，武贲郎将陈棱、朝请大夫张镇州击流求，破之，献俘万七千口，颁赐百官。
现代文：二月十三日，虎贲郎将陈棱、朝请大夫张镇州率兵攻打流求，击败了它，凯旋时献俘虏一万七千人，炀帝把他们分赐给百官为奴。
English: On February 13th, Tigress took Chen Ren and invited doctor Zhang Zhenzhou to lead an army to attack Liu Kui, defeating it. When he returned in triumph, he offered seventeen thousand captives, and Emperor Qian gave them to hundreds of officials as slaves.

古文：乙卯，诏曰： 夫帝图草创，王业艰难，咸仗股肱，叶同心德，用能拯厥颓运，克膺大宝，然后畴庸茂赏，开国承家，誓以山河，传之不朽。
现代文：二十三日，下诏书说： 天子创业十分艰难，全仗大臣同心同德，借此来挽救那衰败的命运，承受帝位，然后酬报功劳，大加赏赐，创建帝国，承继家业，用山河立誓，要使国家政权永不衰败。
English: On the 23rd, the next imperial edict said: "It is very difficult for a son of heaven to start a business, and all the ministers are of one mind and one heart, in order to save the fate of decline, inherit the throne, and then reward the merits, increase the reward, create an empire, inherit the family business, and swear by mountains and rivers that the national power will never decline.

古文：近代丧乱，四海未一，茅土妄假，名实相乖，历兹永久，莫能惩革。
现代文：近代丧乱，四海未一，受封的王侯颇多虚名，经历了很长的时间，没能变革。
English: The modern world is in turmoil, the four seas are not one, and the princes who have been named have quite a lot of false fame. They have experienced a long time and have not been able to change.

古文：皇运之初，百度伊始，犹循旧贯，未暇改作，今天下交泰，文轨攸同，宜率遵先典，永垂大训。
现代文：先皇立国之初，百事刚刚起步，仍然依循旧制，无暇改立新制。现在天下太平，文字车轨相同，应当遵循前代的典章制度，使先王的教令永远流传。
English: At the beginning of the founding of the first emperor, Pepsi was just getting started, still following the old system, and there was no time to change the new system. Now that the world is peaceful and the text is the same, it should follow the previous generation's award system, so that the king's edict will be passed down forever.

古文：自今已后，唯有功勋乃得赐封，仍令子孙承袭。 
现代文：从今以后，只有有功勋的人才能赐封，仍旧让其子孙承袭。 
English: From now on, only those with meritorious deeds can be awarded the title, and their descendants can still inherit it.

古文：丙辰，改封安德王雄为观王，河间王子庆为郇王。
现代文：二十四日，改封安德王杨雄为观王，河间王的儿子杨庆为郇王。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Ando Wangxiong was renamed as Guan Wang, and Kawama Wang's son, Qing, was renamed as Yao Wang.

古文：庚申，征魏、齐、周、陈乐人，悉配太常。
现代文：二十八日，征调魏、齐、周、陈等地的歌舞艺人，全部分配到大常寺。
English: On the 28th, musicians from Wei, Qi, Zhou and Chen regions were conscripted and all of them were sent to Taiji Temple.

古文：三月癸亥，幸江都宫。
现代文：三月初二，皇上驾莅江都宫。
English: On the second day of March, they went to the Jiangdu Palace.

古文：甲子，以鸿胪卿史祥为左骁卫大将军。
现代文：初三，任命鸿胪卿史祥为左骁卫大将军。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, he appointed Hongyuqing Shi Xiang as General of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards.

古文：夏四月丁未，宴江淮已南父老，颁赐各有差。
现代文：四月十六日，宴请江淮以南父老，并颁发给不同的赏赐。
English: On April 16th, Jiang Huai gave a banquet for his father and grandfather, and presented them with various awards.

古文：六月辛卯，室韦、赤土并遣使贡方物。
现代文：六月初一，室韦、赤土都派使臣来贡献土产。
English: On the first day of June, the cities of Muroto and Akatsuchi sent envoys to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：壬辰，雁门贼帅尉文通聚众三千，保于莫壁谷。
现代文：初二，雁门贼帅尉迟文通聚众三千人，在莫壁谷据守。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, Ganmen Zoku Shuai Fei Chiwen Tong gathered a crowd of three thousand people and held out in Mogi Valley.

古文：遣鹰扬杨伯泉击破之。
现代文：派鹰扬郎将杨伯泉率部击败了贼寇。
English: Yang Boquan and his troops were defeated by the bandits.

古文：甲寅，制江都太守秩同京尹。
现代文：二十四日，下诏江都太守的品第俸禄与京尹相同。
English: On the 24th, the salary of the next Empress Dowager was the same as that of the Empress Dowager.

古文：冬十月壬申，刑部尚书梁毗卒。
现代文：十月壬申日，刑部尚书梁毗去世。
English: In the winter of October in Jinshin, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shang Shuliang, passed away.

古文：壬子，民部尚书、银青光禄大夫长孙炽卒。
现代文：十四日，民部尚书、银青光禄大夫长孙炽去世。
English: On the 14th, the great-grandson of Dr. Shang Shu and Dr. Yin Qing Guanglu of the Ministry of Civil Affairs passed away.

古文：十二月己未，左光禄大夫、吏部尚书牛弘卒。
现代文：十二月初三，左光禄大夫、吏部尚书牛弘去世。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, Dr. Sakoroku and the head of the personnel department, Shoshu Ushihiro passed away.

古文：辛酉，硃崖人王万昌举兵作乱，遣陇西太守韩洪讨平之。
现代文：初五，朱崔人王万昌起兵作乱，派陇西太守韩洪讨伐平定了它。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Wang Wanchang, a man from Zhujiajie, started a mutiny and sent Han Hong, the governor of Shaanxi Province, to settle the matter.

古文：七年春正月壬寅，左武卫大将军、光禄大夫、真定侯郭衍卒。
现代文：大业七年正月十六日，左武卫大将军、光禄大夫、真定侯郭衍去世。
English: On the 16th day of the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, General Zuo Wuwei, Doctor Guanglu, and Prince Guoyan passed away.

古文：二月己未，上升钓台，临扬子津，大宴百僚，颁赐各有差。
现代文：二月初三，皇上登钓台，驾莅扬子津，大宴百官，按等级赏赐他们。
English: On the 3rd day of the 2nd month, the emperor boarded the fishing platform, drove to Yangtze River, held a grand banquet for hundreds of officials, and rewarded them according to their ranks.

古文：庚申，百济遣使朝贡。
现代文：十六日，百济派使臣前来朝贡。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Baekje sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：乙亥，上自江都御龙舟入通济渠，遂幸于涿郡。
现代文：十九日，皇上从江都乘龙舟驶入通济渠，于是驾临涿郡。
English: On the 19th, the emperor took a dragon boat from Jiangdu to Tongji Canal, and then went to Jiu County.

古文：壬午，诏曰： 武有七德，先之以安民；政有六本，兴之以教义。
现代文：二十六日，下诏书说： 军事工作有七件大事，首要的是安民。政治有六件基础的东西，要靠教授道义来振兴。
English: On the 26th, he issued the following edict: "Wu has seven virtues, the first of which is peace and security for the people; politics has six, the first of which is doctrine.

古文：高丽高元，亏失籓礼，将欲问罪辽左，恢宣胜略。
现代文：高丽国的高元缺失了属国应有的礼节，朕想前往辽东问罪，弘扬我克敌制胜的谋略。
English: Gao Yuan of Goryeo lacked the proper etiquette of a vassal state. I want to go to Liaodong to ask for forgiveness and promote my strategy to defeat the enemy and win.

古文：虽怀伐国，仍事省方。
现代文：虽然关怀高丽人民，但只是从事视察地方的工作。
English: Although they care about the people of Korea, they are only engaged in the work of inspecting places.

古文：今往涿郡，巡抚民俗。
现代文：现在到涿郡去，巡视安抚民心习俗。
English: Now I'm going to Min County to supervise folk customs.

古文：其河北诸郡及山西、山东年九十已上者，版授太守，八十者授县令。 
现代文：黄河北部各郡及崤山东西部地区凡年满九十的人，册令授予太守官衔，满八十岁的人，授予县令官衔。 
English: In counties in the northern part of the Yellow River and in the eastern and western regions of Lushan, those who are over ninety years old will be awarded the official title of Taizhou by order, and those who are over eighty years old will be awarded the official title of county magistrate.

古文：三月丁亥，右光禄大夫、左屯卫大将军姚辩卒。
现代文：三月初二，右光禄大夫、左屯卫大将军姚辩去世。
English: On the second day of March, Yao Yan, doctor of the Right Guangluqing and general of the Left Tunwei, passed away.

古文：夏四月庚午，至涿郡之临朔宫。
现代文：四月十五日，炀帝到涿郡的临朔宫。
English: On April 15th, Emperor Qian went to the Linshuo Palace in Qian County.

古文：五月戊子，以武威太守樊子盖为民部尚书。
现代文：五月初四，任命武威太守樊子盖为民部尚书。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, Wuwei's grand vizier, Zizi Gai, was appointed minister of the people.

古文：秋，大水，山东、河南漂没三十余郡，民相卖为奴婢。
现代文：秋天，发水灾，崤山以东、黄河以南地区淹没了三十多郡，百姓多卖为奴婢。
English: In the autumn, there was a great flood, and more than 30 counties in Shandong and Henan were flooded, and people scrambled to be sold as slaves.

古文：冬十月乙卯，底柱山崩，偃河逆流数十里。
现代文：十月初四，砥柱山崩塌，堵塞河道，迫使黄河水倒流数十里。
English: On the fourth day of October, Mount Tianzhu collapsed, blocking the river and forcing the Yellow River to flow back dozens of miles.

古文：戊午，以东平太守吐万绪为左屯卫大将军。
现代文：初七，任命东平太守吐万绪为左屯卫大将军。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he appointed the Dongping Daju, Tu Wansu, as the General of the Left Tunwei.

古文：十二月己未，西面突厥处罗多利可汗来朝。
现代文：十二月初八，西面突厥处罗多利可汗前来朝见天子。
English: On the 8th day of the 12th month, Rodoli Khan from the West Turkic Department came to see the heavenly son.

古文：上大悦，接以殊礼。
现代文：皇上大为高兴，以特殊礼仪接待。
English: The Emperor was very pleased and received them with special etiquette.

古文：于时辽东战士及餽运者填咽于道，昼夜不绝，苦役者始为群盗。
现代文：此时辽东战士及运送物资的人堵塞在路上，昼夜不断，苦于兵役徭役的人开始成群为盗。
English: At this time, Liaodong soldiers and people transporting materials were jammed on the road, day and night, and people suffering from military service and service began to steal in droves.

古文：甲子，敕都尉、鹰扬与郡县相知追捕，随获斩决之。
现代文：十三日，责令都尉、鹰扬与郡县配合追捕，一旦抓获，随即斩决。
English: On the 13th, he ordered captains, eagles, and counties to hunt down, capture, and immediately behead Zhuang.

