古文：王天下有三重焉，其寡过矣乎！
现代文：治理天下能够做好议订礼仪，制订法度，考订文字规范这三件重要的事，就可以减少过失了吧！
English: There are three important things to do to rule the world. If you do them well, you will reduce losses.

古文：上焉者虽善，无征。
现代文：居于上位的人，虽然品行很好，但没有政绩。
English: Those at the top, despite their good conduct, have no political achievements.

古文：无征，不信。不信，民弗从。
现代文：没有政绩，就不能使人信服，不能使人信服，老百姓就不会听从。
English: Without political achievements, it is impossible to convince people, and without convincing people, the people will not listen.

古文：下焉者虽善，不尊。不尊，不信。不信，民弗从。
现代文：居于下位的人，虽然品行很好，但由于没有尊贵的地位，也不能使人信服，不能使人信服，老百姓就不会听从。
English: Although the people in the lower ranks are of good moral character, they cannot convince people because they do not have a high position. If they cannot convince people, the people will not listen to them.

古文：故君子之道，本诸身，征诸庶民。
现代文：所以，君子治理天下，先修养自身的德行，并从老百姓那里得到验证。
English: Therefore, for a gentleman to govern the world, he must first cultivate his own virtue and get verification from the common people.

古文：考诸三王而不缪，建诸天地而不悖。质诸鬼神而无疑，百世以俟圣人而不惑。
现代文：考查夏、商、周三代先王的做法而没有背谬，立于天地之间而没有悖理的地方，质询于鬼神而没有可疑的地方，百世以后待到圣人来验证也没有什么不理解的地方。
English: There is no fallacy in examining the practices of Xia, Shang and the three dynasties of the Middle Kingdom, no contradiction in standing between heaven and earth, no doubt in questioning ghosts and gods, and no misunderstanding in staying with saints to verify after a hundred lifetimes.

古文：质诸鬼神而无疑，知天也。百世以俟圣人而不惑，知人也。
现代文：质询于鬼神而没有疑问，这是知道天理；百世以后待到圣人出现也没有什么不理解的地方，这是知道人意。
English: To question the gods and spirits without doubt is to know the truth of heaven; to wait for a saint to appear after a hundred lifetimes is to know the will of man.

古文：是故君子动而世为天下道，行而世为天下法，言而世为天下则。
现代文：所以君子的举动能世世代代成为天下的法则，君子的行为能世世代代成为天下的法度，君子的言谈能世世代代成为天下的准则。
English: Therefore, the actions of a gentleman can become the law of the world for generations, the actions of a gentleman can become the law of the world for generations, and the words of a gentleman can become the standard of the world for generations.

古文：远之，则有望；近之，则不厌。
现代文：在远处有威望，在近处也不使人厌恶。
English: He is respected far away, but not despised at home.

古文：诗曰： 在彼无恶，在此无射；庶几夙夜，以永终誉。 
现代文：《诗经》说， 在那里没有人憎恶，在这里没有人厌烦，日日夜夜操劳啊，为了保持美好的名望。 
English: The "Song of Songs" says, "There is no one to hate, here there is no one to loathe, day and night they toil to maintain a good reputation."

古文：君子未有不如此，而蚤有誉于天下者也。
现代文：君子没有不这样做而能够早早在天下获得名望的。
English: There is no gentleman who can gain fame in the world at an early stage without doing so.

