古文：◎礼三
现代文：礼三
English: Third chorus

古文：社稷朝日夕月先农先蚕高禖祭告祈报神祇星辰灵星寿星太岁月将风云雷雨岳镇海渎山川城隍
现代文：社稷朝日夕月先农先蚕高禖祭告祈报神祇星辰灵星寿星太岁月将风云雷雨岳镇海渎山川城隍
English: The morning sun, the evening moon, the farmer's son, the silkworm, the sorghum festival, the announcement and prayer of the gods, the stars, the spirit, the stars, the life, the stars, the years, the clouds, the thunderstorms, the mountain town, the sea, the mountains and rivers, the city.

古文：社稷
现代文：社稷
English: Society

古文：社稷之祀，自京师以及王国府州县皆有之。其坛在宫城西南者，曰太社稷。
现代文：社稷的祭祀，从京都到王国府州县都有。祭坛位于宫城西南的，称焉太社稷。
English: Sacrifices for the shrine can be found from Kyoto to the prefectures of the Kingdom of Japan. The altar is located in the southwest of Miyagi, and is known as the Grand Shrine.

古文：明初建太社在东，太稷在西，坛皆北向。
现代文：明朝初年在东方建造社坛，在西方建造稷坛，祭坛都面向北方。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the altar was built in the east and the altar in the west, with the altars facing north.

古文：洪武元年，中书省臣定议： 周制，小宗伯掌建国之神位，右社稷，左宗庙。
现代文：洪武元年，中书省大臣议定： 周朝的制度，小宗伯掌管建国的神位，右为社稷，左为宗庙。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the Chinese Minister of Literature and Calligraphy agreed: the system of the Zhou Dynasty, with Xiao Zongbo in charge of the founding of the country, the right for the shrine, and the left for the ancestral temple.

古文：社稷之祀，坛而不屋。
现代文：社稷的祭祀，建祭坛不建殿宇。
English: When it comes to social rites, building an altar is not the same as building a shrine.

古文：其制在中门之外，外门之内。
现代文：其制度建在中门之外，外门之内。
English: Its system is built outside the middle gate and inside the outer gate.

古文：尊而亲之，与先祖等。
现代文：尊崇而又亲近，与先祖同等对待。
English: Revered and close, they are treated the same as their ancestors.

古文：然天子有三社。
现代文：然而天子有三社。
English: However, there are three shrines to Tenshi.

古文：为群姓立者曰太社。
现代文：为天下百姓设立的为太社。
English: For Taisha, which was established for the people of the world.

古文：其自为立者曰王社。
现代文：为自己设立的为王社。
English: He founded the Wei Wang Society for himself.

古文：又胜国之社屋之，国虽亡而存之，以重神也。
现代文：被减前朝的社坛建殿宇覆盖，国家虽然被灭了也要存留，是敬重神只的原故。
English: It is the reason why the shrines and temples built by the previous dynasty have been covered, and why the country should remain even though it has been destroyed.

古文：后世天子惟立太社、太稷。
现代文：后代天子祇立太社、太稷。
English: Subsequent generations of heavenly sons established Taisha and Taiko.

古文：汉高祖立官太社、太稷，一岁各再祀。
现代文：汉高祖为太社、太稷设官吏，一年乏中各祭祀两次。
English: The ancestors of Hango were officials of Taisha and Taiko, and they held two mid-year festivals each year.

古文：光武立太社稷于洛阳宗庙之右，春秋二仲月及腊，一岁三祀。
现代文：光武帝在洛阳宗庙的右边设太社稷，春秋雨季的第二个月及腊月，一年三次祭祀。
English: Emperor Guangwu set up a grand shrine on the right side of the Luoyang ancestral temple. The second month of the spring and autumn rainy season and the waxing gibbous moon, three times a year.

古文：唐因隋制，并建社稷于含光门右，仲春、秋戊日祭之。
现代文：唐沿袭了隋的制度，在含光门右侧建社稷坛，二月、八月的戊日举行祭祀。
English: The Tang Dynasty followed the system of the Sui Dynasty and built a shrine and altar on the right side of the Han Kuang Gate, and held religious services on the Ides of February and August.

古文：玄宗升社稷为大祀，仍令四时致祭。
现代文：玄宗升社稷为大祀，仍旧下令四时致祭。
English: Even though Xuanzong was elevated to the position of grand priest, he still ordered that the offering be made at four o'clock.

古文：宋制如东汉时。
现代文：宋的制度如同束汉时。
English: The Song system is similar to the Han system.

古文：元世祖营社稷于和义门内，以春秋二仲上戊日祭。
现代文：元世祖在和义门内营建社稷坛，在二月、八月的上旬的戊日举行祭祀。
English: The original founder built a shrine and altar inside the gate, and held religious services on the third day of the month of February and the first half of August.

古文：今宜祀以春秋二仲月上戊日。 
现代文：而今宜于在二月、八月两月的上旬的戊日举行祭祀。 
English: Now, it is appropriate to hold the ritual on the first day of the month of February and the first day of August.

古文：是年二月，太祖亲祀太社、太稷。
现代文：这年二月，太祖亲自祭祀太社、太稷。
English: In February of that year, the great ancestor himself held a ceremony to enshrine Taisha and Taiko.

古文：社配以后土，西向。
现代文：社由后土配祀，面向西。
English: The shrine is located at the back of the community and faces west.

古文：稷配以后稷，东向。
现代文：稷以后稷配祀，面向东。
English: After,  and  are aligned, facing east.

古文：帝服皮弁服，省牲；通天冠、绛纱袍，行三献礼。
现代文：皇帝穿皮弁服，视察祭牲；戴通天冠、穿绛纱袍，行三献礼。
English: The emperor put on the furs and inspected the sacrificial animals. He wore a crown and a gauze robe, and made three offerings.

古文：初，帝命中书省翰林院议创屋，备风雨。
现代文：起初，皇帝命中书省翰林院商议建殿宇，防备风雨。
English: At first, the emperor ordered the Hanlin Academy of the Ministry of Education to discuss the construction of the hall to protect it from wind and rain.

古文：学士陶安言： 天子太社必受风雨霜露。
现代文：学士陶安说： 天子太社必须经受风雨霜露。
English: Tao An, a bachelor, said: Tianzi Taisha must endure the wind, rain and frost.

古文：亡国之社则屋之，不受天阳也。
现代文：亡国的社便建殿宇覆盖，是不接受天光。
English: After the death of the country, the shrine built a hall to cover it, and did not accept natural light.

古文：建屋非宜。
现代文：所以建殿宇不恰当。
English: Therefore, it is inappropriate to build a shrine.

古文：若遇风雨，则请于斋宫望祭。 
现代文：如若遇到风雨，就请在斋宫遥祭。 
English: If you encounter wind or rain, please go to the remote festival at the temple.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从其说。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：三年，于坛北建祭殿五间，又北建拜殿五间，以备风雨。
现代文：洪武三年，在坛北建祭殿五间，再在北边建拜殿五问，以防风雨。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, five sacrificial halls were built on the north side of the altar, and five worship halls were built on the north side to prevent wind and rain.

古文：十年，太祖以社稷分祭，配祀未当，下礼官议，尚书张筹言：
现代文：洪武十年，太祖认为社稷分祭，配祀不当，下交礼部官员商议。
English: In the 10th year of Hongwu, Taizu thought that the distribution of offerings was inappropriate, so he consulted with officials from the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：按《通典》，颛顼祀共工氏子句龙为后土。
现代文：尚书张筹说：按《通典》记载，颛项祭祀共工氏的儿子句龙为后土。
English: Shangshu Zhang Ge said, "According to the records of the "Tongxian," the son of Gu Long, who was a co-worker of Xiang Xiang, was the back soil.

古文：后土，社也。
现代文：后土，就是社。
English: The hinterland is Tsumo.

古文：烈山氏子柱为稷。
现代文：祭祀烈山氏的儿子柱焉稷。
English: The son of the Reizan clan, Zhu Yan, is sacrificed.

古文：稷，田正也。
现代文：稷，就是田正。
English: In the back, there is a field officer.

古文：唐、虞、夏因之。
现代文：唐、虞、夏继承下来。
English: Tang, Yu and Xia succeeded.

古文：此社稷所由始也。
现代文：这是社稷的起始。
English: This was the beginning of the company.

古文：商汤因旱迁社，以后稷代柱。
现代文：商汤因为干旱改迁社，以后稷代替柱。
English: Due to the drought, the soup kitchen was moved to a new location, and later, the straw replaced the pillar.

古文：欲迁句龙，无可继者，故止。
现代文：想要迁句龙，役人能够继承，因而作罢。
English: If officials want to change the sentence, they can inherit it, so they can do it.

古文：然王肃谓社祭句龙，稷祭后稷，皆人鬼，非地祇。
现代文：然而王肃认为社祭句龙，稷祭后稷，都是人鬼，并非地只。
English: However, Wang Su believed that both the dragon and the cocoon were human ghosts, not ghosts from the earth.

古文：而陈氏《礼书》又谓社祭五土之祇，稷祭五谷之神。
现代文：而陈氏《礼书》又认为社祭五土的地只，稷祭五谷的神灵。
English: However, Chen's "Book of Etiquette" also believes that only the land of the five lands can be used for social sacrifice, and the gods of the five valleys can be used for sacrificial offerings.

古文：郑康成亦谓社为五土总神，稷为原隰之神。
现代文：郑康成也说社为五土总神，稷为原野之神。
English: Zheng Kangcheng also said that Sha was the supreme god of the five lands, and Ya was the god of the wilderness.

古文：句龙有平水土功，故配社，后稷有播种功，故配稷。
现代文：句龙有治水土的功德，因而配社，后稷有播种的功德，因而配稷。
English: Qulong has the merit of controlling water and soil, and thus is a matchmaker, while Houyi has the merit of sowing seeds, and thus is a matchmaker.

古文：二说不同。
现代文：两种说法不同。
English: The two accounts differ.

古文：汉元始中，以夏禹配官社，后稷配官稷。
现代文：汉元始年问，以夏禹配官社，后稷配官稷。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, Hsia Yu was appointed to the office, and Hou Yi was appointed to the post.

古文：唐、宋及元又以句龙配社，周弃配稷。
现代文：唐、宋及元又以句龙配社，周的弃配稷。
English: Tang, Song and Yuan dynasties also used the dragon to match the company, and Zhou abandoned the match.

古文：此配祀之制，初无定论也。
现代文：这就是配祀的制度，超初并无定论。
English: This is the system of matchmaking, and there is no conclusion at the very beginning.

古文：至社稷分合之义，《书召诰》言 社于新邑 ，孔注曰： 社稷共牢。 
现代文：至于社稷分合的道理，《书召诰》说 在新邑举行社稷 ，孔注为： 社稷共享牲牢。 
English: As for the reason for the separation of social groups, "Book Call" said that social groups should be held in Xinyi, with the annotation: Social groups should share animal prisons.

古文：《周礼》 封人掌设王之社壝 ，注云： 不言稷者，举社则稷从之。 
现代文：《周礼》 封人掌管设立王的社坛 ，注说： 不说稷，是因为举行社祭则稷祭合在一起。 
English: "Weekly Rituals," the person in charge of setting up Wang's community hall, said: "I don't say "we," because when a community festival is held, the "we" festival is held together.

古文：陈氏《礼书》曰： 稷非土无以生，土非稷无以见生生之效，故祭社必及稷。 
现代文：陈氏《礼书》说： 百谷没有土地无法生长，土地不种百谷显不出生养的功效，因而祭社必定连及稷。 
English: Mr. Chen's "Book of Rites" says: "Without land, a hundred grains cannot grow, and without land, a hundred grains cannot be cultivated. Therefore, the shrine must be connected to the earth.

古文：《山堂考索》曰： 社为九土之尊，稷为五谷之长，稷生于土，则社与稷固不可分。 
现代文：《山堂考索》说： 社为九土之尊，稷为五谷之长，谷物生于土地，那么社与稷本来就不可分。 
English: "Sando Kousou" says: Society is the honor of the nine lands, and the plow is the head of the grain, and the grain is born in the land, then society and the plow are originally inseparable.

古文：其宜合祭，古有明证。
现代文：宜于共同祭祀，自古就有明证。
English: Since ancient times, there has been clear evidence that it is appropriate to hold joint sacrifices.

古文：请社稷共为一坛。
现代文：请求社稷共建一坛。
English: Ask the community to build a shrine together.

古文：至句龙，共工氏之子也，祀之无义。
现代文：至于句龙，是共工氏的儿子，祭他役什么意义。
English: As for Gu Long, he was the son of a co-worker, so what was the significance of sacrificing him?

古文：商汤欲迁未果。
现代文：商汤想要替换没有结果。
English: Shangtang tried to replace it, but to no avail.

古文：汉尝易以夏禹，而夏禹今已列祀帝王之次，弃稷亦配先农。
现代文：汉曾经换祭夏禹，但现在夏禹已经位于帝王之列受祀。弃稷也配祀先农。
English: The Han Dynasty once changed the festival of Xia Yu, but now Xia Yu has been enshrined in the line of emperors.

古文：请罢句龙、弃配位，谨奉仁祖淳皇帝配享，以成一代盛典。
现代文：恳请罢除句龙、弃的配位，谨奉仁祖淳皇帝配享，以成就一代的盛典。
English: I earnestly request that you remove the sentence dragon and the abandoned coordination, and I would like to pay tribute to Emperor Renzuchun for sharing, so as to achieve a grand ceremony for a generation.

古文：遂改作于午门之右，社稷共为一坛。
现代文：于是改在午门之右建造，社稷共为一坛。
English: As a result, the construction was changed to the right of the noon gate, and the shrine became one altar.

古文：初，社稷列中祀，及以仁祖配，乃升为上祀。
现代文：起初，社稷列于中等祭祀，等到以仁祖配祀，就升为上等祭祀。
English: At first, the shrine was ranked as a middle-ranking ritual, but when it was combined with the worship of the benevolent ancestor, it was promoted to a higher-ranking ritual.

古文：具冕服以祭，行奉安礼。
现代文：穿戴冕服举行祭祀，行奉安礼。
English: Wearing coronation robes, they held a religious service and performed a welcome ceremony.

古文：十一年春，祭社稷行新定仪。
现代文：洪武十一年春，祭社稷实行新制定的仪程。
English: In the spring of the 11th year of Hongwu, the newly formulated ritual was implemented.

古文：迎神、饮福、送神凡十二拜，馀如旧。
现代文：迎神、饮福、送神共十二拜，其余照旧。
English: There will be a total of twelve prostrations to welcome the gods, drink blessings, and send blessings to the gods, and the rest will be the same.

古文：建文时，更奉太祖配，永乐中。
现代文：建文年问，改换供奉太祖配祀。
English: In the year of Jianwen, it was changed to be dedicated to the Great Ancestor.

古文：北京社稷坛成，制如南京。
现代文：永乐年问，北京社稷坛建成，制度如同南京。
English: Beijing's Great Hall of the People has been completed, and the system is similar to that of Nanjing.

古文：洪熙后，奉太祖、太宗同配。
现代文：洪熙以后，奉太祖、太宗共同配祀。
English: After Hongxi, it was common to worship the Great Patriarch and the Great Patriarch together.

古文：旧制，上丁释奠孔子，次日上戊祀社稷。
现代文：旧的制度，上旬丁日在学校祭祀孔子，第二天即上旬戊日祭祀社稷。
English: Under the old system, the Confucius memorial service was held at school in the early part of the fourth day, and at the shrine in the early part of the fifth day.

古文：弘治十七年八月，上丁在初十日，上戊在朔日，礼官请以十一日祀社稷。御史金洪劾之，言如此则中戊，非上戊矣。
现代文：弘治十七年八月，上丁在初十，上戊在下月初一，礼部官员奏请在十一日祭祀社稷御史金洪弹劾他们，说照这样就是中戊，而非上戊了。
English: In August of the seventeenth year of Hongzhi, when Shang Ding was in the tenth month of the year, and Shang Wu was in the first month of the next month, the officials of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies requested Jin Hong to impeach them on the eleventh day of the month, saying that this was the Middle Wu, not the Upper Wu.

古文：礼部覆奏言： 洪武二十年尝以十一日为上戊，失不始今日。 
现代文：礼部覆奏说： 洪武二十年，曾经以十一日为上戊，失误不是从今天开始的。 
English: The etiquette department replied, "In the past twenty years of Hongwu, the eleventh day of the month has been the most auspicious day. Mistakes do not start from today.

古文：命遵旧制，仍用上戊。
现代文：下令遵照旧制，仍旧用上戊日。
English: The order follows the old system and still uses the last day of the month.

古文：嘉靖九年谕礼部： 天地至尊，次则宗庙，又次则社稷。
现代文：嘉靖九年谕令礼部： 天地为至尊，其次为宗庙，再次为社稷。
English: In the ninth year of the Jiajing Emperor, he ordered the ritual department: Heaven and earth are supreme, followed by the ancestral temple, and then the shrine.

古文：今奉祖配天，又奉祖配社，此礼官之失也。
现代文：而今奉祖配天，又奉祖配社，这是礼官的失误。
English: Now, however, it is a mistake for the etiquette officials to worship the ancestors in the name of heaven and society.

古文：宜改从皇祖旧制，太社以句龙配，太稷以后稷配。 
现代文：虑当改从皇祖旧制，太社以句龙配祀，太稷以后稷配祀。 
English: In consideration of the change from the old system of the emperor's ancestors, the Taisha was enshrined with a dragon, and after the Taisho, it was enshrined with a dragon.

古文：乃以更正社稷坛配位礼，告太庙及社稷，遂藏二配位于寝庙，更定行八拜礼。
现代文：于是因此更正社稷坛配位的礼仪，祭告太庙及社稷，便在寝庙中收藏两个配位，复位行八拜礼。
English: As a result, the etiquette of the alignment of the altar of the shrine was corrected, the temple and the shrine were announced, two alignments were collected in the sleeping temple, and eight prayers were restored.

古文：其坛在西苑豳风亭之西者，曰帝社稷。
现代文：祭坛在西苑豳风亭西面的，是帝社稷。
English: The altar on the west side of the West Courtyard Pavilion is the Imperial Pavilion.

古文：东帝社，西帝稷，皆北向。
现代文：东焉帝社，西为帝稷，都是面向北。
English: The Imperial Shrine in the east and the Imperial Palace in the west both face north.

古文：始名西苑土谷坛。
现代文：开始称为西苑土谷坛。
English: It was originally called the West Courtyard Valley Altar.

古文：嘉靖十年，帝谓土谷坛亦社稷耳，何以别于太社稷？
现代文：嘉靖十年，皇帝说土谷坛也是社稷坛，为什么有别于太社稷？
English: In the 10th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the emperor said that the earthen valley altar was also a shrine altar, why was it different from the great shrine altar?

古文：张璁等言： 古者天子称王，今若称王社、王稷，与王府社稷名同。
现代文：张璁等人说： 古代天子称王，现在如果称为王社、王稷，就与王府的社稷名称相同。
English: Zhang Qian and others said: In ancient times, the Son of Heaven was called the king. Now, if it is called the king's shrine or the king's palace, it is the same as the name of the palace.

古文：前定神牌曰五土谷之神，名义至当。 
现代文：从前定神牌为五土谷之神，名义很恰当。 
English: Formerly, the deity was the god of Watsuchidani, which is a very appropriate name.

古文：帝采帝耤之义，改为帝社、帝稷，以上戊明日祭。
现代文：皇帝采用帝藉之义，改为帝社、帝稷，在上戊的第二天祭祀。
English: The emperor adopted the principle of imperial succession and changed the name to Imperial Shrine and Imperial Throne, and the ritual began on the second day of Shangwu.

古文：后改次戊，次戊在望后，则仍用上巳。
现代文：后来改为第二个戊日，第二个戊日在十五以后，就仍在上巳日。
English: Later it was changed to the second day of the month, and after the fifteenth day of the second month, it was still the first day of the month.

古文：春告秋报为定制。
现代文：春季告礼、秋季报礼成为定制。
English: Spring's farewell and autumn's report have become custom-made.

古文：隆庆元年，礼部言： 帝社稷之名，自古所无，嫌于烦数，宜罢。 
现代文：隆庆元年，礼部说： 帝社稷的名称，古来没有，太过繁琐，应该罢除。 
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, the Ministry of Ceremonies said: The name of the Imperial Household Agency, which has not existed since ancient times, is too cumbersome and should be abolished.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从了他们的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：中都亦有太社坛，洪武四年建。
现代文：中都也有太社坛，洪武四年建造。
English: Zhongdu also has a community center, which was built by Hongwu in four years.

古文：取五方土以筑。
现代文：取五方之土筑成。
English: It was built by taking soil from five directions.

古文：直隶、河南进黄土，浙江、福建、广东、广西进赤土，江西、湖广、陕西进白土，山东进青土，北平进黑土。
现代文：直隶、河南进献黄土，浙江、福建、广东、广西进献红土，江西、湖广、陕西进献白土，山东进献青土，北平进献黑土。
English: Zhili and Henan donated yellow soil, Zhejiang, Fujian, Guangdong and Guangxi donated red soil, Jiangxi, Hunan and Shaanxi donated white soil, Shandong donated blue soil, and Beiping donated black soil.

古文：天下府县千三百余城，各土百斤，取于名山高爽之地。
现代文：天下府县一千三百余座城市，各献土一百斤，在名山高处爽朗之地挖取。
English: More than 1,300 cities, prefectures and counties around the world each donated 100 jin of soil, which was excavated from the high places of famous mountains.

古文：王国社稷，洪武四年定。
现代文：诸王藩国社稷，洪武四年确定。
English: It was determined that Hongwu would be the ruler of the Zhuwang Domain for four years.

古文：十一年，礼臣言： 太社稷既同坛合祭，王国各府州县亦宜同坛，称国社国稷之神，不设配位。 
现代文：洪武十一年，礼部大臣说： 太社稷既然已同坛共同祭祀，诸王藩国各府州县也应同坛，称国社国稷之神，不设置配位。 
English: In the eleventh year of Hongwu, the Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies said: Since Taishakuten has been jointly worshipped with the altar, all kings, clans, provinces, and counties should also worship with the altar, calling it the god of the national shrine and the national shrine, and no coordination should be set.

古文：诏可。
现代文：诏令许可。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：十三年九月，复定制两坛一壝如初式。
现代文：洪武十三年九月，如同起初的样式恢复为两座坛一道矮墙。
English: In September of the thirteenth year of Hongwu, it was restored to its original form of two altars and a low wall.

古文：十八年，定王国祭社稷山川等仪，行十二拜礼。
现代文：洪武十八年，规定诸王藩国祭祀社稷山川等的仪程，行十二拜礼。
English: In the 18th year of Hongwu, it was stipulated that the rituals of the kings, domains, and countries would be held in the mountains and rivers, and twelve worship services would be held.

古文：府州县社稷，洪武元年颁坛制于天下郡邑，俱设于本城西北，右社左稷。
现代文：府州县的社稷，洪武元年颁布祭坛制度于天下郡邑，都设在本城西北，右社左稷。
English: The shrines in Fuzhou County, and the shrines in Tianxia County, which promulgated the altar system in the first year of Hongwu, are all located in the northwest of the city, with the right shrine on the left.

古文：十一年，定同坛合祭如京师。
现代文：洪武十一年，规定照京城同坛共同祭祀。
English: In the eleventh year of Hongwu, it was decided to hold a joint sacrifice according to the custom of the capital city.

古文：献官以守御武臣为初献，文官为亚献、终献。
现代文：献礼官由守御武将行初献，文官行亚献、终献。
English: The first offering is made by the military commander, and the second and final offering is made by the civil official.

古文：十三年，溧水县祭社稷，以牛醢代鹿醢。
现代文：十三年，溧水县祭社稷，以牛醢代替鹿醢。
English: In the thirteenth year, the festival of Ershui County began to replace the deer with oxen.

古文：礼部言： 定制，祭物缺者许以他物代。 
现代文：礼部说： 制度规定，祭物缺少的允许用其它物品代替。 
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies said: According to the system, it is allowed to replace the missing offerings with other items.

古文：帝曰： 所谓缺者，以非土地所产。
现代文：皇帝说： 所谓缺少，是指非本地出产的。
English: The emperor said: The so-called shortage refers to non-local products.

古文：溧水固有鹿，是有司故为苟简也。
现代文：溧水县本来有鹿，这是主管官吏故意随便简慢。
English: There used to be deer in Surabaya County, but the officials in charge were deliberately slow to act.

古文：百司所以能理其职而尽民事者，以其常存敬惧之心耳。
现代文：百官之所以能尽到职责办理人民之事务，是因为他们常存敬畏之心。
English: The reason why officials are able to perform their duties and manage the affairs of the people is because they always have a sense of awe.

古文：神犹忽之，于人事又何惧焉！ 
现代文：对神都疏忽，对人事又有什么畏惧呢。 
English: They are careless about God, and have no fear of man.

古文：命论如律。
现代文：命按刑法论罪。
English: He was ordered to plead guilty in accordance with the criminal law.

古文：乃敕礼部下天下郡邑，凡祭祀必备物，苟非地产、无从市鬻者，听其缺。
现代文：于是敕命礼部下达天下郡邑，凡是祭祀必须备好祭品，如果非本地出产、无从购买的，听任其缺。
English: As a result, sacrificial rites have spread to every county and town in the country. All sacrificial offerings must be prepared, and if they are not produced locally and cannot be purchased, they should be left out.

古文：十四年，令三献皆以文职长官，武官不与。
现代文：洪武十四年，令三献礼都由文职长官施行，武官不参加。
English: In the 14th year of Hongwu, the three offerings were all carried out by civilian officials, and military officers did not participate.

古文：里社，每里一百户立坛一所，祀五土五谷之神。
现代文：里社，每里一百户人家设立一座坛，祭祀五土五谷的神灵。
English: According to the legend, every hundred households in the village set up an altar to worship the gods of the five lands and five valleys.

古文：朝日夕月
现代文：朝日夕月
English: Morning sun, evening moon

古文：洪武三年，礼部言：
现代文：洪武三年，礼部说：
English: In the third year of Hongwu, the Ministry of Ceremonies said:

古文：古者祀日月之礼有六。
现代文：古代祭祀日月的礼仪有六种。
English: There are six kinds of ancient rituals for the worship of the sun and moon.

古文：《郊特牲》曰： 郊之祭，大报天而主日，配以月 ，一也。
现代文：《郊特牲》上说， 郊祭大报天以日为主，以月为配 ，这是第一种。
English: "Suburban special sacrifice" said that the suburban festival broadsheet day is mainly the day, with the moon as the match, which is the first kind.

古文：《玉藻》曰： 翰日于东门之外 ，《祭义》曰： 祭日于东郊，祭月于西郊 ，二也。
现代文：《玉藻》上说， 在东门之外设朝日坛 ，《祭义》上说， 在束郊祭日，在西郊祭月 ，这是第二种。
English: "Tamamo" says that an altar to the rising sun should be set up outside the east gate, and "Saigi" says that it should be set up on the festival day in the suburbs and on the festival month in the western suburbs. This is the second type.

古文：《小宗伯》： 肆类于四郊，兆日于东郊，兆月于西郊 ，三也。
现代文：《小宗伯》， 在四郊祭天，在柬郊祭日，在西郊祭月 ，这是第三种。
English: "Little Zongbo," in the four suburbs, the day of the festival, in the Cambodian suburbs, in the western suburbs, the month of the festival, this is the third kind.

古文：《月令》：孟冬 祈来年于天宗 ，天宗，日月之类，四也。
现代文：《月令》孟冬 向天宗祈求来年 ，天宗，就是日月之类，这是第四种。
English: "Lunar Calendar" by Meng Dong Praying to the Heavenly Patriarch for the coming year, the Heavenly Patriarch is like the sun and the moon, which is the fourth kind.

古文：《觐礼》： 拜日于东门之外，反祀方明，礼日于南门之外，礼月于北门之外 ，五也。 霜雪风雨之不时，则禜日月 ，六也。
现代文：《觐礼》， 在束门之外拜日，返回在方明坛祭祀上下四方神明，在南门之外礼日，在北门之外礼月 ，这是第五种。 霜雪风雨没有定时，就荣祭日月 ，这是第六种。
English: This is the fifth kind of "sacred rites," worshiping the sun outside the bunch gate, returning to the Fangming Altar to worship the gods of the four directions, the day of worship outside the south gate, and the month of worship outside the north gate. Frost, snow, wind and rain are not timed, and the Rong Festival is the sun and moon, which is the sixth kind.

古文：说者谓因郊祀而祀之，非正祀也。
现代文：论说者以为随着郊祀来祭它们，不是正式的祭祀。
English: The commentator thought that they were offered along with the suburb worship, not the formal worship.

古文：类禜而祀之，与觐诸侯而礼之，非常祀也。
现代文：类似荣祭来举行祭祀，与诸侯觐见而行礼，不是常规的祭祀。
English: Similar to the Rong Festival, the festival is held to meet and greet the local lords, but it is not a regular festival.

古文：惟春分朝之于东门外，秋分夕之于西门外者，祀之正与常也。
现代文：只有春分早上在束门外，秋分晚上在西门外举行祭祀，纔是正式和常规的做法。
English: Only on the vernal equinox, in the morning, outside Sokumen, and on the autumnal equinox, in the evening, outside the West Gate, are the sacrificial rites held. This is a formal and regular practice.

古文：盖天地至尊，故用其始而祭以二至。
现代文：因天地至尊，所以在元旦和二至日祭祀。
English: Because heaven and earth are supreme, sacrifices are held on New Year's Day and the second day of the month.

古文：日月次天地，春分阳气方永，秋分阴气向长，故祭以二分，为得阴阳之义。
现代文：日月次于天地，春分阳气开始变长，秋分阴气开始变长，因而在二分祭祀，是符合阴阳的意义。
English: The sun and the moon are next to heaven and earth, the yang of the vernal equinox begins to lengthen, and the yin of the autumnal equinox begins to lengthen. Therefore, the two-point sacrifice is in line with the meaning of yin and yang.

古文：自秦祭八神，六曰月主，七曰日主，雍又有日月庙。
现代文：自从秦祭八神，六为月主，七为日主，雍又有日月庙。
English: Since the Qin Dynasty had eight deities, six for the moon god, seven for the sun god, Yong has a sun and moon temple.

古文：汉郊太乙，朝日夕月改周法。
现代文：汉郊祀太乙，朝日夕月改从周法。
English: The Han suburb worshiped Tai Yi, and the morning sun and evening moon were changed from Zhou Fa.

古文：常以郊泰畤，质明出行宫，东向揖日，西向揖月，又于殿下东西拜日月。
现代文：常常在泰时郊天时，拂晓出行宫，向东拜日，向西拜月，又在殿下东西向拜日月。
English: He often went to the palace at dawn, worshipped the sun in the east, worshipped the moon in the west, and worshipped the sun and moon in the east and west.

古文：宣帝于神山祠日，莱山祠月。
现代文：宣帝在神山祭日，在莱山祭月。
English: Emperor Xuan is celebrated on Kamiyama Festival Day, and on Laiyama Festival Month.

古文：魏明帝始朝日东郊，夕月西郊。
现代文：魏明帝开始在束郊祭日，在西郊祭月。
English: Emperor Ming of the Wei Dynasty began to celebrate the festival day in the suburbs and the festival month in the western suburbs.

古文：唐以二分日，朝日夕月于国城东西。
现代文：唐在二分日，在都城东西早晨祭日晚上祭月。
English: In Tang Dynasty, on the day of the bicentennial, the morning of the festival day and the evening of the festival month were celebrated in the east and west of the capital.

古文：宋人因之，升为大祀。
现代文：宋人沿袭下来，升为大祀。
English: The Song people followed suit, and it was elevated to the status of a grand shrine.

古文：元郊坛以日月从祀，其二分朝日夕月，皇庆中议建立而未行。
现代文：元郊坛以日月从祀，在二分日早晨祭日晚上祭月，皇庆年间提议造祭坛而没有实行。
English: Originally, the suburb altar was dedicated to the sun and the moon, and the moon was offered on the morning of the second day of the festival and the evening of the festival, and it was proposed to build an altar during the imperial festival, but it was not implemented.

古文：今当稽古正祭之礼，各设坛专祀。
现代文：而今应当考察古代正式祭祀的礼法，各设坛专祭。
English: Now, however, we should examine the etiquette of the ancient formal rituals, especially the special altar-sacrifices.

古文：朝日坛宜筑于城东门外，夕月坛宜筑于城西门外。
现代文：朝日坛适宜建在城束门外，夕月坛适宣建在城西门外。
English: The morning sun altar should be built outside the castle gate, and the evening moon altar should be built outside the west gate of the castle.

古文：朝日以春分，夕月以秋分。
现代文：在春分祭日，在秋分祭月。
English: On the spring equinox festival day, in the autumn equinox festival month.

古文：星辰则祔祭于月坛。
现代文：星辰就在月坛拊祭。
English: The stars are dancing on the moon altar.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从了他们的建议。
English: Heeded their advice.

古文：其祀仪与社稷同。
现代文：祭祀仪程与社稷相同。
English: The ritual is the same as that of the shrine.

古文：二十一年，帝以大明、夜明已从祀，罢朝日夕月之祭。
现代文：洪武二十一年，皇帝认为大明、夜明已经从祀，罢除了早晨祭日晚上祭月的祭祀。
English: In the twenty-first year of Hongwu, the emperor thought that Daming and Yaming had already been abolished, and abolished the morning festival and the evening festival.

古文：嘉靖九年，帝谓 大报天而主日，配以月。
现代文：嘉靖九年，皇帝说 大报天以日为主，以月为配。
English: In the ninth year of Jiajing, the emperor said that the broadsheet sky would be dominated by the sun and matched by the moon.

古文：大明坛当与夜明坛异。
现代文：大明坛应当与夜明坛不同。
English: The Great Light Altar should be different from the Evening Light Altar.

古文：且日月照临，其功甚大。
现代文：况且日月照临，功德伟大。
English: Moreover, the sun and the moon are shining, and his merits are great.

古文：太岁等神，岁有二祭，而日月星辰止一从祭，义所不安 。
现代文：太岁等神，一年有两祭，而日月星辰只有一次陪祭，道义上有所不安 。
English: For gods such as Taishi, there are two festivals a year, while the sun, moon and stars only have one accompanying festival, which is morally unsettling.

古文：大学士张璁亦以为缺典。
现代文：大学士张璁也认为缺少了礼数。
English: Zhang Jun, a university scholar, also believes that the number of eulogies is too low.

古文：遂定额春秋分之祭如旧仪，而建朝日坛于朝阳门外，西向；夕月坛于阜城门外，东向。
现代文：于是规定春分、秋分的祭祀按旧仪举行，而在朝阳门外建朝日坛，面向西；在阜城门外建夕月坛，面向东。
English: As a result, it was decided that the rituals for the vernal and autumnal equinoxes would be held according to the old rituals, and that the altar for the morning sun would be built outside the morning sun gate, facing west, and the altar for the evening moon would be built outside the Fucheng gate, facing east.

古文：坛制有隆杀以示别。
现代文：坛的形制有增减以示区别。
English: The shape of the altar has been increased and decreased to show the difference.

古文：朝日，护坛地一百亩；夕月，护坛地三十六亩。
现代文：朝日坛，护坛地一百亩；夕月坛，护坛地三十六亩。
English: The Asahi altar, 100 mu of earth to protect it; the Yugetsu altar, 36 mu of earth to protect it.

古文：朝日无从祀，夕月以五星、二十八宿、周天星辰共一坛，南向祔焉。
现代文：朝日坛没有从祀，夕月坛以五星、二十八宿、周天星辰共一坛，面向南柑祭。
English: The morning sun altar is not enshrined, while the evening moon altar has five stars, twenty-eight lodges, and the stars of Sunday all in one altar, facing the Nankan Festival.

古文：春祭，时以寅，迎日出也。
现代文：春分的祭祀，在寅时，迎接日出。
English: The ritual of the vernal equinox, in the time of the Tiger, greets the sunrise.

古文：秋祭，时以亥，迎月出也。
现代文：秋分的祭祀，在亥时，迎接月出。
English: The ritual of the autumn equinox, at the time of the boar, greets the moonrise.

古文：十年，礼部上朝日、夕月仪：朝日迎神四拜，饮福受胙两拜，送神四拜；夕月迎神饮福受胙送神皆再拜。
现代文：嘉靖十年，礼部上奏朝日、夕月仪程：朝日迎神四拜，饮福酒受胙肉两拜，送神四拜；夕月迎神饮福酒受胙肉送神都为两拜。
English: In the 10th year of the Jiajing era, the morning sun and the evening moon were played in the ritual section: the morning sun was greeted with four bows, the blessed wine was received with two bows, and the god was sent with four bows; the evening moon was greeted with two bows.

古文：馀并如旧仪。
现代文：其余都照旧的仪程。
English: The rest of the ceremony went on as usual.

古文：隆庆元年，礼部议定，东郊以甲、丙、戊、庚、壬年，西郊以丑、辰、未、戌年，车驾亲祭。
现代文：隆庆元年，礼部议定，束郊在甲、丙、戊、庚、壬年，西郊在丑、辰、未、戌年，由皇帝亲自祭祀。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, the Ministry of Ceremonies agreed that the emperor would personally offer sacrifices in the suburban areas in the years of A, C, E, G, and I, and in the western suburban areas in the years of U, H, M, and Z.

古文：馀岁遣文大臣摄祭朝日坛，武大臣摄祭夕月坛。
现代文：其余年份派遣文职大臣代为举行祭祀朝日坛，武职大臣代为举行祭祀夕月坛。
English: In the remaining years, the Minister of Civil Service is sent to hold the Asahi Altar on behalf of the Minister of Defense, and the Minister of Military Affairs is sent to hold the Yugetsu Altar on behalf of the Minister of Defense.

古文：三年，礼部上朝日仪，言： 正祭遇风雨，则设小次于坛前，驾就小次行礼。
现代文：三年，礼部上奏朝日仪，说： 正祭遇上风雨，就在坛前设临时休息的小帐篷，皇上在小帐篷行礼。
English: In the third year, the ritual department played the Asahi ceremony, saying: If the main festival is stormy, a small tent will be set up in front of the altar for temporary rest, and the emperor will perform the ritual in the small tent.

古文：其升降奠献，俱以太常寺执事官代。 
现代文：其上下坛祭献，都由太常寺孰事官代替。 
English: Both the upper and lower altar offerings were replaced by officials from Taejō-ji Temple.

古文：制曰 可 。
现代文：皇帝说 准许 。
English: Emperor Jing agreed.

古文：先农
现代文：先农
English: Early farmers

古文：洪武元年，谕廷臣以来春举行耤田礼。
现代文：洪武元年，谕令延臣在第二年春天举行藉田礼。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, an edict ordered Yancheng to hold a land lease ceremony in the spring of the following year.

古文：于是礼官钱用壬等言： 汉郑玄谓王社在耤田之中。
现代文：于是礼部官员钱用壬等人说： 汉郑玄说王社在藉田之中。
English: As a result, the officials of the Ministry of Ceremonies used money to tell others: Han Zhengxuan said that the royal shrine was in a rented field.

古文：唐祝钦明云： 先农即社。 
现代文：唐祝钦明说： 先农就是社。 
English: Tang Zhu Qinming said: The first farmer is the company.

古文：宋陈祥道谓： 社自社，先农自先农。
现代文：宋陈祥道说： 社是社，先农是先农。
English: Song Chenxiang said, "Society is society, and farmers are farmers.

古文：耤田所祭乃先农，非社也。
现代文：藉田祭祀的是先农，不是社。 
English: It is the pioneer farmers, not the shrine, who are worshipped at Erita.

古文：至享先农与躬耕同日，礼无明文，惟《周语》曰： 农正陈耤礼。 
现代文：至于祭享先农与皇帝亲耕同一天举行，礼法上没有明确记载。只有《周语》中说： 农正官举行藉礼。 
English: There is no clear record in the etiquette as to how to hold the celebration of ancestor farmers and the emperor's personal cultivation on the same day. Only "Zhouyu" says: the farmer official held the ceremony.

古文：而韦昭注云： 祭其神为农祈也。 
现代文：而韦昭注说： 祭其神是为农事祈祷。 
English: However, Wei Zhaojun said, "Sacrificing one's god is to pray for agricultural affairs."

古文：至汉以耤田之日祀先农，而其礼始著。
现代文：到汉在藉田之日祭祀先农，而它的礼仪纔开始显著。
English: When the Han Dynasty arrived, the first farmers were sacrificed on the day of renting the field, and its etiquette began to rise significantly.

古文：由晋至唐、宋相沿不废。
现代文：从晋到唐、宋沿袭不废。
English: From the Jin dynasty to the Tang and Song dynasties, the lineage is unbroken.

古文：政和间，命有司享先农，止行亲耕之礼。
现代文：政和年问，命令主管官吏祭享先农，皇帝只举行亲耕的礼仪。
English: On the occasion of the Chinese New Year, the officials in charge were ordered to hold a ceremony to celebrate the ancestors of the peasants, while the emperor only held a ceremony for his relatives.

古文：南渡后，复亲祀。
现代文：南渡之后，恢复亲自祭祀。
English: After his arrival in the south, he resumed in-person religious services.

古文：元虽议耕耤，竟不亲行。
现代文：元虽然议定耕藉之礼，但终究不亲自举行祭祀。
English: Although it was originally agreed that there would be a ceremony of cultivation, in the end, he did not personally hold the sacrifice.

古文：其祀先农，命有司摄事。
现代文：它祭祀先农，命令主管官吏代为行事。
English: It sacrificed the forefathers and ordered the officials in charge to act on their behalf.

古文：今议耕耤之日，皇帝躬祀先农。
现代文：而今商议耕藉的日期，皇帝亲自祭祀先农。
English: However, now that the date of the cultivation period is being discussed, the emperor himself will offer a sacrifice to the farmers.

古文：礼毕，躬耕耤田。
现代文：行礼完毕，亲自耕藉田。
English: After the ceremony, he personally ploughed the fields.

古文：以仲春择日行事。 
现代文：在仲春择日举行。 
English: It is held on the day of the Mid-Autumn Festival.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从他们的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：二年二月，帝建先农坛于南郊，在耤田北。
现代文：洪武二年二月，皇帝在南郊建先农坛，在藉田以北。
English: In February of the second year of Hongwu, the emperor built the first farmland in the southern suburbs, north of Ertinga.

古文：亲祭，以后稷配。
现代文：亲自祭祀，由后稷配祀。
English: He will personally perform the ritual, and his wife will accompany him.

古文：器物祀仪与社稷同。
现代文：祭器祭品仪程与祭社稷相同。
English: The ritual of offering the sacrificial objects is the same as that of the festival.

古文：祀毕，行耕耤礼。
现代文：祭祀完毕，行耕藉礼。
English: Once the ritual is over, the ceremony is over.

古文：御耒耜二具，韬以青绢，御耕牛四，被以青衣。
现代文：御用耒耜两柄，套上青绢，御用耕牛四头，披上青衣。
English: He used two yakitori sticks, covered with green onions, and four oxen, covered with green onions.

古文：礼毕，还大次。
现代文：行礼完毕，回到临时休息的大帐篷。
English: After the ceremony, they returned to the large tent for a short break.

古文：应天府尹及上元、江宁两县令率庶人终亩。
现代文：命应天府尹及上元、江宁两县县令率领百姓耕完。
English: In response to the orders of Tianfu Yin, Shangyuan and Jiangning, he led the people to complete the cultivation.

古文：是日，宴劳百官耆老于坛所，十年二月，遣官享先农，命应天府官率农民耆老陪祀。
现代文：这天在祭坛之地宴请犒劳百官和年高有德的老人。十年二月，派官祭享先农，命令应天府官员率领农民耆老陪同祭祀。
English: On this day, a banquet was held in the place of the altar for the hundreds of officials who had worked hard and the elderly who were old and virtuous. In February of the 10th year, the officials were sent to celebrate the ancestors of the peasants, and the officials of Tianfu were ordered to lead the peasants and the elderly to accompany the sacrifice.

古文：二十一年，更定祭先农仪，不设配位。
现代文：二十一年，重新制定祭祀先农的礼仪，不设配位。
English: In the 21st year, the etiquette of sacrificing the first farmers was reformulated, and there was no coordination.

古文：永乐中，建坛京师，如南京制，在太岁坛西南。
现代文：永乐年间在京城建造祭坛，如同南京的形制，在太岁坛西南。
English: During the Yongle Dynasty, an altar was built in the capital city, which, like the one in Nanjing, is southwest of the Taiyitan.

古文：石阶九级。
现代文：九级石阶。
English: Nine stone steps.

古文：西瘗位，东斋宫、銮驾库，东北神仓，东南具服殿，殿前为观耕之所。
现代文：西方为痉埋的位置，东方是斋宫、銮驾库，东北方是神仓，东南方是具服殿，殿前为观看耕藉的地方。
English: The west is the location of the tomb, the east is the temple, the north-east is the shrine, the south-east is the clothes hall, and the front of the hall is the place to watch the cultivation.

古文：护坛地六百亩，供黍稷及荐新品物地九十余亩。
现代文：护坛地六百亩，供应黍稷及荐新物品的土地九十余亩。
English: There are 600 mu of land to protect the altar, and more than 90 mu of land to supply and recommend new items.

古文：每岁仲春上戊，顺天府尹致祭。
现代文：每年二月上旬戊日，顺天府尹举行祭祀。
English: On the first day of February every year, Shun Tian Fu Yin held a religious service.

古文：后凡遇登极之初，行耕耤礼，则亲祭。
现代文：后来凡是遇上皇帝继位登极的第一年，举行耕藉礼，就亲自行祭。
English: Later, whenever the first year of the emperor's ascension to the throne was held, he would personally perform the ceremony.

古文：弘治元年，定耕耤仪：前期百官致斋。
现代文：弘治元年制定耕藉的礼仪。祭期前百官进行斋戒。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, the etiquette of farming was established. Before the festival, officials had to fast.

古文：顺天府官以耒耜及穜稑种进呈，内官仍捧出授之，由午门左出。置彩舆，鼓乐，送至耤田所。
现代文：顺天府官员进献未耜及积种种子，内官则捧出交给他们，从午门左边出来，设置彩车，奏乐，送到藉田所在地。
English: Shuntianfu officials presented unpicked sprouts and accumulated seeds, while inner officials handed them out, came out from the left side of the noon gate, set up floats, played music, and sent them to the location of Erda.

古文：至期，帝翼善冠黄袍，诣坛所具服殿，服衮冕，祭先农。
现代文：到预定日期，皇帝头戴翼善冠身穿黄袍，前往祭坛的具服殿，穿上衮冕，祭祀先农。
English: On the scheduled date, the emperor, wearing a winged crown and a yellow robe, went to the altar of the Fufu Hall, put on a crown, and made a sacrifice to the farmers.

古文：毕，还，更翼善冠黄袍。
现代文：礼毕，回来，换上翼善冠和黄抱。
English: After bowing, come back and change into a winged crown and a yellow cape.

古文：太常卿导引至耕耤位，南向立。
现代文：太常卿引导至耕藉位置，面向南方站立。
English: He was guided to a ploughing position and stood facing south.

古文：三公以下各就位，户部尚书北向跪进耒耜，顺天府官北向跪进鞭。
现代文：三公以下官员各就各位，户部尚书面向北跪下进献末耜，顺天府官面向北跪下进献鞭子。
English: The officials below the three princes each took their places. The head of the household, still facing north, knelt down to offer the last rites, and the head of the prefectural government, facing north, knelt down to offer the whip.

古文：帝秉耒，三推三反讫，户部尚书跪受耒耜，顺天府官跪受鞭，太常卿奏请复位。
现代文：皇帝执耒，三进三退完毕。户部尚书跪下接受末耜，顺天府官跪下接受鞭子，太常卿奏请回到原位。
English: The emperor held the scepter, and the three advances and three retreats were completed. Hubei Shangshu knelt down to receive the last scepter, Shuntian prefect knelt down to receive the whip, and Tai Changqing played, please return to your original position.

古文：府尹挟青箱以种子播而覆之。
现代文：府尹携青箱把种子播下盖上土。
English: Fu Yin took the seed box to sow the seeds and cover them with soil.

古文：帝御外门，南向坐，观三公五推，尚书九卿九推。
现代文：皇帝驾临外门，面向南坐下，观看三公行五推礼，尚书九卿行九推礼。
English: The emperor drove to the outer gate, sat down facing south, and watched the three princes perform five prostrations, and the nine nobles perform nine prostrations.

古文：太常卿奏耕毕，帝还具服殿，升座。
现代文：太常卿奏报耕藉完毕，皇帝回到具服殿，升座。
English: After the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report of the report.

古文：府尹率两县令耆老人行礼毕，引上中下农夫各十人，执农器朝见，令其终亩。
现代文：府尹率领两县县令耆老百姓行礼完毕，带上中下农夫各十人，手执农具朝见，命令他们把土地耕完。
English: Fu Yin led the people from the counties of the two counties after the ceremony, and took ten farmers from the middle and lower classes to see the morning, holding agricultural tools in their hands, and ordered them to finish cultivating the land.

古文：百官行庆贺礼，赐酒馔。
现代文：百官举行庆贺礼，赐以酒食。
English: Hundreds of officials held a celebration and were given food and drink.

古文：三品以上丹陛上东西坐，四品以下台下坐，并宴劳耆老于坛旁。
现代文：三品官以上在丹陛上东西向就坐，四品以下在台下就坐，并在坛旁宴请犒劳年高有德的老人。
English: Those with three or more court ranks would sit on the throne facing east or west, and those with four or fewer court ranks would sit under the table, and the elders who had worked hard and lived a virtuous life would be invited to a banquet next to the altar.

古文：宴毕，驾还宫。
现代文：宴会结束，起驾回宫。
English: After the banquet, they drove back to the palace.

古文：大乐鼓吹振作，农夫人赐布一匹。
现代文：大乐队鼓乐齐鸣，农夫每人赏赐布一匹。
English: The big band's drums beat in unison, and the farmers were each awarded a horse.

古文：嘉靖十年，帝以其礼过烦，命礼官更定。
现代文：嘉靖十年，皇帝认为那些礼节遇于繁琐，命礼部官员重新制定。
English: In the 10th year of Jiajing, the emperor thought that those etiquettes were cumbersome and ordered the officials of the Ministry of Ceremonies to reformulate them.

古文：迎神送神止行二拜。
现代文：迎神送神只拜两拜。
English: It only takes two bows to welcome the gods and send them away.

古文：先二日，顺天府尹以耒耜穜稑种置彩舆，至耕耤所，并罢百官庆贺。
现代文：提前两天，顺天府尹把耒耜农具檀种种子放在彩车中，到耕藉所，一并罢除百官庆贺。
English: Two days ahead of schedule, Shuntianfu Yin put the straw farming tools and sandalwood seeds in the floats, went to the farm, and dismissed the officials to celebrate.

古文：后又议造耕根车载耒耜，府尹于祭日进呈毕，以耒耜载车内前玉辂行。
现代文：后来又提议制造耕根车运载耒耜，府尹在举行祭祀当日进献之后，把末耜装在车上在玉辖前行走。
English: Later, it was proposed to manufacture a ploughing cart to carry the yakitori. After the offering on the day of the sacrifice, Fu Yin loaded the last yakitori onto the cart and walked in front of Yu Bei.

古文：其御门观耕，地位卑下，议建观耕台一。
现代文：御门观看耕藉，地势低矮，提议建造一座观耕台。
English: The gate watches the ploughing, the terrain is low, and it is proposed to build a viewing platform.

古文：诏皆可。
现代文：诏令都准许。
English: All are permitted by imperial edict.

古文：后又命垦西苑隙地为田。
现代文：后来又命开垦西苑空地为田。
English: Later, he was ordered to reclaim the vacant land of Xiyuan.

古文：建殿曰无逸，亭曰豳风，又曰省耕，曰省敛，仓曰恒裕。
现代文：建造大殿名为无逸殿，亭为豳风亭，又称焉省耕、省敛，仓为恒裕仓。
English: The main hall to be built is called Mu Yat-den, the pavilion is Shufeng Pavilion, also known as Yan Sheng, Sheng Yuan, and the warehouse is Hengyu Warehouse.

古文：礼部上郊庙粢盛支给之数，因言： 南郊耤田，皇上三推，公卿各宣其力，较西苑为重。
现代文：礼部上报郊庙黍稷祭品的支取数目，因而说： 南郊藉田，皇上行三推礼，公卿各出其力，比西苑更为重要。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies reported the number of donations received from temples and shrines in the suburbs, and thus said: The southern suburbs are more important than the West Court.

古文：西苑虽农官督理，皇上时省耕敛，较耤田为勤。
现代文：西苑虽有农官管理，而皇上时时视察耕种收割，比藉田更勤。
English: Although the West Garden was managed by an agronomist, the emperor inspected the cultivation and harvest from time to time, and was more diligent than the tenant farmers.

古文：请以耤田所出，藏南郊圆廪神仓，以供圜丘、祈谷、先农、神祇坛、长陵等陵、历代帝王及百神之祀。
现代文：请求把藉田的产品，贮藏在南郊圆糜神仓，以供应圜丘、祈谷、先农、神只坛、长陵等陵、历代帝王及百神的祭祀。
English: It was requested that the products from the rice fields be stored in a warehouse in the southern suburb of Yuancheng to supply the offerings to the Mengqiu, Qigu, Shennong, Jintao Altar, Changling and other mausoleums, the emperors of all ages, and the hundreds of gods.

古文：西苑所出，藏恒裕仓，以供方泽、朝日、夕月、太庙、世庙、太社稷、帝社稷、禘佩、先蚕及先师孔子之祀。 
现代文：西苑的产品，贮藏在恒裕仓，以供应方泽、朝日、夕月、太庙、世庙、太社稷、帝社稷、柿袷、先蚕及先师孔子的祭祀。 
English: The products of Xiyuan, stored in Hengyukang, are used to supply the sacrifices of Fangze, the morning sun, the evening moon, the great temple, the world temple, the great shrine, the imperial shrine, the persimmon, the first silkworm and the first teacher Confucius.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从他们的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十六年，谕凡遇亲耕，则户部尚书先祭先农。
现代文：嘉靖十六年，谕令凡是遇上亲耕，户部尚书先祭先农。
English: In the 16th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, an edict decreed that in the event of family farming, the head of the household should be the first to offer sacrifice.

古文：皇帝至，止行三推礼。
现代文：皇帝到来，只行三推礼。
English: When the emperor arrives, he only has to bow three times.

古文：三十八年，罢亲耕，惟遣官祭先农。
现代文：三十八年，罢除亲耕，只派官祭祀先农。
English: In the 38th year, Chikko was abolished, and only officials were sent to offer sacrifices to the pioneer farmers.

古文：四十一年，并令所司勿复奏。
现代文：四十一年，并命令主管官吏无须复奏。
English: 41, and ordered the officials in charge not to have to play it again.

古文：隆庆元年，罢西苑耕种诸祀，皆取之耤田。
现代文：隆庆元年罢除西苑耕种，各种祭祀用谷都从藉围取用。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, the cultivation of the West Garden was abolished, and all kinds of sacrificial valleys were used.

古文：先蚕
现代文：先蚕
English: The Silkworm

古文：明初未列祀典。
现代文：明朝初年先蚕没有列入祭祀典礼。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, silkworms were not included in the sacrificial ceremony.

古文：嘉靖时，都给事中夏言请改各宫庄田为亲蚕厂公桑园。
现代文：嘉靖年间，都给事中夏言奏请改各宫庄田为亲蚕厂公桑园。
English: During the Jiajing period, all of them were asked by Xia Yansong to change each palace village field into the public mulberry garden of the pro-silk factory.

古文：令有司种桑柘，以备宫中蚕事。
现代文：令主管官吏种植桑柘树木，预备宫中亲蚕之事。
English: He ordered the officials in charge to plant mulberry trees to prepare for the arrival of silkworms in the palace.

古文：九年，复疏言，耕蚕之礼，不宜偏废。
现代文：嘉靖九年，又上疏说，耕蚕的礼仪，不应有所偏废。
English: In the ninth year of Jiajing, Shang Zuo said that the etiquette of cultivating silkworms should not be wasteful.

古文：帝乃敕礼部： 古者天子亲耕，皇后亲蚕，以劝天下。
现代文：于是皇帝敕命礼部： 古代天子亲耕，皇后亲蚕，以鼓励天下农事。
English: So the emperor decreed the following ritual: In ancient times, the emperor cultivated and the empress silkwormed in order to encourage agriculture throughout the world.

古文：自今岁始，朕亲祀先农，皇后亲蚕，其考古制，具仪以闻。 
现代文：从今年起，朕亲自祭祀先农，皇后亲自祭祀先蚕，希望考察古代制度，制定仪程上奏。 
English: From this year, I will personally sacrifice the first farmer, and the empress will personally sacrifice the first silkworm. I hope to examine the ancient system and formulate a ceremony.

古文：大学士张璁等请于安定门外建先蚕坛。
现代文：大学士张璁等人奏请在安定门外建先蚕坛。
English: Please build a silkworm altar outside the stable gate first.

古文：詹事霍韬以道远争之。
现代文：詹事霍韬以道路遥远作为理由和他争论。
English: Zhan Zhifu argued with him on the grounds that the road was far away.

古文：户部亦言： 安定门外近西之地，水源不通，无浴蚕所。
现代文：户部也说： 安定门外靠近西方之地，水源不通，无法建浴蚕的地方。
English: The household department also said: outside the stable gate, close to the west, the water source is impassable, and it is impossible to build a place for bathing silkworms.

古文：皇城内西苑中有太液、琼岛之水。
现代文：皇城内西苑中有太液、琼岛之水。
English: In the West Courtyard of the Imperial City, there is Taisui and Qiongdao spring water.

古文：考唐制在苑中，宋亦在宫中，宜仿行之。 
现代文：考证唐制建在苑中，宋也建在宫中，宜仿效施行。 
English: According to the research, the Tang system was built in the middle of the courtyard, and the Song system was also built in the middle of the palace. It is advisable to follow suit.

古文：帝谓唐人因陋就安，不可法。
现代文：皇帝说唐人因陋就简，不可效法。
English: The emperor said that the Chinese people should not follow the example of the Chinese.

古文：于是礼部尚书李时等言： 大明门至安定门，道路遥远，请凤辇出东华、玄武二门。 
现代文：这时礼部尚书李时等人说： 大明门到安定门道路迁远，请乘坐凤辇出束华、玄武二门。 
English: At this time, the etiquette department's Shangshu Li Shi and others said: The road from the Da Ming Gate to the Stability Gate has moved far away, please take the Fengxuan out of the two gates of Sokhua and Xuanwu.

古文：因条上四事：一、治茧之礼，二、坛壝之向，三、采桑之器，四、掌坛之官。
现代文：因而条陈上奏四件事：一、治茧之礼，一、祭坛的朝向，三、采桑的器具，四、掌坛的官吏。
English: Therefore, four events are listed: 1. The ritual of the healing of the sick, 1. The direction of the altar, 3. The equipment for harvesting mulberry, 4. The official who holds the altar.

古文：帝从其言，命自玄武门出。
现代文：皇帝听从了他们的建议，命令从玄武门出宫。
English: The emperor followed their advice and ordered them to leave the palace through the Xuanwu Gate.

古文：内使陈仪卫，军一万人，五千围坛所，五千护于道，余如议。
现代文：内使陈设仪仗护卫，军士一万人，五千人围住坛所，五千人在路上保护，其余事宜遵照提议。
English: The envoy set up a ceremonial guard, ten thousand soldiers, five thousand people surrounded the altar, five thousand people protected on the road, and the rest of the matters followed the proposal.

古文：二月，工部上先蚕坛图式，帝亲定其制。
现代文：二月，工部上呈先蚕坛图形样式，皇帝亲自制定形制。
English: In February, the silkworm altar graphic style was first presented at the workshop, and the emperor himself formulated the shape.

古文：坛方二丈六尺，叠二级，高二尺六寸，四出陛。
现代文：坛方圆二丈六尺，两级重叠，高二尺六寸，四面有台阶。
English: The altar is 2'6" in circumference, with two overlapping levels, 2'6" in height, and steps on all four sides.

古文：东西北俱树桑柘，内设蚕宫令署。
现代文：东西北方都种上桑柘树，内设蚕宫令官署。
English: Mulberry trees have been planted in the north, east and west, and the Silkworm Palace Regency Office has been established.

古文：采桑台高一尺四寸，方十倍，三出陛。
现代文：采桑台高一尺四寸，长宽为高的十倍，三面有台阶。
English: The mulberry picking platform is one foot four inches high, ten times as wide as it is high, and has steps on three sides.

古文：銮驾库五间。
现代文：銮驾库五间。
English: There are five garages.

古文：后盖织堂。
现代文：后面建织堂。
English: A weaving hall was built at the back.

古文：坛围方八十丈。
现代文：祭坛围墙方圆八十丈。
English: The altar enclosure wall is eighty meters in circumference.

古文：礼部上皇后亲蚕仪：蚕将生，钦天监择吉巳日以闻。
现代文：礼部上奏皇后亲蚕的礼仪。蚕即将出生，钦天监择吉祥的巳日上奏。
English: At the ceremony, the queen's own silkworm is played. The silkworm is about to be born, and the auspicious day chosen by the celestial overseer is played.

古文：顺天府具蚕母名数送北郊，工部以钩箔筐架诸器物给蚕母。
现代文：顺天府写上主管蚕事的女官蚕母的名称数目送往北郊，工部把钩箔筐架等器物供给蚕母。
English: Shuntianfu wrote down the names and numbers of the female officials in charge of the sericulture and sent them to the northern suburbs. The Ministry of Industry provided the serpents with hooked foil baskets and other utensils.

古文：顺天府以蚕种及钩筐一进呈，内官捧出，还授之。
现代文：顺天府将蚕种及钩筐各一份进呈，内官捧出，又交还他们。
English: Shuntianfu presented a portion of silkworm seeds and a basket of hooks, which the officials took out and handed back to them.

古文：出玄武右门，置彩舆中，鼓乐送至蚕室。
现代文：从玄武右门出来，放在彩车中，奏乐送到蚕室。
English: From the right door of the Xuanwu, it is placed in the floats, and the music is sent to the silkworm room.

古文：蚕母受蚕种，浴饲以待。
现代文：蚕母接受蚕种，洗浴喂养等待。
English: The mother silkworm receives the silkworm seed, bathes and waits to be fed.

古文：命妇文四品、武三品以上俱陪祀，携一侍女执钩筐。
现代文：朝廷命妇文职四品、武职三品以上都要陪同祭祀，带一个侍女拿钩筐。
English: The imperial court ordered that all women with four grades of civil service and above with three grades of military service should accompany the sacrificial rites, and bring a maid with a hook basket.

古文：皇后斋三日，内执事并司赞、六尚等女官及应入坛者斋一日。
现代文：皇后斋戒三日，内执事官以及司赞、六尚等女官以及应当入坛的人，斋戒一日。
English: The empress fasts for three days, and the deaconesses, scribes, six maids of honor, and those who are to enter the altar fast for one day.

古文：先一日，太常寺具祝版，祭物，羊、豕、笾豆各六、黑帛，送蚕宫令。
现代文：提前一天，太常寺准备祝板，祭物有羊、豕、篷豆各六份以及罴帛，送给蚕宫令。
English: A day ahead of time, the Taiji Temple prepared a celebratory plate. The offerings included six portions each of sheep, bamboo shoots, and taro beans, as well as bamboo shoots, which were given to the pharaoh.

古文：是日，分授执事女官。
现代文：祭祀逭天，分别发给执事女官。
English: Sacrifices to the God of Thunder were distributed to the deaconesses separately.

古文：日未明。宿卫陈兵备，女乐司设监备仪仗及重翟车，俱候玄武门外。
现代文：天役亮，值班侍卫列队准备，女乐司设监备仪仗以及重翟车，都等候在玄武门外。
English: The day's work is bright, the guards on duty are ready to line up, the women's music department is set up to supervise the ceremonial battle and the heavy carriage, all waiting outside the Xuanwu Gate.

古文：将明，内侍诣坤宁宫奏请。
现代文：天将亮，内侍前往坤宁宫奏请。
English: As dawn broke, the chambermaids went to Kunning Palace to perform.

古文：皇后服常服，导引女官导出宫门，乘肩舆，至玄武门。
现代文：皇后穿日常服装，导引女官引导出宫门，乘轿到玄武门。
English: The empress put on her everyday clothes, guided by a court lady out of the palace gate, and took a limousine to the Xuanwu Gate.

古文：内侍奏请降舆，升重翟车。
现代文：内侍奏请下轿，上重翟车。
English: Waiter, please step out of the limousine.

古文：兵卫仪仗及女乐前导，出北安门，障以行帷，至坛内壝东门。
现代文：卫兵仪仗及女乐队在前面引导，出北安弓，用行帷遮蔽，到坛内堰柬门。
English: The guard of honor and the female band led the way in front, out of the Beian Arch, shielded by the curtain, to the inner weir of the altar, the Camden Gate.

古文：内侍奏请降车，乘肩舆，兵卫、仪仗停东门外。
现代文：内侍奏请下车，乘轿，卫兵、仪仗停在柬门外。
English: Please get off the car and take a sedan. The guards and the guard of honor are parked outside the Cambodian gate.

古文：皇后入具服殿，易礼服，出，至坛。
现代文：皇后进入具服殿，换上礼服，出来，到祭坛。
English: The empress enters the vestibule, changes into a gown, comes out, and goes to the altar.

古文：司赞奏就位。
现代文：司赞奏请就位。
English: Ensign, please take your seats.

古文：公主、内外命妇各就拜位。
现代文：公主、内外命妇各自走上拜位。
English: The princess and the mother-in-law went up to the throne individually.

古文：祭先蚕，行三献礼，女官执事如仪。
现代文：祭祀先蚕，举行三献礼，女官按礼节行事。
English: Sacrifices are made to the first silkworm, three offerings are made, and the maids of honour act according to the rules of propriety.

古文：迎神四拜，赐福胙二拜，送神四拜。
现代文：迎神四拜，赐福胙两拜，送神四拜。
English: Greet God with four bows, bestow blessings with two bows, and send God with four bows.

古文：凡拜跪兴，公主、内外命妇皆同。
现代文：凡是拜跪起立，公主、内外命妇都一同进行。
English: Whenever they kneel and stand up, the princess and the inner and outer maids of honour do the same.

古文：礼毕，皇后还具服殿，更常服。
现代文：行礼完毕，皇后回到具服殿，更换日常服装。
English: After the formalities, the Empress returned to the Cloth Hall to change into her daily attire.

古文：司宾引外命妇先诣采桑坛东陛下，南北向。
现代文：司宾引导外命妇先到采桑坛束阶下，南北向站立。
English: The officiant guided the ordained woman to stand at the foot of the mulberry picking altar, facing north and south.

古文：尚仪奏请，皇后诣采桑位，东向。
现代文：尚仪奏请，皇后前往采桑位，面向东站立。
English: For the rite of passage, the empress should go to the mulberry picking position and stand facing east.

古文：公主以下位皇后位东，亦南北向，以西为上。
现代文：公主以下位于皇后位以束，也是南北向，以西向马上位。
English: Below the princess, the queens are placed in bunches, also from north to south, and from west to north.

古文：执钩者跪进钩，执筐者跪奉筐受桑。
现代文：执钩者跪下进献钩，执筐者跪下举起筐子盛桑叶。
English: The person holding the hook kneels down to present the hook, and the person holding the basket kneels down to lift the basket containing the mulberry leaves.

古文：皇后采桑三条，还至坛南仪门坐，观命妇采桑。
现代文：皇后采下三条桑叶，回到祭坛以南仪门坐下，观看命妇采桑。
English: The empress picked three mulberry leaves, returned to the south of the altar, sat down at the ceremonial gate, and watched the maid of honor pick mulberries.

古文：三公命妇采五条，列侯、九卿命妇采九条。
现代文：三公命妇采桑五条，列侯、九卿命妇采桑九条。
English: The three princes ordered their wives to pick five mulberry trees, and the lords and nine nobles ordered their wives to pick nine mulberry trees.

古文：讫，各授女侍。
现代文：采完，各自交给女侍。
English: After picking, they each handed it over to the waitress.

古文：司宾引内命妇一人，诣桑室，尚功率执钩筐者从。
现代文：司宾引导一名内命妇，前往桑室，尚功率领拿钩筐的人跟随。
English: The celebrant leads a lady-in-waiting to the Mulberry Room, followed by the person who still has the power to take the hook basket.

古文：尚功以桑授蚕母。
现代文：尚功把桑叶交给蚕母。
English: Shang Gong gave the mulberry leaves to the mother silkworm.

古文：蚕母受桑，缕切之，以授内命妇。
现代文：蚕母接遇桑叶，切捆，交给内命妇。
English: When the mother silkworm meets the mulberry leaf, she cuts the bundle and gives it to the godmother.

古文：内命妇食蚕，洒一箔讫，还。
现代文：内命妇喂蚕，洒满一个箔完毕，退回。
English: The maid feeds the silkworms, sprinkles them all over a piece of foil, and returns them.

古文：尚仪奏礼毕，皇后还坐具服殿。
现代文：尚仪官奏报礼仪结束，皇后回具服殿就座。
English: At the end of the ceremony, the Empress returned to the Imperial Court and took her seat.

古文：司宾率蚕母等叩头讫，司赞唱班齐。
现代文：司宾率领蚕母等人叩头完毕，司赞宣唱列队齐班。
English: After the officiant led the serpents and others to bow their heads, the officiant and choristers lined up in formation.

古文：外名妇序立定，尚仪致词云： 亲蚕既成，礼当庆贺。 
现代文：外命妇按照顺序站立排定，尚仪致词说： 亲蚕礼已经完成，按礼仪应当庆贺。 
English: The foreign emissaries stood in the order they were scheduled, and Shang Yi gave a speech, saying: The pro-silk ceremony has been completed, and it should be celebrated according to the etiquette.

古文：四拜毕，赐宴命妇，并赐蚕母酒食。
现代文：拜完四拜，赐命妇饮宴，并赐蚕母酒食。
English: After the four prostrations, he ordered a banquet for his wife and gave her food and wine.

古文：公主及内命妇于殿内，外命妇文武二品以上于台上，三品以下于丹墀，尚食进膳。
现代文：公主及内命妇在殿内，外命妇文武二品以上在台上，三品以下在台阶，尚食进献膳食。
English: The princess and her lady-in-waiting are in the hall, the lady-in-waiting is on the stage with two or more dishes, and the lady-in-waiting is on the steps with three or fewer dishes, and they are eating a meal.

古文：教坊司女乐奏乐。
现代文：教坊司女乐手奏乐。
English: The music is played by the music mistress.

古文：宴毕，公主以下各就班四拜。
现代文：宴会结束，公主以下各到班列四拜。
English: At the end of the banquet, everyone from the princess down went to pay their respects to the cortege.

古文：礼毕，皇后还宫，导从前。
现代文：行礼完毕，皇后回宫，引导随从如同先前。
English: After the salute, the queen returns to the palace, leading her retinue as before.

古文：诏如拟。
现代文：诏令照拟定仪程进行。
English: The eulogy proceeded as planned.

古文：四月，蚕事告成，行治茧礼。
现代文：四月，蚕事完成，举行治茧礼。
English: In April, the silkworm business was completed, and the reunion ceremony was held.

古文：选蚕妇善缫丝及织者各十人。
现代文：选蚕妇中擅长缫丝及纺织的人各十名。
English: Among the silkworm harvesters, there are ten who are good at spinning silk and ten who are good at weaving.

古文：卜日，皇后出宫，导从如常仪，至织堂。
现代文：占卜吉日，皇后出宫，引导随从如同日常礼仪，到织堂。
English: On the auspicious day of divination, the empress leaves the palace and leads her retinue to the weaving hall, as is the daily ritual.

古文：内命妇一人行三盆手礼，布于织妇，以终其事。
现代文：内命妇一名行三盆手礼，吩咐给织妇，完成工作。
English: A lady-in-waiting bowed three times and told the weaver to finish her work.

古文：蚕宫令送尚衣织染监局造祭服，其祀先蚕，止用乐，不用舞，乐女生冠服俱用黑。
现代文：蚕宫令送往尚衣织染监局制作祭服。祭祀先蚕，只奏乐，不舞蹈，女乐生衣冠都为黑色。
English: The silkworm palace order was sent to the Shangyi Weaving and Dyeing Supervision Bureau for the production of ceremonial clothes. The first silkworm to be sacrificed, only played music, not dance, and the female musician's clothes were black.

古文：十年二月，礼臣言： 去岁皇后躬行采桑，已足风励天下。
现代文：嘉靖十年二月，礼部大臣说： 去年皇后亲自采桑，已经足以勉励天下。
English: In February of the 10th year of Jiajing, the Minister of Ceremonies said: Last year, the Empress personally picked mulberry, which was enough to encourage the world.

古文：今先蚕坛殿工未毕，宜且遣官行礼。 
现代文：而今先蚕坛殿工程没有结束，应当派官吏行礼。 
English: But now that the construction of the Serpent Altar Hall has not been completed, officials should be sent to pay their respects.

古文：帝初不可，令如旧行。
现代文：皇帝起初不允许，下令照旧举行。
English: The emperor did not allow it at first, but ordered it to be held as usual.

古文：已而以皇后出入不便，命改筑先蚕坛于西苑。
现代文：后来因为皇后出入不便，命在西苑改筑先蚕坛。
English: Later, because it was inconvenient for the empress to go in and out, it was decided to build the silkworm altar in the West Garden first.

古文：坛之东为采桑台，台东为具服殿，北为蚕室，左右为厢房，其后为从室，以居蚕妇。
现代文：祭坛东方为采桑台，台柬为具服殿，北方焉蚕室，左右为厢房，后面为从室，以供蚕妇居住。
English: The altar in the east is Tsai Sang Tai, the one in the south is Gufu Hall, the one in the north is the silkworm room, the ones on the left and right are the wing rooms, and the one in the back is the servant room for the silkworm women to live in.

古文：设蚕宫署于宫左，令一员，丞二员，择内臣谨恪者为之。
现代文：在官左设蚕宫署，令一人，丞二人，挑选内臣中谨慎的人担任。
English: The Silkworm Palace Office was set up on the left of the official, and one person, or two people, were selected to be the most prudent person among the vassals.

古文：四月，皇后行亲蚕礼于内苑。
现代文：四月，皇后在内苑举行亲蚕礼。
English: In April, the Empress held her own silkworm ceremony in the inner courtyard.

古文：帝谓亲耕无贺，此安得贺，第行叩头礼，女乐第供宴，勿前导。
现代文：皇帝说亲耕不朝贺，这怎么能朝贺呢？只行叩头礼，女乐只供给宴饮，不用仪仗引导。
English: The emperor said, "You can't have a morning greeting if you're a farmer," so how can you have a morning greeting? All you have to do is make a kowtow, and the female musicians only provide the banquet, they don't have to lead the ceremonial procession.

古文：三十八年罢，亲蚕礼。
现代文：嘉靖三十八年，罢除亲蚕礼。
English: In the 38th year of Jiajing, the pro-silkworm ceremony was abolished.

古文：四十一年，并罢所司奏请。
现代文：四十一年，一并罢除主管官吏的奏请。
English: Forty-one years later, the officials in charge were dismissed.

古文：高禖
现代文：高禖
English: Takatsuki

古文：嘉靖九年，青州儒生李时飏请祠高禖，以祈圣嗣。
现代文：嘉靖九年，青州儒生李时扬请求祭祀高禖，以祈祷圣上子嗣繁盛。
English: In the ninth year of the Jiajing era, Li Shiyang, a Confucian scholar from Qingzhou, requested that a sacrificial offering be made to Gao Gan, praying for the prosperity of the saint's descendants.

古文：礼官覆以闻。
现代文：礼部官员据以上奏。
English: Officials from the Ministry of Etiquette made the announcement according to the above.

古文：帝曰： 高禖虽古礼，今实难行。 
现代文：皇帝说： 祭祀高禖虽然是古代就有的礼仪，现在确实难以举行。 
English: The emperor said: Although the sacrificial offering of sorghum is an ancient etiquette, it is really difficult to hold it now.

古文：遂寝其议。
现代文：于是停止商议。
English: Negotiations were then suspended.

古文：已而定祀高禖礼。
现代文：不久制定了祭祀高禖的礼仪。
English: Soon after, the ritual of sacrificing a stilt was established.

古文：设木台于皇城东，永安门北，震方。
现代文：在皇城束边设木台，永安门以北，东方。
English: A wooden platform will be set up at the edge of the Imperial City, north of the Yongan Gate and east.

古文：台上，皇天上帝南向，骍犊，苍壁。
现代文：祭台上，皇天上帝面向南，用辟色的牛犊，青苍色的璧。
English: On the altar, the Emperor God faces south, with a pale-colored calf, a pale-blue gem.

古文：献皇帝配，西向，牛羊豕各一。
现代文：献皇帝配祀，面向西，用牛羊豕各一只。
English: It is dedicated to the emperor, faces west, and is decorated with a cow and a goat.

古文：高禖在坛下西向，牲数如之，礼三献。
现代文：高禖之神在坛台下面向西，祭牲数目相同，行三献礼。
English: The god of sorghum rises from under the altar and faces west. The number of sacrificial animals is the same, and three offerings are made.

古文：皇帝位坛下北向，后妃位南数十丈外，北向，用帷。
现代文：皇帝位在坛台下面向北，皇后妃嫔位在南面几十丈外面向北，用帷幕遮蔽。
English: The emperor's throne faces north under the altar, while the empress consort's throne faces north a few dozen meters to the south, shielded by a curtain.

古文：坛下陈弓矢、弓韣如后妃嫔之数。
现代文：坛下陈设弓箭、弓套如同后宫嫔妃的数目。
English: Arrows and bows are displayed under the altar, and the number of bows and arrows is like the number of concubines in a harem.

古文：祭毕，女官导后妃嫔至高禖前，跪取弓矢授后妃嫔，后妃嫔受而纳于弓韣。
现代文：祭祀完毕，女官引导皇后妃嫔到高禖神位前，跪下取弓箭授予皇后妃嫔，皇后妃嫔接过来收在弓套中。
English: After the ritual, the maidservant led the Empress Dowager to the throne of Takatsuki. She knelt down and took a bow and arrow and gave it to the Empress Dowager. The Empress Dowager took it and put it in a bow case.

古文：祭告
现代文：祭告
English: Announcement of the festival

古文：明制，凡登极、巡幸及上谥、葬陵、册立、册封、冠婚等事，皆祭告天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：明朝制度，凡是刚登上皇位、巡幸及上谧号、葬陵、册立、册封、冠礼婚礼等事，都要祭告天地、宗庙、社稷。
English: According to the Ming Dynasty system, all the newly ascended to the throne, the imperial inspection tour, the announcement of the imperial edict, the burial, the enthronement, the investiture, the coronation and the wedding, etc. should be announced to the world, the ancestral temple and the society.

古文：凡营造宫室，及命将出师，岁时旱潦，祭告天地、山川、太庙、社稷、后土。
现代文：凡是营建宫殿，以及命令将士出军，年成旱涝，都要祭告天地、山川、太庙、社稷、后土。
English: Whenever a palace is built, or a general is ordered to march out, or there is a drought, the heavens, the earth, the mountains, the rivers, the temples, the shrines, and the hinterland must be warned.

古文：凡即位之初，并祭告阙里孔庙及历代帝王陵寝。
现代文：凡是即位之初，还要祭告阙里庙以及历代帝王陵寝。
English: At the beginning of the enthronement, it is also necessary to pay homage to the Boli Temple and the imperial mausoleums of all times.

古文：洪武二年，礼部尚书崔亮奏，圜丘、方丘、大祀，前期亲告太庙，仍遣使告百神于天下神祇坛。
现代文：洪武二年，听从礼部尚书崔亮的奏议，圜丘、方丘、大祀，在祭期之前亲自祭告太庙，接着派遣使者向天下神只坛百神祭告。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, he listened to the suggestion of Cui Liang, Shangshu of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and personally offered sacrifices to the Great Temple before the festival period, and then sent an emissary to offer sacrifices to the world's only altar of a hundred gods.

古文：六年，礼部尚书牛谅奏，太岁诸神，凡祈报，则设一十五坛，有事祭告，则设神位二十八坛。
现代文：淇武六年，礼部尚书牛谅上奏，太岁诸神，凡是祈祷报祭，就设十五坛。有事祭告，就设神位二十八坛。
English: In the sixth year of the Qin and Wu Dynasties, the ceremonial department was still in the process of writing and recording, and the gods were too old. Fifteen altars were set up for prayers and offerings. Twenty-eight altars were set up for divinities when there was an event to be announced.

古文：中，太岁、风云雷雨、五岳、五镇、四海，凡五坛。
现代文：中间，太岁、风云雷雨、五岳、五镇、四海，共五坛。
English: In the middle, Tai Lai, Fengyun and Thunderstorm, Five Mountains, Five Towns, Four Seas, a total of five altars.

古文：东，四渎、京畿、湖广、山东、河南、北平、广西、四川、甘肃山川，夏冬二季月将，京都城隍，凡十二坛。
现代文：东方，四渎、京都地区、湖广、山东、河南、北平、广西、四川、甘肃山川，夏冬雨季月将，京都城隍，共十二坛。
English: Dongfang, Shifang, Kyoto area, Hougang, Shandong, Henan, Beiping, Guangxi, Sichuan, Gansu mountains and rivers, summer and winter rainy season, Kyoto castle moat, a total of 12 altars.

古文：西，钟山，江西、浙江、福建、山西、广东、辽东山川，春秋二季月将，旗纛、战船等神，凡十一坛。
现代文：西方，钟山，江西、浙江、福建、山西、陕西、广东、辽东山川，春秋雨季月将，旗纛、战船等神，共十一坛。
English: Western, Zhongshan, Jiangxi, Zhejiang, Fujian, Shanxi, Shaanxi, Guangdong, Liaodong mountains and rivers, the moon in spring and autumn, banners, warships and other gods, a total of eleven altars.

古文：若亲祀，皇帝皮弁服行一献礼，每三坛行一次礼。
现代文：如若亲自祭祀，皇帝穿皮弁服，行一献礼，每三坛行一次礼。
English: In the case of a personal offering, the emperor would wear a fursuit and make one offering, with one offering for each of the three altars.

古文：八年，帝驻跸中都，祭告天地于中都之圜丘。
现代文：八年，皇帝驾临中都，在中都的圜丘祭告天地。
English: In the eighth year, the emperor arrived in Zhongdu, and announced to the world at the Mengqiu Festival in Zhongdu.

古文：九年，以诸王将之藩，分日告祭太庙、社稷、岳镇海渎及天下名山大川，复告祀天地于圜丘。
现代文：九年，由于诸位藩王将要前往藩国，在分日告祭太庙、社稷、岳、镇、海、渎，以及天下的名山大川，又在圜丘祭告天地。
English: In the ninth year, since all the lords of the domain were going to travel to the country of the domain, they announced the temple, shrine, mountain, town, sea, and river, as well as the famous mountains and rivers in the world, on the first day of the festival, and announced the world on the second day of the festival.

古文：初，诸王来朝还藩，祭真武等神于端门，用豕九、羊九、制帛等物，祭护卫旗纛于承天门，亦如之。
现代文：起初，诸王来朝返回藩国，在端门祭告真武等神，用九只豕、九只羊、制帛等祭品。在承天门祭告护卫旗纛，也是这样。
English: At first, kings came to the Joseon Dynasty and returned to their domains. At the front gate, they offered sacrifices to gods such as Jinmu, using nine donkeys, nine sheep, and yakitori, and so on. This was also the case at the front gate of the Joseon Dynasty, where they offered sacrifices to protect the banner.

古文：二十六年，帝以其礼太繁，定制豕一、羊一，不用帛。
现代文：洪武二十六年，皇帝认为礼仪过于繁琐，规定用一只豕、一只羊，不用帛。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of Hongwu, the emperor thought that the etiquette was too cumbersome, and stipulated that a donkey and a sheep should be used instead of a donkey.

古文：寻又罢端门祭，惟用荤素二坛祭于承天门外。
现代文：不久又罢除端门的祭祀，惟用荤素二坛在承天门外祭告。
English: Soon after, the ritual at the end of the gate was abolished, except that the two altars were used to offer sacrifices outside the Gate of Heaven.

古文：永乐七年，巡狩北京，祭告天地、宗庙、社稷，嘉靖八年秋，以躬祭山川诸神，命先期不必遣官告太庙。
现代文：永乐七年，巡狩北京，祭告天地、宗庙、社稷。嘉靖八年秋，因为皇帝亲自祭告山川诸神，命令不必提前派官告请太庙。
English: In the seventh year of Yongle, he went on a hunting tour of Beijing, and offered sacrifices to heaven and earth, ancestral temples, and shrines. In the autumn of the eighth year of Jiajing, because the emperor himself offered sacrifices to the gods of the mountains and rivers, there was no need to send an officer in advance to invite the imperial temple.

古文：凡出入，必亲告祖考于内殿。
现代文：凡是出入，必定在内殿亲自祭告皇祖皇考。
English: Anyone entering or leaving must personally announce the imperial examination to the emperor in the inner hall.

古文：圣诞前一日，以酒果告列圣帝后于奉先殿，至日，以酒脯告皇天上帝于玄极宝殿，遣官以牲醴祭神烈、天寿、纯德诸陵山，及东岳、都城隍，以素羞祭真武及灵济宫，又告修斋于道极七宝帝尊。
现代文：圣上生日前一天，用酒果在奉先殿祭告列圣帝后。到这一天，在玄极宝殿用酒和脯祭告皇天上帝，派官用祭牲酒醴祭告神烈、天寿、纯德众陵山，以及束岳、都城隍，用素食祭告真武及灵济宫，斋请僧徒在道极七宝帝尊前做法事祭告。
English: On the day before the saint's birthday, he was canonized with fruits and wine at the ceremony held in the Hall of the Ancients. On this day, the Emperor God was proclaimed with wine and burnt offerings at the Hall of Precious Gems, and officials were dispatched to offer sacrifices of animals and wine and burnt offerings to the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of

古文：隆庆三年，以亲祭朝日坛，预告奉先、弘孝、神霄殿。
现代文：隆庆三年，因为亲自祭祀朝日坛，预先祭告奉先、弘孝、神霄殿。
English: In the third year of the Longqing Festival, because I personally worshiped the Asahi Altar, I announced beforehand that it would be dedicated to Bosen, Hongxiao, and Shinsyo-den.

古文：祈报
现代文：祈报
English: Praying for recovery

古文：洪武二年，太祖以春久不雨，祈告诸神祇。
现代文：洪武二年，太祖因为春天久不下雨，向众神只祈告。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, because the spring did not rain for a long time, Taizu only prayed to the gods.

古文：中设风云雷雨、岳镇海渎，凡五坛。
现代文：中间设风云雷雨、岳、镇、海、渎，共五坛。
English: In the middle, there are wind, clouds, thunder and rain, mountain, town, sea, and evil, a total of five altars.

古文：东设钟山、两淮、江西、两广、海南北、山东、燕南燕蓟山川、旗纛诸神，凡七坛。
现代文：东方设钟山、两淮、江西、两广、海南北、山东、燕南燕蓟山川、旗纛谙神，共七坛。
English: In the east, there are Zhongshan, two Huai, Jiangxi, two Guang, north and south of the sea, Shandong, Yan'nan, Yan'an Mountains and Rivers, Qibao Shen, a total of seven altars.

古文：西设江东、两浙、福建、湖广荆襄、河南北、河东、华州山川、京都城隍，凡六坛。
现代文：西方设江束、两浙、福建、湖广剂襄、河南北、河东、华州山川、京都城隍，共六坛。
English: In the west, there are six halls: Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Fujian, Hunan, Hebei, Henan, Hebei, Huazhou, and Kyoto.

古文：中五坛奠帛。
现代文：中间五坛祭奠帛。
English: In the middle, the five altars are dedicated.

古文：初献，帝亲行礼，两庑命官分献。
现代文：初献，皇帝亲自行礼，两侧命官分献。
English: At the first offering, the emperor himself performed the ritual, and officials on both sides distributed the offerings.

古文：三年夏，旱。
现代文：洪武三年夏季，遭受旱灾。
English: In the summer of the third year of Hongwu, it suffered from drought.

古文：六月朔，帝素服草履，步祷于山川坛。
现代文：六月初一，皇帝穿素服草鞋，行禹步祷告于山川坛。
English: On the first day of June, the emperor wore a vegetarian dress and straw sandals, and prayed at the altar of mountains and rivers.

古文：藁席露坐，昼曝于日，夜卧于地，凡三日。
现代文：露天坐在藁席上，白天任太阳暴晒，夜晚睡在地上，共有三天。
English: Sitting in the open air at a banquet, exposed to the sun during the day, sleeping on the ground at night, for a total of three days.

古文：六年，从礼部尚书牛谅言，太岁诸神，春祈秋报，凡十五坛。
现代文：洪武六年，听从礼部尚书牛谅的提议，太岁诸神，春天祈祷秋天报祭，共十五坛。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu, he listened to the suggestion of Shang Shu Niu Tong from the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies to pray for the gods in the spring and offer sacrifices in the autumn, a total of 15 altars.

古文：中，太岁、风云雷雨、五岳、五镇、四海。
现代文：中间，太岁、风云雷雨、五岳、五镇、四海。
English: In the middle, Tai Lai, Fengyun and Thunderstorm, Wu Yue, Wu Zhen, and Shihai.

古文：东，四渎、京畿山川，春秋二季月将，京都各府城隍。
现代文：东方，四渎、京城地区山川，春秋雨季月将，京都各府城隍。
English: The east, the four districts, the mountains and rivers in the capital area, the rainy season in spring and autumn, and the castle moats in each of Kyoto's prefectures.

古文：西，钟山、甘肃山川，夏冬二季月将，旗纛战船等神。
现代文：西方，钟山、甘肃山川，夏冬雨季月将，旗纛战船等神。
English: In the west, Zhongshan, the mountains and rivers of Gansu, the summer and winter rainy seasons, and the banner and warship are the gods.

古文：各五坛。
现代文：各五坛。
English: Five altars each.

古文：时甘肃新附，故附其山川之祭于京师。
现代文：当时甘肃新来归附，因此将其山川附祭于京城。
English: At that time, Gansu was newly annexed, so its mountains and rivers were enshrined in the capital.

古文：其亲祀之仪与祭告同。
现代文：亲祀的仪程与祭告相同。
English: The ceremony for a relative's enshrinement is the same as the announcement.

古文：正统九年三月，雨雪愆期，遣官祭天地、社稷、太岁、风云雷雨、岳镇海渎。
现代文：正统九年三月，降雪失期，派官祭告天、地、社稷、太岁、风云雷雨、岳、镇、海、渎众神。
English: In March of the ninth year of orthodoxy, the snowfall expires, and the officials' festival is held to announce the gods of heaven, earth, society, the sun, the clouds, the thunderstorms, the mountains, the town, the sea, and the gods.

古文：弘治十七年，畿内、山东久旱，命官祭告天寿山，分命各巡抚祭告北岳、北镇、东岳、东镇、东海。
现代文：弘治十七年，京郊地区、山东久旱，命令官员祭告天寿山，分别命令各巡抚祭告北岳、北镇、束岳、束镇、束海。
English: In the 17th year of the Hongzhi era, officials in the suburbs of Beijing and Shandong, where there had been a long drought, were ordered to make offerings to Tianshou Mountain, and the governors were separately ordered to make offerings to Beidake, Beizhen, Sokdake, Sokzhen and Sokhai.

古文：嘉靖八年春，帝谕礼部： 去冬少雪，今当东作，雨泽不降，当亲祭南郊社稷、山川。 
现代文：嘉靖八年春天，皇帝谕令礼部： 去年冬天少雪，现在要春耕，天不降雨，应当亲自祭告南郊社稷、山川。 
English: In the spring of the eighth year of Jiajing, the emperor ordered the ritual department: Last winter there was little snow, now it is time for spring plowing, if it does not rain, you should personally tell the southern suburbs, mountains and rivers.

古文：尚书方献夫等言： 《周礼·大宗伯》： 以荒礼哀凶札。 
现代文：尚书方献夫等人说： 《周礼·大宗伯》： 以废置礼仪来哀伤五谷歉收疾疫流行。 
English: Shangshu Fang Xianwu and others said: "Zhouli · Dai Zongbai": to mourn the poor harvest of grain with the abolition of etiquette epidemic.

古文：释者谓： 君膳不举，驰道不除，祭事不县，皆所以示贬损之意。 
现代文：注释者说： 君主不举行宴会，不清扫御道，不举行祭礼，都是为了表示贬损之意。 
English: The commentator said: The monarch does not hold a banquet, does not sweep the imperial road, does not hold a festival, all of which are intended to express derogatory.

古文：又曰： 国有大故，则旅上帝及四望。 
现代文：又说： 国家有大灾患，就祈告上帝及迁祭四方山川。 
English: He also said: If there is a great disaster in the country, we should pray to God and move the festival to the mountains and rivers in all directions.

古文：释者曰： 故谓凶灾。
现代文：注释者说： 就是指饥荒灾祸。
English: The commentator says: It means famine disaster.

古文：旅，陈也，陈其祭祀以祷焉，礼不若祀之备也。 
现代文：旅，就是陈列。陈列祭祀来祷告，礼节不如大祀完备。 
English: A journey is a display. A display of sacrificial rites to pray, the etiquette is not as complete as a large ritual.

古文：今陛下闵劳万姓，亲出祈祷。礼仪务简约，以答天戒。
现代文：而今陛下不忍烦劳百姓，亲自祈祷，礼仪务必简约，以答覆上天的垂诫。
English: Now, however, His Majesty can't bear to bother the people and prays in person. The etiquette must be simple, so as to respond to Heaven's command.

古文：常朝官并从，同致省愆祈吁之诚。 
现代文：固定的朝廷官员一并随从，共同表达反省祈愿的诚意。 
English: The regular officials of the imperial court also followed, jointly expressing the sincerity of their remorse and prayers.

古文：随具上仪注。
现代文：随同呈上仪程。
English: Accompanied by the presentation ceremony.

古文：二月，亲祷南郊，山川同日，社稷用次日，不除道，冠服浅色，群臣同。
现代文：二月在南郊亲自祈祷，在同一天祭祀山川，在次日祭祀社稷，不清扫御道。衣冠为浅色，群臣相同。
English: In February, he prayed in person in the southern suburbs, worshiped mountains and rivers on the same day, and worshiped the shrine on the next day. He did not sweep the path. His robe was light-colored, as were his retainers.

古文：文五品、武四品以上于大祀门外，馀官于南天门外，就班陪祀。
现代文：文官五品、武官四品以上在大祀门外，萁余官员在南天门外，就班列陪祀。
English: Civilian officials of the fifth grade and military officers of the fourth grade and above were lined up outside the Great Worship Gate, and remaining officials were lined up outside the South Heaven Gate to accompany the worship.

古文：是秋，帝欲亲祀山川诸神。
现代文：这年秋天，皇帝想亲自祭祀山川诸神。
English: In the autumn of that year, the emperor wanted to personally worship the gods of the mountains and rivers.

古文：礼部尚书李时言： 旧例山川等祭，中夜行礼，先一日出郊斋宿。
现代文：礼部尚书李时说： 旧例山川等坛的祭祀，在半夜行礼，提前一天出郊斋戒留宿。
English: Shangshu Lisi, from the Ministry of Ceremonies, said: "In the old days, the rituals of altars such as mountains and rivers were performed in the middle of the night, and one day in advance, people went out to the countryside to fast and stay overnight.

古文：祭毕，清晨回銮，两日毕事，礼太重。
现代文：祭祀完毕，清晨回官。两天完成祭祀之事，礼仪太重。
English: After the ritual, the early morning eulogy. Two days to complete the ritual, the etiquette is too heavy.

古文：宜比先农坛例，昧爽行礼。 
现代文：应该比照先农坛例，拂晓行礼。 
English: It is necessary to follow the example of the farmers' altars and perform the ritual at dawn.

古文：因具仪以进。
现代文：因而制定仪程呈上。
English: Therefore, the schedule has been drawn up and submitted.

古文：制可。
现代文：皇帝许可。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：祭服用皮弁，迎神、送神各两拜。
现代文：祭服用皮弁装，迎神、送神各拜两拜。
English: At the festival, people dress up in leather and bowler hats, and offer two bows to welcome and send off the gods.

古文：十一年，大学士李时等以圣嗣未降，请廷臣诣岳镇名山祝祷。
现代文：嘉靖十一年，大学士李时等因为圣上尚无子嗣，请朝中大臣前往岳镇名山祝祷。
English: In the eleventh year of the Jiajing era, Li Shih, a university scholar, and others, because the saint had no son, invited the Minister of the Middle Kingdom to go to the famous mountain in Yue Town to pray.

古文：帝欲分遣道士赍香帛行，令所在守臣行礼，在廷大臣分诣地祇坛祈告。
现代文：皇帝想分别派遣道士，赏赐香烛布帛前往，令当地官员行礼，朝中大臣分别前往地祇坛祈告。
English: The emperor wanted to send Taoist priests separately, reward them with incense candles and cloth to go, order local officials to make a bow, and the ministers of the two Koreas separately went to the Jigotan to pray.

古文：于是礼部尚书夏言言： 我朝建地祇坛，自岳镇海渎以及远近名山大川，莫不怀柔，即此而祷，正合古人望衍之义。
现代文：于是礼部尚书夏言说： 我朝设立地祇坛，自岳、镇、海、渎以及远近名山大川没有不受到抚慰的，到此祈祷，正符合古人所说的 迁祭，之义。
English: Therefore, the ceremonial department secretary Xia Yan said: I set up the ground altar in the morning, and from the mountain, the town, the sea, the ditch, and the famous mountains and rivers far and near, there is no one who has not been comforted, and praying here is in line with the meaning of the ancient people's "moving ceremony."

古文：但辅臣所请，止于岳镇。
现代文：但宰辅大臣请求的，祇有岳镇。
English: However, Giyotake Town is the one requested by the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs.

古文：窃以山川海渎，发祥效灵，与岳镇同功，况基运、翊圣、神烈、天寿、纯德诸山，又祖宗妥灵之地，祈祷之礼，皆不可缺。 
现代文：私下认为山川海滨，祥瑞灵验，与岳镇同等重要，何况基运、翊圣、神烈、天寿、纯德众山，又是祖宗安放灵魂的地方，祈祷的礼仪都不可缺少。 
English: Privately, I believe that the mountains, rivers, and seashores, as well as the auspiciousness and efficacy, are as important as Yue Town, not to mention the fundamental movement, the sacred, the divine, the heavenly life, the pure and virtuous mountains, and the place where the ancestors placed their souls, and the prayer etiquette is indispensable.

古文：遂命大臣诣坛分祀。
现代文：于是命大臣前往各坛分祀。
English: As a result, the minister went to each of the altars to pay his respects.

古文：神祇坛
现代文：神祇坛
English: Shrine altar

古文：洪武二年，从礼部尚书崔亮言，建天下神祇坛于圆丘壝外之东，及方丘壝外之西。
现代文：洪武二年听从礼部尚书崔亮的提议，在圜丘坛颁外的东方及方丘堰外的西方建天下神只坛。
English: In the second year of Hongwu's reign, he followed the suggestion of Cui Liang of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies to build the world's only altar to the gods in the east and the west.

古文：郊祀前期，帝躬诣坛，设神位，西向，以酒脯祭告。
现代文：郊祀之前，皇帝亲自前往祭坛，设神位，面向西，用酒脯祭告。
English: Before the suburb worship, the emperor himself went to the altar, set up a god, facing west, and made a toast with sake lees.

古文：郊之日，俟分献从祀将毕，就坛以祭。
现代文：郊祀当天，等到分献从祀快要完成时，到坛举行祭祀。
English: On the day of the suburb worship, when the distribution from the worship is about to be completed, a sacrifice is held at the altar.

古文：后定遣官预告。
现代文：后来规定派官员预告。
English: Later, it was stipulated that officials should be sent to give advance notice.

古文：又建山川坛于正阳门外天地坛西，合祀诸神。
现代文：又在正阳门外天地坛西方建山川坛，共同祭祀诸神。
English: In addition, a mountain and river altar was built to the west of the heaven and earth altar outside the Zhengyang Gate to jointly worship the gods.

古文：凡设坛十有九，太岁、春夏秋冬四季月将为第一，次风云雷雨，次五岳，次五镇，次四海，次四渎，次京都钟山，次江东，次江西，次湖广，次淮东、淮西，次浙东、浙西、福建，次广东、广西、海南、海北，次山东、山西、河南、河北，次北平、陕西，次左江、右江，次安南、高丽、占城诸国山川，次京都城隍，次六纛大神、旗纛大将、五方旗神、战船、金鼓、铳炮、弓弩、飞枪飞石、阵前阵后诸神，皆躬自行礼。
现代文：共设有十九座祭坛，太岁、春夏秋冬四季月将为第一，其次为风云雷雨，再次为五岳，再次为五镇，再次为四海，再次为四演，再次为京都钟山，再次为江束，再次为江西，再次为湖广，再次为淮东、淮西，再次为浙束、浙西、福建，再次为广东、广西、海南、海北，再次为山东、山西、河南、河北，再次为北平、陕西，再次为左江、右江，再次为安南、高丽、占城等国山川，再次为京都城隍，再次六纛大神、旗纛大将、五方旗神、战船、金鼓、镜炮、弓弩、飞枪、飞石、阵前阵后诸神都亲自行礼。
English: There are a total of nineteen altars. The four seasons of the year, spring, summer, autumn and winter will be the first, followed by the wind and thunderstorms, followed by the five mountains, followed by the five towns, followed by the four seas, followed by the four performances, followed by Kyoto Zhongshan, followed by Jiangzhuang, followed by Jiangxi, followed by Hunan, followed by Huadong and Huaxi, followed by Zhezhuang, Zhejiang and Fujian, followed by Guangdong, Guangxi, Hainan and Hebei, followed by Shandong, Shanxi, Henan and Hebei, followed by Beiping and Shaanxi, followed

古文：先祭，礼官奏： 祝文，太岁以下至四海，凡五坛，称臣者亲署御名。
现代文：祭祀之前，礼部官员上奏： 祝文，从太岁以下到四海，共五坛，自称为臣的亲自签署陛下名讳。
English: Prior to the ritual, officials from the Ministry of Ceremonies played the following: A congratulatory message, signed by the self-proclaimed vassal himself, on a total of five altars, from the Taisho to the Shikai.

古文：其钟山诸神，称余者请令礼官代署。 
现代文：钟山诸神，自称为余的请命礼部官员代为署名。 
English: The gods of the Bell Mountain, who call themselves Yu, asked the officials of the Ministry of Ceremonies to sign on their behalf.

古文：帝曰： 朋友书牍，尚亲题姓名，况神明乎？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 朋友之间写书信，尚且亲自题写姓名，何况对神明呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "It is not proper to write letters between friends and personally inscribe their names, let alone to the gods.

古文：遂加亲署。
现代文：于是加上亲自署名。
English: He then added his signature.

古文：后又定惊蛰、秋分后三日，遣官祭山川坛诸神。
现代文：后来又规定惊垫、秋分后三天，派官员祭祀山川坛诸神。
English: Later, officials were sent to offer sacrifices to the gods of mountains and rivers three days after the autumn equinox.

古文：七年令春、秋仲月上旬，择日以祭。
现代文：洪武七年，下令在春、秋雨季的第二月上旬，择吉日举行祭祀。
English: In the seventh year of Hongwu, it was ordered to hold a ritual on the auspicious day at the beginning of the second month of the spring and autumn rainy season.

古文：九年，复定山川坛制，凡十三坛。
现代文：九年，又制定山川坛制度，共十三坛。
English: Nine years later, the mountain and river altar system was established, with a total of thirteen altars.

古文：正殿，太岁、风云雷雨、五岳、五镇、四海、四渎、钟山七坛。
现代文：正殿，太岁、风云雷雨、五岳、五镇、四海、四演、钟山七坛。
English: The main hall, the sun, the wind, the clouds, the thunderstorms, the five mountains, the five towns, the four seas, the four performances, the seven bell towers.

古文：东西庑各三坛，东，京畿山川、夏冬二季月将。
现代文：东西廊糜各三坛，束边，是京郊地区山川、夏冬雨季月将。
English: The east and west corridors are each surrounded by three altars, and Sokube is surrounded by mountains and rivers in the suburbs of Kyoto, and the rainy season in summer and winter.

古文：西，春秋二季月将、京都城隍。
现代文：西边，是春秋雨季月将、京都城隍。
English: To the west is Kyoto Castle, which is closed during the rainy season in spring and autumn.

古文：十年，定正殿七坛，帝亲行礼，东西庑遣功臣分献。
现代文：十年，定正殿七坛，皇帝亲自行礼，东西廊殿派功臣分献。
English: In ten years, the seven altars of the Dingzheng Hall, the emperor's self-worship, and the East and West galleries of the hall were donated by meritorious subjects.

古文：二十一年，增修大祀殿诸神坛壝。
现代文：二十一年，增修大祀殿诸神祭坛。
English: In the twenty-first year, the altar to the gods in the Great Hall of Worship was renovated.

古文：乃敕十三坛诸神并停春祭，每岁八月中旬，择日祭之。
现代文：于是敕令十三坛诸神春季的祭祀一并停止，每年八月中旬，择吉日举行祭祀。
English: As a result, the Emperor ordered that the springtime sacrifices to the 13 deities at the altar be stopped all together, and that the sacrifices be held in mid-August every year, on the auspicious day of the year.

古文：命礼部更定祭山川坛仪，与社稷同。
现代文：命礼部重新制定祭祀山川坛仪程，与社稷坛相同。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies re-established the ritual of the mountain and river altar, which is the same as that of the shrine altar.

古文：永乐中，京师建山川坛，并同南京制，惟正殿钟山之右，益以天寿山之神。
现代文：永乐年间，京都建山川坛如同南京形制，只有正殿在钟山之右，增加天寿山之神。
English: During the Yongle era, the mountain and river shrines in Kyoto were built in the same style as those in Nanjing, except that the main hall was built to the right of the bell tower, with the addition of the god of Mount Tianju.

古文：嘉靖十一年，改山川坛名为天神地祇坛，改序云师、雨师、风伯、雷师。
现代文：嘉靖十一年，改山川坛名为天神地只坛，改排序云师、雨师、风伯、雷师。
English: In the 11th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the altar of mountains and rivers was renamed as the Altar of Heaven and Earth, and the order of the priests was changed to Yun Shi, Yu Shi, Feng Bo, and Lei Shi.

古文：天神坛在左，南向，云、雨、雷，凡四坛。
现代文：天神坛在左，面向南，云、雨、风、雷，共四坛。
English: The altar of Tenjin is on the left, facing south. There are four altars, representing clouds, rain, wind, and thunder.

古文：地祇坛在右，北向，五岳、五镇、基运翊圣神烈天寿纯德五陵山、四海、四渎，凡五坛。
现代文：地只坛在右，面向北，五岳、五镇、基运翊圣神烈天寿纯德五陵山、四海、四渎，共五坛。
English: The earth altar is on the right, facing north. There are five altars in total, including five mountains, five towns, five holy mountains, four seas, and four defilements.

古文：从祀，京畿山川，西向；天下山川，东向。
现代文：陪祀的，是京城地区山川，面向西；天下山川，面向东。
English: Accompanying the shrine are the mountains and rivers of the capital area, facing west; and the mountains and rivers of the country, facing east.

古文：以辰、戌、丑、未年仲秋，皇帝亲祭，馀年遣大臣摄祭。
现代文：在辰、戌、丑、未年仲秋，皇帝亲自举行祭祀，其余年份派大臣大为祭祀。
English: In the spring, autumn, winter, and mid-autumn, the emperor himself held the sacrifice, and in the remaining years, he sent his ministers to perform the sacrifice.

古文：其太岁、月将、旗纛、城隍，别祀之。
现代文：太岁、月将、旗纛、城隍，另外祭祀。
English: Tairyo, Tsukimasa, Kata-hoko, Shiro-hoko, as well as other rituals.

古文：十七年，加上皇天上帝尊称，预告于神祇，遂设坛于圜丘外壝东南，亲定神祇坛位，陈设仪式。
现代文：十七年，加上皇天上帝尊号，预先祭告神只，于是在圜丘外堰东南方设祭坛，亲自确定神只坛位置，陈设仪式。
English: In the seventeenth year, together with the name of the Emperor God of Heaven, the deities were announced in advance, so an altar was set up in the southeast of the outer wall of the mound, and the location of the altar was determined in person, and the ceremony was set up.

古文：礼部言： 皇上亲献大明坛，则四坛分献诸臣，不敢并列。
现代文：礼部说： 皇上亲献大明坛，则分献四坛的众臣，不敢并列。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies said, "If the emperor personally dedicates the Great Altar of Light, then the ministers who dedicate the four altars will not dare to stand side by side.

古文：请先上香毕，命官代献。 
现代文：请先上香完毕，命令官员代为献礼。 
English: Please finish the incense first, and order the officials to present the gift on your behalf.

古文：帝裁定，上香、奠帛、献爵复位后，分献官方行礼。
现代文：皇帝裁定，上香、奠帛、献爵复位后，分献官纔开始行礼。
English: The emperor ruled that after the reinstatement of Shang Xiang, Dian Xuan, and Xuan Xuan, the officials began to salute.

古文：亚、终二献，执事官代，馀坛俱献官三行。
现代文：亚、终两献，执事官代替，其余坛都由献官行三次礼。
English: After the second and final offering, the deacon takes his place, and the remaining altars are blessed three times by the officiating minister.

古文：隆庆元年，礼臣言： 天神地祇已从祀南北郊，其仲秋神祇之祭不宜复举。 
现代文：隆庆元年，礼部大臣说： 天神地只已陪祀南北郊，仲秋神只之祭不宜重复举行。 
English: In the first year of the Longqing Festival, the Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies said: The gods of heaven and earth have only been enshrined in the northern and southern suburbs, and the Mid-Autumn Festival should not be repeated.

古文：令罢之。
现代文：下令停止。
English: The order stands.

古文：星辰坛
现代文：星辰坛
English: The Altar of Stars

古文：洪武三年，帝谓中书省臣： 日月皆专坛祭，而星辰乃祔祭于月坛，非礼也。 
现代文：洪武三年，皇帝对中书省臣说： 日月都有专门的祭坛，而星辰仅柑祭月坛，不符合礼节。 
English: In the third year of Hongwu, the emperor said to the Chinese provincial minister: The sun and the moon have special altars, but the stars only have the moon altar, which is not in line with etiquette.

古文：礼部拟于城南诸神享祭坛正南向，增九间，朝日夕月祭周天星辰，俱于是行礼。
现代文：礼部拟走在城南谙神享祭坛正南方向，增加九间，朝日夕月祭祀周天星辰，都在此举行礼仪。
English: The ceremonial department intends to walk in the south of the city, in the direction of the altar, adding nine rooms. The rituals of the morning sun, the evening moon, and the stars on Sunday are all held here.

古文：朝日夕月仍以春秋分祭，星辰则于天寿节前三日。
现代文：朝日夕月仍旧在春、秋分祭祀，星辰之祭则在天寿节前三天。
English: The morning sun, the evening sun and the moon are still worshipped at the spring and autumn equinoxes, while the Star Festival is held three days before the Tenju Festival.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从了他们的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：四年九月，帝躬祀周天星辰。
现代文：四年九月，皇帝亲自祭祀周天星辰。
English: In September of the fourth year, the emperor personally sacrificed Zhou Tianxing.

古文：正殿共十坛，中设周天星辰位，仪如朝日。
现代文：正殿共十坛，中间设周天星辰位，仪程如同朝日祭。
English: There are a total of ten altars in the main hall, with the Zhou Tian Xingcheng in the middle, and the ceremony is similar to the Asahi Festival.

古文：二十一年，以星辰既从祀南郊，罢禜星之祭。
现代文：洪武二十一年，因为星辰已经陪祀南郊，停止萦星的祭祀。
English: In the twenty-first year of Hongwu, because the stars have accompanied the worship of the southern suburbs, stop the worship of the stars.

古文：灵星诸神
现代文：灵星诸神
English: The stars and the gods

古文：洪武元年，太常司奏： 《周礼》 以槱燎祀司中、司命、风师、雨师 。
现代文：洪武元年，太常司上奏： 《周礼》 聚柴燎祭司中、司命、风师、雨师 。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the first secretary of the Grand Council of State played: "Zhou Li" (Zhou Li) by the middle priest, the steward, the wind master, and the rain master.

古文：《天府》 若祭天则祀司民、司禄，而献民数、谷数，受而藏之。 
现代文：《天府》 如若祭天就祭祀司民、司禄，奉献百姓数目、谷物数目，接受贮藏 。
English: "Tianfu" If you worship the heavens, you will sacrifice priests, people, and crops, and offer the number of people, the number of grains, and accept storage.

古文：汉高帝命郡国立灵星祠。
现代文：汉高帝命令郡国设立灵星祠。
English: Emperor Han Gao ordered the county to set up a spiritual star shrine.

古文：唐制，立秋后辰日祀灵星，立冬后亥日遣官祀司中、司命、司民、司禄，以少牢。
现代文：唐朝制度，立秋后辰日祭祀灵星，立冬后亥日派遣官员祭祀司中、司命、司民、司禄，用少牢。
English: In the Tang Dynasty system, officials were dispatched on the day after the autumn equinox to offer sacrifices to the spirit star, and on the day after the winter equinox to offer sacrifices to the middle steward, steward of life, steward of the people, and steward of the lot.

古文：宋祀如唐，而于秋分日祀寿星。
现代文：宋朝的祭祀如同唐朝制度，而在秋分日祭祀寿星。
English: The sacrificial rites of the Song Dynasty were the same as those of the Tang Dynasty, but the autumn equinox was the day for the celebration of the birthday star.

古文：今拟如唐制，分日而祀，为坛于城南。 
现代文：现在拟定如同唐朝的制度，分日期祭祀，在城南建祭坛。 
English: Now they are working out a system similar to that of the Tang Dynasty, with daily sacrifices and the construction of an altar in the south of the city.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从了他们的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：二年，从礼部尚书崔亮奏，每岁圣寿日祭寿星，同日祭司中、司命、司民、司禄，示与民同受其福也。
现代文：二年，听从礼部尚书崔亮上奏，每年圣上生日祭祀寿星，同一天祭司中、司命、司民、司禄，表示与百姓共同受福佑。
English: In the second year, they listened to the prelude of Choe Ryong, the chief priest of the Ministry of Rites, and every year, on the saint's birthday, they held a celebration of the birthday star. On the same day, the middle priest, the chief priest, the chief priest, and the chief priest, expressed that they were blessed together with the people.

古文：八月望日祀灵星。
现代文：八月十五日祭祀灵星。
English: On the 15th of August, the ritual of worshipping the spirit star ended.

古文：皆遣官行礼。
现代文：都派遣官员举行礼仪。
English: All of them sent officials to hold ceremonies.

古文：三年，罢寿星等祀。
现代文：三年，停止寿星等的祭祀。
English: In three years, the rituals of the birthday star, etc. will stop.

古文：太岁月将风云雷雨之祀
现代文：太岁月将风云雷雨之祀
English: Too many years will be stormy and stormy worship

古文：古无太岁、月将坛宇之制，明始重其祭。
现代文：古代没有太岁、月将祭坛的制度，明开始重视对它们的祭祀。
English: In ancient times, there was no system of altars for the great old man or the moon god, but the Ming dynasty began to attach importance to their worship.

古文：增云师于风师之次，亦自明始。
现代文：在风师之下增加云师，也从明朝开始。
English: Under the wind division, the cloud division will be added, also starting from tomorrow morning.

古文：太祖既以太岁诸神从祀圜丘，又合祭群祀坛。
现代文：太祖已经把太岁诸神陪祀圜丘，又共同祭祀群祀坛。
English: The great-grandfather had already accompanied the deities of the great-grandfather to worship the sacred mound, and also jointly worshiped the group altar.

古文：已而命礼官议专祀坛壝。
现代文：不久命令礼部官员商议建专祀的祭坛。
English: He soon ordered officials from the Ministry of Ceremonies to discuss the construction of a special altar.

古文：礼臣言： 太岁者，十二辰之神。
现代文：礼部大臣说： 太岁，是十二星辰之神。
English: The Minister of Ceremonies said: Taisei, is the god of the twelve stars.

古文：按《说文》，岁字从步从戌。
现代文：按照《说文》，岁字从步从戌。
English: According to the "Analects," the Chinese character for the year goes from  to.

古文：木星一岁行一次，历十二辰而周天，若步然也。
现代文：木星每年运行一次，历经十二辰为一周天，如若步行。
English: Jupiter runs once a year, and after twelve hours, it is a weekday, as if walking.

古文：阴阳家说，又有十二月将，十日十二时所直之神，若天乙、天罡、太乙、功曹、太冲之类。
现代文：阴阳家说，又有十二月将，十日十二时当值的神灵，如同天乙、天罡、太乙、功曹、太冲之类。
English: The yin and yang people say that there will be another December, and the deities on duty at 12 o'clock on the 10th, such as Tianyi, Tianyu, Taiyi, Gong Cao, and Taichong.

古文：虽不经见，历代因之。
现代文：虽然不常见，但历代都沿袭下来。
English: Although uncommon, it has been passed down through the generations.

古文：元每有大兴作，祭太岁、月将、日直、时直于太史院。
现代文：元每当有大型建筑工程，在太史院祭太岁、月将、日值、时值。
English: In ancient times, whenever there was a large-scale construction project, the Tai Shi Academy would hold a festival to celebrate the new year, the new moon, the new day and the new hour.

古文：若风师、雨师之祀，见于《周官》，后世皆有祭。
现代文：至于风师、雨肺的祭祀，见于《周官》，后世都有祭祀。
English: As for the rituals of the wind master and the rain lung, they can be found in "Zhou Guan" and have been performed in later generations.

古文：唐天宝中，增雷师于雨师之次。
现代文：唐天宝年问，在雨师之下增设雷师。
English: Tang Tianbao asked to add a thunder division under the rain division.

古文：宋、元因之。
现代文：宋、元沿袭下来。
English: Song and Yuan dynasties.

古文：然唐制各以时别祭，失享祀本意。
现代文：然而唐制是各自按时另外祭祀，失去了祭享的本意。
English: However, in the Tang Dynasty, people made separate sacrifices at different times, losing the original intention of offering and sharing.

古文：宜以太岁、风云雷雨诸天神合为一坛，诸地祇为一坛，春秋专祀。 
现代文：应当把太岁、风云雷雨诸天神合为一坛，诸地只为一坛，在春秋雨季专门举行祭祀。 
English: The deities of the sun, wind, clouds, thunder and rain should be combined into one altar, and the deities of all lands should be only one altar, and special sacrifices should be held in the spring and autumn rainy seasons.

古文：乃定惊蛰、秋分日祀太岁诸神于城南。
现代文：于是定惊垫、秋分日在城南祭太岁诸神。
English: So, to everyone's surprise, the autumnal equinox falls on the day of the Shonan Matsuri, the festival of the old gods.

古文：三年后以诸神阴阳一气，流行无间，乃合二坛为一，而增四季月将。
现代文：三年，又因为众神阴阳一气，天地之间往来无间，于是合二坛为一，并增设四季月将。
English: Three years later, because the gods of yin and yang are one and the same, and there is no communication between heaven and earth, the two altars were combined into one, and the four seasons and months were added.

古文：又改祭期，与地祇俱用惊蛰、秋分后三日。
现代文：又改变祭期，与地只都在惊垫、秋分后三天。
English: They also changed the festival period so that it falls three days after the autumnal equinox.

古文：嘉靖十年，命礼部考太岁坛制。
现代文：嘉靖十年，命礼部查考太岁坛制度。
English: In the 10th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the Ministry of Ceremonies was ordered to investigate the Taiyitan system.

古文：礼官言： 太岁之神，唐、宋祀典不载，元虽有祭，亦无常典。
现代文：礼部官员说： 太岁之神，唐、宋的祀典没有记载，元虽有祭典，也没有一定的仪程。
English: The official from the Ministry of Ceremonies said, "There is no record of the Tang and Song deities of the god of longevity. Although there was originally a festival, there was no specific ritual.

古文：坛宇之制，于古无稽。
现代文：祭坛的形制，在古代无从考察。
English: The form of the altar could not be studied in ancient times.

古文：太岁天神，宜设坛露祭，准社稷坛制而差小。 
现代文：太岁是天神，应当设坛露天祭祀，依据社稷坛的形制而有所减小。 
English: Tai Lai is a god of heaven, and an open-air altar should be set up for worship. The height of the altar should be reduced according to the shape of the altar.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从了他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：遂建太岁坛于正阳门外之西，与天坛对。
现代文：于是在正阳门外的西方建太岁坛，与天坛相对。
English: Therefore, the Altar of the Sun was built in the west outside the Zhengyang Gate, opposite the Temple of Heaven.

古文：中，太岁殿。
现代文：中间，是太岁殿。
English: In the middle is Taisei-dono.

古文：东庑，春、秋月将二坛。
现代文：束侧，是春、秋月将二坛。
English: On the bundle side, there are two altars for the spring and autumn months.

古文：西庑，夏、冬月将二坛。
现代文：西侧，是夏、冬月将二坛。
English: On the west side, there are two altars for the summer and winter months.

古文：帝亲祭于拜殿中。
现代文：皇帝在拜殿中亲自祭祀。
English: The emperor himself performed the ritual in the hall of worship.

古文：每岁孟春享庙，岁暮祫祭之日，遣官致祭。
现代文：每年正月祭享太庙，年终袷祭之日，派遣官员举行祭祀。
English: Every year, officials are dispatched to hold rituals on the day of the New Year's Festival and the New Year's Eve Festival.

古文：王国府州县亦祀风云雷雨师，仍筑坛城西南。
现代文：王国府州县也祭祀风云雷雨师，仍然在城西南筑坛。
English: The Kingdom of Fuzhou County also worships the wind, clouds and thunderstorms, and still builds altars in the southwest of the city.

古文：祭用惊蛰、秋分日。
现代文：在惊垫、秋分日举行祭祀。
English: The festival is held on the first day of spring and the autumnal equinox.

古文：岳镇海渎山川之祀
现代文：岳镇海渎山川之祀
English: Dake Town, Sea, Mountains and Rivers

古文：洪武二年，太祖以岳渎诸神合祭城南，未有专祀。
现代文：洪武二年，太祖以岳渎诸神合祭于城南，没有专门的祭祀。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, Taizu held a joint festival with Yuege and other gods in the south of the city. There was no special ritual.

古文：又享祀之所，屋而不坛，非尊神之道。
现代文：又祭享的处所，只有屋宇而没有祭坛，不是尊敬神灵之道。
English: It is not the way to honor the gods to have a place of worship where there is only a building and no altar.

古文：礼官言： 虞舜祭四岳，《王制》始有五岳之称。
现代文：礼部官员说： 虞舜祭四岳，《王制》中开始有五岳之称。
English: The official from the Ministry of Ceremonies said, "There are four mountains in the Yuanyang Festival. In the "King System," there were originally five mountains.

古文：《周官》： 兆四望于四郊 ，《郑注》以四望为五岳四镇四渎。
现代文：《周官》， 在四郊迁祭四方山川神灵 ，《郑注》，以四方山川为五岳四镇四渎。
English: "Zhou Guan," in the four suburbs relocation festival four square mountains and rivers deities, "Zheng Note," with the four square mountains and rivers as the five mountains, four towns and four deities.

古文：《诗序》巡狩而礼四岳河海，则又有四海之祭。
现代文：《诗序》中说天子巡狩向四岳河海献礼，那么又有四海的祭祀。
English: In the "Sequence of Poems," it is said that the Son of Heaven went on a pilgrimage to offer sacrifices to the four mountains, four rivers, and four seas.

古文：盖天子方望之事，无所不通。
现代文：天子祭祀四方群神，无所不达。
English: The Tenshi ritual worships the gods of the four directions, reaching everywhere.

古文：而岳镇海渎，在诸侯封内，则各祀之。
现代文：而岳镇海滨，在诸侯封疆之内，就各自举行祭祀。
English: On the other hand, Yuezhen Seaside, within the fiefdom of the princes, held their own sacrificial rites.

古文：奏罢封建，岳渎皆领于祠官。
现代文：秦废除封邦建藩，岳镇都由祠官专领祭事。
English: When the Qin Dynasty abolished feudal states and established domains, all of Yue Town was governed by the ancestral officials.

古文：汉复建诸侯，则侯国各祀其封内山川，天子无与。
现代文：汉恢复建诸侯国，那么诸侯各祭祀其封域内的山川，天子不参预。
English: When the Han Dynasty resumed the construction of a vassal state, the vassals of each vassal worshiped the mountains and rivers within their fiefdoms, and the Son of Heaven did not attend.

古文：武帝时，诸侯或分或废，五岳皆在天子之邦。
现代文：武帝时，诸侯或分封或废弃，五岳都在天子的土地上。
English: At the time of Emperor Wu, the princes were either divided or abandoned, and the five mountains were all on the land of the son of heaven.

古文：宣帝时，始有使者持节祠岳渎之礼。
现代文：宣帝时，开始有使者持节祭祀岳渎之礼。
English: When Emperor Xuan was proclaimed, emissaries began to hold festivals to worship Yue Zang.

古文：由魏及隋，岳镇海渎，即其地立祠，有司致祭。
现代文：从魏到隋，岳镇海滨，就在当地建立祠庙，主管官吏举行祭祀。
English: From the Wei Dynasty to the Sui Dynasty, temples were built on the coast of Yue Zhen, and officials in charge held religious services.

古文：唐、宋之制，有命本界刺史、县令之祀，有因郊祀而望祭之祀，又有遣使之祀。
现代文：唐、宋的制度，有时命界内刺史、县今祭祀，有时随郊祀行适祭之礼，有时又派遣使者举行祭祀。
English: In the Tang and Song dynasties, there were times when rituals were held to mark the passage of time within the realm, and there were times when rituals were held in the county, and there were times when rituals were held in the suburbs, and there were times when emissaries were sent to hold rituals.

古文：元遣使祀岳镇海渎，分东西南北中为五道。
现代文：元派遣使者祭祀岳镇海渎，分东西南北中焉五道。
English: Yuan sent emissaries to offer sacrifices to Yue Zhen Haizhu, divided into five directions, from east to west, north to south.

古文：今宜以岳镇海渎及天下山川城隍诸地祇合为一坛。与天神埒，春秋专祀。 
现代文：现在应当把岳镇海滨及天下山川城隍诸地只合为一坛，与天神等同，春秋雨季专门举行祭祀。 
English: Now it is time to unite the coast of Yuezhen and all the mountains, rivers, cities and towns of the country into one altar, which is equivalent to the heavenly god, and hold special sacrifices in the spring and autumn rainy seasons.

古文：遂定祭日以清明霜降。
现代文：于是定清明霜降为祭日。
English: As a result, Qingming Frost was set as the festival day.

古文：前期一日，皇帝躬省牲。
现代文：提前一天，皇帝亲自视察祭牲。
English: A day earlier, the emperor personally inspected the sacrificial animals.

古文：至日，服通天冠绛纱袍，诣岳镇海渎前，行三献礼。
现代文：当天，戴通天冠穿绛纱袍，前往岳镇海滨之前，行三献礼。
English: On the same day, wearing a crown and a gauze robe, they made three offerings before heading to the Yuezhen seashore.

古文：山川城隍，分献官行礼。是年，命官十八人，祭天下岳镇海渎之神。
现代文：山川城隍，由分献官行礼这年，命令官员十八名，祭天下岳镇海滨之神。
English: Yamakawa castle, ordered eighteen officials to make a sacrifice to the god of the coast of Tengadake Town.

古文：帝皮弁御奉天殿，躬署御名，以香祝授使者。
现代文：皇帝穿皮弁服驾临奉天殿，亲自署名，把香烛祝文授予使者。
English: The emperor, dressed in leather, came to the Temple of Heaven, signed his name in person, and bestowed the incense candle congratulation on the messenger.

古文：百官公服，送至中书省，使者奉以行。
现代文：百官穿官服，送到中书省，使者奉命出行。
English: Hundreds of officials were dressed in official uniforms and sent to the Ministry of Chinese Literature, and the envoys were ordered to travel.

古文：黄金合贮香，黄绮幡二，白金二十五两市祭物。
现代文：黄金盒贮藏香烛，黄绮幡两面，白银二十五两购买祭品。
English: A gold box to store incense, a yellow banner on both sides, and twenty-five taels of silver to buy offerings.

古文：三年，诏定岳镇海渎神号。
现代文：洪武三年，下韶确定岳镇海渎各神的名号。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, it was determined that the names of the gods in Yuezhen were corrupted by the sea.

古文：略曰： 为治之道，必本于礼。
现代文：大略说： 治国之道，以礼法为根本。
English: In a nutshell: the way to govern the country is based on etiquette.

古文：岳镇海渎之封，起自唐、宋。
现代文：对岳镇海滨的封赠，始于唐、宋。
English: The donation of the Yuezhen waterfront began in the Tang and Song dynasties.

古文：夫英灵之气，萃而为神，必受命于上帝，岂国家封号所可加？
现代文：英灵之气，会聚而焉神，必须受到上帝的任命，国家的封号哪里是可以妄加的？
English: The gathering of God's spirit must be by God's appointment. Where can a country's seal be arbitrarily imposed?

古文：渎礼不经，莫此为甚。
现代文：亵渎礼法不合常理，没有比这更严重的。
English: The blasphemy law is an aberration, nothing more.

古文：今依古定制，并去前代所封名号。
现代文：而今依据古代定制，一并去除前代所封名号。
English: Now, according to the ancient custom, the name of the previous generation has been removed.

古文：五岳称东岳泰山之神，南岳衡山之神，中岳嵩山之神，西岳华山之神，北岳恒山之神。
现代文：五岳称东越泰山之神，南岳衡山之神，中岳嵩山之神，西岳华山之神，北岳恒山之神。
English: The five peaks are called the god of Dongyue Taishan, the god of South Yue Hengshan, the god of Middle Yue Songshan, the god of West Yue Huashan, and the god of North Yue Hengshan.

古文：五镇称东镇沂山之神，南镇会稽山之神，中镇霍山之神，西镇吴山之神，北镇医无闾山之神。
现代文：五镇称束镇沂山之神，南镇会稽山之神，中镇霍山之神，西镇昊山之神，北镇医无阎山之神。
English: Wuzhen is known as the god of Shushan, Nanzhen as the god of Huizhishan, Zhongzheng as the god of Huoshan, Xizhen as the god of Haoshan, and Beizhen as the god of Yimuzhan.

古文：四海称东海之神，南海之神，西海之神，北海之神。
现代文：四海称束海之神，南海之神，西海之神，北海之神。
English: The four seas are called the god of the sea, the god of the South Sea, the god of the West Sea and the god of the North Sea.

古文：四渎称东渎大淮之神，南渎大江之神，西渎大河之神，北渎大济之神。 
现代文：四渎称柬渎大淮之神，南演大江之神，西渎人河之神，北渎大济之神。 
English: The four deities are known as the god of the Great Huai River, the god of the Great Yangtze River in the south, the god of the Yangtze River in the west, and the god of the Dazhi River in the north.

古文：帝躬署名于祝文，遣官以更定神号告祭。
现代文：皇帝在祝文上亲自署名，派遣官员以更新确定的神号告祭。
English: The emperor personally signed the congratulatory letter and dispatched officials to announce the sacrifice with the newly determined divine call.

古文：六年，礼官言： 四川未平，望祭江渎于峡州。
现代文：六年，礼部大臣说： 四川未平定，在峡州迁祭江渎。
English: Six years ago, the Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies said: Sichuan has not been pacified, and the relocation of the festival to Jiuzhou is a mistake.

古文：今蜀既下，当遣人于南渎致祭。 
现代文：而今蜀已经攻克，应当派人到南渎行祭。 
English: Now that Shu has been conquered, people should be sent to Nanfu to perform the ceremony.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从他们的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十年，命官十八人分祀岳镇海渎，赐之制。
现代文：洪武十年，命令官员十八人分别祭祀岳镇海滨，赐以制命。
English: In the tenth year of Hongwu's reign, he ordered 18 officials to go to the seaside of Yue Town to offer sacrifices, and gave them their lives.

古文：万历十四年，巡抚胡来贡请改祀北岳于浑源州。
现代文：万历十四年，巡抚胡来贡请求改在浑源州祭祀北岳。
English: In the 14th year of Wanli, the procurator Hu Lai Gong requested that the festival be held in Hunyuan County instead.

古文：礼官言： 《大明集礼》载，汉、唐、宋北岳之祭，皆在定州曲阳县，与史俱合。
现代文：礼部大臣说： 《大明集礼》记载，汉、唐、宋北岳的祭祀，都在定州曲阳县，与史实都符合。
English: The Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies said: "The Daming Collection of Ceremonies" records that the sacrifices of the Han, Tang and Song Beiyue are all in Quyang County, Dingzhou, which is consistent with historical facts.

古文：浑源之称北岳，止见州志碑文，经传无可考，仍祀曲阳是。 
现代文：浑源称为北岳，只见于州志碑文，经传中都无处可考，仍旧祀于曲阳为是。 
English: Hunyuan, known as Beidake, is only found in the inscription of the state history, and there is no place to examine it in the scriptures. It is still enshrined in Quyang.

古文：其他山川之祀。
现代文：其他山川之祀。
English: Other mountains and rivers are worshipped.

古文：洪武元年躬祀汴梁诸神，仍遣官祭境内山川。
现代文：洪武元年亲自祭祀汴梁诸神，接看派遣官员祭祀各自境内山川。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he personally offered sacrifices to the gods of Qiliang, and watched the dispatched officials offer sacrifices to the mountains and rivers in their respective territories.

古文：二年，以天下山川祔祭岳渎坛。
现代文：二年，以天下山川柑祭于岳渎坛。
English: In the second year, the world's best mandarin orange festival was held at the Yuexiu Altar.

古文：帝又以安南、高丽皆臣附，其国内山川，宜与中国同祭。
现代文：皇帝又认为安南、高丽都已称臣附属，其国内山川，应当与中国一同祭祀。
English: The emperor also believed that Annan and Goryeo had declared themselves subordinate to the emperor, and that their domestic mountains and rivers should be worshipped together with China.

古文：谕中书及礼官考之。
现代文：谕令中书及礼部官员查考。
English: The official of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies examined the document and the decree.

古文：安南之山二十一，其江六，其水六。
现代文：安南之山有二十一座，有江六条，水六条。
English: There are twenty-one mountains in Annan, six rivers and six rivers.

古文：高丽之山三，其水四。
现代文：高丽之山有三座，水四条。
English: There are three mountains and four rivers in Goryeo.

古文：命著祀典，设位以祭。
现代文：下令写入祀典，设位举行祭祀。
English: The order was written into the ritual book, and a place was set for the ritual to be held.

古文：三年，遣使往安南、高丽、占城，祀其国山川。
现代文：三年，派遣使者前往安南、高丽、占城，祭祀其国山川。
English: In the third year, envoys were sent to Annan, Goryeo, and Zamcheng to offer sacrifices to the mountains and rivers of their countries.

古文：帝斋戒，亲为祝文。
现代文：皇帝斋戒，亲自撰写祝文。
English: The emperor fasted and personally wrote a congratulatory letter.

古文：仍遣官颁革正山川神号诏于安南、占城、高丽。六年，琉球诸国已朝贡，祀其国山川。
现代文：接着派遣官员到安南、占城、高丽颁布改正山川神号的诏令。六年，琉球诸国已来朝贡，祭祀其国山川。
English: Next, officials were dispatched to Annam, Chamcheng, and Goryeo to promulgate the edict to correct the name of the mountain and river god.For six years, Ryukyuan countries have come to pay tribute and worship their national mountain and river.

古文：八年，礼部尚书牛谅言： 京都既罢祭天下山川，其外国山川，亦非天子所当亲祀。 
现代文：八年，礼部尚书牛谅说： 京都已停止祭祀天下山川，对外国山川，也不是天子应当亲自行祭的。 
English: In the eighth year, the head of the ritual department, Shang Shuxiu, said, "Kyoto has stopped offering sacrifices to the mountains and rivers of the world, and it is not the Son of Heaven who should personally offer sacrifices to foreign mountains and rivers.

古文：中书及礼臣请附祭各省，从之。
现代文：中书及礼臣请求附祭于各省山川，听从了他们的请求。
English: Zhongshu and his courtiers requested that offerings be made to mountains and rivers in various provinces, and he complied with their request.

古文：广西附祭安南、占城、真腊、暹罗、锁里，广东附祭三佛齐、爪哇，福建附祭日本、琉球、渤泥，辽东附祭高丽，陕西附祭甘肃、朵甘、乌斯藏，京城不复祭。
现代文：广西附祭安南、占城、真腊、暹罗、锁里，广东附祭三佛齐、爪哇，福建附祭日本、琉球、渤泥，辽东附祭高丽，陕西附祭甘肃、朵甘、乌斯藏，京城不再祭祀。
English: The Guangxi subsidiary festivals of Annan, Zhancheng, Zhenla, Siam, and Zholi, the Guangdong subsidiary festival of the Three Buddhas, Java, the Fujian subsidiary festival of Japan, Ryukyu, and Ganmeng, the Liaodong subsidiary festival of Goryeo, and the Shaanxi subsidiary festival of Gansu, Dokan, and Wuszang, will no longer be held in Beijing.

古文：又从礼官言，各省山川居中南向，外国山川东西向，同坛共祀。
现代文：又听从礼部官员之言，各省山川居中面向南，外国山川东西向，同坛共祭。
English: He also listened to the words of the officials of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the mountains and rivers in each province were placed in the middle facing south, and the mountains and rivers in foreign countries were placed facing east and west, and they were all enshrined together.

古文：其王国山川之祀，洪武十三年定制。
现代文：王国山川的祭祀，洪武十三年制定制度。
English: In the 13th year of Hongwu, a system was established for the sacrificial rites of the kingdom's mountains and rivers.

古文：十八年定王国祭山川。仪同社稷，但无瘗埋之文。
现代文：十八年，规定王国祭山川，仪程如同祭社稷，但没有痉埋之礼。
English: In the 18th year, it was stipulated that the Kingdom would hold a festival of mountains and rivers, and the ceremony would be similar to that of a festival, but there would be no burial ceremony.

古文：凡岳镇海渎及他山川所在，令有司岁二祭，以清明、霜降。
现代文：凡是岳镇海滨以及其它山川所在之地，命令主管官吏每年清明、霜降两次行祭。
English: In all places where the coast of Yuezhen and other mountains and rivers are located, the officials in charge order the Qingming and Frosting Festival twice a year.

古文：城隍
现代文：城隍
English: Chengdu

古文：洪武二年，礼官言： 城隍之祀，莫详其始。
现代文：洪武二年，礼部官员说： 城隍的祭祀，起始已经不清楚了。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, the official of the Ministry of Ceremonies said: The beginning of the sacrificial rites in Chengdu is no longer clear.

古文：先儒谓既有社，不应复有城隍。
现代文：先儒说既已有社，不应又有城隍。
English: The early Confucianists said that there should be no city walls if there are already shrines.

古文：故唐李阳冰《缙云城隍记》谓 祀殿无之，惟吴越有之。 
现代文：因而唐李阳冰《缙云城隍记》说 祀典没有记载，只在昊、越祭城隍 。
English: Therefore, Tang Li Yangbing's "Record of the Battle of Yan Yun City" said that there was no record in the ritual book, but only in Hao and Yue Festival City.

古文：然成都城隍祠，李德裕所建，张说有祭城隍之文，杜牧有祭黄州城隍文，则不独吴越为然。
现代文：然而成都城隍祠，是李德裕所建，张说有祭城隍的文章，杜牧有祭黄州城隍文，那么就不祇是昊、越有这种习俗。
English: However, Chengdu City God's Shrine was built by Li Deyu, Zhang said that there is an article about the city god's sacrifice, and Dumu has a text about the sacrifice of Huangzhou City God's sacrifice, so it is not just Hao, the more there is this custom.

古文：又芜湖城隍庙建于吴赤乌二年，高齐慕容俨、梁武陵王祀城隍，皆书于史，又不独唐而已。
现代文：又芜湖城隍庙建于昊赤乌二年，高齐慕容俨、梁武陵王祭祀城隍，都记载于史书，又不只是唐纔这样。
English: In addition, the Lugu Lake City God Temple was built in the second year of the reign of Emperor Haochao. Gao Qi Murong and King Liang Wuling were the first to worship the city god, which is recorded in the history books. This was not just the case for Tang Dynasty.

古文：宋以来其祠遍天下，或锡庙额，或颁封爵，至或迁就傅会，各指一人以为神之姓名。
现代文：宋以来城隍的祠庙遍及天下，有的赐予祠庙匾额，有的颁赐封爵，至于有的迁就傅会，各指认一人为神的姓名。
English: Since the Song Dynasty, the temples and shrines of the city have spread all over the world. Some have been granted the title of temple and shrine, some have been awarded the title of knight, and some have been transferred to the Fu Association, each of which has designated one person as the name of God.

古文：按张九龄《祭洪州城隍文》曰： 城隍是保，氓庶是依。 
现代文：按张九龄《祭洪州城隍文》说： 城隍是守护神，是乡土百姓的依靠。 
English: According to Zhang Jiuling's "Sacrificing the Hongzhou City God" he said: The city god is the guardian deity and is the reliance of the local people.

古文：则前代崇祀之意有在也。
现代文：前代敬奉祭祀之意犹在。
English: The spirit of the previous generation's worship and sacrifice still exists.

古文：今宜附祭于岳渎诸神之坛。 
现代文：现在应该附祭于岳渎诸神之坛。 
English: It should now be attached to the altar of the deities of Mt.

古文：乃命加以封爵。
现代文：于是下令加以对爵名号。
English: He then ordered the peerage to be restored.

古文：京都为承天鉴国司民升福明灵王，开封、临濠、太平、和州、滁州皆封为王。
现代文：京都平、和州、滁州都封为王。
English: Kyoto-daira, Washu, and Choshu were all crowned as kings.

古文：其馀府为鉴察司民城隍威灵公，秩正二品。
现代文：其余府为鉴察司民城隍威灵公，品秩为正二品。
English: The rest of the prefectures were inspected by the inspector of Mincheng and Weiling, with a grade of second-class.

古文：州为鉴察司民城隍灵佑侯，秩三品。
现代文：州为鉴察司民城隍灵佑侯，品秩为三品。
English: Its prefecture is Jinsha Simincheng Yulingyouhou, and its product rank is three products.

古文：县为鉴察司民城隍显佑伯，秩四品。
现代文：县为鉴察司民城隍显佑伯，品秩为四品。
English: The county is led by the inspector general of Mincheng, Zou Xianyoubo, with four awards.

古文：衮章冕旒俱有差。
现代文：服饰冠冕都有差别。
English: There are differences in the costume crowns.

古文：命词臣撰制文以颁之。
现代文：命令文词之臣撰写制文颁赐。
English: The minister of literature was ordered to write a preface.

古文：三年，诏去封号，止称其府州县城隍之神。
现代文：三年，诏令去除封号，只称为某府州县城隍之神。
English: Three years later, the imperial decree removed the seal number, and it was only called the god of a certain prefecture.

古文：又令各庙屏去他神。
现代文：又令各庙摒除其它神位。
English: He also ordered temples to get rid of other deities.

古文：定庙制，高广视官署厅堂。
现代文：规定庙制，高度宽度比照官署厅堂。
English: The temple system is stipulated, and the height and width are the same as the hall of the government office.

古文：造木为主，毁塑像舁置水中，取其泥涂壁，绘以云山。
现代文：取木制造神主牌，毁塑像弃置水中，取其泥涂抹墙壁，描绘云山风景。
English: Take the wood to make the main god card, destroy the statue and abandon it in the water, take the mud to paint the walls, and depict the Yunshan scenery.

古文：六年，制中都城隍神主成，遣官赍香币奉安。
现代文：六年，中都城隍神主制成，派遣官员赐以香烛布帛安放。
English: In the sixth year, officials were sent to place incense cloths in the shrine.

古文：京师城隍既附飨山川坛，又于二十一年改建庙。
现代文：京城城隍既已在山川坛附飨，又在二十一年改建祠庙。
English: The capital city castle moat has already been attached to the mountain and river altar, and the ancestral temple was rebuilt in the 21st year.

古文：寻以从祀大礼殿，罢山川坛春祭。
现代文：不久因为从祀大祀殿，停止山川坛春祭。
English: Soon after, the Yamakawadan Spring Festival was stopped because it was no longer being held in the main hall.

古文：永乐中，建庙都城之西，曰大威灵祠。
现代文：永乐年间，在都城以西建庙，称为大威灵祠。
English: During the Yongle Dynasty, a temple was built west of the capital, known as the Dawei Shrine.

古文：嘉靖九年，罢山川坛从祀，岁以仲秋祭旗纛日，并祭都城隍之神。
现代文：嘉靖九年，停止山川坛从祀，每年在仲秋祭旗纛日，一并祭祀都城隍之神。
English: In the ninth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the worship of the mountain and river altars was stopped. Every year, on the day of the Mid-Autumn Festival, the gods of the capital city were worshipped together.

古文：凡圣诞节及五月十一日神诞，皆遣太常寺堂上官行礼。
现代文：凡是圣上生日及五月十一日神的生日，都派太常寺堂上官员行礼。
English: Whenever it is the saint's birthday or God's birthday on May 11th, officials in the hall of Taijo-ji Temple are dispatched to perform the ritual.

古文：国有大灾则告庙。
现代文：国家有大的灾难就祭告于庙。
English: If there is a big disaster in the country, it will be reported to the temple.

古文：在王国者王亲祭之，在各府州县者守令主之。
现代文：在王国的由藩王亲自举行祭祀，在各府州县的由当地长官主持。
English: In the kingdom, the king of the domain himself held the sacrifice, and in each prefecture and county, it was presided over by the local magistrate.

