古文：图谶星纬之学，岂不或中，然要为误人，圣贤所不道也。
现代文：以文字、图画、星相等预卜言凶祸福的图谶星纬之学；当然也有偶而言中的时候，但是更多的则是使人误入岐途，因而不为圣贤所道。
English: The science of divination, which uses words, pictures, and star constellations to foretell good and bad fortune; of course, there are times when it is accidental, but more often it is misleading, and therefore not the path of the sages.

古文：眭孟睹公孙病己之文，劝汉昭帝求索贤人，禅以帝位，而不知宣帝实应之，孟以此诛。
现代文：眭孟看到公孙病己之文，劝汉昭帝求索贤人，禅让帝位，却不知此举宣帝实应之，硅孟因此被诛。
English: Seeing that his grandson was ill, Zi Meng read an article and advised Emperor Han Zhao to ask for a wise man and let Zen ascend to the throne. However, he did not know that this action was in accordance with Emperor Xuan's wishes. As a result, Zi Meng was executed.

古文：孔熙先知宋文帝祸起骨肉，江州当出天子，故谋立江州刺史彭城王，而不知孝武实应之，熙先以此诛。
现代文：孔熙先知道宋文帝将祸起萧墙，江州当出天子，因此谋立江州刺史彭城王刘义康为帝，却不知孝武帝刘驶实应之，孔熙先因此被杀。
English: Kong Xixian knew that Emperor Songwen would bring the calamity of Xiaowan, and that Jiangzhou would be the son of Heaven. Therefore, he plotted to make Liu Yikang, the king of Spengcheng in Jiangzhou, the emperor. However, he did not know that Liu Jieshi, the Emperor Xiaowu, would do the same. Therefore, Kong Xixian was killed.

古文：当涂高之谶，汉光武以诘公孙述，袁术、王浚皆自以姓名或父字应之，以取灭亡，而其兆为曹操之魏。
现代文：当涂高之谶，汉光武帝刘秀以此诘问公孙述，袁术、王浚都自以为姓名或父亲的名应之，结果以取灭亡。
English: When the emperor Liu Xiu of the Han dynasty, Guangwu, asked his grandson about the name of Tu Gao, Yuan Shu and Wang Jun both thought that it was the name or the name of their father, and as a result, they were killed.

古文：两角犊子之谶，周子谅以劾牛仙客，李德裕以议牛僧孺，而其兆为朱温。
现代文：而其兆实为曹操的魏国，两角犊子之谶，周子谅以此弹劾牛仙客，李德裕以此影射牛僧孺，而其兆实为朱温。
English: And its triad is Cao Cao's Wei Kingdom, the two-horned mule of the mule, Zhou Zi Peng's impeachment of the Cow Immortal, Li Deyu's insinuation of the Cow Monk, and its triad is Zhu Wen.

古文：隋炀帝谓李氏当有天下，遂诛李金才之族，而唐高祖乃代隋。
现代文：隋炀帝听说李氏当有天下，于是诛灭李金才之族，而最终却是唐高祖李渊取代隋朝。
English: The Sui and Qian dynasties heard that the Li clan was to rule the world, so they annihilated the Li Jincai clan, but in the end it was the Tang Gaozhu Li Yuan who replaced the Sui dynasty.

古文：唐太宗知女武将窃国命，遂滥五娘子之诛，而阿武婆几易姓。
现代文：唐太宗知女武将篡夺李唐家江山，于是大量地处死姓武的女子，而武则天几乎使李家的江山改换了主人。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty knew that a female warrior would usurp the Li Tang dynasty, so he executed a large number of women with the surname Wu, and Wu Zetian almost made the Li dynasty change its master.

古文：武后谓代武者刘，刘无强姓，殆流人也，遂遣六道使悉杀之，而刘幽求佐临淄王平内难，韦、武二族皆殄灭。
现代文：武则天认为取代武周的乃是刘氏，而刘姓没有强有力的人物，估计大概是流民，于是派六道使者将他们全部杀掉，而最后却是刘幽求帮助临淄王李隆基平定内难，韦、武二族都被诛灭。
English: Wu Zetian thought that it was the Liu clan that replaced Wu Zhou, but there was no strong person with the surname Liu, and it was estimated that they were probably exiles, so he sent six emissaries to kill them all, but in the end it was Liu Yucu to help the Linyi King Li Longji to quell the internal difficulties, Wei and Wu were both annihilated.

古文：晋张华、郭璞，魏崔伯深，皆精于天文卜筮，言事如神，而不能免于身诛家族，况其下者乎！
现代文：晋代的张华、郭璞，北魏的崔伯深，都精通天文卜筮，料事如神，却不能保护自己的身家避免被诛灭的命运，更何况是造诣还不如他们的人呢！
English: Zhang Hua and Guo Qi of the Jin Dynasty, and Cui Botou of the Northern Wei Dynasty, were all proficient in astronomy and divination, but they could not protect their wealth from being destroyed, let alone people who were not as accomplished as them!

