古文：愍皇帝，明宗第五子从厚也。为人形质丰厚，寡言好礼，明宗以其貌类己，特爱之。
现代文：唐愍皇帝从厚是唐明宗第五子，身体健壮，为人寡言有礼貌，唐明宗因为他长得像自己而特别爱他。
English: Emperor Tang Xuan was the fifth son of Emperor Mingzong of Tang Dynasty. He was physically robust, reserved and polite. Emperor Mingzong of Tang Dynasty especially loved him because he looked like him.

古文：天成二年，以检校司徒拜河南尹、判六军诸卫事，加检校太保、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：天成二年，以检校司徒任河南尹、判六军诸卫事，加检校太保、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the second year of Tiancheng, Henan Yin was appointed as the inspector of the school, the guards of the six armies were sentenced, the inspector of the school was added, and the book gate of the school was leveled.

古文：从厚妃，孔循女也，安重诲怒循以女妻从厚，三年，罢循枢密使，出从厚为宣武军节度使。
现代文：从厚妃是孔循女，安重诲对孔循把女儿嫁给从厚很愤怒，天成三年，罢免孔循的枢密使，要从厚出任宣武军节度使。
English: Zeng Houfei was the daughter of Kong Cui, and An Chongzhen was very angry with Kong Cui for marrying his daughter to Zeng Hou. Three years later, Zeng Houfei dismissed Kong Cui's envoy and appointed Zeng Houfei as the envoy of the Xuanwu army.

古文：明年，徙镇河东。
现代文：天成四年，移镇河东。
English: Tiancheng four years, moved to the town of Hedong.

古文：长兴元年，封从厚宋王，徙镇成德。
现代文：长兴元年，封从厚为宋王，移镇成德。
English: In the first year of Changxing, he was given the title of Song King and moved to Chengde.

古文：二年，徙镇天雄，累加兼中书令。
现代文：次年，移镇天雄，累加兼中书令。
English: The following year, he moved to the town of Tiengxiong, where he accumulated additional Chinese calligraphy.

古文：四年十一月，秦王从荣伏诛。
现代文：长兴四年十一月，秦王从荣被处死。
English: In November of the fourth year of Changxing, Qin Wang Congrong was executed.

古文：明宗病甚，遣宦者孟汉琼召王于鄴，而明宗崩，秘其丧六日。
现代文：明宗病危，派宦官孟汉琼到邺召宋王回京，明宗死，秘不发丧达六天之久。
English: Mingzong was critically ill and sent eunuch Meng Hanqiong to summon King Song back to Beijing. Mingzong's death was kept secret for six days.

古文：十二月癸卯朔，发丧于西宫，皇帝即位于柩前，群臣见于东阶，复于丧位。
现代文：十二月一日，在西宫发丧，从厚即皇帝位于柩前，在东阶接见群臣后又恢复丧礼之位。
English: On December 1st, the funeral was held in the West Palace, from the thick that the emperor was in front of the coffin, and after receiving the courtiers on the east step, the funeral was resumed.

古文：丙午，成服于西宫。
现代文：四日，穿上丧服在西宫举行丧礼。
English: On the fourth day, a funeral service was held in the West Palace, with mourners donning mourning clothes.

古文：庚戌，登光政门楼，存问军民。
现代文：八日，登上光政门楼，慰问军民。
English: On the 8th, he ascended the Guangzheng Gate Tower to offer condolences to the military and the people.

古文：辛亥，杀司衣王氏。
现代文：九日，杀司衣王氏。
English: On the 9th, the Wang clan was killed.

古文：癸丑，始听政。
现代文：十一日，开始听政。
English: On the eleventh day, he began to listen to the government.

古文：乙卯，杀司仪康氏。
现代文：十三日，杀司仪康氏。
English: On the thirteenth day, the killing of Master Yi Kang began.

古文：丁巳，冯道为大行皇帝山陵使，户部尚书韩彦恽为副，中书舍人王延为判官，礼部尚书王权为礼仪使，兵部尚书李鏻为卤簿使，御史中丞龙敏为仪仗使，左仆射权判河南府卢质为桥道顿递使。
现代文：十五日，派冯道当大行皇帝山陵使，户部尚书韩彦恽为副，中书舍人王延为判官，礼部尚书王权为礼仪使，左仆射权判河南府卢质为桥道顿递使。
English: On the 15th, Feng Dao was appointed as the envoy to the Emperor Da Xing's mausoleum, Shangshu Han Yanqi of the Household Department was appointed as the deputy, Wang Yan of the Chinese Library was appointed as the adjudicator, Shangshu Wang Quan of the Ministry of Ceremonies was appointed as the ceremonial envoy, and Zuoqiu Sha Quan was appointed as the messenger to Luqiao Doton in Henan Province.

古文：丁卯，礻覃。
现代文：二十五日，进行祭祀，脱下丧服。
English: On the 25th, a memorial service was held, and the mourning clothes were taken off.

古文：应顺元年春正月壬申朔，视朝于广寿殿。乙亥，契丹使都督没辣于来。
现代文：应顺元年正月一日，在广寿殿视朝。四日，契丹使者都督没辣于来。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：戊寅，大赦，改元，用乐。
现代文：七日，大赦，改元，用音乐。
English: Seven days, amnesty, change the name, sing with music.

古文：回鹘可汗王仁美遣使者来。
现代文：回鹘可汗王仁美派使者来。
English: In response, the Khan, King Inmei, sent an envoy.

古文：沙州、瓜州遣使者来。
现代文：沙州、瓜州派使者来。
English: Shazhou and Guazhou sent envoys.

古文：乙未，硃弘昭、冯赟献钱助作山陵。
现代文：二十四日，朱弘昭、冯斌贝献钱助作山陵。
English: On the 24th, Zhu Hongzhao and Feng Binbei donated money to help build the mausoleum.

古文：闰月丙午，册皇太后。
现代文：闰一月五日，册封皇太后。
English: On January 5th, she was crowned empress dowager.

古文：甲寅，册太妃王氏。
现代文：十三日，册封太妃王氏。
English: On the 13th, she was given the title of Princess Wang.

古文：北京留守石敬瑭献银绢助作山陵。
现代文：北京留守石敬瑭献银绢助作山陵。
English: Beijing's left-behind Shi Jingyu donated silver ingots to help build the mountain mausoleum.

古文：二月庚寅，视作山陵。
现代文：二月二十日，视察山陵。
English: On February 20, he inspected the mausoleum.

古文：凤翔节度使潞王从珂反。
现代文：凤翔节度使潞王从珂反叛。
English: Fengxiang Jiedu made King He rebelled from Ke.

古文：辛卯，西京留守王思同为西面行营都部署，静难军节度使药彦稠为副。
现代文：二十一日，任西京留守王思同为西面行营都步署，靖难军节度使药彦稠为副。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wang Sitong, who was left behind in West Beijing, was appointed as the commander of the Western Camp, and the commander of the Jingnan Army made Yakuhiko Choshi his deputy.

古文：三月丙辰，思同兵溃，严卫指挥使尹晖、羽林指挥使杨思权以其军叛降于从珂。
现代文：三月十六日，思同兵溃，严卫指挥使尹晖、羽林指挥使杨思权叛变投降从珂。
English: On March 16th, the Sido army was routed, and Commander Yan Wei ordered Commander Yin Qi and Commander Ulin ordered Commander Yang Siquan to surrender.

古文：辛酉，杀侍卫亲军都指挥使硃弘实。
现代文：二十一日，杀侍卫亲军都指挥使朱弘实。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Zhu Hongzhi, the commander of the army, killed the guards.

古文：癸亥，河阳三城节度使康义诚为凤翔行营都招讨使，王思同为副。
现代文：二十三日，任河阳三城节度使康义诚为凤翔行营都招讨使，王思同为副。
English: On the 23rd, Kang Yicheng, who was in charge of the festival of the three cities in Heyang, sent envoys to Fengxiang for the camp, and Wang Sitong was the deputy.

古文：西京副留守刘遂雍叛降于从珂，思同奔归于京师，不克，死之。
现代文：西京副留守刘遂雍叛变投降从珂，思同奔潼关，至昭应被俘，从珂下令把他杀掉。
English: Liu Suiyong, the deputy governor of West Beijing, surrendered to Zengke, and Zengke ordered him to be killed.

古文：丁卯，京城巡检使安从进叛，杀冯赟，硃弘昭自杀，从进传其二首于从珂。
现代文：二十七日，京城巡检使安从进叛变，杀冯斌贝，朱弘昭自杀，从进将二人首级传送给从珂。
English: On the 27th, the Beijing Municipal Inspection ordered An Congjin to mutiny, kill Feng Binbei and Zhu Hongzhao to commit suicide. Congjin sent the heads of the two men to Congke.

古文：戊辰，如卫州。
现代文：二十八日，愍帝往卫州。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Gong went to Weizhou.

古文：废帝，镇州平山人也。
现代文：废帝，镇州平山人。
English: The deposed emperor, a native of Pingshan, Zhenzhou.

古文：本姓王氏，其世微贱，母魏氏，少寡，明宗为骑将，过平山，掠得之。
现代文：本姓王，家世贫贱，母亲魏氏，年轻守寡，明宗当骑将时路过平山县抢到她。
English: Originally surnamed Wang, his family was poor, his mother was from the Wei clan, a young widow, and Mingzong passed through Pingshan County to snatch her when he was a cavalry commander.

古文：魏氏有子阿三，已十余岁，明宗养以为子，名曰从珂。
现代文：魏氏子阿三已十多岁，明宗收为养子取名从珂。
English: Asan, the son of the Wei clan, is more than ten years old. Mingzong Hui adopted him as an adopted son and named him Zongke.

古文：及长，状貌雄伟，谨信寡言，而骁勇善战，明宗甚爱之。
现代文：长大后状貌雄伟，谨慎老实，说话少，骁勇善战，明宗很喜欢他。
English: When he grew up, he had a majestic appearance, was prudent and honest, spoke little, and was brave and good at fighting. Mingzong liked him very much.

古文：自晋兵战梁于河上，从珂常立战功，庄宗呼其小字曰： 阿三不徒与我同年，其敢战亦类我。 
现代文：自从晋与梁在河上交战，从珂常立战功，庄宗喊着他的小名说： 阿三不枉与我同年，勇敢善战也很像我。 
English: Ever since Jin and Liang fought on the river and Kechang won the battle, Zhuangzong called out his nickname and said: Ahsan is not unfairly the same age as me, he is also very brave and good at fighting.

古文：同光二年，为卫州刺史突骑指挥使，戍于石门。
现代文：同光二年，当卫州刺史突骑指挥使，在石门戍守。
English: In the second year of the same era, when the commanding officer of the Weizhou Zhishi cavalry charge, he was stationed at Shimen.

古文：明宗讨赵在礼，自魏反兵而南，从珂率戍兵自曲阳、孟县驰出常山以追明宗。
现代文：明宗讨伐赵在礼，从魏返回向南进军，从珂率领戍兵从曲阳、盂县驰过常山追赶上明宗。
English: Zhao Zaili, who fought against the Ming Dynasty, returned from Wei to march to the south, and Zou Ke, who led his soldiers from Quyang and Jixian, drove through the Changshan Mountains to catch up with the Ming Dynasty.

古文：明宗之南也，兵少，得从珂兵在后，而军声大振。
现代文：明宗南下，兵少，得到从珂军，使军威大振。
English: Mingzong went to the south, with few soldiers, and received reinforcements from the Koga army, which greatly boosted the army's prestige.

古文：明宗入立，拜从珂河中节度使，封潞王。
现代文：明宗入京称帝，升从珂为河中节度使，封潞王。
English: Mingzong entered Beijing as emperor, and was promoted from Kecheng to the middle of the river as the envoy of the emperor, and was crowned king.

古文：是时，明宗春秋已高，王于诸子次最长，枢密使安重诲患之，乃矫诏河中裨将杨彦温使图之。
现代文：那时，明宗年龄已大，王比其他几个儿子年长，枢密使安从诲觉得他是个祸根，就假传诏命叫河中裨将杨彦温把他除掉。
English: At that time, Mingzong was already very old, and Wang was older than the other sons. Privy Counsellor An Congyao thought he was a bane, so he ordered Yang Yanwen to eliminate him.

古文：王阅马于黄龙庄，彦温即闭门拒之，王止于虞乡以闻。明宗召王还京师，居之清化里第。
现代文：王到黄龙庄检阅马匹，彦温关闭城门不准潞王回来，王到虞乡把此事上报明宗，明宗召王回京住在清化里家里。
English: Wang went to Huanglongzhuang to inspect the horses, Yanwen closed the city gate and did not allow the king to return, Wang went to Yu Township to report the matter to Mingzong, and Mingzong called Wang back to Beijing to live at home in Qinghua.

古文：重诲数请行军法，明宗不听，后重诲见杀，乃起王为左卫大将军、西京留守。
现代文：重诲多次要求按军法处理，明宗不听，后来重诲被杀，才起用王为左卫大将军、西京留守。
English: Mingzong did not listen to Shigeaki's repeated requests to be dealt with according to military law. Later, Shigeaki was killed, and only then was Wang appointed as the General of the Left Division and left for the West.

古文：长兴三年，为凤翔节度使。
现代文：长兴三年，当凤翔节度使。
English: Changxing three years, when Fengxiang Festival.

古文：王子重吉自明宗时典禁兵，为控鹤指挥使，愍帝即位，硃弘昭、冯赟用事，乃罢重吉兵职，出为亳州团练使。
现代文：王子重吉在明宗时掌管禁军，当控鹤指挥使，愍帝即位，朱弘昭、冯斌贝专权，罢免重吉兵职，出任亳州团练使。
English: At the time of Emperor Mingzong, Prince Chongjie was in charge of the Forbidden Army. When Heng He commanded the envoys, Emperor Gong ascended to the throne. Zhu Hongzhao and Feng Binbei had the exclusive right to remove Chongjie from his military post and appointed him as the training envoy of the Zhangzhou Regiment.

古文：又徙王为北京留守，不降制书而宣授，又以李从璋为代。
现代文：又把王移任北京留守，不降制书而宣布任命李从璋代替他。
English: He also transferred Wang to Beijing to stay, and announced the appointment of Li Conglu to replace him without reducing the production of books.

古文：初，安重诲得罪罢河中，以从璋为代，而重诲见杀，故王益自疑，遂据城反。
现代文：以前，安重诲得罪罢职到河中，用从璋代，而重诲被杀，所以王更加疑虑，就据城造反。
English: In the past, An Chong Chou was ousted to the middle of the river for a crime, and he was killed, so the king was even more suspicious and rebelled against the city.

古文：愍帝遣王思同会诸镇兵讨之，思同战败走，诸镇兵皆溃。
现代文：愍帝派王思同会合各族兵马讨伐他，思同战败退走，各兵马溃散。
English: Emperor Qian sent Wang Sitong to gather soldiers and horses of all ethnic groups to fight against him. Sitong was defeated and retreated, and the soldiers and horses dispersed.

古文：清泰元年三月丁巳，王以兵东。
现代文：清泰元年三月十七日，王率兵东进。
English: On March 17th of the first year of the Qing Dynasty, Wang and his soldiers marched eastward.

古文：庚申，次长安，西京副留守刘遂雍叛于唐，来降。
现代文：二十日，到达长安，西京留守刘遂雍叛唐来归降。
English: On the 20th, after arriving in Chang'an, Liu Suiyong, who had stayed behind in West Beijing to rebel against the Tang Dynasty, surrendered.

古文：甲子，次华州，执药彦稠。
现代文：二十四日，到华州，捉住药彦稠。
English: On the 24th, he went to Huazhou to catch the yakitori.

古文：丙寅，次灵宝，河中安彦威、陕州康思立叛于唐，来降。
现代文：二十六日，到灵宝，河中安彦威、陕州康思立叛唐来归降。
English: On the 26th, to Lingbao, An Yanwei of Hechu and Kang Sili of Shaanxi rebelled against the Tang Dynasty and surrendered.

古文：己巳，次陕州。
现代文：二十九日，到陕州。
English: On the 29th, to Shaanxi Province.

古文：康义诚叛于唐，来降。
现代文：康义诚叛唐来归降。
English: Kang Yicheng defected from Tang Dynasty and surrendered.

古文：杀宣徽使孟汉琼。
现代文：杀宣徽使孟汉琼。
English: The killing of Xuan Hui made Meng Hanqiong.

古文：愍帝出居于卫州。
现代文：愍帝逃到卫州。
English: Emperor Gong fled to Weizhou.

古文：夏四月壬申，入京师，冯道率百官迎王于蒋桥，王辞不见。
现代文：四月三日，入京，冯道率百官到蒋桥迎接，王推辞不见。
English: On April 3, when he entered Beijing, Feng Dao led hundreds of officials to Jiangqiao to welcome him. Wang Shujie was nowhere to be seen.

古文：入哭于西宫，遂见群臣，道拜，王答拜。
现代文：入西宫大哭后，接见群臣，冯道拜见，王答拜。
English: After entering the West Palace in tears, he received the courtiers, said goodbye to Feng Dao, and bowed to Wang Du.

古文：入居于至德宫。
现代文：入居至德宫。
English: Moved into Toku no Miya.

古文：癸酉，以太后令降天子为鄂王，命王监国。
现代文：四日，以皇太后的命令降天子为鄂王，命潞王监国。
English: On the fourth day, by the order of the empress dowager, the son of heaven was made the king of E, and the king was appointed to supervise the country.

古文：乙亥，皇帝即位。
现代文：六日，即皇帝位。
English: On the sixth day, the emperor abdicated.

古文：丙子，率河南民财以赏军。
现代文：七日，搜刮河南民财全部用来赏赐军队。
English: On the seventh day, all of Henan's people's wealth was collected and used to reward the army.

古文：丁丑，借民房课五月以赏军。
现代文：八日，借五个月的民房租税来赏赐军队。
English: On the 8th, the military was rewarded with a five-month housing tax holiday.

古文：戊寅，弑鄂王，慈州刺史宋令询死之。乙酉，大赦，改元。
现代文：九日，弑鄂王，慈州刺史宋令询死。十六日，大赦，改元清泰。
English: On the 9th, the king of Sui and Hsi, Cizhou, died. On the 16th, there was a general amnesty, and the era was changed to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：戊子，杀康义诚及药彦稠。
现代文：十九日，杀康义诚及药彦稠。
English: On the 19th, he killed Kang Yicheng and Yakuhiko.

古文：五月丙午，端明殿学士、左谏议大夫韩昭胤为枢密使，庄宅使刘延朗为枢密副使。
现代文：五月十三日，任端明殿学士、左谏议大夫韩昭胤为枢密使，庄宅使刘彦朗为枢密副使。
English: On May 13, Han Zhaotian, a graduate of Duanming Palace and a doctor of the Left Division of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, was appointed as the envoy, and Liu Yanlang, an envoy from Zhuoyu, was appointed as the deputy envoy.

古文：庚戌，冯道罢。
现代文：十七日，冯道罢相。
English: On the 17th, Feng Dao retired.

古文：天雄军节度使范延光为枢密使。
现代文：天雄军节度使范延光为枢密使。
English: Tianxiong's army sent Fan Yanguang as a confidential envoy.

古文：甲寅，赐劝进选人、宗子官。
现代文：二十一日，赐劝进选人、主祭祀之官。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the person who is to be inducted into the priesthood and the person who is to officiate at the Lord's sacrifice are to be exhorted.

古文：六月庚辰，幸范延光及索自通第。
现代文：六月十一日，到范延光及索自通家。
English: On June 11, he went to Fan Yanguang and asked for a ride home.

古文：秋七月辛亥，太常卿卢文纪为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：七月十三日，升太常卿卢文纪为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On July 13th, Lu Wenji, who was promoted to the position of the First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC), was appointed to the position of the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and the member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC).

古文：丁巳，立沛国夫人刘氏为皇后。
现代文：十九日，立沛国夫人刘氏为皇后。
English: On the 19th, Liu, the wife of Li Peiguo, became the empress.

古文：八月辛未，尚书左丞姚顗为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：八月三日，任尚书左丞姚岂页为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On August 3rd, Yao Xizhe, the left-hand man of Shangshu, was appointed as the attendant of Zhongshu, and Xia Ping, the gatekeeper of Zhongshu, was appointed as the secretary of Zhongshu.

古文：许御署官选。
现代文：许御署官选。
English: Election of officers of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：九月，契丹寇边。
现代文：九月，契丹侵犯边境。
English: In September, the Khitan invaded the border.

古文：冬十月戊寅，李愚、刘昫罢。
现代文：十月十一日，李愚、刘日旬罢相。
English: On October 11th, Li Yu and Liu Rishun went on strike.

古文：十二月己亥，雄武军节度使张延郎为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十二月九日，任雄武军节度使张延朗为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On December 9th, Zhang Yanlang was appointed as the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and was given the title of the second-ranked disciple of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：契丹寇云州。
现代文：契丹进犯云州。
English: Khitan invade Yunnan.

古文：庚寅，幸龙门。
现代文：二十四日，到龙门。
English: On the 24th, to Longmen.

古文：旱。
现代文：旱灾。
English: Drought.

古文：二年春二月甲戌，范延光罢。
现代文：清泰二年二月九日，范延光罢相。
English: On February 9, the second year of the Qing Dynasty, Fan Yanguang retired from the stage.

古文：己丑，追尊鲁国太夫人魏氏为皇太后。
现代文：十四日，追尊鲁国太夫人魏氏为皇太后。
English: On the 14th, the Dowager Empress Wei, the wife of Emperor Songzong of the State of Lu, became the Empress Dowager.

古文：三月辛丑，忠武军节度使赵延寿为枢密使。
现代文：三月七日，任忠武军节度使赵延寿为枢密使。
English: On March 7th, the Ren Zhongwu Army Festival made Zhao Yanshou a privy envoy.

古文：夏五月辛卯，宣徽南院使刘延皓为枢密使。
现代文：五月八日，任宣徽南院使刘延皓为枢密使。
English: On May 8th, Liu Yanqi was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Court of Xuanhui Province.

古文：契丹寇边。
现代文：契丹侵犯边境。
English: Khitan encroachment on the border.

古文：六月癸未，群臣献添都马。
现代文：六月二十日，群臣献添都马。
English: On June 20th, a group of courtiers presented a horse to the emperor.

古文：秋七月丁酉，回鹘可汗王仁美使其都督陈福海来。
现代文：七月五日，回鹘可汗王仁美派其都督陈福海来。
English: On July 5, Hui Khan Wang Rongmei sent his governor Chen Fuhai.

古文：刘延皓罢。
现代文：刘延皓罢官。
English: Liu Yanzhong was dismissed.

古文：九月己酉，刑部尚书房暠为枢密使。
现代文：九月十七日，任刑部尚书房詗为枢密使。
English: On September 17th, he was appointed as the Privy Councilor of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：乙卯，渤海遣使者来。
现代文：二十三日，渤海派使者来。
English: On the 23rd, Bohai sent an envoy.

古文：三年春正月乙未，百济遣使者来。
现代文：清泰三年正月五日，百济派使者来。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the Qing Dynasty, Baekje sent an envoy.

古文：丁未，封子重美为雍王。
现代文：十七日，封子重美为雍王。
English: On the 17th, Fushi Shigemi became the Yongwang.

古文：三月丙午，翰林学士、礼部侍郎马胤孙为中书侍郎，同中书门下平章事。
现代文：三月十七日，任翰林学士、礼部侍郎马胤孙为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On March 17th, Ma Yansong, a scholar of Hanlin and an attendant of the etiquette department, became the attendant of the middle school and a disciple of the middle school.

古文：河东节度使石敬瑭反。
现代文：河东节度使石敬瑭反叛。
English: The Hedong Festival made Shijingshan rebel.

古文：夏五月乙卯，建雄军节度使张敬达为太原四面都招讨使，义武军节度使杨光远为副。
现代文：五月七日，任命建雄军节度使张敬达为太原四面都招讨使，义武军节度使杨光远为副。
English: On May 7, Zhang Jingda was appointed as the commander of the Jianxiong Army, and Yang Guangyuan was appointed as the deputy commander of the Yiwu Army.

古文：戊申，先锋指挥使安审信叛降于石敬瑭。
现代文：二十日，先锋指挥使安审信叛变投降石敬瑭。
English: On the 20th day, the vanguard commander made An Xunxin surrender to Shi Jingyao.

古文：己酉，振武戍将安重荣叛降于石敬瑭。
现代文：二十一日，振武戍将安重荣叛降石敬瑭。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Zhenwuxuan ordered An Chung Rong to abdicate the throne.

古文：壬子，天雄军屯驻捧圣都虞候张令昭逐其节度使刘延皓。
现代文：二十四日，天雄军屯驻捧圣都虞候张令昭驱逐节度使刘延皓。
English: On the 24th, Tianxiong's army stationed in the holy city of Hupo, waiting for Zhang Lingzhao to expel Liu Yanxuan.

古文：六月癸亥，以令昭为右千牛卫将军，权知天雄军事。
现代文：六月六日，以令昭为右千牛卫将军，权知天雄军事。
English: On June 6, Lin Zhao was appointed as the general of the Right Qian Niu Wei, the military authority of Tianxiong.

古文：甲戌，宣武军节度使范延光为天雄军四面招讨使。
现代文：十七日，任宣武军节度使范延光为天雄军四面招讨使。
English: On the 17th, Fan Yanguang was appointed as the commander of the Xuanwu Army and sent to all four directions to recruit soldiers for the Tianxiong Army.

古文：秋七月戊申，克魏州。
现代文：七月二十二日，攻克魏州。
English: On July 22nd, he conquered Weizhou.

古文：壬子，张令昭伏诛。
现代文：二十六日，张令昭被处死。
English: On the 26th, Zhang Lingzhao was executed.

古文：癸丑，彰圣指挥使张万迪叛降于石敬瑭。
现代文：二十七日，彰圣指挥使张万迪率军叛变投降石敬瑭。
English: On the 27th, the commander of Zhang Sheng ordered Zhang Wandi to lead the mutinous army to surrender to Shi Jingyi.

古文：八月戊午，契丹使梅里来。
现代文：八月二日，契丹使者梅里来。
English: On August 2nd, the Khitan emissary Meili arrived.

古文：九月甲辰，张敬达及契丹战于太原，败绩，契丹围敬达于晋安。戊申，如河阳。
现代文：九月十八日，张敬达与契丹在太原交战失败。契丹在晋安包围敬达。二十二日，往河阳。
English: On September 18th, Zhang Jinda and the Khitan failed to fight in Taiyuan. The Khitan encircled Jinda in Jin'an. On the 22nd, they left for Kheyang.

古文：冬十月壬戌，括马，籍民为兵。
现代文：十月七日，搜刮马匹，按户籍征兵。
English: On October 7th, horses were requisitioned and soldiers were recruited according to their household registration.

古文：十一月戊子，卢龙军节度使赵德钧为行营都统。
现代文：十一月三日，任卢龙军节度使赵德钧为行营都统。
English: On November 3, the Lulong Army Festival made Zhao Deyao the commander of the Lulong Army.

古文：丁酉，契丹立晋。
现代文：十二日，契丹立晋。
English: On the 12th, Khitan was enthroned.

古文：闰月甲子，杨光远杀张敬达，以其军叛降于契丹。
现代文：闰十一月九日，杨光远杀张敬达，叛变投降契丹。
English: On November 9, Yang Guangyuan killed Zhang Jingda and surrendered to the Khitan.

古文：甲戌，契丹及晋人至于潞州。
现代文：十九日，契丹和晋军到达潞州。
English: On the 19th, Khitan and Jin forces arrived in Zhangzhou.

古文：丁丑，至自河阳。
现代文：二十二日，从河阳回到京城。
English: On the 22nd, he returned to Beijing from Kheyang.

古文：辛巳，皇帝崩。
现代文：二十六日，皇帝自焚死。唉！
English: On the 26th, the emperor set himself on fire and died. Alas!

古文：呜呼，君臣之际，可谓难哉！
现代文：君臣之间的关系是很难处理的啊！
English: The relationship between monarch and vassal is very difficult to handle!

古文：盖明者虑于未萌而前知，暗者告以将及而不惧，故先事而言，则虽忠而不信，事至而悔，其可及乎？
现代文：聪明的人对于未发生的事情有预见性，所以预先提出忠言，但得不到信任和采纳，等到事情发生了后悔时，又哪里还来得及呢？
English: A wise man foreseeth the things that are not yet come to pass: therefore doth he advance counsel, and it is not believed, nor received: and when it cometh to pass, where is the place of repentance?

古文：重诲区区独见潞王之祸，而谋之不臧，至于殒身赤族，其隙自兹。
现代文：重诲早已独自预见到潞王之祸，但处理得不恰当，以至于被杀和灭族，他的矛盾就是从这件事上产生的。
English: He alone foresaw the calamity of Shao Wang, but handled it inappropriately, so that he was killed and exterminated. His conflict arose from this incident.

古文：及愍帝之亡也，穴于徽陵，其土一垅，路人见者，皆为之悲。
现代文：说到愍帝的灭亡，墓穴在徽陵，只有一堆土，路人看见，都感到悲哀。
English: When it comes to the demise of Emperor Qian, the tomb in Huiling is nothing but a pile of earth. Passers-by feel sad when they see it.

古文：使明宗为有知，其有愧于重诲矣，哀哉！
现代文：假设明宗地下有知，他是有愧于重诲的，可悲啊！
English: Assuming that there is knowledge under the Ming dynasty, he is ashamed to repeat it, pathetic!

