古文：张通古，字乐之，易州易县人。
现代文：张通古，字乐之，易州易县人。
English: Zhang Tonggu, Zhi Lezhi, from Yizhou and Yixian.

古文：读书过目不忘，该综经史，善属文。
现代文：通古读书过目不忘，他综合所有的经史，善于撰写文辞。
English: Tonggu never forgets to read, he synthesizes all the scriptures, and is good at writing literature.

古文：辽天庆二年进士第，补枢密院令史。
现代文：辽国天庆二年，通古考中进士，被任命为枢密院令史。
English: In the second year of Tianqing in Liaoning Province, he was promoted to a junior high school student through the ancient examination, and was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：丁父忧，起复，恳辞不获，因遁去，屏居兴平。
现代文：正遭逢父亲之丧，守制尚未期满而应召任职，通古恳切推辞不接受，因此而隐遁离去，隐居在兴平。
English: He was suffering from the death of his father. He was called to take up the post before his term of office had expired. Tongu earnestly refused to accept his resignation, so he went into seclusion and lived in Xingping.

古文：太祖定燕京，割以与宋。
现代文：太祖阿骨打平定燕京，又将燕京割让给宋朝。
English: The great-grandfather Akechi conquered Yanjing and ceded it to the Song Dynasty.

古文：宋人欲收人望，召通古。通古辞谢，隐居易州太宁山下。
现代文：宋人想收买人心，召见通古，通古辞谢了，隐居在易州太宁山下。
English: The Song people wanted to buy the hearts of the people and summoned Tonggu. Tonggu declined and lived in seclusion at the foot of Mount Taining in Yizhou.

古文：宗望复燕京，侍中刘彦宗与通古素善，知其才，召为枢密院主奏，改兵刑房承旨。
现代文：宗望收复燕京，侍中刘彦宗和通古平时关系好，知道他的才华，请他担任枢密院主奏，又改任兵刑房承旨。
English: Zong hoped to recover Yanjing, and the chamberlains Liu Yanzong and Tong Gu had a good relationship in peacetime. Knowing his talent, they invited him to serve as the main performer of the Privy Council, and he was also reassigned to the torture chamber to carry out orders.

古文：天会四年，初建尚书省，除工部侍郎，兼六部事。
现代文：天会四年，尚书省刚刚建立，通古被授工部侍郎的职位，兼管六部事。
English: In the fourth year of the Heavenly Association, the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy had just been established, and Tongu was awarded the position of the Secretary of the Ministry of Industry, and was also in charge of six departments.

古文：高庆裔设磨勘法，仕宦者多夺官，通古亦免去。
现代文：高庆裔设立《磨勘法》，官宦之中不少人丢了官，通古也免去了职务。
English: Gao Qing's descendants established the "Grinding Law," many of the officials lost their positions, and Tongu was also relieved of his duties.

古文：辽王宗干素知通古名，惜其才，遣人谕之使自理。
现代文：辽王宗干一向知道通古的名气，爱惜他的才学，派人去告诉他要他自理。
English: Liao Wangzonggan always knew Tonggu's reputation, cherished his talent, and sent someone to tell him to take care of himself.

古文：通古不肯，曰： 多士皆去，而己何心，独求用哉！ 
现代文：通古不肯这样做，他说： 许多士人都离去了，而我自己有什么心情单独去请求留用呢？ 
English: Thungu did not want to do so, he said: Many gentlemen have left, and what is the mood for me to ask to stay alone?

古文：宗干为论理之。
现代文：宗干为他去论理。
English: Sōgan tried to reason with him.

古文：除中京副留守，为诏谕江南使，宋主欲南面，使通古北面。通古曰： 大国之卿当小国之君。
现代文：拜中京副留守的官，当诏谕江南使，宋朝君主要面向南坐，让通古面向北坐，通古说 ：大国的长官等于小国的国君。
English: When the imperial edict was issued to send envoys to the south of the Yangtze River, officials who stayed in Beijing and vice versa had to bow to the emperor. The emperor of the Song Dynasty mainly sat facing south, while Tonggu sat facing north. Tonggu said, "The leader of a big country is equal to the sovereign of a small country."

古文：天子以河南、陕西赐之宋，宋约奉表称臣，使者不可以北面。
现代文：我朝天子把河南、陕西赐给了宋国，宋签约要对我朝奉表称臣，所以我朝使臣不可以面向北坐。
English: I, as the Son of Heaven, gave Henan and Shaanxi to the Song Dynasty, and the Song Dynasty signed a treaty to serve as a vassal to my dynasty, so I, as a vassal of the dynasty, cannot sit facing north.

古文：若欲贬损使者，使者不敢传诏。 
现代文：如果你想贬低损害使者，使者不敢传诏。 
English: If you want to belittle and damage the messenger, the messenger dare not preach.

古文：遂索马欲北归。
现代文：于是要马欲北归。
English: As a result, he wants to return to the north.

古文：宋主遽命设东西位，使者东面，宋主西面，受诏拜起皆如仪。
现代文：宋主立刻命令设东、西座位，使者面向东坐，宋主面向西坐，受诏拜起一切按礼仪进行。
English: Lord Song immediately ordered to set up east and west seats. The messenger sat facing east, and Lord Song sat facing west. After receiving the imperial edict, everything proceeded according to etiquette.

古文：使还，闻宋已置戍河南，谓送伴韩肖胄曰： 天子裂壤地益南国，南国当思图报大恩。
现代文：通古完成使命回还，听说宋国已在河南布置兵力，谓宋国送他回朝的韩肖胄说： 我朝天子割让土地给南国使你们获益，南国应当考虑图报大恩。
English: After Tonggu completed his mission and returned, he heard that Song had deployed troops in Henan. Han Xiaoqi, who was sent back to the North by Song, said: I ceded the land to the South to benefit you. The South should consider this a great favor.

古文：今辄置守戍，自取嫌疑，若兴师问罪，将何以为辞？
现代文：现在却设置守军，自己造成要动兵戈的嫌疑，如果我朝兴师问罪，你们将拿什么言辞答对？
English: Now, however, they have set up a defensive army, creating the suspicion that they want to start a war. If I accuse Chao Xingdi, what words will you answer correctly?

古文：江左且不可保，况齐乎？ 
现代文：江左尚且保不住，何况齐呢？ 
English: Jiang Zuo still can't hold on, and what about Qi?

古文：肖胄惶恐曰： 敬闻命矣。 
现代文：肖胄听罢很惶恐，说： 敬听尊命。 
English: Xiao Yao was very alarmed when he heard this and said, "Listen to me.

古文：即驰白宋主。
现代文：立即策马驰回宋国把通古的话如实向宋主禀告。
English: He immediately rode back to Song to report Tonggu's words truthfully to Song.

古文：宋主遽命罢戍。
现代文：宋主当即命令罢兵。
English: Song immediately ordered a general strike.

古文：通古至上京，具以白宗干，且曰： 及其部置未定，当议收复。 
现代文：通古到达上京，详细向宗干汇报，并且说： 在他们的布置还不定的时候，应当讨论收复河南 。
English: When Tongu arrived in Shangjing, he reported in detail to Zonggan and said, "The recovery of Henan should be discussed while their disposition is still uncertain."

古文：宗干喜曰： 是吾志也。 
现代文：宗干高兴地说 ：这正是我的心愿！ 
English: Zong Gan said happily, "This is exactly what I want!"

古文：即除参知行台尚书省事。
现代文：通古又出任参知行台尚书省事。
English: Tongo also served as the Sanzhi Xingtao Shangshu Minoru.

古文：未几，诏宗弼复取河南，通古请先行至汴谕之。
现代文：未过多久，皇帝诏令宗弼再取河南，通古请求自己先行到汴京晓谕宋国。
English: Not long after, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Zonglu to retake Henan, and Tongu requested to go to Beijing to preach to Song.

古文：比至汴，宋人已去矣。
现代文：等他临近汴京，宋人已经离开了那里。
English: By the time he neared Beijing, Song had already left.

古文：或谓通古曰： 宋人先退，诈也，今闻将自许、宿来袭我。 
现代文：有人对通古说： 宋人先撤退，恐怕其中有诈。现在听说他们将从许、宿两地来袭击我军。 
English: Someone said to Tonggu: "The Song people retreated first, I'm afraid there was a trick. Now I hear that they will attack our army from Xu and Suku.

古文：通古曰： 南人宣言来者，正所以走耳。 
现代文：通古说： 南人公开说要来，正是已经走了。 
English: Tungu said: "The southerners openly said they were coming, but they have already left.

古文：乃使人觇之，宋人果溃去。
现代文：于是派人去观察，宋人果真退却了。
English: So they sent someone to observe, and the Song people really retreated.

古文：宗弼抚髀笑曰： 谁谓书生不能晓兵事哉？ 
现代文：宗弼手抚髀部笑着说 ：谁说书生不明白兵家之事呢！ 
English: Zonglu rubbed his crotch with his hand and said with a smile, "Who says that students don't understand the military?"

古文：河南卒孙进诈称 皇弟按察大王 ，谋作乱。
现代文：河南籍士兵孙进虚妄地自称是 皇弟按察大王 ，阴谋作乱。
English: Sun Jin, a soldier from Henan Province, falsely claimed to be the emperor's younger brother, King Azecha, and plotted to start a riot.

古文：是时海陵为相，内怀觊觎，欲先除熙宗弟胙王常胜，因孙进称皇弟大王，遂指名为胙王以诬构之。
现代文：当时海陵是丞相，内心怀有非分的企图，他想除掉熙宗的弟弟胙王常胜，因为孙进自称皇弟大王，于是他指控这是胙王诬蔑陷害熙宗。
English: At that time, Hailing was the prime minister of the Joseon Dynasty, and he harbored a sinister intention in his heart. He wanted to get rid of Hezong's younger brother, Shao Wang Changsheng. Since Sun Jin claimed to be the younger brother of the king, he accused Shao Wang of slandering and framing Hezong.

古文：熙宗自太子济安薨后，继嗣未定，深以为念。
现代文：熙宗自从太子济安逝世以后，继嗣没有确定，心中深深惦记这件事。
English: Since the death of Prince Jian, Heejong has not been able to determine a successor, and he has been deeply concerned about this matter.

古文：裴满后多专制，不得肆意后宫，颇郁郁，因纵酒，往往迷惑妄怒，手刃杀人。
现代文：再加上裴满皇后很专制，他不能在后宫肆意寻欢，很是郁闷，常常因此而恣意饮酒，酒醉妄自发怒，手持刀子杀人。
English: In addition, Empress Pei Man was very autocratic, and he was not allowed to seek pleasure in the harem. He was very depressed, and often drank alcohol arbitrarily, got drunk and got angry, and killed people with a knife.

古文：及海陵中伤胙王，熙宗以为信然不疑，遣护卫特思就汴京鞫治。
现代文：在海陵中伤胙王的时候，熙宗相信有这事不怀疑，于是派遣护卫特思去汴京审查处理。
English: When the king was injured in the mausoleum, Xizong believed that there was no doubt about it, so he sent the escort Te Si to Beijing to examine and deal with the matter.

古文：行台知熙宗意在胙王，导引孙进连属之。
现代文：行台知道熙宗着意在胙王，就诱引孙进招出胙王。
English: Knowing that Xizong's intention was to dethrone the king, the governor lured Sun into summoning the king.

古文：通古执其咎，极力辩止。
现代文：通古抓住其中的祸害，极力辩论劝止。
English: Tongu grasped the scourge of it and tried his best to persuade and dissuade.

古文：及孙进引服，盖假托名称，将以惑众，规取财物耳，实无其人也。
现代文：及至把孙进引来让他服法，他供出原来假托 皇弟 大名，拿此来蛊惑众人，是想按规定骗取财物罢了，实际并没有这个人。
English: When it came to bringing Sun Jin to have him practice the Fa, he offered up the original fake name of the emperor's younger brother, Daimyo, and used this to deceive everyone. He only wanted to defraud people of their property according to regulations, but in reality, there was no such person.

古文：特思奏状，海陵谮之曰： 特思且将徼福于胙王。 
现代文：特思将此情上奏，海陵向皇上说特思的坏话，他说： 特思想让胙王侥幸得福。 
English: These sentiments were played up by Teth, and Hailing spoke ill of Teth to the emperor, saying: Teth's thoughts have made the king of Shanshu lucky.

古文：熙宗益以海陵为信，遂杀胙王，并特思杀之。
现代文：熙宗更加认为海陵的话是真实的，于是杀了胙王，同时杀了特思。
English: Xizong further believed that Hailing's words were true, so he killed Shao Wang and Te Si at the same time.

古文：行台诸人乃责通古曰： 为君所误，今坐死矣。 
现代文：行台诸位官员都责备通古说： 被你所误，现在要受连累死了。 
English: All the officials on the platform blamed Tongu and said, "You made a mistake, and now you're going to die."

古文：通古曰： 以正获罪死，贤于生。 
现代文：通古说 ：因正义而获罪被杀死，比活着强。 
English: Thungu said: "It is better to be killed for a just cause than to live."

古文：海陵既杀胙王，不复缘害他人，由是坐止特思，行台不坐。
现代文：海陵已经杀了胙王，便不再加害他人，于是牵连治罪止于特思，行台没有受牵连。
English: Since Hailing had already killed King Gong, he would no longer harm others. Therefore, Te Si was not implicated in the crime, and Xingtai was not implicated.

古文：天德初，迁行台左丞，进拜平章政事，封谭王，改封郓王。
现代文：天德初年，通古迁升行台左丞，进拜平章政事，被封为谭王，又改封为郓王。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Tiande, Tonggu was promoted to the position of Tai Zu Rong, and he was promoted to the position of Pingzhang, and he was given the title of Tan Wang, and he was also changed to Shao Wang.

古文：以疾求解机务，不许。
现代文：通古以有病为理由请求解除有关国家机密大事的工作，没有获准。
English: Tongu's request to be relieved of his duties related to state secrets on the grounds that he was ill was not approved.

古文：拜司徒，封沈王。
现代文：后通古又拜司徒官职，封为沈王。
English: Later, Tonggu was promoted to the official post of scribe, and was given the title of Shen Wang.

古文：海陵御下严厉，收威柄，亲王大臣未尝少假以颜色，惟见通古，必以礼貌。
现代文：海陵王完颜亮对下属臣僚严厉，握紧威势和权柄，亲王大臣没有不曾或少给脸色看的，只有见到通古时，一定礼貌相待。
English: King Can Yan Liang of Hailin was strict with his subordinate ministers, and kept a tight grip on his power and authority. The prince's ministers did not give him the slightest look of displeasure, and only when they saw Tonggu did they treat him with a certain amount of politeness.

古文：会磁州僧法宝欲去，张浩、张晖欲留之不可得，朝官又有欲留之者。
现代文：正当磁州僧人法宝想离去，张浩、张晖想挽留他而留不住，而朝中官员又有想留住他的人。
English: Just as Magizhou monk Fa Bao wanted to leave, Zhang Hao and Zhang Ye wanted to keep him but couldn't, and officials in the DPRK and China had people who wanted to keep him.

古文：海陵闻其事，诏三品以上官上殿，责之曰： 闻卿等每到寺，僧法宝正坐，卿等皆坐其侧，朕甚不取。
现代文：海陵听说这件事，诏令三品以上官员上殿，责备他们说： 听说各位爱卿每次到寺院，法宝僧都在正座，卿等便坐在他旁边，朕认为很不可取。
English: When Hailing heard about this, he ordered officials with three or more court ranks to come to the palace and scolded them: "I heard that every time you nobles go to the temple, the magic treasure monk sits in the main seat, and the nobles sit next to him, which I think is very undesirable.

古文：佛者本一小国王子，能轻舍富贵，自苦修行，由是成佛，今人崇敬。
现代文：所谓佛本是一个小国的王子，能轻易地舍弃富贵，甘愿吃苦修行，由于这个原因才成为佛，现在受到人们的崇敬。
English: The so-called Buddha was originally a prince of a small country, who could easily give up wealth and was willing to practice hard. It was for this reason that he became a Buddha and is now revered by people.

古文：以希福利，皆妄也。
现代文：如果信佛只是希图福利，都是妄想。
English: If believing in Buddha is just hoping for welfare, it is all delusion.

古文：况僧者，往往不第秀才，市井游食，生计不足，乃去为僧，较其贵贱，未可与簿尉抗礼。
现代文：况且作为僧人，往往考不中秀才，在市井中流浪讨食，生活的计谋不足，才去当僧人，比较他的贵贱，不可和簿尉抗礼。
English: Moreover, as a monk, he often fails to pass the middle school examination, roams the streets for food, and his life strategy is insufficient. Before becoming a monk, he should compare his status with that of a bookkeeper.

古文：闾阎老妇，迫于死期，多归信之。
现代文：里巷的老妇，临近死期，她们中多有皈依信奉的人。
English: Old women in the alleys, close to death, many of them converts.

古文：卿等位为宰辅，乃复效此，失大臣体。
现代文：卿等位尊为宰相辅国大臣，却还效法这些，有失大臣的身份。
English: He was a prime minister and an assistant minister of state, but he followed these examples and lost his status as a minister.

古文：张司徒老成旧人，三教该通，足为仪表，何不师之？ 
现代文：张司徒是稳重老成的故人，再三教诲应该明白了，他足够当我们的表率，为什么不向他学习呢？ 
English: Zhang Sitou is a stable and mature man. Repeated teachings should make it clear that he is enough to be our role model. Why not learn from him?

古文：召法宝谓之曰： 汝既为僧，去住在己，何乃使人知之？ 
现代文：海陵又召见法宝对他说 ：你既然是僧人，去或留全在你自己，为什么要让别人知道这件事？ 
English: Hailing also summoned the magic weapon and said to him, "Since you are a monk, whether you go or stay is entirely up to you. Why would you let others know about this?"

古文：法宝战惧，不知所为。
现代文：法宝害怕了，不知怎样做才好。
English: The magic treasure was scared and didn't know what to do.

古文：海陵曰： 汝为长老，当有定力，今乃畏死耶？ 
现代文：海陵说： 你是长老，应当有一定的主见，现在难道怕死吗？ 
English: Hailing said: You are an elder, you should have a certain opinion. Are you afraid of death now?

古文：遂于朝堂杖之二百，张浩、张晖杖二十。
现代文：于是吩咐在朝堂打了他二百大板，打了张浩、张晖各二十板。
English: So he gave orders to beat him with two hundred large boards in the court, and to beat Zhang Hao and Zhang Ye with twenty boards each.

古文：正隆元年，以司徒致仕，进封曹王。
现代文：正隆元年，以司徒之职位辞官，被进封为曹王。
English: In the first year of Zhenglong, he was promoted to Cao Wang after resigning from the post of Sito.

古文：是年，薨，年六十九。
现代文：当年，通古逝世，享年六十九岁。
English: That year, Tongo passed away at the age of 69.

古文：通古天资乐易，不为表襮，虽居宰相，自奉如寒素焉。
现代文：通古天生和乐平易，不做表面花样，虽然位居宰相，要求自己平素仍然清寒。
English: Tongo is naturally easy-going and easy-going, does not do superficial tricks, although he is the prime minister, he still requires himself to be cold.

古文：子沉，天德三年，赐杨建中榜及第。
现代文：他的儿子叫沉，天德三年，被赐杨建中榜及第。
English: His son named Shen, Tiande three years, was awarded the Yang Jian middle list and the first.

古文：张浩，字浩然，辽阳渤海人。
现代文：张浩，字浩然，辽阳渤海人。
English: Zhang Hao, known as Haoran, is a native of Liaoyang and the Bohai Sea.

古文：本姓高，东明王之后。
现代文：张浩原来姓高，东明王的后代。
English: Zhang Hao's original surname was Gao. He was a descendant of King Dongming.

古文：曾祖霸，仕辽而为张氏。
现代文：张浩的曾祖父叫张霸，在辽国做官时改为张姓。
English: Zhang Hao's great-grandfather was called Zhang Ba, but changed his surname to Zhang when he became an official in Liao.

古文：天辅中，辽东平，浩以策干太祖，太祖以浩为承应御前文字。
现代文：天辅中期，辽东被金朝平定，张浩以谋略献金太祖，金太祖任张浩为承应御前文字。
English: In the mid-Tianwu period, Liaodong was subdued by the Kim dynasty, and Zhang Hao made a plan to donate money to the great-grandfather, and the great-grandfather appointed Zhang Hao as a successor to the imperial letter.

古文：天会八年，赐进士及第，授秘书郎。
现代文：天会八年，张浩被赏赐进士及第，授为秘书郎。
English: In the eighth year of the Heaven's Fair, Zhang Hao was awarded the title of "Chamberlain" and "Secretary."

古文：太宗将幸东京，浩提点缮修大内，超迁卫尉卿，权签宣徽院事，管勾御前文字，初定朝仪。
现代文：金太宗将到东京，张浩为提点缮修大内，一跃升为卫尉卿、权签宣徽院事，管勾御前文字，初次拟定朝廷礼仪。
English: When King Taizong of Jin Dynasty came to Tokyo, Zhang Hao went to the Imperial Palace to make some suggestions, and he was immediately promoted to the rank of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, authorized to sign the Emperor's seal, to supervise the Imperial edict, and to draft the Imperial etiquette for the first time.

古文：求养亲，去职。
现代文：张浩请求赡养双亲，辞去官职。
English: Zhang Hao asked to support his parents and resigned from his post.

古文：起为赵州刺史。
现代文：后张浩复出任赵州刺史。
English: Later, Zhang Haofu served as Zhaozhou chief historian.

古文：官制行，以中大夫为大理卿。
现代文：金朝官制施行后，张浩凭中大夫做大理卿。
English: After the implementation of the officialdom system in the Kim dynasty, Zhang Hao was promoted to the position of Daliqing with the title of Zhongdafu.

古文：天眷二年，详定内外仪式，历户、工、礼三部侍郎，迁礼部尚书。
现代文：天眷二年，张浩详细制定内外礼仪，历任户部、工部、礼部三部侍郎，后升为礼部尚书。
English: Two years later, Zhang Hao formulated the internal and external etiquette in detail, and successively served as the attendant of the three departments of the household, the work department, and the ceremonial department, and later rose to the ceremonial department.

古文：田珏党事起，台省一空，以浩行六部事。
现代文：田珏结党叛乱，台省职位空缺，任张浩行六部事。
English: Tian Rongjie's party rebelled, positions in Taiwan Province were vacant, and Zhang Hao was appointed to six ministries.

古文：簿书丛委，决遣无留，人服其才。以疾求外，补除彰德军节度使，迁燕京路都转运使。俄改平阳尹。
现代文：张浩因为有病请求离开宫内，后补充他做彰德军节度使，升迁燕京路都转运使。不久改任平阳尹。
English: Zhang Hao requested to leave the palace due to illness, and later he was added to the post of the German army's festival envoy, and promoted to the post of the Yanjing Road. He was soon transferred to the post of Pingyang Yin.

古文：平阳多盗，临汾男子夜掠人妇，浩捕得，榜杀之，盗遂衰息。
现代文：平阳多盗贼，临汾一男子夜里掠走人家的妇女，张浩捕住他，并杀之示众，强盗于是得以平息。
English: There are many thieves in Pingyang. In Linyi, there was a man who robbed a woman in the middle of the night. Zhang Hao caught him and killed him in front of everyone. The robber was then able to calm down.

古文：近郊有淫祠，郡人颇事之。
现代文：平阳近郊有淫祠，当地人都很敬奉它。
English: In the suburbs of Pingyang, there is a temple of prostitution, which is revered by the locals.

古文：庙祝、田主争香火之利，累年不决。
现代文：庙祝、田主争夺香火之利，多年得不到解决。
English: Temple celebrants and farmers have been fighting over the profits from the incense for years, with no resolution in sight.

古文：浩撤其祠屋，投其像水中。
现代文：张浩拆除祠堂，把里面的塑像扔到水中。
English: Zhang Hao demolished the ancestral hall and threw the statues inside into the water.

古文：强宗黠吏屏迹，莫敢犯者。
现代文：为此强大的宗族、狡黠的官吏都销声匿迹，不敢再侵犯他人。
English: For this reason, powerful clans and cunning officials have all disappeared, no longer daring to encroach on others.

古文：郡中大治。
现代文：郡中大治。
English: The county is in a state of upheaval.

古文：乃缮葺尧帝祠，作击壤遗风亭。
现代文：于是张浩修缮尧帝祠堂，建击壤遗风亭。
English: As a result, Zhang Hao renovated the Andean ancestral hall and built a pavilion.

古文：海陵召为户部尚书，拜参知政事。
现代文：金皇帝海陵王召张浩任户部尚书，授给参知政事。
English: Emperor Jin and King Hailing summoned Zhang Hao to serve as household secretary and conferred the title of senator.

古文：天德二年，丁母忧。起复参知政事，进拜尚书右丞。
现代文：天德二年，张浩母亲去世，他服丧期满出来后仍任参知政事，进而授予尚书右丞。
English: Two years after Tiande, Zhang Hao's mother passed away, and after his mourning period was over, he still served as a co-governor and political affairs, and was then awarded the title of Shang Shu Rong.

古文：天德三年，广燕京城，营建宫室。
现代文：天德三年，扩大燕京城，营建宫殿皇室。
English: In three years, Tiande expanded Yanjing City and built a royal palace.

古文：浩与燕京留守刘筈、大名尹卢彦伦监护工作，命浩就拟差除。
现代文：张浩与燕京留守刘薚、大名尹卢彦伦监护工程。
English: Zhang Hao and Yanjing left-behind Liu Ye, daimyo Yin Lu Yanlun supervision project.

古文：既而暑月，工役多疾疫。诏发燕京五百里内医者，使治疗，官给药物，全活多者与官，其次给赏，下者转运司举察以闻。
现代文：不久到了夏天，工匠们大多得了疾病，皇帝下诏派燕京五百里内的医生都前去治疗，官府负责发放药物。把自己所负责的病人全治活的医生给官职，其次给赏。最后由转运使调查后报告上级。
English: Before long, in the summer, most of the artisans fell ill. The emperor issued an edict to send doctors within 500 miles of Yanjing to treat them, and the government was responsible for distributing medicines. Doctors who cured their patients completely and kept them alive were given official positions, and then rewards. Finally, the transportation commission investigated and reported to their superiors.

古文：贞元元年，海陵定都燕京，改燕京为中都，改析津府为大兴府。
现代文：贞元元年，金皇帝海陵王定都燕京，把燕京改名为中都，把析津府改为大兴府。
English: In the first year of the Zhengyuan era, Emperor Jin and King Hailing set the capital at Yanjing, renamed Yanjing to Zhongdu, and changed Seletianfu to Daxingfu.

古文：浩进拜平章政事，赐金带玉带各一，赐宴于鱼藻池。
现代文：张浩进升为平章政事，赏赐给金带、玉带各一条，在鱼藻池赏赐酒宴。
English: Zhang Hao was promoted to Pingzhang government affairs, awarded a gold belt and a jade belt each, and awarded a wine banquet in the algae pond.

古文：浩请凡四方之民欲居中都者，给复十年，以实京城，从之。
现代文：张浩请求凡是周围的百姓想到中都居住的人，十年内随时办理，以充实京城，皇帝批准了他的请求。
English: Zhang Hao asked all the surrounding people to think about the people living in the capital, and to deal with them at any time within ten years to enrich the capital, and the emperor approved his request.

古文：拜尚书右丞相兼侍中，封潞王，赐其子汝霖进士及第。
现代文：后张浩被授予尚书右丞相兼侍中，封为潞王，赏赐他的儿子张汝霖进士及第。
English: Later, Zhang Hao was awarded the title of Shangshu Righteous Minister and Servant of the Emperor, and was given the title of Shao Wang, and his son was awarded the title of Zhang Rulin Jin Shi and the first rank.

古文：未几，改封蜀王，进拜左丞相。
现代文：没过多久，张浩改封为蜀王，进升为左丞相。
English: Not long after, Zhang Hao was given the title of King of Shu and promoted to Minister of the Left.

古文：正隆二年，改封鲁国公。
现代文：正隆二年，张浩改封为鲁国公。
English: In the second year of Zhenglong, Zhang Hao was given the title of Prince of Lu.

古文：表乞致仕。
现代文：张浩上奏章请求退休。
English: Zhang Hao made a request to retire.

古文：海陵曰： 人君不明，谏不行，言不听，则宰相求去。
现代文：金皇帝海陵王回答他说： 如果皇帝不明智，劝谏行不通，良言听不进，那么宰相就乞求离开。
English: Emperor Hailing replied to him, "If the emperor is not wise, if persuasion does not work, and if he does not listen to good advice, then the prime minister will beg to leave."

古文：宰相老病不能任事则求去。
现代文：宰相老弱病残不能胜任其职也乞求离开。
English: The prime minister, too old, too weak, too sick and too incapacitated to carry out his duties, also begged to leave.

古文：卿于二者何居？ 
现代文：你属于哪一种？ 
English: Which one do you belong to?

古文：浩对曰： 臣羸病不堪任事，宰相非养病之地也，是以求去。 
现代文：张浩回答说 ：我病弱不能胜任其职，宰相不是养病的官，所以乞求离开。 
English: Zhang Hao replied, "I am too weak to perform my duties, and the prime minister is not a health official, so I begged him to leave."

古文：不许。
现代文：皇帝没有批准他的退休请求。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：海陵欲伐宋，将幸汴，而汴京大内失火，于是使浩与敬嗣晖营建南京宫室。
现代文：金朝皇帝海陵王想攻打宋朝，准备前往汴京，然而汴京大内宫廷失火，于是命令张浩与敬嗣晖营建南京宫室。
English: Emperor Hailing Wang of the Jin Dynasty wanted to attack the Song Dynasty and was preparing to go to Beijing. However, the imperial court of Peking University caught fire, so he ordered Zhang Hao and Keizong to build a palace in Nanjing.

古文：浩从容奏曰： 往岁营治中都，天下乐然趋之。
现代文：张浩从容上奏说： 以前营建中都，天下人都很高兴地前来干活。
English: Zhang Hao calmly said: Before the construction of Zhongdu, people from all over the world were happy to come to work.

古文：今民力未复，而重劳之，恐不似前时之易成也。 
现代文：现在民力没有恢复，却去干这样的大工程，恐怕不像以前那样容易完成。 
English: Now that the people's strength has not been restored, it is not as easy to complete such a large project as before.

古文：不听。
现代文：金朝皇帝海陵王不听张浩劝谏。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：浩朝辞，海陵问用兵利害。浩不敢正谏，乃婉词以对，欲以微止海陵用兵，奏曰： 臣观天意，欲绝赵氏久矣。 
现代文：张浩朝拜离朝，金朝皇帝海陵王问他攻打宋朝的利害关系，张浩不敢正面劝谏，于是婉言回答，想用微言阻止海陵王攻打宋朝，张浩上奏说： 我观察天象，要想灭赵氏还需要很长时间。 
English: Zhang Hao paid homage to the departing dynasty. The emperor of the Jin dynasty, Hailing Wang, asked him about the interests of attacking the Song dynasty. Zhang Hao did not dare to persuade him directly, so he answered gently. He wanted to use small words to prevent Hailing Wang from attacking the Song dynasty. Zhang Hao said: I observe the celestial elephant, it will take a long time to destroy the Zhao clan.

古文：海陵愕然曰： 何以知之？ 
现代文：海陵王说 ：你怎么知道的？ 
English: Haering Wang said: How did you know?

古文：对曰： 赵构无子，树立疏属，其势必生变，可不烦用兵而服之。 
现代文：张浩回答说： 赵构没有儿子，又没有培植亲信，形势一定会发生变化，可以不用军队而让他服从于我们。 
English: Zhang Hao replied: Zhao Jie has no son, and has not cultivated close friends. The situation will definitely change. We can make him obey us without using the army.

古文：海陵虽喜其言，而不能从也。
现代文：海陵王虽然很喜欢张浩说的话，但却不听从。
English: Although King Hailing liked Zhang Hao's words very much, he did not listen.

古文：浩至汴，海陵时时使宦者梁珫来视工役，凡一殿之成，费累巨万。
现代文：张浩到了汴京，海陵王常常派宦官梁糵去视察工程，凡是建成一殿，都耗资极大。
English: When Zhang Hao arrived in Beijing, King Hailing often sent eunuch Liang Yao to inspect the project. Whenever a hall was built, it was extremely expensive.

古文：珫指曰： 某处不如法式。 
现代文：梁糵常指着建筑说 ：某某地方不符合建筑规则。 
English: Liang Wei would often point to a building and say: this or that place does not comply with the building regulations.

古文：辄撤之。
现代文：那样就拆了重建。
English: So they tore it down and rebuilt it.

古文：浩不能抗而与之均礼。
现代文：张浩不能违抗梁糵并以礼相待。
English: Zhang Hao could not defy Liang Yao and treated him with courtesy.

古文：汴宫成，海陵自燕来迁居之。
现代文：汴京宫殿建成，海陵王从燕京迁来居住。
English: The palace in Yanjing was completed, and King Hailing moved from Yanjing to live there.

古文：浩拜太傅、尚书令，进封秦国公。
现代文：张浩被授予太傅、尚书令，进而封为秦国公。
English: Zhang Hao was awarded the title of Taifu and Shang Shuling, and then he was made Qin Guogong.

古文：海陵至汴，累月不视朝，日治兵南伐，部署诸将。
现代文：海陵王到达汴京后，几个月不上早朝，天天调整军队南征，部署各路大将。
English: After King Hailing arrived in Beijing, he did not go out in the early morning for several months, adjusting the army's southern expedition every day and deploying generals from all walks of life.

古文：浩欲奏事，不得见。
现代文：张浩想上奏事情，又不能见到他。
English: Zhang Hao wanted to bring up the matter, but couldn't see him.

古文：会海陵遣周福儿至浩家，浩附奏曰： 诸将皆新进少年，恐误国事。
现代文：适逢海陵王派周福儿到张浩家中，张浩附带上奏说： 各路大军都是新提拔的少年，恐怕耽误了国家大事。
English: At the same time, the king of Hailing sent Zhou Fule to Zhang Hao's home. Zhang Hao said in his report: All the generals are newly promoted young men. I am afraid that I have delayed the national event.

古文：宜求旧人练习兵者，以为千户谋克。 
现代文：最好是寻找老将军来训练军队，作为千户谋克。 
English: It is best to look for an old general to train the army, as a mentor.

古文：而海陵部署已定，恶闻其言，乃杖之。
现代文：然而海陵王部署已定，很讨厌张浩说这种话，于是杖打张浩。
English: However, the deployment of Hailing Wang had already been decided, and Zhang Hao hated to say such a thing, so he beat Zhang Hao with a stick.

古文：海陵自将发汴京，皇后、太子居守。
现代文：海陵王将亲自带兵从汴京出发，皇后、太子居守。
English: King Haile Selassie will personally lead the troops from Beijing, while the Empress and the Crown Prince will stay behind.

古文：浩留治尚书省事。
现代文：张浩被留下管理尚书省事宜。
English: Zhang Hao was left to manage the affairs of Shangshu.

古文：世宗即位于辽阳，扬州军变，海陵遇害。
现代文：金世宗在辽阳即皇帝位，扬州发生军事政变，海陵王遇害。
English: Jin Shizong became emperor in Liaoyang, a military coup took place in Yangzhou, and King Hailing was killed.

古文：都督府使使杀太子光英于南京。
现代文：都督府派使者到南京杀死了太子光英。
English: The prefectural government sent an envoy to Nanjing to kill Prince Guangying.

古文：浩遣户部员外郎完颜谋衍上贺表。
现代文：张浩派户部员外郎完颜谋衍向新皇帝进上祝贺信。
English: Zhang Hao sent a congratulatory letter to the new emperor from a member of the household department, Wei Lang, to the new emperor.

古文：明年二月，浩朝京师，入见。
现代文：第二年二月，张浩朝拜京城，入朝拜见皇帝。
English: In February of the following year, Zhang Hao paid homage to the capital and entered the imperial court to see the emperor.

古文：世宗谓曰： 朕思天位惟艰，夙夜惕惧，不遑宁处。
现代文：皇帝世宗对他说 ：我身为天子很费神操心，早晚都担惊受怕，没有一点安宁的地方。
English: Emperor Shizong said to him, "As the son of Heaven, I am very worried and anxious. Sooner or later, I am always worried and frightened. There is no place of peace.

古文：卿国之元老，当戮力赞治，宜令后世称扬德政，毋失委注之意也。 
现代文：你是国家的元老，应该合力帮助治理国家，应当让后世之人称扬德能政绩，不要有失我的委托。 
English: You are the elder statesman of the country, you should work together to help govern the country, and you should let future generations praise the achievements of the De Neng government, and do not lose my commission.

古文：俄拜太师、尚书令，封南阳郡王。
现代文：不久张浩被授予太师、尚书令，封为南阳郡王。
English: Not long after, Zhang Hao was awarded the title of Grand Master, Shang Shuling, and crowned the King of Nanyang County.

古文：世宗曰： 卿在正隆时为首相，不能匡救，恶得无罪。
现代文：金世宗对张浩说 ：你在正隆年间做第一丞相，不能纠正救治国家，哪能没罪？
English: Jin Shizong said to Zhang Hao: You were the first prime minister during the Zhenglong era, and you can't correct and save the country. How can you be innocent?

古文：营建两宫，殚竭民力，汝亦尝谏，故天下不以咎汝，惟怨正隆。
现代文：营建两宫殿，殚竭民力，你曾经劝谏过，对此天下不认为你有过错，只怨恨正隆时有海陵王。
English: The world does not consider you to be at fault for building two palaces and exhausting the people's strength, which you once advised others to do, and only resents Zhenglong when there was a king of Hailing.

古文：而卿在省十余年，练达政务，故复用卿为相，当自勉，毋负朕意。 
现代文：你在尚书省十多年，精通政务，所以再用你做丞相，你应当自勉，不要辜负我的心愿。 
English: You have been in the ministry for more than ten years and are well-versed in government affairs, so if you are reappointed as prime minister, you should be self-disciplined and not betray my wishes.

古文：浩顿首谢。
现代文：张浩叩头致谢。
English: Zhang Hao bowed his head in thanks.

古文：居数日，世宗谓浩曰： 卿为尚书令，凡人材有可用者，当举用之。 
现代文：张浩做了几天官后，金世宗对他说： 你为尚书令，凡是可以任用的人才，应当举荐任用。 
English: After Zhang Hao had been an official for a few days, Kim Sejong said to him, "You are a minister of letters, and anyone who can be appointed should be recommended for appointment."

古文：浩举纥石烈志宁等，其后皆为名臣。
现代文：张浩举荐了纥石烈志宁等人，以后他们都成了名臣。
English: Zhang Hao recommended Zou Shi Retshinin and others, and later they all became famous ministers.

古文：浩有疾，在告者久之。
现代文：张浩有病，休假很长时间。
English: Zhang Hao is ill and has been on leave for a long time.

古文：遣左司郎中高衎及浩侄汝弼宣谕。
现代文：皇帝派左司郎中高絗和张浩的侄子张汝弼前去宣旨召见张浩。
English: The emperor sent his left-hand man, Zhong Gaoqi, and Zhang Hao's nephew, Zhang Ruqi, to summon Zhang Hao.

古文：浩力疾入对，即诏入朝毋拜，许设座殿陛之东，若有咨谋，然后进对。
现代文：张浩用力快走入朝，皇帝下诏张浩入朝不用跪拜，允许他坐在殿陛的东边，如果皇帝有询问，然后他才进前回答。
English: Zhang Hao forced his way quickly into the court, and the emperor decreed that Zhang Hao did not have to kneel to enter the court, and he was allowed to sit on the east side of His Majesty. If the emperor had any questions, he would only answer them after he had stepped forward.

古文：或体中不佳，不必日至省中，大政可就第裁决。
现代文：张浩身体不好，不必天天到尚书省去，一些大的行政事务可就地裁决。
English: Zhang Hao is not in good health, so there is no need to go to Shangshu every day. Some major administrative affairs can be adjudicated on the spot.

古文：浩虽受诏，然每以退为请。
现代文：张浩虽然接受了诏谕，然而还时时请求辞职。
English: Although Zhang Hao accepted the edict, he still asked for resignation from time to time.

古文：三年夏，复申前请。
现代文：三年夏季，他又请求辞职。
English: In the summer of 2003, he again asked to resign.

古文：乃除判东京留守。
现代文：于是授予张浩东京留守。
English: As a result, Zhang Hao was granted leave to remain in Tokyo.

古文：疾不能赴任，因请致仕。
现代文：张浩有病不能赴任，因而请求退休。
English: Zhang Hao was too ill to take up his post, so he asked to retire.

古文：初，近侍有欲罢科举者，上曰： 吾见太师议之。 
现代文：当初，皇帝身边侍者有的想废除科举制，皇帝说： 我接见太师议论这件事。 
English: At first, some attendants around the emperor wanted to abolish the imperial examination system. The emperor said: I will meet with the Grand Master to discuss this matter.

古文：浩入见，上曰： 自古帝王有不用文学者乎？ 
现代文：张浩进殿拜见，皇帝说： 自古以来帝王有不用文人学士的人吗？ 
English: Zhang Hao entered the hall to pay his respects, and the emperor said, "Since ancient times, have there been any emperors who did not need a bachelor's degree in literature?

古文：浩对曰： 有。 
现代文：张浩回答说 ：有。 
English: Zhang Hao replied: Yes.

古文：曰： 谁欤？ 浩曰： 秦始皇。 
现代文：皇帝问 ：他是谁？ 张浩说 ：秦始皇。 
English: The emperor asked, "Who is he?" Zhang Hao said, "Qin Shi Huang."

古文：上顾左右曰： 岂可使我为始皇乎！ 
现代文：皇帝看看左右的人说 ：难道让我做秦始皇那样的人？ 
English: The emperor looked at the people around him and said, "Should I be like Qin Shi Huang?"

古文：事遂寝。
现代文：废科举之事从此不再提了。
English: So it was stopped.

古文：是岁，薨。
现代文：这一年，张浩去世。
English: He died that year.

古文：上辍朝一日。
现代文：为此皇帝停朝一日。
English: For this reason, the emperor suspended his activities for one day.

古文：诏左宣徽使赵兴祥率百官致奠，赙银千两、重彩五十端、绢五百匹。
现代文：他诏谕左宣徽使赵兴祥带领百官前去致奠，赠送给张浩银千两、重彩五十端、绢五百匹用于丧葬。
English: He ordered Zhao Xingxiang to lead hundreds of officials to pay their respects, and presented Zhang Hao with 1,000 taels of silver, 50 taels of gold, and 500 horses for his funeral.

古文：谥曰文康。
现代文：张浩谥号文康。
English: Zhang Hao rides the Wen Kang.

古文：明昌五年，配享世宗庙廷。
现代文：明昌五年，张浩附带享用金世宗的庙廷祭祀。
English: In the fifth year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, Zhang Hao enjoyed the temple ritual of the Jin Sect.

古文：事连汝弼，上以事觉在汝弼死后，得免削夺。
现代文：泰和元年，张浩的图像被画在衍庆宫中。张浩有儿子张汝为、张汝霖、张汝能、张汝方、张汝猷。
English: In the first year of the Taihe era, Zhang Hao's image was painted in the Yanqing Palace. Zhang Hao had sons Zhang Ruwei, Zhang Rulin, Zhang Runeng, Zhang Rufang and Zhang Ruzhen.

古文：耶律安礼，本名纳合，系出遥辇氏。
现代文：耶律安礼原名耶律纳合，出于遥辇氏世系。
English: The original name of Yerutianli is Yerutnahe, which comes from the Yaobu clan.

古文：幼孤，事母以孝闻。
现代文：幼年丧父，他侍奉孝敬母亲出了名。
English: He lost his father at an early age and became famous for his filial piety while serving his mother.

古文：辽季，间关避难，未尝一日怠温凊。
现代文：辽国末年，耶律安礼秘密地进入关塞避难，没有一天对她母亲不孝的。
English: In the last years of the Liao Dynasty, Yelu Anli secretly took refuge in Guansei, and she was never unfilial to her mother.

古文：入朝，当路者重其行义，使主帅府文字，授左班殿直。
现代文：他进入官府，当权者很重视他的行义，使用他为主帅府文安，授给左班殿直。
English: He entered the government, and those in power attached great importance to his conduct, using him as the head of the government, Wen'an, and awarding him the title of Zuoban.

古文：天眷初，从元帅于山西。
现代文：天眷初年，耶律安礼在山西跟从元帅作战。
English: In the first year of Tianyan, Yelu Anli followed the marshal to fight in Shanxi.

古文：母丧，不克归葬，主帅怜之，赙礼甚厚。
现代文：此时他母亲去世，他赶回家里埋葬，主帅怜悯他，赠送给他很厚重的财物以办丧事。
English: At this time, his mother passed away, he rushed home to bury her, and the coach took pity on him and gave him a very heavy treasure to carry out the funeral.

古文：安礼冒大暑，挽柩行千余里，哀毁骨立，行路嗟叹。
现代文：耶律安礼冒炎热酷暑，拉着母亲的灵柩行走一千多里，他悲痛得只剩一把骨头，走路都喘息。
English: Yerutianli braved the scorching heat and walked more than a thousand miles while carrying his mother's coffin. He was so grief-stricken that all he had left was a handful of bones and was gasping for breath as he walked.

古文：服除，由行台吏、礼部主事累迁工部侍郎，改左司郎中。
现代文：服丧期满，耶律安礼由行台吏、礼部主事直至升为工部侍郎，改任左司郎中。
English: At the end of the mourning period, Jeru-An-Ri was promoted from being a procession officer and the head of the ceremonial department to the head of the engineering department, and then to the position of junior assistant secretary.

古文：天德间，罢行台尚书省，入为工部侍郎，累迁本部尚书。
现代文：天德年间，耶律安礼被免去行台尚书省，进入朝廷做工部侍郎，直至升为工部尚书。
English: During the reign of Emperor Tiande, Jeru Anli was exempted from the Ministry of Education and Culture and entered the imperial court as a chamberlain of the Ministry of Education and Culture, until he was promoted to the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：明年冬，为宋国岁元使。
现代文：第二年冬，任宋朝岁元使。
English: In the winter of the second year, he was appointed as the envoy of the Song Dynasty to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：被诏鞫治韩王亨狱于广宁。
现代文：耶律安礼被诏在广宁审讯处理韩王完颜亨的案子。
English: Yerudianli was sent to Guangning for trial to deal with the case of Han Wang Wanyanheng.

古文：亨无反状，安礼还奏。
现代文：完颜亨没有谋反的迹象，耶律安礼回朝上奏。
English: After Yan Heng's death, there was no sign of rebellion, and Yelu Anli returned to play in the morning.

古文：海陵怒，疑安礼梁王宗弼故吏，乃责安礼曰： 孛迭有三罪。
现代文：海陵王大怒，怀疑耶律安礼、梁王完颜宗弼这些老官员，于是斥责耶律安礼说： 完颜孛迭有三条罪状。
English: King Hailing was furious, suspecting the old officials such as Yelu Anli and Liang Wang Guan Yan Zongyi, so he rebuked Yelu Anli and said: Guan Yan Zongli has three charges.

古文：其论阿里出虎有誓券不当死，既引伏。
现代文：他说徒单阿里出虎有誓言在不应当死，就把他藏了起来。
English: He said that he had sworn not to die, so he hid him.

古文：其谓不足进马，及密遣刺客二者，安得无之？
现代文：他说对徒单阿里出虎不足以动兵讨伐，等到我派两名刺客前去，哪里有阿里出虎？
English: He said that it was not enough to mobilize troops to fight against a single assassin, but when I sent two assassins forward, where was Ali the Tiger?

古文：汝等来奏，欲测我喜怒以为轻重耳。 
现代文：你们前来奏知，想试探我的喜怒来权衡轻重罢了。 
English: You have come to inquire, to test my affections, to weigh the balance.

古文：乃遣安礼再往，与李老僧同鞫之。
现代文：于是派耶律安礼再前往广宁，与李老僧共同审讯完颜亨。
English: Therefore, he sent Jeru Anli to Guangning again, and interrogated Yan Heng together with the old monk Li.

古文：老僧由是杀亨于狱。
现代文：李老僧因此把完颜亨杀死在狱中。
English: As a result, Li Laozang killed Guan Yanheng in prison.

古文：海陵犹谓安礼辄杀亨以绝灭事迹，亲戚得以不坐。
现代文：海陵王仍对耶律安礼说杀完颜亨的目的是消灭不良迹象，他的亲戚可以不连坐。
English: King Hailing still told Yelu Anli that the purpose of killing Yan Heng was to eliminate bad signs, and his relatives could not sit together.

古文：安礼之不附上刻下乃如此。
现代文：耶律安礼就是这样不附和顺从皇帝而去削减下面人的罪状。
English: In this way, Jeru'am did not agree to obey the emperor and reduced the charges of those below him.

古文：改吏部尚书，护大房山诸陵工作。
现代文：耶律安礼改任吏部尚书，统辖大房山诸皇陵的工作。
English: Yerutianli was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, supervising the work of the imperial tombs in Dafangshan.

古文：拜枢密副使，封谭国公，迁尚书右丞，进封郕国公，转左丞。
现代文：不久耶律安礼被授予枢密副使，封为谭国公，升为尚书右丞，进而封为成阝国公，转为尚书左丞。
English: Soon after, Yerutianli was awarded the title of Privy Vice-Envoy, was given the title of Tan Guo Gong, was promoted to Shang Shuxu Yuanzheng, was then given the title of Chengyu Guo Gong, and was then promoted to Shang Shuxu Zuozheng.

古文：温都思忠子长寿、椿年子猛安参谋合等三十余家凡冒占三千余顷。
现代文：耶律安礼议论对前朝中所封的功臣爵位应降职，并秘密劝谏攻打江南的事，这违反了海陵王的心愿，免除他原职而任他为南京留守，封为温国公。耶律安礼擅长于做官，谨慎廉洁，他再次跟从帅府攻打宋朝，对财物人口一无所取。
English: Yelu Anli argued that the knighthood of the meritorious vassal awarded in the previous dynasty should be downgraded, and secretly advised Zou to attack the south of the Yangtze River. This violated the wishes of King Hailing, exempting him from his original position and allowing him to stay in Nanjing and be awarded the title of Wen Guogong. Yelu Anli was good at being an official, prudent and clean. He once again followed the Shuai government to attack the Song dynasty, gaining nothing from the wealth of the population.

古文：诏诸家除牛头税地各再给十顷，其余尽赋贫民种佃。
现代文：耶律安礼地位虽很显贵，然而奴婢只有几个人，而且都有契约，当时的人都说他很贤达。
English: Although the status of Yerutianli was very prominent, there were only a few slaves and maidservants, and they all had contracts. People at the time said that he was very wise.

古文：世颇以此讥椿年云。
现代文：耶律安礼五十六岁时死去。
English: Jeroen died at the age of fifty-six.

古文：祁宰，字彦辅，江淮人。
现代文：祁宰字彦辅，长江淮河之间的人。
English: Zhaozai Zhihanfu, a person between the Yangtze River and the Huai River.

古文：宋季以医术补官。
现代文：宋朝末年，因为懂医学而做官。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, he became an official because he knew medicine.

古文：王师破汴得之，后隶太医。
现代文：金朝的军队攻破汴京俘获了他，后来做了太医。
English: The army of the Kim dynasty broke through and captured him, and he later became the Grand Physician.

古文：累迁中奉大夫、太医使。
现代文：他直至做到中奉大夫、太医使。
English: He worked his way up to the position of Zhongfeng Doctor and Taiheiji.

古文：数被赏赉，常感激欲自效。
现代文：多次被赏赐，他常常感激因而尽力效劳。
English: Rewarded many times, he was always grateful and did his best to serve.

古文：海陵将伐宋，宰欲谏，不得见。
现代文：海陵王准备攻打宋朝，祁宰想上谏，没有被召见。
English: King Hailing was preparing to attack the Song Dynasty, but he was not summoned because he wanted to take the throne.

古文：会元妃有疾，召宰诊视。
现代文：适逢元妃有病，呼唤祁宰去诊断看病。
English: When Yuanfei fell ill, he called Zou Zai to diagnose and see a doctor.

古文：既入见，即上疏谏，其略言： 国朝之初，祖宗以有道伐无道，曾不十年，荡辽戡宋。
现代文：进入宫廷后，祁宰就呈上劝谏奏议，大略意思是： 国家刚建立的时候，祖宗们用有道攻打无道，不到十年，就平定了辽国和宋朝。
English: After entering the court, Zhai Zhai presented a persuasive argument, roughly meaning: When the country was just established, the ancestors used a way to attack without a way, and within ten years, they had leveled Liaoning Province and the Song Dynasty.

古文：当此之时，上有武元、文烈英武之君，下有宗翰、宗雄谋勇之臣，然犹不能混一区宇，举江淮、巴蜀之地，以遗宋人。
现代文：当时，上面有武元、文烈那样的英武之君，下面有完颜宗翰、完颜宗雄那样的谋勇之臣，然而还不能把天下的土地都统为一体，虽攻下长江淮河、巴蜀的地方，后来还是把它们送给了宋朝人。
English: At that time, there were the kings of valor, such as Wu Yuan and Wen Li, on the top, and the ministers of valor, such as Guan Yan Zonghan and Guan Yan Zongxiong, on the bottom. However, it was not possible to unify all the lands of the world. Although they conquered the Yangtze River, Huaihe and Bashu, they later gave them to the Song Dynasty.

古文：况今谋臣猛将，异于曩时。
现代文：况且今天的谋臣猛将，和先前的不一样。
English: Moreover, today's strategist is a fierce general, different from the previous one.

古文：且宋人无罪，师出无名。加以大起徭役，营中都，建南京，缮治甲兵，调发军旅，赋役烦重，民人怨嗟，此人事之不修也。
现代文：而且宋朝人没有罪状，出兵攻打它没有借口，加上大大增加劳役，建造中都，修建南京，修造军器，调遣军队，赋税劳役繁重，百姓怨声叹气，这是人和方面的不利。
English: Moreover, the Song Dynasty was not guilty, and there was no excuse for sending troops to attack it. In addition, labor service was greatly increased, the capital of China was built, Nanjing was built, military equipment was built, troops were dispatched, taxes and labor were heavy, and the people complained and sighed. This was unfavorable to people and aspects.

古文：间者昼星见于牛斗，荧惑伏于翼轸。巳岁自刑，害气在扬州，太白未出，进兵者败，此天时不顺也。
现代文：夜里昼星出现在斗牛星宿旁，荧惑星伏在翼轸星旁，太白星没有出来，进兵会失败的，这是天时的不顺。
English: In the night, the day star appears next to the bullfighting star, the fluorescent planet lies down next to the pterodactyl star, the white star does not come out, and the advance will fail. This is a bad time.

古文：舟师水涸，舳舻不继，而江湖岛渚之间，骑士驰射，不可驱逐，此地利不便也。 
现代文：水兵出击而水道干涸，大船不连续，而且江湖岛渚之间，骑兵难驰骋射击，不可以驱逐，这是地利的不便。 
English: The waterway dries up when the sailors attack, the big ships are not continuous, and between the rivers, lakes and islands, the cavalry is difficult to ride and shoot, and can not be expelled, which is the inconvenience of geography.

古文：言甚激切。海陵怒，命戮于市，籍其家产，天下哀之。
现代文：祁宰言词激烈，海陵王大怒，命令在街上杀死祁宰，没收他的家产，为此天下的人很悲痛。
English: Gozai's words were fierce, and King Hailing was furious and ordered that Gozai be killed in the street and that his property be confiscated. People around the world were very saddened by this.

古文：綦戩，宰婿也，海陵疑奏疏戩为之。
现代文：綦戬是祁宰的女婿，海陵王怀疑祁宰的奏章是他写的。
English: Zhai was the son-in-law of Zhezai, and King Hailing suspected that he had written Zhezai's music.

古文：辞曰： 实不知也。 
现代文：綦戬回答说 ：我实在不知道这件事。 
English: The baboon replied, "I really don't know about that."

古文：海陵犹杖戩。
现代文：海陵王还是杖打了綦戬。
English: King Hailing still hiccupped his cane.

古文：召禁中诸司局官至咸德门，谕以杀宰事。
现代文：海陵王下诏京城中各个司局的官员到咸德门，向他们说明杀祁宰的事。
English: Under King Haile Selassie, officials from various administrative bureaus in the capital went to Hamdok Gate to explain to them about the killing of Yazai.

古文：明年，世宗即位于辽东。
现代文：第二年，金世宗在辽东即皇帝位。
English: The following year, Kim Sejong became emperor in Liaodong.

古文：四年，诏赠资政大夫，复其田宅。
现代文：大定四年，金世宗下诏追封祁宰为资政大夫，归还他的土地和家宅。
English: In the 4th year of the Taisho era, Kim Sejong issued an edict to restore Yeongjae's status as a doctor of finance and administration, and to return his land and home.

古文：章宗即位，诏访其子忠勇校尉、平定州酒监公史，擢尚药局都监。
现代文：章宗即皇帝位，下诏书查访祁宰的儿子授予他忠勇校尉、平定州酒监公史，提拔他为尚乐局都监。
English: Zhang Zong was the emperor, and the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son.

古文：泰和初，诏定功臣谥，尚书省掾李秉钧上言： 事有宜缓而急，若轻而重者，名教是也。
现代文：泰和初年，皇帝下诏确定功臣的谥号，尚书省掾李秉钧上言说 ：事情有应该缓的却急了，轻的却重了，诸侯王公的文告就是这样。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, the emperor issued an edict to determine the title of meritorious subject. Li Bingya, the governor of Shangshu Province, said in his edict: "Things should be slowed down, but they are in a hurry. Things should be eased, but they are heavy. This is the message of the princes."

古文：伏见故赠资政大夫祁宰以忠言被诛，慕义之士，尽伤厥心。
现代文：受人敬佩的已故追封资政大夫祁宰因为忠言被杀，敬仰他的人都很伤心。
English: People who admired the late Zhaofeng Zhengdefu Yanzai were sad because Tadanobu was killed.

古文：世宗即位，赠之以官，陛下录用其子，甚大惠也。
现代文：世宗即皇帝位，追封他为官，陛下录用他的儿子，这是很大的恩惠。
English: It is a great favor that Emperor Sejong made him an official and that His Majesty hired his son.

古文：虽武王比干之墓，孔子誉夷、齐之仁，何以异此。
现代文：纵然武王授给比干坟墓，孔子称赞夷、齐的仁义，但同这件事不相同。
English: Even though King Wu gave the tomb to Bi Gan, and Confucius praised the benevolence of Yi and Qi, this is not the same thing.

古文：而有司拘文，以职非三品不在议谥之例，臣窃疑之。
现代文：然而有司拘泥于制度，认为职位不到三品的人不在讨论封谥号的行列，我私下怀疑此事。
English: However, I have a sneaking suspicion that there are some officials who are too attached to the system and think that people with less than three-star rank are not in the ranks of those who discuss the awarding of honorary titles.

古文：若职至三品方得请谥，当时居高官、食厚禄者，不为无人，皆畏罪淟涊，曾不敢申一喙，画一策，以为社稷计。
现代文：如果职位到三品的人才能请求封谥号，当时居高官、食厚禄的人，不是没有人，但都怕被判污浊罪，曾经不敢陈述自己的观点，写出自己的计策，为国家出谋献计。
English: If a person with a rank of third grade can only request a seal of approval, there were not a few people who were high-ranking officials and well-paid people at that time, but they were afraid of being convicted of defamation, and they did not dare to state their own views, write their own strategies, and make plans for the country.

古文：卒使立名死节之士，顾出于医卜之流，亦可以少愧矣。
现代文：终于为祁宰正名是为节操而死的人，这对于出身医学的人，也可以减少他们的一点羞愧。
English: For those with a medical background, it can also lessen some of the shame of being named after someone who died for their country.

古文：臣以谓非常之人，当以非常之礼待之。
现代文：我认为祁宰不是平常的人，应当用特别的礼仪对待他。
English: I believe that the Emir is not an ordinary person and should be treated with special etiquette.

古文：乞诏有司特赐谥以旌其忠，斯亦助名教之一端也。 制曰： 可。 
现代文：请求皇上下诏有司特别赏赐给祁宰谥号，以表彰他的忠诚，这也有助于改正文告。 皇帝下令说 ：可以这样做。 
English: Requesting the imperial edict to give a special award to Uzai to commend his loyalty, which would also help to amend the edict, the emperor ordered: "You may do so."

古文：下太常，谥曰忠毅。
现代文：于是颁令祁宰为太常，谥号忠毅。
English: As a result, an order was issued to change his title to Taizang, and his posthumous name to Zhongyi.

