古文：武帝下普通元年春正月乙亥朔，改元，大赦天下。赐文武劳位，孝悌力田爵一级，尤贫之家，勿收常调，鳏寡孤独，并加赡恤。
现代文：普通元年春正月乙亥初一，改年号，大赦天下，赐予文武官员劳绩品级，对任孝悌力田的农官赐爵一级，格外贫穷的家庭，不征收正常赋税，对鳏寡孤独之人，都加以救助抚恤。
English: Usually, on the first day of the first month of the first month of the first year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the

古文：丙子，日有蚀之。
现代文：丙子，发生日食。
English: C'mon, there's an eclipse.

古文：己卯，以司徒临川王宏为太尉、扬州刺史，安右将军、监扬州萧景为安西将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：己卯，任命司徒临川王萧宏为太尉、扬州刺史，安右将军、监扬州萧景为安西将军、郢州刺史。
English: At the same time, he appointed Wang Xiaohong, the governor of Linchuan, as the first lieutenant, Yangzhou as the chief historian, An Yu as the general, Yangzhou Xiao Jing as the inspector, An Xi as the general and Zhangzhou as the chief historian.

古文：尚书左仆射王暕以母忧去职，金紫光禄大夫王份为尚书左仆射。
现代文：尚书左仆射王睐因母亲去世离职，金紫光禄大夫王份担任尚书左仆射。
English: Shangshu's left-hand servant Sha Wang Zhen left his post due to his mother's death, and Jin Ziguanglu served as Shangshu's left-hand servant Sha Zheng.

古文：庚子，扶南、高丽国各遣使献方物。
现代文：庚子，扶南、高丽国各自派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: Gyeonggi Province, Funan Province and Goryeo Province each sent envoys to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：二月壬子，老人星见。
现代文：二月壬子，老人星出现。
English: In February, Ren Zi, the elderly star, appears.

古文：癸丑，以高丽王世子安为宁东将军、高丽王。
现代文：癸丑，任命高丽王的世子直宣为宁束将军、直屋旺。
English: At the same time, he appointed King Goryeo's heir, Naonobu, as the general of Ningzoku, and Naoya as the warlord.

古文：三月丙戌，滑国遣使献方物。
现代文：三月丙戊，迢玺派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: In March, the emperor sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：夏四月甲午，河南王遣使献方物。
现代文：夏四月甲午，河南王派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the fourth month of the summer, the king of Henan sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：六月丁未，以护军将军韦睿为车骑将军。
现代文：六月丁未，任命护军将军童壑为车骑将军。
English: In June, Ding Wei appointed Tong Yao, the general of the escort, as the general of the cavalry.

古文：秋七月己卯，江、淮、海并溢。
现代文：秋七月己卯，长江、淮水、海洋都涨水漫过堤防。
English: In the autumn and July, the Yangtze River, the Huai River and the ocean all flooded and overflowed their dikes.

古文：辛卯，以信威将军邵陵王纶为江州刺史。
现代文：辛卯，任命信威将军邵陵王萧纶为江州刺史。
English: Xinwu appointed Xinwei General Shao Ling Wang Xiaojun as the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：八月庚戌，老人星见。
现代文：八月庚戌，老人星出现。
English: August Geng Yao, the old man star appears.

古文：甲子，新除车骑将军韦睿卒。
现代文：甲子，新任车骑将军韦敔去世。
English: A new cavalry general, Wei Xuan, passed away.

古文：九月乙亥，有星晨见东方，光烂如火。
现代文：九月乙亥，有星辰清晨出现在东方，光彩灿烂如火焰。
English: In September of the year of the boar, the stars appeared in the east in the early morning, shining like flames.

古文：冬十月辛亥，以宣惠将军长沙王深业为护军将军。
现代文：冬十月辛亥，任命宣惠将军长沙王深业为护军将军。
English: In the winter and October of Xinhai, he appointed General Xuan Hui Changsha Wang Shenye as the escorting general.

古文：辛酉，以丹阳尹晋安王纲为平西将军、益州刺史。
现代文：辛酉，任命丹阳尹晋安王萧纲为平西将军、益州刺史。
English: Xin Xi, appointed Danyang Yin Jin An Wang Xiao Gang as the general of Pingxi and the governor of Yizhou.

古文：二年春正月甲戌，以南徐州刺史豫章王综为镇右将军。
现代文：二年春正月甲戌，任命南徐州刺史豫章王萧综为镇右将军。
English: In the first month of the second year of spring in Jiaozuo, the Southern Xuzhou Governor Yu Zhang Wang Xiaoshu was appointed as the town's right-hand general.

古文：新除益州刺史晋安王纲改为徐州刺史。
现代文：新任益州刺史晋安王萧纲改任为徐州刺史。
English: Wang Xiao Gang, the newly-appointed Ezhou magistrate, was reappointed as the Xuzhou magistrate.

古文：辛巳，舆驾亲祠南郊。
现代文：辛巳，皇帝亲自祭祀南郊。
English: Soon, the emperor himself began to offer sacrifices in the southern suburbs.

古文：诏曰： 春司御气，虔恭报祀，陶匏克诚，苍璧礼备，思随乾覆，布兹亭育。
现代文：韶令说： 春祠侍奉节气，恭敬地祭祀，陶制器皿自然诚实，青黑玉璧礼仪完备，思虑依据上天覆盖荫庇之恩，施行抚育。
English: The imperial edict said: the Spring Temple serves the solar terms, reverently performs sacrifices, the pottery vessels are naturally honest, the blue and black jade rites are complete, and the thoughts are based on the grace of the heavens to cover the shade, and carry out the upbringing.

古文：凡民有单老孤稚，不能自存，主者郡县咸加收养，赡给衣食，每令周足，以终其身。
现代文：凡是民众年老孤单和幼小失去父母不能养活自己的，主管部门和郡县都加以收养，救济衣食，必使周全充足，以维持他们的生计。
English: The competent departments and counties shall take in all the people who are old, lonely, and young, who have lost their parents and are unable to support themselves. The relief of food and clothing must be well-planned and sufficient to maintain their livelihood.

古文：又于京师置孤独园，孤幼有归，华发不匮。
现代文：另外在京城设置孤独园，使孤儿有归宿，老年人不匮乏。
English: In addition, a lonely garden will be set up in Beijing, so that orphans have a home and the elderly are not in short supply.

古文：若终年命，厚加料理。
现代文：如果去世，厚重地加以安葬。
English: If they die, they should be buried with dignity.

古文：尤穷之家，勿收租赋。 
现代文：特别穷困的家庭，不征收田租户调。 
English: For particularly poor families, there will be no land rent adjustment.

古文：戊子，大赦天下。
现代文：戊子，大赦天下。
English: Peace, peace to all the world.

古文：二月辛丑，舆驾亲祠明堂。
现代文：二月辛丑，皇帝亲自祭祀明堂。
English: It was so ugly that the emperor himself had to offer a sacrifice to the Myodo.

古文：三月庚寅，大雪，平地三尺。
现代文：三月庚寅，下大雪，平地雪深三尺。
English: In March, heavy snow fell in Goyang. The snow on the ground was three feet deep.

古文：夏四月乙卯，改作南北郊。
现代文：夏四月乙卯，改建南郊北郊祭坛。
English: In April of the following year, the southern suburb and northern suburb altars were rebuilt.

古文：丙辰，诏曰： 夫钦若昊天，历象无违。躬执耒耜，尽力致敬，上协星鸟，俯训民时，平秩东作，义不在南。
现代文：丙辰，诏令说： 敬顺上天，天象不乱，亲自手扶农具，努力表示敬意，上协和星象，下教导民众顺应时节，辨别先后进行春耕，按义理不在南方。
English: For example, the imperial edict said: "Respect the heavens, and the celestial objects will not be disturbed, personally hold the agricultural tools, strive to show respect, harmonize with the celestial objects, and teach the people to conform to the seasons, distinguish and carry out spring plowing in succession, and do not stay in the south according to the principle of righteousness."

古文：前代因袭，有乖礼制，可于震方，简求沃野，具兹千亩，庶允旧章。 
现代文：前代因循的，违背了礼制，可在东方，挑选肥沃田野，设立藉田，希望能合乎旧日典章。 
English: The previous generation followed, violated the etiquette, and in the East, selected fertile fields and set up leased fields, hoping to conform to the old day ceremony.

古文：五月癸卯，琬琰殿火，延烧后宫屋三千间。
现代文：五月癸卯，琬琰殿起火，蔓延焚烧后宫房屋三千间。
English: At the end of May, a fire broke out in the main hall of the Imperial Palace, spreading and burning 3,000 houses of the Imperial Palace.

古文：丁巳，诏曰： 王公卿士，今拜表贺瑞，虽则百辟体国之诚，朕怀良有多愧。
现代文：丁巳，诏令说： 王公卿士，现在送表章庆贺祥瑞，虽说是百官体恤国家的诚意，我心中实有多种惭愧。
English: Ding, the edict said: "Wang Gongye, now you are sending a medal to celebrate Xiang Rui, although it is the sincerity of the country's officials, I really have a lot of shame in my heart.

古文：若其泽漏川泉，仁被动植，气调玉烛，治致太平，爰降嘉祥，可无惭德；而政道多缺，淳化未凝，何以仰叶辰和，远臻冥贶？
现代文：如果恩泽遍及川流山泉，仁德覆盖动物植物，气候四季调和，政治达到太平，天降祥瑞，可以没有惭愧之心；然而治道多有阙失，纯朴的教化没有形成，如何上协星辰，远远获得神祇赐福呢？
English: If grace pervades the streams and springs, benevolence covers the animals and plants, the four seasons are harmonized, politics achieves peace, and heaven descends, there can be no feeling of shame; however, there are many mistakes in the way of governance, and simple enlightenment has not been formed. How can we reach the stars and receive the blessings of the gods?

古文：此乃更彰寡薄，重增其尤。
现代文：这是更显出我的德行微薄，再增添我的过失。
English: For this is yet the poor meanness of my conduct, and the increase of mine iniquity.

古文：自今可停贺瑞。 
现代文：从现在起可停止庆贺祥瑞。 
English: From now on, we can stop celebrating Xiang Rui.

古文：六月丁卯，信威将军、义州刺史文僧明以州叛入于魏。
现代文：六月丁卯，信威将军、义州刺史文僧明献出州城背叛到魏国。
English: In June of Dingwu, General Xinwei and Yizhou Jishi Monk Ming betrayed the state capital to Wei.

古文：秋七月丁酉，假大匠卿裴邃节，督众军北讨。
现代文：秋七月丁酉，赐给大匠卿裴邃符节，统领各军向北讨伐。
English: In the autumn and July of Dingwu, he was given the great craftsman Sir Pei Yu Fu Jie, and led the army to the north to fight.

古文：甲寅，老人星见。
现代文：甲寅，老人星出现。
English: Kuching, the old man star appears.

古文：魏荆州刺史桓叔兴帅众降。
现代文：魏国荆州刺史桓叔兴率领部众投降。
English: The Wei general Jing Zhou stabbed Shih Kuan Shuxing and led his troops to surrender.

古文：八月丁亥，始平郡中石鼓村地自开成井，方六尺六寸，深三十二丈。
现代文：八月丁亥，始平郡中石鼓村土地自行裂开成为井，方六尺六寸，深三十二丈。
English: In August of Dinghai, the land of Zhongshigu Village, Shiping County, spontaneously cracked into a well, six feet and six inches square and thirty-two feet deep.

古文：冬十一月，百济、新罗国各遣使献方物。
现代文：冬十一月，百济、新罗国各自派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: In the winter of November, Baekje and Silla each sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：十二月戊辰，以镇东大将军百济王馀隆为宁东大将军。
现代文：十戊辰，任命镇束大将军百济王余隆为宁束大将军。
English: On the 10th day of the 10th month of the 10th month of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11

古文：三年春正月庚子，以尚书令袁昂为中书监，吴郡太守王暕为尚书左仆射，尚书左仆射王份为右光禄大夫。
现代文：三年春正月庚子，任命尚书令袁昂为中书监，吴郡太守王陈为尚书左仆射，尚书左仆射王份为右光禄大夫。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Spring, Geng Zi appointed Yuan Ang, Shang Shuling's second-in-command, as the chief librarian, Wang Chen, the governor of Wu County, as Shang Shuling's second-in-command, and Wang Ben, Shang Shuling's second-in-command, as the doctor of Uguanglu.

古文：庚戌，京师地震。
现代文：庚戌，京城发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in Gyeongbokgung, Seoul.

古文：己未，以宣毅将军庐陵王续为雍州刺史。
现代文：己未，任命宣毅将军庐陵王萧续为雍州刺史。
English: At the same time, he appointed Xuan Yi General Gong Ling Wang Xiao Gang as the historian of Yongzhou.

古文：三月乙卯，巴陵王萧屏薨。
现代文：三月乙卯，巴陵王萧屏逝世。
English: In March, Xiao Ping, the king of Baling, passed away.

古文：夏四月丁卯，汝阴王刘端薨。
现代文：夏四月丁卯，汝阴王刘端逝世。
English: In the summer of the fourth month of Dingwu, Ruyin King Liu Duan passed away.

古文：五月壬辰朔，日有蚀之，既。
现代文：五月壬辰初一，发生日食，是全食。
English: On the first day of Imjin in May, a solar eclipse occurred, a total eclipse.

古文：癸巳，赦天下。并班下四方，民所疾苦，咸即以闻，公卿百僚各上封事，连率郡国举贤良、方正、直言之士。
现代文：癸巳，大赦天下，并颁布命令到四方，民众所疾苦的事，都立即上奏，公卿百官各自封缄奏事，郡国守相推举贤良、方正、敢说真话的人。
English: At this time, the emperor pardoned the whole country, and issued an order to the four quarters, the people's sufferings were immediately reported, the nobles and officials each signed a report, and the county governors recommended the virtuous, the upright, and those who dared to speak the truth.

古文：秋八月辛酉，作二郊及籍田并毕，班赐工匠各有差。
现代文：秋八月辛酉，建造的南郊北郊祭坛和为皇帝耕作用的藉田都已完毕，赏赐工匠多少不等。
English: Autumn and August were very busy. The construction of the southern suburb and northern suburb altars and the loan of fields for the emperor to cultivate were all completed. The rewards for the craftsmen varied.

古文：甲子，老人星见。
现代文：甲子，老人星出现。
English: Koji, the old man star appears.

古文：婆利、白题国各遣使献方物。
现代文：婆利、白题国各自派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: Both Borneo and Baekje sent envoys to offer tribute to the local special products.

古文：冬十月丙子，加中书监袁昂中卫将军。
现代文：冬十月丙子，加授中书监袁昂为中卫将军。
English: In the winter of October, the middle school librarian Yuan Ang was awarded the title of General of the Middle Guard.

古文：十一月甲午，抚军将军、开府仪同三司、领军将军始兴王憺薨。
现代文：十一月甲午，抚军将军、开府仪同三司、领军将军始兴王萧儋逝世。
English: On the afternoon of November 1st, General Fuzhong and Kaifu Yi, as well as the Third Division and the leading general Shi Xing Wang Xiaojun passed away.

古文：辛丑，以太子詹事萧渊藻为领军将军。
现代文：辛丑，任命太子詹事萧渊藻为领军将军。
English: Xin Ugly appointed Prince Zhan Zhi Xiao Yuanmao as the leading general.

古文：四年春正月辛卯，舆驾亲祠南郊，大赦天下。应诸穷疾，咸加赈恤，并班下四方，时理狱讼。
现代文：四年春正月辛卯，皇帝亲自祭祀南郊，大赦天下，所有穷困有病的人，都加以赈济抚恤，并发布命令到四方，及时处理案件诉讼。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fourth year, the emperor personally sacrificed the Southern Suburbs, pardoned the world, and all the poor and sick people were given relief and pensions, and issued an order to the four directions to timely handle the case litigation.

古文：丙午，舆驾亲祠明堂。
现代文：丙午，皇帝亲自祭祀明堂。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, the emperor himself made a sacrifice to Myeongdong.

古文：二月庚午，老人星见。
现代文：二月庚午，老人星出现。
English: In the late afternoon of February, the elderly star appeared.

古文：乙亥，躬耕籍田。
现代文：乙亥，皇帝亲自耕种藉田。
English: In the year of the Boar, the emperor himself cultivated the borrowed fields.

古文：诏曰： 夫耕籍之义大矣哉！
现代文：诏令说： 耕种藉田的意义重大啊!
English: The imperial edict said: The significance of cultivating borrowed fields is great!

古文：粢盛由之而兴，礼节因之以著，古者哲王咸用此作。
现代文：祭品因此而产生，礼节因此而显著，古代英明的君王都由此而兴盛。
English: Sacrifices are born of it, propriety is marked by it, and wise kings of old have flourished from it.

古文：眷言八政，致兹千亩，公卿百辟，恪恭其仪，九推毕礼，馨香靡替。
现代文：回顾八种政事，实行藉田，公卿百官，恭敬执行礼仪，九次拨土的礼仪完毕，祭品不断。
English: Review the eight kinds of government affairs, implement the loan of fields, nobles and officials, respectfully implement the etiquette, the nine times of earth-pouring ceremony has been completed, and the offerings continue.

古文：兼以风云叶律，气象光华，属览休辰，思加奖劝。
现代文：加上风调雨顺，气象万千，恰逢看到造美好的时刻，思虑加以奖赏激励。
English: In addition, the wind and rain are good, the weather is perfect, and it is a good time to see and create, and to reward and encourage.

古文：可班下远近，广辟良畴，公私畎亩，务尽地利。
现代文：可颁布各地，广泛开辟良田，公私土地，务必尽收土地效益。
English: It can be promulgated all over the country to widely open up good fields, public and private land, and must make full use of land benefits.

古文：若欲附农，而粮种有乏，亦加贷恤，每使优遍。
现代文：如果有要归农而粮食种子缺乏的，也加以借贷抚恤，务使优厚周到。
English: If there are grain seeds that need to be returned to farmers but are in short supply, loans and subsidies should also be provided, so that they are generous and thoughtful.

古文：孝悌力田赐爵一级。
现代文：对任孝悌力田的农官赐爵一级。
English: An agrarian official who was appointed as a filial piety force field was awarded a first-class knighthood.

古文：预耕之司，克日劳酒。 
现代文：参与耕种的有关官员，选定时间设酒席慰劳。 
English: Relevant officials involved in farming will set up a banquet at a selected time.

古文：三月壬寅，以镇右将军豫章王综为平北将军、南兗州刺史。
现代文：三月壬寅，任命镇右将军豫章王萧综为平北将军、南兖州刺史。
English: In March, Jinyin appointed Zhenyu General Yu Zhang Wang Xiaoshu as the general of Pingbei and the governor of Nanluozhou.

古文：六月乙丑，分益州置信州，分交州置爱州，分广州置成州、南定州、合州、建州，分霍州置义州。
现代文：六月乙丑，分割益州设置信州，分割交州设置爱州，分割广州设置成州、南定州、合州、建州，分割霍州设置义州。
English: In June, Yizhou was divided into Shinshou, Jiaozhou was divided into Aizhou, Guangzhou was divided into Chengzhou, Nandingzhou, Hezhou and Jianzhou, and Huzhou was divided into Yizhou.

古文：秋八月丁卯，老人星见。
现代文：秋八月丁卯，老人星出现。
English: In the autumn and August, the elderly star appears.

古文：冬十月庚午，以中书监、中卫将军袁昂为尚书令，即本号开府仪同三司。
现代文：冬十月庚午，任命中书监、中卫将军袁昂为尚书令，就以本号开府仪同三司。
English: On the afternoon of the winter of October, Yuan Ang, the Central Book Supervisor and the General of the Middle Guard, was appointed as the General Secretary of the Central Book Supervision and the General Secretary of the Central Book Supervision and the General Secretary of the Central Book Supervision and the General of the Middle Guard.

古文：己卯，护军将军昌义之卒。
现代文：己卯，护军将军昌义之去世。
English: At the same time, the escorting general, Masayoshi, passed away.

古文：十一月癸未朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十一月癸未初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of November, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：太白昼见。
现代文：太白星白天出现。
English: Too white Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：甲辰，尚书左仆射王暕卒。
现代文：甲辰，尚书左仆射王陈去世。
English: Jia Chen, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Sha Wang Chen passed away.

古文：十二月戊午，始铸铁钱。
现代文：十二二月戊午，开始铸造铁钱。
English: At noon on February 12, the minting of iron money began.

古文：狼牙脩国遣使献方物。
现代文：狼牙脩国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: China sends envoys to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：五年春正月，以左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司南平王伟为镇卫大将军，改领右光禄大夫，仪同三司如故。
现代文：五年春正月，任命左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司南平王萧伟为镇卫大将军，改为兼右光禄大夫，仪同三司照旧。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fifth year, Xiao Wei, the left Guanglu doctor, Kaifu ceremony and three departments of Nanping Wang, was appointed as the general of the garrison, and was also changed to the right Guanglu doctor, and the ceremony and three departments remained the same.

古文：征西将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史鄱阳王恢进号骠骑大将军。
现代文：征西将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史鄱阳王萧恢升军号为骠骑大将军。
English: General of the Western Conquest, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, Jing Zhou Zishi, King of Shenyang Xiao Gui Sheng, his military title was General of the Horse Cavalry.

古文：太府卿夏侯亶为中护军。
现代文：太府卿夏侯宜担任中护军。
English: Tai Fuqing Xia Houyi served as the middle guard.

古文：右光禄大夫王份为左光禄大夫，加特进。
现代文：右光禄大夫王份担任左光禄大夫，加授特进。
English: Dr. Wang of the Right Guanglu served as Dr. Wang of the Left Guanglu, and received a special promotion.

古文：辛卯，平北将军、南兗州刺史豫章王综进号镇北将军。
现代文：辛卯，平北将军、南兖州刺史豫章王萧综升军号为镇北将军。
English: Xinwu, the general of Pingbei, Nanxizhou, Zhishi, Yuzhang, Wang Xiao, the general of Zhenbei.

古文：平西将军、雍州刺史晋安王纲进号安北将军。
现代文：平西将军、雍州刺史晋安王萧纲升军号为安北将军。
English: The general of Pingxi, the king of Yongzhou, the prince of Jinan, the king of Xiao Gang, the general of Anbei.

古文：二月庚午，特进、左光禄大夫王份卒。
现代文：二月庚午，特进、左光禄大夫王份去世。
English: On the afternoon of the second day of the second month of the year, Dr. Wang Ben, a doctor of Tetsujin and Sakoroku, passed away.

古文：丁丑，老人星见。
现代文：丁丑。老人星出现。
English: Ding ugly. Old man star appears.

古文：三月甲戌，分扬州、江州置东扬州。
现代文：三月甲戊，分割扰业、辽业设置束扬州。
English: In March, Jiawu was divided, and Liaoye was set up in Yangzhou.

古文：夏四月乙未，以云麾将军南康王绩为江州刺史。
现代文：夏四月乙未，任命云麾将军南康王萧绩为江州刺史。
English: In April of the same year, he appointed the general of Yunnan Province, Nankang Wang Xiaodi, as the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：六月乙酉，龙斗于曲阿王陂，因西行至建陵城。
现代文：六月乙酉，龙在曲阿的王陂相斗，随之向西行走到建陵城。
English: In June, dragons fought with each other in the royal city of Qu'a, and then moved westward to Jianling City.

古文：所经处树木倒折，开地数十丈。
现代文：所经过的地方树木倒地折断，大地裂开几十丈。
English: Where it passed, trees fell to the ground and broke, cracking the earth by dozens of feet.

古文：戊子，以会稽太守武陵王纪为东扬州刺史。
现代文：戊子。任命会稽太守武陵王萧纪为束扬州刺史。
English: Boshi. Yangzhou's history is marked by the appointment of Wuling Wang Xiaoji, the procurator-general of the Appointment Committee.

古文：庚子，以员外散骑常侍元树为平北将军、北青、兗二州刺史，率众北伐。
现代文：庚子，任命员外散骑常侍元树为平北将军、北青兖二州刺史，率领军队向北征伐。
English: Geng Zi appointed his non-commissioned officer and riding companion, Geng Shu, to be the general of the North, and the North Qing Dynasty to be the governor of the two states, and led the army to the north.

古文：秋七月辛未，赐北讨义客位一阶。
现代文：秋七月辛未，赏赐向北征讨的外族义士官位一级。
English: In the autumn and July of Xinwei, he was awarded the rank of first-class foreign volunteer officer for the Northern Expedition.

古文：八月庚寅，徐州刺史成景隽克魏童栈。
现代文：八月庚寅，徐州刺史成景隽攻克魏国童城。
English: In August, Geng Yin and Xuzhou assassinated Shih Chengjing and captured Wei Tongcheng.

古文：九月戊申，又克睢陵城。
现代文：九月戊申，又攻克雎座球。
English: In September, Wushin won the championship again.

古文：戊午，北兗州刺史赵景悦围荆山。
现代文：戊午，韭查姐刺史赵墓嚏包围趔山。
English: In the afternoon, Zhaozhou's sister, Zhaozhou Zhaozhou, surrounded Lushan.

古文：壬戌，宣毅将军裴邃袭寿阳，入罗城，弗克。
现代文：壬戌，宣毅将军墓邃袭击蠢肠，进入外城，没有攻克。
English: In Nyingchi, General Xuan Yi's tomb raiders attacked Juche and entered the outer city, but failed to conquer it.

古文：冬十月戊寅，裴邃、元树攻魏建陵城，破之。
现代文：冬十月戊寅，裴邃、元树攻打魏国建陵城，攻下来了。
English: In winter and October, Wu Yin, Pei Xuan, and Yuan Shu attacked Wei Guo Jianling City and conquered it.

古文：辛巳，又破曲木。
现代文：辛巳，又攻下曲木。
English: Soon after, Kuraki was captured again.

古文：扫虏将军彭宝孙克琅邪。
现代文：扫虏将军彭实孙攻克琅邪。
English: The sweeping general Peng Shisun conquered the evil.

古文：甲申，又克檀丘城。
现代文：甲申，又攻克檀丘城。
English: Jiaxing, and conquered Dangqiu City.

古文：辛卯，裴邃破狄城。
现代文：辛卯，裴邃攻下狄城。
English: Xinwu, Pei Yao captured Di City.

古文：丙申，又克甓城，遂进屯黎浆。
现代文：丙申，又攻克甓城，于是进军驻守黎浆。
English: Bishen, also conquered Licheng, and then marched to garrison Li Li.

古文：壬寅，魏东海太守韦敬欣以司吾城降。
现代文：壬寅，魏国东海太守韦敬欣献出司吾城投降。
English: In Ren'in, Wei Jingxin, the governor of the East Sea of Wei, surrendered Shigu City.

古文：定远将军太守曹世宗破魏曲阳城。
现代文：定远将军口口太守曹世宗攻下魏国曲阳城。
English: Cao Shizong, the warlord of the Qing Dynasty, captured the city of Quyang in Wei.

古文：甲辰，又克秦墟。
现代文：甲辰，又攻克秦墟。
English: Jiachen, and conquered Qinhuangdao.

古文：魏郿、潘溪守悉皆弃城走。
现代文：魏国郡城、潘溪的守军都放弃城池逃跑。
English: The defenders of Wei County Town and Panxi abandoned the city and fled.

古文：十一月丙辰，彭宝孙克东莞城。
现代文：十一月丙辰，彭宝孙攻克东莞城。
English: In November, Peng Baosun conquered Dongguan City.

古文：壬戌，裴邃攻寿阳之安城，克之。丙寅，魏马头、安城并来降。
现代文：壬戌，裴邃攻打寿阳的安城，丙寅，魏国马头、安城的军队都前来投降。
English: The armies of Ren Zheng, Pei Zheng attacking Shouyang's Ancheng, He Yin, Wei Ma Tou, and Ancheng all came to surrender.

古文：十二月戊寅，魏荆山城降。
现代文：十二月戊寅，魏国荆山城投降。
English: In December, Wuyin, Jingshan City of Wei surrendered.

古文：乙巳，武勇将军李国兴攻平静关，克之。
现代文：乙巳，武勇将军李国兴攻打平静关，攻克。
English: Suddenly, the brave general Li Guoxing attacked the calm pass and conquered it.

古文：辛丑，信威长史杨法乾攻武阳关；壬寅，攻岘关：并克之。
现代文：辛丑，信威长史杨法干攻打武阳关；壬寅，攻打岘关。都攻克。
English: Xinxiu, trusted by Chang Shiyang, attacked Wuyang Pass; Ren Yin, attacked Shaoguan. Both were conquered.

古文：六年春正月丙午，安北将军晋安王纲遣长史柳津破魏南乡郡，司马董当门破魏晋城。
现代文：六年春正月丙午，安北将军晋安王萧纲派遣长史柳津攻下魏国的南乡郡，司马董当门攻下魏国的晋城。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of spring in the sixth year, the Anbei general Jin An Wang Xiao Gang sent the commander Shi Liuzin to conquer the Nanxiang County of Wei, and Sima Dong Dangmen conquered the Jincheng of Wei.

古文：庚戌，又破马圈、彫阳二城。
现代文：庚戌，又攻下马圈、雕阳二城。
English: Geng Yao also captured Ma Hui and Jieyang Second City.

古文：辛亥，舆驾亲祠南郊，大赦天下。
现代文：辛亥，皇帝亲自祭祀南郊，大赦天下。
English: Xinhai, the emperor personally sacrificed the southern suburbs, and pardoned the world.

古文：庚申，魏镇东将军、徐州刺史元法僧以彭城内附。
现代文：庚申魏国镇束将军、徐州刺史元法僧献出彭城归附。
English: Gen. Gaoshen Zhenzhu of Wei and Xuzhou Zhi Yuan, a Buddhist monk, donated and annexed Pengcheng.

古文：己巳，雍州前军克魏新蔡郡。
现代文：己巳，雍州先头部队攻克魏国的新蔡郡。
English: At this time, the Yongzhou vanguard army invaded Xin Cai County in Wei.

古文：诏曰： 庙谟已定，王略方举。
现代文：诏令说： 朝廷大计已经决定，对外攻取将要进行。
English: The imperial edict said: The general plan of the imperial court has been decided, and the external attack will be carried out.

古文：侍中、领军将军西昌侯渊藻，可便亲戎，以前启行；镇北将军、南兗州刺史豫章王综董驭雄桀，风驰次迈；其余众军，计日差遣，初中后师，善得严办。
现代文：侍中、领军将军西昌侯渊藻，可亲自出征，做前锋先出动；镇北将军、南兖州刺史豫章王萧综统领豪杰，风驰电掣般地跟进；其余各军，商定时间派遣。
English: Xichang Houyuanmao, the attendant and leading general of the army, can personally go to the front and be the first to go out; Zhenbei General, Nanluozhou Zhishi Yuzhang Wang Xiao, the leader of the heroic general, will follow up like a whirlwind; the remaining armies will be dispatched at an agreed time.

古文：朕当六军云动，龙舟济江。 
现代文：前锋、居中的部队和后续部队，妥善地加以部署。我将率六军如云彩翻滚，乘龙船渡过长江。 
English: The forward, middle and follow-up troops should be properly deployed. I will lead the six armies to roll like clouds and cross the Yangtze River by dragon boat.

古文：癸酉，克魏郑城。
现代文：癸酉，攻克魏国的郑城。
English: , conquered Zhengcheng of Wei.

古文：甲戌，以魏镇东将军、徐州刺史元法僧为司空。
现代文：甲戌，任命原魏国镇束将军、徐州刺史元法僧为司空。
English: Jia Jun, appointed the former Wei Zhenzhu general and Xuzhou Jishi Yuan monk as the secretary.

古文：二月丁丑，老人星见。
现代文：二月丁丑，老人星出现。
English: February ding ugly, old man star appears.

古文：庚辰，南徐州刺史庐陵王续还朝，禀承戎略。
现代文：庚辰，南徐州刺史庐陵王萧续回到朝廷，禀受军事策略。
English: Geng Chen, the southern Xuzhou ruler, returned to the imperial court in succession, and was guided by military strategy.

古文：乙未，赵景悦下魏龙亢城。
现代文：乙未，趟景悦攻下魏国的龙亢城。
English: In the second half of the year, Jing Yue captured Longyu City in Wei.

古文：三月丙午，岁星见南斗。
现代文：三月丙午，岁星出现在南斗。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of March, the year star appeared in the Southern Cross.

古文：赐新附民长复除，应诸罪失，一无所问。
现代文：赏赐新归附的民众长久免除赋税，所有罪过一概不予以追究。
English: The newly annexed people will be granted a long-term tax exemption, and all crimes will not be prosecuted.

古文：己酉，行幸白下城，履行六军顿所。
现代文：己酉，皇帝前往白下城，巡视六军驻扎之处。
English: On his return, the emperor went to Baixia Town to inspect the Six Army's garrison.

古文：乙丑，镇北将军、南兗州刺史豫章王综权顿彭城，总督众军，并摄徐州府事。
现代文：乙丑，镇北将军、南兖州刺史豫章王萧综暂且驻扎在彭城，总领各军，并代理徐州府中事务。
English: B. Ugly, Zhenbei General, Nanxizhou Zhishi, Yuzhang Wang, Xiao Simi were temporarily stationed in Pengcheng, leading the armies, and acting for Xuzhou Fuzhong affairs.

古文：己巳，以魏假平东将军元景隆为衡州刺史，魏征虏将军元景仲为广州刺史。
现代文：己巳，任命原魏国暂署平东将军元景隆为衡州刺史，原魏国征虏将军元景仲为广州刺史。
English: At the same time, the former Wei State temporarily appointed the Pingdong General Yuan Jinglong as the Hengzhou Consul, and the former Wei State Conscript General Yuan Jingzhong as the Guangzhou Consul.

古文：夏五月己酉，筑宿预堰，又修曹公堰于济阴。
现代文：夏五月己酉，修筑宿预堰，又在济阴修筑曹公堰。
English: In the summer and May, the construction of the Shuku Weir was carried out in Jiading, and the construction of the Cao Gong Weir was carried out in Jilin.

古文：太白昼见。
现代文：太白金星在白天出现。
English: Too white Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：壬子，遣中护军夏侯亶督寿阳诸军事，北伐。
现代文：壬子，派遣中护军夏侯宣统领寿阳各军事务，向北征伐。
English: Jinsi dispatched the middle protector Xia Hou Xuan to lead the affairs of the Shouyang armies and march northward.

古文：六月庚辰，豫章王综奔于魏，魏复据彭城。
现代文：六月庚辰，豫章王萧综投奔魏国，魏国又占据彭城。
English: In June, Geng Chen, Yu Zhang, Wang Xiao and others went to Wei, and Wei occupied Pengcheng.

古文：秋七月壬戌，大赦天下。
现代文：秋七月壬戌，大赦天下。
English: In autumn and July, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：八月丙子，以散骑常侍曹仲宗兼领军。
现代文：八月丙子，任命散骑常侍曹仲宗兼任领军将军。
English: In August, Cixi appointed the horseback cavalryman Cao Zhongzong as the leading general.

古文：壬午，老人星见。
现代文：壬午，老人星出现。
English: At noon, the old man appeared.

古文：十二月戊子，邵陵王纶有罪，免官，削爵土。
现代文：十二月戊子，邵陵王萧纶犯罪，被免除官职，削夺爵位封邑。
English: In December, Wu Zi, Shao Ling Wang Xiao Wei committed a crime, was removed from office, stripped of his title and fief.

古文：壬辰，京师地震。
现代文：壬辰，京城发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in Imjin, Kyoto.

古文：七年春正月辛丑朔，赦殊死以下。
现代文：七年春正月辛丑初一，赦免死罪以下的囚徒。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of Spring, prisoners with less than capital punishment were pardoned.

古文：丁卯，滑国遣使献方物。
现代文：丁卯，滑国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: Dingwu, the state of Nanning sent an envoy to pay tribute to the local specialty.

古文：二月甲戌，北伐众军解严。
现代文：二月甲戌，向北征伐的各军解除戒严。
English: In February, the martial law was lifted for all the armies marching to the north.

古文：河南遣使献方物。
现代文：河南王派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: The king of Henan sent an envoy to pay tribute to the local specialties.

古文：丁亥，老人星见。
现代文：丁亥，老人星出现。
English: Dinghai, the old man star appears.

古文：三月乙卯，高丽国遣使献方物。
现代文：三月乙卯，高丽国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: On the second day of March, Korea sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：夏四月乙酉，太尉临川王宏薨。
现代文：夏四月乙酉，太尉临!王萧宏逝世。
English: In the summer of April, Wang Xiaohong passed away.

古文：南州津改置校尉，增加俸秩。
现代文：南州津改设校尉，增加俸禄品级。
English: Nanshujin was reclassified as a school captain, and the salary grade was increased.

古文：诏在位群臣，各举所知，凡是清吏，咸使荐闻，州年举二人，大郡一人。
现代文：韶令在任的群臣，各自推荐所熟悉的人才，凡是清廉的吏员，都使他们被上奏推荐，每州一年推荐二人，大郡一年推荐一人。
English: The emperor ordered the ministers in office to recommend the talents they were familiar with, and all the officials who were clean were recommended. Two people were recommended in each state and one person was recommended in each large county.

古文：六月己卯，林邑国遣使献方物。
现代文：六月己卯，林邑国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: In June, Lin County sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：秋九月己酉，骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史鄱阳王恢薨。
现代文：秋九月己酉，骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史鄱阳王萧恢逝世。
English: In the autumn and September of the same year, the general of the imperial cavalry, the general of the imperial cavalry and the three departments of the imperial cavalry, the general of the imperial cavalry and the three departments of the imperial cavalry, the general of the imperial cavalry and the three departments of the imperial cavalry, the general of the imperial cavalry and the three departments of the imperial cavalry, the general of the imperial cavalry and the three departments of the imperial cavalry, the general of the imperial cavalry and the three departments of the imperial cavalry, the general of the imperial cavalry and the three departments of the imperial cavalry, the general of the imperial cavalry and the three departments

古文：冬十月辛未，以丹阳尹、湘东王绎为荆州刺史。
现代文：冬十月辛未，任命丹阳尹湘东王萧绎为荆州刺史。
English: In the winter of October, Danyang Yin Xiang Dong Wang Xiaoyuan was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：十一月庚辰，大赦天下。
现代文：十一月庚辰，大赦天下。
English: In November, Geng Chen was pardoned.

古文：是日，丁贵嫔薨。
现代文：逭天，丁贵嫔逝世。
English: On the same day, Ding Guixuan passed away.

古文：辛巳，夏侯亶、胡龙牙、元树、曹世宗等众军克寿阳城。
现代文：辛巳，夏侯直、胡龙牙、元树、曹世宗等各军攻克寿阳城。
English: Soon after, Xia Hou Zhi, Hu Long Ya, Yuan Shu, Cao Shizong and other armies conquered Shouyang City.

古文：丁亥，放魏扬州刺史李宪还北。
现代文：丁亥，释放魏国扬州刺史李宪回到北方。
English: Dinghai, release Wei's Yangzhou assassin Li Xian and return to the north.

古文：以寿阳置豫州，合肥改为南豫州。
现代文：以寿阳设置豫州，合肥改为南豫州。
English: Shouyang was set as Yuzhou, and Hefei was changed to South Yuzhou.

古文：以中护军夏侯亶为豫、南豫二州刺史。
现代文：任命中护军夏侯宜为豫、南豫二州刺史。
English: Xia Houyi was appointed as the Central Military Governor of Henan Province, and the Southern Military Governor of Henan Province was appointed as the Second Military Governor of Henan.

古文：平西将军、郢州刺史元树进号安西将军。
现代文：平西将军、墨州刺史丞塑升军号为安西将军。
English: General Pingxi, Muzhou Zhi Shizhen, Shaosheng's military title is General Anxi.

古文：魏新野太守以郡降。
现代文：秀困的逝野太守献出郡城投降。
English: The dour-faced late governor of Ono surrenders the county seat.

古文：大通元年春正月乙丑，以尚书左仆射徐勉为尚书仆射、中卫将军。
现代文：太通元年春正月乙丑，任命尚书左仆射迤为尚书仆射、中卫将军。
English: On the second day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Taitong, he appointed Shang Shuxu's left-hand servant Shao Wei as Shang Shuxu's left-hand servant Shao Wei, the general of the middle guard.

古文：诏曰： 朕思利兆民，惟日不足，气象环回，每弘优简。
现代文：韶令说： 我思虑有利于民众，每日尽力还嫌不够，岁月往复，常常刻意优待简易之举。
English: The imperial edict said: My thoughts are for the benefit of the people, daily efforts are not enough, the years go back and forth, and I often deliberately give preferential treatment to simple actions.

古文：百官俸禄，本有定数，前代以来，皆多评准，顷者因循，未遑改革。
现代文：百官的俸禄，本有固定数额，前代以来，多次评定核准，近来因袭旧例，没来得及改变。
English: Since the previous generation, the salary of centaurs has been a fixed amount and has been evaluated and approved many times. Recently, because of the old practice, it has not had time to change.

古文：自今已后，可长给见钱，依时即出，勿令逋缓。
现代文：从现在以后，可长期发给现钱，按时即出，不使拖欠发生。
English: From now on, cash can be issued for a long time, and it can be issued on time without causing arrears.

古文：凡散失官物，不问多少，并从原宥。
现代文：凡是散失的官府物资的错误，不管多少，都加以宽恕。
English: Any mistakes in the distribution of lost government materials, no matter how small, will be forgiven.

古文：惟事涉军储，取公私见物，不在此例。 
现代文：不过事情涉及军事储备，取用公私现有物资的，不在这一条例内。 
English: However, the matter involves military reserves, and the use of public and private existing materials is not included in this regulation.

古文：辛未，舆驾亲祠南郊。诏曰： 奉时昭事，虔荐苍璧，思承天德，惠此下民。
现代文：辛未，皇帝亲自祭祀南郊诏令说： 敬奉时令昭示礼仪，虔诚奉上青黑色的玉璧，思虑秉承上天德行，施惠天下民众。
English: Xinwei, the emperor personally dedicated the southern suburb of the imperial edict, saying: "Worship the time to show etiquette, piously worship the blue and black jade, adhere to the heavenly virtues, and benefit the people of the world.

古文：凡因事去土，流移他境者，并听复宅业，蠲役五年。
现代文：凡因战事离开家乡，流落到其他地方的，都准许恢复住宅田产，免除五年劳役。
English: All those who left their hometowns due to the war and were displaced to other places were allowed to resume residential farming and were exempted from five years of forced labor.

古文：尤贫之家，勿收三调。
现代文：格外贫困的家庭，不征收三调。
English: Exceptionally poor families are not subject to the three-tier system.

古文：孝悌力田赐爵一级。 
现代文：对任孝悌力田的农官赐爵一级。 
English: An agrarian official who was appointed as a filial piety force field was awarded a first-class knighthood.

古文：是月，司州刺史夏侯夔进军三关，所至皆克。
现代文：这月，司州刺史夏侯夔进军到三关，所到之处都攻克。
English: In this month, Shizhou Zhangshi Xia Houyi marched into the Three Passes, conquering everywhere he went.

古文：三月辛未，舆驾幸同泰寺舍身。甲戌，还宫，赦天下，改元。
现代文：三月辛未，皇帝前往同泰寺舍身甲戌，回到宫中，大赦天下，改年号。
English: In late March, the emperor went to the Dongtai Temple to lay down his armor, returned to the palace, pardoned the world, and changed the year.

古文：以左卫将军萧渊藻为中护军。
现代文：任命左卫将军萧渊遵为中护军。
English: He appointed General of the Left Division Xiao Yuan Zun as the middle guard.

古文：林邑、师子国各遣使献方物。
现代文：垫垦、鳄王厘各自派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: Mat and crocodile Wangli each sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：夏五月丙寅，成景隽克魏临潼竹邑。
现代文：夏五月丙寅，成景隽攻克魏国的临潼、竹垦。
English: In the summer and May, Cui Yin and Cheng Jing Yi conquered Linyi and Zhubei in Wei.

古文：秋八月壬辰，老人星见。
现代文：秋八月壬辰，老人星出现。
English: In autumn and August, the elderly star appears.

古文：冬十月庚戌，魏东豫州刺史元庆和以涡阳内属。
现代文：冬十月庚戌，魏国束豫州刺史元庆和献出涡阳归附。
English: In the winter of October, Geng Zang, Wei Guozhong, Yu Zhou, Zi Shi, Yuan Qinghe, and Wuyang were annexed.

古文：甲寅，曲赦东豫州。
现代文：甲寅，赦免东豫州囚徒。
English: Jia Yin pardoned the prisoners in East Henan Province.

古文：十一月丁卯，以中护军萧渊藻为北讨都督、征北大将军，镇涡阳。
现代文：十一月丁卯，任命中护军萧渊藻为北讨都督、征北大将军，镇守涡阳。
English: In November of Dingwu, Xiao Yuanmao, the middle guard, was appointed the governor of the Northern Expedition, the general of the Northern Expedition, and the town guard of Wuruyang.

古文：戊辰，加尚书令、中卫将军、开府仪同三司袁昂中书监。
现代文：戊辰，加授尚书令、中卫将军、开府仪同三司袁昂为中书监。
English: Wu Chen, Shang Shuling, Zhongwei General, Kaifu Yi and Yuan Ang, the Third Secretary, were awarded the title of Central Supervisor.

古文：以涡阳置西徐州。
现代文：在过盐设置西徐州。
English: In the over-salt setting west of Xuzhou.

古文：高丽国遣使献方物。
现代文：高丽国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: Koryo dispatches envoys to offer tribute to local specialties.

古文：二年春正月庚申，司空元法僧以本官领中军将军。
现代文：二年春正月庚申，司空元法僧以本来官职兼任中军将军。
English: In Goshun, the first month of the second year of the Spring, Siku, a former Buddhist monk, assumed his official position as a general of the Chinese army.

古文：中书监、尚书令、中卫将军、开府仪同三司袁昂进号中抚大将军。
现代文：中书监、尚书令、中卫将军、开府仪同三司直显升军号为中抚大将军。
English: The chief librarian, the deputy chief librarian, the general of the middle guards, the keeper of the imperial residences, and the three officers were promoted to the rank of general of the middle guards.

古文：卫尉卿萧昂为中领军。
现代文：卫尉卿盖昂担任中领军。
English: Lieutenant-Commander Guyon served as the middle leader.

古文：乙酉，芮芮国遣使献方物。
现代文：乙酉，芮芮国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: Acetic anhydride, a local specialty, was sent as a tribute by envoys from the State of Min.

古文：二月甲午，老人星见。
现代文：二月甲午，老人星出现。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of February, the elderly star appeared.

古文：是月，筑寒山堰。
现代文：这月，修筑寒山埋。
English: This month, build a cold mountain and bury it.

古文：三月壬戌，以江州刺史南康王绩为安右将军。
现代文：三月壬戊，任命江州刺史南康王萧绩为安右将军。
English: In March, the governor of Jiangsu Province, Nankang Wang Xiao, was appointed General An Yu.

古文：夏四月辛丑，魏郢州刺史元愿达以义阳内附，置北司州。
现代文：夏四月辛丑，馥凰坚刺史五题达献出盏阳归附，设置北司州。
English: The summer and April were harsh and ugly, and the five questions of the history of the Zhenhuangjian stabbing reached the dedication of the Zhenyang annexation, setting up the North Sichuan.

古文：时魏大乱，其北海王元颢、临淮王元彧、汝南王元悦并来奔；其北青州刺史元世隽、南荆州刺史李志亦以地降。
现代文：当时龚厘政局大乱，他们的北海王豆题、堕进王五盛、达瘤匡远坦都前来投奔；他们的韭卖业刺史五型蛊、尘塑幽刺史奎尽也献出土地投降。
English: At that time, the political situation in Bali was in a turmoil. Their Beihai Wang Douzhi, Cangjin Wang Wusheng, and Dazhou Kuangyuan all came to flee; their broomsticks selling industry, Zushi Five-Type Broom, and Dust and Plastic Yuzushi Shuiqui also offered land and surrendered.

古文：六月丁亥，魏临淮王元彧求还本国，许之。
现代文：六月丁亥，魏国临淮王元或请求回到本国，准许了他的请求。
English: In June of Dinghai, Wei Guo Lin Huai Wangyuan requested to return to his home country, and his request was granted.

古文：冬十月丁亥，以魏北海王元颢为魏主，遣东宫直阁将军陈庆之卫送还北。
现代文：冬十月丁亥，委任魏国北海王元颢为魏主，派遣束宫直合将军陈庆之护送他回到北方。
English: In the winter of October of Dinghai, he appointed Wei Beihai Wang Yuanxuan as the ruler of Wei, and dispatched General Chen Qingzhi to escort him back to the north.

古文：魏豫州刺史邓献以地内属。
现代文：魏国的豫州刺史邓献献出土地归附。
English: The land donated by Emperor Deng Xizhi of the State of Wei to the State of Yuzhou was annexed.

古文：中大通元年正月辛酉，舆驾亲祠南郊，大赦天下，孝悌力田赐爵一级。
现代文：中大通元年正月辛酉，皇帝亲自祭祀南郊，大赦天下，对任孝悌力田的农官赐爵位一级。
English: In the first month of the first year of the year, the emperor personally offered sacrifices to the southern suburbs, pardoned the world, and gave a first-class knighthood to the peasant officials who were appointed to filial piety.

古文：甲子，魏汝南王元悦求还本国，许之。
现代文：甲子，魏国汝南王元悦请求回到本国，准许了他的请求。
English: At the request of King Yuan Rong of the Southern Ruins of Wei, he was allowed to return to his country.

古文：辛巳，舆驾亲祠明堂。
现代文：辛巳，皇帝亲自祭祀明堂。
English: Soon, the emperor himself came to Myeongdong to offer the sacrifice.

古文：二月甲申，以丹阳尹武陵王纪为江州刺史。
现代文：二月甲申，任命丹阳尹武陵王萧纪为江州刺史。
English: In February of Jiaxun, Danyang Yin Wuling Wang Xiao Ji was appointed as the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：辛丑，芮芮国遣使献方物。
现代文：辛丑，芮芮国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: Xinxiu, Shan State sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：三月丙辰，以河南王阿罗真为宁西将军、西秦、河沙三州刺史。
现代文：三月丙辰，任命河南王阿罗真为宁西将军、酉台回沙三州刺史。
English: In March, Henan King Arozhen was appointed as the general of Ningxi, and Xingtai returned to Shasanzhou to make history.

古文：庚辰，以中护军萧渊藻为中权将军。
现代文：庚辰，任命中护军芦遄莲为中权将军。
English: Geng Chen, appointed the middle protection force, Lv Yulian, as the middle power general.

古文：夏四月癸未，以安右将军南康王绩为护军将军。
现代文：夏四月癸未，任命安右将军南康王萧续为护军将军。
English: In the late summer of April, An Yu's general Nan Kang Wang Xiao Jie was appointed as the escort general.

古文：癸巳，陈庆之攻魏梁城，拔之，进屠考城，擒魏济阴王元晖业。
现代文：癸巳，陈庆之攻打魏国的梁城，攻下来了；进军屠灭考城，擒获魏国济阴王元晖业。
English: At this time, Chen Qingzhi attacked Liangcheng in Wei and was defeated; he marched into the slaughter of Kaocheng and captured the Wei King Zhiyin.

古文：五月戊辰，克大梁。
现代文：五月戊辰，攻克大梁。
English: May Boshen, conquer the girders.

古文：癸酉，克虎牢城。
现代文：癸酉，攻克虎牢城。
English: , to conquer the Tiger's Stronghold.

古文：魏主元子攸弃洛阳，走河北。
现代文：墓主元子攸放弃盗堡，逃到迥韭。
English: The owner of the tomb, Motoko You, gave up stealing the castle and fled to Tsune.

古文：乙亥，元颢入洛阳。
现代文：乙亥，五题进入荡荡。
English: In the second year of the Chinese lunar calendar, the five questions enter the swing.

古文：六月壬午，大赦天下。
现代文：六月壬午，大赦天下。
English: At noon of June, the general amnesty came into effect.

古文：辛亥，魏淮阴太守晋鸿以湖阳城内属。
现代文：辛亥，魏国淮阴太守晋鸿献出湖阳城归附。
English: In Xinhai, the Huaiyin Emperor of Wei State, Jin Hong, offered to annex Hoyang City.

古文：闰月己未，安右将军、护军南康王绩薨。
现代文：闰月己未，安右将军、护军南康王萧绩逝世。
English: Before the intercalary month, General An Yu and the bodyguard Nan Kang Wang Xiao Bi passed away.

古文：己卯，魏尔硃荣攻杀元颢，复据洛阳。
现代文：己卯，魏国人尔朱荣攻打并杀死元颢，又占据洛阳。
English: Zhu Rong of Wei attacked and killed Yuan Shao and occupied Luoyang.

古文：秋九月辛巳，硃雀航华表灾。
现代文：秋九月辛巳，朱雀航的华表遭到损害。
English: In the autumn and September, Zhu Qiaohang's watch was damaged.

古文：以安北将军羊侃为青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：任命安北将军羊侃为青、冀二州刺史。
English: Anbei General Yang Kan was appointed as the general of Anbei, and the general of Hebei and Shandong was appointed as the general of Shandong.

古文：癸巳，舆驾幸同泰寺，设四部无遮大会，因舍身，公卿以下，以钱一亿万奉赎。
现代文：癸巳，皇帝前往同泰寺，举行四部无遮大法会，随之舍身入寺，公卿以下官员，用钱一亿万文赎回。
English: Soon after, the emperor went to the Dongtai Temple, held four sessions of the Great Indiscriminate Puja, and then went to the temple, and officials from the nobility on down redeemed one billion mon in money.

古文：冬十月己酉，舆驾还宫，大赦，改元。
现代文：冬十月己酉，皇帝回宫，大赦天下，改年号。
English: In winter and October, the emperor returned to the palace, pardoned the world, and changed the year.

古文：十一月丙戌，加中抚大将军、开府仪同三司袁昂中书监。
现代文：十一月丙戌，加授中抚大将军、开府仪同三司室显为中书监。
English: In November of the same year, he was awarded the title of General of the Central Office of the Central Government, and was appointed as the Supervisor of the Central Library.

古文：加镇卫大将军、开府仪同三司南平王伟太子少傅。
现代文：加授镇卫大将军、开府仪同三司宜垩王芦伟为太子少傅。
English: He was additionally awarded the title of Zhenwei Grand General, the title of Kaifu, and the title of Sanzhi Yigong Wang Lu Wei as the youngest prince.

古文：加金紫光禄大夫萧琛、陆杲并特进。
现代文：加授金紫光禄大夫芦拯、堕基都为特进。
English: Dr. Ziguanglu Lu Zheng, who was awarded the gold medal, and Mr. Zou Ji, who was awarded the gold medal, were both promoted.

古文：司空、中军将军元法僧进号车骑将军。
现代文：司空、中军将军五迭增升军号为车骑将军。
English: Siku and the five generals of the Chinese army were promoted to the rank of cavalry general.

古文：中权将军萧渊藻为中护军将军。
现代文：中权将军萧渊藻担任中护军将军。
English: Zhongquan General Xiao Yuanmao served as the general of the Middle Protection Force.

古文：中领军萧昂为领军将军。
现代文：中领军芦显担任领军将军。
English: The leader of the middle army, Lu Xian, served as the leading general.

古文：戊子，魏巴州刺史严始欣以城降。
现代文：戊子，麸玺旦业刺史壁盘巫献出城池投降。
English: Wanzi, Wotan industry stabbed history wall pan witch presented the surrender of the city.

古文：十二月丁巳，盘盘国遣使献方物。
现代文：十丁巳，盘盘国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: Ten minutes later, the country of Pan Pan sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：二年春正月戊寅，以雍州刺史晋安王纲为骠骑大将军、扬州刺史，南徐州刺史庐陵王续为平北将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：二年春正月戊寅，任命壅刺史置宝王蕉面为骠骑大将军、挝塑刺史，亩途刺史庐陵王萧续为平北将军、壅刺史。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, Emperor Wu of the State of Wu appointed Wang Shao-men (刺史置宝王蕉面) to be the General of the Horse Cavalry and Lao Shuxian ( Lao塑刺史) to be the General of the Horse Cavalry, and Mu Tu-shih (亩途刺史陵王萧续) to be the General of the North and the General of the Horse Cavalry.

古文：癸未，老人星见。
现代文：癸未，老人星出现。
English: In the morning, the old man appeared.

古文：夏四月庚申，大雨雹。
现代文：夏四月庚申，天下大雨和冰雹。
English: In the summer of April, heavy rain and hail fell.

古文：壬申，以河南王佛辅为宁西将军、西秦、河二州刺史。
现代文：壬申，任命回直工垡趸为宁西将军、酉台回二州刺史。
English: Jinshin, appointed back to Zhigong Zou as the general of Ningxi, Xingtai back to Erzhou Zushi.

古文：六月丁巳，遣魏太保汝南王元悦还北为魏主。
现代文：六月丁巳，派遣魏国太保汝南王元悦回到北方任魏主。
English: In June of the same year, Wang Yuan Rong, the Wei State Protector of the South, was sent back to the north to serve as the ruler of Wei.

古文：庚申，以魏尚书左仆射范遵为安北将军、司州牧，随元悦北讨。
现代文：庚申，任命羹蝈尚书左仆射莲遵为安北将军、塱牧，跟随互坦向北讨伐。
English: Goshun appointed Junnan Shangshu's left-hand man, Jialian Zun, as the general of Anbei and Dangmu, and they followed each other to fight in the north.

古文：林邑国遣使献方物。
现代文：叠垦玺派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: Send messengers to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：壬申，扶南国遣使献方物。
现代文：壬申，扶南国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: In Jinshin, Funan Province sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：秋八月庚戌，舆驾幸德阳堂，设丝竹会，祖送魏主元悦。
现代文：秋八月庚戌，皇帝到德阳堂，举行音乐会，为墓主盈区饯行。
English: In the autumn and August of Geng Zi, the emperor went to Deyang Hall, held a concert, and made a pilgrimage to Yinggu for the head of the tomb.

古文：山贼聚结，寇会稽郡所部县。
现代文：山中贼寇集结，侵犯会稽郡所辖各县。
English: Thieves and robbers gathered in the mountains and invaded the counties under the jurisdiction of the Audit Commission.

古文：九月壬午，假超武将军湛海珍节以讨之。
现代文：九月壬午，赐给超武将军湛海珍符节去讨伐山中贼寇。
English: At noon of September, the super military general Zhan Haizhen was given a festival to fight the bandits in the mountains.

古文：三年春正月辛巳，舆驾亲祠南郊，大赦天下，孝悌力田赐爵一级。
现代文：三年春正月辛巳，皇帝亲自祭祀南郊，大赦天下，对作孝悌力田的农官赐爵位一级。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year, the emperor personally sacrificed the southern suburbs, pardoned the world, and gave a first-class knighthood to the peasant officials who were filial to the peasants.

古文：丙申，以魏尚书仆射郑先护为征北大将军。
现代文：丙申，任命蕴垦尚书仆射鄞生谨为征北大将军。
English: Bishin, the appointment of Yunnan Shang's clerk Jie Shansheng as the general of the Northern Expedition.

古文：二月辛丑，舆驾亲祠明堂。
现代文：辛丑，皇帝亲自祭祀明堂。
English: It was so ugly that the emperor himself had to offer a sacrifice to the Myodo.

古文：甲寅，老人星见。
现代文：甲寅，老人星出现。
English: Kuching, the old man star appears.

古文：乙卯，特进萧琛卒。
现代文：乙卯，特进芦茎去世。
English: Otsu, a special envoy to the reed, has died.

古文：乙丑，以广州刺史元景隆为安右将军。
现代文：乙丑，任命卢业刺史五基建为安右将军。
English: Second, he appointed Lu Ye Zhishi Wujian as General An Yu.

古文：夏四月乙巳，皇太子统薨。
现代文：夏四月乙巳，皇太子萧统逝世。
English: In the summer of April, Crown Prince Xiao Tong passed away.

古文：六月丁未，以前太子詹事萧渊猷为中护军。
现代文：六月丁未，任命前太子詹事萧渊猷为中护军。
English: In June, the former crown prince Zhan Zhi Xiao Yuanjun was appointed as the middle protector.

古文：尚书仆射徐勉加特进、右光禄大夫。
现代文：尚书仆射徐勉加授特进、右光禄大夫。
English: Shang Shuxu's servant, Jie Xu Mian, was promoted to the rank of special promotion, and Uguanglu became a doctor.

古文：丹丹国遣使献方物。
现代文：丹丹玺派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: Dandan County sends envoys to offer tribute to local special products.

古文：癸丑，立昭明太子子南徐州刺史华容公欢为豫章郡王，枝江公誉为河东郡王，曲阿公察为岳阳郡王。
现代文：癸丑，立昭明太子的儿子尘途业刺史萋容公芦麸为豫章郡王，挞丝公芦誉为回塞：郡王，迪回生趸餐为岳阳郡王。
English: 丑, the son of the Crown Prince Lichao Ming, the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the

古文：秋七月乙亥，立晋安王纲为皇太子。
现代文：秋七月乙亥，立置塞王芦捆为皇太子。
English: In the autumn and July of the first year of the Heian period, King Sa and his consort were installed as crown princes.

古文：大赦天下，赐为父后者及出处忠孝文武清勤，并赐爵一级。
现代文：大赦天下，赏赐为父亲后嗣者以及处世忠诚孝顺在文武两方面清廉勤恳者，都赐爵位一级。
English: The amnesty of the world, the reward for the father's heirs and the loyalty and filial piety in the world, the integrity and diligence in the two aspects of literature and martial arts, have all been given a first-class knighthood.

古文：乙酉，以侍中、五兵尚书谢举为吏部尚书。
现代文：乙酉，任命侍中、五兵尚书谢举为吏部尚书。
English: Yixuan appointed the chamberlains and five soldiers to be promoted to the rank of officials.

古文：庚寅，诏曰： 推恩六亲，义彰九族，班以侯爵，亦曰惟允。
现代文：庚寅，韶令说： 推广恩爱到六亲，道义彰明九族，颁赐侯爵，也可以说是恰当的。
English: Geng Yin, the imperial edict said: It is appropriate to extend the grace and love to six relatives, highlight the morality of nine ethnic groups, and award the marquis.

古文：凡是宗戚有服属者，并可赐沐食乡亭侯，各随远近以为差次。
现代文：凡是宗室亲属在五服以内的，都可赐给沐食乡亭侯，各随服属亲疏为等级。
English: Any relatives of the family within the five servings can be given to the villagers, and each serving belongs to the class of relatives.

古文：其有昵亲，自依旧章。 
现代文：有亲近关系的，自然依照旧日典章。 
English: If there is a close relationship, it will naturally follow the old rules.

古文：壬辰，以吏部尚书何敬容为尚书右仆射。
现代文：壬辰，任命吏部尚书何敬容为尚书右仆射。
English: In Imjin, he appointed Shangshu He Jingrong as his right-hand man.

古文：癸巳，老人星见。
现代文：癸巳。老人星出现。
English: Suddenly, the elderly star appeared.

古文：九月庚午，以太子詹事萧渊藻为征北将军、南兗州刺史。
现代文：九月庚午，任命太子詹事萧渊藻为征北将军、南兖州刺史。
English: In the afternoon of September, Prince Zhan Zhi Xiao Yuanmao was appointed as the general of the Northern Expedition and the governor of Southern Luzhou.

古文：戊寅，狼牙脩国奉表献方物。
现代文：戊寅，狼牙脩国送呈奏表贡奉地方特产。
English: Wu Yin, wolf teeth, the country sent a song sheet tribute to local special products.

古文：冬十月己酉，行幸同泰寺，高祖升法座，为四部众说《大般若涅盘经》义，迄于乙卯。
现代文：冬十月己酉，前往同泰寺，高祖登上法座。为出家与在家的佛教弟子讲授《大般若涅盘经》的义理，直到乙卯。
English: In the winter of October, he went to Tongtai Temple, where Gao Zu ascended the Dharma throne. He taught the principles of the "Great Prajnaparamita Sutra" to ordained and lay Buddhist disciples until the age of eighteen.

古文：前乐山县侯萧正则有罪流徙，至是招诱亡命，欲寇广州，在所讨平之。
现代文：前乐山县侯萧正则犯罪被流放，到逭时招引逃亡的人，想侵犯广州，当地守军讨伐平定了他。
English: Former Leshan County Hou Xiao Zhengzhe was exiled for crime, and when he was old, he invited fugitives to invade Guangzhou, and the local defenders fought and subdued him.

古文：十一月乙未，行幸同泰寺，高祖升法座，为四部从说《摩诃般若波罗蜜经》义，讫于十二月辛丑。
现代文：十一月乙未，前往同泰寺，高祖登上法座。为出家与在家的佛教弟子讲授《摩诃般若波罗蜜经》的义理，直到十二月辛丑日。
English: In November, he went to Tongtai Temple, where Gao Zu ascended the Dharma throne. He taught the principles of the Mahāprabhu Prajnaparamita Sutra to ordained and lay Buddhist disciples until December.

古文：是岁，吴兴郡生野谷，堪食。
现代文：这年，吴兴郡长出野生谷物，能够食用。
English: This year, Wuxing County grew wild grain, which can be eaten.

古文：四年春正月丙寅朔，以镇卫大将军、开府仪同三司南平王伟进位大司马，司空元法僧进太尉，尚书令、中权大将军、开府仪同三司袁昂进位司空。
现代文：四年春正月丙寅初一，把镇卫大将军、开府仪同三司南平王盖伟升为大司马，司空元法僧升为太尉，尚书令、中抚大将军、开府仪同三司袁显升为司空。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of the Spring, he promoted General Zhenwei, General Kaifu Yi and the Third Secretary Nanping Wang Gaiwei to the rank of Major General, Siku Yuan, a Buddhist monk, to the rank of Lieutenant General, and Shang Shuling, General Zhong Fu, General Kaifu Yi and the Third Secretary Yuan Xian to the rank of Siku.

古文：立临川靖惠王宏子正德为临贺郡王。
现代文：立临川靖惠王芦塞的儿子空递为堕贺郡王。
English: The son of Lissei, the King of Linchuan and Jinghui, was crowned the King of He County.

古文：戊辰，以丹阳尹邵陵王纶为扬州刺史。
现代文：戊辰，任命且盐尹迎堕王趸输为扰刺史。
English: Boshen, and the appointment of Yan Yin Ying and the fall of Wang Xuan to disturb the history.

古文：太子右卫率薛法护为平北将军、司州牧，卫送元悦入洛。
现代文：太子右卫率蓥造护为平北将军、业牧，护送左坦进入堕堡。
English: Prince Umei led a fake escort for General Pingbei and Yemoku, escorting Zuotan into the ruined castle.

古文：庚午，立嫡皇孙大器为宣城郡王。
现代文：庚午，立嫡皇孙主墨为宣越郡王。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the legitimate emperor Sun Shumo became the king of Xuan Yue County.

古文：癸未，魏南兗州刺史刘世明以城降，改魏南兗州为谯州，以世明为刺史。
现代文：癸未，曲周南兖州刺史刘世明献出城池投降，改称魏国南兖州为谯州，任命世明为刺史。
English: Shortly after, Liu Shiming, Qu Zhou's governor of southern Luzhou, surrendered the city and was renamed Luzhou, and Shiming was appointed governor of southern Luzhou.

古文：二月壬寅，老人星见。
现代文：二月壬寅，老人星出现。
English: February Renin, the old man star appears.

古文：新除太尉元法僧还北，为东魏主。
现代文：新任太尉元法僧回到北方，成为束魏主。
English: The new captain, a former Buddhist monk, returned to the north and became the leader of the Wei dynasty.

古文：以安右将军元景隆为征北将军、徐州刺史，云麾将军羊侃为安北将军、兗州刺史，散骑常侍元树为镇北将军。
现代文：任命安右将军元景隆为征北将军、徐州刺史，云麾将军羊侃为安北将军、兖州刺史，散骑常侍五树为镇北将军。
English: He appointed An Yu's general Yuan Jinglong as the general of the Northern Expedition, Xuzhou as the general of the Northern Expedition, Yunqi's general Yang Kan as the general of the Northern Expedition, Zhangzhou as the general of the Northern Expedition, and Wuxu, the cavalryman of the Northern Expedition, as the general of the Northern Expedition.

古文：庚戌，新除扬州刺史邵陵王纶有罪，免为庶人。
现代文：庚戌，新任握州刺史邵陵王芦钥犯罪，被免职成为平民。
English: Geng Yao, the newly appointed Guizhou chief of the Shaoling Wang Luchuan crime, was removed from office and became a civilian.

古文：壬子，以江州刺史武陵王纪为扬州刺史，领军将军萧昂为江州刺史。
现代文：壬子，任命江州刺史武陵王萧纪为扬州刺史，领军将军盖显为辽业刺史。
English: Ren Zi appointed Jiangzhou chief historian Wuling Wang Xiao Ji as Yangzhou chief historian, and the leading general Gai Xian as Liaoye chief historian.

古文：丙辰，邵陵县获白鹿一。
现代文：丙辰，邵陵县捕获一头白色的鹿。
English: Xing Chen, Shaoling County captured a white deer.

古文：三月庚午，侍中、领国子博士萧子显上表置制旨《孝经》助教一人，生十人，专通高祖所释《孝经义》。
现代文：三月庚午，侍中、兼国子博士萧子显上奏表请求设置制旨《孝经》助教一人，学生十人，专心通读高祖所注释的《孝经义》。
English: In the late afternoon of March, Xiao Zixian, a chambermaid and Kuniko Doctor, submitted a petition requesting the establishment of a "filial piety" teaching assistant, and ten students devoted themselves to reading through the "filial piety" annotated by Gao Zu.

古文：夏四月壬申，盘盘国遣使献方物。
现代文：夏四月壬申，盘盘国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: In Jinshin in the summer of April, many countries sent envoys to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：秋七月甲辰，星陨如雨。
现代文：秋七月甲辰，星辰陨落如同降雨。
English: In the first hour of autumn and July, the stars fall like rain.

古文：八月丙子，特进陆杲卒。
现代文：八月丙子，特进陆杲去世。
English: August Cixi, Tejin Lu Yao passed away.

古文：九月乙巳，以太子詹事南平王世子恪为领军将军，平北将军、雍州刺史庐陵王续为安北将军，西中郎将、荆州刺史湘东王绎为平西将军，司空袁昂领尚书令。
现代文：九月乙巳，任命太子詹事南平王世子萧恪为领军将军，平北将军、雍州刺史庐陵王萧续为安北将军，西中郎将、荆州刺史湘东王萧绎为平西将军，司空袁昂兼任尚书今。
English: In September, he appointed Prince Zhan Zhi Nanping Wang's descendant Xiao Ke as the leading general, General Ping Bei, Yongzhou's successor Shuling Wang Xiao Jian as An Bei general, West Zhong Lang general, Jingzhou's successor Shandong's king Xiaoyan as Ping Xi general, and Secretary Kuang Yuan as Shang Shujin.

古文：十一月己酉，高丽国遣使献方物。
现代文：十一月己酉，高丽国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: In November, Goryeo dispatched an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：十二月庚辰，以太尉元法僧为骠骑大将军、开府同三司之仪、郢州刺史。
现代文：十二月庚辰，任命太尉互迭增为骠骑大将军、开府同三司之仪、竖蛆刺史。
English: In December, Geng Chen was appointed captain and was successively promoted to the general of the cavalry, the ceremony of opening the capital and the three departments, and the history of the battle.

古文：五年春正月辛卯，舆驾亲祠南郊，大赦天下，孝悌力田赐爵一级。
现代文：五年春正月辛卯，皇帝亲自祭祀南郊，大赦天下，对任孝悌力田的农官赐爵位一级。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fifth year, the emperor personally sacrificed the southern suburbs, pardoned the world, and gave the first-class knighthood to the peasant official who was appointed as a filial son.

古文：先是一日丙夜，南郊令解涤之等到郊所履行，忽闻空中有异香三随风至，及将行事，奏乐迎神毕，有神光满坛上，硃紫黄白杂色，食顷方灭。
现代文：先前一天的三更，南郊令解涤之等人到祭祀场所巡查，忽然闻到空中有异常香味三次随风飘来，随即祭祀时，奏乐迎神完毕，有神光布满坛上，朱紫黄白和杂色，过了一顿饭的时间才消失。
English: On the previous day's third day of the festival, the people of the Southern Suburbs Order of the Purification inspected the sacrificial site. Suddenly, they smelled an unusual fragrance in the air that wafted in the wind three times. Immediately after the sacrifice, the music to welcome the god was completed, and the altar was covered with divine light, vermilion, purple, yellow, white and mixed colors. After a meal, the time disappeared.

古文：兼太宰武陵王纪等以闻。
现代文：兼太宰武陵王萧纪等人将此事上奏。
English: Concurrently, Wuling King Xiaoji and others reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：戊申，京师地震。
现代文：戊申，京城发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in Wushin, Beijing.

古文：己酉。长星见。
现代文：己酉，长星出现。
English: A long star appears in the sky.

古文：辛亥，舆驾亲祠明堂。
现代文：辛亥，皇帝亲自祭祀明堂。
English: At the time of Xinhai, the emperor himself dedicated the Ming Hall.

古文：癸丑，以宣城王大器为中军将军。
现代文：癸丑，任命宣城王大器为中军将军。
English: Uglily, he appointed Xuancheng Wang Daki as the general of the Chinese army.

古文：河南国遣使献方物。
现代文：河南国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: Henan Province sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：二月癸未，行幸同泰寺，设四部大会，高祖升法座，发《金字摩诃波若经》题，讫于己丑。
现代文：二月癸未，前往同泰寺，举行四部大法会，直担登上法座，揭示《金字摩诃波若经》义理，直到己丑。
English: On the last day of February, he went to Dongtai Temple, held four grand puja sessions, ascended the Dharma throne, and revealed the principles of the "Golden Character of the Mahabharata Sutra" until he was ugly.

古文：老人星见。
现代文：老人星出现。
English: The old man star appears.

古文：三月丙辰，大司马南平王伟薨。
现代文：三月丙辰，大司马南平王萧伟逝世。
English: In March, the grand secretary of Mananping Wang Xiaowei passed away.

古文：夏四月癸酉，以御史中丞臧盾兼领军。
现代文：夏四月癸酉，任命御史中丞臧盾兼任领军。
English: In the summer of April, he appointed Goshi Chujo Shindun to be the leader of the army.

古文：五月戊子，京邑大水，御道通船。
现代文：五月戊子，京城遭遇大水灾，御道上可通船只。
English: In May, the capital city of Kyoto suffered a major flood, and boats were allowed to pass on the main road.

古文：六月己卯，魏建义城主兰宝杀魏东徐州刺史，以下邳城降。
现代文：六月己卯，魏鳕建盏城主蓝宣杀死蝈墓俭州刺史，献出王歪咽投降。
English: In June of the same year, Lan Xuan, the lord of the Wei and Jian Zhan city, killed Jian Zhou, the scribe of the Jian Zhan tomb, and surrendered to the king.

古文：秋七月辛卯，改下邳为武州。
现代文：秋七月辛卯，改工塑称为茎业。
English: In the autumn and July, it was difficult, and the reworked plastic was called the stem industry.

古文：八月庚申，以前徐州刺史元景隆为安右将军。
现代文：八月庚申，任命前刺史元景隆为安右将军。
English: In August, Koshin appointed the former assassin, Shigenori Motokage, as General An.

古文：老人星见。
现代文：老人星出现。
English: The old man star appears.

古文：甲子，波斯国遣使献方物。
现代文：甲子，遮堑厘派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: Jiazi, Chagoury sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：甲申，中护军萧渊猷卒。
现代文：甲申，中护军萧渊猷去世。
English: Gaoshin, the middle guardian Xiao Yuanzhang passed away.

古文：九月己亥，以轻车将军、临贺王正德为中护军。
现代文：九月己亥，任命轻车将军、临贺王正德为中护军。
English: In September of the same year, Lin He Wang Zhengde, the general of light vehicles, was appointed as the middle guard.

古文：甲寅，以尚书令、司空袁昂为特进、左光禄大夫，司空如故。
现代文：甲寅，任命尚书令、司空袁昂为特进、左光禄大夫，司空照旧。
English: A Yin, appointed Shang Shuling, Siku Yuan Ang as a special envoy, and Zuo Guanglu as a doctor, Siku as before.

古文：盘盘国遣使献方物。
现代文：盘盘国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: Countries around the world send envoys to offer tribute to local special products.

古文：冬十月庚申，以尚书右仆射何敬容为尚书左仆射，吏部尚书谢举为尚书右仆射，侍中、国子祭酒萧子显为吏部尚书。
现代文：冬十月庚申，任命尚书右仆射何敬容为尚书左仆射，吏部尚书谢举为尚书右仆射，侍中、国子祭酒萧子显为吏部尚书。
English: In the winter of October, Goshun appointed Shangshu's right-hand man, He Jingrong, as Shangshu's left-hand man, Shangshu Xieju as Shangshu's right-hand man, and Shangzhong and Guozihong as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：六年春二月癸亥，舆驾亲耕籍田，大赦天下，孝悌力田赐爵一级。
现代文：六年春二月癸亥，皇帝新自耕种藉田，大赦天下，对任孝悌力田的农官赐爵位一级。
English: In the spring of the sixth year and in February of the year, Emperor Xin cultivated his own farmland, pardoned the world, and gave a first-class knighthood to the agricultural official who was appointed as a filial son.

古文：三月己亥，以行河南王可沓振为西秦、河二州刺史、河南王。
现代文：三月己亥，任命代理河南王可沓振为西秦河二州刺史、河南王。
English: In March of the same year, the acting king of Henan Province, Ke Yuzhen, was appointed as the prince of the two states of West Qin and the king of Henan Province.

古文：甲辰，百济国遣使献方物。
现代文：甲辰，百济国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: At that time, Baekje sent an envoy to pay tribute to the local specialty.

古文：夏四月丁卯，荧惑在南斗。
现代文：夏四月丁卯，火星行进到南斗。
English: In the summer, April and May, Mars travels to the south.

古文：秋七月甲辰，林邑国遣使献方物。
现代文：秋七月甲辰，林邑国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: At the first hour of autumn in July, Lin'yi Province sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：八月己未，以南梁州刺史武兴王杨绍先为秦、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：八月己未，任命南梁州刺史武兴王杨绍先为秦、南秦二州刺史。
English: In August, the governor of South Liangzhou, Wuxing Wang Yangshao, was appointed as the governor of Qin and the governor of the two southern Qin states.

古文：冬十月丁卯，以信武将军元庆和为镇北将军，率众北伐。
现代文：冬十月丁卯，任命信武将军元庆和为镇北将军，率领军队向北征伐。
English: In the winter of October, Gen. Yuan Qinghe, the general of Xinwu, was appointed as the general of Zhenbei and led the army to the north.

古文：闰十二月丙午，西南有雷声二。
现代文：闰十二月丙午，西南发出雷声二次。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the third month in December, the southwestern region thundered for the second time.

古文：大同元年春正月戊申朔，改元，大赦天下。
现代文：去回元年春正月戊申初一，改年号，大赦天下。
English: Go back to the first day of the first month of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the

古文：二月己卯，老人星见。
现代文：二月己卯，老人星出现。
English: In February, the elderly star appeared.

古文：辛巳，舆驾亲祠明堂。
现代文：辛巳，皇帝亲自到明堂祭祀。
English: Soon, the emperor himself came to Myeongdong to offer the sacrifice.

古文：丁亥，舆驾躬耕籍田。
现代文：丁亥，皇帝亲自耕种藉田。
English: Dinghai, the emperor himself cultivated the borrowed land.

古文：辛丑，高丽国、丹丹国各遣使献方物。
现代文：辛丑，高丽国、丹丹国各自派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: In response, Goryeo and Dangdang sent their respective envoys to pay tribute to the local specialties.

古文：三月辛未，滑国王安乐萨丹王遣使献方物。
现代文：三月辛未，遗玺王安乐萨丹王派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: In late March, the widow of King Anle, King Sadan, sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：夏四月庚子，波斯国献方物。
现代文：夏四月庚子，波斯国贡奉地方特产。
English: Summer April Geng Zi, a local specialty of Gong Bong in Persia.

古文：甲辰，以魏镇东将军刘济为徐州刺史。
现代文：甲辰，任命盏困镇束将军型边为涂赵刺史。
English: Jia Chen, appointed by the besieged general Zhenzhu, was a pupil of Zhao Zhishi.

古文：壬戌，以安北将军庐陵王续为安南将军、江州刺史。
现代文：壬戌，任命安北将军庐陵王芦续为安南将军、辽丛刺史。
English: In addition, he appointed the general of Anbei, Gongling Wang Ruzhong, as the general of Annan, and Liao Cong as the general of Shishi.

古文：秋七月乙卯，老人星见。
现代文：秋七月乙卯，老人星出现。
English: One day in July, the elderly star appeared.

古文：辛卯，扶南国遣使献方物。
现代文：辛卯，扶南国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: Xinwu, Funan Province sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：冬十月辛卯，以前南兗州刺史萧渊藻为护军将军。
现代文：冬十月辛卯，任命前南兖州刺史萧渊藻为护军将军。
English: In the winter of October, Xiao Yuanmao, the former governor of South Luzhou, was appointed as the escort general.

古文：十一月丁未，中卫将军、特进、右光禄大夫徐勉卒。
现代文：十一月丁未，中卫将军、特进、右光禄大夫徐勉去世。
English: In November, Ding Wei, Zhongwei General, Tejin, and Uguanglu Doctor Xu Min passed away.

古文：壬戌，北梁州刺史兰钦攻汉中，克之，魏梁州刺史元罗降。
现代文：壬戌，北梁州刺史兰钦攻打漠中，攻克，魏国梁州刺史元罗投降。
English: The Northern Liang Province attacked and defeated the Northern Liang Province, the Northern Liang Province attacked and defeated the Northern Liang Province, the Northern Liang Province attacked and defeated the Northern Liang Province, and the Northern Liang Province attacked and defeated the Northern Liang Province.

古文：癸亥，赐梁州归附者复除有差。
现代文：癸亥，赏赐梁州归附的人免除赋税多少不等。
English: Yanhai, the number of tax exemptions granted to people who belong to Liangzhou varies.

古文：甲子，雄勇将军、北益州刺史阴平王杨法深进号平北将军。
现代文：甲子，雄勇将军、北益州刺史阴平王杨法深升军号为平北将军。
English: Gao Zi, Xiong Yong General, Bei Yizhou Zhishi, Yin Ping Wang, Yang Faxian Sheng's military title is Pingbei General.

古文：月行左角星。
现代文：月亮行进到左角星旁。
English: The moon is moving to the left of the star.

古文：十二月乙酉，以魏北徐州刺史羊徽逸为平北将军。
现代文：十二月乙酉，任命前魏国北徐州刺史羊徽逸为平北将军。
English: In December of the same year, he appointed Yang Huiyi, a former Wei general from the northern Xuzhou Province, as the new general of Pingbei.

古文：戊戌，以平西将军、秦、南秦二州刺史武兴王杨绍先进号车骑将军、平北将军、北益州刺史阴平王杨法深进号骠骑将军。
现代文：戊戌，平西将军、秦南秦二州刺史武兴王杨绍先升军号为车骑将军，平北将军、北益州刺史阴平王杨法深升军号为骠骑将军。
English: Wuzhong, Pingxi General, Qin Nan Qin Erzhou Zhishi Wuxing Wang Yang Shao first rose to the rank of cavalry general, Pingbei General, Beiyizhou Zhishi Yin Ping Wang Yang Faxian rose to the rank of cavalry general.

古文：辛丑，平西将军、荆州刺史湘东王绎进号安西将军。
现代文：辛丑，平西将军、荆州刺史湘束王萧绎升军号为安西将军。
English: Xinxiu, Pingxi General, Jingzhou Zishi, Xiangzhu Wang Xiaoyan, the military code is Anxi General.

古文：二年春正月甲辰，以兼领军臧盾为中领军。
现代文：二年春正月甲辰，任命兼领军臧盾为中领军。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, Jia Chen appointed the leader of the army, Xing Dun, as the middle leader.

古文：二月乙亥，舆驾躬耕籍田。
现代文：二月乙亥，皇帝亲自耕种藉田。
English: In February of the year of the Rooster, the emperor personally cultivated the borrowed fields.

古文：丙戌，老人星见。
现代文：丙戌，老人星出现。
English: The elderly star appeared.

古文：三月庚申，诏曰： 政在养民，德存被物，上令如风，民应如草。
现代文：三月庚申，诏令说： 政治在于养育民众，德行在于普及百姓，朝廷发令如同风，民众响应如同草。
English: In March, the imperial edict said: Politics lies in educating the people, virtue lies in popularizing the people, the imperial order is like the wind, and the people's response is like the grass.

古文：朕以寡德，运属时来，拨乱反正，倏焉三纪。
现代文：我以微薄的德行，时来运到，治理乱世恢复正常秩序，忽然已三十六年。
English: It has suddenly been thirty-six years since I, with my meager virtue, came to rule the chaotic world and restore normal order.

古文：不能使重门不闭，守在海外，疆埸多阻，车书未一。
现代文：但不能使内门不关闭，防守达到海外，边境还多有阻隔，车轨文书也没有统一。
English: However, it is not possible for the inner gate not to be closed, the defense to reach overseas, there are still many barriers at the border, and the track documents are not unified.

古文：民疲转输，士劳边防。
现代文：民众为辗转运输而疲惫，士兵为边防而劳苦。
English: The people are tired of being transported back and forth, and the soldiers are struggling to guard the border.

古文：彻田为粮，未得顿止。
现代文：开发土地谋取粮食，不能片刻停止。
English: The exploitation of land for food cannot be stopped for a moment.

古文：治道不明，政用多僻，百辟无沃心之言，四聪阙飞耳之听，州辍刺举，郡忘共治。
现代文：治道不够清明，政事多有违失，百官没有开启心智的进言，四方耳目缺乏顺风耳的听力，州停止检举奸恶推荐功臣，郡忘记共同治理天下。
English: The way of governance is not clear enough, there are many violations and mistakes in government affairs, hundreds of officials have not opened their minds to input, all ears and eyes lack the ability to listen to the wind, the state has stopped prosecuting and recommending heroes, and the county has forgotten to jointly govern the world.

古文：致使失理负谤，无由闻达。侮文弄法，因事生奸，肺石空陈，悬钟徒设。
现代文：致使因违背事理而遭诽谤的人，没有途径上告，官吏舞文弄墨歪曲法令，利用事件产生奸诈，鸣冤的石头徒然陈列，悬钟徒然摆设。
English: As a result, people who have been slandered for violating the reason have no way to appeal, officials have distorted the laws and regulations by manipulating the ink, used the incident to create treachery, and displayed the stone of grievance in vain, and hung the bell in vain.

古文：《书》不云乎： 股肱惟人，良臣惟圣。 
现代文：《尚书》不是说遇吗： 有脚手才能成人，有良臣才能成圣。
English: Isn't it said in "Shang Shu" that it's a matter of luck: You can become an adult only if you have a good footman, and you can become a saint only if you have a good minister.

古文：实赖贤佐，匡其不及。
现代文：实在是须依赖贤明的辅佐，来匡正我的不足。
English: I really have to rely on wise assistants to rectify my shortcomings.

古文：凡厥在朝，各献谠言，政治不便于民者，可悉陈之。
现代文：凡是在朝官员，各自进献直言，政策不便于民众的，可悉数陈述。
English: All officials in the DPRK who have been outspoken, and whose policies are inconvenient to the public, can be fully stated.

古文：若在四远，刺史二千石长吏，并以奏闻。
现代文：如在四方外地，刺史郡守县令，都上奏疏禀报。
English: For example, in the four provinces and outlying areas, the county governor and county magistrate of Zhishi County have all been reported.

古文：细民有言事者，咸为申达。
现代文：百姓有谈论政事的，都为他们申述上报。
English: If the people talk about political affairs, they all report it to the government.

古文：朕将亲览，以纾其过。
现代文：我将亲自阅览，来消解过失。
English: I'll read it myself to absolve myself.

古文：文武在位，举尔所知，公侯将相，随才擢用，拾遗补阙，勿有所隐。 
现代文：在位的文武官员，推举你们所了解的人，公侯将相，依才能擢升任用，纠正过失补救政事上的缺漏，不要有隐讳。 
English: Reigning civil and military officials, nominate people you know, including princes and generals, promote and appoint according to ability, correct mistakes and remedy omissions in government affairs, and do not be secretive.

古文：夏四月乙未，以骠骑大将军、开府同三司之仪元法僧为太尉，领军师将军。
现代文：夏四月乙未，任命骠骑大将军、开府同三司之仪元法僧为太尉，兼军师将军。
English: In April of the same year, he appointed the general of the imperial cavalry and the ceremonial monk of the Kaifu and the three departments as the first lieutenant and the general of the division.

古文：先是，尚书右丞江子四上封事，极言政治得失。
现代文：在这以前，尚书右丞江子四呈上密封的奏章，极力谈论政事得失。
English: Prior to this, Shang Shuyuan and Jiang Zixi presented a sealed record and tried their best to talk about the merits and demerits of politics.

古文：五月癸卯，诏曰： 古人有言，屋漏在上，知之在下。
现代文：五月癸卯，诏令说： 古人说过，屋漏在上面，知道的在下面。
English: At the end of May, the imperial edict said: The ancients said that the leak is at the top, and knowledge is at the bottom.

古文：朕所钟过，不能自觉。
现代文：我所产生的过失，不能自己察觉。
English: I can't detect my own mistakes.

古文：江子四等封事如上，尚书可时加检括，于民有蠹患者，便即勒停，宜速详启，勿致淹缓。 
现代文：江子四等人密封奏章近日呈上，尚书可时常加以检查，对民众有危害的事情，便立即停止，应迅速详细启奏，不要使事情延缓。 
English: Jiang Zi and four others have recently submitted a sealed record, and the record can be checked from time to time. If there is any harm to the public, it will be stopped immediately. It should be played in detail quickly, and do not delay the matter.

古文：乙巳，以魏前梁州刺史元罗为征北大将军、青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：乙巳，任命原魏国前梁州刺史元罗为征北大将军、青冀二州刺史。
English: At the same time, Yuan Luo, the general of Liangzhou in the former Wei Dynasty, was appointed as the general of the Northern Expedition, and the general of the two states in Qinghai and Hebei was appointed as the general of the Northern Expedition.

古文：六月丁亥，诏曰： 南郊、明堂、陵庙等令，与朝请同班，于事为轻，可改视散骑侍郎。 
现代文：六月丁亥，诏令说： 南郊、明堂、陵庙等长官，和奉朝请品级相同，就事务而言是轻了，可改为比照散骑侍郎。 
English: In June of Dinghai, the imperial edict said: the governors of Nanjiao, Myeongdong, and Neungmyo are of the same rank as those who are invited to the imperial court. In terms of affairs, they are light, and they can be changed to attendants.

古文：冬十月乙亥，诏大举北伐。
现代文：冬十月乙亥，诏令大规模出兵向北征伐。
English: In the winter, in October of the Year of the Boar, the Emperor issued an order for a large-scale expedition to the north.

古文：十一月己亥，诏北伐众班师。
现代文：十一月己亥，诏令向北征伐的军队撤兵。
English: In November of the same year, the emperor ordered the withdrawal of troops from the northern campaign.

古文：辛亥，京师地震。
现代文：辛亥，京城发生地震。
English: In Xinhai, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：十二月壬申，魏请通和，诏许之。
现代文：十二月壬申，魏国请求通问和好，韶令准许。
English: In December, Jinshin, the State of Wei requested to communicate and make peace, and the imperial order was granted.

古文：丁酉，以吴兴太守、驸马都尉、利亭侯张缵为吏部尚书。
现代文：丁酉，任命吴兴太守、驸马都尉、利亭侯张缆为吏部尚书。
English: Ding Yao appointed Wu Xing, the governor of Taizhou, Xingma, the captain of the horse, and Liting, the lord of Zhangqian, as officials.

古文：三年春正月辛丑，舆驾亲祠南郊，大赦天下；孝悌力田赐爵一级。
现代文：三年春正月辛丑，皇帝亲自祭祀南郊，大赦天下，对孝悌力田艘官赏赐爵位一级。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year, the emperor personally sacrificed the southern suburbs, pardoned the world, and awarded the first-class knighthood to the filial piety of Tian Jian.

古文：是夜，硃雀门灾。
现代文：这天夜晚朱雀门发生火灾。
English: That night, a fire broke out in Suzakumon.

古文：壬寅，天无云，雨灰，黄色。
现代文：壬寅，天空没有云彩，降落灰尘，黄颜色。
English: In Renin, the sky has no clouds, and the falling dust is yellow.

古文：癸卯，以中书令邵陵王纶为江州刺史。
现代文：癸卯，任命中书令邵陵王萧纶为江丛刺史。
English: At the same time, the appointment of the Shuling King Xiao Wei as the history of the river cluster.

古文：二月乙酉，老人星见。
现代文：二月乙酉，老人星出现。
English: February acetylene, old man star appears.

古文：丁亥，舆驾亲耕籍田。
现代文：丁亥，皇帝亲自耕种藉田。
English: Dinghai, the emperor himself cultivated the borrowed land.

古文：己丑，以尚书左仆射何敬容为中权将军，护军将军萧渊藻为安右将军、尚书左仆射。
现代文：己丑，任命尚书左仆射何敬容为中权将军，护军将军萧渊藻为安右将军、尚书左仆射。
English: At the same time, he appointed Shangshu's left-hand man, He Jingrong, as the general of the central government, and the general of the escort, Xiao Yuanmao, as the general of the right-hand side, and Shangshu's left-hand man, Sha.

古文：以尚书右仆射谢举为右光禄大夫。
现代文：任命尚书右仆射谢举为右光禄大夫。
English: Appointed Shangshu's right-hand man, Sha Xie, as the doctor of Uguanglu.

古文：庚寅，以安南将军庐陵王续为中卫将军、护军将军。
现代文：庚寅，任命安南将军庐陵王芦续为中卫将军、护军将军。
English: Gyeongin appointed Annan's general, Goryeongwang Rukgyo, as the general of the middle guard and the general of the escort.

古文：三月戊戌，立昭明太子子嵒为武昌郡王，灊为义阳郡王。
现代文：三月戊戌，立昭明太子的儿子萧警为武旦登王，芦篑为义阳郡王。
English: In March, the son of Crown Prince Zhaoming, Xiao Guan, ascended to the throne of Wudang, and Lulu became the king of Yiyang County.

古文：夏四月丁卯，以南琅邪、彭城二郡太守河东王誉为南徐州刺史。
现代文：夏四月丁卯，任命南琅邪、彭城二郡太守河东王萧誉为南徐州刺史。
English: In April of the same year, Wang Xiaoyu, the governor of the two counties of Nanluye and Pengcheng, was appointed as the governor of South Xuzhou.

古文：五月丙申，以前扬州刺史武陵王纪复为扬州刺史。
现代文：五月丙申，任命前扬州刺史武陵王萧纪重为扬州刺史。
English: In May, he appointed former Yangzhou chief historian Wuling Wang Xiao Jisheng as Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：六月，青州朐山境陨霜。
现代文：六月，青州朐山境内下霜。
English: In June, it was frosty in Lushan, Qingzhou.

古文：秋七月癸卯，魏遣使来聘。
现代文：秋七月癸卯，魏国派遣使者前来通问修好。
English: At the end of the autumn and the beginning of July, Wei dispatched an envoy to ask for a truce.

古文：己酉，义阳王灊薨。
现代文：己酉，义阳王萧譬逝世。
English: Ji Xuan, Yiyang King Xiao Wei passed away.

古文：是月，青州雪，害苗稼。
现代文：这月，青州降雪，损伤庄稼。
English: This month, snow fell in Qingzhou, damaging crops.

古文：八月甲申，老人星见。
现代文：八月甲申，老人星出现。
English: In August of Jiaxun, the elderly star appeared.

古文：辛卯，舆驾幸阿育王寺，赦天下。
现代文：辛卯，皇帝前往阿育王寺，大赦天下。
English: Xinwu, the emperor went to the Ashoka Temple and pardoned the whole world.

古文：九月，南兗州大饥。
现代文：九月，南兖州发生大饥荒。
English: In September, a major famine occurred in southern Luzhou.

古文：是月，北徐州境内旅生稻稗二千许顷。
现代文：遣月，北徐州境内野生稻稗二千来顷。
English: In the first month of the year, there were more than 2,000 hectares of wild rice fields in northern Xuzhou.

古文：闰月甲子，安西将军、荆州刺史湘东王绎进号镇西将军，扬州刺史武陵王纪为安西将军、益州刺史。
现代文：闰月甲子，安西将军、荆州刺史湘束王萧绎升军号为镇西将军，扬州刺史武陵王萧纪担任安西将军、益州刺史。
English: Xiangzhu Wang Xiao Yan Sheng of Jingzhou and Wuling Wang Xiao Ji of Yangzhou served as general of Anxi and general of Yizhou, respectively.

古文：冬十月丙辰，京师地震。
现代文：冬十月丙辰，京城发生地震。
English: In the winter of October, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：是岁，饥。
现代文：这年，发生饥荒。
English: This year, there was a famine.

古文：四年春正月庚辰，以中军将军宣城王大器为中军大将军、扬州刺史。
现代文：四年春正月庚辰，任命中军将军宣城王大器为中军大将军、扬州刺史。
English: In the spring of the first month of the fourth year, Geng Chen appointed the Chinese general Xuancheng Wang Daki as the Chinese general and Yangzhou Shishi.

古文：二月己亥，舆驾亲耕籍田。
现代文：二月己亥，皇帝亲自耕种藉田。
English: At the end of February, the emperor himself began to cultivate the borrowed fields.

古文：三月戊寅，河南国遣使献方物。
现代文：三月戊寅，河南国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: In March, Henan Province sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：癸未，芮芮国遣使献方物。
现代文：癸未，芮芮国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: Not long ago, the State of Min dispatched an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：五月甲戌，魏遣使来聘。
现代文：五月甲戌，魏国派遣使者前来通问修好。
English: In May, Wei dispatched an envoy to ask for a truce.

古文：秋七月己未，以南琅邪、彭城二郡太守岳阳王察为东扬州刺史。
现代文：秋七月己未，任命南琅邪、彭城二郡太守岳阳王萧察为束扬州刺史。
English: In the autumn of July, Yueyang Wang Xiao Cha, the governor of the two counties of Nanluyeye and Pengcheng, was appointed as the governor of Yangzhou.

古文：癸亥，诏以东冶徒李胤之降如来真形舍利，大赦天下。
现代文：癸亥，韶令因束冶囚徒李胤之求得如来真身舍利于，大赦天下。
English: In the year of the boar, the emperor's edict granted the request of the prisoner Li Yan, who was sentenced to be shackled and tortured, to be granted amnesty.

古文：八月甲辰，诏 南兗、北徐、西徐、东徐、青、冀、南北青、武、仁、潼、睢等十二州，既经饥馑，曲赦逋租宿责，勿收今年三调。 
现代文：八月甲辰，诏令 南兖、北徐、西徐、束徐、青、冀、南北青、武、仁、潼、睢等十二州，经历饥荒后，赦免拖欠的租税债务，不征收今年的三调租税。 
English: At the stroke of midnight in August, twelve prefectures including Nanlu, Beixu, Xixu, Zuoxu, Qingdao, Hebei, Nanbei Qingdao, Wu, Ren, Handan and Handan, which had experienced famine, were ordered to forgive tax arrears and not to levy this year's three-tiered tax.

古文：冬十二月丁亥，兼国子助教皇侃表上所撰《礼记义疏》五十卷。
现代文：冬十二月丁亥，兼国子助教皇侃上奏表呈上所撰作的《礼记义疏》五十卷。
English: In the winter of December of Dinghai, Guo Zi, who was also a papal aide, boldly presented the 50-volume "Book of Rites and Decrees" he had written.

古文：五年春正月乙卯，以护军将军庐陵王续为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，安右将军、尚书左仆射萧渊藻为中卫将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：五年春正月乙卯，任命护军将军庐陵王萧续为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，安右将军、尚书左仆射萧渊藻为中卫将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the second month of the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, the general of the escort army, Gu Ling Wang Xiao Zhuang, was appointed as the general of the cavalry, and the three divisions of the Kaifu ceremony, and the general of the right, and the left-hand servant of Shang Shuxu, Sha Xiao Yuanmou, were appointed as the general of the middle guard, and the three divisions of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：中权将军、丹阳尹何敬容以本号为尚书令，吏部尚书张缵为尚书仆射，都官尚书刘孺为吏部尚书。
现代文：中权将军、丹阳尹何敬容以本来名号担任尚书令，吏部尚书张缵担任尚书仆射，都官尚书刘孺担任吏部尚书。
English: General Zhongquan, Danyang Yin He Jingrong, assumed the title of Shang Shuling with his original name, the official Shang Shuling Zhang Jie assumed the title of Shang Shuling, and the official Shang Shuling Liu Jie assumed the title of Shang Shuling.

古文：丁巳，御史中丞、参礼仪事贺琛奏： 今南北二郊及籍田往还并宜御辇，不复乘辂。
现代文：丁巳，御史中丞、参礼仪事贺琛上奏： 现在南北二郊祭祀和籍田往返都应该驾御用车辆，不再乘人拉车。
English: Ding Si, Mi Shih Chung Chung, Sang Rei Rites and Ceremonies, Congratulatory Music: Now, both the North and South Suburbs and the home villages should be driven by royal vehicles, and no longer by human drivers.

古文：二郊请用素辇，籍田往还乘常辇，皆以侍中陪乘，停大将军及太仆。 
现代文：二郊祭祀请求使用未经雕饰的车，藉田往返乘坐平常车辆，都用侍中陪同乘坐，停止大将军和太仆陪同。 
English: The two suburban sacrificial rites requested the use of an uncarved car, the use of ordinary vehicles to travel to and from the field, and the use of attendants to accompany the ride, stopping the general and the servant.

古文：诏付尚书博议施行。
现代文：下诏交付尚书广泛讨论执行。
English: The following is a transcript of the wide-ranging discussion on implementation.

古文：改素辇名大同辇。
现代文：改未经雕饰的车名为大同辇。
English: The name of the car without the carving was changed to Datong Yao.

古文：昭祀宗庙乘玉辇。
现代文：祭祀宗庙乘坐玉辇。
English: Attending a religious service at the ancestral temple, riding on a yamahoko.

古文：辛未，舆驾亲祠南郊，诏孝悌力田及州闾乡党称为善人者，各赐爵一级，并勒属所以时腾上。
现代文：辛未，皇帝亲自祭祀南郊，韶令孝悌力田和同乡称为善人的人，各赐给爵位一级，并且写明原因及时送交朝廷。
English: In Xinwei, the emperor personally sacrificed the southern suburbs, and ordered the filial piety of Lida and the people who were called good people by their fellow townsmen, and each was given a first-class peerage, and the reasons were sent to the imperial court in time.

古文：三月己未，诏曰： 朕四听既阙，五识多蔽，画可外牒，或致纰缪。
现代文：三月己未，诏令说： 我四方视听缺略，五种意识多有遮蔽，签署同意的外朝文书，有时错缪。
English: Before March, the imperial edict said: My four-way audio-visual is deficient, the five consciousnesses are mostly obscured, and the foreign and North Korean documents signed and agreed upon are sometimes mistaken.

古文：凡是政事不便于民者，州郡县即时皆言，勿得欺隐。
现代文：凡是政事不便于民众的，州郡县都要及时报告，不能欺瞒隐讳。
English: If any political affairs are inconvenient to the public, the state, county and township shall report it in a timely manner, and it shall not be concealed.

古文：如使怨讼，当境任失。
现代文：如果造成怨恨诉讼，当地承担过失。
English: If it results in a libel suit, the county will be liable.

古文：而今而后，以为永准。 
现代文：从今以后，作为永久的准则。 
English: Henceforth, as a permanent norm.

古文：秋七月己卯，以骠骑将军、开府仪同三司庐陵王续为荆州刺史，湘东王绎为护军将军、安右将军。
现代文：秋七月己卯，任命骠骑将军、开府仪同三司庐陵王芦迩为型业刺史，湘束王芦颦为护军将军、安右将军。
English: In the autumn and July, he appointed the general of the imperial cavalry, Kaifu Yi, and the three officers of the imperial palace, the king of Huling, and the king of Hunan, the king of Shu, as the general of the guard and the general of Anyu.

古文：八月乙酉，扶南国遣使献生犀及方物。
现代文：八月乙酉，扶南国派遣使者贡奉活犀牛和地方特产。
English: In August, Hunan Province sent an envoy to pay tribute to the live rhinoceros and local specialties.

古文：九月庚申，以都官尚书到溉为吏部尚书。
现代文：九月庚申，任命都官尚书到溉为吏部尚书。
English: In September of the year of the Go-shin, Shosho, a magistrate of the capital, was appointed to the position of Shosho, an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：冬十一月乙亥，魏遣使来聘。
现代文：冬十一月乙亥，委蝈派遣使者前来通问修好。
English: In the winter of November, the commission sent an envoy to ask for a truce.

古文：十二月癸未，以吴郡太守谢举为中书监，新除中书令鄱阳王范为中领军。
现代文：十二月癸未，任命昱邓太守邀壁为中书监，新任中书令邮垦旺芦笆为中领军。
English: In late December, Zou Deng Taishou was appointed as China's chief librarian, and the newly appointed China's chief librarian, Zhou Wangluo, was appointed as the leader.

古文：六年春正月庚戌朔，曲赦司、豫、徐、兗四州。
现代文：六年春正月庚戌初一，赦免司、豫、徐、兖四州囚徒。
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year of spring, Geng Xu pardoned the prisoners of Shishu, Yu, Xu and Zou.

古文：二月己亥，舆驾亲耕籍田。
现代文：二月己亥，皇帝亲自耕种藉田。
English: At the end of February, the emperor himself began to cultivate the borrowed fields.

古文：丙午，以江州刺史邵陵王纶为平西将军、郢州刺史，云麾将军豫章王欢为江州刺史。
现代文：丙午，任命丝业刺史邵陵王芦钥为平西将军、坚业刺史，云麾将军豫章王萧欢为江州刺史。
English: In the afternoon of the 4th day of the 4th month, Shaoling Wang Luchuan, general of silk industry, was appointed as the general of Pingxi Province, Jianye as the general of silk industry, and Yuzhang Wang Xiaohuan, general of Yunnan Province, as the general of Jiangsu Province.

古文：秦郡献白鹿一。
现代文：秦郡贡奉白鹿一头。
English: Qin County will donate one head of white deer.

古文：夏四月癸未，诏曰： 命世兴王，嗣贤传业，声称不朽，人代徂迁，二宾以位，三恪义在，时事浸远，宿草榛芜，望古兴怀，言念怆然。
现代文：夏四月癸未，诏令说： 顺应时代而王业兴起，贤人继嗣流传业绩，声名永不磨灭，世代变迁，二姓宾客在位，三代子孙获封的义理犹在。世事逐渐遥远，墓地荒芜，遥想古代产生感怀，说起来心中悲怆。
English: In the summer of April, the imperial edict said: "In accordance with the times, kingship has risen, sages have passed down their achievements to their successors, fame will never be extinguished, generations have changed, the second guest is on the throne, and the three generations of descendants have been given titles. Things are gradually distant, cemeteries are desolate, and it is sad to think of ancient times.

古文：晋、宋、齐三代诸陵，有职司者勤加守护，勿令细民妄相侵毁。
现代文：晋、宋、齐三代的所有陵墓，有关官府要兢兢业业地加以守卫保护，不要使百姓随意加以侵占毁坏。
English: All the mausoleums of the three dynasties of Jin, Song and Qi should be diligently guarded and protected by the relevant government departments, and should not be occupied and destroyed by the people at will.

古文：作兵有少，补使充足。
现代文：守卫兵士人少，可补充足额。
English: The number of soldiers on guard is small and can be replenished.

古文：前无守视，并可量给。 
现代文：先前没有守卫的，都可酌量配给。 
English: Those that were previously unguarded can now be rationed.

古文：五月戊寅，以前青、冀二州刺史元罗为右光禄大夫。
现代文：五月戊寅，任命前青、冀二州刺史元罗为右光禄大夫。
English: In May, Wu Yin appointed the former Qing and Hebei two-state magistrate Shiyuan Luo as the doctor of Uguanglu.

古文：己卯，河南王遣使献马及方物。
现代文：己卯，河南王派遣使者贡奉马匹和地方特产。
English: At the same time, the king of Henan sent an envoy to pay tribute with horses and local specialties.

古文：六月丁未，平阳县献白鹿一。
现代文：六月丁未，乎阳县贡奉白鹿一头。
English: In June, Ding Wei, a head of white deer was found in Gongfeng, Huyang County.

古文：秋七月丁亥，魏遣使来聘。
现代文：秋七月丁亥，魏国派遣使者前来通问修好。
English: In the autumn and July of Dinghai, Wei dispatched an envoy to ask for a truce.

古文：八月戊午，赦天下。
现代文：八月戊午，大赦天下。
English: At noon on August 3rd, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：辛未，诏曰： 经国有体，必询诸朝，所以尚书置令、仆、丞、郎，旦旦上朝，以议时事，前共筹怀，然后奏闻。
现代文：辛未，韶令说： 治理国家有法式，一定要征询朝中官员，所以尚书省设置令、仆射、丞、郎，每天上朝，商议当前事务，在一起筹划，然后上奏。
English: Xinwei, the imperial edict said: There is a French style of governing the country, and it is necessary to consult the officials of the DPRK and China. Therefore, Shang Shushu set up an order, a messenger, a secretary, and a secretary, and went to the DPRK every day to discuss current affairs, plan together, and then report.

古文：顷者不尔，每有疑事，倚立求决。
现代文：近来不是这样，每当有疑难事情，顷刻间就寻求决断。
English: That's not the case these days. Whenever there's a problem, decisions are made in an instant.

古文：古人有云，主非尧舜，何得发言便是。
现代文：古人说过，君主不是尧、舜，怎么能讲话都正确呢。
English: As the ancients said, if the monarch is not a scholar, how can he speak correctly?

古文：是故放勋之圣，犹咨四岳，重华之睿，亦待多士。
现代文：因此以放勋的圣明，还咨询四岳，以重华的睿智，也依赖士人。
English: Therefore, relying on the wisdom of the four mountains, relying on the wisdom of the sages, relying on the wisdom of the sages.

古文：岂朕寡德，所能独断。
现代文：岂是我微薄的德行，所能独自决断的。
English: Is this something that I, with my meager virtue, can decide for myself?

古文：自今尚书中有疑事，前于朝堂参议，然后启闻，不得习常。
现代文：从现在起尚书中有疑难的事，先在朝堂召集众人商议，然后启奏，不能因袭以往。
English: From now on, when there is a difficult matter on the agenda, everyone should be gathered in the Imperial Hall for discussion first, and then the music should be played. This should not be a repeat of the past.

古文：其军机要切，前须谘审，自依旧典。 
现代文：军事机密国家大事，以前必须咨询审察准确，现在自然依照旧日典章办。 
English: Military secret affairs of state, which previously had to be consulted and examined accurately, are now naturally handled in accordance with the old laws and regulations.

古文：盘盘国遣使献方物。
现代文：盘盘国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: Countries around the world send envoys to offer tribute to local special products.

古文：九月，移安州置定远郡，受北徐州都督，定远郡改属安州。
现代文：九月，迁移安州设置定远郡，接受北徐州统领，室塑改为隶属玄业。
English: In September, Anzhou was relocated to Dingyuan County, which accepted the leadership of North Xuzhou, and Muroplast was transferred to Xuanye.

古文：始平太守崔硕表献嘉禾一茎十二穗。
现代文：捡垩太守崔玺上奏表进献茁壮的禾稻一根茎十二个谷穗。
English: The late Empress Dowager Cui Rong presented twelve ears of grain from a single stalk of flourishing rice.

古文：戊戌，特进、左光禄大夫、司空袁昂薨。
现代文：戊戌，特进、左光禄大夫、司空袁昂逝世。
English: Dr. Wuzhen, Dr. Tejin, Dr. Zuo Guanglu and Dr. Yuan Ang passed away.

古文：冬十一月己卯，曲赦京邑。
现代文：冬十一月己卯，赦免京城囚徒。
English: In the winter of November, he pardoned the prisoners in the capital.

古文：十二月壬子，江州刺史豫章王欢薨。
现代文：十二月壬子，辽州刺史豫章王萧欢逝世。
English: In December, Renzi, Liaozhou chief historian Yu Zhang Wang Xiaohuan passed away.

古文：以护军将军湘东王绎为镇南将军、江州刺史。
现代文：任命护军将军泅重王芦赶为镇南将军、辽业刺史。
English: He appointed the general of the escort, Zou Chong Wang Luhi, as the general of Zhenan, and Liao Ye stabbed history.

古文：置桂州于湘州始安郡，受湘州督；省南桂林等二十四郡，悉改属桂州。
现代文：在迩业的篮圭塑设置挂业，接受挝业的统领；撤销亩挂并等二十四个郡，全部改为隶属桂州。
English: Guizhou Guizhou Plastic Industry Co., Ltd. was set up in Guizhou and accepted the leadership of the industry in Laos. It was revoked and merged with twenty-four counties, all of which were subordinated to Guizhou.

古文：七年春正月辛巳，舆驾亲祠南郊，赦天下，其有流移及失桑梓者，各还田宅，蠲课五年。
现代文：七年春正月辛巳，皇帝亲自祭祀南郊，大赦天下，有流浪和失去故乡的，各自归还田产住宅，免除五年的赋税。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, the emperor personally sacrificed the southern suburbs and pardoned the world. Those who had wandered and lost their hometowns returned their homes and were exempted from five years of taxes.

古文：辛丑，舆驾亲祠明堂。
现代文：辛丑，皇帝亲自在明堂祭祀。
English: It was so ugly that the emperor himself held a religious service in the Ming Hall.

古文：二月乙巳，以行宕昌王梁弥泰为平西将军、河凉二州刺史、宕昌王。
现代文：二月乙巳，任命代理宕昌王梁弥泰为平西将军、回凉二州刺史、室旦工。
English: In February of this year, Liang Yitai, the acting king of Tangchang, was appointed as the general of Pingxi, the governor of Huilang, the governor of Erzhou, and the governor of Murotan.

古文：辛亥，舆驾躬耕籍田。
现代文：辛亥，皇帝亲自耕种籍田。
English: At the turn of the century, the emperor himself cultivated his ancestral land.

古文：乙卯，京师地震。
现代文：乙卯，京城发生地震。
English: Suddenly, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：丁巳，以中领军、鄱阳王范为镇北将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：丁巳，任命中领军、邮旦旺芦筻为镇北将军、壅业刺史。
English: Ding Si, appointed the middle leader of the army, the postman Wang Lushan as the general of Zhenbei, and Zou Ye stabbed the history.

古文：三月乙亥，宕昌王遣使献马及方物。
现代文：三月乙亥，宕昌王派遣使者贡奉马匹和地方特产。
English: In March of the first year of the Heian period, Emperor Gosho sent an envoy to offer tribute of horses and local special products.

古文：高丽、百济、滑国各遣使献方物。
现代文：直丽、亘辽、逞厘各自派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: Naoli, Watriao and Gangli each sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：夏四月戊申，魏遣使来聘。
现代文：夏四月戊申，魏国派遣使者前来通间修好。
English: In the summer of April, the State of Wei sent an envoy to Tongming to mend fences.

古文：五月癸己，以侍中南康王会理兼领军。
现代文：五月癸巳，任命侍中卢尘王盒理兼任领军。
English: In May of the same year, he appointed a chamberlain, Lu Chen Wang Xue Li, to lead the army.

古文：秋九月戊寅，芮芮国遣使献方物。
现代文：秋九月戊寅，芮芮国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: In autumn and September, the state of Min dispatched an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：冬十月丙午，以侍中刘孺为吏部尚书。
现代文：冬十月丙午，任命侍中刘孺为吏部尚书。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the tenth month in winter, he appointed the chamberlain Liu Wei as the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：十一月丙子，诏停在所役使女丁。
现代文：十一月丙子，韶令制止各处役使女丁。
English: In November of the same year, the imperial edict was issued to stop the use of maidservants in all departments.

古文：丁丑，诏曰： 民之多幸，国之不幸，恩泽屡加，弥长奸盗，朕亦知此之为病矣。
现代文：丁丑，诏令说： 民众的侥幸多，是国家的不幸。恩泽屡次施加，越发助长奸猾盗贼，我也知道这种作法造成的弊端了。
English: Ding Xi, the edict said: The people have more luck than luck, which is the misfortune of the country. The favors repeatedly imposed have increasingly encouraged the treacherous thieves, and I also know the drawbacks caused by this practice.

古文：如不优赦，非仁人之心。
现代文：而不优厚赦免，又不是仁人的心胸。
English: But it is not a generous pardon, and it is not a benevolent heart.

古文：凡厥愆耗逋负，起今七年十一月九日昧爽以前，在民间无问多少，言上尚书，督所未入者，皆赦除之。 
现代文：凡是过失耗费和拖欠租税，从大同七年十一月九日拂晓以前，在民间无论多少，报告尚书统领处没有翰纳的，全部免除。 
English: All negligent expenses and tax arrears, from November 9, Datong before dawn, no matter how many people report to the General Office of the General Office of the People's Republic of China, are exempted.

古文：又诏曰： 用天之道，分地之利，盖先圣之格训也。
现代文：又下韶说： 利用上天的道理，分享大地的利益，大概是先代圣人的格言。
English: He also said, "Using the principles of heaven to share the benefits of the earth is probably the motto of the previous sages.

古文：凡是田桑废宅没入者，公创之外，悉以分给贫民，皆使量其所能以受田分。
现代文：凡是田地房屋被没收的，除公田以外，全部用来分给贫苦民众，都使他们依据能力来接受田地。
English: All the fields and houses that were confiscated, with the exception of public land, were all used to distribute to the poor people, so that they could receive the fields according to their ability.

古文：如闻顷者，豪家富室，多占取公田，贵价僦税，以与贫民，伤时害政，为蠹已甚。
现代文：听说近段时间裹，豪富的家庭，多方占取公田，用昂贵的价格租税，来给贫苦民众耕种，破坏时政，造成的祸害是极为严重的。
English: It is said that in recent times, rich and affluent families have occupied public land in many ways and used expensive taxes to cultivate for the poor, undermining the current government. The harm caused is extremely serious.

古文：自今公田悉不得假与豪家；已假者特听不追。
现代文：从现在起公田全部不能租给豪富家庭；已经租借的特地准许不追回。
English: From now on, all public land cannot be leased to wealthy families; special permits that have already been leased will not be recovered.

古文：其若富室给贫民种粮共营作者，不在禁例。 
现代文：如果富户给予贫苦民众种子共同经营的，不在禁止的条例中。 
English: If rich households give seeds to poor people to jointly operate, it is not in the prohibited regulations.

古文：己丑，以金紫光禄大夫臧盾为领军将军。
现代文：己丑，任命金紫光禄大夫臧盾为领军将军。
English: He was so embarrassed that he appointed Jin Zi Guanglu's doctor, Xing Dun, as the leading general.

古文：十二月壬寅，诏曰： 古人云，一物失所，如纳诸隍，未是切言也。
现代文：十二月壬寅，诏令说： 古人说过，一人失去本来的处所，如同自己把他推入深沟中，遣不是最要紧的话。
English: In December, the imperial edict said: "The ancients said that if a person loses his original place, it is as if he pushes him into a deep ditch. Sending him away is not the most important thing.

古文：朕寒心消志，为日久矣，每当食投箸，方眠彻枕，独坐怀忧，愤慨申旦，非为一人，万姓故耳。
现代文：我痛心悲伤，时间很长了，经常欲进食又放下筷子，正要睡眠又撤去枕头，独自坐着心怀忧虑，抑郁感慨通宵达旦，不是为一人，是为所有民众的缘故。
English: I am saddened and saddened, the time is long, I often want to eat and put down the chopsticks, I am about to sleep and remove the pillow, I sit alone with worry, depression and emotion all night long, not for one person, but for the sake of all the people.

古文：州牧多非良才，守宰虎而傅翼，杨阜是故忧愤，贾谊所以流涕。
现代文：州牧多不是良好人才，郡守县令为恶人作帮凶，杨阜因此忧虑愤恨，贾谊因此流下眼泪。
English: The state herdsmen are mostly not good people. The county magistrate is an accomplice of the villain. Yang Fu is worried and angry, and Jia Yi shed tears.

古文：至于民间诛求万端，或供厨帐，或供厩库，或遣使命，或待宾客，皆无自费，取给于民。
现代文：至于在民间多方求取，有的供给食品，有的供给马棚库房，有的派遣使命，有的接待宾客，都不是自己开支，从民众那裹搜取。
English: As for soliciting from many people, some supply food, some supply horse stables, some send missions, and some receive guests. These are not their own expenses, but are solicited from the public.

古文：又复多遣游军，称为遏防，奸盗不止，暴掠繁多，或求供设，或责脚步。
现代文：又大量派遣游动军队，称为遏止防范，而奸猾盗贼不止，残暴掠夺更繁多，有时寻求别人的供奉，有时要求别人服役。
English: They also dispatched a large number of roving troops, known as deterrence and prevention, and there were more cunning thieves and more brutal robberies, sometimes seeking the service of others, sometimes requiring others to serve.

古文：又行劫纵，更相枉逼，良人命尽，富室财殚。
现代文：又施行劫掠，再加以冤枉逼迫，好人丧命，富户财尽。
English: They plundered and pillaged, persecuted the innocent, killed the good, and plundered the rich.

古文：此为怨酷，非止一事。
现代文：逭造成的怨恨残酷，不仅仅是一两件事。
English: The rancour caused by badgers is brutal and not just about one or two things.

古文：亦频禁断，犹自未已，外司明加听采，随事举奏。
现代文：也曾频繁禁止，仍然没有完结。外司明白地加以收集，据事实检举上奏。
English: There have also been frequent prohibitions, which are still not complete. The foreign affairs department has clearly collected them and reported them according to the facts.

古文：又复公私传、屯、邸、冶，爰至僧尼，当其地界，止应依限守视；乃至广加封固，越界分断，水陆采捕，及以樵苏，遂致细民措手无所。
现代文：又恢复公私的传舍、屯田、邸店、冶铸，直至僧尼寺院，在其地界内，衹应依照限额加以守护；后来竟广加封禁，越过地界去禁止水陆采集、捕鱼和打柴，于是使得百姓没有放手的地方。
English: They also restored public and private mission houses, military camps, residences, smelting and casting, and even monasteries and nunneries, within their territorial boundaries, which should be guarded according to quotas; later, they extended the ban to prohibit water and land collection, fishing and firewood collection beyond the territorial boundaries, so that the people had no place to let go.

古文：凡自今有越界禁断者，禁断之身，皆以军法从事。
现代文：从现在起凡是越过地界加以禁止的，下禁令的本人，都依照军法加以处治。
English: From now on, anyone who crosses the border to impose a ban, as well as the person who imposed the ban, will be dealt with in accordance with military law.

古文：若是公家创内，止不得辄自立屯，与公竞作，以收私利。至百姓樵采以供烟爨者，悉不得禁。及以采捕，亦勿诃问。
现代文：如果是公家田地，禁止不能随意设立屯田，和公家竞争以谋取私利，至于百姓打柴采集以供烧饭者，都不能禁止；以及百姓采集捕鱼，也不要呵责追问。
English: If it is a public field, it is forbidden to set up a farm at will, and compete with the public for private gain. As for the people who collect firewood for cooking, they cannot be prohibited; and the people who collect and catch fish should not be punished.

古文：若不遵承，皆以死罪结正。 
现代文：如果不遵循顺从，都以死罪结案判定。 
English: Failure to comply is punishable by death.

古文：魏遣使来聘。
现代文：魏国派遣使者前来通问修好。
English: Wei dispatched an envoy to ask for a truce.

古文：丙辰，于宫城西立士林馆，延集学者。
现代文：丙辰，在宫城的西面建造士林馆，延聘聚集学者。
English: Hsin-Chen, built the Shilin Museum on the west side of Miyagi, and continued to recruit scholars.

古文：是岁，交州土民李贲攻刺史萧谘，谘输赂，得还越州。
现代文：逭一年，交州当地百姓李贲攻打刺史萧谘，萧谘送纳财货，得以返回越州。
English: In the following year, local people in Jiaozhou, Li Yan, attacked and stabbed Shi Xiaozhi, and Xiaozhi was able to return to Yuezhou after delivering valuable goods.

古文：八年春正月，安成郡民刘敬躬挟左道以反，内史萧说委郡东奔，敬躬据郡，进攻庐陵，取豫章，妖党遂至数万，前逼新淦、柴桑。
现代文：八年春正月，安成郡百姓刘敬躬依仗旁门左道反叛，内史萧说放弃郡城向东逃奔，敬躬占据郡城，进军攻打庐陵，夺取豫章，妖党竟达到几万人，向前逼近新淦、柴桑。
English: In the first month of the spring of the eighth year, the people of Ancheng County, Liu Jingyi, rebelled by relying on the side door and left the road. Inner Shi Xiao said that he would abandon the county seat and flee to the east. Jingyi occupied the county seat, marched into the attack on Fuling, and captured Yuzhang. The demon party actually reached tens of thousands of people, and approached Xinlu and Chaisang.

古文：二月戊戌，江州刺史湘东王绎遣中兵曹子郢讨之。
现代文：二月戊戌，江州刺史湘束王萧绎派遣中兵参军曹子郢讨伐敬躬。
English: In February, at the end of the Warring States period, the prince of Xiangzhu, King Xiaoyan, dispatched soldiers to join the army to fight against Cao Ziqi.

古文：三月戊辰，大破之，擒敬躬送京师，斩于建康市。
现代文：三月戊辰，大败敬躬，擒获敬躬送到京城，在建康街市斩首。
English: In March of the same year, he was defeated and sent to Beijing, where he was beheaded in Jiankang Street.

古文：是月，于江州新蔡、高塘立颂平屯，垦作蛮田。
现代文：这月，在江州的新蔡、高塘设立颂平屯，开垦蛮人田地。
English: This month, Songping Town was established in Xin Cai and Gaotang of Jiangzhou to reclaim the barbarian fields.

古文：遣越州刺史陈侯、罗州刺史宁巨、安州刺史李智、爱州刺史阮汉，同征李贲于交州。
现代文：派遣越州刺史陈侯、墨刺史空旦、刺史奎望、玺刺史医违，一同到交州征伐李贲。
English: He dispatched Chen Hou, Kuotan, Kuiwang, and Ihong to Jiaozhou to conquer Liyang.

古文：九年春闰月丙申，地震，生毛。
现代文：九年春闰月丙申，发生地震，生长出毛状物。
English: In the spring leap month of the ninth year, an earthquake occurred, and hair-like things grew.

古文：二月甲戌，使江州民三十家出奴婢一户，配送司州。
现代文：二月甲戌，命辽民众三十家出一户奴婢，发配到旦业。
English: In February, Armor Day, the people of Liao ordered thirty households to produce one household of slaves and maidservants, and distribute them to Danye.

古文：三月，以太子詹事谢举为尚书仆射。
现代文：三月，任命太子詹事邀举为尚书仆射。
English: In March, Prince Zhan Zhi was invited to be appointed as Shang Shu's valet.

古文：夏四月，林邑王破德州，攻李贲，贲将范修又破林邑王于九德，林邑王败走。
现代文：夏四月，林邑王攻下垄业，攻打奎童，奎童的将领莲恺又在：妪打败挞旦王，麸垦王失败逃走。
English: In the summer of April, King Lin Yi conquered Luoyang and attacked Quedong. The general of Quedong, Lian Ye, was also in Luoyang. He defeated King Jutan, and King Zou fled unsuccessfully.

古文：冬十一月辛丑，安西将军、益州刺史武陵王纪进号征西将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：冬十一月辛丑，安西将军、益州刺史武屋王蕴纪升军号为征西将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the bitter cold of winter in November, Anxi General Wang Yunji, the governor of Yizhou Province, was promoted to the rank of General of the Western Expedition, and Kaifu Yi was promoted to the Third Division.

古文：十二月壬戌，领军将军臧盾卒；以轻车将军河东王誉为领军将军。
现代文：十二月壬戌，领军将军臧盾去世；任命轻车将军河东王萧誉为领军将军。
English: In December of the same year, the leading general Zou Dun died, and the light vehicle general, Hedong Wang Xiaoyu, was appointed as the leading general.

古文：十年春正月，李贲于交址窃位号，署置百官。
现代文：十年春正月，李贲在交耻窃取名号，设置百官。
English: In the first month of the tenth year of the Spring, Li Yao stole the name and set up a hundred officials.

古文：三月甲午，舆驾幸兰陵，谒建宁陵。
现代文：三月甲午，皇帝前往兰陵，拜谒建陵。
English: On the afternoon of March 1st, the emperor went to Lanling to pay homage to Yu Jianling.

古文：辛丑，至修陵。
现代文：辛丑，到达脩陵。
English: Xin ugly, arrived at Fuling.

古文：壬寅，诏曰： 朕自违桑梓，五十余载，乃眷东顾，靡日不思。
现代文：壬寅，诏令说： 我自离开故乡，五十多年了，眷念回到东方，没有哪天不思索。
English: Jinyin said, "It has been more than fifty years since I left my hometown, and I have longed to return to the East. I never go a day without thinking about it.

古文：今四方款关，海外有截，狱讼稍简，国务小闲，始获展敬园陵，但增感恸。
现代文：现在四方归附，海外诸侯齐听命，案件诉讼逐渐减少，国家事务稍有闲暇，始能到陵墓表达敬意，衹是增添了感伤悲恸。
English: Now that all four sides have been annexed, the overseas princes are all obeying orders, the cases and lawsuits are gradually decreasing, the state affairs have a little leisure, and they can pay their respects to the mausoleum, which has added to the sentimentality and sadness.

古文：故乡老少，接踵远至，情貌孜孜，若归于父，宜有以慰其此心。
现代文：故乡老少，接连远远到来，神情状态勤勉不怠，如同回到父亲身边，应足以安慰我的遣颗心。
English: My hometown, old and young, coming from far away one after another, looking diligent and hardworking, as if returning to my father's side, should be enough to comfort my heart.

古文：并可锡位一阶，并加颁赉。
现代文：都可赐予官位一级，并且加以赏赐。
English: They can all be given the rank of first-class official and rewarded accordingly.

古文：所经县邑，无出今年租赋。
现代文：所经过的县邑，不交纳今年的租赋。
English: The counties and towns visited will not pay this year's rent.

古文：监所责民，蠲复二年。
现代文：监察部门向民众收取过的，免除二年租赋。
English: The supervisory department will waive two years of rent that has been collected from the public.

古文：并普赉内外从官军主左右钱米各有差。 
现代文：并且普遍赏赐内外随从官员军主左右钱米多少不等。 
English: Moreover, the amount of money and rice generally awarded to officials and military leaders' followers inside and outside the country varied widely.

古文：因作《还旧乡》诗。
现代文：因之撰作《还旧乡》的诗篇。
English: As a result, he wrote the poem "Returning to the Old Town."

古文：癸卯，诏园陵职司，恭事勤劳，并锡位一阶，并加颁赉。
现代文：癸卯，诏令陵园主管部门，恭敬勤劳，都赐予官位一级，并加以赏赐。
English: At the same time, the imperial edict ordered the cemetery authorities to respectfully and diligently grant the first-class official rank and reward it.

古文：丁未，仁威将军、南徐州刺史临川王正义进号安东将军。
现代文：丁未，仁威将军、南徐州刺史临川王正义升军号为安束将军。
English: Ding Wei, General Ren Wei, South Xuzhou, Linchuan, Wang Zhengyi, the military code is General Anzac.

古文：己酉，幸京口城北固楼，改名北顾。
现代文：己酉，皇帝前往京口城北固楼，改楼名为北顾。
English: On his return, the emperor went to Beigulou in the city of Jingkou and renamed it Beigulou.

古文：庚戌，幸回宾亭，宴帝乡故老，及所经近县奉迎候者少长数千人，各赉钱二千。
现代文：庚戌，前往回宾亭，宴请皇帝家乡故老和所经过附近县迎候的老少几千人，各赏赐钱二千文。
English: Geng Zheng, went to Huibin Pavilion and invited thousands of old and young people from the emperor's hometown and nearby counties, each of whom was rewarded with 2,000 yuan.

古文：夏四月乙卯，舆驾至自兰陵。
现代文：夏四月乙卯，皇帝从兰陵返回。
English: In the summer of April, the emperor returned from Lanling.

古文：诏鳏寡孤独尤贫者赡恤各有差。
现代文：韶令对鳏寡孤独格外贫困的人救济抚恤多少不等。
English: The number of relief pensions for the widowed, lonely and extremely poor varies according to the imperial edict.

古文：五月丁酉，尚书令何敬容免。
现代文：五月丁酉，尚书令何敬容被免职。
English: In May of the same year, Shang Shuling dismissed He Jingrong from his post.

古文：秋九月己丑，诏曰： 今兹远近，雨泽调适，其获已及，冀必万箱，宜使百姓因斯安乐。
现代文：秋九月己丑，韶令说； 今年远近各地，雨量调和适中，收获时节已到，希望定能积粮万箱，使百姓因此而安乐。
English: The autumn and September are ugly, said the imperial edict; this year, the rainfall is moderate in all regions, and the harvest season has arrived. It is hoped that it will be able to accumulate thousands of boxes of grain, so that the people will be happy.

古文：凡天下罪无轻重，已发觉未发觉，讨捕未擒者，皆赦宥之。
现代文：凡天下罪过无论轻重，已经发觉或者没发觉，讨捕没有擒获的，都赦免宽恕他们。
English: All the sins of the world, no matter how serious they are, whether they have been discovered or not, whether they have been caught or not, are forgiven.

古文：侵割耗散官物，无问多少，亦悉原除。
现代文：侵占耗费官府物资，无论多少，也全部原谅免罪。
English: Embezzlement of government materials, no matter how much, is also completely forgiven and exonerated.

古文：田者荒废、水旱不作、无当时文列，应追税者，并作田不登公格者，并停。
现代文：田地荒废、遇水旱不耕作、没有当时的文书报告，应追交租税的，以及耕种土地没有登记到官府簿籍上的，都停止交税。
English: If the fields are abandoned, if they are not cultivated in the event of floods or droughts, if there is no written report at that time, and the tax should be recovered, and if the cultivated land is not registered in the government book, the tax will be stopped.

古文：各备台州以文最逋殿，罪悉从原。
现代文：各台州因文书末等及拖欠租税列在下等的，罪遇都从宽原谅。
English: Each Taizhou is listed in the lower class due to late paperwork and tax arrears, and the crimes are forgiven with leniency.

古文：其有因饥逐食，离乡去土，悉听复业，蠲课五年。 
现代文：有因饥荒到外地谋食，离开了家乡本土的，都准许恢复产业，免除五年租税。 
English: Those who left their hometowns to seek food in other places due to famine were allowed to resume their industries and were exempted from taxes for five years.

古文：冬十二月，大雪，平地三尺。
现代文：冬十二月，天降大雪，平地雪深三尺。
English: In the winter of December, heavy snow fell from the sky, and the snow on the flat ground was three feet deep.

古文：十一年春三月庚辰，诏曰： 皇王在昔，泽风未远，故端居玄扈，拱默岩廊。
现代文：十一年春三月庚辰，韶令说： 黄帝在从前，恩德的风尚相距不远，所以安详地住在玄扈山，在朝廷拱手沉默。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year of the Heian period, in March of the Heian period, the imperial edict said: In the past of the Yellow Emperor, the Ende style was not far away, so he lived peacefully in Xuanlu Mountain and kept silent in the imperial court.

古文：自大道既沦，浇波斯逝，动竞日滋，情伪弥作。
现代文：自从大道沦落，朴实的风尚消失，竞争逐日滋长，虚假越发出现。
English: Since the decline of the avenue, the simple style has disappeared, competition has grown day by day, and falsehood has increasingly appeared.

古文：朕负扆君临，百年将半。
现代文：我背靠斧纹屏风统御天下，一百年将遇一半。
English: I will rule the world with an axe-shaped screen behind me. In a hundred years, I will meet half of them.

古文：宵漏未分，躬劳政事；白日西浮，不遑飧饭。
现代文：夜半时分，还亲自操劳政事；太阳西下，还来不及吃晚饭。
English: In the middle of the night, I was still busy with work and government affairs; the sun was setting, and it was too late to have dinner.

古文：退居犹于布素，含咀匪过藜藿。
现代文：退朝还披着布衣，品味的不过是野菜。
English: Back in the day, they were still clothed in cloth, and they only tasted like vegetables.

古文：宁以万乘为贵，四海为富；唯欲亿兆康宁，下民安乂。
现代文：哪裹以万乘车辆为尊贵，占据四海为富有；衹是想使百姓康乐宁静，小民安定太平。
English: Where wrapped in a million-passenger vehicle for the noble, occupy the four seas for the rich; the dragonfly is to make the people relaxed and peaceful, the little people stable and peaceful.

古文：虽复三思行事，而百虑多失。
现代文：即使三思而后行，且还是百虑中多有过失。
English: Even if you think twice before you act, you will still make mistakes.

古文：凡远近分置、内外条流、四方所立屯、传、邸、冶，市埭、桁渡，津税、田园，新旧守宰，游军戍逻，有不便于民者，尚书州郡各速条上，当随言除省，以舒民患。
现代文：凡是远近分割设置、内外条例流别、四方所设屯田、传舍、邸店、冶铸，市内土坝、浮桥，渡口税、田园，新旧郡守县令，设游动军队戍守巡逻，有不便利于民众的，尚书州郡各自迅速条列奏上，应同时说明免除省略，来消除民众的患难。 
English: For matters that are not convenient for the people, such as the far-and-near division of the county, the separation of internal and external regulations, the establishment of military cantonments, residences, residences, and metallurgical foundries by the four parties, the city dam, floating bridges, the ferry tax, the countryside, the new and old county governors' orders, and the establishment of military patrols, all of which are not convenient for the people, Shangshuzhou County should quickly make a report, and at the same time explain the exemptions and omissions, so as to eliminate the difficulties of the people.

古文：夏四月，魏遣使来聘。
现代文：夏四月，魏国派遣使者前来通问修好。
English: In the summer of April, Wei dispatched an envoy to come and ask for a truce.

古文：冬十月己未，诏曰： 尧、舜以来，便开赎刑，中年依古，许罪身入赀，吏下因此，不无奸猾，所以一日复敕禁断。
现代文：冬十月己未，韶令说： 尧、舜以来，便开创了赎刑，即位后依照古代，准许犯罪的人送交资产，有下层官吏利用这个机会，不能杜绝奸猾产生，所以不久前的一天又下令禁止。
English: Before the winter of October, the imperial edict said: "Since Emperor Wu and Empress Dowager Cixi came to power, they have pioneered the punishment of atonement. After the enthronement, according to ancient times, those who committed crimes were allowed to hand over their assets. Some lower-level officials took advantage of this opportunity, and they could not prevent treachery from occurring. Therefore, one day not long ago, they issued another order to ban it.

古文：川流难壅，人心惟危，既乖内典慈悲之义，又伤外教好生之德。
现代文：水流难以堵塞，人心动荡不安，既违背佛典慈悲为怀的义理，又损伤儒教爱惜生灵的德行。
English: The flow of water is difficult to block, and people's hearts are restless. This not only violates the Buddhist principle of compassion, but also damages the Confucian virtue of caring for the living.

古文：《书》云： 与杀不辜，宁失不经。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 与其杀害无罪的人，宁可放过不守正道的人。 
English: "Shangshu" said: Rather than killing innocent people, it is better to let go of those who do not follow the right path.

古文：可复开罪身，皆听入赎。 
现代文：可再给有罪的人打开生路。都准许输钱赎身。 
English: But it can also open up a way of life for the guilty. All are allowed to lose money to redeem themselves.

古文：中大同元年春正月丁未，曲阿县建陵隧口石骐驎动，有大蛇斗隧中，其一被伤奔走。
现代文：史主回元年春正月丁未，迪回逊!邀的墓道口上石骐膦晃动，有大蛇在墓道中相斗，其中一条受伤逃跑。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the year, the stone coffin at the entrance of the graveyard was shaking. There were big snakes fighting each other in the graveyard, and one of them was injured and ran away.

古文：癸丑，交州刺史杨票克交趾嘉宁城，李贲窜入獠洞，交州平。
现代文：癸丑，交州刺史杨瞟攻克交趾的嘉宁城，李贲逃窜到屈僚洞，交州平定。
English: 丑, Jiaozhou stabbed Shi Yang Jie to conquer Jiaoning City, Jiaozhou stabbed Shi Yang Jie to conquer Jiaozhou stabbed Jiaozhou stabbed Jiaozhou stabbed Jiaozhou stabbed Jiaozhou stabbed Jiaozhou stabbed Jiaozhou stabbed Jiaozhou stabbed Jiaozhou stabbed Jiaozhou stabbed Jiaozhou stabbed Jiaozhou stabbed Jiaozhou stabbed.

古文：三月乙巳，大赦天下：凡主守割盗、放散官物，及以军粮器甲，凡是赦所不原者，起十一年正月以前，皆悉从恩，十一年正月已后，悉原加责；其或为事逃叛流移，因饥以后亡乡失土，可听复业，蠲课五年，停其徭役；其被拘之身，各还本郡，旧业若在，皆悉还之。
现代文：三月乙巳，大赦天下：凡是负责守护而割取盗贼、抛弃丢失官府物资，以及军粮器械，凡是赦免令所不宽恕的，在十一年正月以前，都全部从宽施恩；十一年正月以后，都宽恕而加以责罚；有人因事逃跑叛变流落他乡，因饥荒以后离开家乡失去土地，可准许恢复产业，免除五年赋税，停征徭役；被拘捕的人，各自回到本郡，旧日田宅如果还在，都全部归还他们。
English: On the 21st day of March, there will be a general amnesty: all those who are responsible for guarding and cutting off thieves, abandoning lost government materials, and military food equipment, and those who are not pardoned by the amnesty order, will all be pardoned before the first month of the 11th year; after the first month of the 11th year, they will all be pardoned and punished; some people who have fled and defected and lost their land due to famine may be allowed to restore their property, exempt from five years of taxation, and suspend conscription; those who have been arrested will each return to this county, and if the old Hita house is still there,

古文：庚戌，法驾出同泰寺大会，停寺省，讲《金字三慧经》。
现代文：庚戌，皇帝乘车到回台圭参加法会，停留在寺省，讲解《金字三慧经》。
English: Geng Zi, the emperor, took a car back to Taigui to attend the puja, and stayed at the temple to give a lecture on the "Golden Three Wisdom Sutra."

古文：夏四月丙戌，于同泰寺解讲，设法会。
现代文：夏四月丙戌，在同泰寺讲授佛经，设立法会。
English: In the summer of April, he lectured on Buddhist scriptures at Dongtai Temple and established the Legislative Council.

古文：大赦，改元。
现代文：大赦天下，改年号。
English: An amnesty will be implemented and the year will be changed.

古文：孝悌力田为父后者赐爵一级，赉宿卫文武各有差。
现代文：对孝悌力田和为父亲继嗣者赐爵位一级，赏赐守卫的文武官员多少不等。
English: For filial sons and daughters and those who are the heirs of their fathers, a first-class knighthood is given, and the rewards for the guards of the civil and military officials vary somewhat.

古文：是夜，同泰寺灾。
现代文：这天夜晚，同泰寺遭遇火灾。
English: On this night, Dongtai Temple suffered a fire.

古文：六月辛巳，竟天有声，如风雨相击薄。
现代文：六月辛巳，满天有声音，如同风雨相撞击。
English: It was June, and there was a sound in the sky, as if the wind and rain were colliding.

古文：秋七月辛酉，以武昌王嵒为东扬州刺史。
现代文：秋七月辛酉，任命武昌王萧警为束扬州刺史。
English: In the autumn and July, Wuchang King Xiaoguan was appointed as the leader of Yangzhou.

古文：甲子，诏曰： 禽兽知母而不知父，无赖子弟过于禽兽，至于父母并皆不知。
现代文：甲子，诏令说： 禽兽知道母亲而不知道父亲，奸诈强横的子弟超过禽兽，以致连父母都不知道。
English: "Animals know their mothers but not their fathers, and children who are deceitful and disobedient surpass animals so that they do not even know their parents," the edict said.

古文：多触王宪，致及老人。
现代文：多触犯国法，牵害到老人。
English: Many of them violate the law of the country and involve the elderly.

古文：耆年禁执，大可伤愍。
现代文：老人被囚禁，大可悲伤同情。
English: The old man's imprisonment arouses great sorrow and sympathy.

古文：自今有犯罪者，父母祖父母勿坐。
现代文：从现在起有犯罪的，父母和祖父祖母不要连坐。
English: From now on, if there is a crime, parents and grandparents should not sit together.

古文：唯大逆不预今恩。 
现代文：惟独大逆不道的罪行不获得今日的恩典。 
English: Only the most heinous crimes do not receive today's grace.

古文：丙寅，诏曰： 朝四而暮三，众狙皆喜，名实未亏，而喜怒为用。
现代文：丙寅，诏令说： 早晨四个而晚上三个，一群弥猴都喜悦，名称实质没有亏负，而喜怒的心情却有意义。
English: Hsin Yin, the edict said: At four in the morning and three in the evening, a group of monkeys are happy. The name is not deficient in essence, but the mood of joy and anger is meaningful.

古文：顷闻外间多用九陌钱，陌减则物贵，陌足则物贱，非物有贵贱，是心有颠倒。
现代文：近来听说民间多用九陌钱，钱额减少则货物昂贵，钱额充足则物价低，这不是货物有贵贱，是人心颠倒了。
English: Recently, I heard that people use more than nine strange money. If the amount of money is reduced, the goods will be expensive. If the amount of money is sufficient, the price will be low. This is not because the goods are valuable, but because people's hearts have been turned upside down.

古文：至于远方，日更滋甚。岂直国有异政，乃至家有殊俗，徒乱王制，无益民财。
现代文：至于偏远处，更日渐严重哪裹衹是国家有不同的政策，简直是家庭中有不同的习俗，徒然扰乱国家制度，无益于民众增加财富。
English: As for the remote areas, it is becoming more and more serious. This is because the state has different policies, and it is almost as if there are different customs in the family, which in vain disturbs the national system and does not benefit the people to increase wealth.

古文：自今可通用足陌钱。
现代文：从现在起可通行足额的钱币。
English: From now on, the full amount of coins can be used.

古文：令书行后，百日为期，若犹有犯，男子谪运，女子质作，并同三年。 
现代文：法令施行后，以一百天为期限，如果还有违犯的，男子判罚转运，女子服劳役，都同为三年。 
English: After the implementation of the decree, the deadline is 100 days. If there are still violations, the man will be sentenced to transportation, and the woman will be sentenced to labor service, both for three years.

古文：八月丁丑，东扬州刺史武昌王嵒薨。
现代文：八月丁丑，束扬州刺史武昌王萧警逝世。
English: In August, Ding Chou, a member of the Yangzhou Jinshi Wuchang Wang Xiaoguan died.

古文：以安东将军、南徐州刺史临川王正义即本号东扬州刺史，丹阳尹邵陵王纶为镇东将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：任命安柬将军、南徐州刺史临川王正义以本来名号任塞扬州刺史，丹阳尹邵陵王萧纶为镇束将军、南徐州刺史。
English: He appointed General An Kham, the governor of South Xuzhou Province, Linchuan Wang Zhengyi as the governor of Sayang Province with his original name, and Danyang Yin Sholing Wang Xiaoqi as the governor of Zhenzhu Province and the governor of South Xuzhou Province.

古文：甲午，渴般国遣使献方物。
现代文：甲午，渴槃陁国派遣使者贡奉地方特产。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, the thirsty country sent an envoy to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：冬十月癸酉，汝阴王刘哲薨。
现代文：冬十月癸酉，汝阴王刘哲逝世。
English: In the winter of October, Ruyin King Liu Zhe passed away.

古文：乙亥，以前东扬州刺史岳阳王察为雍州刺史。
现代文：乙亥，任命前东扬州刺史岳阳王萧察为雍州刺史。
English: Yi Hai, appointed the former East Yangzhou chief historian Yueyang Wang Xiao Cha as the Yongzhou chief historian.

古文：太清元年正月壬寅，骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史庐陵王续薨；以镇南将军、江州刺史湘东王绎为镇西将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：太清元年正月壬寅，骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史庐陵王萧续逝世；任命镇南将军、江州刺史湘束王萧绎为镇西将军、荆州刺史。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the First Qing Dynasty, Ren Yin, the general of the cavalry, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, Jing Zhou, the general of the cavalry and the general of the cavalry and the general of the cavalry and the general of the cavalry and the general of the cavalry and the general of the cavalry and the general of the cavalry and the general of the cavalry and the general of the cavalry and the general of the cavalry and the general of the cavalry and the general of the cavalry and the general of the cavalry passed away.

古文：辛酉，舆驾亲祠南郊，诏曰： 天行弥纶，覆焘之功博；乾道变化，资始之德成。
现代文：辛酉，皇帝亲自祭祀南郊，诏令说： 上天运行弥补缝合，覆盖的功效博大；天道变化，滋生万物的德行形成。
English: Xin Xin, the emperor personally sacrificed the southern suburbs, the imperial edict said: the operation of heaven compensates for the sutures, the effect of covering is great; the heavens change, and the virtues of all things are formed.

古文：朕沐浴斋宫，虔恭上帝，祗事燎，高熛太一，大礼克遂，感庆兼怀，思与亿兆，同其福惠。
现代文：我在斋室沐浴，虔诚敬奉上天，恭谨聚积柴禾，高祭太一，大礼完成，感慨与喜庆兼具，思虑和广大民众，同享幸福恩惠。
English: I bathed in the prayer room, reverently worshipped the heavens, respectfully gathered firewood, celebrated the high festival, completed the grand ceremony, both sentimental and festive, thoughtful and broad masses, and shared happiness and grace.

古文：可大赦天下，尤穷者无出即年租调；清议禁锢，并皆宥释；所讨逋叛，巧籍隐年，暗丁匿口，开恩百日，各令自首，不问往罪；流移他乡，听复宅业，蠲课五年；孝悌力田，赐爵一级；居局治事，赏劳二年。
现代文：可大赦天下，格外贫穷的不要交纳今年的田租户调；因社会公正的议论而被禁止为官的，全都宽恕解除禁令；所讨伐的逃犯反叛者，玩弄账籍隐瞒年龄，藏匿男丁人口者，开恩一百天，使各自自首，不追究过去的罪行；流落他乡，准许恢复住宅田产，免除五年的赋税；对孝悌力田者赐予爵位一级；住在官府办事的赏赐两年的劳绩。
English: However, there will be a general amnesty, and the extremely poor will not have to pay this year's field tenant transfer; those who have been banned from serving as officials due to social justice discussions will all be pardoned and the ban will be lifted; the fugitive rebels who have been persecuted, those who play with accounts to hide their age, and those who hide the male population will be granted a hundred days to make each of them surrender without investigating past crimes; those who have been exiled to other villages will be allowed to restore residential fields and will be exempted from five years of taxation; those who are filial and work in fields will be given a first-class knighthood; those who live in

古文：可班下远近，博采英异，或德茂州闾，道行乡邑，或独行特立，不求闻达，咸使言上，以时招聘。 
现代文：可以颁布到远近各地，广泛搜罗英才，有人德行闻名于州里，道义实行于乡间，有人志行高洁不随波逐流，不谋求为人所知，都使有关官员上报，及时召见聘用。 
English: It can be promulgated to all parts of the country far and near, widely collecting talents, some people's virtues are famous in the state, morality is practiced in the countryside, some people aspire to be noble and clean, do not drift with the tide, and do not seek to be known to people, all of which make the relevant officials report and timely summon for employment.

古文：甲子，舆驾亲祠明堂。
现代文：甲子，皇帝亲自到明堂祭祀。
English: In fact, the emperor himself went to Myeongdong to offer the sacrifice.

古文：二月己卯，白虹贯日。
现代文：二月己卯，一股白气贯穿太阳。
English: It is February, and the sun is shining brightly.

古文：庚辰，魏司徒侯景求以豫、广、颍、洛、阳、西扬、东荆、北荆、襄、东豫、南兗、西兗、齐等十三州内属。
现代文：庚辰，魏国司徒侯景请求献出豫、广、颖、洛、阳、西扬、束荆、北荆、襄、束豫、南兖、西兖、齐等十三个州归附梁国。
English: Geng Chen and Wei Sitou Houjing requested that thirteen states, including Yu, Guang, Ying, Luo, Yang, Xiyang, Sokou, Beijin, Xiang, Sokou, Nanlu, Xilu and Qi, be annexed to Liang.

古文：壬午，以景为大将军，封河南王，大行台，制承如邓禹故事。
现代文：壬午，任命侯景为大将军，封河南王，大行台秉承制命行事，如同邓禹的旧例。
English: In Renwu, he appointed Hou Jing as the great general, named him the king of Henan, and Da Xing Tai followed his orders, just like Deng Yu's old example.

古文：丁亥，舆驾躬耕籍田。
现代文：丁亥，皇帝亲自耕种藉田。
English: Dinghai, the emperor himself cultivated the borrowed land.

古文：三月庚子，高祖幸同泰寺，设无遮大会，舍身，公卿等以钱一亿万奉赎。
现代文：三月庚子，直担前往同泰寺，举行无遮大法会，施舍自身，公卿等官员用钱一亿万文赎回。
English: In March, Geng Zi went to Dongtai Temple to hold the Great Indiscriminate Puja. He gave alms himself, and officials such as court nobles redeemed him with 100 million yuan.

古文：甲辰，遣司州刺史羊鸦仁、兗州刺史桓和、仁州刺史湛海珍等应接北豫州。
现代文：甲辰，派遣司业刺史芏墨迄、塞刺史担勉、仁蛆刺史湛海珍等人接应韭辽姐。
English: Jia Chen dispatched the Division of Industry and Commerce of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of the People's Republic of China, the Department of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of the People's Republic of China, the Department of Education, Science and Technology of the People's Republic of China, the Department of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of the People's Republic of China, the Department of Education, Science and Technology of the People's Republic of China, the Department of Education, Science and Technology of the People's Republic of China, the Department of Education, Science and Technology of the People's Republic of China, the Department of Education,

古文：夏四月丁亥，舆驾还宫，大赦天下，改元，孝悌力田为父后者赐爵一级，在朝群臣宿卫文武并加颁赉。
现代文：夏四月丁亥，皇帝回宫，大赦天下，改年号，对孝悌力田和为父亲继嗣者赐爵位一级，在朝的群臣和守卫的文武官员都加以赏赐。
English: In the summer and April of Dinghai, the emperor returned to the palace, pardoned the world, changed the year, and gave the first-class knighthood to the filial piety and the father's successor, and rewarded the courtiers and the guarding civil and military officials in the court.

古文：五月丁酉，舆驾幸德阳堂，宴群臣，设丝竹乐。
现代文：五月丁酉，皇帝前往德阳堂，宴请群臣，设立音乐会。
English: In May, Ding Xi, the emperor went to Deyang Hall, invited a group of ministers to a banquet, and set up a concert.

古文：六月戊辰，以前雍州刺史鄱阳王范为征北将军，总督汉北征讨诸军事。
现代文：六月戊辰，任命前雍州刺史鄱阳王萧范为征北将军，总督汉北征讨诸军事。
English: In June, Wu Chen appointed Xiao Fan, the former Yongzhou governor of Shiyang, as the general of the Northern Expedition, and the governor of the Northern Expedition to the military.

古文：秋七月庚申，羊鸦仁入悬瓠城。
现代文：秋七月庚申，芏堕仁进入悬邀球。
English: In the autumn and July Koshin, 堕落仁 entered the invitation ball.

古文：甲子，诏曰： 二豫分置，其来久矣。
现代文：甲子，韶令说： 两个邃业分别设置，由来很久了。
English: First son, the imperial edict said: The two yakitori businesses were set up separately and have been around for a long time.

古文：今汝、颍克定，可依前代故事，以悬瓠为豫州，寿春为南豫，改合肥为合州，北广陵为淮州，项城为殷州，合州为南合州。 
现代文：现在迪丞、题丞已平定，可依照前代旧例，在曼翅设逸业，画童设南豫州，改盒胆为金丛，韭庐堕为进业，玺球为壁业，金州为直金业。 
English: Now that Di Zheng and Zhe Zheng have been settled, it is possible to follow the old precedent of the previous generation and set up Ying industry in Man Ying and Nan Yuzhou in Gaodong, change the box gallbladder to the gold cluster, the skull and crossbones to the advancement industry, the skull and crossbones to the wall industry, and the gold state to the direct gold industry.

古文：八月乙丑，王师北伐，以南豫州刺史萧渊明为大都督。
现代文：八月乙丑，朝廷军队向北征伐，任命南豫州刺史芦揽塱为大都督。
English: In the second month of August, the imperial army marched northward and appointed the governor of the southern part of Henan Province, Lu Zhaojun, as the grand governor.

古文：诏曰： 今汝南新复，嵩、颍载清，瞻言遣黎，有劳鉴寐，宜覃宽惠，与之更始。
现代文：诏令说： 现在迪亩刚收复，当山、题丞清明，思念百姓，日夜辛劳，应该广施恩惠，让他们重新开始。
English: The edict said: Now that Di Mu has just been recovered, when the mountains and hills are clear, and the people are missed, and they are working hard day and night, we should give them a wide range of favors and let them start anew.

古文：应是缘边初附诸州部内百姓，先有负罪流亡，逃叛入北，一皆旷荡，不问往愆。并不得挟以私仇而相报复。
现代文：所有缘边刚归附的各州之内百姓，先前有罪逃跑，背叛进入北方的，一律免除，不追究往的罪过，都不能怀有私仇而加以报复。
English: All the people in the newly annexed states, who had previously committed the crime of fleeing and defecting to the north, were to be absolved. They were not to be held accountable for their past sins, nor were they to take revenge with personal vengeance.

古文：若有犯者，严加裁问。 
现代文：如有违犯的，严厉加以制裁追究。 
English: If there is any violation, it will be severely sanctioned and investigated.

古文：戊子，以大将军侯景录行台尚书事。
现代文：戊子，任命大将军堡量为录行台尚书事。
English: Bo Zi, appointed the commander of the fortress as the recording desk Shang Shuji.

古文：九月癸卯，王游苑成。
现代文：九月癸卯，王游苑建成。
English: At the end of September, Wang Youyuan was completed.

古文：庚戌，舆驾幸苑。
现代文：庚戌，皇帝前往苑中。
English: Geng Zang, the emperor went to the middle school.

古文：冬十一月，魏遣大将军慕容绍宗等至寒山。
现代文：冬十一月，魏国派遣大将军慕容绍宗等人到达塞山。
English: In the winter of November, the State of Wei dispatched General Murong Shaosong and others to Saishan.

古文：丙午，大战，渊明败绩，及北兗州刺史胡贵孙等并陷魏。
现代文：丙午，大战，逦塱大败，和北兖州刺史胡贵孙等人都陷落到魏国。
English: In the afternoon of the 4th day of the 3rd month, the great war, the great defeat of the Han Dynasty, and the Northern Han Dynasty statesman Hu Guisun and others all fell to Wei.

古文：绍宗进围潼州。
现代文：绍宗进军包围潼州。
English: Shaozong marched to encircle Ganzhou.

古文：十二月戊辰，遣太子舍人元贞还北为魏主。
现代文：十二月戊辰，派遣太子舍人元贞回到北方为魏主。
English: In December, Emperor Wencheng sent the crown prince Shenren Yuanzhen back to the north to become the ruler of Wei.

古文：辛巳，以前征北将军鄱阳王范为安北将军、南豫州刺史。
现代文：辛巳，任命前征北将军鄱阳王萧范为安北将军、南豫州刺史。
English: Xin Si, appointed the former Northern Expeditionary General, Shenyang Wang Xiao Fan, as the General of Anbei and the Historian of Southern Yuzhou.

古文：二年春正月戊戌，诏在位各举所知。
现代文：二年春正月戊戌，诏令在位官员各举所了解的人。
English: In the first month of the second year of spring, the reigning officials of the imperial edict listed the people they knew.

古文：己亥，魏陷涡阳。
现代文：己亥，魏军攻占涡阳。
English: At the end of the Heian period, the Wei army conquered the Turbulent Sun.

古文：辛丑，以尚书仆射谢举为尚书令，守吏部尚书王克为尚书仆射。
现代文：辛丑，任命尚书仆射谢举为尚书令，试任吏部尚书王克为尚书仆射。
English: Xin Ug, appointed Shang Shuxu's servant Sha Xiejue as Shang Shuxu's deputy, and appointed Shang Shuxu's subordinate Wang Ke as Shang Shuxu's deputy.

古文：甲辰，豫州刺史羊鸦仁，殷州刺史羊思达，并弃城走，魏进据之。
现代文：甲辰，豫州刺史羊鸦仁、殷州刺史羊思达，都放弃城池逃走，魏军进兵占据。
English: Jiachen, Yuzhou Zhishi Yangren, Yinzhou Zhishi Yang Sida, all abandoned the city and fled, and the Wei army marched in to occupy.

古文：乙卯，以大将军侯景为南豫州牧，安北将军、南豫州刺史鄱阳王范为合州刺史。
现代文：乙卯，任命大将军侯景为南豫州牧，安北将军、南豫州刺史鄱阳王萧范为合州刺史。
English: Second, he appointed General Hou Jing as the governor of South Henan Province, and General An Bei and South Henan Provincial Governor Shenyang Wang Xiao Fan as the governor of Hezhou Province.

古文：三月甲辰，抚东将军高丽王高延卒，以其息为宁东将军、高丽王、乐浪公。
现代文：三月甲辰，抚束将军高丽王高延去世，任命他的儿子为宁束将军、高丽王、乐浪公。
English: In March, Fuzoku General Goryeo King Gaoyan passed away, and his son was named General Ningzoku, King of Goryeo, and Prince Le Lang.

古文：己未，以镇东将军、南徐州刺史邵陵王纶为平南将军、湘州刺史、同三司之仪，中卫将军、开府仪同三司萧渊藻为征东将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：己未，任命镇束将军、南徐州刺史邵陵王萧纶为平南将军、湘州刺史、同三司之仪，中卫将军、开府仪同三司萧渊藻为征东将军、南徐州刺史。
English: In the past, Zhenzucu General, South Xuzhou General Shaoling Wang Xiaojun was appointed as Pingnan General, Hunan General, and the same three divisions, Zhongwei General, Kaifu General, and the same three divisions, Xiaoyuan, were appointed as East Conquest General and South Xuzhou General.

古文：是日，屈獠洞斩李贲，传首京师。
现代文：这天，屈僚洞斩杀李贲，传送首级到京城。
English: On this day, Qu Rongdong beheaded Li Yao and sent his head to Beijing.

古文：夏四月丙子，诏在朝及州郡各举清人任治民者，皆以礼送京师。
现代文：夏四月丙子，韶令在朝和州郡的官员各自推举能胜任治理民众的清廉人士，都以礼节送到京城。
English: In April of the same year, the emperor ordered the officials in the imperial court and the prefectural government to each nominate a clean person who could competently govern the people, and they were all sent to the capital with courtesy.

古文：戊寅，以护军将军河东王誉为湘州刺史。
现代文：戊寅，任命护军将军河东王萧誉为湘州刺史。
English: Wu Yin, appointed the escort general of the East River, Wang Xiaoyu, as the history of Xiangzhou.

古文：五月辛丑，以新除中书令邵陵王纶为安前将军、开府仪同三司，前湘州刺史张缵为领军将军。
现代文：五月辛丑，任命新任中书令邵陵王萧纶为安前将军、开府仪同三司，前湘州刺史张缵为领军将军。
English: In May, the newly-appointed Chinese General Secretary Shaoling Wang Xiaojun was appointed as the former general of An, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, and the former Hunan statesman Zhang Jie as the leading general.

古文：辛亥，曲赦交、爱、德三州。
现代文：辛亥，赦免交、爱、德三州囚徒。
English: Xinhai pardoned prisoners from the three states of Jia, Ai and Dezhou.

古文：癸丑，诏曰： 为国在于多士，宁下寄于得人。
现代文：癸丑，诏令说： 治国在于人才多，安宁民众依靠用人得当。
English: At the same time, the edict said: "Governing a country depends on having a lot of talented people, and a peaceful population depends on employing people properly."

古文：朕暗于行事，尤阙治道，孤立在上，如临深谷。
现代文：我不熟悉料理事务，尤其缺乏治理方法，孤独地处于帝位，如同面临深渊山谷。
English: I am not familiar with material affairs, especially the lack of governance methods, lonely in the throne, as if facing the abyss valley.

古文：凡尔在朝，咸思匡救，献替可否，用相启沃。
现代文：凡是在朝官员，都要思考匡正补救，进献忠言，以相启迪。
English: All officials in the DPRK should think about rectifying and remedying the situation, offer loyal advice, and enlighten others.

古文：班下方岳，傍求俊乂，穷其屠钓，尽其岩穴，以时奏闻。 
现代文：颁布给各州刺史，广泛寻求优异人才，搜罗人才至于屠夫、渔翁足迹，穷尽山岩洞穴，及时上奏。 
English: It was promulgated to the states to dig up history, extensively search for outstanding talents, collect talents as for butchers, fishermen footprints, exhaust mountain rock caves, and play in time.

古文：是月，两月夜见。
现代文：这个月，两个月亮在夜晚出现。
English: This month, two moons will appear at night.

古文：秋八月乙未，以右卫将军硃异为中领军。
现代文：秋八月乙未，任命右卫将军朱异为中领军。
English: In autumn and August, Zhu Yi, the right guard general, was appointed as the central leader.

古文：戊戌，侯景举兵反，擅攻马头、木栅、荆山等戍。
现代文：戊戌，侯景起兵反叛，任意攻打马头、木栅、荆山等城堡。
English: Wuzhong and Houjing rebelled and attacked the castles of Ma Tou, Muzha and Jingshan at will.

古文：甲辰，以安前将军、开府仪同三司邵陵王纶都督众军讨景。
现代文：甲辰，委派安前将军、开府仪同三司邵陵王萧纶统领各军讨伐侯景。
English: Jia Chen appointed General An Qian, Kaifu Yi and the Third Shao Ling King Xiao Wei to lead the armies to fight against Houjing.

古文：曲赦南豫州。
现代文：赦免南豫州囚徒。
English: Pardoning prisoners in southern Henan Province.

古文：九月丙寅，加左光禄大夫元罗镇右将军。
现代文：九月丙寅，加授左光禄大夫元罗为镇右将军。
English: In September, Hsin-in conferred the title of Zhenyu General to Doctor Yuan Luo of Zaganglu.

古文：冬十月，侯景袭谯州，执刺史萧泰。
现代文：冬十月，侯景袭击谯州，捉住刺史萧泰。
English: In the winter of October, Hou Jing attacked Zhangzhou and captured the assassin Xiao Tai.

古文：丁未，景进攻历阳，太守庄铁降之。
现代文：丁未，侯景进军攻打历阳，太守庄铁投降侯景。
English: Ding Wei, Hou Jing marched to attack Liyang, the governor Zhuang Tie surrendered to Hou Jing.

古文：戊申，以新除光禄大夫临贺王正德为平北将军，都督京师诸军，屯丹阳郡。
现代文：戊申，任命新任光禄大夫临贺王正德为平北将军，统领京城各军，驻守丹阳郡。
English: Wushin, appointed the newly appointed Guanglu doctor Lin He Wang Zhengde as the general of Pingbei, commanding the troops of Beijing and stationed in Danyang County.

古文：己酉，景自横江济于采石。
现代文：己酉，侯景从横江渡江到采石。
English: Jiqian, Houjing from the cross-river to the river to the quarry.

古文：辛亥，景师至京，临贺王正德率众附贼。
现代文：辛亥，侯景的军队到达京城，临贺王正德率领军队依附贼军。
English: In Xinhai, the army of Hou Jing arrived in Beijing, and Lin He Wang Zhengde led the army to attach to the thief army.

古文：十一月辛酉，贼攻陷东府城，害南浦侯萧推、中军司马杨暾。
现代文：十一月辛酉，贼军攻占束府城，杀害南浦侯萧推、中军司马杨暾。
English: At the end of November, the bandit army captured Sokfu Town, killing Nampo lord Xiao Du and Chinese military commander Ma Yang Jun.

古文：庚辰，邵陵王纶帅武州刺史萧弄璋、前谯州刺史赵伯超等，入援京师，顿钟山爱敬寺。
现代文：庚辰，邵陵王萧纶率领武州刺史萧弄璋、前谯州刺史趟伯超等人进入京城救援，停留在钟山爱敬寺。
English: Geng Chen, Shao Ling Wang Xiao Jie, led by Wuzhou chief historian Xiao Nanzhuo, and former Zhangzhou chief historian Wai Bo Chao, and others entered Beijing to help, and stayed at the Zhongshan Ai Jing Temple.

古文：乙酉，纶进军湖头，与贼战，败绩。
现代文：乙酉，萧纶进军到湖头，同贼军交战，大败。
English: Acetylene and Xiaoqi marched to the lake head, fought with the thief army, and suffered a great defeat.

古文：丙戌，安北将军鄱阳王范遣世子嗣、雄信将军裴之高等帅众入援，次于张公洲。
现代文：丙戌，安北将军鄱阳王萧范派遣世子萧嗣、雄信将军裴之高等人率领军队进京救援，停驻在张公洲。
English: At the same time, Anbei General Shenyang Wang Xiao Fan dispatched his son Xiao Zi and the high-ranking person of Xiongxin General Pei to lead the army to Beijing for rescue and stationed in Zhang Gongzhou.

古文：十二月戊申，天西北中裂，有光如火。
现代文：十二月戊申，天西北中间裂开，有光芒如同火焰。
English: In December, Boshin, the northwest part of the sky was split in two, and there was a glow like a flame.

古文：尚书令谢举卒。
现代文：尚书令谢举去世。
English: Shang Shuling passed away.

古文：丙辰，司州刺史柳仲礼、前衡州刺史韦粲、高州刺史李迁仕、前司州刺史羊鸦仁等并帅军入援，推仲礼为大都督。
现代文：丙辰，司州刺史柳仲礼、前衡州刺史韦粲、高州刺史李迁仕、前司州刺史圭鸦仁等人都率领军队进京救援，推举仲礼为大都督。
English: Bing Chen, Liu Zhongli, former Hengzhou, Shi Wei Wei, Gaozhou, Li Qianshi, and former Sizhou, Gui Raven, all led the army to rescue Beijing, and elected Zhongli as the grand governor.

古文：三年春正月丁巳朔，柳仲礼帅众分据南岸。
现代文：三年春正月丁巳初一，柳仲礼率领军队分别占据南岸。
English: On the first day of spring in the third year of Ding Si, Liu Zhongli led the army to occupy the south bank separately.

古文：是日，贼济军于青塘，袭破韦粲营，粲拒战死。
现代文：这天，贼人在青塘渡过军队，偷袭攻下韦塞的营垒，韦粲抵御直至战死。
English: On this day, the bandits crossed the army in Qingtang, made a sneak attack and attacked the camp of Wei Xie. Wei Xie resisted until he died in battle.

古文：庚申，卲陵王纶、东扬州刺史临成公大连等帅兵集南岸。
现代文：庚申，邵陵王萧纶、东扬州刺史临成公大连等人率领兵士聚集在南岸。
English: Geng Shen, Shao Ling Wang Xiao Wei, Dongyang Zhou Zhishi Lin Cheng Gong Dalian and others led the soldiers to gather on the south bank.

古文：乙丑，中领军硃异卒。
现代文：乙丑，中领军朱异去世。
English: Second Ugly, middle leader Zhu Yixing passed away.

古文：丙寅，以司农卿傅岐为中领军。
现代文：丙寅，任命司农卿傅岐为中领军。
English: Cui Yin, appointed the Secretary of Agriculture Fu Qi as the middle leader.

古文：戊辰，高州刺史李迁仕、天门太守樊文皎进军青溪东，为贼所破，文皎死之。
现代文：戊辰，高州刺史李迁仕、玉亚太守矾塞堕进军到直还以东，被贼军打败，文皎战死。
English: Wuchen, Gaozhou, Zhishi, Lijiang, and Yuping marched eastward, defeated by the invaders, and Wenyi died in the battle.

古文：壬午，荧惑守心。
现代文：壬午，火星停留在心宿。
English: At midsummer, Mars stays in the heart.

古文：乙酉，太白昼见。
现代文：乙酉，太白金星在白天出现。
English: Acetylene, too white Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：二月丁未南兗州刺史南康王会理、前青、冀二州刺史湘潭侯萧退帅江州之众，顿于兰亭苑。
现代文：二月丁未，南兖州刺史南康王会理、前青冀二州刺史湘潭侯萧退率领江州的军队，停留在兰亭苑。
English: In February of the same year, the army of Jiangzhou, led by Hou Xiaoqi, the president of the Southern Kangwang Association and the former governor of Qinghai-Hebei Province, stayed in Lantingyuan.

古文：庚戌，安北将军、合州刺史鄱阳王范以本号开府仪同三司。
现代文：庚戌，安北将军、合州刺史鄱阳王萧范以本来职位开府仪同三司。
English: Geng Xuan, General An Bei, Hezhou Zhi Shi, Yang Wang Xiao Fan, with their original posts of Kaifu Yi and San Si.

古文：三月戊午，前司州刺史羊鸦仁等进军东府北，与贼战，大败。
现代文：三月戊午，前司州刺史羊鸦仁等人进军到束府的北面，同贼军交战，大败。
English: On the afternoon of March 3rd, the former Shizhou cadet Shi Yang Rongren and others marched to the north of Sokfu, fought with the invaders, and were soundly defeated.

古文：己未，皇太子妃王氏薨。
现代文：己未，皇太子妃王氏逝世。
English: In the meantime, Crown Princess Wang Shi passed away.

古文：丁卯，贼攻陷宫城，纵兵大掠。
现代文：丁卯，贼军攻占宫城，放纵兵士大肆掳掠。
English: Dingwu, the thief army captured Miyagi, and indulged the soldiers to plunder.

古文：己巳，贼矫诏遣石城公大款解外援军。
现代文：己巳，贼人假称诏令派遣石城公大款解散外面的援军。
English: At this time, the bandits pretended to issue an imperial edict to dispatch Shicheng Gong Dajian to disband the outside reinforcements.

古文：庚午，侯景自为都督中外诸军事、大丞相、录尚书。
现代文：庚午，侯景自称为都督中外诸军事、大丞相、录尚书。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Hou Jing declared himself as the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, the prime minister, and the recorder of the records.

古文：辛未，援军各退散。
现代文：辛未，援军各自撤退散开。
English: Before long, the reinforcements retreated and dispersed.

古文：丙子，荧惑守心。
现代文：丙子，火星停留在心宿。
English: He Zi, Mars stays in the heart.

古文：壬午，新除中领军傅岐卒。
现代文：壬午，新任中领军傅岐去世。
English: In Renwu, Fu Qi, the newly appointed middle leader, passed away.

古文：夏四月己丑，京师地震。
现代文：夏四月己丑，京城发生地震。
English: Summer turned ugly in April, and an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：丙申，地又震。
现代文：丙申，大地又震动。
English: Oh my God, the ground is shaking again.

古文：己酉，高祖以所求不供，忧愤寝疾。
现代文：己酉，高祖因所求取的需用不能供给，忧虑气愤而患病。
English: However, Gao Zu fell ill due to the fact that he could not supply what he needed. He was worried and angry.

古文：是月，青、冀二州刺史明少遐、东徐州刺史湛海珍、北青州刺史王奉伯各举州附于魏。
现代文：这月，青冀二州刺史明少遐、东徐州刺史湛海珍、北青州刺史王奉伯各自献出州城依附魏国。
English: This month, the two states of Qinghai and Hebei, Ming Shaoqi, East Xuzhou, Zhan Haizhen, and North Qingzhou, Wang Bongbo, each presented a state capital to Wei.

古文：五月丙辰，高祖崩于净居殿，时年八十六。
现代文：五月丙辰，高祖在净居殿逝世，时年八十六岁。
English: In May, Gao Zu passed away at the age of 86, in the Pure Residence Hall.

古文：辛巳，迁大行皇帝梓宫于太极前殿。
现代文：辛巳，迁大行皇帝的棺材到太极前殿。
English: Soon, the coffin of Emperor Taigang was moved to the front hall of Taiji Temple.

古文：冬十一月，追尊为武皇帝，庙曰高祖。
现代文：冬十一月，追尊大行皇帝为武皇帝，庙号为高祖。
English: In the winter of November, Emperor Suizong Da Xing became Emperor Wu, and the name of the temple was Gao Zu.

古文：乙卯，葬于修陵。
现代文：乙卯，安葬在脩陵。
English: He was buried in Fuling Mausoleum.

古文：高祖生知淳孝。
现代文：高祖天生淳厚孝顺。
English: Gao Zu was born with strong filial piety.

古文：年六岁，献皇太后崩，水浆不入口三日，哭泣哀苦，有过成人，内外亲党，咸加敬异。
现代文：六岁时，献皇太后逝世，他水米浆汤三天不入口，哭泣哀伤痛苦，超过成年人，内外亲属，都加以尊敬惊异。
English: At the age of six, after the death of the Dowager Empress, he did not eat rice noodle soup for three days, weeping with sorrow and pain, surpassing adults, and surprising relatives at home and abroad.

古文：及丁文皇帝忧，时为齐随王谘议，随府在荆镇，仿佛奉闻，便投劾星驰，不复寝食，倍道就路，愤风惊浪，不暂停止。
现代文：等到遭遇文皇帝去世，当时直担担任壹厘迪王的谘议参军，随军府在荆州镇所，约略听到消息，就递上辞呈星夜赶路，不再吃饭睡觉，日夜兼程，大风大浪，也不短暂停留。
English: After the death of Emperor Wen, when he was directly in charge of advising and joining the army, he followed the military government in Jingzhou Town, and when he heard the news, he submitted his resignation and rushed to the road at night, no longer eating and sleeping, traveling day and night, wind and waves, and not stopping for a short time.

古文：高祖形容本壮，及还至京都，销毁骨立，亲表士友，不复识焉。
现代文：高祖身体本来强壮，等回到京城，瘦得皮包骨，亲属和朋友，不再认得出他。
English: Gao Zu was originally physically strong, and when he returned to Beijing, he was so thin that his relatives and friends could no longer recognize him.

古文：望宅奉讳，气绝久之，每哭辄欧血数升。
现代文：拜望住宅敬奉父亲，昏倒过去很长时间，每当哭泣就吐血几升。
English: She visited the house to pay homage to her father, passed out for a long time, and vomited several liters of blood whenever she cried.

古文：服内不复尝米，惟资大麦，日止二溢。
现代文：服丧期间不再吃米饭，仅用大麦，每日衹二升多。
English: During the period of mourning, rice is no longer eaten, only barley is used, and more than two liters of millet are brewed daily.

古文：拜扫山陵，涕泪所洒，松草变色。
现代文：拜祭陵墓，眼泪洒落之处，松树野草为之变了颜色。
English: Paying homage to the mausoleum, where tears fall, pine trees and weeds change color.

古文：及居帝位，即于钟山造大爱敬寺，青溪边造智度寺，又于台内立至敬等殿。
现代文：等到处于帝位，就在钟旦修建大爱敬寺，在壹选边修建塑庆寺，又在朝廷内设立至敬等殿堂。
English: He waited until he was on the throne to build the Great Aikei-ji Temple in Zhongdang, the Shokei-ji Temple in Ichiban, and the Hall of Supreme Reverence in the Imperial Court.

古文：又立七庙堂，月中再过，设净馔。
现代文：又设立七庙堂，每月两次前往，摆设素食。
English: They also set up seven temples, which they visit twice a month, and serve vegetarian food.

古文：每至展拜，恒涕泗滂沲，哀动左右。
现代文：每到叩拜时，总是泪如雨下，哀伤感动了左右的人。
English: Whenever I go to worship, it always rains tears, and people on both sides are moved by the sadness.

古文：加以文思钦明，能事毕究，少而笃学，洞达儒玄。
现代文：加之才思敏捷，凡事能深入研究，年轻时爱好学习，通晓儒学道学。
English: In addition, he is quick-witted, can deeply study everything, loves to study when he is young, and is familiar with Confucianism and Taoism.

古文：虽万机多务，犹卷不辍手，燃烛侧光，常至戊夜。
现代文：虽然事务繁多，还书不离手，点火烛借光研读，常常到五更。
English: Although there are a lot of things to do, the book does not leave his hands, and the candlelight is used to study, often to five more.

古文：造《制旨孝经义》，《周易讲疏》，及六十四卦、二《系》、《文言》、《序卦》等义，《乐社义》，《毛诗答问》，《春秋答问》，《尚书大义》，《中庸讲疏》，《孔子正言》，《老子讲疏》，凡二百余卷，并正先儒之迷，开古圣之旨。
现代文：撰写《制旨孝经义》，《周易讲疏》，以及六十四卦、二篇《系辞》、《文言》、《序卦》等篇的义疏，《乐社义》，《毛诗答问》，《春秋答问》，《尚书大义》，《中庸讲疏》，《孔子正言》，《老子讲疏》，共二百多卷，都是纠正先代儒者的迷惑，揭示古代圣人的旨意。
English: He was the author of the "Precepts and Precepts of the Filial Piety Sutra," the "Precepts and Precepts of the Zhou Yi," the "Sixty-four Degrees of Separation," the "Precepts and Precepts" of the two "Lineages," "Writings" and "Precepts," the "Precepts and Precepts," the "Precepts and Precepts," the "Precepts and Precepts," the "Precepts and Precepts," the "Precepts and Precepts," the "Mao's Poetry Answers," the "Spring and Autumn Answers," the "Precept

古文：王侯朝臣皆奉表质疑，高祖皆为解释。
现代文：王侯朝臣都呈奏表询问疑难，高祖都为他们解释。
English: The princes and courtiers all submitted their report forms to inquire about the difficulties, and Gaozu all explained for them.

古文：修饰国学，增广生员，立五馆，置《五经》博士。
现代文：还修造装饰国子学，增加学生名额，建立五馆，设置《五经》博士。
English: He also renovated the Decorative Chinese Studies, increased the number of students, established five museums, and set up a "Five Classics" doctorate.

古文：天监初，则何佟之、贺蒨、严植之、明山宾等覆述制旨，并撰吉凶军宾嘉五礼，凡一千余卷，高祖称制断疑。
现代文：天监初年，有何佟之、贺场、严植之、明山宾等人阐述皇帝旨意，并且撰写吉、凶、军、宾、嘉五礼，共一千多卷，高祖作为皇帝为其决断疑难。
English: In the first year of the Celestial Inspector, there were some people such as Yuxi Zhi, Hefang, Yan Zhiwu, and Mingshan Bin who expounded the emperor's will, and wrote about auspicious, inauspicious, military, guests, and five auspicious rituals, a total of more than one thousand volumes. Gaozhu, as the emperor, had to make difficult decisions for them.

古文：于是穆穆恂恂，家知礼节。
现代文：这时风气端庄肃敬，家家懂得礼节。
English: At this time, the atmosphere is dignified and respectful, and everyone knows the etiquette.

古文：大同中，于台西立士林馆，领军硃异、太府卿贺琛、舍人孔子袂等递相讲述。
现代文：大回年间，在台城西设立垫馆，领军苤昱、太府卿昼逊、舍人孔王挂等人交替在那裹讲述。
English: During the Taiping Rebellion, a pavilion was set up in the west of Taicheng, where the leaders of the army, the Grand Mufu, and the dissidents, such as Kong Wangkang and others, took turns to speak.

古文：皇太子、宣城王亦于东宫宣猷堂及扬州廨开讲，于是四方郡国，趋学向风，云集于京师矣。
现代文：皇太子、宣城王也在束宫宣猷堂和荡业官府设立讲坛，于是四方郡国，追求学术、仰慕品德，都云集在京城。
English: The crown prince, the King of Xuancheng, also set up a pulpit in the Xuancheng Hall of the Palace of the Grand Dukes and the Xuancheng Government Office. As a result, the four counties, the pursuit of scholarship, and the admiration of virtue, all gathered in Beijing.

古文：兼笃信正法，尤长释典，制《涅盘》、《大品》、《净名》、《三慧》诸经义记，复数百卷。
现代文：高祖深信佛法，尤其擅长释家典籍，撰作《涅盘》、《大品》、《净名》、《三慧》等经的义疏，又有几百卷。
English: Gao Zu was a firm believer in Buddhism. He was particularly good at interpreting the classics, and he wrote several hundred volumes of sutras such as "Nirvana Table," "Great Text," "Clear Name" and "Three Wisdoms."

古文：听览余闲，即于重云殿及同泰寺讲说，名僧硕学，四部听众，常万余人。
现代文：处理政事的余暇，就在重云毖和回台寺讲说，著名僧人博通的学者、在家与出家的佛教弟子中的听众，经常有一万多人。
English: In his spare time, when he was dealing with political affairs, he lectured at the Chongyunzhu and Huitai temples. The famous monk and scholar, who had an audience of more than 10,000 Buddhist disciples, both at home and among those who had become monks.

古文：又造《通史》，躬制赞序，凡六百卷。
现代文：又编撰《通史》，亲自写作赞语序言，共六百卷。
English: He also compiled the "General History," personally writing the preface of praise, a total of six hundred volumes.

古文：天情睿敏，下笔成章，千赋百诗，直疏便就，皆文质彬彬，超迈今古。
现代文：天性聪慧敏捷，下笔便成文章，千篇赋百首诗，径直注释便完成，都文采与内容协调配合，超出古今。
English: Natural intelligence and agility, the next stroke will become an article, a thousand poems will become a hundred poems, direct annotation will be completed, both literary works and content coordination and cooperation, beyond the past and the present.

古文：诏铭赞诔，箴颂笺奏，爰初在田，洎登宝历，凡诸文集，又百二十卷。
现代文：诏书碑铭赞语谏文，箴言颂辞书札奏章，从起初在民间，到登上帝位，所有文集，又有一百二十卷。
English: There are also 120 volumes of anthologies, including the Imperial Rescript, the Imperial Rescript, the Imperial Rescript, the Imperial Rescript, the Imperial Rescript, the Imperial Rescript, and the Imperial Rescript.

古文：六艺备闲，棋登逸品，阴阳纬候，卜筮占决，并悉称善。
现代文：对六种技艺理解透彻，棋艺居于超众脱俗的品级，阴阳纬候，筮占决，都全部在行。
English: He has a thorough understanding of the six kinds of skills, and his chess skills are at a superlative level, and he is good at yin and yang, as well as casting lots.

古文：又撰《金策》三十卷。
现代文：又撰写《金策》三十卷。
English: He also wrote 30 volumes of "Golden Strategy."

古文：草隶尺牍，骑射弓马，莫不奇妙。
现代文：草书隶书和书信，骑马射箭，无不奇特精妙。
English: Cursive calligraphy and letters, horse riding and archery are all exquisitely exquisite.

古文：勤于政务，孜孜无怠。
现代文：勤于政事，孜孜不倦。
English: He is diligent in politics and tireless.

古文：每至冬月，四更竟，即敕把烛看事，执笔触寒，手为皴裂。
现代文：每到冬月，四更天一过，就下令拿火烛查阅奏请事宜，握笔接触寒气，手为之裂口。
English: Every winter month, as soon as the four moon day passed, he ordered to take a candle to check the request, holding the pen in contact with the cold, and his hand was torn.

古文：纠奸擿伏，洞尽物情，常哀矜涕泣，然后可奏。
现代文：纠察奸人揭露隐秘的事，洞察人心，经常哀其不争以致流泪，然后同意上奏。
English: The picketing traitor exposes secret things, sees into people's hearts, often laments their indifference to the point of tears, and then agrees to play.

古文：日止一食，膳无鲜腴，惟豆羹粝食而已。
现代文：每天仅吃一餐，膳食没有鲜鱼肥肉，衹是豆羹粗食而已。
English: They only eat one meal a day. The meal does not contain fresh fish or fatty meat, and bean curd is just a coarse food.

古文：庶事繁拥，日傥移中，便嗽口以过。
现代文：各种事务繁杂，头倘若到了天中央，就嗽口度过遣一天。
English: All kinds of affairs are complicated. If the head reaches the center of the sky, the mouth will spend a day.

古文：身衣布衣，木绵皁帐，一冠三载，一被二年。
现代文：身上穿着布衣服，床上是木绵青帐，一顶帽子戴了三年，一床被褥用了二年。
English: He wore cloth clothes on his body, the bed was a wooden blanket, a hat was worn for three years, and a bed was used for two years.

古文：常克俭于身，凡皆此类。
现代文：经常自身厉行节俭，都是遣一类。
English: They often practice frugality themselves, and they are all of the same type.

古文：五十外便断房室。
现代文：五十岁以后就断绝了房事。
English: After the age of fifty, he gave up housework.

古文：后宫职司，贵妃以下，六宫袆褕三翟之外，皆衣不曳地，傍无锦绮。
现代文：后宫女官从贵妃以下，六宫除了三种绘有山雉的祭服外。衣服都不拖在地上，没有其余的锦绣绫罗。
English: The ladies of the harem, from princess to princess, in the Sixth Palace, except for the three kinds of sacrificial clothing with hawthorn, do not drag their clothes on the ground, and there is no other brocade.

古文：不饮酒，不听音声，非宗庙祭祀、大会飨宴及诸法事，未尝作乐。
现代文：不饮酒，不听音乐，不是宗庙祭祀、大会酒宴和各种法事，不曾奏乐。
English: They do not drink alcohol, do not listen to music, do not participate in ancestral temple rituals, grand banquets and various religious services, and have never played music.

古文：性方正，虽居小殿暗室，恒理衣冠，小坐押衤要，盛夏暑月，未尝褰袒。
现代文：性格端庄，虽然住在小殿暗室中，总是整理衣帽，闲坐时都系好衣带，盛夏暑月，不曾撩起衣裳露出上身。
English: He had a dignified personality. Although he lived in the darkroom of a small hall, he always tidied up his clothes and hat. When he was sitting idly, he always wore a belt. In the height of summer, he never pulled up his clothes to reveal his upper body.

古文：不正容止，不与人相见，虽觌内竖小臣，亦如遇大宾也。
现代文：不端庄容貌，不和人见面，虽然与宫内宦官小臣相见，也如同接待贵宾。
English: He does not look dignified and does not meet with people, although meeting with eunuchs and courtiers in the palace is like receiving distinguished guests.

古文：历观古昔帝王人君，恭俭庄敬，艺能博学，罕或有焉。
现代文：历观古代的帝王君主，恭顺节俭端庄礼敬，多才多艺学问广博，恐怕很少有人可与他相比
English: Looking back on the emperors and monarchs of ancient times, I am afraid that few can be compared to him in terms of courtesy, frugality, dignity, courtesy, versatility, and broad knowledge

古文：史臣曰：齐季告终，君临昏虐，天弃神怒，众叛亲离。
现代文：史臣曰：齐末天命完结，统治者昏庸暴虐，上天抛弃神灵发怒，众人反对亲信离开。
English: Shichen said: At the end of the day, the fate of heaven is complete, the ruler is dull and tyrannical, the heaven abandons the gods and is angry, and the people oppose the cronies to leave.

古文：高祖英武睿哲，义起樊、邓，仗旗建号，濡足救焚，总苍兕之师，翼龙豹之阵，云骧雷骇，剪暴夷凶，万邦乐推，三灵改卜。
现代文：高祖英明勇武通达明智，在樊城、邓县兴起义兵，树起旗帜建立国号，从水深火热中拯救民众，总领如苍兕般勇猛的军队，摆起龙豹般的阵势，如云奔雷击，歼灭残暴君主平定凶恶小人，万国乐意推举，天地人改变国运。
English: Gao Zu, heroic, brave, and wise, raised a volunteer army in Shicheng and Deng County, set up a banner to establish a country name, saved the people from the depths of the sea, led an army as brave as a heron, set up a formation like a dragon and leopard, such as cloud and lightning, annihilated the cruel monarch, pacified the vicious villain, and was willingly elected by all countries, and the people of heaven and earth changed the national fortune.

古文：于是御凤历，握龙图，辟四门，弘招贤之路，纳十乱，引谅直之。
现代文：于是登上帝位，手握河图，打开四门拓展招引贤人的道路，接纳十乱一类的治国能臣，推延诚信正直的规范。
English: So he ascended to the throne, holding the river map in his hand, opened the four doors to expand the road of attracting wise men, accepted the ten kinds of chaotic statesmen, and extended the norms of honesty.

古文：兴文学，修郊祀，治五礼，定六律，四聪既达，万机斯理，治定功成，远安迩肃。
现代文：复兴文学，修理祭祀，整治五礼，制定六律，四方视听发达，各项事务得以治理，政治稳定功成名就，远方安宁近处肃静。
English: Revival of literature, repair of sacrificial rites, rectification of the Five Rites, formulation of the Six Laws, development of audio-visual in all directions, governance of various affairs, achievement of political stability, tranquility in the far and tranquility in the near.

古文：加以天祥地瑞，无绝岁时。
现代文：加上天地的祥瑞，每年每季不断绝。
English: Coupled with the auspiciousness of heaven and earth, every year has its own season.

古文：征赋所及之乡，文轨傍通之地，南超万里，西拓五千。
现代文：征讨收税所到的乡间，文书车轨通行的地方，南方超过一万里，西方开拓五千里。
English: The distance from the tax collection office to the countryside, where the clerical track passes, is more than ten thousand miles in the south and five thousand miles in the west.

古文：其中瑰财重宝，千夫百族，莫不充牣王府，蹶角阙庭。
现代文：其中珍奇的财物贵重的实器，成千成百，无不充满于国家府库，贡奉朝廷。
English: Among them, there are thousands and hundreds of rare and valuable objects, all of which are filled with the national treasury and donated to the imperial court.

古文：三四十年，斯为盛矣。
现代文：三四十年中，这是够兴盛的了。
English: For three or four decades, it was quite prosperous.

古文：自魏、晋以降，未或有焉。
现代文：自从瑟、晋以后，恐怕是没有的。
English: I'm afraid there hasn't been any since Seul and Jin.

古文：及乎耄年，委事群幸。
现代文：到了老年时，把事务托付给一群宠臣。
English: When they reach old age, they entrust their affairs to a group of favorites.

古文：然硃异之徒，作威作福，挟朋树党，政以贿成，服冕乘轩，由其掌握，是以朝经混乱，赏罚无章。 小人道长 ，抑此之谓也。
现代文：如此朱异之流，作威作福，树立朋党，政事因贿赂而办，皇帝的起居住行，由他们掌握，所以朝廷纲纪混乱，赏罚没有章法。 小入之道滋长 ，大概是说的这事吧。
English: In this way, there is a continuous stream of corruption, arrogance, favoritism, cronyism, bribery in government affairs, and control over the emperor's life and death, so that the imperial court is in disarray, and there are no rules for rewards and punishments.

古文：贾谊有云 可为恸哭者矣 。
现代文：玺谊说过 可为之悲伤痛哭了 。
English: You can cry with sadness for what you said.

古文：遂使滔天羯寇，承间掩袭，鹫羽流王屋，金契辱乘舆，涂炭黎元，黍离宫室。呜呼！
现代文：致使漫天的过人贼寇，利用时机偷袭，雕的羽毛遍及宫廷，刀枪侮辱了皇帝，百姓困苦，宫室荒凉。呜呼!
English: As a result, a swarm of superhuman thieves and robbers, taking advantage of the opportunity to sneak attack, carved feathers throughout the court, insulted the emperor with knives and guns, the people were poor, and the palace was desolate. Alas!

古文：天道何其酷焉。
现代文：天道是何等的残酷。
English: How cruel is the way of heaven.

古文：虽历数斯穷，盖亦人事然也。
现代文：造虽然是国运穷尽，大概也是人的行事使其如此。
English: Although it is the exhaustion of the national fortune, it is probably human behavior that makes it so.

