古文：十有五年春，王正月，邾子来朝。
现代文：十五年春季，周历正月，邾隐公前来鲁国朝见。
English: In the spring of the fifteenth year, in the first month of the lunar calendar, Emperor Qianyin came to see the Imperial Court of Lu.

古文：鼷鼠食郊牛，牛死，改卜牛。
现代文：鼷鼠咬了供祭祀天地用的牛，牛死了。重新占十一头牛。
English: The weasel bit a cow that was used for the sacrifice of heaven and earth, and the cow died. Eleven cows were recaptured.

古文：二月辛丑，楚子灭胡，以胡子豹归。
现代文：二月辛丑日，楚昭王领兵灭掉胡国，将胡国国君豹抓了回去。
English: On the fateful day of February, King Chu Zhao led an army to wipe out the State of Hu and brought back the Emperor of Hu.

古文：夏五月辛亥，郊。
现代文：夏季五月辛亥日，鲁国祭祀天地。
English: In the summer, in May, on the day of Xinhai, the country of Lu will hold a festival to worship heaven and earth.

古文：壬申，公薨于高寝。
现代文：壬申日，定公在寝宫正室去世。
English: On the day of Jinshin, Sadakimi passed away in his bedroom.

古文：郑罕达帅师伐宋。
现代文：郑国大夫罕达率领军队攻打宋国。
English: Zheng Guo's doctor Handa led the army to attack Song.

古文：齐侯、卫侯次于渠蒢。
现代文：齐侯、卫侯住在渠蒢。
English: Qi Hou and Wei Hou lived in Quzhou.

古文：邾子来奔丧。
现代文：邾隐公来鲁国奔丧。
English: 隐公 came to Lu to mourn.

古文：秋七月壬申，姒氏卒。
现代文：秋季七月壬申日，姒氏去世。
English: In the autumn, on July 23rd, Lu Ding Gong's wife Zou Shi died.

古文：八月庚辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月庚辰初一这天，发生了日食。
English: On the first day of August, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：九月，滕子来会葬。
现代文：九月，滕子来参加定公的葬礼。
English: In September, Teng Zi came to attend Ding Gong's funeral.

古文：丁巳，葬我君定公，雨，不克葬。
现代文：丁巳日，安葬定公，因为天下雨，不能安葬。
English: Ding Si Day, buried Ding Gong, because it was raining, can not be buried.

古文：戊午，日下昊，乃克葬。
现代文：戊午日，太阳西下时，才安葬。
English: He was buried at midday, when the sun was setting.

古文：辛巳，葬定姒。
现代文：辛巳日，安葬姒氏。
English: On the day of his death, the funeral was held for him.

古文：冬，城漆。
现代文：冬季，鲁国在漆地筑城。
English: In winter, the Rus built their city on lacquer.

古文：十五年春，邾隐公来朝。
现代文：十五年春季，邾隐公前来鲁国朝见。
English: In the spring of the 15th year, Emperor Qianyin came to see the Imperial Court of the State of Lu.

古文：子贡观焉。
现代文：子贡观礼。
English: Tribute viewing is over.

古文：邾子执玉高，其容仰。
现代文：邾子把玉高高地举起，他的脸仰着。
English: The mule lifted the ball high, his face upturned.

古文：公受玉卑，其容俯。
现代文：鲁定公谦卑地接受了玉，他的脸向下。
English: Mr. Lu humbly accepted the award, bowing his head.

古文：子贡曰： 以礼观之，二君者，皆有死亡焉。
现代文：子贡说： 用礼来看待这件事，两位国君都快要死亡了。
English: Zigong said: Looking at this matter with courtesy, the two sovereigns are about to die.

古文：夫礼，死生存亡之体也。将左右周旋，进退俯仰，于是乎取之。
现代文：礼，是死生存亡的主体，一举一动或左或右，以及揖让、进退、俯仰，就从这里来选取它。
English: The salute is the subject of life and death. Every movement, whether left or right, as well as yielding, advancing, retreating, and bowing, is selected from here.

古文：朝祀丧戎，于是乎观之。
现代文：朝会、祭礼、丧事、征战，也从这里来观察它。
English: Morning gatherings, festivals, funerals, and military campaigns have all been observed from here.

古文：今正月相朝，而皆不度，心已亡矣。
现代文：现在在正月互相朝见，而都不合法度，两位国君的心里已经不存在礼了。
English: Now, the first month's imperial court meeting is not legal, and there is no thought.

古文：嘉事不体，何以能久？
现代文：朝会不符合礼仪，哪里能够长久？
English: Such a good thing as the morning assembly is not proper, how can it survive for a long time?

古文：高仰，骄也；卑俯，替也。
现代文：高和仰，这是骄傲。低和俯，这是衰颓。
English: To look up is pride; to look down is decadence.

古文：骄近乱，替近疾。
现代文：骄傲接近动乱，衰颓接近疾病。
English: Pride is close to rebellion, decadence is close to illness.

古文：君为主，其先亡乎。 
现代文：君王是国家的主人，恐怕会先死去吧！ 
English: The king is the master of the country, I'm afraid he'll die first!

古文：吴之入楚也，胡子尽俘楚邑之近胡者。
现代文：吴国进攻楚国的时候，胡子把楚国城邑靠近胡国的百姓全部俘虏。
English: When the State of Wu attacked the State of Chu, Beard captured all the people in the cities of the State of Chu that were close to the State of Hu.

古文：楚既定，胡子豹又不事楚，曰： 存亡有命，事楚何为？
现代文：楚国安定以后，胡子豹又不事奉楚国，说： 国家的存亡由于天命，事奉楚国干什么？
English: After the stability of Chu, the bearded leopard did not serve the state of Chu, saying: The survival of the country is due to the fate of heaven, why serve the state of Chu?

古文：多取费焉。 
现代文：只不过多花费一点而已。 
English: It just costs a little more.

古文：二月，楚灭胡。
现代文：二月，楚国灭亡胡国。
English: In February, the State of Chu fell to the State of Hu.

古文：夏五月壬申，公薨。
现代文：夏季，五月二十二日，鲁定公死。
English: In the summer, on May 22, Luding died.

古文：仲尼曰： 赐不幸言而中，是使赐多言者也。 
现代文：孔丘说： 赐不幸而说中了，这件事使他成为多嘴的人了。 
English: Confucius said, "It is a misfortune for a man to say the right thing, for it makes him a talker."

古文：郑罕达败宋师于老丘。
现代文：郑国的罕达在老丘打败宋军。
English: Zheng's Xanda defeated the Song army in Laoqiu.

古文：齐侯、卫侯次于蘧挐，谋救宋也。
现代文：齐景公、卫灵公住在蘧挐。这是为了谋划救援宋国。
English: Qi Jing Gong and Wei Ling Gong lived in Handan. This was in order to plan the rescue of Song.

古文：秋七月壬申，姒氏卒。
现代文：秋季，七月二十三日，鲁定公夫人姒氏死了。
English: In the autumn, on July 23rd, Lu Ding Gong's wife Zou Shi died.

古文：不称夫人，不赴，且不祔也。
现代文：《春秋》不称她为夫人，这是因为没有发讣告，而且也没有陪祀祖姑之庙。
English: "Spring and Autumn" does not call her a wife, because there was no obituary, and there was no temple to accompany the ancestor.

古文：葬定公。
现代文：安葬鲁定公。
English: The funeral of Lord Luding is over.

古文：雨，不克襄事，礼也。
现代文：下雨，没有能办完事情，这是符合礼的。
English: It's polite not to get things done in the rain.

古文：葬定姒。
现代文：安葬定姒。
English: The funeral of Ding Xuan ended peacefully.

古文：不称小君，不成丧也。
现代文：《春秋》不称她为小君，这是因为没有按夫人的葬礼来安葬。
English: "Spring and Autumn" does not refer to her as Xiaojun, this is because she was not buried according to her wife's funeral.

古文：冬，城漆。书不时告也。
现代文：冬季，在漆地筑城，《春秋》所以记载这件事，是由于没有按时祭告祖庙。
English: In winter, the city was built in lacquer, and "Spring and Autumn" recorded this event because the ancestral temple was not announced on time.

