古文：孝景皇帝十四男。
现代文：孝景皇帝有十四个儿子。
English: Emperor Xiao Jing had fourteen sons.

古文：王皇后生孝武皇帝。
现代文：王皇后生孝武皇帝。
English: Empress Wang gives birth to Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：栗姬生临江闵王荣、河间献王德、临江哀王阏。
现代文：栗姬生临江闵王刘荣、河间献王刘德、临江哀王刘阏。
English: Liu Rong, the king of Linjiang, Liu De, the king of Hema, and Liu Yao, the king of Linjiang, were born to Kurihime.

古文：程姬生鲁共王馀、江都易王非、胶西于王端。
现代文：程姬生鲁共王刘馀、江都易王刘非、胶西于王刘端。
English: Cheng Jiesheng was the son of Liu Yu, the King of Lu, Liu Fei, the King of Jiangdu, and Liu Duan, the King of Jiaoxi.

古文：贾夫人生赵敬肃王彭祖、中山靖王胜。
现代文：买夫人生赵敬肃王刘彭祖、中山靖王刘胜。
English: Buy a husband's life Zhao Jingsu Wang Liu Pengzu, Zhongshan Jing Wang Liu Sheng.

古文：唐姬生长沙定王发。
现代文：唐姬生长沙定王刘发。
English: Tang Ji grew up with the hair of Shading Wang Liu.

古文：王夫人生广川惠王越、胶东康王寄、清河哀王乘、常山宪王舜。
现代文：王夫人生广川惠王刘越、胶束康王刘寄、清河哀王刘乘、常山宪王刘舜。
English: In Mrs. Wang's life, Guangchuan Hui Wang Liu Yue, Micellar Kang Wang Liu Ying, Qinghe Lai Wang Liu Rong, Changshan Xian Wang Liu Yao.

古文：河间献王德以孝景前二年立，修学好古，实事求是。
现代文：河间献王刘德在景帝前元二年封王，研习学业喜好古事，总是从实际出发，求得正确的结论。
English: Liu De, who was crowned king in the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year

古文：从民得善书，必为好写与之，留其真，加金帛赐以招之。
现代文：在民间得到好书，一定要很好地抄录副本给书主，而留下书的正本，又加赐金帛以广泛招求好书。
English: If you get a good book from the people, you must copy the copy well and give it to the book owner, and leave the original of the book, and give the gold ingot to widely solicit good books.

古文：繇是四方道术之人不远千里，或有先祖旧书，多奉以奏献王者，故得书多，与汉朝等。
现代文：这样四方有道德学术的人不远千里而来，有的有祖先旧藏的书，大多也进献给献王，所以得到的书很多，与汉王朝相等。
English: Such ethical and scholarly people from all over the country came from thousands of miles away. Some of them had books from their ancestors' old collections, and most of them were also dedicated to the king. Therefore, they obtained a lot of books, equal to that of the Han Dynasty.

古文：是时，淮南王安亦好书，所招致率多浮辩。
现代文：同时，淮南王刘安也爱好书，他所招来的书多半是没实用的。
English: At the same time, Liu An, the king of Huainan, also loved books. Most of the books he brought were not practical.

古文：献王所得书皆古文先秦旧书，《周官》、《尚书》、《礼》、《礼记》、《孟子》、《老子》之属，皆经传说记，七十子之徒所论。
现代文：献王所得的书都是秦以前的古文旧书，如《周官》、《尚书》、《礼》、《礼记》、《孟子》、《老子》等书，都是经传说记，孔子的七十弟子所著论的书。
English: The books donated to the king were all ancient books before the Qin Dynasty, such as "Zhou Guan," "Shang Shu," "Li," "Li Ji," "Meng Zi," "Lao Zi" and other books, all of which were written by the seventy disciples of Confucius.

古文：其学举六艺，立《毛氏诗》、《左氏春秋》博士。
现代文：献王学习举用六经，设立了《毛氏诗》、《左氏春秋》博士。
English: He set up the "Mao's Poetry" and "Zao's Spring and Autumn" doctoral programs.

古文：修礼乐，被服儒术，造次必于儒者。
现代文：修习礼乐，亲自感受儒家的学术，所向所学必定以儒术为准。
English: If you want to practice ritual music and experience Confucian scholarship for yourself, you must learn Confucianism first.

古文：山东诸儒多从而游。
现代文：山东诸儒多随从而游。
English: Most of the Confucianists in Shandong followed suit.

古文：武帝时，献王来朝，献雅乐，对三雍宫及诏策所问三十余事。
现代文：武帝时期，献王来朝见，奉献雅乐，答对三雍宫以及诏令策问三十多件事。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu, there were more than 30 events, such as presenting the king to the imperial court, dedicating elegant music, answering questions about the Sanyong Palace and the imperial edict.

古文：其对推道术而言，得事之中，文约指明。
现代文：就他所谈的道德学术，正合事理之中，文辞简约明晰。
English: As far as the moral science he talks about is concerned, the wording is concise and clear.

古文：立二十六年薨。
现代文：献王在位二十六年后薨。
English: Emperor Xianwang died after 26 years on the throne.

古文：中尉常丽以闻，曰： 王身端行治，温仁恭俭，笃敬爱下，明知深察，惠于鳏寡。 
现代文：中尉常丽上奏朝廷，说： 王自身端正且行为清明，温和仁慈恭敬俭朴，真诚敬爱下级，明知深察，恩惠及于鳏寡。 
English: Lieutenant Chang Li reported to the imperial court, saying: The king himself is upright and behaves clearly, gentle and kind, respectful and frugal, sincerely loves his subordinates, is knowledgeable and thoughtful, and is gracious to his widow.

古文：大行令奏： 谥法曰 聪明睿智曰献 ，宜谥曰献王。 
现代文：大行令上奏： 谧法说 聪明睿智曰献 ，应该谧为卢迄。 
English: The great line is played: 法說 聪明睿智曰献, should be  for Lu.

古文：子共王不害嗣，四年薨。
现代文：儿子基王丕昼继位，在位四年薨。
English: He was succeeded by his son, King Ki, who reigned for four years.

古文：子刚王堪嗣，十二年薨。
现代文：儿子刚王刘堪嗣位，在位十二年薨。
English: The son of King Gang, Liu Kanshi, ascended to the throne and reigned for twelve years.

古文：子顷王授嗣，十七年薨。
现代文：儿子顷王刘授嗣位，在位十七年薨。
English: His son, He Wang Liu, was given the throne and ruled for seventeen years.

古文：子孝王庆嗣，四十三年薨。
现代文：儿子孝王刘庆嗣位，在位四十三年薨。
English: His son, Prince Xiaowang Liu Qingzhi, ascended the throne, ending his forty-three-year reign.

古文：子元嗣。
现代文：儿子刘元继位。
English: His son Liu Yuan succeeded him.

古文：元取故广陵厉王、厉王太子及中山怀王故姬廉等以为姬。
现代文：刘元将已死的广陵厉王、厉王太子及中山怀王原来的姬妾廉等娶做姬妾。
English: Liu Yuan married the deceased Guangling Li Wang, Li Wang Taizi and Zhongshan Huai Wang's original concubine Ren as concubines.

古文：甘露中，冀州刺史敞奏元，事下廷尉，逮召廉等。
现代文：甘露年间，冀州刺史敞将刘元的事情进奏，皇上把这件事交给廷尉审理，要捕拿廉等人。
English: In the years of the nectar of the nectar of the rose, Jizhou's assassin Shichang brought up the matter of Liu Yuan, and the emperor handed the matter over to the imperial lieutenant for trial, and wanted to arrest Lian Rong and others.

古文：元迫胁凡七人，令自杀。
现代文：刘元逼迫威胁共七，命令她们自杀。
English: Liu Yuan made a total of seven threats and ordered them to commit suicide.

古文：有司奏请诛元，有诏 削二县，万一千户 。
现代文：有关官员奏请诛杀刘元，皇上下诏削减二县，计有一万一千户。
English: Relevant officials made a request to kill Liu Yuan, and the emperor decreed the reduction of two counties, a total of eleven thousand households.

古文：后元怒少史留贵，留贵逾垣出，欲告元，元使人杀留贵母。
现代文：后来刘元怨恨少史留贵，留贵害怕逾墙逃走，想告发刘元，刘元派人杀了留贵的母亲。
English: Later, Liu Yuan held a grudge against the younger Remigui. Remigui was afraid to escape over the wall and wanted to denounce Liu Yuan. Liu Yuan sent someone to kill Remigui's mother.

古文：有司奏元残贼不改，不可君国子民。
现代文：有关官员上奏刘元残暴本性不改，不能为国之君治理臣民。
English: The officials concerned reported that Liu Yuan did not change his cruel nature and could not govern his subjects as the ruler of the country.

古文：废勿王，处汉中房陵。
现代文：于是废除了他的王位，让他住在汉中房陵。
English: Therefore, his throne was abolished and he was allowed to live in Han Zhongfang Mausoleum.

古文：居数年，坐与妻若其乘朱轮车，怒若，又笞击，令自髡。
现代文：遇了数年，因与妻子若共乘朱轮车，生若的气，又鞭打她，令她自己剃去头发。
English: A few years later, when he was angry with his wife for riding a red-wheeled carriage together, he whipped her and made her shave off her hair.

古文：汉中太守请治，病死。
现代文：汉中太守请治刘元的罪，后来刘元病死。
English: Liu Yuan was punished for his crime by the emperor of Han, and later died of illness.

古文：立十七年，国除。
现代文：刘元在位十七年，河间国被废除。
English: In the seventeenth year of Liu Yuan's reign, Kawama Province was abolished.

古文：绝五岁，成帝建始元年，复立元弟上郡库令良，是为河间惠王。
现代文：河间国断绝五年，成帝建始元年，重立刘元的弟弟上郡库令刘良，造就是河间惠王。
English: In the first year of Emperor Chengzhi's reign, five years after the secession of Kawama Province, Liu Yuan's younger brother, Liu Liang, was reinstated as the county treasurer. He was known as Kawama Hui Wang.

古文：良修献王之行，母太后薨，服丧如礼。
现代文：刘良学习献王的行为，母太后薨，守丧如礼。
English: Liu Liang learned the behavior of dedicating the king, and his mother, the empress dowager, observed the funeral rites.

古文：哀帝下诏褒扬曰： 河间王良，丧太后三年，为宗室仪表，其益封万户。 
现代文：哀帝下诏褒扬说： 河间王刘良，为太后守丧三年，实为宗室表率，加封他万户。 
English: The mourning emperor issued an imperial edict praising Liu Liang, saying: "Kawama King Liu Liang, who has been the guardian of the empress dowager for three years, is actually the head of the family, and he has been awarded the title of 10,000 households.

古文：二十七年薨。
现代文：在位二十七年薨。
English: His reign of 27 years is over.

古文：子尚嗣，王莽时绝。
现代文：儿子刘尚继位，王莽时嗣位断绝。
English: His son Liu Shang succeeded to the throne, but Wang Mang did not succeed to the throne.

古文：临江哀王阏以孝景前二年立，三年薨。无子，国除为郡。
现代文：临江哀王型迩在基查前元二年封王，在位三年薨，没有留下儿子，封国被废除为郡。
English: In the second year of the first century B.C., King Linjiang Aye Wang-tao was enthroned, and he reigned for three years. He did not leave a son, and the state was abolished as a county.

古文：临江闵王荣以孝景前四年为皇太子，四岁废为临江王。
现代文：临江闵王刘荣在景帝前元四年为皇太子，过了四年被废除皇太子为临江王。
English: Liu Rong, the King of Linjiang, was crown prince for four years before the Jing Dynasty. After four years, the crown prince was abolished as the King of Linjiang.

古文：三岁，坐侵庙壖地为为宫，上征荣。
现代文：又过了三年。因侵占庙堂的空地建立宫室，皇帝征召刘荣。
English: Another three years passed. The emperor conscripted Liu Rong for encroaching on the open space of the temple to build a palace.

古文：荣行，祖于江陵北门，既上车，轴折车废。
现代文：刘茔出发时在江陵北门祭祖，上了车后，车轴折断车便坏了。
English: When Liu Wei set out, he went to the North Gate of Jiangling to pay homage to the ancestors. After he got on the car, the axle broke and the car broke down.

古文：江陵父老流涕窃言曰： 吾王不反矣！ 
现代文：江陵的父老私下流着泪说： 我们的大王不会回来了！ 
English: The Gangneung patriarchs thought this was an ominous sign, weeping and whispering: I'm afraid our king won't come back!

古文：荣至，诣中尉府对簿。
现代文：刘荣到达京师后，到中尉府受审。
English: After Liu Rong arrived at the Beijing Division, he was taken to the lieutenant's residence for trial.

古文：中尉郅都簿责讯王，王恐，自杀。
现代文：中尉郅都以供状质问王，王害怕，自杀。
English: Lieutenant Xingdu questioned Wang with a confession. Wang was afraid and committed suicide.

古文：葬蓝田，燕数万衔土置冢上。百姓怜之。
现代文：葬于蓝田，数万只燕子衔土置于坟上，百姓怜惜他的遭遇。
English: He was buried in Lantian. Tens of thousands of swallows covered the grave with soil. The people felt sorry for him.

古文：荣最长，亡子，国除。
现代文：刘荣年龄最长，没有儿子，封国被废除。
English: Liu Rong, the oldest, had no son, and the state was abolished.

古文：地入于汉，为南郡。
现代文：封地归入汉，成为南郡。
English: The fief was incorporated into the Han Dynasty and became Minami-gun.

古文：鲁恭王馀以孝景前二年立为淮阳王。
现代文：鲁恭王刘余在景帝前元二年封为淮阳王。
English: Liu Yu, King of Lu Gong, was crowned King of Huaiyang in the second year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：吴、楚反破后，以孝景前三年徙王鲁。
现代文：吴楚造反，被打败后，在景帝前元三年迁徙刘余到鲁地。
English: After Wu Chu rebelled and was defeated, Liu Yu migrated to Ludi in the third year of the reign of Emperor Jing.

古文：好治宫室、苑囿、狗马，季年好音，不喜辞。
现代文：刘余喜好建造宫室苑囿、饲养狗马，晚年爱好音乐，不喜文辞。
English: Liu Yu liked to build a palace garden and raise dogs and horses. In his later years, he loved music and disliked literature.

古文：为人口吃难言。
现代文：他生来口吃说话不便。
English: He was born with a stutter.

古文：二十八年薨。
现代文：鲁恭王刘余在位二十八年后薨。
English: He died twenty-eight years later.

古文：子安王光嗣，初好音乐舆马，晚节遴，唯恐不足于财。
现代文：儿子安王刘光嗣位，最初喜好音乐车马，晚年贪婪吝啬，惟恐财富不足。
English: The son of An Wang, Liu Guangzhe, was initially fond of musical carriages and horses, but in his later years he became greedy and miserly, fearing a lack of wealth.

古文：四十年薨。子孝王庆忌嗣，三十七年薨。
现代文：在位四十年薨，儿子孝王庆忌嗣位，在位三十七年薨。
English: He reigned for forty years, and his son, Xiao Wangqing, succeeded him and reigned for thirty-seven years.

古文：子顷王劲嗣，二十八薨。
现代文：儿子顷王刘劲嗣位，在位二十八年薨。
English: His son, Liu Jinshi, ascended to the throne after reigning for 28 years.

古文：子文王睃嗣，十八年薨，亡子，国除。
现代文：儿子文王刘睃嗣位，在位十八年薨，没有儿子，封国被废除。
English: The son of King Wen, Liu He, succeeded to the throne and reigned for eighteen years. He had no son, and the feudal state was abolished.

古文：哀帝建平三年，复立顷王子睃弟郚乡侯闵为王。
现代文：哀帝建平三年，又立顷王的儿子文王刘睃的弟弟部乡侯刘闵为王。
English: In the third year of Emperor Jianping's reign, Liu Ye, the younger brother of King Wen's son King Liu Ye, was made king.

古文：王莽时绝。
现代文：王莽时断绝。
English: Wang Mengshi broke it off.

古文：恭王初好治宫室，坏孔子旧宅以广其宫，闻钟磬琴瑟之声，遂不敢复坏，于其壁中得古文经传。
现代文：恭王最初爱好扩建宫室，毁坏孔子旧宅用来扩建他的宫室，听到有钟磬琴瑟的声音，便不敢再毁坏，在旧宅壁中得到古文经传。
English: At first, King Gong liked to expand the palace. He destroyed the old house of Confucius to expand his palace. When he heard the sound of the glockenspiel, he did not dare to destroy it again. He got ancient scriptures in the old house wall.

古文：江都易王非以孝景前二年立为汝南王。
现代文：江都易王刘非在孝景前元二年封为汝南王。
English: Liu Fei, the King of Jiangdu and Yi, was crowned the King of Southern Ruin in the 2nd year of the 1st year of the reign of Xiao Jing.

古文：吴、楚反时，非年十五，有材气，上书自请击吴。
现代文：吴楚反叛时，刘非刚十五岁，有才能气概，自己上书请求攻打吴国。
English: When Wu Chu rebelled, Liu Feigang was fifteen years old, talented and courageous, and he wrote a letter to request an attack on Wu.

古文：景帝赐非将军印，击吴。
现代文：景帝赐刘非将军印，去攻打吴国。
English: Emperor Jing gave Liu Fei the seal of a general to attack Wu.

古文：吴已破，徙王江都，治故吴国，以军功赐天子旗。
现代文：吴国被攻破，迁王到江都，治理以前的吴国，因战功赏赐给天子旗。
English: Wu was conquered and the king was moved to Jiangdu, and the banner of the Son of Heaven was given to him as a reward for his war service.

古文：元光中，匈奴大入汉边，非上书愿击匈奴，上不许。
现代文：元光年间，匈奴大举进入汉的边境，刘非上书愿攻打匈奴，景帝不同意。
English: During the reign of Yuan Guang, the Xiongnu entered the Han border on a large scale. Liu Fei wrote a letter expressing his willingness to attack the Xiongnu, but Emperor Jing did not agree.

古文：非好气力，治宫馆，招四方豪杰，骄奢甚。
现代文：刘非喜好气力，扩建宫室馆宇，招来四方豪杰，异常骄奢。
English: Liu Fei liked power, expanded the palace building, invited great heroes from four directions, and was extremely arrogant.

古文：二十七年薨，子建嗣。
现代文：在位二十七年薨，儿子刘建嗣位。
English: He reigned for 27 years and was succeeded by his son Liu Jian.

古文：建为太子时，邯郸人梁蚡持女欲献之易王，建闻其美，私呼之，因留不出。
现代文：刘建为太子时，邯郸人梁蚣带一女子想献给易王，刘建听说这女子很美，私下呼来，从而留下不让出来。
English: When Liu Jian was crown prince, Liang Ying took a woman with him to present to Yi Wang. Liu Jian heard that the woman was very beautiful and called her in secret, so he did not let her out.

古文：蚡宣言曰： 子乃与其公争妻！ 
现代文：梁蛤就传言说： 儿子竟与父争妻！ 
English: Liang Yao heard a rumor: the son was fighting with his father over his wife!

古文：建使人杀蚡。蚡家上书，下廷尉考，会赦，不治。
现代文：刘建派人杀了梁蚜，梁蚜的家人上书申诉，把遣件事交给廷尉审查，碰上赦免，没有治罪。
English: Liu Jian sent someone to kill Liang Hui, Liang Hui's family members filed a complaint, submitted the case to the imperial court for review, and when they were pardoned, there was no crime.

古文：易王薨未葬，建居服舍，召易王所爱美人淖姬等凡十人与奸。
现代文：易王薨尚未下葬，刘建居住在居丧时的住室，召唤易王所爱的美人淖姬等共十人与其通奸。
English: Yi Wangyao had not yet been buried, and Liu Jian was living in the room where he was staying at the time of his death, summoning a total of ten people to commit adultery with him, including Yi Wangyao's beloved beauty, Zou Ji.

古文：建女弟徵臣为盖侯子妇，以易王丧来归，建复与奸。
现代文：刘建的妹妹征臣是盖侯的儿媳妇，因易王丧事回来，刘建又与她通奸。
English: Liu Jian's younger sister, Suetian, was the daughter-in-law of Gui Hou. When she returned from the funeral of Yi Wang, Liu Jian again committed adultery with her.

古文：建异母弟定国为淮阳侯，易王最小子也，其母幸立之，具知建事，行钱使男子荼恬上书告建淫乱，不当为后。
现代文：刘建异母弟定国为淮阳侯，是易王最小的儿子，他的母亲希望立他为易王的继嗣，详细知道刘建的所作所为，花钱派一男子荼恬上书，告发刘建淫乱，不应当为后。
English: Liu Jian's half-brother Ding Guo was the Prince of Huaiyang and was the youngest son of King Yi. His mother hoped to make him the heir of King Yi. She knew in detail what Liu Jian had done and spent money to send a man to write a letter to denounce Liu Jian's adultery. He should not be queen.

古文：事下廷尉，廷尉治恬受人钱财为上书，论弃市。
现代文：事情交到廷尉，廷尉治罪荼恬接受人的钱财替人上书，定为死罪。
English: The matter was handed over to the imperial lieutenant, who punished the crime by sentencing the recipient of the money to write a letter on behalf of the recipient, making it a capital crime.

古文：建罪不治。
现代文：刘建的罪恶得不到惩治。
English: Liu Jian's crimes go unpunished.

古文：后数使使至长安迎徵臣，鲁恭王太后闻之，遗徵臣书曰： 国中口语籍籍，慎无复至江都。 
现代文：后多次派人到长安迎接征臣，鲁恭王太后听到这事，送征臣信说： 国内议论喧聒嘈杂，应谨慎不要再来江都。 
English: After that, she repeatedly sent people to Chang'an to welcome the envoys. When the Empress Dowager Lu Gong heard about this, she sent a letter to the envoys saying: Domestic discussions are noisy and noisy, and you should be careful not to come to Jiangdu again.

古文：后建使谒者吉请问共太后，太后泣谓吉： 归以吾言谓而王，王前事漫漫，今当自谨，独不闻燕、齐事乎？
现代文：后来刘建派谒者吉进见共太后，太后哭着告诉吉： 回去把我说的告诉你王，王以前任意妄为，今后应当谨慎，难道没听说燕、齐的事吗？
English: Later, Liu Jian sent the eunuch, Ji Jin, to see the Communist Empress Dowager, and the Empress Dowager cried and told Ji, "Go back and tell your king what I told you. The king used to act arbitrarily, but he should be careful in the future. Haven't you heard about Yan and Qi?"

古文：言吾为而王泣也！
现代文：说我为你王悲泣。 
English: Say I'm crying for you.

古文：吉归，致共太后语，建大怒，击吉，斥之。 
现代文：吉回来向刘建表述共太后的话，刘建大怒，击打吉，并斥退了他。
English: When Ji returned and told Liu Jian what the Empress Dowager had said, Liu Jian flew into a rage, beat Ji, and drove him away.

古文：建游章台宫，令四女子乘小船，建以足蹈覆其船，四人皆溺，二人死。
现代文：刘建游章台宫，使四个女子乘小船，刘建用脚蹈翻这只小船，四人皆落水，二人被淹死。
English: Liu Jian took four women on a boat trip to the Presidential Palace. Liu Jian turned the boat over with his foot. All four of them fell into the water, and two of them drowned.

古文：后游雷波，天大风，建使郎二人乘小船入波中。
现代文：后来游雷波，刮大风，刘建使两个男子乘小船入波中。
English: Later, sailing through thunderstorms and strong winds, Liu Jian sent two men into the waves in a small boat.

古文：船覆，两郎溺，攀船，乍见乍没。建临观大笑，令皆死。
现代文：船翻，二男子落入水中，攀着船，在水中时隐时现，刘建在旁看着大笑，不救，致使他们都被淹死。
English: The boat overturned, the two men fell into the water, clinging to the boat, appearing and disappearing in the water, Liu Jian watched and laughed, and did not save them, causing them all to drown.

古文：宫人姬八子有过者，辄令裸立击鼓，或置树上，久者三十日乃得衣；或髡钳以铅杵舂，不中程，辄掠；或纵狼令啮杀之，建观而大笑；或闭不食，令饿死。
现代文：宫人姬妾八子凡有过错的，就让她们裸体击鼓，或放到树上，时间久的三十日才得到衣服；有的被剃去头发用铁圈束颈用铅杵捣谷，如不符合规则，就鞭打；或放狼咬死，刘建在旁观看而大笑；有的被关起来不给饭吃，把她们饿死。
English: The eight concubines and concubines of the imperial court, if they did something wrong, they were made to play the drums naked, or they were placed on a tree, and it took them 30 days to get clothes; some were shaved, their hair was tied with an iron ring around their necks, and they were beaten with lead when they didn't follow the rules; or they were killed by wolves, while Liu Jian watched and laughed; some were locked up without food and starved to death.

古文：凡杀不辜三十五人。
现代文：共杀无辜三十五人。
English: Thirty-five innocent people were killed.

古文：建欲令人与禽兽交而生子，强令宫人裸而四据，与羝羊及狗交。
现代文：刘建想让人与禽兽性交而生子，强使宫人裸体而四处按住，与雄羊和狗性交。
English: Liu Jian wanted people to have sexual intercourse with animals to have children, forced the palace people to be naked and hold them down everywhere, and had sexual intercourse with rams and dogs.

古文：专为淫虐，自知罪多，国中多欲告言者，建恐诛，心内不安，与其后成光共使越婢下神，祝诅上。
现代文：刘建一心淫乱暴虐，自知罪多，国内不少人想告发他，刘建害怕被杀，心中不安，与他的王后成光共同让越婢下神，诅咒皇上。
English: Liu Jian was bent on adultery, violence and cruelty. He knew that he was guilty of many crimes. Many people in the country wanted to denounce him. Liu Jian was afraid of being killed and was uneasy. Together with his queen, Chengguang, he let Yue Yibin become a god and curse the emperor.

古文：与郎中令等语怨望： 汉廷使者即复来覆我，我决不独死！ 
现代文：与郎中令等有不满的话： 如汉廷使者治罪于我，我决不独自死掉！ 
English: If you are dissatisfied with your second-in-command, etc.: If the emissary of the Han court punishes me, I will never die alone!

古文：建亦颇闻淮南、衡山阴谋，恐一日发，为所并，遂作兵器。
现代文：刘建也多闻淮南王、衡山王的阴谋，恐怕有一天他们发动后，自己被吞并，便制造兵器。
English: Liu Jian also heard a lot about the conspiracies of King Huainan and King Hengshan. I am afraid that one day, after they were launched, they would be annexed and would manufacture weapons.

古文：号王后父胡应为将军。
现代文：号称王后的父亲胡应为将军。
English: The queen's father, Hu Ying, is said to be a general.

古文：中大夫疾有材力，善骑射，号曰灵武君。
现代文：中大夫疾有膂力，善射骑，号称为灵武君。
English: Zhongdafu was strong and good at shooting and riding. He was called Lingwukun.

古文：作治黄屋盖，刻皇帝玺，铸将军、都尉金银印，作汉使节二十、绶千余，具置军官品员及拜爵封侯之赏，具天下之舆地及军陈图。
现代文：制作黄屋盖；刻制皇帝玺，铸造将军、都尉金银印，制造汉使的符节二十个，绶带一千多；充分设置军官品级，等拜爵封侯时就进行赏赐；收齐天下的地理及军队部署地图。
English: They made the yellow roof cover; carved the emperor's seal, cast the general's and captain's gold and silver seals, made twenty Han envoy's symbols and more than a thousand ribbons; fully set up the officer's rank, and rewarded them when they were knighted; and collected the world's geography and army deployment map.

古文：遗人通越繇王闽侯，遗以锦帛奇珍，繇王闽侯亦遗建荃、葛、珠玑、犀甲、翠羽、蝯熊奇兽，数通使往来，约有急相助。
现代文：派人与越繇王闽侯沟通，赠给锦帛奇珍，逊王阻堡也赠给型建荃、葛、珠玑、犀甲、翠羽、猿熊奇兽，使者多次往来，约定在有紧急情况时要相助。
English: He sent messengers to communicate with the king of Yue and the prince of Wu, and presented the brocade to Qizhen, and the castle of the king of Song to Qian, Ge, Zhu, Rhinoceros, Jade Feather, and Monkey and Bear. The messengers had many contacts, and agreed to help in case of emergency.

古文：及淮南事发，治党与，颇连及建，建使人多推金钱绝其狱。
现代文：等到淮南事发，惩治同党，多牵连到刘建，型建派人多次用金钱贿赂而未进狱。
English: Wait until the Huainan incident, punish the same party, mostly implicate Liu Jian, Qian Jian sent people repeatedly bribed with money and did not go to prison.

古文：后复谓近臣曰： 我为王，诏狱岁至，生又无欢怡日，壮士不坐死，欲为人所不能为耳。 
现代文：后来又对近臣说： 我为王，皇帝派来审案的官，每年都来，活着没有欢快的日子，勇士不能等着死，要做人所不能做的事。 
English: Then he said to his courtiers, "I am the king, and the magistrate sent by the emperor comes every year. There is no joy in living. A warrior cannot wait for death, he must do what is impossible for man.

古文：建时佩其父所赐将军印，载天子旗出。
现代文：刘建经常佩带他父亲受赐的将军印，载着天子旗出游。
English: Liu Jian often wears the general's seal given to him by his father and travels with the flag of the Son of Heaven.

古文：积数岁，事发觉，汉遣丞相长史与江都相杂案，索得兵器、玺、绶、节反具，有司请捕诛建。
现代文：过了数年，事被发觉，汉派丞相长史与江都相来查办，搜出兵器印玺绶带旌旗等造的器具，有司请捕拿诛杀刘建。
English: A few years later, the matter was discovered, and the Han minister, Chang Shi, and Jiang Du jointly investigated and investigated, and found weapons, printed ribbons, banners, and other equipment. Some departments asked the police to arrest and kill Liu Jian.

古文：制曰： 与列侯吏二千石博士议。 
现代文：皇上下韶说： 与列侯吏二千石博士讨论。 
English: The Emperor said, "Let's discuss it with the vassal of 2,000 koku."

古文：议皆曰： 建失臣子道，积久，辄蒙不忍，遂谋反逆。
现代文：讨论时都说： 刘建失去臣子之道，已有很长时间，一直蒙皇恩不忍惩罚，于是就图谋反叛。
English: During the discussion, they all said: Liu Jian has lost the way of a vassal for a long time, has always been favored by the emperor and cannot bear to be punished, so he tried to rebel.

古文：所行无道，虽桀、纣恶不至于此。
现代文：他的所作所为没有人道，就是桀纣的罪恶也到不了造种地步。
English: What he did was not humane, and even the most heinous of crimes would not rise to the level of planting a seed.

古文：天诛所不赦，当以谋反法诛。 
现代文：天诛所不能赦免的，应当以反叛罪诛杀。 
English: Those who cannot be pardoned by Heaven should be put to death for the crime of rebellion.

古文：有诏宗正、廷尉即问建。
现代文：皇上下韶令宗正、廷尉前去审问刘建。
English: The emperors ordered Zong Zheng and a courtier to interrogate Liu Jian.

古文：建自杀，后成光等皆弃市。
现代文：刘建自杀，后成光等都处弃市刑。
English: Liu Jian committed suicide, and Hou Chengguang and others were all given suspended sentences.

古文：六年国除，地入于汉，为广陵郡。
现代文：六年封国被废除，封地归入汉，成为广陵塑。
English: Six years later, the feudal state was abolished and the fief was incorporated into the Han Dynasty, becoming Guangling Plastic.

古文：绝百二十一年，平帝时新都侯王莽秉政，兴灭继绝，立建弟盱眙侯子宫为广陵王，奉易王后。
现代文：过了一百二十一年，平帝时新都侯王莽执政，兴灭继绝，立刘建的弟弟盱眙侯的儿子刘宫为广陵王，过继为易王的后嗣。
English: One hundred and twenty-one years later, during the reign of Emperor Ping, Wang Mang, the prince of Xindu, was in power. He ruled from one generation to the next. Liu Jian's brother, Liu Gong, the son of the prince of Xindu, was made the king of Guangling and the heir of King Yi.

古文：莽篡，国绝。
现代文：王莽篡位，封国灭绝。
English: After Wang Zha usurped the throne, the gong was once again abolished.

古文：胶西于王端，孝景前三年立。
现代文：胶西于王刘端在景帝前元三年封王。
English: Guoxi Yu Wang Liu Duan was crowned king in the third year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：为人贼盭，又阴痿，一近妇人，病数月。
现代文：为人残忍暴虐，而身体痿弱，一接近女人，即病数月。
English: He is a cruel and violent man, but his body is weak, and as soon as he gets close to a woman, he falls ill for months.

古文：有所爱幸少年，以为郎。郎与后宫乱，端禽灭之，及杀其子母。
现代文：有一个他所喜爱的少年，成为他的侍从官，侍从官和后宫淫乱，刘端擒住并杀了他，并杀了他的儿子和母亲。
English: There was a boy he liked who became his equerry. The equerry and the harem had an affair. Liu Duan caught and killed him, and also killed his son and mother.

古文：数犯法，汉公卿数请诛端，天子弗忍，而端所为滋甚。
现代文：刘端多次犯法，汉公卿数次请求诛杀刘端，天子不忍心，因此刘端所作所为更加放肆。
English: Liu Duan repeatedly violated the law, Han Gongqing repeatedly requested to kill Liu Duan, Tianzi could not bear it, so Liu Duan's behavior was even more reckless.

古文：有司比再请，削其国，去太半。
现代文：有司多次请求，就削减他的封国，减去一大半。
English: At Yuji's repeated request, his fiefdom was reduced by more than half.

古文：端心愠，遂为无訾省。
现代文：刘端心中恼怒，于是不再管理资。
English: Liu Duan harbored a grudge in his heart, so he no longer calculated and managed the money in the country.

古文：府库坏漏，尽腐财物，以巨万计，终不得收徙。
现代文：府库毁坏漏雨，财物全部腐烂，损失以巨万计，始终不予收拾移动。
English: The prefectural treasury was damaged by leaking rain, all the property was rotten, the losses were huge, and it was never cleaned up and moved.

古文：令吏毋得收租赋。
现代文：命令官吏不能去收租税。
English: He also ordered officials not to collect rents.

古文：端皆去卫，封其宫门，从一门出入。
现代文：刘端把侍卫人员去掉，宫弓封死，从一个门出入。
English: Liu Duan removed the guards, sealed the palace bow, and entered and exited through a single door.

古文：数变名姓，为布衣，之它国。
现代文：多次变换姓名，装作平民，前往其他国家。
English: He repeatedly changed his name, pretended to be a civilian and travelled to other countries.

古文：相二千石至者，奉汉法以治，端辄求其罪告之，亡罪者诈药杀之。
现代文：相二千石到来的，遵奉汉法来治理胶西，刘端往往搜求他们的罪状上告，无罪的则诈骗以毒药杀死。
English: Liu Duan would often search for and appeal against the charges of those who came into possession of 2,000 koku of rice and followed the Chinese law to deal with them. Those who were not guilty were killed by fraud and poison.

古文：所以设诈究变，强足以距谏，知足以饰非。
现代文：所以他设诈求变，强横足以用来拒绝别人的规劝，智谋足以掩饰自己的错误。
English: So he sets up deception for change, strong enough to reject the persuasion of others, and clever enough to cover up his mistakes.

古文：相二千石从王治，则汉绳以法。
现代文：相二千石跟从王来治理，就被漠绳之以法。
English: He was brought to justice for deserting the king when he came to govern a province of two thousand koku.

古文：故胶西小国，而所杀伤二千石甚众。
现代文：所以胶西小国，而所杀的二千石相当多。
English: As a result, although Jiaoxi is a small country, there are many officials of 2,000 koku rank who have been killed or injured.

古文：立四十七年薨，无子，国除。地入于汉，为胶西郡。
现代文：胶西王在位四十七年薨，没有儿子，封国被废除，所封之地归入汉，成为胶西郡。
English: In the 47th year of his reign, King Koxi died without a son, and the fief was abolished. The fief land was incorporated into the Han Dynasty and became Koxi County.

古文：赵敬肃王彭祖以孝景前二年立为广川王。
现代文：赵敬肃王刘彭祖在景帝前元二年被封为广川王。
English: Liu Pengzu, the king of Zhao Jingsu, was named the king of Guangchuan in the 2nd year of the 1st century BC.

古文：赵王遂反破后，徙王赵。
现代文：赵王刘遂谋反，被攻破后，迁徙王到赵地。
English: Zhao Wang Liu then plotted a rebellion, and after being defeated, the king moved to Zhao.

古文：彭祖为人巧佞，卑谄足共，而心刻深，好法律，持诡辩以中人。
现代文：茎担为人虚伪不实，奉迎谄媚，对人过度谦敬，而内心严酷，惯用法律，用诡辩来陷害人。
English: He is full of hypocrisy and insincerity, flattery and flattery, excessive modesty towards others, but he is harsh at heart, and is accustomed to using the law and sophistry to frame others.

古文：多内宠姬及子孙。
现代文：多纳宠姬有很多子孙。
English: Donna Petchick has many descendants.

古文：相二千石欲奉汉法以治，则害于王家。
现代文：相二千石打算遵奉汉法来管治，这就有害于王家。
English: It is harmful to the royal family if a prince of 2,000 koku intends to rule in accordance with Han law.

古文：是以每相二千石至，彭祖衣帛布单衣，自行迎除舍，多设疑事以诈动之，得二千石失言，中忌讳，辄书之。
现代文：因此每看到有相二千石到来的，彭祖就穿帛布单衣，自到馆舍门前迎接，多设可疑之事来诈骗他使他动摇，如果二千石言论有过错，所说的与要忌讳的事相符，就记下来。
English: Therefore, whenever he saw someone with the appearance of 2,000 koku coming, Peng Zu would put on a single-breasted shirt and go to the front door of the guesthouse to greet him, and set up more suspicious things to deceive him and make him waver. If there is a mistake in the speech of 2,000 koku, if what is said is consistent with the things to be avoided, then write it down.

古文：二千石欲治者，则以此迫劫；不听，乃上书告之，及污以奸利事。
现代文：二千石想进行治理的，就用这些记录来逼迫威胁；不听从的，就上书告发，并诬陷以贪利作奸之事。
English: Those who wanted to manage the 2,000-koku mine used these records to coerce and threaten; those who did not obey were denounced in writing and accused of greed and treachery.

古文：彭祖立六十余年，相二千石无能满二岁，辄以罪去，大者死，小者刑。以故二千石莫敢治，而赵王擅权。
现代文：彭祖在位六十余年，相二千石任期不能到两年，就因罪去职，大的被处死，小的受刑，因此二千石没有敢去治理的，而赵王专权。
English: Peng Zu reigned for more than sixty years. If his term of office was less than two years, he would be removed from office for a crime. If he had more than two thousand koku, he would be executed. If he had less than two thousand koku, he would be punished. Therefore, if he did not dare to govern the two thousand koku, King Zhao would have absolute power.

古文：使使即县为贾人榷会，入多于国租税。
现代文：派使者到各县为商贾说合交易加以征税，这些收入比国家的租税还多。
English: Envoys were sent to counties to collect taxes on business transactions, which generated more revenue than the national tax.

古文：以是赵王家多金钱，然所赐姬诸子，亦尽之矣。
现代文：因此赵王家多金钱，然而赐给姬及诸子的也全把它们耗光了。
English: As a result, the Zhao royal family had a lot of money, but this money was also given to the concubines and their children, and it was all spent.

古文：彭祖不好治宫室禨祥，好为吏。
现代文：彭祖不喜好建筑宫室供奉鬼神求福，而好为吏治。
English: Peng Zu did not like to build a palace to worship ghosts and gods for good luck, but to rule as an official.

古文：上书愿督国中盗贼。
现代文：上书愿督察国中盗贼。
English: The petitioner wishes to inspect the thieves in the country.

古文：常夜从走卒行徼邯郸中。
现代文：常在夜中与差役巡察到邯郸。
English: He often led patrols at night to inspect the city.

古文：诸使过客，以彭祖险陂，莫敢留邯郸。
现代文：许多使者和过客，因彭祖邪谄不正，没有敢留宿邯郸的。
English: Many messengers and passers-by did not dare to stay there because of Peng Zu's wickedness.

古文：久之，太子丹与其女弟及同产姊奸。
现代文：长期以来，太子刘丹和他的妹妹姊姊通奸。
English: For a long time, Prince Liu Dan and his younger sister committed adultery.

古文：江充告丹淫乱，又使人椎埋攻剽，为奸甚众。
现代文：江充告发刘丹淫乱，还派人杀人抢劫，所做恶事相当多。
English: Jiang Chong accused Liu Dan of fornication, and sent people to kill and rob him. He did a lot of evil things.

古文：武帝遣使者发吏卒捕丹，下魏郡诏狱，治罪至死。
现代文：武帝派遣使者调吏卒捕拿刘丹，下到魏邵关押犯人的地方，治以死罪。
English: Emperor Wu dispatched an envoy to dispatch officials to arrest Liu Dan, go down to the place where Wei Shao held the prisoner, and sentence him to death.

古文：彭祖上书冤讼丹，愿从国中勇敢击匈奴，赎丹罪，上不许。
现代文：彭祖上书为刘丹申冤，愿与国内有勇气有胆量的人一起攻打匈抠，为刘且赎罪，这查不同意。
English: Peng Zu wrote a letter to Liu Dan to seek redress for his grievances, and was willing to fight against Hungary together with people with courage and courage in China to atone for Liu Dan, but the investigation did not agree.

古文：久之，竟赦出。
现代文：过了很久，竟被赦免。
English: After a long time, he was pardoned.

古文：后彭祖入朝，因帝姊平阳、隆虑公主求复立丹为太子，上不许。
现代文：后彭祖入朝，通过皇帝姊平阳隆虑公主，请求再立刘丹为太子，武帝不同意。
English: After Peng Zu entered the imperial court, through the emperor's sister, Princess Pingyang Longxian, he requested that Liu Dan be reinstated as crown prince. Emperor Wu did not agree.

古文：彭祖取江都易王宠姬，王建所奸淖姬者，甚爱之，生一男，号淖子。
现代文：彭祖娶江都易王宠姬为妻，就是被王刘建所奸淫过的淖姬，非常喜爱她，生一儿子，名叫淖子。
English: Peng Zu married Wang Zhaoji of Jiangdu, who had been raped by Wang Liu Jian, and loved her very much. They had a son named Zizi.

古文：彭祖以征和元年薨，谥敬肃王。
现代文：彭祖在征和元年薨，谧敬肃王。
English: In the year of the Conquest and the First Year of the Heian period, Peng Zu paid tribute to King Su.

古文：彭祖薨时，淖姬兄为汉宦者，上召问： 淖子何如？ 
现代文：彭祖薨时，淖姬的哥哥是汉的宦官，皇帝召见他问道： 淖子如何？ 
English: At the time of Peng Zu's death, Yan Ji's brother was a eunuch in the Han Dynasty. The emperor summoned him and asked, "How is Yan Zi Rong?

古文：对曰： 为人多欲。 
现代文：回答说： 为人贪心。 
English: He answered, "Being greedy.

古文：上曰： 多欲不宜君国子民。 
现代文：皇帝说： 贪心不适宜做国家君主来管理人民。 
English: The emperor said: Greed is not suitable to be a national monarch to manage the people.

古文：问武始侯昌，曰： 无咎无誉。 上曰： 如是可矣。 
现代文：又问武始侯昌怎么样，回答说： 没什么罪过也没什么可称赞的。 
English: He also asked Wu Shihuo how Houchang was, and he replied, "There is no sin and nothing to praise.

古文：遣使者立昌，是为顷王，十九年薨。
现代文：皇帝说： 像这样就可以。 于是派遣使者立刘昌为王，这就是顷王，在位十九年薨。
English: The emperor said, "It can be done like this," and sent an envoy to set up Liu Chang as king.

古文：子怀王尊嗣，五年薨。
现代文：儿子怀王尊嗣位，在位五年薨。
English: His son, Prince Huai, ascended to the throne and reigned for five years.

古文：无子，绝二岁。
现代文：没有儿子，封国断了两年。
English: Without a son, he was deprived of his title for two years.

古文：宣帝立尊弟高，是为哀王，数月薨。
现代文：宣帝立刘尊的弟弟刘高，这就是哀王，在位数月薨。
English: Liu Gao, the younger brother of Emperor Xuanzong's Liu Zun, known as the King of Lamentation, reigned for only a few months.

古文：子共王充嗣，五十六年薨。
现代文：儿子共王刘充嗣位，在位五十六年薨。
English: His son and co-emperor Liu Cheng succeeded to the throne and reigned for fifty-six years.

古文：子隐嗣，王莽时绝。
现代文：儿子刘隐嗣位，王莽时断绝。
English: He abdicated when his son, Liu Yingzong, succeeded to the throne.

古文：初，武帝复以亲亲故，立敬肃王小子偃为平干王，是为顷王，十一年薨。
现代文：从前，武帝又因亲爱他亲人的原因，立敬肃王的小儿子刘偃为平干王，造就是顷王，在位十一年薨。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Wu, out of love for his relatives, made Liu Ye, the youngest son of King Keisui, the King of Pinggan, which means the King of He, and he reigned for eleven years.

古文：子缪王元嗣，二十五年薨。
现代文：儿子缪王刘元嗣位，在位二十五年薨。
English: Liu Yuan, the son of King Mu, ascended to the throne and reigned for twenty-five years.

古文：大鸿胪禹奏： 元前以刃贼杀奴婢，子男杀谒者，为刺史所举奏，罪名明白。
现代文：大鸿胪禹上奏： 刘元以前用刀杀害奴，儿子杀害进见的人，被刺史举报，罪名确凿。
English: Da Hong Xuan Yu: Liu Yuan had previously killed a slave with a knife, his son killed an enterprising person, and was reported by the stabbing history, and the crime was conclusive.

古文：病先令，令能为乐奴婢从死，迫胁自杀者凡十六人，暴虐不道。
现代文：病中遣令，令能做乐的奴婢从葬，被逼迫威胁自杀的共十六人，暴虐无道。
English: A total of sixteen people, who were ordered to be sent away in the midst of illness, ordered slaves and maids who could make music to be buried, and were forced to threaten suicide, were brutally treated.

古文：故《春秋》之义，诛君之子不宜立。
现代文：按《春秋》上的义理，被诛杀的国君的儿子不应当立。
English: According to the principle of "Spring and Autumn," the son of the king who was killed should not stand up.

古文：元虽未伏诛，不宜立嗣。 
现代文：刘元虽未受死刑，但不应有继嗣。 
English: Although Liu Yuan did not receive the death penalty, he should not have an heir.

古文：奏可，国除。
现代文：上奏许可。封国被废除。
English: permission to perform. The feudal state was abolished.

古文：中山靖王胜以孝景前三年立。
现代文：中山靖王刘胜在景帝前元三年封王。
English: Liu Sheng, the King of Zhongshan, was enthroned three years before Emperor Jing.

古文：武帝初即位，大臣惩吴、楚七国行事，议者多冤晁错之策，皆以诸侯连城数十，泰强，欲稍侵削，数奏暴其过惩。
现代文：武帝初即位时，大臣有鉴于吴楚七国的行事，议论的人多为晁错的计策申辩叫冤，都认为诸侯连城数十，过于强大，想逐渐削夺，数次上奏披露他们的过失。
English: When Emperor Wu first ascended the throne, the minister, in view of the actions of the seven kingdoms of Wu and Chu, and the fact that most of the people who were discussing the wrong strategy were calling for revenge, all thought that the ten princes were too powerful and wanted to gradually reduce their power, and several times disclosed their mistakes in the report.

古文：诸侯王自以骨肉至亲，先帝所以广封连城，犬牙相错者，为盘石宗也。
现代文：诸侯王自以为骨肉最为亲近，先帝所以广封连城，犬牙交错，是为使宗族像盘石一样坚固。
English: Princes and princes consider themselves to be closest to their own flesh and blood. That is why emperors were so widely connected, with interlaced canine teeth, in order to make the clan as solid as a rock.

古文：今或无罪，为臣下所侵辱，有司吹毛求疵，笞服其臣，使证其君，多自以侵冤。
现代文：现在有的无罪，被臣下所侵犯污辱，有司吹毛求疵，拷打臣下使其服从，迫使他们为他们的君主作证，多半是这样造成的冤曲。
English: Now some are innocent, some are violated and insulted by their subjects, some are faultfinders, some torture their subjects into submission and force them to testify for their monarch, and most of them are the result of such wrongdoings.

古文：建元三年，代王登、长沙王发、中山王胜、济川王明来朝，天子置酒，胜闻乐声而泣。问其故，胜对曰：
现代文：建元三年，代王刘登、长沙王刘发、中山王刘胜、济川王刘明来朝见，天子备酒，刘胜闻乐声而哭泣，问他为什么，刘胜回答说：
English: In the third year of Jianyuan, the acting king Liu Deng, the king of Changsha Liu Fa, the king of Zhongshan Liu Sheng, the king of Jichuan Liu Ming came to see the morning, the son of heaven prepared wine, Liu Sheng heard the music and cried, asked him why, Liu Sheng replied:

古文：臣闻悲者不可为累欷，思者不可为叹息。
现代文：臣听说悲痛的人不可以过度哭泣，悲思的人不可叹息。
English: The minister heard that those who are sad should not cry excessively, and those who are sad should not sigh.

古文：故高渐离击筑易水之上，荆轲为之低而不食；雍门子壹微吟，孟尝君为之於邑。
现代文：所以高渐离击筑易水之上，荆轲因此低头而不食；雍门子微吟，孟尝君为之悒悒不乐。
English: As a result, Gao Qianli became detached from the building of Yishui. As a result, Jing Jun bowed his head and did not eat; Yongmenzi chanted softly, and Meng Yijun was unhappy.

古文：今臣心结日久，每闻幼眇之声，不知涕泣之横集也。
现代文：如今臣心中的疙瘩已结了很久，每听到微妙曲折的声音，不自觉地涕泣交流。
English: Now, the knot in my heart has been closed for a long time, and every time I hear the subtle twists and turns of the voice, I involuntarily weep and exchange.

古文：夫众喣漂山，聚蚊成雷，朋党执虎，十夫桡椎。
现代文：众人吹气能将山移动，聚集而飞的蚊子声音犹如雷鸣，结成朋党可以抓住老虎。十个男子可以弄弯铁椎。
English: A mountain can be moved by the breath of many; a gathering of mosquitoes sounds like thunder; a group of friends can catch a tiger; ten men can bend iron.

古文：是以文王拘于牖里，孔子厄于陈、蔡。
现代文：所以文王被拘于牖里，孔子被围在陈、蔡。
English: Therefore, King Wen was detained in Yili, and Confucius was surrounded in Chen and Cai.

古文：此乃烝庶之风成，增积之生害也。臣身远与寡，莫为之先，众口铄金，积毁销骨，丛轻折轴，羽翮飞肉，纷惊逢罗，潸然出涕。
现代文：造就是众人成风，累积生害，臣远离京师又无亲友，莫能为之扬名，众一词，可以致人于死地，丛轻可以折轴，羽翮可以飞翔，受惊后又遇罗网，潸然流涕。
English: The result is that many people have become popular, causing harm and damage. The minister is far away from the capital and has no relatives or friends, so he can't make a name for himself. The word "many people" can cause people to die, the thicket can break the shaft, the feather can fly, and after being frightened, it will be caught in the net, and it will flow.

古文：臣闻白日晒光，幽隐皆照；明月曜夜，蚊虻宵见。
现代文：臣听说白日日光照射，连阴暗处都能照到；明月照耀夜晚，蚊虫也能见到。
English: The minister heard that when the sun shines during the day, it can illuminate even the dark places; when the moon shines at night, mosquitoes can be seen.

古文：然云蒸列布，沓冥昼昏；尘埃布覆，昧不见泰山。
现代文：但云气密布，白昼也昏暗；尘埃散布，昏暗不见泰山。
English: But the clouds are thick, and the day is dark; the dust is spread out, and Mount Tai cannot be seen in the dark.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么？
English: Why is that?

古文：物有蔽之也。
现代文：因有物遮蔽。
English: Obscured by debris.

古文：今臣雍阏不得闻，谗言之徒蜂生，道辽路远，曾莫为臣闻，臣窃自悲也。
现代文：今臣壅塞听不到什么，谗言之徒蜂拥而生，道途遥远，臣什么也听不到，暗自伤心。
English: Now, the vassal can't hear anything, the gossips are swarming, the road is far away, the vassal can't hear anything, and he is secretly sad.

古文：臣闻社鼷不灌，屋鼠不熏。
现代文：臣听说土地庙裹的鼠不能用水灌，屋裹的鼠不能用烟熏。
English: The minister heard that the rat wrapped in the temple could not be rinsed with water, and the rat wrapped in the house could not be smoked.

古文：何则？
现代文：这是为什么？
English: Why is that?

古文：所托者然也。
现代文：是因为这种老鼠托身的地方的缘故。
English: It's because of where these mice are hiding.

古文：臣虽薄也，得蒙肺附；位虽卑也，得为东藩，属又称兄。
现代文：臣虽轻微，得蒙帝王的亲近；地位虽卑下，但能作为束面藩臣，又属称皇帝为兄。
English: Although a minor vassal, he was close to the emperor; although his status was low, he was able to serve as a vassal of the domain, and he was also called the emperor's elder brother.

古文：今群臣非有葭莩之亲，鸿毛之重，群居党议，朋友相为，使夫宗室摈却，骨肉冰释。
现代文：现在群臣没有葭莩这样的亲近，鸿毛这样的重量，他们在一起进行非议，使宗室被抛弃，骨肉消散。
English: Now the courtiers do not have such a close relationship, such a weight, and they criticize together, causing the ancestral home to be abandoned and the flesh and blood to dissipate.

古文：斯伯奇所以流离，比干所以横分也。
现代文：造就是伯奇所以流离失所，比干所以身首分离的原因。
English: This is the reason why Birch was displaced and Bican was separated.

古文：《诗》云 我心忧伤，惄焉如捣；假寐永叹，唯忧用老；心之忧矣，疢如疾首 ，臣之谓也。
现代文：《诗经》上说 我的心忧伤，犹如棒槌把心捣；和衣而卧长叹息，忧伤使我人衰老；心裹苦闷说不完，好像头痛发高烧。 
English: The "Song of Songs" says, "My heart is sad, like a mallet pounding my heart; I lie down in my robe and sigh. Sadness makes me old; my heart is full of anguish, like a headache with a high fever."

古文：具以吏所侵闻。
现代文：这是在说臣下。
English: This is talking about a vassal.

古文：于是上乃厚诸侯之礼，省有司所奏诸侯事，加亲亲之恩焉。
现代文：他把官吏所侵犯的事全部上奏皇帝，于是皇帝就给诸侯以厚礼，减去有司所奏诸侯事情，增加亲近亲戚的恩情。
English: He reported all the offenses committed by officials to the emperor, and the emperor rewarded the lords with a generous gift, reducing the number of cases that had to be reported to the lords, and increasing the favors given to close relatives.

古文：其后更用主父偃谋，令诸侯以私恩自裂地分其子弟，而汉为定制封号，辄别属汉郡。
现代文：后来改用主父偃的计谋，使诸侯以私恩自己分地给子弟，而汉为他们制定制度和封号，就另属汉郡。
English: Later, they changed to using the trick of the main father, Xing, to make the lords divide the land to their sons with their own grace, while Han set up a system and seal for them, and they belonged to Han County.

古文：汉有厚恩，而诸侯地稍自分析弱小云。
现代文：汉有厚恩，而诸侯之地就渐渐分散削弱变小。
English: The Han were favored, and the vassal states were gradually dispersed, weakened, and reduced in size.

古文：胜为人乐酒好内，有子百二十余人。
现代文：刘胜为人好酒色，有子一百二十余人。
English: Liu Sheng was fond of wine and had more than one hundred and twenty children.

古文：常与赵王彭祖相非曰： 兄为王，专代吏治事。
现代文：常与赵王彭祖相互指责说： 兄长为王，专门代官吏治事。
English: Zhao Wang and Peng Zu often accused each other, saying, "The elder brother is the king, and the deputy official is in charge of affairs."

古文：王者当日听音乐，御声色。 
现代文：为王应当日听音乐，玩赏歌舞美女。 
English: The king should listen to music every day and enjoy beautiful women singing and dancing.

古文：赵王亦曰： 中山王但奢淫，不佐天子拊循百姓，何以称为藩臣！ 
现代文：赵王也说： 中山王只管奢侈淫乐，不辅佐天子安抚百姓，怎么能称为蕃臣呢！ 
English: King Zhao also said: How can Zhongshan Wang be called a vassal when he only indulges in luxury and debauchery, and does not help Tianzi to pacify the people!

古文：四十二年薨。
现代文：刘胜在位四十三年薨。
English: Liu Sheng died after reigning for 43 years.

古文：子哀王昌嗣，一年薨。
现代文：儿子哀王刘昌嗣位，在位一年薨。
English: His son, the late King Liu Chang, succeeded to the throne and reigned for one year.

古文：子康王昆侈嗣，二十一年薨。
现代文：儿子康王昆侈嗣位，在位二十一年薨。
English: His son, Kang Wang Kun, succeeded to the throne and reigned for 21 years.

古文：子顷王辅嗣，四年薨。
现代文：儿子顷王刘辅嗣位，在位四年薨。
English: His son, Liu Shuo, became the heir to the throne and reigned for four years.

古文：子宪王福嗣，十七年薨。
现代文：儿子宪王刘福嗣位，在位十七年薨。
English: His son, Prince Liu Fuzhi, ascended the throne after 17 years on the throne.

古文：子怀王循嗣，十五年薨，无子，绝四十五岁。
现代文：儿子怀王刘循嗣位，在位十五年薨，没有儿子，断绝四十五年。
English: His son, Huai Wang Liu, succeeded to the throne. He reigned for fifteen years, without a son, and died after forty-five years.

古文：成帝鸿嘉二年，复立宪王弟孙利乡侯子云客，是为广德夷王。
现代文：成帝鸿嘉二年又立宪王弟弟的孙子利乡侯的儿子云客，造就是广德夷王。
English: In the second year of Emperor Hongjia's reign, the grandson of Emperor Xianwang's younger brother and the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son of the son.

古文：二年薨，无子，绝十四岁。
现代文：在位三年薨，无子，封国断绝十四年。
English: He reigned for only three years, had no children, and ended his statehood after fourteen years.

古文：哀帝复立云客弟广汉为广平王。
现代文：哀帝又立云客之弟广汉为广平王。
English: Emperor Ai also made Guanhan, the younger brother of Yunke, the king of Guangping.

古文：薨，无后。
现代文：薨，无后。
English: There is no afterlife.

古文：平帝元始二年，复立广川惠王曾孙伦为广德王，奉靖王后。
现代文：平帝元始二年又立广川惠王的曾孙刘伦为广德王，过继为靖王后。
English: In the first two years of the Ping Dynasty, Liu Lun, the great-grandson of Guangchuan Hui Wang, was appointed as the Guangde King, and his heir as the Jing Queen.

古文：王莽时绝。
现代文：王莽时断绝。
English: Wang Mengshi broke it off.

古文：长沙定王发，母唐姬，故程姬侍者。
现代文：长沙定王刘发，母亲唐姬，是以前程姬的侍者。
English: Changsha Ding Wang Liu Fa, Tang Ji's mother, used to be Cheng Ji's waiter.

古文：景帝召程姬，程姬有所避，不愿进，而饰侍者唐儿使夜进。
现代文：景帝召程姬去陪侍，程姬身体不便，不愿去，而使侍者唐儿化装夜进。
English: Emperor Jing summoned Cheng Ji to accompany him. Cheng Ji was physically inconvenient and did not want to go, so he asked the waiter, Tang Er, to disguise himself and go into the night.

古文：上醉，不知，以为程姬而幸之，遂有身。
现代文：皇帝醉，不知道，以为是程姬而与她发生关系，唐儿便有了身孕。
English: The emperor, drunk and unaware, thought it was Cheng Ji and had relations with her, and Tang'er became pregnant.

古文：已乃觉非程姬也。
现代文：皇帝与她发生关系后才明白她不是程姬。
English: It was only afterwards that the emperor discovered that it was not Cheng Ji.

古文：及生子，因名曰发。
现代文：等生了儿子，于是名叫刘发。
English: She gave birth to a son and named him Liu Fa.

古文：以孝景前二年立。
现代文：在景帝前元二年封王。
English: He was crowned king two years before the reign of Emperor Jing.

古文：以其母微无宠，故王卑湿贫国。
现代文：因母亲出身微贱不得宠爱，所以才去治理一个土地低洼潮湿的贫国。
English: Because of his mother's humble background, he could not be pampered, so he went to govern a poor country with low-lying and wet land.

古文：二十八年薨。
现代文：在位二十八年薨。
English: He died twenty-eight years later.

古文：子戴王庸嗣，二十七年薨。
现代文：儿子戴王刘庸嗣位，在位二十七年薨。
English: Dai Wang's son Liu Yongzhi ascended the throne, ending his 27-year reign.

古文：子顷王鲋鮈嗣，十七年薨。
现代文：儿子顷王鲋绚嗣位，在位十七年薨。
English: His son, He Wangtao, succeeded to the throne and reigned for seventeen years.

古文：子剌王建德嗣，宣帝时坐猎纵火燔民九十六家，杀二人，又以县官事怨内史，教人诬告以弃市罪，削八县，罢中尉官。
现代文：儿子剌王建德嗣位，宣帝时因打猎纵火烧毁民居九十六家，杀死二人，又因朝廷事怨恨内史，教唆别人诬告而处以弃市罪，削减八县，罢免中尉官。
English: His son, Shao Wang Jiande, succeeded to the throne. During the proclamation of the emperor, he set fire to ninety-six houses and killed two people because of hunting. He was also punished for abandoning the city, reducing eight counties, and dismissing a lieutenant because he resented the imperial court and instigated others to make false accusations.

古文：三十四年薨。
现代文：在位三十四年薨。
English: His reign of thirty-four years was over.

古文：子炀王旦嗣，二年薨。
现代文：儿子炀王刘旦嗣位，在位二年薨。
English: His son, Liu Tan, succeeded to the throne and ruled for two years.

古文：无子，绝岁余。
现代文：没有儿子，封国断绝一年多。
English: Without a son, he was deprived of the title for more than a year.

古文：元帝初元三年复立旦弟宗，是为孝王，五年薨。
现代文：元帝初元三年又立刘旦之弟刘宗，这就是孝王，在位五年薨。
English: In the first three years of the Yuan Dynasty, Liu Zong, the younger brother of Liu Dan, was also established. This was the Xiao Wang, who reigned for five years.

古文：子鲁入嗣，王莽时绝。
现代文：儿子鲁人嗣位，王莽时断绝。
English: His son, Lu Ren, succeeded to the throne, but Wang Mang then abdicated.

古文：广川惠王越以孝景中二年立，十三年薨。
现代文：广川惠王刘越在景帝中元二年封王，在位十三年薨。
English: Liu Yue, the Hui King of Guangchuan, was crowned king in the second year of the Middle Yuan Dynasty during the reign of Emperor Jing, and reigned for thirteen years.

古文：子缪王齐嗣，四十四年薨。
现代文：儿子缪王刘齐嗣位，在位四十四年薨。
English: His son, Liu Qi, ascended to the throne after reigning for 44 years.

古文：初，齐有幸臣乘距，已而有罪，欲诛距。
现代文：从前刘齐有受宠幸的臣子乘距，后来犯了罪，刘齐想杀掉乘距。
English: Once upon a time, Liu Qi had a favored and fortunate vassal, who later committed a crime. Liu Qi wanted to kill the vassal.

古文：距亡，齐因禽其宗族。
现代文：乘距逃走，刘齐因此擒拿了他的宗族。
English: As Liu Qi fled, Liu Qi took his clan captive.

古文：距怨王，乃上书告齐与同产奸。
现代文：乘距因而怨恨刘齐，于是上书告刘齐与同母姊妹通奸。
English: He resented Liu Qi because of the distance, so he wrote a letter accusing Liu Qi of committing adultery with his mother's sister.

古文：是后，齐数告言汉公卿及幸臣所忠等，又告中尉蔡彭祖捕子明，骂曰： 吾尽汝种矣！ 
现代文：从这以后，刘齐数次告说汉的公卿及宠臣所忠等人，又告中尉蔡彭祖捕拿他的儿子刘明，骂道： 我要全部除掉你的子孙！ 
English: From then on, Liu Qi several times denounced Han's noblemen and favorite vassals such as Zhuang Zhong, and also accused Lieutenant Cai Pengzu of capturing his son Liu Ming, and scolded: I want to get rid of all your children and grandchildren!

古文：有司案验，不如王言，劾齐诬罔，大不敬，请系治。
现代文：有司立案考察，不像王说的那样，弹劾刘齐诬陷，是大不敬，请拘捕囚禁。
English: It is not like Wang said that impeaching and framing Liu Qi is a great disrespect to have a judge file a case for investigation. Please arrest and imprison him.

古文：齐恐，上书愿与广川勇士奋击匈奴，上许之，未发，病薨。
现代文：刘齐慌恐，上书愿与广川勇士奋击匈奴，皇帝允许他。未出发，病死。
English: Liu Qi panicked and wrote a letter expressing his willingness to fight against the Xiongnu with the Guangchuan warriors, but the emperor allowed him to do so. He died of illness before he could leave.

古文：有司请除国，奏可。
现代文：有司请废除封地，上奏得到许可。
English: Some officials asked for the abolition of fiefdoms, and permission was granted.

古文：后数月，下诏曰： 广川惠王于朕为兄，朕不忍绝其宗庙，其以惠王孙去为广川王。 
现代文：过了数月，下诏说： 广川惠王是我的哥哥，我不忍断绝他的宗庙，还是让惠王的孙子刘去为广！王。 
English: After several months, he issued the following edict: Guangchuan Hui Wang is my elder brother, I can't bear to cut off his ancestral temple, so I'll let Hui Wang's grandson Liu become Guang! Wang.

古文：去即缪王齐太子也，师受《易》、《论语》、《孝经》皆通，好文辞、方技、博弈、倡优。
现代文：刘去就是缪王刘齐的太子，从师学习《易》、《论语》、《孝经》都通晓，爱好文辞、方技、棋艺、歌舞等。
English: Liu De was the prince of Liu Qi, the King of Mu. He learned "Yi," "Analects" and "Filial Piety" from his teacher, and was fond of literature, strategy, chess, singing and dancing.

古文：其殿门有成庆画，短衣大绔长剑，去好之，作七尺五寸剑，被服皆效焉。有幸姬王昭平、王地馀，许以为后。
现代文：他的殿门有成庆的画像，短衣大绔长剑，刘去非常喜爱，制作了一柄七尺五寸的剑，穿着都仿效那画像，他喜爱的姬妾有王昭平、王地余，许诺她们以后作王后。
English: At the gate of his palace, there is a picture of Chengqing, a short-clothed, long-sword-wielding man. Liu loved him so much that he made a seven-foot-five-inch sword, and his clothes were all modeled after that picture. His favorite concubines were Wang Zhaoping and Wang Diyu, and he promised that they would later become queens.

古文：去尝疾，姬阳成昭信侍视甚谨，更爱之。
现代文：刘去曾得病，姬妾阳成昭信侍奉极为周到，更加爱她。
English: Liu Gao had been ill, and his concubine Yang Chengzhaoxin was extremely thoughtful in serving her and loved her even more.

古文：去与地馀戏，得袖中刀，笞问状，服欲与昭平共杀昭信。
现代文：刘去和地余戏嬉，得袖中尖刀，鞭打审问她，供出想与昭平共同谋杀昭信。
English: Liu went to play with Yu Yu, got a sharp knife in his sleeve, whipped and interrogated her, and offered to play a role in the murder of Zhaoxin together with Zhaoping.

古文：笞问昭平，不服，以铁针针之，强服。
现代文：又拷问昭平，昭平不服，用铁针刺她，强迫她招供。
English: They also interrogated and tortured her, and when she refused, they stabbed her with an iron needle and forced her to confess.

古文：乃会诸姬，去以剑自击地馀，令昭信击昭平，皆死。
现代文：于是招集所有姬妾，刘去用剑亲自刺地余，又让昭信刺昭平，都死了。
English: So he summoned all of his concubines, and Liu personally stabbed Ji Yu with a sword. He also had Zhaoxin stab Zhao Ping, and they all died.

古文：昭信曰： 两姬婢且泄口。 
现代文：昭信说： 两姬的婢女会将此事说出。 
English: Akinobu said, "Nakahime's maidservant will tell everyone about this."

古文：复绞杀从婢三人。
现代文：又绞杀随从的婢女三人。
English: He also strangled his three female attendants.

古文：后昭信病，梦见昭平等以状告去。
现代文：后来昭信得病，梦见昭平等人，把这事告诉了刘去。
English: Later, when Zhaoxin fell ill, he dreamt of Zhaoxin and told Liu about it.

古文：去曰： 虏乃复见畏我！独可翻烧耳。 
现代文：刘去说： 她们现形是想使我畏忌，衹能用火烧掉。 
English: Liu went on to say, "They are trying to make me afraid, and I can burn them with fire.

古文：掘出尸，皆烧为灰。
现代文：掘出尸体，都烧成灰。
English: exhume the bodies, burn them to ashes.

古文：后去立昭信为后；幸姬陶望卿为脩靡夫人，主缯帛；崔脩成为明贞夫人，主永巷。
现代文：后来刘去立昭信为后；幸姬陶望卿为脩靡夫人，主管缯帛；崔脩成为明贞夫人，主管永巷。
English: Later, Liu went to appoint Zhaoxin as his successor; Xingji Tao Wangqing became the wife of Zhaomai and in charge of the palace; Cui Yao became the wife of Mingzhen and in charge of Yongxiang.

古文：昭信复谮望卿曰： 与我无礼，衣服常鲜于我，尽取善缯丐诸宫人。 
现代文：昭信又诬陷望卿说： 她对我无礼，衣服经常比我的还华丽，她还拿好的丝帛全送给了宫人。 
English: She was rude to me, her clothes were often more ornate than mine, and she gave away all the good silk brocades to the palace staff.

古文：去曰： 若数恶望卿，不能减我爱；设闻其淫，我亨之矣。 
现代文：刘去说： 你多次谗毁望卿，不能稍减我对她的喜爱；假若听到她淫乱，我就把她烹煮了。 
English: Liu went on to say, "You have repeatedly slandered Lady Wang, you can't make me love her any less. If I heard that she was an adulteress, I would cook her.

古文：后昭信谓去曰： 前画工画望卿舍，望卿袒裼傅粉其傍。又数出入南户窥郎吏，疑有奸。 
现代文：后来昭信对刘去说： 以前画工画望卿住舍，望卿袒露肩膀傅粉靠近画工，又数次出入南户偷看郎吏，疑有奸情。 
English: Later, Zhaoxin went to Liu and said, "In the past, painters used to paint Wang Jing's residence. Wang Jing used to walk bare-shouldered and powder-puffed close to the painters. He also entered and left the south house several times to peep at the servants. He is suspected of having an affair."

古文：去曰： 善司之。 
现代文：刘去说： 要好好地留意她。 
English: Liu De said, "Pay close attention to her.

古文：以故益不爱望卿。
现代文：为此逐渐不喜爱望卿。
English: For this reason, he gradually became disliked.

古文：后与昭信等饮，诸姬皆侍，去为望卿作歌曰： 背尊章，嫖以忽，谋屈奇，起自绝。
现代文：后来与昭信等饮酒，众姬都在旁服侍，刘去给望卿作歌道： 瞒着舅姑，淫乱一时，寻求奇异，自取灭绝。
English: Later, drinking with Zhaoxin and others, all the concubines were serving, Liu went to make a song for Wangqing: concealing the aunt, fornicating for a while, seeking the strange, and exterminating himself.

古文：行周流，自生患，谅非望，今谁怨！ 
现代文：行走各地，自生灾祸，诚非所望，今有何怨！ 
English: Walking all over the place, self-generated disaster, is not what is expected, now what is the complaint!

古文：使美人相和歌之。
现代文：令美人相和歌唱。
English: To make beauty look and sing.

古文：去曰： 是中当有自知者。 
现代文：刘去说： 遣裹边当有自知的。 
English: Liu De said, "You should have self-awareness when dealing with others.

古文：昭信知去已怒，即诬言望卿历指郎吏卧处，具知其主名，又言郎中令锦被，疑有奸。
现代文：昭信知道刘去已发怒，就诬陷望卿多次指点郎吏卧处，全知道他们的姓名，还能认出郎中令的锦被，怀疑有奸情。
English: Knowing that Liu had already lost his temper, Zhaoxin framed Wang Ching by repeatedly pointing out the servants' sleeping places. He knew all their names, and could also recognize the brocade quilt of the servant's second-in-command, suspecting treachery.

古文：去即与昭信从诸姬至望卿所，裸其身，更击之。令诸姬各持烧铁共灼望卿。
现代文：刘去马上和昭信跟诸姬到望卿住处，让她裸体，便加以击打，命诸姬各拿烧红的铁一起灼烫望卿。
English: Liu immediately went with Zhaoxin and Zhu Xi to the residence of Wang Jing, made her naked, then beat her, and ordered Zhu Xi to each take a red-hot iron and burn Wang Jing.

古文：望卿走，自投井死。
现代文：望卿逃出，投井而自尽。
English: Bokyeong escaped, threw himself into a well and committed suicide.

古文：昭信出之，椓杙其阴中，割其鼻唇，断其舌。
现代文：昭信把她从井中捞出，将木桩钉入其阴中，割去鼻唇，断掉舌头。
English: Zhaoxin fished her out of the well, hammered a wooden stake into her anus, cut off her nose and lips, and severed her tongue.

古文：谓去曰： 前杀昭平，反来畏我，今欲靡烂望卿，使不能神。 
现代文：对刘去说： 前杀昭平，反来吓我，今要粉碎望卿，使她不能成神。 
English: He went to Liu and said, "You killed Zhao Ping before, but now you want to scare me. Now you want to crush Wang Jing so that she cannot become a god."

古文：与去共支解，置大镬中，取桃灰毒药并煮之，召诸姬皆临观，连日夜靡尽。复共杀其女弟都。
现代文：与刘去一起肢解，放进大获中，取来桃木灰毒药一起烹煮，召诸姬都来观看，连日连夜直至完全煮烂，又一起杀了她的妹妹都。
English: She and Liu dismembered her, put her in a large pot, took the poisoned peach ash and boiled it together, called Zhuji to come and watch, day and night until it was completely cooked, and then killed her sister together.

古文：后去数召姬荣爱与饮，昭信复谮之，曰： 荣姬视瞻，意态不善，疑有私。 
现代文：后来刘去数次召唤姬妾荣爱饮酒，昭信又诬陷她，说： 荣姬顾盼之间，意态不够善良，怀疑有私情。 
English: Later, Liu went several times to summon her concubine, Rong Ai, to drink, and Zhaoxin framed her, saying: Rong Ai was not kind enough to Gu Ran, and suspected her of having personal feelings.

古文：时爱为去刺方领绣，去取烧之。爱恐，自投井。出之未死，笞问爱，自诬与医奸。
现代文：这时荣爱正给刘去刺绣方领，刘去拿来烧掉，荣爱感到害怕，自行投井，救出来时未死，拷问荣爱，荣爱自诬与医通奸。
English: At this time, Rong Ai was giving Liu to embroider the square collar, Liu took it and burned it, Rong Ai felt scared, threw herself into the well, did not die when she was rescued, tortured Rong Ai, Rong Ai committed adultery with the doctor.

古文：去缚系柱，烧刀灼溃两目，生割两股，销铅灌其口中。
现代文：刘去将她缚住系在柱上，烧热刀灼溃两眼，生割两股，将熔化的铅灌入她口中。
English: Liu went to tie her to a post, burned her eyes with a hot knife, cut her in two, and poured molten lead into her mouth.

古文：爱死，支解以棘埋之。
现代文：荣爱死，肢解其尸体埋在荆棘中。
English: Rong Ai died, and her body was dismembered and buried in thorns.

古文：诸幸于去者，昭信辄谮杀之，凡十四人，皆埋太后所居长寿宫中。
现代文：刘去所喜爱的诸妾，昭信就诬陷杀害，共十四人，都埋在太后居住的长寿宫中。
English: A total of fourteen concubines, whom Liu loved, were falsely accused and killed by Akechi, and all of them were buried in the Palace of Longevity, where the empress dowager lived.

古文：宫人畏之，莫敢复迕。
现代文：宫人害怕，没有人再敢违背她。
English: The palace people are afraid, and no one dares to disobey her.

古文：昭信欲擅爱，曰： 王使明贞夫人主诸姬，淫乱难禁。
现代文：昭信想独霸王爱，说： 王使明贞夫人主管诸姬，淫乱难以禁止。
English: Zhaoxin wanted to dominate Wang Ai, saying: Wang sent Lady Mingzhen to be in charge of Zhuji, and it was difficult to prohibit fornication.

古文：请闭诸姬舍门，无令出敖。 
现代文：请关闭诸姬舍门，不要让她们出外游戏。 
English: Please close the door of Zhuji's house and don't let her go out to play.

古文：使其大婢为仆射，主永巷，尽封闭诸舍，上籥于后，非大置酒召，不得见。
现代文：让她年长的婢女为仆射，主管妃嫔、宫女的住址，各舍全给封闭，把钥匙交给王后，除非大摆酒宴召唤，不能见王。
English: Let her older handmaid be a servant, in charge of the addresses of the concubines and courtesans, each house to be closed, handing the keys to the queen, and unable to see the king unless summoned to a large banquet.

古文：去怜之，为作歌曰： 愁莫愁，居无卿。
现代文：刘去怜惜她们，为她们作歌道： 多么地忧愁，居住无所依。
English: Liu took pity on them and wrote a song for them: How sad, there is nowhere to live.

古文：心重结，意不舒。
现代文：内心系成结，心意不舒畅。
English: My heart is in knots and my mind is not at ease.

古文：内茀郁，忧哀积。上不见天，生何益！
现代文：内中犹抑郁，忧愁哀伤积，上不见天，人生有何益！
English: In the middle of it all is depression, sorrow, sorrow, sorrow, sorrow, sorrow, sorrow, sorrow, sorrow, sorrow!

古文：日崔隤，时不再。
现代文：曰月蹉跎，时不再来。
English: When the moon is full, the time will no longer come.

古文：愿弃躯，死无悔。 
现代文：愿抛弃身躯，死而无悔。 
English: I am willing to give up my body and die without regret.

古文：令昭信声鼓为节，以教诸姬歌之，歌罢辄归永巷，封门。
现代文：让昭信敲鼓为节拍，以教诸姬歌唱，歌罢仍归永巷，封门。
English: Let Zhaoxin beat the drum to teach Zhuji to sing, the song will still go to Yongxiang, and the door will be closed.

古文：独昭信兄子初为乘华夫人，得朝夕见。
现代文：惟独昭信兄长的女儿初为乘华夫人，能朝夕相见。
English: However, the daughter of Shoshin's elder brother became Mrs. Yoriharu for the first time, and they were able to see each other in the morning and evening.

古文：昭信与去从十余奴博饮游敖。
现代文：昭信与刘去随从十多个奴仆每天豪饮游玩。
English: Zhaoxin and Liu would accompany more than a dozen servants to go out drinking every day.

古文：初，去年十四五，事师受《易》，师数谏正去，去益大，逐之。
现代文：从前刘去刚十四五岁的时候，从师学《易》，老师多次直言规劝刘去，刘去年渐长大，将老师赶走。
English: Once upon a time, when Liu Gao was just 14 or 15 years old, he learned "Easy" from his teacher. The teacher repeatedly advised Liu to go. Liu gradually grew up last year and drove the teacher away.

古文：内史请以为掾，师数令内史禁切王家。
现代文：内史请他作为佐助，老师数次让内史限制王家。
English: Naishi asked him to be a teaching assistant, and the teacher let Naishi restrict the royal family several times.

古文：去使奴杀师父子，不发觉。
现代文：刘去派奴仆杀了老师父子，没人发觉。
English: Liu sent his slaves to kill the teacher and his son, but no one noticed.

古文：后去数置酒，令倡俳裸戏坐中以为乐。
现代文：后来刘去多次摆酒宴，令奏乐和演杂戏的人裸体坐在中间以为乐。
English: Later, Liu went to many wine banquets and made the musicians and actors sit naked in the middle for fun.

古文：相彊劾系倡，阑入殿门，奏状。
现代文：相彊弹劾拘囚倡优，擅入殿门，并奏状上告。
English: The impeachment prisoners advocated excellence, entered the palace gate without permission, and filed an appeal.

古文：事下考案，倡辞，本为王教脩靡夫人望卿弟都歌舞。
现代文：事情被吩咐下来考察审问，倡优交待，本为王教脩靡夫人望卿的妹妹都歌舞。
English: The matter was ordered to be investigated, interrogated, and recommended for preferential treatment. The sister of Wang Jiaoqian, Wang Jiaoqian's wife, sang and danced.

古文：使者召望卿、都，去对 皆淫乱自杀 。
现代文：使者召见望卿、都，刘去答对说她们皆因淫乱自杀。
English: The messenger summoned Wang Jing and Du, and Liu went to answer that they all committed suicide because of fornication.

古文：会赦不治。
现代文：恰逢赦免此案没有惩办。
English: Coinciding with the pardon, the case went unpunished.

古文：望卿前亨煮，即取他死人与都死并付其母。
现代文：望卿前被烹煮，就取他人的尸体和都的尸体一并交给她们的母亲。
English: Before they were cooked, they took the bodies of others and the bodies of the capital and handed them over to their mothers.

古文：母曰： 都是，望卿非也。 
现代文：母亲说： 都的尸体是对的，望卿的尸体不对。 
English: My mother said, "Duo's body is right, but Wang Ching's body is wrong."

古文：数号哭求死，昭信令奴杀之。
现代文：多次号哭寻死，昭信命奴仆杀了她。
English: After crying for her death many times, Zhaoxin ordered his servants to kill her.

古文：奴得，辞服。
现代文：奴仆为吏所捕，供辞招认。
English: The servant was arrested by officers and confessed.

古文：本始三年，相内史奏状，具言赦前所犯。
现代文：本始三年，相内史把情况上奏，完全奏明是大赦前所犯罪状。
English: In the first three years, the internal history of the party reported the situation and fully reported the crimes committed before the amnesty.

古文：天子遣大鸿胪、丞相长史、御史丞、廷尉正杂治巨鹿诏狱，奏请逮捕去后昭信。
现代文：天子派遣大鸿胪、丞相长史、御史丞、廷尉正会合惩治钜鹿皇帝下令关押的犯人，奏请逮捕刘去及后昭信。
English: The Son of Heaven dispatched the Great Magus, the Prime Minister Nagashi, the Grand Historian, and the Courtier to punish the prisoners ordered to be detained by the Emperor Elk, and requested the arrest of Liu De and Hou Shuxin.

古文：制曰： 王后昭信、诸姬奴婢证者皆下狱。 
现代文：皇帝下令说： 王后昭信、各姬奴婢作证的人都入狱。 
English: The emperor gave the order: Queen Zhaoxin and all the concubines and maidservants who testified were to be put in prison.

古文：辞服。
现代文：供词招认。
English: That's a confession.

古文：有司复请诛王。
现代文：有司再次请诛杀王。
English: Once again, Yushi asked him to fight and kill the king.

古文：制曰： 与列侯、中二千石、二千石、博士议。 
现代文：皇上下诏说： 与列侯、中二千石、二千石、博士商议。 
English: The imperial edict said, "Discuss with the vassals, the middle class of 2,000 koku, the upper class of 2,000 koku, and the doctorate."

古文：议者皆以为去悖虐，听后昭信谗言，燔烧亨煮，生割剥人，距师之谏，杀其父子。
现代文：议者都以为刘去逆乱暴虐，听信王后昭信的谗言，燔烧烹煮，生割剥人，拒绝老师的规谏，杀了他们父子。
English: The legislators all thought that Liu went to rebel against the tyranny, listened to the queen's words, cooked and boiled, cut people, refused the teacher's discipline, and killed their father and son.

古文：凡杀无辜十六人，至一家母子三人，逆节绝理。
现代文：共杀无辜十六人，甚至一家母子三人，违背道义，灭绝人伦。
English: Sixteen innocent people were killed, including three members of a mother and son family. This was an immoral act that destroyed human relations.

古文：其十五人在赦前，大恶仍重，当伏显戮以示众。
现代文：其中十五人在大赦前，罪恶仍重，应当将他斩首示众。
English: Fifteen of them were guilty of serious crimes before the amnesty and should be publicly beheaded.

古文：制曰： 朕不忍致王于法，议其罚。 
现代文：皇上下韶说： 朕不忍将王正法，可讨论怎样惩罚。 
English: The emperor said, "I can't bear to punish Wang Zhengfa, but we can discuss how to punish him."

古文：有司请废勿王，与妻子徙上庸。
现代文：有司请求废掉他不再为王，和妻子儿女迁徙到上庸。
English: There was a petition to abolish him as king, and he and his wife and children moved to Shangyong.

古文：奏可。
现代文：上奏得到许可。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：与汤沐邑百户。
现代文：赐给一百户汤沐邑。
English: It was given to 100 households in Tangmu village.

古文：去道自杀，昭信弃市。
现代文：刘去在途中自杀，昭信被弃市。
English: Liu Gang committed suicide on the way, and Zhaoxin was abandoned.

古文：立二十二年，国除。
现代文：在位二十二年，封国被废除。
English: Twenty-two years into his reign, the feudal state was abolished.

古文：后四岁，宣帝地节四年，复立去兄文，是为戴王。
现代文：过了四年，宣帝地节四年，又立刘去的兄长刘文，造就是戴王。
English: Four years later, on the four-year anniversary of the proclamation of the emperor, Liu's elder brother Liu Wen, also named Liu, was created by King Dai.

古文：文素正直，数谏王去，故上立焉，二年薨。
现代文：刘文素来正直，曾多次规劝王刘去，所以皇帝立了他，在位二年薨。
English: Liu Wen had always been honest and had repeatedly persuaded Wang Liu to go, so the emperor appointed him, and he reigned for two years.

古文：子海阳嗣，十五年，坐画屋为男女裸交接，置酒请诸父姊妹饮，令仰视画；又海阳女弟为人妻，而使与幸臣奸；又与从弟调等谋杀一家三人，已杀。
现代文：儿子海阳嗣位，在位十五年，因在画室裹挂着男女裸体性交的画，摆酒请他的叔伯姊妹们饮酒，令她们抬头看画；又有海阳的妹妹已为人妻，而让她与自己喜爱的臣下通奸；还与堂弟刘调等谋杀一家三人，已杀。
English: Haiyang's son, the heir to the throne, who has been on the throne for fifteen years, invited his uncles and sisters to drink alcohol to make them look up at the paintings because the paintings of male and female nude sexual intercourse were hanging in the studio; Haiyang's sister was already married, and let her commit adultery with her favorite vassal; he also murdered a family of three with his cousin Liu Shun and others, and was killed.

古文：甘露四年坐废，徙房陵，国除。
现代文：甘露四年获罪被废，迁徙房陵，封国被废除。
English: The four-year sentence of Kanro was annulled, the mausoleum was relocated, and the fiefdom was abolished.

古文：后十五年，平帝元始二年，复立戴王弟襄隄侯子愈为广德王，奉惠王后，二年薨。
现代文：过了十五年，平帝元始二年，又立戴王弟襄堤侯的儿子刘愈为广德王，过继惠王为后，在位二年薨。
English: Fifteen years later, in the second year of the reign of Emperor Ping of the Yuan Dynasty, Liu Yu, the son of Wang Dai's younger brother Xiang Ti Hou, was appointed as the King of Guangde and the successor of King Hui, and he reigned for two years.

古文：子赤嗣，王莽时绝。
现代文：儿子刘赤嗣位，王莽时断绝。
English: His son Liu Akitsugu ascended to the throne, but Wang Mangshi abdicated.

古文：胶东康王寄以孝景中二年立，二十八年薨。
现代文：胶东康王型昼在基壶中元二年封王，在位二十八年薨。
English: Jiaodongkangwang was enthroned as king in the middle of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the

古文：淮南王谋反时，寄微闻其事，私作兵车镞矢，战守备，备淮南之起。
现代文：淮南王谋反时，型壹暗中听到此事，秘密制作兵车弓箭，战守都已齐备，警戒进菌的起事。
English: When King Huainan was plotting a rebellion, he secretly heard about this and secretly made chariots, bows and arrows. The garrison was fully prepared and on alert for a possible uprising.

古文：及吏治淮南事，辞出之。
现代文：等到官吏处治随的事，供辞供出了尘王。
English: After waiting for the officials to deal with the matter, the king of dust offered his resignation.

古文：寄于上最亲，意自伤，发病而死，不敢置后。
现代文：窒遗对上最亲，暗自伤心，发病而死，不敢设立后嗣。
English: The closest relative of the deceased, secretly saddened, died of the disease, and did not dare to set up an heir.

古文：于是上闻寄有长子贤，母无宠，少子庆，母爱幸，寄常欲立之，为非次，因有过，遂无所言。
现代文：于是上听说刘寄有长子刘贤，不受母亲宠爱，小儿子刘庆受到宠爱，刘寄常想立他为王，但不合正当的顺序，因有过错，终于有什么话说。
English: Then it was heard that Liu Ying had an eldest son, Liu Xian, who was not favored by his mother, and a younger son, Liu Qing, who was favored. Liu Ying often wanted to make him king, but in an improper order, due to a mistake, he finally had something to say.

古文：上怜之，立贤为胶东王，奉康王祀，而封庆为六安王，王故衡山地。
现代文：皇帝怜惜他，封刘贤为胶束王，接奉康王的祭祀，而封刘庆为六安王，在以前衡山的地方为王。
English: The emperor took pity on him and appointed Liu Xian as the King of Micellar Beads to succeed the sacrificial rites of King Kang, and Liu Qing as the King of Liuan to be the king of Hengshan.

古文：胶东王贤立十五年薨，谥为哀王。
现代文：胶束王贤在位十五年薨，追谧为哀王。
English: After the 15th year of the reign of King Kyokushu Wangxian, he became the King of Lamentation.

古文：子戴王通平嗣，二十四年薨。
现代文：儿子戴王通平嗣位，在位二十四年薨。
English: His son Dai Wang Tongping succeeded to the throne and reigned for twenty-four years.

古文：子顷王音嗣，五十四年薨。
现代文：儿子顷王刘音嗣位，在位五十四年薨。
English: His son, Liu Yingzi, ascended the throne after 54 years on the throne.

古文：子共王授嗣，十四年薨。
现代文：儿子共王刘授嗣位，在位十四年薨。
English: His son and co-emperor Liu Juxi ascended the throne, ending his 14-year reign.

古文：子殷嗣，王莽时绝。
现代文：儿子刘殷嗣位，王莽时断绝。
English: His son Liu Yin succeeded to the throne, but Wang Mangxi abdicated.

古文：六安共王庆立三十八年薨。
现代文：六安共王刘庆在位三十八年薨。
English: Liu Qing, the Communist King of Lu'an, died after reigning for 38 years.

古文：子夷王禄嗣，十年薨。
现代文：儿子夷王刘禄嗣位，在位十年薨。
English: He was succeeded by his son Liu Lu, who reigned for ten years.

古文：子缪王定嗣，二十二年薨。
现代文：儿子缪王刘定嗣位，在位二十二年薨。
English: His son, Liu Dingzhi, ascended the throne after 22 years on the throne.

古文：子顷王光嗣，二十七年薨。
现代文：儿子顷王刘光嗣位，在位二十七年薨。
English: His son, Liu Guangzhe, ascended to the throne after reigning for 27 years.

古文：子育嗣，王莽时绝。
现代文：儿子鉴育嗣位，王莽时断绝。
English: His son Jianyu inherited the throne, but Wang Mangxi abdicated.

古文：清河哀王乘以孝景中三年立，十二年薨。
现代文：清河哀王型垂在曼查中元三年封王，在位十二年薨。
English: The Qing He Wei Wang type was crowned king in the middle of the Yuan Dynasty in Manzha and reigned for twelve years.

古文：无子，国除。
现代文：没有儿子，封国被废除。
English: Without a son, the state was abolished.

古文：常山宪王舜以孝景中五年立。
现代文：常山宪王刘舜在景帝中元五年封王。
English: Liu Ye, the constitutional king of Changshan, was crowned king in the middle of the reign of Emperor Jing in the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：舜，帝少子，骄淫，数犯禁，上常宽之。
现代文：刘舜，是皇帝的小儿子，骄奢淫逸，数次违反禁令，帝经常宽恕他。
English: Liu Xuan, the emperor's youngest son, was proud and debauched. He violated the ban several times, but the emperor often forgave him.

古文：三十一年薨，子勃嗣为王。
现代文：在位三十二年薨，儿子刘勃嗣位为王。
English: Thirty-two years into his reign, his son Liu Bozhi became king.

古文：初，宪王有不爱姬生长男棁，棁以母无宠故，亦不得幸于王。
现代文：从前，宪王有不被宠爱的姬生了长男刘税，刘悦因母亲不受宠的原因，也不被王所喜爱。
English: Once upon a time, King Heungseong's unloved daughter-in-law gave birth to the eldest son, Liu Han, and Liu Ye was not loved by the king because his mother was unloved.

古文：王后脩生太子勃。
现代文：王后脩生太子刘勃。
English: The queen's twin son, Prince Liu Bo.

古文：王内多，所幸姬生子平、子商，王后稀得幸。
现代文：王妻妾多，所喜爱的姬生儿子刘平、儿子刘商，王后很少得幸。
English: The queen had many wives and concubines, and her favorite sons were Liu Ping and Liu Shang. The queen was rarely so fortunate.

古文：及宪王疾甚，诸幸姬侍病，王后以妒媢不常在，辄归舍。
现代文：到了宪王病重，诸位受喜爱的姬妾侍奉病人，王后因嫉妒不常在，往往归舍休息。
English: When the king fell seriously ill, his beloved wives and concubines served the sick. The queen, jealous of her husband's absence, often went home to rest.

古文：医进药，太子勃不自尝药，又不宿留侍疾。
现代文：御医送药来，太子刘勃不自尝药，又不留宿侍奉疾病。
English: The doctor sent medicine, but Prince Liu Bo did not taste the medicine himself, nor did he stay to serve the disease.

古文：及王薨，王后、太子乃至。
现代文：等王薨后，王后、太子才到。
English: The queen and the prince did not arrive until after the death of the king.

古文：宪王雅不以棁为子数，不分与财物。
现代文：宪王向来不把刘悦当做儿子，不分给他财物。
English: Emperor Xianwang never treated Liu Yue as his son and did not give him any property.

古文：郎或说太子、王后，令分棁财，皆不听。
现代文：郎有时劝说太子、王后，让分给刘悦财产，都不听。
English: His brother-in-law would sometimes try to persuade the crown prince and queen to give Liu Yue some of their property, but they would not listen.

古文：太子代立，又不收恤棁。
现代文：太子继承王位，又不安置刘悦。
English: After the prince succeeded to the throne, he refused to accept Liu Ye's pension.

古文：棁怨王后及太子。
现代文：刘税怨恨王后及太子。
English: Liu Fei resented the queen and the prince.

古文：汉使者视宪王丧，棁自言宪王病时，王后、太子不侍，及薨，六日出舍，太子勃私奸、饮酒、博戏、击筑，与女子载驰，环城过市，入狱视囚。
现代文：汉派使者审察宪王丧事，刘悦自言宪王病时，王后、太子不侍奉，等到王薨，守丧六之后就出房门，太子刘勃暗地奸淫、饮酒、赌博、击筑，与女子坐车奔驰，绕城过市，入狱探监。
English: Envoys from the Han Dynasty were sent to investigate the funeral of King Xianwang. Liu Yue said that when King Xianwang was ill, the queen and the prince did not serve him. When the king died, he went out of the house after the funeral. Prince Liu Bo secretly committed adultery, drank alcohol, gambled, smashed buildings, and drove around with a woman in a car, bypassed the city, and visited a prison.

古文：天子遣大行骞验问，逮诸证者，王又匿之。
现代文：天子派遣大行张骞查问，逮捕所有证人，王又把证人藏了起来。
English: Tianzi sent Zhang Ye to investigate and arrest all the witnesses, but Wang hid the witnesses.

古文：吏求捕，勃使人致击笞掠，擅出汉所疑囚。
现代文：吏请求拘捕他们，刘勃派人击打吏，擅自放出汉所关押的嫌疑犯。
English: The officers requested to arrest them, and Liu Bo sent people to beat the officers and release the suspects detained by Han without authorization.

古文：有司请诛勃及宪王后脩。
现代文：有司请求诛杀刘勃及宪王王后脩。
English: A magistrate requested that Liu Bo and Xian Wang Wang Hui be killed.

古文：上曰： 脩素无行，使棁陷之罪。
现代文：皇帝说： 脩平素无德行，让刘悦使她陷入罪中。
English: The emperor said, "She has no virtue, so let Liu Yue make her fall into sin."

古文：勃无良师傅，不忍致诛。 
现代文：刘勃无良师，不忍诛杀他。 
English: Liu Bo did not have a good teacher, and he could not bear to kill him.

古文：有司请废勿王，徙王勃以家属处房陵，上许之。
现代文：有司请求废除他不要为王，迁徙王刘勃及家属居住房陵，皇帝允许。
English: There was a petition to abolish him from being king, to move King Liu Bo and his family to live in the mausoleum, and the emperor allowed it.

古文：勃王数月，废，国除。
现代文：刘勃封王数月，被废除，封地收回。
English: Liu Bo, the feudal king for several months, was abolished, and his fief was taken back.

古文：月余，天子为最亲，诏有司曰： 常山宪王早夭，后、妾不和，適、孽诬争，陷于不谊以灭国，朕甚闵焉。
现代文：一个多月后，天子因为与王最亲，下诏有司说： 常山宪王早死，后与妾不和，嫡庶相互诬蠛相争，陷于不义而减国，朕非常怜悯。
English: More than a month later, the heavenly son, because he was the closest relative of the king, said: I am very sorry for the early death of King Changshan Xianwang, the subsequent discord with his concubine, the dispute between the legitimate and illegitimate children, and the reduction of the country due to injustice.

古文：其封宪王子平三万户，为真定王；子商三万户，为泗水王。 
现代文：令封宪王儿子刘平三万户，为真定王；子刘商三万户，为泗水王。 
English: The 30,000 households of Liu Ping, the son of Liu Fengxian Wang, were designated as Zhending Wang, and the 30,000 households of Liu Shang, the son of Liu Fengxian Wang, were designated as Ershui Wang.

古文：顷王平立二十五年薨。
现代文：顷王刘平在位二十五年薨。
English: King Liu Ping died after 25 years on the throne.

古文：子烈王偃嗣，十八年薨。
现代文：儿子烈王刘偃嗣位，在位十八年薨。
English: His son, Liu Ye, succeeded him and reigned for eighteen years.

古文：子孝王申嗣，三十三年薨。
现代文：儿子孝王刘由嗣位，在位二十二年薨。
English: His son, Prince Xiaowang Liu Yu, ascended to the throne and reigned for 22 years.

古文：子安王雍嗣，二十六年薨。
现代文：儿子安王刘雍嗣位，在位二十六年薨。
English: An Wang's son Liu Yongzhi ascended the throne, ending 26 years on the throne.

古文：子共王普嗣，十五年薨。
现代文：儿子共王刘普嗣位，在位十五年薨。
English: His son and co-king Liu Puxi ascended the throne, ending his 15-year reign.

古文：子阳嗣，王莽时绝。
现代文：儿子刘阳嗣位，王莽时断绝。
English: His son Liu Yang succeeded to the throne, but Wang Mangxi abdicated.

古文：泗水思王商立十二年薨。
现代文：泅水思王刘商在位十二年薨。
English: The reign of King Liu Shang lasted for twelve years.

古文：子哀王安世嗣，一年薨，无子。
现代文：儿子哀王安世嗣位，在位一年薨，无子。
English: His son, Lê Văn An Thiên, succeeded to the throne, but he reigned for only one year and had no children.

古文：于是武帝怜泗水王绝，复立安世弟贺，是为戴王。
现代文：于是武帝怜悯泅水王绝嗣，又立安世弟刘贺，这就是戴王。
English: As a result, Emperor Wu took pity on Shun Shui Wang's dying heir, and appointed Liu He, the younger brother of An Shi, as his successor. This was King Dai.

古文：立二十二年薨，有遗腹子爰，相内史不以闻。
现代文：在位二十二年薨，有遣腹子刘暖，相内史没有上报此事。
English: In the 22nd year of his reign, he sent his son Liu Nuan, but the internal history did not report this.

古文：太后上书，昭帝闵之，抵相内史罪，立爰，是为勤王。
现代文：太后上书，昭帝怜悯他们，对相内史处以相应的罪刑，封刘暖，造就是勤王。
English: The empress dowager sent a letter to Emperor Zhao, who took pity on them and punished them accordingly, sealing Liu Nuan as a king-follower.

古文：立三十九年薨。
现代文：在位三十九年薨。
English: Thirty-nine years have passed since his enthronement.

古文：子戾王骏嗣，三十一年薨。
现代文：儿子戾王刘骏嗣位，在位三十一年薨。
English: His son, Liu Xizhe, succeeded to the throne and reigned for 31 years.

古文：子靖嗣，王莽时绝。
现代文：儿子刘靖嗣位，王莽时断绝。
English: His son Liu Jing succeeded to the throne, and Wang Mang then abdicated.

古文：赞曰：昔鲁哀公有言： 寡人生于深宫之中，长于妇人之手，未尝知忧，未尝知惧。 
现代文：赞日：从前鲁哀公有言： 寡人生活在深宫之中，生长于妇女手下，从不知道什么是忧愁，什么是恐惧。 
English: Praise: Once upon a time, Lu Aiguo said: Some people live in a deep palace, grow up under a woman's hand, and never know what is sadness and what is fear.

古文：信哉斯言也！虽欲不危亡，不可得已。
现代文：这话可信啊！即使不想危亡，也是不行的。
English: That's believable! Even if you don't want to die, it's not possible.

古文：是故古人以宴安为鸩毒，亡德而富贵，谓之不幸。
现代文：所以古人把安逸视为毒酒，没有道德而富贵，称作不幸。
English: That is why the ancients regarded comfort as poisoned wine, and wealth without morality as misfortune.

古文：汉兴，至于孝平，诸侯王以百数，率多骄淫失道。
现代文：汉朝建立后，到了孝平时，诸侯王已达数百之多，大都骄淫失道。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, by the time of Xiaoping, there were hundreds of princes and kings, most of whom were arrogant and immoral.

古文：何则？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：沉溺放恣之中，居势使然也。
现代文：是因为沉溺于放纵之中，位于权势使他们这样的。
English: It is because of indulgence and power that has made them this way.

古文：自凡人犹系于习俗，而况哀公之伦乎！
现代文：平常人还拘泥于习俗，更何况哀公之辈呢！
English: Ordinary people are still stuck in customs, let alone the mourners!

古文：夫唯大雅，卓尔不群，河间献王近之矣。
现代文：高尚雅正，卓尔不群，衹有河间献王近似如此。
English: Noble and elegant, droll and unconventional, it's almost like the King's Offering at the River Kwai.

