古文：萧摩诃，字元胤，兰陵人也。
现代文：萧摩诃，字元胤，兰陵人。
English: Xiao Maqi, Zhi Yuanyin, Lanling people.

古文：祖靓，梁右将军。
现代文：祖父萧靓，梁朝右将军。
English: Grandfather Xiao Wei, General Liang Chaowu.

古文：父谅，梁始兴郡丞。
现代文：父亲萧谅，梁朝始兴郡丞。
English: His father was Xiao Jun, and Liang Chao Shixing was the county magistrate.

古文：摩诃随父之郡，年数岁而父卒，其姑夫蔡路养时在南康，乃收养之。
现代文：萧摩诃随父到郡，数岁时父亲死去，他的姑父蔡路养当时在南康，便收养了他。
English: Xiao Maqian followed his father to the county. When he was a few years old, his father died. His uncle Cai Luyang was in Nankang at the time, and he adopted him.

古文：稍长，果毅有勇力。
现代文：稍年长，他果断刚毅而有勇力。
English: Slightly older, he is resolute, tough and courageous.

古文：侯景之乱，高祖赴援京师，路养起兵拒高祖，摩诃时年十三，单骑出战，军中莫有当者。
现代文：侯景叛乱时，高祖赴援京城，蔡路养起兵拒阻高祖，萧摩诃遣时十三岁，单骑出战，军中没有能阻挡者。
English: During the rebellion of Houjing, Gaozu went to support Beijing, Cai Lu raised an army to resist Gaozu, Xiao Muxuan was thirteen years old and rode out to fight alone. There was no one in the army who could stop him.

古文：及路养败，摩诃归于侯安都，安都遇之甚厚，自此常隶安都征讨。
现代文：到蔡路养失败，萧摩诃归于侯安都，侯安都对他很好，从此他常隶属于侯安都征讨。
English: When Cai Lu's rearing failed, Xiao Maqi went to Hou An Du, and Hou An Du treated him very well. Since then, he has often been under the command of Hou An Du.

古文：及任约、徐嗣徽引齐兵为寇，高祖遣安都北拒齐军于钟山龙尾及北郊坛。
现代文：到巡、徐嗣徽引齐兵为寇时，直担派哇谴都向北拒阻齐军于钟山龙尾及北郊坛。
English: When the patrol arrived and Xu Shihui led the Qi soldiers as invaders, the direct supporters all went to the north to resist the Qi army in Zhongshan Longwei and the northern suburb.

古文：安都谓摩诃曰： 卿骁勇有名，千闻不如一见。 
现代文：侯安都对萧摩诃说： 你英勇有名，千闻不如一见。 
English: Hou Andu said to Xiao Mazu: You are famous for your bravery. Hearing a thousand stories is not as good as seeing one.

古文：摩诃对曰： 今日令公见矣。 
现代文：萧摩诃回答说： 今日您就可见到了。 
English: "You can see it today," Mr. Xiao replied.

古文：及战，安都坠马被围，摩诃独骑大呼，直冲齐军，齐军披靡，因稍解去，安都乃免。
现代文：到作战时，侯安都落马被包围，萧摩诃独骑大呼，直冲齐军，变军溃散，于是逐渐解围而去，侯安都才得免一死。
English: At the time of the battle, Hou Andu was besieged, Xiao Maqi rode alone and shouted loudly, directly rushed the Qi army, and the army was dispersed, so the siege was gradually lifted, and Hou Andu was spared death.

古文：天嘉初，除本县令，以平留异、欧阳纥之功，累迁巴山太守。
现代文：天嘉初年，封本县令，因平定留异、欧阳纥的功劳，又改任巴山太守。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, the county magistrate of Fubon County was reappointed as the governor of Bashan due to his achievements in suppressing dissidents and Ouyang Xie.

古文：太建五年，众军北伐，摩诃随都督吴明彻济江攻秦郡。
现代文：太建五年，众军北伐，萧摩诃随都督吴明彻渡过江攻打豢锂。
English: In the fifth year of the Great Leap Forward, the Northern Expedition, Xiao Maqi followed the governor Wu Mingche to cross the river to attack Bao Li.

古文：时齐遣大将尉破胡等率众十万来援，其前队有 苍头 、 犀角 、 大力 之号，皆身长八尺，膂力绝伦，其锋甚锐。
现代文：当时齐派大将慰壁曲等率领十万兵马来援助，他们的前队有 苍头 、 犀角 、 大力 之号，都身长八尺，气力超人，他们的锋头锐利。
English: At that time, Qi sent General Qiao Jibing and other generals to lead 100,000 soldiers and horses to help. Their vanguard included Cang Tou, Rhino Horn, and Deli Zhou, all of whom were eight feet tall, superhuman strength, and their front was sharp.

古文：又有西域胡，妙于弓矢，弦无虚发，众军尤惮之。
现代文：又有西域胡，妙于弓箭，箭无虚发，众军士特别害怕。
English: There is also the Western Wu, which is superior to the bow and arrow, and the arrow is without flaw. All the sergeants are particularly afraid of it.

古文：及将战，明彻谓摩诃曰： 若殪此胡，则彼军夺气，君有关、张之名，可斩颜良矣。 
现代文：到将战时，吴明彻对萧摩诃说： 如杀死此西域胡，那就会使敌军丧失了锐气，你有关羽、张飞之名，可以斩颜良了。 
English: When the war was approaching, Wu Mingcher said to Xiao Mazu: "If you kill this Western Hu, it will make the enemy lose their spirit. You have the name of Guan Yu and Zhang Fei, you can make a good impression."

古文：摩诃曰： 愿示其形状，当为公取之。 
现代文：萧摩诃说： 愿指明他的状貌，应当为公取之。 
English: Xiao Miao said: I would like to point out his appearance, it should be made public.

古文：明彻乃召降人有识胡者，云胡著绛衣，桦皮装弓，两端骨弭。
现代文：吴明彻于足召投降的人中有认识西域胡的，说西域胡穿绛红色衣服，用桦皮装弓，弓的两端有象骨。
English: Among those who were called to surrender, Wu Mingche said that he knew Xi Gui Hu. He said that Xi Gui Hu wore a scarlet robe and used a sable skin to make a bow. Both ends of the bow had elephant bones.

古文：明彻遣人觇伺，知胡在阵，乃自酌酒以饮摩诃。
现代文：吴明彻派人暗中窥伺，知道西域胡在军阵内，便亲自倒酒让萧摩诃饮。
English: Wu Mingcher sent someone to spy secretly, and knowing that Xi Gui Hu was in the army, he personally poured wine for Xiao Ma Jun to drink.

古文：摩诃饮讫，驰马冲齐军，胡挺身出阵前十馀步，彀弓未发，摩诃遥掷铣鋧，正中其额，应手而仆。
现代文：萧摩诃饮完，策马驰入齐军，西域胡挺身出阵前十余步，弯弓未发，萧摩诃远远地投掷锏，正中西域胡的额头，西域胡应声扑倒于地。
English: Xiao Miao finished drinking, Zema galloped into the Qi army, West Hu stepped forward more than ten steps before the battle, the bow was not issued, Xiao Miao threw the crossbow far away, the forehead of West Hu was in the middle, and West Hu Yingxuan fell to the ground.

古文：齐军 大力 十馀人出战，摩诃又斩之，于是齐军退走。
现代文：齐军 大力 十余人出战，萧摩诃又斩之，于是齐军退走。
English: The Qi army fought vigorously. More than ten people went out to fight, and Xiao Maqi was killed, so the Qi army retreated.

古文：以功授明毅将军、员外散骑常侍，封廉平县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：萧摩诃以功被授明毅将军、员外散骑常侍，封廉平县伯，邑五百户。
English: For his meritorious service, Xiao Maqi was awarded the title of Mingyi General, the title of non-commissioned cavalry officer, and the title of Liangping County, with more than 500 households.

古文：寻进爵为侯，转太仆卿，馀如故。
现代文：接着进爵为侯，转任太仆卿，其余照旧。
English: Next, he was made a marquis, and then he was transferred to the position of eunuch, and the rest continued as before.

古文：七年，又随明彻进围宿预，击走齐将王康德，以功除晋熙太守。
现代文：太建七年，又随吴明彻进军包围宿预，击走齐将王康德，以功被封为晋熙太守。
English: In the seventh year of the Jian Dynasty, he marched with Wu Mingche to encircle Suiyuan, drove away the Qi general Wang Kangde, and was awarded the title of Jinxi Taishu.

古文：九年，明彻进军吕梁，与齐人大战，摩诃率七骑先入，手夺齐军大旗，齐众大溃。
现代文：太建九年，吴明彻进军旦里，与齐人大战，萧摩诃率领七骑先入，亲手夺了齐军大旗，齐兵大乱。
English: In the ninth year of the Taijian era, Wu Mingche marched into Danli, and fought with the Qi people. Xiao Maqi led the seven horsemen to enter first, and personally won the large banner of the Qi army. The Qi soldiers were in great disorder.

古文：以功授持节、武毅将军、谯州刺史。
现代文：以功被授持节、武毅将军、谯州刺史。
English: Awarded for meritorious service, General Wu Yi and Zhangzhou stabbed history.

古文：及周武帝灭齐，遣其将宇文忻率众争吕梁，战于龙晦。
现代文：到北周武帝灭齐，派他的将领宇文忻率领众军争夺吕梁，战于龙晦。
English: When the Northern Zhouwu Emperor died, he sent his general Yu Wenyi to lead the army to fight for Luliang and fight in Longwei.

古文：时忻有精骑数千，摩诃领十二骑深入周军，纵横奋击，斩馘甚众。
现代文：此时字文忻有精骑数千，萧摩诃率十二骑深军中，纵横奋击，斩首很多。
English: At this time, there were thousands of Zhiwenqi riding horses, and Xiao Maqi was the twelfth riding horse in the army, and he fought hard both vertically and horizontally, beheading many.

古文：及周遣大将军王轨来赴，结长围连锁于吕梁下流，断大军还路。
现代文：到北周派大将军王轨来赴战，结长围连锁于旦凿的下流，阻断大军还路。
English: To the north Zhou sent the general Wang Luo to go to war, and tied a chain around the lower reaches of the Dan River to block the army from returning.

古文：摩诃谓明彻曰： 闻王轨始锁下流，其两头筑城，今尚未立，公若见遣击之，彼必不敢相拒。
现代文：芦壁诬对昱旦困说： 听说王塾始锁下流，在两头筑城，现今尚未立，公如现在派人击之，他们必定不敢抵抗。
English: "I heard that Wang Ju Ju began to lock the lower reaches of the river and built a city at both ends, but it has not yet been built. If they send someone to attack it now, they will certainly not dare to resist.

古文：水路未断，贼势不坚，彼城若立，则吾属且为虏矣。 
现代文：水路不断，贼势不坚，他们的城如立，那么我们就都成俘虏了。 
English: The waterways are endless, the thieves are not strong, their city is standing, then we are all prisoners.

古文：明彻乃奋髯曰： 搴旗陷阵，将军事也；长算远略，老夫事也。 
现代文：吴明彻奋然掀髯说： 举旗冲锋陷阵，是将军的事；长谋远略，是老夫的事。 
English: Wu Mingche said, "It is a general's duty to raise the flag and charge into battle; it is an old man's duty to plan ahead.

古文：摩诃失色而退。
现代文：萧摩诃惊而失色，退出。
English: Xiao Ma was so shocked that he lost his composure and quit.

古文：一旬之间，周兵益至，摩诃又请于明彻曰： 今求战不得，进退无路，若潜军突围，未足为耻。
现代文：十天之间，北周兵不断涌到，萧摩诃又请见吴明彻说： 今日求战不得，进退无路，如悄悄率军突围，不足为耻。
English: For ten days, the Northern Zhou soldiers kept pouring in, and Xiao Maqi also invited Wu Mingcher to see him, saying: Today, there is no way to fight, there is no way to retreat, if you quietly lead the army to break through the siege, it is not enough to be ashamed.

古文：愿公率步卒，乘马舆徐行，摩诃领铁骑数千，驱驰前后，必当使公安达京邑。 
现代文：愿公率步兵，乘马车慢行，我萧摩诃率领铁骑敷千，驰驱于前后，必能使公安全抵达京城。 
English: May the public lead the infantry, travel slowly by carriage, and I, Xiao Miao, lead the iron cavalry, gallop in front and behind, and will surely be able to make the public arrive safely in Beijing.

古文：明彻曰： 弟之此计，乃良图也。
现代文：明彻说： 你的此计，确是良图。
English: Meng Che said, "Your plan is indeed a good one.

古文：然老夫受脤专征，不能战胜攻取，今被围逼蹙，惭置无地。
现代文：但是老夫我受命专门出征，不能战胜攻取，如今被围困逼迫，羞惭得无地自容。
English: However, I was ordered to go on a special expedition, unable to defeat the attack, and now I am besieged and persecuted. I am ashamed of myself.

古文：且步军既多，吾为总督，必须身居其后，相率兼行。
现代文：况且步兵又多，我是总督，必须身居其后，相率兼行。
English: Moreover, there are many infantry, I am the governor, I have to stay behind, and I have to do both.

古文：弟马军宜须在前，不可迟缓。 
现代文：你的马军必须在前，不可迟缓。 
English: Your cavalry must advance, and not delay.

古文：摩诃因率马军夜发。
现代文：萧摩诃便率马军夜间出发。
English: Xiao Miao then led the horse army to set out at night.

古文：先是，周军长围既合，又于要路下伏数重，摩诃选精骑八十，率先冲突，自后众骑继焉，比旦达淮南。
现代文：先前，习匕周军长围既已合，又在要路上埋下伏兵敷重，芦鏖诬选精骑八十，率先冲出重围，自后众骑继之，第二日早晨抵达淮南。
English: Previously, the encirclement of the general of the Xi Xi Zhou army had already been closed, and on the way to Huainan, an ambush was set up. Lulu falsely selected eighty horsemen and took the lead in breaking out of the encirclement, followed by the horsemen, and arrived in Huainan on the morning of the second day.

古文：高宗诏征还，授右卫将军。
现代文：高宗下韶征还，授萧摩诃右卫将军。
English: Gao Zong was promoted to the rank of lieutenant general, and Xiao Ma was promoted to the rank of lieutenant general.

古文：十一年，周兵寇寿阳，摩诃与樊毅等众军赴援，无功而还。
现代文：太建十一年，北周兵侵犯寿阳，萧摩诃与樊毅等众军赶赴援助，无功而还。
English: In the eleventh year of the Taijian era, the Northern Zhou soldiers invaded Shouyang. Xiao Maqi and Zou Yi and other troops rushed to help, but to no avail.

古文：十四年，高宗崩，始兴王叔陵于殿内手刃后主，伤而不死，叔陵奔东府城。
现代文：太建十四年，高宗崩，始兴王叔陵在宫殿内刀刺后主，后主伤而未死，叔陵逃奔东府城。
English: In the 14th year of the Tai Jian era, Gao Zong passed away, and Shixing Wang Shuling stabbed the empress in the palace with a knife. The empress was wounded but did not die, and Shuling fled to Dongfu City.

古文：时众心犹预，莫有讨贼者，东宫舍人司马申启后主，驰召摩诃，入见受敕，乃率马步数百，先趣东府城西门屯军。
现代文：其时，众人之心犹豫，无讨贼的人，束宫舍人司马申启奏后主，于是速召萧摩诃，入见受命，便由萧摩诃率马军步兵数百，先至束府城西门屯军。
English: At that time, the hearts of the people hesitated, there was no one to solicit the thief, Sima Shen, the person who left the palace to the palace, came after the opening ceremony, so he quickly summoned Xiao Maqian, received the order, and then Xiao Maqian led hundreds of infantrymen of the horse army to the Ximen Tun Army in Shoufu City.

古文：叔陵惶遽，自城南门而出，摩诃勒兵追斩之。
现代文：叔陵恐慌，从城南门出，萧摩诃令士兵追而斩之。
English: Shuling panicked and left from the south gate of the city. Xiao Mabing ordered the soldiers to chase and kill him.

古文：以功授散骑常侍、车骑大将军，封绥建郡公，邑三千户，叔陵素所蓄聚金帛累巨万，后主悉以赐之。
现代文：萧摩诃以功授散骑常侍、车骑大将军，封绥建郡公，邑三千户。叔陵平素所蓄聚的金帛累计达巨万，后主全部都赐给萧摩诃。
English: Xiao Maqian was awarded the title of knight errant, general of chariots and cavalry, and the title of county magistrate of 3,000 counties. The gold ingots accumulated by Shuling Pingsu amounted to a huge amount, and all of them were given to Xiao Maqian by his heirs.

古文：寻改授侍中、骠骑大将军，加左光禄大夫。
现代文：不久改授侍中、骠骑大将军，加左光禄大夫。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of chamberlain, grand general of cavalry, and doctor of logistics.

古文：旧制三公黄阁听事置鸱尾，后主特赐摩诃开黄阁，门施行马，听事寝堂并置鸱尾。
现代文：旧制，三公官署厅堂设置鸱尾，后主特赐萧摩诃开黄合，门施行马，厅事寝堂均置鸱尾。
English: In the old system, the hall of the three public officials' bureaus was placed at the end of the hall, and the master of the house specially gave Xiao Miao to open the yellow door, the door was opened by a horse, and the sleeping hall of the office was placed at the end of the hall.

古文：仍以其女为皇太子妃。
现代文：还封萧摩诃女儿为皇太子妃。
English: He also made Xiao Miao's daughter the crown princess.

古文：会隋总管贺若弼镇广陵，窥觎江左，后主委摩诃备御之任，授南徐州刺史，馀并如故。
现代文：正值隋军总管贺若弼镇守广陵，窥视江左，厘主委任萧摩诃准备防御，授予南徐州刺史，其余照旧。
English: At the same time, He Ruoqian, the general of the Sui army, was guarding Guangling, peering at the left side of the river. The commander-in-chief appointed Xiao Maqian to prepare for defense, awarded the south of Xuzhou to Jishi, and the rest remained as before.

古文：祯明三年正月元会，征摩诃还朝，贺若弼乘虚济江，袭京口，摩诃请兵逆战，后主不许。
现代文：擅塱三年正月元会，征召芦麈诬还朝，贺若弼乘虚过江，袭击京口，萧摩诃请兵迎战，后主不允许。
English: Without authorization, the three-year New Year's meeting was held, and the reed warblers were conscripted to return to the morning, the Hera warblers took the river and attacked Kyoguchi, Xiao Miao invited soldiers to fight, and the latter was not allowed.

古文：及弼进军钟山，摩诃又请曰： 贺若弼悬军深入，声援犹远，且其垒堑未坚，人情惶惧，出兵掩袭，必大克之。 
现代文：到贺若弼进军钟山，萧摩诃又请求说： 贺若弼孤军深入，援军还远，而且他的阵垒未坚，人心惶恐，出兵袭击，必能大败他们。 
English: When He Ruoqi marched into Zhongshan, Xiao Maojun also pleaded: He Ruoqi's lone army is deep, reinforcements are still far away, and his fortifications are not strong, people are afraid, send troops to attack, will be able to defeat them.

古文：后主又不许。
现代文：鲈又不允许。
English: Singing is not allowed.

古文：及隋军大至，将出战，后主谓摩诃曰： 公可为我一决。 
现代文：到鹰军大规模兵临，将要出战，篷主对萧摩诃说： 你可为我决此一战。 
English: When the eagle army arrived in large numbers and was about to go to war, the lord of the tent said to Xiao Miao: You can fight this battle for me.

古文：摩诃曰： 从来行阵，为国为身，今日之事，兼为妻子。 
现代文：萧摩诃说： 从来出阵，为国为身，今之事，兼为妻子。 
English: "I've always fought for my country, but now I'm also a wife," said Xiao Miao.

古文：后主多出金帛，颁赏诸军，令中领军鲁广达陈兵白土岗，居众军之南偏，镇东大将军任忠次之，护军将军樊毅、都官尚书孔范次之，摩诃军最居北，众军南北亘二十里，首尾进退，各不相知。
现代文：厘圭多出金帛，颁赏各军，令中领军鲁广达在直崖列阵，居于众军偏南处，镇东大将军任盅次之，护军将军峦、都官尚书王邀次之，萧麈诬军居最北，众军南北绵延二十里，首尾进退，各不相知。
English: Gui Gui gave out more gold ingots to reward each army, and ordered the central leader, Lu Guangda, to line up at the straight cliff, living in the southern part of the army, followed by the general of the town of Dongdong, the general of the garrison, the general of the garrison, the official of the capital, Shang Shouwang, and the northernmost army of Xiao Yulan. The army stretched for twenty miles from north to south, advancing and retreating at the same time, and no one knew each other.

古文：贺若弼初谓未战，将轻骑，登山观望形势，及见众军，因驰下置阵。
现代文：贺若弼起初认为不宜出战，率轻骑兵，登山观望形势，到看见众军，便驰下山布置军阵。
English: At first, He Ruoqi thought that it was not appropriate to go to war. He led light cavalry, climbed the mountain to observe the situation, and when he saw the army, he rushed down the mountain to set up the army.

古文：广达首率所部进薄，弼军屡却，俄而复振，更分军趣北突诸将，孔范出战，兵交而走，诸将支离，阵犹未合，骑卒溃散，驻之弗止，摩诃无所用力焉，为隋军所执。
现代文：叠卢达首先率领部下进军，贺羞迩军屡次退却，不久又复振，又分军向北突向诸将，孔篼出战，兵交而走，诸将之间分散，军阵未合，骑兵溃散，无法阻止，萧摩诃无能为力，被隋军擒住。
English: Luda first led his subordinates to march into the army, He Xinyi's army repeatedly retreated, and soon revived, and another army rushed north to the generals, Kong Yu went to war, the soldiers exchanged and walked, the generals dispersed, the army did not meet, the cavalry broke up and could not be stopped, Xiao Miao was powerless and was choked by the Sui army.

古文：及京城陷，贺若弼置后主于德教殿，令兵卫守，摩诃请弼曰： 今为囚虏，命在斯须，愿得一见旧主，死无所恨。 
现代文：到京城陷落，贺若弼将后主置于德教殿，命令卫兵看守，萧摩诃请求贺若弼说： 今已为囚俘，命在顷刻，愿得一见旧主，死无遣恨。 
English: After the fall of the capital, He Ruoqian placed his successor in the Taoist Temple and ordered the guards to keep watch. Xiao Miao asked He Ruoqian to say: I am now a prisoner, my life is in an instant, I would like to see my old master, and I would die without regret.

古文：弼哀而许之。
现代文：贺若弼同情并许可了。
English: Herakazu sympathized and gave permission.

古文：摩诃入见后主，俯伏号泣，仍于旧厨取食而进之，辞诀而出，守卫者皆不能仰视。
现代文：萧摩诃入见后主，俯身伏地而号哭，并在旧厨取食进奉给后主，辞谢诀别而出，守卫的士兵都不敢仰视他。
English: Xiao Miao went in to see his master, fell to the ground and cried. He took food from the old kitchen and gave it to his master. He said his goodbyes and left. The soldiers on guard didn't dare to look up at him.

古文：其年入隋，授开府仪同三司。
现代文：遣一年入隋，被授予开府仪同三司。
English: He entered the Sui Dynasty one year after his enlistment, and was awarded the Kaifu Yi and the Third Division.

古文：寻从汉王谅诣并州，同谅作逆，伏诛，时年七十三。
现代文：不久跟从汉王杨谅去并州，同杨谅作乱，被杀，其时七十三岁。
English: Soon after, he followed the Han king Yang Peng to annex the state. He and Yang Peng made trouble and were killed. He was 73 years old at the time.

古文：摩诃讷于语言，恂恂长者，至于临戎对寇，志气奋发，所向无前。
现代文：萧摩诃不善言辞，是个忠厚老实的长者，至于临战对敌，则志气昂奋，所向无敌。
English: Xiao Maqian is not good at words, he is a loyal and honest elder, but when it comes to fighting against the enemy, his spirit is high and he is invincible.

古文：年未弱冠，随侯安都在京口，性好射猎，无日不畋游。
现代文：少年时，随侯安都在京口，生性喜好射猎，无日不猎游。
English: When he was a boy, he went hunting with Hou An in Beijing. He had a natural affinity for shooting and would go hunting every day.

古文：及安都东征西伐，战胜攻取，摩诃功实居多。
现代文：到侯安都束征西伐，战胜攻取，萧摩诃居功最多。
English: By the time of the Western Expedition to Hou'an, Xiao Miao had made the most achievements in conquering and capturing.

古文：子世廉，少警俊，敢勇有父风。
现代文：萧摩诃儿子萧世廉，少年机警英俊，勇敢有父亲遣风。
English: Xiao Shiliang, the son of Xiao Maqi, is a handsome young policeman, brave and has his father's charisma.

古文：性至孝，及摩诃凶终，服阕后，追慕弥切。
现代文：生性极为孝顺，到萧摩诃凶事结束，服丧期满后，仍追慕甚切。
English: He was extremely filial by nature. Even after the tragic death of Xiao Maqian and the end of the mourning period, he still yearned for her.

古文：其父时宾故脱有所言及，世廉对之，哀恸不自胜，言者为之歔欷。
现代文：他父亲时的宾客故人如有说及他父亲的，萧世廉对答中，感情悲哀不能克制自己，说者为之感叹悲戚。
English: If the deceased, who was his father's guest, had spoken about his father, Xiao Shiliang could not restrain himself from feeling sad in the dialogue, and the speaker lamented his sadness.

古文：终身不执刀斧，时人嘉焉。
现代文：终身不使刀斧，当时人对他很有好评。
English: He never used a knife or an axe in his life, and people spoke very highly of him at the time.

古文：摩诃有骑士陈智深者，勇力过人，以平叔陵之功，为巴陵内史。
现代文：萧摩诃手下有骑士叫陈智深的，勇力过人，以平定叔陵之功，任巴陵内史。
English: There was a knight named Chen Zhizhen under the command of Xiao Maqian. He was very brave, and he was appointed to the position of Baling Inner Historian for his achievements in pacifying Shuling.

古文：摩诃之戮也，其妻子先已籍没，智深收摩诃尸，手自殡敛，哀感行路，君子义之。
现代文：萧摩诃被杀时，他的妻儿财产先已被没收，陈智深收了萧摩诃的尸体，亲自予以殡殓，哀痛感动路人，君子以此为义。
English: When Xiao Maqian was killed, his wife and children's property had already been confiscated. Chen Zhisheng collected Xiao Maqian's body and personally buried it, moving passers-by with grief. The gentleman justified this.

古文：颍川陈禹，亦随摩诃征讨，聪敏有识量，涉猎经史，解风角、兵书，颇能属文，便骑射，官至王府谘议。
现代文：颍川人陈禹，也曾随萧摩诃征讨，他聪敏而有胆识，涉猎经史之书，能解释占候术、兵书，颇能写文章，会骑马射箭，官至王府谘议。
English: Chen Yu, a native of Luochuan, was also recruited by Xiao Maqi. He was intelligent and daring, dabbled in books on history, could explain horoscopes and military books, was quite capable of writing articles, could ride a horse and shoot arrows, and consulted officials in the royal court.

古文：任忠，字奉诚，小名蛮奴，汝阴人也。
现代文：任忠字奉诚，小名蛮奴，汝阴人。
English: Ren Zhongzhi Bongcheng, petty name barbarian, you Yinren.

古文：少孤微，不为乡党所齿。
现代文：少年时孤苦贫贱，被乡里同辈人所不齿。
English: When he was a boy, he was lonely, poor, and despised by his peers in the village.

古文：及长，谲诡多计略，膂力过人，尤善骑射，州里少年皆附之。
现代文：年长，多诡计，力气遇人，尤善于骑马射箭，州里少年都归附他。
English: Older, more cunning, more forceful, especially good at riding and archery, the state's young people are attached to him.

古文：梁鄱阳王萧范为合州刺史，闻其名，引置左右。
现代文：銮朝鄱阳王萧范为合州刺史，听说任忠之名，将他引置于自己身边。
English: Xiao Fan, the King of Shanyang in the Qing Dynasty, was a famous statesman in Hezhou. When he heard Ren Zhong's name, he brought him to his side.

古文：侯景之乱，忠率乡党数百人，随晋熙太守梅伯龙讨景将王贵显于寿春，每战却敌。
现代文：侯景作乱，任忠率乡人数百，跟随晋熙太守梅伯龙讨伐侯景部将王贵显于寿春，每战都打退敌人。
English: Hou Jing made a riot, Ren Zhong led hundreds of people in the village, followed by Jin Xi's grand vizier Mei Bolong to fight Hou Jing's general Wang Guixian in Shuchun, and beat back the enemy in every battle.

古文：会土人胡通聚众寇抄，范命忠与主帅梅思立并军讨平之。
现代文：正值土人胡通聚众骚乱，萧范命令任忠与主帅梅思立合军讨伐平定。
English: At a time when the natives of Hutong were rioting, Xiao Fan ordered Ren Zhong and the commander Mei Sili to join forces to fight and pacify.

古文：仍随范世子嗣率众入援，会京城陷，旋戍晋熙。
现代文：任忠乃随萧范世子萧嗣率众入援，值京城陷落，旋即保卫晋熙。
English: Ren Zhongnao followed Xiao Fan's son, Xiao Zi, and led the crowd to come to the rescue. When the capital fell, Ren Zhongnao immediately went to defend Jinxi.

古文：侯景平，授荡寇将军。
现代文：侯景被平定，授任忠荡寇将军。
English: Hou Jing was subdued and given the title of General of the Loyalists.

古文：王琳立萧庄，署忠为巴陵太守。
现代文：王琳立萧庄，命任忠暂任巴陵太守。
English: Wang Lin established Xiaozhuang and appointed Zhong as the temporary governor of Baling.

古文：琳败还朝，迁明毅将军、安湘太守，仍随侯瑱真进讨巴、湘。
现代文：王琳失败回朝，任忠改任明毅将军、安湘太守，仍随侯填进军讨伐巴、湘。
English: Wang Lin failed to return to the imperial court, Ren Zhong was changed to General Ming Yi and An Xiang became the de facto ruler, but he still marched into the battlefields of Ba and Hunan with Hou.

古文：累迁豫宁太守、衡阳内史。
现代文：又改任豫宁太守、衡阳内史。
English: He was also appointed as Yu Ning's governor and Hengyang's historian.

古文：华皎之举兵也，忠预其谋。
现代文：华皎举兵，任忠参预其谋。
English: Hua Tuo raised an army, and Ren Zhong took part in the pre-planning.

古文：及皎平，高宗以忠先有密启于朝廷，释而不问。
现代文：到华皎被平定，高宗因任忠事先有密启给朝廷，释放他不予问罪。
English: When Huayu was subdued, Gaozong released Ren Zhong because he had secretly revealed to the imperial court in advance that he would not be questioned.

古文：太建初，随章昭达讨欧阳纥于广州，以功授直阁将军。
现代文：太建初年，任忠随章昭达讨伐欧阳纥于广州，因功被授直合将军。
English: In the first year of Tai Jian, Ren Zhong accompanied Zhang Zhaoda to fight Ouyang Xuan in Guangzhou, and was awarded the title of Zhihe General for his service.

古文：迁武毅将军、庐陵内史，秩满，入为右军将军。
现代文：改任武毅将军、庐陵内史，任期满，入为右军将军。
English: He was reassigned to the post of General Wu Yi and the Inner History of Fuling, and at the end of his term, he became the General of the Right Army.

古文：五年，众军北伐，忠将兵出西道，击走齐历阳王高景安于大岘，逐北至东关，仍克其东西二城。
现代文：太建五年，众军北伐，任忠率兵出西道，击走齐历阳王高景安于大岘，追逐到束关，攻克了东西二城。
English: In the fifth year of the Taiguan era, Ren Zhong led the troops of the Northern Expedition out of the West Road, drove away the king of Qi Liyang, Gao Jing, and settled in Dalat, chased him to Shouguan, and conquered the two cities in the east and west.

古文：进军蕲、谯，并拔之。
现代文：又进军蕲、谯，一并拔之。
English: They also marched into  and, and pulled them out together.

古文：径袭合肥，入其郛。
现代文：直接袭击合肥，入合肥城郭。
English: Directly attacked Hefei and entered the Hefei city wall.

古文：进克霍州。
现代文：进而又攻克霍州。
English: He then went on to conquer Ho County.

古文：以功授员外散骑常侍，封安复县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：因功被授员外散骑常侍，封安复县侯，邑五百户。
English: For his meritorious service, he was awarded the title of non-commissioned officer, knight-errant, and county magistrate of Anfu County, with 500 households in the county.

古文：吕梁之丧师也，忠全军而还。
现代文：吕梁一战丧失军队，任忠全军回还。
English: Luliang lost his army in the First World War, and Ren Zhong's entire army returned.

古文：寻诏忠都督寿阳、新蔡、霍州缘淮众军，进号宁远将军、霍州刺史。
现代文：不久诏令任忠都督寿阳、新蔡、霍州沿淮众军，进号宁远将军、霍州刺史。
English: Soon after, Renzhong ordered the troops of the provincial governors Shouyang, Xin Cai, and Huozhou to march along the Huai River. They were given the titles of Ningyuan General and Huozhou Historian.

古文：入为左卫将军。
现代文：入为左卫将军。
English: He was promoted to General of the Left Division.

古文：十一年，加北讨前军事，进号平北将军，率众步骑趣秦郡。
现代文：太建十一年，加封北讨前军事，进号平北将军，率领众步兵骑军趋向秦郡。
English: In the eleventh year of the Taijian era, the former military commander of the Northern Expeditionary Force, General Pingbei, led a large number of infantry and cavalry to Qin County.

古文：十二年，迁使持节、散骑常侍、都督南豫州诸军事、平南将军、南豫州刺史，增邑并前一千五百户。
现代文：十二年，改任使持节、散骑常侍、都督南豫州诸军事、平南将军、南豫州刺史，增邑到一千五百户。
English: In the 12th year, he was reappointed as the envoy of the Jizhi Festival, the horseback riding attendant, the military governor of South Henan Province, the general of Binan Province, and the historian of South Henan Province, and the number of villages increased to 1,500.

古文：仍率步骑趣历阳。
现代文：于是率领步兵骑军趋向历阳。
English: As a result, he led the infantry cavalry towards Liyang.

古文：周遣王延贵率众为援，忠大破之，生擒延贵。
现代文：北周派王延贵率众为援军，任忠大破之，活擒王延贵。
English: Beizhou sent Wang Yangui and his troops as reinforcements. Ren Zhong Da defeated Wang Yangui and captured him alive.

古文：后主嗣位，进号镇南将军，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：后主继位，进任忠号为镇南将军，给鼓吹一部。
English: Later, he succeeded to the throne and was appointed to the post of Zhenan General, and became a part of the propaganda.

古文：入为领军将军，加侍中，改封梁信郡公，邑三千户。
现代文：人为领军将军，加侍中，改封梁信郡公，邑三千户。
English: He was promoted to the rank of general leading the army, and was given the title of county magistrate of Liangxin County, with 3,000 households in the county.

古文：出为吴兴内史，加秩中二千石。
现代文：出为吴兴内史，加秩中二千石。
English: It was published as Wu Xing's internal history, adding 2,000 koku to his rank.

古文：及隋兵济江，忠自吴兴入赴，屯军硃雀门。
现代文：到隋兵过江，任忠自吴兴入朝赴战，屯军于朱雀门。
English: When the Sui soldiers crossed the river, Ren Zhong from Wu Xing entered the North to go to war, and the garrison was at Suzaku Gate.

古文：后主召萧摩诃以下于内殿定议，忠执议曰： 兵家称客主异势，客贵速战，主贵持重。
现代文：后主召萧摩诃以下官将在内殿商议，任忠坚持议道： 兵家称客主异势，客贵速战，主贵持重。
English: Afterward, the commander-in-chief summoned Xiao Maqian and his subordinates to discuss in the inner hall, and Ren Zhong insisted on the discussion: The soldiers said that the host was a dissident, the host was a quick war, and the host was important.

古文：宜且益兵坚守宫城，遣水军分向南豫州及京口道，断寇粮运。
现代文：宜暂且增兵坚守宫城，派水军分向南豫州及京日道，断敌粮运。
English: For the time being, it is advisable to increase the number of soldiers to hold fast to Miyagi, and send naval forces to the south of Yuzhou and Beijing-Ri Province to cut off the enemy grain transport.

古文：待春水长，上江周罗珣等众军，必沿流赴援，此良计矣。 
现代文：待春水涨，江上流周罗喉等众军，必定沿流赶来援助，这是良计。 
English: When the spring water rises, the upstream Zhou Luogou and other armies will certainly come to the aid of the people along the river. This is a good plan.

古文：众议不同，因遂出战。
现代文：众人所议不同，于是使出战。
English: The crowd disagreed, so they went to war.

古文：及败，忠驰入台见后主，言败状，启云： 陛下唯当具舟楫，就上流众军，臣以死奉卫。 
现代文：战败，任忠急入台见后主，诉说失败状况，启奏道： 陛下惟有立即具备舟船，到上流众军中，臣将以死奉卫。 
English: Defeated, Ren Zhong hurried to Taiwan to see his master and tell him of his defeat. He opened his speech by saying, "Your Majesty only needs to have a boat immediately. If you go to the upper ranks of the army, your vassal will be guarded to the death."

古文：后主信之，敕忠出部分，忠辞云： 臣处分讫，即当奉迎。 
现代文：后主相信了，令任忠出台部署，任忠辞谢说： 臣处分完毕，就会奉迎。 
English: After the lord believed, he ordered Renzhong to issue a deployment, and Renzhong said: Once the vassal punishment is completed, it will be welcomed.

古文：后主令宫人装束以待忠，久望不至。
现代文：后主命宫人装束以等待任忠，但久等不见任忠到。
English: Later, the lord ordered the palace attendants to dress up and wait for Ren Zhong, but it didn't take long for Ren Zhong to arrive.

古文：隋将韩擒虎自新林进军，忠乃率数骑往石子岗降之，仍引擒虎军共入南掖门。
现代文：隋将韩擒虎从新林进军，任忠便率领数名骑兵往石子岗投降他，并引韩擒虎军共入南掖门。
English: The Sui Dynasty marched Han Xinghu from Xinlin, and Ren Zhong then led several cavalrymen to Shizigang to surrender to him, and led the Han Xinghu army into Nanmen.

古文：台城陷，其年入长安，隋授开府仪同三司。
现代文：台城陷落，当年入长安，隋授任忠开府仪同三司。
English: After the fall of Taicheng, he entered Chang'an that year, and was awarded the post of Zhongkaifu Yi and the Third Division by the Sui Dynasty.

古文：卒，时年七十七。
现代文：任忠死时七十七岁。
English: Ren Zhong was 77 years old at the time of his death.

古文：子幼武，官至仪同三司。
现代文：任忠儿子任幼武，官至仪同三司。
English: Ren Zhong's son, Ren Xiaowu, was appointed to the Third Division of the Ministry of State Security.

古文：时有沈客卿者，吴兴武康人，性便佞忍酷，为中书舍人，每立异端，唯以刻削百姓为事，由是自进。
现代文：其时有沈客卿的，是吴兴郡武康人，为人阿谀逢迎残忍冷酷，任中书舍人，每每立异端，惟以侵害百姓为能事，由此而自进。
English: At that time, there was a man named Shen Keqing, who was from Wu Xing County, Wu Kang. He was a cruel and cold-hearted person. He was a scholar and a layman, and he always stood up against heresy. However, he was able to infringe on the people, and thus he advanced himself.

古文：有施文庆者，吴兴乌程人，起自微贱，有吏用，后主拔为主书，迁中书舍人，俄擢为湘州刺史。
现代文：有施文庆的，是呈兴郡乌程人，出身微贱，有官吏才干，后主提拔他为主书，改任中书舍人，不久提升为渔业刺史。
English: Shi Wenqing was from Chengxing County, Wucheng. He came from a humble background and had the ability to be a government official. Later, he was promoted to the position of chief scribe, changed his position to that of assistant scribe, and was soon promoted to the position of fishery historian.

古文：未及之官，会隋军来伐，四方州镇，相继以闻。
现代文：未及到任，正值堕军来讨伐，四方州镇相继奏闻。
English: Before taking office, just as the fallen army came to fight, the towns of Shifang and Zhouzhou successively reported the news.

古文：文庆、客卿俱掌机密，外有表启，皆由其呈奏。
现代文：施文庆、沈客卿都掌管机密，外界有表启，都由他们呈奏。
English: Both Shi Wenqing and Sheng Keqing are in charge of secrets. If there is a revelation from the outside world, it will be presented by them.

古文：文庆心悦湘州重镇，冀欲早行，遂与客卿共为表里，抑而不言，后主弗之知也，遂以无备，至乎败国，实二人之罪。
现代文：施文庆看中湘州重镇，希望早日出行，便与沈客卿互为表裹，将外界表启压住不上奏，后主毫不知晓，于是没有任何防备，以至于败国，实是这二人之罪。
English: Shi Wenqing looked at the important town of Central Hunan and hoped to travel as soon as possible, so he and Sheng Keqing wrapped themselves in each other's arms, holding down the outside world and not playing. The latter did not know anything, so there was no defense, so that the defeat of the country was actually the sin of these two.

古文：隋军既入，并戮之于前阙。
现代文：隋军入后，将两人均斩杀于前宫。
English: After the Sui army entered, both men were beheaded in the front palace.

古文：樊毅，字智烈，南阳湖阳人也。
现代文：樊毅，字智烈，南阳郡湖阳人。
English: Yan Yi, Zi Zhi Rong, a native of Hoyang, Nanyang County.

古文：祖方兴，梁散骑常侍、仁威将军、司州刺史，鱼复县侯。
现代文：祖父樊方兴，梁朝散骑常侍、仁威将军、司州刺史，鱼复县侯。
English: Grandfather Zou Fangxing, Liang Dynasty horseback riding attendant, General Ren Wei, Sizhou Sashimi, Yufu County marquis.

古文：父文炽，梁散骑常侍、信武将军、益州刺史，新蔡县侯。
现代文：父亲樊文炽，梁朝散骑常侍、信武将军、益州刺史，新蔡县侯。
English: His father was a well-known writer, and Liang was a knight-errant of the Liang dynasty, a general of the Xinwu army, a historian of Yizhou, and the new prefect of Cai County.

古文：毅累叶将门，少习武善射。
现代文：樊毅世代将门，少年时即习武善射。
English: Zou Yi is a generational general, and when he was a boy, he practiced martial arts.

古文：侯景之乱，毅率部曲随叔父文皎援台。
现代文：侯景叛乱时，樊毅率领部伍随叔父樊文皎援台。
English: When Houjing rebelled, Zou Yi led the leading group to follow his uncle Zou Wen to support Taiwan.

古文：文皎于青溪战殁，毅将宗族子弟赴江陵，仍隶王僧辩，讨河东王萧誉，以功除假节、威戎将军、右中郎将。
现代文：樊文皎在青溪战亡，樊毅率宗族子弟奔赴江陵，并隶属王僧辩，讨伐河东王萧誉，因功封假节、威戎将军、右中郎将。
English: Zou Wenyi died in the Battle of Qingxi, Zou Yi led the children of his clan to go to Jiangling, and was subordinate to Wang Sofen, fought against King Xiaoyu of the East River, and was awarded the title of General Wei Rong and the title of General of the Right Middle.

古文：代兄俊为梁兴太守，领三州游军，随宜豊侯萧循讨陆纳于湘州。
现代文：代兄樊俊为梁兴太守，领三州游军，随宣丰侯萧循讨伐陆铂于翅业。
English: The second brother, Gong Jun, was the governor of Liang Xing and led the three-state tour. He followed Xuan Fenghong and Xiao Xun to fight against land piracy in the wing industry.

古文：军次巴陵，营顿未立，纳潜军夜至，薄营大噪，营中将士皆惊扰，毅独与左右数十人，当营门力战，斩十馀级，击鼓申命，众乃定焉。
现代文：军队到巴陵，安营停顿未成，陆纳军悄悄乘夜而至，迫近军营大噪，军营中将士都被惊扰，叁邀独舆左右数十人，挡着营门力战，斩十余人，击鼓申命，众人心神方定。
English: The army arrived in Baling, but did not stop to set up camp. The Lu Na army quietly arrived in the night, approaching the camp with great noise. The camp's lieutenant generals were all alarmed. They invited dozens of people, blocked the gate of the camp, and killed more than ten people. They beat drums and gave their orders, and everyone's hearts were set.

古文：以功授持节、通直散骑常侍、贞威将军，封夷道县伯，食邑三百户。
现代文：因功授凿堑持节、通直散骑常侍、贞威将军，封夷道县伯，食邑三百户。
English: He was awarded the prize for his meritorious service in the "Chiseling and Carrying Festival," the title of "Straight-up Free-riding Regular Attendant," the title of "General Zhenwei," the title of "County Magistrate of Fei Dao" and the title of "Three Hundred Households of Food Villages."

古文：寻除天门太守，进爵为侯，增邑并前一千户。
现代文：不久封玉亚太守，进爵为侯，增邑到一千户。
English: Soon after, he was given the title of Jade Asia Pacific Governor, was ennobled as a marquis, and the number of villages increased to one thousand.

古文：及西魏围江陵，毅率兵赴援，会江陵陷，为岳阳王所执，久之遁归。
现代文：到西魏围江陵，樊毅率兵赴援，正值江陵失陷，他被岳阳王所擒，久而逃回。
English: When the Western Wei Dynasty besieged Jiangling, Zou Yi led an army to help. At the time of the fall of Jiangling, he was captured by King Yueyang and fled back.

古文：高祖受禅，毅与弟猛举兵应王琳，琳败奔齐，太尉侯瑱遣使招毅，毅率子弟部曲还朝。
现代文：高祖受禅，樊毅与弟樊猛举兵响应王琳，王琳败而奔齐，太尉侯填派使者招樊毅，樊毅率领子弟部伍还朝。
English: Gao Zu accepted Zen, Zou Yi and his younger brother Zou Yan raised an army in response to Wang Lin, Wang Lin was defeated and rushed to the scene, the prince sent an envoy to invite Zou Yi, Zou Yi led his sons and brothers to return to the court.

古文：天嘉二年，授通直散骑常侍，仍随侯瑱进讨巴、湘。
现代文：天嘉二年，授通直散骑常侍，仍随侯填进军讨伐巴、湘。
English: In the second year of Tian Jia, he was awarded the title of Zhi Sanzhi Zheng, and still marched into the crusade of Ba and Hunan with the lord.

古文：累迁武州刺史。
现代文：又改任武州刺史。
English: He was also appointed as the governor of Bushu Province.

古文：太建初，转豊州刺史，封高昌县侯，邑一千户。
现代文：太建初年，转任丰州刺史，被封为高昌县侯，邑一千户。
English: In the first year of Taijian, he was transferred to the post of Fengzhou magistrate, and was named the marquis of Gaochang County, with more than a thousand households in the county.

古文：入为左卫将军。
现代文：入为左卫将军。
English: He was promoted to General of the Left Division.

古文：五年，众军北伐，毅率众攻广陵楚子城，拔之，击走齐军于颍口，齐援沧陵，又破之。
现代文：太建五年，众军北伐，樊毅率众攻打广陵楚子城，拔下，击走齐军于颖口，齐军支援沧陵，又破之。
English: In the fifth year of Ta Jian, the army of the Northern Expedition, led by Zou Yi, attacked Guangling Chuzi City, pulled down and drove away the Qi army in Yingkou, the Qi army supported Cangling, and broke it.

古文：七年，进克潼州、下邳、高栅等六城。
现代文：太建七年，进而攻克潼州、下邳、高栅等六城。
English: It took him seven years to build it, and then he conquered six cities including Zhangzhou, Heshan, and Gaozhe.

古文：及吕梁丧师，诏以毅为大都督，进号平北将军，率众渡淮，对清口筑城，与周人相抗，霖雨城坏，毅全军自拔。
现代文：到吕梁一战丧失军队，帝韶令樊毅为大都督，进号平北将军，率领众兵渡淮水，面对清口筑城，与北周人相对抗，连绵大雨使城毁坏，樊毅全军自行开拔。
English: When Luliang lost its army in the First World War, the emperor ordered Zou Yi to be the grand governor, and he was given the title of General of Pingbei. He led the troops across the Huai River, faced the Qingkou River, built a city, and resisted the Northern Zhou people. The continuous heavy rain destroyed the city, and Zou Yi's entire army withdrew on its own.

古文：寻迁中领军。
现代文：不久改任中领军。
English: He was soon reassigned to lead the middle group.

古文：十一年，周将梁士彦将兵围寿阳，诏以毅为都督北讨前军事，率水军入焦湖。
现代文：太建十一年，北周将领梁士彦率兵包围寿阳，诏令以樊毅为都督北讨前军事，率领水军入焦湖。
English: In the 11th year of the Tai Jian era, Northern Zhou general Liang Shiyan led his troops to encircle Shouyang, and issued an imperial edict appointing Zou Yi as the prefect of the Northern Zhou army, leading the navy into Jiao Lake.

古文：寻授镇西将军、都督荆、郢、巴、武四州水陆诸军事。
现代文：不久授镇西将军、都督荆郢巴武四州水陆诸军事。
English: He was soon promoted to General of Zhenxi and Governor of Jingye Bawu, leading the military in the four states of water and land.

古文：十二年，进督沔、汉诸军事，以公事免。
现代文：太建十二年，进督沔、汉诸军事，因公事免职。
English: In the 12th year of the Taijian era, the military of the Jin and Han dynasties were removed from office for official business.

古文：十三年，征授中护军。
现代文：十三年，征授中护军。
English: Thirteen years later, he was awarded the title of middle guard.

古文：寻迁护军将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：继而改任护军将军、荆州刺史。
English: Subsequently, he was reappointed as the general of the military escort, Jingzhou Jishi.

古文：后主即位，进号征西将军，改封逍遥郡公，邑三千户，馀并如故。
现代文：后主即位，樊毅进号征西将军，改封逍遥郡公，邑三千户，其余照旧。
English: After the emperor ascended to the throne, Zou Yi was promoted to General of the Western Expedition, and changed his title to Shouyao County, with 3,000 households in the county and the rest as before.

古文：入为侍中、护军将军。
现代文：入为侍中、护军将军。
English: He was promoted to Samurai Junior Officer and Escort General.

古文：及隋兵济江，毅谓仆射袁宪曰： 京口、采石，俱是要所，各须锐卒数千，金翅二百，都下江中，上下防捍。
现代文：到隋兵过江，樊毅对仆射袁宪说： 京口、采石，都是要地，各需精锐兵敷千，金翅二百，都下江中，以便上下防备捍卫。
English: When the Sui soldiers crossed the river, Zou Yi said to his servant Yuan Xian: Jingkou and Quarry are both important places, each needs a thousand elite soldiers and two hundred gold wings, and they all go down to the middle of the river in order to guard and defend.

古文：如其不然，大事去矣。 
现代文：如不这样，大事完了。 
English: If not, it's all over.

古文：诸将咸从其议。
现代文：各位将领都同意他的提议。
English: The generals all agreed to his proposal.

古文：会施文庆等寝隋兵消息，毅计不行。
现代文：正值施文庆等封锁隋兵消息，樊毅之计未行。
English: At the same time, Shi Wenqing and others were blocking the news of the Sui soldiers.

古文：京城陷，随例入关，顷之卒。
现代文：京城陷落，樊毅随例入关，不久即死。
English: After the fall of the capital, Zhai Yi went into exile and died soon after.

古文：猛字智武，毅之弟也。
现代文：樊猛，字智武，樊毅之弟。
English: He is the younger brother of Fierce, Zhiwu, and Yan Yi.

古文：幼倜傥，有干略。
现代文：幼时卓异不凡，有才干谋略。
English: A child prodigy with a knack for strategy.

古文：既壮，便弓马，胆气过人。
现代文：青壮年时，能射箭骑马，胆气过人。
English: When he was young and strong, he could shoot arrows and ride a horse.

古文：青溪之战，猛自旦讫暮，与虏短兵接，杀伤甚众。
现代文：青溪之战，樊猛从早晨到傍晚，与敌短兵相接，杀伤敌人很多。
English: The Battle of Qingxi was fierce from morning to evening, with the enemy's short-ranged soldiers, and there were many enemy killed and wounded.

古文：台城陷，随兄毅西上京，累战功为威戎将军。
现代文：台城陷落，随兄樊毅西上京城，因战功被封为威戎将军。
English: After the fall of Taicheng, he followed his brother Zou Yi westward to Beijing and was awarded the title of General Wei Rong for his military exploits.

古文：梁南安侯萧方矩为湘州刺史，以猛为司马。
现代文：梁朝南安侯萧方矩为渔业刺史，以樊猛为司马。
English: Liang Dynasty's Nan'an Hou Xiao Fang Mom is the fishery history, with fierce as the Sima.

古文：会武陵王萧纪举兵自汉江东下，方矩遣猛率湘、郢之卒，随都督陆法和进军以拒之。
现代文：正值武陵王芦纪举兵自谨辽东下，芦左垄派矾猛率领潮、郢之兵，随都督陆法和进军以抵抗萧纪兵。
English: At the same time, King of Wuling, Lu Ji, raised an army and marched to the east of Liao, and the Lu Zuorong faction led the soldiers of the tide and the egrets, followed by the governor Lu Fa and marched to resist Xiao Ji.

古文：时纪已下，楼船战舰据巴江，争峡口，相持久之，不能决。
现代文：其时萧纪已束下，楼船战舰占据了巴江，争夺峡，相持很久，不能解决。
English: At that time, Xiao Ji was already shackled, the warships occupied the Bajiang River, fought for the gorge, and held each other for a long time, which could not be resolved.

古文：法和揣纪师老卒堕，因令猛率骁勇三千，轻舸百馀乘，冲流直上，出其不意，鼓噪薄之。
现代文：陆法和估计萧纪军士兵疲劳，便令叁迩率精兵三千，乘轻便战船百余艘，冲流直上，出其不意，鼓噪而迫近。
English: Based on the law of the land and estimating that the soldiers of Xiao Ji's army were fatigued, he ordered 3,000 elite soldiers to take more than 100 light warships and rush straight up the stream. They were taken by surprise and approached with a roar.

古文：纪众仓卒惊骇，不及整列，皆弃舰登岸，赴水死者以千数。
现代文：萧纪众兵仓促间十分惊骇，来不及整顿战列，都弃舰登岸，落水而死者以千数。
English: In their haste, Xiao Ji's soldiers were so shocked that they did not have time to reorganize the battle line. They all abandoned the ship and went ashore, falling into the water and dying by the thousands.

古文：时纪心膂数百人，犹在左右，猛将部曲三十馀人，蒙楯横戈，直登纪舟，瞋目大呼，纪侍卫皆披靡，相枕藉不敢动。
现代文：此时萧纪的心腹将士数百人，还在左右，叁妪率部伍三十余人，蒙盾横戈，直登芦堑的战舰，瞪眼大呼，萧纪侍卫都应声而扑倒，相互枕藉而不敢动。
English: At this time, hundreds of Xiao Ji's henchmen, still around, led by more than 30 subordinates, surrounded by shields, climbed onto the reed warship, stared and shouted, Xiao Ji's bodyguards all fell down in response, leaning against each other and not daring to move.

古文：猛手擒纪父子三人，斩于絺中，尽收其船舰器械。
现代文：樊猛亲手擒住萧纪父子三人，斩于船舱中，将他们的船舰器械全部收缴。
English: He brutally handcuffed Xiao Ji and his three sons, beheaded them in the cabin, and confiscated all of their ship's equipment.

古文：以功授游骑将军，封安山县伯，邑一千户。
现代文：凿猛因功授游骑将军，封安山县伯，邑一千户。
English: He was awarded the title of "Ranger General" for his meritorious service, and was given a fief of 1,000 households in Bo, Anshan County.

古文：仍进军抚定梁、益，蜀境悉平。
现代文：继而进军安抚平定梁、益，蜀境内全部平定。
English: He then marched to pacify and subdue Liang and Yi, and the territory of Shu was completely subdued.

古文：军还，迁持节、散骑常侍、轻车将军、司州刺史，进爵为侯，增邑并前二千户。
现代文：军队回还，樊猛改任持节、散骑常侍、轻车将军、旦业刺史，进爵为侯，增邑到二千户。
English: When the army returned, he was fiercely reappointed as the commander of the armed forces, horseback riding attendant, light vehicle general, tanye sashimi, knighted as marquis, and the number of villages increased to two thousand.

古文：永定元年，周文育等败于沌口，为王琳所获。
现代文：永定元年，周文育等败于沌口，被王琳所俘获。
English: In the first year of Yongding, Zhou Wenyu and others were defeated in Chaozhou and captured by Wang Lin.

古文：琳乘胜将略南中诸郡，遣猛与李孝钦等将兵攻豫章，进逼周迪，军败，为迪斩执。
现代文：王琳乘胜将攻南中诸郡，派樊猛与李孝钦等率兵攻打遂童，进军逼近励皂，失败，被固迪所擒。
English: Taking advantage of the victory, Wang Lin will attack the counties in the south, send the fierce and Li Xiaoqin and other soldiers to attack Suidong, march towards Lishao, fail, and be captured by Gu Di.

古文：寻遁归王琳。
现代文：不久逃归王琳。
English: He soon fled back to Wang Lin.

古文：王琳败，还朝。
现代文：王琳失败，还朝。
English: Wang Lin failed and returned to the imperial court.

古文：天嘉二年，授通直散骑常侍、永阳太守。
现代文：天嘉二年，授壁猛通直散骑常侍、永阳太守。
English: In the second year of Tianjia, he was awarded the title of Jubei Mengtong Zhianzhong Zhanji Changzhu and Yongyang Dazhu.

古文：迁安成王府司马。
现代文：改任安成王府司马。
English: He was transferred to the post of Ancheng Wangfu Sima.

古文：光大元年，授壮武将军、庐陵内史。
现代文：光大元年，授壮武将军、庐陵内史。
English: In the first year of the Guangda period, he was awarded the title of General Zhuangwu and the title of Inner Historian of Fuling.

古文：太建初，迁武毅将军、始兴平南府长史，领长沙内史。
现代文：基建初年，改为武毅将军、始兴平南府长史，领旦沙内史。
English: In the first year of construction, it was changed to General Wu Yi, the history of the governor of Shixingping South Prefecture, and the history of the territory of Danshan.

古文：寻隶章昭达西讨江陵，潜军入峡，焚周军船舰，以功封富川县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：不久隶属童压达向西讨伐辽陵，潜伏军队入峡，焚烧韭周军船舰，以功被封富川县堡，邑五百户。
English: Soon, he was subordinated to Tong Banda to fight against Liaoling to the west, infiltrate the army into the gorge, burn the warships of Zhangzhou, and was awarded the Fuchuan County Fort, with 500 households.

古文：历散骑常侍，迁使持节、都督荆信二州诸军事、宣远将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：历任散骑常侍，改任使持节、都督划值二州诸军事、宣远将军、荆州刺史。
English: Successive samurai rangers were reassigned as envoys to hold festivals, governors were assigned to the military of the two states, General Xuanyuan, and Jingzhou stabbed history.

古文：入为左卫将军。
现代文：入为左卫将军。
English: He was promoted to General of the Left Division.

古文：后主即位，增邑并前一千户，馀并如故。
现代文：后主登位，增邑到一千户，其余都照旧。
English: After the Lord ascended to the throne, the number of villages was increased to one thousand, and the rest remained the same.

古文：至德四年，授使持节、都督南豫州诸军事、忠武将军、南豫州刺史。
现代文：至垄四年，授使持节、都督南塑出诸军事、忠武将军、南豫州刺史。
English: In the fourth year of the year of the dragon, the military, the loyal generals, and the history of southern Yuzhou were created by the conferment of the festival and the governor of the south.

古文：隋将韩擒虎之济江也，猛在京师，第六子巡摄行州事，擒虎进军攻陷之，巡及家口并见执。
现代文：堕将韩翅虚过辽，堑猛在京城，他的第六个儿子樊巡代行州事，韩擒虎进军攻陷州城，樊巡及家人都被擒。
English: The fallen general Han Ying virtually overran Liao, and Yan Yan was in the capital. His sixth son, Zou Jun, acted on behalf of the state. Han Yinghu marched into the state capital and captured it. Zou Jun and his family were all captured.

古文：时猛与左卫将军蒋元逊领青龙八十艘为水军，于白下游弈，以御隋六合兵，后主知猛妻子在隋军，惧其有异志，欲使任忠代之，又重伤其意，乃止。
现代文：其时樊猛与左卫将军蒋元逊率领青龙八十艘为水军，在白下游弋，以防御隋军六合兵，后主知道樊猛妻子在隋军，怕他有异志，想命任忠代替他，又恐伤他的心，便停止了。
English: At that time, the fierce and left-guard general Jiang Yuanxun led the Qinglong eighty ships as a naval force, and swam under the White Sea to defend the Sui Army's six-in-one soldiers. When the latter knew that the fierce wife was in the Sui Army, he was afraid that he had a different ambition, wanted Renzhong to replace him, and was afraid of breaking his heart, so he stopped.

古文：祯明三年入于隋。
现代文：祯明三年，樊猛入隋。
English: In the third year of the Ming Dynasty, it entered the Sui Dynasty.

古文：鲁广达，字遍览，吴州刺史悉达之弟也。
现代文：鲁广达，字遍览，吴州刺史鲁悉达的弟弟。
English: Lu Guangda, the younger brother of Lu Sida, a famous poet in Wuzhou.

古文：少慷慨，志立功名，虚心爱士，宾客或自远而至。
现代文：少年慷慨，志在立功名，虚心爱士，宾客有的从速方而来。
English: The boy is generous, aspiring to make a name for himself, modest and loving. Some of the guests come from far away.

古文：时江表将帅，各领部曲，动以千数，而鲁氏尤多。
现代文：其时江表将帅，各自率领部伍，动辄以千数，而其中鲁广达尤其多。
English: At that time, Jiang table will be handsome, each led the team, often with thousands, and among them, Lu Guangda is especially large.

古文：释褐梁邵陵王国右常侍，迁平南当阳公府中兵参军。
现代文：初任梁朝邵陵王国右常侍，改任平南当阳公府中兵参军。
English: At first, Liang Chao served as the Right Attendant of the Kingdom of Shao Ling, but he was reassigned as a soldier of the Dangyang Municipal Government in Pingnan to join the army.

古文：侯景之乱，与兄悉达聚众保新蔡。
现代文：侯景叛乱时，他与兄鲁悉达聚众保新蔡。
English: When Hou Jing rebelled, he and his brother Lu Sida gathered together to protect Xin Cai.

古文：梁元帝承制，授假节、壮武将军、晋州刺史。
现代文：梁元帝承制，授鲁广达假节、壮武将军、晋州刺史。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan's succession system, the Guangda Festival, General Zhuangwu, and the history of Jinzhou.

古文：王僧辩之讨侯景也，广达出境候接，资奉军储，僧辩谓沈炯曰： 鲁晋州亦是王师东道主人。 
现代文：王僧辩讨伐侯景，鲁广达出境迎接，并资奉军中储备物，王僧辩对沈炯说： 鲁晋州也是王师束道主人。 
English: Wang Sangyan fought against the invasion of Houjing, Lu Guangda went abroad to meet him, and provided military reserves. Wang Sangyan said to Shen Yi: Lu Jinzhou is also the master of Wang Shucao Road.

古文：仍率众随僧辩。
现代文：于是鲁广达率众随从王僧辩。
English: As a result, Lu Guangda led the crowd to follow Wang Sofen.

古文：景平，加员外散骑常侍，馀如故。
现代文：侯景被平定，加鲁广达员外散骑常侍，其余照旧。
English: Houjing was subdued, Garu Guangda members rode out the regular attendants, and the rest continued as before.

古文：高祖受禅，授征远将军、东海太守。
现代文：高祖受禅，授予征远将军、东海太守。
English: Gaozu accepted Zen and was awarded the title of General of the Expeditionary Force and Governor of the East Sea.

古文：寻徙为桂阳太守，固辞不拜，入为员外散骑常侍。
现代文：不久转为桂阳太守，他坚辞不拜任，入为员外散骑常侍。
English: He soon became the governor of Guiyang, but he refused to accept the post and became a non-commissioned officer.

古文：除假节、信武将军、北新蔡太守。
现代文：封假节、信武将军、北新蔡太守。
English: On the occasion of the National Day of the People's Republic of China, General Nobutake and the Governor of the Northern Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region Cai Taimou.

古文：随吴明彻讨周迪于临川，每战功居最。
现代文：随吴明困讨伐旦迪于临川，每战功劳居于最高。
English: With Wu Ming's struggle to defeat the Dandies in Linchuan, he achieved the highest achievements in every war.

古文：仍代兄悉达为吴州刺史，封中宿县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：乃代兄叠垂产为吴州刺史，被封为中宿县侯，邑五百户。
English: Nodai's older brother, who was born and raised in Wuzhou, was given the title of the lord of Zhongshu County, with 500 households in the county.

古文：光大元年，授通直散骑常侍、都督南豫州诸军事、南豫州刺史。
现代文：光大元年，授予通直散骑常侍、都督南豫州诸军事、南豫州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Guangda period, he was awarded the title of Zongzhi Sanzhijian, the Governor of South Yuzhou, the Military, and the Governor of South Yuzhou.

古文：华皎称兵上流，诏司空淳于量率众军进讨。
现代文：华皎兴兵上流，帝韶令司空淳于量率众兵进军讨伐。
English: Hua Wei sent his soldiers upstream, and the emperor ordered Siku Chun to march into the crusade with a large number of soldiers.

古文：军至夏口，皎舟师强盛，莫敢进者，广达首率骁勇，直冲贼军。
现代文：军队到夏口，华皎水军强盛，没有敢前进的，鲁广达首先率领精兵，直冲贼军。
English: When the army arrived at Xiakou, the Hualien navy was strong, and those who did not dare to advance, Lu Guangda first led the elite soldiers to directly attack the thief army.

古文：战舰既交，广达愤怒大呼，登舰楼，奖励士卒，风急舰转，楼摇动，广达足跌堕水，沈溺久之，因救获免。
现代文：战舰既已交战，鲁广达愤怒大呼，登上舰楼，奖励士兵，风急舰转，舰楼摇动，鲁广达失足跌落水中，沉溺多时，幸亏救上获免一死。
English: The warship was already at war, Lu Guangda shouted angrily, boarded the shipyard, rewarded the soldiers, the ship turned quickly, the shipyard shook, Lu Guangda lost his footing and fell into the water, indulged for a long time, and was fortunately saved from death.

古文：皎平，授持节、智武将军、都督巴州诸军事、巴州刺史。
现代文：华皎被平定，授鲁广达持节、智武将军、都督巴州诸军事、巴州刺史。
English: Huayu was pacified, and Guangda Jisi, General Zhiwu, the military governor of Bazhou, and the history of Bazhou were conferred on Lu.

古文：太建初，与仪同章昭达入峡口，拓定安蜀等诸州镇。
现代文：太建初年，台仅达与仪同章昭达入峡口，开拓安定宝蜀等各州镇。
English: In the first year of Taijian, Taiwan only reached the mouth of the gorge with the same chapter as Yi, and opened up the towns of various states such as Stable Baoshu.

古文：时周氏将图江左，大造舟舰于蜀，并运粮青泥，广达与钱道戢等将兵掩袭，纵火焚之。
现代文：其时旦氐将图辽左，在蜀大造舟舰，并运粮到青泥，鲁广达与钱道戢等率兵袭击，纵火焚烧。
English: At that time, Danzhao ordered Tu Liao Zuo to build a boat at Shu Da and transport grain to Qingde. Lu Guangda and Qian Daozhang led soldiers to attack and set fire to it.

古文：以功增封并前二千户，仍还本镇。
现代文：以功增封鲁广达食邑到二千户，仍还本镇。
English: With hard work, Lu Guangda Food Town has increased to 2,000 households, and it is still our town.

古文：广达为政简要，推诚任下，吏民便之。
现代文：鲁广达为政简要，推诚任下，官吏与百姓均称便。
English: Lu Guangda was a concise politician, and officials and common people alike felt at ease under his leadership.

古文：及秩满。皆诣阙表请，于是诏留二年。
现代文：到任期满，吏民都向朝廷奏表请求，于是诏令留任二年。
English: At the end of his term of office, all officials and citizens petitioned the imperial court for a report, so the imperial decree remained in office for two years.

古文：五年，众军北伐，略淮南旧地，广达与齐军会于大岘，大破之，斩其敷城王张元范，虏获不可胜数。
现代文：太建五年，众军北伐，攻掠淮南旧地，鲁广达与齐军会于大岘，大破齐军，斩了敷城王张元范，俘获不可胜数。
English: In the fifth year of the Taijian era, the northern army attacked and plundered the old land of Huainan. Lu Guangda and the Qi army met in Dalat, defeated the Qi army, killed Zhang Yuanfan, the king of Shijie, and captured countless numbers.

古文：进克北徐州，乃授都督北徐州诸军事、北徐州刺史。
现代文：进而又攻克北徐州，于是授都督北徐州诸军事、北徐州刺史。
English: He went on to conquer North Xuzhou, and then awarded the military and political history of North Xuzhou to the governor of North Xuzhou.

古文：寻加散骑常侍，入为右卫将军。
现代文：继而加散骑常侍，入为右卫将军。
English: Subsequently, he was given the additional rank of sanshaku (free rider) and became a general of the right guard.

古文：八年，出为北兗州刺史，迁晋州刺史。
现代文：太建八年，出为北兖州刺史，改任晋州刺史。
English: Eight years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, he was appointed as the governor of North Luzhou Province and then the governor of Jinzhou Province.

古文：十年，授使持节、都督合霍二州诸军事，进号仁威将军、合州刺史。
现代文：十年，授使持节、都督合霍二州诸军事，进号仁威将军、合州刺史。
English: Ten years later, he was awarded the title of Jizhixi, the military governor of Hefei and Shandong, promoted to the title of General of Renwei, and made history in Hefei.

古文：十一年，周将梁士彦将兵围寿春，诏遣中领军樊毅、左卫将军任忠等分部趣阳平、秦郡，广达率众入淮，为掎角以击之。
现代文：十一年，北周将领梁士彦率兵包围寿春，韶令派中领军樊毅、左卫将军任忠等分部趋向阳平、秦郡，鲁广达率众兵入淮，成为掎角态势而击之。
English: In the eleventh year of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, Northern Zhou general Liang Shiyan led his troops to encircle Shuchun. The central leader of the Northern Zhou faction, Zou Yi, and the left guard general, Ren Zhong, marched towards Yangping and Qin County. Lu Guangda led his troops into Huai, which became a critical situation and was attacked.

古文：周军攻陷豫、霍二州，南、北兗、晋等各自拔，诸将并无功，尽失淮南之地，广达因免官，以侯还第。
现代文：北周军攻陷豫、霍二州，南兖、北兖、晋等各自拔，各位将领都无功，尽失淮南之地，鲁广达由此被免官，以侯的身份还府第。
English: The Northern Zhou army invaded and occupied Yu, Huo, Erzhou, Nanlu, Beilun, Jin, and so on. All generals were useless and lost the land of Huainan. As a result, Lu Guangda was dismissed and returned to the capital as a marquis.

古文：十二年，与豫州刺史樊毅率众北讨，克郭默城。
现代文：太建十二年，与豫州刺史樊毅率众北上讨伐，攻克郭默城。
English: In the twelfth year of Tai Jian, he led the northward crusade with the leader of Yuzhou, Shishi Zou Yi, and conquered Guo Mucheng.

古文：寻授使持节、平西将军、都督郢州以上十州诸军事，率舟师四万，治江夏。
现代文：不久授使持节、平西将军、都督郢州以上十州诸军事，率领水军四万，治江夏。
English: Soon after, he was given the post of Jizhixi, the general of Pingxi, the military governor of more than ten states, led the navy of forty thousand, and governed Jiangxia.

古文：周安州总管元景将兵寇江外，广达命偏师击走之。
现代文：北周安州总管元景率兵侵犯江外，鲁广达命令部分军队击跑他们。
English: Northern Zhou's Anzhou Governor Yuan Jing led troops to invade outside the river, and Lu Guangda ordered some troops to drive them away.

古文：后主即位，入为安左将军。
现代文：后主登位，鲁广达入为安左将军。
English: After the Lord ascended to the throne, Lu Guangda became General An Zuo.

古文：寻受平南将军、南豫州刺史。
现代文：继授平南将军、南豫州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of General of Pingnan Province, and the title of General of Southern Yuzhou Province.

古文：至德二年，授安南将军，征拜侍中，又为安左将军，改封绥越郡公，封邑如前。
现代文：至德二年，授安南将军，征拜侍中，又为安左将军，改封绥越郡公，封邑如前。
English: In the following two years, he was awarded the title of General Annan, was recruited as an attendant, and became General An Zuo. He was given the title of Xinyue County Governor, and his fief remained the same as before.

古文：寻为中领军。
现代文：不久为中领军。
English: He soon became the middle leader.

古文：及贺若弼进军钟山，广达率众于白土岗南置阵，与弼旗鼓相对。
现代文：到贺若弼进军钟山，鲁广达率众兵在白土岗南面布置军阵，与贺若弼旗鼓相对。
English: When He Ruakun marched into Zhongshan, Lu Guangda led the soldiers to set up a military formation on the south side of the white earth mound, opposite to He Ruakun.

古文：广达躬擐甲胄，手执桴鼓，率励敢死，冒刃而前，隋军退走，广达逐北至营，杀伤甚众，如是者数四焉。
现代文：鲁广达亲自穿戴盔甲，手执桴鼓，率领督促敢死队，冒着刀锋前行，隋军退走，鲁广达向北追逐到隋军营，杀伤极多，如此有四次之多。
English: Lu Guangda personally wore armor, held a gong and drum, led and urged the death squads, marched forward at the risk of the blade, the Sui army retreated, Lu Guangda chased north to the Sui military camp, and there were many casualties, as many as four times.

古文：及弼攻败诸将，乘胜至宫城，烧北掖门，广达犹督馀兵，苦战不息，斩获数十百人。
现代文：到贺若弼攻败诸将，乘胜打到宫城，烧划匕挞门，鲁卢崖还率余兵，苦战不止，斩死俘获数十百人。
English: He defeated the generals at Heraojuan, took advantage of the victory to fight to Miyagi, burned the castle gate, led the remaining soldiers to Lulu Cliff, fought hard, and captured dozens of hundreds of people.

古文：会日暮，乃解甲，面台再拜恸哭，谓众曰： 我身不能救国，负罪深矣。 
现代文：到傍晚，才解下盔甲，面对台再拜痛哭，对众人说： 我身不能救国，负罪深重。 
English: In the late afternoon, he took off his armor, faced the stage and wept bitterly, saying to the crowd: I cannot save the country, I am deeply guilty.

古文：士卒皆涕泣歔欷，于是乃就执。
现代文：士兵们都流泪抽泣，于是才就擒。
English: The soldiers were in tears and sobbing, and then they went to sleep.

古文：祯明三年，依例入隋。
现代文：祯明三年，按例入隋。
English: In the third year of the Ming Dynasty, it entered the Sui Dynasty as usual.

古文：广达怆本朝沦覆，遘疾不治，寻以愤慨卒，时年五十九。
现代文：鲁广达悲痛本朝沦落颠覆，患疾不治。不久以愤慨而亡，其时五十九岁。
English: Lu Guangda was grief-stricken by the fall and subversion of this dynasty and died of illness. He died of indignation not long after, at the age of fifty-nine.

古文：尚书令江总抚柩恸哭，乃命笔题其棺头，为诗曰： 黄泉虽抱恨，白日自流名。悲君感义死，不作负恩生。 
现代文：尚书令江总抚着棺柩痛哭，于是下笔题写于棺材头，诗写道： 黄泉虽抱恨，白日自流名，悲君感义死，不作负恩生。 
English: Shangshu made Jiang Zong fondle the coffin and weep bitterly, so he wrote the inscription on the head of the coffin, the poem wrote: Although Huangquan holds hatred, he is famous in the daytime, the pathetic prince died a righteous death, and did not live a life of indebtedness.

古文：总又制广达墓铭，其略曰： 灾流淮海，险失金汤，时屯运极，代革天亡。
现代文：江总又撰写了鲁广达的墓志铭，铭文大略说： 灾难流于淮海，金城汤池之险丧失，时运屯集，改朝换代。
English: General Jiang also wrote Lu Guangda's epitaph, the epitaph roughly said: Disaster flows in Huaihai, the risk of losing Jincheng Tangchi, the time of change, the change of dynasty.

古文：爪牙背义，介胄无良，独摽忠勇，率御有方。
现代文：爪牙背义，兵甲无良，你独奋忠良，率领防御有方。
English: Minions disobey the law, armor is no good, you are single-minded and loyal, and lead the defense well.

古文：诚贯皎日，气励严霜，怀恩感报，抚事何忘。 
现代文：忠诚上贯皎日，浩气可励严霜，怀恩感报，抚事怎能忘之。 
English: Loyalty prevails throughout the day, generosity can be encouraged by the frost, gratitude can be reported, and how can you forget it?

古文：初，隋将韩擒虎之济江也，广达长子世真在新蔡，乃与其弟世雄及所部奔擒虎，擒虎遣使致书，以招广达。广达时屯兵京师，乃自劾廷尉请罪。
现代文：当初，堕将韩逮虚过红时，鲁广达的长子鲁世真在新蔡，便与他的弟弟鲁世雄及部下投奔虎，虎派使者致书，招揽广达，广达其时正屯兵京城，便自我弹劾向廷尉请罪。
English: At first, when the dethroned Han Han was too popular, Lu Guangda's eldest son, Lu Shizhen, went to Xin Cai with his brother, Lu Shixiong, and his subordinates to join the tiger. The tiger sent an envoy to write a letter to recruit Guangda. At that time, Guangda was stationed in Beijing, and he impeached himself and pleaded guilty to the courtier.

古文：后主谓之曰： 世真虽异路中大夫，公国之重臣，吾所恃赖，岂得自同嫌疑之间乎？ 
现代文：厘圭对他说： 叠：妪虽不同于路中大夫，但你是国之重臣，我所依赖的人，岂能自己置同于那些嫌疑中间呢? 
English: Li Gui said to him: Stack: Although you are different from Dr. Lu Zhongcun, you are the chief minister of the country, the person I rely on, can you put yourself in the middle of those suspects?

古文：加赐黄金，即日还营。
现代文：加赐黄金，当日还军营。
English: In addition, gold was given, and the military camp was restored on the same day.

古文：广达有队主杨孝辩，时从广达在军中，力战陷阵，其子亦随孝辩，挥刃杀隋兵十馀人，力穷，父子俱死。
现代文：鲁广达有队主杨孝辩，其时跟从鲁广达在军中，奋力作战，冲锋陷阵，他的儿子也跟随杨孝蛮，挥刀杀死臆兵十多人，力尽而父子都阵亡。
English: Lu Guangda had a team leader, Yang Xiaofeng, who at that time followed Lu Guangda in the army, fought hard and charged into battle. His son also followed Yang Xiaoman, wielding a sword to kill more than ten soldiers, and both father and son died in battle.

古文：史臣曰：萧摩诃气冠三军，当时良将，虽无智略，亦一代匹夫之勇矣；然口讷心劲，恂恂李广之徒欤！
现代文：史臣曰：萧摩诃气冠三军，是当时良将，虽然没有智谋，也是一代匹夫之勇了；然而他不善言内心刚毅，诚信感人是李广一类的人物。
English: Shichen said: Xiao Ma was the best general of the three armies at that time. Although he had no wisdom, he was also the bravest of his generation. However, he was not good at expressing his inner fortitude, and his sincerity impressed people like Li Guang.

古文：任忠虽勇决强断，而心怀反覆，诬绐君上，自踬其恶，鄙矣！
现代文：任盅虽然勇猛果断，但心怀反覆，诬言欺诈君上，自阻于其恶，可鄙啊!
English: Although he is brave and resolute, Ren Zheng repeatedly slanders and cheats his master, and is self-defeating, which is despicable!

古文：至于鲁广达全忠守道，殉义忘身，盖亦陈代之良臣也。
现代文：至于鲁广达全忠守道，殉义忘身，乃陈代的良臣。
English: As for Lu Guangda, he was a good minister in the Chen Dynasty.

