古文：维王维王克殷，国君诸侯、乃厥献民征主、九牧之师见王与殷郊。
现代文：武王灭了殷商，成了诸侯的君主之后，就召集殷的贤民及诸侯的下属在朝歌郊外见武王。
English: After King Wu exterminated the Yin merchants and became the monarch of the princes, he summoned the wise men of Yin and the subordinates of the princes to see King Wu in the suburbs of Chaoga.

古文：王乃升汾之阜以望商邑，永叹曰： 呜呼，不淑，兑天对。 
现代文：武王登上汾地的小土山，遥望朝歌，长叹道 啊呀，纣王不善充当天对，所以坠命于一日。
English: King Wu ascended a small hill in Shunde, gazed at the morning song from afar, and sighed for a long time. Ah, the king of Shunde was not good at performing the day's duties, so he died on the same day.

古文：遂命一日，维显畏弗忘。
现代文：明显的令人可怕，不能忘啊。 
English: Obviously, it's horrible. You can't forget it.

古文：王至于周，自鹿至于丘中。
现代文：武王返回宗周，从鹿地到丘中，通宵不眠。
English: King Wu returned to Zong Zhou, from Deer Park to the Hill, and stayed up all night.

古文：具明不寝，王小子御告叔旦，叔旦亟奔即王，曰： 久忧劳问，害不寝？ 
现代文：武王的内竖御报告了王弟姬旦，叔旦急忙跪到武王近前说： 长久这样要疲劳生病的。 问为何不睡觉。武王说： 坐！
English: King Wu's inner empress reported to the king's younger brother Hidan, and Hidan hurriedly knelt down to King Wu and said, "It takes a long time to get tired and sick like this. Ask him why he doesn't sleep." King Wu said, "Sit down!

古文：曰： 安予告汝。 
现代文：我告诉你，武王说： 啊呀，姬旦!
English: I tell you, King Wu said, "Ah, Hidan!

古文：王曰： 呜呼，旦惟天不享于殷，发之未生，至于今六十年，夷羊在牧，飞鸿满野。
现代文：上天不佑助殷人，从我未生到现今的六十年前就开始了。当时夷羊出现在朝歌郊外。飞蝗遍野，天昏地暗。
English: Heaven forfend, it all started sixty years ago, before I was born. At that time, the Yao sheep appeared in the suburbs of Chaoga. Flying locusts were everywhere, and the sky was dark.

古文：天不享于殷，乃今有成。
现代文：上天不佑助殷人，到现在才有了结果。
English: Heaven forfend, it has only now come to fruition.

古文：维天建殷，厥征天民，名三百六十夫，弗顾，亦不宾灭。
现代文：当初上天建立殷朝，也征用了贤民三百六十名。殷的后嗣虽不回报上天，上天也不弃灭他们，一直延续到现在。唉呀！
English: In the beginning, when Heaven established the Yin Dynasty, it also requisitioned 360 wise men. Although Yin's heirs did not return to Heaven, Heaven did not abandon them, and they have continued to this day. Alas!

古文：用戾于今。
现代文：我担心这种灾难，几乎随时都在忧虑。
English: I'm worried about this disaster, I'm worried almost all the time.

古文：呜呼于忧，兹难近饱于恤辰，是不室。
现代文：我们住在天堂附近，没有确定天保，岂能安心睡觉?武王说： 姬旦!
English: We live near heaven, and if we don't know what heaven is like, how can we sleep safely? King Wu said: Hidan!

古文：我未定天保，何寝能欲。 
现代文：我能得到上天的明命，确定天保，依傍天室。
English: I can get the clear mandate of heaven, determine the heaven's protection, and rely on the heavenly abode.

古文：王曰： 旦，予克致天之明命，定天保，依天室，志我其恶，专从殷王纣，日夜劳来，定我于西土。我维显服，及德之方明。 
现代文：要记住我们厌恶的那些殷王恶臣及顽民，惩处如同对待纣王。我们要日夜操劳安定我西土，我想大服天下，趁现今威德正明的时候。 
English: We must remember those evil vassals and ruffians whom we detest, and punish them as we would treat the king of snakes. We must work day and night to stabilize our western land. I want to serve the world, taking advantage of the present time when virtue is righteous.

古文：叔旦泣涕于常悲，不能对王。
现代文：姬旦哭泣，泪水掉在下衣上，悲痛得不能答话。
English: Hidan wept, tears falling onto her underwear, too grief-stricken to speak.

古文：□□传于后王。
现代文：武王想让姬旦承继王位。武王说： 姬旦！
English: King Wu wanted Hiedan to succeed to the throne. King Wu said: Hiedan!

古文：王曰： 旦，汝维朕达弟，予有使汝，汝播食不遑食，矧其有乃室。
现代文：你是我明达的弟弟，我要命令你。你摆上食物也无暇进食，何况说岂能顾及家室?
English: You are my wise brother, and I will instruct you; for when you prepare your dinner, you will not have time to eat, and how will you provide for your household?

古文：今维天使子，惟二神授朕灵期，予未致，予休，予近怀子。朕室汝，维幼子大有知。
现代文：现在是上天使唤我，只是天地二神给了我的死期。我未能使国家休美，我最近想到我们的家族成员，你虽然年轻，却大有智慧。
English: It is the angel of the Lord who calls me now, but the two gods of heaven and earth have given me a deadline for death. I have not been able to make the country beautiful, I recently thought of our family members, although you are young, you are very wise.

古文：昔皇祖厎于今，勖厥遗，得显义，告期付于朕身，肆若农服田，饥以望获。
现代文：从先世皇至于今，你能叙说他们的遗德显义，并告知期望付话于我。故我如同农夫耕地，急于要得到收获。
English: From the past emperors to the present, you can describe their legacy, and tell me what you expect from me. So I am like a farmer plowing the land, anxious to get a harvest.

古文：予有不显。朕卑皇祖不得高位于上帝。
现代文：我有不显美的行为，使皇祖们不得高升到上天那里。
English: I have done something unseemly so that the ancestors of the emperors would not be able to ascend to heaven.

古文：汝幼子庚厥心，庶乃来班，朕大肆环兹于有虞，意乃怀厥妻子，德不可追于上民，亦不可答于朕，下不宾在高祖，维天不嘉于降来省，汝其可瘳于兹，乃今我兄弟相后，我筮龟其何所即。今用建庶建。 叔旦恐，泣涕其手。王曰： 呜呼，旦！我图夷，兹殷，其惟依天，其有宪命，求兹无远。
现代文：你年轻人能承继我那心愿，差不多才能治理好我们广大的寰宇。这样我才安心。
English: If you young people can succeed my wish, you will almost be able to govern our vast world well. This gives me peace of mind.

古文：天有求绎，相我不难。
现代文：上天要是高兴，从那里帮助也不困难。
English: If heaven is pleased, it is not difficult to get help from there.

古文：自洛汭延于伊汭，居阳无固，其有夏之居。
现代文：从洛水以北直到伊水以北，地势平坦而无险固，那曾是夏人的居地。
English: From the north of Luoshui to the north of Yishui, the terrain is flat and not dangerous. It was once the residence of the Xia people.

古文：我南望过于三途，北望过于有岳，鄙顾瞻过于河宛，瞻于伊洛。无远天室，其曰兹曰度邑。 
现代文：我从那儿向南望望过三涂，向北望望过太岳，从都鄙回头后望望过黄河，顺势望去望过伊水、洛水，这儿离天室嵩山不远，就叫这为度邑吧！ 
English: From there, I looked to the south for San Tu, to the north for Taiyue, to the south for the Yellow River, to the south for Yishui and Luoshui, and here, not far from Tianmurosong Mountain, let's call it Duyun!

