古文：寓言十九，重言十七，卮言日出，和以天倪。
现代文：寄托的话占十分之九，假托前人所言的话占十分之七，无心之言日出不穷，合于自己的分际。
English: The words of trust account for nine tenths, the words of the predecessors account for seven tenths, and the words of carelessness are endless, and they are within their own range.

古文：寓言十九，藉外论之。
现代文：寄托的话占十分之九，借他人的话来谈论。
English: Nine times out of ten, we use the words of others to talk about it.

古文：亲父不为其子媒。
现代文：亲生父亲不给他的儿子做媒。
English: The biological father would not mediate for his son.

古文：亲父誉之，不若非其父者也。
现代文：与其听亲生父亲的赞美不如听不是他父亲的人的评价。
English: Rather than listen to the praise of his biological father, he would rather listen to the evaluation of someone who is not his father.

古文：非吾罪也，人之罪也。
现代文：这不是我的过错，人人都有这个过错。
English: It's not my fault, it happens to everyone.

古文：与己同则应，不与己同则反。
现代文：跟自己一致就赞同，跟自己不一致就反对。
English: If you agree with yourself, you agree, if you disagree with yourself, you disagree.

古文：同于己为是之，异于己为非之。
现代文：跟自己一致就认为对，跟自己不一致就认为错。
English: If you agree with yourself, you think it's right, and if you disagree with yourself, you think it's wrong.

古文：重言十七，所以已言也。
现代文：假托前人所言的话占十分之七，为了中止争辩，这些话来自长者。
English: Seven-tenths of the time, the words come from an elder to break up an argument.

古文：是为耆艾，年先矣，而无经纬本末以期年耆者，是非先也。
现代文：年龄在人的前面，而没有见解只是徒称年长的，那就不能算先于人。
English: Age is ahead of a person, but if you don't have any opinions and just say you're older, then you can't be ahead of people.

古文：人而无以先人，无人道也。人而无人道，是之谓陈人。
现代文：为人如果没有才德学识，这是缺乏为人之道；为人缺乏为人之道，这就叫做陈腐的人。
English: If there is no talent and learning for a person, it is a lack of a way of being a person; if there is a lack of a way of being a person, it is a stale person.

古文：卮言日出，和以天倪，因以曼衍，所以穷年。
现代文：无心之言层出不穷，天然和合，由此推衍事理，因而说到死为止。
English: Unintentional words come out one after another, natural harmony, deducing things from this, and thus speaking until death.

古文：不言则齐，齐与言不齐，言与齐不齐也。故曰： 言无言。 
现代文：不用说话事物的常理自然齐一，原本齐一的自然之理加上主观的言论就不能齐同了，所以说，要发没有主观成见的言论。
English: There is no need to say that the common sense of things is naturally uniform, and the originally uniform natural reason plus subjective speech cannot be the same. Therefore, it is necessary to make speech without subjective prejudice.

古文：言无言：终身言，未尝言；终身不言，未尝不言。
现代文：说出跟自然常理谐和一致的话就如同没有说话，终身在说话，也像是不曾说过话；而终身不说话，也未尝不是在说话。
English: To utter words in harmony with nature is to be speechless, to speak all one's life is to be speechless, to be speechless all one's life is to be speechless.

古文：有自也而可，有自也而不可；有自也而然，有自也而不然。
现代文：有原因适宜，也有原因不适宜；有原因如此，也有原因并非如此。
English: There are reasons why it is appropriate and reasons why it is not; there are reasons why it is so and reasons why it is not.

古文：恶乎然？
现代文：为什么如此？
English: How can it be right?

古文：然于然；恶乎不然？
现代文：如此因为原来如此；为什么不如此？
English: So because it is so; why not?

古文：不然于不然。
现代文：不如此因为原来不如此。
English: What is unacceptable is that it is unacceptable in itself.

古文：恶乎可？
现代文：为什么适合？
English: How is it incorrect?

古文：可于可；恶乎不可？
现代文：适合在于已经适合；为什么不适合？
English: What is suitable is that it is already suitable; why not suitable?

古文：不可于不可。
现代文：不适合在于已经不适合。
English: It is recognizable because it is recognizable.

古文：物固有所然，物固有所可。无物不然，无物不可。
现代文：事物本来就会适合。没有什么事物不如此，没有什么事物不适合。
English: Things inherently have a correct side, things inherently have a recognizable side, there is nothing that does not have a correct side, and there is nothing that does not have a recognizable side.

古文：非卮言日出，和以天倪，孰得其久！
现代文：要不是无心之言日出不穷，天然和合，事理哪能日新月异持续下去？
English: If it were not for the unintentional words of endless sunrises and natural harmony, how could things continue to change with each passing day?

古文：万物皆种也，以不同形相禅，始卒若环，莫得其伦，是谓天均。天均者，天倪也。
现代文：万物都是种子，以不同形态进行新陈代谢的生命过程，首尾衔接如环相扣，难以分清它们的次序，这叫 天钧 。 天钧 也就是 天倪 。
English: All things are seeds, and the life process of metabolism is carried out in different forms, which are connected to each other like a chain, and it is difficult to distinguish their order. This is called the cycle of nature. The cycle of nature is also the cycle of nature.

古文：庄子谓惠子曰： 孔子行年六十而六十化。始时所是，卒而非之。未知今之所谓是之非五十九非也。 
现代文：庄子对惠子说： 孔子活了六十岁而六十年来随年变化与日俱新，最开始认为是对的，到最后又作了否定，不知道现今所认为是对的不就是五十九岁时所认为是不对的。 
English: Chuang Tzu said to Hui Tzu: Confucius lived for sixty years, and for sixty years the changes were new every day. At first he thought it was right, but in the end he denied it. He didn't know whether what he thought was right now was what he thought was wrong when he was fifty-nine.

古文：惠子曰： 孔子勤志服知也。 
现代文：惠子说： 孔子勤于励志用心学习。 
English: Keiko said: Confucius was diligent in motivating people to study hard.

古文：庄子曰： 孔子谢之矣，而其未之尝言也。
现代文：庄子说： 孔子励志用心的精神已经大为减退，你不必再妄自评说。
English: Zhuo Zi said: The spirit of Confucius's encouragement and diligence has been greatly reduced. You don't have to judge yourself anymore.

古文：孔子云：夫受才乎大本，复灵以生。
现代文：孔子说过： 禀受才智于自然，回复灵性以全生 。
English: Confucius said: "Receive wisdom from nature, and restore spirituality with your whole life."

古文：鸣而当律，言而当法。
现代文：如今发出的声音合于乐律，说出的话语合于法度。
English: Nowadays, the sound emitted conforms to the melody, and the words spoken conform to the law.

古文：利义陈乎前，而好恶是非直服人之口而已矣。
现代文：如果将利与义同时陈列于人们的面前，进而分辨好恶与是非，这仅仅只能使人口服罢了。
English: If people are presented with both benefit and righteousness at the same time, and then distinguish between likes and dislikes and right and wrong, this can only make people obey.

古文：使人乃以心服而不敢蘁，立定天下之定。
现代文：要使人们能够内心诚服，而且不敢有丝毫违逆，还得确立天下的定规。
English: In order for people to be able to sincerely believe in their hearts, and not dare to do anything contrary, it is necessary to establish the world's rules.

古文：已乎，已乎！
现代文：算了算了，我还比不上他呢！ 
English: Forget it, forget it!

古文：吾且不得及彼乎！ 曾子再仕而心再化，曰： 吾及亲仕，三釜而心乐；后仕，三千锺而不洎，吾心悲。 
现代文：曾参再次做官内心感情较前一次又有了变化，说： 我当年做官双亲在世，三釜微薄的俸禄就心满意足了；自双亲去世以后再次做官，三千钟的丰厚俸禄也不能用来养亲人了，我很悲伤。 
English: Zeng San's inner feelings about being an official again have changed compared to the last time, saying: When I was an official and my parents were still alive, I was satisfied with my meager salary; since my parents passed away and I became an official again, the rich salary of three thousand won't be able to support my relatives, I am very sad.

古文：弟子问于仲尼曰： 若参者，可谓无所县其罪乎？ 
现代文：孔子的弟子问孔子： 像曾参这样至孝的人，可以说是没有牵挂俸禄的过错吧？ 
English: A disciple of Confucius asked Confucius: A filial son like Zeng Zang, can it be said that he did not care about his salary?

古文：曰： 既已县矣！
现代文：孔子说： 曾参的心思已经跟俸禄联系起来了。
English: Confucius said: Zeng Zang's mind has already been linked to the salary.

古文：夫无所县者，可以有哀乎？
现代文：如果内心没有牵挂，会出现悲伤的感情吗？
English: If there is no concern in the heart, will there be sad feelings?

古文：彼视三釜、三千锺，如观雀蚊虻相过乎前也。 
现代文：对待俸禄心无所系的人他们看待三釜乃至三千钟，就像是看待雀儿和蚊虻从眼前飞过一样。 
English: They look at the three caldrons and even the three thousand bells as if they were looking at the birds and mosquitoes flying past their eyes.

古文：颜成子游谓东郭子綦曰： 自吾闻子之言，一年而野，二年而从，三年而通，四年而物，五年而来，六年而鬼入，七年而天成，八年而不知死、不知生，九年而大妙。
现代文：颜成子游对东孰子綦说： 自从我听了您的教诲，第一年返于质朴，第二年就不自执，第三年就通达无碍了，第四年就与物同化了，第五年众物来集，第六年感到鬼神来舍，第七年感到自己与自然浑然一体，第八年已经不知道什么是死亡和不知道什么是存在，第九年进入道的奇异妙境。
English: Yan Cheng Zi You said to Dong Xuan Zi Yao: Since I listened to your teachings, in the first year I returned to simplicity, in the second year I stopped being self-obsessed, in the third year I became unimpeded, in the fourth year I assimilated with things, in the fifth year all things came together, in the sixth year I felt that ghosts and spirits came to my house, in the seventh year I felt that I was one with nature, in the eighth year I no longer knew what death was or what existence was, and in the ninth year I entered the miraculous realm of the Tao.

古文：生有为，死也。
现代文：人生在世而妄为，这等同于死亡。
English: To live recklessly in this world is tantamount to death.

古文：劝公以其私，死也有自也，而生阳也，无自也。而果然乎？
现代文：辅助天公出于私心，这等同于死亡，有其必然因素；然而只是活生生地活着，那就没有什么必然因素了。
English: Assisting God out of selfishness, which is equivalent to death, has its inevitable factor; however, just living, there is no inevitable factor.

古文：恶乎其所适，恶乎其所不适？
现代文：那么果真如此吗？什么才是适合？什么才是不适合？
English: So is this really the case? What is suitable? What is not suitable?

古文：天有历数，地有人据，吾恶乎求之？
现代文：天有四时变化，地有人物依据，我哪能强求呢？
English: The sky has a four-hour change, the land has a human basis, how can I force it?

古文：莫知其所终，若之何其无命也？
现代文：不知道什么是终结，怎能断定没有运命呢？
English: If you don't know what the end is, how can you conclude that there is no fate?

古文：莫知其所始，若之何其有命也？
现代文：不知道什么开始，怎能断定有运命呢？
English: If you don't know what started it, how can you say it's fate?

古文：有以相应也，若之何其无鬼邪？
现代文：确有人物感应，难道能断定没有鬼吗？
English: Is it possible to conclude that there is no ghost?

古文：无以相应也，若之何其有鬼邪？ 
现代文：没有发生感应，难道能断定有鬼吗？
English: If there is no induction, can we conclude that there is a ghost?

古文：众罔两问于景曰： 若向也俯而今也仰，向也括撮而今也被发；向也坐而今也起；向也行而今也止：何也？ 
现代文：影外的微阴问影子说： 你以前低着头现在昂着头，以前束着发髻现在披散着头发，以前坐着现在站起，以前行走现在停下来，这是为什么呢？ 影子回答： 我就是这样地随意运动，何必要问呢？
English: The shadow asked the shadow: Why did you keep your head down before, but now hold it up, why did you wear your hair in a bun before, why do you wear your hair loose now, why did you sit before, why do you stand now, why did you walk before, why do you stop now? The shadow replied: I move around freely like this, why do I have to ask?

古文：景曰： 搜搜也，奚稍问也！
现代文：我如此行止自己也不知道为什么会是这样。
English: I act like this and I don't know why.

古文：予有而不知其所以。予，蜩甲也，蛇蜕也，似之而非也。火与日，吾屯也；阴与夜，吾代也。
现代文：我，就如同寒蝉蜕下来的壳、蛇蜕下来的皮，跟那本体事物的相似却又不是那事物本身。火与阳光，使我聚合而显明；阴与黑夜，使我得以隐息。
English: I am like a shell pecked by a cicada, or a hide pecked by a snake, similar to the thing itself, but not the thing itself; fire and sunlight unite me and reveal me; shade and night conceal me.

古文：彼，吾所以有待邪，而况乎以无有待者乎！
现代文：可是有形的物体真就是我赖以存在的凭借吗？何况是没有任何依待的事物呢！
English: But are tangible objects really what I depend on for my existence? What's more, there is nothing to depend on!

古文：彼来则我与之来，彼往则我与之往，彼强阳则我与之强阳。
现代文：有形的物体到来我便随之到来，有形的物体离去我也随之离去，有形的物体徘徊不定我就随之不停地运动。
English: When a tangible object arrives, I arrive with it. When a tangible object leaves, I leave with it. When a tangible object wanders, I move with it.

古文：强阳者，又何以有问乎！ 
现代文：变化不定的事物有什么可问的呢？ 
English: What is there to ask of things that do not change?

古文：阳子居南之沛，老聃西游于秦。邀于郊，至于梁而遇老子。
现代文：阳子居往南到沛城去，正巧老聃往西边的秦地闲游，阳子居到郊外迎接老子，直至大梁才遇上老子。
English: Yang Zi Ju went south to Peicheng. It was just by chance that Laoju wandered to Qin in the west. Yang Zi Ju went to the suburbs to meet Lao Zi, and only met Lao Zi in Daliang.

古文：老子中道仰天而叹曰： 始以汝为可教，今不可也。 
现代文：老子走到半路，昂起头仰天叹气说： 当初我还以为你是可以调教的，现在看来是不行了。 
English: Lao Zi walked to the middle of the road, raised his head, looked up to the sky and sighed, "At first I thought you could be trained, but now it seems you can't.

古文：阳子居不答。
现代文：阳子居没有回答。
English: Yang Zi Ju did not answer.

古文：至舍，进盥漱巾栉，脱屦户外，膝行而前，曰： 向者弟子欲请夫子，夫子行不闲，是以不敢；今闲矣，请问其故。 
现代文：到了旅店，阳子居进上各种盥洗用具，把鞋子脱在门外，双脚跪着上前说道： 刚才弟子正想请教先生，正赶上先生旅途中没有空闲，所以不敢冒然启齿。如今先生闲暇下来，恳请先生指出我的过错。 
English: When he arrived at the inn, Yang Zi Rui put on various toiletries, took off his shoes outside the door, and kneeled down with his feet in front of him and said: Just now, the disciple wanted to ask the teacher for advice. He was just catching up with the teacher on his journey, so he didn't dare to speak up. Now that the teacher is free, I implore him to point out my mistake.

古文：老子曰： 而睢睢盱盱，而谁与居！
现代文：老聃说： 你仰头张目傲慢跋扈，你还能够跟谁相处？
English: The old woman said, "You are haughty and arrogant. Who else can you get along with?

古文：大白若辱，盛德若不足。 
现代文：过于洁白的好像总会觉得有什么污垢，德行最为高尚的好像总会觉得有什么不足之处。 
English: The whitest things seem very dark, and the most virtuous seem to lack something.

古文：阳子居蹴然变容曰： 敬闻命矣！ 
现代文：阳子居听了脸色大变羞惭不安地说： 弟子由衷地接受先生的教导。 
English: After listening to this, Yang Zi Ju's face turned pale and he said with embarrassment and unease, "The disciple sincerely accepts his master's teaching.

古文：其往也，舍者迎将其家，公执席，妻执巾栉，舍者避席，炀者避灶。
现代文：阳子居刚来旅店的时候，店里的客人都得迎来送往，那个旅舍的男主人亲自为他安排坐席，女主人亲手拿着毛巾梳子侍候他盥洗，旅客们见了他都得让出座位，烤火的人见了也就远离火边。
English: When Yang Zi Ju first came to the hotel, all the guests in the store had to be welcomed and sent to him. The male owner of that hostel personally arranged the seating for him. The hostess personally held a towel and comb to wait for him to wash. When the passengers saw him, they had to give up their seats. When they saw the person who was roasting, they also moved away from the fire.

古文：其反也，舍者与之争席矣！
现代文：等到他离开旅店的时候，旅店的客人已经跟他无拘无束争席而坐了。
English: By the time he left the hotel, the hotel guests had already sat down with him without restraint.

