古文：候人各掌其方之道治，与其禁令。
现代文：侯人各自掌管所分管的那一方的道路的治安和有关禁令，而分设下属掌管各条道路。
English: Each of the governors is responsible for the security of the road and related prohibitions on the side they are in charge of, while subordinates are in charge of each road.

古文：以设侯人，若有方治，则帅而致于朝。及归，送之于竟。环人掌致师，察军慝，环四方之故，巡邦国，搏谍贼，讼敌国，扬军旅，降围邑。挈壶氏掌挈壶以令军井。
现代文：负责接受被包围城邑的投降。挈壶氏掌管在打成的水井上悬挂水壶做标志以使军士们前来汲水，在当宿营处悬挂马辔做标志以使军士们前来宿营，在存放军粮处悬挂畚做标志以使军士们前来领取粮食。
English: He was in charge of accepting the surrender of the besieged towns. He was in charge of hanging water jugs on the wells to signal the soldiers to come and draw water, hanging horses to signal the soldiers to come and camp at the camp, and hanging ploughs to signal the soldiers to come and collect grain at the grain depot.

古文：挈辔以令舍，挈畚以令粮。
现代文：凡有军事行动，悬挂漏壶计时以轮流更换击柝巡夜的人。
English: Whenever there is a military operation, the people on night patrol will take turns to change the time by hanging a leaking kettle.

古文：凡军事，县壶以序聚柝。
现代文：凡有丧事，悬挂漏壶计时以轮流更换代哭的人。
English: Whenever there is a funeral, hang up the leaking jug and take turns to replace the mourners.

古文：凡丧，县壶以代哭者，皆以水火守之，分以日夜。
现代文：所设的漏壶都设有专人用水火在一旁守候，并负责区分昼漏和夜漏的长短。
English: The leaking pots are all equipped with a special person to stand by with water and fire, and is responsible for distinguishing the length of the day leak and the night leak.

古文：及冬，则以火爨鼎水而沸之，而沃之。
现代文：到冬天，就用火烧沸鼎中的水，而用以注入漏壶。
English: In winter, the water in the kettle is boiled over a fire and used to fill the leaking jug.

古文：射人掌国之三公、孤、卿、大夫之位，三公北面，孤东面，聊大夫西面。
现代文：射人掌管王国的三公、孤、卿、大夫的朝位：三公面朝北而立，孤面朝东而立，卿、大夫面朝西而立。
English: Sagittarius is in charge of the kingdom of the three princes, Koku, Kyo, and Dokufu: the three princes face north, Koku faces east, and Kyo and Dokufu face west.

古文：其挚，三公执璧，孤执皮帛，卿执羔，大夫执厄。
现代文：他们所拿的见面礼：三公拿玉璧，孤拿兽皮裹饰的束帛，卿拿羔羊，大夫拿鹅。
English: Their gifts for the meeting: the three princes with a jade gem, the lone man with a leather-wrapped sash, the lord with a lamb, and the doctor with a goose.

古文：诸侯在朝，则皆北面，诏相其法。
现代文：诸侯在王朝，都面朝北而立，告教并帮助他们履行有关的仪法。
English: In the dynasty, the princes stood facing north to teach and help them perform the relevant rituals.

古文：若有国事，则掌其戒令，诏相其事。
现代文：如果王有祭祀的事，就掌管有关诸侯的戒令，告教并帮助他们行助祭的事。
English: If the king has a matter of sacrifice, he is in charge of the precepts of the relevant princes, telling them and helping them to perform the ritual.

古文：掌其治达，以射法治射仪。
现代文：掌管转达诸侯们对王的报告或奏书。依据王的射礼演习射箭的礼仪。
English: In charge of conveying the report or report of the lords to the king. According to the king's shooting exercises, the etiquette of archery.

古文：王以六耦射三侯，三获三容，乐以《驺虞》，九节五正。
现代文：王的射礼用六耦为正耦，设三处射侯，设三名唱获者，设三容，用《驺虞》作为伴奏的音乐，音乐演奏九遍，射前先听五遍。
English: Wang's shooting ceremony uses six-couple as positive-couple, three shooting places, three singers, three units, and uses "Shuyu" as the accompanying music. The music is played nine times, and listen to it five times before shooting.

古文：诸侯以四耦射二侯，二获二容，乐以《狸首》，七节三正。
现代文：诸侯的射礼用四耦为正耦，设二处射侯，设二名唱获者，设二容，用《狸首》作为伴奏的音乐，音乐演奏七遍，射前先听三遍。
English: The shooting ceremony of the lords uses a four-couple as a positive-couple, with two shooting places, two singing winners, and two pieces, with "Bullhead" as the accompanying music. The music is played seven times, and it is first listened to three times before shooting.

古文：孤卿大夫以三耦射一侯，一获一容，乐以《采苹》，五节二正。
现代文：孤、卿、大夫的射礼用三耦为正耦，设一处射侯，设一名唱获者，设一容，用《采蓣》作为伴奏的音乐，音乐演奏五遍，射前先听二遍。
English: The shooting ceremony of the lonely, the noble, and the doctor uses the three-couple as the positive-couple, setting a shooting place, setting a singing recipient, setting a volume, using "Cherry Picking" as the accompanying music, playing the music five times, and listening to it twice before shooting.

古文：士以三耦射豻侯，一获一容，乐以《采蘩》，五节二正。
现代文：士的射礼用三耦为正耦，射犴侯，设一名唱获者，设二容，用《采蘩》作为伴奏的音乐，音乐演奏五遍，射前先听二遍。
English: The shooting ceremony of the warrior uses the three-couple as the positive-couple, the shooting of the warrior, the setting of a singing winner, the setting of the two-person, the use of "Cherry Picking" as the accompanying music, the music is played five times, and the shooting is first listened to twice.

古文：若王大射，则以狸步张三侯。
现代文：到王举行大射礼的时候，就用狸步测量侯道，张设三侯。
English: When the king held a grand shooting ceremony, he measured the road with a camel's pace and set up three roads.

古文：王射，则令去侯，立于后，以矢行告。
现代文：王开始射箭时，就命令背靠射侯而立的获者离开射侯，然后站到王的身后，把王所射出的箭飞行的毛病告诉王，以帮助王纠正。
English: When the king began to shoot arrows, he ordered the winner, who stood with his back to the archer, to leave the archer, and then to stand behind the king and tell the king the problem with the flight of the arrow he had shot, so as to help the king correct it.

古文：卒，令取矢。
现代文：射毕，命令射鸟氏拾取射出的矢。
English: After shooting, order Mr. Shooter to pick up the arrows.

古文：祭侯，则为位，与大史数射中，佐司马治射正。
现代文：将要祭射侯的时候，就为服不氏确定接受献酒的位置。与大史一起数笄以计算射中的次数。协助大司马治理有关射礼的仪法。
English: When it's time to sacrifice a horse, determine the position for the horse to receive the libation. Count the number of times the horse has been shot to calculate the number of times the horse has been shot. Assist the grand steed in administering the shooting ceremony.

古文：祭祀，则赞射牲。
现代文：举行祭祀，就协助王射杀牲，协助孤、卿、大夫行祭祀的礼仪。
English: When a ritual is held, they assist the king in shooting the animal, and assist the guru, nobles, and doctors in performing the ritual.

古文：相孤、卿、大夫之法仪，会同、朝觐、作大夫介。
现代文：王外出与诸侯会同，或诸侯前来朝觐，就使大夫做公、卿的副手前往对诸侯进行慰劳或赠赐。
English: When the king went out to meet the lords, or when the lords came to perform the pilgrimage, he would send the deputy of the doctor to comfort or give gifts to the lords.

古文：凡有爵者，大师，令有爵者乘王之倅车。有大宾客，则作卿大夫従，戒大史及大夫介。大丧，与仆人迁尸，作聊大夫掌事，比其庐，不敬者，苛罚之。
现代文：有诸侯来朝时，就选派卿、大夫随从王接见，告诫随同三公前往诸侯馆舍传达王命的大史和做副手的大夫。有大丧，就同大仆负责迁移尸体，使卿、大夫分掌职事，查核居庐的人数及其是否遵守丧礼，有不严肃的，就加以责问和惩罚。
English: When the princes came to the imperial court, they would send their lords and doctors to accompany the king to receive him, and they would admonish the Grand Historian and the doctor who served as his deputy to go with the three princes to the lords' residences to convey the king's order. If there was a great funeral, they and the servants would be responsible for moving the bodies, assigning the lords and doctors to their duties, checking the number of mourners and whether they observed the funeral rites, and if they were not serious, they would be reprimanded and punished.

古文：服不氏掌养猛兽而教扰之。
现代文：凡祭祀供给猛兽做牺牲。有宾客来朝聘的事，就举起他们所进献的兽皮进内收藏。
English: When there are guests coming to pay homage to the emperor, they take the animal skins they have offered and go inside to collect them.

古文：凡祭祀，共猛兽，宾客之事则抗皮，射则赞张侯，以旌居乏而待获。
现代文：举行射箭比赛就协助射人张设射侯。射箭比赛开始后，拿着旌旗在乏后等待有人射中而唱获。
English: When an archery competition was held, he assisted the archer in setting up the shooting stand. After the start of the archery competition, he held the chequered flag and waited for someone to hit the target.

古文：射鸟氏掌射鸟。
现代文：射鸟氏掌管射鸟。
English: The Shooter clan is in charge of shooting birds.

古文：祭祀，以弓矢驱乌鸢。
现代文：举行祭祀，就用弓箭驱逐乌鸦和鸢。
English: When a religious service is held, crows and crickets are chased away with bows and arrows.

古文：凡宾客、会同、军旅，亦如之。
现代文：凡有接待宾客、会同、出征等事，也这样做。
English: The same applies to all matters such as receiving guests, holding meetings, and going on military expeditions.

古文：射则取矢，矢在侯高，则以并夹取之。
现代文：举行射箭比赛就负责收取射在侯处的矢。矢在侯上过高，就用并夹夹取。
English: When an archery competition is held, it is responsible for collecting the arrows shot at the guard. If the arrows are too high at the guard, they will be used and clamped.

古文：罗氏掌罗乌鸟，蜡则作罗糯。
现代文：罗氏掌管用罗捕获乌鸦。举行蜡祭后，就用细密的罗捕鸟。
English: The Luo clan is in charge of catching crows with a rope. After the wax festival, they use a fine rope to catch birds.

古文：中春，罗春鸟，献鸠以养国老，行羽物。
现代文：春二月，用罗捕获春季始出的鸟，进献鸠鸟以供行养国老礼，用鸟赏赐官吏们。
English: In spring and February, the birds that are released in the spring are caught with a rod, and the ostriches are presented for the ceremony of raising the nation, and the officials are rewarded with the birds.

古文：掌畜掌养鸟而阜蕃教扰之。
现代文：掌畜掌管喂养鸟，使鸟繁殖并调教而使之驯服。
English: The handler is in charge of feeding the bird, breeding it and training it to be tame.

古文：祭祀，共卵鸟。
现代文：举行祭祀供给会生蛋的家禽。
English: A ritual is held to supply the poultry with eggs.

古文：岁时，贡鸟物，共膳献之鸟。
现代文：每年按季节供给候鸟。供给王用膳所当进献的鸟类。
English: Each year, migratory birds are supplied according to the season. The birds that are to be presented at the king's table are supplied.

古文：司士掌群臣之版，以治其政令。
现代文：司士掌管群臣的名籍，以施行有关的政令。
English: The magistrate is in charge of the names of the ministers in order to implement the relevant decree.

古文：岁登下其损益之数，辨其年岁与其贵贱，周知邦国、都家、县鄙之数，卿、大夫、士、庶子之数，以诏王治，以德诏爵，以功诏禄，以能诏事，以久奠食，唯赐无常。
现代文：每年登记或注销群臣增加或减少的员数，辨明他们的年龄和级别的高低，遍知各诸侯国、畿内各采邑、各公邑的卿、大夫、士和庶子的员数。报请王所当黜陟的臣：根据德行报请黜陟爵位，根据功劳报请黜陟俸禄，根据能力报请黜陟职事，根据长期任职的表现确定所当给予的食粮数。
English: Annually register or cancel the number of members of the group of retainers who increase or decrease, identify their age and level, and know the number of lords, doctors, soldiers, and illegitimate sons in each vassal state, each county in the Kinai region, and each official village. Report the vassal who is to be appointed by the king: according to the virtue report the peerage, according to the merit report the salary, according to the ability report the duties, and according to the long-term performance determine the amount of grain to be given.

古文：正朝仪之位，辨其贵贱之等。
现代文：规正朝仪的位置，分辨贵贱的等级。
English: Regulate the position of the imperial regalia, distinguish the rank of the noble and the low.

古文：王南卿，三公北面东上，孤东面北上，卿、大夫西面北上，王族故士、虎士在路门之左，南面东上，大仆、大右、大仪従者，在路门之右，南面西上。
现代文：王面朝南而立；三公面朝北而立，以东边为上位；孤面朝东而立，以北边为上位；卿、大夫面朝西而立，以北边为上位；王族故士、虎士在路门的右边，面朝南而立，以东边为上位；大仆、大右、大仆从者，在路门的左边，面朝南而立，以西边为上位。
English: The king stands facing south; the three generals stand facing north, with the east as the superior side; the solitary stands facing east, with the north as the superior side; the lord and doctor stand facing west, with the north as the superior side; the royal family and the tigers stand on the right side of the road gate, facing south, with the east as the superior side; the great servant, the great right, and the great servant stand on the left side of the road gate, facing south, with the west as the superior side.

古文：司士摈，孤卿特揖；大夫以其等旅揖；士旁三揖。王还，揖门左，揖门右，大仆前，王入内朝，皆退。
现代文：司士担任摈者，引导王揖请群臣就位：对孤、卿每人一揖，对大夫依照等级、分别向同级者三揖，对一旁的士总行三揖，王又转身向门左、门右的人行揖礼。大仆在王前引导王就朝位。王进入路门，内朝的群臣都退去。
English: The magistrate served as the usher, guiding the king to invite the courtiers to take their places: one usher for each of the orphans and nobles, three ushers for the doctors according to their rank, three ushers for those of the same rank, and three ushers for the chief usher. The king then turned to the people to the left and right of the door and bowed. The servants led the king to the throne. The king entered the gate, and all the courtiers of the Inner Court retreated.

古文：掌国中之士治，凡其戒令，掌摈士者，膳其挚。
现代文：掌管王都中士的任职情况，以及凡有关土的戒令。掌管引导初命为士的人入见王，把士所拿的挚交给膳夫。
English: He is in charge of the appointment of the vanguards sergeants, as well as all the land-related commands. He is in charge of guiding the first-named sergeants into the king, and handing over the heart of the sergeant to the caterer.

古文：凡祭祀，掌士之戒令，诏相其法事，及赐爵，呼昭穆而进之，帅其属而割牲，羞俎豆。
现代文：凡举行祭祀，掌管有关士的戒令，告教并协助他们行礼仪的事；到行旅酬礼向众人赐酒的时候，依照昭穆的次序呼唤土进前接受赐酒；率领下属而解割牲体，进献俎和豆。
English: Anyone who holds a religious service, administers the commandments of the relevant priests, teaches them and assists them in performing the rituals; when giving wine to the people in the travel reward ceremony, call the soil forward to receive the wine according to the order of the Shomu; lead the subordinates to cut the animals, and donate the straw and beans.

古文：凡会同，作士従。
现代文：凡王前往与诸侯会同，就选派士做随从。
English: Whenever a king went to meet with his vassals, he would choose a retinue.

古文：宾客，亦如之。
现代文：王接见宾客时也这样做。
English: The same applies when entertaining guests.

古文：作士适四方使，为介。
现代文：以王命使士为使者出使四方，或做大夫使者的副手。
English: With the king's messenger as the emissary, or as the deputy of the doctor's emissary.

古文：大丧，作士掌事，作六军之士执披。
现代文：有大丧，分派士掌理有关事项，并选派六军中的士执披。
English: When there is a great mourning, assign a soldier to take charge of the relevant matters, and select a soldier from the Sixth Army to carry out the mourning.

古文：凡士之有守者，令哭，无去守。
现代文：凡士有职守的，令他们哭而不离开职守。
English: Ordinary people have duties, let them cry without leaving their duties.

古文：国有故，则致士而颁其守。
现代文：国家有变故，就召集士而分派他们职守。
English: When there is a change in the country, they call the officers together and assign them their duties.

古文：凡邦国，三岁则稽士任，而进退其爵禄。
现代文：凡诸侯国每三年考核一次他们的卿、大夫、士的任职情况，而升降他们的爵位和俸禄。
English: Every three years, all the vassal states review the status of their lords, doctors, and officials, and raise and lower their ranks and salaries.

古文：诸子掌国子之倅，掌其戒令与其教治，辨其等，正其位。
现代文：诸子掌管国子这些做父亲副手的人，掌管有关他们的戒令，以及对他们的教育和管理，区别他们的尊卑等级，规正他们的朝位。
English: The sons are in charge of the sons of the state, who are the father's deputies, and they are in charge of the precepts concerning them, as well as their education and management, distinguishing their levels of superiority and inferiority, and regulating their imperial position.

古文：国有大事，则帅国子而致于大子，唯所用之。
现代文：国家有大事，就率领国子到太子那里，听从差遣使用。
English: When there is a major event in the country, he will lead Kuniko to the prince and obey his orders.

古文：若有兵甲之事，则授之车甲，合其卒伍，置其有司，以军法治之。
现代文：如果有战争，就授给他们战车和铠甲，按军事编制集合他们，为他们设置军官，依照军法对他们进行管理。
English: If there is a war, give them chariots and armor, assemble them in military formations, assign officers to them, and administer them according to military law.

古文：司马弗正，凡国正弗及。
现代文：司马不征发他们的赋役。
English: Sima does not conscript them.

古文：大祭祀，正六牲之体。
现代文：凡国家征发役徒都不涉及他们。举行大祭祀，负责捞出鼎中的牲体放置在俎上。
English: They are not involved in any of the state's requisitioning and dispatching cadres. They are responsible for holding the grand sacrifice and retrieving the animals from the dinghy and placing them on the raft.

古文：凡乐事，正舞位，受舞器。
现代文：凡举行舞乐的事，孥正舞蹈者的行列，授给舞蹈者道具。
English: Whenever there is a dance, he leads the dancers and gives them the props.

古文：大丧，正群子之服位。
现代文：有大丧，规正群国子的丧服和哭位。
English: There was a great mourning, and the mourning clothes and weeping places of all the sons of the state were in full swing.

古文：会同、宾客，作群子従。
现代文：王有会同或接待宾客的事，选派国子随从。
English: Wang had the matter of meeting or receiving guests, and chose to send Kuniko to accompany him.

古文：凡国之政事，国子存游倅，使之修德学道。春合诸学，秋合诸射，以考其艺而进退之。
现代文：凡国家有徭役的事，国子就列入游暇无事的国子之中而不参加，让他们修养德行、学习道艺：春季把他们集合在大学里，秋季把他们集合在射宫里，以考察他们的道艺，而决定对他们的进用或黜退。
English: Whenever the country has a military service, the sons of the country are included in the sons of the country who have no leisure and do not participate, let them cultivate virtue and learn the arts: in the spring they are gathered in the university, in the autumn they are gathered in the palace, to examine their arts and decide on their advancement or decline.

古文：司右掌群右之政令。
现代文：司右掌管有关众车右的政令。
English: The Right Division is in charge of the decree on the right turn of public vehicles.

古文：凡军旅、会同，合其车之卒伍，而比其乘，属其右。
现代文：凡出征、会同，就负责组合车队，编排车乘，安排车右。
English: Whenever they go on a mission or join forces, they are responsible for assembling the motorcade, arranging passengers and vehicles, and arranging the right-of-way.

古文：凡国内之勇力之士能用五兵者，属焉，掌其政令。
现代文：凡国中勇力之士能使用五种兵器的就选为属员，掌管有关他们的政令。
English: The bravest men in every land who are able to use the five weapons will be chosen as subordinates and will be in charge of the decrees concerning them.

