古文：◎食货五
现代文：食货五
English: Groceries five

古文：○钱钞坑冶商税市舶马市
现代文：钱钞坑冶商税市舶马市
English: Money pit metallurgy business tax city Hebo-ma city

古文：钱币之兴，自九府圜法，历代遵用。
现代文：钱币的兴起，从九府圜法开始，历代遵循使用。
English: The rise of coins began with the nine prefectures minting method, and has been used throughout the ages.

古文：钞始於唐之飞钱，宋之交会，金之交钞。
现代文：钞开始于唐代的飞钱，宋代的交会，金朝的交钞。
English: Banknotes began in the Tang Dynasty's flying money, the Song Dynasty's trade fair, and the Jin Dynasty's banknote payment.

古文：元世始终用钞，钱几废矣。
现代文：元代始终用钞，钱几乎被废弃。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, banknotes were always used, and money was almost abandoned.

古文：太祖初置宝源局於应天，铸 大中通宝 钱，与历代钱兼行。
现代文：太祖开初在应夭设置实源局，铸造 大中通宝 钱，与历代的钱同时流通。
English: In the beginning, the great-grandfather set up the real source bureau in Yingyao, and minted the high and medium-level treasure money, which circulated at the same time as the money of previous generations.

古文：以四百文为一贯，四十文为一两，四文为一钱。
现代文：以四百文为一贯，四十文为一两，四文为一钱。
English: Consistent with four hundred mon, forty mon is one or two, and four mon is one money.

古文：及平陈友谅，命江西行省置货泉局，颁大中通宝钱，大小五等钱式。
现代文：到平定陈友谅，命令江西行省设置货泉局，颁布大中通宝钱，大小五等钱的样式。
English: To pacify Chen Youzhen, he ordered the Jiangxi Province to set up the Commodity Spring Bureau, and promulgated the pattern of large and medium-sized treasure money, and the size of five-tiered money.

古文：即位，颁 洪武通宝 钱，其制凡五等：曰 当十 、 当五 、 当三 、 当二 、 当一 。 当十 钱重一两，馀递降至重一钱止。
现代文：即皇帝位，颁布 洪武通宝 钱，其形制共有五等：叫做 当十 、 当五 、 当三 、 当二 、 当一  当十 钱重一两，其余依次下降到重一钱为止。
English: That is to say, the emperor issued the Hongwu Tongbao money, which has a total of five grades: it is called when ten, when five, when three, when two, when one, when ten, the weight of the money is one or two, and the rest are reduced to the weight of one.

古文：各行省皆设宝泉局，与宝源局并铸，而严私铸之禁。
现代文：各行省都设置实泉局，与宝源局同时铸钱，而严禁私人铸钱。
English: All provinces have set up real spring bureaus to mint money at the same time as treasure source bureaus, and private minting of money is strictly prohibited.

古文：洪武四年改铸大中、洪武通宝大钱为小钱。
现代文：洪武四年改铸大中、洪武通宝大钱为小钱。
English: In the fourth year of Hongwu, the casting of large and medium-sized coins was changed, and the large coins of Hongwu Tongbao were changed to small coins.

古文：初，宝源局钱铸 京 字於背，后多不铸，民间无 京 字者不行，故改铸小钱以便之。
现代文：当初，宝源局的钱在钱背后铸 京 字，后来多不铸造，民间无 京 字的不通行，所以改铸小钱以方便使用。
English: At first, the money of the Treasure Resources Bureau was minted with the characters of Beijing on the back of the money. Later, many coins were not minted, and people could not use them without the characters of Beijing. Therefore, small coins were minted to make it easier to use.

古文：寻令私铸钱作废铜送官，偿以钱。
现代文：不久命令私铸的钱作废铜送交官府，以钱抵偿。
English: Soon after, he ordered that the privately minted money be sent to the government as scrap copper, in order to compensate for the loss.

古文：是时有司责民出铜，民毁器皿输官，颇以为苦。
现代文：适时主管部门责求人民出铜，人民毁掉器皿输送给官府，以此感到很苦恼。
English: At the right time, the competent department asked the people to produce copper, and the people destroyed the utensils and transported them to the government, which made them very distressed.

古文：而商贾沿元之旧习用钞，多不便用钱。
现代文：而商人沿袭丞塑旧有习惯使用钞，多不便于用钱。
English: Merchants, on the other hand, have inherited the old habit of using banknotes, which is more inconvenient than using money.

古文：七年，帝乃设宝钞提举司。
现代文：七年，皇帝便设置宝钞提举司。
English: In the seventh year, the emperor set up a treasury to raise money.

古文：明年始诏中书省造大明宝钞，命民间通行。
现代文：第二年纔韶令中书省造大明宝钞，命令民间通行。
English: In the second year, the Central Government issued an order to the Ministry of Education to produce large bright treasure banknotes, and ordered them to be used by the general public.

古文：以桑穰为料，其制方，高一尺，广六寸，质青色，外为龙文花栏。
现代文：用桑树茎穰作原料，其形制，高一尺，宽六寸，质地青色，外面是龙纹花栏。
English: Made from mulberry stalks, its shape is one foot high, six inches wide, blue in texture, with a dragon-patterned flower border on the outside.

古文：横题其额曰 大明通行宝钞 。
现代文：横着题印钞额为 大明通行宝钞 。
English: The banknote with the horizontal inscription is the Daming Passing Treasure Banknote.

古文：其内上两旁，复为篆文八字，曰 大明宝钞，天下通行 。
现代文：内面上面两旁，又为篆文八个字，叫做 大明宝钞，天下通行 。
English: On both sides of the inside, there are eight characters of the imperial script, which is called Daming treasure banknote, which is accepted by the whole world.

古文：中图钱贯，十串为一贯。
现代文：中间图画钱贯，十串为一贯。
English: In the middle of the picture, the money runs through, and the ten strings are consistent.

古文：其下云 中书省奏准印造大明宝钞与铜钱通行使用，伪造者斩，告捕者赏银二十五两，仍给犯人财产。 
现代文：钞的下面印道： 中书省奏准印造大明宝钞，与铜钱通行使用，伪造者斩，告捕者赏银二十五两，并给犯人财产。 
English: At the bottom of the banknote was printed: "The People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature and Culture has approved the printing of Daming treasure banknotes, which will be used in common with copper money. Counterfeiters will be executed, and those who denounce their captors will be rewarded with 25 taels of silver and prisoners will be given property."

古文：若五百文则画钱文为五串，馀如其制而递减之。
现代文：如果是五百文便画钱文为五串，其余如同那样的形制而依次减少。
English: If it is five hundred coins, then five strings of coins are drawn, and the rest are reduced in turn like that.

古文：其等凡六：曰一贯，曰五百文、四百文、三百文、二百文、一百文。
现代文：宝钞等次共六等：为一贯，五百文、四百文、三百文、二百文、一百文。
English: There are a total of six grades of high-value banknotes: 500, 400, 300, 200 and 100.

古文：每钞一贯，准钱千文，银一两；四贯准黄金一两。
现代文：每钞一贯，等同钱一千文，银一两；四贯等同黄金一两。
English: Each banknote is consistent, equivalent to one thousand coins, silver one or two; four consistent is equivalent to one or two gold.

古文：禁民间不得以金银物货交易，违者罪之；以金银易钞者听。
现代文：禁止民间不准用金银货物进行交易，违犯的处以罪罚；用金银交换钞的听便。
English: It is forbidden for non-governmental people to use gold and silver goods to conduct transactions, and violators will be punished with criminal penalties; it is convenient to use gold and silver to exchange banknotes.

古文：遂罢宝源、宝泉局。
现代文：于是罢除寅源、宝泉局。
English: As a result, the Torengen and Hosen bureaus were dismissed.

古文：越二年，复设宝泉局，铸小钱与钞兼行，百文以下止用钱。
现代文：永乐二年，恢复设置宝泉局，铸造小钱，与钞一同流通，一百文以下只用钱。
English: In the second year of Yongle, the treasure spring bureau was restored and set up, minted small money, circulated together with banknotes, and only used money below 100 mon.

古文：商税兼收钱钞，钱三钞七。
现代文：商税兼收钱钞，钱三分钞七分。
English: Commercial taxes are also collected in the form of banknotes. A three-cent banknote is worth seven cents.

古文：十三年，以钞用久昏烂，立倒钞法，令所在置行用库，许军民商贾以昏钞纳库易新钞，量收工墨直。
现代文：十三年，因钞使用长久模糊破烂，便设立倒钞法，命令所在各地设置行用库，允许军民商人以模糊破烂的钞纳入库交换新钞，酌量收取工墨钱。
English: In the thirteenth year, due to the long-term use of fuzzy and tattered banknotes, the bill of exchange was established, and it was ordered to set up bank vaults in various regions, allowing military and civilian merchants to exchange new banknotes with fuzzy and tattered banknotes into the vault, and to collect the amount of ink money.

古文：会中书省废，乃以造钞属户部，铸钱属工部，而改宝钞文 中书省 为 户部 ，与旧钞兼行。
现代文：适逢中书省废除，便把造钞的事归属卢部，铸钱归属工部，而改动宝钞上的文字 中书省 焉 户部 ，舆旧钞一并流通。
English: When the Ministry of Culture and Literature was abolished, the minting of banknotes was transferred to the Ministry of Finance, and the minting of money was transferred to the Ministry of Industry and Trade. The words "Ministry of Culture and Literature" and "Ministry of Household" were changed on the banknotes, and the old and new banknotes were circulated together.

古文：十六年，置户部宝钞广源库、广惠库；入则广源掌之，出则广惠掌之。
现代文：十六年，设置卢部宝钞广源库、广惠库；纳入便是广源库职掌，调出便是广惠库职掌。
English: In the 16th year of the year, the Lu Department of the People's Republic of China set up the Lu Department of the People's Republic of China and the Lu Department of the People's Republic of China.

古文：在外卫所军士，月盐皆给钞，各盐场给工本钞。
现代文：在外地卫所的军士，按月拨盐都给予钞，各盐场给予工本钞。
English: The sergeant-at-arms at the out-of-town sanatorium is given a monthly allowance of salt, and each salt farm is given a lump sum of money.

古文：十八年，天下有司官禄米皆给钞，二贯五百文准米一石。
现代文：十八年，天下主管官吏的俸禄米都给予钞，二贯五百文等同米一石。
English: In the 18th year, the salary rice of the world's competent officials were all given banknotes, with two hundred and five hundred mon equal to one stone of rice.

古文：二十二年诏更定钱式：生铜一斤，铸小钱百六十，折二钱半之， 当三 至 当十 ，准是为差。
现代文：二十二年，下诏改定钱的样式：生铜一斤，铸小钱一百六十，折合二钱半， 当三 至 当十 ，以此为准的有差等。
English: In 1922, the following edict changed the standard of money: raw copper one catty, minted small money one hundred and sixty, equivalent to two and a half coins, when three to when ten, and so on.

古文：更造小钞，自十文至五十文。
现代文：又造小钞，从十文到五十文。
English: They also made small bills, ranging from 10 to 50 mon.

古文：二十四年谕榷税官吏，凡钞有字贯可辩者，不问烂损，即收受解京，抑勒与伪充者罪之。
现代文：二十四年，训谕征税官吏，凡是钞有字贯可以分辨的，不管破烂缺损，便收受解送到京城，压制和伪造冒充的处以罪罚。
English: In 1924, tax officials were instructed to collect and deliver to the capital all banknotes that could be distinguished by their characters, regardless of whether they were tattered or damaged, and to suppress and punish counterfeiting.

古文：二十五年设宝钞行用库於东市，凡三库，各给钞三万锭为钞本，倒收旧钞送内府。
现代文：二十五年，在束市设立宝钞行用库，一共三库，各自提供钞三万锭作为钞本，倒收旧钞送入内府。
English: Twenty-five years ago, a banknote bank was established in Sokcho, with a total of three banks, each of which provided banknotes of 30,000 baht as banknotes, and collected old banknotes and sent them to the capital.

古文：令大明宝钞与历代钱兼行，钞一贯准钱千文，提举司於三月内印造，十月内止，所造钞送内府充赏赉。
现代文：命令大明宾钞与历代钱一并流通，钞一贯等同钱一千文，提举司在三个月内印造，十个月内停止，所造之钞送交内府充作赏赐。
English: It was ordered that the daimingbin banknote should circulate together with the money of previous generations. The banknote was always equal to 1,000 mon. The printing department should print it within three months and stop it within ten months. The banknote should be sent to the government as a reward.

古文：明年罢行用库，又罢宝泉局。
现代文：第二年罢除行用库，又罢除宝泉局。
English: The following year, the treasury was abolished, and the treasury bureau was also abolished.

古文：时两浙、江西、闽、广民重钱轻钞，有以钱百六十文折钞一贯者，由是物价翔贵，而钞法益坏不行。
现代文：当时两浙、江西、闽、广人民重视钱轻视钞，有以钱一百六十文折合钞一贯的，因此物价上涨，而钞法更败坏不流通。
English: At that time, the people of Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Shandong and Guangxi attached great importance to money and despised banknotes. There was a consistent practice of using money equivalent to one hundred and sixty coins. As a result, prices rose, and the banknote law was even more corrupt and did not circulate.

古文：三十年乃更申交易用金银之禁。
现代文：三十年，便重申交易用金银的禁令。
English: Thirty years later, it reaffirmed the ban on the use of gold and silver in transactions.

古文：成祖初，犯者以奸恶论，惟置造首饰器皿，不在禁例。
现代文：成祖初年，违犯的人按奸恶论处，只有置办制造首饰器皿，不在禁止之例。
English: In the first year of Chengzu, violators were punished according to the principle of treason, and only the purchase and manufacture of jewelry utensils and dishes were not prohibited.

古文：永乐二年诏犯者免死，徙家戍兴州。
现代文：永乐二年，下韶违犯者免死罪，迁徙全家戍役于兴州。
English: In the second year of Yongle, the offenders were exempted from the death penalty, and the whole family moved to Xingzhou.

古文：陕西都司佥事张豫，坐抵易官钞论戍。
现代文：陕西都司食事张豫，因抵制交换官钞获罪判处戍役。
English: Zhang Yu, the governor of Shaanxi Province, was sentenced to forced labor for resisting the exchange of official banknotes.

古文：江夏民父死，以银营葬具，当戍边。
现代文：江夏平民父亲死，用银营置丧葬器具，判处戍守边防。
English: The father of a Jiangxia civilian died, used silver to build funeral equipment, and was sentenced to guard the border.

古文：帝以其迫於治葬，非玩法，特矜宥之。
现代文：皇帝认为他迫于办理丧事，不是玩忽法令，特意同情宽宥他。
English: The emperor thought that he was forced to handle the funeral, not a negligent act, and specially sympathized and pardoned him.

古文：都御史陈瑛言： 比岁钞法不通，皆缘朝廷出钞太多，收敛无法，以致物重钞轻。
现代文：都御史陈瑛说： 近年来钞法不流通，都因为朝廷发出的钞太多，收敛没有好办法，以致重实物轻宝钞。
English: Metropolitan Historian Chen Ying said: In recent years, the banknote law has not been circulated, all because there are too many banknotes issued by the imperial court, and there is no good way to converge, resulting in heavy physical light treasure banknotes.

古文：莫若暂行户口食盐法。
现代文：不如暂时实行户口食盐法。
English: It is better to temporarily implement the household salt law.

古文：天下人民不下千万户，官军不下二百万家，诚令计口纳钞食盐，可收五千馀万锭。 
现代文：天下的人民不下千万户，官军不下二百万家，果真命令计算人口交纳钞换盐食用，可以收入五千余万锭。 
English: There are no less than ten million households in the world, and no less than two million households in the government army. If the order to calculate the population to pay banknotes for salt consumption is true, it can earn more than fifty million baht.

古文：帝令户部会群臣议。
现代文：皇帝命令户部会合群臣商议。
English: The emperor ordered a meeting of households to discuss the issue.

古文：大口月食盐一斤，纳钞一贯，小口半之。
现代文：大口每月食用盐一斤，交纳钞一贯，小口减半。
English: A large mouthful of salt a kilo a month, pay bills consistently, small mouthful halved.

古文：从其议。
现代文：皇帝听从其议。
English: The emperor followed his advice.

古文：设北京宝钞提举司，税粮课程赃罚俱折收钞，其直视洪武初减十之九。
现代文：设置北京宝钞提举司，征收粮税、按税率征收的赋税、贪脏处罚一律折合收钞，其价值比照洪武初期减少十分之九。
English: Set up the Beijing Treasure Banknote Withdrawal Office, the collection of grain tax, tax levied according to the tax rate, and corruption punishment are all equivalent to the collection of banknotes, and their value is reduced by nine-tenths compared to the early Hongwu period.

古文：后又令盐官纳旧钞支盐，发南京抽分场积薪、龙江提举司竹木鬻之军民，收其钞。
现代文：后来又命令盐官交纳旧钞支取盐，调发南京抽分场积薪、龙江提举司的竹木卖给军民，收取宝钞。
English: Later, he also ordered the salt officials to pay the old banknotes to withdraw salt, transfer the accumulated salary from the Nanjing extraction field, and sell the bamboo from Longjiang to the military and civilians, and collect the treasure banknotes.

古文：应天岁办芦柴，徵钞十之八。
现代文：应天每年备办芦柴，征收钞分之八。
English: Prepare reed every year according to the weather, and collect eight-tenths of the money.

古文：帝初即位，户部尚书夏原吉请更钞板篆文为 永乐 。
现代文：皇帝初即位，户部尚书夏原吉请求更换钞版篆文为 永乐 。
English: At the beginning of the emperor's enthronement, the head of the household, Shangshu Xia Yuanji, requested that the banknote inscription be changed to "Yongle."

古文：帝命仍其旧。
现代文：皇帝命令仍然保持旧有字样。
English: The emperor's order still retains the old wording.

古文：自后终明世皆用洪武年号云。
现代文：从此之后，至明朝终结，宝钞都用洪武的年号。
English: From then on, until the end of the Ming Dynasty, the years of Hongwu were used on the banknotes.

古文：仁宗监国，令犯笞杖者输钞。
现代文：仁宗监管国事，命令犯罚鞭笞杖击罪的交纳钞。
English: Renzong oversaw state affairs and ordered the payment of fines for those who committed crimes punishable by whipping and caning.

古文：及即位，以钞不行询原吉。
现代文：到即位以后，以钞不流通的原因询问夏原吉。
English: After ascending to the throne, he asked Natsuhara no Kichi why banknotes were no longer in circulation.

古文：原吉言： 钞多则轻，少则重。
现代文：夏原吉说： 钞发放多便轻贱，发放少就贵重。
English: Natsuhara Yoshimi said: Issuing more banknotes is easy and cheap, issuing fewer is expensive.

古文：民间钞不行，缘散多敛少，宜为法敛之。
现代文：民间宝钞不流通，是因为散发多收回少，应该设法收回钞。
English: Folk treasure banknotes do not circulate because they are more likely to be distributed and less likely to be recovered. Efforts should be made to recover the banknotes.

古文：请市肆门摊诸税，度量轻重，加其课程。
现代文：请求集市门摊等税，测量轻重，增加按税率应征收的赋税。
English: Request the tax of the market stall and so on, measure the weight, and increase the tax to be levied according to the tax rate.

古文：钞入官，官取昏软者悉毁之。
现代文：钞收入官府，官府取模糊柔软的全部烧毁。
English: Banknotes received by the government, the government takes the fuzzy soft ring and burns it all.

古文：自今官钞宜少出，民间得钞难，则自然重矣。 
现代文：从今以后官钞应当少发出，民间获官钞困难，那么自然会贵重起来。 
English: From now on, official banknotes should be issued less, and it will be difficult for the public to obtain official banknotes, so they will naturally become more valuable.

古文：乃下令曰： 所增门摊课程，钞法通，即复旧，金银布帛交易者，亦暂禁止。 
现代文：于是下令说： 所增加的门摊赋税，钞法流通，便恢复旧数，用金银布帛交易的，也暂时禁止。 
English: He then issued an order saying: The increased door stall tax, the circulation of banknotes, will restore the old number, and trading in gold and silver cloth, is also temporarily prohibited.

古文：然是时，民卒轻钞。
现代文：然而这时，人民终究轻视官钞。
English: However, at this time, the people finally despised the official banknotes.

古文：至宣德初，米一石用钞五十贯，乃驰布帛米麦交易之禁。
现代文：到宣德初年，米一石用钞五十贯，便放松布帛米麦进行交易的禁令。
English: By the first year of Xuande, the ban on the trading of buckwheat and buckwheat was relaxed when one stone of rice was worth 50 yuan in banknotes.

古文：凡以金银交易及匿货增直者罚钞，府县卫所仓粮积至十年以上者，盐粮悉收钞，秋粮亦折钞三分，门摊课钞增五倍，塌房、店舍月纳钞五百贯，果园、驘车并令纳钞。
现代文：凡是用金银交易和藏匿货物增值的处罚官钞，府县卫所仓中的粮食存积达十年以上的，盐、粮全部收钞，秋粮也折合收钞三分，门摊赋税纳钞增加五倍，塌房、店舍每月交纳钞五百贯，果园、骡车一并命令交纳官钞。
English: For all official banknotes that are used to punish gold and silver transactions and hidden value-added goods, grain stored for more than ten years in the warehouse of the prefectural health center, salt and grain are all collected, autumn grain is also equivalent to collecting three cents of banknotes, door stall tax payment increased fivefold, collapsed houses and shops pay 500 yuan of banknotes per month, and orchards and cars are also ordered to pay banknotes.

古文：户部言民间交易，惟用金银，钞滞不行。
现代文：户部上奏说，民间交易，只用金银，官钞滞留不流通。
English: According to the report of the Household Department, only gold and silver are used for private transactions, and official banknotes are not circulated.

古文：乃益严其禁，交易用银一钱者，罚钞千贯，赃吏受银一两者，追钞万贯，更追免罪钞如之。
现代文：于是更严格禁止，交易用银一钱的，罚钞一千贯，贪赃官吏收受银一两的，追缴钞一万贯，更追收免罪钞如同这样。
English: As a result, the ban was made stricter, and those who traded with a silver coin were fined 1,000 kroner, while corrupt officials who received a silver coin or two were required to pay 10,000 kroner in fines, and even more fines.

古文：英宗即位，收赋有米麦折银之令，遂减诸纳钞者，而以米银钱当钞，驰用银之禁。
现代文：英宗即位，收缴赋税有米麦折合成银的命令，便减少各纳钞者，而用米、银、钱当钞，放松用银进行交易的禁令。
English: When Emperor Yingzong ascended the throne, he issued an order that taxes should be collected with rice and barley converted into silver, which reduced the number of bill collectors, and rice, silver, and money were used as banknotes, relaxing the ban on trading with silver.

古文：朝野率皆用银，其小者乃用钱，惟折官俸用钞，钞壅不行。
现代文：朝廷和民间大致都用银交易，数额小的便用钱，只有折合官员俸禄用钞，钞壅塞不流通。
English: Both the imperial court and the people generally used silver for transactions, and money was used for small amounts. Only banknotes equivalent to officials' salaries were used, and banknotes were not circulated.

古文：十三年复申禁令，阻钞者追一万贯，全家戍边。
现代文：十三年，又申明禁令，阻止用钞的追罚一万贯，全家戍守边地。
English: In the thirteenth year, it also affirmed the ban to prevent the use of banknotes with a fine of ten thousand yuan, and the whole family guarded the border.

古文：天顺中，始驰其禁。
现代文：天顺年间，纔放松禁令。
English: During the years of good weather, the ban was relaxed.

古文：宪宗令内外课程钱钞兼收，官俸军饷亦兼支钱钞。
现代文：宪宗命令内外按税率征收赋税钱钞兼收，官员俸禄、军队粮饷也兼支付钱钞。
English: Kenzong ordered to collect tax money and banknotes both at home and abroad according to the tax rate, and officials' salaries and army rations were also paid with money and banknotes.

古文：是时钞一贯不能直钱一文，而计钞徵之民，则每贯徵银二分五厘，民以大困。
现代文：这时钞一贯不能值钱一文，而计算钞征收于民，则每贯征收银二分五厘，人民因此非常困窘。
English: At this time, banknotes could not always be worth a penny, and the calculation of banknotes levied on the people was two-and-a-half percent of silver, so the people were very embarrassed.

古文：弘治元年，京城税课司，顺天、山东、河南户口食盐，俱收钞，各钞关俱钱钞兼收。
现代文：弘治元年，京城税课司，顺天、山东、河南户口食用盐，都使用钞，各钞关都钱钞兼收。
English: In the first year of Hongzhi, the Beijing Tax Division, Shuntian, Shandong, and Henan Hukou Edible Salt all used banknotes, and all banknote gates accepted both banknotes and money.

古文：其后乃皆改折用银。
现代文：此后便都改为折合收银。
English: Since then, they have all been converted into cash registers.

古文：而洪武、永乐、宣德钱积不用，诏发之，令与历代钱兼用。
现代文：而洪武、永乐、宣德钱积储不使用，下韶调发，命令与历伐的钱兼用。
English: However, Hongwu, Yongle, and Xuande do not use the accumulated money, but transfer the money from the lower bowl to the upper bowl, and use both the order and the money from the calendar.

古文：户部请鼓铸，乃复开局铸钱。
现代文：户部请求铸造，于是恢复开局铸造钱。
English: The head of the household requested the casting, so the initial casting of money was resumed.

古文：凡纳赎收税，历代钱、制钱各收其半；无制钱即收旧钱，二以当一。
现代文：凡是交纳赎罪钱征收赋税，历代钱、制钱各收一半；没有制钱便收旧钱，以二当一。
English: Whenever the atonement money is paid, the tax is levied, and the money of past generations and the money-making money are each charged half; if there is no money-making money, the old money is charged, with two as one.

古文：制钱者，国朝钱也。
现代文：制钱，就是本朝钱。
English: Making money is what this morning money is all about.

古文：旧制，工部所铸钱入太仓、司钥二库；诸关税钱亦入司钥库。
现代文：旧有制度，工部铸造的钱纳入太仓、司钥二库；各关税钱也纳入司钥库。
English: Under the previous system, the money minted by the Ministry of Industry and Trade was included in the Taicang and the Secretary's Key Second Library; the tariff money was also included in the Secretary's Key Library.

古文：共贮钱数千百万，中官掌之，京卫军秋粮取给焉，每七百当银一两。
现代文：共贮藏钱数千百万，由中官职掌，京卫军秋粮取出供给，每七百当银一两。
English: A total of tens of millions of money was stored and supplied by the middle-ranking officials and the autumn rations of the Beijing Guard, with a silver coin or two for every seven hundred.

古文：武宗之初，部臣请察核侵蚀；又以钱当俸粮者，仅及银数三之一，请於承运库给银。
现代文：武宗初年，部臣请求查核侵吞；又以钱当俸禄粮的，仅达到银数的三分之一，请求在承运库供给银。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wuzong's reign, his ministers requested that the embezzlement be investigated; and those who used money as salary and grain, only reached one-third of the amount of silver, and requested that silver be supplied at the shipping warehouse.

古文：时中官方用事，皆不听。
现代文：当时宦官正专权，都不听从。
English: At that time, eunuchs had absolute power, and no one obeyed them.

古文：已而司钥库太监庞〈木栗〉言： 自弘治间榷关折银入承运库，钱钞缺乏，支放不给，请遵成化旧制，钱钞兼收。 
现代文：随后司钥库太监庞躁说： 自从弘治年间征收关税折合银纳入承运库，钱钞缺乏，支出不足，请求遵照成化年间的旧有制度，钱钞兼收。 
English: Then, the eunuch Pang Mani, the keystore keeper, said: Since the collection of tariffs equivalent to silver into the carrier warehouse in the Hongzhi era, there has been a shortage of banknotes, insufficient expenditure, request to comply with the old system in the Chenghua era, both money and banknotes are collected.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：正德三年，以太仓积钱给官俸，十分为率，钱一银九。
现代文：正德三年，以太仓积储的钱供给官员俸禄，以十分作为标准，钱一分银九分。
English: In the three years of Zhengde, the money accumulated in the ether warehouse provided officials with salaries, with ten as the standard, and the money was one point silver and nine points.

古文：又从太监张永言，发天财库及户部布政司库钱，关给徵收，每七十文徵银一钱，且申私铸之禁。
现代文：又听从太监张永的建议，调发天财库和户部布政司库钱，发放或征收，每七十文征银一钱，并且申明私自铸钱的禁令。
English: He also followed the advice of Zhang Yong, the eunuch, to transfer and issue money from the Treasury of Heaven and the Treasury of the Household Department, to issue or collect one silver coin for every seventy coins, and to affirm the prohibition of privately minted money.

古文：嘉靖四年，令宣课分司收税，钞一贯折银三厘，钱七文折银一分。
现代文：嘉靖四年，命令宣课分司收税，钞一贯折合银三厘，钱七文折合银一分。
English: In the fourth year of Jiajing, he ordered the branch office of the proclamation to collect taxes. Banknotes were always equivalent to silver three per cent, and money seven coins were equivalent to silver one cent.

古文：是时钞久不行，钱亦大壅，益专用银矣。
现代文：这时钞长久不流通，钱也很壅塞，更加专用银了。
English: At this time, banknotes did not circulate for a long time, money was also very tight, and silver became more exclusive.

古文：明初铸洪武钱。
现代文：明代初年铸造洪武钱。
English: Hongwu coins were minted in the first year of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：成祖九年铸永乐钱。
现代文：成祖九年铸造永乐钱。
English: Cheng Zu has been minting Yongle money for nine years.

古文：宣德九年铸宣德钱。
现代文：宣德九年铸造宣德钱。
English: Xuande has been minting Xuande money for nine years.

古文：弘治十六年以后，铸弘治钱。
现代文：弘治十六年以后，铸造弘治钱。
English: After the 16th year of Konnichiwa, Konnichiwa coins were minted.

古文：至世宗嘉靖六年，大铸嘉靖钱。
现代文：到世宗嘉靖六年，大规模铸造嘉靖钱。
English: Six years after the founding of Sejong Jiajing, large-scale casting of Jiajing money began.

古文：每文重一钱三分，且补铸累朝未铸者。
现代文：每文重一钱三分，并且补铸以前数朝没有铸造的钱。
English: Each coin weighed one and a third of a penny, and the minting of money that had not been minted in the previous few days increased.

古文：三十二年铸洪武至正德九号钱，每号百万锭，嘉靖钱千万锭，一锭五千文。
现代文：三十二年，铸造洪武至正德九号钱，每号一百万锭，嘉靖钱一千万锭，一锭五千文。
English: In the 32nd year, the Hongwu-Zhengde Nine-Number Money was minted, with one million baht per number, and the Jiajing Money was minted with ten million baht, and one baht was worth five thousand mon.

古文：而税课抽分诸厂，专收嘉靖钱。
现代文：而税课抽出分到各厂，专门收纳嘉靖钱。
English: The tax department, however, distributed the money to each factory for special collection of Jiajing money.

古文：民患钱少，乃发内库新旧钱八千一百万文折给俸粮。
现代文：人民苦于钱少，于是调发内库新旧钱八千一百万文折合供给俸禄粮。
English: The people were suffering from a shortage of money, so 81 million old and new money was transferred from the treasury to supply salary grain.

古文：又令通行历代钱，有销新旧钱及以铜造像制器者，罪比盗铸。
现代文：又命令通行历代钱，有销熔新旧钱以及以铜造像制造器物的，罪罚与盗铸钱相当。
English: He also ordered the circulation of money from past generations, the sale and melting of old and new money, and the manufacture of utensils with bronze statues. The punishment is equivalent to the theft of money.

古文：先是，民间行滥恶钱，率以三四十钱当银一分。
现代文：在此之前，民间流通粗劣滥制的钱，大多以三四十钱当银一分。
English: Prior to this, most of the money circulated by the people was of poor quality, with thirty or forty coins being worth one silver cent.

古文：后益杂铅锡，薄劣无形制，至以六七十文当银一分。
现代文：后来更杂以铅锡，薄而粗劣没有形制，以至于以六七十文当银一分。
English: Later, it was mixed with lead and tin, which was thin and coarse and had no shape, so that one point was worth sixty or seventy mon.

古文：翦楮夹其中，不可辨。
现代文：剪楮夹在钱中，不可分辨。
English: A pair of scissors stuck in money, indistinguishable.

古文：用给事中李用敬言，以制钱与前代杂钱相兼行，上品者俱七文当银一分，馀视钱高下为三等，下者二十一文当银一分；私造滥恶钱悉禁不行，犯者置之法。
现代文：用给事中李用敬的意见，以本朝钱与前代杂钱一并流通，上品的都是七文当银一分，其余的比照钱的高低分成三等，下等的二十一文当银一分；私自铸造的粗滥低劣钱全部禁止不流通，违犯的置之以法。
English: In accordance with the opinion of Li Ying Kei, the present-day money and the miscellaneous money of the previous generation are circulated together, and the superior money is divided into seven coins and one silver cent, and the rest are divided into three grades according to the level of the money, and the inferior 21 coins and one silver cent; all the crude and inferior money minted by myself is prohibited from circulation, and the violators will be brought to justice.

古文：小钱行久，骤革之，民颇不便。
现代文：小钱通行时间久，突然革除，人民多不方便。
English: Small money has been in circulation for a long time, and it is suddenly removed, which is inconvenient for many people.

古文：又出内库钱给文武官俸，不论新旧美恶，悉以七文折算。
现代文：又调出内库钱供给文武官员幸禄，不论新钱旧钱好钱壤钱，全部以七文折算。
English: In addition, money from the treasury was transferred to provide civil and military officials with lucky money. Regardless of whether it was new money, old money, good money or bad money, it was all converted into seven coins.

古文：诸以俸钱市易者，亦悉以七文抑勒予民，民亦骚然。
现代文：众官以俸禄钱买卖的，也全部以七文强压给予人民，人民也骚动。
English: The officials bought and sold with salary money, but all of it was given to the people by force, and the people were in an uproar.

古文：属连岁大侵，四方流民就食京师，死者相枕藉。
现代文：适逢连年大饥荒，四方流亡的人民到京城求食物，死去的人遍地都是。
English: This coincided with years of great famine. People from all over the country came to the capital to beg for food. People were dying everywhere.

古文：论者谓钱法不通使然。
现代文：议论的人认为是钱法不流通使得这样。
English: Commentators believe that this is due to the fact that money does not circulate.

古文：於是御史何廷钰条奏，请许民用小钱，以六十文当银一分。
现代文：于是御史何廷钮分条上奏，请求允许人民使用小钱，以六十文当银一分。
English: Therefore, Emperor He Tingnü issued a proclamation, requesting that the people be allowed to use small money, with sixty mon being equal to one silver cent.

古文：户部执不从。
现代文：户部坚持不同意。
English: The head of the household emphatically disagreed.

古文：廷钰讦奏尚书方钝及郎中刘尔牧。
现代文：何廷钮上奏揭发尚书方钝和郎中刘尔牧。
English: He Ting Niu's report exposed Shang Shufang's accomplice and henchman Liu Ermu.

古文：帝怒，斥尔牧，采廷钰议，命从民便。
现代文：皇帝发怒，斥责刘尔牧，采纳何廷钮的提议，命令听凭人民的方便。
English: Enraged, the emperor rebuked Liu Ermu, accepted He Tingnubu's proposal, and ordered that the matter be left to the convenience of the people.

古文：且定嘉靖钱七文，洪武诸钱十文，前代钱三十文，当银一分。
现代文：并且制定嘉靖钱七文，洪武等钱十文，前代钱三十文，当银一分。
English: Moreover, Jiajing money was set at seven coins, Hongwu and other money at ten coins, the previous money at thirty coins, and one silver coin.

古文：然诸滥恶小钱，以初禁之严，虽奉旨间行，竟不复用，而民间竞私铸嘉靖通宝钱，与官钱并行焉。
现代文：然而各粗滥劣质小钱，因初禁严厉，虽奉旨间杂流通，终究不复使用，而民间竞相私下铸造嘉靖通宝钱，与官钱一并流通。
English: However, due to the strictness of the initial ban, all coarse and inferior small money, although circulated according to the instructions of the government, eventually ceased to be used, and the people competed to privately mint Jiajing Tong treasure money, which circulated together with government money.

古文：给事中殷正茂言： 两京铜价大高，铸钱得不偿费。
现代文：给事中殷正茂上奏说： 两京铜价太高，铸造钱得不偿失。
English: In his report, Yin Zhengmao said: The price of copper in Beijing and Nanking is too high, and it is not worth the trouble to mint money.

古文：宜采云南铜，运至岳州鼓铸，费工本银三十九万，可得钱六万五千万文，直银九十三万馀两，足以少佐国家之急。 
现代文：应开采云南铜，运到岳州提炼铸钱，费工本银三十九万，可以得到钱六万五千万文，值银九十三万余两，足以稍微佐助国家的急用。 
English: Yunnan copper should be mined and transported to Yuezhou to refine and mint money. The cost of the work is 390,000 silver, and 650 million coins can be obtained, with a value of more than 930,000 silver, which is enough to slightly help the country's urgent needs.

古文：户部覆言： 云南地僻事简，即山鼓铸为便。 
现代文：户部答复说： 云南地方偏僻办事简便，就在铜山炼铜铸钱方便。 
English: The household department replied: It is easy to do business in remote areas of Yunnan, and it is convenient to make copper and cast money in Tongshan.

古文：乃敕巡抚以盐课银二万两为工本。
现代文：于是下救命令巡抚用盐税银二万两为工本。
English: As a result, the bailiff ordered the salvage operation to be funded with 20,000 taels of salt and silver.

古文：未几，巡抚王昺言费多入少，乞罢铸。
现代文：不久，巡抚王禺上奏说费多收入少，请求罢除铸钱。
English: Not long after, the governor, Wang Xuan, reported to the emperor that Feidoo's income was too low, and requested that the minting of money be abolished.

古文：帝以小费不当惜，仍命行之。
现代文：皇帝认为小费不应顾惜，仍然命令施行。
English: The emperor thought that gratuity should not be spared, and still issued the order.

古文：越数年，巡按王诤复言宜罢铸。
现代文：过了几年，巡按王诤又上奏说应该罢除铸钱。
English: A few years later, the inspector-general Wang Xi again made a report saying that minted money should be abolished.

古文：部议： 钱法壅滞者，由宣课司收税以七文当一分。
现代文：户部商议： 钱法壅塞阻滞的原因，是由于宣课司收税以七文当一分。
English: Household department deliberation: The reason for the delay in the money method is due to the fact that the school announcement department collects taxes with seven coins as one point.

古文：奸民乘机阻挠，钱多则恶滥相欺，钱少则增直罔利，故禁愈繁而钱愈滞。
现代文：奸猾之民乘机阻挠，钱多便低劣粗滥相欺骗，钱少便增加价值欺罔得利，所以禁令越繁而钱越滞留。
English: Treacherous people take advantage of the opportunity to obstruct, more money can be used to cheat the inferior and coarse, less money can increase the value and cheat the profit, so the more prohibitions, the more money will stay.

古文：自今准折听民便，不必定文数，而课税及官俸且俱用银。 
现代文：从今以后折钱标准听凭人民的方便，不必确定文数，而征收赋税和官员俸禄将全部用银。 
English: From now on, the money-changing standard will be subject to the convenience of the people, there is no need to determine the number of coins, and the collection of taxes and officials' salaries will all be made of silver.

古文：乃罢云南铸钱，而从户部议。
现代文：于是罢除云南铸钱，而听从户部的议论。
English: As a result, Yunnan minted money was abolished, and the discussion of the Household Department was followed.

古文：时所铸钱有金背，有火漆，有镟边。
现代文：当时所铸的钱有金背，有火漆，有镞边。
English: The money minted at that time had a gold backing, fire-painted edges, and ruffles.

古文：议者以铸钱艰难，工匠劳费，革镟车用鑢铴。
现代文：议论的人以铸钱艰难，工匠辛劳费时，革除镞车，使用镳钖。
English: People talk about the difficulty of minting money, the time it takes for craftsmen to work hard, the removal of the wheel, and the use of the plough.

古文：於是铸工竞杂铅锡便坐刂治，而轮郭粗粝，色泽黯黪。
现代文：于是铸工竞相杂以铅锡便锉治，而轮廓粗糙，色泽暗淡。
English: As a result, the foundrymen compete in mixing lead and tin, and the outline is rough and the color is dull.

古文：奸伪仿效，盗铸日滋，金背钱反阻不行。
现代文：奸猾诈伪仿效，盗铸钱一天天滋生，金背钱反而受阻不流通。
English: Treachery, fraud and imitation, the theft of money is growing day by day, but the money behind the money is blocked from circulation.

古文：死罪日报，终不能止。
现代文：死罪一天天判处，终究币能禁止。
English: The death penalty is being sentenced day by day, and eventually coins will be banned.

古文：帝患之，问大学士徐阶。
现代文：皇帝对此感到忧虑，询问大学士徐阶。
English: The emperor was worried about this and asked the university scholar Xu Qi.

古文：阶陈五害，请停宝源局铸钱，应支给钱者悉予银。
现代文：徐阶陈说五样害处，请求停止宝源局铸钱，应该支付钱的人全部给银两。
English: Xu Qian Chen said five kinds of harm, requested to stop the treasure source bureau from minting money, and the people who should pay the money should all give silver coins.

古文：帝乃鞫治工匠侵料减工罪，而停鼓铸。
现代文：皇帝便追究工匠侵吞原料减少工序的罪过，而停止铸钱。
English: The emperor prosecuted the artisans for the crime of embezzling raw materials and reducing the process, and stopped minting money.

古文：自后税课徵银而不徵钱。
现代文：从此之后征收赋税征银而不征钱。
English: From then on, taxes were levied on silver and not on money.

古文：且民间止用制钱，不用古钱，而私铸者多。
现代文：并且民间只用本朝钱，不用古钱，而私自铸钱的人多。
English: Moreover, people only use this morning money, not old money, and there are many people who mint money themselves.

古文：隆庆初，钱法不行，兵部侍郎谭纶言： 欲富民，必重布帛菽粟而贱银，欲贱银，必制钱法以济银之不足。
现代文：隆庆初年，钱法不流通，兵部侍郎谭纶上奏说： 要想使人民富裕，必须以布帛粮食为贵重而以银为轻贱；要想以银为贱，必须制定钱法以补救银的不足。
English: In the first year of the Longqing, the money law did not circulate, and Tan Xuanjun, the secretary of the military department, said: In order to make the people rich, we must regard cloth grain as precious and silver as cheap; in order to regard silver as cheap, we must formulate a money law to remedy the shortage of silver.

古文：今钱惟布於天下，而不以输於上，故其权在市井。
现代文：现在钱只是散布于天下，而不以输纳入官，所以权力在民间。
English: Now money is just spread around the world, rather than being transferred to officials, so power is in the hands of the people.

古文：请令民得以钱输官，则钱法自通。 
现代文：请求让人民能够以钱输纳入官，那么钱法自然流通。 
English: The request is to allow people to transfer money to officials, then the money will naturally circulate.

古文：於是课税银三两以下复收钱，民间交易一钱以下止许用钱。
现代文：于是征收税银三雨以下恢复收钱，民间交易一钱以下只许用钱。
English: As a result, the collection of taxes and fees will resume after three rainfalls, and private transactions will only be allowed to use money after one money.

古文：时钱八文折银一分，禁民毋得任意低昂。
现代文：当时钱八文折合银一分，禁止人民不能任意压低或抬高。
English: At that time, eight mon was equal to one silver cent, and it was forbidden for the people to arbitrarily lower or raise it.

古文：直隶巡按杨家相请铸大明通宝钱，不识年号。
现代文：直隶巡按杨家相请求铸造大明通宝钱，不记年号。
English: According to the request of Yang Jiaxiang, Zhili patrol minted Daming Tong treasure money, without year number.

古文：部议格不行。
现代文：户部议论拒不施行。
English: The Ministry of the Interior refused to implement it.

古文：高拱再相，言： 钱法朝议夕更，迄无成说。
现代文：高拱再次为相，说： 钱法早晨议论晚上便更改，迄今没有固定之说。
English: Gao Gong was once again a witness, saying: The monetary law is discussed in the morning and changed in the evening, and there is no fixed saying so far.

古文：小民恐今日得钱，而明日不用，是以愈更愈乱，愈禁愈疑。
现代文：小民恐怕今天得到钱，而明天就不能使用，因此越更换越混乱，越禁止越怀疑。
English: I'm afraid that the common people will get money today, but they can't use it tomorrow, so the more changes, the more confusion, the more prohibitions, and the more suspicion.

古文：请一从民便，勿多为制以乱人耳目。 
现代文：请求全部听从人民的方便，不要多立制度以挠乱人的耳目。 
English: The request is to listen to the convenience of the people, and not to set up more systems to disturb people's ears and eyes.

古文：帝深然之。
现代文：皇帝认为很对。
English: Xuanzong deeply felt justified.

古文：钱法复稍稍通矣。
现代文：钱法又稍稍流通了。
English: Money is circulating a little more.

古文：宝钞不用垂百馀年，课程亦鲜有收钞者，惟俸钱独支钞如故。
现代文：宝钞不使用将近一百多年，收税部门也很少有收宝钞的，只有俸禄钱独如原来支付宝钞。
English: Treasure banknotes have not been used for almost a hundred years, and there are very few treasure banknotes in the tax collection department. Only the salary money is the same as the original payment treasure banknotes.

古文：四年始以新铸隆庆钱给京官俸云。
现代文：四年，纔用新铸造的隆庆钱供给京城官的俸禄。
English: In the fourth year, he used newly minted Longqing money to provide the salary of the capital official.

古文：万历四年命户工二部，准嘉靖钱式铸 万历通宝 金背及火漆钱，一文重一钱二分五厘，又铸镟边钱，一文重一钱三分，颁行天下，俸粮皆银钱兼给。
现代文：万历四年，命令户、工二部，按照嘉靖钱的式样铸造 万历通宝 金背和火漆钱，一文重一钱二分五厘，又铸造镞边钱，一文重一钱三分，颁布通行天下，俸粮和银钱兼着供给。
English: In the fourth year of Wanli, households and the two departments of industry and commerce were ordered to mint Wanli Tongbao gold-backed and fire-painted money according to the pattern of Jiajing money, with a weight of one dollar and two-and-a-half percent, and to mint ruffled money, with a weight of one dollar and three percent, and it was promulgated that it would be circulated all over the world, and both salary grain and silver money would be supplied.

古文：云南巡按郭庭梧言： 国初京师有宝源局，各省有宝泉局，自嘉靖间省局停废，民用告匮。
现代文：云南巡按郭庭梧说： 开国初京城有宝源局，各省有宝泉局。自从嘉靖年间省局停止废弃，人民的用度便匮乏了。
English: Guo Tingwu, inspector of Yunnan Province, said: At the beginning of the founding of the People's Republic of China, there was a treasure source bureau in Beijing and a treasure spring bureau in each province. Since the provincial bureau was abandoned during the Jiajing period, the people's consumption has been scarce.

古文：滇中产铜，不行鼓铸，而反以重价购海〈贝巴〉，非利也。 
现代文：滇中出产铜，不炼铜铸钱，却反而以高价购买海肥，不能获利。 
English: Yunnan produces copper, but does not refine copper to make money. Instead, it buys sea fertilizer at a high price and cannot make a profit.

古文：遂开局铸钱。
现代文：于是开局铸造钱。
English: So the game of minting money began.

古文：寻命十三布政司皆开局。
现代文：不久命令十三布政司都开局。
English: Soon after, he ordered all 13 political secretaries to start the game.

古文：采工部言，以五铢钱为准，用四火黄铜铸金背，二火黄铜铸火漆，粗恶者罪之。
现代文：采纳工部的意见，以五铢钱为标准，用四火黄铜铸造金背，二火黄铜铸造火漆，粗糙低劣的判罪。
English: Adopted the opinion of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, with five yuan as the standard, using four-fire brass casting gold back, two-fire brass casting fire paint, rough and inferior conviction.

古文：盖以费多利少则私铸自息也。
现代文：因为以费多利少则私自铸钱自然止息。
English: Because with less Fedor, my self-made money will naturally cease.

古文：久之，户部言： 钱之轻重不常，轻则敛，重则散，故无壅阏匮乏之患。
现代文：随后，户部上奏说： 钱的轻重没有常规，轻钱便收起来，重钱便散发出去，所以没有壅塞匮乏的祸害。
English: Subsequently, the head of the household said: There is no rule for the weight of money, light money is put away, and heavy money is distributed, so there is no prevarication of the scourge of scarcity.

古文：初铸时，金背十文直银一分，今万历金背五文，嘉靖金背四文，各直银一分，火漆镟边亦如之。
现代文：初铸时，金背十文值银一分，今万历金背五文，嘉靖金背四文，各值银一分，火漆镞边也如那样。
English: At the time of the first minting, the ten-cents gold backing was worth one silver cent. Now, the five-cents gold backing of Wanli and the four-cents gold backing of Jiajing are each worth one silver cent. The fire-painted ruffles are also the same.

古文：仅逾十年，而轻重不啻相半，钱重而物价腾踊，宜发库贮以平其直。 
现代文：仅过十年，而轻重不只一半，钱重丽物价猛涨，应该调发库存来平衡其价值。 
English: After only ten years, and the weight is more than half, the price of money has soared, and the inventory should be transferred to balance its value.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：时王府皆铸造私钱，吏乐敢讦。
现代文：当时王府都铸造私钱，官吏不敢揭发。
English: At that time, the royal court minted private money, and officials did not dare to expose it.

古文：古钱阻滞不行，国用不足，乃命南北宝源局拓地增炉鼓铸。
现代文：古钱阻塞滞留不流通，国家财用不足，便命令南北宝源局开拓矿地增加熔炉炼铜铸钱。
English: The old money was blocked and remained out of circulation, and the state was short of funds, so it ordered the South and North Treasure Resources Bureau to open up mines and increase the number of furnaces for smelting copper and casting money.

古文：而北钱视南钱昂值三之一，南铸大抵轻薄。
现代文：而北方的钱比南方的钱价值昂贵三分之一，南方铸的钱大都轻而薄。
English: While the money of the North is up to one-third more valuable than that of the South, the money minted in the South is mostly light and thin.

古文：然各循其旧，并行不废。
现代文：然而各自因循旧制，一起流通而不废。
English: However, each of them follows the old system, circulates together and does not waste.

古文：天启元年铸泰昌钱。
现代文：天启元年铸造泰昌钱。
English: Taichang money was minted in the first year of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：兵部尚书王象乾，请铸当十、当百、当千三等大钱，用龙文，略仿白金三品之制，於是两京皆铸大钱。
现代文：兵部尚书王象干，奏请铸造以一当十、以一当百、以一当干的三等面值大的钱，装饰龙纹，大约照白金三品的规定，于是两京都铸大钱。
English: According to the regulations of the Three Articles of Platinum, the Minister of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Shang Shouwang, requested the minting of three large denomination coins with face values of one-tenth, one-hundredth, and one-hundredth, decorated with dragon patterns. Therefore, two large coins were minted in Kyoto.

古文：后有言大钱之弊者，诏两京停铸大钱，收大钱发局改铸。
现代文：后来有人议论大钱的弊端，皇帝下诏两京停止铸造大钱，收聚大钱调拨给局改铸。
English: Later, some people talked about the drawbacks of big money, and the emperor issued an edict to stop the minting of big money in the two capitals, collect big money and transfer it to the bureau for recasting.

古文：当是时，开局遍天下，重课钱息。
现代文：当时，开局铸钱遍天下，便重征铸钱利息。
English: At that time, the beginning of minted money all over the world, they re-collected the interest on minted money.

古文：崇祯元年，南京铸本七万九千馀两，获息银三万九千有奇；户部铸钱获息银二万六千有奇。
现代文：崇祯元年，南京铸钱成本七万九千多两，获得利润银三万九千两有余；户部铸钱获得利润银二万六千两有余。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, the cost of minting money in Nanjing was more than 79,000 taels, and the profit was more than 39,000 taels; the profit of minting money in Hubei was more than 26,000 taels.

古文：其所铸钱，皆以五十五文当银一钱，计息取盈，工匠之赔补，行使之折阅，不堪命矣。
现代文：其所铸的钱，都以五十五文当银一钱，计息取盈利，工匠的赔补，行使的折价，人民不能忍受。
English: The people cannot bear the fact that the money minted by the mint is made of 55-cents-per-dollar silver, with interest taken as profit, the craftsmen compensated, and a discount applied.

古文：宝泉局铜本四十万两，旧例钱成还本太仓，次年再借，至是令永作铸本。
现代文：宝泉局铜的成本四十万两，旧有条例钱铸成后还成本给太仓，第二年再借，到这时命令永远作为铸钱的成本。
English: The cost of the copper of the Hoquan Bureau was 400,000 taels. According to the old regulation, after the money was minted, the cost was returned to Taicang, and it was re-borrowed the next year. At this time, the order was always used as the cost of minting money.

古文：三年，御史铙京言： 铸钱开局，本通行天下，今乃苦於无息，旋开旋罢，自南北两局外，仅存湖广、陕西、四川、云南及宣、密二镇。
现代文：三年，御史饶京上奏说： 铸钱开局，本为通行天下，现在却苦于役有利润，旋即开局旋即关闭，除南北两局外，祗存湖广、陕西、四川、云南以及宣、密二镇。
English: In the third year, the imperial historian Rao said in a speech in Beijing: The game of minting money was originally popular all over the world, but now it is struggling to make a profit. The game starts and ends at the same time. In addition to the two games in the north and south, there are also games in Hukang, Shaanxi, Sichuan, Yunnan, and the two towns of Xuan and Mi.

古文：而所铸之息，不尽归朝廷，复苦无铸本，盖以买铜而非采铜也。
现代文：而铸钱所得利润，不全归朝廷。又苦于没有铸钱成本，是因为购买铜而不是开采铜。
English: However, the profits from the minting of money did not all go to the imperial court. Moreover, the fact that there was no cost of minting money was due to the purchase of copper rather than the mining of copper.

古文：乞遵洪武初及永乐九年、嘉靖六年例，遣官各省铸钱，采铜於产铜之地，置官吏驻兵，仿银矿法，十取其三。
现代文：请求遵照洪武初年和永乐九年、嘉靖六年的制度，派遣官吏到各省铸钱，在产铜的地方开采铜，设置官吏驻扎军队，仿照银矿的办法，收取十分之三。
English: The request is to follow the system of the first year of Hongwu, the ninth year of Yongle, and the sixth year of Jiajing, sending officials to mint money in various provinces, mining copper in copper-producing areas, setting up officials to station troops, and collecting three-tenths according to the method of silver mines.

古文：铜山之利，朝廷擅之，小民所采，仍予直以市。 
现代文：铜山有利，朝廷占有，小民开采，仍然给予钱购买。 
English: The copper mine is advantageous, the imperial court owns it, the common people mine it, and still give money to buy it.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝听从。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：是时铸厂并开，用铜益多，铜至益少。
现代文：这时铸厂一并开放，用铜更多，铜的收聚更少。
English: At this time, the foundry was opened at the same time, more copper was used, and less copper was collected.

古文：南京户部尚书郑三俊请专官买铜。
现代文：南京户部尚书郑三俊请求专门设官买铜。
English: Zheng Sanjun of the Nanjing Household Department requested a special officer to buy copper.

古文：户部议原籍产铜之人驻镇远、荆、常铜铅会集处，所谓采铜於产铜之地也。
现代文：户部提议原籍是产铜的人驻在镇速、剂、常铜、铅会集之处，这便是所说的在产铜之地采铜。
English: The Household Department proposed that the people who were originally copper producers should be stationed in the places where the speed reducer, the agent, the ordinary copper, and the lead would gather. This is the so-called mining of copper in the copper-producing areas.

古文：帝俱从之。
现代文：皇帝都听从这些意见。
English: All the emperors listened to these opinions.

古文：既，又采绛、孟、垣曲、闻喜诸州县铜铅。
现代文：随后，又开采绛、孟、垣曲、闻喜等州县的铜铅。
English: Subsequently, copper and lead were also mined in Min, Meng, Kakiku, Wensi and other prefectures.

古文：荆州抽分主事朱大受言： 荆州上接黔、蜀，下联江、广，商贩铜铅毕集，一年可以四铸。
现代文：剂州抽分主事朱大受土奏说： 剂州上面连接黔、蜀，下面联系江、广，商人贩运铜铅都集中在这里，一年可以四铸。
English: Zhu Dazhong, the person in charge of the Gezhou subdivision, said: Gezhou is connected to Min and Shu above, and to Jiang and Guang below. Merchants trafficking in copper and lead are concentrated here. It can be mined four times a year.

古文：四铸之息，两倍於南，三倍於北。 
现代文：四铸的利润，两倍于南方，三倍于北方。 
English: The profit of four castings is twice that of the south and three times that of the north.

古文：因陈便宜四事，即命大受专督之。
现代文：于是陈说合乎时势的四件事，便命令朱大受专门督理。
English: As a result, Chen said four things that were in line with the current situation, and ordered Zhu Da to be under special supervision.

古文：遂定钱式，每文重一钱，每千直银一两。
现代文：于是制定钱的式样，每文重一钱，每干文值银一两。
English: So they worked out the design of the money. Each piece weighed one coin, and each piece was worth one or two silver.

古文：南都钱轻薄，屡旨严饬，乃定每文重八分。
现代文：南都的钱轻而且薄，多次下旨严格整饬，便规定每文重八分。
English: Nanto's money was light and thin, and after many attempts at strict rectification, the weight of each article was set at eight points.

古文：初，嘉靖钱最工，隆、万钱加重半铢，自启、祯新铸出，旧钱悉弃置。
现代文：当初，嘉靖钱最精工，隆庆、万历钱加重半铢，自从天启、崇祯新铸之钱出现，旧钱全部弃置不用。
English: At the beginning, Jiajing money was the most refined, Longqing and Wanli money were the most refined, and since the new money from Tianqi and Chongzhen appeared, all the old money was abandoned and not used.

古文：然日以恶薄，大半杂铅砂，百不盈寸，捽掷辄破碎。
现代文：然而钱一天天粗劣而轻薄，大半杂以铅砂，百钱不满一寸，甩掷于地便破碎。
English: However, the money is getting coarser and thinner day by day. Most of it is mixed with lead sand, and one hundred yuan is less than one inch. If it is thrown to the ground, it will be broken.

古文：末年敕铸当五钱，不及铸而明亡。
现代文：崇祯末年下敕命铸造当五钱，没有来得及铸造明朝便灭亡了。
English: In the last years of his life, he made a vow to mint five coins, but before he could do so, the Ming Dynasty perished.

古文：初制，历代钱与制钱通行。
现代文：当初制度，历代钱与本朝钱通行。
English: At the beginning of the system, the money of previous generations and the money of this dynasty were allowed to pass.

古文：自神宗初，从佥都御史庞尚鹏议，古钱止许行民间，输税赎罪俱用制钱。
现代文：自从神宗初年，听从食都御史庞尚鹏的提议，古钱只允许通行于民间，交纳赋税赎免罪罚都用本朝钱。
English: Since the first year of the Shenzong, following the proposal of the food capital official Pang Shangpeng, the old money is only allowed to be used by the people, and the payment of taxes, redemption and exemption from punishment are all used for this morning money.

古文：启、祯时广铸钱，始括古钱以充废铜，民间市易亦摈不用矣。
现代文：天启、崇祯时期广泛铸钱，纔收聚古钱以充废铜，民间贸易也槟弃不用了。
English: At the time of the Apocalypse and the Great Leap Forward, money was widely minted, and the government collected old money to replenish waste copper. Private trade was also abandoned.

古文：庄烈帝初即位，御平台召对，给事中黄承昊疏有销古钱之语。
现代文：庄烈帝初即位，驾临平台召臣下对策，给事中黄承昊上疏有销毁古钱的话。
English: Zhuang Rongdi ascended the throne for the first time, came to the platform to call on his subjects for countermeasures, and Huang Chenghao neglected to destroy the old money.

古文：大学士刘鸿训言： 北方皆用古钱，若骤废之，於民不便。 
现代文：大学士刘鸿训说： 北方都用古钱，如果突然废除，于人民不方便。 
English: Liu Hongxun, a university scholar, said: The north all uses old money. If it is suddenly abolished, it will be inconvenient for the people.

古文：帝以为然。
现代文：皇帝认为对。
English: Emperor Wu believed Dongfang Shuo's explanation.

古文：既而以御史王燮言，收销旧钱，但行新钱，於是古钱销毁顿尽。
现代文：随后采纳御史王燮的意见，收聚销毁旧钱，只流通新钱，于是古钱顿时销毁殆尽。
English: Subsequently, it adopted the opinion of Wang Qi, the imperial historian, to collect and destroy old money, and only circulate new money. As a result, the old money was destroyed all at once.

古文：盖自隋世尽销古钱，至是凡再见云。
现代文：从隋代全部销毁古钱，到这时一共两次。
English: Since the Sui Dynasty, ancient money has been completely destroyed twice.

古文：钞法自弘、正间废，天启时，给事中惠世扬复请造行。
现代文：钞法从弘治、正德年间废弃，天启时期，给事中惠世扬又请求造钞流通。
English: The banknote law was abolished between the Hongzhi and Zhengde dynasties, and during the Apocalypse period, Hui Shiyang requested to make banknotes for circulation.

古文：崇祯末，有蒋臣者申其说，擢为户部司务。
现代文：崇祯末年，有一个叫蒋臣的申述其说，提升为户部司务。
English: In the last years of his life, a man named Jiang Chen was promoted to the position of secretary of the household department.

古文：倪元璐方掌部事，力主之，然终不可行而止。
现代文：倪元璐正职掌户部事，竭力主张，但是终究不能流通而停止。
English: Ni Yuanqi, the official in charge of the accounts department, tried his best to advocate, but eventually could not circulate and stopped.

古文：坑冶之课，金银、铜铁、铅汞、朱砂、青绿，而金银矿最为民害。
现代文：开矿冶炼的赋税，金、银、铜、铁、铅、汞、朱砂、青绿，而金银矿最成为人民的祸害。
English: Taxes on the mining and smelting of gold, silver, copper, iron, lead, mercury, cinnabar, and turquoise began, and the gold and silver mines became the scourge of the people.

古文：徐达下山东，近臣请开银场。
现代文：徐达攻下山东，近侍之臣请求开设银场。
English: When Xu Da conquered Shandong, his vassal asked him to open a silver mine.

古文：太祖谓银场之弊，利於官者少，损於民者多，不可开。
现代文：太祖指出开银场的弊端，有利于官府的很少，损害于人民的多，不能开。
English: The great-grandfather pointed out the drawbacks of opening a silver mine. There are few advantages for the government and many disadvantages for the people. It should not be opened.

古文：其后有请开陕州银矿者，帝曰： 土地所产，有时而穷。
现代文：此后有请求开采陕州银矿的，皇帝说： 土地出产，有时限而穷尽。
English: After that, when there was a request to mine the silver mines in Shaanxi Province, the emperor said, "The land is productive, but there is a time limit and it will be exhausted."

古文：岁课成额，徵银无已。
现代文：每年的赋税形成额数，征收银不止。
English: The amount of tax generated each year is more than the amount of silver collected.

古文：言利之臣，皆戕民之贼也。 
现代文：言利的大臣，都是害民的盗贼。 
English: Ministers who talk about profits are all thieves who harm the people.

古文：临淄丞乞发山海之藏以通宝路，帝黜之。
现代文：临淄丞请求开发山海的宝藏以通宝路，皇帝贬黜他。
English: Lintongzheng requested the development of the treasures of the mountains and seas to pass the treasure road, the emperor demeaned him.

古文：成祖斥河池民言采矿者。
现代文：成祖斥责河池谈论采矿的人民。
English: Cheng Zu rebuked the people of Hechi for talking about mining.

古文：仁、宣仍世禁止，填番禺坑洞，罢嵩县白泥沟发矿。
现代文：仁宗、宣宗时仍然世代禁止，填塞番禺坑洞，罢除嵩县白泥沟开发的矿场。
English: At the time of Ninsong and Xuanzong, it was still prohibited for generations, the Panyu pit was filled in, and the mine developed in Baidi ditch in Song County was cancelled.

古文：然福建尤溪县银屏山银场局炉冶四十二座，始於洪武十九年。
现代文：然而福建尤溪县银屏山银场局有冶炼炉四十二座，开始于洪武十九年。
English: However, the Yinping Mountain Silver Mine Bureau in Youxi County, Fujian, has 42 smelting furnaces, which began in the 19th year of Hongwu.

古文：浙江温、处、丽水、平阳等七县，亦有场局。
现代文：浙江温、处、丽水、平阳等七县，也有场局。
English: Seven counties in Zhejiang, including Wen, Duan, Lishui and Pingyang, will also host the games.

古文：岁课皆二千馀两。
现代文：每年赋税都是二千余两银。
English: The annual tax is more than 2,000 taels.

古文：永乐间，开陕西商县凤皇山银坑八所。
现代文：永乐年间，开采陕西商县凤皇山银坑八所。
English: During the Yongle period, eight silver pits were mined in Fenghuangshan, Shang County, Shaanxi Province.

古文：遣官湖广、贵州采办金银课，复遣中官、御史往核之。
现代文：派遣官员在湖广、贵州采办金银赋税，又派宦官御史前往审察。
English: Officials were dispatched to procure gold and silver for taxation in Hougang and Guizhou, and the eunuch historian was also sent to Wuxi for inspection.

古文：又开福建浦城县马鞍等坑三所，设贵州太平溪、交址宣光镇金场局，葛容溪银场局，云南大理银冶。
现代文：又开采福建浦城县马鞍等坑三所，设立贵州太平溪、交趾宣光镇金场局，葛容溪银场局，云南大理银冶。
English: It also mined three pits such as Ma'anshan in Pucheng County, Fujian Province, and set up the Guizhou Taipingxi, Jiaozuo Xuanguang Town Gold Mine Bureau, Ge Rongxi Silver Mine Bureau, and Yunnan Dali Silver Mine.

古文：其不产金银者，亦屡有革罢。
现代文：那些不出产金银的地方，也多次有罢除。
English: Those places that do not produce gold and silver have also been ousted many times.

古文：而福建岁额增至三万馀两，浙江增至八万馀。
现代文：而福建每年的数额增加到三万余两，浙江增加到八万余两。
English: But the annual amount in Fujian has increased to more than 30,000 yuan, and in Zhejiang to more than 80,000 yuan.

古文：宣宗初，颇减福建课，其后增至四万馀，而浙江亦增至九万馀。
现代文：宣宗初年，多减少福建赋税，此后增加到四万余两，而浙江也增加到九万多两。
English: In the first year of Xuan Zong's reign, Fujian's taxes were reduced, and later increased to more than forty thousand taels, while Zhejiang's also increased to more than ninety thousand taels.

古文：英宗下诏封坑穴，撤闸办官，民大苏息，而岁额未除。
现代文：英宗下诏封矿坑洞，撤除闸办官，人民得到大大的休养生息，而每年赋税的额数没有除去。
English: Under Emperor Yingzong, the mine pits were sealed, the gate officials were removed, and the people received a great deal of rest and recreation, but the amount of annual tax was not removed.

古文：岁办，皆洪武旧额也。
现代文：岁办，都是洪武时期的旧有额数。
English: year-on-year, are all the old quotas from the Hongwu period.

古文：闸办者，永、宣所新增也。
现代文：闸办，是永乐、宣德时期所增。
English: The number of gate offices increased during the Yongle and Xuande periods.

古文：既而禁革永煎。
现代文：随后禁止革除永久冶炼。
English: Permanent smelting was subsequently banned.

古文：奸民私开坑穴相杀伤，严禁不能止。
现代文：奸猾之民私自开掘坑穴互相杀伤，虽严禁而不能止。
English: The treacherous people dug pits to kill each other, and although it is strictly forbidden, they can't stop.

古文：下诏宥之，不悛。
现代文：下诏宽宥，但不改过。
English: Forgive, but don't change.

古文：言者复请开银场，则利归於上，而盗无所容。
现代文：有人又请求开银场，利益归于君上，而盗贼无处容身。
English: There was also a request to open a bank, the profits would go to the prince, and the thieves would have nowhere to hide.

古文：乃命侍郎王质往经理，定岁课，福建银二万馀，浙江倍之。
现代文：于是命令侍郎王质前往经营管理，制定每年赋税，福建银二万余两，浙江银加倍。
English: Therefore, he ordered the attendant Wang Qian to go to the business management and set the annual tax, Fujian silver more than two thousand, Zhejiang silver doubled.

古文：又分遣御史曹祥、冯杰提督，供亿过公税，民困而盗愈众。
现代文：又分别派御史曹祥、冯杰提督，按需供应的东西超过公家赋税，人民困窘而盗贼更多。
English: In addition, he separately dispatched the imperial historian Cao Xiang and Admiral Feng Jie, and the supply of things on demand exceeded the public taxation, the people were embarrassed and there were more thieves.

古文：邓茂七、叶宗留之徒流毒浙、闽，久之始定。
现代文：邓茂七、叶宗留等人长期毒害浙、闽，很久纔安定。
English: Deng Shouqi, Ye Zongrui and others have long poisoned Zhejiang and Fujian, and the situation has been stable for a long time.

古文：景帝尝封闭，旋以盗矿者多，兵部尚书孙原贞请开浙江银场，因并开福建，命中官戴细保提督之。
现代文：景帝曾经封闭银矿，随即因盗矿的人很多，兵部尚书孙原贞请求开设浙江银场，于是一并开设福建银场，命令宦官戴细保提督。
English: Emperor Jing once closed the silver mine, and then many people were arrested for stealing the ore. Sun Yat-sen of the Ministry of Military Affairs requested the opening of the Zhejiang silver mine, so he also opened the Fujian silver mine and ordered the eunuch Dai Xibao to be the admiral.

古文：天顺四年命中官罗永之浙江，罗珪之云南，冯让之福建，何能之四川。
现代文：天顺四年，命令宦官罗永到浙江，罗珪到云南，冯让到福建，何能到四川。
English: In the fourth year of Tianshun, he ordered eunuchs Luo Yong to Zhejiang, Luo Wei to Yunnan, Feng Zhan to Fujian, and He Neng to Sichuan.

古文：课额浙、闽大略如旧，云南十万两有奇，四川万三千有奇，总十八万三千有奇。
现代文：赋税额数浙、闽大致如旧，云南十万两有余，四川一万三千两有余，总共十八万三千有余。
English: The amount of tax levied in Zhejiang and Fujian was roughly the same as before, with more than 102,000 in Yunnan and more than 132,000 in Sichuan, for a total of more than 183,000.

古文：成化中，开湖广金场，武陵等十二县凡二十一场，岁役民夫五十五万，死者无算，得金仅三十五两，於是复闭。
现代文：成化年间，开设湖广金场，武陵等十二县一共二十一场，每年役使民夫五十五万，死去的人数也数不清，获得金只有三十五两，于是又关闭。
English: During the Chenghua period, a total of 21 gold mines were opened in 12 counties, including Huguang and Wuling, with 550,000 people working each year. The number of people who died was also countless, and only 35,000 gold was obtained, so it was closed again.

古文：而浙江银矿以缺额量减，云南屡开屡停。
现代文：而逝垄银矿因缺额量减少，云南屡次开又屡次停止。
English: However, Yunnan has repeatedly opened and repeatedly closed the Gudong Silver Mine due to the reduction in the amount of deficit.

古文：弘治元年始减云南二万两，温、处万两馀，罢浦城废坑银冶。
现代文：弘治元年，纔减少云南银二万两，温、处减少一万多两，罢除浦城废坑银冶炼。
English: In the first year of Hongzhi, the province reduced the amount of Yunnan silver by 20,000 taels, the prefecture and the county reduced the amount by more than 10,000 taels, and the waste pit silver smelting in Pucheng was abolished.

古文：至十三年，云南巡抚李士实言： 云南九银场，四场矿脉久绝，乞免其课。 
现代文：到十三年，云南巡抚李士实说： 云南九座银场，四座场矿脲长久采绝，请求免除这些矿的赋税。 
English: By the thirteenth year, the Yunnan governor Li Shishi said: Yunnan's nine silver mines and four mines have been closed for a long time, and requested that these mines be exempted from taxation.

古文：报可。
现代文：回复同意。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：四川、山东矿穴亦先后封闭。
现代文：四川、山东的矿坑洞也先后封闭。
English: Mines in Sichuan and Shandong have also been closed.

古文：武宗初，从中官秦文等奏，复开浙、闽银矿。
现代文：武宗初年，听从宦官秦文等人所奏言，恢复开釆浙、闽银矿。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wuzong, he listened to the speech of eunuch Qinwen and others and resumed the reclamation of the Xinzhe and Xinzhuang silver mines.

古文：既而浙江守臣言矿脉已绝，乃令岁进银二万两，刘瑾诛乃止。
现代文：随后浙江守臣上奏说矿脉已经采绝，便命令每年进交银二万两，刘瑾被诛杀后纔停止。
English: Subsequently, Zhejiang Shoucheng reported that the ore vein had been exhausted, and ordered to import 20,000 taels of silver every year, but stopped after Liu Yao was killed.

古文：世宗初，闭大理矿场。
现代文：世宗初年，关闭大理矿场。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, the Dali mine was closed.

古文：其后蓟、豫、齐、晋、川、滇所在进矿砂金银，复议开采，以助大工。
现代文：此后，蓟、豫、齐、晋、川、滇所在之地进纳矿砂金银，又议论开采，以资助土木大工程。
English: Since then, the provinces of Handan, Henan, Qi, Jin, Sichuan and Yunnan have received ore, gold and silver, and discussed mining in order to fund major civil engineering projects.

古文：既获玉旺峪矿银，帝谕阁臣广开采。
现代文：获得玉旺峪矿银之后，皇帝训谕阁臣广泛开采。
English: After obtaining the silver from the Jade Wangtao mine, the emperor ordered his ministers to begin extensive mining.

古文：户部尚书方钝等请令四川、山东、河南抚按严督所属，一一搜访，以称天地降祥之意。
现代文：户部尚书方钝等人请求命令四川、山东、河南巡抚巡按严厉督责所属之地，一一搜索探访，以称合天地降下吉祥的意思。
English: The head of the household, Shangshu Fangchu, and others requested that the Sichuan, Shandong, and Henan patrols be ordered to strictly supervise the places they belonged to, and search and visit them one by one, in order to praise the auspicious meaning of the heavens and earth.

古文：於是公私交鹜矿利，而浙江、江西盗矿者且劫徽、宁，天下渐多事矣。
现代文：于是公家和私人交相追求开矿的利益，而浙江、江西盗矿之人并且劫夺徽、宁二地，天下渐渐多变乱了。
English: As a result, the public and private sectors intermingled in pursuit of the benefits of mining, while the people of Zhejiang and Jiangxi stole mines and robbed Hui and Ning, and the world gradually became more and more chaotic.

古文：隆庆初，罢蓟镇开采。
现代文：隆庆初年，罢除蓟镇开采。
English: In the first year of Longqing, the mining of Shanzhen was cancelled.

古文：南中诸矿山，亦勒石禁止。
现代文：南中各矿山，也刻石禁止。
English: Mines in southern and central China have also banned the carving of stones.

古文：万历十二年，奸民屡以矿利中上心。
现代文：万历十二年，奸猾之民屡次以开矿的利益打动皇上的心。
English: In the twelfth year of Wanli, the treacherous people repeatedly moved the emperor's heart with the benefits of mining.

古文：诸臣力陈其弊。
现代文：诸大臣尽力陈说开矿的弊端。
English: The ministers did their best to explain the drawbacks of mining.

古文：帝虽从之，意怏怏。
现代文：皇帝虽然听从，心意却不愉快。
English: Although the emperor obeyed, his heart was not happy.

古文：二十四年，张位秉政，前卫千户仲春请开矿，位不能止。
现代文：二十四年，张位职掌朝政，前卫千户仲春请求开采矿，张位不能制止。
English: In 1924, Zhang Yi was in charge of the imperial government, and the avant-garde Chihou Zhongchun requested mining, and Zhang Yi could not stop it.

古文：开采之端启，废弁白望献矿峒者日至，於是无地不开。
现代文：开采的端绪一旦开启，废黜的军弁、宫市的宦者派在市场的采办人员献矿峒的天天来到，于是无地不开矿。
English: Once the cusp of mining is opened, the deposed warlord, the ruler of Miyagi, will send procurement personnel to the market to donate ore to the mine, so there is no place to mine.

古文：中使四出：昌平则王忠，真、保、蓟、永、房山、蔚州则王虎，昌黎则田进，河南之开封、彰德、卫辉、怀庆、叶县、信阳则鲁坤，山东之济南、青州、济宁、沂州、滕、费、蓬莱、福山、楼霞、招远、文登则陈增，山西之太原、平阳、潞安则张忠，南直之宁国、池州则郝隆、刘朝用，湖广之德安则陈奉，浙江之杭、严、金、衢、孝丰、诸暨则曹金，后代以刘忠，陕西之西安则赵鉴、赵钦，四川则丘乘云，辽东则高淮，广东则李敬，广西则沈永寿，江西则潘相，福建则高寀，云南则杨荣。
现代文：宦官四处派出：昌平则是王忠，真、保、蓟、丞、房山、蔚州则是王虎，昌黎则是田进，河南的开封、彰德、卫辉、怀庆、叶县、信阳则是鲁坤，山东的济南、青州、济宁、沂州、滕、费、蓬莱、福山、栖霞、招远、文登则是陈增，山西的太原、平阳、潞安则是张忠，南直的宁国、池州则是郝隆、刘朝用，湖广的德安则是陈奉，浙江的杭、严、金、衢、孝丰、诸暨则是曹金，后来以刘忠代替，陕西的西安则是趟鉴、赵钦，四川则是丘乘云，辽东则是高淮，广东则是李敬，庭酉则是沈永寿，江西则是潘相，福建则是高案，云南则是杨荣。
English: The eunuchs were sent to various places: Wang Zhong was sent to Changping, Wang Hu to Zhen, Bao, Yao, Cheng, Fangshan, and Ulshu; Tian Jin to Changli; Lukun to Kaifeng, Changde, Weihui, Huaiqing, Ye County, and Xinyang in Henan; Chen Zeng to Jinan, Qingzhou, Jining, Zhangzhou, Tengfei, Penglai, Fukuyama, Qixia, Zhaoyuan, and Wenden in Shandong; Zhang Zhong to Taiyuan, Pingyang, and An'an in Shanxi; Qilong and Liu Chaoying to Ninggu

古文：皆给以关防，并偕原奏官往。
现代文：都给以关防凭证，并偕同原奏官前往。
English: They were all given a pass certificate and accompanied by the original musician.

古文：矿脉微细无所得，勒民偿之。
现代文：矿脲微小没有收获，便勒令人民补偿。
English: There was no harvest from the small mine, so the people were ordered to pay compensation.

古文：而奸人假开采之名，乘传横索民财，陵轹州县。
现代文：而奸猾之人藉开矿的名义，乘着传车强横勒索人民的财物，欺压州县。
English: However, under the guise of opening mines, deceitful people took advantage of the power of the cartels to extort the people's property and oppress the counties.

古文：有司恤民者，罪以阻挠，逮问罢黜。
现代文：主管官吏体恤人民，便加罪以阻挠，逮捕审问罢免官职。
English: The officials in charge felt sorry for the people, so they added the crime of obstruction, arrested, interrogated, and removed from office.

古文：时中官多暴横，而陈奉尤甚。
现代文：当时宦官多凶暴强横，而陈奉尤其厉害。
English: At that time, eunuchs were often violent and domineering, and Chen Bong was particularly violent.

古文：富家钜族则诬以盗矿，良田美宅则指以为下有矿脉，率役围捕，辱及妇女，甚至断人手足投之江，其酷虐如此。
现代文：对富豪家族便以盗采矿山相诬眚，对良田美宅便指出那些地方地下有矿脉，率领役工包围逮捕，侮辱妇女，甚至斩断别人手足投到江中，其残酷暴虐如此。
English: For the rich family, they falsely accused them of stealing and mining the mountain, and for Ryota Miyake, they pointed out that there were mineral veins underground in those places, led the forced laborers to surround and arrest them, insulted the women, and even cut off other people's hands and feet and threw them into the river, such was their cruel tyranny.

古文：帝纵不问。
现代文：皇帝竟纵容不追究。
English: The emperor actually condoned it and did not pursue it.

古文：自二十五年至三十三年，诸珰所进矿税银几及三百万两，群小藉势诛索，不啻倍蓰，民不聊生。
现代文：从二十五年到三十三年，众宦官所进献的矿税银将近三百万两，小人们藉势诛求勒索，不只一倍五倍，人民无法生存。
English: From the twenty-fifth year to the thirty-third year, the mining tax money donated by the eunuchs amounted to nearly three million taels, and the small people resorted to blackmail to extort more than double and five times. The people could not survive.

古文：山西巡抚魏允贞上言： 方今水旱告灾，天鸣地震，星流气射，四方日报。
现代文：山西巡抚魏允贞上奏说： 当今水、旱造成灾害，天空呜响大地震动，陨星流坠晦气四射，四方一天接一天上报。
English: Wei Yunzhen, the governor of Shanxi Province, said in his report: Today, water and drought have caused disasters, the sky is rumbling, the earth is shaking, meteorites are falling and bad luck is everywhere, and all sides are reporting one day after another.

古文：中外军兴，百姓困敝。
现代文：内外战争兴起，百姓困窘疲敝。
English: Internal and external wars were on the rise, and the people were exhausted.

古文：而嗜利小人，借开采以肆饕餮。
现代文：而贪图财利的小人，借口开采矿山以肆虐侵吞。
English: However, greedy villains, under the pretext of mining, are rampaging through the mines.

古文：倘衅由中作，则矿夫冗役为祸尤烈。
现代文：如果祸乱从中发作，那磨矿工冗役制造灾祸尤其剧烈。
English: If there is a calamity in the making, it is particularly acute in the case of the miners" strike.

古文：至是而后，求投珠抵璧之说用之晚矣。 
现代文：从此之后，寻求投珠抵璧之说也用之已晚了。 
English: From then on, it was too late to seek the pearl-throwing contest.

古文：河南巡按姚思仁亦言： 开采之弊，大可虑者有八。
现代文：河南巡按姚思仁也说： 开采矿山的弊端，大的方面值得忧虑的有八点。
English: Yao Siren, a Henan tour correspondent, also said: The drawbacks of mining mountains, there are eight major aspects that are worth worrying about.

古文：矿盗哨聚，易於召乱，一也。
现代文：矿盗相招聚集，容易发动变乱，这是第一点。
English: This is the first point. Miners and thieves gather together, and it is easy to start a riot.

古文：矿头累极，势成土崩，二也。
现代文：矿头过分赔累，形势会造成土崩瓦解，这是第二点。
English: The second point is that the mine head is overburdened and the situation will cause the mine to collapse.

古文：矿夫残害，逼迫流亡，三也。
现代文：矿夫遭受残害，逼迫逃亡，这是第三点。
English: The third point is that the miners were mutilated and forced to flee.

古文：雇民粮缺，饥饿噪呼，四也。
现代文：雇用之民粮食缺乏，因饥饿而鼓噪呼叫，这是第四点。
English: The fourth point is that the employed people are short of food and are crying out because of hunger.

古文：矿洞遍开，无益浪费，五也。
现代文：矿洞遍地开采，没有收益徒增浪费，这是第五点。
English: The fifth point is that mines are being exploited everywhere, and there is no gain but waste.

古文：矿砂银少，强科民买，六也。
现代文：矿砂含银少，强行征收让人民购买，这是第六点。
English: The sixth point is that if the ore contains less silver, it should be forcibly collected and the people should buy it.

古文：民皆开矿，农桑失业，七也。
现代文：人民都开矿，农耕种桑失去常业，这是第七点。
English: The people have all gone into mining, and the farming of mulberry has lost its regular business, which is the seventh point.

古文：奏官强横，淫刑激变，八也。
现代文：奏事官强暴凶横，滥施刑法激起变乱，这是第八点。
English: The eighth point is that the rape and violence of the investigating officer and the indiscriminate application of criminal law have incited riots.

古文：今矿头以赔累死，平民以逼买死，矿夫以倾压死，以争斗死。
现代文：现在矿头因赔本欠债而死，平民因逼迫购买矿砂而死，矿工以倾压而死，以争斗而死。
English: Now the mine bosses are dying because they have lost money and are in debt, the civilians are dying because they are being forced to buy ore, the miners are dying because of the pressure, and they are dying because of fighting.

古文：及今不止，虽倾府库之藏，竭天下之力，亦无济於存亡矣。 
现代文：到现在还不停止，即使倾注国家府库的宝藏，竭尽天下的力量，也不能挽救危亡了。 
English: Even pouring the treasure of the national treasury and exhausting the power of the world cannot save us from peril.

古文：疏入，皆不省。
现代文：奏疏呈入，皇帝都不省察。
English: The Emperor paid no attention to the poor performance.

古文：识者以为明亡盖兆於此。
现代文：有识之士认为明朝灭亡大概开始于此。
English: People of insight believe that the downfall of the Ming Dynasty probably began here.

古文：铁冶所，洪武六年置。
现代文：铁冶所，是洪武六年设置。
English: Iron and Steel Research Institute, was set up by Hongwu six years later.

古文：江西进贤、新喻、分宜，湖广兴国、黄梅，山东莱芜，广东阳山，陕西巩昌，山西吉州二，太原、泽、潞各一，凡十三所，岁输铁七百四十六万馀斤。
现代文：江西进贤、新喻、分宜，湖广兴国、黄梅，山东莱夔，廑塞阳山，陕西巩昌，山西吉州二所，太原、泽、潞各一所，一共十三所，每年交纳铁七百四十六万多斤。
English: Jinxian, Xinyu and Fengyi in Jiangxi, Hukang Xingguo and Huangmei in Shandong, Laiwu in Shandong, Yangshan in Shaanxi, Gongchang in Shaanxi, two in Jizhou in Shanxi, and one each in Taiyuan, Ze and Handan, a total of thirteen, with more than 7.46 million catties of iron ore paid annually.

古文：河南、四川亦有铁冶。
现代文：河南、四川也有铁矿冶炼。
English: Iron ore is also smelted in Henan and Sichuan.

古文：十二年益以茶陵。
现代文：十二年，增加茶陵。
English: Twelve years later, the tea mausoleum was added.

古文：十五年，广平吏王允道言： 磁州产铁，元时置官，岁收百馀万斤，请如旧。 
现代文：十五年，广平官吏王允道上奏说： 磁州出产铁，元代时设置官，每年收缴一百余万斤，请求如旧制。 
English: In the fifteenth year, Wang Yun, a Guangping official, made a report on the road, saying: "Magnetic prefecture produces iron, officials were set up in the Yuan Dynasty, and more than one million catties are collected every year. The request is as in the old system.

古文：帝以民生甫定，复设必重扰，杖而流之海外。
现代文：皇帝因为人民生活刚刚安定，恢复设置必然重新扰乱，便杖责王允道并流放到海外。
English: Because the people's life had just stabilized, the emperor inevitably disrupted the restoration of the system, and ordered the king to be exiled overseas.

古文：十八年罢各布政司铁冶。
现代文：十八年，罢除各布政司冶炼铁。
English: In 18 years, the iron smelting division of the Political Bureau was abolished.

古文：既而工部言： 山西交城产云子铁，旧贡十万斤，缮治兵器，他处无有。 
现代文：随后工部上奏说： 山西交城出产云子铁，旧时进贡十万斤，修缮打造兵器，别处没有。 
English: Subsequently, the Ministry of Industry and Trade made a report saying: Shanxi Jiaocheng is the top producer of Yunzi iron. In the old days, it paid a tribute of 100,000 jin, repaired and built weapons, and there is no other place.

古文：乃复设。
现代文：于是恢复设置。
English: The settings are then restored.

古文：已而武昌、吉州以次复焉。
现代文：后来武昌、吉州依次恢复。
English: Later, Wuchang and Jizhou were restored in turn.

古文：末年，以工部言，复尽开，令民得自采炼，每三十分取其二。
现代文：洪武末年，因工部上言，又全部开放，让人民得以自己开采冶炼，每三十分抽取二分。
English: In the last years of Hongwu's reign, due to the recommendation of the Ministry of Industry, all mines were opened again, allowing the people to mine and smelt for themselves, extracting two-tenths every thirty minutes.

古文：永乐时，设四川龙州、辽东都司三万卫铁冶。
现代文：永乐时期，设置四川龙州、辽东都司三万卫冶炼铁矿。
English: Yongle period, set up Sichuan Longzhou, Liaodong Capital Division Sanwanwei smelting iron ore.

古文：景帝时，办事吏请复陕西、宁远铁矿，工部劾其违法，下狱。
现代文：景帝时期，办事吏请求恢复陕酉、室逮铁矿，工部弹劾他违法，被关进监狱。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jing, the clerk requested the restoration of the Shaanxi and Guizhou iron ore mines, the Ministry of Industry impeached him for violating the law, and he was put in prison.

古文：给事中张文质以为不宜塞言路，乃释之。
现代文：给事中张文质认为不应该堵塞言路，纔释放了他。
English: In the middle of the matter, Zhang Wenyi thought that the way of speech should not be blocked, and he released him.

古文：弘治十七年，广东归善县请开铁冶，有司课外索赂，唐大鬓等因作乱，都御史刘大夏讨平之。
现代文：弘治十七年，广东归善县请求开矿炼铁，主管官吏在赋税之外勒索贿赂，唐大鬓等人于是发动叛乱，都御史刘大夏讨伐平定了叛乱。
English: In the seventeenth year of Hongzhi, Guizhan County of Guangdong requested to open a mine for iron smelting, and the officials in charge extorted bribes in addition to taxes. Tang Daxi and others then launched a rebellion, which was quelled by Liu Daxia, the governor of the capital.

古文：正德十四年，广州置铁厂，以盐课提举司领之，禁私贩如盐法。
现代文：正德十四年，广州设置铁厂，以盐课提举司统管，如同盐法禁止私贩。
English: In the 14th year of Zhengde, Guangzhou set up an iron plant, and the salt class was raised to the general management, just as the salt law banned private traders.

古文：嘉靖三十四年开建宁、延平诸府铁冶。
现代文：嘉靖三十四年，开设建宁、延平等府炼铁。
English: In the 34th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the Jianning and Yanping Ironworks were established.

古文：隆、万以后，率因旧制，未尝特开云。
现代文：隆庆、万历以后，大都因循旧有制度，不曾特别开设。
English: After Longqing and Wanli, most of them followed the old system and did not open specially.

古文：铜场，明初，惟江西德兴、铅山。
现代文：铜场，明朝初年，祇有江西德兴、铅山。
English: Copper mine, the first year of the Ming Dynasty, there are Jiangxi Dexing and Lead Mountain.

古文：其后四川梁山，山西五台，陕西宁羌、略阳及云南皆采水银、青绿。
现代文：此后四川梁山，山西五台，陕西宁羌、略阳以及云南都开采水银、青绿。
English: Since then, Liangshan in Sichuan, Wutai in Shanxi, Ningbo and Liaoyang in Shaanxi, as well as Yunnan, have all mined mercury and blue-green alumina.

古文：太祖时，廉州巡检言： 阶州界西戎，有水银坑冶及青绿、紫泥，愿得兵取其地。 
现代文：太祖时期，廉州巡检上奏说： 阶州与西戎交界，有水银矿场以及青绿、紫泥，希望得到军队攻取那个地区。 
English: At the time of Taizu, the Lianzhou inspection report said: the border between Chaozhou and Xi'an has mercury mines and blue-green and purple mud, hoping to get the army to conquer that area.

古文：帝不许。
现代文：皇帝不允许。
English: The emperor would not allow it.

古文：惟贵州大万山长官司有水银、朱砂场局，而四川东川府会川卫山产青绿、银、铜，以与外番接境，虞军民潜取生事，特禁饬之。
现代文：只有贵州大万山长官司有水银、朱砂场局，而四川束川府会川卫大山出产青绿、银、铜，因与外番交界，担心军民暗中夺取发生动乱，特别禁止整饬。
English: Only Guizhou's Dawan Mountain has mercury and cinnabar mine bureaus, while Sichuan's Shukawa Prefecture's Shukawa Mountain produces blue-green, silver and copper. Because of the border with the outside world, it is feared that the military and the people will secretly seize and cause turmoil, and it is especially prohibited to rectify the situation.

古文：成化十七年封闭云南路南州铜坑。
现代文：成化十七年，封闭云南路南州铜矿洞。
English: In the seventeenth year of Chenghua, the Nanzhou Copper Mine Cave on Yunnan Road was closed.

古文：弘治十八年裁革板场坑水银场局。
现代文：弘治十八年，裁除板场坑水银场局。
English: In 18th year of the Heian period, the Board of Mines, Mines and Metallurgy was abolished.

古文：正德九年，军士周达请开云南诸银矿，因及铜、锡、青绿。
现代文：正德九年，军士周达请求开采云南各银矿，于是兼及铜、锡、青禄。
English: In the ninth year of Zhengde, Sergeant Zhou Da requested the mining of silver mines in Yunnan, so he also obtained copper, tin and Qingluo.

古文：诏可，遂次第开采。
现代文：下诏同意。于是依次开采。
English: The emperor agreed, and mining began in turn.

古文：嘉靖、隆、万间，因鼓铸，屡开云南诸处铜场，久之所获渐少。
现代文：嘉靖、隆庆、万历年间，便冶炼铸钱，多次开设云南各处铜场，很久以后所获渐渐减少。
English: During the years of Jiajing, Longqing and Wanli, they smelted and minted money, and repeatedly opened copper mines throughout Yunnan. After a long time, the gains gradually decreased.

古文：崇祯时，遂括古钱以供炉冶焉。
现代文：崇祯时期，便收聚古钱以供熔炉冶炼铸钱。
English: During the Chongzhen period, ancient money was collected for the furnace to smelt and cast money.

古文：关市之征，宋、元颇繁琐。
现代文：关市的征税，宋、元很繁琐。
English: The Song and Yuan dynasties were very cumbersome.

古文：明初务简约，其后增置渐多，行赍居鬻，所过所止各有税。
现代文：明朝初期务求简易，此后增加设置渐渐变多，出行要送财物，停留从事买卖也要送财物，经过的地方居留的地方各自有税。
English: At the beginning of the Ming Dynasty, it was simplified, and since then, more and more facilities have been added. It is necessary to send property when traveling, and it is also necessary to send property when staying for trading. There are taxes in each place of residence.

古文：其名物件析榜於官署，按而征之，惟农具、书籍及他不鬻於市者勿算，应征而藏匿者没其半。
现代文：应收税的财物器具在官署张榜公布，按物征收，只有农具、书籍以及其它不在集市上出售的不计算，应征收而藏匿的没收一半。
English: The list of property and equipment subject to the receivable tax shall be published by the government office, and the tax shall be levied according to the items. Only agricultural tools, books and other items not sold at the fair shall not be counted, and half of the items that should be levied but are hidden shall be confiscated.

古文：买卖田宅头匹必投税，契本别纳纸价。
现代文：买卖田地房屋大牲畜必须交税，契本另外交纳纸价。
English: The sale and purchase of fields, houses, and large livestock must be taxed, and the paper price must be paid separately in the deed.

古文：凡纳税地，置店历，书所止商氏名物数。
现代文：凡是纳税之地，设置店房登记簿，书写留止商人姓名物品数量。
English: In all places where taxes are paid, a store registration book shall be set up, and the names of merchants and the number of items shall be recorded.

古文：官司有都税，有宣课，有司，有局，有分司，有抽分场局，有河泊所。
现代文：主管部门有都税，有宣课，有司，有局，有分司，有抽分埸局，有河泊所。
English: The competent departments include the metropolitan tax, the announcement of classes, the division, the bureau, the subdivision, the subdivision and the bureau, and the river berth.

古文：所收税课，有本色，有折色。
现代文：所收的赋税，有原定征收的实物，有改征的银钞布帛。
English: The taxes collected include the physical goods originally planned to be collected and the silver banknotes that were changed.

古文：税课司局，京城诸门及各府州县市集多有之，凡四百馀所。
现代文：税课司局，京城各门和各府州县的市集多设有，共有四百多所。
English: There are more than four hundred markets, including the Tax Bureau, in each gate of the capital city and in each prefecture and county.

古文：其后以次裁并十之七。
现代文：以后依次裁减省并十分之七。
English: Thereafter, the number of ministries to be reduced in turn will be reduced by seven-tenths.

古文：抽分在南京者，曰龙江、大胜港；在北京者，曰通州、白河、卢沟、通积、广积；在外者，曰真定、杭州、荆州、太平、兰州、广宁。
现代文：抽分，在南京的，有龙江、大胜港；在北京的，有通州、白河、卢沟、通积、广积；在外地的，有真定、杭州、剂州、太平、兰州、广宁。
English: In Nanjing, there are Longjiang River and Dasheng Port; in Beijing, there are Tongzhou, Baihe, Lugou, Tongzhe and Guangzhe; in other places, there are Zhending, Hangzhou, Ganzhou, Taiping, Lanzhou and Guangning.

古文：又令军卫自设场分，收贮柴薪。
现代文：又命令军卫自己设置场分，收聚贮藏柴薪。
English: He also ordered the guards to set up their own sites to collect and store firewood.

古文：河泊所惟大河以南有之，河北止盐山县。
现代文：河泊所只有黄河以南设置，河北只有盐山县。
English: River berthing stations are only set up south of the Yellow River, and in Hebei only in Yanshan County.

古文：凡税课，徵商估物货；抽分，科竹木柴薪；河泊，取鱼课。
现代文：凡是课税，征收商人所买货物；抽分，征收竹木柴薪；河泊，征收鱼税。
English: In the case of taxation, the goods bought by merchants are levied; the bamboo, wood and firewood are levied; and the fish tax is levied.

古文：又有门摊课钞，领於有司。
现代文：又有门摊课钞，由主管部门统领。
English: There are also door booths for issuing banknotes, which are managed by the competent department.

古文：太祖初，征酒醋之税，收官店钱。
现代文：太祖初年，征收酒醋之税，收官店钱。
English: In the first year of the great-grandfather, the tax of wine vinegar was levied, and the money of the liquor store was collected.

古文：即吴王位，减收官店钱，改在京官店为宣课司，府县官店为通课司。
现代文：即位作昊王，碱收官店钱，改在京的官店为宣课司，府县的官店改为通课司。
English: The official store in Beijing was changed to the Office of Course Announcement, and the official stores in prefectures and counties were changed to the Office of Course Delivery.

古文：凡商税，三十而取一，过者以违令论。
现代文：凡是商税，三十分取其一分，超过征收按违犯法令论处。
English: In the case of all commercial taxes, one point shall be deducted for every 30 minutes, and the amount in excess of the levy shall be dealt with according to the violation law.

古文：洪武初，命在京兵马指挥领市司，每三日一校勘街市度量权衡，稽牙侩物价；在外，城门兵马，亦令兼领市司。
现代文：洪武初年，命令在京的兵马指挥兼管市司，每三天校对一次街市的度量衡器，稽察商人的物价；在外地，城门兵马，也命令兼管市司。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he ordered the commander of the soldiers and horses in Beijing to be in charge of the city government, to check the measuring instruments in the street market every three days, and to inspect the prices of merchants; in other places, the soldiers and horses at the city gate were also ordered to be in charge of the city government.

古文：彰德税课司，税及蔬果、饮食、畜牧诸物。
现代文：彰德税课司，收税下及蔬菜水果、饮食、畜牧等物。
English: Zhangde Tax Division, collecting taxes and vegetables, fruits, food, livestock and other items.

古文：帝闻而黜之。
现代文：皇帝听说后贬黜了他。
English: When the emperor heard about it, he was furious.

古文：山西平遥主簿成乐秩满来朝，上其考曰 能恢办商税 。
现代文：山西平迁主簿成乐任期满后到京朝拜，上呈他的考绩材料称 能征收督办商税 。
English: After the expiration of the term of the main book of the Shanxi relocation, Cheng Le, he went to Beijing to worship, and submitted his performance evaluation materials saying that he could collect the supervising business tax.

古文：帝曰： 税有定额，若以恢办为能，是剥削下民，失吏职也。州考非是。 
现代文：皇帝说： 税收有固定额敷，如果以征收督办焉能，造就是剥削下层人民，失去官吏职责，州考不对。 
English: The emperor said: There is a fixed amount of tax. If the collection and supervision office cannot do it, it means exploiting the lower-class people, losing the duties of officials, and the state examination is wrong.

古文：命吏部移文以讯。
现代文：命令吏部移送文书讯问。
English: He ordered the personnel department to hand over the documents for questioning.

古文：十年，户部奏： 天下税课司局，征商不如额者百七十八处。
现代文：十年，户部上奏： 天下的税课司局，征收商税不按额敷的达一百七十八处。 
English: Ten years later, the Ministry of Households reported that there were 178 tax bureaus in the world that did not levy commercial tax according to the amount.

古文：遂遣中官、国子生及部委官各一人核实，立为定额。
现代文：便派遣宦官、国子生以及户部委派官各一人核实，确立为定额。
English: Then, one eunuch, one national student, and one official from the Household Ministry were dispatched to verify the quota.

古文：十三年，吏部言： 税课司局岁收额米不及五百石者，凡三百六十四处，宜罢之。 
现代文：十三年，吏部说： 税课司局每年征收额定米不到五百石的，一共有三百六十四处，应该罢除。 
English: In the 13th year of the year, the cadres' department said, "There are a total of three hundred and sixty-four places where the tax bureau collects less than five hundred koku of rice per year, and they should be removed."

古文：报可。
现代文：回复同意。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：胡惟庸伏诛，帝谕户部曰： 曩者奸臣聚敛，税及纤悉，朕甚耻焉。
现代文：胡惟庸伏罪被杀，皇帝训谕户部说： 过去奸臣聚敛财物，税收施及极细小极全面，朕对此感到很羞耻。
English: When Hu Wei Yong was killed for treachery, the emperor ordered the household to say: In the past, treacherous vassals gathered wealth, and taxes were very small and very comprehensive. I feel very ashamed of this.

古文：自今军民嫁娶丧祭之物，舟车丝布之类，皆勿税。 
现代文：从今以后军民嫁娶丧葬祭祀的物品，船卓丝布之类，都不收税。 
English: From now on, no tax will be levied on items such as funerary and sacrificial articles for military and civilian weddings, funerary and funerary silk fabrics, etc.

古文：罢天下抽分竹木场。
现代文：罢除天下的抽分竹木场。
English: Eliminate the world's lottery bamboo and wood farms.

古文：明年令以野兽皮输鱼课，制裘以给边卒。
现代文：第二年命令以野兽皮交纳鱼税，制成皮服以供给边防士卒。
English: The following year, he ordered that the fish tax be paid in animal skins, and that leather clothing be made to supply the border guards.

古文：初，京师军民居室皆官所给，比舍无隙地。
现代文：当初，京城军民居住的房屋都是官府提供，房屋相连没有空地。
English: At first, the housing for the military and civilians in Beijing was provided by the government, and there was no vacant space between the buildings.

古文：商货至，或止於舟，或贮城外，驵侩上下其价，商人病之。
现代文：商人货物到达，有的留在船中，有的贮藏在城外，中介经纪人抬高或压低价格，商人感到忧虑。
English: Merchants are worried about the arrival of goods, some of which are left in the ship, some are stored outside the city, and intermediary brokers raise or lower prices.

古文：帝乃命於三山诸门外，濒水为屋，名塌房，以贮商货。
现代文：皇帝便命令在三山诸门外，濒临江水建造房屋，名叫塌房，用来贮存商货。
English: The emperor then ordered the construction of a building, called a hall, outside the gates of the three mountains, on the edge of the river, to store commercial goods.

古文：永乐初定制，嫁娶丧祭时节礼物、自织布帛、农器、食品及买既税之物、车船运己货物、鱼蔬杂果非市贩者，俱免税。
现代文：永乐初年制定法度，嫁娶丧葬祭祀和一定季节的礼物、自己编织的布帛、农器、食品以及购买已交税的货物、车船运输自己的货物、鱼类蔬菜杂果不在集市上贩卖的，都免征税。
English: In the first year of Yongle, laws were enacted to exempt from taxation the following items: wedding gifts, funerary offerings, seasonal gifts, self-woven cloths, farm implements, and foodstuffs, as well as the purchase of goods that have already been taxed, the transportation of one's own goods by car and ship, and fish, vegetables, and miscellaneous fruits that are not sold at the market.

古文：准南京例，置京城官店塌房。
现代文：按照南京的办法，建置京城的官店塌房。
English: According to Nanjing's plan, government-owned stores in Beijing will be rebuilt from the rubble.

古文：七年遣御史、监生於收课处榷办课程。
现代文：七年，派御史、监生到收税处专办税收。
English: In the seventh year, he sent his secretary and supervisors to the tax collection office to collect taxes.

古文：二十一年，山东巡按陈济言： 淮安、济宁、东昌、临清、德州、直沽，商贩所聚。
现代文：二十一年，山东巡按陈济说： 淮安、济宁、束昌、临清、德州、直沽，是商贩聚居的地方。
English: In the 21st year, Chen Ji, the inspector of Shandong Province, said: Huai'an, Jining, Sokchang, Linqing, Dezhou, and Zhaojun are the places where merchants live together.

古文：今都北平，百货倍往时。
现代文：现在建都北平，各种货物比过去高一倍。
English: Now that the capital is Beiping, various goods are twice as expensive as before.

古文：其商税宜遣人监榷一年，以为定额。 
现代文：那些商税应该派人监督专管一年，以此作为定额。 
English: Those commercial taxes should be supervised by someone for one year and used as a quota.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝听从他的意见。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：洪熙元年增市肆门摊课钞。
现代文：洪熙元年，增设市肆门摊征收钱钞。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, the municipal government set up additional door stalls to collect money.

古文：宣德四年，以钞法不通，由商居货不税，由是於京省商贾凑集地、市镇店肆门摊税课，增旧凡五倍。
现代文：宣德四年，因钞法不流通，由商人积货出卖不收税，于是在京省商人聚集之地、市镇店肆门摊收税，比旧时增加共五倍。
English: In the four years of Xuande, due to the non-circulation of banknotes, no tax was collected from the sale of goods accumulated by merchants. Therefore, in the place where merchants gathered in Beijing Province, the tax was collected from town stores and door stalls, a total increase of five times compared to the old time.

古文：两京蔬果园不论官私种而鬻者，塌房、库房、店舍居商货者，骡驴车受雇装载者，悉令纳钞。
现代文：两京的蔬果园不论官府私人栽种出售的，塌房、库房、店舍囤积商货的，骡驴车受雇装载的，命令全部交纳钞。
English: Vegetable and fruit gardens in the two capital cities, regardless of whether they are privately planted and sold by the government, or stored in warehouses, warehouses, and stores, or loaded by hired donkey carts, are all ordered to pay banknotes.

古文：委御史、户部、锦衣卫、兵马司官各一，於城门察收。
现代文：委派御史、户部、锦衣卫、兵马司官吏各一人，在城门察收。
English: One official each from the Imperial Historian's Office, the Household Division, the Brocade Guards, and the Terracotta Warriors and Horses Division was assigned to inspect and collect the coins at the castle gate.

古文：舟船受雇装载者，计所载料多寡、路近远纳钞。
现代文：船只受雇佣装载的，计算所载货物多少、道路远近交纳钞。
English: If the vessel is hired and loaded, the amount of goods carried shall be calculated, and the distance of the road shall be paid.

古文：钞关之设自此始。
现代文：钞关的设置从此开始。
English: The setting up of the banknote gate starts from here.

古文：其倚势隐匿不报者，物尽没官，仍罪之。
现代文：那些倚仗权势隐藏不报的，货物全部没收，仍要加罪处罚。
English: Those who rely on power to hide and do not report, the goods are all confiscated, and the crime is still punished.

古文：於是有漷县、济宁、徐州、淮安、扬州、上新河、浒墅、九江、金沙洲、临清、北新诸钞关，量舟大小修广而差其额，谓之船料，不税其货。
现代文：于是有涕县、济宁、徐州、淮安、扬州、上新河、游墅、九江、金沙洲、临清、北新等钞关，计算船的大小长短宽窄而额数有等差，叫做船料，不收货税。
English: As a result, there are bank counters in Alixian County, Jining, Xuzhou, Huai'an, Yangzhou, Shangxinhe, Youxiu, Jiujiang, Jinshazhou, Linqing, Beixin, etc. The size of the calculation ship is narrow in length and width, but the amount is unequal, which is called freight, and no goods tax is collected.

古文：惟临清、北新则兼收货税，各差御史及户部主事监收。
现代文：只有临清、北新则兼收货税，各差派的御史及户部主事监督收税。
English: Only Linqing and Beixin collect the goods tax, and the superintendent of each faction and the head of the household department supervise the tax collection.

古文：自南京至通州，经淮安、济宁、徐州、临清，每船百料，纳钞百贯。
现代文：从南京到通州，经过淮安、济宁、徐州、临清，每只船一百料，交纳钞一百贯。
English: From Nanjing to Tongzhou, passing through Huai'an, Jining, Xuzhou, Linqing, each ship will pay 100 yuan and pay 100 yuan.

古文：侍郎曹弘言： 塌房月钞五百贯，良苦，有鬻子女输课者。 
现代文：侍郎曹弘说： 塌房每月交钞五百贯，确实很苦，有卖子女交纳税的。 
English: The waiter, Cao Hong, said, "It's really hard to pay 500 yuan a month for a low-rise apartment. Some people sell their children to pay taxes.

古文：帝令核除之。
现代文：皇帝命令审核免除。
English: The emperor ordered that the examination be waived.

古文：及钞法通，减北京蔬地课钞之半，船料百贯者减至六十贯。
现代文：钞法流通后，减少北京蔬菜地征收钞的一半，船料一百贯的减少到六十贯。
English: After the circulation of the banknote law, the amount of banknotes levied on Beijing's vegetable fields was reduced by half, and the shipping fee was reduced from 100 yuan to 60 yuan.

古文：正统初，诏凡课程门摊，俱遵洪武旧额，不得藉口钞法妄增。
现代文：正统初年，下诏说凡是征收门摊税，都遵照洪武畴期的旧有数额不能借口钞法妄自增加。
English: In the first year of the orthodoxy, the next edict said that all the taxes levied on the door stall were in accordance with the old amount of the Hongwu period and could not be increased under the pretext of the banknote law.

古文：未几，以兵部侍郎於谦奏，革直省税课司局，领其税於有司；罢济宁、徐州及南京上新河船料钞，移漷县钞关於河西务；船料当输六十贯者减为二十贯。
现代文：不久，因兵部侍郎于谦上奏，革除直省税课司局，由主管官吏兼管收税；罢除济宁、徐州以及南京上新河船料钞，迁移椁县钞关到河西务；船料应交纳六十贯的，减成二十贯。
English: Soon, because of the report of Yu Qian, the attendant of the military department, the direct provincial tax bureau was abolished, and the competent official was also in charge of tax collection; the shipping bills of Jining, Xuzhou and Nanjing Shangxinhe were removed, and the banknotes of Yuxian County were moved to Hexi; the shipping fee should be paid 60 yuan, reduced to 20 yuan.

古文：商民称便。
现代文：商人和平民都称便。
English: Merchants and ordinary people alike appreciate the convenience.

古文：九年，王佐掌户部，置彰义门官房，收商税课钞，复设直省税课司官，征榷渐繁矣。
现代文：九年，王佐掌管卢部，设置彰义门官房，征收商人的赋税钞，又设置直省税课司官，征收商品税渐渐繁多。
English: In the ninth year, Wang Zu took charge of the Lu Department, set up the Changyi Gate Office, collected merchants' tax bills, and set up a direct provincial tax officer, and collected more and more commodity taxes.

古文：景泰元年，於谦柄国，船料减至十五贯，减涨家湾及辽阳课税之半。
现代文：景泰元年，于谦掌管国政，船料税减少到十五贯，减少张家湾和辽阳一半赋税。
English: In the first year of Jing Tai, when Yu Qian was in charge of state affairs, the shipping tax was reduced to 15 yuan, and the tax on Zhangjiagang and Liaoyang was reduced by half.

古文：大理卿薛瑄忻言： 抽分薪炭等匿不报者，准舶商匿番货罪，尽没之，过重。
现代文：大理卿薛管说： 抽分薪炭等藏匿不报的，与船舶商藏匿番货的罪行相当，全部没收，过分沉重。
English: Xue Guan, the Secretary of the Supreme People's Procuratorate of China, said: "The crime of concealing and not reporting the extraction of fuel coal and so on is equivalent to the crime of hiding the goods of a shipowner. All of them were confiscated, which is too heavy.

古文：请得比匿税律。 
现代文：请求比照藏匿纳税的律令执行。 
English: The request will be enforced in accordance with the law on tax evasion.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝听从他的意见。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：成化七年增置芜湖、荆州、杭州三处工部官。
现代文：成化七年，增加设置芜湖、荆州、杭州三处工部官。
English: In the past seven years, Wuhu, Jingzhou and Hangzhou have been added to the list.

古文：初抽分竹木，止取钞，其后易以银，至是渐益至数万两。
现代文：当初，抽分竹木税，只取钞，后来改换用银，到这时渐渐增加到数万两。
English: At first, the tax on bamboo and wood was levied only on banknotes. Later, it was changed to silver, and gradually increased to tens of thousands of rupees.

古文：寻遣御史榷税。
现代文：不久，派遣御史专门征税。
English: Soon after, the imperial historian was dispatched specifically to collect taxes.

古文：孝宗初，御史陈瑶言： 崇文门监税官以掊克为能，非国体。 
现代文：孝宗初期，御史陈瑶说： 崇文门监税官以收刮为能，不合国体。 
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Xiaozong, Grand Historian Chen Qi said, "The tax inspectors of Chongwen Gate are only good at collecting taxes, which is not in line with the national spirit.

古文：乃命客货外，车辆毋得搜阻。
现代文：于是命令客货之外，车辆不能搜查阻挠。
English: He then ordered that in addition to passengers and goods, vehicles could not be searched or obstructed.

古文：又从给事中王敞言，取回芜湖、荆州、杭州抽分御史，以府州佐贰官监收其税。
现代文：又听从给事中王敞的意见，召回芜湖、剂州、杭州抽分御史，用府州佐副官监收商税。
English: He also listened to the opinions of Wang Miao, who was in charge of the matter, and recalled the governor of Wuhu, Ganzhou and Hangzhou to supervise the collection of commercial tax with the deputy governor of Fuzhou.

古文：十三年复遣御史。
现代文：十三年，又派遣御史。
English: Thirteen years later, he was dispatched again.

古文：正德十一年始收泰山碧霞元君祠香钱，从镇守太监言也。
现代文：正德十一年，开始收泰山碧霞元君祠香钱，是听从镇守太监之言。
English: In the eleventh year of Zhengde's reign, he began to collect incense money from the Bixia Yuanjun Shrine on Mount Tai, heeding the words of the town's eunuch.

古文：十二年，御史胡文静请革新设诸抽分厂。
现代文：十二年，御史胡文静请求革新设置诸抽分厂。
English: In the 12th year, Minister of History Hu Wenzhing requested the innovation of setting up an extraction plant.

古文：未一年，太监郑玺请复设於顺德、广平。
现代文：不到一年，太监郑玺请求复设于顺德、广平。
English: Less than a year later, the eunuch Zheng Jun requested to be resettled in Shunde and Guangping.

古文：工部尚书李鐩依阿持两端，横征之端复起。寻命中官李文、马俊之湖广、浙江抽分厂，与主事中分榷税。
现代文：工部尚书李铛曲从附顺持两端，横加征收之端又兴起不久命令宦官李文、马俊到湖广、浙江抽分厂，与主事中分征税。
English: Not long after the Ministry of Industry and Commerce's Shangshu Li Yingqu issued an order to the eunuchs Li Wen and Ma Jun to go to the Huguang and Zhejiang extraction plants to divide the taxation with the main business.

古文：世宗初，抽分中官及江西、福建、广东税课司局多所裁革，又革真定诸府抽印木植中官。
现代文：世宗初年，抽分中官和江西、福建、广东税课司局多被裁除，又革除真定等府抽印木植中官。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, most of the officials in charge of tax collection and the tax bureau of Jiangxi, Fujian and Guangdong were dismissed, and the officials in charge of tax collection and the tax bureau of Shandong and other provinces were also dismissed.

古文：京城九门之税，弘治初岁入钞六十六万馀贯，钱二百八十八万馀文，至末年，数大减。
现代文：京城九门的税收，弘治初年，每年收入钞六十六万余贯，钱二百八十八万余文，到弘治末年，数量大减。
English: In the first year of Hongzhi, the tax revenue of Jiumen in Beijing increased to more than 660,000 yuan in banknotes and more than 2.88 million yuan in coins. By the end of Hongzhi, the amount had greatly decreased.

古文：自正德七年以后，钞增四倍，钱增三十万。
现代文：从正德七年以后，钞增加四倍，钱增加三十万。
English: In the seven years since Zhengde, the number of banknotes has quadrupled, and the amount of money has increased by 300,000 yuan.

古文：嘉靖三年，诏如弘治初年例，仍减钱三十万。
现代文：嘉靖三年，下诏如同弘治初年的规定，仍然减少钱三十万。
English: In the third year of Jiajing, the following edict, as stipulated in the first year of Hongzhi, still reduced the money by 300,000 yuan.

古文：直省关税，成化以来，折收银，其后复收钱钞。
现代文：直省关税，成化以来，折合收银，此后恢复收钱钞。
English: Direct provincial tariffs have been converted into cash since the establishment of the province, after which the collection of banknotes was resumed.

古文：八年复收银，遂为定制。
现代文：八年，又收银，于是成为固定的制度。
English: Eight years later, cash registers were added, and it became a fixed system.

古文：始时钞关估船料定税，既而以估料难核，乃度梁头广狭为准，自五尺至三丈六尺有差。
现代文：开始时钞关估计船料确定税收，随后因估计船料难以核实，便以测量梁头宽窄为准，从五尺到三丈六尺有等差。
English: At the beginning, the customs estimated the freight to determine the tax, and then, because it was difficult to verify the estimated freight, the width of the beam head was measured as the standard, with a variance from five feet to three feet and six feet.

古文：帝令以成尺为限，勿科畸零。
现代文：皇帝命令以成尺焉限，不征收零数。
English: The emperor ordered that the number of shaku be limited, and no zeros were levied.

古文：太监李能请於山海关榷商税，行之数年，主事邬阅言： 广宁八里铺前屯卫既有榷场，不宜再榷。 
现代文：太监李能请求在山诲关征收商税，实行数年，主事鄙阅说： 广宁八里铺前屯卫已有征税场，不应再征税。 
English: The eunuch Li Neng requested that the commercial tax be levied at Shanyu Pass, which has been implemented for several years. The main thing was to read: Guangning Baili Pu Qian Tunwei already has a tax collection site, and should not be taxed again.

古文：罢之。
现代文：罢除掉。
English: and dismissed him.

古文：其后复山海关税，罢八里铺店钱。
现代文：此后恢复山海关税，罢除八里铺店钱。
English: After that, the mountain and sea tariffs were restored, and the eight-mile shop money was abolished.

古文：四十二年令各关岁额定数之外，馀饶悉入公帑。
现代文：四十二年，命令各关卡岁额定数之外，剩余的全部纳入公家府库。
English: In 1942, it was ordered that in addition to the quota for each level, all the rest should be included in the public treasury.

古文：隆庆二年始给钞关主事关防敕书，寻令钞关去府近者，知府收解；去府远者，令佐贰官收贮府库，季解部。
现代文：隆庆二年，开始给予钞关主事关防敕书。不久命令钞关离府近的，由知府收税并且解送；离府远的，命令佐副官收税贮藏在府库，每季度解送到户部。
English: In the second year of the Longqing era, he began to give the person in charge of the banknote gate the relevant anti-counterfeiting book. Soon, he ordered that if the banknote gate was close to the prefecture, the prefecture would collect the tax and send it; if it was far from the prefecture, he ordered the assistant deputy officer to collect and store the tax in the prefectural treasury and send it to the household department every quarter.

古文：主事掌核商所报物数以定税数，收解无有所与。
现代文：主事职掌核定商人所报物数以确定税数，收税解送没有参与。
English: The number of goods reported by the merchant was approved by the responsible official to determine the amount of tax, and the tax collection and delivery was not involved.

古文：神宗初，令商货进京者，河西务给红单，赴崇文门并纳正、条、船三税；其不进京者，河西务止收正税，免条、船二税。
现代文：神宗初年，命令商人货物进京的，河西务供给红单，到崇文门一并交纳正、条、船三种税；那些不进京的，河西务只收正税，免除条、船二税。
English: In the first year of Shenzong, he ordered merchants to supply red slips to the Hexi Department for goods entering Beijing, and to pay three kinds of taxes at the same time to the Chongwen Gate; for those who did not enter Beijing, the Hexi Department only collected the positive tax, and exempted the two taxes of slips and ships.

古文：万历十一年革天下私设无名税课。
现代文：万历十一年革除天下私设的无名赋税。
English: In the 11th year of the Manchurian Revolution, the nameless tax privately set up by the world was abolished.

古文：然自隆庆以来，凡桥梁、道路、关津私擅抽税，罔利病民，虽累诏察革，不能去矣。
现代文：然而从隆庆以来，凡是桥梁、道路、关卡渡口私下擅自抽税，求利而害民，虽然多次下诏察办革除，但也不能革去。
English: However, since Longqing, all bridges, roads, checkpoints and ferry ports have been secretly collecting taxes without authorization, seeking profits and harming the people. Although they have been removed many times by the Imperial Procuratorate, they cannot be removed.

古文：迨两宫三殿灾，营建费不赀，始开矿增税。
现代文：到两宫三殿受灾，营建费没有资财，便开始开矿增加税收。
English: When the two palaces and three halls were affected by the disaster and there were no funds for construction costs, the government began to open mines and increase taxes.

古文：而天津店租，广州珠榷，两淮馀盐，京口供用，浙江市舶，成都盐茶，重庆名木，湖口、长江船税，荆州店税，宝坻鱼苇及门摊商税、油布杂税，中官遍天下，非领税即领矿，驱胁官吏，务朘削焉。
现代文：而天津的店租，广州的珠赋，两淮的余盥，京口的供用，浙江的市舶，成都的盐茶，重庆的名木，湖口、长江的船税，荆州的店税，实坻的鱼苇和门摊商税、油布杂税，宦官遍布天下，不是统管税就是统管矿，驱使胁迫官吏，务求搜刮剥削。
English: On the other hand, the shop rent in Tianjin, the Zhu Fu in Guangzhou, the Yu Yu in Zhuhai, the supply in Beijing, the city ship in Zhejiang, the salt tea in Chengdu, the famous tree in Chongqing, the ship tax in Hukou and the Yangtze River, the shop tax in Jingzhou, the fish bait and door stall merchant tax in Chengdu, the oilcloth miscellaneous tax, and the eunuch are all over the world. Whether it is the unified management of taxes or the unified management of mines, they are driven to coerce officials in order to search and exploit.

古文：榷税之使，自二十六年千户赵承勋奏请始。
现代文：征税的使者，从二十六年千户赵承勋奏请开始。
English: The emissary of taxation, please start from the 26th year of Zhao Chengxun's thousand households.

古文：其后高寀於京口，暨禄於仪真，刘成於浙，李凤於广州，陈奉於荆州，马堂於临清，陈增於东昌，孙隆於苏、杭，鲁坤於河南，孙朝於山西，丘乘云於四川，梁永於陕西，李道於湖口，王忠于密云，张晔於卢沟桥，沈永寿於广西，或徵市舶，或徵店税，或专领税务，或兼领开采。
现代文：此后高案在京口，暨禄在仪真，刘成在浙，李凤在广州，陈奉在剂州，马堂在临清，陈增在东昌，孙隆在苏、杭，鲁坤在河南，孙朝在山西，丘乘云在四川，梁永在陕西，李道在湖口，王忠在密云，张晔在卢沟桥，沈永寿在广西，有的征收市舶，有的征收店税，有的专管税务，有的兼管开采。
English: After that, Gao Jian was in Jingkou, Ji Lu was in Yizhen, Liu Cheng was in Zhejiang, Li Feng was in Guangzhou, Chen Bong was in Ganzhou, Ma Tang was in Linqing, Chen Zeng was in Dongchang, Sun Long was in Su, Hang, Lukun was in Henan, Sun Dynasty was in Shanxi, Qiu Rongyun was in Sichuan, Liang Yong was in Shaanxi, Li Dao was in Hukou, Wang Zhong was in Miyun, Zhang Ye was in Lugouqiao, and Shen Yongshou was in Guangxi. Some levied merchant ships, some levied shop taxes, some were in charge

古文：奸民纳贿於中官，辄给指挥千户札，用为爪牙。
现代文：奸猾之民送财物给宦官，便给予指挥千户的札子，用为爪牙。
English: When the treacherous people send wealth to the eunuch, he gives the commander a thousand pieces of paper to use as pawns.

古文：水陆行数十里，即树旗建厂。
现代文：水陆行走数十里，便树着旗建立厂。
English: After walking dozens of miles on land and water, he planted a tree and erected a factory.

古文：视商贾懦者肆为攘夺，没其全赀。
现代文：看到懦弱的商人便肆意抢夺，没收他的全部财产。
English: When they see a cowardly businessman, they wantonly rob him and confiscate all his property.

古文：负戴行李，亦被搜索。
现代文：携带的行李，也被搜索。
English: His luggage was also searched.

古文：又立土商名目，穷乡僻坞，米盐鸡豕，皆令输税。
现代文：又设立土商名目，穷因的乡间偏僻的码头，米盐鸡猎，都命令收税。
English: In addition, tax collection was ordered for the establishment of local merchants, poor rural remote docks, and rice and salt chicken hunting.

古文：所至数激民变，帝率庇不问。
现代文：所到之处，多次激起人民反抗，皇帝大都包庇不追究。
English: Everywhere he went, he repeatedly aroused the people's resistance, and the emperor mostly shielded him from investigation.

古文：诸所进税，或称遗税，或称节省银，或称罚赎，或称额外赢馀。
现代文：各所进之税，有的称遗税，有的称节省银，有的称处罚赎罪，有的称额外赢余。
English: Some of the taxes paid by each of them are called lost taxes, some are called saving money, some are called punishment and atonement, and some are called extra earnings.

古文：又假买办、孝顺之名，金珠宝玩、貂皮、名马，杂然进奉，帝以为能。
现代文：又藉买办、孝顺的名义，金银珠宝玩好、貂皮、名马，纷纷进奉，皇帝认为能干。
English: Moreover, in the name of comprador and filial piety, gold, silver, jewels, furs, and famous horses were offered one after another, and the emperor considered them capable.

古文：甚至税监刘成因灾荒请暂宽商税，中旨仍徵课四万，其嗜利如此。
现代文：甚至税监刘成因灾荒请求暂时宽限商税，皇帝在内宫直接下旨仍然征收四万，他们贪图利益到这个地步。
English: Even the tax inspector Liu Chengru requested a temporary grace period for commercial tax due to the disaster and famine, and the emperor issued an order directly in the inner palace to still collect forty thousand. They are greedy for profit to this point.

古文：三十三年始诏罢采矿，以税务归有司，而税使不撤。
现代文：三十三年，纔下诏罢除采矿，把税务归主管部门，而税使不撤除。
English: In 1933, mining was abolished under the imperial edict, and the tax was transferred to the competent department, but the tax authority was not removed.

古文：李道诡称有司固却，乞如旧便。
现代文：李道假称主管官吏坚持推辞，请求如旧时方便。
English: Li Dao pretended that the officials in charge insisted on the resignation and requested that it be convenient as in the old days.

古文：帝遽从之。
现代文：皇帝立即听从他的请求。
English: The emperor immediately acceded to his request.

古文：又听福府承奉谢文铨言，设官店於崇文门外，以供福邸。
现代文：又听从福王府承奉谢文铨的话，在崇文门外设立官店，以供应福邸。
English: He also listened to the words of Fu Wangfu to follow the words of Xie Wenyi, and set up a government store outside the Chongwen Gate to supply the Fu residence.

古文：户部尚书赵世卿屡疏，不听。
现代文：户部尚书赵世卿多次上疏。不听从。
English: The head of the household, Shangshu Zhao Shijing, repeatedly refused to obey.

古文：世卿又言： 崇文门、河西务、临清、九江、浒墅、扬州、北新、淮安各钞关，岁徵本折约三十二万五千馀两，万历二十五年增银八万二千两，此定额也。
现代文：趟世卿又说： 崇文门、河西务、临清、九江、游墅、扬州、北新、淮安各个钞关，每年征收本色折色银大约三十二万五千多两，万历二十五年增加银八万二干两，这是定额。
English: Wang Shixing also said: In Chongwenmen, Hexiwu, Linqing, Jiujiang, Youxiu, Yangzhou, Beixin and Huai'an, the annual collection of genuine colored silver is about 325,000 plus two, and the increase of silver in 25 years is 82,000 plus two, which is the quota.

古文：乃二十七年以后，历岁减缩，至二十九年总解二十六万六千馀两。
现代文：而二十七年以后，历年减少压缩，到二十九年，总共解送二十六万六千多两。
English: However, after the 27th year, the number of deportations decreased year by year, and by the 29th year, a total of more than 266,000 were deported.

古文：究厥所由，则以税使苛敛，商至者少，连年税使所供，即此各关不足之数也。 
现代文：探究其缘由，便是因为税使苛细收敛，商人到达的人少，连年税使所供，就是这各关卡不足的数目。 
English: Exploring the reasons for this, it is because the taxes are too high, the merchants are too few, and the annual taxes are insufficient.

古文：疏入不省。
现代文：奏疏呈入，皇帝不省察。
English: The Emperor did not think twice about the lackluster performance.

古文：宝坻银鱼厂，永乐时设，穆宗时，止令估直备庙祀上供。
现代文：宝坻银鱼厂，永乐时期设立，穆宗时期，只是命令估计价值以准备庙祀上供。
English: Baodi Silverfish Factory, established in the Yongle period, during the Mu Zong period, only ordered to estimate the value to prepare for temple worship.

古文：及是始以中官坐采，又徵其税，后并税武清等县非产鱼之处。
现代文：到这时纔以宦官坐地开采，又征收赋税，以后对武清等县不产鱼的地方也一并收税。
English: At this time, eunuchs were employed to mine the land, and taxes were levied. Later, taxes were also levied on areas that did not produce fish, such as Wuqing County.

古文：增苇网诸税，且及青县、天津。
现代文：增加苇纲等赋税，并且牵及青县、天津。
English: The increase of taxes such as those for the middle class will also affect Qingxian and Tianjin.

古文：九门税尤苛，举子皆不免，甚至击杀觐吏。
现代文：九门税尤其苛细，考试的举人都不能免除，甚至打死朝觐官吏。
English: The tax on the nine gates was particularly harsh, and those who passed the examination were not exempted, and even officials of the imperial court were beaten to death.

古文：事闻，诏法司治之，监竖为小戢。
现代文：事情上报，下诏由司法机关治罪，太监为此稍微收敛。
English: The matter was reported, and the next step was for the judicial authorities to punish the crime. For this reason, the eunuch was somewhat restrained.

古文：至四十二年，李太后遗命减天下税额三之一，免近京畸零小税。
现代文：到四十二年，李太后临终嘱咐减少天下税额三分之一，免除京城附近的零星小税。
English: By the year 42, Empress Dowager Li, on her deathbed, ordered a one-third reduction in the amount of taxes in the country, exempting sporadic small taxes near the capital.

古文：光宗立，始尽蠲天下额外税，撤回税监，其派入地亩、行户、人丁、间架者，概免之。
现代文：光宗即位，纔全部免除天下的额外税，撤回税监，那些分摊入地亩、行户、人丁、问架的税，一概免除。
English: With the enthronement of Emperor Guangzong, all the extra taxes in the world will be exempted, the tax inspectors will be withdrawn, and those taxes that are allocated to land, households, people, and questionnaires will all be exempted.

古文：天启五年，户部尚书李起元请复榷水陆冲要，依万历二十七八年例，量徵什一。
现代文：天启五年，户部尚书李起元请求恢复征收水陆冲要之地的关税，依照万历二十七、二十八年规定，酌量征收十分之一的税。
English: At the beginning of the fifth year of the Heian period, the head of the household, Shangshu Li Qiyuan, requested the resumption of the collection of tariffs on land and water, and in accordance with the provisions of the 27th and 28th years of Wanli, the discretionary amount of one-tenth of the tax was collected.

古文：允行之。
现代文：朝廷允许施行。
English: The Imperial Court allowed the execution.

古文：崇祯初，关税每两增一钱，通八关增五万两。
现代文：崇祯初年，关税每一两增加一钱，总计八关增加五万两。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, the tariff increased by one yuan for every two tariffs, for a total increase of fifty thousand two tariffs.

古文：三年复增二钱，惟临清仅半，而崇文门、河西务俱如旧。
现代文：三年，又增加二钱，只有临清仅一半，而崇文门、河西务都如同过去。
English: In three years, another two-cents were added, only Linqing was only half, while Chongwenmen and Hexiwu were the same as before.

古文：户部尚书毕自严，议增南京宣课司税额一万为三万。
现代文：户部尚书毕自严，提议增加南京宣课司的税收额数一万增至三万。
English: The head of the household department, Shang Shuxu, was more self-restrained and proposed to increase the tax amount of the Nanjing Education Bureau by ten thousand to thirty thousand.

古文：南京户部尚书郑三俊，以宣课所收落地税无几，请税芜湖以当增数。
现代文：南京户部尚书郑三俊，因宣课司所收落地税没有多少，请求收芜湖税以抵偿增加数。
English: Zheng Sanjun, an accountant at the Nanjing Household Department, requested the collection of the Lugu Lake tax to offset the increase because the land tax collected by the Education Bureau was not much.

古文：自严遂议税芜湖三万两，而宣课仍增一万。
现代文：毕自严于是提议征收芜湖税三莴两，而宣课司仍然增加一万两。
English: Bi Zi Yan then proposed to levy a Wuhu tax of three hundred taels, while the proclamation department still increased by ten thousand taels.

古文：三俊悔，疏争不能已。
现代文：郑三俊后悔，上疏争辩也不能停收。
English: Zheng Sanjun regretted that he could not end the discussion on Shangxu.

古文：九年复议增税课款项。
现代文：九年，又提议增加赋税款项。
English: In 1997, it was proposed to increase the tax.

古文：十三年增关税二十万两，而商民益困矣。
现代文：十三年，增加关税二十万两，而商民更加困窘了。
English: Thirteen years later, the tariff was increased by 200,000 taels, and the merchants were even more embarrassed.

古文：凡诸课程，始收钞，间折收米，已而收钱钞半，后乃折收银，而折色、本色递年轮收，本色归内库，折色归太仓。
现代文：所有各种赋税，开始时征收钞，问或折合征收米，随后征收钱钞各半，后来便折合收银，而货币布帛、米麦实物递年轮流征收，米麦实物收归内库，货币布帛收归太仓。
English: All kinds of taxes, at the beginning of the collection of banknotes, ask or convert to collect rice, then collect half of the money and half of the banknotes, and then convert to cash, and the money cloth, rice and barley in kind are collected year by year, the rice and barley in kind are returned to the internal warehouse, and the money cloth is returned to the warehouse.

古文：明初，东有马市，西有茶市，皆以驭边省戍守费。
现代文：明朝初年，束面有马市，西面有茶市，都用来控制边防行省戍守的费用。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, there was a horse market in Sokumen and a tea market in the west, both of which were used to control the costs of border defense and provincial defense.

古文：海外诸国入贡，许附载方物与中国贸易。
现代文：海外各国进贡，允许附载土产与中国贸易。
English: Overseas countries paid tribute and allowed the shipment of local products to trade with China.

古文：因设市舶司，置提举官以领之，所以通夷情，抑奸商，俾法禁有所施，因以消其衅隙也。
现代文：于是设立市舶司，设置提举官来管理，用以沟通外夷情况，抑制奸商，使法律禁令有所施行，因而以此消除隔阂。
English: As a result, a municipal shipping department was established, and an official was appointed to manage it, which was used to communicate the situation with foreigners, restrain profiteers, and enforce legal prohibitions, thus eliminating the gap.

古文：洪武初，设於太仓黄渡，寻罢。
现代文：洪武初年，设立在太仓黄渡，不久罢除。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, it was established in Taicang Huangdu, and was soon dismissed.

古文：复设於宁波、泉州、广州。
现代文：又设置在宁波、泉州、广州。
English: It is also set up in Ningbo, Quanzhou and Guangzhou.

古文：宁波通日本，泉州通琉球，广州通占城、暹罗、西洋诸国。
现代文：宁波通日本，泉州通琉球，广州通占城、暹罗、西洋各国。
English: Ningbo to Japan, Quanzhou to Ryukyu, Guangzhou to Zhancheng, Siam and Western countries.

古文：琉球、占城诸国皆恭顺，任其时至入贡。
现代文：琉球、占城等国都恭顺，任意让它在一定时节到中国进贡。
English: Countries such as Ryukyu and Chamcheng were obedient and allowed it to pay tribute to China at a certain time.

古文：惟日本叛服不常，故独限其期为十年，人数为二百，舟为二艘，以金叶勘合表文为验，以防诈伪侵轶。
现代文：只有日本反叛顺服不定，所以独自限定它进贡的日期为十年，人数为二百，船为二艘，用金叶验合的表文作为验证，以防备欺诈假冒侵犯。
English: Only the Japanese rebellion did not obey, so it independently limited the date of its tribute to ten years, the number of people to two hundred, and the ship to two, using the form of gold leaf verification as verification, in order to prevent fraud and infringement.

古文：后市舶司暂罢，辄复严禁濒海居民及守备将卒私通海外诸国。
现代文：后来市舶司暂时罢除，便又严禁濒临大海的居民和守备的将士私下交通海外各国。
English: Later, the city's shipping department was temporarily removed, and residents on the verge of the sea and soldiers on guard were strictly prohibited from privately communicating with overseas countries.

古文：永乐初，西洋剌泥国回回哈只马哈没奇等来朝，附载胡椒与民互市。
现代文：永乐初年，西洋刺泥国回回哈只马哈没奇等来朝拜，附带载胡椒与人民交易。
English: In the first year of Yongle, Western spiny mud countries such as Hanyu Maha Mengqi came back to worship, and traded with the people with pepper.

古文：有司请徵其税。
现代文：主管官吏请求征收他的税。
English: The official in charge requested that his taxes be collected.

古文：帝曰： 商税者，国家抑逐末之民，岂以为利。
现代文：皇帝说： 商税，是国家抑制追逐末利的人民的，哪里是以此获利？
English: The emperor said, "The commercial tax is a means by which the state restrains the people from chasing after small profits. Where is the profit to be made from this?

古文：今夷人慕义远来，乃侵其利，所得几何，而亏辱大体多矣。 
现代文：现在外夷仰慕礼义远道而来，却侵夺他的利益，所获得有多少？而亏损侮辱国家体面则多了。
English: Now, foreigners come from afar to admire Li Yi, but how much have they gained by encroaching on his interests? And how much more have they gained by insulting the country's dignity with losses.

古文：不听。
现代文：誓不听从他的请求。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：三年，以诸番贡使益多，乃置驿於福建、浙江、广东三市舶司以馆之。
现代文：三年，因各番进贡的使者增多，便在福建、浙江、广东三个市舶司设置驿站来安置他们。
English: In the third year, due to the increase in the number of envoys paying tribute, shipping companies in three cities, Fujian, Zhejiang and Guangdong, set up shipping stations to accommodate them.

古文：福建曰来远，浙江曰安远，广东曰怀远。寻设交址云屯市舶提举司，接西南诸国朝贡者。
现代文：福建叫 来远 ，浙江叫 安远 ，广东叫 怀远 不久设置交阻云屯市舶提举司，迎接西南各国朝贡的人。
English: Fujian is called Laiyuan, Zhejiang is called Anyuan, Guangdong is called Huaiyuan. Soon, the Yuntun Ship Lifting Station was set up to welcome the tributes from the southwest countries.

古文：初，入贡海舟至，有司封识，俟奏报，然后起运。
现代文：当初，进贡的海船到来，主管官吏封存题签，等待上奏回报，然后起运。
English: At first, when the tribute-paying ship arrived, the officials in charge would seal the inscription, wait for the return, and then start the transport.

古文：宣宗命至即驰奏，不待报随送至京。
现代文：宣宗命令到来便迅速奏闻，不需等待回报随即送到京城。
English: When the proclamation order arrived, it was quickly reported, and without waiting for a return, it was immediately sent to Beijing.

古文：武宗时，提举市舶太监毕真言： 旧制，泛海诸船，皆市舶司专理，近领於镇巡及三司官，乞如旧便。 
现代文：武宗时期提举市舶太监毕真说： 旧有制度，航海各船，都是市舶司专管，最近由镇巡和三司官管理，请求按照旧办法好。 
English: Bi Zhen, who was promoted to the position of the city's shipping eunuch during the Wuzong period, said: Under the old system, all ships at sea were under the exclusive control of the city's shipping department. Recently, they have been managed by the town patrol and the three officers. Requests should be made according to the old method.

古文：礼部议：市舶职司进贡方物，其泛海客商及风泊番船，非敕旨所载，例不当预。
现代文：礼部讨论：市舶主掌各地进贡土特产，航海的客商和风泊的番船，不是敕命旨意所载，按规定不应当干预。
English: The ceremonial affairs department discussed: the city's ships are in charge of the tribute of local special products from all over the country, the sailing merchants and the wind-parked guard ships, are not contained in the will of the emperor, and should not interfere according to the regulations.

古文：中旨令如熊宣旧例行。
现代文：皇帝从内宫降旨按熊宣旧有规定施行。
English: The Emperor's decrees issued from the Inner Palace will be implemented according to the old regulations of Xiong Xuan.

古文：宣先任市舶太监也，尝以不预满剌加诸国番舶抽分，奏请兼理，为礼部所劾而罢。
现代文：熊宣，是前任市舶太监，曾经因不干预满刺加等国番舶抽分，上奏请求兼管，被礼部弹劾而罢免。
English: Xiong Xuan, the former city shipping eunuch, was impeached and dismissed by the Ministry of Ceremonies for not intervening in the drawing of points from the ships of Manchukuo and other countries, and for being in charge of the request for submission.

古文：刘瑾私真，谬以为例云。
现代文：刘瑾偏袒毕真，错误地以他作为事例。
English: Liu Bei favored Bi Zhen and mistakenly used him as an example.

古文：嘉靖二年，日本使宗设、宋素卿分道入贡，互争真伪。
现代文：嘉靖二年，日本派宗设、宋素卿分路进贡，互相争论真假。
English: In the second year of Jiajing, the Japanese sect and Song Suqing divided the tribute and argued about the truth and falsehood.

古文：市舶中官赖恩纳素卿贿，右素卿，宗设遂大掠宁波。
现代文：市舶宦官赖恩收纳宋素卿的贿赂，袒护宋素卿，宗设便大肆抢掠宁波。
English: Ryen, the city's naval officer, accepted bribes from Song Suqing, protected Song Suqing, and then plundered Ningbo.

古文：给事中夏言言倭患起於市舶。
现代文：给事中夏言说倭祸患产生于市舶。
English: At the time of the incident, Natsugen said that the Yamato disaster originated in the city of Hakodate.

古文：遂罢之。
现代文：于是罢除。
English: So I gave up.

古文：市舶既罢，日本海贾往来自如，海上奸豪与之交通，法禁无所施，转为寇贼。
现代文：市舶罢除以后，日本海商往来自如，海上的奸猾豪强与海商勾结，法律禁令无法施行，转变成寇贼。
English: After the abolition of the city's ships, the Japanese maritime merchants came from everywhere, the treacherous and powerful at sea colluded with the maritime merchants, the legal ban could not be enforced, and they turned into robbers.

古文：二十六年，倭寇百艘久泊宁、台，数千人登岸焚劫。
现代文：二十六年，倭寇一百艘船长久停泊在宁、台，敷干人登岸焚烧抢劫。
English: In the twenty-sixth year, a hundred Wokou ships anchored for a long time in Ning and Tai, and the Shikang people came ashore to burn and loot.

古文：浙江巡抚朱纨访知舶主皆贵官大姓，市番货皆以虚直，转鬻牟利，而直不时给，以是构乱。
现代文：浙江巡抚朱鱿访察了解到舶主都是贵官大姓，买番货都用没有实付的空价，转卖牟取利润，而价值不按时还给，因此发生骚乱。
English: Zhu Xi, the governor of Zhejiang Province, visited and learned that the owners of the ships were all high-ranking officials. The goods were bought at short prices that were not actually paid, resold for profit, and the value was not returned on time. As a result, riots occurred.

古文：乃严海禁，毁馀皇，奏请镌谕戒大姓，不报。
现代文：于是严格海禁，毁坏大船，上奏请求镑刻训谕告诫大姓。朝廷不回复。
English: As a result, there was a strict naval ban, the great ship was destroyed, and the imperial court did not reply to the petition requesting the imperial edict to admonish the eldest son.

古文：二十八年，纨又言： 长澳诸大侠林恭等勾引夷舟作乱，而巨奸关通射利，因为向导，躏我海滨，宜正典刑。 
现代文：二十八年，朱鱿又说： 长澳等大侠林恭等人勾结外夷船作乱，而大奸人串通谋取财利，因而作向导，蹂躏我海滨，应该以刑法处置。 
English: In 1928, Zhu Xi also said, "Chang'ao and other great heroes such as Lin Qiong colluded with foreigners to sabotage ships, while the great traitors colluded to seek financial gain, thus acting as guides and ravaging our seashore. They should be dealt with according to criminal law."

古文：部覆不允。
现代文：部批覆不允许。
English: Ministerial approval is not permitted.

古文：而通番大猾，纨辄以便宜诛之。
现代文：而勾结番人的大奸人，朱鱿便根据实际情况诛杀掉。
English: As for the traitor who colluded with the guards, Zhu Xi killed him according to the actual situation.

古文：御史陈九德劾纨措置乖方，专杀启衅。
现代文：御史陈九德弹劾朱鱿处理方法不当，专主杀戮开启争端。
English: Historian Chen Jiude's impeachment of Zhu Xi was handled improperly, and the killing of the dictator opened a dispute.

古文：帝逮纨听勘。
现代文：皇帝逮捕朱鱿听候审问。
English: The emperor arrested Zhu Xi to await interrogation.

古文：纨既黜，奸徒益无所惮，外交内讧，酿成祸患。
现代文：朱鱿被废黜后，奸猾之徒更加无所忌惮，对外勾结，内部互相争斗，造成祸患。
English: After Zhu Xi was deposed, the treacherous people were even more unscrupulous, colluding with the outside world and fighting with each other internally, causing disasters.

古文：汪直、徐海、陈东、麻叶等起，而海上无宁日矣。
现代文：汪直、徐海、陈束、麻叶等人起事，海上没有了安宁的日子。
English: Wang Zhi, Xu Hai, Chen Zuc, Ma Ye and others revolted, and there was no peace on the sea.

古文：三十五年，倭寇大掠福建、浙、直，都御史胡宗宪遣其客蒋洲、陈可愿使倭宣谕。
现代文：三十五年，倭寇大肆劫掠福建、浙、童，都御史胡宗宪派遣他的门客蒋洲、陈可愿出使倭宣示训谕。
English: In the 35th year, the wokou plundered Fujian, Zhejiang, and Tong extensively, and the governor of the capital, Hu Zongxian, sent his protégé, Jiang Zhou, and Chen Ke, to announce the edict.

古文：还报，倭志欲通贡市。
现代文：返回报告，倭的心志想要输通贡市。
English: Report back, Wa's ambition is to export Tonggong City.

古文：兵部议不可，乃止。
现代文：兵部商议不同意，便停止。
English: When the Ministry of Military Affairs disagreed with the proposal, it was stopped.

古文：三十九年，凤阳巡抚唐顺之议复三市舶司。
现代文：三十九年，凤阳巡抚唐顺之提议恢复三市舶司。
English: In the 39th year, Fengyang Inspector Tang Shun proposed to restore the three city shipping companies.

古文：部议从之。
现代文：户部商议听从。
English: The Ministry of Industry and Trade agreed to their request.

古文：四十四年，浙江以巡抚刘畿言，仍罢。
现代文：四十四年，浙江因巡抚刘畿奏言，仍然罢除。
English: In 1944, the governor of Zhejiang Province, Liu Qi, was still dismissed because of his speech.

古文：福建开而复禁。
现代文：福建开设后又禁止。
English: It was banned again after it opened in Fujian.

古文：万历中，复通福建互市，惟禁市硝黄。
现代文：万历年间，又开通福建互市，只是禁止交男硝黄。
English: During the Wanli period, Fujian reciprocal market was opened, but it was forbidden to have sex with men.

古文：已而两市舶司悉复，以中官领职如故。
现代文：随后两市舶司全部恢复，用宦官管理职掌如故。
English: Subsequently, the shipping companies of the two cities were all restored, with eunuchs managing the duties as before.

古文：永乐间，设马市三：一在开原南关，以待海西；一在开原城东五里，一在广宁，皆以待朵颜三卫。
现代文：永乐年间，设立马市三处：一处在开原南关，以对待海西；一处在开原城东五里，一处在广宁，都用以对待朵颜三卫。
English: During the Yongle period, three horse cities were set up: one in Kaiyuan South Pass to deal with the West Sea, one in Kaiyuan City East Five Mile, and one in Guangning, all of which were used to deal with Doyan Sanwei.

古文：定直四等：上直绢八疋，布十二，次半之，下二等各以一递减。
现代文：规定价值为四等；上等值绢八匹，布十二匹；第二等是上等的一半；下二等各以一匹递减。
English: The specified value is four classes; the upper equivalent is eight horses for ploughing and twelve horses for cloth; the second class is half of the upper class; the lower two classes are reduced by one horse each.

古文：既而城东、广宁市皆废，惟开原南关马市独存。
现代文：随后城束、广宁马市都废弃，只有开原南关马市独自保存。
English: Subsequently, Chengzhuang and Guangningma were abandoned, and only Kaiyuan Nanganma was preserved independently.

古文：大同马市始正统三年，巡抚卢睿请令军民平价市驼马，达官指挥李原等通译语，禁市兵器、铜铁。
现代文：大同马市开始于正统三年，巡抚卢睿请求命令军民平价交易驼马，达官指挥李原等人通译语，禁止贸易兵器、铜铁。
English: Datong Horse Market began in the third year of the Qing Dynasty. Governor Lu Rui requested that the military and civilians should be ordered to trade camels at the same price, and the high-ranking commander Li Yuan and others translated the language, prohibiting the trade of weapons, copper and iron.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝听从他的请求。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：十四年，都御史沈固请支山西行都司库银市马。
现代文：十四年，都御史沈固请求支取山西行都司库银买马。
English: In the 14th year, the governor of the capital, Shen Gu, requested to withdraw the treasurer's money for the trip to Shanxi.

古文：时也先贡马互市，中官王振裁其马价，也先大举入寇，遂致土木之变。
现代文：当也先进贡马进行贸易时，宦官王振裁减他的马价，也先大规模入侵，于是导致土木事变。
English: When the eunuch Wang Zhencai reduced the price of his horses, he also made a large-scale invasion first, which led to the Civil Engineering Incident.

古文：成化十四年，陈钺抚辽东，复开三卫马市。
现代文：成化十四年，陈钹巡抚辽东，恢复开放三卫马市。
English: In the 14th year of Chenghua, Chen Qi, the governor of Liaodong, resumed the opening of Sanweima City.

古文：通事刘海、姚安肆侵牟，朵颜诸部怀怨，扰广宁，不复来市。
现代文：通事刘海、姚安肆意侵吞牟利，朵颜诸部心怀怨恨，骚扰广宁，不再前来贸易。
English: Liu Hai and Yao An, who were in charge of communications, wantonly embezzled and profited, and the various ministries harbored resentment, harassed Guangning, and no longer came to trade.

古文：兵部尚书王越请令参将、布政司官各一员监之，毋有所侵克。
现代文：兵部尚书王越请求命令参将、布政司官各一人监督，不要有侵吞克扣。
English: The commander of the military department, Shang Shu Wang Yue, requested an order to supervise the general and the political secretary one by one, and not to have any embezzlement.

古文：遂治海、安二人罪。
现代文：于是刘海、姚安二人获罪。
English: As a result, Liu Hai and Yao An were both found guilty.

古文：寻令海西及朵颜三卫入市；开原月一市，广宁月二市，以互市之税充抚赏。
现代文：不久命令海西和朵颜三卫入内贸易；开原每月贸易一次，广宁每月贸易=次，用贸易所收的税充作抚赏。
English: Soon, he ordered Haixi and Doyan Sanwei to carry out domestic trade; Kaiyuan to trade once a month, Guangning to trade once a month, and the taxes collected from trade to be used as a reward.

古文：正德时，令验放入市者，依期出境，不得挟弓矢，非互市日，毋辄近塞垣。
现代文：正德时期，命令验证放入贸易的，按期出境，不能挟带弓箭，不是贸易日，不准靠近边塞墙垣。
English: During the Zhengde period, the order verified that those who were allowed to enter the trade would leave the country on schedule, and they could not take bows and arrows with them. It was not a trade day, and they were not allowed to approach the border wall.

古文：嘉靖三十年，以总兵仇鸾言，诏於宣府、大同开马市，命侍郎史道总理之。
现代文：嘉靖三十年，因总兵仇鸾奏言，下诏在宣府、大同开放马市，命令侍郎史道全面管理。
English: In the 30th year of Jiajing, due to the general enmity of the soldiers, he made a speech, issued an edict to open Ma City in Xuanfu and Datong, and ordered his servant, Shi Dao, to fully manage it.

古文：兵部员外郎杨继盛谏。
现代文：兵部员外郎杨继盛劝谏。
English: Yang Jisheng, the son-in-law of a member of the military department, advised him to quit.

古文：不从。
现代文：不听从。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：俺答旋入寇抄，大同市则寇宣府，宣府市则寇大同。
现代文：俺答不久入侵抄掠，大同市便侵犯宣府，宣府市便侵犯大同。
English: We soon invaded and plundered, Datong City invaded Xuanfu, and Xuanfu City invaded Datong.

古文：币未出境，警报随至。
现代文：币还没有出境，警报随后就到。
English: The money has not left the country yet, and the alert comes later.

古文：帝始悔之，召道还。
现代文：皇帝纔感到后悔，召回史道。
English: Emperor Yao felt regret and recalled Shi Tao.

古文：然诸部嗜马市利，未敢公言大举，而边臣亦多畏慑，以互市啖之。
现代文：然而诸部贪图马市的利益，不敢公然宣称要大举侵犯，而边防守臣也多畏惧，用相互贸易来给他好处。
English: However, the ministries covet the interests of the horse city and dare not openly declare that they want to aggressively invade it, while the border defense minister is also more afraid and uses mutual trade to give him benefits.

古文：明年罢大同马市，宣府犹未绝，抄掠不已，乃并绝之。
现代文：第二年罢除大同马市，宣府还没有断绝，由于抢掠不止，便一并断绝。
English: In the second year, Datongma City was abolished, but Xuanfu was not yet abolished. However, because of the continuous looting, it was abolished at the same time.

古文：隆庆四年，俺答孙把汉那吉来降，於是封贡互市之议起。
现代文：隆庆四年，俺答的孙子把汉那吉来归降，于是封贡互市的议论兴起。
English: In the fourth year of the Longqing era, the grandson of Ippon took Hanaji to surrender, and the discussion of mutual tribute arose.

古文：而宣、大互市复开，边境稍静。
现代文：而宣、大互相贸易恢复开放，边境稍稍安静。
English: However, the Sino-Japanese mutual trade is open again, and the border is a little quieter.

古文：然抚赏甚厚，朝廷为省客兵饷、减哨银以充之。
现代文：然而安抚赏赐十分丰厚，朝廷为此节省由外地调来的军队的军饷、减少哨银以充实。
English: However, the reward for appeasement was very rich, so the imperial court saved the military pay of the troops transferred from other places and reduced the amount of sentry money to make up for it.

古文：频年加赏，而要求滋甚，司事者复从中乾没，边费反过当矣。
现代文：连年增加赏赐，而要求更多，主管此事的人又从中侵吞，边防费用反而超过相抵的数目。
English: Year after year they increased the bounty, and demanded more, and those in charge of the matter embezzled from it, and the cost of border protection exceeded the amount.

古文：辽东义州木市，万历二十三年开，事具李化龙传。
现代文：辽东义州木市，万历二十三年开设，事情详细参见《李化龙传》。
English: Liaodong Yizhou Mishi, opened in the 23rd year of Wanli, see "Li Huadong Biography" for details.

古文：二十六年从巡抚张思忠奏罢之，遂并罢马市。
现代文：二十六年，听从巡抚张思忠的奏言，罢除木市，于是一并罢除马市。
English: In the 26th year, heeded the speech of the governor Zhang Sizhong, and dismissed the wooden city, and then dismissed the horse city.

古文：其后总兵李成梁力请复，而蓟辽总督万世德亦疏於朝。
现代文：此后总兵李成梁竭力请求恢复，而蓟辽总督万世德也向朝廷上疏。
English: After that, the commander-in-chief, Li Chengliang, tried his best to request the restoration, and the governor of Liao, Wan Shide, also appealed to the court.

古文：二十九年复开马、木二市，后以为常。
现代文：二十九年，恢复开放马、木二市，后来成为常规。
English: In 1929, the reopening of Ma and Mii was resumed, and later became a regular practice.

