古文：起重光赤奋若，尽昭阳单阏六月，凡二年有奇。
现代文：起重光赤奋若，尽昭阳单阏六月，凡二年有奇。
English: If the lifting light is red-hot, the sun is shining brightly in June, every two years there is a miracle.

古文：肃宗文明武德大圣大宣孝皇帝下之下
现代文：肃宗文明武德大圣大宣孝皇帝下之下
English: under the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, the great saint of civilization and martial arts,

古文：上元二年辛丑，公元七六一年春，正月，癸卯，史思明改元应天。
现代文：唐纪三十八唐肃宗上元二年春季，正月癸卯史思明改年号为应天。
English: In the spring of the second year of the thirty-eighth year of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Xuanzong changed the name of the year to Yingtian.

古文：张景超引兵攻杭州，败李藏用将李强于石夷门。
现代文：张景超率军进攻杭州，在石夷门击败李藏用的部将李强。
English: Zhang Jingchao led the army to attack Hangzhou, and defeated Li Qiang, the general of Li Zang, at Shiyi Gate.

古文：孙待封自武康南出，将会景超攻杭州，温晁据险击败之；待封脱身奔乌程，李可封以常州降。
现代文：孙待封从武康南下，将要会同张景超进攻杭州，温晁凭借险要地形将孙待封击败，孙待封脱身逃往乌程，李可封献出常州向朝廷投降。
English: Sun Chifeng went south from Wukang and was going to attack Hangzhou together with Zhang Jingchao. Wen Qi defeated Sun Chifeng by virtue of the dangerous terrain, Sun Chifeng escaped and fled to Wucheng, and Li Kefeng surrendered Changzhou to the imperial court.

古文：丁未，田神功使特进杨惠元等将千五百人西击王恒。
现代文：丁未，田神功派遣特进杨惠元等人率领一千五百人向西攻击王。
English: Ding Wei, Tian Sheng Gong dispatched Yang Hui Yuan and others, who led fifteen hundred people, to attack Wang to the west.

古文：辛亥夜，神功先遣特进范知新等将四千人自白沙济，西趣下蜀；邓景山等将千人自海陵济，东趣常州；神功与邢延恩将三千人军于瓜洲，壬子，济江。
现代文：辛亥夜里，田神功先派遣特进范知新等人率领四千人从白沙渡长江，西赴下蜀；邓景山率领一千人从海陵渡过长江，东奔常州；随后田神功与邢延恩率领三千人驻军瓜洲，壬子，渡过长江。
English: On the night of Xinhai, Tian Sheng Gong first dispatched the special advance Fan Zhixin and others to lead four thousand people from Baisha to cross the Yangtze River and west to Shimo Shu; Deng Jingshan led one thousand people to cross the Yangtze River from Hailing and east to Changzhou; then Tian Sheng Gong and Zou Yenn led three thousand garrison troops to Guazhou and Renzi and crossed the Yangtze River.

古文：展将步骑万馀陈于蒜山；神功以舟载兵趣金山，会大风，五舟飘抵金山下，展屠其二舟，沉其三舟，神功不得度，还军瓜洲。
现代文：刘展率领步骑兵一万多人在蒜山布阵。田神功用船运载军队奔赴金山，恰巧路遇大风，有五艘船漂到了金山下，刘展便杀掉了其中二艘船上的士兵，又将另三艘船凿沉，田神功无法再渡长江，只好回师瓜州。
English: Liu Zhen led more than ten thousand infantry and cavalry to set up a line of battle in the Garlic Mountain. Tian Shengong used a boat to transport the army to Jinshan. It just so happened that there was a strong wind. Five boats floated to the bottom of Jinshan. Liu Zhen killed two of the soldiers on the boats and scuttled the other three boats. Tian Zheng was unable to cross the Yangtze River again and had to return to Guazhou.

古文：而范知新等兵已至下蜀，展击之，不胜。
现代文：而那时范知新等人的军队已经到达下蜀，刘展攻击范知新，未能获胜。
English: At that time, Fan Zhixin's army and others had already arrived in Lower Shu. Liu Zhan attacked Fan Zhixin and failed to win.

古文：弟殷劝展引兵逃入海，可延岁月，展曰： 若事不济，何用多杀人父子乎！
现代文：刘展弟弟刘殷劝刘展率领军队入海逃命，这样可以拖延时间，刘展说： 如果大事不能成功，何苦要多杀人父子呢？
English: Liu Zhen's brother, Liu Yin, advised Liu Zhen to lead the army into the sea to escape, so that time could be delayed. Liu Zhen said: If the great event cannot succeed, why bother to kill more fathers and sons?

古文：死，早晚等耳！ 
现代文：早死晚死还不是一样！ 
English: Early death is not the same as late death!

古文：遂更帅众力战。
现代文：于是刘展再次率领部众死战。
English: As a result, Liu Zhan once again led the troops in a fight to the death.

古文：将军贾隐林射展，中目而仆，遂斩之。刘殷、许峄等皆死。
现代文：将军贾隐林用箭射击刘展，击中他的眼睛，刘展倒在地上，于是被贾隐林杀死。刘殷、许峄等人也都战死。
English: General Jia Yinglin shot Liu Zhen with an arrow, hitting him in the eye. Liu Zhen fell to the ground and was killed by Jia Yinglin. Liu Yin, Xu Jun and others also died in the battle.

古文：隐林，滑州人也。
现代文：贾隐林是滑州人。
English: Jia Yinglin is from Slum.

古文：杨惠元等击破王恒于淮南，恒引兵东走，至常熟，乃降。
现代文：杨惠元等人在淮南击败王，王率军向东逃跑，到达常熟时，才投降。
English: Yang Huiyuan and others defeated Wang in Huainan. Wang and his army fled eastward and only surrendered when they reached Changshu.

古文：孙待封诣李藏用降。
现代文：孙待封也到李藏用处投降。
English: Sun Chifeng also surrendered to Li Zang.

古文：张景超聚兵至七千馀人，闻展死，悉以兵授张法雷，使攻杭州，景超逃入海。
现代文：张景超聚集的军队达到七千多人，听到刘展已死，便将全部军队交给张法雷，让他进攻杭州，张景超自己入海逃命。
English: Zhang Jingchao gathered an army of more than seven thousand people. When he heard that Liu Zhen was dead, he handed over the entire army to Zhang Falei and let him attack Hangzhou. Zhang Jingchao himself fled into the sea.

古文：法雷至杭州，李藏用击破之，馀党皆平。
现代文：张法雷到达杭州，李藏用击败了他，歼余军队全部被平定。
English: Zhang Falei arrived in Hangzhou, Li Zangde defeated him, and the remaining troops were all subdued.

古文：平卢军大掠十馀日。
现代文：平卢军大肆虏掠十多天。
English: The Pinglu army plundered and pillaged for more than ten days.

古文：安、史之乱，乱兵不及江、淮，至是，其民始罹荼毒矣。
现代文：安、史之乱的时候，叛军尚未到达江、淮地区，到这时，江、淮地区的百姓才遭受战乱的蹂躏。
English: At the time of the An-Shi Rebellion, the rebels had not yet reached the Jiang and Huai regions, and it was only then that the people in the Jiang and Huai regions suffered the ravages of war.

古文：荆南节度使吕諲奏，请以江南之潭、岳、郴、邵、永、道、连，黔中之涪州，皆隶荆南；从之。
现代文：荆南节度使吕上奏：请求将江南的潭州、岳州、郴州、邵州、永州、道州、连州，黔中的涪州，都归属荆南管辖。
English: The Jingnan Festival made Lu Shangso: request that the southern part of the Yangtze River, including Tanzhou, Yuezhou, Zhangzhou, Shaozhou, Yongzhou, Daozhou, Lianzhou, and Zhangzhou in the middle of the Yangtze River, all belong to the jurisdiction of Jingnan.

古文：二月，奴剌、党项寇宝鸡，烧大散关，南侵凤州，杀刺史萧洩，大掠而西；凤翔节度使李鼎追击破之。
现代文：肃宗同意了这一请求。二月，奴剌、党项进犯宝鸡，焚烧大散关，向南入侵凤州，杀掉刺史萧，大肆掠夺，然后西归。凤翔节度使李鼎前去追击，将他们击败。
English: Su Zong agreed to this request. In February, Nuxuan and Dangxiang attacked Baoji, burned Dasankuan, invaded Fengzhou in the south, killed Jishi Xiao, plundered extensively, and then returned to the west. Fengxiang Jiedu sent Li Ding to pursue and defeat them.

古文：戊辰，新罗王金嶷入朝，因请宿卫。
现代文：戊辰，新罗王金嶷入朝，奏请留下为朝廷值宿警卫。
English: When the King of Silla, Jin Xuan, entered the imperial court, he requested to stay behind as a guard on duty for the imperial court.

古文：或言： 洛中将士皆燕人，久戍思归，上下离心，急击之，可破也。 
现代文：有人说： 洛中的将士都是燕地人，因长期戍守洛中，都思归故乡，军中上下离心离德，这时攻击他们，就可以将他们打败。 
English: Some people said: The soldiers in Luochu are all Yan people. Because they have stayed in Luochu for a long time, they all miss their hometowns. The soldiers in the army have left Germany. If you attack them at this time, you can defeat them.

古文：陕州观军容使鱼朝恩以为信然，屡言于上，上敕李光弼等进取东京。
现代文：陕州观军容使鱼朝恩信以为然，多次在肃宗面前提到此事，于是肃宗命令李光弼等人去攻取东京。
English: Gu Jun Rong of Shaanxi believed the fish to be a sign of gratitude to the emperor, and repeatedly mentioned the matter in front of Su Zong. Therefore, Su Zong ordered Li Guangyao and others to attack Tokyo.

古文：光弼奏称： 贼锋尚锐，未可轻进。 
现代文：李光弼上奏说： 贼军士气还很盛，不可轻举冒进。 
English: Li Guangyao said at the beginning of the speech: The morale of the thief army is still very strong, and it is not easy to advance.

古文：朔方节度使仆固怀恩，勇而愎，麾下皆蕃、汉劲卒，恃功，多不法，郭子仪宽厚曲容之，每用兵临敌，倚以集事；李光弼性严，一裁之以法，无所假贷。
现代文：朔方节度使仆固怀恩生性勇敢，但刚愎自用，他的部下都是蕃、汉劲旅，他们依仗有功，做了许多违法乱纪的事情，郭子仪对他们宽仁厚待，委曲包容，每次在临敌用兵之际，都依靠他们成事。而李光弼生性严厉，将他们一一绳之以法，决不包容。
English: Guo Ziyi treated his subordinates generously and generously, and was tolerant of their irregularities. He relied on them every time when he had to use troops against the enemy, and depended on them to achieve his goals. Li Guangxu, however, was a stern man, and would not tolerate his subordinates being brought to justice one by one.

古文：怀恩惮光弼而心恶之，乃附朝恩，言东都可取。
现代文：仆固怀恩害怕李光弼，内心又十分厌恶他，于是附合鱼朝恩的意见，说东京可以攻取。
English: Minion Gu Huai'en was afraid of Li Guangyao and loathed him in his heart, so he agreed with Yu Chaon's opinion that Tokyo could be conquered.

古文：由是中使相继，督光弼使出师，光弼不得已，使郑陈节度使李抱玉守河阳，与怀恩将兵会朝恩及神策节度使卫伯玉攻洛阳。
现代文：由此，中使一个接着一个，督促李光弼出师，李光弼迫不得已，派遣郑陈节度使李抱玉镇守河阳，自己与仆固怀恩率领军队会合鱼朝恩及神策节度使卫伯玉进攻洛阳。
English: As a result, the Chinese envoys one after another urged Li Guangyao to dispatch a division. Li Guangyao had no choice but to send Zheng Chen Jiedu to make Li Baoyu Zhen guard the city of Heyang. He and his servant Gu Wai'en led the army to meet Yu Chaon and the divine plan to make Wei Boyu attack Luoyang.

古文：戊寅，陈于邙山。
现代文：戊寅，官军在邙山布阵。
English: In Wuyin, the government army is setting up camp on Lushan Mountain.

古文：光弼命依险而陈，怀恩陈于平原，光弼曰： 依险则可以进，可以退；若平原，战而不利则尽矣。
现代文：李光弼下令军队依据险要地形布阵，当时仆固怀恩在平原地带布阵，李光弼对他说： 依据险要地形布阵，可以进攻，也可以退守；如果在平原地带布阵，交战不利就全完了。
English: Li Guangyao ordered the army to set up a formation according to the critical terrain. At that time, Min Gu Wai Tong set up a formation in the plain area. Li Guangyao said to him: According to the critical terrain, you can attack or retreat; if you set up a formation in the plain area, the unfavorable engagement will be completely over.

古文：思明不可忽也。 
现代文：我们不能小看史思明这个人。 
English: We cannot underestimate Shi Siming.

古文：命移于险，怀恩复止之。
现代文：于是命令军队转移到险要的地方布阵，但仆固怀恩又制止了这种做法。
English: So he ordered the army to move to the critical place to set up a line of battle, but the servant Gu Wai Yan stopped this practice.

古文：史思明乘其陈未定，进兵薄之，官军大败，死者数千人，军资器械尽弃之。
现代文：这时，史思明乘官军阵势还没有布署完毕，发兵进攻，结果官军大败，死了数千人，军资器械全部丢弃。
English: At this time, Shi Siming led the government army, whose deployment had not yet been completed, and launched an attack. As a result, the government army was defeated, thousands of people died, and all military equipment was discarded.

古文：光弼、怀恩渡河走保闻喜，朝恩、伯玉奔还陕，抱玉亦弃河阳走，河阳、怀州皆没于贼。
现代文：李光弼、仆固怀恩渡过黄河，退保闻喜，鱼朝恩、卫伯玉逃回陕州，李抱玉也放弃河阳城逃跑，于是河阳、怀州都陷入叛军之手。
English: Li Guangyao and Min Gu Hui'en crossed the Yellow River and were released, while Yu Chaon and Wei Bo-yu fled back to Shaanxi. Li Baoyu also abandoned Heyang City and fled. As a result, Heyang and Hui Zhou fell into the hands of the rebels.

古文：朝廷闻之，大惧，益兵屯陕。
现代文：朝廷得知此事，大为惊恐，便增兵驻守陕州。
English: When the Imperial Court learned of this, it was greatly alarmed and increased the number of troops stationed in Shaanxi.

古文：李揆与吕諲同为相，不相悦。
现代文：李揆与吕同时担任宰相，他们互相看不起。
English: Li Qian and Lu served as prime ministers at the same time, and they despised each other.

古文：諲在荆南，以善政闻，揆恐其复入相，奏言置军湖南非便，又阴使人如荆、湖求諲过失。
现代文：吕在荆南时，以善治政事而闻名，李揆害怕他再次入朝出任宰相，便上奏说在湖南设置军镇很不便利，同时，又偷偷地派人到荆南、湖南，收集吕的过失。
English: When Lyu was in Jingnan, he was famous for his good governance. Fearing that he would once again enter the imperial court to serve as prime minister, Li Gan made a report that it would be very inconvenient to set up a military town in Hunan. At the same time, he secretly sent people to Jingnan and Hunan to collect Lyu's faults.

古文：諲上疏讼揆罪，癸未，贬揆袁州长史，以河中节度使萧华为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：吕上书控告李揆之罪，癸未，肃宗将李揆贬为袁州长史，任命河中节度使萧华为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Lü Shangshu accused Li Yu of the crime, and Su Zong demoted Li Yu to Yuan Guo Shi, and appointed Kawanzhong Jiedu to make Xiao Hua the attendant of Zhongshu and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：史思明猜忍好杀，群下小不如意，动至族诛，人不自保。
现代文：史思明猜忌残忍，好杀无辜，部下稍不如他的意，动辄就诛杀九族，因而人人都不能自保。
English: Shi Siming is suspicious of cruelty and likes to kill innocent people. His subordinates are not as good as he wants them to be, and they kill the nine tribes at every turn, so no one can protect themselves.

古文：朝义，其长子也，常从思明将兵，颇谦谨，爱士卒，将士多附之；无宠于思明，思明爱少子朝清，使守范阳，常欲杀朝义，立朝清为太子，左右颇泄其谋。
现代文：史朝义是史思明的长子，经常跟随史思明带兵，比较恭谦谨慎，爱惜士兵，将士们多归心于他，但史朝义没有受到史思明的宠爱。史思明偏爱小儿子史朝清，派他镇守范阳，时常想杀掉史朝义，立史朝清为太子，史思明的随从对他的打算颇有泄露。
English: Shi Chao Yi was the eldest son of Shi Siming. He often followed Shi Siming to lead the troops. He was rather humble and prudent, and cherished soldiers. Many soldiers were devoted to him, but Shi Chao Yi was not favored by Shi Siming. Shi Siming favored his youngest son, Shi Chao Qing, and sent him to guard Fanyang. He often wanted to kill Shi Chao Yi and make Shi Chao Qing the crown prince. Shi Siming's followers were quite open about his intentions.

古文：思明既破李光弼，欲乘胜西入关，使朝义将兵为前锋，自北道袭陕城，思明自南道将大军继之。
现代文：史思明已经击败李光弼的军队，想乘胜西进入关，便派遣史朝义率兵作为前锋，自北道袭击陕城，史思明亲率大军自南道进攻。
English: Shishiming had already defeated Li Guangyao's army and wanted to take advantage of the victory to enter Guan, so he sent Shichao Yi and his soldiers as the vanguard to attack Shaanxi City from the North Province, and Shishiming's relatives led the army to attack from the South Province.

古文：三月，甲午，朝义兵至礓子岭，卫伯玉逆击，破之。
现代文：三月甲午，史朝义军至礓子岭，遭到唐军卫伯玉的反击而失败。
English: On the afternoon of March 1st, the Shichosha rebels reached Shanziling, but were defeated by the counterattack of the Tang army led by Wei Boyu.

古文：朝义数进兵，皆为陕兵所败。
现代文：史朝义数次进攻，均被卫伯玉打败。
English: Shi Chaoyi attacked several times, but was defeated by Wei Boyu.

古文：思明退屯永宁，以朝义为怯，曰： 终不足成吾事！ 
现代文：史思明退兵驻守永宁，以为史朝义临阵胆怯，史思明说： 史朝义终究不能成就我的大事！ 
English: Shi Siming, who was stationed in Yongning after retiring from the military, thought that Shi Chao Yi was too timid to join the battle. Shi Siming said: After all, Shi Chao Yi cannot accomplish my great task!

古文：欲按军法斩朝义及诸将。
现代文：想要按军法斩杀史朝义及诸位将领。
English: They want to assassinate Shih Chao Yi and all the generals in accordance with military law.

古文：戊戌，命朝义筑三隅城，欲贮军粮，期一日毕，朝义筑毕，未泥，思明至，诟怒之，令左右立马监泥，斯须而毕。
现代文：戊戌，史思明命令史朝义修筑三隅城，打算贮存军粮，限期一天修完。史朝义修筑完毕，尚未抹泥，史思明来到，大肆怒骂史朝义，命令随从骑在马上监督抹泥，片刻之间完成。
English: In Wuyi, Shi Siming ordered Shi Chaoying to build the three-cornered castle, intending to store military grain, with a deadline of one day to complete the repair. Shi Chaoying completed the construction, but had not yet wiped the mud, Shi Siming came, scolded Shi Chaoying, ordered the attendant to ride on the horse to supervise the wiping of mud, and completed it in a few moments.

古文：思明又曰： 俟克陕州，终斩此贼。 
现代文：史思明又说： 等攻克陕州，终究要杀掉史朝义。 
English: Shi Siming also said: After conquering Shaanxi Province, we must finally kill Shi Chaoying.

古文：朝义忧惧，不知所为。
现代文：史朝义十分忧虑恐惧，不知如何是好。
English: Shi Chongyi was very worried and afraid, and did not know what to do.

古文：思明在鹿桥驿，令腹心曹将军将兵宿卫；朝义宿于逆旅，其部将骆悦、蔡文景说朝义曰： 悦等与王，死无日矣！
现代文：史思明在鹿桥驿，命令心腹曹将军率军值宿警卫。这时史朝义在旅馆住宿，他的部将骆悦、蔡文景劝史朝义说： 我们与您已经死到临头了！
English: Shi Siming, in Deer Bridge, ordered his adjutant general to lead the military guards on duty. At this time, Shi Chaoyi stayed at the hotel. His subordinates Luo Yue and Cai Wenjing advised Shi Chaoyi to say: "We and you are already on the verge of death!"

古文：自古有废立，请召曹将军谋之。 
现代文：自古以来就有废立君王之事，请您召见曹将军，共商大事。 
English: Since ancient times, there have been cases of dethroned emperors. I would ask you to summon General Cao to discuss this important matter.

古文：朝义俯首不应。
现代文：史朝义低着头，没有回答。
English: Shi Chao Yi kept his head down and did not answer.

古文：悦等曰： 王苟不许，悦等今归李氏，王亦不全矣。 
现代文：骆悦等人又说： 您假如不允许的话，我们今天就归附李氏，那么您也就完了。 
English: Luo Yue and others also said, "If you don't allow it, we'll join Li today, and then you're finished."

古文：朝义泣曰： 诸君善为之，勿惊圣人！ 
现代文：史朝义哭着说： 诸位好好处理这件事，不要惊吓我父亲！ 
English: Shi Chaoyi cried and said, "You all should handle this matter well, don't scare my father!"

古文：悦等乃令许叔冀之子季常召曹将军，至，则以其谋告之；曹将军知诸将尽怨，恐祸及己，不敢违。
现代文：骆悦等人就命令许叔冀的儿子许季常去召见曹将军，他来到后，就将他们的计划告诉了他。曹将军知道诸位将领都心怀怨恨，害怕自己受害，不敢违抗。
English: Luo Yue and the others ordered Xu Shu Ji, the son of Xu Shu Ji, to summon General Cao frequently. When he arrived, they told him of their plan. General Cao knew that the generals held grudges and were afraid of being harmed, so they did not dare to disobey.

古文：是夕，悦等以朝义部兵三百被甲诣驿，宿卫兵怪之，畏曹将军，不敢动。
现代文：当天傍晚，骆悦等人率领史朝义的士兵三百人，全付武装来到驿站，值宿的卫兵颇觉奇怪，但他们惧怕曹将军，不敢动手。
English: In the evening of the same day, Luo Yue and others led 300 soldiers of the historical Chao Yi, fully armed, to the station. The guards on duty felt quite strange, but they were afraid of General Cao and did not dare to do anything.

古文：悦等引兵入至思明寝所，值思明如厕，问左右，未及对，已杀数人，左右指示之。
现代文：骆悦等人带兵闯入史思明的卧室，正好史思明上厕所了，于是问他身边的人，没等他们回答，骆悦已经杀掉了好几个人，史思明身边的人指出了他的去向。
English: Luo Yue and others led soldiers to break into Shi Siming's bedroom. It just so happened that Shi Siming had gone to the toilet, so he asked the people around him. Before they could answer, Luo Yue had already killed several people. The people around Shi Siming pointed out his whereabouts.

古文：思明闻有变，逾垣至厩中，自备马乘之，悦傔人周子俊射之，中臂，坠马，遂擒之。
现代文：史思明听到情况有变，跳墙来到马厩里，自己驾马逃跑，骆悦的侍从周子俊发箭，射中手臂，史思明坠落马下，于是被他们抓住。
English: When Shi Siming heard that the situation had changed, he jumped over the wall into the stables and drove his horse to escape. Luo Yue's attendant, Zhou Zijun, fired an arrow and shot him in the arm. Shi Siming fell under the horse and was caught by them.

古文：思明问： 乱者为谁？ 
现代文：史思明问道： 谁在作乱？ 
English: Shi Siming asked: Who is causing the turmoil?

古文：悦曰： 奉怀王命。 
现代文：骆悦回答说： 奉怀王史朝义的命令。 
English: Luo Yue replied, "I am following the order of King Huai Shi Chao Yi.

古文：思明曰： 我朝来语失，宜其及此。
现代文：史思明说： 早晨我说话失口，应该得到这样的下场。
English: Shi Siming said, "In the morning, I made a slip of the tongue, and this is how it should have ended.

古文：然杀我太早，何不待我克长安！
现代文：但是这样杀我太早了，为什么不等到攻克长安呢！
English: But it's too early to kill me like this, why not wait until we conquer Chang'an!

古文：今事不成矣。 
现代文：如今不能成就大业了。 
English: You can't make it big now.

古文：悦等送思明于柳泉驿，囚之，还报朝义曰： 事成矣 。
现代文：骆悦等人将史思明押送柳泉驿，囚禁起来，然后回去报告史朝义说： 大事已经完成。 
English: Luo Yue and others sent Shi Siming to Liu Quanqian, imprisoned him, and then went back to report to Shi Chaoyi: The important work has been completed.

古文：朝义曰： 不惊圣人乎？ 
现代文：史朝义说： 没有惊吓我父亲吗？ 
English: Shi Chouyi said, "Didn't you scare my father?"

古文：悦曰： 无。 
现代文：骆悦回答说： 没有。 
English: Luo Yue replied: No.

古文：时周挚、许叔冀将后军在福昌，悦等使许季常往告之，挚惊倒于地；朝义引军还，挚、叔冀来迎，悦等劝朝义执挚，杀之。
现代文：当时周挚、许叔冀率领后军驻扎在福昌，骆悦等人派许季常前去通告此事，周挚惊倒在地。史朝义率领军队回来，周挚，许叔冀出来迎接，骆悦等人劝史朝义拿下周挚，将他杀掉。
English: At that time, Zhou Zhengyi and Xu Shuji led the rear army stationed in Fuchang, Luo Yue and others sent Xu Ji Chang to announce the matter, and Zhou Zhengyi was shocked to the ground. Shi Chao Yi led the army back, Zhou Zhengyi and Xu Shuji came out to meet, and Luo Yue and others persuaded Shi Chao Yi to take Zhou Zhengyi and kill him.

古文：军至柳泉，悦等恐众心未壹，遂缢杀思明，以氈裹其尸，橐驼负归洛阳。
现代文：军队到达柳泉，骆悦等人害怕众心不一，于是勒杀史思明，用毡毯裹尸，用骆驼运回洛阳。
English: When the army arrived at Liuquan, Luo Yue and the others were afraid of public discord, so they strangled Shi Siming, wrapped the corpse in a silk blanket, and transported it back to Luoyang by camel.

古文：朝义即皇帝位，改元显圣。
现代文：史朝义即帝位，改年号为显圣。
English: The historical meaning of the dynasty is the imperial throne, and the year name was changed to Xian Sheng.

古文：密使人至范阳，敕散骑常侍张通儒等杀朝清及朝清母辛氏并不附己者数十人。
现代文：他秘密派人到范阳，命令散骑常侍张通儒等人杀掉史朝清以及史朝清的母亲辛氏，还有数十名不归附自己的人。
English: He secretly sent people to Fanyang and ordered Zhang Tongru and others to kill Shi Chaoqing and Shi Chaoqing's mother Xin, as well as dozens of people who did not belong to him.

古文：其党自相攻击，战城中数月，死者数千人，范阳乃定。
现代文：叛军自相攻击，在城中打了几个月，死掉数千人，范阳这才安定。
English: The rebels attacked each other and fought in the city for several months, killing thousands of people. It was only then that Fanyang became stable.

古文：朝义以其将柳城李怀仙为范阳尹、燕京留守。
现代文：史朝义任命他的部将柳城人李怀仙为范阳尹、燕京留守。
English: Shi Chaoyi appointed his subordinate Li Huaixian from Liucheng as Fan Yangyin, leaving Yanjing.

古文：时洛阳四面数百里，州、县皆为丘墟，而朝义所部节度使皆安禄山旧将，与思明等夷，朝义召之，多不至，略相羁縻而已，不能得其用。
现代文：当时洛阳四周数百里，州、县城都成为废墟，而史朝义所部节度使都是安禄山的旧部将，与史思明同辈，史朝义召见他们，他们多不前来，相互之间大致仅仅维持君臣关系而已，不能为史朝义所用。
English: At that time, Luoyang was surrounded by hundreds of miles, and the prefectures and county towns were in ruins. However, the leaders of the historical and chauvinistic department were the old generals of Anlu Mountain. They were the same age as Shi Siming, and the historical and chauvinistic department summoned them. Most of them did not come, and they only maintained the relationship between monarchs and subjects. They could not be used by the historical and chauvinistic department.

古文：李光弼上表，固求自贬；制以开府仪同三司、侍中，领河中节度使。
现代文：李光弼上书，坚决要求将自己贬官。肃宗下诏让他以开府仪同三司、侍中的身份，出任河中节度使。
English: Li Guangyao wrote a letter, firmly demanding that he be demoted. Su Zong issued an edict to have him appointed as the Keifu Yi, Tong San Shi, and Waizhong, and to serve as the Kechu Festival envoy.

古文：术士长塞镇将硃融与左武卫将军窦如玢等谋奉嗣岐王珍作乱，金吾将军邢济告之。
现代文：方士长塞镇将朱融与左武卫将军窦如玢等人图谋拥戴岐王李珍叛乱，金吾将军邢济告发了他们。
English: Fang Shi, Chang Sai Zhen, Zhu Rong, Zuo Wei General Dou Ruzhen and others plotted to support the rebellion of King Li Zhen of Qi, and Kingu General Xun Ji denounced them.

古文：夏，四月，乙卯朔，废珍为庶人，溱州安置，其党皆伏诛。
现代文：夏季，四月乙卯朔，肃宗将李珍废为平民，安置到溱州，他的党羽全部伏法。
English: In the summer, in April, Su Zong abolished Li Zhen as a commoner and resettled him in Zhangzhou. All his party members fled to France.

古文：珍，业之子也。
现代文：李珍是李业的儿子。
English: Li Zhen is the son of Li Ye.

古文：丙辰，左散骑常侍张镐贬辰州司户。镐尝买珍宅故也。
现代文：丙辰，左散骑常侍张镐被贬为辰州司户，因为张镐曾经买过李珍的住宅。
English: Xing Chen, the left rider of Zhang Ye, was relegated to the position of Chenzhou steward, because Zhang Ye had once bought Li Zhen's house.

古文：己未，以吏部侍郎裴遵庆为黄门侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：己未，肃宗任命吏部侍郎裴遵庆为黄门侍郎、同平章事。
English: At the same time, Su Zong appointed Pei Zunqing, the attendant of the administrative department, as the attendant of Huangmen and Tongping.

古文：乙亥，青密节度使尚衡破史朝义兵，斩首五千馀级。
现代文：乙亥，青密节度使尚衡击败史朝义的军队，杀死五千多人。
English: In the Year of the Boar, the Qing Dynasty defeated the armies of Shi Chao Yi, killing more than five thousand people.

古文：丁丑，兗郓节度使能元皓破朝义兵。
现代文：丁丑，兖郓节度使能元皓击败史朝义的军队。
English: Ding Yuxiu and Zou Jiedu enabled Yuan Shao to defeat the army of Shichongyi.

古文：壬午，梓州刺史段子璋反，子璋骁勇，从上皇在蜀有功，东川节度使李奂奏替之，子璋举兵，袭奂于绵州。
现代文：壬午，梓州刺史段子璋谋反。段子璋作战勇猛，跟从太上皇玄宗到蜀地，立下汗马功劳，东川节度使李奂上奏要替代他，所以段子璋举兵谋反，在绵州袭击李奂。
English: In the morning of the 13th day of the 7th month, Zizhou assassinated Duanzi, who was plotting a rebellion. Duanzi fought bravely and followed Emperor Xuanzong to Shudi, where he made great contributions. Dongchuan Jiedu wanted to replace him, so Duanzi raised an army to plot a rebellion and attacked Duanzi in Mianzhou.

古文：道过遂州，剌史虢王巨苍黄修属郡礼迎之，子璋杀之。
现代文：路过遂州时，刺史虢王李巨急忙按照属郡的礼节迎接，却被段子璋杀死。
English: When passing through Suizhou, the king of Shishi, Li Jiu, hurried to greet him according to the etiquette of the county, but was killed by Duan Zixuan.

古文：李奂战败，奔成都，子璋自称梁王，改元黄龙，以绵州为龙安府，置百官，又陷剑州。
现代文：李奂战败，逃往成都，段子璋自称梁王，改年号为黄龙，以绵州为龙安府，设置百官，又攻陷剑州。
English: Li Yu was defeated and fled to Chengdu. Duan Zi Yu called himself Liang Wang, changed his name to Huanglong, made Mianzhou the capital of Longan, appointed hundreds of officials, and invaded Jianzhou.

古文：五月，己丑，李光弼自河中入朝。
现代文：五月己丑，李光弼从河中入朝。
English: In May, Li Guangyao entered the imperial court from the river.

古文：初，李辅国与张后同谋迁上皇于西内。
现代文：当初，李辅国与张后合谋将太上皇玄宗迁到西内居住。
English: At first, Li Yu and Zhang Huan conspired to move Emperor Xuanzong to live in the west.

古文：是日端午，山人李唐见上，上方抱幼女，谓唐曰： 朕念之，卿勿怪也。 
现代文：这一天是端午，隐士李唐见到肃宗，肃宗正抱着小女儿，对李唐说： 朕很顾念她，你不要见怪。 
English: This day is the Dragon Boat Festival, the hermit Li Tang saw Su Zong, Su Zong was holding his little daughter and said to Li Tang: I miss her very much, don't be surprised.

古文：对曰： 太上皇思见陛下，计亦如陛下之念公主也。 
现代文：李唐回答说： 太上皇思念和想见陛下，大概也同陛下顾念公主一样。 
English: Li Tang replied, "The Emperor misses you and wants to see you, just like your majesty misses the princess."

古文：上泫然泣下，然畏张后，尚不敢诣西内。
现代文：肃宗流下了眼泪，然而他惧怕张后，还不敢到西内去探视。
English: Su Zong shed tears, but he was afraid of Zhang Hou and did not dare to go to the West to visit.

古文：癸巳，党项寇宝鸡。
现代文：癸巳，党项进犯宝鸡。
English: Suddenly, the Party's attack on Baoji was over.

古文：初，史思明以其博州刺史令狐彰为滑郑汴节度使，将数千兵戍滑台。
现代文：从前，史思明让他的博州刺史令狐彰担任滑郑汴节度使，率领数千士兵戍守滑台。
English: Once upon a time, Shi Siming had his Boshou acolyte Shiling Xuchang serve as an envoy to the Zhengxuan Skiing Festival, leading thousands of soldiers to guard the slide.

古文：彰密因中使杨万定通表请降，徙屯杏园度。
现代文：令狐彰秘密通过中使杨万定上表请求归降，又将军队转移到杏园度驻扎。
English: During the secret passage of the order to Fox Chang, Yang Wanding made a request for surrender on the table, and the army was transferred to the apricot garden to be stationed.

古文：思明疑之，遣其将薛岌围之。
现代文：史思明怀疑令狐彰叛变，派遣部将薛岌包围他。
English: Shi Siming suspected that Ling Xuchang had mutinied, and dispatched General Xue to surround him.

古文：彰与岌战，大破之，因随万定入朝。
现代文：令狐彰与薛岌交战，将薛彰打得大败，于是跟随杨万定入朝。
English: Ling Xuchang fought against Xue Rui and defeated Xue Rui, so he followed Yang Wanding into the imperial court.

古文：甲午，以彰为滑、卫等六州节度使。
现代文：甲午肃宗任命令狐彰为滑州、卫州等六州节度使。
English: In A.D., Emperor Sui ordered Foo Chang to be the festival envoy to six states, including Luzhou and Weizhou.

古文：戊戌，平卢节度使侯希逸击史朝义范阳兵，破之。
现代文：戊戌，平卢节度使侯希逸攻击史朝义的范阳部队，将他们打败。
English: In the Pinglu Festival of the Wu and Lu Dynasties, Hou Xiyi attacked the Fanyang troops of the historical dynasty and defeated them.

古文：乙未，西川节度使崔光远与东川节度使李奂共攻绵州，庚子，拔之，斩段子璋。
现代文：乙未，西川节度使崔光远与东川节度使李奂共同进攻绵州，庚子，攻克绵州，杀掉段子璋。
English: In the second year of the Wei Dynasty, Cui Guangyuan was sent by the West River Sect to attack Mianzhou and Gengzi together with the East River Sect to conquer Mianzhou and kill Duanzi.

古文：复以李光弼为河南副元帅、太尉兼侍中，都统河南、淮南东西、山南东、荆南、江南西、浙江东西八道行营节度，出镇临淮。
现代文：肃宗重新任命李光弼为河南副元师、太尉兼侍中，都统河南、淮南东、淮南西、山南东、荆南、江南西、浙江东、浙江西八道行营节度，让他出镇临淮郡。
English: Su Zong reappointed Li Guangyao as Henan deputy division commander, lieutenant and chamberlain. He was sent to Linyi County, Henan Province, East Huai Province, West Huai Province, East Shannan Province, South Jing Province, West Jiangnan Province, East Zhejiang Province and West Zhejiang Province.

古文：六月，甲寅，青密节度使能元皓败史朝义将李元遇。
现代文：六月甲寅，青密节度使能元皓击败史朝义的部将李元遇。
English: In June, Jia Yin, the Qing Dynasty's top military strategist, enabled Yuan Shao to defeat Li Yuan Rong, the general of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：江淮都统李峘畏失守之罪，归咎于浙西节度使侯令仪，丙子，令仪坐除名，长流康州；加田神功开府仪同三司，徙徐州刺史；征李峘、邓景山还京师。
现代文：江淮都统李害怕朝廷治他失守之罪，就将责任归咎于浙西节度使侯令仪。丙子，侯令仪因此被削除名籍，远地流放到康州。肃宗加封田神功为开府仪同三司，调任徐州刺史，召李、邓景山回京师。
English: Fearing that the imperial court would punish him for his dereliction of duty, Emperor Li of the Jianghuai Empire feared that the imperial court would punish him for his dereliction of duty, so he laid the blame on Hou Lingyi, the official of the Western Zhejiang Festival. As a result, Hou Lingyi was stripped of his title and exiled to Kangzhou. Su Zong and Jiafeng Tian Shengong were appointed as the three officials of the Kaifu ceremony and the three officials of the Xuzhou ceremony, and Li and Deng Jingshan were called back to Beijing.

古文：戊寅，党项寇好畤。
现代文：戊寅，党项进犯好。
English: Wu Yin, it is good for the party to attack.

古文：秋，七月，癸未朔，日有食之，既，大星皆见。
现代文：秋季，七月癸未朔，出现日全食，大星都显现出来。
English: In autumn, in the early morning of July, there was a total solar eclipse, and the great stars all appeared.

古文：以试少府监李藏用为浙西节度副使。
现代文：肃宗任命试少府监李藏用为浙西节度副使。
English: Su Zong appointed Li Zangyong, a probationary young prefectural inspector, as the deputy envoy of the Western Zhejiang Festival.

古文：八月，癸丑朔，加开府仪同三司李辅国兵部尚书。
现代文：八月癸丑朔，肃宗加封开府仪同三司李辅国为兵部尚书。
English: In August, Su Zong's investiture ceremony was held, and he and his three subordinates, Li Yu Guo, were promoted to the military.

古文：乙未，辅国赴上，宰相朝臣皆送之，御厨具馔，太常设乐。
现代文：乙未，李辅国赴尚书省上任，宰相和朝臣都去送他，御厨摆上食品，太常卿设乐队奏乐。
English: In the second year of his reign, Li Shuoguo went to Shangshu Province to take office. The prime minister and courtiers all went to see him off, the imperial kitchen set out food, and the emperor set up an orchestra to play music.

古文：辅国骄纵日甚，求为宰相。上曰： 以卿之功，何官不可为，其如朝望未允何！ 
现代文：李辅国日益骄横放纵，请求担任宰相，肃宗对他说： 以你的功劳，有什么官不可以担任的呢？只是朝廷中有声望的大臣不同意，又怎么办呢！ 
English: Li Fuguo became more and more arrogant and self-indulgent. He asked to be appointed as prime minister. Su Zong said to him, "With your merits, what kind of position can you not hold? However, a prominent minister in the imperial court did not agree, so what should you do?

古文：辅国乃讽仆射裴冕等荐己。
现代文：李辅国就暗示仆射裴冕等人，让他们推荐自己。
English: Li Yuxuo hinted that he would recommend himself to Fuchai, Fei Guanzhong and others.

古文：上密谓萧华曰： 辅国求为宰相，若公卿表来，不得不与。 
现代文：肃宗悄悄地对萧华说： 李辅国请求担任宰相，如果公卿大臣们上表推荐的话，那就不得不给他了。 
English: Su Zong quietly said to Xiao Hua: Li Yuzhong requested to be the prime minister. If the nobles and ministers recommended him, then he would have to be given it.

古文：华出，问冕，曰： 初无此事，吾臂可断，宰相不可得！ 
现代文：萧华出宫后去问裴冕；裴冕说： 从来就没有那回事，我的臂可以断，但宰相的职位决不让他得到。 
English: After Xiao Hua left the palace, he went to ask Fei Guan. Fei Guan said, "That never happened. My arm can be broken, but the position of prime minister will never be given to him."

古文：华入言之，上大悦；辅国衔之。
现代文：萧华入宫将此事告诉肃宗，肃宗十分高兴。而李辅国则对裴冕怀恨。
English: When Xiao Hua entered the palace, he told Su Zong about this, and Su Zong was very happy. However, Li Yu Guo held a grudge against Pei Guan.

古文：己巳，李光弼赴河南行营。
现代文：己巳，李光弼前往河南行营。
English: Soon after, Li Guangyao went to Henan for a camping trip.

古文：辛巳，以殿中监李若幽为朔方、镇西、北庭、兴平、陈郑等节度行营及河中节度使，镇绛州，赐名国贞。
现代文：辛巳，肃宗任命殿中监李若幽为镇西、北庭、兴平、陈郑等节度行营以及河中节度使，镇守绛州，赐名为国贞。
English: Soon after, Su Zong appointed the palace middle warden Li Ruoyu as the commander of the festivals in the west of the town, Beiting, Xingping, Chen Zheng and other festivals, as well as the festival envoy in the middle of the river, the town guard of Zhangzhou, and was given the name Guozhen.

古文：九月，甲申，天成地平节。上于三殿置道场，以宫人为佛菩萨，北门武士为金刚神王，召大臣膜拜围绕。
现代文：九月甲申，是天成地平节，肃宗在三殿设置道场，以宫人装扮佛和菩萨，武士装扮金刚神王，命令大臣围绕着他们膜拜。
English: In September, Kashin, it was the Tiancheng Festival. Su Zong set up a dojo in the Third Hall, with courtiers dressed as Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, and warriors dressed as King Kong, and ordered the ministers to worship around them.

古文：壬寅，制去尊号，但称皇帝；去年号，但称元年；以建子月为岁首，月皆以所建为数；因赦天下。停京兆、河南、太原、凤翔四京及江陵南都之号。
现代文：壬寅，肃宗下制书去掉尊号，只称皇帝，去掉年号，只称元年，以建子月为一年的第一月，每月都以所建字的起首命名，因而大赦天下，又下令停用京兆、河南、太原、凤翔四京以及江陵南都的称号。
English: Ren Yin, Su Zong removed the honorific title from the book, only called the emperor, removed the year name, only called the first year, with the first month of the year being the first month of the year, and each month was named after the initials of the characters created. Therefore, he pardoned the world, and ordered to stop using the titles of Jing Zhao, Henan, Taiyuan, Fengxiang, Shijing and Jiangling Nandu.

古文：自今每除五品以上清望京官及郎官、御史、刺史，令举一人自代，观其所举，以行殿最。
现代文：自今以后，每当任命五品以上的清望官及郎官、御史、刺史时，都命令他们推举一人替代自己，然后朝廷考察他们所推举的人，以确定考绩先后。
English: From now on, whenever a high-ranking courtier with five or more titles is appointed, as well as a vassal, vassal, or vassal, they are ordered to nominate a person to replace themselves, and then the imperial court examines the person they have nominated to determine the order of performance evaluation.

古文：江、淮大饥，人相食。
现代文：江淮地区发生特大饥荒，出现人吃人的现象。
English: Extreme famine and cannibalism occurred in the Jianghuai region.

古文：冬，十月，江淮都统崔圆署李藏用为楚州刺史。
现代文：冬季，十月，江淮都统崔圆让李藏用暂任楚州刺史。
English: In the winter, in October, Cui Yuan, the leader of the Jianghuai Dudu, appointed Li Zang as the temporary governor of Chuzhou.

古文：会支度租庸使以刘展之乱，诸州用仓库物无准，奏请征验。
现代文：恰巧支度租庸使因为刘展之乱，各州使用仓库中的财物没有标准，上奏请求核验。
English: Due to the Liu Zhan Rebellion, the states had no standard for the use of the property in the warehouse, and the request for verification was submitted.

古文：时仓猝募兵，物多散亡，征之不足，诸将往往卖产以偿之。
现代文：当时招募士兵很仓促，财物又多流散，经核验数量不足时，于是诸位将领往往卖掉自己的财产来补偿。
English: At that time, the recruitment of soldiers was very hasty, and many belongings were scattered. When the number was insufficient after verification, the generals often sold their own property to compensate.

古文：藏用恐其及己，尝与人言，颇有悔恨。
现代文：李藏用害怕核验到自己头上，曾经对人说，对担任楚州刺史，他有点悔恨。
English: Li Zang used the fear of verification to his own head, once telling people that he was a little remorseful for serving as the history of Chuzhou.

古文：其牙将高干挟故怨，使人诣广陵告藏用反，先以兵袭之，藏用走，干追斩之。
现代文：李藏用手下的牙将高干对他怀有旧恨，派人到广陵控告李藏用谋反，并且首先用兵袭击。李藏用逃跑，高干追上去将他杀掉。
English: Li Zang used his men's teeth to lure Gao Gan into harboring old hatred against him, sent people to Guangling to accuse Li Zang of plotting a rebellion, and first attacked with soldiers. Li Zang fled, and Gao Gan chased him down and killed him.

古文：崔圆遂簿责藏用将吏以验之，将吏畏，皆附成其状。
现代文：于是崔圆按文簿次序一一盘问李藏用的将领，以核实李藏用谋反事，将领很害怕，都附和高干的说法，说李藏用谋反。
English: So Cui Yuan asked Li Zang's generals one by one, according to the order of the textbook, to verify that Li Zang was plotting a rebellion. The generals were very afraid, and they all agreed with Gao Gan's statement that Li Zang was plotting a rebellion.

古文：独孙待封坚言不反，圆命引出斩之。
现代文：唯独孙待封坚持说李藏用没有谋反，崔圆命令把他推出去斩首。
English: However, Sun Zhifeng insisted that Li Zangyong did not conspire to rebel, and Cui Yuan ordered him to be pushed out and beheaded.

古文：或谓曰： 子何不从众以求生！ 
现代文：有人对孙待封说： 你为什么不附和大家的意见求得生存呢？ 
English: Someone said to Sun Chifeng, "Why don't you follow everyone's advice to survive?"

古文：待封曰： 吾始从刘大夫，奉诏书来赴镇，人谓吾反；李公起兵灭齐大夫，今又以李公为反。
现代文：孙待封说： 起先我跟随刘大夫，奉诏书来上任，人们说我谋反，李公起兵消灭了刘大夫，如今人们又认为李公谋反。
English: Sun Chifeng said: At first, I followed Dr. Liu Tong and came to office with an imperial edict. People said that I was plotting a rebellion. Li Gong took up arms and eliminated Dr. Liu. Now, people think that Li Gong is plotting a rebellion.

古文：如此，谁则非反者，庸有极乎！
现代文：如此一来，谁才算不是谋反者呢？那还有个完吗？
English: In this way, who is not a rebel? Is there an end to it?

古文：吾宁就死，不能诬人以非罪。 
现代文：我宁愿去死，也不能诬告没有罪的人。 
English: I would rather die than falsely accuse an innocent person.

古文：遂斩之。
现代文：于是崔圆将他杀掉。
English: With that, he too was beheaded.

古文：建子月，壬午朔，上受朝贺，如正旦仪。
现代文：建子月壬午朔，肃宗接受大臣们上朝祝贺，仪式如同正月初一。
English: At the stroke of noon on the first day of the third month of the Jianzi era, Su Zong received the congratulations of the ministers of the last dynasty. The ceremony was like the first day of the first month of the year.

古文：或告鸿胪卿康谦与史朝义通，事连司农卿严庄，俱下狱。
现代文：有人控告鸿胪卿康谦与史朝义有联系，此事牵连司农卿严庄，肃宗将他们都关进监狱。
English: Some people accused Hongyuqing Kangqian of having a connection with Shi Chaoyi. This implicated the Secretary of Agriculture Yan Zhuang, and Su Zong put them all in prison.

古文：京兆尹刘晏遣吏防守庄家。
现代文：京兆尹刘晏派遣官吏看守严庄的家。
English: Emperor Jingzhao sent officials to guard Yan Zhuang's home.

古文：上寻敕出庄，引见。
现代文：不久，肃宗下令释放严庄，带他来见。
English: Soon after, Su Zong ordered Yan Zhuang to be released and brought to him.

古文：庄怨晏，因言晏与臣言，常道禁中语，矜功怨上。
现代文：严庄很恨刘晏，因而说刘晏对他说，刘晏经常传宫中一些闲话，自夸其功，埋怨皇上。
English: Yan Zhuang hated Liu Bei very much, so he said that Liu Bei told him that Liu Bei often spread some gossip in the palace, boasted of his achievements, and complained about the emperor.

古文：丁亥，贬晏通州刺史，庄难江尉，谦伏诛。
现代文：丁亥，肃宗贬刘晏为通州刺史，严庄为难江县尉，康谦伏法。
English: Dinghai, Su Zong, Liu Ye as Tongzhou Zhi Shi, Yan Zhuang as Nujiang County Lieutenant, Kang Qianfu.

古文：戊子，御史中丞元载为户部侍郎，充句当度支、铸钱、盐铁兼江淮转运等使。
现代文：戊子，御史中丞元载担任户部待郎，出任勾当度支使、铸钱使、盐铁使、兼任江淮转运使等。
English: At the beginning of his reign, Goshi Chujo, also known as Boshi Chujo, served as the head of the household, and also served as the chief of staff, the chief of the mint, the chief of the salt and iron works, and the chief of the Jianghuai Railway.

古文：载初为度支郎中，敏悟善奏对，上爱其才，委以江淮漕运，数月，遂代刘晏，专掌财利。
现代文：从前元载担任度支郎中时，机敏而又善于奏对，肃宗爱他有才气，委任他掌管江淮漕运事务，数月之后，便取代刘晏，专管财政事务。
English: When he served as a middle-ranking official in the Yuan Dynasty, he was quick-witted and good at playing the piano. Su Zong loved his talent and appointed him to be in charge of the affairs of the Jianghuai River. A few months later, he replaced Liu Wei and was in charge of financial affairs.

古文：戊戌，冬至；己亥，上朝上皇于西内。
现代文：戊戌冬至。己亥，肃宗到西内拜见太上皇玄宗。
English: On the winter solstice, Su Zong went to the west to visit the Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：神策节度使卫伯玉攻史朝义，拔永宁，破渑池、福昌、长水等县。
现代文：神策军节度使卫伯玉进攻史朝义，攻克永宁、渑池、福昌、长水等县。
English: The festival of the Divine Providence Army caused Wei Bo Yu to attack the historical Chao Yi and conquer Yongning, Dianchi, Fuchang, Changshui and other counties.

古文：己酉，上朝献太清宫；庚戌，享太庙、元献庙。
现代文：己酉，肃宗去太清宫祭祀。庚戌，去太庙祭祀祖宗，元献庙祭祀母后。
English: Su Zong went to the Grand Qing Palace to offer sacrifices. Geng Zong went to the Grand Temple to offer sacrifices to his ancestors, and Yuan Zong went to the Grand Temple to offer sacrifices to his mother.

古文：建丑月，辛亥朔，祀圜丘、太一坛。
现代文：建丑月辛亥朔，肃宗祭圜丘和大一坛。
English: Jian Ugly Moon, Xin Hai Shuo, Su Zong Festival, Zouqiu and Daiyi Altar.

古文：平卢节度使侯希逸与范阳相攻连年，救援既绝，又为奚所侵，乃悉举其军二万馀人袭李怀仙，破之，因引兵而南。
现代文：平卢节度使侯希逸与范阳李怀仙的军队相攻多年，救援已经断绝，又遭到奚人的侵扰，便率领全军二万多人袭击李怀仙，击败李怀仙后，就率军南归。
English: The Pinglu Festival made Hou Xiyi and Fanyang Li Huaixian's army attack each other for many years. The rescue had been cut off, and they were also harassed by intruders. He led the whole army of more than 20,000 people to attack Li Huaixian. After defeating Li Huaixian, he led the army back to the south.

古文：宝应元年壬寅，公元七六二年建丙月，甲申，追尊靖德太子琮为奉天皇帝，妃窦氏为恭应皇后，丁酉，葬于齐陵。甲辰，吐蕃遣使请和。
现代文：宝应元年建寅月甲申，肃宗追封靖德太子李琮为奉天皇帝，妃子窦氏为恭应皇后，丁酉，将他们葬在齐陵。甲辰，吐蕃派遣使者请求与唐朝和好。
English: In the first year of the Baoying Dynasty, Jian Yin Yue, Jia Shen, Su Zong and Su Zong made Prince Jingde, Prince Li Qian, Emperor Feng Tian, Prince Dou, Empress Gong Ying, and Ding Qi, and buried them in Qiling. Jia Chen and Tubo sent envoys to request peace with the Tang Dynasty.

古文：李光弼拔许州，擒史朝义所署颍川太守李春；朝义将史参救之，丙午，战于城下，又破之。
现代文：李光弼攻克许州，抓获史朝义所任命的颍川太守李春。史朝义的部将史参前去援救，丙午，双方在许州城下交战，李光弼又将史参击败。
English: Li Guangya attacked Keshu and captured Li Chun, the governor of Shichuan who was appointed by Shi Chaoyi. Shi Chaoyi's general, Shi San, went to rescue him. In the afternoon of the third day, the two sides fought under the castle of Keshu, and Li Guangya defeated Shi San again.

古文：戊申，平卢节度使侯希逸于青州北渡河而会田神功、能元皓于兗州。
现代文：戊申，平卢节度使侯希逸在青州北面渡过黄河，与在兖州的田神功和能元皓会合。
English: According to Wushin, the Pinglu Festival enabled Hou Xiyi to cross the Yellow River in the north of Qingzhou and meet with Tian Shengong and Nengyuan in Zhangzhou.

古文：租庸使元载以江、淮虽经兵荒，其民比诸道犹有资产，乃按籍举八年租调之违负及逋逃者，计其大数而征之；择豪吏为县令而督之，不问负之有无，资之高下，察民有粟帛者发徒围之，籍其所有而中分之，甚者什取八九，谓之白著。
现代文：租庸使元载认为江淮地区虽然经历战事与饥荒，但是那里的百姓仍比各道百姓富有，于是按照户籍查出八年来拒交和欠交租调和逃户欠额，然后估计一个大概数字进行征收。元载选择凶恶官吏担任县令，让他们督办此事，无论是否拖欠，资产多少，只要查到百姓有粮食和布帛，就派人将他们围起来，登记粮食、布帛的数量后对半分，甚至取走十分之八九，称之为白著。
English: The Zengyong made Yuan Zai believe that although the Jianghuai region had experienced war and famine, the people there were still richer than the people in other provinces. According to the household register, he then found out the amount of unpaid and unpaid rent and the amount owed by the fugitive households over the past eight years, and then estimated an approximate figure for collection. Yuan Zai selected vicious officials to serve as county magistrates and let them supervise the matter. Regardless of whether they were in arrears or not, or how much assets they had, as long as they found that the people had grain and cloth, they would send people to surround them and register the amount of grain and cloth, and then

古文：有不服者，严刑以威之。
现代文：如果有不服的，就施以严刑来威胁他们。
English: If they do not comply, they are threatened with severe punishment.

古文：民有蓄谷十斛者，则重足以待命，或相聚山泽为群盗，州县不能制。
现代文：有的百姓积蓄了十斛粮食，就非常恐惧，等待官府的命令。有的百姓相聚在山川河泽，成为强盗，州县都无法制止。
English: Some people have accumulated ten shekels of grain and are very afraid, waiting for the order of the government. Some people have gathered in the mountains and rivers and become robbers, and the state and county cannot stop them.

古文：建卯月，辛亥朔，赦天下；复以京兆为上都，河南为东都，凤翔为西都，江陵为南都，太原为北都。
现代文：建卯月辛亥朔，大赦天下；再次以京兆为上都，河南为东都，凤翔为西都，江陵为南都，太原为北都。
English: Jianwu Yue Xinhai Shuo, the great amnesty to the world; once again with Beijing as the capital, Henan as the eastern capital, Fengxiang as the western capital, Jiangling as the southern capital, Taiyuan as the northern capital.

古文：奴剌寇成固。
现代文：奴剌进犯成固县。
English: The henchmen invaded Chenggu County.

古文：初，王思礼为河东节度使，资储丰衍，赡军之外，积米百万斛，奏请输五十万斛于京师。
现代文：从前，王思礼担任河东节度使时，储备了大量物资，除了供养军队之外，积蓄粮米一百万斛，王思礼上奏请求输送给京师五十万斛粮米。
English: In the past, when Wang Sili served as the envoy of the Hedong Festival, he stored a large amount of materials. In addition to providing for the army, he accumulated one million baht of grain and rice. Wang Sili requested that half a million baht of grain and rice be sent to the Beijing division.

古文：思礼薨，管崇嗣代之，为政宽弛，信任左右，数月间，耗散殆尽，惟陈腐米万馀斛在。
现代文：王思礼去世后，由管崇嗣继任，他为政宽容松弛，信任他左右的人，数月间，粮食耗散殆尽，只存下一万多斛陈腐烂米。
English: After Wang Sili's death, he was succeeded by Guan Chongzhi. He was tolerant and relaxed as a politician, trusting those around him. Within a few months, the grain was exhausted, and only more than ten thousand stalks of stale rotten rice remained.

古文：上闻之，以邓景山代之。
现代文：肃宗听说后，让邓景山取代管崇嗣。
English: After Su Zong heard about it, he asked Deng Jingshan to replace Guan Chongzhi.

古文：景山至，则钩校所出入，将士辈多有隐没，皆惧。
现代文：邓景山到任后，就查对府库所出入的帐目，大多数将士隐藏了粮食，他们都很惧怕。
English: After Deng Jingshan took office, he checked the accounts of the prefectural treasury. Most soldiers hid grain, and they were very afraid.

古文：有裨将抵罪当死，诸将请之，不许；其弟请代兄死，亦不许；请入一马以赎死，乃许之。
现代文：有一副将抵罪应当处死，诸将请求赦免，邓景山不同意，副将的弟弟请求代兄去死，也不同意，他们又请求带一匹马来赎取死罪，邓景山这才同意。
English: One of the generals pleaded guilty and should be put to death. The generals asked for a pardon, but Deng Jingshan did not agree. The younger brother of the vice-general asked to die in place of his brother, but also did not agree. They also asked to bring a horse to redeem the death penalty, but Deng Jingshan agreed.

古文：诸将怒曰： 我辈曾不及一马乎！ 
现代文：诸将愤怒地说道： 我们还不如一匹马吗！ 
English: Zhu Shou said angrily, "Are we not as good as a horse?"

古文：遂作乱，癸丑，杀景山。
现代文：于是诸将作乱。癸丑，杀掉邓景山。
English: As a result, the generals started a riot. They killed Deng Jingshan.

古文：上以景山抚御失所以致乱，不复推究乱者，遣使慰谕以安之。
现代文：肃宗认为邓景山安抚和驾驭部下不当，使得他们叛乱，因此，不再追究叛乱者，而派遣使者去劝慰、安抚他们。
English: Su Zong believed that it was improper for Deng Jingshan to appease and control his subordinates, causing them to rebel. Therefore, he no longer pursued the rebels, but sent an envoy to console and appease them.

古文：诸将请以都知兵马使、代州刺史辛云京为节度使。
现代文：诸将请求让都知兵马使、代州刺史辛云京担任河东节度使。
English: The generals requested that the Tochi envoy and the Daizhou envoy, Xin Yunjing, be appointed as the envoy to the Hedong Festival.

古文：己未，以云京为北都留守、河东节度使。云京奏张光晟为代州刺史。
现代文：辛云京奏请让张光晟担任代州刺史。
English: Xin Yunjing, please let Zhang Guangya serve as the daizhou sashimi.

古文：绛州素无储蓄，民间饥，不可赋敛，将士粮赐不充，朔方等诸道行营都统李国贞屡以状闻；朝廷未报，军中咨怨。
现代文：绛州一向没有粮食储蓄，民间闹饥荒，无法再征收赋税，因此赐赏给将士的粮食不足，朔方等诸道行营都统李国贞屡次奏报这一情况。朝廷没有答复，军中将士哀叹埋怨。
English: There had always been no grain savings in Ganzhou, the people were starving, and taxes could no longer be collected. As a result, there was insufficient grain to reward the soldiers. Li Guozhen repeatedly reported this situation to Shuo Fang and other military leaders. The court did not reply, and the soldiers lamented and complained.

古文：突将王元振将作乱，矫令于众曰： 来日修都统宅，各具畚锸，待命于门。 
现代文：突将王元振行将作乱，在众人面前诈称上峰有令，说道： 过几天让你们修理都统的住宅，各自准备畚箕铁锹，在门口待命。 
English: Wang Yuan Zhenxing, the commander of the assault, said that he would create a disturbance, and falsely claimed in front of everyone that Shangfeng had an order, saying: In a few days, let you repair the houses in Tudong, prepare your own shovels, and be on standby at the door.

古文：士卒皆怒，曰： 朔方健儿岂修宅夫邪！ 
现代文：士兵们都很愤怒，说道： 朔方的健儿难道是修理住宅的民夫吗！ 
English: The soldiers were furious and said, "Isn't Shuo Fang Jian'er a repairman?

古文：乙丑，元振帅其徒作乱，烧牙城门。
现代文：乙丑，王元振率领部下作乱，烧毁牙城门。
English: In the second, Wang Yuanzhen led his subordinates in a riot, burning down the city gate.

古文：国贞逃于狱，元振执之，置卒食于彰，曰： 食此而役其力，可乎？ 
现代文：李国贞逃进监狱，被王元振抓住，王元振把士兵们吃的食物摆在李国贞面前，说道： 吃这些东西又要让他们出力修理住宅，能行吗？ 
English: Li Guozhen fled to prison and was caught by Wang Yuanzhen. Wang Yuanzhen put the food that the soldiers had eaten in front of Li Guozhen and said, "If they eat these things, they will have to work hard to repair the house. Is that possible?"

古文：国贞曰： 修宅则无之，军食则屡奏而未报，诸君所知也。 
现代文：李国贞回答说： 修理住宅并无此事，至于军粮则屡次奏报，但没有得到答复，这是诸位所知道的事。 
English: Li Guozhen replied, "There is no such thing as repairing houses. As for the military food, we have repeatedly sent reports, but have not received a reply. This is something you all know.

古文：众欲退。元振曰： 今日之事，何必更问！
现代文：众人想退走，王元振说道： 今日之事，何必再问呢！
English: The crowd wanted to leave, but Wang Yuanzhen said: "Why do you need to ask about today's event again?

古文：都统不死，则我辈死矣。 
现代文：都统不死，那么我们就得死了。 
English: If we don't all die, then we're all going to die.

古文：遂拔刃杀之。
现代文：于是拔刀杀掉李国贞。
English: So he drew his sword and killed Li Guozhen.

古文：镇西、北庭行营兵屯于翼城，亦杀节度使荔非元礼，推裨将白孝德为节度使，朝廷因而授之。
现代文：镇西、北庭行营的士兵驻扎在翼城，也杀掉节度使荔非元礼，推举副将白孝德为节度使，朝廷因此授予白孝德为节度使。
English: The soldiers from the west of the town and the north court camp were stationed in the wing city, and they also killed the festival to make Li Fei Yuanli, and elected the vice-commander Bai Xiaode as the festival, and the court therefore awarded Bai Xiaode as the festival.

古文：戊辰，淮西节度使王仲升与史朝义将谢钦让战于申州城下，为贼所虏，淮西震骇。
现代文：戊辰，淮西节度使王仲升与史朝义部将谢钦让在申州城下交战，王仲升被贼军俘虏，淮西十分震惊和恐惧。
English: In Wu Chen, Huaxi, the festival made Wang Zhongsheng fight with the historical and political leader Xie Qin under the city of Shenzhou. Wang Zhongsheng was captured by the thief army, and Huaxi was very shocked and frightened.

古文：会侯希逸、田神功、能元皓攻汴州，朝义召钦让兵救之。
现代文：恰巧此时侯希逸、田神功、能元皓进攻汴州，史朝义命令谢钦让的军队前去救援。
English: Coincidentally, at this time, Hou Xiyi, Tian Shengong and Nengyuan attacked Zhangzhou, and Shi Chaoyi ordered Xie Qinjan's army to come to the rescue.

古文：绛州诸军剽掠不已，朝廷忧其与太原乱军合从连贼，非新进诸将所能镇服，辛未，以郭子仪为汾阳王，知朔方、河中、北庭潞泽节度行营兼兴平、定国等军副元帅，发京师绢四万匹、布五万端、米六万石以给绛军。
现代文：绛州各军掠杀不止，朝廷担心他们与太原作乱的军队联合起来，决不是新提拔的诸将所能镇服的。辛未，朝廷将郭子仪封为汾阳王，担任朔方、河中、北庭、潞泽节度行营兼兴平军、定国军副元帅，调拨京师四万匹绢，五万端布匹，六万石米供给绛州的军队。
English: The armies of Bozhou kept pillaging, and the imperial court was worried that they would join forces with Taiyuan's army, which had caused the turmoil, and that the newly promoted generals would not be able to subdue them. Soon after, the imperial court made Guo Ziyi the king of Bozhou, and he served as the deputy marshal of the Shuo, Hechu, Beiting, and Heze festivals, as well as the deputy marshal of the Xingping Army and the Dingguo Army. The Beijing division was allocated forty thousand horses, fifty thousand pieces of cloth, and sixty thousand kilos of rice to supply the army of Bozhou.

古文：建辰月，庚寅，子仪将行，时上不豫，群臣莫得进见。子仪请曰： 老臣受命，将死于外，不见陛下，目不瞑矣！ 
现代文：建辰月庚寅，郭子仪即将动身，当时肃宗生病，大臣们不能前去觐见，郭子仪请求说： 老臣受命，将死在外面，不见陛下，死不暝目。 
English: At that time, Su Zong was ill, and the ministers could not go to see him. Guo Ziyi pleaded: "The old minister has been ordered to die outside. If you do not see your majesty, you will not die."

古文：上召入卧内，谓曰： 河东之事，一以委卿。
现代文：肃宗将郭子仪召入卧室，对他说： 河东的事情，全部托付给你了。 
English: Su Zong called Guo Ziyi into his bedroom and said to him, "I have entrusted all matters concerning Hedong to you.

古文：史朝义遣兵围李抱玉于泽州，子仪发定国军救之，乃去。
现代文：史朝义派遣军队在泽州围攻李抱玉，郭子仪征调定国军前去救援，史朝义军才退走。
English: Shi Zhaoyi sent troops to besiege Li Baoyu in Zhezhou, and Guo Ziyi ordered the national army to go to the rescue, and the Shi Zhaoyi army retreated.

古文：上召山南东道节度使来瑱赴京师。瑱乐在襄阳，其将士亦爱之，乃讽所部将吏上表留之，行及邓州，复令还镇。
现代文：肃宗命令山南东道节度使来前来京师，来乐意呆在襄阳，他的将士也爱他，于是来便暗示部将官吏上表请求肃宗让他留在襄阳。
English: Su Zong ordered the envoy of the Shannan Host Festival to come to Beijing and stay in Yangyang. His soldiers also loved him, so they came to suggest that the general officials request Su Zong to let him stay in Yangyang.

古文：荆南节度使吕諲、淮西节度使王仲升及中使往来者言： 瑱曲收众心，恐久难制。 
现代文：当他到达邓州时，肃宗又命令他回到镇所。荆南节度使吕、淮西节度使王仲升以及往来的各地的中使都说： 来千方百计收买人心，恐怕时间一长难于节制。 
English: When he arrived in Dengzhou, Su Zong ordered him to return to the town hall. The Jingnan Festival sent Lv, the Huaixi Festival sent Wang Zhongsheng, and the middle envoys from all over the country said: Come and do everything possible to win the hearts of the people, I am afraid it will be difficult to control the time.

古文：上乃割商、金、均、房别置观察使，令瑱止领六州。
现代文：肃宗便将商州、金州、均州、房州分出另设观察使，使来只统领六州。
English: Su Zong then separated Shangzhou, Jinzhou, Junzhou, and Fangzhou and set up another observation envoy, which only led six states.

古文：会谢钦让围王仲长升于申州数月，瑱怨之，按兵不救，仲升竟败没。
现代文：那时，恰好谢钦让在申州围攻王仲升数月，来很怨愤，按兵不救，王仲升终于失败被俘。
English: At that time, just as Xie Qin had besieged Wang Zhongsheng in Shenzhou for several months, he became very angry and did not save the soldiers, and Wang Zhongsheng finally failed and was captured.

古文：行军司马裴谋夺瑱位，密表瑱倔强难制，请以兵袭取之，上以为然。
现代文：行军司马裴谋图夺取来的位置，秘密上表声称来生性倔强，难于节制，请求让他率军袭取襄阳，肃宗以为这个建议很正确。
English: Marching Sima Pei tried to seize the position, and secretly claimed that he was stubborn and difficult to control, and asked him to lead the army to attack Xiangyang. Su Zong thought that this suggestion was very correct.

古文：癸巳，以瑱为淮西、河南十六州节度使，外示宠任，实欲图之。
现代文：癸巳，肃宗任命来为淮西、河南十六州节度使，表面上表示对他宠幸重用，实际上想要除掉他。
English: Soon after, Su Zong was appointed as the 16th provincial governor of Huaixi and Henan, ostensibly to show that he was favored and reused, but actually to get rid of him.

古文：密敕以代瑱为襄、邓等州防御使。
现代文：肃宗又秘密下令让裴取代来担任襄阳、邓州等州防御使。
English: Su Zong also secretly ordered that Bae be replaced as the defense envoy of Xiangyang, Dengzhou and other provinces.

古文：甲午，奴剌寇梁州，观察使李勉弃城走，以邠州剌史河西臧希让为山南西道节度使。
现代文：甲午，奴剌进犯梁州，观察使李勉弃城逃跑。肃宗任命州刺史河西人臧希让为山南西道节度使。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Nuhong invaded Liangzhou and watched Li Mian abandon the city and run away. Su Zong appointed Zhi Shi, a person from the west of the Hebei River, as the festival envoy of Shannan West Road.

古文：丙申，党项寇奉天。
现代文：丙申，党项进犯奉天县。
English: On the 17th, the party invaded Mukden.

古文：李辅国以求宰相不得怨萧华。
现代文：李辅国因为求任宰相没有得到，十分怨恨萧华。
English: As Li Fuguo did not get the post of prime minister, he resented Xiao Hua very much.

古文：庚午，以户部侍郎元载为京兆尹。
现代文：庚午，肃宗任命户部侍郎元载为京兆尹。
English: In the evening of the 7th day of the 7th month, Suizong appointed the head of the household as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：载诣辅国固辞，辅国识其意；壬寅，以司农卿陶锐为京兆尹。
现代文：元载到李辅国那里坚决辞让，李辅国知道他的意图。壬寅肃宗任命司农卿陶锐为京兆尹。
English: The Yuan Zhao resolutely resigned to Li Shuo, and Li Shuo knew of his intention. Mian Yin Su Zong appointed the Secretary of Agriculture, Tao Rui, to be the successor of Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：辅国言萧华专权，请罢其相，上不许。
现代文：李辅国对肃宗说萧华专权，请求罢免他的宰相职务，肃宗不同意。
English: Li Fuguo told Su Zong that Xiao Hua had absolute power and requested that he be removed from the post of prime minister. Su Zong did not agree.

古文：辅国固请不已，乃从之，仍引元载代华。
现代文：李辅国不停地坚持请求，肃宗才勉强同意，于是李辅国引荐元载来取代萧华。
English: Li Fuguo kept insisting on the request, Su Zong reluctantly agreed, so Li Fuguo recommended Yuan Zeng to replace Xiao Hua.

古文：戊申，华罢为礼部尚书，以载同平章事，领度支、转运如故。
现代文：戊申，萧华被罢去宰相，任礼部尚书，元载被任命为同平章事，仍然兼任度支使、转运使。
English: In Wushin, Xiao Hua was ousted as prime minister and appointed as the ceremonial secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies. In the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed to the same post, and still served as the envoy of the degree and the envoy of the transfer.

古文：建巳月，庚戌朔，泽州剌史李抱玉破史朝义兵于城下。
现代文：建巳月庚戌朔，泽州刺史李抱玉在泽州城下击败史朝义的军队。
English: In the early morning of the second month of Jianming, the troops of Zhezhou stabbed Shi Li Baoyu to defeat the troops of Shi Chaoyi under the castle of Zhezhou.

古文：壬子，楚州刺史崔侁表称，有尼真如，恍惚登天，见上帝，赐以宝玉十三枚，云： 中国有灾，以此镇之。 
现代文：壬子，楚州刺史崔上表说，有一名叫真如的尼姑，在恍惚中登天，见到了天帝，天帝赐给她十三枚宝玉，说道： 中原有灾难，用这些宝玉可以镇压。 
English: According to the above table, there was a nun named Zhenru, who ascended to heaven in a trance and saw the heavenly emperor. The heavenly emperor gave her thirteen precious stones and said: There is a disaster in the Central Plains, and these precious stones can be used to suppress it.

古文：群臣表贺。
现代文：大臣们上表祝贺。
English: The ministers congratulated each other.

古文：甲寅，上皇崩于神龙殿，年七十八。
现代文：甲寅，太上皇玄宗在神龙殿驾崩，享年七十八岁。
English: Emperor Go-Jin, Emperor Go-Jong died at the age of seventy-eight in the Dragon Hall.

古文：乙卯，迁坐于太极殿。
现代文：乙卯，将太上皇的神座迁到太极殿。
English: Otsu moved the seat of the retired emperor to Taiji-den.

古文：上以寝疾，发哀于内殿，群臣发哀于太极殿。
现代文：肃宗因为卧病不起，在内殿举哀，大臣们在太极殿举哀。
English: Because Su Zong was bedridden and unable to work, the mourning was held in the inner hall, and the ministers mourned in the Taiji Hall.

古文：蕃官嫠面割耳者四百馀人。
现代文：有四百多名蕃官划破面孔、割耳表示哀悼。
English: More than four hundred eunuchs cut their faces and ears to express their condolences.

古文：丙辰，命苗晋卿摄冢宰。
现代文：丙辰，肃宗命令苗晋卿总摄朝政。
English: Xing Chen and Su Zong ordered Miao Jinqing to be the general regent of the dynasty.

古文：上自仲春寝疾，闻上皇登遐，哀慕，疾转剧，乃命太子监国。
现代文：自从仲春以来，肃宗卧病不起，听说太上皇驾崩，十分哀痛，病情由此加重，便命令太子监理国政。
English: Since Zhongchun, Su Zong had been bedridden due to illness. He was very sad to hear that the Emperor had passed away, and his condition worsened as a result. He ordered the Crown Prince to supervise state affairs.

古文：甲子，制改元；复以建寅为正月，月数皆如其旧；赦天下。
现代文：甲子，肃宗下诏改年号为宝应，又以建寅为正月，其他月份都恢复旧称。大赦天下。
English: Under Emperor Su, the name of the year was changed to Baoying, and the first month of the year was named Jianyin, and all other months were restored to their former names.

古文：初，张后与李辅国相表里，专权用事，晚年，更有隙。
现代文：从前，张后与李辅国互相勾结，掌握大权，独断专行，晚年时，二人有了裂痕。
English: Once upon a time, Zhang Hou and Li Shuo Guo colluded with each other, seized power, and acted arbitrarily. In their later years, the two had a rift.

古文：内射生使三原程元振党于辅国。
现代文：内射生使三原人程元振与李辅国结成一党。
English: Inner shooters made the Mihara people Cheng Yuan Zhen and Li Shuo Guo form a party.

古文：上疾笃，后召太子谓曰： 李辅国久典禁兵，制敕皆从之出，擅逼迁圣皇，其罪甚大，所忌者吾与太子。
现代文：肃宗病情恶化，张后召见太子，对他说： 李辅国长期执掌禁军，皇上的制敕都从他手中发出，又擅自威逼太上皇迁到太极宫，他的罪行很大，所忌恨的就是我和太子你了。
English: As Su Zong's condition worsened, Zhang Hou called him to see the prince and said to him, "Li Yu Guo has been in charge of the Imperial Guard for a long time. The imperial edicts were issued from his hands, and he forced the emperor to move to the Taiji Palace without authorization. His crime is great. What he hates is me and the prince.

古文：今主上弥留，辅国阴与程元振谋作乱，不可不诛。 
现代文：如今皇上已处在弥留之际，李辅国暗中与程元振图谋作乱，不能不杀。 
English: Now that the emperor was on his deathbed, Li Shuo Guo secretly plotted with Cheng Yuan Zhen to make trouble, and they had to kill him.

古文：太子泣曰： 陛下疾甚危，二人皆陛下勋旧之臣，一日不告而诛之，必致震惊，恐不能堪也。 
现代文：太子哭着说： 陛下病情十分危急，他们二人都是陛下有功勋的旧臣，一旦不告诉陛下而杀掉他们，必然会使陛下震惊，恐怕承受不住。 
English: The prince cried and said, "Your majesty's condition is very critical. Both of them are your majesty's meritorious old retainers. If you kill them without telling your majesty, it will surely shock your majesty and I'm afraid he won't be able to bear it."

古文：后曰： 然则太子姑归，吾更徐思之。 
现代文：张后说： 那么太子暂且回去，我再慢慢考虑。 
English: Zhang Hou said: Then let the prince go back for the time being, and I'll think about it slowly.

古文：太子出，后召越王系谓曰： 太子仁弱，不能诛贼臣，汝能之乎？ 
现代文：太子出去后，张后召见越王李系，对他说： 太子仁慈软弱，不能杀掉贼臣，你能够办这件事吗？ 
English: After the prince went out, Zhang Hou summoned the king of Yue, Li Xie, and said to him: The prince is kind and weak, and cannot kill the thief. Can you do this?

古文：对曰： 能。 
现代文：李系回答说： 能。 
English: Zoga replied, "Yes."

古文：系乃命内谒者监段恒俊选宦官有勇力者二百馀人，授甲于长生殿后。
现代文：于是李系便命令内谒者监段恒俊挑选勇敢有力的宦官二百多人，在长生殿后授给他们铠甲兵器。
English: Therefore, Emperor Li ordered the eunuch overseer Heng Jun to select more than 200 brave and powerful eunuchs and give them armor-piercing weapons after the Hall of Immortality.

古文：乙丑，后以上命召太子。
现代文：乙丑，张后以皇上的命令召见太子。
English: In the second act, Empress Zhang summons the crown prince by order of the emperor.

古文：元振知其谋，密告辅国，伏兵于陵霄门以俟之，太子至，以难告。
现代文：程元振知道了张后的阴谋，悄悄地将此事告诉了李辅国，又在陵霄门埋下伏兵，等待太子的到来。
English: Cheng Yuan Zhen learned of Zhang's plot, quietly told the matter to Li Yuxuo, and planted an ambush at the gate of the mausoleum, waiting for the arrival of the prince.

古文：太子曰： 必无是事。
现代文：太子来到后，程元振告诉他皇后发难。
English: After the prince arrived, Cheng Yuan Zhen told him that the queen was in trouble.

古文：主上疾，亟召我，我岂可畏死而不赴乎！ 
现代文：太子说： 一定没有这样的事，皇上病重才召见我，我难道可以怕死而不去吗！ 
English: The prince said, "There must be no such thing. The emperor summoned me only when he was seriously ill. Can I be afraid of death and not go?"

古文：元振曰： 社稷事大，太子必不可入。 
现代文：程元振说： 社稷事大，太子万万不可入宫。 
English: Cheng Yuan Zhen said: The social situation is serious, and the crown prince must not enter the palace.

古文：乃以兵送太子于飞龙厩，且以甲卒守之。
现代文：于是派士兵将太子送到飞龙厩，并且让全副武装的士兵守住他。
English: So they sent soldiers to take the prince to the flying dragon stable, and let the fully armed soldiers guard him.

古文：是夜，辅国、元振勒兵三殿，收捕越王系、段恒俊及知内侍省事硃光辉等百馀人，系之。
现代文：当天夜里，李辅国、程元振率军来到三殿，逮捕越王李系、段恒俊以及掌管内侍省事务的朱光辉等一百多人，将他们囚禁起来。
English: In the evening of the same day, the troops led by Li Shuo Guo and Cheng Yuan Zhen came to the Third Palace and arrested more than a hundred people, including Yue Wang Lixie, Duan Hengjun and Zhu Guanghui, who was in charge of the affairs of the Ministry of the Interior, and imprisoned them.

古文：以太子之命迁后于别殿。
现代文：又以太子的命令将张后迁到别殿。
English: At the command of Ether, Zhang Hou was also moved to another palace.

古文：时上在长生殿，使者逼后下殿，并左右数十人幽于后宫，宦官宫人皆惊骇逃散。
现代文：当时肃宗在长生殿，使者逼着张后离开长生殿，将她和左右数十人一起幽禁在后宫，宦官和宫女都惊恐害怕，纷纷逃散。
English: At that time, Su Zong was in the Hall of Immortality. The emissary forced Zhang He to leave the Hall of Immortality and confined her in the harem together with dozens of others. The eunuchs and court ladies were terrified and fled in droves.

古文：丁卯，上崩。
现代文：丁卯，肃宗驾崩。
English: Dingwu, Su Zong passed away.

古文：辅国等杀后并系及兗王僴。
现代文：李辅国等人杀掉张后和李系以及兖王李。
English: Li Fuguo and others killed Zhang Hou and Li Xie as well as Wang Li.

古文：是日，辅国始引太子素服于九仙门与宰相相见，叙上皇晏驾，拜哭，始行监国之令。
现代文：这一天，李辅国才带着太子，让他身着素服，在九仙门与宰相相见，讲述太上皇驾崩以后宫中的一系列变故。
English: It was on this day that Li Yuxu took the crown prince, dressed him in plain clothes, to meet the prime minister at the Nine Immortals Gate, and told him about a series of changes in the palace after the death of the emperor.

古文：戊辰，发大行皇帝丧于两仪殿，宣遗诏。
现代文：并且伏地哭拜，太子这才开始行使监国的权力。戊辰，太子在两仪殿给大行皇帝发丧，宣读遗诏。
English: And Voldemort wept and bowed before him, and only then did the prince begin to exercise his powers as the overseer of the country. At that time, the prince mourned Emperor Da Xing at the Two Ceremonial Hall and read out his last will and testament.

古文：己巳，代宗即位。
现代文：己巳，唐代宗即位。
English: At that time, the Tang Dynasty Emperor ascended to the throne.

古文：高力士遇赦还，至朗州，闻上皇崩，号恸，呕血而卒。
现代文：高力士遇到大赦，返回京师，到朗州时，听说太上皇玄宗驾崩，放声大哭，呕血而死。
English: Gao Lixi encountered an amnesty and returned to Beijing Division. When he arrived in Lanzhou, he heard that Emperor Xuanzong had passed away. He cried loudly and vomited blood and died.

古文：甲戌，以皇子奉节王适为天下兵马元帅。
现代文：甲戌，代宗任命皇子奉节王李适为天下兵马元帅。
English: Emperor Gaozong appointed Prince Gongjie Wang Lisi to be the world's marshal of soldiers and horses.

古文：李辅国恃功益横，明谓上曰： 大家但居禁中，外事听老奴处分。 
现代文：李辅国自恃有功而更加专横，公然对代宗说： 陛下住在宫中就可以了，外面的事让老奴处理。 
English: Li Fuguo, boasting of his achievements, became even more despotic and openly said to the daimyō, "Your majesty can live in the palace, but let the old man handle the outside affairs."

古文：上内不能平，以其方握禁兵，外尊礼之。
现代文：代宗内心忿忿不平，但因李辅国正掌握着禁军，所以表面上对他十分尊敬。
English: Inside, Daizong was resentful, but since Li Shuo was in control of the Imperial Army, he was outwardly highly respected.

古文：乙亥，号辅国为尚父而不名，事无大小皆咨之，群臣出入皆先诣，辅国亦晏然处之。
现代文：乙亥代宗尊称李辅国为尚父，而不直呼其名，事无大小都征询他的意见，大臣们出入宫中都先见李辅国，李辅国也安然处之。
English: Emperor Yihai referred to Li Fuguo as his father, but did not call him by his name. Li Fuguo was consulted on all matters, large and small. The ministers saw Li Fuguo first when entering and leaving the palace, and Li Fuguo also treated him well.

古文：以内飞龙厩副使程元振为左监门卫将军。
现代文：代宗任命内飞龙厩副使程元振为左监门卫将军。
English: Daizong appointed Cheng Yuan Zhen, the deputy of Nefei Long Mews, as the left guard general.

古文：知内侍省事硃光辉及内常侍啖庭瑶、山人李唐等二十馀人皆流黔中。
现代文：掌管内侍省事务的朱光辉以及内常侍啖庭瑶、隐士李唐等二十多人都被流放到黔中。
English: Zhu Guanghui, who was in charge of the internal affairs of the province, as well as more than 20 people, including the regular attendant of the court and the hermit Li Tang, were exiled to the cocoon.

古文：初，李国贞治军严，朔方将士不乐，皆思郭子仪，故王元振因之作乱。
现代文：从前，李国贞治军严厉，朔方将士很不高兴，都思念郭子仪，所以王元振乘机作乱。
English: In the past, Li Guozhen ruled the army strictly, and the soldiers of the Shuo side were very unhappy. They all missed Guo Ziyi, so Wang Yuanzhen took the opportunity to make trouble.

古文：子仪至军，元振自以为功，子仪曰： 汝临贼境，辄害主将，若贼乘其衅，无绛州矣。
现代文：郭子仪来到军中，王元振自以为有功，郭子仪说： 你身临敌境，杀害主将，如果叛贼乘此机会进攻，那么绛州就完了。
English: Guo Ziyi came to the army, Wang Yuan Zhen thought he had done a good deed, Guo Ziyi said: You are in the enemy's territory, kill the captain, if the traitors take this opportunity to attack, then Zhangzhou will be over.

古文：吾为宰相，岂受一卒之私邪！ 
现代文：我身为宰相，难道要接受一个士兵的的私托吗？ 
English: As Prime Minister, should I accept a private message from a soldier?

古文：五月，庚辰，收元振及其同谋四十人，皆杀之。
现代文：五月庚辰，郭子仪将王元振及其同谋四十人抓起来，全部杀掉。
English: In May, Geng Chen and Guo Ziyi arrested Wang Yuanzhen and his 40 accomplices and killed them all.

古文：辛云京闻之，亦推按邓景山者数十人，诛之。
现代文：辛云京听说此事后，也推究审问杀害邓景山的几十个人，然后将他们杀掉。
English: After Xin Yunjing heard about this, he also investigated and interrogated dozens of people who killed Deng Jingshan, and then killed them.

古文：由是河东诸镇率皆奉法。
现代文：因此河东诸镇大都遵奉法令。
English: As a result, most towns in the eastern part of the river obeyed the decree.

古文：壬午，以李辅国为司空兼中书令。
现代文：壬午，代宗任命李辅国为司空兼中书令。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, the daimyō appointed Li Shuoguo as the secretary and the second secretary.

古文：党项寇同官、华原。
现代文：党项进犯同官、华原。
English: Hua Yuan, a co-officer of the party, was arrested.

古文：甲申，以平卢节度使侯希逸为平卢、青、淄等六州节度使，由是青州节度有平卢之号。
现代文：甲申，代宗任命平卢节度使侯希逸为平卢、青、淄等六州节度使，由此青州节度使有了平卢的称号。
English: Gao Shin, the daimyos appointed Pinglu Festival to make Hou Xiyi the Pinglu, Qingdao, Handan and other six state festival, and thus the Qingdao Festival has the title of Pinglu.

古文：乙酉，徙奉节王适为鲁王。
现代文：乙酉，代宗改封奉节王李适为鲁王。
English: Acetylene, the vicar general changed his title to Fengjie Wang, and Li Si became the King of Lu.

古文：庚寅，追尊上母吴妃为皇太后。
现代文：庚寅，代宗追封他的母亲吴妃为皇太后。
English: Gyeongin, the daimyong, succeeded his mother, Empress Wu, as empress dowager.

古文：壬辰，贬礼部尚书萧华为峡州司马。
现代文：壬辰，代宗将礼部尚书萧华贬为峡州司马。
English: In Imjin, the daizong relegated Xiao Hua, the ceremonial secretary, to the position of Sima, the governor of Xiaozhou.

古文：元载希李辅国意，以罪诬之也。
现代文：这是由于元载迎合李辅国的意图，诬告萧华有罪。
English: This is due to the fact that Yuan Zai pandered to the intentions of Li Yuxuo and falsely accused Xiao Hua of being guilty.

古文：敕乾元大小钱皆一当一，民始安之。
现代文：代宗下令大小乾元通宝钱都以一当一，百姓这才安心。
English: The daimyō ordered that the Qianyuan Tongbao money, large and small, should be shared equally, so that the people would have peace of mind.

古文：史朝义自围宋州数月，城中食尽，将陷，剌史李岑不知所为。
现代文：自从史朝义围困宋州以来已有数月，城中粮食已经用尽，宋州即将陷落，刺史李岑束手无策。
English: It had been several months since Shi Chao Yi besieged Songzhou, the grain in the city had been exhausted, Songzhou was about to fall, and there was no way to defeat Shi Li Yongzhu.

古文：遂城果毅开封刘昌曰： 仓中犹有麹数千斤，请屑食之；不过二十日，李太尉必救我。
现代文：遂城府果毅开封人刘昌说： 粮仓中还有几千斤酒曲，请捣碎吃，不出二十天，李太尉必定前来救援我们。
English: So Liu Chang, the person who opened the seal of Guoyi, Chengdu, said: There are still several thousand pounds of wine in the granary, please mash and eat. In less than twenty days, Lieutenant Li will surely come to rescue us.

古文：城东南隅最危，昌请守之。 
现代文：城东南角最危急，请让我前去防守。 
English: The southeast corner of the city is the most critical, please let me go forward to defend.

古文：李光弼至临淮，诸将以朝义兵尚强，请南保扬州。
现代文：这时，李光弼来到临淮，诸位将领认为史朝义兵力还很强大，请求向南退保扬州。
English: At this time, Li Guangyao came to Linhuai, and the generals thought that the historical and patriotic forces were still very strong, and requested to go south to defend Yangzhou.

古文：光弼曰： 朝廷倚我以为安危，我复退缩，朝廷何望！
现代文：李光弼说： 朝廷依靠我来决定安危，我再退缩，朝廷还指望什么呢！
English: Li Guangyao said, "The imperial court relies on me to decide on matters of safety and security. If I withdraw, what hope does the imperial court have?"

古文：且吾出其不意，贼安知吾之众寡！ 
现代文：况且我出其不意，贼军哪里知道我军众寡！ 
English: Moreover, I was taken by surprise, how could the bandits know that our army was small!

古文：遂径趣徐州，使兗郓节度使田神功进击朝义，大破之。
现代文：于是直赴徐州，派兖郓节度使田神功进击史朝义，将史朝义打得大败。
English: Therefore, he went straight to Xuzhou, and dispatched Sheng Du to make Tian Sheng Gong attack Shichao Yi, and defeated Shichao Yi.

古文：先是，田神功既克刘展，留连扬州未还，太子宾客尚衡与左羽林大将军殷仲卿相攻于兗、郓，闻光弼至，惮其威名，神功遽还河南，衡、仲卿相继入朝。
现代文：起先，田神功已经攻克刘展，留恋扬州不愿回去，太子宾客尚衡与左羽林大将军殷仲卿在兖州、郓州相互攻击，听说李光弼到来，都慑于李光弼的威望，田神功急速返回河南，尚衡、殷仲卿也相继入朝。
English: At first, Tian Shengong had already conquered Liu Zhen, but he did not want to go back to Yangzhou. The prince's guest, Shang Heng, and the General of the Left Feather Lin, Yin Zhongqing, attacked each other in Luzhou and Luzhou. When they heard that Li Guangyao had arrived, they were all deterred by Li Guangyao's prestige. Tian Shengong quickly returned to Henan. Shang Heng and Yin Zhongqing also entered the imperial court one after another.

古文：光弼在徐州，惟军旅之事自决之，自馀众务，悉委判官张傪。
现代文：李光弼在徐州，只有军队的事情自己决断，其余一切事务都委托判官张处理。
English: In Xuzhou, only the military affairs were decided by Li Guangyao, and all other affairs were entrusted to Judge Zhang.

古文：傪吏事精敏，区处如流，诸将白事，光弼多令与傪议之，诸将事如光弼，由是军中肃然，东夏以宁。
现代文：张为政精明，处理事务十分自如，诸将陈述事情，李光弼多让与张商议，诸将事奉张如同事奉李光弼，因此军中整肃，东夏得以安宁。
English: Zhang Weizhong was shrewd and handled affairs with great ease. Generals presented matters, Li Guangyao mostly let Zhang negotiate, and generals served Zhang as colleagues served Li Guangyao. As a result, the army was purged and the Eastern Xia was peaceful.

古文：先是，田神功起偏裨为节度使，留前使判官刘位等于幕府，神功皆平受其拜；及见光弼与傪抗礼，乃大惊，遍拜位等曰： 神功出于行伍，不知礼仪，诸君亦胡为不言，成神功之过乎！ 
现代文：先前，田神功从副将出身作到节度使，将前节度使判官刘位等人留在节度使幕府中，大模大样接受他们的叩拜；等到看到李光弼与张行对等礼时，才大吃一惊，于是一一拜谢刘位等人，说道： 田神功行伍出身，不懂礼仪，诸位为什么也不说，铸成田神功的错呢？ 
English: Previously, Tian Shengong had been promoted from vice-commander to ceremonial envoy, leaving the former ceremonial envoy and judge Liu Yi and others in the ceremonial envoy of the shogunate, accepting their kowtow in a grand manner; when he saw Li Guangyao and Zhang performing the reciprocal salute, he was taken aback, so he bowed to Liu Yi and others one by one and said: Tian Shengong was born in the army and does not know the etiquette, why do you not say that it was Tian Shengong's fault?

古文：丁酉，赦天下。
现代文：丁酉，大赦天下。
English: Ding Jun, the world is at your mercy.

古文：立皇子益昌王邈为郑王，延为庆王，迥为韩王。
现代文：代宗册封皇子益昌王李邈为郑王，李延为庆王，李迥为韩王。
English: In the genealogical record, the crown prince of Yichang, Li Yan, was named Zheng Wang, Li Yan was named Qing Wang, and Li Yan was named Han Wang.

古文：来瑱闻徙淮西，大惧，上言： 淮西无粮，请俟收麦而行。 
现代文：来瑱听说让他去淮西任节度使，十分害怕，进言说： 淮西没有粮食，请等到收麦后再动身前去。 
English: He was very afraid when he heard that he was to go to Huaxi to serve as the governor of the festival, and said: Huaxi has no grain, please wait until after the wheat harvest before setting out.

古文：又讽将吏留己。
现代文：同时又暗示将领们挽留自己。
English: At the same time, he also hinted that the generals should restrain themselves.

古文：上欲姑息无事，壬寅，复以瑱为山南东道节度使。
现代文：代宗想息事宁人，壬寅，再次任命来为山南东道节度使。
English: The daimyō wanted to calm things down, so he reappointed Ningren, Renin, as the Shannan host and festival envoy.

古文：飞龙副使程元振谋夺李辅国权，密言于上，请稍加裁制。
现代文：飞龙副使程元振谋划夺取李辅国的权力，悄悄地请求代宗对李辅国稍加制裁。
English: Fei Long's deputy sent Cheng Yuan Zhen to plan to seize the power of Li Yu Province, and quietly requested the delegate to impose some sanctions on Li Yu Province.

古文：六月，己未，解辅国行军司马及兵部尚书，馀如故，以元振代判元帅行军司马，仍迁辅国出居外第。
现代文：六月己未，代宗解除了李辅国行军司马及兵部尚书的职务，其余职务不变，让程元振取代李辅国兼任元帅行军司马，还让李辅国迁出皇宫到外面的宅第居住。
English: Before June was over, the daimyō dismissed the marshal-in-charge of the marching troops of the State of Li Yu and the secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs. The remaining positions remained unchanged, and Cheng Yuan Zhen was appointed as the marshal-in-charge of the marching troops of the State of Li Yu to replace Li Yu. He also allowed Li Yu to move out of the palace and live in a mansion outside.

古文：于是道路相贺。
现代文：于是人们都互相庆贺。
English: As a result, people are celebrating with each other.

古文：辅国始惧，上表逊位。
现代文：李辅国这才害怕起来，上表请求退位。
English: It was only then that Li Fuguo became afraid and made the above request to abdicate.

古文：辛酉，罢辅国兼中书令，进爵博陆王。
现代文：辛酉，代宗罢免了李辅国兼任的中书令职务，进爵位为博陆王。
English: At that time, the daimyō removed Li Yu's concurrent position as the Censorial Governor of China, and he was given the title of Bolu Wang.

古文：辅国入谢，愤咽而言曰： 老奴事郎君不了，请归地下事先帝！ 
现代文：李辅国入宫致谢，愤恨哽咽地对代宗说道： 老奴侍候不了郎君了，请让老奴到九泉之下去侍候先帝吧！ 
English: Li Fuguo entered the palace to express his thanks, and said to the Daizong, choking with resentment, "The old man can no longer serve his son-in-law, please let the old man go to Jiuzhen to serve the former emperor!"

古文：上犹慰谕而遣之。
现代文：代宗仍然安慰劝说一番，然后让他回去。
English: Daizong still consoled and persuaded him, and then let him go back.

古文：壬戌，以兵部侍郎严武为西川节度使。
现代文：壬戌，代宗任命兵部侍郎严武为西川节度使。
English: In response, the daimyō appointed the attendant of the military department, Yanbu, as the Nishikawa Setsudoshi.

古文：襄邓防御使裴谷屯穀城，既得密敕，即帅麾下二千人沿汉趣襄阳；己巳，陈于谷水北。
现代文：襄邓防御使裴驻军城，即然得到了肃宗的密敕，便率领部下二千人沿汉江奔赴襄阳，己巳在水北岸布阵。
English: The defense of Xiang and Deng made Pei garrison the military city. As soon as he received Su Zong's secret plan, he led two thousand of his subordinates along the Han River to Xiangyang and set up a position on the north bank of the water.

古文：瑱以兵逆之，问其所以来，对曰： 尚书不不受朝命，故来。
现代文：来率军迎战，询问裴率军前来的原因，裴回答说： 尚书不接受朝廷的命令，所以我前来讨伐。
English: He asked Bae why he had come to lead the army into battle. Bae replied, "Shang Shu did not accept the order of the imperial court, so I came to fight.

古文：若受代，谨当释兵。 
现代文：如果你接受取代你的命令，我自当解甲而归。 
English: If you accept the order to replace you, I will disarm myself and return.

古文：瑱曰： 吾已蒙恩，复留镇此，何受代之有！ 
现代文：来说： 我已经承蒙皇上的恩典，再次留下来镇守襄阳，还有什么要接受替代的呢？ 
English: He said: I have accepted the grace of the emperor to stay and guard Xiangyang again, what else should I accept instead?

古文：因取敕及告身示之，瑱惊惑。
现代文：说罢便取出代宗的敕令以及告身给裴看，裴惊疑不解。
English: Saying that, he took out the daimyō's imperial edict and exposed himself to Bae, who was surprised and puzzled.

古文：瑱与副使薛南阳纵兵夹击，大破之，追擒于申口，送京师；赐死。
现代文：来与节度副使薛南阳纵兵夹击，将裴打得大败，在申口追上裴，将他抓获，押送京师。代宗赐他死。
English: He clashed with Xue Nanyang, the vice-commander of the festival, and defeated Bae. He caught up with Bae at Shenkou, captured him, and sent him to the capital. The emperor sentenced him to death.

古文：乙亥，以通州刺史刘晏为户部侍郎兼京兆尹，充度支、转运、盐铁、铸钱等使。
现代文：乙亥，代宗任命通州刺史刘晏为户部侍郎兼京兆尹，担任度支使、转运使、盐铁使、铸钱使等职。
English: At the time of Emperor Yihai, the daimyō appointed Tongzhou's chief secretary Liu Xi to be the household attendant and also the Jingzhao Yin, and he served as the imperial envoy, the transportation envoy, the salt and iron envoy, and the minting envoy.

古文：秋，七月，壬辰，以郭子仪都知朔方、河东、北庭、潞、仪、泽、沁、陈、郑等节度行营及兴平等军副元帅。
现代文：秋季，七月壬辰，代宗任命郭子仪总领朔方、河东、北庭及潞、仪、泽、沁、陈、郑等节度使行营，以及兴平等军副元帅。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Taizong appointed Guo Zi Rong as the commander-in-chief of Shuo Fang, Hedong, Beiting, and the commander-in-chief of Jie, Yi, Ze, Chen and Zheng, as well as the vice-marshal of the Xingbei Army.

古文：癸巳，剑南兵马使徐知道反，以兵守要害，拒严武，武不得进。
现代文：癸已，剑南兵马使徐知道谋反，派军队扼守要害地区，抵挡严武，严武无法前进。
English: By now, the soldiers and horses of Jian'nan had made Xu aware of the rebellion, and he sent troops to guard the critical areas and resist Yanwu. Yanwu was unable to advance.

古文：八月，桂州刺史刑济讨西原贼帅吴功曹等，平之。
现代文：八月，桂州刺史邢济征讨西原贼军统帅吴功曹等人，针他们平定。
English: In August, Guizhou sent troops to subdue the commander of the Western Plains thief army, Wu Gong Cao, and others.

古文：己未，徐知道为其将李忠勇所杀，剑南悉平。
现代文：己未，徐知道被他的部将李忠厚杀掉，剑南叛军全部平定。
English: Before he knew it, Xu knew that his subordinate Li Zhonghou had been killed, and all the rebels in Jian'nan had been subdued.

古文：乙丑，山南东道节度使瑱入朝谢罪，上优待之。
现代文：乙丑，山南东道节度使来入朝承认有罪，请求恕罪，代宗对他很优待。
English: Second Ugly, the Shannan host of the festival, came to the court to admit his guilt and ask for forgiveness. The daimyō treated him very favorably.

古文：己巳，郭子仪自河东入朝。
现代文：己巳，郭子仪从河东入朝。
English: At that time, Guo Zi Yi entered the imperial court from the east of the river.

古文：时程元振用事，忌子仪功高任重，数谮之于上。
现代文：当时程元振当权，他忌妒郭子仪功高任重，多次在代宗面前说郭子仪的坏话。
English: At that time, Cheng Yuan Zhen was in power. He was jealous of Guo Ziyi's high achievements and heavy responsibilities, and repeatedly spoke ill of Guo Ziyi in front of the Daizong.

古文：子仪不自安，表请解副元帅、节度使。
现代文：郭子仪心里不安，上表请求解除副元帅、节度使的职务。
English: Guo Ziyi was uneasy in his heart and petitioned for the removal of the vice-marshal and the chief envoy.

古文：上慰抚之，子仪遂留京师。
现代文：代宗慰劳安抚他，于是郭子仪便留在京师。
English: The daimyosong comforted him, so Guo Ziyi stayed in Beijing.

古文：台州贼帅袁晁攻陷浙东诸州，改元宝胜；民疲于赋敛者多归之。
现代文：台州贼军统帅袁晁攻陷浙东各州，改年号为宝胜，深受赋税之苦的百姓大多归附袁晁。
English: The commander-in-chief of the Taizhou thief army, Yuan Xuan, invaded the eastern Zhejiang provinces and changed the year name to Baosheng. Most of the people who suffered from taxation were attached to Yuan Xuan.

古文：李光弼遣兵击晁于衢州，破之。
现代文：李光弼派遣军队在衢州进攻袁晁，将他击败。
English: Li Guangyao sent troops to attack Yuan Shao in Ganzhou and defeated him.

古文：乙亥，徙鲁王适为雍王。
现代文：乙亥，代宗改封鲁王李适为雍王。
English: King Yi Hai, the founder of the dynasty, changed the title of King of Lu to King of Li to King of Yong.

古文：九月，庚辰，以来瑱为兵部尚书、同平章事、知山南东道节度使。
现代文：九月庚辰，代宗任命来为兵部尚书、同平章事，兼任山南东道节度使。
English: In September, Gengchen, Daizong was appointed to be the secretary of the military department and the secretary of Tongping chapter, and also served as the host of the festival in Shannan.

古文：乙未，加程元振骠骑大将军兼内侍监。
现代文：乙未，代宗提升程元振为骠骑大将军兼内侍监。
English: At the same time, the Daizong promoted Cheng Yuan Zhen to the post of grand general of cavalry and chamberlain.

古文：左仆射裴冕为山陵使，议事有与程元振相违者，丙申，贬冕施州刺史。
现代文：左仆射裴冕担任山陵使，商议事情时，有时意见与程元振不一致，丙申，代宗将裴冕贬为施州刺史。
English: His left-hand man, Sha Pei Guan, served as the envoy to the mausoleum. When discussing matters, sometimes the opinions were inconsistent with those of Cheng Yuan Zhen. In other words, the daimyosun relegated Pei Guan to the status of a minor official of Shizhou.

古文：上遣中使刘清潭使于回纥，修旧好，且征兵讨史朝义。
现代文：代宗派遣中使刘清潭出使回纥，重新建立过去的友好关系，并想征调回纥军队讨伐史朝义。
English: Liu Qingtan was sent back to Silla to re-establish the friendly relations of the past, and he wanted to recruit Silla's army to fight against Shichongyi.

古文：清潭至其庭，回纥登里可汗已为朝义所诱，云 唐室继有大丧，今中原无主，可汗宜速来共收其府库。 
现代文：刘清潭来到回纥王大庭，当时回纥登里可汗已经受到史朝义的诱惑，史朝义曾对他说： 唐室相继有大丧事，如今中原没有皇帝，可汗应当迅速前来共同收取唐室府库的财物。 
English: Liu Qingtan came to the court of King Huizong. At that time, Huizong Dengrui Khan had already been tempted by Shi Chao Yi. Shi Chao Yi had told him: Tang Dynasty had a series of great funerals, now there is no emperor in Central Plains, Khan should quickly come to collect the property of Tang Dynasty treasury.

古文：可汗信之。
现代文：回纥可汗信以为真。
English: The return of the khan is believed to be true.

古文：清潭致敕书曰： 先帝虽弃天下，今上继统，乃昔日广平王，与叶护共收两京者也。 
现代文：刘清潭将诏书递给可汗，说道： 先帝虽然驾崩，但是现今的皇上已经即位，皇上就是过去的广平王，曾与叶护共同收复两京。 
English: Liu Qingtan handed the edict to the khan and said: Although the former emperor has passed away, the current emperor has already ascended the throne. The emperor is the former Guangping King, who together with Ye Gu recovered the two capitals.

古文：回纥业已起兵至三城，见州、县皆为丘墟，有轻唐之志，乃困辱清潭。
现代文：当时回纥已经调动军队到三受降城，看到州、县都成为废墟，产生了瞧不起唐朝的念头，于是困辱刘清潭。
English: At that time, Hui Yao had already mobilized the army to Sanju-Fengcheng, and when he saw that the prefecture and county were in ruins, he had the idea of despising the Tang Dynasty, and humiliated Liu Qingtan.

古文：清潭遣使言状，且曰： 回纥举国十万众至矣！ 
现代文：刘清潭便派遣使者回朝汇报情况，并且说： 回纥调动全国十万军队前来了！ 
English: Liu Qingtan then sent an envoy back to the North to report on the situation, and said: "The mobilization of 100,000 troops across the country has come!

古文：京师大骇。
现代文：京师上下大为震骇。
English: The whole of Beijing was shocked.

古文：上遣殿中监药子昂往劳之于忻州南。
现代文：代宗派遣殿中监药子昂前去忻州南面慰劳回纥军队。
English: The daimyō dispatched the palace middle warden, Yakushi Atsushi, to the south of Luzhou to comfort the troops.

古文：初，毘伽阙可汗为登里求婚，肃宗以仆固怀恩女妻之，为登里可敦，可汗请与怀恩相见，怀恩时在汾州，上令往见之，怀恩为可汗言唐家恩信不可负，可汗悦，遣使上表，请助国讨朝义。
现代文：从前，回纥毗伽阙可汗曾向唐朝为登里求婚，肃宗将仆固怀恩的女儿嫁给登里为妻，成为登里可敦。回纥可汗请求与仆固怀恩会面，仆固怀恩当时在汾州，代宗命他前去见面。仆固怀恩对回纥可汗说对唐朝的恩典信义不能辜负，回纥河汗很高兴，派遣使者上表，请求帮助唐朝讨伐史朝义。
English: Once upon a time, Uighur Vijayan Khan proposed to the Tang Dynasty to marry Deng Ri, Su Zong married the daughter of his servant Gu Wai Yan to Deng Ri and became Deng Ri Kedon. Uighur Khan asked to meet with the servant Gu Wai Yan, who was in Zhangzhou at the time and went to meet him on behalf of the emperor. The servant Gu Wai Yan told Uighur Khan that he could not live up to the grace and loyalty of the Tang Dynasty. Uighur Khan was very happy and sent an envoy to the table to ask for help in fighting against the Tang Dynasty.

古文：可汗欲自蒲关入，由沙苑出潼关东向，药子昂说之曰： 关中数遭兵荒，州县萧条，无以供拟，恐可汗失望；贼兵尽在洛阳，请自土门略邢、洺、怀、卫而南，得其资财以充军装。 可汗不从；又请 自太行南下据河阴，扼贼咽喉 ，亦不从；又请 自陕州大阳津渡河，食太原仓粟，与诸道俱进 ，乃从之。袁晁陷信州。
现代文：回纥可汗这才同意。袁晁攻陷信州。
English: Yuan Shao's invasion of Shinshu was successful.

古文：冬，十月，袁晁陷温州、明州。
现代文：冬季十月，袁晁攻陷温州、明州。
English: In the winter of October, Yuan Shao invaded Wenzhou and Mingzhou.

古文：以雍王适为天下兵马元帅。
现代文：代宗任命雍王李适为天下兵马元帅。
English: The Daizong appointed Yong Wang Li Si as the general of the world's armies and horses.

古文：辛酉，辞行，以兼御史中丞药子昂、魏琚为左、右厢兵马使，以中书舍人韦少华为判官，给事中李进为行军司马，会诸道节度使及回纥于陕州，进讨史朝义。
现代文：辛酉，雍王李适向代宗辞行，代宗任命兼任御史中丞的药子昂、魏琚为左右厢兵马使，中书舍人韦少华为判官，给事中李进为行军司马，前去陕州会合诸道节度使和回纥军队，共同进军讨伐史朝义。
English: In Xinjiang, the Yong Wang, Li Shih, resigned to the daimyō, and the daimyō appointed the concurrently appointed Imperial Historian Chujo, Yue Zi Ang, and Wei Zheng as the left and right wing soldiers and horse envoys, and the Chinese scholar Wei Shaohua as the judge, and Li Jin as the marching horse in the event, and went to Shaanxi to meet with the provincial festival envoys and Uighur army, and jointly marched to fight against the Sino-Japanese War.

古文：上欲以郭子仪为适副，程元振、鱼朝恩等沮之而止。
现代文：代宗想让郭子仪担任李适的副手，程元振、鱼朝恩等人阻止，代宗只好作罢。
English: Daizong wanted Guo Ziyi to serve as Li Shih's deputy, but Cheng Yuan Zhen, Yu Chaon and others prevented this, so Daizong had no choice but to give up.

古文：加朔方节度使仆固怀恩同平章事兼绛州刺史，领诸军节度行营以副适。
现代文：另外任命朔方节度使仆固怀恩为同平章事兼绛州刺史，统领各军节度行营，担任李适的副手。
English: In addition, he appointed his servant Gu Wai'en as Tongping Zhangji and Zhang Zhou Shishi, who led the troops to the festival and served as Li Si's deputy.

古文：上在东宫，以李辅国专横，心甚不平，及嗣位，以辅国有杀张后之功，不欲显诛之。
现代文：代宗在东宫当太子时，因为李辅国专横跋扈，心里忿忿不平，等到即位后，因为李辅国有杀掉张后的功劳，不想公开杀掉他。
English: When Daizong was crown prince in the East Palace, he was resentful because of the tyranny of Li Fuxu, but after he ascended the throne, he did not want to publicly kill him because Li Fuxu had the merit of killing Zhang.

古文：壬戌夜，盗入其第，窃辅国之首及一臂而去。
现代文：壬戌夜里，盗贼进入李辅国的宅第，杀掉李辅国，带了他的头和一条臂走了。
English: In the middle of the night, a thief entered Li Fuguo's house, killed Li Fuguo, and took his head and one arm.

古文：敕有司捕盗，遣中使存问其家，为刻木首葬之，仍赠太傅。
现代文：代宗敕令有关部门捕捉盗贼，又派遣中使慰问李辅国的家属，为他刻了一个木脑袋来安葬李辅国，还追赠他为太傅。
English: On behalf of the Holy Father, he ordered the relevant departments to catch the thieves, and sent the Chinese envoy to offer condolences to the family members of Li Fuguo, carved a wooden head for him to bury Li Fuguo, and posthumously awarded him the title of Taifu.

古文：丙寅，上命仆固怀恩与母、妻俱诣行营。
现代文：丙寅，代宗命令仆固怀恩和他母亲、妻子都到行营去。
English: In response, the daimyō ordered his servant Gohain, his mother, and his wife to go to the encampment.

古文：雍王适至陕州，回纥可汗屯于河北，适与僚属从数十骑往见之。
现代文：雍王李适到达陕州时，回纥可汗驻扎在陕州河北县，李适与僚属随从数十人乘马前往看望回纥可汗。
English: When the Yong Wang, Li Shih, arrived in Shaanxi, the Uighur Khan was stationed in Hebei County, Shaanxi Province. Li Shih and dozens of his followers rode to visit the Uighur Khan.

古文：可汗责适不拜舞，药子昂对以礼不当然。
现代文：回纥可汗叱责李适不行拜舞大礼，药子昂回答说，按照礼仪不应当这样。
English: In response to Khan's reprimand that Li Shih could not perform the grand salute, Dang Zi Ang replied that according to the etiquette, it should not be done.

古文：回纥将军车鼻曰： 唐天子与可汗约为兄弟，可汗于雍王，叔父也，何得不拜舞 子昂曰： 雍王，天子长子，今为元帅。
现代文：回纥将军车鼻说： 唐朝天子与可汗已经结为兄弟，对雍王来说，可汗是叔父，怎么能不拜舞呢？ 药子昂说： 雍王是天子的长子，如今又为元帅。
English: General Che Hna said: The Tang Dynasty's Tian Zi and Khan have become brothers. For King Yong, Khan is an uncle, so how can he not bow and dance? Yang Zi Ang said: King Yong is the eldest son of Tian Zi, and now he is a marshal.

古文：安有中国储君向外国可汗拜舞乎！ 
现代文：哪里有中国的储君向外国河汗拜舞的道理呢！
English: Where is the reason for China's crown prince to bow and scrape to a foreign monarch?

古文：且两宫在殡，不应舞蹈。 
现代文：况且太上皇和先帝尚未出殡，也不应该舞蹈。 
English: Moreover, the last emperor and the former emperor have not yet been buried, and there should be no dancing.

古文：力争久之，车鼻遂引子昂、魏琚、韦少华、李进各鞭一百，以适年少未谙事，遣归营。
现代文：力争好长时间，于是车鼻将药子昂、魏琚、韦少华、李进各打一百鞭，以李适年少不懂事，遣送回营。
English: They struggled for a long time, so the coachman gave a hundred lashes to each of Dang Zi Ang, Wei Wei, Wei Shao Hua, and Li Jin, and sent Li, who was too young to understand, back to the camp.

古文：琚、少华一夕而死。
现代文：魏琚、韦少华过了一夜就死了。
English: Wei Yao and Wei Shaohua died overnight.

古文：戊辰，诸军发陕州，仆固怀恩与回纥左杀为前锋，陕西节度使郭英乂、神策观军容使鱼朝恩为殿，自渑池入；潞泽节度使李抱玉自河阳入；河南等道副元帅李光弼自陈留入；雍王留陕州。
现代文：戊辰，各路军队从陕州出发，仆固怀恩与固纥左杀为前锋，陕西节度使郭英义、神策观军容使鱼朝恩殿后，从渑池入攻洛阳；潞泽节度使李抱玉从河阳入攻洛阳，河南等道副元帅李光弼从陈留入攻洛阳。雍王李适留守陕州。
English: In Wuchen, the armies of all directions set out from Shaanxi Province, with Gu Guaiyin and Gu Guanzhang Zuoxi as the vanguard. After the Shaanxi Festival sent Guo Yingyi and Shen Zeguang Jun Rong to Yu Chaon Hall, they entered Luoyang from Dianchi; the Heze Festival sent Li Baoyu to Luoyang from Heyang, and Li Guangyao, the vice-marshal of Henan and other provinces, entered Luoyang from Chen. Yong Wang Lishu stayed in Shaanxi.

古文：辛未，怀恩等军于同轨。
现代文：辛未，仆固怀恩等在同轨驻扎。
English: Xin Wei, Minion Gu Wai En and others were stationed on the same track.

古文：史朝义闻官军将至，谋于诸将。
现代文：史朝义听说官军即将到达，便与诸将商议对策。
English: When Shichoyoshi heard that the imperial army was about to arrive, he discussed countermeasures with the generals.

古文：阿史那承庆曰： 唐若独与汉兵来，宜悉众与战；若与回纥俱来，其锋不可当，宜退守河阳以避之。 
现代文：阿史那承庆说： 如果唐朝单独率领汉军前来，就应当率领全军与他们决战。如果与回纥军队一起来，兵锋锐不可挡，我们就应该退守河阳，避其锋芒。 
English: Ashina Chengqing said: If the Tang Dynasty alone led the Han Army to come, it should lead the whole army to fight with them. If it comes with the Uighur Army, the soldiers are unstoppable, we should retreat to the river Yang and avoid its edge.

古文：朝义不从。
现代文：史朝义不同意。
English: Shi Chaoyi disagreed.

古文：壬申，官军至洛阳北郊，分兵取怀州；癸酉，拔之。
现代文：壬申，官军到达洛阳北郊，分兵夺取怀州。癸酉，官军攻克怀州。
English: At Jinshin, the government army reached the northern suburb of Luoyang, and the detachment captured Huaizhou. At the same time, the government army conquered Huaizhou.

古文：乙亥，官军陈于横水。
现代文：癸酉，官军攻克怀州。
English: At that time, the government army conquered Huaizhou.

古文：贼众数万，立栅自固，怀恩陈于西原以当之。
现代文：乙亥，官军在横水布阵。数万叛军，设置栅栏，各自固守，仆固怀恩在西原布阵抵挡叛军。
English: At the end of the second year of the Heian period, the government army was deployed in Yokomizu. Tens of thousands of rebels set up fences and defended themselves, and Minoru Wain was deployed in Nishihara to resist the rebels.

古文：遣骁骑及回纥并南山出栅东北，表里合击，大破之。
现代文：又派遣劲骑以及回纥军队出南山攻到栅栏东北，里外合击，将叛军打得大败。
English: He also dispatched the cavalry and the Hui army to attack from Nanshan to the northeast of the fence, and the rebels were defeated.

古文：朝义悉其精兵十万救之，陈于昭觉寺，官军骤击之，杀伤甚众，而贼陈不动；鱼朝恩遣射生五百人力战，贼虽多死者，陈亦如初。
现代文：史朝义率领他所有的精锐部队十万人前去救援，在昭觉寺布阵，官军急速冲击敌阵，杀伤很多敌军，但贼军陈势仍然没有动摇。鱼朝恩派遣射生军五百人奋力冲杀，虽然叛军死者众多，但阵势仍如当初。
English: Shi Chaoyi led all of his 100,000 elite troops to the rescue, and set up a line of battle at Zhaojue Temple. The government army quickly attacked the enemy line, killing and wounding many enemy troops, but the rebel army's position remained unshaken. Yu Chaoyun dispatched 500 soldiers to fight and kill, and although there were many rebel deaths, the position was still as it was at the beginning.

古文：镇西节度使马璘曰： 事急矣！ 
现代文：镇西节度使马说： 事情急迫了！ 
English: Zhenxi Festival made Ma say: Things are urgent!

古文：遂单骑奋击，夺贼两牌，突入万众中。
现代文：于是单枪匹马奋力冲击，夺得叛军两块盾牌，突入千军万马之中。
English: As a result, he single-handedly attacked, captured two shields of the rebels, and rushed into the midst of thousands of soldiers.

古文：贼左右披靡，大军乘之而入，贼众大败；转战于石榴园、老君庙，贼又败；人马相蹂践，填尚书谷，斩首六万级，捕虏二万人，朝义将轻骑数百东走。
现代文：叛军纷纷倒下，大部队乘机突入敌阵，叛军大贩。双方转战到石榴园、老君庙一带，叛军又遭惨败，人马互相践踏，填满了尚书谷。官军杀死六万人，捕获二万人，史朝义仅率领数百名轻骑向东逃窜。
English: The rebels fell one after another, large forces took advantage of the opportunity to break into the enemy lines, and the rebel vendors left. The two sides switched to fighting in the area of the pomegranate garden and the Laojun Temple, and the rebels suffered a crushing defeat, trampling each other and filling Shangshugu Valley. The government army killed sixty thousand people, captured twenty thousand people, and Shi Chaoyi only led hundreds of light horsemen to flee to the east.

古文：怀恩进克东京及河阳城，获其中书令许叔冀、王伷等，制释之。
现代文：仆固怀恩进而攻克东京以及河阳城，抓获史朝义的中书令许叔冀、王等人，遵照代宗的制令又将他们释放了。
English: Minion Gu Hui'en then conquered Tokyo and Kawayan Castle, captured Xu Shuji, Wang and others in accordance with the Chinese imperial edict, and released them in accordance with the emperor's edict.

古文：怀恩留回纥可汗营于河阳，使其子右厢兵马使瑒及朔方兵马使高辅成帅步骑万馀乘胜逐朝义，至郑州，再战皆捷。
现代文：仆固怀恩留在河阳回纥河汗的营帐中，派他的儿子右厢兵马使仆固以及朔方兵马使高辅成率领步、骑兵一万多人乘胜追击史朝义，到达郑州时，又与叛军交战，都取得了胜利。
English: Minion Gu Wai'en stayed in the camp of the Khaoyang Uighur Khan, sent his son Right Wing Troops and Horses to lead Minion Gu and Shuo Fang Troops and Horses to lead Gao Fu Cheng, and more than 10,000 cavalrymen took advantage of the victory to pursue Shi Chongyi. When they arrived in Zhengzhou, they also fought with the rebels and achieved victory.

古文：朝义至汴州，其陈留节度使张献诚闭门拒之；朝义奔濮州，献诚开门出降。
现代文：史朝义逃到汴州，他的陈留节度使张献诚紧闭城门，拒绝让他进城，史朝义又逃奔濮州，张献诚打开城门出城向官军投降。
English: Shi Chaoyi fled to Bozhou. His stay-at-home order made Zhang Xiancheng close the city gate and refused to let him enter the city. Shi Chaoyi fled to Bozhou, while Zhang Xiancheng opened the city gate and surrendered to the government army.

古文：回纥入东京，肆行杀略，死者万计，火累旬不灭。
现代文：回纥军队进入东京，肆意杀掠，死者数以万计，大火几十天都没有熄灭。
English: Returning imperial troops entered Tokyo, killing and looting at will, tens of thousands died, and the fires did not go out for dozens of days.

古文：朔方、神策军亦以东京、郑、汴、汝州皆为贼境，所过虏掠，三月乃已，比屋荡尽，士民皆衣纸。
现代文：朔方、神策军也因为东京、郑州、汴州、汝州都是叛军控制的区域，所过之处大肆虏掠，三个月之后才停止。一排排的房屋被毁坏荡尽，百姓都只好穿上纸衣。
English: Because Tokyo, Zhengzhou, Zhangzhou, and Ruzhou were all areas controlled by the rebels, the Shuo and Shanzhao armies also plundered and pillaged everywhere they went, and only stopped after three months. Rows and rows of houses were completely destroyed, and the people had to wear paper clothes.

古文：回纥悉置所掠宝货于河阳，留其将安恪守之。
现代文：回纥可汗将他们所掠的财物全部存放到河阳，留下他的将领安恪看守。
English: The Uighur khan deposited all of their plundered property in Kheyang, leaving his generals to guard it.

古文：十一月，丁丑，露布至京师。
现代文：十一月，丁丑，捷报传到京师。
English: In November, Ding Qiu, Jie Bao spread to Beijing Division.

古文：朝义自濮州北渡河，怀恩进攻滑州，拔之，追败朝义于卫州。
现代文：史朝义从濮州北渡黄河，仆固怀恩进攻并攻克了滑州，又在卫州追上史朝义，将他击败。
English: Shi Chaoyi crossed the Yellow River from the north of Luzhou, and Gu Wai'en attacked and conquered Leshou. He also caught up with Shi Chaoyi in Weizhou and defeated him.

古文：朝义睢阳节度使田承嗣等将兵四万馀人与朝义合，复来拒战；仆固瑒击破之，长驱至昌乐东。
现代文：史朝义的睢阳节度使田承嗣等人率兵四万多人与史朝义会合，又前来抵抗。仆固将他们击败，长驱直入，到达昌乐县东面。
English: Shigeyoshi's Shinyang festival made more than forty thousand soldiers led by Tian Shigeji and others meet with Shigeyoshi, and they came to resist. Minko defeated them and drove straight in, reaching the east of Changle County.

古文：朝义帅魏州兵来战，又败走。
现代文：史朝义率领魏州的军队前来交战，又兵败退走。
English: Shi Zhaoyi led the army of Weizhou to fight, but was defeated and retreated.

古文：于是鄴郡节度使薛嵩以相、卫、洺、邢四州降于陈郑、泽潞节度使李抱玉，恒阳节度使张忠志以恒、赵、深、定、易五州降于河东节度使辛云京。
现代文：于是邺郡节度使薛嵩献出相州、卫州、州、邢州，向陈郑、泽潞节度使李抱玉投降。恒阳节度使张忠志献出赵州、恒州、深州、定州、易州，向河东节度使辛云京投降。
English: As a result, the Jie County Festival made Xue Song offer up Xiangzhou, Weizhou, Zhoushan and Zhangzhou, the Chen Zheng and Zeyu Festival made Li Baoyu surrender, the Hengyang Festival made Zhang Zhongzhi offer up Zhaozhou, Hengzhou, Shenzhou, Dingzhou and Yizhou, and the Hedong Festival made Xin Yunjing surrender.

古文：嵩，楚玉之子也。
现代文：薛嵩是薛楚玉的儿子。
English: Xue Song is the son of Xue Chu Yu.

古文：抱玉等已进军入其营，按其部伍，嵩等皆受代；居无何，仆固怀恩皆令复位。
现代文：李抱玉等人已进军到薛嵩的军营中，检查他的部队，薛嵩等人都接受李抱玉派人取代。没过多久，仆固怀恩让他们都官复原位。
English: Li Baoyu and others have marched into Xue Song's camp to inspect his troops. Xue Song and others have accepted Li Baoyu's replacement. It didn't take long for Gu Wai Yan to restore them to their original positions.

古文：由是抱玉、云京疑怀恩有贰心，各表言之，朝廷密为之备；怀恩亦上疏自理，上慰勉之。
现代文：因此，李抱玉、辛云京怀疑仆固怀恩怀有二心，分别上表说到此事，朝廷暗地里防备仆固怀恩。仆固怀恩也上书为自己辩护，代宗安慰和勉励他一番。
English: Therefore, Li Baoyu and Xin Yunjing suspected that the servant Gu Huai'en was of two minds. The above-mentioned matter was said separately, and the court secretly guarded the servant Guai'en. The servant Guai'en also wrote a letter to defend himself, and the emperor consoled and encouraged him.

古文：辛巳，制： 东京及河南、北受伪官者，一切不问。 
现代文：辛巳，代宗下制令： 东京以及河南、河北接受伪职的人概不追究。 
English: Soon after, the daimyō issued an order: Tokyo, as well as Henan and Hebei, would not prosecute anyone who accepted a fake post.

古文：己丑，以户部侍郎刘晏兼河南道水陆转运都使。
现代文：己丑，代宗任命户部侍郎刘晏兼任河南道水陆转运都使。
English: On his own initiative, the daimyō appointed the head of the household, Liu Xuan, to also serve as the envoy for land and water transportation in Henan Province.

古文：丁酉，以张忠志为成德军节度使，统恒、赵、深、定、易五州，赐姓李，名宝臣。
现代文：丁酉，代宗任命张忠志为成德军节度使，统领恒州、赵州、深州、定州、易州，赐姓为李，名为宝臣。
English: Ding Xi, the daimyō, appointed Zhang Zhongzhi as the military envoy of the Chengde Army, commanding Hengzhou, Zhaozhou, Shenzhou, Dingzhou, and Yizhou. He was given the surname Li and the name Baochen.

古文：初，辛云京引兵将出井陉，常山裨将王武俊说宝臣曰： 今河东兵精锐，出境远斗，不可敌也。
现代文：从前，辛云京率领军队将要东出井陉，常山副将王武俊劝李宝臣说： 如今河东军队十分精锐，出境远征，势不可敌。
English: Once upon a time, Xin Yunjing led the army to march eastward from Jingzheng, and Wang Wujun, the deputy general of Changshan, advised Li Baochen, saying, "Nowadays, the army of Hedong is very elite, and it is invincible in overseas expeditions.

古文：且吾以寡当众，以曲遇直，战则必离，守则必溃，公其图之。 
现代文：况且我们以少挡多，以曲遇直，如果交战就必定会众叛亲离，固守就必然会溃败，你应该好好考虑。 
English: Moreover, we use the principle of "less is more" and "song is the best." If there is a war, the congregation will surely defect, and the adherents will surely be defeated. You should think about it carefully.

古文：宝臣乃撤守备，举五州来降。
现代文：李宝臣便撤除守备，率五州前来投降辛云京。
English: Li Baochen then removed the defences and led the five states to surrender Xinyunjing.

古文：及复为节度使，以武俊之策为善，擢为先锋兵马使。
现代文：等到李宝臣又任节度使后，认为王武俊的计策很好，提拔他为先锋兵马使。
English: After Li Baochen was appointed as the envoy of the festival, he thought that Wang Wujun's strategy was very good and promoted him to the vanguard of the soldiers and horses.

古文：武俊，本契丹也，初名沿诺干。
现代文：王武俊本是契丹族人，原名没诺干。
English: Wang Wujun is originally from the Khitan ethnic group and his original name was Meng Nogan.

古文：郭子仪以仆固怀恩有平河朔功，请以副元帅让之。
现代文：郭子仪因为仆固怀恩有平定河朔的功劳，请求代宗将副元帅的职位让给他。
English: Guo Ziyi requested the deputy emperor to give him the position of vice-marshal because his servant Gu Wai En had the merit of pacifying Heshaku.

古文：己亥，以怀恩为河北副元帅，加左仆射兼中书令、单于、镇北大都护、朔方节度使。
现代文：己亥，代宗任命仆固怀恩为河北副元帅，加任左仆射兼中书令、单于、镇北大都护、朔方节度使。
English: Ji Hai, the daimyō appointed his servant Gu Wai En as the deputy marshal of Hebei, and appointed his left-hand servant Jie as the middle secretary, Shan Yu, Zhenbei Daduo, and Shuo Fang as the festival envoys.

古文：史朝义走至贝州，与其大将薛忠义等两节度合，仆固瑒追之至临清。朝义自衡水引兵三万还攻之，瑒设伏击走之。
现代文：史朝义逃到贝州，与他的大将薛忠义等二节度使会合，仆固一直追击到临清县，史朝义从衡水率军三万回师反攻，仆固设下伏兵将他们击退。
English: Shi Chao Yi fled to Bechu, and met with his general Xue Zhongyi and other second-rate envoys. Mugu chased them all the way to Linqing County. Shi Chao Yi led an army of 30,000 divisions from Hengshui to counterattack, and Mugu set ambushes to repel them.

古文：回纥又至，官军益振，遂逐之；大战于下博东南，贼大败，积尸拥流而下，朝义奔莫州。
现代文：此时回纥军队又抵达临清县，官军势力更加壮大，于是追击史朝义。在下博县东南双方大战，贼军大败，成堆的尸体随着河流冲走了。史翰义逃往莫州。
English: At this time, the Uighur army arrived in Linqing County, and the strength of the government army became even stronger, so they chased Shichangyi. In the southeast of Shimbo County, the two sides fought a big battle, the thief army was defeated, and piles of bodies were washed away with the river. Shihangyi fled to Mozhou.

古文：怀恩都知兵马使薛兼训、兵马使郝庭玉与田神功、辛云京会于下博，进围朝义于莫州，青淄节度使侯希逸继至。
现代文：仆固怀恩部下都知兵马使薛兼训、兵马使郝庭玉在下博县与田神功、辛云京会合后，便进军莫州，围攻史朝义，青淄节度使侯希逸也随后赶到。
English: After meeting with Tian Shengong and Xin Yunjing in Shimo Bo County, the servants of Gu Wai's subordinates, the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of the soldiers and horses of

古文：十二月，庚申，初以太祖配天地。
现代文：十二月庚申，首次在祭祀天地时附祭太祖。
English: In December, Koshin, for the first time, there was an additional offering to Taizu during the worship of heaven and earth.

古文：代宗睿文孝武皇帝上之上
现代文：代宗睿文孝武皇帝上之上
English: Emperor Wenzong and Emperor Wenxiao-wu

古文：广德元年癸卯，公元七六三年春，正月，己卯，追谥吴太后曰章敬皇后。
现代文：唐代宗广德元年春季，正月己卯，代宗追谥吴太后为章敬皇后。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Zong Guangde, the first month of the year, the Empress Dowager Wu, who was the successor of Zong Guangde, became the Empress Zhang Jing.

古文：癸未，以国子祭酒刘晏为吏部尚书、同平章事，度支等使如故。
现代文：癸未，代宗任命国子祭酒刘晏为吏部尚书、同平章事，度支使等职务仍然不变。
English: In the meantime, the daimyos appointed Liu Ye, the son of the state, as the secretary, the secretary, the secretary of the same level, and the secretary of the same level, and other positions remain unchanged.

古文：初，来瑱在襄阳，程元振有所请托，不从；及为相，元振谮瑱言涉不顺。
现代文：从前，来在襄阳时，程元振曾经请求和嘱托他办事，来没有答应；等到来担任宰相后，程元振诬陷来说了对代宗不恭敬的话。
English: Once upon a time, when he was in Yangyang, Cheng Yuan Zhen had requested and instructed him to do things, but he did not agree; after he came to serve as prime minister, Cheng Yuan Zhen was framed for disrespecting the daizong.

古文：王仲升在贼中，以屈服得全，贼平得归，与元振善，奏瑱与贼合谋，致仲升陷贼。
现代文：王仲升在贼军中，曾因表示屈服才得以偷生，贼军被平定后，他回归朝廷，与程元振关系很好，便奏称来与贼军合谋，致使自己被贼军抓获。
English: Wang Zhongsheng was a member of the Kleptocratic Army, and was able to survive by showing submission. After the Kleptocratic Army was subdued, he returned to the imperial court. He had a good relationship with Cheng Yuan Zhen, so he pretended to conspire with the Kleptocratic Army, resulting in his capture by the Kleptocratic Army.

古文：壬寅，瑱坐削官爵，流播州，赐死于路。由是籓镇皆切齿于元振。
现代文：壬寅，来被削去官爵，流放播州，在流放的路上被代宗赐死，因此藩镇都对程元振恨得咬牙切齿。
English: Ren Yin was stripped of his title of nobility, exiled to Bozhou, and died on his way to exile. As a result, all the towns in the domain hated Cheng Yuan Zhen with all their teeth.

古文：史朝义屡出战，皆败，田承嗣说朝义，令亲往幽州发兵，还救莫州，承嗣自请留守莫州。
现代文：史朝义屡次出战，都遭失败，田承嗣劝说史朝义，他亲自前往幽州征调军队，回救莫州，请求让自己留下守卫莫州。
English: Shi Chao Yi repeatedly went to war, but failed. Tian Cheng Ci persuaded Shi Chao Yi to leave, and he personally went to Yuzhou to recruit troops, rescue Mozhou, and ask him to stay to guard Mozhou.

古文：朝义从之，选精骑五千自北门犯围而出。
现代文：史朝义采纳了他的建议，挑选五千精锐骑兵从北门冲出包围。
English: Shi Chaoyi accepted his suggestion and selected five thousand elite cavalry to rush out from the north gate to surround.

古文：朝义既去，承嗣即以城降，送朝义母、妻、子于官军。
现代文：史朝义离去之后，田承嗣马上举城投降，将史朝义的母亲、妻子、儿子一起送到官军那儿。
English: After Shi Chao Yi left, Tian Cheng Ci immediately surrendered the city and sent Shi Chao Yi's mother, wife, and son to the government army.

古文：于是仆固瑒、侯希逸、薛兼训等帅众三万追之，及于归义，与战，朝义败走。
现代文：于是仆固、侯希逸、薛兼训等人率领三万士兵追击史朝义，在归义县追上了史朝义，双方交战，史朝义又败走。
English: As a result, Mugu, Hou Xiyi, Xue Jianxun and others led 30,000 soldiers to chase Shichao Yi, and caught up with Shichao Yi in Guiyi County. The two sides fought, and Shichao Yi lost again.

古文：时朝义范阳节度使李怀仙已因中使骆奉仙请降，遣兵马使李抱忠将兵三千镇范阳县，朝义至范阳，不得入。
现代文：当时史朝义部下范阳节度使李怀仙已经通过中使骆奉仙向朝廷请求投降，并派遣兵马使李抱忠率领三千士兵镇守范阳县。史朝义来到范阳，李抱忠不让他入城。
English: At that time, Li Huaixian had already passed the Fanyang Festival of Li Chaoyi's subordinates, so he asked Luo Fengxian to surrender to the imperial court, and sent soldiers and horses to send Li Baozhong to lead three thousand soldiers to guard Fanyang County. Shi Chaoyi came to Fanyang, and Li Baozhong did not let him enter the city.

古文：官军将至，朝义遣人谕抱忠以大军留莫州、轻骑来发兵救援之意，因责以君臣之义，抱忠对曰： 天不祚燕，唐室复兴。今既归唐矣，岂可更为反覆，独不愧三军邪！
现代文：官军即将追到，史朝义派人将大部队留在莫州、轻装骑兵前来征调军队救援的意图告诉了李抱忠，并且用君臣道理责备他，李抱忠回答说： 老天不让燕人做皇帝，唐室又复兴了，今天既然已经归顺唐朝，难道可以再反覆，就不愧对三军将士吗？
English: The government army was about to catch up with Li Baozhong, and Li Baozhong told Li Baozhong that Shi Chao Yi had sent people to leave a large force in Mozhou, and told him of the intention of light cavalry to come to recruit and rescue the army. Li Baozhong also reproached him with the principle of a monarch and a subject. Li Baozhong replied: God forbid that Yan people become emperor. The Tang Dynasty has been revived. Today, since it has surrendered to the Tang Dynasty, can it be repeated again? Is it worthy of the three soldiers?

古文：大丈夫耻以诡计相图，愿早择去就以谋自全。
现代文：大丈夫以诡计相图为可耻，但愿你能早点选择后路，考虑保全自己。
English: It is shameful for a husband to scheme, but I hope you can choose the back way early and consider protecting yourself.

古文：且田承嗣必已叛矣，不然，官军何以得至此！ 
现代文：况且田承嗣一定已经叛变了，不然的话，官军怎么能够追到这里呢！ 
English: Moreover, Tian Chengzhi must have already mutinied, otherwise, how could the government army chase him here!

古文：朝义大惧，曰： 吾朝来未食，独不能以一餐相饷乎！ 
现代文：史朝义十分害怕，说： 从早晨以来，我们滴水未进，难道不能让我们吃一顿饭吗？ 
English: Shi Chaoyi was very scared and said, "We haven't had a drop of water since morning, can't you let us have a meal?"

古文：抱忠乃令人设食于城东。
现代文：李抱忠便让人在城东供应膳食。
English: Li Baozhong then asked someone in the east of the city to provide meals.

古文：于是范阳人在朝义麾下者，并拜辞而去，朝义涕泣而已，独与胡骑数百既食而去。
现代文：于是史朝义手下的范阳人一起向史朝义叩拜辞别而去，史朝义只是痛哭流涕而已，吃罢饭，独自与数百名胡人骑兵离去。
English: As a result, Fan Yang's men under Shi Chao Yi bowed to Shi Chao Yi and bid him farewell. Shi Chao Yi only cried bitterly, skipped dinner, and left alone with hundreds of Hu cavalry.

古文：东奔广阳，广阳不受；欲北入奚、契丹，至温泉栅，李怀仙兵追及之；朝义穷蹙，缢于林中，怀仙取其首以献。
现代文：史朝义向东奔赴广阳，广阳也不接收他们。史朝义想向北进入奚、契丹境内，来到温泉栅时，李怀仙派兵追上了他们。史朝义走投无路，在树林中上吊自杀，李怀仙割取了他的头颅献给朝廷。
English: Shi Chao Yi rushed east to Guangyang, but Guangyang did not accept them. Shi Chao Yi wanted to go north into the territory of Shao and Khitan, and when he came to the hot spring gate, Li Huai Xian sent soldiers to catch up with them. Shi Chao Yi had no choice but to hang himself in the woods, and Li Huai Xian cut off his head and dedicated it to the imperial court.

古文：仆固怀恩与诸军皆还。
现代文：仆固怀恩与各路军队都回军。
English: Servant Gu Wai Yan and all the troops returned to the army.

古文：甲辰，朝义首至京师。
现代文：甲辰，史朝义的头颅被送到了京师。
English: The head of Jia Chen and Shichao Yi was sent to the capital.

古文：闰月，己酉夜，有回纥十五人犯含光门，突入鸿胪寺，门司不敢遏。
现代文：闰正月己酉夜里，有十五名回纥人侵犯含光门，冲进鸿胪寺，守门人不敢制止他们。
English: On the night of the first day of the leap month, fifteen Uighurs invaded the light gate and rushed into Hongye Temple. The gatekeepers did not dare to stop them.

古文：癸亥，以史朝义降将薛嵩为相、卫、邢、洺、贝、磁六州节度使，田承嗣为魏、博、德、沧、瀛五州都防御使，李怀仙仍故地为幽州、卢龙节度使。
现代文：癸亥，代宗任命史朝义部下的降将薛嵩为相、卫、邢？贝、磁六州节度使，田承嗣为魏、博、德、沧、瀛五州都防御使，李怀仙仍在故地担任幽州、卢龙节度使。
English: At the end of the Heian period, Emperor Taizong appointed Xue Song, a subordinate of Shi Chao Yi, as the festival envoy of the six states of Fang, Wei, Jianbei, and Magnetism; Tian Chengzhi as the defense envoy of the five states of Wei, Bo, De, Cang, and Jia; Li Huaixian still served as the festival envoy of Yuzhou and Lulong in his hometown.

古文：时河北诸州皆已降，嵩等迎仆固怀恩，拜于马首，乞行间自效；怀恩亦恐贼平宠衰，故奏留嵩等及李宝臣分帅河北，自为党援。
现代文：当时河北各州都已投降，薛嵩等人迎接仆固怀恩，在他坐骑前叩拜，恳求让他们留在军中效力，仆固怀恩也害怕贼军平定后会失宠，所以上奏让薛嵩等人以及李宝臣留下来，分别统率河北各藩镇，成为他的党羽外援。
English: At that time, all the states in Hebei had surrendered. Xue Song and others greeted the servant Gu Wai and bowed before his horse, begging them to stay in the army to serve. The servant Gu Wai was also afraid that he would fall out of favor after the rebel army was pacified, so he asked Xue Song and others and Li Baochen to stay and lead the provinces and towns in Hebei, respectively, to become his party's foreign aid.

古文：朝廷亦厌苦兵革，敬冀无事，因而授之。
现代文：朝廷也厌恶战争，只希望天下无事，因而将河北交给他们。
English: The imperial court also abhorred war and wanted nothing but peace, so they handed Hebei over to them.

古文：回纥登里可汗归国，其部众所过抄掠，廪给小不如意，辄杀人，无所忌惮。
现代文：回纥登里可汗回国，他的部众在所经之地搜劫财物，由官府供给他们粮食，稍有不如意的地方，就动手杀人，无所顾忌。
English: On the way back to the country, his subordinates looted property in the places they passed through. The government provided them with grain, and if there was anything less than desirable, they began to kill people without any scruples.

古文：陈郑、泽潞节度使李抱玉欲遣官属置顿，人人辞惮，赵城尉马燧独请行。
现代文：陈郑、泽潞节度使李抱玉想派遣下属官吏设办理招待和供应的事，但因为害怕，人人都推托，唯独赵城县尉马燧请求去办理。
English: Chen Zheng and Zecheng Festival made Li Baoyu want to send subordinate officials to handle the invitation and supply, but because of fear, everyone refused, but Zhaocheng County Lieutenant Ma Jun requested to handle it.

古文：比回纥将至，燧先遣人赂其渠帅，约毋暴掠，帅遣之旗曰： 有犯令者，君处戮之。 
现代文：等到回纥军即将到达时，马燧先派人贿赂他们的首领，约定不得残暴抢劫，首领给他留下了一面旗，说道： 如果有违反命令的人，你可以自行杀掉他们。 
English: When the Hui army was about to arrive, Ma Xun first sent someone to bribe their leader, agreeing not to rob brutally. The leader left him a flag and said: If there are people who violate orders, you can kill them yourself.

古文：燧取死囚为左右，小有违令，立斩之。
现代文：马燧让死囚作随从，稍有违令，便立即杀掉。
English: Ma Wei let the death row convicts be his followers, and if there was the slightest violation of the order, he would immediately kill them.

古文：回纥相顾失色，涉其境者皆拱手遵约束。
现代文：回纥人互相对视，大惊失色，于是经过境内的回纥人都拱手遵守规约。
English: The Uighurs looked at each other, shocked, and all the Uighurs passing through the territory complied with the statute.

古文：抱玉奇之，燧因说抱玉曰： 燧与回纥言，颇得其情。
现代文：李抱玉十分惊奇，马燧借此机会劝说李抱玉，说道： 我与回纥人交谈过，对他们情况颇为了解。
English: Li Baoyu was very surprised. Ma Zhen took this opportunity to persuade Li Baoyu, saying: I have talked with the Uighur people, and I understand their situation quite well.

古文：仆固怀恩恃功骄蹇，其子瑒好勇而轻，今内树四帅，外交回纥，必有窥河东、泽潞之志，宜深备之。 
现代文：仆固怀恩自恃有功，傲慢不顺，他的儿子仆固喜欢逞能，轻率浮躁，如今在国内树立田承嗣、李宝臣、李怀仙、薛嵩四员将帅，对外结交回纥，一定有窥视河东、泽潞的志向，应当好好地防备他们。 
English: Minion Gu Wai En prides himself on his achievements, but his arrogance does not go down well. His son Minion Gu likes to be bold, rash and impetuous. Nowadays, he has set up four generals in the country, Tian Cheng He, Li Baochen, Li Huai Xian, and Xue Song, and has established diplomatic relations with other countries. He must have the ambition to spy on Hedong and Zeyao, and should be well prepared for them.

古文：抱玉然之。
现代文：李抱玉认为确实如此。
English: Li Baoyu believes that this is indeed the case.

古文：初，长安人梁崇义以羽林射生从来瑱镇襄阳，累迁右兵马使。
现代文：从前，长安人梁崇义以羽林射生军跟随来镇守襄阳，历经升迁，任右兵马使。
English: Once upon a time, Liang Chongyi, a native of Chang'an, came to guard Xiangyang with the Hualin Archery Army. After promotion, he served as the right-hand soldier.

古文：崇义有勇力，能卷铁舒钩，沉毅寡言，得众心。
现代文：梁崇义有勇力，能够弯卷铁器，舒展铁钩，生性刚毅，沉默寡言，很得人心。
English: Liang Chongyi has courage, can bend and roll iron tools, stretch iron hooks, is naturally strong-willed, taciturn, and very popular.

古文：瑱之入朝也，命诸将分戍诸州；瑱死，戍者皆奔归襄阳。
现代文：来入朝时，命令诸将分别戍守各州，来死后，戍守各州的将士都纷纷逃回襄阳。
English: When he came to the court, he ordered his generals to guard each state separately. After his death, the generals who guarded each state fled back to Xiangyang one after another.

古文：行军司马庞充将兵二千赴河南，至汝州，闻瑱死，引兵还袭襄州；左兵马使李昭拒之，充奔房州。
现代文：行军司马庞充率领二千士兵奔赴河南，到达汝州时，听说来去世，便率军回袭襄州。左兵马使李昭抵抗庞充，庞充逃往房州。
English: Marching Sima Pangchong led two thousand soldiers to Henan. When he arrived in Ruzhou, he was rumored to be dead, so he led the army to strike back at Xiangzhou. Left soldiers and horses made Li Zhao resist Pangchong, and Pangchong fled to Fangzhou.

古文：崇义自邓州引戍兵归，与昭及副使薛南阳相让为长，久之不决，众皆曰： 兵非梁卿主之不可。 
现代文：梁崇义从邓州率领戍守的军队返回襄阳，他与李昭和节度副使薛南阳互相推让不肯做统帅，很长时间决定不下，大家都说： 军队非梁崇义统帅不可。 
English: Liang Chongyi returned to Xiangyang from Dengzhou leading the garrisoned army. He and Li Showa's vice-commander Xue Nanyang mutually refused to be commander-in-chief. It took a long time to decide, and everyone said: the army must be commanded by Liang Chongyi.

古文：遂推崇义为帅。
现代文：于是推举梁崇义为统帅。
English: As a result, Liang Chongyi was promoted to commander.

古文：崇义寻昭及南阳，以其状闻，上不能讨。
现代文：不久梁崇义杀掉了李昭和薛南阳，并向代宗作了奏报，代宗不能讨伐他。
English: Soon after, Liang Chongyi killed Li Showa Xue Nanyang and made a report to Daizong. Daizong could not fight him.

古文：三月，甲辰，以崇义为襄州刺史、山南东道节度留后。
现代文：三月甲辰，代宗任命梁崇义为襄州刺史、山南东道节度留后。
English: In March, the vicar general appointed Liang Chongyi as the vicar general of Xiangzhou and the host of the festival in Shannan.

古文：崇义奏改葬瑱，为之立祠，不居瑱听事及正堂。
现代文：梁崇义奏请为来改葬，并建立祠堂，自己不在来的厅堂和正堂居住。
English: Liang Chongyiso asked to come to change the funeral and build an ancestral hall, and to live in the hall and the main hall when he was not there.

古文：辛酉，葬至道大圣大明孝皇帝于泰陵；庙号玄宗。
现代文：辛酉，代宗将至道大圣大明孝皇帝葬在泰陵，庙号为玄宗。
English: Emperor Mingxiao, the founder of the Ming Dynasty, was buried in Tai Ling, and his temple name was Xuanzong.

古文：庚午，葬文明武德大圣大宣孝皇帝于乔陵；庙号肃宗。
现代文：庚午，将文明武德大圣大宣孝皇帝葬在建陵，庙号为肃宗。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Emperor Xuanxiao, the great saint of civilization and martial arts, was buried in Jianling Mausoleum. The temple's name was Su Zong.

古文：夏，四月，庚辰，李光弼奏擒袁晃，浙东皆平。
现代文：夏季，四月庚辰，李光弼奏称已经抓获袁晁，浙东地区的叛乱全部平息。
English: In the summer, in April, Gengchen, Li Guangyao announced that Yuan Qi had been captured, and all the rebellions in the eastern Zhejiang region were quelled.

古文：时晁聚众近二十万，转攻州县，光弼使部将张伯仪将兵讨平之。
现代文：当时，袁晁聚集了近二十万人马，辗转进攻州县，李光弼派遣部将张伯仪率领军队讨伐，镇压了他们。
English: At that time, Yuan Shao gathered nearly two hundred thousand people to attack the prefectures, and Li Guangya dispatched Zhang Boyi to lead the army to fight and suppress them.

古文：伯仪，魏州人也。
现代文：张伯仪是魏州人。
English: Zhang Boyi is from Weizhou.

古文：郭子仪数上言： 吐蕃、党项不可忽，宜早为之备。 
现代文：郭子仪多次进言说： 吐蕃、常项不可忽视，应当及早防备他们。 
English: Guo Ziyi repeatedly said: "Tuhui and Changye should not be ignored, and they should be prevented at an early stage.

古文：辛丑，遣兼御史大夫李之芳等使于吐蕃，为虏所留，二年乃得归。
现代文：辛丑代宗派遣兼御史大夫李之芳等人出使吐蕃，他们被吐蕃扣留，二年之后才得以回到唐朝。
English: Emperor Xinwu sent Li Zhifang, who was also the Grand Historian, and others as envoys to Tubo. They were detained by Tubo and were only able to return to the Tang Dynasty two years later.

古文：群臣三上表请立太子；五月，癸卯，诏许俟秋成议之。
现代文：大臣们三次上表请求立太子，五月癸卯，代宗下诏允许等到秋收后商议此事。
English: Three times the ministers petitioned for the crown prince to be installed, and in May, Emperor Taizong issued an edict to wait until after the autumn harvest to discuss the matter.

古文：丁卯，制分河北诸州：以幽、莫、妫、檀、平、蓟为幽州管；恒、定、赵、深、易为成德军管；相、贝、邢、洺为相州管；魏、博、德为魏州管；沧、棣、冀、瀛为青淄管；怀、卫、河阳为泽潞管。
现代文：丁卯，唐代宗颁布制令分割河北各州：将幽州、莫州、妫州、檀州、平州、蓟州归属幽州统管；恒州、定州、赵州、深州、易州归属成德军统管；相州、贝州、邢州、州归属相州统管；魏州、博州、德州归属魏州统管；沧州、棣州、冀州、瀛州归属青淄统管；怀州、卫州、河阳归属泽潞统管。
English: At the time of Emperor Dingwu, the Tang Dynasty issued an order to divide the provinces of Hebei: Yuzhou, Mozhou, Zhangzhou, Danzhou, Pingzhou, and Zhangzhou were placed under the administration of Yuzhou; Hengzhou, Dingzhou, Zhaozhou, Shenzhou, and Yizhou were placed under the administration of Chengdu; Xiangzhou, Beizhou, Zhangzhou, and Zhangzhou were placed under the administration of Xiangzhou; Weizhou, Boshou, and Dezhou were placed under the administration of Weizhou; Cangzhou, Zhangzhou, Jizhou, and Zhangzhou were placed under the administration of Qinghai; and Waizhou

古文：六月，癸酉，礼部侍郎华阴杨绾上疏，以为： 古之选士必取行实，近世专尚文辞。
现代文：六月癸酉，礼部侍郎华阴人杨绾上书认为： 古代选官必须考核他的操行，近代选官则专门崇尚文章。
English: At the end of June, Yang Xuan, an attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a member of Hua Yin, wrote: Ancient electors had to examine their conduct, but modern electors especially worship articles.

古文：自隋炀帝始置进士科，犹试策而已；至高宗时，考功员外郎刘思立始奏进士加杂文，明经加帖，从此积弊，转而成俗。
现代文：从隋炀帝开始设置进士科以来，还只是考试策论而已；到唐高宗时，考功员外郎刘思立首次上奏，考进士科要加试杂文，明经科加试帖经，从此积成弊端，又转变成习俗。
English: Since the Sui and Qian Dynasties began to set up the entrance examination, it was just an examination policy; when Tang Gaozong arrived, the examiner, Wei Lang Liu Sili, played for the first time. The entrance examination for the entrance examination required additional essays, and the sutra examination required additional sutras. From then on, it accumulated drawbacks and turned into a custom.

古文：朝之公卿以此待士，家之长老以此训子，其明经则诵贴括以求侥幸。
现代文：朝廷的公卿大臣以此来看待士人，家中长辈以此来教导儿子，其中明经科的考试，人们背诵帖括经书以求侥幸及第。
English: Court nobles and ministers of the imperial court used it to treat nobles, and the elders of the family used it to teach their sons. Among them, in the examination of the classics, people recited paraphrased scriptures in order to get lucky and get a place.

古文：又，举人皆令投牒自应，如此，欲其返淳朴，崇廉让，何可得也！
现代文：而且，让举人都自己呈递谱牒前来应试，如此一来，要想让他们回归淳朴，崇尚清廉忍让，怎么做得到呢！
English: Moreover, let all the candidates come to take the exam by submitting their transcripts themselves. In this way, if we want them to return to simplicity, advocating integrity and tolerance, how can we do it?

古文：请令县令察孝廉，取行著乡闾、学知经术荐之于州。
现代文：请让县令察举孝廉之士，取那些在乡里表现出众的，以及饱读经书的人，推荐他们到州府。
English: Please let the county magistrate investigate and select the most filial and honest people, take those who have performed well in the countryside, as well as those who have read a lot of scriptures, and recommend them to the state capital.

古文：剌史考试，升之于省。
现代文：经过刺史对他们的考试，再送到尚书省。
English: They are sent to the Ministry of Education and Culture after being examined by a historian.

古文：任各占一经，朝廷择儒学之士，问经义二十条，对策三道，上第即注官，中第得出身，下第罢归。
现代文：让他们各自选一部经典，朝廷选择儒学之士作考官，考问他们经义二十条，对策三道，考试成绩优秀的便按资历名次授予官职，中等的给予录选的资格，下等的让他们回去。
English: Let them each choose a classic. The imperial court will choose a Confucian scholar to be the examiner. They will be asked about the 20 principles of Confucianism and the three countermeasures. Excellent exam results will be awarded official posts according to their seniority rank. Intermediate ones will be given the qualification to be selected. Inferior ones will be sent back.

古文：又，道举亦非理国所资，望与明经、进士并停。 
现代文：再者，考老庄的道举也同治理国家无干，希望与明经、进士二科的考试一起停止。 
English: Moreover, the Dao Zhuang of the exam is also irrelevant to the governance of the country, and it is hoped that it will be stopped together with the examination of the Ming Dynasty and the two subjects for entering the priesthood.

古文：上命诸司通议，给事中李栖筠、左丞贾至、京兆尹严武并与绾同。
现代文：代宗命令各有关部门共同商议，给事中李栖筠、左丞贾至、京兆尹严武都与杨绾的意见相同。
English: The daimyō ordered all relevant departments to discuss the matter together, and Li Suiqi, Zuo Jiaqi, and Jingzhao Yin Yanwu all shared the same opinion as Yang Hui.

古文：至议以为： 今试学者以帖字为精通，考文者以声病为是非，风流颓弊，诚当厘改。
现代文：贾至的意见认为： 如今考试经学的人以帖括经书的文字来断定是否精通经典，考试文章的人以是否音从文顺来辨别文章的好坏，这种风气颓废衰败，确实应当更改。
English: Jia Zhi's opinion is that: Nowadays, people who take the exam to study the scriptures use the text of the book to determine whether they are proficient in the classics, and people who take the exam to distinguish the quality of the article from the sentence, this decadent and decaying culture should really be changed.

古文：然自东晋以来，人多侨寓，士居乡土，百无一二；请兼广学校，保桑梓者乡里举焉，在流寓者痒序推焉。 
现代文：然而从东晋以来，人们都侨居他乡，在故乡居住的士人，不到百分之一二，请求朝廷同时广设学校，确保在故乡的人得到乡里的推举，寓居他乡的人得到学校的推举。 
English: However, since the Eastern Jin Dynasty, people have been living abroad, and less than two percent of the scholars lived in their hometowns. They asked the imperial court to set up a large number of schools at the same time to ensure that people living in their hometowns would be promoted by their hometowns, and people living in other hometowns would be promoted by their schools.

古文：敕礼部具条目以闻。
现代文：代宗敕令礼部制定科举考试条陈，再上报给他。
English: On behalf of the Zongzheng Emperor, he ordered the Ministry of Ceremonies to draw up the examination regulations for the imperial examinations and then submit them to him.

古文：绾又请置五经秀才科。
现代文：杨绾又请求代宗设置五经秀才科。
English: Yang Hui also requested the daimyō to set up the Five Meritorious Scholarships.

古文：庚寅，以魏博都防御使田承嗣为节度使。
现代文：庚寅，代宗任命魏博都防御使田承嗣为节度使。
English: Geng Yin, the daizong, appointed Wei Bodu defense envoy Tian Chengzhi as the festival envoy.

古文：承嗣举管内户口，壮者皆籍为兵，惟使老弱耕稼，数年间有众十万；又选其骁健者万人自卫，谓之牙兵。
现代文：田承嗣检索所辖的全部户籍人口，强壮者都入册让他们当兵，只让老弱者耕种庄稼，数年时间便拥有十万大军。他又挑选骁勇刚健的士兵一万人保卫自己，称之为牙兵。
English: Tian Cheng He searched the entire registered population under his jurisdiction. The strong ones were all registered and allowed to serve as soldiers. Only the old and weak ones were allowed to cultivate crops. In a few years, he had a hundred thousand soldiers. He also selected ten thousand brave and robust soldiers to defend himself, calling them tooth soldiers.

古文：同华节度使李怀让为程元振所谮，恐惧，自杀。
现代文：同华节度使李怀让被程元振所诬陷，恐惧万分，最后自杀身亡。
English: Tonghua Festival made Li Huajang be framed by Cheng Yuanzhen, and he was so afraid that he finally committed suicide.

