古文：睢水出梁郡鄢县，睢水出陈留县西蒗渠，东北流。
现代文：睢水发源于梁郡焉仔县，睢水发源于陈留县西边的菠蔼渠，往东北流。
English: The Ershui originates from Yanzai County, Liang County, and the Ershui originates from the Pineapple Canal in the west of Chenliu County, and flows to the northeast.

古文：《地理志》曰：睢水首受陈留浚仪狼汤水也，《经》言出鄢，非矣。
现代文：《地理志》说：睢水上口承接陈留县浚仪的狼汤水。《水经》说发源于郡县，显然是错误的。
English: "Geography" said: "The wolf soup water of Chen Liu County's dredge was inherited by the mouth of the water. "Water Sutra" said that it originated from the county, which is obviously wrong.

古文：又东径高阳故亭北。俗谓之陈留北城，非也。
现代文：睢水又往东流经高阳故亭北面，俗称陈留北城，其实不是。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the north side of Gaoyang Former Pavilion, commonly known as Chenliu North Town, but it is not.

古文：苏林曰：高阳者，陈留北县也。
现代文：苏林说：高阳是陈留北面的县。
English: Su Lin said: Goyang is the county in the north of Chenliu.

古文：按在留故乡聚名也。有《汉广野君庙碑》。
现代文：现在原来的祠庙已不再有人知道了，只有这块庙碑还孤零零地竖立着。
English: Now the original ancestral temple is no longer known to anyone, only this temple monument still stands alone.

古文：延熹六年十二月，雍丘令董生，仰余徽于千载，遵茂美于绝代，命县人长照为文，用章不朽之德，其略云：辍洗分餐，咨谋帝猷，陈郑有啄鹿之功，海岱无牧野之战，大康华夏，绥静黎物，生民以来，功盛莫崇，今故字无闻，而单碑介立矣。《陈留风俗传》曰：郦氏居于高阳，沛公攻陈留县，郦食其有功，封高阳侯。有郦峻，字文山，官至公府掾。
现代文：《陈留风俗传》说：丽耳氏居住在高阳，沛公攻陈留时，丽肠食其因献计有功，后来被封为高阳侯。族人哪峻，字文山，曾任公府椽。
English: "Chenliu Customs and Traditions" says: The Lir clan lived in Gaoyang, and when Pei Gong attacked Chenliu, Lir guts ate it because of its contribution, and was later named Gaoyang Hou. The tribesman Nejun, the word Wenshan, once served as the public magistrate.

古文：大将军商有功，食邑于涿，故自陈留徙涿。
现代文：大将军哪商有功，受封以琢为食邑，因此他从陈留迁往琢。
English: The general, who was a successful merchant, was given the title of Taku as a food town, so he moved from Chenliu to Taku.

古文：县有鉼亭鉼乡。
现代文：高阳县有饼亭、饼乡。
English: In Goyang County, there are cake pavilions and cake towns.

古文：建武二年，世祖封王常为侯国也。
现代文：建武二年世祖把这地方封给王常，立为侯国。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, the ancestor granted this place to Wang Chang and established it as a principality.

古文：睢水又东径雍丘县故城北。
现代文：睢水又往东流经雍丘县旧城北面。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the north of the old city of Yongqiu County.

古文：县，旧杞国也。殷汤周武以封夏后，继禹之嗣。
现代文：雍丘县是从前的祀国，殷汤和周武王曾把此地封给夏的子孙，以维续禹的后嗣。
English: Yongqiu County was a former state of worship. Yin Tang and King Zhou Wu had given this land to Xia's descendants to ensure the continuation of Yu's heirs.

古文：楚灭杞，秦以为县。
现代文：后来楚灭了祀，秦时设置为县。
English: Later, Chu extinguished the worship, and Qin set it up as a county.

古文：圈称曰：县有五陵之名、故以氏县矣。
现代文：圈称说：县里有五陵之丘，所以县名叫雍丘。
English: The circle said: There are five mausoleums in the county, so the county is called Yongqiu.

古文：城内有夏后祠。
现代文：城内有夏后祠。
English: There is a small shrine to the Summer Queen in the city.

古文：昔在二代，享祀不辍。
现代文：从前商周二代，从未停止过祭祀。
English: Formerly a merchant family, they have never stopped worshipping.

古文：秦始皇因筑其表为大城，而以县焉。
现代文：到了秦始皇时，在外围修筑了大城墙，并设置为县。
English: By the time of Qin Shihuang, a large city wall was built around the periphery, and it was set up as a county.

古文：睢水又东，水积成湖，俗谓之白羊陂。
现代文：睢水又往东流，水流积蓄成湖，俗称白羊破，方圆四十里。
English: The rushing water flowed eastward, and the water flow accumulated into a lake, commonly known as Baiyangba, with a circumference of forty miles.

古文：陂方四十里，右则奸梁陂水注之。其水上承肢水，东北径雍丘城北，又东分为两渎、谓之双沟，俱入白羊陂。
现代文：睢水右边有奸梁破水注入，这条水上流承接阪水，往东北流经雍丘城北面，又往东流，分为两条水，称为双沟，一同注入白羊破。
English: On the right side of Surabaya Water, there is a double-beam broken water injection. This upstream water is connected to Osaka Water, flows to the northeast through the north side of Yongqiu City, and flows to the east. It is divided into two waters, called Shuanggou, and injected into Baiyoba together.

古文：陂水东合洛架口，水上承汳水，谓之洛架水，东南流入于睢水。
现代文：白羊破水往东流，汇合洛架口。此口的水上流承接饭水，称为洛架水，往东南流，注入睢水。
English: The Aries watershed flows eastward and joins the Luo Jia mouth. The water flowing upstream from this mouth receives the rice water, known as Luo Jia water, and flows southeastward, injecting the brackish water.

古文：睢水又东径襄邑县故城北，又东径雍丘城北。
现代文：睢水又往东流经襄邑县老城北面，又往东流经雍丘城北面。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the north of the old city of Xiangyi County, and eastward through the north of Yongqiu City.

古文：睢水又东径宁陵县故城南。故葛伯国也，王莽改曰康善矣。
现代文：睢水又继续往东流经宁陵县老城南面，这里是从前的葛伯国，王莽时改名为康善。
English: Surabaya continued to flow eastward through the southern part of the old city of Ningling County. This was the former Ge Bo Province, which was renamed Kang Son by Wang Mang Shi.

古文：历鄢县北，二城南北相去五十里，故《经》有出鄢之文。
现代文：睢水流经都县北面，焉卜县与宁陵县两城南北相距五十里，所以《水经》里有睢水发源于部县的记载。
English: The Ershui River flows through the north of Du County, and the distance between the two cities of Yanbu County and Ningling County is fifty miles from north to south. Therefore, there is a record of the Ershui River originating from Bu County in the "Water Sutra."

古文：城东七里，水次有单父令杨彦，尚书郎杨禅字文节，兄弟二碑，汉光和中立也。
现代文：郡县城东七里，水边有单父县令杨彦、尚书郎杨禅兄弟的两块墓碑，立于汉光和年间。
English: Seven miles east of the county seat, on the water's edge, there are two tombstones of the single-fathered brothers, Yang Yan, the county magistrate, and Yang Zhen, the county sheriff, which were erected during the Han and Qing dynasties.

古文：东过睢阳县南，睢水又东径横城北。
现代文：往东流过唯阳县南面，睢水又往东流经横城北面。
English: It flows eastward through the southern part of Veiyang County, and flows eastward through the northern part of Hengcheng.

古文：《春秋左传》昭公二十一年，乐大心御华向于横。
现代文：《春秋左传》：昭公二十一年前，乐大心在横抵御华向的进攻。
English: "Chunqiu Zu Chuan": Twenty-one years ago, Le Daxin was defending against Hua Xiang's attack.

古文：杜预曰：梁国睢阳县南，有横亭，今在睢阳县西南，世谓之光城，盖光、横声相近，习传之非也。
现代文：杜预说：梁国唯阳县南有横亭。现在横亭在唯阳县西南，世人称为光城，大概是光、横两字读音相近，用惯了因而造成的错误。
English: Du Yu said: In the south of Weiyang County, Liang Province, there was Hengting. Now Hengting is in the southwest of Weiyang County, known to the world as Guangcheng. It is probably a mistake caused by getting used to the similar pronunciation of the words "light" and "horizontal."

古文：《续述征记》曰：回道似蠡，故谓之蠡台。
现代文：睢水又流经新城北面，这就是宋国的新城亭。《春秋左传》：文公十四年就以此地为梁国。汉文帝十二年一样，因而称为蠢台。其实不然。
English: Surabaya also flows through the northern side of Xincheng, which is the Xincheng Pavilion of the Song Dynasty. "Spring and Autumn Left Biography": In the 14th year of Wen Gong, this was the place for Liang Guo. In the 12th year of Han Wen Di, it was the same, so it was called the stupid platform. Actually, it was not.

古文：非也。余按《阙子》，称宋景公使工人为弓，九年乃成。
现代文：我按《殉子》说宋景公叫工人为他制弓，九年才制成。
English: According to "Martyr," I said that Song Jing Gong asked the workers to make a bow for him, and it took nine years to make it.

古文：公曰：何其迟也？
现代文：景公问：为什么做得那么久？
English: Jing Gong asked: Why did it take so long?

古文：对曰，臣不复见君矣，臣之精尽于弓矣。
现代文：工人回答道：我不能再见到您了，我把自己的全部精力都花在这张弓上了。
English: The worker replied, "I can't see you anymore, I've put all my energy into this bow."

古文：献弓而归，三日而死。
现代文：那工人献了弓回家去，三天后就死了。
English: The workman took his bow and went home, and died three days later.

古文：光和七年，主记掾李友字仲僚作碑文。碑阴有《右鼎文》，建宁三年拜司空。又有《中鼎文》。建宁四年拜司徒。又有《左鼎文》，光和元年拜大尉。
现代文：晋太和年间逝世。在新蒙营建陵墓，太康九年 ，主记椽李友，字仲僚，撰写了碑文，在碑的背面刻着《右鼎文》：建宁三年授官司空；又有《中鼎文》：建宁四年授官司徒；又有《左鼎文》光和元年授官太尉。
English: He died in the year of Jin Taifu. The mausoleum was built in New Mengying, and in the ninth year of Taikang, the main writer, Zou Liyou, a word broker, wrote an inscription. On the back of the monument is engraved "Right Dingwen": Jianning was awarded the rank of Sifu for three years; there is also "Middle Dingwen": Jianning was awarded the rank of Sifu for four years; there is also "Left Dingwen" Guang and was awarded the rank of Taijun in the first year.

古文：《鼎铭》文曰：故臣门人，相与述公之行，咨度体则，文德铭于三鼎，武功勒于征钺，书于碑阴，以昭光懿。
现代文：铭中说：旧时的下属和门人，相互讲述桥公的事迹，商讨如何用合宜的规格来纪念他，决定把他的文德刻在三只鼎上，武功刻在斧铺上，并写在碑的背面，以昭示他光辉的美德。
English: According to the inscription, the old subordinates and retainers told each other about the deeds of Qiao Gong, discussed how to commemorate him with appropriate specifications, and decided to engrave his literary virtues on the three tripods, his martial arts on the axe pavement, and write on the back of the monument to show his brilliant virtues.

古文：又有《钺文》称，是用镂石假象，作兹征钺军鼓，陈之于东阶，亦以昭公之文武之勋焉。
现代文：又有《钱文》说，凭这石头雕琢的形状，制成斧钻、军鼓，陈列于东阶，也是用以昭示桥公的文武功勋。
English: "Qianwen" also said that with the shape of this stone carved rim, it was made into an axe drill and a military drum, displayed on the east step, and was also used to show the bridge master's literary and military merits.

古文：庙南列二往，柱东有二石羊，羊北有二石虎。庙前东北，有石驼，驼西北有二石马，皆高大，亦不甚雕毁。
现代文：庙南置有二柱，柱东有两头石羊，石羊北有两只石虎，庙前东北有石驼，石驼西北有两匹石马，都很高大，也没有怎么损毁。
English: There are two pillars to the south of the temple, two stone sheep to the east of the pillar, two stone tigers to the north of the stone sheep, a stone camel to the northeast of the temple, and two stone horses to the northwest of the stone camel. They are very tall and have not been damaged much.

古文：惟庙颓构，粗传遗墉，石鼓仍存，钺今不知所在。
现代文：只是庙宇已经颓纪，留下一些断壁残垣；石鼓现在也还在，但械却已不知去向了。
English: However, the temple has been dilapidated, leaving some broken walls and remnants; the stone drum is still there, but the machinery has disappeared.

古文：睢水于城之阳，积而为逢洪陂。
现代文：睢水在城南积成逢洪破，破塘的西南又有一个破塘。
English: Surge water accumulates in the south of the city and floods, and there is another broken pond in the southwest of the broken pond.

古文：陂之西南有陂，又东合明水。水上承城南大池，池周千步，南流会睢，谓之明水，绝睢注涣。
现代文：睢水又东流与明水汇合。明水上源承接城南的大池，池的周围千步，池水南流与睢水汇合，称为明水；明水横穿过睢水，注入涣水。
English: The upper source of the clear water is connected to the large pond in the south of the city, and there are thousands of steps around the pond. The southern stream of the pond water merges with the clear water, which is called the clear water; the clear water crosses the clear water and injects the clear water.

古文：睢水又东南流，历于竹圃。水次绿竹萌渚，菁菁实望，世人言粱王竹园也。
现代文：睢水又往东南流经竹圃，水边是一片茂密青翠的竹林，绿荫笼罩着水滨，满眼一片郁郁葱葱，人们说这是梁王的竹园。
English: Surabaya water flows south-east through the bamboo groves. At the water's edge is a lush green bamboo forest. The waterfront is shrouded in green shade and is full of lush greenery. People say that this is Liang Wang's bamboo garden.

古文：睢水又东，径谷熟县故城北。睢水又东，蕲水出焉。睢水又东，径粟县故城北。
现代文：睢水又往东流经毁熟县旧城北面；睢水又东流，分出一条薪水；睢水又往东流经粟县旧城北面。
English: Surabaya also flows eastward through the north side of the old city of Ruiju County; Surabaya also flows eastward, and a salary is allocated; Surabaya also flows eastward through the north side of the old city of Maoxian County.

古文：《地理志》曰：侯国也。王莽曰成富。
现代文：《地理 志》说：这是个侯国，王莽时称为成富。
English: "Geography" said: This is a principality, Wang Mangshi called Chengfu.

古文：睢水又东，径太丘县故城北。
现代文：睢水又往东流经太丘县旧城北面。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the northern part of the old city of Taiyuan County.

古文：《地理志》曰：故敬丘也。
现代文：《地理志》说：这就是过去的敬丘。
English: "Geography" said: This is the past of Keikyu.

古文：汉武帝元朔三年，封鲁恭王子节侯刘政为侯国。汉明帝更从今名。
现代文：汉武帝元朔三年前，把这地方封给鲁恭王的儿子节侯刘政，立为侯国；汉明帝时改为今名。
English: Three years before Emperor Hanwu Yuan Shuo, this place was given to Prince Liu Zheng, the son of King Lu Qiong, and established as a principality; Emperor Hanming changed it to its current name.

古文：《列仙传》曰：仙人文宾，邑人，卖靴履为业，以正月朔日，会故妪于乡亭西社，教令服食不老。即此处矣。
现代文：《列仙传》说：仙人文宾是本县人，以卖靴为业，正月初一在乡亭西社与旧日的妻子相会，教她服食不老之法，就在此处。
English: "Legends of the Immortals" says: The Immortal Beloved is a native of this county, and sells shoes for a living. On the first day of the first month, he met his old wife at the West Town Hall, and taught her the Law of Immortality, right here.

古文：睢水又东，径芒县故城北。汉高帝六年，封耏跖为侯国。王莽之传治。
现代文：睢水又往东流经芒县旧城北边，汉高帝六年前，把这地方封给耐环，立为侯国，这就是王莽时的传治。
English: Surabaya also flows eastward through the northern part of the old city of Mang County. Six years ago, Emperor Han Gao gave this place to Naihuan and established it as a princely state. This was the reign of Wang Mangshi.

古文：世祖改曰临睢。
现代文：世祖改名为临•唯。
English: Shizu changed his name to Rin•Wei.

古文：城西二里，水南有《豫州从事皇毓碑》，殒身州牧，阴君之罪，时年二十五。
现代文：城西二里，睢水南岸有豫州从事皇毓碑，皇毓因州牧阴君之罪而死，当时只有二十五岁。
English: Two miles west of the city, on the south bank of Surabaya, there is a monument to the imperial eunuch of Yuzhou. The imperial eunuch was only twenty-five years old when he died for the crime of the state's herdsman.

古文：临睢长平舆李君，二千石丞，纶氏夏文则，高其行而悼其殒，州国咨嗟，旌闾表墓，昭叙令德，式示后人。
现代文：临唯长平舆李君，二千石皿纶氏县夏文则，敬佩他的崇高精神，对他的死深表哀悼，州国上下也叹息不已，于是在他的家乡族表他，并在墓前立碑表扬他的美德，为后人树立榜样。
English: Lin Wei Chang Ping Miao Li Jun, a 2,000-stone Sarasvati County Xia Wenzhe, admired his lofty spirit, expressed deep condolences for his death, and the state and the country also sighed, so he was honored in his hometown and a monument was erected in front of his grave to praise his virtues and set an example for future generations.

古文：城内有《临睢长左冯翊王君碑》，善有治功，累迁广汉属国都尉，吏民恩德。县人公府掾陈盛孙，郎中兑定兴、刘伯鄜等，共立石表政，以刊远绩。
现代文：城内有临唯长左冯诩王君碑，他善于治理，功绩卓著，多次升迁，官至广汉属国都尉，官吏、百姓都思念他的恩德，同县人公府椽陈盛孙、郎中儿定兴及刘伯娜等，共同立碑表彰他的政绩。
English: In the city, there is a monument to King Linyi, who was good at governance, had outstanding achievements, and was promoted many times. Officials as high as the governor of Guanghan Province, officials, and people all miss his kindness. Chen Shengsun, Langzhong'er Dingxing, Liu Bena, and others from the county people's government jointly erected a monument to commend his political achievements.

古文：县北与砀县分水。有砀山。
现代文：县北与杨县以睢水为分界，有杨山。
English: The northern part of the county and Yang County are separated by Surabaya, with Yangshan as the border.

古文：芒、砀二县之间，山泽深固，多怀神智。
现代文：芒县与杨县之间，有很多高山大泽，孕育了一批聪明才智之士。
English: Between Mang County and Yang County, there are many high mountains and lakes, which have bred a group of clever people.

古文：有仙者涓子、主柱，并隐砀山得道，汉高祖隐之。
现代文：仙人涓子、主柱都是一起隐居在场山修炼得道的。
English: Both the hermit and the main pillar live in seclusion on the mountain to cultivate the Tao.

古文：吕后望气知之，即于是处也。
现代文：汉高祖也曾在山上隐居，吕后观望云气就知道他的行踪，也是在这里。
English: Henkel's ancestor also used to live in seclusion in the mountains, and it was here that Lü knew his whereabouts by watching the clouds.

古文：京房《易候》曰：何以知贤人隐？
现代文：京房《易候》说：怎么知道贤人的隐居之地呢？
English: Kyobo "Ikoha" said: How do you know the hermitage of a sage?

古文：师曰：视囚方常有大云，五色具而不雨，其下贤人隐矣。
现代文：大师说：看到四方常有五色大云出现，但不下雨，就可以知道下面必有贤人隐居了。
English: The master said: Seeing that there are often five-colored clouds in the four directions, but no rain, we can know that there must be sages living in seclusion below.

古文：杜预曰：东郡濮阳县东南，有咸城者是也。
现代文：又往东流过相县南边，转弯从城北东流，在萧县以南注人破湖中。相县是旧时宋国的土地。
English: It also flows eastward through the south of Xiangxian, and turns to flow eastward from the north of the city, and flows into the broken lake south of Xiao County. Xiangxian was the land of the Song Dynasty in the old days.

古文：瓠子故渎，又东径桃城南。
现代文：秦始皇二十三年夏，在咸会盟。杜预说：东郡淮阳县东南，有咸城。
English: In the summer of the 23rd year of the Qin Dynasty, Emperor Qin Shihuang was at the Hamhung Association. Du Yu said: "In the southeast of Huaiyang County, Dong County, there is Hamhung City.

古文：《春秋传》曰：分曹地，自洮以南，东傅于济，尽曹地也。
现代文：瓠子河旧道又东经桃城南，《春秋传》说：把曹国的土地分掉，从挑水以南，东到济水，都是曹国的土地。
English: The old road of the Lizi River also passed through the south of Taocheng to the east. "The Spring and Autumn Legend" said: "Divide the land of Cao, from the south of the water, east to the water, are the land of Cao."

古文：今鄄城西南五十里有姚城，或谓之洮也。
现代文：现在哪城西南五十里有姚城，有人称为挑城。
English: Now there is Yaocheng in the southwest of the city, some people call it the pick-up city.

古文：瓠渎又东南径清丘北。《春秋》宣公十二年，《经》书楚灭萧，晋人、宋、卫、曹同盟于清丘。
现代文：瓠读又往东南流经清丘北边，《春秋》：宣公十二年前，《经》中提到楚灭萧，晋人、宋、卫、曹等在清丘会盟。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Twelve years before the proclamation of the Republic of China, the "Ching" mentioned that Chu Zhaoxiao, Jin Ren, Song, Wei, Cao, etc. were in the Qingqiu League.

古文：京相璠曰：在今东郡濮阳县东南三十里，魏东都尉治。
现代文：京相潘说：清丘在今东郡淮阳县东南三十里，是魏东都尉治所。
English: Beijing Minister Pan said: Qingqiu is located 30 miles southeast of Huaiyang County, Jindong County, and is the capital of the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：东至济阴句阳县，为新沟。
现代文：往东到济阴郡句阳县，就是新沟。
English: To the east of Jiyin County, Guyang County, is Xingou.

古文：瓠河故渎，又东径句阳县之小成阳，城北侧渎。
现代文：瓠河旧道又东经句阳县的小成阳，城的北面临近河道。
English: The old Luohe Road also runs east through Xiaochengyang of Guyang County, and the north of the city faces the nearby river.

古文：《帝王世纪》曰：尧葬济阴成阳西北四十里，是为谷林，墨子以为尧堂高三尺，土阶三等，北教八狄，道死，葬蛩山之阴。
现代文：《帝王世纪》说：尧葬在济阴成阳西北四十里，那地方叫毁林。墨子认为尧堂高三尺，有三级土阶。尧曾去北方教导八狄，死于途中，葬在蛰山的北坡。
English: "The Century of Emperors" says: "He was buried forty miles northwest of Jiyin and Chengyang, that place is called the destruction of forests. Mozi thought that the hall was three feet high and had three steps. He had gone to the north to teach the Eight Immortals, died on the way, and was buried on the north slope of Mount Lushan.

古文：《山海经》曰：尧葬狄山之阳，一名崇山。
现代文：《山海经》说：尧葬在狄山的南坡，狄山又名崇山。
English: The "Song of Mountains and Seas" says: "He was buried on the southern slope of Mount Dizan, also known as Mount Chongshan."

古文：二说各殊，以为成阳，近是尧冢也。
现代文：两种说法互不相同，认为成阳是尧墓所在地较接近事实。
English: The two versions are different from each other, and it is closer to the truth to say that Chengyang is the location of Gong's tomb.

古文：余按小成阳在成阳西北半里许实中，俗喭以为囚尧城，士安盖以是为尧冢也。
现代文：我查考过，小成阳在成阳西北约半里，很坚固，俗称囚尧城，士安认为大概就是尧墓。
English: I have checked, Xiaochengyang is about half a mile northwest of Chengyang, very solid, commonly known as the Prisoner's City, and Shian believes that it is probably the tomb.

古文：瓠子北有部关县故城：县有羊里亭，瓠河径其南，为羊里水，盖资城地而变名，犹《经》有新沟之异称矣。
现代文：瓠子河北有都关县旧城，该县有羊里亭，瓠子河流经亭南，称羊里水，这是随着水流所经的城或地点而来的变名，就如同《水经》中有新沟这异名一样。
English: To the north of Hebei Province, there is the old city of Duguan County, and the county has Yanglitei. The Yangzi River flows through the south of the county, and is called Yanglishui. This is a change of name that comes with the city or place through which the water flows, just like the different name of Xingou in the "Water Sutra."

古文：黄初中，贾逵为豫州刺史，与诸将征吴于洞浦，有功，魏封逵为羊里亭侯，邑四百户，即斯亭也。
现代文：黄初年间一，贾逆任豫州刺史，率诸将在洞浦征讨吴军，立了功劳，魏封他为羊里亭侯，食邑四万户，就是这个羊里亭。
English: In the first year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Jia Rong served as a historian of Yuzhou, led the troops to conquer the Wu army in Dongpu, and made great contributions. In Wei Dynasty, he was the governor of Yanglitei, and 40,000 households in the food village were this Yanglitei.

古文：俗名之羊子城，非也，盖韵近字转耳。
现代文：俗称羊子城，其实不是。这是由于字音相近而致误的缘故。
English: Commonly known as "Sheep Town," it is actually not. This is due to the similarity of the letters and sounds.

古文：又东，右会濮水枝津，水上承濮渠，东径沮丘城南。
现代文：瓠子河又东流，右面与淮水支流汇合，支流的上流承接淮渠，往东流经沮丘城南。
English: The Lizi River also flows eastward, merging with the Huai Shui tributary on the right. The upstream of the tributary is connected to the Huai Canal, and flows eastward through the south of the city.

古文：京相璠曰：今濮阳城西南十五里，有沮丘城，六国时沮楚同音，以为楚丘，非也。
现代文：京相潘说：现在淮阳城西南十五里有沮丘城，六国时沮、楚二字同音，以为这是楚丘，是不对的。
English: Beijing's Minister of Foreign Affairs Pan said, "Nowadays, in the southwest 15th of Huaiyang City, there is Depuqiu City. In the Six Kingdoms, Depuqiu and Chu have the same pronunciation. It is wrong to think that this is Chuqiu.

古文：又东径浚城南，西北去濮阳三十五里。
现代文：淮水支流又往东流经浚城南边，浚城西北距淮阳三十五里，城旁有寒泉冈。
English: The Huai Shui tributary also flows eastward through the south side of Dungcheng, the northwest of Dungcheng is thirty-five miles from Huaiyang, and there is a cold spring hill next to the city.

古文：城侧有寒泉冈，即《诗》所谓爱有寒泉，在浚之下。世谓之高平渠，非也。
现代文：《诗经》说：于是有寒泉，在浚邑城下。就指此泉。人们将这条支流称为高平渠是不对的。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Then there was a cold spring, at the foot of the city of Junyi. This spring is referred to. It is incorrect to call this tributary a high plain canal.

古文：京相璠曰：濮水故道，在濮阳南者也。
现代文：京相瑶说：淮水旧河道在淮阳南边。
English: Beijing's foreign minister said: "The old Huai Shui river is in the south of Huaiyang.

古文：又东径句阳县西，句渎出焉。
现代文：淮水支流又往东流经句阳县西边，句读在这里分出。
English: The Huai Shui tributary also flows eastward through the west of Guoyang County, and the sentence is read out here.

古文：濮水枝渠又东北径句阳县之小成阳东垂亭西，而北入瓠河。
现代文：蹼水支渠又往东北流，经过句阳县小成阳东垂亭西边，往北注入瓠河。
English: The Lishui Branch Canal also flows to the northeast, passing through the west side of Xiaochengyang Dongluting, Guyang County, and flows into the Lishui River to the north.

古文：《地理志》曰：濮水首受泲沛于封丘县东北，至都关，入羊里水者也。
现代文：《地理志》说：淮水上口在封丘县承接姊水，往东北流到都关，注入羊里水。
English: "Geography" said: the upper mouth of the Huai River receives the sister water in Fengqiu County, flows to the northeast to Duguan, and injects the Yangli water.

古文：又按《地理志》：山阳郡有都关县，今其城在廪丘城西。考地志，句阳、廪丘，俱属济阴，则都关无隶山阳理。
现代文：又据《地理志》山阳郡有都关县，今天此城在凛丘城西边，查考《地志》，句阳、凛丘都属济阴，那么都关决无属于山阳的道理。
English: Also, according to the "Geography" of Sanyang County, there is Duguan County. Today, this city is on the west side of Lingqiu City. According to the "Geography," Guyang and Lingqiu both belong to Jiyin, so there is no reason for Duguan to belong to Sanyang.

古文：又按《地理志》，成都亦是山阳之属县矣。
现代文：又据《地理志》，郝都也是山阳郡的属县。
English: According to "Geography," Shidu is also a subordinate county of Sanyang County.

古文：而京、杜考地验城，又并言在廪丘城南，推此而论，似《地理志》之误矣，或亦疆理参差所未详。
现代文：而京相潘、杜预对地域和城邑作了一番考证后，都说邸都在凛丘城南，据此推论，似乎《地理志》记载有误。或者是划分疆界地域不一致，这就不清楚了。
English: However, after Beijing Xiangpan and Du Yuan made a thorough examination of the region and the city, they all said that the residence was in the south of Rinqiu City, according to this inference, it seems that the "Geography" was recorded incorrectly. Or the demarcation of the border region is inconsistent, which is unclear.

古文：瓠渎又东径垂亭北。《春秋》隐公八年，宋公、卫侯遇于犬丘，《经》书垂也。
现代文：瓠读又往东流经垂亭北边，《春秋》：隐公八年前，宋公、卫侯在犬丘相会。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Eight years ago, Song Gong and Wei Hou met in Inuqiu.

古文：京相璠曰：今济阴句阳县小成阳东五里，有故垂亭者也。
现代文：犬丘在《经》里写作垂。京相播说：今天，济阴句阳县小成阳以东五里有旧时的垂亭。
English: Jing Xiangbo said: Today, there are five old-time pavilions east of Xiaochengyang in Guyang County, Jilin Province.

古文：又东北过廪丘县，为濮水。
现代文：又往东北流过康丘县，称为璞水。
English: It also flows northeast through Kangqiu County, known as Lushui.

古文：瓠河又左径雷泽北，其泽薮在大成阳县故城西北十余里。昔华胥履大迹处也。
现代文：瓠河又向左流经雷泽北边，这个大泽在大成阳县旧城西北十余里，就是从前华青踩着巨人足迹而受孕的地方。
English: The Lijiang River flows to the left and passes to the north of Leize, which is more than ten miles northwest of the old city of Dachengyang County. This is the place where Huaqing stepped on the giant's footprints and conceived.

古文：其陂东西二十余里，南北十五里，即舜所渔也。
现代文：这一片大泽东西二十余里，南北十五里，就是舜捕过鱼的地方。
English: This area of Osawa, more than 20 miles east to west and 15 miles north to south, is where the cormorants used to fish.

古文：泽之东南即成阳县，故《史记》曰：武王封弟叔武于成。
现代文：大泽的东南面，就是成阳县，因此《史记》说，武王把成封给他的弟弟叔武。
English: The southeast of Osawa is Chengyang County, so "History" says that King Wu gave Chengfu to his brother Uncle Wu.

古文：应劭曰：其后乃迁于成之阳，故曰成阳也。
现代文：应劭说：他的后裔就迁到成国的南方，所以称为成阳。
English: "His descendants migrated to the south of Chengguo, which is why they are called Chengyang," said Yinglu.

古文：《地理志》曰；成阳有尧冢灵台，今成阳城西二里，有尧陵，陵南一里，有尧母庆都陵。
现代文：《地理志》说：成阳有尧墓、灵台，现在成阳城西面二里有尧陵。陵南一里处有尧母庆都陵，在成阳城的西南方，称为灵台。
English: "Geography" said: Chengyang has the tomb of Gong and the spiritual platform. At present, there are two Gong mausoleums in the west of Chengyang City. A mile south of the mausoleum, there is the tomb of Gong Mok Qing, and in the southwest of Chengyang City, it is called the spiritual platform.

古文：于城为西南，称曰灵台，乡曰崇仁，邑号修义，皆立庙。
现代文：乡叫崇仁，城名惰义，都立了庙，四周环水；水静不流，与泽水相通，泉水从不枯竭。
English: The township is called Chongren, the city is named Neiyi, a temple has been built in the capital, and there is water all around; the water is calm and does not flow, it is connected to the lake water, and the spring water is never exhausted.

古文：四周列水，潭而不流，水泽通泉，泉不耗竭，至丰鱼笋，不敢采捕。前并列数碑，栝柏数株，檀马成林，二陵南北，列驰道径通，皆以砖砌之，尚修整。
现代文：这一带鱼类和竹笋很丰富，但人们不敢去采捕。庙前并列着几块石碑，还有几株桧树和柏树，檀木梓榆成林。两座陵墓一南一北，  有驰道相通，路面都用砖砌成，至今还平整完好。
English: This area is rich in fish and bamboo shoots, but people do not dare to go fishing. In front of the temple, there are several stone monuments, several eucalyptus and cypress trees, and a dense forest of sandalwood. The two mausoleums, one in the south and one in the north, are connected by a road. The road is made of bricks and is still in good condition.

古文：尧陵东城西五十余步，中山夫人祠，尧妃也。
现代文：尧陵东边，城的西边五十余步，有尧妃中山夫人祠。
English: East of Fuling, more than fifty paces to the west of the city, there is the Anhui Zhongshan Lady's Shrine.

古文：石壁阶墀仍旧，南、西、北三面，长栎联荫，扶疏里余。
现代文：石璧石阶仍然如旧，南、西、北三面，高大的麻栋树绿荫连成一片，绵延里余。
English: The stone steps are still the same as before. On the three sides of the south, west and north, the green shade of the tall hemp trees stretches for miles.

古文：瓠河又东，径底县故城南。《地理志》：济阴之属县也。
现代文：中山夫人祠南有仲山甫墓，墓西有一座石庙，石羊石虎已经沉陷，差不多都破碎了。石庙在成阳城西南，灵台的东北面。
English: There is a tomb of Zhongshan Fu in the south of Mrs. Zhongshan's ancestral hall, and a stone temple in the west of the tomb. The stone sheep and stone tiger have sunk and are almost all broken. The stone temple is in the southwest of Chengyang City and the northeast of Lingtai.

古文：褚先生曰：汉武帝封金日待为侯国，王莽之万岁矣，世犹谓之为万岁亭也。
现代文：据郭缘生《述征记》记载，从汉朝到晋朝，傣禄二千石一级的官吏及承尉，大多有刻石记述，从尧即位直至永嘉三年五月成阳县令管遵所立的碑文中可以看到。
English: According to Guo Yansheng's "Record of Records," from the Han Dynasty to the Jin Dynasty, most of the officials and lieutenants at the level of 2,000 koku had carved stone records, which can be seen in the inscriptions erected by Chengyang County's commander Zun from the enthronement of Emperor Zhao until May of the third year of Yongjia.

古文：瓠河又东径郓城南。
现代文：在尧陵北边，仲山甫墓南边，两墓间有伍员祠，是晋朝太安年间建立。
English: In the north of Fuling and the south of Zhongshan Fu's tomb, there is a soldier's shrine between the two tombs. It was built during the reign of Emperor Taian of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：《春秋左传》成公十六年，公自沙随还，待于郓。
现代文：一块碑是永兴年间：成公十六年前，成公从沙随回来，逗留在郸城。
English: One monument is from the Yongxing years: Sixteen years ago, Chenggong came back from Shahe and stayed in Lucheng.

古文：京相璠曰：《公羊》作运字，今东郡廪丘县东八十里，有故运城，即此城也。
现代文：京相潘说：《公羊传》写作运字，现在东郡凛丘县东八十里有旧运城，就是此城。
English: Beijing's Minister of Foreign Affairs Pan said: "The word "yun" (fortune) is written in "The Ram's Tale." Now, there is an old Yuncheng in Dongbaizhili, Rinqiu County, Dong County, which is this city.

古文：又北过东郡范县东北，为济渠，与将渠合。
现代文：又往北流过东郡范县东北，称为济渠，与将渠汇合。
English: It also flows northward through the northeast of Fan County, Dong County, known as the Ji Canal, and merges with the Shou Canal.

古文：瓠河自运城东北径范县，与济濮枝渠合，故渠上承济渎于乘氏县，北径范县，左纳瓠渎，故《经》有济渠之称。
现代文：瓠河从运城开始向东北流，经过范县，与济、淮支渠汇合。旧渠道上流在乘氏县承接济读，往北流经范县，从左面接纳了瓠读，因此《水经》里有济渠的名称。
English: The Lijiang River flows from Yuncheng to the northeast, passing through Fan County and merging with the Jizhi and Huai branch canals. The upstream of the old channel receives the Jizhi reading in Jishi County, flows northward through Fan County, and receives the Jizhi reading from the left, so the name of the Jizhi Canal is in the "Water Divination."

古文：又北，与将渠合，渠受河于范县西北，东南径秦亭南。
现代文：瓠河又北流，与将渠汇合。将渠上流在范县西北引入河水，往东南流经秦亭南边。
English: The upper stream of the canal is introduced into the river in the northwest of Fan County, and flows southeast through the south side of Qin Ting.

古文：杜预《释地》曰：东平范县西北，有秦亭者也。
现代文：杜预《释地》说：东平范县西北有个秦亭。
English: Du Yuan of "Interpretation" said: There is a Qin Pavilion in the northwest of Dongping Fan County.

古文：又东南径范县故城南，王莽更名建睦也。
现代文：将渠又往东南流经范县旧城南边，王莽改名为建睦。
English: Wang Mang changed his name to Jian Mu after the canal flowed south-east through the southern part of the old city of Fan County.

古文：汉兴平中，靳允为范令，曹太祖东征陶谦于徐州，张邈迎吕布，郡县响应。
现代文：汉朝兴平年间一，靳允任范令，曹太祖东征，在徐州攻打陶谦，张邀去迎接吕布，郡县都起来响应。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Xingping, Emperor Gong Yunren issued an order to Cao Taizu to march eastward and attack Tao Qian in Xuzhou. Zhang invited him to meet Lvbu, and the counties all rose to respond.

古文：程昱说允曰：君必固范，我守东阿，田单之功可立。
现代文：程星劝靳允说：您必须固守范县，我守东阿，那么我们就可以建立像田单那样的功业了。
English: Cheng Xing advised Gong Yun: "You must stick to Fan County, I will stick to Donga, then we can build a career like Tian Shan."

古文：即斯邑也。
现代文：指的就是此城。
English: It refers to this city.

古文：将渠又东会济渠，自下邀谓之将渠，北径范城东，俗又谓之赵沟，非也。
现代文：将渠又往东流，与济渠汇合。自此以下，渠道通称将渠，往北流经范城东边，民间又称赵沟，这是不对的。
English: Since then, the channel is commonly known as the Zhao Canal, and flows northward through the eastern part of Fancheng, which is also known as Zhao Gou. This is not correct.

古文：又东北过东阿县东，瓠河故渎，又东北，左合将渠枝渎。枝渎上承将渠于范县，东北径范县北，又东北径东阿城南，而东入瓠河故渎，又北径东阿县故城东。
现代文：又往东北流过东阿县东边，瓠河旧道又往东北流，左边与将渠支读汇合，支读上源在范县承接将渠，往东北流经范县北边，又往东北流经东阿城南边，然后东流注入瓠河旧道。旧河道又往北流经东阿县旧城东边。
English: It flows to the northeast through the eastern part of Dong'a County. The old course of the Minhe River flows to the northeast again. On the left, it merges with the branch of the Jiaozuo Canal. The upper source of the branch joins the Jiaozuo Canal in Fan County, flows to the northeast through the northern part of Fan County, flows to the northeast through the southern part of Dong'a City, and then flows eastward into the old course of the Minhe River. The old course of the river flows to the north through the eastern part of the old city of Dong'a County.

古文：《春秋经》书：冬，及齐侯盟于柯。
现代文：《春秋经》记载，冬天，和齐侯在柯会盟。
English: "Spring and Autumn Annals" records that in winter, and Qi Hou in Ke Hui Meng.

古文：《左传》曰：冬盟于柯，始及齐平。
现代文：《左传》说：冬天，在柯会盟才与齐讲和。
English: "Zo Zhuan" said: In winter, it is only in the Ke Association that we can make peace with the others.

古文：杜预曰：东阿即柯邑也。
现代文：杜预说：东阿就是柯邑。
English: Du Yu said: Dong'a is Ke'eup.

古文：按《国语》，曹沫挟匕首劫齐桓公返，遂邑于此矣。
现代文：按《国语》，曹沫手持匕首，要挟齐桓公，就在这里收回遂邑。
English: According to the "National Language," Cao Miao held a dagger in his hand and threatened Qi Kuan, and it was here that he reclaimed Suiyu.

古文：又东北过临邑县西，又东北过在平县东，为邓里渠。
现代文：又往东北流过临邑县西边，又往东北流过往平县东边，称为邓里渠。
English: It also flows northeast to the west of Linyi County and northeast to the east of Ping County, and is known as the Dengli Canal.

古文：自宣防已下，将渠已上，无复有水，将渠下水首受河，自北为邓里渠。
现代文：从宣房以下，将渠以上不再有水。将渠以下的水，上口由河水导入，从此以北，称邓里渠。
English: From below Xuanfang, there is no more water above the canal. The water below the canal is led into the upper mouth by river water, and from this point north, it is called the Dengli Canal.

古文：又东北过祝阿县，为济渠。
现代文：又往东北流过祝阿县，称为济渠。
English: It also flows to the northeast through Zhua County, known as the Jizhou Canal.

古文：河水自四渎口出为济水，济水二渎合而东注于祝阿也。
现代文：河水从四渎口分支流出，叫济水。济水二读汇合，然后东流注入祝阿县。
English: The river water flows out from the four branches of the mouth, called Jishui. The second reading of Jishui is the confluence, and then the eastward flow is injected into Zhuaha County.

古文：又东北至梁邹县西，分为二。
现代文：又往东北流，到了梁邹县西边，分为两条。
English: It flowed to the northeast and reached the west side of Liangyao County. It was divided into two branches.

古文：脉水寻梁邹，济无二流，盖《经》之误。
现代文：探寻水脉，济水并没有两条水流，这是《水经》的错误。
English: Exploring the water vein, there are not two streams of water, which is the mistake of the "Water Sutra."

古文：俗人遏令侧城南注，又屈径其城南。《史记》，汉文帝十五年，分齐为胶西王国，都高苑。
现代文：往东北流的一条是济河，东流的是时水。济河又往东北流到济西，往东北注人大海。时水往东流到临淄县西边转弯，往南流过太山郡华县东边，又往南流到费县，往东注人沂水。时水就是耏水，耐音而。《春秋》：襄公三年从齐国划地设置胶西王国，建都高苑。
English: The one flowing to the northeast is the Jie River, and the one flowing to the east is the Jiu River. The Jie River flows to the northeast to Jixi, and to the northeast it pours into the sea. The Jiu River flows to the east to the west of Linyi County, flows south to the east of Huaxian County, Taishan County, flows south to Fei County, and to the east it pours into the Jiu River. The Jiu River is brackish water, and it is resistant to sound. "Spring and Autumn": In the third year of Xianggong's reign, he set up the Jiu River Kingdom and built the

古文：徐广《音义》曰：乐安有高苑城，故俗谓之东高苑也。
现代文：徐广《音义》说：乐安有高苑城，因此俗称东高苑。
English: Xu Guang "Onyi" said: Le An has Gao Yuancheng, so it is commonly known as East Gao Yuancheng.

古文：其水又北注故渎，又西，盖野沟水注之，源导延乡城东北，平地出泉。西北径延乡城北。
现代文：时水又往北流，注入旧河道，又往西流，盖野沟水注入。盖野沟水源出延乡城东北，平地涌出泉水，往西北流经延乡城北边。
English: At the same time, the water flowed northward, injecting into the old river channel, and then westward, injecting into the water of the Gaian ditch. The source of the Gaian ditch water came from the northeast of Yanxiang City, and the spring water gushed out of the plain and flowed to the northwest through the north of Yanxiang City.

古文：《地理志》：千乘有延乡县，世人谓故城为从城，延、从字相似，读随字改，所未详也。
现代文：据《地理志》，千乘有延乡县，民询称旧城为从城，也许因为延、从字形相近，读音也随着字而改变的缘故吧，这也不清楚。
English: According to the "Geography," there is Yanxiang County in Chizhen, and the people's inquiry said that the old city is from the city, perhaps because Yan and Zong are similar in shape, and the pronunciation also changes with the letter, which is also unclear.

古文：西北流，世谓之盖野沟，又西北流，径高苑县北，注时水。
现代文：水又往西北流，世人称为盖野沟，又往西北流经高苑县北边，注入时水。
English: The water flows to the northwest, known to the world as Gaiengou, and flows to the northwest through the north of Gaoyuan County, injecting fresh water.

古文：时水又西径西高苑县故城南。
现代文：时水又往西流经高苑县旧城南边。
English: At other times, the water flows westward through the southern part of the old town of Gaoyuan County.

古文：汉高帝六年，封丙倩为侯国，王莽之常乡也。其水侧城西注。
现代文：汉高帝六年前，把这地方封给丙倩，立为侯国，主莽时改名常乡，时水沿着城旁继续往西流。
English: Six years ago, Emperor Han Gao gave this place to the Xiongnu and established it as a vassal state. It was renamed Changxiang, and the water continued to flow west along the city.

古文：京相璠曰：今乐安博昌县南界，有时水西通济。其源上出盘阳，北至高苑，下有死时，中无水。
现代文：京相播说：现在乐安博昌县南界有时水，西流与济水相通，源头出自盘阳，北流到高苑，下游有死时，河道无水。
English: Beijing's official broadcaster said: "Nowadays, the southern boundary of Le'an Bochang County sometimes has water, the western stream is connected to Jishui, the source is from Panyang, the northern stream is to Gaoyuan, and when there is death in the downstream, the river is dry.

古文：杜预亦云：时水于乐安枝流，旱则竭涸，为春秋之干时也。
现代文：杜预也说：时水流到乐安分出支流，天旱时就枯涸，就是《春秋》里提到的乾时。
English: Du Yu also said: when the water flows to Le'an, it branches off into tributaries, and when the weather is dry, it dries up, which is the dry time mentioned in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：《左传》庄公九年，齐鲁战地，鲁师败处也。
现代文：《左传》：庄公九年前，齐鲁交战，鲁军在此处战败。
English: "Zhuan": Zhuangong nine years ago, Qi and Lu fought, and the Lu army was defeated here.

古文：时水西北至梁邹城，入于济。
现代文：时水往西北流，到梁邹城注入济水―不是济水注入时水，而是时水注入济水。
English: When the water flows to the northwest, the water supply is injected into Liangyu City - not when the water supply is injected into the water supply, but when the water supply is injected into the water supply.

古文：非济入时，盖时来注济，若济分东流，明不得以时为名。寻时，济更无别流，南延华费之所，斯为谬矣。
现代文：如果济水分支东流，显然不会以时水为名。探究时水和济水，再没有别的水流向南延伸到华县和费县地界了。
English: If the branch of the Jishui River flows eastward, it will obviously not be named the Jishui River. When investigating the Jishui River and the Jishui River, there is no other river that extends southward to the border of Huaxian and Feixian.

古文：汶水出泰山莱芜县原山，西南过其县南。
现代文：这是经文的错误。汶水发源于泰山郡莱芜县原山，往西南流过县南。
English: This is a mistake in the scripture. The Wen Shui originates from the original mountain of Laiwu County, Taishan County, and flows southwest through the south of the county.

古文：莱芜县在齐城西南原山，又在县西南六十许里。
现代文：莱芜县在齐城西南，原山又在县西南约六十里。
English: Laiwu County is in the southwest of Qicheng, and the original mountain is about sixty miles southwest of the county.

古文：《地理志》，汶水与淄水俱出原山西南入济，故不得过其县南也。
现代文：据《地理志》，汶水与淄水都发源于原山，往西南注入济水，因此不可能流经莱芜县南边。
English: According to the "Geography," both the Wenshui and the Lishui originate from the original mountain and are injected into the southwest, so it is impossible to flow through the south of Laiwu County.

古文：《从征记》曰：汶水出县西南流。
现代文：《从征记》说：汶水发源于莱芜县，往西南流；又说，流入莱芜谷后，道路两边山峦连绵百余里。
English: "Records from the Collection" says: The water of the Wen originates in Laiwu County and flows to the southwest; it also says that after flowing into the Laiwu Valley, the mountains on both sides of the road stretch for more than a hundred miles.

古文：又言：自入莱芜谷，夹路连山百数里，水隍多行石涧中，出药草，饶松柏，林藿绵蒙，崖壁相望，或倾岑阻径，或回岩绝谷，清风鸤条，山壑俱响，凌高降深，兼惴栗之惧，危蹊断径，过悬度之艰。
现代文：水道大都经过乱石嶙峋的山涧。这一带盛产药草，遍地松柏，林莽茂密，断崖峭壁，遥相对望。有的地方，险峻的小山挡住去路；有的地方，岩壁回环，通入山谷，山风吹动，枝梢鸣声响彻幽谷。攀登高峻的山峰，爬下幽深的山谷，令人心惊胆战；有时路绝崖断，就只能靠绳索引渡，真是艰险极了。
English: Most of the waterways pass through the rocky mountains. This area is rich in medicinal herbs, pine and cypress trees everywhere, dense forests, cliffs and cliffs, distant views. In some places, steep hills block the way; in some places, the rock walls loop back into the valley, the mountain wind blows, and the sound of branches ringing through the valley. Climbing high peaks and climbing down deep valleys is frightening; sometimes the road is cut off by cliffs, and it can only be delivered by rope, which is really dangerous.

古文：未出谷十余里，有别谷在孤山。谷有清泉，泉上数丈，有石穴二口，容人行。
现代文：出谷还有十余里，在一座孤峰下另有一处山谷，山谷里有清泉，泉上数丈有个石洞，有两个洞口，能容人行走。
English: There are still more than ten miles to go in the valley, and there is another valley under a lonely peak. There is a clear spring in the valley, and there is a stone cave several meters above the spring. There are two cave entrances, which can accommodate people walking.

古文：言是昔人居山之处，薪爨烟墨，犹存谷中，林木致密，行人鲜有能至矣。
现代文：进入洞口丈余，洞内高约九尺，宽广四五丈，据说是古人穴居之处，洞里还留有柴灶、残灰和烟痕。山谷中树木茂密，行人很少能到这里来。
English: The entrance to the cave is a little longer than the entrance. The cave is about nine feet high and four to five feet wide. It is said to be the place where the ancients lived. There are also wood stoves, ash and smoke traces left in the cave. The valley is densely wooded, and pedestrians can rarely come here.

古文：又有少许山田，引灌之踪尚存。
现代文：但还能见到少许山田，留有引水灌溉的痕迹。
English: However, a few yamadas can still be seen, with traces of water diversion irrigation.

古文：出谷有平丘，面山傍水，土人悉以种麦，云此丘不宜殖稷黍而宜麦，齐人相承以殖之，意谓麦丘所栖愚公谷也。
现代文：出了山谷有一片平缓的丘陵，面山傍水，当地土人都在那里种麦。人们说，这丘陵地不宜种植高粱，只适于种麦。齐人世代相承，都在这里种麦。想来这就是麦丘愚公所住的山谷了。
English: Out of the valley, there is a gentle hill, facing the mountains and the water, where the local natives grow wheat. People say that this hilly land is not suitable for growing sorghum, but only for growing wheat. Qi people have been growing wheat here for generations. It seems that this is the valley where Meiqiu Yugong lived.

古文：何其深沉幽翳，可以托业抬生如此也。
现代文：谷里怎么会这样深幽，这样藉翁郁郁；人们在这里又怎么会这样安居乐业，怡然自得地生活呀！
English: How can the valley be so deep and dark, so gloomy; how can people live here so peacefully and contentedly?

古文：余时径此，为之踌蹰，为之屡眷矣。余按麦丘愚公在齐川谷犹传其名，不在鲁，盖志者之谬耳。
现代文：我当时经过这里，看到这么远离尘俗的好地方，真是徘徊不舍，离去时还屡屡回头呢，我按麦丘愚公在齐境的川谷，至今还流传着这个地名；那地方并不在鲁，这是著作家记述时弄错的。
English: At that time, I passed by here and saw a good place so far away from the mundane. I really lingered, and when I left, I repeatedly turned back. I followed the Meicugugong in the valley of Qi, and this place name has been passed down to this day; that place is not in Lu, which is a mistake made by the writer when describing it.

古文：汶水又西南径赢县故城南。
现代文：汶水又向西南流经赢县老城南。
English: The Wen Shui also flows to the southwest through the south of the old city of Win County.

古文：《春秋左传》桓公三年，公会齐侯于赢，成婚于齐也。
现代文：《春秋左传》：桓公三年前，桓公在赢会见齐侯，在齐结了婚。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn": Three years ago, Huan Gong met Qi Hou in Win and married him in Qi.

古文：又西南过奉高县北。
现代文：又往西南流过奉高县北边。
English: It also flows southwest past the northern edge of Fenggao County.

古文：奉高县，汉武帝元封元年立，以奉泰山之祀，泰山郡治也。
现代文：奉高县在汉武帝元封元年设置，以供祭祀泰山之需，是泰山郡的治所。
English: Bonggao County was set up in the first year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, to provide for the needs of the worship of Mount Tai, and is the seat of the Tai Shan County.

古文：县北有吴季札子墓，在汶水南曲中。
现代文：县北有吴季札儿子的坟墓，座落在汶水南面的水湾里。
English: In the north of the county, there is the tomb of Wu Jizha's son, which is located in the bay to the south of Wenshui.

古文：季札之聘上国也，丧子于赢博之间，即此处也。
现代文：吴季札受聘于中原上国，在赢、博之间死了儿子，就是这地方。
English: Wu Jizha was hired in the Central Plains of Shangguo, and his son died between Win and Bo. This is the place.

古文：《从征记》曰：赢县西六十里，有季札儿冢，冢圆，其高可隐也。
现代文：《从征记》说：赢县西六十里，有季札儿子的坟，呈圆形，墓在高处，可以凭依眺望。
English: "From the record" said: sixty miles west of Win County, there is the grave of Ji Fata's son. It is round, and the grave is on a high place. You can look over it.

古文：前有石铭一所，汉末奉高令所立，无所述叙，标志而已。
现代文：墓前有一座石铭，是汉末奉高县令所立，上面没有记述什么，只不过作为标志而已。
English: There is a stone inscription in front of the tomb, which was erected at the end of the Han Dynasty by order of Gao County. There is no description on it, it is just a sign.

古文：自昔恒蠲民户洒扫之，今不能。然碑石糜碎，靡有遗矣，惟故跌存焉。
现代文：从前都指派民户去扫墓，现在已不能这样做了；石碑都已剥蚀破碎，没有留下什么了，只有石碑的基座还在。
English: In the past, people were assigned to sweep the tombs, but now they can no longer do so; the stone tablets have been eroded and broken, and nothing is left, only the base of the stone tablet is still there.

古文：屈从县西南流，汶出牟县故城西南阜下，俗谓之胡卢堆。
现代文：转弯从县城西南流过，汶水发源于牟县旧城西南的山岗下，俗称胡卢堆。
English: The curve flows from the southwest of the county seat, and the Wen Shui originates from under the hill to the southwest of the old city of Mu County, commonly known as Huludun.

古文：《淮南子》曰：汶出弗其。
现代文：《淮南子》说：汶水发源于弗其。
English: "Huai Nanzi" said: "Wen Shui originated in Fuzhou."

古文：高诱曰：山名也，或斯阜矣。
现代文：高诱说：弗其是山名。也许就是这座小山吧。
English: Gao Yu said: "Fuji is the name of the mountain. Maybe it's this hill."

古文：牟县故城在东北，古牟国也，春秋时，牟人朝鲁，故应劭曰：鲁附庸也。
现代文：牟县旧城在东北，古代这里是牟国。春秋时，牟国人要去朝拜鲁国，因此应肋说：牟国是鲁国的附庸。
English: The old town of Mu County is in the northeast, and in ancient times this was Mu Province. In spring and autumn, the people of Mu Province would go to visit Lu Province, so it was said that Mu Province was a vassal of Lu Province.

古文：俗谓是水为牟汶也。
现代文：俗称这条水为牟坟。
English: This water is commonly known as mugu.

古文：又西南径奉高县故城西，西南流注于坟。
现代文：又往西南流经奉高县旧城西边，往西南流，注入汉水。
English: It also flows to the southwest through the west side of the old city of Fenggao County, flows to the southwest, and injects Chinese water.

古文：坟水又南，右合北汶水。水出分水溪，源与中川分水，东南流，径泰山东，右合天门下溪水： 水出泰山天门下谷，东流。
现代文：汶水又南流，在右边汇合了北汶水，北汶水发源于分水溪，源头流出后又分出中川水，往东南流经泰山东边，右边与天门下溪水汇合。下溪水发源于泰山天门下谷，往东流。
English: The North Wenchuan Water originates from the Dividing Stream. After flowing out from the source, it separates from the Middle River Water. It flows southeast through the eastern side of Mount Tai and merges with the Lower Tianmen Creek on the right. The Lower Tianmen Creek originates from the Lower Tianmen Valley of Mount Tai and flows eastward.

古文：古者帝王升封，咸憩此水。
现代文：古时，帝王登山祭天，都在这条水边歇息。
English: In ancient times, emperors used to rest at this water's edge during the mountaineering festival.

古文：水上往往有石窍存焉，盖古设舍所跨处也。
现代文：水上随处有石洞，那是古时人们搭棚架舍时留下的。
English: There are stone caves everywhere on the water, which were left by people in ancient times when they were erecting huts.

古文：马第伯书云：光武封泰山，第伯从登，山去平地二十里，南向极望无不睹。
现代文：马第伯写道：光武帝来泰山封禅，第伯跟随着一起登山。离平地二十里时，向南极目望去，山下景物一览无遗。
English: Madiba wrote: Emperor Guangwu came to Mount Tai for a retreat, and Madiba climbed the mountain with him. When he was twenty miles from the plain, he looked toward the South Pole and had an unobstructed view of the scenery below.

古文：其为高也，如视浮云，其峻也，石壁窅，如无道径，遥望其人，或为白石，或雪，久之白者移过，乃知是人，仰视岩石松树，郁郁苍苍，如在云中，俯视溪谷，碌碌不可见丈尺。
现代文：泰山确实很高，可与浮云相比；泰山也很险峻；那悬崖绝壁，深不见底，像是没有通路可上。遥望那些登山的人，有的像白石，有的像雪，看得久了，那白的在移动，才知道是人。仰视山上的岩石松树，郁郁苍苍，仿佛是在云中；俯视底下，到处是千姿百态的岩石，却看不到丈尺的溪流。
English: Mount Tai is indeed very high, and can be compared to floating clouds; Mount Tai is also very steep; that cliff precipice, bottomless, as if there is no way to go up. Looking at those climbers from afar, some are like white stone, some are like snow, after watching for a long time, the white one is moving, only to know that it is a person. Looking up at the rocky pine trees on the mountain, it is gloomy, as if it is in the clouds; looking down below, there are rocks of all shapes and sizes everywhere, but you can't see the stream.

古文：直上七里天门，仰视天门，如从穴中视天矣。
现代文：一直登上七里，到了天门，抬头仰视天门，就好像在石洞中观天似的。
English: After climbing seven miles, I reached the Heaven's Gate. Looking up at the Heaven's Gate was like looking at the sky in a stone cave.

古文：应劭《汉官仪》云：泰山东南山顶，名曰日观。
现代文：应韵《汉宫仪》说：泰山东南面的山顶，名叫日观。
English: According to the rhyme "Han Gong Yi" said: the southeastern peak of Mount Tai is called Nichikan.

古文：日观者，鸡一鸣时，见日始欲出，长三丈许，故以名焉。
现代文：日观这地方，第一遍鸡啼时，就可以来看日出，太阳刚出来时，长约三丈，因而称为日观。
English: In this place, when the cock crows for the first time, you can watch the sunrise. When the sun comes out, it is about three feet long, so it is called Nichikan.

古文：其水自溪而东，浚波庄壑，东南流，径龟阴之田。
现代文：下溪水沿溪东流，翻着滚滚的波浪，注入岩壑，接着往东南流经龟阴之田。
English: The water of the lower stream flows along the east side of the stream, rolling over the rolling waves, injecting into the bedrock, and then flowing southeast through the Kameinota field.

古文：其水又屈而东流，又东南径明堂下。
现代文：龟山在博县北十五里，从前孔夫子哀叹时政世道的衰落，望龟山有感而赋诗作曲，所以后来的《琴操》中有《龟山操》。
English: Kameyama is located 15 miles north of Bo County. Once upon a time, Confucius bemoaned the decline of politics and the world, and hoped that Kameyama would have a feeling and compose poems. Therefore, "Kameyama Exercise" was included in the later "Qin Gong."

古文：汉武帝元封元年，封泰山，降坐明堂于山之东北阯。
现代文：龟山北面就是龟阴之田。《春秋》：定公十年来泰山筑坛祭天，祭毕下山，坐于东北边山麓的明堂中。
English: To the north of Kameyama is Kameyino-no-ta. "Spring and Autumn": In the tenth year of Joko's reign, Mount Tai was the site of the altar-sacrifice. After the sacrifice, he went down the mountain and sat in the Myodo Hall at the foot of the mountain on the northeast side.

古文：武帝以古处险狭而不显也，欲治明堂于奉高傍，而未晓其制。
现代文：汉武帝觉得古时所建明堂的地址狭隘而不开敞，想在奉高县旁重建一座明堂，但不知道这种建筑的格局和形式。
English: Emperor Hanwu felt that the address of the Ming Hall built in ancient times was narrow and not spacious. He wanted to rebuild a Ming Hall next to Fenggao County, but he did not know the pattern and form of this building.

古文：济南人公玉带上黄帝时明堂图，图中有一殿，四面无壁，以茅盖之，通水，圜宫垣为复道，上有楼，从西南入，名曰昆仑。天子从之入，以拜把上帝焉。
现代文：济南人公玉带献上了黄帝时的《明堂图》，图中有一座殿宇，四面都没有墙壁，用茅草盖顶，引水流过；环绕着四面宫墙外又建了天桥复道，上面有楼，名叫昆仑，入口在西南；天子从这里进入，就在里面祭祀礼拜上天。
English: Jinan man Gong Yutong presented the "Ming Tang Map" of the Yellow Emperor. In the map, there is a hall, with no walls on all four sides, covered with thatch, with water flowing through. Surrounding the four walls of the palace, a flyover road was built. There is a building above, called Kunlun, with the entrance in the southwest; the heavenly son enters from here, where he offers sacrifices and worships the heavens.

古文：于是上令奉高作明堂于汶上，如带图也。
现代文：于是武帝就命令奉高县在汉上修建明堂。
English: So Emperor Wu ordered Bonggao County to build a Ming Hall in Hanzhong.

古文：古引水为辟雍处，基渎存焉。世谓此水为石汶。
现代文：古时引水作辟雍的地方，墙基和环形水道的遗迹都还存在，人们称此水为石汉水。
English: In ancient times, it was a place where water was diverted to create a moat. The remains of the wall foundation and the circular waterway still exist. People call this water Shihanshui.

古文：《山海经》曰：环水出泰山，东流庄于汶。
现代文：《山海经》说：环水发源于泰山，东流注入汉水。
English: "Mountain and Sea Classic" says: the ring of water originates from Mount Tai, and the east stream is infused with Chinese water.

古文：即此水也。
现代文：指的就是这条水。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the northern part of Dangse.

古文：环水又左入于汶水。
现代文：环水又从左边注入汉水。
English: The ring of water is then filled with Chinese water from the left.

古文：汶水数川合注，又西南流径徂徕山西。
现代文：汶水有几条水流一起注入，又往西南流经祖徕山西边。
English: There are several streams of water flowing into the Wenshui together, and it flows to the southwest through the western side of Zuyu Mountain.

古文：山多松柏，《诗》所谓徂徕之松也。
现代文：山上松柏很多，就是《诗经》里所谓的祖徕之松。
English: There are a lot of pine and cypress trees on the mountain, which is the so-called ancestor pine in the "Song of Songs."

古文：《广雅》曰：道梓松也。
现代文：《广雅》说：就是梓松。
English: "Guangya" said: It is Azusa pine.

古文：《抱朴子》称《玉策记》曰：千岁之松中有物，或如青牛，或如青犬，或如人，皆寿万岁。
现代文：《抱朴子》提到《玉策记》的话，说：千年的老松，里面有种怪物，形状或是像青牛，或是像青狗，或是像人，寿命都有一万岁。
English: "Embrace Pak Tzu" mentioned the words of "Diary of the Jade Emperor" and said: "The thousand-year-old pine tree contains a kind of monster, shaped either like a young ox, or a young dog, or a person, with a lifespan of ten thousand years.

古文：又称天陵有偃盖之松也，所谓楼松也，《鲁连子》曰：松枞高十仞而无枝，非忧正室之无柱也。
现代文：又说天子陵墓上有斜敬的老松，就是所谓楼松。《鲁连子》说：松树极树高达十初，但没有树枝，并不是怕正室没有柱子。
English: It is also said that there is an oblique old pine tree on the tomb of the heavenly son, which is the so-called tower pine. "Lu Lian Zi" said: the pine tree is as high as the tenth century, but there are no branches, it is not afraid that there is no pillar in the main room.

古文：《尔雅》曰：松叶柏身曰枞。
现代文：《尔雅》说：叶子如松，枝干如柏，这种树叫极树。
English: "Lya" said: the leaves are like pine, the branches are like cypress, this kind of tree is called pole tree.

古文：山东有巢父庙，山高十里。
现代文：《邹山记》说：祖徕山又称尤徕之山，在梁甫、奉高、博三县的边境，现在还有美松。
English: "Lushan Ji" said: Zu Lushan, also known as Yu Lushan Mountain, is on the border of Liangfu, Fenggao and Bosan counties, and now there is also Meisong.

古文：山下有陂水，方百许步，三道流注，一水东北沿溪而下，屈径县南，西北流，人于汶。一水北流，历涧，西流入于汶。一水南流，径阳关亭南。
现代文：赤眉军的头目樊崇曾据守此山，所以他自称尤徕三老。祖徕山东边有巢父庙，山高十里，山下有个池塘，方圆百步左右，有主条溪涧注入。一条从东北沿溪流下，转弯流经县南，往西北流，注入汶水；一条往北流经溪涧，西流注入汉水；一条往南流经阳关亭南。
English: The leader of the Red Eyebrows Army, Gong Chong, once guarded this mountain, so he called himself the Three Elders. There is a temple on the east side of Zuye Mountain, the mountain is ten miles high, and there is a pond at the bottom of the mountain, about a hundred paces in circumference, with the main stream flowing into it. A stream flows from the northeast along the stream, turns through the south of the county, flows to the northwest, and pours into the Wen Shui; a northbound stream flows through the creek, and the westbound stream pours into the Han Shui; a southbound stream flows through the south of Yangguanting.

古文：《春秋》襄公十七年，逆臧纥自阳关者也。
现代文：《春秋》：襄公十七年前 ，迎减绝于阳关。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Seventeen years before the rise of Xiang Gong, the decline and fall of Yang Guan.

古文：又西流入于汶水也。过博县西北。
现代文：又西流注入汶水。流过博县西北。
English: The westerly current also flows into the Wen Shui, flowing through the northwest of Bo County.

古文：汶水南径博县故城东。
现代文：汶水往南流经博县老城东边。
English: The Wen Shui flows south through the east side of the old town of Bo County.

古文：《春秋》隐公十一年营之，公谓羽父曰：吾将归老焉。
现代文：《春秋》：哀公十一年营建此城，隐公对羽父说：我将到这里来安度晚年。
English: "Spring and Autumn": In the eleventh year of the construction of this city, Ying Gong said to his father: I will come here to spend my old age.

古文：故《郡国志》曰：梁父有菟裘聚。
现代文：所以《郡国志》说：梁父有冤裘聚。
English: Therefore, the "County History" said: Liang father has grievances.

古文：淄水又径梁父县故城南，县北有梁父山。
现代文：淄水又流经梁父县旧城南面，县北有梁父山。
English: Surabaya water also flows through the southern part of the old city of Liangchih County, and there is Liangchih Mountain in the north of the county.

古文：《开山图》曰：泰山在左，亢父在右，亢父知生，梁父主死。
现代文：《开山图》说：泰山在左，亢父在右；亢父管出生，梁父管死亡。
English: "The Map of the Founding of a Mountain" says: Mount Tai is on the left, and his father is on the right; his father is responsible for his birth, and his father is responsible for his death.

古文：王者封泰山，禅梁父，故县取名焉。
现代文：皇帝来泰山祭天，来梁父祭地，所以县就取名梁父。
English: The emperor came to Mount Taishan to offer sacrifices to heaven, and to the Liang father's place of worship, so the county was named Liang father.

古文：淄水又西南径柴县故城北。
现代文：淄水又往西南流经柴县旧城北面。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southwest through the north of the old city of Chai County.

古文：《地理志》：泰山之属县也。
现代文：按《地理志》，柴县是泰山郡的属县，人们称为柴坟。
English: According to "Geography," Chai County is a subordinate county of Taishan County, and people call it Chai Tomb.

古文：世谓之柴汶矣。
现代文：淄水又流经哪县北面。
English: Surabaya water also flows through the north of Ne County.

古文：淄水又径郕县北。汉高帝六年，封董渫为侯国。
现代文：汉高帝六年前，把这里封给董谍，立为侯国。
English: Six years ago, Emperor Han Gao granted this land to Dong Xian and made it a principality.

古文：《春秋》，齐师围郕，郕人伐齐，饮马于斯水也。
现代文：《春秋》：齐军包围郝，郁人伐齐国，就在这条水边放马饮水。
English: "Spring and Autumn": The Qi army encircled Yunnan, and the people of Yunnan fought against the Qi country. It was at this water's edge that horses were allowed to drink water.

古文：昔孔子行于郕之野，遇荣启期于是，衣鹿裘，被发琴歌三乐之欢，夫子善其能宽矣。
现代文：从前孔子在邸的旷野走路，就在这里碰到荣启期。荣启期身穿鹿皮衣，披散着头发，弹琴唱歌，以三件乐事自喜，孔夫子赞他的仁厚。
English: Once upon a time, Confucius was walking in the wilderness of his residence, and it was here that he encountered the Rongqi period. During the Rongqi period, he wore a deerskin coat, wore his hair loose, played the piano and sang, and pleased himself with three pieces of music. Confucius praised his benevolence.

古文：淄水又西径阳关城南，西流注于汶水。
现代文：淄水又往西流经阳关城南面，西流注入汶水。
English: Surabaya water also flows westward through the south of Yangguan City, and the westward flow is injected into Wenshui.

古文：汶水又南径矩平县故城东，而西南流。
现代文：汉水又往南流经巨平县旧城东面，然后往西南流。
English: The Han River flows south through the eastern side of the old town of Jouping County, and then flows southwest.

古文：城东有鲁道，《诗》所谓鲁道有荡，齐子由归者也。
现代文：城东有鲁道，就是《诗经》所谓鲁道宽阔平坦，齐子由此归来。
English: In the east of the city, there is the Rudo, which is the broad and flat Rudo mentioned in the "Shikei" (Book of Songs), from which the Qiizi return.

古文：今汶上夹水有文姜台。
现代文：现在坟上水边有文姜台。
English: There is now a Wen Jiang table on the edge of the water above the grave.

古文：汶水又西南流，《诗》云汶水滔滔矣。
现代文：汉水又往西南流。《诗经》说：汉水滔滔。
English: The Chinese water also flows to the southwest. "The Book of Songs" says: The Chinese water gushes forth.

古文：《淮南子》曰：狢渡汶则死，天地之性，倚伏难寻，固不可以情理穷也。
现代文：《淮南子》说：格渡过汶水就会死。天地万物的生性，祸福的相互关系探究起来相当困难，原来就不可能按普通的情理搞得清楚的。
English: "Huainanzi" said: "If you cross the Wen Shui, you will die. It is quite difficult to explore the nature of heaven and earth and all things, and the interrelationship of misfortune and good fortune. It is impossible to understand it according to ordinary reason.

古文：汶水又西南径鲁国汶阳县北，王莽之汶亭也。
现代文：汶水又往西南流经鲁国坟阳县北面，这就是王莽的汉亭。
English: Wen Shui also flows to the southwest through the north of Lu Guoyang County, which is Wang Mang's Hanting.

古文：县北有曲水亭，《春秋》桓公十二年，《经》书：公会杞侯、莒子盟于曲池。
现代文：县北有曲水亭，《春秋》：桓公十二年前,桓公与祀侯、营子在曲池会盟。
English: In the northern part of the county, there is Qu Shui Pavilion. "Spring and Autumn": Twelve years before King Kan, King Kan made an alliance with Shihou and Yingzi in the Qu Pool Association.

古文：《左传》曰：平杞，莒也。
现代文：《左传》说：这是与祀、营礴和。
English: "Zo Zhuan" said: This is the same as worshipping and making peace.

古文：故杜预曰：鲁国汶阳县北有曲水亭。
现代文：所以杜预说：鲁国坟阳县北面有曲水亭。
English: Therefore, Du Yu said: There is a curved water pavilion in the north of Guoyang County, Lu Province.

古文：汉章帝元和二年，东巡泰山，立行宫于汶阳，执金吾耿恭屯于汶上，城门基堑存焉，世谓之阙陵城也。
现代文：汉章帝元和二年，东巡泰山，在仪阳建立行宫，执金吾耿恭驻在坟上，城门遗址和城壕至今还在，人们称为网陵城。
English: In the 2nd year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Zhang inspected Mount Tai in the east, and established the imperial palace in Yiyang. The regent King Wu Geng Gong was stationed on the tomb. The ruins of the city gate and the trenches are still there, and people call it the Net Ling City.

古文：汶水又西径汶阳县故城北而西注。
现代文：汶水又往西流经仪阳县旧城北面，然后往西流去。
English: The Wen Shui also flows westward through the north of the old city of Yiyang County, and then flows westward.

古文：又西南过蛇丘县南，汶水又西，洸水注焉。
现代文：又往西南流过蛇丘县南面，汉水又西流，洗水注入。
English: It also flows to the southwest through the south of Shekou County, and the Chinese water flows westward, and the washing water is injected.

古文：又西径蛇丘县南，县有铸乡城。
现代文：又往西流经蛇丘县南面，县里有个铸乡城。
English: It also flows westward through the south of Shekou County. There is a casting township in the county.

古文：《春秋左传》宣叔娶于铸。
现代文：《春秋左传》：宣叔在铸娶亲。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn": Uncle Xuan is in the process of marrying a relative.

古文：杜预曰：济北，蛇丘县所治铸乡城者也。
现代文：杜预说：铸，就是济北蛇丘县所属的铸乡城。
English: Du Yu said: Casting is the casting township of Jibei Shekou County.

古文：又西南过刚县北，《地理志》：刚，故阐也，王莽更之曰柔。
现代文：又往西南流过刚县北面，据《地理志》，刚，就是以前的阐；王莽改名为柔。
English: It also flows to the southwest through the north of Gang County. According to "Geography," Gang is the former pronunciation; Wang Mang was renamed Zhuang.

古文：应劭曰：《春秋经》书：齐人取讙及阐。
现代文：应劭说：《春秋经》记载，齐人侵占了灌和阐。
English: Ying Jun said: "According to the Spring and Autumn Annals, Qi people invaded and occupied Guanhe.

古文：今阐亭是也。
现代文：阐就是现在的阐亭。
English: Yanping is the current Yanping Pavilion.

古文：杜预《春秋释地》曰：阐在刚县北，刚城东有一小亭，今刚县治，俗人又谓之阐亭。
现代文：杜预《春秋释地》说：阐在刚县北，刚城东面有个小亭。现在是刚县的治所，俗人又叫阐亭。
English: Du Yuanyuan, "Spring and Autumn Interpretation," said: There is a small pavilion in the north of Gang County and the east of Gangcheng. It is now the government office of Gang County, and the layman is also called Yuanyuan Pavilion.

古文：京相璠曰：刚县西四十里有阐亭。
现代文：京相潘说：刚县西四十里有阐亭。
English: Beijing's Minister of Foreign Affairs Pan said: There is a pavilion in the west forty of Gang County.

古文：未知孰是。
现代文：诸说不同，不知哪一个正确。
English: I don't know who's right.

古文：汶水又西，蛇水注之。
现代文：汉水又西流，蛇水注入。
English: The Han River flows west, and the Snake River flows in.

古文：水出县东北泰山，西南流，径汶阳之田。齐所侵也。
现代文：蛇水发源于刚县东北的泰山，往西南流经坟阳之田，这是齐侵占过的地方。
English: The Snake River originates from Mount Tai in the northeast of Gang County and flows southwest through the fields of Goyang, which was once occupied by the Qi Dynasty.

古文：自汶之北，平畅极目，僖公以赐季友。
现代文：汶水以北，极目望去，是一片旷阔的平原，僖公把它赐给季友。
English: To the north of Wenshui, as far as the eye can see, is a vast plain, which was given to Ji Yu by the Duke of Yan.

古文：蛇水又西南径铸城西，《左传》所谓蛇渊囿也。
现代文：蛇水又往西南流经铸城西面，这就是《左传》所谓的蛇渊囿。
English: The serpentine water also flows to the southwest through the west side of the cast city, which is the so-called serpentine abyss in "Zhuan."

古文：故京相璠曰：今济北有蛇丘城，城下有水，鲁囿也。
现代文：所以京相潘说：现在济北有蛇丘城，城下有水。这就是鲁囿。
English: Therefore, Beijing's Pan said: There is now a snake hill city in North Jeju, and there is water under the city. This is the crane.

古文：俗谓之浊须水，非矣。
现代文：民间把这条水叫浊须水，这是不对的。
English: It is not right for the public to call this water "scrub water."

古文：蛇水又西南径夏晖城南。
现代文：蛇水又向西南流经夏晖城南。
English: The snake water also flows southwest through the southern part of Xiali City.

古文：《经》书：公会齐侯于下讙是也。
现代文：《春秋经》载，公在下灌与齐侯会见。
English: "Spring and Autumn Annals" recorded that the public met with Qi Hou in the lower basin.

古文：今俗谓之夏晖城。
现代文：现在俗称夏晖城。
English: Now it is commonly known as Xiayuan City.

古文：盖《春秋左传》桓公三年，公子翚如齐，齐侯送姜氏于下讙，非礼也。
现代文：《春秋左传》：桓公三年前，公子晕到齐，齐侯送姜氏到下灌，这是不合礼法的。
English: "Chunqiu Zuo Zhen": Three years ago, Prince Huan's son fainted to Qi, Qi Hou sent Mr. Jiang to the lower basin, which is against etiquette.

古文：世有夏晖之名矣。
现代文：这就有了夏晖这个地名了。
English: This gave rise to the place name Xiali.

古文：蛇水又西南入汶。
现代文：蛇水又往西南流，注入汉水。
English: Snake water also flows to the southwest, injecting Chinese water.

古文：汶水又西，沟水注之，水出东北马山，西南流，径棘亭南。
现代文：汶水又西流，沟水注入。沟水发源于东北边的马山，向西南流经棘亭南面。
English: Wenshui also flows westward, injecting ditch water. The ditch water originates from Mashan in the northeast and flows southwest through the south of Spine Pavilion.

古文：《春秋》成公三年《经》书：秋，叔孙侨如帅师围棘。
现代文：《春秋》：成公三年前《经》记载，叔孙侨如率兵包围棘。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Chenggong three years ago, "Ching" recorded that the uncles and grandsons of overseas Chinese led soldiers to surround the thorns.

古文：《左传》曰：取汶阳之田，棘不服，围之。
现代文：《左传》说：齐侵占了泣阳之田，棘不服，于是就把它包围起来。
English: "Zo Zhuan" said: Qi occupied Weiyang's field, the thorns were not satisfied, so they surrounded it.

古文：南去汶水八十里。
现代文：棘亭南离汶水八十里。
English: Spine Pavilion South is eighty miles away from Wenshui.

古文：又西南径遂城东。
现代文：沟水又往西南流经遂城东面。
English: The ditch water also flows southwest through the eastern side of Suicheng.

古文：《地理志》曰：蛇丘，遂乡，故遂国也。
现代文：《地理志》说：遂城是蛇丘遂乡，就是从前的遂国。
English: "Geography" said: Suicheng is the snake hill Suixiang, that is, the former Suiguo.

古文：《春秋》庄公十三年，齐灭遂而戍之者也。
现代文：《春秋》：庄公十三年前,齐灭了遂，就在那里设城堡屯兵驻防。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Thirteen years ago, after Zhuang Gong was defeated, a castle garrison was set up there.

古文：京相璠曰：遂在蛇丘东北十里，杜预亦以为然。
现代文：京相播说：遂在蛇丘东北十里。杜预也认为这说法正确。
English: Beijing's official broadcaster said: "We are now ten miles northeast of Shekou." Du Yueh also believes that this statement is correct.

古文：然县东北无城以拟之，今城在蛇丘西北，盖杜预传疑之非也。
现代文：可是县城东北没有一座城对得上号，现在的城是在蛇丘西北，这是杜预存疑造成的错误。
English: However, there is no city in the northeast of the county seat that has the right number. The current city is in the northwest of Shekou, which is a mistake caused by Du's pre-existing doubts.

古文：又西径下讙城西而入汶水。
现代文：沟水又往西流经下灌城西面，然后注入汶水。
English: The ditch water also flows westward through the western side of the lower irrigation city, and then it is injected into the Wen Shui.

古文：汶水又西径春亭北。考古无春名，惟平陆县有崇阳亭，然是亭东去刚城四十里，推璠所《注》则符，并所未详也。
现代文：佼水又往西流经春亭北面，据查考，古时没有春这个地名，只有平陆县有个崇阳亭，但此亭东距刚城四十里，以京相潘所注来推断倒是符合的，但实际如何却不清楚。
English: According to the investigation, there was no place name "Chun" in ancient times, only there was a "Soyang Pavilion" in Pinglu County, but this pavilion was forty miles east of the city of Gangseo. The inference made by the Beijing scholar Pan is consistent, but it is unclear how it actually is.

古文：又西南过东平章县南，《地理志》曰：东平国，故梁也。
现代文：又往西流过东平郡章县南面，《地理志》说：东平国，就是从前的梁。
English: It also flowed westward to the south of Zhang County, Dongping County. "Geography" said: Dongping Country is the former Liang Gang.

古文：景帝中六年，别为济东国。武帝元鼎元年为大河郡，宣帝甘露二年为东平国，王莽之有盐也。
现代文：景帝中元六年前，又分出济东国；武帝元鼎元年前，这里是大河郡；宣帝甘露二年前，是东平国；王莽时叫有盐。
English: Six years before the reign of Emperor Jing in the middle of the Yuan Dynasty, Jidong Province was separated; before the reign of Emperor Wu in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, it was Dahe County; two years before the reign of Emperor Xuan, it was Dongping Province; Wang Mangshi was called Yishan.

古文：章县按《世本》，任姓之国也，齐人降章者也，故城在无盐县东北五十里。
现代文：章县，按《世本》，是任姓之国，是投降于章的齐人的居地。旧城在无盐县东北五十里。
English: Zhang County, according to the "World Book," is the country of all surnames, and is the residence of the Qi people who surrendered to Zhang. The old city is fifty miles northeast of Wuxi County.

古文：汶水又西南，有泌水注之，水出肥成县东北原，西南流，径肥成县故城南。
现代文：汝水又往西南流，有泌水注入。泌水发源于肥成县东边的白原，往西南流经肥成县旧城南面。
English: The water originates from the White Plains in the eastern part of Hecheng County and flows southwest through the southern part of the old city of Hecheng County.

古文：乐正子春谓其弟子曰：子适齐过肥，肥有君子焉。
现代文：乐正子春对他的弟子说：你去齐国要经过肥，肥这地方有一些贤能的人。
English: Le Zi Zi Chun said to his disciple: "If you go to Qi, you must pass through Fei. Fei is a place where there are some capable people.

古文：左径句窳亭北。
现代文：泌水左边流过句扇亭北面。
English: The water seepage on the left flows through the north side of Jusen Pavilion.

古文：章帝元和二年，凤凰集肥成句窳亭，复其租而巡泰山，即是亭也。
现代文：章帝元和二年，凤凰飞集到肥成的句魔亭，于是豁免了当地的地租，并去巡游泰山。说的就是此亭。
English: In the first and second year of Emperor Zhang's reign, the phoenix flew to the magical pavilion in Hucheng, whereupon they exempted themselves from the local land rent and went on a tour of Mount Tai. This pavilion is the one in question.

古文：泌水又西南径富成县故城西，王莽之成富也。
现代文：泌水又往西南流经富成县旧城西面，这就是王莽时的成富。
English: The seepage water also flows to the southwest through the west side of the old city of Fucheng County. This is Wang Mangshi's Chengfu.

古文：其水又西南流注于汶，汶水又西南径桃乡县故城西。王莽之鄣亭也。
现代文：又往西南流，注入泣水。汶水又往西南流经桃乡县旧城西面，这就是王莽时的郭亭。
English: It also flows to the southwest, injecting weeping water. The Wen Shui also flows to the southwest through the west of the old city of Taoxiang County, which is the Guoting of Wang Mangshi.

古文：世以此为鄣城，非，盖因巨新之故目耳。
现代文：人们把它叫做郭城，这是不对的，那只是把新朝的旧地名加以扩大罢了。
English: People call it Guocheng, which is not correct, it is just an extension of the old place name of the New Dynasty.

古文：又西南过无盐县南，又西南过寿张县北，又西南至安民亭，入于济。
现代文：又往西南流过无盐县南面，又往西南流过寿张县北面，又往西南流到安民亭，注人济水。
English: It also flows to the southwest through the south of Wuxi County, and to the southwest through the north of Shuzhang County, and to the southwest to Anminting, injecting water.

古文：汶水自桃乡四分，当其派别之处，谓之四汶口。
现代文：汶水自桃乡分为四条，四水分流处，称为四坟口。
English: From Taoxiang to Wenshui, it is divided into four streams, and the place where the four streams flow is called the four cemeteries.

古文：其左二水双流，西南至无盐县之郈乡城南。
现代文：左边分出两条，向西南流，到无盐县的郡乡城南。
English: Two streams branch off to the left, flowing southwest to the county seat of Wuxi County, Chengnan.

古文：郈，昭伯之故邑也，祸起斗鸡矣。
现代文：部乡是昭伯的封邑，祸事起于斗鸡。
English: Bu Xiang is the fiefdom of Zhao Bo, and the calamity began with a cockfight.

古文：《春秋左传》定公十二年，叔孙氏堕郈，今其城无南面。
现代文：《春秋左传》：定公十二年前，叔孙氏毁去鄙城。现在部城南面仍没有城墙。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn": Twelve years before Ding Gong, the Uncles and Grandsons destroyed the lower city. Now there is still no city wall on the south side of the city.

古文：汶水又西南径东平陆县故城北。
现代文：汉水又往西南流经东平陆县旧城北面。
English: The Han River also flows southwest through the northern part of the old city of Dongpinglu County.

古文：应劭曰：古厥国也，今有厥亭。
现代文：应肋说：这是古时的厥国；现在有厥亭。
English: Ying Li said: This is the ancient Jue Kingdom; now there is the Jue Pavilion.

古文：汶水又西径危山南，世谓之龙山也。
现代文：汶水又往西流经危山南面，人们称为龙山。
English: The Wen Shui also flows westward through the south side of the dangerous mountain, which is known as Longshan.

古文：《汉书。宣元六王传》曰：哀帝时，无盐危山土自起，覆草，如驰道状，又瓠山石转立。
现代文：《汉书•宣元六王传》说：哀帝时，无盐危山的泥土自行隆起，上面盖了草，好像驰道的样子；此外瓤山的岩石也转了方向。
English: "Hanshu, the Legend of the Six Kings of the Xuan Yuan" says: When the emperor was mourned, the soil of the salt-free dangerous mountain rose up on its own, covered with grass, as if it were a road; in addition, the rocks of Lushan also turned the direction.

古文：晋灼曰：《汉注》作报山。山胁石一枚，转侧起立，高九尺六寸，旁行一丈，广四尺，东平王云及后谒曰：汉世石立，宣帝起之表也。
现代文：晋灼说：《汉书注》把瓤山写成报山，说山边有一块巨石，转身立起，高九尺六寸，旁移了一丈，宽四尺。东平王云及王后渴说：汉朝岩石立起，这是表明有新皇帝将兴起的征兆。
English: Jin Jiao said: "Hanshu Annotation" wrote Lushan as Houzhan, saying that there was a huge rock on the edge of the mountain, turned around and stood up, nine feet and six inches high, moved a height, four feet wide. Dongping Wangyun and Queen Thirst said: Han Dynasty rock stands up, this is a sign that a new emperor will rise.

古文：自之石所祭，治石象报山立石，束倍草，并祠之。
现代文：于是亲自到岩石所在之处致祭，又造了一块类似于报山石的岩石，束倍草，还为它立祠。
English: Therefore, he personally went to the place where the rock was located to offer a sacrifice, and he also made a rock similar to the stone used to announce the arrival of the new year, called Sokubekusa, and built a shrine for it.

古文：建平三年，息夫躬告之，王自杀，后谒弃市，国除。
现代文：建平三年前，息夫躬告发了他，东平王于是自杀，王后渴被杀头示众，封国也被撤除了。
English: Three years before Jianping, his son-in-law had denounced him. King Dongping then committed suicide, his queen was brutally murdered, and the state seal was removed.

古文：汶水又西合为一水，西南入茂都淀。
现代文：汉水又西流，汇合为一条水，向西南流入茂都淀。
English: The Han River also flows westward, merging into a single stream and flowing southwest into the Maudu River.

古文：淀，陂水之异名也。
现代文：茂都淀是破水的异名。
English: Mado-Yodo is another name for water breaking.

古文：淀水西南出，谓之巨野沟。又西南径致密城南。
现代文：淀水向西南流出，称为巨野沟，又向西南流经致密城南面。
English: The stagnant water flows out to the south-west, known as the Giant Wild Ditch, and flows south-west through the southern part of the compact city.

古文：《郡国志》曰：须昌县有致密城，古中都也，即夫子所宰之邑矣，制养生送死之节，长幼男女之礼，路不拾遗，器不雕伪矣。
现代文：《郡国志》说：须昌县有致密城，就是古时的中都，也就是孔夫子当过宰的城邑。孔夫子制定了养生送死的仪式，长幼男女之间的礼度，于是路上丢了东西没有人捡，器物也不作虚浮的雕饰。
English: "County History" said: Suchang County has Dimi Town, which is the ancient capital, that is, the town where Confucius served as the ruler. Confucius established the ritual of life and death, the courtesy between the eldest and youngest men and women, so no one picked up things lost on the road, and the utensils did not make vain carvings.

古文：巨野沟又西南入桓公河，北水西出淀，谓之巨良水，西南径致密城北，西南流注洪渎。
现代文：巨野沟又往西南注入桓公河石北边的水往西流出茂都淀，叫巨良水；往西南流经致密城北面；往西南流，注入洪读。
English: The water from the north side of the Huan Gong River flows into the southwest and flows out of Mudu Yodo to the west, which is called the great water; it flows to the southwest through the north side of the dense city; it flows to the southwest and is injected into Hongyue.

古文：次一汶，西径郈亭北又西至寿张故城东，潴为泽渚。
现代文：另一条汉水往西流经鄙亭北面，又往西流到寿张旧城东面，积聚成为沼泽。
English: Another Han River flows westward through the northern part of Dianting, and then westward to the eastern part of Shuzhang Old Town, accumulating into a swamp.

古文：初平三年，曹公击黄巾于寿张东，鲍信战死于此。
现代文：初平三年，曹操在寿张东部攻打黄巾，鲍信就在这里战死。
English: At the beginning of the third year of the Heian period, Cao Cao attacked the Yellow Turban in the eastern part of Shouzhang, and Bao Xin died in the battle.

古文：其右一汶，西流径无盐县之故城南，旧宿国也。
现代文：右边一条汶水，往西流经无盐县旧城南面。这地方原是从前的宿国，又是齐宣后的故都。
English: On the right, a stream of Wen Shui flows westward through the southern part of the old city of Wuxi County. This place was the former host country and the former capital after Qi Xuan.

古文：齐宣后之故邑，所谓无盐丑女也。
现代文：她就是所谓无盐丑女。
English: She is the so-called salt-free ugly woman.

古文：汉武帝元朔四年，封城阳共王子刘庆为东平侯，即此邑也。
现代文：汉武帝元朔四年前，封城阳共王的儿子刘庆为东平侯，就是此城。
English: Four years before Emperor Hanwu Yuan Shuo, Liu Qing, the son of Emperor Chengyang, was named Dongping marquis, and this is the city.

古文：王莽更名之曰有盐亭。
现代文：王莽改名为有盐亭。
English: Wang Mang changed his name to You Yan Ting.

古文：汶水又西径郈乡城南。
现代文：泣水又往西流经鄙乡城南面。
English: The weeping water flowed westward through the countryside to the south of the city.

古文：《地理志》所谓无盐有郈乡者也。
现代文：《地理志》所谓无盐有郡乡，就指这地方。
English: "Geography," the so-called salt-free counties and townships, refers to this place.

古文：汶水西南流，径寿张县故城北。《春秋》之良县也。
现代文：汶水往西南流经寿张县旧城北面，就是《春秋》中的良县。
English: The Wen Shui flows southwest through the north of the old city of Shouzhang County, which is the Liang County in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：县有寿聚，汉曰寿良。
现代文：县里有寿聚，汉时叫寿良。
English: There is Shouju in the county, which is called Shouliang in Han Dynasty.

古文：应劭曰：世祖叔父名良，故光武改曰寿张也。
现代文：应肋说：世祖的叔父叫刘良，所以光武帝把地名改为寿张。
English: Ying Li said: Shizu's uncle was called Liu Liang, so Emperor Guangwu changed the name of the place to Shou Zhang.

古文：建武十二年，世祖封樊宏为侯国。
现代文：建武十二年，世祖把这地方封给樊宏，立为侯国。
English: In the twelfth year of the Jianwu era, the ancestor gave this place to Jianhong and established it as a principality.

古文：汶水又西南，长直沟水注之。
现代文：汶水又往西南流，长直沟水注入。
English: The Wen Shui also flows to the southwest, injecting water into the long straight ditch.

古文：水出须昌城东北谷阳山，南径须昌城东，又南，漆沟水注焉。
现代文：长直沟水发源于须昌城东北的毁阳山南面，流过须昌城东；又往南流，漆沟水注入。
English: The water of Changzhaigou originates from the south side of Zhoyang Mountain in the northeast of Suchang City and flows through the east of Suchang City. It also flows southward, injecting water into the lacquer ditch.

古文：水出无盐城东北五里阜山下，西径无盐县故城北。水侧有东平宪王仓冢，碑阙存焉。
现代文：漆沟水发源于无盐城东北五里的阜山下，往西流经无盐县旧城北面，水边有东平宪王仓墓，墓碑和墓网都还在。
English: The water of the lacquer ditch originates at the foot of Mount Fu, five miles northeast of Wuxi City, and flows westward to the north of the old city of Wuxi County. There is a tomb of Dongping Xianwang Cang on the water's edge, and the tombstone and tomb net are still there.

古文：元和二年，章帝幸东平，把以太牢，亲拜祠坐，赐御剑于陵前。
现代文：元和二年，章帝临幸东平，以太牢致祭，亲自在祠座上跪拜。
English: In the first and second years of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Zhang went to Dongping to pay his respects and personally kneeled on the ancestral seat.

古文：其水又西流注长直沟，沟水奇分为二：一水西径须昌城南入济，一水南流注于汶。
现代文：并在陵前赐赠御剑。漆沟水又西流，注入长直沟。沟水分成两条；一条往西流经须昌城南面，注入济水，一条南流，注入汝水。
English: The water of the lacquer ditch also flowed west, and was poured into the long straight ditch. The water of the ditch was divided into two; one flowed westward through the south side of Suchang City, and was poured into Jishui, and one flowed south, and was poured into Jushui.

古文：汶水又西流入济，故《淮南子》曰：汶出弗其，西流合济。
现代文：泣水又西流注入济水。所以《淮南子》说：汶水发源于弗其，西流与济水汇合。
English: Therefore, "Huainanzi" said: "Wen Shui originated from Fuchi, and the west stream merged with Jishui."

古文：高诱云：弗其，山名，在朱虚县东。
现代文：高诱说：弗其是山名，在朱虚县东面。
English: Gao Yu said: Fuchi is a mountain name, in the east of Zhuxu County.

古文：余按诱说是，乃东汶，非《经》所谓入济者也，盖其误证耳。
现代文：我以为高诱的说法是正确的，这是东泣，并不是《水经》所谓注入济水的那一条。这里引证错了。
English: I thought that Gao Yu's statement was correct. This is Dong Weeping, not the so-called "water-giving water" in the "Water Sutra." The quotation is wrong here.

