古文：王褒庾信王褒字子渊，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：王褒字子渊，琅邪临沂人人。
English: Wang Baozhi Ziyuan, the evil is the same for everyone.

古文：曾祖俭，齐侍中、太尉、南昌文宪公。
现代文：曾祖父王俭，曾在齐国担任侍中、太尉，封南昌文宪公。
English: His great-grandfather, Wang Jian, had served as a chamberlain and second lieutenant in the State of Qi and was given the title of Nanchang Wencheng.

古文：祖骞，梁侍中、金紫光禄大夫、南昌安侯。
现代文：祖父王骞，在梁国担任侍中、金紫光禄大夫，封南昌安侯。
English: His grandfather, Wang Qian, served as an attendant in Liang Province, a doctor of Jin Ziguanglu, and was given the title of Nanchang Anhu.

古文：父规，梁侍中、左民尚书、南昌章侯。
现代文：父亲王规，在梁国担任侍中、左民尚书，封南昌章侯。
English: His father, Wang Gui, served as an attendant in Liang Province, a disciple of Zuo Min Shangshu, and was named the prince of Nanchang.

古文：并有重名于江左。褒识量渊通，志怀沉静。
现代文：在江东都享有盛名。王褒见识广博，气量通达，性格深沉文静。
English: Wang Bao is well-known in the east of the Yangtze River. He is well-informed, energetic, and has a deep and quiet personality.

古文：美风仪，善谈笑，博览史传，尤工属文。
现代文：风度潇洒，善于谈笑，博览史传，尤善于写文章。
English: He has a dashing demeanor, is good at talking and laughing, knows a lot about history, and is especially good at writing articles.

古文：梁国子祭酒萧子云，褒之姑夫也，特善草隶。
现代文：梁国国子祭酒萧子云，是王褒的姑夫，特别精于草书、隶书。
English: Xiao Ziyun, Liang's uncle, was particularly good at cursive and cursive writing.

古文：褒少以姻戚，去来其家，遂相模范。
现代文：王褒少年时候，由于亲戚关系，常去他家，于是向他学习书法。
English: When Wang Bao was a teenager, he often went to his home because of his relatives, so he learned calligraphy from him.

古文：俄而名亚子云，并见重于世。
现代文：不久，名气仅次于萧子云，都被时人所推崇。
English: Soon, his fame was second only to that of Xiao Ziyun, and both were highly respected by the people of the time.

古文：梁武帝喜其才艺，遂以弟鄱阳王恢之女妻之。
现代文：梁武帝喜欢他的才能技艺，就把弟弟鄱阳王萧恢的女儿嫁给他为妻。
English: Emperor Liangwu liked his talent and skill, so he married the daughter of his brother, King Shenyang Xiao Wei, to him as his wife.

古文：起家秘书郎，转太子舍人，袭爵南昌县侯。
现代文：最初担任秘书郎，转任太子舍人，袭爵南昌县侯。
English: At first, he served as a secretary, then he was appointed as the prince's secretary, and became the hereditary lord of Nanchang County.

古文：稍迁秘书丞。
现代文：过了一段时间，升任秘书丞。
English: After a while, he was promoted to secretary.

古文：宣成王大器，简文帝之冢嫡，即褒之姑子也。
现代文：宣成王萧大器，是梁简文帝的嫡长子，又是王褒姑姑的儿子。
English: Xuancheng Wang Xiao Daqi was the eldest legitimate son of Emperor Liang Jianwen and the son of Wang Bao's aunt.

古文：于时盛选僚佐，乃以褒为文学。
现代文：当时大选僚属，就让王褒担任文学。
English: At that time, Wang Bo, a general election party member, was assigned to literature.

古文：寻迁安成郡守。
现代文：随即升任安成郡守。
English: He was immediately promoted to the position of Ancheng County Governor.

古文：及侯景渡江，建业扰乱，褒辑宁所部，见称于时。
现代文：侯景渡过长江后，建业动乱，而王褒能安定部属，被时人称赞。
English: After Hou Jing crossed the Yangtze River, Jianye was in turmoil, while Wang Bao Neng was praised by the people of the time for being a stable subordinate.

古文：梁元帝承制，转智武将军、南平内史。
现代文：梁元帝秉承皇帝旨意，将王褒转任智武将军、南平内史。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan, adhering to the emperor's will, transferred Wang Bo to General Zhimu, and Nanping's history began.

古文：及嗣位于江陵，欲待褒以不次之位。
现代文：梁元帝在江陵继位后，打算破格提升王褒。
English: After succeeding to the throne in Gangneung, Emperor Liang Yuan planned to promote Wang Bo in an unprecedented way.

古文：褒时犹在郡，敕王僧辩以礼发遣。
现代文：王褒当时还在郡守任上，诏令王僧辩以礼送行。
English: At that time, Wang Bo was still in the position of county governor, and the imperial edict ordered Wang Sangye to send him off with a salute.

古文：褒乃将家西上。
现代文：王褒于是携家西上。
English: Wang Bo then went west with his family.

古文：元帝与褒有旧，相得甚欢。
现代文：梁元帝与王褒从前就有交情，彼此相处很好。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan and Wang Bo have been friends for a long time and get along well with each other.

古文：拜侍中，累迁吏部尚书、左仆射。
现代文：授侍中，先后升任吏部尚书、左仆射。
English: During the investiture ceremony, he was successively promoted to the posts of secretary, secretary, and left-hand servant.

古文：褒既世冑名家，文学优赡，当时咸相推挹，故旬月之间，位升端右。
现代文：王褒出身于贵族世家，文章出众，学问渊博，当时人都十分推崇他，所以一月之间，就升任尚书省长官。
English: Wang Bao was born into an aristocratic family, his writings were outstanding and his knowledge was profound. At that time, people highly respected him, so in January, he was promoted to the post of governor of Shangshu Province.

古文：宠遇日隆，而褒愈自谦虚，不以位地矜人，时论称之。
现代文：王褒受宠，恩遇日深，但他更加谦虚，不因官职地位高而瞧不起别人，当时的舆论对他十分称赞。
English: Wang Bao was favored and his favor was deeply appreciated, but he was more modest and did not look down on others because of his high official position. The public opinion at that time highly praised him.

古文：初，元帝平侯景及擒武陵王纪之后，以建业雕残，方须修复；江陵殷盛，便欲安之。
现代文：当初，梁元帝平定侯景，活捉武陵王萧纪以后，由于建业破败，尚待修复，江陵富足繁华，想定都江陵。
English: At first, after Emperor Liang Yuan had subdued Houjing and captured Wuling King Xiao Ji alive, due to the dilapidation of the construction industry, it had yet to be repaired. Jiangling was prosperous and prosperous, and it was assumed to be the capital of Jiangling.

古文：又其故府臣寮，皆楚人也，并愿即都荆郢。
现代文：又因为他原来的部属，都是楚人，都希望在荆、郢一带选定京师。
English: Also, because his original subordinates were all Chu people, they all hoped to select the Beijing division in the Jing and Handan areas.

古文：尝召群臣议之。
现代文：梁元帝召集群臣商议。
English: Emperor Yuan once convened a group of courtiers to discuss the construction of the capital.

古文：领军将军胡僧佑、吏部尚书宗懔、太府卿黄罗汉、御史中丞刘钰等曰： 建业虽是旧都，王气已尽。且与北寇邻接，止隔一江。
现代文：领军将军胡僧、吏部尚书宗懔、太府卿黄罗汉、御史中丞刘等人说： 建业虽是旧都，但帝王气象已尽，又与北部强敌相邻，中间只隔一条长江。
English: Hu Zeng, the leading general of the army, Shang Shuzong, the head of the personnel department, Huang Luohan, the grand secretary of the prefectural government, Liu, the vice-president of the imperial court, and others said: Although Jianye is the old capital, the imperial weather has been exhausted, and it is adjacent to the strong enemy in the north, with only one Yangtze River separating them.

古文：若有不虞，悔无及矣。
现代文：如果有什么意外，后悔莫及。
English: If something unexpected happens, you'll regret it.

古文：臣等又尝闻之，荆南之地，有天子气。
现代文：臣等又曾听说，荆南之地，有天子气象。
English: The vassals had also heard that the weather in the southern part of Jing Province was divine.

古文：今陛下龙飞缵业，其应斯乎。
现代文：如今陛下承继大业，恐怕就是应验这个吧？
English: Now that His Majesty has succeeded to the throne, I'm afraid this is exactly what will happen, isn't it?

古文：天时人事，征祥如此。
现代文：天象人事，均有如此祥兆。
English: All celestial beings have such auspicious signs.

古文：臣等所见，迁徙非宜。 
现代文：臣等认为，不宜迁徙。 
English: In the opinion of ministers and others, it is not appropriate to migrate.

古文：元帝深以为然。
现代文：梁元帝十分赞同。
English: Yuan Di thought that what they said was right.

古文：时褒及尚书周弘正咸侍座。
现代文：当时王褒与尚书周弘正都在座。
English: Wang Bao and Shangshu Zhou Hongzheng were both present at the time.

古文：乃顾谓褒等曰： 卿意以为何如？ 
现代文：梁元帝问王褒等人道： 你们认为怎样？ 
English: Emperor Liang Yuan asked Wang Bo and other humanitarians: What do you think?

古文：褒性谨慎，知元帝多猜忌，弗敢公言其非。当时唯唯而已。
现代文：王褒生性谨慎，知道梁元帝多有猜忌，不敢公开指出不当之处，当时只得恭敬地顺着应了几句。
English: Wang Baosheng was cautious, knowing that Emperor Liang Yuan was suspicious and did not dare to openly point out the wrongdoing. At that time, he only had to respectfully comply with a few words.

古文：后因清闲密谏，言辞甚切。
现代文：后来乘机秘密劝谏，言词十分恳切。
English: Later, he took the opportunity to secretly persuade her, and his words were very sincere.

古文：元帝颇纳之。
现代文：梁元帝也愿意采纳。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan was also willing to adopt it.

古文：然其意好荆、楚，已从僧佑等策。
现代文：但梁元帝喜好荆、楚，已决定采纳胡僧等人的计谋。
English: However, Emperor Liang Yuan liked Jing and Chu, and had decided to adopt the stratagems of the Hu monks and others.

古文：明日，乃于众中谓褒曰： 卿昨日劝还建业，不为无理。 
现代文：第二天，梁元帝当着众臣，对王褒说： 你昨天劝我返回建业，不是没有道理。 
English: The next day, Emperor Liang Yuan praised Wang in front of all the courtiers, saying, "You persuaded me to return to Jianye yesterday, and it was not without reason.

古文：褒以宣室之言，岂宜显之于众。
现代文：王褒认为，宫中所言，岂能向众人泄露？
English: Wang Bao believed that what was said in the palace could not be leaked to the public.

古文：知其计之不用也，于是止不复言。
现代文：知道皇帝不用自己的建议，就不再说什么了。
English: Knowing that the emperor would not take his own advice, he said nothing more.

古文：及大军征江陵，元帝授褒都督城西诸军事。
现代文：关中大军征讨江陵时，梁元帝任命王褒为都督城西诸军事。
English: When Guanzhong's large army conquered Gangneung, Emperor Liang Yuan appointed Wang Bo as the military leader of the western part of the city.

古文：褒本以文雅见知，一旦委以总戎，深自勉励，尽忠勤之节。
现代文：王褒原来以文雅出名，一旦出任将帅，自我勉励，竭尽忠诚。
English: Originally, Wang Bo was famous for his gentleness. Once he became commander-in-chief, he worked hard and was loyal to the end.

古文：被围之后，上下猜惧，元帝唯于褒深相委信。
现代文：被包围以后，上下互相猜疑提防，梁元帝只对王褒还十分信任。
English: After being surrounded, the upper and lower ranks were suspicious of each other. Emperor Liang Yuan only trusted Wang Bo very much.

古文：朱买臣率众出宣阳之西门，与王师战，买臣大败。
现代文：朱买臣率军出宣阳西门，与大军交战，朱买臣大败。
English: Zhu Mai Shen led the army out of Xuanyang West Gate, and fought with the big army, Zhu Mai Shen was defeated.

古文：褒督进不能禁，乃贬为护军将军。
现代文：王褒监督进攻，但无法控制军队，降职为护军将军。
English: Wang Bo oversaw the offensive, but was unable to control the army and was demoted to the position of general of the escort.

古文：王师攻其外栅，城陷，褒从元帝入子城，犹欲固守。
现代文：大军攻克城外栅栏，又攻占外城，王褒跟随梁元帝进入子城，还打算坚守。
English: The large army overcame the fence outside the city, and captured the outer city. Wang Bo followed Emperor Liang Yuan into the sub-city, and still intended to hold out.

古文：俄而元帝出降，褒遂与众俱出。
现代文：不久，梁元帝出城投降，王褒也与众臣全部出城。
English: Soon, Emperor Liang Yuan left the city to surrender, and Wang Bao and all his vassals also left the city.

古文：见柱国于谨，谨甚礼之。
现代文：见到柱国于谨，于谨待他很有礼貌。
English: When he saw the pillar country, he was very respectful and treated him very politely.

古文：褒曾作燕歌行，妙尽关塞寒苦之状，元帝及诸文士并和之，而竞为凄切之词。
现代文：王褒曾经写过《燕歌行》，巧妙地写尽了关塞寒苦的情景，梁元帝与众文士都曾和作，竞相堆砌凄切之词。
English: Wang Bao once wrote "Yan Xing Xing," which skillfully described the cold and harsh scenery of Guanzai. Emperor Liang Yuan and all the scribes once wrote together, competing to pile up the terrible words.

古文：至此方验焉。
现代文：到这时才有了验证。
English: That's when the proof came.

古文：褒与王克、刘钰、宗懔、殷不害等数十人，俱至长安。
现代文：王褒与王克、刘、宗懔、殷不害等数十人，都被送到长安。
English: Wang Bao and dozens of others, including Wang Ke, Liu, Zong Qi, and Yin Nuxing, were all sent to Chang'an.

古文：太祖喜曰： 昔平吴之利，二陆而已。
现代文：太祖高兴地说： 从前晋国平定吴国的好处，是得到陆机、陆云兄弟二人。
English: The great-grandfather said happily, "In the past, the advantage of subduing Wuzhong in Jin was getting two brothers, Lu Jian and Lu Yun.

古文：今定楚之功，群贤毕至。
现代文：今日平定楚地，各位贤才全部来了。
English: Today, calmly and steadily, all of you wise men have come.

古文：可谓过之矣。 
现代文：可说是超过古人了。 
English: It can be said that they have surpassed the ancients.

古文：又谓褒及王克曰： 吾即王氏甥也，卿等并吾之舅氏。
现代文：又对王褒、王克说： 我是王家的外甥，你们都是我的舅氏。
English: He also said to Wang Bo and Wang Ke: I am the nephew of the Wang family, and you are all my uncles.

古文：当以亲戚为情，勿以去乡介意。 
现代文：应当念及亲戚之情，不要因为离开家乡而难受。 
English: You should consider the feelings of your relatives, and don't feel bad about leaving your hometown.

古文：于是授褒及克、殷不害等车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：于是任命王褒、王克、殷不害等人为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: As a result, Wang Bao, Wang Ke, and Yin Buxing were appointed as the general of chariot and cavalry and the three departments of ceremony.

古文：常从容上席，资饩甚厚。
现代文：常常位居上席，待遇十分优厚。
English: They often sit comfortably in the upper seats, and the rewards are very rich.

古文：褒等亦并荷恩眄，忘其羁旅焉。
现代文：王褒等人也都感恩戴德，忘了自己流落异乡。
English: Wang Bao and others are also grateful, forgetting their exile in a foreign land.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，封石泉县子，邑三百户。
现代文：孝闵帝登基，封为石泉县子，食邑三百户。
English: Emperor Xiaozhun ascended to the throne and was given the title of the son of Shiquan County, with 300 households in the county.

古文：世宗即位，笃好文学。
现代文：世宗即位，喜好文学。
English: Sejong ascended to the throne and became fond of literature.

古文：时褒与庾信才名最高，特加亲待。
现代文：当时，王褒、庾信才名最高，被世宗特别亲近。
English: At that time, Wang Bao and Yu Xin were the most famous, and they were particularly close to Shizong.

古文：帝每游宴，命褒等赋诗谈论，常在左右。
现代文：皇帝每次巡游饮宴，都命令王褒等人写诗谈论，在身边陪侍。
English: Every time the emperor cruised the banquet, he ordered Wang Bo and others to write poems and talk about them, and to accompany them.

古文：寻加开府仪同三司。
现代文：不久，加开府仪同三司衔。
English: He was soon given the additional award of Kaifu Yi and the three divisions.

古文：保定中，除内史中大夫。
现代文：保定年间，授内史中大夫。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhouwu in Baoding, he was awarded the post of doctor of internal history.

古文：高祖作象经，令褒注之。
现代文：高祖写了《象经》，命令王褒作注。
English: Gaozu wrote "The Elephant Sutra" and ordered Wang Huan to write a commentary.

古文：引据该洽，甚见称赏。
现代文：引证丰富详备，很受称赞。
English: The citation is rich and detailed, which is highly praised.

古文：褒有器局，雅识治体。
现代文：王褒有见识有气量，十分了解治国的体要。
English: Wang Bo has insight and stamina, and fully understands the essentials of governing the country.

古文：既累世在江东为宰辅，高祖亦以此重之。
现代文：他家在江东世代为辅政大臣，高祖也因此而器重他。
English: His family was an assistant minister of state in the Jiangdong generation, and Gao Zu also valued him for this reason.

古文：建德以后，颇参朝议。
现代文：从建德年间以后，经常参加朝廷政议。
English: He often took part in the Imperial Court's political deliberation after the founding of the German nation.

古文：凡大诏册，皆令褒具草。
现代文：凡是重要的诏书，都命令王褒起草。
English: Wang Bo was ordered to draft all important imperial edicts.

古文：东宫既建，授太子少保，迁小司空，仍掌纶诰。
现代文：设立东宫后，授太子少保，升小司空，仍然掌管诏诰文书。
English: After the establishment of the East Palace, the Crown Prince was awarded the title of Junior Protector, and the Junior Secretary was promoted to Junior Secretary, still in charge of the imperial rescript.

古文：乘舆行幸，褒常侍从。
现代文：皇帝乘车巡视，王褒常常跟随身边。
English: Emperor Wu would travel around the country by car, and Wang Bo would often accompany him.

古文：初，褒与梁处士汝南周弘让相善。
现代文：当初，王褒与梁国处士汝南人周弘让交好。
English: At the beginning, Wang Bao made friends with Zhou Hongzhan, an official of Liang Guo.

古文：及弘让兄弘正自陈来聘，高祖许褒等通亲知音问。
现代文：周弘让之兄周弘正从陈国前来访问时，高祖允许王褒等人与亲戚互通音讯。
English: When Zhou Hongzhi's brother Zhou Hongzhi was visiting from Chen Guo, Gao Zu allowed Wang Bao and others to exchange messages with relatives.

古文：握管操觚，声泪俱咽。
现代文：王褒赠送周弘让诗篇，又写信倾诉思念之情，言词凄切。
English: Wang Bao presented Zhou Hongzhang with a poem, and also wrote a letter to express his feelings of longing. The words were amazing.

古文：寻出为州刺史。
现代文：周弘让回信，愿老友保重身体，也说不尽离别之念。
English: Zhou Hongzhang replied to the letter, wishing the old friend to take care of his health, and also saying goodbye.

古文：卒于位，时年六十四。
现代文：不久，出任宜州刺史。在任上去世，当时六十四岁。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the governor of Yizhou Province. He died in office at the age of 64.

古文：子鼒嗣。
现代文：儿子王承袭爵位。
English: His son Wang inherited the title.

古文：庾信字子山，南阳新野人也。
现代文：庾信字子山，南阳新野人。
English: Yuxin Zizishan, Nanyang Xinyang.

古文：祖易，齐征士。
现代文：祖父庾易，在齐国不应朝廷征聘。
English: Grandfather Zhai Yi, in Qi, should not be recruited by the imperial court.

古文：父肩吾，梁散骑常侍、中书令。
现代文：父亲庾肩吾，曾任梁国散骑常侍、中书令。
English: My father, who stood shoulder to shoulder with me, was once an attendant of Liang Guo's cavalry, and a Chinese calligrapher.

古文：信幼而俊迈，聪敏绝伦。
现代文：庾信自幼英杰出众，聪明机敏无与伦比。
English: Yuxin has been outstanding since he was a child. His intelligence and agility are unmatched.

古文：博览群书，尤善春秋左氏传。
现代文：博览群书，特别通晓《春秋左氏传》。
English: He has an extensive collection of books, and is particularly familiar with "The Spring and Autumn Legend of Zuo Shiwen."

古文：身长八尺，腰带十围，容止颓然，有过人者。
现代文：身高八尺，腰带长达十围，形貌举动疏慢而不拘礼法，有不同常人之处。
English: He is eight feet tall, his belt is ten times as long, his appearance and demeanour are deferential, and he is exceptional.

古文：起家湘东国常侍，转安南府参军。
现代文：从湘东国常侍起家，转任安南府参军。
English: He started his career as a regular attendant in Shandong Province and transferred to Annan Prefecture to join the army.

古文：时肩吾为梁太子中庶子，掌管记。
现代文：当时庾肩吾担任梁国太子中庶子，主管文书。
English: At that time, he served as the middle child of the Prince of Liang Province and was in charge of paperwork.

古文：东海徐摛为左卫率。
现代文：东海人徐扌离任左卫率。
English: East China Sea native Xu Wei is the highest-ranking left-back to leave the club.

古文：摛子陵及信，并为抄撰学士。
现代文：徐扌离之子徐陵和庾信同时担任抄撰学士。
English: Xu Ling and Xuxin, the sons of Xu Bingli, also served as copyists.

古文：父子在东宫，出入禁闼，恩礼莫与比隆。
现代文：父子均在东宫，出入宫禁之中，恩宠礼遇无人可比。
English: Both father and son are in the East Palace, forbidden to enter and leave the palace, and the grace and courtesy are incomparable.

古文：既有盛才，文并绮艳，故世号为徐、庾体焉。
现代文：庾信、徐陵才华横溢，文风都是绮靡浮艳，因此世人称为徐庾体。
English: Xuxin and Xuling are talented, and their literary styles are both lively and bright. Therefore, the world is called the Xuxin style.

古文：当时后进，竞相模范。
现代文：当时的后学之士，争相模仿他们的文章。
English: Post-graduates at the time scrambled to imitate their articles.

古文：每有一文，京都莫不传诵。
现代文：每写成一篇文章，京师没有不传诵的。
English: Every time he writes an article, he has to read it aloud.

古文：累迁尚书度支郎中、通直正员郎。
现代文：多次升迁，官至尚书度支郎中、通直正员郎。
English: He was promoted several times, rising through the ranks to Shudo Shiro-naka and Tsunenao Shokan-ro.

古文：出为郢州别驾。
现代文：出任郢州别驾。
English: Please do not run for office in Zhangzhou.

古文：寻兼通直散骑常侍，聘于东魏。
现代文：随即兼任通直散骑常侍，出使东魏。
English: He then concurrently served as Tsuchizuchika Sanzhishi no Tsuneishi, and was sent to the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：文章辞令，盛为邺下所称。
现代文：他的文章和言谈，被邺下高度赞美。
English: His articles and speeches have been highly praised by his followers.

古文：还为东宫学士，领建康令。
现代文：回来后任东宫学士，兼任建康令。
English: After returning to China, he held the post of Donggong Baccalaureate and led the Jiankang Order.

古文：侯景作乱，梁简文帝命信率宫中文武千余人，营于朱雀航。
现代文：侯景作乱时，梁简文帝命令庾信率领宫中文武官员千余人，在朱雀航扎营。
English: At the time of Hou Jing's rebellion, Emperor Liang Jianwen ordered Yu Xin to lead more than a thousand Chinese military officials from the imperial court to set up camp in Suzakhang.

古文：及景至，信以众先退。
现代文：侯景赶到，庾信让众人先撤退。
English: When Hou Jing arrived, Yan Xin led the crowd to retreat first.

古文：台城陷后，信奔于江陵。
现代文：台城失陷后，庾信逃到江陵。
English: After the fall of Taichung, Yan Xin fled to Gangneung.

古文：梁元帝承制，除御史中丞。
现代文：梁元帝秉承皇帝旨意，任命他为御史中丞。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan was ordered to place his trust in Goshi Zhongzheng.

古文：及即位，转右卫将军，封武康县侯，加散骑常侍，来聘于我。
现代文：梁元帝继位后，庾信转任右卫将军，封武康县侯，加散骑常侍衔，出使我朝。
English: After Emperor Liang Yuan succeeded to the throne, Yuxin was transferred to the post of General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard, he was given the title of Marquis of Wukan County, and the rank of a common equestrian was added, and he was sent to the Ming Dynasty.

古文：属大军南讨，遂留长安。
现代文：适逢大军南征，就留在长安。
English: The time was right for a large army to march south to conquer Jiangling, so he stayed in Chang'an.

古文：江陵平，拜使持节、抚军将军、右金紫光禄大夫、大都督，寻进车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：平定江陵后，任命为使持节、抚军将军、右金紫光禄大夫、大都督，随即升任车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: After the quelling of Gangneung, he was appointed as the envoy to hold the festival, the general of the army, the doctor of the right gold, purple, and light, and the grand governor, and then he was promoted to the general of the cavalry and the three departments of the ceremony.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，封临清县子，邑五百户，除司水下大夫。
现代文：孝闵帝登基后，封为临清县子，食邑五百户，任司水下大夫。
English: After Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, he was given the title of the son of Linqing County, 500 households in food villages, and the post of underwater doctor.

古文：出为弘农郡守，迁骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、司宪中大夫，进爵义城县侯。
现代文：出任弘农郡守，升骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、司宪中大夫，晋爵义城县侯。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Hongnong County, promoted to the general of cavalry, the third secretary of Kaifu ceremony, the doctor of constitutional law, and the marquis of Yicheng County.

古文：俄拜洛州刺史。
现代文：不久又被任命为洛州刺史。
English: He was soon given the post of Los Angeles County historian.

古文：信多识旧章，为政简静，吏民安之。
现代文：庾信懂得旧时的不少典章制度，为政简要清静，官吏百姓都能安宁。
English: Xuanxin understood many of the old-time legal codes and regulations. The government was simple and quiet, and officials and commoners could live in peace.

古文：时陈氏与朝廷通好，南北流寓之士，各许还其旧国。
现代文：当时陈氏与朝廷互通友好，寄居他乡的南北人士，都允许回归故里。
English: At that time, the Chen clan and the imperial court were on friendly terms with each other, and people from the north and the south who lived in other villages were allowed to return to their hometowns.

古文：陈氏乃请王褒及信等十数人。高祖唯放王克、殷不害等，信及褒并留而不遣。
现代文：陈氏就请求放还王褒、庾信等十余人，高祖只放还王克、殷不害等人，留住庾信、王褒不放。
English: Chen requested the release of more than ten people including Wang Bao and Yan Xin. Gao Zu only released Wang Ke, Yin Nuxin and others, but kept Yan Xin and Wang Bao.

古文：寻征为司宗中大夫。
现代文：不久被征调为司宗中大夫。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of junior doctor of Shizong.

古文：世宗、高祖并雅好文学，信特蒙恩礼。
现代文：世宗、高祖都很喜好文学，庾信受到特殊的恩宠礼遇。
English: Both Shizong and Gaozu were fond of literature, and Yuxin received special grace and courtesy.

古文：至于赵、滕诸王，周旋款至，有若布衣之交。
现代文：至于赵王、滕王等人，更是恳切应酬，好比平民之间的交情。
English: As for King Zhao, King Teng and other kings, they interacted very harmoniously, just like they interacted with the common people.

古文：群公碑志，多相请托。
现代文：公卿们的墓碑墓志，大多拜托他撰写。
English: Most of the epitaphs on the tombstones of nobles were written by him.

古文：唯王褒颇与信相埒，自余文人，莫有逮者。
现代文：当时只有王褒与庾信文才相当，其余的文人，没有能及的。
English: At that time, only Wang Bao and Zou Xinwen were comparable, and the rest of the literati were second to none.

古文：岂知灞陵夜猎，犹是故时将军；咸阳布衣，非独思归王子。大象初，以疾去职，卒。
现代文：庾信虽然官位高，名声大，但常有思乡之情。于是作《哀江南赋》以抒发自己的心意。大象初年，因病退职，不久去世。
English: Although he had a high official rank and a great reputation, Yuxin often felt homesick. Therefore, he wrote "Southern Lamentation" to express his feelings. In the first year of the elephant, he resigned due to illness and died soon after.

古文：隋文帝深悼之，赠本官，加荆淮二州刺史。
现代文：隋文帝深切悼念，追赠他原来官职，加荆、淮二州刺史衔。
English: Sui Emperor deeply mourned, and posthumously awarded him his former official position, as well as the titles of Jiajing and Huai Erzhou.

古文：子立嗣。
现代文：儿子庾立承袭封爵。
English: His son stands to inherit a knighthood.

