古文：起玄黓涒滩，尽柔兆阉茂，凡十五年。
现代文：起，止，一共十五年。
English: A total of fifteen years.

古文：太宗孝文皇帝下前十一年
现代文：汉文帝十一年冬季，十一月，文帝巡行代国。
English: In the winter of the eleventh year of Emperor Wen of Han, in November, Emperor Wen went on a tour to represent the country.

古文：冬，十一月，上行幸代。
现代文：春季，正月，文帝自代国返回长安。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Wen returned to Chang'an from his own country.

古文：春，正月，自代还。
现代文：夏季，六月，梁怀王刘揖去世，他没有儿子。
English: In the summer, in June, Liang Huai Wang Liu Yao passed away. He had no son.

古文：夏，六月，梁怀王揖薨，无子。贾谊复上疏曰： 陛下即不定制，如今之势，不过一传、再传，诸侯犹且人恣而不制，豪植而大强，汉法不得行矣。
现代文：贾谊再次上疏说： 陛下如果不确立制度，从如今的趋势来看，封国不过传了一代或者两代，诸侯尚且自行其事不受朝廷节制，再扩张强大，朝廷的法度就没有办法实行了。
English: Jia Yi said again, "Your Majesty, if you don't establish a system, judging from the current trend, the fiefdom will only last for one or two generations, the princes will still do their own thing without restraint from the court, and if they expand and become powerful, there will be no way to enforce the court's laws.

古文：陛下所以为籓扞及皇太子之所恃者，唯淮阳、代二国耳。
现代文：陛下当做屏障和皇太子所能仗恃的，只有淮阳国、代国两个封国罢了。
English: There are only two fiefdoms, Huaiyang Province and Substitute Province, that His Majesty can use as a barrier and the crown prince can rely on.

古文：代，北边匈奴，与强敌为邻，能自完则足矣；而淮阳之比大诸侯，廑如黑子之著面，适足以饵大国，而不足以有所禁御。
现代文：代国，北部与匈奴相接，与强敌为邻，能自我保全就足够了；淮阳国与那些强大的诸侯国相比，仅仅像一个黑痣附着在脸上一样，它恰恰只能诱发大国吞并的欲望，而无力对大国有所牵制。
English: Compared with those powerful vassal states, Huaiyang is just like a black mole on the face. It can only induce the desire of annexation by big countries, but is powerless to restrain the big countries.

古文：方今制在陛下，制国而令子适足以为饵，岂可谓工哉！
现代文：现在权在陛下手中；封立王国却使自已儿子的封国小得只能做被人吞并的诱饵，怎能说设计得好呢！
English: Now the system is for His Majesty to establish, to compile the vassal states and to make his son fit for the table of a great power, can it be said to be a trick?

古文：臣之愚计，愿举淮南地以益淮阳，而为梁王立后，割淮阳北边二、三列城与东郡以益梁。
现代文：我有个愚笨的计谋，请皇帝把原属淮南国的封地，全划归淮阳国，使淮阳国增大，并且为梁王立继承人，把淮阳北边的两三个城和东郡划归梁国，以扩大梁国的封地。
English: I had a stupid stratagem. I asked the emperor to transfer all the fiefs originally belonging to Huainan Province to Huaiyang Province, so that Huaiyang Province would increase in size, and for Liang Wangli's successor, to transfer two or three cities in the north of Huaiyang and Dong County to Liang Province, so as to expand Liang Province's fiefs.

古文：不可者，可徙代王而都睢阳。
现代文：如果不妥，可以把代王改封为梁王，而以睢阳为都城。
English: If it is not appropriate, the acting king can be changed to Liang Wang, and the capital city to Poyang.

古文：梁起于新郪而北著之河，淮阳包陈而南揵之江，则大诸侯之有异心者破胆而不敢谋。
现代文：梁国封地起于新而北面直达黄河，淮阳国的封地囊括了原来陈国的全境并且南部直达长江，那么其他大诸侯国有二心的，也胆战心惊不敢图谋反叛朝廷了。
English: The fiefdoms of Liang Guo originated in Xinjiang and reached as far as the Yellow River in the north, while the fiefdoms of Huai Yang Guo covered the entire territory of the original Chen Guo and reached as far as the Yangtze River in the south. The other great lords had double-mindedness and were too timid to attempt to rebel against the imperial court.

古文：梁足以扞齐、赵，淮阳足以禁吴、楚，陛下高枕，终无山东之忧矣，此二世之利也。
现代文：梁国足以阻止齐国和赵国，淮阳国足以禁制吴国和楚国，陛下可以垫高枕头安睡，再没有对崤山以东的忧虑了。
English: Liang Province is enough to stop Qi Province and Zhao Province, Huaiyang Province is enough to prohibit Wu Province and Chu Province, and His Majesty can sleep with a high pillow and no longer worry about the east of Lushan.

古文：当今恬然，适遇诸侯之皆少；数岁之后，陛下且见之矣。
现代文：这可使两代君主安享太平。现在安然无事，是因为恰巧诸侯王都还年幼，几年之后，陛下就会看见诸侯王带来的危机了。
English: This will allow two generations of monarchs to enjoy peace and tranquility. It is safe now because the princes are still young, and in a few years, His Majesty will see the crisis brought about by the princes.

古文：夫秦日夜苦心劳力以除六国之祸；今陛下力制天下，颐指如意，高拱以成六国之祸，难以言智，苟身无事，畜乱，宿祝，孰视而不定；万年之后，传之老母、弱子，将使不宁，不可谓仁。 
现代文：秦始皇日日夜夜苦心劳力以铲除六国之祸；而现在陛下牢牢地控制着天下，一举一动都能如意，却高拱两手安坐，造成新的六国之祸，就难说您有智谋。即便是终您一生太平无事，但却留下了祸乱的根源，对这些危机早就看到了却不去解决，待您百年之后，把危机留给了年迈的老母，幼稚的弱子，使他们不得安宁，不能说您是仁者。 
English: Qin Shihuang worked hard day and night to eradicate the Six Nations Disaster; but now that your majesty firmly controls the world, every move can be as desired, but if you sit with your arms raised high, causing a new Six Nations Disaster, it is hard to say that you have a clever plan. Even if you have a peaceful life, but you have left the root of the disaster, you have seen these crises for a long time but do not solve them. After a hundred years, you have left the crisis to your old mother, a childish weakling, so that they do not have peace, you cannot say that you are a benevolent person.

古文：帝于是从谊计，徙淮阳王武为梁王，北界泰山，西至高阳，得大县四十馀城。
现代文：文帝于是采纳了贾谊的计策，把淮阳王刘武改封为梁王，梁国封地北以泰山为界，西至高阳，共有大县四十多个。
English: Emperor Wen then adopted Jia Yi's strategy and changed the title of Liu Wu, the king of Huaiyang, to the king of Liang. The fiefs of Liang were bounded by Mount Tai in the north and Gaoyang in the west, with a total of more than forty large counties.

古文：后岁馀，贾谊亦死，死时年三十三矣。
现代文：又过了一年多，贾谊死去了，死时年仅三十三岁。
English: More than a year later, Jia Yi passed away, only 33 years old at the time of death.

古文：徙城阳王喜为淮南王。
现代文：文帝改封城阳王刘喜为淮南王。
English: Emperor Wen changed the title of Liu Xi, King of Chengyang, to King of Huainan.

古文：匈奴寇狄道。
现代文：匈奴侵犯狄道。
English: The Huns invaded Dido.

古文：时匈奴数为边患，太子家令颍川晁错上言兵事曰： 《兵法》曰： 有必胜之将，无必胜之民。 
现代文：当时，匈奴经常挑起边境战争，太子家令颍川人晁错向文帝上书，谈论战争问题说： 《兵法》说： 有战无不胜的将军，没有战无不胜的民众。 
English: At that time, the Xiongnu often provoked border wars, and the prince's family ordered the Xichuan people to send a letter to Emperor Wen to discuss the issue of war, saying: "The Law of War says: There are invincible generals, but there is no invincible people.

古文：由此观之，安边境，立功名，在于良将，不可不择也。
现代文：由此看来，安定边境，建立功名，关键在于良将，不可不慎重地选择良将。
English: From this point of view, the key to stabilizing the border and building a reputation lies in good generals. It is necessary to carefully select good generals.

古文：臣又闻，用兵临战合刃之急者三：一曰得地形，二曰卒服习，三曰器用利。
现代文： 臣又听说：在战场上与敌人交锋，有三件最重要的事情：一是占据有利地形，二是士兵训练有素，三是武器精良。
English: The minister also heard that there are three most important things in fighting the enemy on the battlefield: one is to occupy favorable terrain, the second is to have well-trained soldiers, and the third is to have sophisticated weapons.

古文：兵法：步兵、车骑、弓弩、长戟、矛鋋、剑楯之地，各有所宜；不得其宜者，或十不当一。
现代文：按照《兵法》所说，步兵、车骑兵、弓弩、长戟、矛铤、剑盾等不同的兵种和武器，分别适用于不同的地形，各有所长；如果战场地形不利于发挥军队和武器的长处，就可能出现十个士兵不如一个士兵的情况。
English: According to the "Law of War," different arms and weapons such as infantry, cavalry, archers, crossbows, halberds, spears, and swords and shields are suitable for different terrains and have their own strengths. If the battlefield terrain is not conducive to the strengths of the army and weapons, there may be a situation where ten soldiers are not as good as one soldier.

古文：士不选练，卒不服习，起居不精，动静不集，趋利弗及，避难不毕，前击后解，与金鼓之指相失，此不习勒卒之过也，百不当十。
现代文：士兵不经过挑选，军队缺乏训练、起居管理混乱，动静不一致，胜利进攻时跟不上，退避危难时不能一致行动，前军已经刀兵相接，后军却仍松松垮垮，士兵不能随着鸣金击鼓进退，这是不训练军队的错误，这样的军队，一百个人不抵十个用。
English: Soldiers are not selected, the army lacks training, the living and management are chaotic, the movement and movement are inconsistent, it cannot keep up with the attack when it is victorious, it cannot act in unison when it is retreating from danger, the front army has met the sword and the soldiers, but the rear army is still loose and broken, the soldiers cannot advance and retreat with the sound of drums. This is the mistake of not training the army, such an army, a hundred people are not worth ten.

古文：兵不完利，与空手同；甲不坚密，与袒裼同；弩不可以及远，与短兵同；射不能中，与无矢同；中不能入，与无镞同；此将不省兵之祸也，五不当一。
现代文：士兵手中的兵器不齐备不锋利，与徒手作战一样；将士身上的盔甲不坚固，与脱衣露体一样；弩箭射不到远处，与短兵器一样；射不中目标，与没有箭一样；箭虽然射中目标却射不进敌人身体，就与没有箭头一样。这是将领不检查武器导致的祸患，这样的军队，五个人不抵一个用。
English: Weapons in the hands of soldiers are not complete and sharp, just like hand-to-hand combat; the armor on the soldiers is not strong, just like undressed bodies; crossbows and arrows cannot be shot far away, just like short weapons; they cannot hit the target, just like no arrows; although the target is hit, the arrow cannot enter the enemy's body, just like no arrows. This is the calamity caused by the generals not checking the weapons, such an army, five people are not worth one.

古文：故《兵法》曰： 器械不利，以其卒予敌也；卒不可用，以其将予敌也；将不知兵，以其主予敌也；君不择将，以其国予敌也。 
现代文：所以《兵法》说： 器械不锋利，是把士卒奉送给敌人；士卒不听号令，是把统兵将领奉送给敌人；将领不懂兵法，是把他的君主奉送给敌人；君主不精心选择将领，是把国家奉送给敌人。 
English: Therefore, the "Law of War" says: If the instrument is not sharp, it is to give the soldiers to the enemy; if the soldiers do not listen to the order, it is to give the general to the enemy; if the general does not understand the military method, it is to give his monarch to the enemy; if the monarch does not carefully select the general, it is to give the country to the enemy.

古文：四者，兵之至要也。
现代文：这四点，是用兵最重要的关键。
English: These four aspects are the essentials of the use of force.

古文：臣又闻：小大异形，强弱异势，险易异备。
现代文： 臣又听说：在用兵时，依据交战双方国家大小不同、强弱不同和战场地形险峻平缓的不同，应采取不同的对策。
English: The minister also heard that when using soldiers, different countermeasures should be taken according to the different sizes, strengths and weaknesses of the two countries and the different steepness and flatness of the battlefield terrain.

古文：夫卑身以事强，小国之形也；合小以攻大，敌国之形也；以蛮夷攻蛮夷，中国之形也。
现代文：自我贬抑，去侍奉大国，这是小国应采取的方法；如果与敌方不分强弱，就应联合其他小国对敌作战；利用蛮夷部族去进攻蛮夷部族，这是中原王朝应该采取的战略。
English: To serve the strong by humbling oneself is the form of a small country; to attack a big country by uniting with a small country is the form of a country with equal strength; to attack a country by using force is the form of a country in the Central Plains.

古文：今匈奴地形、技艺与中国异，上下山阪，出入溪涧，中国之马弗与也；险道倾仄，且驰且射，中国之骑弗与也；风雨罢劳，饥渴不困，中国之人弗与也；此匈奴之长技也。
现代文：现在匈奴的地形、军事技术与中原有很大不同：奔驰于山上山下，出入于山涧溪流，中原的马匹不如匈奴；在危险的道路上，一边策马奔驰一边射击，中原的骑射技术不如匈奴；不畏风雨疲劳，不怕饥渴，中原将士不如匈奴人；这是匈奴的优势。
English: Now, the terrain and military technology of the Huns are very different from those of the Central Plains: they gallop up and down the mountains, and go in and out of mountain streams. The horses of the Central Plains are not as good as those of the Huns; on dangerous roads, they gallop and shoot at the same time. The riding and shooting skills of the Central Plains are not as good as those of the Huns; they are not afraid of wind and rain, they are not afraid of fatigue, they are not afraid of hunger and thirst. The soldiers of the Central Plains are not as good as the Huns; this is the advantage of the Huns.

古文：若夫平原、易地、轻车、突骑，则匈奴之众易挠乱也；劲弩、长戟、射疏、及远，则匈奴之弓弗能格也；坚甲、利刃，长短相杂，游弩往来，什伍俱前，则匈奴之兵弗能当也；材官驺发，矢道同的，则匈奴之革笥、木荐弗能支也；下马地斗，剑戟相接，去就相薄，则匈奴之足弗能给也；此中国之长技也。
现代文：如果到了平原、地势平缓的地方，汉军使用轻车和骁勇的骑兵精锐，那么匈奴的军队就很容易被打乱；汉军使用强劲的弓弩和长戟，箭能射得很远，长戟也能远距离杀敌，那么匈奴的小弓就无法抵御；汉军身穿坚实的铠甲，手中有锋利的武器，长兵器与短兵器配合使用，弓箭手机动出击，兵按什伍编制统一进攻，匈奴的军队就不能抵挡；有勇力的弓箭手，以特制的好箭射向同一个目标，匈奴用皮革和木材制造的防御武器就会失效；下马在平地作战，剑戟交锋，近身搏斗，匈奴人的脚力就不如汉军；这是中原的军事优势。
English: If, when they reach the plains, where the terrain is flat, the Chinese army uses light vehicles and brave cavalry elite, then the Hun army will be easily disrupted; the Chinese army uses strong bows and crossbows, the arrows can be shot very far, and the crossbows can also kill the enemy at a long distance, then the Hun's small bow will not be able to resist; the Chinese army is wearing solid armor, and they have sharp weapons in their hands. Long weapons are used in conjunction with short weapons. The bow and arrow mobilizes to attack, and the soldiers are organized according to ranks for a unified attack, and the Hun army cannot resist; the brave

古文：以此观之，匈奴之长技三，中国之长技五。陛下又兴数十万之众以诛数万之匈奴，众寡之计，以一击十之术也。
现代文：由此看来：匈奴有三项优势，汉军有五项优势；陛下又动用了数十万军队，去攻伐只有数万军队的匈奴，从兵员数量计算，这是以一击十的战术。士
English: From this, it can be seen that the Huns have three advantages, while the Han Army has five advantages. His Majesty also used hundreds of thousands of troops to attack the Huns, who only had tens of thousands of troops. Judging from the number of soldiers, this is a one-strike-ten tactic.

古文：虽然，兵，凶器；战，危事也。故以大为小，以强为弱，在俛仰之间耳。
现代文： 尽管如此，刀兵是不祥之物，战争是凶险之事；由大变小，由强变弱，瞬息之间就会发生。
English: Nevertheless, swords and soldiers are ominous things, war is a perilous thing; from big to small, from strong to weak, it happens in a flash.

古文：夫以人之死争胜，跌而不振，则悔之无及也。
现代文：用人的生死去决胜负，失利就难以重振国威，后悔都来不及了。
English: Using people's lives and deaths to decide victory and defeat, it is difficult to revive national prestige after a defeat, and it is too late to regret.

古文：帝王之道，出于万全。
现代文：英明的君主在决策时，应立足于万无一失。
English: The emperor's road to success is based on a comprehensive strategy.

古文：今降胡、义渠、蛮夷之属来归谊者，其众数千，饮食、长技与匈奴同。
现代文：现在已归降朝廷的胡人、义渠、蛮夷等，部众达数千人，他们的饮食习俗、善于骑射的特长，都与匈奴一样。
English: There are thousands of Hu, Yiqu and barbarians who have now surrendered to the imperial court. Their eating habits and shooting skills are the same as those of the Xiongnu.

古文：可赐之坚甲、絮衣、劲弓、利矢，益以边郡之良骑，令明将能知其习俗、和辑其心者，以陛下之明约将之。
现代文：赐给他们坚固的铠甲、绵衣、强劲的弓，锋利的箭，再加上边境各郡的精崐锐骑兵，起用通晓兵法并了解蛮夷部族风俗习惯，能笼络其人心的将领，用陛下明确的约定统率他们。
English: He gave them strong coats of mail and armour, strong bows and sharp arrows, together with the best horsemen of the frontier counties, and appointed generals who knew the art of war and the customs and habits of the barbarian tribes, and who could win their hearts, to lead them by His Majesty's express command.

古文：即有险阻，以此当之；平地通道，则以轻车、材官制之；两军相为表里，各用其长技，衡加之以众，此万全之术也。 
现代文：如果遇到险阻，就让这些人冲锋陷阵；在宽阔的平野，就用战车、步兵去制服敌人；两支军队互为表里，各自发挥他们的优势，再加上以众击寡，这是万无一失的战略。 
English: If encountering a dangerous obstacle, let these people charge into battle; on a broad plain, use chariots and infantry to subdue the enemy; the two armies are inside each other, each exerting their advantages, plus using the crowd to attack the few, this is a foolproof strategy.

古文：帝嘉之，赐错书，宠答焉。
现代文：文帝很赞赏他的意见，赐给晁错一封复信，以表示宠信。
English: Emperor Wen appreciated his opinion very much and gave him a reply letter to show his favor.

古文：错又上言曰： 臣闻秦起兵而攻胡、粤者，非以卫边地而救民死也，贪戾而欲广大也，故功未立而天下乱。
现代文：晁错再一次上书说： 臣听说秦起兵攻打匈奴和百越，不是为了保卫边境安宁、防止人民死于战争，而是残暴贪婪，要想扩大它的疆域，所以，功业没有建立，天下已经大乱。
English: Zou Er wrote again, saying, "My minister has heard that Qin raised an army to attack the Xiongnu and Bai Yue, not in order to protect the border and prevent people from dying in the war, but out of brutal greed to expand its territory. Therefore, the cause has not been established, and the world has been in chaos.

古文：且夫起兵而不知其势，战则为人禽，屯则卒积死。
现代文：而且如果用兵而不了解敌人的虚实强弱，进攻就会被敌人所俘虏，屯守就会被敌人所困死。
English: If soldiers are sent out without knowing the situation, they will be captured in battle, and the garrison will let the soldiers die on the outskirts.

古文：夫胡、貉之人，其性耐寒；扬、粤之人，其性耐暑。
现代文：北方的胡人和貉人，生性耐寒；南方扬、粤一带的人，生性耐暑。
English: The Hu people and the Qiang people in the north are naturally cold-resistant; the people in the southern Yang and Guangdong regions are naturally heat-resistant.

古文：秦之戍卒不耐其水土，戍者死于边，输者偾于道。
现代文：秦朝的戍卒不服南北两地的水土，戍守边疆的死在边境，输送给养的死于路上。
English: The vassals of the Qin Dynasty were not satisfied with the soil and water of the north and south. Those who guarded the frontier died at the border, and those who transported supplies died on the road.

古文：秦民见行，如往弃市，因以谪发之，名曰 谪戍 ；先发吏有谪及赘婿、贾人，后以尝有市籍者，又后以大父母、父母尝有市籍者，后入闾取其左。
现代文：秦朝百姓被征发当兵，就如同去刑场被处死，于是秦王朝就征发犯罪的人去戍边，称作 谪戍 。先是征发犯罪的官吏以及赘婿和商人充军，后来又扩大到曾有市籍经过商的人，然后又扩大到祖父母、父母曾有市籍经过商的人，最后强迫居住于闾左按规定不负担兵役的人，也去当兵。
English: The people of the Qin Dynasty were conscripted as soldiers, just as if they were going to the execution site to be executed. Therefore, the Qin Dynasty conscripted people who committed crimes to go to Fuzhou, known as Fuzhou. First, officials who committed crimes, as well as sons-in-law and merchants, were conscripted into the army. Later, it was expanded to people who had been merchants, and then to grandparents and parents who had been merchants. Finally, people who lived in Fuzhou and did not bear military service according to regulations were also forced to become soldiers.

古文：发之不顺，行者愤怨，有万死之害而亡铢两之报，死事之后，不得一算之复，天下明知祸烈及己也。
现代文：胡乱征发，被强迫当兵的人都心怀愤恨，他们遭受必死无疑的厄运，朝廷却不给以丝毫的报偿，死于战场，他们的家属得不到国家免收一算赋税的回报，天下人都清楚地知道秦的暴政祸及自己。
English: The people who were indiscriminately conscripted and forced to serve as soldiers all harbored resentment. They suffered the inevitable misfortune of death, but the imperial court did not give them the slightest reward. They died on the battlefield, and their families did not receive the return of the state's exemption from taxation. The world is well aware of the tyranny of Qin and themselves.

古文：陈胜行戍，至于大泽，为天下先倡，天下从之如流水者，秦以威劫而行之之敝也。
现代文：陈胜前去戍边，来到达大泽乡，首先为天下人做出了反秦的表率。天下人响应陈胜，如同流水下泄势不可挡，这是秦以严威强制征兵的恶果。
English: Chen Sheng went to Fuxian and arrived at Osawa Township. He took the lead in advocating an uprising for the whole country, and people all over the world followed him like water, because the Qin Dynasty used violence to forcibly conscript labor.

古文：胡人衣食之业，不著于地，其势易以扰乱边境，往来转徙，时至时去。此胡人之生业，而中国之所以离南畮也。
现代文： 匈奴人的衣食来源，不依靠土地，所以经常扰乱边境，往来转移，有时入侵，有时撤走；这是匈奴人的谋生之业，却使中原汉人离开了农田。
English: The source of food and clothing of the Huns does not depend on the land, so they often disturb the border, transfer goods back and forth, sometimes invade, sometimes withdraw; this is the livelihood of the Huns, but it has made the Central Plains Han people leave the farmland.

古文：今胡人数转牧、行猎于塞下，以候备塞之卒，卒少则入。
现代文：现在匈奴人经常在边界一带放牧、打猎，察看汉军守边士兵的状况，发现汉军人少，就会入侵。
English: Now the Huns often graze and hunt along the border, inspect the condition of the Chinese soldiers guarding the border, and if they find that there are few Chinese soldiers, they will invade.

古文：陛下不救，则边民绝望而有降敌之心；救之，少发则不足，多发，远县才至，则胡又已去。
现代文：如果陛下不发兵救援，边境百姓不能指望朝廷的救兵，就会萌发投降敌人的念头；如果陛下发兵救援，发兵太少就不起作用，多发援兵，来自于远方的各县援兵刚刚到达，匈奴军队又已撤走了。
English: If His Majesty does not help, the border people will despair and have a heart of surrender to the enemy; to save, send fewer troops is not enough to resist the Hu people, more troops, the road is far away, just arrived, the Hu people have left.

古文：聚而不罢，为费甚大；罢之，则胡复入。
现代文：不撤走聚集在边境的大量军队，军费开支太大；撤走援兵，匈奴人又乘虚而入。
English: If they do not retreat, the cost will be too high. If they retreat, the Hu people will invade again.

古文：如此连年，则中国贫苦而民不安矣。
现代文：这样连年折腾，那么中原地区就会陷入贫困，百姓无法安居乐业了。
English: Thus, year after year, the Central Plains are impoverished and the people have no peace.

古文：陛下幸忧边境，遣将吏发卒以治塞，甚大惠也。
现代文：幸得陛下担忧边境问题，派遣将吏发兵加强边塞防务，这是对边境百姓的很大恩惠。
English: Fortunately, His Majesty is concerned about the border, and sending troops to rectify the border is of great benefit.

古文：然今远方之卒守塞，一岁而更，不知胡人之能。
现代文：但是现在远方的士兵驻防边塞，一年轮换一批，不了解匈奴人的本领。
English: But now soldiers from far away are stationed at the border fortress, rotating one batch a year, and they don't understand the Huns' skills.

古文：不如选常居者家室田作，且以备之，以便为之高城深堑；要害之处，通川之道，调立城邑，毋下千家。
现代文：不如选常居的人在边境安家从事农耕生产，并且用于防御匈奴入侵，利用有利地势建成高城深沟；在战略要地、交通要道，规划建立城镇，规模不小于千户人口。
English: It is not as good as choosing people with permanent residence to settle down at the border to engage in agricultural production, and to be used to defend against the invasion of the Huns, to take advantage of the advantageous situation to build a high city in a deep ditch; to plan and build towns in strategic locations and major transportation routes, with a size of not less than a thousand households.

古文：先为室屋，具田器，乃募民，免罪，拜爵，复其家，予冬夏衣、禀食，能自给而止。
现代文：官府先在城中修建房屋，准备农具，再召募百姓来边城居住，赦免罪名，赏给爵位，免除应募者全家的赋税劳役，并向他们提供冬夏季衣服和粮食，直到他们能生产自足时为止。
English: The government first built houses in the city, prepared agricultural tools, and then recruited people to live in the border city, pardoned crimes, awarded titles, exempted the entire family of the recruits from tax and labor, and provided them with winter and summer clothes and food until they could produce self-sufficiency.

古文：塞下之民，禄利不厚，不可使久居危难之地。
现代文：如果崐不给边塞民众优厚的利禄，就无法使他们长期定居在这片危险困苦的土地上。
English: The people living under the blockade do not have a lot of money, so they should not be allowed to live permanently in a dangerous place.

古文：胡人入驱而能止其所驱者，以其半予之，县官为赎。
现代文：匈奴入侵，有人能从匈奴手中夺回所掠财物，就把其中的一半给他，由官府为他赎买。
English: When the Xiongnu invaded, anyone who was able to recapture the plundered property from the Xiongnu would give him half of it, and the government would buy it for him.

古文：其民如是，则邑里相救助，赴胡不避死。
现代文：边塞的百姓得到这样的待遇，就会邻里街坊相互救援帮助，冒死与匈奴搏斗。
English: If the people of the frontier fortress were treated like this, they would rescue and help each other in their neighborhoods and fight the Huns to the death.

古文：非以德上也，欲全亲戚而利其财也；此与东方之戍卒不习地势而心畏胡者功相万也。
现代文：他们这样做，并不是对皇帝感恩戴德想有所报答，而是要想保全亲戚邻居，贪恋财产；与那些不了解本地地形并且对匈奴心怀畏惧的东方戍卒相比，他们防御匈奴的功效要高出一万倍。
English: They did not do this to repay the emperor's gratitude, but to protect their relatives and neighbors, covet their property, and defend themselves against the Huns ten thousand times more effectively than the oriental pawns who did not know the local terrain and were afraid of the Huns.

古文：以陛下之时，徙民实边，使远方无屯戍之事；塞下之民，父子相保，无系虏之患；利施后世，名称圣明，其与秦之行怨民，相去远矣。 
现代文：在陛下当政之时，迁徙百姓以充实边防，使远方没有屯戍边境的徭役；而边塞的居民，父子相互保护，免受被匈奴俘虏的苦难；陛下这样做，利益传到后世，得到圣明的名声，这与秦征发满怀怨恨的百姓去戍守边疆，是不能相比的。 
English: When His Majesty was in power, he moved the people to strengthen the border defense, so that there were no border guards stationed in far away places; and the residents of the border fortress, father and son, protected each other from the suffering of being captured by the Huns; His Majesty did this, and the benefits were passed down to future generations and gained a sacred reputation. This is not comparable to Qin's enlistment of resentful people to guard the border.

古文：上从其言，募民徙塞下。
现代文：文帝采纳晁错的建议，招募百姓迁往边塞定居。
English: The emperor followed the erroneous advice and called on the people to migrate to the frontier fortress.

古文：错复言： 陛下幸募民徙以实塞下，使屯戍之事益省，输将之费益寡，甚大惠也。
现代文：晁错再次上书说： 陛下召募迁徙的百姓以充实边塞，使屯戍的徭役越发减省，运输费用更加减少，这是对百姓很大的恩惠。
English: Zou Er wrote again, saying, "Your Majesty has called up and recruited the migratory people to enrich the border fortresses, so that the labor of the garrison will be further reduced and transportation costs will be further reduced. This is a great boon to the people.

古文：下吏诚能称厚惠，奉明法，存恤所徙之老弱，善遇其壮士，和辑其心而勿侵刻，使先至者安乐而不思故乡，则贫民相慕而劝往矣。
现代文：下级官吏的表现如果真能与陛下对百姓的厚惠相称，遵奉陛下的法令，对迁来的应募百姓，照顾其中的老弱，厚待其中的壮士，争取他们的拥护而不去欺凌他们，使先来的人安居乐业而不思念自己的故乡，那么贫民就会感到羡慕，相互劝勉前往边塞了。
English: If the performance of lower-level officials can truly be commensurate with His Majesty's benevolence to the people, follow His Majesty's decrees, take care of the recruited people who have moved in, take care of the old and weak among them, treat the strong among them kindly, win their support without bullying them, and enable the first arrivals to live and work in peace without thinking about their hometown, then the poor will feel envious and exhort each other to go to the frontier.

古文：臣闻古之徙民者，相其阴阳之和，尝其水泉之味，然后营邑、立城、制里、割宅，先为筑室家，置器物焉。民至有所居，作有所用。
现代文：臣听说古代明君迁徙百姓，要先察看当地是否阴阳调和，品尝水泉是否甘美可口，然后再营造集镇、修筑城池，设计乡里、划分住宅地，先为百姓修筑房屋，配置器物，百姓到达后有可居住的房屋，有可使用的器物。
English: The minister heard that in ancient times when the Ming Dynasty migrated people, they should first check whether the local yin and yang were harmonized, and taste whether the water springs were sweet and delicious. Then they should build market towns, construct city pools, design villages, and divide residential areas. First, they should build houses for the people and arrange utensils. After the people arrived, they would have habitable houses and usable utensils.

古文：此民所以轻去故乡而劝之新邑也。
现代文：这正是百姓不留恋故乡而相互勉励迁往新居的原因。
English: This is precisely the reason why people encourage each other to move to a new home rather than lingering in their hometowns.

古文：为置医、巫以救疾病，以修祭祀，男女有昏，生死相恤，坟墓相从，种树畜长，室屋完安。
现代文：官府在迁徙的新居住区设置医生、巫神，为百姓医治疾病，主持祭祀。百姓得以男女婚配，生老病死相互照顾，坟墓相互依靠，栽种树木，喂养六畜，屋房完备安全。
English: The government set up doctors and mages in the new resettlement area to treat the people's diseases and preside over sacrifices. The people were able to marry men and women, take care of each other in life and death, rely on each other's graves, plant trees, feed six animals, and keep their houses safe.

古文：此所以使民乐其处而有长居之心也。
现代文：这样做正是为了让百姓乐于长期定居此地。
English: This is done precisely in order to make people happy to settle here for a long time.

古文：臣又闻古之制边县以备敌也，使五家为伍，伍有长；十长一里，里有假士；四里一连，连有假五百；十连一邑，邑有假候。皆择其邑之贤材有护、习地形、知民心者。居则习民于射法，出则教民于应敌。
现代文： 臣又听说古代明君为了防御敌人入侵，在沿边境的各县创设如下建制：每五家为一伍，设置伍长；每十个伍的民户为一里，里设置有假士；每四里为一连，连有假五百；每十连为一邑，邑设置假候，都选择邑中贤才里有保护能力、熟悉地形、了解民心的人担任这些职务；安居本地就教民众学习射箭，出临边境就教民众学习防御敌人。
English: The minister also heard that in order to defend against the invasion of the enemy, the ancient Ming Dynasty created the following structures in each county along the border: for every five families, there was a troop commander; for every ten families, there was a villager; for every four families, there were five hundred soldiers; for every ten families, there was a township; and for every township, there was a village guard. They all chose people who had the ability to protect, who were familiar with the terrain, and who understood the people's hearts to serve in these positions; people who lived safely in the local area taught the people to learn archery, and people who went to the border taught the people to defend

古文：故卒伍成于内，则军政定于外。
现代文：军事编制形成于内，军事政令就能在外有效地发挥作用。
English: The military establishment is formed internally, and military decrees can play an effective role externally.

古文：服习以成，勿令迁徙，幼则同游，长则共事。
现代文：百姓训练有素，不许他们随便迁移，年幼时一同玩乐，成年后共事。
English: After the training is completed, they are not allowed to migrate again. They travel together when they are young and work together when they are adults.

古文：夜战声相知，则足以相救；昼战目相见，则足以相识；欢爱之心，足以相死。
现代文：夜间战斗，只要听到声音就能互相了解，足以相互救援；白天作战，只要看见，就足以相互识别；友爱之心，足以使他们生死与共。
English: Night fighting by sound to recognize their own people, it is enough to rescue each other; daytime fighting eyes can see, it is enough to recognize each other; love heart, it is enough to desperately save each other.

古文：如此而劝以厚赏，威以重罚，则前死不还踵矣。
现代文：在此基础上，朝廷再以厚赏奖励，以重罚威逼，百姓就会前仆后继，勇往直前了。
English: In this way, with a heavy reward for persuasion, with a heavy punishment for deterrence, then death will not turn back and flee in front.

古文：所徙之民非壮有材者，但费衣粮，不可用也；虽有材力，不得良吏，犹亡功也。
现代文：所迁徙的百姓如果不是强壮有力的人，只能虚耗衣服粮食，不能用于充实边防；百姓虽然强壮有力，但如果没有好官去治理，也不会有功效。
English: If the migrated people are not strong and powerful, they can only waste clothes and grain, and cannot be used to strengthen the border defense; although the people are strong and powerful, if there is no good official to govern, it will not be effective.

古文：陛下绝匈奴不与和亲，臣窃意其冬来南也；壹大治，则终身创矣。
现代文： 陛下拒绝与匈奴和亲，我私下估计他们冬季会向南进犯；边境一旦大治，就可以重创匈奴，使他们终身不振恢复不了元气。
English: Your Majesty refused to make peace with the Huns, and I privately estimate that they will attack the south in the winter; once the border is under control, the Huns can be hit hard, so that they will never recover.

古文：欲立威者，始于折胶；来而不能困，使得气去，后未易服也。 
现代文：如果想树立汉朝廷的威名，就应该在秋季匈奴刚纵兵入侵时就给以痛击；假若匈奴来犯而不能打败他们，使他们得志而去，以后就不容易降服了。 
English: If you want to establish the prestige of the Han Dynasty, you should give a hard blow to the Huns as soon as they invade in the autumn; if the Huns come and can't beat them, make them go away, it will not be easy to surrender later.

古文：错为人峭直刻深，以其辩得幸太子，太子家号曰 智囊 。
现代文：晁错为人刚直而又严峻苛刻，因辩才而得到太子的宠信，太子家里称他为 智囊 。
English: Zou Er was an upright and stern person. He was favored by the prince because of his debating ability. The prince's family called him "the brain."

古文：太宗孝文皇帝下十二年
现代文：汉文帝十二年癸酉，公元前年
English: The twelfth year of Emperor Hanwen, B.C.

古文：冬，十二月，河决酸枣，东溃金堤，东郡大兴卒塞之。
现代文：冬季，十二月，黄河在酸枣县决口，向东冲溃了金堤，淹没东郡；朝廷大量征发士卒堵塞决口。
English: In winter, in December, the Yellow River broke the golden dike at the mouth of Yazu County and flooded Dong County; the imperial court sent a large number of envoys to block the mouth.

古文：春，三月，除关，无用传。
现代文：春季，三月，朝廷宣布废止关隘检查制度，吏民出行不必带证明身份的符传。
English: In the spring, in March, the imperial court announced the abolition of the pass inspection system. Officials and citizens no longer had to carry proof of identity when traveling.

古文：晁错言于上曰： 圣王在上而民不冻饥者，非能耕而食之，织而衣之也，为开其资财之道也。
现代文：晁错对文帝说： 英明的君主在位，百姓不受饥寒的折磨，这并不是君主能亲自耕作供给百姓食物，亲自织布为百姓做衣服，而是君主为百姓开辟了生财之路。
English: He said to Emperor Wen: A wise monarch is on the throne, and the people are not tormented by hunger and cold. This does not mean that the monarch can personally cultivate and supply the people with food, and personally weave cloth to make clothes for the people, but that the monarch has opened up a way of making money for the people.

古文：故尧有九年之水，汤有七年之旱，而国亡捐瘠者，以畜积多而备先具也。
现代文：所以尧遇到九年的大涝灾，商汤七年的大旱灾，而全国并没有被抛弃的病饿者，其原因就在蓄积多而预先做了充分的准备。
English: As a result, Handan has experienced nine years of heavy hailstorms, Shangtang seven years of heavy droughts, and the country has not been abandoned by the sick and hungry. The reason for this is that they have accumulated a lot and have made sufficient preparations in advance.

古文：今海内为一，土地、人民之众不减汤、禹，加以无天灾数年之水旱，而畜积未及者，何也？
现代文：现在海内大一统，土地之广、人口之众，不亚于商汤和夏禹时代，再加上没有持续几年的旱涝天灾，但蓄积却没有那时多，原因何在？
English: At present, the country is unified, the land is vast and the population is large, no less than in the Shang Tang and Xia Yu eras. Coupled with the drought and flood natural disasters that have not lasted for several years, but the accumulation is not as much as then. What is the reason?

古文：地有遗利，民有馀力；生谷之土未尽垦，山泽之利未尽出，游食之民未尽归农也。
现代文：是因为土地还有余力没有利用，百姓还有余力没有发挥；可生长谷物的土地还没有全部开垦，山林川泽的财富还没有全部开发，不从事生产而消耗粮食的游民还没有全部回归农业生产。
English: It is because the land still has spare capacity that has not been utilized, and the people still have spare capacity that has not been exerted; the land that can grow grain has not yet been fully reclaimed, the wealth of the mountains and forests has not yet been fully developed, and the wanderers who consume grain without engaging in production have not yet all returned to agricultural production.

古文：夫寒之于衣，不待轻暖；饥之于食，不待甘旨；饥寒至身，不顾廉耻。
现代文： 严寒之时人们急需衣服，不求轻暖，能御寒就穿；饥饿时急需食品，不求香甜可口，能充饥就吃。饥寒临身，人们顾不得讲究廉耻。
English: When it's cold, they don't ask for fancy clothes; when they're hungry, they don't ask for delicious food; when they're hungry and cold, they don't care about being shameless.

古文：人情，一日不再食则饥，终岁不制衣则寒。
现代文：人之常情，一天不吃两餐就会挨饿，一年不做衣服就会挨冻。
English: It is human nature to be hungry without eating two meals a day, and cold without making clothes for the whole year.

古文：夫腹饥不得食，肤寒不得衣，虽慈母不能保其子，君安能以有其民哉！
现代文：如果腹中饥饿却得不到食物，肌肤寒冷却得不到衣服，即便是慈父也不能保有他的儿子，君主怎么能够控制住他的百姓呢！
English: If hunger in the belly is not fed, if coldness in the skin is not clothed, if even a good father cannot keep his son, how can a prince keep his people under control?

古文：明主知其然也，故务民于农桑，薄赋敛，广畜积，以实仓廪，备水旱，故民可得而有也。
现代文：英明的君主知道这个道理，所以引导百姓从事农桑耕织，少收赋税，多搞蓄积，用来充实府库，防备旱涝灾害，所以才能稳定对百姓的统治。
English: The wise monarch knows this, and therefore requires the people to devote themselves to agriculture and mulberry industry, reduce taxes, increase savings, replenish warehouses, and prevent floods and droughts, so that they can get and own the people.

古文：民者，在上所以牧之；民之趋利，如水走下，四方无择也。
现代文：百姓的善恶，就看君主如何去诱导、统治他们；百姓追求财利，就如同水只会向下流而不选择方向一样。
English: The good or evil of the people depends on how the monarch induces and rules them; the people's pursuit of profit is like water that only flows downhill without choosing a direction.

古文：夫珠、玉、金、银，饥不可食，寒不可衣；然而众贵之者，以上用之故也。
现代文： 珠、玉、金、银等物品，饿的时候不能吃，冷的时候不能穿；但是大家都把它们视为珍宝，原因就在于君主使用它们。
English: Pearls, jade, gold, silver, and the like, are not to be eaten when hungry, nor worn when cold; but they are esteemed precious by all, because they are used by princes.

古文：其为物轻微易藏，在于把握，可以周海内而无饥寒之患。
现代文：这些东西轻又小便于收藏，只要拿着握于手掌中的那么一点，就可以周游天下而不受饥寒之苦。
English: These things are light and small and easy to store. Just by holding one in the palm of your hand, you can travel around the world without suffering from hunger and cold.

古文：此令臣轻背其主，而民易去其乡，盗贼有所劝，亡逃者得轻资也。
现代文：这可以使臣子轻易地背叛他的君主，使百姓轻易地离开故乡，刺激了盗贼的贪欲，使逃亡者得到轻便的资财。
English: This made it easy for a minister to desert his master, for the people to leave their homes, for thieves to be encouraged, and for fugitives to be provided with easy-to-carry goods.

古文：粟、米、布、帛，生于地，长于时，聚于力，非可一日成也；数石之重，中人弗胜，不为奸邪所利，一日弗得而饥寒至。
现代文：粟、米、布、帛等物，产于土地，按时成长，投入很多人力，不是一天就可以生产出来的；重达数石的粟、米、布、帛，价值有限，一个体力中等的人却已无法搬运，它不会成为资贼劫夺的目标，但人们一天得不到它们，就得忍受饥寒。
English: Corn, rice, cloth, straw and other things, are produced on the land, grow on time, and invest a lot of manpower, and can not be produced in one day; corn, rice, cloth, straw weighing several stones have limited value, but a person with medium physical strength can not carry it. It will not become the target of robberies, but if people do not get them for a day, they will have to endure hunger and cold.

古文：是故明君贵五谷而贱金玉。
现代文：所以英明的君主看重五谷而轻视金玉。
English: Therefore, the wise monarchs valued the grain and despised the gold.

古文：今农夫五口之家，其服役者不下二人，其能耕者不过百畮，百畮之收不过百石。
现代文： 现在家中有五口人的农民家庭，为官府服徭役的不少于两个人，能耕种的土地不过一百亩，百亩土地的收获量不超过一百石。
English: At present, there are five members of a peasant family in the family, and no less than two people work for the government. The land that can be cultivated is only one hundred mu, and the harvest of one hundred mu of land does not exceed one hundred koku.

古文：春耕，夏耘，秋获，冬藏，伐薪樵，治官府，给繇役；春不得避风尘，夏不得避暑热，秋不得避阴雨，冬不得避寒冻，四时之间亡日休息；又私自送往迎来、吊死问疾、养孤长幼在其中。
现代文：农民春季耕种，夏季锄草，秋季收获，冬季贮藏，砍柴，修缮官府房屋，服徭役；春天不能避风尘，夏天不能避暑热，秋天不能避阴雨，冬天不能避严寒，一年四季没有休息的日子；还有民间的人情往来，吊唁死者慰问病人、赡养父母、哺育子女等负担，也得从一百石的收获物中支付。
English: Farmers cultivate in the spring, weed in the summer, harvest in the fall, store in the winter, cut firewood, repair government buildings, and serve in the army; in the spring, they cannot avoid the wind and dust, in the summer, they cannot avoid the heat, in the fall, they cannot avoid the rain, in the winter, they cannot avoid the cold, and there are no days of rest throughout the year; there are also burdens such as people's human relations, condolences for the dead, condolences for the sick, support for parents, and nursing of children, which also have to be paid from the harvest of one hundred koku.

古文：勤苦如此，尚复被水旱之灾，急政暴赋，赋敛不时，朝令而暮改。
现代文：农民如此勤劳困苦，还要再蒙受旱涝灾害，官府政令严苛而赋税繁重，不按规定时间征收赋税，早上发布的政令晚上又有变化。
English: Farmers are so hardworking and poor that they have to suffer drought and flood disasters again. The government decrees are harsh and taxes are heavy. Taxes are not levied according to the prescribed time. The decrees issued in the morning change again in the evening.

古文：有者半贾而卖，无者取倍称之息，于是有卖田宅、鬻子孙以偿责者矣。
现代文：农民家中有资财的，以半价折卖，家中贫穷的，只好去借利息双倍的高利贷，于是就有人卖土地房宅、卖妻卖子以偿还债务了。
English: If a farmer's family had assets, they were sold at half price. If the family was poor, they had to borrow money from loan sharks at double the interest rate. As a result, some people sold their land, houses, and wives to pay off their debts.

古文：而商贾大者积贮倍息，小者坐列贩卖，操其奇赢，日游都市，乘上之急，所卖必倍。
现代文：而那些行商坐贾，实力大的积贮钱财发放双倍利息的高利贷，实力小的坐在市肆中作买卖，依靠手中囤积的物品，每天游荡在都市之中，得知皇帝急需某种物品，就把价格提高到两倍以上。
English: But the merchants, both great and small, sat in the marketplaces and hawked, with their accumulated wealth and hoarded goods, wandering daily through the city, selling their wares at double the going rate, in the emperor's haste.

古文：故其男不耕耘，女不蚕织，衣必文采，食必粱肉；无农夫之苦，有仟伯之得。
现代文：所以商人男的不去耕田耘草，女的不去养蚕纺织，但穿衣服却非穿华丽的绸缎不可，吃饭非吃好米好肉不可。
English: Therefore, the merchant man does not go to plough the fields and weed, the woman does not go to raise silkworms and weave, but it is not necessary to wear gorgeous silk and satin to wear clothes, and it is not necessary to eat good rice and meat to eat.

古文：因其富厚，交通王侯，力过吏势，以利相倾；千里游敖，冠盖相望，乘坚、策肥，履丝、曳缟。
现代文：商人不受农民那样的辛苦，却可以得到很多钱财。商人依仗手中大量的钱财，与王侯显贵结交，势力超过了一般官员，于是以财利进行倾轧；商人到千里之外遨游，车子在路上前后相望，络绎不绝。他们乘坐着坚实的车子，鞭策着肥马，踏着丝制的鞋子，穿着精美的白色绸缎衣服。
English: Merchants are not subject to the same hardships as farmers, but they can get a lot of money. Merchants rely on a large amount of money in their hands, make friends with princes and dignitaries, and their power exceeds that of ordinary officials, so they make money and profit. Merchants travel thousands of miles away, and cars look back and forth on the road, never ending. They ride solid cars, whip fat horses, step on silk shoes, and wear exquisite white silk and satin clothes.

古文：此商人所以兼并农人，农人所以流亡者也。方今之务，莫若使民务农而已矣。
现代文：这就是商人兼并农民、农民破产流亡的原因。 现在的当务之急，没有比使百姓从事农耕更重要的了。
English: This is the reason why merchants annex farmers and farmers go bankrupt and go into exile.There is no more urgent task than to get the people engaged in farming.

古文：欲民务农，在于贵粟。贵粟之道，在于使民以粟为赏罚。
现代文：要想使百姓务农，关键在于使全社会把粮食看成为珍宝；使全社会把粮食看做珍宝的方法，在于朝廷把粮食作为奖惩手段统治百姓。
English: If you want the people to engage in agriculture, the key is to make the whole society regard grain as a precious treasure; the way to make the whole society regard grain as a precious treasure is for the imperial court to use grain as a means of reward and punishment to rule the people.

古文：今募天下入粟县官，得以拜爵，得以除罪。
现代文：可以召募天下百姓向官府缴纳粮食，用以购买爵位免除罪名。
English: Soliciting the world to hand over the poppy to the government, can be awarded to the peerage, absolve the sin.

古文：如此，富人有爵，农民有钱，粟有所渫。
现代文：这样，富人可以拥有爵位，农民可以得到钱，粮食就不会被屯积。
English: In this way, the rich will have titles, the peasants will have money, and the poppy will be dispersed.

古文：夫能入粟以受爵，皆有馀者也。取于有馀以供上用，则贫民之赋可损，所谓损有馀，补不足，令出而民利者也。
现代文：那些能够缴纳粮食换取爵位的人，都是粮食有余的，收取余粮供给国家使用，就可以减少对贫困百姓收取的赋税，这就是所说的 损有余，补不足 ，政令一公布就可以给百姓带来利益。
English: Those who can pay grain in exchange for a knighthood are those who have surplus grain. Collecting surplus grain and supplying it to the state for use can reduce the tax levied on poor people. This is the so-called "loss and surplus, make up the shortfall," and the decree can bring benefits to the people as soon as it is announced.

古文：今令民有车骑马一匹者，复卒三人；车骑者，天下武备也，故为复卒。
现代文：现行的律令规定：有一匹战马的人家，可免除三人的兵役；战马，是天下的重要军事装备，所以给予免除兵役的优待。
English: The current law stipulates that a family with one war horse can exempt three people from military service; war horses are important military equipment in the world, so they are given preferential treatment for exemption from military service.

古文：神农之教曰： 有石城十仞，汤池百步，带甲百万，而无粟，弗能守也。 
现代文：神农的教令说： 有高达十仞的石砌城墙，有宽达一百步的滚沸的护城河，有一百万全副武装的士兵，但没有粮食，那无法守住城池。 
English: Shennong's edict said: There are stone walls up to ten fathoms high, there is a boiling moat up to a hundred paces wide, there are a million fully armed soldiers, but without food, that can not hold the castle.

古文：以是观之，粟者，王者大用，政之本务。
现代文：由此看来，粮食是君主的重要资本，是国家政治的根本所在。
English: From the point of view of creation, millet is the greatest need of those who claim to be kings, and the foundation of politics.

古文：令民入粟受爵至五大夫以上，乃复一人耳，此其与骑马之功相去远矣。
现代文：现在百姓缴纳粮食要得到五大夫以上的爵位，才能免除一人的兵役，这与对有战马的人的优待相比较，差得太远了。
English: It is a far cry from the exploits of war horses to allow the people of Nahao to receive a title of nobility up to five husbands or more, only to be exempted from one person's corvée.

古文：爵者，上之所擅，出于口而无穷；粟者，民之所种，生于地而不乏。
现代文：封爵的权力，是君主所专有的，由口而出可以无穷无尽；粮食，是百姓所种的，生长于土地而不会缺乏。
English: The power of a knighthood is the sole prerogative of the sovereign, and it is inexhaustible from his mouth; grain is sown by the people, it grows on the land, and there is no lack of it.

古文：夫得高爵与免罪，人之所甚欲也；使天下人入粟于边以受爵、免罪，不过三岁，塞下之粟必多矣。 
现代文：得到高等爵位和免除罪名，是天下百姓最迫切的欲望；让天下人输送粮食到边境地区，以换取爵位、免除罪名，不用三年时间，边塞的粮食储备就必定会很多了。 
English: It is the most urgent desire of the people of the world to get a high title and exemption from criminal charges; let the people of the world transport grain to the border areas in exchange for a title and exemption from criminal charges, and within three years, the grain reserves of the border fortress will certainly be a lot.

古文：帝从之，令民入粟边，拜爵各以多少级数为差。
现代文：文帝采纳晁错的意见，下令规定：百姓输送粮食到边塞，依据输送粮食的多少，分别授给高低不同的爵位。
English: Emperor Wen adopted the erroneous opinion and issued an order stipulating that the people should transport grain to the frontier fortress, and according to the amount of grain transported, they should be awarded different ranks.

古文：错复奏言： 陛下幸使天下入粟塞下以拜爵，甚大惠也。
现代文：晁错又上奏说： 陛下降恩，让天下人输送粮食去边塞，以授给爵位，这是对百姓的很大恩德。
English: "Your majesty has the honor of making the people of the world wear poppies to bestow peerages on the frontiersmen. This is a great favor.

古文：窃恐塞卒之食不足用，大渫天下粟。
现代文：我私下担忧边塞驻军的粮食不够吃，所以让天下的屯粮崐大批流入边塞。
English: Privately, I was worried that the grain for the garrison troops in the frontier fortress would not be enough to eat, so I allowed a large amount of the world's grain to flow into the frontier fortress.

古文：边食足以支五岁，可令入粟郡县矣；郡县足支一岁以上，可时赦，勿收农民租。
现代文：如果边塞积粮足够使用五年，就可以让百姓向内地各郡县输送粮食了；如果郡县积粮足够使用一年以上，可以随时下诏书，不收农民的土地税。
English: If the grain stored in the frontier posts is enough to be used for five years, the people can be allowed to transport grain to the counties and counties in the interior; if the grain stored in the counties is enough to be used for more than one year, an edict can be issued at any time, and farmers will not be charged land tax.

古文：如此，德泽加于万民，民愈勤农，大富乐矣。 
现代文：这样，陛下的恩德雨露普降于天下万民，百姓就会更积极地投身农业生产，天下就会十分富庶安乐了。 
English: In this way, His Majesty's blessing of rain and dew will descend on all the people of the world, the people will be more actively engaged in agricultural production, and the world will be very rich and happy.

古文：上复从其言，诏曰： 道民之路，在于务本。
现代文：文帝采纳了他的建议，下诏说： 引导百姓的正确道路，在于让他们从事农业生产。
English: Emperor Wen accepted his suggestion and issued the following edict: The correct way to guide the people is to let them engage in agricultural production.

古文：朕亲率天下农，十年于今，而野不加辟，岁一不登，民有饥色；是从事焉尚寡而吏未加务。
现代文：朕亲自率领天下人务农耕种，至今已有十年了，但荒地的开垦没有增加，一年收成不好，百姓就有饥饿之色；这是从事农耕的人还不多，而官吏没有切实发展农业。
English: It has been ten years since I personally led the world's people in agricultural cultivation, but the reclamation of wasteland has not increased, the harvest is not good every year, and the people are hungry; this is because there are not many people engaged in farming, and government officials have not effectively developed agriculture.

古文：吾诏书数下，岁劝民种树而功未兴，是吏奉吾诏不勤而劝民不明也。
现代文：朕屡次颁下诏书，每年都鼓励百姓种植，至今未见成效，这就证明官吏没有认真地执行诏令去勉励百姓。
English: I have repeatedly issued the edict and encouraged the people to plant every year, but have not seen any results so far. This proves that the officials have not seriously implemented the edict to encourage the people.

古文：且吾农民甚苦而吏莫之省，将何以功焉！
现代文：况且朕的农民生活很苦而官吏并不去照顾他们，又怎么能勉励他们从事农业呢！
English: Besides, the life of our farmers is very hard and the officials do not take care of them, so how can we encourage them to engage in agriculture?

古文：其赐农民今年租税之半。 
现代文：今年把原定征收的土地税的的一半赐给农民。 
English: This year, half of the originally planned land tax will be given to farmers.

古文：太宗孝文皇帝下十三年
现代文：汉文帝十三年
English: The Thirteenth Year of Emperor Hanwen

古文：春，二月，甲寅，诏日； 朕亲率天下农耕以供粢盛，皇后亲桑以供祭服；其具礼仪。 
现代文：春季，二月，甲寅，文帝下诏说： 朕亲自率领天下臣民进行农耕，供应宗庙祭祀的粮食，皇后亲自采桑养蚕，供应祭祀的祭服；制定有关此事的礼仪！ 
English: In the spring, in February, Emperor Wen issued the following edict: I will personally lead the world's subjects to farm and supply the grain for the ancestral temple's sacrifice, the empress will personally harvest mulberry and raise silkworms and supply the sacrificial clothing; establish the etiquette for this matter!

古文：初，秦时祝官有袐祝，即有灾祥，辄移过于下。
现代文：当初，秦朝的祝官中有秘祝，一旦出现了灾异，就把造成过失的责任从皇帝身上移到臣子身上。
English: At first, there were secret wishes among the officials of the Qin Dynasty. Once a disaster occurred, the responsibility for causing the fault was shifted from the emperor to the vassal.

古文：夏，诏曰： 盖闻天道，祸自怨起而福繇德兴，百官之非，宜由朕躬。
现代文：夏季，文帝下诏书说： 朕听说天之道，祸从怨而起，福由德而兴，百官的过失，都应该由朕一人负责。
English: In the summer, Emperor Wen issued an edict saying, "I have heard that the way of heaven is that misfortune comes from grudges, good fortune comes from virtue, and the faults of all officials should be the responsibility of me alone.

古文：今袐祝之官移过于下，以彰吾之不德，朕甚弗取。
现代文：现在秘祝官员把过失的责任推给臣下，是显扬了朕的失德，朕很不赞成。应予废除！ 
English: Now, the secret wish of the officials to shift the responsibility of the fault to the vassals is to show my immorality, I strongly disapprove of it. It should be abolished!

古文：其除之！ 齐太仓令淳于意有罪，当刑，诏狱逮系长安。
现代文：齐国太仓令淳于意犯了罪，当处以肉刑，被逮捕拘压在长安诏狱。
English: The Taicang ruler of Qi State, Jun Yuyi, committed a crime, was immediately punished with corporal punishment, and was arrested and detained in the Chang'an Imperial Prison.

古文：其少女缇萦上书曰： 妾父为吏，齐中皆称其廉平；今坐法当刑。
现代文：他的小女儿缇萦向皇帝上书说： 我父亲做官，齐国人都称赞他廉洁公平；现在他犯了罪，按法律应判处肉刑。
English: His little daughter, Zou, wrote to the emperor, "My father was a government official, and the people of Qi praised him for his honesty and fairness; now he has committed a crime, and according to the law, he should be sentenced to corporal punishment.

古文：妾伤夫死者不可复生，刑者不可复属，虽后欲改过自新，其道无繇也。
现代文：我感到悲痛伤心的是，死人不能复生，受刑者残肢不能再接，即使以后想改过自新，也没有办法了。
English: What saddens and grieves me is that the dead cannot be brought back to life, and the remaining limbs of prisoners cannot be reattached. Even if they want to reform themselves in the future, there is nothing they can do.

古文：妾愿没入为官婢，以赎父刑罪，使得自新。 
现代文：我愿意没入官府做官婢，以抵赎我父亲该受的刑罚，使他得以改过自新。 
English: I am willing to be absorbed into the government as a slave, in order to redeem my father's punishment, so that he can be human again.

古文：天子怜悲其意，五月，诏曰： 《诗》曰： 恺弟君子，民之父母。 
现代文：文帝很怜悯和同情缇萦的孝心，五月，下诏书说： 《诗经》说 开明宽厚的君主，是爱护百姓的父母。 
English: Emperor Wen was very compassionate and sympathetic to Yao's filial piety. In May, the next imperial edict said: "The Book of Songs says that an enlightened and generous monarch is a parent who loves and protects the people.

古文：今人有过，教未施而刑已加焉，或欲改行为善而道无繇至，朕甚怜之！
现代文：现在人们有了过错，还没有加以教育就处以刑罚，有的人想改变行为向善，也无路可走了，朕很怜惜！
English: Nowadays, when people make a mistake, they are punished without being educated. Some people want to change their behavior for the better, but there is no way out. I feel very sorry for them!

古文：夫刑至断支体，刻肌肤，终身不息，何其刑之痛而不德也！
现代文：肉刑的残酷，以至于切断人的肢体，摧残人的皮肉，使人终生无法生育，这是多么残酷和不合道德！
English: The cruelty of physical punishment, to the point of cutting off a person's limbs, destroying a person's skin and flesh, and making a person infertile for life, how cruel and immoral this is!

古文：岂为民父母之意哉！
现代文：难道这符合为民父母的本意吗！
English: Does it really meet the meaning of being the people's parents?

古文：其除肉刑，有以易之；及令罪人各以轻重，不记逃，有年而免。
现代文：应该废除肉刑，用别的惩罚去代替它；此外，应规定犯罪的人各依据罪名的轻重，只要不从服刑的地方潜逃，服刑到一定年数，就可以释放他。
English: Corporal punishment should be abolished and replaced by other punishments; in addition, it should be stipulated that a criminal can be released as long as he does not escape from the place where he is serving his sentence and serves a certain number of years, depending on the severity of the crime.

古文：具为令！ 
现代文：制定出有关的法令！ 
English: Work out the relevant laws and regulations!

古文：丞相张苍、御史大夫冯敬奏请定律曰： 诸当髡者为城旦、舂；当黥者髡钳为城旦、舂；当劓者笞三百；当斩左止者笞五百；当斩右止及杀人先自告及吏坐受赇、枉法、守县官财物而即盗之、已论而复有笞罪皆弃市。
现代文：丞相张苍、御史大夫冯敬奏请制定这样的法律条文： 原来应判处髡刑的，改为罚作城旦和城旦舂；原来应判处黥髡刑的，改作钳为城旦、钳为城旦舂；原来应判处劓刑的，改为笞三百；原来应判处斩左脚的，改为笞五百；原来崐判处斩右脚以及杀人之后先去官府自首的，官吏因受贿、枉法、监守自盗等罪名已被处置但后来又犯了应判处笞刑的，全都改为公开斩首。
English: The Minister of Justice Zhang Cang and the Minister of History Feng Jingso, please formulate the following legal provisions: those who should have been sentenced to beheading should be punished as city officials and city officials; those who should have been sentenced to beheading should be punished as city officials and city officials; those who should have been sentenced to beheading should be punished as city officials and city officials; those who should have been sentenced to beheading should be punished as city officials and city officials; those who should have been sentenced to beheading should be punished as city officials and city officials; those who should have been sentenced to beheading should be punished as city officials and city officials; those who should have been

古文：罪人狱已决为城旦、舂者，各有岁数以免。 
现代文：罪犯已被判处为城旦、城旦舂的，各自服刑到一定年数后赦免。 
English: Criminals who have been sentenced to imprisonment for a certain number of years will be pardoned after serving their respective sentences.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：文帝下达批准文书： 同意。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：是时，上既躬修玄默，而将相皆旧功臣，少文多质。
现代文：这一时期，文帝自身谦逊自守，而将相大臣都是老功臣，少文采而多质朴。
English: During this period, Emperor Wen himself was modest and self-controlled, and the generals and ministers were all old heroes, less literary and more simple.

古文：惩恶亡秦之政，论议务在宽厚，耻言人之过失，化行天下，告讦之俗易。
现代文：君臣以导致秦灭亡的弊政为鉴诫，论议国政讲究以宽厚为本，耻于议论别人的过失；这种风气影响到全国，改变了那种互相检举、攻讦的风俗。
English: Princes and ministers used the bad politics that led to Qin's downfall as a warning, and discussed national politics with an emphasis on generosity. They were ashamed to discuss the mistakes of others. This culture affected the whole country and changed the custom of mutual accusations and attacks.

古文：吏安其官，民乐其业，畜积岁增，户口浸息。
现代文：官吏安于自己的官位，百姓乐于自已的生业，府库储蓄每年都有增加，人口繁衍。
English: Officials are satisfied with their duties, the people are happy to produce, the accumulation is increasing year by year, and the number of people is gradually increasing.

古文：风流笃厚，禁罔疏阔，罪疑者予民，是以刑罚大省，至于断狱四百，有刑错之风焉。
现代文：风俗归于笃实厚道，禁制法网宽松，有犯罪嫌疑的，从宽发落，所以，刑罚大量减少，甚至一年之内全国只审判了四百起案件，出现了停止动用刑罚的景象。
English: The custom is attributed to the benevolence of the people, the prohibition of the law is loose, and those suspected of a crime are given a wide range of punishments. Therefore, the punishment has been greatly reduced, and even only 400 cases were tried in the whole country within one year, and the use of punishment has been stopped.

古文：六月，诏曰： 农，天下之本，务莫大焉。
现代文：六月，文帝下诏书说： 农业，是天下的根本，没有什么事情比农业更为重要。
English: In June, the next emperor said: Agriculture is the foundation of the world and should be given special attention.

古文：今勤身从事而有租税之赋，是为本末者无以异也，其于劝农之道未备。其除田之租税。 
现代文：现在那些辛苦勤劳的农民，还要缴纳租税，这样做，使从事农耕本业和从事工商末业的人没有区别，说明鼓励发展农业生产的政策不完备，应当免除农田的租税！ 
English: At present, those hard-working farmers still have to pay taxes. In this way, there is no difference between those engaged in farming and those engaged in commerce and industry, indicating that the policy of encouraging the development of agricultural production is not complete, and farmland taxes should be exempted!

古文：太宗孝文皇帝下十四年
现代文：汉文帝十四年
English: The 14th year of Emperor Hanwen

古文：冬，匈奴老上单于十四万骑入朝那、萧关，杀北地都尉卬，虏人民畜产甚多；遂至彭阳，使奇兵入烧回中宫，候骑至雍甘泉。
现代文：冬季，匈奴老上单于用十四万骑兵攻入朝那县和萧关，杀了北地郡都尉孙，掳掠了许多百姓和牲畜财产；匈奴骑兵直抵彭阳县境，并派一支奇兵深入腹地烧了回中宫，侦察骑兵一直到了雍地的甘泉宫。
English: In the winter, the Hun overlord single-handedly invaded Chaona County and Shouguan with 140,000 cavalry, killed the governor of Beidi County, Sun, and plundered many people and livestock property; the Hun cavalry arrived at the border of Pengyang County, and sent a strange soldier deep into the hinterland to burn back to the Middle Palace, and the reconnaissance cavalry went all the way to Gansu Palace in Yongdi.

古文：帝以中尉周舍、郎中令张武为将军，发车千乘、骑卒十万军长安旁，以备胡寇；而拜昌侯卢卿为上郡将军，甯侯魏遬为北地将军，隆虑侯周灶为陇西将军，屯三郡。
现代文：文帝任命中尉周舍、郎中令张武为将军，征发一千辆战车、十万骑兵驻扎在长安附近，以防御匈奴进攻；文帝又任命昌侯卢卿为上郡将军，宁侯魏为北地将军，隆虑侯周灶为陇西将军，分别率军屯守上郡、北地郡和陇西郡。
English: Emperor Wen appointed Lieutenant Zhou She and Vice Admiral Zhang Wu as generals, and sent 1,000 chariots and 100,000 cavalrymen to Chang'an to defend against the Hun attack. Emperor Wen also appointed Chang Hou Lu as the general of Shang County, Ning Hou Wei as the general of the North, and Longxi Hou Zhou Zhao as the general of the West, and led the troops to guard Shang County, North County and West County respectively.

古文：上亲劳军，勒兵，申教令，赐吏卒，自欲征匈奴。
现代文：文帝亲自去慰劳军队，操演军队，颁布军事训令，奖赏将士，准备亲自统兵去征伐匈奴。
English: Emperor Wen personally went to comfort the troops, exercise the troops, issue military instructions, reward the soldiers, and prepare to personally lead the troops to conquer the Huns.

古文：群臣谏，不听；皇太后固要，上乃止。
现代文：群臣劝阻他亲征，文帝不从；皇太后坚决阻止，文帝才打消了统兵亲征的念头。
English: A group of courtiers dissuaded him from personally enlisting, but Emperor Wen did not comply; the empress dowager resolutely prevented it, and Emperor Wen finally dispelled the idea of personally enlisting soldiers.

古文：于是以东阳侯张相如为大将军，成侯董赤、内史栾布皆为将军，击匈奴。
现代文：于是文帝任命东阳侯张相如为大将军，成侯董赤、内史栾布为将军，迎击匈奴。
English: As a result, Emperor Wen appointed the Dongyang marquis Zhang Xiangru as the general, and Chenghou Dongchao and Neishi Renbu as generals to fight against the Xiongnu.

古文：单于留塞内月馀，乃去。
现代文：匈奴单于在汉塞之内活动了一个多月，才撤退出塞。
English: The Huns only lasted in the Hanseatic League for a little more than a month before withdrawing.

古文：汉逐出塞即还，不能有所杀。
现代文：汉军把匈奴驱逐出边塞之外，就撤兵回境，未能对匈奴有所杀伤。
English: After the Han army expelled the Huns from the border fortress, they withdrew back to China, failing to inflict any casualties on the Huns.

古文：上辇过郎署，问郎署长冯唐曰： 父家安在？ 
现代文：文帝乘辇车经过中郎的官府，问郎署长冯唐说： 您老人家原籍是何处？ 
English: Wen Di passed Zhong Lang's government office by tuk-tuk, and asked the director of Zhong Lang, Feng Tang, "What is the origin of your old man's family?"

古文：对曰： 臣大父赵人，父徙代。 
现代文：冯唐回答说： 我的祖父是赵国人，父亲迁居代国。 
English: Feng Tang replied: My grandfather was a native of Zhao, and my father immigrated to China.

古文：上曰： 吾居代时，吾尚食监高祛数为我言赵将李齐之贤，战于巨鹿下。
现代文：文帝说： 我在代国时，我的尚食监高祛多次对我称赞当年赵国将军李齐的贤能，讲述他与秦兵大战于钜鹿城下的事情。
English: Wen Di said: When I was in charge of the country, my food inspector Gao Yao praised the virtue of Zhao general Li Qi to me many times, and told me about his battle with Qin soldiers at the foot of the Elk Castle.

古文：今吾每饭意未尝不在巨鹿也。
现代文：现在，我每次吃饭，心思没有不在钜鹿的时候。
English: Now, every time I eat, there is never a time when my mind is not on elk.

古文：父知之乎？ 
现代文：老人家您知道吗？ 
English: Does the old man know this man?

古文：唐对曰： 尚不如廉颇、李牧之为将也。 
现代文：冯唐回答说： 李齐还不如廉颇、李牧为将带兵的本领大。 
English: Feng Tang replied, "He is still not as good as Li Mu, who is not only corrupt, but also has the ability to command."

古文：上搏髀曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：文帝拍着大腿说： 唉！
English: Wendi patted his thigh and said: Alas!

古文：吾独不得廉颇、李牧为将！
现代文：我偏偏得不到廉颇、李牧那样的人做将军！
English: I just can't get a corrupt person like Li Mu to be a general!

古文：吾岂忧匈奴哉！ 
现代文：有了这样的将军，我难道还担忧匈奴的入侵吗！ 
English: With a general like that, am I still worried about the Hun invasion?

古文：唐曰： 陛下虽得廉颇、李牧，弗能用也。 
现代文：冯唐说： 陛下即使得到了廉颇、李牧也不能任用他们。 
English: Feng Tang said, "Even if His Majesty were to become rich, Li Mu could not appoint them.

古文：上怒，起，入禁中，良久，召唐，让曰： 公奈何众辱我，独无间处乎！ 
现代文：文帝大怒，起身返回宫中，过了许久，召见冯唐，责备说： 您为什么要当众侮辱我，难道没有适当的机会吗！ 
English: Emperor Wen flew into a rage, got up and returned to the palace. After a long time, he summoned Feng Tang and scolded him, saying, "Why do you want to insult me in public? Isn't there a proper opportunity?

古文：唐谢曰： 鄙人不知忌讳。 
现代文：冯唐谢罪说： 我是个乡鄙之人，不懂得忌讳。 
English: Feng Tang Xie Sin said: I am a despicable person who does not know how to avoid taboos.

古文：上方以胡寇为意，乃卒复问唐曰： 公何以知吾不能用廉颇、李牧也？ 
现代文：文帝正在担忧匈奴的入侵问题，于是终于再问冯唐说： 您怎么知道我不能任用廉颇和李牧呢？ 
English: Emperor Wen was worried about the invasion of the Xiongnu, so he finally asked Feng Tang again: How do you know that I can't appoint Renpo and Li Mu?

古文：唐对曰： 臣闻上古王者之遣将也，跪而推毂，曰： 阃以内者，寡人制之；阃以外者，将军制之。 
现代文：冯唐回答说： 我听说上古明君派遣将军出征时，跪着推将军的车辆前行，而且说： 国门之内的事，由我来决定；国门以外的事情，请将军裁决。 
English: Feng Tang replied, "I heard that when the ancient Ming Emperor dispatched a general to go to war, he knelt down and pushed the general's vehicle forward, and said, "I will decide matters within the country; I will ask the general to decide matters outside the country."

古文：军功爵赏皆决于外，归而奏之，此非虚言也。
现代文：一切军功、封爵、奖赏的事都由将军在外面决定，回国后再奏报君主。这并不是虚假的传言。
English: It is not a false rumour that all matters of military merit, knighthoods and awards are decided by the general outside, and then reported to the monarch after returning home.

古文：臣大父言：李牧为赵将，居边，军市之租，皆自用飨士；赏赐决于外，不从中覆也。
现代文：我的祖父说：李牧为赵国将军，驻守边境时，把从军中交易市场上收得的税收，都自行用于犒劳将士；赏赐都由将军在外决定，不必向朝廷请示批准。
English: My grandfather said: Li Mu is the general of Zhao Guo, and when he was stationed at the border, he used the taxes collected from the military trading market to reward the soldiers; the rewards were decided by the general outside, and there was no need to ask the court for approval.

古文：委任而责成功，故李牧乃得尽其智能；选车千三百乘，彀骑万三千，百金之士十万，是以北逐单于，破东胡，灭澹林，西抑强秦，南支韩、魏。当是之时，赵几霸。
现代文：对他委以重任而责令成功，所以李牧才能充分发挥他的聪明才干；他率领着精选出来的一千三百辆战车、一万三千名善于骑射的骑兵，十万训练有素的将士，所以能够在北方驱逐匈奴，击败东胡，消灭澹林，在西方抑制了强大的秦国，在南方抵御了韩国和魏国；在那个时候，赵国几乎成为一个霸主之国。
English: Li Mu was able to give full play to his ingenuity; he led a selection of thirteen hundred chariots, thirteen thousand cavalrymen skilled in cavalry shooting, and one hundred thousand well-trained soldiers, so he was able to expel the Huns in the north, defeat Donghu, and eliminate Yulin, suppress the powerful Qin in the west, and resist Korea and Wei in the south; at that time, Zhao almost became a hegemonic country.

古文：其后会赵王迁立，用郭开谗，卒诛李牧，令颜聚代之；是以兵破士北，为秦所禽灭。
现代文：后来，恰逢赵王赵迁继位，他听信郭开的谗言，终于诛杀李牧，命令颜聚代替李牧而统兵；正因为如此，赵国军队溃败，将士逃散，被秦军消灭。
English: Later, coinciding with Zhao Wang Zhao Qian's succession to the throne, he listened to Guo Kai's advice and finally killed Li Mu and ordered Yan Jiu to replace Li Mu and lead the army; because of this, the Zhao army was defeated, the soldiers fled and were destroyed by the Qin army.

古文：今臣窃闻魏尚为云中守，其军市租尽以飨士卒，私养钱五日一椎牛，自飨宾客、军吏、舍人，是以匈奴远避，不近云中之塞。
现代文：现在我私下听说魏尚担任云中郡郡守时，把军中交易市场所得的税收全都用来犒劳士卒，还用自已的官俸钱，每五天宰杀一头牛，自已宴请宾客、军吏和幕僚属官，因此，匈奴远避，不敢接近云中边塞。
English: Now I have heard in private that when Wei Shang served as the county magistrate of Yunzhong County, he used all the tax revenue from the military trading market to reward employees, and also used his own official salary money to slaughter a cow every five days, and invited guests, military officials and staff officers to his own banquet. Therefore, the Xiongnu avoided and did not dare to approach the Yunzhong border fortress.

古文：虏曾一入，尚率车骑击之，所杀甚众。
现代文：匈奴曾经入侵云中郡一次，魏尚率领车骑部队出击，杀了很多匈奴人。
English: The Xiongnu once invaded Yunzhong County. Wei Shang led the cavalry to attack and killed many Xiongnu.

古文：夫士卒尽家人子，起田中从军，安知尺籍、伍符！
现代文：那些士兵都是平民百姓的子弟，从田间出来参军从征，怎能知道 尺籍  伍符 之类的军令军规！
English: Those soldiers are all the children of common people. They come out of the fields to join the army. How can they know military orders and regulations such as standards, ranks and insignia?

古文：终日力战，斩首捕虏，上功幕府，一言不相应，文吏以法绳之，其赏不行，而吏奉法必用。
现代文：整日拼死战斗，斩敌首级，捕获俘虏，在向幕府呈报战果军功时，只要一个字有出入，那些舞文弄墨的官员，就引用军法来惩治他们，他们应得到的赏赐就被取消了；而那些官吏所奉行的法令却必须执行。
English: All day long they fought to the death, cut off the heads of the enemy, captured prisoners, and when reporting the results of the war to the shogunate, as long as there was a discrepancy in a single word, the officials who tampered with the script cited the military law to punish them, and the rewards they should have received were canceled; but the laws that those officials followed had to be enforced.

古文：臣愚以为陛下赏太轻，罚太重。
现代文：我认为陛下的赏赐太轻，而惩罚却太重。
English: I think your majesty's reward is too light, but the punishment is too heavy.

古文：且云中守魏尚坐上功首虏差六级，陛下下之吏，削其爵，罚作之。
现代文：而且云中郡守魏尚因为上报斩杀敌军首级的数量差了六个，陛下就把他交给官吏治罪，削去他的爵位，判罚他做一年的刑徒。
English: Moreover, the county governor of Yunzhong County, Wei Shang, only committed the crime of falsely reporting that he had killed six more enemies. His Majesty handed him over to the judge, stripped him of his title and sentenced him to one year in prison.

古文：由此言之，陛下虽得廉颇、李牧，弗能用也！ 
现代文：由此说来，陛下即使得到廉颇、李牧，也不能任用啊！ 
English: Therefore, even if His Majesty were to get Li Mu, he would not be able to appoint him!

古文：上说。是日，令唐持节赦魏尚，复以为云中守，而拜唐为车骑都尉。
现代文：文帝高兴地接受了冯唐的批评。当天，就令冯唐持皇帝信节去赦免魏尚，重新任命魏尚做云中郡守，并任命冯唐为车骑都尉。
English: Emperor Wen gladly accepted Feng Tang's criticism. On the same day, he ordered Feng Tang to take the emperor's letter to pardon Wei Shang, reappointed Wei Shang as the governor of Yunnan County, and appointed Feng Tang as the captain of the cavalry.

古文：春，诏广增诸祀坛场、珪币，且曰： 吾闻祠官祝釐，皆归福于朕躬，不为百姓，朕甚愧之。
现代文：春季，文帝诏令扩大祭祀的场所，增加祭祀所用的玉和币帛，并且说： 朕听说祠官在祭祀的祈福祷告中，都将福归于朕个人，而没有为百姓祈福，朕对此很感惭愧。
English: In the spring, Emperor Wen issued an edict to expand the places of worship and increase the number of jade and coins used for worship, and said, "I heard that the ancestral priest attributed all the blessings to me personally in the prayers for blessings of the worship, but did not pray for the people. I am very ashamed of this.

古文：夫以朕之不德，而专飨独美其福，百姓不与焉，是重吾不德也。
现代文：以朕这样的失德之人，独享神灵的福荫，而百姓们却不能分享，这是加重朕的过失。
English: It is an aggravation of my fault that an immoral person like me can exclusively enjoy the blessings of the gods, while the people cannot share them.

古文：其令祠官致敬，无有所祈！ 
现代文：此后祠官在祭祀祷告时，不要再为朕个人祈祷祝福！ 
English: After that, when the ancestral priest prays at the sacrificial service, he should no longer pray for my personal blessings!

古文：是岁，河间文王辟强薨。
现代文：这一年，河间王刘辟强去世。
English: In the same year, Liu Biqiang, the king of Kawama, died.

古文：初，丞相张苍以为汉得水德，鲁人公孙臣以为汉当土德，其应，黄龙见；苍以为非是，罢之。
现代文：当初，丞相张苍认为汉朝得 五行 中的水德。鲁国人公孙臣认为汉朝当属土德，与土德相应，应该出现黄龙；张苍认为公孙臣说的不对，不采纳崐他的观点。
English: At first, the prime minister, Zhang Cang, thought that the Han Dynasty had the best water virtue among the five virtues. The Lu people's Gong Sun Chen thought that the Han Dynasty should belong to the local virtue, and corresponding to the local virtue, there should be a yellow dragon; Zhang Cang thought that what Gong Sun Chen said was not right, and did not adopt his point of view.

古文：太宗孝文皇帝下十五年
现代文：汉文帝十五年
English: Fifteen Years of Emperor Hanwen

古文：春，黄龙见成纪。
现代文：春季，成纪县出现了黄龙。
English: In the spring, a yellow dragon appeared in Chengji County.

古文：帝召公孙臣，拜为博士，与诸生申明土德，草改历、服色事。
现代文：文帝召见公孙臣，任命他为博士，与其他学者论证汉得土德的观点，草拟改换历法和改变服色的方案。
English: Emperor Wen summoned Gongsun Chen and appointed him as a doctor. He argued with other scholars about the views of the Hanseatic League, and drafted a plan to change the calendar and change the color of clothing.

古文：张苍由此自绌。
现代文：张苍从此自动黜退。
English: Zhang Cang has since resigned.

古文：夏，四月，上始幸雍，郊见五帝，赦天下。
现代文：夏季，四月，文帝第一次亲自前往雍地，对五帝庙行郊祭之礼，并且宣布大赦天下。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Wen personally went to Yongdi for the first time, performed a suburb festival for the Five Emperors Temple, and announced a general amnesty.

古文：九月，诏诸侯王、公卿、郡守举贤良、能直言极谏者，上亲策之。
现代文：九月，文帝下诏，令诸侯王、公卿、郡守举荐贤良、能直言极谏的人，皇帝亲自策问考试。
English: In September, Emperor Wen issued an edict, ordering princes, nobles, and county governors to recommend virtuous people who could be outspoken, and the emperor himself set up the examination.

古文：太子家令晁错对策高第，擢为中大夫。
现代文：太子家令晁错的对策为高等，文帝提升他为中大夫。
English: The response to the prince's erroneous order was high-level, and Emperor Wen promoted him to middle doctor.

古文：错又上言宜削诸侯及法令可更定者书凡三十篇。
现代文：晁错又上书文帝，谈论应该削减诸侯王的实力以及应该改的法令，上书共计三十篇。
English: Erroneously, Emperor Wenzong wrote another letter, discussing the need to reduce the power of the princes and the decrees that should be changed, a total of thirty letters.

古文：上虽不尽听，然奇其材。
现代文：文帝虽然没有完全采用他的意见，却对他的才能另眼相看。
English: Although Emperor Wen did not fully adopt his opinions, he looked at his talent with a different eye.

古文：是岁，齐文王则、河间哀王福皆薨，无子，国除。
现代文：这一年，齐王刘则、河间王刘福去世，都无子，封国被废除。
English: In the same year, King Liu Zeng of Qi and King Liu Fu of Hema both died without children, and the fief was abolished.

古文：赵人新垣平以望气见上，言长安东北有神气，成五采，于是作渭阳五帝庙。
现代文：赵国人新垣平自称善于 望气 ，得以进见文帝。他说长安东北有神，结成五彩之气。于是文帝下令在渭阳修建五帝庙。
English: Niigaki Ping, a native of Zhao, said that he was good at "waiting for the wind" and was able to see Emperor Wen. He said that there were gods in the northeast of Chang'an, forming a colorful atmosphere. So Emperor Wen ordered the construction of the Five Emperor Temple in Shenyang.

古文：太宗孝文皇帝下十六年
现代文：汉文帝十六年丁丑，公元前年
English: Emperor Hanwen in the 16th year of Dingwu, around the year BC

古文：夏，四月，上郊祀上帝于渭阳五帝庙。
现代文：夏季，四月，文帝在渭阳五帝庙郊祭五帝。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Wen presided over the Five Emperors Festival on the outskirts of the Five Emperors Temple in Shenyang.

古文：于是贵新垣平至上大夫，赐累千金；而使博士、诸生刺《六经》中作《王制》，谋议巡狩、封禅事。
现代文：这时，文帝宠贵新垣平，封为上大夫，赏赐黄金累计一千斤；文帝还让博士、诸生杂采《六经》中的记载，汇集成《王制》，谋划议论巡狩、封禅等事。
English: At this time, Emperor Wen favored Arakagidaira and made him a high-ranking doctor, awarding him a total of one thousand jin in gold; Emperor Wen also had the doctor and all living beings collect the records in the "Six Classics" and compile them into the "King System," and planned to discuss things such as hunting tours and the sealing of Zen.

古文：又于长门道北立五帝坛。
现代文：又在长门亭的道北设立了五帝坛。
English: In addition, the Altar of the Five Emperors was set up in the northern part of Hokkaido at Nagato-tei.

古文：徙淮南王喜复为城阳王，又分齐为六国；丙寅，立齐悼惠王子在者六人：杨虚侯将闾为齐王，安都侯志为济北王，武成侯贤为菑川王，白石侯雄渠为胶东王，平昌侯卬为胶西王，扐侯辟光为济南王。
现代文：文帝把淮南王刘喜再次封为城阳王。又把齐国分立为六国。丙寅，文帝封立齐悼惠王在世的六个儿子为王：杨虚侯刘将闾为齐王，安都侯刘志为济北王，武成侯刘贤为川王，白石侯刘雄渠为胶东王，平昌侯刘为胶西王，侯刘辟光为济南王。
English: Emperor Wen once again crowned Liu Xi, the king of Huainan, as the king of Chengyang. He also divided Qi into six provinces. In Yin, Emperor Wen crowned the six living sons of Liu Hui as kings: Yang Xiu as the king of Qi, Andu as the king of Jibei, Wucheng as the king of Sichuan, Baishi as the king of Jiaodong, Pyeongchang as the king of Jiaoxi, and Liu Biguang as the king of Jinan.

古文：淮南厉王子在者三人：阜陵安为淮南王，安阳侯勃为衡山王，阳周侯赐为庐江王。
现代文：文帝封立淮南厉王在世的三个儿子为王：阜陵侯刘安为淮南王，安阳侯刘勃为衡山王，阳周侯刘赐为庐江王。
English: Emperor Wen made the three living sons of King Li of Huainan as kings: Liu An of Fulin as King of Huainan, Liu Bo of Anyang as King of Hengshan, and Liu Zhou as King of the Li River.

古文：秋，九月，新垣平使人持玉杯上书阙下献之。
现代文：秋季，九月，新垣平指使人携带玉杯到皇宫门前上书，献宝给文帝。
English: In the autumn, in September, Arakaki Taira ordered people to bring jade cups to the front of the Imperial Palace to make offerings to Emperor Wen.

古文：平言上曰： 阙下有宝玉气来者。 
现代文：新垣平对文帝说： 宫门前有一股宝玉之气移来。 
English: Arakigahira himself told the emperor in advance, "A precious gem has come under the auspices of the Son of Heaven.

古文：已，视之，果有献玉杯者，刻曰 人主延寿 。
现代文：过了一会，前去查看，果然有人来献玉杯，杯上刻有 人主延寿 四字。
English: After a while, I went to check, and sure enough, someone came to offer a jade cup. The cup was engraved with the four characters of the Lord's life extension.

古文：平又言： 臣侯日再中。 
现代文：新垣平又说： 我算出今天太阳将再次出现在中天。 
English: Arakigahira also said, "I have calculated that the sun will appear in the middle of the sky again today."

古文：居顷之，日却，复中。
现代文：过了一会儿，太阳向东退行，再次到达中天。
English: After a while, the sun retreated to the east and reached the middle of the sky again.

古文：于是始更以十七年为元年，令天下大酺。
现代文：于是，决定把文帝在位的第十七年改称为元年，并特许天下人聚会痛饮，以示庆贺。
English: As a result, it began to change to the seventeenth year as the first year, making the whole world celebrate and drink.

古文：平言曰： 周鼎亡在泗水中。
现代文：新垣平说： 周朝的大鼎沉没在泗水中。
English: Arakaki Ping said: The Zhou dynasty's Great Seal sank in turbid waters.

古文：今河决，通于泗，臣望东北汾阴直有金宝气，意周鼎其出乎！
现代文：现在黄河决口，与泗水相连通，我看东北正对着汾阴有金宝之气，估计周鼎可能会出世吧！
English: Now the mouth of the Yellow River, connected to Surabaya, I think the northeast is facing the gloom with a golden atmosphere, it is estimated that Zhou Ding may be born!

古文：兆见，不迎则不至。 
现代文：它的征兆已经出现了，如果不去迎接，周鼎是不会来的。 
English: Its signs have already appeared. If we do not welcome it, Zhou Ding will not come.

古文：于是上使使治庙汾阴南，临河，欲祠出周鼎。
现代文：这个时候，文帝派人在汾阴修庙，南面靠崐近黄河，想要通过祭祀求得周鼎出世。
English: Therefore, the emperor sent an envoy to the south of Suyin to build an ancestral temple, along the Yellow River, in order to evoke Zhou Ding with a ritual.

古文：太宗孝文皇帝下后元年
现代文：太宗孝文皇帝下后元年
English: Emperor Taizong Xiaowen in the first year of the Heian period

古文：冬，十月，人有上书告新垣平 所言谐诈也 ；下吏治，诛夷平。
现代文：冬季，十月，有人向文帝上书，检举新垣平 所说的一切都是诈骗 ，文帝命令司法官员审查，最后，新垣平被诛灭三族。
English: In the winter, in October, someone sent a letter to Emperor Wen, accusing Arakigahira that everything he said was a fraud, Emperor Wen ordered judicial officials to investigate, and finally, Arakigahira was annihilated.

古文：是后，上亦怠于改正、服、鬼神之事，而渭阳、长门五帝，使祠官领，以时致礼，不往焉。
现代文：从此之后，文帝对于改变历法、服色及祭祀鬼神的事，也就疏怠了，立于渭阳、长门的五帝庙，隶属于祠官管理，由祠官按照季节时令祭祀，文帝自己不再去了。
English: From then on, Emperor Wen neglected to change the calendar, the color of clothing, and the way of worshiping ghosts and gods. The Five Emperors Temple, which was built in Fenyang and Changmen, was under the management of the ancestral priest, and the ancestral priest performed the sacrifices according to the seasons. Emperor Wen himself no longer went there.

古文：春，三月，孝惠皇后张氏薨。
现代文：春季，三月，孝惠帝的张皇后去世。
English: In the spring, in March, Empress Zhang of the Xiao Hui Dynasty passed away.

古文：诏曰： 间者数年不登，又有水旱、疾疫之灾，朕甚忧之。
现代文：文帝下诏说： 近来连续几年歉收，又有旱涝和疾病的灾害，朕十分担忧。
English: Emperor Wen said: I am very worried about the poor harvests in recent years, droughts and diseases.

古文：愚而不明，未达其咎：意者朕之政有所失而行有过与？
现代文：朕愚蠢而不聪明，不知道出现这些灾害的祸根是什么：或许是朕治国有失误、行为有过错吗？
English: I am stupid and unintelligent, I do not know what the root cause of these disasters is: perhaps I am guilty of mistakes in governance and behavior?

古文：乃天道有不顺，地利或不得，人事多失和，鬼神废不享与？
现代文：是天道不顺，或者是不得地利，人事多有失和，没有供奉鬼神吗？
English: Or is it that the heavenly way is not smooth, the location is difficult to obtain, the number of personnel is out of balance, and the ghosts and gods do not want to enjoy the sacrifice?

古文：何以致此？
现代文：为什么会这样呢？
English: What is the real reason for this?

古文：将百官之奉养或废，无用之事或多与？
现代文：或者是废弃了百官的奉养，所兴办的无用之事太多了吗？
English: Or is it that the maintenance of a hundred officials has been abandoned, and too many useless things have been set up?

古文：何其民食之寡乏也？
现代文：为什么百姓缺乏粮食充饥呢？
English: Why are the people starving for lack of food?

古文：夫度田非益寡，而计民未加益，以口量地，其于古犹有馀，而食之甚不足者，其咎安在？
现代文：估计土地没有比以前减少，而统计百姓的人口也没有比以前增加，按平均每人占有的耕地来计算，现在比古代还要多；但百姓的粮食却严重缺乏，造成这种失误的根源在哪里？
English: It is estimated that the land is not less than before, and the population of the people is not more than before. According to the average cultivated land per person, it is now more than in ancient times; but the people are seriously short of food. What is the root cause of this mistake?

古文：无乃百姓之从事于末以害农者蕃，为酒醪以靡谷者多，六畜之食焉者众与？
现代文：莫非是由于百姓之中从事工商末业而损害农耕本业的人多，造酒大量耗费了粮食，六畜吃得太多了吗？
English: Is it because the people have abandoned agriculture and commerce, such as wasting grain by making a lot of wine, and consuming grain by raising too many livestock, which has seriously damaged agriculture?

古文：细大之义，吾未得其中，其与丞相、列侯、吏二千石、博士议之。有可以佐百姓者，率意远思，无有所隐！ 
现代文：这些大大小小的原因，我不知道哪个是最主要的，可以由丞相、列侯、二千石官员、博士共同议论这个问题，有能够帮助百姓的意见，可按照各自的思路，去做深远的探讨，无所隐瞒地全都告诉我！ 
English: These large and small reasons, I don't know which is the most important, can be discussed jointly by the prime minister, vassals, officials of two thousand koku, and doctors. They have opinions that can help the people, and they can do far-reaching exploration according to their own ideas. Tell me everything without hiding anything!

古文：太宗孝文皇帝下二年
现代文：太宗孝文皇帝下后二年
English: Two years after the reign of Emperor Taizong Xiaowen

古文：夏，上行幸雍棫阳宫。
现代文：夏季，文帝前往雍地的阳宫。
English: In summer, Emperor Wen went to the Yang Palace in the Yangtze River Delta.

古文：六月，代孝王参薨。
现代文：六月，代王刘参去世。
English: In June, the acting king, Liu Sang, passed away.

古文：匈奴连岁入边，杀略人民、畜产甚多；云中、辽东最甚，郡万馀人。
现代文：匈奴连年入寇边境，杀害、掳掠了许多百姓及其牲畜财产，云中郡和辽东郡所受侵害最为严重，受害人数每郡多达一万余人。
English: Year after year, the Huns invaded the border, killed and plundered many people and their livestock and property. Yunnan and Liaodong counties suffered the most serious violations, with more than 10,000 victims in each county.

古文：上患之，乃使使遗匈奴书。单于亦使当户报谢，复与匈奴和亲。
现代文：文帝担忧匈奴的入侵，就派使臣给匈奴送去书信，匈奴单于也派一位当户来汉朝廷答谢，汉与匈奴恢复了和亲关系。
English: Emperor Wen was worried about the invasion of the Xiongnu, so he sent an envoy to the Xiongnu to send a letter. The Xiongnu also sent a dignitary to the Han court to thank him. Han and the Xiongnu restored friendly relations.

古文：八月，戊戌，丞相张苍免。
现代文：八月，戊戌，文帝罢免了丞相张苍的职务。
English: In August, Emperor Wen dismissed the prime minister Zhang Cang.

古文：帝以皇后弟窦广国贤，有行，欲相之，曰： 恐天下以吾私广国，久念不可。 
现代文：文帝因为皇后的崐弟弟窦广国贤能，品行好，想任命他为丞相，说： 恐怕天下人会以为我偏爱窦广国。 
English: Emperor Wen wanted to appoint Dou Guangguo, the younger brother of Empress Dowager Zhao, as the prime minister because of Dou Guangguo's ability and good character. He said, "I'm afraid the world will think that I prefer Dou Guangguo.

古文：而高帝时大臣，馀见无可者。
现代文：考虑很久，认为不能用他为丞相，而高帝时代的大臣，现在健在的人中，又没有能胜任丞相职务的人。
English: He thought about it for a long time and decided that he could not be used as chancellor, and among the ministers of the time of Emperor Gao, there is no one who is competent for the post of chancellor.

古文：御史大夫梁国申屠嘉，故以材官蹶张从高帝，封关内侯；庚午，以嘉为丞相，封故安侯。
现代文：御史大夫梁国人申屠嘉，当年曾以步兵强弩射手的身份跟随高帝征战，封为关内侯；庚午，文帝任命申屠嘉为丞相，封为故安侯。
English: Shen Tu Jia, the chief historian and a native of Liang Guo, once followed Emperor Gao to war as an infantry sharpshooter and was given the title of Guan Nei Hou; in the afternoon, Emperor Wen appointed Shen Tu Jia as the prime minister and gave him the title of the late An Hou.

古文：嘉为人廉直，门不受私谒。
现代文：申屠嘉为人廉洁正直，在家中不接见私人拜谒的人。
English: Shen Tu Jia is a person of integrity and honesty, and does not accept personal visits at home.

古文：是时，太中大夫邓通方爱幸，赏赐累巨万。帝尝燕饮通家，其宠幸无比。
现代文：当时，太中大夫邓通正得皇帝宠幸，赏赐的财物累计万万钱；文帝曾在他家中欢宴饮酒，宠幸的程度无人能够相比。
English: At that time, the imperial court's chief physician, Deng Tong, was the emperor's favorite, and he was rewarded with a total of tens of thousands of dollars in property. Emperor Wen once had a banquet and drank alcohol at his home, and no one can compare to the extent of his favor.

古文：嘉尝入朝，而通居上旁，有怠慢之礼，嘉奏事毕，因言曰： 陛下幸爱群臣，则富贵之；至于朝廷之礼，不可以不肃。 
现代文：申屠嘉曾来朝见文帝，见到邓通正在文帝身边，礼节很简慢。申屠嘉奏报完了政事，就说： 陛下如果宠信亲近臣子，可以让他富贵，至于朝廷之礼，却不能不整肃。 
English: Shen Tuo Jia once came to the court to see Emperor Wen, and when he saw that Dang Tong was with Emperor Wen, his etiquette was very simple. After Shen Tuo Jia reported the completion of the government affairs, he said: If His Majesty is close to his vassal, he can make him rich, but as far as the court's courtesy is concerned, it must be tidy.

古文：上曰： 君勿言，吾私之。 
现代文：文帝说： 你不必说了，我私下会告诫他。 
English: The emperor said, "Please don't say any more, I just prefer Deng Tong."

古文：罢朝，坐府中，嘉为檄召通诣丞相府，不来，且斩通。
现代文：散朝之后，申屠嘉坐在丞相府中，用公文召邓通来丞相府。邓通不来，申屠嘉便要斩杀邓通。
English: After the collapse of the Joseon Dynasty, Shen Tuo Jia sat in the prime minister's office and used official documents to summon Duntong to the prime minister's office. If Duntong did not come, Shen Tuo Jia would kill Duntong.

古文：通恐，入言上；上曰： 汝第往，吾今使人召若。 
现代文：邓通很恐惧，进宫去告知文帝，文帝说： 你只管前去，我会派人召你。 
English: Duntong was very frightened and went into the palace to inform Emperor Wen. Emperor Wen said, "You just go ahead, I will send someone to summon you."

古文：通诣丞相，免冠、徒跣，顿首谢嘉。
现代文：邓通来到丞相府，摘下帽子，赤着双脚，向申屠嘉叩头请罪。
English: Duntong came to the prime minister's office, took off his hat, barefoot, and bowed to Shen Tu Jia to plead guilty.

古文：嘉坐自如，弗为礼，责曰： 夫朝廷者，高帝之朝廷也。
现代文：申屠嘉坐着，安然自若，不予礼待，责备说： 朝廷，那是高皇帝的朝廷。
English: Shen Tu Jia sat calmly, refused to be treated with courtesy, and scolded: The imperial court, that is the imperial court of Emperor Gao.

古文：通小臣，戏殿上，大不敬，当斩。
现代文：你邓通只不过是一个小臣，意在殿上戏闹，这是大不敬之罪，该判处斩首。
English: You, Duntong, are no more than a junior minister, yet you dare to play on the main hall. You are guilty of great disrespect and should be beheaded.

古文：吏！
现代文：来人！
English: Come on!

古文：今行斩之！ 
现代文：立即把邓通处斩！ 
English: Execute Deng Tong immediately!

古文：通顿首，首尽出血，不解。
现代文：邓通吓得一再磕头，磕得头到处流血，申屠嘉仍不表示宽恕。
English: Dang Tong bowed his head, blood streamed from his head, but Shen Tu Jia still did not say that he would spare him.

古文：上度丞相已困通，使使持节召通而谢丞相： 此吾弄臣，君释之！ 
现代文：文帝估计丞相已让邓通吃了苦头，就派使者持皇帝信节前来传唤邓通，并且转达文帝向丞相表示歉意的话： 这个人是我所戏弄的昵臣，您就赦免了他吧！ 
English: Emperor Wen estimated that the prime minister had made Duntong suffer, so he sent an envoy with the emperor's letter to summon Duntong, and conveyed Emperor Wen's words of apology to the prime minister: This person is the vassal I teased, you should pardon him!

古文：邓通既至，为上泣曰： 丞相几杀臣！ 
现代文：邓通回到宫中，哭着对文帝说： 丞相差一点杀了我！ 
English: Duntong returned to the palace, crying and saying to Emperor Wen: "The prime minister almost killed me!

古文：太宗孝文皇帝下三年
现代文：太宗孝文皇帝下后三年
English: Three years after Emperor Taizong Xiaowen

古文：春，二月，上行幸代。
现代文：春季，二月，文帝前往代国。
English: In the spring, in February, Emperor Wen went to represent the country.

古文：是岁，匈奴老上单于死，子军臣单于立。
现代文：这一年，匈奴老上单于死，其子军臣单于继位。
English: In the same year, the Xiongnu warlord Shan died and his son and military vassal Shan succeeded to the throne.

古文：太宗孝文皇帝下四年
现代文：太宗孝文皇帝下后四年辛巳，公元前年
English: Emperor Taizong Xiaowen died four years after his enthronement, BC

古文：夏，四月，丙寅晦，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，四月，丙寅晦，出现了日食。
English: In the summer, in April, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：五月，赦天下。
现代文：五月，文帝宣布大赦天下。
English: In May, Emperor Wen declared a general amnesty.

古文：上行幸雍。
现代文：文帝前往雍县。
English: Wen Di went to Yong County.

古文：太宗孝文皇帝下五年
现代文：太宗孝文皇帝下后五年
English: Five years after Emperor Taizong Xiaowen's death

古文：春，正月，上行幸陇西；三月，行幸雍；秋，七月，行幸代。
现代文：春季，正月，文帝前往陇西郡；三月，文帝前往雍县；秋季，七月，文帝前往代国。
English: In spring, the first month, Emperor Wen went to Shaanxi County; in March, Emperor Wen went to Yong County; in autumn, in July, Emperor Wen went to Qingdao.

古文：太宗孝文皇帝下六年
现代文：太宗孝文皇帝下后六年
English: Six years after Emperor Taizong Xiaowen's death

古文：冬，匈奴三万骑入上郡，三万骑入云中，所杀略甚众，烽火通于甘泉、长安。
现代文：冬季，匈奴三万骑兵入侵上郡，三万骑兵入侵云中郡，杀害和掳掠了很多军民，报警的烽火一直传到甘泉和长安城。
English: In winter, the Huns invaded Shang County with thirty thousand cavalry, and invaded Yunzhong County with thirty thousand cavalry. They killed and plundered many soldiers and civilians, and the alarm of bonfires spread all the way to Ganquan and Chang'an City.

古文：以中大夫令免为车骑将军，屯飞狐；故楚相苏意为将军，屯句注；将军张武屯北地；河内太守周亚夫为将军，次细柳；宗正刘礼为将军，次霸上，祝兹侯徐厉为将军，次棘门；以备胡。
现代文：朝廷任命中大夫令免为车骑崐将军，率军屯守飞狐；任命原楚相苏意为将军，守句注；命将军张武屯守北地郡；命河内郡守周亚夫为将军，驻扎细柳；命宗正刘礼为将军，驻扎霸上；命祝兹侯徐厉为将军，驻扎棘门，以防备匈奴。
English: The imperial court appointed Zhong Dafu as the general of chariot and cavalry and led the army to guard the flying fox; appointed the original Chu Xiang Su as the general, keeping the sentence note; ordered the general Zhang Wutun to guard the Beidai County; ordered the general of Hanoi County, Zhou Yafu, to be stationed in Xiliu; ordered the general of Zong Zheng Liu Li to be stationed in Baguang; ordered the general of Zhou Xu Li to be stationed in Thorn Gate to guard against the Xiongnu.

古文：上自劳军，至霸上及棘门军，直驰入，将以下骑送迎。
现代文：文帝亲自犒劳军队，到达驻扎霸上和棘门的军营时，文帝一行人直接驰马进入营垒，将军和他的部属都骑着马迎送文帝出入。
English: Emperor Wen personally rewarded the troops for their hard work. When they arrived at the military camps stationed in Baxian and Thorn Gate, Emperor Wen and his entourage rode directly into the camp. The general and his subordinates rode out to welcome Emperor Wen.

古文：已而之细柳军，军士吏被甲，锐兵刃，彀弓弩持满，天子先驱至，不得入。
现代文：接着文帝到达细柳的军营，只见将士们身披铠甲，手执锋利的武器，张满弓弩。文帝的先导队伍到达，不能进入军营。
English: Then Emperor Wen arrived at the military camp in Xiliu, only to see the soldiers wearing armor, holding sharp weapons, and displaying bows and arrows. Emperor Wen's leading team arrived and could not enter the military camp.

古文：先驱曰： 天子且至！ 
现代文：先导说： 天子马上就到了！ 
English: The usher said, "The Son of God is coming!"

古文：军门都尉曰； 将军令曰： 军中闻将军令，不闻天子之诏！  
现代文：把守军门的都尉说： 将军命令说： 军中只听将军的号令，不听天子的诏令。  
English: The captain guarding the gate said, "The general has given the order: In the army, only obey the general's orders, not the emperor's."

古文：居无何，上至，又不得入。
现代文：过了一会，文帝来到，也不能进入军营。
English: Soon after, the emperor arrived, but he was not allowed to enter.

古文：于是上乃使使持节诏将军： 吾欲入营劳军。 
现代文：于是文帝便派使者持节诏告将军： 朕想进入军营慰劳军队。 
English: As a result, Emperor Wen sent an envoy to the general with a solemn edict: "I want to enter the camp of the comfort labor army."

古文：亚夫乃传言 开壁门 。
现代文：周亚夫才传达军令说： 打开军营大门。 
English: Zhou Yafu only conveyed the military order and said: Open the gate of the military camp.

古文：壁门士请车骑曰： 将军约：军中不得驱驰。 
现代文：守卫军营大门的军官向皇帝的车马随从说： 将军有规定：在军营内不许策马奔跑。 
English: The officer guarding the gate of the military camp said to the emperor's chariot and horse entourage: The general has a rule: no horses are allowed to run in the military camp.

古文：于是天子乃按辔徐行。
现代文：文帝一行人便拉着马缰绳缓慢地前进。
English: As a result, the son of heaven fastened his horse's bridle and walked slowly.

古文：至营，将军亚夫持兵揖曰： 介胄之士不拜，请以军礼见。 
现代文：来军营中，周亚夫手执兵器对着文帝拱手作揖说： 身上穿着盔甲的武士不能下拜，请允许我以军礼参见陛下。 
English: When he arrived at the camp, General Zhou Yafu saluted with his weapons in his hands and said: Armored soldiers cannot kneel, please allow me to see the emperor with military salute.

古文：天子为动，改容，式车，使人称谢： 皇帝敬劳将军。 
现代文：文帝被打动了，面容变得庄重肃穆，手扶车前的横木，向军营将士致意，并派人向周亚夫表示谦意，说： 皇帝恭敬地慰劳将军。 
English: Emperor Wen was moved, his face became solemn and serious, he held the crossbar in front of the carriage and greeted the soldiers of the camp, and sent someone to Zhou Yafu to express his modesty, saying: The emperor respectfully consoled the general.

古文：成礼而去。
现代文：完成了劳军的仪式后离去。
English: He left after completing the labor army's etiquette.

古文：既出军门，群臣皆惊。
现代文：走出营门，群臣都表示惊讶。
English: As soon as they left the camp gate, the courtiers were shocked.

古文：上曰： 嗟乎，此真将军矣！
现代文：文帝说： 唉！周亚夫才是真正的将军呢！
English: Wendi said: Alas! Zhou Yafu is the real general!

古文：曩者霸上、棘门军若儿戏耳，其将固可袭而虏也。
现代文：前面所经过的霸上和棘门的军队，如同儿戏罢了，那些将军很容易受到袭击而被人俘虏。
English: The armies of the Overlord and the Thorn Gate that passed in front of them were like child's play, and those generals were easily attacked and captured.

古文：至于亚夫，可得而犯耶！ 
现代文：至于周亚夫，谁能冒犯他呢！ 
English: As for Zhou Yafu, who could offend him?

古文：称善者久之。
现代文：文帝对周亚夫称赞了很久。
English: Praise him for a long time.

古文：月馀，汉后至边，匈奴亦远塞，汉兵亦罢。
现代文：过了一个多月，汉军到达边境，匈奴远远地离开了边界，汉军也就撤回来了。
English: After more than a month, the Chinese army reached the border, the Xiongnu left the border far away, and the Chinese army withdrew.

古文：乃拜周亚夫为中尉。
现代文：于是，文帝任命周亚夫为中尉。
English: As a result, Emperor Wen appointed Zhou Yafu as a lieutenant.

古文：夏，四月，大旱，蝗。
现代文：夏季，四月，大旱，出现蝗灾。
English: Summer, April, drought, plague of locusts.

古文：令诸侯无入贡；弛山泽，减诸服御，损郎吏员；发仓庾以振民；民得卖爵。
现代文：文帝下令：诸侯封国停止向朝廷进贡；取消禁止百姓进入山林川泽的命令；减少御用衣服、车马等诸项开销；裁减专为皇帝服务的郎官人数；打开官府仓库救济百姓；允许百姓出卖爵位。
English: Emperor Wen ordered: the feudal lords to stop paying tribute to the imperial court; cancel the order prohibiting the people from entering the mountains and rivers; reduce the expenses of royal clothes, cars and horses; reduce the number of vassals serving the emperor; open the government warehouse to help the people; allow the people to sell their titles.

古文：太宗孝文皇帝下七年
现代文：太宗孝文皇帝下后七年
English: Seven years after Emperor Taizong Xiaowen's death

古文：夏，六月，已亥，帝崩于未央宫。
现代文：夏季，六月，己亥，文帝在未央宫驾崩。
English: In the summer, in June, in Ji Hai, Emperor Wen passed away at the Weiyang Palace.

古文：遗诏曰： 朕闻之：盖天下万物之萌生，靡有不死。死者，天地之理，物之自然，奚可甚哀！
现代文：文帝留下的遗诏说： 朕听说，天下万物萌生，没有不死的；死，是天地的常理，是万物的自然规则，有什么值得特别悲哀的呢！
English: The last will and testament left by Emperor Wen said: I have heard that all things in the world come into being, and nothing is immortal; death is the common sense of heaven and earth, and the natural rule of all things. What is particularly sad?

古文：当今之世，咸嘉生而恶死，厚葬以破业，重服以伤生，吾甚不取。
现代文：现在这个时代，世人都乐于生而厌恶死，为了厚葬而破产，为了强调服丧尽孝而损害身体健康，朕很不赞成这些做法。
English: In today's world, people love life but die an evil death, people are buried in large numbers, resulting in a waste of wealth, and people's lives are harmed by wearing heavy clothing. I strongly disagree with this.

古文：且朕既不德，无在佐百姓；今崩，又使重服久临以罹寒暑之数，哀人父子，伤长老之志，损其饮食，绝鬼神之祭祀，以重吾不德，谓天下何！
现代文：况且，朕本人已经没有什么德行，没有帮助百姓，现在死了，如果再让臣民们长期地为朕服丧哭悼，经历寒暑变化那么久，使民众父子悲哀，老人伤感，减少了他们的饮食，停止了对鬼神的祭祀，这是加重了朕的失德，怎么对得起天下人呢！
English: Moreover, I myself have no virtue, did not help the people, and now I am dead. If I let my subjects mourn for me for a long time, experience cold and heat changes for so long, make the people and their children sad, the elderly sad, reduce their diet, and stop the worship of ghosts and gods, this has aggravated my loss of virtue, how can I be worthy of the world?

古文：朕获保宗庙，以眇眇之身托于天下君王之上，二十有馀年矣。
现代文：朕获得了保护宗庙的权力，以渺小之身，托身于天下君王之上，已经有二十多年了。
English: I have gained the power to protect the ancestral temple, and I have been holding myself above the kings of the world for more than twenty years.

古文：赖天之灵，社稷之福，方内安宁，靡有兵革。
现代文：依赖上天的神灵，社稷的福运，才使境内安宁，没有战争。
English: Only by relying on the gods of heaven and the good fortune of society and the country can there be peace in the country and no war.

古文：朕既不敏，常畏过行以羞先帝之遗德，惟年之久长，惧于不终。
现代文：朕确实不聪明，时常害怕自己做出错事，而使先帝遗留下来的美德蒙受耻辱，惧怕年久日长，自己可能会因失德而不得善终。
English: I'm really not smart. I'm always afraid of doing something wrong and bringing dishonor to the virtues left behind by the former emperor. I'm afraid of living a long life, and I may not have a good end because of my immorality.

古文：今乃幸以天年得复供养于高庙，其奚哀念之有！
现代文：现在万幸的是我得以享尽天年，又可在高庙奉养高帝，哪里还有什么值得悲哀的呢！
English: Now, fortunately, I have been able to enjoy my life to the fullest, and I can worship Emperor Gao at the Gao Temple. What else is there to be sad about?

古文：其令天下吏民：令到，出临三日，皆释服；毋禁取妇、嫁女、祠祀、饮酒、食肉，自当给丧事服临者，皆无跣；绖带毋过三寸；毋布车及兵器；毋发民哭临宫殿中；殿中当临者，皆以旦夕各十五举音，礼毕罢；非旦夕临时，禁毋得擅哭临；已下棺，服大功十五日，小功十四日，纤七日，释服。
现代文：诏告天下官员百姓：令到以后，哭吊三天，就都脱下丧服；不要禁止娶妻嫁女、祭祀、饮酒、吃肉。亲戚中应当参加丧事穿丧服哭吊的，都不要赤脚；孝带不要超过三寸粗；不要在车辆和兵器上蒙盖丧布；不要调发百姓到宫中来哭吊；殿中应当哭祭的人，都在早晚哀哭十五次，礼仪完毕就停止哭祭；非早晚哭祭时间，禁止擅自前来哭祭崐；棺椁入土后，凡属 大功 的宗室亲戚，穿丧服十五天， 小功 穿丧服十四天， 纤服 穿丧服七天，然后脱下丧服。
English: The edict told the world's officials and people: after the decree, if there are three days of mourning, they should all take off their mourning clothes; do not prohibit marrying a wife and daughter, sacrificing, drinking alcohol, and eating meat. Relatives who should participate in the funeral should not be barefoot; filial piety should not exceed three inches in thickness; do not cover vehicles and weapons with mourning cloth; do not send people to the palace to mourn; those who should mourn and sacrifice in the palace should mourn fifteen times in the morning and evening, and stop the wailing ritual when the ceremony is completed; if it is not the morning and evening wailing ritual time, it is

古文：它不在令中者，皆以此令比类从事。
现代文：其他未在诏令中规定的问题，都要比照诏令的用意办理。
English: All other relevant matters not mentioned in the order shall be construed by analogy with this order.

古文：布告天下，使明知朕意。
现代文：此诏要向天下臣民公布，使大家清楚知道朕的心意。
English: Announce it to the whole world, so that people will know my will.

古文：霸陵山川因其故，毋有所改。
现代文：霸陵周围的山脉河流都保持原貌，不许有所改变。
English: The mountains and rivers in the Hailing area should remain as they are, and should not be changed.

古文：归夫以下至少使。 
现代文：后宫中的妃嫔，从夫人以下到少使，都送归母家。 
English: The concubines in the harem, from the lady down to the junior envoy, were all sent back to their mother's home.

古文：乙巳，葬霸陵。
现代文：乙巳，文帝被安葬在霸陵。
English: On June 7th, he was buried in the Mausoleum.

古文：帝即位二十三年，宫室、苑囿、车骑、服御，无所增益；有不便，辄驰以利民。
现代文：文帝即位已来，历时二十三年，宫室、园林、车骑仪仗、服饰器具等，都没有增加；有对百姓不便的禁令条例，就予以废止以利于民众。
English: Emperor Wen has been on the throne for 23 years, and there has been no increase in the number of palace rooms, gardens, horse-drawn carriages, ceremonial vehicles, clothing, etc. If there are prohibitory regulations that are inconvenient to the people, they will be abolished in order to benefit the people.

古文：尝欲作露台，召匠计之，直百金。
现代文：文帝曾想修建一个露台，召来工匠计算，需花费一百斤黄金。
English: He once planned to build a terrace and asked a craftsman to calculate the cost, which required a hundred kilos of gold.

古文：上曰： 百金，中人十家之产也。吾奉先帝宫室，常恐羞之，何以台为！ 
现代文：文帝说： 一百斤黄金，相当于中等民户十家财产的总和，我居住着先帝的宫室，经常惧怕使它蒙羞，还修建露台干什么呢！ 
English: Emperor Wen said, "One hundred catties of gold is equivalent to the total wealth of ten middle-class households. I live in the palace of the former emperor, and I am always afraid of disgracing him. What's the point of building a terrace?

古文：身衣弋绨；所幸慎夫人，衣不曳地；帷帐无文绣；以示敦朴，为天下先。
现代文：文帝自己身穿黑色的粗丝衣服，他宠爱的慎夫人，所穿的衣服不拖到地面；所用的帷帐都不刺绣花纹，以显示朴素，为天下人做出表率。
English: Emperor Wen himself wore black coarse silk clothes, and his beloved Lady Shen wore clothes that did not drag on the ground; the curtains used were not embroidered, to show simplicity and set an example for the world.

古文：治霸陵，皆瓦器，不得以金、银、铜、锡为饰，因其山，不起坟。
现代文：修建霸陵，都使用陶制器物，不准用金、银、铜、锡装饰，利用山陵形势，不另兴建高大的坟堆。
English: The mausoleums of tyrannical rulers are all built with earthenware, and are not allowed to be decorated with gold, silver, copper, and tin. Because of the rise of mountains, no other tombs are chosen.

古文：吴王诈病不朝，赐以几杖。
现代文：吴王刘濞伪称有病，不来朝见，文帝反而赐给他几案手杖。
English: Wu King Liu Ye falsely claimed to be ill and did not come to the imperial court. Instead, Emperor Wen gave him several cases of walking sticks.

古文：群臣袁盎等谏说虽切，常假借纳用焉。
现代文：群臣之中，袁盎等人的进谏言辞激烈而尖锐，文帝常常予以宽容并采纳他们的批评意见。
English: Among the courtiers, Yuan Ang and others were the most outspoken, and Emperor Wen often tolerated and adopted their criticisms.

古文：张武等受赂金钱，觉，更加赏赐以愧其心；专务以德化民。
现代文：张武等人接受金钱贿赂，事情被觉察后，文帝反而赏赐他们钱财，使他们心中愧咎；他全力以德政去教化百姓。
English: Zhang Wu and others were bribed with money. After the affair was discovered, Emperor Wen rewarded them with money instead, which made them feel guilty. He did his best to educate the people with virtue politics.

古文：是以海内安宁，家给人足，后世鲜能及之。
现代文：所以，国家安宁，百姓富裕，后世很少能做到这一点。
English: Therefore, the country is peaceful and the people are affluent. Future generations will rarely be able to achieve this.

古文：丁未，太子即皇帝位，尊皇太后薄氏曰太皇太后，皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：丁未，太子刘启即位称帝。尊奉皇太后薄氏为太皇太后，尊奉皇后为皇太后。
English: On June 9, the crown prince succeeded to the imperial throne. His mother, Empress Dowager Bo, became the Grand Empress Dowager, and his mother, Empress Dowager Dou, became the Empress Dowager.

古文：九月，有星孛于西方。
现代文：九月，在西方天空出现了一颗异星。
English: In September, a comet appeared in the west.

古文：是岁，长沙王吴著薨，无子，国除。
现代文：这一年，长沙王吴著去世，他没有儿子，封国被废除。
English: In the same year, King Wu of Changsha passed away. He had no son, and the feudal state was abolished.

古文：初，高祖贤文王芮，制诰御史： 长沙王忠，其令著令。 
现代文：当初，高祖很赏识长沙文王吴芮的贤德，给御史下达诏令： 长沙王吴芮忠于朝廷，应该写入令中，特封为王。 
English: At first, Emperor Gaozhu was very appreciative of the virtue of Wusong, the King of Changsha, and issued an imperial decree to Gu Shi: Wusong, the King of Changsha, was loyal to the imperial court, and it should be written in the decree that he should be given the special title of king.

古文：至孝惠、高后时，封芮庶子二人为列侯，传国数世绝。
现代文：到孝惠帝、高后统治时期，将吴芮的两个庶子为列侯，各自传国数代之后断绝。
English: At the time of Emperor Hui and Empress Gao, the two sons other than the legitimate son of Wu Xi were appointed as vassals, and the fief was passed down for several generations, and finally abolished.

古文：孝景皇帝上
现代文：汉景皇帝上元年
English: Emperor Han Jing died in the first year of the year

古文：元年乙酉，公元前一五六年冬，十月，丞相嘉等奏： 功莫大于高皇帝，德莫盛于孝文皇帝。
现代文：冬季，十月，丞相申屠嘉等大臣奏请： 功勋没有大过高皇帝的，圣德没有超过孝文皇帝的。
English: In the winter, in October, the prime minister, Shen Tu Jia, and other ministers made a petition: the merits of the emperor are not too high, and the sanctity is not more than that of the emperor Xiaowen.

古文：高皇帝庙，宜为帝者太祖之庙；孝文皇帝庙，宜为帝者太宗之庙。
现代文：高皇帝的庙，应该做为本朝皇帝宗庙中的太祖庙；孝文皇帝的庙，应该做为本朝皇帝宗庙中的太宗庙。
English: Emperor Gao's temple should be the ancestral temple of the imperial ancestral temple of this dynasty; Emperor Xiaowen's temple should be the ancestral temple of the imperial ancestral temple of this dynasty.

古文：天子宜世世献祖宗之庙，郡国诸侯宜各为孝文皇帝立太宗之庙。 
现代文：后世的天子，应该世世代代供奉太祖、太宗庙，各郡和各国诸侯都应该在当地为孝文皇帝修建太宗庙。 
English: Future generations of heavenly sons should dedicate Taizoh and Taizong temples for generations to come. Counties and sovereigns of all countries should build Taizong temples for Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：景帝下达批复： 可以。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：夏，四月，乙卯，赦天下。
现代文：夏季，四月，乙卯，大赦天下。
English: In summer, in April, there is a general amnesty.

古文：遣御史大夫青至代下与匈奴和亲。
现代文：景帝派遣御史大夫陶青，到代国边塞，与匈奴和亲。
English: Emperor Jing sent the imperial historian Tao Qing to the border fortress of the modern country to make peace with the Xiongnu.

古文：五月，复收民田半租，三十而税一。
现代文：五月，朝廷恢复向百姓征收田税的一半，税率为三十分之一。
English: In May, the imperial court resumed collecting half of the rice field tax from the common people, with the tax rate being one-thirtieth.

古文：初，文帝除肉刑，外有轻刑之名，内实杀人；斩右止者又当死；斩左止者笞五百，当劓者笞三百，率多死。
现代文：当初，文帝废除肉刑，表面上有减轻刑罚之名，实际上却多杀了人；原判斩右脚的改死刑；原判斩左脚的改笞打五百下，原判割鼻的改笞打三百，这些人大多被打死。
English: At first, Emperor Wen abolished corporal punishment, ostensibly in the name of mitigating punishment, but in fact more people were killed; those originally sentenced to beheading their right foot were sentenced to death; those originally sentenced to beheading their left foot were sentenced to 500 lashes, and those originally sentenced to cutting their nose were sentenced to 300 lashes. Most of these people were beaten to death.

古文：是岁，下诏曰： 加笞、重罪无异；幸而不死，不可为人。
现代文：这一年，景帝下诏说： 增加笞打数与处死没有什么不同；即便侥幸而保住生命，也成了残废，无法维持生计。
English: In that year, Emperor Jing issued an edict: "Increasing the number of beatings is no different from execution; even if you are lucky enough to survive, you will become disabled and unable to make a living.

古文：其定律：笞五百曰三百，笞三百曰二百。 
现代文：应制定法律：原定笞打五百下的罪，改为笞打三百下；原定笞打三百下的罪，改为笞打二百下。 
English: The determined criminal law should be as follows: 500 should be changed to 300, and 300 to 200.

古文：以太中大夫周仁为郎中令，张欧为廷尉，楚元王子平陆侯礼为宗正，中大夫晁错为左内史。
现代文：景帝任命太中大夫周仁为郎中令，任命张欧为廷尉，任命楚元王的儿子平陆侯刘礼为宗正，任命中大夫晁错为左内史。
English: Emperor Jing appointed Taizhong Dr. Zhou Ren as the second-in-command, appointed Zhang Ou as a courtier, appointed the son of King Chu Yuan, Pinglu Hou Liu Li, as Zongzheng, and appointed Dr. Zou Er as Zuo Neishi.

古文：仁始为太子舍人，以廉谨得幸。
现代文：周仁原来做过太子舍人，因为人廉洁谨慎而得到宠幸。
English: Zhou Ren used to be a prince who did not care about people. He was favored because he was honest and prudent.

古文：张欧亦事帝于太子宫，虽治刑名家，为人长者，帝由是重之，用为九卿。
现代文：张欧也曾经在太子宫中侍奉过景帝，他虽然研究刑名法律的学问，为人却很宽厚；景帝因此很器重他们，任用他们为九卿。
English: Zhang Ou also once served Emperor Jing in the imperial court. Although he studied the knowledge of criminal law, he was a very generous person; Emperor Jing therefore held them in high esteem and appointed them as the Nine Lords.

古文：欧为吏未尝言按人，专以诚长者处官；官属以为长者，亦不敢大欺。
现代文：张欧做官，未曾说过要审查别人，专门以诚厚长者居官用事；他的部属认为他是一位宽厚长者，也不敢太欺蒙他。
English: As an official, Zhang Ou never said that he wanted to censor others, and he only employed honest elders; his subordinates thought he was a generous elder and did not dare to deceive him too much.

古文：二年丙戌，公元前一五五年
现代文：汉景皇帝上二年冬季，十二月，西南天空出现了一颗异星。
English: In December of the winter of Emperor Han Jing's second year, a strange star appeared in the southwest sky.

古文：冬，十二月，有星孛于西南。
现代文：景帝命令全国男子，从二十岁开始到官府登记成为正丁，承担国家的徭役和兵役。
English: Emperor Jing ordered all the men in the country to register with the government from the age of twenty to become Zhengding, to undertake the national military service and military service.

古文：令天下男子年二十始傅。春，三月，甲寅，立皇子德为河间王，阏为临江王，馀为淮阳王，非为汝南王，彭祖为广川王，发为长沙王。
现代文：春季，三月，甲寅，景帝封立皇子刘德为河间王，刘阏为临江王，刘馀为淮阳王，刘非为汝南王，刘彭祖为广川王，刘发为长沙王。
English: In the spring, in March, Emperor Jia and Emperor Jing appointed Prince Liu De as the King of Hebei, Prince Liu Xi as the King of Linjiang, Prince Liu Yu as the King of Huaiyang, Prince Liu Fei as the King of Runan, Prince Liu Peng Zu as the King of Guangchuan, and Prince Liu Fa as the King of Changsha.

古文：夏，四月，壬午，太皇太后薄氏崩。
现代文：夏季，四月，壬午，太皇太后薄氏驾崩。
English: In the summer, in April, at noon, the Empress Dowager Bo passed away.

古文：六月，丞相申屠嘉薨。
现代文：六月，丞相申屠嘉去世。
English: In June, Vice-Minister Shin Tujia passed away.

古文：时内史晁错数请间言事，辄听，宠幸倾九卿，法令多所更定。
现代文：当时，内史晁错多次请求单独与景帝谈论国政，景帝每每采纳他的意见，受宠幸超过了九卿，经晁错的建议修改了许多法令。
English: At that time, Inner Historian Zou Er repeatedly requested to talk about national politics with Emperor Jing alone. Emperor Jing always adopted his opinion, and was favored by more than nine nobles. After Zou Er's suggestion, many decrees were amended.

古文：丞相嘉自绌所言不用，疾错。
现代文：丞相申屠嘉因景帝不采用他的意见而自行黜退，很恨晁错。
English: Because Emperor Jing did not adopt his opinion, the chancellor Shen Tu Jia retreated on his own. He hated to make a mistake.

古文：错为内史，东出不便，更穿一门南出。
现代文：晁错作为内史，内史府的门东出不便，就另开了一个门南出。
English: As an internal history, it is inconvenient to go out from the east gate of the internal history department, so another door was opened to go out from the south.

古文：南出者，太上皇庙堧垣也。
现代文：这个南门，开凿在太上皇庙外空地的围墙上。
English: It enters and exits from the south, passing through the open space inside the outer wall and outside the inner wall of the Imperial Palace.

古文：嘉闻错穿宗庙垣，为奏，请诛错。
现代文：申屠嘉听说晁错打通了宗庙的墙，就上奏景帝，请诛杀晁错。
English: When Shen Tuo Jia heard that he had opened the wall of the ancestral temple by mistake, he appealed to Emperor Jing to please kill the mistake.

古文：客有语错，错恐，夜入宫上谒，自归上。
现代文：有人把此事告知晁错，晁错很害怕，夜里入宫求见景帝，向景帝自首，寻求保护。
English: A guest told the emperor in advance about his mistake, his fear of making a mistake, entered the palace late at night to see the emperor, and took the initiative to confess to the emperor.

古文：至朝，嘉请诛内史错。
现代文：到天亮上朝时，申屠嘉奏请诛杀内史晁错。
English: In the morning of the next day, Shen Tuo and Jia Suo requested to kill Neishi.

古文：上曰： 错所穿非真庙垣，乃外耎垣，故冗官居其中；且又我使为之，错无罪。 
现代文：景帝说： 晁错所打通的墙，并不是真正的庙墙，而是宗庙外边的围墙，原来的一些散官住在那里；而且又是我让晁错这样做的，晁错没有罪。 
English: Emperor Jing said, "The wall that Zou Er made open is not the real temple wall, but the outer wall of the ancestral temple, where some former officials lived; moreover, I let Zou Er do it, Zou Er is not guilty.

古文：丞相嘉谢。
现代文：丞相申屠嘉只好表示谢罪。
English: The chancellor, Shen Tu Jia, had no choice but to apologize.

古文：罢朝，嘉谓长史曰： 吾悔不先斩错乃请之，为错所卖。 
现代文：散朝之后，申屠嘉对长史说： 我后悔没有先把晁错斩首再去奏请皇上认可，现在却被晁错所欺。 
English: After the collapse of the dynasty, Shen Tu Jia said to Chang Shi: "I regret that I did not first behead Zibo and then appeal to the emperor for approval, but now I have been deceived by Zibo.

古文：至舍，因欧血而死。
现代文：回到府中，申屠嘉吐血而死。
English: Back at the residence, Shen Tu Jia vomited blood and died.

古文：错以此愈贵。
现代文：晁错因此越发尊贵。
English: Mistakes become more and more precious.

古文：秋，与匈奴和亲。
现代文：秋季，汉朝与匈奴和亲。
English: Autumn makes peace with the Xiongnu.

古文：八月，丁未，以御史大夫开封侯陶青为丞相。
现代文：八月，丁未，景帝任命御史大夫开封侯陶青为丞相。
English: In August, Ding Wei passed away, and Emperor Jing appointed Goshi Daifu Kaifeng Hou Tao Qing as chancellor.

古文：丁巳，以内史晁错为御史大夫。
现代文：丁巳，景帝任命内史晁错为御史大夫。
English: Soon after, Emperor Jing appointed Naishi Shizuku to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：彗星出东北。
现代文：彗星,出现在东北天空中。
English: The comet appeared in the northeast.

古文：秋，衡山雨雹，大者五寸，深者二尺。
现代文：秋季，衡山国境内下了一场冰雹，大的直径有五寸，冰雹堆积最厚的地方达二尺。
English: In autumn, Hengshan's hailstones are like rain. The largest hailstone is five inches, and the deepest is two feet.

古文：荧惑逆行守北辰，月出北辰间；岁星逆行天廷中。
现代文：火星逆行靠近了北极星，月亮反常地经过了北极星的天区；木星在太微星座逆行。
English: Mars retrogrades close to the North Star, the Moon anomalously passes through the celestial region of the North Star; Jupiter retrogrades in the constellation of Draco.

古文：梁孝王以窦太后少子故，有宠，王四十馀城，居天下膏腴地。
现代文：梁孝王因为是窦太后的小儿子，受到宠爱，封国内有四十多座城，封地是全国最肥沃富饶的土地。
English: Because he was the youngest son of Empress Dowager Dou, Liang Xiaowang was favored. There were more than forty cities in the fief, and the fief was the most fertile land in the country.

古文：赏赐不可胜道，府库金钱且百巨万，珠玉宝器多于京师。
现代文：给他的赏赐多得说不清，府库中所藏的金钱接近了一百万万，珠玉宝器比京城还要多。
English: It is hard to say how much he was awarded. The amount of money hidden in the treasury is close to one million million, and there are more jewels and treasures than the capital city.

古文：筑东苑，方三百馀里，广睢阳城七十里，大治宫室，为复道，自宫连属于平台三十馀里。
现代文：梁孝王修建了方圆三百余里的东苑，扩大其都城睢阳城的规模，使之达到周长七十里，大规模兴建宫室，修建了架于空中的通道，从宫室连接到平台达三十余里。
English: Liang Xiaowang built the Dongyuan with a circumference of more than 300 miles, expanded the scale of its capital city, Shenyang City, to reach a circumference of 70 miles, built a large-scale palace, built a passageway in the air, and connected the palace to the platform for more than 30 miles.

古文：招延四方豪俊之士，如吴人枚乘、严忌，齐人羊胜、公孙诡、邹阳，蜀人司马相如之属皆从之游。
现代文：招揽延聘四方豪杰，如吴地人枚乘、严忌，齐地人羊胜、公孙诡、邹阳，蜀地人司马相如之流，都跟随他交游。
English: He invited and recruited heroes from the four directions, such as the Wu people Mihari and Yanbei, the Qi people Yosheng, Gongsun Qi, Shenyang, and the Shu people Sima Xianglu, all of whom followed him.

古文：每入朝，上使使持节以乘舆驷马迎梁王于关下。
现代文：每当梁王入朝时，景帝都派出使者持皇帝符节、用四匹马拉着皇帝专用的车辆，到函谷关前迎接梁王。
English: Whenever Liang Wang entered the imperial court, Emperor Jing would send an emissary to meet Liang Wang in front of the Hanzhouguan Pass, carrying the imperial symbols and pulling the emperor's special vehicle with four horses.

古文：既至，宠幸无比，入则侍上同辇，出则同车，射猎上林中。
现代文：梁王到达长安之后，所受的宠幸无人可比；进入皇宫就陪侍景帝乘坐同一辇车，外出就与景帝乘坐同一御车，在上林苑中射猎。
English: After Liang Wang arrived in Chang'an, there is no one who can match the favors he received. When he entered the palace, he accompanied Emperor Jing to ride in the same carriage, and when he went out, he rode in the same carriage with Emperor Jing to go shooting in Shanglinyuan.

古文：因上疏请留，且半岁。
现代文：梁王借机向景帝上书，要求留居长安，一住将近半年。
English: Liang Wang took the opportunity to write a letter to Emperor Jing, requesting to stay in Chang'an for nearly half a year.

古文：梁侍中、郎、谒者著籍引出入天子殿门，与汉宦官无异。
现代文：梁王的侍中、郎官、谒者都在名册上登记，可出入天子的殿门，与朝廷的宦官没有区别。
English: Liang Wang's attendants, retainers, and eunuchs were all registered in the roster and could enter and leave the gate of the heavenly son, no different from the eunuchs of the imperial court.

