古文：明宗圣德和武钦孝皇帝，世本夷狄，无姓氏。
现代文：明宗圣德和武钦孝皇帝，生于少数民族，无姓氏。
English: He was born into an ethnic minority and had no surname.

古文：父霓，为雁门部将，生子邈佶烈，以骑射事太祖，为人质厚寡言，执事恭谨，太祖养以为子，赐名嗣源。
现代文：父霓，为雁门部将，生子邈佶烈，以善于骑射被太祖选为侍卫，为人忠厚寡言，办事认真谨慎，太祖收为养子，赐名嗣源。
English: His father was a goose gate keeper, and his son was a fierce warrior. He was chosen by his great-grandfather as an attendant because he was good at riding and shooting. He was a loyal person, and was careful in his actions. His great-grandfather adopted him and gave him the name Heir.

古文：梁攻兗、郓，硃宣、硃瑾来乞师，太祖遣李存信将兵三万救之。
现代文：梁军攻兖、郓二州，朱宣、朱瑾来求援军，太祖派李存信率兵三万去救援。
English: Liang's army attacked and occupied two provinces, Zhu Xuan and Zhu Xi came to ask for reinforcements, and Li Cunxin led 30,000 soldiers to the rescue.

古文：存信留莘县不进，使嗣源别以兵三干先击梁兵，梁兵解去。
现代文：存信留驻莘县不肯进军，太祖使嗣源另率三千兵士攻击梁军，梁军解围而去。
English: Cunxin, who was stationed in Jixian County, refused to march into the army. The great-grandfather sent Siyuan with another three thousand soldiers to attack Liang's army, and Liang's army broke the siege and left.

古文：存信留莘县久之，为罗弘信所袭，存信败走，嗣源独殿而还，太祖以嗣源所将骑五百号 横冲都 。
现代文：存信留莘县久了，被罗弘信袭击败走，嗣源独自殿后而还，太祖以嗣源所部五百骑兵将士为 横冲都 。
English: After Cunxin had stayed in Jixian County for a long time, he was attacked and defeated by Luo Hongxin, and Sogen went back to the palace on his own. The great-grandfather used Sogen's 500 cavalrymen as a rampaging army.

古文：光化三年，李嗣昭攻梁邢、洺，出青山，遇葛从周兵，嗣昭大败走，梁兵追之。
现代文：光化三年，李嗣昭攻梁邢、洛二州，出青山，遇葛从周兵，嗣昭败走，梁军追赶。
English: In the third year of Guanghua, Li Shizhao attacked Liangyao, Luo Erzhou, out of Qingshan, met Ge from Zhou Bing, was defeated by Shizhao and fled, pursued by Liang's army.

古文：嗣源从间道后至，谓嗣昭曰： 为公一战。 
现代文：嗣源从近道赶来，对嗣昭说： 为公一战。 
English: Sogen arrived from a shortcut, and said to Senzo: Let's have a public fight.

古文：乃解鞍砺镞，凭高为阵，左右指画，梁追兵望之莫测。
现代文：他下马解鞍磨箭镞，在高处摆开阵势，左右指画，梁追兵望见不知在干什么。
English: He dismounted, unsaddled his horse, sharpened his quiver of arrows, took up a position on high ground, pointed to the right and to the left, and chased the soldiers, looking as if he did not know what he was doing.

古文：嗣源急呼曰： 吾取葛公，士卒可无动！ 
现代文：嗣源大叫说： 我要杀葛公，士兵不要动！ 
English: Sogen shouted, "I want to kill Ge Gong, soldiers don't move!"

古文：乃驰骑犯之，出入奋击。嗣昭继进，梁兵解去。
现代文：说罢，纵马驰入敌阵，出入奋击，嗣昭也驰入敌阵，梁追兵退走了。
English: Having said that, Zongma galloped into the enemy lines and fought hard. Zi Zhao also galloped into the enemy lines. Liang chased the soldiers and retreated.

古文：嗣源身中四矢，太祖解衣赐药以劳之，由是李横冲名重四方。
现代文：嗣源身中四箭，太祖解衣看伤，赐药治疗多方慰劳，从此李横冲名扬四方。
English: He inherited four arrows in his body, the great-grandfather untied his clothes to see the injury, gave medicine to treat multiple consolation, and since then, Li Hengchong has become famous in all directions.

古文：梁、晋相拒于柏乡，梁龙骧军以赤、白马为两阵，旗帜铠仗皆如马色，晋兵望之皆惧。
现代文：梁、晋大军在柏乡对峙，梁龙骧军以赤、白马分为两阵，旗帜铠仗和马的颜色一样，晋兵望见都感到害怕。
English: The Liang and Jin armies confronted each other in Baoxiang. The Liang and Jin army was divided into two groups with red and white horses. The colors of the flags were the same as those of the horses. The Jin soldiers were scared.

古文：庄宗举钟以饮嗣源曰： 卿望梁家赤、白马惧乎？
现代文：庄宗举盅向嗣源敬酒说： 你望见梁军的赤、白马害怕吗？
English: Zhuozong held up his gong and toasted Siyuan, saying: "Do you see the red and white horses of Liang's army, are they afraid?

古文：虽吾亦怯也。 
现代文：连我也有点胆怯啊！ 
English: Even I'm a bit of a coward!

古文：嗣源笑曰： 有其表尔，翌日归吾厩也。 
现代文：嗣源笑着回答说 ：这是虚张声势，这些马明日都会归到我的马厩中来。 
English: With a smile, Sogen replied, "This is a bluff. These horses will all be returned to my stables tomorrow."

古文：庄宗大喜曰： 卿当以气吞之。 
现代文：庄宗高兴地说： 你应当以这种气魄去消灭敌人。 
English: Zhuangzong said happily, "You should use this kind of courage to destroy the enemy."

古文：因引钟饮酹，奋楇驰骑，犯其白马，挟二裨将而还。
现代文：嗣源拿起酒盅一饮而尽，然后上马挥鞭驰入敌阵，攻其白马，捉拿两名裨将而回。
English: Sogen picked up a bottle of wine and drank it down, then mounted his horse, rode into the enemy lines with a whip, attacked his white horse, captured two warlords and returned.

古文：梁兵败，以功拜代州刺史。
现代文：梁兵大败而去，嗣源因功被封为代州刺史。
English: Liang Bing suffered a crushing defeat and left, and Siyuan was awarded the title of "Daishu Shishi" for his achievements.

古文：庄宗攻刘守光，嗣源及李嗣昭将兵三万别出飞狐，定山后，取武、妫、儒三州。
现代文：庄宗攻打刘守光，嗣源及李嗣昭率兵三万出飞狐，定山后，攻取武、妫、儒三州。
English: Zhuangzong attacked Liu Shuguang, and Siyuan and Li Shuzhao led an army of thirty thousand out of the flying fox. After Jingshan, they captured Wuzhou, Handan and Ruzhou.

古文：庄宗已平魏州，因徇下磁、相，拜相州刺史、昭德军节度使。
现代文：庄宗攻占魏州，接着攻下磁、相二州，封嗣源为相州刺史、昭德军节度使。
English: Zhuangzong conquered Weizhou, and then the two states of Magnetism and Phase II, and the fiefs were inherited by Shishi of Phase II and Shengduo of the Zhao German Army.

古文：久之，徙镇安国。
现代文：后来，移镇安国。
English: Later, he moved to the town of Ankoku.

古文：契丹攻幽州，庄宗遣嗣源与阎宝等击走之。
现代文：契丹攻幽州，庄宗派嗣源与阎宝等人去赶走。
English: The Khitan attacked Yuzhou, and Zhuang Zong sent Sigen and Yan Bao and others to drive them away.

古文：同光元年，徙镇横海。
现代文：同光元年，移镇横海。
English: In the same year, it moved to Yokohai.

古文：是时，梁、唐相拒于河上，李继韬以潞州叛降梁，庄宗有忧色，召嗣源帐中，谓曰： 继韬以上党降梁，而梁方急攻泽州，吾出不意袭郓州，以断梁右臂，可乎？ 
现代文：梁、唐军对峙于河上，李继韬以潞州降梁，庄宗很忧愁，召嗣源商议说： 继韬以上党降梁，而梁正在急攻泽州，我们若出其不意袭击郓州，能够断梁的右臂，可以吗？ 
English: Liang and Tang's army were facing each other on the river. Li Jizhong was the first to surrender Liang by taking Bozhou. Zhuangzong was very sad, and summoned Shiyuan to discuss. He said, "Since Liang is attacking Zhezhou, if we attack Bozhou by surprise, we can cut off Liang's right arm. Is that okay?

古文：嗣源对曰： 夹河之兵久矣，苟非出奇，则大计不决，臣请独当之。 
现代文：嗣源说 ：隔河对峙久了，如果不出奇兵，很难成大事，我请求担当这一重任。 
English: Sogen said, "The confrontation across the river has been going on for a long time. If there are no miracle soldiers, it will be difficult to achieve great things. I ask you to take on this important task."

古文：乃以步骑五千涉济，至郓州，郓人无备，遂袭破之，即拜天平军节度使、蕃汉马步军副都总管。
现代文：于是率步骑五千渡过济水到达郓州，郓州军毫无防备，被一举攻破，嗣源当即被任命为天平军节度使、蕃汉马步军副都总管。
English: As a result, he led 5,000 horsemen across the Jishui River to Luzhou. The Luzhou army was defenseless and was defeated in one fell swoop. Sogen was immediately appointed as the military governor of the Tianping Army and the deputy head of the horse-marching army of Luzhou.

古文：梁军攻破德胜南栅，庄宗退保杨刘。王彦章急攻郓州，庄宗悉军救之，嗣源为前锋，击梁军。追至中都，擒彦章及梁监军张汉杰。
现代文：梁军攻破德胜南栅，庄宗退兵守杨刘城，王彦章急攻郓州，庄宗全军救援，嗣源为前锋进攻梁军，追至中都，捉住彦章及梁监军张汉杰。
English: Liang's army broke through the southern gate of Desheng, Zhuangzong retreated to guard Yang Liu City, Wang Yanzhang made a sudden attack on Zhangzhou, Zhuangzong's whole army came to the rescue, Siyuan was the forward to attack Liang's army, chased to Zhongdu, and caught Yanzhang and Liang Jian's army Zhang Hanjie.

古文：彦章虽败，而段凝悉将梁兵屯河上，庄宗未知所向，诸将多言乘胜以取青、齐，嗣源曰： 彦章之败，凝犹未知，使其闻之，迟疑定计，亦须三日。纵使料吾所向，亟发救兵，必渡黎阳，数万之众，舟楫非一日具也。
现代文：彦章虽败，而段凝仍将梁兵驻守河上，庄宗未知所向，众将希望乘胜攻占青、齐二州，嗣源说： 彦章兵败，段凝还不知道，即使他已知道了，从迟疑到定计，也要两、三天，纵然知道了我们的计划，立即发救兵，必然从黎阳渡河，几万军队，船一天能准备齐吗？
English: Although Yan Zhang was defeated, Duan Jian still stationed Liang's soldiers on the river. Zhuang Zong did not know where to go, and the crowd hoped to take advantage of the victory to capture Qing and Qi. Siyuan said: Yan Zhang was defeated, Duan Jian still did not know. Even if he knew, it would take two or three days from hesitation to final calculation. Even if he knew our plan, he would immediately send rescuers, and he would certainly cross the river from Liyang. Can tens of thousands of troops and ships be ready in one day?

古文：此去汴州，不数百里，前无险阻，方阵而行，信宿可至，汴州已破，段凝岂足顾哉！ 
现代文：从这里到汴州不过数百里，前边无险阻，大队人马前进很快就到，攻下了汴州，段凝还能有什么作为？ 
English: From here to Zhangzhou is only a few hundred miles, there are no obstacles ahead, the large group of people and horses will soon arrive and capture Zhangzhou. What else can Duan Rong do?

古文：而郭崇韬亦劝庄宗入汴，庄宗以为然，遣嗣源以千骑先至汴州，攻封丘门，王瓚开门降。
现代文：郭崇韬也劝庄宗进攻汴州，庄宗认为说得很对，派嗣源率千骑先到汴州，攻封丘门，王瓒开门投降。
English: Guo Chongzhen also advised Zhuangzong to attack Bozhou. Zhuangzong thought that this was very right. He sent Zhuangzong Yuan and a thousand horsemen to Bozhou first to capture Qiumen, and Wang Xi opened the door to surrender.

古文：庄宗后至，见嗣源大喜，手揽其衣，以头触之曰： 天下与尔共之。 
现代文：庄宗后到，见嗣源大喜，拉着他的衣服，以头相触说 ：天下与你共有。 
English: When Zhuang Zong arrived later, he was overjoyed to see the heir, took hold of his clothes, and touched his head, saying, "The whole world belongs to you."

古文：拜中书令。
现代文：立即任嗣源为中书令。
English: He immediately appointed Sigen to the position of Chushiro.

古文：二年，庄宗祀天南郊，赐以铁券。
现代文：第二年，庄宗在南郊祭天，赐给嗣源铁券。
English: In the second year, Zhuangzong held a divine service in the southern suburb and gave the heir a gift of iron money.

古文：五月，破杨立于潞州。
现代文：五月，击破杨立于潞州。
English: In May, Yang Li was defeated in Zhangzhou.

古文：六月，徙镇宣武，兼蕃汉内外马步军总管。
现代文：六月，移镇宣武，兼任蕃汉内外马步军总管。
English: In June, he moved to the town of Xuanwu and concurrently served as the general manager of the horse cavalry troops in and out of Shanhan.

古文：冬，契丹侵渔阳，嗣源败之于涿州。
现代文：冬，契丹侵犯渔阳，嗣源在涿州击败契丹。
English: In winter, Khitan invaded Yuyang, and Siyuan defeated Khitan in Zhangzhou.

古文：太后崩，请赴山陵，许之，而契丹侵边，乃止。十二月，遂朝于洛阳。
现代文：第三年，移镇成德。庄宗到邺，嗣源请求朝见，庄宗不允许。贞简太后病重，嗣源请求问候，庄宗又不允许。十二月，才到洛阳朝见庄宗。
English: In the third year, he moved to Chengde. Zhuangzong went to Handan, and Siyuan requested to see the emperor, but Zhuangzong did not allow it. Empress Dowager Zhengjian was seriously ill, and Siyuan asked for greetings, but Zhuangzong did not allow it. In December, he went to Luoyang to see Zhuangzong.

古文：天成元年，郭崇韬、硃友谦皆以谗死，嗣源以名位高，亦见疑忌。
现代文：天成元年，郭崇韬、朱友谦都因为庄宗听信谗言而被杀，嗣源因名位高也受到庄宗猜忌。
English: In the first year of Tiancheng, Guo Chongyao and Zhu Youqian were both killed for listening to Zhuo Zong's advice, and Siyuan was also suspected by Zhuo Zong because of his high rank.

古文：赵在礼反于魏，大臣皆请遣嗣源讨贼，庄宗不许。群臣屡请，庄宗不得已，遣之。
现代文：赵在礼在魏州谋反，大臣们都请求派嗣源去讨伐，庄宗不许，群臣屡请，庄宗不得已才派嗣源去讨伐。
English: Zhao Zaili plotted a rebellion in Weizhou. The ministers all asked Zhuangzong to send Xiyuan to fight, but Zhuangzong refused. The ministers repeatedly invited Zhuangzong, but he had no choice but to send Xiyuan to fight.

古文：三月壬子，嗣源至魏，屯御河南，在礼登楼谢罪。
现代文：三月二十五日，嗣源至魏，驻军御河南，在礼登楼谢罪。
English: On March 25th, Siyuan Zhiwei, the garrison commander of Henan, ascended the palace to apologize.

古文：甲寅，军变，嗣源入于魏，与在礼合，夕出，止魏县。
现代文：二十七日，军士哗变，强迫嗣源入魏城与在礼合军，傍晚嗣源出城到魏县。
English: On the 27th, the sergeants mutinied and forced Siyuan to enter Wei City and join the army in the ceremony. In the evening, Siyuan left the city and went to Wei County.

古文：丁巳，以其兵南，遣石敬瑭将三百骑为先锋。
现代文：三月一日，率兵南进，派石敬瑭率三百骑兵为先锋。
English: On March 1, he marched south at the head of an army and sent 300 cavalry led by Shi Jingjun as the vanguard.

古文：嗣源行过钜鹿，掠小坊马二千匹以益军。
现代文：嗣源经过巨鹿，掠小坊马二千匹补充军队。
English: After passing through the giant deer, the two thousand horses replenished the army.

古文：壬申，入汴州。
现代文：十六日，进入汴州。
English: On the 16th, it entered Zhangzhou.

古文：四月丁亥，庄宗崩。
现代文：四月一日，庄宗死。
English: On April 1, Zhuangzong died.

古文：己丑，入洛阳。
现代文：三日，嗣源率军进入洛阳。
English: On the third day, Siyuan led the army into Luoyang.

古文：甲午，监国，朝群臣于兴圣宫。
现代文：八日，自为监国，在兴圣宫朝见群臣。
English: On the 8th, he made himself the overseer of the country and met with his ministers in the morning at Heungseong Palace.

古文：乙未，中门使安重诲为枢密使。
现代文：九日，任命中门使安重诲为枢密使。
English: On the 9th, the Middle Gate Envoy An Chongchuan was appointed as the Privy Envoy.

古文：杀元行钦及租庸使孔谦。
现代文：杀元行钦及租庸使孔谦。
English: Killing Yuan Xingqin and hiring Yong Zi Kongqian.

古文：壬寅，左骁卫大将军孔循为枢密使。
现代文：十六日，任命左骁卫大将军孔循为枢密使。
English: On the 16th, he appointed General of the Left Division of the National Guard Kong Sam to be the Privy Envoy.

古文：丙午，始奠于西宫，皇帝即位于柩前，易斩缞以衮冕。
现代文：二十日，才到西宫在庄宗灵前祭奠，在柩前即皇帝位，换掉丧服穿上皇帝礼服。
English: It was not until the 20th day that he went to the West Palace to pay his respects in front of Zhuangzong's remains, and to be enthroned as emperor in front of the coffin. He changed out of his mourning clothes and put on the emperor's robes.

古文：壬子，魏王继岌薨。
现代文：二十六日，魏王继岌死。
English: On the 26th, Wei Wangji suddenly died.

古文：甲寅，大赦，改元。
现代文：二十八日，大赦，改元。
English: On the 28th, there was an amnesty and the era was changed.

古文：渤海国王大諲撰使大陈林来。
现代文：渤海国王大讠巽派使者大陈林来朝。
English: King Dafu of the Bohai Sea sent an envoy, Dafu Chenlin, to the imperial court.

古文：是月，张居翰罢。
现代文：当月，张居翰罢相。
English: That month, Zhang Juhan retired from acting.

古文：五月丙辰朔，太子宾客郑珏、工部尚书任圜为中书侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：五月一日，任命太子宾客郑珏和工部尚书任圜为中书侍郎，同中书门下平章事。
English: On May 1st, the guests of the prince, Zheng Qi and Shang Shu Ren Qi of the Ministry of Industry were appointed as the attendants of the Chinese calligraphy, and the Chinese calligraphy door was opened.

古文：戊辰，赵在礼为义成军节度使。
现代文：十三日，任命赵在礼为义成军节度使。
English: On the 13th, Zhao Zaili was appointed as the envoy of the Yicheng Army.

古文：六月丁酉，汴州控鹤军乱，指挥使张谏杀其权知州事高逖。
现代文：六月十二日，汴州控鹤军作乱，指挥使张谏杀权州知事高逖。
English: On June 12th, the Zhangzhou Guozhe Army made a riot, and the commander ordered Zhang Xi to kill the state governor Gao Qi.

古文：己亥，谏伏诛。
现代文：十四日，诏令处死张谏。
English: On the 14th, Zhang Yao was executed by imperial edict.

古文：秋七月庚申，安重诲杀殿直马延于御史台门。
现代文：七月六日，安重诲杀殿直马延于御史台门前。
English: On the 6th of July, the An-chong Choksu-den straight horse parade was held in front of the Goshidai Gate.

古文：甲申，流革于陵州，说于合州。
现代文：契丹使臣梅老述骨来朝，渤海使臣大昭佐来朝。二十五日，贬豆卢革为辰州刺史，韦说为叙州刺史。
English: The Khitan envoy Mei Lao Shubo came to the DPRK, and the Bohai envoy Dazhao Zuo came to the DPRK. On the 25th, Zhu Ruge was sent to Chenzhou, and Wei Wei was sent to Suzhou.

古文：八月乙酉朔，陕州硖石县民高存妻一产三男子。
现代文：三十日，把豆卢革流放到陵州，把韦说流放到合州。
English: On the 30th, Zhu Ruge was exiled to Lingzhou, and Wei Wei was exiled to Heshou.

古文：丁酉，以象笏三十二赐百官之无笏者。阅稼于冷泉宫。
现代文：八月十二日，皇帝以象笏三十二个赐给没有笏的百官到冷泉宫看庄稼。
English: On August 12th, the emperor gave thirty-two elephant shrews to the officials who had no shrews to go to the Reizei Palace to see the crops.

古文：己亥，契丹寇边。
现代文：十五日，契丹侵犯边境。
English: On the 15th, the Khitan invaded the border.

古文：丁未，平卢军节度使霍彦威杀其登州刺史王公俨。
现代文：二十三日，平卢军节度使霍彦威杀登州刺史王公俨。
English: On the 23rd, the Pinglu military festival made Huo Yanwei kill Wang Gongyi, the governor of Danzhou.

古文：甲寅，医官张志忠为太原少尹。
现代文：三十日，任命医官张志忠为太原少尹。
English: On the 30th, Zhang Zhizhong, a medical officer, was appointed as Taiyuan Shao Yin.

古文：九月己未，幸至德宫及袁建丰第。
现代文：九月五日，皇帝到至德宫和袁建丰家。
English: On September 5, the emperor went to the German Imperial Palace and Yuan Jianfeng's home.

古文：冬十月丁亥，云南山后两林百蛮都鬼主、右武卫大将军李卑晚使大鬼主傅能何华来。
现代文：十月四日，云南山后两林百蛮都鬼主、右武卫大将军李卑晚使大鬼主付能何华来朝。
English: On October 4th, the ghost master of Yunnan's Shanhou Two Forests and Hundred Barbarians, General Li Beiyang of the Right Division of Wuwei, sent the great ghost master Fu Neng He Hua to the DPRK.

古文：辛丑，契丹使没骨馁来告阿保机哀，废朝三日。
现代文：十八日，契丹使者没骨馁来报告阿保机的死讯，皇帝为此事三日不上朝。
English: On the 18th, the Khitan envoy did not have the guts to report the death of Ah Bao, and the emperor did not go to the court on the 3rd.

古文：旱，辛亥雨。
现代文：旱灾，二十八日下雨。
English: Drought, rain on the 28th.

古文：二年春正月癸丑朔，更名亶。
现代文：第二年一月一日，皇帝改名。
English: On January 1 of the following year, the emperor changed his name.

古文：癸亥，端明殿学士兵部侍郎冯道、太常卿崔协为中书侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十一日，任命端明殿学士、兵部侍郎冯道和太常卿崔协为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Feng Dao, an academician of the Duanming Palace and an attendant of the military department, and Cui Xie, the First Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, were appointed as the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters and the subordinate of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：二月壬午朔，新罗使张芬来。
现代文：二月一日，新罗国使臣张芬来朝。
English: On February 1, Zhang Fen, an envoy from Silla, arrived in Korea.

古文：西川节度使孟知祥杀其兵马都监李严。
现代文：西川节度使孟知祥杀其兵马都监李严。
English: Nishikawa Setsudo ordered Meng Zhixiang to kill his commander Li Yan.

古文：丙申，赦京师囚。
现代文：十五日，赦免京城囚犯。
English: On the 15th, he pardoned prisoners in Kyoto.

古文：郭从谦为景州刺史，既而杀之。
现代文：任命郭从谦为景州刺史，不久下令杀死。
English: He appointed Guo Congqian as the chief historian of Jingzhou, and soon ordered him to be killed.

古文：戊戌，山南东道节度使刘训为南面招讨使，以伐荆南。
现代文：十七日，任命山南东道节度使刘训为南面招讨使去讨伐荆南。
English: On the 17th, Liu Xun was appointed as the host of the festival in Shannan to invite the south side to go and fight Jingnan.

古文：夏四月庚寅，卢台军将龙晊等伏诛。
现代文：三月一日，皇帝到会节园，群臣交买宴钱。卢台军内乱，杀其将乌震。
English: Lin Yan, the envoy of Silla, came to the DPRK. On April 10, the general of the Lutetian army, Tomotsune, was executed.

古文：夏四月庚寅，卢台军将龙晊等伏诛。
现代文：新罗使者林彦来朝。四月十日，卢台军将领友日至等被处死。
English: Lin Yan, the envoy of Silla, came to the DPRK. On April 10, the general of the Lutetian army, Tomotsune, was executed.

古文：六月丙戌，任圜罢。
现代文：六月七日，任圜罢相。
English: On June 7, Ren Ren resigned as minister.

古文：庚子，幸白司马坡，祭突厥神。
现代文：二十一日，皇帝到白司马坡，祭突厥神。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor went to Baishmapo to offer sacrifices to the Turkic gods.

古文：秋七月甲子，随州刺史西方鄴取夔、忠、万州。
现代文：七月十五日，随州刺史西方邺攻取夔、忠、万三州。
English: On July 15, Suizhou defeated Xichang and captured Handan, Zhong and Manzhou.

古文：癸酉，杀豆卢革、韦说。
现代文：二十四日，下令杀豆卢革、韦说。
English: On the 24th, Lu Ge and Wei Zeng ordered to kill the beans.

古文：八月乙酉，牂牁使宋朝化及昆明使者来。
现代文：八月七日，使者宋朝化和昆明使者来朝。
English: On August 7, the emissaries of the Song Dynasty and the Kunming Emissary came to the DPRK.

古文：九月庚午，党项使如连山来。
现代文：九月二十二日，党项使者如连山来。
English: On September 22nd, the party's emissaries arrived in droves.

古文：壬申，契丹使梅老来。
现代文：二十四日，契丹使者梅老来。
English: On the 24th, the Khitan envoy Mei Lao arrived.

古文：冬十月乙酉，如汴州。
现代文：十月七日，皇帝出行汴州。
English: On October 7, the emperor traveled to Ganzhou.

古文：宣武军节度使硃守殷反，马步军都指挥使马彦超死之。
现代文：宣武军节度使朱守殷反叛，马步军都指挥使马彦超死难。
English: The festival of the Xuanwu Army caused Zhu Shouyin to rebel, and the command of the Ma Bu Army caused Ma Yan to die.

古文：己丑，守殷自杀。
现代文：十一日，朱守殷兵败自杀。
English: On the 11th day, Zhu Shouyin committed suicide.

古文：乙未，杀太子少保致仕任圜。
现代文：十七日，杀已罢官归家的太子少保任圜。
English: On the 17th, Prince Shōhō, who had been dismissed from his post and returned home, was killed.

古文：辛丑，德音释轻系囚。
现代文：二十三日，下诏释放在押囚犯。
English: On the 23rd, the prisoners were released.

古文：是月，传箭于霍彦威。
现代文：当月，皇帝赐箭给霍彦威。
English: That month, the emperor gave arrows to Huo Yanwei.

古文：十一月乙亥，契丹使梅老来。
现代文：十一月二十八日，契丹使者梅老来。
English: On November 28th, the Khitan envoy Mei Lao arrived.

古文：十二月己丑，回鹘西界吐蕃遣使者来。
现代文：十二月十二日，回鹘西边的吐蕃遣使者来朝。
English: On December 12, the envoys from Tubo, west of Hubei, arrived in the morning.

古文：甲辰，畋于东郊。
现代文：二十七日，在东郊打猎。
English: On the 27th, he went hunting in the eastern suburbs.

古文：丙午，追尊祖考为皇帝，妣为皇后；高祖聿谥曰孝恭，庙号惠祖，祖妣刘氏谥曰孝恭昭；曾祖敖谥曰孝质，庙号毅祖，祖妣张氏谥曰孝质顺；祖琰谥曰孝靖，庙号烈祖，祖妣何氏谥曰孝靖穆；考谥曰孝成，庙号德祖，妣刘氏谥曰孝成懿。
现代文：二十九日，追尊祖考为皇帝，妣为皇后：高祖聿谥曰孝恭昭；曾祖敖谥曰孝质，庙号毅祖，祖妣章氏谥曰孝质顺；祖琰谥曰孝靖，庙号列祖，祖妣何氏谥曰孝靖穆；考谥曰孝成，庙号德祖，妣刘氏谥曰孝成懿。
English: On the 29th, the emperor and empress were named after the revered ancestors: Gao Zu, called Xiao Jun Zhao; Zeng Zu, called Xiao Qiao, the temple name Yi Zu, the ancestor of the Zhang clan, called Xiao Qiao Shun; Zou Zu, called Xiao Jing, the temple name Re Zu, the ancestor of the Ho clan, called Xiao Jing Mu; Gao Zu, called Xiaocheng, the temple name De Zu, the ancestor of the Liu clan, called Xiaocheng Zhou.

古文：立庙于应州。
现代文：立庙于应州。
English: The temple was built in Yingzhou.

古文：三年春正月丁巳，契丹陷平州。
现代文：第三年一月十日，契丹攻陷平州。
English: On January 10 of the third year, Khitan forces invaded and occupied Pingzhou.

古文：二月辛巳，吐浑都督李绍虏来。
现代文：二月五日，吐浑都督李绍虏来朝。
English: On February 5th, the governor of Tuban, Li Shao-Ryu, came to the DPRK.

古文：乙未，孔循罢。
现代文：十九日孔循罢相。
English: On the 19th, Kongxun went on strike.

古文：戊戌，回鹘使李阿山来。
现代文：二十二日，回鹘使者李阿山来。
English: On the 22nd, Li Ashan, the emissary of Hui Dynasty, came.

古文：三月丁未朔，御札求直言。
现代文：三月一日皇帝下诏求直言。
English: On March 1st, the emperor issued an edict calling for frank talk.

古文：己未，郑珏罢。
现代文：十三日，郑珏罢相。
English: On the 13th, Zheng Qi resigned as premier.

古文：癸亥，成德军节度使王建立为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十七日，任命成德军节度使王建立为尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 17th, it was appointed as the German Army Festival to establish the king as the right-hand shooters of the book and the right-hand shooters of the book.

古文：西方鄴克归州。
现代文：西方邺攻克归州。
English: The West was defeated and returned to the state.

古文：戊辰，宣徽南院使范延光为枢密使。
现代文：二十二日，任命宣徽南院使范延光为枢密使。
English: On the 22nd, Fan Yanguang, the chief envoy of the Southern Court of Xuanhui, was appointed as a privy envoy.

古文：夏四月戊寅，延光罢。
现代文：四月三日，延光罢相。
English: On April 3, Yan Kuang retired from the stage.

古文：乙酉，达靼遣使者来。
现代文：十日，鞑靼遣使者来朝。
English: On the 10th, the Tartars sent an envoy to Korea.

古文：义武军节度使王都反。
现代文：义武军节度使王都反叛。
English: The festival of the volunteer army caused Wang Du to rebel.

古文：壬寅，归德军节度使王晏球为北面行营招讨使。
现代文：二十七日，任命归德军节度使王晏球为北面行营招讨使。
English: On the 27th, he was appointed as the envoy to invite the returning German troops to the north.

古文：五月，契丹秃馁入于定州。
现代文：五月，契丹秃馁攻入定州。
English: In May, the Khitan vultures invaded Dingzhou.

古文：辛酉，右卫上将军赵敬怡为枢密使。
现代文：十七日，任命右卫上将军赵敬怡为枢密使。
English: On the 17th, he appointed Admiral Zhao Jingyi as a privy envoy.

古文：封回鹘可汁王仁裕为顺化可汗。
现代文：封回鹘可汗王仁裕为顺化可汗。
English: Wang Renyu, the Hui Khan, became the Khan of Hue.

古文：秋七月己未，杀齐州防御使曹廷隐。
现代文：七月十日，下诏杀齐州防御使曹廷隐。
English: On July 10th, Cao Tingyin, the defense minister of Qizhou, was killed.

古文：八月，卢龙军节度使赵德钧执契丹首领惕隐赫邈。
现代文：八月，卢龙军节度使赵德钧捉住契丹首领惕隐赫邈。
English: In August, the Lulong Army Festival made Zhao Deyu capture the Khitan leader Tiyin Huan.

古文：庆州防御使窦廷琬反。
现代文：庆州防御使窦廷琬反叛。
English: The defense of Gyeongju made Dou Tingyu rebel.

古文：冬十月，静难军节度使李敬周讨之。
现代文：十月，派靖难军节度使李敬周去讨伐。
English: In October, he sent the Jingnan Army to the festival to make Li Jing Zhou go to the crusade.

古文：丁巳，突厥使张慕晋来。
现代文：十月十六日突厥使者张慕晋来朝。
English: On October 16, the Turkish envoy Zhang Mujin came to Korea.

古文：十一月壬午，吐浑使念九来。
现代文：十一月十一日，吐浑使者念九来朝。
English: On the 11th of November, the emissary from Tuban came to the morning to recite the Nine.

古文：甲午，王建立罢。
现代文：二十三日，王建立罢相。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Jianjun resigned from his post.

古文：十二月，李敬周克庆州，窦廷琬伏诛。
现代文：十二月，李敬周攻克庆州。窦廷琬被处死。
English: In December, Li Jing Zhou conquered Qingzhou. Dou Tingyu was executed.

古文：幸亥，幸康义诚第。
现代文：十二月十日，皇帝到康义诚家。
English: On December 10, the emperor went to Kang Yicheng's home.

古文：四年春正月壬辰，回鹘使掣拨都督来。
现代文：第四年正月二十一日，回鹘使者掣拨都督来朝。
English: On the twenty-first day of the first month of the fourth year, the emissary of the Hui Dynasty summoned the governor to come to China.

古文：二月癸卯，王晏球克定州。
现代文：二月三日，王晏球攻克定州。
English: On February 3, Wang Yeqiu marched to conquer Dingzhou.

古文：辛酉，晏球献馘俘。赵敬怡薨。
现代文：二十一日，晏球割取敌人的左耳以计数献功。赵敬怡逝世。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Zhao Jingyi died after he cut off his opponent's left ear with a racket.

古文：丁卯，崔协薨。
现代文：二十七日，崔协逝世。
English: On the 27th, Cui Xie passed away.

古文：庚午，至自汴州。
现代文：二月三十日皇帝从汴州到洛阳。
English: On February 30, the emperor left Zhangzhou for Luoyang.

古文：三月丙戌，杀侄从璨。
现代文：三月十六日，杀侄从璨。
English: On March 16th, he killed his nephew.

古文：夏四月，契丹寇云州。
现代文：四月，契丹侵犯云州。
English: In April, the Khitan invaded Yunnan.

古文：癸丑，契丹使撩括梅里来求秃馁，杀之。
现代文：十四日，契丹使者撩括梅里来要求放回秃馁，被杀。
English: On the 14th, Khitan emissaries, including Meri, came to demand the return of the vultures and were killed.

古文：甲寅，端明殿学士、尚书兵部侍郎赵凤为门下侍郎兼工部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十五日，任命端明殿学士、尚书兵部侍郎赵凤为门下侍郎兼工部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 15th, Zhao Feng, a scholar of the Duanming Palace and an attendant of the Shangshu Military Department, was appointed as a subordinate attendant and an attendant of the Shangshu Engineering Department and a subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate.

古文：五月己巳，朝群臣贺朔。
现代文：五月一日，群臣按道家之说贺朔。
English: On May 1st, according to the Taoists, the group of courtiers went to celebrate the new year.

古文：乙酉，追谥少帝曰昭宣光烈孝皇帝。
现代文：十七日，追谥少帝为昭宣光烈孝皇帝。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the young emperor was chased by Emperor Zhaoxuan.

古文：契丹寇云州。
现代文：契丹侵犯云州。
English: Khitan invade Yunnan.

古文：秋七月壬申，杀右金吾卫上将军毛璋。
现代文：七月五日，杀右金吾卫上将军毛璋。
English: On July 5th, General Mao Yao, the commander of the Right Wing of the Chinese Army, was killed.

古文：八月乙巳，黑水使骨至来。
现代文：八月九日，黑水使者骨至来朝。
English: On August 9, the Blackwater messenger Bone arrived in the morning.

古文：丁未，吐浑首领念公山来。
现代文：十一日，吐浑首领念公山来朝。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the chiefs of the Tuhun came to the Imperial Palace.

古文：乙卯，党项折遇明来。
现代文：十九日，党项折遇明来朝。
English: On the 19th, a party matter was brought to the attention of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：己未，高丽王建使张彬来。
现代文：二十三日高丽王使者张彬来朝。
English: On the 23rd, Zhang Bin, the envoy of the King of Goryeo, came to Korea.

古文：九月癸巳，杀供奉官乌昭遇。
现代文：九月二十七日，杀供奉官乌昭遇。
English: On September 27th, Wu Zhao, a sacrificial official, was killed.

古文：冬十二月辛丑，杀西平县令李商。
现代文：十二月六日，杀西平县令李商。
English: On December 6, Xiping County issued an order to kill Li Shang.

古文：长兴元年春正月丁卯，阅马于苑。
现代文：长兴元年一月二日，到养兽场阅马。
English: On January 2nd of the first year of Changxing, a horse parade was held at the zoo.

古文：辛卯，宣徽南院使硃弘昭为大内留守。
现代文：二十六日，任命宣徽南院使朱弘昭为大内留守。
English: On the 26th, Zhu Hongzhao, the chief envoy of the Southern Yuan of Xuanhui, was appointed to stay at the university.

古文：二月，戊戌，黑水兀兒遣使者来。
现代文：二月四日，黑水兀儿遣使者来朝。
English: On February 4th, Kurosaki sent an envoy to the DPRK.

古文：乙巳，天雄军节度使石敬瑭为御营使。
现代文：十一日，任命天雄军节度使石敬瑭为御营使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the commander of the Tianxiong Army appointed Shi Jingyao as the imperial envoy.

古文：癸丑，朝献于太微宫。
现代文：十九日，朝献于太微宫。
English: On the 19th, the morning was dedicated to the Taichung Palace.

古文：甲寅，享于太庙。
现代文：二十日，祭太庙。
English: On the 20th, the temple festival is over.

古文：乙卯，有事于南郊，大赦，改元。
现代文：二十一日，在南郊祭天，宣布大赦，改元。
English: On the 21st, in the southern suburb of Saitian, an amnesty was announced and the era was changed.

古文：三月庚寅，立淑妃曹氏为皇后。
现代文：三月二十六日，立淑妃曹氏为皇后。
English: On the 26th of March, Lixu Fei Cao became the empress.

古文：夏四月戊戌，安重诲使河中衙内指挥使杨彦温逐其节度使从珂。
现代文：四月五日，安重诲唆使河中衙内指挥使杨彦温驱逐其节度使从珂。
English: On April 5th, An Chongyi instigated the commanding officer of the Inner Palace of the Central Military Commission of the People's Republic of China to order Yang Yanwen to expel his commander from the capital.

古文：壬寅，西京留守索自通、侍卫步军指挥使药彦稠讨之。
现代文：九日派西京留守索自通、侍卫步军指挥使药彦稠去讨伐。
English: On the 9th, Saikyo left-behind Sotsitsuji and the commander of the bodyguard infantry sent Yakuhiko to fight.

古文：辛亥，自通执彦温杀之。
现代文：十八日，自通捉住彦温杀掉。
English: On the 18th, they captured Hikone and killed him.

古文：戊午，群臣上尊号曰圣明神武文德恭孝皇帝。
现代文：二十五日群臣上尊号曰圣明神武文德恭孝皇帝。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the group of high-ranking courtiers gave him the title of "Holy Emperor, God of War, Literature and Culture."

古文：辛酉，吐蕃首领于拨葛来。
现代文：二十八日，吐蕃首领于拨葛来朝。
English: On the 28th, the leader of Tu Wei, Yu Zhuge, came to the DPRK.

古文：五月丁丑，回鹘使孽栗祖来。
现代文：五月十四日，回鹘使者孽栗祖来朝。
English: On the fourteenth day of the fifth month, the emissary of the Hui Dynasty, Wei Li Zu, came to the imperial court.

古文：庚辰，回鹘使安黑连来。
现代文：十七日，回鹘使者安黑连来朝。
English: On the 17th, the emissary of the Hui Dynasty, An Heirian, came to Korea.

古文：秋七月壬午，访庄宗子孙瘗所。
现代文：七月二十一日，访庄宗子孙埋葬处。
English: On July 21st, they visited the burial place of Zhuang Zong's children and grandchildren.

古文：八月乙未，忠武军节度使张延朗为三司使。
现代文：八月十四日，任命忠武军节度使张延朗为三司使。
English: On August 14th, Zhang Yanlang was appointed as the third envoy of the loyal military.

古文：壬寅，杀捧圣都军使李行德、大将张俭，灭其族。
现代文：十一日，杀捧圣军使李行德、十将张俭，灭其族。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Xingde, the commander of the Sacred Army, and Zhang Jian, the 10th commander, were killed and their families exterminated.

古文：吐浑来附。
现代文：吐浑来归附。
English: Tohun came to be annexed.

古文：封子从荣为秦王。
现代文：封子从荣为秦王。
English: Fushi was crowned as the King of Qin.

古文：九月壬戌，吐蕃使王满儒来。
现代文：十七日，海州将王传极杀其刺史陈宣，叛吴来降。二十四日，吐蕃使者王满儒来朝。
English: On the seventeenth day, Haizhou sent Wang Chuanji to assassinate Chen Xuan, a traitor to Wu. On the twenty-fourth day, Wang Manju, a messenger from Tubo, came to the imperial court.

古文：东川节度使董璋反。
现代文：东川节度使董璋反叛。
English: Dongchuan Jiedu caused Dong Xi to rebel.

古文：甲申，成德军节度使范延光为枢密使。
现代文：八月二十四日，吐浑康合毕来朝。二十五日，封子从厚为宋王。九月二日，任命成德军节度使范延光为枢密使。
English: On the 24th of August, Tu Hun Kang came to the imperial court. On the 25th, Hun Zi was crowned King of Song. On the 2nd of September, Fan Yan Guang was appointed as a privy envoy to the German military festival.

古文：丁亥，石敬瑭为东川行营都招讨使。
现代文：二十七日，任命石敬瑭为东川行营都招讨使。
English: On the 27th, Shi Jingyao was appointed as the chief envoy of the Dongchuan Campaign.

古文：冬十月丁酉，始藏冰。甲辰，骁卫上将军致仕张筠进助军粟。
现代文：十月十四日，原骁卫上将军、已告老归家的张筠进助军粟。
English: On October 14th, Zhang Xuan, a retired general, came to the aid of the troops.

古文：乙巳，董璋陷阆州，杀节度使李仁矩，指挥使姚洪死之。
现代文：十五日，董璋攻陷阆州，杀节度使李仁矩，指挥使姚洪死。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Dong Xuan attacked and occupied Zhangzhou. He killed Li Rincang and ordered the death of Yao Hong.

古文：孟知祥反。
现代文：孟知祥反叛。
English: Meng Zhixiang rebelled.

古文：十一月庚申朔，秦王从荣受册，谒于太庙。
现代文：十一月一日，秦王从荣册封，祭告太庙。
English: On November 1st, King Qin was enthroned in the Book of Rites, and the temple was dedicated.

古文：丙戌，契丹东丹王突欲来奔。
现代文：二十七日，契丹东丹王突欲逃来归附。
English: On the 27th, the King of Khitan Dongdan suddenly wanted to escape and return.

古文：安重诲讨董璋。沙州曹义金遣使者来。
现代文：十二月十八日，二王后、秘书丞、餋国公杨仁矩逝世，废朝一日。十二月二十八日，回鹘顺化可汗王仁裕使者翟末斯来朝。
English: On the 18th of December, the second queen, the secretary, and the prince Yang Rincang died, and the dynasty was abolished on the 1st of December. On the 28th of December, the envoy of the Hui Hui Khan, King Rinyu, came to the country.

古文：二年春正月戊辰，党项使折七移来。
现代文：第二年一月九日，党项使者折七移来朝。
English: On January 9th of the following year, the emissaries of the party moved to the DPRK.

古文：庚辰，达靼使列六薛娘居来。
现代文：二十一日，鞑靼使者列六薛娘居来朝。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, six Tatar envoys came to the Imperial Palace.

古文：二月丁酉，幸安元信第。
现代文：二月九日，皇帝到安元信家。
English: On February 9, the emperor went to An Yuan Xin's home.

古文：戊戌，突厥使杜阿熟、吐浑使康万琳来。
现代文：十日，突厥使者杜阿熟、吐浑使者康万琳来朝。
English: On the 10th, the Turkic emissary Du A Rong and the Tibetan emissary Kang Wanlin came to the DPRK.

古文：辛丑，安重诲罢。
现代文：十三日，安重诲罢相。
English: On the thirteenth day, they retired peacefully.

古文：三月，赵凤罢。
现代文：三月，赵凤罢相。
English: In March, Zhao Feng resigned from the post.

古文：丁亥，太常卿李愚为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：三月二十九日，任命太常卿李愚为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On March 29, Li Gu, the First Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, was appointed as the Secretary of the CPC Central Committee and the Vice-Minister of the CPC Central Committee.

古文：夏四月甲辰，宣徽北院使赵延寿为枢密使。
现代文：四月十六日，任命宣徽北院使赵延寿为枢密使。
English: On April 16th, Zhao Yanshou, the new envoy of the Northern Court of Xuanhui, was appointed as the Privy Envoy.

古文：甲寅，董璋陷遂州，武信军节度使夏鲁奇死之。
现代文：二十六日，董璋攻占遂州，武信军节度使夏鲁奇死。
English: On the 26th, Dong Xuan invaded and occupied Suizhou, and the Wuxin Army killed Xialuqi.

古文：乙卯，以旱赦流罪以下囚。
现代文：二十七日，因天旱赦免流罪以下囚犯。
English: On the 27th, due to the drought, the following prisoners were pardoned.

古文：闰五月丁酉，杀太子太师致仕安重诲及其妻张氏、子崇赞崇绪。
现代文：闰五月十日，杀太子太师、已告老归家的安重诲及其妻张氏，子崇赞、崇绪。
English: On the 10th day of leap May, An Chongyuan and his wife Zhang, and their sons, Chongzhan and Chongxu, who had already retired to their homes, were killed.

古文：秋八月己未，契丹使邪姑兒来。
现代文：八月四日，契丹使者邪姑儿来朝。
English: On August 4th, the Khitan envoy, the evil aunt, came to the DPRK.

古文：九月丁亥，放五坊鹰隼。
现代文：九月三日，放五坊鹰隼。
English: On September 3rd, the five-square eagle beacon was released.

古文：冬十一月戊申，吐蕃遣使者来。
现代文：十一月二十五日，吐蕃遣使者来朝。
English: On November 25th, Tubo sent an envoy to the DPRK.

古文：辛丑，旌表棣州民邢钊门闾。
现代文：二十八日，旌表棣州民邢钊门闾。
English: On the 28th, the official opening ceremony was held.

古文：十二月甲寅朔，除铁禁，初税农具钱。
现代文：十二月一日，废除铸铁的禁令，初税农具钱。
English: On December 1, the ban on cast iron was abolished, and the initial tax on agricultural tools was raised.

古文：己未，西凉府遣使者来。
现代文：六日，西凉府遣使者来朝。
English: On the 6th, Seiryo-fu sent an envoy to Korea.

古文：己巳，回鹘使安永思来。
现代文：十六日，回鹘使者安求思来朝。
English: On the 16th, the emissary of Hui Dynasty, An Qiusi, came to the DPRK.

古文：辛未，渤海使文成角来。
现代文：十八日，渤海使者文成角来朝。
English: On the 18th, the messenger of the Bohai Sea, Wen Cheng Kok, came to the DPRK.

古文：党项寇方渠。
现代文：党项侵犯方渠。
English: The party's violation of the party line has ended.

古文：三年春正月庚子，契丹使拽骨来。
现代文：第三年一月八日，契丹使者拽骨来京。
English: On January 8 of the third year, the Khitan emissary came to Beijing.

古文：己酉，渤海、回鹘皆遣使者来。
现代文：二十七日，渤海、回鹘皆遣使者来朝。
English: On the 27th, the Bohai and Hui dynasties all sent emissaries to the imperial court.

古文：二月己卯，静难军节度使药彦稠及党项战于牛兒谷，败之。
现代文：二月二十七日，静南军节度使药彦稠在牛儿谷打败党项军。
English: On February 27th, the Jingnan Army defeated the Dangxiang Army in Niu'er Valley.

古文：三月甲申，契丹遣使者来。
现代文：三月二日，契丹遣使者来朝。
English: On March 2, Khitan sent an envoy to Korea.

古文：夏四月庚申，新罗遣使者来。
现代文：四月八日新罗遣使者来朝。
English: On April 8, Silla sent an envoy to Korea.

古文：五月己丑，二王後詹事司直杨延绍袭封酅国公。
现代文：五月八日，二王后、詹事司直杨延绍袭封餋国公。
English: On May 8th, the second queen, Zhan Zhizhi Zhi Zhi Yang Yan Shao, succeeded to the title of Duke of Yan.

古文：丙午，孟知祥攻董璋，陷绵州。
现代文：二十五日，孟知祥进攻董璋，攻陷绵州。
English: On the 25th, Meng Zhixiang attacked Donglu and captured Mianzhou.

古文：六月甲寅，封王建为高丽国王、大义军使孟知祥杀董璋，陷东川。
现代文：六月三日，封王建为高丽国王、大义军使。孟知祥杀董璋，攻占东川。
English: On June 3, Feng Wangjian became the King of Goryeo and the envoy of the Great Yi Army. Meng Zhixiang killed Dong Xuan and captured Dongchuan.

古文：达靼首领颉哥以其族来附。
现代文：鞑靼首领颉哥率全族来归附。
English: The Tatar chieftain, Genko, led the whole nation to annexation.

古文：秋八月己卯，吐蕃遣使者来。
现代文：八月三十日，吐蕃遣使者来朝。
English: On August 30th, Tubo sent an envoy to the DPRK.

古文：冬十月庚申，幸石敬瑭第。
现代文：十月十二日，皇帝到石敬瑭家。
English: On October 12th, the emperor went to Shi Jingyao's home.

古文：四年春正月庚寅，端明殿学士、兵部侍郎刘昫为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：第四年一月十三日，任命端明殿学士、兵部侍郎刘日句为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On January 13th of the fourth year, Liu Nichiku, a scholar of Duanming Palace and an attendant of the military department, was appointed as the attendant of the middle school and the subordinate disciple of the middle school.

古文：二月戊午，孟知祥使硃滉来。
现代文：二月十二日，孟知祥使朱氵晃来朝。
English: On February 12, Meng Zhixiang sent Zhu Rongguo to the North.

古文：三月甲辰，追册晋国夫人夏氏为皇后。
现代文：三月二十八日，追封晋国夫人夏氏为皇后。
English: On March 28th, the wife of Jin, Lady Xia, was enthroned as empress.

古文：夏五月戊寅，封子从珂为潞王，从益许王，侄从温兗王，从璋洋王，从敏泾王。丙戌，契丹使述骨卿来。
现代文：五月三日，封子从珂为潞王、从益许王，侄从温衮王、从璋洋王、从敏泾王，十一日，契丹使者述骨卿来。
English: On the 3rd of May, the emissary of Khitan, Lord Shubon, came from King Ke, from King Yixu, his nephew from King Wen, from King Shiyang, from King Min, and on the 11th.

古文：秋七月乙未，回鹘都督李末来，献白鹘，命放之。
现代文：七月二十一日，回鹘都督李末来朝，献白鹘，命放掉。
English: On July 21, Li Matsu, the governor of Hui Province, came to the capital to offer egrets, and his life was spared.

古文：冬十月庚申，范延光罢。
现代文：八月四日，大赦。九月二十五日，赵延寿罢相。
English: On August 4th, there was a general amnesty. On September 25th, Zhao Yanshou resigned as minister.

古文：三司使冯赟为枢密使。
现代文：任命山南东道节度使朱弘昭为枢密使。
English: The appointment of Shannan as the host of the festival made Zhu Hongzhao a confidential envoy.

古文：壬申，幸士和亭，得疾。
现代文：二十九日，到士和亭，得病。
English: On the 29th, he went to Shihatei and fell ill.

古文：十一月壬辰，秦王从荣以兵入兴圣宫，不克，伏诛。
现代文：十一月二十日，秦王从荣率兵攻兴圣宫，失败被杀。
English: On November 20, Qin King Rong Rong led an army to attack the Holy Palace of Xing, but was defeated and killed.

古文：乙未，侍卫亲军都指挥使康义诚杀三司使孙岳。
现代文：二十三日，侍卫亲军都指挥使康义诚杀三司使孙岳。
English: On the 23rd, the bodyguards and the troops were all commanded by the envoy Kang Yixing to kill the three envoys Sun Yue.

古文：戊戌，皇帝崩于雍和殿。
现代文：二十六日，皇帝在雍和殿病死。
English: On the 26th, the emperor died of illness in Yonghe Hall.

古文：呜呼，自古治世少而乱世多！
现代文：唉，自古以来治世少而乱世多！
English: Alas, since ancient times, there have been fewer reigns and more chaos!

古文：三代之王有天下者，皆数百年，其可道者，数君而已，况于后世邪！
现代文：三代之王有天下者，都是数百年，可以赞颂者，不过几个国君而已，何况后世呢！
English: Three generations of kings have ruled the world for hundreds of years, and can be praised, but only a few sovereigns, not to mention future generations!

古文：况于五代邪！
现代文：更何况五代呢！
English: Not to mention five generations!

古文：予闻长老为予言： 明宗虽出夷狄，而为人纯质，宽仁爱人。 
现代文：我听长辈对我说 ：明宗虽出身于少数民族，但为人纯质，宽仁爱人。 
English: I heard my elders say to me, "Although Mingzong was born into an ethnic minority, he is a pure person, and he is generous and loving.

古文：于五代之君，有足称也。
现代文：对于五代的君主来说，称得上好皇帝。
English: For a monarch of five generations, he deserves to be called a good emperor.

古文：尝夜焚香，仰天而祝曰： 臣本蕃人，岂足治天下！
现代文：他常常夜里焚香，仰天而祝说： 臣本蕃人，怎能治理好天下？
English: He would often burn incense at night, look up to the heavens and wish: "My loyal subjects, how can you govern the world well?

古文：世乱久矣，愿天早生圣人。 
现代文：世乱太久了，希望早生圣人。 
English: The world has been in turmoil for too long. I hope I'm born a saint.

古文：自初即位，减罢宫人、伶官；废内藏库，四方所上物，悉归之有司。
现代文：初即位，放出宫人、伶官；废内藏库，四方所贡之物，全都交有关机构处理。
English: When he ascended the throne for the first time, he released courtiers and eunuchs; the abandoned treasury and the objects donated by the four parties were all handed over to the relevant agencies for disposal.

古文：广寿殿火灾，有司理之，请加丹雘，喟然叹曰： 天以火戒我，岂宜增以侈邪！ 
现代文：广寿殿火灾，有关部门处理，请加强保护。明宗叹气说： 天以火警告我，我怎能增加奢侈呢？ 
English: Guangshou Hall fire, the relevant departments are handling, please strengthen protection. Mingzong sighed and said: Heaven warned me with fire, how can I increase luxury?

古文：岁尝旱，已而雪，暴出庭中，诏武德司宫中无得扫雪，曰： 此天所以赐我也。 
现代文：天气常干旱，又突然下雪，皇帝坐庭园中，下诏宫中不要扫雪，说 ：这是天赐给我的。 
English: The weather is often dry, and then it suddenly snows. The emperor sits in the garden, and tells the palace not to sweep the snow away, saying, "This was given to me by heaven."

古文：数问宰相冯道等民间疾苦，闻道等言谷帛贱，民无疾疫，则欣然曰： 吾何以堪之，当与公等作好事，以报上天。 
现代文：多次向宰相冯道等人问民间疾苦，听说谷帛贱，民无疾疫，就高兴地说： 我有何德能得天如此重爱，应与大家都做好事，来报答上天之恩。 
English: He repeatedly asked Prime Minister Feng Dao and others about the hardships of the people, and when he heard that the valley was low-lying and the people had no disease, he said happily: "How can I be so loved by heaven, and I should do good things with everyone to repay the grace of heaven."

古文：吏有犯赃，辄置之死，曰： 此民之蠹也！ 
现代文：官吏有贪污的，常被处死刑，说 ：这种人是民贼、是蛀虫啊！ 
English: Corrupt officials were often sentenced to death, saying, "These people are thieves and maggots!"

古文：以诏书褒廉吏孙岳等，以风示天下。
现代文：下诏褒奖廉洁的官吏孙岳等人，以昭示天下。
English: He issued the following edict to commend the incorruptible official Sun Yue and others, as a testimony to the world.

古文：其爱人恤物，盖亦有意于治矣。
现代文：他这样爱人恤物，完全是有意把国家治理好。
English: He loves people and things so much, and it is entirely his intention to govern the country well.

古文：其即位时，春秋已高，不迩声色，不乐游畋。
现代文：他即位时，年龄已高，不近声色，不乐游猎。
English: When he ascended to the throne, he was already old, not close to the tone, and did not enjoy hunting.

古文：在位七年，于五代之君，最为长世，兵革粗息，年屡丰登，生民实赖以休息。
现代文：在位七年，是五代君主中最长寿的人，战争基本上停止了，年年丰收，百姓因此得到休养生息。
English: During his seven years on the throne, he was the longest-lived person in five generations of monarchs. The war basically stopped, and the harvest was plentiful every year, so the people were able to rest and recuperate.

古文：然夷狄性果，仁而不明，屡以非辜诛杀臣下。
现代文：但是他有少数民族的习惯，虽仁慈而不明，往往不分是非地杀大臣。
English: But he has the habit of ethnic minorities, although benevolent and unclear, often kill the minister regardless of right and wrong.

古文：至于从荣父子之间，不能虑患为防，而变起仓卒，卒陷之以大恶，帝亦由此饮恨而终。
现代文：甚至对从荣父子之间的事都不能防患于未然，祸起仓卒，使他犯了反叛大罪，皇帝也因此饮恨而死。
English: Even the affairs between Emperor Rong Rong and his son could not be prevented in advance, and the disaster occurred in a hurry, causing him to commit the heinous crime of rebellion, and the emperor died from drinking hatred.

古文：当是时，大理少卿康澄上疏言时事，其言曰： 为国家者有不足惧者五，深可畏者六：三辰失行不足惧，天象变见不足惧，小人讹言不足惧，山崩川竭不足惧，水旱虫蝗不足惧也；贤士藏匿深可畏，四民迁业深可畏，上下相徇深可畏，廉耻道消深可畏，毁誉乱真深可畏，直言不闻深可畏也。 
现代文：当时，大理少卿康澄上疏谈时事，说 ：掌握国家权力的人有不足惧者五，深可畏者六：日、月、星发生变异不足惧，天象变异不足惧，小人流言蜚语不足惧，山崩川竭不足惧，水旱虫蝗不足惧；贤士躲藏深可畏，人民流亡深可畏，上下相徇深可畏，廉耻丧失深可畏，毁誉乱真深可畏，直言不闻深可畏啊！ 
English: At that time, Dali Shaoqing Kangcheng casually talked about current affairs and said: Those who hold state power have five fears and six fears: the sun, the moon and the stars are not afraid to mutate, the celestial objects are not afraid to mutate, the villains are not afraid of rumors, the landslides and rivers are not afraid, and the locusts are not afraid; the sages are afraid of hiding, the people are afraid of exile, the people are afraid of fighting with each other, the loss of shame is afraid, the destruction of reputation is really afraid, and the straight talk is not afraid!

古文：识者皆多澄言切中时病。
现代文：有见识的人都说这些话切中时弊。
English: People with insight say these words are right on the mark.

古文：若从荣之变，任圜、安重诲等之死，可谓上下相徇，而毁誉乱真之敝矣。
现代文：从荣之变，任圜、安重诲等人之死，可谓上下相徇，毁誉乱真之弊了。
English: From the change of Rong, the death of Ren Rong, An Rong and others, it can be said that the top and bottom are at odds with each other, and the reputation is ruined.

古文：然澄之言，岂止一时之病，凡为国者，可不戒哉！
现代文：然而康澄的话，也不是指一时的弊病，凡是掌握国家政权的人，都要经常警戒自己才好。
English: However, Kangcheng's words do not refer to a momentary malaise. All those who hold state power should always be on their guard.

