古文：昭明太子统，字德施，高祖长子也。
现代文：昭明太子萧统，字德施，梁武帝长子。
English: The eldest son of Emperor Liangwu, Zhaoming Prince Xiao Tong, surnamed Deshi.

古文：母曰丁贵嫔。
现代文：生母是丁贵嫔。
English: The birth mother is Ding Guizhou.

古文：初，高祖未有男，义师起，太子以齐中兴元年九月生于襄阳。
现代文：当初，梁武帝没有男孩，梁武帝率兵起义讨伐东昏侯时，萧统于齐中兴元年九月在襄阳出世。
English: At first, Emperor Liangwu did not have a son. When Emperor Liangwu led his troops in the uprising against the Eastern Wei, Xiao Tong was born in September of the first year of the Qing Dynasty in Xiangyang.

古文：高祖既受禅，有司奏立储副，高祖以天下始定，百度多阙，未之许也。
现代文：梁武帝登帝位后，有司上书请求立储君，梁武帝认为天下刚刚安定，很多制度缺失还有待进一步健全，便不同意册立皇位继承人。
English: After Emperor Liangwu ascended the throne, there was a petition asking for the establishment of a crown prince. Emperor Liangwu believed that the world had just been stabilized and that many system deficiencies still needed to be further improved, so he did not agree to register an heir to the throne.

古文：群臣固请，天监元年十一月，立为皇太子。
现代文：后来在大臣们的坚决请求下，天监元年十一月，萧统被梁武帝立为皇太子。
English: Later, at the firm request of the ministers, Xiao Tong was appointed crown prince by Emperor Liangwu in November of the first year of Tianjing.

古文：时太子年幼，依旧居于内，拜东宫官属文武，皆入直永福省。太子生而聪睿，三岁受《孝经》、《论语》，五岁遍读五经，悉能讽诵。
现代文：当时太子年幼，仍旧居在皇宫。太子萧统天生聪明、机灵，三岁启蒙学习《孝经》、《论语》，五岁时把 五经 全部学完，并能加以背诵。
English: At that time, the prince was young and still lived in the imperial palace. Prince Xiao Tong was naturally clever and quick-witted. At the age of three, he was initiated into the study of "The Book of Filial Piety" and "The Analects." At the age of five, he completed all the Five Classics and was able to recite them.

古文：五年五月庚戌，始出居东宫。
现代文：五年六月十七日才搬出皇宫，住进东宫。
English: They moved out of the Imperial Palace and into the East Palace on June 17, 1905.

古文：太子性仁孝，自出宫，恒思恋不乐。
现代文：萧统生性仁慈孝顺，自从离开皇宫后，时常思恋父母，心情总是郁郁不乐。
English: Xiao Tong was born with a benevolent and filial nature. Since he left the palace, he often missed his parents and was always depressed.

古文：高祖知之，每五日一朝，多便留永福省，或五日三日乃还宫。
现代文：梁武帝知道这一情况后，便让他每五天朝见一次，时常居留永福省，有时三天，有时五天不等，然后才回东宫。
English: When Emperor Liangwu learned of this, he made him see him every five days in the morning, and he often stayed in Yongfu Province, sometimes for three days, sometimes for five days, before returning to the East Palace.

古文：八年九月，于寿安殿讲《孝经》，尽通大义。
现代文：八年九月，梁武帝在寿安殿考察儿子的学业，让萧统讲解《孝经》，萧统的讲解大义突出、条理清晰。
English: In September of the eighth year, Emperor Liang Wudi inspected his son's studies at the Shou'an Palace, and asked Xiao Tong to explain the "Filial Piety Sutra." Xiao Tong's explanation was outstanding and clear.

古文：讲毕，亲临释奠于国学。
现代文：讲解完毕后，又亲自到国学陈设酒宴祭奠至圣先师。
English: After the lecture, he personally went to the Chinese University to set up a wine banquet to pay tribute to the holy pioneer.

古文：十四年正月朔旦，高祖临轩，冠太子于太极殿。
现代文：十四年正月初一，梁武帝在殿前的平台上接见臣僚，在太极殿给太子萧统举行加冠礼。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 14th year, Emperor Liangwu received his ministers on the platform in front of the hall, and held a crowning ceremony for Prince Xiao Tong in the Taiji Hall.

古文：旧制，太子著远游冠，金蝉翠緌缨；至是，诏加金博山。
现代文：过去的规定，太子戴远游冠，佩金蝉翠謊缨；这次皇帝下诏让太子戴金博山冠。
English: In the past, the prince had to wear the crown of travel and the golden cicada; this time, the emperor decreed that the prince should wear the crown of Mount Jinbo.

古文：太子美姿貌，善举止。
现代文：萧统长相英俊，说话办事都很得体。
English: Xiao Tong is handsome in appearance, and speaks and acts in a proper manner.

古文：读书数行并下，过目皆忆。
现代文：读书时一目数行，并且能做到过目不忘。
English: When reading, read a few lines at a time, and be able to do it without forgetting.

古文：每游宴祖道，赋诗至十数韵。
现代文：每逢游宴祖道的盛会，作诗可赋至十数韵。
English: Whenever there is a grand feast in the ancestral way, poems can be composed to more than ten rhymes.

古文：或命作剧韵赋之，皆属思便成，无所点易。
现代文：有时梁武帝让他作剧韵诗，他总是稍加思考便能作出，而且不用串改修饰。
English: Sometimes Emperor Liangwu asked him to compose a dramatic rhyme, which he could always do with a little thought, and without string modification.

古文：高祖大弘佛教，亲自讲说；太子亦崇信三宝，遍览众经。
现代文：梁武帝大力提倡佛教，并亲自讲解佛经。太子萧统也十分崇信佛教三宝佛、法、僧，翻阅了很多佛教经书。
English: Emperor Liangwu vigorously advocated Buddhism and personally explained Buddhist scriptures. Crown Prince Xiao Tong also highly revered Buddhism's three treasures of Buddha, Dharma and monk, and read many Buddhist scriptures.

古文：乃于宫内别立慧义殿，专为法集之所。招引名僧，谈论不绝。
现代文：并在宫内特建慧义殿，作为讲解佛教教义的教堂，招徕有名望的僧侣，经常在一起谈论研究佛经。
English: He also specially built the Egyi Hall within the palace as a church to teach Buddhist teachings, inviting renowned monks and often discussing the study of Buddhist scriptures together.

古文：太子自立三谛、法身义，并有新意。
现代文：萧统自己还创立了二谛法身经义，很有自己独到的见解。
English: Xiao Tong himself also founded the Law of Two Truths, which has its own unique views.

古文：普通元年四月，甘露降于慧义殿，咸以为至德所感焉。
现代文：普通元年四月，有甘露降落在慧义殿，大家都认为这是太子的美德感动了上天。
English: In April of the first year of the common era, some nectar fell on Huiyi Palace, and everyone thought that it was the virtue of the prince that moved heaven.

古文：三年十一月，始兴王憺薨。旧事，以东宫礼绝傍亲，书翰并依常仪。
现代文：七年十一月，太子萧统的生母丁贵嫔生病了，他回到永福省，日夜守候在病床旁，观察病情，睡觉时连衣服都不脱。
English: In November of the seventh year, the birth mother of Prince Xiao Tong, Ding Guijuan, fell ill. He returned to Yongfu Province and stayed by her bedside day and night, observing her condition. He did not even take off his clothes while sleeping.

古文：太子意以为疑，命仆射刘孝绰议其事。孝绰议曰： 案张镜撰《东宫仪记》，称 三朝发哀者，逾月不举乐；鼓吹寝奏，服限亦然 。
现代文：后来丁贵嫔医治无效而死去，萧统步行跟在搬运尸体的队伍后面，一直走回皇宫，直到他母亲尸体入棺时，没有吃一口饭，喝一口水，一哭就伤心得几乎喘不过气来。
English: Later, Ding Guixuan died after the treatment was ineffective. Xiao Tong followed the corpse carrying team on foot and walked all the way back to the imperial palace. When his mother's body was put into the coffin, he did not eat a bite of food, drink a sip of water, and was so sad that he could hardly breathe when he cried.

古文：寻傍绝之义，义在去服，服虽可夺，情岂无悲？铙歌辍奏，良亦为此。
现代文：梁武帝派中书舍人顾协宣读圣旨说： 居丧时期，因伤心而减少进食数量并使孝子的身体有所衰弱，但不能让孝子们因此饿死，这是圣人制定的礼节。
English: Emperor Liangwu sent the scholar Gu Xie to read out the holy will, saying: During the mourning period, due to sadness, reduce the amount of eating and weaken the body of the filial son, but do not let the filial son starve to death, this is the etiquette established by the saint.

古文：既有悲情，宜称兼慕，卒哭之后，依常举乐，称悲竟，此理例相符。
现代文：《礼记》说因哀伤过度导致孝子身体过度衰弱甚至死亡，不能完成守丧三年的任务，那就和不讲孝心一样。我还健在，你怎么能如此糟践自己！应该立即强迫自己吃饭喝水。 
English: "The Book of Rites" says that if one's filial son becomes too weak or even dies as a result of excessive grief, and is unable to complete the three-year mourning period, then it is the same as not showing filial piety. I am still alive, how can you abuse yourself so badly! You should force yourself to eat and drink water immediately.

古文：谓犹应称兼慕，至卒哭。 
现代文：太子萧统接到皇帝的圣旨后才吃了几合米做的稀饭。
English: It was only after receiving the emperor's edict that Prince Xiao Tong ate porridge made from a few hectoliters of rice.

古文：仆射徐勉、左率周舍、家令陆襄并同孝绰议。
现代文：从此直到丁贵嫔下葬，每天只吃一升麦米做的稀饭。
English: From then on, until Ding Guizhong was buried, he ate only one liter of porridge made of wheat and rice every day.

古文：太子令曰： 张镜《仪记》云 依《士礼》，终服月称慕悼 。又云 凡三朝发哀者，逾月不举乐 。
现代文：梁武帝又下诏说， 听说你每天所吃的食物太少，身体已经很虚弱，快要病倒，我虽然没有其他的疾病，正因为你现在这个样子，让我心中闷闷不乐而生病了。
English: Emperor Liangwu also issued an edict, saying, "I heard that you eat too little food every day, and your body is already very weak and about to fall ill. Although I have no other diseases, it is because of the way you are now that I am so unhappy and sick.

古文：刘仆射议，云 傍绝之义，义在去服，服虽可夺，情岂无悲，卒哭之后，依常举乐，称悲竟，此理例相符 。寻情悲之说，非止卒哭之后，缘情为论，此自难一也。
现代文：所以你应该强迫自己吃些稠稀饭，不要让我总是替你担心。 但萧统尽管多次接到圣旨，无论如何规劝，他仍坚持每天只吃一溢米的稀饭，疏菜瓜果一点也不吃。
English: Therefore, you should force yourself to eat some thick porridge, and don't let me always worry about you. But Xiao Tong, despite receiving the holy will many times, no matter how he was persuaded, he still insisted on eating only a spoonful of rice porridge every day, and did not eat any vegetables or fruits.

古文：用张镜之举乐，弃张镜之称悲，一镜之言，取舍有异，此自难二也。
现代文：萧统身体一向很健壮，原来腰带有十围，现在已瘦减过半。每次入朝时，官员和平民看到他如此瘦弱，没有不伤心落泪的。
English: Xiao Tong has always been physically very strong. Originally, he had a girth of ten girths, but now he has lost more than half of his weight. Every time he enters the imperial court, officials and commoners see him so thin and weak that they cannot help but shed tears of sorrow.

古文：太子明于庶事，纤毫必晓，每所奏有谬误及巧妄，皆即就辩析，示其可否，徐令改正，未尝弹纠一人。
现代文：太子萧统自从举行加冠仪式后，梁武帝就让他参与国家大事，朝廷内外各部门的奏章都堆在他的面前。萧统知晓民间很多事情，任何细微末节都要查清楚，每次发现上报的事情有错漏或玩巧弄假不合实情的，当时就加以分析辨别，告诉上奏的人是对还是错，让他们逐渐改正错误，没有一个人因此事而受到弹劾。
English: Ever since Prince Xiao Tong held the crowning ceremony, Emperor Liang Wu allowed him to participate in national affairs. The records of all departments inside and outside the court were piled up in front of him. Xiao Tong knew a lot of things about the people, and he had to investigate every detail. Every time he found that there was a mistake in the report or a trick to make it false or untrue, he analyzed it at the time, told the person who played it right or wrong, and let them gradually correct the mistake. No one was impeached for this matter.

古文：平断法狱，多所全宥，天下皆称仁。
现代文：给犯人量刑判案时，经常宽恕、赦免罪犯，老百姓都称赞他仁义厚道。
English: When sentencing prisoners, he often pardoned and pardoned criminals, and the common people praised him for his benevolence.

古文：性宽和容众，喜愠不形于色。
现代文：萧统生性宽厚、待人和气，与人相处融洽，并很有涵养，喜怒哀乐埋在心底，从不表露在脸上。
English: Xiao Tong has a generous nature, treats people kindly, gets along well with people, and is very tolerant. He keeps his emotions buried in his heart and never shows them on his face.

古文：引纳才学之士，赏爱无倦。
现代文：招纳有真才实学的人，并倍加推崇爱护，从不厌烦。
English: It is never boring to recruit people with real talent and real learning, and to promote and cherish them.

古文：恒自讨论篇籍，或与学士商榷古今；闲则继以文章著述，率以为常。
现代文：经常自己研讨学问，有时也和一些有才学的人一起讨论过去或当世发生的事情；一有空闲时间便不停地撰写诗赋文章，并且养成习惯。
English: He often studied on his own, and sometimes discussed the past or the present with some talented people; whenever he had free time, he kept writing poems and articles, and developed a habit.

古文：于时东宫有书几三万卷，名才并集，文学之盛，晋、宋以来未之有也。
现代文：当时东宫差不多有三万多卷书，知名才子都云集在那里，文学创作一片繁荣，出现了自晋、宋以来从未有过的盛况。
English: At that time, there were almost more than 30,000 volumes in the East Palace, famous talents gathered there, literary creation flourished, and there was a pomp that had not been seen since the Jin and Song dynasties.

古文：性爱山水，于玄圃穿筑，更立亭馆，与朝士名素者游其中。
现代文：萧统喜欢游山玩水，在玄圃园中挖修水池，堆筑石山，建造亭台馆舍，经常和朝廷中有学问的臣僚，或民间有名气的人一起在园中游赏风景，吟诗作赋。
English: Xiao Tong liked to walk in the mountains and play in the water. He dug and repaired ponds in the garden, piled up rocks, and built pavilions and pavilions. He often toured the landscape in the garden with learned courtiers from the imperial court or famous people from the people, and composed poems.

古文：尝泛舟后池，番禺侯轨盛称 此中宜奏女乐。 
现代文：有一次在御花园后池中划船，番禺侯侯轨一边夸赞这里的环境优雅，景色优美，一边说： 如果再在这里增设女乐就更美了。 
English: Once, when rowing in the back pond of the imperial garden, Panyu Hou Houluo, while praising the elegant environment and beautiful scenery here, said: If female music is added here, it will be even more beautiful.

古文：太子不答，咏左思《招隐诗》曰： 何必丝与竹，山水有清音。 
现代文：太子萧统没有回答他的话，只是吟诵了左思《招隐诗》中的两句： 何必丝与竹，山水有清音。 
English: Prince Xiao Tong did not answer his words, but only recited two sentences from Zuo Si's "Invitation Poem": Why silk and bamboo, the landscape has a clear sound.

古文：侯惭而止。
现代文：侯轨感到十分惭愧不再多言了。
English: Hourao felt too ashamed to say any more.

古文：出宫二十余年，不畜声乐。
现代文：离开皇宫二十多年，从来不曾收留舞妓歌女。
English: After more than twenty years away from the Imperial Palace, he has never hosted a maiko singer.

古文：少时，敕赐太乐女妓一部，略非所好。
现代文：年幼时，梁武帝曾下诏赐给他一部太乐女妓，他一点也不喜欢。
English: When he was young, Emperor Liangwu gave him a Tai Le prostitute, which he did not like at all.

古文：普通中，大军北讨，京师谷贵，太子因命菲衣减膳，改常馔为小食。
现代文：普通年间，梁朝军队北伐魏国，京城一带谷价很高，太子萧统看到这一情况后，便下令节衣省食，将原来的家宴改为普通的便餐。
English: In ordinary years, the Liang Dynasty's army went to the north of Wei, and grain prices in the Beijing area were very high. After Prince Xiao Tong saw this situation, he ordered to save food and clothing, and changed the original family dinner to an ordinary light meal.

古文：每霖雨积雪，遣腹心左右，周行闾巷，视贫困家，有流离道路，密加振赐。
现代文：每遇阴雨连绵或下大雪时，他便派心腹大臣走街串巷，察看贫困人家，如果有人无家可归，流落街头，则经常拿出钱物救助他们。
English: Whenever there was continuous rain or heavy snow, he would send his trusted ministers to walk the streets, inspect the homes of the poor, and if someone was homeless and living on the streets, they would often come up with money and goods to help them.

古文：又出主衣绵帛，多作襦袴，冬月以施贫冻。
现代文：还将自己做长袍的丝绵和布帛捐献出来，做成短衣短袄，冬月天冷时，施舍给贫困受冻的人。
English: He also donates the silk and cloth yarns from which he makes his robes to make shorts, and when it is cold in winter, he gives alms to the poor who are suffering from the cold.

古文：若死亡无可以敛者，为备棺槥。
现代文：如果有人死后无力收埋，太子就替他购买棺材。
English: If someone dies and cannot be buried, the prince buys a coffin for him.

古文：每闻远近百姓赋役勤苦，辄敛容色。
现代文：一听到远近各地老百姓的赋税过重，劳役太多太苦，便收敛笑容和喜色变得很不开心。
English: As soon as they heard that the taxes of the people from far and near were too heavy, and the labor service was too much and too hard, they restrained their smiles and became very unhappy.

古文：常以户口未实，重于劳扰。
现代文：常常为老百姓贫苦劳累而心神不安。
English: They are often worried about the poor and overworked people.

古文：吴兴郡屡以水灾失收，有上言当漕大渎以泻浙江。
现代文：吴兴郡经常因河水泛滥而使农业歉收。有人上书建议修一条大水渠向浙江排洪。
English: Wuxing County often suffers poor agricultural harvests due to river flooding. A petition has been submitted suggesting the construction of a large canal to discharge floodwaters to Zhejiang.

古文：中大通二年春，诏遣前交州刺史王弁假节，发吴郡、吴兴、义兴三郡民丁就役。
现代文：中大通二年，梁武帝下诏派前交州刺史王弁持符节，征调吴郡、吴兴、义兴三郡民工开凿这一水渠。
English: In the second year of the Middle Dynasties, Emperor Liangwu issued an edict to the former governor of Jiaozhou Province, Wang Ben, to hold a festival of symbols, and conscripted the migrant workers from the three counties of Wuxi, Wuxing and Yixing to dig the canal.

古文：臣意见庸浅，不识事宜，苟有愚心，愿得上启。 高祖优诏以喻焉。
现代文：太子萧统上奏疏，认为将扰民农事，请求暂停此徭役，梁武帝特地下诏加以开导。
English: Prince Xiao Tong made a report, saying that it would disturb the people's agricultural affairs, requesting the suspension of this duty, and Emperor Liang Wudi issued an edict to enlighten them.

古文：太子孝谨天至，每入朝，未五鼓便守城门开。
现代文：太子萧统特别谨慎孝顺，每次上朝，不到敲五更鼓的时候便等候在城门外。
English: Prince Xiao Tong was particularly cautious and dutiful. Every morning, he would wait outside the city gate until the fifth bugle was sounded.

古文：东宫虽燕居内殿，一坐一起，恒向西南面台。宿被召当入，危坐达旦。
现代文：太子所居的东宫虽说在内殿里面，然无论是坐着还是站着，总是面朝西南方向，如果晚上被召见上朝，便半跪半坐着直到天亮。
English: Although the East Palace, where the prince lives, is inside the inner hall, whether he is sitting or standing, he always faces southwest. If he is summoned in the evening, he will kneel and sit until dawn.

古文：三年三月，寝疾。恐贻高祖忧，敕参问，辄自力手书启。
现代文：三年三月，太子卧病不起，害怕让梁武帝担忧，每次梁武帝派人来提问政事，他总是亲自写信告诉皇上。
English: In March of the third year, the prince fell ill and was afraid of worrying Emperor Liangwu. Every time Emperor Liangwu sent someone to ask questions about politics, he always wrote to the emperor in person.

古文：悬忠贞于日月，播鸿名于天地；惟小臣之纪言，实含毫而无愧。
现代文：四月初六，萧统病死，年仅三十一岁。梁武帝亲自来到东宫，扶着太子的棺柩失声大哭。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month, Emperor Xiao Tong died of illness, only 31 years old. Emperor Liangwu himself came to the East Palace, held the prince's coffin and wept loudly.

古文：呜呼哀哉！
现代文：下诏用衮衣和冕服装殓萧统。
English: Alas, alas!

古文：太子仁德素著，及薨，朝野惋愕。
现代文：太子仁义有德，人人皆知，死后，朝野都都感到惋惜愕然。
English: Everyone knows that the prince was a benevolent and virtuous man. When he died, the court was saddened and stunned.

古文：京师男女，奔走宫门，号泣满路。四方氓庶，及疆徼之民，闻丧皆恸哭。
现代文：京城男女，都到太子宫去凭吊，满路上都是哭泣的人；全国各地的百姓，守卫疆土的士兵听到他死去的消息后都十分悲痛。
English: Both men and women in Beijing went to the imperial palace to pay their respects, and there were people crying all over the road; people from all over the country and soldiers guarding the territory were very sad to hear the news of his death.

古文：所著文集二十卷；又撰古今典诰文言，为《正序》十卷；五言诗之善者，为《文章英华》二十卷；《文选》三十卷。
现代文：所著文集二十卷；又撰写古今典诰文书；写《正序》十卷；五言诗写得较好的收录为《文章英华》二十卷；《文选》三十卷。
English: He also wrote ancient and modern classics and documents; wrote the "Procedure" ten volumes; five-character poems that were well written were included in the "Articles of Yinghua" twenty volumes; "Selected Works" thirty volumes.

古文：哀太子大器，字仁宗，太宗嫡长子也。
现代文：哀太子大器字仁宗，太宗的嫡长子。
English: He was the eldest legitimate son of Emperor Taizong.

古文：普通四年五月丁酉生。
现代文：普通四年五月丁酉生。
English: Ding Xinsheng was born in May of ordinary years.

古文：中大通四年，封宣城郡王，食邑二千户。
现代文：中大通四年，封为宣城郡王，食邑二千产。
English: Zhongdazhong four years, was named the king of Xuancheng County, and produced 2,000 products.

古文：寻为侍中、中卫将军，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：不久任侍中、中卫将军，被赐给鼓吹乐一部。
English: He was soon appointed to the posts of chamberlain and general of the middle guard, and was given a part in the trumpeters' music.

古文：大同四年，授使持节、都督扬、徐二州诸军事、中军大将军、扬州刺史，侍中如故。
现代文：大同四年，被授职使持节、都督扰、涂二州诸军事、中军大将军、扰刺史，仍担任侍中。
English: In the fourth year of the Datong era, he was awarded the post of envoy to hold the festival, the governor of the capital, the military of the two states, the general of the Chinese army, and the history of the interference, and still served as a chamberlain.

古文：太清二年十月，侯景寇京邑，敕太子为台内大都督。
现代文：太清二年十月，侯景进攻京都所在的地区，韶命太子任台内大都督。
English: In October of the second year of the Taiching Dynasty, Houjing attacked the area where Kyoto is located, and the prince was appointed as the grand governor of Taichung.

古文：三年五月，太宗即位。
现代文：三年五月，太宗即皇帝位。
English: In May of the third year, Emperor Taizong ascended the throne.

古文：六月丁亥，立为皇太子。
现代文：六月丁亥日，立他为皇太子。
English: In June, Dinghai Day, he was appointed crown prince.

古文：大宝二年八月，贼景废太宗，将害太子，时贼党称景命召太子，太子方讲《老子》，将欲下床，而刑人掩至。
现代文：大实二年八月，叛贼侯景黜废太宗，将杀害太子，当时叛贼的部下声称侯景的命令召见太子，太子正在研究《老子》，刚要下床，而刽子手就悄悄走近了。
English: In August of the 2nd year of the Dashi era, the traitor Hou Jing dethroned the Taizong and was about to kill the prince. At that time, the traitor's subordinates claimed that Hou Jing's order was to summon the prince. The prince was studying "Lao Zi" and was just about to get out of bed when the executioner quietly approached.

古文：太子颜色不变，徐曰： 久知此事，嗟其晚耳。 
现代文：太子面不改色，慢慢地说： 早就知道会有这样的事发生，我还叹息来临得晚了哩。 
English: Without changing his expression, the prince said slowly, "I already knew that something like this would happen. I'm so late to come to my senses."

古文：刑者欲以衣带绞之。
现代文：刽子手想用衣带来绞杀他。
English: The executioner tried to strangle him with a belt.

古文：太子曰： 此不能见杀。 
现代文：太子说： 遣杀不死我。 
English: The prince said, "Killing me won't kill me.

古文：乃指系帐竿下绳，命取绞之而绝，时年二十八。
现代文：就指着捆绑帐子的竹竿下面的绳子，叫他们拿过来绞他而死，时年二十九岁。
English: He pointed to the rope under the bamboo pole used to tie the noose and told them to take it and hang him to death. He was 29 years old.

古文：太子性宽和，兼神用端嶷，在于贼手，每不屈意。
现代文：太子生性宽厚随和，加上精神气质端庄聪慧，在叛贼的控制下，经常表现出不屈的意志。
English: The princeling is naturally generous and easy-going, coupled with a dignified and intelligent temperament. Under the control of traitors, he often shows an indomitable will.

古文：初，侯景西上，携太子同行，及其败归，部伍不复整肃，太子所乘船居后，不及贼众，左右心腹并劝因此入北。
现代文：当初，侯景西行，带太子同路，等到他败回来的时候，部队不再整齐严肃，太子所乘的船又处于后面，赶不上叛贼们，他左右的心腹都劝他因此北上避难。
English: At first, Hou Jing went west, taking the prince with him. By the time he was defeated and returned, the troops were no longer orderly and serious, and the prince's ship was behind, unable to catch up with the traitors. His confidants on both sides advised him to take refuge in the north.

古文：太子曰： 家国丧败，志不图生；主上蒙尘，宁忍违离？
现代文：太子说： 现在家与国都败亡了，我的心意是不想求生；主上蒙难，我哪裹忍心避难而去。
English: The prince said, "Now that my family and my country have been defeated, my heart does not want to live. The Lord has suffered, and I have no patience to take refuge.

古文：吾今逃匿，乃是叛父，非谓避贼。 
现代文：我现在如果逃藏，就是背叛父亲，而不叫避贼。 
English: If I run away now, I would be betraying my father, not avoiding him.

古文：便涕泗鸣咽，令即前进。
现代文：说完就痛哭流涕，命令立即前进。
English: After saying this, he burst into tears and gave the order to advance immediately.

古文：贼以太子有器度，每常惮之，恐为后患，故先及祸。
现代文：叛贼因为太子有气魄度量，对他就常常怀着畏惧之心，担心他成为后的祸患，所以他就先遭了难。
English: The traitor, because of the prince's courage and prudence, was often afraid of him, fearing that he would become the next calamity, so he was first in trouble.

古文：承圣元年四月，追谥哀太子。
现代文：承圣元年四月，追加他谧号为哀太子。
English: In April of the year of his consecration, he was given the additional title of Prince of Sorrows.

古文：愍怀太子方矩，字德规，世祖第四子也。
现代文：愍怀太子方矩，字德规，是世祖的第四个儿子。
English: He was the fourth son of the founder of the dynasty.

古文：初封南安县侯，随世祖在荆镇。
现代文：起初封为南安县侯，跟从世祖在荆城镇守。
English: At first, he was given the title of Lord of Nan'an County, and followed his ancestor to become the governor of Jing Town.

古文：太清初，为使持节、督湘、郢、桂、宁、成、合、罗七州诸军事、镇南将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：太清初年，任使持节、督湘郢桂宁成合罗七州诸军事、镇南将军、湘州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Taiching Dynasty, he was appointed as the military commander of the seven states of Luo, the general of Zhenan, and the governor of Hunan, Gui Ning.

古文：寻征为侍中、中卫将军，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：不久征召他任侍中、中卫将军，赐给他鼓吹乐一套。
English: He was soon called up to serve as a chamberlain and general of the middle guard, and was given a set of trumpet music.

古文：世祖承制，拜王太子，改名元良。
现代文：世祖秉承皇帝旨意，立他为太子，改名元良。
English: The founder upheld the emperor's will, made him crown prince, and changed his name to Genryo.

古文：承圣元年十一月丙子，立为皇太子。
现代文：承圣元年十一月己卯日，立他为皇太子。
English: He was enthroned as crown prince in November of the first year after his enthronement.

古文：及西魏师陷荆城，太子与世祖同为魏人所害。
现代文：等到西魏的军队攻陷荆城，太子和世祖一起被魏兵杀害。
English: When the West Wei army invaded Jingcheng, the prince and his father were both killed by the Wei soldiers.

古文：太子聪颖，颇有世祖风，而凶暴猜忌。
现代文：太子聪明颖悟，颇有世担的风度，但却凶暴猜忌。
English: The prince is intelligent and insightful, with a rather worldly demeanor, but he is ferociously suspicious.

古文：敬帝承制，追谥愍怀太子。
现代文：敬童秉承皇帝旨意，追加他谧号愍怀太子。
English: Keidong adhered to the emperor's will and added his nickname, Prince Charming.

古文：陈吏部书姚察曰：孟轲有言： 鸡鸣而起，孳孳为善者，舜之徒也。 
现代文：陈的吏部尚书姚察说：孟轲有话， 鶸叫就起床，勤勤恳恳做好事的人，是舜的好学生啊。 
English: Chen's clerk, Shangshu Yao, said: Meng Yao has a way with words, he wakes up screaming, and he is a diligent and sincere person who does good things. He is a good student.

古文：若乃布衣韦带之士，在于畎亩之中，终日为之，其利亦已博矣。
现代文：如果一个普通的百姓，在田地裹作农夫，一天到晚干农活，他带来的好处也已是多方面的。
English: If an ordinary citizen works as a farmer in the fields and does farm work all day long, the benefits he brings are already manifold.

古文：况乎处重明之位，居正体之尊，克念无怠，烝烝以孝。大舜之德，其何远之有哉！
现代文：更何况太子处在重要显明的地位上，居于正统体面的尊位，若都像昭明那样能够约束内心不懈怠，淳厚孝道，那么要拥有大舜的德行，还会很远吗?
English: Not to mention the fact that the crown prince is in an important and obvious position, in an orthodox and dignified position, if they can all restrain their hearts and not slack off, and have a good filial piety, like Zhao Ming, then will it be far away to have the virtue of Daxing?

